Shakespeare's Henry V,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">**
º:
ºº
K.
K E C
A letter borrowed by the Engliſh from the Greek
alphabet. It has before all the vowels one in-
variable ſound: as, keen, Ken, Kill; but is not
much in uſe, except after c at the end of words:
Q as, knock, clock, crack, back, brick, /tick, pluck,
check, which were written anciently with e final: as, clocke,
checke, tricke. It is alſo in uſe between a vowel and the ſilent
e final: as, cloke, broke, brake, pike, duke, eke. It likewiſe
ends a word after a diphthong: as, look, break, ſhock, beck.
The Engliſh never uſe c at the end of a word. K is filent in
the preſent pronunciation before n : as, knife, knee, knell.
KA'u ENDAR. n. ſ. [now written calendar.] An account of
time.
Let this pernicious hour
Stand as accurſed in the Kalendar. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
KA'll. n.ſ. [an Arabick word..] Sea-weed, of the aſhes of
which glaſs was made, whence the word alkali.
The aſhes of the weed kali is ſold to the Venetians for
their glaſs works.
KAM. adj. Crooked.
Kam, in Erſe, is ſquint-eyed, and applied to any thing
awry: clean kam ſignifies crooked, athwart, awry, croſs from
the purpoſe. Aſ hembo, Italian, hence our Engliſh a-kimbo.
Clean Éam is, by vulgar pronunciation, brought to Kim kam.
The blood he hath loſt, he dropt it for his country:
And what is left, to loſe it by his country,
Were to us all that do’t and ſuffer it,
. A brand to th' end o' th' world.
—This is clean kam.
—Meerly awry. Shakeſpeare.
To KAw. v. n. [from the ſound.] To cry as a raven, crow,
or rook. See CAw. -
Jack-daws kawing and fluttering about the neſts, ſet all
their young ones a gaping; but having nothing in their emp-
ty mouths but noiſe and air, leave them as hungry as before.
Locke.
KAw. m. ſ. [from the verb.] The cry of a raven or crow.
The daſtard crow that to the wood made wing,
With her loud Kaws her craven-kind doth bring,
Who, ſafe in numbers, cuff the noble bird. Dryden.
KAYLE. m. ſ. ſquille, French..]
Bacon.
1. Ninepin; kettlepins, of which ſkittles ſeems a corruption.
And now at keels they try a harmleſs chance,
And now their cur they teach to fetch and dance. Sidney.
The reſidue of the time they wear out at coits, Kayles, or
the like idle exerciſes. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
2. A kind of play ſtill retained in Scotland, in which nine holes
ranged in three's are made in the ground, and an iron bullet
rolled in among them.
To KEck. v. n. [Åecken, Dutch..] To heave the ſtomach; to
reach at vomiting. -
All thoſe diets do dry up humours and rheums, which
they firſt attenuate, and while the humour is attenuated it
troubleth the body a great deal more; and therefore patients
muſt not Keck at them at the firſt. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. N°. 68.
The faction, is it not notorious
Keck at the memory of glorious. Swift's Miſcel.
To KE"ckle a cable. To defend a cable round with rope.
- Ainſworth.
KF'cks Y. m. ſ. [commonly 'ex, cigue, French; cicuta, Latin.
Skinner.) Skinner ſeems to think £ecºſy or Rex the ſame as
hemlock. . It is uſed in Staffordſhire both for hemlock, and
any other hollow jointed plant.
Nothing teems
But hateful docks, rough thiſtles, kecăſes, burs,
Loſing both beauty and utility. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Ke‘cky. adj. [from Kex.] Reſembling a kex.
An Indian ſceptre, made of a ſort of cane, without any
joint, and perfectly round, conſiſteth of hard and blackiſh
cylinders, mixed with a ſoft keely body; ſo as at the end
cut tranſverfly, it looks as a bundle of wires. Grew.
K E E
To KEDGE. v. a. [AEaghe, a ſmall veſſel, Dutch.]
In bringing a ſhip up or down a narrow river, when the
wind is contrary to the tide, they ſet the fore-ſail, or fore-
top-ſail and mizzen, and ſo let her drive with the tide. The
ſails are to flat her about, if ſhe comes too near the ſhore.
They alſo carry out an anchor in the head of the boat, with
a hawſer that comes from the ſhip; which anchor, if the
ſhip comes too near the ſhore, they let fall in the ſtream, and
ſo wind her head about it; then weigh the anchor again
when ſhe is about, which is called Áedging, and from this
uſe the anchor a kedger. Harris,
KE/DGER. m. ſ. [from kedge.] A ſmall anchor uſed in a river.
See KEDGe.
KEE, the provincial plural of cow, properly kine.
A laſs that Cic’ly hight had won his heart,
Cic'ly the weſtern laſs that tends the kee. Gay's Paſº.
KE/DLAck. n.ſ. A weed that grows among corn; charnock.
Tuffer.
KEEL. m. ſ. [coele, Saxon; Kiel, Dutch; quille, Fr.] The
bottom of the ſhip.
Portunus
Heav'd up his lighten’d keel, and ſunk the ſand,
And ſtcer'd the ſacred veſſel. - Dryden.
Her ſharp bill ſerves for a keel to cut the air before her;
her tail ſhe uſeth as her rudder. Grew's Coſmol, b, i.
Your cables burſt, and you muſt quickly feel
The waves impetuous entring at your keel. Swift.
Keels, the ſame with Kayles, which fee. -
To KEEL. v. a. [caelan, Saxon.] This word, which is pre-
ſerved in Shakeſpeare, probably ſignifies to cool, though Han-
mer explains it otherwiſe.
To keel ſeems to mean to drink ſo deep as to turn up the
bottom of the pot, like turning up the keel of a ſhip. Hammer.
While greaſy Joan doth keel the pot. Shakeſpeare.
KE'ELFAT. m. ſ. [coºlan, Saxon, to cool, and fat or vat, a veſ-
ſel.] Cooler; tub in which liquor is let to cool. - -
KE. Elsos. m. ſ. The next piece of timber in a ſhip to her
keel, lying right over it next above the floor timber. Harris.
To KE'ELHALE. v. a. [keel and hale.] To puniſh in the ſea-
mens way, by dragging the criminal under water on one ſide
of the ſhip and up again on the other.
KEEN. adj. ſcene, Saxon; Kuhn, German; Koen, Dutch.]
-1, Sharp; well edged; not blunt. -
- Come thick night
That my keen knife ſee not the wound it makes. Shakespeare
Here is my keen-edged ſword, -
Deck'd with fine flower-de-luces on each ſide, Shakeſp.
To me the cries of fighting fields are charms,
Keen be my ſabre, and of proof my arms. . . Dryden.
A ſword keen-edg’d within his right he held,
The warlike emblem of the conquer'd field. Dryden.
.2. Severe ; piercing. - -
The winds -
Blow moiſt, and keen, ſhattering the graceful locks
Of theſe fair ſpreading trees ; which bids us ſeek
Some better ſhroud. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
The cold was very ſupportable ; but as it changed to the
north-weſt, or north, it became exceſſively keen. Ellis.
3. Eager; vehement. -
Never did I know
A creature, that did bear the ſhape of man,
So keen and greedy to confound a man. Shakeſpeare.
Keen diſpatch of real hunger. Milton.
The ſheep were ſo keen upon the acrons, that they gobbled
up a piece of the coat. L’Eſtrange.
Thoſe curs are ſo extremely hungry, that they are too keen
at the ſport, and worry their game. Tatler, No. 62.
This was a proſpect ſo very inviting, that it could not be.
eaſily withſtood by any who have ſo keen an appetite for
- wealth. : : Swift's Miſcel.
12 Y 4. Acrimonious;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K. E. E.
K E E
4. Acrimonious ; bitter of mind.
Good father cardinal, cry thou, amen,
To my keen curſes. Shakeſp. King john.
I have known ſome of theſe abſent officers as keen againſt
Ireland, as if they had never been indebted to her. Swift.
To KEEN. v. a. [from the adjective.] To ſharpen. An un-
authoriſed word.
Nor when cold Winter keens the brightening flood,
Wou'd I weak ſhivering linger on the brink. Thomſon.
KE'ENLY. adj. [from keen...] Sharply; vehemently; eagerly ;
bitterly.
KE'ENNess. n.ſ.. [from Keen.]
1. Sharpneſs; edge.
No, not the hangman's ax bears half the Frenneſ;
Of thy ſharp envy. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
2. Rigor of weather; piercing cold.
3. Aſperity; bitterneſs of mind.
That they might keep up the keenneſ againſt the court, till
the coming together of both houſes, his lordſhip furniſhed
them with informations, which might be wreſted to the
king's diſadvantage. Clarendon.
The ſting of every reproachful ſpeech is the truth of it;
and to be conſcious is that which gives an edge, and keenneſ;
to the invečtive. - South's Sermons.
4. Eagerneſs; vehemence.
To KEEP. v. a. ſcepan, Saxon; Kepen, old Dutch.]
1. To retain ; not to loſe. -
I kept the field with the death of ſome, and flight of others.
Sidney, b. ii.
We have examples in the primitive church of ſuch as by
fear being compelled to ſacrifice to ſtrange gods repented,
and kept ſtill the office of preaching the goſpel. H/hitgift.
Keep in memory what I preached unto you. I Cor. xv. 2.
This charge I Keep till my appointed day
Of rend'ring up. Milton.
His loyalty he tett, his love, his zeal. Milton.
You have loſt a child; but you have kept one child, and
are likely to do ſo long. Temple's Miſcel.
If we would weigh, and keep in our minds, what we are
conſidering, that would inſtruct us when we ſhould, or ſhould
not, branch into diſtinctions. Locke.
2. To have in cuſtody.
The crown of Stephanus, firſt king of Hungary, was al-
ways kept in the caſtle of Vicegrade. Knolles.
She kept the fatal key. Milton.
3. To preſerve ; not to let go. -
Theſe men of war that could keep rank, came with a per-
fečt heart to Hebron. 1 Chron. xii. 38.
The Lord God merciful and gracious, keeping mercy for
thouſands, forgiving iniquity. Exod. xxxiv. 7.
I ſpared it greatly, and have kept me a grape of the cluſter,
and a plant of a great people. 2 Eſdr. ix. 21.
4. To preſerve in a ſtate of ſecurity.
We paſſed by where the duke keeps his gallies. Addiſon.
5. To protećt; to guard.
Behold I am with thee to keep thee. Gen. xxviii.
6. To guard from flight.
Paul dwelt with a ſoldier that kept him. Aćis xxviii. 16.
7. To detain.
But what's the cauſe that keeps you here with me?
—That I may know what keeps me here with you.
Bryden.
8. To hold for another.
A man delivers money or ſtuff to keep. Exod. xxii. 7.
Reſerv'd from night, and kept for thce in ſtore. Milton.
9. To reſerve ; to conceal.
Some are ſo cloſe and reſerved, as they will not ſhew their
wares but by a dark light; and ſeem always to keep back
ſomewhat. Bacon's Eſſays, Nº. 27.
10. To tend.
God put him in the garden of Eden to keep it. Gen. ii. 15.
While in her girliſh age ſhe kept ſheep on the moor, it
chanced that a merchant ſaw and liked her. Carew.
Count it thine
To till and Keep, and of the fruit to eat. Milton.
i 1. To preſerve in the ſame tenour or ſtate.
To know the true ſtate, I will keep this order. Bacon.
Take this at leaſt, this laſt advice my ſon,
Keep a ſtiff rein, and move but gently on :
The courſers of themſelves will run too faſt, *
Your art muſt be to moderate their haſte. Addiſon's Ovid.
12. To regard; to attend.
While the ſtars and courſe of heav'n I keep,
My weary'd eyes were ſeiz'd with fatal ſleep. Dryden.
If that idea be ſteadily ºpt to, the diſtinction will eaſily
be conceived. Locke.
.13. To not ſuffer to fail.
My mercy will I keep for him for ever. Pſal. lxxxix.
Shall truth fail to keep her word : 41ilton.
14. To hold in any ſtate.
Ingenuous ſhame, and the apprehenſions of diſpleaſure,
are the only true reſtraints: theſe alone ought to hold the
reins, and keep the child in order. Locke on Education.
Men are guilty of many faults in the exerciſe of this fa-
culty of the mind, which keep them in ignorance. Locke.
appy ſouls' who keep ſuch a ſacred dominion over their
inferior and animal powers, that the ſenſitive tumults never
riſe to diſturb the ſuperior and better operations of the rea-
ſoning mind. J%atts's Improvement of the Mind.
15. To retain by ſome degree of force in any place or ſtate.
Plexirtus, ſaid he, this wickedneſs is found by thee; no
good deeds of mine have been able to keep it down in thee.
Sidney, b. ii.
It is hardly, to be thought that any governor ſhould ſo much
malign his ſucceſſor, as to ſuffer an evil to grow up which he
might timely have kept under; or perhaps nouriſh it with
coloured countenance of ſuch ſiniſter means. Sfenſer.
What old acquaintance could not all this fleſh
Keep in a little life Poor Jack, farewel. Shakeſpeare.
Venus took the guard of noble Hector's corſe,
And kept the dogs off: night and day applying ſovereign
force -
Of roſy balms, that to the dogs were horrible in taſte."
- Chapman's Iliad.
The Chineſe ſail where they will; which ſheweth that
their law of Keeping out ſtrangers is a law of puſillanimity and
fear. Bacon's New Atlantis.
And thoſe that cannot live from him aſunder,
Ungratefully ſhall ſtrive to keep him under. 4/ſtor.
If any aſk me what wou'd ſatisfy,
To make life eaſy, thus I would reply:
As much as keeps out hunger, thirſt, and cold. Dryden.
Matters, recommended by our paſſions, take poſſeſſion of
our minds, and will not be kept out. Zocée.
Prohibited commodities ſhould be kept out, and uſeleſs
ones impoveriſh us by being brought in. Lºcke-
An officer with one of theſe unbecoming qualities, is look-
ed upon as a proper perſon to keep off impertinence and ſoli-
citation from his ſuperior. Addiſon's Speciator.
And if two boots keep out the weather,
What need you have two hides of leather. Prºar.
We have it in our power to keep in our breaths, and to
ſuſpend the efficacy of this natural function. Cheyne-
16. To continue any ſtate or action.
The houſe of Ahaziah had no power to keep ſtill the king-
dom. 2 Chron. xxii. 9-
Men gave ear, waited, and kept ſilence at my counſel.
job xxix. 21.
Auria made no ſtay, but ſtill kept on his courſe, and with
a fair gale came directly towards Carone. Knoller.
It was then ſuch a calm, that the ſhips were not able to
keep way with the gallies. Knolles's Hył. ºf the Tarh.
The moon that diſtance keeps till night. Milton.
An heap of ants on a hillock will more eaſily be kept to an
uniformity in motion than theſe. .. Glanville's Scep.
He dy'd in fight:
Fought next my perſon; as in conſort fought:
Kept pace for pace, and blow for blow. Bryden.
He, being come to the eſtate, keeps on a very buſy fami-
ly ; the markets are weekly frequented, and the commodi-
ties of his farm carried out and ſold. Locke.
Invading foes, without reſiſtance,
With eaſe I make to keep their diſtance. Swift.
17. To preſerve in any ſtate.
My ſon, keep the flower of thine age ſound. Eccluſ. xxvi.
18. To pračtiſe; to uſe habitually.
I rule the family very ill, and keep bad hours. Pope.
19. To copy carefully.
Her ſervants eyes were fix’d upon her face,
And as ſhe mov’d or turn'd, her motions view'd,
Her meaſures kept, and ſtep by ſtep purſu'd. Dryden.
20. To obſerve any time.
This ſhall be for a memorial; and you ſhall keep it
a feaſt to the Lord. Exod. xii. 14.
That day was not in filence holy kept. Milton.
21. To obſerve; not to violate.
It cannot be,
The king ſhould keep his word in loving us;
He will ſuſpect us ſtill, and find a time
To puniſh this offence in other faults. Shakeſpeare.
Sworn for three years term to live with me,
My fellow ſcholars; and to keep thoſe ſtatutes
That are recorded in this ſchedule here. Shakeſpeare.
Lord God, there is none like thee: who keepſ? covenant
and mercy with thy ſervants. - 1 King; viii. 23.
Lord God of Iſrael, keep with thy ſervant that thou pro-
miſedſt him. I King; viii. 25.
Obey and Heep his great command. Milton.
His promiſe Palamon accepts ; but pray'd
To keep it better than the firſt he made. Dryden.
My debtors do not keep their day,
Deny their hands and then refuſe to pay. Dryden's juv.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2 My
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K. E. E.
K E. E.
* - -º
J-21
V tº:
:: * ~ *
My wiſhes are,
That Ptolemy may keep his royal word. Dryden.
22. To maintain; to ſupport with neceſſaries of life.
Much more affliction than already felt
They cannot well impoſe, nor I ſuſtain,
If they intend advantage of my labours,
The work of many hands, which earns my keeping. Milt.
23. To have in the houſe.
Baſe tyke, call'ſt thou me hoſt I ſcorn the term ; nor
ſhall my Nell keep lodgers. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
24. Not to intermit. .
Keep a ſure watch over a ſhameleſ, daughter, left ſhe make
thee a laughing-ſtock to thine enemies, and a bye-word in
the city. Eccluſ. xli. II.
Not Feeping ſtrićteſt watch as ſhe was warn'd. Milton.
25. To maintain; to hold.
They were honourably brought to London, where every
one of them kept houſe by himſelf. Hayward.
Twelve Spartan virgins, noble, young, and fair,
To the pompous palace did reſort,
Where Menelaus kept his royal court. Dryden.
26. To remain in ; not to leave a place.
I pry'thee, tell me, doth he keep his bed. Shakeſpeare.
27. Not to reveal; not to betray.
A fool cannot keep counſel. Eccluſ. viii. 17.
Great are thy virtues, though kept from man. Milton.
If he were wiſe, he would keep all this to himſelf. Tillºtſ.
28. To reſtrain; to with-hold. -
If any rebel or vain ſpirit of mine
Did, with the leaſt affection of a welcome,
Give entertainment to the might of it;
Let heav'n for ever keep it from my head. Shakeſpeare.
Some obſcure paſſages in the inſpir'd volume keep from the
knowledge of divine myſteries. Boyle on Scripture.
If the God of this world did not blind their eyes, it would
be impoſſible, ſo long as men love themſelves, to keep them
from being religious. Tillotſon's Sermont.
There is no virtue children ſhould be excited to, nor fault
they ſhould be kept from, which they may not be convinced
of by reaſons. Locke on Education.
If a child be conſtantly kept from drinking cold liquor whilſt
he is hot, the cuſtom of forbearing will preſerve him. Locke.
By this they may keep them from little faults. Locke.
29. To debar from any place. -
Ill fenc'd for heav'n to keep out ſuch a foe. Milton.
30. To KEEP back. To reſerve; to with-hold.
Whatſoever the Lord ſhall anſwer, I will declare: I will
Keep nothing back from you. jer. xlii. 4.
31. To KEEP back. To with-hold; to reſtrain.
Keek back thy ſervant from preſumptuous ſins. Pſal. xix.
32. To KEEP company. To frequent any one; to accompany.
Heav'n doth know, ſo ſhall the world perceive,
That I have turn'd away my former ſelf,
So will I thoſe that kept me company. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Why ſhould he call her whore ? Who keeps her com-
pany º
What place what time Shakeſp. Othello.
What mean'ſt thou, bride this company to keep P
To fit up, till thou fain would ſleep? Donne.
Neither will I wretched thee
In death forſake, but keep thee company. Dryden.
33. To KEEP company with. To have familiar intercourſe.
A virtuous woman is obliged not only to avoid immodeſty,
but the appearance of it; and ſhe could not approve of a
young woman keeping company with men, without the permiſ-
ſion of father or mother. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
34. To KEEP in. To conceal; not to tell.
I perceive in you ſo excellent a touch of modeſty, that you
will not extort from me what I am willing to keep in. Shakespeare
Syphax, your zeal becomes importunate:
I’ve hitherto permitted it to rave,
And talk at large; but learn to keep it in,
Left it ſhould take more freedom than I'll give it. Addiſon.
35. To KEEP in. To reſtrain; to curb.
If thy daughter be ſhameleſs, keep her in ſtraightly, leſt
ſhe abuſe herſelf through over-much liberty. Eccluj. xxvi. 13.
It will teach them to keep in, and ſo maſter their inclina-
tions. Locke on Education.
36. To KEEP off. To bear to diſtance; not to admit.
27. To Keep off. To hinder.
A ſuperficial reading, accompanied with the common opi-
nion of his invincible obſcurity, has kept off ſome from ſeek-
ing in him the coherence of his diſcourſe. Locke.
38. To Keep up. To maintain without abatement.
Land kept up its price, and ſold for more years purchaſe
than correſponded to the intereſt of money. Locke.
This reſtraint of their tongues will keep up in them the re-
ſpect and reverence due to their parents. Locke.
Albano keeps up its credit ſtill for wine. Addison.
This dangerous diffenſion among us we keep up and cheriſh
with much pains. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 34.
The ancients were careful to coin money in due weight
6. To KEEP on.
and fineneſs, and keep it up to the ſtandard. Arbuthnot.
39. Tº KEER up. To continue ; to hinder from ceaſing.
You have enough to keep you alive, and to #eep up and
improve your hopes of heaven. Taylor's ºf:
. In joy, that which keeps up the aëtion is the deſire to con-
tinue it. Locke.
Young heirs, from their own refle&amp;ting upon the eſtates
they are born to, are of no uſe but to Keep up their families,
and tranſmit their lands and houſes in a line to poſterity.
Addiſon's Spect. Nº. 123.
During his ſtudies and travels he kept up a punctual corre-
ſpondence with Eudoxus. Addison.
40. To KEEP under. To oppreſs; to ſubdue.
9 happy mixture' whereby things contrary do ſo qualify
and correct the one the danger of the other's exceſs, that
neither boldneſs can make us preſume, as long as we are
&amp;ept under with the ſenſe of our own wretchedneſs; nor,
while we truſt in the mercy of God through Chriſt Jeſus,
fear be able to tyrannize over us. Hooker, b. v.
. Truth may be ſmothered a long time, and kept under by
violence; but it will break out at laſt. Stillingfleet.
To live like thoſe that have their hope in another life, in-
plies, that we keep under our appetites, and do not let them
looſe into the enjoyments of ſenſe. Atterbury's Sermons.
To KEEP. v. n.
1. To remain by ſome labour or effort in a certain ſtate.
With all our force we kept aloof to ſea,
And gain'd the iſland where our veſſels lay. Pope's Ody.
A man that cannot fence will keep out of bullies and game-
ſters company. Locke on Education.
2. To continue in any place or ſtate; to ſtay.
She would give her a leſſon for walking ſo late, that ſhould
make her keep within doors for one fortnight. Sidney.
What! Keep a week away ſeven days and nights
Eightſcore hours ? and lovers abſent hours.
Oh weary reckoning. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
I think, it is our way,
If we will keep in favour with the king,
To be her men, and wear her livery. Shakespeare Rich. IHI.
Thou ſhalt keep faſt by my young men, until they have
ended. - Ruth i. 21.
The neceſſity of keeping well with the maritime powers,
will perſuade them to follow our meaſures. Temple.
On my better hand Aſcanius hung,
And with unequal paces tript along :
Creuſa kept behind. Dryden's Aenei.
The goddeſs born in ſecret pin’d ;
Nor viſited the camp, nor in the council join'd;
But keeping cloſe, his gnawing heart he fed
With hopes of vengeance. Dryden's Homer.
And while it keeps there, it keeps within our author's limi-
tation. Locke.
There are caſes in which a man muſt guard, if he intends
to keep fair with the world, and turn the penny. Collier.
The endeavours Achilles uſed to meet with Hector, the
contrary endeavours of the Trojan to keep out of reach are
the intrigue. Pope's View of Epick Poetry.
3. To remain unhurt; to laſt.
Diſdain me not, although I be not fair:
Doth beauty keep which never ſun can burn,
Nor ſtorms do turn ? Sidney, b. i.
Grapes will keep in a veſſel half full of wine, ſo that the
grapes touch not the wine. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
If the malt be not thoroughly dried, the ale it makes will
not keep. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
4. To dwell; to live conſtantly.
A breath thou art,
Servile to all the ſkiey influences,
That do this habitation, where thou keepſ,
Hourly afflićt. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Knock at the ſtudy, where, they ſay, he keeps,
To ruminate ſtrange plots of dire revenge. Shakeſpeare.
5. To adhere ſtrićtly.
Did they keep to one conſtant dreſs they would ſometimes
be in faſhion, which they never are. Addiſon's Spect.
It is ſo whilſt we keep to our rule ; but when we forſake
that, we go *:: Baker's Reflections on Learning.
o go forward.
So chearfully he took the doom ;
Nor ſhrunk, nor ſtept from death,
But, with unalter'd pace, kept on. Dryden.
7. To KEEP up. To continue undiſmayed.
He grew ſick of a conſumption; yet he ſtill kept up, that
he might free his country. Dryden's Life of Cleomenes.
8. The general idea of this word is care, continuance, or du-
ration.
KEEP. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Cuſtody; guard.
Pan, thou god of ſhepherds all,
Which of our lambkins takeſt kep;
And when our flocks into miſchance doth fall,
Docſt ſave fom miſchief the unwary ſheep. Spenser.
Within<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K E N
K E R
The priſon ſtrong,
Within whoſe keep the captive knights were laid :
Was one partition of the palace-wall. Dryden.
2. Guardianſhip; reſtraint. -
Youth is leaſt looked into when they ſtand in moſt need
of good keep and regard. Aftham.
Ke‘E PER. n.ſ.. [from keep.]
1. One who holds any thing for the uſe of another.
The good old man having neither reaſon to diſſuade, nor
hopes to perſuade, received the things with the mind of a
Keeper, not of an owner. Sidney.
2. One who has priſoners in cuſtody.
The keeper of the priſon, call to him.
- Io now
With horns exalted ſtands, and ſeems to lowe:
A noble charge ; her keeper by her ſide
To watch her walks his hundred eyes apply'd.
A pleaſant beverage he prepar’d before,
Of wine and water mix'd, with added ſtore
Of opium ; to his keeper this he brought,
Who ſwallowed unaware the ſleepy draught.
3. One who has the care of parks, or beaſts of chaſe.
There is an old tale goes, that Herne the hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windſor foreſt,
Doth all the Winter-time, at ſtill of midnight,
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Walk round about an oak with ragged horns. Shakeſp.
The firſt fat buck of all the ſeaſon's ſent,
And keeper takes no fee in compliment. Dryden.
4. One that has the ſuperintendence or care of any thing.
Hilkiah went unto Hildah, kee, er of the wardrobe. 2 King. .
KE'EPER of the great ſeal. [culos magni ſigilli, Latin.]. Is a lord
by his office, and called lord keeper of the great ſeal of Eng-
land, &amp;c. and is of the king's privy-council, under whoſe
hands paſs all charters, commiſſions, and grants of the king,
ſtrengthened by the great or broad ſeal, without which ſeal
all ſuch inſtruments by law are of no force ; for the king is,
in interpretation and intendment of law, a corporation, and
therefore paſſeth nothing firmly, but under the great ſeal.
This lord keeper, by the ſtatute of 5 Eliz. c. 18. hath the
like juriſdiction, and all other advantages, as hath the lord
chancellor of England. Cowell.
KEEPERSHIP. n. ſ. [from keeper.] Office of a keeper.
The common gaol of the ſhire is kept at Launceſton :
this keeperſhip is annexed to the conſtableſhip of the caſtle.
Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
KEG. m. ſ. [caque, French.] A ſmall barrel, commonly uſed
for a fiſh barrel.
KELL. m. ſ. A ſort of pottage. Ainſ. It is ſo called in Scot-
land, being a ſoupe made with ſhreded greens.
KELL. m. ſ. The omentum; that which inwraps the guts.
The very weight of bowels and kell, in fat people, is the
occaſion of a rupture. ///eman's Surgery.
KELP. m. ſ. A ſalt produced from calcined ſea-weed.
In making alum, the workmen uſe the aſhes of a ſea-weed
called kelp, and urine. Boyle on Colours.
KE'lso N. m. ſ. [more properly keelſon.] The wood next the
keel. . - -
We have added cloſe pillars in the royal ſhips, which be-
ing faſtened from the Kelſon to the beams of the ſecond deck,
keep them from ſettling, or giving way. Raleigh.
KE LTER. m. ſ. [He is not in Kelter, that is, he is not ready ;
from Kilter, to gird, Daniſh. Skinner.]
To KFMB. v. a. [coemban, Saxon; kammen, German : now
written, perhaps leſs properly, to comb.] To ſeparate or diſ-
entangle by a denticulated inſtrument.
Yet are the men more looſe than they,
More Kemb’d and bath'd, and rubb’d and trim’d,
More ſleek. Benj. johnſºn.
Thy head and hair are ſleek;
And then thou Kemb'ſ the tuzzes on thy check. Dryden.
To KEN. v. a. ſcennan, Saxon; Kennan, Dutch, to know.]
1. To ſee at a diſtance; to deſcry.
At once as far as angels ken, he views
The diſmal ſituation, waſte and wild. Milton's Par. Lºft.
The next day about evening we ſaw, within a Kenning, be-
fore us thick clouds, which did put us in ſome hope of land.
- - Bacon's New Atlantis.
If thou Men'ſ from far,
Among the Pleiads, a new-kindled ſtar;
'Tis ſhe that ſhines in that propitious light. Dryden.
We ken them from afar, the ſetting ſun
Plays on their ſhining arms. Addison.
2. To know. - -
'Tis he, I Ken the manner of his gate. Shakeſp.
Now plain I Ken whence love his riſe begun:
Sure he was born ſome bloody butcher's ſon,
Bred up in ſhambles. Gay's Paſ?.
KEN. m. ſ. [from the verb.] View ; reach of fight.
Lo! within a Ken, our army lies. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
When from the mountain top Piſanio ſhew'd thee,
Thou waſt within a ken. Shakesp, Cymbeline.
- - It was a hill
S
Of paradiſe the higheſt; from whoſe top
The hemiſphere of earth, in cleareſt ken,
Stretch'd out to th’ ampleſt reach of proſpe&amp;t, lay. Milton.
He ſoon
Saw within ken a glorious angel ſtand.
Rude, as their ſhips, was navigation then;
No uſeful compaſs or meridian known:
Coaſting they kept the land within their ken,
And knew the North but when the pole-ſtar ſhone. Dryd.
When we conſider the reaſons we have to think, that what
lies within our ken is but a ſmall part of the univerſe, we
ſhall diſcover an huge abyſs of ignorance. Locłe.
Milton.
KE'NNFL. m. ſ. ſchenil, French.]
1. A cot for dogs.
A dog ſure, if he could ſpeak, had wit enough to deſcribe
his kennel. Sidney.
From forth the Kennel of thy womb hath crept
A hell-hound, that doth hunt us all to death. Shakeſp.
The ſeditious remain within their ſtation, which, by rea-
ſon of the naſtineſs of the beaſily multitude, might be more
fitly termed a Kennel than a camp. Hayward.
2. A number of dogs kept in a kennel.
A little herd of England's tim’rous deer,
Maz'd with a yelping Kennel of French curs. Shakeſpeare.
3. The hole of a fox, or other beaſt.
4. [Kennel, Dutch ; chenal, Fr. canalis, Latin.] The water-
courſe of a ſtreet.
Bad humours gather to a a bile; or, as divers Kennels flow
to one ſink, ſo in ſhort time their numbers increaſed. Hayw.
He always came in ſo dirty, as if he had been dragged
through the Zennel at a boarding-ſchool. Arbuthnot.
To KENNEL. v. m. [from Kennel.] To lie; to dwell: uſed of
beaſts, and of man in contempt.
Yet, when they liſt, would creep,
If ought diſturb’d their noiſe, into her womb,
And Kennel there; yet there ſtill bark'd and howl’d
Within, unleen. Milton's Par. Lºſt, b. ii.
The dog kennelled in a hollow tree, and the cock rooſted
upon the boughs. L'E/ºrange's Fables.
KEPT. pret. and part. paſſ of Heep.
KFrch E'IF. n.ſ. ſcovrecheif, Chaucer; couvre, to cover, and
chef, the head; and hence a handkercheif to wipe the face
or hands.]
1. A head dreſs.
I ſee how thine eye would emulate the diamond; thou
haſt the right arched bent of the brow, that becomes the
tire vailant.
—A plain kerchief, Sir John; my brows become nothing
elſe. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of J/ind/or-
The proudeſt Kerchief of the court ſhall reſt
Well ſatisfy'd of what they love the beſt.
2. Any cloath uſed in dreſs.
O! what a time have you choſe out, brave Caius,
To wear a Kerchief. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
Every man had a large Kerchef folded about the neck.
Hayward.
*:::::::::::: }a}. [Hom ºrdſ.) Dreſſed; hooded.
Dryden.
The evening comes
Kercheſt in a comely cloud,
While racking winds are piping loud.
KERF. m. ſ. ſceomran, Saxon, to cut.]
The ſawn-away ſlit between two pieces of ſtuff is called a
#erſ. Moxon's Mech. Exerci/2.
KERMEs, n, ſ. - -
Kermes is a roundiſh body, of the bigneſs of a pea, and
of a browniſh red colour, covered when moſt perfect with a
purpliſh grey duſt. It contains a multitude of little diſtinct
granules, ſoft, and when cruſhed yield a ſcarlet juice. . It is
found adhering to a kind of holin oak, and till lately was
generally underſtood to be a vegetable excreſcence; but we
now know it to be the extended body of an animal parent,
filled with a numerous offspring, which are the little red
granules. - Hiiſ.
KERN. m. ſ. [an Iriſh word.] Iriſh foot ſoldier; an Iriſh boor.
Out of the fry of theſe rake-hell horſeboys, growing up
in knavery and villainy, are their Kearn ſupplicd. Speºſer.
No ſooner juſtice had with valour arm’d, -
Compell'd theſe ſkipping kernes to truſt their heels,
But the Norweyan lord, ſurveying advantage, . . . . .
Began a freſh aſſault. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
If in good plight theſe Northern Kerns arrive,
Then does fortune promiſe fair. Philips's Briton.
KERN. m. ſ. A hand-mill conſiſting of two pieces of ſtone, by
which corn is ground. It is ſtill uſed in ſome parts of Scotland.
To KERN. v. m. [probably from Kernel, or, by change of a
vowel, corrupted from corn.]
1. To harden as ripened corn.
When the price of corn falleth, men break no more
ground than will ſupply their own turn, wherethrough it
Halleth out that an ill kerned or ſaved harveſt ſoon emptieth
their clá ſtore. - Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
º 2. To
Milton.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K E Y
K I C
-º-º-º:
2. Tº take the form of grains; to granulate.
. The principal knack is in making the juice, when ſuffi-
ºnly boiled, to kern or granulate. Grew.
KE RNEL., n.ſ.. .[cynnel, a gland, Saxon; Karne, Dutch;
cerneau, French.
The edible ſubſtance contained in a ſhell.
As brown in hue
As hazle nuts, and ſweeter than the kernels.
2. An inſtrument by which ſomething is ſcrewed or turned -
Hide the key of the jack. Świń
3. An explanation of anything difficult. y -
An emblem without a key to't, is no more than a tale of a
tub. - - - - L’Eſtrange.
Theſe notions, in the writings of the ancients darkly deli-
vered, receive a clearer light when compared with this theory,
Shakeſpeare. which repreſents every thing plainly, and is a key to their
There can be no kernel in this light nut; the ſoul of this though
:* - tS. Burnet's Theory of the Earth
man is his clothes. Shakeſp. All's will that ends well. # ſe wh - y of the Earth.
th º of the nut ſerves them for bread and meat, and of tº." o are accuſtomed to reaſon have got the º: º
e inells for cups. More. 4. Th - - .*.*.*e.
2. Ayº included in a huſk or integument. 4 fiftº of a muſical inſtrument which are ſtruck with the
* he kernel of a grape, the fig's ſmall grain, Pamela loves to handle -
- - - the ſpinnet, and touch the keys. Pam.
Can cloath a mountain, and o'erſhade a plain. Denham, 5. [In muſick.] Is a certain tone wherto every º,
Oats are ripe when the ſtraw turns yellow and the kernel
**::. whether long or ſhort, ought to be fitted; a - - - -
hard. - Mortimer's Husbandry. to be jºi. Or ſharp. not in reſpect .." ...
ºs' 3. The ſeeds of pulpy fruits. - but with relation to the flat or ſharp third, which is ioned
- . I think he will carry this iſland home in his pocket, and with it. 2 #. is
give it his ſon for an apple.—And ſowing the kernel of it in Hippolita, I woo'd thee with my ſword *13.
the ſea, bring forth more iſlands. Shakespeare Tempeſt. And won thy love, doing thee injuries; &gt;
* . The apple incloſed in wax was as freſh as at the firſt putting But I will wed thee in another key, &gt;
* in, and the kernels continued white. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling. Shakeſp.
4. The central part of any thing upon which the ambient ſtrata But ſpeak you with a ſad brow? Or do you play the
º are concreted. y
- - - - - flouting Jack Come, in what key ſhall k
A ſolid body in the bladder makes the kernel of a ſtone. Arb. go in the ſong &gt; sº. %. "...º.
5. Knobby concretions in childrens fleſh. Not know my voice! Oh, time's extremity
-: , To KERNEL. v. n, [from the noun..] To ripen to kernels. Haſt thou ſo crack'd and ſoli r
In Staffordſhire, garden-rouncivals ſown . the fields kernel In ſev’n ſhort years, that º... *
sº well, and yield a good increaſe. Mortimer’s Husbandry. Knows not my feeble key of untun'd cares? Shakeſpeare.
tº KERNELLY. adj. . [from kernel.] . Full of kernels; having the 6. [Kaye, Dutch; quai, French..]. A bank raiſed perpendicular
* -3. quality or reſemblance of kernels. for the eaſe of lading and unlading ſhips.
º KERNElwort. n.ſ. An herb. Ainſworth. A key of fire ran along the ſhore,
º KE'R's EY. n.ſ. [Karſaye, Dutch; cariſe, French. J Coarſe KE! And lighten’d all the river with a blaze. Dryden.
Ulfſ. e'YAGE. m. ſ. ſ from key.] Monev pai inor
Tafſata phraſes, ſilken terms preciſe, key. ſ. [. ty.] ney paid for º:
--. I do forſwear them; and I here proteſt, Key Ho/L E. m. ſ. [Key and hole.] The perforation in the door
Henceforth my wooing mind ſhall be expreſt
In ruſſet yeas, and honeſt Kerſey noes. Shakeſpeare.
His lackey with a linnen ſtock on one leg, and a Kerſey
boot-hoſe on the other. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
The ſame wool one man felts it into a hat, another weaves
it into cloth, and another into Kerſey or ſerge. Hale.
Thy Kerſey doublet ſpreading wide,
Drew Cicly's eye aſide. Gay.
KEST. The preter tenſe of caſt. It is ſtill uſed in Scotland.
Only that noiſe heav'ns rolling circles ºff. Fairfax.
Keſsºr Rel. n.ſ. A little kind of baſtard hawk. Hanmer.
In his keſtrel kind,
A pleaſing vein of glory, vain did find,
To which his flowing tongue, and troublous ſprit,
Gave him great aid. Fairy Queen.
Kites and Reſirels have a reſemblance with hawks. Bacon.
Kerch. n.ſ.. [from caicchio, Italian, a barrel.] A heavy
ſhip.
I wonder
That ſuch a Ketch can with his very bulk
Take up the rays o' th' beneficial ſun,
And keep it from the earth. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
KETTLE. n.ſ. [cerl, Saxon; Ketel, Dutch..] A veſſel in
which liquor is boiled. In the kitchen the name of pot is
given to the boiler that grows narrower towards the top, and
of kettle to that which grows wider. In authors they are
confounded.
The fire thus form’d, ſhe ſets the Kettle on;
Like burniſh'd gold the little ſeethel ſhone. Dryden.
KETTLEDRUM. m.ſ. [Kettle and drum.] A drum of which
the head is ſpread over a body of braſs.
As he drains his draughts of Rheniſh down,
The Kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
or lock through which the key is put.
Make doors faſt upon a woman's wit, and it will out at the
caſement; ſhut that, and 'twill out at the keyhole. Shakeſpeare.
I looked in at the keyhole, and ſaw a well-made man. Tatler.
I keep her in one room; I lock it;
The key, look here, is in this pocket;
The keyhole is that left? Moſt certain. Prior.
Keysto'NE. n.ſ. [Key and ſtone..] The middle ſtone of an
arch.
If you will add a keyſtone and chaptrels to the arch, let the
breadth of the upper part of the keyſtone be the height of the
arch. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
KIBE. m. ſ. [from kerb, a cut, German, Skinner; from kibwe,
Welſh, Minſhew.] An ulcerated chilblain; a chap in the
heel cauſed by the cold.
If 'twere a kibe, 'twould put me to my ſlipper. Shakeſp.
The toe of the peaſant comes ſo near the heel of our cour-
tier, that it galls his kibe. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
One boaſt of the cure, calling them a few kibes. Wiſeman.
KI'BED. adj. [from kibe.] Troubled with kibes: as kibed heels.
To KICK. v.a. [Kauchen, German; calco, Latin.] To ſtrike
with the foot.
He muſt endure and digeſt all affronts, adore the foot that
Kicks him, and kiſs the hand that ſtrikes him. South.
It anger'd Turenne once upon a day, -
To ſee a footman kick'd that took his pay. Pope.
Another, whoſe ſon had employments at court, that valued
not, now and then, a kicking or a caning. Swift.
To Kick. v. n. To beat the foot in anger or contempt.
wherefore kick ye at my ſacrifice, which I have com-
manded ? 1 Sa. ii. 29.
Jeſhurun waxed fat and kicked. Deutr. xxxii. 15.
The doctrines of the holy Scriptures are terrible enemies to
wicked men, and this is that which makes them kick againſt
religion, and ſpurn at the doćtrines of that holy book. Tillotſ.
Kick. n.f. [from the verb.]. A blow with the foot. -
What, are you dumb Quick, with your anſwer, quick,
Before my foot ſalutes you with a ##. Drd juvenal.
Kr'cker. n.f. [from kick.j One who ſtrikes with his foot.
KEY. n.ſ. [ coeş, Saxon.]
*". 1. An inſtrument formed with cavities correſpondent to the
wards of a lock, by which the bolt of a lock is puſhed forward
- or backward.
º If a man were porter of hellgate, he ſhould have old turn-
º * ing the key. Shakeſp. Macbeth. Kickshaw. n.ſ. [This word is ſuppoſed, I think with truth,
º Fortune, that arrant whore, to be only a corruption of quelque choſe, ſomething; yet Milton
º Ne'er turns the key to th’ poor. Shakespeare King Lear. ſeems to have underſtood 1t otherwiſe; for he writes it Åick-
º Poor key cold figure of a holy king ! ſhoe, and ſeems to think it uſed in contempt of dancing.]
Pale aſhes of the houſe of Lancaſter. Shakespeare Rich. III. 1. Something uncommon; fantaſtical; ſomething ridiculous.
The glorious ſtandard laſt to heav'n they ſpread, Shall we need the monſieurs of Paris to take our hopeful
º with Peter's keys ennobled and his crown. Fairfax. outh into their ſlight and prodigal cuſtodies, and ſend them
Yet ſome there be, that by due ſteps aſpire Över back again transformed into mimicks, apes, and kick-
º To lay their juſt hands on that golden Key, ſhoe - - †.
That opes the palace of eternity. Milton. 2. A diſh ſo changed by the cookery that it can ſcarcely be
º Conſciênce is its own counſellor, the ſole maſter of its own known.
-
Some pigeons, a couple of ſhort-legged hens, a joint ºf sº
mutton, and any pretty little tiny kickſhaw. Whakºſ H.I.V. º. 3
In wit, as well as war, they give us vigour; *
… " ſecrets; and it is the privilege of our nature, that every man
&amp; ſhould keep the key of his own breaft. South's Sermons.
- He came, and knocking thrice, without delay
*
Fºnton.
The longing lady heard, and turn'd the Kºy. Dryden. Creſſy was loſt by kickſhaws and ſoup-meage. + *
i. in * room, I lock it; y J Kºcksy-wicksey, n.ſ. (from ſick and wº.] A made word 3. º #
The {..., look here, is in this pocket. Prior. in ridicule and diſdain of a wife. Fianmer. 4-
y, loº 12 Z He . 5.
- - *<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K I L
K I N
f{e wears his honour in a box, unſeen,
That hugs his kickſy-wickſy here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms.
KID. m. ſ. [kid, Daniſh.]
1. The young of a goat.
Leaping like wanton Kids in pleaſant ſpring. Fa. Queen.
There was a herd of é. with their young ones, upon
which fight fir Richard Graham tells, he would ſnap one of
the kids, and carry him cloſe to their lodging. Wotton.
Sporting the lion ramp'd, and in his paw
Dandled the kid. Milton.
So kids and whelps their fires and dams expreſs;
And ſo the great I meaſur’d by the leſs. Dryden's Virgil.
2. [From cidwlen, Welſh, a faggot.) A bundle of heath or
furze.
To Kid. v. a. [from the noun J To bring forth kids.
Kı'DD FR. m. ſ. An ingreſſer of corn to enhance its price. Ainſ.
To KIDNA'P. v. a. [from kind, Dutch, a child, and nap.] To
ſteal children; to ſteal human beings.
KIºr: R. m. ſ. [from kidnap.] One who ſteals human
eings.
The man compounded with the merchant, upon condition
that he might have his child again; for he had ſmelt it out,
that the merchant himſelf was the kidnapper. L’Eſtrange.
Theſe people lye in wait for our children, and may be con-
ſidered as a kind of kidnappers within the law. Spediator.
KIDNEY. n.ſ. [Etymology unknown.]
1. Theſe are two in number, one on each ſide: they have the
ſame figure as kidneybeans: their length is four or five fingers,
their breadth three, and their thickneſs two: the right is un-
der the liver, and the left under the ſpleen. The uſe of the
kidneys is to ſeparate the urine from the blood, which, by the
motion of the heart and arteries, is thruſt into the emulgent
branches, which carry it to the little glands, by which the
ſeroſity being ſeparated, is received by the orifice of the little
tubes, which go from the glands to the pelvis, and from thence
it runs by the ureters into the bladder. 9aincy.
A youth laboured under a complication of diſeaſes, from his
meſentery and kidneys. JWiſeman's Surgery.
2. Race; kind: in ludicrous language.
Think of that, a man of my kidney; think of that, that
am as ſubjećt to heat as butter; a man of continual diſſolution
and thaw. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſºr.
There are millions in the world of this man's kidney, that
take up the ſame reſolution without noiſe. L’Eſtrange.
Ki'DNEY BEAN. n.ſ.. [ſo named from its ſhape.]
It hath a papilionaceous flower, out of whoſe empalement
riſes the pointal, which becomes a long pod, incloſing ſeveral
ſeeds, which are ſhaped almoſt like a kidney : it has pinnated
leaves, conſiſting of an unequal number of lobes. Miller.
Kidneybeans are a ſort of cod ware, that are very pleaſant
wholeſome food. Mortimer's Husbandry.
KI’DNEY vetch. }nſ Plants. Ainſworth.
Shakeſpeare.
Ki’DNEY wort.
Ki'lper KIN. n.ſ. [kindekin, a baby, Dutch..] A ſmall barrel.
Make in the kilderkin a great bung-hole of purpoſe. Bacon.
A tun of man in thy large bulk is writ;
But ſure thou'rt but a £ilderkin of wit. Dryden.
To KILL v. a. [ Anciently To quell; crellan, Saxon; Éelen,
Dutch J
1. To deprive of life; to put to death as an agent.
Dar'ſt thou reſolve to kill a friend of mine?
—Pleaſe . I'd rather kill two enemies. Shakespeare R. III.
Ye have brought us forth into this wilderneſs, to kill this
whole aſſembly with hunger. Ex. xvi. 3.
There was killing of young and old, making away of men,
women, and children. 2 Mac. v. 13.
2. To deſtroy animals for food.
We're mere uſurpers, tyrants, and what's worſe,
To fright the animals, and to kill them up
In their aſſign'd and native dwelling place. Shakeſpeare.
Thou ſhalt kill of thy herd, and of thy flock. Deutr. xii.
Shall I take my bread, and my fleſh that I have killed for my
ſhearers ? 1 Sa. xxv. 11.
3. To deprive of life as a cauſe or inſtrument.
The medicines which go to the magical ointments, if they
were uſed inwards, would kill thoſe that uſe them; and there-
fore they work potently, though outwards. Bacon.
4. To deprive of vegetative or other motion, or active qualities.
Try with oil, or barm of drink, ſo they be ſuch things as
Åill not the bough. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Catharticks of mercurials mix with all animal acids, as ap-
pears by killing it with ſpittle. Floyer on the Humours.
KI'LLER. n.ſ.. [from kill.] One that deprives of life.
What ſorrow, what amazement, what ſhame was in Am-
phialus, when he ſaw his dear foſter-father find him the killer
of his only ſon Sidney.
Wilt thou for the old lion hunt, or fill
His hungry whelps ? and for the killer kill,
When couch'd in dreadful dens : Sandys.
So rude a time,
When love was held ſo capital a crime,
That a crown'd head could no compaſſion find,
But dy’d, becauſe the killer had been kind. If aller.
Ki'llow. n.ſ. [This ſeems a corruption of coal and low, a
flame, as ſoot is thereby produced.]
An earth of a blackiſh or deep blue colour, and doubtleſs
had its name from kollow, by which name, in the North, the
ſmut or grime on the backs of chimneys is called. Woodward.
KILN. m. ſ. [cyln, Saxon J A ſtove; a fabrick formed for
admitting heat, in order to dry or burn things contained in
1t.
What ſhall I do? I'll creep up into the chimney.
There they always uſe to diſcharge their birding-pieces: creep
into the film hole. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſºr.
After the putting forth in ſprouts, and the drying upon the
Åiln, there will be gained a buſhel in eight of malt. Bacºn.
Phyſicians chuſe lime which is newly drawn out of the
Kiln, and not ſlacked. 44oxon's Mech. Exer.
To KI'LNDRY. v. a. [kiln and dry.] To dry by means of a
kiln.
The beſt way is to kilndry them. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Kilt for killed. - Spenſer.
Ki'Mbo. adj. [a ſchembo, Italian.] Crooked; bent; arched.
The kimbo handles ſeem with bears-foot carv’d,
And never yet to table have been ſerv'd. Dryden's Virgil.
He obſerved them edging towards one another to whiſper;
ſo that John was forced to fit with his arms a kimbo, to keep
them aſunder. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
KIN. n.ſ.. [cynne, Saxon.]
1. Relation either of conſanguinity or affinity.
You muſt uſe them with fit reſpects, according to the bonds
of nature; but you are of kin, and ſo a friend to their per-
ſons, not to their errours. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Th’ unhappy Palamon,
Whom Theſeus holds in bonds, and will not free,
Without a crime, except his kin to me.
2. Relatives; thoſe who are of the ſame race.
Tumultuous wars
Shall kin with kin, and kind with kind confound.
The father, mother, and the kin beſide,
Were overborn by fury of the tide.
3. A relation; one related.
Then is the ſoul from God; ſo pagans ſay,
Which ſaw by nature's light her heavenly kind,
Naming her kin to God, and God's bright ray,
A citizen of heav'n, to earth confin'd. Davier.
4. The ſame generical claſs, though perhaps not the ſame ſpe-
cies; thing related.
The burſt,
And the ear-deaf’ning voice of the oracle,
Kin to Jove's thunder, ſo ſurpriz'd my ſenſe,
That I was nothing. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
The odour of the fixed nitre is very languid; but that
which it diſcovers, being diſſolved in a little hot water, is
altogether differing from the ſtink of the other, being of kin
to that of other alcalizate ſalts. Boyle.
5. A diminutive termination from kind, a child, Dutch: as, ma-
nikin, minikin.
KIND. adj. [from cynne, relation, Saxon.]
1. Benevolent; filled with general good-will.
By the kind gods, 'tis moſt ignobly done
To pluck me by the beard. Shakespeare King Lear.
Some of the ancients, like kind hearted men, have talked
much of annual refrigeriums, or intervals of puniſhment to
the damned, as particularly on the great feſtivals of the reſur-
rečtion and aſcenſion. South's Sermony.
2. Favourable; beneficent.
He is kind to the unthankful and evil.
KIND. n. ſ. [cynne, Saxon.]
1. Race; generical claſs. Kind in Teutonick Engliſh anſwers
to genus, and ſort to ſpecies; though this diſtinčtion, in popular
language, is not always obſerved.
Thus far we have endeavoured in part to open of what na–
ture and force laws are, according to their kinds. Hocker-
As when the total kind
Of birds, in orderly array on wing,
Came ſummon'd over Eden, to receive
Their names of Thee. Milton's Parad. Loft, b. vi.
That both are animalia,
Igrant; but not rationalia;
For though they do agree in kind, -
Specifick difference we find. Hudibras, p. i.
God and nature do not principally concern themſelves in
the preſervation of particulars, but of kind; and companies.
South's Sermons.
Dryaen.
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
Lu. vi. 35-
He with his wife were only left behind
Of periſh'd man; they two were human kind. Drydºn.
I inſtance ſome ačts of virtue common to Heathens and
Chriſtians; but I ſuppoſe them to be performed by Chriſtians,
after a more ſublime manner than ever they were among the
Heathens; and even when they do not differ in kind from
moral virtues, yet differ in the degrees of perfection. Atterb.
He,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K I N
K I N
gºt
ºf ſº
::::::
::::::
ºf
º:2:
… :
He, with a hundred arts refin'd,
Shall ſtretch thy conqueſts over half the kind. Pope.
2. Particular nature.
No human laws are exempt from faults, ſince thoſe that
have been looked upon as moſt perfect in their kind, have been
found, upon enquiry, to have ſo many. Baker.
3. Natural ſtate.
He did, by edićt, give the goods of all the priſoners unto
thoſe that had taken them, either to take them in kind, or
compound for them. Bacon's Henry VII.
The tax upon tillage was often levied in kind upon corn,
and called decume, or tithes. Arbuthnot on Coins.
4. Nature; natural determination.
The ſkilful ſhepherd peel'd me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind,
He ſtuck them up before the fulſome ewes. Shakeſpeare.
Some of you, on pure inſtinét of nature,
Are led by kind tº admire your fellow-creature. Dryden.
5. Manner; way.
Send me your priſoners with the ſpeedieſt means,
Or you ſhall hear in ſuch a kind from me
As will diſpleaſe you. Shakespeare Henry IV.
This will encourage induſtrious improvements, becauſe
many will rather venture in that kind than take five in the hun-
dred. Bacon's Eſſays.
6. Sort. It has a ſlight and unimportant ſenſe.
Diogenes was #. in a kind of ſcorn, what was the mat-
ter that philoſophers haunted rich men, and not rich men phi-
loſophers He anſwered, becauſe the one knew what they
wanted, the other did not. Bacon.
To Kı'NDL E. v. a.
1. To ſet on fire; to light; to make to burn.
He will take thereof, and warm himſelf; yea, he kindleth it
and baketh bread. Iſ xliv. 15.
I was not forgetful of thoſe ſparks, which ſome mens diſ-
tempers formerly ſtudied to kindle in parliaments. K. Charles.
If the fire burns vigorouſly, it is no matter by what means
it was at firſt kindled: there is the ſame force and the ſame re-
freſhing virtue in it, kinded by a ſpark from a flint, as if it were
#indled from the ſun. South's Sermons.
2. To inflame the paſſions; to exaſperate; to animate; to heat;
to fire the mind.
I've been to you a true and humble wife;
At all times to your will conformable:
Ever in fear to kindle your diſlike. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
He hath kindled his wrath againſt me, and counteth me as
one of his enemies. job xix. I 1.
Thus one by one kindling each other's fire,
*Till all inflam’d, they all in one agree. Daniel’s Civ. War.
Each was a cauſe alone, and all combin'd
To kindle vengeance in her haughty mind. Dryden.
To KINDLE. v. n. [cinnu, Welſh; cynbelan, Saxon.]
1. To catch fire.
When thou walkeſt through the fire, thou ſhalt not be
burnt, neither ſhall the flame kindle upon thee.
2. [From cennan, to bring forth, Saxon.]
Are you native of this place?
—As the coney that you ſee dwells where ſhe is kindled. Shakespeare
KI'NDLER. m. ſ. [from kindle.] One that lights; one who
inflames. *
Now is the time that rakes their revels keep,
Kindlers of riot, enemies of ſleep. Gay.
Kı'NDLY. adv. [from kind.].
1. Benevolently; favourably; with good will.
Sir Thurio borrows his wit from your ladyſhip's looks, and
ſpends what he borrows kindly in your company. Shakeſpeare.
I ſometime lay here in Corioli,
At a poor man's houſe: he us'd me kindly. Shakeſp. Coriol.
Be Kindy affectioned one to another, with brotherly love,
in honour prefering one another. Ro. xii. Io.
His grief ſome pity, others blame;
The fatal cauſe all kindly ſeek. Prior.
Who, with leſs deſigning ends,
Kindlier entertain their friends;
With good words, and count'nance ſprightly,
Strive to treat them all politely Swift.
KI'NDLY. adj.. [from kind; probably from kind the ſubſtantive.]
1. Homogeneal; congeneal; kindred; of the ſame nature.
This competency I beſeech God I may be able to digeſt
into kindly juice, that I may grow thereby. Hammond.
Theſe ſoft fires
Not only enlighten, but with kindy heat,
Of various influence, foment and warm,
Temper or nouriſh. 44lton's Parad. Loft, b. iv.
2. The foregoing ſenſe ſeems to have been originally implied by
this word; but following writers, inattentive to its etymology,
confounded it with kind.
3. Bland; mild ; ſoftening.
Through all the living regions do'ſt thou move,
And ſcatter'ſt, where thou goeſt, the kindly ſeeds of love.
Dryden.
If xliii. 2. '
Ye heav'ns, from high the dewy nečiar pour,
And in ſoft ſilence ſhed the Kindly ſhow'r I Pope.
Ki'NdNess. n.ſ.. [from kind.] Benevolence; beneficence;
good will; favour; love.
If there be kindneſs, meekneſs, or comfort in her tongue,
then is not her huſband like other men. Eccluſ, xxxvi. 23.
Old Lelius profeſſes he had an extraordinary kindneſs for
ſeveral young people. Collier of Friendſhip.
Ever bleſt be Cytherea's ſhrine,
Since thy dear breaſt has felt an equal wound,
Since in thy kindneſs my deſires are crown'd. Prior.
Love and inclination can be produced only by an expe-
rience or opinion of kindneſs to us. Rogers's Sermons.
KI'NDRED. n.ſ. [from in ; cynnene, Saxon ]
1. Relation by birth or marriage; cognation; affinity.
Like her, of equal kindred to the throne,
You keep her conqueſts, and extend your own.
2. Relation; ſort. -
His horſe hipp'd with an old mothy ſaddle, and the ſtirrups
of no kindred. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
3. Relatives.
I think there is no man ſecure
But the queen's kindred. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Nor needs thy juſter title the foul guilt
Of Eaſtern kings, who, to ſecure their reign,
Muſt have their brothers, ſons, and kindred ſlain. Denham.
KI'NDRed. adj. Congeneal; related; cognate.
From Tuſcan Coritum he claim'd his birth;
But after, when exempt from mortal earth,
From thence aſcended to his kindred ſkies
Dryden.
A god. Dryden.
KIN E. n.ſ. plur. from cow.
To milk the kine, -
E'er the milk-maid fine
Hath open'd her eyne. Ben. johnſon.
A field I went, amid’ the morning dew,
To milk my kine. Gay.
KING.. n.ſ. [A contraćtion of the Teutonick word cuning, or
cyning, the name of ſovereign dignity. In the primitive
tongue it ſignifies ſtout or valiant, the kings of moſt nations
being, in the beginning, choſen by the people on account of
their valour and ſtrength. Werftegan.]
1. Monarch; ſupreme governour.
The great king of kings,
Hath in the table of his law commanded,
That thou ſhalt do no murder.
A ſubſtitute ſhines brightly as a king,
Until a king be by ; and then his ſtate
Empties itſelf, as doth an inland brook
Into the main of waters. Shakespeare Merch, of Venice.
True hope is ſwift, and flies with ſwallows wings ;
Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings. Shakeſp.
The king becoming graces,
As juſtice, verity, temp'rance, ſtableneſs,
Bounty, perſev’rance, mercy, lowlineſs,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
I have no reliſh of them. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Thus ſtates were form'd; the name of king unknown,
* Till common int’reſt plac'd the ſway in one;
'Twas virtue only, or in arts or arms,
Diffuſing bleſfings, or averting harms,
The ſame which in a fire the ſons obey'd,
A prince the father of a people made. . Pope.
2. It is taken by Bacon in the feminine: as prince alſo, i.
Ferdinand and Iſabella, kings of Spain, recovered the great
and rich kingdom of Granada from the Moors. Bacon.
3. A card with the pićture of a king.
The king unſeen
Lurk'd in her hand, and mourn’d his captive queen. Pope.
4. King at Arms, or of heralds, a principal officer at arms,
that has the pre-eminence of the ſociety; of whom there are
three in number, viz. Garter, Norroy, and Clarencieux:
Phillips.
A letter under his own hand was lately ſhewed me by fir
William Dugdale, king at arms. //alton.
To KING. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſupply with a king. -
England is ſo idly king'd,
Her ſceptre ſo fantaſtically borne,
By a vain, giddy, ſhallow, humorous youth,
That fear attends her not. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
2. To make royal; to raiſe to royalty.
Sometimes am I a king;
Then treaſon makes me wiſh myſelf a beggar,
And ſo I am : then cruſhing penury
Perſuades me, I was better when a king; -
Then am I king’d again. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
KI'NGApple. n.ſ. A kind of apple. - -
The kingapple is preferred before the jenneting: Mrtimer.
Kı'No craft. n.ſ.. [ting and craft.] The ačt of governing.
A word commonly uſed by king james.
Shakespeare R. III.
Ri'r Gcup.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K I N
|
f
KI'NGc UP. m. ſ. [king and cup.] A flower
June is drawn in a mantle of dark graſs green, and upon .
his head a garland of bents, kingcups, and maidenhair. Peach.
Fair is the kingcup that in meadow blows,
Fair is the daiſy that befide her grows. Gay.
KI'NG Do M. n.ſ.. [from king.]
1. The dominion of a king; the territories ſubjećt to a
monarch.
You're welcome,
Moſt learned, reverend ſir, into our kingdom. Shakeſp.
Moſes gave unto them the kingdom of Sihon, king of the
Amorites, and the kingdom of Og, king of Baſhan. Num. xxxii.
2. A different claſs or order of beings. A word chiefly uſed
among naturaliſts.
The animal and vegetable kingdoms are ſo nearly joined,
that if you take the loweſt of one, and the higheſt of the
other, there will ſcarce be perceived any difference. Lacke.
3. A region; a tract.
The wat'ry kingdom is no bar
To ſtop the foreign ſpirits; but they come,
As o'er a brook, to ſee fair Portia. Shakeſp. March. of P'en.
KI'NGFisher. m. ſ. A ſpecies of bird.
When dew refreſhing on the paſture fields
The moon beſtows, kingfiſhers play on ſhore. May's Virgil.
Bitterns, herons, ſea-gulls, kingfiſhers, and water-rats, are
great enemies to fiſh. Mortimer's Husbandry.
KI'NGLIke. di. ſſrom ki
KI'NGLY. }a lj. [from king.]
I. Royal ; ſovereign; monarchical.
There we'll ſit,
Ruling in large and ample empery,
O'er France, and all her almoſt kingly dukedoms. Shakeſp.
Yet this place
Had been thy kingly ſeat, and here thy race,
From all the ends of peopled earth, had come
To rev'rence thee. Dryden's State of Innocence.
In Sparta, a kingly government, though the people were
perfectly free, the adminiſtration was in the two kings and
the ephori. Swift.
The cities of Greece, when they drove out their tyranni-
cal kings, either choſe others from a new family, or aboliſhed
the kingly government, and became free ſtates. Swift.
2. Belonging to a king.
Why lieſt thou with the vile
In loathſome beds, and leav'ſt the kingly couch
A watch-caſe to a common 'larum-bell ? Shakeſp. H. IV.
Then ſhalt thou give me with thy kingly hand,
What huſband in thy power I will command. Shakeſpeare.
3. Noble; auguſt.
He was not born to live a ſubječt life, each ačtion of his
bearing in it majeſty, ſuch a kingly entertainment, ſuch a king-
A magnificence, ſuch a kingly heart for enterprizes. Sidney.
I am far better born than is the king;
More like a king, more kingly in my thoughts. Shakeſp..
K.'s Gly, adv. With an air of royalty; with ſuperiour dignity.
Adam bow'd low; he, kingly, from his ſtate
Inclin’d not. Milt. Parad. Loft.
His hat, which never vail'd to human pride,
Walker with rev'rence took, and laid aſide;
- Low bow'd the reſt, he, kingly, did but nod. Dunciad.
KINGSE’vil. n. ſ. [King and evil..] A ſcrofulous diſemper, in
which the glands are ulcerated, commonly believed to be cured
by the touch of the king.
Sore eyes are frequently a ſpecies of the kingſvil, and take
their beginning from vicious humours inflaming the tunica
ad nata. J/ſeman's Surgery.
Ki'Ngship. m. ſ. [from King.] Royalty; monarchy.
They deſigned and propoſed to me the new modelling of
foyºreignty and Kingſhip, without any reality of power, or
without any neceſſity of ſubječtion and obedience. K. Charles.
We know how ſucceſsful the late uſurper was, while his
army believed him real in his zeal againſt fingſhip; but when
they found out the impoſture, upon his aſpiring to the ſame
himſelf, he was preſently deſerted and oppoſed by them, and
never able to crown his uſurped greatneſs with the addition of
that title which he paſſionately thirſted after. South.
KI'NGSPEAR. m. ſ. A plant.
The ſtalk is round, ſmooth, ſtrong, and branchy; the
leaves like thoſe of a leek, but ſtronger and narrower: the
flowers are divided commonly as far as the baſis, naked, ſtel-
lated, and embracing the ovary like a calyx : the apex of the
ovary puts forth ſix ſtamina, and a long tube from the centre,
which becomes a roundiſh fruit, carnous, triangular, divided
into three partitions incloſing triangular ſeeds. Miller.
KING's Fox E. m. ſ. A fiſh. Ainſworth.
KissFolk, n.ſ.. [in and folk.] Relations; thoſe who are of
the ſame family.
Thoſe lords, ſince their firſt grants of thoſe lands, have
beſtowed them amongſt their tinyolks. Spenſer.
My Kinſºlk have failed, and my familiar friends forgotten
ne. job xix. 14.
Kiss MAs. "...ſ. ſkin and man.] A man of the ſame race or
family.
The jury he made to be choſen out of their neareſt kinſmen,
and their judges he made of their own fathers. Spenſer.
Both fair, and both of royal blood they ſeem’d,
Whom kinſmen to the crown the heralds deem'd. Dryden.
Let me ſtand excluded from my right,
Robb'd of my kinſman's arms, who firſt appear'd in fight.
Dryden's Fables.
There is a branch of the Medicis in Naples: the head of it
has been owned as a kinſman by the great duke, and’tis thought
will ſucceed to his dominions. Addiſon on Italy.
KI'Nswoman. m. ſ. ſkin and woman.] A female relation.
A young noble lady, near kinſwoman to the fair Helen,
queen of Corinth, was come thither. Sidney.
The duke was as much in love with wit as he was with his
Ainſwoman. Dennis's Letters.
Kirk. n ſ. [cyrce, Saxon; zvetaxx...] An old word for a
church, yet retained in Scotland.
#: they haſten the poſts to dight,
And all the kirk pillars ere day-light,
With hawthorn buds, and ſweet eglantine. Spenser.
Nor is it all the nation hath theſe ſpots,
There is a church as well as kirk of Scots. Cleaveland.
What one party thought to rivet by the Scots, that the other
contemns, deſpiſing the kirk government and diſcipline of the
Scots. King Charles.
Kl'rtle. n.ſ.. [cyncel, Saxon.] An upper garment; a gown.
All in a kirtle of diſcoloured ſay
He clothed was. Fairy Queen:
What ſtuff wilt thou have a kirtle of? Thou ſhalt have a
cap to-morrow. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Thy gowns, thy ſhoes, thy beds of roſes,
Thy cap, thy Kirtle, and thy poeſies,
Soon break, ſoon wither, ſoon forgotten,
In folly ripe, in reaſon rotten. Raleigh.
To KISS. v. a. [cuſan, Welſh; x!...]
1. To touch with the lips.
But who thoſe ruddy lips can miſs, -
Which bleſſed ſtill themſelves do kiſs. Sidney.
He took
The bride about the neck, and fift her lips
With ſuch a clamorous ſmack, that at the parting
All the church echo'd. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
Their lips were four red roſes on a ſtalk,
And in their ſummer beauty kiſs'd each other. Shakespeare R. III.
2. To treat with fondneſs.
The hearts of princes kiſ, obedience,
So much they love it; but to ſtubborn ſpirits,
They ſwell and grow as terrible as ſtorms. Shakespeare H. VIII.
3. To touch gently.
The moon ſhines bright: in ſuch a night as this,
When the ſweet wind did gently kiſ; the trees,
And they did make no noiſe. Shakespeare Merch. of Penice.
Kiss. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Salute given by joining lips.
What ſenſe had I of her ſtol’n hours or luſt?
I found not Caſio's Kiſes on her lips.
Upon my livid lips beſtow a kiſs :
O envy not the dead, they feel not bliſs' Dryden.
KI'ss ER. n.ſ.. [from Kiſs.] One that kiſſes.
KI'ssING crust. n.ſ. [Kiſſing and cruſt.] Cruſt formed where
one loaf in the oven touches another.
Theſe bak'd him kiſſingeruſis, and thoſe
Brought him ſmall beer.
KIT. n.ſ. [Kitte, Dutch.]
1. A large bottle. S{inner.
2. A ſmall diminutive fiddle.
'Tis kept in a caſe fitted to it, almoſt like a dancing-maſter's
kit. Grew's Muſæum.
3. A ſmall wooden veſſel, in which Newcaſtle ſalmon is ſent up
to toWn.
KITCHEN. m. ſ. ſiegin, Welſh; Feg, Flemiſh; cºcene, Sax.
cuiſine, French; cucina, Italian; £yſhen, Erſe.] The room in
a houſe where the proviſions are cooked. -
Theſe being culpable of this crime, or favourers of their
friends, which are ſuch by whom their Aitchens are ſometimes
amended, will not ſuffer any ſuch ſtatute to paſs. Spenſer.
Can we judge it a thing ſeemly for any man to go about the
building of an houſe to the God of heaven, with no other ap-
pearance than if his end were to rear up a kitchen or a parlour
for his own uſe 2 Hºoker.
King's Cookery.
He was taken into ſervice in his court to a baſe office in his
Hitchen; ſo that he turned a broach that had worn a crown. Bac.
We ſee no new built palaces aſpire,
No kitchens emulate the veſtal fire. Pope.
Kl'rcHEN GARDEN. m.ſ. [ kitchen and garden. J Garden in
which eſculent plants are produced.
Gardens, if planted with ſuch things as are fit for food, are
called kitchengardens. Bacon.
A kitchengarden is a more pleaſant fight than the fineſt
orangery. Speciator.
Kl'rch ES MAID. m.ſ. [kitchen and maid.]. A cookmaid.
Kl'rch ENSTUFF. n.ſ. [Kitchen and ſitſ...]. The fat of meat
ſcummed off the pot, or gathered out of the **,
I s
Shakespeare Othello.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K. N. A
K N A
*
As a thrifty wench ſcrapes ſºft
And barreling the droppings and the ſnu
Of waſting candles, which in thirty year,
Reliquely kept, perchance buys wedding cheer. Bonne.
Inſtead of kitchenſiuff ſome cry
A goſpel preaching miniſtry. Hudibras.
Kl'rcHe swench. n.ſ. [kitchen and wench.] Scullion; maid
employed to clean the inſtruments of cookery.
Laura to his lady was but a kitchenwench. Shakeſteare.
Roaſting and boiling leave to the kitchenwench. Swift.
KI’tch EN work. m. ſ. [kitchen and work.] Cookery; work
done in the kitchen.
Kite. n.ſ. [cyca, Saxon.]
1. A bird of prey that infeſts the farms, and ſteals the chickens.
Ravenous crows and kites
Fly o'er our heads. Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
More pity that the eagle ſhould be mew'd,
While kites and buzzards prey at liberty. Shakespeare R. III.
The heron, when ſhe ſoareth high, ſo as ſometimes ſhe is
ſeen to paſs over a cloud, ſheweth winds; but kites, flying
aloft, ſhew fair and dry weather. - Bacon.
A leopard and a cat ſeem to differ juſt as a kite doth from
an eagle. Grew.
2. A name of reproach denoting rapacity.
Deteſted kite / thou lieſt.
3. A fiétitious bird made of paper.
A man may have a great eſtate conveyed to him; but if he
will madly burn, or childiſhly make paper kites of his deeds,
he forfeits his title with his evidence. Gov. of the Tongue.
Kı”. Es foot. m. ſ. A plant. Ainſworth.
Kl'rt N n.ſ. [Katteken, Dutch..] A young cat.
That a mare will ſooner drown than an horſe is not expe-
ricnced, nor is the ſame obſerved in the drowning of whelps
and #itters, - Brown's Vulg. Err.
Shakespeare King Lear.
It was ſcratched in playing with a kitten. //ſeman.
Helen was juſt ſlipt into bed;
Her eyebrows on the toilet lay,
Away the Kitten with them fled,
As fees belonging to her prey. Prior.
To KITT EN. v. n. [from the noun..] To bring forth young cats.
So it would have done
At the ſame ſeaſon, if your mother's cat
Had Kitten'd, though yourſelf had ne'er been born. Shakeſp.
The eagle timbered upon the top of a high oak, and the
cat fittened in the hollow trunk of it. L’Eſtrange.
To Klick. v. n. [from clack.]
1. To make a ſmall ſharp noiſe.
2. In Scotland it denotes to pilfer or ſteal away ſuddenly with a
ſnatch.
To KNA.B. v. a. [knappen, Dutch; Knaap, Erſe.] To bite.
Perhaps properly to bite ſomething brittle, that makes a noiſe
when it is broken ; ſo as that Knab and knap may be the ſame.
I had much rather lie Knabbing cruits, without fear, in my
own hole, than be miſtreſs of the world with cares. L'E/Iran.
An aſs was wiſhing, in a hard Winter, for a little warm
weather, and a mouthful of freſh graſs to Knab upon. L'E/ºr:
KNACK. m. ſ. ſenec, Welſh, ſly knavery 5 cmajunge, ſkill, Sax.]
1. A little machine; a petty contrivance; a toy.
When I was young, I was wont
To load my ſhe with knacks: I would have ranſack'd
The pedlar's ſilken treaſury, and have pour'd it
To her acceptance. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
For thee, fond boy,
If I may ever know thou do'ſt but figh
That thou no more ſhalt ſee this knack, as never
I mean thou ſhalt, we'll bar thee from ſucceſs.
This cap was moulded on a porringer,
A velvet diſh; fie, fie, 'tis lewd and filthy:
Why ’tis a cockle, or a walnut ſhell,
A Knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap. Shakeſpeare.
But is't not preſumption to write verſe to you,
Who make the better poems of the two
For all theſe pretty knacks that you compoſe,
Alas, what are they but poems in proſe!
He expounded both his pockets,
And found a watch, with rings and lockets;
A copper-plate, with almanacks
Engrav'd upon't, with other knacks. Hudibras.
2. A readineſs; an habitual facility; a lucky dexterity.
I'll teach you the knacks
Of eating of flax,
And out of their noſes
Draw ribbands and poſies. Ben. johrſon's Gypſies.
The Knack of faſt and looſe paſſes with fooliſh people for a
turn of wit; but they are not aware all this while of the de-
ſperate conſequences of an ill habit. L’Eſtrange.
There is a certain knack in the art of converſation that gives
a good grace to many things, by the manner and addreſs of
handling them. L’Eſtrange.
Knaves, who in full aſſemblies have the knack
Of turning truth to lies, and white to black. Dryden.
My author has a great Knack at remarks: in the end he makes
Shakeſp.
Denham.
another, about our refining in controverſy, and coming nearer
and nearer to the church of Rome. Atterbury.
The dean was famous in his time,
And had a kind of knack at rhime. Swift.
3. A nice trick.
For how ſhould equal colours do the knack 2
Cameleons who can paint in white and black? Pope.
To KNack. v. n. [from the noun.] To make a ſharp quick
noiſe, as when a ſtick breaks.
KNA'cker. n.ſ.. [from knack.]
1. A maker of ſmall work.
One part for plow-wright, cartwright, knacker, and ſmith.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. A ropemaker, [Reſtio, Latin.] Ainſworth.
KNAG. m. ſ. [knag, a wart, Daniſh. It is retain’d in Scotland.]
A hard knot in wood.
KNA'GGY. adj. [from Knag.] Knotty; ſet with hard rough knots.
KNAP. m. ſ. [cnap, Welſh, a protuberance, or a broken piece;
cnaep, Saxon, a protuberance..] A protuberance; a ſwelling
prominence.
You ſhall ſee many fine ſeats ſet upon a knap of ground, en-
vironed with higher hills round about it, whereby the heat of
the ſun is pent in, and the wind gathereth as in troughs. Bacon.
To KNAP. v. a. [knappen, Dutch.]
1. To bite; to break ſhort.
. He knappeth the ſpear in ſunder. Cºmmon Prayer.
He will knap the ſpears a-pieces with his teeth. More.
2. [Knaap, Erſe J. To ſtrike ſo as to make a ſharp noiſe like
that of breaking.
Knap a pair of tongs ſome depth in a veſſel of water, and
you ſhall hear the ſound of the tongs. Bacon's Natural Hiſł.
To KNAP. v. n. To make a ſhort ſharp noiſe.
I reduced ſhoulders ſo ſoon, that the ſtanders-by heard them
knap in before they knew they were out. Wiſeman's Surgery.
To KNA'PPLE. v. n. [from Knap.] To break off with a ſharp
quick noiſe. Ainſwºrth.
KNA'PsAck. n.ſ.. [from knappen, to eat..] The bag which a
ſoldier carries on his back; a bag of proviſions.
The conſtitutions of this church ſhall not be repealed, 'till
I ſee more religious motives than ſoldiers carry in their knap-
ſacks. King Charles.
If you are for a merry jaunt, I'll try for once who can foot
it fartheſt: there are hedges in Summer, and barns in Winter
to be found: I with my knapſack, and you with your bottle at
your back: we'll leave honour to madmen, and riches to
knaves, and travel 'till we come to the ridge of the world.
Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
KNA'Pw EED. m.ſ. [jacea, Latin.]
This is one of the headed plants deſtitute of ſpines: the
cup is ſquamoſe; the borders of the leaves are equal, being
neither ſerrated nor indented: the florets round the border of
the head are barren; but thoſe placed in the center are ſuc-
ceeded each by one ſeed, having a down adhering to it. There
are fifty ſpecies of this plant, thirteen of which grow wild in
England, and the reſt are exoticks. Miller.
KNARE. n.ſ. ſknor, German.] A hard knot.
A cake of ſcurf lies baking on the ground,
And prickly ſtubs inſtead of trees are found ;
Or woods with knots and knares deform'd and old,
Headleſs the moſt, and hideous to behold.
KNAVE. n.ſ.. [cnapa, Saxon.]
1. A boy; a male child.
2. A ſervant. Both theſe are obſolete.
For as the moon the eye doth pleaſe
With gentle beams not hurting fight,
Yet hath fir ſun the greater praiſe,
Becauſe from him doth come her light;
So if my man muſt praiſes have,
What then muſt I that keep the knave P
He eats and drinks with his domeſtick ſlaves;
A verier hind than any of his knaves,
3. A petty raſcal; a ſcoundrel; a diſhoneſt fellow.
Moſt men rather brook their being reputed knaves, than for
their honeſty be accounted fools; Anave, in the mean time,
paſſing for a name of credit. South’s Sermons.
When both plaintiff and defendant happen to be crafty
#naves, there's equity againſt both. L’Eſtrange.
An honeſt man may take a knave's advice;
But idiots only may be cozen'd twice.
See all our fools aſpiring to be knaver.
4. A card with a ſoldier painted on it.
For 'twill return, and turn t” account,
If we are brought in play upon't,
Or but by caſting knaves get in,
What pow'r can hinder us to win
KNA’ver Y. n.ſ.. [from knave.]
1. Diſhoneſty; tricks; petty villainy.
Here's no knavery / See, to beguile the old folks, how the
young folks lay their heads together. Shakeſpeare.
If I thought it were not a piece of honeſty to acquaint the
king withal, I would dot; I hold it the more knavery to con-
ceal it, Shakespeare. Winter's Tale.
Here's
Drydºn.
Sidney.
Dryden.
Bryden.
Pope.
Hudibrar.
13 A<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">KN E
K N I
i
H 3.
the º: . folly of the aſ in truſting the fox, and here's
. . . . the fox in betraying the als. L'E/irange
Wh * Sunning courtier ſhould be ſlighted too ge.
3. º "tº dull knavery makes ſo muj.”
I ". the ſhrewd fºol, by thriving too too faſt
M ** 1ſop's fox, becomes a prey at laſt &gt;
* Miſchievous tricks or practices. -
ſeems a general term for -
- - - or any th - -
for trifling things of more à º an illuſe, or perhaps
wº º it as bravely as the beſt
With annber bracelets, beads * . ~,”
KNA vish. adj. [from .. S, and all this inav'ry. Shakeſp.
1. Diſhoneſt; wicked; fraudulent.
x * r *: -
Tis fooliſh to conceal it at all, and Anaviſh to do it from
friends.
2 §. - - - - Pºpe's Letters.
2. Waggiſh; miſchievous.
Here ſhe comes curſt and ſad:
Cupid is a &amp;naviſh lad, &gt;
Thus to make poor females mad.
KNA'vishly. adv. [from Anaviſh.]
I. Piſhoneſtly ; fraudulently.
2. Waggiſhly; miſchievouſly.
To KNEAD. v. a. ſcnabañ, Saxon; Kneden, Dutch..] To beat
or mingle any ſtuff or ſubſtance. It is ſeláom applied in po-
pular language but to the act of making bread.
Here's yet in the word hereafter, the kneading, the making
Dryden.
In the following paſſage it
Shakeſp. }
of the cakes, and the heating of the oven. Shakeſpeare.
It is a lump, where all beaſts kneaded be; - -
Wiſdom makes him an ark where all agree. Donne.
Thus Kneaded up with milk the new made man
His kingdom o'er his kindred world began;
Till knowledge miſapply'd, miſunderſtood,
And pride of empire, ſour’d his balmy blood. Dryden.
One paſte of ficth on all degrees beſtow'd,
And kneaded up alike with moiſt'ning blood. Dryden.
Prometheus, in the kneading up of the heart, ſeaſoned it
with ſome furious particles of the lion. Addison's Speciator.
No man ever reapt his corn,
Or from the oven drew his bread,
Ere hinds and bakers yet were born,
That taught them both to ſow and knead. Prior.
The cake ſhe kneaded was the ſav'ry meat. Prior.
KNE'ADINGTRough, n. ſ. [knead and trough..] A trough in
which the paſte of bread is worked together.
Frogs ſhall come into thy kneadingtroughs.
KNEE. n.ſ. ſcneop, Saxon; knee, Dutch J
1. The joint of the leg where the leg is joined to the thigh.
Thy royal father
Was a moſt ſainted king: the queen that bore thee,
Oftner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died every day ſhe liv'd. Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
I have reſerved to myſelf ſeven thouſand, who have not
bowed the knee to Baal. Ro. xi. 4.
Scotch ſkink is a kind of ſtrong nouriſhment, made of the
Knees and ſinews of beef long boiled. Bacon.
I beg and claſp thy knees. Milton.
Weary'd with length of ways, worn out with toil,
Io lay down, and leaning on her knees,
Invok'd the cauſe of all her miſeries;
And caſt her languiſhing regards above,
Ex. viii. 3.
For help from heav'n, and her ungrateful Jove. Dryden.
Diſdainful of Campania's gentle plains,
When for them ſhe muſt bend the ſervile knee. Thomſon.
2. A knee is a piece of timber growing crooked, and ſo cut that
the trunk and branch make an angle. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
Such diſpoſitions are the fitteſt timber to make great politicks
of: like to knee timber, that is good for ſhips that are to be
toſſed; but not for building houſes, that ſhall ſtand firm. Ba on.
To KNEE. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſupplicate by kneeling.
Go you that baniſh'd him, a mile before his tent, fall down,
and knee the way into his mercy. Shakeſp. Coriºlanus.
Return with her | -
Why, the hot-blooded France, that dow’rleſs took
Our youngeſt born: I could as well be brought
To Knce his throne, and ſquire-like penſion beg.
KN E ED. adj. [from knee.]
1. Having knees: as in-kneed, or out-Kneed.
2. Having joints: as kneed graſs.
KNE/E DEEP. adj. [knee and deep.]
1. Riſing to the knees.
Shah'ſ
2. Sunk to the knees. - -
The country peaſant meditates no harm,
When clad with ſkins of beaſts to keep him warm;
In winter weather unconcern'd he goes,
Almoſt kneedeep, through mire in clumſey ſhoes.
r Dryden.
KNE'E Hol M. m. ſ. An herb.
Ainſworth.
KNE/EPAN. m. ſ. [Ånce and pan.] A little round boné about
two inches broad, pretty thick, a little convex on both ſides,
and covered with a ſmooth cartilage on its foreſide. It is ſoft
in children, but very hard in thoſe of riper years: it is called
Patella or mola. Over it paſſes the tendon of the muſcles which
extend the leg, to which it ſerves as a pully. &amp; inty.
a fine ſhadow underneath the joint.
To KNEEL. v. n. [from knee.] To perform the act of genu.
flection; to bend the knee.
cy upon my ſon; for he is lunatick.
2. Among us the order of gentlemen next to the nobi
the baronets.
KNIGHT Errant. [ chevalier er
one who went about in queſt of adventuſ"
The kneefan muſt be ſhewn, with the knitting thereof, by
Peacham on Drawing.
When thou do'ſt aſk me bleſfing, I’ll kneel down,
And aſk of thee forgiveneſs. Shakespeare King Liar,
Ere I was riſen from the place that ſhew'd
My duty kneeling, came a recking poſt,
Stew’d in his haſte, half breathing, panting forth
From Goneril, his miſtreſs, ſalutation. Shakespeare King Lear.
A certain man Aneeling down to him, ſaid, Lord, have mer-
Mat. xvii. 14.
As ſoon as you are dreſſed, kneel and ſay the Lord's prayer.
Taylor's Guide to Devotion,
KNE’ETR1but e. n.ſ. [knee and tribute.] Genuflection; wor-
ſhip or obeiſance ſhown by kneeling.
Receive from us
Knºctribute yet unpaid, proſtration vile. Milton.
KN FL. m. ſ. ſenil, Welſh, a funeral pile; cnjilan, to ring, Sax.]
The ſound of a bell rung at a funeral.
I would not wiſh them to a fairer death,
And ſo his knell is knoll’d.
Sea nymphs hourly ring his knell:
Hark, now I hear them. Shakespeare Tempſ,
When he was brought again to th' bar, to hear
His knell rung out, his judgment, he was ſtirr'd
With ſuch an agony, he ſweat extremely. Shakespeare H. VIII.
All theſe motions, which we ſaw,
Are but as ice, which crackles at a thaw:
Or as a lute, which in moiſt weather rings
Her knell alone, by cracking of her ſtrings. Dannt.
Unhappy ſlave, and pupil to a bell, -
Which his hours work, as well as hours do tell; }
Unhappy 'till the laſt, the kind releaſing knell. Cºwl,
At dawn poor Stella danc'd and ſung;
The am’rous youth around her bow'd :
At night her fatal knell was rung; -
I ſaw, and kiſs'd her in her ſhrowd. Priºr,
Shakeſpeare.
KNEw. The preterite of know. -
KNIFE. m / plur. knives. [cnir, Sax. Aniff, Daniſh.] Anil-
ſtrument edged and pointed, wherewith meat is cut, and ani-
mals killed.
Come, thick night,
And pall thee in the dunneſt ſmoke of hell,
That my keen knife ſee not the wound it makes. Shaleſ.
Beſt powers, forbid thy tender life
Should bleed upon a barbarous Knife. Craſhaw,
The ſacred prieſts with ready knives bereave
The beaſt of life, and in full bowls receive 3.
The ſtreaming blood. Dryden's £n.
Ev’n in his ſleep he ſtarts, and fears the Knife, -
And, trembling, in his arms takes his accomplice wife. Drſ.
Pain is not in the knife that cuts us; but we call it cutting
in the Anife, and pain only in ourſelves. º
KNIGHT. m.ſ. ſcnipe, Sax. Knecht, Germ. a ſervant, or "P. J
1. A man advanced to a certain degree of military rank. It was
anciently the cuſtom to knight every man of rank." º:
that he might be qualified to give challenges, to fight in º
liſts, and to perform feats of arms. In England hº
confers the title of ſir; as, ſir Thomas, ſir Richard, When
the name was not known, it was uſual to ſay ſir knight,
That ſame Knight's own ſword this is of yore,
ſ
Which Merlin made. Spetſer,
Sir knight, if knight thou be, Stenſer
Abandon this foreſtalled place. penſºr.
When every caſe in law is right,
No ſquire in debt, and no poor Knight.
Pardon, goddeſs of the night,
Thoſe that ſlew thy virgin knight;
For the which, with ſongs of woe, Shakespeare
Round about her tomb they go. im knight
This knight; but yet why ſhould I call him knight,
Shai. King Lear.
To give impiety to this rev'rent ſtile. Daniel's Civil War.
No ſquire with knight did better fit Hudibraſ.
In parts, in manners, and in wit. lity, except
- ddiſºn.
The Knight intends to make his appearanº Addi
3. A champion.
He ſuddenly unties the poke,
Which out of it ſent ſuch a ſmoke,
As ready was them all to choke,
So grievous was the pother;
So that the Knight, each other loſt,
And ſtood as ſtill as any poſt. .
Did I for this my country bring.
To help their night againſt their king:
And raiſe the firſt ſedition 3
Draytºn.
Denham.
rant J A wandering knig"
Like a bold Knight errant did proclaim Denham.
Combat to all, and bore away the dame. The
_*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K N I
K N O
º
-; :º
The ancient errant knights
Won all their miſtreſſes in fights;
They cut whole giants into fritters,
To put them into am’rous twitters. Hudibras.
KNIGHT Errantry. [from knight errant.] The character or
manners of wandering knights. -
That which with the vulgar paſſes for courage is a brutiſh
ſort of knight errantry, ſeeking out needleſs encounters. Norris.
KNIGHT of the Poſº. A hireling evidence.
There are knights of the poſt, and holy cheats enough, to ſwear
the truth of the broadeſt contradićtions, where pious frauds
ſhall give them an extraordinary call. South's Sermons.
KNIGHT of the Shire. One of the repreſentatives of a
county in parliament: he formerly was a military knight, but
now any man having an eſtate in land of ſix hundred pounds
a year is qualified.
To KNIGHT. v. a. [from the noun..] To create one a knight,
which is done by the king, who gives the perſon kneeling a
blow with a ſword, and bids him riſe up ſir.
Favours came thick upon him: the next St. George's day
he was knighted. //otton.
The lord protećtor Knighted the king; and immediately the
king ſtood up, took the ſword from the lord protector, and
dubbed the lord mayor of London knight. Hayward.
The hero William, and the martyr Charles,
One knighted Blackmore, and one penſion'd Quarles. Pope.
KN1'GHT.I.Y. adj. [from Knight.] Befitting a knight; beſeem-
ing a knight.
Let us take care of your wound, upon condition that a more
knightly combat ſhall be performed between us. Sidney.
How dares your pride preſume againſt my laws?
As in a liſted field to fight your cauſe:
Unaſk'd the royal grant, no marſhal by,
As knightly rites require, nor judge to try. Dryden.
KNI'GHT Hood. n.ſ.. [from knight.] The chara&amp;ter or dignity
of a knight.
For that ſame knight's own ſword this is of yore,
Which Merlin made by his almighty art,
For that his nourſling, when he knighthood ſwore,
There with to doen his foes eternal ſmart. Fairy Queen.
Speak truly on thy Knighthºod, and thine oath,
And ſo defend thee heaven and thy valour. Shakespeare R. II.
Is this the fir, who ſome waſte wife to win,
A Knighthood bought, to go a wooing in Pen. johnſºn.
If you needs muſt write, write Caeſar's praiſe,
You'll gain at leaſt a knighthood, or the bays. Poe.
KN1'GHTL Ess. adj.[from Knight. Unbecomingaknight. Obſolete.
Ariſe, thou curſed miſcreant, º
That haſt with knightleſs guile, and treacherous train,
Fair knighthood foully ſhamed. Fairy 3:tºen.
To KNIT. v. n. preter. knit or knitted. [cnretan, Saxon.]
1. To make or unite by texture without a loom.
Sleep, that knits up the ravell'd ſleeve of care,
The birth of each day's life, ſore labour's bath,
Balm of hurt minds. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
A thouſand Cupids in thoſe curls do ſit;
Thoſe curious nets thy ſlender fingers knit.
2. To tye.
Šid for the county; go tell him of this;
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning. Shakeſpeare.
3. To join ; to unite.
His gall did grate for grief and high diſdain,
J/aller.
And, knitting all his force, got one hand free. Fa. Queen.
Theſe, mine enemies, are all knit up
In their diſtraćtions: they are in my power. Shakeſpeare.
O let the vile world end,
And the premiſed flames of the laſt day
Knit earth and heav'n together.
Lay your highneſs'
Command upon me; to the which my duties
Are with a moſt indiſſoluble tye
, For ever Anit. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
And the conjunction of our inward ſouls
Married in league, coupled and link'd together
With all religious ſtrength of ſacred vows.
Shakeſpeare's King john.
By the ſimplicity of Venus’ doves,
By that which knitteth ſouls, and proſpers loves. Shakeſp.
If ye be come peaceably, mine heart ſhall be knit unto
"OUI. Chro. xii. 17.
That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together
in love. Col. ii. 2.
He doth fundamentally and mathematically demonſtrate
the firmeſt knittings of the upper timbers, which make the
roof. //otton's Archite?.
Pride and impudence, in faction knit,
Uſurp the chair of wit! Ben. johnſon's New Ian.
Ye knit my heart to you by aſking this queſtion. Bacon.
Theſe two princes were agreeable to be joined in marriage,
and thereby knit both realms into one. Hayward.
Shakespeare. Henry VI. .
Come, Knit hands, and beat the ground
In a light fantaſtick round. M'':27,
God gave ſeveral abilities to ſeveral perſons, that each
might help to ſupply the publick needs, and, by joining to fill
up all wants, they be knit together by juſtice, as the parts of
the world are by nature. 7aylºr's Rule of living holy.
Nature cannot knit the bones while the parts are under a
diſcharge. ///eman's Surgery.
3. To contraćt. -
What are the thoughts that knit thy brow in frowns,
And turn thy eyes ſo coldly on thy prince. Addison's Cato.
4. To tie up. .
He ſaw heaven opened, as it had been a great ſheet knit
at the four corners, and let down to the earth. Aći; x. 11.
To KNIT. v. n. -
1. To weave without a loom. -
A young ſhepherdeſs knitting and ſinging: her voice com-
forted her hands to work, and her hands kept time to her
voice's muſick. Sidney.
Make the world diſtinguiſh Julia's ſon
From the vile offspring of a trull, that ſits
By the town-wall, and for her living knits. Dryden.
2. To join; to cloſe ; to unite.
Our ſever'd navy too
Have knit again, and float, threat'ning moſt ſea-like. Shakespeare
KNIT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Texture.
Let their heads be ſleekly comb'd, their blue coats bruſh'd,
and their garters of an indifferent Anit. Shakeſpeare.
KN1"TTER. m. ſ. [from knit.] One who weaves or knits.
The ſpinſters and the knitters in the ſun,
And the free maids that weave their thread with bones,
Do uſe to chant it. Shakeſpeare's ſwelfth Night.
KNITTING NEEDLE. n.ſ. [knit and needle.] A wire which wo-
men uſe in knitting.
He gave her a cuff on the ear, ſhe would prick him with
her knittingneedle. Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of john Bull.
&amp; KN1'ttle. n.ſ.. [from Knit.] A ſtring that gathers a purſe
round. Ainſworth.
KNOB. m. ſ. [ cnaep, Saxon; Anoop, Dutch. J A protube-
rance; any part bluntly riſing above the reſt.
Juſt before the entrance of the right auricle of the heart
is a remarkable knob or bunch, raiſed up from the ſubjacent
fat; by the interpoſition whereof the blood falling down by
the deſcending vein is diverted into the auricle. , Ray.
KNo BBED. adj. [from knob.] Set with knobs; having protu-
berances.
The horns of a roe deer of Greenland are pointed at the
top, and Ánobbed or tuberous at the bottom. Grew.
KNo BB1N Ess. n.ſ.. [from Knolly..] The quality of having knobs.
KNo'BBY, adj. [from knob.] º
1. Full of knobs.
2. Hard ; ſtubborn.
The informers continued in a knobby kind of obſtinacy, re-
ſolving ſtill to conceal the names of the authors. Howel.
To KNock. v. n. [cnucan, Saxon; cnoce, a blow, Welſh.]
1. To claſh ; to be driven ſuddenly together.
Any hard body thruſt forwards by another body contiguous,
without knocking, giveth no noiſe. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
They may ſay, the atoms of the chaos being variouſly
moved according to this catholick law, muſt needs knock
and interfere. Bentley's Sermons.
2. To beat, as at a door for admittance.
Villain, I ſay knock me at this gate,
And rap me well; or I'll knock your knave's pate. Shakespeare
Whether to knock againſt the gates of Rome,
Or rudely viſit them in parts remote,
To fright them, ere destroy. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
I bid the raſcal knock upon your gate,
And could not get get him for my heart to do it. Shakesp.
For harbour at a thouſand doors they knock'd,
Not one of all the thouſand but was lock'd. Dryden.
Knock at your own breaſt, and aſk your ſoul,
If thoſe fair fatal eyes edg’d not your ſword. Dryden.
3. To KNock under. A common expreſſion, that denotes when
a man yields or ſubmits.
To KNock. v. a.
1. To affect or change in any reſpect by blows.
How do you mean removing him
—Why, by making him incapable of Othello's place ;
Knocking out his brains. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
He that has his chains knocked off, and the priſon doors
ſet open to him, is perfectly at liberty. Locke.
Time was, a ſober Engliſhman would knock
His ſervants up, and riſe by five o'clock;
Inſtruct his family in ev'ry rule
And ſend his wife to church, his ſon to ſchool. Dryden.
2. To daſh together; to ſtrike; to collide with a ſharp noiſe.
So when the cook ſaw my jaws thus knock it,
She would have made a pancake of my pocket. Cleveland.
At him he lanch'd his ſpear, and pierc'd his breaſt;
On the hard earth the Lycian knock'd his head,
And lay ſupine; and forth the ſpirit fled. Pºſ,
* I is<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K N O
K N O
'Tis the ſport of ſtateſmen,
º When heroes knock their knotty heads together,
And fall by one another.
3. Tº KNock down. To fell by a blow.
He began to knock dºwn his fellow citizens with a great
deal of zeal, and to fill all Arabia with an unnatural medley
- of religion and bloodſhed. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 50.
- - A man who is groſs in a woman's company, ought to be
knocked down with a club. Clariſſa.
4. To KNock on the head. To kill by a blow ; to deſtroy.
He betook himſelf to his orchard, and walking there was
Knocked on the head by a tree. South's Sermons.
Exceſs, either with an apoplexy, knocks a man on the head;
* or with a fever, like fire in a ſtrong-water-ſhop, burns him
down to the ground. Grew's Coſmol.
KNock. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſudden ſtroke; a blow.
Some men never conceive how the motion of the earth
ſhould wave him from a knock perpendicularly directed from
a body in the air above. Brown's Wugar Err. b. vii.
Ajax belabours there an harmleſs ox,
And thinks that Agamemnon feels the knocks.
2. A loud ſtroke at a door for admiſſion.
Guiſcard, in his leathern frock,
Stood ready, with his thrice-repeated knock :
Thrice with a doleful ſound the jarring grate
Rung deaf and hollow. Dryden's Boccace.
KNo'ck E.R. m. ſ. [from knock.]
1. He that knocks.
2. The hammer which hangs at the door for ſtrangers to ſtrike.
Shut, ſhut the door, good John fatigu'd, I ſaid,
Tie up the knocker, ſay I'm ſick, I'm dead. Pope.
To KN LL. v. a. [from knell.] To ring the bell, generally
for a funeral.
Had I as many ſons as I have hairs,
I would not wiſh them to a fairer death,
And ſo his knell is knoll d. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To KNoll. v. n. To found as a bell.
If ever you have look'd on better days,
If ever been where bells have knoll'd to church.
KNoll. n.ſ. A little hill. Ainſ.
KNop. m. ſ. [A corruption of knap.] Any tufty top. Ainſ.
KNot. n.ſ. [cnotta, Saxon; knot, German; Anutte, Dutch;
knotte, Erſe.]
1. A complication of a cord or ſtring not eaſily to be diſen-
tangled. -
- He found that reaſon's ſelf now reaſons found
º To faſten knots, which fancy firſt had bound.
* As the fair veſtal to the fountain came,
- Let none be ſtartled at a veſtal's name,
Tir'd with the walk, ſhe laid her down to reſt;
And to the winds expos'd her glowing breaſt,
To take the freſhneſs of the morning air,
And gather'd in a knºt her flowing hair. Addison.
2. Any figure of which the lines frequently interſe&amp; each other.
Garden knots, the frets of houſes, and all equal figures,
pleaſe; whereas unequal figures are but deformities. Bacon.
Our ſea-wall'd garden, the whole land,
Is full of weeds, her faireſt flowers choked up,
Her knots diſorder'd. Shakespeare. Rich. II.
It fed flow’rs worthy of paradiſe, which not nice art
In beds and curious knots, but nature boon,
Pour'd forth profuſe on hill and dale, and plain. Milton.
Their quarters are contrived into elegant knots, adorned
with the moſt beautiful flowers. 44-re.
Henry in Knots involving Emma's name, e
Had half-expreſs'd, and half-conceal’d his flame
Upon this tree ; and as the tender mark
º Grew with the year, and widen'd with the bark,
Venus had heard the virgin's ſoft addreſs,
- That, as the wound, the paſſion might increaſe.
3. Any bond of aſſociation or union.
Confirm that amity
With nuptial knot, if thou vouchſafe to grant
That virtuous lady Bona. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
Richmond aims
- At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
s And by that Anot looks proudly on the crown.
I would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himſelf
The noble knot he made. Shakeſpeare's Coriolinus.
Why left you wife and children,
Thoſe precious motives, thoſe ſtrong Knots of love. Shakespeare
Not all that Saul could threaten or perſuade, -
In this cloſe knot, the ſmalleſt looſeneſs made. Cowley.
4. A hard part in a piece of wood cauſed by the protuberance
Rowe.
Dryden.
Satº.
Sidney.
Prior.
Shakeſp.
of a bough, and conſequently by a tranſverſe direction of
the fibres. A joint in an herb.
Taking the very refuſe among thoſe which ſerved to no uſe,
being a crooked piece of wood, and full of Åncts, he hath
//id.
‘Such knot; and croſineſs of grain is objected here, as will
carved it diligently, when he had nothing elſe to do.
hardly ſuffer that form, which they cry up here as the only juſt
reformation, to go on ſo ſmoothly here as it might do in
Scotland. King Charles.
5. A confederacy; an aſſociation; a ſmall band.
Oh you panderly raſcals there's a knot, a gang, a conſpi-
racy againſt me. Shakeſp Merry Wives of Windſor.
What is there here in Rome that can delight thee?
Where not a ſoul, without thine own foul knot,
But fears and hates thee. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
A knot of good fellows borrowed a ſum of money of a
gentleman upon the king's highway. L’Eſtrange.
I am now with a knot of his admirers, who make requeſt
that you would give notice of the window where the knight
intends to appear. Addiſon's Spectator.
6. Difficulty; intricacy.
A man ſhall be perplexed with knots and problems of buſi-
neſs, and contrary affairs, where the determination is dubious,
and both parts of the contrariety ſeem equally weighty; ſo
that, which way ſoever the choice determines, a man is ſure
to venture a great concern. South's Sermons.
7. Any intrigue, or difficult perplexity of affairs.
When the diſcovery was made that the king was living,
which was the knot of the play untied, the reſt is ſhut up in
the compaſs of ſome few lines, becauſe nothing then hindered
the happineſs of Toriſmond and Leonora. Dryden's Dufreſh.
8. A cluſter; a collection.
The way of fortune is like the milky way in the ſky,
which is a meeting or knot of a number of ſmall ſtars, not
ſeen aſunder, but giving light together. Bacon's Eſſays.
In a picture, beſides the principal figures which compoſe it,
and are placed in the midſt of it, there are leſs groups or
Anots of figures diſpoſed at proper diſtances, which are parts
of the piece, and ſeem to carry on the ſame deſign in a more
inferior manner. Dryden's Dufreſhay.
To Knot. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To complicate in knots.
Happy we who from ſuch queens are freed,
That were always telling beads:
But here's a queen when ſhe rides abroad
Is always knotting threads.
2. To intangle; to perplex.
3. To unite.
The party of the papiſts in England are become more
knotted, both in dependence towards Spain, and amongſt them-
ſelves. Bacon's War with Spain.
To KNot. v. n.
1. To form buds, knots, or joints in vegetation.
Cut hay when it begins to knot. Mortimer’s Huſbandry.
2. To knit knots for fringes.
KNo"TBERRYBush. n. ſ. A plant. Ainſ.
KNo"TGRAss. m. ſ. [Knot and graſs.] A plant.
KNo'TTED. adj. [from Anot..] Full of knots.
The knotted oaks ſhall ſhow’rs of honey weep. Dryden.
KNo'TTIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from knotty..] Fulneſs of knots; uneven-
neſs; intricacy; difficulty.
Virtue was repreſented by Hercules naked, with his lion's
ſkin and knotted club : by his oaken club is ſignified reaſon
ruling the appetite; the knottineſs thereof, the difficulty they
have that ſeek after virtue. Peacham on Drawing.
KNo'TTY. adj. [from knot.]
1. Full of knots.
I have ſeen tempeſts, when the ſcolding winds
Have riv'd the knotty oaks. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
The timber in ſome trees more clean, in ſome more knotty:
try it by ſpeaking at one end, and laying the ear at the other;
for if it be knotty, the voice will not paſs well. Bacon.
The knotty oaks their liſt’ning branches bow. Roſcommon-
One with a brand yet burning from the flame,
Arm'd with a knotty club another came: Dryden's AEn.
Where the vales with violets once were crown'd,
Now knotty burrs and thorns diſgrace the ground:
Come, ſhepherds, come, and ſtrew with leaves the plain;
Such funeral rites your Daphnis did ordain. IDryden.
2. Hard; rugged.
Valiant fools
Were made by nature for the wiſe to work with:
They are their tools; and 'tis the ſport of ſtateſmen,
When heroes knock their knitty heads together,
And fall by one another. Rowe's Ambitious Stepmother:
3. Intricate; perplexed; difficult; embaraſſed.
King Henry, in the very entrance of his reign, when the
kingdom was caſt in his arms, met with a point of great dif-
ficulty, and Knotty to ſolve, able to trouble and confound the
wiſeſt kings. Bacon's Henry VII.
Princes exerciſed ſkill in putting intricate queſtions; and
he that was the beſt at the untying of knotty difficulties, carried
Sidley.
the prize. L'Eſtrange.
Some on the bench the Knotty laws untie. Dryden.
They compliment, they fit, they chat,
Fight o'er the wars, reform the ſtate;
A thouſand knotty points they clear, -
*Till ſupper and my wife appear. Prior.
5 To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K N O
K N U
To KNOW. v. a. preter. I knew, I have known.
Saxon. J
*. Perceive with certainty, whether intuitive or diſcur-
live.
ſcnapan
O, that a man Inight know
The end of this day's buſineſs ere it come! Shakeſpear.
The memorial of virtue is immortal, becauſe it is known
with God and with men. Wiſd. iv. 1.
The gods all things know. Milton.
* Not from experience, for the world was new,
He only from their cauſe their natures nºw. Denham.
We doubt not, neither can we properly ſay we think we
admire and love you above all other men: theſe is a certainty -
in the propoſition, and we know it. Dryden.
When a man makes uſe of the name of any ſimple idea,
which he perceives is not underſtood, or is in danger to be
‘miſtaken, he is obliged by the laws of ingenuity, and the end
of ſpeech, to declare his meaning, and make known what idea
he makes it ſtand for. Locke.
2. To be informed of; to be taught.
Ye ſhall be healed, and it ſhall be known to you why his
hand is not removed from you. i Sa. vi. 3.
Led on with a deſire to know
What nearer might concern him. Milton.
One would have thought you had known better things than
to expect a kindneſs from a common enemy. L'E/irange.
3. To diſtinguiſh.
Numeration is but the adding of one unit more, and givin
to the whole a new name, whereby to know it from thoſe be:
fore and after, and diſtinguiſh it from every ſmaller or greater
multitude of units. Locke.
4. To recogniſe.
What a monſtrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on me, that
is neither known of thee, nor knºws thee Shakeſpeare.
They told what things were done in the way, and how he
was known of them in breaking of bread. Lu. xxiv. 35.
At nearer view he thought he knew the dead,
And call'd the wretched man to mind. Flatman.
Tell me how I may know him. Milton.
5. To be no ſtranger to.
What are you? -
—A moſt poor man, made tame to fortune's blows,
Who, by the art of known and feeling ſorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Shakespeare King Lear.
6. To converſe with another ſex.
And Adam knew Eve his wife. Gen. iv. 4.
7. To ſee with approbation.
They have reigned, but not by me; they have ſet a ſeig-
niory over themſelves, but I knew nothing of it. Hoſea.
To KNow. e. m.
1. To have clear and certain perception; not to be doubtful.
I knºw of a ſurety that the Lord hath ſent his angel, and
delivered me out of the hand of Herod. Aérs xii. 11.
2. Not to be ignorant.
When they know within themſelves they ſpeak of that
they do not well know, they would nevertheleſs ſeem to others
to know of that which they may not well ſpeak.
Bacon's Eſſays, Nº. 27.
Not to know of things remote, but know
That which before us lies in daily life,
Is the prime wiſdom. Milton.
In the other world there is no conſideration that will ſting
our conſciences more cruelly than this, that we did wickedly,
when we knew to have done better; and choſe to make our-
ſelves miſerable, when we underſtood the way to have been
happy. Tillºtſon's Sermons.
They might underſtand thoſe excellencies which they
blindly valued, ſo as not to be farther impoſed upon by bad
pieces, and to know when nature was well imitated by the
•- moſt able maſters. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
3. To be informed.
The prince and Mr. Poins will put on two of our jerkins
and aprons, and ſir John muſt not know of it.
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
There is but one mineral body, that we know of, heavier
than common quickſilver. Boyle.
4. To KNow for. To have knowledge of. A colloquial ex-
preſſion.
He ſaid the water itſelf was a good healthy water; but for
the party that own'd it, he might have more diſeaſes than he
Anew for. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
5. To KNow of In Shakeſpeare, is to take cogniſance of; to
examine.
Fair Hermia, queſtion your deſires;
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,
You can endure the livery of a nun,
For ay to be in ſhady cloiſter mew'd. . . Shakeſpeare.
KNow Abie. adj. [from knºw..] Cognoſcible ; poſſible to be
diſcovered or underſtood.
Theſe are reſolved into a confeſſed ignºrance, and I ſhall
not purſue them to their old aſylum; and yet it may be, there :
is more knowable in theſe than in leſs acknowledged my-
ſteries.
'Tis plain, that under the law of works is comprehended
alſo the law of nature, knowable by reaſon, as well as the
law given by Moſes. Locke.
Theſe two arguments are the voices of nature, the unani.
mous ſuffrages of all real beings and ſubſtances created, that
are naturally knowable without revelation. Bentley.
Kºº. mºſ [from know..] One who has ſkill or know-
edge. -
If we look on a vegetable as made of earth, we muſt
have the true theory of the nature of that element, or we
miſerably fail of our ſcientifical aſpirings; and while we can
only ſay 'tis cold and dry, we are pitiful knowers. Glanv.
I know the reſpect and reverence which in this addreſs I
ought to appear in before you, who are a general knower of
mankind and poetry. Southerm.
KNow ING. adj. [from know.]
1. Skilful; well inſtructed; remote from ignorance.
You have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he, which hath our noble father ſlain, -
Purſu'd my life. Shakespeare Hamlet.
The knowingeſt of theſe have of late reformed their hy-
potheſis. Boyle.
* What makes the clergy glorious is to be knowing in their
profeſſion, unſpotted in their lives, ačtive and laborious in
their charges. Scuth.
The neceſſity of preparing for the offices of religion was a
leſſon which the mere light and dićtates of common reaſon,
without the help of revelation, taught all the knowing and ia-
telligent part of the world. South's Sermons.
§. Bellino, one of the firſt who was of any conſideration
at Venice, painted very drily, according to the manner of his
time: he was very knowing both in archite&amp;ture and per-
ſpective. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
All animals of the ſame kind, which form a ſociety, are
more knowing than others. Addiſon's Guardian.
2. Conſcious; intelligent.
Could any but a knowing prudent Cauſe
Begin ſuch motions and aſſign ſuch laws?
If the Great Mind had form'd a different frame,
Might not your wanton wit the ſyſtem blame Blackmore.
KNow ING.. n.ſ.. [from know..] Knowledge.
Let him be ſo entertain’d as ſuits gentlemen of your knowing
to a ſtranger of his quality. Shakeſpeare.
KNow INGLY. adv. [from knowing.] With ſkill; with know-
ledge.
É. knowingly and wittingly brought evil into the world.
More's Divine Dialogues.
They who before were rather fond of it than knowingly ad-
mired it, might defend their inclination by their reaſon.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
To the private duties of the cloſet he repaired, as often
as he entered upon any buſineſs of conſequence: I ſpeak
knowingly. Attarbury's Sermons.
KNo'w LEDGE. n.ſ.. [from #now.]
1. Certain perception; indubitable apprehenſion.
Knowledge, which is the higheſt degree of the ſpeculative
faculties, conſiſts in the perception of the truth of affirmative
or negative propoſitions. - Lºcke.
2. Learning; illumination of the mind.
Ignorance is the curſe of God, -
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heav'n. Shakeſp.
3. Skill in anything.
Do but ſay to me what I ſhould do,
That in your knowledge may by me be done, -
And I am preſt unto it. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
4. Acquaintance with any faët or perſon.
The dog ſtraight fawned upon his maſter for old Know-
ledge. Sidney. .
That is not forgot, -
Which ne’er I did remember; to my knowledge -
I never in my life did look on him. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
. Cogniſance ; notice.
5 §. have fºund grace in thine eyes, that thou ſhouldſt
take knowledge of me, ſeeing I am a ſtranger ? Ruthii. Io.
A ſtate's anger ſhould not take -
Knowledge either of fools or women. Ben. jºhnſon's Catil.
6. Information; power of knowing.
I pulled off my headpiece, and humbly entreated her par-
don, or knowledge why ſhe was cruel. Sidney.
To KNowledge. v. a. [not in uſe.] To acknowledge; to
aVOW. -
The prophet Hoſea tells us that God faith of the Jews,
they have reigned, but 'not by me; which proveth plainly,
that there are governments which God doth not avow: for
though they be ordained by his ſecret providence, yet they are
not knowledged by his revealed will. Bacon's hºly ſtar.
To KNU'bble. v. a. [Anipler, Daniſh.] To beat. Skinner.
- - - -º-º-º-º-º-º-
Glanv. Scepſ. -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">K N U
K Y D
KNU'CKLE. m. ſ. [cnucle, Saxon; knockle, Dutch.]
1. The joints of the fingers protuberant when the fingers
cloſe.
Thus often at the Temple-ſtairs we've ſeen
Two tritons, of a rough athletick mien,
Sourly diſpute ſome quarrel of the flood,
With knuckles bruis'd, and face beſmear'd in blood. Garth.
2. The knee joint of a calf.
We find alſo that Scotch ſkinck, which is a pottage of
frong nouriſhment, is made with the knees and finews of
beef, but long boiled: jelly alſo, which they uſed for a reſto-
rative, is chiefly made of knuckles of veal. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
3. The articulation or joint of a plant.
Divers herbs have joints or knuckles, as it were ſtops in
their germination; as gillyflowers, pinks, fennel, and corn.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To KNU'ckle. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſubmit: I ſuppoſe
from an odd cuſtom of ſtriking the under fide of the table
with the knuckles, in confeſſion of an argumental de-
feat.
KNU'cKLED. adj. [from knuckle.] Jointed.
The reed or cane is a watry plant, and groweth not but in
the water: it hath theſe properties, that it is hollow, and it is
#nuckled both ſtalk and root; that, being dry, it is more hard
and fragile than other wood; that it putteth forth no boughs, .
though many ſtalks out of one root. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
KNuff. n.ſ. [perhaps corrupted from knave, or the ſame with
chuff..] A lout. An old word preſerved in a rhyme of pre-
diction.
The country Knuff, Hob, Dick, and Hick,
With clubs and clouted ſhoon,
Shall fill up Duſſendale
With ſlaughtered bodies ſoon. Hayward.
KNUR. }*{ [ knor, German. J A knot; a hard ſub-
KNURLE. W. ſtance.
The ſtony nodules found lodged in the ſtrata, are called by
the workmen knurs and knots. Woodward's Met. Foſſ.
Koned for knew. Spenſer.
To Kyd. v. n. [corrupted probably from cuts, Saxon.] To
know.
But ah, unjuſt and worthleſs Colin Clout,
That kydſt the hidden kinds of many a weed;
Yet hydſ? not one to cure thy ſore heart root,
Whoſe rankling wound as yet doth rifely bleed. Spenſa.
