*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 325</div><p class="Text">E A G
Has two ſounds; long, as ſcène, and ſhort, as men.
E is the moſt frequent vowel in the Engliſh lan-
guage; for it not only is uſed like the reſt in the
beginning or end of words, but has the peculiar
9 quality of lengthening the foregoing vowel, as
cin, cine; min, mine; gºp, gipe; glid, glide; brid, bride;
chin, chine; whip, wipe; thin, thine; n.d, nºde ; tān, tine;
plim, plime. Yet it ſometimes occurs final, where yet the
foregoing vowel is not lengthened; as gºne, knowledge, Édge,
gºve. Anciently almoſt every word ended with ei as for can,
ranne; for year, yeare; for great, greate; for need, neede; for
fock, flocke. It is probable that this e final had at firſt a ſoft
ſound, like the female e of the French; and that afterwards it
was in poetry either mute or vocal, as the verſe required, 'till at
laſt it became univerſally ſilent.
Ea has the ſound of e long: the e is commonly lengthened
rather by the immediate addition of a than by the appoſition
of e to the end of the word; as min, mean ; ſell, ſal; mit,
néat ; nét, mºat.
. Each. pron. [elc, Saxon; elsh, Dutch; ilk, Scottiſh.]
1. Either of two.
Though your orbs of diff'rent greatneſs be,
Yet both are for each other's uſe diſpos'd ;
His to incloſe, and your's to be inclos'd. Dryden.
2. Every one of any number. This ſenſe is rare, except in
poetry.
Th’ invention all admir’d, and each how he
To be th' inventer miſs'd. Milton, b. vi.
- Let each
His adamantine coat gird well, and each
Fit well his helm.
By hunger, that each other creature tames,
Thou art not to be harm'd, therefore not mov’d;
Thy temperance invincible beſides. Milton's Paradiſ. Reg:
Wiſe Plato ſaid, the world with men was ſtor'd,
That ſuccour each to other might afford. Denham.
Tº Each the correſpondent word is other, whether it be uſed of
, two, or of a greater number.
'Tis ſaid they eat each other. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Let each eſteem other better than themſelves. Phil. ii. 3.
Lovelieſt of women heaven is in thy ſoul;
Beauty and virtue ſhine for ever round thee,
Bright'ning each other / Thou art all divine! Addison Cato.
EAD. [ed, ed.] in the compound, and eadig in the ſimple
names, denotes happineſs, or bleſſedneſs. Thus Eadward is
a happy preſerver; Eadulph, happy aſſiſtance; Eadgar, happy
power; Eadwin, happy conqueror; which Macarius Eupo-
kmuſ, Fauſa, Fortunatus, Felicianus, &amp;c. do in ſome meaſure
reſemble. Ead may alſo in ſome caſes be derived from the
Saxon eath, which ſignifies eaſy, gentle, mild. Gib. Camden.
EAGER. adj. ſeazor, Saxon; aigre, French.]
1. Struck with defire; ardently wiſhing; keenly deſirous; vehe-
ment in deſire; hotly longing. -
Of ačiion eager, and intent of thought,
The chieſs your honourable danger ſought. Dryden's Ovid.
Eager to read the reſt, Achates came. Dryden's 4ºn.
With joy th’ ambitious youth his mother heard,
And eager for the journey ſoon prepar'd;
He longs the world beneath him to ſurvey,
To guide the chariot, and to give the day.
Love inflam’d, and eager on his bliſs,
Smother'd her words. Allſou’s Ovid's Metam. b. ii.
2. It is uſed ſometimes with of, ſometimes with on or after before
the thing fought.
3. Hot of diſpoſition; vehement; ardent; impetuous.
... Apt as well to quicken the ſpirits as to allay that which is
too eager. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 38.
Nor do the eager clamours of diſputants yield more relief
to eclipſed truth, than did the ſounding braſs of old to the
labouring moon. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 19.
This is not a general charađer of women, but a reproof
of ſome eager ſpirited gipſies. L’Eſtrange.
Imperfect zeal is hot and eager, without knowledge. Spratt.
Palcmon icplies,
Jager his tone, and ardent were his eyes.
Milton, b. vi.
Dryden.
Dryden.
E A G
A man, charged with a crime of which he thinks himſelf
innocent, is apt to be too eager in his own defence. Dryden.
4. Quick; buſy; eaſily put in ačtion.
His Numidian genius
Is well diſpos'd to miſchief, were he prompt
And eager on it; but he muſt be ſpurr'd.
5. Sharp; ſower; acid.
With a ſudden vigour it doth poſſet
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholſome blood. Shakespeare's Hamlet.
6. Keen; ſevere; biting.
The air bites ſhrewdly; it is very cold.
—It is a nipping and an eager air. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
The reſiſtance of bone to cold is greater than of fleſh; for
that the fleſh ſhrinketh, but the bone reſiſteth, whereby the
cold becometh more eager. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°.688.
7. Brittle; inflexible; not dućtile. A cant word of artificers.
Gold will be ſometimes ſo eager, as artiſts call it, that it
will as little endure the hammer as glaſs itſelf. Locke.
EA'G ERLY. adv. [from eager.]
1. With great ardour of deſire; with impetuoſity of inclination.
To the holy war how faſt and eagerly did men go, when
the prieſt perſuaded them that whoſoever died in that expedi-
tion was a martyr; South's Sermons.
How eagerly he flew, when Europe's fate
Did for the ſeed of future a&amp;tions wait.
2. Ardently; hotly.
#º gave the word too early,
Who having ſome advantage on O&amp;avius,
Took it too eagerly; his ſoldiers fell to ſpoºl, º
Whilſt we by Anthony were all inclos'd. Shakespeare jul. Caeſar.
3. Keenly ; ſharply.
Abundance of rain froze ſo eagerly as it fell, that it ſeemed
the depth of Winter had of a ſudden been come in. Knolles.
EA'GERNess. n.ſ. [from eager.]
1. Keenneſs of deſire; ardour of inclination.
She knew her diſtance, and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerneſ with her reſtraint. Shakeſpeare.
Have you not ſeen, when whiſtled from the fiſt,
Some falcon ſtoop'd at what her eye deſign'd,
And, with her eagerneſs, the quarry miſs'd. Dryden.
The eagerneſ, and ſtrong bent of the mind after knowledge,
if not warily regulated, is often an hindrance to it. Locke.
Detraction and obloquy are received with as much eagerneſs
as wit and humour. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Juba lives to catch
That dear embrace, and to return it too,
With mutual warmth and eagerneſs of love. Addiſon's Cato.
His continued application to publick affairs diverts him
Addison's Cato.
from thoſe pleaſures, which are purſued with eagerneſs by
princes who have not the publick ſo much at heart. Addiſon.
The things of this world, with whatever eagerneſ, they en-
gage our purſuit, leave us ſtill empty and unſatisfied with
their fruition. Rogers's Sermons.
2. Impetuoſity; vehemence; violence.
It finds them in the eagerneſ, and height of their devotion;
they are ſpeechleſs for the time that it continues, and proſtrate
and dead when it departs. Dryden.
I'll kill thee with ſuch eagerneſs of haſte,
As fiends, let looſe, would lay all nature waſte. Dryd. Aur.
EA'GLE. n.ſ.. [aigle, French; aquila, Latin; ealler, Erſe.]
1. A bird of prey, which, as it is reported, renews its age when
it grows old. But ſome think that this recovery of youth
happens no otherwiſe in the eagle than in other birds, by caſt-
ing their feathers every year in the moulting ſeaſon, and
having others in their room. It is alſo ſaid not to drink at
all, like other birds with ſharp claws. It is given out, that
when an eagle ſees its young ſo well grown as to venture upon
flying, it hovers over their neſt, flutters with its wings, and
excites them to imitate it, and take their flight; and when it
ſees them weary, or fearful, it takes and carries them upon its
back. Eagles are ſaid to be extremely ſharp-ſighted, and,
when they take flight, ſpring perpendicularly upward, with
their eyes ſteadily fixed upon the ſin, mounting 'till, by their
diſtance, they diſappear. Salmet.
º Diſmay’d
Stepney. '<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 326</div><p class="Text">E. A. R.
E A R
Diſmay’d not this
Our captains Macbeth and Banquo
——Yes, -
As ſparrows eagles, or the hare the lion. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Draw forth the monſters of th’ abyſs profound,
Or fetch th’ aerial eagle to the ground. Pope's Eff, on Man.
2. The ſtandard of the ancient Romans.
Arts ſtill follow’d where Rome's eagles flew.
EAGLE-EYED. adj. [from eagle and eye.]
1. Sharp-ſighted as an eagle.
As he was rarely quick and perſpicacious, ſo was he inwardly
Pope.
eagle-eyed, and perfectly verſed in the humours of his ſubječts.
- Howel's Wocal Forreſt.
Ev'ry one is eagle-ey'd to ſee
Another's faults and his deformity. Dryden's Perſ. Sat. 4.
EA'GlesPEED. n.ſ. [eagle and ſpeed.] Swiftneſs like that of
an eagle.
Abrupt, with eagleſpeed ſhe cut the ſky,
Inſtant inviſible to mortal eye. Pope's Odyſſey, b, i.
EA'Gleston E. m. ſ. A ſtone ſaid to be found at the entrance
of the holes in which the eagles make their neſts, and affirmed
to have a particular virtue in defending the eagle's neſt from
thunder. The ſtones of this kind which are moſt valued are
flat and blackiſh, and ſound, if ſhaken near the ear; a leſſer
ſtone being contained in the greater. Calmet.
The eagleſome contains, in a cavity within it, a ſmall looſe
ſtone, which rattles when it is ſhaken; and every foſſil, with
a flucleus in it, has obtained the name. The ſort of analogy
that was ſuppoſed to be between a ſtone, thus containing
another within it, or, as the fanciful writers expreſs it, preg-
nant with another, and a woman big with child, led people
to imagine that it muſt have great virtues and effects in acce-
lerating or retarding delivery ; ſo that, if tied to the arm of a
woman with child, it prevents abortion; and if to the leg, it
promotes delivery. It is pretended, that the eagles ſeek for
theſe ſtones to lay in their neſts, and that they cannot hatch
their young without. On ſuch idle and imaginary virtues
was raiſed all the credit which this famous foſſil poſſeſſed for
many ages. - Hill’s Materia Medica.
If you ſtop the holes of a hawk's bell it will make no
ring, but a flat noiſe or rattle; and ſo doth the aetites, or eagle-
ſtone, which hath a little ſtone within it. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
EA'GLET. m., f [from eagle.} A young eagle. -
This treaſon of his ſons did the king expreſs in an em-
blem, wherein was an eagle with three eaglets tyring on her
breaſt, and the fourth pecking at one of her eyes. Davies.
£A'GRE. m.ſ.. [arger, in Runick, is the ocean ; eggia, in Iſlandick,
is to agitate, to incite.] A tide ſwelling above another tide,
obſervable in the river Severn. -
For as an eagre rides in triumph o'er the tide,
The tyrant paſſions, hope and fear,
Did in extremes appear, -
And flaſh’d upon the ſoul with equal force. Dryden.
Ea'LDERMAN. n.ſ. [ealberman, Saxon.] The name of a
... Saxon magiſtrate; alderman.
EAME. m. ſ. ſeam, Saxon; eam, Dutch J Uncle: a word ſtill
uſed in the wilder parts of Staffordſhire.
Daughter, ſays ſhe, fly, fly; behold, thy dame
Foreſhows the treaſon of thy wretched eame /
EAR. m. ſ. [eane, Saxon; oor, Dutch.] -
1. The whole organ of audition or hearing.
What fire is in my ears / Can this be true? -
Stand I condemn'd? Shakeſp. Much Ada about Nothing.
His ears are open unto their cry. Pſ. xxxiv. 15.
Valſalva diſcovered ſome paſſages into the region of the
ear drum; of mighty uſe, among others, to make diſcharges
of bruiſes. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
2. That part of the ear that ſtands prominent. . . . "
You have heard of the news abroad: I mean, the whiſper’d
ones; for they are yet but ear kiffing arguments. Shakespeare K. Lear.
His maſter ſhall bore his ear through with an awl. Ex.
3. Power of judging of harmony; the ſenſe of hearing. .
4. The head; or the perſon: in familiar language.
. Their warlike force was ſore weakened, the city beaten
down about their ears, and moſt of them wounded. Knolles.
Better paſs over an affront from one ſcoundrel, than draw
the whole herd about a man's ears. L’Eſtrange.
Be not alarmed, as if all religion was falling about our
ears. Burnet's Theory,
5. The higheſt part of a man; the top. -
A cavalier was up to the ears in love with a very fine
lady. L’Eſtrange.
6. The privilege of being readily and kindly heard; favour.
Ariſtippus was earneſt ſuitor to Dionyſius for ſome grant,
who would give no car to his ſuit: Ariſtippus fell at his feet,
and then Dionyſius granted it. Bacon's Apophthegms.
They being told there was ſmall hope of eaſe, -
Were willing at the firſt to give an ear -
To anything that ſounded #. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
If on a pillory, or near a throne,
He gain his prince's car, or loſe his own.
Fairfax.
Pºpe's Epiſtles.
w
7. Diſpoſition to like or diſlike what is heard; judgment; opi"
nion; taſte. º
He laid his ſenſe cloſer, and in fewer words, according to
the ſtyle and ear of thoſe times. Denham.
8. Any prominences from a larger body, raiſed for the ſake of
holding it.
There are ſome veſſels, which, if you offer to lift by the
belly or bottom, you cannot ſtir them ; but are ſoon removed,
if you take them by the ears. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
A quilted night-cap with one car. Congr. 1/ay ºf the World.
A pot without an ear. - - Swift.
9. The ſpike of corn; that part which contains the ſeeds.
He delivereth to each of them a jewel, made in the figure
of an ear of wheat, which they ever after wear. Bacon.
The leaves on trees not more,
Nor bearded ears in fields, nor ſands upon the ſhore. Dryd.
From ſeveral grains he had eighty ſtalks, with very large
ears full of large corn. Mortimer’s Huſbandry.
10. To fall tºgether by the EARs. To fight; to ſcuffle; to quat-
re's [In Dutch oorlogen.] A familiar phraſe.
Poor naked men belaboured one another with ſhagged
ſticks, or dully fell together by the ears at fifty-cuffs. More.
Fools go together by the ears, to have knaves run away
with the ſtakes. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 5.
All Aſia now was by the ears, -
And gods beat up for voluntiers. Prior.
11. To ſet by the EARs. To make ſtrife; to quarrel: in low
language.
A mean raſcal ſets others together by the ears without fighting
himſelf. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 67.
She uſed to carry tales from one to another, 'till ſhe had ſet
the neighbourhood together by the ears. Arbuthnot.
It is uſual to ſet theſe poor animals by the ears. Addison Freeb.
EA'RLess. paj. [from ear.] Without any ears.
Earleſ on high ſtood unabaſh'd Defoe,
And Tuthin flagrant from the ſcourge below. Pope's Dunc.
EA'RRING.. n.ſ.. [ear and ring.] Jewels ſet in a ring and worn
at the ears; ornament of a woman's ear.
With gold and ſilver they increaſe his ſtore,
And gave the precious earrings which they wore. Sandys.
A lady beſtowed earrings upon a favourite lamprey. Arbuth.
EA'R's Hot. m. ſ. Reach of the ear; ſpace within which words
". heard. * ---
omez, ſtand you out of earſhot.—I have ſomething to ſay
to your wife in private. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
EA'Rwax. m.ſ. [ear and wax.] The cerumen or exudation
which ſmears the inſide of the ear.
The ear being to ſtand open, becauſe there was ſome danger
that inſe&amp;s might creep in thereat; therefore hath nature
loricated or plaiſtered over the ſides of the hole with earwax,
to entangle any inſects that ſhould attempt to creep in there.
- . . . . . . . . Ray on the Creation.
EA'Rwig. m. ſ. [eane and pizza, a grub, Saxon.] A ſheath-
winged inſe&amp;t, imagined to Krcep into the ear.
Himſelf he on an earwig ſet;
Yet ſcarce he on his back could get, - }
So oft and high he did curvet. Drayton's Nymphid.
Earwigs and ſnails ſeldom infect timber. Mortimer’s Husb.
Doll never flies to cut her lace,
Or throw cold water in her face,
Becauſe ſhe heard a ſudden drum,
Or found an earwig in a plum.
2. By way of reproach, a whiſperer; a prying informer.
EA'Rwitness. n.ſ. [ear and witneſs.]... One who atteſts, or
can atteſt any thing as heard by himſelf.
All preſent were made earwitneſſes, even of each particular
branch of a common indićtment. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 36.
The hiſtories of mankind, written by eye or earwitneſſes,
are built upon this principle. J/atts’s Logick.
Swift.
To EAR. v. a. ſaro, Latin J To plow; to till.
He that ears my land ſpares my team, and gives me leave
to enjoy the crop. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
M: and Menas, famous pirates,
Make the ſea ſerve them, which they ear and wound
With keels of every kind. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Then we bring forth weeds,
When our quick mind lies ſtill; and our ill, told us,
Is as our earing. Shakeſpeare's Anthºny and Cleºpatra.
A rough valley, which is neither eared nor ſown. Deutr.
Five years, in the which there ſhall neither be caring nor
harveſt. - Gen. xlv. 6.
The field of love, with plow of virtue ear'd. Fairfax.
To EAR. v. n. [from ear.] To ſhoot into ears.
EA'RED. adj. [from ear.] -
J. Having ears, or organs of hearing.
2. Having ears, or ripe corn. º
The covert of the thrice ear'd field
Saw ſtately Ceres to her paſſion yield. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv.
EARL. m. ſ. ſeonl, Saxon ; eoryl, Erſe.] A title of nobility,
anciently the higheſt of this nation, now the third.
Thanes and kinſmen,
Henceforth
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 327</div><p class="Text">E. A. R.
Henceforth be earl, the firſt that ever Scotland
For ſuch an honour nam'd. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
EARL-MARSHAL. m. ſ. [earl and marſhal.] He that has chief
care of military ſolemnities. -
The marching troops through Athens take their way;
The great earl-marſhal orders their array. Dryden.
EA's Dov. m. ſ. [from earl.] The ſeigniory of an earl; the
title and dignity of an earl.
The duke of Clarence having married the heir of the earl
of Ulſter, and by her having all the earldºm of Ulſter, care-
fully went about the redreſſing evils. Spenser's State of Ireland.
* * When I am king, claim thou of me
The earldom of Hereford. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
EA'RL's Ess. n.ſ.. [from early J Quickneſs of any ačtion with
reſpect to ſomething elſe: as earlineſ in the morning, the aët
of riſing ſoon with reſpect to the ſun; earlineſ of growth,
the act of growing up ſoon in compariſon with other things
of the ſame kind.
The next morning we, having ſtriven with the ſun's earli-
neſ, were beyond the proſpect of the higheſt turrets. Sidney.
The goodneſs of the crop is great gain, if the goodneſs
anſwer the earlineſ of coming up. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
EA'RLY, adj. [æft, Saxon, before J Soon with reſpea to
ſomething elſe: as, in the morning, with reſpect to the ſun;
in time, with reſpect to creation; in the ſeaſon, in compa-
riſon with other produćts.
I am a tainted wether of the flock,
Meeteſt for death : the weakeſt kind of fruit
Drops earlieſ to the ground, and ſo let me. Shakeſpeare.
Nt is a curioſity to have ſeveral fruits upon one tree; and
the more when ſome of them come early, and ſome come
late, ſo that you may have upon the ſame tree ripe fruits all
Summer. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 5ol.
God made all the world, that he might be worſhipped in
ſome parts of the world; and therefore, in the firſt and moſt
early times of the church, what care did he manifeſt to have
ſuch places erected to his honour? South's Sermons.
And yet my numbers pleaſe the rural throng,
Rough ſatyrs dance, and Pan approves the ſong;
The nymphs, forſaking ev'ry cave and ſpring,
Their early fruit and milk-white turtles bring. Pope.
Sickneſs is early old age: it teaches us a diffidence in our
earthly ſtate, and inſpires us with the thoughts of a future.
Pope.
- Oh ſoul of honour !
Oh early heroe Smith's Phaedra and Hippolitus.
EA'RLY. adv. [from the adjećtive..] Soon; betimes.
Early before the morn with crimſon ray
The windows of bright heav'n opened had. Fairy ºpeen.
None in more languages can ſhow
Thoſe arts, which you ſo early know. JWaller.
The princeſs makes her iſſue like herſelf, by inſtilling early
into their minds religion, virtue and honour. Addison's Freehol.
To EARN. v. a. ſeannian, Saxon.]
1. To gain as the reward or wages of labour, or any per-
formance. -
Thoſe that have joined with their honour great perils, are
leſs ſubjećt to envy; for men think that they earn their honours
hardly. Bacon's Eſſays.
Winning cheap the high repute, -
Which he through hazard huge muſt earn. Mih. Par. Left.
I to the evil turn -
My obvious breaſt; arming to overcome
By ſuffering, and earn reſt ãº, labour won. Mill. Pa. Lºft.
- - Men may diſcern -
From what conſummate virtùe I have choſe
This perſea man, by merit call’d my ſon,
To earn ſalvation for the ſons of men. Paradiſ, Rºgained
Since they all beg, it were better for the ſtate to keep them,
even although they earned nothing. Graunt's Bill of Mortality.
This is the great expence of the poor, that takes up almoſt
all their earnings. - - Locke.
The poems gained the plagiary wealth, while the author
hardly earned his bread by repeating them. Pºpe's Eſ: on Homer.
, -- After toiling twenty days, -
To earn a ſtock of pence and praiſe,
. ...Thy labour's grown the critick's prey. " Swift.
2. To gain ; to obtain. . .
* * I can't ſay whore;
It does abhor me, now I ſpeak the word:
To do the act, that might th'addition earn,
...Not the world's maſs of vanity could make me. Shakespeare. Othello.
EA'RNEST. adj. [connerz, Saxon.]
1. Ardent in any affection; warm; zealous; importunate.
He which prayeth in due fort, is thereby made the more
attentive to hear; and he which heareth, the more earneſ to
pray for the time which we beſtow, as well in the one as the
* other. * Hoºker, b. v. ſ. 34.
2. Intent; fixed; eager. -
- On that proſpect ſtrange
Their earneft eyes they fix’d; imagining,
For one forbidden tree, a multitude
Now ris'n, to work them further woe or ſhame. Miſt. P. L.
They are never more earneſt to diſturb us, than when they
ſee us moſt earneſt in this duty. Duppa.
EA/RNEst. m. ſ. [from the adječtive.]
1. Seriouſneſs; a ſerious event not a jeſt; reality not a
feigned appearance.
Take heed that this jeſt do not one day turn to earneft. Sid.
I told you Klaius was the hapleſs wight,
Who earneſ found what they accounted play. Sidney.
Therewith ſhe laugh'd, and did her earneſt end injeſt. F. 3.
That high All-ſeer, which I dallied with, º
Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head,
And given in earneſt what I begg'd in jeſt. Shakespeare Rich. III.
Nor can I think that God, Creator wiſe !
Though threat'ning, will in earneſ, ſo deſtroy
Us, his prime creatures. Milton's Paradiſ. Loff, b. ix.
But the main buſineſs and earnſ of the world is money,
dominion, and power. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 5.
We ſhall die in carnºff, and it will not become us to live
in jeſt. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 7.
Sempronius, you have acted like yourſelf;
One would have thought you had been half in carneff. Addison
2. [ernitz penge, Daniſh; arres, French.] Pledge; handſel; firſt
fruits; token of ſomething of the ſame kind in futurity.
The apoſtles term it the handſel or earneſt of that which is
to conne. w Hooker, b. v. ſ. 5.
Which leader ſhall the doubtful vićt'ry bleſs,
And give an earneſ of the war's ſucceſs. If aller.
It may be looked upon as a pledge and earneſt of quiet and
tranquillity. Smalridge's Sermonſ.
The mercies received, great as they are, were earneſ's and
pledges of greater. Atterbury.
3. . money which is given in token that a bargain is ra-
tified.
You have conſpir'd againſt our perſon,
Join'd with an enemy proclaim’d, and from his coffers
Receiv'd the golden earneft of our death. Shakespeare Henry V.
Pay back the earnºff penny received from Satan, and fling
away his fin. Decay of Piety.
EA/RNEstLY. adv. [from earneft.]
1. Warmly; affectionately; zealouſly; importunately; in-
tenſely.
When earneffy they ſeek
Such proof, conclude they then begun to fail. Mih. P. L.
Shame is a baniſhment of him from the good opinion of
the world, which every man moſt earneſtly defires. South.
Earneffly invoke the goodneſs and power of an all merciful
and almighty God. Smalridge's Sermons.
2. Eagerly; deſirouſly. -
Why ſo earneſtly ſeek you to put up that letter Shakespeare K. Lear.
EA'RN Est Ness. n.ſ.. [from earneſſ.]
1. Eagerneſs; warmth; vehemence; impetuoſity.
Often with a ſolemn earneſtneſs,
More than, indeed, belong'd to ſuch a trifle,
He begg'd of me to ſteal it. Shakeſpeare's Otheik.
Audacity and confidence doth in buſineſs ſo great effects,
as a man may doubt, that beſides the very daring and earneſ:-
neſs, and perſiſting and importunity, there ſhould be ſome
ſecret binding, and ſtooping of other mens ſpirits to ſuch
perſons. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 943.
Marcus is overwarm; his fond complaints
Have ſo much earneſtneſ; and paſſion in them,
I hear him with a ſecret kind of horror,
And tremble at his vehemence of temper. Addison's Cato.
2. Solemnity; zeal. -
There never was a charge maintained with ſuch a ſhew of
gravity and earneffneſs, which had a ſlighter foundation to ſup-
port it. - Atterbury's Sermons, Preface.
3. Solicitude; care; intenſeneſs.
With overſtraining, and earneſtneſs of finiſhing their pieces,
, they often did them more harm than good. Dryden's Dufreſh.
EARsh, n.ſ.. [from ear, to plow.] A plowed field. -
Fires oft are good on barren earſhes made,
With crackling flames to burn the ſtubble blade. May's Virg.
EARTH. n.ſ. [eon's, Saxon.] -
1. The element diſtinét from air, fire, or water; ſoil; ter-
rene matter.
The ſmiling god is ſeen; while water, earth,
And air atteſt his bounty. Thºmſon's Spring, l. 855:
2. The terraqueous globe; the world.
Nought ſo vile that on the earth doth live,
But to the earth ſome ſpecial good doth give. Shakeſpeare,
This ſolid globe we live upon is called the earth, though it
contains in it a great variety of bodies, ſeveral whereof are
not properly earth; which word, taken in a more limited ſenſe,
ſignifies ſuch parts of this globe as are capable, being expoſed
to the air, to give rooting and nouriſhment to plants, ſo that
they may ſtand and grow in it. Locke.
3. Different modification of terrene matter. In this ſenſe it
has a plural.
The five genera of earths are, 1. Boles. 2. Clays.
3. Marls. 4. Ochres. 5. Tripclay Hill's 4ſat. Aſ dia.
* Earth;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 328</div><p class="Text">E A R
Earths are opake, inſipid, and, when dried, friable, or con-
ſiſting of parts eaſy to ſeparate, and ſoluble in water; not
diſpoſed to burn, flame, or take fire. //oodward's Met. Foſſ.
4. This world oppoſed to other ſcenes of exiſtence.
w What are theſe, *
So wither'd, and ſo wild in their attire,
That look not like th’ inhabitants o' th' earth,
And yet are on’t
They can judge as fitly of his worth,
As I can of thoſe myſteries which heav'n
Will not have earth to know. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
5. The inhabitants of the earth.
The whole earth was of one language. Gen. xi. 1.
6. Turning up the ground in tillage. [from ear, to plow.]
Such land as ye break up for barley to ſow,
Two earths, at the leaſt, ere ye ſow it beſtow. Tuſſ. Husb.
To EARTH. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To hide in earth.
The fox is earthed; but I ſhall ſend my two terriers in after
him. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
2. To cover with earth.
Shaft. King Lar.
4. Anything in the world; a female hyperbole.
Oh! if to dance all night, and dreſs all day,
Charm'd the ſmall-pox, or chas'd old age away, -
Who would not ſcorn what houſewife's cares produce
Or who would learn one earthy thing of uſe : Pºpe.
EARTHNUT. n.ſ. [earth and nut..] A pignut; a root in ſhape
and ſize like a nut. -
It is an umbelliferous plant, with a roſe-ſhaped flower, con-
iſting of many leaves orbicularly placed, which turns to a
fruit compoſed of ſmall oblong ſmooth leaves, gibbous on one
ſide, and plain on the other. It has a fleſhy tuberoſe root. It
is very common in ſhady woods and paſtures, riſing early in
Spring, and flowering in May: in July the ſeeds are ripe, and
ſoon after the leaves decay. Some dig up the roots, and eat
them raw: they are very much like cheſtnuts, and not an un-
pleaſant, morſel; but boiled they are a very delicious food,
eaten with butter and pepper, and are eſtéemcd very nou-
riſhing. AMiler.
Where there are earthnuts in ſeveral patches, though the
roots lie deep in the ground, and the ſtalks be dead, the ſwine
will by their ſcent root only where they grow. . . Ray.
Earth up with freſh mould the roots of thoſe auricula's EARTHQUAKE. m.ſ. [earth and quake.] Tremor or convul-
which the froſt may have uncovered.
To EARTH. v. m. To retire under ground.
Hence foxes earth'd, and wolves abhorr'd the day,
And hungry churles enſnar'd the nightly prey. Tickell.
EA'RTH BoARD. n.ſ. [earth and board.] The board of the
plow that ſhakes off the earth.
The plow reckoned the moſt proper for ſtiff black clays,
is one that is long, large, and broad, with a deep head and a
ſquare earth/card, ſo as to turn up a great furrow. Mrtimer.
EA'Rt HBORN. adj. [earth and born.]
1. Born of the earth; terrigenous; meanly born.
The wounds I make but ſow new enemies;
Which from their blood, like earthborn brethren riſe. Dryd.
The God for ever great, for ever king,
Who flew the earthborn race, and meaſures right
Evelyn's Kalendar.
w
To heav'n's great habitants 2 Prior.
2. Meanly born.
Earthborn Lycon ſhall aſcend the throne. Smith.
EARTHBou ND. adj. [earth and bound...] Faſtened by the preſ-
ſure of the earth.
That will never be :
Who can impreſs the foreſt, bid the tree
Unfix his earthbound root ” Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
EA'RTHEN. adj. [from earth.J. Made of earth; made of clay.
About his ſhelves -
Green earthen pots, bladders, and muſty ſeeds
Were thinly ſcatter'd. Shakespeare.
As a ruſtick was digging the ground by Padua, he found
an urn, or earthen pot, in which there was another urn, and
in this leſſer a lamp clearly burning. Wilkins's Math. Magic.
The moſt brittle water-carriage was uſed among the Egyp-
tians, who, as Strabo ſaith, would ſail ſometimes in the boats
made of earthen ware. Arluthnot on Coins.
EA'RTHFLAx. m. ſ. [earth and flax.] A kind of fibrous foſfil.
Of Engliſh tile, the coarſer ſort is called plaiſter, or par-
get ; the finer, earthfax, or ſalamander's hair. JWoodward.
EA'RTHINEss. n.ſ. The quality of containing earth; groſſ-
neſs.
EA'RTHLING. m. ſ. [from earth.] An inhabitant of the earth;
a mortal; a poor frail creature.
To earthlings, the footſtool of God, that ſtage which he
raiſed for a ſmall time, ſeemeth magnificent. Drummond.
EA/RTHLY. adj. [from earth.]
1. Not heavenly; vile; mean; ſordid.
But I remember now
I'm in this earthly world, where to do harm
ls often laudable; to do good, ſometime
Accounted dangerous folly. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
When faith and love, which parted from thee never,
Had ripen'd thy juſt ſoul to dwell with God,
Meckly thou didſt reſign this earthly load
Of death, call'd life.
2. Belonging only to our preſent ſtate; not ſpiritual.
Our common neceſſities, and the lack which we all have
as well of ghoſtly as of earthly favours, is in each kind eaſily
known. Hooker.
.*
Milton.
You have ſcarce time
To ſcal from ſpiritual leiſure a brief ſpan,
To keep your earthly audit. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
It muſt be our ſolemn buſineſs and endeavour, at fit ſeaſons,
to turn the ſtream of our thoughts from earthly towards
divine objects. Atterbury's Sermons.
3. Corporeal; not mental.
Great grace that old man to him given had,
For God he often ſaw, from heaven hight,
All were his earthly eyen both blunt and bad. Fairy Queen.
Sudden he view'd, in ſpite of all her art,
V An earthly lover luiking at her heart. Pºpe's Ra, of the Lock.
cL. I. -
*
ſion of the earth.
This ſubterranean heat or fire being in any part of the
earth flopt, by ſome accidental glut or obſtruction in the paſ-
ſages through which it uſed to aſcend, and being preterna-
turally aſſembled in greater quantity into one place, cauſes a
great rarefaction and intumeſcence of the water of the abyſs,
putting it into very great commotions; and making the ſke
effort upon the earth, expanded upon the face of the abyſs,
occaſions that agitation and concuſſion which we callſ an
earthquake. //oodward's vatural Hiſtory.
Theſe tumults were like an earthºuake, ſhaking the very
foundations of all, than which nothing in the world hath
more of horrour. - King Charles.
Was it his youth, his valour, or ſucceſs,
Theſe might perhaps be found in other men:
'Twas that reſpect, that awful homage paid me;
That fearful love which trembled in his eyes,
And with a ſilent earthquake ſhook his ſoul. Dryd. Sp. Fryar.
The country, by reaſon of its vaſt caverns and ſubterra-
neous fires, has been miſerably torn by earthquakes, ſo that the
whole face of it is quite changed. Addiſon's Remark, on Italy.
EARTH SHAKING. adj. [earth and ſhake..] Having power to
ſhake the earth, or to raiſe earthquakes.
By the earthſhaking Neptune's mace,
And Tethys grave majeſtick pace. Milton.
Now ſcarce withdrawn the fierce earthſhaking pow'r,
Jove's daughter Pallas watch'd the favºring hour;
Back to their caves ſhe bad the winds to fly,
And huſh'd the bluſtring brethren of the ſky. Poſe.
EA'RTHwo RM. m. ſ. [earth and worm.]
1. A worm bred under ground. -
Worms are found in ſnow commonly, like earthwormſ,
and therefore it is not unlike that it may likewiſe put forth
plants. Bacon's Natural / iſ ry, Nº. 569.
Upon a ſhower, after a drought, earthworms and land-
ſnails innumerable come out of their lurking places. Ray.
2. A mean ſordid wretch.
Thy vain contempt, dull earthworm, ceaſe;
I won't for refuge fly.
EA'R r HY. adj. [from earth.]
1. Conſiſting of earth.
Long may’ſ thou live in Richard's ſeat to fit,
And ſoon lie Richard in an earthy pit ! Shakeſp. Richard II.
Theſe lamps are inflamed by the admiſſion of new air,
when the ſepulchres are opened, as we ſee in fat carthy vapours
of divers ſorts. //ilk.ns's Math. Magic.
All water, eſpecially that of rain, is more or leſs ſtored with
matter, light in compariſon of the common mineral earthy
natter. //oodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
2. Compoſed or partaking of earth; terrene.
To ſurvey his dead and earthy image,
What were it but to make my ſorrow greater. Shakespeare H. VI.
Him lord pronounc'd, he, O indignity
Subjected to his ſervice angel-wings,
And flaming miniſters to watch and tend -
Their earthy charge. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, l. ix. l. 157.
3. Inhabiting the earth; terreſtrial.
Thoſe earthy ſpirits black and envious are ;
I'll call up other gods of form more fair. Dryd. Iºd. Emper.
4. Relating to earth.
Mine is the ſhipwreck, in a watry ſign;
And in an earthy, the dark dungeon thine.
5. Not mental; groſs; not refined.
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and ſpeak;
Lay open to my earthy groſs conceit, -
Smother'd in errors, feeble, ſhallow, weak,
The folded meaning of your words deceit. Shakeſpeare.
Nor is my flame -
7 S So
Norris.
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 329</div><p class="Text">E A S
E A S
So earthy, as to need the dull material force
Of eyes, or lips, or cheeks.
EASE. m. ſ. ſaiſe, French.] ---- - - -
1. Quiet * {º} tranquility; no º
We ſhould not find her half to brave and bo
To lead it to the wars, and to the ſeas;
To make it ſuffer watchings, hungeſ, cold,
Denham's Sophy.
when it might feed with Plºy- reſt with eaſ. Davies.
The prieſt on ſkins of off’rings takes his eaſe, -
And nightly viſions in his ſlumber fees. Dryden's AEn.
-&gt;
éontent with praiſe, may lie at caſe
hº and marble palaces. Dryde's juv. Sat. 7.
Mcn of parts and penetration were not idly to diſpute at
their caſ, but were to act according to the reſult º:
OcAfe.
*ś, is under an obligation to know every thing:
knowledge and ſcience in general is the buſineſs only of thoſe
who are at eaſe and leiſure. Locke:
2. Freedom from pain; a neutral ſtate between pain and
pleaſure. . . -
That which we call caſe is only an indolency, or a freedom
from pain. L’E/irange.
Is it a ſmall crime to wound himſelf by anguiſh of heart,
to deprive himſelf of all the pleaſures, or eaſe, or enjoyments
of life? Temple.
3. Reſt after labour; intermiſſion of labour. . . -
Give yourſelves caſe from the fatigue of waiting. Swift.
4. Facility; not difficulty.
The willing metal will obey thy hand,
Following with eaſe, if favour’d by thy fate,
Thou art foredoom'd to view the Stygian ſtate;
If not, no labour can the tree conſtrain,
And ſtrength of ſtubborn arms and ſteel are vain. Dryden.
5. Unconſtraint; freedom from harſhneſs, formality, forced be-
haviour, or conceits.
True caſe in writing comes from art, not chance;
As thoſe move eaſieſt who have learn'd to dance. Pope's Eff.
To EASE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To free from pain.
Help and eaſe children the beſt you can; but by no means
bemoan them. Locke.
2. To relieve; to aſſuage; to mitigate; to alleviate.
Thy father made our yoke grievous, now therefore eaſe
thou ſomewhat the grievous ſervitude. 2 Cbro. x. 4.
Complain, queen Margaret, and tell thy grief;
It ſhall be eas'd, if France can yield relief. Shakeſp. H. VI.
As if with ſports my ſufferings I could eaſe. Dryden.
Though he ſpeaks of ſuch medicines as procure ſleep, and
eaſe pain, he doth not determine their doſes. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Will he for ſacrifice our ſorrows eaſe ?
And can our tears reverſe his firm decrees
3. To relieve from labour.
If ere night the gath'ring clouds we fear,
A ſong will help the beating ſtorm to bear;
And that thou may’ſt not be too late abroad,
Sing, and I'll eaſe thy ſhoulders of thy load. Dryden's Paſt.
4. To ſet free from anything that offends.
I will eaſe me of mine adverſaries. Iſ i. 24.
No body feels pain that he wiſhes not to be eaſed of, with a
deſire equal to that pain, and inſeparable from it. Locke.
ºvt. adj. [eaſe and full.] Quiet; peaceable; fit for
reit.
I ſpy a black, ſuſpicious, threat'ning cloud,
That will encounter with our glorious ſun,
Ere he attain his eaſtful weſtern bed. Shałºff. Henry VI.
EA's EMENT. n.ſ.. [from eaſ...]
1. Aſſiſtance; ſupport; relief from expences.
He has the advantage of a free lodging, and ſome other eaſ:-
771entſ. Swift.
2. [In law.] A ſervice that one neighbour has of another by
charter or preſcription, without profit; as a way through his
ground, a fink, or ſuch like. Cowel.
EA'sſly. adv. [from eaſy.]
1. Without difficulty.
Thoſe move ſwiftly, and at great diſtance; but they re-
quire a medium well diſpoſed, and their tranſmiſſion is eaſily
ſtopped. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 647.
She aſk'd the reaſon of his woe;
She aſk'd, but with an air and mien,
That made it eaſily foreſeen
She fear'd too much to know.
3. Without pain; without diſturbance; in tranquillity.
As it not to bid defiance to all mankind to condemn their
univerſal opinions and deſigns, if, inſtead of paſſing your life
*Well and eaſily, you reſolve to paſs it as ill and as miſèrable as
you can: Temple,
3. Readily; without reluctance. p
|Safi eaſily reſign to others the praiſe of your illuſtrious
Prior.
Prior.
family. Dryden's Dedic, to State of Innocence.
Not ſoon provok'd, ſhe eaſy forgives;
And much ſhe fuffers, as ſhe much believes. Prior.
EA's IN Ess. m. ſ. [from eaſy..]
1. Freedom from difficulty.
Believe me, friends, loud tumults are not laid
With half the eaſineſ that they are rais'd. Ben. Johnſ. Catil.
Eoſineſ, and difficulty are relative terms, and relate to ſome
power; and a thing may be difficult to a weak man, which
yet may be eaſy to the ſame perſon, when aſſiſted with a
reater ſtrength. Tillºtſon, Sermon 6.
The ſeeming eaſineſs of Pindarick verſe has made it ſpread;
but it has not been conſidered. Dryden.
You left a conqueſt more than half atchiev’d,
And for whoſe eaſinſ, I almoſt griev'd. Dryden.
This plea appears under a colour of friendſhip to religion,
and to invite men to it by the eaſinºſ of the terms it offers.
Rogers, Sermon I 5.
2. Flexibility; compliance; readineſs; not oppoſition; not re-
lućtance. -
His yielding unto them in one thing might happily put
them in hope, that time would breed the like eaſineſs of con-
deſcending further unto them. Hooker, Prºf.
Since the cuſtom of eaſineſs to alter and change laws is ſo
evil, no doubt but to bear a tolerable fore is better than to
venture on a dangerous remedy. Hºcker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
Give to him, and he ſhall but laugh at your eaſinºſ; ; ſave
his life, but, when you have done, look to your own. South.
The ſafeſt way to ſecure honeſty, is to lay the foundations
of it early in liberality, and an eoſineſs to part with to others
whatever they have or like themſelves. Locke.
3. Freedom from conſtraint; not effort; not formality.
Abſtruſe and myſtick thoughts you muſt expreſs
With painful care, but ſeeming eaſinºſ : {
For truth ſhines brighteſt through the plaineſt dreſs. Roſ.
4. Reſt; tranquillity.
I think the reaſon I have aſſigned hath a great intereſt in
that reſt and eaſinºſ, we enjoy when aſleep. Ray on the Creation.
EAST. n.ſ. [eore, Saxon; he's, Erſe.]
1. The quarter where the ſun riſes.
They counting forwards towards the Eaſt, did allow
180 degrees to the Portugals eaſtward. Abbot.
2. The regions in the eaſtern parts of the world.
I would not be the villain that thou thinkeſt,
For the whole ſpace that's in the tyrant's graſp,
And the rich Eaſt to boot. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
EA's TER., n.ſ.. [earne, Saxon; coffer, Dutch..] The day on
which the Chriſtian church commemorates our Saviour's re-
ſurreótion. -
Did'ſt thou not fall out with a taylor for wearing his new
doublet before Eaſter P Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
Vićtor's unbrother-like heat towards the Eaſtern churches,
in the controverſy about Eaſter, fomented that difference into
a ſchiſm. Decay of Piety.
EA's TERLY. adj. [from Eaſt.]
1. Coming from the parts towards the Faſt.
When the eaſiery winds or breezes are kept off by ſome
high mountains from the vallies, whereby the air, wanting
motion, doth become exceeding unhealthful. Raleigh.
2. Lying towards the Eaſt.
Theſe give us a view of the moſt eaſterly, ſoutherly, and
weſterly parts of England. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
3. Looking towards the Eaſt.
Water he chuſes clear, light, without taſte or ſmell, drawn
not from ſnow, but from ſprings with an eafterly expoſition.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
EA'ste RN. adj. [from Eaſt.]
1. Dwelling or found in the Eaſt; oriental.
Eaſtern tyrants from the light of heaven -
Seclude their boſom-ſlaves. Thomſºn's Spring.
2. Lying or being towards the Eaſt. - *-
The eaſtern end of the iſle riſes up in precipices. Addison.
3. Going towards the Eaſt.
A ſhip at ſea has no certain method in either her ea'ern or
weſtern voyages, or even in her leſs diſtant ſailing from the
coaſts, to know her longitude, or how much ſhe is gone eaſi-
ward or weſtward, as can eaſily be known in any clear day or
night how much ſhe is gone northward or ſouthward. Addison.
4. Looking towards the Eaſt.
EA'stward. adv. [Eaſt and toward.] Towards the Eaſt.
The moon, which performs its motion ſwifter than the
ſun, gets eaſiward out of his rays, and appears, when the
ſun is ſet. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 13.
What ſhall we do, or where direét our flight -
Eaſtward, as far as I could caſt my fight, }
From op'ning heav'ns, I ſaw deſcending light. Dryden.
EA's Y. adj. [from eaſe.]
1. Not difficult.
The ſervice of God, in the ſolemn aſſembly of ſaints, is a
work, though eaſy, yet withal very weighty, and of great
reſpect. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 31.
There is a ſlave, whoſe eaſy-borrow'd pride
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows. Shaº. K. Lear.
How much it is in every one's power to make reſolutions
to
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 330</div><p class="Text">E A T
to himſelf, ſuch as he may keep, is eaſy for every º to
ºtA'e,
The whole iſland was probably cut into ſeveral eaſy aſcents,
and planted with variety of palaces. Addiſon on Italy.
2. Quiet; at reſt; not harraſſed; not diſturbed; without
anxiety. - . . .
Thoſe that are eaſ in their conditions, or their minds,
refuſe often to enter upon publick charges and employ-
Inent. Temple.
Keep their thoughts caſ, and free, the only temper wherein
the mind is capable of receiving new informations. Locke.
A marriage of love is pleaſant, a marriage of intereſt eaſy,
and a marriage where both meet happy. Addiſon's Spectator.
When men are eaſy in their circumſtances, they are natu-
rally enemics to innovations. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 42.
A man ſhould direét all his ſtudies and endeavours at making
himſelf eaſy now, and happy hereafter. Addiſon's Spetiator.
we plainly feel whether at this inſtant we are ºft Or un-
eaſy, happy or miſerable. Smalridge's Sermons.
3. Complying; unreſiſting; credulous.
Baited with reaſons not unplauſible,
Win me into the eaſy hearted man, -
And hug him into ſnares. Milton.
With ſuch deceits he gain'd their eaſy hearts,
Too prone to credit his perfidious arts. Dryden's Án.
The kindeſt father I have ever found him,
Eaſy and good, and bounteous to my wiſhes. Addison's Cato.
4. Free from pain.
Another part, in ſquadrons and groſs bands,
On bold adventure to diſcover wide
That diſmal world, if any clime perhaps -
Might yield them eaſier habitation. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
Pleaſure has been the bus'neſs of my life,
And every change of fortune eaſy to me, -
Becauſe I ſtill was eaſy to myſelf. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
5. Ready ; not unwilling. . . -
Pity and he are one;
So merciful a king did never live,
Loth to revenge, and eaſy to forgive. Dryden's Span. Fryar.
6. Without want of more.
They ſhould be allowed each of them ſuch a rent as would
make them eaſy. Swift's Arg, againſt aboliſhing Chriſtianity.
7. Without conſtraint; without formality.
Thoſe move eaſieſ that have learn'd to dance. Pope.
Praiſe the eaſy vigour of a line,
Where Denham's ſtrength, and Waller's ſweetneſs join. Po.
To EAT. v. a. preterite ate, or eat; part, eat, or eaten. [ecan,
Sax. itan, Gothick; eich, Erſe.]
1. To devour with the mouth.
Locuſts ſhall eat the reſidue of that which is eſcaped from
the hail, and ſhall eat every tree which groweth. Ex. x. 5.
Other ſtates cannot be accuſed for not ſtaying for the firſt
blow, or for not accepting Polyphemus's courteſy, to be the
laſt that ſhall be eaten up. Bacon's War with Spain.
Even wormwood, eat with bread, will not bite, becauſe it is
mixed with a great quantity of ſpittle. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To conſume; to corrode. -
Thou beſt of gold art worſt of gold;
Other leſs fine in carrat is more precious,
Preſerving life in med'cine potable: ' '
But thou, moſt fine, moſt honour'd, moſt renown'd,
Haſt eat thy bearer up. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
They entail a ſecret curſe upon their eſtates, which does
cither inſenſibly waſte and conſume it, or eat out the heart
and comfort of it. Tillotſon, Sermon 4.
There ariſes a neceſſity of keeping the ſurface even, either
by preſſure or eating medicines, that the eminence of the fleſh
may not reſiſt the fibres of the ſkin in their tendency to cover
the wound. Sharp's Surgery.
3. To ſwallow back; to retreat. This is only uſed of a man's
word.
They cannot hold, but burſt out thoſe words, which after-
wards they are forced to eat.
Credit were not to be loſt
B’ a brave knight errant of the poſt,
That eats, perfidiouſly, his word,
And ſwears his ears through a two inch board. Hudibrar.
To EAT. v. m. -
1. To go to meals; to take meals; to feed.
He did eat continually at the king's table. 2 Sa. ix. 13.
And when the ſcribes and phariſees ſaw him eat with pub-
licans and finners, they ſaid unto his diſciples, how is it that
he eateth with publigans and ſinners? Mat. ii. 16.
2. To take food. -
He that will not eat 'till he has a demonſtration that it will
nouriſh him, he that will not ſtir 'till he infallibly knows the
buſineſs he goes about will ſucceed, will have little elſe to do
but ſit ſtill and periſh. Locke.
3. To be maintained in food. -
The righteous eateth to the ſatisfying of his ſoul, but the
belly of the wicked ſhall want. Prov, xiii. 25.
Hakewill on Providence.
Thou art paſt the tyrant's ſtroke; * - 1
Care no more to cloath and eat. Shakeſpeare's Gymieline.
4. To make way by corroſion. - -
. The plague of fin has even altered his nature, and caten
into his very eſſentials. South's Sermons.
A prince's court eats too much into the income of a poor
ſtate. Addison's Italy.
EA"TABLE. n.ſ. ſſrom eat.] Any thing that may be eaten.
If you all ſorts of perſons would engage,
Suit well your catalles to ev'ry age. King's Art of Cookery.
Ea'TER. n.ſ. (from eat.] -
1. One that eats any thing. -
The Caribees and the Cannibals, almoſt all, are caters
of man's fleſh. Abbot's Deſcription of the Wºrld.
A knave, a raſcal, an eater of broken meats. Shakespeare K. Lear.
If the taſte of this fruit maketh the eaters like gods, why
remaineſt thou a beaſt : Brown's Wulgar Erreurs, b. i. e. i.
As if the lotus grew only here, the virtue of whoſe fruit is
to cauſe in the eaters an oblivion of all other ſoils. Howel.
2. A corroſive. -
º adj. [eaº, Saxon.] Eaſy; not difficult. An old
Word. -
Where eaſe abounds, it's eath to do amiſs. Fairy $2:ſeen.
What works not beauty, man's relenting mind
Is eath to move with plaints and ſhews of woe. Fairfax, h. iv.
The way was ſtrait and eath. Fairfax.
EATH. adv. [from the adjective J Eaſily. An old word.
Who hath the world not try’d,
From the right way full eath may wander wide. Hubb. Tale:
EATINGHouse. n.ſ. ſeat and houſe..] A houſe where provi-
fions are ſold ready dreſſed.
An hungry traveller ſtept into an eatinghotſ for his
dinner. L’Eſtrange.
EAVES. n.ſ.. [epere, Saxon.] The edges of the roof which
overhang the houſe.
Every night he comes
With muſick of all ſorts, and ſongs compos'd
To her unworthineſs: it nothing ſteads us
To chide him from our eaves; for he perſiſts,
As if his life lay on't. Shakeſpeare's All's well that end; well.
His tears run down his beard, like Winter drops
From eaves of reeds. Shakeſpeare's Tempſ?.
If in the beginning of Winter the drops of the eaves of
houſes come more ſlowly down than they uſe, it portendeth a
hard and froſty Winter. Bacon, Nº. 81 1.
Uſher'd with a ſhower ſtill,
When the guſt hath blown his fill,
Ending on the ruſling leaves,
With minute drops from off the eaves. - Milton.
The icicles hang down from the eaves of houſes. Iſºodward.
To EA’vesdrop. v. a. [eaves and drop.] To catch what
comes from the eaves; in common phraſe, to liſten under
windows.
EA’vesdropper. m. ſ. [eaves and drop.] A liſtener under
windows.
Under our tents I’ll play the eavesdrºpper,
To hear if any mean to ſhrink from me. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
EBB. m. ſ. [ebba, epplob, Saxon; ebbe, Dutch.]
1. The reflux of the tide towards the ſea.
The clear ſun on his wide wat'ry glaſs
Gaz'd hot, and of the freſh wave largely drew,
As after thirſt ; which made their flowing ſhrink
From ſtanding lake to tripping ebb, that ſtole
With ſoft foot tow’rds the deep. A.ilton's Parad'ſ Lºft.
Hither the ſeas at ſtated times reſort,
And ſhove the loaden veſſels into port;
Then with a gentle ebb retire again, -
And render back their cargo to the main. Addison on Italy.
2. Decline; decay; waſte. -
You have finiſhed all the war, and brought all things to
that low ebb which you ſpeak of. Spenſer on Ireland.
This tide of man's life, after it once turneth and declineth,
ever runneth with a perpetual ebb and falling ſtream, but never
floweth again. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Thus all the treaſure of our flowing years,
Our ebb of life for ever takes away. Roſcommon.
The greateſt age for poetry was that of Auguſtus Caeſar,
yet painting was then at its loweſt ebb, and perhaps ſculpture
was alſo declining. Dryden's Dufreſnºy, Preface.
Near my apartment let him prisºner be,
That I his hourly ebbs of life may ſee. Dryden's Aurengzebe,
What is it he aſpires to ?
Is it not this To ſhed the ſlow remains, -
His laſt poor ebb of blood in your defence Addison's Cata.
To ERB. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To flow back towards the ſea,
Though my tide of blood
Hath proudly flow'd in vanity 'till now, -
Now it doth turn and ebb back to the ſca. Shakespeare . Hon. IV,
From thence the tide of fortune left their ſhore,
And elbºd much faſter than it flow'd befºre. Dryden's Án.
2. To decline; to decay; to waſte, -
*
2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 331</div><p class="Text">E. C. C.
E C [.
|
- Well, I am ſtanding water:
—I'll teach you how to flow.
—Do ſo: to ebb
Hereditary ſloth inſtrućts me. Shakespeare's Tempſ?.
But oh he ebbs / the ſmiling waves decay !
For ever, lovely ſtream, for ever ſtay! Halifax.
E'BEN. {{ [ebenus, Latin.] A hard, heavy, black, valu-
#. able wood, which admits a fine gloſs.
BONY.
If the wood be very hard, as shony, or lignum vitae, they
are to turn: they uſe not the ſame tools they do for ſoft
woods. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſes.
Oft by the winds extinét the ſignal lies,
Or ſmother'd in the glimmering ſocket dies,
Ere night has half roll'd round her ebon throne. Gay's Triv.
ERRI'ety. n.ſ. [ebrietas, Latin.] Drunkenneſs; intoxication
by ſtrong liquors. º
Bitter almonds, as an antidote againſt ebriety, hath com-
monly failed. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 6.
EBRILLADE. n.ſ. [French..] A check of the bridle which
a horſeman gives a horſe, by a jerk of one rein, when he re-
fuſes to turn.
EBRio'sity. n.ſ.. [elirioſtas, Latin.] Habitual drunkenneſs.
That religion which excuſeth Noah in ſurpriſal, will neither
acquit brioſity nor ebriety in their intended perverſion. Brown.
Eb'ULLITIon. n.ſ. [ebullio, Latin.]
1. The act of boiling up with heat.
2. Any inteſtine motion.
3. That ſtruggling or efferveſcence, which ariſes from the
mingling together any alkalizate and acid liquor; and hence
any inteſtine violent motion of the parts of a fluid, occaſioned
by the ſtruggling of particles of different properties, is ſo
called. Quincy.
The diſſolution of gold and ſilver diſagree; ſo that in their
mixture there is great ebulition, darkneſs, and, in the end, a
precipitation of a black powder. Bacon.
Iron, in aqua fortis, will fall into ebullition with noiſe and
emication; as alſo a craſſe and fumid exhalation, cauſed
from the combat of the ſulphur of iron with the acid and
nitrous ſpirits of aqua fortis. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii.
When aqua fortis, or ſpirit of vitriol, poured upon filings
of iron, diſſolves the filings with a great heat and ebullition,
is not the heat and ebullition effected by a violent motion of
the parts; and does not their motion argue, that the acid parts
of the liquor ruſh towards the parts of the metal with vio-
lence, and run forcibly into its pores, ’till they get between
its outmoſt particles and the main maſs of the metal. Newton.
A violent cold, as well as heat, may be produced by this
ebullition; for if ſal ammoniack, or any pure volatile alkali,
diſſolved in water, be mixed with an acid, an ebullition, with
a greater degree of cold, will enſue. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
ECCENTRISAL ) aſ: tricus. Lati
ECCE/NTRICK. ład. [eccentricus, Latin.]
1. Deviating from the center.
2. Not having the ſame center with another circle: ſuch circles
were ſuppoſed by the Ptolemaick philoſophy:
Thither his courſe he bends
Through the calm firmament; but up or down,
By centrick or eccentrick, hard to tell. Milton's Parad. Loft.
They build, unbuild, contrive,
To ſave appearances: they gird the ſphere
With centrick, and eccentrick, ſcribbl’d o'er,
Cycle, and epicycle, orb in orb. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
Whence is it that planets move all one and the ſame way
in orbs concentrick, while comets move all manner of ways
in orbs very eccentrick P Newton's Opt.
3. Not terminating in the point; not directed by the ſame
principle.
Whatſoever affairs paſs ſuch a man's hands, he crooketh
them to his own ends; which muſt needs be often eccentrick
to the ends of his maſter. Bacon's Eſſays.
4. Irregular; anamalous; deviating from ſtated and conſtant
methods.
This motion, like others of the times, ſeems eccentrick and
łrregular. King Charles.
A charaćter of an eccentrick virtue, is the more exact image
of human life, becauſe it is not wholly exempted from its
frailties. Dryden's Dedicat. to the Conqueſt of Granada.
Then from whate'er we can to ſenſe produce,
Common and plain, or wond’rous and abſtruſe,
From nature's conſtant or eccentri. A laws,
The thoughtful ſoul this gen'ral inference draws,
That an effect muſt preſuppoſe a cauſe. Prior.
Ecc ENTRI'CITY. m. ſ. [from eccentrick.]
1. Deviation from a center.
2. The ſtate of having a different center from another circle.
In regard of eccentricity, and the epicycle wherein it moveth,
the motion of the moon is unequal. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
By reaſon of the ſun's eccentricity to the earth, and obliquity
to the equator, he appears to us to move unequally. Holder.
3. Excurſion from the proper orb.
The duke at his return from his eccentricity, for ſo I account
favourites abroad, met no good news of the Cadiz attempt.
- //otton.
4. Eccentricity of the earth is the diſtance between the focus
and the center of the earth's elliptick orbit. Harris.
Ecchy'Mosis. n.ſ.. [izzazzi;] Livid ſpots or blotches in the
ſkin, made by extravaſatcd blood. &amp;#incy.
Ecchymoſ; may be defined an extravaſation of the blood in
or under the ſkin, the ſkin remaining whole. JJ iſ man’s Surg.
Laxations are accompanied with tumour and ecchymºſ;. J/ſ.
£994-º!ºl. ºff. [...ſ.º.º., Lati
ECCLESIA’STICK. {a}. [ºccluſiyiicus, Latin J
1. Relating to the church; not civil.
Is diſcipline an eccleſiaſtical matter or civil? If an eccleſiaſti-
cal, it muſt of neceſſity belong to the duty of the miniſter.
Hooker, Preface.
Clergymen, otherwiſe little fond of obſcure terms, yet in
their ſermons are liberal of thoſe which they find in eccleſiaſi-
cal writers. Swift.
A church of England man has a true veneration for the
ſcheme eſtabliſhed among us of eccleſiaſtick government. Swift.
Ecclesia'stick. m. ſ. [from the adjective..] A perſon dedi-
cated to the miniſtries of religion.
The ambition of the eccleſiaſti ki deſtroyed the purity of
the church. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Eccoproticks. n.ſ. ſix and xa,6-.] Such medicines as
gently purge the belly, ſo as to bring away no more than the
natural excrements lodged in the inteſtines.
The body ought to be maintained in its daily excretions by
ſuch means as are eccoprotick. Harvey ºn the lague.
Echina'te. Nadj. [from echinus, Latin.] Briſtled like an
EcHINA"TED. } hedgehog; ſet with prickles.
An echinated pyrites in ſhape approaches the echinated cryſ-
talline balls. J/~ward on Fºyls.
E"CHINUS. n.ſ. [Latin.]
1. A hedgehog.
2. A ſhellfiſh ſet with prickles.
3. [With botaniſts.] The prickly head, cover of the ſced, or
top of any plant.
4. [In architecture.] A member or ornament, taking its name
from the roughneſs of the carving, reſembling the prickly
rind of a cheſnut, and not unlike the thorny coat of a hedge-
hog,
This ornament is uſed by modern archite&amp;s in cornices of
the Ionick, Corinthian, and Compoſite orders; and generally
ſet next to the abacus, being carved with anchors, darts, and
ovals or eggs. Harris.
ECHO. m. ſ. [...]
1. Echo was ſuppoſed to have been once a nymph, who pined
into a ſound for love of Narciſius.
The pleaſant myrtle may teach th' unfortunate Echo
In theſe woods to reſound the renowned name of a goddeſs.
Sidney, b, i.
2. The return or repercuſſion of any found.
Babbling echo mocks the hounds,
Replying ſhrilly to the well-tun'd horns,
As if a double hunt were heard at once. Shakespeare. Titus Andron.
The ſound, filling great ſpaces in arched lines, cannot be
guided; therefore there hath not been any means to make arti-
ficial echoes. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 242.
To you I mourn, nor to the deaf I fing;
The woods ſhall anſwer, and the echo ring Pope's Summer.
'Tis not enough no harſhneſs gives offence;
The ſound muſt ſcem an echo to the ſenſe. Pope's Eſ. Crit.
3. The ſound returned.
Wilt thou hunt 3,
Thy hounds ſhall make the welkin anſwer them,
And fetch ſhrill echoes from their hollow earth. Shakeſpeare.
O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales and bow'rs
With other echo late I taught your ſhades
To anſwer, and reſound far other ſong! A ſilt. Parad. Lºft. .
To Echo. v. n.
1. To reſound; to give the repercuſſion of a voice.
- At the parting
All the church echo'd Shakeſpeare's 7 aming of the Shrew.
Through rocks and caves the name of Delia founds;
Delia each cave and echoing rock rebounds. Pope's Autumn.
2. To be founded back.
Hark, how the ſound diſturbs imperious Rome!
Shakes her proud hills, and rolls from dome to dome!
Her miter'd princes hear the echoing noiſe,
And, Albion, dread thy wrath and awful voice. Blackmore.
To Echo. v. a. To ſend back a voice; to return what has
been uttered.
Our modern ſeparatiſts do but echo the ſame note.
Decay of Piety.
With peals of ſhouts the Tyrians praiſe the ſong;
Thoſe peals are cºho'd by the irojan throng. Dryden's Żn.
One great death deforms the dreary ground;
The echo'd woes from dittant rocks reſound. - Prior.
EcL AIRc1'ss EMENT. n.ſ. [French.J Explanation; the act of
clearing up an affair by verbal expoſtulation.
3 - J. "CLAI.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 332</div><p class="Text">E. C. L
ECLAT. n.ſ. [French.] Splendour; ſhow ; luſtre.
Nothing more contributes to the variety, ſurprize, and eclat
of Homer's battles, than that artificial manner of gaging his
heroes by each other. Pope's Effy on Homer.
Eclect Ick. adj. [****, J Selečting; chufing at will.
Cicero gives an account of the opinions of philoſophers;
but was of the eclectick ſect, and choſe out of each ſuch poſi-
tions as came neareſt truth. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
Ecle GMA. n.ſ. ſix and xiºzº.] A form of medicine made by
the incorporation of oils with ſyrups, and which is to be
taken upon a liquorice ſtick. - Quincy.
ECLI/PSE. n. ſ. [**** *...]
1. An obſcuration of the luminaries of heaven; the ſun is
eclipſed by the intervention of the moon; the moon by
the interpoſition of the earth. The word originally ſignifies
departure from the place, to which Milton alludes.
Slips of yew,
Sliver'd in the moon's eclipſ. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Planets, planet-ſtruck, real eclipſe
Then ſuffer'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x. l. 413.
So though the ſun vićtorious be,
And from a dark eclipſe ſet free,
The influence, which we fondly fear,
, Afilićts our thoughts the following year. J/aller.
An eclipſe of the moon is when the atmoſphere of the earth,
being between the ſun and the moon, hinders the iight of the
ſun from falling upon and being refle&amp;ted by the moon: if
the light of the ſun is kept off from the whole body of the
moon, it is a total eclipſe; if from a part only, it is a partial
on C. - Locke.
2. Darkneſs; obſcuration. -
All the poſterity of our firſt parents ſuffered a perpetual
eclipſe of ſpiritual life. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
Experience we have of the vanity of human glory, in our
ſcatterings and eclipſes. Ring Charles.
To Ecli'ps E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To darken a luminary.
Let the eclipſed moon her throne reſign. Sandys.
Now if the earth were flat, the dark’ned mobn
Would ſeem to all eclips'd as well as one. Creech's Manilius.
2. To extinguiſh ; to put out.
Then here I take my leave of thee, fair ſon,
Born to eclipſe thy life this afternoon. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
3. To cloud; to obſcure. -
They had ſeen tokens of more than common greatneſs,
howſoever now eclipſed with fortune. Sidney.
Praiſe him to his father:
Let the prince's glory
Seem to eclipſe, and caſt a cloud on his. Denham's Sophy.
Let other muſes write his proſp'rous fate,
Of conquer'd nations tell, and kings reſtor'd;
But mine ſhall ſing of his eclips'd eſtate,
... Which, like the ſun's, more wonders does afford. Dryden.
He deſcended from his father, and eclipſed the glory of his
divine majeſty with a veil of fleſh. Calamy’s Sermons.
4. To diſgrace. -
She told the king, that her huſband was eclipſed in Ireland
by the no-countenance his majeſty had ſhewed towards
him. Clarendºn, b. viii.
Another now hath to himſelf engroſs'd
All pow'r, and us eclips'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. v.
Ecliptick. m. ſ. ſixtºrtºs.] A great circle of the ſphere,
ſuppoſed to be drawn through the middle of the Zodiack, and
making an angle with the Equinoćtial, in the points of Aries
and Libra, of 23°. 30'. which is the ſun's greateſt declina-
tion. This is by ſome called via ſalis, or the way of the ſun,
becauſe the ſun, in his annual motion, never deviates from
this line. It is this line which is drawn on the globe, and
not the Zodiack. But in the new aſtronomy the Ecliptick is
that path among the fixed ſtars, which the earth appears to
deſcribe to an eye placed in the ſun, as in its annual motion
it runs round the ſun from Weſt to Eaſt. If you ſuppoſe this
circle to be divided into twelve equal parts, they will be the
twelve ſigns, each of which is denoted or diſtinguiſhed by
ſome aſteriſm or conſtellation. Harris.
All ſtars, that have their diſtance from the Ecliptick north-
wards not more than twenty-three degrees and a half, may,
in progreſſion of time, have declination ſouthward, and move
beyond the Equator. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 13.
The terraqueous globe had the ſame ſite and poſition, in
reſpect of the ſun, that it now hath: its axis was not parallel
to that of the Ecliptick, but inclined in like manner as it is at
preſent. Wºodward's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 6.
The earth's rotation makes the night and day;
The ſun revolving through th' Ecliptick way,
Effects the various ſeaſons of the year. Blackm on the Creat.
You muſt conceive an imaginary plane, which paſſing
through the center of the ſun, and the earth, extends itſelf on
all ſides as far as the firmament: this plane is called the Eclip-
tick, and in this the center of the earth is perpetually carried,
without any deviation. Bentley's Sermons.
Vol. I.
Eclogue. m. ſ. ſº.] A paſtoral poem ſo called, becauſe
Wirgil called his paſtorals eclogues.
What exclaiming praiſes Baſilius gave this eclºgue any man
may gueſs, that knows love is better than ſpectacles to make
every thing ſeem great. Sidney.
It is not ſufficient that the ſentences be brief, the whole
eclogue ſhould be ſo too. Pope.
ECONOMY. n ſ. [woogía. This word is often written, from
its derivation, a conomy; but a being no diphthong in Engliſh,
it is placed here with the authorities for different ortho-
graphy.] -
1. The management of a family; the government of a houſhold.
By St. Paul's economy the heir differs nothing from a ſervant,
while he is in his minority; ſo a ſervant ſhould differ nothing
from a child in the ſubſtantial part. Taylor’s Rule of living holy.
2. Frugality ; diſcretion of expence; laudable parſimony.
Particular ſums are not laid out to the greateſt advantage in
his economy; but are ſometimes ſuffered to run waſte, while he is
only careful of the main. Dryden's State of Innocence, Preface.
I have no other notion of economy, than that it is the parent
of liberty and eaſe. Swift to Lord Bolingbroke.
3. Diſpoſition of things; regulation.
All the divine and infinitely wiſe ways of economy that God
could uſe towards a rational creature, oblige mankind to that
courſe of living which is moſt agreeable to our nature. Hamm.
4. The diſpoſition or arrangement of any work.
In the Greek poets, as alſo in Plautus, we ſhall ſee the ecº-
nomy and diſpoſition of poems better obſerved than in Terence.
Ben. Johnſºn's Diſ overies.
If this economy muſt be obſerved in the minuteſ parts of an
epick poem, what ſoul, though ſent into the world with great
advantages of nature, cultivated with the liberal arts and
ſciences, can be ſufficient to inform the body of ſo great a
work Dryden’s Dedication to the AEn.
5. Syſtem of motions; diſtribution of every thing active or
paſſive to its proper place.
Theſe the ſtrainers aid,
That, by a conſtant ſeparation made,
They may a due economy maintain,
Exclude the noxious parts, the good retain. Blackm. Creat.
Eco'NoMick.
Eco'No MIca L. }ad. [from economy.]
1. Pertaining to the regulation of an houſhold.
| Her quick’ning power in ev'ry living part,
Doth as a nurſe, or as a mother ſerve;
And doth employ her economick art,
And buſy care, her houſhold to preſerve. JXavier.
In ecºnomical affairs, having propoſed the government of a
family, we conſider the proper means to effect it. J/atts.
2. Frugal. -
Some are ſo plainly economical, as even to deſire that the ſeat
be well watered, and well fuelled. Wottºn’s Archite.º.
EcPHRA'cTicks. m. ſ. ſix and ºf...] Such medicines as
render tough humours more thin, ſo as to promote their diſ-
charge. 3:ſincy.
Procure the blood a free courſe, ventilation, and tranſpi-
ration, by ſuitable purges and ecphraciick medicines. Harvey.
E/CSTASY. m. ſ. [; Facts.] -
1. Any paſſion by which the thoughts are abſorbed, and in which
the mind is for a time loſt.
Follow them ſwiftly,
And hinder them from what this eſtaſy
May now provoke them to. Shakespeare's Tempeſt.
'T may be
No longer joy there, but an ecſtaſy. Suckling.
Whether what we call ecſtaſy be not dreaming with our
eyes open, I leave to be examined. Locke.
2. Exceſſive joy; rapture.
O, love, be moderate Allay thy ecſtaſ, 1 Shakeſpeare.
The religious pleaſure of a well diſpoſed mind moves
gently, and therefore conſtantly: it does not affect by rap-
ture and eſtaſy; but is like the pleaſure of health, ſtill and
ſober. South's Sermons.
Each delighted, and delighting, gives
The pleaſing ecſtaſy which each receives. Priºr,
A pleaſure, which no language can expreſs;
An ecſtaſy, that mothers only feel,
Plays round my heart. Phillips's Diſºrgſ Mºther.
3. Enthuſiaſm; exceſſive elevation of the mind.
He lov'd me well, and off would beg me fing;
Which when I did, he on the tender graſs
Would fit, and hearken even to ecſtaſy. Milton.
4. Exceſſive grief or anxiety. This is not now uſed.
Sighs and groans, and ſhrieks that rend the air,
Are inade, not mark'd; where violent ſorrow ſeems
A modern eſtaſy. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Better be with the dead,
Than on the torture of the mind to lie
In reſtleſs eſtaſy. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
5. Madneſs; diſtraction. This ſenſe is not now in uſe.
- Now ſee that noble and moſt ſovereign reaſon,
7 T Like
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 333</div><p class="Text">E D G
E D I
Like ſweet bells jangled out of tune, and harſh,
That unmatch'd form, and feature of blown º l
Blaſted with eſtaſy. in..."...".
Ecstasied. adj. Ifrom eſtaſy J Raviſhed; filled with en-
thuſiaſm. - - -
Theſe are as common to the inanimate things as to the
moſt cºſiaſed ſoul upon earth. Morris.
Ecst A'TIcAL. i. ſix-alizes.
Ecst ATIck. }a}. [ s.]
1. Raviſhed; rapturous; elevated to ecſtaſy.
There doth my ſoul in holy viſion ſit, -
In penſive trance, and anguiſh, and eſtatick fit. Milton.
when one of them, after an ecſtatical manner, fell down
before an angel, he was ſeverely rebuked, and bidden to wor-
ſhip God. º: Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
In trance eſtatick may thy pangs be drown'd;
- Bright clouds deſcend, and angels watch thee round. Pºpe.
2. In the higheſt degree of joy.
To gain Peſcennius one employs his ſchemes;
One graſps a Cecrops in eſtatick dreams. . . Pope.
3. Tending to external obječts. This ſenſe is, I think, only
to be found once, though agreeable enough to the derivation.
I find in me a great deal of eſtatical love, which conti-
nually carries me out to good without myſelf. Norris.
Ectype. n.ſ.. [izrvitz...] A copy. -
The complex ideas of ſubſtances are e6?ypes, copies, but
not perfect ones, not adequate. - Locke.
Ecu RIF. n.ſ. [French; equws, Latin.] A place covered for
the lodging or houſing of horſes.
EDAſcious adj. [edax, Latin.] Eating; voracious; devour-
ing; predatory; ravenous; rapacious ; greedy.
EDA'city. n.ſ. ſedacitas, Latin.] Voracity; ravenouſneſs;
greedincſs; rapacity.
The wolf is a beaſt of great edacity and digeſtion: it may
be the parts of him comfort the bowels. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
To EDDER. v. a. [probably from edge.] To bind or inter-
weave a fence.
To add ſtrength to the hedge, edder it; which is, bind the
top of the ſtakes with ſome ſmall long poles on each ſide.
AMortimer's Husbandry.
E/DDER. m.ſ.. [from the verb.] Such fencewood as is com-
monly put upon the top of fences, and binds or interweaves
each other.
In lopping and felling, ſave edder and ſtake,
Thine hedges, as needeth, to mend or to make. Tuffer.
EDDY. m. ſ. [eb, backward, again, and ea, water, Saxon.]
1. The water that by ſome repercuſſion, or oppoſite wind, runs
contrary to the main ſtream.
My praiſes are as a bulruſh upon a ſtream: if they fink not,
'tis becauſe they are born up by the ſtrength of the current,
which ſupports their lightneſs; but they are carried round
again, and return on the eddy where they firſt began. Dryden.
2. Whirlpool; circular motion.
The wild waves maſter'd him, and ſuck'd him in,
And ſmiling eddies dimpled on the main. Dryd. Ann, Mirab.
So, where our wide Numidian waſtes extend,
Sudden th' impetuous hurricanes deſcend,
Wheel through the air, in circling eddies play,
Tear up the ſands, and ſweep whole plains away. Addison Cato.
EDDY. adj. Whirling; moving circularly.
And chaff with eddy winds is whirl’d around,
And dancing leaves are lifted from the ground. Dryd. Wirgil.
EDEMAto's E. adj. [*] Swelling; full of humours, See
CEDEMATous.
A ſºroſity obſtructing the glands may be watery, edematoſ,
and ſchirrous, according to the viſcoſity of the humour. Afth.
ED *S****P. 6d. [edentatus, Latin.] Deprived of teeth. Diº.
EDGE n.ſ. ſecse, Saxon.]
1. The thin or cutting part of a blade.
Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' th' ſword
His wife, his babes. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
He that will a good edge win,
Mºſt forge thick, and grind thin.
The edge of war, like an ill ſheathed knife,
No more ſhall cut his maſter. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
'Tis ſlander,
Whoſe edge is ſharper than the ſword. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
If the iron be blunt, and he do not whº the edge, then
muſt he put to more ſtrength. Eccl. x, Io
2. A narrow part riſing from a broader. -
sºme harrow their ground over, and then plow it upon an
tºº. - 44ortimer's Husbandry.
3. º margin; extremity.
*** which paſs very near to the edges of an odv, ar
º: º by the action .# the body. &amp; sº:
... we have, for many years, walked upon the edge of a pre-
i. while "thing but the ſlender thread of human life has
eld ". º tinking into endleſs miſery. Rogers's Sermons.
Wh es, t º Pen for freedom let me draw,
4. sº." r..". i. the edge of law. - Pope.
tenſeneſs of deſire. Pºlition for action or operation; in-
Give him a further edge,
Proverb.
And drive his purpoſe into theſe delights. Shakespeare Hamlet.
But when longtime the wretches thoughts refin'd,
When want had ſet an edge upon their mind,
Then various cares their working thoughts employ'd,
And that which each invented, all enjoy’d. Creech's Manil.
Silence and ſolitude ſet an edge upon the genius, and cauſe
a greater application. IXryden's Dufreſnoy,
5. Keenneſs; acrimony of temper.
Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord!
That would reduce theſe bloody days again. Shakespeare Rich.III.
6. To ſet teeth ºn EDGE. To cauſe a tingling pain in the teeth.
A harſh grating tune ſetieth the teeth on edge. Bacon.
To EDGE. v. a. (from the noun.]
1. To ſharpen; to enable to cut.
There ſat ſhe rolling her alluring eyes,
To edge her champion's ſword, and urge my ruin. Dryden,
2. To furniſh with an edge.
I fell'd along a man of bearded face,
His limbs all cover'd with a ſhining caſe ;
So wond’rous hard, and ſo ſecure of wound,
It made my ſword, though edg’d with flint, rebound. Dryd.
3. To border with any thing; to fringe.
Their long deſcending train,
With rubies edg’d, and ſaphires, ſwept the plain. Dryden.
I rid over hanging hills, whoſe tops were edged with groves,
and whoſe feet were watered with winding rivers. Pope.
4. To exaſperate; to embitter.
By ſuch reaſonings the ſimple were blinded, and the ma-
licious edged. Hayward.
He was indigent and low in money, which perhaps might
have a little edged his deſperation. Wotton's Life of D. of Bucks.
5. To put forward beyond a line.
Edging by degrees their chairs forwards, they were in a lit-
tle time got up cloſe to one another. Locke.
To EDGE. v. n. [perhaps from eb, backward, Saxon. J. To
move forward againſt any power; going cloſe upon a wind,
as if upon its ſkirts or border, and ſo ſailing ſlow.
I muſt edge upon a point of wind,
And make ſlow way. Dryden's Cleomenes.
E/DG Ed. participial adj. [from edge.] Sharp; not blunt.
We find that ſubtile or edged quantities do prevail over
blunt ones. Digby on Bodies.
E"dging. n.ſ.. [from edge.]
1. What is added to any thing by way of ornament,
The garland which I wove for you to wear,
And border'd with a roſy edging round. Dryden.
A woman branches out into a long diſſertation upon the
edging of a petticoat. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 247.
2. A narrow lace.
E/DGEl Ess. adj. [from edge.] Blunt; obtuſe; unable to cut.
To-morrow in the battle think on me, ,
And fall thy edgeleſ, ſword; deſpair and die. Shakespeare R. III.
They are only edgeleſs weapons it hath to encounter.
Decay of Piety.
Ed GETool. n.ſ. [edge and tool.] . A tool made ſharp to cut.
-There muſt be no playing with things ſacred, nor jeſting
with edgetools. L’Eſtrange.
Nurſes from their children keep edgetools. Dorſet.
I ſhall exerciſe upon ſteel, and its ſeveral ſorts; and what
ſort is fitteſt for edgetools, which for ſprings. Moxon's Mech.Ex.
E’DGewise. adv. [edge and wiſe.] With the edge put into
any particular direction.
Should the flat ſide be objećted to the ſtream, it would be
ſoon turned edgewiſe by the force of it. Ray on the Creation.
E'Dib E. adj. [from edo, Latin.] Fit to be eaten; fit for
food. -
Some fleſh is not edible; as horſes and dogs. Bacon.
Wheat and barley, and the like, are made either edible or
potable by man's art and induſtry. More againſt Atheiſm.
Some of the fungus kind, gathered for edible muſhrooms,
have produced a difficulty of breathing. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The edible creation decks the board. Prior:
Edict. n.ſ. [edicium, Latin.] A proclamation of command
or prohibition; a law promulgated. -
When an abſolute monarch commandeth his ſubjećts that
which ſeemeth good in his own diſcretion, hath not his ºdiº
the force of a law. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 10.
The great king of kings,
Hath in the table of his law commanded
That thou ſhalt do no murder; will you then ...
Spurn at his edići, and fulfil a man's 'Shakeſp. Richard III.
Severe decrees may keep our tongues in awe, -
But, to our thoughts whated ºf can give law Dryd, Aure"g.
The miniſters are always preaching, and the governours
putting out edicis, againſt gaming and fine cloaths. 4dºſ”
Edification. n.ſ.. [a dificatio, Latin.] -
1. The act of building up man in the faith; improvement in
holineſs.
Our bleſſed Saviour told us, that we muſt account for every
idle word, not meaning that every word which is not deſigned
to edification, or is leſs prudent, ſhall be reckoned for.” "
Taylor’s Rule ºf living holy.
2. Improvement;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 334</div><p class="Text">E D U
. . . . * *
E F F
2. Improvement; inſtruction. * , . . . . . .
Out of theſe magazines I ſhall ſupply the town with what
may tend to their edification. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 14.
E'DIFIce. m. ſ. [ardificium, Latin.] A fabrick; a building; a
ſtructure. -
My love was like a fair houſe built on another man's
ground; ſo that I have loſt my edifice by miſtaking the place
where I erected it. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
- He built
So ſpacious, and his line ſtretch'd out ſo far,
That man may know he dwells not in his own; -
An edifice too large for him to fill. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
The edifice, where all were met to ſee him,
Upon their heads and on his own he pull’d. Milton's Agon.
As Tuſcan pillars owe their original to this country, the
archite&amp;ts always give them a place in edifices raiſed in Tuſ-
cany. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
He muſt be an idiot that cannot diſcern more ſtrokes of
workmanſhip in the ſtrućture of an animal than in the moſt
elegant edifice. Bentley’s Sermons.
EDIFI'ER. n.ſ.. [from edify.] One that improves or inſtructs
another.
To EDIFY. v. a. [edifico, Latin.]
1. To build.
Men have ediff'd -
A lofty temple, and perfum’d an altar to thy name. Chapm.
2. To inſtruct; to improve.
- He who ſpeaketh no more than edifieth, is undeſervedly re-
prehended for much ſpeaking. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 32.
Men are edified, when either their underſtanding is taught
fomewhat whereof, in ſuch ačtions, it behoveth all men to
conſider, or when their hearts are moved with any affection
ſuitable thereunto. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 1.
Life is no life, without the bleſfing of a friendly and an
edifying converſation. L’Eſtrange.
He gave, he taught; and edify'd the more,
Becauſe he ſhew’d, by proof, 'twas eaſy to be poor. Dryd.
3. To teach; to perſuade.
You ſhall hardly edify me, that thoſe nations might not, by
the law of nature, have been ſubdued by any nation that had
only policy and moral virtue. Bacon's holy War.
E’DILE, n.ſ.. [adilis, Latin.] The title of a magiſtrate in old
Rome, whoſe office ſeems in ſome particulars to have re-
ſembled that of our juſtices of peace.
The edile, ho! let him be apprehended. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
EDITION. m. ſ. [editio, Latin.]
1. Publication of anything, particularly of a book.
Theſe are of the ſecond edition. Shakespeare Mer. Wiv. of Windſ.
This Engliſh edition is not ſo properly a tranſlation, as a
new compoſition upon the ſame ground. . Burnet.
2. Republication; generally with ſome reviſal or correčting.
The buſineſs of our redemption is to rub over the defaced
copy of the creation, to reprint God’s image upon the ſoul,
and to ſet forth nature in a ſecond and a fairer edition. South.
I cannot go ſo far as he who publiſhed the laſt edition of
him. Dryden's Fableſ, Preface.
The Code, compoſed haſtily, was forced to undergo an
emendation, and to come forth in a ſecond edition. Baker.
E'DITOR. m.ſ.. [editor, Latin.] Publiſher; he that reviſes or
prepares any work for publication.
When a different reading gives us a different ſenſe, or a
new elegance in an author, the editor does very well in taking
notice of it. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 450.
This nonſenſe got into all the editions by a miſtake of the
ſtage editors. Pope's Notes on Shakeſp. Henry V.
To E'DUCATE. v. a. [educo, Latin.] To breed; to bring
up; to inſtruct youth.
Their young ſucceſſion all their cares employ;
They breed, they brood, inſtruct and educate,
And make proviſion for the future ſtate. Dryd. Virg, Georg.
Education is worſe, in proportion to the grandeur of the
parents: if the whole world were under one monarch, the
heir of that monarch would be the worſt educated mortal ſince
the creation. Swift on Modern Education.
EducA’tion. n.ſ.. [from educate.] Formation of manners in
yourh ; the manner of breeding youth ; nurture.
Education and inſtruction are the means, the one by
uſe, the other by precept, to make our natural faculty of rea-
ſon both the better and the ſooner to judge rightly between
truth and error, good and evil. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 6.
All nations have agreed in the neceſſity of a ſtrict education,
which conſiſted in the obſervance of moral duties. Swift.
To EDU’CE v.a. [educo, Latin J. To bring out; to extract;
to produce from a ſtate of occultation. -
All that can be made of the power of matter, is a re-
ceptive capacity; and we may as well affirm, that the world
was educed out of the power of ſpace, and give that as a rea-
ſon of its original: in this language, to grow rich, were to
educe money out of the power of the pocket. Glanv. Scepſ.
This matter muſt have lain eternally confined to its beds of
earth, were there not this agent to educe it thence. .
J%odward's Natural Hiſtory, p. iii.
5
º
Th’ eternal art educer good from ill, -
Grafts on this paſſion our beſt principle. Pope's Eſſ. on Man,
EDU’ction. n.ſ. [from educe.] The act of bringing anything
into View. -
To EDU'LCORATE. v. n. [ from dulcis, Latin. ) To
ſweeten. -
Eduºcoration, n.ſ. [from edukorate.] The act of ſweet-
ening. -
To Eek. v. a. [eacan, ecan, can, Sax. eak, Scott. eck, Erſe.]
1. To make bigger by the addition of another piece.
2. To ſupply any deficiency. See Eke.
Hence endleſs penance for our fault I pay;
But that redoubled crime, with vengeance new, -
| Thou biddeſt me to eke. Fairy Queen, b. i. e. 5. ſ. 42.
EEL. h..ſ. [oºl, Saxon ; aal, German.]. A ſerpentine ſlimy
fiſh, that lurks in mud.
Is the adder better than the eel,
Becauſe his painted ſkin contents the eye? Shakeſpeare.
The Cockney put the eels i' th' paſty aſive. Shakespeare K. Lear.
E’EN. adv. Contračted from even. See Eye N.
Says the ſatyr, if you have a trick of blowing hot and cold
out of the ſame mouth, I have e'en done with ye. L’E/irange.
EFF. n.ſ. See EFt. -
E‘FFA ble. adj. [effabilis, Latin.] Expreſſive; utterable. Dić.
To EFFA'ce. v. a. [effacer, French.]
1. To deſtroy any form painted, or carved.
2. To make no more legible or viſible; to blot out; to ſtrike
Out. t
Charaćters drawn on duſt, the firſt breath of wind effaces.
Locke.
It was ordered, that his name ſhould be effaced out of all
publick regiſters. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy:
Time, I ſaid, may happily efface
That cruel image of the king's diſgrace. Prior.
Otway fail'd to poliſh or refine,
And fluent Shakeſpeare ſcarce effac'd a line. Pope.
3. To deſtroy; to wear away.
Nor our admiſſion ſhall your realm diſgrace,
Nor length of time our gratitude efface. Dryden's Zn.
EFFE'cT. n. ſ. [effectus, Latin.]
1. That which is produced by an operating cauſe.
You may ſee by her example, in herſelf wiſe, and of others
beloved, that neither folly is the cauſe of vehement love, nor
reproach the effect. Sidney, b. ii.
Effect is the ſubſtance produced, or ſimple idea introduced
into any ſubjećt, by the exerting of power: Locke.
We ſee the pernicious effects of luxury in the antient Ro-
mans, who immediately found themſelves poor as ſoon as this
vice got footing among them. Addiſon on Italy.
2. Conſequence; event.
No man, in effect, doth accompany with others, but he
learneth, ere he is aware, ſome geſture, or voice, or faſhion.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 236.
To ſay of a celebrated piece that there are faults in it, is,
in effect, to ſay that the author of it is a man. Addison Guard.
. Purpoſe; intention; general intent. -
They ſpake to her to that effect. 2 Chro. xxxiv. 22.
4. Conſequence intended; ſucceſs; advantage.
Chriſt is become of no effect unto you. Gal. v. 4.
He ſhould depart only with a title, the effect whereof he
ſhould not be poſſeſſed of, before he had very well deſerved
it. Clarendon, b. viii.
The cuſtom or inſtitution has hitherto proved without
effect, and has neither extinguiſhed the practice of ſuch
crimes, nor leſſened the numbers of ſuch criminals. Temple.
5. Completion; perfeótion.
Semblant art ſhall carve the fair effº,
And full atchievement of thy great deſigns. Prior.
6. Reality; not mere appearance.
In ſhew, a marvellous indifferently compoſed ſenate ec-
cleſiaſtical was to govern, but in effect one only man ſhould,
as the ſpirit and ſoul of the reſidue, do all in all. Hooker.
State and wealth, the buſineſs and the crowd,
Seems at this diſtance but a darker cloud;
And is to him, who rightly things eſteems,
No other in effect than what it ſeems. Denham.
7. [In the plural.] Goods; moveables.
What form of prayer
Can ſerve my turn ? Forgive me my foul murther'
That cannot be, ſince I am ſtill poſſeſt
Of thoſe ºffeº; for which I did the murther,
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen. Shakeſp.
The emperor knew that they could not convey away many
of their effºls. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 499.
To EFFE'cºr. v. a. [ºfficio, Latin. J -
1. To bring to paſs; to attempt with ſucceſs; to atchieve ; to
accompliſh as an agent. -
Being conſul, I not doubt tº ºffici
All that you wiſh.
2. To produce as a cauſe.
The change made of that ſyrup into a purple colour,
was effected by the vinegar. Boyle on Colouri.
EF FE'cTIBLE,
Ben. johnſ. Catil.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 335</div><p class="Text">E F F
E F F
EFFE'ctible. adj. [from ºff...] Performable; practicable;
feaſible. " .
That a pot full of aſhes will ſtill contain as much water
as it would without them, is not ºffºliº upon the ſtricteſt
experiment. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 3.
EFFE'ctive. adj. [from ºffee?..]
1. Having the power to produce effects.
They are not ºfficiive of any thing, nor leave no work
behind them. - Bacon.
If any myſtery, rite, or ſacrament be ºfficiive of any ſpi-
ritual bleſfings, then this much more, as having the prero-
gative and principality above every thing elſe. - Taylor.
There is nothing in words and ſtiles but ſuitableneſs, that
makes them acceptable and effective. Glanv. Scºpſ. Preface.
2. Operative; ačtive.
Nor do they ſpeak properly who ſay that time conſumeth
all things; for time is not effective, nor are bodies deſtroyed
by it. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
. Producing effects; efficient.
Whoſoever is an effective real cauſe of doing his neighbour
wrong is criminal, by what inſtrument ſoever he does it. Taylor.
4. Having the power of operation; uſeful, as effective men in
an army.
EFFE'ctively. adv. [from effective J Powerfully; with real
operation.
This effºlively reſiſts the devil, and ſuffers us to receive no
hurt from him. Taylor's Rule ºf living holy.
EFFE'cTLEss. adj. [from ºffed.] Without effect; impotent;
uſeleſs; unmeaning.
I'll chop off my hands;
In bootleſs prayer have they been held up,
And they have ſerv'd me to effecilſ uſe. Shakespeare. Tit. Andron.
EFFE'ctor. m. ſ. [effector, Latin.]
1. He that produces any effect.
2. Maker; Creator.
We commemorate the creation, and pay worſhip to that
infinite Being who was the effector of it. Derham's Phy. Theol.
EFFE'cTUAL. adj [effectuel, French J
1. Produćtive of effects; powerful to a degree adequate to the
occaſion; operative; efficacious.
The reading of Scripture is effectual, as well to lay even
the firſt foundation, as to add degrees of farther perfection, in
the fear of God. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
The communication of thy faith may become effectual, by
the acknowledging of every good thing. Philem. 6.
2. Veracious; expreſſive of facts. A ſenſe not in uſe.
Reprove my allegation, if you can ;
Or elſe conclude my words effectual. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
EFFE'cTUALLY. adv. [from effectual J In a manner produc-
tive of the conſequence intended; efficaciouſly.
Sometimes the ſight of the altar, and decent preparations
for devotion, may compoſe and recover the wandering mind
more effectually than a ſermon. South's Sermons.
This is a ſubječt of that vaſt latitude, that the ſtrength of
one man will ſcarcely be ſufficient effectually to carry it on.
Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
To EFFE'cTUATE. v. a. [effectuer, French.] To bring to
paſs; to fulfil.
He found means to acquaint himſelf with a nobleman, to
whom diſcovering what he was, he found him a fit inſtrument
to effectuate his deſire. Sidney, b. ii.
EFFE'M IN Acy. m. ſ. [from effeminate J
1. Admiſſion of the qualities of a woman; ſoftneſs; unmanly
delicacy; mean ſubmiſſion.
But foul effeminacy held me yok'd
Her bond-ſlave: O indignity, O blot -
To honour and religion! Milton's Agoniſies, l. 410.
2. Laſciviouſneſs; looſe pleaſure.
So long as idleneſs is quite ſhut out from our lives, all the
fins of wantonneſs, ſoftneſs, and effeminacy are prevented. Tayl.
EFFE MINATE. adj. [effeminatus, Latin.] -
1. Having the qualities of a woman; womaniſh ; ſoft to an un-
manly degree; voluptuous; tender; luxurious.
After the ſlaughter of ſo many peers,
Shall we at laſt conclude effeminate peace? Shakespeare Henry VI.
The king, by his voluptuous life and mean marriage, be-
came effeminate, and leſs ſenſible of honour. Bacon's Hen. VII.
From man’s effeminate ſlackneſs it begins,
Who ſhould better hold his place. Milton.
The more effeminate and ſoft his life,
The more his fame to ſtruggle to the field. Dryd. Don Seb.
2. Womanlike; ſoft without reproach: a ſenſe not in uſe.
As well we know your tenderneſs of heart,
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorſe. Shakeſpeare', R. III.
To EFFE'M IN AT E. v. a. [effemino, Latin.] To make wo-
maniſh; to weaken ; to emaſculate; to unman.
When one is ſure it will not corrupt or effeminate childrens
minds, and make them fond of trifles, I think all things ſhould
be contrived to their ſatisfactionſ. Locke.
To EFFE'MINATE. v. n. To grow womaniſh; to ſoften ; to
melt into weakneſs,
In a ſlothful peace both courage will ºff-minate and man-
ners corrupt. - Pope.
EFFE'MINATION. n.ſ.. [from effeminate.] The ſtate of one
grown wenaniſh; the ſtate of one emaſculated or unmanned.
Vices it figured; not only feneration, or uſury, from its
fecundity and ſuperfetation, but from this mixture of ſexes,
degenerate effemination. Brown's ſugar Erraurs, b. iii c. 17.
To EFFE'RV ESCE. v. n. [ºffervºſco, Latin.] To generate
heat by inteſtine motion. -
The compound ſpirit of nitre, put to oil of cloves, will
ºfferveſce even to a flame. 41ead on PoiSpenser.
Effe'R v Escence. n. / [from effºrwea, Latin.] The act of
growing hot; production of heat by inteſtine motion.
In the chymical ſenſe, ºfferveſcence ſignifies an inteſtine mo-
tion, produced by mixing two bodies together that lay at reft
before ; attended ſometimes with a hiding noiſe, frothing, and
ebullition. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Take chalk, ignite it in a crucible, and then powder it:
put it into ſtrong ſpirit of nitre, ’till it becomes ſweetiſh, and
makes no efferveſcence upon the injection of the chalk. Grew.
Hot ſprings do not owe their heat to any colluétation or
ºfferveſcence of the minerals in them, but to ſubterranean heat
or fire. //oodward's Natural Hiſtory, p. iii.
EFFE't E. adj. [effºrtus, Latin.]
1. Barren ; diſabled from generation.
It is probable that females have in them the ſeeds of all the
young they will afterwards bring forth, which, all ſpent and
exhauſted, the animal becomes barren and effete. Ray.
In moſt countries the earth would be ſo parched and ºffite
by the drought, that it would afford but one harveſt. Bently.
2. Worn out with age.
All that can be allowed him now, is to refreſh his decrepit,
effite ſenſuality with the hiſtory of his former life. South.
EFFICA’CIOUS. adj. [efficax, Łº Productive of effects;
powerful to produce the conſequence intended.
A glowing drop with hollow'd ſteel
He takes, and by one ºfficaciºus breath
Dilates to cube or ſquare. Philºs.
Effica'ciously. adv. [from ºfficacious.]. Effectually; in ſuch
a manner as to produce the conſequence deſired.
If we find that any other body ſtrikes ºfficaciouſly enough
upon it, we cannot doubt but it will move that way which the
ſtriking body impels it. Digby on Bodies.
EFFICAcy. m. ſ. [from ºff-ax, Latin.] Power to produce.
effects; production of the conſequence intended.
Whatſoever is ſpoken concerning the ºfficacy or neceſſity of
God's word, the ſame they tie and reſtrain only unto ſermons.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 21.
Whether if they had taſted the tree of life before that of
good and evil, they had ſuffered the curſe of mortality; or
whether the efficacy of the one had not overpowered the pe-
nalty of the other, we leave it unto God. Brown's /uſg. Err.
Efficacy is a power of ſpeech which repreſents a thing, by
preſenting to our minds the lively ideas or forms of things,
Peacham on Drawing.
The apoſtle tel's us of the ſucceſs and ºfficacy of the Goſ-
pel upon the minds of men; and, for this reaſon, he calls
it the power of God unto ſalvation. Tillotſon's Sermons.
The arguments drawn from the goodneſs of God have a
prevailing ºfficacy to induce men to repent. Rogers, Sermon 16.
EFF1'cIENCE. Un. ſ. [from ºfficio, Latin.] The act of pro-
EFF1'ci ENcy. ; ducing effects; agency.
The manner of this divine ºfficiency being far above us, we
are no more able to conceive by our reaſon, than creatures un-
reaſonable by their ſenſe are able to apprehend after what man-
ner we diſpoſe and order the courſe of our affairs. Hooker, b.i.
That they are carried by the manudućtion of a rule, is
evident; but what that regulating ºfficiency ſhould be, is not
eaſily determined. Glanv. Scepſ, c. iv.
Sinning againſt conſcience has no ſpecial produćtive ºff-
ciency of this particular ſort of finning, more than of any
other. South's Sermons.
A pious will is the means to enlighten the underſtanding
in the truth of Chriſtianity, upon the account of a natural
ºfficiency: a will ſo diſpoſed, will engage the mind in a fevere
ſearch. South's Sermons.
Gravity does not proceed from the efficiency of any contin-
gent and unſtable agents; but ſtands on a baſis more firm,
being entirely owing to the direct concourſe of the power of
the Author of nature. J}oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
EFFI'CIENT. n ſ. [efficius, Latin.]
1. The cauſe which makes effects to be what they are
God, which moveth meer natural agents as an effcient only,
doth otherwiſe move intellectual creatures, and eſpecially his
holy angels. . Hooker, b. i. ſ. 3.
2. He that makes; the effector.
Obſervations of the order of nature are of uſe to carry the
mind up to the admiration of the great ºfficient of the world.
Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
EFFICIENT. adj. Cauſing effects; that which makes the
effect to be what it is.
f Your
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 336</div><p class="Text">E F F
E F F
Your anſwering in the final cauſe, makes me believe you
are at a loſs for the efficient. Collier on Thought.
To EFFIGIATE. v. a. [effigio, Latin.] To form in ſem-
blance; to image
EFF161A(tion. m. ſ. [from effgiate.] The aët of imaging;
or forming the reſemblance of things or perſons. Dich.
Hºſ [effigies, Latin.] Reſemblance; image in .
Ef F1'GY. painting or ſculpture; repreſentation; idea.
We behold the ſpecies of eloquence in our minds, the ºff-
gies or actual image of which we ſeek in the organs of our
hearing, Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Preface,
RE'SC e NCE. -
#:...}, ſ ſºft, Latin.]
1. Produćtion of flowers.
Where there is leſs heat, there the ſpirit of the plant is
digeſted, and ſevered ftom the groſſer juice in effortſcence. Bac.
2. Excreſcencies in the form of flowers.
Two white ſparry incruſtations, with efforeſcencies in form
of ſhrubs, formed by the trickling of water. J}oodward.
3. [In phyſick.] The breaking out of ſome humours in the
ſkin; as in the meaſles, and the like. 9;incy.
A wart beginneth in the cutis, and ſeemeth to be an effo-
reſcence of the ſcrum of the blood. //iſeman's Surgery.
EFFlo RE'scENT. adj. [effºrºſio, Lat J Shooting out in form
of flowers.
Yellowiſh efforeſcent ſparry incruſtations on ſtone. Iſºodw.
Efflu'EN.cf. ii. ſ. Tºffluo, Latin.] That which iſſues from
ſome other principle.
Bright effluence of bright eſſence increate.
From the bright ºffluence of his deed
They borrow that reflected light,
With which the laſting lamp they feed,
Whoſe beams diſpel the damps of envious night. Prior.
EFFLU'v IA. m. ſ. [from ºffius, Latin.] Thoſe ſmall particles
EFFLU'v IUM. } which are continually flying off from bodies;
the ſubtilty and fineneſs of which appears from their being
able, a long time together, to produce very ſenſible effects,
without any ſenſible diminution of the body from whence they
ariſe. &amp;ºiney.
If the earth were an eleētrick body, and the air but the
effºium thereof, we might perhaps believe that from at-
taction, and by effluxion, bodies tended to the earth.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
Neither the earth's diurnal revolution upon its axis, nor
any magnetick ºffluvia of the earth, nor the air, or atmoſphere
which environs the earth, can produce gravity. Woodward.
If theſe effuvia, which do upward tend,
Becauſe leſs heavy than the air, aſcend;
Why do they ever from their height retreat,
And why return to ſeek their central ſeat?
E'FF LUx. m. ſ. [effuxus, Latin.].
1. The ačt of flowing out.
Through the daily and copious efflux of matter through
the orifice of a deep ulcer in his thigh, he was reduced to a
ſkeleton. Harvey on Conſumptions.
2. Effuſion.
The firſt effux of mens piety, after receiving of the faith,
was the ſelling and conſecrating their poſſeſſions. Hammond.
3. That which flows from ſomething elſe; emanation.
Prime chearer, light!
Of all material beings, firſt and beſt
Efflux divine ! Thomſon's Summer, 1.80.
To EFFLU'x. v. m. [effluo, Latin.] To run out; to flow
aWaV. -
FK. thouſand and ſome odd centuries of years are effluxed
ſince the creation. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
EFFLU'xios. m. ſ. [effuxum, Latin.]
1. The act of flowing out
By ºff!.aion and attraction bodies tend towards the
earth. + Brown.
2. That which flows out; effluvium ; emanation.
There are ſome light effuxions from ſpirit to ſpirit, when
men are one with another; as from body to body. Bacon.
To EFFO'RCE. v. a. [efforcer, French.]
1. To force; to break through by violence.
In all that room was nothing to be ſeen,
But huge great iron cheſts and coffers ſtrong,
All barr'd with double bonds, that ne'er could ween
Then to effºrce by violence or wrong. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
2. To force; to raviſh; to violate by force.
Then 'gan her beauty ſhine as brighteſt ſky, -
And burnt his beaſtly heart t' efforce her chaſtity. Fa. 94.
To EFFo'RM. n.ſ. [efformo, Latin.] To make in any certain
manner; to ſhape; to faſhion.
Merciful and gracious, thou gaveſt us being, raiſing us from
nothing, and effºrming us after thy own image. Taylor.
EFroRMA'tion. m. ſ. [from efform.] The act of ſaſhioning
or giving form to.
They pretend to ſolve phaenomena, and to give an account
of the produćtion and efformation of the univerſe. Ray.
Nature begins to ſet upon her work of efformation. Mors.
Vol. J.
A.iii. P. Lºft.
Blackm. Creat.
º
Effo'rt. n.ſ. [ºffort, French.J Struggle; laborious endez-
VOur.
If, after having gained vićtories, we had made the ſame
efforts as if we had loſt them, France could not have with-
ſtood us. Addiſº on the State of the Iſ ar.
Though the ſame ſun, with all diffuſive rays,
Bluſh in the roſe, and in the diamond blaze,
We prize the ſtronger ºffºrt of his pow'r,
And always ſet the gem above the flow'r. Pope, Epſ. 1.
EFFo'ssion. n.ſ. . [...ſºſumo, Latin.] The act of digging up
from the ground; deterration.
He ſet apart annual ſums for the recovery of manuſcripts,
the effºſion of coins, and the procuring of mummies. Arbuthn.
EFFRA1ABLE. adj. [effrºyalle, French.j Dreadful; frightful;
terrible. A word not uſed. -
Peſtilential ſymptoms declare nothing a proportionate eff-
cient of their ºffraiable nature, but arſenical fumes. Harvey.
E'FFR on TERY. n.ſ. [ºffronterie, Fr.] Impudence; ſhame-
leſſneſs; contempt of reproach.
They could hardly contain themſelves within one unwor-
thy act, who had ºffrontery enough to commit or countenance
1t. King Charles,
Others with ignorance and inſufficiency have ſelf-admi-
ration and ºff onter, to ſet up themſelves. J/atts's Improv.
A bold man's ºff ontery, in company with women, muſt be
owing to his low opinion of them, and his high one of him-
ſelf. Clariſſa.
EFFU'LGENCE. m. ſ. [ºffulgeo, Latin.] Luſtre; brightneſs;
clarity ; ſplendor. -
- On thee -
Impreſs'd, th' effulgence of his glory abides. Milt, Pa. Loft.
Thy luſtre, bleſt effulgence, can diſpel
The clouds of error, and the gloom of hell. Blackmore.
EFF'I.GENT. adj [ºffulgen, Latin.] Shining; bright; lu-
II]] in OUS.
How ſoon th' ºffilgent emanations fly ,
• Through the blue gulph of interpoſing ſky
The downward ſun -
Looks out ºffiligent, from amid’ the flaſh
Of broken clouds. Thomſon's Spring, l. 185.
EFFU'MABILITY. m. ſ. [ ſumus, Latin.] The quality of fly-
ing away, or vapouring in fumes.
They ſeem to define mercury by volatility, ºr, if I may
coin ſuch a word, ºftemability. Boyle's Scept. Clym.
To # lºse v. a. [effºſus, Latin.] To pour out; to ſpill ;
to ſhed.
Blackmore.
He fell, and, deadly pale,
Groan'd out his ſoul, with guſhing blood effus’d. Milton.
At laſt emerging from his noſtrils wide,
And guſhing mouth, effus’d the briny tide. Pope's Odyſſey.
EFFU'se. n. ſ. [from the verb.] Waſte; effuſion. -
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
And much effuſe of blood doth make me faint. Shakespeare H.VI.
EFFU's Ion. m. ſ. [effuſio, Latin.]
1. The aët of pouring out.
My heart hath melted at a lady's tears,
Being an ordinary inundation;
But this effuſion of ſuch manly drops,
This ſhow'r, blown up by tempeſt of the ſoul,
Startles mine eyes, and makes me more amaz'd. Shakeſp.
Our bleſſed Lord commanded the repreſentation of his
death, and ſacrifice on the croſs, ſhould be made by breaking
bread and effuſion of wine. Taylor's J/ºrthy Cºmmunicant.
If the flood-gates of heaven were any thing diſtinct from
the forty days rain, their effuſion, 'tis likely, was at this ſame
time when the abyſs was broken open. Burnet's The of Earth.
2. Waſte; the act of ſpilling or ſhedding. -
When there was but as yet one only family in the world,
no means of inſtruction, human or divine, could prevent
effuſion of blood. lºoker, b. i. ſ. 1 o.
Stop effuſion of our Chriſtian blood,
And 'ſtabliſh quietneſs. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Yet ſhall ſhe be reſtor'd, ſince publick good
For private int’reſt ought not be withſtood, {
To ſave th' effuſion of my people's blood. Dryd. Homer.
3. The act of pouring out words.
Endleſs and ſenſeleſs ºffiſions of indigeſted prayers, ºften
times diſgrace, in moſt unſuffe able manner, the worthieſt
part of Chriſtian duty towards God. Hooker, b. v. f. 26.
4. Bounteous donation.
Such great force the goſpel of Chriſt had then upon
mens ſouls, melting them into that liberal ºffiſion of all that
they had. Hammand on Fundamentals.
5. The thing poured out.
Purge me with the blood of my redeemer, and I ſhall be
clean; waſh me with that precious effº/ion, and I ſhall be
whiter than ſnow. King Charles,
Ef Fu'sive. adj. [from effiſ...] Pouring out; diſperſing.
The North-eaſt ſpends its rage; and now ſhut up
Within its iron caves, th’ ºffuſive South
Warms the wide air. Thomſºn's Spring, l. 145.
7 U FT,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 337</div><p class="Text">E. G. R.
E J E
EFr. n.ſ. [ereza, Saxon.] A newts an evet; a ſmall kind of
lizard that lives generally in the water.
Peacocks are beneficial to the places where they are kept,
by clearing of them from ſnakes, adders and ºft, upon which
they will live. - Mortimer's Husbandry.
The crocodile of Egypt is the lizard of Italy, and the ºf ill
our country. - - Nichols.
EFT, adv. ſerr, Saxon J. Soon ; quickly; ſpeedily; ſhortly.
Eft through the thick they heard one rudely ruſh,
With noiſe whereof he from his lofty ſteed
Down fell to ground, and crept into a buſh,
To hide his coward head from dying dread. Fairy ºueen.
Quite conſumed with flame,
The idol is of that eternal maid ;
For ſo at leaſt I have preſerv'd the ſame,
With hands profane, from being eft betray'd. Fairfax, b. ii.
E’Fºrsoons. adv. ept and roon..] Soon afterwards; in a ſhort
time; again. An obſolete word.
He in their ſtead eſtSpenser placed Engliſhmen, who poſ-
ſeſſed all their lands. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Eſſoons the nymphs, which now had flowers their fill,
Run all in haſte to ſee that ſilver brood. Senſºr's Epitha'am.
The Germans deadly hated the Turks, whereof it was to be
thought that new wars would ºf ſoons enſue. Knolles's Hiſtory.
Efſºons, O ſweetheart kind, my love repay,
And all the year ſhall then be holiday. Gay's Paſtorals.
E. G. [exemºli gratia.J For the ſake of an inſtance or example.
EGER. n ſ. [See EAGER.] An impetuous and irregular flood
or tide.
From the peculiar diſpoſition of the earth at the bottom,
wherein quick excitations are made, may ariſe thoſe egers and
flows in ſome eſtuaries and rivers; as is obſervable about
Trent and Humber in England. Brown's Pulgar Err urs.
To EGE's r. v. a [egero, Latin.] To throw out food at the
natural vents.
Divers creatures ſleep all the Winter; as the bear, the hedge-
hog, the bat, and the bee: theſe all wax fat when they ſleep,
and ege/f not. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 899.
EGE'stion. "/: ſegeſ’us, Latin.] The act of throwing out
the digeſted food at the natural vents.
The animal ſoul or ſpirits manage as well their ſponta-
neous actions as the natural or involuntary exertions of di-
geſtion, seſſion, and circulation. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
EGG. m. ſ. ſocș, Saxon; ough, Erſe.]
1. That which is laid by feathered animals, from which their
young is produced.
An egg was found, having lain many years at the bottom
of a moat, where the earth had ſomewhat overgrown it;
and this egg was come to the hardneſs of a ſtone, and the
colours of the white and yolk perfeót. Bacon's Natural Hiſſ.
Eggs are perhaps the higheſt, moſt nouriſhing, and exalted
of all animal food, and moſt indigeſtible. Arbuthnºt on Diet.
2. The ſpawn or ſperm of other creatures.
Therefore think him as the ſerpent's egg,
Which, hatch'd, would, as his kind, grow miſchievous. Shakespeare
Ev'ry inſect of each different kind,
In its own egg, cheard by the ſolar rays,
Organs involv’d and latent life diſplays. Blackmore's Creatiºn.
3. Any thing faſhioned in the ſhape of an egg.
There was taken a great glaſs-bubble with a long neck,
ſuch as chemiſts are wont to call a philoſophical egg. Bºyle.
To EGG. v. a. ſeggia, to incite, Iſlandick; e.gian, Saxon.] To
incite; to inſtigate ; to provoke to action.
Study becomes pleaſant to him who is purſuing his genius,
and whoſe ardour of inclination eggs him forward, and car-
rieth him through every obſtacle. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
RºastiNE. m. ſ. ſºftlantier, French..] A ſpecies of roſé.
See Rose.
O'er canopied with luſcious woodbine,
With ſweet muſk roſes, and with eglantine. Shakeſpeare.
The leaf of eglantinº, not to ſlander,
Outſweeten’d not thy breath. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Sycamores with glantine were ſpread,
A hedge about the ſides, a covering over head. Dryden.
E'Got Is M. n.ſ.. [from ego, Latin.] The fault committed in
writing by the frequent repetition of the word ego, or I; too
frequent mention of a man's ſelf, in writing or converſation.
The moſt violent egotiſm which I have met with, in the
courſe of my reading, is that of cardinal Wolſey's; go &amp;
rex meus, I and my king. Spectator, Nº. 562.
I'Gotist. n.ſ.. [from gº..] . One that is always repeating the
word ego, 1 ; a talker of himſelf.
A tribe of egºtiſts, for whom I have always had a mortal
averſion, are the authors of memoirs, who are never men-
tioned in any works but their own. Spectator, Nº. 562.
Tº ºrize. v. n. [from ego..] To talk much of one's
Clt.
EGREGIOUS. adj. [...gregius, Latin.]
I. Eminent; remarkable; extraordinary.
. He might be able to adorn this preſent age, and furniſh
hiſtory with the records of egregious exploits, both of art and
valour. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
One to empire born;
Egregious prince' whoſe manly childhood ſhew’d
His mingled parents, and portended joy
Unſpeakable. Philipt.
2. Eminently bad; remarkably vicious. This is the uſual
ſenſe.
We may be bold to conclude, that theſe laſt times,
for inſolence, pride and egregious contempt of all good
order, are the worſt. Hocker, Preface.
Ah me, moſt credulous fool!
Egregious murtherer! Shakespeare's Cymbeline.
And hence th' eg, egio's wizzard ſhall foredoom
The fate of Louis, and the fall of Rome. Pope.
EGRE'Giously. adv. [from egregious.] Eminently; ſhame-
fully.
Make the more thank me, love me, and reward me,
For making him egregio ſ'y an aſs,
And practiſing upon his peace and quiet,
Even to madneſs. Shakeſpeare's Othell.
He diſcovered that, beſides the extravagance of every ar-
ticle, he had been egregiouſly cheated. Ar ºthnot's john Bull.
Eºg R ess. n ſ. [ºgreſſus, Latin.] The act of going out of any
place; departure.
And gates of burning adamant,
Barr'd over us, prohibit all grºſs. 41ilton's Paradiſe Loft, b.ii.
This water would have been locked up within the earth,
and its egreſs utterly debarred, had the ſtrata of ſtone and
marble remained continuous. I/oºdward's Natural Hiſtory.
EGRE'ssic.N. m. ſ. [ºgrºño, Latin.] The act of going out.
The vaſt number of troops is expreſſed in the ſwarms;
their tumultuous manner of iſſuing out of their ſhips, and
the perpetual grºſion, which ſeemcd without cnd, are imaged
in the bees pouring out. Notes on the Iliads.
E’o R.E.T. n. ſ. A fowl of the heron kind, with red legs. Bailey.
E/G Riot. n.ſ.. [aigret, French ; perhaps from aigre, four.] A
ſpecies of cherry.
The coeur-cherry, which inclineth more to white, is
ſweeter than the red; but the egriot is more ſour. Bacon.
To EJA’CULATE. v. a. [e, aculºr, Latin.] To throw ; to
ſhoot; to dart out.
Being rooted ſo little way in the ſkin, nothing near ſo
deeply as the quills of fowls, they are the more eaſy ja-
culated. Grew’s Muſæum.
The mighty magnet from the center darts
This ſtrong, though ſubtile force, through all the parts:
Its active rays, ejaculated thence,
Irradiate all the wide circumference. Llackmore’, Creation. .
EJA'culation. m. ſ. [from ejaculate.]
1. A ſhort prayer darted out occaſionally, without ſolemn re-
tirement.
In your dreſſing let there be ejaculations fitted to the ſeveral
aćtions of dreſſing; as at waſhing your hands, pray God to
cleanſe your ſoul from fin. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
2. The act of darting or throwing out.
There ſeemeth to be acknowledged, in the aët of envy, an
ejaculatiºn or irradiation of the eye. . Bacon's 1ſyſ.
There is to be obſerved, in thoſe diſſolutions which will
not eaſily incorporate, what the effects are; as the ebullition,
the precipitation to the bottom, the ejaculation towards the
top, the ſuſpenſion in the midſt, and the like. Bacon.
EJA'cui. An or Y. adj. [from jaculate J Suddenly darted out;
uttered in ſhort ſentences; ſudden; haſty.
The continuance of this poſture might incline to eaſe and
drowſineſs: they uſed it rather upon ſome ſhort ejaculatory
prayers, than in their larger devotions. ' Dupa's Devotion.
We are not to value ourſelves upon the merit of ejaculatory
repentances, that take us by fits and ſtarts. l'Ejirange.
To EJECT. v. a. [efficio eječium, Latin.]
1. To throw out; to caſt forth; to void.
Infernal lightning ſallies from his throat I
Ejected ſparks upon the billows float! Sandyſ.
The heart, as ſaid, from its contračted cave, -
On the left ſide ejeć's the bounding wave. Blackm. Creation.
Tears may ſpoil the eyes, but not waſh away the affiétion;
fighs may exhauſt the man, but not eječf the burthen. South.
2. To throw out or expel from an office or poſſeſſion.
It was the force of conqueſt; force with force
Is well jećled, when the conquer'd can. Milton's Agºniſies.
The French king was again ejecied when our king ſub-
mitted to the church. Dryden's Preface to Rel. Laici.
3. To expel; to drive away; to diſmiſs with hatred.
We are peremptory to diſpatch
This viperous traitor; to eječí him hence,
Were but our danger; and to keep him here,
Our certain death; therefore it is decreed
He dies to-night. Shakespeare's Criolanus.
4. To caſt away; to rejećt. -
To have ejećied whatſoever the church doth make account
of, be it never ſo harmleſs in itſelf, and of never ſo ancient
continuance, without any other crime to charge it with, than
only that it hath been the hap thereof to be uſed by the church
of Rome, and not to be commanded in the word of God, could
not have been defended. Płocker.
5 Will
.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 338</div><p class="Text">/ -
E I T
E LA
Will any man ſay, that if the words whoring and drink-
ing were by parliament ejećied out of the Engliſh tongue, we
ſhould all awake next morning chaſte and temperate Swift.
EJF'ction. m. ſ. [eje?io, Latin.] .
1. The aët of caſting out; expulſion. . . . .
Theſe ſtories are founded on the ejećlion of the fallen angels
from heaven. , Notes on the Odyſſey.
2. [in phyſick.] The diſcharge of any thing by vomit, ſtool, or
any other emunctory. Quincy.
EJE'cTMENT. n.ſ [from eječf.] A legal writ by which any
inhabitant of a houſe, or tenant of an eſtate, is commanded
to depart.
EIGH. interj. An expreſſion of ſudden delight. - r
EIGHT. adj. [eahza, Saxon; ahta, Gothick; acht, Scottiſh.]
Twice four. A word of number. , -
This iſland contains eight ſcore and eight miles in circuit.
- Sandy,’s journey.
EIGHTH. adj. [from eight.] Next in order to the ſeventh;
the ordinal of eight.
Another yet 2—A ſeventh ! I'll ſee no more;
And yet the eighth appears Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
In the eighth month ſhould be the reign of Saturn. Bacon.
I ſtay reluctant ſeven continu'd years,
And water her ambroſial couch with tears;
The eighth, ſhe voluntary moves to part,
Or urg’d by Jove, or her own changeful heart. Pope's Odyſſ.
E1'GHTEEN. adj. [eight and ten..] Twice nine.
He can't take two from twenty, for his heart,
And leave eighteen. * Shakeſpeare’s Cymbeline.
If men naturally lived but twenty years, we ſhould be ſa-
tisfied if they died about eighteen; and yet eighteen years now
are as long as eighteen years would be then. Taylor.
E1’GHT E ENTH adj. [from eighteen.] The next in order to
the ſeventeenth ; twice nine.
In the eighteenth year of Jeroboam reigned Abijam. I Kingſ.
E1'GHT Fold. adj. [eight and fold.] Eight times the number
or quantity.
EI'GHTHLY. adv. [from eighth.] In the eighth place.
Eighthly, living creatures have voluntary motion, which
plants have not. Bacon's Natural Hitory, N°. 607.
E1'GHTIE TH. adj. [from eighty.] The next in order to the
ſeventyninth ; eighth tenth.
Some balances are ſo exact as to be ſenſibly turned with
the eightieth part of a grain. J/ilkins's Math. Magic.
E!'GHT scor E. adj. [eight and ſcore.] Eight times twenty;
an hundred and ſixty.
What! keep a week away ? Seven days and nights?
Eightſcore eight hours? And lovers abſent hours,
More tedious than the dial eightſcore times?
Oh weary reckoning. Shakeſpeare's Othello:
E1'GHTY. adj. [eight and ten.J Eight times ten; fourſcore.
Eighty odd years of ſorrow have I ſeen,
And each hour's joy wreck'd with a week of teen. Shakeſp.
Among all other clima&amp;tericks three are moſt remarkable;
that is, ſeven times ſeven, or fortynine; nine times nine, or
eighty one; and ſeven times nine, or the year ſixtythree,
which is conceived to carry with it the moſt conſiderable
fatality. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
E1'GN e. adj. [aiſie, Fr.] [In law.] Denotes the eldeſt or firſt
born. Here it ſignifies unalienable, as being entailed.
Many aſſurances do alſo paſs to godly and charitable uſes
alone; and it happeneth not ſeldom, that, to avoid the yearly
oath, for averment of the continuance of ſome eſtate for life,
which is eigne, and not ſubject to forfeiture for the alienation
that cometh after it, the party will offer to ſue a pardon un-
compelled before the time; in all which, ſome mitigation of
the uttermoſt value may well and worthily be offered. Bacon.
FI's EL. m. ſ. ſeoril, Saxon.] Vinegar; verjuice; any acid.
Woo't drink up eiſel, eat a crocodile *
I’ll do.’t. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
E1'THER. pron. [æ;Sen, Saxon; auther, Scottiſh.]
1. Which ſoever of the two ; whether one or the other.
Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flatter'd ; but he neither loves,
Nor either cares for him. Shakeſp. Anthony and Cleopatra.
So like in arms theſe champions were,
As they had been a very pair;
So that a man would almoſt ſwear,
That either had been either. Drayton's Nymp.
Goring made a faſt friendſhip with Digby, either of them
believing he could deceive the other. Clarendon, b. viii.
I do not aſk whether bodies do ſo exiſt, that the motion of
one body cannot really be without the motion of another: to
determine this either way, is to beg the queſtion for or againſt
a V2Cll unn. Locke.
2. Each; both.
In the proceſs of natural beings, there ſeem ſome to be
creatures placed, as it were, in the confines of ſeveral pro-
vinces, and participating ſomething of either. Hale.
Sev'n times the ſun has either tropick view’d,
The Winter baniſh'd, and the Spring renew'd. Dryd, Wirg.
E1't HER. adv. [from the noun..] A diſtributive adverb, an-
ſwered by or; either the one or.
We never heard of any ſhip that had been ſeen to arrive
upon any ſhore of Europe; no nor of either the Eaſt or Weſt
Indies. - - Bacon's New Atlantis.
- - What perils ſhall we find, .
If either place, or time, or other courſe, -
Cauſe us to alter th' order now affign'd? Daniel's C. War.
Either your brethran have miſerably deceived us, or power
confers virtue. , ; Swift to Pope.
EJULATION. m. ſ. [ejulatio, Latin.] Outcry; lamentation;
moan ; wailing. - - *.
Inſtead of hymns and praiſes, he breaks out into ejulations
and effeminate wailings. Government of the Tongue.
- With diſmal groans
And ejulation, in the pangs of death,
Some call for aid neglected; ſome, o'erturn'd
In the fierce ſhock, lie gaſping. Phillips.
EKE, adv. [eac, Saxon; ook, Dutch J Alſo; likewiſe; beſide;
moreover. -
If any ſtrength we have, it is to ill;
But all the good is God's, both power and eke will. Fa. Qx.
Now if 'tis chiefly in the heart
That courage does itſelf exert,
'Twill be prodigious hard to prove,
That this is eke the throne of love. Prior.
To Eke. v. a. [eacan, Saxon.]
I. To increaſe.
I dempt there much to have eked my ſtore,
But ſuch eking hath made my heart ſore. Spenser's Paſtorals.
The little ſtrength that I have, I would it were with you:
And mine to eke out her’s. Shakespeare . As you like it.
2. To ſupply; to fill up deficiencies.
Still be kind,
And eke out our performance with your mind. Shakespeare H. V.
Your ornaments hung all,
On ſome patch'd doghole ek’d with ends of wall. Pope.
3. To protract; to lengthen.
I ſpeak too long; but 'tis to piece the time,
To eke it, and to draw it out in length,
To ſtay you from ele&amp;tion. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
4. To ſpin out by uſeleſs additions. [In this ſenſe it ſeems bor-
rowed from the uſe of our old poets, who put eke into their
lines, when they wanted a ſyllable.]
Euſden ekes out Blackmore's endleſs line. Pope's Dunciad.
To ELABORATE. v. a. [elaboro, Latin.]
I. To produce with labour. º
They in full joy elaborate a ſigh. 1%ung.
2. To heighten and improve by ſucceſſive endeavours or ope-
rations.
The ſap is diverſified, and ſtill more and more elaborated
and exalted, as it circulates through the veſſels of the plant.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
El A'Rorate. adj. [elaboratus, Latin.] Finiſhed with great
diligence; performed with great labour.
Formalities of extraordinary zeal and piety are never more
ſtudied and elabºrate than when politicians moſt agitate deſpe-
rate deſigns. King Charles.
At leaſt, on her beſtow'd
Too much of ornament, of outward ſhew
Elaborate; of inward, leſs exact. Alton's Paradiſe Loſt.
Man is thy theme, his virtue or his rage
Drawn to the life in each elab'rate page. Waller.
Conſider the difference between elaborate diſcourſes upon
important occaſions, delivered to parliaments, and a plain ſer-
mon intended for the lower people. Swift.
ELA'borately. adv. [from elaborate.] Laboriouſly ; dili-
gently; with great ſtudy or labour.
Politick conceptions ſo elaborately formed and wrought, and
grown at length ripe for delivery, do yet prove abortive South.
Some coloured powders, which painters uſe, may have
their colours a little changed, by being very elaborately and
finely ground. - Newtºn's Opt.
I will venture once to incur the cenſure of ſome perſons,
for being elaborately trifling. Bentley's Sermons.
It is there elaborately ſhewn, that patents are good. Swift.
ELABoration. n.ſ.. [from elaborate.] Improvement by ſuc-
ceſſive operations.
To what purpoſe is there ſuch an apparatus of veſſels for
the elaboration of the ſperm and eggs; ſuch a tedious proceſs
of generation and nutrition This is but an idle pomp. Ray.
To ELA'Nce. v. a. [elancer, French..] To throw out; to dart;
to caſt as a dart.
- While thy unerring hand elanc'd
Another, and another dart, the people
Joyfully repeated lo! Prior.
Harſh words, that, once elanc'd, muſt ever fly
Irrevocable. Prior.
To Ela (pse. v. n. [elapſus, Latin.] To paſs away; to glide
away; to run out without notice.
There is a docible ſeaſon, a learning time in youth, which,
ſuffered to elapſe, and no foundation laid, ſeldom returns. Clariſ.
ELASTICAL.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 339</div><p class="Text">E L D
E L D
º AL. ad;. ſ from ºxa.º. 1 Having the power of re-
####! } #. to the º from which it is diſtorted
or withheld; ſpringy; having the power of a ſpring.
By what cladiº engines did ſhe rear. - -
The ſtarry roof, and roll the orbs in air. Bººm. Creation.
If the body is compact, and bends or yields inward to
preſſion, without any ſliding of its parts, it is hard and ela/lick,
returning to its figure with a force riſing from the mutual
attraction of its parts. - Newton’s Opt.
The moſt common diverſities of human conſtitutions ariſe
from the ſolids, as to their different degrees of ſtrength and
tenſion; in ſome being too lax and weak, in others too elaſtick
and ſtrong. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
A fermentation muſt be excited in ſome aſſignable place,
which may expand itſelf by its elaſtical power, and break
through, where it meets with the weakeſt reſiſtance. Bentley.
Elasticity. n.ſ [from elaſtick.] Force in bodies, by which
they endeavour to reſtore themſelves to the poſture from
whence they were diſplaced by any external force. ºuincy.
A lute ſtring will bear a hundred weight without rupture;
but, at the ſame time, cannot exert its elo/licity: take away
fifty, and immediately it raiſeth the weight. Arbuthn. on Alim.
Me emptineſs and dulneſs could inſpire, -
And were my eafficity and fire. Poe's Dunciad, b. i.
ELATE. adj, [clatus, Latin J. Fluſhed with ſucceſs; ele-
vated with proſperity; lofty; haughty.
Oh, thoughtleſs mortals' ever blind to fate'
Too ſoon dejected, and too ſoon elate / Pºpe', Ra, of Lock.
I, of mind elate, and ſcorning fear,
Thus with new taunts inſult the monſter's ear. Pope's Odyſſ.
To ELATE v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To elevate with ſucceſs; to puff up with proſperity.
2. To exult ; to heighten. An unuſual ſenſe.
&gt; Or truth, divinely breaking on his mind,
Eates his being, and unfolds his power. Thomſon's Autumn.
EL/I E. RIUM. n. ſ. [Latin.] An inſpiſſated juice, in frag-
ments of flat and thin cakes, ſeldom thicker than a ſhilling.
It is light, of a friable texture; a pale, dead, whitiſh colour,
and an acrid and pungent taſte. It is procured from the fruit
of the wild cucumber; the ſeeds of which ſwim in a large
quantity of an acrid and almoſt cauſtick liquor. It is a very
violent and rough purge. - Hill.
ELA'tion. m. ſ. [from elate.] Haughtineſs proceeding from
ſucceſs; pride of proſperity. -
God began to puniſh this vain elatiºn of mind, by with-
drawing his favours. Atterbury's Sermons.
E'LBOW. n.ſ. [elboza, Saxon.]
1. The next joint or curvature of the arm below the ſhoulder.
In ſome fair evening, on your elbºw laid,
You dream of triumphs in the rural ſhade. Pope.
2. Any flexure, or angle.
Fruit-trees, or vines, ſet upon a wall between elbows or
buttreſſes of ſtone, ripen more than upon a plain wall. Bacon.
3. Yo be at the Elbow. To be near; to be at hand.
Here ſtand behind this bulk. Straight will he come:
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home:
Quick, quick; fear nothing, I'll be at th; elow. Shakespeare Othel.
Elbowcha'ir. m. ſ. ſellow and chair.] A chair with arms to
ſupport the elbows."
Swans and elbowchairs, in the opera of Diocleſian, have
danced upon the Engliſh ſtage with good ſucceſs. Gay.
Elgowroom. n ſ. ſºlbow and room.J. Room to ſtretch out the
elbows on each ſide; perfect freedom from confinement.
Now my ſoul hath elbowroom;
It would not out at windows nor at doors. Shakespeare.
The natives are not ſo many, but that there may be low-
r” enough for them, and for the adventives alſo. Bacon.
A politican muſt put himſelf into a ſtate of liberty, ſo to
provide dºwroºm for his conſcience to have its full play in.
- South's Sermons.
To Elbow. v.a...[from the noun.]
1. To puſh with the elbow.
One elbows him, one juſtles in the ſhole. Dryden's juven.
2. To puſh; to drive to diſtance; to encroach upon.
It thruſts and ſtretches out,
And elow: all the kingdoms round about.
If fortune takes not off this boy betimes,
He'll make mad work, and elbow all his neighbours. Dryden.
Tººlbow. v. n. To jut out in angles. S Dić?.
ELD. m. ſ. ſeals, Saxon ; eld, Scottiſh.]
I . Old age; decrepitude.
Her heart with joy unwonted inly ſwel'd,
* Reling wond’rous comfort in he weaker'.h. Fa. Queen:
3. Old people; perſons worn out with years.
- Thy blazed youth
Bºomes aſſuaged, and doth beg the alms
Of palfied eldſ Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
He thought it touch'd his deity full near,
º he ſome fair one wedded not,
O hereby to wipe away th’ infamous blot
• * * uncoupled bed and chilji,
Dryden.
Milton.
Elder. adj. The comparative of eld, now corrupted to ca,
ealb, eakon, Saxon.] Surpaſſing another in years; ſurvivor;
having the privileges of primogeniture.
They bring the compariſon of younger daughters comform-
ing themſelves in attire to the example of their elder fifiers. .
Hooker, b. iv. f 13.
Let ſtill the woman take
An elder than herſelf; ſo wears ſhe to him,
So ſways ſhe level in her huſband's heart. Shakesp. Twelfth Night.
How I firmly am reſolv’d, you know ; --
That is, not to beflow my youngeſt daughter,
Before I have a huſband for the elder. Shakesp. Tam, of the Shrew,
The elder of his children comes to acquire a degree of au-
thority among the younger, by the ſame means the father did
among them. Temple.
Fame's high temple ſtands;
Stúpendous pile ! not rear'd by mortal hands !
Whate'er proud Rome, or artful Greece beheld,
Or elder Babylon, its frame excell’d. Pope's Temp, of Fame.
E'LDERs. n.ſ.. [from elder.]
1. Perſons whoſe age gives them a claim to credit and reverence.
Rebuke not an elder, but intreat him as a father, and the
younger men as brethren. 1 Tim. v. 1.
Our elders ſay,
The barren, touched in this holy chaſe,
Shake off their ſteri) curſe. Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar:
Among the Lacedæmonians, the chief magiſtrates, as the
were, ſo they are called, elder men. Raleigh's H. of the ſtºrſ.
The bluſhing youth their virtuous awe diſcloſe,
And from their ſeats the reverend elders roſe.
2. Anceſtors.
Says the gºoſe, if it will be no better, e'en carry your
head as your elders have done before ye. L'E/irange.
I loſe my patience, and I own it too,
Where works are cenſur'd, not as bad, but new ;
While, if our elders break all reaſon's laws,
Thoſe fools demand not pardon, but applauſe. Pope.
3. Thoſe who are older than others.
At the board, and in private, it very well becometh chil-
dren's innocency to pray, and their elders to ſay amen. Hooker.
4. [Among the Jews.] Rulers of the people.
5. [In the New Teſtament.] Eccleſiaſticks.
6. [Among preſbyterians.] Laymen introduced into the kirk-
polity in ſeſſions, preſbyteries, ſynods and aſſemblies.
Flea-bitten ſynod, an aſſembly brew'd
Of clerks and elders ana; like the rude
Chaos of preſbytry, where laymen ride
With the tame woolpack clergy by their ſide. Claveland.
ELDER. m. ſ. ſellara, Saxon.] The name of a tree.
The branches are full of pith, having but little wood: the
flowers are monopetalous, divided into ſeveral ſegments, and
expand in form of a roſe: theſe are, for the moſt part, col-
lečted into an umbel, and are ſucceeded by ſoft ſucculent ber-
ries, having three ſeeds in each. It may be eaſily propagated
from cuttings or ſeeds; but the former, being the moſt expe-
ditious method, is generally practiſed. The ſeaſon for plant-
ing their cuttings is any time from September to March,
thruſting them ſix or eight inches into the ground. Dwarf
elder is near London propagated for medicinal uſe. Miller.
Look for thy reward
Amongſt the nettles at the elder tree,
Which overſhades the mouth of that ſame pit. Sh, Tit. And.
Then ſeek the bank where flowering elders crowd. Thom.
El DERLY. adj. [from elder.] No longer young; bordering
upon old age
I have a race of orderly elderly people of both ſexes at com-
mand, who can bawl when I am deaf, and tread ſoftly when I
am giddy. Swift to Pope.
ELDERSHIP. m. ſ. [from elder.]
1. Seniority; primogeniture. -
That all ſhould Alibech adore, ’tis true;
But ſome reſpect is to my birthright due:
My claim to her by eiderſhip I prove. Dryden's Ind. Emp.
Nor were the elderſhip
Of Artaxerxes worth our leaſt of fears,
If Memnon's intereſt did not prop his cauſe. Rowe,
2. Preſbytery; eccleſiaſtical ſenate; kirk-ſeſſion.
Here were the ſeeds ſown of that controverſy which ſprang
up between Beza and Eraſtus, about the matter of excom-
munications; whether there ought to be in all churches an
elderſhip, having power to excommunicate, and a part of that
elderſhip to be of neceſſity certain choſen out from amongſt
the laity for that purpoſe. Hooker, Preface.
Eldest adj. The ſuperlative of eld, now changed to old.
[ealo, ealbon, ealerte, Saxon.] -
1. The oldeſt; the child that has the right of primogeniture.
- We will eſtabliſh our eſtate upon
Our eldeſ? Malcolm, whom we name hereafter -
The prince of Cumberland. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
. The mother's and her eldeſt daughter's grace,
It ſeems, had brib'd him to prolong their ſpace.
Sandys.
Dryden.
2. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 340</div><p class="Text">E L E
E L E
2. The perſon that has lived moſt years.
Eldºſt parents ſignifies either the oldeſt men and women
that have had children, or thoſe who have longeſt had
iſſue. * . Locke.
ELEcAMPA'NE. m. ſ. [helenium, Latin.] A plant, named alſo
ſtarwort.
It hath a radiated flower, whoſe florets are hermaphrodite;
but the ſemi-florets are female: both theſe are yellow. The
ovaries reſt on a naked placenta, crowned with down: all theſe
parts are included in a ſcaly cup. To theſe notes may be
added, the leaves growing alternately on the ſtalks, and the
flowers on the top of the branches. Botaniſts enumerate
thirty ſpecies of this plant. The firſt is the true elecampane,
uſed in medicines: it grows wild in moſt fields and meadows,
and is cultivated in gardens, to furniſh the ſhops with roots,
which is the only part of the plant in uſe. Miller.
The Germans have a method of candying elecampane root
like ginger, to which they prefer it, and call it German ſpice.
Hill's Mat. Med.
To ELECT. v. a. [elecius, Latin.] -
1. To chooſe for any office or uſe; to take in preference to
others.
Henry his ſon is choſen king, though young;
And Lewis of France, elected firſt, beguil’d. Dan. C. War.
This prince, in gratitude to the people, by whoſe conſent
he was choſen, elected a hundred ſenators out of the com-
moners. Swift on the Diffenſions in Athens and Rome.
2. [in theology.] To ſelect as an obječt of eternal mercy.
Some I have choſen of peculiar grace,
Elect above the reſt: ſo is my will. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
ELE'cT. adj. [from the verb.]
1. Choſen; taken by preference from among others.
You have here, lady,
And of your choice, theſe reverend fathers,
Of ſingular integrity and learning;
Yea, the eled? of the land, who are aſſembl’d
To plead your cauſe. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
2. Choſen to an office, not yet in poſſeſſion.
The biſhop eled? takes the oaths of ſupremacy, canonical
obedience, and againſt ſimony; and then the dean of the
arches reads and ſubſcribes the ſentences. Ayliffe’s Parergon.
3. [In theology.] Choſen as an object of eternal mercy.
A vitious liver, believing that Chriſt died for none but the
elečf, ſhall have attempts made upon him to reform and amend
his life. Hammond.
Election. m. ſ. ſelečio, Latin.]
1. The act of chuting; the act of ſelecting one or more from
a greater number for any uſe or office; choice.
If the elegion of the miniſter ſhould be committed to every
ſeveral pariſh, do you think that they would chuſe the
meeteſt. - * Iſhitgift.
I was ſorry to hear with what partiality, and popular heat,
elections were carried in many places. King Charles.
Him, not thy election,
But natural neceſſity, begot. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x.
As charity is, nothing can more increaſe the luſtre and
beauty than a prudent election of objects, and a fit application
of it to them. Spratt's Sermons.
2. The power of choice.
For what is man without a moving mind,
Which hath a judging wit, and chufing will
Now, if God's pow'r ſhould her election bind,
Her motions then would ceaſe, and ſtand all ſtill.
3. Voluntary preference.
He calls upon the finners to turn themſelves and live; he
tells us, that he has ſet before us life and death, and referred
it to our own election which we will chuſe. Rogers'; Sermons.
*
4. [In theology.] The predetermination of God by which any
were ſelected for eternal life.
The conceit about abſolute eleēlion to eternal life, ſome
enthuſiaſts entertaining, have been made remiſs in the practice
of virtue. Atterbury's Sermons.
5. The ceremony of a publick choice.
- Since the late diſſolution of the club, many perſons
put up for the next election. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 5 50.
FLE'cTI v E. adj. [from eleč.] Exerting the power of choice;
regulated or beſtowed by election or choice.
I will ſay poſitively and reſolutely, that it is impoſſible an
eºſive monarchy ſhould be ſo free and abſolute as an here-
ditary. - Racon.
To talk of compelling a man to be good, is a contradićtion;
for where there is force, there can be no choice: whereas all
moral goodneſs conſiſteth in the eleēlive act of the under-
ſtanding will. Grew's Coſmol. Sac. b. iii. c. 2.
The laſt change of their government, from elečive to he-
reditary, has made it ſeem hitherto of leſs force, and unfitter
for action abroad. Temple.
El E"ct IV E LY. adv. [from eleči.] By choice; with preference
of one to another. -
How or why that ſhould have ſuch an influence upon the
ſpirits, as to drive them into thoſe muſcles electively, I am not
ſubtile enough to diſcern. Ray on the Creation.
Vol. I.
Davies.
f
They work not eleáively, or upon propoſing to themſelves
an end of their operations. Grew's Coſm, Sac.
ELECTOR. m. ſ. [from eleē.]
1. He that has a vote in the choice of any officer.
From the new world her ſilver and her gold
Came, like a tempeſt, to confound the old;
Feeding with theſe the brib'd electors’ hopes,
Alone ſhe gave us emperors and popes. J/aller.
2. A prince who has a voice in the choice of the German
emperour.
ELE"ctor AL. adj. [from elector.] Having the dignity of an
ele&amp;tor.
ELE"ctor ATE. m. ſ. [ from elector. | The territory of an
elečtor.
* He has a great and powerful king for his ſon-in-law; and
can himſelf command, when he pleaſes, the whole ſtrength
of an electorate in the empire. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 24.
ELE'cTRE. m. ſ. [electrum, Latin.]
1. Amber; which, having the quality when warmed by frićtion
of attracting bodies, gave to one ſpecies of attraction the
name of electricity, and to the bodies that ſo attract the epithet
elečirick. -
2. A mixed metal. -
Change ſilver plate or veſſel into the compound ſtuff, being
a kind of ſilver cle&amp;re, and turn the reſt into coin. Bacon.
ELECTRICAL.
ELECTRICK. 5
1. Attractive without magnetiſm; attractive by a peculiar pro-
perty, ſuppoſed once to belong chiefly to amber.
By electrick bodies do I conceive not ſuch only as take up
light bodies, in which number the ancients only placed jett
and amber; but ſuch as, conveniently placed, attract all bo-
dies palpable. Brown’s %. Errours, b. ii. c. 4:
An electrick body can by frićtion emit an exhalation ſo ſub-
tile, and yet ſo potent, as by its emiſſion to cauſe no ſenſible
diminution of the weight of the electrick body, and to be ex-
panded through a ſphere, whoſe diameter is above two feet,
and yet to be able to carry up lead, copper, or leaf-gold, at
the diſtance of above a foot from the electrick body. Newton.
2. Produced by an electrick body.
If that attraćtion were not rather ele?rical than magne-
tical, it was wonderous what Helmont delivereth concerning
a glaſs, wherein the magiſtery of loadſtone was prepared,
which retained an attractive quality. Brown's ſugar Errowrs.
If a piece of white paper, or a white cloath, or the end of
one's finger, be held at about a quarter of an inch from the
glaſs, the electrick vapour, excited by frićtion, will, by daſhing
againſt the white paper, cloth, or finger, be put into ſuch an
agitation as to emit light. Newton's Opt.
Elect Ri'city. . n. ſ. [from eleērick. See ELEct R.E.] A
property in ſome bodies, whereby, when rubbed ſo as to grow
warm, they draw little bits of paper, or ſuch like ſubſtances,
to them. Quincy.
Such was the account given a few years ago of electricity;
but the induſtry of the preſent age, firſt excited by the expe-
riments of Gray, has diſcovered in electricity a multitude of
philoſophical wonders. Bodies electrified by a ſphere of glaſs,
turned nimbly round, not only emit flame, but may be fitted
with ſuch a quantity of the electrical vapour, as, if diſcharged
at once upon a human body, would endanger life. The force
of this vapour has hitherto appeared inſtantºn, ous, perſons at
both ends of a long chain ſeeming to be ſtruck at once. The
philoſophers are now endeavouring to intercept the ſtrokes of
lightning. z
ELE'cTUARY. m. ſ. ſele?arium, Colin's Aurel, which is now
written elec/uary.] A form of medicine made of conſerves,
and powders, in the conſiſtence of honey. The form is
attended with conſiderable inconveniencies; for eleåuarieſ,
generally made up with honey, or ſyrup, when the conſiſtence
is too thin, are apt to ferment; and when too thick, to candy.
By both which the ingredients will either be entirely altered
in their nature, or impaircd in their virtues. Quinty.
We meet with divers ele-ſuaries, which have no ingredient,
except ſugar, common to any two of them. Boyle's Sc. Chym.
ELE Exo's YN ARY. adj. [ixº~wn.]
1. Living upon alms; depending upon charity.
It is little better than an abſurdity, that the cauſe ſhould be
an eleemºſy.ary for its ſubſiſtence to its effects, as a nature poſ-
teriour to and dependent on itſelf. Glanv Stººſ. c. 18.
2. Given in charity.
ELEGA/NCE. N. m. ſ. [el gantia, Latin.J. Beauty of art; ra-
#:...} ther foothing than ſtriking; beauty without
grandcur. - -
St. Auguſtine, out of a kind of ekgancy in writing, makes
ſome difference. Raleigh's Hi/ory ºf the //orld.
Theſe queſtions have more propriety, and elgary, under-
ſtood of the old world. Burnet.
My compoſitions in cardening are altogether Pindarick, and
run into the beautiful wildneſs of nature, without the nicer
elegancies of art. Speciator, N°. 477. -
ELE/GAN F. adj. [eleganº, Latin J
1. Pleaſing with minuter beautics.
7 X Triſes
adj. [from elečirum. See ELECTRE.]
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 341</div><p class="Text">E L E
;
Trifles themſelves are elegant in him. Pope.
There may’ſt thou find ſome clºgant retreat. London.
2. Nice; not coarſe; not groſs.
Polite with candour, elegant with eaſe. Pope.
Elec ANTLY. adv. [from elegant.]
1. In ſuch a manner as to pleaſe without elevation.
2. Neatly; nicely; with minute beauty.
Whoever would write elegantly, muſt have regard to the
different turn and juncture of every period: there muſt be
proper diſtances and pauſes. Pºpe's Odyſſey, Notes.
Elegi'Ack. adj. [elgiacus, Latin.]
1. Uſed in elegies.
2. Pertaining to elegies.
3. Mournful; ſorrowful.
Let elegiack lay the woe relate,
Soft as the breath of diſtant flutes. Gay's Trivia.
Elegy. n.ſ. [elegus, Latin.]
1. A mournful ſong. -
He hangs odes upon hawthorns, and elegie; upon brambles,
all forſooth deifying the name of Roſalind. Shakespeare A you like it.
2. A funeral ſong.
So on meanders banks, when death is nigh,
The mournful ſwan ſings her own elegy. Dryden,
3. A ſhort poem without points or turns.
E'LEMENT. n.ſ. (elementum, Latin.]
1. The firſt or conſtituent principle of any thing.
If nature ſhould intermit her courſe, thoſe principal and
mother elements of the world, whereof all things in this lower
world are made, ſhould loſe the qualities which now they
have. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 3.
A man may rationally retain doubts concerning the num-
ber of thoſe ingredients of bodies, which ſome call elements,
and others principles. Boyle's Phyſ. Conſider.
Simple ſubſtances are either ſpirits, which have no manner
of compoſition, or the firſt principles of bodies, uſually called
elements, of which other bodies are compounded. It atts.
2. The four elements, uſually ſo called, are earth, fire, air,
water, of which our world is compoſed.
The king is but a man: the violet ſmells to him as it doth
to me; and the element ſhews to him as it doth to me. Shakespeare
My deareſt ſiſter, fare thee well;
The elements be kind to thee, and make
Thy ſpirits all of comfort. Shakespeare Anth, and Cleopatra.
The king,
Contending with the fretful elements,
Bids the wind blow the earth into the ſea,
Or ſwell the curled waters. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The heavens and the earth will paſs away, and the
elements melt with fervent heat. Peter.
Here be four of you were able to make a good world;
for you are as differing as the four element. Bacon's Hol. J/ar.
He from his flaming ſhip his children ſent,
To periſh in a milder element. J/aller.
3. The proper habitation or ſphere of anything: as water of
We are ſimple men; we do not know ſhe works by charms,
by ſpells, and ſuch dawbry as is beyond our element. Shakeſp.
Our torments may, in length of time,
Became our elements. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ii l. 275.
They ſhew that they are out of their element, and that logick
is none of their talent. Baker's Reflections on Learn, ng.
4. An ingredient; a conſtituent part.
Who ſet the body and the limbs
Of this great ſport together, as you gueſs?
One ſure that promiſes no element
In ſuch a buſineſs. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
5. The letters of any language.
6. The loweſt or firſt rudiments of literature or ſcience.
With religion it fareth as with other ſciences; the firſt de-
livery of the elements thereof muſt, for like conſideration, be
framed according to the weak and ſlender capacity of young
beginners. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 18.
Every pariſh ſhould keep a petty ſchoolmaſter, which ſhould
bring up children in the firſt elements of letters. Spenſer on Irel.
We, when we were children, were in bondage under the
elements of the world. Gal. iv. 3.
There is nothing more pernicious to a youth, in the ele-
ments of painting, than an ignorant maſter. Dryden's Dufreſn.
c
To E'LEMENT. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To compound of elements.
Whether any one ſuch body be met with, in thoſe ſaid to
be elemented bodies, I now queſtion. Bºyle's Scept. Chym.
2. To conſtitute; to make as a firſt principle.
Dull ſublunary lover's love,
Whoſe ſoul is ſenſe, cannot admit
Of abſence, 'cauſe it doth remove
The thing which elemented it. Donne.
ELEME’NTAL. adj. [from element.]
1. Produced by ſome of the four elements.
If duſky ſpots are vary'd on his brow,
And ſtreak'd with red, a troubl’d colour ſhow;
That ſullen mixture ſhall at once declare
Winds, rain and ſtorms, and elemental war. Dryden's Virg.
Soft yielding minds to water glide away,
And ſip, with nymphs, their elemental tea. Pope.
2. Ariſing from firſt principles.
Leeches are by ſome accounted poiſon not properly, that
is, by temperamental contrariety, occult form, or ſo much as
elemental repugnancy; but inwardly taken, they faſten upon
the veins, and occaſion an effuſion of blood. Brºwn's Wu. Err.
ELEMENT A'Riºry. n.ſ.. [from elementary.] Containing the
rudiments or firſt principles; ſimplicity of nature; abſence of
compoſition; being uncompounded.
A very large claſs of creatures in the earth, far above the
condition of elementarity. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 1.
ELEME'NTARY. adj. [from elementary. ] Uncompounded;
having only one principle or conſtituent part.
All rain water contains in it a copious ediment of terreſtrial
matter, and is not a ſimple elementary water. Ray on the Crºat.
The elementary ſalts of animals are not the ſame as they
appear by diſtillation. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Ele"M1. n.ſ.
This drug is improperly called gum elemi, being a refin.
The genuine elemi is brought from AEthiopia in flattiſh maſles,
or in cylinders, of a yellowiſh colour. Its ſmcll is acrid and
reſinous. It is very rare in Europe, and ſuppoſed to be pro-
duced by a tree of the olive kind. The ſpurious or American
elemi, almoſt the only kind known, is of a whitiſh colour,
with a greater or leſs tinge of a greeniſh or yellowiſh. It is
of an agreeable ſmell, and of an acrid and bitteriſh taſte. It
proceeds from a tall tree, which the Braſilians wound at
night, and in the morning collect the reſin that has run
Out. Hill's 41ateria Medica.
El E'Nch. m.ſ [elen.hts, Latin.] An argument; a ſophiſm.
The firſt deluſion Satan put upon Eve, and his whole ten-
tation might be the ſame elºnch continued, as when he ſaid,
Ye ſhall not die; that was, in his equivocation, you ſhall not
incur preſent death. Brºwn's Pulgar Errours, b. i. c. 4.
Diſcover the fallacies of our common adverſary, that old
ſophiſter, who puts the moſt abuſive eſenc's on us. Ije. of Piety.
Ele'ots... n.ſ. Some name the apples in requeſt in the cyder
countries ſo ; not known by that name in ſeveral parts
of England. lſo timer's Art of Husbandry.
E1. EPHANT. m. ſ. ſel-phas, Latin.] The largeſt of all qua-
drupeds, of whoſe ſagacity, faithfulneſs, prudence, and even
underſtanding, many ſurpriſing relations are given. This ani-
mal is not carnivorous, but feeds on hay, herbs, and all ſorts
of pulſe; and it is ſaid to be extremely long lifed. It is na-
turally very gentle; but when enraged, no creature is more
terrible. He is ſupplied with a trunk, or long hollow carti-
lage, like a large trumpet, which hangs between his teeth,
and ſerves him for hands: by one blow with his trunk he will
kill a camel or a horſe, and will raiſe a prodigious weight
with it. His teeth are the ivory ſo well known in Europe,
ſome of which have been ſeen as large as a man's thigh, and a
fathom in length. Wild elephants are taken with the help of
a female ready for the male: ſhe is confined to a narrow
place, round which pits are dug; and theſe being covered
with a little earth ſcattered over hurdles, the male elephants
eaſily fall into the ſhare. In copulation the female receives
the male lying upon her back; and ſuch is his pudicity, that
he never covers the female ſo long as any one appars in
fight. - Calmet.
He loves to hear,
That unicorns may be betray'd with trees,
And bears with glaſſes, elephants with holes. Shakespeare. jul. Cºſ.
The elephant hath joints, but not for courteſy;
His legs are for neceſſity, not flexure. Shakesp. Irzil. and Crºſſida.
2. Ivory; the teeth of elephants.
High o'er the gate, in elephant and gold,
The crowd ſhall Caſar's Indian war behold. Dryden's Pīrg.
ELEPHANT1'Asis. m. ſ. [elephantioſis, Latin.] A ſpecies of
leproſy, ſo called from covering the ſkin with incruſtations
like thoſe on the hide of an elephant.
ELF PHA'NTINE, adj. [elephantinus, Latin.] Pertaining to the
elephant.
To F/LEVATE. v. a. ſervo, Latin.]
1. To raiſe up aloft.
This ſubterranean heat or fire, which elevates the water out
of the abyſs. - //oodward.
2. To exalt; to dignify.
3. To raiſe the mind with great conceptions.
Others apart ſat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reaſon'd high
Of providence, foreknowledge, will and fate. Milt. P. L.
In all that great extent, wherein the mind wanders, in
thoſe remote ſpeculations it may ſeem to be elevated with, it
ſtirs not beyond ſenſe or reflection. Locke.
Now riſing fortune elevates his mind,
He ſhines unclouded, and adorns mankind. Savage.
4. To elate the mind with vicious pride.
5. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 342</div><p class="Text">E L L
5. To leſſen by detraćtion. This ſenſe, though legitimately
deduced from the Latin, is not now in uſe.
when the judgments of learned men are alledged againſt
you, what do they but either elevate their credit, or oppoſe
into them the judgments of others as learned: Hooker, b. ii.
Elevate. part, adj. [from elevated.]. Exalted; raiſed aloft.
On each ſide an imperial city ſtood,
With tow’rs and temples proudly elevate
On ſeven ſmall hills. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd, b. ii.
Elev A'tion. n ſ [elevatio, Latin.]
1. The act of raiſing aloft.
The diſruption of the ſtrata, the elevation of ſome, and
depreſſion of others, did not fall out by chance, but were
directed by a diſcerning principle. Woodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. Exaltation; dignity. - -
Angels, in their ſeveral degrees of elevation above us, may
be endowed with more comprehenſive faculties. Locke.
3. Exaltation of the mind by noble conceptions:
We are therefore to love him with all poſſible application
and elevation of ſpirit, with all the heart, ſoul and mind. Norris.
4. Attention to obječts above us.
All which different elevations of ſpirit unto God, are con-
tained in the name of prayer. Booker, b.v. ſ. 48.
5. The height of any heavenly body with reſpect to the
horizon.
Some latitudes have no canicular days, as thoſe which
have more than ſeventy-three degrees of northern elevation,
as Nova Zembla. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
Elevator. n.ſ.. [from elevate.] A raiſer or lifter up, applied
to ſome chirurgical inſtruments put to ſuch uſes. &amp;uincy.
ELEVEN. adj. [anolepen, Saxon.] Ten and one; one more
than ten.
Had I a dozen ſons, each in my love alike, and none leſs
dear than thine and my good Marcius, H had rather eleven die
nobly for their country, than one voluptuouſly ſurfeit out of
ačtion. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Ele've Nth. adj. [from eleven.] The next in order to the
tenth.
In the eleventh chapter he returns to ſpeak of the building
of Babel. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/ºrld.
ELF. n.ſ. plural elves. [eif, Welſh. Baxter's Gloſſ.]
1. A wandering ſpirit, ſuppoſed to be ſeen in wild unfrequented
laces.
P Through this houſe give glimmering light,
By the dead and drowſie fire;
Every elf, and fairy ſprite,
Hop as light as bird from briar. Shakespeare Midſ. Night's Dream.
The king of elf, and little fairy queen -
Gambol’d on heaths, and danc'd on ev'ry green. Dryden.
If e'er one viſion touch'd thy infant thought,
Of all the nurſe and all the prieſt have taught;
Of airy elves by moon-light ſhadow ſeen,
The ſilver token, and the circled green. Pope's R. of the L.
2. A devil.
That we may angels ſeem, we paint them elves;
And are but ſatires to ſet up ourſelves. Dryden's Eſſ. on Sat.
However it was civil, an angel or elf;
For he ne'er could have fill'd it ſo well of himſelf. Swift.
To ELF. v. a. [from the noun..] To entangle hair in ſo intri-
cate a manner, that it is not to be unravelled. This the vul-
gar have ſuppoſed to be the work of fairies in the night;
and all hair ſo matted together, hath had the name of elf-
locks. Hanmer.
My face I'll grime with filth,
Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots. Shakeſ K. Lear.
ELFlock. n.J. [ elf and lock. J Knots of hair twiſted by
elves.
This is that very Mab,
That plats the manes of horſes in the night,
And cakes the elflocks in foul ſluttiſh hairs,
Which, once untangl’d, much misfortune bodes. Shakespeare.
To ELI'CITE. v. a. [elicio, Latin.] To ſtrike out; to fetch
out by labour or art.
Although the ſame truths may be elicited, and explicated by
the contemplation of animals, yet they are more clearly evi-
denced in the contemplation of man. Hale's Origin of Mank.
He elicits thoſe acts out of the meer lapſed ſtate of human
nature. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
E1.1(cit. adj. [elicitus, Latin.] Brought into ačt; brought
from poſſibility to real exiſtence.
It is the virtue of humility and obedience, and not the
formal elicit ačt of meekneſs; meekneſs being ordinarily an-
nexed to theſe virtues. Hammond's Prači. Catech.
The ſchools diſpute whether, in morals, the external ačtion
ſuperadds anything of good or evil to the internal elicit act of
the will. - South's Sermons.
Elicit Aºtion. n.ſ.. [from elicio, Latin.]
That elicitation which the ſchools intend, is a deducing of
the power of the will into act: that drawing which they
mention, is merely from the appetibility of the objećt. Bramh.
To Eli'DE. v. a. [elido, Latin.] To cut in pieces.
We are to cut off that whereunto they, from whom theſe
4.
obještions proceed, fly for defence, when the force and ſtrength
of the argument is elided. Hooker, b. iv. f. 4.
Eligibility. n.ſ. [from eligible.] Worthineſs to be choſen.
The buſineſs of the will is not to judge concerning the
nature of things, but to chuſe them in Gonſequence of the
report made by the underſtanding, as to their eligibility or
oodneſs. Fiddes's Sermons.
fºLIGIBLE, adj. [eligibilis, Latin] Fit to be choſen; worthy
of choice; preferable.
A Britiſh miniſtry ought to be ſatisfied, if, allowing to
every particular man that his private ſcheme is wiſeſt, they
can perſuade him that next to his own plan, that of the go-
vernment is the moſt eligible. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 48.
Did they really think, that going on with the war was more
eligible for their country than the leaſt abatement of thoſe
conditions : Swift.
That the moſt plain, ſhort, and lawful way to any good
end, is more eligible than one directly contrary in ſome or all
of theſe qualities. Swift.
Certainty, in a deep diſtreſs, is more eligible than ſuſpenſe.
Clariſſa.
EligibleNess. n.ſ.. [from eligible.] Worthineſs to be choſen;
preferableneſs.
ELIMINA’Tion. m. ſ. ſelimino, Latin.] The ačt of baniſhing;
the act of turning out of doors; rejećtion. Licł.
Eli'sion. m. ſ. ſelfio, Latin.] r
1. The aët of cutting off: as, th’ attempt, there is an eliſion of
a ſyllable.
You will obſerve the abbreviations and cliſions, by which
conſonants of moſt obdurate ſounds are joined together, with-
out any ſoftening vowel to intervene. Swift.
2. Diviſion; ſeparation of parts.
The cauſe given of ſound, that it would be an eliſion of the
air, whereby, if they mean any thing, they mean a cutting
or dividing, or elſe an attenuating of the air, is but a term
of ignorance. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 124.
Elixation. n.ſ. [elixus, Latin.] The act of boiling or
ſtewing anything.
Even to ourſelves, and more perfeót animals, water per-
forms no ſubſtantial nutrition; ſerving for refrigeration, dilu-
tion of ſolid aliment, and its elixation in the ſtomach. Brown.
Eli'x1R. m. ſ. [Arabick.]
1. A medicine made by ſtrong infuſion, where the ingredients
are almoſt diſſolved in the menſtruum, and give it a thicker
conſiſtence than a tinéture. &amp;#incy.
For when no healing art prevail'd,
When cordials and elixirs fail'd,
On your pale cheek he dropp'd the ſhow'r,
Reviv'd you like a dying flow’r. J/aller,
2. The liquor, or whatever it be, with which chymiſts hope to
tranſmute metals to gold.
No chymiſt yet the elixir got,
But glorifies his pregnant pot,
If by the way to him befal
Some odoriferous thing, or medicinal. Donne.
3. The extract or quinteſſence of any thing.
In the ſoul, when the ſupreme faculties move regularly, the
inferior paſſions and affections following, there ariſes a ſere-
nity infinitely beyond the higheſt quinteſſence and elixir of
worldly delight. South’s Sermons.
4. Any cordial; or invigorating ſubſtance.
What wonder then, if fields and regions here
Breathe forth elixir pure 44ilton's Paradiſe Lø/?, b. iii.
Elk, n, ſ. ſaelc, Saxon ]
The elk is a large and ſtately animal of the ſtag kind. The
neck is ſhort and ſlender; the ears nine inches in length, and
four in breath. The colour of its coat in Winter is greyiſh,
in Summer it is paler; generally three inches in length, and
equalling horſehair in thickneſs. The upper lip of the elk is
large. The articulations of its legs are cloſe, and the liga-
ments hard, ſo that its joints are leſs pliable than thoſe of
other animals. The horns of the male elk are ſhort and
thick near the head, where it by degrees expands into a great
breadth, with ſeveral prominences in its edges. Elks live in
herds, and are very timorous. The hoof of the left hinder
foot only, has been famous for the cure of epilepſies; but it is
probable, that the hoof of any other animal will do as
well. Hill's Mat. Mºd.
And, ſcarce his head
Rais'd o'er the heapy wreath, the branching elk
Lies ſlumb'ring ſullen in the white abyſs. Thomſon's I/inter.
ELL. m. ſ. ſeln, Saxon.]
1. A meaſure containing forty-five inches, or a yard and a
quarter. -
They are ſaid to make yearly forty thouſand pieces of lin-
nen cloath, reckoning two hundred ells to the piece. Addiſon,
2. It is taken proverbially for a long meaſure.
Acquit thee bravely, play the man;
Look not on pleaſures as they come, but go :
Defer not the laſt virtue; life's poor ſpan
Make not an ell by trifling in thy woe. Herbert.
ELLIPSIS,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 343</div><p class="Text">E L O
E L S
LLI/PSIS. m. ſ. taxiiroi;..] - -
Fº .# £º. by which ſomething is left out neceſ-
be ſupplied by the hearer. . ... -
#.º . i: by way of ellipſ, Rom. iv. 18. Hamm.
2. [In geometry.] An oval figure, being generated from the
ſain of a cone, by a plane cutting both fides of the cone,
but not parallel to the baſe, which produces a circle, and
meeting with the baſe when produced. - Harris.
On the cylinder inclined, deſcribe an cliffſ, parall: to the
horizon. - Wilkin's Dadalus.
The planets could not poſſibly acquire ſuch revolutions in
circular orbs, or in ellipſes very little eccentrick. . Bentley.
Eſſºptical. v adj. [from ellipſii.j Having the form of an
ELLI'PTICK. } ellipſis ; oval. - - - - -
Since the planets move in elliptick orbits, in one of whoſe
foci the ſun is, and by a radius from thc ſun deſcribe equal
areas in equal times, which no other law of a circulating fluid,
but the harmonical circulation, can account for ; we muſt find
out a law for the paracentrical motion, that may make the
orbits elliptick. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
In animals, that gather food from the ground, the pupil is
oval or elliptical; the greateſt diameter going tranſverſely from
fide to ſide. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Elm. n.ſ.. [ulmus, Latin; elm, Saxon.] -
1. The name of a tree. The flower conſiſts of one leaf, ſtriped
like a bell, having many ſtamina in the center: from the bot-
tom ariſes the pointal, which becomes a membranaceous or
leafy fruit, almoſt heart-ſhaped; in the middle of which is
placed a pear-ſhaped ſeed-veſſel; containing one feed of the
fame ſhape. The ſpecies are, the common rough-leaved elm;
the witch hazel, or broad-leaved elm, by ſome called the Bri-
tiſh elm; the ſmooth-leaved or witch elm. It is generally
believed neither of them were originally natives of this coun-
try; but they have propagated themſelves by ſeeds and ſuckers
in ſuch plenty as hardly to be rooted out, where they have had
long poſſeſſion; eſpecially in hedgerows, where there is har-
bour for their roots, which will ſend forth various twigs. .
They are very proper to place in hedgerows upon the borders
of fields, where they will thrive better than when planted in
a wood or cloſe plantation, and their ſhade will not be very
injurious to whatever grows under them. They are alſo pro-
per to plant at a diſtance from a garden, or building, to break
the violence of winds; for they may be trained up in form of
an hedge, keeping them cut every year, to the height of forty
or fifty feet: but they ſhould not be planted too near a garden
where fruit-trees or other plants are placed, becauſe the roots
of the elm run ſuperficially near the top of the ground, and
will intermix with the roots of other trees, and deprive them
of nouriſhment. Miller.
The rural ſeat,
Whoſe lofty elms and venerable oaks
Invite the rook, who high amid’ the boughs,
In early Spring, his airy city builds. Thomſºn's Spring.
2. It was uſed to ſupport vines, to which the poets allude.
Thou art an elm, my huſband; I a vine,
Whoſe weakneſs married to thy ſtronger ſtate,
Makes me with thy ſtrength to communicate. Shakespeare,
Elocution. n.ſ.. [elocutio, Latin.]
1. The power of fluent ſpeech. -
A travelled doćtor of phyſick, of bold, and of able clo-
cution. J/otton.
2. Eloquence; flow of language.
Whoſe taſte, too long forborne, at firſt eſſay
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught
The tongue not made for ſpeech to ſpeak thy praiſe. Milton.
As I have endeavoured to adorn it with noble thoughts,
ſo much more to expreſs thoſe thoughts with elocution. Dryden.
3. The power of expreſſion or dićtion.
The third happineſs of this poet's imagination is elocution,
or the art of cloathing or adorning that thought ſo found, and
varied, in apt, ſignificant, and founding words. Dryden.
E'logy. m.ſ.. [elſe, French.J. Praiſe; panegyrick.
Buckingham lay under millions of maledićtions, which at
the prince's arrival did vaniſh into praiſes and elogies. Wotton.
If I durſt ſay all I know of the logies received from abroad
concerning him, I ſhould offend the modeſty of our author.
- Boyle.
Some excellent perſons, above my approbation or elºgy,
have conſidered this ſubject. Holder’s Elements of Speech.
To ELo'IGN.E. v. a. [eligner, French.] To put at a diſtance;
to remove one far from another. Now diſuſed.
From worldly cares himſelf he did eloin,
And greatly ſhunned many exerciſe. Fairy Queen, b. i. c. 4.
I'll tell thee now, dear love what thou ſhalt do
To anger deſtiny, as ſhe doth uS ;
ºu, a
* --&gt; g - In OW. It too. 0x7e.
To ELONGATE. J.a. [from longus, Latin.] To lengthen;
to draw out; to protract; to ſtretch. t
! ºr
* ** To go off to a diſtance from any
About Cape Frio in Braſilia, the South point of the com-
paſs varyeth twelve degrees unto the Weſt; but elongating from
the coaſt of Braſília, towards the ſhore of Africa, it varyeth
eaſtward. Brown's Pu'ar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
Elon 6 A^T Ion. m. ſ. [from elºngate.]
1. The act of ſtretching or lengthening itſelf.
To this motion of elongation of the fibres, is owing the
union or conglutination of the parts of the body, when they
are ſeparated by a wound. 4 buthnot on Alimentſ.
2. The ſtate of being ſtretched.
3. [In medicine.] An imperfect luxation, when the ligament of
any joint is ſo extended or relaxed as to lengthen the limb,
but yet not let the bone go quite out of its place. &amp;ing.
Elongations are the effect of an humour ſoaking upºn a
ligament, thereby making it liable to be ſtretched, and to be
thruſt quite out upon every little force. J//eman's Surgery.
4. Diſtance; ſpace at which one thing is diſtant from another.
The diſtant points in the celeſtial expanſe appear to the eye
- in ſo ſmall a degree of elongation from another, as bears no
proportion to what is real.. Glanv. Scºtſ, c. 11.
5. Departure; removal.
Northen had it been placed in a middle point, but that of
deſcent, or elongation. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 2.
To ELO'PE. v. a. [loopen, to run, Dutch..] I o run away;
to break looſe; to eſcape from law or reſtraint. º
It is neceſſary to treat women as members of the body po-
litick, ſince great numbers of them have e oped from their
allegiance. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 32.
What from the dame can Paris hope
She may as well from him elºpe. Prior.
The fool whoſe wife elºpe; ſome thrice a quarter,
For matrimonial ſolace dics a martyr. Poe’s ſp. of Horace.
Elo. PEMENT. n.ſ.. [from elºpe.] Departure from juſt reſtraint;
reječtion of lawful power.
An elopement is the voluntary departure of a wife from her
huſband to live with an adulterer, and with whom ſhe lives in
breach of the matrimonial vow. A, ºft's Parcrgon.
The negligent huſband, truſting to the efficacy of this prin-
ciple, was undone by his wife's elºpement from him. A lui, not.
Elops. n.ſ.. [ixº. J. A fiſh; reckoned however by Aliton
among the ſerpents.
Scorpion and aſp, and amphiſbena dire,
Ceraſtes horn'd, hydrus, and elºps drear,
And dipſas. Milton's Paradiſe I ºff, b. x. l. 525.
Eloque's ce. m. ſ. [eloquentia, Latin.]
1. The power of ſpeaking with fluency and clegance; ora-
tory.
Aétion is elºquence, and the eyes of th’i-norant
More learned than the ears. Sla'ſp. Cºrio'ahu.
2. Elegant language uttered with fluency.
Say ſhe be mute, and will not ſpeak a word;
Then I'll commend her volubility,
And ſay ſhe uttereth piercing cºerce. Sha'ſ cart.
Fit words attended on his weighty ſenſe,
And mild perſuaſion flow'd in clºſurrºr. Pºpe's Cºſſy, l. vii.
Eloque N.T. adj. [clºſurns, Latin.] Having the power cf ora-
tory ; having the power of fluent and elegant ſpeech.
The Lord of hoſts doth take away the captain of fifty, and
the honourable man, and the counſellor, and the cunning arti-
ficer, and the eloquent orator. Mſ. iii. 3.
O death! all elºquent, you only prove -
What duſt we dote on, when 'tis man we love. Pºe.
ELSE. pronoun, ſeller, Saxon J. Other; one beſides: it is ap-
plied both to perſons and things. -
To ſtand flained with travel, and ſweating with deſire to
ſee him; thinking of nothing elſ', putting all affairs eſſe in
oblivion, as if there were nothing cle to be done but to ſee
him. Sºft. Henry V. p. ii.
Should he or any eſſ ſearch, he will find evidence of the
Divine Wiſdom. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
He ſays, 'twas then with him, as now with you ;
He did it when he had nothing ele to do. Denham.
Els E. adv. Otherwiſe. . .
Dare not, on thy life,
Touch ought of mine beſide, by lot my due,
But ſtand aloof, and think profane to view:
This faulchion, eſſe, not hitherto withſtood,
Theſe hoſtile fields ſhall fatten with thy blood. Dryden.
What ways are there whereby we ſhould be aſure!, but
either by an internal impreſſion of the notion of a God upon
our minds, or elſe by ſuch external and viſible effects as our
reaſon tells us muſt Še attributed to ſome cauſe. Tilºſº's Sºn.
2. Beſide; except that mentioned. -
Pleaſures which no where eſſ were to be found,
And all Elyſium in a ſpot of ground. Dryden.
E'ls E whº R.E. adv. [eft and where.]
1. In any other place.
There are here divers trees, which are not to be found
elewhere. All ºt's I gºtiºn ºf the {ºrld.
As he proved that Piſon was not Ganges, or Gºhº, Nº.
ſo where to find them e ſewhere he knew not. Raleigh's H/.
- 3 I' or,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 344</div><p class="Text">E L Y
For, if we chance to fix our thoughts elſewhere,
Though our eyes open be, we cannot ſee. Davies.
Henceforth oracles are ceas'd,
And thou no more with pomp and ſacrifice
Shalt be enquir'd at Delphos, or elſewhere. Paradiſe Reg.
Although ſeaſoned bodies may and do live near as long in
London as elſewhere, yet new-comers and children do not.
Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
2. In other places; in ſome other place.
They which elſewhere complain, that diſgrace and injury
is offered to the meaneſt miniſter, when the magiſtrate ap-
pointeth him what to wear, think the graveſt prelates no com-
petent judges to appoint where it is fit for the miniſter to
ſtand. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 29.
Let us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blam'd enough elſewhere. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Beſtow, baſe man, thy idle threats elſewhere;
My mother's daughter knows not how to fear. Dryden.
If it contradićt what he ſays elſewhere, it is no new or
ftrange thing. Tillotſon, Preface.
To Elu'cIDATE. v.a. [elucido, Latin.] To explain; to clear;
to make plain.
To elucidate a little the matter, let us conſider it. Boyle.
ELucIDA'tion. n.ſ.. [from elucidate.] Explanation; expo-
ſition. -
We ſhall, in order to the elucidation of this matter, ſubjoin
the following experiment. Boyle,
Elucida"toR. n.ſ.. [from elucidate.] Explainer; expoſitor;
commentator.
Obſcurity is brought over them by the courſe of ignorance
and age, and yet more by their pedantical elucidators. Abbot.
To ELUDE. v. a. [eludo, Latin.]
1. To eſcape by ſtratagem; to avoid any miſchief or danger by
artifice.
Several pernicious vices, notorious among us, eſcape or
elude the puniſhment of any law yet invented. Swift.
He who looks no higher for the motives of his condućt
than the reſentments of human juſtice, whenever he can pre-
fume himſelf cunning enough to elude, rich enough to bribe,
or ſtrong enough to reſiſt it, will be under no reſtraint. Rogers.
2. To mock by an unexpected eſcape.
Me gentle Delia beckons from the plain,
Then, hid in ſhades, eludes her eager ſwain;
But feigns a laugh to ſee me ſearch around,
And by that laugh the willing fair is found. Pope's Spring.
ELU'DIBLE. adj. [from elude..] Poſſible to be defeated.
There is not any common place more inſiſted on than the
happineſs of trials by juries; yet if this bleſſed part of our
law be eludible by power and artifice, we ſhall have little rea-
ſon to boaſt. Swift.
Elves. The plural of elf. See Elf.
Ye ſylphs and ſylphids to your chief give ear;
Fays, fairies, genii, elves and demons hear. Pope.
Elvelock. n.ſ.. [from elves and lock.] Knots in the hair
ſuperſtitiouſly ſuppoſed to be tangled by the fairies.
From the like might proceed the fears of polling elvelºcks,
or complicated hairs of the head. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v.
Elvish. adj. [from elves, the plural of elf: it had been written
more properly elfiſh.] Relating to elves, or wandering ſpirits.
Thou elviſh markt, abortive, rioting hogſ
The ſlave of nature, and the ſon of hell! Shakeſp. R. III.
No muſe hath been ſo bold,
Or of the latter, or the old,
Thoſe elviſh ſecrets to unfold,
Which lie from others reading. Drayton.
ELU'MBATED. adj. [elumbis, Lat..] Weakened in the loins. Dići.
ELU'sion. m. ſ. [eluſio, Latin.] An eſcape from enquiry or
examination; a fraud; an artifice.
An appendix, relating to the tranſmutation of metals, de-
te&amp;ts the impoſtures and eluſions of thoſe who have pretended
to it. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
ELU'sive. adj. [from elude..] Pračtiſing eluſion; uſing arts to
eſcape.
Eluſive of the bridal day, ſhe gives
Fond hopes to all, and all with hopes deceives. Pope's Odyſſ.
ELU’so R Y. adj. [from elude.] Tending to elude; tending to
deceive ; fraudulent; deceitful; fallacious.
It may be feared they are but Parthian flights, ambuſcade
retreats, and eluſory tergiverſation. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To El U’t E. v. a. [eluo, Latin.] To waſh off.
The more oily any ſpirit is, the more pernicious; becauſe
it is harder to be eluted by the blood. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To ELu’rriate. v. a. [elutrio, Latin.] To decant; or ſtrain
Out.
The preſſure of the air upon the lungs is much leſs than it
has been computed by ſome ; but ſtill it is ſomething, and the
alteration of one tenth of its force upon the lungs muſt pro-
duce ſome difference in elutriating the blood as it paſſes through
the lungs. Arbuthnot on Air.
FLY slan. adj. [elyſius, Latin.] Pertaining to Elyſium; plea-
ſant; º ſoft and ſoothing; exceedingly delightful.
Vol. I.
The river of life, through midſt of heaven,
Rolls o'er elyſian flowers her amber ſtream. AMilton.
ELY's 1UM. n.ſ. [Latin.] The place aſſigned by the heathens
to happy ſouls; any place exquiſitely pleaſant.
To have thee with thy lips to ſtop my mouth,
So ſhould'ſt thou either turn my flying ſoul,
Or I ſhould breathe it ſo into thy body,
And then it liv'd in ſweet Elſium. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
'EM. A contraćtion of them. -
For he could coin and counterfeit
New words with little or no wit;
And when with haſty noiſe he ſpoke 'em,
The ignorant for current took 'em. Hudibras.
To EMA’CIATE. v. a. [emacio, Latin.] To waſte; to de-
prive of fleſh.
All dying of the conſumption, die emaciated and lean.
- Graunt's Bills ºf Mortality.
To EMA'cIATE. v. n. To loſe fleſh; to pine; to grow lean.
He emaciated and pined away in the too anxious enquiry of
the ſea's reciprocation, although not drowned therein. Brown.
EMACIA't Ion. m. ſ. [emaciatus, Latin.]
1. The aët of making lean.
2. The ſtate of one grown lean.
Searchers cannot tell whether this emaciation or leanneſs
were from a phthiſis, or from an he&amp;tick fever. Graunt.
EMAcu LATION. n.ſ.. [emaculo, Latin.] The aët of freeing
anything from ſpots or foulneſs. Die?.
E'MANANT, adj. [emanans, Latin.] Iſſuing from ſomething
elſe.
The firſt ačt of the divine nature, relating to the world
and his adminiſtration thereof, is an emanant act: the moſt
wiſe counſel and purpoſe of Almighty God terminate in thoſe
two great tranſient or emanant acts or works, the work of
creation and providence. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
EMANA'TIGN. n.ſ.. [emanatio, Latin.]
1. The aët of iſſuing or proceeding from any other ſubſtance.
Ariſtotle ſaid, that it ſtreamed by connatural reſult and
emanation from God, the infinite and eternal Mind, as the
light iſſues from the ſun South's Sermons.
2. That which iſſues from another ſubſtance; an effluence;
effluvium.
The experience of thoſe profitable and excellent emanations
from God, may be, and commonly are, the firſt motive of
our love. Taylor.
Another way of attraćtion is delivered by a tenuous emana-
tion, or continued effluvium, which, after ſome diſtance, re-
tracteth unto itſelf; as in ſyrups, oils, and viſcoſities, which,
ſpun, at length retire into their former dimenſions. Brown.
Such were the features of her heav'nly face;
Her limbs were form'd with ſuch harmonious grace;
So faultleſs was the frame, as if the whole
Had been an emanation of the ſoul. Dryden.
The letters, every judge will ſee, were by no means efforts
of the genius, but emanations of the heart. Pºpe.
Each emanation of his fires
That beams on earth, each virtue he inſpires;
Each art he prompts, each charm he can create;
Whate'er he gives, are giv'n forY. to hate. Pope's Dunciad.
EMA'NATIve. adj. [from emano, Latin.] Iſſuing from an-
other. Dić?.
To EMA'NCIPATE. v. a. [emancipo, Latin.] To ſet free
from ſervitude; to reſtore to liberty. .
Having received the probable inducements of truth, we
become emancipated from teſtimonial engagements. Brown.
By the twelve tables, only thoſe were called unto the in-
teſtate ſucceſſion of their parents that were in the parents
power, excluding all emancipated children. Ayliffe's Parergon.
They ſoon emancipated themſelves from that dependance.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
EMAncipa'tion. n.ſ.. [from emancipate.] The act of ſetting
free; deliverance from ſlavery.
Obſtinacy in opinions holds the dogmatiſt in the chains of
error, without hope of emancipation. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 27.
To EMA'Ro1NATE. v. a. [margo, Latin.] To take away the
margin or edge of anything. Dići.
To EMA'sculate. v. a. [emaſculo, Latin.]
1. To caſtrate; to deprive of virility.
When it is found how many evs, ſuppoſe twenty, one ram
will ſerve, we may geld nineteen, or thereabouts; for if you
emaſculate but ten, you ſhall, by promiſcuous copulation,
hinder the increaſe.
2. To effeminate; to weaken; to vitiate by unmanly ſoftneſs.
From wars and from affairs of ſtate abſtain;
Women emaſculate a monarch's reign. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
Dangerous principles not only impoſe upon our under-
ſtandings, but emaſculate our ſpirits, and ſpoil our temper.
Colier on Pride.
EMA's cul At 1o N. n.ſ.. [from emaſculate.]
1. Caſtration.
2. Effeminacy; womaniſh qualities; unmanly ſoftneſs.
To EM B A'l E. v. a. [emballer, French.]
; , 1. To
Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 345</div><p class="Text">*
E M B
1. To make up into a bundle.
2. To bind up; to incloſe.
Below her ham her weed did ſomewhat train,
And her ſtraight legs moſt bravely were embal'd
In golden buſkins of coſtly cordwain. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
I would not be a queen »
For all the world.
—In faith, for little England
... .You'd venture an embaling.
To EMBA'LM. v. a. [embaumer,
To impregnate a body with ar
putrefaction.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
French; embalſamar, Span.]
omaticks, that it may reſiſt
Embalm me,
Then lay me forth; although unqueen'd, yet like
A queen, and daughter to a king, inter me. Shaº. H. VIII.
I would ſhew future times
What you were, and teach them tº urge towards ſuch :
Verſe embalms virtue, and tombs or thrones of rhymes,
Preſerve frail tranſitory fame as much
A: ſpice doth bodies from corrupt air's touch.
Muſe' at that name thy ſacred ſorrows ſhed;
Thoſe tears eternal, that embalm the dead. Pope.
EMBALMER. n.ſ. [from embalm..] One that practiſes the art
of embalming and preſerving bodies -
The Romans were not ſo good embalmers as the Egyptians,
ſo the body was utterly conſumed. Bacon', Natural Hiſtory.
To EMBA'R. v. a. [from bar.]
1. To ſhut; to encloſe.
Themſelves for fear into his jaws to fall,
He forc'd to caſtle ſtrong to take their flight;
Where faſt embar'd in mighty brazen wall,
He has them now four years beſieg'd to make them thrall.
- Fairy &amp;ueen, h. i. eant. 7. ſtanz 44.
In form of airy members fair embar'd,
His ſpirits pure were ſubject to our fight. Fairfax, b, i.
2. To ſtop 5 to hinder by prohibition; to block up.
Tranſlating the mart, which commonly followed the Eng-
liſh cloth, unto Calis, he enlared all further trade for the
future. Bacon's Henry VII.
If this commerce 'twixt heav'n and earth were not
Embard, and all this traffick quite forgot,
She, for whoſe loſs we have lamented thus,
Would work more fully and pow'rfully on us.
EMBA'Reation. n.ſ.. [from embark.]
1. The ačt of putting on ſhipboard.
The French gentlemen were very ſolicitous for the embar-
cation of the army, and for the departure of the fleet. Clarendon.
2. The act of going on ſhipboard.
EMBA'RGo. n.ſ. [embargar, Spaniſh.] A prohibition to paſs;
in commerce, a ſtop put to trade. -
He knew that the ſubjects of Flanders drew ſo great com-
modity from the trade of England, as by embargo they would
ſoon wax weary of Perkin. Bacon's Henry VII.
After an embargo of our trading ſhips in the river of Bour-
deaux, and other points of ſovereign affront, there did ſuc-
ceed the action of Rhecz. - //otton.
I was not much concerned, in my own particular, for the
embargo which was laid upon it. Dryden's Preface to Cleomenes.
To EMBA'RK. v. a. [embarquer, French.]
1. To put on ſhipboard.
Of mankind, ſo numerous late,
All left, in one ſmall bottom fivam embark'd. Milt. P. I off.
The king had likewiſe provided a good fleet, and had cauſed
a body of three thouſand foot to be embarked on thoſe ſhips.
Clarendon, b. ii.
Straight to the ſhips Eneas took his way,
Embark'd his men, and ſkim'd along the ſea. Dryden's /En.
2. To engage another in any affair.
To EMBA/RK. v. n. -
1. To go on ſhipboard.
I ſhould with ſpeed embark,
And with their embaſſy return to Greece. A. Philips.
2. To engage in any affair.
To EMBA(RRASS. v. a. [embaraſſer, French J To perplex;
to diſtreſs; to entangle. -
I ſaw my friend a little embarraſſ, and turned away. Sp.67.
EMBA'RRAssMe NT. n.ſ.. [from embarraſ...] Perplexity; en-
tanglement.
Let your method be plain, that your hearers may run
through it without embarraſſment, and take a clear view of the
whole. //atts's Logick.
To EMBA’s E. v. a. [from baſe.]
1. To vitiate; to depauperate; to lower; to deprave; to
impair.
Grains are annual, ſo that the virtue of the ſeed is not
worn out; whereas in a tree it is embaſed by the ground. Bac.
I have no ſervice or ignoble end in my preſent labour,
which may, on either ſide, reſtrain or emloſ, the freedom of
my poor judgment. 11 otton.
I will rather chuſe to wear a crown of thorns, than to ex-
change that of gold for one of lead, whoſe embaſed flexibleneſs
ſhall be forced to bend, King Charles.
Dorne.
Donne.
*
**
*
E M B
A pleaſure high, rational, and angelical ; a pleaſure em-
baſed with no appendant ſting; but ſuch a one as being honey
in the mouth, never turns to gall or gravel in the belly. South.
2. To degrade; to vilify. -
Joy of my life, full oft for loving you
I bleſs my lot, that was ſo lucky plac'd ;
But then the more your own miſhap 1 rue,
That are ſo much by ſo mean love embas'd, Šfenſºr's Sonn.
EMBA'ss ApoR. m. ſ. [See AMBass Adour...] One ſent on a
publick meſſage. - -
Mighty Jove's embaſſador appear'd
With the ſame meſſage. Denham.
Myſelf, my king's embaſſador, will go. Dryd. Ind. Emp. ,
EMBA’ssa D R Ess. n.ſ. A woman ſent on a publick meſſage.
With fear the modeſt matron lifts her eyes,
And to the bright embaſſadreſs replies. Garth's Ovid.
E/MBAss AGE. Un.J. [It may be obſerved, that though our
E/MBA'ss Y. ; authors write almoſt indiſcriminately embaſſa-
dor or am' aſſador, embaſſage or ambaſſage; yet there is ſcarcely
an example of ambaſſy, all concurring to write embaſſy J.
1. A publick meſſage; a meſlage concerning buſineſs between
princes or ſtates. -
Freſh embaſſ, and ſuits,
Nor from the ſtate nor private friends, hereafter,
Will I lend ear to. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
When he was at Newcaſtle he ſent a ſolemn embaſſage unto
James III. king of Scotland, to treat and conclude a peace
with him. Bacon's Henry VII.
The pence polluted thus, a choſen band
He firſt commiſſions to the Latian land,
In threat'ning cºnbaſſy.
2. Any ſolemn meſſage.
He ſends the angels on embaſſis with his decrees.
3. An errand in an ironical ſenſe.
A bird was made fly with ſuch art to carry a written em-
baſſage among the ladies, that one might ſay, if a live bird,
how taught : If dead, how made? Sidney, b. ii.
Nimble miſchance, that art ſo light of foot,
Doth not thy embaſſage belong to ºne *
And am I laſt that know it. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
To EMBATTLE. v. a. [from battle ] To range in order or
array of battle.
The Engliſh are embattled;
To horſe! you gallant princes, ſtrait to horſe! Shakespeare.
I could drive her then from the ward of her purity, her
reputation, her marriage-vow, and a thouſand other her de-
fences, which now are too ſtrongly embattled againſt me.
Shakeſpeare's Merry //ives ºf I/indſor.
On their embattl’d ranks the waves return,
And overwhelm the war ! Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii.
Embattl’d nations ſtrive in vain
The hero's glory to reſtrain:
Streams arm'd with rocks, and mountains red with fire,
In vain againſt his force conſpire. Prior.
To EMBA’Y. v. a. [from baigner, to bathe, French.]
1. To bathe; to wet; to waſh.
In her lap a little babe did play;
His cruel ſport;
For in her ſtreaming blood he did embay
His little hands, and tender joints embrew. Fairy Queen.
Every ſenſe the humour ſweet embay'd,
And, ſlumb'ring ſoft, my heart did ſteal away. Fai. Qxcen.
2. [From bay J To incloſe in a bay ; to land-lock.
If that the Turkiſh fleet
Be not inſhelter'd and embay'd, they're drown'd. Shakespeare
To EMBE LLISH. v. a. [embellir, French..] To adorn; to
beautify; to grace with ornaments; to decorate.
- How much more beauteous had the fountain been,
Embeliſh’d with her firſt created green;
Where cryſtal ſtreams through living turf had run,
Contented with an urn of native ſtone. Dryden’s juvena'.
The names of the figures that embelliſhed the diſcourſes of
thoſe who underſtood the art of ſpeaking, are not the art and
ſkill of ſpeaking well. Locke.
That which was once the moſt beautiful ſpot of Italy, co-
vered with palaces, embelliſhed by emperors, and celebrated by
poets, has now nothing to ſhew but ruins. Addiſon on Italy.
EMBE’ll is HMENT. n.f. [from embelliſh.] Ornament; adven-
titious beauty; decoration; adſcitious grace; any thing that
confers the power of pleaſing.
Cultivate the wild licentious ſavage
With wiſdom, diſcipline, and liberal arts,
The embelliſhments of life. Addison's Cato.
Apparitions, viſions, and intercourſes of all kinds between
the dead and the living, are the frequent and familiar embelliſh-
ments of thoſe pious romances, the legends of the Romiſh
church. - Atterbury's Sermons.
EMBERING.. n.ſ.. . The ember days. A word uſed by old au-
thors, now obſolete.
For cauſes good ſo many ways,
Keep emb'rings well, and faſting days;
Dryden's Án.
Taylor.
~
What
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 346</div><p class="Text">E M B
E M B º
What law commands we ought to obey, -
For Friday, Saturn, and Wedneſday. Tuff. Huſ for june.
E/M BERs. n.ſ. without a ſingular. [a-mynia, Saxon, aſhes;
einmyria, Iſlandick, hot aſhes or cinders..] Hot cinders; aſhes
not yet extinguiſhed.
Take hot embers, and put them about a bottle filled with
new beer, almoſt to the very neck: let the bottle be well
ſtopped, leſt it fly out; and continue it, renewing the embers
every day for the ſpace of ten days. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Or if the air will not permit,
Some ſtill removed place will fit,
While glowing embers through the room
Teach light to counterfeit a gloom.
While thus heav'n's higheſt counſels, by the low
Footſteps of their effects, he trac'd too well,
He toſt his troubled eyes, embers that glow
Now with new rage, and wax too hot for hell.
He ſaid, and roſe, as holy zeal inſpires;
He rakes hot embers, and renews the fires. Dryden's Virgil.
E/MRE Rweek. n.ſ. [The original of this word has been much
controverted: ſome derive it from embers or aſhes ſtrewed by
penitents on their heads; but Nelſon decides in favour of
Marſhal, who derives it from ynbren or embren, a courſe or
circumvolution.] A week in which an ember day falls.
The ember days at the four ſeaſons are the Wedneſday,
Friday, and Saturday after the firſt Sunday in Lent, the feaſt
of Pentecoſt, September 14, December 13. Comm. Prayer.
Stated times appointed for faſting are Lent, and the four
ſeaſons of the year called emberweeks. A liffe's Parergon.
To EMBE'ZZLE. v. a. [This word ſeems corrupted by an
ignorant pronunciation from imbecil.]
1. To appropriate by breach of truſt; to turn what is intruſted
in his hands to his own uſe.
He had embezzled the king's treaſure, and extorted money
by way of loan from all men. Hayward.
2. To waſte; to ſwallow up in riot.
When thou haſt embezzl'd all thy ſtore,
Where's all thy father left? Dryden's Perſ. Sat. vi.
EMBE/zzl EMENT. m. ſ. [from embezzle.]
1. The act of appropriating to himſelf that which is received
in truſt for another.
2. The thing appropriated.
To EMELA'ze. v. a. [blaſanner, French.]
1. To adorn with glittering embelliſhments. *
Th’ unſought diamonds
Would ſo emblaze the forehead of the deep,
And ſo beſtud with ſtars, that they below
Milton.
Craſhaw.
Would grow inur'd to light. Milton.
No weeping orphan ſaw his father's ſtores
Our ſhrines irradiate, or emblaze the floors. Pope.
2. To blaſon; to paint with enſigns armorial.
Nor ſhall this blood be wiped from thy point,
But thou ſhalt wear it as a herald's coat, -
Tº emblaze the honour which thy maſter got. Shakespeare H. VI.
He from the glittering ſtaff unfurl’d
Th’ imperial enſign, ſtreaming to the wind,
With gems and golden luſtre rich emblaz'd,
Seraphick arms and trophies. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
To EMBLA’zoN. v a. [blaſºmmer, French.]
1. To adorn with figures of heraldry; to grace with enſigns
armorial. -
2. To deck in glaring colours; to ſet out pompouſly to ſhew.
We find Auguſtus, for ſome petty conqueſt, emblazoned by
the poets to the higheſt pitch. Hakewill on Providence.
E/MBLEM. n. ſ. [iu.3anua.] -
1. Inlay; enamel; anything inſerted into the body of another.
2. An occult repreſentation; an alluſive pićture; a typical de-
ſignation. -
She had all the royal makings of a queen,
The rod, and bird of peace, and all ſuch emblems,
Laid nobly on her. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
If you draw your beaſt in an emblem, ſhew a landſcape of
the country natural to the beaſt. Peacham on Drawing.
Gentle Thames,
Thy mighty maſter's emblem, in whoſe face
Sate meekneſs, heighten’d with majeſtick grace. Denham.
He is indeed a proper emblem of knowledge and action,
being all head and paws. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 114.
To E/MBLEM. v. a. [from the noun..] To repreſent in an
occult or alluſive manner.
The primitive fight of elements doth fitly emblem that of
opinions.
EMBLEMA(TICAL. -
EMBLEMATIck. {ad. [from emblem.] -
1. Compriſing an emblem ; alluſive ; occultly repreſentative.
In the well fram'd models,
With emblematick ſkill and myſtick order,
Thou ſhew'dſt where tow’rs on battlements ſhould riſe,
Where gates ſhould open, or where walls ſhould compaſs.
Glanv. Scepſ c. 27.
Prior.
The poets contribute to the explication of reverſes purely
emblematical, or when the perſons are allegorical, Adilſon.
2. Dealing in emblems; uſing emblems. ,
By tongue and pudding to our friends explain
* What does your emblematick worſhip mean. Priºr.
EMPLEMA"tically. adv. [from emblematical J In the man-
ner of emblems; alluſively; with occult repreſentation. .
Others have ſpoken emblematically and hierogliphically, as
to the Egyptians; and the phoenix was the hierogliphick of
the ſun. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 10.
He took a great ſtone, and put it up under the oak, emºle-
matically joining the two great elements of maſonry. Swift.
EMBLE"MAT 1st. n.ſ.. [from emblem.] Writers or inventers
of emblems.
Theſe fables are ſtill maintained by ſymbolical writers, em-
blematiſts, and heralds. Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. i. c. 9.
EMBo LISM. n.ſ. ſizºidaº.]
1. Intercalation; inſertion of days or years to produce regula-
rity and equation of time.
The civil conſtitutions of the year were after different
manners in ſeveral nations; ſome uſing the ſun's year, but in
divers faſhions; and ſome following the moon, finding out
emboliſms or equations, even to the addition of whole months,
to make all as even as they could. Holder on I ime.
2. The time inſerted; intercalatory time.
E/M Bolus. n.ſ.. [iaºs.] Any thing inſerted and acting in
another, as the ſucker in a pump.
Our members make a ſort of an hydraulick engine, in
which a chemical liquor, reſembling blood, is driven through
elaſtick channels by the force of an embolus, like the heart.
A buthnºt and Pope's Mart. Scriblerus.
To EMBO'SS. v. a. [from baſe, a protuberance, French.J.
1. To form with protuberances; to cover with ſomething riſing
into lumps or bunches.
Timon hath made his everlaſting manſion
Upon the beached verge of the ſalt flood;
Which once a day, with his emboſſed froth,
The turbulent ſurge ſhall cover. Shakeſpeare's Timn.
º Thou art a bile,
A plague fore, or emboſſed carbuncle, -
In my corrupted blood. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Botches and blains muſt all his fleſh embºſ,
And all his people. AMilton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xii.
All croud in heaps, as at a night-alarm
The bees drive out upon each others backs,
Tº emboſs their hives in cluſters. Dryden's Don Sclaſſian.
2. To engrave with relief, or riſing work.
Then o'er the lofty gate his art embºſs'd
Androgeo's death, and off'rings to his ghoſt. Dryden's Wirg.
3. [from emboiſter, French, to incloſe in a box.] To incloſe;
to include; to cover. -
And in the way, as ſhe did weep and wail,
A knight her met, in mighty arms emboſs'd. Fairy Queen.
4. [emboſcare, Italian.] To incloſe in a thicket.
Like that ſelf-begotten bird
In th’Arabian woods emboſt. Milton's Agoniſter.
5. To hunt hard.
When a deer is hard run, and foams at the mouth, he is
ſaid to be emboſ a dog alſo, when he is ſtrained with hard
running, eſpecially upon hard ground, will have his knces
ſwelled, and then he is ſaid to be emboſ’, from boſſe, French,
a tunnoum. 4????ier.
Oh, he is more mad
Than Telamon for his ſhield; the boar of Theſſaly
Was never ſo emboſł. Shakeſpeare's Ant. and Cleopatra.
We have almoſt emhoff him: you ſhall ſee his fall to-
night. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
EM Bo'ssMENT. n.ſ [from embºſs.]
1. Anything ſtanding out from the reſt; jut; eminence.
I wiſh alſo, in the very middle, a fair mount, with three
aſcents and alleys, enough for four to walk a-breaſt; which I
would have to be perfect circles, without any bulwarks or em-
boſſments. Bacon's Eſſays, Civ. and Moral.
2. Relief; riſing work.
They are at a loſs about the word pendentis; ſome fancy it
expreſſes only the great emboſinent of the figure, others believe
it hung off the helmet in alto relievo. Addison on Italy.
To EM Bo'tt LE. v. a. [bouteille, French..] . To include in
bottles; to bottle.
Stirom, firmeſt fruit
Embottled, long as Priamean Troy
Withſtood the Greeks, endures. Philips.
To EM Boſwel. v. a. [from bowel J. To eviſcerate; to deprive
of the entrails; to exenterate.
The ſchools,
Em/cwelled of their doćtrine, have left off
The danger to itſelf. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
Emb well'd will I ſee thee by and by ;
*Till then, in blood, by noble Percy lye. Shakespeare Henry IV.
The roar
Embowel'd with outrageous noiſe the air,
And all her entrails tore. Milton’s Paradiſe Loſt, b. vi.
Foſſils and minerals that th' embowel dearth A
Diſplays. -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 347</div><p class="Text">E M B
E. M. E.
To EMBRACE. v. a. [embraſſer, French.)
I. To hold fondly in the arms; to ſqueeze in kindneſs.
Embrace again, my ſons be foes no more;
Nor ſtain your country with her children's gore. Dryden.
2. To ſeize ardently or eagerly ; to lay hold on; to welcome ;
to accept willingly anything offered.
I take it, your own buſineſs calls on you,
And you embrace th' occaſion to depart. Shakeſpeare.
At firſt, her mother earth ſhe holdeth dear,
* And doth embrace the world, and worldly things. Davies.
They who are repreſented by the wiſe virgins, embraced the
profeſſion of the Chriſtian religion, as the fooliſh virgins alſo
had done. Tillotſon's Sermons.
3. To comprehend ; to take in; to encompaſs; to encircle.
4. To compriſe ; to incloſe; to contain.
Low at his feet a ſpacious plain is plac'd,
Between the mountain and the ſtream embrac'd, Denham.
5. To admit; to receive.
Fenton, heav'n give thee joy!
What cannot be eſchew'd, muſt be embraced. Shakeſpeare.
If a man can be fully aſſured of any thing, without having
examined, what is there that he may not embrace for truth :
Locke.
6. To find; to take.
Fleance, his ſon,
Whoſe abſence is no leſs material to me
Than is his father's, muſt embrace the fate
Of that dark hour. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
7. To ſqueeze in a hoſtile manner.
To EMERA'ce. v. n. To join in an embrace.
Let me embrace with old Vincentio;
And wander we to ſee thy honeſt ſon,
who will of thy arrival be full joyous. # Shakespeare.
EM brace. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] s
1. Claſp; fond preſſure in the arms; hug.
Thames, the moſt lov'd of all the ocean's ſons
By his old fire, to his embraces runs. Denham.
2. An hoſtile ſqueeze; cruſh.
EMERA'ceMent. n. ſ. [from embrace.]
1. Claſp in the arms; hug; embrace.
Thus death becomes a rival to us all,
And hopes with foul embracements her to get,
In whoſe decay virtue's fair ſhrine muſt fall. Sidney
There cheriſhing one another with dear, though chaſte em-
bracements, with ſweet, though cold kiſſes, it might ſeem that
love was come to play him there without darts. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Comprehenſion.
Nor can her wide embracements filled be. Davieſ.
3. State of being contained; incloſure.
The parts in man's body eaſily reparable, as ſpirits, blood,
and fleſh, die in the embracement of the parts hardly reparable,
as bones, nerves, and membranes. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
4. Conjugal endearment.
I would freelier rejoice in that abſence, wherein he won
honour, than in the embracements of his bed, where he would
ſhew moſt love. Shakeſpeare's Corio'anus.
EMERA'cer. n.ſ.. [from embrace.] The perſon embracing.
Yet are they the greateſt embracers of pleaſure of any other
upon earth; and they eſteem of pearls as pebbles, ſo º
ſatisfy their guſt, in point of pleaſure or revenge. owel.
EMBRA'sure. m. ſ. [embraſure, French. An aperture in the
wall, through which the cannon is pointed; battlement.
To EMBRA’ve. v. a. [from brave.] To decorate; to embel-
liſh; to deck; to grace; to adorn.
So, both agree their bodies to engrave;
The great earth's womb they open to the ſky,
And, with ſad cypreſs, ſeemly it embrave. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
To E'MBROCATE. v. a. [i.ºgix...] To rub any part diſ-
eaſed with medicinal liquors.
I returned her a glaſs with oil of roſes and vinegar, to em-
brocate her arm. Wiſeman on Inflammations.
EM brocation. n.ſ.. [from embrocate.]
1. The aët of rubbing any part diſeaſed with medicinal liquors
or ſpirits.
2. The lotion with which any diſeaſed part is waſhed or em-
brocated.
We endeavoured to eaſe by diſcutient and emollient cata-
plaſms, and embrocations of various ſorts. Jºſeman's Surgery.
To EMBRO'IDER. v. a. [broder, French.] To border with
ornaments; to decorate with figured work; to diverſify with
| needlework; to adorn a ground with raiſed figures.
- Embroider'd ſo with flowers it had ſtood,
That it became a garden of a wood. Waller.
Let no virgin be allowed to receive her lover, but in a ſuit
of her own embroidering. Spectator, Nº. 606.
Embroider'd purple clothes the golden beds;
This ſlave the floor, and that the table ſpreads. Pope.
EM B Ro'IDERER. m.ſ.. [from embroider.] One that adorns
cloaths with needlework.
Blue filk and purple, the work of the embroiderer. Eccluſ.
EMBRo'iDERY. n.ſ.. [from ex-broider.]
1. Figures raiſed upon a ground; variegated needlework.
Write,
In emrald tuffs, flow'rs purſled, blue and white,
Like ſaphire, pearl, in rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee. Shakeſpeare.
Laces and embrºideries are more coſtly than either warm or
comely. Bacon's Advice to filliers.
Next theſe a youthful train their vows expreſs'd,
With feathers crown'd, with gay embroidery dreſs'd. Pºpe.
2. Variegation; diverſity of colours.
If the natural embroidery of the meadows were helpt and
improved by art, a man might make a pretty landſkip of his
own poſſeſſions Spectator, Nº. 414.
To EMBro'il. v. a. [brouiller, French.] To diſturb; to con-
fuſe; to diſtraćt; to throw into commotion; to involve in
troubles by diffenſion and diſcord.
I had no paſſion, deſign, or preparation to embroil my king-
dom in a civil war. Ring Charles.
Rumour next, and chance,
And tumult and confuſion, all embroil'd, -
And diſcord with a thouſand various mouths. Milt. P. Loft.
When ſhe found her venom ſpread ſo far,
The royal houſe embroil'd in civil war,
Rais'd on her duſky wings ſhe cleaves the ſkies. Dryden.
2. In the following paſſage the word ſeems improperly uſed for
broil or burn.
That knowledge, for which we boldly attempt to rifle
God's cabinet, ſhould, like the coal from the altar, ſerve only
to embroil and conſume the ſacrilegious invaders. Dec. of Piety.
To EMBRO'THE L. v. a. [brothel, brodel.] To incloſe in a
brothel.
Men, which chuſe
Law pračtice for mere gain, boldly repute,
Worſe than embrothel'd ſtrumpets proſtitute. Donne.
f
#::::. ºn ſ. [ipºvº.]
1. The offspring yet unfiniſhed in the womb.
The bringing forth of living creatures may be accelerated,
if the embryo ripeneth and perfecteth ſooner. Bacon's Na. Hiſt.
An excluſion before conformation, before the birth can
bear the name of the parent, or be ſo much as properly called
an embryon. Brown's Vulgar Errou's, b. iii. c. 6.
The earth was form’d, but in the womb as yet
Of waters, embryon immature involv'd
Appear'd not. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. vii. l. 277:
In that dark womb are the ſigns and rudiments of an embryo
world. Burner's Theory ºf the Earth.
When the crude embryo careful nature breeds,
See how ſhe works, and how her work proceeds. Blackmore:
While the promis'd fruit
Lies yet a little embryo, unperceiv'd
Within its crimſon folds. Thomſon's Spring, l. Ito.
2. The ſtate of any thing yet not fit for production; yet un-
finiſhed.
The company little ſuſpected what a noble work I had then
in embryo. - Swift.
EME. m.ſ. ſeame, Saxon.] Unkle. Now obſolete.
Whilſt they were young, Caffibelan their eme,
Was by the people choſen in their ſtead;
Who on him took the royal diadem,
And goodly well it long time governed. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
EME'NDABLE. adj. [emendo, Laºn..] Capable of emenda-
tion; corrigible. t
EMENdatios. n.ſ. [emendo, Latin.]
1. Correction; alteration of any thing from worſe to better.
The eſſence and the relation of every thing in being, is
fitted, beyond any emendation, for its action and uſe; and ſhews
it to proceed from a mind of the higheſt underſtanding. Grew.
2. An alteration made in the text by verbal criticiſm.
EMENDA’tor. n.ſ.. [emendo, Latin.] A corrector; an im-
prover; an alterer for the better.
E'MERALD. m. ſ. [émeraude, French ; ſmaragdus, Latin.] A
green precious ſtone.
The emerald is evidently the ſame with the antient ſma-
ragdus; and, in its moſt perfect ſtate, is perhaps the moſt beau-
tiful of all the gems: it is found from the ſixteenth of an inch
in diameter, to the ſize of a walnut. The rough emerald is
uſually of a very bright and naturally poliſhed ſurface, and is
ever of a pure and beautiful green, without the admixture of
any other colour. It is of all the various ſhades of green,
from the deepeſt to the paleſt, and doubtleſs is found at times
whºlly colourleſs; but then it is eſteemed, by our jewellers, a
white ſaphire. The oriental emerald is of the hardneſs of
the ſaphire and ruby, and is ſecond only to the diamond in
luſtre and brightneſs: they are only found in the kingdom of
Cambay. The American, called by our jewellers oriental
emeralds, are found in Peru, of the hardneſs of the garnet:
the European are ſomewhat ſofter, but harder than cryſtal,
and found in Sileſia. The coloured cryſtals, ſold as occiden-
tal emeralds, are from the mines of Germany. 1 ill ºn Foſſ.
Do you not ſee the graſs how in colour they excel the
emera'd ' Sidney.
The emerald is a bright graſs green: it is found in fiſſures
of rocks, along with copper ores. }}oodward's Faffils.
- Nor
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 348</div><p class="Text">E. M. E.
*A
E M I
ºt,
Nor deeper verdure dies the robe of Spring,
When firſt ſhe gives it to the ſouthern gale,
Than the green enerald ſhows. Thomſon's Summer, l. 15c,
To EME'RGE. v. n. [emergo, Latin.]
1. To riſe out of anything in which it is covered.
They emerged, to the upper part of the ſpirit of wine, as
much of them as lay immerſed in the ſpirit. Boyle.
The mountains emerged, and became dry land again, when the
waters, after their violent agitation was abated, retired into the
lower places. Burner's Theºry of the Earth.
Thetis, not unmindful of her ſon,
Emerging from the deep, to beg her boon,
Purſu'd their track.
2. To iſſue; to proceed.
If the priſin was turned about its axis that way, which
made the rays emerge more obliquely out of the ſecond refračt-
ing ſurface of the priſm, the image ſoon became an inch or
two longer or more. Newton's Opt.
3. To riſe; to mount from a ſtate of depreſſion or obſcurity;
to riſe into view.
Darkneſs, we ſee, emerges into light;
And ſhining ſuns deſcend to ſable night. Dryden's Fables.
When, from dewy ſhade emerging bright,
Aurora ſtreaks the ſky with orient light,
Let each deplore his dead. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv. l. 470.
Then from antient gloom emerg'd
A riſing world. Thomſon's Summer, l. 995.
#::::::: }nſ. [from emerge.] -
1. The act of riſing out of any fluid by which it is covered.
We have read of a tyrant, who tried to prevent the emer-
gence of murdered bodies. Brown's Wulgar Errouri, b. iv. s. 1.
2. The act of riſing into view.
The emergency of colours, upon coalition of the particles of
ſuch bodies, as were neither of them of the colour of that
mixture whereof they are ingredients, is very well worth our
attentive obſervation. Boyle on Colours.
The white colour of all refračted light, at its very firſt
emergence, where it appears as white as before its incidence, is
compounded of various colours. Newton's Opt.
3. Any ſudden occaſion; unexpected caſualty.
Moſt of our rarities have been found out by caſual emer-
gency, and have been the works of time and chance rather
than of philoſophy. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 21.
4. Preſſing neceflity. A ſenſe not proper. -
In any caſe of emergency, he would employ the whole wealth
of his empire, which he had thus amaſſed together in his
ſubterraneous exchequer. Addiſon's Freeholder,
EME’RGENt. adj. [from emerge.]
1. Riſing out of that which overwhelms or obſcuresult.
Love made my emergent fortune once more look
Above the main, which now ſhall hit the ſtars. Ben, johnſ
The man that is once hated, both his good and his evil
deeds oppreſs him; he is not eaſily emergent. Ben. johnſon.
2. Riſing into view, or notice.
Immediately the mountains huge appear
Emergent, and their broad bare backs unheave
Into the clouds, their tops aſcend the ſky. Milt. Par. Loft.
3. Proceeding or iſſuing from any thing.
The ſtoicks held a fatality, and a fixed unalterable courſe
of events; but then they held alſo, that they fell out by a ne-
ceſſity emergent from and inherent in the things themſelves,
which God himſelf could not alter. South's Sermons.
4. Sudden; unexpectedly caſual.
All the lords declared, that, upon any emergent occaſion,
they would mount their ſervants upon their horſes. Clarendon.
EME Rods. Un.ſ.. [corrupted by ignorant pronunciation from
E/MERoi Ds. } hemorrhoids, a poés, J. Painful ſwellings of
the hemorrhoidal veins; piles.
He deſtroyed them, and ſmote them with emerodº. 1 Sa. v.
EME’Rsion. n.ſ.. [from emerge.] The time when a ſtar, having
been obſcured by its too near approach to the ſun, appears
a Qalth.
"The time was in the heliacal emerſion, when it becomes at
greateſt diſtance from the ſun. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv.
F'MERY. n.ſ.. [ſmyris, Latin; eſmeril, French.J
Emery is an iron ore, confiderably rich. It is uſually of a
duſky browniſh red on the ſurface; but, when broken, of a
fine bright iron grey, but not without ſome tinge of redneſs,
and is ſpangled all over with ſhining ſpecks. It is alſo ſome-
times very red, and then contains veins of gold. It is found
in the iſland of Guernſey, in Tuſcany, and many parts of
Germany. It has a near relation to the magnet. Emery has
been recommended by the ancients as an abſtergent, but it
muſt be uſed with great caution. It is prepared by grinding
in mills; and the lapidaries cut the ordinary gems on their
wheels by ſprinkling the wetted powder over them; but it
will not cut diamonds. It is uſeful in cleaning and poliſhing
ſteel. Hill's Mat. A/ed.
EMETICAL. U adj. [ºw.] Having the quality of provoking
EMETKO.K. vomits.
Various are the temperaments and operations of herbs;
Vol. I.
Dryden's Homer.
ſome purgative, ſome emeticſ, and ſome ſudorifick. Hale.
EME"tically. adv. [from emetical.] In ſuch a manner as to
provoke to vomit.
It has been complained of, that preparations of ſilver have
produced violent vomits; whereas we have not obſerved duly
refined ſilver to work emetically, even in women and girls. Boyle.
EMIcA"tion, n.ſ. ſemicatio, Latin.] Sparkling; flying off in
ſmall particles, as ſprightly liquors.
Iron, in aqua fortis, will fall into ebullition with noiſe and
emication, as alſo a craſs and fumid exhalation. Brown.
EMI’ction. m. ſ. [from emicium, Latin.] Urine; what is
voided by the urinary paſſages. -
Gravel and ſtone grind away the fleſh, and effuſe the
blood apparent in a ſanguine emiction. Harvey on Cºnſumptions.
To EMIGRATE. v. n. [emigro, Latin.] To remove from
one place to another. -
EMIGRATION. m. ſ. [from emigrate.] Change of habitation;
removal from one place to another.
We find the originals of many kingdoms either by vićtories,
E or by emigrations, or inteſtine commotions. ' Hale.
É. }nſ [eminentia, Latin.]
1. Loftineſs; height.
2. Summit; higheſt part.
Mountains abound with different vegetables, every ver-
tex or eminency affording new kinds. Ray on the Creation.
3. A part riſing above the reſt. -
They muſt be ſmooth, almoſt imperceptible to the touch,
and without either eminence or cavities. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
4. A place where one is expoſed to general notice.
A ſatyr or libel on one of the common ſtamp, never meets
with that reception as what is aimed at a perſon whoſe merit
places him upon an eminence, and gives him a more conſpi-
cuous figure. - Addison's Speciator, Nº. 256.
5. Exaltation; conſpicuouſneſs; ſtate of being expoſed to view;
reputation; celebrity; fame; preferment; greatneſs.
You've too a woman's heart, which ever yet
Affected eminence, wealth, ſovereignty. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Alterations are attributed to the powerfulleſt under princes,
where the eminency of one obſcureth the reſt. //ction.
He deſerv’d no ſuch return
From me, whom he created what I was,
In that bright eminence; and with his good
Upbraided none. Milton's Paradiſe Lo?, b. iv. l. 44.
Where men cannot arrive to any eminency of eſtate, yet
religion makes a compenſation, by teaching content. Tilotſºn.
Theſe two were men of eminency, of learning as well as
piety. Stillingfieet's Def ºf Diſc. on Rom, Idol.
6. Supreme degree. -
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoy'ſt,
And pure thou wert created, we enjo
In eminence. Milton's Paradſe Loſt, b. viii. l. 624.
7. Notice; diſtinétion. -
Let your remembrance ſtill apply to Banquo;
Preſent him eminence both with eye and tongue. Shakespeare Mack.
8. A title given to cardinals.
EMINENT. adj. [eminens, Latin.]
1. High ; lofty.
Thou haſt built unto thee an eminent place. Ezek. xvi. 24.
2. Dignified; exalted.
Rome for your ſake ſhall puſh her conqueſts on,
And bring new titles home from nations won, }
To dignify ſo eminent a ſon. Dryden's juv. Sat. 8.
3. Conſpicuous; remarkable.
Satan, in geſture proudly eminent,
Stood like a tow’r. * Miltºn.
She is eminent for a ſincere piety in the practice of religion.
Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 21.
E/MINENTLY. adv. [from eminent.] -
1. Conſpicuouſly ; in a manner that attracts abſervation.
- - Thy love, which elſe
So eminently never had been known. Milton's Parad. Lºſt.
Lady, thät in the prime of earlieſt youth,
Wiſely has ſhun'd the broad way and the green,
And with thoſe few art eminently ſeen, *
That labour up the hill of heav'nly truth. Milton,
Such as thou haſt ſolemnly elected,
With gifts and graces eminently adorn'd,
To ſome great work. Aliſten's Agºniſłcs, l. 678. ,
2. In a high degree. - - -
All men are equal in their judgment of what is eminently.
beſt. - Dryden.
That fimplicity, without which no human performance can
arrive to perfection, is no where more eminently uſeful than in
this. Swift.
F'Missa R Y. m. ſ. ſemiffarius, Latin.] -
1. One ſent out on private meſſages ; a ſpy; a ſecret agent.
- Clifford, now become the ſtate informer, was an emiſſary
and ſpy of the king's, and he fled over into Flanders with
his conſent and privity. Bacon's Henry VII.
You ſhall neither eat nor ſleep,
No, nor forth your window peep,
7 Z º With
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 349</div><p class="Text">E. M. O
E M P
With your emiſſary eye, -
To fetch in the forms go by. Ben, johnſºn's Underwood.
The Jeſuits ſend over emiſſaries, with inſtructions to per-
ſonate themſelves members of the ſeveral ſects amongſt us. Swift.
2. One that emits or ſends out. A technical ſenſe,
Wherever there are emiſſaries, there are abſorbent veſſels in
the ſkin; and, by the abſorbent veſſels, mercury will paſs into
the blood, Arbuthnot cn Aliments.
EMI'ssion. n.ſ. ſemiſſio, Latin.] The act of ſending out;
Vent.
Tickling cauſeth laughter: the cauſe may be the emiſſion of
the ſpirits, and ſo of the breath by a flight from titillation. Bac.
Though it might reſtrain their diſperſion, it could not their
populofity, which neceſſarily requireth tranſmigration and
emiſſion of colonies. Brown's Vulgar Errour, b. i. c. 6.
Affection, in the ſtate of innocence, was happily pitched
upon its right object ; it flamed up in direct fervours of devo-
tion, to God, and in collateral emiſſions of charity to its
º, South's Sermons.
Çover them with glaſſes; but upon all warm and benign
e'ſſiºn of the ſun, and ſweet ſhowers, give them air. Evejn.
To EMI'T. v. a. [emitto, Latin.]
1. To ſend forth; to let go; to give vent to.
Theſe baths continually emit a manifeſt and very ſenſible
heat; nay, ſome of them have been obſerved, at ſome times,
to ſend forth an actual and viſible flame //codward's V, Hiſt.
The ſoil, being fruitful and rich, emits ſteams, conſiſting of
volatile and active parts. Arbuthnot on Air.
2. To let fly; to dart.
Pay ſacred rev'rence to Apollo's ſong,
Leſt, wrathful, the far-ſhooting god emit
His fatal arrows. Prior.
3. To iſſue out juridically. -
. That a citation be valid, it ought to be decreed and emitted
by the judge's authority, and at the inſtance of the party.
- Ayliffe's Parergon.
EMME'NAGoGues. n.ſ.. [iuania and 3,2..] Medicines that
promote the courſes; and theſe do this, either by giving a
greater force to the blood in its circulation, whereby its mo-
mentum againſt the veſſels is increaſed; or by making it thin-
ner,whereby it will more eaſily paſs through any outlets. Quin.
Emmenagogues are ſuch as produce a plethora, or fulneſs of the
veſſels, conſequently ſuch as ſtrengthen the organs of digeſtion,
ſo as to make good blood. Arbuthnot on Diet.
EMMET. n.ſ. [æmerce, Saxon.] . An ant; a piſmire.
When cedars to the ground fall down by the weight of
an emmet,
Or when a rich ruby's juſt price be the worth of a walnut.
Sidney, b, i.
To EMME'w. v. a. [from mew J. To mew or coop up.
This outward ſainted deputy,
Whoſe ſettled viſage and delib'rate word,
Nips youth i' th' head, and follies doth emmew,
As faulcon d th the fowl, is yet a devil. Shakesp. Meaſ for Meaſ.
To Em Move. v. a. [emmouvºir, French..] To excite; to rouſe;
to put into emotion.
One day, when him high courage did emmove,
He pricked forth. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. 1. ſtan. 50.
EM 'll NT. adj. [emoliens, Latin.J Softening; ſuppling.
Barley is emollient, moiſtening, and expectorating Arbuthn.
Drurcticks are decoètions, emulſions, and oils of emollient
vegetables, ſo far as they relax the urinary paſſages: ſuch as
relax ought to be tried before ſuch as ſtimulate. Arbuthnot.
EMo'lli ENTs. n.ſ. Such things as ſheath and ſoften the
aſperities of the humours, and relax and ſupple the ſolids at
the ſame time. $2uincy.
Emolients ought to be taken in open air, to hinder them
from perſpiring, and on empty ſtomachs. Arbuthnet.
EMolli’t ſon, n.f. [emolitio, Latin.] The aët of ſoftening. '
Laſſitude is remedied by bathing, or anointing with oil and
warm water: the cauſe is, for that all laſſitude is a kind of
cºntuſion and compreſſion of the parts, and bathing and
anointing give a relaxation or emolition. Bacon.
Powerful menſtruums are made for its emolition, whereby
it may receive the tinéture of minerals. Brown's Wulgar Err.
£Mo'LUMENT. n.ſ. [emolumentum, Latin.] Profit; advan-
tage.
i. them conſult how politick they were, for a temporal
emolument to throw away eternity. South's Sermons.
Nothing gives greater ſatisfaction than the ſenſe of having
diſpatched a great deal of buſineſs to publick emolument. Tatler.
EMo'NGst, prep. [ſo written by Spenſer.] Among.
The merry birds of every ſort,
Chaunted aloud their chearful harmony;
And made emongſt themſelves a ſweet conſort,
That quick’ned the dull ſprit with muſical comfort. F. Qu.
£Moºrios. m. ſ. [emotion, French..] Diſturbance of mind;
vehemence of paſſion, or pleaſing or painful.
I will appeal to any man, who has read this poet, whether
he finds not the natural emotion of the ſame paſſion in himſelf,
which the poet deſcribes in his feigned perſons? Dryden.
Thoſe rocks and oaks that ſuch emotion felt, -
Were rural maids whom Orpheus taught to melt. Granv.
To EMPA'LR. v. a. [empaler, French.]
1. To fence with a pale. -
How happy's he, which hath due place aſſign'd
Tº his beaſts, and diſaforeſted his mind 2
Empal’d himſelf to keep them out, net in ;
Can ſow, and dares truſt corn, where they have been. Doñn.
2. To fortify.
All that dwell near enemies empale villages, to ſave them-
ſelves from ſurprize. Raleigh's Eſſays.
The Engliſh empaled themſelves with their pikes, and there-
with bare off their enemies. * Hayward.
3. To incloſe; ſhut in.
Keep yourſelves in breath,
And when I have the bloody Hector found,
Empale him with your weapons round about. Shakeſpeare.
They have empal'd within a zodiack
The free-born ſun, and keep twelve ſigns awake
To watch his ſteps; the Goat and Crab controul
And fright him back. Donne.
•. Thank my charms,
I now empale her in my arms. Cleaveland.
Impenetrable, empal'd with circling fire,
Yet unconſum’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ii. 1. 647.
4. To put to death by ſpitting on a ſtake fixed upright.
Who can bear this, reſolve to be empal'd?
His ſkin flead off, and roaſted yet alive? Southern's Oroonok.
Let them each be broken on the rack;
Then, with what life remains, empal’d, and left
To writhe at leiſure round the bloody ſtake. Addison Cato.
Nay, I don't believe they will be contented with hanging;
they talk of empaling, or breaking on the wheel. Arbuthnot.
EMPANNEL. n.ſ. [from panne, French.] The writing or
entering the names of a jury into a parchment ſchedule, or
roll of paper, by the ſheriff, which he has ſummoned to ap-
pear for the performance of ſuch publick ſervice as juries are
employed in. Cowel.
Who can expect any more upright verdićts from ſuch
packed, ſuch corrupt juries : Why may we not be allowed to
make exceptions againſt this ſo incompetent empannel 2
- Decay of Chriſtian Piety.
To EMPA'NNel. v.a. [from the noun..] To ſummon to ſerve
on a jury. A law term.
I ſhall not need to empannel a jury either of moraliſts or
divines, every man's own breaſt ſufficiently inſtructing him.
Government of the Tongue, ſ. 8:
EMPA'RLANce. n.ſ.. [from parler, French..] It ſignifieth, in
common law, a deſire or petition in court of a day to pauſe
what is beſt to do; and it is ſometimes uſed for the conference
of a jury in the cauſe committed to them. Cowel.
EMPA's M. n.ſ.. [wwazaw. J A powder to correót the bad
ſcent of the body. -
To EMPA'ssion. v. a. [from paſſion.] To move with paſſion;
to affect ſtrongly ; to throw off from equanimity.
Unto my eyes ſtrange ſhows preſented were,
Pićturing that which I in mind embrac'd,
That yet thoſe fights empaſſion me full near. Spenſer.
So, ſtanding, moving, or to height upgrown,
The tempter, all empaſſion'd, thus began. Milt. Par. Loft.
To EMPE'ople. v. a. [from people.] To form into a people
or communitv.
H. wonder'd much, and 'gan enquire
What ſtately building durſt ſo high extend
Her lofty towers unto the ſtarry ſphere,
And what unknown nation there empeopled were. F. Queen.
E’MPER ess. n.ſ.. [from emperour, now written empreſs.]
1. A woman inveſted with imperial power.
Long, long, may you on earth our empereſ, reign,
E’re you in heaven a glorious angel ſtand. Davies.
2. The queen of an emperour.
Lavinia will I make my empereſ,
Rome's royal miſtreſs, miſtreſs of my heart. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
EMPEROUR. m. ſ. [empereur, French; imperator, Latin.] A
monarch of title and dignity ſuperiour to a king: as, the em-
perour of Germany.
Charles the emperour,
Under pretence to ſee the queen his aunt,
Makes viſitation. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
E/MPERY. m. ſ. [empire, French; imperium, Latin.] Empire;
fovereign command. A word out of uſe.
A lady
So fair, and faſten’d to an empery,
Would make the great'ſ king double. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land;
Not as protector, ſteward, ſubſtitute,
But as ſucceſſively from blood to blood,
Your right of birth, your empery, your own. Shakespeare R. III.
E'MPHASIS. n.ſ.. [ippazú.] A remarkable ſtreſs laid upon a
word or ſentence; particular force impreſſed by ſtile or pro-
Ilull Clatl On.
Oh,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 350</div><p class="Text">E M P
- Oh, that brave Caeſar ! -
—Be choak'd with ſuch another emphaſis. Shakesp. Ant, and Cleºp.
Emphaſis not ſo much regards the time as a certain gran-
deur, whereby ſome letter, ſyllable, word, or ſentence is ren-
dered more remarkable than the reſt, by a more vigorous pro-
nunciation, and a longer ſtay upon it. Holder's Elem, of Speech.
. Theſe queſtions have force and emphaſis, if they be under-
ſtood of the antediluvian earth. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
EMPHATICAL | au; Taº, J
EMPHA"Tick. } #. [itzpawa.] .
1. Forcible; ſtrong; ſtriking. - º
Where he endeavours to diſſuade from carnivorous appe-
tites, how emphatical is his reaſoning ! Garth's Pref. to Ovid.
In proper and emphatick terms thou didſt paint the blazing
comet's fiery tail. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
2. Striking the fight.
It is commonly granted, that emphatical colours are light
itſelf, modified by refračtions. Boyle on Colours.
3. Appearing; ſeeming not real.
EMPHA’tically. adv. [from emphatical.]
1. Strongly ; forcibly ; in a ſtriking manner.
How emphatically and divinely does every word proclaim
the truth that I have been ſpeaking of ! South's Sermons.
2. According to appearance. -
What is delvered of the incurvity of dolphins, muſt be
taken emphatially, not really, but in appearance, when they
leap above water, and ſuddenly ſhoot down again. Brown.
EMPHY's E'MAtous. adj. [from iPºdzºza.] Bloated; puffed
up; ſwollen.
. . The ſigns of a gangrene are theſe: the inflammation loſes
its redneſs, and becomes duſkiſh and livid ; the tenſeneſs of
the ſkin goes off, and feels to the touch flabby or emphyſema-
tous; and veſications, filled with ichor of different colours,
ſpread all over it. - Sharp's Surgery.
To EMPIE’Rce. v. a. [from pierce.] To pierce into ; to enter
into by violent appulſe.
The weapon bright,
Taking advantage of his open jaw,
Ran through his mouth with ſo importune might,
That deep empierc'd his darkſome hollow maw. Fai. Queen.
EMP1’GHT. part. [To pight, or pitch. See Pitch..] Set;
pitched; put in a poſture. *
But he was wary, and ere it empight
In the meant mark, advanc'd his ſhield atween. Fai. Queen.
EMPIRE. m.ſ. [empire, French ; imperium, Latin.]
1. Imperial power; ſupreme dominion; ſovereign command.
Aſſert, ye fair ones, who in judgment ſit,
Your ancient empire over love and wit.
2. The region over which dominion is extended.
A nation extended over vaſt tracts of land, and numbers
of people, arrives in time at the ancient name of kingdom,
or modern of empire. Temple.
Rowe.
Sextus Pompeius
Hath given the dare to Caeſar, and commands
The empire of the ſea. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
2. Command over anything.
E’MPIRIC, n.ſ.. [iaziºixos.] A trier or experimenter; ſuch
perſons as have no true education in, or knowledge of phy-
fical pračtice, but venture upon hearſay and obſervation
only. - $2uincy.
The name of Hippocrates was more effectual to perſuade
ſuch men as Galen, than to move a ſilly empirick. Hooker.
That every plant might receive a name, according unto
the diſeaſes it cureth, was the wiſh of Paracelſus; a way
more likely to multiply empiricks than herbaliſts. Brown.
Such an averſion and contempt for all manner of innova-
tors, as phyſicians are apt to have for empiricks, or lawyers
for pettifoggers. - Swift.
'RICA l. -
É.º: : } adj. [from the noun.]
1. Verſed in experiments.
By fire .
Of ſooty coal, the empirick alchymiſt
Can turn, or holds it poſſible to turn,
Metals of droſfieſt ore to perfeót gold. Milton's Parad. Loſt.
2. Known only by experience; practiſed only by rote, without
rational grounds. ~
The moſt ſovereign preſcription in Galen is but empirick
to this preſervative. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
In extremes, bold counſels are the beſt;
Like empirick remedies, they laſt are try’d,
And by th' event condemn'd or juſtify'd. Dryden's Aurengz.
EMPI'Rica LLY. adv. [from empirical.] -
1. Experimentally; according to experience.
We ſhall empirically and ſenſibly dedućt the cauſes of black-
neſs from originals, by which we generally obſerve things
denigrated. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 12.
2. Without rational grounds; charlatanically ; in the manner
of quacks.
EMP1'R1c1sM. n.ſ.. [from empirick..] Dependence on expe-
rience without knowledge or art; quackery.
EMPLA'STER. m.ſ.. [iaºxrec. This word is now always
pronounced, and generally written plaſter.] An application
to a fore of an oleaginous or viſcous ſubſtance, ſpread upon
cloth. See Plaster. -
All emplaſters, applied to the breaſts, ought to have a hole
for the nipples. //iſeman's Surgery.
To EMPLA's TER. v. a. [from the noun..] To cover with a
plaſter. - -
They muſt be cut out to the quick, and the ſores emplaſtered
with tar. Mortimer's Art of Huſbandry.
EMPLA's ick. adj. [ww24rixos.] Viſcous; glutinous; fit to
be applied as a plaſter.
Reſin, by its emplaſii. A quality, mixed with oil of roſes,
perfects the concoëtion. Jºſeman's Surgery.
Emplaſtick applications are not ſufficient to defend a wound
from the air. - Arbuthnot on Air.
To EMPLE'AD. v. a. [from plead..] To indiét; to prefer a
charge againſt; to accuſe. - -
To terrify and torture them to their minds, and wind their
necks more ſurely under their arm, their tyrannous maſters
did often emplead arreſt, caſt them into priſon, and thereby
conſume them to worſe than nothing. Hayward.
Antiquity thought thunder the immediate voice of Jupiter,
and empleaded them of impiety that referred it to natural
cauſalties. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 14.
Since none the living villains dare emplead,
Arraign them in the perſons of the dead. Dryden’s juvenal.
To EMPLOY. v. a. [emploier, French.] -
I. To buſy ; to keep at work; to exerciſe.
For thrice, at leaſt, in compaſs of the year,
Thy vineyard muſt employ the ſturdy ſteer
To turn the glebe. Dryden's Virgil's Georg. b. ii. l. 551.
Their principal learning was applied to the courſe of the
ſtars, and the reſt was employed in diſplaying the brave ex-
ploits of their princes. - - - Temple.
Our reaſon is often puzzled, becauſe of the imperfection
of the ideas it is employed about. Lºcke.
The proper buſineſs of the underſtanding is not that which
men always employ it to. Lºcke.
Labour in the beginning gave a right of property, where-
ever any one was pleaſed to employ it upon what was com-
mon. - Locke.
"The cat became a bluſhing maid;
And, on the happy change, the boy
Emplºy'd his wonder and his joy. Prior.
This is a day in which the thoughts of our countrymen
ought to be employed on ſerious ſubjećts. Addiſon's Freeholder.
2. To uſe as an inſtrument.
The cleanly cheeſe-preſs ſhe could never turn, ... "
Her aukward fiſt did ne'er employ the churn, Gay's Paſtorals,
3. To uſe as means. - -
The money was employed to the making of gallies. 2 Mac.
Peace is not freed from labour, but from noiſe;
And war more-force, but not more pains employs. Dryden.
4. To uſe as materials.' .
The labour of thoſe who felled and framed the timber em-
played about the plough, muſt be charged on labour. Locke.
5. To commiſſion; to intruſt with the management of any
affairs. - -
Jonathan and Jabaziah were employed about this matter.
- Ezra, x. 15. .
Jeſus Chriſt is furniſhed with ſuperior powers to the angels,
becauſe he is employed in ſuperiour works, and appointed to be
the ſovereign Lord of all the viſible and inviſible worlds. Watts.
6. To fill up with buſineſs.
To ſtudy nature will thy time employ;
Knowledge and innocence are perfect joy.
7. To paſs or ſpend in buſineſs.
Why, whilſt we ſtruggle in this vale beneath,
With want and ſorrow, with diſeaſe and death,
Do they more bleſs'd perpetual life employ -
In ſongs of pleaſure, and in ſcenes of joy:
EMPLO'Y. n ſ. [from the verb.] -
1. Buſineſs; objećt of induſtry. . .
Preſent to graſp, and future ſtill to find,
The whole employ of body and of mind. Pope's Eſ, on Man.
2. Publick office.
Leſt animoſities ſhould obſtruct the courſe of juſtice, if
one of their own number had the diſtribution of it, they have
always a foreigner for this employ. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
The honours and the burdens of great poſts and employs
were joined together. Atterbury's Sermons.
Emplo’yable, adj. [from employ..] Capable to be uſed; pro-
per for uſe.
The objećtions made againſt the doćtrine of the chymiſts,
ſeem employable againſt this hypotheſis. , Boyle's Scept. Chym.
EMPlo'yer. n.J. [from employ..] One that uſes or cauſes to
be uſed. i
That man drives a great trade, and is owner or employer of
much ſhipping, and continues and increaſes in trade and
fhipping. Child's *ś. on Trade.
MPlo'YMENT.
Dryden.
Prior.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 351</div><p class="Text">E. M. P
E. M. P
EMFlo'YMENT. m. ſ. [from emplºy.]
". Buſineſs; object of induſtry; 6bject of labour.
2. Buſineſs; the ſtate of being employed.
3. Office; poſt of buſineſs.
f any ſtation, any employment upon earth be honourable,
their's was. Atterbury's Sermons.
Leaders on each ſide, inſtead of intending the publick weal,
have their hearts wholly ſet upon ways and means to get or to
keep employments. Swift.
4. Buſineſs intruſted.
Call not your ſtocks for me; I ſerve the king,
On whoſe employment I was ſent to you. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
To EMPoison. v. a. [empoiſºnner, French.J
1. To deſtroy by poiſon; to deſtroy by venomous food or drugs;
to poiſon.
Leaving no means unattempted of deſtroying his ſon, among
others employing that wicked ſervant of his, who undertook
to empoiſon him. Sidney, b. ii.
Muſhrooms cauſe the incubus, or the mare in the ſtomach,
and therefore the ſurfeit of them may ſuffocate and empoiſºn.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 546.
2. º taint with poiſon; to envenom. This is the more uſual
enic.
Empo’isoner. n.ſ. [empoiſonneur, French..] One who deſtroys
another by poiſon
. He is vehemently ſuſpected to have been the empoiſºner of
his wife, thereby to make vacant his bed. Bacon's Henry VII.
EMP9'ison MENT. m. ſ. [empoiſonnement, French..] The prac-
tiſe of deſtroying by poiſon.
It were dangerous for ſecret empoiſºnments. Bacon's N. Hiſt.
FM Por E"tick, adj. [izwºrk... j. That which is uſed at
markets, or in merchandize.
Eviro'RiuM. n.ſ. ſizzº..] A place of merchandiſe; a mart;
a town of trade; a commercial city.
And while this fam'd emporium we prepare,
The Britiſh ocean ſhall ſuch triumphs boaſt,
That thoſe who now diſdain our trade to ſhare,
Shall rob like pyrates on our wealthy coaſt. Dryden.
! take the proſperous eſtate of this great emporium to be
owing to thoſe inſtances of charity. Atterbury's Sermons.
To EMPOVERISH. v. a. [pauvre, French.]
1. To make poor; to depauperate; to reduce to indigence.
Since they might talk better as they lay together, they em-
poveriſhed their cloaths to enrich their bed, which, for that
night, might well ſcorn the ſhrine of Venus. Sidney, b. ii.
Your's ſounds aloud, and tells us you excel
No leſs in courage than in ſinging well;
While, unconcern'd, you let your country know,
They have empoveriſh'd themſelves, not you. JWaller.
For ſenſe of honour, if it empoveriſheth a man, it is, in his
cfteem, neither honour nor ſenſe. South's Sermons.
Freſh roſes bring -
To ſtrow my bed, 'till the empoveriſh’d Spring
Confeſs her want. * Prior.
2. To leſſen fertility.
Exºpo'ver Isher. n. ſ. [from empoveriſh.]
1. One that makes others poor.
2. That which impairs fertility. -
They deſtroy the weeds, and fit the land for after-crops,
being an improver, and not an empoveriſher of land. Mortimer.
Mpo'v ERISH MENT. n.ſ.. [from empoveriſh.] Diminution;
cauſe of poverty; waſte. -
, Being paid as it is, now ſome, and then ſome, it is no
great burden unto her, nor any great empoveriſhment to her
coffers. - Spenſer's State of Ireland.
All appeals for juſtice, or appellations for favour or prefer-
ment to another country, are ſo many grievous empoveriſh-
7new1t 5. Swift's Wiew of Ireland.
To EM power. v. a. [from power.]
1. To authoriſe; to commiſſion; to give power or authority to
any purpoſe.
You are empºwered, when you pleaſe, to give the final deci-
ſion of wit. Dryden's juv. Dedication.
The government ſhall be empowered to grant commiſſions
to all Proteſtants whatſoever. Swift on the Sacram. Teſt.
2. To give natural force; to enable.
Does not the ſame power that enables them to heal, em-
tower them to deſtroy Baker's Reflexions on Learning.
EMPREss. n.f. [contračted from empereſ, which is retained
by johnſon.] -
1. The queen of an emperour.
Let your nimble feet
Tread ſubtile circles, that may always meet
In point to him; and figures, to expreſs
The grace of him, and his great empereſ. Ben, johnſºn.
2. A female inveſted with imperial dignity; a female ſovereign.
Empreſs of this fair world, reſplendent Eve Milion.
Yet, London, empreſs of the northern clime,
By an high fate thou greatly didſt expire. Dryden.
Wiſdom, thou ſay'ſt, from heav'n receiv'd her birth;
Her beams tranſmitted to the ſubjećt earth:
Yet this great empreſs of the human ſoul,
Does only with imagin'd power controul,
If reſtleſs paſſion, by rebellious ſway, -
Compels the weak uſurper to obey. Prior.
EMPR1's E. n.ſ. [empriſe, French.) Attempt of danger; un-
dertaking of hazard; enterpriſe.
Noble minds, of yore, allied were
In brave purſuit of chivalrous empriſe. Fairy Queen, b, i.
A double conqueſt muſt you make,
If you atchieve renown by this empriſe. Fairfax, b, ii.
Fierce faces threat'ning wars;
Giants of mighty bone, and bold empriſe. Milt. Par. Loft.
Thus, 'till the ſun had travell'd half the ſkies,
Ambuſh'd we lie, and wait the bold empriſe. Pope's Odyſſey.
E/MPTIER. n.ſ.. [from empty..] One that empties; one that
makes any place void by taking away what it contained.
The emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their
vineyards. Nah, ii. 2.
EMPTINEss. m. ſ. [from empty.]
1. Abſence of plenitude; inanity.
Where cities ſtood,
Well fenc'd, and numerous, deſolation reigns,
And emptineſs; diſmay’d, unfed, unhous’d,
The widow and the orphan ſtroll. Phillips.
2. The ſtate of being empty.
His coffers ſound
With hollow poverty and emptineſs. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
3. A void ſpace; vacuity; vacuum.
Nor could another in your room have been,
Except an emptineſs had come between. Dryden.
The ordinary air in which we live and reſpire, is of ſo
thin a compoſition, that fixteen thouſand one hundred and
forty-nine parts of its dimenſions are mere emptineſ; and no-
thing; and the remaining one only, material and real ſub-
ſtance. Bentley's Sermons.
4. Want of ſubſtance or ſolidity.
'Tis this which cauſes the graces and the loves to take up
their habitations in the hardeſt marble, and to ſubſiſt in the
emptineſs of light and ſhadow. Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Prºf.
5. Unſatisfactorineſs; inability to fill up the deſires.
Ofrail eſtate of human things,
Now to our coſt your emptineſ, we know. Dryden.
Form the judgment about the worth or emptineſ of things
here, according as they are or are not of uſe, in relation to
what is to come after. Atterbury's Sermoni.
6. Vacuity of head; want of knowledge:
Eternal ſmiles his emptineſs betray,
As ſhallow ſtreams run dimpling all the way. Pope's Epſi.
F'Mption. n. ſ. [emptio, Latin.] The act of purchafing; a
purchaſe.
There is a diſpute among the lawyers, whether Glaucus his
exchanging his golden armour with the brazen one of Ty-
dides, was emption or commutation. Arbuthnºt on Coins.
EMPTY, adj. [a-mtix, Saxon.]
1. Void; having nothing in it; not full.
I did never know ſo full a voice iſſue from ſo empty a heart;
but the ſaying is true, the empty veſſel makes the greateſt
ſound. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
The pit was empty, there was no water in it. Gen. xxxvii.
If you have two veſſels to fill, and you empty one to fill the
other, you gain nothing by that ; there ſtill remains one veſſel
empty. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. Devoid; unfurniſhed.
Art thou thus boldened, man, by thy diſtreſs?
Or elſe a rude deſpiſer of good manners,
That in civility thou ſeem'ſt ſo empty &amp; Shakespeare As you like it.
Mr. Boyle has ſhewed, that air may be rarified above ten
thouſand times in veſſels of glaſs; and the heavens are much
emptier of air than any vacuum we can make below. Newton.
. Unſatisfactory; unable to fill the mind or deſires.
. Without any thing to carry; unburthened; unfreighted.
He alleges that the ſatyrs carried platters full of fruit in
their hands; but if they had been empty handed, had they been
ever the larger ſatyrs : Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
Yet all the little that I got, I ſpent;
And ſtill return’d as empty as I went. Dryden's Virg. Paft.
5. Vacant of head; ignorant; unſkilful; unfurniſhed with ma-
terials for thought.
How comes it that ſo many worthy and wiſe men depend
upon ſo many unworthy and empty headed fools Raleigh.
His anſwer is a handſome way of expoſing an empty, trifling,
pretending pedant; the wit lively, the ſatyr courtly and
ſevere. Felton on the Clafficki.
6. Without ſubſtance; without ſolidity; vain.
The god of ſleep there hides his heavy head,
And empty dreams on ev'ry leaf are ſpread. Dryden's Án.
To EMPTY. v. a. [from the adjective.] To evacuate; to
exhauſt; to deprive of that which was contained in it.
Boundleſs intemperance,
In nature is a tyranny: it hath been
Th'untimely emptying of the happy throne,
And fall of many kings. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The
:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 352</div><p class="Text">E M U
E N A
*
The emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their vine-
branches. ſah. ii.2.
Sheep are often blind by fulneſs of blood: cut their tails,
and empty them of their blood. Mortimer's Husbandry.
The Euxine ſea is conveniently ſituated for trade, by the
communication it has both with Aſia and Europe, and the
great navigable rivers that empty themſelves into it. Arbuthnot.
To EMPU'RPLE. v. a. [from purple.] To make of a purple
colour; to diſcolour with purple. -
Now in looſe garlands, thick thrown off, the bright
Pavement, that like a ſea of jaſper ſhone, .
Empurpled with celeſtial roſes ſmil’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
The deep,
Empurpl’d ran, with guſhing gore diſtain'd. Phillips.
To EMPU'zzle. v. a. [from puzzle.] To perplex; to put to
ſtand.
a It hath empuzzled the enquiries of others to apprehend, and
enforced them unto ſtrange conceptions to make out. Brown.
EMpy EMA. n.ſ. [iz, wruz.] A collection of purulent matter
in any part whatſoever; generally uſed to ſignify that in the
cavity of the breaſt only, and which ſometimes happens upon
the opening of abſceſſes, or ulcerations of the lungs, or mem-
branes incloſing the breaſt. - - Quincy.
An empyema, or a colle&amp;tion of purulent matter in the
breaſt, if not ſuddenly cured, doth undoubtedly impel the
patient into a phthiſical conſumption, Harvey on Conſumptions.
There is likewiſe a conſumption from an empyema, after an
inflammation of the lungs; which may be known from a
weight upon the diaphragm, oppreſſion of the lungs, a diffi-
culty of breathing, and inability to lie on one ſide, which is
that which is ſound. Arbuthnot on Diet.
EMPYREAL. adj. [a-v;6..] Formed of the element of fire;
refined beyond aerial; pertaining to the higheſt and pureſt
region of heaven. [Tickell accents it on the penult.]
Now went forth the morn,
Such as in higheſt heav'n, array'd in gold
Empyreal. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi. l. 13.
Go, ſoar with Plato to th’ empyreal ſphere,
To the firſt good, firſt perfeót, and firſt fair. Pope.
But empyreal forms, howe'er in fight
Gaſh'd and diſmember'd, eaſily unite. Tickell.
EMPyRE'AN. m. ſ. [...ºvgo;..] The higheſt heaven where the
pure element of fire is ſuppoſed to ſubſiſt.
Almighty Father from above,
From the pure empyrean, where he fits
High thron’d above all height, bent down his eye. Milton,
Under his burning wheel
The ſtedfaſt empyrean ſhook throughout,
All but the throne itſelf of God. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
The empyrean rung - -
- With hallelujahs. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii. l. 633.
EMPyREUM. R. n.ſ.. [iazvgºvt.º.] The burning to of any mat-
EMPYR Fºum A. } ter in boiling or diſtillation, which gives
a particular offenſive ſmell. &amp;uincy.
It is ſo far from admitting an empyreum, that it burns clear
away without leaving any cinders, or aduſt about it. Harvey.
The hopes of an elixir inſenſibly evaporate, and vaniſh
to air, or leave in the recipient a foul empyreuma. Dec. of Piety.
EMPYREUMA't ic AL. adj. . [from empyreuma.] Having the
ſmell or taſte of burnt ſubſtances.
Many empyreumatical oils, diſtilled by ſtrong fires in retorts,
may be brought to emulate eſſential oils drawn in limbicks.
Boyle's Hiſtory of Firmneſs.
EMPyRo's 1s. n ſ. [iuwwºw. J Conflagration ; general fire.
The former opinion that held theſe cataclyſms and empyroſes
univerſal, was ſuch as held that it put a total conſummation
unto things in this lower world, eſpecially that of confla-
ration. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To E/MULATE. v. a. [a-mulor, Latin.]
1. To rival; to propoſe as one to be equalled or excelled.
2. To imitate with hope of equality, or ſuperiour excellence.
I would have
Him emulate you : ’tis no ſhame to follow -
The better precedent. Ben. Johnſon's Catiline.
Thoſe fair ideas to my aid I'll call,
And emulate my great original. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
What though no weeping loves thy aſhes grace,
Nor poliſh'd marble emulate thy face. Pope.
3. To be equal to ; to riſe to equality with .
I ſee how thy eye would emulate the diamond. Shakeſp.
We ſee no new-built palaces aſpire,
No kitchens emulate the veſtal fire. Pope's Sat. of Donne.
4. To imitate ; to copy ; to reſemble.
It is likewiſe attended with a delirium, fury, and an invo-
luntary laughter, the convulſion emulating this motion. Arbuth.
EMULA'tion. m. ſ. [a-mulatio, Latin.]
1. Rivalry; deſire of ſuperiority.
- Mine emulation
Hath not that honour in't it had ; for where
I thought to cruſh him in an equal force,
True ſword to ſword, I’ll pitch at him ſome way,
. Or wrath or craft may get him. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus,
z
There was neither envy nor emulation amongſt them. 1 Mac.
Ariſtotle allows that ſome emulation may be good, and may
be found in ſome good men; yet envy he utterly condemns, as
wicked in itſelf, and only to be found in wicked minds. Sprat.
The apoſtle exhorts the Corinthians to an holy and general
emulation of the charity of the Macedonians, in contributing
freely to the relief of the poor ſaints at Jeruſalem, South.
A noble emulation heats your breaſt,
And your own fame now robs you of your reſt:
Good ačtions ſtill muſt be maintain'd with good,
As bodies nouriſh'd with reſembling food. Dryden.
2. Envy; deſire of depreſſing another; conteſt; contention;
diſcord.
What madneſs rules in brainſick men I
When for ſo ſlight and frivolous a cauſe,
Such factious emulations ſhall ariſe. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
E/MULATIVE. adj. [from emulate.] Inclined to emulation;
rivalling; diſpoſed to competition. .
EMULA'toR. m. ſ. [from emulate.] A rival; a competitor.
In ſuperiours it quencheth jealouſy, and layeth their com-
petitors and emulators aſleep. Bacon's Eſſays.
To EMU'lgº. v. a. [emulge, Latin J To milk out.
EMU'LG ENT. adj. [emulgens, Latin.j
1. Milking or draining out. -
2. Emulgent veſſels [in anatomy] are the two large arteries and
veins which ariſe, the former from the deſcending trunk of
the aorta, or great artery; the latter from the vena cava.
They are both inſerted into the kidneys; the emulgent arte-
ries carrying blood with the ſerum to them, and the emulgent
veins bringing it back again, after the ſerum has been ſepa-
rated therefrom by the kidneys. Harris.
Its deſcent doth furniſh the left emulgent with one vein, and
the firſt vein of the loins on the right fide with another. Brown.
Through the emulgent branches the blood is brought to the
kidneys, and is there freed of its ſerum. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
E/MULous. adi, [anulus, Latin.] -
1. Rivalling; engaged in competition. "
What the Gaul or Moor could not effect,
Nor emulus Carthage, with their length of ſpite,
Shall be the work of one. en. johnſon's Catiline.
She is in perpetual diffidence, or ačtual enmity with her,
but always emulous and ſuſpectful of her. Howel's Pocal Forreſt.
2. Deſirous of ſuperiority; deſirous to riſe above another; de-
ſirous of any excellence poſſeſſed by another. With of before
the objećt of emulation.
By ſtrength
They meaſure all, of other excellence
Not emulous, nor care who them excels. Milton's Par. Loſt.
By fair rewards our noble youth we raiſe
To emulous merit, and to thirſt of praiſe.
Good Howard, emulous of the Grecian art. '
3. Fa&amp;tious ; contentious.
Whoſe glorious deeds, but in theſe fields of late,
Made emulous miſfions 'mongſt the gods themſelves,
And drave great Mars to faction. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſ.
EMULously. adv, [from emulous.] With deſire of excelling
or outgoing another. -
So tempt they him, and emulouſly vie
To bribe a voice, that empires would not buy. Granville:
EMU'lsion... n.ſ. [emaſº, Latin.] A form of medicine, by
bruiſing oily ſeeds and kernels, and drawing out their ſub-
ſtances with ſome liquor, that thereby becomes milky. Quincy.
The aliment is diſſolved by an operation reſembling that of
making an emulſion; in which operation the oily parts of nuts
and ſeeds, being gently ground in a marble mortar, and gra-
dually mixed with ſome watery liquor, are diſlolved into a
ſweet, thick, turbid, milky liquor, reſembling the chyle in
an animal body. Arbuthnot on Aliments:
EMU'Nctor IEs. n.ſ. [emunélorium, Latin.] Thoſe parts of
the body where anything excrementitious is ſeparated and col-
lečted, to be in readineſs for ejećtment. &amp;uincy.
Superfluous matter deflows from the body unto their proper
emunélories. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 4.
There are receptacles in the body of man, and emum/jories
to drain them of ſuperfluous choler. More againſt Atheiſm.
Diſcourſing of the lungs, I ſhew that they are the grand
emunélory of the body; that the main end of reſpiration is
continually to diſcharge and expel an excrementitious fluid
out of the maſs of blood. Hºodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
The regimen in quinſies, which proceed from an obſtruction
of the glands, muſt be to uſe ſuch warm liquors as relax thoſe
glands, ſuch as, by ſtimulating, open the emunetories to ſecern
the humour. Arbuthnot on Diet.
EN. An inſeparable particle borrowed by us from the French,
and by the French formed from the Latin in. Many words
are uncertainly written with en or in.
To ENA'BLE. v. a. [from able.] To make able; to confer
power; to give ſtrength or ability.
If thou would'ſt vouchſafe to overſpread
Me with the ſhadow of thy gentle wing,
I ſhould enabled be thy acts to ſing. Spenser’s Hymn on Love.
8 A - His
Prior.
Prior.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 353</div><p class="Text">E N A
E N C
His great friendſhip with God might enable him, and his
compaſſion might incline him. Atterbury's Sermons.
He points ºut to him the way of life, ſtrengthens his weak-
neſs, reſtores his lapſes, and enables him to walk and perſevere
in it. Rogers, Sermon 1
To ENA'ct, v.a. [from aº.] gery, 4.
1. To act; to perform; to effect,
In true ballancing of juſtice, it is flat wrong to
puniſh the thought or purpoſe of any before it be ºn.
Spenſer's State of Ir -
Three hours the fight ãº ºf Ireland
• Where valiant Talbot, above human thought,
Ena&amp;ed wonders with his ſword and lance. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
2. To eſtabliſh; to decree.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
If it be proved againſt an alien,
He ſeeks the life of any citizen,
The party,’gainſt the which he doth contrive,
Shall ſeize on half his goods. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
The ſenate were authors of all counſels in the ſtate; and
what was by them conſulted and agreed, was propoſed to the
people, by whom it was enacted or commanded. Temple.
3. To repreſent by ačtion.
I did enact Hečtor. Shakeſpeare.
ENA’ct. n ſ [from the verb.] Purpoſe; determination.
ENA’ctor. m. ſ. [from enađ.]
1. One that forms decrees, or eſtabliſhes laws.
The great Author of our nature, and enađor of this law
of good and evil, is highly diſhonoured. Atterbury.
2. One who practiſes or performs any thing.
* The violence of either grief or joy,
- Their own enactors with themſelves deſtroy. Shakespeare Hamlet.
ENA'll AGE. n.ſ. [from the Greek imaxxzyz.] A figure in
grammar, whereby there is a change either of a pronoun, as
when a poſſeſſive is put for a relative, or when one mood or
tenſe of a verb is put for another. Harris.
To ENA/M Bush. v. a. [from ambuſh.] To hide in ambuſh; to
hide with hoſtile intention.
They went within a vale, cloſe to a flood, whoſe ſtream
Us'd to give all their cattle drink, they there enambuſh'd
them. Chapman's Iliadi, b. i.
*To ENA'Mel. v. a. [from amel. See AMEL.]
1. To inlay; to variegate with colours.
Muſt I, alas !
Frame and enamel plate, and drink in glaſs? Donnt.
See Pan with flocks, with fruits Pomona crown'd;
Here bluſhing Flora paints th' enamell'd ground. Pope.
I bequeath to the earl of Orrery the enamelled ſilver plates,
to diſtinguiſh bottles of wine by. Swift's laſt Will,
2. To lay upon another body ſo as to vary it.
Higher than that wall, a circling row
Of goodlieſt trees, loaden with faireſt fruit,
Bloſſoms, and fruits at once of golden hue,
Appear'd with gay enamel'd colours mix’d. Milton's Pa. Loft.
To ENA'Mel. v. n. To pračtiſe the uſe of enamel.
Though it were fooliſh to colour or enamel upon the glaſſes
of teleſcopes, yet to gild the tubes of them may render them
more acceptable to the uſers, without leſſening the clearneſs of
the objećt. - Bºyle.
ENA’MEL. m.ſ [from the verb J
1. Anything enamelled, or variegated with colours inlaid.
Down from her eyes welled the pearles round,
Upon the bright enamel of her face;
Such honey drops on ſpringing flowers are found,
When Phoebus holds the crimſon morn in chace. Fairfax.
There are various ſorts of coloured glaſſes, paſtes, enamels,
and factitious gems. JWoodward on Foſſils.
2. The ſubſtance inlaid in other things.
ENAMELLER. n.ſ.. [from enamel.] One that pračtiſes the art
of enamelling.
To ENA'MoUR. v. a. [amour, French. J. To inflame with
love; to make fond. With of before the thing or perſon
loved.
Afflićtion is enamour'd of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity. Shakespeare Rom, and juliet.
My Oberon What viſions have I ſeen!
I thought I was enamour'd of an aſs. Shakeſpeare.
You are very near my brother in his love: he is enamoured
on Hero. Shakeſpeare's Much Ado about Nothing.
Or ſhould ſhe, confident,
As fitting queen ador'd on beauty's throne,
Deſcend with all her winning charms begint,
Tº enamour, as the zone of Venus once
Brought that effect on Jove, ſo fables tell. Milt. Par. Loft.
He, on his ſide,
Leaning half-rais'd, with looks of cordial love
Hung over her enamour'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. 5.
- Your uncle cardinal
Is not ſo far enamour'd of a cloyſter,
But he will thank you for the crown. Dryd Don Sebaſtian.
'Tis hard to diſcern whether is in the greateſt errour, he
who is enamoured of all he does, or he whom nothing of his
own can pleaſe. Dryden', Dufreſnoy.
EN ARRA'tion. n.ſ.. [enarro, Latin.] Explanation; narra-
tive. Dić7.
FN ARTHRo's 1s. n.ſ.. [i, and 2:Seo, J The inſertion of one
bone into another to form a joint.
Enarthrºſis is where a good round head enters into a cavity,
whether it be cotyla, or profound cavity, as that of os coxae,
receiving the head of the os femoris; or glene, which is
more ſhallow, as in the ſcapula, where it receives the
humerus. //iſeman's Surgery.
ENATA’t lon. % ſenatº, Latin.] The act of ſwimming
out; eſcape by ſwimming. Dici.
ENA'UNTER. adv. An obſolete word explained by Spenſer hini-
ſelf to mean leſt j
Anger would not let him ſpeak to the tree,
Fnaunter his rage might cooled be,
But to the root bent his ſturdy ſtroke. Spenſer's Paſłoral. -
To Esca'ce. v. a. [from cage.] To ſhut up as in a cage; to
coop up; to confine.
He ſuffer'd his kinſman March,
Who is, if every owner were right plac'd,
Indeed, his king, to be encag'd in Wales,
There without ranſom to lie forfeited. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
Like Bajazet encag'd, the ſhepherds ſcoff,
Or like ſlack-ſinew'd Sampſon, his hair off,
Languiſh our ſhips. Donne.
To EN.ca/MP. v. n. [from camp.] To pitch tents; to fit down
for a time in a march.
He encamped at the mount of God. Fxed. xiii. 5.
The French knew how to make war with the Engliſh, by
not putting things to the hazard of a battle, but wearing them
by long ſieges of towns, and ſtrong fortified encampings. Bacon.
To ENCA’MP. v. a. To form an army into a regular camp;
to order to encamp. -
ENcA'MPMENT. n.ſ.. [from encamp.]
1. The act of encamping, or pitching tents.
2. A camp; tents pitched in order.
Their enemies ſerved to improve them in their encamp-
ments, weapons, or ſomething elſe. Grew's Cºſmol. Sac. b. iii.
When a gen'ral bids the martial train
Spread their encampment o'er the ſpacious plain,
Thick riſing tents a canvas city build. Gay's Trivia.
To ENcA'v E. v. a. [from cave.] To hide as in a cave.
Do but encave yourſelf,
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable ſcorns,
That dwell in ev'ry region of his face;
For I will make him tell the tale anew. Shakespeare . Othell.
ENCE'INTE. m. ſ. [French..] Incloſure; ground incloſed
with a fortification. A military term not yet naturaliſed.
To Encha'Fe. v. a. [eſchauffer, French.] To enrage; to
irritate; to provoke.
The wind ſhak'd ſurge, with high and monſtrous main,
Seems to caſt water on the burning bear,
And quench the guards of th' ever-fired pole:
I never did like moleſtation view
On the enchaſed flood. Shakeſpeare's Othells.
To ENcHA'IN. v. a. [enchainer, French.] To faſten with a
chain ; to hold in chains; to bind; to hold in bondage.
What ſhould I do while here I was enchain'd,
No glimpſe of godlike liberty remain'd. Dryden's Virgil.
To ENCHANT. v. a. [enchanter, French.]
1. To give efficacy to anything by ſongs of ſorcery.
And now about the cauldron ſing,
Like elves and fairies in a ring, }
Exchanting all that you put in. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Theſe powerful drops thrice on the threſhold pour,
And bathe with this enchanted juice her door;
That door where no admittance now is found,
But where my ſoul is ever hov'ring round.
2. To ſubdue by charms or ſpells. .
Arcadia was the charmed circle, where all his ſpirits for
ever ſhould be enchanted. - Sidney, b. ii.
One whom the muſick of his own vain tongue
Doth raviſh, like enchanting harmony. Shakesp. Love's Lab. Loft.
John thinks them all enchanted: he enquires if Nick had
not given them ſome intoxicating potion. Arbuthnot's j. Bull.
3. To delight in a high degree.
Too dear I priz’d a fair enchanting face;
Beauty unchaſte is beauty in diſgrace. Pope's Odyſſey, b.viii.
ENch A'NTER. m. ſ. [enchanteur, French.] A magician; a ſor-
cerer; one who has ſpirits or demons at his command; one
who has the power of charms and ſpells.
Such phaſms, ſuch apparitions, are excellencies which men
applaud in themſelves, conjured up by the magick of a ſtrong
imagination, and only ſeen within that circle in which the
enchanter ſtands. - Decay of Piety.
Gladio, by valour and ſtratagem, put to death tyrants, en-
chanters, monſters, and knights. Speſſator, Nº. 597.
Ardan, that black enchanter, whoſe dire arts
Enſlav'd our knights, and broke our virgin hearts. Granu.
Encha/Ntingly, adv. [from enchant..] With the force of
enchantment.
Granville.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 354</div><p class="Text">';
E N C
enchantment. It is improperly uſed in a paſſive ſenſe in the
following paſſage.
He's gentle; never ſchool'd, and yet learned; full of noble
device; of all ſorts enchantingly belov’d. Shakespeare As you like it.
ENcHa'NTMENT. n. ſ. [enchantement, French.]
1. Magical charms; ſpells; incantation; ſorcery.
The Turks thought that horrible tempeſt was brought upon
, them by the charms and enchantments of the Perſian magicians.
Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
2. Irreſiſtible influence; overpowering delight.
Warmth of fancy will carry the loudeſt and moſt univerſal
applauſe, which holds the heart of a reader under the ſtrong-
eſt enchantment. Pope's Preface to the Iliad.
ENcha'NTREss. n.ſ.. [enchantereſ, French.]
1. A ſorcereſs; a woman verſed in magical arts.
Fell banning hag! Enchantreſs, hold thy tongue. Shakespeare
I have it by certain tradition, that it was given to the firſt
who wore it by an enchantreſs. Tatler, Nº. 52.
2. A woman whoſe beauty or excellencies give irreſiſtible in-
fluence.
From this enchantreſ, all theſe ills are come;
You are not ſafe 'till you pronounce her doom. Dryden.
Oft with th' enchantreſs of his ſoul he talks,
Sometimes in crowds diſtreſs'd. Thomſon's Spring, l. 1050.
to ENcHA’s E. v. a. [enchaſer, French..] .
1. To infix; to encloſe in any other body ſo as to be held faſt,
but not concealed.
Like poliſh'd iv'ry, beauteous to behold;
Or Parian marble, when enchas'd in gold. Dryden's Virgil.
Words, which, in their natural ſituation, ſhine like jewels
enchaſed in gold, look, when tranſpoſed into notes, as if ſet
in lead. Felton on the Caſſicts.
2. To adorn by being fixed upon it.
What ſee'ſt thou there King Henry's diadem,
Enchas'd with all the honours of the world ! Shakespeare HenryVI.
They houſes burn, and houſhold gods deface,
To drink in bowls which glitt'ring gems enchaſe. Dryden.
ENcHE'Ason. n.ſ. [encheſºn, old law French..] Cauſe; occa-
ſion. Skinner. Cowel. Bailey.
Certes, ſaid he, well mote I ſhould to tell
The fond encheaſon that me hither led. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
To ENci'Rcle. v. a. [from circle.] To ſurround; to environ;
to incloſe in a ring or circle; to enring.
That ſtranger-gueſt the Paphian realm obeys,
A realm defended with encircling ſeas. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
Beneath a ſculptur'd arch he ſits inthron’d;
The peers encircling, form an awful round. Pope's Odyſſey.
Enci'Rclet. n.ſ.. [from circle.] A circle; a ring.
In whoſe encirclets if ye gaze,
Your eyes may tread a lover's maze. Sidney, b. ii.
Encli'ticks. n.ſ.. [iyxxºriza.] Particles which throw back
the accent upon the foregoing ſyllable.
To EN clo's E. v. a. [enclos, French.]
1. To part from things or grounds common by a fence.
The protećtor cauſed a proclamation to be ſet forth againſt
encloſures, commanding that they who had enclºſed lands, ac-
cuſtomed to lie open, ſhould lay them open again, Hayward.
As much land as a man tills, and can uſe the produćt of,
fo much he by his labour encloſes from the common. Locke.
For encloſing of land, the uſual way is with a bank ſet with
quick. Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. To environ; to encircle; to ſurround; to encompaſs; to
ſhut in between other things; to include.
The fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jaſper: they
ſhall be ſet in gold in their encloſings. Ex. xxviii. 20.
The peer now ſpreads the glitt'ring forfex wide,
Tº encloſe the lock; now joins it, to divide. Pope.
Enclo's ER. m. ſ. [from encloſe.]
1. One that encloſes, or ſeparates common fields in ſeveral diſ-
tinét properties.
If God had laid all common, certainly
Man would have been th’ encloſer; but ſince now
God hath impal'd us, on the contray,
Man breaks the fence. Herbert.
2. Anything in which another is encloſed.
Enclosure. n.ſ.. [from encloſe.]
1. The act of encloſing or environing any thing.
The membranes are for the comprehenſion or encloſure of
all theſe together. Wilkins's Math. Magick.
2. The ſeparation of common grounds into diſtinét poſſeſſions.
Encloſures began to be frequent, whereby arable land was
turned into paſture. Bacon's Henry VII.
Touching encloſures, I am not ignorant what a profitable
purchaſe is made thereby, becauſe a company of lands incloſed
are thereby improved in worth two or three parts at the
leaſt. Hayward.
3. The appropriation of things common.
Let no man appropriate what God hath made common;
that is againſt juſtice and charity, and by miraculous accidents
God hath j. his diſpleaſure againſt ſuch encloſure. Taylor.
4. State of being ſhut up in any place; encompaſſed, or en-
vironed. 5
This expreſſes particularly the enclºſure of the waters within
the earth. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
For the young, during its encloſure in the womb, there are
formed membranes inveloping it, called ſecundines. Ray,
5. The ſpace encloſed; the ſpace comprehended within certain
limits.
And all, that elſe this world's encloſure baſe
Hath great or glorious in mortal eye, .
Adorns the perſon of her majeſty. Fairy Queen, b. ii. can. 2:
They are to live all in a body, and generally within the
ſame encloſure; to marry among themſelves, and to eat nd
meats that are not prepared their own way. Addiſon's Spectator.
6. Several ; ground encloſed; ground ſeparated from the
COInnon.
'Tis not the common, but the encloſure muſt make him
rich. South's Sermons.
EN.co/MIAst. n. ſ. ſix-park.] A panegyriſt; a proclaimer
praiſe; a praiſer.
The Jeſuits are the great encomiaſis of the Chineſe. Locke,
EN.com IA'sticAL. ladj [iyawaarike. J Panegyrical; lau-
EN.com IA'stick. ; datory; containing praiſe ; beſtowing
praiſe. -
ENCO'MIUM. n.ſ. [..tx.uo..] Panegyrick; praiſe; elogy.
How eagerly do ſome men propagate every little encomium
their paraſites make of them. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 9.
A vile encomium doubly ridicules;
There's nothing blackens like the ink of fools. Pope.
To Exco'MPAss. v. a. [from compaſs.] -
I. To encloſe ; to encircle.
Look how my ring encampaſſeth thy finger;
Ev’n ſo thy breaſt encloſeth my poor heart. Shakespeare Rich. III.
Two ſtrong ligaments encompaſs the whole head of the
femur. - Jºſeman's Surgery.
Poetick fields encompaſs me around,
And ſtill I ſeem to tread on claſſick ground. Addiſon.
2. To ſhut in ; to ſurround; to environ.
He, having ſcarce ſix thouſand in his troop,
By three and twenty thouſand of the French
Was round encompaſſed, and ſet upon. Shakeſp. Henry VI:
3. To go round any place: as, Drake encompaſſed the world.
EN.co'MPAssMent. m. ſ. [from encompaſs.] Circumlocution;
remote tendency of talk. -
- Finding
By this encompaſſinent and drift of queſtion, -
That they do know my ſon, come you more near, Shakespeare
Enco'R.E. adv. [French..] Again; once more. A word uſed
at publick ſhows when a ſinger, or fiddler, or buffoon is de-
fired by the audience to do the ſame thing again.
To the ſame notes thy ſons ſhall hum or ſnore,
And all thy yawning daughters cry encore. Dunciad, b. iv.
ENCO/UNTER. m. ſ. [encontre, French.]
1. Duel; ſingle fight; conflićt.
Thou haſt beat me out
Twelve ſeveral times, and I have nightly ſince . .
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyſelf and me. Shakeſ earc.
Let's leave this keen encounte, of our wits,
And fall ſomething into a ſlower method. Shakeſ Rich. III.
Pallas th’ encounter ſeeks; but e're he throws,
To Tuſcan Tiber thus addreſs'd his vows: .
O ſacred ſtream, direct my flying dart,
And give to paſs the proud Haleſus' heart. Dryden's Án.
2. Battle; fight in which enemies ruſh againſt each other.
Two black clouds
With heav'n's artillery fraught, come rattling on
• Over the Caſpian; then ſtand front to front,
Hov'ring a ſpace, 'till winds the ſignal blow -
To join their dark encounter in mid air. Milt. Parad. Loft.
3. Eager and warm converſation, either of love or anger.
The peaking cornuto comes to me in the inſtant of our
encounter, after we had ſpoke the prologue of our comedy. Shakespeare
4. Accidental congreſs; ſudden meeting.
Propitious Pallas, to ſecure her care,
Around him ſpread a veil of thicken'd air,
To ſhun th' encounter of the vulgar crowd. Pope's Odyſſy.
5. Accoſting.
But in what habit will you go along?
—Not like a woman; for I would prevent the looſe encountert
of laſcivious men. Shakeſpeare's Two Gentlemen of Werona.
Three parts of Brutus
Is ours already; and the man entire,
Upon the next encounter, yields him ours. Shakeſ jul. Caºſ.
6. Caſual incident; occaſion. This ſenſe is ſcarcely Engliſh.
An ‘. is not ſufficient for the unity of character: 'tis
further neceſſary, that the ſame ſpirit appear in all ſort of
encounters. Pope's View of Epick Poetry.
To ENco'UNT ER. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To meet face to face.
If I muſt die,
I will encounter darkneſs as a bride,
And hug it in mine arms. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
The faſhion of the world is to avoid coſt, and you encoun-
fer it. Shakeſpeare's Much Ado about Nothing.
Thoſe
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 355</div><p class="Text">E N C
E N C
Thou ſtronger may'ſt endure the flood of light;
And, while in ſhades I chear my fainting fight,
Encounter the deſcending excellence: Dryd. State of Innºcence.
2. To meet in a hoſtile manner; to ruſh againſt in conflićt. .
Putting themſelves in order of battle, they encountered their
enemies. . . Knollº's Hiſtory of the Turks.
3. To meet with reciprocal kindneſs., .
See, they encounter thee with their hearts thanks;
Both ſides are even. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
4. To attack; to meet in the front.
which way ſoever we turn ourſelves, we are encountered
with clear evidences and ſenſible demonſtrations of a Deity.
- Tillotſon, Sermon 1.
. To oppoſe; to oppugn.
5 }. are not º to believe two witneſſes, if the pro-
bability of the fact does reaſonably encounter them. Hale.
6. To meet by accident.
. I am moſt fortunate thus to encounter you :
You have ended my buſineſs, and I will merrily -
Accompany you home. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
To Enco'UNTER. v. n. -
1. To ruſh together in a hoſtile manner; to conflict.
And let belief and life encounter ſo,
As doth the fury of two deſperate men,
Which, in the very meeting, fall and die. Shakespeare K. john.
Five times, Marcius,
Have I fought with thee; ſo often haſt thou beat me:
And wouldſt do ſo, I think, ſhould we encounter
As often as we eat. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
2. To engage; to fight.
Our wars
Will turn into a peaceful comick ſport,
when ladies crave to be encounter'd with. Shakespeare H. VI.
Both the wings of his fleet had begun to encounter with the
Chriſtians. - Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turki.
Thoſe who have the moſt dread of death, muſt in a little
time be content to encounter with it, whether they will or no.
Hake’s Preparation fºr Death.
3. To meet face to face. -
4. To come together by chance.
Enco'UNT E RER. n.ſ.. [from encounter.]
1. Opponent; antagoniſt; enemy.
The lion will not kick with his feet, but he will ſtrike ſuch
a ſtroke with his tail, that he will break the back of his en-
counterer with it. More's Antidºte againſt Atheiſm.
The doćtrines of the reformation have kept the field againſt
all encounterers, and does he think they may be foiled by two
or three remarks Atterbury's Prºf. to Anſ, on Conſid, on Luther.
2. One that loves to accoſt others. An old term.
Oh, theſe encounterers 1 ſo gilt of tongue,
They give a coaſting welcome ere it comes;
And wide unclaſp the tables of their thoughts
To every tickliſh reader. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
To ENco'URAGE. v. a. [encourager, French.]
1. To animate; to incite to anything.
They encourage themſelves in an evil matter. Pſ. lxiv. 5.
2. To give courage to ; to ſupport the ſpirits; to inſpirit; to
embolden.
I would neither encourage the rebels, nor diſcourage the
proteſtants loyalty. King Charles.
3. To raiſe confidence; to make confident.
I doubt not but there are ways to be found, to affiſt our
reaſon in this moſt uſeful part; and this the judicious Hooker
encourages me to ſay. Locke.
EN.co'URAGEMENT. m. ſ. [from encºurage.]
1. Incitement to any adion or practice; incentive.
sº ſtrength of heart
Thy condućt and example gives; nor ſmall
Encouragement, Godolphin, wiſe and juſt.
2. Favour; countenance; ſupport.
For when he dies, farewel all honour, bounty,
All generous encouragement of arts. Otway's Orphan.
The reproach of immorality will lie heavieſt againſt an
eſtabliſhed religion, becauſe thoſe who have no religion will
profeſs themſelves of that which has the encouragement of the
law. Rogers, Sermon 9.
EN.co'URAGER. m.ſ...[from encourage.] One that ſupplies in-
citements to any thing; a favourer.
Live then, thou great encourager of arts,
Live ever in our thankful hearts. Dryden.
As the pope is himſelf a maſter of polite learning, and a
great encourager of arts; ſo at Rome any of thoſe arts im-
mediately thrives, under the encouragement of the prince.
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
To ENCROACH. v. n. [accrocher, from croc, a hook, Fy
1. To make invaſions upon the right of another; to put a hook
intº another man's poſſeſſions to draw them away.
Thoſe Iriſh captains of countries have encroached upon the
queen's freeholders and tenants. Spenſer on Ireland.
2. To advance gradually and by ſtealth upon that to which one
has no right.
The ſuperſtition that riſeth voluntarily, and by degrees
6
Phillips.
-
mingleth itſelf with the rites, even of every divine ſervice
done to the only true God; muſt be conſidered of as a creen.
ing and encroaching evil. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 3
This hour is mine; if for the next I care, I grow tº,
wide,
And do encroach upon death's ſide.
They fabled how the ſerpent, whom they call’d
Ophion, with Eurynome, the wide
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had firſt the rule
Of high Olympus. Milton's Paradie A 6/7, b. x, l. 582
Th’ encroaching ill you early ſhould oppoſe; ---
Flatter'd, 'tis worſe, and by indulgence grows. Dryden
Next, fenc'd with hedges and deep ditches round, -
Herbert,
Exclude th’ encroaching cattle from thy ground. Dryden.
Tiſiphone, let looſe from under ground,
Before her drives diſeaſes and affright;
And every moment riſes to the fight,
Aſpiring to the ſkies, en reaching on the light. Dryden.
EN.cp o'Achº R. m. ſ. [from encroach..]
1. One who ſeizes the poſſeſſion of another by gradual and filent
Incans.
The bold encroachers on the deep,
Gain by degrees huge tracts of land,
*Till Neptune, with one gen'ral ſweep,
Turns all again to barren ſtrand. Swift
2. One who makes ſlow and gradual advances beyond i.
rights.
Full dreſs creates dignity, augments conſciouſneſ, and
keeps at diſtance an encroacher. Clariſſa
Excko'AcHMENT. n.ſ. [from encroach. J -
1. An unlawful gathering in upon another man. For example:
if two mens grounds lying together, the one preſſes too far
upon the other; or if a tenant owe two ſhillings rent-ſervice
to the lord, and the lord takes three: ſo the Spences en-
croached to themſelves royal power and authority. Cowel.
But this uſurper his encroachment proud
Stays not on man: to God his tow'r intends
Siege, and defiance. 44iltºn's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xii. 1. 72.
As a man had a right to all he could employ his labour
upon, ſo he had no temptation to labour for more than he
could make uſe of: this left no room for controverſy about
the title, nor for encroachment on the right of others. Lock.
If it be a man's known principle to depart from his right,
ill men will make unjuſt encroachments upon him. gir.
The people, ſince the death of Solon, had already made
great encroachments. Swift on the 12 ſent, in Athens and Rome.
2. Advance into the territories or rights of another.
It gave the ancient Romans an opportunity of making ſo
many encroachments on the ſea, and of laying the foundations
of their palaces within the very borders of it. Addison on Italy.
To ENcu'MBER. v. a. [encombrer, French..]
1. To clog; to load; to impede.
We have, by this many years experience, found that ex-
ceeding great good, not encumbered with any notable incon-
venience. Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 20.
Encumber'd with his veſt, without defence. Dryden.
2. To entangle; to embarraſs; to obſtruct.
The verbal copier is encºmbered with ſo many difficulties at
once, that he can never diſentangle himſelf. Dryden.
The god awak'd,
And thrice in vain he ſhook his wing,
Encumber'd in the ſilken ſtring. Priºr.
3. To load with debts: as, his ſtate is encumbered with mort-
gages.
ENcu'MB RANce. m. ſ. [from encumber.]
1. Clog; load; impediment.
Philoſophers agreed in deſpiſing riches, at beſt, conſ-
dering them as unneceſſary encumbrances of life. Temple.
Dead limbs are an encumbrance to the body, inſtead of being
of uſe to it. Addiſon's Freehºlder, N°. 13.
2. Excreſcence; uſeleſs addition.
Strip from the branching Alps their piny load,
The huge encumbrance of horrifick woods. Thomſ. Autumn. -
3. Burthen upon an eſtate. . .
In reſpect of the encumbrances of a living, confider whether
it be ſufficient for his family, and to maintain hoſpitality. Ayſ.
ENcy'clicAL. adj. [ixv.2.x: J Circular; ſent round through
a large region. -
This council was not received in patriarchal ſces, which
is evident from Photius's encyclical epiſtle to the patriarch of
Alexandria. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſ. on Rom. Idºl.
ENcyclope'DIA. l. n. ſ. [ ºvºx waiia. ] The circle of
ENcycloPE/DY } ſciences; the round of learning.
Every ſcience borrows from all the reſt, and we cannot at-
tain āny ſingle one without the encyclºpardy. Glamº. Sºpſ, c. 25.
This art may juſtly claim a place in the encyclºpædia, eſpe-
cially ſuch as ſerves for a model of education for an able poli:
tician. Arbuthnot's Hiſlory of john Hull.
ENcy'sted adj. [x'-...] Fncloſed in a veſicle or bag,
Ency!ed tumours borrow their names from a cyſt or bag
in which they are contained, and are farther diſtinguiſhed by
the nature of their contents. Sharp's Sargery.
Esp.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 356</div><p class="Text">E N D
E N D
END. m. ſ. ſenb, Saxon.]
1. The extremity of anything materially extended. -
Jonathan put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand,
and dipt it in a honeycomb. 1 Sam. xiv. 27.
The extremity and bounds of all bodies we have no diffi-
culty to arrive at ; but, when the mind is there, it finds no-
thing to hinder its progreſs into this endleſs expanſion: of that
it can neither find, nor conceive any end. , Locke.
2. The laſt particle of any aſſignable duration.
If the world's age and death be argu'd well
By the ſun's fall, which now tow'rds earth doth bend,
Then we might fear that virtue, ſince ſhe fell
So low as woman, ſhould be near her end. Donne.
3. The concluſion or ceſſation of any ačtion.
Jacob had made an end of commanding his ſons. Gen. xlix.
Yet vainly moſt their age in ſtudy ſpend; -
No end of writing books, and to no end. Denham.
The cauſes and deſigns of an action are the beginning:
the effects of theſe cauſes, and the difficulties that are met
with in the execution of theſe deſigns, are the middle ; and
the unravelling and reſolution of theſe difficulties, are the
end. Pope's View of Epic Poem.
4. The concluſion or laſt part of any thing; as, the end of a
chapter; the end of a diſcourſe.
5. Ultimate ſtate; final doom.
6. The point beyond which no progreſſion can be made.
They reel to and fro, and ſtagger like a drunken man, and
are at their wits end. Pſ. cwii, 27.
7. Final determination; concluſion of debate or deliberation.
My guilt be on my head, and there's an end! Shakeſp.
8. Death; fate; deceaſe.
I determine to write the life and the end, the nature and
the fortunes of George Villiers. Wotton.
- The ſoul receives intelligence,
By her near genius, of the body's end,
And ſo imparts a ſadneſs to the ſenſe. Daniel's Civil War.
'Tis the great buſineſs of life to fit ourſelves for our end,
and no man can live well that has not death in his eye. L’E/?r.
Remember Milo's end,
Wedg'd in that timber which he ſtrove to rend. Roſcommon.
My God, my father, and my friend,
Do not forſake me in my end. Roſcommon.
Unblam'd through life, lamented in thy end. Pope.
9. Abolition; total loſs. *
There would be an end of all civil government, if the
aſſignment of civil power were by ſuch inſtitution. Locke.
1e. Cauſe of death; deſtroyer.
Take heed you dally not before your king,
Leſt he that is the ſupreme king of kings,
Confound your hidden falſhood, and award
Either of you to be the other's end. Shakeſp. Richard III.
11. Conſequence; event.
O, that a man might know
The end of this day's buſineſs ere it come !
But it ſufficeth that the day will end. Shakeſp. 7ul. Caſar.
The end of theſe things is death. Rom. vi. 21.
12. Fragment; broken piece.
Thus I cloathe my naked villany
With old odd ends, ſtol’n forth of Holy Writ,
And ſeem a ſaint. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
13. Purpoſe; intention
There was a purpoſe to reduce the monarchy to a republick,
which was far from the end and purpoſe of that nation. Claren.
I have lov’d
What can thy ends, malicious beauty, be -
Can he who kill'd thy brother, live for thee? Dryd. Ind. Em.
Heav'n, as its inſtrument, my courage ſends;
Heav'n ne'er ſent thoſe who fight for private ends. Dryden.
Others are apt to attribute them to ſome falſe end or in-
tention. Addiſon's Spečiator, N°. 255.
14. Thing intended; final deſign.
Wiſdom may have framed one and the ſame thing to ſerve
commodiouſly for divers ends, and of thoſe end; any one may
be ſufficient cauſe for continuance, though the reſt have
ceaſed. Howker, b. v. ſ. 42.
All thoſe things which are done by him, have ſome end for
which they are done; and the end for which they are done, is
a reaſon of his will to do them. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 2.
Her only end is never-ending bliſs;
Which is, the eternal face of God to ſee,
Who laſt of ends, and firſt of cauſes is;
And to do this, ſhe muſt eternal be.
The end of the commandment is charity. 1 Tim. i. 5.
Two thingsl ſhall propound to you, as ends; ſince the wiſe
men of this world have made them theirs. Suckling.
Such conditions did fully comply with all thoſe ends, for
which the parliament had firſt taken up arms. Clarendon.
Hear and mark
To what end I have brought thee hither, and ſhewn
All this fair fight. 44iltºn's Paradiſe Regained, b. iii.
Life, with my Indamora, I would chuſe;
But, loſing her, the end of living loſe. Dryden's Murengz.
Davies.
For when ſucceſs a lover's toil attends,
Few aſk if fraud or force attain’d his ends. Pope.
The end of our faſt is to pleaſe God, and make him pro-
pitious. Smalridge's Sermons.
15. An END. [Probably corrupted from on end.J Upright ;
erect: as, his hair ſtands an end
16. An END has a ſignification in low language not eaſily ex-
plained; as, moſt an end, commonly : perhaps it is properly on
end, at the concluſion; or corrupted from ſome old word not
eaſily recoverable.
Stay'ſt thou to vex me here 2
Slave, that, ſtill an end, turns me to ſhame. Shakeſpeare.
To END. v. a. [from the noun.]
r. To terminate ; to conclude; to finiſh.
That but this blow
Might be the be-all, and the end-all. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He would in one battle end quarrel with them, either win
or loſe the empire. Knolley’s Hiſtory of the Turks.
That expenſive war under which we have ſo long groaned,
is not yet ended. Smalridge's Sermoni.
2. To deſtroy; to put to death. /
The lord of Stafford dear to-day hath bought
Thy likeneſs; for inſtead of thee, king Harry,
This ſword hath ended him. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
To END. v. m.
1. To come to an end; to be finiſhed.
Yet happy were my death, mine ending bleſt,
If this I could obtain, that, breaſt to breaſt,
Thy boſom might receive my yielded ſpright. Fairfax, b. ii.
Then eaſe your weary Trojans will attend,
And the long labours of your voyage end. Dryden's &amp;n.
2. To terminate; to conclude; to ceaſe; to fail.
Our laughing, if it be loud and high, commonly end, in a
deep ſigh; and all the inſtances of pleaſure have a ſting in the
tail. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
His ſovereignty, built upon either of theſe titles, could not
have deſcended to his heir, but muſt have ended with him. Lºc.
To ENDA/MAG E. v. a. [from damage.] To miſchief; to pre-
judice; to harm. -
Nor ought he car'd whom he endamaged
By tortous wrong, or whom bereav'd of right. Fa. Queen.
And it cometh ſometime to paſs, that a thing unneceſſary
in itſelf, touching the whole direct purpoſe, doth notwith-
ſtanding appear convenient to be ſtill held, even without uſe,
left, by reaſon of that coherence which it hath with ſome-
what moſt neceſſary, the removal of the one ſhould endamage
the other. - Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
Where your good word cannot advantage him,
Your ſlander never can endamage him. Shakeſpeare.
Gather our ſoldiers, ſcatter'd and diſperſt,
And lay new platforms to endamage them. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
The trial hath endamag’d thee no way;
Rather more honour left, and more eſteem. Milton.
When an erroneous opinion is publiſhed, the publick is en-
damaged, and therefore it becomes puniſhable by the magi-
ſtrate. South's Sermons.
A great alteration doth ſeldom any wiſe endamage or diſor-
der the globe. //oºdward's Natural Hiſlory.
To ENDA'NGER. v. a. [from danger.]
1. To put into hazard; to bring into peril.
Every one deſires his own preſervation and happineſs, and
therefore hath a natural dread of everything that cam deſtroy
his being, or endanger his happineſs. Tillotſon, Sermon 4.
He rais’d the reſt,
To force the foes from the Lavinian ſhore,
And Italy's endanger'd peace reſtore. Dryden's Aºn, b. vii.
My kingdom claims your birth ; my late defence,
Of our endanger'd fleet, may claim your confidence. Dryden.
Volatile ſalts never exiſt in an animal body; the heat re-
quired to make them volatile, endangers the animal.
- Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The intereſt endangered is no leſs than our title to heaven.
Rogers, Sermon 4.
2. To incur the danger of; to hazard.
He that turneth the humours back, and maketh the wound
bleed inwards, endangereth malign ulcers. Bacon's Eſſays.
To ENDE'AR. v. a. [from dear.] To make dear; to make
beloved.
All thoſe inſtances of charity which uſually endear each
other, ſweetneſs of converſation, frequent admonition, all
ſignifications of love muſt be expreſſed towards children. Tayl.
And in the mixture of all theſe appears
Variety, which all the reſt endears. Denham.
The only thing that can endear religion to your practice,
will be to raiſe your affections above this world. Wake.
ENDE"A R MENT. n.ſ.. [from endear.]
1. The cauſe of love; means by which anything is endeared.
Her firſt endearments, twining round the ſoul. Thomſon.
2. The ſtate of being endeared; the ſtate of being loved.
Is not the ſeparate property of a thing the great cauſe of its
endearment amongſt all mankind? South's Sermons.
8 B When
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 357</div><p class="Text">*
When a man ſhall have done all that he can to make one
his friend, and emptied his purſe to create endearment between
them, he may, in the end, be forced to write vanity and
fruſtration. South's Sermons.
ENDEAVOUR. m. ſ. [devoir, French ; endevoir.] Labour
dire&amp;ted to ſome certain end; effort to obtain or avoid.
My ſtudied purpoſes went
Beyond all man's endeavours. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Heav'n doth divide
The ſtate of man in divers functions,
Setting endeavour in continual motion. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Here their appointment we may beſt diſcover,
And look on their endeavour. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
I take imitation of an author, in their ſenſe, to be an en-
deavour of a later poet to write like one, who has written be-
fore him on the ſame ſubject. Dryden.
The bold and ſufficient purſue their game with more paſ-
flon, endeavour, and application, and therefore often ſuc-
ceed. Temple.
She could not make the leaſt endeavour towards the pro-
ducing of any thing that hath vital and organical parts. Ray.
Such an º: as will quicken mens endeavours for the
obtaining of a leſſer good, ought to animate men more power-
fully in the purſuit of that which is infinitely greater. Tillotſ.
This is the hinge on which turns the liberty of intellectual
beings, in their conſtant endeavours after, and ſteady proſecu-
tion of true felicity. Locke.
To ENDEA'vour. v. n. [from the noun..] To labour to a
certain purpoſe; to work for a certain end.
Í could wiſh that more of our country-clergy would endea-
vour after a handſome elocution. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 106.
Of old, thoſe met rewards who could excel;
And thoſe were prais'd, who but endeavour’d well.
To ENDEA'vour. v. a. To attempt; to try."
To pray’r, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavour'd with ſincere intent,
Mine ear ſhall not be ſlow, mine ear not ſhut. Milt. P. L.
ENDEA'vour E.R. m. ſ. [from endeavour.] One who labours to
a certain end.
He appears an humble endeavourer, and ſpeaks honeſtly to
no purpoſe. Rymer’s Tragedies of the laſt Age.
ENDECA'goN. n.ſ.. [is?wayo...] A plain figure of eleven ſides
and angles.
EN DE'MIAL. {; [ºzuº..] Peculiar to a country; uſed of
Pope.
END EMICAL. : any diſeaſe that affects ſeveral people together
ENDE'Mick. in the ſame country, proceeding from ſome
cauſe peculiar to the country where it reigns: ſuch as the
ſcurvy to the northern climes. - &amp;uincy.
We may bring a conſumption under the notion of a pan-
demick, or endemick, or rather a vernacular diſeaſe, to Eng-
land. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Solenander, from the frequency of the plants ſpringing up
in any region, could gather what endemial diſeaſes the inhabi-
tants were ſubject to. Ray on the Creation.
An endemial diſeaſe is what is common to the people of the
country. Arbuthnot on Air.
What demonſtrates the plague to be endemial to Egypt, is
its invaſion and going off at certain ſeaſons. Arbuthn, on Air.
To ENDE'Nize. v. a. [from denizen.] To make free; to en-
franchiſe.
It hath been beautified and enriched out of other good
tongues, partly by enfranchiſing and endenizing ſtrange words.
Camden's Remains.
}. #. }v. a. ſeniºr, French, didum, Latin.]
1. To charge any man by a written accuſation before a court of
juſtice : as, he was endited for felony.
2. To draw up; to compoſe; to write.
Your battles they hereafter ſhall indite,
And draw the image of our Mars in fight. Waller.
How ſhall Filbert unto me indite,
When neither I can read, nor he can write. Gay.
Hear how learn'd Grecce her uſeful rules indites,
When to repreſs, and when indulge our flights Pºpe.
FNDI'ct MF NT. }'ſ [from endite.] A bill or declaration made
ENDI"t EMENT. $ in form of law, for the benefit of the com-
monwealth ; or an accuſation for ſome offence exhibited unto
jurours, and by their verdićt found and preſented to be true,
before an officer can have power to puniſh the ſame offence.
- Cowel.
'Tis neceſſary that the ſpecies of the crime be deſcribed in
the libel or articles, which our Engliſh lawyers call an in-
dić/ment or information. Ayliffe's Parergon.
We never draw any indićiment at all againſt them, but
think commendably cven of them. Hooker.
The hand-writing againſt him may be cancelled in the
court of heaven, and yet the indictment run on in the court
of conſcience. South's Sermons.
Attend the court, and thou ſhalt briefly find
In that one place the manners of mankind;
Hear the indictments, then return again,
Call thyſelf wretch, and, if thou darſt, complain. Dryden.
E N D
END Ive. n.f. [andiwe, French; intybum, Latin.1 -
Endºve, or ſuccory, is of ſeveral ſorts; as the white, the
green, and the curled, which are only propagated by ſeed,
that is longiſh, of a white-grey colour, flat at one end, and
roundiſh at the other. It grows upon the ſtocks or ſtems of
the preceding year's growth. 41artimer's Husbandry.
E’ND less, adj. [from end.]
1. Without end; without concluſion or termination.
Nothing was more endleſs than the common method of
comparing eminent writers by an oppoſition of particular
paſſages in them. Pope's Preface tº the Iliad.
2. Infinite in longitudinal extent.
As it is pleaſant to the eye to have an endleſs proſpect, ſo it
is ſome pleaſure to a finite underſtanding to view unlimited
excellencies. Tillºtſon.
3. Infinite in duration; perpetual.
None of the heathens, how curious ſoever in ſearching out
all kinds of outward ceremonies, could ever once endeavour
to reſemble herein the church's care for the endleſs good of
her children. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 18.
But after labours long, and ſad delay,
Brings them to joyous reſt, and endleſs bliſs. Fairy Queen.
All our glory extinct, and happy ſtate,
Here ſwallow'd up in endleſs miſery Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
4. Inceſlant; continual.
All the prieſts and friars in my realm,
Shall in proceſſion ſing her endleſs praiſe. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Each pleaſing Blount ſhall endleſs ſmiles beſtow,
And ſoft Belinda's bluſh for ever glow.
E'Ndlessly. adv. [from endleſs.]
1. Inceſſantly; perpetually.
Though his promiſe has made a ſure entail of grace to all
thoſe who humbly ſeek, yet it no where engages that it ſhall
importunately and endleſsly renew its aſſaults on thoſe who have
often repulſed it. Decay of Piety.
2. Without termination of length.
E’NDlessNess. n. ſ. [from endleſs.]
1. Perpetuity; endleſs duration.
2. The quality of being round without an end.
The Tropick circles have,
Yea, and thoſe ſmall ones, which the poles engrave,
All the ſame roundneſs, evenneſs, and all
Pope.
The endleſſneſs of the Equinoćtial. Donne.
E'Ndlong. adv. [end and long..] In a ſtrait line.
Then ſpurring at full ſpeed, ran endlong on,
Where Theſeus ſat on his imperial throne. Dryden.
E’NDMost, adj. [end and mg/l.] Remoteſt; furtheſt; at the
farther end. Dić?.
To ENDO'RSE. v. a. [endſ.r, French; dorſum, Latin.]
1. To regiſter on the back of a writing; to ſuperſcribe.
A French gentleman ſpeaking with an Engliſh of the law
ſalique, the Engliſh ſaid that was meant of the women them-
ſelves, not of males claiming by women. The French gen-
tleman ſaid, where do you find that gloſs? The Engliſh an-
ſwered, look on the backſide of the record of the law ſalique,
and there you ſhall find it endorſed. Bacon's Apophth.
Upon credential letters was endorſed this ſuperſcription, To
the king who hath the ſun for his helmet. Howel's Vocal Forr.
All the letters I can find of your's I have faſtened in a folio
cover, and the reſt in bundles endorſed. Swift to Pope.
2. To cover on the back
Chariots, or elephants endors'd with tow’rs
Of archers. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd, b. iii. l. 329.
ENDo'R's EMENT. n.ſ.. [from endorſe.]
1. Superſcription; writing on the back.
2. Ratification.
Th’ endorſement of ſupreme delight,
Writ by a friend, and with his blood. Herbert.
To ENDOW. v. a. [ind.tare, Latin; endºuairer, French.]
1. To enrich with a portion.
He ſhall ſurely endow her to be his wife.
2. To ſupply with any external goods.
An alms-houſe }. to endow very handſomely for a
dozen ſuperannuated huſbandmen. Addiſon's Speciator.
3. To enrich with any excellence. -
I at firſt with two fair gifts
Created him endow’d; with happineſs
And immortality; that fondly loſt,
This other ſerv’d but to eternize woe. Milt. Parad. Lºſ’.
Among thoſe who are the moſt richly endowed by nature,
and accompliſhed by their own induſtry, how few are there
whoſe vertues are not obſcured Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 255.
God did never command us to believe, nor his miniſters to
preach any doctrine contrary to the reaſon he hath pleaſed to
endow us with. Swift.
4. To be the fortune of any one.
I do not think
So fair an outward, and ſuch ſtuff within, -
Endºws a man but him. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
ENDow MENT. n.f. [from endow.]
1. Wealth beſtowed to any perſon or uſe.
2. The beſtowing or aſſuring a dower; the ſetting
Exod. xxii. 16.
forth or
ſevering
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 358</div><p class="Text">E N E
E N F
ſevering a ſufficient portion for a vicar toward his perpetual
maintenance, when the benefice is appropriated. Cowel.
A chapel will I build, with large endºwment. Dryden.
3. Gifts of nature.
By a deſire of fame, great endowments are not ſuffered to
lie idle and uſeleſs to the publick. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 255.
If providence ſhews itſelf even in the blemiſhes of theſe
creatures, how much more does it diſcover itſelf in their ſeveral
endowments, according to the condition in which they are
poſted. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 1 2 i.
To ENDU’E. v. a. [induo, Latin.]
1. To ſupply with mental excellencies; to inveſt with intellec-
tual powers. -
Endue them with thy holy ſpirit. Common Prayer.
Wiſdom was Adam's inſtructor in Paradiſe: wiſdom endued
the fathers, who lived before the law, with the knowledge of
holy things. Hoºker, b, ii. ſ. 7.
Theſe baniſh'd men that I have kept withal,
Are men endu'd with worthy qualities.
With what eaſe,
Endu’d with royal virtues as thou art,
Appearing and beginning noble deeds,
Might'ſ thou expel this monſter from his throne. Milton.
Whatſoever other knowledge a man may be endued withal,
he is but an ignorant perſon who doth not know God, the
author of his being. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Every Chriſtian is endued with a power, whereby he is en-
abled to reſiſt and conquer temptations. Tillºtſºn, Sermon 6.
2. In the following paſſage it ſeems incorrectly printed for
endow.
Leah ſaid, God hath endued me with a good dowry. Gen.
ENDu'RAN ce. n.ſ.. [from endure.]
1. Continuance; laſtingneſs.
Some of them are of very great antiquity and continuance,
others more late and of leſs endurance. Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
2. Patience; the act of ſupporting; ſufferance.
- Great things of ſmall
One can create; and in what place foe'er
Thrive under evil, and work eaſe out of pain,
Through labour and endurance. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. ii.
Their fortitude was moſt admirable in their patience and
endurance of all evils, of pain, and of death. Temple.
3. Delay; procraſtination. Obſolete.
Í ſhould have ta'en ſome pains to bring together
Yourſelf and your accuſers, and have heard you,
Without endurance further. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
To ENDU/RE. v. a. [endurer, French; durare, Latin.] To
bear'; to undergo; to ſuſtain; to ſupport.
By thine own tongue thou art condemn'd, and muſt
Endure our law. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
The hardneſs of bodies is cauſed chiefly by the jejuneneſs
of the ſpirits, and their imparity with the tangible parts,
which make them not only hard, but fragile, and leſs enduring
of preſſure. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 844.
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure; without him, live no life. Milt. Par. Loſt.
The gout haunts uſually the eaſy and the rich, the
nice and the lazy, who grow to endure much, becauſe they
can endure little. - Temple.
I wiſh to die, yet dare not death endure. Dryd. Aurengz.
Both were of ſhining ſteel, and wrought ſo pure,
As might the ſtrokes of two ſuch arms endure. Dryden.
To ENDU/RE. v. m.
1. To laſt; to remain; to continue.
Labour not for the meat which periſheth, but for that meat
which endureth unto everlaſting life. john vi. 27.
Doth the crown endure to every generation ? Prov. xxvii.
By being able to repeat meaſures of time, or ideas of ſtated
length of duration in our minds, we can imagine duration,
Shakeſpeare.
where nothing does really endure or exiſt. Locke.
A charm, that ſhall to age endure
The mind benevolent and pure. Anºn.
2. To brook; to bear; to admit.
For how can I endure to ſee the evil that ſhall come unto
my people? Or how can I endure to ſee the deſtruction of
my kindred 2 Eſth. viii. 6.
Our great Engliſh lords could not endure that any kings
ſhould reign in Ireland but themſelves; nay, they could hardly
endure that the crown of England ſhould have any power over
them. Davies on Ireland.
ENDU’R ER. m. ſ. [from endure.]
1. One that can bear or endure; ſuſtainer; ſufferer.
They are very valiant and hardy; for the moſt part great
endurers of cold, labour, hunger, and all hardineſs. Spenſer.
2. Continuer; laſter.
ENDwis E. adv. [end and wiſe.] Erectly; uprightly; on end.
A rude and unpoliſhed America, peopled with ſlothful and
naked Indians, living in pitiful huts and cabbins, made of
poles ſet endwiſe. Ray on the Creation.
To E'NEcAt E. v. a. [eneco, Latin.] To kill; to deſtroy.
Some plagues partake of ſuch a pernicious degree of ma-
lignity, that, in the manner of a moſt preſentaneous poiſon,
they enecate in two or three hours, ſuddenly corrupting or ex-
tinguiſhing the vital ſpirits. Harvey on the Plague.
E'NE MY. n.ſ.. [ennemi, French ; inimicus, Latin.]
1. A publick foe.
All theſe ſtatutes ſpeak of Engliſh rebels and Iriſh enemier,
as if the Iriſh had never been in condition of ſubjećts, but
always out of the protećtion of the law. Davies on Ireland.
The enemy thinks of raiſing threeſcore thouſand men for
the next Summer. Addiſon on the State of the War.
2. A private opponent; an antagoniſt.
3. Any one who regards another with malevolence; not a
friend.
Kent, in diſguiſe,
Follow'd his enemy king, and did him ſervice
Improper for a ſlave. * Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
4. One that diſlikes.
He that deſignedly uſes ambiguities, ought to be looked on
as an enemy to truth and knowledge. Locke.
Bold is the critick, who dares prove
Theſe heroes were no friends to love;
And bolder he who dares aver,
That they were enemies to war.
5. [In theology.] The fiend; the devil.
Defend us from the danger of the enemy. Common Prayer.
ENERGE'Tick. adj. [itºyºrizos.]
1. Forcible; ačtive; vigorous ; powerful in effect; efficacious.
2. Operative; active; working; not at reſt.
If then we will conceive of God truly, and, as far as we
can, adequately, we muſt look upon him not only as an eter-
nal Being, but alſo as a Being eternally emergetick. Grew.
E/NERGY. n. ſ. [w:{ysia. J
1. Power not exerted in action. .
They are not effective of any thing, nor leave no work
behind them, but are energies merely; for their working upon
mirrours, and places of echo, doth not alter any thing in
thoſe bodies. Bacon.
2. Force; vigour; efficacy; influence.
Whether with particles of heav'nly fire
The God of nature did his ſoul inſpire;
Or earth, but new divided from the ſky,
And pliant ſtill, retain'd th' ethereal energy. Dryden.
God thinketh with operation infinitely perfeół, with an
omnipotent as well as an eternal energy. Grew's Coſmol. Sac.
Beg the bleſſed Jeſus to give an energy to your imperfect
prayers, by his moſt powerful interceflion. Smalridge's Serm.
What but God | -
Inſpiring God! who, boundleſs ſpirit all,
And unremitting energy, pervades,
Adjuſts, ſuſtains, and agitates the whole. Thomſon's Spring.
3. Faculty; operation.
Matter, though divided into the ſubtileſt parts, moved ſwift-
ly, is ſenſeleſs and ſtupid, and makes no approach to vital
energy. Ray on the Creation.
How can concuſſion of atoms beget ſelf-conſciouſneſs,
and other powers and energies that we feel in our minds?
- Bentley.
4. Strength of expreſſion; force of ſignification; ſpirit; life.
Who did ever, in French authors, ſee
The comprehenſive Engliſh energy. Roſcommon.
Swift and ready, and familiar communication is made by
ſpeech; and, when animated by elocution, it acquires a greater
life and energy, raviſhing and captivating the hearers. Holder.
Many words deſerve to be thrown out of our language, and
not a few antiquated to be reſtored, on account of their energy
and ſound. Swift.
To ENER v At E. v. a. [enervo, Latin. ) To weaken; to
deprive of force; to emaſculate.
Great empires, while they ſtand, do enervate and deſtroy
the forces of the natives which they have ſubdued, reſting
upon their own protećting forces. Bacon, Eſſay 59.
Sheepiſh ſoftneſs often enervates thoſe who are bred like
Prior.
fondlings at home. Locke.
On each enervate ſtring they taught the note,
To pant, or tremble through an eunuch's throat. Pope.
Footmen exerciſe themſelves, whilſt their enervated lords
are ſoftly lolling in their chariots. Arbuthn, and Pope's 44. Scrib.
ENER v A'tion. n.ſ.. [from enerve.]
1. The aët of weakening; emaſculation.
2. The ſtate of being weakened; effeminacy.
To ENE'Rve. v. a. [enervo, Latin.] To weaken ; to break
the force of; to cruſh.
We ſhall be able perfeótly to ſolve and enerve their force.
Digby on Bodies.
Such objećt hath the pow'r to ſoft'n and tame
Severeſt temper, ſmooth the rugged'ſt brow,
Enerve, and with voluptuous hope diſſolve. Milt. Par. Reg.
To ENFA'Mish. v. a. [from famiſh.] To ſtarve; to famiſh;
to kill with hunger. IDict.
To ENFE'eble. v. a. [from feeble.] To weaken; to ener-
wate; to deprive of ſtrength. I
've
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 359</div><p class="Text">E N F
E N G
I've belied a lady,
The princeſs of this country; and the air on't
Revengingly enfeebles me Shakeſpeare's Cyril, lice.
My people are with ſickneſs much enfeebled. Shakespeare H. V.
Much hath hell debas'd, and pain
, Enfiell'd me, to what I was in heav'n' Mi't. Parad. Lºſt.
Some there are that employ their time in affairs infinitely
below the dignity of their perſons; and being called by God,
or the republick, to bear great burdens, do enfeeble their un-
derſtandings, and diſable their perſons, by ſordid and brutiſh
buſineſs. Taylºr's Rule of living holy.
Sure, nature form'd me of her ſofteſt mould,
Enfºchled all my ſoul with tender paſſions,
And ſunk me even below my own weak ſex. Addiſ Cato.
To ENFE/OFF. v. a. [foſfamentum, low Latin.] To inveſt
with any dignities or poſſeſſions. A law term.
If the eldeſt ſon enfeoff the ſecond, reſerving homage,
and that homage paid, and then the ſecond ſon dies without
iſſue, it will deſcend to the eldeſt as heir, and the ſeignory is
extinct. Hale's Common Law ºf England.
ENFE of FMENT. n.ſ.. [from enfeºff.]
1. The act of enfeoffing.
2. The inſtrument or deed by which one is inveſted with poſ-
ſcſſions. . - -
To ESFETTER. v. a. [from fitter.] To bind in fetters; to
enchain.
His ſoul is ſo enfetter'd to her love,
That ſhe may make, unmake, do what ſhe liſt. Shakespeare. Othello.
ENF/L.A. D.E. n.ſ. [Fr.] A ſtrait paſſage; any thing through
which a right line may be drawn.
T; EN FILA’d E. v. a. [from the noun..] To pierce in a right
line. -
The avenues, being cut through the wood in right lines,
were enfiladed by the Spaniſh canon. Expedition to Carthagena.
To ENFIRE. v. a. [from fire.] To fire; to ſet on fire; to
kindle.
So hard thoſe heavenly beauties be enfr’d,
As things divine, leaſt paſſions do impreſs.
To EN Fo'R.C.E. v. a. [enforcir, French.]
1. To give ſtrength to ; to ſtrengthen; to invigorate.
2. To make or gain by force.
The idle ſtroke, enforcing furious way,
Miſſing the mark of his miſaimed fight,
Did fall to ground. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 8. ſtan. 8.
3. To put in act by violence.
Sker away as ſwift as ſtones
Enfºrced from the old Aſſyrian ſlings. Shakespeare Henry V.
4. To inſtigate; to provoke; to urge on; to animate.
- Fear gave her wings, and rage enforc'd my flight
Through woods and plains. Fairy Queen, b, ii. cant. 4.
If you knew to whom you ſhew this honour,
I know you would be prouder of the work, -
Than cuſtomary bounty can enforce you, Shakesp. Merch of Ven.
5. To urge with energy.
Let them aſſemble ;
And, on a ſafer judgment, all revoke
Your ignorant election; enforce his pride,
And his old hate to you. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
He prevailed with him, by enforcing the ill conſequence of
his refuſal to take the office, which would be interpreted to
his diſlike of the court. Clarendon.
To avoid all appearance of diſaffection, I have taken care
to enforce loyalty by an invincible argument. Swift.
6. To compel; to conſtrain. •
For competence of life I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evil. Shakespeare H. IV.
A juſt diſdain conceived by that queen, that ſo wicked a
rebel ſhould prevail againſt her, did move and almoſt enfºrce
her to ſend over that mighty army. IPavies on Ireland.
7. To preſs with a charge. Little uſed.
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannick pow'r: if he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the ſpoil got on the Antiates
Was ne'er diſtributed. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
To EN Fo'Rc E. v. n. To prove; to evince; to ſhew beyond
contradićtion.
Which laws in ſuch caſe we muſt obey, unleſs there be
reaſon ſhewed, which may neceſſarily enforce that the law of
reaſon, or of God, doth enjoin the contrary. Hooker, b. i.
EN Fo'R cf. m. ſ. [from force..] Power; ſtrength.
He now defics thee thrice to fingle fight,
Spenser.
As a petty enterpriſe of ſmall enforce. . Milton's Agoni/les.
EN Forcedly, adv. [from enfºrce..] By violence; not volun-
tarily 3 not ſpontaneouſly; not by choice.
If thou didſt put this ſow'r cold habit on, e
To caſtigate thy pride, 'twere well; but thou
Doſt it enforcedy: thoud'ſt courtier be,
Wert thou not beggar.
- ENEC'RCEMENT. n ſifrom enºrce.]
1. An act of violence; compulſion; force offered.
Confeſs 'twasher's, and by what rough enforcement
Shakeſpeare's Timon.
You got it from her. Shakeſp. All's well that end, wal.
He that contendeth againſt theſe enfºrcements, may eaſily
maſter or reſiſt them. Raleigh', Hyory of the J/orld.
2. Sanétion; that which gives force to a law.
The rewards and puniſhments of another life, which the
Almighty has eſtabliſhed as the enfºrcements of his law, are
of weight enough to determine the choice. Locke.
3. Motive of convićtion; urgent evidence.
The perſonal deſcent of God himſelf, and his aſſumption
of our fleſh to his divinity, was an enforcement beyond all the
methods of wiſdom that were ever made uſe of in the
world. Hammond on Fundamental,
4. Preſſing exigence.
More than I have ſaid,
The leiſure and enfºrement of the time
Forbids to dwell on. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
EN force R. n.ſ. [from enforce..] Compeller; one who effects
by violence.
When a man tumbles a cylinder or roller down an hill,
'tis certain that the man is the violent enforcer of the firſt mo-
tion of it. Hammºnd's Fundamentals.
EN Fou LDR ED. adj. [from fºudre, French. J. Mixed with
lightning. -
Heart cannot think what outrage and what cries,
With foul enſouldred ſmoak and flaſhing fire,
The hell-bred beaſt threw forth unto the ſkies. Fairy Queen.
To EN FRA'Nch is E v. a. [from franchiſe.]
1. To admit to the privileges of a freeman.
The Engliſh colonies, and ſome ſepts of the Iriſhry, en-
franchiſed by ſpecial charters, were admitted to the benefit of
the laws. Davies on Ireland.
Romulus was the natural parent of all thoſe people that
were the firſt inhabitants of Rome, or of thoſe that were after
incorporated and enfranchiſed into that name, city, or govern-
ment. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
2. To ſet free from ſlavery.
Men, forbearing wine, come from drinking healths to a
draught at a meal; and, laſtly, to diſcontinue altogether: but
if a man have the fortitude and reſolution to enfranchiſe him-
ſelf at once, that is the beſt. Bacon's Eſſays.
If they won a battle, priſoners became ſlaves, and
continued ſo in their generations, unleſs enfranchiſed by their
maſters. Temple.
3. To free or releaſe from cuſtody.
The gentleman, I told your ladyſhip,
Had come along with me, but that his miſtreſs
Did hold his eyes lockt in her cryſtal looks.
—Belike, that now ſhe hath enfranchis'd them,
Upon ſome other pawn for fealty.
4. To deniſen; to endeniſen.
Theſe words have been erfranchiſed amongſt us.
ENFRANCH is EMENT. n.ſ.. [from enfranchiſe.]
1. Inveſtiture of the privileges of a deniſen.
The incorporating a man into any ſociety, or body politick.
For example, he that is by charter made denizen of England,
is ſaid to be enfranchiſed; and ſo is he that is made a citizen
of London, or other city, or burgeſs of any town corporate,
becauſe he is made partaker of thoſe liberties that appertain to
the corporation. . Cowel.
His coming hither hath no farther ſcope,
Than for his lineal royalties, and to beg
Enfranchiſement immediate on his knees. Shakespeare Rich. II.
2. Releaſe from priſon or from ſlavery.
Never did captive with a freer heart
Caſt off his chains of bondage, and embrace
His golden uncontroul’d enfranchiſement. Shakespeare Richard II.
EN FRoºz EN. particip. [from frozen.] Congealed with cold.
Yet to augment the anguiſh of my ſmart,
Thou haſt enfrozen her diſdainful breaſt,
That no one drop of pity there doth reſt. Spenser on Lºve.
To ENGAGE. v. a. [engager, French.]
1. To make liable for a debt to a creditor.
I have engag'd myſelf to a dear friend,
Engag'd my friend to his meer enemy,
To feed my means, Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
2. To impawn; to ſtake.
They moſt perfidiouſly condemn
Thoſe that engag'd their lives for them,
3. To enliſt; to bring into a party.
All wicked men are of a party againſt religion: ſome luſt
or intereſt engageth them againſt it. Hillotſºn's Sermons.
4. To embark in an affair; to enter in an undertaking.
So far had we engaged ourſelves, unfortunate ſouls, that we
liſted not to complain, ſince our complaints could not but carry
the greateſt accuſation to ourſelves. Sidney, b. ii.
Before I engage myſelf in #ºf any anſwer to this ob-
jećtion of inconſumptible lights, I would ſee the effect cer-
tainly averred. Digby on Bodies:
5. To unite ; to attach; to make adherent.
This humanity anti good-nature engages every body to him,
ſo that when he is pleaſant upon any of them, all his family
are in good humour. Addiſo.'s Speciator, Nº. 105.
2 6. To
Shakeſpeare.
Watts.
Hudibras, p. ii.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 360</div><p class="Text">E N G
E N G
6. To induce; to win by pleaſing means; to gain.
To ev'ry duty he cou’d minds engage,
Provoke their courage, and command their rage. Waller.
His beauty theſe, and thoſe his blooming age,
The reſt his houſe and his own fame engage. Dryden's Án.
So ſhall I court thy deareſt truth, º
When beauty ceaſes to engage;
So thinking on thy charming youth,
I'll love it o'er again in age. Prior.
7. To bind by any appointment or contračt.
We have been firm to our allies, without declining any
expence to which we had engaged ourſelves, and we have even
exceeded our engagement. Atterbury's Sermons.
8. To ſeize by the attention.
9. To employ; to hold in buſineſs.
For I ſhall ſing of battles, blood and rage,
Which princes and their people did engage. Dryden.
10. To encounter; to fight.
The rebel knave, who dares his prince engage,
Proves the juſt vićtim of his royal rage. Pope.
To ENGA'GE. v. n.
1. To conflićt; to fight.
Upon advertiſement of the Scots army, the earl of Holland
was ſent with a body to meet and engage with it. Clarend.n.
2. To embark in any buſineſs; to enliſt in any party.
'Tis not, indeed, my talent to engage
In lofty trifles, or to ſwell my page
With wind and noiſe. Dryden's Perſ. Sat. 5.
ENGAGEMENT. n.ſ.. [from engage; engagement, French.]
1. The act of engaging, impawning, or making liable to a
debt.
2. Obligation by contračt. -
We have, in expence of blood, exceeded our engagements.
Alterbury's Sermons.
3. Adherence to a party or cauſe; partiality.
This practice may be obvious to any who impartially, and
without engagement, is at the pains to examine. Swift.
4. Employment of the attention.
Play, either by our too conſtant or too long engagement in
it, becomes like an employment or profeſion. Rºgers's Serm.
5. Fight; conflićt; battle. 4.
Our army, led by valiant Torriſmond,
Is now in hot engagement with the Moors. 'Dryden.
Encourag’d by deſpair, or obſtinate
To fall like men in arms, ſome dare renew -
Feeble engagement, meeting glorious ſate
On the firm land. Phillips.
6. Obligation; motive.
This is the greateſt engagement not to forfeit an oppor-
tunity. - Hammond's Fundamentals.
To ENGA'ol. v. a. [from gaol.] To impriſon; to confine.
Within my mouth you have engaol d my tongue,
Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips. Shakespeare R. II.
To ENGA'RRIson. v. a. [from garriſon J To protect by a
garriſon.
Neptune with a flying guard doth engarriſon her ſtrongly.
To ENGE'NDER. v. a. [engendrer, French.]
1. To beget between different ſexes.
This baſtard love is engendered betwixt luſt and idleneſs. Sid.
2. To produce; to form. -
Oh nature! thou, who of the ſelf ſame mettle,
Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is pufft,
Engender'ſ the black toad and adder blue. Shakeſp. Timon.
Again, if ſouls do other ſouls beget,
'Tis by themſelves, or by the body's pow'r :
If by themſelves, what doth their working let,
But they might ſouls engender ev'ry hour Davies.
3. To excite; to cauſe ; to produce.
Say, can you faſt? Your ſtomachs are too young,
And abſtinence engerders maladies. Shakespeare Love's Lab. Loſt.
The preſence of a king engenders love
Amongſt his ſubjects and his loyal friends. Shakespeare HenryVI.
That engenders thunder in his breaſt,
And makes him roar theſe accuſations forth Shakespeare H. VI.
It unloads the mind, engenders thoughts, and animates
virtue. Addison's Spectator, Nº. 93.
4. To bring forth.
Vice engenders ſhame, and folly broods o'er grief. Prior.
To ENGE'NDER. v. n. To be cauſed; to be produced.
Thick clouds are ſpread, and ſtorms engender there. Dryd.
ENGINE, n.ſ.. [engin, French ; ingegnº, Italian.]
1. Any mechanical complication, in which various movements
and parts concur to one effect.
2. A military machine.
This is our engine, towers that overthrows ;
Our ſpear that hurts, our ſword that wounds our foes. Fairf.
3. Any inſtrument.
The ſword, the arrow, the gun, with many terrible en-
gines of death, will be well employcd. Kaleigh's Eſſays.
He takes the ſciſſars, and extends
The little engine on his fingers ends. Pope's Rape of the Lock.
Howel's Pocal Forrºſ.
4. Any inſtrument to throw water upon burning houſes.
Some cut the pipes, and ſome the engines play;
And ſome, more bold, mount ladders to the fire. Dryden.
5. Any means uſed to bring to paſs, or to effect. Uſually in an
ill ſenſe.
Prayer muſt be divine and heavenly, which the devil with
all his engines ſo violently oppoſeth. Duppa's Rules for Devotion.
6. An agent for another. In contempt.
They had th' eſpecial engines been, to rear
His fortunes up into the ſtate they were.
ENGINEER. m. ſ. [engingnier, French..] One who manages en-
gines; one who direéts the artillery of an army.
For ’tis the ſport to have the engineer
Hoiſt with his own petard. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Him thus enrag'd,
Deſcrying from afar, ſome engineer,
Dext'rous to guide th' unerring charge, deſign'd
By one nice ſhot to terminate the war. Phillips.
An author, who points his ſatire at a great man, is like the
engineer who ſignalized himſelf by this ungenerous pračtice.
Addison's Freeholder, N°. 19.
E'NGINER Y. m. ſ. [from engine.]
1. The act of managing artillery:
They may deſcend in mathematicks to fortification, archi-
te&amp;ture, enginery, or navigation. Milion on Education.
2. Engines of war; artillery. -
We ſaw the foe
Approaching, groſs and huge, in hollow cube
Training his dev’liſh enginery. - Milton.
To ENGI'Rd. v. a. [from gird..] To encircle; to ſurround;
to environ; to encompaſs.
My heart is drown'd with grief,
My body round engi t with miſery;
For what’s more miſerable than diſcontent Shakespeare Hen. VI.
That gold muſt round engirt theſe brows of mine. Shakespeare
E/NGLE. m. ſ. [derived from the French engluer, to catch with
birdlime.] A gull; a put; a bubble. Hanmer.
I ſpied
An ancient engle going down the hill,
Will ſerve our turn. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew:
An alteration of Theobald's for angel. -
ENGLISH. adj. [engler, Saxon.] Belonging to England;
thence Engliſh is the language of England.
He hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian; and you ma
come into the court, and ſwear that I have a poor pennywo
in the Engliſh. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
Of Engliſh talc, the coarſer ſort is called plaiſter, or parget;
the finer, ſpoad. JWoodward.
To E/NGLISH. v. a. [from the noun. J. To tranſlate into
Engliſh.
We find not a word in the text can properly be rendered
aniſe, which is what the Latins call anethum, and properly
Engliſhed dill. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vii. c. 7.
To ENGLU't. v. a. [engloutir, French..]
1. To ſwallow up.
Neither my place, nor ought I heard of buſineſs,
Hath rais'd me from my bed; nor doth the general
Take hold on me: for my particular grief
Engluts and ſwallows other ſorrows. Shakeſpeare's Othelle,
Certainly, thou art ſo near the gulf,
Thou needs muſt be englutted. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
How many prodigal bits have ſlaves and peaſants
This night englutted / Shakeſpeare's Timon.
2. To glut; to pamper.
Whoſe grieved minds, which choler did englut,
Againſt themſelves turning their wrathful ſpight. Fai. 98.
Being once englutted with vanity, he will ſtraightway loath
all learning. Aſtham's Schoolmaſter.
To ENGo'r E. v. a. [from gore.] To pierce; to prick.
As ſavage bull, whom two fierce maſtiffs bait,
When rancour doth with rage him once engore,
Forgets with wary ward them to await,
But with his dreadful horns them drives afore. Fairy Queen:
To ENGo'Rce. v. a. [from gorge, French, a throat.] To
ſwallow ; to devour; to gorge.
Then fraught with rancour and engorged ire, -
He caſt at once him to avenge for all. Fairy Queen, b. i.
That is the gulf of greedineſs, they ſay,
That deep engorgºth all this world is prey. Spenser's Fa, 98.
To ENGo'RGE. v. m. To devour ; to feed with eagerneſs and
voracity; to riot. -
Greedily ſhe engorg'd without reſtraint, . -
And knew not eating death! Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
To ENG RAIL. v. a. [from gree, French, hail.] To batter;
to bruiſe as with hail. A word now uſed only in heraldry,
for, to indent in curve lines.
AEacides then ſhews
A long lance, and a caldron, new, engrail'd with twenty
hues. Chapman's Iliads:
Polwheel beareth a ſaultier engrailed. Carew's Survey.
To ENGRAIN. v. a. [from grain..] To die deep; to die in
grain. 8 C Sees
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 361</div><p class="Text">E N G
E N }
Sees thou how freſh my flowers being ſpread,
... Dyed in lilie white and crimſon red, 3.
With leaves engrain’d in luſty green; Spenſer's Paſtoral.
To ENGRA’pple. v. n. [from grºpple.] To cloſe with 3 to
contend with hold on each other.
There ſhall young Hotſpur, with a fury led, -
Engrapple with thy ſon, as fierce as he. Danie"; Civ. War.
To End RA’sp. v. a. [from graſp.] To ſeize 3 to hold faſt in
the hand; to gripe.
Now 'gan Pyrrocles wax as wood as he,
And him affronted with impatient might;
And both together fierce engraſped he, -
Whiles Guyon ſtanding by, their uncouth ſtrife does ſee.
Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 5: Jian. 20.
To ENGRA’ve. v. a. preter. engraved; part. Paſſ ºrº
or engraven. [engraver, French.]
1. Topićture by inciſions in any matter.
Her ivory forehead, full of bounty brave,
Like a broad table, did itſelf diſpread,
For love his lofty triumphs to engrave, -
And write the battles of his great godhead. Fairy Sºueen.
O'er all, the heav'n's refulgent image ſhines;
On either gate were ſix engraven ſigns. Addison's Ovid's Met.
Names freſh engrav'd appear'd of wits renown'd :
I look'd again, nor could their trace be found. Poſe.
2. To mark wood or ſtone.
Engrave the two ſtones with the names.
3. To impreſs deeply; to imprint.
It will ſcarce ſeem poſſible, that God ſhould engrave prin-
ciples, in men's minds, in words of uncertain ſignifica-
tion. Locke.
Our Saviour makes this return, fit to be engraven in the
hearts of all promoters of charity. Atterbury's Serm.ns.
Sounds which addreſs the ear, are loſt and die
In one ſhort hour; but that which ſtrikes the eye,
Lives long upon the mind: the faithful ſight
Engraves the knowledge with a beam of light.
4. [from grave.] To bury; to inhume ; to inter.
The ſon had charge of them now being dead,
In ſeemly ſort their corſes to engrave,
Ex. xxviii. 1 1.
//atts.
And deck with dainty flowers their bridal bed. Fai. Queen. :
ENGRA'v ER. n.ſ.. [from engrave J A cutter in ſtone or other
matter. -
Images are not made in the brain itſelf, as the pencil of a
painter or engraver makes the images in the table or metal,
but are imprinted in a wonderful method in the very ſoul
itſelf. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To ENGR1'Ev E. v. a. [from grieve..] To pain; to vex; to
afflićt; to diſconſolate.
The gnawing anguiſh, and ſharp jealouſy,
Which his ſad ſpeech infixed in my breaſt,
Rankled ſo fore, and feſter'd inwardly,
That my engrieved mind could find no reſt. Fairy Queen.
Aches, and hurts, and corns, do engrieve either towards
rain, or towards froſt. Bacon's Natural Hijiory, Nº. 828.
To ENGRoss. v. a. [groffir, French. J
1. To thicken; to make thick.
But more happy he than wiſe,
. Of that ſea's nature did him not aviſe;
The waves thereof ſo ſlow and ſluggiſh were,
Engroſs'd with mud, which did them foul agrieſe,
That every weighty thing they did upbear. Fairy Queen.
2. To encreaſe in bulk. -
Though pillars, by channeling, be ſeemingly engroſſed to
our fight, yet they are truly weakened in themſelves. J/otten.
3. To fatten; to plump up.
Not ſleeping, to engroſs his idle body;
But praying, to enrich his watchful ſoul. Shakespeare Rich. III.
4. To ſeize in the groſs; to ſeize the whole of any thing.
If thou engroſºft all the griefs as thine,
Thou robb'ſt me of a moiety. Shakespeare All's well that end, well.
Thoſe two great things that ſo engroſ, the deſires and deſigns
of both the nobler and ignobler fort of mankind, are to be
found in religion; namely, wiſdom and pleaſure. South's Serm.
A dog, a parrot, or an ape,
Qr ſome worſe brute in human ſhape,
Engroſs the fancies of the fair. Swift.
5. To purchaſe the whole of any commodity for the ſake of
ſelling at a high price.
6. To copy in a large hand.
Here is th’ indictment of the good lord Haſtings,
Which in a ſet hand fairly is engroſs'd, Shakespeare Rich. III.
A clerk, foredoom'd his father's ſoul to croſs, *
E who Pens a ſtanza when he ſhould engroſs. Pºpe's Epiſils.
NGRoss ER. m.ſ.. [from engroſs.] He that purchaſes large
quantities of any commodity, in order to ſell it at a high
price. tº
A new ſort of engroſſers, or foreſtallers, having the feeding
and ſupplying this numerous body of workmen in the woollen
manufactures, out of their warchouſes, ſet the price upon the
Poor landholder. Locke
ENG. Ro'ssMENT, n.ſ.. [from engrºſs.] Appropriation of things
in the groſs ; exorbitant acquiſition.
Our thighs are packt with wax, our mouths with honey:
We bring it to the hive; and, like the bees,
Are murder'd for our pains! This bitter taſte
Yield his engriffments to the dying father. Shakesp. Henry IV.
Thoſe held their immoderate engroſſments of power and
favour by no other tenure than preſumption. Swift.
To ENGUA’R D. v. a. [from guard. J. To proteć ; to defend;
to ſurround as guards.
A hundred knights' yes, that on ev'ry dream
He may enºuard his dotage with their pow'rs,
And hold our lives at mercy. Slakeſpear ºf King Lear,
To ENHA's CE. v. a. ſha'ſſºr, enhauſ”, French.J
1. To lift up ; to raiſe on high. A ſenſe now obſolete.
Both of them high at once their hands enhan,’d,
And both at once their huge blows down did ſway. I’a. &amp;#.
2. To raiſe; to advance; to heighten in price. -
The deſire of money is every where the ſame ; its vent
varies very little, but as its greater ſcarcity enhances its price,
and increaſes the ſcramble. Locke.
3. To raiſe in effecm.
What is it but the experience of want that enhances the
value of plenty. L’Eſtrange.
The remembrance of the difficulties we now undergo, will
contribute to enlance our pleaſure. Atterbury's Sermons.
4. To aggravate ; to increaſe from bad to worſe.
To believe or pretend that whatever our hearts incite is
the will of God within us, is the principle of villainy that
hath acted in the children of diſobedience, enhanced and im-
proved with circumſtances of greater impudence than the
moſt abominable heathens were guilty of. Hammond.
The relation which thoſe children bore to the prieſthood,
contributed to enhance their guilt, and increaſe their puniſh-
ment. - Atier buy’s S.rmons.
ENHA'Nc E MENT. n ſ [from enhance.]
1. Encreaſe; augmentation of value.
Their yearly rents are not improved, the landlords making
no leſs gain by fines than by enhancement of rents. Ea.cº.
2. Aggravation; encreaſe of ill.
Jocular ſlanders have, from the ſlightneſs of the temptation,
an enhancement of guilt. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 5.
ENIGMA. m. ſ. [anigma, Latin; &amp;nywa.] A riddle; an ob-
ſcure queſtion; a poſition expreſſed in remote and ambiguous
terns.
The dark enigma will allow
A meaning; which, if well I underſtand,
From ſacrilege will free the god's command. Dryden.
A cuſtom was amongſt the ancients of propoſing an enigma
at feſtivals, and adjudging a reward to him that ſolved it. Pope.
ENIGMATICAL. adj. [from enigma.]
1. Obſcure; ambiguouſly or darkly expreſſed. -
Your anſwer, ſir, is enigmatical. Shakesp. Much Ado about Noth.
Enigmatical deliveries comprehend uſeful verities; but
being miſtaken by liberal expoſitors at firſt, they have been
miſunderflood by moſt ſince. Brown's Pulgar Erronry.
2. Cloudy ; obſcurely conceived or apprehended.
Faith here is the aſſent to thoſe things which come to us by
hearing, and are ſo believed by adherence, or dark enigratical
knowledge, but hereafter are ſeen or known demonſtratively.
- Hammond's Pracical Catechiſm.
ENIGMAT IcAL LY. adv. [from enigma.] In a ſenſe different
from that which the words in their familiar acceptation imply.
Homer ſpeaks enigmatically, and intends that theſe monſters
are merely the creation of poetry. Notes on the Odyſſey.
EN 16 M Atist. n.ſ.. [from enigma.] One who deals in ob-
ſcure and ambiguous matters; maker of riddles.
That I may deal more ingenuouſly with my reader than
the abovementioned enigmatiſt has done, I ſhall preſent him.
with a key to my riddle; which, upon application, he will
find exactly fitted to all the words of it. Addison's I//ig Exam.
To ENJOIN. v. a. ſº French.) To direct; to or-
der; to preſcribe. It is more authoritative than direct, and
leſs imperious than command.
To ſatisfy the good old man,
I would bend under any heavy weight -
That he'll enjºin me to Shakespeare Mºuth Ado alout Nºthing.
Monks and philoſophers, and ſuch as do continually enja"
themſelves. Pacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 292.
It endeavours to ſecure every man's intereſt, by enjoining
that truth and fidelity be inviolably preſerved. Tillºtſ. Serºons.
ENJJ'INER. m.ſ. [ from enjoin. J. One who gives injuris-
tions. Picſ.
ENJo'INMFNT. n.ſ. [from cºin.) Direétion; command.
Critical trial ſhould be made by publick enjoinment, whereby
determination might be ſettled beyond debate. 1, own’, ſº fºr.
To ENJOY. v. a. [jcuir, enj uir, French J -
1. To feel or perceive with pleaſure; to have a pleaſing Spensere of
to be delighted with.
I could enjºy the pangs of death,
And ſmile in agony. A....”. Caº.
2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 362</div><p class="Text">E N L
E N M
* -
2. To obtain poſſeſſion or fruition of.
Edward the ſaint, in whom it pleaſed God, righteous and
juſt, to let England ſee what a bleſfing fin and iniquity would
not ſuffer it to enjoy. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
* He, who to enjoy
Plato's elyſium, leap'd into the ſea,
Cleombrotus. Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. iii. 1. 471.
3. To pleaſe; to gladden; to exhilarate; to glad; to delight.
This ſenſe is uſual with the reciprocal pronoun, and is derived
from enjouir.
Creatures are made to erjºy themſelves, as well as to ſerve
• More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
When a man ſhall, with a ſober, ſedate, diabolical rancour,
look upon and enjy himſelf in the fight of his neighbour's
ſin and ſhamc, can he plead the inſtigation of any appetite in
nature ? South's Sermons.
To ENJo'Y. v. m. To live in happineſs.
Then I ſhall be no more
And Adam, wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct. Milton's Parad. Loft.
ENJo'y E.R. m.ſ.. [from enjoy..] One that has fruition or poſ-
ſeſſion. Dić7.
ENJo'y MENT. n.ſ. [ ſrom enjoy. J Pleaſure; happineſs;
fruition. -
His hopes and expectations are bigger than his enjoyments.
Tillaſºn, Sermon I.
us
To ENK1'NDI.E. v. a. [from kindle.]
1. To ſet on fire; to inflame; to put in a flame.
Edmund, enkinde all the ſparks of nature
To quit this horrid act. Shakeſp. King Lear.
2. To rouſe paſſions; to ſet the ſoul into a flame.
Your hand
Gave ſign for me to leave you: ſo I did,
Fearing to ſtrengthen that impatience,
Which ſeem'd too much enkindled.
3. To incite to any act or hope.
Do you not hope your children ſhall be kings:
When thoſe that gave the thane of Cawder to me,
Promis’d no leſs to them 2
That, truſted home,
Might yet enkindle you unto the crown. Shakeſp. Macleth.
To ENLA'RC E. v. a. [clargir, French.]
1. To make greater in quantity or appearance.
The wall, in luſtre and effect like glaſs,
Which o'er each object caſting various dyes,
Enlarges ſome, and others multiplics. Pºpe's Temp. of Fame.
2. To encreaſe any thing in magnitude; to extend.
Where there is ſomething both laſting and ſcarce, and ſo
valuable to be hoarded up, there men will not be apt to en-
large their poſſeſſions of land. Locke.
3. To encreaſe by repreſentation; to magnify ; to exaggerate.
4. To dilate; to expand.
O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart
is enlarged. 2 Cor. vi. 1 1.
5. To ſet free from limitation.
Though ſhe appear honeſt to me, yet at other places
ſhe enlargeth her mirth ſo far, that there is ſhrewd conſtruc-
tion made of her. Shakeſpeare's Merry I/ives of hindſºr.
6. To extend to more purpoſes or uſes.
It hath grown from no other root than only a deſire to
enlarge the neceſſary uſe of the word of God, which deſire
hath begotten an errour, enlarging it farther than ſoundneſs of
truth will bear. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 1.
7. To amplify; to aggrandiſe.
This is that ſcience which would truly enlarge mens minds,
were it ſtudied. Locke.
Could the mind, as in number, come to ſo ſmall a part of
extenſion or duration as excluded diviſibility, that would be
the indiviſible unit, or idea; by repetition of which it would
make its more enlarged ideas of extenſion and duration. Locke.
8. To releaſe from confinement.
Enlarge the man committed yeſterday,
That rail'd againſt our perſon. Shakespeare care's Henry V.
9. To diffuſe in cloquence.
They enlarged themſelves upon this ſubječt with all the in-
vidious infinuations they could deviſe. C arendon, b. viii.
To ENLA'RG E. v. n. To expatiate; to ſpeak in many words.
They appointed the chancellor of the Exchequer to enlarge
upon any of thoſe particulars. Clarendon, b. viii.
This is a theme ſo unpleaſant, I delight not to enlarge on
it; rather wiſh the memory of it were extinét. Decay ºf Piety.
ENLA'RC EMENT. n.ſ.. [from enlarge.]
1. Encreaſe; augmentation; farther extenſion.
The king afterwards enlarged the conſtant obedience of the
city with enlargement both of liberties and of revenues. Hayw.
The ocean, which ſo long our hopes confin'd,
Could give no limits to his vaſter mind :
Our bounds en'argement was his lateſt toil,
Nor hath he left us prisºners to our iſle. JWaller.
There never were any iſlands, or other conſiderable par-
cels of land, amaſſed or heaped up; nor any enlargement, or
Shck. jul Caſar.
addition of earth, made to the continent by the mud that is
carried down into the ſea by rivers. Iłoodward's Nat. Hiſ.
The commons in Rome generally purſued the enlargement
of their power by more ſet quarrels of one entire aſſembly
againſt another. Swift on the Diſſent. in Athens and Rome.
The Greek tongue received many enlarg, ments between the
time of Homer and that of Plutarch. Swift.
2. Releaſe from confinement or ſervitude.
- Lieutenant,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees? Shakespeare Henry VI.
If thou holdeſt thy peace at the time, then ſhall there en-
largement and deliverance ariſe to the Jews from another
place. Eſther iv. 14-
3. Magnifying repreſentation.
And all who told it, added ſomething new ; -
And all who heard it, made enlargements too. Pope.
4. Expatiating ſpecch; copious diſcourſe.
He concluded with an enlargement upon the vices and cor-
ruptions which were got into the army. Clarendon, b. viii.
ENLA'RGER. m.ſ.. [from en'arge.] Amplifier; one that en-
creaſes or dilates any thing.
We ſhall not contentiouſly rejoin, but confer what is in us
unto his name and honour, ready to be ſwallowed in any
worthy enlarger. Brown's Pulgar Errours:
To ENLI'gH r. v. a. ſſrom light.] To illuminate; to ſupply
with light; to enlighten.
Wit from the firſt has ſhone on ages paſt, .
Enlights the preſent, and ſhall warm the laſt. Pope.
To ENLI'GHT EN. v. a. [from light.] -
1. To illuminate; to ſupply with light.
As one ſun ſhineth to the whole world, ſo there is no faith
but this one publiſhed, the brightneſs whereof muſt enlighten
all that come to the knowledge of the truth. Hooker, b. v.J. 46.
2. To inſtruct; to furniſh with encreaſe of knowledge.
This doćtrine is ſo agreeable to reaſon, that we meet with
it in the writings of the enlightened heathens. Speciator.
'Tis he who enlightens our underſtanding, correóts our wills,
and enables us to ſubdue our affections to the law of God. Rog.
3. To cheer; to exhilarate; to gladden. -
4. To ſupply with fight; to quicken in the faculty of viſion.
Love never fails to maſter what he finds; -
The fool enſightens, and the wiſe he blinds. Dryden.
ENLI'GHT ENER. m.ſ.. [from enlighten.]
1. Illuminator; one that gives light.
O, ſent from heav'n,
Enlight'ner of my darkneſs gracious things -
Thou haſt reveal’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii. 1. 27.1:
2. Inſtructor. -
To ENLINK. v.a. [from link.] To chain to ; to bind.
What is it then to me, if impious war,
Array'd in flames like to the prince of fiends,
Do with his ſmirch'd complexion all fell feats,
Enlinkt to waſte and deſolation. Shakeſp. Henry V.
To ENLI've N. v. a. [from life, live.] *
1. To make quick; to make alive; to animate.
2. To make vigorous or active.
In a glaſs-houſe the workmen often fling in a ſmall quan-
tity of freſh coals, which ſeems to diſturb the fire, but very
much enlivers it. , Swift's Thoughts on various Subjects.
3. To make ſprightly or vivacious.
4. To make gay or cheerful in appearance.
ENLI'v ENER. n.ſ.. [from enliven.] That which animates :
that which puts in motion; that which invigorates.
But fire, th’ enlivener of the general frame,
Is one, its operation ſtill the ſame:
Its principle is in itſelf; while ours
Works, as confederates war, with mingled pow'rs. Dryden.
To ENLU'MIN E. v. a. ſenluminer, French..] To illumine; to
illuminate; to enlighten. See ILLUMINE, -
For having yet, in his dedućted ſpright,
Some ſparks remaining of that heav'nly fire,
He is enlumin'd with that goodly light,
Unto like goodly ſemblance to aſpire. Spenſ. Hymn on Lºve.
E'NMITY.. n.ſ.. [from enemy; as if enemity, inamity.]
1. Unfriendly diſpoſition; malevolence; averſion.
Their being forced to their books, in an age at enmity with
all reſtraint, has been the reaſon why many have hated
books. Lºcke.
2. Contrariety of intereſts or inclinations; mutual malignity.
They ſhall within this hour,
On a diſſenſion of a doit, break out
In bittereſt enmity. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Between thee and the woman I will put -
Elimity; and between thine and her ſeed: -
Her ſeed ſhall bruiſe thy head, thou bruiſe his heel. Miltºn.
How far theſe controverſies, and appearing enmities of thoſe
glorious creatures, may be carried, is not my buſineſs to ſhew
or determine. Dryden's juven. Dedication.
3. State of oppoſition. -
Know ye not that the friendſhip of the world is enmity
with God jam. iv. 4.
You muſt firm'v be convinced, that every ſin you commit
ſets
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 363</div><p class="Text">E N O
E N R
ſets you at enmity with heaven, and will, if not forſaken, ren-
der you incapable of it. Iſake's Preparation frPeath.
4. Malice; miſchievous attempts.
I abjure all roofs, and chuſe
To wage againſt the enmit, o' th' air. Shakeſ King Lear.
He who performs his duty in a ſtation of great power, muſt
needs incur the utter enmity of many, and the high diſpleaſure
of more. Atterbury's Sermons.
To ENMA'RBLE. v. a. [from marble.] To turn to marble; to
harden.
Their dying to delay,
Thou do'ſt enmarble the proud heart of her,
Whoſe love before their life they do prefer. Spenser.
To ENME’s H. v. a. [from meſh.] To net; to intangle; to
intrap.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch;
And out of her own goodneſs make the net
That ſhall enmeſh them all. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
ENNE'AGon. m. ſ. [ima and ſ.a.] A figure of nine angles.
ENNEA'Tic AL. adj. [wia,] Enneatical days, are every ninth
day of a ſickneſs; and enmeatical year, every ninth year of
one's life.
To ENNoºple. v a. [ennollir, French.]
1. To raiſe from commonalty to nobility.
Many fair promotions
Are given daily to ennoble thoſe,
That ſcarce ſome two days ſince were worth a noble. Shakespeare
2. To dignify; to aggrandiſe; to exalt; to raiſe.
God raiſed up the ſpirit of this great perſon, and ennobled
his courage and conduct with the entire overthrow of this
mighty hoſt. South's Sermºns.
What can ennoble ſots, or ſlaves, or cowards !
Alas! not all the blood of all the Howards. Pope's Eſſays.
3. To elevate ; to magnify.
None ſo lovely, ſweet and fair,
Or do more ennoble love. J/aller.
Ennºbled, yet unchang'd, if nature ſhine. Anon.
4. To make famous or illuſtrious.
The breath of Scotland the Spaniards could not endure;
neither durſt they as invaders land in Ireland, but only en-
nobled ſome of the coaſts thereof with ſhipwrecks. Lacon.
ENNobleMENT. n.ſ.. [from ennoble.]
1. The act of raiſing to the rank of nobility.
He added during parliament, to his former creations, the
ennoblement or advancement in nobility of a few others. Bacon.
2. Exaltation; elevation; dignity. -
The eternal wiſdom enriched us with all ennoblements, ſuit-
able to the meaſures of an unſtraitned goodneſs. Glanv. Scepſ.
ENoDA'tion. m. ſ. [enodatio, Latin.]
1. The act of untying a knot.
2. Solution of a difficulty. IXić7.
ENORMITY. m. ſ. [from enormour.]
1. Deviation from rule; irregularity.
2, Deviation from right; depravity; corruption.
We ſhall ſpeak of the particular abuſes and enormities of
the government. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
That the mean, which this law provideth, will be always
ſufficient to bridle or reſtrain enormity, no man can warrant.
Hoºker, b. iii. ſ. 1 o.
There are many little enormities in the world, which our
preachers would be very glad to ſee removed; but at the ſame
time dare not meddle with them, for fear of betraying the
dignity of the pulpit. Addison's Guardian, Nº. 1 16.
3. Atrocious crimes; flagitious villanies; crimes exceeding the
common meaſure.
It is not a bare ſpeculation that kings may run into enormi-
ties; the practice may be proved by examples. Swift.
ENORMOUS. adj. [enormis, Latin J
1. Irregular; out of rule; not regulated by any ſlated meaſures;
excurſive beyond the limits of a regular figure.
Nature here -
Wanton'd, as in her prime; and plaid at will
Her virgin fancies, pouring forth more ſweets,
Wild above rule, or art, enºrmous bliſs' Milton's Par. Left.
The enormºus part of the light in the circumference of every
lucid point, ought to be leſs diſcernible in ſhorter teleſcopes
than in longer, becauſe the ſhorter tranſmit leſs light to the
‘. Newton's Opt.
2. Diſordered; confuſed.
I ſhall find time
From this enormous ſtate, and ſeek to give
Loſſes their remedies. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. Wicked beyond the common meaſure.
4. Exceeding in bulk the common meaſures: always uſed with
ſome degree of diſlike, or horror, or wonder.
A giant-ſhepherd here his flock maintains,
Far from the reſt, and ſolitary reigns,
A form enormous / far unlike the race
Of human birth, in ſtature, or in face. Pope's Odyſſey.
Eso'RMoUSLY. adº. [from enormous.) Beyond meaſure.
One who could ever eſpouſe a notion ſo enºrmoſy abſurd
and ſenſeleſs, as that the world was framed by chancé.7/oodw.
ENo'RMoUs N Ess. "n. ſ. [from enormous.] Immeaſurable wick-
edneſs.
When thoſe who have no opportunity to examine our
faith, ſee the enormouſneſs of our works, what ſhould hinder
them from meaſuring the maſter by the diſciples Dec. of Piety.
ENo'UGH. adj. [enoh, Saxon ; ganah, Gothick; genoeg, Dut.
It is not eaſy to determine whether this word be an adjective
or adverb; perhaps, when it is joined with a ſubſtantive, it is
an adjective, of which enow is the plural. In other ſituations
it ſeems an adverb; except that after the verb to have, or to
be, either expreſſed or underſtood, it may be accounted a
ſubſtantive. It is pronounced as if it were written enuf.] In
a ſufficient meaſure; ſo as may ſatisfy; ſo as may ſuffice.
Why wou'dſt thou go, with one conſent they cry,
When thou hadſt gold enough, and Emily. Dryden.
When there was not room enough for their herds, they by
conſent ſeparated, and enlarged their paſture. Lºcke.
ENo'UGH. n.ſ.
1. Something ſufficient in greatneſs or excellence.
'Tis enºugh for me to have endeavoured the union of my
country, whilſt I continued in publick employments. Templº.
The indolency and enjoyment we have, ſufficing for our
preſent happineſs, we deſire not to venture the change, being
content, and that is enough. Locke.
Enough for me that to the liſt’ning ſwains,
Firſt in thoſe fields I ſung the filvan ſtrains. Pope.
I will not quarrel with the preſent age: it has done enough
for me, in making and keeping you two my friends. Pºpe.
2. Something equal to a man's powers or faculties.
He could not have been without ſome great defe&amp;s and
main errours in his nature, cuſtoms, and proceedings, which
he had enºugh to do to ſave and help, with a thouſand little
induſtries and watches. Bacon's Henry VII.
ENo'u G H. adv.
1. In a ſufficient degree; in a degree that gives ſatisfaction.
2. It notes a ſlight augmentation of the poſitive degree: as, I am
ready enough to quarrel; that is, I am rather quarrelſome than
peaceable.
I am apt enough to think, that this ſame binarium of a
ſtronger and a weaker, like unto maſculine and feminine,
doth hold in all living bodies. Bacon.
It is ſometimes pleaſant enough to conſider the different no-
tions which different perſons have of the ſame thing. Addison.
They are now in priſon at Florence; and, as it is ſaid,
treated hardly enough. Addiſon on Italy.
3. Sometimes it notes diminution; as, the ſong is well enough ;
that is, not quite well, though not much amiſs.
4. An exclamation noting fulneſs or ſatiety.
Macbeth, beware Macduff!
Beware the thane of Fife! Diſmiſs me.—Enough. Shakespeare
Henceforth I'll bear
Afflićtion, 'till it do cry out itſelf,
Enough, enough, and die. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
ENow. The plural of enºugh. In a ſufficient number.
The earth hath ſince born enow bleeding witneſſes, that it
was no want of true courage. Sidney, b. ii.
The walls of the church there are enow contented to build,
and to underſet it with goodly pillars: the marbles are po-
liſhed, the roofs ſhine with gold, the altar hath precious
ſtones to adorn it, and of Chriſt's miniſters no choice at all.
Hocker, b. v. ſ. 15.
As if
Man had not ſelfiſh foes enow beſides,
That, day and night, for his deſtruction wait. Milt. P. Loft.
My conquering brother will have ſlaves enow,
To pay his cruel vows for vićtory. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
There are at Rome enºw modern works of architecture to
employ any reaſonable man. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
EN PASSANT. adv. [French.] By the way.
To ENRA'G E. v. a. [enrager, French.] To irritate; to pro-
voke; to make furious; to exaſperate.
The juſtice of their quarrel ſlould not ſo much encourage
as enrage them, being to revenge the diſhonour done to their
king, and to chaſiſe the deceitful dealings of their ene-
mies. Hayward,
Enrag’d at this, upon the bawd I flew ;
And that which moſt enrag'd me was, 'twas true. Iła/h.
To ENRA'N G.E. v. a. [ from range. J To place regularly ; to
put into order. -
- In their jaw
Three ranks of iron teeth enranged were. Fairy Qeem, b, i.
As fair Diana, in freſh Summer's day,
Beholds her nymphs enrang'd in ſhady wood. Fai. Sºleen.
To ENRA'NK. v. a. [from rank.] To place in orderly ranks.
No leiſure had he to enrank his men. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
To ENRA'pt. v. a. [from rapt. J
1. To throw into an extaſy ; to tranſport with enthuſiaſm.
I myſelf
Am, like a prophet, ſuddenly enrapt
To tell thee, that this day is ominous. Shakespeare Ant, and Cººp.
2. In the following quotation it ſeems erroneouſly written for
enwrapt, involved ; wrapt up.
Nor<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 364</div><p class="Text">-\
E N R
Y, f
E N S
º
l
Nor hath he been ſo enraft in thoſe ſtudies as to he icºt the
polite arts of painting, architecture, muſick, and Pºetry;
A buthnot and Pºpe's Mart. Sc. iulerui.
To ENRA'pture. v. a. [from rapture.] To tranſport with
pleaſure; to delight highly.
Tô ENRA'vish. v. a. [from raviſh.] To throw into extaſy ;
to tranſport with delight.
What wonder,
Frail men, whoſe eyes ſeek heaveſly things to ſee,
At fight thereof ſo much enraviſh'd be Spenser:
ENRA'vish MENT. n.ſ.. [from enraviſh.J Extaſy of delight.
They contract a kind of ſplendor from the ſeemingly ob:
ſcuring vail, which adds to the enraviſhments of her tranſ.
ported admirers. Glanv. Scepſ.
To ENR1'cH. v. a. [enricher, French.] -
1. To make wealthy; to make opulent. -
The king will enrich him with great riches, and will give
him his daughter. 1 Sa. xvii. 25.
Henry is able to enrich his queen,
And not to ſeek a queen to make him rich. Shakespeare Henry VI.
The city, which thou ſeeſt, no other deem
Than great and glorious Rome, queen of the earth,
So far renown'd, and with the ſpoils enrich'd
Of nations. Milton's Paradije Rºgain'd, b. iv. l. 446.
Thoſe are ſo unhappy as to rob others, without ºrithing
themſelves. Denham.
2. To fertiliſe; to make fruitful.
See the ſweet brooks in ſilver mazes creep,
Enrich the meadows, and ſupply the deep. Blackm. Creatiºn.
3. To ſtore; to ſupply with augmentation of any thing de-
fireable. -
There is not any one among them that could ever enrich
his own underſtanding with any certain truth, or ever edify
others therein. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the ſºorld.
ENR1'cHMENT. n.ſ.. [from enrich.)
1. Augmentation of wealth.
2. Amplification; improvement by addition.
I have procured a tranſlation of that book into the general
language, not without great and ample additions, and enrich-
ment thereof. Bacon's Holy War.
It is a vaſt hindrance to the enrichment of our underſtand-
ings, if we ſpend too much of our time and pains among in-
finites and unſearchables. Watts's Logick.
To ENRI'do E. v. a. [from ridge.] To form with longitu-
dinal protuberances or ridges.
He had a thouſand noſes,
Horns walk'd and wav'd like the enridged ſea:
It was ſome fiend. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To ENRI'NG. v.a. [from ring.] º bind round; to encircle.
vv ſo
Enrings the barky fingers of * elm. Shakeſpeare.
To ENRI'PEN. v. a. [from ripe.] To ripen; to mature; to
bring to perfection. -
The Summer, how it enripen'd the year;
And Autumn, what our golden harveſts were: Donne.
To ENRo'BE. v. a. [from robe.] To dreſs; to cloath; to ha-
bit; to inveſt.
Her mother hath intended,
That, quaint in green, ſhe ſhall be looſe enrob'd,
With ribbands pendant, flaring 'bout her head. Shakeſpeare.
To INRo'll. v. a. [enroller, French.]
1. To inſert in a roll or regiſter.
There be enrolled amongſt the king's forces about thirty
thouſand men of the Jews. 1 Mac. x. 36.
We find ourſelves enrolled in this heavenly family as ſer-
vants, and as ſons. Spratt's Sermons.
The champions, all of high degree,
Who knighthood lov’d, and deeds of chivalry,
Throng'd to the liſts, and envy'd to behold
The names of others, not their own, enroll’d.
Mentes, an ever-honour’d name of old,
High in Ulyſſes' ſocial liſt enroll’d, Pope's Odyſſey, b, i.
Heroes and heroines of old,
By honour only were enroll'd
Among their brethren of the ſkies; - - -
To which, though late, ſhall Stella riſe. Swift.
2. To record; to leave in writing.
He ſwore conſent to your ſucceſſion;
His oath enrolled in the parliament. Shakespeare's Henry VI.
Laws, which none ſhall find
Left them enroll'd; or what the ſpirit within
Shall on the heart engrave. Milton's Paraºſe Loff, b. xii.
3. To involve; to inwrap.
From his infernal furnace forth he threw
Huge flames, that dimmed all the heaven's light,
Enroll'd in duſkiſh ſmoak and brimſtone blue. Fairy Queen.
ENRo'LLER. n.ſ.. [from enrol.] He that enrols; he that re-
iſters.
Eºst. n.ſ [from enro'.] Regiſter; writing in which
any thing is recorded 3 record.
The king himſelf cauſed to be enrolled, and teſtified by a
Dryden.
notary publick; and delivered the enrolments, with his own
hands, to the biſhop of Saliſbury. Davies on Ireland.
To ENRo'ot. v. a. [from root.J. To fix by the root; to im-
plant deep. *
Full well he knows
He cannot ſo preciſely weed this land,
As his miſdoubts preſent occaſion:
His foes are ſo en' oot d with his friends,
That, plucking to unfix an enemy, --
He doth unfaſten ſo and ſhake a friend. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
To ENR o'UND. v. a. [from round.] To environ; to ſur-
round; to encircle; to incloſe.
Upon his royal face there is no note
How dread an army hath enrounded him. Shakeſp. Henry V.
ENS. n.ſ. [Latin.] *
1. Any being or exiſtence.
2. [In chymiſtry.] Some things that are pretended to contain
all the qualities or virtues of the ingredients they are drawn
from in a little room.
ENSA'MPLE. n.ſ. [effºrnpio, Italian.] Example; pattern ;
º of imitation. This orthography is now juſtly diſ-
u!ed. -
Such life ſhould be the honour of your light;
Such death, the ſad enſample of your might. Spenſer's Sonnets.
Ye have us for an enſample. Phil. iii. 17.
Such perſons as would be willing to make uſe of our enſample
to do the ſame thing, where there is not the ſame neceſſity,
may do it upon their own ſcore, and not be able to vouch our
pračtice for their excuſe. Sanderſºn’s judgment.
To ENSA'Mple. v. a. [from the noun..] To exemplify; to
ſhew by example ; to give as a copy.
I have followed all the ancient poets hiſtorical: firſt,
Homer, who, in the perſon of Agamemnon, enſampled a
good governor and a virtuous man. Spenſer:
To ENSA'NGUINE. v. a. [ſanguis, Latin; enſang'anter; Fr.]
To ſmear with gore; to ſuffuſe with blood.
With cruel tournament the ſquadrons join,
Where cattle paſtur'd late ; now ſcatter'd lies,
With carcaſſes and arms, th' enſanguin'd field
Deſerted. Milton's Paradiº Loft, b. xi. l. 654.
To ENscHE'DULE. v. a. [from ſchedule.] To inſert in a ſche-
dule or writing. -
You muſt buy that peace
With full accord to all our juſt demands, -
Enſchedul’d here. Shakespeare Hen. W.
To ENsco'NcE. v. a. [from ſconce.] To cover as with a fort;
to ſecure. Hanmer.
I myſelf ſometimes, hiding mine honour in my neceſſity,
am fain to ſhuffle, to hedge, and to lurch; and yet your
rogue will enſconce your rags, your cat-a-mountain looks, your
red lettice phraſes, your bold bearing oaths under the ſhelter
of your honour. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
She ſhall not ſee me: I will enſcºnce me behind the arras.
Shakeſpeare's Merry I/ives ºf Windſor.
We make trifles of terrours, enſconcing ourſelves in ſeem-
ing knowledge. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
A fort of error to enſconce
Abſurdity and ignorance.
This he courageoufly invaded,
And having enter'd, barricado'd,
Enſconc'd himſelf as formidable
As could be underneath a table. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 1.
To ENSE'AM. v. a. [from ſºam.] To ſow up; to incloſe by a
ſcam or juncture of needlework.
A name engraved in the reveſtiary of the temple, watched
by two brazen dogs, one ſtole away, and enſeamed it in his
thigh. Camden's Remains.
To ENSE/AR. v. a. [from ſcar.] To cauteriſe; to ſtanch or
ſtop with fire.
Enfear thy fertile and conceptious womb;
Let it no more bring out tº ingrateful man. Shakeſp. Timon.
To ENSH1'ELD. v. a. [from ſhield..] To ſhield; to cover; to
protećt.
Hudibras, p. iii. cant, 3.
Theſe black maſks
Proclaim an enſhield beauty, ten times louder
Than beauty could diſplay. Shakespeare Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
To ENSHRI'N E. v. a. [from ſhrine.] To incloſe in a cheſt or
cabinet; to preſerve and ſecure as a thing ſacred.
He ſeems
A phoenix, gaz'd by all, as that ſole bird,
When to enſhrine his reliques in the ſun's
Bright temple, to Egyptian Thebes he flies. Mill, Pa. Loft.
! -- The ſots combine
With pious care a monkey to enſhrine. Tate's juv. Sat.
Fair fortune next, with looks ſerene and k nd,
Receives 'em, in her ancient fane rºſhrin'd. Addſon.
ENSIF. R.M. adj. [e'ſſormis, Latin.] Having the ſhape of a
ſword, as the xiphoeides or anſform cartilage.
ENSIGN. m. ſ enſeigne, French.]
1. The flag or ſtandard of a regiment.
Hang up your eºſigns, let your drums be ſtill ;
For here we entertain a ſolemn Peace. Shakeſpeare's H. VI.
8 D The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 365</div><p class="Text">* -
E N S
E N T
-
* i
The Turks ſtill preſfing on, got up to the top of the walls
with eight enſigns, from whence they had repulſed the defen-
dants. Knollº’s Hiſory of the Turks.
Men taking occaſion from the qualities, wherein they ob-
ſerve often ſeveral individuals to agree, range them into forts,
in order to their naming, for the convenience of comprehen-
five ſigns; under which individuals, according to thes con-
formity to this or that abſtract idea, come to be ranked as un-
der enſigns. Locke.
2. Any ſignal to aſſemble.
He will lift up an enſign to the nations from far. lſ. v.
3. Badge; or mark of diſtinčtion, rank or office.
Princes that fly, their ſceptres left behind,
Contempt or pity, where they travel, find;
The enſigns of our pow'r about we bear,
And ev'ry land pays tribute to the fair. J7a'ler.
The marks or enſigns of virtues contribute not a little, by
their nobleneſs, to the ornament of the figures; ſuch, for
example, as are the decorations belonging to the liberal arts,
to war or ſacrifices. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
4. The officer of foot who carries the flag. [Formerly written
ancient.]
Ensign be ARER. m. ſ. ſenſign and bear.] He that carries the
flag; the enſign. -
If it be true that the giants ever made war againſt heaven,
he had been a fit enſignhearer for that company. Sidney, b. ii.
To ENSLA’v E. v. a. [from ſlave.]
1. To reduce to ſervitude; to deprive of liberty.
The conquer d alſo, and enſlav'd by war,
Shall, with their freedom loſt, their virtue loſe. Milt. P. L.
2. To make over to another as his ſlave or bondman.
I to do this I, whom you once thought brave,
To ſell my country, and my king enſlave. Dr. d Ind. Emp.
Long draughts of ſleep his monſtrous limbs enſave;
He reels, and falling fills the ſpacious cave. Dryden's ºn.
He is certainly the moſt ſubjected, the moſt enſlaved, who
is ſo in his underſtanding. Locke.
While the balance of power is equally held, the ambition
of private men gives neither danger nor fear, nor can poſſibly
enſlave their country. Swift.
No man can make another man to be his ſlave, unleſs he
hath firſt enſlaved himſelf to life and death, to pleaſure or pain,
to hope or fear: command thoſe paſſions, and you are freer
than the Parthian king. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
The more virtuouſly any man lives, and the leſs he is en-
flaved to any luſt, the more ready he is to entertain the prin-
ciples of religion. Tillotſºn, Sermon I.
A man, not having the power of his own life, cannot by
compačt, or his own conſent, enſlave himſelf to any one, nor
put himſelf under the abſolute a bitrary power of another, to
take away life when he pleaſes. Lice.
ENslav EMENT. n.ſ. [from eſſave.] The ſtate of ſervitude;
ſlavery; abject ſubjection.
The children of Iſrael, according to their method of ſinning,
after mercies, and thereupon returning to a freſh enſlavement
to their enemies, had now paſſed ſeven years in cruel ſub-
jećtion. South's Sermºns.
ENS LA'v ER. n. / [from enſlave..] He that reduces others to a
ſtate of ſervitude. - -
What indignation in her mind, , .
Againſt enſlavers of mankind Swift.
To ENsu'E. v. a. ſenſuiver, French..] To follow ; to purſue.
Flee evil, and do good; ſeek peace, and cºſite it. Con. Pray.
But now theſe Epicures begin to ſmile,
And ſay, my doćtrine is more ſafe than true;
And that I fondly do myſelf beguile,
While theſe receiv'd opinions I enjie. Davies.
To ENSU’E. v. n.
1. To follow as a conſequence to premiſes.
Let this be granted, and it ſhall hereupon plainly enſue,
that the light of Scripture once ſhining in the world,
all other light of nature is therewith in ſuch ſort drowned,
that now we need it not. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 4.
2. To ſucceed in a train of events, or courſe of time.
The man was noble;
But with his laſt attempt he wip'd it out,
Deſtroy'd his country, and his name remains
To the enſuing age abhorr'd. Shakeſpeare's Coriolarus.
Biſhops are placed by collation of the king, without any
precedent election or confirmation ºnſhing. Hayward.
Of worſe deeds worſe ſufferings muſt enſue. Milt. P. L.
With mortal heat each other ſhall purſue;
What wars, what wounds, what ſlaughter ſhall enſue! Dryd.
Impute not then thoſe ills which may enſue
To me, but thoſe who with inceſſant hate
Purſue my life. Rowe's /mlitious Stepmother.
Then grave Clariſſa graceful wav'd her fan;
Silence enſu'd, and thus the nymph began. Pope.
ENsu'RANCE. m. ſ. [from enſure.]
1. Exemption from hazard, obtained by the payment of a cer-
tain ſum.
2. The ſum paid for ſecurity.
ENSU'RANc ER. m. ſ. [from enſurance.] He who undertakes to
exempt from hazard.
The vain enſurancers of life,
And they who moſt perform’d, and promis'd leſs,
Ev’n Short and Hobbes, forſook th' unequal ſtrife. Dryden.
To ENSU'R E. v. a. [from ſure, aſſurer, French.]
1. To aſcertain; to make certain ; to ſecure.
It is eaſy to entail debts on ſucceeding ages, but how to en-
ſure peace for any term of years is difficult enough. Swift.
2. To exempt anything from hazard by paying a certain ſum,
on condition of being reimburſed for miſcarriage.
3. To promiſe reimburſement of any miſcarriage for a certain
reward ſtipulated.
A mendicant contracted with a country fellow for a quan-
tity of corn, to enſure his ſheep for that year. L'E/irange.
ENsu'RER. m.ſ.. [from enſure.] One who makes contraćts of
enſurance; one who for a certain ſum exempts anything from
hazard.
ENTA'blatur F. W. n. ſ. [from table.] [In archite&amp;ture.] Sig-
ENTA'ble MENT. } nifies the architrave, friſe, and cornice of a
pillar; being in effect the extremity of the flooring, which is
either ſupported by pillars, or by a wall, if there be no
columns. Harris.
ENTA'il. n.ſ. [feudun talliatum, from the French entaille, cut,
from tailler, to cut.
1. The eſtate entailed or ſettled, with regard to the rule of its
deſcent.
2. The rule of deſcent ſettled for any eſtate.
3. Engraver's work; inlay. Obſolete.
Well it appeared to have been of old
A work of rich entail, and curious mold,
Woven with anticks and wild imagery. Fairy Qween, b. ii.
To ENTA’II. v. a. [tailler, to cut; entailler, French.]
1. To ſettle the deſcent of any eſtate ſo that it cannot be by any
ſubſequent poſleſſor bequeathed at pleaſure.
! here entail
The crown to thce and to thine heirs for ever. Shakespeare H. VI.
Had Richard unconſtrain’d reſign'd the throne,
A king can give no more than is his own: {
The title ſtood entail'd, had Richard had a ſon. Dryden.
2. To fix unafienably upon any perſon or thing.
None ever had a privilege of infallibility entailed to all he
ſaid. Digby on Bodies.
The intemperate and unjuſt tranſmit their bodily infirmities
and diſeaſes to their children, and entail a ſecret curſe upon
their cit::tes. Tillotſºn, Sermon 4.
3. To cut. Obſolete.
The mortal ſteel diſpiteouſly entail'd,
Deep in their fleſh, quite through the iron walls,
That a large purple itream adown their giambeux falls. F2.
To ENTA'M E. v. a. from ſame ] To tame; to ſubjugate; to
ſubdue.
'Tis not your inky brows, your black ſilk hair,
Your bugle eyeballs, and your check of cream,
That can entame my ſpirits to your worſhip. Shakeſpeare.
To NTA'NGL E. v. a. [A word of uncertain etymology.]
1. To inwrap or enſnare with ſomething not eaſily extricable,
as a net; or ſomething adheſive, as briars.
2. To loſe in multiplied involutions; as in a labyrinth.
3. To twiſt, or confuſe in ſuch a manner as that a ſeparation
cannot eaſily be made; to make an entangled knot.
4. To involve in difficulties; to embarraſs; to perplex.
He kncw not how to wreſtle with deſperate contingencies,
and ſo abhorred to be entangled in ſuch, Clarendon.
5. To puzzle; to bewilder.
The duke, being queſtioned, neither held ſilence as he
might, nor conſtantly denied it, but entangled himſelf in his
doubtful tale. - Hayward.
I ſuppoſe a great part of the difficulties that perplex mens
thoughts, and entangle their underſtandings, would be eaſily
reſolved. Locke.
6. To enſnare by captious queſtions or artful talk.
The Phariſees took counſel how they might entangle him in
his talk. Mat. xxii. 15.
7. To diſtraćt with variety of cares.
No man that warreth entangleth himſelf with the affairs of
this life. 2 ſin. ii. 4.
8. To multiply the intricacies or difficulties of a work.
Now all labour,
Marrs what it does, yea very force eſtang'es
Itſelf with ſtrength. Shakeſpeare's Anth. and Cleºpatra.
ENTA'Nolt M. ENT. n.f [from entangle.]
1. Involution of any thing intricate or adheſive.
The higheſt and moſt improved ſpirits are frequently caught
in the enjanglements of a tenacious imagination. Glanv. Sºpſ.
2. Perplexity; puzzle.
There will be no greater entanglements, touching the notion
of God and his providence. A ſore's Divine Dialogues.
It is to fence againſt the entanglements of equivocal words,
and the art of ſophiſtry, that diſtinctions have been mul-
tiplied. Lºcke.
ENTA's cl. ER. m. ſ. [from exiangle.] One that entangles.
To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 366</div><p class="Text">E N T
E N T
".
To ENTER. v. a. [entrer, French.]
1. To go or come into any place.
A king of repute and learning entered the liſts againſt
him. . . Atterbury.
2. To initiate in a buſineſs, method, or ſociety.
The eldeſt being thus entered, and then made the faſhion, it
would be impoſſible to hinder them: Locke,
3. To introduce or admit into any counſel.
So your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are cnter'd in our counſels,
And know how we proceed. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
4. To ſet down in a writing.
Mr. Phang, have you enter'd the aëtion ?
—ſt is en'er'd. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Agues and fevers are entered promiſcuouſly, yet in the few
bills they have been diſtinguiſhed. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
To E'N TER. v. n.
1. To come in ; to go in. -
Be not ſlothful to go and to enter to poſſeſs the land. Judg.
Other creature here,
Beaſt, bird, inſe&amp;t, or worm, durſt enter none. Milton.
2. To penetrate mentally ; to make intellectual entrance.
He is particularly pleaſed with Livy for his manner of tell-
ing a ſtory, and with Salluſt for his entering into internal prin-
ciples of ačtion. Addiſon's Speciatºr, Nº. 409.
They were not capable of entering into the numerous con-
curring ſprings of action. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
3. To engage in.
The French king hath often entered on ſeveral expenſive
prºjects; on purpoſe to diffipate wealth. Addiſon on the War.
Gentlemen did not care to enter upon buſineſs 'till after their
morning draught. Tatler, N°. 86.
4. To be initiated in.
As ſoon as they once entered into a taſte of pleaſure, polite-
neſs, and magnificence, they fell into a thouſand violences,
conſpiracies and diviſions. Addiſon on Italy.
ENTERDE'Al. n.ſ. [entre and deal.] Reciprocal tranſactions.
For he is practis'd well in policy,
And thereto doth his courting moſt apply;
To learn the enterdeal of princes ſtrange,
To mark th’ intent of counſels, and the change
Of ſtates. Hubberd’s Tale.
E’NTERING. m. ſ. [from enter.] Entrance; paſſage into a
lace.
It is laid waſte, ſo that there is no houſe, no entering in. Iſ.
To ENTERLA'ch. v. a. [entrelaſer, French..] To intermix;
to interweave.
This lady walked outright, 'till ſhe might ſee her enter into
a fine cloſe arbor: it was of trees, whoſe branches ſo lovingly
enterlaced one another, that it could reſiſt the ſtrongeſt violence
of the fight. Sidney.
ENTE Ro'cELE. m. ſ. ſenterocele, Latin.] A rupture from the
bowels preſſing through or dilating the peritonaeum, ſo as to
fall down into the groin. The remedy in ſuch caſes, is chief-
ly by truſſes and bolſters. £aincy.
If the inteſtine only is fallen, it becomes an enterocele; if
the omentum or epiploon, epipocele; and if both, entero-
epiplocele. Sharp's Surgery.
ENTER o'logy. m. ſ. [ºrse", and Aºyos.] The anatomical ac-
count of the bowels and internal parts.
ENTE Ro'MPH Alos. n.ſ.. [its;” and ºxxos.] An umbilical
or navel rupture.
ENT ERPA'RLANce. n.ſ. [entre and parler, French..] Parley;
mutual talk; conference.
During the enterparlance the Scots diſcharged againſt the
Engliſh without harm, but not without breach of the laws of
the field. Hayward.
ENTERPI E'ADER, n.ſ. [entre and plead..] The diſcuſſing of a
point incidentally falling out, before the principal cauſe can
take end. For example: two ſeveral perſons, being found
heirs to land by two ſeveral officers in one county, the king is
brought in doubt whether livery ought to be made; and there-
fore, before livery be made to either, they muſt enterplead;
that is, try between themſelves who is the right heir, Cowel.
ENTERPRISE. n.ſ. [entrepriſe, French.] An undertaking of
hazard; an arduous attempt.
Now is the time to execute mine enterpriſes to the deſtruc-
tion of the enemies. judith ii. 5.
Whet on Warwick to this enterpriſe. Shakespeare Henry VI.
The day approach'd, when fortune ſhould decide
Th’ important enterpriſe, and give the bride. Dryde".
To E'NTERPRISE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To undertake; to attempt; to eſſay.
Nor ſhall I to the work thou enterpriſiſ?
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid. Milton's Parad. Loft.
Princes were only chiefs of thoſe aſſemblies, by whoſe con-
fultations and authority the great actions were reſolved and
enterpriſed. 7 emple.
An epick poem, or the heroick action of ſome great com-
mander, enterpriſed for the common good and honour of the
Chriſtian cauſe, and executed happily, alay be as well written
now as it was of old by the heathens. Dryden's juv. Dedicat.
- Haſte then, and loſe no time:
The buſineſs muſt be enterpris’d this night;
We muſt ſurpriſe the court in its delight. Dryden.
2. To receive; to entertain. Obſolete.
In goodly garments, that her well became,
Fair marching forth in honourable wiſe,
Him at the threſhold met, and well did enterpriſe. Fa. 9a.
E’NT's RPRISE.R. m. ſ. [from enterpriſe.] A man of enterpriſe;
one who undertakes great things; one who engages himſelf
in important and dangerous deſigns.
They commonly proved great enterpriſers with happ
ſucceſs. Hayward on Edward VI.
To ENTERTA'IN. v.a. [entretenir, French.]
1. To converſe with; to talk with.
His head was ſo well ſtored a magazine, that nothing could
be propoſed which he was not . furniſhcd to entertain
any one in. Locke.
2. To treat at the table.
You ſhall find an apartment fitted up for you, and ſhall be
every day entertained with beef or mutton of my own feed-
ing. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 549.
3. To receive hoſpitably.
Be not forgetful to entertain ſtrangers; for thereby ſome
have entertained angels unawares. Heb. iii. 2.
Heav'n, ſet ope thy everlaſting gates,
To entertain my vows of thanks and praiſe. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
4. To keep in one’s ſervice.
How many men would you require to the furniſhing of this
which you take in hand 2 And how long ſpace would you
have them entertained 2 Spenſer's Ireland.
You, ſir, I entertain for one of my hundred; only, I do
not like the faſhion of your garments. Shakeſp. King Lear.
I’ll weep and ſigh,
And, leaving ſo his ſervice, follow you,
So pleaſe you entertain me. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
5. To reſerve in the mind.
This is the ſevereſt purpoſe God can entertain towards us.
Decay ºf Piety.
6. To pleaſe; to amuſe; to divert.
David entertained himſelf with the meditations of God's
law, not his hidden decrees or counſels. Decay of Piety.
The hiſtory of the Royal Society ſhews how well philoſo-
phy becometh a narration: the progreſs of knowledge is as
entertaining as that of arms. He ton ºn the Clufficks.
They were capable of entertaining themſelves on a thouſand
different ſubjects, without running into the common topicks.
Addison on Ancient Medals.
In gardens, art can only reduce the beauties of nature to a
figure which the common eye may better take in, and is there-
fore more entertained with. Pope's Prºf. to the Iliads.
7. To admit with ſatisfaction.
Reaſon can never permit the mind to entertain probability,
in oppoſition to knowledge and certainty. Locke.
ENTERTA'1NER. m. ſ. [from entertain.j
1. He that keeps others in his ſervice.
He was, in his nature and conſtitution of mind, not very
apprehenſive or forecaſting of future events afar off, but an
entertainer of fortune by the day. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. He that treats others at his table.
He ſhews both to the gueſts and to the entertainer their
great miſtake. Smalridge's Sermons.
It is little the ſign of a wiſe or good man to ſuffer tempe-
rance to be tranſgreſſed, in order to purchaſe the repute of a
generous entertainer. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. He that pleaſes, diverts, or amuſes. -
ENTERTA'INM. ENT. n.ſ.. [from entertain.]
1. Converſation.
2. Treatment at the table; convivial proviſion.
Arrived there, the little houſe they fill,
Ne look for entertainment where none was ;
Reft is their feaſt, and all things at their will;
The nobleſt mind the beſt contentment has. Fairy Queen.
With Britiſh bounty in his ſhip he feaſts
Th’ Heſperian princes, his amazed gueſts,
To find that watry wilderneſs exceed
The entertainment of their great Madrid. J/aller,
3. Hoſpitable reception.
4. Reception; admiſſion.
It is not eaſy to imagine how it ſhould at firſt gain enter-
tainment, but much more difficult to conceive how it ſhould
be univerſally propagated. Tºll ſon, Sermon 1.
5. The ſtate of being in pay as ſoldiers or ſervants. *
Iſave you an army ready, ſay you ? lºº º --
—A moſt royal one. º centurions and their charges ºil. i. fit tº 'º.
diſtinctly billcted, already in the entertainment, and to be on
foot at an hour's warning. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
6. Payment of ſoldiers or ſervants. Now obſolete, -
The entertainment of the general, upon his firſt arrival, was
but ſix ſhillings and eight pence. - Davies on Ireland.
The captains did covenant with the king to ſerve him with
certain numbers of men, for certain wages and entertain-
ments. Davies on treland.
4. - 7. Amuſement;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 367</div><p class="Text">E N T
E N T
7. Amuſement; diverſion. -
Becauſe he that knoweth leaſt is fitteſt to aſk queſtions, it is
more reaſon, for the entertainment of the time, that he aſk me
queſtions than that I aſk you. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Paſſions ought to be our ſervants, and not our maſters; to
give us ſome agitation for entertainment, but never to throw
reaſon out of its ſeat. Tºp e.
8. Dramatick performance; the lower comedy.
A great number of dramatick entertainments are not come-
dies, but five-aēt farces. Gay's Pref. to I/hat dye Call it.
EN Terti'ssued. adj. [entre and tiſſue..] Enterwoven or in-
termixed with various colours or ſubſtances.
The ſword, the mace, the crown imperial,
The entertiſſued robe of gold and pearl. Shakespeare. Henry V.
To ENTH Ro'NE. v. a. [from throne.]
1. To place on a regal ſeat.
Mercy is above this ſcepter'd ſway;
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings;
It is an attribute to God himſelf. Shakespeare Merchant ºf Penice.
On a tribunal ſilver'd,
Cleopatra and himſelf, in chairs of gold,
Were publickly enthrou’d. Shakeſpeare's Ant, and Cleºpatra.
Beneath a ſculptur'd arch he ſits ent ran'd,
The peers, encircling, form an awful round. Pope's Odiffy.
2. To inveſt with ſovereign authority.
This pope was no ſooner elected and enthroned, but that he
began to exerciſe his new rapines. Ayliffe's Paregon.
EN THU's, As M. n. ſ. [Sealazº.]
1. A vain belief of private revelation; a vain confidence of
divine favour or communication.
Enthuſiaſm is founded neither on reaſon nor divine revelā-
tion, but riſes from the conceits of a warmed or overweening
brain. Locke.
2. Heat of imagination; violence of paſſion; confidence of
opinion.
3. Elevation of fancy; exaltation of ideas.
Imaging is, in itſelf, the very height and life of poetry,
which, by a kind of enthuſiaſm, or extraordinary emotion of
ſoul, makes it ſeem to us that we behold thoſe things which
the poet paints. Dryden's juv. Prºfa e.
ENT HU’s 1As T. n. ſ. [i.Suzaw.] -
1. One who vainly imagines a private revelation; one who has
a vain confidence of his intercourſe with God.
Let an enthuſiaſt be principled that he or his teacher is in-
ſpired, and ačted by an immediate communication of the
Divine Spirit, and you in vain bring the evidence of clear
reaſons againſt his doctrine. Locke.
2. One of a hot imagination, or violent paſſions.
Chapman ſeems to have been of an arrogant turn, and an
enthuſiaſt in poetry. Pope's Prºf. to the Iliad.
3. One of elevated fancy, or exalted ideas.
At laſt divine Cecilia came,
Inventreſs of the vocal frame ;
The ſweet enthuſia/, from her ſacred ſtore,
Enlarg’d the former narrow bounds,
And added length to ſolemn ſounds,
With nature's mother-wit, and arts unknown before. Dryd.
FNT HUs. A's TICAL. }ad. [i.Sevizºr...]
ENT HUSIA's TIck.
1. Perſuaded of ſome communication with the Deity.
He pretended not to any ſcraphick anthuſiaſtical raptures, or
inimitable unaccountable tranſports of devotiºn. Calany.
2. Vehemently hot in any cauſe.
3. Elevated in fancy; exalted in ideas.
. It commonly happens in an enthuſiaſtick or prophetick flyle,
that, by reaſon of the eagerneſs of the fancy, it doth not al-
ways follow the even thread of diſcourſe. Burnet.
At laſt, ſublim’d -
To rapture and enthuſiaſſick heat, -
We feel the preſent Deity. Thomſon's Spring, l. 895.
E’NTHY MEME. n.ſ. [tº wºrp., J. An argument conſiſting only
of an antecedent and conſequential propoſition ; a ſyllogiſm
where the major propoſition is ſuppreiled, and only the minor
and conſequence produced in words.
Playing much upon the ſimple or luſtrative argumentation,
to induce their enthymemes unto the people, they take up popu-
lar conceits. Brown's Palgar Errours, b. i. c. 9.
What is an enthymene, quoth Corneilus. Why, an enthy-
meme, replied Crambe, is when the major is indeed married to
the minor, but the marriage kept ſecret. Ark. and Pope's 44. S.
To ENTI'CE. v. a. [of uncertain etymology. ] To allure;
to attract; to draw by blandiſhments or hopes to ſomething
ſinful or deſtructive.
The readicſ way to entangle the mind with falſe doćtrine,
is firſt to entice the will to wanton living Aſchard's Schoolmaſter.
If a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, he ſhall ſurely
endow her to be his wife. Ex. xxii. 16.
So ſang the ſyrens, with enchanting ſound,
Enticing all to liſten, and be drown'd. Granville.
FNT1'cE MENT. m. ſ. [from entice.]
1. The act or practice of alluring to ill.
Suppoſe we that the ſacred word of God can at their hands
receive due honour, by whoſe entirement the holy ordinances
of the church cndure every where open contempt? Hooker.
And here to every thirſty wanderer,
By ſly entirement gives his bancful cup,
With many murmurs mixt. AMilton.
2. The means by which one is allured to ill; blandiſhment;
allurement.
In all theſe inſtances we muſt ſeparate intreaty and entice.
ments from deceit or violence. 7ay'or's Ride of living holy.
FN I'd F R. m.ſ. (from entice J One that allures to ill.
En Tici's olx, adv. [from entire J Charmingly; in a winning
Illa Inner.
She ſtrikes a lute well, and fings moſt enticingly. Addison Stº.
E's rºl. R T Y. n.ſ. [entiertº, French..] The whole; not barely
a part.
Sometime the attorney thruſteth into the writ the uttermoſt
quantity; or elſe ſetteth down an ent erty, where but a moiety
was to be paſſed. Bacon's Off of Alienation.
ENTIRE. adj. [entier, French; integer, Latin.]
1. Whole; undivided.
It is not ſafe to divide, but to extol the entire, ſtill in ge-
neral. Bacon'; Collection of Good and Evil.
2. Unbroken ; complete in its parts.
An antique model of the famous Laocoon is the more re-
markable, as it is entire in thoſe parts where the ſtatue is
maimed. Addiſon on Italy.
Water and earth, compoſed of old worn particles and
fragments of particles, would not be of the ſame nature and
texture now with water and earth compoſed of entire particles
in the beginning. Newton's Opt.
3 Full; complete; compriſing all requiſites in itſelf.
he church of Rome hath rightly alſo conſidered that pub-
lick prayer is a duty entire in itſelf, a duty requiſite to be per-
formed much oftener than ſermons can poſſibly be made. Hook.
Love's not love,
When it is mingled with regards that ſtand
Aloof from th’ entire point. Shakeſp. King Lear.
An action is entire when it is complete in all its parts; or,
as Ariſtotle deſcribes it, when it conſiſts of a beginning, a
midle, and an end. Speciator, Nº. 207.
4. Sincere; hearty.
He run a courſe more entire with the king of Arragon, but
more laboured and officious with the king of Caſtile. Bacon.
5. Firm; ſure; ſolid; fixed.
Entire and ſure the monarch's rule muſt prove,
Who founds her greatneſs on her ſubjećts love. Prior.
6. Unmingled; unallayed.
Wrath ſhall be no more
Thenceforth, but in thy preſence joy entire. Mi'i. P. Loft.
. Honeſt; firmly adherent; faithful.
No man had ever a heart more entire to the king, the
church, or his country; but he never ſtudied the eaſieſt ways
thoſe ends. Clarendon.
They had many perſons, of whoſe entire affections they
were well aſſured. C arendon, b. viii.
8. In full ſtrength; with vigour unabated; with power un-
broken.
Then back to fight again, new breathed and entire. F.2,
ENT1's FLY. adv. [from entire.]
1. In the whole; without diviſion. -
Euphrates, running, finketh partly into the lakes of Chal-
dea, and falls not enti, cºy into the Perſian ſea. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
2. Completely; fully.
Here finiſh’d he, and all that he had made
View'd, and beheld all was entirely good. Aºil. Par. I off.
Chyle may be ſaid to be a vegetable juice in the ſtomach
and inteſtines; and, poured upon blood, it ſeems like oil: as
it paſſeth into the lačteals it grows ſtill more animal, and when
it has circulated often with the blood, it is entirely ſo. Arbuth.
General conſent entirely altered the whole frame of their
government. Swift.
3. With firm adherence; faithfully.
Which when his penſive lady ſaw from far,
Great woe and ſorrow did her ſoul aſſay,
As weening that the ſad end of the war,
And 'gan to higheſt God entirely pray. Fairy Queen, b, i.
ENT1'RENEss. m. ſ. [from entire.] -
1. Totality; compleatneſs; fulneſs.
In an arch where each ſingle ſtone, which, if ſevered from
the reſt, would be perhaps defenceleſs, is ſufficiently ſecured
by the ſolidity and entirenſ of the whole fabrick, of which
it is a part. Boyle.
2. Honeſty; integrity. .
To ENTITL E. v. a. ſer:tituler, French.] -
1. To grace or dignify with a title or honourable appellation.
2. To give a title or diſcriminative appellation; as, to entitle a
book.
Beſides the Scripture, the books which they call eccleſiaſ-
tical were thought not unworthy ſome time to be brought into
publick audience, and with that name they entitled the books
which we term apocryphal, Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 2.--
7
Next
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 368</div><p class="Text">E N T
E. N. T.
Next favourable thou, - -
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchſaf'ſt,
Far other name deſerving ! Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
3. To ſuperſcribe or prefix as a title.
How ready zeal for party is to entitle chriſtianity to their
deſigns, and to charge atheiſm on thoſe who will not ſub-
mit. Locke.
4. To give a claim to anything. . . "
But we, deſcended from your ſacred line,
Entitled to your heav'n, and rites divine, - * -
Are baniſh’d earth. Dryden's Virg. Æn.
He diſcovers the martyr and confeſſor without the trial of
flames and tortures, and will hereafter entitle many to the
reward of ačtions which they had never the opportunity of
performing. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 257.
He entitled himſelf to the continuance of the divine protec-
tion and goodneſs, by humiliation and prayer. Atterbury.
Thus hardly even is the penitent ſinner ſaved; thus difficult
is that duty, by which alone he can be reconciled to his
Creator, and entitled to the mercies of the goſpel. Rogers.
5. To grant anything as claimed by a title.
This is to entitle God's care how and to what we pleaſe. Loc.
E’NTITY. m. ſ. [entitas, low Latin.]
1. Something which really is; a real being.
Dear hope! earth's dowry and heaven's debt,
The entity of things that are not yet:
Subtleſt, but ſureſt being. Craſhaw.
Fortune is no real entity, nor phyſical eſſence, but a mere
relative ſignification. Bentley’s Sermons.
God’s decrees of ſalvation and damnation both Romiſh and
Reformed affix to mens particular entity, abſolutely conſidered,
without any reſpect to demeanours. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Here entity and quiddity
The ſouls of defunct bodies fly.
2. A particular ſpecies of being.
All eruptions of air, though ſmall and ſlight, give an entity
of ſound, which we call crackling, puffing, and ſpitting; as
in bay ſalt and bay leaves, caſt into the fire. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
To ENTo'IL. v. a. *[from toil.] To enſnare; to intangle; to
bring into toils or nets.
He cut off their land forces from their ſhips, and entoiled
both their navy and their camp with a greater power than
their's, both by ſea and land. Bacon's New Atlautis.
To ENTo'MB. v. a. [from tomb.] To put into a tomb; to
bury. -
#ieſ. proceſſions were firſt begun for the interring of
holy martyrs, and the viſiting of thoſe places where they
were entombed. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 41.
The cry went once for thee,
And yet it may again,
If thou would ſt not entomb thyſelf alive, * -
And caſe thy reputation in a tent. Shakeſp. Troil. and Creſ.
They, within the beaſt's vaſt womb,
The choice and flow'r of all their troops entomb. Denham.
ENTRAILs. n.ſ. without a ſingular. [entrailles, Fr. irriga.]
1. The inteſtines; the bowels; the inward parts; the guts.
What, hath thy firy heart ſo parch'd thine entrails,
That not a tear can fall 2 Shać. H. VI.
As for the entrails, they are all without bones; ſave that a
bone is ſometimes found in the heart of a ſtag, and it may be
in ſome other creature. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 749.
The earth hath loſt
Moſt of her ribs, as entrails; being now
Wounded no leſs for marble than for gold. Ben. johnſ Catil.
I tear that harden'd heart from out her breaſt,
Which with her entrails makes my hungry hounds a feaſt. Dr.
2. The internal parts; receſs; caverns.
A precious ring that lightens all the hole,
And ſhews the ragged entrails of this pit. Shakeſ Tit. Andr.
He had brought to light but little of that treaſure, that lay
ſo long hid in the dark entrails of America. Locke.
To ENTRA(IL. v. a. To mingle; to interweave; to diverſify.
Over him, art ſtriving to compare
With nature, did an arbor green diſpred,
Framed of wanton ivy, flow'ring fair,
Through which the fragrant eglantine did ſpread,
His pricking arms entrail'd with roſes red. Fairy Queen.
A little wicker baſket, ,
Made of fine twigs, entrailed curiouſly,
In which they gather'd flowers.
ENTRANcs. n.ſ.. [entrant, French.]
1. The power of entering into a place.
Whence are you, ſir? Has the porter his eyes in his head,
that he gives entrance to ſuch companions? Pray, get you
Out. - Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Where diligence opens the door of the underſtanding, and
impartially keeps it, truth is ſure to find both an entrance and
a welcome too. South's Sermons.
2. The act of entering.
The reaſon, that I gather, he is mad,
Is a mad tale he told to-day at dinner,
Of his own door being ſhut againſt his entrance. Shakeſpears.
5
Hudibras.
Spenser's Prothal.
1.
! , , Better far, I gueſs, …” t
That we do make our entrance ſeveral ways. Shakespeare H. n. VI.
- , ... All the world's a ſtage,
And all the men and women meerly players;
They have their exits and their entrances. Shakespeare A yºu like it.
3. The paſſage by which a place is entered; avenue. -
He charged them to keep the paſſages of the hilly country;
for by them there was an entrance into Judea. judith iv. 7.
Palladio did conclude, that the principal entrance was never
to be regulated by any certain dimenſions, but by the dignity
of the maſter. . . . . J/ot on's Archite&amp;ure.
- Many are the ways that lead
To his grim cave, all diſmall yet to ſenſe
More terrible at th' entrance than within. Milt. Parad. Lºft.
Let this, and every other anxious thought,
. At th' entrance of my threſhold be forgot. Dryden's juven.
4. Initiation; commencement.
This is that which, at firſt entrance, balks and cools them :
they want their liberty. , Ilocke.
5. Intellectual ingreſs; knowledge. -
He that travelleth into a country before he hath ſome en-
trance into the language, goeth to ſchool, and not to travel.
- Bacon's Effys.
6. The aët of taking poſſeſſion of an office or dignity.
From the firſt entrance of this king to his reign, never was
king either more loving, or better beloved. Hayw. Edw. VI.
7. The beginning of any thing.
St. Auguſtine, in the entrance of one of his ſermons, makes
a kind of apology. Hakewill on Providence.
The earl of Holland we have had occaſion to men-
tion before in the firſt entrance upon this diſcourſe. Clarendon.
To ENTRA'Nce. v. n. [from trance; trarſe, French, from
tranſeo, Latin, to paſs over; to paſs for a time from one region
to another.]
1. To put into a trance; to withdraw the ſoul wholly to other
regions, while the body appears to lye in dead ſleep.
2. To put into an extaſy; to make inſenſible of preſent obječts.
With delight I was all the while entranced, and carried ſo
far from myſelf, as that I am right ſorry that you ended ſo
ſoon. Spenser’s Ireland.
Adam, now enforc'd to cloſe his eyes,
Sunk down, and all his ſpirits became entranc'd,
And I ſo raviſh'd with her heav'nly note,
I ſtood entranc'd, and had no room for thought;
But all o'erpower'd with ecſtaſy of bliſs,
Was in a pleaſing dream of paradiſe.
To ENTRA(P. v. a. [from trap.]
1. To enſnare; to catch in a trap or ſhare.
Take heed, mine eyes, how ye do ſtare
Henceforth too raſhly on that guileful net;
In which, if ever eyes entrapped are,
Out of her bands ye by no means ſhall get. Spenſer.
2. To involve unexpectedly in difficulties or diſtreſſes; to en-
tangle. -
Misfortune waits advantage to entrap
The man moſt wary, in her whelming lap. Fairy Queen.
The fraud of England, not the force of France,
Hath now entrapt the noble minded Talbot, Shakespeare Hen. VI.
He ſought to entrap me by intelligence. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
3. To take advantage of.
An injurious perſon lies in wait to entrap thee in thy
words. Eccluſ. viii. 1 1.
To ENTRE’AT. v. a. [traeter, French.]
1. To petition; to ſolicite; to importune.
Iſaac entreated the Lord for his wife.
2. To prevail upon by ſolicitation. “
I have a wife, whom, I protećt, I love;
I would ſhe were in heaven, ſo ſhe could
Entreat ſome pow'r to change this curriſh Jew. Shakespeare.
The Lord was entreated of him, and Rebecah his wife con-
ceived. - Gen. xxv. 21.
It were a fruitleſs attempt to appeaſe a power, whom no
prayers could entreat, no repentance reconcile. Rºgers'; Serm.
3. To treat or uſe well or ill.
Whereas thy ſervant worketh truly, entreat him not eviſ.
- Eccluſ, vii. 20.
Muſt you, fir John, protećt my lady here?
Entreat her not the worſe in that I pray
You uſe her well. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI, p. ii.
Well I entreated her, who well deſerv'd :
I call'd her often; for ſhe always ſerv'd :
Uſe made her perſon eaſy to my fight,
And eaſe inſenſibly produc’d delight.
4. To entertain; to amuſe.
My lord, I muſt entreat the time alone.
—Gód ſhield I ſhould diſturb devotion. Shakespeare. Rom. and Juliet.
5. To entertain; to receive.
The garden of Proſerpina this hight,
And in the midſt thereof a ſilver ſeat,
With a thick arbour goodly overdight,
In which ſhe often us'd, from open heat,
Herſelf to ſhroud, and pleaſures to entreat.
8 E
Milton.
Dryden.
Gen. xxv. 21.
Prior,
Fairy Queen.
Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 369</div><p class="Text">E N V
E N V
To ENTRE'A r. v. m.
1. To offer a treaty or compačt.
Alexander was the firſt that entreated peace with them.
1 Mac. xvi. 47.
2. To treat ; to diſcourſe.
The moſt admirable myſtery of nature is the turning of
iron, touched with the loadſtone, toward the North pole,
of which I ſhall have farther occaſion to entreat. Hakewill.
3. To make a petition. -
. They charged me, on pain of perpetual diſpleaſure, neither
to ſpeak of him, entreat for him, or any way ſuſtain him. Shakespeare
The Janizaries entreated for them, as valiant men. Knolles.
ENTRE’ATANCE. n.ſ.. [from entreat..] Petition; entreaty ;
ſolicitation.
Theſe two entreatance made they might be heard,
Nor was their juſt petition long deny'd. Fairfax, b. ii.
ENTRE’ATY. m. ſ. [from entreat..] Petition; prayer; ſolicita-
tion; ſupplication; requeſt.
If my weak orator
Can from his mother win the duke of York,
Anon expect him here; but if ſhe be
Obdurate to entreaties, God forbid
We ſhould infringe the holy privilege
Of ſanétuary. Shakespeare's Richard III.
ENI REME'TS. m. ſ. [French..] Small plates ſet between the
main diſhes.
Chards of beet are plants of white beet tranſplanted, pro-
ducing great tops, which, in the midſt, have a large white
main ſhoot, which is the true chard uſed in pottages and
entreſ/lets. Martimer's Art of Hu bandry.
E’NTRY. m. ſ. [from enter; entree, French.]
1. The paſſage by which any one enters a houſe
Some there are that know the reſorts and falls of
buſineſs, that cannot ſink into the main of it; like a houſe
that hath convenient ſtairs and entries, but never a fair
IOOmn, Bacon's Eſſays.
A ſtrait long entry to the temple led,
Blind with high walls, and horror over head. Dryden.
Is all this hurry made
On this account, becauſe thou art afraid
A dirty hall or entry ſhould offend
The curious eyes of thy invited friend? Dryden's juven.
We proceeded through the entry, and were neceſſarily kept
in order by the ſituation. Tatler, N°. 86.
2. The aët of entrance; ingreſs.
Bathing and anointing give a relaxation or emollition; and
the mixture of oil and water is better than either of them
alone, becauſe water entereth better into the pores, and oil
after entry ſofteneth better. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory. Nº. 730.
I took horſe to the lake of Conſtance, which lies at two
leagues diſtance from it, and is formed by the entry of the
Rhine. Addiſon on Italy.
By the entry of the chyle and air into the blood, by the lac-
teals, the animal may again revive. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. The act of taking poſſeſſion of any eſtate.
4. The act of regiſtering or ſetting down in writing.
A notary made an entry of this act. Bacon's New Atlantis.
5. The act of entering publickly into any city.
The day being come, he made his entry: he was a man of
middle ſtature and age, and comely. Bacon.
To ENU'B1LATE. v. a. [e and nubile, Latin.] To clear from
clouds. Dićf.
To ENU'cLEAT E. v. a. [enucleo, Latin.] To ſolve; to clear;
to diſentangle. - Dict.
To ENvelop. v. a. [enveloper, French J
1. To inwrap; to cover; to inveſt with ſome integument.
2. To cover; to hide; to ſurround.
The beſt and wholeſom'ſ ſpirits of the night envelop you,
good provoſt. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
A cloud of ſmoke envelops either hoſt,
And all at once the combatants are loſt:
Darkling they join adverſe, and ſhock unſeen,
Courſers with courſers juſting, men with men. Dryden.
It is but to approach nearer, and that miſt that enveloped
them will remove. Locke.
Noćturnal ſhades
This world envelop, and th’ inclement air
Perſuades men to repel benumming froſts. Phillips.
3. To line; to cover on the inſide.
His iron coat, all over grown with ruſt,
Was underneath enveloped with gold,
Darkned with filthy duſt. Fairy Queen.
Envelope. m. ſ. [French. J A wrapper; an outward caſe;
an integument; a cover.
Send theſe to paper-ſparing Pope;
And, when he fits to write,
No letter with an envelope
Could give him more delight. Swift.
To EN v ENOM. v. a. [from venom J
1. To tinge with poiſon; to poiſon; to impregnate with venom.
It is never uſed of the perſon to whom poiſon is given, but of
the draught, meat, or inſtrument by which it is conveyed.
The treacherous inſtrument is in thy hand,
Unbated and envenom'd.
!cides, from Oechalia, crown'd .
With conqueſt, felt th' envenom'd robe, and tore, -
Through pain, up by the roots Theſłalian pines. Milton.
Nor with envenom'd tongue to blaſt the fame -
Of harmleſs men. Philip.
2. To make odious.
Oh, what a world is this, when what is comely
Envenºms him that bears it ! Shakeſp. As you like it.
3. To enrage.
With her full force ſhe threw the pois'nous dart,
And fix’d it deep within Amata's heart;
That thus envenom'd ſhe might kindle rage,
And ſacrifice to ſtrife her houſe and huſband's age. Dryden.
E’NVIABLE, a j. [from envy..] Deſerving envy, ſuch as may
excite envy. -
They, in an enviable mediocrity of fortune, do happily
poſſeſs themſelves. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
E’s v1 E.R. m. ſ. [from envy..] One that envies another; a ma-
ligner; one that deſires the downfall of another.
Men had need beware how they be too perfeót in compli-
ments; for that enviers will give them that attribute, to the
diſadvantage of their virtues. Bacon's Eſſays, Civ. and Mor.
They ween’d
That ſelf-ſame day, by fight or by ſurprize,
To win the mount of God, and on his throne
To ſet the envier of his ſtate, the proud
Aſpirer; but their thoughts prov'd fond and vain. Milton.
All preferments in church and ſtate were given by him, all
his kindred and friends promoted, and all his enemies and en-
viers diſcountenanced. Clarendon.
E's vious paj. [from envy..] Infected with envy pained by
the excellence or happineſs of another.
A man of the moſt envious diſpoſition that ever infected the
air with his breath, whoſe eyes could not look right upon any
happy man, nor ears bear the burden of any man's praiſe. Sidn.
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
To filence envious tongues. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Be not thou envious againſt evil men. Prov. xxiv. 19.
Neither be thou envious at the wicked. Prºv. xxiv. 19.
Sure you miſtake the precept, or the tree;
Heav'n cannot envious of his bleſfings be. Dryden.
E'Nviously. adj. . [from envious J. With envy; with malig-
nity; with ill will.
Biº ſpirits, being fallen from heaven, endeavour envi-
ouſly to obſtruct the ways that may lead us thither. Duppa.
How enviouſly the ladies look,
When they ſurpriſe me at my book
And ſure as they're alive at night,
As ſoon as gone, will ſhew their ſpight. Swift.
To ENvi'RoN. v. a. [environner, French.J
1. To ſurround; to encompaſs; to encircle.
I ſtand-as one upon a rock,
Environ'd with a wilderneſs of ſea. Shakespeare 7 it. Andronicus.
The country near unto the city of Sultania is on every
ſide environed with huge mountains. Knoles’s Hiſtory.
The manifold ſtreams of goodly navigable rivers, as ſo
many chains, environed the ſame ſite and temple. Bacon.
On a plain, within the environing rocks, ſtood the city.
- Sandys’s journey.
Shakſ eart.
A wand'ring
Compačt of unétuous vapour, which the night
Condenſes, and the cold environs round. Milt. Parad. Loſt.
Thought following thought, and ſtep by ſtep led on,
He enter'd now the bordering deſart wild,
And with dark ſhades and rocks environ'd round, .
His holy meditation thus purſu'd. Milton's Par. Regain'd.
God hath ſcattered ſeveral degrees of pleaſure and pain in
all the things that environ and affect us, and blended them to-
gether in almoſt all that our thoughts. Locke.
2. To involve; to envelope.
May never glorious ſun refle&amp;t his beams
Upon the country where you make abode'
But darkneſs and the gloomy ſhade of death
Environ you, 'till miſchief and deſpair
Drive you to break your necks. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
Since ſhe muſt go, and I muſt mourn, come, night,
Environ me with darkneſs whilſt I write. Donne.
3. To ſurround in a hoſtile manner; to beſiege; to hem in.
Methought a legion of foul fiends
Environ'd me, and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries, that with the very thought
I trembling wak'd. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
In thy danger,
If ever danger do environ thee,
Commend thy grievance to my holy prayer. Shakespeare.
I did but prompt the age to quit their clogs,
By the known rules of ancient liberty,
When ſtraight a barbarous noiſe environ, me. AMilton.
4. To incloſe ; to inveſt. .
- The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 370</div><p class="Text">E N V
F P H
i
}
The ſoldier, that man of iron, -
Whom ribs of horrour all environ. Cleave and.
ENvi'RoNs. m. ſ... [environs, French.] The neighbourhood or
neighbouring places round about the country.
To ENU'MERATE. v. a. ſenume, o, Latin.] To reckon up
ſingly ; to count over diſtinčily; to numb' r.
You muſt not only acknowledge to God that you are a
ſinner, but muſt particularly enumerate the kirds of fin where-
of you know yourſelf guilty. Wake's Pretaration for Death.
Beſides enumerating the groſs defect of duty to the queen,
I ſhew how all things were managed wrong. Swift.
ENUMERA'TION. m. ſ. [enumeratio, Latin.] The act of num-
bering or counting over; number told out.
Whoſoever reads St. Paul's enumeratiºn of duties incum-
bent upon it, muſt conclude, that well nigh the buſineſs of
Chriſtianity is laid on charity. Sprat's Sermons.
The chemiſts make ſpirit, ſalt, ſulphur, water, and earth
their five elements, though they are not all agreed in this emu-
meration of elements. - J/atts's Logick.
To ENU'NCIATE. v. a. [enuncio, Latin.] To declare; to
proclaim; to relate; to expreſs.
ENunci A'tion. m. ſ. [enunciatio, Latin.]
1. Declaration; publick atteſtation; open proclamation.
This preaching is to ſtrangers and infants in Chriſt, to pro-
duce faith; but this ſacramental enunciation is the declaration
and confeſſion of it by men in Chriſt, declaring it to be done,
and owned, and accepted, and prevailing. Taylor.
2. Intelligence; information.
It remembers and retains ſuch things as were never at all
in the ſenſe; as the conceptions, enunciations, and actions of
the intelle&amp;t and will. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
ENu'NcIATIVE. adj. [from enunciate.] Declarative; expreſſive.
This preſumption only proceeds in reſpect of the diſpoſitive
words, and not in regard of the enunciative terms thereof. Ayſ.
ENu'NcIATIVELY. adv. [from enunciative..] Declaratively.
E’Nvoy. n.ſ. [envoye, French.]
1. A publick miniſter ſent from one power to another.
Now the Lycian lots conſpire
With Phoebus; now Jove's envoy through the air
Brings diſmal tydings. - Denham.
Perſeus ſent envoys to Carthage, to kindle their hatred
againſt the Romans. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. A publick meſſenger, in dignity below an ambaſſador.
3. A meſſenger.
The watchful ſentinels at ev'ry gate,
At ev'ry paſſage to the ſenſes wait;
Still travel to and fro’ the nervous way,
And their impreſſions to the brain convey;
Where their report the vital envoys make,
And with new orders are commanded back. Blackm. Creat.
To ENVY. v. a. [envier, French; invidere, Latin.]
1. To hate another for excellence, happineſs, or ſucceſs.
Envy thou not the oppreſſor, and chuſe none of his ways.
Prov. iii. 31.
A woman does not envy a man for fighting courage, nor a
man a woman for her beauty. Collier of Envy.
2. To grieve at any qualities of excellence in another.
I have ſeen the fight,
When I have envied thy behaviour. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleop.
You cannot envy your neighbour's wiſdom, if he gives you
good counſel; nor his riches, if he ſupplies you in your wants;
nor his greatneſs, if he employs it to your protećtion. Swift.
3. To grudge; to impart unwillingly ; to withold maliciouſly.
Johnſon, who, by ſtudying Horace, had been acquainted
with the rules, ſeemed to envy others that knowledge. Dryden.
To E'N v Y. v. n. To feel envy ; to feel pain at the ſight of
excellence or felicity.
In ſeeking tales and informations
Againſt this man, whoſe honeſty the devil
And his diſciples only envy at,
Ye blew the fire that burns ye. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
He that loves God is not diſpleaſed at accidents which God
chuſes, nor envies at thoſe gifts he beſtows. Taylor.
Who would envy at the proſperity of the wicked, and the
ſucceſs of perſecutors : Taylor's Rule of living holy.
E’Nvy. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Pain felt and malignity conceived at the ſight of excellence
or happineſs.
Envy is a repining at the proſperity or good of another, or
anger and diſpleaſure at any good of another which we want,
or any advantage another hath above us. Ray on the Creation.
All the conſpirators, ſave only he,
Did that they did in envy of great Caeſar. Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
Many ſuffered death merely in envy to their virtues and
ſuperiour genius. at: Swift.
Envy, to which th' ignoble mind's a ſlave,
Is emulation in the learn'd or brave. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
2. Rivalry; competition.
You may ſee the parliament of women, the little envies of
them to one another. Dryden on Dramatick Po ſy.
3. Malice; malignity.
Madam, this is a meer diſtraćtion; :
...You turn the good we offer into envy. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
4. Publick odium; ill repute.
Edward Plantagenet ſhould be, in the moſt publick and
notorious manner, ſhewed unto the people; to diſcharge the
king of the envy of that opinion and bruit, how he had been
put to death privily. - Bacon's Henry VII.
To EN whe'El v. a. [from wheel.] To encompaſs; to en-
circle. A word probably peculiar to Shakeſpeare.
Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heav'n,
Before, behind thee, and on ev'ry hand -
Enwheel thee round. Shakeſpeare's Othelio.
To EN wo'MB. v. a [from womb.]
1. To make pregnant.
Me then he left enwomb.d of this child,
This luckleſs child, whom thus ye ſee with blood. Fa. Qa.
I'm your mother;
And put you in the catalogue of thoſe
That were enwombed mine. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
2. To bury; to hide as in a womb.
Or as the Africk niger ſtream enwombs
Itſelf into the earth, and after comes,
Having firſt made a natural bridge to paſs,
For many leagus, far greater than it was ;
May't not be ſaid, that her grave ſhall reſtore
Her greater, purer, finer than before. Donne.
Eo'i IP LE. n.ſ. (from Æolus and pila..] A hollow ball of
metal with a long pipe; which ball, filled with water, and
expoſed to the fire, ſends out, as the water heats, at intervals,
blaſts of cold wind through the pipe.
Conſidering the ſtructure of that globe, the exterior cruſt,
and the waters lying round under it, both expoſed to the ſun,
we may fitly compare it to an editile, or an hollow ſphere with
water in it, which the heat of the fire rarefies, and turns into
vapours and wind. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
EPA’ct. m. ſ. ſizarrº. J A number, whereby we note
the exceſs of the common ſolar year above the lunar, and
thereby may find out the age of the moon every year. For
the ſolar year conſiſting of 365 days, the lunar but of 354,
the lunations every year get eleven days before the ſolar year;
and thereby, in 19 years, the moon completes 20 times 12
lunations, or gets up one whole ſolar year; and having
finiſhed that circuit, begins again with the ſun, and ſo from
19 to 19 years. For the firſt year afterwards the moon will
go before the ſun but I 1 days; the ſecond year 22 days; the
third 33 days: but 30 being an entire lunation, caſt that
away, and the remainder 3 ſhall be that year's epačt; and ſo
on, adding yearly 11 days. To find the epačt, having the
prime or golden number given, you have this rule:
Divide by three; for each one left add ten;
Thirty rejećt: the prime makes epačf then. Harris.
As the cycle of the moon ſeems to ſhew the epaës, and that
of the ſun the dominical letter, throughout all their varia-
tions; ſo this Dionyſian period ſerves to ſhew theſe two cycles
both together, and how they proceed or vary all along, 'till at
laſt they accompliſh their period, and both together take their
beginning again, after every 532d year. Polder an ‘i’ imé.
EPA'ULM F NT. n.ſ. [French, from epaule, a ſhoulder.] In
fortification, a ſidework made either of earth thrown up,
of bags of earth, gabions, or of faſcines and earth; of which
latter are made the epaulments of the places of arms for the
cavalry behind the trenches. It ſometimes denotes a ſemi-
baſtion and a ſquare orillion, or maſs of earth faced and lined
with a wall, deſigned to cover the cannon of a cazemate. Harr.
EPE'N THESIS. n. / [ºr Szº.] [In grammar.] The addition
of a vowel or conſonant in the middle of a word. Harris.
EPHA. m.ſ.. [Hebrew.] A meaſure among the Jews, con-
taining fifteen ſolid inches.
The epha and the bath ſhall be of one meaſure; that the
bath may contain the t-nth part of an homer, and the “pha
the tenth part of an homer. Ezek. xlv. 11
EPHE'MER A. m. ſ. [º.s.º. )
1. A fever that terminates in one day.
2. An infect that lives only one day.
EPH E'MERAL. !": [iprp.is...] Diurnal; beginning and end-
EPHE'MF Rick. $ ing in a day.
This was no more than a meer bubble or blaſt, and like
an ephemeral fit of applauſe. //otton.
EPHE/MERIS. n. ſ. [*]
1. A journal; an account of daily tranſactions.
2. An account of the daily motions and ſituations of the planets.
When caſting up his eyes againſt the light,
Both month, and day, and hour he meaſur'd right;
And told more truly than the ephemers;
For art may err, but nature cannot miſs. Dryd. Nun's Tale:
EPHE'M ERIST. n. /. [from epheme is...] One who conſults the
planets; one who ſtudies or practiſes aſtrology.
The night immediately before, he was diſcourſing of and
ſlighting the art of thoſe fooliſh aſtrologers, and genethiacal
ep emer://s, that uſe to pry into the horoſcope of nativities.
- Howel's Vocal Fºrrſ.
EPH IMER ON-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 371</div><p class="Text">E P I
E P I
YPHE MERON-worm. n. ſ. [from iºgo, and worm.] A ſort
of worm that lives but a day.
Swammerdam obſerves of the ephemeron-worms, that their
food is clay, and that they make their cells of the ſame. Derh.
EºPho D. m. ſ. [."DN] A ſort of ornament worn by the
Hebrew prieſts. That worn by the high prieſt was richly
compoſed of gold, blue, purple, crimſon, and twiſted cot-
ton ; and upon the part which came over his two ſhoulders,
were two large precious ſtones, upon which were engraven
the names of the twelve tribes of Iſrael, upon each ſtone ſix
names Where the ephod croſled the high prieſt's breaſt,
was a ſquare ornament, called the breaſt-plate; in which
twelve precious ſtones were ſet, with the names of the twelve
tribes of Iſrael engraved on them, one on each ſtone. The
ephods worn by the other prieſts were only of plain linen.
Calmet.
He made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and ſcarlet,
and fine twined linen. Ex. xxxix. 2.
- Array'd in ephod, ; nor ſo few
As are thoſe pearls of morning dew,
Which hang on herbs and flowers. Sandys's Paraphr.
Epic, adj. [epicus, Latin; iro, J Narrative; compriſing nar-
rations, not acted, but rehearſed. It is uſually ſuppoſed to
be heroick, or to contain one great action atchieved by a
hero.
Holmes, whoſe name ſhall live in epic ſong,
While muſic numbers, or while verſe has feet. Dryden.
The epic poem is more for the manners, and the tragedy
for the paſſions. Dryden.
From morality they formed that kind of poem and fable
which we call epic. Pope's Piew of Epic Poems.
tºº. n-ſ: [-º, J An elegy; a poem upon a fu-
In Cra!.
You from above ſhall hear each day
One dirge diſpatch'd unto your clay;
Theſe, your own anthems, ſhall become
Your laſting epicedium. - Sandº's Paraphraſ.
EPICURE. n. /.. [epicureus, Latin.] A follower of Epicurus;
a man given wholly to luxury.
- - Then fly falſe thanes,
And mingle with the Engliſh picures, Shakespeare. Macbeth.
The epicure buckles to ſtudy, when ſhame, or the deſire to
recommend himſelf to his miſtreſs, ſhall make him uneaſy in
, the want of any ſort of knowledge. Lºcke.
EpicuRE'AN. m. ſ. [epicureus, Latin.] One who holds the
phyſiological principles of Epicurus.
The Platoniſts have their ſoul of the world, and the Epi-
cureans their ſoul of the world, and the Epicureans their endea-
vour towards motion in their atoms when at reſt. Locke.
Epicu'REAN, adj. ... Luxurious; contributing to luxury.
Tie up the libertine in a field of feaſts,
Keep his brain fuming; epicurean cooks,
Sharpen with cloyleſs ſauce his appetite, Shakespeare Ant, and Cleop.
What a damn'd epicurean raſcal is this Shakeſpeare.
Epicu'rism.. n.f. [from epicure.] Luxury; ſenſual enjoy-
ment; groſs pleaſure.
Here you do keep a hundred knights and ſquires;
Men ſo diſorder'd, ſo debauch'd and bold,
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Shews like a riotous inn; epicuriſm and luſt
Make it a tavern or a brothel. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
There is not half ſo much epicuriſm in any of their moſt
ſtudied luxuries, as a bleeding fame at their mercy.
Government of the Tongue, ſ. 6.
Some good men have ventured to calf munificence, the
greateſt ſenſuality, a piece of epicuriſm. Calamy's Sermons.
Ericycle. n.ſ. ſia, and sixxe) A little circle whoſe center
is in the circumference of a greater; or a ſmall orb, which,
being fixed in the deferent of a planet, is carried along with
its motion ; and yet, with its own peculiar motion, carries the
body of the planet faſtened to it round about its proper
center. Harris.
In regard of the epicycle, or leſſer orb, wherein it moveth,
the motion of the moon is various and unequal. Brown.
- Gird the ſphere
With centric and eccentric, ſcribbl’d o'er;
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b.viii.
EPicycloid... n.ſ.. [izºotiºns.] A curve generated by the
revolution of the periphery of a circle along the convex or
concave part of another circle. Harris.
EPIDE'MIcAl.
£.: ; ºf ſix and *.e.]
* That which falls at once upon great numbers of people, as
a plague.
It was conceived not to be an epidemick diſeaſe, but to pro-
ceed from a malignity in the conſtitution of the air, gathered
by the prediſpoſitions of ſeaſons. Bacºn's Hºry VII.
As the proportion of acute and epidemical diſeaſes ſhews the
aptneſs of the air to ſudden and vehement impreſſions, ſo the
chronicel diſeaſes ſhew the ordinary temper of the place.
Graunt's Bills ºf Mortality.
2. Generally prevailing; affe&amp;ting great numbers.
The more epidemical and prevailing this evil is, the more
honourable are thoſe who ſhine as exceptions. South's Sermons.
He ought to have been buſied in loſing his money, or in
other amuſements equally laudable and epidemick among per-
ſons of honour. Swift.
3. General; univerſal. -
They're citizens o' th' world, they're all in all;
Scotland's a nation epidemical. Cleaveland.
EPIDE/RM 1s. n.ſ.. [iziºisº, J The ſcarf-ſkin of a man's
body.
EPIGRAM. n.ſ. [epigramma, Latin.] A ſhort poem termi-
nating in a point.
A college of witcrackers cannot flout me out of my hu-
mour: do'ſt thou think I care for a ſatire or an epigram * Shakespeare
What can be more witty than the epigram of Moore upon
the name of Nicolaus, an ignorant phyſician, that had been
the death of thouſands Peacham ºf Poetry.
I writ
An epigram that boaſts more truth than wit. Gay.
EPIGRAMMA"TICAL. - - - -
EPIGRAMMA"Tick {e}. [epigrammaticus, Latin.]
1. Dealing in epigrams; writing epigrams.
Our good epigrammatical poet, old Godfrey of Wincheſter,
thinketh no ominous foreſpeaking to lie in names. Camden.
2. Suitable to epigrams; belonging to epigrams.
He is every where above conceits of epigrammatick wit and
groſs hyperboles: he maintains majeſty in the midſt of plain-
neſs; he ſhines, but glares not; and is ſtately, without am-
bition. Addiſon.
He has none of thoſe little points and puerilities that are ſo
often to be met with in Ovid; none of the epigrammatick turns
of Lucan; none of thoſe ſwelling ſentiments which are ſo
frequent in Statius and Claudian; none of thoſe mixt embel-
liſhments of Taſſo. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 279.
Epic RAM M ATIST. n.ſ.. [from epigram.] One who writes or
deals in epigrams.
A jeſt upon a poor wit, at firſt might have had an epi-
grammatiſt for its father, and been afterwards gravely under-
ſtood by ſome painful colle&amp;tor. Pope.
Such a cuſtomer the epigrammatiſ Martial meets withal,
one who, after he had walked through the faireſt ſtreet twice
or thrice, cheapening jewels, plate, rich hangings, came away
with a wooden diſh. Peacham on Blazoning.
EPI'GRAPHE. n.ſ.. [iziyºat?..] An inſcription on a ſtatue. Diet.
EPILEPSY. m. ſ. ſizianº; J An convulſion, or convulſive mo-
tion of the whole body, or of ſome of its parts, with a loſs
of ſenſe. A convulſive motion happens when the blood, or
nervous fluid, runs into any parts with ſo great violence, that
the mind cannot reſtrain them from attraction. &amp;aincy.
My lord is fell into an epilepſy :
This is the ſecond fit. - Shakespeare Othello.
Melancholy diſtempers are deduced from ſpirits drawn from
that cacochymia; the phrenitis from cholerick ſpirits, and the
epilepſy from fumes. Flyer on the Humours.
Epileptick, adj. [from epilepſy..] Convulſed; diſeaſed with
an epilepſy.
A plague upon your epileptick viſage 1
Smile you my ſpeeches, as I were a fool? Shakeſ K. Lear.
Epilepticks ought to breathe a pure air, unaffected with any
ſteams, even ſuch as are very fragrant. Arbuthnot on Diet.
EpiloGUE. n.ſ. [pilogus, Latin.] The poem or ſpeech at the
end of a play.
If it be true that good wine needs no buſh, 'tis true that a
good play needs no pilogue; yet to good wine they do uſe good
buſhes, and good plays prove the better by the help of good
epilogues. Shakeſpeare's A you like it.
Are you mad, you dog;
I am to riſe and ſpeak the epilogue. Dryden's 7;ran. Love.
EPINY'cTIs, n.ſ.. [izuvià...] A fore at the corner of the eye.
The epinyétis is of the bigneſs of a lupin, of a duſky red,
and ſometimes of a livid and pale colour, with great inflam-
mation and pain: it diſchargeth firſt a ſanies of bloody
In atter. Wiſeman's Surgery.
EPI'PHANY. n.ſ.. [izºpariſa..] A church feſtival, celebrated on
the twelth day after Chriſtmas, in commemoration of our
Saviour's being manifeſted to the world, by the appearance of
a miraculous blazing ſtar, which conducted the magi to the
place where he was. Dicf.
EPIPHoNE/MA. n.ſ.. [izºpa.] An exclamation; a conclu-
five ſentence not cloſely connected with the words forgoing.
I know a gentleman, who made it a rule in reading to ſkip
over all ſentences where he ſpied a note of admiration at the
end. I believe, if thoſe preachers who abound in efiphomºnas
would but look about them, they would find one part of their
congregation out of countenance, and the other aſleep, except
perhaps an old female beggar or two in the iſles; who, if they
be ſincere, may probably groan at the found. Swift.
Eri'PHoRA, n.ſ.. [tº ſpot2.J. An inflammation of any part,
but more eſpecially a defluxion of humours on the eyes.
Harris.
EPIPHY Llo's PHERMoUs,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 372</div><p class="Text">E Q U
Epiphyllos PE'RMous. adj. [from iri, ºxxov and Tréſºz.)
Is applied to plants that bear their ſeed on the back part of their
leaves, being the ſame with capillaries. Pſarris.
EPI'physis. n.ſ.. [triºpuri;..] Accretion; the part added by
accretion; one bone growing to another by ſimple contiguity,
without any proper articulation. Sºuincy.
The efiphyſis of the os femolis is a diſtinét bone from it in
a child, whereas in a man they do entirely unite. J/jcman.
EPI(Ploce. m. ſ. [Ariraoxi.] A figure of rhetorick, by which
one aggravation, or ſtriking circumſtance, is added in due
gradation to another; as, he not only ſpared his enemies, but con-
tinued them in employment; not only continued, but advanced
them.
Epi'scopacy. m. ſ. [epiſopatus, Latin.] The government of
biſhops; the government of the church eſtabliſhed by the
apoſtles.
They durſt not conteſt with the aſſembly in juriſdićtion;
ſo that there was little more than the name of epiſcopacy pre-
ſerved. Clarendon.
Prelacy itſelf cannot be proved by preſcription, fince epiſ:
copacy is not preſcribed by any time whatſoever. Ayliffe's Par.
EPI'sco PAL. adj. [from epiſcopus, Latin.]
1. Belonging to a biſhop.
The apoſtle commands Titus not only to be a pattern of
good works himſelf, but to uſe his epiſcopal authority in ex-
horting every rank and order of men. Rogers's Sermons.
2. Veſted in a biſhop. - -
The plot of diſcipline ſought to ere&amp;t a popular authority
of elders, and to take away epiſcopal juriſdićtion. Hooker.
Epi'scopate. n.ſ. [epiſcopatus, Latin.] A biſhoprick; the
office and dignity of a biſhop.
EPISODE. m.ſ. [rſtºn.] An incidental narrative, or di-
greſſion in a poem, ſeparable from the main ſubjećt, yet
riſing naturally from it. -
The poem, which we have now under our confideration,
hath no other epiſºdes than ſuch as naturally ariſe from the
ſubjećt. Addiſon's Spediator.
Episo'Dica L. }*. [from epiſºde..] Contained in an epiſode;
EPIso'Dick. pertaining to an epiſode.
Epiſºdical ornaments, ſuch as deſcriptions and narrations,
were delivered to us from the obſervations of Ariſtotle. Dryd.
I diſcover the difference between the epiſodick and principal
aćtion, as well as the nature of epiſodes. Notes ºn the Odyſſey.
EpisPA's Tick. n.ſ.. [its and a rºw.J
1. Drawing.
2. Bliſtering. This is now the more frequent, though leſs pro-
per ſenſe.
The matter ought to be ſolicited, by all poſſible methods, to
the lower parts, by fomentations, bathing, epiſºd/?icks, and
bliſtering. Arbuthnot on Diet.
EPISTi.E. n. ſ. [ºrizox.] A letter. This word is ſeldom
uſed but in poetry, or on occaſions of dignity and ſolemnity.
When looſe epiſtles violate chaſte eyes,
She half conſents, who ſilently denies.
EP1's Tol ARY. adj. [from eºiſile.]
1. Relating to letters; ſuitable to letters.
2. Tranſacted by letters.
I ſhall carry on an epiſolary correſpondence between the two
heads. Addison's Guardian, N°. 1 14.
Epist LER. n.ſ. [from epiſtle..] A ſcribbler of letters.
E PITAPH. m. ſ. [#1&amp;po.] An inſcription upon a tomb.
Live ſtill, and write mine epitaph. Shakeſpeare.
Some thy lov’d duſt in Parian ſtones enſhrine, !
Dryden.
Others immortal epitaphs deſign;
With wit, and ſtrength, that only yields to thine Smith.
EP IT HAL AMIU M. n.ſ. [ in S32.2%GP. J A nuptial ſong ;
a compliment upon marriage.
I preſume to invite you to theſe ſacred nuptials: the
ejithalamium ſung by a crowned muſe. Sandys's Paraphraſe.
The forty-fifth pſalm is an epithalamium to Chriſt and the
church, or to the lamb and his ſpouſe. Burnet.
EºPITHEM. n.ſ.. [in Snºz.] A liquid medicament externally
applied.
A tithems, or cordial applications, are juſtly applied unto
the left breaſt. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 1.
Cordials and epithems are alſo neceſſary, to reſiſt the putre-
faćtion and ſtrengthen the vitals. Wiſeman's Surgery.
E’pit HET. n ſ. [triºtroy.]
1. An adjećtive denoting any quality good or bad; as, the ver-
dant grove, the craggy mountain's lofty head.
I affirm with phlegm, leaving the epithets of falſe, ſcan-
dalous and villainous to the author. Swift.
2. It is uſed by ſome writers improperly for title, name.
The epithet of ſhades belonged more properly to the dark-
neſs than the refrcſhment. Decay of Piety.
3. It is uſed improperly for phraſe, expreſſion.
For which of my good parts did you firſt ſuffer love for me?
—Suffer love! a good epithet: I do ſuffer love indeed; for I
love thee againſt my will. Shakeſpeare.
EPITOME. m. ſ. [ trirowº. J . Abridgment; abbreviature;
compendious abſtract; compendium. º
This is a poor epitºme of your’s,
Which, by th' interpretation of full time,
May ſhew like all yourſelf. Shake peare's Corizºntº.
Epitomes are helpful to the memory, and of good private
uſe; but ſet forth for publick monuments, accuſe the in-
duſtrious writers of delivering much impertinency. Lºttºn.
I think it would be well, if there were a ſhort and plain
epitome made, containing the chief and moſt material heads.
Locke on Educatiºn.
Such abſtraćts and epitomes may be reviewed in their proper
places. //atts's Imprºvement of the Mind.
To EP1"roMise. v. a. (from epitome.]
1. To abſtract; to contract into a narrow ſpace.
Who did the whole world's ſoul contract, and drove
Into the glaſſes of your eyes;
So made ſuch mirrours and ſuch ſpies, -
That they did all to you epitomiſe. Donne.
2. Leſs properly, to diminiſh ; to curtail.
We have pitºmiſed many particular words, to the detriment
of our tongue. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 1 35.
EP1’ to M Is ER. }": [from efitemiſe. An abridger; an ab-
EPI'ToM is T. ſtraćter; a writer of epiton.es.
Epoch. l n ſ. [Tox; ] The time at which a new compu-
E'poch A. ; tation is begun; the time from which dates are
numbered.
Moſes diſtinétly ſets down this account, computing by cer-
tain intervals, memorable aeras and etc. has, or terms of time.
Brown's J lºar Erroirs, b. vi. c. 1.
Theſe are the practices of the world, ſince the year ſixty ;
the grand epoch of falihood, as well as debauchery. South.
Some lazy ages, loſt in ſleep and caſe,
No action leave to buſy chronicles;
Such whoſe ſupine felicity but makes -
In ſtory chaſms, in pochas miſtakes. Dryden.
Their ſeveral erochas or beginnings, as from the creation of
the world, from the flood, from the firſt olympiad, from the
building of Rome, or from any remarkable paſſage or acci-
dent, give us a pleaſant proſpect into the hiſtories of anti-
quity and of former ages. Hºlder on 7 ime.
Time is always reckoned from ſome known parts of this
ſenſible world, and from ſome certain epochs marked out to us
by the motions obſerveable in it. Locłe.
Time, by neceſſity compel'd, ſhall go
Through ſcenes of war, and epochas of woe. P; ior.
Epo'DE. n.ſ.. [ww3GP.] The ſtanza following the ſtrophe and
antiſtrophe.
EPope E. m. ſ [from of 2...] An epick or heroick poem.
Tragedy borrows from the epopee, and that which borrows
is of leſs dignity, becauſe it has not of its own. Dryd. Virgil.
EPULATION. n.ſ. [ºpulatio, Latin.j Banquet ; feaft.
Contented with bread and water, when he would dine with
Jove, and pretended to “pulation, he deſired no other addition
than a piece of cheeſe. Brºwn's Pugar Érraurs, b. vii. c. 17.
EPULo"rick n ſ. [irovX&amp;tizGP.] A cicatriſing medicament.
The ulcer, incarned with common ſarcoticks, and the ulce-
rations about it, were cured by ointment of tuty, and ſuch
like epuloticks. - J/ijeman of Inflammatiºn.
EQUAbi'l IT Y. n ſ [from equable.j Equality to itſelf; even-
neſs; uniformity.
For the celeſtial bodies, the equability and conſtancy of
their motions argue them ordained by Wiſdom. Ray.
The equability of the temperature of the air rendered the
Aſiaticks lazy. Ari uthnot on Air.
E’QUABLE. adj. [arguabilis, Latin.] Equal to itſelf; even ;
uniform in reſpcét to form, motion, or temperature.
He would have the vaſt body of a planet to be as elegant
and round as a factitious globe repreſents it; to be every where
ſmooth and equable, and as plain as elyſian fields. Bentley.
Nothing abates acrimony of the blood more than an equable
motion of it, neither too ſwift nor too ſlow; for too quick a
motion produceth an alkaline, and too ſlow an acid acri-
in On W. Arbuthnot on Diet.
E’QUABLY. adv. [from equable. }, Uniformly; in the ſame
tenour ; evenly ; equally to itſelf.
If bodies move equably in concentrick circles, and the
ſquares of their periodical times be as the cubes of their diſ-
tances from the common center, their centripetal forces will
be reciprocally as the ſquares of the diſtances. Cheyne.
E’QUAL. adj. [a qualis, Latin.]
.*. another in bulk, excellence, or any other quality that
admits compariſon; neither greater nor leſs; neither worſe
nor better.
If thou be among great men, make not thyſelf equal with
them. Eccluſ, xxxii. 9.
Equal lot
May join us; equal joy, as equal love. Milton's Par. Ioff.
Although there were no man in the would to take notice of
it, every triangle would contain three angles equal to two
right angles. Hale's Origin of Aſankind.
2. Adequate to any purpoſe. -
The Scots truſted not their own numbers, as equal to fight
with the Engliſh. Clarendon, b. viii.
8 F 3. Even;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 373</div><p class="Text">E Q U
ſ
:
-
|
;
:
3. Even; uniform.
He laughs at all the vulgar cares and fears,
At their vain triumphs, and their vainer tears;
An equal temper in his mind he found,
When fortune flatter'd him, and when ſhe frown'd. Dryden.
Think not of me: perhaps my equal mind
May learn to bear the fate the gods allot me. Smith.
4. In juſt proportion.
It is not permitted me to make my commendations equal
to your merit. Dryden's Fab. Dedication.
5. Impartial; neutral. *
Each to his proper fortune ſtand or fall;
Equal and unconcern'd I look on all:
Rutilians, Trojans, are the ſame to me,
And both ſhall draw the lots their fates decree. Dryd. Æn.
6. Indifferent.
They who are not diſpoſed to receive them, may let them
alone, or reječt them; it is equal to me. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
7. Equitable; advantageous alike to both parties.
He ſubmitted himſelf, and ſware to all equal conditions.
- 2 Mac. xiii. 23.
8. Upon the ſame terms.
. They made the married, orphans, widows, yea and the
aged alſo, equal in ſpoils with themſelves. 24/ac. viii. 30.
E'QUAL. m. ſ. [from the adjective.]
I. One not inferiour or ſuperiour to another.
He is enamoured on Hero: I pray you, diſſuade him from
her; ſhe is no equal for his birth. Shakesp. Much Ado about Nothing.
He would make them all equals to the citizens of Rome.
2 Mac. ix. 15.
Thoſe who were once his equal, envy and defame him,
becauſe they now ſee him their ſuperiour; and thoſe who
were once his ſuperiours, becauſe they look upon him as their
equal. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 256.
To my dear equa', in my native land,
My plighted vow I gave: I his receiv'd :
Each ſwore with truth; with pleaſure each believ'd :
The mutual contract was to heav'n convey’d. Prior,
2. One of the ſame age.
I profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in
mine own nation. Gal. i. 14.
To EQUAL. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To make one thing or perſon equal to another.
2. To riſe to the ſame ſtate with another perſon.
I know no body ſo like to equal him, even at the age he
wrote moſt of thein, as yourſelf. Trumbull to Pope.
3. To be equal to. -
One whoſe all not equal, Edward's moiety. Shakeſpeare.
, 4. To recompenſe fully. -
Then ſought Sicheus through the ſhady grove,
Who anſwer'd all her cares, and equal'd all her love. Dryd.
Nor you, great queen, theſe offices repent,
Which he will equal, and perhaps augment. Dryden's Wirg.
To E'QUALISE. v. a. [from equal.]
1. To make even.
To equaliſe accounts we will allow three hundred years,
and ſo long a time as we can manifeſt from the Scripture. Bro.
2. To be equal to : a ſenſe not uſed.
That would make the moved body, remaining what it is,
in regard of its bigneſs, to equaliſe and fit a thing bigger than
it is. Digby on Bodies.
Ye loſty beeches, tell this matchleſs dame,
That if together ye fed all one flame,
It could not rqualiſe the hundredth part
Of what her eyes have kindled in my heart. J/aller.
EQUALITY. m. ſ. [from cqual.]
1. Likeneſs with regard to any quantities compared.
Equality of two domeſtick powers,
Breeds ſcrupulous faction: the hated, grown to ſtrength,
Are newly grown to love. Shakeſp. Anthony and Cleºpatra.
2. The ſame degree of dignity.
One ſhall riſe,
Of proud ambition; who, not content
With fair equality, fraternal ſtate,
Will arrogate dominion undeſerv’d,
Over his brethren. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii. l. 26.
According to this equality wherein God hath placed all
mankind, with relation to himſelf, in all the relations between
man and man there is a mutual dependance. Swift.
3. Eyenneſs; uniformity; conſtant tonour; equability.
Meaſure out the lives of men, and periodically define the
alterations of their tempers, conceive a regularity in muta-
tiºns, with an equality in conſtitutions, and forget that variety
which phyſicians therein diſcover. Brown's Wulgar Errºurs.
Egg Ally adv. [from e4 al.]
1. In the ſame degree with another perſon or thing; alike.
To reconcile mens vices to their fears is the aim of all the
various ſchemes and proječts of ſin, and is equally intended
by atheiſm and immorality. Rogers, Sermon 5.
They are equally impatient of their condition, equally
tempted with the wages of unrighteouſneſs, as if they were
indeed poor. - Rogers, Sermon 2.
2. Evenly ; equably; uniformly.
If the motion of the ſun were as unequal as of a ſhip,
ſometimes ſlow, and at others ſwift; or, if being conſtantly
equally ſwift, it yet was not circular, and produced not the
ſame appearances, it would not help us to meaſure time more
than the motion of a comet does. Lºcke.
3. Impartially.
We ſhall uſe them,
As we ſhall find their merits and our ſafety
May equally determine. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
EQU'A N GULAR. adj. [from equus and angulus, Latin.] Con-
fifting of equal angles.
EQUANI'M IT Y. m. ſ. [a quanimitas, Latin.] Evenneſs of mind
neither elated nor depreſied.
EQUA'NI Mous. adj. [aquatiºnis, Latin.] Even ; not dejected;
not elated.
EQUATION. m. ſ. ſacq are, Latin.] The inveſtigation of a
mean proportion collected from the extremities of exceſs and
defect, to be applied to the whole.
We are to find out the extremities on both ſides, and from
and between them the middle daily motions of the fun along
the Ecliptick; and to frame tables of equation of natural days,
to be applied to the mean motion by addition or ſubſtraction,
as the caſe ſhall require. Halder on Jime.
By an argument taken from the equations of the times of the
eclipſes of Jupiter's ſatellites, it ſeeins that light is propagated
in time, ſpending in its pallage from the fun to us about ſeven
minutes of time. Newtºn's Opt.
EQUATION. [In algebra Is an expreſſion of the ſame quan-
tity in two diſſimilar terms, but of cqual value; as 5 s =36 d.
19ićt.
EQUAt ſon. [In aſtronomy. ] The difference between the time
marked out by the ſun's apparent motion, and the time that
is meaſured by its real or middle motion; according to which
clocks and watches ought to be adjuſted. Die?.
EQUA' TOR. m. ſ. [a quatºr, Latin.] On the earth, or equi-
noćtial in the heavens, is a great circle, whoſe poles are the
poles of the world. It divides the globe into two equal parts,
the northern and ſouthern hemiſpheres. It paſſes through the
eaſt and weſt points of the horizon; and at the meridian is
raiſed as much above the horizon as is the complement of the
latitude of the place. Whenever the ſun comes to this circle,
it makes equal days and nights all round the globe, becauſe he
then riſes due eaſt and ſets due weſt, which he doth at no
other time of the year. - Harris.
By reaſon of the convexity of the earth, the eye of man,
under the equator, cannot diſcover both the poles; neither
would the eye, under the poles, diſcover the ſun in the
equator. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 5
On the other ſide the equator there is much land ſtill re-
maining undiſcovered. Ray on the Creation.
Rocks rich in gems, and mountains big with mines,
That on the high equator ridgy riſe,
Whence many a burſting ſtream auriferous plays. Thomſºn.
EQUAto'RIAL. adj. [from equator.] Pertaining to the equator;
taken at the equator.
The planets have ſpheroidical figures, and obliquities of
their equatorial to their ecliptick planes. Cheyne.
EQUE's TRAN. adj. [eque/fris, Latin.]
1. Appearing on horſeback.
An equeſt, ian lady appeared upon the plains. Sprélator.
2. Skilled in horſemanſhip.
3. Belonging to the ſecond rank in Rome.
EQUE'RRY... n.ſ. ſecurie, Dutch..] Maſter of the horſe.
EQU cru'R A L.
EQUICRU'R E.
1. Having the legs of an equal length. *
2. Having the legs of an equal length, and longer than the
baſe; iſoſceles.
An equicrure triangle goes upon a certain proportion of
length and breadth. Digby on the Soul.
We begin with Saturn, and ſucceſſively draw lines from
angle to angle, until ſeven equicrural triangles be deſcribed.
Brºwn's Wulgar Errours, b. v. c. 22.
EQUIDI's TANT: adj. [acquus and diſtans, Latin.] At the ſame
diſtance.
The fixt ſtars are not all placed in the ſame concave ſpheri-
cal ſuperficies, and equid/lant from us, as they ſeem to be.
Ray on the Creation.
Equidi'st ANTLY. adv. [from equidiſtant. J At the ſame
diſtance. -
The liver, though ſeated on the right ſide, yet by the ſub
clavian diviſion equidiſtantly communicates unto either arm.
Brºwn's Pulgar Errour, b. iv. c. 4.
EQUIFo'RMITY.. n.ſ.. [a quus and forma, Latin J Uniform
equality.
No diverſity or difference, but a ſimplicity of parts and
equiformity of motion. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 5.
EQUILA'TERAL. adj. [a quus and latu, Latin.] Having all
ſides equal. -
Circles or ſquares, or triangles equilateral, which are aii
figures of equal lines, can differ but in greater or leſſer. Bacon.
Trifling futility appears in their twelve ſigns of the zo-
2. diack
{a}. [arquus and crus, Latin.]<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 374</div><p class="Text">E Q U
diack and their aſpects: why no more aſpéâs than diametri-
cally oppoſite, and ſuch as make equilateral figures? Bentley.
To EQUIL1(BRATE. v. a. [from equilibrium.] To balance
equally; to keep even with equal weight on each ſide.
If the point of the knife, drawn over the loadſtone, have
in this affriction been drawn from the equator of the load-
ſtone towards the pole, it will attract one of the cxtremes of
an equilibrated magnetick needle. Boyle's Experiments.
The bodies of fiſhes are equilibrated with the water in which
they ſwim. Arbuthnot on Air.
EQ, ill BRATION. m. ſ. [from equilibrate.] Equipoiſe; the act
of keeping the balance even.
The acceſſion of bodies upon, or ſeceſſion thereof from the
carth's ſurface, perturb not the equilibration of either hemi-
ſphere. Brown's ſugar Errours, b, i. c. 2.
In ſo great a variety of motions, as running, leaping, and
dancing, nature's laws of equilibration are always obſerved.
Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
EQUILI'pp IUM. n ſ. [Latin.]
1. Equipoiſe; equality of weight.
2. Equality of evidence, motives, or powers of any kind.
Things are not left to an equilibrium, to hover under an
indifference whether they ſhall come to paſs, or not come to
paſs. South's Sermons.
It is in equilibrio
If deities deſcend or no;
Then let th' affirmative prevail,
As requiſite to form my tale. Prior.
Health conſiſts in the equilibrium between thoſe two powers,
when the fluids move ſo equally that they don't preſs upon the
ſolids with a greater force than they can bear. Arbuth, on Alin.
Equis E'cess ARY. adj. [a quus and neceſſarius, Latin.J Need-
ful in the ſame degree.
For both to give blows and to carry,
In fights, are equineceſſary. Hudibra, p. i cant. 3.
EQUINo’ct 1A L. m. ſ. [a ſitus and nox, Latin. The line that
encompaſſes the world at an equal diſtance from cither pole, to
which circle when the ſun comes, he makes equal days and
nights all over the globe.
Eqviso’ct AL. adj. [from equinox.]
1. Pertaining to the equinox.
Thrice th' equino&amp;ial line
He circled; four times croſs'd the car of night
From pole to pole, traverſing each colure. Milion's Pa. Loft.
Some ſay the ſun
Was bid turn reins from th' equinoëtial road,
Like diſtant breadth. 4.itºn's Paradiſe Lºſº, b. x.
2. Happening about the time of the equinoxes.
3. Being near the equinoëtial line; having the properties of
things near the equator.
In vain they covet ſhades, and Thracia's gales,
Pining with equinośial heat. Phillips.
EqJINo'c'ſ ALLY. adv. [from equinºffial.] In the direction of
the equinoëtial.
They may be refrigerated inclanaterly, or ſomewhat equi-
mºtiaiº; that is, towards the eaſtern and weſtern points. Brown.
EQUINOX. m. / [arquus and ii-x, Latin.]
1. Equinoxes are the preciſe times in which the ſun enters into
the firſt point of Aries and Libra; for then, moving exactly
under the equinoëtial, he makes our days and nights equal.
This he doth twice a year, about the 21ſt of March and 2.3d
of Se; tºmber, which therefore are called the vernal and au-
tumnal equinoxes. * Harris.
It ariſeth not unto Biarmia, and heliacally about the au-
tumnal equinox. Brown's ſugar E. rours, b. iv. c. 13.
The tune when this kid was taken out of the womb was
about the vernal equinox. Ray on the Creation.
* I was now the month in which the world legan,
If March beheld the firit created man ;
And iiiice the vernal eq., inza, the ſun
in Aries twelve degrees or more had run. Dryden.
2. Equality; even meaſure. Improper. -
Do but ſee his vice;
'Tis to his virtues a juſt equinox,
The one as jong as th’ other.
3. Equinoctial wind : a poetical uſe.
The paſſage vet was good; the wind, 'tis true, }
Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Was ſomewhat high, but that was nothing new,
No more than uſual equinoxes blew. Dryden.
Eq! INU'MeRAN. T. adj. a quus and numer us, Latin.] Having
the ſame number ; conſiſting of the ſame number.
This talent of gold, though not equintºmerant, nor yet equi-
ponderant, as to any other; yet was cquivalent to ſome cor-
reſpondent talent in braſs. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To F. QUIP. v. a. ſcquipper, French.]
1. Fo furniſh for a horſeman or cavalier.
2. To furniſh; to accoutre; to dreſs out.
The country are led aſtray in following the town; and
equipped in a ridiculous habit, when they fancy themſelves in
the height of the mode. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 129.
E QUIPAC f. m. ſ. [equipage, French.]
1. Furniture for a horſema 1.
2. Carriage of ſtate; vehicle.
Winged ſpirits, and chariots wing’d,
From th’ armory of God; where ſtand of old
Myriads, between two brazen mountains lodg'd
Againſt a ſolemn day, harneſs'd at hand,
Celeſtial equipage / Milton's Paradiſe Lø/?, b. vii. l. 203,
3. Attendance; retinue.
Think what an equitage thou haſt in air,
And vicw with ſcorn two pages and a chair. Pope.
4. Accoutrements; furniture. -
Soon as thy dreadful trump begins to ſound, -
The god of war, with his fierce equipage, -
Thou do'ſ awake, ſleep never he ſo ſound. Fairy Queen.
I will not lend thee a penny.− -
I will retort the ſum in equipage.
Shakespeare', Merry I/ives ºf Hindſºr.
E'QUIPAGED. adj. [from equipage.] Accoutred; attended;
with fine habits; with ſplendid retinue.
She forth iſſued with a goodly train
Of ſquires and ladies, equipaged well,
And entertained them right fairly, as befell. Fairy 3'ueen.
EQUIPE'NDENCY. m. ſ [a quus and pendez, Latin J The act of
hanging in equipoiſe; not determined either way.
Doubtleſs the will of man, in the ſtate of innocence, had
an entire freedom, a perfect equipendency and indifference to
either part of the contradićtion, to ſtand or not to ſtand. South.
EQUI'PM Est. m. ſ. [from equip.]
1. The act of equipping or accoutering.
2. Accoutrement; equipage.
Equipois F. n.ſ. ſequs, Latin, and poids, French J Equality
of weight; equilibration; equality of force.
In the temperate zone of our life there are few bodies at
ſuch an equipoiſe of humours; but that the prevalency of ſome
one indiſpoſeth the ſpirits. Glanv Scepſ, c. 14.
EQUI.Pollence, n.ſ.. [a quus and fallentia, Latin J Equality
of force or power. - -
Equipo'll ENT. adj. [a quipollens, Lat..] Having equal power
or force; equivalent. -
Votary reſolution is made equipºlicnt to cuſtom, even in
matter of blood. Bacon's Eſſays, Civil and Moral.
Eqy IPO'NDERANc E. }'ſ [a quus and pondus, Latin.] Equa-
Equ , Po'NDER A Ncy. $ lity of weight; equipoiſe. Dić.
Equipo's DER ANT. adj. [a quus and ponderani, Latin J Being
of the ſame weight.
Their lungs may ſerve to render their bodies equiponderant
to the water. Ray on the Creation.
A column of air, of any given diameter, is equiponderant
to a column of quickſilver of between twenty-nine and thirty
inches height. - Locke.
To Equipo's DERATE. v. n. [æguus and pondero, Latin.] To
weigh equal to any thing.
The havineſs of any weight doth increaſe proportionably to
its diſtance from the center: thus one pound A at D, will equi-
ponderate unto two pounds at B, if the diſtance A D is double
unto A B. JWilkins's Aſatham. Alſagick.
Equipo'NDºors. adj. [arquus and pondus, Lat.] Equilibrated;
equal on either part.
The Scepticks affected an indifferent equitoſidious neutrality,
as the only means to their ataraxia. Glanv. Sceſſ, c. 27.
f/QUITABLE. adj. [equitable, French.]
1. Juſt ; due to juſtice.
It ſeems but equitable to give the artiſts leave to name them
as they pleaſe. Boy'e's Scept. Chym.
2. Loving juſtice; candid; impartial.
Equit AELY. adv. [from equitable.] . Juſtly ; impartially.
Equity. n.ſ. [equite, French ; a quitas, Latin.]
1. Juſtice; right; honeſty.
oul ſubornation is predominant,
And equity exil'd your highneſs' land. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Chriſtianity ſecures both the private intereſts of men and
the publick peace, enforcing all juſtice and equity. Tillºtſºn.
2. Impartiality.
Liking their own ſomewhat better than other mens, even
becauſe they are their own, they muſt in equity allow us to be
like unto them in this affection. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 13.
3. [In law.] The rules of deciſion obſerved by the court of
Chancery. -
Equivalence. \ n.ſ.. [acquus and valeo, Latin J Equality of
EQUI'v ALEN cy. } power or worth. -
Muſt the ſervant of God be aſſured that which he nightly
prays for ſhall be granted Yes, either formally or by way of
equivalence, either that or ſomething better. Hamm. Pračf. Cat.
That there is any equivalence or parity of worth betwixt
the good we do to our brother, and the good we hope for
from God, all good Proteſtants do deny. Smalridge.
Civil cauſes are equivalent unto criminal cauſes, and of as
great importance; but that this equivalenty ºnly reſpects the
careful and diligent admiſſion of proofs. Ayliffe's Parergen,
To EQUI’val ENCE. v. a. [from the noun..] 1 o equiponde-
rate; to be equal to.
Whether the tranſgreſſion of Eve ſeducing did not exceed
Adam ſeduced, or whether the reſiſtibility of his reaſon did
Inot
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 375</div><p class="Text">E Q U
. E R E
not equivalence the facility of her ſedućtion, we ſhall refer to
ſchoolmen. Brown’s Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 1.
Equiv At ent: adj. [*quus and valent, Latin.]
1. Equal in value.
Things
well nigh equivalent, and neighbºring value,
By lot are parted; but the value, high heav'n, thy ſhare,
In equal balance laid with earth and hell, -
Flings up the adverſe ſcale, and ſhuns proportion.
2. Equal in value, or in any excellence. -
No fair to thine
Equivalent, or ſecond which compell’d
Mie thus, though importune perhaps, to come
And gaze, and worſhip thee. Milton's Paradiſ? Loft, b. ix.
3. Equal in force or power. -
The dread of Iſrael's foes, who, with a ſtrength
Equivalent to angels, walk'd their ſtreets,
None offering fight. Milton's Agoniſ'es, 1.342.
4. Of the ſame cogency or weight.
The conſideration of publick utility is, by very good ad-
vice, judged at the leaſt equivale t with the eaſier kind of
neceſſity. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 9.
5. Of the ſame import or meaning.
The uſe of the word miniſter is brought down to the literal
ſignification of it, a ſervant; for now to ſerve and to miniſter,
ſervile and miniſterial, are terms equivalent. South's Sermony.
EQUI'v Ales T. m. ſ. A thing of the ſame weight, dignity, or
value.
The ſlave without a ranſom ſhall be ſent;
It reſts for you to make th' equival nt. Dryden's Homer.
Fancy a regular obedience to one law will be a full equiva-
Pent for their breach of another. Rogers, Sermon 13.
EqJ.'vocal, adj. [a quivocus, Latin.]
1. Of doubtful ſignification; meaning different things; ſtand-
ing for different notions.
Theſe ſentences to ſugar, or to gall, -
Being ſtrong on both ſides, are equivocal. Shakeſp. Othello
Words of different ſignifications, taken in general, are of
an equivocal ſenſe; but being conſidered with all their particu-
lar circumſtances, they have their ſenſe reſtrained. Stillingfleet.
The greater number of thoſe who held this were miſguided
by equivocal terms. Swift.
2. Uncertain; doubtful; happening different ways.
Equivocal generation is the production of plants without ſeed,
or of inſects or animals without parents in the natural way of
coition between male and female; which is now believed never
to happen, but that all bodies are univocally produced. Harr.
My affirmation is, that there is no ſuch thing as equivocal or
ſpontaneous generation; but that all animals are generated by
animal parents of the ſame ſpecies with themſelves. Ray.
Thoſe half-learn'd withings, num’rous in our iſle
As half-form'd inſects on the banks of Nile;
Unfiniſh'd things, one knows not what to call,
Their generation's ſo equivocal. , Pope's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
EQUI'vocal. m. ſ Ambiguity; word of doubtful meaning.
Shall two or three wretched equivocal, have the force to
corrupt us. Dennis.
EQU,"vocally, adv. [from equivocal.]
1. Ambiguouſly; in a doubtful or double ſenſe. -
Words abſtracted from their proper ſenſe and ſignification,
lºſe the nature of words, and are only equivocally ſo called. South.
2. By uncertain or irregular birth; by equivocal generation; by
generation out of the ſtated order.
No infect or animal did ever proceed equivocally from putre-
faction, unleſs in miraculous caſes; as in Egypt by the Divine
judgments. Bentley's Sermons.
Equivocals ess. "...ſ (from equivocal.] Ambiguity; double
meaning
Pºnguiſh the quivºcalºſ, or latitude of the word, and
then point out that determinate part which is the ground of
my demonſtration. Norris.
To Eqy Y99 At E. v. n. [a quivocatio, Latin.] To uſe words
of double meaning ; to uſe ambiguous expreſſions; to mean
one.thing and expreſs another.
Not only Jeſuits can equivocate. Dryden's Hind and Panth.
My ſoul diſdain’d a promiſe;
But yet your falſe equivocating tongue,
Your looks, Your eyes, your ev'ry motion promis'd :
But you are ripe in frauds, and learn'd in fiſhoods. Smith.
EQUI voca'rios. n: ſ [a quivocatio, Latin.] Ambiguity of
ſpeech; dºuble meaning. -
Reproof is eaſily miſapplied, and, through equivocation,
wreſted. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 8.
Prior.
I pull in reſolution, and begin
To doubt the equivocation of the fiend, -
E º hat lies like truth. - • Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
SVivos A‘roR. m. ſ. [from equivocate.] One who uſes ambi-
guous language; one who uſes mental reſervation.
.." º "... that could ſwear in both the ſcales
º, h *** who committed treaſon, yet could not
CaVCll. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Er, a ſyllable in the middle of names of places, comes by con-
traction from the Saxon para, dwellers. Gibſºn’, Camden.
E’RA. m. ſ. ſara, Latin.] The account of time from any par-
ticular date or epoch.
Frºm the bleſſings they beflow
Our times are dated, and our eras move:
They govern, and enlighten all below,
As thou do'ſt all above. Prior.
ERA DIA'tion. m. ſ. [e and radius, Latin.] Emiſſion of ra-
diance.
God gives me a heart humbly to converſe with him, from
whom alone are all the eradiations of true majeſty, K. Charle.
To ERADIUATE. v. a. [eradic, Latin J
1. To pull up by the root.
He ſuffereth the poiſon of Nubia to be gathered, and Aconite
to be eradicated, yet this not to be moved. Brown'; /lºg. Err.
2. To completely deſtroy ; to end; to cut off.
If a gouty perſon can bring himſelf entirely to a milk diet,
he may ſo change the whole juices of his body as to radicate
the diſtemper. Arbuthnot on Diet.
If vice cannot wholly be eladicated, it ought at leaſt to be
confined to particular objects. Swift's Examiner, Nº. 27.
ERA Dica"tion. m.ſ.. [from erad cate.]
1. The act of tearing up by the root; deſtruction; exciſion.
2. The ſtate of being torn up by the roots.
They affirm the roots of mandrakes give a ſhriek upon era-
dication, which is falſe below confutation. Brown's Pig. Err.
ERA'dicative. adj. [from eradicate. J ‘I hat which cures
radically; that which drives quite away.
To ERA(SE. v. a. [roſer, French..] To deſtroy; to exſcind;
to expunge; to rub out.
The heads of birds, for the moſt part, are given eroſºd;
that is, plucked off. Peacham on Blazoning.
ERA's EMENT. n.ſ. [from eraſ...]
1. Deſtruction; devaſtation.
2. Expunction; abolition.
ERE. adv. [arn, Saxon; air, Gothick; cer, Dutch. This word
is ſometimes vitiouſly written e'er, as if from ever. It is like-
wiſe written or before ever, on and aen in Saxon being indiſ-
criminately written. Mr. Lye J
1. Before; ſooner than.
Ere he would have hang'd a man for the getting a hundred
baſtards, he would have paid for the nurſing a thouſand. Shakespeare
The lions brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came
to the bottom of the den. Daniel.
Juſt trial, ere I merit
My exaltation without change or end. A ſilt. Par. Regain'd.
The mountain trees in diſtant proſpect pleaſe,
Ere yet the pine deſcended to the ſeas;
Ere ſails were ſpread new oceans to explore. Dryden's Ovid.
Our fruitful Nile
Flow'd ere the wonted ſeaſon. Dryden's All fºr Lºve.
The birds ſhall ceaſe to tune their ev'ning ſong,
The winds to breathe, the waving woods to move,
And ſtreams to murmur, ere I ceaſe to love. Pope's Autumn.
ERElo's G. adv. [from ere and ling.] Before a long time had
elapſed. Nec lingum tempur.
The wild horſe having enmity with the ſtag, came to a
man to deſire aid, who mounted upon his back, and, follow-
ing the ſtag, ere!ong ſlew him. Spenſer on Ireland.
The anger already began to paint revenge in many colours,
erelong he had not only gotten pity but pardon. Sidney.
Nothing is laſting that is feigned; it will have another face
than it had erelong. Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
They ſwim in joy,
Fre'ong to ſwim at large, and laugh, for which
The world erelong a world of tears muſt weep. Milt. P. Lºft.
I ſaw two ſtock-doves billing, and erelong
Will take the neſt. Dryden', ſirgil, Paft. 3.
It pleaſes me to think, that I who know ſo ſmall a portion
of the works of the Creator, and with ſlow and painful ſteps
creep up and down on the ſurface of this globe, ſhall erºlºng
ſhoot away with the ſwiftneſs of imagination, and trace the
ſprings of nature's operations. Sººjata, Nº. 635.
ERENow. adv. [from ere and now..] Before this time.
Ah, gentle ſoldiers, ſome ſhort time allow ;
My father has repented him erencv. Dryd. Conq. ºf Granad.
Had the world eternally been, ſcience had been brought to
perfection long erenow. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
ER Ew H1'le. Nadv. [from cre and while.] Some time ago;
ERE whi'LEs. } before a little while.
I am as fair now as I was erewhile :
Since night you lov'd me, yet ſince night you left me. Shał.
We fit down to our meals, ſuſpect not the intruſion of armed
uninvited gueſts, who crewhiles, we know, were wont to ſur-
priſe U.S. Decay of Piety.
To ERECT. v. a. ſeriºus, Latin.]
1. To raiſe in a ſtrait line; to place perpendicularly to the
horizon.
2. To ER Ect a Perpendicular. To croſs one line by another at
right angles.
3. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 376</div><p class="Text">E R K
E R R
. To raiſe; to build. - --
3. 1 oral - Happier walls expect, - - -
which, wand'ring long, at laſt thºuſhal trº. Dryd, Virg.
Th. are many monuments erected to benefactºrs tº.”
republick. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
4. To eſtabliſh anew ; to ſettle. - -
G. difference there is between their proceedings. who
are: a new commonwealth which is to have neither regiment
nor religion the ſame that was, and theirs who only reform a
decayed eſtate. Hawker, h;y. ſ' 17.
He ſuffers ſeventy-two diſtinë, nations to be erected out of
the firfi monarchy, under diſtinét governours. Raleigh.
5. To elevate ; to exalt. ... — » - ºr * • * *
- * * am not to ered myſelf into a judge.
J, who am a party, - Dryden's Fables, Preface.
I am far from pretending infallibility: that would be to
ereſt myſelf into an apoſtle. Locke on St. Paul's Epiſtles.
6. To raiſe conſequences from premiſes. -
. Men being too haſty to errº tº themſelves general notions
and ill-grounded theories, find themſelves deceived in their
ſtock of knowledge. - . - Locke:
Milibranche ºft; this propoſition, of ſeeing all thing in
God, upon their ruin. Docke.
7. To animate; not tº depreſs; to encourage.
why ſhould not hope .
As much ared our thoughts, as fear deject them: Denham.
To Erect. v. n. To riſe upright:
Q # i: trefoil againſt rain ſwelleth in the ſtalk, and ſo ſtand-
eth more upright; for by Wºt Italks do ereºi, and leaves bow
down. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 827.
Eºcr. adj. [ereffus, Latin.] e
. Upright; not leaning; not prone. -
I É. far from proneneſs, are almoſt ered ; advancing the
head and breaſt in progreſſion, only pronº in volitation. Brown.
p.ſ.l. tells us, that the ſerpent went ered like man. Brown.
2. Directed upwards. - -
Vain were vows, - - - -
And plaints, and ſuppliant hands, to heav'n erect. Phillips.
3- Bold; confident; unſhaken. : -
i.e. no vain fear thy gen’rous ardour tame; , -
But ſtand erett, and ſound as loud as fame. Granville.
4. Vigorous ; not depreſſed.
- - ãº attention of mind, which in prayer
That vigilant and ere &gt; 2. To miſs the right way; to ſtray.
is very neceſſary, is waſted or dulled. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 33.
ERE!ction. n.f. [from treet.]
... The act of raiſing, or ſtate of being raiſed upward.
W. to confider only the crediion of the hills above the
ordinary land. Brerewood on Languages.
2. The act of building or raiſing edifices.
rſt thing which moveth them thus to caſt up their
º . ..º.º. uſual at the firſt erection of
churches. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 12.
pīār, were ſet up above one thouſand four hundred and
twenty-ſix years before the flood, counting Seth to he an hun-
dred years old at the erection of them. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
3. Eſtabliſhment; ſettlement. . . -
It muſt needs have a peculiar influence upon the erection,
countinuance, and diſſolution of every ſociety. South's Serm.
. Elevation; exaltation of ſentiments: - -
4. Her ºãº height my mind to high erection draws up. Sidn.
ERecºness. n.ſ. [from treet.] Uprightneſs of poſture or
form. -
We take refineſ; ſtriðly as Galen defined it; they only,
ſayeth he, have an erect figure, whoſe ſpine and thighbone
are carried on right lines. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. º. I.
E REMITE. n.f ſeremita, Latin; it'ſº One who lives .
in a wilderneſs; one who lives in ſolitude; an hermit; a
folitary. - -
Q Kºmu, the eremite findeth a fifth commodity not infe-
rior to any of theſe four- Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
And many more too long,
Embryoes and idiots, eremites and friars, -
W. black, and grey, with all their trumpº. Milton.
EREMI'rical. adj. [from remite.] Religiouſly ſolitary; lead-
ing the life of an hermit. , - ... •
º have multitudes of religious orders, ":#.
* bitical. - tillingflet,
Eºs. n. ſ. ſerepto, Latin.] A creeping forth. Bail.
fºrtion. n.ſ. ſerºptiº, Latin | A ſnatching or taking ...}
force. - au.
1...", ſ: A ſort of ſtub, like a piece of ſoft horn,
about the bigneſs of a cheſnut, which is placed behind and
below the paſtern joint, and is commonly hid under te tuft
of the fetlock. ll l Farrier’s Dićf.
'Noo. ii. ſ. Sea-holly, a plant. - -
łº [its] ' Cºntroverſial; relating to diſpute;
ining controverſies.
rº. [ears, Saxon.] Idle; lazy; flothful. An old
d. - º
WOI For men therein ſhould hem delite;
And of that dede be not erº,
it of ſthes haunt that werke. Chaucer.
E’R ME LIN. n.ſ. [diminutive, of crimin ; armclin, French.] An
ermine. See ERMINE.
- Silver ſkins,
Paſſing the hate ſpot ermelins. Sidney, b. ii.
ERMINE. n.ſ.. [hermine, French, from armenius, Latin.] An
animal that is found in cold countries, and which very nearly
reſembles a weaſle in ſhape; having a white pile, and the tip
of the tail black, and furniſhing a choice and valuable fur.
The fellmongers and furriers put upon it little bits of Lom-
bardy lambſkin, which is noted for its ſhining black colour,
the better to ſet off the whiteneſs of the ermine. Trevoux.
Ermine is the fur of a little beaſt, about the bigneſs of a
weaſel, called Mus Armenius; for they are found in Ar-
menia. 3. on Blazoning.
A lady's honour muſt be touch'd;
Which, nice as ermines, will not bear a ſoil. Dryden.
Fair ermines, ſpotleſs as the ſnows they preſs. Thomſon.
E’RMINED. adj. [from ermine.] Cloathed with ermine.
- Arcadia's counteſs, here in ermin'd pride, -
Is there Paſtoia by a fountain ſide. Pofe's Epiſtles.
E’RNE. W. Do immediately flow from the Saxon ern, earn, a
E’RoN. 5 cottage, or place of retirement. Gibſºn's Camden.
To ERO'DE. v. a. [erodo, Latin.] To canker, or eat away 5
to corrode.
It hath been anciently received, that the ſea-hare hath an-
tipathy with the lungs, if it cometh near the body, and
erodeth them. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 983.
The blood, being too ſharp or thin, erodes the veſſel, iſ iſ.
ERogA'tion. n.ſ. [...rogatio, Latin.] The ast of giving or
beſtowing; diſtribution.
ERO's Ion. n. ſ. ſeroſio, Latin.]
1. The aët of eating away. -
2. The ſtate of being eaten away; canker; corroſion.
As ſea-ſalt is a ſharp ſolid body, when taken in too great
quantities, in a conſtant dict of ſalt meat, it breaks the veſ-
ſels, produceth eroſions of the ſolid parts, and all the ſymptoms
of the ſea-ſcurvy. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To ERR. v. n. [erro, Latin.]
1. To wander; to ramble.
A ſtorm of ſtrokes, well meant, with fury flies, -
And errs about their temples, ears, and eyes. Dryden's Wirg.
The rains ariſe, and fires their warmth diſpenſe;
And fix’d and erring ſtars diſpoſe their influence. Dryd. Wirg.
We have errºd and ſtrayed like loſt ſheep. Common Prayer.
3. To deviate from any purpoſe.
But errs not nature from this gracious end,
From burning ſuns when livid deaths deſcend. Pºpe's Eſſays.
4. To commit errours; to miſtake. -
It is a judgment maim'd and moſt imperfect,
That will confeſs perfection ſo could err,
Againſt all rules of nature. Shakespeare's Othello.
Do they not err that deviſe evil? Prov. xiv. 22.
Poſſibly the man may err in his judgment of circumſtances,
and therefore let him fear; but becauſe it is not certain he is
miſtaken, let him not deſpair. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Nor has it only been the heat of erring perſons that has been
thus miſchievous, but ſometimes men of right judgments have
too much contributed to the breach. Decay of Piety.
The muſes’ friend, unto himſelf ſevere;
With filent pity looks on all that err. J/aller.
He who from the refle&amp;ted image of the ſun in water would
conclude of light and heat, could not err more groſly. Cheyne.
ERRAND. n.ſ. [æmen's, Saxon; arend, Daniſh.] A meſſage;
ſomething to be told or done by a meſſenger; a mandate; a
commiſſion. It is generally uſed now only in familiar lan-
guage.
Servants being commanded to go, ſhall ſtand ſtill, 'till they
have their errand warranted unto them. Hºoker, b. ii. ſ. b.
But haſt thou done thy errand to Baptiſta?
—I told him that your father was in Venice. Shakeſpeare.
A quean have I not forbid her my houſe? She comes of
errands, does ſhe Shakeſpeare's Merry J/ive of I/indſºr.
When he came, behold the captains of the hoſt were fitting,
and he ſaid, I have an errand to thee, O captain. 2 Kings is 5.
From them I go
This uncouth errand ſole. Aílton's Paraiſe Loff, b. ii.
- His eyes,
That run through all the heav'ns, or down to th' earth,
Bear his ſwift errands, over moiſt and dry, -
O'er ſea and land. Miltºn's Paradiſe Loft, h. iii. 1.652.
Well thou do'ſt to hide from common ſight
Thy cloſe intrigues, too bad to bear the light;
Nor doubt I, but the ſilver-footed dame,
Tripping from ſea, on ſuch an errard came. Dryd Homer.
E’RRAB is. adj. [from err..] Liable to cr: , iiable to miſtake.
ERRABLEN Fss. n.ſ. [from erralle. J Liableneſs to error ;
liableneſs to miſtake.
We may inter, from the errallenſ of our nature, the
reaſonableneſs of compaſſion to the ſeduced. Decºy ºf Piety.
ERRA’NT. adj. [errant, Latin; errant, French.]
1. Wandering; roving ; rambling. Particularly applicd to
8 G - alſº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 377</div><p class="Text">E. R. R.
E R U
i
an order of knights much celebrated in romances, who roved
about the world in ſearch of adventures.
There are juſt ſeven planets, or errant ſtars, in the lower
orbs of heaven; but it is now demonſtrable unto ſenſe, that
there are many more. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b, iv. c. 12.
Chief of domeſtick knights and errant,
Either for chartel or for warrant. Hudibras.
2. Vile; abandoned; completely bad. See ARRANT.
Any way, ſo thou wilt do it, good impertinence:
Thy company, if I ſlept not very well -
A-nights, would make me an errant fool with queſtions.
johnſon's Catiline.
E(RRANTRY. n.ſ.. [from errant J
1. An errant ſtate; the condition of a wanderer.
After a ſhort ſpace of errantry upon the ſeas, he got ſafe
back to Dunkirk. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 36.
2. The employment of a knight errant. - -
ERRA't A. n.ſ. [Latin.] The faults of the printer inſerted in
the beginning or end of the book.
If he meet with faults, beſides thoſe that the errata take
notice of, he will conſider the weakneſs of the author's
eyes. - - Boyle.
ERRA"Tick, adj. [erraticus, Latin.] -
1. Wandering; uncertain; keeping no certain order; holding
no eſtabliſhed courſe.
The earth, and each erratick world,
Around the ſun their proper center whirl’d,
Compoſe but one extended vaſt machine. Blackm, Creation.
Through the vaſt waves the dreadful wonders move,
Hence nam'd erratick. Pope's Odyſſey, b. xii. l. 75.
2. Irregular; changeable. -
They are incommoded with a ſlimy mattery cough, ſtink
of breath, and an erratick fever. arvey on Conſumptions.
ERRA’tically. adv. [from erratical or erratick.] Without
rule; without any eſtabliſhed method or order.
They come not forth in generations erratical, or different
from each other; but in ſpecifical and regular ſhapes.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 6.
ERRH1Ne. n.ſ.. [iffiva.] Snuffed up the noſe; occaſioning
ſneezing.
We ſee ſage or betony bruiſed, ſneezing powder, and
other powders or liquors, which the phyſicians call errhines,
put into the noſe to draw phlegm and water from the head.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 38.
Erro'neous, adj. [from erro, Latin.]
1. Wandering; unſettled.
- They roam
Frroneous and diſconſolate, themſelves
Accuſing, and their chiefs improvident
Of military chance. Phillips.
This circle, by being placed here, ſtopped much of the
erroneous light, which otherwiſe would have diſturbed the
viſion. Newton's Cpt.
Unblam’d abundance crown'd the royal board,
What time this done rever'd her prudent lord;
Who now, ſo heav'n decrees, is doom'd to mourn,
Bitter conſtraint erroneous and forlorn. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
2. Irregular; wandering from the right road.
If the veſſels, inſtead of breaking, yield, it ſubjećis the per-
ſon to all the inconveniencies of erroneous circulation; that is,
when the blood ſtrays into the veſſels deſtined to carry ſerum
or lymph. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Miſtaking; miſled by errour.
Thou art far from deſtroying the innocent with the guilty,
and the erroneous with the malicious. King Charles.
. There is the erroneous as well as the rightly informed con-
foience. South's Sermons.
4. Miſtaken; not conformable to truth.
Their whole counſel is in this point utterly condemned, as
having either proceeded from the blindneſs of thoſe times, or
from negligence, or from deſire of honour and glory, or from
an erroneous opinion that ſuch things might be for a while.
- Hooker, b. iv. f. 14.
A wonderful erroneous obſervation that walketh abdut, is
commonly received, contrary to all the true account of time
and experience. Bacon's War with Spain.
The phaenomena of light have been hitherto explained by
ſuppoſing that they ariſe from new modifications of the rays,
which is an erroneous ſuppoſition. Newton's Opt.
ERR o'N Eously. adv. [from erroneous.] By miſtake; not
rightly.
º minds of men are erroneºuſly perſuaded, that it is the
will of God to have thoſe things done which they fancy. Hoºk.
I could not diſcover the lenity and favour of this ſentence;
but conceived it, perhaps erroneouſly, rather to be rigorous
than gentle. Gulliver's Travels.
ERRo's fous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from erroneous.] Phyſical falſehood;
inconformity to truth.
The phaenomena may be explained by his hypotheſis,
whereof he demonſtrates the truth, together with the erro-
nest ſeſs of ours. - Bºyle's Spring of the Air.
ERROUR. m. / [error, Latin.] -
1. Miſtake; involuntary deviation from truth.
Erreur is a miſtake of our judgment giving aſſent to that
which is not true. - ... • - Locke.
Oh, hateful errour, melancholy’s child *
Why do'ſt thou ſhew to the apt thoughts of men,
The things that are not? Shakeſpeare's jid. Caſir.
2. A blunder ; an act or aſſertion in which a miſtake is com-
mitted.
In religion,
What damned errour, but ſome ſober brow
Will bleſs it. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Penice.
He look'd like nature's errºur, as the mind -
And body were not of a piece deſign'd,
But made for two, and by miſtake in one were join'd. Dryd.
3. Roving excurſion; irregular courſe.
What brought you living to the Stygian ſtate?
Driv'n by the winds and errours of the ſea,
- Or did you heav'n's ſuperiour doom obey? Dryden's An.
4. [In theology.J. Sin.
Blood he offered for bimſelf, and for the errours of the
people. - - Heb. ix. 7.
5. [In law, more eſpecially in our common law. J. An
errour in pleading, or in the proceſs; and the writ, which
is brought for remedy of this overſight, is called a writ of
errour, which lies to redreſs falſe judgment given in any court
of record. Cowel.
ERs T. adv. [erſ, German; aerrºa, Saxon.]
I. Firſt.
Sir knight, if knight thou be,
Abandon this foreſtalled place at erſt,
For fear of further harm, I counſel thee. Spenſ Fai. Queen.
2. At firſt ; in the beginning.
Fame that her high worth to raiſe,
Seem'd er/? ſo laviſh and profuſe,
We may juſtly now accuſe
Of detraction from her praiſe. Milton,
3. Once ; when time was.
He taught userſ: the heifer's tail to view. Gay.
The future few or more, howe'er they be,
Were deſtin'd erſt, nor can by fate's decree
Be now cut off. Prior.
4. Formerly; long ago.
5. Before; till then ; till now.
As ſignal now in low dejećted ſtate,
As erſ; in higheſt, behold him. Miltºn's Agoniſłes, l. 338.
Opener mine eyes,
Dim er/?; dilated ſpirits, ampler heart. Milton's Par. Lºft.
The Rhodians, who erſt thought themſelves at great quiet,
were now overtaken with a ſudden and unexpected miſchief.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
ERUBE'scence. }*ſ [erubeſcentia, Latin.] The act of grow-
ERUBE'scENcy. ing red; redneſs. -
ERUBEscENT. adj. ſerubeſcens, Latin.] Reddiſh; ſomewhat
red; inclining to redneſs.
To ERU'CT. v. a. ſerućro, Latin.] To belch; to break wind
from the ſtomach.
ERU cºtAºtion. m. ſ. [from eruć7.]
1. The act of belching.
2. Belch ; the matter vented from the ſtomach.
The ſigns of the functions of the ſtomach being depraved,
are erućations, either with the taſte of the aliment, acid, in-
odorous, or fetid, Arbuthnot.
3. Any ſudden burſt of wind or matter.
Thermae, are hot ſprings, or fiery eručiations; ſuch as burſt
forth of the earth during earthquakes. Iłoodward’s Nat. Hi/?.
ERUDITION. m. ſ. ſeruditio, Latin. J Learning; knowledge
obtained by ſtudy and inſtruction. -
Fam'd be thy tutor, and thy parts of nature;
Thrice fam'd beyond all erudition. Shakespeare.
The earl was of good erudition, having been placed at ſtudy
in Cambridge very young. /7%tton.
To your experience in ſtate affairs you have alſo joined no
vulgar erudition, which all your modeſty is not able to con-
ceal; for to underſtand critically the delicacies of Horace, is
a height to which few of our noblemen have arrived. Drydew.
Some gentlemen, abounding in their univerſity erudition,
are apt to fill their ſermons with philoſophical terms and no-
tions, metaphyſical. - - Swift.
ERU'GINous. adj. [a riginºſus, Latin.] Partaking of the ſub-
ſtance and nature of copper.
Agues depend upon a corrupt incinerated melancholy, or
upon an aduſt ſtibial or eruginous ſulphur. Harvey on Conſumpt.
Copperas is a rough and acrimonious kind of ſalt, drawn
out of ferreous and eruginous earths, partaking chiefly of iron
and copper; the blue of copper, the green of iron. Browne.
ERU'PT Ion. m. ſ. ſeruptio, Latin.]
1. The act of breaking or burſting forth from any confinement.
In part of Media there are criptions of flames out of
plains. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 361.
Finding themſelves pent in by the exterior earth, they
preſſed with violence againſt that arch, to make it yield and
3 give
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 378</div><p class="Text">E S C
E S C
t
give way to their dilatation and eruptiºn.
2. Burſt; emiſſion. - -
Upon a ſignal given the eruption began ; fire and ſmoak,
mixed with ſeveral unuſual prodigies and figures, made their
appearance. Addison's Guardian, Nº. 1 of.
3. Sudden excurſion of an hoſtile kind. . .
Thither, if but to pry, ſhall be perhaps
Our firſt eruption, thither or elſewhere;
For this inſernal pit ſhall never hold
Celeſtial ſpirits in bondage. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b, i.
Such command we had,
To ſee that none thence iſſu'd forth a ſpy,
Or enemy, while God was in his work;
Left he, incens'd at ſuch eruption bold, ---
Barner's Theory.
Deſtruction with creation might have mix’d. Milt. P. Loft.
4. Violent exclamation.
It did not run out in voice or indecent eruptions, but filled
the ſoul, as God does the univerſe, ſilently and without noiſe.
- - - South's Sermons.
5. Efforeſcence ; piſtules. -
Diſeaſed nature oftentimes breaks forth - -
In ſtrange eruptions. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
An eruption of humours, in any part, is not cured merely
by outward applications, but by alterative medicines.
- Government ºf the Tongue, ſ. 6.
Unripe fruits are apt to occaſion foul eruptions on, the
fkin. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
ERU'PTIVE. adj. ſeruptus, Latin.] Burſting forth,
'Tis liſtening fear, and dumb amazement all,
When to the ſtartled eye the ſudden glance
Appears far ſouth eruptive through the cloud. Thomſon.
ERYsi(PELAs. n.ſ.. [tºwairsaw;..] -
An eryſpelas is generated by a hot ſerum in the blood, and
affects the ſuperficies of the ſkin with a ſhining pale red, or
citron colour, without pulſation or circumſcribed tumour,
ſpreading from one place to another. JWiſeman's Surgery.
ESCALA’DE. n.ſ. [French..] The act of ſcaling the walls
of a-fortification. - -
In Geneva one meets with the ladders, petard, and other
utenſils, which were made uſe of in their famous eſcalade. Addison
E'scAlop. m. ſ. A ſhellfiſh, whoſe ſhell is regularly in-
. dented. - - -
The ſhells of thoſe cockles, eſcalops, and periwinkles, which
have greater gravity, were encloſed in the ſtrata of ſtone.
- Woodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
To ESCAPE. v. a. [echaper, French.]
1. To obtain exemption from ; to obtain ſecurity from; to fly;
to avoid. -
Since we cannot eſcape the purſuit of paſſions, and per-
plexity of thoughts, there is no way left but to endeavour all
we can either to ſubdue or divert them. Temple:
Had David died ſooner, how much trouble had he eſcaped,
which by living he endured in the rebellion of his ſon. Wake.
2. To paſs unobſerved. -
Men are blinded with ignorance and errour: many things
may eſcape them, and in many things they may be deceived.
Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
'Tis ſtill the ſame, although their airy ſhape
All but a quick poctick fight eſcape. Denham.
The reader finds out thoſe beauties of propriety in thought
and writing, which eſcaped him in the tumult and hurry of
repreſenting. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian, Prºf.
To EscA'PE. v. n. To fly; to get out of danger.
Benhadad, the king of Syria, eſcaped on horſe. Chronicles.
They eſcaped all ſafe to land. Acts xxvii. 44.
. The ſinner ſhall not eſcape with his ſpoil, and the patience
of the godly ſhall not be fruſtrated. ' Eccluſ xvi. 13.
Eſcape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither ſtay thou
in all the plain: eſcape to the mountain, left thou be con-
ſumcd. s Gen. xix. 17.
Whoſo pleaſeth God ſhall eſcape from her, but the finner
ſhall be taken by her. - - Eccl., vii. 26.
There is no woman's gown big enough for him; otherwiſe
he might put on a hat, a muffler, and a kerchief, and ſo
*ſcape. . Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſor.
To convince us that there was no way to eſcape by climb-
ing up to the mountains, he aſſures us that the higheſt were
all covered. //224vard's Natural Hiſtory:
Laws are not executed, men of virtue are diſgraced, and
murderers eſcape. J/atts's Logick.
EscA' E. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Fight; the act of getting out of danger.
I would halien my eſcape from the windy ſtorm and tem-
peſt Pſ. lv. 7.
He enjoyed neither his ſcape nor his honour long; for he
was hewn in pieces. - Hayward.
Men of virtue have had extraordinary eſcapes out of ſuch
dangers as have encloſed them, and which have ſeemed in-
evitable. Addison's Guardian, Nº. 117.
2. Excurſion; ſally. .
We made an eſcape, not ſo much to ſeek our own,
As to be inſtruments of your ſafety. Denham's Sophy.
3. [In law.] Violent or privy evaſion out of ſºme lawſui re-
ſtraint. For example, if the ſheriff, upon a capias directed
unto him, takes a perſon, and endeavours to carry him to
gaol, and he in the way, either by violence or by ſlight, breaks
from him, this is called an eſcape. C.tvel.
4. Excuſe; ſubterfuge; evaſion. - - -
St. Paul himſelf did not deſpiſe to remember whatſoever he
found agreeable to the word of God among the heathen, that
he might take from them all ºftope by way of ignorance. Raſ.
5. Sally ; flight; irregularity. - *
- Thouſand 'ſºapes of wit,
Make thee the father of their idle dreams,
And rack thee in their fancies. Shakeſp. A ſeaſ fºr Maſure.
-- Looſe ſcapes of love. - 41ilton.
6. Overſight; miſtake. - -
In tranſcribing there would be leſs care taken, as the lan-
guage was leſs underſtood, and ſo the eſcapes leſs ſubject to
obſervation. Brerewood on Languages.
Esca'R GAtol RE. m. ſ. [French.] A nurſery of ſnails.
At the Capuchins I ſaw eſcargatoires, which I took the more
notice of, becauſe I do not remember to have met with any
thing of the ſame kind in other countries. It is a ſquare place
boarded in, and filled with a vaſt quantity of large ſnails that
are eſteemed excellent food, when they are well dreſſed. Addison
EschAlo'T. n.ſ. [French.] Pronounced ſhallºt. -
Eſchalots are now from France become an Engliſh plant,
being increaſed and managed after the ſame manner as garlick;
only they are to be ſet earlier, becauſe they ſpring ſooner, and
taken up as ſoon as the leaves begin to wither, leſt either they
rot there, or the Winter kills them. They give a fine reliſh
to moſt ſauces, and the breath of thoſe that eat them is not
offenſive to others. - Mortimer's Husbandry.
ESCHAR. m. ſ. [iax42.] A hard cruſt or ſcar made by
hot applications.
When iſſues are made, or bones expoſed, the eſchar ſhould
be cut out immediately. Sharp's Surgery.
Esch A'Rotick, adj. [from eſchar..] Cauſtick; having the
power to fear or burn the fleſh.
An eſchar was made by the catharetick, which we thruſt off,
and continued the uſe of eſcharoticks. hºſeman's Surgery.
Eſcaroticks applied of aſh-aſhes, or bliſtering plaiſter. Flyer.
ESCHEAT. n.J. [from the French ſhevir.] Any lands, or
other profits, that fall to a lord within his manor by forfeiture,
or the death of his tenant, dying without heir general or eſpe-
cial. Eſcheat is alſo uſed ſometimes for the place in which the
king, or other lord, has eſcheats of his tenants. Thirdly,
eſcheat is uſed for a writ, which lies where the tenant, having
eſtate of fee-ſimple in any lands or tenements holden of a
ſuperiour lord, dies ſeiſed, without heir general or eſpecial;
for, in this caſe, the lord brings this writ againſt him that poſ:
ſeſſes the lands after the death of his tenant, and ſhall thereby
recover them. Coweſ.
If the king's ordinary courts of juſtice do not extend to
protećt the people, if he have no certain revenue or eſtheats,
I cannot juſtly ſay that ſuch a country is wholly conquered.
- Davies on Ireland.
To Esch E(AT. v. a. [from the noun..] To fall to the lord of
the manor by forfeiture, or for want of heirs.
In the laſt general wars there, I knew many good free-
holders executed by martial law, whoſe lands were thereby
ſaved to their heirs, which ſhould have otherwiſe eſcheated to
her majeſty. Spenser on Ireland.
He would forbear to alienate any of the forfeited ſheated
lands in Ireland, which ſhould accrue to the crown by reaſon
c; this rebellion. Clarendon.
Esche’ATOR. n.ſ.. [from eſcheat..] An officer that obſerves the
eſcheats of the king in the county whereof he is eſcheator,
and certifies them into the Exchequer. Cowel.
At a Bartholomew fair at London an eſcheator of the city
arreſted a clothier, and ſeiſed his goods. Camden's Remains.
To Esch Ew. v. a. [eſcheoir, old French..] To fly; to avoid;
to ſhun ; to decline. A word almoſt obſolete.
She was like a young fawn, who, coming in the wind of
the hunters, doth not know whether it be a thing or no to be
eſchewed. - Sidney, b. ii.
So let us, which this change of weather view,
Change eke our minds, and former lives amend;
The old year's fins forepaſt let us eſchew,
And fly the faults with which we did offend. Spenser,
He who obeys, deſtruction ſhall ſchew;
A wiſe man knows both when and what to do. Sandys.
Of virtue and vice the obligations are ſuch, that men are
univerſally to practiſe the one and ºfthew the other.
Atterbury's Sermºns, Prefice.
Eschu't chron. m. ſ. The ſhield of the family; the pićture
of the enſigns armorial.
Eſchutchºn is a French word, from the Latin ſutum, lea-
ther; and hence cometh our Engliſh word buckler, lene in the
old Saxon ſignifying leather, and buck or bock a buck or flag;
of whoſe ſkins, quited cloſe together with horn or hard wood,
the ancient Britons made their ſhields, Peacham.
We
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 379</div><p class="Text">E. S. P
E S Q
There be now, for martial encouragement, ſome degrees
and orders of chivalry, and ſome remembrance perhaps upon
the eſchutcheon. Bacon's Eſſays.
we will paſs over the ſhutcheºns of the tribes of Iſrael, as
they are uſually deſcribed in the maps of Canaan, Brown.
Esco'RT. n.ſ.. [ſort, French..] Convoy; guard from place
to place.
To Escort. v. a. ſ.ſtorter, French.] To convoy; to guard
from place to place.
Escot. n.ſ. [French J A tax paid in boroughs and corpora.
tions towards the ſupport of the community, which is called
ſcot and lot.
To Escoſt. v. a. [from the noun..] To pay a man's reckon-
ing; to ſupport.
what, are they children? Who maintains them? How
are they eſcoted P Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Escout. i.f. [aſ outer, French.] Liſteners or ſpics; perſons
ſent for intelligence.
They were well entrenched, having good ſcout abrºad, and
ſure watch within. Hayward.
Escri'Toir. n.ſ. [French.] A box with all the implements
neceſſary for writing.
Escu'AGE, n.f. [from eſcu, French, a ſhield.]
Eſcuage, that is ſervice of the ſhield, is either uncertain or
certain. Eſcuage uncertain is likewiſe twofold: firſt, where
the tenant by his tenure is bound to follow his lord, going in
perſon to the king's wars againſt his enemies, either himſelf,
or to ſend a ſufficient man in his place, at his coſt, ſo many
days as were agreed upon between the lord and his firſt tenant
at the granting of the fee; and the days of ſuch ſervice ſeem
to have becn rated by the quantity of the land ſo holden: as:
if it extend to a whole knight's fee, then the tenant was bound
thus to follow his lord forty days. A knight's fee was ſo much
land as, in thoſe days, was accounted a ſufficient living for a
a knight; and that was fix hundred and eighty acres as ſome
think, or eight hundred as others, or 15 l per Annum. Sir
Thomas Smith faith that cenſus equeſtris is 40 l. revenue in
free lands. If the law extend but to half a knight's fee, then
the tenant is bound to follow his lord, as above is ſaid, but
twenty days. The other kind of this eſcuage uncertain is
called caſtleward, where the tenant by his land is bound,
either by himſelf or by ſome other, to defend a caſtle as often
as it ſhall come to his courſe. Eſcuage certain is where the
tenant is ſet at a certain ſum of money, to be paid in lieu of
ſuch uncertain ſervices: as that a man yearly pay for a knight's
fee twenty ſhillings; for half his fee, ten ſhillings, or ſome
like rate. Cowel.
Esculent. adj. [...ſºulentus, Latin.] Good for food; eatable.
I knew a man that would faſt five days; but the ſame man
uſed to have continually a great wiſp of herbs that he ſmelled
on, and ſome ſculent herbs of ſtrong ſcent, as garlick. Bacon.
E’sculent. n.ſ. Something fit for food.
This cutting off the leaves in plants, where the root is the
eſtulent, as radiſh and parſnips, it will make the root the
greater, and ſo it will do to the heads of onions; and where
the fruit is the eſtulent, by ſtrengthening the root, it will make
the fruit alſo the greater. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°.474.
Espa'lie R. n.ſ. Trees planted and cut ſo as to join.
Plant your faireſt tulips in places of ſhelter, and under
eſſaliers. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Behold Villario's ten years toil complete,
His arbours darken, his eſſaliers meet. Pope, Epiſtle iv.
Espa'RcET. n.ſ. A kind of ſaint-foin, and by ſome judged
to be the ſame. Mortimer's Husbandry.
ESPECIAL. adj. [ſpecialis, Latin.] Principal; chief.
They had th' eſpecial engines been, to rear
His fortunes up. Daniel's Civil JWar.
Especially. adv. [from ſpecial.] Principally; chiefly; par-
ticularly; in an uncommon degree above any other.
Iſomewhat marvel, that they eſpecially ſhould think it abſurd
to oppoſe church government, a plain matter of ačtion, unto
matter of faith, who know that themſelves divide the goſpel
into doćtrine and diſcipline. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 3.
Would you proceed eſpecially againſt Caius Marcius Shakespeare
This delight they take in doing of miſchief, whereby I
mean ſpoiling of any thing to no purpoſe; but more eſpecially
the pleaſure they take to put anything to pain that is capable
of it, I cannot perſuade myſelf to be any other than a foreign
and introduced diſpoſition. Locke.
Providence hath planted in all men a natural deſire and
curioſity of knowing things to come; and ſuch things eſpe-
cially as concern our particular happineſs, or the general fate
of mankind. Burnet's Theºry of the Earth.
Espe/RANce. n.ſ. [French.] Hope.
To be worſt,
The loweſt, moſt dejećted things of fortune,
Stands ſtill in ſperance, lives not in fear. Shakeſp. K. Lear,
Yet there is a credence in my heart,
An eſperance ſo obſtinately ſtrong,
That doth invert th' atteſt of eyes and ears. Shakespeare.
ESPI’Al... n ſ. [French, from ſpier.] A ſpy; a ſcout; one ſent
to bring intelligence.
Thoſe four garriſons, iſſuing forth at ſuch convenient times
as they ſhall have intelligence, or eſpial upon the enemy, will
drive him from one ſide to another. Spenser on Ireland.
As he march'd along,
By your eſpials were diſcovered
Two mightier troops. Shakeſp.
'Spials have informed me,
The Engliſh in the ſuburbs cloſe entrench'd,
Went through a ſecret grate. Shakespeare. Hen. VI.
She had ſºme ſecret ºffial to look abroad for graceful
youths, to make Plantagenets. Bac. H. VII.
Esplasade. m. ſ. [French J In fortification, the ſame with
the glacis of the counterſcarpe originally; but now it is taken
for the empty ſpace between the glacis of a citadel and the firſt
houſes of the town. Harris.
Espousals. n.ſ. without a fingul. [ſpoſalia, Latin; eſpous,
French..] The act of contracting or affiancing a man aná
woman to each other; the act or ceremony of betrothing.
Espoºsal. adj, tºed in the act of eſpouſing or betrothing.
The ambaſſador put his leg, ſtript naked to the knee, be-
tween the ſpºuſal ſheets; that the ceremony might amount to
a conſummation. Bacon's Henry VII.
To ESPOUSE. v. a. ſ.ſpouſer, French.]
1. To contračt or betroth to another.
Deliver me my wife Michal, which I eſpouſed to me. 2 Sa.
He had received him as a ſuppliant, protected him as a per-
ſon fled for refuge, and ſpºuſed him with his kinſwoman. Bac.
2. To marry; to wed.
Lavinia will I make my empereſs,
And in the ſacred Pantheon her eſpouſe. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
Here, in cloſe receſs,
With flow'rs, garlands, and ſweet ſmelling herbs,
Eſpºſed Eve deck'd firſt her nuptial bed. Milton's Par. Ioff.
They ſoon ſpºus'd; for they with eaſe were join'd,
Who were before contračted in the mind. Dryden.
If her ſire approves,
Let him ſpouſe her to the peer ſhe loves. Pºpe's Odſy, b. ii.
3. To adopt; to take to himſelf. -
In gratitude unto the duke of Bretagne, for his former
favours, he ſpouſed that quarrel, and declared himſelf in aid
of the duke. Bacon's Henry VII.
4. To maintain ; to defend. -
Their gods did not only intereſt themſelves in the event of
wars, but alſo ſpºſed the ſeveral parties in a viſible corporeal
deſcent. . Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
The city, army, court, eſpouſe my cauſe. Dryd. Sp. Fry.
Men eſpouſe the well-endowed opinions in faſhion, and
then ſeek arguments either to make good their beauty, or var-
niſh over their deformity. Locke.
The righteouſneſs of the beſt cauſe may be over balanced
by the iniquities of thoſe that eſpouſe it. Smalridge's Sermons.
The cauſe of religion and goodneſs, which is the cauſe of
God, is ours by deſcent, and we are doubly bound to ſpouſe
it. Atterbury's Sermons.
To Espy. v. a. ſ.ſpier, French.]
1. To ſee a thing at a diſtance.
2. To diſcover a thing intended to be hid.
He who before he was eſpied was afraid, after being per-
ceived was aſhamed, now being hardly rubbed upon, left both
fear and ſhame, and was moved to anger. Sidney.
Few there are of ſo weak capacity but publick evils they
eaſily eſby; fewer ſo patient as not to complain, when the
grievous inconveniencies thereof doth work ſenſibleſmart. Hook.
3. To ſee unexpectedly.
And as one of them opened his ſack, he ſpied his money.
Gen. xl. 27.
4. To diſcover as a ſpy.
Moſes ſent me to ºffy out the land, and I brought him word
again. jºſ, xiv. 7.
To Espy'. v. m. To watch; to look about.
Stand by the way and eſſy; aſk him that fleeth what is
done. jer. xlvii. 19.
Esqu'iRE. m.ſ. ſeſauer, French.] See SQUIRE. -
1. The armour-bearer or attendant on a knight.
2. A title of dignity, and next in degree below a knight. Thoſe
to whom this title is now of right due, are all the younger ſons
of noblemen, and their heirs male for ever; the four eſquires
of the king's body; the eldeſt ſons of all baronets; ſo alſo of
all knights of the Bath, and knights batchelors, and their heirs
male in the right line; thoſe that ſerve the king in any wor-
ſhipful calling, as the ſerjeant chirurgeon, ſerjeant of the ewry,
maſter cook, &amp;c. ſuch as are created eſquires by the king with
a collar of S.S. of ſilver, as the heralds and ſerjeants at arms.
The chief of ſome ancient families are likewiſe eſquires by
preſcription; thoſe that bear any ſuperior office in the com-
monwealth, as high ſheriff of any county, who retains the
title of eſquire during his life, in reſpect of the great truſt he
has had of the pºſe comitatus. He who is a juſtice of the
peace has it during the time he is in commiſſion, and no
longer, if not otherwiſe qualified to bear it. Utter barriſters,
in the acts of parliament for poll money, were ranked among
eſquires. Bount.
- Where
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 380</div><p class="Text">E. S. S
E S T
What are our Engliſh dead?
—Sir Richard Ketley, Davy Gam eſquire. Shakespeare Hen. V.
To ESSAY. v. a. [eſſayer, French.J
1. To attempt ; to try ; to endeavour.
While I this unexampled taſk eſſay,
Paſs awful gulphs, and beat my painful way,
Celeſtial dove, divine aſſiſtance bring. Blackmore's Creation:
No conqueſt ſhe, but o'er herſelf deſir’d;
No arts eſſay’d, but not to be admir’d. Pope, Epiſtle 5.
2. To make experiment of.
3. To try the value and purity of metals.
The ſtandard in our mint being now ſettled, the rules and
methods of eſſaying ſuited to it ſhould remain unvariable. Locke.
E'ss AY. n.ſ.. [from the verb. The accent is uſed on either
ſyllable.]
1. Attempt; endeavour.
Fruitleſs our hopes, though pious our effay: ;
Your's to preſerve a friend, and mine to praiſe. Smith.
2. A looſe ſally of the mind; an irregular indigeſted piece; not
a regular and orderly compoſition.
Myeſſays, of all myother works, have been moſt current. Bac.
Yet modeſtly he does his work ſurvey,
And calls his finiſh’d poem an eſſay, Poem to Roſcommon.
3. A trial; an experiment.
He wrote this but as an eſſay, or taſte of my virtue. Shakespeare
Repetitions wear us into a liking of what poſſibly, in the
firſt eſſay, diſpleaſed us. Locke.
4. Firſt taſte of any thing; firſt experiment.
Tranſlating the firſt of Homer's Iliads, I intended as an
eſſay to the whole work. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
ESSENCE. n.ſ. [eſſentia, Latin.]
1. Eſſence is but the very nature of any being, whether it be
aćtually exiſting or no: a roſe in Winter has an eſſence; in
Summer it has exiſtence alſo. Watts's Logick.
One thinks the ſoul is air; another, fire;
Another, blood diffus’d about the Heart;
Another faith, the elements conſpire,
And to her eſſence each doth give a part. Davies.
I could wiſh the mature of a ſpirit were more unknown to
me than it is, that I might believe its exiſtence, without med-
dling at all with its eſſence. More's Divine Dialogues.
He wrote the nature of things upon their names: he could
view effences in themſelves, and read forms without the com-
ment of their reſpective properties. South’s Sermons.
2. Formal exiſtence; that which makes any thing to be what
1t 1S.
The viſible church of Jeſus is one in outward profeſſion of
thoſe things, which ſupernaturally appertain to the very effence
of Chriſtianity, and are neceſſarily required in every particular
Chriſtian man. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
3. Exiſtence; the quality of being,
In ſuch cogitations have I ſtood, with ſuch a darkneſs and
heavineſs of mind, that I might have been perſuaded to have
reſigned my very effence. Sidney.
4. Being ; exiſtent perſon.
As far as gods, and heav'nly ‘ſº
Can periſh. A4ilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i. l. 138.
5. Species of exiſtent being.
Here be four of you, as differing as the four elements; and
yet you are friends: as for Eupolis, becauſe he is temperate,
and without paſſion, he may be the fifth ºffence. Bacon.
6. Conſtituent ſubſtance.
For ſpirits, when they pleaſe,
Can either ſex aſſume, or both ; ſo ſoft
And uncompounded is their effence pure ;
Not ty'd or manacled with joint or limb. Milton's Pa, Loſt.
7. The cauſe of exiſtence. This ſenſe is not proper,
She is my effence; and I leave to be,
If I be not by her fair influence
Foſter'd, illumin'd, cheriſh'd, kept alive. Shakeſpeare.
8. [In medicine.] The chief properties or virtues of any ſimple,
or compoſition colle&amp;ted in a narrow compaſs.
9. Perfume; odour; ſcent.
Our humble province is to 'tend the fair;
To ſave the powder from too rude a gale,
Nor let th' impriſon'd effences exhale. Pope's Rape of the Lock.
To E'ss ENcE. v. a. [from ºffence.] To perfume; to ſcent.
The huſband rails, from morning to night, at effenced fops
and tawdry courtiers. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 128.
ESSENTIAL. adj. [eſſentialis, Latin.]
1. Neceſſary to the conſtitution or exiſtence of any thing.
The diſcipline of our church, although it be not an eſſential
part of our religion, ſhould not be raſhly altered, as the very
ſubſtance of our religion will be intereſted in it. Bacon.
From that original of doing good, that is eſſential to the
infinite being of our Creator, we have an excellent copy
tranſcribed. Spratt's Sermºn.
This power cannot be innate and eſſential to matter; and if
it be not eſſential, it is conſequently moſt manifeſt it could
never ſupervene to it, unleſs impreſſed and infuſed into it by
an immaterial and divine power. Bentley's Sermons.
A great miniſter puts you a caſe, and aſks your opinion;
but conceals an effºrtial circumſtance, upon which the whole
weight of the matter turns. Swift.
And if each ſyſtem in gradation roll,
Alike eſſential to th’ amazing whole,
The leaſt confuſion but in one, not all
That ſyſtem only, but the whole muſt fall.
2. Important in the higheſt degree; principal.
Judgment's more eſſential to a general,
Than courage. IXenham's Sºphy.
3. Pure; highly rectified; ſubtilly elaborated; extracted ſo as to
contain all the virtues of its elemental parts contracted into a
narrow compaſs. -
The juice of the ſeed is an effntial oil or balm, deſigned
by nature to preſerve the ſeed from corruption. A bathºlot.
Esse’NTIAL. n.ſ.
1. Exiſtence; being.
His utmoſt ire to the height enrag’d,
Will either quite conſume us, or reduce -
To nothing this eſſential. A4iltºn's Paradiſ? Lºft, b. ii.
2. Nature; firſt or conſtituent principles. -
The plague of ſin has even altered his nature, and eaten
into his very eſſentials. South's Sermons.
3. The chief point; that which is in any reſpect of great im-
portance.
Esse"NTIALLY. adv. [eſſentialiter, Latin.] By the conſtitution
of nature.
Pºpe.
He that loves himſelf, .
Hath not eſſentially, but by circumſtance,
The name of valour. Shakespeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
Body and ſpirit are eſſentially divided, though not locally
diſtant. Glanville.
All ſin eſſentially is, and muſt be, mortal. South's Sermons.
Knowledge is that which, next to virtue, truly and
eſſentially raiſes one man above another. Addison's Guardian.
Esso'INE. m. ſ. [of the French effonie, or examni...]
1. He that has his preſence forborn or excuſed upon any juſt
cauſe; as ſickneſs. - º
2. Allegment of an excuſe for him that is ſummoned, or ſought
for, to appear and anſwer to an action real, or to perform ſuit
to a court-baron, upon juſt cauſe of abſence. C:ve!.
3. Excuſe; exemption.
From every work he challenged ſin,
For contemplation ſake; yet otherwiſe
His life he led in lawleſs riotiſe. Fairy Queen, b. i. c. 4.
To ESTABLISH. v. a. [etablir, French.]
1. To ſettle firmly; to fix unalterably.
He may eſtabliſh thee to-day for a people unto himſelf. Dcut.
Upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to or-
der it, and to eſtabliſh it with judgment and with juſtice. Iſ. ix.
I will eſtabliſh my covenant with him for an everlaſting
covenant, Gen. xvii. 19.
The Normans never obtained this kingdom by ſuch a right
of conqueſt, as did or might alter the eſtabliſh, d laws of the
kingdom. Hale's Common Law ºf England.
2. To ſettle in any privilege or poſſeſſion; to confirm.
Soon after the rebellion broke out, the Preſbyterian ſe&amp;
was eſtabliſhed in all its forms by an ordinance of the lords and
COInn OnS. Swift.
3. To make firm; to ratify.
Every vow, and every binding oath to afflićt the ſoul, her
huſband may eſtabliſh it, or her huſband may make it void. Num.
4. To fix or ſettle in an opinion.
So were the churches ſtabliſhed in the faith.
5. To form or model.
He appointed in what manner his family ſhould be eſ'a-
bliſhed. Clarendon, h. viii.
6. To found; to build firmly ; to fix immoveably. A ſenſe not
in uſe.
For he hath founded it upon the ſeas, and ſla' liſhed it upon
A:7: xvi. 5.
the floods. P/. xxiv. 12.
7. To make a ſettlement of any inheritance. A ſenſe not in
uſe.
We will effabliſh our eſtate upon
Our eldeſt Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
The prince of Cumberland. Shaºcare’s Mºcteth.
Esta‘BLISHMENT. m. ſ. [from ſall/h; etablyement, French..]
1. Settlement; fixed ſtate.
All happy peace, and goodly government,
Is ſettled there in ſure eſtabliſh nºt. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. 11.
2. Confirmation of ſomething already done ; ratification.
He had not the act penned by way of recognition of right;
as, on the other ſide, he avoided to have it by new law ; but
choſe rather a kind of middle way, by way of eſtabliſh-
ment. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. Settled regulation; form; model of a government or family.
Now come unto that general reformation, and bring in
that ſall/ment by which all men ſhould be contained in
duty. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
4. Foundation; fundamental principle; ſettled law.
The ſacred order to which you belong, and even the eſſa-
bliſhment on which it ſubſiſts, have often been ſtruck at ; but
in vain. - Alterbury's Sermºns.
8 H 5. Allowance;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 381</div><p class="Text">E S T
E S T
5. Allowance; income; ſalary.
His excellency, who had the ſole diſpoſal of the emperor's
revenue, might eaſily provide againſt that evil, by gradually
leſſening your eſtabliſhment. Gulliver's Travels.
Esr A'TE. m. ſ. [e/lat, French.]
1. The general intereſt; the buſineſs of the government; the
publick. In this ſenſe it is now commonly written ſtate.
Many times the things adduced to judgment may be meum
&amp; tuum, when the reaſon and conſequence thereof may reach
to point of eſtate : I call matters of eſtate not only the parts of
ſovereignty, but whatſoever introduceth any great alteration,
or dangerous precedent, or concerneth manifeſtly any great
portion of people. Bacon's Eſſays.
2. Condition of life, with regard to proſperity or adverſity.
Thanks to giddy chance,
She caſt us headlong from our high ſtate. Dryden.
3. Condition; circumſtances in general.
Truth and certainty are not at all ſecured by innate prin-
ciples; but men are in the ſame uncertain, floating ſlate with
as without them. - Locke.
4. Fortune; poſſeſſion: generally meant of poſſeſſions in land,
or realities.
She accuſed us to the king, as though we went about to
overthrow him in his own eſtate. Sidney, b. ii.
Go, miſer go; for lucre ſell thy ſoul;
Truck wares for wares, and trudge from pole to pole,
That men may ſay, when thou art dead and gone,
See what a vaſt ºffate he left his ſon Dryden's Perſ. Sat.
5. Rank; quality.
Who hath not heard of the greatneſs of your eſtate 2 Who
ſeeth not that your eſtate is much excelled with that ſweet
uniting of all beauties. Sidney, b. ii.
6. A perſon of high rank. This ſenſe is diſuſed.
She is a dutcheſs, a great eſtate. Latimer.
Herod, on his birthday, made a ſupper to his lords, high
captains, and chief ºffates of Galilee. Aſar. vi. 21.
To Est A't E. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſettle as a fortune.
Why hath thy queen
Summon'd me hither ?
—A contračt of true love to celebrate,
And ſome donation freely to eſtate
On the bleſs'd lovers. Shakeſpeare's Tempºff.
To ESTE’EM. v. a. [eftimer, French; aftime, Latin.]
1. To ſet a value whether high or low upon anything.
The worth of all men by their end ºffeem,
And then due praiſe, or due reproach them yield. Fa. Queen.
I preferred her before ſceptres and thrones, and eſteemed
riches nothing in compariſon of her. J/ijd. vii. 8.
2. To compare; to eſtimate by proportion.
Beſides, thoſe ſingle forms ſhe doth ſteem,
And in her balance doth their values try. Davies.
3. To prize; to rate high; to regard with reverence.
Who would not be loved more, though he were effecmed
leſs 2 Dryden.
4. To hold in opinion; to think; to imagine.
One man eſſeemeth one day above another: another ºffeemath
every day alike. Rom. xiv. 5.
EstE'EM. m. ſ. [from the verb.] High value; reverential re-
gard.
Who can ſee,
Without ºffeem for virtuous poverty,
Severe Fabritius, or can ceaſe t'admire
The ploughman conſul in his coarſe attire. Dryden's A.m.
Both thoſe poets lived in much ºfteem with good and holy
men in orders. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
I am not uneaſy that many, whom I never had any eſteem
for, are likely to enjoy this world after me. Pope.
Este'EM ER. m. ſ. [from effecm.] One that highly values; one
that ſets an high rate upon anything.
This might inſtruct the proudeſt eſ’cemer of his own parts,
how uſeful it is to talk and conſult with others. Locke.
ESTIMABLE. adj. [French.]
1. Valuable; worth a large price.
A pound of man's fleſh, taken from a man,
Is not ſo eſtimable or profitable
As fleſh of muttons, beefs, or goats, Shakespeare Mer. of Wenice.
2. Worthy of eſteem; worthy of ſome degree of honour and
reſpect.
A lady ſaid of her two companions, that one was more
amiable, the other more eſtimable.
You loſt one who gave hopes of being, in time, everything
that was eſ?imable and good. Temple.
E's TIMABLENEss. n.ſ. [from ºffimable.] The quality of de-
ſerving regard.
To F/STMATE. v. a. ſaſſimo, Latin.]
I. To rate; to adjuſt the value of; to judge of any thing by its
proportion to ſomething elſe.
When a man ſhall ſanétify his houſe to the Lord, then the
prieſt ſhall ſtimate it whether it be good or bad: as the pricſt
ihall ºffin'ate it, ſo ſhall it ſtand. Lev. xxvii. 14.
It is by the weight of ſilver, and not the name of the piece,
that men ºffimate commodities and exchange them. Locke.
2. To calculate ; to compute.
E's TIMATE. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Computation; calculation.
Upon a moderate ºftinate and calculation of the quantity of
water now actually contained in the abyſs, 1 found that this
alone was full enough to cover the whole globe to the height
aſſigned by Moſes. J/oodward.
2. Value.
I'd love
My country's good, with a reſpect more tender,
More holy and profound than mine own life,
My dear wife's eſtimate, her womb's increaſe,
The treaſure of my loins. Shakeſpeare's Coriºlanur.
3. Valuation; aſſignment of proportional value; comparative
judgment.
The only way to come to a true effimate upon the odds be-
twixt a publick and a private life, is to try both. L'E/irange.
Outward actions can never give a juſt eſtimate of us, ſince
there are many perfections of a man which are not capable of
appearing in actions. Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 257.
Est IMA’tion. m. ſ. [from ſtimate.]
1. The act of adjuſting proportional value.
If a man ſhall ſanctify unto the Lord ſome part of a field,
the eſtimation ſhall be according to the ſeed, and homer of
barley. Levit.
2. Calculation; computation.
3. Opinion; judgment.
In our own effimation we account ſuch particulars more
worthy than thoſe that are already tried and known. Bacon.
4. Eſteem; regard; honour. -
Crimes there were laid to his charge many, the leaſt where-
of being juſt, had bereaved him of eſtimation and credit with
Inch. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
Of your brace of unprizeable eſtimations, the one is but
frail, and the other caſual. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
I know the gentleman -
To be of worth and worthy ſtimation,
And not without deſert ſo well reputed. Shakeſpeare.
I ſhall have ºffimation among the multitude, and honour
with the elders. //iſd. viii. 1 o.
A plain reaſon of the publick honours due to the magiſtrate
is, that he may be in due eſtimation and reverence. Atterbury.
E's TIMative. adj. [from ºffimate.] Having the power of
comparing and adjuſting the preference.
We find in animals an eſtimative or judicial faculty, an
appetition or averſation, and loco-motive faculty anſwering
the will. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Fººton. n.ſ [from eſtimate.] A ſetter of rates; a com-
putiſt.
E's T1 v AL. adj. [a/?ivus, Latin J
1. Pertaining to the Summer.
2. Continuing for the Summer.
Estivation. n.ſ.. [a/tivatio, Latin.] The aët of paſſing
the Summer.
A grotto is a place of ſhade, or ſº Bacon's Eſſays.
Estr A'D E. m. ſ. [French; ſtratum, Latin.] An even or level
ſpace. Dić?.
To ESTRA'NGE. v. a. [eſiranger, French.]
1. To keep at a diſtance; to withdraw.
Had we not only cut off their corruptions, but alſo
oſtranged ourſelves from them in things indifferent, who ſeeth
not how greatly prejudicial this might have been to ſo good a
cauſe 2 Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 7.
They know it is our cuſtom of ſimple reading, not for
converſion of infidels eſtranged from the houſe of God, but for
inſtruction of men baptized, bred, and brought up in the
boſom of the church. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
See, ſhe weeps;
Thinks me unkind, or falſe, and knows not why
I thus eſtrange my perſon from her bed. Dryden.
2. To alienate; to divert from its original uſe or poſſeſſor.
They have e/iranged this place, and have burnt incenſe in it
to other gods. jer. xix. 4.
3. To alienate from affection; to turn from kindneſs to male-
volence or indifference.
How comes it now, my huſband, oh, how comes it,
That thou art thus eſtranged from thyſelf?
Thyſelf I call it, being ſtrange to me. Shakeſ Com. ºf Err.
Adam, eſtrang'd in look, and alter'd ſtyle,
Speech intermitted, thus to Eve renew’d. Milton's Par. Loft.
I came to grieve a father's heart eſtrang'd ;
But little thought to find a miſtreſs chang'd. Dryd. Aurengz.
I do not know, to this hour, what it is that has ſtranged
him from me. Pºpe.
4. To withdraw or withold.
We muſt endeavour to ſtrange our belief from everything
which is not clearly and diſtinctly evidenced to our faculties.
Glanv. Scepſ, c. 14.
Est RANGEMENT. n.ſ.. [from eſtrange.] Alienation; diſtance ;
removal; voluntary abſtraćtion.
Deſires, by a long eſtrangement from better things, come at
length perfectly to loath, and fly off from them. South.
ESTRAPA"D.E. m. ſ. [French..] The defence of a horſe º
6 W I<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 382</div><p class="Text">E. T. E.
E. T. H
will not obey, who, to get rid of his rider, riſes mightily
before; and while his forehand is yet in the air, yerks furi-
ouſly with his hind icgs. Farrier’s Dićf.
Estri’ATE. m. ſ. [extradium, Latin.] The true copy of an
original writing: for example, of amerciaments or penalties,
ſet down in the rolls of a court, to be levied by the bailiff, or
other officer, of every man for his offence. A law term. Cowel.
Estre'PEMENT. m. ſ. [of the French word ºffrepier.] Spoil
made by the tenant for term of life upon any lands or woods,
to the prejudice of him in the reverſion. Cowel.
Estricii. n.ſ. [commonly written oſtrich..] The largeſt of
birds.
To be furious,
Is to be frighted out of fear; and, in that mood,
The dove will peck the eſtridge. Shakesp Anth. and Cleºpatra.
The peacock, not at thy command, aſſumes
His glorious train; nor ºſtrich her rare plumes. Sandys.
E'st UAR Y. m. ſ. [aſtuarium, Latin.] An arm of the ſea; the
mouth of a lake or river in which the tide reciprocates; a
frith.
To Estu At E. v. a. ſaſſuo, Latin.] To ſwell and fall reci-
procally; to boil; to be in a ſtate of violent commotion. Dići.
Estu A'Tio N. m.ſ. [from aſſuo, Latin.] The ſtate of boiling;
reciprocation of riſe and fall; agitation; commotion.
Rivers and lakes, that want fermenting parts at the bot-
tom, are not excited unto eſtuations; therefore ſome ſeas flow
higher than others. Brºwn's Vulgar Erreurs, b. vii. c. 13.
The motion of the will is accompanied with a ſenſible com-
motion of the ſpirits, and an eſtuation of the blood. Nor is.
E's TURE. n.ſ. [ajus, Latin.] Violence; commotion.
The ſeas retain
Not only their outrageous eſture there,
But ſupernatural miſchief they expire. Chapman's Odyſſey.
E’sURIENT. adj. [eſuriens, Latin.] Hungry; voracious. Dić.
E'su RINE. adj. [efurio, Latin.] Corroding; eating.
Over much piercing is the air of Hampſtead, in which ſort
of air there is always ſomething eſurine and acid. Wiſeman.
Etc. A contračtion of the two Latin words et cattera, which
ſignifies and ſo on ; and the reſt; and others of the like kind.
To Etch. v. a. [etizen, German.] -
I. A way uſed in making of prints, by drawing with a pro-
per needle upon a copper-plate, covered over with a ground
of wax, &amp;c. and well blacked with the ſmoke of a link,
in order to take off the figure of the drawing or print;
which having its backſide tinétured with white lead, will,
by running over the ſtrucken out lines with a ſtift, impreſs
the exact figure on the black or red ground; which
figure is afterwards with needles drawn deeper quite through
the ground, and all the ſhadows and hatchings put in ; and
then a wax border being made all round the plate, there is
poured on a ſufficient quantity of well tempered aqua fortis,
which, inſinuating into the ſtrokes made by the needles,
uſually eats, in about half an hour, into the figure of the print
or drawing on the copper plate. Harris.
2. To ſcetch; to draw; to delineate [unleſs this word be miſ-
taken by Locke for eke.]
There are many empty terms to be found in ſome learned
writers, to which they had recourſe to etch out their
ſyſtems. Locke.
3. [This word is evidently miſtaken by Ray for edge.] To move
forwards towards one ſide. -
When we lie long awake in the night, we are not able to
reſt one quarter of an hour without ſhifting of ſides, or at
leaſt etching this way and that way, more or leſs. . . Ray.
Etch. n.ſ. A country word, of which I know not the
meaning.
When they ſow their etch crops, they ſprinkle a pound or
two of clover on an acre. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Where you find dunging of land makes it rank, lay dung
upon the etch, and ſow it with barley. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
ETE/RNAL. adj. [aternus, Latin.]
1. Without beginning or end.
The eternal God is thy refuge.
2. Without beginning.
It is a queſtion quite different from our having an idea of
eternity, to know whether there were any real being, whoſe
duration has been eternal.
3. Without end; endleſs; immortal.
Thou know'ſt that Banquo and his Fleance lives.
—But in them nature's copy's not eternal. Shakespeare Macbeth.
4. Perpetual; conſtant; unintermitting.
Burnt off'rings morn and ev'ning ſhall be thine,
And fires eternal in thy temple ſhine. Dryd. Knight's Tale.
5. Unchangeable.
Hobbes believed the eternal truths which he oppoſed. Dryd.
ETE'RNAL. m. ſ. [eternel, French..] One of the appellations of
the Godhead. -
That law whereby the eternal himſelf doth work. Hofer.
The eternal, to prevent ſuch horrid fray,
Hung out of heav'n his golden ſcales. Milton.
ETE'RNA list. m. ſ. ſaternu, Latin.] One that holds the paſt
exiſtence of the world infinite. -
Deut. xxxiii. 27.
ccée.
I would aſk the eternaliſts what mark is there that they could
expe&amp;t or deſire of the novelty of a world, that is not found
in this Or what mark is there of eternity that is found in
this 2 Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
To Ete'RNAL Is E. v. a. [ from eternal. J. To make eter-
nal. IXić7.
ETE’RNALLY. adv. [from eternal.]
1. Without beginning or end.
2. Unchangeably; invariably.
That which is morally good, or evil, at any time, or in
any caſe, muſt be alſo eternally and unchangeably ſo, with
relation to that time and to that caſe. South's Sermont,
3. Perpetually; without intermiſſion.
Bear me, ſome god, to Baja's gentle ſeats,
Or cover me in Umbria's green retreats,
Where weſtern gales eternally reſide,
And all the ſeaſons laviſh all their pride. Addiſon.
ETE'RN.E. adj. [acterius, Latin.] Eternal; perpetual; end-
leſs.
The Cyclops hammers fall
On Mars his armour, forg'd for proof eterne. Shakespeare Hamlet.
ETE'RNITY. m.ſ.. [acternitas, Latin.] -
1. Duration without beginning or end.
In this ground his precious root
Still lives, which, when weak time ſhall be pour’d out
Into etermity, and circular joys
Dancing an endleſs round, again ſhall riſe. Craſhaw.
Thy immortal rhyme
Makes this one ſhort point of time,
To fill up half the orb of round eternity. Cowley:
By repeating the idea of any length of duration which we
have in our minds, with all the endleſs addition of number,
we come by the idea of eternity. Locke.
2. Duration without end.
Beyond is all abyſs,
Eternity, whoſe end no eye can reach! Milt. Parad. Loft.
Eternity, thou pleaſing, dreadful thought !
Through what variety of untried being,
Through what new ſcenes and changes muſt we paſs. Addison
To Ete'RNize. v. a. [aterno, Latin.]
I. To make endleſs; to perpetuate.
I with two fair gifts
Created him endow’d; with happineſs,
And immortality: that fondly loſt,
This other ſerv'd but to eternize woe. Milton's Parad. Loft.
2. To make for ever famous; to immortalize.
Mankind by all means ſeeking to eternize himſelf, ſo much
the more as he is near his end, doth it by ſpeeches and
writings. - Sidney.
And well beſeems all knights of noble name,
That covet in th’ immortal book of fame
To be eternized, that ſame to haunt. Fairy Queen, b. i.
I might relate of thouſands, and their names
Eternize here on earth; but thoſe eleēt
Angels, contented with their fame in heav'n,
Seek not the praiſe of men. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vi.
The four great monarchies have been celebrated by the
writings of many famous men, who have eternized their fame,
and thereby their own. Temple.
Both of them are ſet on fire by the great ačtions of heroes,
and both endeavour to eternize them. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Hence came its name, in that the grateful Jove
Hath eterniz'd the glory of his love. Creech's Manilius.
ETHER. m. ſ. [ather, Latin; &amp; Sne.] . *
1. An element more fine and ſubtle than air; air refined or
ſublimed.
If any one ſhould ſuppoſe that ether, like our air, may con-
tain particles which endeavour to recede from one another;
for I do not know what this ether is; and that its particles are
exceedingly ſmaller than thoſe of air, or even than thoſe of
light, the exceeding ſmallneſs of its particles may contribute
to the greatneſs of the force, by which thoſe particles may re-
cede from one another. Newton's Opt.
The parts of other bodies are held together by the eternal
preſſure of the ether, and can have no other conceivable cauſe
of their coheſion and union. Locke.
2. The matter of the higheſt regions above.
There fields of light and liquid ether flow,
Purg'd from the pond’rous dregs of earth below. Dryden.
ETHE’REAL. adj. [from ether.]
1. Formed of ether.
Man feels me, when I preſs th' ethereal plains. Dryden.
2. Celeſtial; heavenly.
Go, heav'nly gueſt, ethereal meſſenger,
Sent from whoſe ſov’reign goodneſs I adore. Milton,
Thrones and imperial pow'rs, offspring of heav'n,
Ethereal virtues Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii. l. 311.
Such as theſe, being in good part freed from the entangle-
ments of ſenſe and body, are employed, like the ſpirits above,
in contemplating the Divine Wiſdom in the works of nature;
a kind of anticipation of the ethereal happineſs and employ-
IIl CIlt. Glanv. Apol.
Vaſt
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 383</div><p class="Text">E V A
E V A
Vaſt chain of being, which from God began,
Natures ethereal, human ; angel, man. Pope.
ETHER Eous. adj. [from ether J Formed of ether ; heavenly.
Behold the bright ſurface
Of this ethereous mould, whereon we ſtand. Miſt. Pa. Lºſt.
ETHICAL. adj. [#SixGP.] Moral; treating on morality.
ETHICALLY. adv. [from ethical.] According to the doctrines
of morality. - *- -
My ſubject leads me not to diſcourſe ethically, but chriſtian-
ly of the faults of the tongue. Government ºf the Tongue.
E’ſ Hick, adj. [#3ſzº.] Moral; delivering precepts of mo-
rality. Whence Pºpe entitled part of his works Ethick Epiſtles.
ETHIcks. n.ſ. without the fingular. [23.2%.] The doctrine
of morality; a ſyſtem of morality.
For of all moral virtues, ſhe was all
That ethicks ſpeak of virtues cardinal. Dºnne.
I will never ſet politicks againſt ethicks; eſpecially for that
true ethicks are but as a handmaid to divinity and religion.
Bacon's War with Spain.
Perſius profeſſes the ſtoick philoſophy; the moſt noble, ge-
nerous, and beneficial amongſt all the ſects who have given
rules of ethicks. Dryden's juvenal, Dedicat.
If the atheiſts would live up to the ethicks of Epicurus him-
ſelf, they would make few or no proſelytes from the Chriſtian
religion. Bentley's Sermons.
E"THNick. adj. [3,129°.] Heathen; Pagan; not Jewiſh;
not Chriſtian.
Such contumely as the ethnick world durſt not offer him, is
the peculiar inſolence of degenerated Chriſtians. Gov. of Tongue.
I ſhall begin with the agreement of profane, whether
Jewiſh or ethnick, with the Sacred Writings. Grew's Coſm. Sac.
ETHNicks. n.ſ. Heathens; not Jews; not Chriſtians.
This firſt Jupiter of the ethnicks was then the ſame Cain,
the ſon of Adam. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
ET Holo'G1c Al. adj. [n,3G and 2.67GP.] Treating of mo-
rality.
Etiology. m. ſ. [2,1102.07ſ2.] An account of the cauſes of
anything, generally of a diſtemper.
I have not particulars enough to enable me to enter into
the etiology of this diſtemper. Arbuthnot on Air.
Ery Molo'GICAL. adj. [from etymology.] Relating to etymo-
logy; relating to the derivation of words.
Excuſe this conceit, this etymological obſervation. Locke.
ETYMo‘logist. m. ſ. [from etymology..] One who ſearches out
the original of words; one who ſhows the derivation of words
from their original.
ETYMOLOGY.. n.ſ. [etymologia, Lat. [trup.G and x67&amp;’.]
1. The deſcent or derivation of a word from its original; the
deduction of formations from the radical word; the analyſis
of compound words into primitives.
Conſumption is generally taken for any univerſal diminu-
tion and colliquation of the body, which acception its etymo-
logy implies. Harvey on Conſumptions.
When words are reſtrained, by common uſage, to a parti-
cular ſenſe, to run up to etymology, and conſtrue them by dic-
tionary, is wretchedly ridiculous. Collier’s View of the Stage.
Pelvis is uſed by comick writers for a looking-glaſs, by
which means the etymºlºgy of the word is viſible, and pelvidera
will ſignify a lady who looks in her glaſs. Addiſon's Speciator.
If the meaning of a word could be learned by its derivation
or etymology, yet the original derivation of words is oftentimes
very dark. J/atts's Logick.
2. The part of grammar which delivers the infle&amp;tions of nouns
and verbs.
ETYMox. m. ſ. ſirvgov.] Origin; primitive word.
Blue hath its etymon from the High Dutch blaw ; from
whence they call himmel-blue, that which we call ſky-colour
or heaven's blue. Peacham on Drawing.
To Eva'cATE. v. a. ſtaco, Latin.] To empty out; to throw
Out.
Dry air opens the ſurface of the earth to diſincarcerate
venene bodies, or to evacate them. Harvey on the Plague.
To EVA’CUATE. v. a. [evacuo, Latin.]
1. To make empty; to clear.
There is no good way of prevention but by evacuating
clean, and emptying the church. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 1d.
We tried how far the air would manifeſt its gravity in ſo
thin a medium, as we could make in our receiver, by eva-
cºating it. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
2. To throw out as noxious, or offenſive. -
3. To void by any of the excretory paſſages.
Boerhaave gives an inſtance of a patient, who, by a long
uſe of whey and water, and garden fruits, evacuated a great
quantity of black matter, and recovered his ſenſes. A buthnot.
4. To make void; to evacate; to nullify to annul.
The defečt, though it would not evacuate a marriage, after
cohabitation and actual conſummation; yet it was enough to
make void a contračt. Bacon's Henry VII.
If the prophecies recorded of the Meſſiah are not fulfilled
in Jeſus of Nazareth, it is impoſſible to know when a pro-
phecy is fulfilled, and when not, in anything or perſon what-
foever, which would utterly evacuate the uſe of them. South.
5. To quit; to withdraw from out of a place.
As this neutrality was never obſerved by the emperor, ſo he
never effectually evacuated Catalonia. Swift.
R v A'cuANT. m. ſ. [evacuans, Latin.] Medicine that procures
cvacuation by any paſſage.
Ev Acuation. n.ſ.. [from evacuate.]
1. Such emiſſions as leave a vacancy; diſcharge.
Conſider the vaſt evacuations of men that England hath had,
by aſſiſtances lent to foreign kingdoms. Hale's Orig. of Manſ.
2. Abolition; nullification.
Popcry hath not been able to re-eſtabliſh itſelf in any place,
after proviſion made againſt it by utter evacuation of all Romiſh
ceremonies. Hooker, b. iv. J. 9.
2. The practice of emptying the body by phyſick.
The uſual practice of phyſick among us, turns in a man-
ner wholly upon evacuation, either by bleeding, vomit, or
ſome purgation. Temple.
3. Diſcharges of the body by any vent natural or artificial.
To EVADE. v. a. [evado, Latin.]
1. To elude; to eſcape by artifice or ſtratagem.
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannick power: if he evade us there,
Inforce him with his envy to the people. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Or, if thou covet death, as utmoſt end -
Of miſery, ſo thinking to evade
The penalty pronounc'd, doubt not but God
Hath wiſelier arm'd his vengeful ire, than ſo
To be foreſtall’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. 1. Iozr.
He might evade the accompliſhment of theſe afflićtions he
now gradually endureth. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i.
2. To avoid; to decline by ſubterfuge.
Our queſtion thou evad/?; how did'ſt thou dare
To break hell bounds? Dryden's State ºf Innºcence.
3. To eſcape or elude by ſophiſtry.
My argument evidently overthrows all that he brings to
evade the teſtimonies of the fathers. Stillingfect.
4. To eſcape as imperceptible, or unconquerable, as too great
or too ſubtle to be ſeized or ſubdued.
We have ſeen how a contingent event baffles man's know-
ledge, and evades his power. South's Sermons.
To Eva'DE. v. n.
1. To eſcape; to ſlip away.
His wiſdom, by often evading from perils, was turned
rather into a dexterity to deliver himſelf from dangers, than
into a providence to prevent. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. To practiſe ſophiſtry or evaſions.
Unarm'd they might
Have eaſily, as ſpirits, evaded ſwift
By quick contraction, or remove. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
The miniſters of God are not to evade or take refuge in
any of theſe two forementioned ways. South's Sermons.
Evagation. n. ſ. [evagor, Latin.] The act of wandering;
excurſion; ramble; deviation.
Theſe long chains of lofty mountains, which run through
whole continents eaſt and weſt, ſerve to ſtop the evagation of
the vapours to the north and ſouth in hot countries. Ray.
Ev ANE'scENT. adj. [evaneſcent, Latin.] Vaniſhing; imper-
ceptible; leſſening beyond the perception of the ſenſes.
As the canal is wire-drawn, it grows ſtill ſmaller and ſlen-
derer, ſo as that the evaneſcent ſolid and fluid will ſcarce
differ. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The difference between right and wrong, on ſome petty
caſes, is almoſt evaneſcent. J/cloſion.
The downy orchard, and the melting pulp
Cf mellow fruit, the nameleſs nations feed
Of evaneſcent inſects. Thomſon's Spring, l. 3oo.
Ev ANGE'lica L. adj. [evangelique, French ; evangelicus, Latin J
1. Agreeable to goſpel; conſonant to the Chriſtian law revealed
in the holy goſpel.
This diſtinction between moral goodneſs and evangelical
perfection, ought to have been obſerved. Atterlury's Sermºns.
God will indeed judge the world in righteouſneſs; but 'tis
by an evangelical, not a legal righteouſneſs, and by the inter-
vention of the man Chriſt Jeſus, who is the Saviour as well
as the judge of the world. - Atterbury's Sermºns.
2. Contained in the goſpel.
Thoſe evangelical hymns they allow not to fland in our
liturgy. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 35.
Ev ANGELISM. m. ſ. [from evangely..] The promulgation of
the bleſſed goſpel.
Thus was this land ſaved from infidelity, through the apoſ-
tolical and miraculous evangeliſm. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Ev A'NG E list. m. ſ. ſºvºzy), º&amp;’.]
1. A writer of the hiſtory of our Lord Jeſus.
Each of theſe early writers aſcribe to the four evangeliſts by
name their reſpective hiſtories. Addiſon's Chriſt. Religion.
2. A promulgator of the Chriſtian laws.
Thoſe to whom he firſt entruſted the promulgating of the
goſpel, had inſtructions; and it were fit our new evangeliſ's
ſhould ſhow their authority. Decay of Piety.
To Eva N.GE'Liz E. v. a. [evangeliz, Latin ; iv.237’s ago.] To
inſtruct in the goſpel, or law of Jeſus. -
i The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 384</div><p class="Text">E U C
E. V. E.
The ſpirit -
Pour'd firſt of his apoſtles, whom he ſends
Tº evangelize the nations; then on all
Baptiz'd, ſhall them with wond’rous gifts endue. Milion;
EVANGELY. n.ſ.. [ivayyºv, that is, good tidings.] Good
tidings; the meſſage of pardon and ſalvation; the holy goſ-
pel; the goſpel of jeſus.
Good Lucius,
That firſt received Chriſtianity, -
The ſacred pledge of Chriſt's evangely. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Eva’N D. adj. [evanidus, Latin.] Faint; weak; evaneſcent.
Where there is heat and ſtrength enough in the plant to
make the leaves odorate, there the ſmell of the flower is rather
evanid and weaker than that of the leaves. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
The decoctions of fimples, which bear the viſible colours
of bodies deco&amp;ted, are dead and evanid, without the com-
mixtion of allum, argol, and the like. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
I put as great difference between our new lights and ancient
truths, as between the ſun and an evanid meteor. Glanv. Scepſ,
To Eva’NIs H. v. a. [evaneſco, Latin.] To vaniſh; to eſcape
from notice or perception.
Ev A'poRABLE. adj. [from evaporate.]
fumes or vapours.
Such cordial powders as are aromatick, their virtue lies in
parts that are of themſelves volatile, and eaſily evapo-
rable. Grew's Muſæum.
To EVA'PORATE. v. n. [evaporo, Latin.] To fly away in
vapours or fumes; to waſte inſenſibly as a volatile ſpirit.
Poeſy is of ſo ſubtile a ſpirit, that in the pouring out of
one language into another it will all evaporate. Denham.
Our works unhappily evaporated into words; we ſhould
have talked leſs, and done more. Decay of Piety.
Being weary with attending the ſo ſlow conſumption of the
liquor, we ſet it in a digeſting furnace to evaporate more
nimbly. Boyle on Saltpetre.
This vapour falling upon joints which have not heat
enough to diſpel it, cannot be cured otherwiſe than by burn-
ing, by which it evapºrates. Temple.
The enemy takes a ſurer way to conſume us, by letting our
courage evaporate againſt ſtones and rubbiſh. Swift.
To Ev A'Por At E. v. a.
1. To drive away in fumes; to diſperſe in vapours.
If we compute that prodigious maſs of water daily thrown
into the ſea from all the rivers, we ſhould then know how
much is perpetually evaporated, and caſt again upon the conti-
nents to ſupply thoſe innumerable ſtreams. Bentley's Sermons.
Convents abroad are ſo many retreats for the ſpeculative,
the melancholy, the proud, the filent, the politick, and the
moroſe, to ſpend themſelves, and evaporate the noxious par-
ticles. Swift's Argument againſt aboliſhing Chriſtianity.
We perceive clearly, that fire will warm or burn us, and
will evaporate water. J/atts's Logick.
2. To give vent to ; to let out in ebullition or fallies.
My lord of Eſſex evaporated his thoughts in a ſonnet to be
ſung before the queen. Wotton.
Ev ApoRA't on. n.ſ.. [from evaporate.]
1. The act of flying away in fumes or vapours; vent; diſ-
charge. -
they are but the fruits of aduſted choler, and the evapora-
tions of a vindicative ſpirit. Howel's Vocal Forreſt.
Evaporations are at ſome times greater, according to the
greater heat of the ſun; ſo wherever they alight again in rain,
'tis ſuperior in quantity to the rain of colder ſeaſons. JWoodw.
2. The act of attenuating matter, ſo as to make it fume away.
Thoſe waters, by rarifaction and evaporation, aſcended.
Raleigh's Hiſlory of the Wºrld.
3. [In pharmacy..] An operation by which liquids are ſpent or
driven away in ſteams, ſo as to leave ſome part ſtronger, or
of a higher conſiſtence than before. wincy.
Eva's los. n ſ [evoſum, Latin.] Excuſe; ſubterfuge; ſophiſ-
try; artifice; artful means of eluding or eſcaping.
We are too well acquainted with thoſe anſwers;
But his evaſion, wing'd thus ſwift with ſcorn,
Cannot outfly our apprehenſions. Shakespeare. Troilus and Crºſſida.
- Him, after all diſputes, -
Forc'd I abſolve: all my evaſiºns vain,
And reaſonings, though through mazes, lead me ſtill
But to my own convićtion. Miltºn's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
In vain thou ſtriv'ſt to cover ſhame with ſhame;
For by evaſions thy crime uncover'ſt more. Miltºn's Agoniſies.
Eva'sive. adj. [from evade.]
1. Pračtifing evaſion; eluſive.
Thus he, though conſcious of th' etherial gueſt,
Anſwer'd evaſive of the ſly requeſt. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
2. Containing an evaſion; ſophiſtical; diſhoneſtly artful.
Eva'sively adv. [from evaſive..] By evaſion; eluſively;
ſophiſtically.
FU'CHARIST, n.ſ. [ivX26 ſiz.] The aët of giving thanks;
the ſacramental ačt in which the death of our Redeemer is
commemorated with a thankful remembrance; the ſacrament
of the Lord's ſupper.
Eaſily diffipated in
Himſelf did better like of common bread to be uſed in the
eucharift. Hocker, Preface.
Some receive the ſacrament as a means to procure great
graces and bleſfings, others as an eucha, iſ and an office of
thankſgiving for what they have received. 7aylor.
Euchari'stic AL. adj. [from eucharift.]
1. Containing ačts of thankſgiving.
The latter part was euthari/ica', which began at the break-
ing and bleſſing of the bread. Brown's Pugar Erreurs, b. v.
It would not be amiſs to put it into the euchariſtical part of .
our daily devotions: we praiſe thee, O God, for our limbs
and ſenſes. Ray on the Creation.
2. Relating to the ſacrament of the ſupper of the Lord.
Eucho'LoGY. m.ſ.. [ivXºytov..] A formulary of prayers.
Euck as Y. m. ſ. ſºvkézaſz.] . An agreeable well proportioned
mixture of qualities, whereby a body is ſaid to be in a good
ſtate of health.
Eve.
E’ve N. $n. ſ' ſaepen, Saxon; avend, or avend, Dutch.]
1. The cloſe of the day; the latter part of the day; the interval
between bright light and darkneſs.
They like ſo many Alexantlers,
Have in theſe parts from morn’till even fought,
And ſheath'd their ſwords for lack of argument. Shakespeare H. V.
Such ſights as youthful poets dream
&amp;incy.
On Summer eves by haunted ſtream. Milton.
O, nightingale, that on yon bloomy ſpray
Warbleſt at eve, when all the woods are ſtill. Milton.
When the ſun's orb both even and morn is bright,
Then let no fear of ſtorms thy mind affright. May's Wirgil.
Th'unerring ſun by certain ſigns declares,
What the late ev'n, or early morn prepares. Dryd. Virgil.
Winter, oft at eve, reſumes the breeze,
Chills the pale morn. Thomſon's Spring, 1.2c.
2. The vigil or faſt to be obſerved before an holiday. In this
ſenſe only eve is uſed, not even.
Let the immediate preceding day be kept as the eve to this
great feaſt. Duppa's Rule to Devotion.
E’ve N. adj. [epen, Saxon; even, Dutch; acquus, Latin.]
1. Level; not rugged; not unequal.
To ſee a beggar's brat in riches flow,
Adds not a wrinkle to my even brow. Dryden's Perſ. Sat. 6.
The preſent face of Rome is much more even and level
than it was formerly. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
The ſuperficies of ſuch plates are not even, but have many
cavities and ſwellings, which, how ſhallow ſoever, do a little
vary the thickneſs of the plate. Newton's Opt.
2. Uniform; equal to itſelf; ſmooth as oppoſed to rough.
Lay the rough paths of peeviſh nature ev'n,
And open in each heart a little heav'n. Prior:
3. Level with; parallel to.
That the net may be even to the midſt of the altar. Ex.
And ſhall lay thee even with the ground. Luk. xix. 44.
4. Without inclination any way; not leaning to any ſide.
He was
A noble ſervant to them; but he could not
Carry his honours even. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
5. Without any part higher or lower than the other.
When Alexander demanded of one what was the fitteſt ſeat
of his empire, he laid a dry hide before him, and deſired him
to ſet his foot on one ſide thereof; which being done, all the
other parts of the hide did riſe up; but when he did ſet his
foot in the middle, all the other parts lay flat and even. Davies.
Upheld by me, yet once more he ſhall ſtand
On even ground againſt his mortal foe. Milton's Par. Lºft.
6. Equal on both ſides: as, the account is even.
Even reckoning makes laſting friends; and the way to make
reckonings even, I am ſure, is to make them often. South.
7. Without anything owed, either good or ill; out of debt.
We reckon with your ſeveral loves,
And make us even with you; -
Henceforth be earls. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I will be even with thee, doubt it not. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleop.
I do confeſs
The blind lad's pow'r, whilſt he inhabits there;
But I'll be ev'n with him nevertheleſs. Suckling.
In taking revenge, a man is but even with his enemy; but
in paſſing it over, he is ſuperior. Bacon's Eſſays.
The publick is always even with an author who has not a
juſt deference for them: the contempt is reciprocal. Addiſon.
The true reaſon of their flying to this ſtrange doćtrine was
to be even with the magiſtrate, who, they found, was againſt
them; and they reſolved, therefore, at any rate to be againſt
him. Atterbury's Sermons.
8. Calm; not ſubječt to elevation or depreſſion.
Deſires compos'd, affections ever ev'n,
Tears that delight, and ſighs that waſt to heav'n.
9. Capable to be divided into equal parts; not odd.
Let him tell me whether the number of the ſtars be even or
odd. Taylºr's Rule of living holy.
What verity there is in that numeral conceit, in the lateral
diviſion
Pope.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 385</div><p class="Text">E V E.
!
diviſion of man by even and odd, aſcribing the odd unto the
right fide, and even unto the left. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
To E'v EN. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To make even.
2. To make out of debt; to put in a ſtate in which either good
or ill is fully repaid.
Nothing can, or ſhall content my ſoul,
*Till I am evened with him, wife for wife. Shakeſp. Othell.
3. To level; to make level.
This temple Xerxes evened with the ſoil, which Alexander
is ſaid to have repaired. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
Beat, roll, and mow carpet-walks and cammomile; for now
the ground is ſupple, and it will even all inequalities. Evelyn.
To E'v EN. v. n. To be equal to. Now diſuſed.
A like ſtrange obſervation taketh place here as at Stone-
henge, that a redoubled numbering never eveneth with the
E've N. adv, ſoften contraćted to ev'n.]
1. A word of ſtrong aſſertion; verily.
Even ſo did thoſe Gauls poſſeſs the coaſts. Spenser's Ireland.
Thou waſt a ſoldier
Even to Cato's wiſh ; not fierce, and terrible
Only in ſtrokes. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Dang'rous rocks,
Which, touching but my gentle veſſel's ſide,
Would ſcatter all the ſpices on the ſtream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my ſilks;
And, in a word, yea even now worth this,
Ahd now worth nothing. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
It is not much that the good man ventures ; and after this
life, if there be no God, is as well as the bad ; but if there
be a God, is infinitely better, even as much as unſpeakable
and eternal happineſs is better than extreme and endleſs
miſery. Tillotſºn's Sermons.
2. Notwithſtanding; though it was ſo that.
All I can ſay for thoſe paſſages is, that I knew they were bad
enough to pleaſe, even when I wrote them. Dryden.
3. Likewiſe; not only ſo, but alſo.
The motions of all the lights of heaven might afford mea-
ſures of time, if we could number them; but moſt of thoſe
motions are not evident, and the great lights are ſufficient, and
ſerve alſo to meaſure even the motions of thoſe others. Holder.
He might even as well have employed his time, as ſome
princes have done, in the frivolous and low delights of catch-
ing moles. Atterbury.
Here all their rage, and ev'n their murmurs ceaſe,
And ſacred ſilence reigns, and univerſal peace. Pope.
4: So much as.
Books give the ſame turn to our thoughts that company
does to our converſation, without loading our memories, or
making us even ſenſible of the change. Swift.
5. A word of exaggeration in which a ſecret compariſon is
implied: as, even the great, that is, the great like the mean.
Nor death itſelf can wholly waſh your ſtains,
But long contračted filth ev’n in the ſoul remains. Dryden.
I have made ſeveral diſcoveries which appear new, even to
thoſe who are verſed in critical learning. Addiſon's Spectator.
6. A term of conceſſion.
Since you refined the notion, and correóted the malignity,
I ſhall e'en let it paſs. Collier of Friendſhip.
Even HA'NDED. adj. [even and hand.] Impartial; equitable.
Evenhanded juſtice
Returns th’ ingredients of our poiſon’d chalice -
... To our own lips. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Evening. n.ſ. [æren, Saxon; avend, Dutch..] The cloſe of
the day; the beginning of night.
I ſhall fall -
Like a bright exhalation in the evening,
And no man ſee me more. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The devil is now more laborious than ever, the long day
of mankind drawing faſt towards an evening, and the world's
tragedy and time near at an end. Raleigh's Hiſ of the Wºrld.
Mean time the ſun deſcended from the ſkies,
And the bright evening ſtar began to riſe. Dryden's AEn.
It was a ſacred rule among the Pythagoreans, that they
ſhould every evening thrice run over the actions and affairs of
the day. Watts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i.
E've NLY. adj. [from even.]
1. Equally ; uniformly ; in an equipoiſe.
In an infinite chaos nothing could be formed ; no particles
could convene by mutual attraction; for every one there muſt
have infinite matter around it, and therefore muſt reſt for ever,
being evenly balanced between infinite attractions. Bently.
2. Levelly; without aſperities.
The firſt ſhall be a paliſh clearneſs, eveny and ſmoothly
ſpread; not overthin and waſhy, but of a pretty ſolid con-
ſiſtence. //ottºn.
3. Without inclination to either ſide; in a poſture parallel to
the horizon; horizontally. -
The upper face of the ſea is known to be level by nature,
and evenly diſtant from the center, and waxes deeper and
deeper the farther one ſaileth from the ſhore. Brerewºod,
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
4. Impartially ; without favour or enmity.
You ſerve a great and gracious maſter, and there is a moſt
hopeful young prince: it behoves you to carry yourſelf wiſely
and evenly between them both. Bacon's Advice to Pilliers.
Even N Ess. n.ſ.. [from even.] - -
1. State of being even.
2. Uniformity; regularity.
The ether moſt readily yieldeth to the revolutions of the
celeſtial bodies, and the making them with that evenneſ, and
celerity is requiſite in them all. Grew's Coſmºlºg. Sacr. b. i.
3. Equality of ſurface; levelneſs.
4. Freedom from inclination to either ſide.
A crooked ſtick is not ſtraitned, unleſs it be bent as far on
the clear contrary ſide, that ſo it may ſettle itſelf at the length
in a middle cſtate of eventſ, between both. Hooker, b. iv. f. 8.
5. Impartiality; equal reſpect.
6. Calmneſs ; freedom from perturbation.
Though he appeared to reliſh theſe bleſfings as much as any
man, yet he bore the loſs of them, when it happened, with
great compoſure and evenneſs of mind. Alt.rbury's Sermons.
E’ve Nso NG. m. ſ. [even and ſong.]
1. The form of worſhip uſed in the evening.
Thee, 'chantreſs of the woods among,
I woo to hearthy evenſong. Milton.
If a man were but of a day's life, it is well if he laſts 'till
evenſºng, and then ſays his compline an hour before the time.
Taylor's Rule of living holy.
2. The evening; the cloſe of the day.
He tun'd his notes both evenſong and morn. Dryden.
Eventr'DE. m. ſ. [even and tide.] The time of evening.
A ſwarm of gnats at eventide,
Out of the fens of Allan do ariſe,
Their murmuring ſmall trumpets ſounding wide. Fa. Queen.
Iſaac went out to meditate at the eventide. Gen. xxiv. 63.
EVENT. n.ſ.. [eventus, Latin.]
I. An incident; any thing that happens, good or bad.
There is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked. Eccl.
Oh heavy times, begetting ſuch events / Shakespeare Hen. VI.
2. The conſequence of an action ; the concluſion; the upſhot.
Two ſpears from Meleager's hand were ſent,
With equal force, but various in th' event;
The firſt was fixt in earth, the ſecond ſtood
On the boar's briſtled back, and deeply drank his blood. Dry.
To Eve'NTERATE. v. a. [eventero, Latin.] To rip up; to
open by ripping the belly.
In a bear, which the hunters eventerated, or opened, I be-
held the young ones with all their parts diſtinét. Brown.
Eve'N'tful, adj. [event and full.] Full of incidents; full of
changes of fortune.
Laſt ſcene of all,
That ends this ſtrange eventful hiſtory,
Is ſecond childiſhneſs. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
To Eve’NTILATE. v. n. [eventilo, Latin.]
1. To winnow ; to fift out. -
2. To examine; to diſcuſs. Diſł.
Eve’NTUAL. adj. [from event.] Happening in conſequence of
anything; conſequential.
Eve'NTUALLY. adv. [from eventual.] In the event; in the laſt
reſult; in the conſequence.
Hermione has but intentionally, not eventually, diſobliged
you ; and hath made your flame a better return, by reſtoring
you your own heart, than ſhe could have done by exchanging
her's for it. - Bºyle's Seraphic&amp; Love.
EveR. adv. [a-pne, Saxon.]
1. At any time.
Men know by this time, if ever they will know, whether
it be good or evil which hath been ſo long retained. Hooker.
If thou haſt that, which I have greater reaſon to believe
now than ever, I mean valour, this might ſhew it. Shakespeare. Othello.
You ſerve a maſter who is as free from the envy of friends,
as ever any king was. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
So few tranſlations deſerve praiſe, that I ſcarce ever ſaw any
which deſerved pardon. Denham.
The moſt ſenſual man that ever was in the world, never felt
ſo delicious a pleaſure as a clear conſcience. Tillotſon's Sermons.
By repeating any ſuch idea of any length of time, as of a
minute, a year, or an age, as often as we will in our own
thoughts, and adding them to one another, without ever com-
ing to the end of ſuch addition, we come by the idea of
eternity. Locke.
2. At all times; always; without end.
God hath had ever, and ever ſhall have, ſome church viſible
upon the earth. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
I ſee things may ſerve long, but not ſerve ever. Shakeſp.
Riches endleſs is as poor as Winter,
To him that ever fears he ſhall be poor. Shakeſp. Othello.
Blinded greatneſs, ever in turmoil,
Still ſeeking happy life, makes life a toil. Daniel's Civ. J/ar.
There under ebon ſhades, and low-brow'd rocks,
In dark cimmerian deſart ever dwell. Ilºilton.
The inclinations of the people muſt ever have a great in-
fluence. Temple.
He<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 386</div><p class="Text">º - - -
E V E
He ſhall ever love, and always be . . . "
The ſubject of my ſcorn and cruelty. Dryden's Ind. Emp.
Mankind is ever the ſame, and nothing loſt out of nature,
though every thing is altered. Dryden's Fables, Pref.
Ever ſince that time Liſander has been at the houſe. Tatler.
Immortal Vida! on whoſe honour’d brow
The poet's bays and critick's ivy grow,
Cremona now ſhall ever boaſt thy name,
As next in place to Mantua, next in fame.
3. For ever; eternally; to perpetuity.
Men are like a company of poor inſe&amp;ts, whereof ſome are
bees, delighted with flowers and their ſweetneſs; others beetles,
delighted with other kinds of viands; which, having enjoyed
for a ſeaſon, they ceaſe to be, and exiſt no more for ever. Loc.
We'll to the temple: there you'll find your ſon; ...
And there be crown'd, or give him up for ever. A. Phillips.
4. It is ſometimes reduplicated.
For ever, and for ever, farewel, Caſſius. Shakeſpeare.
I know a lord who values no leaſe, though for a thouſand
Pope's Eſſays.
years, nor any eſtate that is not for ever and ever. Temple.
The meeting points the fatal lock diffever
From the fair head, for ever and for ever. Pope.
5. At one time, as, ever and anon: that is, at one time and
another; now and then.
So long as Guyon with her communed,
Unto the ground ſhe caſt her modeſt eye;
And ever and anon, with roſy red,
The baſhful blood her ſnowy cheeks did dye. Fairy Queen.
The fat ones would be ever and anon making ſport with
the lean, and calling them ſtarvelings. L'Eſtrange.
* He lay ſtretch'd along,
And ever and anon a ſilent tear
Stole down and trickled from his hoary beard.
6. In any degree.
Let no man fear that harmful creature ever the leſs, be-
cauſe he ſees the apoſtle ſafe from that poiſon. Hall.
- For a mine undiſcovered, neither the owner of the ground
or any body elſe are ever the richer. Collier on Pride.
It ſuffices to the unity of any idea, that it be conſidered as
one repreſentation or pićture, though made up of ever ſo many
Dryden.
particulars. Locke.
There muſt be ſomewhere ſuch a rank as man; ,
And all the queſtion, wrangle e'er ſo long,
Is only this, if God has plac'd him wrong. . Pope's Eſſays.
7. A word of enforcement, or aggravation. As ſºn as ever he
had done it; that is, immediately after he had done it. In this
ſenſe it is ſcarcely uſed but in familiar language.
That ever this fellow ſhould have fewer words than a parrot,
and yet the ſon of a woman. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. 1.
They brake all their bones in pieces, or ever they came at the
bottom of the den. Dam. iv. 24.
That purſe in your hand, as a twin brother, is as like him as
ever he can look. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
As ſoon as eer the bird is dead,
Opening again, he lays his claim
To half the profit, half the fame. Prior.
The title of duke had been ſunk in the family ever ſince the
attainder of the great duke of Suffolk. Addiſon on Italy.
8. Ever A. Any: [as every, that is, even ich or ever each
is each one, all.] This word is ſtill retained in the Scottiſh
dialect.
I am old, I am old.
—I love thee better than I love e'er a ſcurvy young boy of
them all. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
9. It is often contraćted into e'er.
10. It is much uſed in compoſition in the ſenſe of always: as,
evergreen, green throughout the year; everduring, enduring
without end. It is added almoſt arbitrarily to neutral participles
and adječtives, and will be ſufficiently explained by the follow-
ing inſtances. -
Ever BU'BBLING. adj. [ever and bubbling.] Boiling up with
perpetual murmurs.
Panting murmurs, ſtill'd out of her breaſt, *
That everbubbling ſpring. . Craſhaw.
EveRBU'RNING. adj. [ever and burning.] Unextinguiſhed.
. His tail was ſtretched out in wond’rous length,
That to the houſe of heavenly gods it raught;
And with extorted power and borrow'd ſtrength,
The everburning lamps from thence it brought. Fai, Queen.
Torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed
With everburning ſulphur unconſum'd Milton's Par. Loft.
EveRDU'RING. adj. [ever and during. J Eternal; enduring
without end.
Our ſouls, piercing through the impurity of fleſh, behold -
the higheſt heavens, and thence bring knowledge to contem-
plate the everduring glory and termleſs joy. Raleigh.
Heav'n open'd wide
Her everduring gates, harmonious ſound !
On golden hinges moving. AMilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
EveRGREEN. adj. [ever and green.] Verdant throughout the year.
- There will I build him
A monument, and plant it round with ſhade
E. V. E.
Of laurel, evergreen, and branching palm. Miltºn's Agonſ.
. The juice, when in greater plenty than can be exhaled b
the ſun, renders the plant evergreen. Arbuthnot on diment;.
Ev ERGREEN. n.ſ. A plant that retains its verdure through ali
the ſeaſons.
Some of the hardieſt evergreens may be tranſplanted, eſpe-
cially if the weather be moiſt and temperate. Evelyn's Kalend.
I find you are againſt filling an Engliſh garden with ever-
greens. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 477:
Ev ERHO'Nou R F D. adj. [ever and honoured.]. Always held in
honour or eſteem.
Mentes, an everhonour'd name, of old
High in Ulyſſes' ſocial liſt enroll’d. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
EveRLA's TING. adj. [ever and laſting.] -
1. Laſting or enduring without end;
eternal.
Whether we ſhall meet again, I know not; '
Therefore our everlaſting farewel take:
For ever, and for ever, farewel, Caſſius. Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
The everlaſting life, both of body and ſoul, in that future
perpetual; immortal;
ftate, whether in bliſs or woe, hath been added. Hammond.
And what a trifle is a moment's breath,
Laid in the ſcale with everlofting death ! Denham.
2. It is uſed of paſt as well as future eternity, though not ſo
properly. -
Ev ERLA'stiNG. m. ſ. Eternity; eternal duration whether paſt
or future.
From everlaffing to everlaſting thou art God. Pſ, xc. 2.
We are in God through the knowledge which is had of us,
and the love which is born towards us, from everlaſting. Hooker.
EveRLA'stiNGLY. adv. [from everlaſting. J Eternally; with-
out end.
I'll hate him everlaſtingly,
That bids me be of comfort any more. Shakespeare Rich. II.
Many have made themſelves everlaiingly ridiculous. Swift.
EveRLA's TING NEss. n. ſ. [from everlaſting.] Eternity; per-
petuity; an indefinite duration.
Nothing could make me ſooner to confeſs,
That this world had an everlaſtingneſs,
Than to conſider that a year is run
Since both this lower world's, and the ſun's ſun,
The luſtre and the vigour of this all,
Did ſet. Donne.
EveRLI'v1NG. adj. [ever and living.] Living without end;
immortal; eternal; inceſſant. -
Is not from hence the way, that leadeth right
To that moſt glorious houſe, that gliſt’reth bright
With burningſtars and everliving fires. Fairy Queen, b, i.
In that he is man, he received life from the Father, as from
the fountain of that everliving Deity. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 56.
God's juſtice in the one, and his goodneſs in the other, is
exerciſed for evermore, as the everliving ſubjećts of his re-
ward and puniſhment. Raleigh's H; of the World.
The inſtinét of brutes and inſe&amp;ts can be the effect of no-
thing elſe than the wiſdom and ſkill of a powerful everliving
Agent. Newton's Opt.
EveRMo‘RE. adv. [ever and more.] Always; eternally. More
ſeems an expletive accidentally added, unleſs it ſignified origi-
nally from this time : as, evermore, alway; henceforward; but
this ſenſe has not been ſtrićtly preſerved.
It govern'd was, and guided evermore,
Through wiſdom of a matron grave and hoare. Fa. $24een.
Sparks by nature evermore aſpire,
Which makes them now to ſuch a highneſs flee. Davies.
Religion prefers thoſe pleaſures which flow from the pre-
ſence of God for evermore, infinitely before the tranſitory plea-
ſures of this world. Tillotſon, Sermºn i.
EveRo'PEN. adv. [ever and open.] Never cloſed; not at any
time ſhut.
God is the great eye of the world, always watching over
our actions, and has an everopen ear to hear all our words.
Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Ev ERPLEASING. adj. [ever and pleaſing..] Delighting at all
times; never ceaſing to give pleaſure.
The everpleaſing Pamela was content to urge a little farther
for me. - Sidney.
Forſaking Scheria's everpleaſing ſhore,
The winds to Marathon the virgin bore. Pope's Odyſſey.
To Eve'R's E. v. a. [everſus, Latin.] To overthrow ; to ſub-
vert; to deſtroy.
The foundation of this principle is totally everſed by the
ingenious commentator upon immaterial beings. Glanv Scepſ.
To Eve'Rt. v. a. [everto, Latin.] To deſtroy; to over-
throw.
A proceſs is valid, if the juriſdiction of the judge is not
yet everted and overthrown. Ayliffe's Parergon.
EveRw A'tch ful. adj. [ever and watchful] Always vigilant.
Plac'd at the helm he ſat, and mark'd the ſkies,
Nor clos'd in ſleep his everwatchful eyes. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv.
E’v ERY. adj. [in old language everich, that is, ever each;
aepen eale, Saxon.] -
1. Each one of all. Every has therefore no plural ſignification.
4. He
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 387</div><p class="Text">E V I
E V I
He propoſeth unto God their neceſſitics, and they their own
requeſts for relief in every of them. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 39.
All the congregation are holy, every one of them. Num. xvi.
The king made this ordonance, that every twelve years
there ſhould be ſet forth two ſhips. Bacon's New Atlantis.
The virtue and force of every of theſe three is ſhrewdly
allayed. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Ariſtotle has long ſince obſerved, how unreaſonable it is to
expect the ſame kind of proof for everything, which we have
for ſome things. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Every one, that has any idea of a foot, finds that he can
repeat that idea, and, joining it to the former, make the idea
of two feet. Locke.
From pole to pole the thunder roars aloud,
And broken lightnings flaſh from ev’ry cloud. Pope's Statius.
2. Eve R Y-w HERE. In all places; in each place.
The ſubſtance of the body of Chriſt was not every-where
ſeen, nor did it every-where ſuffer death; every-where it could
not be entombed : it is not every-where now, being exalted
into heaven. Hoºker, b. v. ſ. 55.
If I ſend my ſon abroad, how is it poſſible to keep him from
vice, which is every-where ſo in faſhion? Lºcke.
'Tis no-where to be found, or every-where. Pope.
E’ve RYouNG. adj, ſever and young J. Not ſubječt to old age,
or decay; undecaying.
Joys everyoung, unmix'd with pain or fear,
Fill the wide circle of th' eternal year. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv.
E’ves DR opp ER. m. ſ. ſeves and dropper. J Some mean fellow
that ſkulks about a houſe in the night. -
What makes you liſtening there Get farther off; I preach
not to thee, thou wicked eveſdropfer. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Do but think how decent a habit you have on, and how
becoming your function it is to be diſguiſed like a ſlave, and
an eveſdropper, under the women's windows. Dryd. Don Sebaſh.
To Eve'sTIGATE. v. a. [eveſtigo, Lat.] To ſearch out. Dict.
Eug H. n.ſ. [This word is ſo written by moſt writers; but ſince
the original p, Saxon, or Welſh yºven, more favours the
eaſier orthography of yew, I have referred it thither.] A
tree.
At the firſt ſtretch of both his hands he drew,
And almoſt join'd the horns of the tough eugh. Dryd. Æn.
To F.VICT. v. a. [evinco, Latin.]
1. To diſpoſſeſs of by a judicial courſe.
The law of England would ſpeedily ević; them out of their
poſſeſſion, and therefore they held it the beſt policy to caſt off
the yoke of Engliſh law. Davies on Ireland.
2. To take away by a ſentence of law."
His lands were evićied from him. K. james's Declaration.
3. To prove; to evince. Little uſed.
This nervous fluid has never been diſcovered in live ani-
mals by the ſenſes, however aſſiſted; nor its neceſſity evićied
by any cogent experiment. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
Eviction. n.ſ. [from evići.]
1. Diſpoſſeſſion or deprivation by a definitive ſentence of a court
of judicature.
If any of the parties be laid aſleep, under pretence of arbi-
trement, and the other party doth cautiouſly get the ſtart at
common law, yet the pretorian court will ſet back all things,
and no reſpect had to evićlion or diſpoſſeſſion. Bacon,
2. Proof; evidence; certain teſtimony.
A plurality of voices carries the queſtion, in all our debates,
but rather as an expedient for peace than an eviction of the
right. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
E’VIDENCE. m. ſ. [French.]
1. The ſtate of being evident; clearneſs; indubitable certainty;
notoriety.
2. Teſtimony; proof.
I had delivered the evidence of the purchaſe unto Baruch.
jer. xxxii. 16.
Unreaſonable it is to exped the ſame kind of proof and
evidence for everything, which we have for ſome things. Tillot.
Cato major, who had borne all the great offices, has left
us an evidence, under his own hand, how much he was verſed
in country affairs. Locke.
They bear evidence to a hiſtory in defence of Chriſtianity,
the truth of which hiſtory was their motive to embrace
Chriſtianity. - Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
3. Witneſs; one that gives evidence. In this ſenſe it is ſome-
times plural ; as, the evidence were fworn : but ſometimes re-
gularly augmented, as evidences.
To ſwear he ſaw three inches through a door,
As Aſiatick evidences ſwore. Dryden's juvenal, Sat. vii.
There are books extant, which they muſt needs allow of as
proper evidence; even the mighty volumes of viſible nature,
and the everlaſting tables of right reaſon. Bently.
To Hºvi DENce. v. a. [from the noun.]
I. To prove; to evince.
If they be principles evident of themſelves, they need
nothing to evidence them. Tillotſon's Sermons, Preface.
Theſe things the Chriſtian religion require, as might be
*tidesced from texts. 'ſillotſon, Sermon v.
2. To ſhew; to make diſcovery of.
Thou on earth had'ſt proſper'd, which thy looks
Now alſo evidence. Milton's Paradi e Lo/?, b. x. 1. 361.
Evi DENT. adj. [French.) Piain ; apparent; notorious.
It is evident, in the general frame of nature, that things
moſt manifeſt unto ſenſe have proved obſcure unto the under-
ſtanding. Brown's P'ugar Errºuns. A. vi. c. 1r.
In this ſtate they are incapable of making conqueſts upon
their neighbours, which is evident to all that know their con-
ſtitutions. Tºmple.
Children minded not what was ſaid, when it was evident
to them that no attention was ſufficient. Locke.
E’v IDENTLY. adv. [from evidnt.] Apparently; certainly;
undeniably.
Laying their eggs, they evidently prove
The gen al pow'r and full effects of love. Prior.
The printing private letters is the worſt ſort of betraying
converſation, as it has evidently the moſt extenſive ill confe-
trences. Pope.
EVIL. adj. ſypel, Saxon; ruvel, Dutch.]
1. Having bad qualities of any kind; not good.
He hath brought up an evil name upon a virgin of 1ſrael.
Deut xxii. 19.
An evil diſeaſe cleaveth faſt unto him ; and now that he
lieth, he ſhall riſe up no more. Pſ. xli. 8.
The good fig's very good, and the evil very evil, that can-
not be eaten they are ſo evil. jeremiah xxiv. 3.
That hour he cured many of evil ſpirits. Lake vii. 2 i.
2. Wicked; bad; corrupt.
Is thine eye evil, becauſe I am good? Matt xx. 15.
The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Gen.
3. Unhappy; miſerable; calamitous.
And the officers did ſee that they were in evil caſe. Fr. v.
All the days of the afflićted are evil. Prov. xv. 15.
4. Miſchievous; deſtructive; ravenous.
It is my ſon's coat; an evil beaſt hath devoured him. Gen.
Evil. n.ſ. [generally contracted to ill.]
1. Wickedneſs; a crime.
Not in the legions
Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
In evi's to top Macbeth. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. Injury; miſchief.
Whoſo rewardeth evil for good, evil ſhall not depart from
his houſe. Prov. xvii. 13.
Let thine enemies, and they that ſeek evil to my Lord, be
as Nabal. 1 Sa. xxv. 26.
3. Malignity; corruption.
The heart of the ſons of men is full of evil. Eccleſ. ix. 3.
4. Misfortune; calamity. -
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and ſhall we
not receive evil. ob ii. Io.
A prudent man foreſeeth the evil, and hideth himſelf. Prºv.
If we will ſtand boggling at imaginary evils, let us never
blame a horſe for ſtarting at a ſhadow. L’E/irange.
Evil is what is apt to produce or increaſe any pain, or
diminiſh any pleaſure in us; or elſe to procure us any evil, or
deprive us of any good. Locke.
5. Malady; diſeaſe: as, the King's evil.
At his touch,
Such ſanétity hath heaven given his hand,
They preſently amend.
—What's the diſeaſe he means ?
——’Tis call'd the evil."
Evil. adv. [commonly contračted to ill.]
1. Not well in whatever reſpect.
Ah, froward Clarence, evil it beſeems thee,
To flatter Henry, and forſake thy brother! Shakespeare Hen. VI.
2. Not well; not virtuouſly ; not innocently.
If I have ſpoken evil, bear witneſs of the evil; but if well,
why ſmiteſt thou me. john xviii. 22.
3. Not well; not happily; not fortunately.
It went evil with his houſe.
4. Injuriouſly; not kindly.
The Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflićted us. Deut. xxvi.
5. It is often uſed in compoſition to give a bad meaning to a
word; but in this, as in all other caſes, it is in the modern
dialect generally contracted to ill.
Evil AFFE'cTED. adj. [evil and affºrd.] Not kind; not diſ-
poſed to kindneſs.
The unbelieving Jews ſtirred up the Gentiles, and made
their minds eviloffºrd againſt the brethren. Afts xiv. 2.
Evildo'er. n.ſ. [evil and doer.] Malefactor; one that com-
mits crimes.
Whereas they ſpeak evil againſt you as evildoers, they may
by your good works glorify God. 1 Pet. ii. 12.
Evil FA'vou RED. adj. [evil and favour.] Illcountenanced;
having no good aſpect. -
Machiavel well noteth, though in an evifavoured inſtance,
there is no truſting to the force of nature, nor the bravery of
words, except it be corroborate by cuſtom. Bacon's Eſſays.
Ev ILFA'vour EdNESS. m. ſ. [from evilfavoured.) Deformity.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Deut. vii. 23.
2 Thou
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 388</div><p class="Text">E V U *
Thou ſhalt not ſacrifice unto the Lord any bullock, or
ſheep, wherein is blemiſh or any evilfavouredeſ. Deutr. xvii.
E’v ILLY. adv. [from evil..] Not well.
This ačt, ſo evilly born, ſhall cool the hearts
Of all his people, and freeze up their zeal. Shakespeare K. john.
Evi LM1'NDED. adj. [evil and mind.] Malicious ; miſchievous;
malignant; wicked; inſidious.
But moſt ſhe fear'd, that travelling ſo late,
Some evilminded beaſts might lie in wait, }
And, without witneſs, wreak their hidden hate. Dryden.
E’v ILN Ess. n.ſ.. [from evil. J. Contrariety to goodneſs; bad-
neſs of whatever kind.
The moral goodneſs and congruity, or evilneſs, unfitneſs,
and unſeaſonableneſs of moral or natural actions, falls not
within the verge of a brutal faculty. Hale's Org of Mankind.
Ev ILSPE(AKING.. n.ſ. [evil and ſpeaking.] Slander; defama-
tion; calumny; cenſoriouſneſs.
Wherefore laying aſide all malice and all guile, and hypo-
crifies and envies, and all evil/peakings. I Pet. ii. 1.
Evil wi's HING. adj. [evil and wiſh J Wiſhing evil to ; having
no good will. - -
They having heard of this ſudden going out with ſo ſmall
a company, in a country full of evi,wiſhing minds towards
him, followed him. Sidney, b. ii.
Evil wo'RKER. n.ſ. [evil and work.] One who does ill.
Beware of dogs, beware of evilworkers. Phil. iii. 3.
To EVINCE. v. a. [evince, Latin.] To prove; to ſhow ;
to manifeſt; to make evident.
Doubt not but that ſin
Will reign among them, as of thee begot;
And therefore was law given them, to evince
Their natural pravity. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xii.
That religion, teaching a future ſtate of ſouls, is a proba-
bility; and that its contrary cannot, with equal probability,
be proved, we have evinced. South's Sermons.
The greater the abſurdities are, the more ſtrongly do they
evince the falſity of that ſuppoſition from whence they flow.
Atterbury's Sermons, Preface.
Evi'NcIBLE, adj. [from evince.] Capable of proof; demon-
ſtrable.
Implanted inſtinës in brutes are in themſelves highly rea-
ſonable and uſeful to their ends, and evincible by true reaſon to
be ſuch. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Ev1'NcIBLY. adv. [from evincible.] In ſuch a manner as to
force convićtion. - -
To Evi RATE. v. a. [eviratus, Latin.] To deprive of man-
hood; to emaſculate. Diº.
To Evi's CE RATE. v. a. [eviſero, Latin.] To embowel; to
draw; to deprive of the entrails; to ſearch within the en-
trails. -
Evſt ABLE, adj. [evitabilis, Latin.] Avoidable; that may be
eſcaped or ſhunned. -
Of divers things evil, all being not evitable, we take
one ; which one, ſaving only in caſe of ſo great urgency,
were not otherwiſe to be taken. Hooker, b, i. ſ. 8.
To E'VITATE. v. a. [evito, Latin.] To avoid; to ſhun; to
eſcape.
t
Therein ſhe doth evitate and ſhun
A thouſand irreligious curſed hours,
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her Shakespeare
Evit ATION. m. ſ. [from evitate.] The ačt of avoiding. Dić.
Evi TE'RNAL. adj. [aviternus, Latin.] Eternal in a limited
ſenſe ; of duration not infinitely but indefinitely long.
Ev ITERNITY. m. ſ. ſav termitas, low Lat...] Duration not infi-
nitely, but indefinitely long.
EU'Log Y. n.ſ.. [iv and 2.6762.] Praiſe; encomium; pane-
gyrick.
Many brave young minds have oſtentimes, through hearing
the praiſes and famous eulogies of worthy men, been ſtirred up
to affect the like commendations. Sfºnſºr ºf Ireland.
EU'NUCH. n ſ. [ºvvexº-.] One that is caſtrated "or emaſ-
culated. -
He hath gelded the commonwealth, and made it an eunuch.
- Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
It hath been obſerved by the ancients, that much of Venus
doth dim the fight; and yet eunuchs, which are unable to ge-
nerate, are nevertheleſs alſo dimfighted. Racºn's Nat. Hiſtory.
So charm'd you were, you ceas'd awhile to doat
On nonſenſe gargl’d in an eunuch's throat.
To EU'NUCHATE. v. a. To make an eunuch.
It were an impoſſible ačt to eunuchate or caſtrate themſelves.
Brown's Julgar Errturs, b. viii. c. 4.
Evoc A"rion. m. ſ ſevºcatio, Latin.] The act of calling cut.
Inſtead of a deſcent into hell, it ſeems rather a conjuring
up or an evocatiºn of the dead from hell. Nºtes to Poe's Odyſſey.
Evo LA'T19 N. m. ſ. [evolº, Latin.] The act of flying away.
To EVOLVE. v. a. [evolvº, Latin.] To unfold; to diſ-
entangle. -
The animal ſoul ſooner expands and evolves itſelf to its
full orb and extent than the human ſoul Halº's Orig. of Mank.
This little active principle, as the body increaſeth and
dilateth, evoketh, diffuſeth, and expandeth, if not his ſub-
Fenton.
ſtantial exiſtence, yet his energy. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To Evo'Lv E. v. n. To open itſelf; to diſcloſe itſelf.
Ambroſial odours
Does round the air evºlving ſcents diffuſe;
The holy ground is wet with heav'nly dews.
Evo'Lv ENT. n.f. [evolvens, Latin.]
Evolu'tion. n.ſ. [evolutus, Latin.]
1. The aët of unrolling or unfolding.
2. The ſeries of things unrolled or unfolded.
The whole evolution of ages, from everlaſting to everlaſt-
ing, is ſo colle&amp;tedly and preſentifickly repreſented to God at
once, as if all things which ever were, are, or ſhall be, were
at this very inſtant, and ſo always, really preſent and exiſtent
before him. Mºre's Divine Dialogues.
3. [In geometry.] The equable evoluticn of the periphery of
a circle, or any other curve, is ſuch a gradual approach of the
circumference to rectitude, as that all its parts do meet toge-
ther, and equally evolve or unbend; ſo that the ſame line be-
comes ſucceſſively a leſs arch of a reciprocally greater circle,
'till at laſt they turn into a ſtrait line. In the Philoſ. Tranſ-
aćtions, Nº. 260. you have a new quadratrix to the circle,
found by this means. Harris.
4. [In tačticks.] The motion made by a body of men in
changing their poſture, or form of drawing up, either to
make good the ground they are upon, or to poſſeſs themſelves
of another; that ſo they may attack the enemy, or receive
his onſet more advantageouſly. And theſe evolutions are
doubling of ranks or files, countermarches, and wheelings.
- Harrir.
This ſpontaneous coagulation of the little ſaline bodies
was preceded by almoſt innumerable evolutions, which were ſo
various, that the little bodies came to obvert to each other
thoſe parts by which they might be beſt faſtened together. Boyle.
5. Evolution of Powers [in algebra]... Extracting of roots
from any given power, being the reverſe of involution. Harr.
Evo MI'tion. m. ſ. [evomo, Latin. J The act of vomiting
Out. Dić7.
EUPHo'Nica L. adj. [from euphony.] Sounding agreeably. Dić.
EU'PHONY. m. ſ. ſºvº ºvíz.] An agreeable ſound; the con-
trary to harſhneſs.
EUPHo'RBIUM. n.ſ.
1. A plant.
It hath flowers and fruit like the ſpurge, and is alſo full of
an hot ſharp milky juice. The plants are angular, and
ſhaped ſomewhat like the cereus or torch-thiſtle. It is com-
monly beſet with ſpines, and for the moſt part hath no
leaves. Miller-
2. A gum reſin, brought to us always in drops or grains, of a
bright yellow, between a ſtraw and a gold colour, and a
ſmooth gloſſy ſurface. It has no great ſmell, but its taſte is
violently acrid and nauſcous. It is produced in the remoter
parts of Africa, whence it is ſent to Sallee, and thence tranſ-
ported into Europe. The plant is alſo common on the coaſt
of Malabar; but the Africans only know the ſecret of col-
lečting the gum. It is uſed medicinally in finapiſms. Hill.
EU'PHR As Y. m. ſ. [euthraſia, Latin.] The herb eyebright; a
plant ſuppoſed to clear the fight.
Then purg'd with euphraſy, and rue,
The viſual nerve; for he had much to ſee;
And from the well of life three drops inſtill’d. Mill. P. Loft.
EUR o'cly doN., n.ſ.. [ivºxxâjoy.] A wind which blows be-
tween the Eaſt and North, and is very dangerous in the Me-
diterranean. It is of the nature of a whirlwind, which falls
ſuddenly on ſhips, makes them tack about, and ſometimes
cauſes them to founder, as Pliny obſerves. Calmet.
• There aroſe againſt it a tempeſtuous wind called euroclydon.
Acts xxvii. 14.
EUROPE(AN. adj. [europaeus, Latin.] Belonging to Europe.
Mean while the Spaniards in America,
Near to the line the ſun approaching ſaw,
And hop'd their European coaſts to find
Clear'd from our ſhips by the autumnal wind.
What was the waſte of war, what fierce alarms
Shook Aſia's crown with European arms Dryden's &amp;n.
He alone defy'd
The European thrones combin'd, and ſtill
Had ſet at nought their machinations vain.
EU'Rus. n ſ. [Latin.] The Eaſt wind.
Eurus, as all other winds, muſt be drawn with blown
cheeks, wings upon his ſhoulders, and his body the colour of
the tawny moon. Peacham.
Eurythsiy, n. ſ. [429,62.J Harmony; regular and
ſymmetrical meaſure. -
#º }n. ſ. [932y20 (z. An eaſy death.
Prior.
Harris.
Waller.
Phillip;,
A recovery, in my caſe, and at my age, is impoſſible: the ſº
kindeſt wiſh of my friends is euthanaſia. Arbuthnot.
Eyu'i.sion. n.f [evulſio, Latin.] The aét of plucking out.
From a ſtrict enquiry we cannot maintain the evulſion, or
biting off any parts. B, own’s l'u'gar Errours, b. iii. c. 2.
Ey U LGA'rlo N. m. ſ. ſet u go, Latin.] The act of divulging;
publication. Fići.
Ews.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 389</div><p class="Text">E X A
E X A
Ewr n.f. [eope, Saxon.] The ſhe-ſheep; the female to the
rann.
Abraham ſet ſeven eve lambs by themſelves. Gen. xxi. 28.
Rams have more wreathed horns than ewes. Bac. N. Hiſł.
- Haſte the ſacrifice;
Sev'n bullocks yet unyok'd, for Phoebus chuſe;
And for Diana ſeven unſpotted ewes. Dryden's AFn. b. viii.
Eºw ER. n.ſ.. [from cau, perhaps anciently eu, water.] A veſ-
ſel in which water is brought for waſhing the hands.
I dreamt of a ſilver baſon and ewer to-night. Shakeſp. Timon.
Let one attend him with a ſilver baſon
Full of roſewater, and beſtrew’d with flowers;
Another bear the ewer; a third a diaper;
And ſay, wil’t pleaſe your lordſhip cool your hands Shakespeare
The golden ever a maid obſequious brings,
Repleniſh'd from the cool, tranſlucent ſprings;
With copious water the bright vaſe ſupplies
A ſilver laver, of capacious ſize:
They waſh. Pope's Odºſy, b. i. 1, 179.
Ewry. m. ſ. [from ewer.] . An office in the king's houſhold,
where they take care of the linen for the king's table, lay the
cloth, and ſerve up water in ſilver ewers after dinner. Dić.
Ex. A Latin prepoſition often prefixed to compounded words;
ſometimes meaning out, as exhauſ?, to draw out; ſometimes
only enforcing the meaning, and ſometimes producing little
alteration.
To EXACE’RBATE. v. a. [exacerbo, Latin.] To imbitter;
to exaſperate; to heighten any malignant quality.
ExAcERBA'TION. m. ſ. [from exacerbate.]
1. Encreaſe of malignity ; augmented force or ſeverity.
2. Height of a diſeaſe; paroxyſm.
The patient may ſtrive, by little and little, to overcome the
ſymptom in exacerbation; and ſo, by time, turn ſuffering into
nature. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 61.
Watchfulneſs and delirium, and exacerbation, every other
day. - Arbuthnot on Diet.
ExAce R v A'TION. n.ſ.. [acervus, Latin J The act of heaping
up. Dić.
EXACT. adj. [exaſ?us, Latin.]
I. Nice; without failure; without deviation from rule.
All this, exact to rule, were brought about,
Were but in a combat in the liſts left out. Pope's Eſ: on Crit.
2. Methodical; not negligently performed.
What if you and I enquire how money matters ſtand be-
tween us?—With all my heart, I love exačí dealing; and let
Hocus audit. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
3. Accurate; not negligent.
Many gentlemen turn out of the ſeats of their anceſtors, to
make way for ſuch new maſters as have been more exact in
their accounts than themſelves. Spectator, Nº. 174.
4. Honeſt; ſtričt; punétual.
In my doings I was exact. Eccluſ. li. 19.
To ExA'ct. v. a. [exigo, exačius, Latin J
1. To require authoritatively.
Thou now exaci'ſ the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's fleſh. Shakeſp.
Of a foreigner thou mayeft exad? it again ; but that which
is thine with thy brother, thine hand ſhall releaſe. Deut. xv. 3.
Exact of ſervants to be faithful and diligent. Taylor.
From us his foes pronounc'd glory he exačis. Milton.
The hand of fate is over us, and heaven
Exaº's ſeverity from all our thoughts.
2. To demand of right.
- Years of ſervice paſt,
From grateful ſouls exact reward at laſt. Dryd. Knight's Tale.
Where they deſign a recompence for benefits received, they
are leſs ſolicitous to make it when it is exached. Sºna'ridge.
3. To ſummon; to enjoin.
Let us deſcend now therefore from this top
Of ſpeculation; for the hour preciſe
Exačis our parting *: Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xii.
- uty, -
And juſtice to my father's ſoul, exact
This cruel piety.
To ExA’ct. v. n. To pračliſe extortion.
The enemy ſhall not exact upon him.
ExA’ct ER. m. ſ. [from exact.]
1. Extortioner; one who claims more than his due, or claims
his due with outrage and ſeverity.
The poller and exacter of fees juſtifies the common reſem-
blance of the courts of juſtice to the buſh, whereunto while
the ſheep flies for defence in weather, he is ſure to loſe part
of the fleece. Bacon's Eſſays, Civ. and Mor.
I will alſo make thy officers peace, and thine exacters
righteouſneſs. - Iſ, lx. 17.
2. He that demands by authority.
Light and lewd perſons, eſpecially that the exacter of the
oath did neither uſe exhortation, nor examining of them for
taking thereof, were eaſily ſuborsed to make an affidavit for
money. Bacon’s Office of Alienation.
3. One who is ſevere in his injunétions or his demands.
No men are prone to be greater tyrants, and more rigorous
Addison's Cato.
Denham's Sophy.
Pſ. lxxx. 22.
exačfers upon others, than ſuch whoſe pride was formerly leaſt
diſpoſed to the obedience of lawful conſtitutions. K. Charles.
The grateful perſon being ſtill the moſt ſevere exacier of
himſelf, not only confeſſes, but proclaims his debts. South.
There is no way to deal with this man of reaſon, this rigid
exačfer of ſtrićt demonſtration for things which are not capable
of it. Tilloſon.
Exa’ction. n.ſ.. [from exa&amp;#.] . -
“. act of making an authoritative demand, or levying by
OſCC.
If he ſhould break his day, what ſhould I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture Shakespeare Mer.h. of Penice.
2. Extortion; unjuſt demand.
They vent reproaches
Moſt bitterly on you, for putter-on
Of theſe exactions. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
. Remove violence and ſpoil, and execute judgment and juſ-
tice; take away your exations from my people. , Ez. xlv. 9.
As the firſt earl did firſt raiſe the greatneſs of that houſe, by
Iriſh exačiions and oppreſſions; ſo Girald the laſt earl did at laſt
ruin and reduce it to nothing, by uſing the like extortions.
Davies's State of Ireland.
3. A toll; a tribute ſeverely levied.
They have not made bridges over the rivers for the conve-
nience of their ſubjects as well as ſtrangers, who pay an un-
reaſonable exacıion at every ferry upon the leaſt uſing of the
Waters. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
ExA'ctly. adv. [from exaff.] Accurately; nicely; thoroughly.
Both of 'em knew mankind exaſily well; for both of 'em
began that ſtudy in themſelves. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
The religion they profeſs is ſuch, that the more exacil, it is
fifted by pure unbiaſed reaſon, the more reaſonable ſtill it will
be found. Atterbury's Sermons.
ExA'cTx Ess. m. ſ. [from exa.º.]
1. Accuracy; nicety; ſtrict conformity to rule or ſymmetry.
The experiments were all made with the utmoſt exašingſ;
and circumſpection. //oodward on Fºſſils.
In wit, as nature, what affects our hearts
Is not th' exactneſs of peculiar parts;
'Tis not a lip, or eye, we beauty call,
But the joint force and full reſult of all. Pope's Eſ: on Crit.
The balance muſt be held by a third hand, who is to deal
power with the utmoſt exactneſs into the ſeveral ſcales. Swift.
2. Regularity of condućt; ſtrictneſs of manners; care not to
deviate.
I preferred not the outward peace of my kingdoms with
men, before that inward exactneſs of conſcience before
God. - King Charles.
They think that their exa.ºneſ in one duty will attone for
their neglect of another. Rogers.
To EXA'GGERATE. v. a. [exaggero, Latin.] To heighten
by repreſentation; to enlarge by hyperbolical expreſſions.
He had exaggerated, as pathetically as he could, the ſenſe
the people generally had, even deſpair of ever ſeeing an end
of the calamities. Clarendon, b. viii.
A friend exaggerates a man's virtues, an enemy inflames his
crimes. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 399.
ExAGGERATION. m. ſ. [from exaggerate.]
1. The aët of heaping together; an heap; an accumulation.
Some towns, that were anciently havens and ports, are
now, by exaggeration of ſand between thoſe towns and the
ſea, converted into firm land. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
2. Hyperbolical amplification.
Exaggerations of the prodigious condeſcenſions in the prince
to paſs good laws, would have an odd ſound at Weſt-
minſter. - Swift.
To ExA'GITATE. v. a. ſexagito, Latin.] - -
1. To ſhake; to put in motion.
The warm air of the bed exagitates the blood. Arbuthnot.
2. To reproach; to purſue with invectives. This ſenſe is now
diſuſed, being purely Latin.
This their defect and imperſe&amp;tion I had rather lament in
ſuch caſe than exagitate. Hocker, b. iii.
ExAGITA'tion. m. ſ. [from exagitate.] The act cf ſhaking,
or agitating. - Die?.
To EXALT. t. a. [exalter, French; altuſ, Latin; axalto, low
Latin.]
1. To raiſe on high. - -
And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven,
ſhalt be brought down to hell. AZat. xi. 23.
2. To elevate to power, wealth, or dignity.
Exalt him that is low, and abaſe him that is high. Ezek.
As yet exaltſ; thou thyſelf againſt my people, that thou
wilt not let them go Ex. ix. 17.
How long ſhall mine enemy be exalted over me? Pſ, xiii. 2.
3. To elevate to joy or confidence.
The covenanters who underſtood the court, and their own
want of ſtrength, were very reaſonably exalted with this
ſucceſs. Clarendon, b. iii.
How much ſoever the king's friends were dejected upon the
paſſing thoſe two acts, it is certain, they who thought they got
whatſoever
6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 390</div><p class="Text">E X A
E X A
atſoever he loſt were mightily exalted, and thought them-
yº. ſuperior to any ºn. Dryden's AB m. Dedicat.
iſe : to extol; to magnify. -
4- "3. the Lºrd . and let us exalt his name
together. ſ ſ l phraſ Pſ. xxxiv. 3.
to raiſe up in oppoſition: a ſcriptural phraſe. . . -
5. "... º thou exalted thy voice, and lift up thine
eyes on high 2 Kings xix. 22.
6. To intend; to enforce. -
Now Mars, ſhe ſaid, let fame exalt hér voice ; -
Nor let thy conqueſts only be her choice. . Prior.
. To heighten; to improve; to refine by fire, as 1n chemiſtry.
The wild animals have more exerciſe, have their juices
more elaborated and exalted; but, for the ſame reaſon, the
fibres are harder, eſpecially when old. Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
with chymick art exalts the min'ral pow'rs,
And draws the aromatick ſouls of flow’rs. . . . Pºpe.
They meditate what will be the effect of their compoſition,
and whether the virtues of the one will exalt or diminiſh the
force of the other, or correct any of its nocent qualities. Watts.
8. To elevate in dićtion or ſentiment. -
But hear, oh hear, in what exalted ſtrains,
Sicilian muſes, through theſe happy plains, .
Proclaim Saturnian times, our own Apollo reigns. Rºſé.
ExALTA’tion. n. ſ. [from exall.]
1. The aët of raiſing on lº -
•y - ower, or dignity. -
-- º º the * . widowhood, for the exaltatiºn
of thoſe that were oppreſſed. judith xvi. 8.
The former was an humiliation of Deity, the latter an
humiliation of manhood; for which cauſe there followed,
upon the latter, an exaltation of that ». * *. º:
with power he created the world, but re ‘.* * º 3.
3. Moſt elevated ſtate; ſtate of greatneſs or dignity.
I wonder'd at my flight and change
To this high exaltation. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. v. l. 90.
In God aſ perfections, in their higheſt degree and exalta-
tion, meet together. Tillotſon, Sermon i.
You are as much eſteemed, and as much beloved, perhaps
more dreaded, than ever you were in your higheſt §.
- 701 ſt.
4. †. pharmacy..] Raiſing a medicine to a higher degree of
virtue, or an increaſe of the moſt remarkable property of any
body. - - fancy.
5. Dignity of a planet in which its powers arºſ. -
Aſtrologers tell us, that the ſun receives his exaltation in the
ſign Aries. - - - . . . Dryden.
ExA/MEN. m. ſ. [Latin. J Examination; diſquiſition; en-
quiry.
This confidered together with a ſtriët account, and critical
examen of reaſon, will alſo diſtraćt the witty determinations
of aſtrology. Brown's V.ulgar Erraurs, b. iv. c. 12.
ExA/MINAT. n.f. [examinatus, Latin. J The perſon exa-
mº, examination where a freed ſervant, who having
power with Claudius, very ſaucily had almoſt all the words,
aſked in ſcorn one of the examinates, who was likewiſe a
freed ſervant of Scribonianus; I pray, fir, if Scribonianus had
been emperor, what would you have done? He anſwered, I
would have ſtood behind his chair and held my peace. Bacon.
Examination... n.ſ. [examinatio, Latin.] The ač of exa-
mining by queſtions, or experiment; ºccurate diſquiſitiºn.
I have brought him forth, that, after examination had, I
might have ſomewhat to write. - - A:is xxv.26.
ii. men leaving out or putting in ſeveral ſimple ideas,
according to their various examinatiºn, ſkill, or obſervation of
the ſubject, have different eſſences. - Lºcke.
ExAMINA'roR. m. ſ. [ Latin. J. An examiner; an en-
quirer. - ----&gt;
An inference, not of power to perſuade a ſerious exami-
77ator. Brown's I.ulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 6.
To EXAMINE. v. a. [examino, Latin.] . -
1. To try a perſon accuſed or ſuſpected by interrogatories.
Let’ them examine themſelves whether they repent them
truly. Ch. Cat.
If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the
impotent man. - - Aéis iv. 9.
We ought, before it be too late, to ºxamine our ſouls, and
provide for futurity. . . //ake's Preparation for Death.
2. To interrogate a witneſs. - -
Command his accuſers to come unto thee, by examining of
whom thyſelf mayeſt take knowledge of all theſe things. Ads.
3. To try the truth or faiihood of any propoſition.
... To try by experiment, or obſervation; narrowly ſift; ſcan.
To write what may ſecurely ſtand the teſt
Of being well read over thrice at leaſt,
Compare each phraſe, examine ev'ry line,
Weigh ev'ry word, and eycry thought refine. . .
. To make enquiry into; to ſearch into ; to ſcrutiniſe.
when I began to examine the extent and certainty of our
knowledge, I found it had a near connexion with words. Locke.
ExA(MINER. n.ſ. [from examine.]
1. One who interrogates a criminal or evidence.
A crafty clerk, commiſſioner, or examiner, will make 2.
witneſs ſpeak what he truly never meant. Hale's Law of Engl.
2. One who ſearches or tries any thing; one who ſcrutiniſes.
So much diligence is not altogether neceſſary, but it will
promote the ſucceſs of the experiments, and by a very ſcru-
Pulous examiner of things deſerves to be applied. Newſ. Opt.
ExA'MPLARY. adj. [from example.] Serving for example or
pattern ; propoſed to imitation. -
We are not of opinion that nature, in working, hath before
her certain examplary draughts or patterns, which ſubſiſting in
the boſom of the Higheſt, and being thence diſcovered, ſhe
fixeth her eye upon them. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 3.
EXAMPLE. m.ſ. ſexemple, French; exemplum, Latin.]
1. Copy or pattern; that which is propoſed to be reſembled or
imitated.
The example and pattern of thoſe his creatures he beheld
in all eternity. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
2. Precedent; former inſtance of the like.
So hot a ſpeed, with ſuch advice diſpos'd,
Such temp'rate order in ſo fierce a courſe, -
Doth want example. Shakespeare's King john.
3. Precedent of good.
Let us ſhew an example to our brethren. Judith viii. 24.
Taught this by his example, whom I now
Acknowledge my Redeemer ever bleſt Mill. Parad. Loſt.
4. A perſon fit to be propoſed as a pattern.
Be thou an example of the believers.
5. One puniſhed for the admonition of others.
Sodom and Gomorrah, giving themſelves over to fornica-
tion, are ſet forth for an example, ſuffering the vengeance of
eternal fire. - jude vii.
6. Influence which diſpoſes to imitation.
When virtue is preſent, men take example at it; and when
it is gone, they deſire it. * Wiſd. iv. 2.
Éxample is a motive of a very prevailing force on the
ačtions of men. Rogers, Sermon 4.
7. Inſtance; illuſtration of a general poſition by ſome particu-
lar ſpecification.
Can we, for example, give the praiſe of valour to a man,
who, ſeeing his gods prophaned, ſhould want the courage to
defend them * Dryden's Wirg. Æn. Dedication.
8. Inſtance in which a rule is illuſtrated by an application.
My reaſon is ſufficiently convinced both of the truth and
uſefulneſs of his precepts: it is to pretend that I have, at leaſt
in ſome places, made examples to his rules. Dryden.
To ExA'MPLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To examplify; to
give an inſtance of. -
The proof whereof I ſaw ſufficiently exampled in theſe late
wars of Munſter. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
ExA/NGUIous. adj. [exanguis, Latin.] Having no blood;
formed with animal juices, not ſanguineous.
Hereby they confound the generation of perfeół animals
with imperfect, ſanguineous with exanguious. Brown.
The inſects, if we take in the exanguious, both terreſtial
and aquatick, may for number vie even with plants. Ray.
ExA'NIMATE. adj. [exanimatus, Latin.]
1. Lifeleſs; dead.
2. Spiritleſs; depreſſed.
1 Tim, iv. 12.
The grey morn
Lifts her pale luſtre on the paler wretch,
Exanimate by love. Thomſon's Spring, l. 1045.
ExANIMATION. m. ſ. [ from exanimate. J Deprivation of
life. Dić7.
ExA'NIMOUs, adj. [exanimis, Latin.] Lifeleſs; dead; killed.
EXANTHE'44ATA. m. ſ. [ {{zyśwo.12. J. Effioreſcencies;
eruptions; breaking out; puſtules.
ExANTHE/MA Tous. adj. [from exanthemata.] Puſtulous; ef.
floreſcent; eruptive. .
To EXANTLATE. m. ſ. [exantl, Latin.]
I. To draw out.
2. To exhauſt; to waſte away.
By time thoſe ſeeds are wearied or exantlated, or unable to
aćt their parts any longer. Boyle's Scept. Chym.
ExA NTLA Ti9N. m.ſ. [from exantiate.] The act of drawing
out; exhauſtion.
ExARATION. m. ſ. [exaro, Lat..] The manual ačt of writing;
the manner of manual writing. Dić.
ExARticula'TION. m. ſ. [ex and articulus, Latin.] The diſ-
location of a joint. Dicſ.
To EXA/SPERATE. v. a. [exaſperº, Latin.]
1. To provoke; to enrage; to irritate ; to anger; to make
furious.
To take the widow,
Exaſperates, makes mad her ſiſter Goneril. Shakespeare K. Lear.
The people of Italy, who run into news and politicks,
have ſomething to exaſperate them againſt the king of France.
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
2. To heighten a difference; to aggravate; to embitter.
Matters grew more exºfferas, between the two kings of
England
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 391</div><p class="Text">E X C
E X C
Eagland and France, for the auxiliary forces of French, and
Engliſh were much blooded one againſt another. . . Bacon.
When our ambition is unable to attain its º: º not
ied, but exaſperated too at the vanity of its labours.
only wearied, iſ? y Parnel to Pope.
3. To exacerbate; to heighten malignity. -
The plaiſter alone would pen the humour already contained
in the part, and ſo exaferate it Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
Exasper ATF R. n.ſ. [from exoſerate.] He that exaſperates,
or provokes; a provoker.
Exasperation. n.ſ. [from exaſperate.]
1. Aggravation ; malignant repreſentation. .
My going to demand juſtice upon the five members, my
enemies loaded with all the obloquies and exaſperations they
could. King Charles.
2. Provocation; irritation; incitement to rage. -
Their ill uſage and exaſperations of him, and his zcal for
maintaining his argument, diſpoſed him to take liberty. Wººdw.
To EXAU/CTORATE. v. a. [exaudioro, Latin.)
1. To diſmiſs from ſervice.
2. To deprive of a benefice. -
Arch hereticks, in the primitive days of Chriſtianity, were
by the church treated with no other puniſhment than excom-
munication, and by exaudiorating and depriving them of their
degrees therein. Ayliff's Parergon.
ExAutoRA'rios. n.ſ.. [from exaučfor ate.]
1. Diſmiſſion from ſervice.
2. Deprivation; degradation. - - -
Depoſition, degradation, or exaučloration, is nothing elſe
but the removing of a perſon from ſome dignity or order in
the church, and the depriving him of his eccleſiaſtical preſer-
n1cints. Ayliffe's Parergon.
* f - -
#...'...}, ſ […andſ, Latin)
1. Heat; the ſtate of growing hot. -
2. Anger; the ſtate of growing angry.
ExcANTATIon. m. ſ. [excanto, Latin.] Diſenchantment by
a counter-charm. -
To ExcA/RNATE. v. a. ſex and carnes, Latin.] To clear from
fleſh.
The ſpleen is moſt curiouſly excarnated, and the veſſels
filled with wax, whereby its fibres and veſſels are very well
ſeen. Grew's Muſeum.
ExcARNIFIcA'Tion. m. ſ. [excarnifico, Latin.] The act of
taking away the fleſh. -
To E/XCAVATE. v. a. [excavo, Latin.] To hollow ; to cut
into hollows.
The cups, gilt with a golden border about the brim, were
of that wonderful ſmalneſs, that Faber put a thouſand of them
into an excavated pepper-corn. Ray on the Creation.
Though nitrous tempeſts, and clandeſtine death,
Fill'd the deep caves, and num'rous vaults beneath,
Which form'd with art, and wrought with endleſs toil,
Ran through the faithleſs excavated ſoil,
See the unweary'd Briton delves his way,
And to the caverns lets in war and day. Blackm. Creation.
Flat thecae, ſome like hats, ſome like buttons, excavated
in the middle.
ExcAvA"rion. n.ſ.. [from excavate.]
1. The aët of cutting into hollows.
2. The hollow formed; the cavity.
While our eye meaſures the eminent and the hollowed parts
of pillars, the total objećt appeareth the bigger; and ſo, as
much as thoſe excavations do ſubſtraćt, is ſupplied by a fallacy
of the ſight. J/otton's Architecture.
To EXCEED. v. a. [excedo, Latin.]
1. To go beyond; to outgo.
Nor did any of the cruſts much exceed half an inch in
thickneſs. I/oodward on Foſſils.
2. To excel; to ſurpaſs.
Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth. I Kings x. 23.
To Exce'ED. v. m.
1. To go too far ; to paſs the bounds of fitneſs.
In your prayers, and places of religion, uſe reverent poſ-
tures and great attention, remembering that we ſpeak to God,
in our reverence to whom we cannot poſſibly exceed. Taylor.
2. To go beyond any limits. -
Forty ſtripes he may give him, and not exceed. Deutr. xxv.
3. To bear the greater proportion.
Juſtice muſt puniſh the rebellious deed;
Yet puniſh ſo, as pity ſhall exceed. Dryd. State ºf Innocence.
Exe E'EDING, participial adj. [from exceed.] Great in quan-
tity, extent, or duration.
He ſaith, that cities were built an exceeding ſpace of time
before the great flood. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the 1/2"ld.
Exce'EDING, adv. [This word is not analogical, but has been
ºute and cſtabliſhed.] In a very great degree; emi-
nently.
The country is ſuppoſed to be exceeding rich. Albot.
The Genoeſe were exceeding powerful by ſea, and had
many places in the Eaſt, and contended often with the Vene-
tians for ſuperiority. Raleigh.
Derham's Phyſico-Theºlogy.
Talk no more ſo exceeding proudly; let not arrogance come
but of your mouth. i Sa. ii. 3.
The action of the Iliad and that of the AEneid were in
themſelves exceeding ſhort; but are beautifully extended and
diverſificd by the invention of epiſodes, and the machinery of
the gods. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 267.
The ſerum of the blood affords, by diſtillation, an exceed-
ing limpid water, neither acid nor alkaline. Arbuthn, on Aim.
Exce'EDINGLY. adv. [from exceeding J To a great degree;
greatly; very much.
They cried out the more exceedingly, crucify him. Mar. xv.
Iſaac trembled exceedingly. Gen. xxvii. 33.
The earl of Surrey, lieutenant of Ireland, was much feared
of the king's enemies, and exceedingly beloved of the king's
ſubjects. Davies on Ireland.
Precious ſtones look exceedingly well, when they are ſet in
thoſe places which we would make to come out of the pic-
ture. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
Is not this medium exceedingly more rare and ſubtile than
the air, and exceedingly more elaſtick and active : Newt. Opt.
To EXCEL. v. a. [excelo, Latin.] To outgo in good quali-
ties; to ſurpaſs.
Venus her myrtle, Phoebus has his bays;
Tea both excels, which you vouchſafe to praiſe. J/aller.
How heroes riſe, how patriots ſet,
Thy father's bloom and death may tell;
Excelling others, theſe were great;
Thou, greater ſtill, muſt theſe excel. Prior.
To Excel. v. n. To have good qualities in a great degree;
to be eminent; to be excellent.
Then to Silvia let us ſing,
* That Silvia is excelling. Shakespeare . Two Gent of Pºrona.
Reuben, unſtable as water, thou ſhalt not excel. Gen. xlix.
It is not only in order of nature for him to govern, that is,
the more intelligent; but there is no leſs required, courage to
protect, and, above all, honeſty and probity to abſtain from
injury: ſo fitneſs to govern is a perplexed buſineſs. Some
men, ſome nations, excel in the one ability, ſome in the
other. - Bacon's Holy I/ar.
Company are to be avoided that are good for nothing;
thoſe to be ſought and frequented that excel in ſome quality or
other. Temple.
He match'd their beauties where they moſt excel;
Of love ſung better, and of arms as well. Dryden.
Let thoſe teach others, who themſelves excel;
And cenſure freely, who have written well. Poſe.
Excell E'Nce.
Exc ELLE'Ncy } m. ſ. [excellence, French; excellentia, Latin.]
1. The ſtate of abounding in any good quality.
2. Dignity; high rank in exiſtence.
Is it not wonderful, that baſe deſires ſhould ſo extinguiſh in
men the ſenſe of their own excellency, as to make them willing
that their ſouls ſhould be like to the ſouls of beaſts, mortal
and corruptible with their bodies : Hooker, b. v. ſ. 2.
I know not why a fiend may not deceive a creature of more
excellency than himſelf, but yet a creature. Dryden's juv. Dedic.
3. The ſtate of excelling in any thing.
I have, amongſt men of parts and buſineſs, ſeldom heard
any one commended for having an excellency in muſick. Locke.
4. That in which one excels.
The criticiſms have been made rather to diſcover beauties
and excellencies than their faults and imperfeótions. Addison Speci.
5. Purity; goodneſs.
She loves him with that excellence,
That angels love good men with. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
6. A title of honour. It is now uſually applied to generals of
an army, ambaſſadors, and governors.
They humbly ſue unto your excellence,
To have a goodly peace concluded of. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
ExcFLLEN T. adj. [excellens, Latin.j
1. Of great virtue; of great worth; of great dignity.
Arts and ſciences are excellent, in order to certain ends. Tayl.
2. Eminent in any good quality.
He is excellent in power and in judgment. Jol xxxvii. 23,
Excell ENTLY. adv. [from excellen'..]
1. Well ; in a high degree.
He determines that man was erect, becauſe he was made
with hands, as he excellently declareth. Brown's Pug. Errours.
That was excellently obſerved, ſays I, when I read a paſſage
in an author, where his opinion agrees with mine. Swift.
2. To an eminent degree.
Comedy is both excellently inſtrućtive and extremely plea-
fant; ſatyr laſhes vice into reformation; and humour repre-
ſents folly, ſo as to render it ridiculous. Dryd, St. of Inn. Prºf.
To EXCEPT, v. a. [excipio, Latin J
I. To leave out, and ſpecify as left out of a general precept, or
poſition.
But when he faith, all things are put under him, it is mani-
feſt, that he is excepted which did put all things under him.
I Cor. xv. 27,
Adam, behold
Th’ effects, which thy original crime hath wrought
I.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 392</div><p class="Text">E X C
E X C
In ſome to ſpring from thee, who rever touch'd
Th’ excepted tree. A.iit.n's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. xi. l. 426.
To Except. v. n. To object; to make objections.
A ſucceſſion which our author could not except againſt. Locke.
Except. p. e oſit. [from the verb. This word, long taken as
a prepoſition or conjunction, is originally the participle paſſive
of the verb; which, like moſt others, had for its parti-
ciple two terminations, except or excepted. All except one,
is all, ºne excepted. Except may be, according to the Teu-
tonick idiom, the imperative mood: all, except one; that is,
all but one, which you muſt except J
1. Excluſively of ; without incluſion of.
Richard except, thoſe, whom we fight againſt;
Had rather have us win than him they follow. Shakespeare R. III.
God and his ſon except,
Nought valued he nor fear'd.
2. Unleſs.
It is neceſſary to know our duty, becauſe 'tis neceſſary for
us to do it; and it is impoſſible to do it, except we know it. Till.
Except in G. prefºſit. [from except. See EXCEPT.] With-
out incluſion of ; with exception of. An improper word.
What, ſince the pretor did my fetters looſe, -
May I not live without controul and awe,
Excepting ſtil the letter of the law. Dryden's Perſ. Sat. 5:
People come into the world in Turkey the ſame way they
do here; and yet, excepting the royal family, they get but little
by it. Collier ºn Duelling.
Exce/PTION. m. ſ. [from except; exceptio, Latin.]
1. Excluſion from the things comprehended in a precept, or po-
ſition; excluſion of any perſon from a general law.
When God renewed this charter of man's ſovereignty over
the creatures to Noah and his family, we find no exception at
all; but that Cham ſtood as fully inveſted with this right as any
of his brethren. South's Sermons.
2. It ſhould have from before the rule or law to which the excep-
tion refers; but it is ſometimes inaccurately uſed with to.
Let the money be raiſed on land, with an exception to ſome
of the more barren parts, that might be tax-free. Addiſon.
, Pleads, in exception to all gen'ral rules,
Your taſte of follies with our ſcorn of fools. Pope's Epiſtles.
3. Thing excepted or ſpecified in exception.
Every ačt of parliament was not previous to what it en-
aćted; unleſs thoſe two, by which the earl of Strafford and fir
John Fenwick loſt their heads may paſs for exceptions. Swift.
... Who firſt taught ſouls enſlav'd, and realms undone,
Th’ enormous faith of many made for one;
That proud exception to all nature's laws,
Tº invert the world and counterwork its cauſe. Pope's Eſſays,
4. Obječtion; cavil. With againſt or to:
our aſſertion hath drawn us to make ſearch whether theſe
be juſt exceptions againſt the cuſtoms of our church, when ye
plead that they are the ſame which the church of Rome hath,
or that they are not the ſame which ſome other reformed
churches have deviſed. Hooker, Preface.
He may have exceptions peremptory againſt the jurors, of
which he then ſhall ſhew cauſe. Spenſer.
Revelations will ſoon be diſcerned to be extremely condu-
cible to reforming men's lives, ſuch as will anſwer all objec-
tions and exceptions of fleſh and blood againſt it. Hammond.
I will anſwer what exceptions they can have againſt our ac-
count, and confute all the reaſons and explications they can
give of their own. Bentley's Sermons.
.5. Peeviſh diſlike; offence taken.
I fear'd to ſhew my father Julia's letter,
Leſt he ſhould take exceptions to my love.
He firſt took exception at this badge,
Pronouncing, that the paleneſs of this flow'r
Bewray'd the faintneſs of my maſter's heart. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Rodorigo, thou haſt, taken againſt me an exception; but
I proteſt I have dealt moſt direétly in thy affair. Shakespeare Othello.
He gave ſir James Tirrel great thanks; but took exception to
the place of their burial, being too baſe for them that were
king's children. Bacon's Henry VII.
Exce'ption ABLE. adj. [from exception.] Liable to objection.
The only piece of pleaſantry is where the evil ſpirits rally
the angels upon the ſucceſs of their artillery: this paſſage I
look upon to be the moſt exceptionable in the whole poem. Zdd.
Exceptious. adj. [from except.] Peeviſh; froward; full of
objećtions; quarrelſome.
They are ſo ſupercilious, ſharp, troubleſome, fierce, and
exceptious, that they are not only ſhort of the true character of
friendſhip, but become the very ſores and burdens of ſociety.
South's Sermons.
Exce'P'ſ Ive. adj. [from except.] Including an exception.
Exceptive propoſitions will make complex ſyllogiſms, as
none but phyſicians came to the conſultation: the nurſe is no
phyſician, therefore the nurſe came not to the conſultation.
Watts's Logick.
Exce'Ptless. adj. [from except.] Omitting or neglecting all
exception; general; univerſal.
Forgive my gen'ral and exceptleſ raſhneſs,
Perpetual ſober gods ! I do proclaim
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
One honeſt man. - Shaftºffenre's Timºn.
Exceptor. n.ſ.. [from except J Objećter; one that makes
exceptions.
The exceptor makes a refle&amp;tion upon the impropriety of
thoſe expreſſions. Burnet'. Theory of the Earth.
To Exce'RN. v. a. [excerns, Latin.] To ſtrain out; to ſepa-
rate or emit by ſtrainers; to ſend out by excretion.
That which is dead, or corrupted, or exce, med, hath anti-
pathy with the ſame thing when it is alive and ſound, and
with thoſe parts which do excern. Eacon', Natural Hiſłory.
Exerciſe firſt ſendeth nouriſhment into the parts; and ſé-
condly, helpeth to excern by ſweat, and ſo maketh the parts
aſſimilate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 299.
An unguent or pap prepared, with an open veſſel to extern
it into. - Ray on the Creation.
Exce'Rption. n.ſ. [excerptio, Latin.]
1. The aët of gleaning; ſelecting,
2. The thing gleaned or ſelected.
Times have conſumed his works, ſaving ſome few ex-
cerptions. Raleigh.
EXCE'SS. m. ſ. [exceſſils, Latin.]
1. More than enough ; ſuperfluity.
Amongſt the heaps of theſe exceſſes and ſuperfluities, there is
eſpied the want of a principal part of duty. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 43.
Goodneſs anſwers to the theological virtue charity, and ad-
mits no exceſ, but error: the deſire of power in exceſs cauſed
the angels to fall; the deſire of knowledge in exciſ, cauſed
man to fall; but in charity there is no exceſs, neither can angeſ
or man come in danger by it. Bacon's Eſſays.
Members are crooked or diſtorted, or diſproportionate to
the reſt, either in exceſ, or defe&amp;t. Ray on the Creation.
2. Exuberance; ačt of exceeding; comparative exuberance.
Tº: the ſuperfluous and luſt dieted man,
hat braves your ordinance, feel your power quickly;
Se iº ſhall undo exceſs, your power quickly
And each man have enough. Shakeſpeare's King Lear:
The ſeveral rays in that white light retain their colorifick
qualities, by which thoſe of any ſort, whenever they become
more copious than the reſt, do by their exceſ; and predomi-
nance cauſe their proper colour to appear. 'ewton's Opt.
3. Intemperance; unreaſonable indulgence in meat and drink.
It was exceſs of wine that ſet him on, -
And on his more advice we pardon him. Shakeſp. Hen. W.
There will be need firſt of temperance in diet; for the
body, once heavy with exceſs and ſurfeits, hangs plummets on
the nobler parts: Duppa's Rules for Devotion.
4. Violence of paſſion.
5. Tranſgreſſion of due limits. . .
A popular ſway, by forcing kings to give
More than was fit for ſubjects to receive,
Ran to the ſame extremes; and one exceſ;
Made both, by ſtriving to be greater, leſs. Denham.
Hoſpitality ſometimes degenerates into profuſeneſs: even
parſimony itſelf, which ſits but ill upon a publick figure, is
yet the more pardonable exceſ of the two. Atterbury's Sermons.
Exce'ssive. adj. [exceſſ, French; from exceſs.]
1. Beyond the common proportion of quantity or bulk.
If panicum be laid below and about the bottom of a root,
it will cauſe the root to grow to an exceſſive bigneſs. Bacon.
2. Vehement beyond meaſure in kindneſs or diſlike.
Be not exceſſive toward any. Eccluſ xxxiii. 29.
The people whoſe property it is, by exceſſive favour, to
bring great men to miſery, and then to be exceſſive in pity,
departed away grieved and afraid. ' Hayward.
Exce'ssively. adv. [from exceſſive..] Exceedingly; eminent-
ly; in a great degree.
A man muſt be exceſſively ſtupid, as well as uncharitable,
who believes there is no virtue but on his own ſide. Addiſon.
To EXCHA'NGE. v. a. [exchanger, French; excambiare, low
Latin.]
1. To give or quit one thing for the ſake of gaining another.
They ſhall not ſell of it, neither exchange nor alienate the
firſt fruits. Ezek. xlviii 1.4.
Exchange his ſheep for ſhells, or wool for a ſparkling pebble,
or a diamond. Locke.
Take delight in the good things of this world, ſo as to re-
member that we are to part with them, and to exchange them
for more excellent and durable enjoyments. Atterbury's Serm.
2. To give and take reciprocally.
Exchange forgiveneſs with me, noble Hamlet;
Mine and my father's blood, be not upon thee, -
Nor thine on me. Shakespeare's Hamlet.
Words having naturally no ſignification, the idea muſt be
learned by thoſe who would exchange thoughts, and hold intel-
ligible diſcourſe with others. Locke.
Here then exchange we mutually forgiveneſs,
So may the guilt of all my broken vows,
My perjuries to thee, be all forgotten. Rowe's jane Shore.
. It has with before the perſon with whom the exchange is made,
and for before the thing taken in exchange.
The king called in the old money, and erected exchanges
where the weight of old money was exchanged fr new. Camd.
Being
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 393</div><p class="Text">- +-
E X C
E X C
Being acquainted with the laws and faſhions of his own
country, he has ſomething to exchange with thoſe abroad. Locke,
Exch A's G.E. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The act of giving and receiving reciprocally.
And thus they parted with exchange of harms;
Much blood thé monſters loſt, and they their arms. Waller.
They lend their corn, they make exchanges; they are al-
ways ready to ſerve one another. Addison.
2. Traffick by permutation.
The world is maintained by intercourſe; and the whole
courſe of nature is a great exchange, in which one good turn
is, and ought to be, the ſtated price of another. South's Serm.
3. The form or act of transferring, properly by bills or notes.
I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence, and muſt here deliver them. Shakespeare.
4. The balance of the money of different nations.
He was ſkilful in the exchange beyond ſeas, and in all the
circumſtances and pračtices thereof. Hayward on Edward VI.
5. The thing given in return for ſomething received.
Thou art arm’d, Glo'ſter; let the trumpet ſound:
If none appear to prove upon thy perſon
Thy heinous, manifeſt, and many treaſons,
There is my pledge: I’ll prove it on thy heart.
—There's my exchange; what in the world he is
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Spend all I have, only give me ſo much time in exchange of
it. Shakeſp. Merry I/ives of Windſor.
It made not the filver coined go for more than its value in
all things to be bought; but juſt ſo much as the denomination
was raiſed, juſt ſo much leſs of commodity had the buyer in
exchange for it. Locke.
If blood you ſeek, I will my own reſign:
O ſpare her life, and in exchange take mine. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
6. The thing received in return for ſomething given.
The reſpect and love which was paid you by all, who had
the happineſs to know you, was a wiſe exchange for the honours
of the court. Dryden.
7. The place where the merchants meet to negociate their
affairs; place of ſale.
He that uſes the ſame words ſometimes in one, and ſome-
times in another ſignification, ought to paſs, in the ſchools,
for as fair a man, as he does, in the market and exchange, who
fells ſeveral things under the ſame name. Locke.
No thing, no place is ſtrange,
While his fair boſom is the world's exchange. Denham.
Excha'NGER. m. ſ. [from exchange J One who praśliſes ex-
change.
Whilſt bullion may be had for a ſmall price more than the
weight of our current caſh, theſe exchangers generally chuſe
rather to buy bullion than run the riſk of melting down our
coin, which is criminal by the law. Locke.
ExchE’AT. n.ſ. See Esche AT.
The ſons of day he favoureth, I ſee,
And by my ruins thinks to make them great:
To make one great by others loſs, is bad excheat. Fai. Qu.
Exche’AtoR. m. ſ. See Esch Eator.
Theſe earls and dukes appointed their ſpecial officers; as
ſheriff, admiral, receiver, havener, cuſtomer, butler, ſearcher,
comptroller, gager, excheator, feodary, auditor, and clerk of
the market. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Exch Eſque R. n.ſ. ſeſchequeir, Norman French ; ſchaccharium,
low Latin, from ſhatz, a treaſure, German.] The court to
which are brought all the revenues belonging to the crown.
It conſiſts of two parts; whereof one dealeth ſpecially in the
hearing and deciding of all cauſes appertaining to the king's
coffers: the other is called the receipt of the exchequer, which
is properly employed in the receiving and paying of money.
It is alſo a court of record, wherein all cauſes touching the
revenues of the crown are handled. Harris.
I will be cheater to them both, and they ſhall be exchequers
to me: they ſhall be my Eaſt and Weſt Indies. Shakeſpeare.
* Your treaſures
Are quite exhauſted, the exchequer's empty. Denham's Sophy.
Clipped money will paſs whilſt the king's bankers and at laſt
the exchequer takes it. Locke.
EXCISE. n.ſ.. [accijs, Dutch; exciſiºn, Latin J A hateful
tax levied upon commodities, and adjudged not by the com-
mon judges of property, but wretches hired by thoſe to whom
exciſe is paid. -
The people ſhould pay a ratable tax for their ſheep, and an
exciſe for everything which they ſhould eat. Hayward.
Ambitious now to take exciſe
Of a more fragrant paradiſe. Cleaveland.
Exciſe, -
With hundred rows of teeth, the ſhark exceeds,
And on all trades like Caſſawar ſhe feeds. Marvel.
Can hire large houſes, and oppreſs the poor,
By farm'd exciſe. Dryden's juvenal, Sat. 3.
To Exci's E. v. a. [from the noun..] To levy exciſe upon a
perſon or thing.
In South-ſea days, not happier when ſurmis'd
The lord of thouſands, than if now excis'd. Pope's Horace.
Exci's EMAN. m. ſ. [exciſe and man.] An officer who inſpects
commodities, and rates their exciſe. -
Exci's Ion. m. ſ. [exciſio, Latin.] Extirpation; deſtruction;
ruin; the act of cutting off; the ſtate of being cut off.
Pride is one of the fatalleſt inſtruments of exciſion.
- Decay of Piety.
Such conquerors are the inſtruments of vengeance on thoſe
nations that have filled up the meaſure of iniquities, and are
grown ripe for exciſion. Atterbury's Sermons.
Excitation. n.ſ. [from excito, to excite, Latin.]
1. The act of exciting, or putting into motion.
All putrefactions come from the ambient body, either by
ingreſs of the ambient body into the body putrefied, or by ex-
citation and ſolicitation of the body putrefied by the body am-
bient. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 836.
2. The aët of rouſing or awakening.
The original of ſenſible and ſpiritual ideas may be owing to
ſenſation and refle&amp;tion, the recollection and freſh excitation
of them to other occaſions. J/atts's Logick.
To EXCITE. v. a. [excito, Latin.]
1. To rouſe; to animate; to ſtir up; to encourage.
The Lacedemonians were more excited to deſire of honour
with the excellent verſes of the poet Tirtaeus, than with all
the exhortations of their captains, or authority of their rulers
and magiſtrates. Spºnſer's State of Ireland.
That kind of poeſy which excites to virtue the greateſt men,
is of greateſt uſe to human kind. Dryden.
2. To put into motion; to awaken; to raiſe.
Exci'TEMENT. n.ſ.. [from excite.] The motive by which one
is ſtirred up, animated, or put in ačtion.
How ſtand I then,
That have a father kill'd, a mother ſtain'd,
Excitements of my reaſon and my blood,
And let all ſleep Shakeſpeare's Tempºff.
ExcI'TER. n.ſ.. [from excite.]
1. Qne that ſtirs up others, or puts them in motion.
They never puniſhed the delinquency of the tumults and
their exciters. King Charles.
2. The cauſe by which any thing is raiſed or put in motion.
Hope is the grand exciter of induſtry. Decay of Piety.
To EXCLAIM. v. n. [exclamo, Latin.]
1. To cry out with vehemence; to make an outcry; to cry out
querulouſly and outrageouſly.
This ring,
Which, when you part from, loſe, or give away,
Let it preſage the ruin of your love,
And be my 'vantage to exclaim on you. Shakesp. Merch. of Venice.
Thoſe who exclaim againſt all foreign tyranny, do, to this
inteſtine uſurper, make an entire dedition of themſelves.
Decay of Piety.
The moſt inſupportable of tyrants exclaim againſt the exer-
ciſe of arbitrary power. L’Eſtrange.
2. To declare with loud vociferation.
Is Cade the ſon of Henry the fifth,
That thus you do exclaim you'll go with him Shakespeare H.VI.
ExcLA'IM. n.J. [from the verb.] Clamour; outcry. Now
diſuſed.
Alas, the part I had in Glo'ſter's blood
Doth more ſolicit me than your exclaims,
To ſtir againſt the butchers of his life. Shakespeare Richard II.
ExcLAMA"tion. n.ſ.. [exclamatio, Latin J
1. Vehement outcry; clamour; outrageous vociferation.
The ears of the people are continually beaten with exclama-
tions againſt abuſes in the church. Hooker, Dedication.
Either be patient, and intreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of war
Thus will I drown your exclamations. Shakeſp. Richard III.
2. An emphatical utterance; a pathetical ſentence.
O Muſidorus! Muſidorus! but what ſerve exclamations,
where there are no ears to receive the ſound Sidney, b. ii.
3. A note by which a pathetical ſentence is marked thus
Excla’MER. m. ſ. [from exclaim..] One that makes vehement
outcries; one that ſpeaks with great heat and paſſion.
I muſt tell this exclaimer, that, if that were his real aim,
his manner of proceeding is very ſtrange and unaccountable.
Atterbury's Sermons, Preface.
ExcLA/MATORY. adj. [from exclaim.]
1. Pračtiſing exclamation.
2. Containing exclamation.
To EXCLU'DE. v. a. [exclude, Latin.]
1. To ſhut out; to hinder from entrance or admiſſion.
Fenc'd with hedges and deep ditches round,
Exclude th' incroaching cattle from thy ground. Dryd. Wing.
Sure I am, unleſs I win in arms,
To ſtand excluded from Emilia's charms. Dryd Knight's Tale.
Bodies do each ſingly poſſeſs its proper portion, according
to the extent of its ſolid parts, and thereby exclude all other
bodies from that ſpace. - Locke.
Though theſe three ſorts of ſubſtances do not exclude one
another out of the ſame place, yet we cannot conceive but
that they muſt neceſſarily each of them exclude any of the ſame
kind out of the ſame place, Locke.
If
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 394</div><p class="Text">F. X. C
E X C
If the church be ſo unhappily contrived as to exclude from
its communion ſuch perſons likelieſt to have great abilities, it
fºotild be altered. Swift.
2. i o debar; to hinder from participation; to prohibit.
Juſtice, that ſits and frowns where publick laws
Exclude ſoft mercy from a private cauſe,
In your tribunal moſt herſelf does pleaſe;
There only ſmiles, becauſe ſhe lives at eaſe. Dryden.
This is Dutch partnerſhip, to ſhare in all our beneficial
bargains, and exclude us wholly from theirs. Swift.
3. To except in any poſition.
4. Not to comprehend in any grant or privilege.
They ſeparate from all apparent hope of life and ſalvation,
thouſands whom the goodneſs of Almighty God doth not ex-
clude. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
Exclu’s Ion. m. ſ. [from exclude J i
1. The aët of ſhutting out or denying admiſſion.
In bodies that need detention of ſpirits, the excluſion of the
air doth good; but in bodies that need emiſſion of ſpirits, it
doth hurt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 343.
2. Rejećtion; not reception in any manner.
If he is for an entire excluſion of fear, which is ſuppoſed to
have ſome influence in every law, he oppoſes himſelf to every
government. Addiſh's Freeholder, Nº. 31.
3. The act of debarring from any privilege, or participation.
4. Exception.
There was a queſtion alſo aſked at the table, whether the
French king would agree to have the diſpoſing of the marriage
of Bretagne, with an exception and excluſion that he ſhould
not marry her himſelf. Bacon's Henry VII.
5. The diſmiſſion of the young from the egg or womb.
How were it poſſible the womb ſhould contain the child,
nay ſometimes twins, ’till they come to their due perfection
and maturity for excluſion 8 Ray on the Creation.
Fxclu's 1 v E. adj. [from exclude.]
1. Having the power of excluding or denying admiſſion.
They obſtacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, excluſive bars:
Eaſier than air with air, if ſpirits embrace,
Total they mix.
2. Debarring from participation.
In Scripture there is no ſuch thing as an heir that was, by
right of nature, to inherit all, excluſive of his brethren. Locke.
3. Not taking into an account or number; oppoſed to incluſive.
I know not whether he reckons the droſs excluſive or inclu-
five with his three hundred and ſixty tons of copper. Swift.
4. Excepting.
Exclusiv ELY. adv. [from excluſive.] ~
1. Without admiſſion of another to participation.
It is not ſo eaſy to diſcern, among the many differing ſub-
ſtances that may be obtained from the ſame portion of matter,
which ought to be eſteemed, excluſively to all the reſt, its in-
exiſtent elementary ingredients; much leſs what primogeneal
and ſimple bodies, convened together, compoſe it. Boyle.
Ulyſſes addreſſes himſelf to the queen chiefly or primarily,
but not excluſively of the king, Notes to Pope's 3.
2. Without comprehenſion in an account or number.
The firſt part laſts from the date of the citation to the join-
ing of iſſue, excluſively: the ſecond continues to a concluſion
in the cauſe, incluſively. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To Exco’ct. v. a. [excočius, Latin.] To boil up; to make
by boiling.
Salt and ſugar, excoºled by heat, are diſſolved by cold and
moiſture. hacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 843.
To Exco’GITATE. v. a. [excogito, Latin.] To invent; to
ſtrike out by thinking.
If the wit of man had been to contrive this organ for him-
ſelf, what could he have poſſibly excogitated more accurate 2
More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
The tradition of the origination of mankind ſeems to be
univerſal ; but the particular methods of that origination, ex-
cogitated by the heathen, were particular. Hale's Orig. of Mank.
We ſhall find them to be little elſe than excogitated and in-
vented models, not much ariſing from the true image of the
things themſelves. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To Exco’MMUNICATE. v. a. ſex.c mmunico, low Latin.] To
eječt from the communion of the viſible church by an eccle-
ſiaſtical cenſure; to interdićt from the participation of holy
myſteries.
Thou ſhalt ſtand curſt and excommunicate;
And bleſſed ſhall he be, that doth revolt
From his allegiance to an heretick. Shakeſp. King john.
What if they ſhall excommunicate me, hath the doćtrine of
meekneſs any ſalve for me then Hammond's Prači. Catech.
The office is performed by the pariſh-prieſt at interment,
but not unto perſons excommunicated. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Exco MMUN1cA'tion. n.f. [from excommunicate.] An eccle-
ſiaſtical interdićt; excluſion from the fellowſhip of the church.
As for excommunication, it neither ſhutteth out from the
myſtical, nor clean from the viſible church; but only from
fellowſhip with the viſible in holy duties. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
To EXCO RIATE. v. a. To flay to ſtrip off the ſkin.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. viii. 1.625. '
An hyperſarcoſis ariſes upon the excºriated eyelid, and
turneth it outward. //jeman's Surgery.
A looſeneſs proves often a fatal ſymptom in fevers; for it
weakeng, excoriates, and inflames the bowels. Arbuthnot.
Exco RIA"Tion, n.ſ.. [from excoriate.]
1. Loſs of ſkin; privation of ſkin; the ačt of flaying.
The pituite ſecerned in the noſe, mouth, and inteſtines,
is not an excrementitious, but a laudable humour, neceſſary
for defending thoſe parts from excoriations. Arbuthn, on Aliments.
2. Plunder; ſpoil; the act of ſtripping of poſſeſſions.
It hath marvellouſly enhanced the revenues of the crown
to many millions more than it was, though with a pitiful exco-
riation of the poorer fort. Hºwel's Pocal Forreſt.
ExcöRTICATION. n.ſ. [from cortex and ex, Latin.] Pulling
the bark off any thing. Quincy.
To ExcREATE. v a. [excreo, Latin.] To ejećt at the mouth
by hawking, or forcing matter from the throat.
EXCREMENT. n.ſ. [excrementum, Latin.] That which is
thrown out as uſeleſs, noxious, or corrupted from the natural
paſſages of the body.
We ſee that thoſe excrements, that are of the firſt digeſtion,
ſmell the worſt; as the excrements from the belly. Bacºn.
It fares with politick bodies as with the phyſical; each would
convert all into their own proper ſubſtance, and caſt forth as
excrement what will not ſo be changed. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Their ſordid avarice rakcs -
In excrements, and hires the very jakes. Dryden's juv. Sat. 3.
Farce, in itſelf, is of a naſty ſcent;
But the gain ſmells not of the excrement. Dryden.
You may find, by diffection, not only their ſtomachs full of
meat, but their inteſtines full of excrement. Bentley’s Sermons.
The excrements of horſes are nothing but hay, and, as ſuch,
combuſtible. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
ExcREME'NTAL. adj. [from excrement.] That which is voided
aS eXCrement, - -
God hath given virtues to ſprings, fountains, earth, plants,
and the excremental parts of the baſeſt living creatures. Raleigh.
ExcREMENT1'tious. adj. [from excrement.] Containing ex-
crements; conſiſting of matter excreted from the body; of
fenſive or uſeleſs to the body.
The excrementitious moiſture of living creatures paſſeth in
birds through a fairer and more delicate ſtrainer than in beaſts.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 5.
Toil of the mind deſtroys health, by attracting the ſpirits
from their taſk of concočtion to the brain; whither they
carry along with them clouds of vapours and excrementitious
humours. - Harvey on Conſumptions.
The lungs are the grand emunétory of the body; and the
main end of reſpiration is continually to diſcharge and expel
an excrementitious fluid out of the maſs of blood. Woodward.
An animal fluid no ways excrementitious, mild, elabo-
rated, and nutritious. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Excke'scence. Un. ſ. [excrºſco, Latin.] Somewhat growing
Excr E'sce Nc Y. } out of another without uſe, and contrary to
the common order of production; preternatural produćtion.
All beyond this is monſtrous, 'tis out of nature, ’tis an ex-
creſcence, and not a living part of poetry. Dryden.
We have little more than the excrºftencies of the Spaniſh
monarchy. Addiſon on the State of the War.
They are the excreſcences of our ſouls; which, like our hair
and beards, look horrid or becoming, as we cut or let them
grow. Tatler, No. 54.
Tumours and excreſcences of plants, out of which .
iſſues a fly or a worm, are at firſt made by ſuch inſects whic
wound the tender buds. Bentley.
Excre's cent. adj. [excreſcens, Latin.] That which grows
out of another with preternatural ſuperfluity.
Expunge the whole, or lop the excreſcent parts
Of all, our vices have created arts:
Then ſee how little the remaining ſum,
Which ſerv'd the paſt, and muſt the times to come. Pope.
ExcRE'TIon. n.ſ. [excretio, Latin.] Separation of animal ſub-
ſtance; ejecting ſomewhat quite out of the body, as of no
further uſe, which is called excrement. &amp;ºinty.
The ſymptoms of the excretion of the bile vitiated, are a
yellowiſh ſkin, white hard feces, loſs of appetite, and lixivial
urine. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Excre"rive. adj. [excretus, Latin.] Having the power of
ſeparating and ejecting excrements.
A diminution of the body happens by ſome fault in the ex-
cretive faculty, excerning or evacuating more than neceſſary.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
Excretory. adj. [from excretion ] Having the quality of
ſeparating and ejećting ſuperfluous parts.
Excretºries of the body are nothing but ſlender ſlips of the
arteries, deriving an appropriated juice from the blood. Cheyne.
Excru'cIABLE adj. [from excruciate.] Liable to torment. Dicſ.
To EXCRUCIATE. v. a. [excrucio, Latin.] To torture; to
torment. -
And here my heart, long time excruciate,
Amongſt the leaves I reſted all that night. Chapm. O.'ſ y.
4. Leave
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 395</div><p class="Text">*
E X C
z
E X E
Leave them, as long as they keep their hardneſs and impe-
hitent hearts, to thoſe gnawing and excruciating fears, thoſe
whips of the Divine Nemeſis, that frequently ſcourge even
atheiſts themſelves. Bentley’s Sermons.
Excº BA"rios. n. ſ. [excuſatiº, Latin.] The act of watching
all night. Die?.
To Excu'lpATE. v. a. ſex and cupo, Latin.] To clear from
the imputation of a fault.
A good child will not ſeek to excupate he ſelf at the expence
of the moſt revered charaćters. Clariſſa.
Excu'Rsion. n.ſ. [excurſion, French; excurro, Latin J
1. The act of deviating from the ſtated or ſettled path; a
ramble. -
The muſe whoſe early voice you taught to ſing,
Preſcrib'd her heights, and prun'd her tender wing;
Her guide now loſt, no more attempts to riſe,
But in low numbers ſhort excurſions tries. Pope's Eſſays.
2. An expedition into ſome diſtant part. -
The mind extends its thoughts often even beyond the ut-
moſt expanſion of matter, and makes excurſiºns into that in-
comprehenſible Locke.
3. Progreſſion beyond fixed limits.
The cauſes of thoſe great excurſions of the ſeaſons into the
extremes of cold and heat, are very obſcure. Artuthm. on Air.
4. Digreſſion; ramble from a ſubject.
Expect not that I ſhould beg pardon for this excurſion, 'till
I think it a digreſſion, to inſiſt on the bleſſedneſs of Chriſt in
heaven. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
I am too weary to allow myſelf any excurſion from the main
deſign. Atterbury.
Excu'Rsive. adj. [from excurro, Latin.] Rambling; wander-
ing ; deviating.
But why ſo far excurſive 2 when at hand
Along theſe bluſhing borders, bright with dew,
Fair-handed Spring unboſoms every grace Thomſ. Spring.
Excu's ABLE. adj. [from excuſe..] Pardonable; that for which
ſome excuſe or apology may be admitted.
Though he were already ſtept into the winter of his age,
he found himſelf warm in thoſe deſires, which were in his ſon
far more excuſable. Sidney, b, ii.
Learned men are excuſable in particulars, whereupon our
ſalvation dependeth not. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the //orld.
Not only that;
That were excuſable, that and thouſands more
Qf ſemblable import. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
For his intermeddling with arms he is the more exºſable,
becauſe many others of his coat are not only martial direc-
tors, but commanders. Howel's Vocal Forreſt.
Before the Goſpel, impenitency was much more excuſaile,
becauſe men were ignorant. Tillotſon, Sermon 5.
Excu's ABLENEss. m. ſ. [from excuſable. J Párdonableneſ;
capability to be excuſed.
It may ſatisfy others of the excuſableneſ of my diſatisfac-
tion, to peruſe the enſuing relation. Boyle's Phyſiºl Conſiderat.
Excusation. n.ſ.. [from excuſe..] Excuſe; plea; apology.
Prefaces, excuſations, and other ſpeeches of reference to the
perſon, though they ſeem to proceed of modeſty, they are
bravery. Bacon's Eſſays.
And goodneſs to be admired, that it refuted not his argu-
ment in the puniſhment of his excuſation. Brown's Wul. Err.
Excuſsatory, adj. [from excuſe.] Pleading excuſe; apolo-
getical; making apology.
To EXCU'SE. v. a. [excuſ, Latin J
1. To extenuate by apology.
Bad men excuſe their faults, good men will leave them;
He acts the third crime that defends the firſt. B. johnſ. Catil.
2. To diſengage from an obligation; remit attendance.
I have bought a piece of ground, and I muſt needs go and
ſee it: I pray thee, have me excuſ... Luke xiv. 19.
Laud attended throughout that whole journey, which he
was not obliged to do, and no doubt would have been excuſed
from it. Clarendon.
3. To remit; not to exačt. -
4. To weaken or mollify obligation to any thing; to obtain
remiſſion. -
Nor could the real danger of leaving their dwellings to go
up to the temple, excuſe their journey. South's Sermons.
5. To pardon by allowing an apology.
O thou, whoe'er thou art, excuſ, the force
Theſe men have us'd; and O befriend our courſe. Addison.
Excuſe ſome courtly ſtrains;
No whiter page than Addiſon's remains. Pope.
0. To throw off imputation by a feigned apology.
Think you that we excuſe ourſelves unto you? 2 Cor. xii.
Excu's E. n.ſ. [from the verb. The laſt ſyllable of the verb is
founded as if written excuze, that of the noun with the natural
ſound.]
1. Plea offered in extenuation; apology.
I was ſet upon by ſome of your ſérvants, whom becauſe I
have in my juſt defence evil entreated, I came to make my
exciſe to you. Sidney.
Be gone, I will not hearthy vain excuſ ;
But, as thou lov'ſt thy life, make ſpeed from hence. Shakespeare
As good ſucceſs admits no examination, ſo the contrary
allows of no excuſe, how reaſonable or juſt focyer. Raleigh.
We find cut ſome excuſe or other for deferring good reſolu-
tions, ’till our intended retreat is cut off by death. Addiſon.
2. The act of excuſing or apologiſing.
Heav'n put it in thy mind to take it hence,
That thou might'ſt win the more thy father's love,
Pleading ſo wiſely in excuſe of it. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
3. Cauſe for which one is excuſed.
Let no vain hope your eaſy mind ſeduce ;
For rich ill poets are without excuſ. Roſcommon.
Nothing but love this patience could produce;
And I allow your rage that kind excuſe. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
Excu's El Ess. adj. [from excuſe..] I hat for which no excuſe
or apology can be given.
The voluntary enſlaving myſelf is excuſeleſs. Decay of Piety.
Excu's ER. m. ſ. [from excuſe.]
1. One who pleads for another.
In vain would his excuſers endeavour to palliate his enormi-
ties, by imputing them to madneſs. Swift.
2. One who forgives another.
To EXCUSS. v.a. [excuſis, Lat.] To ſeize and detain by law.
The perſon of a man ought not, by the civil law, to be
taken for a debt, unleſs his goods and eſtate has been firſt ex-
c://cd. Ayliff's Parergon.
Excussion. n.ſ.. [excuffo, Latin.] Seizure by law.
If upon an excuſſion there are not goods to ſatisfy the judg-
ment, his body may be attached. A liffe's Parergon.
ExE'cRABLE. adj. [execrabilis, Latin.] Hateful; deteſtable;
accurſed; abominable. .
For us to change that which he hath eſtabliſhed, they hold
it execrable pride and preſumption. Hooker, b iii. ſ. 1 o.
Of the viſible church of Jeſus Chriſt thoſe may be, in re-
ſpect of their outward profeſſion; who, in regard of their
inward diſpoſition, are moſt worthily both hateful in the fight
of God himſelf, and in the eyes of the ſounder parts of the
viſible church moſt execrable. Hocker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
Give ſentence on this execrable wretch,
That hath been breeder of theſe dire events. Shakespeare. Tit. And.
When execrable Troy in aſhes lay,
Through fires, and ſwords, and ſeas, they forc'd their way.
Dryden's Aen, b. vii. 1. 4c8.
Exe'cRABLY. adv. [from execrable.] Curſedly; abominably.
'Tis fuſtian all, 'tis execrably bad;
But if they will be fools, muſt you be mad? Dryden'. Perſ
To E'XECRATE. v. a. [execrer, i.j To curſe ; to im-
precate ill upon; to abominate.
Extinction of ſome tyranny, by the indignation of a peo-
ple, makes way for ſome form contrary to that which they
lately execrated and deteſted. Temple.
ExEcRA'tion. m. ſ. [from execrate.] Curſe; imprecation of
evil.
Miſchance and ſorrow go along with you,
And threefold vengeance tend upon your ſteps
– Ceaſe, gentle queen, theſe execrations. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
For this we may thank Adam but his thanks
Shall be the execration. Milton's Paradſe Loſº, b. x.
The Indians, at naming the devil, did ſpit on the ground
in token of execration. Stillingfieet's Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
To EXE'CT. v. a. [execo, Latin.] To cut out; to cut away.
Were it not for the effuſion of blood which would follow
an exection, the liver might not only be execied, but its office
ſupplied by the ſpleen and other parts. Harvey on Conſumptions.
ExE'cTION. m. ſ. [from execi.] The act of cutting out. See
EXECT.
To E/XECUTE. v. a. [exequor, Latin.]
1. To perform; to practiſe.
Againſt all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment. Ex.
He caſts into the balance the promiſe of a reward to ſuch as
ſhould execute, and of puniſhment to ſuch as ſhould neglect
their commiſſion. South's Sermons.
2. To put in act ; to do what is planned or determined.
Men may not deviſe laws, but are bound for ever to uſe
and execute thoſe which God hath delivered. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 7.
The government here is ſo regularly diſpoſed, that it almoſt
executes itſelf. Swift.
Abſalom pronounced ſentence of death againſt his brother,
and had it executed too. Locke.
3. To put to death according to form of juſtice; to puniſh
capitally.
Sir William Bremingham was executed for treaſon. Davies.
Fitzoſborn was executed under him, or diſcarded into foreign
ſervice for a pretty ſhadow of exilement. Spenſer.
O Tyburn, cou’dſt thou reaſon and diſpute,
Cou'dſt thou but judge as well as execute,
How often wou'dſt thou change the felon's doom,
And truſs ſome ſtern chief juſtice in his room. Dryden.
4. To put to death; to kill.
The treacherous Faſtolfe wounds my peace,
Whom with my bare fiſts I would executº,
If I now had him.
Shaſt p.a. 's Henry VI. p. i.
3 ExECU'TION.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 396</div><p class="Text">E X E
Execu'TION. n.ſ.. [from execute J
1. Performance; practice. - -
When things are come to the execution, there is no ſecrecy
comparable to celerity. Bacon's Eays.
I wiſh no better
Than have him hold that purpoſe, and to put it
In execution. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
I like thy counſel; and how will I like it,
The execution of it ſhall make known. Shakeſpeare.
The excellency of the ſubject contributed much to the hap-
pineſs of the execution. 19 ryden.
2. The laſt act of the law in civil cauſes, by which poſſeſſion is
given of body or goods. - -
Sir Richard was committed to the Fleet in execution for the
whole ſix thouſand pounds. Clarendon, b.viii.
3. Capital puniſhment; death inflićted by forms of law.
Good reſt.
—As wretches have o'er night,
That wait for execution in the morn. Shakespeare Two Gent. of War.
I have ſeen,
When, after execution, judgment hath
Repented o'er his doom. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
Laws ſupport thoſe crimes they checkt before,
And executions now affright no more. Creech's Manilius.
4. Deſtruction; ſlaughter.
Brave Macbeth, with his brandiſh’d ſteel,
Which ſmok'd with bloody execution, carv'd out his paſſage.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The execution had been too cruel, and far exceeding the
bounds of ordinary hoſtility. Hayward.
When the tongue is the weapon, a man may ſtrike where
he cannot reach, and a word ſhall do execution both further and
deeper than the mightieſt blow. South's Sermons.
Ships of ſuch height and ſtrength, that his veſſels could do
no execution upon them. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Execution E.R. m. ſ. [from execution.]
I. He that puts in act, or executes.
Is not the cauſer of the timeleſs deaths, -
As blameful as the executioner P Shakeſp. Richard III.
It is a ſingular comfort to the executioners of this office,
when they conſider that they cannot be guilty of oppreſſion.
* Bacon's Office of Alienation.
The heart of every man was in the hand of God, and he
could have made them executioners of his wrath upon one
another. JWoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
In this caſe every man hath a right to puniſh the offender,
and be the executioner of the law of nature. Locke.
2. He that inflicts capital puniſhment; he that puts to death ac-
cording to the ſentence of the law.
He, born to the greateſt expectation, and of the greateſt
blood, ſubmitted himſelf to be ſervant to the executioner that
ſhould put to death Muſidorus. Sidney, b. ii.
The deluge was not ſent only as an executioner to mankind,
but its prime errand was to reform the earth. JWoodward.
3. He that kills; he that murthers.
I would not be thy executioner:
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee;
Thou tell'ſt me, there is murder in mine eyes. Shakeſpeare.
4. The inſtrument by which anything is performed.
All along
The walls, abominable ornaments
Are tools ºf wrath, anvils of torments hung,
Fell executioners of foul intents.
Exe'cutive. adj. [from execute. J
1. Having the quality of executing or performing.
They are the nimbleſt, agil, ſtrongeſt inſtruments, fitteſt
to be executive of the commands of the ſouls. Hale.
2. Aétive ; not deliberative; not legiſlative; having the power
to put in act the laws.
The Roman emperors were poſſeſſed of the whole legiſla-
tive as well as executive power. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 51.
Hobbes confounds the executive with the legiſlative power,
though all well inſtituted ſtates have ever placed them in dif-
ferent hands. Swift.
Fºx F cut ER. m. ſ. [from execute.]
1. He that performs or executes any thing.
My ſweet miſtreſs
Weeps when ſhe ſees me work, and ſays ſuch baſeneſs
Had ne'er like executer. Shakeſpeare's Tempºff.
Sophocles and Euripides, in their moſt beautiful pieces, are
impartial exe, uters of poetick juſtice. Dennis.
2. He that is intruſted to perform the will of a teſlator. In this
ſenſe the accent is on the ſecond ſyllable.
Let's chuſe executers, and talk of wills;
And yet not ſo; for what can we bequeath? Shakespeare R. II.
3. An executioner; one who puts others to death. Diſuſed.
The ſad-ey'd juſtice, with his ſurly hum,
Delivers o'er to execut, rs pale
The lazy yawning drone. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
ExE'cut ERSHIP. n. ſ. [from executer.] The office of him
that is appointed to perform the will of the defunct.
For fiſhing for teſtaments and executorſhips it is worſe, by
-
Craſhaw.
how much men ſubmit themſelves to mean perſons, than in
ſervice. Bacºn's Eſſays, Civil and 41, ai.
Ex: "cut Rix. m. ſ. ſfrom execute.] A woman intruſted to per-
form the will of the teſtator. -
He did, after the death of the earl, buy of his executrix
the remnant of the term. Bacon's Office ºf Alienation.
Ex E GE's Is. n.ſ. [&amp;#7771;..] An explanation.
ExEGE ticAL. adj. [37%rizº”.] Explanatory; expoſitory.
I have here and there interſperſed ſome critical and ſome
exegetical notes, fit for learners to know, and not unfit for
ſome teachers to read. Iſaker's Pref. to Ex. ºf the Lat. Synt.
Ex EMPLAR. m. ſ. [exemplar, Latin.] A pattern; an example
to be imitated.
The idea and exemplar of the world was firſt in God. Raleigh.
They began at a known body, a barleycorn, the weight
whereof is therefore called a grain; which ariſeth, being mul-
tiplied to ſcruples, drachms, ounces, and pounds, and then
thoſe weights, as they happen to take them, are fixed by au-
thority, and exemplars of them publickly kept. Holder.
If he intends to murder his prince, as Cromwel did, he
muſt perſuade him that he reſolves nothing but his ſafety; as
the ſame grand exemplar of hypocriſy did before. South.
Beſt poet ! fit exemplar for the tribe
Of Phoebus. Philips.
ExE'MPLARILY. adv. [from exemplary.]
1. In ſuch a manner as deſerves imitation.
She is exemplarily loyal in a high exact obedience. Howel.
2. In ſuch a manner as may warn others.
If he had ſhut the commons houſe to have been quiet, whilſt
their champions were exemplarily puniſhed, their juriſdiction
would probably in a ſhort time have been brought within the
due limits. Clarendon.
Exe'Mplariness. n.ſ.. [from exemplary..] State of ſtanding
as a pattern to be copied.
In Scripture we find ſeveral titles given to Chriſt, which
import his exemplarineſ; as of a prince and a captain, a maſter
and a guide. Tillotſon's Sermons.
ExE'MPLARY. adj. [from exemplar.]
1. Such as may deſerve to be propoſed to imitation, whether per-
ſons or things.
The archbiſhops and biſhops have the government of the
church: be not you the mean to prefer any to thoſe places,
but only for their learning, gravity, and worth : their lives
and doćtrine ought to be exemplary. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
If all theſe were exemplary in the conduct of their lives,
religion would receive a mighty encouragement. Swift.
2. Such as may give warning to others.
Had the tumults been repreſſed by exemplary juſtice, I had
obtained all that I deſigned. King Charles.
3. Such as may attract notice and imitation.
Awaking therefore, as who long had dream’d,
Much of my women and their gods aſham’d,
From this abyſs of exemplary vice
Reſolv'd, as time might aid my thought, to riſe. Prior.
When any duty is fallen under a general diſuſe and neglect,
in ſuch a caſe the moſt viſible and exemplary performance is
required. Rogers, Sermºn 18.
ExEMPLIFICATION. n.ſ. [ from exemplify. J A copy; a
tranſcript.
An ambaſſador of Scotland demanded an exemſ liftation of
the articles of peace. Hayward.
A love of vice as ſuch, a delighting in fin for its own ſake,
is an imitation, or rather an exemplificatiºn of the malice of the
devil. - South's Sermons.
To Exe"MPLIFY. v. a. [from exemplar.]
1. To illuſtrate by example.
This might be exemplified even by heaps of rites and cuſ-
toms, now ſuperſtitious in the greateſt part of the Chriſtian
world. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 3.
Our author has exemplified his precepts in the very precepts
themſelves. Speciator, Nº. 253.
A ſatire may be exemplified by pićtures, characters, and
examples. Pope to Swift.
2. To tranſcribe; to copy.
To EXE/MPT. v. a. [exemptus,
grant immunity from.
Things done well,
And with a care, exempt themſelves from fear:
Things done without example, in their iſſue
Are to be fear'd. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
The religious were not exempted, but fought among the
other ſoldiers. Knolles'. Hiſtory of the 1 urkſ.
The emperors exempted them from all taxes, to which they
ſubjected merchants without exception. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Exe’M PT. adj. [from the verb.]
1. Free by privilege.
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt;
But wrong not that wrong with a mere contempt. Shakſ.
An abbot cannot, without the advice of his convent, ſub-
jećt a monaſtery to any, from whoſe juriſdiction ſuch mo-
naſtery was exem, ted. Ayliffe's Parergon.
8 M 2. Not
Latin.] To privilege; te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 397</div><p class="Text">E X E
E X E
4. Not ſubjećt; not liable to.
Do not ouce hope, that thou canſt tempt
A ſpirit ſo reſolved to tread
Upon thy throat, and live exempt
From all the nets that thou canſt ſpread. Ben. 7.
No man, not even the moſt wealthy and powerful among
the ſons of men, is exempt from the chances of human life.
Atterbury's Sermons.
The god conſtrains the Greek to roam,
A hopeleſs exile from his native home,
From death alone exempt. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i. 1. 96.
3. Clear; not included.
His dreadful imprecation hear;
'Tis laid on all, not any one exempt.
4. Cut off from. Diſuſed.
was not thy father for treaſon 'headed ?
And by his treaſon ſtand'ſ not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Exe'MptióN. n.ſ. [ from exempt. J Immunity; privilege;
freedom from impoſts or burdenſome employments.
The like exemption hath the writ to enquire of a man's
death, which alſo muſt be granted freely. Bacon's Off of Alien.
The Roman laws gave particular exemptions to ſuch as built
ſhips, or traded in corn. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Ex; ºpti"tious. adj. [from exemptus, Latin. J Separable;
that which may be taken from another.
If motion were looſe or exemptitious from matter, I could
be convinced that it had extenſion of its own. More.
To Ex E'N TERATE. v.a. [exentero, Latin.] To embowel; to
deprive of the entrails.
A toad contains not thoſe urinary parts which are found in
other animals to avoid that ſerous excretion, which may ap-
pear unto any that exenterates or diffects them. Brown.
Ex ENTERA'tion. m. ſ. [eventeratio, Lat.] The aët of taking
out the bowels; embowelling.
Belonius not only affirms that chamelions feed on flies,
caterpillars, beetles, and other inſe&amp;ts; but upon exenteration
he found theſe animals in their bellies. Brown's Wulg. Errours.
ExE'QUIAL. adj. [from exequia, Latin.] Funeral; relating to
funerals. Dić7.
Exe'quies. n.ſ. without a ſingular. [exequiæ, Lat..] Funeral
rites; the ceremony of burial; the proceſſion of burial. For
this word obſequies is often uſed, but not ſo properly.
Let's not forget
The noble duke of Bedford late deceas'd,
But ſee his excquies fulfill'd in Roan. Shakeſpeare's Hen. VI.
The tragical end of the two brothers, whoſe excquies the
next ſucceſſor had leiſure to perform. Dryden's Dedic. to Æn.
ExE’RcENT. adj. [exercens, Latin.] Pračtiſing; following any
calling or vocation. -
The judge may oblige every exercent advocate to give his
patronage and aſſiſtance unto a litigant in diſtreſs for want of
an advocate. º Aylºff's Parergon.
EXERCISE. n.ſ. [exercitium, Latin
1. Labour of the body; labour conſidered as conducive to the
cure or prevention of diſeaſes.
Men ought to beware that they uſe not exerciſe and a ſpare
diet both ; but if much exercie, a plentiful diet; if ſparing
diet, little exerciſe Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 298.
The wiſe for cure on exerciſe depend;
God never made his work for man to mend. Dryden.
He is exact in preſcribing the exerciſes of his patients, or-
dering ſome of them to walk eighty ſtadia in a day, which is
about nine Engliſh miles. Arbuthnot on C ins.
The pureſt exerciſe of health,
The kind refreſher of the Summer heats. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. Something done for amuſement.
As a watchful king, he would not negle&amp;t his ſafety, think-
ing nevertheleſs to perform all things rather as an exerciſe than
as a labour. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. Habitual ačtion by which the body is formed to gracefulneſs,
air, and agility.
He was ſtrong of body, and ſo much the ſtronger as he, by
a well diſciplined exerciſe, taught it both to do and to ſuffer.
Sidney, b. ii.
The French apply themſelves more univerſally to their
exerciſes than any nation: one ſeldom ſecs a young gentleman
that does not fence, dance, and ride. Addiſon.
4. Preparatory practice in order to ſkill: as, the exerciſe of
ſoldiers.
5. Uſe ; ačtual application of any thing.
The ſceptre of ſpiritual regimen over us in this preſent
world, is at the length to be yielded up into the hands of the
Father which gave it; that is, the uſe and exerciſe thereof ſhall
ceaſe, there being no longer on carth any militant church to
govern. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 54.
6. Pračice; outward performance. -
The ſame prince refuſed even thoſe of the church of Eng-
land, who followed their maſter to St. Germain's, the publick
excrciſe of their religion. -iddiſon on Itcy.
j. Employment.
The learning of the ſituation and boundaries of kingdoms,
Lee's Oedipus.
being only an exerciſe of the eyes and memory, a child with
pleaſure will learn them. A cºe.
Children, by the exerciſe of their ſenſes about objeas that
affect them in the womb, receive ſome few ideas before they
are born. Locke.
- Exerciſ is very a'luring and entertairing to the underſtand-
ing, while its reaſoning powers are employed without la-
bour. J/atti.
8. Taſk ; that which one is appointed to perform.
Patience is more oſt the exºr, ſº
Of ſaints, the trial of their fortitude
Making them each his own deliverer,
And victor over all
That tyranny or fortune can inflićt. Milton', Agoniſei.
9. Aćt of divine worſhip whether publick or private. &lt;&gt;
Good fir John,
I’m in your debt for your laſt exerciſe;
Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you. Shakeſp.
To Ex ERcis E. m. a. [exer.e., Latin.]
1. To employ; to engage in employment.
This faculty of the mind, when it is exerciſd immediately
about things, is called judgment. Locke.
2. To train by uſe to any act.
The Roman tongue was the ſtudy of their youth: it was
their own language they were inſtructed and excrciſed in Locłe.
3. To make ſkilful or dexterous by practice; to habituate.
Strong meat belongeth to them who, by reaſon of uſe,
have their ſenſes exerciſed to diſcern both good and evil. Hebr.
Reaſon, by its own penetration, where it is ſtrong and
exerciſed, uſually ſces quicker and clearer without ſyllo-
giſm. Locºe.
And now the goddeſs, exercis'd in ill,
Who watch'd an hour to work her impious will,
Aſcends the roof. Dryden's Zn. b. vii. l. 713.
4. To buſy ; to keep buſy. /
He will exerciſe himſelf with pleaſure, and without weari-
neſs, in that godlike employment of doing good which is
aſſigned him. 4. terbury's Sermons.
5. To taſk; to keep employed as a penal injunction.
Sore travel hath God given to the ſons of man, to be exer-
ciſed therewith. Eccl. i. 13.
Where pain of unextinguiſhable fire
Muſt exerciſe us, without hope of end. Miltºn's Par. Lº?.
6. To practiſe; to perform. -
A man's body is confined to a place; but where friendſhip
is, all offices are granted to him and his deputy: for he may
exerciſe then by his friend. Bacºn's Eſſays.
Age’s chief arts, and arms, are to grow wiſe;
Virtue to know, and, known, to exerciſe. Denham.
7. To excrt; to put in uſe.
The princes of the Gentiles exerciſe dominion over them,
and they that are great exerciſe authority upon them. Mat. xx.
Their conſciences oblige them to ſubmit to that dominion
which their governours had a right to exerciſe over them. Locke.
8. To practiſe or uſe in order to habitual ſkill.
Meanwhile I’ll draw up my Numidian troop
Within the ſquare, to exerciſe their arms. Addiſon's Cato.
To Exercise. v. n. To uſe exerciſe; to labour for health or
for amuſement.
The Lacedenonians were remarkable for the uſe of this
ſport, and Alexander the Great frequently exerciſed at it.
Notes to the Odyſſey.
Exercise R. m. ſ. [from exerciſ...] He that direés or uſes
exerciſe. Diº.
ExEF cita"rio N. m.ſ.. [exercitatio, Latin.]
1. Exerciſe. -
It were ſome extenuation of the curſe, if ſºdore vulius tui
were confinable unto corporal exercitations. Irown's Pulg. Err.
2. Pračtice; uſe.
By frequent exercitations we form them within us. Felton.
To EXE/RT. v. a. [exero, Latin.]
1. To uſe with an effort; to uſe with ardour and vehemence.
When the ſervice of Britain requires your courage and
conduct, you may exe t them both. Drydºn's Falles, Dedicat.
Whate’er I am, each faculty,
The utmoſt power of my exerted ſoul,
Preſerves a being only for your ſervice. Rowe.
2. To put forth ; to perform.
When the will has exerted an ad of command upon any
faculty of the ſoul, or member of the body, it has done all
that the whole man, as a moral agent, can do for the actual
exerciſe or employment of ſuch a faculty or member. Soºth.
3. To enforce; to puſh to an effort. With the reciprocal pro-
In Oun.
Strong virtue, like ſtrong nature, ſhruggles ſill;
Exerts itſelf, and then throws off the ill. 12; d. Aurengzele.
ExE'RTIon. m. ſ. [from exert. The act of exerting; effort.
ExE's ION. m. ſ. [cºſts, Latin.] The act of cating through.
Theophraſius denieth the exºſon or forcing of vipers through
the belly of the dam. Brown's Ji.gar Errºrſ, b. iii.
ExESTUATION. m. / [evaſ'uo, Latin. The ſtate of boiling ;
tumultuous heat ; cf.cſveſcence; ebullition.
Saltpetie
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 398</div><p class="Text">E X H
E X I
*
*.
re, is in operation a cold body: phyſicians and chy-
mi". it in i. to allay the inward exe/luations º:
humours. -
tºº. E. v. m. ſex and folium, Latin.] To ſhell off;
ſeparate, as a corrupt bone from the ſound part. A term of
or r ". - -
dº. went on ſucceſsfully, the bone ºfºliating from
the edges. //ſeman's Surgery.
ExFol Ation. m. ſ. [from efoliate.] The proceſs by which
the corrupted part of the bone ſeparates from the ſound.
If the bone be dreſſed, the fleſh will ſoon ariſe in that cut
of the bone, and make efoliatiºn of what is neceſſary, and
incarn it. - - Iłżeman's Surgery.
Exfo'LIATIve. adj. [... exfoliate.] That which has the
ocuring exfoliation. -
Fº bone § the milder exfoliatives, 'till ths burnt
bone is caſt off. //iſeman's Surgery.
ExHA/LABLE. adj. [from exhale.] That which may be eva-
haſed.
Pº hº reſolve ſome of the more ſpirituous and ex-
halable parts, whereof diſtillation has ſhewn me that alabaſter
is not deſtitute, into vapours. - Boyle.
ExHALA’rios. n.ſ. [exhalatiº, Latin.] -
1. The act of exhaling or ſending out in vapours; emiſſion.
2. The ſtate of evaporating or flying out in vapours; evapo-
3. º which riſes in vapours, and ſometimes takes the form of
TS.
Ineteors No natºral exhalation in the ſky,
No 'ſcape of nature, no diffemperº day,
But they will pluck away its nat ral cauſe,
And call them meteors, prodigies, * ſigns,
tives, and preſages, tongues of heav'n -
#. iº. vengeance upon John. Shakespeare King john.
While moving in ſo high a ſphere, and with ſo vigorous a
luſtre, he muſt needs, as the ſun, raiſe many envious cahala-
tions; which, condenſed by a popular odium, are Sapable to
caſt a cloud upon the brighteſt merit and integrity. K. Charles.
Anon, out of the earth, a fabrick huge
Roſe like an exhalation, with the ſound * j, *
Of dulcet ſymphonies and voices ſweet. Aſilion's Par. Lºft.
It is no wonder if the earth be often ſhaken, there being
quantities of exhalations within thoſ. mines, or cavernous paſ-
ſages, that are capable of rarefaction and inflammation. Burn.
The growing tow’rs like exhalations riſe,
And the huge columns heave into the ſkies. . - Pope.
To EXHA'LE. v. a. [exhal, Latin.]
1. To ſend or draw out in vapours or fumes.
Yon light is not daylight, I know it well:
It is ſome meteor that the ſun exhales,
To be to thee this night a torch-bearer. Shakesepare. Rom, ard jul.
I flattered myſelf with hopes that the vapour had been
exhaled. Temple.
Fear freezes minds; but love, like heat,
Exhales the ſoul ſublime to ſeek her native ſeat. Dryden.
Out.
2. To draw See, dead Henry's wounds
Open their congeal’d mouths, and bleed afreſh!
Bluſh, bluſh, thou lump of foul deformity;
For ’tis thy preſence that exhales this blood
From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells. Shakespeare
ExHA'LEMENT. m. ſ. [from exhale.] Matter exhaled; va-
"..., will poliſhed amber, although it ſend forth a groſs and
corporal exhalement, be found a long time defective upon the
exačteſt ſcales. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 5.
"I'o EXHA'UST. v. a. - - -
1. To drain; to diminiſh; to deprive by draining. -
Single men be many times more charitable, becauſe their
means are leſs exhauſted. Bacon J E|ſays.
Spermatick matter of a vitious ſort abounds in the blood,
axhauſ's it of its beſt ſpirits, and derives the flower of it to the
ſeminal veſſels. Iłºſeman's Surgery.
2. To draw out totally; to draw 'till nothing is left.
Though the knowledge they have left us be worth our
ſtudy, yet they exhauſted not all its treaſures: they left a great
deal for the induſtry and ſagacity of after-ages. Locke.
The nurſling grove
Seems fair awhile, cheriſh’d with foſter earth;
But when the alien compoſt is exhauff, ----
Its native poverty again prevails. Philips.
ExHA’ustion. m. ſ. [from exhauſf J The aët of drawing or
ning. -
Eºre. ad. [from exhauſ?..] Not to be emptied; not
to be all drawn off; inexhauſtible. -
Of heat and light, what everduring ſtores
Brought from the ſun's exhauſtleſ; golden ſhores,
Through gulphs immenſe of intervening air, -
Enrich the earth, and every loſs repair. Blackm. Creation,
To EXHIBIT. v. a. [exhibeo, Latin.] -
1. To offer to view or uſe ; to offer or propoſe in a formal or
publick manner.
If any claim redreſs of injuſtice, they ſhould exhi, it their
petitions in the ſtreet. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr 4…aſº, e.
He ſuffered his attorney-general to exiſti, a charge of high
treaſon againſt the earl.
2. Tº ſhow; to diſplay.
One of an unfortúnate conſtitution is perpetually exhibiting
* miſerable example of the weakneſs of ninj and body. F ºf .
Exhi'Bit ER. m. ſ. [from ºit...]. He that offers any thig,
** Petition or charge, in a publick manner
- - He ſeems indifferent,
QI rather ſwaying more upon our part,
Than cheriſhing th' exhiº, againſt us. Shałºff. Henry V.
ExHIBI'tion. m. ſ. [from exhi'it.]
1. The aët of exhibiting; diſplay; ſetting forth.
What are all mechanick works, but the ſenſible exhibitiºn
of mathematick demonſtrations? Grew's Coſmol. Sac. l. ii.
2. Allowance; ſalary; penſion.
I crave fit diſpoſition for my wiſe,
Due preference of place and exhibition,
As levels with her breeding. Shakespeare's Othel.o.
What maintenance he from his friends receives,
Like exhibition thou ſhalt have ſºn, ne. Shakesp frare.
All was aſſigned to the army and garriſons there, and ſhe
received only a penſion or exhiº, out of his coffers. Bacon.
** is now neglected, and driven to five in cxile upon a
ſmall exhibition., Swift.
Exhibitive. adj. [from exhibit J Repreſentative; diſplay-
ing.
Truths muſt have an eternal exiſtence in ſome underſtand-
ing; or rather, they are the ſame with that underſtanding
itſelf, conſidered as variouſly exhibitive or repreſentative, adº
cording to the various modes of inimitability or partici-
pation. Norri;.
EXH1'LARA J E. v.a. [exhilaro, Latin.] To make cheerful;
to cheer; to fill with mirth; to enliven; to glad; to gladden.
The coming into a fair garden, the coming into a fair room
richly furniſhed, a beautifi perſon, and the like, do delight
and exhilarate the ſpirits much. Bacon's Natural Lyf.ry.
The force of that fallacious fruit,
That with *ilarating vapours bland
About their ſpirits, hid Play'd, and inmoſt pow'rs
Made err, was now exhatá. 4.ilton's Paradiſe L97, b. ix.
Continual tide
Flows from th’ exhilarating fount.
Let them thank
Boon nature, that thus annually ſupplies
Their vaults, and with her for nºr liquid gifts
Exhilarates their languid minds, within
The golden mean confin'd.
ExHILARA'tion. "...ſ. [from exhilarate.]
1. The act of giving gaiety.
2. The ſtate of being enlivened.
And therefore exhi aration hath ſome affinity with joy,
though it be a much lighter motion. Lacon's Nairal Hiſtory.
To EXHO'RT. v. a. [...] ..., Latin.] To incite by words
to any good ačtion.
We beſeech you, and exhort you by the Lord Jeſus, that
as ye have received of us, how you ought to walk, ſo ye
would abound. I 7%rſ. iv. i.
My duty is to exhort you to conſider the dignity of that
holy myſtery. Common Prayer.
ExHoRTA'tion. m. ſ. [from exhort.]
Clarendon.
Philips:
Philipi.
1. The act of exhorting; incitement to good.
If we will not encourage publick beneficence, ’till
**.*re ſecure that no ſtorm ſial, overturn what we help to
build, there is no room for ºriatiº, charity. Atterbury.
2. The form of words by which one is exhorted.
I'll end my exhortation aſter dinner. Shakeſpeare.
Exhort Aſtory adj. [from exhort.] Tending to exhoſt.
ExHo'RTER. m. ſ. [from exhort.] One who exhorts or encou-
rages by words.
To EXICCATE. v. a. [effect, Latin. J. To dry; to dry
up. Dº?.
Exiccation. m.ſ.. [from exiccate.] Arefaction; act of dry-
ing up; ſtate of being dried up.
What is more eaſily refuted than that old vulgar aſſertion
9f an univerſal drought and exication of the eartſ: As if the
ſun could evaporate the leaſt drop of its moiſture, ſo that it
ſhould never deſcend again, but be attracted and elevated quite
out of the atmoſphere. Bentley’s Sermons.
Ex1'ccAtive. adj. [from exiccate.] Drying in quality; having
the power of drying.
Exigence. Un. ſ. [This word is probably only a corruption
#... } of exigents, vitiated by an unſkilful pronoun-
ciation.] -
I. Demand; want; need.
As men, we are at our own choice, both for time and
place and form, according to the exigence of our own occa-
ſions in private. Hººker, b. v. ſ. 24.
You have heard what the preſent condition an exigencies of
theſe ſeveral charitics are. 4tterbury's Aerºns.
While our fortunes cxceed not the meaſure of . CC Inve-
nience,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 399</div><p class="Text">* ~ y
E X I
S.-
+ -&gt;
*
ſº
*
hience, and are adapted to the exigencies of our ſtation, we
perceive the hand of providence in our gradual and ſucceſſive
ſupplies. Rºgers, Sermon 2.
2. Preſſing neceſſity; diſtreſs; ſūden occaſion.
This diſſimulation in war may be called ſtratagem and con-
du&amp; in other exigencies addreſs and dexterity. Notes on the Ody.
Now in ſuch exigencies not to need,
Upon my word you muſt be rich indeed!
A noble ſuperfluity it craves,
Not for yourſelf, but for your fools and knaves. Pºpe.
Exig ENT. m. ſ. [exigens, Latin.]
1. Preſſing buſineſs; occaſion that ... immediate help.
In ſuch an exigent I ſee not how they could have ſtaid to
deliberate about any other regiment than that which already
was deviſed to their hands. - Hºoker, Preface.
The council met, your guards to find you ſent,
And know your pleaſure in this exigent. JValler.
2. A law term.] A writ ſued when the defendant is not to be
found, being part of the proceſs leading to an outlawry.
Shakeſpeare uſes it for any extremity. Hanner.
. End.
3 Theſe eyes, like lamps whoſe waſting oil is ſpent,
Wax dim, as drawing to their exigent. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Exigu'ity. n.ſ. [exiguitas, Latin.] Smallneſs; diminitive-
neſs; ſlenderneſs. -
The exiguity and ſhape of the extant particles is now
ſuppoſed. Boyle on Colours.
Ex1öu'ous. adj. [exiguus, Latin.] Small; diminutive; little.
Their ſubtile parts and exiguºus doſe are conſumed and
evaporated in leſs than two hours time. Harvey.
EXILE. n.f. [exilium, Latin. It ſeems anciently to have had
the accent indifferently on either ſyllable: now it is uniformly
on the firſt.]
1. Baniſhment; ſtate of being baniſhed from one's country.
Our ſtate of bodies would bewray what life
We've led ſince thy exile. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Welcome is exile, welcome were my death. Shakespeare H.VI.
Let them pronounce the ſteep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, flaying, pent to linger
But with a grain of day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
2. The perſon baniſhed.
O muſt the wretched exiles ever mourn,
Nor after length of rowling years return ? Dryden's Wirg.
Ulyſſes, ſole of all the vićtor train,
An exile from his dear paternal coaſt,
Deplor’d his abſent queen, and empire loſt. Pope's Odyſſey.
Ex1'le, adj. [exilis, Latin J Small; ſlender ; not full; not
powerful. Not in uſe, except in philoſophical writings.
It were alſo good to enquire what other means may be to
draw forth the exile heat which is in the air; for that may be
a ſecret of great power to produce cold weather. Bacon.
In a virginal, when the lid is down, it maketh a more exile
ſound than when the lid is open. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
To Exile. v. a. [from the noun. This had formerly the ac-
cent on the laſt ſyllable, now generally on the firſt, though
Dryden has uſed both.] To baniſh; to drive from a country;
to tranſport.
Call home our exil'd friends abroad,
That fled the ſnares of watchful tyranny. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Foul ſubornation is predominant,
And equity exil'd your highneſs' land. Shakespeare Henry VI.
For that offence,
Immediately we do exile him hence. Shakespeare. Rom. and juliet.
They fettered with the bonds of a long night, lay there
exiled from the eternal providence. J/iſd. xvii. 2.
His brutal manners from his breaſt exil'd,
His mien he faſhion'd, and his tongue he fil’d. Dryden.
Arms and the man I ſing, who forc’d by fate,
And haughty Juno's unrelenting hate,
Expel'd and exil'd, Dryden's Pirgi's Min.
Ex1'LEMENT. n.ſ.. [from exile.] Baniſhment.
Fitzoſborn was diſcarded into foreign ſervice for a pretty
ſhadow of exilement. J/oſtºn.
Ex1L1'TION. m. ſ. [exilitio, Latin.] The aët of ſpringing or
ruſhing out ſuddenly.
From ſaltpetre proceedeth the force and report; for ſulphur
and ſmall-coal, mixt, will not take fire with noiſe or exilition;
and powder, which is made of impure and greaſy petre, hath
but a weak cmiſſion, and gives but a faint report. Brºwn.
Ex1'LITY. m. ſ. [exilis, Latin.] Slenderneſs; ſmalneſs; dimi-
mution.
Certain flies, called ephemera, live but a day: the cauſe is
the exility of the ſpirit, or perhaps the abſence of the ſun. Bac.
For exility of the voice, or other ſounds, it is certain that
the voice doth paſs through ſolid and hard bodies, if they be
not too thick; and through water, which is likewiſe a very
cloſe body, and ſuch an one as letteth not in air. Bacon.
A body, by being ſubtilized, can loſe nothing of its cor-
poreity; neither can it hereby gain any thing but exility; for
all degress of ſubtility are cºntially the ſame thing. Grew.
Ex1'MIous. adj. [eximius, Latin.] Famous; eminent; con-
ſpicuous; excellent. Diº.
ExIN ANITION. n ſ. [exiwanitia, Latin.] Privation; loſs.
He is not more impotent in his glory than he was in his
eximanitiºn. Decay of Piety.
To EXIST. v. n. [exiſło, Latin.] To be; to Have a being.
It is as eaſy to conceive that an infinite Almighty Power
might produce a thing out of nothing, and make that to exiſt
de novo, which did not exiſt before; as to conceive the world
to have had no beginning, but to have exiſted from eternity.
- South's Sermons.
It ſeems reaſonable to enquire, how ſuch a multitude comes
to make but one idea, ſince that combination does not always
exiſt together in nature. - Lºcke.
One year is paſt; a different ſcene
No farther mention of the dean :
Who now, alas, no more is miſt -
Than if he never did exiſt. Swift.
Ex1'st ENCE. !" / [exiſtentia, low. Latin.] State of being;
Ex1's TENCY. actual poſſeſſion of being.
Nor is only the exiſtency of this animal conſiderable, but
many things delivered thereof. Brown's / ulgar Errour, b. iii.
It is impoſſible any being can be eternal with ſucceſſive
eternal phyſical changes, or variety of ſtates or manner of
exiſtency, naturally and neceſſarily concomitant unto it. Hale.
The ſoul, ſecur'd in her exiſtence, ſmiles
At the drawn dagger, and defies its point. Addison's Cato.
When a being is conſidered as poſſible, it is ſaid to have an
eſſence or nature: ſuch were all things before the creation.
... When it is conſidered as actual, then it is ſaid to have exiſt-
ence alſo. J.”atts's Logick,
Exi'stENT, adj. [from exiſt.] In being; in poſſeſſion of being
or of exiſtence.
Whatſoever ſign the ſun poſſeſſed, whoſe receſs or vicinity
defineth the quarters of the year, thoſe ſeaſons were aćtually
exiſtent. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 2.
The eyes and minds are faſtened on objects which have no
real being, as if they were truly exiſtent. Dryden.
Exist IMA/TION. m. ſ. [exiſtimatio, Latin.]
1. Opinion.
2. Eſteem.
Exit. n.ſ. [exit, Latin.]
1. The term ſet in the margin of plays to mark the time at
which the player goes off the ſtage.
2. Receſs; departure; ačt of quitting the ſtage; ačt of quitting
the theatre of life.
All the world's a ſtage,
And all the men and women mecrly players:
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts. Shakespeare.
A regard for fame becomes a man more towards the exit
than at his entrance into life. Swift.
Many of your old comrades live a ſl.ort life, and make a
figure at their exit. Swift.
3. Paſſage out of any place.
In ſuch a pervious ſubſtance as the brain, they might find
an eaſy either entrance or exit, almoſt every where. Glanville.
4. Way by which there is a paſſage out.
. . The fire makes its way, forcing the water forth through
its ordinary exits, wells, and the outlets of rivers. J/ccd.v.
Exiſt A L. l adj. [ exitialis, Latin. J. Deſtrućtive; fatal;
ExI'tious. ; mortal.
Moſt exitial fevers, although not concomitated with the
tokens, exanthemata, anthraces, or carbuncles, are to be cen-
ſured peſtilential. Harvey on the Plague.
ExoDUs. Un. ſ. [2003”.] Departure; journey from a place:
Exo DY. ; the ſecond book of 4/ſºs is ſo called, becauſe it
deſcribes the journey of the Iſraelites from Egypt.
In all probability thcir years continued to be three hundred
and ſixty-five days, ever ſince the time of the Jewiſh exody at
leaſt. . Hale's Origin of A.ankind.
Exoſ. E(TE. adj. ſexoletus, Lat.] Obſolete; out of uſe. Diž.
To Exo'Lv E. v. a. ſexolvo, Latin J. To looſe; to pay. Dić.
Exo's PHA Los. m. ſ. [3 and ºxxG2.] A navel rupture.
To EXONERATE. v. a. [exonero, Latin.] To unload; to
diſburthen ; to free from any heavy charge.
The glands being a congeries of veſſels curled, circumgy-
rated, and complicated, give the blood time to ſeparate through
the capillary veſſels into the ſecretory ones, which aſterwards
all exonerate themſelves into one common dućtus. Ray.
ExoMER A^+ ion. m. ſ. [from exonerate.] The act of diſburthen-
ing, or diſcharging.
The body is adapted unto eating, drinking, nutrition, and
other ways of repletion and exoneration. Grew.
Exo‘PFABLE, adj. [exºſ tali is, Lat J Deſireable; to be ſought
with eagerneſs or deſire.
ExOR ABLE. adj. [exoralilis, Latin.] To be moved by in-
treaty.
/ - •
Fº } n. ſ. ſſrom exorbitance.]
1. The act of going out of the track preſcribed.
3 2. Enormity;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 400</div><p class="Text">E X O
E X P
I ſee ſome degree of this fault cleave to thoſe, who have
eminently corrected all other exorbitancies of the tongue.
Government of the Tongue, ſ. 4.
2. Enormity; groſs deviation from rule or right.
The reverence of my preſence may be a curb to your exor-
bitancie'. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
The people were groſly impoſed on, to commit ſuch exor-
bitancies as could not end but in the diſkolution of the govern-
ment. Swift on the Diſſentions in Athens and Rome.
3. Boundleſs depravity.
They riot ſtill,
Unbounded in exorbitance of ill.
Exo'RBITANT. adj. [ex and orbito, Latin.]
1. Going out of the preſcribed track; deviating from the courſe
appointed or rule eſtabliſhed.
What ſignifies the fićtion of the tortoiſe riding upon the
wings of the wind, but to preſcribe bounds and meaſures to
our exorbitant paſſions? L’Eſtrange.
Theſe phenomena are not peculiar to the earthquakes which
have happened in our times, but have been obſerved in all
ages, and particularly thoſe exorbitant commotions of the wa-
ters of the globe. JWoodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
2. Anomalous; not comprehended in a ſettled rule or method.
The Jews, who had laws ſo particularly determining in all
affairs what to do, were notwithſtanding continually inured
with cauſes exorbitant, and ſuch as their laws had not provided
for. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 11.
3. Enormous; beyond due proportion; exceſſive.
Their ſubjects would live in great plenty, were not the im-
poſitions ſo very exorbitant ; for the courts are too ſplendid for
the territories. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
So endleſs and exorbitant are the deſires of men, that they
will graſp at all, and can form no ſcheme of perfect happineſs
with leſs. Swift on the Diſſentions in Athens and Rome.
Garth's Diſpenſary.
To Exo'RBITATE. v. n. [ex and orbito, Latin.] To deviate;
to go out of the track or road preſcribed.
The planets ſometimes would have approached the ſun as
near as the orb of Mercury, and ſometimes have exorbitated
beyond the diſtance of Saturn. Bentley's Sermons.
To E/XORCISE. v. a. [;32&amp;ſºw.]
1. To adjure by ſome holy name.
2. To drive away ſpirits by certain forms of adjuration.
3. To purify from the influence of malignant ſpirits by religious
ceremonies.
And fry’rs, that through the wealthy regions run,
Reſort to farmers rich, and bleſs their halls,
And exorciſe the beds, and croſs the walls. Dryden.
Exorcise R. m. ſ. [from exorciſe.] One who pračtiſes to drive
away evil ſpirits.
Exorcis M. n.ſ. ſićoexiguès.] The form of adjuration, or
religious ceresmony by which evil and malignant ſpirits are
driven away.
Will his lordſhip behold and hear our exorciſms P Shakeſp.
Symptoms ſupernatural, muſt be only curable by ſuperna-
tural means; namely, by devout prayers or exºrciſms. Harvey.
E’xoRc1st. m. ſ. [#962; º;..]
1. One who by adjurations, prayers, or religious acts, drives
away malignant ſpirits.
Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorciſts, took upon
them to call over them which had evil ſpirits. Aëts xix. 13.
2. An enchanter; a conjurer. Improperly.
Soul of Rome !
Thou, like an exorciſt, haſt conjur'd up
My mortificd ſpirit. Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
Is there no exorciſt
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes } -
ls’t real that I ſee? Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
EXO'RDIUM. m. ſ. [Latin.] A formal preface; the proemial
part of a compoſition.
Nor will I thee detain
With poets fićtions, nor oppreſs thine ear
With circumſtance, and long exordiums here. May's Virgil.
I have been diſtaſted at this way of writing, by reaſon of
long prefaces and exordiums. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
Exor NA"rio N. m. ſ. [exornatio, Latin.] Ornament; decora-
tion ; embelliſhment.
It ſeemeth that all thoſe curious exornations ſhould rather
ceaſe. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 15.
Hyperbolical exornations and elegancies many much affect.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Exo'ss ATED. adj. [exoſatus, Latin.] Deprived of bones. Dić.
Exosto'sis. m. ſ. ſix and 3rsov.] Any protuberance of a bone
that is not natural, as often happens in venereal caſes. Quincy.
Exo'sseous. adj [ex and oſa, Latin.] Wanting bones; bone-
leſs; formed without bones.
Thus we daily obſerve in the heads of fiſhes, as alſo in
ſnails and ſoft exoſſeous animals, nature near the head hath
placed a flat white ſtone, or teſtaceous concretion. Brown.
Exotick, adj. [tºrizès.] Foreign; not produced in our
own country; not domeſtick.
Some learned men treat of the nature of letters as of ſome
remote exºtic; thing, whereof we had no knowledge but by
fabulous relations. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Continue freſh hot-beds to entertain ſuch exotick plants as
arrive not to their perfection without them. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Exo't Ick, n. ſ. A foreign plant.
Claudian was ſeated on the other ſummit, which was bar-
ren, and produced, on ſome ſpots, plants that are unknown to
Italy, and ſuch as the gardeners call exoticks. Addison's Guard.
To EXPAND. v. a. [expande, Latin J -
I. To ſpread; to lay open as a net or ſheet.
2. To dilate; to ſpread out every way; to diffuſe.
An animal growing, expands its fibres in the air as a fluid.
Arbuthnot on Air.
Along the ſtream of time thy name
Expanded flies, and gathers all its fame. Pope's Eſ on Man.
ExPA'NSE. n.ſ. [expanſum, Latin.] A body widely extended
without inequalities.
A murmuring ſound
Of waters iſſu'd from a cave, and ſpread
Into a liquid plain; then ſtood unmov’d,
Pure as th’ expanſe of heav'n. Miltºn's Paradiſe Loſt, b. iv.
Bright as th' ethereal glows the green expanſe. Savage.
On the ſmooth expanſe of cryſtal lakes,
The ſinking ſtone at firſt a circle makes;
The trembling ſurface, by the motion ſtirr'd,
Spreads in a ſecond circle, then a third;
Wide, and more wide, the floating rings advance, -
Fill all the watry plain, and to the margin dance. Pope.
ExPANsibility. n.ſ.. [from expanſible.] Capacity of exten-
ſion; poſſibility to be expanded or ſpread into a wider ſurface.
Together with the rotundity common to the atoms of all
fluids, there is ſome difference in bulk, by which the atoms in
one fluid are diſtinguiſhed from thoſe of another; elſe all fluids
would be alike in weight, expanſibility, and all other qualities.
Grew's Coſmolog. Sacr. b. i. c. 3.
ExPA'NSIBLE. adj. [from expanſu, Latin J Capable to be ex-
tended; capable to be ſpread into a wider ſurface.
Bodies are not expanſible in proportion to their weight, or
to the quantity of matter to be expanded. Grew's Cºſmol.
ExPA'Nsion. n.ſ.. [from expand.]
1. The ſtate of being expanded into a wider ſurface or greater
ſpace. -
'Tis demonſtrated that the condenſation and expanſion of
any portion of the air is always proportional to the weight and
preſſure incumbent upon it. Bentley's Sermons.
2. The act of ſpreading out.
The eaſy expanſion of the wing of a bird, and the lightneſs,
ſtrength, and ſhape of the feathers, are all fitted for her better
flight. Grew's Coſmolog. Sac. b. i. c. 5.
3. Extent; ſpace to which anything is extended.
The capacious mind of man takes its flight farther than the
ſtars, and cannot be confined by the limits of the world: it
extends its thoughts often even beyond the utmoſt expanſion of
matter, and makes excurſions into that incomprehenſible
inane. - Locke.
4. Pure ſpace, as diſtinét from extenſion in ſolid matter.
Diſtance or ſpace, in its ſimple abſtraćt conception, I call
expanſion, to diſtinguiſh it from extenſion, which expreſſes this
diſtance only as it is in the ſolid parts of matter. Locke.
It would for ever take an uſeleſs flight,
Loſt in expanſiºn, void and infinite. Blackmore's Creation.
ExPA'Nsive. adj. [from expand.] Having the power to ſpread
into a wider ſurface, or greater ſpace.
The elaſtick or expanſive faculty of the air, whereby it
dilates itſelf when compreſſed, hath been made uſe of in the
common weather-glaſſes. . Ray on the Creation.
Then no more
Th’ expanſive atmoſphere is cramp'd with cold. Thomſon.
To ExPA'T1At E. v. n. [expation, Latin.] -
1. To range at large; to rove without any preſcribed limits.
Religion contračts the circle of our pleaſures, but leaves it
wide enough for her votaries to expatiate in. Addiſon's Speciat.
He looks in heav'n with more than mortal eyes,
Bids his free ſoul expatiate in the ſkies;
Amidſt her kindred ſtars familiar roam,
Survey the region, and confeſs her home. Pope.
Expatiate free o'er all this ſcene of man;
A mighty maze l but not without a plan. Pope's Eſ on Man.
With wonder ſeiz'd, we view the pleaſinggº
And walk delighted, and expatiate round. ope's Odyſſey.
2. To enlarge upon in language.
They had a cuſtom of offering the tongues to Mercury,
becauſe they believed him the giver of º; Dacier ex-
patiates upon this cuſtom. Notes on Pope's Odyſſey, b. iii.
3. To let looſe; to allow to range. This ſenſe is very improper.
Make choice of a ſubjećt, which, being of itſelf capable of
all that colours and the elegance of deſign can poſſibly give,
ſhall afterwards afford art an ample field of matter wherein to
expatiate itſelf. Dryden's Dufreſnoy,
To EXPECT. v. a. [expećio, Latin.]
1. To have a rº apprehenſion of either good or evil.
8
2. To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 401</div><p class="Text">E X P
E X P
2. To wait for; to attend the coming.
While, expeding there the queen, he rais'd
His wond'ring eyes, and round the temple gaz'd. Dryden.
To ExPE’ct. v. n. To wait to ſtay.
Flihu had expected 'till Job had ſpoken. job.
Expe'ct ABLE, adj. [from expect.] To be expected; to be
hoped or feared. z
Occult and ſpiritual operations are not expečiable from ice;
for being but water congealed, it can never make good ſuch
qualities. - Brown's Vulgar Errours.
xPE^ct A Nc E.
#::::::::: }*.ſ. [from expect.]
1. The act or ſtate of expecting ; expectation.
Every moment is expectancy
Of more arrivance.
Satyrs leave your petulance,
Or elſe rail upon the moon,
Your expectance is too ſoon;
For before the ſecond cock
Crow, the gates will not unlock. Ben. johnſ. Fairy Prince.
Shakeſpeare's Othello.
This bleſſed expectance muſt be now my theme. Bºyle.
But fy, my wand'ring muſe, how thou do'ſt ſtay!
Expediance calls thee now another way. Milton.
2. Something expected.
There is expediance here from both the ſides,
What further you will do. Shakeſ Troilus and Creſſida.
3. Hope; that of which the expe&amp;tation is accompanied with
pleaſure.
Oh, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown |
The expediancy and roſe of the fair ſtate. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Expect AN r. adj. [French.J Waiting in expectation.
Her majeſty has offered conceſſions, in order to remove
ſcruples raiſed in the mind of the expeciant heir. Swift.
ExPE'ct ANT. m. ſ. [from expect J One who waits in expecta-
tion of any thing; one held in dependance by his hopes.
They, vain expeciants of the bridal hour,
My ſtores in riotous expence devour. Pope's Odſey, b. i.
This treatiſe was agreeable to the ſentiments of the whole
nation, except of thoſe gentlemen who had employments, or
were expediants. Swift to Pope.
Expectatios. m. ſ. ſexſpeãatio, Latin.]
1. The aët of expecting.
The trees
Should have borne men, and expediation fainted,
Longing for what it had not. Shakespeare Anth. and Cleopatra.
The reſt, -
That are within the note of expediation,
Already are i' th' court. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. The ſtate of expecting either with hope or fear.
Live in a º and ſerious expe:lation of that day, when
we muſt appear before the Judge of heaven and earth. Rºgers.
3. Proſpe&amp;t of anything good to come.
My ſoul, wait thou only upon God; for my expediation is
from him. Pſ. lxii. 5.
4. The obječt of happy expe&amp;tation; the Meſſiah expected.
ow clear I underſtand,
What oft my ſteadieſt thoughts have ſearch'd in vain,
Why our great expeciation ſhould be call’d
The ſeed of woman. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xii.
5. A ſtate in which ſomething excellent is expected from us
How fit it will be for you, born ſo great a prince, and of ſo
rare not only expediation but proof, to divert your thoughts
from the way of goodneſs. Sidney.
You firſt came home
From travel with ſuch hopes as made you look'd on,
By all men's eyes, a youth of expediation;
Pleas'd with your growing virtue, I receiv'd you. Otway.
ExPE'ct ER. n.ſ.. [from expeã.]
1. One who has hopes of ſomething.
Theſe are not great expediers under your adminiſtration,
according to the period of governors here. Swift.
2. One who waits for another.
Signify this loving interview
- To the expeºfers of our Trojan part. Shakespeare. Troil, and Creſſ.
To EXPE'CTQRATE. v. a. ſex and pečius, Latin.] To eject
from the breaſt. -
Excrementitious humours are expectorated by a cough after
a cold or an aſthma. Harvey on Cºnſumptions.
Morbifick matter is either attenuated ſo as to be returned
into the channels, or expectorated by coughing. Arbuthnot,
ExPE'croRATION. n.ſ.. [from expeciorate.]
1. The aët of diſcharging from the breaſt.
2. That diſcharge which is made by coughing, as bringing up
phlegm, or any thing that obſtructs the veſſels of the lungs,
and ſtrengthens the breath. $ºuincy.
With water, vinegar, and honey, in pleurifies and inflam-
mations of the lungs, he mixeth ſpices, for promoting expec-
toration, Arbuthnot on Aliments. .
ExPE'ctor Ative. adj. [from expectorate.] Having the quality
of promoting expectoration.
Syrups and other expedioratives, in coughs, muſt neceſſarily
occaſion a greater cough. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Expe'dience. -
Expe'DIENcy. }n.ſ. [from expedient.]
1. Fitneſs; propriety; ſuitableneſs to an end.
Solemn dedications of things ſet apart for Divine Worſhip,
could never have been univerſally practiſed, had not right rea-
ſon dićtated the high expediency and great uſe of ſuch practices.
South's Sermons.
2. It is uſed in Shakeſpeare for expedition; adventure; or at-
tempt.
Let me hear
What yeſternight our council did decree,
In forwarding this dear expedience. Shakespeare's Henry IV.
3. It is alſo uſed by Shakespeare for expedition; haſte; diſpatch.
I ſhall break
The cauſe of our expedience to the queen,
And get her leave to part. Shakeſp. Anth and Cleofatra.
Eight tall ſhips, three thouſand men of war,
Are making hither with all due expedience. Shakespeare Richard II.
EXPEDIENT. adj. [expedit, Latin.]
1. Proper; fit; convenient; ſuitable.
All things are not expedient : in things indifferent there is a
choice; they are not always equally expedient. Hooker, b. ii.
When men live as if there were no God, it becomes expe-
dient for them that there ſhould be none; and then they ºn-
deavour to perſuade themſelves ſo. Tilºtſon's Senens.
2. In Shakeſpeare, quick; expeditious. ,
The adverſe winds,
Whoſe leiſure I have ſtaid, have given him time
To land his legions all as ſoon as I:
His marches are expedient to this town. Shakesp. King jº,
Expe'd ſent. n.ſ.. [from the adjective.]
1. That which helps forward; as means to an end.
God, who delights not to grieve the children of men, does
not project for our ſorrow, but our innocence; and would
never have invited us to the one, but as an expedient to the
other. Decay of Piety.
2. A ſhift; means to an end which are contrived in an exi-
gence.
Th’ expedient pleas'd, where neither loſt his right;
Mars had the day, and Venus had the night. Dryden.
He flies to a new expedient to ſolve the matter, and ſuppoſes
an earth of a make and frame like that of Des Cartes. J/zzdw.
ExPE'DIENT ly, adv. [from expedient.]
1. Fitly; ſuitably; conveniently.
2. Haſtily; quickly.
Let my officers of ſuch a nature
Make an extent upon his houſe and lands:
Do this expediently, and turn him going, Shakespeare As you like it.
To EXPEDITE. v. a. [extedio, Latin.]
1. To facilitate; to free from impediment.
By fin and death a broad way now is pav'd,
To expedite your glorious march. Milton's Paradiſe Loft,
2. To haſten; to quicken.
An inquiſition would ſill be a further improvement, and
would ex; edite the converſion of the Papiſ's. Swift.
3. To diſpatch; to iſſue from a publick office.
Though ſuch charters be expedited of courſe, and as of right,
yet they are varied by diſcretion. Bacon's New Atlantis.
ExPF DIT.E. adj. [ex^editus, Latin.]
1. Quick; haſty; ſoon performed.
Wholeſome advice, and expedite execution in freeing the
ſtate of thoſe monſters. Sandys.
2. Eaſy; diſencumbered; clear from impediments.
Nature can teach the church but in part; neither ſo
fully as is requiſite for man's ſalvation, nor ſo eaſily as to
make the way plain and expedite enough, that many may come
to the knowledge of it, and ſo be ſaved, and therefore the
Scripture has been given. . Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 3.
3. Nimble; active; agile.
The more any man's ſoul is cleanſed from ſenſual luſts,
the more nimble and expedite it will be in its operations. Tillot.
4. It ſeems to be uſed by Bacon for light armed in the Roman
ſignification. -
He ſent the lord chamberlain with expedite forces to ſpeed to
Exeter, to the reſcue of the town. Bacon's Henry VII.
ExPEDITELY. adv. [from expedite.] With quickneſs, readi-
neſs, haſte. -
Nature hath left his ears naked, that he may turn them
more expeditely for the reception of founds from every quarter.
Grew's Muſæum.
ExPED1'Tion. m. ſ. [from expedite.]
1. Haſte; ſpeed; ačtivity. -
Prayers, whereunto devout minds have added a piercing
kind of brevity, thereby the better to expreſs that quick and
ſpeedy expedition wherewith ardent affections, the very wings
of prayer, are delighted to preſent our ſuits in heaven. Hooker.
Ev’n with the ſpeedieſt expedition • *
I will diſpatch him to the emperor's court. Shakespeare.
2. A march or voyage with martial intentions.
Young Octavius, and Mark Antony,
Come down upon us with a mighty power,
Bending their expedition tow'rd Philippi. Shakespeare jul. Cºſir.
2 To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 402</div><p class="Text">E X P
To EXPE'L. v. a. [expell, Latin.]
1. To drive out; to force away.
The Lord your God ſhall expel them from before you, and
drive them from out of your ſight. joſ xxiii. 5.
I may know the ſet why gentle peace
Should not expel theſe inconveniencies. Shakespeare Henry V.
Suppoſe a mighty rock to fall there, it would expel the wa-
ters out of their places with ſuch violence as to fling them
among the clouds. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. To ejećt; to throw out.
Whatſoever cannot be digeſted by the ſtomach, is either
put up by vomit, or put down to the guts, and other parts of
the body are moved to expel by conſent. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
3. To baniſh; to drive from the place of reſidence.
Arms and the man I ſing, who forc’d by fate,
And haughty Juno's unrelenting hate,
Expe"d and exil'd left the Trojan ſhore. Dryden's Virg. Æn:
Expe’LLER. m. ſ. [from expel. J. One that expels or drives
a Way.
To fººp. v. a. [expends, Latin.] To lay out; to ſpend.
If my death might make this iſland happy,
I would expend it with all willingneſs. Shakeſp. Henky VI.
The king of England waſted the French king's country,
and thereby cauſed him to ex, end ſuch ſums of money as ex-
ceeded the debt. Hayward.
The publick burthens, though they may be a good reaſon
for our not expending ſo much in charity, yet will not juſtify
us in giving nothing. Atterbury's Sermons.
EXPENSE. m. ſ. [expenſum, Latin.] Coſt; charges; money
expended. -
Hence comes that wild and vaſt expenſe,
That hath enforc’d Rome's virtue thence,
Which ſimple poverty firſt made. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
A feaſt prepar'd with riotous expenſe,
Much coſt, more care, and moſt magnificence. Dryden.
I can ſee no reaſon by which we were obliged to make thoſe
prodigious expenſes. - -
Expe'N's EFUL. adj. [expenſe and full.] Coſtly; chargeable;
expenſive.
No part of ſtrućture is either more expenceful than win-
dows or more ruinous, as being expoſed to all violence of
weather. JWotton's Architecture.
ExPE'NSELEss. adj. [from expenſe..] Without coſt. -
A phyſician may ſave any army by this frugal and expenſelſ;
means only. ilton on Education.
What health promotes, and gives unenvy'd peace,
Is all expenſeleſ, and procur'd with eaſe. Blackm. Creation.
ExPE'Nsive. adj. [from expenſe.]
1. Given to expenſe; extravagant; luxurious.
Frugal and induſtrious men are friendly to the eſtabliſhed
government, as the idle and expenſive are dangerous. Temple.
2. Coſtly; requiring expenſe: as, expenſive dreſs;' an expenſive
journey. -
3. Liberal; generous; diſtributive.
This requires an active, expenſive, indefatigable goodneſs,
ſuch as our apoſtle calls a work and labour of love. Spratt.
Fxpe’Nsively. adv. [from expenſive..] With great expenſe;
at great charge.
f. knew him live ſo great and expenſively as he hath
done ſince his return from exile. Swift.
Expf'Nsive Ness. n. ſ. [from expenſive.]
1. Addićtion to expenſe; extravagance.
2. Coſtlineſs.
Their highways, for their extent, ſolidity, or expenſiveneſ,
are ſome of the greateſt monuments of the grandeur of the
Roman empire. Arbuthnot on Coins.
EXPERIENCE. n. ſ. [experientia, Latin.]
1. Pračtice; frequent trial.
Hereof experience hath informed reaſon, and time hath
made thoſe things apparent which were hidden. Raleigh.
2. Knowledge gained by trial and pračtice.
Boys immature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their preſent pleaſure,
And ſo rebel to judgment. sº Ant, and Cleopatra.
But if you’ll proſper, mark what I adviſe,
Whom age and long experience render wiſe. Pºpe.
To ExPE(R1ENCE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To try ; to pračtiſe.
2. To know by praśtice.
ExPE'RIENCED. participial adj. [from experience.]
1. Made ſkilful by experience.
We muſt perfect, as much as we can, our ideas of the diſ-
tin&amp;t ſpecies; or learn them from ſuch as are uſed to that ſort
of things, and are experienced in them. Locke.
2. Wiſe by long pračtice. -
To him experienc'd Neſtor thus rejoin'd,
O friend! what ſorrows do'ſt thou bring to mind! Pope.
ExPE'RIENCE R. n.ſ. One who makes trials; a praśtiſer of
experiments.
A curious experiencer did affirm, that the likeneſs of any
object, if ſtrongly enlightned, will appear to another, in the
eye of him that looks ſtrongly and ſteadily upon it, 'till he be
Swift."
dazzled by it; even after he ſhall have turned his eyes from
it, Digby on Bodies.
EXPERIMENT. n. ſ. [experimentum, Latin.] Trial of any
thing; ſomething done in order to diſcover an uncertain or
unknown effect.
That which ſheweth.them to be wiſe, is the gathering of
principles out of their own particular experiments; and the
framing of our particular experiments, according to the rule of
their principles, ſhall make us ſuch as they are. Hºoker, b. v.
It is good alſo not to try experiments in ſtates, except the
neceſſity be urgent, or the utility evident. Bacon.
Adam by ſad experiment I know,
How little weight with thee my words can find,
Found ſo erroneous. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
'Till his fall it was ignorant of nothing but of ſin; or, at
leaſt, it reſted in the notion without the ſmart of the expe-
riment. South's Sermons.
When we are ſearching out the nature or properties of any
being by various methods of trial, this ſort of obſervation is
called experiment. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
To Expe'RIMENT. v. a. [from the noun.] To try; to ſearch
out by trial. -
Franciſco Redi experimented that no putrified fleſh will of
itſelf, if all infects be carefully kept from it, produce any. Ray,
ExPERIME'NTAL. adj. [from experiment.]
1. Pertaining to experiment.
2. Built upon experiment; formed by obſervation.
Call me a fool;
Truſt not my reading, nor my obſervations,
Which with experimental ſcal do warrant
The tenor of my book. Shakespeare Much Ado about Nothing.
The experimental teſtimony of Gillius is moſt conſiderable
of any, who beheld the courſe thereof. Brown's Pugar Err.
3. Known by experiment or trial.
We have no other evidence of univerſal impenetrability,
beſides a large experience, without an experimental excep-
tion. Newton's Opt.
Theſe are ſo far from being ſubſervient to atheiſts in their
audacious attempts, that they rather afford an experimental
confirmation of the univerſal deluge. Bentley's Sermons.
Exper IM E/NT ALLY. adv. from experimental. J. By expe-
rience; by trial; by experiment; by obſervation.
The miſcarriage being ſometimes univerſal, has made us
impart what we have experimentally learned by our own obſer-
vations. - Evelyn's Kalendar:
While the man is under the ſcourge of afflićtion, he is
willing to abjure thoſe ſins which he now exterimental, finds
attended with ſuch bitter conſequences. Rºgers's Serººns.
ExPE’RIMENTER. m. ſ. [from experinent. One who makes
experiment.
Galileus and Marſenius, two exaćt exterimenter, do think
they find this verity by their experiences; but firely this, is
impoſſible to be done. Digby on Bodies.
EXPERT. a.j [expertuſ, Latin.] -
1. Skilful; addreſsful; intelligent in buſineſs.
Now we will take ſome order in the town,
Placing therein ſome expert officers. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Again fair Alma ſits confeſt,
On Florimei's experter breaſt;
When ſhe the riſing ſigh conſtrains,
And by concealing ſpeaks her pains. Prior.
2. Ready ; dexterous.
The meanett ſculptor in th’ + milian ſquare,
Can imitate in braſs the nails and hair;
Expert in trifles, and a cunning fool,
Ablet' expreſs the parts, but not diſpoſe the whole. Dryden.
They have not the good luck to be perfeółly knowing in the
forms of ſyllogiſm, or expert in mode and figure. Locke.
3. Skilful by practice or experience. This ſenſe is rare.
Expert men can execute, and judge of particulars, one by
one; but the general counſels, and the plots and marſhalling
of affairs, come beſt from thoſe that are learned. Bacon.
4. It is uſed by Pºpe with ºf before the object of ſkill, generally
with in. *
Thy offspring bloom,
Expert of arms, and prudent in debate, º
The gifts of heav'n to guard thy hoary ſtate. Pºpe's Odyſſey:
Expe'RTLY. adv. [from expert.] In a ſkilful, ready and dex-
terous nilanner. -
Expe'RTNess. n.ſ. [from expert.] Skill; readineſs; dex-
terity. -
What his reputation, what his valour, honeſty, and ex-
pertneſs in war. Shakespeare Alſ', well that ends well.
This army, for the experineſ, and valour of the ſoldiers,
was thought ſufficient to have met the greateſt army of the
Turks. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Yurks.
Expiable. adj. [from expiate.] Capable to be expiated, or
attoned.
To EXPIATE. v. a. [expio, Latin.] -
1. To annul the guilt of a crime by ſubſequent acts of piety;
to attone for. -
Strong and able petty felons, in true penitence, implore
permiſſion
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 403</div><p class="Text">E X P
E X P
permiſſion to expiate their crimes by their affiduous labours in
ſo innocent and ſo hopeful a work Bacon's Phyſ. Remarks.
The odium which ſome men's rigour or remiſineſs had con-
tracted upon my government, I reſolved to expiate by regu-
lations. King Charles.
For the cure of this diſeaſe an humble, ſerious, hearty re-
pentance is the only phyſick; not to expiate the guilt of it,
but to qualify us to partake of the benefit of Chriſt's attone-
ment. . Ray on the Creation.
2. To avert the threats of prodigies.
Expiation. n.ſ.. [from expiate.]
1. The act of expiating or attoning for any crime.
2. The means by which we attone for crimes; attonement.
Law can diſcover fin, but not remove,
Save by thoſe ſhadowy expiations weak,
The blood of bulls and goats. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
The former part of this poem is but a due expiation for my
not ſerving my king and country in it. Dryden.
Let a man's innocence be what it will, let his virtues riſe to
the higheſt pitch of perfeótion, there will be ſtill in him ſo
many ſecret fins, ſo many human frailties, ſo many offences of
ignorance, paſſion and prejudice, ſo many unguarded words
and thoughts, that without the advantage of ſuch an expiation
and attonement, as Chriſtianity has revealed to us, it is impoſ-
ſible he ſhould be ſaved. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 50.
3. Practices by which the threats of ominous prodigies were
averted.
Upon the birth of ſuch monſters the Grecians and Romans
did uſe divers ſorts of expiations, and to go about their prin-
cipal cities with many ſolemn ceremonies and ſacrifices. Hayw.
F'xpiatory. adj. [from expiate.] Having the power of ex-
plation or attonement.
His voluntary death for others prevailed with God, and had
the force of an expiatory ſacrifice. Hooker, b.v. f. 56.
Expila'rion. n ſ. [expilati, Latin J Robbery; the act of
committing waſte upon land to the loſs of the heir.
Expir A'tion. m.ſ [frem expire.] -
1. That ačt of reſpiration which thruſts the air out of the lungs,
and contraćts the cavity of the breaſt. Quincy.
In all expiration the motion is outwards, and therefore rather
driveth away the voice than draweth it. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Of an inflammation of the diaphragm, the ſymptoms are a .
violent fever, and a moſt exquiſite pain increaſes upon inſpi-
ration; by which it is diſtinguiſhed from a pleuriſy, in which
the greateſt pain is in expiration. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. The laſt emiſſion of breath; death.
We have heard him breathe the groan of expiration. Rambler.
3. Evaporation; act of fuming out.
4. Vapour; matter expired.
Words of this ſort reſemble the wind in fury and impetu-
ouſneſs, in tranſientneſs and ſudden expiration. Decay of Piety.
Cloſe air is warmer than open air, as the cauſe of cold is
an expiration from the earth, which in open places is ſtronger.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 866.
5. The ceſſation of any thing to which life is figuratively
aſcribed.
To ſatisfy ourſelves of its expºration we darkened the room,
and in vain endeavoured to diſcover any ſpark of fire. Boyle.
6. The concluſion of any limited time.
If 'till the expiration of your month,
You will return and ſojourn with my fiſter,
Diſmiſſing half your train, come there to me. Shakespeare K. Lear.
This he did in a fortnight after the expiration of the treaty
of Uxbridge. Clarendon, b. viii.
To EXPIRE. v. a. [expiro, Latin.]
1. To breathe out.
To ſave his body from the ſcorching fire,
Which he from helliſh entrails did expire. Fairy Queen.
Anatomy exhibits the lungs in a continual motion of in-
ſpiring and expiring air. Harvey on Conſumptions.
This chaff'd the boar; his noſtrils flames expire,
And his red eyeballs roll with living fire. Dryden's Ovid.
2. To exhale; to ſend out in exhalations.
The fluid which is thus ſecreted, and expired forth along
with the air, goes off in inſenſible parcels. Woodward.
3. To cloſe ; to conclude; to bring to an end.
When as time flying with wings ſwift,
Expired had the term that theſe two javels
Should render up a reck'ning of their travels. Hubb. Tale.
To ExPI'R E. v. n.
1. To make an emiſſion of the breath.
If the inſpiring and expiring organ of any animal be flopt, it
ſuddenly dies. J/alton’s Angler.
2. To die; to breathe the laſt.
For when the fair in all their pride expire,
To their firſt elements the ſouls retire.
3. To periſh; to fall; to be deſtroyed.
All thy praiſe is vain,
Save what this verſe, which never ſhall expire,
Shall to thee purchaſe. Spenser.
The dead man's knell,
Is there ſcarce aſk'd, for whom; and good mens lives
Pope.
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Dying or ere they ſicken. Shakeſpeare’s Macbeth.
4. To fly out with a blaſt.
The diſtance judg’d for ſhot of every ſize,
The linſtocks touch, the pond’rous ball expires;
The vig rous ſeaman every porthole plies,
And adds his heart to every gun he fires.
5. To conclude; to terminate; to come to an end.
A month before
This bond expires, I do expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond. Slakeſpeare.
To EXPLA’IN. v. a. [explano, Latin.] To expound; to il-
luſtrate; to clear by notes or commentaries.
Such is the original deſign, however we may explain it
away. Ayliffe's Parergon.
You will have variety of commentators to explain the dif-
ficult paſſages to you. Gay.
Some explain'd the meaning quite away. Pope.
Expla'INAple. adj. [from explain.] Capable of being ex-
plain d or interpreted.
It is ſymbolically explainable, and implieth purification and
cleanneſs. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. v. c. 21.
Expla'1N E R. m. ſ. [from explain.] Expoſitor; interpreter;
Commentator.
Explan A'TIon. m. ſ. [from explain.]
1. The act of explaining or interpreting.
2. The ſenſe given by an explainer or interpreter.
Before this explanation be condemned, and the bill found
upon it, ſome lawyers ſhould fully inform the jury. Swift.
Expla'N AT or Y. adj. [from explain.] Containing explana-
tion.
Had the printer given me notice, I would have printed the
names, and writ explanatory notes. Swift.
Expletive. n.ſ. [expletivum, Latin J Something uſed only to
take up room; ſomething of which the uſe is only to prevent
a vacancy.
Theſe are not only uſeful expletives to matter, but great or-
naments of ſtyle. Swift.
Oft the ear the open vowels tire,
While expletives their feeble aid do join. Pope's Eſ, on Critic.
Another nicety is in relation to expletives, whether words
or ſyllables, which are made uſe of purely to ſupply a va-
cancy: do, before verbs plural, is abſolutely ſuch; and future
refiners may explode did and does. Pope.
Explicable. adj. [from explicate.] Explainable; poſſible to
be explained.
Many difficulties, ſcarce explicable with any certainty, occur
in the fabrick of human nature. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Great variety there is in compound bodies, and little many
Dryden.
of them ſeem to be explicable. Boyle.
To EXPLICATE. v.a. [explico, Latin.]
1. To unfold; to expand.
They explicate the leaves, and ripen food
For the filk labourers of the mulberry wood. Blackmore.
2. To explain; to clear; to interpret. .
They do not underſtand that part of Chriſtian philoſophy
which explicates the ſecret nature of this divine ſacrament.
Taylor's iſ orthy Communicant.
Although the truths may be elicited and explicated by the
contemplation of animals, yet they are more clearly evidenced
in the contemplation of man. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
The laſt verſe of his laſt ſatyr is not yet ſufficiently ex-
plicated. Dryden's juvenal, Ded cat.
Explication. m. ſ. [from explicate.]
1. The act of opening; unfolding or expanding.
2. The aët of explaining; interpretation; explanation. -
The church preacheth, firſt publiſhing, by way of teſti-
mony, the truth which from them ſhe hath received, written
in the ſacred volumes of Scripture; ſecondly, by way of expli-
cation, diſcovering the myſteries which lie hid therein. Hooker.
Many things are needful for explication, and many for appli-
cation unto particular occaſions. ocker, b. !.
Allowances are made in the explication of our Saviour's
parables, which hold only as to the main ſcope. Alterbury.
3. The ſenſe given by an explainer; interpretation.
'Tis the ſubſtance of this theory I mainly depend upon;
many ſingle explications and particularities may be rectified
upon farther thoughts. Burner's Theory of the Earth, Preface.
Explicative. adj. [from explicate.] Having a tendency to
explain.
If the term which is added to the ſubject of a complex pro-
poſition be either eſſential or any way neceſſary to it, then it
is called explicative; for it only explains the ſubject, as every
mortal man is a ſon of Adam. I/atts's Logick.
Explicator. n.ſ. (from explicate.] Expounder; interpreter;
explainer.
EXPLI'CIT. adj. [explicitus, Latin.] Unfolded; plain; clear;
not obſcure; not merely implied.
We muſt lay aſide that lazy and fallacious method of cen:
furing by the lump, and bring things cloſe to explicit proof
and evidence. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, {{..
Theſe ſpeculations, when moſt refined, ſerve only to .
ow
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 404</div><p class="Text">E X P
how impoſſible it is for us to have a clear and explicit notion
of that which is infinite. South's Sermons.
Explicitly. adv. [from explicit J Plainly ; directly ; not
merely by inference or implication.
his querulous hubour carries an implicit repugnance to
God's diſpoſals; but where it is indulged, it uſually is its own
expoſitor, and ºx; licitly avows it. Gºvernment ºf the Tongue.
To EXPLO'DE. v. a. [ex lodo, Latin.]
1. To drive out diſgracefully with ſome noiſe of contempt; to
treat with open contempt; to treat not only with neglect, but
epen diſdain or ſcorn.
Him old and young
Exploded, and had ſeiz'd with violent hands,
Had not a cloud deſcending ſnatch'd him thence - :
Unſeen amid’ the throng. AZilton’, Paradiſe Loft, b, xi.
Thus was th’ applauſe they meant,
Turn'd to exploding hiſs, triumph to ſharne,
Caſt on themſelves from their own mouths. Milt. Par. Loft.
Old age explodes all but morality. Roſcommon.
There is pretended, that a magnetical globe or terrella,
being placed upon its poles, would have a conſtant rotation;
but this is commonly exploded, as being againſt all expe-
rience. Wilkins's Daedalus.
Shall that man paſs for a proficient in Chriſt's ſchool, who
would have been exploded in the ſchool of Zeno or Epićtetus.
South’s Sermons.
Provided that no word, which a ſociety ſhall give a ſanétion
to, be afterwards antiquated and exploded, they may re-
ceive whatever new ones they ſhall find occaſion for.
- Swft's Letter to the Lord High Treaſurer,
2. To drive out with noiſe and violence.
But late the kindled powder did explode
The maſſy ball, and the braſs tube unload. Blackmore.
Explo'DER. m. ſ. [from explode..] An hiſſer ; one who drives
out any perſon or thing with open contempt.
EXPLOIT. n.ſ.. [expletum, Latin, res expleta.] A deſign
accompliſhed; an atchievement; a ſucceſsful attempt.
Know'ſt thou not any whom corrupting gold
Would tempt into a cloſe exploit of death? Shakespeare Rich. III.
Flight cannot ſtain the honour you have won;
But mine it will, that no exploit have done. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
- How ſhall Irelate
To human ſenſe th’ inviſible exploits
- Of warring ſpirits? Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. v.
He breaks fierce Hannibal's inſulting heats;
Of which exploit thus our friend Ennius treats.
Will you thus diſhonour
Your paſt exploits, and ſully all your wars? Addiſon's Cato.
To Explo'it. v. a. [from the noun..] To perform; to at-
chieve.
He exploited great matters in his own perſon in Gallia, and
by his ſon in Spain. Camden's Remains,
To EXPLC'RATE. v. a. [explºra, Latin.] To ſearch out;
to try by ſearching.
Snails exclude their horns, and therewith explorate their
way. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 20.
Explor A'TIon. m. ſ [from explorate.] Search; examination.
For exačt exploration they ſhould be ſuſpended where the air
is quiet, that, clear of impediments, they may the more freely
convert upon their natural verticity. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Uſe may be made of the like way of exploration in that en-
quiry which puzzles ſo many modern naturaliſts. Boyle.
Explora"ro R. n.ſ.. [from explorate J One who ſearches; a
fearcher; an examiner.
Explo'RAT or Y. adj. [ from explorate. J
mining,
To EXPLORE. v. a. [exploro, Latin.] To try; to ſearch
into ; to examine by trial.
Abdiel that ſight endur'd not, where he ſtood
Among the mightieſt, bent on higheſt deeds,
Denham.
Searching; exa-
And thus his own undaunted heart explores. Milt. Par. Loft.
Divers opinions I have been inclined to queſtion, not
only as a naturaliſt, but as a chymiſt, whether they be agree-
able to true grounds of philoſophy, or the exploring experi-
ments of the fire. Boyle.
But Capys, and the reſt of ſounder mind,
The fatal preſent to the flames deſign'd,
Or to the wat'ry deep; at leaſt to bore
The hollow ſides, and hidden frauds explore. Dryden's Án.
The mighty Stagyrite firſt left the ſhore,
Spread all his ſails, and durſt the deeps explore;
He ſteer'd ſecurely, and diſcover'd far,
Led by the light of the Moeonian ſtar. Pope's Eſ: on Crit.
Explo'REMENT. n.ſ.. [from explore.] Search ; trial.
The fruſtrated ſearch of Porta, upon the explorement of
many, could ſcarce find one. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
Explo'sion. m. ſ. [from explode.] The act of driving out
anything with noiſe and violence.
Thoſe parts which abound with ſtrata of ſtone, or marble,
making the ſtrongeſt oppoſition, are the moſt furiouſly ſhat-
tered; an event obſervable not only in this, but all other
explºſions whatever, IWººdward's Natural Hiſtory.
In gunpowder the charcoal and ſulphur eaſily take fire, ará
ſet fire to the nitre ; and the ſpirit of the nitre being the ety
rarified into vapour, ruſhes out with exploſio, after the nati-
ner that the vapour of water ruſhesout of an aeolipile: the ful-
phur alſo, being volatile, is converted into vapour, and aug.
ments the expoſiºn
With explºſion vaſt,
. . The thunder raiſes his tremendous voice. 7%inſºn.
Explosive. adj. [from explode J Driving out with noiſ; and
violence. *
Theſe minerals conſtitute in the earth a kind of natural
gunpowder, which takes fire; and by the aſſance of its ex-
plºſive power, renders the ſhock greater. If oldward's N. Hiſ3.
EXPO'NENT. n.ſ.. [from expono, Latin.] -
Exponent of the ratio, or proportion between any two num-
bers or quantities, is the exponent ariſing when the antecedent
is divided by the conſequent : thus fix is the exponent of the
ratio which thirty hath to five. Alſo a rank of numbers in
arithmetical progreſſion, beginning from o, and placed over
a rank of numbers in geometrical progreſſion, are called in-
dices or exponents: and in this is founded the reaſon and de-
monſtration of logarithms; for addition and ſubtraction of
theſe exponents anſwers to multiplication and diviſion in the
geometrical numbers. Harris.
Expo’Ne NTIAL. adj. [from exponent.]
Exponential curves are ſuch as partake both of the nature
of algebraick and tranſcendental ones. They partake of the
former, becauſe they conſiſt of a finite number of terms,
though thoſe terms themſelves are indeterminate; and they
are in ſome meaſure tranſcendental, becauſe they cannot be
algebraically conſtructed. Harr is.
To EXPORT. v. a. ſextorto, Latin J. To carry out of a
country, generally in the way of traffick. - -
Glorious followers taint buſineſs for want of ſecrecy, and
export honour from a man, and make him a return in envy.
Bacon's Eſſays, Civil and Moral.
Edward III. by his encouragement of trade, turned the
ſcale ſo much in favour of Engliſh merchandize, that, by a
balance of trade taken in his time, the exported commodities
amounted to two hundred ninety-four thouſand pounds, and
the imported but to thirty-eight thouſand. Addison's Freeholder.
Great ſhips brought from the Indies precious wood, and ex-
ported pearls and robes. A, buthn ton Coins.
ExpoRT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Commodity carried out in
traffick.
ExpoRTA'tion, n.ſ.. [from export.] The ačt or practice of
carrying out commodities into other countries.
he cauſe of a kingdom's thriving is fruitfulneſs of ſoil to
produce neceſſaries, not only ſufficient for the inhabitants, but
for exportation into other countries. Swift.
Expo'RTER. n.ſ.. [from export.] He that carries out commo-
dities, in oppoſition to the importer, who brings them in.
oney which is weight, according to its denomination by
the ſtandard of the mint, will be that which will be melted
down, or carried away in coin by the exporter, whether the
pieces of each ſpecies be by the law bigger or leſs. Lo ke.
To EXPOSE. v.a. [expone, expoſitum, Lat. expºſer, French.]
1. To lay open; to make liable to.
Take phyſick, pomp ;
Expoſe thyſelf to feel what wretches feel, ,
That thou may'ſt ſhake the ſuperflux to them,
And ſhew heav'n juſt. *akſpeare's King Lear.
Who here
Will envy whom the higheſt place expºſes -
Foremoſt to ſtand againſt the Thunderer's aim : Milt. P. f.
To paſs the riper period of his age,
Aćting his part upon a crowded ſtage,
To laſting toils expos'd, and endleſs cares,
A eru. wn's Opt.
To open dangers, and to ſecret ſnares. Priºr.
2. To put in the power of any thing.
But ſtill he held his purpoſe to depart;
For as he lov’d her equal to his life,
He would not to the ſeas expoſe his wife. Dryden,
3. To lay open; to make bare; to put in a ſtate of being acted
upon.
Then joyous birds frequent the lonely grove,
And beaſts, by nature ſtrong, renew their love;
Then fields the blades of bury'd corn diſcloſe,
And while the balmy weſtern ſpirit blows,
Earth to the breath her boſom dares ex %
4. To lay open to cenſure or ridicule; to
as brings contempt.
Like Horace, you only expºſe the follies of men, without
arraigning their vices. Dryden's juv. Dedication.
Tully has juſtly expoſed a precept, that a man ſhould live
with his friend in ſuch a manner, that if he became his ene-
my, it ſhould not be in his power to hurt him. Addiſon's Spect.
A fool might once himſelf alone expoſe;
Now one in verſe makes many more in proſe. Pºe.
Your fame and your property ſuffer alike, you are at once
expoſed and plundered. - Pope.
5. To lay open to examination. -
Thoſe
Dryden's Pirg 'i.
ow in ſuch a ſtate
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 405</div><p class="Text">Thoſe who ſeek truth only, freely expºſe their principles to
the teſt, and are pleaſed to have them examined. Locke.
6. To put in danger.
The expoſing himſelf notoriouſly did ſometimes change the
fortune of the day, when his troops begun to give ground.
Clarendon, b. viii.
7. To caſt out to chance.
A father, unnaturally careleſs of his child, gives him to
another man; and he again expoſes him: a third man finding
him, breeds up and provides for him as his own. Lºcke.
Helpleſs and naked on a woman's knees,
- To be expos'd or rear'd as ſhe may pleaſe, }
Feel her negle&amp;t, and pine from her diſeaſe. Prior.
A colloquial abuſe of
8. To cenſure; to treat with diſpraiſe.
the word.
A little wit is equally capable of expoſing a beauty, and of
aggravating a fault. Addiſon's Spediator, N°. 29.
Exposition. n.ſ.. [from expoſe.]
1. The ſituation in which anything is placed with reſpect to the
ſun or air.
Water he chuſes clear, light, without taſte or ſmell; drawn
not from ſnow, but from ſprings with an eaſterly expºſition.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The diverſity of expoſition of the ſeveral kitchens in this
city, whereby ſome receive the rays of the ſun ſooner, and
others later, will occaſion great irregularity as to the time of
dining. Arbuthnot.
2. Explanation; interpretation; [from expound, expano, Latin.]
My lord of York, it better ſhew’d with you,
When that your flock, aſſembled by the bell,
Encircled you, to hear with reverence
Your expoſition on the holy text. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
* You are a worthy judge;
You know the law: your expoſition
Hath been moſt ſound. Shakeſpeare's Merch. of Venice.
I have ſometimes very boldly made ſuch expoſitions of my
authors, as no commentator will forgive me. Dryden.
Expo'sitoR. n.ſ. [expoſitor, Latin.] "Explainer; expounder;
interpreter.
º A mirth-moving jeſt,
Which his fair tongue, conceit's expoſitor,
Delivers in ſuch apt and gracious words,
That aged ears play truant at his tales. Shakeſpeare.
In the pićture of Abraham's ſacrificing his ſon, Iſaac is
deſcribed as a little boy, which is not conſentaneous unto the
authority of expºſitors. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v. c. 8.
The finner's conſcience is the beſt expºſitor of the mind of
God, under any judgment or afflićtion. • South's Sermons.
Commentators and ſcholiaſts, thoſe copious expoſitors of
places, pour out a vain overflow of learning on paſſages plain
and eaſy. Locke.
º To EXPOSTULATE. v. n. [expoſłulo, Latin.] To can-
vaſs with another; to altercate; to debate without open rup-
ture.
More bitterly could l expoſulate,
Save that for reverence of ſome alive
I give a ſparing limit to my tongue. Shakespeare . Richard III.
The emperor's ambaſſador did expoſulate with the king,
that he had broken his league with the emperor. Hayward.
It is madneſs for friendleſs and unarmed innocence to ex-
foſtulate with invincible power. L’Eſtrange.
Durſt I expoſtulate with providence, I then might aſk. Cotton.
The biſhop will expoſulate, and the tenant will have regard
to the reaſonableneſs of the demand, rather than engage in a
ſuit. t Swift.
Expostulation. m. ſ. [from expoſſulate.]
1. Debate; altercation; diſcuſſion of an affair in private with-
out rupture.
Expoſłulations end well between lovers, but ill between
friends. Spect.
2. Charge; accuſation.
This makes her bleeding patients to accuſe
High heav'n, and theſe expºſulations uſe;
Could nature then no private woman grace,
Whom we might dare to love, with ſuch a face? I/allºr.
Expoſłulation is a private accuſation of one friend touching
another, ſuppoſed not to have dealt ſingly or conſiderately in
the courſe of good friendſhip. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Expost ULA'toR. n.ſ.. [from expoſulate.] One that debates
with another without open rupture.
Expo's Tulatory. adj. [from expºſulate.] Containing ex-
poſtulation.
This fable is a kind of an expoſłulatory debate between
bounty and ingratitude. L’E/irange.
Exposur E. n.J. [from expoſe.]
1. The act of expoſing or ſetting out to obſervation.
2. The ſtate of being open to obſervation.
- When we have our naked frailties hid,
...That ſuffer in expoſure, let us meet. Shakeſ Macbeth.
3. The ſtate of being expoſed, or being liable to anything.
Determine on ſome courſe,
More than a wild expºſure to each chance
That ſtarts i' th' way before thee. Shakeſ Coriolanus.
4. The ſtate of being in danger.
- - - Ajax ſets Therſites
To match us in compariſons with dirt;
To weaken and diſcredit our expoſure,
How hard ſoever rounded in with danger. Shakespeare.
5. Expoſition; the ſituation in which the ſun or air is received.
The cold now advancing, ſet ſuch plants as will not endure
the houſe, in pots two or three inches lower than the ſurface
of ſome bed, under a ſouthern expoſure. Evelyn,
To EXPOUND. v. a. [expono, Lat.]
1. To explain; to clear; to interpret; to ſhew the meaning of.
We cannot better interpret the meaning of thoſe words
than pope Leo himſelf expounded them, whoſe ſpeech concern-
ing our Lord's aſcenſion may ſerve inſtead of a marginal
gloſs. Hoºker, b. v. ſ. 45.
This by Calphurnia's dream is ſignified.
—And this way you have well expounded it Shakespeare Yu. Caſ:
He expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things con-
cerning himſelf. Lu. xxiv. 27.
Thoſe right holy fathers, as in matters of faith they did
not make truth, but religiouſly expounded it; ſo in matters of
eccleſiaſtical government, they did not create provinces for
themſelves, but ordered the countries which they then had.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
2. To examine; to lay open: a Latiniſm.
He expound.d both his pockets, -
And found a watch with rings and lockets. Hudibras.
Expo'UNDER. n.ſ. [from expound..] Explainer; interpreter.
This they did partly as faithful witneſſes, making a mere re-
lation of what God himſelf had revealed unto them; and partly
as careful expounders, teachers, and perſuaders thereof. Hooker.
The beſt he was,
And faithfulleſt expounder of the laws. Dryden's juv. Sat. 4.
To EXPRESS. v. a. [exprimo, expreſſus, Latin.]
1. To copy; to reſemble; to repreſent.
So kids and whelps their fires and dams expreſ,
And ſo the great I meaſur’d by the leſs. Dryden's Wirgil.
Adorn a dream, expreſſing human form,
The ſhape of him who ſuffer'd in the ſtorm;
And ſend it fleeting to the Thracian court,
The wreck of wretched Ceyx to report. Dryden.
2. To repreſent by any of the imitative arts: as poetry, ſculp-
ture, painting.
Each ſkilful artiſt ſhall expreſ; thy form * *, *.
In animated gold. Smith's Phadra and Hippolitus.
3. To repreſent in words; to exhibit by language; to utter; to
declare.
Leſs than half we find expreſ?, -
Envy bid conceal the reſt. Milton.
Though they have learned thoſe ſounds, yet there are no
determined ideas laid up in their minds, which are to be ex-
tº to others by them. Locke.
n moral ideas we have no ſenſible marks that reſemble
them, whereby we can ſet them down: we have nothing but
words to expreſs them by. Locke.
True wit is nature to advantage dreſt,
What oft was thought, but ne'er ſo well expreſſ. Pope.
Others for language all their care expreſs,
And value books, as women men, for dreſs. Pope.
To ſhed tears, among the ancients, when they ſhould ex-
preſ; their gratitude to the gods with joy, was eſteemed a pro-
phanation. Notes to Pope's Odyſſey.
4. To ſhow or make known in any manner.
No longer ſhall thy bodice aptly lace,
That air and ſhape of harmony expreſs,
Fine by degrees, and delicately leſs.
5. To utter; to declare, with the reciprocal pronoun. . .
Mr. Philips did expreſs himſelf with much indignation
againſt me one evening. Pope.
6. To denote; to deſignate. -
Moſes and Aaron took theſe men expreſſed by their names.
Numb. i. 17.
Prior.
7. To ſqueeze out; to force out by compreſſion. -
Among the watry juices of fruit are all the fruits ºut of
which drink is expreſſed; as the grape, and the apple. Bacon.
8. To extort by violence: a Latiniſm.
Halters and racks cannot expreſs from thee
More than thy deeds: 'tis only judgment waits thee: ...
Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
ExPRE'ss, adj. [from the verb.]
1. Copied ; reſembling; exactly like.
Of his preſence many a ſign
Still following thee, ſtill compaſſing thee round
With goodneſs and paternal love; his face
Expreſs, and of his ſteps the track divine. Milton's P. Lºft.
2. Plain; apparent; in direct terms. -
There hath been ſome doubt whether containing in Scrip:
ture do import expreſs ſetting down in plain terms; or elſe
comprehending in ſuch ſort, that by reaſon we may from
thence conclude all things which are neceſſary. Hooker, 4. i.
There is not any poſitive law of men, whether general or
particular, received by formal expreſs conſent, as in councils;
or by ſecret approbation; but the ſame may be taken away, if
occaſion ſerves. Hocker, b. iv. ſ. Ai
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 406</div><p class="Text">E X P
E X P
All the gazers on the ſkies,
Read not in fair heaven's ſtory
Expreſſer truth, or truer glory,
Than they might in her bright eyes. Ben. jºhnſ. Epigr.
. Clear; not dubious.
I love to feel myſelf of an expreſ; and ſettled judgment and
affestion, in things of the greateſt moment. More's Div. Dial.
As to the teſtimonies of the fathers, let them be never ſo
expreſ; againſt all ſorts of prayers and invocations, they hold
only of ſuch a ſort of prayer. Stillingfieet.
Where reaſon or ſcripture is expreſ; for any opinion, or
aćtion, we may receive it as of divine authority. Locke.
4. On purpoſe; for a particular end.
They who are not induced to believe and live as they ought,
by thoſe diſcoveries which God hath made in Scripture, would
ſtand out againſt any evidence whatſoever; even that of a
meſſenger ſent expreſ; from the other world. Atterbury's Serm.
Expre’ss. n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive..] .
1. A meſſenger ſent on purpoſe. -
The king ſent an expreſ; immediately to the marquis, with
all the particular informations. Clarendon, b. viii.
As if expreſſes from all parts had come;
With freſh alarms threat'ning the fate of Rome. Dryd, juv.
Upon the firſt moment I was diſcovered ſleeping on the
ground, after my landing, the emperor had early notice of it
by an expreſs. Gulliver's Travels.
2. A meſſage ſent.
I am content my heart ſhould be diſcovered to the world,
without any of thoſe popular captations which ſome men uſe
in their ſpeeches and expreſſes. King 6harles.
3. A declaration in plain terms. Not uſual.
They do not offly contradićt the general deſign and particu-
lar expreſs of the goſpel, but treſpaſs againſt all logick and
' common ſenſe. Norris.
ExPRE'ssible. adj. [from expreſs.]
1. That may be uttered or declared.
They had not only a memory and tradition of it in general,
but even of ſeveral particular accidents of it likewiſe, which
they handed downwards to the ſucceeding ages, with notes of
the greateſt terror expreſſible. , Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. That may be drawn by ſqueezing or expreſfion.
ExPRE'ssion. n.ſ.. [from expreſs.]
1. The aët or power of repreſenting anything.
There is nothing comparable to the variety of inſtructive
expreſſions by ſpeech, wherewith a man alone is endowed, as
with an iłºś. ſuitable to the excellency of his ſoul, for
the communication of his thoughts. Holder's Elem, of Speech.
2. The form or caſt of language in which any thoughts are
uttered.
But ill expreſſion ſometimes gives allay
To noble thoughts, whoſe flame ſhall ne'er decay. Buckingh.
The poet, to reconcile Helen to his reader, brings her in
as a penitent, condemning her own infidelity in very ſtrong
expreſſiºns. Notes on the Odyſſey.
3. A phraſe; a mode of ſpeech. -
4. The act of ſqueezing or forcing out anything by a preſs. . . .
Thoſe juices that are ſo fleſhy, as they cannot make drink
by expreſſion, yet may make drink by mixture of water. Bacon.
The juices of the leaves are obtained by expreſſion; from
this juice proceeds the taſte. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Expre’ssive. adj. [from expreſs.] Having the power of ut-
terance or repreſentation. With of before the thing expreſſed.
Each verſe ſo ſwells expreſſive of her woes,
And ev'ry tear in lines ſo mournful flows,
We, ſpite of fame, her fate revers'd believe,
O'erlook her crimes, and think ſhe ought to live. Tickell.
And four fair queens, whoſe hands ſuſtain a flow'r,
Th’ expreſſive emblem of their ſofter pow'r. Pope.
A viſible and exemplary obedience to God’s laws is the
moſt expreſſive acknowledgment of the majeſty and ſovereignty
of God, and diſpoſes others to glorify him by the ſame ob-
ſervances. Rogers, Sermon 18.
ExPRE'ssiveLY. adv. [from expreſſive..] In a clear and reple-
ſentative way.
ExPRE'ssive Ness. n.ſ.. [from expreſſive J The power of ex-
preſſion, or repreſentation by words.
• The murrain at the end has all the expreſſiveneſ; that words
can give: it was here that the poet ſtrained hard to outdo
Lucretius. Addiſon.
ExPRE'ssly. adv. [from expreſ;..] In direét terms; plainly;
clearly; not by implication; not generally.
It doth not follow, that of neceſſity we ſhall ſin, unleſs
we expreſsly extend this in every particular. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 2.
Articles of belief, and things which all men muſt of neceſ-
fity do, to the end they may be ſaved, are either expreſsly ſet
down in Scripture, or elſe plainly thereby to be gathered.
Hooker, b. iii. ſ. Io.
Who dare croſs 'em,
Bearing the king's will from his mouth expreſsly?. Shakeſp
The beginning of the worſhip of images in theſe weſtern
parts, was by the folly and ſuperſtition of the people, expreſsly .
againſt the will of their own biſhop.
I
Suillingfleet.
This account I expreſly give of them, when I enter on the
argument. Atterbury's Sermºns.
. All the duties that the beſt political laws enjoin, as condu-
cive to the quiet and order of ſocial life, are expreſ...} com-
manded by our religion. Rºgers, Sermon 7.
ExPRE'ssu RE. m.ſ. (from expreſs. Now diſuſed.]
1. Expreſſion; utterance.
There is a myſtery in the ſoul of ſtate,
Which hath an operation more divine,
Than breath or pen can give expreſſure to. Shakespeare. Troil. and Cr.
2. The form; the likeneſs repreſented.
I will drop ſome obſcure epiſtles of love, wherein, by the
colour of his beard, the manner of his gait, the expreſſure of
his eye, forehead, and complexion, he ſhall find himſelf per-
ſonated. - Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
3. The mark; the impreſſion.
And nightly, meadow fairies, look you fing,
Like to the garter-compaſs in a ring:
Th’ expreſſure that it bears, green let it be, -
More fertile freſh than all the field to ſee. Shakeſpeare.
To EXPROBRATE. v.a. [exprobro, Latin.] To charge upon
with reproach; to impute openly with blame; to upbraid.
To exprobrate their ſtupidity, he induces the providence of
ſtorks: now, if the bird had been unknown, the illuſtration
had been obſcure, and the exprobration not ſo proper. Brown.
Exprobra"tion. n: ſ [from exprobrate.] Scornful charge;
reproachful accuſation; act of upbraiding.
The only goodneſs we glory in, is to find out ſomewhat
whereby we may judge others to be ungodly: each other's
fault we obſerve as matter of exprobration, and not of grief.
Hooker's Sºrmons, Preface.
The Parthians, with exprobration of Craſſus's thirſt after
money, poured molten gold into his mouth after he was dead.
Abbot's Deſcription of the World.
It will be a denial with ſcorn, with a taunting exprobration;
and to be miſerable without commiſeration, is the height of
miſery. - South's Sermons.
No need ſuch boaſts, or exprobrations falſe
Of cowardice: the military mound
The Britiſh files tranſcend in evil hour -
For their proud foes, Philips.
To Expropriate. v. a. ſex and proprius, Latin.] To make
: longer our own; to hold no longer as a property. Not in
Llle. -
When you have reſigned, or rather conſigned, your expro-
priated will to God, and thereby entruſted him to will for you,
all his diſpenſations towards you are, in effect, the acts of
our own will. Bºyle's Seraphick Love.
To EXPU'GN. v. a. [expugno, Latin.] To conquer; to take
by aſſault.
Expug Nation. m. ſ. [from expugn.] Conqueſt; the act of
taking by aſſault. * -
. The expugnation of Vienna he could never accompliſh. Sand.
To EXPULSE. v. a. [expulſus, Latin.] To drive out; to ex-
pel; to force away.
For ever ſhould they be expuls'd from France, -
And not have title of an earldom there. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Suppoſe a nation where the cuſtom were, that after full age
the ſons ſhould expulſe their fathers and mothers out of poſſeſ-
ſions, and put them to their penſions. Bacon's holy War.
Although inwardly received, it may be very diuretick, and
expulſe the ſtone in the kidneys; yet how it ſhould reſolve or
break that in the bladder, will require a farther diſpute. Brown.
Dićtys relates, that Peleus was expulſed from his kingdom
by Acaſtus, Notes on the Odyſſey.
, Expu'lsion. n.ſ.. [from expulſe.]
1. The act of expelling or driving out.
A wooer,
More hateful than the foul expulſion is
Of thy dear huſband. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Sole vićtor from th' expulſion of his foes,
Meſfiah his triumphal chariot turn'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
Others think it poſſible ſo to contrive ſeveral pieces of ſteel
and a load-ſtone, that, by their continual attraction and expul-
ſon of one another, they may cauſe a perpetual revolution of
a wheel. ' - Wilkins's Dardalus.
Coffee-coloured urine proceeds from a mixture of a ſmall
quantity of blood with the urine ; but often prognoſticates a
reſolution of the obſtructing matter, and the expulſion of gra-
vel or a ſtone. - Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. The ſtate of being driven out.
To what end had the angel been ſet to keep the entrance
into Paradiſe, after Adam's expulſion, if the univerſe had been
Paradiſe? For then muſt Adam have been chaſed alſo out of
the world. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
This magnificent temple was not finiſhed 'till after the ex-
pulſion of Tarquin. Stillingfleet,
Expu'lsive. adj. [from expulſe J Having the power of ex-
ulſion.
P If the member be dependent, by raiſing of it up, and
placing it equal with or higher than the reſt of the body, the
influx
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 407</div><p class="Text">influx may be reſtrained, and the part ſtrengthened by expul-
five bandages. //ſeman's Surgery.
XPU'N cºr I N. m. f. [from expunge.] Abolition; the act of ex-
punging, blotting, or effacing.
To EXPU'NGE. v. a. [expungo, Latin.]
1. To blot out; to rub out.
The difference of the denarius and drachm having been
done in the manuſcript, it was needleſs to expunge it. Arbuthn.
Neither do they remember the many alterations, additions,
and expungings made by great authors in thoſe treatiſes which
they prepare for the publick. Swift.
2. To efface; to annihilate.
Wilt thou not to a broken heart diſpenſe
hy balm of mercy, and expunge th' offence? Sandys.
l)educt what is tº vanity, or dreſs,
Or learning's luxury, or idleneſs,
Or tricks to ſhew the ſtretch of human brain
Mere curious pleaſure, or ingenious pain;
Expunge the whole, or lop th’ excreſcent parts
Of all, our vices have created arts:
Then ſee how little the remaining ſum,
Which ſerv'd the paſt, and muſt the times to come! Pope.
Expurgaºrion. m. ſ. [expurgatio, Latin.]
1. The act of purging or cleanſing.
All the inteſtines, but eſpecially the great ones, kidneys
and ureters, ſerve for expurgation. J/ijeman's Surgery.
2. Purification from bad mixture, as of errour or falſhood.
Wiſe men know, that arts and learning want expurga-
tion; and if the courſe of truth be permitted to itſelf, it can-
not eſcape many errours. Brown's º to Vulgar Errours.
Expu'r Gatory adj. [expurgatorius, Latin.] Employed in
purging away what is noxious: as, the expurgatory index of
the Romaniſts direéts the abolition or expumétion of paſſages
admitted by any authors contrary to popery.
There wants expurgatory animadverfions, whereby we
might ſtrike out great numbers of hidden qualities; and having
once a conceded liſt, we might with more ſafety attempt their
reaſons. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 7.
ExOUISITE. adj. [exquiſtus, Latin j
1. Farſought; excellent; conſummate; complete.
His abſolute exactneſs they imitate by tending unto that
which is moſt exquiſite in every particular. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 5.
Why ſhould the flate be troubled with this needleſs charge
of keeping and maintaining ſo great a navy in ſuch exquiſite
perfection and readineſs? Raleigh's Eſſays.
Adam and Eve, before the fall, were a different ſpecies ;
and none but a poet of the moſt unbounded invention, and
the moſt exquiſite judgment, could have fitted their converſa-
tion and behaviour to their ſtate of innocence. Addiſon.
The pleaſures of ſenſe are probably reliſhed by beaſts in a
more exquiſite degree than they are by men; for they taſte them
fincere and pure, without being diſtracted in the purſuit, or
diſquieted in the uſe of them. Atterbary's Sermons.
2. Conſummately bad.
With exquiſite malice they have mixed the gall and vinegar
of falſity and contempt. King Charles.
Exqu'isit Ely, adv. [from exquiſite.] Perfeółly; completely:
in either a good or ill ſenſe. -
We ſee more exquiſitely with one eye ſhut than with both
open ; for that the ſpirits viſual unite themſelves, and become
ſtronger. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 86.
A colle&amp;tion of rare manuſcripts, exquiſitely written in Ara-
bick, and ſought in the moſt remote parts by Epenius, the moſt
excellent linguiſt. JWatton.
The ſoldier then, in Grecian arts unſkill'd,
Returning rich with plunder from the field,
If cups of ſilver or of gold he brought,
With jewels ſet, and exquiſitely wrought,
To glorious trappings ſtrait the plate he turn'd,
And with the glitt'ring ſpoil his horſe adorn'd. Dryden.
The poetry of opera's is generally as exquiſitely ill as the
muſick is good. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Exqu'isite Ness. n. ſ. [from exquiſite.] Nicety; perfeótion.
We ſuppoſe the ſuperficies of the two glaſſes ſhould be ſo
exactly flat and ſmooth, that no air at all can come between
them ; and experience has informed us, that it is extremely
difficult to procure from our ordinary tradeſmen either glaſſes
or marbles ſo much as approaching ſuch an exquiſiteneſs. Boyle.
Exscºrt. n. ſ. [exſcriptum, Latin.] A copy; a writing co-
pied from another.
Exsi'ccANT. adj. [from exſtrate J Drying; having the power
to dry up.
Some are moderately moiſt, and require to be treated with
medicines of the like nature, ſuch as fleſhy parts; others dry
in themſelves, yet require exſiccants, as bones. Jºſeman.
To EXSPCCATE. v. a. ſesſicco, Latin.] To dry.
If in a diſſolution of ſteel a ſeparation of parts be made by
precipitation, or exhalation, the esſiccated powder aſcends not
unto the loadſtone. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii., c. 3.
Great heats and droughts exſiccate and waſte the moiſture
and vegetative nature of the earth. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Fxsiccation. m. ſ. [from exſiccate.] The aâ of drying,
That which is concreted by exſiccation, or expreſſion of hu-
midity, will be reſolved by humectation; as earth, dirt, and
clay. Brown's Vulgar Erreurs, b. ii. c. 1.
Exsi'ccATIVE. adj. [from exſiccate.] Having the power of
drving.
Eºios. n. ſ... [expuo, Latin.] A diſcharge of ſaliva by
ſpitting. - &amp;ainty.
Exsu’ction. n.ſ. ſexugo, Latin.] The act of ſucking out, or
draining out, without immediate contact of the power ſucking
with the thing ſucked.
If you open the valve, and force up the ſucker, after this
firſt exſuélion you will drive out almoſt a whole cylinder full of
air. Boyle.
Exsudation. n.ſ [from exudo, Latin.] A ſweating out; an
extillation; an emiſſion.
They ſeemed to be made by an exſudation, or extillation of
ſome petrifying juices out of the rocky earth. Derham:
To Exsu'ffolate. v. a. (a word peculiar to Shakeſpeare.]
To whiſper; to buzz in the ear, [from the Italian verb
fuffolar. - Hammer.
Exchange me for a goat,
When I ſhall turn the buſineſs of my ſoul
To ſuch exſuffolate and blown ſurmiſes. Shakeſp. Othello.
Exsufflation. m. ſ. ſex and ſuffe, Latin.] A blaſt working
underneath.
Of volatility the utmoſt degree is when it will fly away
without returning: the next is when it will fly up, but with
eaſe return: the next is when it will fly upwards over the
helm, by a kind of exſuffation, without vapouring. Bacon.
To Exsu'scitate. v.a. [exſuſ ite, Latin.) Torouſe up; to
ſtir up. Dicf.
Extancy. m. ſ. [from extant. J Parts riſing up above the
reſt; in oppoſition to thoſe depreſſed.
The order of the little extancies, and conſequently that of
the little depreſſions in point of ſituation, will be altered
likewiſe. Boyle on Cºlours.
EXTANT. adj. [extans, Latin.]
1. Standing out to view; ſtanding above the reſt,
That part of the teeth which is extant above the gums is
naked, and not inveſted with that ſenſible membrane called
perioſteum, wherewith the other bones are covered. Ray.
2. Publick; not ſuppreſſed.
The firſt of the continued weekly bills of mortality, extant
at the pariſh clerks hall, begins the twenty-ninth of December
1603. Graunt's Bill, of Mºrtality.
ExtA’tical.
ExtA"tick. -
1. Tending to ſomething external.
I find in me a great deal of extatical love, which continual-
%. me to good without myſelf. Boyle.
apturous.
In trance extatick may thy pangs be drown'd ;
Bright clouds deſcend, and angels watch thee round. Pºpe,
Exte’MPor AL. adj. [extempºralis, Latin.]
1. Uttered without premeditation; quick; ready; ſudden.
Alcidimus the ſophiſter hath many arguments to prove,
that voluntary and extemporal far excelleth premeditated ſpecch.
Hooker, b v. ſ. 22.
A man of pleaſant and popular converſation, of good ex-
temporal judgment and diſcourſe, for the ſatisfying of publick
miniſters. H atton's Life of the Duke of Buckingham.
2. Speaking without premeditation.
Many fooliſh things fall from wiſe men, if they ſpeak in
haſte, or be extemporal. Ben. johnſon's Diſcoverieſ.
Exte'Mpor Ally. adv. [from extemporal.J. Quickly; without
premeditation.
}a}. [ix;&amp;rix};. See Ecstacy.]
2.
The quick comedians
Extemporally will ſtage us, and preſent
Our Alexandrian revels. Shakespeare Anthony and Cleºpatra.
Extempor A'NEous. adj. [extemporaneus, Latin.] Without
premeditation; ſudden.
ExtE’M Por ARY. adj. [extemporareus, Latin.] Uttered or per-
formed without premeditation ; ſudden; quick. -
This cuſtom was begun by our anceſtors out of an ambition
of ſhewing their extemporary ability of ſpeaking upon any
ſubjećt. AMore's Divine Dialogues.
That men ſhould confer at very diſtant removes by an ex-
temporary intercourſe, is another reputed impoſſibility. Glanv-
They write in ſo diminutive a manner, with ſuch frequent
interlineations, that they are hardly able to go on without per-
petual heſitations, or extemporary expletives. Swift.
EXTEMPORE. adv. [exteºporº, Latin.]
1. Without premeditation; ſuddenly; readily ; without any
previous care or preparation.
You may do it extempore; for it is nothing but roaring. Shakespeare
Nothing great ought to be ventured upon without prepara-
tion; but, above all, how ſottiſh is it to engage extempore,
where the concern is eternity ? South's Sermon.
Haft thou no mark at which to bend thy bow
Or, like a boy, purſu'ſt the carrion-crow
With pellets and with ſtories from tree to tree,
A fruitleſs toil, and liv'ſ extempore * Dryden's Pe’ſ Sat. i.
2. It
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 408</div><p class="Text">E X T
E X
-&gt;
2. It is ſometimes uſed as an adječtive, but very improperly.
I have known a woman branch out into a long extempore
diſſertation upon a petticoat Addison's Speciator, Nº. 247.
ExtEMPOR IN Ess. n.ſ. [ from extempore. J . The faculty of
ſpeaking or acting without premeditation.
To ExtE'MroRIZE. v. n. [from extempore.] To ſpeak extem-
pore, or without premeditation.
The extemporizing faculty is never more out of its element
than in the pulpit ; though, even here, it is much more ex-
cuſable in a ſermon than in a prayer. South's Sermons.
To EXTEND. v. a. [extendo, Latin.]
1. To ſtretch out towards any part.
See the figure of his lifeleſs friend, -
And his old fire, his helpleſs hand extend Dryden's Virgil.
Should'ring god's altar a vile image ſtands, -
Belies his features, nay extends his hands. -
2. To ſpread abroad; to diffuſe; to expand.
He much magnifies the capacity of his underſtanding, who
perſuades himſelf that he can extend his thoughts farther than
God exiſts, or imagine any expanſion where he is not. Locke.
3. To widen to a large comprehenſion.
Few extend their thoughts towards univerſal know-
ledge - Locke.
4. To ſtretch into aſſignable dimenſions; to make local ; to
magnify ſo as to fill ſome aſſignable ſpace.
The mind, ſay they, while you ſuſtain
To hold her ſtation in the brain;
You grant, at leaſt ſhe is extended,
Ergo, the whole diſpute is ended.
5. To enlarge; to continue.
To Helen's bed the gods alone aſſign -
Hermione, t e tend the regal line. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv.
6. To encreaſe in force or duration.
If much you note him,
You ſhall offend him, and extend his paſſion: ” -
Feed and regard him not. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
7. To enlarge the comprehenſion of any poſition.
Seeing it is not ſet down how far the bounds of his ſpeech
concerning diſſimilitude reach, who can aſſure us that it ex-
tendeth farther than to thoſe things only wherein the nations
were idolatrous. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 6.
8. To impart; to communicate.
Let there be none to extend mercy unto him. Pſ, civ. 12.
9. To ſeize by a courſe of law.
The law, that ſettles all you do,
And marries where you did but woo;
And if it judge upon your ſide,
Will ſoon extend her for your bride;
And put her perſon, goods or lands,
Or which you like beſt, int' your hands. Hudibras, p. iii.
- ExtE’NDER. m. ſ [from extend J. The perſon or inſtrument
by which any thing is extended. -
The extenſion made, the extenders are to be looſened
gently. - - //iſeman's Surgery.
ExTE'NDIBI. E. adj. [ from extend. J Capable of extenſion;
capable to be made wider or longer.
Tubes, recently made of fluids, are eaſily lengthened; ſuch
as have often ſuffered force, grow rigid, and hardly ex-
tendible. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
ExtE’NDLESSN ESS. m. ſ. [from extend J. Unlimited extenſion.
In this ſenſe it is once found; but, I think, with little pro-
priety.
Certain moleculae ſeminales muſt keep the world from an
infinitude, and extendleſſneſs of excurſions every moment into
new figures and animals. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Ex ENSIBILITY.. n.ſ.. [from extenſible.] The quality of being
extenſible. *
In what manner they are mixed, ſo as to give a fibre exten-
ſibility, who can ſay? Grew's Cºſmol. Sac. b. ii. c. 5.
ExtE’NSIBLE. adj. [extenſin, Latin.]
1. Capable of being ſtretched into length or breadth. ºr
The malleus being fixed to an extenſible membrane, follows
the traction of the muſcle, and is drawn inward. Bolder.
2. Capable of being extended to a larger comprehenſion.
That love is blind, is extenſible beyond the objećt of
poetry. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 15.
Exte'N's BLENEss. n.ſ [from extenſible.] Capacity of being
extended.
Exte'Nsion. m. ſ. [from extenſio, Latin.]
1. The aët of extending.
2. The ſtate of being extended.
The hiccough cometh of fulneſs of meat, eſpecially in chil-
dren, which cauſeth an extenſion of the ſtomach. Bacon.
All reſt ſatisfied at the poſtures of moderation, and none
endure the extremity of flexure or extenſion. Brown's Wul. Err.
This foundation of the earth upon the waters, or extenſion
of it above the waters, doth agree to the antediluvian earth.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
By this idea of ſolidity is the extenſion of body diſtinguiſhed
from the extenſion of ſpace: the extenſion of body being no-
thing but the coheſion or continuity of ſolid, ſeparable, move-
able parts; and the extenſion of ſpace, the continuity of un-
ſolid, inſeparable, and immoveable parts. Locke.
Prior.
Pope.
Ext E'ssive. adj. [extenſivus, Latin.] Wide; large. +
I would not be underſtood to recommend to all a purſuit
of thoſe ſciences, to thoſe extenſive lengths to which the mo-
derns have advanced them. //atts's improvement of the Mind.
ExTE'NSIVE LY. adv. [from extenſive J \\ idely ; largely.
'Tis impoſſible for any to paſs a right judgment concerning
them, without entering into moſt of theſe circumſtances, an
ſurveying them extenſively, and comparing and balancing them
all aright. - ſ/atti's Improvement of the A4ind.
ExT ENSIVEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from extenſive.] -
1. Largeneſs; diffuſiveneſs; wideneſs. - -
As we have reaſon to admire the excellency of this con-
trivance, ſo have we to applaud the extenſiveneſs of the be-
nefit. Government of the longue, ſ. 1.
An extenſiveneſs of underſtanding and a large memory are
of ſervice. - - //atts's Logick.
2. Poſſibility to be extended.
We take notice of the wonderful dilatability or extenſiveneſ;
of the throats and gullets of ſerpents: I myſelf have taken
two entire adult mice out of the ſtomach of an adder, whoſe
neck was not bigger than my little finger Ray on the Creation.
ExtE'Nsor. n.ſ. [Latin.] The muſcle by which any limb is
extended. - - * * * L **
Extenſors are muſcles ſo called, which ſerve to extend any
part. , - - - - &amp;Mincy.
Complaiſant and civil people had the flexors of the head
very ſtrong; but in the proud and inſolent there was a great
overbalance of ſtrength in the extenſors of the neck and the
, muſcles of the back. Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. S. riblerus.
ExTE'N T. participle. from extend. Extended.
Both his hands moſt filthy feculent,
Above the water were on high extent,
And fain'd to waſh themſelves inceſſantly. Spenſ. Fai. Queen.
ExTE'N.T. n.ſ. [extentus, Latin.]
1. Space or degree to which anything is extended.
If I mean to reign
David's true heir, and his full ſceptre ſway . . .
To juſt extent over all Iſrael’s ſons. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
2. Communication; diſtribution.
An emperour of Rome
Troubled, confronted thus, and for th’ extent -
Of equal juſtice us’d with ſuch contempt. Shakespeare. Tit. Andron.
3. Execution; ſeizure.
Let my officers
Make an extent upon his houſe and land,
And turn him going. . Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
To EXTE'NUA’ſ E. v. a. [extenuo, Latin.]
1. To leſſen; to make ſmall or ſlender in bulk.
His body behind his head becomes broad, from whence it
is again extenuated all the way to the tail. Grew's Muſæum.
2. ‘I o leſſen; to diminiſh in any quality.
To perſiſt
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy. Shakespeare. Troilus and Creſſida.
But fortune there extentiate; the crime; -
What's vice in me, is only mirth in him Dryden's juvenal.
3. To leſſen; to degrade; to diminiſh in honour.
Righteous are thy decrees on all thy works;
Who can extent at thee 4,ilton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x.
4. To leſſen in repreſentation; to palliate. Oppoſite to ag-
gravate -
When you ſhall theſe unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me, as I am : nothing extenuate,
Nor ſet down aught in malice. Shakespeare Othell.
Upon his examination he denied little of that wherewith
he was charged, nor endeavoured much to excuſe or extenuate
his fault; ſo that, not very wiſely thinking to make his offence
leſs by confeſſion, he made it enough for condemnation. Bac.
Yet hear me, Sampſon, not that I endeavour, -
To leſiºn or extenuate my offence. Milton's Agoniſłes.
5. To make lean. -
Ext E NU A^T Ion. n.ſ.. [from extenuate.] -
1. The aët of repreſenting things leſs ill than they are; con-
trary to aggravation; palliation.
2. Mitigation; alleviation of puniſhment. -
When ſin is to be judged, the kindeſt enquiry is what deeds
of charity we can allege in extenuation of our puniſhment. Att.
3. A loſs of plumpneſs, or a general decay in the muſcular fleſh
of the whole body. - &amp;iny.
EXTERIOR. adj. [exterior, Latin.] Outward; external;
not intrinſick. -
And what is faith, love, virtue uneſſay'd
Alone, without exterior help ſuſtain'd? Milton's Par. Loſt.
Seraphick and common lovers behold exterior beauties as
children and aſtronomers conſider Galileo's optick glaſſes. Boyle.
Father, blacker, and merrier, are words which, together
with the thing they denominate, imply alſo ſomething elſe
ſeparate and exterior to the exiſtence of that thing. Lºcke.
Exte'Riorly, adv. [from exterior.] Outwardly; externally;
not intrinſically. - -
- You have ſlander'd nature in my form;
Which, howſoever rude exteriorly,
Is
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 409</div><p class="Text">E X T
E X T
Is yet the cover of a fairer mind,
Than to be butcher of an innocent child, Shaleſ. K. john.
To EXTERMINATE. v. a. [extermino, Latin.] To root
out; to tear up; to drive away; to aboliſh; to deſtroy.
Unlucky vices, on which the exterminating lot happened to
fall. Decay of Piety.
Alexander left Grecian colonies in the Indies; but they were
exterminated by Sandrocothus. Arlethnot on Coins.
This diſcovery alone is ſufficient, if the vices of men did
not captivate their reaſon, to explode and exterminate rank
atheiſm out of the world. Bentley's Sermons.
ExtERMINATION. m. ſ. [from exterminate. J Deſtruction;
exciſion.
The queſtion is, how far an holy war is to be purſued,
whether to diſplanting and extermination of people. Bacºn.
ExtERMINA'To R. n.f. [exterminator, Latin.] The perſon or
inſtrument by which any thing is deſtroyed.
To ExtE’RMIN E. v. a. [extermino, Latin.] To exterminate;
to deſtroy.
If you do ſorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love, your ſorrow and my grief
W cre both extermin'd. Shakespeare . As yºu like it.
Exte'RN. adj. [externus, Latin.]
1. External; outward; viſible.
When my outward action doth demonſtrate
The native act and figure of my heart
In compliment extern, 'tis not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my ſleeve,
For daws to peck at. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
2. Without itſelf; not inherent; not intrinſick; not depending
on itſelf.
When two bodies are preſſed one againſt another, the rare
body not being ſo able to reſiſt diviſion as the denſe, and being
not permitted to retire back, by reaſon of the extern violence
impelling it, the parts of the rare body muſt be ſevered. Digby.
ExtERNAL. adj. [externus, Latin.]
1. Outward; not proceeding from itſelf; operating or acting
from without; oppoſite to internal.
We come to be aſſured that there is ſuch a being, either by
an internal impreſſion of the notion of a God upon our minds,
or elſe by ſuch external and viſible effects as our reaſon tells us
muſt be attributed to ſome cauſe, and which we cannot attri-
bute to any other but ſuch as we conceive God to be. Tillotſon.
Theſe ſhells being thus expoſed looſe upon the ſurface of
the earth to the injuries of weather, to be trod upon by
horſes and other cattle, and to many other external accidents,
are, in tract of time, worn, fretted, and broken to pieces.
ſ/codward’s Natural Hiſtory.
2. Having the outward appearance; having to the view or out-
ward perception any particular nature.
Adam was then no leſs glorious in his externals: he had a
beautiful body as well as an immortal ſoul. South's Sermons.
He that commits only the external act of idolatry is as guilty
as he that commits the external ačt of theft. Stillingfleet.
Exº E'RNALLY. adv. [from exernal.] Outwardly.
The exterior miniſtry, externally and alone, hath in it no-
thing excellent, as being deſtitute of the ſanétity that God
requires, and it is common to wicked men and good. Taylor.
To lº. v. n. [ex and ſtillo, Lat.] To drop or diſtil from.
Ext ILLATIon. n.ſ.. [from ex and ſtillo, Latin.] The act of
falling in drops.
They ſeemed made by an exſudation or extillation of putri-
fying juices out of the rocky earth. Derham's Phyſ. Theology.
To EX ['I(MULATE. v.a. [extimulo, Latin.] To prick; to
incite by ſtimulation.
Choler is one excretion whereby nature excludeth another,
which, deſcending unto the bowels, extimulates and excites
them unto expulſion. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 2.
ExTIMULA'Tion. n.ſ.. [from extimulatio, Latin.] Pungency;
power of exciting motion or ſenſation.
The native ſpirits admit great diverſity; as hot, cold, ačtive,
dull, &amp;c. whence proceed moſt of the virtues of bodies; but
the air intermixed is without virtues, and maketh things in-
ſipid, and without any extimulation. Bacon's Natural H/ory.
Ext 1'NcT. adj. [extinéius, Latin.]
1. Extinguiſhed; quenched; put out.
Their purple vengeance bath'd in gore retires,
'Her weapons blunted, and extiné; her fires. Pope.
2. At a ſtop; without progreſſive ſucceſſion.
The royal family is all extinº,
And ſhe who reigns beſtows her crown on me. Dryden.
The nobility are never likely to be extinct, becauſe the
greateſt part of their titles deſcend to heirs general. Swift.
3. Aboliſhed; out of force.
A cenſure inflićled a jure continues, though ſuch law be
extinéſ, or the lawgiver removed from his office. Ayliffe.
Exti'Nction. n. ſ. [extinézio, Latin.]
1. The act of quenching or extinguiſhing.
Red-hot necdles or wires, extinguiſhed in quickſ'ver, do
yet acquire a verticity according to the laws of poſition and
extºn&amp;ion. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
2. The ſtate of being quenched.
The parts are conſumed through extinction of their native
heat, and diſſipation of their radical moiſture.
3. Deſtruction; exciſion.
The extinction of nations, and the deſolation of kingdoms,
were but the effects of this deſtructive evil. Rogers's Sermon.
4. Suppreſſion.
They lie in dead oblivion, loſing half
The fleeting moments of too ſhort a life,
Total extinction of th' enlighten’d ſoul. Thomſon's Summer.
To EXTINGUISH. v.a. [eatinguo, Latin.]
1. To put out; to quench.
The ſoft god of pleaſure that warm'd our deſires,
Has broken his bow, and extinguiſh’d his fires. Dryden.
Then roſe the ſced of chaos and of night,
To blot out order, and extinguiſh light. Dunciad, b. iv.
2. To ſuppreſs; to deſtroy.
They extinguiſh the love of the people to the young king, by
Harvey.
remembring ſome imperfections of his father. Hayward.
My fame of chaſtity, by which the ſkies
I reacht before, by thee extinguiſh’d dies. Denham.
3. To cloud; to obſcure.
Bethink thee on her virtues that ſurmount,
Her nat'ral graces that extinguiſh art. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Exti'NGUISHA ble, adj. [from extinguiſh.] That may be
quenched, ſuppreſſed, or deſtroyed.
Ext 1'NGU is H.E.R. m. ſ. [from extinguiſh.] A hollow cone put
upon a candle to quench it.
If it ſhould ever offer to flame out again, I would uſe the
conicum as an extinguiſher to ſmother it. More's Div. Dialog.
Of it a broad extinguiſher he makes,
And hoods the flames that to their quarry ſtrove. Dryden:
'Tis better to cover the vital flame with an extinguiſer of
honour, than let it conſume 'till it burns blue, and lies ago-
nizing within the ſocket. Collier on the Value of Life:
ExT1'NGUISHMENT. n. ſ. [from extinguiſh.]
1. Extinction; ſuppreſſion; act of quenching; deſtruction.
When death's form appears, ſhe feareth not
An utter quenching, or extinguiſhment ;
She would be glad to meet with ſuch a lot,
That ſo ſhe might all future ill prevent. Davies.
He moved him to a war upon Flanders, for the better ex-
tinguiſhment of the civil wars of France. Bacon.
The immediate cauſe of death is the reſolution or extinguiſh-
ment of the ſpirits. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 400.
2. Abolition; nullification.
Divine laws of Chriſtian church polity may not be altered
by extinguiſhment. Hooker, b. iii.
3. Termination of a family or ſucceſſion.
His heart eaſily conceived treaſon againſt the crown,
wherein he periſhed himſelf, and made a final extinguiſhment
of his houſe and honour. Davies on Ireland.
To Exti'RP. v. a. [extirpo, Latin.] To eradicate; to root
Out,
Which to extirp he laid him privily
Down in a darkſome lowly place far in. Fairy Queen, b.i.
Nor ſhall that nation boaſt it ſo with us,
But be extirped from our provinces. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
To EXTI'RPATE. v. a. [extirpe, Latin.] To root out; to
eradicate; to exſcind; to deſtroy.
The rebels were grown ſo ſtrong, that they made account
ſpeedily to extirpate the Britiſh nation in that kingdom. Dryd.
We in vain endeavour with noiſe, and weapons of law, to
drive the wolf from our own to another's door: the breed
º to be extirpated out of the iſland. Locke.
t is not the buſineſs of virtue to extirpate the affections,
but to regulate them. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 494.
Extirpa"tion. n.ſ.. [from extirpate.] The act of rooting
out; eradication; exciſion; deſtruction.
It is ſaid that popery, for want of utter extirpation, hath in
ſome places taken root and flouriſhed again. Hooker, b. iv.;
Religion requires the extirpation of all thoſe paſſions and
vices which render men unſociable and troubleſome to one
another. - Tillotſon, Sermon 3.
Ext IRPA toR. m. ſ. [from extirpate.] One who roots out ; a
deſtroyer. -
Extispi’cious. adj. [extiſpicium, Latin.] Augurial; relating
to the inſpection of entrails in order to prognoſtication.
Thus hath he deluded many nations unto his augurial and
extiſpicious inventions, from caſual and uncontrived contin-
gences, divining events ſucceeding. Brown's Pulgar Erreurs.
To EXTO'L. v. a. ſextolo, Latinj To praiſe; to magnify;
to laud; to celebrate.
When a rich man ſpeaketh, every man holdeth his tongue;
and look, what he ſaith they extol it to the clouds. Eccluſ, xiii.
For which both heav'n and earth ſhall high extol
Thy praiſes, with th' innumerable ſound
Of hymns, and ſacred ſongs, wherewith thy throne
Encompaſs'd ſhall reſound thee ever bleſs'd. Milt. Par, Lºff.
Let Araby extol her happy coaſt, -
Her cinnamon and ſweet amomum boaſt. Dryden's Ovid.
ExTo'LLER. m. ſ. (from extol.] A praiſer; a magnifier; one
that praiſes to the ſkies.
Exto'Rsive. adj. [from extort.] Having the quality of draw-
ing by violent means. ExTo'RsiveLY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 410</div><p class="Text">E X T
Expo'ssively. adv. [from extorſºve..] In an extorfive man-
ner; by violence. -
To EXFORT. v. a. [extorqueo, extortus, Latin.] .
1. To draw by force; to force away; to wreſt; to wring from
On C.
*Till the injurious Roman did extort
This tribute from us, we were free.
- Newneſs
Of Clotch's death may drive us to a render,
Where we have liv'd , and ſo extort from us -
That which we’ve done Shakespeare Cymbeline.
That glory never ſhall his . or might
Extort from me, to bow and ſue for grace ...
with ſuppliant knee, and deify his pow'r, Milt. Par. Lºft.
I remember well the impious oath,
Hardly extorted from my trembling youth. Rowe.
My earneſt deſires, not any doubts of your goodneſ, but
my réal concern for your welfare, extort this from me. Wake.
2. To gain by violence or oppreſſion. -
His tail was ſtretch'd out in wond’rous length,
That to the houſe of heav'nly gods it raught, .
And with extºrtea power and borrow'd ſtrength,
The ever-burning lamps from thence it brought. . .Stenſºr.
Are my cheſts fill'd up with extorted gold; Shakeſp H. VI.
To Exto'RT. v. n. To practiſe oppreſſion and violence. Now
diſuſed. -
To whom they never gave any penny of entertainment,
but let them feed upon the countries, and extort upon all men
where they come. Spenſer on Ireland.
Before they did extort and oppreſs the people only by colour
of a lewd cuſtom, they did afterwards uſe the ſame extortions
by warrant. Davies on Ireland.
Exfor res. n.ſ. [from extort.] One who practiſes oppreſſion
or extortion.
Edric the extorter was deprived by king Cnute of the go-
vernment of Mercia. Camden's Remains.
Ex-roºtion. n.ſ.. [from extort.] . . -
1. The aâ or práctice of gaining by violence and rapacity.
That goodneſs
Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one,
i.. own hands, cardinal, by extortion. Shah. H. VIII.
Oppreſſion and extortion did maintain the greatneſs, and op-
preſion and extortion did extinguiſh the greatneſs of that
houſe. Davies on Ireland.
2. Force by which any thing is unjuſtly taken away.
Becauſe the lords had power to impoſe this charge, the free:
holders were glad to give a great part of their lands to hold
the reſt free from that extortion. Davies on Ireland.
A ſucceeding king's juſt recovery of rights from unjuſt
uſurpations and extortions, ſhall never be prejudiced by any ačt
of mine. - King Charles.
Extortioner. m. ſ. [from extortion.] One, who practiſes
extortion; one who grows rich by violence and rapacity.
There will be always tyrants, murderers, thieves, adulterers,
extortioners, church-robbers, traitors, and other of the ſame
rabblement. Camden’s Remains.
The covetous extortioner is involved in the ſame ſentence.
Decay of Piety.
To ExtRACT. v.a. [extraho, extradium, Latin.]
1. To draw out of ſomething.
The drawing one metal or mineral out of another, we call
extračiing. Bacon's Phyſical Remarks.
Out of the aſhes of all plants they extraët a ſalt which they
uſe in medicines. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 645.
If the metallick or mineral matter is diſcoverable, it is ſo
diffuſed and ſcattered amongſt the craſſer and more unprofitable
matter, that it would never be poſſible to ſeparate and extract
it. Woodward’s Natural Hiſiony.
2, To draw by chemical operation: -
The
Whom ſunny Borney bears, are ſtor'd with ſtreams ----
Egregious, rum and rice's ſpirit extrači. Phillips.
3. To take from ſomething of which the thing taken was a part.
I now ſee
Bone of my bone, fleſh of my fleſh, myſelf
Before me: woman is her name, of man ---
Extraćied. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. viii. i. 497.
4. To draw out of any containing body or cavity.
Theſe waters were extracted, and laid upon the ſurface of
the ground. Barner's Theory of the Earth.
5. To ſelect and abſtraćt from a larger treatiſe.
To ſee how this caſe is repreſented, I have extracted out of
Shakespeare Cymbeline.
that pamphlet a few notorious falſhoods. Swift. .
'XTRAct. m. ſ. ſfrom the verb.] -
º: *::::::: ; the chief parts drawn from anything.
in tinctures, if the ſuperfluous ſpirit of wine be diſtilled off,
it leaves at the bottom that thicker ſubſtance, which chymiſts
call the extract of the vegetables. Boyle's Scept. Chym.
To dip our tongues in gall, to have nothing in our mouth
but the extrađ and exhalation of our inward bitterneſs, is no
great ſenſuality. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 19.
2.*The chief heads drawn from a book; an abſtračt; an epi-
tonne.
I will preſent a few extračis out of authors. Camden's Rem.
-
Some books may be read by extraffs made of them by
others, but only in the leſs important arguments, and the
meaner books; elſe diſtilled books are like common diſtilled
waters, flaſhy things. Bacon's Aſſays, Civil and M ral.
Spend ſome hours every day in reading, and making ex-
tracts, if your memory be weak. Swift.
ExT R Act, partic, adj. See the verb.
ExTRA'cTio N. m. ſ. [extradio, Latin J
1. The act of drawing one part out of a compound; the aât
of drawing out the principal ſubſtance by chemical operation.
Although the charge of extraction ſhould exceed the worth,
at leaſt it will diſcover nature and poſſibility. Bacon.
They have fallen upon the diſtillatio.s of waters, extrađiºns
of oils, and ſuch like experiments unknown to the ancients.
Hakewill on Providence.
It would not defray the charge and labour of the extraction,
and muſt needs be all irretrievably loſt. Hºodward's Nat. Hiſt.
2. Derivation from an original; lineage; deſcent. -
One whoſe extraction's from an ancient line,
Gives hope again that well-born men may ſhine;
The meaneſt in your nature mild and good,
The noble reſt ſecured in your blood. Waller.
A family of an ancient extraction, tranſported with the con-
queror out of Normandy. Clarendon.
Extraºctor. n.ſ. [Latin. J. The perſon or inſtrument by
which anything is extracted.
ExtRAP1’ctionak Y, adj. [extra and dići, Latin.] Not
confifting in words but realities.
Of theſe extradićionary and real fallacies, Ariſtotle and lo-
gicians make ſix; but we obſerve men are commonly deceived
by four thereof. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 4.
Extrajupi'cial, adj. [extra and judicium, Latin.j Out of
the regular courſe of legal procedure.
A declaratory or extrajudicial abſolution is conferred inforo
paenitentiali. Ayliffe's Parergon.
ExTRAJUDI'cially, adv. [from extrajudicial.] In a manner
different from the ordinary courſe of legal procedure.
The confirmation of an elečtion, though done by a pre-
vious citation of all perſons concerned, may be ſaid to be done
, extrajudicially, when oppoſition enſues thereupon. Ayliffe:
Extra M1'ssion. m. ſ. ſextra and mitto, Latin..] The act of
emitting outwards; oppoſite to intromiſſion.
Ariſtotle, Alhazen, and others, hold that fight is by recep-
tion, and not by extramiſſion; by receiving the rays of the ob-
jećt unto the eye, and not by ſending any out. Brown.
ExTRAMUNDANE. adj. [extra and mundus, Latin.] Beyond
the verge of the material world.
'Tis a philoſophy that gives the exačteſt topography of the
extramundane ſpaces. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 18.
ExTRA'NEous. adj [extraneus, Latin.] Not belonging to any
thing; foreign; of different ſubſtance; not intrinſick.
Relation is not contained in the real exiſtence of things,
but ſomething extraneous and ſuperinduced. Locke.
When the mind refers any of its ideas to anything extra-
neous to them, they are then called true or falſe. Locke.
Gold, when equally pure, and freed from extraneous matter,
is abſolutely alike in colour, conſiſtence, ſpecifick gravity,
and all other reſpešts. Woodward on Foſſils.
ExTRAo'RDINARIly, adv. [from extraordinary.]
1. In a manner out of the common method and order.
In the affairs which were not determinable one way or
other by the Scripture, himſelf gave an extraordinarily direc-
tion and counſel, as oft as they ſought it at his hands. Hooker.
In government it is good to uſe men of one rank equally;
for to countenance ſome extraordinarily, is to make them in-
ſolent, and the reſt diſcontent. Bacon's Eſſays, Civ. and Moral.
2. Uncommonly; particularly; eminently; remarkably.
He quotes me right; and I hope all his quotations, wherein
he is ſo extraordinarily copious and elaborate, are ſo. Howel.
The temple of Solomon was a type, and therefore was ſo
extraordinarily magnificent; otherwiſe perhaps a cheaper ſtruc-
ture might have been as ſerviceable. Wilkins's Math. Magick.
Extrao'r DINARINEss. n.ſ.. [from extraordinary..] Uncom-
monneſs; eminence; remarkableneſs.
I chuſe ſome few, which either for the extraordinarineſ of
their guilt, or the frequency of their pračtice, are the moſt
eminent. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 4.
EXTRAO'RDINARY. adj. [extraordinarius, Lat. This word
and its derivatives are generally pronounced extrordinary,
whereby the a is liquified into the o.]
1. Different from common order and method; not ordinary.
Evils muſt be judged inevitable, if there be no apparent
ordinary way to avoid them; becauſe where council and ad-
vice bear rule of God's extraordinary power, without extraor-
dinary warrant, we cannot preſume. Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 9.
At that time Spain had no other wars, ſave thoſe which
were grown into an ordinary: now they have coupled there-
with the extraordinary of the Voltaline and the Palatinate.
Bacon's War with Spain.
Let us ſee what extraordinary armies have been tranſmitted
thither, and what ordinary forces have been maintained there.
Davie's State ºf Ireland.
2. Different from the common courſe of law.
If they proceeded in a martial or any other extraordinary
- 7 way,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 411</div><p class="Text">E X T
- F. X. T
-
way, without any form of law, his majeſty ſhould declare
his iuſtice and affection to an old faithful ſervant. Clarend.n.
3. Eminent ; remarkable; more than common.
The houſe was built of fair and ſtrong ſtone, not aſ Ging
ſo much any extraordinary kind of fineneſs, as an honourable
repreſenting of a firm ſtatelineſs. Sidney.
The Indians worſhipped rivers, ſountains, rocks, or great
flones, &amp;c. and all things which ſeemed to have tomething
extraordinary in them. Stilingfiest's Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
Extrao's DINARY: adu. [This word ſeems only a colloquial
barbariſm, uſed for the eaſe of pronunciation.] Extraor-
dinarily.
I ran over their cabinet of medals, but don't remember to
have met with anythings in it that are extraordinary rare. Addison
Extra PAR o'chi AL. adj. [extra and parochia, Latin J. Not
comprehended within any pariſh. - -
ExTRAPRovi Nc 1A L. adj. [extra and provincia, Latin.] Not
within the ſame province ; not within the juriſdiction of the
ſame archbiſhop.
An extrap' ovincial citation is not valid, ultra duas diatas,
above two day's journey; nor is a citation valid that contains
many conditions manifeſtly inconvenient. , Ayliff's Parergon.
Ext RARE'GULAR. adj. [ext, a and regula, Latin..] Not com-
prehended within a rule.
His providence is extrargular, and produces ſtrange things
beyond common rules; and he led Iſrael through a ſea, and
made a rock pour forth water. Taylor's Rule ºf living holy.
ExtRA'v AGA Nce. -
Ext: A'v Ag ANcy. ! n. ſ. ſextravagans, Latin.]
1. Excurſion or ſally beyond preſcribed limits.
I have troubled you too far with this extravagance: I ſhall
make no delay to recall myſelf into the road again, having
been taught by you thoſe ſeveral particulars. Hammand.
2. Irregularity; wildneſs.
3. Outrage; violence; outrageous vehemence.
How many, by the wild fury and extravagancy of their own
paſſions, have put their bodies into a combuſtion, and by ſtirr-
ing up their rage againſt others, have armed that fierce humour
againſt themſelves. Tillotſon, Sermon 4.
4. Unnatural tumour; bombaſt.
I remember ſome verſes of my own, Maximin and Alman-
zor, which cry vengeance upon me for their extravagance.
Dryden’s Spaniſh Fryar, Dedication.
5. Waſle; vain and ſuperfluous expence.
She uſed to come home in her cups, and break the china
and the looking-glaſſes; and was of ſuch an irregular temper,
and ſo entirely given up to her paſſion, that you might argue
as well with the North-wind as with her ladyſhip; ſo expen-
five, that the income of three dukes was not enough to ſup-
ply her extravagance. Arbuthnot.
EXTRAVAGAN T. adj. [extravagans, Latin.]
1. Wandering out of his bounds. This is the primogeneal
ſenſe, but not now in uſe.
At his warning
The extravagant and erring ſpirit hies
To his confine. Shakespeare's IHam'et.
2. Roving beyond juſt limits or preſcribed methods.
I dare not aſk for what you would not grant:
But wiſhes, madam, are extravagant;
They are not bounded with things poſſible;
I may wiſh more than I preſume to tell. Dryden's Aurengz.
3. Not comprehended in anything.
Twenty conſtitutions of pope John XXII. are called the
extravagants; for that they being written in no order or me-
thod, vagantu extra corpus collectionum canonum. Ayliffe's Parer.
4. Irregular ; wild.
- For a dance they ſeem'd
Somewhat extravagant, and wild. Miſion's Paradiſ? Loft.
There appears ſomething nobly wild and extravagant in
great natural geniuſes, infinitely more beautiful than turn and
poliſhing. Addiſon's Spediator, N°. 160.
New ideas employed my fancy all night, and compoſed a
wild extravagant dream. Addiſon's Speciator.
5. Waſteful; prodigal; vainly expenſive.
An extravagant man, who has nothing elſe to recommend
him but a falſe generoſity, is often more beloved than a per-
ſon of a much more finiſhed character, who is defective in
this particular. Addison's Spectator, Nº. 243.
ExTRA'v AGANT. n.ſ. One who is confined in no general
rule or definition.
We pity or laugh at thoſe fatuous extravagants. Glanville.
There are certain extravagants among people of all ſizes
and profeſſions; and there muſt be no drawing of general
rules from particular cxceptions. L'A/ºrange.
Ex4 RA'v AGANTLY. adv. [from extravagant.]
I. In an extravagant manner; wildly.
Her paſſion was extravagantly new ;
But mine is much the madder of the two. Dryden.
2. In an unreaſonable degree.
Some are found to praiſe our author, and others as raſhly
and extravagantly contradićt his admirers. Pope's Eſ, on Homer.
3. Expenſively; luxuriouſly ; waſtefully,
Ext RAvAGA'NTN ESS. m. ſ. [from extravagant.] Exceſs; ex-
curſion beyond limits. -
To Ext RA’v AGATE. v. n. [extra and vagor, Latin.] To
wander out of limits, Dićf.
Extra’v ASATED. adj, ſextra and vaſa, Latin.] Forced out
of the properly containing veſſels. -
The viſcuous matter, which lics like leather, upon the ex-
travaſated blood of pleuretick people, may be diſſolved by a
due degree of heat. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Extr Avas ATION. m. ſ. [from extravaſated J The act of
forcing, or ſtate of being forced out of the Proper containing
veſſels. sº
Aliment, too viſcuous, obſtruding the glands, and by its
acrimony corroding the ſmall veſſels of the lungs, after a rup-
ture and extravaſation of blood, eaſily produces an ulcer. Afth.
Łxt RAve'NATE, adj. [extra and vena, Latin.] Let out of the
veins.
That there is a magnetick way of curing wounds, by anoint-
ing the weapon; and that the wound is affected in like manner
as is the extravenate blood by the ſympathetick medicine, as to
matter of fact, is with circumſtances of good evidence aſ-
ſerted. Glanv. Scepſ c. 24.
ExTRAVE'Rsion. m. ſ. ſextra and verſio, Latin.] The aa of
throwing out; the ſtate of being thrown out.
Nor does there intervene heat to afford them any colour to
pretend that there is made an extraverſiºn of the ſulphur, or
of any of the two other ſuppoſed principles. Boyle.
Extra'UGHT. part. [This is an obſolete participle from ex-
tradi; as diſi, aught from diſtraći.] Extracted.
Sham it thou not, knowing whence thou artes traught,
To let thy tongue detect thy baſeborn heart? Shakespeare H. VI.
EXTREME. a 'j. [extremus, Latin. This word is ſometimes
corrupted by the ſuperlative termination, of which it is by no
means capable, as it has in itſelf the ſuperlative ſignification.]
1. Greateſt; of the higheſt degree.
He that will take away extreme heat by ſetting the body in
extremity of cold, ſhall undoubtedly remove the diſeaſe; but
together with it the diſeaſed too. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 8.
The Lord ſhall ſmite thee with a fever, an inflammation,
and an extreme burning. Deutr. xxviii. 22.
They thought it the extremºſt of evils to put themſelves at
the mercy of thoſe hungry and diſorderly people.
Bacon.
2. Utmoſt.
The hairy fool
Stood on th’ extremeſ' verge of the ſwiſt brook,
Augmenting it with tears. Shakespeare A you like it.
Miſeno's cape and Bauli laſt he view’d,
That on the ſea's extrºmeſ borders ſtood. Addison on Italy.
3. Laſt; that beyond which there is nothing.
Farewel, ungrateful and unkind I go,
Condemn’d by thee, to thoſe ſad ſhades below:
I go th' extremºſ! remedy to prove,
To drink oblivion, and to drench my love.
4. Preſſing in the utmoſt degree.
Caſes of neceſſity being ſometime but urgent, ſometime
extreme, the conſideration of publick utility is urged equi-
valent to the eaſier kind of neceſſity. Hºcker, b. v. ſ. 9.
FxtR E'ME. m. ſ. [from the adjective J
1. Utmoſt point; higheſt degree of anything.
Thither by harpy-footed furies hal’d,
At certain revolutions, all the damn'd
Are brought; and fed by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce;
From beds of raging fire to ſtarve in ice
Their ſoft ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immoveable, infix'd, and frozen round
Periods of time; thence hurried back to fire. Milt, Pa. Lºft.
Avoid extremes, and ſhun the faults of ſuch
Who ſtill are pleas'd too little, or too much. Pºpe.
They cannot bear that human nature, which they know to
be imperfect, ſhould be praiſed in an extreme, without oppo-
ſition. Pope's Eſſay on Himer.
2. Points at the greateſt diſtance from each other; extremity.
The true Proteſtant religion is ſeated in the golden mean;
the enemies unto her are the extremes on either hand. Bacon.
The ſyllogiſtical form only ſhews, that if the intermediate
idea agrees with thoſe it is on both ſides immediately applied
to, then thoſe two remote ones, or, as they are called, extreme,
do certainly agree. Locke.
ExTRE'MELY. adv. [from extreme.]
1. In the utmoſt degree.
She might hear, not far from her, an extremely doleful voice;
but ſo ſuppreſſed with a kind of whiſpering note, that he could
not conceive the words diſtinétly. Sidney.
2. Very much; greatly: in familiar language.
Whoever ſees a ſcoundrel in a gown reeling home at mid-
night, is apt to be extremely comforted in his own vices. Swift.
ExTRE'M1TY. m. ſ. [extremitas, Latin.]
1. The utmoſt point; the higheſt degree.
He that will take away extreme heat by ſetting the body in
extremity of cold, ſhall undoubtedly remove the diſeaſe; but
together with it the diſeaſed too. ' Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 8.
Should
D rydtºº.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 412</div><p class="Text">E x T.
* - * * +
E X U
s
Should any one be cruel and uncharitable to that extremity,
yet this would not prove that propriety gave any autho-
rity. - . . . Locke.
2. The utmoſt parts; the parts moſt remote from the middle. ,
It is commonly ſet forth green or yellow : in its proper
colour it is inclining to white, excepting the extremities or
tops of the wing-feathers, which are black. . . Brown,
The extremities of the joints muſt be ſeldom hidden, and
the extremities or end of the feet never. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The extremity of pain often creates a coldneſs in the extre-
mities; but ſuch a ſenſation is very conſiſtent with an inflam-
matory diſtemper. Arbuthnot on Diet.
3. The points in the utmoſt degree of oppoſition, or at the ut-
moſt diſtance from each other. - -
He's a man of that ſtrange compoſition,
Made up of all the worſt extremities .
Of youth and age. Denham's Sophy.
4. Remoteſt parts; parts at the greateſt diſtance.
They ſent fleets out of the Red Sea to the extremities of
AEthiopia, and imported quantities of precious goods. Arbuth.
5. Violence of paſſion. -
With equal meaſure ſhe did moderate
The ſtrong extremities of their outrage. Spenſer's Fa. Sºueen.
If I ſhew no colour for my extremity, let me be your table-
ſport. Shakeſpeare.
6. The utmoſt violence, rigour, or diſtreſs.
Why ſhould not the ſame laws take good effect on that
people, being prepared by the ſword, and brought under by
extremity? Spenser on Ireland.
Their hearts ſhe gueſſeth, -
And yields her to extremity of time. Fairy Queen, b. i.
He promiſed, if they ſhould be beſieged, to do all he could
to relieve them, before they ſhould be reduced to extremity.
Clarendon, b. viii.
It ſhould be never ſo expoſed to the extremity of war as to
fall into thoſe barbarous hands. Clarendon.
I wiſh peace, and any terms prefer
Before the laſt extremities of war. Dryden's Ind. Emperor.
'o E'XTRICATE. v. a. [extrico, Latin.] To diſembarraſs;
to ſet free any one in a ſtate of perplexity; to diſentangle.
We run into great difficulties about free created agents,
which reaſon cannot well extricate itſelf out of. Locke.
Theſe are great reliefs to nature, as they give her an oppor-
tunity of extricating herſelf from her oppreſſions, and reco-
vering the ſeveral tones and ſprings of her diſtended veſſels.
Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 195.
ExTR1cA'tion. ‘n. ſ. [from extricate.] The aët of diſen-
tangling; diſentanglement. -
Crude ſalt has a taſte not properly acid, but ſuch as predo-
minates in brine; and it does not appear, that this acid ſpirit
did as ſuch pre-exiſt in the ſalt whence it was obtained, ſo
that we may ſuppoſe it to have been made rather by tranſmu-
tation than extrication. Boyle.
EXTRINSICAL. adj. [extrinſecus, Latin.] External; out-
ward ; not intimately belonging; not intrinſick. It is com-
monly written ſo, but analogy requires extrinſecal.
A body cannot move, unleſs it be moved by ſome extrinſ-
cal agent: we may eaſily frame a conceit, how abſurd it is to
think that a body, by a quality in it, can work upon itſelf.
Digby on Bodies.
Neither is the atom by any extrinſical impulſe diverted from
its natural courſe. - Ray on the Creation.
Outward objećts, that are extrinſical to the mind; and its
- own operations, proceeding from powers intrinſical, and pro-
per to itſelf, which, when reflected on by itſelf, become alſo
obječts of its contemplation, are the original of all know-
ledge. - - - Locke.
Extri'Nsic A1 LY. adv. [from extrinſical] From without.
If to ſuppoſe the ſoul a diſtinét ſubſtance from the body,
and extrinſically advenient, be an error, almoſt all the world
hath been miſtaken. Glanville.
ExTR1'Nsick. adj. [extrinſecus, Latin.] Outward; external.
When they cannot ſhake the main fort, they muſt try if
they can poſſeſs themſelves of the outworks, raiſe ſome preju-
dice againſt his carriage and his moſt extrinſick adherents.
Government of the Tongue, ſ. 7.
Extrinſick modes are ſuch as ariſe from ſomething that is
not in the ſubject or ſubſtance itſelf; but it is a manner of
being which ſome ſubſtances attain, by reaſon of ſomething
that is external or foreign to the ſubject; as, this globe lies
within two yards of the wall; this man is beloved or hated.
J/atts's Logick.
To EXTRU'CT. v. a. [extruo, extrudium, Latin.] To build;
to raiſe; to form into a ſtructure.
Extru'croR. m.ſ.. [from extrue?..] A builder; a fabricator;
a COntri VCr. -
To ExtRU'DE. v. a. [extruda, Latin.] To thruſt off; to
drive ºff; to puſh out with violence.
If in any part of the continent they found the ſhells, they
concluded that the ſea had been extruded and driven off by the
mud. Wºodward’s Natural Hiſt.ry.
ExtRuſsion. n ſ [extruſus, Latin.] The aët of thruſting or
driving out. . . . - - - *
They ſuppoſe the channel of the ſea to have been formed,
and mountains and caverns, by a violent depreſſion of ſome
parts of the earth, and an extrºſion and elevation of others.
• . . . - Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
Extu'Ber ANce. m. ſ. ſex and tuber, Latin.] Knobs, or parts
protuberant; parts that riſe from the reſt of the body.
. The gouge takes off the irregularities or extuberances that
lie fartheſt from the axis of the work. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
Exu'Ber ANCE. m.ſ. ſexuberatio, Latin j Overgrowth; ſuper-
fluous ſhoots; uſeleſs abundance; luxuriance.
Men eſteem the overflowing of gall the exuberance of
zeal, and all the promiſes of the faithful combatant they con-
fidently appropriate. - Decay of Piety.
Though he expatiates on the ſame thoughts in different
... words, yet in his ſimiles that exuberance is avoided. Garth.
EXU’BERANT, adj. [exuberans, Latin.]
1. Growing with ſuperfluous ſhoots; overabundant; ſuperflu-
ouſly plentecus; luxuriant.
Another Flora there of bolder hues,
And richer ſweets, beyond our gardens pride,
Plays o'er the fields, and ſhowers with ſudden hand
Exuberant ſpring. Thomſon's Spring, 1.685.
His ſimiles have been thought too exuberant, and full of
circumſtances. Pope's Preface to the Iliad.
2. Abounding in the utmoſt degree.
We might there diſcern ſuch immenſe power, ſuch un-
ſearchable wiſdom, and ſuch exuberant goodneſs, as may juſtly
raviſh us to an amazement, rather than a bare admiration.
Boyle's Seraphick Love.
A part of that exuberant devotion, with which the whole
aſſembly raiſed and animated one another, catches a reader at
the greateſt diſtance of time. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 49.
ExU(BERANT LY. adv. [from exuberant..] Abundantly; to a
ſuperfluous degree. -
A conſiderable quantity of the vegetable matter lay at the
ſurface of the antediluvian earth, and rendered it exuberantly
fruitful. Woodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
To ExU'BERATE. v. n. [exubero, Latin.] To abound in the
higheſt degree.
All the lovelineſs imparted to the creature is lent it, to give
us enlarged conceptions of that vaſt confluence and immen-
ſity that exuberates in God. Boyle's Seraph. Love.
Exu'ccous, adj. . [exſuccus, Latin.] . Without juice; dry.
This is to be effected not only in the plant yet growing, but
in that which is brought exuccous and dry unto us. Brown.
ExU'DATION. n.f. [from exudo, Latin.] * .
1. The aët of emitting in ſweat; the aët of emitting moiſture
through the pores. -
The tumour ſometimes ariſes by a general exudatiºn out of
the cutis. l/iſman's Surgery.
2. The matter iſſuing out by ſweat from any body.
The gum of trees, which we ſee ſhining and clear, is but a
fine paſſage or ſtraining of the juice of the tree through the
wood and bark; and in like manner Corniſh diamonds, and
rock rubies, which are yet more reſplendent than gums, are
the fine exudations of ſtone. Bacon's Natural Hiſłory.
If it hath more dew at noon than in the morning, then
it ſeemeth to be an exudation of the herb itſelf. Bacon.
Cuckowſpittle, or woodſere, that ſpumous frothy dew,
or exudation, or both, is found eſpecially about the joints of
lavender and roſemary. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. v. c. 3.
To ExU'DATE. U v. n. [exudo, Latin.] To ſweat out; to iſſue
To ExU'd e. } out by ſweat. -
Some perforations in the part itſelf, through which the
humour included doth exudate, may be obſerved in ſuch as
are freſh. Brown's Pug. Err.
The juices of the flowers are, firſt, the expreſſed juice;
ſecondly, a volatile oil, wherein the ſmell of the plant pre-
ſides; thirdly, honey, exuding from all flowers, the bitter not
excepted. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To EXULCERATE. v. a. ſexukert, Latin.]
1. To make ſore with an ulcer ; to affect with a running or eat-
ing fore. -
Cantharides, applied to any part of the body, touch the
bladder and exulcerate it, if they ſtay on long. Bac. Nat. Hiſł.
That the ſaliva hath a virtue of macerating bodies, appears
by the effects in taking away warts, ſometimes exulcerating the
jaws, and rotting the teeth. Ray on the Creation.
The ſtagnating ſerum turning acrimonious, exulce-
rates and putrifies the bowels, producing moſt diſmal ſymp-
to InS. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. To afflićt ; to corrode; tº enrage.
Thoughts, my tormentors, arm'd with deadly ſtings,
Mangle my apprehenſive tendereſt parts,
Exaſperate, exulcerate, and raiſe
Dire inflamination, which no cooling herb -
Or medicinal liquor can aſſwage. Milton's Agoniſies, l 623.
ExUlcERATION. n.ſ.. [from exulcerate.] -
1. The beginning eroſion, which wears away the ſubſtance and
forms an ulcer. - *incy.
8 Q. 2. Exaccibation ,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 413</div><p class="Text">E Y E
E Y E
2. Exacerbation; corroſion.
This exulceration of mind made him apt to take all occa-
ſions of contradićtion. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 5.
Exu'lcERAtoRY. adj. [from exulcerate J Having a tendency
to cauſe ulcers.
To EXULT. v. n. [exulto, Latin J To rejoice above mea-
ſure; to triumph; to be in high exaltation of gladneſs.
The whole world did ſeem to exult that it had occaſion of
pouring out gifts to ſo bleſſed a purpoſe. Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 13.
Who might be your mother,
That you inſult, exult, and rail, at once
Over the wretched. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Exu'lt ANce. n.ſ.. [from exult..] Tranſport; joy; triumph;
gladneſs; exultation. -
We have great cauſe of exultance and joy, God's ſervice
being the moſt perfect freedom. Government ºf the Tongue.
Exultation. n.ſ. ſexultatio, Latin.] Joy ; triumph; rap-
turous delight.
Good effects may grow in each of the people towards other,
in them all towards their paſtor, and in their paſtor towards
every of them; between whom there daily and interchange-
ably paſs, in the hearing of God himſelf, and in the preſence
of his holy angels, ſo many heavenly acclamations, exultationſ,
provocations, petitions. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 39.
Devotion inſpires men with ſentiments of religious grati-
tude, and ſwells their hearts with inward tranſports of joy and
exultation. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 49.
To EXUNDATE. v. n. [exundo, Lat.] To overflow. Dićf.
ExUNDATIon. n.ſ.. [from exundate.] Overflow; abundance.
It is more worthy the Deity to attribute the creation of the
world to the exundation and overflowing of his tranſcendent
and infinite goodneſs. Ray on the Creation.
Exu'PERA ble adv. [exuperabilis, Latin. J Conquerable;
ſuperable; vincible.
Exu'PERAN ce. n.ſ. ſexuperantia, Lat.] Overbalance; greater
proportion.
Rome hath leſs variation than London; for on the Weſt
ſide of Rome are ſeated France, Spain and Germany, which
take off the exuperance, and balance the vigour of the Eaſtern
parts, Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
o ExU'scITATE. v. a. [exſuſcito, Latin.] To ſtir up ; to
rouſe. -
Exu'stion, n.ſ. ſexuffio, Latin.] The act of burning up;
conſumption by fire.
EXU’/IAE. n.ſ. [Latin.] Caſt ſkins; caſt ſhells; whatever is
thrown off, or ſhed by animals.
. The fiſhes upon this ſtone have taken up ſo little room in
the ſtone, that they appear to be only the ſkins or exuviae,
rather than entire bodies of fiſhes. Woodward on Fiſhes.
Ey. ) May either come from 13, an iſland, by melting the
# Saxon 3 into y, which is uſually done; or from the
EE. ). Saxon ea, which ſignifies a water, river, &amp;c. or, laſtly,
from 1eag, a field, by the ſame kind of melting. Gibſon.
EY'As. n.ſ.. [niais, French..] A young hawk juſt taken from
the neſt, not able to prey for itſelf. • Hanmer.
There is, fir, an aiery of children, little eyaſes, that cry out.
- Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
EY'As Musket. n.ſ. A young unfledged male hawk of the
muſket kind. Hanmer.
Here comes little Robin.—How now, my eyaſmuſket; what
news with you ? Shakeſp. Merry Wives # JWindſor.
EYE. n.ſ. obſolete plural eyne, now eyes. [auga, Gothick; eag,
Saxon; cog, Dutch ; ee, Scottiſh, plur, eene.]
1. The organ of viſion; the medium of the ſenſe of ſight.
Good fir John, as you have one eye upon my follies, turn
another into the regiſter of your own, that I may paſs with a
reproof off the eaſier. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſor.
My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
—Bleſſed are clouds to do as ſuch clouds do:
Vouchſafe, bright moon, and theſe thy ſtars to ſhine,
Thoſe clouds remov’d, upon our watry eyne. Shakeſpeare.
Nor doth the eye itſelf,
That moſt pure ſpirit of ſenſe, behold itſelf,
Not going from itſelf; but eyes oppos'd,
Salute each other with each other's form. Shakespeare. Troil, andCreſ.
He kept him as the apple of his eye. Deutr. xxxii. Io.
As long looking againſt the ſun or fire hurteth the eye by
dilatation; ſo curious printing in ſmall volumes, and reading
of ſmall letters, do hurt the eye by contračtion. Bacon.
His awful preſence did the crowd ſurprize,
Nor durſt the raſh ſpectator meet his eyes;
Fyes that confeſs'd him born for kingly ſway,
So fierce, they flaſh'd intolerable day. Dryd. Knight's Tale.
But ſure the eye of time beholds no name
So bleſt as thine in all the rolls of fame. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. Sight; ocular knowledge.
Who hath bewitched you, that you ſhould not obey the
truth, before whoſe eyes Jeſus Chriſt hath been evidently ſet
forth 2 - Gal. iii. 1.
3. Look; countenance.
I'll ſay yon grey is not the morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow. Shakespeare. Rom, andjul.
4. Front; face.
To juſtify this worthy nobleman,
Her ſhall you hear diſproved to your cyes. .
- Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for AMeaſure.
5. A poſture of direét oppoſition, where one thing is in the ſame
line with another. -
Now paſs'd, on either ſide they nimbly tack,
Both ſtrive to intercept and guide the wind;
And in its eye more cloſely they come back,
To finiſh all the deaths they left behind. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
6. Aſpect; regard.
Having an eye to a number of rites and orders in the church
of England, as marrying with a ring, &amp;c. fundry church-
offices, dignities and callings, for which they found no com-
mandment in the holy Scripture, they thought by the one only
ſtroke of an axiom to have cut them off. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 4.
As in Scripture a number of laws, particular and poſitive,
being in force, may not by any law of man be violated; we
are, in making laws, to have thereunto an eſpecial eye. Hooker.
The man that is tender among you, and very delicate, his
eyes ſhall be evil towards his brother. Deutr. xxviii. 54.
He that hath a bountiful eye ſhall be bleſſed. Prov. xxii. 9.
None ſhould be put into either of thoſe commiſſions, with
an eye of favour to their perſons, to give them countenance or
reputation in the places where they live. Bacon to Williers.
Winds and hurricanes at land, tempeſts and ſtorms at ſea,
have always been looked upon with as evil an eye as earth-
quakes. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
In this diſpoſal of my ſiſter, I have had an eye to her being a
wit, and provided that the bridegroom be a man of ſound
judgment. Tatler, N°. 75.
Bookſellers mention with reſpect the authors they have
printed, and conſequently have an eye to their own advan-
tage. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 92.
7. Notice; attention; obſervation.
Not ſatisfied with our oath, he appointed a band of horſe-
men to have an eye that we ſhould not go beyond appointed
limits. Sidney, b. ii.
Lawmakers muſt have an eye to the place where, and to the
men amongſt whom. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 1 o.
His majeſty hath caſt his eyes upon you, as finding you to
be ſuch as you ſhould be, or hoping to make you to be ſuch
as he would have you to be. Bacon.
If the Engliſh had driven the Iriſh into the plains and open
countries, where they might have an eye and obſervation upon
them, the Iriſh had been eaſily kept in order. Davies on Irel.
Spenſer has followed both Virgil and Theocritus in the
charms which he employs for curing Britomartis of her love;
but he had alſo our poet's Ceiris in his eye. Dryden's Án.
Miſdoubt my conſtancy, and do not try; -
But ſtay and ever keep me in your eye. Dryd. Ind. Emperor.
After this jealouſy he kept a ſtrićt eye upon him. L’Eſtrange.
This method of teaching children by a repeated pračtice,
under the eye and direction of the tutor, 'till they have got the
habit of doing well, has many advantages. Locke.
Theſe are intrinſick difficulties ariſing from the text itſelf,
as the uncertainty ſometimes who are the perſons he ſpeaks to,
or the opinions or practices which he has in his eye. Locke.
Several performances have been juſtly applauded for their
wit, which have been written with an eye to this predominant
humour of the town. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 35.
We were the moſt obedient creatures in the world, con-
ſtant to our duty, and kept a ſteddy eye on the end for which
we were ſent hither. Speciator, Nº. 577.
8. Opinion formed by obſervation.
She told her huſband, ſhe deſigned to be beautiful in no
body's eye but his. Sidney.
It hath, in their eye, no great affinity with the form of the
church of Rome. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 27:
Like one of two contending in a prize,
That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes. Shakeſpeare.
I was as far from meditating a war as I was, in the eye of
the world, from having any preparations for one. K. Charles.
Though he in all the people's eyes ſeem'd great,
Yet greater he appear'd in his retreat. Denham.
9. Sight; view; the place in which anything may be ſeen.
There ſhall he pračtiſe tilts and tournaments,
Hear ſweet diſcourſe, converſe with noblemen;
And be, in eye of every exerciſe,
Worthy his youth and nobleneſs of birth. Shakeſpeare.
Io. Any thing formed like an eye.
Or ſee colours like the eye of a peacock's feather, by preſſ-
ing our eyes on either corner, whilſt we look the other way.
- Newton's Opt.
11. Any ſmall perforation.
This Ajax has not ſo much wit as will ſtop the eye of He-
len's needle. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
Does not our Saviour himſelf ſpeak of the intolerable diffi-
culty which they cauſe in men's paſſage to heaven Do not
they make the narrow way much narrower, and contract the
gate
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 414</div><p class="Text">º
".
.
:
º
gate which leads to life to the ſtreightneſs of a needle's
eye * South's Sermony.
12. A ſmall catch into which a hook goes. .
Thoſe parts, if they cohere to one another but by reſt only,
may be much more eaſily diſſociated, and put into motion by
any external body, than they could be, if they were by little
hooks and eyes, or other kind of faſtenings entangled in one
another. Boyle.
13. Bud of a plant. : - - -
Prune and cut off all your vine-ſhoots to the very root,
fave one or two of the ſtouteſt, to be left with three or four
eyes of young wood. Evelyn's Kalendar.
14. A ſmall ſhade of colour. -
The ground indeed is tawny. -
—With an eye of green in't. Shakespeare Tempeſ.
Red with an eye of blue, makes a purple. Boyle on Colours.
15. Power of perception.
The eyes of your underſtanding being enlightened. Eph. i.
A gift doth blind the eyes of the wiſe. Deutr. xvi. 19.
To EYE. v. a. [from the noun.] To watch; to keep in view;
to obſerve.
When they are laid in garriſon, they may better hide
their defaults than when they are in camp, where they are
continually eyed and noted of all men. Spenſer on Ireland.
- Full many a lady
I've ey'd with beſt regard. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
The kitchen Malkin pins
Her richeſt lockram 'bout her reeky neck,
Clamb'ring the walls to eye him. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Bid the cheek be ready with a bluſh,
Modeſt as morning, when ſhe coldly eyes
The youthful Phoebus. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
Bold deed thou haſt preſum’d, advent'rous Eve,
And peril great provok'd, who thus hath dar'd,
Had it been only coveting to eye
That ſacred fruit. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ix. l. 923.
Such a ſtory as the baſiliſk is that of the wolf, concerning
priority of viſion, that a man becomes hoarſe and dumb, if
the wolf have the advantage firſt to eye him. Brown's Vulg. Err.
It was needful for her perpetually to eye her purſuing enemy.
More's Antidote againſt Ætheiſm.
Then gave it to his faithful ſquire,
With leſſons how tobſerve and eye her. Hudibras, p. iii.
Eye nature's walks, ſhoot folly as it flies,
And catch the manners living as they riſe. Pope's Eſ on Man.
Have a box when eunuchs ſing,
And foremoſt in the circle eye a king. Pope's Epiſt. of Hor.
To EYE. v. n. To appear; to ſhow ; to bear an appearance.
Forgive me,
Since my becomings kill me when they do not - -
Eye well to you. Shakespeare Anthony and Cleopatra.
EY's ball. n.ſ.. [eye and ball.] The apple of the eye; the
upil. -
pup Oh, were mine eyeballs into bullets turn'd,
That I in rage might ſhoot them at your faces ! Shakespeare H.VI.
Be ſubjećt to no fight but mine: inviſible
To every eyeball elſe. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
I feel my hair grow ſtiff, my eyeballs rowl;
This is the only form could ſhake my ſoul. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
Not when a gilt buffet's refle&amp;ted pride
Turns you from ſound philoſophy aſide,
Not when from plate to plate your eyeballs roll,
And the brain dances to the mantling bowl. Pope's Horace.
EYEBRI'GHT. n.ſ.. [euphraſia, Latin.] It hath an anomalous
perſonated flower of one leaf, divided into two lips; the upper
one upright, parted into ſeveral diviſions; and the lower one
divided into three parts, each of which is again divided into
two: out of the flowercup riſes the pointal, which afterwards
turns to a fruit, or oblong huſk, divided into two parts, and
replete with ſmall ſeeds. Miller.
EY’ee Row. n.ſ. [eye and brow.] The hairy arch over the
cye.
y The lover,
Sighing like a furnace, with a woful ballad
Made to his miſtreſs eyebrow. Shakeſp. As you like it.
On the ſeventh day he ſhall ſhave all his hair off his head,
his beard, and his eyebrows. Lev. xiv. 9.
Above ſtand the eyebrows, to keep anything from running
down upon them; as drops of ſweat from the forehead, or
duſt. Ray on the Creation.
The balls of his broad eyes roll'd in his head,
And glar'd betwixt a yellow and a red;
He look'd a lion with a gloomy ſtare,
And o'er his eyebrows hung his matted hair. Dryden.
EY'EDR op. n.ſ. [eye and drop.] Tear.
That tyranny which never quaft but blood,
Would by beholding him have waſh’d his knife
With gentle eyedrops. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
EY'EGLANCE. n.ſ. [eye and glance.] Quick notice of the
eye.
y His countenance was bold, and baſhed not
For Guyon's looks; but ſcornful eyeglance at him ſhot. F.2,
Fº n. ſ. ſºye and glaſ...] Spe&amp;acles; glaſ, to aſſiſt the
light. -
- - Ha' not you ſeen, Camillo?
But that's paſt doubt you have; or your eyeglaſ; º
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn. Shakespeare If inter's 7%.
By comparing it with a good perſpective of four foot in
length, made with a concave eyeglaſ, I could read at a greater
diſtance with my own inſtrument than with the glaſs. Newton.
EY'ELEss. adj. [from eye.] Without eyes; fightleſs; deprived
of ſight. - - -
A proclaim'd prize! moſt happy! .
That gº Hºhff,
To raiſe my fortunes. Shakeſp. King Lear.
- Promiſe was, that I -
Should Iſrael from Philiſtian yoke deliver:
Aſk for this great deliverer now, and find him
Eyelſ, in Gaza, at the mill with ſlaves:
# is bound under Philiſtian yoke. Miltºn's Agonſlei.
- Pentheus durſt deride -
The cheated people, and the eyeleſ, guide.
Addison's Ovid's Metamorph.
Eyeleſ, he grop'd about with vengeful haſte,
And juſtled promontories as he paſs'd. Garth’s Ovid.
Meonides,
Poor eyekſ pilgrim. --- -
Cyclop, if any pitying thy diſgrace,
Aſk who disfigur'd thus that eye'ſ face. Pope's Odyſſey.
EY’elet. n.ſ [drillet, French, a little eye.] A hole through
which light may enter; any ſmall perforation for a lace to go
through. - - •
Slitting the back and fingers of a glove, I made eyelet holes
to draw it cloſe. Wiſeman's Surgery.
EY'el, D. m.ſ. [eye and lid.] The membrane that ſhuts over
the eye. -
Therewith her dim eyelid; ſhe up 'gan rear,
On which the dreary death did fit, as ſad
As lump of lead, and made dark clouds appear. Fai. Queen.
Mark when ſhe ſmiles with amiable chear,
And tell me whereto can ye liken it !
When on each eyelid ſweetly do appear
An hundred graces as in ſhade to fit. Spenser's Sonnets.
On my eyelids is the ſhadow of death. job xvi. 16.
Fetch me that flower; the herb I ſhew'd thee once;
The juice of it, on ſleeping eyelids laid,
Will make or man or woman madly doat
Upon the next live creature that it ſees. Shakeſpeare.
The Turks have a black powder, made of a mineral called
alcohol, which with a fine long pencil they lay under their
eyelids, which doth colour black, whereby the white of the
eye is ſet off more white. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
At length, the crackling noiſe and dreadful blaze
Call'd up ſome waking lover to the ſight;
And long it was ere he the reſt could raiſe,
Whoſe heavy eyelid, yet were full of night. Dryden.
Eyese/Rv ANT. n.ſ. [eye and ſervant..] A ſervant that works
only while watched. -
Eyeservice. n.ſ.. [eye and ſervice.] Service performed only
under inſpection.
Servants, obey in all things your maſter; not with eye-
ſervice, as men pleaſers, but in ſingleneſs of heart. Col. iii.
EY'Eshot. m. ſ. [eye and ſhot..] Sight; glance; view.
Phillips.
I muſt carry off my prize as others do; and not think of
ſharing the booty before I am free from danger, and out of
eyeſhot from the other windows. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
I have preſerved many a young man from her eyeſhot by this
In eans. Spediator, Nº. 284.
Ey'Esight. n.ſ. [eye and ſight.] Sight of the eye.
The Lord hath recompenſed me according to my cleanneſs
in his eyeſight. 2 Sam. xxii. 22.
I have an ill-divining ſoul:
Methinks I ſee thee, now thou art below,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb;
Either my eyeſight fails, or thou look'ſt pale. Shakeſpeare.
I love you, ſir,
Dearer than eyeſight, ſpace and liberty,
Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare. Shakeſp K. Lear.
Though fight be loſt,
Life yet hath many ſolaces, enjoy'd
Where other ſenſes want not their delights,
At home in leiſure and domeſtick eaſe,
Exempt from many a care and chance, to which
Eyeſight expoſes daily men abroad. Milton's Agoniſter.
Joſephus ſets this down from his own eyeſight, being him-
ſelf a chief captain at the fiege of Jopata, where theſe events
happened. Wilkins's Math. Magic.
He blinds the wiſe, gives eyeſight to the blind,
And molds and ſtamps anew the lover's mind. Dryden.
Ey'ssor E. m. ſ. [eye and ſore..] Something offenſive to the
fight.
"Hath the church of Chriſt, from the firſt beginning, by a
ſecret univerſal inſtinét of God’s good ſpirit, always tied itſelf
to
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 415</div><p class="Text">E Y E
E Y R
to end neither ſermon, nor almoſt any ſpeech ºf moment,
which hath concerned matters of God, without ſome ſpecial
words of honour and glory to the Trinity which we alladore;
and is the like concluſion of pſalms become now; at length,
an eyeſore, or a galling to the ears that hear it? Hooker, b. v.
Fy, doff this habit; ſhame to yºur eſtate,
And eyeſore to our ſolemn feſtival. Shakespeare7am. of the Shrew.
As ſoon as the two lords came thither they covered, to the
trouble of the other; but having preſently to ſpeak, they were
quickly freed from that eyeſore. Clarendon, b. viii.
Mordecai was an eyeſore to Haman. L'Eſtrange, Fable 38.
He's the beſt piece of man's fleſh in the market; not an
eyeſore in his whole body. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
Eyasported. adj. [eye and ſpot.] Marked with ſpots like
eyes.
y Nor Juno's bird, in her eyeſpotted train,
So many goodly colours doth contain. Spenſer.
Eyestri'NG. n.ſ. [eye and ſiring.] The ſtring of the eye;
the tendon by which the eye is moved.
I would have broke mine eyeſirings; crackt them, but
To look upon him. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
To know whether the ſheep are ſound or not, ſee that their
gums be red, the briſket-ſkin red, and the eyeſ?rings ruddy.
Martimer's Huſbandry.
Ey'etooth. n.ſ. [eye and tooth.] The tooth on the upper
jaw next on each ſide to the grinders; the fang.
The next one on each ſide ſtronger and deeper rooted, and
more pointed, called canini, in Engliſh eyeteeth, to tear the
more tough ſort of aliments. Ray on the Creation.
EY'Ewink. m. ſ. [eye and wink.] A wink, as a hint or token.
They would have won any woman's heart; and, I warrant
you, they could never get an eyewink of her. Shakeſpear.
EYE wit NESS... n.ſ. [eye and witneſs.] An ocular evidence; one
who gives teſtimony to facts ſeen with his own eyes.
We made known unto you the power and coming of our
Lord Jeſus Chriſt, and were eyewitneſſes of his majeſty. 2 Pet.
To meet him all his ſaints, who filent ſtood
Eyewitneſſes of his almighty acts,
With jubilee advanc'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi.
Give us, if thou can'ſt,
Eyewitneſs of what firſt of laſt was done,
Relation more particular and diſtinét. Milton's 4niſia.
The curious, by laying together circumſtances, atteſtations,
and charaćters of thoſe who are concerned in them, either re.
ceive or reject what at firſt but eyewitneſſes could abſolutely
believe or diſbelieve. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
Eyre. n.ſ. ſºyre, French; iter, Latin.) . The court of juſtice,
itinerants; and juſtices in eyre are thoſe only, which Bration
in many places calls juſticiarios itinerantes. The eyre alſo of
the foreſt is nothing but the juſtice-ſeat, otherwiſe called.
which is, or ſhould by ancient cuſtom, be held every thre:
years by the juſtices of the foreſt, journeying up and down
to that purpoſe. Cowel.
EY'RY. n.ſ.. [from ey, an egg.] The place where birds of
prey build their neſts and hatch.
But I was born ſo high,
Our eyrie buildeth in the cedars top, -
And dallies with the wind, and ſcorns the ſun. Shah. R. III.
The eagle, and the ſtork,
On cliffs and cedar-tops their eyries build. Mill. Par. Loft.
Some haggard hawk, who had her eyry nigh,
Well pounc'd to faſten, and well wing'd to fly. Dryden.
