<div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">No page number
A - . A B A
The firſt letter of the European alphabets, has, For cloves and nutmegs to the line-a,
in the Engliſh language, three different ſounds, And even for oranges to China. Dryden.
which may be termed the broad, open, and ſlen- A is ſometimes, in familiar writings, put by a barbarous corrup-
- der. . . . . . -- tion for he. -
9 The broad ſound reſembling that of the Ger- A, in compoſition, ſeems to have ſometimes the power of the French
mana is found, in many of our monoſyllables, as all, wall, a in theſe phraſes, a droit, a gauche, &amp;c. and ſometimes to be
malt, ſalt; in which a is pronounced asſau in cauſe, or aw in contračted from at; as, Aſide, aſſape, afoot, aſleep, athirſt, aware.
law. Many of theſe words were anciently written with au, If this, which he avouches, does appear,
as fault, waulk; which happens to be ſtill retained in fault. . There is no flying hence, nor tarrying here.
This was probably the ancient ſound of the Saxons, ſince it is . I gin to be a weary of the ſun; . . . . * * * *
almoſt uniformly preſerved in the ruſtic pronunciation, and And wiſh the ſtate of the world were now undone: ;
the Northern dialeås, as maun for man, haund for hand. -- Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
A open, not unlike the a of the Italians, is found in father, ra- And now a breeze from ſhore began to blow,
ther, and more obſcurely in fancy, faſt, &amp;c. The ſailors ſhip their oars, and ceaſe to row;
A ſlender or cloſe, is the peculiar a of the Engliſh language, re- . Then hoiſt their yards a-trip, and all their ſails
ſembling the ſound of the French e maſculine, or diphthong ai Let fall, to court the wind, and catch the gales.
in pai, or perhaps a middle ſound between them, or between . . . . . ." Dryden's Ceyx and Alcyone.
the a and e, to this the Arabic a is ſaid nearly to approach. A is ſometimes redundant; as, ariſ, arouſe, awake; the ſame
Of this ſound we have examples in the words, place, face, with riſe, rouſe, wake. *
waſte, and all thoſe that terminate in ation ; as, relation, na- A, in abbreviations, ſtands for artium, or arts; as, A.B. bachelor
tian, generation. . "... . . : ; : * : . º of arts, artium baccalaureus; A. M. maſter of arts, artium ma .
A is ſhort, as, glaſ, Éraft; or long, as, glaze, graze: it is marked giffer; or, anno; as, A.D. anno domini. -
lºng, generally, by an º final, plane, or by an i added, as, AB, at the beginning of the names of places, generally ſhews
plain, ' ' ' - . . . . . . . . ... that they have ſome relation to an abbey. . . . . . . .
A, an article ſet before nouns of the ſingular number; a man, a ABA'cKE...adu, obſolete....Backwards. . . ." ". .
tree; denoting the number one, as, a man is coming, that is, But when they came where thou thy ſkill didſt ſhow,
no more than one; or an indefinite indication, as, a man may They drew abacke, as half with ſhame confound,
come this way; that is, any man... This article has no plural Shepherds to ſee them in their art outgo. . . . Sºnſ. Paſº.
fignification. Before a word beginning with a vowel, it is ABA CTOR. m. ſ. [Lat. abacior, a driver away.] Thoſe who
written an, as, an ox, an egg, of which a is the contračtion. drive away or ſteal cattle in herds, or great numbers at once,
A is ſometimes a noun; as, a great A, a little a tes - in diſtinction from thoſe that ſteal only a ſheep or two. Blount.
A is placed before a participle, or participial noun; and is con- ABACUS. n.ſ.. .[Lat: dbacus.] . -
ſidered by Wallis as a contraćtion of at, when it is put before 1. A counting-table, anciently uſed in calculations.
a word denoting ſome ačtion not yet finiſhed; as, I am a walk- 2. In architecture, it is the uppermoſt member of a column,
-*
ing. It alſo ſeems to be anciently contračted from at, when which ſerves as a ſort of crowning both to the capital and co-
placed before local ſurnames; as, Thomas a Becket. In other lumn. - - - Dić7. '
caſes, it ſeems to ſignify to, like the French a. A BAFT. adv. [of abarzan, Sax. Behind.] From the fore-part
A hunting Chloé went. Prior. of the ſhip, towards the ſtern. Dićf.
They go a begging to a bankrupt's door. Dryd. ABA's ANC E. m. ſ. . [from the French alaiſºr, to depreſs, to
ay pure contents for ever pitch their tents bring down.] An act of reverence, a bow. Obeyſance is
Upon theſe downs, theſe meads, theſe rocks, theſe moun- confidered by Skinner as a corruption of alaiſance, but is
tains, now univerſally uſed.
And peace ſtill ſlumber by theſe purling fountains ! To ABA'LIENATE. v. a. [from ahalieno, Lat.] To make
that another's which was our own before. Caſv. Lex. jºr. -
Which we may every year -
Find when we come a fiſhing here. J/otton. A term of the civil law, not much uſed in common ſpeech.
Now the men fell a rubbing of armour, which a great while ABA LIEN A Tros. m. ſ. [Lat alalienatio.] A giving up one's
had lain oiled; the magazines of munition are viewed; the right to another perſon; or a making over an eſtate, goods,
officers of remains called to account. Wotton. or chattels by ſale, or due courſe of law. Dićf.
Another falls a ringing a Peſcennius Niger, and judiciouſly To ABA'N B. v. a. [A word contracted from abanden, but
diſtinguiſhes the ſound of it to be modern. Addiſon on medal. not now in uſe. See ABANDON.J. To forſake.
A has a peculiar ſignification, denoting the proportion of one Thoſe foreigners which came from far
thing to another. Thus we ſay, The landlord hath a hundred Grew great, and got large portions of land,
a year; The ſhip's crew gained a thouſand pounds a man. That in the realm, ere long, they ſtrºnger are
The river Inn, that had been hitherto ſhut up among moun- Than they which fought at firſt their helping hand, '.
And Vortiger enforced the kingdon to aband. -
Speºſº | Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 12.
To A BAND ON. v. a. [Fr. atandonner. Derived, according
to Menage, from the Italian *dºngre, which ſignifies tº for.
wº to thc ſenſe. . - ſº his colours; land-ºn [-exilium] deſcrire. Fºſsi.ier thinks
ol. 1. - w . . . . . it
tains, paſſes generally through a wide open country, during all
its courſe through Bavaria; which is a voyage of two days,
after the rate of twenty leagues a day. Addiſon on Italy.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B A
A B A
it a coalition of a ban donner, to give up to a proſcription fºr
in which ſenſe we, at this day, mention the ban of the em-
pire. Ban, in our own old dialeót, ſignifies a curſe; and to
Abandon, if confidered as compounded between French and
Saxon, is exactly equivalent to diris devover:J
- There is an abaſement becauſe of gory; and there is that
lifteth up his head from a low eſtate. Eccleſ officus, xx. 11.
To ABA's H. v. a. [See BASHFUL.] To put into confuſion;
to make aſhamed. It generally implies a ſudden impreſſion of
ſhame.
1. To give up, reſign, or quit; often followed by the particle to. - - - They heard, and were abaſh'd, and up they ſprung
The paſſive gods behold the Greeks defile . . . . . Upon the wing.
Their temples, and abandon to the ſpoil . .
Their own abodes; we, feeble few, conſpire -
To ſave a ſinking town, involv’d in fire. Dryd. Æneid.
2. To deſert. T--
The princes uſing the paſſions of fearing evil, and deſiring
to eſcape, only to ſerve the rule of virtue, not to abandon one's --
felf, leapt to a rib of the ſhip. Sidney, b. ii.
Then being alone,
Left and abandon'd of his velvet friends, -
'Tis right, quoth he , thus miſery doth part • *
The flux of company. Shakeſp. A you like it.
What fate a wretched fugitive attends,
Scorn'd by my foes, abandon'd by my friends. Dryd. Æn. 2.
3. To forſake, generally with a tendency to an ill ſenſe.
When he in preſence came, to Guyon firſt
He boldly ſpake, Sir knight, if knight thou be,
Abandon this foreſtalled place at erſt,
For fear of further harm, I counſel thee.
Spenſºr's Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 4. ſtanz. 39.
But to the parting goddeſs thus ſhe pray'd;
Propitious ſtill be preſent to my aid,
Nor quite abandon your once favour'd maid. Dryd. Fab.
To ABANDoN over. v. a. [a form of writing not uſual, per-
haps not exact.] To give up to, to reſign.
Look on me as a man abandon'd o'er
To an eternal lethargy of love;
To pull, and pinch, and wound me, cannot cure,
And but diſturb the quiet of my death. Dryd. Sp. Friar.
ABANDoNE D. particip. adj. -
1. Given up.
If ſhe be ſo abandon'd to her ſorrow,
As it is ſpoke, ſhe never will admit me.
Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
Who is he ſo abandoned to ſottiſh credulity, as to think,
upon that principle, that a clod of earth in a ſack, may ever,
by eternal ſhaking, receive the fabric of man's body ?
- Bentley's Sermoni.
Muſt he, whoſe altars on the Phrygian ſhore,
With frequent rites, and pure, avow'd thy pow'r,
Be doom'd the worſt of human ills to prove,
Unbleſs'd, abandon'd to the wrath of Jove?
Pope's Odyſſey, b, i. l. 80.
2. Forſaken, deſerted. -
3. Corrupted in the higheſt degree. In this ſenſe, it is a con-
traction of a longer form, abanidoned [given up] to wic-
kedncſs.
ABA NDoN IN G. [A verbal noun from abandon.] Deſertion,
forſaking.
He hoped his paſt meritorious ačtions might outweigh his
preſent, abandoning the thought of future action. Clarend. b. viii.
ABANDoN MF NT. n.ſ.. [abandomnement, Fr.]
1. The act of abandoning.
2. The ſtate of being abandoned. Dić7.
ABANN1"tion. n.ſ. [Lat. abannitio.] A baniſhment for one or
two years, among the ancients, for manſlaughter. Diff.
A BARcy. m. ſ. Inſatiableneſs. Dićf.
To A BA’R E. v. a. [abanian, Sax.] To make bare, uncover,
or diſcloſe. Dić7.
AB Articula’t 1o N. m. ſ. [from ab, from, and articulus,a joint,
Lat.] A good and apt conſtrućtion of the bones, by which
they move ſtrongly and eaſily; or that ſpecies of articulation
that has manifeſt motion. Dić7.
To ABA s F. v. a. [Fr. ałaiffer, from the Lat. baſis, or baſis,
a barbarous word, ſignifying low, baſe.] To caſt down, to
depreſs, to bring low, almoſt always in a figurative and per-
ſonal ſenſe.
Happy ſhepherd, with thanks to the gods, ſtill think to be
thankful, that to thy advancement their wiſdoms have thee
aloſed Sidney, b. i.
With unreſiſted might the monarch reigns;
He levels mountains, and he raiſes plains;
And, not regarding diff'rence of degree,
Alas'd your daughter, and exalted me. Dryd. Fables.
Behold every one that is proud, and abaſe him. job, xl. 1 1.
If the mind be curbed and humbled too much in children ;
if their ſpirits be abaſed and broken much by too ſtrićt an hand
over them; they loſe all their vigour and induſtry, and are in
a worſe ſtate than the former. Locke on Education, $46.
ABA's ED. adj. [with heralds] is a term uſed of the wings of
eagles, when the top looks downwards towards the point of
the ſhield; or when the wings are ſhut; the natural way of
bearing them being ſpread with the top pointing to the chief of
the angle. Bailey. Chambers.
ABA’s E MENT, n.ſ. The ſtate of being brought low; the
act of bringing low; depreſſion.
Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. i. 1.331.
This heard, th’ imperious queen ſat mute with fear;
Nor further durſt incenſe the gloomy thunderer.
Silence was in the court at this rebuke:
Nor could the gods, aboſh'd, ſuſtain their ſovereign's look.
- Dryden's Fables.
The paſſive admits the particle at, ſometimes of, before the
cauſal noun. "
In no wiſe ſpeak againſt the truth, but be abaſed of the
error of thy ignorance. Eccleſiaſticus, iv. 25.
I ſaid unto her, from whence is this kid? is it not ſtolen?
Render it to the owners, for it is not lawful to eat any thing
that is ſtolen. But ſhe replied upon me, it was given for a
gift, more than the wages: however, I did not believe her,
but bad her render it to the owners: and I was alaſhed at her.
- - - - - 7%. ii. 13, 14-
The little Cupids hov'ring round,
(As pictures prove) with garlands crown'd
£: at what they ſaw and heard,
lew off, nor ever more-appear'd. Steiff's Miſcellanies:
To A BATE. v. a. [from the French allatre, !. º
1. To leſſen, to diminiſh.
Wh9 can tell whether the divine wiſdom, to alate the glory
of thoſe kings, did not reſerve this work to be done by a
queen, that it might appear to be his own immediate work
- Sir John Davies on Ireland.
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
And how unwillingly I left the ring,
You would abate the ſtrength of your diſpleaſure.
- Shakeſp. Alferchant of Wenice,
Here we ſee the hopes of great benefit and light frcin expo-
ſitors, and commentators are in a great part abated; and thoſe
who have moſt need of your help, can receive but little from
them, and can have very little aſſurance of reaching the A-
poſtle's ſenſe, by what they find in them. -
Locke's Eſſay on St. Paul's Epiftles.
2. To deječt, or depreſs the mind. -
This iron world (the ſame he weeping ſays)
Brings down the ſtouteſt hearts to loweſt ſtate : -
For miſery doth braveſtminds abate. Spenſ. Hullºrd'; Tal.
— — — — Have they power ſtill -
To baniſh your defenders, till at length
Your ignorance deliver you,
As moſt abated captives to ſome nation - .
That won you without blows Shakespeare. Coriolanus.
Time that changes all, yet changes us in vain,
The body, not the mind; nor can controul º
Th’ immortal vigour, or abate the ſoul. Dryden's Facid.
3. In commerce, to let down the price in ſelling, ſometimes to
beat down the price in buying.
To ABATE. v. n. To grow leſs; as, his paſſion abates; the
ſtorm abates. It is uſed ſometimes with the particle of before
the thing leſſened.
Our phyſicians have obſerved, that, in proceſs of time,
ſome diſeaſes have abated of their virulence, and have, in a
manner, worn out their malignity, ſo as to be no longer mor-
tal. Dryden's Hind and Panth.
To ABATE. [in common law.
It is in law uſed both ačtively and neuterly; as, to abate a
caſtle, to beat it down. To abate a writ, is, by ſome cxception,
to defeat or overthrow it. A ſtranger abateth, that is, entereth
upon a houſe or land void by the death of him that laſt poſ-
ſeſſed it, before the heir take his poſſeſſion, and ſo keepeth him
out. Wherefore, as he that putteth out him in poſſeſſion, is
ſaid to diffeiſe: ſo he that ſteppeth in between the former poſ-
ſeſſor and his heir, is ſaid to abate. In the neuter ſignification
thus; The writ of the demandment ſhall abate, that is, ſhall be
diſabled, fruſtrated, or overthrown. The appeal abateth by
covin, that is, that the accuſation is defeated by deccit. Cºwel.
To ABATE. [in horſemanſhip.] A horſe is ſaid to abate or take
down his curvets; when working upon curvets, he puts his
two hind-legs to the ground both at once, and obſerves the
ſame exačtneſs in all the times. Dić.
ABA’t EMENT. n.ſ.. [abatement, Fr.]
1. The act of abating or leſſening.
The law of works then, in ſhort, is that law, which re-
quires perfect obedience, without remiſſion or abatement; ſº,
that, by that law, a man cannot be juſt, or juſtified, without
an exact performance of every tittle. Locke.
2. The ſtate of being abated.
Coffee has, in common with all nuts, an oil ſtrongly com-
bined and entangled with earthy particles. The moſt noxious
part of oil exhales in roaſting to the abatement of near one
quarter of its weight. Arbuthnot on alivients.
3. The ſum or quantity taken away by the aâ of abating.
Xenophon tells us, that the city contained about ten thou-
ſand
&gt;
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B D
and houſes, and allowing one man to every houſe, who could
have any ſhare in the government, (the reſt, conſiſting of
women, children and ſervants) and making other obvious
abatements, theſe tyrants, if they had been careful to adhere
together, might have been a majority, even, of the people
colle&amp;tive. *::: the conteſis in Athens and Rome.
4. The cauſe of abating ; uation.
As our advantages towards pračtifing and promoting piety
and virtue were greater than thoſe of other men; ſo will our
excuſe be leſs, if we neglect to make uſe of them. We
cannot plead in abatement of our guilt, that we were ignorant
of our duty, under the prepoſſeſſion of ill habits, and the biaſs
of a wrong education. Atterbury's Sermons.
ABATEMENT, in law.
The act of the abator; as, the abatement of the heir into the
land before he hath agreed with the lord. The affection or
paſſion of the thing abated; as, abatement of the writ. Cowel.
ABATEMENT, [with heralds] is an accidental mark, which be-
ing added to a coat cf arms, the dignity of it is abaſed, by
reaſon of ſome ſtain or diſhonourable quality of the bearer. Dići.
ABA'TER. m. ſ. The agent or cauſe by which an abatement is
procured.
Alaters of acrimony or ſharpneſs: expreſſed oils of ripe
vegetables, and all preparations of ſuch ; as of almonds, piſ-
tachoes, and other nuts. Arbuthnot on diet.
AbA'toR. m. ſ. [a law-term.] One who intrudes into houſes
or land, that is void by the death of the former poſſeſſour, as
yet not entered upon or taken up by his heir. Dić7.
AbAtude. n.ſ. ſold records.] Anything diminiſhed. Bailey.
A BATURE. m. ſ. [a hunting term.] Thoſe ſprigs of graſs which
are thrown down by a ſtag in his paſſing by. Dićf.
ABB, n.ſ. The yarn on a weaver's warp; a term among clo-
thiers. Chambers.
ABBA. m. ſ. [Heb. 58] A Syriac word, which fignifies father.
ABBAcy, n.ſ. [Lat. abbatia.] The rights or privileges of an
abbot. See ABBEY.
According to Felinus, an abbacy is the dignity itſelf, ſince
an abbot is a term or word of dignity, and not of office; and,
therefore, even a ſecular perſon, who has the care of ſouls,
is ſometimes, in the canon law, alſo ſtiled an abbot.
Ayliff's Parergonjuris Canonici.
Abbess. n.ſ. [Lat. abbatiſa, from whence the Saxon abu-
bºrre, then probably abbateſs, and by contračtion abbeſ, in
Fr. and abbeſs, Eng.) The ſuperiour or governeſs of a nun-
nery or monaſtery of women.
They fled
Into this abbey, whither we purſued them;
And here the abheſ; ſhuts the gate on us,
And will not ſuffer us to fetch him out.
Shakeſp, Comedy of Errours.
I have a ſiſter, abbeſ, in Terceras,
Wholoſt her lover on her bridal-day. Dryd. D. Sebaſ.
Conſtantia's heart was ſo elevated with the diſcourſe of Fa-
ther Francis, that the very next day ſhe entered upon her vow.
As ſoon as the ſolemnities of her reception were over, we re-
tired, as it is uſual, with the abbeſ into her own apartment,
Addiſon. Spect. Nº 164.
Agbºy, or Abby. m. ſ. [Lat, abbatia; from whence probably
firſt ABBA cy; which ſee..] A monaſtery of religious per-
ſons, whether men or women; diſtinguiſhed from religious
houſes of other denominations by larger privileges, See
ABBOT.
With eaſy roads he came to Leiceſter;
Lodg’d in the abbey, where the reverend abbot,
With all his convent, honourably receiv'd him.
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
A'BBEY-Lubbe R. n.ſ. [See LUBBER.] A ſlothful loiterer in
a religious houſe, under pretence of retirement and auſterity.
This is no Father Dominic, no huge overgrown abbey-
ſtºler; this is but a diminutive ſucking friar. Dryd. Sp. Fr.
ABBOT. n.ſ.. [in the lower Latin abbas, from 5x father,
which ſenſe was implied; ſo that the abbots were called pa-
tº, and abbeſſes matres monaſterii. Thus Fortunatus to the
abbot Paternus: Namini; offium jure, Paterne, geris.] The
chief of a convent, or fellowſhip of canons. Of theſe,
ſome in England were mitred, ſome not: thoſe that were mi-
tred, were excmpted from the juriſdiction of the dioceſan,
having in themſelves epiſcopal authority within their precincts,
and being alſo lords of parliament. The other ſort were ſub-
ject to the dioceſan in all ſpiritual government. Cowel.
See ABBEY.
A BBy. Sec Abbey.
ABForship. m. ſ. The ſtate or privilege of an abbot. Dić.
To ABBRE'VíATE. v. a. [Lat. abbreviare.]
i. To ſhorten by contraction of parts without loſs of the main
fubſtance.
It is one thing to abbreviate by contračting, another by cut-
ting off. Bacon. Eſſay 26.
The only invention of late years, which hath any way con-
tributed towards politeneſs in diſcourſe, is that of abbreviating
or reducing words of many ſyllables into one, by lopping off
the reſt, Swift's Introduciion to gentrel converſation.
I
2. To ſhorten, to cut ſhort. - -
Againſt this opinion we may very well ſet the length of
their days before the flood; which were abbreviated after, and
in half this ſpace contračted into hundreds and threeſcores:
Brown's Wulgar Erreurs, b. vi. c. 6.
Abbreviation. n.ſ.
I. The aët of abbreviating.
2. The means uſed to abbreviate, as charaćters ſignifying whole
words.
Such is the propriety and energy of expreſſion in them
all, that they never can be changed, but to diſadvantage, ex-
cept in the circumſtance of uſing abbreviations. -
Swift's Introduction to genteel converſation.
ABB Rev.1A"Tor, n, ſ: [abbreviateur, Fr.] One who abbreviates,
or abridges.
ABBRE'v1at UR F. n.ſ.. [abbreviatura, Lat.]
1. A mark uſed for the ſake of ſhortening.
2. A compendium or abridgement.
He is a good man, who grieves rather for him that injures
him, than for his own ſuffering; who prays for him, that
wrongs him, forgiving all his faults; who ſooner ſhews mercy
than anger; who offers violence to his appetite, in all things
endeavouring to ſubdue the fleſh to the ſpirit. This is an ex-
cellent abbreviature of the whole duty of a chriſtian.
Taylor's Guide to devotion.
ABBREUWOI" R. [in French, a watering-place. This word
is derived by Menage, not much acquainted with the Teutonic
dialects, from adhibare for adhibere; but more probably it comes
from the ſame root with brew. See BREW.] It ſignifies,
among maſons, the joint or junéture of two ſtones, or the
interſtice between two ſtones to be filled up with mortar. Dić.
A, B, C.
1. Is taken for the alphabet; as, he has not learned his a, b, c.
2. Sometimes for the little book by which the elements of reading
are taught.
To A BDICATE. v. a. [Lat. abdico.] To give up right; to
reſign; to lay down an office.
Old Saturn, here, with upcaſt eyes,
Beheld his abdicated ſkies. Addiſon.
ABDica"rion. n.ſ.. [abdicatio, Lat.] The act of abdicating;
reſignation; quitting an office by one's own proper act before
the uſual or ſtated expiration.
Neither doth it appear how a prince's abdication can make
any other ſort of vacancy in the throne, than would be cauſed
by his death ; ſince he cannot abdicate for his children, other-
wiſe than by his own conſent in form to a bill from the two
houſes. Swift on the Sentiments of a Church of England man.
A'BDicATIVE. adj. That which cauſes or implies an abdica-
tion. Dić?.
A'BDITIve. adj. [from abdo, to hide.] That which has the
power or quality of hiding. Dićf.
ABDO'MEN. n.ſ. [Lat. from abdo, to hide..] A cavity com-
monly called the lower venter or belly: It contains the ſto-
mach, guts, liver, ſpleen, bladder, and is within lined with
a membrane called the peritonaeum. The lower part is called
the hypogaſtrium ; the foremoſt part is divided into the
epigaſtrium, the right and left hypochondria, and the navel;
'tis bounded above by the cartilago enſiformis and the dia-
phragm, ſideways by the ſhort or lower ribs, and behind by
the vertebrae of the loins, the bones of the coxendix, that of
the pubes and os ſacrum. It is covered with ſeveral muſcles,
from whoſe alternate relaxations and contractions in reſpira.
tion, digeſtion is forwarded, and the due motion of all the
parts therein contained promoted, both for ſecretion and ex-
pulſion. &amp;uincy.
The abdomen conſiſts moreover of parts containing and
contained. JWiſeman's Surgery.
AB Do'M INAL.
ABDo'MINo Us. S
To ABDU’CE. v.a. [Lat. abduco.] To draw to a different part;
to withdraw one part from another. A word chiefly uſed in
phyſic or ſcience. -
And if we abduce the eye unto either corner, the obječt
will not duplicate; for, in that poſition, the axis of the cones
remain in the ſame plain, as is demonſtrated in the optics de-
livered by Galen. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 20.
AB DU'cENT, adj. Muſcles abducent, are thoſe which ſerve to
open or pull back divers parts of the body; their oppoſites be-
ing called adducent. Dict.
Abdu'ction. m. / [abdućio, Lat.]
1. The ačt of drawing apart, or withdrawing one part from
another.
2. A particular form of argument.
ABDU’CTOR. m. ſ. ſaiduºlor, Lat.] The name given by
anatomiſts to the muſcles, which ſerve to draw back the ſeveral
members.
In purſuance of this theory, he ſuppoſed the conſtrićtors of
the eyelids muſt be ſtrengthened in the ſupercilious ; the ab-
dºors in drunkards, and contemplative men, who have
the ſame ſteady and grave motion of the eye.
Arbuthnot and Pope's Martinus Scribierus,
adj. relating to the abdomen.
As ECE-
—
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
t
A B E
Abfce DA'R1A N. m. ſ. [from the names of a, b, c, the three
firſt letters of the alphabet.] He that teaches or learns the
alphabet, or firſt rudiments of literature. -
This word is uſed by Wood in his Athenae Oxoniºſº, where
mentioning Farnaby the critic, he relates, that, in ſome part
of his life, he was reduced to follow the trade of an abece-
darian by his misfortunes.
A'Bec EDARY. adj. [See Abeced ARIAN.]
1. Belonging to the alphabet.
2. Inſcribed with the alphabet.
This is pretended from the ſympathy, cf two needles
touched with the loadſtone, and placed in the center of two
. . abecedary circles, or rings of letters, deſcribed round about
them, one friend keeping one, and another the other, and
agreeing upon an hour wherein they will communicate...
4. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii., c.2,
Ab F^D. adv. [from a, for at. See (A,) and BE D.J. In bed.
It was a ſhame for them to mar their complexions, yea and
conditions too, with long lying aled: and that, when ſhe was
of their age, ſhe trowed, ſhe would have made a handker-
chief by that time o' day. Sidney, b. ii.
She has not been abed, but in her chapel
All night devoutly watch'd, and brib'd the ſaints -
With prayers for her deliverance. Dryd. Span. Friar.
ABERR'ANce. n.ſ.. [from aberro, Lat. to wander from the
right way.] A deviation from the right way; an errour; a
miſtake; a falſe opinion. -
Could a man be compoſed to ſuch an advantage of conſtitu-
tion, that it ſhould not at all adulterate the images of his mind;
yet this ſecond nature would alter the crafis of his underſtand-
ing, and render it as obnoxious to aberrances, as now.
Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica, c. 16.
ABE’RRANcy. The ſame with A B E R RAN CE.
They do not only ſwarm with errors, but vices depending
thereon. Thus they commonly affect no man any farther than
he deſerts his reaſon, or complies with their aberrancies.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 3.
ARE'RRANT. adj. [from aberrans, Lat.] Deviating, wandering
from the right or known way. Dić?.
ABERRATION. n.ſ.. [from aberratio, Lat.] The aët of devia-
ting from the common track.
And if it be a miſtake, it is only ſo; there is no hereſy in
ſuch an harmleſs aberration; at the worſt, with the ingenuous,
the probability of it will render it a lapſe of eaſy pardon.
Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica, c. 11.
ABE’RRING. part. [from the verb aberr, of aberro, Lat J Wan-
dering, going aſtray. ".
Though there were a fatality in this year, yet divers were,
and others might be, out in their account, aberring ſeveral ways
from the true and juſt compute, and calling that one year,
which perhaps might be another.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12,
Of the verb aberr I have found no example.
To ABERU'NcATE. v. a. [averunca, Lat..] To pull up by the
roots; to extirpate utterly. Dić7.
To ABET. v. a. [from bezan, Sax. ſignifying to enkindle or
animate.] To puſh forward another, to ſupport him in his de-
ſigns by connivance, encouragement, or help. It is generally
taken, at leaſt by modern writers, in an ill ſenſe; as may be
ſeen in A BETTER.
To abet ſignifieth, in our common law, as much as to encou-
rage or ſet on. Cowel.
Then ſhall I ſoon, quoth he, return again,
Abet that virgin's cauſe diſconſolate,
And ſhortly back return unto this place,
To walk this way in pilgrim's poor eſtate. Fairy Q. b. i.
A widow who by ſolemn vows,
Contračted to me, for my ſpouſe,
Combin'd with him to break her word,
And has abetted all.——— Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 3.
Men lay ſo great weight upon their being of right opinions,
and their eagerneſs of abetting them, that they account that
the unum neceſſarium. Decay of Piety.
In the reign of king Charles the firſt, though that prince
was married to a daughter of France, and was perſonally be-
loved and eſteemed in the French court; it is well known that
they abetted both parties in the civil war, and always furniſhed
fupplies to the weaker ſide, leaſt there ſhould be an end put to
theſe fatal diviſions. Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 28.
ABET MENT. m. ſ. The aët of abetting. Dićf.
ABE’tt &amp; R, or ABET roR. m.ſ. He that abets; the ſupporter
or encourager of another.
You ſhall be ſtill plain Torriſmond with me,
Th' abettor, partner, (if you like the name)
The huſband of a tyrant, but no king;
Till you deſerve that title by your juſtice.
Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
Whilſt this ſin of calumny has two ſuch potent aletters, we
are not to wonder at its growth: as long as men are malicious
and deſigning, they will be traducing. Govern, of the Tongue.
. Theſe and the like. conſiderations, though they may have no
influence on the headſtrong unruly multitude, ought to fink
into the minds of thoſe who are their altiors, and who, if
they eſcape the puniſhment here due to them, muſt very well
know, that theſe ſeveral miſchiefs will be one day laid to their
charge. Addiſon. Freeholder, Nº. 50.
ABEY’ANCF. n.ſ.. [from the French alºyer, allatrare, to bark
at:J. This word, in Littleton, cap. Diſcontinuance, is thus
uſed. . The right of fee-ſimple lieth in abeyance, when it is all
only in the remembrance, intendment, and conſideration of
the law. The frank tenement of the glebe of the parſonage,
is in no man during the time that the parſonage is void, but is
in abeyance. Cowel.
ABG REGATION. n.ſ.. [abgregatio, Lat..] A ſeparation from the
flock. Dić7.
To A BHO'R. v. a. ſabhorreo, Lat.] To hate with acrimony;
to deteſt to extremity; to loath.
Whilſt I was big in clamour, came there a man,
Who having ſeen me in my worſer ſtate,
Shunn'd my abhorr'd ſociety. Shakeſpear's K. Lear,
To whom thus Michael: Juſtly thou abhºrr'ſ
That ſon, who on the quiet ſtate of men
Such trouble brought, affecting to ſubdue
Rational liberty. 44ilt. Parad. Lºft, b. xii. 1. 79-
The ſelf-ſame thing they will abhor
One way, and long another for. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
A church of England man abhors the humour of the age, in
delighting to fling ſcandals upon the clergy in general; which,
beſides the diſgrace to the reformation, and to religion itſelf,
caſt an ignominy upon the kingdom that it doth not deſerve.
Swift on the Sentiments of a Church of England man.
AB Ho'RRENce. n.ſ.. [from abhor.]
1. The act of abhorring, deteſtation.
It draws upon him the juſt and univerſal hatred and abhor-
rence of all men here; and, finally, ſubjects him to the wrath
of God, and eternal damnation hereafter. South's Serm.
2. The diſpoſition to abhor, hatred.
He knew well that even a juſt and neceſſary offence does, by
giving men acquaintance with war, take off ſomewhat from
the abhorrence of it, and inſenſibly diſpoſe them to farther hoſti-
lities. Decay of Piety.
Ab Ho'RRENcy. m. ſ. The ſame with AB HoR RE Nc e.
The firſt tendency to any injuſtice that appears, muſt be
ſuppreſſed with a ſhow of wonder and abhorrency in the parents
and governours. Locke on Education, S11-.
AB Ho'RRENT. adj. [from abhor]
I. Struck with abhorrence.
— — — For if the worlds
In worlds inclos'd would on his ſenſes burſt,
He would abhorrent turn. Thomſon's Summer, i. 310.
2. Contrary to, foreign, inconſiſtent with. It is uſed with the
particles from or to, but more properly with from.
This I conceive to be an hypotheſis, well worthy a rational
belief; and yet is it ſo abhorrent from the vulgar, that they
would as ſoon believe Anaxagoras, that ſnow is black, as him
that ſhould affirm it is not white; and if any ſhould in effect
aſſert, that the fire is not formally hot, it would be thought
that the heat of his brain had fitted him for Anticyra, and that
his head were ſo to madneſs. Glanville's Scepſis Scient. c. 12.
Why then theſe foreign thoughts of ſtate employments, .
Abhorrent to your function and your breeding: -
Poor droning truants of unpračtis'd cells,
Bred in the fellowſhip of beardleſs boys,
What wonder is it if you know not men
Dryden's Don Sebaſtian-
Ab Ho'RR ER. n.ſ.. [from abhor.] The perſon that abhors; a
hater, deteſter.
The repreſentatives of the lower clergy were railed at, for
diſputing the power of the biſhops, by the known abhorrers of
epiſcopacy, and abuſed for doing nothing in the convocations,
by theſe very men who wanted to bind up their hands.
Swift. Examiner, N° 21.
Ab Ho'RRING. The objećt of abhorrence. This ſeems not to
be the proper uſe of the participial noun.
And they ſhall go forth, and look upon the carcaſes of the
men that have tranſgreſſed againſt me: for their worm ſhall
not die, neither ſhall their fire be quenched, and they ſhall be
an abhorring unto all fleſh. Iſaiah, lxvi. 44.
To A BIDE. v. n. I abode or abid. [from biblan, or aubbian,
Sax.]
1. To dwell in a place, not remove.
Thy ſervant became ſurety for the lad unto my father, ſay-
ing, if I bring him not unto thee, then I ſhall bear the blame
to my father for ever. Now therefore I pray thee, let thy fer-
vant abide inſtead of the lad, a bondman to my lord; and let
the lad go up with his brethren. Gen. xliv, 32, 33.
2. To dwell.
The Marquis Dorſet, as I hear, is fled
To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
3. To remain, not ceaſe or fail.
They that truſt in the Lord ſhall be as mount Zion, which
cannot be removed, but abideth for cver. Pſalm cKxv. 1.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

4. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B J
4. To continue in the ſame ſtate.
The fear of the Lord tendeth to life; and he that hath it
ſhall abide ſatisfied. Prov. xix. 23.
Thoſe who apply themſelves to learning, are forced to ac-
knowledge one God, incorruptible and unbegotten; who is
the only true being, and abides for ever above the higheſt
heavens, from whence he beholds all the things that are done
in heaven and earth. Stillingſ. Defence of Diſc. on Rom. Idolat.
There can be no ſtudy without time; and the mind muſt
abide and dwell upon things, or be always a ſtranger to the in-
ſide of them. - South.
5. To wait for, expećt, attend, wait upon, await; uſed of
things prepared for perſons, as well as of perſons expecting
things. -
Home is he brought, and laid in ſumptuous bed, º
Where many ſkilful leeches him abide,
To ſalve his hurts. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 5. ſtanz. 17.
While lions war, and battle for their dens,
Poor harmleſs lambs abide their enmity. Shakeſp. Hen.VI. p.3.
Bonds and afflićtions abide me, Acis xx. 23.
6. To bear or ſupport the conſequences of a thing.
Ah me ! they little know
How dearly I abide that boaſt ſo vain.
Milton's Par. Loft, b. iv. 1.87.
7. To bear or ſupport, without being conquered or deſtroyed.
But the Lord he is the true God, he is the living God, and
an everlaſting king: At his wrath the earth ſhall tremble, and
the nations ſhall not be able to abide his indignation. jer. x. I c.
It muſt be allowed a fair preſumption in favour of the truth
of my doćtrines, that they have abid a very rigorous teſt now
for above thirty years, ſtand yet firm; and the longer and
more ſtrictly they are look'd into, the more they are confirmed
to this very day. JWoodward, Letter i.
8. To bear without averſion; in which ſenſe it is commonly
uſed with a negative.
Thou can'ſt not abide Tiridates; this is but love of thy-
ſelf. Sidney, b. ii.
Thy vile race,
Though thou didſt learn, had that in't, which good natures
Could not abide to be with ; therefore waſt thou
Deſervedly confin'd into this rock. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
9. To bear or ſuffer. -
That chief (rejoin'd the God) his race derives
From Ithaca, and wond’rous woes ſurvives;
Laertes' ſon: girt with circumfluous tides
He ſtill calamitous conſtraint abides. Pope's Odyſ: b.iv. 1.75o.
10. It is uſed with the particle with before a perſon, and at or in
before a place.
It is better that I give her to thee, than that I ſhould give
her to another man: Abide with me. Gen. xxix. 19.
For thy ſervant vowed a vow, while I abode at Geſhur in
Syria, ſaying, if the Lord ſhall bring me again indeed to Je-
ruſalem, then I will ſerve the Lord. 2 Sam. xv. 8.
11. It is uſed with by before a thing; as, to abide by his teſti-
mony; to abide by his own ſkill; that is, to rely upon them; to
abide by an opinion; to maintain it; to abide by a man, is alſo,
to defend or ſupport him ... But theſe forms are ſomething low.
Of the participle abid, I have found only the example in
Woodward. -
Abi'DER. n.ſ. (from abide.] The perſon that abides or dwells
in a place; perhaps that lives or endures. A word little in uſe.
Abu'DING.. n. ſ. [from abide.] Continuance.
We are ſtrangers before thee and ſojourners, as were all our
fathers: our days on the earth are as a ſhadow, and there is
none abiding. - 1 Chron, xxix. 15.
The air in that region is ſo violently removed, and carried
about with ſuch ſwiftneſs, as nothing in that place can conſiſt
or have abiding. Rawleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
A'BJECT, adj. [alječius, Lat. thrown away as of no value.]
1. Mean, or worthleſs, ſpoken of perſons.
That rebellion
Came like itſelf in baſe and abjećt routs,
Led on by bloody youth goaded with rage,
And countenanc'd by boys and beggary. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
Honeſt men, who tell their ſovereigns what they expect
from them, and what obedience they ſhall be always ready to
pay them, are not upon an equal foot with ſuch baſe and abject
flatterers; and are therefore always in danger of being the laſt
in the royal favour. Addiſon's Whig Examiner.
2. Contemptible, or of no value; uſed of things.
I was at firſt, as other beaſts that graze
The troden herb, of abject thoughts and low.
Milt. Paradiſe Loſt, b. ix. l. 571.
3. Without hope or regard; uſed of condition.
The rarer thy example ſtands,
By how much from the top of wond’rous glory,
Strongeſt of mortal men,
To loweſt pitch of abjeć fortune thou art fall'n.
Milton's Samſºn Agoniſłes.
We ſee man and woman in the higheſt innocence and
perfection, and in the moſt abjeći ſtate of guilt and infirmity.
W I Addiſon. Speciator, N° 273.
OL. 1. -
4. Deſtitute, mean and deſpicable; uſed of a&amp;ions.
To what baſe ends, and by what aijee ways,
Are mortals urg'd thro' ſacred luft of praiſe
Pºpe's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
The rapine is ſo alieff and profane, º
They not from trifles, nor from gods refrain. -
f Dryden's juvenal, Sat. 8.
A'BJECT. m. ſ. A man without hope; a man whoſe miſeries
are irretrievable.
But in mine adverſity they rejoiced, and gathered them-
ſelves together: yea, the abjects gathered themſelves together
againſt me, and { knew it not; they did tear me, and ceaſed
not. Pſalm xxxv. 15.
To A BJe'cT. v. a. ſahjicio, Lat.] To throw away. A word
rarely uſed. -
ABJESTEDNFss. m.ſ.. [from abjeń..] The ſtate of an abjećt.
He would love at no leſs rate than death; and, from the ſu-
pereminent height of glory, ſtooped and abaſed himſelf to the
ſufferance of the extremeſt of indignities, and ſunk himſelf to
the bottom of abjectedneſs, to exalt our condition to the con-
trary extreme. Boyle's Hºrks.
ABJEction. n.ſ.. [from abject.] Meanneſs of mind; want
of ſpirit; ſervility; baſeneſs.
That this ſhould be termed baſeneſs, abjection of mind, or
ſervility, is it credible Hooker, b. v. § 47.
Now the juſt medium of this caſe lies betwixt the pride and
the abjećtion, the two extremes. L’Eſtrange.
A'BJECT ly, adv. [from abject.] In an abjećt manner, meanly,
baſely, ſervilely, contemptibly.
A'BJE cq Ness. m. ſ. [from abject.] The ſame with abjećtion;
ſervility, meanneſs.
Servility and alječineſ of humour is implicitely involved in
the charge of lying; the condeſcending to that, being a mark
of a diſingenuous ſpirit. Government { the Tongue, $8.
By humility I mean not the abječineſs of a baſe mind: but a
prudent care not to over-value ourſelves upon any account.
- Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. ii. c. 7.
Abi'lity. m. ſ. [Haliletſ, Fr.]
1. The power to do any thing, whether depending upon ſkill, or
riches, or ſtrength, or any other quality.
Of ſinging thou haſt got the reputation,
Good Thyrſis, mine I yield to thy ability;
My heart doth ſeek another eſtimation.
If aught in my ability may ſerve
To heighten what thou ſuffer'ſt, and appeaſe
Thy mind with what amends is in my pow'r,
Milton's Sampſon Agoniſłes, l. 744.
They gave after their ability unto the treaſure of the work.
Ezra ii. 69.
If any man miniſter, let him do it as of the ability which
God giveth; that God in all things may be glorified through
Jeſus Chriſt. - I Pet. iv. 11.
2. Capacity.
Children in whom there was no blemiſh, but well-favoured,
and ſkilful in all wiſdom, and cunning in knowledge, and un-
derſtanding ſcience, and ſuch as had ability in them to ſtand in
the king's palace. Dan. i. 4.
3. When it has the plural number, abilities, it frequently ſignifies
the faculties or powers of the mind, and ſometimes the force of
underſtanding given by nature, as diſtinguiſhed from acquired
qualifications.
Wherever we find our abilities too weak for the performance,
he aſſures us of the aſſiſtance of his holy ſpirit. Rogers's Sermons.
Whether it may be thought neceſſary, that in certain tracts
of country, like what we call pariſhes, there ſhould be one
man, at leaſt, of abilities to read and write :
Swift's Arguments againſ aboliſhing Chriſtianity.
AB INTE'st At E. adj. [of ab, from, and inteſłatus, Lat.] A
term of law, implying him that inherits from a man, who,
though he had the power to make a will, yet did not make it.
To A'5 JUGATE. v. a. [abjugo, Lat.] To unyoke, to un-
couple. Diff.
To ABJU'R.E. v. a. ſabjuro, Lat.] -
1. To caſt off upon oath, to ſwear not to do ſomething.
Either to die the death, or to abjure
Sidney, b. i.
For ever the ſociety of man. Shakeſp. Midſºm. Night's Dream.
No man, therefore, that hath not abjured his reaſon, and
ſworn allegiance to a preconceived fantaſtical hypotheſis, can
undertake the defence of ſuch a ſuppoſition.
Halº's €rigin of Mankind.
2. To retračt, or recant, or abnegate; a poſition upon oath:
Abjura’rion. m. ſ. [from abjure.] The act of abjuring. The
oath taken for that end. - -
Until Henry VIII. his time, if a man, having committed
felony, could go into a church or church-yard, before he
were apprehended, he might not be taken from thence to
the uſual trial of law, but confeſſing his fault to the juitices,
or to the coroner, gave his oath to forſake the realm for ever,
which was called aljuration. -
There are ſome abjurations ſtill in force among us here in
England; as, by the ſtatute of the 25th of king Charles II. all
perſons that are admitted into any office, civil or º:
IIlºl
º
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B L
A B O
muſt take the teſt; which is an abjuration of ſome doćtrines of
the church of Rome.
There is likewiſe another oath of abjuration, which laymen
and clergymen are both obliged to take; and that is, to abjure
the Pretender. Ayliff's Parergon juris Canonici.
To A BLACTATE. v. a. [ablacio, Lat.] To wean from the
breaſt.
AblacTA'tion. m. ſ. One of the methods of grafting; and,
according to the fignification of the word, as it were a wean-
ing of a cyon by degrees from its mother ſtock, not cutting
it off wholly from the ſtock, till it is firmly united to that on
which it is grafted.
Ablaqg EA’t 1o N. ſablaqueatio, Lat.] . The act or pračtice of
opening the ground about the roots of trees, to let the air and
water operate upon them.
Trench the ground, and make it ready for the ſpring: Pre-
pare alſo ſoil, and uſe it where you have occaſion: Dig bor-
ders. Uncover as yet roots of trees, where ablaqueation is
requiſite. - - Evelyn's Kalendar.
The tenure in chief ought to be kept alive and nouriſhed;
the which, as it is the very root that doth maintain this ſilver
{tem, that by many rich and fruitful branches ſpreadeth itſelf
into the chancery, exchequer, and court of wards: ſo if it be
ſuffered to ſtarve, by want of ablaqueation, and other good huſ-
bandry, not only this yearly fruit will much decreaſe from time
to time, but alſo the whole body and boughs of that precious
tree itſelf, will fall into danger of decay and dying.
Bacon's Office of Alienations.
ABLA'TION. m. ſ. ſablatio, Lat.] The act of taking away.
A'BLATIve. m. a. [ablativus, Lat.]
1. That which takes away.
2. The ſixth caſe of the Latin nouns; the caſe which, among
other ſignifications, includes the perſon from whom ſomething
is taken away. A term of grammar.
A'BLE. adj. [habile, Fr. habilis, Lat. Skilful, ready.]
1. Having ſtrong faculties, or great ſtrength or knowledge, riches,
or any other power of mind, body, or fortune.
He was not afraid of an able man, as Lewis the Eleventh was.
But, contrariwiſe, he was ſerved by the ableſt men that were to
be found; without which his affairs could not have proſpered
as they did. Bacon's Henry VII.
Such other gambol faculties he hath, that ſhew a weak mind
and an able body, for the which the prince admits him: for the
prince himſelf is ſuch another: the weight of an hair will turn
the ſcales. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
2. Having power ſufficient; enabled.
All mankind acknowledge themſelves able and ſufficient to
do manythings, which ačtually they never do. South's Serm.
Every man ſhall give as he is able, according to the bleſfing
of the Lord thy God, which he hath given thee. Deut. xvi. 17.
3. Before averb, with the participle to, it ſignifies generally hav-
ing the power; before a noun, with for, it means yº.
Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous ; but who is able to
ſtand before envy Prov. xxvii. 4.
There have been ſome inventions alſo, which have been
able for the utterance of articulate ſounds, as the ſpeaking of
certain words. Wilkins's Mathematical Magic.
To A/Ble. v. a. To make able ; to enable, which is the word
commonly uſed. See ENABLE.
Plate fin with gold,
And the ſtrong lance of juſtice hurtleſs breaks:
Arm it with rags, a pigmy's ſtraw doth pierce it.
None does offend, none, I ſay none; I’ll able 'em;
Take that of me, my friend, who have the pow'r
To ſeal th’ accuſer's lips. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
ABLE-BoDIED. adj. Strong of body.
It lies in the power of every fine woman, to ſecure at leaſt
half a dozen able-bodied men to his majeſty's ſervice.
Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 4.
To A BLEGATE. v. a. [ablego, Lat..] To ſend abroad up-
on ſome employment; alſo to ſend a perſon out of the way
that one is weary of. Dić7.
ABLE GAT Ion. n.ſ.. [from ablegate.] A ſending abroad, or out
of the way. Dićf.
A'Bleness. n.ſ.. [from able.] Ability of body, vigour, force.
That nation doth ſo excel, both for comelineſs and ableneſ,
that from neighbour countries they ordinarily come, ſome to
{trive, ſome to learn, ſome to behold. Sidney, b. ii.
A'BLEPsy. m. ſ. ['A3×442, Gr.] Want of fight, natural blind-
neſs; alſo unadviſedneſs. Ličf.
AB lic URI'tion. m. ſ. [abliguritio, Lat.] A prodigal ſpending
on meat and drink. Dict.
To A'BLIGATE. v. a. [abligo, Lat.] To bind or tye up from. D.
To A'BLOCATE. v. a. [alloco, Lat.] To let out to hire.
Perhaps properly by him who has hired it from another.
Calvin's Lexicon juridicum.
AB locA'TIos. m. ſ. [from ablocate.] A letting out to hire.
To ABLU'D E. v. m. [alludo, Lat.] To be unlike. Dićf.
A'BLUENT, adj. [abluens, Lat. from abluo, to waſh away.]
1. That which waſhes clean.
2. That which has the power of cleanſing. Dićt.
AB 1. U't los. m. ſ. [ablutio, Lat.]
1. The act of cleanſing, or waſhing clean.
There is a natural analogy between the allºon of the body
and the purification of the ſoul; between eating the holy bread
and drinking the ſacred chalice, and a participation of the body
and blood of Chriſt. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
Waſh'd by the briny wave, the pious train
Are cleans'd, and caſt th’ ablutions in the main. Pope's Iliad.
2. The rinſing of chymical preparations in water, to diſſolve and
waſh away any acrimonious particles.
3. The cup given, without conſecration, to the laity in the popiſh
churches.
To A'BNEGATE. v. a. [from abnego, Lat.] To deny.
ABNEGA’ſ Ion., n.ſ.. [abnegatio, Lat, denial, from abnegº, to
deny..] Denial, renunciation.
The abnegation or renouncing ef all his own holds and in-
tereſts, and truſts of all that man is moſt apt to depend upon,
that he may the more expeditely follow Chriſt.
Hammond's Pradical Catechiſm.
ABNoDA'tion. m. ſ. ſabnodatio, Lat.] The act of cutting away
knots from trees; a term of gardening. Dicſ.
Abno'RMous. adj. [abnormis, Lat, out of rule.] Irregular,
miſhapen. Diet.
Abo'ARD. adv. [a ſea-term, but adopted into common language;
derived immediately from the French a bord, as, aller a bord, ºn-
voyer a bord. Bord is itſelf a word of very doubtful original, and
perhaps, in its different acceptations, deducible from different
roots. Borb, in the ancient Saxon, ſignified a houſe; in which
ſenſe, to go aboard, is to take up reſidence in a ſhip.]
In a ſhip.
Which, when far off, Cymocles heard and ſaw,
He loudly call'd to ſuch as were aboard,
The little bark unto the ſhore to draw,
And him to ferry over that deep ford. Fairy Q. b. ii. cant. 6.
I made this anſwer, that he might land them, if it pleaſed
him, or otherwiſe keep them aboard. Sir IP. Rawleigh's Eſſºys.
When morning roſe, I ſent my mates to bring -
Supplies of water from a neighb'ring ſpring;
Whilſt I the motions of the winds explor’d;
Then ſummon'd in my crew, and went aboard.
Addiſon's Ovid's Metamorphoſis, b. iii.
Abo'DE. m. ſ. [from abide.]
1. Habitation, dwelling, place of reſidence.
But I know thy abode and thy going out, and thy coming in,
and º rage againſt me. 2 Kings, xix. 27.
thers may uſe the ocean as their road, -
Only the Engliſh make it their abode;
Whoſe ready ſails with every wind can fly,
And make acov'nant with th' inconſtant ſky. Waller.
2. Stay, continuance in a place.
Sweet ..º. patience for my long abode;
Not I, but my affairs, have made you wait.
Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
Making a ſhort abode in Sicily the ſecond time, landing in
Italy, and making the war, may be reaſonably judged the buſi-
neſs but of ten months. Dryden's Dedicat. to Æneid.
The woodcocks early viſit, and abode
Of long continuance in our temp'rate clime,
Foretel a liberal harveſt. Philips.
3. To make abode; to dwell, to reſide, to inhabit.
Deep in a cave the Sibyl makes abode; -
Thence full of fate returns, and of the God. Dryd. Æn. 6.
To A Bo'DE. v. a. [See BoDE.] To foretoken or foreſhow; to
be a prognoſtic, to be ominous. It is taken, with its deriva-
tives, in the ſenſe either of good or ill.
Every man,
After the hideous ſtorm that follow'd, was
A thing inſpir’d; and, not conſulting, broke
Into a general prophecy, that this tempeſt,
Daſhing the garment of this peace, aboded
The ſudden breach of it. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Abo'DEMENT. n. ſ. [from to abode..] A ſecret anticipation of
ſomething future; an impreſſion upon the mind of ſome event
to come; prognoſtication ; omen. -
I like not this.
For many men that ſtumble at the threſhold,
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.—
—Tuſh man, abodements muſt not now affright us.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. iii.
My lord biſhop, being ſomewhat troubled, took the freedom
to aſk him, Whether he had never any ſecret abodement in his
mind No, replied the duke; but I think ſome adventure may
kill me as well as another man. J/atton.
To ABOLISH. v. a. [from abolev, Lat, to blot out.]
1. To annul.
For us to aboliſh what he hath eſtabliſhed, were preſumption
moſt intolerable. Płooker, b. iii. § 1 c.
On the parliament's part it was propoſed, that all the biſhops,
deans, and chapters, might be immediately taken away, and
aboliſhed. Clarendon, l. viii.
2. To put an end to ; to deſtroy.
The long continued wars, between the Engliſh and the Scots,
had then raiſed invincible jealoufies and hate, which long con-
tinued peace hath ſince aboliſhed. Sir John Haywar...
That
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B O
A B O
That ſhall Perocles well requite, I wot,
And, with thy blood, aboliſh ſo reproachful blot.
Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 4. ſtanza 45.
More deſtroy'd than they,
We ſhould be quite aboliſh'd, and expire.
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii. l. 92.
Or wilt thou thyſelf
Aboliſh thy creation, and unmake
For him,what for thy glory thou haſt made: Idem, b.iii. 1.163.
Fermented ſpirits contraćt, harden, and conſolidate many
fibres together, aboliſhing many canals; eſpecially where the
fibres are the tendereſt, as in the brain. Arbuth. on Aliments.
- Nor could Vulcanian flame
The ſtench aboliſh, or the ſavour tame. Dryd. Virg. Geo. iii.
Abo'LisHABLE. adj. [from aboliſh.] That which may be abo-
liſhed.
Abolish ER. n.ſ [from aboliſh.] He that aboliſhes.
Abo'LISHMENT. n. ſ. [from aboliſh.] The aët of aboliſhing.
The plain and direét way againſt us herein, had been only to
prove, that all ſuch ceremonies, as they require to be aboliſhed,
are retained by us with the hurt of the church, or with leſs be-
nefit than the aboliſhment of them would bring. Hooker, b. iv.
He ſhould therefore think the aboliſhment of that order among
us, would prove a mighty ſcandal and corruption to our faith,
and manifeſtly dangerous to our monarchy.
Swift on the Sentiments of a Church of Englandman.
Aboli'tion. n.ſ.. [from aboliſh.] The ačt of aboliſhing. This
is now more frequently uſed than aboliſhment.
From the total abolition of the popular power, may be dated
the ruin of Rome: for had the reducing hereof to its ancient
condition, propoſed by Agrippa, been accepted inſtead of Mae-
cenas's model, that ſtate might have continued unto this day.
Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. iii. c. 4.
An apoplexy is a ſudden abolition of all the ſenſes, external
and internal, and of all voluntary motion, by the ſtoppage of
the flux and reflux of the animal ſpirits through the nerves
deſtined for thoſe motions. - Arbuthnot on Diet.
being abominable; hatefulneſs, odiouſneſs.
Till we have proved, in its proper place, the eternal and
eſſential difference between virtue and vice, we muſt forbear to
urge atheiſts with the corruption and ahominableneſs of their
principles. Bentley's Sermons.
Abo'MINABLE. adj. [abominabilis, Lat.]
1. Hateful, deteſtable.
Return’d
Succeſsful beyond hope, to lead thee forth
Triumphant out of this infernal pit
Abominable, accurs'd, the houſe of woe. M. Par. Loſt, b. x.
It is not to be queſtioned, but the queen and miniſtry might
| eaſily redreſs this abominable grievance, by enlarging the number
º of juſtices of the peace, % endeavouring to chooſe men of vir-
tuous principles. Swift's Project for the advancement of Religion.
2. Unclean.
The ſoul that ſhall touch any unclean thing, as the unclean-
neſs of man, or any unclean beaſt, or any abominable unclean
thing, and eat of the fleſh of the ſacrifice of peace-offerings,
which pertain unto the Lord, even that ſoul ſhall be cut off
from his people. Leviticus, vii. 21.
In low and ludicrous language, it is a word of looſe and inde-
terminate cenſure. -
They ſay you are a melancholy fellow.—I am ſo; I do love
itbetter than laughing.—Thoſe #. are in extremity of either,
are abominable fellows, and betray themſelves to every modern
cenſure, worſe than drunkards. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
A B o'M INA BLY. adv. [from abominable.] A word of low or fa-
rrniliar language, ſignifying exceſſively, extremely, exceeding-
Iy; in the ill ſenſe.
Since I have been your wife, I have obſerved great abuſes
and diſorders in your family; your ſervants are mutinous and
&lt;Huarrelſome, and cheat you moſt abominably.
Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
To ABO'MINATE. v. a. [abominor, Lat.j To abhor, de-
teſt, hate utterly.
We are not guilty of your injuries,
No way conſent to them; but abhor,
Abominate, and loath this cruelty. Southern's Oroonoko.
He profeſſed both to abominate and deſpiſe all *: refine-
ment, and intrigue, either in a prince or miniſter. He could
not tell what I meant by ſecrets of ſtate, where an enemy, or
fome rival nation, were not in the caſe. Swift's Gulliv. Travels.
Abomina'rion. n.ſ.
I. Hatred, deteſtation; as, to have in abomination.
To aſſiſt king Charles by Engliſh or Dutch forces, would
render him odious to his new ſubjećts, who have nothing in ſo
ſ great abomination, as thoſe whom they hold for heretics.
- Swift's Miſcellanies.
3 -
*. The obječt of hatred.
That ye ſhall ſay, thy ſervant's trade hath been about cattle,
from our youth even until now, both we and alſo our fathers:
that ye may dwell in the land of Goſhen; for every ſhepherd
is an alomination to the Egyptians. Geneſis, xlvi. 34.
Abo'MINABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from abominable.] The quality of
3. Pollution, defilement. -
And there ſhall in no wiſe enter into it any thing that de-
fileth, neither whatſoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie.
Rev. xxi. 27.
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you;
Only th’ adulterous Antony, moſt large
In his abominations, turns you off,
And gives his potent regiment to a trull,
That noſes it againſt us. Shakespeare. Aitony and Cleºpatra,
4. The cauſe of pollution.
And the high places that were before Jeruſalem, which were
on the right hand of the mount of corruption, which Solomon
the king of Iſrael had builded for Aſhtoreth the abomination of
the Zidonians, and for Chemoſh the abomination of the Moa-
bites, and for Milcom the abomination of the children of Am-
mon, did the king defile. - - 2 Kings, xxiii. 13.
ABORI'GINES. m. ſ Lat. The earlieſt inhabitants of a country;
thoſe of whom no original is to be traced; as, the Welſh in
Britain.
To ABO'RT. v. n. [aborto, Lat.] To bring forth before the
time; to miſcarry. Dići.
A Bo'RTIon. n.ſ.. [abortio, Lat.]
1. The aët of bringing forth untimely.
2. The produce of an untimely birth.
His wife miſcarried; but as the abortion proved only a fe-
male foetus, he comforted himſelf, that, had it arrived to per-
fection, it would not have anſwered his account.
- Arbuthnot and Pope's Martinus Scriblerus.
Behold my arm thus blaſted, dry and wither'd,
Shrunk like a foul abortion, and decay’d,
Like ſome untimely produćt of the ſeaſons,
Robb'd of its properties of ſtrength and office.
Rowe's jane Shore.
Abortive. m. ſ. That which is born before the due time. See
Abortive, adj.
No common wind, no cuſtomed event,
But they will pluck away its natºral cauſes,
And call them meteors, prodigies, and ſigns, *
4bortiveſ, and preſages, tongues of heav'n
Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John. Shakeſp K. john.
Take the fine ſkin of an abortive, and, with ſtarch thin laid
on, prepare your ground or tablet. Peacham on Drawing.
his is certain, that many are, by this means, preſerved, and
§o ſignal ſervice to their country, who, without ſuch a provi-
ſon, might have periſhed as abortives, or have come to an un-
timely end, and perhaps have brought, upon their guilty pa-
rents, the like deſtruction. Addiſon. Guardian, N° 106.
Abo'RTIVE. adj. [abortivus, Lat.]
I. That which is brought forth before the due time of birth.
If ever he have 'child, abortive be it,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light. Shakespeare Rich. III.
All th' unaccompliſh'd works of nature's hand,
Abortive, monſtrous, or unkindly mix’d,
Diſſolv’d on earth, fleet hither. Paradiſ, Loft, b. iii. 1. 456.
2. Figuratively, that which fails for want of time. -
This is the true cauſe, why ſo many politic conceptions, ſo
elaborately formed and wrought, and grown at length ripe for
delivery, do yet, in the iſſue, miſcarry and prove abortive.
South's Sermons.
Falſe hopes
He cheriſhes, nor will his fruit expect
Th’ autumnal ſeaſon, but, in ſummer's pride
When other orchards ſmile, abortive fail.
How often haſt thou waited at my cup,
Fed from my trencher, kneel'd down at the board,
When I have feaſted with queen Margaret?
Remember it, and let it make thee creſt-faln;
Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride. Shakeſp. Hen. VI. p. ii.
3. That which brings forth nothing.
Theſe paſs'd, if any paſs, the void profound
Of uneſſential night receives him next,
Wide-gaping! and with utter loſs of being
Threatens him, plung'd in that abortive gulf.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii. 1.451.
Abo'RTIvely. adv. [from abortive..] Born without the due
time; immaturely, untimely. -
Abo'RTIve Ness. n. ſ. [from abortive.] The ſtate of abortion.
Abo'RTMENT. n.ſ. [from abort.] The thing brought forth out
of time; an untimely birth.”
I ſhall not then doubt the happy iſſue of my undertakings in
this deſign, whereby concealed treaſures, which now ſeem ut-
terly loſt to mankind, ſhall be confined to ſo univerſal a piety,
and brought into uſe by the induſtry of converted penitents,
whoſe wretched carcaſes the impartial laws have, or ſhall, de-
dicate, as untimely feaſts, to the worms of the earth, in whoſe
womb thoſe deſerted mineral riches muſt ever lie buried as loſt
abortments, unleſs thoſe be made the active midwives to deliver
them. Bacon's Phyſical Ren ins.
ABOVE. prep. [from a, and buyan, Saxon; boven, Dutch.]
1. Higher in place.
So when with crackling flames a cauldron fries,
The bubbling waters from the bottom riſe;
Philips.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B O
Above the brims they force their firy way;
Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day,
Dryden, AEreid vii. 1, 343.
2. More in quantity or number.
Every one that paſſeth among them, that are numbered from
twenty years old and above, ſhall give an offering unto the Lord.
£32dus, xxx. 14.
3. Higher in rank, power or excellence.
The Lord is high alºve all nations, and his glory above the
heavens. Pſalm cxiii. 4.
The public power of all ſocieties is alove every ſoul contained
in the ſame ſocieties. Hooker, b, i.
There is no riches above a ſound body, and no joy above the
joy of the heart. Eccleſ ºfficus, xxx. 16.
- To her
Thou didſ reſign thy manhood, and the place
Wherein God ſet thee above her, made of thee,
And for thee: whoſe perfection far excell'd
Her’s, in all real dignity. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x. l. 147.
Latona ſees her ſhine above the reſt,
And feeds with ſecret joy her ſilent breaſt. Dryden's AEneid.
4. Superiour to ; unattainable by.
It is an old and true diſtinétion, that things may be above
our reaſon, without being contrary to it. Of this kind are the
power, the nature, and the univerſal preſence of God, with
innumerable other points. Swift.
5. Beyond; more than.
We were preſſed out of meaſure, alove ſtrength; inſomuch
that we deſpaired even of life. 2 Cor. i. 8.
In this, of having thoughts unconfuſed, and being able, nicely
to diſtinguiſh one thing from another, where there is but the
leaſt difference, conſiſts, in a great meaſure, the exactneſs of
judgment and clearneſs of reaſon, which is to be obſerved in
one man above another. Locke.
The inhabitants of Tirol have many particular privileges
above thoſe of the other hereditary countries of the emperour.
Addiſon on Italy.
6. Too proud for; too high for. A phraſe chiefly uſed in fami-
liar expreſſion. *
Kings and princes, in the earlier ages of the world, laboured
in arts and occupations, and were above nothing that tended to
promote the conveniences of life. Pope's Odyſſey; notes.
AB 'v F. adv.
1. Over-head.
To men ſtanding below, men ſtanding aloft ſeem much leſ.
fened ; to thoſe above, men ſtanding below, ſeem not ſo much leſ-
fened. Bacon.
When he eſtabliſhed the clouds above; when he ſtrengthened
the fountains of the deep ; when he gave to the ſea his decree,
that the waters ſhould not paſs his commandment: when he
appointed the foundations of the earth: then I was by him, as
one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him. Proverbs, viii. 28.
2. In the regions of heaven.
Your praiſe the birds ſhall chant in every grove,
And winds ſhall waft it to the pow'rs alove. Pope's Paſtoral.
3. Before. [See ABoy E-cITED.]
I ſaid above, that theſe two machines of the balance, and
the dira, were only ornamental, and that the ſucceſs of the
duel had been the ſame without them. Dryd. Dedicat. Æneid.
FROM A Bove.
1. From an higher place.
The Trojans from above their foes beheld;
And with arm'd legions all the rampires fill’d. Dryd. Aneid.
2. From heaven. -
Every good gift, and every perfeót gift is from ałove, and
cometh down from the father of lights, with whom is no vari-
ableneſs, neither ſhadow of turning. james, i. 17.
Abov E A LL. In the firſt place; chiefly.
I had alſo ſtudied Virgil's deſign, his diſpoſition of it, his
manners, his judicious management of the figures, the ſober
retrenchments of his ſenſe, which always leaves ſomewhat to
gratify our imagination, on which it may enlarge at pleaſure;
but abºve all, the elegance of his expreſſion, and the harmony of
his numbers. - Dryden’s Dedication to the Æneid.
Abov E-BoARD. In open fight; without artifice or trick. A
figurative expreſſion, borrowed Afrom gameſters, who, when
they put their hands under the table, are changing their cards.
It is uſed only in familiar language.
It is the part alſo of an honeſt man to deal above-board, and
without tricks. L'Eſtrange.
. . Though there have not been wanting ſuch heretofore, as
have practiſed theſe unworthy arts (for as much as there have
been villains in all places, and all ages) yet now-a-days they are
owned at ove-board. South's Sermons.
A Roy E-c ITF D. Cited before. A figurative expreſſion, taken
from the ancient manner of writing books on ſcrolls; as what-
º: is cited or mentioned before in the ſame page, muſt be
a D.O. C.
Nor wºuld I mention this particular, did it not appear from
the authority abºve-cited, that this was a fact confefied by hea-
, thens themſelves. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
4.
A Boy E-G Round. An expreſſion uſed to ſignify, that a man is
alive; not in the grave.
Abov E-MENT Iose D. See Above-cited.
I do not remember, that Homer any-where falls into the
faults at ove-mentioned, which were indeed the falſe refinements
of latter ages. Addison. Speciator, N° 279,
To A BO'UN D. v. n. [atundo, Lat. alonder, French.]
1. To have in great plenty; uſed ſometimes with the particle in,
and ſometimes the particle with.
The king-becoming graces,
I have no reliſh of them, but alound
In the diviſion of each ſeveral crime,
Aéting it many ways. Shakeſpeare’s Macbeth.
Corn, wine, and oil, are wanting to this ground,
In which our countries fruitfully abound. Dryd. Indian Emp.
A faithful man ſhall abound with bleſfings: but he that
maketh haſte to be rich, ſhall not be innocent. Prov. xxviii. 2 o.
Now that languages are made, and abound with words, ſtand-
ing for ſuch combinations, an uſual way of getting theſe com-
plex ideas, is by the explication of thoſe terms that ſtand for
them. - Locke.
2. To be in great plenty.
And becauſe iniquity ſhall abound, the love of many ſhall
wax cold. Matthew, xxiv. 12.
Words are like leaves, and where they moſt abound,
Much fruit of ſenſe beneath is rarely found.
Pope's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
ABOUT. prep. [abuzan, or abuton, Sax, which ſeems to fig-
nify encircling on the outſide.]
I. Round, ſurrounding, encircling. - -
Let not mercy and truth forſake thee. Bind them alout thy
neck; write them upon the table of thy heart. Proverbs, iii. 3.
At this ſhe loudly ſhrieks,
'Tis he, ’tis he, ſhe cries, and tears her cheeks,
Her hair, her veſt; and, ſtooping to the ſands,
About his neck ſhe caſt her trembling hands.
2. Near to.
Speak unto the congregation, ſaying, get you up from about
the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. Exodus.
Thou doſt nothing, Sergius,
Thou canſ endeavour nothing, nay, not think;
But I both ſee and hear it; and am with thee,
By and before, about and in thee too. Benj. johnſ Catiline.
3. Concerning, with regard to, relating to. e
When Conſtantine had finiſhed an houſe for the ſervice of
God at Jeruſalem, the dedication he judged a matter not un-
worthy ; aſ out the ſolemn performance whereof, the greateſt
part of the biſhops in chriſtendom ſhould meet together.
Hooker, b. v. § a 2.
The painter is not to take ſo much pains about the drapery as
about the face, where the principal reſemblance lies.
Dryd. Prºf. to Dufreſºzy.
They are moſt frequently uſed as words equivalent, and do
both of them indifferently ſignify either a ſpeculative know-
ledge of things, or a practical skill about them, according to
the exigency of the matter or thing ſpoken of Tillot. Sermºn i.
Theft is always a ſin, although the particular ſpecies of it,
and the denomination of particular ačts, doth ſuppoſe poſitive
laws about dominion and property. -
Stillingfect's Defence ºf Diſcourſes on Romiſh Idolarry.
They ſhould always be heard, and fairly and kindly anſwer-
ed, when they ask after any thing they would know, and cle-
fire to be informed about. Curioſity ſhould be as carefully che-
riſhed in children, as other appetites ſuppreſſed.
Locke on Education, § 108.
It hath been pračtiſed as a method of making men's court,
when they are asked about the rate of lands, the abilities of te-
nants, the ſtate of trade and manufacture, to anſwer, that, in
their neighbourhood, all things are in a flouriſhing condition.
Swift's ſhort /iew of Ireland.
Dryd. Falls.
4. Engaged in, employed upon.
Our bleſſed Lord was pleaſed to command the repreſentation
of his death and ſacrifice on the croſs, ſhould be made by break-
ing of bread and effuſion of wine; to ſignify to us the nature
and ſacredneſs of the liturgy we are about. .
Taylor's J/orthy Communicant.
Labour, for labour's ſake, is againſt nature. The under-
ſtanding, as well as all the other faculties, chooſes always the
ſhorteſt way to its end, would preſently obtain the knowledge it
is about, and then ſet upon ſome new enquiry. But this, whe-
ther lazineſs or haſte, often miſleads it. Locke.
• They ought, however, to be provided with ſecretaries, and
aſſiſted by our foreign miniſters, to tell their ſtory for them in
plain Engliſh, and to let us know, in our mother-tongue, what
it is our brave countrymen are alout. Addison. Speci. Nº 309.
5. Appendant to the perſon; as, cloaths, &amp;c.
If you have this about you,
As I will give you when we go, you ma
Boldly aſſault the necromancer's hall. Milton's Conser.
It is not ſtrange to me, that perſons of the fairer ſex ſhould
like, in all things about them, that handſomeneſs for which they
find themſelves moſt liked. Boyle on Colvizzº-
6. Relatin £<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B R.
A B R
|
4. Relating to the perſon, as a ſervant, -
Liking very well the young gentleman, ſuch I took him to
be, admitted this Deiphantus a cut me, who well ſhewed, there
is no ſervice like his that ſerves becauſe he loves. Sidney, h. ii.
Good maſter, corporal, captain, for my old dame's ſake,
ſtand my friend: ſhe hath no body to do anything about her
when I am gone, and ſhe is old and cannot help herſelf.
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Apo'ut. adv. -
1. Circularly.
The weyward ſiſters, hand in hand,
Poſters of the ſea and land,
Thus do go about, about,
Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
And thrice again to make up nine.
2. In circuit. -
My honeſt lads, I'll tell you what I am alout.—Two yards
and more.—No quips now, Piſtol: indeed I am in the waſte
two yards about ; but I am about no waſte, I am about thrift.
Shakeſpeare's Merry I/ives of //indſºr.
A tun about was ev'ry pillar there,
A poliſh'd mirrour ſhone not half ſo clear.
3. Nearly.
When the boats were come within about ſixty yards of the
pillar, they found themſelves all bound, and could go no far-
ther; yet ſo as they might move to go about, but might not
approach nearer. Bacon's New Atalantis.
4. Here and there; every way.
Up roſe the gentle virgin from her place,
And looked all about, if ſhe might ſpy.
Her lovely knight to move his manly pace.
Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. ii. ſº. 33-
A wolf that was paſt labour, had the wit in his old age, yet
to make the beſt of a bad game; he borrows a habit, and ſo
about he goes, begging charity from door to door, under the
diſguiſe of a pilgrim. L’Eſtrange.
5. With to before a verb; as, alout to fly; upon the point, with-
in a ſmall diſtance of. -
Theſe dying lovers, and their floating ſons,
Suſpend the fight, and ſilence all our guns:
Beauty and youth, about to periſh, finds
Such noble pity in brave Engliſh minds. //aller.
6. The longeſt way, in oppoſition to the ſhort ſtraight way.
Gold hath theſe natures; greatneſs of weight; cloſeneſs of
parts; fixation; pliantneſs, or ſoftneſs; immunity from ruſt;
colour, or tinčture of yellow: Therefore the ſure way (though
moſt about) to make gold, is to know the cauſes of the ſeveral
natures before rehearſed. Bacon’s Natural Hiſt. Nº 328.
Spies of the Volſcians
Held me in chaſe, that I was forc'd to wheel
Three or four miles about ; elſe had I, Sir,
Half an hour ſince brought my report. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
7. Tobring about; to bring to the point or ſtate deſired; as, he
Zzzi brought ałout his purpoſes.
Whether this will be brought about, by breaking his head, I
very much queſtion. Speciator.
8. Tº To come about; to come to ſome certain ſtate or point.
Wherefore it came to paſs, when the time was come about,
after Hannah had conceived, that ſhe bare a ſon. I Sam. i. 20.
One evening it befel, that looking out,
The wind they long had wiſh’d was come about ;
Well pleas'd they went to reſt; and if the gale
*Till morn continu’d, both reſolv’d to ſail.
9- TITo go about a thing ; to prepare to do it.
Lid not Moſes give you the law, and yet none of you
keepeth the law Why go ye about to kill me? john vii. 19.
In common language, they ſay, to come about a man, to cir-
&lt;zzzzzvent him. -
Some of theſe phraſes ſeem to derive their original from the
rench a bout; venir a bout d'une chºſe ; venir a bout de quel-
4 tº zum.
A BP. for Archbiſhop; which ſee. -
#B RACADA'BRA. A ſuperſtitious charm againſtagucs.
"o ABRADE. v. a. [Lat. abrado.] To rub off; to wear a-
way from the other parts; to waſte by degrees.
By this means there may be a continued ſupply of what is
ſucceſſively abraded from them by decurſion of waters.
Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
ABRAHAM's BALM. The name of an herb.
*RA'sic N. [See ABRADE.] -
!. The act of abrading; a rubbing off.
* [In medicine.] The wearing away of the natural mucus,
which covers the membranes, particularly thoſe of the ſtomach
and guts, by corroſive or ſharp medicines, or humours. Qingy.
3. The matter worn off by the attrition of bodies.
**East, adv. [See BR East.] Side by ſide; in ſuch a po-
tition that the breaſts may bear againſt the ſame line.
My couſin Suffolk,
My ſoul ſhall thine keep company to heav'n : .
Tarry, ſweet ſoul, for mine, then fly abreaſi. Shakespeare. Henry V.
For honour travels in a ſtreight ſo narrow,
V º one but gºes all cºſt. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
9L. I. t
ShaKeſp. Macbeth.
Dryd. Fahles.
Dryd. Fables.
The riders rode alreaft, and one his ſhield,
His lance of cornel wood another held ;
The third his bow, and, clorious to beholdſ
The coſtly quiver, all of burniſh'd gold. Dryden's Falles.
A BR 1'cot. See APRI cot.
To A BRITYG E. v. a. ſabreger, Fr. abbrevio, Lat.]
1. To make ſhorter in words, keeping ſtill the ſame ſubſtance.
, All theſe ſayings, being declared by Jaſon of Cyrene in five
books, we will eſſay to abridge in one volume. 2 Macc. ii. 23.
2. To contračt, to diminiſh, to cut ſhort.
The determination of the will, upon enquiry, is following
the direction of that guide; and he, that has a power to act or
not to act, according as ſuch determination directs, is free.
Such determination abridges not that power wherein liberty
conſiſts. Locke.
3. To deprive of; in which ſenſe it is followed by the particle
from, or ºf, preceding the thing taken away.
I have diſabled mine eſtate,
By ſhewing ſomething a more ſwelling port,
Than my faint means would grant continuance;
Nor do I now make moan to be abridg’d
From ſuch a noble rate. , Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
They were formerly, by the common law, diſcharged from
pontage and murage; but this privilege has been abridged them
ſince by ſeveral ſtatutes. Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
ABR1'DGED of. part. Deprived of, debarred from, cut ſhort.
An Ab R1'Do ER.
1. He that abridges; a ſhortener.
2. A writer of compendiums or abridgments.
ABRI'dg MENT. n.ſ. ſabregement, French.]
1. The contračtion of a larger work into a ſmall compaſs.
Surely this commandment containeth the law and the pro-
phets; and, in this one word, is the abridgment of all volumes
of ſcripture. Hooker, b. ii. § 5.
- Myſelf have play'd
The intrim, by remembring you 'tis paſt;
Then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance
After your thoughts, ſtraight back again to France 2
Shakeſpear.’s Henry V.
Idolatry is certainly the firſt-born of folly, the great and
leading paradox; nay, the very abridgment and ſum total of
all abſurdities. South's Sermons.
2. A diminution in general. -
All trying, by a love of littleneſs,
To make abridgments, and to draw to leſs,
Even that nothing, which at firſt we were.
3. Reſtraint, or abridgment of liberty.
The conſtant defire of iº. and the conſtraint it puts
upon us, no body, I think, accounts an abridgment of liberty,
or at leaſt an abridgment of liberty, to be complained of.
Locke.
Donne.
AB Ro'Ach. adv. [See To BROACH.]
1. In a poſture to run out; to yield the liquor contained; pre-
perly ſpoken of veſſels.
The Templer ſpruce, while ev'ry ſpout's abroach,
Stays 'till 'tis fair, yet ſeems to call a coach, Swift's Miſal.
The jarrs of gen'rous wine, (Aceſtes' gift,
When his Trinacrian ſhores the navy left)
He ſet abroach, and for the feaſt prepar’d,
In equal portions with the ven’ſon ſhar'd.
Dryden's Wirgil's Aeneid, vol. ii.
2. In a figurative ſenſe; in a ſtate to be diffuſed or advanced; in
a ſtate of ſuch beginning as promiſes a progreſs.
That man, that ſits within a monarch's heart,
And ripens in the ſunſhine of his favour,
Would he abuſe the count'nance of the king,
Alack what miſchiefs might be ſet abroach,
In ſhadow of ſuch greatneſs Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Ab Ro'AD. adv. [compounded of a and broad. See BRoad.]
1. Without confinement; widely; at large.
Intermit no watch
Againſt a wakeful foe, while I abroad,
Thro' all the coaſts of dark deſtruction ſeek
Deliverance. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii. 1.463.
Again, the lonely fox roams far abroad,
On ſecret rapine bent, and midnight fraud;
Now haunts the cliff, now traverſes the lawn,
And flies the hated neighbourhood of man.
2. Out of the houſe.
Priºr.
- Welcome, Sir,
This cell's my court; here have I few attendants,
And ſubjects none abroad. Shakeſpeare's Tºmps/?.
Lady —— walked a whole hour abroad, without dying after
it; at leaſt in the time I ſtaid ; though ſhe ſeemed to be
fainting, and had convulſive motions ſeveral times in her head.
Pºpe's Letters.
3. In another country.
They thought it better to be ſomewhat hardly yoked at home,
than for ever abroad, and diſcredited. Hocker, Pref
Whoſoever offers at verbal tranſlation, ſhall have the miſ-
- fortune of that young traveller, who loſt his own language
abrood, and brought home no other inſtead of it. Sir J. Denhazi.
D VV hat
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B S
- A B S
What learn our youth abroad, but to refine -
The homely vices of their native land? Dryd. Span. Friar.
He who ſojourns in a foreign country, refers what he ſees
and hears abroad, to the ſtate of things at home. Atterb. Serm.
4. In all direétions, this way and that.
Full in the midſt of this infernal road, -
An elm diſplays her duſky arms abroad. Dryd. Wirg. Æn. vi.
5. Without, not within. -
Bodies politic, being ſubject, as much as natural, to diſſo-
lution, by divers means, there are undoubtedly more ſtates
overthrown through diſeaſes bred within themſelves, than
through violence from alread. Hooker, Dedication.
To A BROGATE. v. a. ſabrogo, Lat.] To take away from
a law its force; to repeal, to annul.
Such laws, as have been made upon ſpecial occaſions, which
occaſions ceaſing, laws of that kind do abrogate themſelves.
Hooker, b. iv. § 14.
The negative precepts of men may ceaſe by many, inſtru-
ments, by contrary cuſtoms, by public diſreliſh, by long o-
miſſion: but the negative precepts of God never can ceaſe,
but when they are expreſly abrogated by the ſame authority.
Taylor's Rule of living holy.
ARRod A'rion. n.ſ. (abrogatio, Lat..] The act of abrogat-
ing; the repeal of a law.
The commiſſioners from the confederate Roman catholics,
demanded the abrogation and repeal of all thoſe laws, which
were in force againſt the exerciſe of the Roman religion.
Clarendon, b. viii.
To ABRo'ok. v. a...[from To brook, with a ſuperabundant, a
word not in uſe.] To brook, to bear, to endure.
Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrook
The abject people gazing on thy face
With envious looks, ſtill laughing at thy ſhame.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
ABRU'PT. adj. [abruptus, Lat.] Broken off.
1. Broken, craggy.
Reſiſtleſs, roaring, dreadful, down it comes
From the rude mountain, and the moſſy wild,
Tumbling through rocks abrupt. Thomſºn's Winter.
2. Divided, without anything intervening.
Or ſpread his airy flight,
Upborn with indefatigable wings,
Over the vaſt abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy iſle. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii. l. 409.
3. Sudden, without the cuſtomary or proper preparatives.
- My lady craves
To know the cauſe of your abrupt departure.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
The abrupt and unkind breaking off the two firſt parlia-
ments, was wholly imputed to the duke of Buckingham. Clar.
Abrupt, with eagle-ſpeed ſhe cut the ſky;
Inſtant inviſible to mortal eye. -
Then firſt he recogniz'd th’ethereal gueſt. Pope's Odyſſ b, i.
4. Unconnected.
The abrupt ſtile, which hath many breaches, and doth not
ſeem to end but fall. Ben. johnſon's Diſcovery.
Abru'pt Ed. adj. [abruptus, Lat. a word little in uſe.] Broken
off ſuddenly.
The effects of whoſe ačtivity are not precipitouſly abrupted,
but gradually proceed to their ceſſations. -
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. Io.
ABRU'ption. m. ſ. ſabruptio, Lat.] Breaking off, violent and
ſudden ſeparation.
Thoſe which are incloſed in ſtone, marble, or ſuch other ſo-
lid matter, being difficultly ſeparable from it, becauſe of its
adheſion to all ſides of them, have commonly ſome of that
matter ſtill adhering to them, or at leaſt marks of its abrup-
, tion from them, on all their ſides. Woodward's Nat. Hiſł. p. 4.
ABRU'PTLY. adv. [See ABRUPT.] Haſtily, without the due
forms of preparation. -
The ſweetneſs of virtue's diſpoſition, jealous even over it-
ſelf, ſuffered her not to enter abruptly into queſtions of Muſi-
dorus. Sidney, b. ii.
Now miſfing from their joy ſo lately found,
So lately found, and ſo abruptly gone. Par. Regain. b. ii.
They both of them punétually obſerved the time thus a-
greed upon, and that in whatever company or buſineſs they
- were engaged, they left it abruptly, as ſoon as the clock warned
them to retire. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 241.
ABRU'pt Ness. n.ſ.. [from abrupt.]
1. An abrupt manner, haſte, ſuddenneſs, untimely vehemence.
2. The ſtate of an abrupt thing; unconnectedneſs, roughneſs,
craggineſs.
The cryſtallized bodies found in the perpendicular intervals,
are eaſily known from thoſe that are lodged in the ſtrata. The
former have always their root, as the jewellers call it, which is
only the abruptneſs, at the end of the body whereby it adhered
to the ſtone, or ſides of the intervals ; which abruptneſs is
cauſed by its being broke off from the ſaid ſtone.
J/oodward's Natural Hiſtory, p. 4.
A'escess. [alſcºffis, Lat..] A morbid cavity in the body; a tu-
mour filled with matter; a term of chirurgery.
If the patient is not relieved, nor dies in cight days, the in-
flammation ends in a ſuppuration and an alſºſ; in the lungs,
and ſometimes in ſome other part of the body. Arbuth. ºf Diet.
Lindanus conjectured it might be ſome hidden abſceſs in the
meſentery, which, breaking ſome few days after, was diſcovered
to be an apoſtem of the meſentery. Harvey on Cºſmºptions.
To Absci'Nd. v. a. To cut off, either in a natural or figura-
tive ſenſe. --
ABSC1'SS.A.. [Lat..] Part of the diameter of a conic ſection,
A intercepted between the vertex and a ſemi-ordinate.
BSc1'ssion. m. ſ. ſabſiſſio, Lat.
1. The act of tº: .# J
Fabricius ab Aquapendente renders the alſiffon of them
difficult enough, and not without danger. //ſeman's Surgery.
2. The ſtate of being cut off.
By cellation of oracles, with Montacutius, we may under-
ſtand this interciſion, not alſciſſion, or conſummate déiolation.
Brown's Pulgar Errors, b. vi. c. 12.
To ABSCOND. v. n. [abſcond, Lat. J. To hide one's ſulf; to
retire from the public view : generally uſed of perſons in debt,
or criminals eluding the law.
Absco'NDER. m.ſ.. [from abſcond..] The perſon that abſconds.
A'B's ENcE. m. ſ. [See ABs ENT.]
1. The ſtate of being abſent, oppoſed to preſence.
Sir, 'tis fit
You have ſtrong party to defend yourſelf
By calmneſs, or by abſence: all's in danger. Shakeſp. Coriol.
His friends beheld, and pity'd him in vain,
For what advice can eaſe a lover's pain
Abſence, the beſt expedient they could find,
Might ſave the fortune, if not cure the mind.
2. Want of appearance, in the legal ſenſe.
Abſence is of a fourfold kind or ſpecies. The firſt is a ne–
ceſſary abſence, as in baniſhed perſons; this is entirely neceſ-
ſary. A ſecond, neceſſary and voluntary ; as, upon the ac-
count of the commonwealth, or in the ſervice of the church.
The third kind the civilians call a probable abſence; as, that
of ſtudents on the ſcore of ſtudy. And the fourth, an abſence
entirely voluntary; as, on the account of trade, merchandiſe,
and the like. Some add a fifth kind of abſence, which is com-
mitted cum dolo &amp; culpá, by a man's non-appearance on a cita-
tion; as, in a contumacious perſon, who, in hatred to his con-
tumacy, is, by the law, in ſome reſpects, reputed as a perſon
preſent. Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
You have given no diſſertation upon the abſence of lovers,
nor laid down any methods how they ſhould ſupport them-
ſelves under thoſe ſeparations. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 241.
3. Inattention, heedleſſneſs, neglect of the preſent obječt.
I continued my walk, reflecting on the little abſences and
diſtraćtions of mankind. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 77.
4. It is uſed with the particle from.
His abſence from his mother oft he'll mourn,
And, with his eyes, look wiſhes to return. Dryd.juv. Sat.ii.
A'BSENT. adj. [abſens, Lat.]
1. Not preſent; uſed with the particle from.
In ſpring the fields, in autumn hills I love;
At morn the plains, at noon the ſhady grove ;
But Delia always: abſent from her fight,
Nor:plains at morn, nor groves at noon delight. Pope's Poff.
Where there is advantage to be given,
Both more and leſs have given him the revolt;
And none ſerve with him but conſtrained things,
Whoſe hearts are abſent too. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Whether they were alſºnt or preſent, they were vexed a-
like. Wiſd. xi. 1 r.
2. Abſent in mind, inattentive; regardleſs of the preſent object.
I diſtinguiſh a man that is abſent, becauſe he thinks of ſome-
thing elſe, from him that is abſent, becauſe he thinks of no-
Dryd. Fab.
thing. Addiſon. Spediator, N° 77.
To Abse'NT. v. a. To withdraw, to forbear to come into
preſence.
If thou didſt ever hold me in thy heart,
Abſent thee from felicity a while,
And in this harſh world draw thy breath in pain,
To tell my tale. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
But if thou think'ſt trial unſought may find
Us both ſecurer, than thus warn'd thou ſeem'ſt,
Go-for thy ſtay, not free, abſents thee more.
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix. 1, 372.
Tho' I am forc'd, thus to abſent myſelf
From all I love, I ſhall contrive ſome means,
Some friendly intervals, to viſit thee.
Southern's Spartan Dame.
The Arengo, however, is ſtill called together in caſes of ex-
traordinary importance; and if, after due ſummons, any mem-
ber abſents himſelf, he is to be fined to the value of about a
peñny Engliſh. Addiſon's Remarks on ſtay.
Absent A'NEous. adj. Relating to abſence; abſent. Dić.
Abs ENTE'E. m. ſ. He that is abſent from his ſtation or employ-
ment, or country. A word uſed commonly with regard to
Iriſhmen living out of their country.
3
Then
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B S
A B S
5- Poſitive, certain, without any heſitation. In this
Then was the firſt ſtatute made againſt alſº itect, command-
łng all ſuch as had land in Ireland, to return and reſide there-
upon. Sir john Davies on Ireland.
A great part of eſtates in Ireland are owned by alſºntees, and
ſuch as draw over the profits raiſed out of Ireland, refunding
nothing. Child's Diſcourſe on Trade.
AES1'N't HIATe D. part. [from alſinthium, Lat, wormwood.]
Imbittered, impregnated with wormwood. Dićf.
ABS IS. See APSIS.
To Absi's T. v. n. [alſo, Lat.] To ſtand off, to leave off. Dić.
To ABSO'LVE. v. a. [abſolvo, Lat.]
1. To clear, to acquit of a crime in a judicial ſenſe.
Your great goodneſs, out of holy pity,
Abſolv'd him with an axe. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Our victors, bleſt in peace, forget their wars,
Enjoy paſt dangers, and abſolve the ſtars. Tickell.
As he hopes, and gives out, by the influence of his wealth,
to be here abſºlved; in condemning this man, you have an op-
portunity of belying that general ſcandal, of redeeming the
credit loſt by former judgments. Swift's Miſcellanies.
2. To ſet free from an engagement or promiſe.
Compell'd by threats to take that bloody oath,
And the aët ill, I am abſolvd by both. Waller's Maid's Trag.
This command, which muſt neceſſarily comprehend the per-
ſons of our natural fathers, muſt mean a duty we owe them,
diſtinét from our obedience to the magiſtrate, and from which
the moſt abſolute power of princes cannot abſolve us. Locke.
3. To pronounce a ſin remitted, in the eccleſiaſtical ſenſe.
But all is calm in this eternal ſleep;
Here grief forgets to groan, and love to weep;
Ev’n ſuperſtition loſes ev'ry fear;
For God, not man, abſolves our frailties here.
Pope's Eloíſa to Abelard.
4. To finiſh, to complete.
If that which is ſo ſuppoſed infinitely diſtant from what is now
current, is diſtant from us by a finite interval, and not infinite-
ly, then that one circulation which preceded it, and muſt ne-
ceſſarily be like ours, and conſequently abſºlved in the ſpace of
twenty-four hours. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
What cauſe
Mov'd the creator, in his holy reſt
Through all eternity, ſo late to build
In chaos; and the work begun, how ſoon
Abſolv’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii. 1, 94.
A'Bsolut E. adj. [abſolutus, Lat.]
1. Complete; applied as well to perſons as things.
Becauſe the things that proceed from him are perfeół, with-
out any manner of defe&amp;t or maim; it cannot be, but that the
words of his mouth are abſolute, and lack nothing which they
ſhould have, for performance of that thing whereunto they
tend. Hooker, b. ii. § 6.
2- Unconditional; as, an abſolute promiſe.
Although it runs in forms abſolute, yet it is indeed conditio-
nal, as depending upon the qualification of the perſon to whom
it is pronounced. South's Sermons.
3- Not relative; as, abſolute ſpace.
I ſee ſtill the diſtinétions of ſovereign and inferior, of abſºlute
and relative worſhip, will bear any man out in the worſhip of
any creature with reſpečt to God, as well at leaſt as it doth in
the worſhip of images. , Stillingſ. Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
An abſºlute mode is that which belongs to its ſubjećt, with-
&lt;&gt;ut reſpect to any other beings whatſoever: but a relative mode
is derived from the regard that one being has to others.
JWatts's Logic.
In this ſenſe we ſpeak of the ablative caſe abſolute in grammar.
4- Not limited; as, abſolute power.
My crown is abſolute, and holds of none;
I cannot in a baſe ſubječtion live,
Nor ſuffer you to take, though I would give. P. Ind. Emp.
enſe it rarely
OCCurs. -
- Long is it ſince I ſaw him,
But time hath nothing blurr'd thoſe lines of favour,
Which then he wore; the ſnatches in his voice,
And burſt of ſpeaking were as his : I’m abſolute,
'Twas very Cloten. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
What is his ſtrength by land?—
— Great and increaſing: but by ſea
He is an abſolute maſter. Shakeſpeare's Antony and Cleopatra.
Bsolut ELY. adv. [from abſolute.]
* Completely, without reſtrićtion.
All the contradićtions which grow in thoſe minds, that nei-
ther alſolutely climb the rock of virtue, nor freely fink into the
ſea of vanity. Sidney.
What merit they can build upon having joined with a pro-
teſtant army, under a king they acknowledged, to defend their
own liberties and properties, is, to me, abſolutely inconceivable;
and, I believe, will equally be ſo for ever. Swift's Presb. Plea.
* Without relation.
Abſºlutely we cannot diſcommend, we cannot abſºlutely ap-
Prove either willingneſs to live, or forwardneſs to die.
Hooker, b. v.
Theſe then being the perpetual cauſes of zeal; the greateſt
good, or the greateſt evil; either abſºlutely ſo in themſelves, or
relatively ſo to us; it is therefore good to be zealouſly affected
for the one againſt the other. Sprat's Sermons.
No ſenſible quality, as light, and colour, and heat, and
found, can be ſubſiſtent in the bodies themſelves, abſºlutely con-
fidered, without a relation to our eyes and ears, and other or-
gans of ſenſe. Theſe qualities are only the effects of our ſen-
ſation, which ariſe from the different motions, upon our nerves,
from objects without, according to their various modification.
and poſitions. Bentley's Sermons.
3. Without limits or dependance.
The prince longtime had courted fortune's love,
But, once poſſeſs'd, did abſolutely reign:
Thus, with their Amazons, the heroes ſtrove,
And conquer'd firſt thoſe beauties they would gain.
- - Dryden's Annus Mirabilis.
4. Without condition.
And of that nature, for the moſt part, are things abſolutely
unto all mens ſalvation neceſſary, either to be held or denied,
either to be done or avoided. Hooker's Preface.
5. Peremptorily, poſitively.
Being as I am, why didſt not thou
Sommand me abſolutely not to go,
. Going into ſuch danger, as thou ſaidſt; Parad. Loft, b. ix.
A'ssoluteness. n.ſ.. [from abſolute.]
1. Compleatneſs.
2. Freedom from dependance, or limits. -
The abſoluteneſ, and illimitedneſs of his commiſſion was ge-
nerally much ſpoken of. - Clarendon, b. viii.
There is nothing that can raiſe a man to that generous al-
Jºhtºn'ſ of condition, as neither to cringe, to fawn, or to de-
pend meanly; but that which gives him that happineſs with-
in himſelf, for which men depend upon others. South's Serm.
3. Deſpoticiſm.
He kept a ſtrait hand on his nobility, and choſe rather to
advance clergymen and lawyers, which were more obſequious
to him, but had leſs intereſt in the people; which made for
his abſºluteneſ, but not for his ſafety. Bacon's Henry VII.
Absolution. n.ſ.. [alſolutio, Lat.]
I. Acquittal. -,
4’ſolution, in the civil law, imports a full acquittal of a
perſon by ſome final ſentence of law; alſo, a temporary diſ-
charge of his farther attendance upon a meſne proceſs, through
a failure or defect in pleading; as it does likewiſe in the canon
law, where, and among divines, it likewiſe ſignifies a relaxa-
tion of him from the obligation of ſome ſentence pronounced
either in a court of law, or elſe inforo paenitentiali. Thus,
there is, in this kind of law, one kind of abſolution, termed
judicial, and another, ſtiled a declaratory or extrajudicial abſº-
dution. Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonicſ.
2. The remiſfion of fins, or penance, declared by eccleſiaſtical
authority.
The abſolution pronounced by a prieſt, whether papiſt or
proteſtant, is not a certain infallible ground to give the per-
ſon, ſo abſolved, confidence towards God. South's Sermons.
A'bsolutoRy. adj. [alſolutorius, Lat.] That which abſolves.
Though an abſolutory ſentence ſhould be pronounced in fa-
vour of the perſons, upon the account of nearneſs of blood;
yet, if adultery ſhall afterwards be truly proved, he may be
again proceeded againſt as an adulterer. Ayliffe's Parergon.
A'ssonant. adj. [See Absonous.] Contrary to reaſon, wide
from the purpoſe.
Absonous. adj. [alſonus, Lat, ill-ſounding.] Abſurd, contrary
to reaſon.
To ſuppoſe an uniter of a middle conſtitution, that ſhould
partake of ſome of the qualities of both, is unwarranted by
any of our faculties; yea, moſt abſonous to our reaſon.
Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica, c. 4.
To Abso'RB. v. a. [abſorbeo, Lat. preter, abſorbed; part, pret.
abſorbed, or abſorpt.]
1. To ſwallow up.
Some tokens ſhew
Of fearleſs friendſhip, and their finking mates
Suſtain; vain love, tho' laudable, abſorpt
By a fierce eddy, they together found - - - -
The vaſt profundity. Phillips.
Moſes imputed the deluge to the diſruption of the abyſs;
and St. Peter, to the particular conſtitution of that earth,
which made it obnoxious to be abſorpt in water. Burn. Theory.
2. To ſuck up. See Abso R BENT.
Suppoſing the forementioned conſumption ſhould prove ſo
durable, as to abſorb and extenuate the ſaid ſanguine parts to
an extreme degree, it is evident, that the fundamental parts
muſt neceſſarily come into danger. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Abso'R BENT. m.ſ.. [abſºrbens, Lat.]
A medicine that, by the ſoftneſs or poroſity of its parts,
either cauſes the aſperities of pungent humours, or drics away
ſuperfluous moiſture in the body. Quincy.
There is a third claſs of ſubſtances, commonly called abſor-
bents; as, the various kinds of ſhells, coral, chalk, crabs cycs,
&amp;c. which likewiſe raiſe an efferveſcence, and arc therefore
called
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B S
A B S
* * * * | * ** - - - - -
called alkalis, though not ſo properly, for they are not ſalts.
Arluthnot on Aliments.
Anso'Rpt. part. [from alſºrb.] Swallowed up ; uſed aS well, in
a figurative ſenſe, of perſons, as, in the primitive, of things.
What can you expect from a man, who has not talked theſe
five days who is withdrawing his thoughts, as far as he can,
from all the preſent world, its cuſtoms and its manners, to be
fully poſſefied and abſºrpt in the paſt. Pope's Letters.
Asso's Prios. m. ſ. [from abſorb.] The aët of ſwallowing up.
It was below the ". of thoſe ſacred penmen, or the
ſpirit of God that directed them, to ſhew us the cauſes of this
diſruption, or of this abſorption; this is left to the enquiries of
Innen. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
To ABSTA/IN. v. n. [al/?ineo, Lat.] To forbear, to deny one's
ſelf any gratification ; with the particle from.
If thou judge it hard and difficult,
Converſing, looking, loving, to abſtain
From love's due rites, nuptial embraces ſweet;
And, with deſires, to languiſh without hope.
AMilton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x. l. 993.
To be perpetually longing, and impatiently deſirous of any
thing, ſo that a man cannot al/?ain from it, is to loſe a man's
liberty, and to become a ſervant of meat and drink, or ſmoke.
Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Even then the doubtful billows ſcarce al/?ain
From the toſs'd veſſel on the troubled main. Dryden's Wirgil.
ABSTEM IOU.S. adj. [al/femius, Lat.] Temperate, ſober, ab-
ſtinent, refraining from exceſs or pleaſures. It is uſed of per-
ſons; as, an abſemious hermit: and of things; as, an al/te-
mious diet. It is ſpoken likewiſe of things that cauſe tempe-
rance.
The inſtances of longevity are chiefly amongſt the abſe-
mious. Abſtinence in extremity will prove a mortal diſeaſe;
but the experiments of it are very rare. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Clytorean ſtreams the love of wine expel,
(Such is the virtue of the abſemious well)
Whether the colder nymph that rules the flood,
Extinguiſhes, and balks the drunken god :
Or that Melampus (ſo have ſome aſſur'd)
When the mad Praetides with charms he cur'd,
And pow'rful herbs, both charms and ſimples caſt
Into the ſober ſpring, where ſtill their virtues laſt. Dryd. Fab.
Abst E'Miously. adv. [from al/femious.] Temperately, ſo-
berly, without indulgence.
Abst E'Mious Ness. n.ſ. [See Abst EMIous.] The quality of
being abſtemious.
Abst E'Ntion. n.ſ.. [from abſtineo, Lat..] The act of holding
off, or reſtraining; reſtraint. Dićf.
To ABSTERGE. v. a. [abſlergo, Lat.] To cleanſe by wip-
ing; to wipe.
A'B'st ERG ENT. adj. Cleanſing; having a cleanſing quality.
To AbstE/Rse. [See ABSTERGE.] To cleanſe, to purify;
a word very little in uſe, and leſs analogical than abſerge.
Nor will we affirm, that iron receiveth, in the ſtomach of
the oſtrich, no alteration ; but we ſuſpect this effect rather
from corroſion than digeſtion; not any tendence to chilifica-
tion by the natural heat, but rather ſome attrition from an acid
and vitriolous humidity in the ſtomach, which may abſerſ and
ſhave the ſcorious parts thereof. Brown's Vulgar }. b. iii.
ABst E'Rsion. n.ſ.. [al/lerſio, Lat..] The act of cleanſing. See
Abst ERG E.]
The ſeventh cauſe is alſºerſon; which is plainly a ſcouring
off, or inciſion of the more viſcous humours, and making the
humours more fluid, and cutting between them and the part;
as is found in nitrous water, which ſcoureth linen cloth ſpeedily
from the foulneſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 42.
ABst E'Rsive. adj. [from abſerge.] That has the quality of ab-
ſterging or cleanſing.
- It is good, after purging, to uſe apozemes and broths, not
... ſo much opening as thoſe uſed before purging ; but abſlerſive
and mundifying clyſters alſo are good to conclude with, to
draw away the reliques of the humours. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
A tablet ſtood of that al/ierſive tree,
Where Æthiops' ſwarthy bird did build to neſt. Sirj. Denh.
There, many a flow'r abſierſve grew,
Thy favºrite flow'rs of yellow hue. Swift's Miſcellanies.
A'BST IN EN ce. m. ſ. ſal/linentia, Lat.]
1. Forbearance of any thing; with the particle from.
Becauſe the al/linence from a preſent pleaſure, that offers it-
ſelf, is a pain, nay, oftentimes a very great one: it is no won-
der that that operates after the ſame manner pain does, and
leſſens, in our thoughts, what is future; and ſo forces us, as
it were, blindfold into its embraces. Locke.
2. Faſting, or forbearance of neceſſary focd. It is generally di-
ſtinguiſhed from temperance, as the greater degree from the
leſs ; ſometimes as ſingle performances from habits; as, a day
of abſtinence, and a life of temperance.
Say, can you fait? your ſtomachs are too young:
And al/linence ingenders maladies. Shakeſp. Lºve's Lab. Lºft. Abstra'ction. m. ſ. ſa'ſ radio, Lat.]
Religious men, who hither muſt be ſent
As awful guides of heavenly government;
To teach you penance, faſts, and aftinence, -
To puniſh bodies for the ſouls offence. Dryden's Ind. Eºf,
And the faces of them, which have uſed al/finence, ſhall
ſhine above the ſtars; whereas our faces ſhall be blackr than
darkneſs. 2 Eſdras, vii. 55.
A'est IN EN cy, n. ſ. The ſame with AustiN ENce. -
Were our rewards for the al/linertis, or riots, of this pre-
ſent life, under the prejudices of ſhort or finite, the promiſes
and threats of Chriſt would loſe much of their virtue and
energy. Hammond's Fundam.
A'Est IN ENT. ad. [al/linens, Lat.] That uſes abſtinence, in
oppoſition to covetous, rapacious, or luxurious. It is uſed
chiefly of perſons.
AEsto'RT Ep, adj. . [al/fortus, Lat..] Forced away, wrung
from another by violence. Dicſ.
To ABSTRACT. v. a. [al/iraho, Lat.]
1. To take one thing from another.
Could we abſtract from theſe pernicious effects, and ſuppoſe
this were innocent, it would be too light to be matter of praiſ.
- Decay of Piety.
2. To ſeparate ideas. y ºf Piety
Thoſe, who cannot diſtinguiſh, compare and al/iracy, would
hardly be able to underſtand and make uſe of language, or judge
or reaſon to any tolerable degree. Z.º.
3. To reduce to an epitome. -
If we would fix in the memory the diſcourſes we hear, or
what we deſign to ſpeak, let us aſſirač them into brief com-
pends, and review them often. . / att's Improv. of the Miºd.
A'B's TRAcT. adj. [al/iračius, Lat. See the verſ. To AB-
STRACT.]
1. Separated from ſomething clfe, generally uſed with relation to
mental perceptions; as, al/irac: mathematics, al/iraci terms,
in oppoſition to concrete. -
Mathematics, in its latitude, is uſually divided into pure
and mixed. And, though the pure do handle only al/tract
quantity in general, as geometry, arithmetic; yet that which
is mixed, doth conſider the quantity of ſome particular deter-
minate ſubject. So aſtronomy handles the quantity of heavenly
motions, muſic of founds, and mechanics of weights and
powers. //ilkins's AMathematical Aſari.A.
4/irač terms ſignify the mode or quality of a being, with-
out any regard to the ſubject in which it is; as, whiteneſs,
roundneſs, length, breadth, wiſdom, mortality, life, death.
- J/atts's Lºgſ.”.
2. With the particle from.
Another fruit from the conſidering things in themſelves, ab-
Jirač from our opinions and other mens notions and diſcourſes
on them, will be, that each man will purſue his thoughts in
that method, which will be moſt agreeable to the nature of the
thing, and to his apprehenſion of what it ſuggeſts to him. Lz.A.
A'B's TR Act. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſmaller quantity, containing the virtue or power of a
greater.
You ſhall there find a man, who is the al/ºrg.: -
Of all faults all men follow. Shakeſp. Antºny and Cleºpatra.
If you are falſe, theſe epithets are ſmall;
You're then the things, and al/tract of them all. Dryd.A.,.
2. An epitome made by taking out the principal parts.
When Mnemon came to the end of a chapter, he recol-
lečted the ſentiments he had remarked; ſo that he could give
a tolerable analyſis and al/tract of every treatiſe he had read,
juſt after he had finiſhed it. , 1/atts's Improvement of the iſ….
3. The ſtate of being abſtracted.
The hearts of great princes, if they be conſidered, as it were
in a ſirači, without the neceſſity of ſtates, and circumſtances
of time, can take no full and proportional pleaſure in the exer-
ciſe of any narrow bounty. //ction.
A'B's TR Act ED. part, adj. [from a 'ſirači.].
1. Separated.
That ſpace the evil one a!/?raćed ſtood
From his own evil, and for the time remain'd
Stupidly good. Milran.
2. Refined, abſtruſe. -
Aſtraded ſpiritual love, they like
Their ſouls, exhal’d. Dozzi.e.
. Abſent of mind, inattentive to preſent obječts; as, an …A-
ſiračied ſcholar. -
Abst RA'cTEDLY. adv. With abſtraćtion, ſimply, ſeparately
from all contingent circumſtances.
Or whether more a ſiračfedly we look,
Or on the writers, or the written book:
Whence, but from heav'n, could men unskill'd in arts,
In ſeveral ages born, in ſeveral parts,
Weave ſuch agreeing truths or how, or wh
Should all conſpire to cheat us with a lie
Unask'd their pains, ungrateful their advice,
Starving their gain, and martyrdom their price. *
Dryden's Religio L.A.A.
1. The act of abſtraćting.
The word aſtractiºn ſignifies a withdrawing ſome part of
* -
º
º
I.
-
--!ºt
º
s
*
*
º*
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
~xº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B S
an idea from other parts of it; by which means, ſuch ab-
ſtraćted ideas are formed, as neither repreſent any thing cor-
poreal or ſpiritual; that is, any thing peculiar or proper to
mind or body. Jºatts's Logick.
2. The ſtate of being abſtraćted.
. Abſence of mind, inattention.
4. Diſregard of worldly objećts.
Åssrºotive. adj. [from abſtrađ.] Having the power or
quality of abſtraćting.
Abstra’ctly. adv. [from abſtrači.] In an abſtraćt manner,
abſolutely, without reference to anything elſe.
Matter abſºraćtly and abſolutely conſidered, cannot have born
an infinite duration now paſt and expired. Bentley's Sermons.
Abstri'cTED. part. adj. [abſºričius, Lat.] Unbound. Dià.
To Abstri'NGE. v. a. ſal/?ringo, Lat.] To unbind. Diet.
To ABSTRU'DE. v. a. ſal/rudo, Lat.] To thruſt off, or
pull away. Pić7.
Asstru'sé. adj. [alſº uſus, Lat. thruſt out of fight.]
1. Hidden.
Th’ eternal eye, whoſe fight diſcerns
Abſtruſºft thoughts, from forth his holy mount,
And from within the golden lamps that burn
Nightly before him, ſaw, without their hight,
Rebellion riſing. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b.v. l. 712.
2. Difficult, remote from conception or apprehenſion. It is op-
poſed to obvious and eaſy.
So ſpake our Sire, and, by his count'nance, ſeem'd
Entring on ſtudious thoughts abſºruſe. Parad. Lºft, b. viii.
The motions and figures within the mouth are abſºruſe, and
not eaſy to be diſtinguiſhed, eſpecially thoſe of the tongue,
which is moved through the help of many muſcles, ſo eaſily,
and habitually, and variouſly, that we are ſearce able to give
a judgment of motions and figures thereby framed.
Holder’s Elements ºf Speech.
No man could give a rule of the greateſt beauties, and the
knowledge of them was ſo abſºruſ, that there was no man-
ner of ſpeaking which could expreſs them. Dryd. Dufreſnoy.
Abstru'sely... adv. . In an abſtruſe manner; obſcurely, not
plainly, or obviouſly.
Abstru's ENEss. n. y [from abſºruſ...] The quality of being
abſtruſe; difficulty, obſcurity.
It is not oftentimes ſo much what the ſcripture ſays, as what
ſome men perſuade others it ſays, that makes it ſeem obſcure,
and that as to ſome other paſſages that are ſo indeed, fince it is
the abſtruſeneſs of what is taught in them, that makes them al-
moſt inevitably ſo; it is little leſs ſaucy, upon ſuch a ſcore, to
find fault with the ſtyle of the ſcripture, than to do ſo with the
author for making us but men. Boyle on the Scripture.
Abstru'sity, n.f. [from abſtruſt.]
1. Abſtruſeneſs.
2. That which is abſtruſe. A word ſeldom uſed.
Authors are alſo ſuſpicious, nor greedily to be ſwallowed,
who pretend to write of ſecrets, to deliver antipathies, ſym-
pathies, and the occult *†. of things. Brown's Wul. Err.
To Absu'ME. v. a. [abſumo, Lat.] To bring to an end by a
gradual waſte; to eat up.
That which had been burning an infinite time could never
be burnt, no not ſo much as any part of it; for if it had
burned part after part, the whole muſt needs be abſumed in a
portion of time. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
A BSU'R.D. adj. [abſurdus, Lat.]
* - Unreaſonable, without judgment, as uſed of men.
Seeming wiſe men may make ſhift to get opinion; but let
ino man chooſe them for employment; for certainly you had
better take for buſineſs a man ſomewhat ºft. than over
formal. acon's Eſſay, 27.
2- Inconſiſtent, contrary to reaſon, uſed of ſentiments or prac-
tices.
The thing itſelf appeared deſireable to him, and accordingly
he could not but like and deſire it; but then, it was after a
very irrational abſurd way, and contrary to all the methods
and principles of a rational agent; which never wills a thing
really and properly, but it applies to the means, by which it
is to be acquired. - South's Sermons.
A man, who cannot write with wit on a proper ſubjećt, is
Jull and ſtupid ; but one, who ſhews it in an improper place,
is as impertinent and abſurd. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 291.
But grant that thoſe can conquer, theſe can cheat,
'Tis phraſe abſurd to call a villain great:
Who wickedly is wiſe, or madly brave,
ls but the more a fool, the more a knave. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
asu'rdity. n.ſ.. [from abſurd.] -
* The quality of being abſurd ; want of judgment applied to
men; want of propriety applied to things.
How clear ſoever this idea of the infinity of number be,
there is nothing more evident than the abſurdity of the ačtual
idea of an infinite number. Locke.
That which is abſurd ; as, his travels were full of abſurdities.
In which ſenſe it has a plural.
That ſatisfaction we receive from the opinion of ſome pre-
eminence in ourſelves, when we ſee the abſurdities of another,
or when we reflect on any paſt alſurdities of our own.
Vol. I. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 249.
Absu'Rdly, adv. [from alſurd.] After an abſurd manner; im-
properly, unreaſonably, -
But man we find the only creature,
Who, led by folly, combats nature;
Who, when ſhe loudly cries, forbear,
With obſtinacy fixes there;
And where his genius leaſt inclines,
Abſurdly bends his whole deſigns. Swift's Miſtellanieſ,
We may proceed yet further with the atheiſt, and convince
him, that not only his principle is abſurd, but his conſequences
... alſo as abſurdly deduced from it. Bentley's Sermons.
Absu'RPNess. n.ſ.. [from abſurd.] The quality of being abſurd;
injudiciouſneſs, impropriety. See Absurdity ; which is
more frequently uſed.
Abu'NDANCE. n.ſ.. [abondance, Fr.]
1. Plenty; a ſenſe chiefly poetical.
At the whiſper y thy word,
Crown'd abundance ſpreads my board. .
The doubled charge his ſubjećts love ſupplies,
Who, in that bounty, to themſelves are kind;
So glad Egyptians ſee their Nilus riſe,
And, in his plenty, their abundance find.
2. Great numbers.
The river Inn, during its courſe through the Tyrol, is ge-
nerally ſhut up between a double range of mountains, that are
moſt of them covered with woods of fir-trees. Abundance of
peaſants are employed in hewing down of the largeſt of theſe
trees, that, after they are barked and cut into ſhape, are tum-
bled down. Addiſon on Italy.
3. A #. quantity.
ir chief enterprize was the recovery of the Holy land;
in which worthy, but extremely difficult, action, it is ſamént-
able to remember what abundance of noble blood hath been
iſhed with very ſmall benefit unto the Chriſtian ſtate. . .
Sir Walter Raleigh's Eſſayſ.
Craſhaw
Dryd. Ann. Mirs
4. Exuberance, more than enough.
For well I wot, moſt mighty ſovereign,
That all this famous antique hiſtory,
Of ſome, th’ abundance of an idle brain -
Will judged be, and painted forgery. Spenſ. Fairy Q. b. ii.
Abu'NDANT. adj. [abundans, Lat.] -
1. Plentiful.
- Good the more
Communicated, more abundant grows; -
The author not impair'd, but honour'd more. Par. Loft, b.v.
2. Exuberant.
If the veſſels are in a ſtate of too great rigidity, ſo as not to
ield, a ſtrong proječtile motion occaſions their rupture, and
aemorrhages; eſpecially in the lungs, where the blood is
abundant. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Fº ſtored. It is followed ſometimes by in, commonly by with.
h
e world began but ſome ages before theſe were found out,
and was abundant with all things at firſt; and men not very
numerous; and therefore were not put ſo much to the uſe of
their wits, to find out ways for living commodiouſly. -
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. It is applied generally to things, ſometimes to perſons.
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-
ſuffering and abundant in goodneſs and truth. Exod. xxxiv. 6.
Abu'NDANTLY. adv. [from abundant.]
1. In plenty.
Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature
that hath life. Geneſis, i. 20.
God on thee
Abundantly his gifts hath alſo pour’d ; -
Inward and outward both, his image fair. Par. Loft, b.viii.
2. Amply, liberally, more than ſufficiently.
What the example of our equals wants of authority, is abun-
dantly ſupplied in the imaginations of friendſhip, and the re-
peated influences of a conſtant converſation, Rogers's Serm.
Heroic poetry has ever been eſteemed the greateſt work of
human nature. In that rank has Ariſtotle placed it; and Lon-
É. is ſo full of the like expreſſions, that he abundantly con-
rms the other's teſtimony. Dryden's State of Innocence, Prºf.
To ABU'SE. v. a. [abutor, Lat.]
In abuſe the verb, ſhas the ſound of z; in the noun, the
common ſound.
1. To make an ill uſe of.
They that uſe this world, as not abuſing it; for the faſhion
of this world paſſeth away. I Cor. vii. 31.
He has fixed and determined the time for our repentance,
beyond which he will no longer await the perverſeneſs of men,
no longer ſuffer his compaſſion to be abuſed. Rogers's Sermons.
2. To deceive, to impoſe upon.
The world hath been much abuſed by the opinion of mak-
ing gold: the work itſelf I judge to be poſſible; but the means
hitherto propounded, are, in the pračice, full of error.
-* Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 126.
He perhaps,
Out of my weakneſs and my inclancholy,
As he is very potent with ſuch ſpirits,
F. Abuſes me to damn me. Shaºffº'c', *;
t
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A B U
A C A
It import; the miſrepreſentation of the qualities of things and
a3ions, to the common apprehenſions of men, abuſing their
minds with falſe notions; and ſo, by this artifice, making evil
paſs for good, and good for evil, in all the great concerns of
life. South's Sermons.
Nor be with all theſe tempting words abus’d ;
Theſe tempting words were all to Sappho us'd.
- - Pºpe's Sappho to Phaon.
3. To treat with rudeneſs, to reproach.
I am no ſtrumpet, but of life as honeſt
As you that thus alſº me.
But he mocked them, and laughed at them, and abuſed them
ſhamefully, and ſpake proudly. 1 Mac. vii. 34.
Some praiſe at morning what they blame at night,
But always think the laſt opinion right.
A muſe by theſe is like a 1...iſtreſs us'd, -
This hour ſhe's idoliz'd, the next abus’d. Pºpe's Eſ, on Crit.
The next criticiſm upon the ſtars ſeems to be introduced for
no other reaſon, but to mention Mr. Bickerſtaff, whom the au-
thor every-where endeavours to imitate and abuſe. Addiſon.
ABU's E. n.ſ.. [from the verb abuſe.]
1. The ill uſe of any thing. -
The caſting away things profitable for the ſuſtenance of man's
life, is an unthankful abuſe of the fruits of God's good provi-
dence towards mankind. . . Hooker, b. v. § 9.
Little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts beſt things
To worſt abuſe, or to their meaneſt uſe. Parad. Loft, b. iv.
2. A corrupt pračtice, bad cuſtom.
The nature of things is ſuch, that, if abuſes be not reme-
died, they will certainly encreaſe. Swift for Advancem, of Relig.
3. Seducement. -
Was it not enough for him to have deceived me, and
through the deceit abuſed me, and, after the abuſe, forſaken me,
but that he muſt now, of all the company, and before all the
company, lay want of beauty to my charge. Sidney, b. ii.
4. Unjuſt cenſure, rude reproach, contumcly.
- I dark in light, expos'd
To daily fraud, contempt, abuſe, and wrong. Sampſ, Agon.
ABU's ER. m.ſ.. [from the verb abºſe.]
1. He that makes an ill uſe.
2. He that deceives.
Next thou, th’ altſºr of thy prince's ear. Denh. Sºphy.
3. He that reproaches with rudeneſs.
'4. A raviſher, a violater. . . .
ABU's Iv E. adj. [from abuſe.] *-
1. Pračtiſing abuſe.
The tongue mov’d gently firſt, and ſpeech was low,
Till wrangling ſcience taught it noiſe and ſhow,
And wicked wit aroſe, thy moſt abuſive foe. Pope's Mºſell.
Dame Nature, as the learned ſhow,
Provides each animal its foe;
Hounds hunt the hare, the wily fox
Devours your geeſe, the wolf your flocks.
Thus envy pleads a natural claim,
To perſecute the muſe's fame,
On poets in all times abuſive,
From Homer down to Pope incluſive. Swift's Miſtellanies,
2...Containing abuſe; as, an abuſive lampoon.
Next, Comedy appear'd with great applauſe,
Till her licentious and abuſive tongue
Waken'd the magiſtrates coercive pow'r,
3. Deceitful; a ſenſe little uſed, yet not improper.
It is verified by a number of examples, that whatſoever is
gained by an º, treaty, º to be reſtored in integrum.
Roſcommon.
Bacon's Conſiderations on J/ar with Spain.
ABU's Iv ELY. adv. [from abuſe.]
1. Improperly, by a wrong uſe.
- The oil, abuſively called ſpirit, of roſes ſwims at the top of
the water, in the form of a white butter; which I remember
not to have obſerved in any other oil drawn in any limbeck.
Boyle's Sceptical Chymiſtry.
2. Reproachfully.
Abu's iv EN Ess. m. ſ. [from abuſ...] The quality of being abu-
five; foulneſs of language.
Pick out of mirth, like ſtones out of thy ground,
Profaneneſs, filthineſs, abuſiveneſs.
Theſe are the ſcum, with which coarſe wits abound:
The fine may ſpare theſe well, yet not go leſs. Herbert.
To A BU'T. v. m. obſolete. [aboutir, to touch at the end, Fr.]
To end at, to border upon; to meet, or approach to, with the
particle upon.
Two mighty monarchies,
Whoſe high upreared and abutting fronts
Perilous the narrow ocean parts aſunder. Shakeſp. Henry V.
In entering the ſame, we will firſt pitch at the Looes,
two ſeveral corporations, diſtinguiſhed by the addition of eaſt
and weſt, abutting upon a navigable creek, and joined by a fair
bridge of many arches. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
AEU'ſ TA:... m. ſ. [from alut..] The butting or boundaries of any
land. A writing declaring on whar lands, highways, or other
places, it does abut. * - . IJict.
Shakeſpeare's Othello. - -
ABU"r Mf N.T. m. ſ. [from abut..] That which abuts, or borders
upon another.
ABY's M. m. ſ. ſalyſine, old Fr. now written contractedly alºne.]
A gulf; the ſame with alyſ. -
My good ſtars, that were my former guides,
Have empty left their orbs, and ſhot their fires
Into the abyſm of hell. Shakeſpeare's ſººny and Cºatra.
ABY'ss. m. ſ. [alyſis, Lat, "A?… -, bottomleſs, Gr.]
1. A depth without bottom.
Who ſhall tempt with wand'ring feet
The dark, unbottom’d, infinite alyſs,
And, through the palpable obſcure, find out
- This uncouth way. 41ilton's Paradjº Lyº, l. ii. i. 4-5.
2. A great depth, a gulph.
The yawning earth diſclos'd th’ ałyſ of hell:
The weeping ſtatues did the wars forétell,
- And holy ſweat from brazen idols fell. Dryd, Jºrg. Georg.i.
3. In a figurative ſenſe, that in which any thing is loſt.
For ſepulchres themſelves muſt crumbling fall
In time's abyſ, the common grave of all. Dryd, juv. St. x.
If, diſcovering how far we have clear and diſtinct ideas, we
confine our thoughts within the contemplation of thoſe things,
that are within the reach of our underſtandings, and launch not
out into that alſ; of darkneſs, out of a preſumption, that no-
thing is beyond our comprehenſion. Locke.
4. The body of waters ſuppoſed at the center of the earth.
We are here to conſider what is generally underſtood by the
great alſ, in the common explication of the deluge; and 'tis
commonly interpreted either to be the ſea, or ſubterraneous
waters hid in the bowels of the earth. Barner's Theor. Earth.
5. In the language of divines, hell.
From that inſatiable abyſs, -
Where flames devour, and ſerpents hiſs,
... Promote me to thy ſeat of bliſs.
Ac, AK, or AKE. -
Being initials in the names of places, as Aion, ſignify
an oak, from the Saxon ac, an oak. Gibſon's Camden.
ACACIA. n.ſ. [Lat.]
1. A drug brought from Egypt, which, being ſuppoſed the in-
ſpiſlated juice of a tree, is imitated by the juice of ſloes, boiled
to the ſame conſiſtence. Dictionaire de Comm. Savary. Trevoux.
2. A tree commonly ſo called here, though different from that
which produces the true acacia; and therefore termed ſudoca-
cia, or Virginian acacia.
It hath a papilionaceous flower, from whoſe flower-cup riſes
the pointal, wrapped in a fimbriated membrane, which after-
wards becomes a pod, opening into two parts, in which are
contained ſeveral kidney-ſhaped ſeeds. - 4/illar.
AcADE'MIAL. adj. [from academy..] Relating to an academy,
beionging to an academy. -
AcADEMIAN. n.ſ.. [from academy..] A ſcholar of an academy or
univerſity; a member of an univerſity. J/ood, in his Atºcºa
Oxonienſes, mentions a great feaſt made for the academians.
AcADE'Mick. m. ſ. [from academy..] A ſtudent of an univerſity.
- A young academic ſhall dwell upon a journal that treats of
trade in a dićtatorial ſtyle, and ſhall be laviſh in the praiſe of
the author; while, at the ſame time, perſons well skilled in
thoſe different ſubjects, hear the tattle with contempt. -
//atts's Improvement of the Aſº...!, p. i. e. 5.
- Rºman.
AcADE'MICK. adj. [academicus, Lat..] Relating to an univerſity.
While thro’ poetic ſcenes the genius roves, -
Or wanders wild in academic groves. Dunciad, b. iv. l. 481.
AcADE'Mical. adj. [academicus, Lat] Belonging to an uni-
verſity.
He drew him firſt into the fatal circle, from a kind of re-
ſolved privateneſs at his houſe at Lampſie in South Wales;
where, after the academical life, he had taken ſuch a taſte of
the rural, as I have heard him ſay, that he could well have bent
his mind to a retired courſe. //otton.
AcADEMI'cIAN. m. ſ. [academicien, Fr.] The member of an
academy. It is generally uſed in ſpeaking of the profeſſors in
the academics of France.
AcA'DEMIST. n.ſ.. [from academy..] The member of an aca-
demy.
It is obſerved by the Pariſian academiſts, that ſome amphibious
quadrupeds, particularly the ſea-calf or ſeal, hath his epiglottis
extraordinarily large. Ray on the Creation.
ACADEMY. n.ſ.. [anciently, and properly, with the accentors
the firſt ſyllable, now frequently on the ſecond. Aademia, Lat.
from Academus of Athens, whoſe houſe was turned into a fehool,
from whom the Groves of Academe in Milton.]
1. An aſſembly or ſociety of men, uniting for the promotion of
, ſome art. -
- Our court ſhall be a little academy,
Still and contemplative in living arts. Sºak. Live's Lab. Igº.
2. The place where ſciences are taught.
Amongſt the academics, which were compoſed by the rare
genius of thoſe great men, theſe four are reckoned as the priº-
cipal; namely, the Athenian ſchool, that of Sicyon, that of
Rhodes, and that of Corinth. Dryºs Iº,.
3. An univerſity. -
4. A place of education, in contradiſtinčion to the cºverſities
...', ' }
or public ſchºols. 2: C.7.Y. 2: . .S.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C C
A C C
AC/NTHUS. m. ſ. [Lat..] The name of the herb bears-foot,
remarkable for being the model of the foliage on the Corinthian
chapter. - .
On either ſide
Acanthus, and each od’rous buſhy ſhrub, * *
Fenc'd up the verdant wall. Milt. Parad. Loff, h. iv. J. 606.
º AcATALE'cT1c. m. ſ. […raºzº, Gr.] A verſe which has
the compleat number of ſyllables, without defect or ſuperfluity.
To ACCEDE. v. n. [accedo, Lat.] To be added to, to come
to ; generally uſed in political accounts; as, another power
has acceded to the treaty; that is, has become a party.
To ACCE'LERATE. v. a. [accelero, Lat.]
1. To make quick, to haſten, to quicken motion; to give a
continual impulſe to motion, ſo as perpetually to encreaſe.
Take new beer, and put in ſome quantity of ſtale beer into
it; and ſee whether it will not accelerate the clarification, by
opening the body of the beer, whereby the groſſer parts may
fall down into lees. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 307.
If the rays endeavour to recede from the denſeſt part of the
vibration, they may be alternately accelerated and retarded by
the vibrations overtaking them. - Newton's Optics.
Spices quicken the pulſe, and accelerate the motion of the
blood, and diſſipate the fluids; from whence leanneſs, pains
in the ſtomach, loathings, and fevers. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Lo from the dread immenſity of ſpace -
- Returning, with accelerated courſe, -
The ruſhing comet to the ſun deſcends. Thomſ. Sum. l. 1690.
2. It is generally applied to matter, and uſed chiefly in philoſophi-
cal language; but is ſometimes uſed on other occaſions.
In which council the king himſelf, whoſe continual vigi-
lancy did ſuck in ſometimes cauſeleſs ſuſpicions, which few elſe
knew, inclined to the accelerating a battle. Bacon's Henry VII.
Perhaps it may point out to a ſtudent now and then, what
may employ the moſt uſeful labours of his thoughts, and accele-
rate his diligence in the moſt momentous enquiries.J/atts's Impr.
AccELERA'TION. m. ſ. [acceleratio, Lat.]
I. The ačt of quickening motion. -
The law of the acceleration of falling bodies, diſcovered firſt
by Galileo, is, that the velocities acquired by falling, being as the
time in which the body falls, the ſpaces through which it paſſes,
will be as the ſquares of the velocities, and the velocity and
time taken together, as in a quadruplicate ratio of the ſpaces.
2. The ſtate of the body accelerated, or quickened in its motion.
The degrees of acceleration of motion, the gravitation of the
air, the exiſtence or non-exiſtence of empty ſpaces, either
coacervate or interſperſed, and many the like, have taken
| up the thoughts, and times of men in diſputes concerning
| them. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To ACCEND. v. a. [accendo, Lat.] To kindle, to ſet on fire;
a word very rarely uſed. - -
Our devotion, if ſufficiently accended, would, as theirs, burn
up innumerable books of this fort. Decay of Piety.
| AccE'Nsion. n.ſ.. [accenſio, Lat.] The aët of kindling, or the
ſtate of being kindled. -
The fulminating damp will take fire at a candle, or other
| flame, and, upon its accenſion, gives a crack or report, like the
| diſcharge of a gun, and makes likewiſe an exploſion ſo forcible
| - as ſometimes to kill the miners, break their limbs, ſhake the
earth, and force-coals, ſtones, and other bodies, even though
they be of very great weight and bulk, from the bottom of
the pit or mine. Iłoodward's Natural Hiſtory, p. iv.
—A CCENT, n.ſ.. [accentus, Lat.] *.
1 - The manner of ſpeaking or pronouncing, with regard either
to force or elegance.
I know, Sir, I am no flatterer; he that beguiled you in a
plain accent was a plain knave; which, for my part, I will not
be. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Your accent is ſomething finer than you could purchaſe in ſo
* removed a dwelling. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
\ 2- In grammar, the marks made upon ſyllables to regulate their
Pronunciation.
Accent, as in the Greek names and uſage, ſeems to have re-
garded the tune of the voice; the acute accent raiſing the voice
in ſome certain ſyllables to a higher, i. e. more acute pitch
or tone, and the grave depreſfing it lower, and both having
fome emphaſis, i. e. more vigorous pronunciation. Holder's Elem.
3- Poetically, language or words.
How many ages hence
Shall this our lofty ſcene be acted o'er,
In ſtates unborn, and accents yet unknown. Shakespeare.jul. Caſar.
Winds on your wings to heav'n her accents bear;
| Such words as heav'n alone is fit to hear. Dryd. Virg. Paſº. 3.
| 4- A modification of the voice, expreſſive of the paſſions or ſenti-
... [Ilchts.
º - The tender accent of a woman's cry
i Will paſs unheard, will unregarded die;
When the rough ſeaman's louder ſhouts prevail,
When fair occaſion ſhews the ſpringing gale. Prizr.
To Accest. v. a. [from accentis, Lat.]
1. To pronounce, to speak words with particular regard to the
grammatical marks or rules. -
- Having got ſomebody to mark the laſt ſyllable but one, where
it is long, in words above two ſyllables (which is chough to re-
3
gulate her pronunciation, and accenting the words) let her read
daily in the goſpels, and avoid underſtanding them in Latin,
if ſhe can. - Locke ºn Education, $177.
2. In poetry, to pronounce or utter in general.
O my unhappy lines' you that before
Have ſerv'd my youth to vent ſome wanton cries,
And, now congeal’d with grief, can ſcarce implore
Strength to accent, Here my Albertus lies Iſºtton.
3. To write or note the accents. .
To AccENTUATE. v. a. [accentuer, Fr.] To place the proper
accents over the vowels.
AccENTUA"tion. m. ſ. [from accentuate.]
1. The aët of placing the accent in pronunciation.
2. Marking the accent in writing. -
To ACCEPT. v. a. [accipio, Lat. accepter, Fr.]
1. To take with pleaſure; to receive kindly; to admit with ap-
probation. It is diſtinguiſhed from receive, as ſpecific from ge-
neral; noting a particular manner of receiving.
Neither do ye kindle fire on my altar for nought. I have
no pleaſure in you, faith the Lord of hoſts, neither will I accept
an offering at your hand, - Malachi, i. Io.
c. Then É. opened his mouth, and ſaid, Of a truth I per-
ceive that God is no reſpecter of perſons: but, in every na-
tion, he that feareth him, and worketh righteouſneſs, is accepted
with him. . .” - 46ts, x, 34, 35.
You have been graciouſly pleaſed to accept this tender of my
duty. - Dryden's Dedication to his Fables.
Charm by accepting, by ſubmitting ſway,
Yet have your humour moſt when you obey. Pope.
2. It is uſed in a kind of juridical ſenſe; as, to accept terms, accept
a treaty.
His promiſe Palamon accepts, but pray'd
. . To keep it better than the firſt he made. Dryden's Falls.
3. In the language of the bible, to accept perſons, is to act with
perſonal and partial regard. -
He will ſurely reprove you, if ye do ſecretly accept perſons.
- - job, xiii. 10.
4. It is ſometimes uſed with the particle of:
I will appeaſe him with the preſent that goeth before me, and
afterward I will ſee his face; peradventure he will accept of me.
- . . . . Geneſis, xxxii. 20.
Accept Abi'lity. n.ſ. The quality of being acceptable. See
AccEPTABLE. - - - - - - - - -
He hath given us his natural blood to be ſhed, for the remiſ-
ſion of our ſins, and for the obtaining the grace and acceptabi-
lity of repentance. Taylºr's J/ºrthy Communicant.
AccE'PTABLE. adj. [acceptable, Fr. from the Latin.] It is pro-
nounced by ſome with the accent in the firſt ſyllable, as by
- Milton ; by others, with the accent on the ſecond. -
1. That which is likely to be accepted; grateful; pleaſing. It is
uſed with the particle to before the perſon accepting.
This woman, whom thou mad'ſt to be my help,
And gav'ſt me as thy perfect gift, ſo good,
So fit, ſo acceptable, ſo divine, -
That from her hand I could expect no ill. Parad, Lºſſ, h. ii.
I do not ſee any other method left for men of that function
to take, in order to reform the world, than by uſing all honeſt
arts to make themſelves acceptable to the laity. Swift's Prºj. &amp;c.
After he had made a peace ſo acceptable to the church, and ſo
honourable to himſelf, he ſpent the remainder of his life at
Ripaille, and died with an extraordinary reputation of ſančtity.
- Addison on }.
AccE'ptABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from acceptable.] The quality of be-
ing acceptable.
It will thereby take away the acceptableneſ of that conjunc-
ton. Grew's Cºſmologia Sacra, b. ii. c. 2.
AccE'PTABLY. adv. [from acceptable.] In an acceptable manner;
ſo as to pleaſe; with the particle to. For the accent, ſee Ac-
CEPTABLE. -
Do not omit thy prayers, for want of a good oratory; for
he that prayeth upon God's account, cares not what he ſuffers,
ſo he be the friend of Chriſt; nor where nor when he prays, ſo
he may do it frequently, fervently, and acceptably.
- Taylor’s Guide to Devotion.
If you can teach them to love and ſº other people, they
will, as your age requires it, find ways to expreſs it acceptably
to every one. Locke on Education, § 145.
AccE'PTANCE. m. ſ. [acceptance, Fr.] - -
1. Reception with approbation.
By that acceptance of his ſovereignty, they alſo accepted of
his laws; why then ſhould any other laws be now uſed amongſt
them 2 Speſſºr's State of Ireland.
If he tells us his noble deeds, we muſt alſo tell him our noble
acceptance of them. Shakeſpeare's Coriolants.
Some men cannot be fools with ſo good acceptance as others,
South's Sermºs.
Thus I imholden'd ſpake, and freedom us'd
Permiſſive, and acceptance found. Par. Loft, l. viii. 1. 435.
2. The meaning of a word as it is received or underſtood; ac-
ceptation. - -
That pleaſure is man's chiefeſt good, becauſe indeed it is
the perception of good that is properly pleaſure, is a: aſ ſtion
Inc.'t
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C C
A C C
whoſt certainly true, though, under the common acceptance of
it, not only falſe but odious : for, according to this, pleaſure
and ſenſuality paſs for terms equivalent; and therefore he, who
takes it in this ſenſe, alters the ſubject of the diſcourſe. South.
AccE'Pºr AN ce. [in law.] The receiving of a rent, whereby
the giver binds himſelf, for ever, to allow a former fact done
by another, whether it be in itſelf good or not. Cowel.
Accept A'rion. n. / [from accept.]
4. Reception, whether good or bad. This large ſenſe ſeems now
wholly out of uſe. -
Yet, poor ſoul! knows he no other, but that I do ſuſpect,
neglect, yea, and deteſt him *. For, every day, he finds one
way or other to ſet forth himſelf unto me; but all are rewarded
with like coldneſs of acceptation. Sidney, b. ii.
What is new finds better acceptation, than what is good or
great. Denham's Sophy.
2. Good reception, acceptance.
Cain, envious of the acceptation of his brother's prayer and
ſacrifice, ſlew him; making himſelf the firſt manſlayer, and
his brother the firſt martyr. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World, b.i.
3. The ſtate of being acceptable, regard.
Some things, although not ſo required of neceſſity, that, to
leave them undone, excludeth from ſalvation, are, notwith-
ſtanding, of ſo great dignity and acceptation with God, that
moſt ample reward in heaven is laid up for them. Hooker, b.ii.
They have thoſe enjoyments only as the conſequences of the
ſtate y eſteem and acceptation they are in with their parents
and governours. Locke an Education, $ 53.
4. Acceptance in the juridical ſenſe. This ſenſe occurs rarely.
As, in order º: paſſing away a thing by gift, there is re-
quired a ſurrender of all right on his part that gives; ſo there
is requircd alſo an acceptation on his part to whom it is given.
South's Sermons.
5. The meaning of a word, as it is commonly received.
Thereupon the earl of Lauderdale made a diſcourſe upon the
ſeveral queſtions, and what acceptation theſe words and expreſ-
ſions had. Clarendon, b. viii.
All matter is either fluid or ſolid, in a large acceptation of
the words, that they may comprehend even all the middle de-
grees between extreme #. and coherency, and the moſt
rapid inteſtine motion of the particles of bodies. Bentl. Serm.
An Accº'Pter. n.ſ.. [from accept.] The perſon that accepts.
Acceptilation. m. ſ. [acceptilatio, Lat.] A term of the civil
law, importing the remiſſion of a debt by an acquittance
from the creditor, teſtifying the receipt of money which has
never been paid.
Acception. [acception, Fr. from acceptio, Lat.] The received
ſenſe of a word; the meaning.
That this hath been eſteemed the due and proper acception of
this word, I ſhall teſtify by one evidence, which gave me the
firſt hint of this notion. Bammond on Fundamentals.
ACCESS. n.ſ.. [In ſome of its ſenſes, it ſeems derived from
acceſſus, in others, from acceſſio, Lat. acces, Fr.]
1. The way by which anything may be approached.
There remained very advantageous acceſſºr for temptations
to enter and invade men, the fortifications being very ſlender
little knowlege of immortality, or any thing beyond this fire.
and no aſſurance that repentance º be admitted for fin. &gt;
Hammond on F.
And here th’ acceſ, a gloomy grove defends; undamentals.
And here th' unnavigable lake extends,
Q'er whoſe unhappy waters, void of light,
No bird preſumes to ſteer his airy flight. Dryd. Æneid vi.
2. The means, or liberty, of approaching either to things or men.
When we are wrong'd, and would unfold our griefs
We are deny'd acceſ; unto his perſon, &gt;
Ev’n by thoſe men that moſt have done us wrong.
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. 2.
They go commiſſion'd to require *::: enry IV p.2
And carry preſents to procure acceſ. Dryd. Æn. vii.
He grants what they befought;
Inſtructed, that to God is no acceſ;
Without Mediator, whoſe high office now
Moſes in figures bears. Milton's Par. Loft,
3. Encreaſe, enlargement, addition.
The gold was accumulated, and flore treaſure, for the moſt
part; but the filver is ſtill growing. Beſides, infinite is the
acrºſs of territory and empire by the ſame enterprize.
Bacon's
Although to opinion, there be many gods, may º...
cºſ; in religion, and ſuch as cannot at all conſiſt with atheiſm
yet doth it dedućtively, and upon inference, include the ſame.
for unity is the inſeparable and eſſential attribute of Deity. 2
Brown's Kulgar Errour, b. i. z. Io
Northink ſuperfluous their aid; -
I, from the influence of thy looks, receive
Acceſs in every virtue; in thy fight
More wiſe, more watchful, ſtronger. Paradſ: Lºſt, b. ix.
- . The reputation
Of virtuous actions paſt, if not ke
With an acceſ, and freſh ſuppl
i. ſ."
l. 209.
b. xii. 1.239.
pt up
of new ones,
Denham's Sophy.
4. It is ſometimes uſed, after the French, to ſignify the returns of
fits of a diſtemper; but this ſenſe ſeems yet ſcarcely received
into our language.
For as relapſes make diſeaſes
More deſperate than their firſt acceſſes. Hud. p. iii. cant. ii.
Access ARINess. m. ſ. [from acceſſary..] The ſtate of being
acceſſary.
Perhaps this will draw us into a negative acceſſarineſ to the
miſchiefs. Decay of Piety.
Accessary. adj. [A corruption, as it ſeems, of the word ac-
ceſſory, which ſee; but now more commonly uſed than the
proper word.]
That which, without being the chief agent in a crime, con-
tributes to it. But it had formerly a good and general ſenſe.
As for thoſe things that are acceſſary hereunto, thoſe things
that ſo belong to the way of ſalvation, &amp;c. Hooker, b. iii. §3.
He had taken upon him the government of Hull, without
any apprehenſion or imagination, that it would ever make him
acceſſary to rebellion. Clarendon, b. viii.
AccE'ssible. adj. [acceſſibilis, Lat. acceſſible, Fr.] That which
may be approached; that which we may reach or arrive at.
}. is applied both to perſons and things, with the particle to.
In converſation, the tempers of men are open and acceſſible,
their attention is awake, and their minds diſpoſed to receive
the ſtrongeſt impreſſions; and what is ſpoken is generally more
affecting, and more appoſite to particular occaſions. Rogers.
As an iſland, we are acceſſible on every ſide, and expoſed to
perpetual invaſions; againſt which it is impoſſible to fortify
ourſelves ſufficiently, without a power at ſea. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Thoſe things, which were indeed inexplicable, have been
rackt and tortured to diſcover themſelves, while the plainer and
more acceſſible truths, as if deſpicable while eaſy, are clouded
and obſcured. - Decay of Piety.
Some lie more open to our ſenſes and daily obſervation ;
others are more occult and hidden, and though acceſſible, in
ſome meaſure, to our ſenſes, yet not without great ſearch and
ſcrutiny, or ſome happy accident. Hale's Origin of 41ankind.
AccE'ssion. m. ſ. [acceſſio, Lat. acceſſion, Fr.]
1. Encreaſe by ſomething added, enlargement, augmentation.
There would not have been found the difference here ſet
down betwixt the force of the air, when expanded, and what
that force ſhould have been according to the theory, but that
the included inch of air received ſome little acceſſion during the
trial. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
The wiſeſt among the nobles began to apprehend the grow-
ing power of the people; and therefore, knowing what an ac-
ceſſion thereof would accrue to them, by ſuch an addition of
property, uſed all means to prevent it.
Swift on the Conteſts in Athens and Rome.
Charity, indeed, and works of munificence are the proper
diſcharge of ſuch over-proportioned acceſſions, and the only vir-
tuous enjoyment of them. Rogers'; Sermons, ii. p. 37.
2. The aët of coming to, or joining one's ſelf to; as, acceſſion to
a confederacy.
Beſide, what wiſe objećtions he prepares
Againſt my late acceſſion to the wars 2
Does not the fool perceive his argument
Is with more force againſt Achilles bent? Dryden's Fables.
3. The act of arriving at ; as, the king's acceſſion to the throne.
A'ccessorily, adv. [from acceſſory.] In the manner of an ac-
ceſſory.
A'ccessor Y. adj. Joined to another thing, ſo as to increaſe it;
Additional. -
In this kind there is not the leaſt action, but it doth ſome-
what make to the acceſſºry augmentation of our bliſs. Hooker.
A'ccessor Y. n.ſ.. [acceſſorius, Lat. acceſſºire, Fr. This word,
which had anciently a general ſignification, is now almoſt con-
fined to forms of law.]
1. Applied to perſons.
A man that is guilty of a felonious offence, not principally,
but by participation; as, by commandment, advice, or con-
cealment. And a man may be acceſſºry to the offence of an-
other, after two ſorts, by the common law, or by ſtatute: and,
by the common law, two ways alſo ; that is, before or after
the fact. Before the fact ; as, when one commandeth or ad-
viſeth another to commit a felony, and is not preſent at the
execution thereof; for his preſence makes him alſo a principal :
wherefore there cannot be an acceſſory before the fact in man-
ſlaughter; becauſe manſlaughter is ſudden and not prepenſed.
Acceſſory after the fact, is, when one receiveth him, whom he
knoweth to have committed felony. Acceſſºry by ſtatute, is he
that abets, counſels, or hides any man committing, or having
committed an offence made felony by ſtatute. Cowel.
By the common law, the acceſſories cannot be proceeded
againſt, till the principal has received his trial. Spe'ſ State ºf Ire.
But pauſe, my ſoul! and ſtudy, ere thou fall
Still before acceſſºries do abide
A trial, muſt the principal be try’d.
Now were all transform'd
Alike, to ſerpents all, as acceſſories
To his bold riot. -Milton's Paradiſe Left, b. x. l. 5 zo.
2. Applied
*- On accidental % th' eſſential.
JDonne.
º:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C C
A C C
|
|
Acci DENT ALLY. adv. [from accidental.]
2. Applied to things.
An acceſſºry is ſaid to be that which does accede unto ſome
principal fact or thing in law; and, as ſuch, generally ſpeaking,
follows the reaſon and nature of its principal.
Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
Accidence. n.ſ.. [a corruption of accidents, from accidentia, Lat.]
The little book containing the firſt rudiments of grammar, and
explaining the properties of the eight parts of ſpeech.
I do confeſs I do want eloquence,
And never yet did learn mine accidence. Taylor the Water-poet.
ACCIDENT. m. ſ. [accideas, Lat.]
1. The property or quality of any being, which may be ſeparated
from it, at leaſt in thought.
If ſhe were but the body's accident,
And her ſole being did in it ſubſiſt,
As white in ſhow, ſhe might herſelf abſent,
And in the body's ſubſtance not be miſs'd. Sir john Davies.
An accidental mode, or an accident, is ſuch a mode as is not
neceſſary to the being of a thing; for the ſubject may be with-
out it, and yet remain of the ſame nature that it was before ;
or it is that mode which may be ſeparated or aboliſhed from its
ſubject. JWatts's Logick.
2. In grammar, the property of a word.
The learning of a language is nothing elſe but the informing
of ourſelves, what compoſures of letters are, by conſent and
inſtitution, to ſignify ſuch certain notions of things, with their
modalities and accidents. Holder's Elements of Speech.
3. That which happens unforeſeen; caſualty, chance.
General laws are like general rules in phyſic, according
whereunto, as no wiſe man will deſire himſelf to be cured, if
there be joined with his diſeaſe ſome ſpecial accident, in regard
whereof, that whereby others in the ſame infirmity, but with-
out the like accident, recover health, would be, to him, either
hurtful, or, at the leaſt, unprofitable. Hooker, b. v. § 9.
The flood, and other accidents of time, made it one common
fidd and paſture with the land of Eden. Raleigh's Hiſt. J/orld.
Thus we rejoic'd, but ſoon our joy is turn'd
Into perplexity, and new amaze;
For whither is he gone What accident
Hath rapt him from us? Paradiſe Regained, b, i.
And trivial accidents ſhall be forborn,
That others may have time to take their turn. Dryd. Fables.
The reformation owed nothing to the good intentions of
king Henry. He was only an inſtrument of it (as the logicians
ſpeak) by accident. Swift's Miſcellanies.
Accide'NTAl... n.ſ.. [accidental, Fr. See ACCIDENT.] A pro-
perty noneſſential.
Conceive, as much as you can, of the eſſentials of any ſub-
jećt, before you conſider its accidentals. J/atts's Logick.
AccIDE'NTAL. adj. [from accident.]
1. Having the quality of an accident, noneſſential ; uſed with
the particle to, before that in which the accident inheres.
A diſtinction is to be made between what pleaſes narurally in
itſelf, and what pleaſes upon the account of machines, ačtors,
dances, and circumſtances, which are merely accidental to the
ri-agedy. Rymer’s Tragedies of the laſt Age.
This is accidental to a ſtate of religion, and therefore ought
ro be reckoned among the ordinary difficulties of it. Tillotſon.
2. Caſual, fortuitous, happening by chance.
Thy fin's not accidental, but a trade. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Meaſ.
So ſhall you hear
Of accidental judgments, caſual ſlaughters;
Of deaths put on by cunning, and forc'd cauſe. Shakeſp Ham.
Look upon things of the moſt accidental and mutable nature;
&lt;r-ridental in their produćtion, and mutable in their continu-
a rice; yet God's preſcience of them is as certain in him, as the
nº emory of them is, or can be, in us. South's Sermons.
3- Iri the following paſſage it ſeems to ſignify adventitious.
Ay, ſuch a miniſter as wind to fire,
That adds an accidental fierceneſs to
Its natural fury. Denham's Sophy.
1. After an accidental manner ; noneſſentially.
Other needful points of public matters, no leſs concerning
the good of the commonwealth, though but accidentally depend-
ing upon the former. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
I conclude choler accidentally better, and acrimonious, but
not in itſelf. Harvey on Conſumptions.
* Caſually, fortuitouſly.
Although virtuous men do ſometimes accidentally make their
way to preferment, yet the world is ſo corrupted, that no man
can reaſonably hope to be rewarded in it, merely upon account
of his virtue. - Swift's Miſcellanies.
Sº ide'NTALs Ess. m. ſ. [from accidental.] The quality of be-
ing accidental. D},7.
“i'PIENT. n.ſ.. [accipiens, Lat.] A receiver, perhaps ſome-
times uſed for recipient. Dić7.
° Acci't E. v. a. ſaccito, Lat.] To call, to ſummons; a word
hot in uſe now.
Our coronation done, we will accite
r - -
9 prince, no peer, ſhall have juſt cauſe to ſay,
- º ſhortin Harry's happy life one day. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Ol. 1.
AccLA'im. h. ſ. [acclamo, Lät from which probably firſt the
verb acclaim, now loſt, and then the noun..] A ſhout of praiſe
acclamation. -
Back from purſuit thy pow'rs, with loud acclaim,
Thee only extoll’d. Miltºn's Par. Lºft, b. iii. I. 397.
The herald ends; the vaulted firmament
With loud acclaims, and vaſt applauſe, is rent. Dryd. Falls.
AccLAMATION. m. ſ. [acclamatio, Lat.] Shouts of applauſe;
ſuch as thoſe with which a victorious army ſalutes the general.
It hath been the cuſtom of chriſtian men, in token of the
greater reverence, to ſtand, to utter certain words of acclama-
tion, and, at the name of Jeſus, to bow. Hºcker, b. v. § 29.
- Gladly then he mix’d
Among thoſe friendly pow'rs, who him receiv'd
With joy, and acclamations loud, that one,
That, of ſo many myriads fall'n, yet one -
Return'd, not loſt. Milt. Parad. Lºff, h. vi. l. 23.
Such an enchantment is there in words, and ſo fine a thing
does it ſeem to ſome, to be ruined plauſibly, and to be uſhered
to their deſtruction with panegyric and acclamation. South. Ser.
Accli'vity. n.ſ.. [from accliviº, Lat.] The ſteepneſs or ſlope
of a line inclining to the horizon, reckoned upwards; as, the
aſcent of an hillis the acclivity, the deſcent is the declivity. Qainty:
The men, leaving their wives and younger children below,
do, not without ſome difficulty, clamber up the acclivitics, drag-
ging their kine with them, where they feed them, and milk
them, and make butter and cheeſe, and do all the dairy-work.
Ray on the Creation.
AccLI'vous. adj. [acclivus, Lat..] Riſing with a ſlope.
To Acclo'Y. v. a. [See CLOY.]
I. To fill up, in an ill ſenſe; to croud, to ſtuff full; a word al-
moſt obſolete.
At the well-head the pureſt ſtreams ariſe:
But mucky filth his branching arms annoys, -
And with uncomely weeds the gentle wave accleys. Fairy Q.
2. To fill to ſatiety; in which ſenſe clay is ſtill in uſe.
They that eſcape beſt in the tempºrate zone, would be ac-
cloyed with long nights, very tedious, no leſs than forty days.
Ray on the Creation.
To Acco'IL. v. n. [See CoIL.] To croud, to keep a coil about,
to buſtle, to be in a hurry ; a word now out of uſe.
About the cauldron many cooks accoil'd,
With hooks and ladles, as need did require;
The while the viands in the veſſel boil'd,
They did about their buſineſs ſweat, and forely toil’d. Fairy Q.
A'ccoLENT. n.ſ.. [accolens, Lat..] He that inhabits near a place;
a borderer. Dić?.
Acco'MMoDABLE. adj. [accommodabilis, Lat.] That which may
be fitted; with the particle to. -
As there is infinite variety in the circumſtances of perſons,
things, ačtions, times and places; ſo we muſt be furniſhed with
ſuch general rules as are accommodalle to all this variety, by it
wiſe judgment and diſcretion. J%atts's Lºgick.
To ACCOMMODATE. v. a. [accommodº, Lat.]
1. To ſupply with conveniencies of any kind.
Theſe three,
Three thouſand confident, in act as many;
För three performers are the file, when all
The reſt do nothing; with this word ſtand, ſtand,
Accommodated by the place, (more charming
With their own nebleneſs, which could have turn’d
A diſtaff to a lance) gilded pale looks. Shakeſp. Cyn'cline.
2. With the particle to, to adapt, to fit, to make conſiſtent with.
He had altered many things, not that they were not natural
before, but that he might accommodate himſelf to the age in which
he lived. Dryden on Dramatic Poetry.
'Twas his misfortune to light upon an hypothcſis, that could
not be accommodated to the nature of things, and human affairs;
his principles could not be made to agree with that conſtitutiori
and order which God had ſettled in the world. Locke.
Accom Mo'DATE. adj. [accommodatus, Lat..] Suitable, fit; uſed
ſometimes with the particle for, but more frequently with to.
They are ſo acted and direéted by nature, as to caſt their
eggs in ſuch places as are moſt accommodate fºr the excluſion of
their young, and where there is food ready for them ſo ſoon as
they be hatched. Ray on the Creation.
7, theſe caſes, we examine the why, the what, and the how,
of things, and propoſe means accommodate to the end. L'E/ºrange.
God did not primarily intend to appoint this way of worſhip,
and to impoſe it upon them as that which was moſt proper and
agreeable to him, but that he condeſcended to it as moſt accom-
modate to their preſent ſtate and inclination. Tillºtſ. Serm. v.
Acco'M MoDATELY. adv. [from accommodate.] Suitably, fitly.
Accom MoD A"tion. n. ſ. [from accommºdate.]
1. Proviſion of conveniencies.
2. In the plural, conveniencies, things requiſite to eaſe or refreſh-
IIlent.
The king's commiſſioners were to have ſuch accommodations,
as the other thought fit to leave to them; who had been very
civil to the king's commiſſioners. Clarºndon, b. viii.
3. Adaptation, fitneſs; with the particle to.
The organization of the body, with accommºdation to its func-
tions,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C C
tions, is fitted with the moſt curious mechaniſm. Hal's Origin.
4. Compoſition of a difference, reconciliation, adjuſtinent.
Acco'MPANABLE. adj. [from accompany..] Sociable; a word
now not uſed.
A ſhow, as it were, of an accompanable ſolitarineſs, and of
a civil wildneſs. Sidney, b, i.
Acco'MPANIER. m. ſ. [from accompany.] The perſon that makes
art of the company; companion. Lic?.
To ACCOMPANY. v. a. [accompagner, Fr.]
1. To be with another as a companion.
Go viſit her, in her chaſte bower of reſt,
Accompany'd with angel-like delights. Spenſer, Sonnet iii.
The great buſineſs of the ſenſes being to make us take no-
tice of what hurts or advantages the body, it is wiſely ordered
by nature, that pain ſhould accompany the reception of feveral
ideas. Locke.
2. To join with.
With regard to ſheep, as folly is uſually accompanied with
perverſencſs, ſo it is here. There is ſomething ſo monſtrous
to deal in a commodity, which we are not allowed to export;
there is, I ſay, ſomething ſo ſottiſh, that it wants a name, in
our language, to expreſs it by. Swift's ſhort View of Ireland.
Acco'MPLIcF. m. ſ. [complice, Fr. from complex, a word in the
barbarous Latin, much in uſe, Complices ſertae prudentius.]
1. An aſſociate, a partaker, uſually in an ill ſenſe.
There were ſeveral ſcandalous reports induſtriouſly ſpread by
Wood, and his accomplices, to diſcourage all oppoſition againſt
his infamous project. Swift.
2. A partner, or co-operator; in a ſenſe indifferent.
If a tongue would be talking without a mouth, what could
it have done, when it had all its organs of ſpeech, and accom-
pices of found, about it. Addison. Speciator, N° 247.
3. It is uſed with the particle to before a thing, and with before
a perſon.
Childleſs Arturius, vaſtly rich before,
Thus by his loſſes multiplies his ſtore,
Suſpected for accomplice to the fire,
That burnt his palace but to build it higher. Dryd. Juv. Sat.
Who, ſhould they ſteal, for want of his relief,
He judg’d himſelf accomplice with the thief. Dryden's Fabies.
To ACCOMPLISH. v. a. [accomplir, Fr. from compko,
Lat.
I. º to execute fully; as, to accompliſh a deſign.
He that is far off ſhall die of the peſtilence, and he that is
near ſhall fall by the ſword, and he that remaineth, and is be-
ſieged, ſhall die by the famine. Thus will I accompliſh my fury
upon them. Ezekiel, vi. 12.
2. To complete a period of time.
He would accompliſh ſeventy years in the deſolations of Je-
ruſalem. Daniel, ix. 2.
3. To fulfil; as, a prophecy.
The viſion,
Which I made known to Lucius ere the ſtroke
Of this yet ſcarce cold battle, at this inſtant
is full accompliſh'd. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
We ſee every day thoſe events exactly accompliſhed, which
our Saviour foretold at ſo great a diſtance.
- Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
4. To gain, to obtain.
Tell him from me (as he will win my love)
He bear himſelf with honourable ačtion;
Such as he hath obſerv’d in noble ladies
Unto their lords, by them accompliſhed. Shakespeare.Tam. of a Shrew.
I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap,
And deck my body in gay ornaments.
Oh miſerable thought, and more unlikely,
Than to accompliſh twenty golden crowns. Shakespeare. Henry V.
5. To adorn, or furniſh, either mind or body.
From the tents
The armourers accompliſhing the knights,
With buſy hammers cloſing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Acco'MPLISHED. participial adj.
1. Complete in ſome qualification. -
For who expects, that, under a tutor, a young gentleman
ſhould be an accompliſhed public orator or logician. Locke on Ed.
2. Elegant, finiſhed in reſpešt of embelliſhments ; uſed com-
monly with reſpect to acquired qualifications, without includ-
ing moral excellence.
The next I took to wife,
O that I never had | fond wiſh too late,
Was in the vale of Sorec, Dalila,
That ſpecious monſter, my accompliſh’d ſnare. Samſºn Agon.
Acco'MPLISHER. m. ſ. [from accompliſh.] The perſon that
accompliſhes. Dić?.
Acco'MPLISHMENT. n.ſ.. [accompliſment, Fr.]
1. Completion, full performance, perfeótion.
Thereby he might evade the accompliſhment of thoſe afflic-
tions, he now but gradually endureth. Brown's Puig. Errours.
This would be the accompliſhment of their common felicity,
in caſe, by their evil, either through deſtiny or advice, they
ſuffered not the occaſion to be loſt. Sir John Haywoºd.
He thought it impoſſible to find, in any one body, all thoſ.
perfections which he ſought for the accompliſhment of a Helena;
becauſe nature, in any individual perſon, makes nothing that
is perfect in all its parts. Dryden's Diſreſnºy, Prºf.
2. Completion ; as, of a prophecy.
The miraculous ſucceſs of the apoſtles preaching, and the
accompliſhment of many of their predićtions, which, to thoſe
early chriſtians, were matters of faith only, are, to us, matters
of fight and experience. Atterbury's Sermons.
3. Embelliſhment, elegance, ornament of mind or body.
Young heirs, and elder brothers, from their own refle&amp;ting
upon the eſtates they are born to, and therefore thinking aii
other accompliſhments unneceſſary, are of no manner of uſe but
to keep up their families. Addiſon. Speciator, Nº. 1 2 3.
4. The act of obtaining anything.
The means ſuggeſted by policy and worldly wiſdom, for
the attainment of thoſe earthly enjoyments, are unfit for that
purpoſe, not only upon the account of their inſufficiency for,
but alſo of their frequent oppoſition and contrariety to, the ac-
compliſhment of ſuch ends. South's Sermons.
Acco'MPT. n.ſ. [Fr. compter and compte, anciently accompler.
Skinner.] An account, a reckoning. See Account.
The ſoul may have time to call itſelf to a juſt accompt of
all things paſt, by means whereof repentance is perfected.
Hººker, b. v. § 46.
Each Chriſtmas they accompts did clear;
And wound their bottom round the year. Prio;'.
Acco'MPTANT. m. ſ. [accomptant, Fr.] A reckoner, computer.
See Account ANT.
As the accompt runs on, generally the accompant goes back-
ward. South's Serznows.
Acco'MPTING-DAY. The day on which the reckoning is to be
ſettled.
To whom thou much doſt owe, thou much muſt pay;
Think on the debt againſt th’ accompting-day. Sirj.D. ºam.
To ACCORD. v. a. [derived, by ſome, from card; the ſtring
of a muſical inſtrument, by others, from corda hearts, in the
firſt, implying harmony, in the other, unity.]
To make agree 3 to adjuſt one thing to another; with the
particle to.
The firſt ſports the ſhepherds ſhowed, were full of ſuch leaps
and gambols, as being accorded to the pipe which they bore in
their mouths, even as they danced, made a right picture of
their chief god Pan, and his companions the ſatyrs. Sidney, b. i.
Her hands accorded the lute's muſic to the voice; her pant-
ing heart danced to the muſic. Sidney, b. ii.
The lights and ſhades, whoſe well accorded ſtrife,
Gives all the ſtrength and colour of our life. Pope's Ep:/º.
To Accorp. v. n. To agree, to ſuit one with another; with
the particle with.
Things are often ſpoke, and ſeldom meant;
But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And to preſerve my ſovereign from his foe. Shaft. Hºn. VI.
Several of the main parts of Moſes's hiſtory, as concerning
the flood, and the firſt fathers of the ſeveral nations of the world.
do very well accord with the moſt ancient accounts of profane
hiſtory. Tillºtſºn, Sermºn i.
Acco'R.D. m. ſ. [accord, Fr.]
1. A compact; an agreement.
If both are ſatisfy'd with this accord,
Swear by the laws of knighthood on my ſword. Dryd. Fº.
2. Concurrence, union of mind.
At laſt ſuch grace I found, and means I wrought,
That I that lady to my ſpouſe had won,
Accord of friends, conſent of parents ſought,
Affiance made, my happineſs begun.
Spenſºr's Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. 4.
They gathered themſelves together, to fight with Joſhua and
Iſrael, with one accord. Jºſhua, ix. 2.
3. Harmony, ſymmetry, juſt correſpondence of one thing with
another. -
Beauty is nothing elſe but a juſt accord and mutual harmony
of the members, animated by a healthful conſtitution.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Prºf.
4. Muſical note.
Try if there were in one ſteeple two bells of uniſon, whe-
ther the ſtriking of the one would move the other, more than
if it were another accord. Bacon's Natural Hi/iory, N° 281.
We muſt not blame Apollo, but his lute,
If falſe accords from her falſe ſtrings be ſent, Sir jo. Davies.
5. Voluntary motion.
Ne Guyon yet ſpake word,
Till that they came unto an iron door,
Which to them open'd of its own accord. Fairy Q. b. ii. c. 7.
Will you blame any man for doing that of his own accora’,
which all men ſhould be compelled to do, that are not willing
of themſelves. - Hooker.
All animal ſubſtances, expoſed to the air, turn alkaline of
their own accord; and ſome vegetables, by heat, will not turn
acid, but alkaline, Arbuthno: on Aliments.
6. Aćtion
*-
* -
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C C
A C C
6. Aćtion in ſpeaking, correſpondent to the words,
Titus, I am come to talk with thee.—
—No, not a word: how can I grace my talk, -
wanting a hand to give it that accord ž Shakeſp. Titus Aid.
Acco'RDANCE. n.ſ.. [from accord.]
1. Agreement with a perſon; with the particle with.
And prays he may in long accordance bide,
With that great worth which hath ſuch wonders wrought.
Fairfax, b. ii. ſtanza 63.
2. Conformity to ſomething.
The only way of defining of ſin, is, by the contrariety to
the will of God; as of good, by the accordance with that will.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
Acco'RDANT. adj. [accordant, Fr.] Willing ; in a good hu-
In Our.
The prince diſcovered to Claudio, that he loved your niece
my daughter, and meant to acknowledge it this night in a
dance; and, if he found her accordant, he meant to take the
preſent time by the top, and inſtantly break with you of it.
Shakeſpeare's Much ado about Nothing.
Acco'RDING. prep. [from accord.]
1. In a manner ſuitable to, agreeably to, in proportion.
Our churches are places provided, that the people might
there aſſemble themſelves in due and decent manner, according
to their ſeveral degrees and orders. Hooker, b. v. § 13.
Our zeal, then, ſhould be according to knowledge. And what
kind of knowledge? Without all queſtion, firſt, according to
the true, ſaving, evangelical knowledge. It ſhould be accord-
ing to the goſpel, the whole goſpel: not only according to its
truths, but precepts: not only according to its free grace, but
neceſſary duties: not only accºrding to its myſteries, but alſo
its commandments. Sprat's Sermons.
How much more noble is the fame that is built on candour
and ingenuity, according to thoſe beautiful lines of Sir John
Denham, in his Poem on Fletcher's works. Addison Spect.
A man may, with prudence and a good conſcience, approve
of the profeſſed principles of one party more than the other,
accºrding as he thinks they beſt promote the good of church
and ſtate. Swift on the Sentinents of a Church of Engl, man.
2. With regard to.
God made all things in number, weight, and meaſure, and
gave them to be conſidered by us according to theſe properties,
which are inherent in created beings. Holder on Time.
Acco'RDINGLY. adv. [from accord..] Agreeably, ſuitably, con-
formably.
Sirah, thou’rt ſaid to have a ſtubborn ſoul,
That apprehends no further than this world;
And ſquar'ſt thy life accordingly. Shakespeare. Meaſure for Maſ.
As the aëtions of men are of fundry diſtinct kinds, ſo the
laws thereof muſt accordingly be diſtinguiſhed. Hooker, b. i.
Whoever is ſo aſſured of the authority and ſenſe of ſcrip-
ture, as to believe the doćtrine of it, and to live accordingly,
ſhall be ſaved. Tillotſºn's Preface.
Mealy ſubſtances, fermented, turn ſour. Accordingly, given
to a weak child, they ſtill retain their nature; for bread will
give them the cholic. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Tro ACCO'ST. v.a. [accoſter, Fr.] To ſpeak to firſt 5 to ad-
dreſs; to ſalute.
You miſtake, knight: accoſt her, front her, board her, woo
Her, aſſail her. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
At length, colle&amp;ing all his ſerpent wiles,
With ſoothing words renew'd, him thus accºſis. Parad. Reg.
I firſt accº/ed him: I ſu'd, I ſought,
And, with a loying force, to Pheneus brought. Dryd./Fneid.
Acco's TABLE. adj. [from acco/.] Eaſy of acceſs; familiar.
They were both indubitable, ſtrong, and high-minded men,
yet of ſweet and acrºſłable nature, almoſt equally delighting in
- the preſs and affluence of dependents and ſuitors. //otton.
\ A CCOUNT. n.ſ.. [from the old French accompt, from com-
fačius, Lat. originally written accompt, which ſee; but, by gra-
dually ſoftening the pronunciation, in time the orthography
changed to account.]
1. A computation of debts or expences; a regiſter of facts re-
lating to money.
At many times I brought in my accounts,
Laid them before you; you would throw them off,
And ſay you found them in mine honeſty. Shakeſp. Timon.
When my young maſter has once got the skill of keeping
accounts (which is a buſineſs of reaſon more than arithmetic)
perhaps it will not be amiſs, that his father from thenceforth
require him to do it in all his concernments. Locke on Education.
• The ſtate or reſult of a computation; as, the account ſtands
thus between us.
Behold this have I found, ſaith the Preacher, counting one
yone, to find out the account. Eccleſiaſticus, vii. 27.
3. Such a ſtate of perſons or things, as may make them more or
leſ, worthy of being conſidered in the reckoning. Value, or
eſtimation.
For the care that they took for their wives and their chil-
"ren, their brethren and kinsfolks, was in leaſt account with
*m; but the greateſt and principal fear was for the holy
temple. 2 Maccab. xv. 18,
i
That good affection, which things of ſmaller accºunt have
once ſet on work, is by ſo much the more eaſily raiſed higher.
Hooker, b. v. § 35.
I ſhould make more account of their judgment, who are men
offenſe, and yet have never touched a pencil, than of the opi-
nion given by the greateſt part of painters. Dryden's Dufreſh.
... We would eſtabliſh our ſouls in ſuch a ſolid and ſubſtantial
virtue, as will turn to account in that great day, when it muſt
ſtand the teſt of infinite wiſdom and juſtice. Addison Speci.Nº.393.
4. Diſtinction, dignity, rank.
There is ſuch a peculiarity in Homer's manner of apoſtro-
phizing Eumaeus, and ſpeaking of him in the ſecond perſon :
it is generally applied, by that poet, only to men of accºunt
and diſtinction. Pºpe's Odyſſey; *10 ſej.
5. A reckoning verified by finding the value of a thing equal to
what it was accounted. -
Conſidering the uſual motives of human actions, which are
pleaſure, profit, and ambition, I cannot yet comprehend how
thoſe perſons find their account in any of the three. -
Swift's Addreſs to Parliament.
6. A reckoning referred to, or ſum charged upon any particular
perſon; and thence, figuratively, regard, conſideration, ſake.
If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on
my account. Philémon, i. 8.
This muſt be always remembered, that nothing can come
into the account of recreation, that is not done with delight.
Locke on Education, $ 1 97.
In matters where his judgment led him to oppoſe men on a
public account, he would do it vigorouſly and heartily.
Atterbury's Sermons.
The aſſertion is our Saviour's, though uttered by him in the
perſon of Abraham, the father of the faithful; who, on the ac-
count of that character, is very fitly introduced. Idem.
Theſe tribunes, a year or two after their inſtitution, kindled.
great diffenſions between the nobles and the commons, on the
account of Coriolanus, a nobleman, whom the latter had im-
peached. Swift's Contºſ's in Athens and Rome.
Nothing can recommend itſelf to our love, on any other
account, but either as it promotes our preſent, or is a means
to aſſure to us a future happineſs. Rogers's Sermon v.
Sempronius gives no thanks on this account. Addison's Cato;
7. A narrative, relation; in this uſe it may ſeem to be derived
from conte, Fr. a tale, a narration.
8. The review or examination of an affair taken by authority;
as, the magiſtrate took an account of the tumult. -
Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain
king, which would take account of his ſervants; and when he
had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed
him ten thouſand talents. Aſatt. xix. 23, 24-
9. The relation and reaſons of a tranſaction given to a perſon in
authority.
Fie, my lord, fie a ſoldier, and afraid! What need we fear
who knows it, when none can call our power to account?
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The true ground of morality can only be the will and law
of a God, who ſees men in the dark, has in his hands rewards
and puniſhments, and power enough to call to accºunt the
proudeſt offender. Locke-
1c. Explanation; aſſignment of cauſes. * *
It is eaſy to give account, how it comes to paſs, that though
all men deſire happineſs, yet their wills carry them ſo contra-
rily. Lºcke.
It being, in our author's account, a right acquired by beget-
ting, to rule over thoſe he had begotten, it was not a power
poſſible to be inherited, becauſe the right, being conſequent to,
and built on, an act perfectly perſonal, made that power ſo too,
and impoſſible to be inherited. Locke.
11. An opinion concerning things previouſly eſtabliſhed.
Theſe were deſigned to join with the forces at ſea, there be-
ing prepared a number of flat-bottomed boats to tranſport the
land-forces, under the wing of the great navy: for they made
no account, but that the navy ſhould be abſolutely maſter of the
ſeas. Bacon's Conſiderations on J/ar with Spain.
A prodigal young fellow, that had ſold his clothes, upon the
fight of a ſwallow, made account that ſummer was at hand, and
away went his ſhirt too. L’E/irange, Fable cKxvii.
12. The reaſons of any thing colle&amp;ted.
Being convinced, upon all accounts, that they had the ſame
reaſon to believe the hiſtory of our Saviour, as that of any
other perſon to which they themſelves were not actually eye-
witneſſes, they were bound, by all the rules of hiſtorical faith,
and of right reaſon, to give credit to this hiſtory.
Addison on the Chriſtian Religion.
13. In law.
Account is, in the common law, taken for a writ or action
brought againſt a man, that, by means of office or buſineſs un-
dertaken, is to render an account unto another; as, a bailiff to-
ward his maſter, a guardian to his ward. Cºwell.
To Account. ... a. [See ACCOUNT.]
1. To eſteem, to think, to hold in opinion.
That alſo was accounted a land of giants. ID-2t.
2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C C
A C C
2. To reckon, to compute.
The calendar months are likewiſe arbitrarily and unequally
ſettled by the ſame power; by which months wº, to this day,
account, and they meaſure, and make up, that which we call the
Julian year. - Holder on Time.
..To give an account, to aſſign the cauſes; in which ſenſe it is
followed by the particle for. -
if any one ſhºuld aſk, why our general continued ſo eaſy to
the laſt? I know no other way to account fºr it, but by that
unmeaſurable love of wealth, which his beſt friends allow to
be his predominant paſſion. - Swift.
4. To make up the reckoning; to anſwer for pračtices.
Then thou ſhalt ſee him plung'd, when leaſt he fears, .
At once accounting fºr his deep arrears. Dryd. juv. Sat. xiii.
They have no uneaſy preſages of a future reckoning, wherein
the pleaſures they now taſte, muſt be accºunted fºr; and may,
perhaps, be outweighed by the pains, which ſhall then lay hold
of them. Atterbury's Sermons.
5. To appear as the medium by which any thing may be ex-
plained.
Such as have a faulty circulation through the lungs, ought to
eat very little at a time; becauſe the increaſe ºf the quantity
of freſh chyle, muſt make that circulation ſtill more uneaſy;
which, indeed, is the caſe of conſumptive and ſome aſthmatic
perſons, and accounts for the ſymptoms they are troubled with
after eating. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
6. To aſſign to, with the particle to. -
For ſome years, really accrued the yearly ſum of two hun-
dred thouſand pounds to the king's coffers; and it was, in
truth, the only project that was accounted to his own ſervice.
Clarendon.
7. To hold in eſteem.
Silver was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon. Chrºn.
Acco'UNTABLE. adj. [from account.] Of whom an account
may be required; who muſt anſwer for: followed by the par-
ticle to before the perſon, and for before the thing.
Accountable to none,
But to my conſcience and my God alone. Oldham.
Thinking themſelves excuſed from ſtanding upon their own
legs, or being accountable fºr their own conduct, they very ſel-
dom trouble themſelves with enquiries. Locke on Education.
The good magiſtrate will make no diſtinction; for the
judgment is God's ; and he will look upon himſelf as account-
able at his bar for the equity of it. Atterbury’s Sermons.
Accou'NtANT. adj. [from account.] Accountable to ; reſpon-
ſible for.
His offence is ſo, as it appears
Accountant to the law upon that pain. Shakeſp. Mºſſºr Meaſ,
I love her too,
Not out of abſolute luſt (though, peradventure,
I ſtand accountant for as great a ſin)
But partly led to diet my revenge. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Accou'NT ANT. m. ſ. [See Accom PTANT.] A computer; a
man ſkilled or employcd in accounts.
The different compute of divers ſtates; the ſhort and irre-
concileable years of ſome; the exceeding errour in the natural
frame of others; and the falſe deductions of ordinary accoun-
tants in moſt. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Acco'UNT-book. n.ſ. A book containing accounts.
I would endeavour to comfort myſelf upon the loſs of friends,
as I do upon the loſs of money; by turning to my account-
book, and ſeeing whether I have enough left for my ſupport.
Swift, Letter lxii.
Acco'UNTING. m. ſ. [from account..] The act of reckoning,
or making up of accounts.
This method faithfully obſerved, muſt keep a man from
breaking, or running behind hand in his ſpiritual eſtate;
which, without frequent accountings, he will hardly be able to
prevent. South's Sermons.
To Accorpi.e., v. a. [accoupler, Fr.] To join, to link together.
He ſent a ſolemn embaſſage to treat a peace and league with
the king; accoupling it with an article in the nature of a re-
queſt. Bacon's Henry VII.
To Acco'URAGE. v. a. [obſolete. See COURAGE.J. To
animate.
That forward pair ſhe ever would aſſuage,
When they would ſtrive due reaſon to exceed;
But that ſame froward twain would accourage,
And of her plenty add unto her need. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. ii.
To Acco'URT. v. a. [See To COURT.] To entertain with
courtſhip, or courteſy; a word now not in uſe.
Who all this while were at their wanton reſt,
A courting each her friend with laviſh feaſt. Fairy Q. b.ii. c.ii.
To ACCOUTRE. v. a. [accolitrer, Fr.] To dreſs, to equip.
Is it for this they ſtudy ? to grow pale,
And miſs the pleaſures of a glorious meal
For this, in rags accoutred are they ſeen,
And made the may-game of the public ſpleen Dryd. Perſus.
Acco'UTREMENT. n.ſ.. [accoutrement, Fr.] Dreſs, equipage,
furniture relating to the perſon; trappings, ornaments.
I profeſs requital to a hair's breadth; not only in the ſimple
office of love, but in all the accoutrement, complement, and
ceremony of it. Shakeſpeare's Merry Hººves of I/indſºr.
º
I have ſeen the pope officiate at St. Peter's, where, for two
hours together, he was buſied in putting on or off his diffeicnt
accoutrements, according to the different parts he was to act in
them. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 2 c 1.
How gay with all th’ accoutrements of war,
The Britons come, with gold well-fraught they come. Phil.
Chriſtianity is loſt among them, in the trappings and accou-
trements of it; with which, inſtead of adorning religion, they
have ſtrangely diſguiſed it, and quite ſtified it in the croud ºf
external rites and ceremonies. 7illotſºn, Sermon xxviii.
ACCRETION. m. ſ. [accretic, Lat.] The act of growing to
another, ſo as to encreaſe it.
Plants do nouriſh; inanimate bodies do not: they have an
accretion, but no alimentation. Bacon's Nat. Hiſſ. Nº 6oz.
The changes ſeem to be effected by the exhaling of the
moiſture, which may leave the tinging corpuſcles more denſe,
and ſomething augmented by the accretion of the oily and
earthy parts of that moiſture. Newton's Optics.
Infants ſupport abſtinence worſt, from the quantity of ali-
ment conſumed in accretion. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
AccRE'rly E. adi, [from accretion.] Growing; that which by
growth is added.
If the motion be very flow, we perceive it not : we have no
ſenſe of the accretive motion of plants and animals: and the
fly ſhadow ſteals away upon the dial; and the quickeſt eye
can diſcover no more but that it is gone. Glanv. Scepſis Scient.
To ACCRO'ACH. v. a. [accrocher, Fr.] To draw to one as
with a hook; to gripe, to draw away by degrees what is an-
other's.
AccRo'AcHMENT. n. ſ. [from accroach..] The act of accroach-
ing. Dić.
To ACCRUE. v. n. [from the participle accr., formed from
accroitre, Fr.]
I. To accede to, to be added to ; as, a natural production or ef-
fect, without any particular reſpect to good or ill.
The Son of God, by his incarnation, hath changed the
manner of that perſonal ſubſiſtence; no alteration thereby ac-
cruing to the nature of God. Hazker, b. v. § 54.
2. To be added, as an advantage or improvement, in a ſenſe
inclining to good rather than ill; in which meaning it is more
frequently uſed by later authors.
From which compact there ariſing an obligation upon every
one, ſo to convey his meaning, there accrues alſo a right to
every one, by the ſame ſigns, to judge of the ſenſe or meaning
of the perſon ſo obliged to expreſs himſelf. South's Sermox.
Let the evidence of ſuch a particular miracle be never ſo
bright and clear, yet it is ſtill but particular; and muſt there-
fore want that kind of force, that degree of influence, which
accrues to a ſtanding general proof, from its having been tried
or approved, and conſented to, by men of all ranks and capa-
cities, of all tempers and intereſts, of all ages and nations.
Atterbury's Sermons.
3. To append to, or ariſe from ; as, an ill conſequence; this
ſenſe ſeems to be leſs proper.
His ſcholar Ariſtotle, as in many other particulars, ſo like-
wiſe in this, did juſtly oppoſe him, and became one of the au-
thors; chooſing a certain benefit, before the hazard that might
accrue from the diſreſpects of ignorant perſons. Iſilk. Math.M.g.
4. In a commercial ſenſe, to be produced, or ariſe; as, profits.
The yearly benefit, that, out of thoſe his works, accructh to
her majeſty, amounteth to one thouſand pounds. Carew's Surv.
The great profits which have accrued to the duke of Flo-
rence from his free port, have ſet ſeveral of the ſtates of Ital
on the ſame ſubject. Addiſon on Italy.
5. Sometimes to follow, as loſs; but leſs properly.
The benefit or loſs of ſuch a trade accruing to the govern-
ment, until it comes to take root in the nation. Temple's Miſ.
AccuBA'TION. m. ſ. [from accubo, to lye down to, Lat.] The
antient poſture of leaning at meals.
It will appear, that accubation, or lying down at meals, was
a geſture uſed by very many nations. Brown's Wulgar Err. b. v.
To Accu'MB. v. a. [accumbo, Lat..] To lie at the table, accord-
ing to the ancient manner. Dićf.
To ACCUMULATE. v. a. [from accumulo, Lat.] To heap
one thing upon another; to pile up, to heap together. It is
uſed either literally, as, to accumulate money, or, figuratively,
as, to accumulate merit or wickedneſs.
If thou doſt ſlander her, and torture me,
Never pray more; abandon all remorſe;
On horrors head horrors accumulate;
For nothing can'ſt thou to damnation Addison Shakespeare. Othel.
Cruſht by imaginary treaſon's weight,
Which too much merit did accumulate.
Accumul A'TION. n. ſ. [from accumulate.]
1. The act of accumulating.
Some, perhaps, might otherwiſe wonder at ſuch an accum:-
lation of benefits, like a kind of embroidering, or liſting of one
favour upon another. //otton.
One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which he atchiev'd by th’ minute, loſt his favour.
Shakeſpeare's Antony and Cleopatra.
2. The
Sir John Denham.
*
.
s
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C E
# The ſtate of being accumulated.
By the regular returns of it in ſome people, and their free-
dom from it after the morbid matter is exhauſted, it looks as
there were regular accumulations and gatherings of it, as of other
humours in the body, growing perhaps on ſome people as
COrms. Arbuthnot on Diet.
Accu'MULATIve. adj. [from accumulate.]
1. That which accumulates.
2. That which is accumulated.
If the injury meet not with meekneſs, it then acquires àn-
other accumulative guilt, and ſtands anſwerable not only for its
own poſitive ill, but for all the accidental, which it cauſes in
the ſufferer. Government of the Tongue, $4.
Accumula"roR. m. ſ. [from accumulate.] He that accumulates;
a gatherer or heaper together.
Injuries may fall upon the paſſive man, yet there would be
no broils and quarrels, the great accumulators and multipliers of
injuries; which demonſtrates how unjuſtly meekneſs is charged
with ſo much as accidental production of them. Decay of Piety.
AccuRAcy. n.f. [accuratio, Lat.] Exactneſs, nicety.
The man who hath the ſtupid ignorance, or hardened ef-
frontery to inſult the revealed will of God; or the petulant
conceit to turn it into ridicule; or the arrogance to make his
own perfections the meaſure of the Divinity; or, at beſt, that
can collate a text, or quote an authority, with an inſipid accu-
ray; or demonſtrate a plain propoſition, in all the formality
of A's and B's ; theſe now are the only men worth mention-
ing. Delany.
We confider the uniformity of the whole deſign, accu-
ray of the calculations, and ſkill in reſtoring and comparing
aſſages of ancient authors. Arbuthnot on Coins, Prof.
ACCURATE. adj. [accuratus, Lat.]
1. Exact, as oppoſed to negligence or ignorance, applied to per-
ſons.
2. Exact, without defečt or failure, applied to things.
No man living has made more accurate trials than Reaumure,
that brighteſt ornament of France. º Elements of Nat.Phil.
AccuRATELY. adv. [from accurate.] In an accurate manner;
exačtly, without errour, nicely.
The fine of incidence is either accurately, or very nearly, in
a given ratio to the fine of refraction. Newt. Opt. ax. v.
That all theſe diſtances, motions, and quantities of matter,
ſhould be ſo accurately and harmoniouſly adjuſted in this great
variety of our ſyſtem, is above the fortuitous hits of blind ma-
terial cauſes, and muſt certainly flow from that eternal fountain
of wiſdom. Bentley's Sermons.
AccuRATEs Ess. n.ſ.. [from accurate.]. Exaétneſs, nicety.
But ſometime after, ſuſpecting that in making this obſerva-
tion I had not determined the diameter of the ſphere with ſuf-
ficient accurateneſs, I repeated the experiment. Newton's Opt.
To Accu'Rs E. v. a. [See CURSE.] To doom to miſery; to in-
voke miſery upon any one.
As if it were an unlucky comet, or as if God had ſo ac-
curſed it, that it ſhould never ſhine to give light in things con-
cerning our duty any way towards him. Hooker, b. iii. §4.
Accu'RSED. part. adj. -
1. That which is curſed or doomed to miſery. -
'Tis the moſt certain ſign the world's accurſ?,
That the beſt things corrupted are and worſt. Denh. Poems.
2. That which deſerves the curſe; execrable; hateful; deteſ-
table; and, by conſequence, wicked; malignant.
Some holy angel
IFly to the court of England, and unfold
His meſſage ere he come; that a ſwift bleſfing
IMay ſoon return to this our ſuffering country,
TUnder a hand accurs'd / Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The chief part of the miſery of wicked men, and thoſe ac-
&lt;zrºyed ſpirits, the devils, is this, that they are of a diſpoſition
contrary to God. Tillotſon, Sermon iv.
They, like the ſeed from which they ſprung, accurſ?,
Againſt the gods immortal hatred nurſt. Dryden's Ovid.
Accu'sable. adj. [from the verb accuſe.] That which may be
Cenſured; blamable; culpable.
There would be a manifeſt defe&amp;t, and her improviſion juſtly
*czºſable; if animals, ſo ſubječt unto diſeaſes from bilious
cauſes, ſhould want a proper conveyance for choler.
- Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Acºus Arios. m. ſ. [from accuſe.]
* The act of accuſing.
Thus they in mutual accuſation ſpent
The fruitleſs hours, but neither ſelf-condemning,
And of their vain conteſt appear'd no end. Milt. Par. Loft.
e charge brought againſt any one by the accuſer.
You read
Theſe accuſations, and theſe grievous crimes
mmitted by your perſon, and your followers.
- Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
s_All accuſation, in the very nature of the thing, ſtill ſuppoſ.
**ś, and being founded upon ſome law : for where there is no
*W, there can be no tranſgreſſion; and where there can be no
ºfeſſion, I am ſure there ought to be no accuſation, South.
OL. I.
3. In the ſenſe of the courts — -
. A declaration of ſome crime preferred before a competcht
judge, by the intervention of an inſcription lawfully made, in
order to inflićt ſome judgment on the guilty perſon. Ayl. Parer.
Accu's ATIVE. m. adj. [accuſativus, Lat..] A term of grammar,
ſignifying the relation of the noun, on which the aëtion im-
plied in the verb terminates. ,
Accu's AtoRY. adj. [from accuſ...] That which produceth or
containeth an accuſation. -
In a charge of adultery, the accuſer ought to ſet forth, in
the accuſatory libel, ſome certain and definite time. Ayl. Parerg.
To ACCU'SE. v. a. [accuſo, Lat.]
1. To charge with a crime. It requires the particle of before the
ſubjećt of accuſation.
He ſtripp'd the bears-foot of its leafy growth; .
And, calling weſtern winds, accus’d the ſpring of ſloth. . .
. . . . Dryden's Wirgil, Georg. iv. l. 205.
The profeſſors are accuſed of all the ili practices which may
ſeem to be the ill conſequences of their principles. Addison on Italy.
2. It ſometimes admits the particle for: -
Never ſend up a leg of a fowl at ſupper, while there is a cat
or dog in the houſe, that can be accuſed for running away with
it: But, if there happen to be neither, you muſt lay it upon
the rats, or a ſtrange greyhound. Swift's Directions tº the Cook.
3. To blame or cenſure, in oppoſition to applauſe or juſtifica-
tion. -
Their conſcience bearing witneſs, and their thoughts the
mean while accuſing or elſe excuſing one another. Rom. ii. 15.
Your valour would your ſloth too much accuſe,
And therefore, like themſelves, they princes chooſe.
Dryden's Tyrannick Love.
Accu's ER. m. ſ. [from accuſe.] He that brings a charge againſt
another.
There are ſome perſons forbidden to be accuſers; on the
ſcore of their ſex, as women; others, of their age, as pupils
and infants; others, upon the account of ſome crimes com-
mitted by them; and others, on the ſcore of ſome filthy lucre
to propoſe to gain thereby; others, on the ſcore of their con-
ditions, as libertines againſt their patrons; and others, through
a ſuſpicion of calumny, as having once already given falſe evi-
dence; and, laſtly, others on account of their poverty, as not
being worth more than fifty aurei. Ayliffe's Parergon.
—That good man, who drank the pois'nous draught,
With mind ſerene, and could not wiſh to ſee
His vile accuſer drink as deep as he. Dryd, juv. Sat. xiii.
If the perſon accuſed maketh his innocence plainly to ap-
pear upon his trial, the accuſer is immediately put to an igno-
minious death; and, out of his goods and lands, the innocent
perſon is quadruply recompenſed. - Gulliver’s Travels.
To ACCU'STOM. v. a. [accoſtumer, Fr.] To habituate, to
enure, with the particle to. It is uſed chiefly of perſons.
How ſhall we breathe in other air
Leſs pure, accuſtom'd to immortal fruits 2 Par. Loft, b. xi.
It has been ſome advantage to accuſtom one's ſelf to books of
the ſame edition. Watts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i. c. 17.
Accu's to MABLE. adj. [from accuſtom J. Of long cuſtom or
habit; habitual, cuſtomary.
Animals even of the ſame original, extraction; and ſpecies,
may be diverſified by accuſtomable reſidence in one climate,
from what they are in another. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Accu's ToMABLY. adv. According to cuſtom.
Touching the king's fines accuſtomably paid for the purchaſ-
ing of writs original, I find no certain beginning of them, and
do therefore think that they alſo grew up with the chancery.
Bacon's Alienation.
Accu's toMANce. n.ſ.. [accoſtumance, Fr.] Cuſtom, habit, uſe.
Through accuſtomance and negligence, and perhaps ſome
other cauſes, we neither feel it in our own bodies, nor take no-
tice of it in others. Boyle's Works.
Accu's ToMARILY. adv. In a cuſtomary manner; according
to common or cuſtomary practice.
Accu's roMARY. adj. [from accuſtom.] Uſual, pračtiſed; ac-
cording to cuſtom.
Accu's ToMED. [from accuſtom.] According to cuſtom; fre-
quent; uſual.
Look how ſhe rubs her hands. It is an accuſtomed ačtion
with her, to ſeem thus waſhing her hands: I have known her
continue in this a quarter of an hour. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
A'ce. m. ſ. [As not only ſignified a piece of money, but any in-
teger, from whence is derived the word ace, or unit. Thus
As ſignified the whole inheritance. Arbuthnot on Coins.]
1. An unit; a ſingle point on cards or dice.
When lots are ſhuffled together in a lap, urn, or pitcher; or
if a man blindfold caſts a die, what reaſon in the world can he
have to preſume, that he ſhall draw a white ſtone rather than
a black, or throw an ace rather than a fife. South Sermons.
2. A ſmall quantity. -
He will not bate an ace of abſolute certainty; but however
doubtful or improbable the thing is, coming from him it muſt
go for an indiſputable truth. Gºvernment ºf the Tºngue, § 1.
G 2. A
-
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C I
A C C
I'll not wag an ace farther: the whole world ſhall not
bribe me to it. Dryden’s Spaniſh Friar.
Ace'PH Alous. n.a. [3ritaxº, Gr.] Without a head. Die?.
Ace'R B. adj. [acerbus, Lat..] Acid, with an addition of rough-
neſs, as moſt fruits are before they are ripe. &amp;Minºy.
Ace'RBIT Y. n.ſ.. [acerbitas, Lat.]
1. A rough ſower taſte. -
2. Applied to men, ſharpneſs of temper; ſeverity.
True it is, that the talents for criticiſm, namely, ſmartneſs,
quick cenſure, vivacity of remark, indeed all but accrbity, ſeem
rather the gifts of youth than of old age. Pope's Intr to Dun.
To ACERVATE. v. a. [acervo, Lat..] To heap up. Dict.
AcER v A'tion. n.ſ.. [from acervate.] The act of heaping to-
gether.
AcE'Rvose, adj. Full of heaps. Dić7.
Ace'scENT. adj. [acºſcens, Lat..] That which has a tendency to
ſourneſs or acidity.
The ſame perſons, perhaps, had enjoyed their health as well
with a mixture of animal diet, qualified with a ſufficient quan-
tity of acºſcents; as, bread, vinegar, and fermented liquors.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
AcEto's E. adi. That which has in it acids or vinegar.
ſ - &gt;
Dić7.
Aceto'sity. n.ſ.. [from acetoſe.] The ſtate of being acetoſe, or
of containing vinegar. IDict.
Ace"rous. adj. [from acetum, vinegar, Lat.] Having the qua-
lity of vinegar, ſour. -
Raiſins, which conſiſt chiefly of the juice of grapes, inſpiſ-
ſated in the skins or husks by the avolation of the ſuperfluous
moiſture through their pores, being diſtilled in a retort, did not
afford any vinous, but rather an acetous ſpirit. Boyle of Spirits.
AcHE. m. ſ. [ace, Sax. 3x3-, Gr, now generally written ake, and
in the plural akes, of one ſyllable; the primitive manner being
preſerved chiefly in poetry, for the ſake of the meaſure.]
A continued pain. See Ake.
- I'll rack thee with old cramps;
Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar,
That beaſts ſhall tremble at thy din. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?.
A coming ſhow'r your ſhooting corns preſage,
Oldaches throb, your hollow tooth will urge. Swift's Miſº.
To AcHE. v. n. [See AcHE.]. To be in pain.
Upon this account, our ſenſes are dulled and ſpent by any
extraordinary intention, and our very eyes will ache, if long
fixed upon any difficultly diſcerned obječt. Glanv. Scepſis, c. xiv.
To ACHIEVE. v. a. [achever, Fr. to complete.]
1. To perform, to finiſh a deſign proſperouſly.
Our toils, my friends, are crown'd with ſure ſucceſs:
The greater part perform’d, achieve the leſs. Dryd. Aneid.
2. To gain, to obtain.
.xperience is by induſtry achiev'd,
And perfected by the ſwift courſe of time.
Shakeſpeare's Two Gentlemen of Perona.
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I periſh, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modeſt girl.
Shakeſpeare's Taming the Shrew.
Thou haſt achiev'd our liberty, confin'd
Within hell-gates till now. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ii. 1.368.
Show all the ſpoils by valiant kings achiev'd,
And groaning nations by their arms reliev'd. Prior.
An AcH1'Ew ER. m.ſ. He that performs; he that obtains what
he endeavours after.
A vićtory is twice itſelf, when the achiever brings home full -
numbers. Shakeſpeare's Much ado about Nothing.
An AcH1'ev EMENT. n.ſ.. [achevement, Fr.]
1. The performance of an action.
From every coaſt that heaven walks about,
Have thither come the noble martial crew,
That famous hard achievements ſtill purſue. Fairy Queen, b. i.
2. The eſcutcheon, or enſigns armorial, granted to any man for
the performance of great ačtions.
Then ſhall the war, and ſtern debate, and ſtrife
Immortal, be the bus'neſs of my life;
And in thy fane, the duſty ſpoils among,
High on the burniſh'd roof, my banner ſhall be hung;
Rank'd with my champions bucklers, and below
With arms revers'd, th’ achievements of the foe. Dryd. Fab.
A hievement, in the firſt ſenſe, is derived from achive, as it ſigni-
fies to perform; in the ſecond, from achieve, as it imports to
gain.
4CHOR. m.ſ.. [achor, Lat. 3x3, Gr, furfur.]
A ſpecies of the herpes; it appears with a cruſty ſcab, which
cauſes an itching on the ſurface of the head, occaſioned by a ſalt
ſharp ſerum oozing through the skin. &amp;uincy.
ACID. adj. [acidus, Lat. acide, Fr.] Sour, ſharp.
Wild trees laſt longer than garden trees; and in the ſame
kind, thoſe whoſe fruit is acid, more than thoſe whoſe fruit is
ſweet. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 585.
Acid, or ſour, proceeds from a ſalt of the ſame nature, with-
out mixture of oil; in auſtere taſtes the oily parts have not diſ-
entangled themſelves from the ſalts and earthy parts; ſuch is
the taſte of unripe fruits. Arbuthnot on aliments.
Liquors and ſubſtances are called acids, which being com-
-&gt;
poſed of pointed particles, affect the taſte in a ſharp and pierc-
ing manner. The common way of trying, whether any parti-
cular liquor hath in it any particles of this kind, is by mixing it
with ſyrup of violets, which it will turn of a red colour; but
if it contains alkaline or lixivial particles, it changes that ſyrup
green. &amp;uin y.
Acipity. m.ſ.. [from acid.] The quality of being acid; an
acid taſte; ſharpneſs; ſourneſs.
Fiſhes, by the help of a diſſolvent liquor, corrode and reduce
their meats, skin, bones, and all, into a chylus or cremor; and
yet this liquor manifeſts nothing of acidity to the taſte.
Ray on the Creation.
When the taſte of the mouth is bitter, it is a fign of a redun-
dance of a bilious alkali, and demands a quite different diet from
the caſe of acidity or ſourneſs. Arbuthnot on Alinents.
Acids Ess. n.ſ.. [from acid.) The quality of being acid; aci.
dity. See Acidity.
AC/DULAE. m. ſ. [that is, aqua acidulae.]
Medicinal ſprings impregnated with ſharp particles, as all
the nitrous, chalybeate, and alum-ſprings are. &amp;incy.
The aidulae, or medical ſpring, emit a greater quantity of
their minerals than uſual; and even the ordinary ſprings, which
were before clear, freſh and limpid, become thick and turbid,
and are impregnated with ſulphur and other minerals, as long as
the earthquake laſts. {}ººdward's Natural Hiſtory, p. 4.
To AcidulATE. v. a. [aciduler, Fr.] To impregnate or tinge
with acids in a ſlight degree.
The muriatic ſcurvy is evidently a diet of freſh unſalted
things, watery liquors aidulated, farinaceous emojient ſub-
ſtances, four milk, butter, and acid fruits. Arbuthnot on Aſia.
To ACKNOWLEDGE. v. a. [a word formed, as it ſeeins, -
between the Latin and Engliſh, from agnoſe, and Ánowledge,
which is deduced from the Saxon, cnapan, to know.]
I. To own the knowledge of; to own anything or perſon in a
particular character.
My people do already know my mind,
And will a.knowledge you and Jeffica,
In place of lord Ballanio and myſelf. Shakespeare. Mr. of J’ºn.
None that acknowledge God, or providence,
Their ſouls eternity did ever doubt. Sir John Davies.
2. To confeſs; as, a fault.
For I acknowledge my tranſgreſſions; and my fin is ever be-
fore me. P/alm li. 3.
3. To own; as, a benefit; ſometimes with the particle to before
the perſon conferring the benefit.
His ſpirit
Taught them; but they his gifts acknowledg’d not. Par Z2/2.
In the firſt place, therefore, I thankfully acknowledge to the
Almighty power the aſſiſtance he has given me in the beginning,
and the proſecution of my preſent ſtudies. Dryden's Aneis.
AcKNow LEDGING. adj. [from acknowledge.] Grateful; ready
to acknowledge benefits received.
He has ſhewn his hero acknowledging and ungrateful, com-
paſſionate and hard-hearted; but, at the bottom, fickle and
ſelf-intereſted. Dryden’s /irgil, Dedicatiºn.
AcKNow LEDGMENT. m. ſ. [from acknowledge.] -
I. Conceſſion of any character in another; as, exiſtence, ſupe-
riority.
The due contemplation of the human nature doth, by a ne-
ceſſary connexion and chain of cauſes, carry us up to the un-
avoidable acknowledgment of the Deity; becauſe it carries every
thinking man to an original of every ſucceſſive individual.
Hale's Origin of Aſamkind.
2. Conceſſion of the truth of any poſition.
Immediately upon the a knowledgment of the chriſtian faith,
the eunuch was baptized by Philip. Hooker, b. iii. § 1.
3. Confeſſion of a fault.
4. Confeſſion of a benefit received; gratitude.
5. Act of atteſtation to any conceſſion; ſuch as homage.
There be many wide countries in Ireland, in which the laws
of England were never eſtabliſhed, nor any acknowledgment of
ſubjection made. Speºſer's State of Ireland.
The ſecond is an acknowledgment to his majeſty for the leave ,
of fiſhing upon his coaſts; and though this may not be grounded
upon any treaty, yet, if it appear to be an ancient right On our
ſide, and cuſtom on theirs, not determined or extinguiſhed by
any treaty between us, it may with juſtice be inſiſted on.
Temple's 44/ºellanies.
ACME. n.ſ. [3xan, Gr.]
The height of any thing; more eſpecially uſed to denote the
height of a diſtemper, which is divided into four periods. , .
The arche, the beginning or firſt attack. 2. Anabaſis, the
growth. 3. A me, the height. And, 4. Paracme, which is
the declenſion of the diſtemper. ſtincy.
Aco'lot Hist. m. ſ. [zzoxesia, Gr.] One of the loweſt ordà.
in the Romiſh church, whoſe office is to prepare the elements
for the offices, to light the church, &amp;c.
In the Romiſh communion it is duty, according to the papal
law, when the biſhop ſings maſs, to order all the inferior cier,
to appear in their proper habits; and to ſee that all the offic s
of the church be rightly performed; to ordain the arolzth:/?, to
keep the ſacred veſſels, &amp;c. Ayº's Parergon.
I Accº-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C Q
Acolyte. n.ſ. The ſame with Acolothrsr. -
Aconite. n.J. [aconitum, Lat.] Properly the herb wolf-bane,
but commonly uſed in poetical language for poiſon in general.
Our land is from the rage of tygers freed,
Nor nouriſhes the lion's angry ſeed;
Nor pois'nous aconite is here produc’d,
Or grows unknown, or is, when known, refus'd. Dryd. Wirg.
Deſpair, that aconite does prove,
And certain death to others, love,
That poiſon never yet withſtood,
Does nouriſh mine, and turns to blood. Granville's Poems.
A'coRN. m. ſ. [AEcenn, Sax. from ac, an oak, and corn, corn or
grain; that is, the grain of the oak..]
The ſeed or fruit born by the oak.
What roots old-age contračteth into errours, and how ſuch
as are but acorns in our younger brows, grow oaks in our older
heads, and become inflexible. Brown's Prºf. to Wulgar Errours.
Content with food which nature freely bred,
On wildings and on ſtrawberrics they fed;
Cornels and bramble-berries gave the reſt,
And falling acorns furniſh'd out a feaſt. Dryden's Ovid.
He that is nouriſhed by the acorns he picked up under an
oak, or the apples he gathered from the trees in the wood, has
certainly appropriated them to himſelf. Locke.
Aco'usticks. n.ſ. ['Axerx2, of &amp;zga, Gr. to hear.)
1. The doćtrine or theory of founds.
2. Medicines to help the hearing. - 9;incy.
To ACQUAINT. v. a. [accointer, Fr.]
1. To make familiar with ; applied either to perſons or things.
We that acquaint ourſelves with ev'ry zone,
And paſs the tropicks, and behold each pole ;
When we come home, are to ourſelves unknown,
And unacquainted ſtill with our own ſoul. Sirj. Davies.
There with thee, new welcome ſaint,
Like fortunes may her ſoul acquaint ;
With thee there clad in radiant ſheen. Mil. on March. Win.
Before a man can ſpeak on any ſubječt, it is neceſſary to be
acquainted with it. Locke on Education, $171.
Acquaint yourſelves with things ancient and modern, natu-
ral, civil, and religious, domeſtic and national; things of your
own and foreign countries; and, above all, be well acquainted
with God and yourſelves; learn animal nature, and the work-
ings of your own ſpirits. JWatts's Lagick.
. To inform.
But for ſome other reaſons, my grave Sir,
Which is not fit you know, I not acquaint
My father of this buſineſs. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
I have lately received a letter from a friend in the country,
wherein he acquaints me, that two or three men of the town
are got among them, and have brought down particular words
and phraſes, which were never before in thoſe parts. Tatler.
Acqu A'INT ANce. n.ſ.. [accointance, Fr.]
1. The ſtate of being acquainted with ; familiarity, knowledge.
It is applied as well to perſons as things, with the particle
2
with.
Nor was his acquaintance leſs with the famous poets of his
age, than with the noblemen and ladies. Dryd.
Our admiration of a famous man leſſens upon our nearer
acquaintance with him; and we ſeldom hear of a celebrated
perſon, without a catalogue of ſome notorious weakneſſes and
infirmities. Addison Speciator, N° 256.
Would we be admitted into an acquaintance with God: let
us ſtudy to reſemble him. We muſt be partakers of a divine
inature, in order to partake of this high privilege and alliance.
Atterbury's Sermons.
2- Familiar knowledge, ſimply without a prepoſition.
Brave ſoldier, pardon me,
That any accent breaking from my tongue, ,
1. Should 'ſcape the true acquaintance of mine ear.ShakespeareK.john.
1. This keeps the underſtanding long in converſe with an ob-
- jećt, and long converſe brings acquaintance. South's Sermons.
\ In what manner he lived with thoſe who were of his neigh-
bourhood and acquaintance, how obliging his carriage was to
them, what kind offices he did, and was always ready to do
them, I forbear particularly to ſay. Atterbury's Sermons.
3- A ſlight or initial knowledge, ſhort of friendſhip, as applied to
perſons.
I hope I am pretty near ſeeing you, and therefore I would
cultivate an a quaintance; becauſe if you do not know me
when we meet, you need only keep one of my letters, and
compare it with my face ; for my face and letters are counter-
parts of my heart. Swift to Pope, Letter xii.
A long noviciate of acquaintance ſhould precede the vows of
friendſhip. Bolingbroke.
4. The perſon with whom we are acquainted; him of whom we
have ſome knowledge, without the intimacy of friendſhip.
. In this ſenſe, the plural is, in ſome authors, acquaintance,
in others acquaintances.
But ſhe, all vow’d unto the red-croſs knight,
His wand'ring peril cloſely did lament,
Ne in this new acquaintance could delight,
But her dear heart with anguiſh did torment. F. &amp;cen, b, i.
-
That young men travel under ſome tutor, I allow well, ſo
that he be ſuch a one that may be able to tell them, what a-
quaintances they are to ſeek, what exerciſes or diſcipline the
place yieldeth. Bacon, Effy xix.
. This, my lord, has juſtly acquired you as many friends, as
there are perſons who have the honour to be known to you ;
meer acquaintance you have none, you have drawn them all in-
to a nearer line; and they who have converſed with you, are
for ever after inviolably yours. Dryd, juvenal, Dediat.
We ſee he is aſhamed of his neareſt acquaintanes.
Boyle againſt Bently,
Acqua'i NTED, [from acquaint.] Familiar, well known; not
Il CW. * -
Now call we our high court of parliament;
That war or peace, or both at once, may be -
As things a quainted and familiar to us. Shakeſp, Henry IV.
Acq9'Est, n.f. [a quºft, Fr. from acquerir, written by ſome
acquiſt, with a view to the word acquire, or acquiſta.]
Attachment, acquiſition; the thing gained. -
New acqueſts are more burden than ſtrength. Bac. Hºn. VII.
Mud, repoſed near the oſtia of thoſe rivers, makes continual
additions to the land, thereby excluding the ſea, and preſerving
theſe ſhells as trophics and ſigns of its new acqugſ, and en-
croachments. Hººdward's Nat. Hi/. p. i.
To ACQUIESCE. v. m. [acquiſer, Fr. acquiſere, Lat.] To
reſt in, or remain ſatisfied with, without oppoſition or diſcon-
tent. - * *
Neither a bare approbation of, nor a mere wiſhing, nor un-
aćtive complacency in ; nor, laſtly, a natural inclination to
things virtuous and good, can paſs before God for a man's
willing of ſuch things; and, conſequently, if men, upon this
account, will needs take up and acquieſce in an airy ungrounded
perſuaſion, that they will thoſe things which really they not
will, they fall thereby into a groſs and fatal deluſion. South.
. He hath employed his tranſcendent wiſdom and power, that
by theſe he might make way for his benignity, as the end
wherein they ultimately acquiſe. Grew's Cºſmolºg. Sa... b. i.
Acquie'scence. m. ſ. [from acquiſe ] -
1. A filent appearance of content, diſtinguiſhed on one ſide from
avowed conſent, on the other from oppoſition.
Neither from any of the nobility, nor of the clergy, who
were thought moſt averſe from it, there appeared any ſign of
contradićtion to that; but an entire acquieſence in all the bi-
ſhops thought fit to do. Clarendon.
2. Satisfaction, reſt, content. - - - - -
Many indeed have given over their purſuits after fame, either
from diſappointment, or from experience of the little pleaſure
which attends it, or the better informations or natural coldneſs
of old-age ; but ſeldom from a full ſatisfaction and acquiſence
in their preſent enjºyments of it. Addison Speciator, N° 256.
3. Submiſſion.
The greateſt part of the world take up their perſuaſions
concerning good and evil, by an implicit faith, and a full ac-
quiſence in the word of thoſe, who ſhall repreſent things to
them under theſe charaćters. South's Sermons.
Acqui'RABLE. adj. [from acquire.] That which may be ac-
quired or obtained; attainable. -
Thoſe rational inſtinčts, the connate principles engraven in
the human ſoul, though they are truths acquirable and dedu-
cible by rational conſequence and argumentation, yet they ſeem
to be inſcribed in the very craſis and texture of the ſoul, ante-
cedent to any acquiſition by induſtry or the exerciſe of the diſ-
curſive faculty in man. Hales's Origin of Mankind.
If the powers of cogitation and volition, and ſenſation, are
neither inherent in matter as ſuch, nor acquirable to matter by
any motion or modification of it; it neceſſarily follows, that
they proceed from ſome cogitative ſubſtance, ſome incorporeal
inhabitant within us, which we call ſpirit and ſoul. Bentley.
To ACQUIRE. v. a. [acquerir, Fr. acquiro, Lat.] To gain
by one's own labour or power; to obtain what is not received
from nature, or tranſmitted by inheritance.
I've done enough. A lower place not well,
May make too great an act: for learn this, Silius,
Better to leave undone, than by our deed
Acquire too high a fame, while he, we ſerve, ’s away.
Shakeſpeare's Antony and Cleºpatra,
Acq9'iRED. particip. adj. [from a quire.] Gained by one's ſelf,
in oppoſition to thoſe things which are beſtowed by nature.
We are ſeldom at eaſe, and free enough from the ſolicitation
of our natural or adopted deſires; but a conſtant ſucceſſion of
uneaſineſſes, out of that ſtock, which natural wants, or acquired
habits, have heaped up, take the will in their turns. Locke.
An Acqui'RER. m. ſ. [from acquire.] The perſon that acquires;
a gainer.
An Acqui'REMENT. n.ſ.. [from acquire.] That which is ac-
quired; gain; attainment. The word may be properly uſed
in oppoſition to the gifts of nature.
Theſe his acquirements, by induſtry, were exceedingly both
enriched and enlarged by many excellent endowments of na-
ture. Hayward on Edward VI.
By a content and acquieſcence in every ſpecies of truth, we
embrace
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C R.
- the ſhadow thereof; or ſo much as may palliate.its
... acquirements. Brown's Wulgar Brºgurº, b. ,
It is very difficult to lay down rules for the acquirement of
ſuch a taſte as that I am here ſpeaking of The faculty muſt,
in ſome degree, be born with us. Addison. Spectator, N° 409.
Acquisition. n.ſ. [acquiſitio, Lat.]
1. The act of acquiring or gaining: -
Each man has but a limited right to the good things of the
world; and the natural allowed way, by which he is to com-
paſs the poſſeſſion of theſe things, is by his own induſtrious ac-
quiſition of them. South's Sermons.
2. The thing gained; acquirement. .
g *. Sir, all acquiſition
Of glory as of empire, here I lay before
¥. º feet. Denham's Sophy.
A ſtate can never arrive to its period in a more deplorable
criſis, than when ſome prince lies hovering like a vulture to
diſmember its dying carcaſe; by which means it becomes only
an acquiſition to ſome mighty monarchy, without hopes of a re-
ſurre&amp;tion. Swift on the Differſons in Athens and Rome:
Acqu'isitive. adj. [acquiſitivus, Lat.] That which is acquired
or gained.
He died not in his acquiſitive but in his native ſoil; nature
herſelf, as it were, claiming a final intereſt in his body, when
fortune had done with him. //atton.
Acquist. n.ſ. [See Acquest.] Acquirement; attainment;
111.
ga His ſervant he with new acquiſ?
Of true experience from this great event,
With peace and conſolation hath diſmiſt. M. Sampſon Agon.
To ACQUIT. v. a. [acquiter, Fr. See QUIT.]
1. To ſet free. º
Nedo I wiſh (for wiſhing were but vain)
To be acquit from my continual ſmart;
But joy her thrall for ever to remain,
And yield for pledge my poor captived heart. Spenſ. Son. xlii.
2. To clear from a charge of guilt; to abſolve; oppoſed to con-
demn, either ſimply with an accuſative, as, the jury acquitted
him, or with the particles from or of, which is more common,
before the crime.
If I ſin, then thou markeſt me, and thou wilt not acquit me
from mine iniquity. job, x. 14.
By the ſuffrage of the moſt and beſt he is already acquitted,
and, by the ſentence of ſome, condemned. -
Dryden's Conqueſt of Granada, Dedic.
He that judges, without informing himſelf to the utmoſt that
he is capable, cannot acquit himſelf of judging amiſs. Locke.
Neither do I reflect upon the memory of his majeſty, whom
I entirely acquit of any imputation upon this matter. Swift.
3. To clear from any obligation.
Steady to my principles, and not diſpirited with my afflic-
tions, I have, by the bleſfing of God on my endeavours, over-
come all difficulties; and, in ſome meaſure, acquitted myſelf
of the debt which I owed the publick, when I undertook this
work. Dryden.
4. In a ſimilar ſenſe, it is ſaid, The man hath acquitted himſelf well;
that is, he diſcharged his duty.
Acqu'it MENT. n. ſ. [from acquit.] The ſtate of being acquit-
ted ; or act of acquitting.
The word imports properly an acquitment or diſcharge of a
man upon ſome precedent accuſation, and a full trial and cog.
nizance of his cauſe had thereupon. South's Sermons.
Acqu'itTAL, n.ſ in law, is a deliverance and ſetting free from
the ſuſpicion or guiltineſs of an offence. Cowell.
The conſtant deſign of both theſe orators, was to drive
ſome one particular point, either the condemnation or acquittal
of an accuſed perſon, a perſuaſive to war, and the like, Swift.
To Acqu'itt ANce. v. m. To procure an acquittance; to
acquit; a word not in preſent uſe.
But if black ſcandal and foul-fac’d reproach,
Attend the ſequel of your impoſition,
Your meer enforcement ſhall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and ſtains thereof. Shakespeare. Rich. III.
Acqu'itt A.N.cf. m. ſ. [from acquit.]
1. The act of diſcharging from a debt.
But ſoon ſhall find
Forbearance, no acquittance, ere day end
Juſtice ſhall not return, as beauty, ſcorn'd. Par. Loft, b. x.
2. A writing teſtifying the receipt of a debt.
- You can produce acquittances
For ſuch a ſum, from ſpecial officers
Of Charles his father. Shakeſp. Love's Labour Lºft.
They quickly pay their debt, and then -
Take no acquittances, but pay again. Donne.
They had got a worſe trick than that; the ſame man
bought and ſold to himſelf, paid the money, and gave the acquit-
ſtance. Arbuthnot's Hiff. of john Bull.
A's R.E., n.ſ. [AEcne, Sax.] A quantity of land containing in
ºngºh fºrty pºrches, and four in breadth, or four thouſand eight
hundred and forty ſquare yards. Dic?.
Search ev'ry acre in the high-grown field,
And bring him to our eye. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear,
AcR1D. ad;. ſacer, Lat..] Of a hot biting taſte; bitter, ſo as to
leave a painful heat upon the organs of taſte. .
Bitter and acrid differ only by the ſharp particles of the firſt,
being involved in a greater quantity of oil than thoſe of the
laſt. Arbuthnot ºn Aliments.
AcR1Mo'Nious. adj. Abounding with acrimony; ſharp; cor-
roſive.
If gall cannot be rendered acrimonious, and bitter of itſelf,
then whatever acrimony or amaritude redounds in it, muſt be
from the admixture of melancholy. Harvey on Conſumptions.
A'cRIMon Y. m. ſ. ſº Lat.]
1
1. Sharpneſs, corroſiveneſs. -- - -
There be plants that have a milk in them when they are cut;
as, figs, old lettuce, ſow-thiſtles, ſpurge, &amp;c. The cauſe may
be an inception of putrefaction: for thoſe milks have all an
acrimony, though one would think they ſhould be lenitive.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 630.
The chymiſts define ſalt, from ſome of its properties, to be
a body fuſible in the fire, congealable again by cold into brittle
glebes or cryſtals, ſoluble in water, ſo as to diſappear, not
malleable, and having ſomething in it which affects the organs
of taſte with a ſenſation of acrimony or ſharpneſs.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Sharpneſs of temper, ſeverity, bitterneſs of thought or lan-
uage.
8. This made John the Baptiſt ſet himſelf, with ſo much acrº-
mony and indignation, to baffle this ſenſeleſs arrogant conceit
of theirs, which made them huff at the doctrine of repentance,
as a thing below them, and not at all belonging to them. South.
A'critude. n.ſ.. [from acrid.] An acrid taſte; a biting heat on
the palate.
Green vitriol, mixed with ſome rays of a pale blue, from
the ſame place; with its aſtringent and ſweetiſh taſtes, is joined
ſome acritude. Grºw's Mºſcºm.
AcRoAMA'ticAL. adj. [axe-a-pa, Gr. I bear.] Of or pertain-
ing to deep learning; the oppoſite of exoterical.
AcRoA'ticks. n.ſ. [Axcoaliza, Gr.] Ariſtotle's le&amp;tures on the
more nice and principal parts of philoſophy, to whom none but
friends and ſcholars were admitted by him.
AcRo'NY cal. adj. [from axée, ſummus, and ºt, nox ; importing
the beginning of night.] A term of aſtronomy, applied to the
ſtars, of which the riſing and ſetting is called acronycal, when
they either appear above or ſink below the horizon at the time
of ſunſet. It is oppoſed to coſmical.
AcRo'NycAlly. adv. [from acronycal.] At the acronycal time.
He is tempeſtuous in the ſummer, when he riſes heliacally,
and rainy in the winter, when he riſes acronycally.
Dryden's Aneid, Dedicat.
A'cRosPIRE. m.ſ.. [from axes and arº;a, Gr.] A ſhoot or ſprout
from the end of ſeeds before they are put in the ground.
Many corns will ſmilt, or have their pulp turned into a ſub-
ſtance like thick cream; and moſt of thoſe which come with-
out extraordinary pains, will ſend forth their ſubſtance in an
acroſpire. Mart. Husbandry.
A'crospired. part, adj. Having ſprouts, or having ſhot out.
For want of turning, when the malt is ſpread on the floor.
it comes and ſprouts at both ends, which is called acrºſpired, and
is fit only for ſwine. Mort. Husbandry.
AcRo'ss. adv. [from a for at, or the French d, as it is uſed in
a travers, and croſs.] Athwart, laid over ſomething ſo as to
croſs it.
The harp hath the concave not along the ſtrings, but acrºſ;
the ſtrings; and no harp hath the ſound ſo melting and pro-
longed as the Iriſh harp. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 223.
This view'd, but not enjoy'd, with arms acroſs,
He ſtood, reflecting on his country's loſs. Dryd. Falles.
There is a ſet of artiſans, who, by the help of ſeveral poles,
which they lay acroſ; each others ſhoulders, build themſelves up
into a kind of pyramid; ſo that you ſee a pile of men in the air
of four or five rows riſing one above another. Addiſ, on Italy.
An AcRo'stick. n.ſ.. [from 2x2 and rºzº, Gr.] A poem in
which the firſt letter of every line being taken, makes up the
name of the perſon or thing on which the pocin is written.
AcRo'stick. adj.
1. That which relates to an acroſtick.
2. That which contains acroſticks.
Leave writing plays, and chooſe for thy command
Some peaceful province in acroſłick land:
There thou may'ſt wings diſplay, and altars raiſe,
And torture one poor word ten thouſand ways. Dryden.
ACROTERS, or ACROTERIA. m. ſ. [In architecture; from
ex;or, Gr, the extremity of any body..] Little pedeſtals with-
out baſes, placed at the middle and the two extremes of pedi-
ments, ſometimes ſerving to ſupport ſtatues.
To ACT. v. a. [ago, ačium, Lat.]
I. To be in action, not to reſt.
He hangs between in doubt to aci or reſt. Pope's Eſſon Man.
2. To perform the proper functions.
Albeit the will is not capable of being compelled to any of
its actings, yet it is capable of being made to aci with moré or
leſs difficulty, according to the different impreſſions it receives
from motives or objects, South's Sermons.
s
I
'Tis
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C T
A C T
3. To pračtiſe the arts or duties of life; to condućt one's ſelf.
'Tis plain, that ſhe who, for a kingdom now,
Would ſacrifice her love, and break her vow,
Not out of love, but intereſt, ačis alone,
And would, ev’n in my arms, lie thinking of a throne.
Dryden's Conqueſt of Granada.
The deſire of happineſs, and the conſtraint it puts upon us to
ači for it, no body accounts an abridgment of liberty. Locke.
The ſplendour of his office, is the token of that ſacred cha-
raćter which he inwardly bears : and one of theſe ought con-
ſtantly to put him in mind of the other, and excite him to ačº
up to it, through the whole courſe of his adminiſtration.
Atterbury's Sermons.
It is our part and duty to co-operate with this grace, vigo-
rouſly to exert thoſe powers, and act up to thoſe advantages to
which it reſtores us. He has given eyes to the blind, and feet
to the lame. Rogers's Sermons.
4. To bear a borrowed charaćter, as, a ſtage-player.
Honour and ſhame from no condition riſe;
Aé! well your part, there all the honour lies.
Pope's Eſſay on Man, ep. 4. l. 193.
5. To counterfeit; to feign by action.
His former trembling once again renew'd,
With ačied fear the villain thus purſu'd. Dryd. Æneid. 2.
6. To produce effects in ſome paſſive ſubječt. -
Hence ’tis we wait the wond’rous cauſe to find
How body acts upon impaſſive mind. Garth's Diſpenſary.
The ſtomach, the inteſtines, the muſcles of the lowerbelly,
all ač; upon the aliment; beſides, the chyle is not ſucked, but
ſqueezed into the mouths of the lačteals, by the action of the
fibres of the guts. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
7. To actuate; to put in motion; to regulate the movements.
Moſt people in the world are acted by levity and humour, by
ſtrange and irrational changes. South's Sermons.
Perhaps they are as proud as Lucifer, as covetous as Demas,
as falſe as Judas, and, in the whole courſe of their converſa-
tion, ači, and are a&amp;ied, not by devotion, but deſign. Idem,
We ſuppoſe two diſtinét incommunicable conſciouſneſſes
affing the ſame body, the one conſtantly by day, the other
by night; and, on the other ſide, the ſame conſciouſneſs ačiing
by intervals two diſtinét bodies. Locke.
Act, n.ſ.. [ačium, Lat.]
I. Something done; a deed; an exploit, whether good or ill.
I’ve done enough. A lower place, not well,
May make too great an ač7: for learn this, Silius,
Better to leave undone than by our deed
Acquire too high a fame, when he, we ſerve, ’s away.
ºs Antony and Cleopatra.
The conſcious wretch muſt all his ad?s reveal;
Loth to confeſs, unable to conceal;
From the firſt moment of his vital breath,
To his laſt hour of unrepenting death.
2. Agency; the power of producing an effect.
I will try the forces
Of theſe thy compounds on ſuch creatures as
We count not worth the hanging; but none human ;
To try the vigour of them, and apply
Allayments to their adī; and by them gather
Their ſeveral virtues and effects. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
3. Aćtion; the performance of exploits; produćtion of effects.
*Tis ſo much in your nature to do good, that your life is but
one continued ač7 of placing benefits on many, as the ſun is
always carrying his light to ſome part or other of the world.
Dryden's Fables, Dedicat.
Who forth from nothing call'd this comely frame,
His will and adī, his word and work the ſame. Prior.
4- The doing of ſome particular thing; a ſtep taken ; a meaſure
executed.
Dryd. Æneid vi.
This ad? perſuades me,
That this remotion of the duke and her, -
Is practice only. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
5- - A ſtate of a&amp;tion.
The ſeeds of herbs and plants at the firſt are not in act, but
in poſſibility that which they afterwards grow to be. . Hooker.
God alone excepted, who actually and everlaſtingly is what-
foever he may be, and which cannot hereafter be that which
Rhow he is not; all other things beſides are ſomewhat in poſfi-
bility, which as yet they are not in ači. Hooker, b. i.
Sure they're conſcious
| Of ſome intended miſchief, and are fled
To put it into ači. - Denham's Sophy.
Her legs were buſkin'd, and the left before;
In act to ſhoot, a ſilver bow ſhe bore. Dryd. Fahles.
• A part of a play, during which the action proceeds without
interruption.
Many never doubt but the whole condition required by
Shriſt, the repentance he came to preach, will, in that laſt
ºcene of their laſt act, immediately before the exit, be as op-
Portunely and acceptably performed, as at any other point of
their lives. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Five ačis are the juſt meaſure of a play. Roſcommon.
7. A decree of a court of juſtice, or º of a legiſlature.
vº. make edićts for uſury to ſupport uſurers, repeal daily
OL.
any wholeſome adt eſtabliſhed againſt the rich, and provide
more piercing ſtatutes daily to chain up and reſtrain the poor.
Shakeſpeare's Coriolanur.
You that are king, though he do wear the crown,
Have caus'd him, by new act of parliament,
To blot out me. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI, p. iii.
8. Record of judicial proceedings.
Judicial acts are all thoſe matters, which relate to judicial
proceedings; and being reduced into writing by a publick no-
tary, are recorded by the authority of the judge.
Ayliff's Parergon juris Canonici.
Action. n.ſ.. [ačion, Fr. ačio, Lat.]
1. The quality or ſtate of ačting, oppoſite to reſt.
O noble Engliſh, that could entertain
With half their forces the full power of France;
And let another half ſtand laughing by,
All out of work, and cold for action.
2. An act or thing done; a deed.
This action, I now go on,
Is for my better grace. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
God never accepts a good inclination inſtead of a good ac-
tion, where that action may be done; nay, ſo much the con-
trary, that, if a good inclination be not ſeconded by a good
aćtion, the want of that ačiion is made ſo much the more cri-
minal and inexcuſable. South's Sermons.
3. Agency, operation.
It is better therefore, that the earth ſhould move about its
own center, and make thoſe uſeful viciſſitudes of night and
day, than expoſe always the ſame ſide to the affion of the ſun.
Bentley's Sermons.
He has ſettled laws, and laid down rules, conformable to
which natural bodies are governed in their actions upon one an-
other. Cheyne's Philoſophical Principles.
4. The ſeries of events repreſented in a fable.
This action ſhould have three qualifications. Firſt, it ſhould
be but one action; ſecondly, it ſhould be an entire action; and,
thirdly, it ſhould be a great ačiion. Addison Speciat. Nº 267.
5. Geſticulation; the accordance of the motions of the body
with the words ſpoken ; a part of oratory.
—He that ſpeaks doth gripe the hearer's wriſt,
While he that hears makes fearful action
With wrinkled brows. Shakeſp. King john.
Our oratours are obſerved to make uſe of leſs geſture or ac-
tion than thoſe of other countries. Addiſon. Speciat. N° 407.
6. [In law.] It is uſed with the prepoſition againſ before the per-
ſon, and for before the thing. -
Aélions are perſonal, real, and mixt: action perſonal be-
longs to a man againſt another, by reaſon of any contract, of
fence, or cauſe, of like force with a contraćt or offence made
or done by him or ſome other, for whoſe fact he is to anſwer.
Action real is given to any man againſt another, that poſſeſſes
the thing required or ſued for in his own name, and no other
man's. Aëtion mixt is that which lies as well againſ or for the
thing which we ſeek, as againſt the perſon that hath it; called
mixt, becauſe it hath a mixt reſpect both to the thing and to the
perſon. • .
Aétion is divided into civil, penal, and mixt. Aftion civil is
that which tends only to the recovery of that which is due to
us; as, a ſum of money formerly lent. Action penal is that
which aims at ſome penalty or puniſhment in the party ſued,
be it corporal or pecuniary: as, in common law, the next
friends of a man feloniouſly ſlain ſhall purſue the law againſ?
the murderer. Aćiian mixt is that which ſeeks both the thing
whereof we are deprived, and a penalty alſo for the unjuſt de-
taining of the ſame.
Aëtion upon the caſe, is an ačiion given for redreſs of wrongs
done without force againſt any man, by law not ſpecially pro-
vided for.
Aëtion upon the ſtatute, is an action brought againſ a man up-
on breach of a ſtatute. Cowell.
There was never man could have a juſter ačiion againſt filthy
fortune than I, ſince all other things being granted me, her
blindneſs is the only lett. Sidney.
}or our reward then,
Firſt, all our debts are paid; dangers of law,
Aëtions, decrees, judgments, againſt us quitted.
- Ben.johnſon's Catiline.
7. In the plural, in France, the ſame asſocks in England.
Action ABLE. adj. [from action.] That which admits an action
in law to be brought againſt it; puniſhable.
After he had been thus, as a man would think, quite extin-
guiſhed, his proceſs was formed; whereby he was found guilty
of nought elſe, that I could learn, which was aélionable, but of
ambition. Howel's Vocal Forg/?.
Action ARY, or Actionist. m. ſ. [from action.] One that
has a ſhare in actions or ſtocks. -
A'ction-TAKING, adj. Accuſtomed to reſent by means of iaw;
litigious. -
A knave, a raſcal, an eater of broken meats, a filthy wok-
ſted-ſtocking knave; a lily-liver'd ačion-taking knave.
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Act 1't A'tion. m. ſ. [from affito, Lat.] Action quick and fre-
quent. - Dizł.
H To
Shakeſp. Henry V.
- *t
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A C T
A C U
dive.] To make active. This
r . v. a. ſfrom a
To Act 1 v At E. v. a. ſ. the author alleged.
rd is perhaps uſed only by -
wº º . ice, eſpecially being hopen, and their cold ac-
tivated by nitre or ſalt, will turn water into ice, # that in a
few hours; ſo it may be, it will " wººd or ſt cly intº
ſtone, in longer time. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 83.
Active. adj. [activus, Lat.] - -
1. That which has the power or quality ºf aćting. -
Theſe particles have not only a vis inertia, accompanied
with ſuch paſſive laws of motion, as naturally reſult from that
force, but alſo they are moved by certain active principles,
ſuch as is that of gravity, and that which cauſes fermentation,
and the coheſion of bodies. Newton's Qpticks.
2. That which acts, oppoſed to paſſive, or that which ſuffers.
— when an even flame two hearts did touch,
His office was indulgently to fit
Aïves to paſſives, correſpondency
Only his ſubject was. - Donne.
If you think that by multiplying the additaments in the
ſame proportion, that you multiply the ore, the work will fol:
low, you may be deceived; for quantity in the paſſive will
add more reſiſtance than the quantity in the active will add
force. Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
3. Buſy, engaged in adion; oppoſed to idle or ſºdºntaſy, or any
ſtate of which the duties are performed only by the mental
powers. -
'Tis virtuous ačtion that muſt praiſe bring forth,
Without which, ſlow advice is little worth;
Yet they who give good counſel, praiſe deſerve,
Though in the active part they cannot ſerve. Sir j. Denham.
4. Pračtical; not merely theoretical. -
The world hath had in theſe men freſh experience, how
dangerous ſuch active errors are. Hºcker, Preface.
5. Nimble; agile; quick. -
Some bend the ſtubborn bow for vićtory;
And ſome with darts their active finews try. Dryd. Æn. vii.
6. In grammar.
A verb active is that which ſignifies action, as does, I teach.
Clarke's Latin Grammar.
Actively. adv. [from active..] In an active manner; buſily;
nimbly. In an active ſignification; as, the word is uſed actively.
Active Ness. n.ſ.. [from active.] The quality of being active ;
quickneſs; nimbleneſs. This is a word more rarely uſed than
ačiivity.
What ſtrange agility and adživeneſ do our common tumblers
and dancers on the rope attain to, by continual exerciſe 2
//ilkins's Mathematical Magick.
Act 1'vity. n. ſ. [from affive.] The quality of being active,
applied either to things or perſons.
Salt put to ice, as in the producing of the artificial ice, in-
creaſeth the aºlivity of cold Bacon's Nat. Hiſł. N° 73.
Our adverſary will not be idle, though we are; he watches
every turn of our ſoul, and incident of our life; and, if we
remit our activity, will take advantage of our indolence. Rogers.
A'croR. n.ſ.. [actor, Lat.]
1. He that acts, or performs anything.
The virtues of either age may correót the defe&amp;ts of both:
and good for ſucceſſion, that young men may be learners, while
men in age are a&amp;ſors. Bacon, Eſſay civ.
He, who writes an Encomium Neronis, if he does it heartily,
is himſelf but a tranſcript of Nero in his mind, and would, no
doubt, gladly enough ſee ſuch pranks, as he was famous for,
aćted again, though he dares not be the actor of them himſelf.
South's Sermons.
2. He that perſonates a charaćter; a ſtage-player.
- Would you have
Such an Herculean affor in the ſcene,
And not this hydra? They muſt ſweat no leſs
To fit their properties, than texpreſs their parts.
- Ben johnſon's Catiline.
When a good ador doth his part preſent,
In every ačthe our attention draws,
That at the laſt he may find juſt applauſe. Sir j. Denham.
Theſe falſe beauties of the ſtage are no more la ing than a
rain-bow; when the afor ceaſes to ſhine upon them, when he
gilds them no longer with his refle&amp;tion, they vaniſh in a
twinkling. Dryd, Spaniſh Friar, Dedication.
A'cTREss. n.ſ.. [affrice, Fr.] -
I. She that performs any thing.
Virgil has, indeed, admitted Fame as an aireſ; in the
Æneid; but the part ſhe acts is very ſhort, and none of the
moſt admired circumſtances of that divine work. Addison Spei.
2. A woman that plays on the ſtage. - - -
We ſprights have juſt ſuch natures
We had, for all the world, when human creatures;
And therefore I that was an ačireſ; here,
Play all my tricks in hell, a goblin there.
AcTUAL. adj. [ačiuel, Fr.]
1. That which compriſes aétion.
In this flumbry agitation, beſides her walking and other ac-
tual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her
ſay * Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Dryd. Tyr. Lºve.
2. Really in act; not merely potential.
Siii, there in pow'r before
Once ałual; now in body, and to dwell -
Habitual habitant. Milt. Paradiſe Lø/?, b. x. 7. 587.
3. In act; not purely in ſpeculation.
For he that but conceives a crime in thought,
Contračts the danger of an actual fault:
Then what muſt he expect, that ſtill proceeds
To finiſh ſin, and work up thoughts to deeds
Dryden's juvenal, Sat. xiii.
Act UA'lity. n ſ [from adual.] The ſtate of being actual.
The affuality of theſe ſpiritual qualities is thus impriſoned,
though their potentiality be not quite deſtroyed; and thus a
craſs, extended, impenetrable, paſſive, diviſible, unintelligent
ſubſtance is generated, which we call matter. Cheyn. Phil. Prin.
Actually. adv. [from actual.] In act; in effect; really.
All mankind acknowledge themſelves able and ſufficient to
do many things, which actually they never do. South.
Read one of the chronicles written by an author of this
frame of mind, and you will think you were reading a hiſtory
of the kings of Iſrael or Judah, where the hiſtorians were ac-
tually inſpired, and where, by a particular ſcheme of provi-
dence, the kings were diſtinguiſhed by judgments or bleſfings,
according as they promoted idolatry, or the worſhip of the
true God. Addison. Speciator, N° 483.
Though our temporal proſpects ſhould be full of danger, or
though the days of ſorrow ſhould actually overtake us, yet ſtill
we muſt repoſe ourſelves on God. Rogers, Sermon xix.
Actual Ness. n.ſ.. [from ağual.] The quality of being actual.
AſcTUARY. m.ſ.. [actuarius, Lat..] The regiſter who compiles
the minutes of the proceedings of a court; a term of the civil
law.
Suppoſe the judge ſhould ſay, that he would have the keep-
ing of the aëts of court remain with him, and the notary will
have the cuſtody of them with himſelf: certainly, in this caſe,
the aºuary or writer of them ought to be preferred.
Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
A'ct UAte, adj. [from the verb To aduate.] Put into action;
animated; brought into effect.
The active informations of the intelle&amp;t, filling the paſſive
reception of the will, like form cloſing with matter, grew ac-
tuate into a third and diſtinét perfection of practice. South.
To ACTUATE. v. a. [from ago, ačium, Lat..] To put into
ačtion; to invigorate or encreaſe the powers of motion.
The light made by this animal depends upon a living ſpirit,
and ſeems, by ſome vital irradiation, to be aduated into this
luſtre. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 6.
Such is every man, who has not aduated the grace given
him, to the ſubduing of every reigning ſin. Decay of Piety.
Men of the greateſt abilitics are moſt fired with ambition;
and, on the contrary, mean and narrow minds are the leaſt
ačuated by it. Addiſon. Spediator, N° 255.
Our paſſions are the ſprings which aduate the powers of our
nature. Rogers, Sermon iii.
Actuo's E. adj. [from aº.] That which hath ſtrong powers
of action; a word little uſed.
To A'cuAt E. v. a. [acuo, Lat.] To ſharpen, to invigorate
with any powers of ſharpneſs.
Acu'LEATE. adj. [aculeatus, Lat.] That which has a point or
ſting; prickly; that which terminates in a ſharp point.
ACUMEN. n.ſ. [Lat.] A ſharp point; figuratively, quickneſs
of intelle&amp;ts.
The word was much affected by the learned Ariſtarchus in
common converſation, to ſignify genius or natural acumen.
Pope's Dunciad, b. iv. notes.
Acu'MINATED. particip. adj. Ending in a point; ſharp-pointed.
This is not acuminated and pointed, as in the reſt, but ſeem-
eth, as it were, cut off. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vii. c. 14.
I appropriate this word, Noli me tangere, to a ſmall round
acuminated tubercle, which hath not much pain, unleſs it be
touched or rubbed, or otherways exaſperated by topicks.
J/ſºnan's Surgery.
ACUTE. adj. [acutus, Lat.] -
1. Sharp, ending in a point; oppoſed to obtuſe or blunt.
Having the ideas of an obtuſe and an acute angled triangle,
both drawn from equal baſes and between parallels, I can, by
intuitive knowledge, perceive the one not to be the other, but
cannot that way know whether they be equal. Locke.
2. In a figurative ſenſe applied to men; ingenious; penetrating;
oppoſed to dull or ſtupid. -
The acute and ingenious author, among many very fine
thoughts, and uncommon reflections, has ſtarted the notion
of ſeeing all things in God. Locke.
3. Spoken of the ſenſes, vigorous; powerful in operation.
Were our ſenſes altered, and made much quicker and acuter,
the appearance and outward ſcheme of things would have quite
another face to us. - Locke.
4. Acute diſeaſe. Any diſeaſe, which is attended with an in-
creaſed velocity of blood, and terminates in a few days.
Quincy.
5. Acute accent; that which raiſes or ſharpens the voice.
Acu'Tel Y.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D A
A D D
Acu't ELY. adv. [from acute.] After an acute manner; ſharp-
ly; it is uſed as well in the figurative as primitive ſenſe.
He that will look into many parts of Aſia and America, will
find men reaſon there, perhaps, as acutely as himſelf, who yet
never heard of a ſyllogiſm. Locke.
Acu'TEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from acute, which ſee.]
1. Sharpneſs. -
2. Force of intelle&amp;ts.
They would not be ſo apt to think, that there could be no-
thing added to the acuteneſ; and penetration of their under-
ſtandings. - Locke.
3. Quickneſs and vigour of ſenſes.
If eyes ſo framed could not view at once the hand and the
hour-plate, their owner could not be benefited by that acuteneſs;
which, whilſt it diſcovered the ſecret contrivance of the ma-
chine, made him loſe its uſe. Locke.
4. Violence and ſpeedy criſis of a malady.
We apply preſent remedies according to indications, re-
ſpecting rather the acuteneſs of the diſeaſe, and precipitancy of
the occaſion, than the riſing and ſetting of ſtars.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 13.
5. Sharpneſs of ſound.
This acuteneſ of ſound will ſhew, that whilſt, to the eye,
the bell ſeems to be at reſt, yet the minute parts of it continue
in a very briſk motion, without which they could not ſtrike
the air. Boyle.
A'DAM's-APPLE, n.ſ.. [in anatomy..] A prominent part of the
throat.
To ADAPT. v. a. ſadapto, Lat.] To fit one thing to another;
to ſuit; to proportion.
'Tis true, but let it not be known,
My eyes are ſomewhat dimmiſh grown;
For nature, always in the right,
To your decays adapt; my fight. Swift's Miſcellanies.
It is not enough that nothing offends the ear, but a good
poet will adapt the very ſounds, as well as words, to the things
he treats of. Pope's Letters.
ADAPTA'tion, m. ſ. . [from adapt.] The aët of fitting one
thing to another; the fitneſs of one thing to another.
Some ſpecies there be of middle natures, that is, of bird
and beaſt, as batts; yet are their parts ſo ſet together, that we
cannot define the beginning or end of either, there being a
commixtion of both, rather than adaptation or cement of the
one unto the other. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii. c. ii.
Their adheſion may be in part aſcribed, either to ſome elaſ-
tical motion in the preſſed glaſs, or to the exquiſite adaptation
of the almoſt numberleſs, though very ſmall, aſperities of the
one, and the numerous little cavities of the other; whereby
the ſurfaces do lock in with one another, or are, as it were,
claſped together. - Boyle.
ADA'ption. n.ſ.. [from adapt.]. The aët of fitting.
It were alone a ſufficient work to ſhew all the neceſſities, the
ADA'ct ED. participial adj. [adačius, Lat..] Driven by force; a wiſe contrivances, and prudent adaptions, of theſe admirable
word little uſed. - Di 37. machines, for the benefit of the whole. Cheyne's Phil. Princip.
ADAGE. m. ſ. [adagium, Lat.] A maxim handed down from To AD.co'RPoRATE. v. a. [from ad and corpus.] To unite one
antiquity; a proverb. body with another; more uſually wrote accorporate; which ſee.
Shallow unimproved intelle&amp;ts, that are confident pretenders To Addison v. a. ſaido, Lat.]
to certainty; as if, contrary to the adage, ſcience had no friend I. To join ſomething to that which was before.
but ignorance. Glanville's Sceſs Scientifica, c. 2.
|
3. Adamant is taken for the loadſtone.
Fine fruits of learning! old ambitious fool,
Dar'ſt thou apply that adage of the ſchool;
As if 'tis nothing worth that lies conceal’d ;
And ſcience is not ſcience till reveal’d Dryd. Perſ. Sat. i.
ADAGIO. m. ſ. [Italian.] A term uſed by muſicians, to mark
a ſlow time.
ADAMANT. n.ſ.. [adamas, Lat. from 2 and 34.02, Gr. that
is, inſuperable, infrangible.]
1. A ſtone, imagined by writers, of impenetrable hardneſs.
So great a fear my name amongſt them ſpread,
That they ſuppos'd I could rend bars of ſteel,
And ſpurn in pieces poſts of adamant. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Satan, with vaſt and haughty ſtrides advanc'd,
Came tow’ring, arm'd in adamant, and gold. Parad. Loft.
Eternal Deities,
Who rule the world with abſolute decrees,
And write whatever time ſhall bring to paſs,
With pens of adamant, on plates of braſs. Dryden's Fables.
2. The diamond.
, Hardneſ, wherein ſome ſtones exceed all other bodies, and
among them the adamant all other ſtones, being exalted to that
degree thereof, that art in vain endeavours to counterfeit it,
the fictitious ſtones of chymiſts, in imitation, being eaſily de.
tected by an ordinary lapidſt. Ray on the Creation.
Let hit: change his lodging from one end and part of the
town to another, which is a great adamant of acquaintance.
… -- . . . . . . . : Bacon, Eſſay xix.
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant / -
But yet you draw not iron; for my heart º
, is true as ſteel. Shakeſpeare's Midſum Night's Dream.
_* E AMANTE'AN. adj. [from adamant.] Hard as adamant.
He ran on embattel'd armics clad in iron,
And weaponleſs himſelf,
Made arms ridiculous, uſeleſs the forgery
Of brazen ſhield and ſpear, the hammer'd cuiraſ,
Chalybean temper'd ſteel, and frock of mail
"Adamanteam proof. Milton's Samſºn Agoniſtes, l, 134.
This word occurs perhaps only in this paſſage. -
* DAMANTINE, adj. [alamantinus, Lat.]
* - Made of adamant.
Wide is the fronting gate, and rais'd on high
With adamantine columns, threats the ſky. Dryd. Æn. vi.
2- Having the qualities of adamant; as, hardneſs, indiſſolubility.
Could Eve's weak hand, extended to the tree,
In ſunder rend that adamantine chain,
Whoſe golden links, effects and cauſes be, -
And which to God’s own chair doth fix’d remain? Davies.
An eternal ſterility muſt have poſſeſſed the world, where all
things had been fixed and faſtened everlaſtingly with the ada-
zantine chains of ſpecific gravity; if the Almighty had not
ſpoken and ſaid, Let the earth bring forth graſs, the herb yield-
ing ſeed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after its kind; and it
was ſo. - Bentley's Sermons.
In adamantine chains ſhall death be bound,
And hell's grim tyrant feel th’ eternal wound. Pope's Mºſiah.
Tho' adamantine bonds the chief reſtrain,
The dire reſtraint his wiſdom will defeat,
‘And ſoon reſtore him to his regal ſeat. Pope's Odyſſey, b, i.
adder's-tongue. -
A'DDER's-wor T. n.ſ. An herb ſo named, on account of its
virtue, real or ſuppoſed, of curing the bite of ſerpents.
A'DDIBLE. adj. . [from Addison] Poſſible to be added. See AD-
Mark if his birth makes any difference,
If to his words it adds one grain of ſenſe. Dryd. Conq. of Gran.
They, whoſe muſes have the higheſt flown,
Add not to his immortal memory,
But do an act of friendſhip to their own. Dryd.
2. To perform the mental operation of adding one number or
conception to another.
Whatſoever poſitive ideas a man has in his mind, of any
quantity, he can repeat it, and add it to the former, as eaſily
as he can add together the ideas of two days, or two years. Locke.
A'DDABLE. adj. [from Addison] That which may be added. Ad-
dible is more proper.
The firſt number in every addition is called the addable num-
ber, the other, the number or numbers added, and the num-
ber invented by the addition, the aggregate or ſum.
Cocker’s Arithmetick.
To ADDE'cIMATE. v. a. ſaddecimo, Lat.] To take or aſcertain
tithes. Diff.
To ADDE'EM. v. a. [from deem.] To eſteem; to account.
This word is now out of uſe.
She ſcorns to be addeem'd ſo worthleſs-baſe,
As to be mov’d to ſuch an infamy. Daniel’s Civil Wars.
A'DDER. m. ſ. [AEccen, AEzzon, Nabone, as it ſeems from erecen,
Sax. poiſon.] A ſerpent, a viper, a poiſonous reptile; perhaps
of any ſpecies. In common language, adders and ſnakes are not
the ſame. -
Or is the adder better than the eel,
Becauſe his painted ſkin contents the eye. Shakespeare. As you like it.
An adder did it; for, with doubler tongue
Than thine, thou ſerpent, never adder ſtung.
Shakeſpeare's Midſum. Night's Dream.
The adder teaches us where to ſtrike, by her curious and
fearful defending of her head. %. of living holy.
A'DDER's-GRAss. n.ſ.. The name of a plant, imagined by
Skinner to be ſo named, becauſe ſerpents lurk about it.
A'pdf|R's-Tongue. n.ſ. [ophioglºſum, Lat.] The name of an
herb. -
It hath no viſible flower; but the ſeeds are produced on a
ſpike, which reſembles a ſerpent's tongue; which ſeed is con-
tained in many longitudinal cells, which open, and caſt forth
the ſeeds when ripe. It grows wild in moiſt meadows, and is
uſed in medicine. Millar.
The moſt common ſimples with us in England, are comfrey,
bugle, agrimony, ſanicle, paul’s-betony, fluellin, periwinkle,
Wiſeman's Surgery.
DABLE.
The cleareſt idea it can get of infinity, is the confuſed, in-
comprehenſible remainder of endleſs, addible numbers, which
affords no proſpect of ſtop, or boundary. Locke.
ADDIBI'LITY... n.ſ.. [from addible.] The poſſibility of being
added. -
This endleſs addition, or addibility (if any one like the word
better) of numbers, ſo apparent to the mind, is that which
gives us the cleareſt and moſt diſtinét idea of infinity. Locke.
A'D DICE. m. ſ. . [for which we corruptly ſpeak and write adz,
from abere, Sax. an axe.]
The addice hath its blade made thin and ſomewhat arching.
3 As
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D D
A D D
. As the axe hath its edge parallel to its handle, ſo the addice
hath its edge athwart the handle, and is ground to a baſil on
its inſide to its outer edge. Mºxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
To ADDICT. v. a. [addico, Lat.]
1. To devote, to dedicate, in a good ſenſe; which is rarely uſed.
Ye know the houſe of Stephanus, that they have addicted
themſelves to the miniſtry of the ſaints. I Cor. xvi. 15.
2. It is commonly taken in a bad ſenſe; as, he addicted himſelf to
ºutce.
Addicted Ness. n.ſ.. [from addićed.] The quality or ſtate
of being addićted.
Thoſe, that know how little I have remitted of my former
addictedneſs to make chymical experiments, will believe, that
the deſign was to give occaſion to the more knowing artiſts to
lay aſide their reſervedneſs. Boyle.
AD di'ction. m. ſ. [addictio, Lat.]
1. The act of devoting, or giving up.
2. The ſtate of being devoted.
It is a wonder how his grace ſhould gean it,
Since his addićion was to courſes vain;
His companies unletter'd, rude and ſhallow;
His hours fill'd up with riots, banquets, ſports Shakespeare. Hen.V.
An A'd pit AMENT. n.f. [additamentum, Lat.] The addition,
or thing added.
Iron will not incorporate with braſs, nor other metals, of
itſelf, by ſimple fire: ſo as the enquiry muſt be upon the cal-
cination, and the additament, and the charge of them. Bacon.
In ſuch a palace there is firſt the caſe or fabrick, or moles of
the ſtructure itſelf; and, beſides that, there are certain addita-
ments that contribute to its ornament and uſe; as, various fur-
niture, rare fountains and aquedućts, curious motions of di-
vers things appendicated to it. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
ADDI'tion. n.ſ.. [from Addison]
1. The act of adding one thing to another; oppoſed to diminu-
front.
The infinite diſtance between the Creator and the nobleſt
of all creatures, can never be meaſured, nor exhauſted by end-
leſs addition of finite degrees. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Additament, or the thing added.
It will not be modeſtly done, if any of our own wiſdom in-
trude or interpoſe, or be willing to make additions to what
Chriſt and his Apoſtles have deſigned. Hammond's Fundam.
Some ſuch reſemblances, methinks, I find
Of our laſt evening's talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition ſtrange | Milt. Paradiſ. Loft, b. v.
The aboliſhing of villanage, together with the cuſtom per-
mitted, among the nobles, of ſelling their lands, was a mighty
addition to the power of the commons.
Swift on the Diffenſions in Athens and Rome.
3. In arithmetick.
Addition is the redućtion of two or more numbers of like
kind, together into one ſum or total. Cocker’s Arithmetick.
4. In law. A title given to a man over and above his chriſtian
name and ſurname, ſhewing his eſtate, degree, occupation,
trade, age, place of dwelling. Cowell.
Only retain
The name, and all th’ addition to a king;
The ſway, revenue, execution of th’ laſt,
Beloved ſons, be yours; which to confirm,
This coronet part between you. Shakeſp. King Lear.
From this time,
For what he did before Corioli, call him,
With all th’ applauſe and clamour of the hoſt,
Caius Marcius Coriolanus. Bear th’ addition nobly ever.
Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
There aroſe new diſputes upon the perſons named by the
king, or rather againſt the additions and appellations of title,
which were made to their names. Clarendon, b. viii.
Add I'tion AL. adj. [from addition.] That which is added.
Our kalendar being once reformed and ſet right, it may be
kept ſo, without any conſiderable variation, for many ages, by
omitting one leap-year; i. e. the additional day, at the end of
every 134 years. Holder on Time.
The greateſt wits, that ever were produced in one age, lived
together in ſo good an underſtanding, and celebrated one an-
other with ſo much generoſity, that each of them receives an
additional luſtre from his cotemporaries. . Addiſon. Spectator.
They include in them that very kind of evidence, which is
ſuppoſed to be ſo powerful; and do, withal, afford us ſeveral
other additional proofs, of great force and clearneſs. Atter. Serm.
Additory. adj. [from Addison]- That which has the power or
quality of adding: -
The additory fiótion gives to a great man a larger ſhare of
reputation than belongs to him, to enable him to ſerve ſome
good end or purpoſe. Arbuthnot's Art of political Lying.
'A'DDLE, adj. [from abel, a diſeaſe, Sax, according to Skinner and
junius; perhaps from yoel, idle, barren, unfruitful..] Origi-
nally applied to eggs, and ſignifying ſuch as produce nothing,
but grow rotten under the hen; thence transferred to brains
that produce nothing.
There's one with truncheon, like a ladle,
That carries eggs too freſh or addle;
And ſtill at random, as he goes,
Among the rabbie rout beſtows. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. ii.
After much ſolitarineſs, faſting, or long ſickneſs, their brains
were addle, and their bellies as empty of meat as their heads
of wit. Burton on Melancholy.
Thus far the poet; but his brains grow adde:
And all the reſt is purely from this noddle. Dryd. Don Seb.
To Addle. v. a. [from addle, adj.] To make addle; to cor-
rupt; to make barren.
This is alſo evidenced in eggs, whereof the ſound ones ſink,
and ſuch as are added ſwim ; as do alſo thoſe that are termed
hypenemia, or wind-eggs. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv.
A'DDLE-PATED. adj. Having addled brains. See Appie.
Poor ſlaves in metre, dull and addle-pated,
Who rhyme below even David's pſalms tranſlated.
Dryden's Abſalom and A.hitophel.
To ADDRESS. v. a. ſaddreſſºr, Fr. from deregar, Span. from
dirigo, direétum, Lat.]
1. To prepare one's ſelf to enter upon any action; as, he ad-
dreſſed himſelf to the work.
It lifted up its head, and did addreſ;
Itſelf to motion, like as it would ſpeak.
With him the Palmer eke, in habit ſad,
Himſelf addrºſt to that adventure hard;
So to the river's ſide they both together far'd. Fairy $2, b. ii.
Then Turnus, from his chariot leaping light,
Addreſs'd himſelf on foot to ſingle fight. Dryden's Żncid.
2. To get ready; to put in a ſtate for immediate uſe.
By this means they fell directly on head on the Engliſh
battle; whereupon the earl of Warwick addreſſed his men to
take the flank. Sir j. Hayward.
Duke Frederick hearing, how that every day
Men of great worth reſorted to this foreſt,
Addreſs'd a mighty power, which were on foot,
In his own condućt purpoſely to take
His brother here. Shakeſpeare, As you like it.
To-night in Harfleur we will be your gueſt,
To-morrow for the march we are addreſſ. Shakespeare. Henry V.
3. To apply to another by words, with various forms of con-
ſtruction.
4. Sometimes without a prepoſition.
Are not your orders to addreſs the ſenate? Addiſon's Cato.
5. Sometimes with to.
Addreſſing to Polio, his great patron, and himſelf no vulgar
poet, he no longer could reſtrain the freedom of his ſpirit, but
began to aſſert his native character, which is ſublimity.
Dryden's Dedication of Virgil's Poſt.
Among the croud, but far above the reſt,
Young Turnus to the beauteous maid addreſſ. Dryd. Æneid.
6. Sometimes with the reciprocal pronoun; as, he addreſſed him-
felf to the general.
7. Sometimes with the accuſative of the matter of the addreſs,
which may be the nominative to the paſſive.
The young hero had addreſſed his prayers to him for his aſ-
ſiſtance. Dryd. Aneid, Dedicat.
The prince himſelf, with awful dread poſſeſs'd,
His vows to great Apollo thus addreſ. Dryden, AEneid vi.
His ſuit was common; but, above the reſt,
To both the brother-prince, thus addreſſ. Dryden's Fableſ.
8. To addreſs, is to apply to the king in form.
The repreſentatives of the nation in parliament, and the
privy-council, addreſs'd the king to have it recalled. Swift.
ADDRE'ss. ºf [addreſſe, Fr.]
I. Verbal application to any one, by way of perſuaſion, peti-
tion.
Henry, in knots involving Emma's name,
Had half confeſs'd and half conceal’d his flame
Upon this tree; and as the tender mark
Grew with the year, and widen'd with the bark,
Venus had heard the virgin's ſoft addreſs,
That, as the wound, the paſſion might encreaſe. Prior.
Moſt of the perſons, to whom theſe addreſſes are made, are
not wiſe and ſkilful judges, but are influenced by their own fin-
ful appetites and paſſions. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. Courtſhip.
They both behold thee with their fiſters eyes,
And often have reveal’d their paſſion to me:
But, tell me, whoſe addreſs thou favour'ſt moſt;
I long to know, and yet I dread to hear it. Addiſon's Cato.
About three years ſince, a gentleman, whom, I am ſure, you
yourſelf would have approved, made his addreſſes to me.
Addiſon. Spediator, N° 163.
3. Manner of addreſſing another; as, we ſay, a man of an happy
or a pleaſing addreſs; a man of an aukward addreſs.
4. Skill, dexterity.
I could produce innumerable inſtances from my own me-
mory and obſervation, of events imputed to the profound ſkill
and addreſs of a miniſter, which, in reality, were either mere
effects of negligence, weakneſs, humour, paſſion, or pride, or,
at beſt, but the natural courſe of things left to themſelves.
Swift's Thoughts on the preſent Poſłure of Affairs.
5. Manner of directing a letter; a ſenſe chiefly mercantile.
ADDRE'ss ER.
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D H
A D J
ADDRE'ssER. m. ſ. [from addreſ...] The perſon that addreſſes or
petitions.
ADDu'cENT, adj. [adducens, Lat.]
A word applied to thoſe muſcles that bring forward, cloſe,
or draw together the parts of the body to which they are an-
nexed. $2:dingy.
To ADDU'lcE. v. a. ſaddoucir, Fr. dulcis, Lat..] To ſweeten;
a word not now in uſe. - -
Thus did the French embaſſadors, with great ſhew of their
king's affection, and many ſugared words, ſeek to adduke all
matters between the two kings. Bacon's Henry VII.
A'DELING. m. a. [from aebel, Sax. illuſtrious.] A word of honour
among the Angles, properly appertaining to the king's children:
king Edward the Confeſſor, being without iſſue, and intending
to make Edgar his heir, called him adºling. Cowell.
ADEN9'GRAPHY. m. ſ. [from a wo, and y:zº., Gr.] A treatiſe
of the glands.
ADEMPTION. m. ſ. [adimo, ademptum, Lat.] Taking away;
privation. - Dić7.
ADEPT. m. ſ. [from adºptus, Lat. that is, adºptus artem.]
He that is completely ſkilled in all the ſecrets of his art. It
is, in its original ſignification, appropriated to the chymiſts,
but is now extended to other artiſts.
The preſervation of chaſtity is eaſy to true adepts. Pope.
ADEPT. adj. Skilful; throughly verſed. º
If there be really ſuch adºpt philoſophers as we are told of, I
am apt to think, that, among their arcana, they are maſters of
extremely potent menſtruums. Bºyle.
ADEQUA TE, adj. [adequatus, Lat.] Equal to ; proportionate;
correſpondent to, ſo as to bear an exact reſemblance or pro-
portion. It is uſed generally in a figurative ſenſe, and often
with the particle to. -
Contingent death ſeems to be the whole adequate obječt of
popular courage; but a neceſſary and unavoidable coffin ſtrikes
paleneſs into the ſtouteſt heart. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The arguments were proper, adequate, and ſufficient to com-
paſs their reſpective ends. South's Sermons.
All our ſimple ideas are adequate; becauſe, being nothing but
the effects of certain powers in things, fitted and ordained by
God to produce ſuch ſenſations in us, they cannot but be cor-
reſpondent and adequate to thoſe powers. Locke.
Thoſe are adequate ideas, which perfeótly repreſent their
archetypes or objects. Inadequate are but a partial, or incom-
plete, repreſentation of thoſe archetypes to which they are re-
ferred. - Watts's Logick.
A'DEQUA TELY. adv. [from adequate.]
I. In an adequate manner; with juſtneſs of repreſentation;
with exactneſs of proportion.
| Gratitude conſiſts adequately in theſe two things: firſt, that
- it is a debt; and, ſecondly, that it is ſuch a debt as is left to
| every man's ingenuity, whether he will pay or no. South.
2. It is uſed with the particle to.
Piety is the neceſſary chriſtian virtue, proportioned adequately
zo the omniſcience and ſpirituality of that infinite Deity.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
A/D EQUA TENEss. n.ſ.. [from adequate.] The ſtate of being
º adequate ; juſtneſs of repreſentation; exactneſs of propor-
tl On. -
AD Espo"tick. adj. Not abſolute; not deſpotick. Dić.
To ADHERE. v. n. [adharco, Lat.]
1. To ſtick to ; as, wax to the finger.
2. To ſtick, in a figurative ſenſe; to be conſiſtent; to hold to-
gether.
Why everything adheres together, that no dram of a ſcruple,
rho ſcruple of a ſcruple, no obſtacle, no incredulous or unſafe
circumſtance— Shakespeare. Twelfth Night.
3- I'o remain firmly fixed to a party, perſon, or opinion.
Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you;
And ſure I am, two men there are not living,
To whom he more adheres. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Every man of ſenſe will agree with me, that fingularity is
laudable, when, in contradiction to a multitude, it adheres
to the dictates of conſcience, morality, and honour. Boyle.
DHE’RENcE. n.ſ.. [from adhere.] See ADHESION.
* - The quality of adhering, or ſticking; tenacity.
2- In a figurative ſenſe, fixedneſs of mind; attachment; ſteadi-
neſs.
Their firm adherence to their religion is no leſs remarkable
than their diſperſion; confidering it as perſecuted or contemned
\ over the whole earth. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 495.
A conſtant adherence to one ſort of diet may have bad effects
on any conſtitution. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Plain good ſenſe, and a firm adherence to the point, have
proved more effectual than thoſe arts, which are contemptu-
ouſly called the ſpirit of negociating. Swift.
DHE'RF Ncy. n.ſ.. [The ſame with adherence.]
* Steady attachment.
2. That which adheres.
Vices have a native adherency of vexation. Decay of Piety.
Abhi's NT, adj. [from adhere.]
1. Sticking to. -
Vol. I.
3
Cloſe to the cliff with both his hands he clung,
And ſtuck adherent, and ſuſpended hung. Pºpe's Odſy,
2. United with.
Modes are ſaid to be inherent or adherent, that is, proper or
improper. Adherent or improper modes ariſe from the joining
of ſome accidental ſubſtance to the chief ſubject, which yet may
be ſeparated from it; ſo when a bowl is wet, or a boy is
cloathed, theſe are adherent modes; for the water and the
clothes are diſtinét ſubſtances which adhere to the bowl, or to
the boy. J/atts's Logick.
ADH E’RENT. n.ſ.. [from adhere.] The perſon that adheres;
one that ſupports the cauſe, or follows the fortune of another;
a follower; a partiſan.
Princes muſt give protećtion to their ſubječts and adherents,
when worthy occaſion ſhall require it. Sir W. Raleigh.
A new war muſt be undertaken upon the advice of thoſe,
who, with their partiſans and adherents, were to be the ſole
gainers by it. Swift's Miſcellanies.
ADH FR F R. n.ſ.. [from adhere.] He that adheres.
He ought to be indulgent to tender conſciences; but, at the
ſame time, a firm adherer to the eſtabliſhed church. Swift.
ADHE'sion. m. ſ. ſadhafto, Lat.]
1. The act or ſtate of ſticking to ſomething. Adhyſion is gene-
rally uſed in the natural, and adherence in the metaphorical
ſenſe; as, the adheſion of iron to the magnet; and adherence of a
client to his patron.
Why therefore may not the minute parts of other bodies, if
they be conveniently ſhaped for adheſion, ſtick to one another,
as well as ſtick to this ſpirit Boyle.
The reſt conſiſting wholly in the ſenſible configuration, as
ſmooth and rough; or elſe more, or leſs, firm adheſion of the
parts, as hard and ſoft, tough and brittle, are obvious. Locke.
Prove that all things, on occaſion,
Love union, and deſire adheſion. Prior.
2. It is ſometimes taken, like adherence, figuratively, for firmneſs
in an opinion, or ſteadineſs in a practice.
The ſame want of ſincerity, the ſame adheſion to vice, and
averſion from goodneſs, will be equally a reaſon for their re-
jećting any proof whatſoever. Atterbury's Sermons.
ADHE's v E. adj. [from adheſion.] Sticking; tenacious; with to.
If ſlow, yet ſure, adheſive to the tract,
Hot-ſteaming up. Thomſon's Autumn, 1.44o.
To ADHIBIT ..w.a. [adhileo, Lat.] To apply; to make uſe of.
ADHIBITION. m. ſ. [from adhibit..] Application; uſe. Dić7.
ADJA'ce Ncy. n.ſ.. [from adjaceo, Lat.]
1. The ſtate of lying cloſe to another thing.
2. That which is adjacent. See ADJ Ace Nt.
Becauſe the Cape hath ſea on both ſides near it, and other
lands, remote as it were, equidiſtant from it; therefore, at that
point, the needle is not diſtracted by the vicinity of adjacencies.
Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
ADJA'cº NT. adj. [adjacens, Lat.] Lying cloſe ; bordering upon
ſomething.
It may corrupt within itſelf, although no part of it iſſue into
the body adjacent. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 771.
Uniform pellucid mediums, ſuch as water, have no ſenſible
reflection but in their external ſuperficies,where they areadjacent
to other mediums of a different denſity. Newton's Opt.
ADJAce NT. n. ſ. That which lies next another.
The ſenſe of the author goes viſibly in its own train, and
the words receiving a determined ſenſe from their companions
and adjacents, will not conſent to give countenance and colour
to what muſt be ſupported at any rate. Locke's Eſ, upon S. Paul.
A DIA'PHoRous. adj. [23.222;3, Gr.] Neutral; particularly
uſed of ſome ſpirits and ſalts, which are neither of an acid or
alkaline nature. $21ſtncy.
Our adiaphorous ſpirit may be obtained, by diſtilling the li-
quor that is afforded by woods and divers other bodies. Boyle.
ADIAPHoRy. m. ſ. [23,29.42, Gr.] Neutrality ; indifference.
To A DJ ECT. v. a. [adjicio, adjectum, Lat..] To add to ; to
put to another thing. -
AD JE'cTION. m. ſ. [adjećio, Lat.]
1. The act of adjećting, or adding.
2. The thing adjected, or added.
That unto every pound of ſulphur, an adješion of one ounce
of quickſilver; or unto every pound of petre, one ounce of
ſal-armoniac, will much intend the force, and conſequently the
report, I find no verity. Brown's Wulgar Erroups, b. ii.
Adject I'tious. adj. [from adjection.] Added ; thrown in upon
the reſt. -
A'DJEctive. m. ſ. [adjeºivum, Lat.]
A word added to a noun, to ſignify the addition or ſepara-
tion of ſome quality, circumſtance, or manner of being ; as,
good, bad, are adjectives, becauſe, in ſpeech, they are applied to
nouns, to modify their ſignification, or intimate the manner of
exiſtence in the things ſignified thereby. Clark's Latin Gram.
All the verſification of Claudian is included within the con-
paſs of four or five lines; perpetually cloſing his ſenſe at the cnd
of a verſe, and that verſe commonly which they call golden, or
two ſubſtantives and two adjecives, with a verb betwixt them,
to keep the peace. Dryd.
I A DJ E c-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D J
Apy ectively. aav. [from adječive..] After the manner of an
adjective; a term of grammar. - - - - -
ADIEU’. adv. [from a Dieu, uſed elliptically for a Dieu je vous
commende, uſed at the departure of friends.] The form of part-
ing, originally importing a commendation to the Divine care,
but now uſed, in a popular ſenſe, ſometimes to things inani-
mate ; farewell.
Ne gave him leave to bid that aged fire . . -
Adieu, but nimbly ran her wonted courſe. Fairy $2ueen, b. ii.
Uſe a more ſpacious ceremony to the noble lords; you re-
ſtrained yourſelf within the liſt of too cold an adieu ; be more
expreſſive to them. Shakeſpeare's Ali's well that ends well.
While now I take my laſt adieu,
Heave thou no figh, nor ſhed a tear;
Leſt yet my half-clos'd eye may view
On earth an object worth its care. Prior.
To Adjo'IN. v. a. [adjoindre, Fr. adjungº, Lat.] To join to ; to
unite to ; to put to.
Corrections or improvements ſhould be as remarks adjoined,
by way of note or commentary, in their proper places, and ſu-
peradded to a regular treatiſe. J/atts's Improvem. of the Mind.
To Adjoi'N. v. n. To be contiguous to ; to lye next ſo as to
have nothing between.
Th’ adjoining fane, th’ aſſembled Greks expreſs'd,
And hunting of the Caledonian beaſt. Dryden's Fables.
In learning any thing, as little ſhould be propoſed to the
mind at once, as is poſſible; and, that being underſtood and
fully maſtered, proceed to the next adjoining, yet unknown,
ſimple, unperplexed propoſition, belonging to the matter in
hand, and tending to the clearing what is principally de-
ſigned. Locke.
To AD JOURN. v. a. [adjourner, Fr.]
1. To put off to another day, naming the time; a term uſed in
juridical proceedings; as, of parliaments, or courts of juſtice.
- The queen being abſent, 'tis a needful fitneſs,
That we adjourn this court to further day. Shakeſp. Hen.VIII.
By the king's authority alone, and by his writs they are aſ-
fembled, and by him alone are they prorogued and diſſolved;
but each houſe may adjourn itſelf. Bac. Advice to Sir G. Pilliers.
2. To put off; to defer; to let ſtay to another time.
Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods,
Why haſt thou thus adjourn’d
The graces for his merits due,
Being all to dolours turn'd. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Crown high the goblets with a chearful draught;
Enjoy the preſent hour, adjourn the future thought.
- Dryd. Æneid. vii. l. I 81.
The formation of animals being foreign to my purpoſe, I
ſhall adjourn the conſideration of it to another occaſion.
J/oodward's Nat. Hiſtory, p. iii.
AD.Jo'URNMENT. n.ſ.. [adjournement, Fr.] An aſſignment of a
day, or a putting off till another day. Adjournement in eyre,
an appointment of a day, when the juſtices in eyre mean to fit
again. - Cowell.
We will and we will not, and then we will not again, and
we will. At this rate we run our lives out in adjournments from
time to time, out of a fantaſtical levity that holds us off and on,
betwixt hawk and buzzard. L’Eſtrange.
A'DIpous. adj. ſadipoſus, Lat.] Fat. Dićf.
A'DIT. m. ſ. ſaditus, Lat.] A paſſage for the conveyance of wa-
ter under ground; a paſſage under ground in general: a term
among the minemen.
For conveying away the water, they ſtand in aid of ſundry
devices; as, adits, pumps, and whecls, driven by a ſtream, and
interchangeably filling and emptying two buckets. Carew's Surv.
The deifs would be ſo flown with waters (it being impoſſible
to make any adits or ſoughs to drain them) that no gins or ma-
chines could ſuffice to lay and keep them dry. Ray on the Creat.
ADI'TION. m. ſ. [from adeo, aditum, Lat..] The act of going to
andther. Dićf.
To ADJU'D.C.E. v. a. [adjudico, Lat.]
1. To give the thing controverted to one of the parties by a judi-
cial ſentence; with the particle to before the perſon.
The way of diſputing in the ſchools leads from it, by inſiſt-
ing on one topical argument; by the ſucceſs of which, vićtory
is adjudged to the opponent, or defendant. Locke.
- The great competitors for Rome
Caeſar and Pompey on Pharſalian plains,
Where ſtern Bellona, with one final ſtroke,
Adjudg’d the empire of this globe to one. Phillips.
2. º ſentence, or condemn to a puniſhment; with to before the
1119.
But though thou art adjudged to the death ;
Yet I will favour thee in what I can. , Shakeſp. Com, of Err.
3. Simply, to judge; to decree; to determine.
He adjudged him unworthy of his friendſhip and favour;
purpoſing ſharply to revenge the wrong he had received.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
ADJUDICA"tion, n.ſ.. [adjudicatio, Lat.] The act of judging, or
of granting ſomething to a litigant, by a judicial ſentence.
To ADJUDICATE. v. a. [adjudico, Lat..] To adjudge;
to give ſomething controverted to one of the litigants, by a
ſcntence or deciſion.
To A'PJUGAt E. v. a. [adjugº, Lat.] To yoke to ; to join to
another by a yoke. Dić?.
A'DJUMENT. n.ſ.. [adjumentum, Lat.] Help ; ſupport. Dići.
ADJUNCT. n.f. [adjuncìum, Lat.]
1. Something adherent or united to another, though not eſºn-
tially part of it.
Learning is but an adjuné: to ourſelf,
And where we are, our learning likewiſe is.
Shakeſp. Love's Lalour Loft.
But I make haſte to conſider you as abſtracted from a court,
which (if you will give me leave to uſe a term of logick) is only
an adjunct, not a propriety, of happineſs. Dryd. Aureng. Deá.
The talent of diſcretion, as I have deſcribed it in its ſeveral
adjuncts and circumſtances, is no where ſo ſerviceable as to the
clergy. Swift's Miſcellanies.
2. A perſon joined to another. This ſenſe rarely occurs.
He made him the aſſociate of his heir apparent, together with
the lord Cottington (as an adunct of ſingular experience and
truſt) in foreign travels, and in a buſineſs of love. //attan.
ADJUNCT. adj. United with ; immediately conſequent.
So well, that what you bid me undertake, -
Though that my death were adjunct to my act,
I’d dot. Shakespeare. King john.
ADJU'Nction. m. ſ. [adjunctio, Lat.]
1. The act of adjoining, or coupling together.
2. The thing joined.
ADJU'Nctive. n.ſ.. [adjunctivus, Lat.]
1. He that joins.
2. That which is joined.
ADJURA'rion. n.ſ.. [adjuratio, Lat.]
1. The act of adjuring, or propoſing an oath to another.
2. The form of oath propoſed to another. -
When theſe learned men ſaw ſickneſs and frenzy cured, the
dead raiſed, the oracles put to ſilence, the daemons and evil
ſpirits forced to confeſs themſelves no gods, by perſons, who
only made uſe of prayer and adjurations in the name of their
crucified Saviour; how could they doubt of their Saviour's
power on the like occaſions : Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
To A DJURE. v. a. [adjuro, Lat.] To impoſe an oath upon
another, preſcribing the form in which he ſhall ſwear.
Thou know'ſt, the magiſtrates
And princes of my country came in perſon,
Solicited, commanded, threaten'd, urg’d,
Adjur’d by all the bonds of civil duty,
And of religion, preſs'd how juſt it was,
How honourable. A4ilton's Sampſºn Agoniſłes, 1.853.
Ye lamps of heav'n he ſaid, and lifted high
His hands now free, thou venerable ſky!
Inviolable pow'rs' ador'd with dread,
Ye fatal fillets that once bound this head,
Ye ſacred altars! from whoſe flames I fled,
Be all of you adjured. Dryden, Æneid ii.
To ADJUST. v. a. ſadiſºr, Fr.]
1. To regulate; to put in order; to ſettle in the right form.
Your Lordſhip removes all our difficulties, and ſupplics all
our wants, faſter than the moſt viſionary projector can adjuſt
his ſchemes. Swift to the Lord High Treaſirer.
2. To reduce to the true ſtate or ſtandard; to make accurate.
The names of mixed modes, for the moſt part, want ſtan-
dards in nature, whereby men may reëtify and adjuſ; their fig-
nification; therefore they are very various and doubtful. Locke.
3. To make conformable. It requires the particle to before the
thing to which the conformity iſ made.
As to the accompliſhment of this remarkable prophecy, who-
ever reads the account given by Joſephus, without knowing his
character, and compares it with what our Saviour foretold, would
think the hiſtorian had been a chriſtian, and that he had nothing
elſe in view, but to adjuſt the event to the prediction.
Addison on the Chriſtian Religion.
ADJU's TMENT. n.ſ.. [adjuſlement, Fr.]
1. Regulation; the act of putting in method; ſettlement.
The farther and clearer adjuſtment of this affair, I am con-
ſtrained to adjourn to the larger treatiſe. Woodward's Nat. Hiſł.
2. The ſtate of being put in method, or regulated.
It is a vulgar idea we have of a watch or clock, when we con-
ceive of it as an inſtrument made to ſhew the hour: but it is a
learned idea which the watch-maker has of it, who knows all
the ſeveral parts of it, together with the various connexions
and adjuſtments of each part. JWatts's Logick.
A'DJUTANT. n.ſ. A petty officer, whoſe duty is to aſſiſt the
major, by diſtributing the pay, and overſeeing the puniſhment,
of the common men.
To ADJUT.E. v. a. [adjuvo, adjutum, Lat..] To help; to
concur; a word not now in uſe.
For there be
Six bachelors as bold as he,
Adjuting to his company;
And each one hath his livery. , Ben. johnſºn's Under-wood.
ADJU'toR. m. ſ. [adjutor, Lat.] A helper. Dić?.
ADJu'roR Y. adj. [adjutorius, Lat...] That which helps. Dić.
An ADJU't Rix. n.ſ. [Lat..] She who helps. Dić7.
A'DJ U W ANT. adj. [adjuvans, Lat..] Helpful; uſeful. Dić.
To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D M
A D M
To A'DjuvAt E. v. a. [adjuvo, Lat.] To help; to further; to
put forward. Dić7.
ADM easure MENT. m. ſ. [See MF Asure.] The adjuſtment of
proportions; the aët or pračtice of meaſuring according to rule.
*::::::: is a writ, which lieth for the bringing of thoſe
to a mediocrity, that uſurp more than their part. It lieth in
two caſes: one is termed admeaſurement of dower, where the
widow of the deceaſed holdeth from the heir, or his guardian,
more in the name of her dower, than belongeth to her.
The other is admeaſurement of paſture, which lieth between
thoſe that have common of paſture appendant to their free-
hold, or common by vicinage, in caſe any one of them, or
more, do ſurcharge the common with more cattle than they
ought. Cowell.
n ſome counties they are not much more acquainted with
admeaſurement by acre; and thereby the writs of thoſe counties
contain twice or thrice ſo many acres more than the land hath.
Bacon's Hiſt. Off. Alienat.
ADMENsu RA'tion. n.ſ.. [ad and menſura, Lat.] The act, or
practice, of meaſuring out to each his part.
ADMI'NICL. E. m. ſ. [adminiculum, Lat.] Help ; ſupport; fur-
therance. Dicſ.
ADMINI'cular. adj. [from adminiculum, Lat.] That which
gives help. Dić?.
To ADMINISTER. v. a. [adminiſtro, Lat.]
1. To give; to afford; to ſupply.
Let zephyrs bland
Adminiſter their tepid genial airs;
Naught fear he from the weſt, whoſe gentle warmth
Diſcloſes well the earth's all-teeming womb. Philips.
2. To act as the miniſter or agent in any employment or office;
generally, but not always, with ſome hint of ſubordination, to
adminiſter the government.
For forms of government let fools conteſt,
Whate'er is beſt adminiſter'd, is beſt. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
3. To adminiſter juſtice.
4. To adminiſter the ſacraments.
Have not they the old popiſh cuſtom of adminiſtering the
bleſſed ſacrament of the holy euchariſt with wafer-cakes?
- Hooker, b. iv. § 10.
5. To adminiſter an oath.
Swear by the duty that you owe to heav'n,
To keep the oath that we adminiſter. Shakeſp. Richard II.
6. To adminiſter phyſick.
I was carried on men's ſhoulders, adminiſtering phyſick and
phlebotomy. Wafer's Voyage.
7. To adminiſter to ; to contribute; to bring ſupplies.
I muſt not omit, that there is a fountain riſing in the upper
part of my garden, which forms a little wandering rill, and ad-
miniſters to the pleaſure, as well as the plenty, of the place.
Speãator, N° 477.
8. To perform the office of an adminiſtrator, in law. See AD-
IMINISTRATOR,
Neal's order was never performed, becauſe the executors
durſt not adminiſter. Arbuthnot and Pope's Martin. Scribler.
To ADMI'NISTRATE. v. a. [adininjiro, Lat.] To exhibit; to
give as phyſick.
They have the ſame effects in medicine, when inwardly ad-
zrainiſtrated to animal bodies. Woodward's Nat. Hiſł.
AD. MINISTRATION. n.ſ.. [adminiſtratio, Lat.]
1. The act of adminiſtering or conducting any employment; as,
the conducting the publick affairs; diſpenſing the laws.
I then did uſe the perſon of your father;
The image of his pow'r lay then in me:
And in th’ adminiſtration of his law,
While I was buſy for the commonwealth,
Your highneſs pleaſed to forget my place. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
In the ſhort time of his adminiſtration, he ſhone ſo power-
fully upon me, that, like the heat of a Ruſſian ſummer, he
ripened the fruits of poetry in a cold climate.
Dryden's Dedication of Virgil's Paſtorals.
2- The ačtive or executive part of government.
It may paſs for a maxim in ſtate, that the adminiſtration can-
not be jº in too few hands, nor the legiſlature in too many.
Swift's Sentiments of a Church of England man.
3- Thoſe to whom the care of publick affairs is committed.
4- Diſtribution; exhibition; diſpenſation.
There is, in ſacraments, to be obſerved their force, and their
form of adminiſtration. Hooker, b. v.
By the univerſal adminiſtration of grace, begun by our blcſ-
ſed Saviour, enlarged by his apoſtles, carried on by their im-
mediate ſucceſſors, and to be compleated by the reſt to the
world's end; all types that darkened this faith are enlightened.
Sprat's Sermons.
ADMI'Nistrative. adj. [from adminiſtrate.] That which ad-
miniſters; that by which any one adminiſters.
DMINISTRA"roR. n.ſ.. [adminiſtrator, Lat.]
*: Is properly taken for him that has the goods of a man dying
inteſtate, committed to his charge by the ordinary, and is ac-
countable for the ſame, whenever it ſhall pleaſe the ordinary to
call upon him thereunto. Cowell.
He was wonderfully diligent to enquire and obſerve what
became of the king of Arragon, in holding the kingdom of
Caſtille, and whether he did hold it in his own right, or as
adminiſtrator to his daughter. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. He that officiates in divine rites.
I feel my conſcience bound to remember the death of Chriſt,
with ſome ſociety of chriſtians or other, ſince it is a moſt plain
command; whether the perſon, who diſtributes theſe elements,
be only an occaſional or a ſettled adminiſtrator.
//atts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i. c. 18.
3. He that condućts the government.
The reſidence of the prince, or chief adminiſtrator, of the
civil power. Swift's ſhort View of Ireland.
ADMI'NISTRATRIX. n.ſ. [Lat..] She who adminiſters in con-
ſequence of a will.
ADMINIS rRA't or SHIP. m. ſ. [from adminiſtrator.] The office
of adminiſtrator.
A'DMIRABLE. adj. [admirabilis, Lat.] To be admired; wor-
thy of admiration; of power to excite wonder; always taken
in a good ſenſe, and applied either to perſons or things.
The more power he hath to hurt, the more admirable is his
praiſe, that he will not hurt. Sidney, b. ii.
God was with them in all their afflićtions, and, at length, by
working their admirable deliverance, did teſtify that they ſerved
him not in vain. Hooker, b. iv. § 2.
What admirable things occur in the remains of ſeveral other
philoſophers? Short, I confeſs, of the rules of chriſtianity, but
generally above the lives of chriſtians. South's Sermons.
You can at moſt
To an indiff'rent lover's praiſe pretend :
But you would ſpoil an admirable friend. Dryd, Aurengz.
A'DMIRABLENEss. m. ſ. [from admirable.] The quality of be-
ing admirable; the power of raiſing wonder.
ADMIRABI'LITY... n.ſ. [admirabilis, Lat..] The quality or ſtate
of being admirable. Dići.
A'DMIRABLY. adv. [from admirable.] So as to raiſe wonder;
in an admirable manner.
The theatre is, I think, the moſt ſpacious of any I ever
ſaw, and, at the ſame time, ſo admirably well contrived, that,
from the very depth of the ſtage, the loweſt ſound may be heard
diſtinctly to the fartheſt part of the audience, as in a whiſpering
place; and yet, if you raiſe your voice as high as you pleaſe,
there is nothing like an echo to cauſe in it the leaſt confuſion.
Addiſon on Italy.
A'DMIRAL. m. ſ. [amiral, Fr. of uncertain etymology.]
1. An officer or magiſtrate that has the government of the king's
navy, and the hearing and determining all cauſes, as well civil
as criminal, belonging to the ſea. Cowell.
2. The chief commander of a fleet.
He alſo, in battle at ſea, overthrew Rodericus Rotundus, ad-
miral of Spain; in which fight the admiral, with his ſon, were
both ſlain, and ſeven of his gallies taken. Knolles's Hiſt. Turks.
Make the ſea ſhine with gallantry, and all
The Engliſh youth flock to their admiral. JWaller.
3. The ſhip which carries the admiral or commander of the fleet.
The admiral galley, wherein the emperor himſelf was, b
great miſchance ſtruck upon a ſand. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
A'DMIRALSHIP. n.ſ.. [from admiral.] The office or power of
an admiral.
ADMIRA'LTY. m. ſ. [ammiraulté, Fr.] The power, or officers,
appointed for the adminiſtration of naval affairs.
ADMIRA't los. m. ſ. [admiratio, Lat.]
1. Wonder; the aët of admiring or wondering.
Indu'd with human voice, and human ſenſe.
Reaſoning to admiration. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
They are imitations of the paſſions, which always move, and
therefore, conſequently, pleaſe; for, without motion, there can
be no delight: which cannot be conſidered but as an active
paſſion. When we view thoſe elevated ideas of nature, the
reſult of that view is admiration, which is always the cauſe of
pleaſure. Dryd. Dufreſnoy, Prºf.
There is a pleaſure in admiration, and this is that which pro-
perly cauſeth admiration, when we diſcover a great deal in an
objećt, which we underſtand to be excellent; and yet we ſee,
we know not how much more beyond that, which our under-
ſtandings cannot fully reach and comprehend. Tillotſºn's Serm.
2. It is taken ſometimes in a bad ſenſe, though generally in a
ood. -
£ Your boldneſs I with admiration ſee ;
What hope had you to gain a queen like me :
Becauſe a hero forc'd me once away,
Am I thought fit to be a ſecond prey? Dryd.
To ADMIR.E. v. a. [admiro, Lat, admirer, Fr.]
1. To regard with wonder; generally in a good ſenſe.
'Tis here that knowledge wonders, and there is an admira-
tion that is not the daughter of ignorance. This indeed ſtu-
pidly gazeth at the unwonted effect; but the philoſophic paſ-
fion truly admires and adores the ſupreme efficient. Glanville.
2. It is ſometimes uſed, in more familiar ſpeech, for to regard
with love.
3. It is uſed, but rarely, in an ill ſenſe.
You have diſplac'd the mirth, broke the good meeting
With moſt admir’d diſorder. Shakespeare. Aſacºth.
O
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D M
A D M
To ADMIRE. v. n. To wonder; ſometimes with the particle at.
The eye is already ſo perfect, that I believe the reaſon of a
man would eaſily have reſted here, and admir'd at his own con-
trivance. Ray on the Creation.
An ADMI'RER. m. ſ. [from admire.]
1. The perſon that wonders, or regards with admiration.
Neither Virgil nor Horace would have gained ſo great repu-
tation, had they not been the friends and admirers of each other.
- Addiſon. Spediator.
Who moſt to ſhun or hate mankind pretend,
Seek an admirer, or would fix a friend. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
2. In common ſpeech, a lover.
ADMI'RINGLY. adv. [from admire.] With admiration; in the
manner of an admirer.
The king very lately ſpoke of him admiringly and mourn-
fully. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
We may yet further admiringly obſerve, that though men
uſually give freelieſt where they have not given before, and
make it an excuſe of their deſiſtance from giving, that they
have given it otherwiſe. Boyle.
ADMI'ssible. adj. [admitto, admiſſim, Lat.] That which may
be admitted.
Suppoſe that this ſuppoſition were admiſſible, yet this would
not any way be inconſiſtent with the etermity of the divine na-
ture and . Hale's Origin of Mankind.
ADMI'ssion. m. ſ. [admiſſio, Lat.]
1. The aët or practice of admitting.
There was alſo enacted that charitable law, for the admiſſion
of poor ſuitors without fee; whereby poor men became rather
able to vex, than unable to ſue. Bacon's Henry VII.
By means of our ſolitary ſituation, and our rare admiſſion of
ſtrangers, we know moſt part of the habitable world, and are
ourſelves unknown. Bacon's New Atalantis.
2. The ſtate of being admitted.
My father ſaw you ill deſigns purſue;
And my admiſſion ſhow'd his fear of you. Dryd. Aurengzebe.
God did then exerciſe man's hopes with the expectations of
a better paradiſe, or a more intimate admiſſion to himſelf.
South's Sermons.
3. Admittance; the power of entering, or being admitted.
All ſprings have ſome degree of heat, none ever freezing,
no not in the longeſt and ſevereſt froſts; eſpecially thoſe, where
there is ſuch a ſite and diſpoſition of the ſtrata as gives free and
caſy admiſſion to this heat. J/oodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
Our king deſcends from Jove:
And hither are we come, by his command,
To crave admiſſion in your happy land.
4. In the eccleſiaſtical law.
It is, when the patron preſents a clerk to a church that is
vacant, and the biſhop, upon examination, admits and allows
of ſuch clerk to be fitly qualified, by ſaying, Admitto te habilºm,
&amp;c. Ayliff's Parergon.
5. The allowance of an argument; the grant of a poſition not
fully proved.
To A DMI'T. v. a. [admitto, Lat.]
1. To ſuffer to enter; to grant entrance.
- Does not one table Bavius ſtill admit 2
2. To ſuffer to enter upon an office; in which ſenſe, the phraſe
of admiſſion into a college, &amp;c. is uſed.
The treaſurer found it no hard matter ſo far to terrify him,
that, for the king's ſervice, as was pretended, he admitted, for
a ſix-clark, a perſon recommended by him. Clarendon.
3. To allow an argument or poſition.
Suppoſe no weapon can thy valour's pride
Subdue, that by no force thou may’ſt be won,
Admit no ſteel can hurt or wound thy ſide,
And be it heav'n hath thee ſuch favour done. Fairfax, b. ii.
This argument is like to have the leſs effect on me, ſeeing I
cannot eaſily admit the inference. Locke.
4. To allow, or grant in general; ſometimes with the particle of:
If you once admit * a latitude, that thoughts may be ex-
alted, and images raiſed above the life, that leads you inſen-
ſibly from your own principles to mine. Dryd, on Heroic Poetry.
ADMI'TTAB LE. adj. [from admit.] The perſon or thing which
may be admitted.
The clerk, who is preſented, ought to prove to the biſhop,
that he is a deacon, and that he has orders; otherwiſe, the
biſhop is not bound to admit him : for, as the law then ſtood,
a deacon was admittable. Ayliff's Parergon juris Canonici.
ADMI'TTANCE. m. ſ. [from admit j
1. The act of admitting; allowance or permiſſion to enter.
It cannot enter any man's conceit to think it lawful, that
every man which liſteth ſhould take upon him charge in the
church ; and therefore a ſolemn admittance is of ſuch neceſſity,
that, without it, there can be no church-polity. Hooker, b. iii.
. As to the admittance of the weighty elaſtić parts of the air
into the blood, through the coats of the veſſels, it ſeems contrary
to experiments upon dead bodies. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. The power or right of entering.
What
If I do line one of their hands?—'tis gold
Which buys admittance. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Dryd. Æneid vii.
Surely a daily expectation at the gate, is the readieſt way to
gain admittance into the houſe. South's Sermons.
There's news from Bertran; he deſires
Admittance to the king, and cries aloud,
This day ſhall end our fears. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
There are ſome ideas which have admittance only through
one ſenſe, which is peculiarly adapted to receive them. Locke.
3. Cuſtom, or prerogative, of being admitted to great perſons;
a ſenſe now out of uſe.
Now, Sir John, here is the heart of my purpoſe: you are
a gentleman of excellent breeding, of great admittance, authen-
tick in your place and perſon, generally allowed for your many
warlike, courtlike, and learned preparations.
- Shakeſpeare's Merry JWives ºf J/indſºr.
4. Conceſſion of a poſition.
Nor could the Pythagorean give eaſy admittance thereto;
for, holding that ſeparate ſouls ſucceſſively ſupplied other bo-
dies, they could hardly allow the raiſing of ſouls from other
worlds. Brown's Wugar Errours, b. i.
To ADMI'x. v. a. [admiſco, Lat..] To mingle with ſome-
thing elſe.
ADMI's tion. m. ſ. [from admix.] The union of one body with
another, by mingling them.
All metals may be calcined by ſtrong waters, or by admixtion
of ſalt, ſulphur, and mercury. Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
The elements are no where pure in theſe lower regions; and
if there is any free from the admixtion of another, ſure it is
above the concave of the moon. Glanville's Scºpſis Scientifica.
There is no way to make a ſtrong and vigorous powder of
ſaltpetre, without the admixtion of ſulphur. Brown's Wulgar Err.
ADMI's TURE. m. ſ. [from admix.] The body mingled with
another; perhaps ſometimes the act of mingling.
A maſs which to the eye appears to be nothing but mere
ſimple earth, ſhall, to the ſmell or taſte, diſcover a plentiful
admixture of ſulphur, alum, or ſome other mineral.
//oodward's Natural Hiſtory, p. iv.
Whatever acrimony, or amaritude, at any time redounds in
it, muſt be derived from the admixture of another ſharp bitter
ſubſtance. Harvey on Conſumptions.
To A D MONISH. v. a. ſ.admoneo, Lat.]
To warn of a fault; to reprove gently ; to counſ l againſt
wrong practices; to put in mind of a fault or a duty; with
the particle of, or againſ, which is more rare, or the infinitive
mood of a verb. ,
One of his cardinals, who better knew the intrigues of af-
fairs, admoniſhed him againſ that unſkilful piece of ingenuity.
Decay of Piety.
He of their wicked ways
Shall them admoniſh, and before them ſet
The paths of righteouſneſs. Miſt. Par. Loſº, b. xi.
But when he was admoniſhed by his ſubject to deſcend, he
came down, gently circling in the air, and ſinging, to the
ground. Dryden's Dedication of Virgil's Paſt.
ADMo'Nish ER. n.ſ.. [from admioniſh.] The perſon that admo-
niſhes, or puts another in mind of his faults or duty.
Horace was a mild admoniſher; a court-ſatyriſt fit for the
gentle times of Auguſtus. Dryden's juvenal, Dedicat.
ADMo'Nish MENT, n.ſ.. [from adroniſh.J Admonition ; the
notice by which one is put in mind of faults or duties: a word
not often uſed.
But yet be wary in thy ſtudious care.—
—Thy grave admoniſhments prevail with me.
Shakeſpeare's Henry V. p. i.
To th’ infinitely Good we owe
Immortal thanks, and his admoniſhment
Receive, with ſolemn purpoſe to obſerve
Immutably his ſovereign will, the end -
Of what we are. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. vii. 1.77.
ADMoN 1'TION. n.ſ.. [admonitio, Lat..] The hint of a fault or
duty; counſel; gentle reproof.
They muſt give our teachers leave, for the ſaving of thoſe
ſouls, to intermingle ſometimes, with other more neceſſary
things, admonition concerning theſe not unneceſſary. Hooker.
From this admonition they took only occaſion to redouble
their fault, and to ſleep again; ſo that, upon a ſecond and third
admonition, they had nothing to plead for their unſeaſonable
drowſineſs. South's Sermons.
ADMoN1"r Ion E.R. m. ſ. [from admonition.] A liberal diſpenſer
of admonition ; a general adviſer. A ludicrous term.
Albeit the admonitioners did ſeem at firſt to like no preſcript
form of prayer at all, but thought it the beſt that their miniſter
ſhould always be left at liberty to pray, as his own diſcretion did
ſerve, their defender, and his aſſociates, have ſithence propoſed
to the world a form as themſelves did like. Hooker, b. v. § 27.
ADMo'NITORY. adj. [admonitorius, Lat.] That which admo-
niſhes.
The ſentence of reaſon is either mandatory, ſhewing what
muſt be done; or elſe permiſſive, declaring only what may be
done; or, thirdly, admonitory, opening what is the moſt conve-
nient for us to do. Hooker's Eccleſia/#, al Polity, b. i.
ADM U R MURA'ſ ION. m. ſ. ſadmurmuro, Lat] The act of mur-
muring, or whiſpering to another. JDićf.
Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D O
A D O
º,
* Po'pt ER. m. ſ. [from adopt.]
To ADMo'v E. v. a. ſ.admoveo, Lat..] To bring one thing to
another.
If, unto the powder of loadſtone or iron, we admove the north-
pole of the loadſtone, the powders, or ſmall diviſions, will erect
and conform themſelves thereto. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b ii.
Ado'. n.ſ.. [from the verb to do, with a before it, as the French
“ſ. from a and faire.]
rouble, difficulty.
He took Clitophon priſoner, whom, with much ado, he keep-
eth alive; the Helots being villainouſly cruel. Sidney, b, i.
They moved, and in the end perſuaded, with much ado, the
people to bind themſelves by ſolemn oath. Hooker, Pref.
He kept the borders and marches of the pale with much
ado; he held many parliaments, wherein ſundry laws were
made. Sir john Davies on Ireland.
With much ado, he partly kept awake;
Not ſuff'ring all his eyes repoſe to take:
And aſk'd the ſtranger, who did reeds invent,
And whence began ſo rare an inſtrument. Dryden.
2. Buſtle; tumult; buſineſs; ſometimes with the particle about.
Let's follow, to ſee the end of this ado.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
All this ado about Adam's fatherhood, and the greatneſs of its
power, helps nothing to eſtabliſh the power of thoſe that go-
Vern. Locke.
3. It has a light and ludicrous ſenſe, implying more tumult and
ſhew of buſineſs, than the affair is worth ; in this ſenſe it is
generally uſed.
I made no more ado, but took all their ſeven points in m
target, thus. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
We'll keep no great ado—a friend or two—
For, hark, Tybalt being ſlain ſo late,
It may be thought we held him careleſly,
Being our kinſman, if we revel much. Shakeſp. Rom.andjul.
Come, come, ſays Puſs, without any more ado, 'tis time
for me to go to breakfaſt; for cats don't live upon dialogues.
L’Eſtrange, Fab. ii.
I.
Adole'scEN ce. n.ſ.. [adoleſentia, Lat.]
The age ſucceeding childhood, and ſucceeded by puberty;
more largely, that part of life in which the body has not yet
reached its full perfection. See Adolescency.
The ſons muſt have a tedious time of childhood and adoleſ:
cence, before they can either themſelves aſſiſt their parents, or
encourage them with new hopes of poſterity. Bentley's Serm.
ADole'scency. n.ſ. The ſame with adoleſcence.
He was ſo far from a boy, that he was a man born, and at
his full ſtature, if we believe Joſephus, who places him in the
laſt adoleſcency, and makes him twenty-five years old.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v. c. 8.
To ADOPT. v. a. ſadopto, Lat.]
1. To take a ſon by choice; to make him a ſon, who was not ſo
by birth.
Were none of all my father's ſiſters left;
Nay, were I of my mother's kin bereft;
None by an uncle's or a grandame's ſide,
Yet I cou’d ſome adopted heir provide. Dryd. Perſ. Sat vi.
2- . To place any perſon or thing in a nearer relation, than they
have by nature, to ſomething elſe.
Whether, adopted to ſome neighb'ring ſtar,
Thou roll'ſt above us, in thy wand'ring race,
Or, in proceſſion fix’d and regular,
Mov’d with the heav'ns majeſtic pace;
Or call'd to more celeſtial bliſs,
Thou tread'ſt, with ſeraphims, the vaſt abyſs. Dryd.
We are ſeldom at eaſe from the ſolicitation of our natural
or adopted deſires; but a conſtant ſucceſſion of uneaſineſſes,
&lt;&gt;ut of that ſtock, which natural wants, or acquired habits, have
heaped up, take the will in their turns. Locke.
PS'PTE DLY. adv. [from adopted.] After the manner of ſome-
thing adopted.
Adoptedly, as ſchool-maids change their names,
By vain, though apt, affection. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Maſ.
He that gives ſome one by choice the rights of a ſon.
A Do'ption. n. f. [adºptio, Lat.]
* - The act of adopting, or taking to one's ſelf what is not native.
See the hell of having a falſe woman My bed ſhall be a-
buſed, my coffers ranſacked, my reputation gnawn at ; and I
fhall not only receive this villainous wrong, but ſtand under
the adºption of abominable terms, and by him that does me the
, wrong. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of J/indſor.
* The ſtate of being adopted.
In which time ſhe purpos'd,
By watching, weeping, tendance, kiſſing, to
O'ercome you with her ſhew : yes, and in time
(When ſhe had fitted you with her craft) to work
Her ſon into th' adoption of the crown. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
In every ačt of our chriſtian worſhip, we are taught to call
upon him under the endearing character of our Father, to re-
mind us of our adoption, that we are made heirs of God, and
joint heirs of Chriſt. Rogers's Sermons.
ºptive. adj. [adoptivus, Lat.]
Vol. I.
1. He that is adopted by another, and made his ſon.
It is impoſſible an eleētive monarch ſhould be ſo free and
abſolute as an hereditary; no more than it is poſſible for a fa-
ther to have ſo full power and intereſt in an adoptive ſon, as in
a natural. Bacon's Conſiderations on a 1/ar with Spain.
2. He that adopts another, and makes him his ſon.
An adopted ſon cannot cite his adºptive father into court,
without his leave. . Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
ADo'RABLE. adj. [adorable, Fr.] That which ought to be ado-
red; that which is worthy of divine honours.
On theſe two, viz. the love of God, and our neighbour,
hang both the law and the prophets, ſays the adorable Author of
chriſtianity; and the Apoſtle ſays, the end of the law is cha-
rity. - Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principles.
ADo'RABLENESS. m. ſ. [from adorable.] The quality of being
adorable; worthineſs of divine honours.
A Do'RABLY. adv. [from adorable.] In a manner worthy of
adoration.
ADoRA'tion. m. ſ. ſadoratio, Lat.]
1. The external homage paid to the Divinity,diſtinét from men-
tal reverence. -
Solemn and ſerviceable worſhip we name, for diſtinétion
ſake, whatſoever belongeth to the church, or publick ſociety,
of God, by way of external adoration. Booker, b. v. § 4.
It is poſſible to ſuppoſe, that thoſe who believe a ſupreme
excellent Being, may yet give him no external adoration at all.
Stillingfleet's Defence of Diſcourſes on Rom. Idolatry.
2. Homage paid to perſons in high place or eſteem.
O ceremony, ſhew me but thy worth:
What is thy toll, O adoration /
Art thou nought elſe but place, degree, and form,
Creating awe and fear in other men
Wherein thou art leſs happy, being fear'd,
Than they in fearing.
What drink'ſt thou oft, inſtead of homage ſweet,
But poiſon'd flattery Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
To ADOR.E. v. a. ſadoro, Lat.]
1. To worſhip with external homage; to pay divine honours.
The mountain nymphs and Themis they adore,
And from her oracles relief implore. Dryden.
2. It is uſed, popularly, to denote a high degree of reverence or
regard; to reverence; to honour; to love.
The people appear adoring their prince, and their prince
adoring God. Tatler, Nº 57.
ADo'REMENT. n.ſ.. [from adore.] Adoration ; worſhip; a
word ſcarcely uſed. -
The prieſts of elder times deluded their apprehenſions with
ſooth-ſaying, and ſuch oblique idolatries, and won their credu-
lities to the literal and downright adorement of cats, lizzards,
and beetles. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i. c. 3.
Ado'RER. n.ſ.. [from adore.] -
He that adores; a worſhiper : a term generally uſed in a
low ſenſe; as, by lovers, or admirers.
Being ſo far provoked as I was in France, I would abate her
nothing; though I profeſs myſelf her adorer, not her friend.
Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Whilſt as th’ approaching pageant does appear,
And echoing crouds ſpeak mighty Venus near;
I, her adorer, too devoutly ſtand
Faſt on the utmoſt margin of the land.
2. A worſhipper, in a ſerious ſenſe.
He was ſo ſevere an adorer of truth, as not to diſſemble; or
to ſuffer any man to think that he would do any thing, which
he reſolved not to do. Clarendon.
To ADO'R.N. v. a. [adorno, Lat.]
1. To dreſs; to deck the perſon with ornaments.
He hath cloathed me with the garments of ſalvation, he
hath covered me with the robe of righteouſneſs, as a bride.
groom decketh himſelf with ornaments, and as a bride adorn-
eth herſelf with her jewels. Iſaiah, lxi. 10.
Yet 'tis not to adorn and gild each part,
That ſhews more coſt than art;
Jewels at noſe and lips, but ill appear.
2. To ſet out any place or thing with decorations.
A gallery adorned with the pićtures or ſtatues of the invention
of things uſeful to human life. Cowley.
3. To embelliſh with oratory or elegance of language.
This will ſupply men's tongues with many new things, to
be named, adorned, and deſcribed, in their diſcourſe.
Sprat's Hiſtory of the Royal Society.
Thouſands there are in darker fame that dwell,
Whoſe names ſome nobler poem ſhall adorn ;
For, though unknown to me, they ſure fought well. Dryd.
ADo'RNMENT. n.ſ.. [from adorn.] Ornament; embelliſhment;
elegance.
Which attribute was not given to the earth, while it was
confuſed ; nor to the hcavens, before they had motion and
adornment. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the Iłºrld.
She held the very garment of Poſthumus in more reſpect than
my noble and natural perſon, together with the adornºcnt of
my qualities. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
A powN. a.d.º. (from a and down.] Down; on the ground.
K Thrice
Prizr.
Cowley.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D V
A D V
hrice did ſhe ſink adown in deadly ſound. º -
Aº. he her reviv'd with buſy pain. º º º
Ado'w N. prep. Down; towards the ground ; from a nig
ſituation towards a lower. . .
in this remembrance Emily ºre "y
Aroſe, and dreſs'd *::: lil º fair
- and as the 9. »
Fº #". ºff her length of hair. ... Pºyd. Fables.
ApsiAD. adv. [from 4 and dread; as, aſide, :ſ: aſleep.]
In a ſtate of fear; frighted tº ificq : now obſolete.
And thinking to make all men adread º a one an º
my, who would not ſpare, nor fear to kill ſo great s}. ii.
Apri'Ft. adv. [from a and drift, from drive.] -
Floating at random ; as: any impulſe may drive.
Then, ſhall this mount
f paradiſe, by might of waves, be mov’d
9. his ſº puſh’d by the horned flood ;
With all his verdure º and trees ºft
own the great river, to the opening gulf, -
. there take root. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi. 1. 832.
It ſeem’d a corps adrift to diſtant fight;
But at a diſtance who could judge aright. Dryd. Fables.
ºn offrequent reflection will keep their mind.”
running adrift, and call their thoughts home from uſeleſs uſ-
attentive roving. Locłe on Educatiºn, § 176.
ADROIT, adj. [French.] Dextrous; active; ſkilful.
An adrºit flout fellow would º a whole fa-
;1... …ith inſki arently againſt him the whole time.
mily, with juſtice app y º, Introdući. to Don Quixote.
dro'It Ness. n.ſ. ſfrom adroit.]
A iº, iſ..." activity. Neither this word, nor a-
droit, ſeem yet completely naturalized. - - -
ADRY', adv. [from a and dry.] Athirſt; thirſty ; in want of drink.
He never told any of them, that he was his humble ſervant,
but his well-wiſher; and would rather be thought a malºon;
tent, than drink the king's health when he was not adry. Speci.
Abscit I'tious. adj. [adjititius, Lat.]
Thiſ which is taken in to complete ſomething elſe, though
originally extrinſick; ſupplemental : additional.
Apsirri"ction. n. ſ. [adjirićlio, Lat..] ..
The act of binding together; and applied, generally, to me-
dicaments and applications, which have the power of making
the part contračt.
To ADVANCE. v. a. ſavancer, Fr.]
1. To bring forward, in the local ſenſe.
Now morn, her roſy ſteps in th’ eaſtern clime
Advancing, ſow'd the earth with orient pearl. Parad. Lºft.
2. To raiſe to preferment; to aggrandize.
The declaration of the greatneſs of Mordecai, whereunto
the king advanced him. Eſther, x. 2.
3. To improve.
What laws can be adviſed more proper and effectual to ad-
vance the nature of man to its higheſt perfection, than theſe pre-
cepts of chriſtianity ? Tillºtſºn.
4. To heighten; to grace; to give luſtre to.
As the calling dignifies the man, ſo the man much more ad-
vances his calling. As a garment, though it warms the body,
has a return with an advantage, being much more warmed by
it. South's Sermons.
5. To forward; to accelerate.
Theſe three laſt were ſlower than the ordinary Indian wheat
of itſelf; and this culture did rather retard than advance. Bacon.
6. To propoſe; to offer to the publick.
I dare not advance my opinion againſt the judgment of ſo
great an author; but I think it fair to leave the deciſion to the
publick. Dryden's Fables, Prºf.
Some ne'er advance a judgment of their own,
But catch the ſpreading notion of the town. Pop. Eſ on Crit.
To Adva'Nce. v. n. -
1. To come forward.
At this the youth, whoſe vent’rous ſoul
No fears of magick art controul,
Advanc'd in open fight. Parnel.
2. To make improvement.
They who would advance in knowledge, and not deceive and
ſwell themſelves with a little articulated air, ſhould not take
words for real entities in nature, till they can frame clear and
diſtinét ideas of thoſe entities. Locke.
ADyA'NcE. m. ſ. [from to advance.]
1. The act of coming forward.
All the foot were put into Abington, with a reſolution to
quit, or defend, the town, according to the manner of the ene-
my’s advance towards it. Clarendon, b. viii.
So, like the ſun's advance, your titles ſhow;
Which, as he riſes, does the warmer grow. J/aller.
2. A tendency to come forward to meet a lover; an adt of invi-
tation.
In vain are all the practis'd wiles,
In vain thoſe eyes would love impart;
. Nºt all th’ advances, all the ſmiles,
Can move one unrelenting heart. JWalſh,
2
His genius was below
The ſkill of ev'ry common beau;
Who, tho’ he cannot ſpell, is wife
Enough to read a lady's eyes;
And will each accidental glance
Interpret for a kind advance. - Swift's Miſall.
He has deſcribed the unworthy paſſion of the goddeſs Ca-
lypſo, and the indecent advances ſhe made to detain him from
his own country. - Pope's Odyſſey, b. vii. notes.
3. Progreſſion; riſe from one point to another.
Gur Saviour raiſed the ruler's daughter, the widow's ſon,
and Lazarus; the firſt of theſe, when ſhe had juſt expired;
the ſecond, as he was carried to the grave on his bier; and the
third, after he had been ſome time buried. And having, by
theſe gradual advances, manifeſted his divine power, he at laſt
exerted the higheſt and moſt glorious degree of it; and raiſed
himſelf alſo by his own all-quickening virtue, and according to
his own expreſs prediction. Atterbury's Sermons.
Men of ſtudy and thought, that reaſon right, and are lovers
of truth, do make no great advances in their diſcoveries of it.
Locke ºf Hºman Underſtanding, $ 3.
4. Improvement; progreſs towards perfection.
The principle and object of the greateſt importance in the
world to the good of mankind, and for the advance and per-
fe&amp;ting of human nature. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
Adva'Nce MENT. m. ſ. ſavancement, Fr.]
1. The act of coming forward.
This refinement having begun about the time of the revolu-
tion, I had ſome ſhare in the honour of promoting it; and I
obſerve, that it makes daily advancements, and, I hope, in time,
will raiſe our language to the utmoſt perfection. Swift.
2. The ſtate of being advanced; preferment.
During whoſe reign, the Percies of the North
Finding his uſurpation moſt unjuſt,
Endeavour'd my advancement to the throne.
Shakespeare's IHenry VI. p. i.
3. The aët of advancing another.
In his own grace he doth exalt himſelf
More than in your advancement. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear.
4. Improvement.
Nor can we conceive it may be unwelcome unto thoſe ho-
noured worthies, who endeavour the advancement of learning.
Brown's Prºf. to Wugar Errours.
Adva's cer. n.ſ.. [from advance.]
He that advances any thing; a promoter; forwarder. -
Soon after the death of a great officer, who was judged no
advancer of the king's matters, the king ſaid to his ſolicitor
Bacon, who was his kinſman, How, tell me truly, what ſay you
of your couſin that is gone? Bacon's Apothºgºns.
}. us add only this concerning this latter ſort, that they are
greater advancers of defamatory deſigns, than the very firſt con-
trivers. Government ºf the ſongwe, § 5.
ADVANTAGE. m. ſ. ſavantage, Fr.]
1. Superiority; often with of or over before a perſon.
In the practical prudence of managing ſuch gifts, the laity
may have ſome advantage over the clergy; whoſe experience
is, and ought to be, leſs of this world than the others. Sprat.
All other forts and ſects of men would evidently have the
advantage of us, and a much ſurer title to happineſs than we.
Afterbury's Prºface to his Sermons.
2. Superiority gained by ſtratagem, or unlawful means.
The common law hath left them this benefit, whereof they
make advantage, and wreſt it to their bad purpoſes.
Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
But ſpecially he took advantage of the night for ſuch privy
attempts, inſomuch that the bruit of his manlineſs was ſpread
every-where. 2 Aſacc. viii. 7.
It is a noble and a ſure defiance of a great malice, backed
with a great intereſt; which yet can have no advantage of a
man, but from his own expectatiºns of ſomething that is with-
out him. South's Sermons.
As ſoon as he was got to Sicily, they ſent for him back; de-
ſigning to take advantage, and proſecute him in the abſence of
his friends. Swift on the Diffºnt. in Athens and Rome.
3. Opportunity; convenience.
I beſeech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of ſome brief diſcourſe
With Deſdemona alone. Shakespeare's Othello.
4. Favourable circumſtances.
Like jewels to advantage ſet,
Her beauty by the ſhade does get. J/allºr.
A face, which is over-fiuſhed, appears to advantage in the
deepeſt ſcarlet, and the darkeſt complexion is not a little alle-
viated by a black hood. Addison. Spectator, N- 265.
True wit is nature to advantage dreſs'd,
What oft was thought, but ne'er ſo well expreſs'd.
- Pºpe's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
5. Gain; profit.
For thou ſaidſt, what advantage will it be unto thee, and what
profit ſhall I have, if I be cleanſed from my fin jet, xxxv. 3.
Certain
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">Certain it is, that advantage now ſits in the room of conſci-
ence, and ſteers all. South's Sermons.
6. Overplus ; ſomething more than the mere lawful gain.
O my gentle Hubert,
We owe thee much ; within this wall of fleſh
There is a ſoul counts thee her creditor,
And with advantage means to pay thy love. -
Shakespeare's King John.
You ſaid, you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
7. Preponderation on one ſide of the compariſon.
Much more ſhould the conſideration of this pattern arm us
with patience againſt ordinary calamities; eſpecially if we con-
fider his example with this advantage, that though his ſuffer-
ings were wholly undeſerved, and not for himſelf but for us,
yet he bore them patiently. Tillotſon.
To Adva'N TAGE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To benefit.
Convey what I ſet down to my lady: it ſhall advantage
more than ever the bearing of letter did.
Shakeſpeare's Twelfth-Night.
The great buſineſs of the ſenſes being to make us take no-
tice of what hurts or advantages the body, it is wiſely ordered
by nature, that pain ſhould accompany the reception of ſeveral
ideas. Locke.
We ſhould have purſued ſome other way, more effectual, for
diſtreſſing the common enemy, and advantaging ourſelves. Swift.
The trial hath endamag'd thee no way, -
Rather more honour left, and more eſteem;
Me naught advantag’d, miſſing what I aim'd. Par. Regained.
2. To promote; to bring forward; to gain ground.
To ennoble it with the ſpirit that inſpires the Royal Society,
were to advantage it in one of the beſt capacities in which it is
improveable. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica, Prºf.
ADVANTAGE D. adj. [from tº advantage.]
Poſſeſſed of advantages.
In the moſt advantaged tempers, this diſpoſition is but compa-
rative; whereas the moſt of men labour under diſadvantages,
which nothing can rid them off. Glanv Scepſis Scientifica.
Adva's TAGE-GRoun D. m. ſ. Ground that gives ſuperiority,
and opportunities of annoyance or reſiſtance.
This excellent man, who ſtood not upon the advantage-
ground before, from the time of his promotion to the archbiſho-
prick, or rather from that of his being commiſſioner of the trea-
ſury, exceedingly provoked, or underwent the envy, and re-
proach, and malice of men of all qualitics and conditions; who
agreed in nothing elſe. Clarendon.
ADVANTA'GEous. adj. [avantageux, Fr.]
1. Of advantage; profitable ; uſeful; opportune; convenient.
The time offickneſs, or afflićtion, is, like the cool of the day
to Adam, a ſeaſon of peculiar propriety for the voice of God to
be heard; and may be improved into a very advantageous op-
portunity of begetting or increaſing ſpiritual life in the ſoul.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
Here perhaps
Some advantageous act may be atchiev'd
By ſudden onſet, either with hell-fire
To waſte his whole creation; or poſſeſs
All as our own. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii. l. 363.
2. It is uſed with relation to perſons, and followed by to.
Since every painter paints himſelf in his own works, ’tis ad-
vantageous to him to know himſelf, to the end that he may cul-
tivate thoſe talents which make his genius. Dryd. Dufreſnoy.
A Dv ANTA'GeoUSLY. adv. [from advantageous.]
Conveniently; opportunely; profitably.
It was advantageouſly ſituated, there being an eaſy paſſage
from it to AEgypt, Æthiopia, Perſia, and India, by ſea. Arbuth.
A Dv ANT A/G Eousness. n.ſ.. [from ...;
Quality of being advantageous; profitableneſs; uſefulneſs ;
Convenience.
The laſt property, which qualifies God for the fitteſt objećt
of our love, is, the advantageouſneſs of his to us, both in the
reſent and the future life. Boyle's Seraphic Love.
To ADVENE. v. n. [advento, Lat.]
To accede to ſomething; to become part of ſomething elſe,
without being eſſential; to be ſuperadded.
A ſixth cauſe conſidered in judicature, is ſtiled an accidental
cauſe; and the accidental of any act, is ſaid to be whatever ad-
venes to the act itſelf already ſubſtantiated. Ayliff's Parergon.
Adve'NIENT. adj. [adveniens, Lat.] -
Advening; coming from outward cauſes; ſuperadded.
If to ſuppoſe the ſoul a diſtinct ſubſtance from the body, and
extrinſecally advenient, be a great error in philoſophy, almoſt all
the world hath hitherto been miſtaken.
- Glanville's Panity of Dogmatiſm.
Being thus divided from truth in themſelves, they are yet
farther removed by advenient deception; for they are daily
mocked into error by ſubtler deviſers. Brown's hug. Errours.
A'Dw ENT. n. /.. [from adventus ; that is, adventus Redemptoris.]
The name of one of the holy ſeaſons, ſignifying the coming ;
that is, the coming of our Saviour; which is made the ſubječt of
our devotion during the four weeks before Chriſtmas.
Adve'NTINE, adj. [from advenia, adventum.]. -
Adventitious; that which is extrinſically added; that which
comes from outward cauſes: a word ſcarcely in uſe.
As for the peregrine heat, it is thus far true, that, if the pro-
portion of the advertine heat be greatly predominant to the na-
tural heat and ſpirits of the body, it tendeth to diſſolution or
notable alteration. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº 836.
ADVENTITIOUs, adj. [adventitius, Lat.]
That which advenes; accidental; ſupervenient; extrinſ-
cally added, not eſſentially inherent.
Diſeaſes of continuance get an adventitious ſtrength from
cuſtom, beſides their material cauſe from the humours. Bacon.
Though we may call the obvious colours natural, and the
others adventitious; yet ſuch changes of colours, from whatſo-
ever cauſe they proceed, may be properly enough taken in, to
illuſtrate the preſent ſubject. Boyle on Colours.
If his blood boil, and th' adventitious fire -
Rais'd by high meats, and higher wines, require
To temper and allay the burning heat;
Waters are brought, which by decoction get
New coolneſs. Dryd, juvena', Sat. v.
Of this we have an inſtance in the gem-kind; where, of
the many ſorts reckoned up by lapidaries, there are not above
three or four that are original; their diverſities, as to luſtre,
colour, and hardneſs, ariſing from the different admixture of
other adventitious mineral matter. Wºodward's Natural H/?.
ADye'Ntive., n.ſ. [from advenio, Lat.] The thing or perſon
that comes from without: a word not now in uſe.
That the natives be not ſo many, but that there may be el-
bow-room enough for them, and for the ad extives alſo.
Bacon's Advice to Sir George Williers,
ADVE'NTUAL. adj. [from advent.]
Relating to the ſeaſon of advent.
I do alſo daily uſe one other colleót; as, namely, the colle@s
adventual, quadrageſimal, paſchal, or pentecchāl, for their pro-
per ſeaſons. Biſhºp Saunderſon upon Suvoiſion to Ujirpers.
ADVENTURE. m. ſ. [French.
I. An accident; a chance; a hazard; an event of which we have
no direction.
The general ſummoned three caſtles that were near : one
deſperate of ſuccour, and not deſirous to diſpute the defence,
preſently yielded; but two ſtood upon their adventure.
Sir John Hayward.
2. In this ſenſe is uſed the phraſe, at all adventures; [a l'adven-
ture, Fr.] By chance; without any rational ſcheme.
Blows flew at all adventures, wounds and deaths given and
taken unexpected; many ſcarce knowing their enemies from
their friends. - Sir John Hayward.
Where the mind does not perceive this probable connection,
there men's opinions are the effects of chance and hazard, of a
mind floating at all adventures, without choice and without di-
rečtion. Locke.
3. The occaſion of caſual events; an enterpriſe in which ſome-
thing muſt be left to hazard.
For I muſt love, and am reſolv'd, to try
My fate, or, failing in th’ adventure, die. Dryden's Fahler.
This noun, with all its derivatives, are frequently writteri
without ad; as, venture, venturous.
To Adve'N'TURE. v. n. [adventurer, Fr.]
1. To try the chance; to dare.
Be not angry,
Moſt mighty princeſs, that I have adventur'd
To try your taking of a falſe report. Shakespeare. Cymbeline.
The tender and delicate woman among you, which would
not adventure to ſet the ſole of her foot upon the ground, for
delicateneſs and tenderneſs. De ter. xxviii. 26.
2. In an active ſenſe, to put into the power of chance.
For my father fought for you, and advertured his life for, and
delivered you out of the hand of Midian. judges, ix. 17.
3. It is often uſed with the reciprocal pronoun; as, he adventured
himſelf.
AD v EN rur ER. n.ſ.. [adventurier, Fr.]
He that ſeeks occaſions of hazard; he that puts himſelf in
the hands of chance.
He is a great adventurer, ſaid he,
That hath his ſword through hard aſſay forgone,
And now hath vow'd, till he avenged be
Of that deſpight, never to wear none. Fairy Qſeen, b. ii.
The kings of England did not make the conqueſt of Ireland
their own work; it was begun by particular adventurers, and
other voluntaries, who came to ſeek their fortunes in Ireland.
Sir jºhn Davies on Ireland.
In this ačtion, highly commendable, he intended to hazard
his own ačtion, that ſo the more eaſily he might win adventur-
ers, who elſe were like to be leſs forward. Sir ſ?". Raj gh’s Eff.
Had it not been for the Britiſh, which the late wars drcºv
over, and of adventurers or ſoldiers feated here, the country had,
by the laſt war, and plague, been ieft, in a manner, deſtitute.
Teºple's Aſſºcilanies.
Their wealthy trade from pirate's rapine free,
Our merchants ſhall no more advent’rers be.
Dryden.
Apy = N-
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D V
A D V
AD VE's TU Rous. adj. [adventureux, Fr.]
1. He that is inclined to adventures; and, conſequently, bold,
daring, courageous. -
At land and ſea, in many a doubtful fight,
Was never known a more advent'rous knight;
Who oftner drew his ſword, and always for the right.
Dryd. Hind and Panther.
2. Applied to things; that which is full of hazard; which re-
quires courage; dangerous.
But I've already troubled you too long,
Nor dare attempt a more advent'rous ſong.
My humble verſe demands a ſofter theme; -
A painted meadow, or a purling ſtream. Addiſon.
ADv E'NTURously. adv. [from adventurous.]
After an adventurous manner ; boldly ; daringly.
They are both hanged; and ſo would this be, if he durſt
ſteal anything adventurouſly. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Adve'N'TUREsoME. adj. [from adventure.]
The ſame with adventurous: a low word, ſcarcely uſed in
writing.
Adve'N'T UREsom ENEss. n.ſ.. [from adventureſome]
The quality of being adventureſome. Dić7.
A'DVER B. m. ſ. [adverbium, Lat.j
A word joined to a verb or adjective, and ſolely applied to
the uſe of qualifying and reſtraining the latitude of their ſigni-
fication, by the intimation of ſome circumſtance thereof; as,
of quality, manner, degree. Clarke's Latin Grammar.
Thus we ſay, he runs ſwiftly; the bird flies aloft; he lives
virtuouſly.
ADv E'R BIAL. adj. [adverbialis, Lat.]
That which has the quality or ſtructure of an adverb.
AD VERBIALLY. adv, [adverbialiter, Lat.]
Like an adverb; in the manner of an adverb.
I ſhould think alta was joined adverbially with tremit, did
Virgil make uſe of ſo equivocal a ſyntax. Addison Rem. on Italy.
ADVERSA BLE. adj. [from adverſe.]
Contrary to ; oppoſite to. Dººf.
ADWERSARIA. m. ſ. [Lat. A book, as it ſhould ſeem, in
which Debtor and Creditor were ſet in oppoſition.] A com-
mon-place; a book to note in.
Theſe parchments are ſuppoſed to have been St. Paul's ad-
verſaria. Bull's Sermons.
A'Dv ERS ARY. n.ſ.. [adverſaire, Fr. adverſarius, Lat.]
An opponent; antagoniſt; enemy: generally applied to
thoſe that have verbal or judicial quarrels; as, controvertiſts or
litigants: ſometimes to an opponent in ſingle combat. It ma
ſometimes imply an open profeſſion of enmity; as we ſay, a
ſecret enemy is worſe than an open adverſary.
Yet am I noble, as the adverſary
I come to cope. Shakeſpeare's King Icar.
Thoſe rites and ceremonies of the church, therefore, which
were the ſelf-ſame now that they were, when holy and virtuous
men maintained them againſt profane and deriding adverſaries,
her own children have in deriſion. Hooker, b. i. § 1.
Mean while th' adverſary of God and man,
Satan, with thoughts inflam’d, of higheſt deſign,
Puts on ſwift wings. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ii. 1.62o.
An adverſary, on the contrary, makes a ſtricter ſearch into
us, and diſcovers every flaw and imperfection in our tempers.
A friend exaggerates a man's virtues; an enemy inflames his
crimes. Addison. Speciator, N° 399.
AD VE'RSAT Ive. adj. [adverſativus, Lat.j
A term of grammar, applied to a word which makes ſome
oppoſition or variety; as in this ſentence: This diamond is
orient, but it is rough. But is an adverſative conjunction.
ADVERSE. adj. [adverſus, Lat.]
In proſe it has now the accent on the firſt ſyllable; in verſe
it is accented on the firſt by Shakeſpeare; on either, indifferent-
ly, by Milton ; on the laſt, by Dryden; on the firſt, by Roſ-
cº/frºzºz. -
1. Acting with contrary direétions; as, two bodies in colliſion.
Was I for this nigh wreckt upon the ſea,
And twice, by adverſe winds, from England's bank
Drove back again unto my native clime. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
As when two polar winds blowing adverſ,
• Upon the Cronian ſea together drive
Mountains of ice. Milton's Paradiſ Loft, b. x. l. 289.
With adverſe blaſt up-turns them from the South,
Notus and Afer. Ilid. l. 7o 1.
A cloud of ſmoke envelopes either hoſt,
And all at once the combatants are loſt;
Darkling they join adverſe, and ſhock unſcen;
Courſers with courſers juſtling, men with men. Dryd.
2. Figuratively, contrary to the wiſh or defire; thence, calami-
tous; afflictive ; pernicious. It is oppoſed to proſperous.
What if he hath decreed, that I ſhall firſt
He try’d in humble ſtate, and things adverſe;
By tribulations, injuries, inſults,
Contempts, and ſcorns, and ſnares, and violence. Par. Reg.
Some the prevailing malice of the great,
Unhappy men, or adverſ fate,
Sunk deep into the gulfs of an afflicted ſtate. Rºſammon.
3. Perſonally opponent; the perſon that countera&amp;s another, or
conteſts anything.
Well ſhe ſaw her father was grown her adverſe party; and
yet her fortune ſuch, as ſhe muſt favour her rivals. Sidney.
Adve'RSITY. m. ſ. [adverſit., Fr.]
Affliction; calamity; that is, oppoſition to our wiſhes.
I. The cauſe of our ſorrow ; affliction; misfortune. In this ſenſe
it º a plural.
t me embrace theſe ſour adverſities,
For wiſe men ſay, it is the wifeſt courſe. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
. The ſtate of uuhappineſs; miſery.
Sweet are the uſes of adverſity,
Which like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head. Shaft. A yºu like it.
Concerning deliverance itſelf from all adverſity, we uſe not
to ſay men are in adverſity, whenſoever they feel any ſmall
hinderance of their welfare in this world, but when ſome not-
able afflićtion or croſs, ſome great calamity or trouble, befall-
eth them. - Hºoker, b. v. § 48.
A remembrance of the good uſe he had made of proſperity,
contributed to ſupport his mind under the heavy weight of ad-
verſity, which then lay upon him. Afterbury's Sermons.
Adve'RSLY. adv. [from adverſ..]
In an adverſe manner; oppoſitely; unfortunately.
What I think, I utter, and ſpend my malice in my breath.
Meeting two ſuch wealſmen as you are, (I cannot cali you Ly-
curgulies) if the drink you give me touch my palate adverſy, I
make a crooked face at it. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
To ADVERT. v. n. [adverto, Lat.]
To attend to ; to regard; to obſºrve; with the particle to
before the object of regard.
The mind of man being not capable at once to a fºrt to
more than one thing, a particular view and examination of
ſuch an innumerable number of vaſt bodies, will afford matter
of admiration. Ray on the Creation.
Now to the univerſal whole advert;
The earth regard as of that whole a part;
In which wide frame more noble worlds abound 3
Witneſs, ye glorious orbs, which hang around. Blackmore.
We ſometimes ſay, 7% advert the mind to an objeń.
Adve'RTEN ce. n.ſ.. [from advert.]
Attention to ; regard to; conſideration.
Chriſtianity may make Archimedes his challenge; give it
but where it may ſet its foot; allow but a ſober advertence
to its propoſals, and it will move the whole world.
Decay of Piety.
ADye'RTENcy. m. ſ. [from advert.]
The ſame with advertence. Attention; regard; heedfulneſs.
Too much advertency is not your talent; or elſe you had
fled from that text, as from a rock. Swift.
To ADVERTISE. v. a. [advertir, Fr.]
It is now ſpoken with the accent upon the laſt ſyllable; but
appears to have been anciently accented on the ſecond.
1. To inform another; to give intelligence; with an accuſatae
of the perſon informed.
The biſhop did require a reſpite,
Wherein he might the king his lord advertiſe,
Whether our daughter were legitimate.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
As I by friends am well advertiſed,
Sir Edmund Courtney, and the haughty prelate,
Biſhop of Exeter, his clier brother,
With many more confederates are in arms.
Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
2. To inform; to give notice; with of before the ſubject of in-
formation.
The death of Selymus nothing ſuſpected, Ferhates, under-
ſtanding that Solyman expected more aſſured advertiſement,
ſent unto the other Baſſas; unto whom he declared the death
of the emperor: #. which they, by another meſſenger, adver-
tiſed Solyman; firming thoſe letters with all their hands and
ſeals. t Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
They were to advertiſe the chief hero of the diſtreſſes of his
ſubjects, occaſioned by his abſence, to crave his ſuccour, and
folicite him to haſten his return. Dryd. Prºf. Dufreſh.
3. To give notice of any thing, by means of an advertiſement in
the publick prints; as, He advertiſed his loſs.
ADV ERTI's EMENT, or ADVERTIs EMENT. n.ſ.. [advertiſ-
ment, Fr.]
I. Inſtruction; admonition.
—'Tis all men's office to ſpeak patience
To thoſe, that wring under the load of ſorrow ;
But no man's virtue nor ſufficiency,
To be ſo moral, when he ſhall endure
The like himſelf: therefore give me no counſel;
My griefs are louder than advertiſement.
Shakeſpeare's Much ad about Nothing.
2. Intelligence; information.
Then, as a cunning prince that uſeth ſpies,
If they return no news, doth nothing know ;
But if they make advertiſement of lies,
The prince's counſel all awry do go, Sir john Davies.
3 He
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D V
A D U
He had received advertiſement, that the party, which was ſent
for his relief from London, had received ſome bruſh in Somer-
ſetſhire, which would much retard their march. Clarendon.
The drum and trumpet, by their ſeveral ſounds, ſerve for
many kinds of advertiſements, in military affairs: the bells ſerve
to proclaim a ſcare-fire; and, in ſome places, water-breaches ;
the departure of a man, woman, or child; time of divine ſer-
vice; the hour of the day; day of the month. . Holder.
. Notice of any thing publiſhed in a paper of intelligence.
Adverti's ER. n.ſ.. [advertiſeur, Fr.]
1. He that gives intelligence or information.
2. The paper in which advertiſements are publiſhed.
Adve'RTIsING, or Advert 1'sing. part. adj. [from advertiſe.]
Aétive in giving intelligence; monitory: a word not now in
uſe.
As I was then
Advertiſing, and holy to your buſineſs,
Not changing heart with habit, I am ſtill
Attornied at your ſervice. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
To Adve'sPERATE. v. m. [adveſpero, Lat.]
To draw towards evening. Dić”.
Advi'ce. n ſ [avis, advis, Fr. from adviſo, low Latin.]
1. Counſel; inſtrućtion: except that inſtruction implies ſuperio-
rity, and advice may be given by equals or inferiors.
Break we our match up, and, by my advice,
Let us impart what we have ſeen to-night
Unto young Hamlet. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
O troubled, weak and coward, as thou art
Without thy poor advice, the lab’ring heart
To worſe extremes with ſwifter ſteps would run;
Not ſav'd by virtue, yet by vice undone. Prior.
2. Reflection; prudent conſideration; as, he always ačts with
good advice.
What he hath won, that he hath fortified:
So hot a ſpeed, with ſuch advice diſpos'd,
Such temperate order, in ſo fierce a courſe,
Doth want example. Shakeſp. Kingjohn.
3. Conſultation; deliberation; with the particle with.
Great princes, for the moſt part, taking advice with work-
men, with no leſs coſt, ſet their things together. Bacon's Eſ.
4. Intelligence; as, the merchants received advice of their loſs.
This ſenſe is ſomewhat low, and chiefly commercial.
Advi'ce-BoA.T. m. ſ. A veſſel employed to bring intelligence.
Advi's able. adj. [from adviſe.] Prudent; fit to be adviſed.
Some judge it adviſable for a man to account with his heart
every day; and this, no doubt, is the beſt and ſureſt courſe;
for Hi the oftner, the better. South's Sermons.
It is not adviſable to reward, where men have the tenderneſs
not to puniſh. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
ADv I's ABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from adviſable.] The quality of being
adviſable, or fit; fitneſs; propriety.
To ADVI'SE. v. a. [adviſer, Fr.j
1. To counſel; with the particle to before the thing adviſed.
If you do ſtir abroad, go arm'd.
Arm'd, brother |
Brother, I adviſe you to the beſt. Shakespeare. K. Lear.
I would adviſe all gentlemen to learn merchants accounts,
and not to think it a ſkill that belongs not to them. Locke.
When I conſider the ſcruples and cautions I here lay in your
way, methinks it looks as if I adviſed you to ſomething which
I would have offered at, but in effect not done. Idem.
2. To give information; to inform; to make acquainted with
any thing; often with the particle of before the thing told.
- You were advis'd, his fleſh was capable
Of wounds and ſcars; and that his forward ſpirit
Would lift him, where moſt trade of danger rang'd.
- Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Such diſcourſe bring on,
As may adviſe him of his happy ſtate;
Happineſs in his pow'r, left free to will. Paradiſe Loſt.
A poſting meſſenger diſpatch'd from hence,
Of this fair troop advis'd their aged prince. Dryden's ABneid.
O Advi's E. v. m. -
* - To conſult; with the particle with before the perſon con-
fulted; as, he adviſed with his companions.
** To conſider; to deliberate.
Adviſe if this be worth
Attempting, or to ſit in darkneſs here,
Hatching vain empires. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
A Dyi'sed. participial adj. [from adviſe.]
I. Aëting with deliberation and deſign; prudent; wiſe.
Let his travel appear rather in his diſcourſe, than in his ap-
Parel or geſture; and, in his diſcourſe, let him be rather ad-
viſed in his anſwers, than forward to tell ſtories. Bacon's Eſ.
Th' Almighty Father, where he ſits
Shrin'd in his ſanétuary of heav'n ſecure,
Conſulting on the ſum of things foreſeen,
This tumult, and permitted all, advis'd. Paradiſe Loſº, b.vi.
* Performed with deliberation; done on purpoſe; ačted with de-
ign.
By that which we work naturally, as, when we breathe,
* * move, we ſet forth the glory of God, as natural
OL. 1.
agents do; albeit we have no expreſs purpoſe to make that our
end, nor any adviſed determination therein to follow a law.
Hoºker, b. i. p. 49.
In my ſchool-days, when I had loſt one ſhaft,
I ſhot his fellow of the ſelf-ſame flight,
The ſelf-ſame way, with more adviſed watch,
To find the other forth; by vent'ring both,
I oft found both. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Advi's eply, adv. [from adviſed.] Deliberately; purpoſely;
by deſign; prudently. -
Surprize may be made by moving things, when the party is
in haſte, and cannot ſtay to conſider adviſedly of that which is
moved. Bacon, Eſſay xxiii.
Thou ſtileſt ſecond thoughts (which are by all allowed the
beſt) a relapſe; and talkeſt of a quagmire, where no man ever
ſtuck faſt; and accuſeſt conſtancy of miſchief in what is na-
tural, and adviſedly undertaken. Sir john Suckling.
Advi'sed Ness. n.ſ.. [from adviſed.] Deliberation; cool and
prudent procedure.
While things are in agitation, private men may modeſtly
tender their thoughts to the conſideration of thoſe that are in
authority; to whoſe care it belongeth, in preſcribing concern-
ing indifferent things, to proceed with all juſt adviſedneſs and
moderation. Saunderſon's judgment in one View.
Advi's EMENT. n.ſ. [adviſement, Fr.]
1. Counſel; information.
Mote I wote,
What ſtrange adventure do ye now purſue 2
Perhaps my ſuccour, or adviſement meet,
Mote ſtead you much your purpoſe to ſubdue. Fairy Queen.
I will, according to your adviſement, declare the evils, which
ſeem moſt hurtful. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
2. It is taken likewiſe, in old writers, for prudence and circum-
ſpection. It is now, in both ſenſes, antiquated.
Advi's ER. n.ſ.. [from adviſe.] The perſon that adviſes, or gives
counſel; a counſellor.
Here, free from court-compliances, he walks,
And with himſelf, his beſt adviſer, talks. Waller.
They never fail of their moſt artful and indefatigable ad-
dreſs, to ſilence this impertinent adviſer, whoſe ſeverity awes
their exceſſes. Rogers's Sermons.
ADULATION. m. ſ. [adulation, Fr. adulatio, Lat.] Flattery ;
high compliment.
O be fick, great Greatneſs!
And bid thy ceremony give thee cure.
Think'ſt thou the firy fever will go out,
With titles blown from adulation 2 Shakeſp. Henry V.
They who flattered him moſt before, mentioned him new
with the greateſt bitterneſs, and called him now the corrupter
of the king, and betrayer of the people; without imputing the
leaſt crime to him, committed ſince the time of that exalted
adulation, or that was not then as much known to them, as it
could be now. Clarendon.
ADULA'toR. n.ſ. [adulator, Lat..] A flatterer. Dićf.
A'DULATORY. adj. [adulatorius, Lat..] Flattering; full of com-
pliments.
ADU/LT. adj. [adultus, Lat..] Grown up; paſt the age of in-
fancy and weakneſs.
. They would appear leſs able to approve themſelves, not only
to the confeſſor, but even to the catechiſt, in their adult age,
than they were in their minority; as having ſcarce ever thought
of the principles of their religion, ſince they conned them to
avoid corre&amp;tion. Decay of Piety.
The earth, by theſe applauded ſchools, ’tis ſaid,
This fingle crop of men and women bred;
Who grown adult, (ſo chance, it ſeems, enjoin'd)
Did, male and female, propagate their kind. Blackmore.
ADU'Lt. n.ſ. A perſon above the age of infancy, or grown
to ſome degree of ſtrength; ſometimes full grown: a word uſed
chiefly by medicinal writers.
The depreſſion of the cranium, without a fraćture, can but
ſeldom occur; and then it happens to children, whoſe bones
are more pliable and ſoft than thoſe of adults. Sharp's Surgery.
ADU'Lt Ness. n. ſ. [from adult..] The ſtate of being adult.
See Adolescence. IDié?.
To ADU'LTER. v. a. [adulterer, Fr. adultero, Lat.] To com-
mit adultery with another: a word not claſſical.
His chaſte wife
He adulters ſtill: his thoughts lye with a whore. Ben. Johnſ,
ADU'LTER ANT. n. ſ. [adulterans, £ij The perſon or thing
which adulterates. -
To Adu'lt ERAt E. v. a. [adulterer, Fr. adultero, Lat.]
1. To commit adultery.
But fortune, oh!
Adulterates hourly with thine uncle John;
And with her golden hand hath pluckt on France. -
Shakeſp. King john.
2. To corrupt by ſome foreign admixture; to contaminate.
Common pot-aſhes, bought of them that ſell it in ſhops,who
are not ſo fooliſhly knavith, as to adulterate them with ſalt-
petre, which is much dearer than pot-aſhes. Boyle-
Could a man be compoſed to ſuch an advantage of conſtitu-
tution,
!
*
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A D U
* - he images of his mind;
tion, that it º notºº: . . underſtand-
i. this ſecond nature Glanville's Scºpſ, ...i. xvi.
- our tongue Wi rall ºc
The preſent war has ſo : one of .ur great .
words, that it would be impºſiº doi Speciat
father to know what his poſterity.” been doing. Spectator.
Adu'lt ERAt E. adj. º º *
- - ilt of adu -
I. Taº, an adulterate º ſł
* ... • ith the grime of luſt;
# *.m º, º Shakeſp, Comedy of Err.
sing That jº, that adulterate beaſt. Idem, Hamlet.
- eforeign mixture,
2. cº jº. than the maker of adulterate
wares does from the vender of them. Governm, of the Tongue.
They will have all their gold and filver, and may keep their
adulterate copper at home; for we are determined not to pur-
chaſe it with our manufactures. Swift's Miſtellanies.
Ajº Tºr Ateness. n.ſ.. [from adulterate.] The quality or
ſtate of being adulterate, or counterfeit.
Adulter A'tion. n.ſ.. [from adulterate.] - -
1. The act of adulterating or corrupting by foreign mixture;
contamination. -- -
To make the compound paſs for the rich metal ſimple, is an
adulteration, or counterfeiting: but if be º; . and
- t diſguiſing, it may be a great ſaving of the richer me-
* gulling, y #. Natural Hiſtory, N°798.
2. The ſtate of being adulterated, or contaminated. -
Such tranſlations are like the adulteration of the nobleft wines,
where ſomething of the colour, ſpirit, and flavour, will re-
main; and, while they pleaſe ſome injudicious palates, do
only raiſe the indignation of every gººd taſte. Felton on the Claſſ.
Abu'it ER ER. n.ſ.. [adulter, Lat.] The perſon guilty of adul-
terW.
y with what impatience muſt the muſe behold,
The wife by her procuring huſband ſold;
For the the law makes null th’ adulterer's deed
Of lands to her, the cuckold may ſucceed. Dryd, juvenal.
Apu'lteress. n.ſ.. [from adulterer.] A woman that com-
mits adultery.
The Spatan lady replied, when ſhe was aſked, What was
, the puniſhment for adulterºff's P There are no ſuch things here.
Government of the Tongue, $3.
A robe of tiſſue, ſtiff with golden wire;
An upper veſt, once Helen's rich attire ;
From Argos by the fam'd adult’reſ brought; re
with golden flow’rs and winding foliage wrought. Dry.}ºr:
Apu'lt ERIs E. m. ſ. [adulterine, Fr. adulterinus, Lat..] A child
born of an adultereſs: a term of canon law.
Abu'lt erous. adj. [adulter, Lat.] Guilty of adultery.
Th’ adulterous Antony, moſt large
In his abominations, turns you off,
And gives his potent regiment to a trull,
That noſes it againſt us. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
An adulterous perſon is tied to reſtitution of the injury, ſo
far as it is reparable; and to make proviſion for the children,
that they may not injure the legitimate. Taylor.
Think on whoſe faith th' adult’rous youth rely'd,
Who promis'd, who procur'd the Spartan bride Dryd. Æn.
ADULTERY. m. ſ. [adulterium, Lat.] The act of violat-
ing the bed of a married perſon.
All thy domeſtic griefs at home be left,
The wife's adult'ry, with the ſervant's theft;
And (the moſt racking thought, which can intrude)
Forget falſe friends, and their ingratitude. Dryd, juven.
ADU'MBR ANT. adj. [from adumbrate.] That which gives a
ſlight reſemblance. -
To A DUMB RATE. v. a. [adumbro, Lat.]
To ſhadow out; to give a ſlight likeneſs; to exhibit a faint
reſemblance, like that which ſhadows afford of the bodies
which they repreſent.
Heaven is deſigned for our reward, as well as reſcue; and
therefore is adumbrated by all thoſe poſitive excellencies, which
can endear or recommend. . Decay of Piety.
ADUMBRATION. n.ſ.. [from adumbrate.]
1. The ağt of adumbrating, or giving a ſlight and imperfeót re-
preſentation. See ADUMBRATE. -
To make ſome adumbration of that we mean, the interiour
is rather an impulſion or contuſion of the air, than an eliſion or
• festion of the fame. . . Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 187.
º ſlight and imperfect repreſentation of a thing; a faint
ketch. - . -
The obſervers view but the backſide of the hangings; the
right one is on the other ſide the grave: and our knowledge is
but like thoſe broken ends; at beſt a moſt confuſed adumbra-
tion. - Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
Thoſe of the firſt ſort have ſome adumbration of the rational
nature, as vegetables have of the ſenſible. Hales's Origin.
ALUNA"rio N. m. ſ. [from ad and unus, Lat.] The ſtate of be-
ing united; union: a word of little uſe.
When, by glaciation, wood, ſtraw, duſt, and water, are
ſuppoſed to be united into one lump, the cold does not cauſe
any real union of aduation,but only hardening the aqueous parts
2
-
of the liquor into ice; the other bodies, being accidentally preſent
in that liquor, are frozen up in it, but not really united. Boyle.
Adu'NcITY. m. ſ. [aduncitas, Lat..] Crookedneſs ; flexure in-
wards; hookedneſs. -
There can be no queſtion, but the aduncity of the pounces,
and beaks of the hawks, is the cauſe of the great and habitual
immorality of thoſe animals. Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
ADU'NQUE. adj. [aduncus, Lat.] Crooked; bending inwards;
hooked. º
The birds that are ſpeakers, are parrots, pies, jays, daws,
and ravens; of which parrots have an adunque bill, but the reſt
not. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 2 38.
Advocacy. n.ſ.. [from advocate.] The act of pleading; win-
dication; defence; apology: a word in little uſe.
If any there are who are of opinion, that there are no anti-
podes, or that the ſtars do fall, they ſhall not want herein the
... applauſe or advocacy of Satan. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i.
A/DV OCATE. n.ſ.. [advocatus, Lat.]
1. He that pleads the cauſe of another in a court of judicature.
An advocate, in the general import of the word, is that per-
ſon who has the pleading and management of a judicial cauſe.
In a ſtrićt way of ſpeaking, only that perſon is ſtiled advocate,
who is the patron of the cauſe, and is often, in Latin, termed
togatus, and, in Engliſh, a perſon of the long robe. Ayl. Par.
Learn what thou ow'ſt thy country and thy friend;
What's requiſite to ſpare, and what to ſpend:
Learn this; and, after, envy not the ſtore
Of the greas'd advocate that grinds the poor. Dryd. Perſeus.
2. He that pleads any cauſe, in whatever manner, as a controver-
tiſt or vindicator.
If ſhe dares truſt me with her little babe,
I'll ſhew’t the king, and undertake to be
Her advocate to th’ loudeſt. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Of the ſeveral forms of government that have been, or are,
in the world, that cauſe ſeems commonly the better, that has
the better advocate, or is advantaged by freſher experience.
Temple's Miſcellanies.
3. It is uſed with the particle for before the perſon or thing, in
whoſe favour the plea is offered.
Foes to all living worth except your own,
And advocates for folly dead and gone. Pope's Epiffler.
4. In the ſcriptural and ſacred ſenſe, it ſtands for one of the offices
of our Redeemer.
Me his advocate,
And propitiation; all his works on me,
Good, or not good, ingraft. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
Advocation. m. ſ. [from advocate.] The office of pleading;
plea; apology.
Alas! thrice gentle Caſſio,
My advocation is not now in tune; r
My lord is not my lord; nor ſhould I know him,
Were he in favour, as in humour, alter'd. Shakeſp. Othella.
AD volation. m. ſ. [advolo, advolatum, Lat.] The act of fly-
ing to ſomething. Die?.
AD volu'ſ ion. n.ſ.. [advolutio, Lat.] The aët of rolling to
ſomething.
Advo'ut Ry. n.ſ. ſavoutrie, Fr.] Adultery.
He was the moſt perfidious man upon the earth, and he had
made a marriage compounded between an advoutry and a
rape. Bacon's Henry VII.
Advowe'. n.ſ. He that has the right of advowſon. See AL-
VO WSON.
Advo'wson, or Advo'wze N. m.ſ. [In common law.]
A right to preſent to a benefice, and ſignifies as much as jus
Patronati's. In the canon law, it is ſo termed, becauſe they
that originally obtained the right of preſenting to any church,
were great benefactors thereto ; and are therefore termed
ſometimes Patroni, ſometimes Advocati. Cowell.
To ADU'R g. v. n. [aduro, Lat.] To burn up.
Such a degree of heat, which doth neither melt nor ſcorch,
doth mellow, and not adure. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 319.
ADU'st, adj. [adu/?us, Lat.]
1. Burnt up; hot as with fire, ſcorched.
By this means, the virtual heat of the water will enter; and
ſuch a heat as will not make the body aduff, or fragile. Bacon.
Which with torrid heat,
And vapours as the Libyan air aduff,
Began to parch that temperate clime. Milton's Par. Loft.
2. It is generally now applied, in a medicinal or philoſophical
ſenſe, to the complexion and humours of the body.
Such humours are adºff, as, by long heat, become of a hot
and fiery nature, as choler, and the like. $2:ſincy.
To eaſe the ſoul of one oppreſſive weight,
This quits an empire, that embroils a ſtate.
The ſame aduff complexion has impell'd
Charles to the convent, Philip to the field. Pope.
ADU'st ED. adj. [See AD Ust.]
1. Burnt; ſcorch'd; dried with fire.
Sulphurous and nitrous foam
They found, they mingled, and with ſubtle art,
Concoëted, and adu/led, they reduc’d
To blackeſt grain, and into ſtore convey'd. Paradiſe É.
2. Hot,
!
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A F F
º
2. Hot, as the complexion. - -
In regard they are but the fruits of aduffed choler, and the
evaporations of a vindicative ſpirit, Helia needs not much care
for them; beſides, ſhe muſt give loſers leave to ſpeak. Howell.
ADU'stible. adj. [from adu/.] That which may be aduſted,
or burnt up. Dićf.
ADU'stion. m.ſ.. [from adu/?..] The act of burning up, or dry-
ing, as by fire. -
This is ordinarily a conſequent of a burning colliquative fe-
ver; the ſofter parts being melted away, the heat continuing
its aduſtion, upon the drier and fleſhy parts, changes into a mar-
cid fever. Harvey on Conſumptions.
ADz. n. J.
AE, or A diphthong of very frequent uſe in the Latin lan-
, which ſeems not properly to have any place in the En-
gliſh; ſince the at of the Saxons has been long out of uſe, be-
ing changed to e ſimple, to which, in words frequently occur-
ring, the at of the Romans is, in the ſame manner, altered, as
in equator, equino?ial, and even in Eneas.
AE'Glogue. n.ſ.. [written inſtead of eclogue, from a miſtaken
etymology.] A paſtoral; a dialogue in verſe between goat-
herds. -
. Which moved him rather in aeglogues otherwiſe to write,
doubting, perhaps, his ability, which he little needed, or mind-
ing to furniſh our tongue with this kind wherein it faulteth.
- Spenſer's Paſtorals.
F'GILops. n. ſ. ſaºl, Gr, ſignifying goat-eyed, the goat be-
ing ſubjećt to this ailment.]
A tumour or ſwelling in the great corner of the eye, by the
root of the noſe, either with or without an inflammation; alſo
a plant ſo called, for its ſuppoſed virtues againſt ſuch a diſtem-
per. - Quincy.
AEgilºps is a tubercle in the inner canthus of the eye.
Wiſeman's Surgery.
Hºcypt 1'Acu M. m. ſ. An ointment conſiſting only of honey,
verdigreaſe and vinegar. Quincy.
AEL, or EAL, or AL.
In compound names, as rº, in the Greek compounds, ſigni-
fies all, or altogether. So AFlwin is a compleat conqueror: Albert,
all illuſºrious : Aldred, altogether reverend: Alfred, altogether
peaceful. To theſe Pammachius, Pancratius, Pamphilius, &amp;c.
do in ſome meaſure anſwer. Gibſon's Camden,
ELF, (which, according to various diale&amp;ts, is pronounced ulf,
welph, halph, hip, helfe, and, at this day, helpe) implies aſſiſtance.
So AEfwin is vićiorious, and Ælfwold, an auxiliary governour;
Ælfgiffa, a lender of aſſiance: with which Boetius, Symmachus,
Epicurus, &amp;c. bear a plain analogy. Gilſon's Camden.
See ADDIce.
HENI'GMA. See ENIGMA.
AE'RIAL. adj. [airius, Lat.]
1. Belonging to the air, as conſiſting of it.
The thunder, when to roll
With terrour through the dark aerial hall.
From all that can with fins or feathers fly,
Thro' the aerial or the wat'ry ſky. Prior.
I gathered the thickneſs of the air, or aerial interval, of the
glaſſes at that ring. Newton's Opticks.
Vegetables abound more with aerial particles, than animal
iſubſtances. . Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Produced by the air.
The gifts of heav'n my foll'wing ſong purſues,
Aerial honey, and ambroſial dews. Dryd. Pirg, Georg.
Paradiſe Loſt.
3- Inhabiting the air.
Where thoſe immortal ſhapes
Of bright aerial ſpirits live inſpher'd,
In regions mild, of calm and ſerene air. Paradiſe Regained.
Aerial animals may be ſubdivided into birds and flies. Locke.
4-- Placed in the air.
Here ſubterranean works and cities ſee,
There towns aerial on the waving tree. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
5- High ; elevated in ſituation, and therefore in the air.
A ſpacious city ſtood, with firmeſt walls,
Sure mounded, and with numerous turrets crown'd,
Aerial ſpires, and citadels, the ſeat
Of kings and heroes reſolute in war.
A'ERIE. n.ſ.. [airie, Fr.]
The proper word in hawks and other birds of prey for that
which we generally call a neſt in other birds. Cowell.
Ro'logy. n.ſ. [2% and 23,3, Gr.] The doćtrine of the air.
‘ERoMANcy. m. ſ. [2n; and Park, Gr.] The art of divining by
the air. Dićf.
ERo'METRY. m. ſ. [2% and ºff;...] The art of meaſuring
the air. Dići.
As Roscopy. m. ſ. [3% and ºxiº-, Gr.] The obſervation of
the air. º Dići.
'ſ Hic Ps-MINE RAI. m. ſ.
A medicine ſo called, from its dark colour, prepared of
quickſilver and ſulphur, ground together in a marble mortar to
a black powder. Such as have uſed it moſt, think its virtues
not very great. ..Quincy.
TI'TEs. n.ſ. [.. e., an eagle.] Eagle-ſtone. It is about the big-
neſs of a cheſnut, and hollow, with ſomewhat in it that rattles
upon ſhaking, &amp;incy.
Philips.
AFA'R. adv. [from a for at, and far..] See FAR.
1. At a great diſtance.
So ſhaken as we are, ſo wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
And breathe ſhort-winded accents of new broils,
To be commenc'd in ſtrouds afar remote : - -
- Shakeſpeare's Henry IV:
We hear better when we hold our breath than contrary;
inſomuch as in liſtening to attain a found afar off, men hold
their breath. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 284.
2. To a great diſtance. . . . . . .
Hečtor haſtened to relieve his boy;
Diſmiſs'd his burniſh’d helm that ſhone afar,
The pride of warriours, and the pomp of war.
3. From afar; from a diſtant place.
The rough Vulturnus, furious in its courſe,
With rapid ſtreams divides the fruitful grounds,
And from afar in hollow murmur ſounds. Addison on Italy.
4, Afar off; remotely diſtant.
Much ſuſpecting his ſecret ends, he entertained a treaty of
peace with France, but ſecretly and afar off, and to be govern-
ed as occaſions ſhould vary. Sir john Hayward.
AFE'ARD. participial adj. [from to fear, for to fright, with a re-
dundant.] - - . . .
1. Frighted; terrified ; afraid. **
He loudly bray'd, that like was never heard,
And from his wide devouring oven ſent
A flake of fire, that flaſhing in his beard,
Him all amaz'd, and almoſt made affard. Fairy Queen.
But tell me, Hal, art thou not horridly afeard? Thou being
heir apparent, could the world pick thee out three ſuch enemies
again, as Douglas, Percy, and Glendower. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Till he cheriſh'd too much beard, -
And make Love, or me afeard. Ben.johnſºn's Underwoods.
2. It has the particle of before the object of fear.
Fear is deſcribed by Spenſer to ride in armour, at the claſh-
ing whereof he looks afeard of himſelf. Peacham.
It is now obſolete; the laſt authour whom I have found uſing
... it, is Sedley. . .
AFER. n.ſ. [Lat.j . The ſouthweſt wind. .*
With adverſe blaſt upturns them from the ſouth,
Notus, and Afer, black with thund’rous clouds, -
From Sierra Liona. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. x.
AFFABI'lity. n.ſ.. [affabilité, Fr. affabilitas, Lat.] See AF-
FABLE. . *
The quality of being affable; eaſineſs of manners; cour-
teouſneſs; civility; condeſcenſion. It is commonly uſed of
ſuperiours. - - * - * * -
Hearing of her beauty and her wit, .------
. Her affability and baſhful modeſty, - - -
Her wond’rous qualities, and mild behaviour. - -
Shakeſpeare's Taming ºf the Shrew.
He was of a moſt flowing courteſy and affability to all men,
and ſo deſirous to oblige them, that he did not enough conſider
the value of the obligation, or the merit of the perſon. Clarend.
All inſtances of charity, ſweetneſs of converſation, affabi-
lity, admonition, all ſignifications of tenderneſs, care and watch-
fulneſs, muſt be expreſſed towards children. Taylor.
It is impoſſible for a publick miniſter to be ſo open and eaſy
to all his old friends, as he was in his private condition; but
this may be helped out by an affability of addreſs. L’Eſtrange.
A/F FA B L E. adj. [affable, Fr. affabilis, Lat.]
1. Eaſy of manners; accoſtable; courteous; complaiſant. It
is uſed of ſuperiours.
He was affable, and both well and fair ſpoken, and would uſe
ſtrange ſweetneſs and blandiſhment of words, where he deſired
to affect or perſuade anything that he took to heart. Bacon.
Her father is Baptiſta Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman. Shakeſp. Tam. Shrew.
Gentle to me, and affable hath been -
Thy condeſcenſion, and ſhall be honour'd ever -
With grateful memory. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, h. viii.
2. It is applied to the external appearance; benign; mild ; fa-
vourable.
Auguſtus appeared, looking round him with a ſerene and
affable countenance upon all the writers of his age. Tatler.
A'FFABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from affable.] Courteſy; affability.
A/FFABLY. adv. [from affable.] In an affable manner; cour-
teouſly; civilly.
A'FFABRous. adj. [affabre, Fr.] Skilfully made ; complete;
finiſhed in a workman-like manner. • Dićt.
AFFABula'TION. n.ſ.. [affabulatio, Lat..] The moral of a
fable. Dićf.
AFFA'iR. m. ſ. ſaffaire, Fr.] Buſineſs; ſomething to be ma-
naged or tranſacted. It is uſed for both private and publick
II latterS. -
I was not born for courts or great affairs;
I pay my debts, believe, and ſay my prayers. Pºpe.
A good acquaintance with method will greatly affiſt every
one in ranging, diſpoſing, and managing all human affairs.
r Watts's Lºgick.
Dryd.
-, *
*
What
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A F F
A F F
What St. John's ſkill in ſtate affairs,
What Ormond's valour, Oxford's cares,
To aid their ſinking country lent, -
Was all deſtroy'd by one event. Swift.
To AFF EAR. v. n. [from affer, Fr.] To confirm ; to give a
ſančtion to ; to eſtabliſh: an old term of law.
Bleed, bleed, poor country'
Great tyranny, lay thou thy baſis ſure;
For goodneſs dares not check thee!
His title is affar'd. - -
AFFE'cT. n.ſ.. [from the verb off.”.]
1. Affection; paſſion; ſenſation.
It ſeemeth that as the feet have a ſympathy with the head ;
ſo the wriſts have a ſympathy with the heart; we ſee the af.
fºci, and paſſions of the heart and ſpirits are notably diſcloſed
by the pulſe. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº 97.
2. &amp;; circumſtance.
find it difficult to make out one ſingle ulcer, as authors de-
ſcribe it, without other ſymptoms or affects joined to it. Jºſen.
This is only the antiquated word for affection.
To AFFE'CT. v. a. [affecter, Fr. afficio, affectum, Lat.]
1. To ad upon; to produce effects in any other thing.
The ſun
Had firſt his precept ſo to move, ſo ſhine,
As might affect the earth with cold, and heat, -
Scarce tolerable. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. x.
The generality of men are wholly governed by names, in
matters of good and evil; ſo far as theſe qualities relate to, and
affº, the actions of men. South's Sermons.
Yet even thoſe two particles do reciprocally affect each other
with the ſame force and vigour, as they would do at the ſame
diſtance in any other ſituation imaginable. Bentley's Sermons.
2. To move the paſſions.
As a thinking man cannot but be very much affected with
the idea of his appearing in the preſence of that Being, whom
none can ſee and live; he muſt be much more affeded, when
he conſiders, that this Being whom he appears before, will exa-
mine the aëtions of his life, and reward or puniſh him accord-
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
ingly. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 5 13.
3. To aim at; to endeavour after; ſpoken of perſons.
Atrides broke
His ſilence next, but ponder'd ere he ſpoke: .
Wiſe are thy words, and glad I would obey,
But this proud man affects imperial ſway. Dryden's Iliad,
4: To tend to ; to endeavour after : ſpoken of things. -
The drops of every fluid affect a round figure, by the mu-
tual attraction of their parts; as, the globe of the earth and
ſea affects a round figure, by the mutual attraction of its parts
by º. Newton's Opticks.
5. To be fond of; to be pleaſed with ; to love; to regard with
fondneſs.
That little which ſome of the heathen did chance to hear,
concerning ſuch matter as the ſacred Scripture plentifully con-
taineth, they did in wonderful ſort affect. Hooker, b. i.
There is your crown;
And he that wears the crown immortally,
Long guard it yours! If I affect it more,
Than as your honour, and as your renown,
Let me no more from this obedience riſe. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Think not that wars we love, and ſtrife affe: ;
Or that we hate ſweet peace. Fairfax, b. ii.
None but a woman could a man direct
To tell us women what we moſt aff:ff. Dryd. Wife of Bath.
6. To make a ſhew of ſomething; to ſtudy the appearance of
any thing; with ſome degree of hypocriſy.
Another nymph, amongſt the many fair,
Before the reſt affºied ſtill to ſtand,
And watch'd my eye preventing my command. Prior.
Theſe often carry the humour ſo far, till their affected
coldneſs and indifference quite kills all the fondneſs of a lover.
Addiſon. Spectator, N° 17 i.
The conſcious huſband, whom like ſymptoms ſeize,
Charges on her the guilt of their diſeaſe;
Affecting fury, ačts a madman's part,
He'll rip the fatal ſecret from her heart. Granville.
7. To imitate in an unnatural and conſtrained manner.
Spenſer, in affecting the ancients, writ no language : yet I
would have him read for his matter, but as Virgil read Ennius.
Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
8. To convićt of ſome crime; to attaint with guilt: a phraſe
merely juridical. -
By the civil law, if a dowry with a wife be promiſed and
not paid, the huſband is not obliged to allow her alimony.
But if her parents ſhall become inſolvent by ſome misfortune,
ſhe ſhall have alimony, unleſs you can affect them with fraud,
in promiſing what they knew they were not able to perform.
Ayliffe's Parergon. ,
AFF Ect ATION. m. ſ. [affºlatio, Lat..] The act of making
an artificial appearance.
In things of their own nature indifferent, if either councils
or particular men have at any time, with ſound judgment, miſ-
liked conformity between the church of God and infidels, the
cauſe there of hath been ſomewhat elſe than only ºff...?atiºn of
diffinilitude. Haº; b. iv. § 7.
It has been, from age to age, an off ſation to love the pſe-
ſure of ſolitude, among thoſe who cannot poſſibly be ſuppoſed
qualified for paſſing life in that manner.
AFFE'ct Ed. participial ad. [from affº.]
1. Moved; touched with affection; internally diſpoſed or in-
clined.
No marvel then if he were ill afficted;
'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
To have th' expence and waſte of his revenues.
- Shakeſp. King Lear.
He was aſſured, that the model they ſeemed affiti to in
their directory, was not like to any of their foreign reformed
churches now in the world. Clarendon.
2. Studied with over-much care, cr with hypocritical appear-
ance.
Theſe antick, liſping, affºrd phantaſies, theſe new tuners
of accents. Shakeſp. Romeo and juſt.
3. In a perſonal ſenſe, full of affectation; as, an affºrd lºy.
AFFE'cTFDLY. adv. [from affected.] In an affected mainer;
hypocritically; with more appearance than reality.
Perhaps they are affectedly ignorant; they are ſo willing it
ſhould be true, that they have not attempted to examine it.
Government ºf the Tongue, $5.
. Some indeed have been ſo officiedy vain, as to counterfeit
immortality, and have ſtolen their death, in hopes to be eſteem-
ed immortal. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b vii c. 10.
By talking ſo familiarly of one hundred and ten thouſand
pounds, by a tax upon a few commodities, it is plain, you are
either naturally or affectedly ignorant of our condition. Swift.
AFFE'CTF DN Ess. n.ſ.. [from affected.] The quality of being
affected, or of making falſe appearances.
AFFE'CTION. n.ſ.. [affºn, Fr. affºlio, Lat.]
1. The ſtate of being affected by any cauſe, or agent. This ge-
neral ſenſe is little in uſe. -
Some men there are love not a gaping pig;
Some that are mad if they behold a cat;
And others, when the bag-pipe ſings i' th' noſe,
Cannot contain their urine, for affºix.
Shakespeare. 44 rehant of Venice.
2. Paſſion of any kind.
Then gan the Palmer thus: moſt wretched man,
That to affections does the bridle lend;
In their beginning they are weak and wan,
But ſoon through ſufferance grow to fearful end. Fairy Q.
. Impute it to my late ſolitary life, which is prone to affe:-
110nj. Sidney, b. i.
Affections, as joy, grief, fear, and anger, with ſuch like,
being, as it were, the fundry faſhions and forms of appetite,
can neither riſe at the conceit of a thing indifferent, nor yet
chooſe but riſe at the fight of ſome things. Hocker. b. i.
To ſpeak truth of Caeſar,
I have not known when his affections ſway’d
More than his reaſon. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
Zeal ought to be compoſed of the higheſt degrees of pious
affections; of which ſome are milder and gentler, ſome ſharper
and more vehement. Sprat's Sermons.
I can preſent nothing beyond this to your affections, to ex-
cite your love and deſire. Tillotſon.
3. Love; kindneſs; good-will to ſome perſon; often with to,
or towards, before the perſon. -
I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Who mutually hath anſwer'd my affection.
Shakeſp. Merry Wives ºf Pindſºr.
My king is tangld in affection to
A creature of the queen's lady Anne Bullen. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
What warmth is there in your affºlion towards any of theſe
princely ſuitors? Shakeſp. Aſerchant of Venice.
Make his intereſt depend upon mutual aff, Čion and goºd
correſpondence with others. Collier on General Kindneſs.
Nor at firſt ſight, like moſt, admires the fair;
For you he lives, and you alone ſhall ſhare
His laſt affection, as his early care. Pºpe.
4. Good-will to any objećt; zeal; paſſionate regard.
I have reaſon to diſtruſt mine own judgment, as that which
may be overborn by my zeal and affection to this cauſe.
Bacon’s Holy I?’ar.
Set your aff::ſion upon my words; deſire them, and ye ſhall
be inſtructed. Jłºſłom, vi. 1 1.
His integrity to the king was without blemiſh, and his of
fection to the church ſo notorious, that he never deſerted it. Cla.
All the precepts of chriſtianity command us to moderate our
paſſions, to temper our affections toward; all things below.
Temple.
Let not the mind of a ſtudent be under the influence of
warm afficiion to things of ſenſe, when he comes to the ſearch
of truth. //atti's Improvement ºf the Mind.
5. State of the mind, in general.
There grows,
In my moſt ill compos'd affection, ſuch
Sºedjatºr, Nº. 26.4.”
º
4 A.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A F F
A F F
A ſtanchleſs avarice, that, were I king,
I ſhould cut off the nobles for their lands.
The man that hath no muſick in himſelf,
Nor is not mov’d with concord of ſweet ſounds,
Is fit for treaſons, ſtratagems, and ſpoils;
The motions of his ſpirit are dull as night,
And his affections dark as Erebus:
Let no ſuch man be truſted. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice,
6. Quality; property.
The certainty and accurateneſs which is attributed to what
they deliver, muſt be reſtrained to what they teach, concern-
ing thoſe purely mathematical diſciplines, arithmetick and geo-
metry, where the affections of quantity are abſtraćtedly conſi-
dered. Boyle.
The mouth being neceſſary to condućt the voice to the
ſhape of its cavity, neceſſarily gives the voice ſome particular
affection of ſound in its paſſage before it come to the lips.
- - Holder's Elements of Speech.
God may have joined immaterial ſouls to other kinds of bo-
dies, and in other laws of union; and, from thoſe different laws
of union, there will ariſe quite different affections, and natures,
and ſpecies of the compound beings. Bentley's Sermons.
7. State of the body, as ačted upon by any cauſe.
It ſeemed to me a venereal gonorrhaea, and others thought
it aroſe from ſome ſcorbutical affection. J/iſeman's Surgery.
8. Lively repreſentation in painting.
Affection is the lively repreſentment of any paſſion whatſo-
ever, as if the figures ſtood not upon a cloth or board, but as
if they were a&amp;ting upon a ſtage. J%tton's Architecture.
AFFE'ctionATE. adj. [affectionné, Fr. from affºlion.]
1. Full of affection; ſtrongly moved; warm; zealous.
In their love of God, and deſire to pleaſe him, men can never
be too affectionate; and it is as true, that, in their hatred of
ſin, men may be ſometimes too paſſionate. Sprat's Sermons.
2. Strongly inclined to ; diſpoſed to ; with the particle to.
As for the parliament, it preſently took fire, being affectio-
nate, of old, to the war of France. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. Fond; tender.
He found me ſitting, beholding this pićture, I know not
with how affectionate countenance, but, I am ſure, with a moſt
affiélionate mind. Sidney.
Away they fly
Affectionate, and undeſiring bear
The moſt delicious morſel to their young. Thomſon's Spring.
4. Benevolent; tender.
When we refle&amp;t on all this affectionate care of providence
for our happineſs, with what wonder muſt we obſerve the little
effect it has on men. Rogers's Sermons.
AFFE'ction ATELY. adv, [from affectionate.] In an affectionate
manner; fondly ; tenderly ; benevolently.
AFFE'ctionATENEss. n.ſ.. [from affectionate.] The quality or
ſtate of being affectionate; fondneſs; tenderneſs; good-will;
benevolence.
AFFE'ctioned. adj. [from aff:ffion.]
1. Affected; conceited. This ſenſe is now obſolete.
An affectioned aſs that cons ſtate without book, and utters it
º great ſwaths. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
2. Inclined; mentally diſpoſed. * .
Be kindly affectioned one to another. Rom. xii. Io.
AFF ectiously. adv. [from affect.] In an affecting manner. Diet.
AFFE'ctive. adj. [from affiti.] That which affects; that
which ſtrongly touches. It is generally uſed for painful.
Pain is ſo uneaſy a ſentiment, that very little of it is enough
to corrupt every enjoyment: and the effect God intends this
variety of ungrateful and affective ſentiments ſhould have on us,
is to reclaim our affections from this valley of tears. Rogers.
AFF Ectuo'sity. n.ſ.. [from affectuous.] Paſſionateneſs. Dićt.
AFFE'ctuous... adj. [from affect.] Full of paſſion; as, an af-
fºluous ſpeech : a word little uſed.
To AFFE'R.E. v. a. [affer, Fr.] A law term, ſignifying to con-
firm. See AF EARD.
AFFE'RoRs. n.ſ.. [from affere.]
Such as are appointed in court-leets, &amp;c. upon oath, to mul&amp;t
ſuch as have committed faults arbitrarily puniſhable, and have
no expreſs penalty ſet down by ſtatute. Cowell.
A FFIANCE. n.ſ.. [affiancé, from affir, Fr.]
* - A marriage-contračt.
At laſt ſuch grace I found, and means I wrought,
That I that lady to my ſpouſe had won,
Accord of friends, conſent of parents ſought,
Affance made, my happineſs begun. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
*- Truſt in general; confidence; ſecure reliance.
The duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given
To dream on evil, or to work my downfal.—
—Ah! what's more dangerous than this fond affance 2
Seems he a dove his feathers are but borrowed.
Shakeſp. Henry VI.
3- Truſt in the divine promiſes and protećtion. To this ſenſe it
is now almoſt confined.
It receives him into a covenant of grace, where there is par-
don reached out to all truly penitent ſinners, and affiſtance pro-
mº, and engaged, and beſtowed upon very eaſy conditions,
ol. I.
Shakespeare Macbeth.
viz. humility, prayer, and affance in him. Hammond's Fund.
There can be no ſurer way to ſucceſs, than by diſclaiming
all confidence in ourſelves, and referring the events of things to
God with an implicit affiance. Atterbury's Sermons.
To AFI'ANce. v. a. [from the noun affance.]
1. To betroth ; to bind any one by promiſe to marriage.
To me, ſad maid, or rather widow ſad,
He was affanced long time before,
And ſacred pledges he both gave and had ;
Falſe, errant knight, infamous, and foreſwore. Fairy Queen.
Her ſhould Angelo have married; was affianced to her by
oath, and the nuptial appointed ; between which time of the
contračt, and limit of the ſolemnity, his brother was wrecked,
having, in that veſſel, the dowry of his ſiſter. Shakespeare. Meaſ for M.
2. To give confidence.
Stranger! whoe'er thou art, ſecurely reſt,
Affanc'd in my faith, a friendly gueſt. Pope's Odyſſey.
AFFI’ANce R. n.ſ.. [from affance.j He that makes a contraćt
of marriage between two parties. Dićf.
AFFIDA’ſ Ion. }". [from affdo, Lat. See AFFIED.] Mutual
AFFIDA’ture. contračt; mutual oath of fidelity. Dićf.
AFFIDA’v IT. n.ſ.. [affidavit ſignifies, in the language of the
common law, he made oath..] A declaration upon oath.
You ſaid, if I return’d next 'ſize in Lent,
I ſhould be in remitter of your grace;
In th’ interim my letters ſhould take place
Of affidavits. Donne.
Count Rechteren ſhould have made affidavit, that his ſervants
had been affronted, and then Monſieur Meſnager would have
done him juſtice. Spectator, N° 481.
AFFI'E d. participial adj. [from the verb affy, derived from affido,
Lat. Braćton uſing the phraſe affäare mulieres.] Joined by
contraćt; affianced.
Be we affed, and ſuch aſſurance ta'en,
As ſhall with either part's agreement ſtand.
- Shakeſp. Taming of a Shrew.
AFFIL1A'tion. n.ſ.. [from ad and filius, Lat..] Adoption; the
act of taking a ſon. Chambers.
A/F FINAGE. n.ſ.. [affnage, Fr.] The aët of refining metals by
the cupel. Dić?.
AFF 1'NED. adj. [from affinis, Lat.] Joined by affinity to an-
other; related to another.
If partially affin'd, or leagu'd in office,
Thou doſt deliver more or leſs than truth,
Thou art no ſoldier.
AFF1'NIt Y. n.ſ.. [affinité, Fr. from affinis, Lat.]
1. Relation by marriage; relation contračted by the huſband to
the kindred of the wife, and by the wife to thoſe of the huſ-
band. It is oppoſed to conſanguinity, or relation by birth.
In this ſenſe it has ſometimes the particle with, and ſome-
times to, before the perſon to whom the relation is contraćted.
And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and
took Pharaoh's daughter. 1 Kings, iii. 1.
They had left none alive, whe had ſet his hand to their ſer-
vitude, by the blindneſs of rage killing many guiltleſs perſons,
either for affinity to the tyrant, or enmity to the tyrant-killers.
- Sidney, b. ii.
A breach firſt with Spain, and not long after with France
itſelf, notwithſtanding ſo ſtrait an affinity, ſo lately treated with
the one, and actually accompliſhed with the other; as if indeed
(according to that pleaſant maxim of ſtate) kingdoms were ne-
ver married. Wotton.
2. Relation to ; connexion with ; reſemblance to ; ſpoken of
things. -
The Britiſh tongue, or Welſh, as we now call it, was in uſe
only in this iſland, having great affinity with the old Gallick.
- Camden.
All things that have affinity with the heavens, move upon the
center of another, which they benefit. Bacon, Eſſay xxiv.
The art of painting hath wonderful affinity with that of poe-
try. Dryd. Dufreſnoy. Prºf.
Man is more diſtinguiſhed by devotion than by reaſon, as
ſeveral brute creatures diſcover ſomething like reaſon, though
they betray not any thing that bears the leaſt affinity to devo-
tion. Addiſon. Spect. Nº zon.
To AFFIRM. v. n. [affirmo, Lat.] To declare; to tell con-
fidently: oppoſed to the word deny. -
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm,
That the land Salike lies in Germany,
Between the floods of Sala and of Elve. Shakespeare. Henry V.
To AFF 1'R.M. v. a. To ratify or approve a former law, or judg-
ment: oppoſed to reverſe or repeal.
The houſe of peers hath a power of judicature in ſome caſes,
properly to examine and then to affirm ; or, if there be cauſe,
to reverſe the judgments which have been given in the court of
king's bench. Bacon's Advice to Sir G. Williers.
In this ſenſe we ſay, to affrºm the truth.
AFF1'RMABLE. adj. [from º That which may be affirmed.
Thoſe attributes and conceptions that were applicable and
affirmable of him when preſent, are now affirmable and appli-
cable to him though paſt. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
Shakeſp. Othello.
M AFFI'R-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A F F
A F F
Aff!'RMANCE. m. ſ. [from affirm.] Confirmation: oppoſed to
repeal.
This ſtatute did but refore an ancient ſtatute, which was it-
ſelf alſo made but in affirmance of the common law. Bacon.
AFF1'RM as r. m. ſ. [from ºffirm.] The perſon that affirms; a
declarer. Dićt.
AFFIRMA'TION. n.ſ.. [affrºatia, Lat.]
1. The act of affirming or declaring: oppoſed to negation or de-
nial.
This gentleman vouching, upon warrant of bloody affirma-
tion, his to be more virtuous, and leſs attemptable, than any of
our ladies. Shakesp. Cymbeline.
2. The poſition affirmed.
That he ſhall receive no benefit from Chriſt, is the affirma-
majon, whereon his deſpair is founded; and one way of remov-
ing this diſmal apprehenſion, is, to convince him, that Chriſt's
death, if he perform the condition required, ſhall certainly be-
long to him. Hammond's Fundamenials.
3. Confirmation: oppoſed to repeal.
‘I he learned in the laws of our land obſerve, that our ſta-
tutes ſometimes are only the affirmation, or ratification, of that
which, by common law, was held before. - Hooker.
AFFI'RMATIy E. adj. [from affirm.]
1. That which affirms, oppoſed to negative; in which we uſe the
affirmative, that is, the affirmative pºſition.
For the affirmative, we are now to anſwer ſuch proofs of
theirs as have been before alleged. Hooker.
Whether there are ſuch beings or not, 'tis ſufficient for my
purpoſe, that many have believed the ºffirmative.
Dryden's Prºface to Tyrannick Love.
2. That which can or may be affirmed: a ſenſe uſed chiefly in
ſcience.
As in algebra, where affirmative quantities vaniſh or ceaſe,
there negative oncs begin: ſo in mechanicks, where attraction
ceaſes, there a repulſive virtue ought to ſucceed. Newt. Opt.
3. Applied to perſons; he who has the habit of affirming with
vehemence; poſitive; dogmatical.
Be not confident and affirmative in an uncertain matter, but
report things modeſtly and temperately, according to the degree
of that perſuaſion, which is, or ought to be, begotten by the
efficacy of the authority, or the reaſon, inducing thee. Taylor.
AFFI'RMATIvely. adv. [fron affirmative..] In an affirmative
manner; on the poſitive fide; not negatively.
The reaſon of man hath no ſuch reſtraint: concluding not
only affirmatively, but negatively; not only affirming, there is
no magnitude beyond the laſt heavens, but alſo denying, there
is any vacuity within them. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
AFF1'RM ER. n.ſ.. [from affirm.] The perſon that affirms.
If by the word virtue, the affirmer intends our whole duty to
God and man, and the denier, by the word virtue, means only
courage, or, at moſt, our duty toward our neighbour, without
including, in the idea of it, the duty which we owe to God.
J/atts’s Logick.
To AFF1'z. v. a. [affgo, affixum, Lat.] To unite to the end,
or a pºſteriori; to ſubjoin.
He that has ſettled in his mind determined ideas, with names
affixed to them, will be able to diſcern their differences one from
another. - Lo.ke.
If men conſtantly affixed applauſe and diſgrace where they
ought, this principle would have a very good influence on the
publick conduct of men; though on ſecret villanies it lays no
reſtraint. Rogers's Sermons.
AF F1's. n.ſ. ſaffrum, Lat.] A term of grammar; ſomething
united to the end of a word.
In the Hebrew language, the noun has its affra, to denote
the pronouns poſſeſſive or relative. Clarke's Latin Grammar.
AFF 1'x1ON. m. ſ. [from affix.] .
1. The act of affixing.
2. The ſtate of being affixed. IDić7.
AF FLA't Ion. n.ſ.. [affo, affatum, Lat.] The act of breathing
upon any thing. Dići.
AFFLATUS. n.ſ. (Lat.] Communication of the power of
prophecy. Dicf.
To AFF LI'CT. v. a. [affiélo, offiéium, Lat.]
1. To put to pain; to grieve ; to torment.
In the ſeventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye
ſhall affii: your ſouls, and do no work at all, whether it be
one of your own country, or a ſtranger that ſojourneth among
you. Leviticus, xvi. 29.
Give not over thy mind to heavineſs, and affic not thyſelf
in thine own counſel. Ecclus, xxx. 21.
For a father affited with untimely mourning, when he hath
made an image of his child ſoon taken away, now honoured
him as a God, which was then a dead man, and delivered to
thoſe that were under him, ceremonies and ſacrifices. Wiſdom.
It teacheth us, how God thought fit to plague and affié
them, it doth not appoint in what form and manner we ought
to puniſh the fin of idolatry in others. Hooker, b. v. § 17.
O coward conſcience how doſt thou affic; me?
The lights burn blue—Is it not dead midnight
Cold fearful drops ſtand on my trembling fleſh.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
A melancholy tear affici; my eye,
And my heart labours with a ſudden figh. Prior
2. The paſſive to be ºfficied, has often at before the cauſaln.
The mother was ſo afficied at the loſs of a fine boy, who
was her only ſon, that ſhe died for grief of it. Addison. Sº
AFF Li'cted Ness. n.ſ.. [from afficied.] The ſtate of ific.
tion, or of being afflićted; ſorrowfulneſs; grief.
AFFlict ER. m. ſ. [from ºffici.] The perſon that afflićis.
Aff Li'ction. n.ſ.. [afficio, Lat.]
1. The cauſe of pain or ſorrow ; calamity.
To the fleſh, as the Apoſtle himſelf granteth, all affiéïion is
naturally grievous: therefore nature, which cauſeth fºr teach-
eth to pray againſt all adverſity. Jicoker, b. V. § 48
We'll bring you to Windſor, to one Mr. Brook, that you
have cozened of money; I think, to repay that money will be
a biting affiéïion. Shakeſp. Merry lºves of/Pindar
2. The flate of ſorrowfulneſs; miſery: oppoſed to prºſperity. -
Beſides you know
Proſperity's the very bond of love,
}; º complexion, and whoſe heart together
ºfficion alters. Shakeſp. /Pinter'
Where ſhall we find the man that bears %;" 5 Talk.
Great and majeſtic in his griefs, like Cato; Addiſ Cato
- Some virtues are only ſeen in afficiion, and ſome in prope.
rity. - Addiſon Sprélator, N° 2'-.
AffircTive. adj. [from ºffici.] That which cauſes affiction.
painful; tormenting. &gt;
They found martyrdom a duty dreſſed up indeed with all
that was terrible and afficiive to human nature, yet not at all the
leſs a duty. South.
Nor find
Where to retire themſelves, or where appeaſe
Th' offiétive keen deſire of food, expos'd
To winds, and ſtorms, and jaws of ſavage death. Phip.
Reſtleſs Proſerpine–
- On the ſpacious land and liquid main,
Spreads ſlow diſeaſe, and darts officiive pain. Prior.
AFI Lu ENce. n.ſ.. [affluence, Fr. oftentia, Lat.]
1. The act of flowing to any place; concourſe. It is almoſt al-
ways uſed figuratively.
I ſhall not relate the affuence of young nobles from hence in-
to Spain, after the voice of our prince being there had been
noiſed. Mºtton.
2. Exuberance of riches; ſtream of wealth; plenty.
Thoſe degrees of fortune, which give fulneſſ and riffuence
to one ſtation, may be want and penury in another. Kegers.
Let joy or eaſe, let aftuence or content, &lt;&gt;
And the gay conſcience of a life well ſpent,
Calm ev’ry thought, inſpirit ev'ry grace. Pope.
A'. I 19 Ncy: n, ſ. The ſame with affiance.
AFFLUENT. adj. [affluent, Fr. djiens, Lat.]
1. Flowing to any part.
Theſe parts are no more than foundation-piles of the enſuing
body; which are afterwards to be increaſed and raiſed to :
greater bulk by the affuent blood, that is tranſmitted out of the
mother's body. Harvey on Conſumptions.
2. Abundant; exuberant; wealthy.
I ſee thee, Lord and end of my deſire,
Loaded and bleſt with all the aftent ſtore,
Which human vows at ſmoaking ſhrines implore. Priºr.
AFF Lu &amp; Nºrn Ess. n.ſ.. [from affiuent.] The quality of being
affluent. Dict.
A/F FLux. n.ſ.. [affuxus, Lat.]
I. The act of flowing to ſome place; affuence.
2. That which flows to another place.
The cauſe hereof cannot be a ſupply by procreations; ergº,
it muſt be by new aftuxes to London out of the country. Graint.
The infant grows bigger out of the womb, by aggiſtinating
º: Barvey on Corſionºtions.
&gt;
one affºux of blood to another.
AFF LU'Xio N. m. ſ. ſºftuxic, Lat.]
1. The act of flowing to a particular place.
2. That which flows from one place to another.
An inflammation either fimple, conſiſting of an hot and
ſanguineous affiuxion, or elſe denominable from other humours,
according unto the predominancy of melancholy, phlegm or
choler. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To AF Fo'R p. v. a. ſaffºurror, affºurrager, Fr.]
1. To yield or produce; as, the ſºil affords grain; the trees affºrd
fruits. This ſeeins to be the primitive fignification.
2. To grant, or conſer any thing; generally in a good ſenſe, and
ſometimes in a bad, not properly. -
So ſoon as Maurmon there arrived, the door
To him did open, and afforded way. Fairy Q:cen.
This is the conſolation of all good men, unto whom his
ubiquity afford-th continual comfort and ſecurity; and this is
the affliction of hell, to whom it affºrdeth deſpair and remedile:s
calamity. Brºwn's Pulgar Erreurs, b. i. c. 2.
3. To be able to ſell. It is uſed always with reference to ſome
certain price ; as, I can affºrd this fºr leſs than the cºher.
They fill their magazines in times of the greateſt plenty,
that ſo they may afford cheaper, and increaſe the public revenue
at a finall expence of its members. Addison on Italy.
2 4. T •
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A F F
A F L
1. To be able to bear expences; as, traders can afford more finery
in peace than war.
The ſame errours run through all families, where there is
wealth enough to afford that their ſons may be good for no-
thing. ºft on Modern Education.
To AFFOREST. v. a. [affºreſare, Lat.] To turn ground
into foreſt. -
It appeareth, by Charta de Foreſa, that he affºrtſied many
woods and waſtes, to the grievance of the ſubject, which by that
jaw were diſafforeſted. Sir john Davies on Ireland.
AFF or Est ATION. m. ſ. [from affºrtſ?..]
The charter de Frºſia was to reform the encroachments
made in the time of Richard I. and Henry II. who had made
new afforºſtations, and much extended the rigour of the foreſt
laws. - Hales's Common Law ºf England.
To AFFRA'Nchise. v. a. ſaffrancher, Fr.] To make free.
To AFF RACY. v. a. [effrayer, or effriger, Fr. which Menage
derives from frayer; perhaps it comes from frigu:)
To fright; to terrify; to ſtrike with fear. This word is
not now in uſe.
The ſame to wight he never won't diſcloſe,
But when as monſters huge he would diſmay,
Or daunt unequal armies of his foes,
Or when the flying heavens he would affray. Fairy Queen.
AFF RA'y, or AFF A'y MENT. n. ſ. [from the verb.] -
A tumultuous aſſault of one or more perſons upon others; a
law term. A battle: in this ſenſe it is written fray.
AFFR1ction. m. ſ. ſaffrićio, Lat..] The act of rubbing one
thing upon another.
I have divers times obſerved, in wearing filver-hilted ſwords,
that, if they rubbed upon my cloaths, if they were of a light-
coloured cloth, the affrićtion would quickly blacken, them;
and, congruouſly hereunto, I have found pens blacked almoſt
all over, when I had a while carried them about me in a ſilver
caſe. -- Boyle.
To Ar FR1'GHT. v. a. [See FF IGHT.]
1. To affect with fear; to terrify: it generally implies a ſudden
impreſſion of fear. - -
Thy name affrights me, in whoſe ſound is death.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
God-like his courage ſecm’d, whom nor delight
Could ſoften, nor the face of death affright. J%aller.
He, when his country (threaten’d with alarm)
Requires his courage and his conqu'ring Arm,
Shall, more than once, the Punic bands affright. Dryd. Æn.
2. It is uſed in the paſſive, ſometimes with at before the thing
feared.
Thou ſhalt not be affrighted at them: for the Lord thy God
is among you. Deut. vii. 21.
3. Sometimes with the particle with before the thing feared.
As one affright
With helliſh fiends, or furies mad uproar,
He then uproſe. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 5.
AFFR1'GHT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Terrour; fear. This word is chiefly poetical.
As the moon, cloathed with cloudy night,
Does ſhew to him, that walks in fear and ſad affright. F. Q.
Wide was his pariſh, not contraćted cloſe
In ſtreets, but here and there a ſtraggling houſe;
Yct ſtill he was at hand, without requeſt,
To ſerve the ſick; to ſuccour the diſtreſs'd :
Tempting, on foot, alone, without affright,
The dangers of a dark tempeſtuous night. Dryd. Fab.
2. The cauſe of fear; a terrible object.
I ſee the gods
Upbraid our ſuff'rings, and would humble them,
By ſending theſe affrights, while we are here, -
That we might laugh at their ridiculous fear. B.johnſ Catil.
The war at hand appears with more affright,
And riſes ev'ry moment to the fight. Dryden’s AFneid.
AFFr1'chtful... adj. [from affright.] Full of affright or ter-
rour; terrible.
We ſhall find there is an abſence of all that is deſtructive or
offrightful to human nature. Decay of Piety.
FF Ri'cha MENT. n.ſ.. [from affright.]
1. The impreſſion of fear; terrour.
Hearing ſhe was at reſt, he attended till ſhe ſhould awake of
herſelf; which ſhe did with theaffrightment of a dream. Hºotton.
Paſſionate words or blows from the tutor, fill the child's mind
with terrour and affrightment; which immediately takes it
Yºholly up, and leaves no room for other impreſſion. Locke.
2- The flate of fearfulneſs. f
Whether thoſe that, under any anguiſh of mind, return to
T ***ightments or doubtings, have not been hypocrites. Hammond.
* A FFRONT. v. a. ſaffronter, Fr. that is, adfrontem ſtare;
ºf Zºrontem &amp; contumcliam allidere, to inſult a man to his face.]
Tomcet face to face; to encounter. This ſeems the genuine
and original ſenſe of the word, which was formerly indifferent
*o good or ill.
We have cloſely ſent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
-ºffront Ophelia. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
I.
The ſeditious, the next day, affronted the king's forces at the
entrance of a highway; whom when they found both ready and
reſolute to fight, they deſired enterparlance, and in the mean-
time they began to fortify. Sir john Hayward.
2. To meet, in an hoſtile manner, front to front. -
His holy rites and ſolemn feaſts profan'd,
And with their darkneſs durſt affront his light. Parad. Left.
3. To offer an open inſult; to offend avowedly. With reſpect to
this ſenſe, it is obſerved by Cervantes, that, if a man ſtrikes an-
other on the back, and then runs away, the perſon fo ſtruck is
injured, but not affronted; an affront always implying a juſtifi-
cation of the aët.
But harm precedes not fin only our foe,
Tempting affronts us with his foul eſteen
Of our integrity. Aſilton's Paradiſ. Loft, l. ix,
I would learn the cauſe, why Torriſmond,
Within my palace walls, within my hearing,
Almoſt within my fight, affronts a prince,
Who ſhortly ſhall command him. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
This brings to mind Fauſtina's fondneſs for the gladiator, and
is interpreted as ſatire. But how can one imagine, that the Fa-
thers would have dared to affront the wife of Aurelius. Addiſon.
Aff Ro'NT. n.ſ.. [from the verb affront.]
1. Inſult offered to the face; contemptuous or rude treatment.
He would often maintain Plantianus, in doing affronts to his
ſon. Bacon's Eſſays.
You've done enough ; for you deſign'd my chains:
The grace is vaniſh'd, but th' affront remains. Dryd. Aureng.
He that is found reaſonable in one thing, is concluded to be
ſo in all; and to think or ſay otherwiſe, is thought ſo unjuſt an
affront, and ſo ſenſeleſs a cenſure, that no body ventures to do
it. ocke.
There is nothing which we receive with ſo much reluctance
as advice: we look upon the man who gives it us, as offering
an affront to our underſtanding, and treating us like children or
ideots. Addiſon. Spediator, N° 5 12.
2. Outrage; ačt of contempt, in a more general ſenſe.
Oft have they violated
The temple, oft the law with foul affronts,
Abominations rather. ...tion's Paradiſe Regained.
3. Open oppoſition ; encounter: a ſenſe not frequent, though re-
gularly deducible from the derivation.
Far beyond
The ſons of Anak, famous now and blaz’d,
Fearleſs of danger, like a petty god
I walk’d about admir'd of all, and dreaded
On hoſtile ground, none daring my affront. Samſon Agoni/?.
4. Diſgrace; ſhame. This ſenſe is rather peculiar to the Scottiſh
dialect.
Antonius attacked the pirates of Crete, and, by his too great
preſumption, was defeated; upon the ſenſe of which affront he
died with grief. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Aff Ro'NTER. n.ſ.. [from affront.] The perſon that affronts.
Aff Ro'NT IN G. participial adj. [from affront.] That which has
the quality of affronting.
Among words which ſignify the ſame principal ideas, ſome
are clean and decent, others unclean; ſome are kind, others
are affronting and reproachful, becauſe of the ſecondary idea
which cuſtom has affixed to them. //-tts's Logick.
To AFF U'S E. v. a. [affundo, affuſum, Lat.] To pour one
thing upon another.
I fruitleſsly poured on them acid liquors, to try if they con-
tained any volatile ſalt or ſpirit, which would probably have diſ-
covered itſelf, by making an ebullition with the affuſed li-
quor. Boyle.
AFFU'sion. n. ſ. [affuſio, Lat.] The aët of pouring one thing
upon another.
Upon the affiſion of a tinéture of galls, it immediately be-
came as black as ink. Grew's 444/aeum.
To A FFY'. v. a. [affer, Fr. affidare mulierem, Braćton.] To
betroth in order to marriage.
Wedded be thou to the hags of hell,
For daring to affy a mighty lord
Unto the daughter of a worthleſs king. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
To AFFY'. v. n. To put confidence in ; to put truſt in.
Marcus Andronicus, ſo I do affy
In thy uprightneſs and integrity,
That I will here diſmiſs my loving friends. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
AFI'E.L.D. adv. [from a and field. See FIELD.] To the field.
We drove afield, and both together heard
What time the grey fly winds her ſultry born,
Batt'ring our flocks with the freſh dews of night. Milton.
Afield I went, amid the morning dew,
To milk my kine, for ſo ſhould houſewives do. Gay.
AFLA'T. adv. [from a and fat. SecFLAT.J Level with the ground.
When you would have many new roots of fruit-trees, take
a low tree, and bow it, and lay all his branches offat upon the
ground, and caſt earth upon them ; and every twig will take
IOOt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry.
AF lo'at, adv. [from a ... See Flo AT.] Floating;
born up in the water: in a figurative ſenſe, within view ; in
II12t1911.
There
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A F R.
A F T
Tºº-º------------ -- — — .
There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in ſhallows and in miſeries.
On ſuch a full ſea are we now affoat;
And we muſt take the current when it ſerves,
Or loſe our ventures. Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
Take any paſſion of the ſoul of man, while it is predomi-
nant and aftoat, and, juſt in the critical height of it, nick it
with ſome lucky or unlucky word, and you may as certainly
over-rule it to your own purpoſe, as a ſpark of fire, falling up-
on gun-powder, will infallibly blow it up. South.
There are generally ſeveral hundred loads affoat, for they be-
gin to cut above twenty-five leagues up the river above Hall ;
and there are other rivers that flow into the Inn, which bring in
their contributions. Addiſon's Italy.
Aro'ot, adv. [from a and foot.]
I. On foot; not on horſeback. -
He thought it beſt to return, for that day, to a village not far
off; and diſpatching his horſe in ſome ſort, the next day early,
to come afot thither. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
2. In action; as, a deſign is afoot.
I pr’ythee, when thou ſeeſt that ačt afoot,
Ev’n with the very comment of thy ſoul
Obſerve mine uncle.
3. In motion.
Of Albany's and Cornwall's pow'rs you heard not—
'Tis ſaid they are afoot. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear.
AFo'RE. prep. [from a and fore. See BEFoR F.]
1. Before ; nearer in place to any thing; as, he ſtood afore him.
2. Sooner in time.
If your diligence be not ſpeedy, I ſhall be there afºre you.
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Idem, ibid.
Afo'RE: adv.
1. In time foregone or paſt.
Whoſoever ſhould make light of any thing afre ſpoken or
written, out of his own houſe a tree ſhould be taken, and he
thereon be hanged. Eſdras, vi. 22.
If he never drank wine afºre, it will go near to remove his
fit. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
2. Firſt in the way.
AEmilia, run you to the citadel,
And tell my lord and lady what hath hap'd ;
Will you go on afore ? Shakeſpeare's Othello.
3. In front; in the fore-part.
Approaching nigh, he reared high afºre
His body monſtrous, horrible and vaſt. Fairy Queen:
A Fo'RE GoING. participial adj. [from afore and going.] Going
before.
AFoRE HAND. adv. [from afore and hand.].
I. By a previous proviſion.
Many of the particular ſubjećts of diſcourſe are occaſional,
and ſuch as cannot aforehand be reduced to any certain ac-
COunt. Government of the Tongue.
2. Provided; prepared; previouſly fitted.
For it will be ſaid, that in the former times, whereof we have
ſpoken, Spain was not ſo mighty, as now it is ; and England,
on the other ſide, was more aforehand in all matters of power.
Bacon's Conſiderations on J/ar with Spain.
AFo'REMENTion ED. adj. [from afore and mentioned.] Men-
tioned before.
. Among the nine other parts, five are not in a condition to
give alms or relief to thoſe aforementioned; being very near
reduced themſelves to the ſame miſerable condition. Addiſon.
AFo'RENAME.D. adj. [from afore and named.] Named before.
Imitate ſomething of circular form, in which, as in all other
aforenamed proportions, you ſhall help yourſelf by the dia-
meter. Peacham on drawing.
AFo'RESAID. adj. [from afore and ſaid.] Said before.
It need not go for repetition, if we reſume again that which
we ſaid in the aforeſaid experiment concerning annihilation.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 771.
AFo'Ret IME. adv. [from afore and time.] . In time paſt.
O thou that art waxen old in wickedneſs, now thy fins which
thou haſt committed aforetime, are come to light. Suſanna.
AFRA'ID. participial adj. [from the verb affray : it ſhould there-
fore properly be written with ſf.]
1. Struck with fear; terrified; fearful.
So perſecute them with thy tempeſt, and make them afraia
with thy ſtorm. Pſalm lxxxiii. 15.
2. It has often the particle of before the objećt of fear.
There, loathing life, and yet of death afraid,
In anguiſh of her ſpirit, thus ſhe pray'd. Dryden's Fables.
, If, while this wearied fleſh draws fleeting breath,
Not ſatisfy'd with life, afraid of death,
It hap’ly be thy will, that I ſhould know
Glimpſe of delight, or pauſe from anxious woe;
‘From now, from inſtant now, great Sire, diſpel
The clouds that preſs my ſoul. Prior.
AFRE's H. adv. [from a and freſh. See FRESH.] Anew ; again,
after intermiſſion.
The Germans now uſing no ſuch light horſemen, but ſerving
upon great horſes, and charged with heavy armour, received
great hurt by theſe light ſkirmiſhes; the Turks, with their
light horſes, eaſily ſhunning their charge, and again, at their
pleaſure, charging them afreſh, when they ſaw the heavy horſes
almoſt weary. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
When once we have attained theſe ideas, they may be excit-
ed afreſh by the uſe of words. J/atts's Logick.
AF Ro NT. adv. [from a and front.] In front; in direct oppoſi-
tion to the face.
Theſe four came all afront, and mainly thruſt at me.
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
A'FTE R. prep. [ærzen, Sax.]
1. Following in place. After is commonly applied to words of
motion; as, he came after, and ſtood behind him. It is oppoſed
to befºre. *
What ſays lord Warwick, ſhall we after them?—
- After them 1 nay, before them, if we can. Shakespeare Henry VI.
2. In purſuit of.
After whom is the king of Iſrael come out? After whom
‘.º purſue? After a dead dog, after a flea. 1 San. xxiv.i.4.
. DCIllſld.
3 Sometimes I placed a third priſm after a ſecond, and ſome-
times alſo a fourth after the third, by all which the image night
be often refracted ſideways. Newton's Opticks.
4. Poſteriour in time.
Good after ill, and after pain delight;
Alternate, like the ſcenes of day and night. Dryden's Fab.
We ſhall examine the ways of conveyance of the ſovereignty
of Adam to princes that were to reign after him. Locke.
5. According to.
He that thinketh Spain our over-match, is no good mintman,
but takes greatneſs of kingdoms according to bulk and currency,
and not after their intrinſic value. Bacon.
6. In imitation of.
There are, among the old Roman ſtatues, ſeveral of Venus,
in different poſtures and habits; as there are many particular
figures of her made after the ſame deſign. Addiſon's Italy.
This alluſion is after the oriental manner: thus in the pſalms,
how frequently are perſons compared to cedars. Pope's Od. notes.
A'FTER. adv.
1. In ſucceeding time. It is uſed of time mentioned as ſucceed-
ing ſome other. So we cannot ſay, I ſhall be happy after, but
hereafter; but we ſay, I was firſt made miſerable by the loſs,
but was after happier.
Far be it from me, to juſtify the cruelties which were at firſt
uſed towards them, which had their reward ſoon after. Bacon.
The chief were thoſe who, from the pit of hell
Roaming to ſeek their prey on earth, durſt fix
Their ſeats long after next the ſeat of God. Paradºſ, Loft.
2. Following another.
Let go thy hold, when a great wheel runs down a hill, leſł
it break thy neck with following it; but the great one that goes
upward, let him draw thee after. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
AFTER is compounded with many words, but almoſt always in its
genuine and primitive ſignification; ſome, which occurred,
will follow, by which others may be explained.
A'FTER AccEPTATION. [from after and acceptation.] A ſenſe
afterwards, not at firſt admitted.
'Tis true, ſome doćtors in a ſcantier ſpace,
I mean, in each apart, contract the place:
Some, who to greater length extend the line,
The church's after acceptation join. Dryd. Hind and Panther.
A'FTERAGES. n.ſ.. [from after and ages.] Succeſſive times;
poſterity. This word has no ſingular.
Not the whole land, which the Chuſites ſhould, or might in
future time, conquer; ſeeing, in afterages, they became lords
of º nations. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
or to philoſophers is praiſe deny'd,
Whoſe wiſe inſtructions afterages guide. Sir j. Denham.
What an opinion will afterages entertain of their religion,
who bid fair for a gibbet, by endeavouring to bring in a ſuper-
ſtition, which their forefathers periſhed in flames to keep out.
Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 1.
A'FTER ALL. When all has been taken into the view; when
there remains nothing more to be added ; at laſt , in fine;
in concluſion.
They have given no good proof in aſſerting this extravagant
principle ; for which, after all, they have no ground or colour,
but a paſſage or two of ſcripture, miſerably perverted, in op-
poſition to many expreſs texts. Atterbury's Sermons.
But, after all, if they have any merit, it is to be attributed
to ſome good old authors, whoſe works I had leiſure to ſtudy.
- Pope on Paſtoral Poetry.
A/F TER BIRTH. n.ſ.. [from after and birth.] The membrane
in which the birth was involved, which is brought away after ;
the ſecundine.
The exorbitances or degenerations of that, whether from a
hurt in labour, or from part of the after-birth left behind,
produce ſuch virulent diſtenpers of the blood, as make it caſt
Out a turn Our. Jºſeman's Surgery.
A'FTER CLAP. m. ſ. [from after and clap.] Unexpected events
happening after an affair is ſuppoſed to be at an end.
3 For
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A F T
A G A
For the next morrow's meed they cloſely went,
For fear of afterclaps to prevent. Spenſ. Hub. Tale.
It is commonly taken in an ill ſenſe.
AFTER cost. m. ſ. [from after and coſt.] The latter charges;
the expence incurred after the original plan is executed.
You muſt take care to carry off the land-floods and ſtreams,
before you attempt draining; leſt your aftercoſ and labour
prove unſucceſsful. Mortimer's Husbandry.
A'Fºr ERCROP. n./ [from after and crop.] The ſecond crop or
harveſt of the ſame year.
Aftercrops I think neither good for the land, nor yet the
hay good for cattle. Mortimer's Husbandry.
AFTER-DINNER. m. ſ. [from after and dinner.] The hour paſ-
fing juſt after dinner, which is generally allowed to indulgence
and amuſement.
Thou haſt nor youth nor age,
But, as it were, an afterdinner's ſleep,
Dreaming on both. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
A'FTER-END F A you R. n.ſ.. . [from after and endeavour.] En-
deavours made after the firſt effort or endeavour.
There is no reaſon why the ſound of a pipe ſhould leave
traces in their brains, which, not firſt, but by their after-en-
deavours, ſhould produce the like ſounds. Locke.
After-EN QUIRY. m. ſ. [from after and enquiry..] Enquiry
made after the fact committed, or after life.
You muſt either be directed by ſome that take upon them to
know, or to take upon yourſelf that, which, I am ſure, you do
not know, or lump the after-enquiry on your peril; and how
you ſhall ſpeed in your journey's end, I think, you’ll never
return to tell me. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
To A'ft ER E YE. v. a. [from after and eye.] To keep one in
view ; to follow in view.
Thou ſhouldſt have made him
As little as a crow, or leſs, ere left
• To aſtereye him. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
AFTERGAME. n.ſ.. [from after and game.] The ſcheme which
may be laid, or the expedients which are practiſed after the
original deſign has miſcarried; methods taken after the firſt
turn of affairs.
This earl, like certain vegetables, did bud and open ſlowly;
nature ſometimes delighting to play an aftergame, as well as
fortune, which had both their turns and tides in courſe. Wotton.
The fables of the ax-handle and the wedge, ſerve to precau-
tion us not to put ourſelves needleſsly upon an aftergame, but
to weigh beforehand what we ſay and do. L'Eſtrange's Fab.
Our firſt deſign, my friend, has prov’d abortive;
Still there remains an aftergame to play. Addiſon's Cato.
A'FTERHours. n.ſ.. [from after and hours.] The hours that
ſucceed.
So ſmile the heav'ns upon this holya&amp;,
That afterhours with ſorrow chide us not.
Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
A'FTER-LIVER, n.ſ.. [from after and live..] He that lives in ſuc-
ceeding times.
By thee my promiſe ſent
Unto myſelf, let after-livers {. Sidney, b. ii.
A's terlové. n.f. [from after and love.] The ſecond or later
OVC.
Intended, or committed, was this fault 2
If but the firſt, how heinous ere it be,
, To win thy after-lºve, I pardon thee. Shakespeare Richard II.
*(FºreRMATH. n.ſ. [from after, and math, from mow.] The
atter math; the ſecond crop of graſs mown in autumn. See
AFTERcRoP. -
**-ternoon. n.ſ. [from after and noon.] The time from the
rxheridian to the evening.
A beauty-waining and diſtreſſed widow,
Ev’n in the afternoon of her beſt days,
Made prize and purchaſe of his wanton eye.
Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
However, keep the lively taſte you hold
Of God; love him now, but fear him more;
And, in your afternoons, think what you told
And promis'd him at morning-prayer before. Donne.
Such, all the morning, to the pleadings run;
But when the bus'neſs of the day is done,
On dice, and drink, and drabs, they ſpend the afternoon.
A. Dryden's Perſius, Sat. i.
* FireRPAINs. n.ſ.. [from after and pain.]
The pains after birth, by which women are delivered of the
, ſecundine.
^ = Tºr. m. ſ. [from after and ...] The latter part.
The flexibleneſs of the former part of a man's age, not yet
grown up to be headſtrong, makes it more governable and ſafe;
** d, in the afterpart, reaſon and forefight begin a little to take
Place, and mind a man of his ſafety and improvement. Locke.
* T ERPRoof. n.ſ.. [from after and proof.] Evidence poſtc-
*iour to the thing in queſtion.
All know, that he likewiſe at firſt was much under the ex-
Pºtation of his afterproof; ſuch a ſolar influence there is in
A’
f the ſolar aſpect. //?ttan.
F - r - - - -
}. º re. n.ſ.. [from after and taſte.] A taſte remaining
upon the tongue after the draught, which was not perceived in
the act of drinking.
A'FTER Thought. n.ſ.. [from after and thought.] Reflections
after the act; expedients formed too late. It is not properly
to be uſed for ſecondthought. .
Expence, and afterthought, and idle care,
And doubts of motely hue, and dark deſpair;
Suſpicions, and fantaſtical ſurmiſe, -
Andjealouſy ſuffus'd with jaundice in her eyes,
Diſcolouring all ſhe view'd, in tawny dreſs'd,
Downlook'd, and with a cuckow on her fiſt. Dryd. Fall.i.
A'FTER-TIMEs. n.ſ.. [from after and time.] Succeeding times.
See AFTERAG Es.
You promis'd once, a progeny divine
Qf Romans, riſing from the Trojan line,
In aftertimes ſhould hold the world in awe,
And to the land and ocean give the law. Dryd. Wirg. Æn.
AFTER tossING.. n.ſ.. [from after and toſ...] The motion of
the ſea after a ſtorm.
Confuſions and tumults are only the impotent remains of an
unnatural rebellion, and are no more than the aftertoſings of
a ſea, when the ſtorm is laid. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 25.
AFTER waſ D. adv. [from after, and jeanb, Sax.] In ſuc-
º time; ſometimes written afterwards, but leſs pro-
perly.
Uſes not thought upon before, may afterward ſpring up,
and be reaſonable cauſes of retaining that, which former conſi.
derations did formerly procure to be inſtituted. Hooker.
An anxious diſtruſt of the divine goodneſs, makes a man
more and more unworthy of it; and miſerable beforehand,
for fear of being ſo afterward. L’Eſtrange.
A'FTER wit. n.ſ.. [from after and wit..] The contrivance of
expedients after the occaſion of uſing them is paſt. See Af.
TER THOUGHT.
There is no recalling of what's gone and paſt; ſo that after-
wit comes too late, when the miſchief is done. L'E/irange.
AFTER-wr ATH. n.ſ.. [from after and wrath.] Anger when
the provocation ſeems paſt.
I hear him mock
The luck of Caeſar, which the gods give men
Tº excuſe their after-wrath. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
4G4 n.ſ. The title of a Turkiſh military officer.
AGA'1N. adv. [axen, Sax.]
1. A ſecond time; once more; marking the repetition of the
ſame thing.
The poor remnant of human ſeed, which remained in their
mountains, peopled their country again ſlowly, by little and
little. Bacon's New Atalantis.
Go now, deluded man, and ſeek again
New toils, new dangers, on the duſty plain. Dryd. Æn.
Some are already retired into foreign countries; and the
reſt, who poſſeſs lands, are determined never to hazard them
again, for the ſake of eſtabliſhing their ſuperſtition. Swift.
2. On the other hand; marking ſome oppoſition or contrariety.
His wit encreaſed upon the occaſion; and ſo much the more,
if the occaſion were ſharpened with danger. Again, whether
it were the ſhortneſs of his forefight, or the ſtrength of his
will, certain it is, that the perpetual trouble of his fortunes
could not have been without defects in his nature. Bacon.
Thoſe things that we know not what to do withal, if we had
them, and thoſe things, again, which another cannot part with,
but to his own loſs and ſhame, are the very conditions of this
fable. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
3. On another part; marking a tranſition to ſome new conſide-
Iſation.
Behold yon mountain's hoary height,
Made higher with new mounts of ſnow;
Again, behold the winter's weight
Oppreſs the lab’ring woods below. Dryden.
4. In return, noting re-action, or reciprocal action; as, his for-
tune worked upon his nature, and his nature again upon his for-
tune.
5. Back; in reſtitution.
When your head did but ake,
I knit my handkerchief about your brows;
The beſt I had, a princeſs wrought it me,
And I did never ask it you again. Shakeſp. King John.
6. In return for any thing; in recompence.
That he hath given will he pay again. Prov. xix. 27.
7. In order of rank or ſucceſſion; marking diſtribution.
Queſtion was aſked of Demoſthenes, What was the chief
part of an orator He anſwered, Action. What next 2 Ac-
tion. What next, again 2 Aétion. Bacon's Eſſays.
The cauſe of the holding green, is the cloſe and compačt
ſubſtance of their leaves, and the pedicles of them : and the
cauſe of that again is either the tough and viſcous juice of the
plant, or the ſtrength and heat thereof. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
8. Beſides; in any other time or place.
They have the Walloons, who are tall ſoldiers; yet that is
but a ſpot of ground. But, on the other ſide, there is not in
the world again ſuch a ſpring and ſeminary of brave military
people, as in England, Scotland, and Ireland. Bacon.
N 9. Twice
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A G A
A G E
9. Twice as much; marking the ſame qual:
There are whom heav'n has bleſt wit
Yet want as much again to manag', '5
Forwit and judgment ever rººt *.,..., P
Tho' meant each other's aid, like man and wife. ope.
I ſhould not be ſorry to ſee a chºrus on theatre, more than
as large and as deep again as outs, built and adorned at a king's
charges. - - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
10. Again and again ; with frequent repetition; often. -
This is not to be º by one . "...".
- be repeated again and again, with a cloſe attention to
i. | the diſcourſe. Locke's Eſſay on St. P. Epiſtles.
11. In oppoſition; by way of reſiſtance.
Who art thou that anſwereſt again *
12. Back; as, returning from ſome meſſage.
Bring us word again which way we ſhall go.
AoA'1Ns f. prºp. [ængeon, on 5eono, Sax.]
1. In oppoſition to any perſon. -
And he will be a wild man; his hand will be againſ every
man, and every man's hand againſt him. Gen. xvi. 12.
2. Contrary; oppoſite, in general. - -
That authority of men ſhould prevail with men either againſ?
or above reaſon, is no part of our belief. Hooker.
He is melancholy without cauſe, and merry againſ the hair.
Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
We might work any effect without and againſt matter; and
this not holpen by the co-operation of angels or ſpirits, but only
by the unity and harmony of nature. Bacon's Natural Hiſt.
The preventing goodneſs of God does even wreſt him from
himſelf, and ſave him, as it were, againſt his will. South.
The god, uneaſy till he ſlept again,
Reſolv’d, at once, to rid himſelf of pain;
And, tho' againſt his cuſtom, call'd aloud,
Exciting Morpheus from the fleepy crowd. Dryden.
Men often ſay a thing is againſt their conſcience, when re-
ally it is not. Swift's Miſcellanies.
3. In contradićtion to any opinion.
After all that can be ſaid againſt a thing, this will ſtill be
true, that many things poſſibly are, which we know not of;
and that many more things may be than are: and if ſo, after
all our arguments againſt a thing, it will be uncertain whether
it be or not. Tillotſon.
The church-clergy have written the beſt colle&amp;tion of tracts
againſt popery, that ever appeared in England. Swift.
4. With contrary motion or º ; uſed of material action.
Boils and plagues
Plaiſter you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd
Farther than ſeen, and one infect another
Againſt the wind a mile. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The kite being a bird of prey, and therefore hot, delighteth
in the freſh air; and many times flieth againſt the wind, as
ity once repeated.
hiſtore of wit,
Rom. ix. 20.
Deut. i. 22.
trouts and ſalmons ſwim againſt the ſtream. Bacon.
5. Contrary to rule or law.
If aught againſ my life
Thy country ſought of thee, it ſought unjuſtly,
4gainſt the law of nature, law of nations. M. Sam. Agon.
Againſ the public ſanctions of the peace,
Againſt all omens of their ill ſucceſs;
With fates averſe, the rout in arms reſort,
To force their monarch, and inſult the court. Dryden's AEn.
6. Oppoſite to, in place.
£ainſt the Tiber's mouth, but far away.
7. To the hurt of another.
And when thou think'ſt of her eternity,
Think not that death againſt her nature is 3
Think it a birth: and when thou go'ſt to die,
Sing like a ſwan, as if thou went'ſ to bliſs.
8. In Prºviſion for ; in expectation of.
... This mºde of ſpeaking probably had its original from the
idea of making proviſion againſ, or in oppoſition to a time of
histortune, but by degrees acquired a neutral ſenſe.
Thence ſhe them brought into a ſtately hall,
Wherein were many tables fair diſpred,
And ready dight with drapets feſtival,
ºff the viands ſhould be miniſtred. Fairy Queen.
The like charge was given them againſt the time they ſhould
some to ſettle themſelves in the land promiſed unto their fa-
thers. Hooker, b. v. § 1 1.
Some ſay, that ever 'gainſt that ſeaſon comes,
w herein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning fingeth all night long :
And then they ſay no ſpirit walks abroad;
The nights are wholeſome, then no planets ſtrike,
No fairy tales, no witch hath power to charm ;
sº hºllowed and ſo gracious is the time. Shářºff. Hamlet.
.*.* that purpoſe, he made haſte to Briſtol, that all things
*ght be ready againſ the prince came thither. Clarenin.
*ainſt the promis'd time provides with care,
A:ld *** in the woof, the robes he was to wear. Dryd.
All which I grant to be reaſonably and truly ſaid, and only
... it's r * r *- - - - - - -
* they may be remembered againſt another day. Stillingſ.
4. - -
Dryden.
Sir j. Davies.
A'6A1. Axy, n.ſ.. [from 2 and yaxa, Gr.] Want of milk. Dić.
AGA'PE. adv. [from a and gape.] Staring with eagerneſs; as, a
bird gapes for meat.
In himſelf was all his ſtate;
More ſolemn than the tedious pomp that waits
On princes, when their rich retinue long
Of horſes led, and grooms befinear'd with gold,
Dazzles the crowd, and ſets them all agape. Paradiſ I3/?.
Dazzle the crowd, and ſet them all agape. Philips.
The whole crowd ſtood agape, and ready to take the doctor
at his word. Speciator, N- 57 2.
AGAR1ck. n.ſ.. [agaricum, Lat.] A drug of uſe in phyſick, and
the dying trade. It is divided into male and female; the male
is uſed only in dying, the female in medicine: the male grows
on oaks, the female on larches.
There are two excreſcences which grow upon trees; both
of them in the nature of muſhrooms: the one the Romans
call boletus, which groweth upon the roots of oaks, and was
one of the dainties of their table; the other is medicinal, that
is called agarick, which groweth upon the tops of oaks; though
it be affirmed by ſome, that it groweth alſo at the roots. Bacon.
AGA'st. adj. [This word, which is uſually, by later authours,
written aghaſt, is, not improbably, the true word derived from
agaze, which has been written aghaſ, from a miſtaken etymo-
logy. Sce AGHAst.]
Struck with terrour; amazed; frighted to aſtoniſhment.
Thus roving on
In confus'd march forlorn, th' advent'rous bands,
With ſhudd'ring horrour pale, and eyes ago/t,
View'd firſt their lamentable lot, and found
No reſt. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii. 1616.
A'GATE. n.ſ.. [agate, Fr. achates, Lat.] A precious ſtone of the
loweſt claſs, often clouded with beautiful variegations.
In ſhape no bigger than an agate ſtone,
On the forefinger of an alderman. Shakespeare. Romeo and Juliet.
Agates are only varieties of the flint kind; they have a grey
horny ground, clouded, lineated, or ſpotted with different co-
lours, chiefly duſky, black, brown, red, and ſometimes blue.
Iłoodward's Method of Fºſſ.
A'GATY. adj. [from agate.] Partaking of the nature of agate.
An agaty flint was above two inches in diameter; the whole
covered over with a friable cretaceous cruſt. J%odward.
To AGA'ze. v. a. [from a and gaze, to ſet agazing; as, amaze,
amuſe, and others.] To ſtrike with amazement; to ſtupify
with ſudden terrour. The verb is now out of uſe.
So as they travell'd, ſo they gan eſpy
An armed knight toward thom gallop faſt,
That ſeemed from ſome feared foe to fly,
Or other griſly thing that him agaff. Fairy Queen.
AGA'z Ed. participial adj. [from agaze; which ſee..] Struck with
amazement; terrified to ſtupidity.
Hundreds he ſent to hell, and none durſt ſtand him;
Here, there, and every where, enrag'd he flew :
The French exclaim'd ; “The devil was in arms ”
All the whole army ſtood agazed on him. Shakespeare Henry VI.
AGE. m. ſ. ſage, Fr. anciently eage, or aage; it is deduced by
Menage, from actatium, of atas; by junius, from aa, which, in
the Teutonic dialects, ſignified long duration.]
1. Any period of time attributed to ſomething as the whole, or
part, of its duration: in this ſenſe, we ſay, the age of man, the
ſeveral ages of the world, the golden or iron age.
One man in his time plays many parts,
His life being ſeven ages. Shakeſpeare.
And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt ſeventeen years; ſo
the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and ſeven years.
Geneſis, xlvii. 28.
2. A ſucceſſion or generation of men.
Hence, laſtly, ſprings care of poſterities,
For things their kind would everlaſting make.
Hence is it, that old men do plant young trees, -
The fruit whereof another age ſhall take. Sir j. Davies.
- Next, to the Son,
Deſtin’d Reſtorer of mankind, by whom
New heav'n, and earth, ſhall to the ages riſe,
Or down from heav'n deſcend. AMilton's Parad'ſ Lºft.
No declining age
E'er felt the raptures of poetic rage. Roſcommon.
. The time in which any particular man, or race of men, lived,
or ſhall live; as, the age of heroes.
4. The ſpace of a hundred years; a ſecular period ; a century.
5. The latter part of life; old-age; oldneſs.
You ſee how full of change his age is: the obſervation we
have made of it hath not been little ; he always loved our
fifter moſt, and with what poor judgment he hath now caſt her
off. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Boys muſt not have th' ambitious care of men,
Nor men the weak anxieties of age. Roſommon.
And on this forehead, where your verſe has ſaid,
The loves delighted, and the graces play’d;
Inſulting age will trace his cruel way,
And leave ſad marks of his deſtructive ſway. Prizr.
6. Matu-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A G G
6. Maturity; ripeneſs; full ſtrength of life.
A ſolemn admiſſion of proſelytes, all that either, being of
age, deſire that admiſſion for themſelves, or that, in infancy,
are by others preſented to that charity of the church. Hammond.
We thought our fires, not with their own content,
Had, ere we came to age, our portion ſpent. Dryd.
. In law. -
In a man, the age of fourteen years is the age of diſcretion;
and twenty-one years is the full age : In a woman, at ſeven
years of age, the lord her father may diſtrain his tenants for aid
to marry her; at the age of nine years, ſhe is dowable; at
twelve years, ſhe is able finally to ratify and confirm her for-
mer conſent given to matrimony; at fourteen, ſhe is enabled
to receive her land into her own hands, and ſhall be out of ward
at the death of her anceſtor; at ſixtecn, ſhe ſhall be out of
ward, though, at the death of her anceſtor, ſhe was within the
age of fourteen years; at twenty-one, ſhe is able to alienate
her lands and tenements. At the age of fourteen, a ſtripling is
enabled to chooſe his own guardian ; at the age of fourteen, a
man may conſent to marriage. Cowell.
A GED. adj. [from age. It makes two ſyllables in poetry.]
1. Old ; ſtricken in years; applied generally to animate beings.
If the compariſon do ſtand between man and man, which
ſhall hearken unto other, fith the aged, for the moſt part, are
beſt experienced, leaſt ſubject to raſh and unadviſed paſſions.
Hooker, b. v. § 7:
Novelty is only in requeſt; and it is as dangerous to be aged
in any kind of courſe, as it is virtuous to be conſtant in any
undertaking. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Kindneſs itſelf too weak a charm will prove,
To raiſe the feeble fires of aged love. Prior.
2. Old ; applied to inanimate things. This uſe is rare, and com-
i monly with ſome tendency to the proſºpoparia.
The people did not more worſhip the images of gold and
ivory, than they did the groves; and the ſame Quintilian ſaith
of the aged oaks. Stillingfleet's Defence of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
A'G EDLY. adv. [from aged.] After the manner of an aged perſon.
AGE'N. adv. [agen, Sax.] Again; in return. See AGAIN.
This word is only written in this manner, though it be in
reality the true orthography, for the ſake of rhime.
Thus Venus: Thus her ſon reply'd agen;
None of your ſiſters have we heard or ſeen. Dryden's An.
A'GENcy. n.ſ.. [from agent.]
1. The quality of acting; the ſtate of being in action; ačtion.
A few advances there are in the following papers, tending to
aſſert the ſuperintendence and agency of providence in the natu-
:
ral world. IVoodward’s Preface to Nat. Hiſtory.
2. The office of an agent or factor for another; buſineſs perform-
ed by an agent.
Some of the purchaſers themſelves may be content to live
cheap in a worſe country, rather than be at the charge of ex-
change and agencies. Swift.
A'GENT. adj. [agens, Lat.] That which ačts; oppoſed to pa-
fient, or that which is ačted upon.
This ſucceſs is oft truly aſcribed unto the force of imagina-
tion upon the body agent; and then, by a ſecondary means, it
may upon a diverſe body; as, for example, if a man carry a ring,
or ſome part of a beaſt, believing ſtrongly that it will help him
to obtain his love, it may make him more induſtrious, and a-
gain more confident and perſiſting than otherwiſe he would
be. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 902.
A "cent. n.ſ. -
* - An actor; he that ačts; he that profeſſes the faculty of a&amp;tion.
Where there is no doubt, deliberation is not excluded as
impertinent unto the thing, but as needleſs in regard of the
agent, which ſeeth already what to reſolve upon. Hooker.
To whom nor agent, from the inſtrument,
Nor pow'r of working, from the work is known. Davies.
Heav'n made us agents free to good or ill,
And forc’d it not, tho’ he foreſaw the will.
Freedom was firſt beſtow'd on human race, *
And preſcience only held the ſecond place. Dryden.
A miracle is a work exceeding the power of any created
&lt;rgent, conſequently being an effect of the divine omnipotence.
South's Sermons.
*- A ſubſtitute; a deputy; a factor; a perſon employed to tranſ-
ačt the buſineſs of another.
— All hearts in love, uſe your own tongues;
Let every eye negotiate for itſelſ,
And truſt no agent. Shakeſpeare.
They had not the wit to ſend to them, in any orderly faſhion,
*sents or choſen men, to tempt them, and to treat with them.
- Bacon's Henry VII.
Remember, Sir, your fury of a wife,
Who, not content to be reveng'd on you,
... The agents of your paſſion will purſue. Dryden's Aureng.
3. That which has the power of operating, or producing cffects
upon another thing.
They produced woºde:ſul cfºls, by the proper application
of agents to patients. Temple.
°º ENERA"rios. m. ſ. [from ad and generatio, Lat.] The ſtate
ºf growing or uniting to another body.
To make a perfect nutrition, there is required a tranſmuta-
tion of nutriment; now where this converſion or aggeneratiºn
is made, there is alſo required, in the aliment, a ſimilarity of
hmatter. Brown's Vulgar Erreurs.
To A'Go ERATE. v. a. [from agger, Lat..] To heap up. Dist.
AGGERO's E. adj. [from agger, Lat.] Full of heaps. Dici.
To AGGLO'MERATE. v. a. ſagglomero, Lat.]
1. To gather up in a ball, as thread.
2. To gather together.
To AGGlo'MERATE. v. n.
Beſides, the hard agglomerating ſalts,
The ſpoil of ages, would impervious choke
. Their ſecret channels. Thomſon's Autumn.
AGGLUTINANTs. n.ſ.. [from agglutinate.] Thoſe medicines or
... applications which have the power of uniting parts together.
To AG GLUT IN AT E. v. n. [from ad and gluten, glue,
Lat..] To unite one part to another; to join together, ſo as
not to fall aſunder. It is a word almoſt appropriated to medi-
Clne. -
It has got room enough to grow into its full dimenſions,
which is performed by the daily ingeſtion of food that is di-
geſted into blood; which being diffuſed through the body, is
agglutinated to thoſe parts that were immediately agglutinated to
the foundation-parts of the womb. Harvey on Conſumptions.
AGGLUTINATION. m. ſ. [from agglutinate.] Union; coheſion;
the act of agglutinating; the ſtate of being agglutinated.
The occaſion of its not healing by agglutination, as the other
did, was from the alteration the ichor had begun to make in
the bottom of the wound. //ſeman's Surgery.
AGGLU'TINATIVE. adj. [from agglutinate.] That which has
the power of procuring agglutination.
Rowl up the member with the agglutinative rowler. Wiſm.
To AGGRANDI'Z.E. v. a. ſaggrandiſer, Fr.] To make
great; to enlarge; to exalt; to improve in power, honour,
or rank. It is applied to perſons generally, ſometimes to
things.
If the king ſhould uſe it no better than the pope did, only to
aggrandize covetous churchmen, it cannot be called a jewel in
his crown. - Ayliffe's Parergon.
Theſe furniſh us with glorious ſprings and mediums, to raiſe
and aggrandize our conceptions, to warm our ſouls, to awaken
the better paſſions, and to elevate them even to a divine pitch,
and that for devotional purpoſes. Watts's Improv. of the Mind.
A'GGRAND1zEMENT. n.ſ.. [aggrandiſement, Fr.] The ſtate of
being aggrandized; the aët of aggrandizing.
A'GGRANDIzER. m. ſ. [from aggrandize.] The perſon that
aggrandizes or makes great another.
To AGGRATE. v. a. [aggratare, Ital.] To pleaſe; to treat
with civilities: a word not now in uſe. -
And in the midſt thereof, upon the floor,
A lovely bevy of fair ladies ſate,
Courted of many a jolly paramour;
The which them did in modeſt wiſe amate,
And each one ſought his lady to aggrate. Fairy Queen.
To AGGRAVATE. v. a. ſaggravo, Lat.]
1. To make heavy; uſed only in a metaphorical ſenſe; as, to
aggravate an accuſation, or a puniſhment.
A grove hard by, ſprung up with this their change,
His will who reigns above 1 to aggravate
Their penance, laden with fruit, like that
Which grew in paradiſe, the bait of Eve
Us’d by the tempter. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
Ambitious Turnus in the preſs appears,
And aggravating crimes augment their fears. Dryd. Æneid.
2. To make any thing worſe, by the addition of ſome particular
circumſtance, not eſſential.
This offence, in itſelf ſo heinous, was yet in him aggravated
by the motive thereof, which was not malice or diſcontent,
but an aſpiring mind to the papacy. Bacon's Henry VII.
AGGRAvA'TION. m. ſ. [from aggravate.]
1. The act of aggravating, or making heavy.
2. The extrinſecal circumſtances or accidents, which encreaſe the
guilt of a crime, or the miſery of a calamity.
If it be weigh'd
By itſelf, with aggravations not ſurcharg’d,
Or elſe with juſt allowance counterpois'd,
I may, if poſſible, thy pardon find
The eaſier towards me, or thy hatred leſs. M. Sampſ. Ag.
He, to the fins which he commits, hath the aggravation ſuper-
added of committing them againſt knowledge, againſt conſci-
ence, againſt ſight of the contrary law. Hammond's Fundam.
A'GGRE GATE. adj. ſaggregatus, Lat.] Framed by the collec-
tion of any particular parts into one maſs, body, or ſyſtem.
They had, for a long time together, produced many other in-
ept combinations, or aggregate forms of particular things, and
nonſenſical ſyſtems of the whole. Ray on the Creation.
A'GóRE GATE. m. ſ. [from the verb.]. The complex or col-
lective reſult of the conjunction or acervation of many par-
ticulars. -
The reaſon of the far greateſt part of mankind, is but an
aggregate of miſtaken phantaſms, and, in things not ſenſible, a
conſtant deluſion. Glanville's Scºpſis Scientifica.
A.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A G H
A G L
A great number of ſuch living and thinking particles could
n tipofibly, by their mutual contact, and preſſing, and ſtriking,
compoſe one greater individual animal, with one mind and un-
derſtanding, and a vital conſenſion of the whole body; any
more than a ſwarm of bees, or a crowd of men and women,
can be conceived to make up one particular living creature,
compounded and conſtituted of the aggregate of them all. Bentl.
To AG GREGATE. v. a. ſaggrego, Lat.] To collect to-
gether; to heap many particulars into one maſs.
The aggregated ſoil
Death, with his mace petrifick, cold, and dry,
As with a trident, ſmote. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. x.
AGGREGA'tion. n.ſ.. [from aggregate.]
1. The collection, or act of collecting many particulars into one
whole.
The water reſident in the abyſs is, in all parts of it, ſtored
with a conſiderable quantity of heat, and more eſpecially in
thoſe where theſe extraordinary aggregations of this fire happen.
//oodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. The whole compoſed by the coacervation of many particu-
lars; an aggregate. /
3. Collection, or ſtate of being collečted.
Their individual imperfections being great, they are more-
over enlarged by their aggregation ; and being erroneous in
their ſingle numbers, once huddled together, they will be er-
rour itſelf. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
To AGGRESS. v. n. [aggredior, ‘.... Lat.] To com-
mit the firſt act of violence; to begin the quarrel.
The rage diſpers'd, the glorious pair advance
With ming!'danger, and collected might,
To turn the war, and tell aggreſſing France,
How Britain's ſons, and Britain's friends can fight. Prior.
AGGRE'ssion. m. ſ. ſaggreſſia, Lat...] The firſt act of injury ;
commencement of a quarrel by ſome act of iniquity.
There is no reſiſting of a common enemy, without an union
for a mutual defence; and there may be alſo, on the other
hand, a conſpiracy of common enmity and aggreſſion. L'Eſtr.
AGGRE'ssor. n.ſ.. [from aggreſs.] The perſon that firſt com-
mences hoſtility; the aſſaulter or invader, oppoſed to the de-
fendant.
Fly in nature's face
But how, if nature fly in my face firſt
Then nature's the aggreſſºr: Let her look to't.
Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
It is a very unlucky circumſtance, to be obliged to retaliate
the injuries of ſuch authours, whoſe works are ſo ſoon forgot-
ten, that we are in danger already of appearing the firſt ag-
greſſors. Pope and Swift's Preface to Miſcellanies.
Ad GR1'Evance. n. ſ. [See GRIE v ANCE.] Injury; hardſhip
inflićted; wrong endured.
To AGGR1'Ev E. v. a. [from gravis, Lat. See To grieve.]
1. To give ſorrow; to cauſe grief; to vex. It is not impro-
-bable, that to grieve was originally neuter, and aggrieve the ac-
t! VC.
But while therein I took my chief delight,
I ſaw, alas ! the gaping earth devour
The ſpring, the place, and all clean out of fight:
Which yet aggrieves my heart even to this hour. Spenſºr.
2. To impoſe ſome hardſhips upon ; to harraſs; to hurt in one's
right. This is a kind of juridical ſenſe; and whenever it is
uſed now, it bears ſome alluſion to forms of law.
Sewall, archbiſhop of York, much aggrieved with ſome prac-
tices of the pope's colle&amp;tors, took all patiently. Cambden.
The landed man finds himſelf aggrieved, by the falling of his
rents, and the ſtreightening of his fortune; whilſt the monied
man keeps up his gain, and the merchant thrives and grows
rich by trade. - Locke.
&amp; injur'd fame, and mighty wrongs receiv'd,
Cloé complains, and wond’rouſly’s aggriev'd. Granville.
To AG GRO'Up. v. a. ſaggropare, Ital.] To bring together in-
to one figure ; to croud together: a term of painting.
Bodies of divers natures, which are aggrouped (or combined)
together, are agreeable and pleaſant to the fight; as alſo thoſe
things which appear to be performed with eaſe. ... Dryd. Dufr.
Ag HA's T. adj. [either the participle of agaze, (ſee AGAze.)
and then to be written agazed, or aga/?, or from a and 3art,
a ghoſt, which the preſent orthography favours; perhaps they
were originally different words.]
Struck with horrour, as at the ſight of a ſpectre; ſtupified
with terrour. It is generally applied to the external appear-
2.IlCC.
Who fighing ſore, as if her heart in twaine
Had riven been, and all her heart-ſtrings braſt,
With dreary drooping eyne look'd up like one aghaſt. Spenſ.
The aged earth aghaſt,
With terrour of that blaſt,
Shall from the ſurface to the centre ſhake. Mil. Chr. Nat.
Aghaſt he wak'd, and, ſtarting from his bed,
Cold ſweat in clammy drops his limbs o'erſpread. Dryd. Æn.
I laugh to think how your unſhaken Cato
Will look aghaſt, while unforeſeen deſtruction
Pours in upon him thus from every ſide. Addison. Cato
AGILE, adj. [agile, Fr. agilis, Lat.] Nimble; ready; having
the quality of being ſpeedily put in motion; active.
With that he gave his able horſe the head,
And bending forward ſtruck his agile heels
Againſt the panting fides of his poor jade,
Up to the rowel-head. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
The immediate and agile ſubſervience of the ſpirits to the
empire of the mind or ſoul. Hale's Origin of 41ankind.
To guide its actions with informing care,
In peace to judge, to conquer in the war,
Render it agile, witty, valiant, ſage,
As fits the various courſe of human age. Priºr.
A'GILE N Ess. m. ſ. [from agile.] The quality of being agile;
* ; readineſs for motion; quickneſs; activity; agi-
ity.
AG1'LITY, n.ſ.. [agilitas, Lat. from agilis, agile.] Nimbleneſs;
readineſs to move ; quickneſs; activity.
A limb over-ſtrained by lifting a weight above its power,
may never recover its former agility and vigour. J/atts.
AGILLOCHUM. m. ſ. Aloes-wood.
A tree in the Eaſt-Indies, brought to us in ſmall bits, of a
very fragrant ſcent. It is hot, drying, and accounted a
ſtrengthener of the nerves in general. The beſt is of a blackiſh
purple colour, and ſo light as to ſwim upon water. Quincy.
A GIO. m. ſ. [an Italian word, ſignifying eaſe or conveniency.j
A mercantile term, uſed chiefly in Holland and Venice, for
the difference between the value of bank notes, and the current
money. Chambers.
To AGIST. v. a. [from gifte, Fr. a bed or reſting-place, or
from giſter, i.e. ſtabulari.]
To take in and feed the cattle of ſtrangers in the king's fo–
reſt, and to gather the money. The officers that do this, are
called agiſtors, in Engliſh gueſt or gift-takers. Their function
is termed agiftment; as, agi/iment upon the ſea banks. This
word agi/? is alſo uſed, for the taking in of other men's cattle
into any man's ground, at a certain rate per week. Blount.
AGI's TMENT. n.ſ. [See AGIST.]
It is taken by the canon lawyers in another ſenſe than is
mentioned under agiſt. They ſeem to intend by it, a modus or
compoſition, or mean rate, at which ſome right or due may be
reckoned : perhaps it is corrupted from adaouciſſement, or ad-
juſtment.
Aoi'stor. m.ſ.. [from agift.] An officer of the king's foreſt.
See Agist. - -
A'GITABLE. m. ſ. [from agitate ; agitabilis, Lat.] That which
may be agitated, or put in motion; perhaps that which may be
diſputed. See AGITATE, and AGITATION.
To A/GITATE. v. a. ſagito, Lat.]
1. To put in motion; to ſhake; to move nimbly; as, the ſur-
face of the waters is agitated by the wind; the veſſel was broken
by agitating the liquour.
2. To be the cauſe of motion; to ačtuate; to move.
- Where dwells this ſov’reign arbitrary ſoul,
Which does the human animal controul,
Informs each part, and agitates the whole? Blackmore.
3. To affect with perturbation; as, the mind of man is agitated
by various paſſions.
4. To ſtir; to bandy from one to another; to diſcuſs ; to con-
trovert; as, to agitate a queſtion.
Though this controverſy be revived, and hotly agitated a-
mong the moderns; yet I doubt whether it be not, in a great
part, a nominal diſpute. Boyle on Colours.
AGITATION. m. ſ. [from agitate, agitatio, Lat.]
1. The act of moving, or ſhaking any thing.
Putrefaction aſketh reſt; for the ſubtle motion which putre-
... fačtion requireth, is diſturbed by any agitation. Bacon.
2. The ſtate of being moved or agitated; as, the waters, after a
ſtorm, are ſometime in a violent agitation.
3. Diſcuſſion ; controverſial examination.
A kind of a ſchool queſtion is ſtarted in this fable, upon rea-
ſon and inſtinét : and whether this deliberative proceeding of
the crow, was not rather a logical agitation of the matter.
L’Eſtrange's Falls.
4. Violent motion of the mind; perturbation; diſturbance of
the thoughts.
A great perturbation in nature! to receive at once the benefit
of ſleep, and do the effects of watching. In this ſlumbry agi-
tation, beſides her walking, and other actual performances, what,
at any time, have you heard her ſay ? Shakeſp. Macbeth.
His mother could no longer bear the agitations of ſo many
paſſions as thronged upon her. Tatler, N° 55.
5. Deliberation; contrivance; the ſtate of being conſulted upon.
The project now in agitation for repealing of the teſt act,
and yet leaving the name of an eſtabliſhment to the preſent
national church, is inconſiſtent Swift's Miſell.
AGITA'toR. m. ſ. [from agitate.] He that agitates any thing;
he who manages affairs: in which ſenſe ſeems to be uſed the
agitators of the army.
A'GLET. m. ſ. [A word which ſome derive from aºx, ſplendour,
but which is apparently to be deduced from aigulette, Fr. a tag
to a point, and that from aigu, ſharp.]
-
2 A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A G O
A G R
A tag of a point curved into ſome repreſentation of an ani-
mal, generally of a man. -
He thereupon gave for the garter a chain worth 2001. and
his gown addreſſed with aglºts, cfteemed worth 251. Hayward.
Why, give him gold enough, and marry him to a puppet,
or an aglet baby, or an old trot, and ne'er a tooth in her head.
Shakespeare. Taming of the Shrew.
2. The pendants at the ends of the chieves of flowers, as in tu-
lips.
Aºsal. adj. [from agmen, Lat.] Belonging to a troop. Dić.
A'GNAIL. n. ſ. [from ange, grieved, and naxle, a nail.]
A diſeaſe of the nails; a whitlow ; an inflammation round
the nails.
AGNATION. n.ſ.. [from agnatus, Lat.] Deſcent from the ſame
father, in a direét male line, diſtinét from cognation, or conſan-
guinity, which includes deſcendants from females.
AdNI'tion. m. ſ. [from agnitio, Lat..] Acknowledgment.
To AGNI'ze. v. a. [from agnoſz, Lat.] To acknowledge; to
own; to avow. This word is now obſolete.
I do agrize
A natural and prompt alacrity
I find in hardneſs; and do undertake
This preſent war againſt the Ottomites. Shakeſp. Othello.
AGNoMINATION. m. ſ. ſagnominatio, Lat.] Alluſion of one
word to another, by reſemblance of ſound.
The Britiſh continueth yet in Wales, and ſome villages of
Cornwall, intermingled with provincial Latin, being very ſig-
nificative, copious, and pleaſantly running upon agnominations,
although harſh in aſpirations. - Camden.
AGNUS CASTU.S. m. ſ. [Lat.] The name of the tree commonly
called the Chaffe Tree, from an imaginary virtue of preſerving
*:::
f laurel ſome, of woodbine many more,
And wreathes of agnus caſus others bore. Dryden.
Ago', adv. [axan, Sax, paſt or gone; whence writers formerly
uſed, and in ſome provinces the people ſtill uſe, agone for ago.]
Paſt; as, long ago; that is, long time has paſt ſince. Reckon-
ing time towards the preſent, we uſe ſince ; as, it is a year ſince
it happened: reckoning from the preſent, we uſe ago; as, it
happened a year ago. This is not, perhaps, always obſerved.
Be of good comfort: for the great ſupply,
That was expected by the Dauphin here, -
Are wreck'd three nights ago on Godwin ſands. Shakespeare K.john.
This both by others and myſelf I know, -
For I have ſerv'd their ſovereign long ago;
Oft have been caught within the winding train. Dryd. Fab.
I ſhall ſet down an account of a diſcourſe I chanced to have
with one of them ſome time ago. Addiſon. Freeholder.
Ago'G. adv. [a word of uncertain etymology; the French have
the term a gogo, in low language; as, ils wivent à gogo, they
live to their wiſh : from this phraſe our word may be, perhaps,
derived.]
1. In a ſtate of deſire; in a ſtate of imagination; heated with
the notion of ſome enjoyment; longing.
As for the ſenſe and reaſon of it, that has little or nothing to
do here; only let it ſound full and round, and chime right to
the humour, which is at preſent agag, (juſt as a big, long, rat-
tling name is ſaid to command even adoration from a Spaniard)
and, no doubt, with this powerful, ſenſeleſs engine, the rabble-
driver, ſhall be able to carry all before him. South's Sermons.
2- It is uſed with the verbs to be, or to ſet ; as, he is agog, or you
may ſet him agº.g.
The gawdy goſſip, when ſhe's ſet agag,
In jewels dreſt, and at each ear a bob,
Goes flaunting out, and, in her trim of pride,
Thinks all ſhe ſays or does, is juſtify’d. Dryd, juv. Sat. 6.
This maggot has no ſooner ſet him agog, but he gets him a
fhip, freights her, builds caſtles in the air, and conceits both the
Indies in his coffers. L’Eſtrange.
3. It has the particles on, or fºr, before the obječt of deſire.
On which the ſaints are all agog,
And all this for a bear and dog. Hudibras, cant. ii.
They generally ſtraggle into theſe parts about this time of
the year; and ſet the heads of our ſervant-maids ſo agog for
huſbands, that we do not expect to have any buſineſs done as
it ſhould be, whilſt they are in the country. Addiſon. Speciator.
* Go's E. adv. [agan, Sax.] Ago; paſt. See Ado.
Is he ſuch a princely one,
As you ſpeak him long agone P Ben. Johnſºn's Fairy Prince.
-A 'cosis M. n. f. [aywriguº;. Gr.] Contention for a prize. Dići.
Go'ING. participial adj. [from a and going.] In action.
Their firſt movement, and impreſſed motions, demanded the
impulſe of an almighty hand to ſet them firſt agoing. Tatler.
"Gonist. n.ſ.. [ayºrſ. Gr.] A contender for prizes. Dići.
G on 1'st Es. n.ſ. ſºyººs, Gr.] A prize-fighter; one that
contends at any public ſolemnity for a prize. Milton has ſo
itled his tragedy, becauſe Sampſºn was called out to divert the
Philiſtines with feats of ſtrength.
Sosi's TICAL. adj. [from agoniſies.] Relating to prize-fight-
ing. Dif.
o A'Gos Iz F. v. n. [from agonizo, low Latin, aywº., Gr.
“gººſer, ºr..] To feel agonies; to be in exceſſive pain.
Q L.
Doſt thou behold my poor diſtraćted heart,
Thus rent with agonizing love and rage,
And aſk me what it means ? Art thou not falſe Rowe'sj.Sh,
Or touch, if, tremblingly alive all o'er,
To ſmart and agonize at ev'ry pore? Pºpe's Eſſay on Man.
AG on othe'Tick. adj. [zya, and 7.924, Gr.] Propoſing pub-
lick contentions for prizes; giving prizes; preſiding at publick
games. Dić7.
AGONY. n.ſ. [4,3, Gr. agon, low Lat, agonie, Fr.]
I. º pangs of death; properly the laſt conteſt between life and
Cath.
Never was there more pity in ſaving any than in ending me,
becauſe therein my agony ſhall end. Sidney, b. ii.
Thou who for me did feel ſuch pain,
Whoſe precious blood the croſs did ſtain,
Let not thoſe agonies be vain.
2. Any violent or exceſſive pain of body or mind.
Betwixt them both, they have me done to dy,
Through wounds and ſtrokes, and ſtubborn handeling,
That death were better than ſuch agony,
As grief and fury unto me did bring. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Thee I have miſs'd, and thought it long, depriv'd
Thy preſence, agony of love! till now
TNot felt, nor ſhall be twice. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. ix.
3. It is particularly uſed in devotions for our Redeemer's conflict
in the garden.
To propoſe our deſires, which cannot take ſuch effect as we
ſpecify, ſhall, notwithſtanding, otherwiſe procure us his heaven-
ly grace, even as this very prayer of Chriſt obtained angels to
be ſent him as comforters in his agony. Hooker, b. v.
AGo'op. adv. [a and good.]. In earneſt; not fićtitiouſly.
At that time I made her weep agood, -
For I did play a lamentable part. Shakespeare Two Gent. of War.
AGo'uty. n.ſ. An animal of the Antilles, of the bigneſs of a
rabbet, with bright red hair, and a little tail without hair.
He has but two teeth in each jaw, holds his meat in his fore-
paws like a ſquirrel, and has a very remarkable cry. When he
is angry, his hair ſtands on end, and he ſtrikes the earth with
his hindfeet, and, when chaſed, he flies to a hollow tree,
whence he is expelled by ſmoke. Trevoux.
To AGRA'cE. v. a. [from a and grace.] To grant favours to ;
to confer benefits upon : a word not now in uſe.
She granted, and that knight ſo much agrac'd,
That ſhe him taught celeſtial diſcipline. Fairy Queen.
AGRA'MMATIST. n.ſ. [a, priv. and yºup.2, Gr.] An illite-
rate man. - Dićf.
AGRA'RIAN. adj. [agrarius, Lat.]_Relating to fields or grounds;
a word ſeldom uſed but in the Roman hiſtory, where there is
mention of the agrarian law.
To AGRE'AsF. v. a. [from a and greaſe.] To daub; to greaſe;
to pollute with filth.
The waves thereof ſo ſlow and ſluggiſh were,
Engroſs'd with mud, which did them foul agreaſ. Fairy Q.
To AGREE. v. m. [agreer, Fr. from grá, liking or good-will;
gratia and gratus, Lat J
1. To be in concord; to live without contention; not to differ.
The more you agree together, the leſs hurt can your ene-
mies do you. Pope's View of Epic Poetry.
2. To grant; to yield to ; to admit; with the particles to or
zºº)0/1.
And perſuaded them to agree to all reaſonable conditions.
2 Maccabees, xi. 14.
We do not prove the origin of the earth from a chaos; ſee-
ing that is agreed on by all that give it any origin. Burnet's Theo.
Roſcommon.
3. To ſettle terms by ſtipulation; to accord.
Agree with thine adverſary quickly, whilſt thou art in the
way with him ; left at any time the adverſary deliver thee to the
judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be
caſt into priſon. Matt. v. 25.
4. To ſettle a price between buyer and ſeller:
Friend, I do thee no wrong: didſt not thou agree with me
for a penny. A4att. xx. 13.
5. To be of the ſame mind or opinion.
He exceedingly provoked, or underwent the envy, and re-
proach, and malice of men of all qualities and conditions, who
agreed in nothing elſe. Clarendon.
Milton is a noble genius, and the world agrees to confeſs it.
IWatts's Improvement ºf the Mind.
6. To ſettle ſome point among many.
Strifes and troubles would be endleſs, cxcept they gave their
common conſent all to be ordered by ſome whom they ſhould
agree upon. - Hooker, b. i.
If judicious men, ſkilled in chymical affairs, ſhall agree to
write clearly, and keep men from being ſtunned by dark or
empty words, it is hoped, they will be reduced either to write
nothing, or books that may teach us ſomething. Boyle.
7. To be conſiſtent; not to contradićt.
For many bare falſe witneſs againſt him, but their witneſs
agreed not together. Mark, xiv. 56.
They that ſtood by ſaid again to Peter, ſurely thou art one
of thern : for thou art a Galilean, and thy ſpeech agreeth there-
to. A1ark, xiv. C.
O Which<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A G R
A G U
which teſtimory I the leſs ſcruple to allege, becauſe it agrees
very well with what has been affirmed to me by a phyſician at
Moſcow. Boyle's Hiſtory of Colours.
8. To ſuit with 5 to be accommodated to. -
Thou feedeſt thine own people with angels food, and didſt
ſend them from heaven bread agreeing to every taſte. Jºſiºn.
His principles could not be made to agree with that conſti-
tution and order, which God had ſettled in the world; and,
therefore, muſt necds claſh with common ſenſe and *;
0ſke.
cauſe no diſturbance in the body.
9. Tº often thought, that our preſcribing aſſes milk in ſuch
ſmall quantities, is injudicious; for, undoubtedly, with ſuch as
it agrees with, it would perform much greater and quicker ef-
fects, in greater quantitics. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To AGRE F. v. a.
1. To put an end to a variance.
He ſaw from far, or ſeemed for to ſee,
Some troublous uproar, or contentious fray, --
Whereto he drew in haſte it to agree. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
2. To make friends; to reconcile.
The mighty rivals, whoſe deſtructive rage
Did the whole world in civil arms engage,
Are now agreed.
AGRE'EABLE. adj. [agreah', Fr.]
1. Suitable to ; conſiſtent with. It has the particle to, or with.
What you do, is not at all agreeable either with ſo good a
chriſtian, or ſo reaſonable and ſo great a perſon. Temple.
That which is agreeable to the nature of one thing, is many
times contrary to the nature of another. L’Eſtrange.
As the practice of all piety and virtue is agreeable to our rea-
ſon, ſo is it likewiſe the intereſt both of private perſons and of
publick ſocieties. Tillotſºn.
4greeable hereunto, perhaps it might not be amiſ, to make
children, as ſoon as they are capable of it, often to tella ſtory.
Locke on Education.
2. Pleaſing; that is ſuitable to the inclination, faculties, or tem-
per. It is uſed in this ſenſe both of perſons and things.
And while the face of outward things we find
Pleaſing and fair, agreeable and ſweet,
Theſe things tranſport. Sir J. Davies.
I recollect in my mind the diſcourſes which have paſſed be-
tween us, and call to mind a thouſand agreeable remarks, which
he has made on theſe occaſions. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 24t.
3. It has alſo the particle to.
The delight which men have in popularity, fame, ſubmiſſion,
and ſubjection of other men's minds, ſeeméth to be a thing, in
itſelf, without contemplation of conſequence, agreeableand grate-
ful to the nature of man. Bacon's Natural Hiſt.
AGRE'EABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from agreeable.]
I. Conſiſtency with ; ſuitableneſ; to; with the particle to.
Pleaſant taſtes depend not on the things themſelves, but their
agreeableneſ to this or that particular Palate, wherein there is
great variety. Locke.
2. The quality of pleafing. It is uſed in an inferiour ſenſe, to
mark the produćtion of ſatisfaction, calm and laſting, but be-
low rapture or admiration. &gt;
There will be occaſion for largeneſs of mind and agree-
alleneſs of temper. Collier of Friendſhip.
It is very much an image of that author's writing, who has
****gſ that charm us, without correàne; ike a miſ-
tº whoſe faults we ſee, but love her with them all. Pope.
3. Reſemblance; likeneſs; ſometimes with the particle between.
This relation is likewiſe ſeen in the agreeableneſs between man
*the other parts of the univerſe; and that in fundry re-
pects. Grew's Coſmologia Sacra.
AGRE'EARLY. adv. [from agreeable.] 2/nolºg al
1. Conſiſtently with; in a manner ſuitable to.
They may look into the ańirs ºf Judea and Jeruſalem,
*...* tº that which is in the law of the Lord. 1 Eſdzviii. 12.
2. Pleaſingly.
I did never imagine, that ſo many excellent rules could be
produced ſo adyantageouſly and agreeably. Swift.
AGREED, participial ad. [from agree.] Settled by conſent.
... When they had got known and agreed names, to ſignify thoſe
internal operations of their own minds, they were ſufficiently
furniſhed to make known by words all their ideas. Locke.
Aºise **** *ſ [from agree.J. Conſiſtence; ſuitable.
AGREEMENT. "...ſ. ſagrement, Fr. in law Latin agreamentum,
I. tºº would willingly derive from aggregati. mentium.]
What agreement is there between the hyena and the dog? and
Yºhai Peace between the rich and the Poor Ecclus, xiii. 18
2. Rºſemblance of one thing to another. &gt; -
Expanſion and duration have this farther agreement, that
though they are both conflieſ. by us as having parts, yet their
ſº are not ſeparable one from another. - &gt; y Locke.
3. Compact; bargain; concluſion of Controverſy; ſtipulation.
And Yº". Covenant with death ſhall be diſannulled, and your
º. º ſhall not ſtand; when the overflowing
it. § P**gh, then ye ſhall be trodden. by
Iſaiah, xxviii. 18.
Rºſcommon.
Make an agreement with me by a preſent, and come out to
me, and then eat ye every man of his own vine, and every one
of his fig-tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his ciſtern.
2 Kings, xviii. 31.
Frog had given his word, that he would meet the above-
mentioned company at the Salutation, to talk of this agree-
77tent. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of John Bull.
AGRE's Tick, or AGRE'stic AL. adj. [from acrºfti, Lat.]
Having relation to the country; rude; ruſtick. Dić7.
AGRIcol ATION. m. ſ. [from agricola, Lat.J Culture of the
ground. - Dià.
A'GR1culture. m. ſ. [agricultura, Lat.] The art of cultivat-
ing the ground ; tillage; huſbandry.
He ſtrictly adviſeth not to begin to ſow before the ſetting of
the ſtars; which notwithſtanding, without injury to agriculiare,
cannot be obſerved in England. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
That there was tillage beſtowed upon the ground, Moſes does
indeed intimate in general; as alſo, what ſort of tillage that
was, is not expreſſed : I hope to ſhew, that their agriculture
was nothing near ſo laborious and troubleſome, nor did it take
up ſo much time as ours doth. {{a,dward's Nat. Hiſºry.
The diſpoſition of Ulyſſes inclined him to war, rather than -
the more lucrative, but more ſecure, method of life, by agri-
•ulture and huſbandry. Pope's Odyſſey; notes.
A'GRIM on Y. m.ſ.. [agrimonia, Lat.] The name of a piánt.
The leaves are rough, hairy, pennated, and grow alternately
on the branches ; the flower-cup conſiſts of one leaf, which is
divided into five ſegments; the flowers have five or fix leaves,
and are formed into a long ſpike, which expand in form of a
roſe; the fruit is oblong, dry, and prickly, like the burdock;
in each of which are contained two kernels.
The ſpecies are; 1. The common or medicinal agrimony.
2. The ſweet-ſmelling agrimony. 3. Leſſer agrimony, with a
white flower.
The firſt is common in the hedges, in many parts, and
is the ſort commonly uſed in medicine. It will grow in almoſt
any ſoil or ſituation; and is increaſed by parting the roots in
autumn, or by ſowing the ſeeds ſoon after they are ripe. Af.
AGRO'UND. adv. [from a and ground.]
I. Stranded ; hindered by the ground from paſſing farther.
With our great ſhips we durſt not approach the coaſt, we
having been all of us aground. Sir W. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Say what you ſeek, and whether were you bound
Were you, by ſtreſs of weather, caſt aground * Dryden's Zn.
2. It is likewiſe figuratively uſed, for being hindered in the pro-
greſs of affairs; as, the negotiators were aground at that objec-
tº On.
AGUE. m. ſ. [aigu, Fr. acute.] An intermitting fever, with
cold fits ſucceeded by hot. " The cold fit is, in popular
language, more particularly called the ague, and the hot the
fever.
Our caſtle's ſtrength
Will laugh a ſiege to ſcorn. Here let them lie,
Till famine and the ague eat them up. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Though
He feels the heats of youth, and colds of age,
Yet neither tempers hor corrects the other;
As if there were an ague in his nature,
That ſtill inclines to one extreme.
A'GUED. adj. [from ague.] Struck with
chill; cold : a word in little uſe.
All hurt behind, backs red, and faces pale,
With flight and agued fear ! mind and charge home.
Shakeſpeare's Coriolants.
AGUE FIT. n.ſ. [from ague and fit..] The paroxyſm of the ague.
This ague fit of fear is overblown;
An eaſy taſk it is to win our own. Shakeſp. Richard II.
A'GUE PRoof. adj. [from ague and proºf.] Proof againſt agues;
able to reſiſt the cauſes which producé agues, without being aſ-
fe&amp;ted.
When the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make
mechatter; when the thunder would not peace at my bidding;
there I found 'em, there I ſmelt 'em out." Go to, they are not
men o' their words; they told me I was every thing: 'tis a lie;
I am not ague proof. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
A'GUE-TREE. n.ſ. Ifrom ague and tree..] A name ſometimes
given to ſaſſafras. Dić.
To AGU’ise. v.a... [from a and guiſ. See Guise.] To dreſs;
to adorn; to deck: a word now not in uſe.
At other whiles ſhe would deviſe,
As her fantaſtick wit did moſt delight;
Sometimes her head ſhe fondly would aguiſe
With gaudy garlands, or freſh flowers dight
About her neck, or rings of ruſhes plight. Fairy Queen.
A'GUISH. adj. [from ague.j Having the qualities of an ague.
So calm, and ſo ſerene, but now,
What means this change on Myra's brow
Her aguiſh love now glows and burns,
Then chills and Shakespeare and the cold fit returns. Granville.
A'GUIs HN Ess. n.ſ.. [from aguſh.J The quality of reſembling
an ague.
Denham's Sophy.
an ague; ſhivering;
- AH.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A I D
A I M
AH. interječn.
1. A word noting ſometimes diſlike and cenſure. -
Ah! ſinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a ſeed of
evil doers, children that are corrupters, they have forſaken the
Lord. Iſaiah, i. 4.
2. Sometimes contempt and exultation.
Let them not ſay in their hearts, Ah 1 ſo we would have it:
let them not ſay, we have ſwallowed him up. Pſahn xxxv. 25.
3. Sometimes, and moſt frequently, compaſſion and complaint.
In youth alone, unhappy mortals live;
But, ah / the mighty bliſs is fugitive:
Diſcolour'd ſickneſs, anxious labour come,
And age and death's inexorable doom. Dryd. Wirg. Georg. iii.
Ah me! the blooming pride of May,
And that of beauty, are but one:
At morn both flouriſh bright and gay,
Both fade at evening, pale, and gone. Prior,
4. When it is followed by that, it expreſſes vehement deſire.
In goodneſs, as in greatneſs, they excell;
Ah that we loved ourſelves but half ſo well. Dryd, juven.
AHA', AHA'ſ interjection. A word intimating triumph and con-
tempt.
They opened their mouth wide againſt me, and ſaid, Aha,
aha 1 our eye hath ſeen it. Pſalm xxxv. 21.
AHE/AD. adv. [from a and head.]
1. Farther onward than another: a ſea term.
And now the mighty Centaur ſeems to lead,
And now the ſpeedy dolphin gets ahead. Dryden's AFn.
2. Headlong; precipitant: uſed of men.
It is mightily the fault of parents, guardians, tutors, and go-
vernours, that ſo many men miſcarry. They ſuffer them at
firſt to run ahead, and, when perverſe inclinations are advanced
into habits, there is no dealing with them. L'E/irange's Fab.
AHE'IGHT. adv. [from a and height.] Aloft; on high.
But have I fall’n or no 2–
—From the dread ſummit of this chalky bourne !
Look up aheight, the ſhrill-gorg’d lark ſo far
Cannot be ſeen or heard. Shakespeare's King Lear.
AHOUAI. m. ſ. The name of a plant.
It hath funnel-ſhaped flowers of one leaf, divided into ſeve-
ral parts at the top; the pointal, which riſes from the cup, is
fixed, like a nail, to the inner part of the flower, and becomes
a pear-ſhaped fleſhy fruit, incloſing a three-cornered nut.
There are two ſpecies of this plant abounding on the conti-
nent of South America: the firſt grows to the height of our
common cherry-tree; its leaves are three or four inches long,
and almoſt two inches broad; the wood of it ſtinks moſt abo-
minably, and the kernel of the nut is a moſt deadly poiſon; to
expel which, the Indians know no antidote, nor will they uſe
the wood for fuel. The ſecond ſort, with an oleander leaf,
and a yellow flower, does not grow higher than ten or twelve
feet; its fruit is of a beautiful red colour when ripe, and e-
qually poiſonous with the former. Both plants abound in every
part with a milky juice. Millar.
To AID. v. a. [aider, Fr. from adjutare, Lat.] To help 3 to
ſupport; to ſuccour.
Into the lake he leapt, his lord to aid,
(So love the dread of danger doth deſpiſe)
And of him catching hold, him ſtrongly ſaid
From drowning. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. 6.
Neither ſhall they give any thing unto them that make war
upon them, or aid them with vićtuals, weapons, money, or
iſhips. Maccabees, viii. 26.
By the loud trumpet, which our courage aids,
We learn that ſound as well as ſenſe perſuades. Rºſcommon.
A r D. m. ſ. [from Tº aid.]
x - Help; ſupport.
The memory of uſeful things may receive conſiderable aid,
if they are thrown into verſe. Tſatt's Improvement ºf the Mind.
Your patrimonial ſtores in peace poſſeſs;
Undoubted all your filial claim confeſs:
Your private right ſhould impious power invade,
The peers of Ithaca would arm in aid. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
* - The perſon that gives help or ſupport; a helper.
Thou haſt ſaid, it is not good that man ſhould be alone ;
letus make unto him an aid, like unto himſelf. Tºlit, viii. 6.
3 - In law.
A ſubſidy. Aid is alſo particularly uſed in matter of plead-
ing, for a petition made in court, for the calling in of help
from another, that hath an intereſt in the cauſe in queſtion;
and is likewiſe both to give ſtrength to the party that prays in
&lt;zid of him, and alſo to avoid a prejudice accruing toward his
&lt;&gt;wn right, except it be prevented: as, when a tenant for term
of life, courteſy, &amp;c. being impleaded touching his eſtate, he
may pray in aid of him in the reverſion; that is, entreat the
court, that he may be called in by writ, to allege what he
thinks good for the maintenance both of his right and his own.
* Cowell.
A 1 p.ANce. n. ſ. [from aid.] Help; ſupport: a word little uſed.
Oft have I ſeen a timely parted ghoſt,
Of aſhy ſemblance, meagré, pale, and bloodleſs,
Being all deſcended to the lab'ring heart,
Who, in the conflićt that it holds with death, -
, , Attracts the ſame for aidance 'gainſt the enemy. Shakespeare. Hen. VI.
AID ANT. adj. [aidant, Fr.] Helping; helpful.
All you unpubliſh’d virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears; be aidant and remediate
In the good man's diſtreſs. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Aºi. m. ſ. [from aid.] He that brings aid or help; a helper;
an ally.
All along as he went, were puniſhed the adherents and aid-
ers of the late rebels. Bacon's Henry VII.
A'iDºss, adj. [from aid and leſ, an inſeparable particle.j
Helpleſs; unſupported; undefended.
Alone he enter'd
The mortal gate o' the city, which he painted
With ſhunleſs deſtiny: aideſ came off,
And, with a ſudden re-enforcement, ſtruck
Corioli, like a planet. Shakeſp. Coriolanur.
Had met
Already, ere my beſt ſpeed could prevent,
The aidleſ innocent lady, his wiſh'd prey. Milt. Comus.
A'IGULET, n.ſ.. [aigulet, Fr.] A point with tags; points of
gold at the end of fringes.
Which all above beſprinkled was throughout
With golden aigulets that gliſter'd bright,
Like twinkling ſtars, and all the ſkirt about -
Was hemm'd with golden fringes. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
To AIL. v. a. [eglan, Sax. to be troubleſome.]
I. To pain; to trouble ; to give pain.
And the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and
ſaid unto her, what aileth thee, Hagar fear not: for God hath
heard the voice of the lad where he is. Gen. xxi. 17.
2. It is uſed, in a ſenſe leſs determinate, for to aff:ff in any man-
ner; as, ſomething ails me that I cannot ſit ſtill; what ails the
man that he laughs without reaſon 2
Love ſmil'd, and thus ſaid, Want join'd to deſire is unhappy;
But if he nought do deſire, what can Heraclitus ail? Sidney.
What ail me, that I cannot loſe thy thought !
Command the empreſs hither to be brought,
I, in her death, ſhall ſome diverſion find,
And rid my thoughts at once of woman-kind. -
Dryden's Tyrannick Love,
3. To feel pain; to be incommoded.
4. It is remarkable, that this word is never uſed but with ſome in-
definite term, or the word nothing; as, What ails him //hat
docs he ail? He ail; ſomething; he ails nothing. Something ails
him; nothing ails him. Thus we never ſay, a fever ail him,
or he ail; a fever, or uſe definite terms with this verb,
AIL. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A diſeaſe.
Or heal, O Narſes, thy obſcener ail. Pºpe,
A'ILMENT. n.ſ.. [from ail.J. Pain; diſeaſe.
Little ailments oft attend the fair, -
Not decent for a huſband's eye or ear. Granville.
I am never ill, but I think of your ailments, and repine that
they mutually hinder our being together. Swift's Letters.
A'ILING. participial adj. [from To ail.] Sickly; full of com-
laints.
T. AIM. v. a. [It is derived by Skinner from eſner, to point at;
a word which I have not found.]
1. To endeavour to ſtrike with a miſſive weapon; to dire&amp;t to-
wards; with the particle at. -
Aimſ thou at princes, all amaz'd they ſaid,
The laſt of games? Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To point the view, or direét the ſteps towards any thing; to
tend towards; to endeavour to reach or obtain; with to form-
erly, now only with at.
Lo, here the world is bliſs; ſo here the end
To which all men do aim, rich to be made,
Such grace now to be happy is before thee laid. Fairy Q,
Another kind there is, which although we deſire for itſelf, as
health, and virtue, and knowledge, nevertheleſs they are not
the laſt mark whereat we aim, but have their further end where-
unto they are referred. Hooker, b. i.
Swoln with applauſe, and aiming ſtill at more,
He now provokes the ſea gods from the ſhore. Dryden's &amp;n.
Religion tends to the eaſe and pleaſure, the peace and tran-
quillity of our minds, which all the wiſdom of the world did al-
ways aim at, as the utmoſt felicity of this life. illotſon.
3. To direct the miſſile weapon; more particularly taken for the
aćt of pointing the weapon by the eye, before its diſmiſſion
from the hand. -
And proud Ideus, Priam's charioteer, - sº tº
Who ſhakes his empty reins, and aims his airy ſpear. Dryºs.º - º
4. To gueſs. &amp; sº.
--
-- -
-,! ...” - **
AIM. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] º 3
1. The direction of a miſſile weapon. Vº ---,
Aſcanius, young and eager of his game, s
Soon bent his bow, uncertain of his aim ;
But the dire fiend the fatal arrow guides, * \\
Which pierc'd his bowels through his parting ſides. º *\\
Dryden, Ån. vii. l. 691 -
2. The point to which the thing thrown is directed, .
That<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A I R.
A I R
---
That arrows fled not ſwifter toward their aim,
Than did our ſoldiers, aiming at their ſafety,
Fly from the field. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
3. In a figurative ſenſe, a purpoſe; a ſcheme; an intention; a
deſign.
- - He truſted to have equall'd the moſt High,
If he oppos'd : and, with ambitious aim
Againſt the throne, and monarchy of God,
Rais'd impious war. Milton's Parad. Lºft, b. i. 1. 41.
But ſee, how oft ambitious aims are croft,
And chiefs contend till all the prize is loſt. Pope.
4. The object of a deſign; the thing after which any one endca-
WOurs.
The ſafeſt way is to ſuppoſe, that the epiſtle has but one aim,
till, by a frequent peruſal of it, you are forced to ſee there are
diſti. St independent parts. Locke's Eſſay on St. Paul's Epiſºles.
5. Conjecture; gueſs.
It is impoſſible, by aim, to tell it; and, for experience
and knowledge thereof, I do not think that there was ever any
of the particulars thereof. Spenſºr on Ireland.
There is a hiſtory in all mens lives, -
Figuring the nature of the times deceas'd;
The which obſerv'd, a man may propheſy,
With a near aim, of the main chance of things,
As yet not come to life, which, in their ſeeds
And weak beginnings, lie intreaſur'd. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
AIR. m. ſ. [air, Fr. air, Lat.]
1. The element encompaſſing the terraqueous globe.
If I were to tell what I mean by the word air, I may ſay, it
is that fine matter which we breathe in and breathe out conti-
nually; or it is that thin fluid body, in which the birds fly, a
little above the earth; or it is that inviſible matter, which fills
all places near the earth, or which immediately encompaſſes the
globe of earth and water. //atts's Logick.
2. The ſtate of the air; or the air conſidered with regard to health.
There be many good and healthful airs, that do appear by
habitation and other proofs, that differ not in ſmell from other
airs. Bacon's Natural Hiſłory, N° 904.
3. Air in motion; a ſmall gentle wind.
Freſh gales, and gentle airs,
Whiſper'd it to the woods, and from their wings
Flung roſe, flung odours from the ſpicy ſhrub
Diſporting ! Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. viii. 1.515.
But ſafe repoſe, without an air of breath,
Dwells here, and a dumb quiet next to death. Dryden.
Let vernal airs through trembling oſiers play,
And Albion's cliffs reſound the rural lay. Pop.'s Paſtorals.
4. Blaſt.
All the ſtor'd vengeancies of heaven fall
On her ingrateful top ſtrike her young bones,
You taking airs, with lamencſs. Shakeſp. King Lear.
5. Any thing light or uncertain ; that is as light as air.
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hope in air of your fair looks,
Lives like a drunken ſailor on a maſt,
Ready, with ev’ry nod, to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
6. The open weather; air unconfined.
The garden was inclos'd within the ſquare,
Where young Emilia took the morning air. Dryd. Falles.
7. Vent; utterance; emſſion into the air.
I would have aſk'd you, if I durſt for ſhame,
If ſtill you lov’d you gave it air before me.
But ah! why were we not both of a ſex :
For then we might have lov'd without a crime. Dryd. D.Seb.
S. Publication; expoſure to the publick view and knowledge.
I am ſorry to find it has taken air, that I have ſome hand in
theſe papers. Pope's Letters.
9. Intelligence; information. -
It grew alſo from the airs, which the princes and ſtates a-
broad received from their ambaſſadors and agents here; which
were attending the court in great number. Bacon's Henry VII.
10. Poetry; a ſong. -
And the repeated air
Of ſad Ele&amp;tra's poet, had the pow'r
To ſave th' Athenian walls from ruin bare. Parad. Regain,
11. Muſick, whether light or ſerious.
This muſick crept by me upon the waters,
Allaying both their fury and my paſſion, -
With its ſweet air. Shakeſpeare's Tempſ.
Call in ſome muſick; I have heard, ſoft airs
Can charm our ſenſes, and expel our cares. Denh. Sophy.
The ſame airs, which ſome entertain with moſt delightful
tranſports, to others are importune. Glanville's Scepſis Scient.
Since we have ſuch a treaſury of words, ſo proper for the
airs of muſick, I wonder that perſons ſhould give ſo little at-
tention. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 406.
Born on the ſwelling notes, our ſouls aſpire,
While ſolemn airs improve the ſacred fire;
And angels lean from heav'n to hear ! Pope's St. Caccilia.
— When the ſoul is ſunk with cares,
Exalts her in enliv'ning airs.
Shakespeare . Rich. III.
Pºpe's Caecilia.
12. The mien, or manner, of the perſon.
Her graceful innocence, her ev'ry air,
Of geſture, or leaſt action, over-aw'd
His malice. A ſilton's Paradiſe Lø/?, b. ix. l. 459.
For the air of youth
Hopeful and chearful, in thy blood ſhall reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry,
To weigh thy ſpirits down; and laſt conſume
The balm of life. Milt. Par. Loft, b. xi. 1. 452.
But, having the life before us, beſides the experience of all
they knew, it is no wonder to hit ſome airs and features, which
they have miſſed. Dryden on Dramatick Poetry.
There is ſomething wonderfully divine in the airs of this
pićture. - Addiſon on Italy.
Yet ſhould the Graces all thy figures place,
And breathe an air divine on ev'ry face. Pope.
13. An affected or laboured manner or geſture; as, a lofty air,
a gay air.
Whom Ancus follows, with a fawning air;
But vain within, and proudly popular. Dryd. Æn. vi.
There are of theſe ſort of beauties, which laſt but for a
moment; as, the different airs of an aſſembly, upon the fight
of an unexpected and uncommon object, ſome particularity of
a violent paſſion, ſome graceful action, a ſmile, a glance of an
eye, a diſdainful look, a look of gravity, and a thouſand other
ſuch like things. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Their whole lives were employed in intrigues of ſtate, and
they naturally give themſelves airs of kings and princes, of
which the miniſters of other nations are only the repreſenta-
tives. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
To curl their waving hairs,
Aſſiſt their bluſhes, and inſpire their airs. Pope.
He aſſumes and affects an entire ſet of very different airs;
he conceives himſelf a being of a ſuperiour nature. Swift.
I4. Appearance.
As it was communicated with the air of a ſecret, it ſoon
found its way into the world. Pºpe's Ded. to Rape of the Lock.
15. [In horſemanſhip.] Airs denote the artificial or practiſed ino-
tions of a managed horſe. Chambers:
To AIR. v. a. [from the noun air.] -
1. To expoſe to the air.
Fleas breed principally of ſtraw or mats, where there hath
been a little moiſture, or the chamber and bed-ſtraw kept
cloſe, and not aired. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 690.
We have had, in our time, experience twice or thrice,
when both the judges that ſat upon the jail, and numbers of
thoſe that attended the buſineſs, or were preſent, ſickened upon
it, and died. Therefore, it were good wiſdom, that, in ſuch
caſes, the jail were aired, before they were brought forth.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº 914.
As the ants were airing their proviſions one winter, up
comes a hungry graſhopper to them, and begs a charity.
L'E/irange's Fables.
Or wicker-baſkets weave, or air the corn,
Orgrinded grain, betwixt two marbles turn. Dryd. Wirgil.
2. To take the air, or enjoy the open air, with the reciprocal
pronoun.
Nay, ſtay a little
Were you but riding forth to air yourſeſ,
Such parting were too petty. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
I aſcended the higheſt hills of Bagdat, in order to paſs the
reſt of the day in meditation and prayer. As I was here air-
ing myſelf on the tops of the mountains, I fell into a profound
contemplation on the vanity of human life. Addiſon. Speci.
3. To open to the air; as, clothes.
The others make it a matter of ſmall commendation in it-
ſelf, if they, who wear it, do nothing elſe but air the robes,
which their place requireth. Hacker, b. v. § 29.
4. To air liquors; to warm them by the fire: a term uſed in
converſation.
5. To make neſts. In this ſenſe, it is derived from aery, a neſt.
It is now out of uſe.
. You may add their buſy, dangerous, diſcourteous, yea, and
ſometimes deſpiteful ſtealing, one from another, of the eggs and
young ones; who, if they were allowed to air naturally and
quietly, there would be ſtore ſufficient, to kill not only the
partridges, but even all the good houſewives chickens in a coun-
try. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
A'IRBL ADD ER. m. ſ. [from air and bladder.]
1. Any cuticle or veſicle filled with air.
The pulmonary artery and vein paſs along the ſurfaces of
theſe airbladders, in an infinite number of ramifications.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. The bladder in fiſhes, by the contračtion and dilatation of
which, they vary the properties of their weight to that of their
bulk, and riſe or fall. -
Though the airbladder in fiſhes ſeems neceſſary for ſwim-
ming, yet ſome are ſo formed as to ſwim without it. Cudworth.
A'iR BUILT. adj. [from air and build.] Built in the air, with-
out any ſolid foundation.
Hence the fool's paradiſe, the ſtateſman's ſcheme,
The airbuilt caſtle, and the golden dream,
4. The
º
º
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L A
The maid's romantick wiſh, the chymiſt's flame, , ,
- And poet's viſion of eternal fame. Pope's Dunciad, b. iii.
AIR-DRAWN. adj. [from air and drawn..] Drawn or painted
ill alr.
This is the very painting of your fear,
This is the air-drawn dagger, which, you ſaid,
Led you to Duncan. Shakeſp. Macleth.
A'IRER. m. ſ. [from To air.] He that expoſes to the air.
A'iRHole. n.ſ.. [from air and hole..] A hole to admit the air.
A'iRIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from airy.]
1. Openneſs; expoſure to the air.
2. Lightneſs ; gaiety; levity.
The French have indeed taken worthy pains to make claſ.
ſick learning ſpeak their language; if they have not ſucceeded,
it muſt be imputed to a certain talkativeneſs and airingſ; repre-
ſented in their tongue, which will never agree with the ſedate-
neſs of the Romans, or the ſolemnity of the Greeks. Felton.
A'IRING. m. ſ. [from air.] A ſhort journey or ramble to enjoy
the free air.
This little fleet ſerves only to fetch them wine and corn, and
to give their ladies an airing in the ſummer-ſeaſon. Addison on It.
A'iRLEss. adj. [from air.] Without communication with the
the free air.
Nor ſtony tower, nor walls of beaten braſs,
Nor airleſ dungeon, nor ſtrong links of iron, -
Can be retentive to the ſtrength of ſpirit. Shakeſp. j. Caſar.
A'iRLING. m. ſ. [from air, for gayety..] A young, light, thought-
leſs, gay perſon.
Some more there be, ſlight airlings, will be won
With dogs, and horſes, and perhaps a whore. B.john. Catil.
A'iRPUMP. m. ſ. [from air and pump.]
A machine by whoſe means the air is exhauſted out of proper
veſſels. The principle on which it is built, is the elaſticity of
the air; as that on which the waterpump is founded, is on the
gravity of the air. The invention of this curious inſtrument
is aſcribed to Otto de Guerick, conſul of Magdebourg, who ex-
hibited his firſt publick experiments before the emperour and
the ſtates of Germany, in 1654. But his machine laboured
under ſeveral defects, in the force neceſſary to work it, which
was very great, and the progreſs very ſlow; beſides, it was to
be kept under water, and allowed of no change of ſubjects for
experiments. However, Mr. Boyle, with the aſſiſtance of Dr.
Hooke, removed ſeveral of theſe inconveniencies; though, ſtill,
the working of this pump was laborious, by reaſon of the preſ-
fure of the atmoſphere at every exſučtion, after a vacuum was
nearly obtained. This labour has been fince removed by Mr.
Hawkſbee ; who, by adding a ſecond barrel and piſton, to riſe
as the other fell, and fall as it roſe, made the preſſure of the at-
moſphere on the deſcending one, of as much ſervice as it was
of diſſervice in the aſcending one. Vream made a furtherim-
provement in Hawkſbee's air-pump, by reducing the alternate
Imotion of the hand and winch to a circular one. Chambers.
For the air that, in exhauſted receivers of airpumps, is
exhaled from minerals, and fleſh, and fruits, and liquours, is as
true and genuine as to elaſticity and denſity, or rarefaction, as
that we reſpire in ; and yet this factitious air is ſo far from be-
ing fit to be breathed in, that it kills animals in a moment, even
fooner than the very abſence of all air, or a vacuum itſelf.
- Bentley's Sermons.
^^* RSHAFt. m. ſ. . [from air and ſhaft.] A paſſage for the air
into mines and ſubterraneous places.
By the ſinking of an airſhaft, the air hath liberty to circu-
late, and carry out the ſteams both of the miners breath and the
&lt;damps, which would otherwiſe ſtagnate there. Ray.
^^+Ry. adj. [from air; aireus, Lat.]
+ - Compoſed of air.
The firſt is the tranſmiſſion, or emiſſion, of the thinner and
rmore airy parts of bodies; as, in odours and infections: and
this is, of all the reſt, the moſt corporeal. Bacon.
* - Relating to the air; belonging to the air.
There are fiſhes that have wings, that are no ſtrangers to the
airy region. Boyle.
3- High in air.
Whole rivers here forſake the fields below,
And, wond'ring at their height, through airy channels flow.
Addiſon.
+- Light as air; thin; unſubſtantial; without ſolidity.
I hold ambition of ſo airy and light a quality, that it is but a
fhadow's ſhadow. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Still may the dog the wand'ring troops conſtrain
Of airy ghoſts, and vex the guilty train;
And, with her griſly lord, his lovely queen remain. Dr. Æn.
5- Without reality; without any ſteady foundation in truth or
nature; vain; trifling.
Nor think with wind
Of airy threats to awe whom yet with deeds
Thou can'ſt not. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. vi.
Nor (to avoid ſuch meanneſs) ſoaring high,
With empty ſound, and airy notions, fly. Roſcommon.
have found a complaint concerning the ſcarcity of money,
which occaſioned many airy propoſitions for the remedy of it.
Temple's Miſcellanies.
Wol. I. p iſ:
6. Fluttering; looſe; as if to catch the air; full of levity.
But the epick poem is too ſtately to receive thoſe little orna-
ments. The painters draw their nymphs in thin and airy ha-
bits ; but the weight of gold and of embroideries is reſerved for
queens and goddeſſes. - Dryd. AEmeid, Dedicat.
By this name of ladies, he means all young perſons, ſlender,
finely ſhaped, airy, and delicate : ſuch as are nymphs and
Naiads. - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
7. Gay ; ſprightly; full of mirth; vivacious; lively; ſpirited;
light of heart. -
He that is merry and airy at ſhore, when he ſees a ſad and a
loud tempeſt on the ſea, or dances briſkly when God thunders
from heaven, regards not when God ſpeaks to all the world.
Taylor's Rule of living holy.
AISLE. m. ſ. [Thus the word is written by Addiſon, but perhaps
improperly; ſince it ſeems deducible only from either aile, a
wing, or allée, a path ; and is therefore to be written aile.]
The walks in a church, or wings of a quire.
The abbey is by no means ſo magnificent as one would ex-
pećt from its endowments. The church is one huge nef, with
a double aiſle to it; and, at each end, is a large quire. Addiſon.
AIt, or EY GHT. m. ſ. [ſuppoſed, by Skinner, to be corrupted
from iſlet.] A ſmall iſland in a river.
AjLTAGE. n.ſ.. [ajutage, Fr.] An additional pipe to water-
works. Dićf.
To Ake. v. n. [from 3x9, Gr. and therefore more grammati-
cally written ache. See AcHE.]
1. To feel a laſting pain, generally of the internal pains; diſtin-
guiſhed from ſmart, which is commonly uſed of uneaſineſs in
the external parts; but this is no accurate account.
To ſue, and be deny'd, ſuch common grace,
My wounds ake at you ! Shakespeare. Timon.
- Let our finger ake, and it endues
Our other healthful members with a ſenſe
Of pain. Shakeſp. Othello,
Were the pleaſure of drinking accompanied, the very mo-
ment, with that ſick ſtomach and aking head, which, in ſome
men, are ſure to follow, I think, no body would ever let wine
touch his lips. Locke.
His limbs muſt ake, with daily toils oppreſt,
Ere long-wiſh’d night brings neceſſary reſt. Prior.
2. It is frequently applied, in an improper ſenſe, to the heart; as,
the heart akes ; to imply grief or fear. Shakeſpeare has uſed it,
ſtill more licentiouſly, of the ſoul.
Here ſhame diſſuades him, there his fear prevails,
And each, by turns, his aking heart affails. Addison Ov. Mct.
- My ſoul aſſes
To know when two authorities are up,
Neither ſupreme, how ſoon confuſion -
May enter. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
AKI'N. adj. [from a and kin.]
1. Related to ; allied to by blood; uſed of perſons.
I do not envy thee, dear Pamela; only I could wiſh, that,
being thy ſiſter in nature, I were not ſo far off akin in fortune.
Sidney, b. ii.
2. Allied to by nature; partaking of the ſame properties; uſed
of things.
The cankered paſſion of envy is nothing akin to the filly
envy of the aſs. L’E/irange, Fab. xxxviii.
Some limbs again in bulk or ſtature
Unlike, and not akin by nature,
In concert act, like modern friends,
Becauſe one ſerves the other's ends. - Prior.
He ſeparates it from queſtions with which it may have been
complicated, and diſtinguiſhes it from queſtions which may be
akin to it. j/atts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i. c. 13.
AL, ATTLE, ADLE, do all ſeem to be corruptions of the Saxon
AEpel, noble, famous ; as alſo, Alling and Adling, are corruptions
of AEpeling, noble, ſplendid, famous. Gibſon's Camden.
Al, Ald, being initials, are derived from the Saxon Ealo, an-
cient; and ſo, oftentimes, the initial all, being melted by the
Normans, from the Saxon ealo. Idem, ibid.
A'LA BASTER. m. ſ. [23432;gor.] - -
A kind of ſoft marble, eaſier to cut, and leſs durable, than the
other kinds; ſome is white, which is moſt common; ſome of
the colour of horn, and tranſparent; ſome yellow, like honey,
marked with veins. The ancients uſed it to make boxes for
perfumes. Savary.
Yet I’ll not ſhed her blood,
Nor ſcar that whiter ſkin of hers than ſnow,
And ſmooth as monumental alabaſter.
A'LA BASTER. adi. Made of alabatter.
I cannot forbear reckoning part of an alabafter column,
found in the ruins of Livia's portico. It is of the colour of
fire, and may be ſeen over the high altar of St. Maria in Cam-
pitello; for they have cut it into two pieces, and fixed it, in the
ſhape of a croſs, in a hole of the wall; ſo that the light paſing
through it, makes it look to thoſe in the church, like a huge
tranſparent croſs of amber. Addiſon on Italy.
ALA'ck. interject. [This word ſeems only the corruption of alas.]
Alas; an expreſſion of ſorrow.
Shakeſp. Othello.
P Alack 1
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L A
A L C
Alack 1 when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right; we would, and we would not.
Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Aſcoſure.
At thunder now no more I ſtart,
Than at the rumbling of a cart:
Nay, what's incredible, alack '
I hardly hear a woman's clack. Swift.
ALA'ck ADAY. interješion. [This, like the former, is for alas the
day.] A word noting ſorrow and melancholy.
Ala'criously. adv. [from alacrious, ſuppoſed to be formed
from alacris; but of alacrious I have found no example.]
Cheerfully ; without dejection.
Epaminondas alacriouſly expired, in confidence that he left
behind him a perpetual memory of the vićtories he had atchiev-
ed for his country. Government of the Tongue, $4.
AlA'cRITY. m. ſ. [alacritas, Lat.] Cheerfulneſs, expreſſed by
ſome outward token; ſprightlineſs; gayety; livelineſs; cheer-
ful willingneſs.
Wherefore, in the end, theſe orders were, on all ſides, aſ-
ſented unto with no leſs alacrity of mind, than cities, unable to
hold out any longer, are wont to ſhew when they take condi-
tions, ſuch as it liketh him to offer them, which hath them in
the narrow ſtraits of advantage. Hooker's Preface.
Give me a bowl of wine;
I have not that alacrity of ſpirit,
Nor cheer of mind, that I was wont to have. Shakespeare. Rich. III.
But glad, that now his ſea ſhould find a ſhore,
With freſh alacrity, and force renew’d,
Springs upward. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii. l. 1011.
Never did men more joyfully obey,
Or ſooner underſtood the ſign to fly:
With ſuch alacrity they bore away,
As if, to praiſe them all, the ſtates ſtood by. Dryd. Ann. Mr.
ALAMI'RE. m. ſ. The loweſt note but one in Guido Aretine's
ſcale of muſick.
ALAMo'DE. adv. [á la mode, Fr.] According to the faſhion: a
low word. It is uſed likewiſe by ſhopkeepers for a kind of thin
ſilken manufacture.
ALA'ND. adv. [from a for at, and land.] At land; landed; on
the dry ground.
He only, with the prince his couſin, were caſt aland, far off
from the place whither their deſires would have guided them.
Sidney, b. ii.
Three more, fierce Eurus, in his angry mood,
Daſh'd on the ſhallows of the moving ſand,
And, in mid ocean, left them moor'd aland. Dryd. Virg. Æn.
ALAR M. m. ſ. [from the French, a l'arme, to arms; as, crier
a l'arme, to call to arms.]
1. A cry by which men are ſummoned to their arms; as, at the
approach of an enemy.
When the congregation is to be gathered together, you ſhall
blow, but you ſhall not ſound an alarm. Numbers, x. 7.
Behold, God himſelf is with us for our captain, and his
prieſts with ſounding trumpets, to cry alarms againſt you.
2 Chron. xiii. 12.
The trumpets loud clangour
Excites us to arms,
With ſhrill notes of anger,
And mortal alarms. Dryden's Caecilia.
Taught by this ſtroke, renounce the wars alarms,
And learn to tremble at the name of arms. Pope's Iliad.
2. A cry, or notice, of any danger approaching; as, an alarm of
fire.
3. Any tumult or diſturbance.
Js it then true, as diſtant rumours run,
That crowds of rivals, for thy mothers charms,
Thy palace fill with inſults and alarms. Pope's Odyſ: b. iii.
To ALA'R.M. v. a. [from alarm, the noun.]
1. To call to arms; to diſturb; as, with the approach of an
enemy.
The waſp the hive alarms
With louder hums, and with unequal arms.
2. To ſurpriſe with the apprehenſion of any danger.
When rage miſguides me, or when fear alarms,
When pain diſtreſſes, or when pleaſure charms. Tickell on Addison
3. To diſturb in general.
His ſon, Cupavo, bruſh'd the briny flood;
Upon his ſtern a brawny Centaur ſtood,
Who heav'd a rock, and threat'ning ſtill to throw,
With lifted hands alarm'd the ſeas below. Dryd. A-meid
ALARMBell. n.ſ.. [from alarm and bell.] The bell that is
rung at the approach of an enemy.
The alarmbell rings from our Alhambra walls,
And, from the ſtreets, ſound drums and ataballes.
- Dryden's Conqueſt of Granada.
ALA'RMING. particip. adj. [from alarm.] Terrifying; awaken-
ing; furpriſing; as, an alarming meſſage; an alarming pain.
ALARM Post. n.ſ.. [from alarm and poſł.] The poſt or place
appºinted to each body of men, to appear at, when an alarm
fhall happen. -
ALARUM. m. ſ. [corruptcd, as it ſeems, from alarm. See A-
LARM.] 2. 2
Addiſon.
Now are our brows bound with vićtorious wreaths,
Our bruiſed arms hung up for monuments,
Our ſtern alarums chang'd to merry meetings.
Shakespeare's Richard III.
Hence too, that ſhe might better hear,
She ſets a drum at either ear;
And loud or gentle, harſh or ſweet,
Are but th' alarums which they beat. Prior.
To Al A'RUM. v. a. [corrupted from Tº alarm. Sec ALARM.J
Withered murder
(Alarum’d by his ſentinel the wolf,
Whoſe how!'s his watch) thus with his ſtealthy pace,
With Tarquin's raviſhing ſtrides, tow'rds his deſign
Moves like a ghoſt. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
ALA's. interječ. [helas, Fr. eylaes, Dutch.]
1. A word expreſiing lamentation, when we uſe it of ourſelves.
But yet, alas! O but yet alas ! our haps be but hard haps.
Sidney, b, i.
Pºpe's Epiff.
Alas ! how little from the grave we claim :
Thou but preſerv'ſt a form, and I a name.
2. A word of pity, when uſed of other perſons.
Alas! poor Protheus, thou haſt entertain'd
A fox to be the ſhepherd of thy lambs.
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Verona.
3. A word of ſorrow and concern, when uſed of things.
Thus faith the Lord God, Smite with thine hand, and ſtamp
with thy foot, and ſay, Alas ! for all the evil abominations of
the houſe of Iſrael. Ezekiel, vi. 11.
Alas! both for the deed, and for the cauſe !
- AMilton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi. 1. 461.
Alas! for pity of this bloody field;
Piteous indeed muſt be, when I, a ſpirit,
Can have ſo ſoft a ſenſe of human woes.
AlAs the DAY. interječi. Ah, unhappy day !
Alas the day / I never gave him cauſe. Shakeſp. Othello.
Alas a day / you have ruined my poor miſtreſs: you have
made a gap in her reputation; and can you blame her, if ſhe
make it up with her huſband Congreve's Old Bachelor.
AlAs THE whil E. interječi. Ah, unhappy time !
All as the ſheep, ſuch was the ſhepherd's look;
For pale and wan he was, (alas the while !)
May ſeem he loved, or elſe ſome care he took. Spenſ. Paſłor.
A LA't E. adv. [from a and late.] Lately; no long time ago.
ALB. m. ſ. [album, Lat..] A ſurplice; a white linen veſtment
worn by prieſts.
ALPE'it, adv. [a coalition of the words all be it ſº. Skinner.]
Although ; notwithſtanding; though it ſhould be.
This very thing is cauſe ſufficient, why duties belonging to
each kind of virtue, albeit the law of reaſon teach them, ſhould,
notwithſtanding, be preſcribed even by human law. Hooker.
Of one, whoſe eyes,
Albeit unuſed to the melting mood,
Drop tears, as faſt as the Arabian trees
Their medicinal gum. Shakeſp. Othell.
He, who has a probable belief, that he ſhall meet with thieves
in ſuch a road, thinks himſelf to have reaſon enough to decline
it, albeit he is ſure to ſuſtain ſome leſs, though yet confiderable,
inconvenience by his ſo doing. South's Sermons.
Al B.U.GI'NEous. adj. [albugo, Lat. the white of an egg.]
Eggs, I obſerve, will freeze in the albugineous part thereof.
º Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii.
I opened it by inciſion, giving vent firſt to an albugineous,
then to white concoëted matter: upon which the tumour ſunk.
Jºſeman's Surgery.
ALBUGO. m. ſ. [Lat.] A diſeaſe in the eye, by which the cornea
contračts a whiteneſs. The ſame with leucoma.
Albu RN colour. n.ſ. See AUBURN.
A’lcAH Est. n.ſ. An Arabick word, to expreſs an univerſal
diſſolvent, which was pretended to by Paracelſus and Helmont.
&amp;Mincy.
Dryd, K. Arthur.
AlcA'ID. m. ſ. [from al, Arab, and Tºp, the head.]
1. In Barbary, the governour of a caſtle.
Th’ alcaid
Shuns me, and, with a grim civility,
Bows, and declines my walks. Dryd. Don Sebaſtian.
2. In Spain, the judge of a city, firſt inſtituted by the Saracens.
Du Cange.
ALCANNA. m. ſ. An Egyptian plant uſed in dying; the leaves
making a yellow, infuſed in water, and a red in acid liquours.
The root of alcanna, though green, will give a red ſtain.
Brown's Walgar Errours,
ALCH v'Mical. adj. [from alchymy.] Relating to alchymy; pro-
duced by alchymy.
The roſe noble, then current for ſix ſhillings and eight pence,
the alchymiſts do affirm as an unwritten verity, was made by
proječtion or multiplication alchymical of Raymond Lully in the
tower of London. Camden's Remains.
AlcHY'Mic All Y. adv. [from alchymical.] In the manner of
an alchymiſt; by means of alchymy. -
Raymond Lully would prove it alchymically. Camden.
A'LCHY MIST. m. ſ. [from alchymy.] One who purſues or pro-
feſſes the ſcience of alchymy.
tº
-
º
3 To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L D
A L E
To ſolemnize this day, the glorious ſun
Stays in his courſe, and plays the alchymiſ,
Turning, with ſplendour of his precious eye,
The meagre cloddy earth to glitt'ring gold. Shakespeare K. john.
Every alchymiſ knows, that gold will endure a vehement fire
for alongtime, without any change; and that after it has been
divided by corroſive liquours, into inviſible parts, yet may pre-
ſently be precipitated, ſo as to appear in its own form. Grew.
A'LCH YMY. n.ſ. [of al, Arab. and xxpa.]
1. The more ſublime and occult part of chymiſtry, which pro-
poſes, for its obječt, the tranſmutation of metals, and otherim-
portant operations.
There is nothing more dangerous than this licentious and de-
luding art, which changeth the meaning of words, as althymy
doth, or would do, the ſubſtance of metals, maketh of anything
what it liſteth, and bringeth, in the end, all truth to nothing.
- Hooker, b. v. § 58.
O he fits high in all the people's hearts;
And that which would appear offence in us,
His countenance, like richeſt alchymy,
Will change to virtue, and to worthineſs. Shakeſp. j. Caſar.
Princes do but play us; compared to this,
All honours mimick, all wealth alchymy. Donne.
2. A kind of mixed metal uſed for ſpoons, and kitchen utenſils.
The golden colour may be ſome mixture of orpiment, ſuch
as they uſe to braſs in the yellow alchymy. Bacon.
White alchymy is made of pan-braſs one pound, and arſeni-
cum three ounces; or alchymy is made of copper and auripig-
mentum. - Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
They bid cry,
With trumpets regal ſound, the great reſult:
Tow’rds the four winds, four ſpeedy cherubim
Put to their mouths the ſounding alchymy,
By herald's voice explain'd. Milton's Paradiſ? Loſº, b. ii.
ALéði OL. n.ſ. An Arabick term uſed by chymiſts for a high
rečtified dephlegmated ſpirit of wine, or for any thing reduced
into an impalpable powder. 9aincy.
If the ſame ſalt ſhall be reduced into alcohol, as the chymiſts
ſpeak, or an impalpable powder, the particles and intercepted
ſpaces will be extremely leſſened. Boyle.
Sal volatile oleoſum will coagulate the ſerum on account of
the alkahol, or reëtified ſpirit which it contains. Arbuthnot.
Alcohol.1zA'tion. m.ſ.. [from alcoholize.] The ačt of alco-
holizing or reëtifying ſpirits; or of reducing bodies to an im-
palpable powder.
To Alcoholize. v. a. [from alcohol.]
1. To make an alcohol; that is, to reëtify ſpirits till they are
wholly dephlegmated.
2. To comminute powder till it is wholly without roughneſs.
A/LcoRAN. n.ſ.. [al and Koran, Arab.] The book of the Maho-
metan precepts, and credenda.
If this would ſatisfy the conſcience, we might not only take
the preſent covenant, but ſubſcribe to the council of Trent;
yea, and to the Turkiſh alcoran; and ſwear to maintain and
defend either of them. Sanderſon againſt the Covenant.
Alco've. n.ſ.. [alcoba, Span.]
A receſs, or part of a chamber, ſeparated by an eſtrade, or
partition of a column, and other correſpondent ornaments; in
which is placed a bed of ſtate, and ſometimes ſeats to entertain
company. Trevoux.
The weary'd champion lulls in ſoft alcoves,
The nobleſt boaſt of thy romantick groves.
Oft, if the muſe preſage, ſhall he be ſeen
By Roſamonda fleeting o'er the green,
In dreams be hail'd by heroes' mighty ſhades,
And hear old Chaucer warble through the glades. Tickell.
Deep in a rich alcove the prince was laid,
And ſlept beneath the pompous colonnade. Pope's Odyſſey.
A'L DER. n. f. [alnus, Lat..] A tree having leaves reſembling thoſe
&lt;&gt;f the hazel; the male flowers, or katkins, are produced at re-
rrnote diſtances from the fruit, on the ſame tree; the fruit is ſqua-
rnoſe, and of a conical figure.
The ſpecies are; 1. The common or round-leaved alder.
2- The long-leaved alder. 3. The ſcarlet alder.
Theſe trees delight in a very moiſt ſoil, where few others will
thrive, and are a great improvement to ſuch lands. They may
be alſo planted on the ſides of brooks, and cut for poles every
third or fourth year. The wood is uſed by turners, and will
*=ndure long under ground, or in water. Theſe trees are pro-
Pagated either by planting layers, or truncheons, about three
feet in length, in February or March. AMillar.
Without the grot, a various ſilver ſcene
Appear'd around, and groves of living green;
Poplars and alders ever quivering play’d,
A -And nodding cypreſs form'd a fragrant ſhade. Pope's Odyſſ.
*-PERLI'ev est. adj. ſuperl. [from ald, alder, old, elder, and
*eve, dear, beloved.]. Moſt beloved; which has held the longeſt
Poſſeſſion of the heart. -
The mutual conference that my mind hath had,
By day, by night, waking, and in my dreams,
n courtly company, or at my beads,
ith you, mine alderlieveſ' ſovereign;
Makes me the bolder to ſalute my king
With ruder terms. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
A'LD H R MAN. n.ſ.. [from ald, old, and man.]
1. The ſame as ſenator, Cowell. A governour or magiſtrate, ori-
ginally, as the name imports, choſen on account of the experi-
ence which his age had given him.
Tell him, myſelf, the mayor, and aldermen,
Are come to have ſome confrence with his grace. Sh, R.III.
Though my own aldermen conferr'd my bays,
To me committing their eternal praiſe;
Their full-fed heroes, their pacifick may’rs,
. Their annual trophies, and their monthly wars. Pope's Dun.
2. In the following paſſage it is, I think, improperly uſed.
But if the trumpet’s clangour you abhor,
And dare not be an alderman of war,
Take to a ſhop, behind a counter lie. Dryd, juv. Sat.
A'LD FRMANLY. adv. [from alderman.] Like an alderman;
belonging to an alderman. -
Theſe, and many more, ſuffered death, in envy to their vir-
tues and ſuperiour genius, which emboldened them, in exigen-
cies (wanting an aldermanly diſcretion) to attempt ſervice out of
the common forms. Swift's Miſcellanies.
A'LDER N. adj. [from alder.] Made of alder.
Then aldern boats firſt plow'd the ocean;
The ſailors number'd then, and nam'd each ſtar. May's Virg.
A LE. n.ſ. ſeale, Sax.] -
1. A liquour made by infuſing malt [See MALT.] in hot water,
and then fermenting the liquour.
I'll ſcratch your heads ; you muſt be ſeeing chriſtenings.
Do you look for ale and cakes here, you rude raſcals
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The fertility of the ſoil in grain, and its being not proper
for vines, put the Egyptians upon drinking ale, of which they
were the inventors. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. A merry meeting uſed in country places.
And all the neighbourhood, from old records
Of antick proverbs drawn from Whitſon lords,
And their authorities at wakes and ales,
With country precedents, and old wives tales,
We bring you now. Ben. Johnſºn.
A'LE BERRY. n.ſ.. [from ale and herry..] A beverage madéby
boiling ale with ſpice and ſugar, and ſops of bread: a word on-
ly uſed in converſation. -
ALE BREwf R. n.ſ.. [from ale and brewer.] One that profeſſes
to brew ale.
The ſummer-made malt brews ill, and is diſliked by moſt of
our ale brewers. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
A'LEconNER. m. ſ. [from ale and con.] An officer in the city
of London, whoſe buſineſs is to inſpect the meaſures of publick
houſes. Four of them are choſen or rechoſen annually by the
common-hall of the city; and whatever might be their uſe
formerly, their places are now regarded only as fine-cures for
decayed citizens.
A'LEcost. m. ſ. [perhaps from ale, and cºſtus, Lat.] The name
of an herb. Dić7.
ALE'cTRYoMANCY, or Ale'ctoRoMANcy, n.ſ. [3Aiºlºvº, and
Pańk.] Divination by a cock. Dić7.
A'LEGA R. n.ſ.. [from ale and eager, ſour.] Sour ale; a kind of
acid made by ale, as vinegar by wine, which has loſt its ſpirit.
A'LEGER. adj. [allegre, Fr. alacris, Lat.] Gay ; chearful;
ſprightly: a word not now uſed.
Certainly, this berrycoffee, the root and leaf betle, and leaf
tobacco, of which the Turks are great takers, do all condenſe
the ſpirits, and make them ſtrong and alger. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
A'LEHoof. m. ſ. [from ale and hoopo, head..] Groundivy, ſo
called by our Saxon anceſtors, as being their chief ingredient
in ale. See GRound Ivy.
Alehoof, or groundivy, is, in my opinion, of the moſt ex-
cellent and moſt general uſe and virtue, of any plants we have
among us. - Temple.
A'LE House. n.ſ.. [from ale and houſe.] A houſe where ale is
publickly ſold; a tipling-houſe. It is diſtinguiſhed from a ta-
vern, where they ſell wine.
Thou moſt beauteous inn,
Why ſhould hard-favour’d grief be lodg'd in thee,
When triumph is become an alehouſe gueſt ? Shakespeare. Rich. II.
One would think it ſhould be no eaſy matter to bring any
man of ſenſe in love with an alehouſe; indeed of ſo much ſenſe,
as ſeeing and ſmelling amounts to ; there being ſuch ſtrong en-
counters of both, as would quickly ſend him packing, did not
the love of good fellowſhip reconcile to theſe nuſances. South.
Thee ſhall each alehouſe, thee each gilhouſe mourn,
And anſw'ring ginſhops ſowrer fighs return. Pope's Dun.
A'LE House K E FEPER. m. ſ. [from alehouſe and keeper.] He that
keeps ale publickly to ſell,
You reſemble perfectly the two althouſ keepers in Holland,
who were at the ſame time burgomaſters of the town, and taxed
one another's bills alternately. Bolingbroke to Swift.
A'LE KNIGHT. n.ſ.. [from ale and knight.] A pot-companion;
a tippler : a word now out of uſe. -
The old alºnights of England were well depainted out of him,
in the ale-houſe colours of that time, in this manner. Camden.
AL E M BICK.
:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L G
ALE'Mpick. m. ſ. A veſſel uſed in diſtilling, conſiſting of a veſ-
ſel placed over a fire, in which is contained the ſubſtance to be
diſtilled, and a concave cloſely fitted on, into which the fumes
ariſe by the heat; this cover has a beak or ſpout...into which the
vapours riſe, and by which they paſs into a ſerpentine pipe,
which is kept cool by making many convolutions in a tub of
water; here the vapours are condenſed, and what entered the
pipe in fumes, comes out in drops. -
Though water may be rarefied into inviſible vapours, yet it
is not changed into air, but only ſcattered into minute parts;
which meeting together in the alembick, or in the receiver, do
preſently return into ſuch water as they conſtituted before. Boyle.
ALE'NGTH. adv. [from a for at, and length.] At full length ;
along; ſtretched along the ground.
ALERT. adj. [alerte, Fr. perhaps from alacris, but probably
from a l'art, according to art or rule.]
1. In the military ſenſe, on guard ; watchful; vigilant; ready at
a call.
2. In the common ſenſe, briſk; pert; petulant; ſmart; imply-
ing ſome degree of cenſure and contempt. -
I ſaw an alert young fellow, that cocked his hat upon a friend
of his, and accoſted him after the following manner: Well,
Jack, the old prig is dead at laſt. Addiſon. Speci. Nº 403.
ALE'RTN Ess. n.ſ.. [from alert.] The quality of being alert;
ſprightlineſs; pertneſs. -
That alertneſs and unconcern for matters of common life,
which a campaign or two would infallibly have given him.
Addiſon. Speciator.
ALE TASTER. m. f [from ale and taſter.] An officer appointed
in every courtlect, and ſworn to look to the aſſize and the
goodneſs of bread and ale, or beer, within the precincts of that
lordſhip. - Cowell.
A'Lev AT. n.ſ.. [from ale and vat.] The tub in which the ale
is fermented.
A'LEwAsHED. adj. [from ale and waſh.] Steeped or ſoaked in
ale.
What a beard of the general's cut, and a horrid ſuit of the
camp, will do among foaming battles and alewaſhed wits, is
wonderful to be thought on. Shakeſp. Henry V.
ALE wif E. m. ſ. [ſrom ale and wife.] A woman that keeps an
alehouſe.
Perhaps he will ſwagger and hečtor, and threaten to beat and
butcher an alewife, or take the goods by force, and throw
them the bad halfpence. Swift's Draper's Letters.
Alex ANDERs. n.J. [Smyrnium, Lat.] The name of a plant.
The flowers are produced in umbels, conſiſting of ſeveral
leaves, which are placed orbicularly, and expand in form of a
roſe; theſe reſt upon the empalement,which afterward becomes
an almoſt globular fruit, compoſed of two pretty thick ſeeds,
ſometimes ſhaded like a creſcent, gibbous, and ſtreaked on one
ſide, and plain on the other.
... The ſpecies are; 1. Common Alexanders. 2. Foreign A-
lexanders, with a round leaf, &amp;c.
The firſt of theſe ſorts, which is that ordered by the college
for medicinal uſe, grows wild in divers parts of England, and
may be propagated by ſowing their ſeeds upon an open ſpot of
ground in Auguſt. Millar.
A'Lex ANDER's Foot. m. ſ. The name of an herb.
ALEx A'N DRINE. m. ſ. A kind of verſe borrowed from the
French, firſt uſed in a poem called Alexander. They conſiſt,
among the French, of twelve and thirteen ſyllables, in alternate
couplets; and, among us, of twelve.
Our numbers ſhould, for the moſt part, be lyrical. For
variety, or rather where the majeſty of thought requires it,
they may be ſtretched to the Engliſh heroick of five feet, and
to the French Alexandrine of ſix. Dryd.
Then, at the laſt, an only couplet fraught
With ſome unmeaning thing they call a thought,
A needleſs Alexandrine ends the ſong,
That, like a wounded ſnake, drags it ſlow length along.
- - Pope's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
ALEx PHA'RMICK. adj. [from 2xiào and pzigzzo,.] That which
drives away poiſon; antidotal; that which oppoſes infection.
That ſome antidotal quality it may have, we have no reaſon
to deny ; for ſince elke's hoofs and horns are magnified for epi-
lepſies, ſince not only the bone in the heart, but the horn of a
deer, is alexipharmick. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
ALEXITE'RICAL, or ALEx ITF'RICK. adj. [from 2xt{ia.] That
which drives away poiſon; that which reſiſts in ſevers.
A'LGATEs, adv. [from all and gate. Skinner. Gate is the ſame
as via; and ſtill uſed for way in the Scottiſh dialect.] On any
terms; every way: now obſolete.
Nor had the boaſter ever riſen more,
But that Rinaldo's horſe ev’n then down fell,
And with the fall his leg oppreſs'd ſo fore,
That, for a ſpace, there muſt he algates dwell. Fairfax.
ALG EBRA, n. ſ. [an Arabick word of uncertain etymology;
derived, by ſome, from Geher the philoſopher; by ſome, from
gºff, parchment; by others, from algehiſła, a bone-ſetter; by
A ſenage, from aſgiatarat, the reſtitution of things broken.]
This is a peculiar kind of arithmetick, which takes the quan-
tity ſought, whether it be a number or a line, or any other
quantity, as if it were granted, and, by means of one or more
-- *** -- - — =
quantities given, proceeds by conſequence, till the quantity at
firſt only ſuppoſed to be known, or at leaſt ſome power there-
of, is found to be equal to ſome quantity or quantities which
are known, and conſequently itſelf is known. The origin of
this, art, is very obſcure. It was in uſe, however, among the
Arabs, long before it came into this part of the world; and
they are ſuppoſed to have borrowed it from the Perſians, and
the Perſians from the Indians. The firſt Greek author of al-
gebra was Diophantus, who, about the year 8oo, wrote thirteen
books. In 1494, Lucas Pacciolus, or Lucas de Burgos, a cor-
delier, printed a treatiſe of algebra, in Italian, at Venice. He
ſays, that algebra came originally from the Arabs, and never
mentions Diophantus; which makes it probable, that that au-
thour was not yet known in Europe; whoſe method was ver
different from that of the Arabs, obſerved by Pacciolus and his
firſt European followers. His algebra goes no farther than
ſimple and quadratick equations; and only ſome of the others
advanced to the ſolution of culick equations. After ſeveral im-
provements by Vieta, Oughtred, Harriot, Deſcartes, Sir Iſaac
Newton brought this art to the height at which it ſtill conti-
Illies. 7 revaux. Chamlers.
It would ſurely require no very profound ſkill in algebra, to
reduce the difference of ninepence in thirty ſhillings. Swift.
ALG EBRA1ck. di, ſfrom alweb
ALG EBRA'IcAL. } adj. [from algebra.]
1. Relating to algebra; as, an algebraical treatiſe.
2. Containing operations of algebra; as, an algebraial computa-
tion.
AlGE BRA'ist, n.ſ [from algebra.] A perſon that underſtands
or practiſes the ſcience of algebra.
When any dead body is found in England, no algebraft or
uncipherer can uſe more ſubtle ſuppoſitions, to find the demon-
ſtration or cipher, than every unconcerned perſon doth to find
the murderers. Graunt's Hills ºf A.ortality.
Confining themſelves to deſcribe almoſt nothing cle but tºe
ſynthetick and analytick methods of geometricians and alge-
brai/?s, they have too much narrowed the rules of method, as
though everything were to be treated in mathematical forms.
//utty’s Lozick.
ATLGID. adj. [alidus, Lat.] Cold; chill. JDic?.
/
Åº: } n.ſ. (Homalil] Chineſ; cold. Dºi.
ALG1'F1c. adj. [from algor, Lat.] That which produces cold. D.
ALGOR. m. ſ. [Lat.] Extreme cold; chilneſs. Djº.
A'LGoRISM, n. ſ. Arabick words, which are uſed to imply
A'LGoRITHM. } the ſix operations of arithmetick, or the ſci-
ence of numbers. Dić.
ALGo's E. adj. [from algor, Lat..] Extremely cold; chill. Diº.
A"LIAS. adv. A Latin word, ſignifying otherwiſe; often uſed
in the trials of criminals, whoſe danger has obliged them te
change their names; as, Simpſon alias Smith, alias Baker; that
is, otherwiſe Smith, otherwiſe Baker.
A'LIBLE, adj. [alibilis, Lat.] Nutritive; nouriſhing; that which
may be nouriſhed. Dić.
ALIEN. adj. [alienus, Lat.]
1. Foreign, or not of the ſame family or land.
The mother plant admires the leaves unknown
Of alien trees, and apples nother own. . Dryd. Wirg. G.org.
But who can tell, what pangs, what ſharp remorſe,
Torment the Boian prince from native ſoil
Exil'd by fate, torn from the tender embrace
Of weeping conſort, and depriv'd the fight
Of his young guiltleſs progeny, he ſeeks
Inglorious ſhelter in an alien land. Philips.
2. Eſtranged from ; not allied to ; adverſe to ; with the particle
from, and ſometimes to, but improperly.
To declare my mind to the diſciples of the fire, by a ſimi-
litude not alien from their profeſſion. Boyle.
The ſentiment that ariſes, is a convićtion of the deplorable
ſtate of nature, to which fin reduced us ; a weak, ignorant crea-
ture, alien from God and goodneſs, and a prey to the great de-
ſtroyer. Rogers's Sermons.
They encouraged perſons and principles, alien from our reli-
gion and government, in order to ſtrengthen their faction.
Swift's Miſcellanies.
A'LIEN. m.ſ.. [alienus, Lat.] -
1. A foreigner; not a deniſon; a man of another country or fa-
mily; not allied; a ſtranger.
In whomſoever theſe things are, the church doth acknow-
ledge them for her children; them only ſhe holdeth for aliens
and ſtrangers, in whom theſe things are not found. Hooker.
If it be prov’d againſt an alien,
He ſeeks the life of any citizen,
The party, gainſt the which he doth contrive,
Shall ſeize on half his goods. Shakeſp. Merch, of Penice.
The mere Iriſh were not only accounted aliens, but enemics,
and altogether out of the protećtion of the law; ſo as it was no
capital offence to kill them. Sir John Davies on Ireland.
Thy place in council thou haſt rudely loſt, -
Which by thy younger brother is ſupply'd,
And art almoſt an alien to the hearts
Of all the court and princes of my blood. Shakespeare Henry IV -
4. Their<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L I
A L I
Their famous lawgiver condemned the perſons, who ſat idle
in diviſions dangerous to the government, as aliens to the com-
munity, and therefore to be cut off from it. Addiſon. Freeholder.
2. In law.
An alien is one born in a ſtrange country, and never enfran-
chiſed. A ſnan born out of the land, ſo it be within the linits
beyond the ſeas, or of Engliſh parents out of the king's obedi-
ence, ſo the parents, at the time of the birth, be of the king's
obedience, is not alien. If one born out of the king's allegi-
ance, come and dwell in England, his children (if he beget any
here) are not aliens, but denizens. Cowell.
To A'i IEN. v. a. [aliener, Fr. alieno, Lat.]
1. To make any thing the property of another. - -
If the ſon alien thoſe lands, and then repurchaſe them again
in fee, now the rules of deſcents are to be obſerved, as if he were
the original purchaſer. Hale's Hiſtory of Common Law.
2. To eſtrange; to turn the mind or affection; to make averſe
to ; with frºm.
The king was wonderfully diſquieted, when he found, that
the prince was totally aliered from all thoughts of, or inclina-
tion to, the marriage. - Clarendon.
ALIENABLE. adj. [from 7% alienate.] That of which the pro-
perty may be transferred. -
Land is alienable, and treaſure is tranſitory, and both muſt, at
one time or other, paſs from him, cither by his own voluntary
aćt, or by the violence and injuſtice of others, or at leaſt by
fate. Dennis's Letters.
To A': 1:NATF. v. a. [aliener, Fr. alieno, Lat.]
1. To transfer the property of any thing to another.
The countries were once chriſtian, and members of the
church, and where the golden candleſticks did ſtand, though
now they be utterly alienated, and no chriſtians left. Bacon.
2. To withdraw the heart or affections; with the particle from,
where the firſt poſſeſſor is mentioned.
The manner of mens writing muſt not alienate our hearts
frºm the truth. - Hooker's Preface.
Be it never ſo true which we teach the world to believe, yet
if once their affections begin to be alienated, a ſmall thing per-
ſuadeth them to change their opinions. Hooker, Dedicat.
His eyes ſurvey'd the dark idolatries
Of alienated Judah. A ſilton's Paradiſ: Lºft, b. i. l. 4;7.
Any thing that is apt to diſturb the world, and to alienate
the affections of men from one another, ſuch as croſs and diſ-
taſteful humours, is, either expreſsly, or by clear conſequence
and deduction, forbidden in the New Teſtament. Tilotſon.
Her mind was quite alienated from the honeſt Caſtilian,whom
fhe was taught to look upon as a formal old fellow. Addison Speciat.
A'LIENATE. a.d. [alienatus, Lat..] Withdrawn from ; ſtranger
to ; with the particle from.
They are moſt damnably wicked; impatient for the death of
the queen; ready to gratify their ambition and revenge, by all
deſperate methods; wholly alienate from truth, law, religion,
mercy, conſcience, or honour. Swift's Miſcellanies.
Alif NATION. m. ſ. ſalienatio, Lat.]
1. The aët of transferring property.
The beginning of this ordinance was for the maintenance of
their lands in their poſtcrity, and for excluding all innovation
or alienation thereof unto ſtrangers. Spenſºr's State of Ireland.
God put it into the heart of one of our princes, towards the
cloſe of her reign, to give a check to that ſacrilege. Her ſuc-
ceſſour paſſed a law, which prevented abſolutely all future alie-
nations of the church revenues. Atterbury.
Great changes and alienations of property, have created new
and great dependencies. : on Athens and Rome.
2. The ſtate of being alienated; as, the eſtate was waſted during
its alieration.
3. Change of affe&amp;tion, -
It is left but in dark memory, what the caſe of this perſon
was, and what was the ground of his defečtion, and the aliena-
t=on of his heart from the king. Bacon's Henry VII.
4. Applied to the mind, it means diſorder of the faculties.
Some things are done by man, though not through outward
force and impulſion, though not againſt, yet without their
wills; as in alienation of mind, or any like inevitable utter ab-
ſence of wit and judgment. Hooker, b. i. p. 23.
At 1'FF Rous. adj. [from ala and fero, Lat..] Having wings. D.
A1. I'GF Rous. adj. [aliger, Lat.] Having wings; winged. Dić.
To Ali'Go E. v. a. [from a, and lig, to lye down.] To lay ;
to allay; to throw down; to ſubdue : an old word even in the
time of Spenſer, now wholly forgotten.
Thomalin, why ſitten we ſo,
As weren overwent with woe:
Upon ſo fair a morrow,
The joyous time now nigheth faſt,
That ſhall aligge this bitter blaſt,
And flake the winter ſorrow. Spenſºr's Paſtorals.
To ALI'ohr. v. n. [2]h-an, Sax. of lichten, Dutch.]
1. To come down, and ſtop. The word implies the idea of de-
fending ; as, of a bird from the wing; a traveller from his horſe
or carriage, and generally of reſting or ſtopping.
There ancient night arriving, did alight
From her high weary waine, Fairy Queen, b. i. e.v.
Vol. J.
There is alighted at your gate
A young Venetian. Shakespeare. Merchant of *…
Slackneſs breeds worms; but the ſure traveller,
Though he alights ſometimes, ſtill goeth on. Herbert.
... When marching with his foot he walks till night;
When with his horſe he never will alight. Denham.
When Dedalus, to fly the Cretan ſhore,
His heavy limbs on jointed pinions bore;
The firſt that ſai'd in air, 'tis ſung by Fame,
To the Cumcan coaſt at length he came, .
And here alighting built this coſtly frame. Dryden's Żncid.
When he was admoniſhed by his ſubject to deſcend, hē
came down gently and circling in the air, and finging to the
ground. Like a lark, melodious in her mounting, and conti-
nuing her ſong till ſhe aſights; ſtill preparing for a higher flight
at her next ſally. ! -- Dryden.
- When finiſh’d was the fight,
The vićtors from their luſty ſteeds alight;
Like them diſmounted all the warlike train. Dryd. Falls:
Should a ſpirit of ſuperiour rank, a ſtranger to human na-
ture, alight upon the earth, what would his notions of us be 2
- Addison. Speciator:
2. It is uſed alſo of anything thrown or falling; to fall upon.
But ſtorms of ſtones from the proud temple's height,
Pour down, and on our batter'd helms alight. Dryd. Aftreid.
ALI'K E. adv. [from a and like..] With reſemblance; without
difference; in the ſame manner; in the ſame f rim.
The darkneſs hideth not from thee; but the night ſhincth as
the day: the darkneſs and the light are both alićr to thee.
- Pſahn cºxxix. 12.
With thee converſing, I forget all time;
All ſeaſons, and their change, all pleaſe alike. Parad. Lºft.
Riches cannot reſcue from the grave,
Which claims alike the monarch and the ſlave. Dryd, juv.
Let us unite at leaſt in an equal zeal for thoſe capital doc-
trines, which we all equally embrace, and are alike concerned
to maintain. Atterbury's Prºfice to his Sermons.
Two handmaids wait the throne: alike in place,
But diff'ring far in figure and in face. Pope’s Rape of the Lock.
A'LIMENT. m. ſ. [alimentum, Lat..] Nouriſhment; that which
nouriſhes; nutriment; food.
New parts are added to our ſubſtance; and as we die, we
are born daily; nor can we give an account, how the aliment is
ſo prepared for nutrition, or by what mechaniſin it is diſtributed.
Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica, Prºf.
All bodies which, by the animal faculties, can be changed in-
to the fluids and ſolids of our bodies, are called aliments. But,
to take it in the largeſt ſenſe, by aliment, I underſtand every
thing which a human creature takes in common diet; as, meat,
drink; and ſeaſoning, as, ſalt, ſpice, vinegar, &amp;c. Artuthnot.
ALIME'N TAL. adj. [from aliment.] That which has the quality
of aliment; that which nouriſhes; that which feeds.
The ſun, that light imparts to all, receives
From all his alimental recompenſe, -
In humid exhalations. Milton's Paradiſ? Loft, b. v.
Except they be watered from higher regions, theſe weeds
muſt loſe their alimental ſap, and wither themſelves.
Brown's Preface to Pulgar Errows.
Th’ induſtrious, when the ſun in Leo rides,
And darts his ſultrieſt beams, portending drought,
Forget not, at the foot of ev'ry plant,
To ſink a circling trench, and daily pour
A juſt ſupply of alimental ſtreams,
Exhauſted ſap recruiting. Philips:
ALIME'NTARINEss. n.ſ.. [from alimentary..] The quality of
being alimentary, or of affording nouriſhment. Dicf.
ALIME'NTARY. adj. [from aliment.]
1. That which belongs or relates to aliment.
The ſolution of the aliment by maſtication is neceſſary;
without it, the aliment could not be diſpoſed for the changes,
which it receives as it paſſeth through the alimentary dućt.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. That which has the quality of aliment, or the power of nou-
riſhing.
I do not think that water ſupplies animals, or even plants,
with nouriſhment, but ſerves for a vehicle to the alimentary
particles, to convey and diſtribute them to the feveral parts ºf
the body. Ray on the Creation.
Of alimentary roots, ſome are pulpy and very nutritious; as,
turneps and carrots. Theſe have a fattening quality, which
they manifeſt in feeding of cattle. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
ALIMENTA"rio N. m. ſ. [from aliment.] The power of afford-
ing aliment; the quality of nouriſhing.
Plants do nouriſh; inanimate bodies do not : they have an
accretion, but no alimentation. Bacon's Natural Hi/?ory, Nº. 54.
ALIMo'NIOUs, adj. [from alimony..] That which nouriſhes: a
word very little in uſe.
The plethora renders us lean, by ſuppreſſing our ſpirits,
whereby they are incapacitated of digeſting the alimonious hu-
mours into fleſh. Harvey on Conſumptions.
A'LIM O N Y. m. ſ. ſalimonia, Lat.]
Aimony ſignifies that legal proportion cf the huſband's eſtate,
which, by the ºntence of the eccleſ...f.i.a. ccºrt, is allowed to
Q. ti.e.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L K
A L L
the wife for her maintenance, upon the account of any ſepara-
tion from him, provided it be not cauſed by her elºpement or
adultery. A fe's Parcrgon.
Before they ſettled hands and hcarts... .
Till alimany or death them parts. Hudibras, p. iii. e. iii.
A'LIQUANT. adj. [aliſtantic, Lat: } Parts of a number, which,
however repeated, will never make up the number exactly ; as,
3 is an aliquant of ic, thrice 3 being 9, four times 3 mak-
1ng I 2.
Aſ irº or. adj. [cliquat, Lat..] Aliquot parts of any number or
quantity, ſuch as will exactly meaſure it without any remain-
der: as, 3 is an alquot part of 12, becauſe, being taken four
times, it will juſt meaſure it.
A lish. adj. [from al..] Reſembling ale; having qualities of ale.
They let it ſtand five days before they put it into the caſk,
ſtirring it and beating down the yeaſt into it; this gives it the
ſweet diſh taſte. AMortinier's Huxlandry.
A'LI'ruRE. m.ſ.. [alitura, Lat.] Nouriſhment. Dict.
ALI'v E. adj. [from a and live.]
1. In the ſtate of life; not dead.
Nor well alive, nor wholly dead they were,
But ſome faint ſigns of feeble life appear.
Not youthful kings in battle ſciz'd alive,
Net ſcornful virgins who their charms ſurvive. Pºpe.
2. In a figurative ſenſe, unextinguiſhed; undeſtroyed; active ;
in full force.
Thoſe good and learned men had reaſon to wiſh, that their
proceedings might be favoured, and the good affection of ſuch
as inclined toward them, kept alive. Hocker, b. v.
3. Chearful; ſprightly ; full of alacrity.
She was not ſo much alive the whole day, if ſhe ſlept more
than ſix hours. Clariſſa.
4. In a popular ſenſe, it is uſed only to add an emphaſis, like the
French du mºnde; as, the był man alive; that is, the bºſſ, with
an emphaſis.
And to thoſe brethren ſaid, riſe, riſe by-live,
And unto battle do yourſelves addreſs;
For yonder comes the proweſt knight alive,
Prince Arthur, flower of grace and nobileſs. Fairy Queen.
The earl of Northumberland, who was the proudeſt man a-
live, could not look upon the deſtruction of monarchy with any
pleaſure. Clarendon, b. viii.
John was quick and underſtood his buſineſs very well; but
no man alive was more careleſs in looking into his accounts.
- Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
A'LKAH Est. n.ſ. A word uſed firſt by Paracelſus, and adopted
by his followers, to ſignify an univerſal diſſolvent, or liquour,
which has the power of reſolving all things into their firſt prin-
ciples.
AL ºctºr. adj. [from alkaſi..] That which has a ten-
dency to the properties of an alkali.
All animal diet is alkaleſcent or anti-acid. Arbuthnot on Aim.
A'L KALI. m. ſ. [The word alkali comes from an herb, called
by the Egyptians Ka'i ; by us glaſswort.]. This herb they burnt
to aſhes, boiled them in water, and, after having evaporated
the water, there remained at the bottom a white ſalt; this they
called ſui kali, or alka i. It is corroſive, producing putrefac-
tion in animal ſubſtances, to which it is applied. Arbuthnot on
4 inents.
Any ſubſtance, which, when mingled with acid, produces
cfferveſcence and fermentation. See ALKALIZAT E.
A'LKALIN E. adj. [from alkali..] That which has the qualities
of alkali.
Any watery liquour wiłl keep an animal from ſtarving very
long, by diluting the fluids, and conſequently keeping them
from this alka ine ſtate, which is confirmed by experience; for
people have lived twenty-four days upon nothing but water.
- Arbuthnot upon Aiments.
To Alk A'Liz ATF. v. a. [from alkali.] To make bodies alka-
line, by changing their nature, or by mixing alkalies with
them.
ALKALIzAt F. adj. [from alkali.] That which has the quali-
ties of alkali; that which is impregnated with alkali.
The odour of the fixed nitre is very languid; but that,
which it diſcovers, being diſlolved in hot water, is different,
being of kin to that of other alkalizate ſalts. Boyle.
The colour of violets ſeems to be of that order, becauſe their
ſyrup, by acid liquours, turns red, and, by urinous and alka izate,
turns green. Newton's Opticks.
ALKALIzATION. m. ſ. [from alkali.] The act of alkalizating,
or impregnating bodies with alkali.
. A LK As E.T. m. ſ. [Anchuſ, Lat J The name of a plant.
This plant is a ſpecies of bugloſs, with a red root, brought
from the ſouthern parts of France, and uſed in medicine. It
will grow in almoſt any ſoil, and muſt be ſown in March. Mil.
A LRE KENG.I. a. ſ. A medicinal fruit or berry, produced by
a plant of the ſame denomination; popularly alſo called win-
ter-cherry; of conſiderable uſe as an aſtringent, diſſolvent, and
diuretick. The plant bears a near reſemblance to Solanum, or
Nightſhade; whence it is frequently called in Latin by that
name, with the addition or epithet of veſicarium. Chambers.
will.J. R.M.E.S. n.ſ. In medicine, a term borrowed from the
-
-
Dryd. Fables.
Arabs, denoting a celebrated remedy, of the form and conſiſt-
ence of a confection; whereof the k, rºles berries are the baſis.
The other ingredients are pippin-cyder, roſe-water, ſugar, am-
bergreaſe, muſk, cinnamon, aloes-wood, pears, and leaf-gold 3.
but the ſweets are uſually omitted. . The cºſ::ſio alºme; i.
chiefly made at Montpelier, which ſupplies moſt part of Eu-
rope there with. . The grain, which gives it the denomination,
is nowhere found ſo plentifully as there. Chambers.
ALL. adv. [See ALL, adj.]
1. Quite; completely.
How is my love all ready forth to come. Spenſºr's Epitha.
Know, Rome, that all alone Marcus did fight
Within Corioli gates. Shakeſp. Coriolanur.
And ſwore ſo loud,
That, all amaz'd, the prieſt let fall the book. ShakespeareTam.Shrew.
They could call a comet a faxed ſtar, which is all one with
fella crimita, or coneta. Camden's Remains,
For a large conſcience is all one,
And ſignifies the ſame with none. Hudibras, p. iii. c. i.
Balin, from a ſilver box diſtill'd around,
Shall all bedev the roots, and ſcent the ſacred ground. Dryº.
I do not remember he any where mentions expreſsly the title
of the firſt-born, but all along keeps himſelf under the ſlicter
of the indefinite term, heir. Locke.
Juſtice, indeed, may be furniſhed out of this element, as far
as her ſword goes; and courage may be all over a continued
blaze, if the artiſt pleaſes. Addison. Guardian, N° 103.
If e'er the miſer durſt his farthings ſpare,
He thinly ſpreads them through the publick ſquare,
Where, all beſide the rail, rang'd beggars lie,
And from each other catch the doleful cry. Gay's Trivia.
2. Altogether; wholly; without any other confideration.
I am of the temper of moſt kings, who love to be in debt,
are all for preſent money, no matter how they pay it after-
ward. Dryd. Fab. Preface.
3. Only ; without admiſſion of any thing elſe.
- When I ſhall wed,
That lord, whoſe hand muſt take my plight, ſhall carry
Half my love with him, half my care and duty.
Sure I ſhall never marry, like my ſiſter,
To love my father all.
4. Although. This ſenſe is truly Teutonick, but now obſolete.
Do you not think th’ accompliſhment of it
Sufficient work for one man's ſimple head, -
All were it as the reſt but ſimply writ. Spenſºr, Son. xxxii.
5. It is ſometimes a word of emphaſis; nearly the ſame with
juſt.
A ſhepherd's ſwain, ſay, did thee bring,
All as his ſtraying flock he fed;
And, when his honour hath thee read,
Crave pardon for thy hardy head. Sººnſºr's Tººra'.
AI. L. adj. [/Ell, AEal, calle, alle. Sax, oll, Welſh; al, Dutch ;
alle, Germ. …, Gr.]
1. The whole number; every one.
Brutus is an honourable man;
So are they all, all honourable men. Shaftºff. jul. Caſar.
To graze the herb all leaving,
Devour’d each other. Mi ton’s Paradiſ Jºſé, b. x.
The great encouragement of all, is the aſſurance of a future
reward. Ticſſon, Sermon vi.
2. The whole quantity; every part.
Six days thou ſhalt labour, and do all thy work. Deut. v. 12.
Political power, I take to be a right of making laws with
penalties, and of employing the force of the community in the
execution of ſuch laws, and in the defence of the common-
wealth; and all this only for the publick good. Locke.
3. The whole duration of time. -
On whoſe paſtures cheerful ſpring,
All the year doth fit and ſing;
And, rejoicing, ſmiles to ſee,
Their green backs wear his livery.
4. The whole extent of place.
Gratiano ſpeaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than
any man in all Venice. Shaft. Merch. ºf Penice.
ALL. m. ſ.
1. The whole; oppoſed to part, or nothing.
And will ſhe yet debaſe her eyes on me ;
On me, whoſe all not equals Edward's moiety 2
On me that halt, and am miſhapen thus : Shakespeare Rich. III.
Nought's had, all's ſpent,
Where our deſire is got without content. Shaft. Macleth.
The youth ſhall ſtudy, and no more engage
Their flatt'ring wiſhes for uncertain age;
No more with fruitleſs care, and cheated ſtrife,
Chace fleeting pleaſure through the maze of life;
Finding the wretched all they here can have, -
But preſent food, and but a future grave. Prºr.
Our all is at ſtake, and irretrieveably loſt, if we fail of ſuc-
ceſs. Addison on the State of the J/ar.
2. Every thing.
Then ſhall we be news-cranm'd.—All the better; we ſhall
be the mere remarkable, Shakespeare. As yºu like ir-
CP
Craſhaw.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L L
Up with my tent, here will I lie to night; -
But where to morrow 2–Well, al’s one for that, Shakespeare. R. III.
All the fitter, Lentulus: our coming
Is not for ſalutation; we have bus'neſs. Ben. johnſ. Catiline.
That is, every thing is the better, the ſame, the fitter.
Sceptre and pow'r, thy giving, I aſſuºc 3
And glad her ſhall reſign, when in the end
Thou ſhalt be all in all, and I in thee,
For ever; and in me all whom thou lov'ſt. Parad. Loft.
They all fell to work at the roots of the tree, and left it ſo
little foothold, that the firſt blaſt of wind laid it flat upon the
ground, neſt, eagles, and all. L’Eſtrange.
They that do not keep up this indifferency for all but truth,
put colo-red ſpectacles before their eyes, and look through falſe
gº-ſies. Locke.
A torch, ſnuff and all, goes out in a moment, when dipped
in the vapour. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Allis much uſed in compoſition; but, in moſt inſtances, it is
merely arbitrary; as, all-commanding. Sometimes the words
compounded with it, are fixed and claſſical; as, A mighty.
When it is connected with a participle, it ſeems to be a
noun; as, all-ſurrounding : in other caſes, an adverb; as, all-
accompliſhed, or completely accompliſhed.
Of theſe compounds, a ſmall part of thoſe which may be
found is inſerted.
ALL-E EARING. adj. [from all and bear.] That which bears every
thing; omniparous.
Thus while he ſpoke, the ſovereign plant he drew,
Where on th’ all-bearing earth unmark’d it grew. Pope's Od.
ALL-CHF ERING. adj. [from a' and cheer.] That which gives
gyety and cheerfulneſs to all.
Soon as the aſ-cheering ſun
Should, in the fartheſt eaſt, begin to draw
The ſhady curtains from Aurora's bed. Shakespeare. Rºmeo and jul.
Air-co:AMAS LING. aff, [from all and command.] Having the
ſovereignty over all. -
He now ſets before them the high and ſhining idol of glory,
the al-commanding image of bright gold. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Aſ L-cox. Pos ING. adj. [from all and compºſe.] That which quiets
ail men, or every thing.
Wrapt in embow ring ſhades, Ulyſſes lies,
His woes forgot but Pallas now addreſt,
To break the bands of all-compºſing reſt. Pope's Odyſſey, b. vi.
ALL-con QUER IN G. adj. [from all and conquer.] That which
fubdues every thing.
Second of Satan ſprung, all-conquering death !
What think’t thou of our empire now 2 Paradiſe I off, b. x.
At L-consus, ING. adj. [from all and conſume.] That which con-
ſurnes every thing.
By age unbroke—but all-conſuming care
Deſtroys perhaps the ſtrength, that time would ſpare. Pope.
Aſ L-DF wou RING. adj. [from all and devour.] That which eats
up every thing. -
ecure from flames, from envy's fiercer rage,
Deſtructive war, and all-devouring age. Pope's Eſſay on Crit.
All Four s. m. ſ. [from a l and fºur.] A low game at cards,
played by two ; ſo named from the four particulars by which
it is reckoned, and which, joined in the hand of either of the
parties, are ſaid to make all fours.
ALL HAIL. m.ſ.. [from all, and hail, for health.] All health. This
is therefore not a compound, though, perhaps uſually reckoncé
among them.
All hail, ye fields, where conſtant peace attends !
All hail, ye ſacred, ſolitary groves |
lſ hail, ye books, my true, my real friends,
Whoſe converſation pleaſes and improves. Iſa'ſ.
All-HAL Low N, n.ſ.. [from all and halow, to make holy.] The
time about Allſaintsday.
Farewell, thou latter ſpring! farewell,
All-hallºwn ſummer. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
At LH A Low TICE. m. ſ. [See ALL-HAllow N.] The term
near Allſaints, or the firſt of November.
Cut off the bough about Aiſhallowtide, in the bare place,
and ſet it in the ground, and it will grow to be a fair tree in
one year. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 427.
All-HEAL. m. ſ. [Panax, Lat.] A ſpecies of ironwort; which ſee.
All-JUDG IN G. adj. [from all and judge.] That which has the
ſovereign right of judgment.
I look with horrour back,
That I deteſt my wretched ſelf, and curſe
My paſt polluted life. All-judging heav'n,
Who knows my crimes, has ſeen my ſorrow for them.
Rowe's jane Shore.
All-KNow ING. adj. [from all and know..] Omniſcient; all-wiſe.
Shall we repine at a little miſplaced charity, we, who could
no way foreſec the effect; when an all-knowing, all-wiſe Being,
ſhowers down every day his benefits on the unthankful and un-
deſerving 2 Atterlury's Sermons.
All-MA Kis G. adj. [from all and make.] That created all;
omnifick. [See All-SE EING..]
Alt-row ERFu 1. adj. [from all and powerful.] Almighty; om-
hipotent; poſſeſſed of infinite Power. 2.
O all-powerful Being, the leaſt motion of whoſe will can cre-
ate or deſtroy a world; pity us, the mournful friends of thy
diſtreſſed ſervant. - - Swift:
ALL, saints DAY. m. ſ. The day on which there is a general
celebration of the ſaints. The firſt of November.
All-seek. n.ſ.. [from all and ſee..] He that ſees or beholds every
thing; he whoſe view comprehends all things. -
That high Al-ſeer, which I dallied with,
Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head,
And giv'n in earneſt, what I begg'd in jeſt. Shakespeare Rich. III.
All-SE EING: adj. [from all and ſee..] That beholds everything.
The ſame Firſt Mover certain bounds has plac'd,
How long thoſe periſhable forms ſhall laſt;
Nor can they laſt beyond the time aſſign'd
By that all-ſeeing and alº making mind. Dryd. Fable.
ALL souls DAY. n.ſ. The day on which ſupplications are made
for all ſouls by the church of Rome; the ſecond of November.
This is all ſºuls day, fellows, is it not 2–
It is, my lord.—
Why then, all ſºuls day is my body's doomſlay. Shakespeare R III.
Al L-su FFICIENT, adj. [from all and ſufficient..] Sufficient to
every thing.
The teſtimonies of God are perfeół, the teſtimonies of God
are all-ſufficient unto that end for which they were given Hocker.
He can more than employ all our powers in their utmoſt ele-
vation; for he is every way perfeót and all-ſºff.ient. Norris.
All-wis E. adj. [from all and wiſ...] Poſſeſt of infinite wiſdom.
There is an infinite, eternal, all-wiſe Mind governing the
affairs of the world. * Sºuth.
Supreme, all-wiſe, eternal, potentate' -
Sole authour, ſole diſpoſer of our fate | Prior.
ALLANTOIS, or ALLANIO//DES. m. ſ. [from 2xxx, a gut,
and tº ſhape.j The urinary tunick placed between the
amnion and chorion, which, by the navel and urachus, or paſ-
ſage by which the urine is conveyed from the intent in the
womb, receives the urine that comes out of the bladder. Kºincy.
To ALL A^. v. a. [from alloyer, Fr. to mix one metal with
another in order to coinage; it is therefore derived by ſome
frºm a la loi, according to law ; the quantity of meals being
mixed according to law ; by others, from allier, to unite; per-
haps from allocare, to put together.]
1. To mix one metal with another, to make it fitter for coin-
age. In this ſenſe, moſt authours preſerve the original French
orthography, and write alloy. See Alloy.
2. To join any thing to another, ſo as to abate its predominant
qualities.
Being brought into the open air,
I would allay the burning quality
Of that fell poiſon. Shakespeare. King john.
No friendly offices ſhall alter or allay that rancour, that frets
in ſome jº,
at its foul mouth in ſlander and invective. South.
3. To quiet; to pacify ; to repreſs. The word, in this ſenſe, I
think not to be derived from the French alloyer, but to be the
Engliſh word lay, with a before it, according to the old form.
If, by your art, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, alloy them. Shakxxx. Tºpºff.
ALLA'Y. m. ſ. [alloy, Fr.]
1. The metal of a baſer kind mixed in coins, to harden them,
that they may wear leſs. Gold is allayed with ſilver and cop-
per, two carats to a pound Troy; ſilver with copper only, of
which eighteen pennyweight is mixed with a pound. Cowel
thinks the allay is added, to countervail the charge of coining;
which might have been done only by making the coin leſs.
For foo's are ſtubborn in their way,
As coins are harden’d by th’ allay. Hudibras, p. iii. c. 2:
2. Anything which, being added, abates the predominant quaſi-
ties of that with which it is mingled; in the ſame manner, as
the admixture of baſer metals allay the qualities of the firſt maſs.
Dark colours eaſily ſuffer a ſenſible a ay, by little ſcattering
light. Newton's Optic{3.
3. Allay being taken from baſer metals, commonly implies ſome-
thing worſe than that with which it is mixed.
The joy has no allay of jealouſy, hope and fear. Rºſcºmmon.
All A'YER. m. ſ. [from allay.] The perſon or thing which has
the power or quality of allaying. -
Phlegm and pure blood are reputed allayers of acrimony;
and, upon that account, Avicen countermands letting blood in
cholerick bodies; becauſe he eſteems the blood a franum li is,
or a bridle of gall, obtunding its acrimony and fiérceneſs.
Harvey on Coſiºptions.
Alla'YM ENT. m. ſ. [from al’ay.] That which has the power
of allaying or abating the force of another.
If I could temporize with my affection,
Cr brew it to a weak and colder palate,
The like a'ayment would I give my grief. Shakespeare. Troilus and Cr.
AL LEGATION. m. ſ. [from a lege.]
1. Aſhrmation; declaration.
2. The thing alleged or affirmed.
Hath he not twit our ſovereign lady here
With ignominious words, though darkly coucht?
breaſts, which, upon all occaſions, will foam out .
s
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L L
A L L
As if ſhe had ſuborned ſome to ſwear - -
Falſe aligations, to o'erthrow his ſtate. Shakesp. Henry VI.
3. An excuſe ; a plea. -
I cºmitted no means in my power, to be informed of my er-
rours; and I expect not to be excuſed in any negligence on
account of youth, want of leiſure, or any other idle allegations.
Pºpe's Prºſace to his //arks.
To ALLEGE. v. a. [all gº, Lat.]
1. To affirm ; to declare; to maintain.
2. To plead as an excuſe, or produce as an argument.
Surely the preſent form of church-government is ſuch, as no
law of God, or reaſon of man, hath hitherto been alged, of
force ſufficient to prove they do ill, who, to the utmoſt of their
power, withſtand the alteration thereof. H22.Éer’s Preſce.
If we forſake the ways of grace or goodneſs, we cannot a'-
Ige any colour of ignorance, or wºnt of inſtruction ; we can-
not ſy we have not learned them, or we could not. Sprat.
He hath a clear and full view, and there is no more to be al-
lºgºd for his better information. Locke.
AL. F GFARLE. adj. [from a "rge.] That which may be alleged.
Upon this interpretation all may be ſolved, that is allegeable
againſt it. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi. c. -.
All E GEMENT. m. ſ. [from allege.] The ſame with allegation.D.
All E'G: R. n.ſ.. [from allege.] He that alleges.
Which narrative, if we may believe it as confidently as the
famous allºger of it, Pamphilio, appears to do, would ſeem to
argue, that there is, ſometimes, no other principle requiſite,
than what may reſult from the lucky mixture of the parts of
ſeveral bodies. Boy'e.
All EC1ANCE. n.ſ.. [alºgcance, Fr.] The duty of ſubjects to
the government.
I did pluck allegiance from mens hearts,
Loud ſhouts and ſalutations from their mouths,
Even in the preſence of the crowned king. Shaft. Henry IV.
We charge you on allegiance to ourſelves,
To hold your ſlaught ring hands, and keep the peace.
Shakeſpeare’s Henry VI. p. i.
The houſe of commons, to whom every day petitions are di-
rected by the ſeveral counties of England, profeſſing all allegi-
ance to them, govern abſolutely; the lords concurring, or rather
ſubmitting to whatſoever is propoſed. Carendon.
All º'GIANT. adj. [from allege.] Loyal ; conformable to the
duty of allºgiance: a word not now uſed.
For your great graces
Heap'd upon me, poor undeſerver, I
Can nothing render but allºgiant thanks,
My pray'rs to heav'n for you. Shaºff. Henry VIII.
Al Le Go's Id K. adj. [from allegory..] After the manner of an
allegory; not real; not literal.
A kingdom they portend thee; but what kingdom,
Real or a lºgarick, I diſcern not. A/iltºn's Par. 1 off, b. iv.
ALLEGo Ric AL. ad. [from allegory.] In the form of an alle-
gory; not real ; not literal ; myſtical.
When our Saviour ſaid, in an algºrical and myſtical ſenſe,
Except ye eat the fleſh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
yc have no life in you ; the hearers underſtood him literally
and groſly. Fentley's Sermons.
‘ſhe epithet of Apollo for ſhooting, is capable of two appli-
cations; one literal, in reſpect of the darts and bow, the en-
ſigns of that, god; the other algorica', in regard to the rays of
the ſun. Pope's Prºfice to Iiad.
All Ego Rica LLY. adv. [from all gory..] After an allegorical
In all ſher.
Virgil often makes Iris the meſſenger of Juno, allegorically
taken for the air. Prºclaim on Drawing.
The place is to be underſtood allegorically ; and what is thus
ſpoken by a Phaeacian with wiſdom, is, by the Poet, applied
to the goddeſs of it. Pºpe's Odyſ' y, b. viii. notes.
A LLEGo Ric ALNEss. n.ſ.. [from allegorica'.] The quality of be-
ing allegorical. ić?.
To A', i.EGoR 17 E. v. a. [from allegory..] To turn into allegory;
to form an allegory; to take in a ſenſe not literal. -
He bath very wittily alegorized this tree, allowing his ſup- -
poſition of the tree itſelf to be true. Ra'eigh's Hiſtory.
As ſome would algorize theſe ſigns, which we noted before ;
ſo others would confine them to the deſtruction of Jeruſalem.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
An alchymiſt ſhall reduce divinity to the maxims of his labo-
ratory, explain morality by ſal, ſulphur, and mercury; and al-
legorize the ſcripture itſelf, and the ſacred myſterics thereof into
the philoſopher's ſtone. Locke.
A'L LEGORY.. n.ſ. [3xxº~..] A figurative diſcourſe, in
which ſomething other is intended, than is contained in the
words literally taken; as, weath is the daughter ºf di.igence, and
the parent ºf authºrity. -
Neithcr muſt we draw cut our a 'gory too long, left either
we make ourſelves obſcure, or fall into affectation, which is
childiſh. Ben. johnſºn's Diſcovery.
This word nympha meant nothing elſe but, by allegory, the
vegetative humour or moiſture that quickeneth and giveth life
to trees and flowers, whereby they grow. Peacham.
ALLE GRſ), n.ſ. A word, denoting one of the ſix diſtinétions
of time. It expreſſes a ſprightly motion, the quickeſt of all,
except Preſto. It originally means gay, as in Miltºn.
ALLELU 7AH. n.ſ. [This word is falſely written for Hallelu-
jah, ºn and nº. J A word of ſpiritual exultation, uſed in
hymns; it ſignifies, Praiſe God.
He will ſet his tongue to thoſe pious divine ſtrains, which
may be a proper praeludium to thoſe alleluja's he hopes eter-
nally to ſing. Gºvernment of the Tongue.
4LLEA/ANDE. m. ſ. [Ital.] A grave kind of muſick. Dià.
To ALLEV IATE. v. a. ſalvº, Lat.]
I. To make light ; to eaſe; to ſoften.
Moſt of the diſtempers are the effects of abuſed plenty and
luxury, and muſt not be charged upon our Maker; who, not-
withſtanding, hath provided excellent medicines, to a leviate
thoſe evils which we bring upon ourſelves. Bentley’s Sermons.
2. º extenuate, or ſoften ; as, he alleviates his fault by an ex-
Cl11e.
ALLE VIA'TION. n.ſ.. [from alleviate.]
1. The act of making light; of allaying, or extenuating.
All apologies for, and a leviatiºns of faults, though they are
the heights of humanity, yet they are not the favours, but the
duties of friendſhip. South’s Sermons.
2. That by which any pain is eaſed, or fault extenuated.
This loſs of one fifth of their debts and income will fit heavy
on them, who ſhall feel it, without the alleviation of any profit:
Lºcke.
A'LLEY. n.ſ.. [allº, Fr.]
I. A walk in a garden.
And all within were walks and alley; wide,
With footing worn, and leading inward far. Fairy Queen.
It is common from experience, that where allºys are cloſe
gravelled, the earth putteth forth the firſt year knotgraſs, and
after ſpiregraſs. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory, N° 565.
Yonder alleys green,
Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown. Parad. Iºff.
Come, my fair love, our morning's taſk we loſe ;
Some labour ev'n the eaſieſt life would chooſe:
Qurs is not great: the danglingbows to crop,
Whoſe too luxuriant growth our alleys ſtop. Dryden.
The thriving plants, ignoble broomſticks made,
Now ſweep thoſe alley; they were born to ſhade. Pope.
2. A paſſage in towns narrower than a ſtreet.
A back friend, a ſhoulder clapper, one that commands
The paſſages of allºys, creeks, and narrow lands.
Shakeſp. Comedy of Erreurs.
ALLI'AN.cf. m. ſ. [aliance, Fr.]
1. The ſtate of connection with another by confederacy; a
league. In this ſenſe, our hiſtories of Queen Anne mention
the grand alliance.
2. Relation by marriage.
A bloody Hymen ſhall th’ alliance join
Betwixt the Trojan and th’ Auſonian line. Dryden’s Freid.
3. Relation by any form of kindred.
For my father's ſake,
In honour of a true Plantagenet,
And, for alliance' ſake, declare the cauſe
My father loſt his head. Shaºff. Henry VI. p. i.
4. The ağt of forming or contračting relation to ano her; the act
of making a confederacy.
Dorſet, your ſon, that with a fearful ſoul
Leads diſcontented ſteps in foreign ſoil,
This fair alliance quickly ſhall call home
To high promotions. Shakespeare Richard III.
Adraſtus ſoon, with gods averſe, ſhall join
In dire alliance with the Theban line;
Thence ſtrife ſhall riſe, and mortal war ſucceed. Pope.
5. The perſons allied to each other.
I would not boaſt the greatneſs of my father,
But point out new alliances to Cato. Addison's Cato.
ALLI'cIEN cy. n.ſ.. [alicio, Lat. to entice or draw.] The power
of attracting any thing; magnetiſm; attraction.
The feigned central alliciency is but a word, and the manner
of it ſtill occult. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
To ALLIGATE. v. a. [alligo, Lat..] To tie one thing to
another; to unite.
ALLIGATION. m. ſ. [from alligate.]
1. The ačt of tying together; the ſtate of being ſo tied.
2. The arithmetical rule that teaches to adjuſt the price of com-
pounds, formed of ſeveral ingredients of different value.
ALLIGA"toR. m. ſ. The crocodile. This name is chiefly uſed
for the crocodile of America, between which, and that of A-
frica, naturaliſts have laid down this difference, that one moves
the upper, and the other the lower jaw ; but this is now known
to be chimerical, the lower jaw being equally moved by both.
See CRocodiLE. -
In his needy ſhop a tortoiſe hung,
An alligator ſtuff’d, and other skins
Of ill-ſhap'd fiſhes. Shakespeare, Romeo and ja'ist.
Aloft in rows large poppy-heads were ſtrung,
And here a ſcaly alligator hung. Garth's Differſary.
A'LLIGATURE. m. ſ. [from alligate.] The link, or ligature, by
which two things are joined together. Dich.
ALL's Hos.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L L
A. L. L.
Alli'sion. n. ſ. ſalido, all ſum, Lat.] The Aét of ſtriking one
thing againſt another.
There have not been any iſlands of note, or confiderable ex-
tent, torn and caſt off from the continent by earthquakes, or
ſevered from it by the boiſterous alliſiºn of the ſea. Iſºodward.
Allocation. m. ſ. [alloc, Lat.]
1. The act of putting one thing to another.
2. The admiſſion of an article in reckoning, and addition of it
to the account.
3. An allowance made upon an account; a term uſed in the ex-
chequer. Chambers.
Allocu'tion, n. ſ. [allocutio, Lat.] The ačt of ſpeaking to
another.
Allo'DIAL. adj. [from allodium.] Held without any acknow-
ledgment of ſuperiority; not feudal; independent.
ALLO'DIUM. m. ſ. [A word of very uncertain derivation, but
moſt probably of German original.]
A poſſeſſion held in abſolute independence, without any ac-
knowledgment of a lord paramount. It is oppoſed to fee, or
feudum, which intimates ſome kind of dependance. There are
no allodial lands in England, all being held either mediately or
immediately of the king.
Allo'NG E. m. ſ. [allonge, Fr.] A paſs or thruſt with a rapier, ſo
called from the lengthening of the ſpace taken up by the fencer.
To Allo'o. v. a. [This word is generally ſpoke haloo, and is
uſed to dogs, when they are incited to the chaſe or battle; it is
commonly imagined to come from the French alons; perhaps
from all lo, look all; ſhewing the object.] To ſet on ; to incite
a dog, by crying alloo.
Alloa thy furious maſtiff; bid him vex
The noxious herd, and print upon their cars
A ſad memorial of their paſt offence. Philips.
A’lloquy. m. ſ. [alloquium, Lat.] The act of ſpeaking to an-
other; converſe; converſation. Dić7.
To A LLC'T. v. a. [from lot.]
1. To diſtribute by lot.
2. To grant.
Five days we do allot thce for proviſion,
To ſhield thee from diſaſters of the world;
And, on the ſixth, to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom. Shakespeare. King Lear.
I ſhall deſerve my fate, if I refuſe
That happy hour, which heaven allots to peace. Dryden.
3. To diſtribute; to parcel out; to give each his ſhare.
Since fame was the only end of all their new enterprizes and
ſtudies, a man cannot be too ſcrupulous in allotting them their
due portion of it.
Allo'TMENT. n.ſ.. [from allot..] That which is alloted to any
one; the part ; the ſhare; the portion granted.
There can be no thought of ſecurity or quiet in this world,
but in a reſignation to the allotments of God and nature. L’E/ir.
Though it is our duty to ſubmit with patience to more ſcanty
alºnents, yet thus much we may reaſonably and lawfully ask
of God. Rogers's Sermons.
Allo'TTERY. n.ſ.. [from allot..] That which is granted to any
particular perſon in a diſtribution. See ALLO'TMENT.
Allow me ſuch exerciſes as may become a gentleman, or give
me the poor allottery my father left me by teſtament.
Shakeſpeare, As you like it.
To AL LOW. v. a. ſal'ouer, Fr. from aláudare.]
1. To admit; as, to allow a poſition; not to contradićt; not
to oppoſe.
The principles, which all mankind allow for true, are in-
nate; thoſe, that men of right reaſon admit, are the principles
allowed by all mankind. Locke.
The pow'r of muſick all our hearts allow;
And what Timotheus was, is Dryden now. Pope's Eff. Crit.
As to what is alleged, that ſome of the Preſbyterians declared
openly againſt the king's murder, I allºw it to be true. Swift.
2. To grant; to yield; to own any one's title to.
We will not, in civility, allow too much ſincerity to the pro-
feſſions of moſt men; but think their actions to be interprèters
of their thoughts. Locke.
I will help you to enough of them, and ſhall be ready to
allºw the pope as little power here as you pleaſe. Swift.
3. To grant licence to ; to permit.
Let's follow the old earl, and get the beldam
To lead him where he would ; his roguiſh madneſs
Allºws itſelf to any thing. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
But as we were allowed of God to be put in truſt with the
goſpel, even ſo we ſpeak, not as pleaſing men, but God, which
trieth our hearts. 1 Theſſ. ii. 4.
They referred all laws, that were to be paſſed in Ireland, to
be confidered, corrected and allowed firſt by the ſtate of Eng-
land. Sir jo: Davies on Ireland.
4. To give a ſančtion to ; to authorize.
There is no ſlander in an allow'd fool. Shakespeare. Tw. Night.
5. To give to ; to pay to.
Ungrateful then! if we no tears allow
...To him that gave us peace and empire too. Waller.
6. To appoint for; to ſet out to a certain uſe ; as, he allowed his
ſon the third part of his income.
Vol. I.
Tatler, N° 81.
7. To make abatement, or proviſion; or to ſettle anything, with
ſome conceſſions or cautions, regarding ſomething clie.
If we conſider the different occaſions of ancient and modern
medals, we ſhall find they both agree in recording the great ac-
tions and ſucceſſes in wār; allowing ſtill for the different ways
of making it, and the circumſtances that attended it. Addiſon.
ALLow A5 E. adj. [from allow.]
1. That which may be admitted without contradićtion.
It is not alºlº, what is obſervable in many pieces of Ra-
Phael, where Magdalen is repreſerted, before our Saviour,
waſhing his fect, on her knees; which will not confiſt with the
text. Brown's jºugar Errours.
2. That which is permitted or licenſed; lawful; not forbidden.
In actions of this ſort, the very light of nature alone may
diſcover that which is ſo far forth in the fight of God allowſ.
able. Hooker, b. ii. § 8.
I was, by the freedom allºwable among friends, tempted to
vent my thoughts with negligence.
Reputation becomes a ſignal and a very peculiar bleſfing to
magiſtrates; and their purſuit of it is not only allºwable, but
laudable. Atterbury's Sermons.
Al Low ABLENEss. n.f. [from allowable.] The quality of be-
ing allowable; lawfulneſs; exemption from prohibition.
I cannot think myſelf engaged to diſcourſe of lots, as to their
nature, uſe, and allowableneſs, in matters of recreation; which
is indeed impugned by ſome, though better defended by others.
South's Sermons.
ALLo'w ANCE. m. ſ. [from allow.]
1. Admiſſion without contradićtion.
Without the notion and allowance of ſpirits, our philoſophy
will be lame and defective in one main part of it. Locke.
2. Sanétion ; licence; authority.
That which wiſdom did firſt begin, and hath been with good
men long continued, challengeth allowance of them that ſuc-
ceed, although it plead for itſelf nothing. Hooker, b. v. § 7.
You ſent a large commiſſion -
To Gregory de Caſſado, to conclude, -
Without the king's will, or the ſtate's allowance,
A league between his highneſs and Ferrara. Shakespeare HenryVIII.
3. Permiſſion; freedom from reſtraint.
They ſhould therefore be accuſtomed betimes to conſult and
make uſe of their reaſon, before they give allowance to their
inclinations. - Locke.
4. A ſettled rate; or appointment for any uſe.
The vićtual in plantations ought to be expended almoſt as
in a beſieged town; that is, with certain allºwance. Bacon.
And his allowance was a continual allowance given him of the
king; a daily rate for every day all his life. 2 Kings, xxv. 30.
. Abatement from the ſtrićt rigour of a law, or demand.
The whole poem, though written in that which they call
heroick verſe, is of the Pindarick nature, as well in the thought
as the expreſſion; and, as ſuch, requires the ſame grains of al-
lowance for it. Dryden.
Parents never give allowances for an innocent paſſion. Swift.
6. Eſtabliſhed character; reputation.
His bark is ſtoutly timber'd, and his pilot
Of very expert and approved allowance;
Therefore my hopes, not ſurfeited to death,
Stand in bold awe.
ALLo'y. m. ſ. [See ALLAY.]
1. Baſer metal mixed in coinage. -
That preciſe weight and fineneſs, by law appropriated to the
picces of each denomination, is called the ſtandard. Fine filver
is ſilver without the mixture of any baſer metal. Alloy is baſer
metal mixed with it. Locke.
For let another piece be coined of the ſame weight, wherein
half the ſilver is taken out, and copper, or other alloy, put into
the place, every one knows it will be worth but half as much;
for the value of the alloy is ſo inconſiderable as not to be rec-
koned. Lockr.
2. Abatement; diminution.
The pleaſures of ſenſe are probably reliſhed by beaſts in a
more exquiſite degree, than they are by men; for they taſte
them ſincere and pure always, without mixture or alloy.
- Atterbury's Sermons.
ALLUBE'scENCY. m. ſ. [al]ubeſcentia, Lat.] Willingneſs; con-
tent. Dići.
To ALLUDE. v. n ſalud, Lat.] To have ſome reference
to a thing, without the direct mention of it; to hint at ; to
infinuate. It is uſed of perſons; as, he alludes to an old ſtory;
or of things, as, the lampoon alludes to his mºther's faults.
Theſe ſpeeches of Jerom and Chryſoſtom do ſeem plainly to
allude unto ſuch miniſterial garments as were then in uſe.
Hooker, b. v. § 20.
True it is, that many things of this nature be alluded unto,
yea, many things declared. Hozier, b. iv. § 2.
Then juſt proportions were taken, and every thing placed b.
weight and meaſure : and this I doubt not was that artificial
ſtructure here aired a to. Burict's Theory of the Earth.
A, Lº'M INok. ::. ſ. ſaſhºnºr, Fr. to light.] One who colours Or
paints upon paper ºr parchment; becauſe he gives graces, light
an ornament, to the letters or figures coloured. Cow-l/.
R T2
Shakeſp. Othello.
Boyle on the Scriptures.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L L
To ALLURE. v. a. ſleurrer, Fr. koren, Dutch, belienen, Sax.]
To entice to any thing whether good or bad; to draw towards
any thing by enticement. -
Unto laws that men make for the benefit of men, it hath
ſeemed always needful to add rewards, which may more allºre
unto good, than any hardneſs deterreth from it, and puniſh-
ments, which may more deter from evil, than any ſweetneſs
thereto allureth. Hooker, b. i. p. 28.
Above them all
The golded ſun, in ſplendour likeſ heav'n,
Alur’d his eye. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii. 1.572.
Each flatt’ring hope, and each alluring joy. Lyttleton.
Allu'R.E. n.ſ.. [from the verb allure.] Something ſet up to en-
tice birds, or other things, to it. We now write ſure.
The rather to train them to his allure, he told them both
often, and with a vehement voice, how they were over-topped
and trodden down by gentlemen. Sir John Hayward.
Allu'REMENT. m. ſ. [from allure.]
That which allures, or has the force of alluring: enticement;
temptation of pleaſure.
Againſt allurement, cuſtom, and a world
Offended; fearleſs of reproach, and ſcorn,
Or violence. Milton's Parad'ſ Loft, b. xi.
Adam, by his wife's allurement, fell. Par. Rºg. b. ii.
To ſhun th' al urement is not hard
To minds reſolv'd, forewarn'd, and well prepar'd ;
But wond’rous difficult, when cnce beſet,
To ſtruggle through the ſtraits, and break th’ involving net.
Dryden.
Allu'RER. m.ſ.. [from allure.] The perſon that allures; en-
ticer; enveigler.
Allu'RING LY. adv. [from allure.] In an alluring manner;
enticingly.
Allu RINóN Ess. n. ſ. [from alluring.] The quality of allur-
ing or enticing; incitation; temptation by propoſing plea-
ſure.
Allu'sion. m. ſ. [aluſio, Lat..] That which is ſpoken with re-
ference to ſomething ſuppoſed to be already known, and there-
fore not expreſſed; a hint; an implication, it has the par-
ticle to.
Here are manifeſt alluſions and footſteps of the diſſolution of
the earth, as it was in the deluge, and will be in its laſt ruin.
- Burnet's Theory.
This laſt alluſion gall'd the Panther more,
Becauſe indeed it rubb’d upon the ſore. Dryden.
Expreſſions now out of uſe, alluſions to cuſtoms loſt to us,
and various particularitics, muſt needs continue ſeveral paſſages
in the dark. Locke's Eſſay on St. Paul's Epiſtles.
ALLU'sive. adj. [alludo, alluſum, Lat..] Hinting at ſomething
not fully expreſſed.
Where the expreſſion in one place is plain, and the ſenſe af-
fixed to it agreeable to the proper force of the words, and no
negative objection requires us to depart from it; and the ex-
preſſion, in the other, is figurative or alluſive, and the doctrine,
deduced from it, liable to great objections; it is reaſonable, in
this latter place, to reſtrain the extent of the figure and alluſion,
to a conſiſtency with the former. Rogers's Sermons.
All U's v F LY. adv. [from alluſive..] In an alluſive manner;
by implication; by infinuation.
The Jewiſh nation, that reječted and crucified him, within
the compaſs of one generation, were, according to his predic-
tion, deſtroyed by the Romans, and preyed upon by thoſe ea-
gles, (Matt. xxiv. 28.) by which, alluſively, are noted the Ro-
man armies, whoſe enſign was the eagle. Hammond's Pr. Cat.
Allu's 1 v EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from aluſive.] The quality of being al-
luſive. - -
Allu'vion. m. ſ. [alluvio, Lat.]
1. The carrying of any thing to ſomething elſe by the motion of
the water.
2. The thing carried by water to ſomething elſe.
The civil law gives the owner of land a right to that increaſe
which ariſes from alluvion, which is defined an inſenſible in-
crement, brought by the water.
Allu'vious. adj. [from alluvion.] That which is carried by
water to another place, and lodged upon ſomething elſe.
To ALLY. v. a. [allier, Fr.]
1. To unite by kindred, friendſhip, or confederacy.
All theſe ſepts are allied to the inhabitants of the North, ſo
as there is no hope that they will ever ſerve faithfully againſt
them. Spenſºr on Ireland.
Wants, frailties, paſſions, cloſer ſtill aſy
The common int’reſt, or endear the tye. Pope's Eff on Man.
To the ſun ally'd,
From him they draw the animating fire. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. To make a relation between two things, by ſimilitude, or re-
ſemblance, or any other means.
Two lines I cannot excuſe: they are indeed remotely alied
to Virgil's ſenſe; but they are too like the tenderneſs of Ovid.
Dryden.
ALLY. . ſ. [allie, Fr.] One united by ſome means of con-
nexion ; as marriage; friendſhip; confederacy.
We could hinder the acceſſion of Holland to France, either as
ſubjects, with great immunities for the encouragement of trade,
or as an inferiour and dependent ally under their protection.
Temple.
Aſ MACANTAR. m. ſ. [An Arabick word, written variouſly by
various authours; by D'Herbelot, alºocantar; by others, al-
mucantar.] A circle drawn parallel to the horizon. It is ge-
nerally uſed in the plural, and means a ſeries of parallel circles
drawn through the ſeveral degrees of the meridian.
ALM A cA'N TAR’s ST A F F. m. ſ. An inſtrument commonly
made of pear-tree or box, with an arch of fifteen degrees, uſed
to take obſervations of the ſun, about the time of its riſing and
ſetting, in order to find the amplitude, and conſequently the Wa-
riation of the compaſs. err,
ALMANACK, n.ſ. [Derived, by ſome, from the Arabick, a, and
manah, Heb. to count, or compute; but others, from al, Arabick,
and *, a month, or gºax?:, the courſe of the months; by others,
from a Teutonick original, al and maan, the moon, an account of
every moon, or month: all of them are probable.]
A calendar; a book in which the revolutions of the ſeaſons,
with the return of feaſts and faſts, is noted for the enſuing
C..ſ. -
It will be ſaid, this is an almanack for the old year; all hath
been well; Spain hath not affailed this kingdom. Bacon.
This aſtrologer made his a manack give a tolerable account of
the weather, by a direct inverſion of the common prognoſtica-
to IS. Government ºf the Tongue.
Beware the woman too, and ſhun her ſight,
Who in theſe ſtudies does herſelf delight;
By whom a greaſy almanacé is born,
With often handling like chaft amber worn. Dryd, juvenal.
I'll have a faſting almanack printed on purpoſe for her uſe.
Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
A LMANDINE, n. ſ. [Fr. a mandira, Ital.] A ruby coarſer
and lighter than the oriental, and nearer the colour of the gra-
nate. - Diſt.
ALMI'ght IN ess. m. ſ. [from a mighty.] Unlimited power;
omnipotence; one of the attributes of G, d.
It ſerveth to the world for a witneſs of his a mightineſ, whom
we outwardly honour with the chiefeſt of outward things.
H.&amp;#er, b. v. § 15.
In creating and making exiſtent the world univerſal, by the
abſolute act of his own word, his power and almightineſs.
Sir J/alter Raleigh.
In the wilderneſs, the bittern and the ſtork, the unicorn and
the elk, live upon his proviſions, and revere his power, and feel
the force of his alºnightineſ. Taylor's Rue of hoy ſiving.
ALMi'ghty, adj. [from all and mighty.] Of unlimited power;
omnipotent.
The Lord appeared unto Abram, and ſaid unto him, I am
the almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect.
Genºſis, xvii. 1.
He wills you in the name of God angly,
That you diveſt yourſelf, and lay apart
The borrow'd glories, that, by gift of heav'n,
By law of nature and of nations lon
To him and to his heirs. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
A'i Mon D. n.ſ.. [amand, Fr. derived by Menage from anandala,
a word in low Latin ; by others, from Alemand, a German;
ſuppoſing that almonds come to France from Germany.]
The nut of the almond tree, either ſweet or bitter.
Pound an almond, and the clear white colour will be altered
into a dirty one, and the ſwect taſte into an oily one. Locke.
A'LMoSD TREE. n.ſ.. [amºgdalus, Lat.]
It has leaves and flowers very like thoſe of the peach tree, but
the fruit is longer and more compreſſed ; the outer green coat
is thinner and drier when ripe, and the ſhell is not ſo rugged.
The ſpecies are, 1. The common large almºnd. 2. The
ſweet a mond, with tender ſhells. 3. The bitter almond. 4. The
white flowering almond.
The three firſt ſorts are chiefly cultivated in England, for the
beauty of their flowers; and the firſt ſort yields large quantities
of fruit yearly, little inferiour to what we receive from abroad,
if not kept too long. They are propagated in July, by ino-
culating a bud into a plum ſtock, for wet ground, or an almond
or peach ſtock for dry. The fourth is a greater curioſity; it
will not ſucceed on a plum, but muſt be budded on a peach or
a'mond. Millar.
Like to an almond tree, you're mounted high
On top of green Selinis, all alone,
With bloſſoms brave bedecked daintily,
Whoſe tender locks do tremble every one,
At every little breath that under heav'n is blown. Fairy 3.
Mark well the flow'ring almonds in the wood,
If od’rous blooms the bearing branches load,
The glebe will anſwer to the ſylvan reign;
Great heats will follow, and large crops of grain. Dryden.
A'LMoN Ds of THE THROAT, or ſons ILs, called improperly
Amonds ºf the cars; are two round glands placed on the fides of
the baſis of the tongue, under the common membrane of the
ſauces ; each of them has a large oval ſinus, which opens into
the fauces, and in it are a great number of leſſºr ones, which
diſcharge themſelves through the great ſinus of a mucous and
the
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L M
A L O
ſlippery matter into the fauces, larynx, and ceſophagus, for the
moiſtening and lubricating thoſe parts. When the ceſophagus
muſcle acts, it compreſſes the almonds, and they frequently are
the occaſion of a ſore throat. - &amp;tiny.
The tonſils, or Almonds of the Ears, are alſo frequently ſwell-
ed in the king's evil; which tumour may be very well reckon-
ed a ſpecies of it. //?ſeman's Surgery.
A'LMon c-FURNAce, or A'i. MAN-FURN Ace, called alſo the
Sweep, is a peculiar kind of furnace uſed in refining, to ſeparate
metals from cinders and other foreign ſubſtances. Chambers.
A'LMon ER, or ALMNER. m. ſ. [eleemoſynarius, Lat.] The officer
of a prince, or other perſon, employed in the diſtribution of
charity.
I enquired among the Jacobins for an almoner; and the ge-
neral fame has pointed out your reverence as the worthieſt
In all. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
A'LMonry. n.ſ.. [from almoner.] The place where the almoner
reſides, or where the alms are diſtributed.
AlMo'st. adv. [from all and moſt ; that is, moſt part of all.
Skinner.] Nearly; well nigh; in the next degree to the whole,
or to univerſality. -
Who is there almoſt, whoſe mind, at ſome time or other,
love or anger, fear or grief, has not ſo faſtened to ſome clog,
that it could not turn itſelf to any other objećt. Locke.
There can be no ſuch thing or notion, as an almoſt infinite;
there can be nothing next or ſecond to an omnipotent God.
Bentley's Sermons.
Atlas becomes unequal to his freight,
And almºſt faints beneath the glowing weight. Addison Ovid.
ALMS. m. ſ. [in Saxon, elmer, from eleemoſyna, Lat.] What
is given gratuitouſly in relief of the poor. It has no ſingular.
My arm'd knees,
Which bow’d but in my ſtirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The poor beggar hath a juſt demand of an alms from the rich
man; who is guilty of fraud, injuſtice and oppreſſion, if he does
not afford relief according to his abilities. Swift.
Alms-BAsket. n.ſ.. [from alms and basket.] The basket in
which proviſions are put to be given away.
There ſweepings do as well,
As the beſt order'd meal;
For who the reliſh of theſe gueſts will fit,
Needs ſet them but the alms-basket of wit. i.
We'll ſtand up for our properties, was the beggar's ſong that
lived upon the alms-basket. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Alaisdeep. n.ſ.. [from alms and deed.] An act of charity; a cha-
ritable gift.
This woman was full of good works, and almsdeeds which
ſhe did. Aéïs, ix. 36.
Hard favour’d Richard, where art thou ?
Thou art not here: murder is thy almsdeed;
Petitioner for blood thou ne'er put'ſt back.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
ALMs-GIvº R. m. ſ. [from a'ms and giver.] He that gives alms;
he that ſupports others by his charity.
He built and endowed many religious foundations, beſides his
memorable hoſpital of the Savoy. And yet was he a great
alms-giver in ſecret, which ſhewed that his works in publick
were dedicated rather to God's glory than his own. Bacon.
ALMsHouse. n.ſ.. [from alms and houſe..] A houſe devoted to
the reception and ſupport of the poor; an hoſpital for the poor.
The way of providing for the clergy by tithes, the device of
almshouſes for the poor, and the ſorting out of the people into
their ſeveral pariſhes, are manifeſt unto men of underſtanding.
Hooker’s Preface.
And to relief of lazars, and weak age
Of indigent faint ſouls, paſt corporal toil,
A hundred almshouſes right well ſupplied. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Many penitents, after the robbing of temples, and other vio-
lences of rapine, build an hoſpital, or ſome alms-houſe, out of
the ruins of the church, and the ſpoils of widows and orphans.
L'Eſtrange's Fables.
Behold yon almshouſe, neat, but void of ſtate,
Where age and want ſit ſmiling at the gate. Pope.
Al Ms MAN. m. ſ. [from alms and man.] A man who lives upon
alms; who is ſupported by charity.
I'll give my jewels for a ſet of beads;
My gorgeous palace, for a hermitage;
My gay apparel for an almsman's gown. , Shakeſp. Rich. II.
A'LMUG-TRE E. m. ſ. A tree mentioned in ſcripture.
Of its wood were made muſical inſtruments, and it was uſed
alſo in rails, or in a ſtaircaſe. The Rabbins generally render
it coral, others ebony, brazil, or pine. In the Septuagint it is
tranſlated wrought wood, and in the Vulgate, Ligna Thyina. But
coral could never anſwer the purpoſes of the almugim ; the
pine-tree is too common in Judea to be imported from Ophir;
and the Thyinum, or citron-tree, much eſteemed by the an-
cients for its fragrance and beauty, came from Mauritania. By
the wood almugim, or angumim, or, ſimply, gummim, taking al
for a kind of article, may be underſtood oily and gummy ſorts
of wood, and particularly the trees which produce gum ammo-
niac, or gum arabick; and is, perhaps, the ſame with the Shit-
tim wood mentioned by Moſes. Calmet.
And the navy alſo of Hiram that brought gold from Ophir,
brought in from Ophir great plenty of almig-trees and precious
trees. 1 Kings, x. 11.
A'LNAGAR, A'LNAGIR, or ALNEGER. m. ſ. [from anage.] .
A meaſurer by the ell; a ſworn officer, whoſe buſineſ for-
merly was to inſpect the aſſize of woollen cloth, and to fix the
ſeals appointed upon it for that purpoſe; but there are now
three officers belonging to the regulation of cloth-manufactures,
the ſearcher, meaſurer, and almºger. Dic.
A'LNAGE. m.ſ.. [from au'nage, or aunage, Fr.] Ell-meaſure, or
rather the meaſuring by the cli or yard. Dić7.
A'LNIGHT. m. ſ. [from all and night.]
There is a ſervice which they call alight, which is a great
cake of wax, with the wick in the midſt; whereby it cometh
to paſs, that the wick fetcheth the nouriſhment farthcroff.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 372.
A'LOES... n.ſ. ſºns, as it is ſuppoſed.] A term applied to
three different things.
1. A precious wood uſed, in the Eaſt, for perfumes, of which the
beſt ſort is of higher price than gold, and was the moſt valu-
able preſent given by the king of Siam, in 1686, to the king of
France. It is called Tanilac, and is the heart, or innermoſt
part, of the aloetree; the next part to which is called Calem-
bac, which is ſometimes imported into Europe, and, though of
inferiour value to the Tanilac, is much eſteemed : the part next
the bark is termed, by the Portugueſe, Pao d'aquila, or eagle-
wood; but ſome account the eagle-wood not the outer part of
the Tambac, but another ſpecies. Our knowledge of this wood
is yet very imperfeót. Savary.
2. Aloes is a tree which grows in hot countries, and even in the
mountains of Spain.
The leaves are thick, ſucculent, and generally beſet with
ſpines on the edges; the flower conſiſts of one leaf, is tubulous,
and cut into ſix ſegments at the top, like the hyacinth ; the
fruit is oblong and cylindrical, divided into three cells, con-
taining flat, and, for the moſt part, ſemicircular ſeeds.
The ſpecies are 39; 1. The common large American alse.
2. The narrow-leaved aloe, from Vera Cruz. 3. The American
aloe, which produces young plants out of the flower ſtems, &amp;c.
Many of theſe plants, in Engliſh gardens, are natives of the
Eaſt and Weſt Indies; but the moſt curious are brought from
the Cape of Good Hope.
The firſt of theſe aloes is very hardy, and has endured the air,
in mild winters, in a very dry ſoil, and under a ſouth wall; but
they may be kept in a common greenhouſe, giving them very
little moiſture in winter. The other ſorts are preſerved in an
º a ſtove. Thealoes are all increaſed by off-ſets.
oſt of the African ſpecies, after the ſecond, third, or fourth
year's growth, produce flowers with us annually; but the Ame-
rican aloes flower but once during the life of the plant, pro-
ducing the flower-ſtems from the centre of the plant, of a con-
ſiderable ſize, and ſometimes fifteen feet in height.
A common error, relating to the firſt ſpecies, is, that it never
flowers till it be an hundred years old; but experience has
proved, that ſome have flowered in fifty years. Another er-
rour is, that, when the flower opens, it makes a report like a
gun. Millar.
3. Aloes is a medicinal juice extracted not from the odoriferous,
but the common aloes tree, by cutting the leaves, and expoſing
the juice that drops from them to the ſun. It is diſtinguiſhed
into Socotorine and and Caballine, or horſe aloes; the firſt is ſo
called from Socotora; the ſecond, becauſe, being coarſer, it ought
to be confined to the uſe of farriers. It is a warm and ſtrong
cathartick, and uſed in moſt purgative compoſitions.
Aloe"Tical. adj. [from aloes.] Conſiſting chiefly of aloes.
It may be excited by aloetical, ſcammoniate, or acrimonious
medicines. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Alo'etick. n.ſ.. [from aloes.] Any medicine is ſo called, which
chiefly conſiſts of aloes. 9:tincy.
Alo'ft. adv. [leffter, to lift up, Dan. Loft air, Icelandiſh; ſo that
aloft is, into the air.] On high; above; in the air: a word
uſed chiefly in poetry.
For ł. read in ſtories oft,
That love has wings, and ſoars aloft. Suckling.
Upright he ſtood, and bore aloft his ſhield,
Conſpicuous from afar, and overlook'd the field. Dryd. Fab.
Al'of T. prep. Above.
The great luminary
Aloft the vulgar conſtellations thick,
That from his lordly eye keep diſtance due,
Diſpenſes light from far. Mihon's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii.
A'.og Y. m. ſ. […yº...] Unreaſonableneſs; abſurdity. Dić?.
Alo'N F. adj. [allºn, Dutch ; from al and een, or one, that is, ſingle.]
1. Without another.
The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;
Betwixt ourſelves let us decide it then. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
If by a mortal hand my father's throne
Could be defended, 'twas by mine alone. Dryden, £reidii.
God, by whoſe alone power and conſervation, we all live,
and move, and have our being. Bentley.
2. Without company; ſolitary.
Eagles we ſee fly alºne, and they are but ſheep which always
herd together. Sidney, $. i.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L O
A L T
Alone, for other creature in this place
Living, or lifeleſs, to be found was none. Paradºſ Lºft.
I never durſt in darkneſs be alºne. Dryden's Ind. Emp.
Alo'N E. adv. -
1. This word is ſeldom uſed but with the word let, if even then
it be an adverb, and implies ſometimes an ironical prohibition,
to help a man who is able to manage the affair himſelf.
Let us alone to guard Corioli,
If they ſet down before's; 'fore they remove,
Bring up your army. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Let you alone, cunning artificer;
See how his gorget peers above his gown,
To tell the people in what danger he was. Ben. Johnſ. Catil.
2. To let alone; to forbear; to leave unfiniſhed.
His clicnt ſtole it, but he had better have let it alone; for he
loſt his cauſe by his jeſt. Addison. Speciator, N° 4cö.
Alo'NG. adv. [au longue, Fr.]
1. At length.
Some rowl a mighty ſtone; ſome laid along,
And, bound with burning wires, on ſpokes of wheelsare hung.
Dryden, AEacid vi.
2. Through any ſpace meaſured lengthwiſe.
A firebrand carried alºng, leaveth a train of light behind it.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 274.
Where Ufens glides along the lowly lands,
Or the black water of Pomptina ſtands. Dryd. Æneid vii.
3. Throughout; in the whole; with all prefixed.
They were all along a croſs, untoward fort of people. South.
Solomon, all along in his Proverbs, gives the title of fool to a
wicked man. Tillºtſºn.
4. Joined with the particle with; in company; joined with.
1 your commiſſion will forthwith diſpatch,
And he to England ſhall along with you. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Hence then and Evil go with thee along,
Thy offspring, to the place of evil, Hell;
Thou and thy wicked crew Milton's Par. Loft, b. vi.
Religious zeal is ſubject to an exceſs, and to a defect, when
ſomething is mingled with it, which it ſhould not have; or when
it wants ſomething that ought to go along with it. Sprat.
5. Sometimes with is underſtood.
Command thy ſlaves: my free-born ſoul diſdains
A tyrant's curb ; and reſtive breaks the reins.
Take this along; and no diſpute ſhall riſe
(Though mine the woman) for my raviſh'd prize.
6. Forward; onward.
French. -
Come then, my friend, my genius, come along, -
Thou maſter of the poet and the ſong. Pope.
Alo's GST. adv. [a corruption, as it ſeems, from along..] Along;
through the length.
The Turks did keep ſtrait watch and ward in all their ports
thereabout alongſt the ſea-coaſt. Knolles's Hi/l. of the Turks.
Alo'of. adv. [all off, that is, quite ºff.]
1. At a diſtance; with the particle from. It generally implies a
ſmall diſtance, ſuch as is within view or obſervation.
Then bad the knight this lady yede aloof,
And to an hill herſelf withdrew aſide,
From whence ſhe might behold the battle's proof,
And elſe be ſafe from danger far deſcried. Fairy Qi.een, i. i.
As next in worth,
Came ſingly where he ſtood, on the bare ſtrand,
While the promiſcuous croud ſtood yet alººf. Parad. Lºft.
The noiſe approaches, though our palace ſtood
Alcoffrom ſtreets, encompaſs'd with a wood. Dryden.
2. Applicd to perſons, it often inſinuates caution and circumſpec-
tl Oil.
Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of ſteel,
And make the cowards ſtand-clºf at bay. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Going northwards, aloof, as long as they had any doubt of
being purſued, at laſt when they were out of reach, they turned
and croſſed the ocean to Spain. Bacon.
The king would not, by any means, enter the city, until he
had aloºf ſeen the croſs ſet up upon the greater tower of Gra-
nada, whereby it became Chriſtian ground. Bacon’s Hon. VII.
Two pots ſtood by a river, one of braſs, the other of clay.
The water carried them away; the earthen veſſel kept alººf
from t'other. L'Eſtrange's Pales.
The ſtrong may fight aloºf; Ancaeus try’d
His force too near, and by preſuming dy’d. Dryd. Falks.
3. In a figurative ſenſe, it is uſed to import art or cunning in con-
verſation, by which a man holds the principal queſtion at a diſ-
tance.
Nor do we find him forward to be ſounded;
But with a crafty madneſs keeps º
When we would bring him on to ſome confeſſion
Of his true ſtate. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
4. * uſed metaphorically of perſons that will not be ſeen in a
ciign.
It is neceſſary the queen join ; for, if ſhe ſtand aloof, there
will be ſtill ſuſpicions: it being a received opinion in the world,
that ſhe hath a great intereſt in the king's favour and power.
3 - Suckling.
Dryden.
In this ſenſe it is derived from allºns,
5. It is applied to things not properly belonging to each other.
Love's not love,
When it is mingled with regard: that fland
Aoºſ from th entire point. Shakespeare. King Lear.
Alou o adv. [from a and lºv'." Loudly; with a treng voice;
with a great noiſe.
Strängled he lies' y't ſeems to cry attº,
To warn the mighty, and inſtruct the proud :
That of the great, neglecting to be juſt,
Heav'n in a moment makes an heap of duſt. Jº allºr.
Then heav'n's high monarch thundred thrice alouſ,
And thrice he ſhook aloft a golden cloud. Dryd. 4: ..eid vii.
ALow. adv. [from a and low.] In a low place; not aloft.
And now alow, and now aloft they fly,
As born through air, and ſeem to touch the sky. Dryden.
A LPHA. m. ſ. 1 he firſt letter in the Greck alphabet, anſwer-
ing to our A ; therefore uſed to ſignify the firſt.
I am alpha and omega, the beginning and the ending, faith
the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to coine, the
Almighty. Revelat.
A'LPHABET. m. ſ. [from 2xca, alpha, and 3.72, beta, the two
firſt letters of the Greeks.] The order of the letters, or ele-
ments of ſpecch.
Thou ſhalt not ſigh,
Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a ſign,
But I of theſe will reſt an ahhabet,
And by ſtill practice learn to know thy meaning.
Shakeſpeare's Titus Andronicus.
The letters of the alphabet, formed by the ſeveral motions of
the mouth, and the great variety of ſyllables compoſed of let-
ters, and formed with almoſt equal velocity, and the cndleſs
number of words capable of being framed out of the alphabet,
either of more ſyllables, or of one. Holder.
Taught by their nurſes, little children get
This ſaying, ſooner than their alphabet. Dryd jun. Yºr.
To A'LPHABET. v. a. [from alphabet, noun..] To range in the
order of the alphabet. -
ALPHAB e"ric Al. Nadj. [from althalet; a hubctique, Fr.] In the
ALPHABE"Tick. ; order of the alphabet; according to the fe-
ries of letters.
I have now by me, digeſted in an aſphaletical order, all the
counties, corporations, and boroughs in Great Britain, with
their reſpective tempers. Swift.
ALPHABETIcALLY. adv. [from alphabetical.] In an alphabeti-
cal manner; according to the order of the letters.
I had once in my thoughts to contrive a grammar, more than
I can now compriſe in ſhort hints; and a dićtionary, alphabeti-
cally containing the words of the language, which the deaf per-
ſon is to learn. Holder's Elenients of Speech.
ALRE'A DY. adv. [from all and ready..] At this preſent time, or
at ſome time paſt; oppoſed to futurity; as, //, // he come ſoon 2
He is come already. J/ill it be dºne * It is done already.
Touching our uniformity, that which hath been already an-
ſwered, may ſerve for anſwer to that exception. Hocker.
You warn'd me ſtill of loving two;
Can I love him, already loving you ? 1'ryd. Indian Emp.
Sec, the guards, from yon far caſtern hill
Already move, no longer ſtay afford;
High in the air, they wave the flaming ſword,
Your ſignal to depart. Dryden's State ºf Innocence.
I confine myſelf to methods for the advancement of piety,
which are in the power of a prince limited like ours, by a ſtrict
execution of the laws already in force. Swift.
Methinks, already I your tears ſurvey,
Already hear the horrid things they ſay,
Already ſee you a degraded toaſt,
And all your honour in a whiſper loſt Pºpe.
A is, adv. [als, Dutch..] Alſo; likewiſe: a word now out of uſe.
The golden ſun his gliſtering head gan ſhew,
And ſad remembrance now the prince amoves
With freſh deſire his voyage to purſue;
Ali Una earn'd her travel to renew.
A'Lso. adv, [from all and ſo J
1. In the ſame manner; likewiſe.
In theſe two, no doubt, are contained the cauſes of the great
deluge, as according to Moſes, ſo alſo according to neceſſity ;
for our world affords no other treaſures of water. Burnet's Theo.
2. Alſo is ſometimes nearly the ſame with and, and only conjoins
the members of the ſentence.
God do ſo to me, and more alſº, I am:::cſ, xiv. 44.
A'. A R. m. ſ. ſaltare, Lat. It is obſerved by fºnius, that the
word altar is received, with chriſtianity, in all the European
languages; and that altare is uſed by one of the Fathers, as ap-
propriated to the Chriſtian worſhip, in oppoſition to the ara of
gentiiſm.]
1. The place where offerings to heaven are laid.
The goddeſs of the nuptial bed,
Tir’d with her vain devotions for the dead,
Reſolv'd the tainted hand ſhould be repelſd,
Which incenſe offer'd, and her altar held. Dryd. Fał,
2. The table in Chriſtian churches where the communion is ad-
miniſtered,
Fairy Queen, b. i.
I}er
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L T
Her grace roſe, and, with modeſt paces,
Came to the altar, where ſhe kneel'd, and, ſaintlike,
Caſt her fair eyes to heav'n, and pray'd devoutly.
- Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Alt AR Act. n.ſ.. [altaragium, Lat.] An emolument ariſing to
the prieſt from oblations, through the means of the altar.
Ayliff's Parergon.
ALTAR-cloth. n.ſ.. [from altar and cloth.] The cloth thrown
over the altar in churches.
I ſhould ſet down the wealth, books, hangings, and altar-
cloths, which our kings gave this abbey. Peacham on Drawing.
To ALT ER. v. a. [alterer, Fr. from alter, Lat.]
1. To change; to make otherwiſe than it is. To alter, ſeems more
properly to imply a change made only in ſome part of a thing;
as, to alter a writing, may be, to blot or interpolate it; to
change it, may be, to ſubſtitute another in its place.
- Do you note
How much her grace is alter'd on the ſudden
How long her face is drawn how pale ſhe looks,
And of an earthly cold 2 Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
Acts appropriated to the worſhip of God by his own ap-
pointment, muſt continue ſo, till himſelf hath otherwiſe de-
clared: for who dares alter what God hath appointed
- Stillingfleet's Defence of Diſc. on Romiſh Idºlatry.
2. To take off from a perſuaſion or ſect.
For the way of writing plays in verſe, I find it troubleſome
and ſlow; but I am no way altered from my opinion of it, at
leaſt with any reaſons which have oppoſed it. Dryden.
To ALTER. v. n. To become otherwiſe than it was ; as,
the weather alters from bright to cloudy.
Alt ERABLE. adj. [from alter; alterable, Fr.] That which may
be altered or changed by ſomething elſe; diſtinét from change-
able, or that which changes, or may change itſelf.
That alterable reſpects are realities in nature, will never be
admitted by a conſiderate diſcerner. Glanville.
Our condition in this world is mutable and uncertain, alter-
able by a thouſand accidents, which we can neither foreſee nor
reveilt. Rogers.
I wiſh they had been more clear in their direStions to him
upon that mighty point, Whether the ſettlement of the ſucceſ-
fion in the Houſe of Hanover be alterable or no Swift.
A'LTERABLE N F ss. n.ſ.. [from alterable.] The quality of being
alterable, or admitting change from external cauſes.
A'LT ERABLY. adv. [from alterable.] In ſuch a manner as may
be altered.
AlTE RANT. adj. [alterant, Fr.] That which has the power of
producing changes in any thing.
And whether the body be alterant or altered, evermore a
perception precedeth operation; for elſe all bodies would be
alike one to another. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
ALT ERA'tion. n.ſ.. [from alter; alteration, Fr.]
1. The act of altering or changing.
Alteration, though it be from worſe to better, hath in it in-
conveniencies, and thoſe weighty. Hooker.
2. The change made.
Why may we not preſume, that God doth even call for ſuch
change or alteration, as the very condition of things themſelves
doth make neceſſary. Hooker, b. ii. § 1 o.
So he, with difficulty and labour hard,
Mov’d on :
But he once paſt, ſoon after, when man fell,
Strange alteration / Sin, and death, amain
Following his track (ſuch was the will of heav'n')
Pav'd after him a broad and beaten way. Parad. Loft, b. ii.
No other alteratiºn will ſatisfy ; nor this neither, very long,
without an utter abolition of all order. South.
Appius Claudius admitted to the ſenate the ſons of thoſe who
had been ſlaves; by which, and ſucceeding alterations, that
council degenerated into a moſt corrupt body. Swift.
A'LTERATIVF. adj. [from alter.]
Medicines called alterative, are ſuch as have no immediate
ſenſible operation, but gradually gain upon the conſtitution, by
changing the humours from a ſtate of diſtemperature to health.
They are oppoſed to evacuants. 9aincy.
When there is an eruption of humour in any part, it is not
cured merely by outward applications, but by ſuch alterative
medicines as purify the blood. Government of the Tongue.
ALTER ca'TION. m. ſ. [altercation, Fr. from altercor, Lat..] De-
bate; controverſy; wrangle.
By this hot purſuit of lower controverſies amongſt men pro-
feſſing religion, and agreeing in the principal foundations there-
of, they conceive hope, that, about the higher principles them-
ſelves, time will cauſe altercation to grow. PHooker.
Their whole life was, in a manner, little elſe than a perpe-
tual wrangling and altercation; and that, many times, rather
for vićtory and oftentation of wit, than a ſober and ſerious
ſearch of truth. Hakewell on Providence.
ALTERN. adj. [alternus, Lat.] A&amp;ting by turns, in ſucceſſion
each to the other.
And God made two great lights, great for their uſe
To man; the greater to have rule by day,
The leſs by night, altern, Milton's Par. Loft, b. vii.
Vol. I.
ALTE'RNAcy. "...ſ [from alternate.] Action performed by turns. .
ALTERNATE. adj. [alternus, Lat..] Being by turns; one
after another; reciprocal.
Friendſhip conſiſts properly in mutual offices, and a generous
ſtrife in alternate acts of kindneſs. - South,
Hear how Timotheus' various lays ſurpriſe,
And bid alternate paſſions fall and riſe !
While, at each change, the ſon of Lybian Jove
Now burns with glory, and then melts with love. Pope.
ALTERNATE ANGLEs. [In geometry.] Are the internal angles
made by a line cutting two parallels, and lying on the oppoſite
ſides of the cutting line; the one below the firſt parallel, and the
other above the ſecond.
ALTERNATE RATIo, or PRoportion, is where the antecedent
of one is to its conſequent, as the antecedent of another to its
conſequent ; the very ſame ratio, in this caſe, holding alter-
nately in reſpect of the antecedents to each other, and the con-
ſequents to each other. Chambers.
ALTE'RNATE. n.ſ.. [from alternate, adj.] That which happens
alternately; viciſſitude. -
And rais'd in pleaſure, or repos'd in caſe,
Grateful alternates of ſubſtantial peace,
They bleſs the long noćturnal influence ſhed
On the crown'd goblet, and the genial bed.
To ALTE'RNATE. v. a. [alterno, Lat.]
1. To perform alternately.
Thoſe who, in their courſe,
Melodious hymns about the ſov’reign throne
Alternate all night long. Milton's Paradiſ: Loſº, b. v.
2. To change one thing for another reciprocally.
The moſt high God, in all things appertaining unto this
life, for ſundry wiſe ends, alternates the diſpoſition of good and
evil. Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. iii.
ALTE'RNATELY. adv. [from alternate.] In reciprocal ſucceſſion,
ſo that each ſhall be ſucceeded by that which it ſucceeds, as,
light follows darkneſs, and darkneſs follows light.
The princeſs Mcleſinda, bath'd in tears,
And toſs'd alternately with hopes and fears,
Would learn from you the fortunes of her lord.
Unhappy man whom ſorrow thus and rage
To different ills alternately engage. Prior.
The rays of light are, by ſome cauſe or other, alternately diſ-
poſed to be reflected or refračted for many viciſſitudes. Newton.
AlTE'RNATENEss. n.ſ.. [from alternate.] The quality of being
alternate, or of happening in reciprocal ſucceſſion. Die?.
ALTERNATION. n.ſ.. [from alternate.] The reciprocal ſucceſſion
of things. -
The one would be oppreſſed with conſtant heat, the other
with inſufferable cold; and ſo the defečt of alternation would
utterly impugn the generation of all things. Brown's Wul. Err.
Alt E'RNATIVE. m. ſ. [alternatif, Fr.] The choice given of two
things; ſo that if one be rejected, the other muſt be taken.
A ſtrange alternative
Muſt ladies have a doćtor, or a dance 2 2%ung.
ALTE'RNATIVELY. adv. [from alternative..] In alternate man-
ner; by turns; reciprocally. -
An appeal alternatively made may be tolerated by the civil
Priºr.
Dryden.
law as valid. Ayliffe's Parergon.
ALTE'RNATIve Ness. n.ſ.. [from alternative.] The quality or
ſtate of being alternative; reciprocation. Dić7.
ALTE'RNITY.. n.ſ.. [from altern..] Reciprocal ſucceſſion; vi-
ciſſitude; turn ; change of one thing for another; recipro-
cally.
fie, imagine, that an animal of the vaſteſt dimenſions, and
longeſt duration, ſhould live in a continual motion, without the
alternity and viciſſitude of reſt, whereby all other animals con-
tinue. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. viii. c. 1.
ALTHo'UGH. conj. [from all and though. See Though..] Not-
withſtanding; however it may be granted; however it may
be that.
We all know, that many things are believed, although they
be intricate, obſcure, and dark; although they exceed the reach
and capacity of our wits; yea, although in this world they be no
way poſſible to be underſtood. Hooker, b. v. § 22.
Me the gold of France did not ſeduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive
The ſooner to effect what I intended. Shakespeare ). Hon. V.
The ſtreſs muſt be laid upon a majority; without which
the laws would be of little weight, although they be good ad-
ditional ſecurities. Swift.
A'LTIGRADE. adj. [from altus and gradior, Lat.] Riſing on
high. Dić.
ALT1'Lo QUENCE. m. ſ. [altus and leguor, Lat.] High ſpeech;
pompous language.
ALT1'M ETRY. m. ſ. ſaltimetria, Lat. from altºs and wº.] The
art of taking or meaſuring altitudes or heights, whether acceſ-
ſible, or inacceſſible, generally performed by a quadrant.
ALT1'soN ANT. Nadj. [altiſºntº, Lat.] High ſounding; pom-
ALT1'sonous. } pous or lofty in ſound. Dicº,
A'LTITU D E. m. ſ. ſaltitudo, Lat.]
1. Height of place; ſpace meaſured upward.
S - Ten
t
t
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A L U
A M A
Ten maſts attach'd make not the altitude, -
Which thou haſt perpendicularly fall'n. Shakespeare King Lear.
Some define the perpendicular altitude of the higheſt Inoun-
tains to be four miles; others but fifteen furlongs. Brown.
She ſhines above, we know, but in what place,
How near the throne, and heav'n's imperial face,
By our weak opticks is but vainly gueſs'd ;
Diſtance and altitude conceal the reſt. Dryden.
2. The clevation of any of the heavenly bodies above the horizon.
Even unto the latitude of fifty-two, the efficacy thereof is not
much conſiderable, whether we conſider its aſcent, meridian,
altitude, or abode above the horizon. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Has not a poet more virtues and vices within his circle,
cannot he obſerve them and their influences in their ſeveral
ſituations, in their oppoſitions and conjunctions, in their alti-
tudes and depreſſions? Rymer’s Tragedies of laſt Age.
3. Situation with regard to lower things.
Thoſe members which are pairs, ſtand by one another in
equal altitude, and anſwer on each ſide one to another. Ray.
4. Height of excellence; ſuperiority.
Your altitude offends the eyes
Of thoſe who want the power to riſe.
The world, a willing ſtander-by,
Inclines to aid a ſpecious lye. Swift.
5. Height of degree ; higheſt point.
He did it to pleaſe his mother, and to be partly proud; which
he is, even to the altitude of his virtue. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
A TI'vo LANT. ad". [alivolans, Lat. from altus and vo.o.] High
flying. Dić7.
A'L'rog ETHER. adv. [from all and together.]
1. Completely; without reſtriction; without exception.
It is in vain to ſpeak of planting laws, and plotting policy,
till they be altogether ſubdued. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
We find not in the world any people that hath lived altoge-
ther without religion. Hooker, b. v. § 18.
If death and danger are things that really cannot be endured,
no man could ever be obliged to ſuffer for his conſcience, or to
die for his religion; it being altogether as abſurd to imagine a
man obliged to ſuffer, as to do impoſſibilities. South.
I do not altogether diſapprove of the manner of interweaving
texts of ſcripture through the ſtyle of your ſermon. Swift.
2. Conjunctly; in company. This is rather all together.
Couſin of Somerſet, join you with me,
And a together with the duke of Suffolk,
We'll quickly hoiſt duke Humphry from his ſeat.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
A LUDEL. m.ſ [from a and lutum; that is, without lute.]
Audels are ſubliming pots uſed in chemiſtry, without bottoms,
and fitted into one another, as many as there is occaſion for,
without luting. At the bottom of the furnace is a pot that holds
the matter to be ſublimed; and, at the top is a head, to retain
the flowers that riſe up. &amp;#iny.
A'LU M. m. ſ. [a'umen, Lat.]
A kind of mineral ſalt, of an acid taſte, leaving in the mouth a
ſenſe of ſweetneſs, accompanied with a conſiderable degree of
aſtringency. The ancient naturaliſts allow of two ſorts of alum,
natural and factitious. The natural is found in the iſland of
Milo, being a kind of whitiſh ſtone, very light, friable, and po-
rous, and ſtreaked with filaments reſembling ſilver. The fac-
titious alum is prepared in different manners, according to the
different materials of which it is made. Hence ariſe red, Ro-
man, and citron a 'uns; alſo plumoſe, ſaccharine, and burnt
a'ums. England, Italy, and Flanders, are the countries where
aſiºn is principally produced ; and the Engliſh reche-alum is
made from a bluiſh mineral ſtone, frequent in the hills of York-
ſhire and Lancaſhire. Alum is uſed in medicine as an abſorbent;
but, being apt to excite vomiting, it is ſeldom preſcribed in-
wardly. i. is uſed outwardly in aſtringent lotions, and is an
ingredient in ſeveral dentifrices and coſmeticks. It is a princi-
pal ingredient in dying and colouring; neither of which can be
well performed without it. It ſerves to bind the colour upon
the ſtuffs, and has the ſame uſes there, that gum water and glu-
tinous oils have in painting. It alſo diſpoſes ſtuffs to take the
colour, and adds a degree of briskneſs and delicacy to it. This
effect of alum ſeems to proceed from its ſtyptick or aſtringent
quality, by which it binds the finer parts of colours together,
and prevents their exhaling. Hence alſo it preſerves paper, that
has been dipped in its water, from ſinking when wrote upon.
Saccharine alum bears a near reſemblance to ſugar, and is a
compoſition of common alum, with roſe-water and whites of
eggs boiled together, to the conſiſtence of a paſte, and thus
moulded at pleaſure. As it cools, it grows hard as a ſtone, and
is uſed as a coſmetick.
Burnt alum is alum calcined over the fire, and thus rendered
whiter, more light, and more eaſily pulverized.
Pºmoſe or plume alum is a ſort of ſaline mineral ſtone, of va-
rious colours, moſt commonly white, bordering on green, re-
ſembling Venetian talc, except that, inſtead of ſcales, it riſes in
threads or fibres, reſembling thoſe of a feather; whence its name
from pluma, a feather. Some will have this to be the lapis ami-
anthus of the ancients. Chambers.
By long beating the white of an egg with a lump of alum,
you may bring it, for the moſt part, into white curds. Boyle.
* * = = − = =: --- as --— – - - - - - -
ALUM s ros F. m. ſ. A ſtone or calx uſed in ſurgery; perhaps
alum calcined, which then becomes corroſive. -
She gargled with oxycrate, and was in a few days cured, by
touching it with the vitriol and alum ſtones. Iłºſeman's Surgery.
ALUMINogs. adj. [from alum.] Relating to alum, or conſiſt-
º alum.
or do we reaſonably conclude, becauſe, by a cold and a u-
minouſ moiſture, it is able a while to reſiſt the fire, that, from a
peculiarity of nature, it ſubſiſteth and liveth in it. Brown.
The tumour may have other mixture with it, to make it of a
- vitriolick or aluminous nature. //iſeman's Surgery.
A'LWAYS. adv. [It is ſometimes written a way, compounded ºf
all and way; eallºpaeśa, Sax. tuttavia, ſtal.]
1. Perpetually; throughout all time; oppoſed to ſºmetime, or to
/*ever.
That, which ſometime is expedient, doth not always ſo con-
tinue. Hooker, b. iv. § 14.
Man never is, but always to be bleſt. Pope.
2. Conſtantly; without variation; oppoſed to ſºmetimes, or to
now and then.
. He is always great, when ſome great occaſion is preſented to
him. Drydew.
A. M. Stands for artium magiſter, or maſter of arts; the ſecond
degree of our univerſities, which, in ſome foreign countries, is
called doćtor of philoſophy.
AM. The firſt perſon of the verb to be. [See To Be..]
And God ſaid unto Moſes, I am that I am; and he ſaid, thus
ſhalt thou ſay unto the children of Iſrael, I am hath ſent me un-
to you. Exodus, iii. 14.
Come then, my ſoul: I call thee by that name,
Thou buſy thing, from whence I know I am :
For knowing what I am, I know thou art;
Since that muſt needs exiſt, which can impart. Prior.
AMABI'll TY. m.ſ.. [from amalilis, Lat.] Lovelineſs; the power
of pleaſing.
No rules can make amalility, our minds and apprehenſions
make that; and ſo is our felicity. Taylor.
AMADETTO. m. ſ. A ſort of pear [See PEAR.] ſo called, ſays
Skinner, from the name of him who cultivated it.
A MADOT. n.ſ. A ſort of pear. [See PEAR.]
AMA'1N. adv. [from maine, or maigne, old Fr. derived from mag-
nu:, Lat.] With vehemence; with vigour; fiercely; violent-
ly. It is uſed of any action performed with precipitation, whe-
ther of fear or courage, or of any violent effort.
Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain,
To ſignify that rebels there are up,
And put the Engliſhmen unto the ſword. Sha}. Henry VI.
What! when we fled amain, purſued, and ſtruck
With heav'n's sº thunder, and befought
The deep to ſhelter us Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. ii.
The hills, to their ſupply,
Vapour and exhalation dusk and moiſt,
Sent up amain. Par. Lºft.
From hence the boar was rous'd, and ſprung amain,
Like light'ning ſudden, on the warriour train,
Beats down the trees before him, ſhakes the ground;
The foreſt echoes to the crackling ſound, }
Shout the fierce youth, and clamours ring around. Dry:
AMATL GAM. n. ſ. [*42. and zzatº.j The mixture of metals
4,444"LG AMA. 5 procured by amalgamation. See AMAlcA-
MATION.
The induration of the amalgam appears to proceed from the
new texture reſulting from the coalition of the mingled ingre-
dients, that make up the amalgam. Boyle.
To AMA'LGAMATE. v. a. [from amalgam.]
To unite metals with quickſilver, which may be pračiſed up-
on all metals, except iron and copper. The uſe of this opera-
tion is, to make the metal ſoft and dućtile. Gold is, by this
method, drawn over other materials by the gilders.
AMALG AMATION. n.ſ.. [from amalgamate.] The ağt or prac-
tice of amalgamating metals.
Amalgamation is the mixing of mercury with any of the me-
tals. The manner is thus in gold, the reſt are anſwerable :
Take ſix parts of mercury, mix them hot in a crucible, and
pour them to one part of gold made red hot in another cru-
cible; ſtir theſe well that they may incorporate; then caſt the
maſs into cold water, and waſh it. Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
AMANDA'TION. m. ſ. [from amando, Lat.] The act of ſending
on a meſſage, or employment.
AMANUE'NSIS. m. ſ. [Lat..] A perſon who writes what an-
other dićtates.
AMARANT H. n.ſ.. [amaranthus, Lat. from 2 and wagºya.] The
name of a plant.
The flowers have no petals; the cup of the flower is dry and
multifid; the ſeeds are included in membranaceous veſſels,
which, when come to maturity, burſt open tranſverſely or hori-
zontally, like purſlane, each of which contains one or more
roundiſh ſeeds.
Among the many ſpecies, the moſt beautiful are, 1. The
tree amaranth. 2. The long pendulous aramanth, with reddiſh
coloured ſeeds, commonly called Love ies a bleeding. All theſe
plants muſt be ſown on a good hotbed in February, or the be-
ginning
:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A M A
A M B
ginning of March. They produce large beautiful flowers, and
perfect their ſeed in September. Millar.
2. In poetry, it is ſometimes an imaginary flower, ſuppoſed, ac-
cording to its name, never to fade.
Immortal amaranth ! a flower which once
In paradiſe, faſt by the tree of life,
Began to bloom ; but ſoon, for man's offence,
To heav'n remov’d, where firſt it grew, there grows,
And flow’rs aloft, ſhading the fount of life;
And where the river of bliſs, thro' midſt of heav'n,
Rowls o'er Elyſian flow’rs her amber ſtream:
With theſe, that never fade, the ſpirits clect
Bind their reſplendent locks, inwreath'd with beams.
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii. l. 353.
AMARA'N THINE. adj. [amaranthinus, Lat..] Relating to ama-
ranths; conſiſting of amaranths.
By the ſtreams that ever flow,
By the fragrant winds that blow
O'er the Elyſian flow’rs,
By thoſe happy ſouls who dwell
In yellow meads of Aſphodel,
Or amaranthine bow’rs. Pope's St. Caecilia.
AMA'RITUD E. m. ſ. [amaritudo, Lat.] Bitterneſs.
What amaritide or acrimony is deprehended in choler, it
acquires from a commixture of melancholy, or external ma-
lign bodies. Harvey on Conſumptions.
AMA'RULENCE. n.ſ.. [amaritudo, Lat.] Bitterneſs. Dićf.
AMA's MENT. n.ſ. [from amaſ...] A heap; an accumulation;
a colle&amp;tion.
What is now in the ſubjećt, is but an amaſment of imagi-
nary conceptions, prejudices, ungrounded opinions, and infinite
impoſtures. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
To AMA'SS. v. a. ſamaſſºr, Fr.]
1. To collect together into one heap or maſs.
The rich man is not blamed, as having made uſe of any un-
lawful means to amaſ, riches, as having thriven by fraud and
injuſtice. Atterbury's Sermons.
When we would think of infinite ſpace, or duration, we, at
firſt ſtep, uſually make ſome very large idea, as perhaps of mil-
lions of ages, or miles, which poſſibly we double and multiply
ſeveral times. All that we thus amaſ; together in our thoughts,
is poſitive, and the aſſemblage of a great number of poſitive ideas
of ſpace or duration. Locke.
2. In a figurative ſenſe, to add one thing to another, generally
with ſome ſhare of reproach, either of eagerneſs or indiſcrimi-
nation.
Such as amaſ, all relations, muſt err in ſome, and be unbe-
lieved in many. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
Do not content yourſelves with mere words, leſt your im-
provements only amaſ; a heap of unintelligible phraſes.
º I/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
The life of Homer has been written, by amaſſing of all the
traditions and hints the writers could meet with, in order to
tell a ſtory of him to the world. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
To AMA'TÉ. v. n. [from a and mate. See MATE.]
1. To accompany; to entertain as a companion. It is now ob-
ſolete. -
A lovely bevy of fair ladies ſate,
Courted of many a jolly paramour,
The which did them immodeſt way amate,
And each one ſought his lady to aggrate. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
2. To terrify ; to ſtrike with horrour. In this ſenſe, it is derived
from the old French, matter, to cruſh or ſubdue.
AMATO'RCULIST. m. ſ. ſanatorculus, Lat.] A little inſignificant
lover; a pretender to affection. Dic?.
AMAT or Y. adj. [anatorius, Lat..] Relating to love; cauſing
love.
It is the ſame thing whether one raviſh Lucretia by force, as
Tarquin, or by amatory potions, not only allure her, but neceſſi-
tate her to ſatisfy his luſt, and incline her effectually, and draw
her inevitably to follow him ſpontaneouſly.
Bramham againſt Hobbes.
AMAUROSIS. n.ſ. [3,129:...] A dimneſs of fight, not from
any viſible defeót in the eye, but from ſome diſtemperature of
the inner parts, occaſioning the repreſentations of flies and duſt
floating before the eyes: which appearances are the parts of the
retina hid and compreſſed by the blood-veſſels being too much
diſtended; ſo that, in many of its parts, all ſenſe is loſt; and
therefore no images can be painted upon them, whereby the
eyes, continually rolling round, many parts of objećts falling
ſucceſſively upon them, are obſcure. The cure of this de-
pends upon a removal of the ſtagnations in the extremities of
thoſe arteries which run over the bottom of the eye. Quincy.
To AMA'Z.E. v. a. [from a and maze, perplexity.]
I. To confuſe with terrour.
Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, and their
kings ſhall be horribly afraid for thee, when I ſhall brandiſh my
ſword before them, and they ſhall tremble at every moment;
every man for his own life in the day of the fall. Ezek.xxxii. 1 o.
2. To put into confuſion with wonder.
Go, heav'nly pair, and with your dazling virtues,
Your courage, truth, your innocence and love,
Amaze and charm mankind. Smith's Phadr, and Hippol.
3. To put into perplexity, -
That cannot chooſe but amaze him. If he be not amazed,
he will be mocked; if he be amazed, he will every way be
mocked. Shakeſpeare's Merry I/ives of I/indſºr,
AMA'z E. m. ſ. [from the verb amaze.] Aſtoniſhment; confuſion,
either of fear or wonder.
Fairfax, whoſe name in arms thro’ Europe rings, .
And fills all mouths with envy or with praiſe,
And all her jealous monarchs with amaze,
And rumours loud. Millon's Paradſ: Rºgained.
Meantime the Trojan cuts his wat'ry way,
Fix'd on his voyage thro' the curling ſea,
Then caſting back his eyes with dire amaz',
Sees, on the Punick ſhore, the mounting blaze. Dryden.
AMA'zedly, adv. [from amazed.] Confuſedly ; with amaze-
ment; with confuſion.
I ſpeak amazedly, and it becomes
My marvel, and my meſſage. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
Wh
y
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly 1
Come, ſiſters, cheer we up his ſprights. AMacbeth.
AMA'z F DNFss. m. ſ. [from amazed.]. The ſtate of being amaz-
ed; aſtoniſhment; wonder; confuſion.
I was by at the opening of the farthel, heard the old ſhep-
herd deliver the manner how he found it; whereupon, after a
little amazedneſs, we were all commanded out of the chamber.
Shakeſp. J/inter’s Tale.
AMA'z E MENT. n.ſ.. [from amaze.]
1. Such a confuſed apprehenſion as does not leave reaſon its full
force; extreme fear; horrour.
He anſwer'd nought at all; but adding new
Fear to his firſt amazement, ſtaring wide,
With ſtony eyes, and heartleſs hollow hue,
Aſtoniſh’d ſtood, as one that had eſpy'd
Infernal furies, with their chains unty'd.
But look! amazement on thy mother ſits ;
O ſtep between her and her fighting ſoul:
Conceit in weakeſt bodies ſtrongeſt works.
2. Extreme dejećtion.
He ended, and his words impreſſion left
Of much amazement to th’ infernal crew,
Diſtraćted and ſurpris'd with deep diſmay
At theſe ſad tidings. Milton's Paradiſe Regained, b. i.
3. Height of admiration.
Had you, ſome ages paſt, this race of glory
Run, with amazement we ſhould read your ſtory;
But living virtue, all atchievements paſt,
Meets envy ſtill to grapple with at laſt.
4. Aſtoniſhment; wonder at an unexpected event.
They knew that it was he which ſat for alms at the Beautiful
gate of the temple, and they were filled with wonder and a-
mazement at that which had happened unto him. Aéïs, iii. 1 o.
AMA'zi Ng. participial adj. [from amaze.] Wonderful; alto-
niſhing.
It is indeed an amazing thing to ſee the preſent deſolation of
Italy, when one conſiders what incredible multitudes of people
it abounded with during the reigns of the Roman emperours.
- Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
AMA'z1NGLY. adv. [from amazing.] To a degree that may ex-
cite aſtoniſhment; wonderfully.
If we ariſe to the world of ſpirits, our knowledge of them
muſt be amazingly imperfect, when there is not the leaſt grain
of ſand but has too many difficulties belonging to it, for the
wiſeſt philoſopher to anſwer. J/atts's Logick.
AMAZON. n.ſ. [.. and wº.] The Amazons were a race of
women famous for valour, who inhabited Caucaſus; they are ſo
called from their cutting off their breaſts, to uſe their weapons
better. A warlike woman; a virago. -
Stay, ſtay thy hands, thou art an amazon,
And º with the ſword. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
AMBAGES. n.ſ. [Lat.] A circuit of words; a circumlocutory
form of ſpeech; a multiplicity of words; an indirect manner
of expreſſion. -
They gave thoſe complex ideas names, that they might the
more eaſily record and diſcourſe of things they were daily con-
verſant in, without long ambages and circumlocutions; and that
the things, they were continually to give and receive informa-
tion about, might be the eaſier and quicker underſtood. Lºcke.
AMBA'gious. adj. [from ambages.] Circumlocutory; perplex-
ed; tedious. . Dić7.
AMBAss A'd E. m.ſ. ſambaſſadº, Fr.] Embaſſy; charaćler or bu-
ſineſs of an ambaſſador; a word not now in uſe.
When you diſgraced me in my ambaſſade,
Then I dégraded you from being king. Shakespeare Henry VI.
AMBA/SSADO.U.R. m. ſ. ſambaſſºdeur, Fr. embaxador, Span.
It is written differently, as it is ſuppoſed to come from the
French or Spaniſh language; and the original derivation being
uncertain, it is not eaſy to ſettle its orthography. Some derive
it from the Hebrew-ºn, to tell, and nºt", a mºſºnger; others
from ambacius, which, in the old Gauliſh, ſignified a ſervant :
whence ambaſcia, in low Latin, is found to ſignify ſº vice, and
ambaſciator, a ſervant; others deduce it from arbººkſ, in old
* Teutonick,
Fairy Queen.
Shakespeare Hamlet.
Waller,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">Teutonick, ſignifying a government, and junius mentions a poſſi-
bility of its deſcent from 2,232, a , and others from am for ad,
and baſis, low, as ſuppoſing the act of ſending an ambaſſa-
dour, to be in ſome ſort an act of ſubmiſſion. All theſe deri-
ºvations lead to write ambaſſadour, not embaſſadour.]
A perſon ſent in a publick manner from one ſovereign power
to another, and ſuppoſed to repreſent the power from which he
is ſent. The perſon of an ambaſſadour is inviolable.
Ambaſſador is, in popular language, the general name of a
meſſenger from a ſovereign power, and ſometimes, ludicrouſly,
from common perſons. In the juridical and formal language,
it ſignifies particularly a miniſter of the higheſt rank reſiding in
another country, and is diſtinguiſhed from an envoy, who is of
leſs dignity.
Sive firſt admittance to th’ ambaſſadours. Shakespeare Hamlet.
Rais'd by theſe hopes, I ſent no news before,
Nor ask'd you leave, nor did your faith implore;
But come, without a pledge, my own ambaſſadour. Dryden:
Oft have their black am%ffadºurs appear'd
Loaden with gifts, and fill'd the courts of Zama. Addison Cato.
AMBA'ss A DR ess. n.ſ. ſambaſſadrice, Fr.]
1. The lady of an ambaſſadour.
2. In ludicrous language, a woman ſent on a meſſage,
Well, my ambaſſadrºſs
Come you to menace war, and loud defiance?
Or does the peaceful olive grace your brow Rowe's Penit.
A'MBAss AGE. m. ſ. [from ambaſſadour.] An embaſſy; the buſi-
neſs of an ambaſſadour.
Maximilian entertained them with dilatory anſwers; ſo as
the formal part of their ambaſſage might well warrant their fur-
ther ſtay. Bacon's Henry VII.
AMBER. m. ſ. [from amlar, Arab, whence the lower writers
formed ambarum.]
A yellow tranſparent ſubſtance of a gummous or bituminous
conſiſtence, but a reſinous taſte, and a ſmell like oil of turpen-
tine; chiefly found in the Baltick ſea, along the coaſts of Pruſ-
fia. Some naturaliſts refer it to the vegetable, others to the mi-
neral, and ſome even to the animal kingdom. Pliny deſcribes
it as a reſinous juice, oozing from aged pines and firs, and diſ-
charged thence into the ſea; where, undergoing ſome altera-
tion, it is thrown, in this form, upon the ſhores of Pruſſia,which
lie very low. He adds, that it was hence the ancients gave it
the denomination of ſuccinum, from ſuccus, juice. This opinion
of the ancient naturaliſt is confirmed by the obſervation of many
of the moderns, particularly Father Camelli. Philoſ. Tranſacł.
No 290. Some have imagined it a concretion of the tears of
birds; others, the urine of a beaſt; others, the ſcum of the lake
Cephiſis, near the Atlantick; others, a congelation formed in
the Baltick, and in ſome fountains, where it is found ſwimming
like pitch. Others ſuppoſe it a bitumen trickling into the ſea
from ſubterraneous ſources; but this opinion is alſo diſcarded,
as good amber having been found in digging at a conſiderable
diſtance from the ſea, as that gathered on the coaſt. Boerhaave
ranks it with camphire, which is a concrete oil of aromatick
plants, elaborated by heat into a cryſtalline form. Amber aſ-
fumes all figures in the ground; that of a pear, an almond, a
pea; and, among others, there have been found letters very well
formed, and even Hebrew and Arabick characters Within
ſome pieces of amber have been found leaves, and infects includ-
ed; which ſeems to indicate, either that theamber was originally
in a fluid ſtate, or, that having been expoſed to the ſun, it was
foſtened, and rendered ſuſceptible of the leaves and inſects. Am-
her, when rubbed, draws or attracts bodies to it; and, by fric-
tion, is brought to yield light pretty copiouſly in the dark. Some
diſtinguiſh amber into yellow, while, brown, and black: but the
two latter are ſuppoſed to be of a different nature and denomi-
nation; the one called jet, the other ambergris. The white is
moſt valued for medicinal uſes, and the yellow for being wrought
into beads and toys, becauſe of its tranſparency. Trev. Chamb.
Liquid amber, is a kind of native balſam or reſin, like turpen-
tine; clear, reddiſh, or yellowiſh; of a pleaſant ſmell, almoſt
like ambergris. It flows from an inciſion made in the bark of
a fine large tree in New Spain, called by the natives oſſal; but
it hardens, as it grows older, into a ſolid form, and is brought
to us in barrels. It is reputed an excellent balſam. Chambers.
If light penetrateth any clear body, that is coloured, as paint-
ed glaſs, amber, water, and the like, it gives the light the co-
lour of its medium. Peacham on Drawing.
No interwoven reeds a garland made,
To hide his brows within the vulgar ſhade;
But poplar wreathes around his temples ſpread,
And tears of amber trickled down his head. Addiſ, Italy.
The ſpoils of elephants the roofs inlay,
And ſtudded amber darts a golden ray. Pope's Odyſſey.
A'MBER. adj. Conſiſting of amber.
With ſcarfs, and fans, and double charge of brav'ry,
With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry.
Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
AMBER DRINK. m.ſ. Drink of the colour of amber, or reſemb-
ling amber in colour and tranſparency.
All your clear amber drink is flat. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
AMBERGR1s. m. ſ. [from amber and gris, or grey; that is, grey
amber.]
A fragrant drug, that melts almoſt lie wax, commonly of a
greyiſh or aſh colour, uſed both as a perfume and a cordial. It
is found on the ſea coaſts of ſeveral warm countries, and on the
weſtern coaſts of Ireland. Some imagine it to be the excrement
of a bird, which, being melted by the heat of the ſun, and waſh-
ed off the ſhore by the waves, is ſwallowed by whales, who re-
turn it back in the condition we find it. Others conclude it
to be the excrement of a cetaceous fiſh, becauſe ſometimes found
in the inteſtines of ſuch animals. But we have no inſtance of
any excrement capable of melting like wax; and if it were the
excrement of a whale, it ſhould rather be found where theſe a-
nimals abound, as about Greenland. Others take it for a kind
of wax or gum, which diſtils from trees, and drops into the ſea,
where it congeals. Many of the orientals imagine it ſprings
out of the ſea, as naphtha docs out of ſome fountains. Others
ſuppoſe it a ſea muſhroom, torn up from the bottom by the
violence of tempeſts. Others aſſert it to be a vegetable produc-
tion, iſſuing out of the root of a tree, whoſe roots always ſhoot
toward the ſea, and diſcharge themſelves into it. Others main-
tain, that ambergris is made from the honey-combs, which fall
into the ſea from the rocks, where the bees had formed their
neſts; ſeveral perſons having ſeen pieces that were half amler-
gris, and half plain honey-comb; and others have found large
pieces of ambergris, in which, when broke, honey-comb, and
honey too, were found in the middle. Some affirm it to be a
true animal concrete, formed in balls in the body of the male
ſpermaceti whale, and lodged in a large oval bag over the teſ-
ticles. But, beſides that it is not one ſpermaceti whale in a
hundred, that is found to have ambergris, Neumann, chemiſt
to the king of Pruſſia, abſolutely denies it to be an animal ſub-
ſtance, as not yielding in the analyſis, any one animal principle.
It may indeed be found in whales, but it muſt have been ſwal-
lowed by them. He concludes it to be a bitumen iſſuing out
of the earth into the ſea; at firſt of a viſcous conſiſtence, but
hardening, by its mixture with ſome liquid naphtha, into the
form in which we find it. Trevoux. Chambers.
Bermudas wall'd with rocks, who does not know
That happy iſland, where huge lemons grow,
Where ſhining pearl, coral, and many a pound,
On the rich ſhore, of ambergris is found. J/aller.
AMBER SEED, or musk ſeed, reſembles millet, is of a bitteriſh
taſte, and brought dry from Martinico and Egypt. The Egyp-
tians uſe it internally as a cordial. It gives a grateful ſcent to
the breath after eating. Chambers.
AMBER TREE. m. ſ. [frutex Africanus ambram ſpirans.] A ſhrub,
whoſe beauty is in its ſmall evergreen leaves, which grow as
cloſe as heath, and, being bruiſed between the fingers, emit a
very fragrant odour. Millar.
AMBIDEXTER. n.ſ. [Lat.] -
1. A man who has equally the uſe of both his hands.
Rodiginus, undertaking to give a reaſon of ambidexters, and
left-handed men, delivereth a third opinion. Brown's Wul. Err.
2. A man who is equally ready to act on either ſide, in party diſ-
putes. This ſenſe is ludicrous.
AM BIDExtE'Rity. n.ſ.. [from ambidexter.]
1. The quality of being able equally to uſe both hands.
2. Double dealing.
AMIBIDExtRous. adj. [from ambidexter, Lat.]
1. Double dealing; practiſing on both ſides.
AEſop condemns the double pračtices of trimmers, and all
falſe, ſhuffling, and ambidextrous dealings. L’Eſtrange's Fab.
2. Having, with equal facility, the uſe of either hand.
Others, not conſidering ambidextrous and left-handed men,
do totally ſubmit unto the efficacy of the liver. Pulgar Err.
AM BIDExTRous Ness. n.ſ.. [from ambidextrous.] The quality
of being ambidextrous. Die?.
A'MBIENT. adj. [ambiens, Lat.] Surrounding; encompaſſing;
inveſting.
This which yields or fills
All ſpace, the ambient air wide-interſus’d. Paradiſ, Loft.
The thickneſs of a plate requiſite to produce any colour, de-
pends only on the denſity of the plate, and not on that of the
ambient medium. Newton's Opticks.
Around him dance the roſy hours,
And damasking the ground with flow’rs,
With ambient ſweets perfume the morn. Fenton to L. Gower.
Illuſtrious virtues, who by turns have roſe,
With happy laws her empire to ſuſtain,
And with full pow'r aſſert her ambient main. Prior.
The ambient aether is too liquid and empty, to impel hori-
zontally with that prodigious celerity. Bentley's Sermons.
AMBIGU. m. ſ. [French..] An entertainment, conſiſting not
of regular courſes, but of a medley of diſhes ſet on together.
When ſtraiten’d in your time, and ſervants few,
You'd richly then compoſe an ambigu ;
Where firſt and ſecond courſe, and your deſert,
All in our ſingle table have their part. King's Art of Cookery.
AMBIGU'1t Y. m. ſ. [from ambiguous.] Doubtfulneſs of mean-
ing; uncertainty of ſignification; double meaning,
2. Ambiguities
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A M B
A M B
With ambiguities they often entangle themſelves, not mark-
ing what doth agree to the word of God in itſelf, and what
in regard of outward accidents. Hooker, b. v.
We can clear theſe ambiguities,
And know their ſpring, their head, their true deſcent.
Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
The words are of ſingle ſignification, without any ambigui-
ty; and therefore I ſhall not trouble you, by ſtraining for an in-
terpretation, where there is no difficulty; or diſtinétion, where
there is no difference. South.
AMBI'GUO U.S. adj. [ambiguus, Lat.]
1. Doubtful; having two meanings; of uncertain ſignification.
But what have been thy anſwers, what but dark,
Ambiguous, and with doubtful ſenſe deluding. Par. Regain.
Some expreſſions in the covenant were ambiguous, and were
left ſo ; becauſe the perſons who framed them, were not all of
one mind. Clarendon, b. viii.
2. Applied to perſons uſing doubtful expreſſions. It is applied
to expreſſions, or thoſe that uſe them, not to a dubious, or ſuſ-
pended ſtate of mind. e
Th’ ambiguous god, who rul’d her lab'ring breaſt,
In theſe myſterious words his mind expreſt; {
Some truths reveal’d, in terms involv'd the reſt. Dryd.
Silence at length the gay Antinous broke,
Conſtrain’d a ſmile, and thus ambiguous ſpoke. Pope's Odyſſ.
AMBI'Guously, adv. [from ambiguous.] In an ambiguous man-
ner; doubtfully; uncertainly ; with double meaning. -
AMBI'guousNess. n.ſ.. [from ambiguous.] The quality of being
ambiguous; uncertainty of meaning; duplicity of ſignifica-
tion.
AMBI'logy. n.ſ.. [from ambo, Lat. and x,yº..] Talk of ambi-
guous or doubtful ſignification. Dićf.
AMBI'loquous. adj. [from ambo and loquor, Lat.] Uſing ambi-
guous and doubtful expreſſions. Dić.
AMBI'loquy. n.ſ.. [ambiloquium, Lat..] The uſe of doubtful and
indeterminate expreſſions ; diſcourſe of doubtful meaning. D.
AMBIT. n.ſ...[ambitus, Lat.] The compaſs or circuit of any
thing; the line that encompaſſes any thing.
The tuſk of a wild boar winds about almoſt into a perfeót
ring or hoop ; only it is a little writhen. In meaſuring by the
ambit, it is long or round about a foot and two inches; its baſis
an inch over. Grew's Muſeum.
AMBI'TION. m. ſ. ſambitio, Lat.] The deſire of ſomething higher
than is poſſeſſed at preſent.
1. The deſire of preferment or honour.
Who would think, without having ſuch a mind as Antiphi-
lus, that ſo great goodneſs could not have bound gratefulneſs
and ſo high advancement not have ſatisfied his ambition PSidn.
2. The defire of anything great or excellent.
The quick’ning power would be, and ſo would reſt;
The ſenſe would not be only, but be well:
But wit’s ambition longeth to the beſt,
For it deſires in endleſs bliſs to dwell.
Urge them, while their ſouls
Are capable of this ambition;
Leſt zeal, now melted by the windy breath
Of ſoft petitions, pity and remorſe,
Cool and congeal again to what it was. Shakeſp. K. john.
3. It is uſed with to before a verb, and of before a noun.
I had a very early ambition to recommend my ſelf to your
Lordſhip's patronage. Addiſon.
There was an ambition of wit, and an affectation of gayety.
Pope's Prºface to his Letters.
AMBI'TIOUS. adj. [ambitioſus, Lat.]
1. Seized or touched with ambition; deſirous of advancement;
eager of honours; aſpiring. It has the particle of before the
obječt of ambition.
The neighb'ring monarchs, by thy beauty led,
Contend in crouds, ambitious of thy bed:
The world is at thy choice, except but one,
Except but him thou canſt not chooſe alone. Dryd. Fables.
You have been pleaſed not to ſuffer an old man to go diſ-
contented out of the world, for want of that protećtion, of
which he had been ſo long ambitious. Dryden.
Trajan, a prince ambitious of glory, deſcended to the mouths
of the Tigris and Euphrates, and went upon the ocean, where,
ſeeing a veſſel trading to the Indies, he had thoughts of out-
doing Alexander. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. Eager to grow bigger; aſpiring.
I have ſeen
Th'ambitious ocean ſwell, and rage, and foam,
To be exalted with the threatening clouds. Shakeſp. j. Caſ:
AMBI'tiously. adv. [from ambitious.] In an ambitious man-
ner; with eagerneſs of advancement or preference.
With ſuch glad hearts did our deſpairing men
Salute th' appearance of the prince's fleet;
And each ambitiouſly would claim the ken, -
That with firſt eyes did diſtant ſafety meet. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
Here Flecknoe, as a place to fame well known,
Ambitiouſly deſign'd his Sh–’s throne. Drydºn.
AMBI'tious sess. n: ſ [from ambitious.] The quality of being
ambitious.
Vol. I.
Sir j. Davies.
AM 81'tude. n.f ſamli, Lat.] Compaſs; circuit; circumfe-
rence.
To AMBLE. v. n. [ambler, Fr. ambulo, Lat.]
1. To move upon an amble. [See AMBLE | -
It is good, on ſome occaſions, to enjoy as much of the pre-
ſent, as will not endanger our futurity; and to provide ourſelves
of the virtuoſo's ſaddle, which will be ſure to amble, when the
world is upon the hardeſt trot. Dryden's Virgil, Dedication,
2. To move eaſily, without hard ſhocks, or ſhaking.
Who ambles time withal – A rich man that hath not the
gout ; for he lives merrily, becauſe he feels no pain; knowing
no burden of heavy tedious penury: him time ambles withal.
Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
3. In a ludicrous ſenſe, to move with ſubmiſſion, and by direc-
tion ; as, a horſe that ambles, uſes a gait not natural.
A laughing, toying, wheedling, whimpering ſhe,
Shall make him amble on a goſlip's meſſage,
And take the diſtaff with a hand as patient,
As ere did Hercules. Rowe's jane Shore.
4. To walk daintily and affectedly.
I am rudely ſtampt, and want love's majeſty,
To ſtrut before a wanton ambling nymph. Shakeſp. Ric. III.
A'MBLE. m. ſ. [from to amble.] A pace or movement in which the
horſe removes both his leg on one ſide; as, on the far ſide, he
removes his fore and hinder leg of the ſame ſide at one time,
whilſt the legs on the near ſide ſtand ſtill; and when the far legs
are upon the ground, the near ſide removes, the fore leg and
hinder leg, and the legs on the far ſide ſtand ſtill. An amble
is the firſt pace of young colts, but when they have ſtrength to
trot, they quit it. There is no amble in the manage; riding-
maſters allow only of walk, trot, and gallop. A horſe may be
put from a trot to a gallop without ſtopping; but cannot be put
from an amble to a gallop without a ſtop, which interrupts the
juſtneſs of the manage. Farrier’s Diä.
AM BLER. m. ſ. [from to amble.] A horſe that has been taught
to amble; a pacer.
AMBLINGLY. adv. [from ambling.] With an ambling move-
ment.
AMBRO'SIA. m. ſ. [2:23:02.42.]
1. The imaginary food of the gods, from which every thing
eminently pleaſing to the ſmell or taſte, is called ambroſia.
2. The name of a plant.
It has male floſculous flowers, produced on ſeparate parts of
the ſame plant from the fruit, having no viſible petals; the
fruit which ſucceeds the female flowers, is ſhaped like a club,
and is prickly, containing one oblong ſeed in each.
The ſpecies are, 1. The marine or ſea ambroſia. 2. Taller
unfavoury ſea ambroſia. 3. The talleſt Canada ambroſia, with
rough plane tree leaves. The firſt ſort ſhould be ſown early in
the ſpring, under a warm wall. The ſecond and third are com-
mon American weeds, which ſhould be ſown upon a gentle hot-
bed in the ſpring. None of them have much beauty to re-
commend them. Millar.
AMBR.o's AL. adj. [from ambrºſia.] Partaking of the nature or
qualities of ambroſia; fragrant; delicious; delečtable.
Thus while God ſpake, ambroſial fragrance fill'd
All heaven, and in the bleſſed ſpirits elect
Senſe of new joy ineffable diffus'd. Milton's Parad, Lºft.
The gifts of heaven my following ſong purſues, -
Aerial honey, and ambroſial dews. Dryden's Wirg. Georg.
To fartheſt ſhores th’ ambroſial ſpirit flies, -
Sweet to the world, and grateful to the ſkies. Pope.
A'MBRY. m. ſ. [a word corrupted from almonry.]
1. The place where the almoner lives, or where alms are diſtri-
buted.
2. The place where plate, and utenſils for houſekeeping, are
kept; alſo a cupboard for keeping cold vićtuals: a word ſtill
uſed in the northern counties, and in Scotland.
AMBs AcE. m. ſ. [from ambo, Lat. and ace.] A double ace; ſo
called when two dice turn up the ace.
I had rather be in this choice, than throw ambs ace for my
life. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
This will be yet clearer, by conſidering his own inſtance of
caſting ambs ace, though it partake more of contingency than of
freedom. Suppoſing the poſiture of the party's hand who did
throw the dice, ſuppoſing the figure of the table, and of the
dice themſelves, ſuppoſing the meaſure of force applied, and
ſuppoſing all other things which did concur to the production
of that caſt, to be the very ſame they were, there is no doubt
but in this caſe the caſt is neceſſary. Bramh, againſt Hobles.
AMBULA'TION. m. ſ. [ambulatio, Lat.] The act of walking.
From the occult and inviſible motion of the muſcles in ſta-
tion, proceed more offenſive laſfitudes, than from ambulation.
Brown's Wugar Errours, b. iii. c. 1.
A'MBU 1. A Tor Y. adj. [ambilº, Lat.
1. That which has the power or faculty of walking,
The gradient, or ambulatory, are ſuch as require ſome baſis,
or bottom, to uphold them in their motions: ſuch were thoſe
ſtrange inventions, commonly attributed to Daedalus, or ſelf-
moving ſtatues, which, unleſs violently detained, would of
themſelves run away. //ilkins's Mathemat. 41agi. 8.
T 2. That
1.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A M E
A M E
- - - ----- lk.
. That which happens during a paſſage or wº - -
2 He was ſent . hither the princeſs Henrietta Maria,
- - mlidatory view in his travels.
of whom his majeſty had an a y J/attan.
. Moveable; as, an ambulatory court; a Cºſt which renoveS
from place to place for the exerciſe of its juriſdiction.
A'MBURY. n.ſ. A bloody wart on any part of a horſe's body.
AmbuscA'DE. m. ſ. ſemiliſa” Fr. See Ambush..]. A private
ſtation in which men lie to ſurpriſe others; ambuſh.
Then waving high her torch, the fignal made,
which rous’d the Grecians from their ambuſcade. Dryden.
When I behold a faſhionable table ſet out, I fancy that
gouts, fevers, and lethargies, with innumerable diſtempers, lie
in ambuſade among the diſhes, Addison. Spect. Nº. 195.
AMBuscá'do. n.ſ. [emboſada, Span.] A private poſt, in order
to ſurpriſe an enemy. -
Sometimes ſhe driveth o'er a ſoldier's neck,
And then he dreams of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuſtadoes, Spaniſh blades,
Of healths five fathom deep. Shakeſp. Romeo andjuliet.
A'MBush. n.ſ.. [embuſche, Fr. from bois a wood; whence em-
buſher, to hide in woods, ambuſhes being commonly laid un-
der the concealment of thick foreſts.]
1. The poſt where ſoldiers or aſſaſſins are placed, in order to fall
unexpectedly upon an enemy.
Charge, charge, their ground the faint Taxallans yield,
Bold in cloſe ambuſh, baſe in open field.
Dryden's Indian Emperour.
2. The act of ſurpriſing another, by lying in wait, or lodging in
a ſecret poſt.
Nor ſhall we need,
With dangerous expedition, to invade
Heav'n, whoſe high walls fear no aſſault or ſiege,
Or ambuſh from the deep. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ii.
3. The ſtate of being poſted privately, in order to ſurpriſe; the
ſtate of lying in wait.
The reſidue retired deceitfully towards the place of their
ambuſh, whence iſſued more. Then the earl gathered his ſmall
company about him, and maintained the fight. But the ene-
my, whether perceiving ſome ſuccours advancing, or whether
intending to draw the Engliſh further into their ambuſh, turned
away at an eaſy pace. Hayward.
4. Perhaps the perſons placed in private ſtations.
For you, my noble lord of Lancaſter,
Once did Ilayan ambuſh for your life. Shakeſp. Richard II.
A'MBushed, adj. [from ambuſh.J Placed in ambuſh; lying in
Walt. -
Thick as the ſhades, there iſſue ſwarming bands
Of ambuſh'd men, whom, by their arms and dreſs,
To be Taxallan enemies I gueſs. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
AMBU's HMENT. n.ſ.. [from ambuſh; which ſee..] Ambuſh;
ſurprize: a word now not uſed.
Like as a wily fox, that having ſpied
Where on aſunny bank the lambs do play,
Full cloſely creeping by the hinder ſide,
Lies in ambuſhment of his hoped prey. Spenſºr's Maiapotmos.
AMBU'st. adj. [ambuſtus, Lat.] Burnt; ſcalded. Diº.
AM BU'stion. m. ſ. [ambuſtio, Lat.] A burn; a ſcald.
A'Mel. m. ſ. [email, Fr.] The matter with which the variegated
works are overlaid, which we call enamelled.
The materials of glaſs melted with calcined tin, compoſe an
undiaphanous body. This white amel is the baſis of all thoſe
fine concretes that goldſmiths and artificers employ in the cu-
rious art of enamelling. Boyle on Colours.
AME'N. adv. [A word of which the original has given riſe to
many conjectures. Scaliger writes, that it is Arabick ; and
the Rabbies make it the compound of the initials of three
words, fignifying the Lord is a faithful king; but the word
ſeems merely Hebrew, "Nº, which, with a long train of deri-
vatives, ſignifies firmneſs, certainty, fidelity.]
A term uſed in devotions, by which, at the end of a prayer,
we mean, ſo be it, at the end of a creed, ſo it is. -
One cried, God bleſs us and, A,i,j, t the other,
As they had ſeen me with theſe hangman's hands.
Liſtening their fear, I could not fay Amen,
When they did ſay God bleſs us. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Bleſſed be the Lord God of Iſrael, from everlaſting and to
everlaſting, Amen and amen. Pſalm xli. 13.
AMENABLE. ºff. [amºſhable, Fr. amener quelqu'un, in the Fren.’
courts, ſignifies to oblige one to appear to anſwer a charge
exhibited againſt him.] Reſponſible; ſubject ſo as to be liable
to enquiries or accounts.
Again, becauſe the inferiour ſort were looſe and poor, and
not amenable to the law, he provided, by another act, that five
of the beſt and eldeſt perſons of every ſept, ſhould bring in all
the idle perſons of their ſurname, to be uſiified by the iv.
Sir John Davies on Ireland.
AMENANCE. m.ſ. [It ſeems to come from amoner, Fr.] Con-
duct; behaviour; mien: a word diſuſed.
For he is fit to uſe in all aſſays,
Whether for arms and warlike amenance,
Or elſe for wiſe and civil governance. Spenſ. Hulb. Tal.
Well kend him ſo far ſpace,
Th’ enchanter, by his arms and amenance,
When under him he ſaw his Lybian fleed to prance.
Fairy ºueen, b. ii. c. vi.
To AMEND. v. a. ſamendºr, Fr. emandº, Lat.]
1. To correct; to change any thing that is wrong to ſomething
better.
2. To reform the life, or leave wickedneſs.
In theſe two caſes we uſually write mend. See MEND.
Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cauſe you to
dwell in this place. jerem. vii. 3.
3. To reſtore paſſages in writers which the copiers are ſuppoſed
to have depraved; to recover the true reading.
To AM E/ND. v. n. To grow better. To amend differs from to
improve; to improve ſuppoſes or not denies that the thing is
well already, but to amend implies ſomething wrong.
As my fortune either amends or impairs, I may declare it un-
to you. Sidney.
At his touch
Such ſančity hath heaven given his hand,
They preſ ºtly amend. Shakeſp. Macheth.
AMENDE. m. ſ. [French..] This word, in French, ſignifies a
fine, by which recompenſe is ſuppoſed to be made for the fault
committed. We uſe, in a cognate ſignification, the word
amends.
AME'Nd MENT. m. ſ. [amendment, Fr.]
1. A change from bad for the better.
Before it was preſented on the ſtage, ſome things in it have
paſſed your approbation and amendment. . . Dryd, Aureng. Prºf.
Man is always mending and altering his works; but nature
obſerves the ſame tenour, becauſe her works are ſo perfeót, that
there is no place for amendments; nothing that can be repre-
hended. Ray on the Creation.
There are many natural defects in the underſtanding, ca-
pable of amendment, which are overlooked and wholly neglec-
ted. Locke.
2. Reformation of life.
Our Lord and Saviour was of opinion, that they which
would not be drawn to amendment of life, by the teſtimony
which Moſes and the prophets have given, concerning the mi-
ſeries that follow finners after death, were not likely to be per-
ſuaded by other means, although God from the dead ſhould
have raiſed them up preachers. Hooker, b. v. § 22.
Behold! famine and plague, tribulation and anguiſh, are
ſent as ſcourges for amendment. 2 Eſdras, xvi. 19.
Though a ſerious purpoſe of amendment, and true acts of con-
trition, before the habit, may be accepted by God; yet there is
no ſure judgment whether this purpoſe be ſerious, or theſe acts
true ačts of contrition. Hammond's Practical Catechiſm.
3. Recovery of health.
Your honour's players hearing your amendment,
Are come to play a pleaſant comedy. Shakeſp. Tam. Shrew.
AM E/ND MENT. [emendatio, Lat.] It ſignifics, in law, the correc-
tion of an errour committed in a proceſs, and eſpied before or
after judgment; and ſometimes after the party's ſecking ad-
vantage by the errour. Blount.
AM E'Nd E.R. m. ſ. [from amend..] The perſon that amends any
thing.
AM E/N ps. m. ſ. [amendº, Fr. from which it ſeems to be acciden-
tally corrupted.] Recompenſe; compenſation; attonement.
If I have too auſterely puniſhed you,
Your compenſation makes amends. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Of the amends recovered, little or nothing returns to thoſe
that had ſuffered the wrong, but commonly all runs into the
prince's coffers. Sir ſº. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Where I a pris’ner chain'd, ſcarce freely draw
The air impriſon’d alſo, cloſe and damp,
Unwholſome draught; but here I feel amends,
The breath of heav'n freſh blowing, pure and ſweet,
With day-ſpring born; here leave me to reſpire.
Milton's Sampſon Agoniſes.
Some little hopes I have yet remaining, that I make the
world ſome part of amends for many ill plays, by an heroick
poem. Dryden's Aureng. Preface.
If our ſouls be immortal, this makes abundant amends and
compenſation for the frailties of life, and ſufferings of this
ſtate. Tillotſon.
It is a ſtrong argument for retribution hereafter, that vir-
tuous perſons are very often unfortunate, and vicious perſons
proſperous; which is repugnant to the nature of a Being, who
appears infinitely wiſe and good in all his works; unleſs we may
ſuppoſe that ſuch a promiſcuous diſtribution, which was neceſ-
ſary for carrying on the deſigns of providence in this life, will
be rectified and made amends for in another. Spect. Nº 483.
AME's 1TY. m. ſ. [amenité, Fr. amanitas, Lat..] Pleaſantneſs;
agreeableneſs of ſituation.
If the ſituation of Babylon was ſuch at firſt, as it was in the
days of Herodotus, it was rather a ſeat of amenity and pleaſure,
than conducing unto this intention. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
To A MERCE. v. a. [amercier, Fr. of Saxº, pi, 32 gº, ſeems
to give the original.] --
1. To puniſh with a pecuniary penalty; to exact a fine; to in-
flićt
\
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A M I
A M I
flićt a forfeiture. It is a word originally juridical, but adopted
by other writers.
But I’ll amerce you with ſo ſtrong a fine,
That you ſhall all repent the loſs of mine.
Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
All the ſuitors were conſiderably amerced; yet this proved but
an ineffectual remedy for thoſe miſchiefs. Hale's Law of Engl.
2. Sometimes with the particle in before the fine.
They ſhall amerce him in an hundred ſhekels of ſilver, and
give them unto the father of the damſel, becauſe he hath brought
up an evil name upon a virgin of Iſrael. Deut. xxii. 19.
3. Sometimes it is uſed, in imitation of the Greek conſtrućtion,
with the particle of:
Millions of ſpirits, for his fault amere'd
Of heav'n, and from eternal ſplendours flung
or his revolt. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
AME'RcER. n.ſ.. [from amerce..] He that ſets a fine upon any
miſdemeanour; he that decrees or inflicts any pecuniary pu-
niſhment or forfeiture.
AME'RcEMENT. Un.ſ.. [from amerce.] The pecuniary puniſh-
AME'RcIAMENT. } ment of an offender, who ſtands at the
mercy of the king, or other lord in his court. Cowell.
All amercements and fines that ſhall be impoſed upon them,
ſhall come unto themſelves. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
AMEs Ace. n.ſ.. [a corruption of the word ambs ace, which ap-
pears, from very old authorities, to have been early ſoftened by
omitting the b.] Two aces on two dice.
But then my ſtudy was to cog the dice,
And dextrouſly to throw the lucky fice:
To ſhun ames ace, that ſwept my ſtakes away;
And watch the box, for fear they ſhould convey
Falſe bones, and put upon me in the play. Dryd. Perſus.
A'Mess. n.ſ.. [corrupted from amice..] A prieſt's veſtment. Dić.
AME THo'DICAL. adj. [from a and method.] Out of method ;
without method; irregular.
AMETHYST. n.ſ.. [au:Svre, contrary to wine, or contrary to
drunkenneſs; ſo called, either becauſe it is not quite of the co-
lour of wine, or becauſe it was imagined to prevent inebria-
tion.
* ſtone of a violet colour, bordering on purple.
The oriental amethyſt is the hardeſt, ſcarceſt, and moſt valuable;
it is generally of a dove colour, though ſome are purple, and
others white like the diamond. The German is of a violet co-
lour, and the Spaniſh are of three ſorts; the beſt are the blackeſt
or deepeſt violet; others are almoſt quite white, and ſome few
tinétured with yellow. They are found in a hill named St. Sig-
minont, in Catalonia, by following the vein of reddiſh or black
earth, or a vein in a rock ſo coloured, and are all hexangular,
and pointed like cryſtal. Sometimes a great number is found
ſticking º: like the Briſtol diamonds; but the beſt are
found looſe in the chinks of the rock. Beautiful ones are
alſo found in the Pyreneans, and in the mountains of Auvergne,
The amethyſt is not extremely hard, but eaſy to be engraved
upon, and is next in value to the emerald. Savary. Chambers.
I obſerved ſome ſtones that nearly approached the granate
complećtion; and ſeveral very nearly reſembling the amethyſt.
Woodward on Foſſils.
A'METHYst [in heraldry] ſignifies the ſame colour in a noble-
man's coat, that purpure does in a gentleman's.
AMethy'stine. adj. [from amethyſt.] Reſembling an amethyſt
in colour.
AMIABLE. adj. [aimable, Fr.]
1. Lovely; pleaſing.
That which is good in the aëtions of men, doth not only de-
light as profitable, but as amiable alſo. Hooker.
She told her, while ſhe kept it,
'Twould make her amiable, ſubdue my father
Intirely to her love; but if ſhe loſt it,
Or made a gift of it, my father's eye
Should hold her loathed.
2. Pretending love; ſhewing love.
Spend all, only give me ſo much time in exchange, as to lay
amiable ſiege to the honeſty of this Ford's wife; uſe your art of
wooing. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of I/indſor.
A'MIABLENEss. m. ſ. [from amiable.] The quality of being ami-
able; lovelineſs; power of raiſing love.
As ſoon as the natural gaiety and amiableneſ of the young
man wears off, they have nothing left to commend them, but lie
by among the lumber and refuſe of the ſpecies. Addison Guard.
A'MiABLY, adv. [from amiable.] In an amiable manner; in
ſuch a manner as to excite love.
AMICABLE. adj. [amicabilis, Lat.] Friendly ; kind. It is
commonly uſed of more than one ; as, they live in an amicable
manner; but we ſeldom ſay, an amicable action, or an amicable
man, though it be ſo uſed in this paſſage.
O grace ſerene ! oh virtue heav'nly fair,
Divine oblivion of low-thoughted care!
Freſh blooming hope, gay daughter of the ſky!
And faith, our early immortality
Enter each mild, each amicable gueſt;
Receive and wrap me in eternal reſt. Pope's Elo. to 4hrſard.
A'MicableNess. n.ſ.. [from amicable.] The quality of being
amicable; friendlineſs; goodwill.
Shakſ. Othell.
A'MICABLY. adv. [from amicable.] In an amicable manner; in
a friendly way; with goodwill and concord.
They ſee
Through the dun miſt, in blooming beauty freſh,
Two lovely youths, that amicably walkt
O'er verdant meads, and pleas'd, perhaps, revolv’d
Anna's late conqueſts. Philipſ.
I found my ſubjects amicably join,
To leſſen their defects, by citing mine. Prior.
In Holland itſelf, where it is pretended that the variety of
ſects live ſo amicably together, it is notorious how a turbulent
party, joining with the Arminians, did attempt to deſtroy the
republick. Swift on the Sentiments of a Church of England man.
AMICE, n.f. [amičius, Lat. amidi, Fr. Primum ºx ſex indumentis
epiſcopo S3 presbyteriis communibus ſunt, amićtus, alba, cingulum,
ſtola, manipulus, &amp; planeta. Du Cange. Amičius quo collum
Jiringitur, &amp; pečius tegitur, coſtitatem interioris homini; deſignat;
tºgit enim cor, ne vanitates cogitet, ſtringit autem collum, ne inde
adlinguam tranſeat mendacium. Bruno.] The firſt or undermoſt
part of a prieſt's habit, over which he wears the alb.
Thus paſs'd the night ſo foul, till morning fair
Came forth with pilgrim ſteps in amice grey. Paradiſe Reg.
On ſome a prieſt, ſuccinét in amice white,
Attends. Pope's Dunciad, b. iv. l. 441.
A....}ºrt, ſome and miſ, or miſ.
I. In the midſt; equally diſtant from either extremity.
Of the fruit
Of each tree in the garden we may eat;
But of the fruit of this fair tree, amidſ?
The garden, God hath ſaid, yeſhall not eat. Paradiſ? Loft.
The two ports, the bagnio, and Donatelli's ſtatue of the great
duke, amidſt the four ſlaves, chained to his pedeſtal, are very
noble ſights. Addiſon on Italy.
2. Mingled with; ſurrounded by ; in the abmit of another thing.
Amid my flock with woe my voice I tear,
And, but bewitch'd, who to his flock would moan Sidney.
So hills amid the air encounter'd hills,
Hurl’d to and fro, with jaculation dire. , Milt. Parad. Left.
What have I done, to name that wealthy ſwain,
The boar amidſt my cryſtal ſtreams I bring;
And ſouthern winds to blaſt my flow'ry ſpring. Dryd. Virg.
Amata's breaſt the fury thus invades,
And fires with rage amid the ſylvan ſhades. Dryd. Æneid.
3. Amongſt; conjoined with.
What tho’ no real voice nor ſound
Amid their radiant orbs be found
In reaſon's ear they all rejoice,
And utter forth a glorious voice,
For ever ſinging, as they ſhine,
“The hand that madeus is divine.” Addison Speii. Nº 465.
AM1'ss, adv. [from a, which, in this form of compoſition, often
ſignifies according to, and miſ, the Engliſh particle, which ſhews
any thing, like the Greek waga, to be wrong; as, to miſcount,
to counterroneouſly; to miſdo, to commit a crime: amiſ; there:
fore ſignifies not right, or out of order.]
1. Faulty; criminal. *
For that which thou haſt ſworn to do amiſ,
Is yet amiſ; when it is truly done. Shakeſp. King john.
2. Faultily; criminally.
We hope therefore to reform ourſelves, if at any time we
have done amiſ, is not to ſever ourſelves from the church we
were of before. * Hooker, b. iii. § 1.
O ye powers that ſearch
The heart of man, and weigh his inmoſt thoughts,
If I have done amiſ, impute it not. Addiſon's Cato.
3. In an ill ſenſe.
She figh’d withal, they conſtru’d all amiſ,
And thought ſhe wiſh'd to kill who long'd to kiſs. Fairfax.
4. Wrong; improper; unfit.
Examples have not generally the force of laws, which all
men ought to keep, but of counſels only and perſuaſions, not
amiſ; to be followed by them, whoſe . is the like. Hooker.
ethinks, though a man had all ſcience, and all principles,
yet it might not be amiſ, to have ſome conſcience. Tillotſ. Prºf.
5. Wrong; not according to the perfection of the thing, what-
ever it be.
Your kindred is not much amiſ, 'tis true; -
Yet I am ſomewhat better born than you. Dryden.
I built a wall, and when the maſons plaid the knaves, no-
thing delighted me ſo much as to ſtand by, while my ſervants
threw down what was amiſ. Swift.
6. Reproachful; irreverent.
Every people, nation, and language, which ſpeak any thing
amiſ; againſt the God of Shadrach, Meſhach, and Abednego,
ſhall be cut in pieces, and their houſes ſhall be made a dunghil;
becauſe there is no other God that can deliver after this fort.
Daniel, iii. 29.
7. Impaired in health; as, I was ſomewhat amiſ, yeſterday, but
am well to day.
8. Amiſ is marked as an adverb, though it cannot always be ad-
verbially rendered ; becauſe it always follows the ſubſtantive to
which
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A M O
which it relates, contrary to the nature of adječtives in Eng-
liſh; and though we ſay the action was amiſ, we never ſay an
amiſ; action.
9. Amiſ is uſed by Shakeſpeare as a noun ſubſtantive.
To my fick ſoul, as fin's true nature is,
Each toy ſeems prologue to ſome great amiſ. Hamlet.
AM1'ssion. n.ſ.. [amiſſio, Lat..] Loſs.
To AM1't. v.a. [amitto, Lat.] To loſe : a word little in uſe.
Ice is water congealed by the frigidity of the air, whereby it
acquireth no new form, but rather a conſiſtence or determina-
tion of its diffluency, and amitteth not its effence, but condition
of fluidity. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii.
A'MITY. m. ſ. ſamitie, Fr. amicitia, Lat.] Friendſhip, whether
publick between nations, oppoſed to war, or among the people,
oppoſed to diſcord, or between private perſons.
The prophet David did think, that the very meeting of men
together, and their accompanying one another to the houſe of
God, ſhould make the bond of their love inſoluble, and tie them
in a league of inviolable amity. Hooker, b. v. § 38.
The monarchy of Great Britain was in league and amity with
all the world. Sir john Davies on Ireland.
You have a noble and a true conceit
Of godlike amity; which appears moſt ſtrongly
In bearing thus the abſence of your lord. Shakespeare Merch. of Wen.
And ye, oh Tyrians, with immortal hate
Purſue this race, this ſervice dedicate
To my deplored aſhes; let there be
Twixt us and them no league nor amity. Sir john Denham.
AMMONIAC. n.ſ. The name of a drug.
GUM AM Mon 1Ac is brought from the Eaſt Hidies, and is ſup-
poſed to ooze from an umbelliferous plant. Dioſcorides ſays,
it is the juice of a kind of ferula growing in Barbary, and the
plant is called agaſyllis. Pliny calls the tree metopion, which, he
ſays, grows near the temple of Jupiter Ammon, whence the
gum takes its name. It ought to be in dry drops, white with-
in, yellowiſh without, eaſily fuſible, reſinous, ſomewhat bitter,
and of a very ſharp taſte and ſmell, ſomewhat like garlick. This
gum is ſaid to have ſerved the ancients for incenſe, in their ſa-
crifices. It enters ſeveral medicinal compoſitions, as an atte-
nuant and detergent; and, outwardly applied, it is reſolutive
and ſuppurative. Savary. Trevoux.
SAL AM Moni Ac is a volatile ſalt of two kinds, ancient and mo-
dern. The ancient ſort, deſcribed by Pliny and Dioſcorides,
was a native ſalt, generated in thoſe large inns or caravanſeras,
where the crouds of pilgrims, coming from the temple of Jupi-
ter Ammon, uſed to lodge; who, in thoſe parts, travelling up-
on camels, and thoſe creatures when in Cyrene, a province of
Egypt, where that celebrated temple ſtood, urining in the ſta-
bles, or, ſay ſome, in the parched ſands, out of this urine,which
is remarkably ſtrong, aroſe a kind of ſalt, denominated ſome-
times from the temple, Ammoniac, and ſometimes from the
country, Cyreniac. Since the ceſſation of theſe pilgrimages,
no more of this ſalt is produced there; and, from this deficien-
cy, ſome ſuſpect there never was any ſuch thing: but this ſuſ-
picion is removed, by the large quantities of a ſalt, nearly of
the ſame nature, thrown out by mount AEtna. The charaćters
of the ancient ſal ammoniac are, that it cools water, turns aqua
fortis into aqua regia, and conſequently diſſolves gold.
The modern ſal ammoniac is entirely factitious, and made in
Egypt; where ſeveral long-necked glaſs bottles, being filled with
ſoot, a little ſea ſalt, and the urine of cattle, and having their
mouths luted with a piece of wet cotton, are placed over an
oven or furnace, contrived for the purpoſe, in a thick bed of
aſhes, nothing but the necks appearing, and kept there two days
and a night, with a continual ſtrong fire. The ſteam ſwells up
the cotton, and forms a paſte at the vent-hole, hindering the
ſalts from evaporating; which, being confined, ſtick to the top
of the bottle, and are, upon breaking it, taken out in thoſe large
cakes, which they ſend to England. Only ſoot exhaled from
dung, is the proper ingredient in this preparation; and the
dung of camels affords the ſtrongeſt and beſt.
Our chymiſts imitate the Egyptian ſal ammoniac, by adding
one part of common ſalt to five of urine; with which ſome mix
that quantity of foot, and putting the whole in a veſſel, they
raiſe from it, by ſublimation, a white, friable, farinaceous ſub-
ſtance, which they call ſal ammoniac. There are various pre-
parations of this ſalt uſed in pharmacy; as, ſullimate of ſalam-
moniac, and flowers of ſal ammoniac, uſed as ſudorificks, diu-
reticks, and good aperients; volatile ſal ammoniac, uſed againſt
malignant fevers, as a ſudorifick, and in pocket bottles; ſpirit
of ſal ammoniac, of various kinds. Chambers.
AMMONI'AcAL. adj. [from ammoniac.] Having the properties
of ammoniac ſalt.
Human blood calcin'd, yields no fixed ſalt; nor is it a ſal
ammoniack; for that remains immutable after repeated diſtil-
lations; and diſtillation deſtroys the ammoniacal quality of ani-
mal ſalts, and turns them alkaline: ſo that it is a ſalt neither
quite fixed, nor quite volatile, nor quite acid, nor quite alka-
line, nor quite ammoniacal; but ſoft and benign, approaching
neareſt to the nature of ſal ammoniac. Arbuthnot.
AMMUNI"tion... n.ſ.. [ſuppoſed by ſome to come from amonitia,
which, in the barbarous ages, ſeems to have ſignified ſupply of
! proviſion; but it, ſurely, may be more reaſonably derived from
munitio, fortification; chºſe, a munitions, things for the fortreſſes.]
Military ſtores.
They muſt make themſelves defenſible againſt ſtrangers; and
muſt have the aſſiſtance of ſome able military man, and conve-
nient arms and ammunition for their defence. Baco".
The colonel ſtaid to put in the amºnunition he brought with
him; which was only twelve barrels of powder, and twelve
hundred weight of match. - Clarendon, b. viii.
All the rich mines of learning ranſackt are,
To furniſh ammunition for this war.
But now his ſtores of ammunition ſpent,
His naked valour is his only guard:
Rare thunders are from his dumb cannon ſent,
And ſolitary guns are ſcarcely heard. Dryden's Annus Mir.
AMMUNITION BREAD. m. ſ. Bread for the ſupply of the armies
or garriſons.
A'MNEST Y. m. ſ. [2.2.2+,2] An act of oblivion; an act by which
crimes againſt the government, to a certain time, are ſo obli-
terated, that they can never be brought into charge.
I never read of a law enacted to take away the force of all
laws, by which a man may ſafely commit upon the laſt of June,
what he would infallibly be hanged for, if he committed it on
the firſt of July; by which the greateſt criminals may eſcape,
provided they continue long enough in power, to antiquate their
crimes, and, by ſtifling them a while, deceive the legiſlature in-
to an amneſty. Swift.
AMNicolist. n.ſ.. [amnicola, Lat.) Inhabiting near a river. D.
AMNI'GENous. m.ſ.. [annigenus, Lat.] Born of a river. Dict.
A MNION. -
A"MNIOS. }n.ſ. [Lat. perhaps from 24.3 J
The innermoſt membrane with which the foetus in the womb
is moſt immediately covered, and with which the reſt of the ſe–
cundines, the chorion, and alantois, are ejected after birth. It is
whiter and thinner than the chorion. It alſo contains a nutri-
tious humour, ſeparated by glands for that purpoſe, with which
the foetus is preſerved. It is outwardly cloathed with the uri-
nary membrane, and the chorion, which ſometimes ſtick ſo
cloſe to one another, that they can ſcarce be ſeparated. It has
alſo its veſſels from the ſame origin as the chorion. &amp;tiny.
AMO'MUAZ. m. ſ. [Lat..] A ſort of fruit.
The commentators on Pliny and Dioſcorides differ about the
ancient amomum; but the generality of them ſuppoſe it to be
a fruit different from ours. Scaliger is confident, that the amo-
mum was no fruit; but the wood, which bore ſome reſem-
blance to a bunch of grapes, and was uſed in embalming of bo–
dies; whence the name mummy was given to bodies embalmed
with it. , The modern anomum appears to be the ſºn, orſium,
of the ancients, or baffard /?one-parſley. It reſembles the muſcat
grape, grows in cluſters, and is about the thickneſs of a pea,
round, membranous, and divided into three cells, that contain
ſeveral brown angular grains, of a very ſtrong aromatick taſte
and ſmell. This fruit is brought from the Eaſt Indies, and
makes part of the compoſition of treacle. It is of a hot ſpicy
taſte and ſmell. There is likewiſe another paler ſeed, named
amomum ; but neither are in much repute in phyſick.
Trevoux. Chambers.
{prºp. ſamanz, žemang, Saxon.]
Denham.
AMo'NG.
A Mo'NGst.
1. Mingled with ; placed with other perſons or things; on every-
ſide.
Amongſ ſtrawberrics ſow here and there ſome borage-ſeed;
and you ſhall find the ſtrawberries under thoſe leaves far more
large than their fellows. Bacon's Natural Hiſt. Nº 441.
The voice of God they heard,
Now walking in the garden, by ſoft winds
Brought to their ears, while day declin'd : they heard,
And from his preſence hid themſelves, among
The thickeſt trees, both man and wife. Paradſ: Lºft.
2. Conjoined with others, ſo as to make part of the number.
I have then, as you ſee, obſerved the failings of many great
wits amongſ; the moderns, who have attempted to write an epic
poem. Dryden's juvenal, Dedicat.
There were, among the old Roman ſtatues, ſeveral of Venus
in different poſtures and habits; as there are many particular
figures of her made after the ſame deſign. Addison on Italy.
A'MoR1st. m. ſ. [from amour.] An inamorato; a galant; a man
profeſſing love.
Female beauties are as fickle in their faces as their minds;
though caſualties ſhould ſpare them, age brings in a neceſſity of
decay; leaving doters upon red and white, perplexed by incer.
tainty both of the continuance of their miſtreſs's kindneſs, and
her beauty, both which are neceſſary to the amoriſt's joys and
quiet. Boyle.
AMORO'SO. m. ſ. [Ital.] A man enamoured. Dićf.
A'MoRous. adj [amorºſo, Ital.] y.
1. In love; enamoured; with the particle of before the thing lov-
ed; in Shakeſpeare, on.
Sure, Iny brother is amºrous of Hero; and hath withdrawn
her father to break with him about it.
Sha&amp;ſjear's Much ado about nothing.
Apes, as ſoon as they have brought forth their young, keep their
s
º
3 eyes
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A M P
A M P
eyes faſtened on them, and are never weary of admiring their
beauty: ſo amorous is nature of whatſoever ſhe produces.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. Naturally inclined to love; diſpoſed to fondneſs; fond.
The am’rous maſter own'd her potent eyes,
Sigh’d when he look'd, and trembl’d as he drew;
Each flowing line confirm'd his firſt ſurprize,
And as the piece advanc'd, the paſſion grew.
3. Relating, or belonging to love.
I that am not ſhap'd for ſportive tricks,
Nor made to court an am’rous looking-glaſs,
I, that am rudely ſtampt. Shakeſp. Rich.III.
And into all things from her air inſpir’d
The ſpirit of love, and amorous delight. Parad. Lºft, b. viii.
In the amorous net
Firſt caught they lik'd; and each his liking choſe.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi. l. 586.
O! how I long my careleſs limbs to lay
Under the plantane's ſhade, and all the day
With am’rous airs my fancy entertain,
Invoke the muſes, and improve my vein Waller,
A'MoRously. adv. [from amorous.] Fondly; lovingly.
When thou wilt ſwim in that live-bath,
Each fiſh, which every channel hath,
Will amorouſly to thee ſwim,
Gladder to catch thee, than thou him. Donne.
AMorousness. n.ſ.. [from amorous.] The quality of being a-
morous; fondneſs; lovingneſs ; love.
All Gynecia's adions were interpreted by Baſilius, as pro-
ceeding from jealouſy of his amorouſneſs. Sidney, b. ii.
I can readily believe that Lindamor has wit, and amorouſneſs
enough, to make him find it more eaſy to defend fair ladies,
than to defend himſelf againſt them. Boyle on Colours.
AMORT. adv. [á la mort, Fr.] In the ſtate of the dead; de-
jected; depreſſed; ſpiritleſs.
How fares my Kate what, ſweeting, all amort P
Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
AMoRTIZA'tion. }". f. [amortiſement, amortiſable, Fr.] The
AMo'Rtize MENT. ſ right or act of transferring lands to mort-
main; that is, to ſome community, that never is to ceaſe.
Every one of the religious orders was confirmed by one pope
or other; and they made an eſpecial proviſion for them, after
the laws of amortization were deviſed and put in uſe by princes.
Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
To AMO'RTIZE. v. a. [amortir, Fr.] To alien lands or te-
nements to any corporation, guild or fraternity, and their ſuc-
ceſſors; which cannot be done without licence of the king, and
the lord of the manour. Blount.
This did concern the kingdom to have farms ſufficient to
maintain an able body out of penury, and to amortize part of
the lands unto the yeomanry, or middle part of the people.
Bacon's Henry VII.
Prior.
To AMo've. v. a. [amoveo, Lat.]
1. To remove from a poſt or ſtation: a juridical ſenſe.
2. To remove; to move; to alter: a ſenſe now out of uſe.
Therewith, amoved from his ſober mood,
And lives he yet, ſaid he, that wrought this ačt?
And do the heavens afford him vital food Fairy Queen.
To AMo'u NT. v. m. [monter, Fr.]
1. To riſe to in the accumulative quantity; to compoſe in the
whole; with the particle to. It is uſed of ſeveral ſums in quan-
tities added together.
Let us compute a little more particularly how much this will
amount to, or how many oceans of water would be neceſſary to
compoſe this great ocean rowling in the air, without bounds or
banks. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. It is uſed, figuratively, of the conſequence riſing from anything
taken altogether.
The errours of young men are the ruin of buſineſs; but the
errours of aged men amount but to this, that more might have
been done, or ſooner. Bacon's Eſſays Civil and Moral.
Judgments that are made on the wrong ſide of the danger,
amount to no more than an affectation of ſkill, without either
credit or effect. L’Eſtrange.
AMo'ust. n.ſ. [from To amount.] The ſum total; the reſult
of ſeveral ſums or quantities accumulated.
And now, ye lying vanities of life,
Where are you now, and what is your amount 2
Vexation, diſappointment, and remorſe. Thomſon's Winter.
AMo'u R. n.ſ.. [amour, Fr. amor, Lat..] An affair of gallantry;
an intrigue: generally uſed of vicious love. The ou ſounds
like oo in poor.
No man is of ſo general and diffuſive a luſt, as to proſecute
his amours all the world over; and let it burn never ſo outra-
geouſly, yet the impure flame will either die of itſelf, or con-
ſume the body that harbours it. South's Sermons.
The reſtleſs youth ſearch'd all the world around;
But how can Jove in his amours be found 2
Addiſon's Ovid's Metam.
A'MPER. n.ſ.. [ampne, Sax.] A tumour, with inflammation;
bile: a word ſaid, by Skinner, to be much in uſe in Eſſex;
but, perhaps, not found in books.
Vol. 1.
AMPHIBIOU.S. adj. [äue, and 26.j That which partake,
of two natures, ſo as to live in two elements; as, in air and
Water.
A creature of amphibious nature,
On land a beaſt, a fiſh in water. Hudibras, cant. iii.
Thoſe are called amphibious, which live freely in the air, up-
on the earth, and yet are obſerved to live long upon water, as
if they were natural inhabitants of that element; though it be
worth the examination to know, whether any of thoſe crea-
tures that live at that eaſe, and by choice, a good while, or at
any time upon the earth, can live, alongtime together, perfect-
ly under water. Locke.
Fiſhes contain much oil, and amphibious animals participate
ſomewhat of the nature of fiſhes, and are oily. Arbuthnot.
AMPH1'biousness. n.ſ.. [from amphibious.] The quality of be-
ing able to live in different elemen's.
AMPHIBolo'GICAL. adj. [from amphibology.] Doubtful.
AMPHIBolo'GICALLY. adv. [from amphibological.] Doubtfully;
with a doubtful meaning:
AMPHIBO'LOGY. n.ſ. [2.2.2.x.y.z.] Diſcourſe of uncer-
tain meaning. It is diſtinguiſhed from equivocation, which
means the double ſignification of a ſingle word; as, noli regem
occidere, timere bonun /?, is amphibology; captare lepores, mean-
ing by lepores, either hares or jeſts, is equivocation.
Now the fallacies, whereby men deceive others, and are de-
ceived themſelves, the ancients have divided into verbal and
real; of the verbal, and ſuch as conclude from miſtakes of the
word, there are but two worthy our notation; the fallacy of
equivocation and amphibology. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
In defining obvious appearances, we are to uſe what is moſt
plain and eaſy; that the mind be not miſled by amphibologies,
or ill conceived notions, into fallacious deductions.
Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
AMPHI'Bolous. adj. [&amp;up, and 32%.] Toſſed from one to an-
other; ſtriking each way.
Never was there ſuch an amphibolus quarrel, both parties de-
claring themſelves for the king, and making uſe of his name in
all their remonſtrances, to juſtify their actions. Howell.
AMPHI'LoGY.. n.ſ...[4.0, and xy 2...] Equivocation; ambiguity. D.
AMPHISBAE'NA. m. ſ. [Lat. 2,0284….] A ſerpent ſuppoſed to
have two heads.
That the amphisbaena, that is, a ſmaller kind of ſerpent,
which moveth forward and backward, hath two heads, or one
at either extreme, was affirmed by Nicander, and others.
%. Pulgar Errours, b. iii.
Scorpion, and aſp, and amphisbaena dire,
Ceraſtes horn'd, hydrus, and ellops drear,
And dipſas. Milton's Paradiſ? Loft, b. x.
AMPHISCII. n.ſ. [Lat. auſpſzºol, of agº, and axi., a ſhadow.]
Thoſe people dwelling in climates, wherein the ſhadows, at
different times of the year, fall both ways; to the north pole,
when the ſun is in the ſouthern ſigns, and to the ſouth pole,
when he is in the northern ſigns. Theſe are the people who
inhabit the torrid zone.
AMPHITHE/ATRE. n. ſ. [of duº,9:27;or, of ap.p. and Čižaz.] A
building in a circular or oval form, having its area encompaſſed
with rows of ſeats one above another; where ſpectators might
behold ſpectacles, as ſtage-plays, or gladiators. The theatres
of the ancients were built in the form of a ſemicircle, only ex-
ceeding a juſt ſemicircle by one fourth part of the diameter;
and the amphitheatre is two theatres joined together; ſo that
the longeſt diameter of the amphitheatre, was to the ſhorteſt,
as one and a half to one.
Within, an amphitheatre appear'd
Rais'd in degrees; to ſixty paces rear'd,
That when a man was plac'd in one degree,
Height was allow'd for him above to ſee. Dryd. Fables.
Conceive a man placed in the burning iron chair at Lyons,
amid the inſults and mockeries of a crouded amphitheatre, and
ſtill keeping his ſeat; or ſtretched upon a grate of iron, over
coals of fire, and breathing out his ſoul, among the exquiſite
ſufferings of ſuch a tedious execution, rather than renounce
his religion, or blaſpheme his Saviour. Addiſ, on the Chr. Rel.
AM PL E. adj. [ampus, Lat.]
1. Large ; wide; extended.
Heav'n deſcends
In univerſal bounty, ſhedding herbs,
And fruits, and flowers, on nature's ample lap.
2. Great in bulk.
Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonſtration of
rief ?—-
g She took 'em, and read 'em in my preſence,
And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
Her delicate cheeks. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. Unlimited; without reſtriction.
Have what you aſk, your preſents I receive;
Land where, and when you pleaſe, with ample leave. Dryd.
4. Liberal; large; without parſimony.
If we ſpeak of ſtrict juſtice, God could no way have been
bound to require man's labours in ſo large and ample manner as
human felicity doth import; in as much as the dignity of this
exceedeth ſo far the other's value. Płocker.
U 5. Large ,
Thomſºn.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A M P
3. Large; ſplendid; without reſervation. -
To diſpoſe the prince the more willingly to undertake his
relief, the earl made ample promiſes, that, within ſo many days
after the ſiege ſhould be raiſed, he would advance his highneſs's
levies with two thouſand men. Clarendon, b. viii.
6. Diffuſive; not contračted; as, an ample narrative; that is, not
an epitome.
A'MPLENEss. n. ſ. [from ample.] The quality of being ample;
largeneſs ; ſplendour.
jº it is for a perſon of my condition to produce any
thing in proportion either to the ampleneſs of the body you re-
preſent, or of the places you bear. South.
To A'MPLIATE. v. a. [amplio, Lat.] To enlarge; to make
greater; to extend.
He ſhall ſolemnly look upon it, not only to deſtroy ours, but
to eſtabliſh his own ; not to traduce or extenuate, but to ex-
plain and dilucidate, to add and ampliate, according to the cuſ-
tom of the ancients. Brown's Preface to Vulgar Errours.
AMPLIA'tion. m.ſ.. [from ampliate.]
1. Enlargement; exaggeration; extenſion:
Odious matters admit not of an ampliation, but ought to be
reſtrained and interpreted in the mildeſt ſenſe. Ayliffe's Parer.
2. Diffuſeneſs; enlargement.
The obſcurity of the ſubjećt, and the prejudice and prepoſ-
ſeſſion of moſt readers, may plead excuſe for any ampliations or
repetitions that may be found, whilſt I labour to expreſs myſelf
plain and full. Holder's Elements of Speech, Prºface.
To AMPLI'FIcAt F. v. a. ſamplifico, Lat.] To enlarge; to
ſpread out; to amplify. Dići.
AMPLIFICATION. n. y ſamplification, Fr. amplificatio, Lat.]
1. Enlargement; extenſion.
2. It is uſually taken in a rhetorical ſenſe, and implies exaggerated
repreſentation, or diffuſe narrative; an image heightened be-
yond reality; a narrative enlarged with many circumſtances.
I ſhall ſummarily, without any amplification at all, ſhew in
what manner defects have been ſupplied. Sir j. Davies.
Things unknown ſeem greater than they are, and are uſu-
ally received with amplifications above their nature.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi.
Is the poet juſtifiable for relating ſuch incredible amplifica-
tions * It may be anſwered, if he had put theſe extravagances
into the mouth of Ulyſſes, he had been unpardonable; but
they ſuit well with the charaćter of Alcinous. Pope's Od, notes.
A'MPLIFIER. m. ſ. [from To amplify.] One that enlarges any
thing; one that exaggerates ; one that repreſents any thing
with a large diſplay of the beſt circumſtances; it being uſually
taken in a good ſenſe.
Dorillaus could need no amplifier's mouth for the higheſt
point of praiſe. Sidney, b. ii.
To A'MPLIFY. v. a. ſamplifier, Fr.]
1. To enlarge ; to encreaſe any material ſubſtance, or obječt of
ſenſe.
So when a great moneyed man hath divided his cheſts, and
coins, and bags, he ſeemeth to himſelf richer than he was: and
therefore a way to amplify any thing, is to break it, and to make
anatomy of it in ſeveral parts, and to examine it according to
the ſeveral circumſtances. Bacon's Eſſays.
All concaves that proceed from more narrow to more broad,
do amplify the found at the coming out. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. To enlarge, or extend any thing incorporeal.
For as the reputation of the Roman prelates grew up in theſe
blind ages, ſo grew up in them withal, a deſire of amplifying
their power, that they might be as great in temporal forces, as
mens opinions have formed them in ſpiritual matters. Raleigh.
3. To exaggerate any thing; to enlarge it by the manner of re-
preſentation.
Since I have plainly laid open the negligence and errours of
every age that is paſt, I would not willingly ſeem to flatter the
preſent, by amplifying the diligence and true judgment of thoſe
ſervitours that have laboured in this vineyard. Davies on Irel.
Thy general is my lover; I have been
The book of his good ačts; whence men have read
His fame unparallel’d, haply amplified. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
4. To enlarge ; to improve by new additions.
I feel age advancing, and my health is inſufficient to increaſe
and ampliſy theſe remarks, to confirm and improve theſe rules,
and to illuminate the ſeveral pages. J/atts.
To A'MPLIFY. v. n. Frequently with the particle on.
1. To ſpeak largely in many words; to lay one's ſelf out in dif-
fuſion.
When you affect to amplify on the former branches of a diſ.
courſe, you will often lay a neceſſity upon yourſelf of contrac-
ting the latter, and prevent yourſelf in the moſt important part
of your deſign. - J/atts's Logick.
2. To form large or pompous repreſentations.
I have ſometimes been forced to amplify on others; but here
where the ſubject is ſo fruitful, that the harveſt overcomes the
reaper, I am ſhortened by my chain. Dryd. Fab. Ded.
Homer amplifies, not invents; and as there was really a peo-
ple called Cyclopeans, ſo they might be men of great ſtature,
or giants. Pope's Odyſſey, notes,
A'MPLITUDE. m. ſ. ſamplitude, Fr. amplitudo, Lat.]
1. Extent.
Whatever I look upon, within the amplitude of heaven and
earth, is evidence of human ignorance. Glanville's Scepſis,
2. Largeneſs; greatneſs.
Men ſhould learn how ſevere a thing the true inquiſition of
nature is, and accuſtom themſelves, by the light of particulars,
to enlarge their minds to the amplitude of the world, and not
reduce the world to the narrowneſs of their minds. Bacon.
3. Capacity.
With more than human gifts from heaven adorn'd,
Perfections abſolute, graces divine,
And amplitude of mind to greateſt deeds. Parad, Rºgained.
4. Splendour; grandeur; dignity.
In the great frame of kingdoms and commonwealths, it is in
the power of princes, or eſtates, to add amplitude and greatneſs
to their kingdoms. Bacon's Eſſays.
5. Copiouſneſs; abundance.
You ſhould ſay every thing which has a proper and dire&amp;t
tendency to this end; always proportioning the amplitude of
your matter, and the fulneſs of your diſcourſe, to your great
deſign; the length of your time, to the convenience of your
hearers. J1 atts's Logick.
6. Amplitude of the range of a projectile, denotes the horizontal line
ſubtending the path in which it moved. l
• Amplitude, in aſtronomy, an arch of the horizon, intercepted
between the true eaſt and weſt point thereof, and the centre of
the fun or ſtar at its riſing or ſetting. It is eaſtern or ortive,
when the ſtar riſes, and weſtern or occiduous, when the ſtar
ſets. The eaſtern or weſtern amplitude, are alſo called northern
or ſouthern, as they fall in the northern or ſouthern quarters of
the horizon.
8. A4agnetical amplitude, is an arch of the horizon contained be-
tween the fun at his riſing, and the eaſt or weſt point of the
compaſs; or, it is the difference of the riſing or ſetting of the
fun, from the eaſt or weſt parts of the compaſs. Chambers.
A'MPLY. adv. [ample, Lat.]
I. Largely ; liberally.
For whoſe well-being,
So amply, and with hands ſo liberal,
Thou haſt provided all things. Milton's Par. Ioff, b. viii.
The evidence they had before was enough, amply enough, to
convince them ; but they were reſolved not to be convinced :
and to thoſe, who are reſolved not to be convinced, all motives,
all arguments are equal. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. At large; without reſerve.
At return
Of him ſo lately promis'd to thy aid,
The woman's ſeed; obſcurely then foretold,
Now amplier known, thy Saviour, and thy Lord. Par. Ig/?.
3. At large; copiouſly; with a diffuſive detail.
Some parts of a poem require to be amply written, and with
all the force and elegance of words; others muſt be caſt into
ſhadows; that is, paſſed over in ſilence, or but faintly touched.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Prºf.
To AMPUTATE. v. a. ſamputo, Lat..] To cut off a limb : a
word uſed only in chirurgery.
Amongſt the cruizers in private frigates from Dunkirk, it
was complained, that their ſurgeons were too ačtive in ampu-
tating thoſe fraćtured members. J/ſeman's Surgery.
AMPUTA'TION. n.ſ.. [amputatio, Lat.]
The operation of cutting off a limb, or other part of the
body, with an inſtrument of ſteel. The uſual method of per-
forming it, in the inſtance of a leg, is as follows. The proper
part for the operation being four or five inches below the knee.
the ſkin and fleſh are firſt to be drawn very tight upwards, and
ſecured from returning by a ligature two or three fingers broad :
above this ligature another looſe one is paſſed, for the gripe;
which being twiſted by means of a ſtick, may be ſtraitened to
any degree at pleaſure. Then the patient being convenientl
ſituated, and the operator placed to the inſide of the limb,which
is to be held by one aſſiſtant above, and another below the part
deſigned for the operation, and the gripe ſufficiently twiſted, to
prevent too large an haemorrhage, the fleſh is, with a ſtroke or
two, to be ſeparated from the bone with the diſmembering knife.
Then the perioſtium being alſo divided from the bone with the
back of the knife, ſaw the bone aſunder, with as few ſtrokes as
poſſible. When two parallel bones are concerned, the fleſh that
grows between them muſt likewiſe be ſeparated before the uſe
of the ſaw. This being done, the gripe may be flackened, to
give an opportunity of ſearching for the large blood veſſels, and
ſecuring the hamorrhage at their mouths. After making pro-
per applications to the ſtump, looſen the firſt ligature, and pull
both the ſkin and the fleſh, as far as conveniently may be, over
the ſtump, to cover it; and ſecure them with the croſs ſtitch
made at the depth of half or three quarters of an inch, in the
ſkin. Then apply pledgets, aſtringents, plaiſters, and other
neceſſaries. Chambers.
The Amazons, by the amputation of their right breaſt, had
the freer uſe of their bow. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv.
A'MULET. n. ſ. [amulette, Fr. amuletum, Lat.] An appended
remedy,
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">remedy, or preſervative: a thing hung about the neck, or any
other part of the body, for preventing or curing of ſome parti-
cular diſeaſes.
That ſpirits are corporeal, ſeems at firſt view a conceit derb-
tive unto himſelf; yet herein he eſtabliſheth the doćtrine of
uſtrations, amulets, and charms. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
They do not certainly know the falſity of what they report;
and their ignorance muſt ſerve you as an amult againſt the guilt
both of deceit and malice. Government of the Tongue.
AMURco's 1TY. m. ſ. ſamurca, Lat..] The quality of lees or mo-
ther of anything.
To AMU'SE. v. a. ſamuſer, Fr.]
1. To entertain with tranquillity; to fill with thoughts that en-
gage the mind, without diſtraćting it. To divert implies ſome-
thing more lively, and to pleaſe, ſomething more important.
It is therefore frequently taken in a ſenſe bordering on con-
tempt.
#y think they ſee viſions, and are arrived to ſome extra-
ordinary revelations; when, indeed, they do but dream dreams,
and amuſe themſelves with the fantaſtick ideas of a buſy imagi-
nation. Decay of Piety.
I cannot think it natural for a man, who is much in love, to
amuſe himſelf with trifles. Walſh.
2. To draw on from time to time; to keep in expectation; as,
he amuſed his followers with idle promiſes.
AMU's EMENT. m. ſ. [amuſement, Fr.] That which amuſes; en-
tertainment.
Every intereſt or pleaſure of life, even the moſt trifling amuſe-
ment, is ſuffered to poſtpone the one thing neceſſary. Rogers.
During his confinement, his amuſement was to give poiſon to
dogs and cats, and ſee them expire by flower or quicker tor-
mentS. Pope's Eth. Epiſt. notes.
I was left to ſtand the battle, while others, who had better
talents than a draper, thought it no unpleaſant amuſement to
look on with ſafety, whilſt another was giving them diverſion,
at the hazard of his liberty. Swift.
AMU's ER. n.ſ.. [amuſeur, Fr.] He that amuſes, as with falſe
promiſes. The French word is always taken in an ill ſenſe.
AMU'sive. adj. [from amuſe.] That which has the power of a-
muſing.
But amaz'd,
Beholds th’ amuſive arch before him fly,
Then vaniſh quite away. Thomſon's Spring.
AMY'GDAL At E. adj. [amygdala, Lat.] Made of almonds.
AMy'GDALINE. adj. [amygdala, Lat..] Relating to almonds;
reſembling almonds.
AN. article. [ane, Saxon. een, Dutch, eine, German.] The ar-
ticle indefinite, uſed before a vowel, or h mute. See A.
1. One, but with leſs emphaſis; as, there ſtands a houſe.
Since he cannot be always employed in ſtudy, reading, and
converſation, there will be many an hour, beſides what his ex-
erciſes will take up. Locke.
2. Any, or ſome; as, an elephant might ſwim in this water.
He was no way at an uncertainty, nor ever in the leaſt at a
loſs concerning any branch of it. Locke on St. Paul's Epiſtles.
A wit’s a feather, and a chief a rod,
An honeſt man's the nobleſt work of God. Pope.
3. Sometimes it ſignifies, like a, ſome particular ſtate; but this
is now diſuſed.
It is certain, that odours do, in a ſmall degree, nouriſh; eſpe-
cially the odour of wine; and we ſee men an hungred do love
to ſmell hot bread. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
4. An is ſometimes, in old authours, a contračtion of and if.
He can't flatter, he
An honeſt mind and plain, he muſt ſpeak truth;
An they will take it ſo; if not, he's plain. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
5. Sometimes a contraction of and before if:
Well I know
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it.
He will an’ if he live to be a man.
Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
6. Sometimes it is a contračtion of as if
My next pretty correſpondent, like Shakeſpeare's lion in Py-
ramus and Thiſbe, roars an it were any nightingale.
- Addiſon. Guardian, N° 121.
4N4. adv. [3,4,] A word uſed in the preſcriptions of phyſick,
importing the like quantity; as, wine and honey, à or and 3ii;
that is, of wine and honey each two ounces.
In the ſame weight prudence and innocence take,
4na of each does the juſt mixture make. Cowley.
He'll bring an apothecary,with a chargeable long bill of anas.
* - - Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
A NA. m. ſ. Books ſo called from the laſt ſyllables of their titles;
as, Scaligerana, Thuaniana; they are looſe thoughts, or caſual
hints, dropped by eminent men, and collected by their friends.
ANACA'MP'tick. adj. [2.2.2%;...] Reflecting, or refle&amp;ted: an
*amptick ſound, an echo ; an anacamptick hill, a hill that
produces an echo.
NACA'M Pricks. m. ſ. The doćtrine of refle&amp;ted light, or ca-
toptricks. It has no fingular.
** AT HARTick; n.ſ. (See CATH ARtick.] Any medicine
that works upwards.
(::),...
Jºſt fiſy.
ANACEPHALEO'SIS. m. ſ ſayazıtax4.2%:..] Recapitulation;
or ſummary of the principal heads of a diſcourſe. Djº.
ANA'chor E.T.E. l n.ſ. [ſometimes viciouſly writen anchorite;
ANA'chor IT E. } avazºğrn...] A monk, who, with the leave
of his ſuperiour, leaves the convent for a more auſtere and ſo-
litary life. -
Yet lies not love dead here, but here doth ſit,
Vow'd to this trench, like an anachorite. 1)onnt.
ANA'chronis M. n.ſ.. [from 24 and zºº..] An errour in com-
puting time, by which events are miſplaced with regard to each
other. It ſeems properly to ſignify an errour by which an event
is placed too early ; but is generally uſed for any errour in chro-
nology.
This leads me to the defence of the famous anachroniſm; in
making Æneas and Dido cotemporaries: for it is certain, that
the hero lived almoſt two hundred years before the building of
Carthage. Dryden’s Virgil, Dedicat.
ANAcLA"Ticks. n.ſ. [2.2 and xxx...] The doćtrine of refrac-
ted light; dioptricks. It has no fingular.
ANADIPLOSIS. m. ſ. [3,2}=x_{...] Reduplication; a figure
in rhetorick, in which the laſt word of a foregoing member
of a period becomes the firſt of the following; as, he retained
his virtues amidſt all his misfortunes, misfortunes which only his
virtue brought upon him. *
ANAGoGE'TICAL. adj. [away&amp;yr.] That which contributes or
relates to ſpiritual elevation, or religious raptures; myſterious;
elevated above humanity. Dić7.
ANAGo'GIcAL. adj. [anagogique, Fr.] Myſterious ; elevated;
religiouſly exalted. Die?.
ANAGo'G1cALLY. adv. [from anagogical.] Myſteriouſly; with
religious elevation.
ANAG RAM. n.ſ. [44 and yºgawa.] A conceit ariſing from
the letters of a name tranſpoſed; as this, of Płºi,l,l,i,a,n, N,2,3,
attorney-general to Charles I, a very laborious man, I mayl in
law.
Though all her parts be not in th' uſual place,
She hath yet the anagrams of a good face:
If we might put the letters but one way;
In that lean dearth of words, what could we ſay Donne.
Thy genius calls thee not to purchaſe fame
In keen iambicks, but mild anagram. Dryden.
ANAGRA'MMAT is M. m. ſ. [from anagram.] The aët or präc-
tice of making anagrams.
The only quinteſſence that hitherto the alchymy of wit
could draw out of names, is anagrammatiſ”, or metagramma-
matiſm, which is a diſſolution of a name truly written into his
letters, as his elements, and a new connexion of it by artificial
tranſpoſition, without addition, ſubſtraction, or change of any
letter into different words, making ſome perfect ſenſe appliable
to the perſon named. Camden.
ANA GRAMMATIST. n.ſ.. [from anagram.] A maker of ana-
grams.
To ANAGRA'MMATIzE. v. n. [anagrammatiſer, Fr.] To make
anagrams.
ANALE'ptick. adj. [2-axºzº..] Comforting; corroborating:
a term of phyſick.
Analeptick medicines cheriſh the nerves, and renew the ſpi-
rits and ſtrength. Quincy.
ANAlo'o IcAL. adj. [from analogy J
1. Uſed by way of analogy. It ſeems properly diſtinguiſhed from
analogous, as words from things; analºgºus ſignifies having re-
lation, and analogical having the quality of repreſenting rela-
tlOn.
It is looked on only as the image of the true God, and that
not as a proper likeneſs, but by analogical repreſentation.
Stillingfleet's Def of Diſt, on Rom. Idolatry.
When a word, which originally ignifies any particular idea
or object, is attributed to ſeveral other objects, not by way of
reſemblance, but on the account of ſome evident reference to
the original idea, this is peculiarly called an analogical word;
ſo a ſound or healthy pulſe, a found digeſtion, ſound ſleep, are
ſo called, with reference to a ſound and healthy conſtitution;
but if you ſpeak of ſound doćtrine, or ſound ſpeech, this is by
way of reſemblance to health, and the words are metaphorical.
J/atts's Lºgick.
2. Analogous; having reſemblance or relation.
There is placed the minerals between the inanimate and ve-
getable province, participating ſomething analogical to either.
Halºs's Origin of Aºnkind.
ANALO'Grc Ally. adv. [from analogical.] In an analogical man-
ner; in an analogous manner. - *- :-
I am convinced, from the ſimplicity and uniformity of the
Divine Nature, and of all his works, that there is ſome one
univerſal principle, running through the whole ſyſtem of crea-
tures analºgically, and congruous to their relative natures.
Cheyne's Philºſºph. Principles.
AN Alo'G1cALNEss. m.ſ.. [from analogical.] The quality of be-
ing analogical; fitneſs to be applied for the illuſtration of ſome
analogy.
ANA'Loč is M. m. ſ. [ .222; ….] An argument from the cauſe
to the effect.
To ANA'Logiz F. v. a. [from analºgy.] To explain by way of
I analogy;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N A
A N A
analogy; to form ſome reſemblance between different things;
to conſider ſomething with regard to its analogy with ſome-
what elſe.
We have ſyſtems of material bodies, diverſy figured and
ſituated, if ſeparately confidered; they repreſent the object of
the deſire, which is analogized by attraction or gravitation.
Cheyne's Philºſ. Principles.
ANA'logous. adj. [2,3 and x/yº.] -
1. Having analogy; bearing ſome reſemblance or proportion;
having ſomething parallel.
Exerciſe makes things eaſy, that would be otherwiſe very
hard; as, in labour, watchings, heats, and colds; and then
there is ſomething analogous in the exerciſe of the mind, to that
of the body. It is folly and infirmity that makes us delicate
and froward. L'E/irange.
Many important conſequences may be drawn from the ob-
ſervation of the moſt common things, and analogous reaſonings
from the cauſes of them. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. It has the word to before the thing to which the reſemblance is
noted.
This incorporeal ſubſtance may have ſome ſort of exiſtence,
analogous to corporeal extenſion: though we have no adequate
conception hereof. Locke.
ANATL OGY. n. ſ. [2,2x2y2.]
1. Reſemblance between things with regard to ſome circum-
ſtances or effects; as, learning is ſaid to enlighten the mind;
that is, it is to the mind what light is to the eye, by enabling
it to diſcover that which was hidden before.
From God it hath proceeded, that the church hath evermore
held a preſcript form of common prayer, although not in all
things every where the ſame, yet, for the moſt part, retaining
the ſame analogy. Hooker, b. v. § 25.
What I here obſerve of extraordinary revelation and pro-
phecy, will, by analºgy and due proportion, extend even to
thoſe communications of God's will, that are requiſite to ſal-
vation. South.
2. When the thing to which the analogy is ſuppoſed, happens to
be mentioned, analogy has after it the particles to or with ;
when both the things are mentioned after analogy, the particle
between or betwixt is uſed.
If the body politick have any analogy to the natural, an act of
oblivion were neceſſary in a hot diſtemper'd ſtate.
Dryd. Pref. to Abſalom and Achitop.
By analºgy with all other liquours and concretions, the form
of the chaos, whether liquid or concrete, could not be the ſame
with that of the preſent earth. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
If we make him expreſs the cuſtoms of our country, rather
than of Rome, it is either when there was ſome analogy be-
twixt the cuſtoms, or to make him more eaſy to vulgar under-
{tanding. Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
3. By grammarians, it is uſed to ſignify the agreement of ſeve-
ral words in one common mode; as, from love is formed loved,
from hate, hated, from grieve, grieved.
ANA'Lysis. m. ſ. [3,4×wº.]
1. A ſeparation of a compound body into the ſeveral parts of
which it conſiſts.
There is an account of dew falling, in ſome places, in the
form of butter, or greaſe, which grows extremely fetid; ſo that
the analyſis of the dew of any place, may, perhaps, be the beſt
method of finding ſuch contents of the ſoil as are within the
reach of the ſun. Arbuthnot.
2. A conſideration of any thing in parts, ſo as that one particu-
lar is firſt conſidered, then another.
Analyſis conſiſts in making experiments and obſervations,
and in drawing general concluſions from them by induction,
and admitting of no objećtions againſt the concluſions, but ſuch
as are taken from experiments, or other certain truths.
- Newton's Opticks.
3. A ſolution of any thing, whether corporeal or mental, to its
firſt elements; as, of a ſentence to the ſingle words; of a com-
pound word, to the particles and words which form it; of a
tune, to ſingle notes; of an argument, to ſimple propoſitions.
We cannot know anything of nature, but by an analyſis of
its true initial cauſes; till we know the firſt ſprings of natural
motions, we are ſtill but ignorants. Glanville's Sºpſis Scientif.
ANARY'TICAL. adj. [from analyſis.]
1. That which reſolves anything into firſt principles; that which
ſeparates any compound. See ANA lysis.
Either may be probably maintained againſt the inaccurate-
neſs of the analytical experiments vulgarly relied on. Boyle.
2. That which proceeds by analyſis, or by taking the parts of a
compound into diſtinét and particular conſideration.
Deſcartes hath here infinitely outdone all the philoſophers
that went before him, in giving a particular and analytical ac-
$ount of the univerſal fabrick: yet he intends his principles but
for hypotheſes. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
****"Tically adv. [from analytical.] In ſuch a mannér as
feparates compounds into fimples. See ANAlysis.
ANALyrick, adj. [***..]. The manner of reſolving com-
pounds into the fimple conſtituent or component parts, ap-
plied chiefly to mental operations.
He was in logick a great critick,
Profoundly ſkill'd in analytick, Hudibras,
Analytick method takes the whole compound as it finds it, whic-
ther it be a ſpecies or an individual, and leads us into the know-
ledge of it, by reſolving into its firſt principles, or parts, its ge-
nerick nature, and its ſpecial properties; and therefore it is
called the method of reſolution. //atts's Logick.
To A'NALYZ.E. v. a. […] To reſolve a compound in-
to its firſt principles. See ANAlysis.
Chymiſtry enabling us to depurate bodies, and, in ſome mea-
ſure, to analyze them, and take aſunder their heterogeneous
parts, in many chymical experiments, we may, better than in
others, know what manner of bodies we employ; art having
made them more ſimple or uncompounded, than mature alone is
wont to preſent them us. Boyle.
To analyze the immorality of any action into its laſt prin-
ciples; if it be inquired, why ſuch an action is to be avoided,
the immediate anſwer is, becauſe it is ſin. Norris's Miſcell.
When the ſentence is diſtinguiſhed into ſubject and predi-
cate, propoſition, argument, act, object, cauſe, effect, adjunct,
oppoſite, &amp;c. then it is analyzed analogically and metaphyſi-
cally. This laſt is what is chiefly meant in the theological
ſchools, when they ſpeak of analyzing a text of ſcripture.
J/atts's Logick.
A'N'AlyzER. m. ſ. [from To analyze.] That which has the power
of analyzing. -
Particular reaſons incline me to doubt, whether the fire be
the true and univerſal analyzer of mixt bodies. , Boyle.
ANAMORPHO'S/S. m. ſ. [a,2 and azºº...] Deformation; a
perſpective projećtion of any thing, ſo that to the eye, at one
point of view, it ſhall appear deformed, in another, an exact
and regular repreſentation. Sometimes it is made to appear
confuſed to the naked eye, and regular, when viewed in a mir-
rour of a certain form.
ANANAS. n.ſ. The pine apple.
It has a flower conſiſting of one leaf, divided into three
parts, and funnel-ſhaped; the embryos produced in the tu-
bercles, afterwards become fruit; the ſeeds in the tubercles are
ſmall, and almoſt kidney-ſhaped.
The ſpecies are, 1. Oval-ſhaped pine apple, with a whitiſh
fleſh. 2. Pyramidal pine apple, with a yellow fleſh. 3. Pine
apple, with ſmooth leaves. 4. Pine apple, with ſhining green
leaves, and ſcarce any ſpines on their edges. 5. The olive-
coloured pine.
The firſt ſort is moſt common in Europe, but the fruit of the
ſecond is larger, better flavoured, and its juice not ſo aſtrin-
gent. The fifth ſort is the moſt rare in Europe, but eſteemed
above all the reſt. Theſe plants are propagated by ſuckers;
and from the crowns which grow on the top of the fruit. Ailſ.
Witneſs thou beſt anana, thou the pride
Of vegetable life, beyond whate'er
The poets imag'd in the golden age. Thomſ. Summer.
ANA NAS, wild. The ſame with penguin. See PENGUIN.
ANA"PHORA, n.ſ.. [aratoga..] A figure, when ſeveral clauſes
of a ſentence are begun with the ſame word, or ſound; as, -
Jºhere is the wiſ. A Where is the ſcribe 2 ///ere is the diſputer of
this world?
ANAP LERO'Tick. adj. […awazºº...] That which fills up any
vacuity; uſed of applications which promote fleſh.
A/NARCH. n.ſ. [See ANARchy..] An authour of confu-
ſidn.
Him thus the anarch old,
With fault ring ſpeech, and viſage incompos'd,
Anſwer'd. Milton's Paradiſ? Loft, b. ii.
ANA'RCHICAL. adj. [from anarchy..] Confuſed; without rule
or government.
In this axarchical and rebellious ſtate of human nature, the
faculties belonging to the material world preſume to determine
the nature of ſubjects belonging to the ſupreme Spirit.
Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principles.
A'N ARCHY. m. ſ. […aeza.] Want of government; a ſtate
in which every man is unaccountable; a ſtate without magi-
ſtracy.
Where eldeſt night
And chaos, anceſtors of nature, hold
Eternal anarchy, amidſt the noiſe
Of endleſs wars, and by confuſion ſtand. Paradiſ Ig/?.
Arbitrary power is but the firſt natural ſtep from anarchy, or
the ſavage life; the adjuſting power and freedom being an ef-
fect and conſequence of maturer thinking. Swift.
ANASA'RCA. m. ſ. [from 22 and gagg.) A ſort of dropſy, where
the whole ſubſtance is ſtuffed with pituitous humours. Q:(incy.
When the lympha ſtagnates, or is extravaſated under the
ſkin, it is called an amaſarca. Arbuthnot on Diet.
ANASA'RCous. adj. [from anaſarca.] Relating to an anaſarca ;
partaking of the nature of an anaſarca. -
A gentlewoman laboured of an aſcites, with an angſarcous
ſwelling on her belly, thighs, and legs. Iłiſºzºan.
ANAstom A^T Ick. adj. [from a 3 and sºuz.] That which has
the quality of opening the veſſels, or of removing obſtruc-
tlonS.
AN/STOMOSIS. n.ſ.. [from 32 and rºua.] The inoſculation
of veſſels, or the opening of one veſſel into another; as, of the
arteries into the veins.
I A.N.”—
4.
t
.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N A
A N C
ANASTROPHE, n. ſ. ſaxºp, a prepoſterous placing, from
&amp;rareiºa.] A figure whereby words which ſhould have been
precedent, are poſtponed.
ANA"THE MA. n. ſ. [*ašiuo..]
I. A curſe pronounced by eccleſiaſtical authority; excommunica-
tion.
Her bare anathemas fall but like ſo many bruta fulmina upon
the ſchiſmatical; who think themſelves ſhrewdly hurt, forſooth,
by being cut off from the body, which they chooſe not to be of.
- South's Sermons.
2. The obječt of the curſe, or perſon curſed. This ſeems the ori-
ginal meaning, though now little uſed.
ANATHEMA'tical. adj. [from anathema.] That which has
the properties of an anathema; that which relates to an ana-
thema.
ANATHEMA'tically. adv. [from anathematical.] In an ana-
thematical manner. -
To ANATHE'MAT1ze. v. a. [from amathema J. To pronounce
accurſed by eccleſiaſtical authority; to excommunicate.
They were therefore to be anathematized after this manner,
and, with deteſtation, branded and baniſhed out of the church.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
ANAT1'Ferous. adj. [from anas and fero, Lat.] Producing
ducks.
If there be anatiferous trees, whoſe corruption breaks forth
into barnacles; yet, if they corrupt, they degenerate into mag-
gots, which produce not them again. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
ANA'tocIsM. n.{ [anatoriſmus, i. analoxoº..] The accumu-
lation of intereſt upon intereſt; the addition of the intereſt due
for money lent, to the original ſum. A ſpecies of uſury gene-
rally forbidden.
ANATO'MICAL. adj. [from anatomy.]
1. Relating or belonging to anatomy.
When we are taught by logick to view a thing completely
in all its parts, by the help of diviſion, it has the uſe of an ana-
tomical knife, which diffects an animal body, and ſeparates the
veins, arteries, nerves, muſcles, membranes, &amp;c. and ſhews us
the ſeveral parts which go to the compoſition of a complete ani-
mal. Watts's Logick.
2. Proceeding upon principles taught in anatomy; conſidered as
the obječt of anatomy.
There is a natural, involuntary diſtortion of the muſcles,
which is the anatomical cauſe of laughter; but there is another
cauſe of laughter, which decency requires. Swift.
3. Anatomized; diffected; ſeparated.
The continuation of ſolidity is apt to be confounded with,
and, if we will look into the minute anatomical parts of matter,
is little different from, hardneſs. Locke.
ANATO'MICALLY. adv. [from anatomical.] In an anatomical
manner; in the ſenſe of an anatomiſt; according to the doc-
trine of anatomy.
While ſome affirmed it had no gall, intending only thereby
no evidence of anger or fury, others have conſtrued anatomically,
and denied that part at all. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
ANA''Tomist. n.ſ. […aloux.] He that ſtudies the ſtructure of
animal bodies, 'by means of diſſection; he that divides the bo-
dies of animals, to diſcover the various parts.
Anatomiſts adjudged, that if nature had been ſuffered to run
her own courſe, without this fatal interruption, he might have
doubled his age. - Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
Hence when anatomiſts diſcourſe,
How like brutes organs are to ours;
They grant, if higher powers think fit,
A bear might ſoon be made a wit;
And that, for any thing in nature,
Pigs might ſqueak love odes, dogs bark ſatire. Prior.
To ANA''Tomize. v. a. […ipow.]
1. To diffect an animal; to divide the body into its component
or conſtituent parts. -
Our induſtry muſt even anatomize every particle of that bo-
dy, which we are to uphold. Hooker, Dedicat.
2. To lay anything open diſtinétly, and by minute parts.
I ſpeak but brotherly of him, but ſhould I anatomize him to
thee as he is, I muſt bluſh and weep, and then muſt look pale
and wonder. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Then dark diſtinétions reaſon's light diſguis'd,
And into atoms truth anatomiz'd.
ANATOMY. n. ſ. […alouiz]
1. The art of diffecting the body.
It is therefore in the anatomy of the mind, as in that of the
body; more good will accrue to mankind, %. to the
large, open, and perceptible parts, than by ſtudying too much
ſuch finer nerves and veſſels, as will for ever eſcape our obſer-
vation. Pope's Eſſay on Man, Prof.
2. The doćtrine of the ſtrućture of the body, learned by diſſec-
tion.
Let the muſcles be well inſerted and bound together, ac-
cording to the knowledge of them which is given us by ana-
tomy. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
3. º: aćt of dividing anything, whether corporeal or intellec-
tual.
Denham.
Vol. I.
When a moneyed man hath divided his cheſts, he ſeemeth to
himſelf richer than he was; therefore, a way to amplify any
thing, is to break it, and to make anatomy of it in ſeveral parts.
Bacon's Eſſays.
4. The body ſtripped of its integuments ; a ſkeleton.
O that my tongue were in the thunder's mouth,
Then with a paſſion I would ſhake the world,
And rouze from ſleep that fell anatomy,
Which cannot hear a feeble lady's voice. Shakespeare. K. jºhn.
5. By way of irony or ridicule, a thin meagre perſon.
They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-fac’d villain,
A meer anatomy, a mountebank,
A thread-bare juggler, and a fortune-teller,
A needy hollow-ey'd, ſharp-looking wretch,
A living dead man. Shakeſpeare's Comedy of Errours.
A's A1 Ros. a. ſ. The ſcum which ſwims upon the molten glaſs in
the furnace, which, when taken off, melts in the air, and then
coagulates into common ſalt. It is likewiſe that ſalt which ga-
thers upon the walls of vaults.
A'N BURY. fé See AM BURY.
A'N CESTOR. m. ſ. [anceſſor, Lat. anceſ/re, Fr.] One from
whom a perſon deſcends, either by the father or the mother. It
is diſtinguiſhed from predeceſſor; which is not, like anceſtor, a
natural, but civil denomination. An hereditary monarch ſuc-
ceeds to his ance/hors; an elečtive, to his predeceſſors.
And ſhe lies buried with her anceſtors,
O, in a tomb where never ſcandal ſlept,
Save this of hers. Shakeſp. Muchado about Nothing:
Cham was the paternal anceſſor of Ninus, the father of Chus,
the grandfather of Nimrod; whoſe ſon was Belus, the father
of Ninus. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Obſcure! why pr’ythee what am I? I know
My father, grandſire, and great grandſire too:
If farther I derive my pedigree,
I can but gueſs beyond the fourth degree.
The reſt of my forgotten anceſſors,
Were ſons of earth like him, or ſons of whores.
Dryden’s Perſius, ſat. vi.
A'Nc Estr E L. adj. [from anceſtor.] Claimed from anceſtors ;
relating to anceſtors: a term of law.
Limitation in actions anceſtrel, was anciently ſo here in
England. Hale's Law of England.
A'Ncestry. m.ſ [from anceſſor.]
1. Lineage; a ſeries of anceſtors, or progenitors; the perſons
who compoſe the lineage. *
Phedon Ihight, quoth he ; and do advance
Mine anceſtry from famous Coradin,
Who firſt to raiſe our houſe to honour did begin, Fairy Q,
A tenacious adherence to the rights and liberties tranſmitted
from a wiſe and virtuous anceſtry, publick ſpirit, and a love of
one's country, are the ſupport and ornaments of government.
- Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 5.
Say from what ſcepter'danceſtry ye claim,
Recorded eminent in deathleſs fame? Pope's Odyſſey.
2. The honour of deſcent; birth. -
Title and anceſtry render a good man more illuſtrious, but
an ill one, more contemptible. Addiſon. Guardian, N° 123.
A'NchENTRY. n.ſ.. [from ancient, and therefore properly to be
written ancientry.] Antiquity of a family; ancient dignity;
appearance or proof of antiquity. -
Wooing, wedding, and repenting, is a Scotch jig, a mea-
ſure and a cinque pace; the firſt ſuit is hot and haſty, like a
Scotch jig, and full as fantaſtical; the wedding mannerly mo-
deſt, as a meaſure full of ſtate and anchentry; and then comes
repentance, and with his bad legs falls into the cinque pace
faſter and faſter, till he ſinks into his grave.
- Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
A/N CHOR. m.ſ.. [anchora, Lat.]
1. A heavy iron, compoſed of a long ſhank, having a ring at one
end to which the cable is faſtened, and at the other, branching
out into two arms or flooks, tending upwards, with barbs or
edges on each ſide. Its uſe is to hold the ſhip, by being fixed
to the ground.
He ſaid, and wept; then ſpread his ſails before
The winds, and reach'd at length the Cuman ſhore: , ,
Their anchors dropt, his crew the veſſels moor. Dryd. Æn.
2. It is uſed, by a metaphor, for any thing which confers ſtability
or ſecurity. -
Which hope we have as an anchor of the ſoul, both ſure and
ſtedfaſt, and which entereth not into that within the veil.
Hebrews, vi. I c.
3. The forms of ſpeech in which it is moſt commonly uſed,
are, to caſt anchor, to lye or ride at anchor.
The Turkiſh general, deceived of his expe&amp;tations, and per-
ceiving that the Rhodians would not be drawn forth to battle
at ſea, withdrew his fleet, when cºffing anchor, and landing his
men, he burnt the corn. Knolles's Hiſtory ºf the Türks.
Ent’ring with the tide,
He drºpp'd his anchors, and his oars he ply'd:
Furl’d cwery ſail, and drawing down the maſt,
His veſſel moor'd, and made with haulſers faſt. Dryd. Homer.
X Far
-
ſ
-
i.
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N C
A N ID
Far from your capital my ſhip reſides
At Reithrus, and ſecure at anchor rides. Pope's Oºſy.
To A'Nchor. v. m. [from anchor.]
1. To caſt anchor; to lie at anchor.
The fiſhermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice; and yon tall anchoring bark
Diminiſh'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy
Almoſt too ſmall for fight. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Near Calais the Spaniards anchored, expecting their land-
forces, which came not. Bacon.
Or the ſtrait courſe to rocky Chios plow,
And anchor under Mimos' ſhaggy brow. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To ſtop at ; to reſt on.
My intention, hearing not my tongue,
Anchors on Iſabel. - Shakeſp.
My tongue ſhould to my ears not name my boys,
"Till that my nails were anchord in thine eyes. Shakespeare R. III.
A'Nchor. m. ſ. Shakeſpeare ſeems to have uſed this word for an-
choret, or an abſtemious recluſe perſon.
To deſperation turn my truſt and hope
An anchor's cheer in priſon be my ſcope Shakespeare. Hamlet.
A'NchoR-hold. n.ſ.. [from anchor and hold.] The hold or fait-
neſs of the anchor; and, figuratively, ſecurity.
The old Engliſh could expreſs moſt aptly all the conceits of
the mind in their own tongue, without borrowing from any ;
as for example: the holy ſervice of God, which the Latins
called religion, becauſe it knitted the minds of men together,
and moſt people of Europe have borrowed the ſame from them,
they called moſt ſignificantly ean-fºſineſ, as the one and only
aſſurance and faſt anchor-hold of our ſouls health. Cambden.
A'NchoR-SMIt H. n.ſ.. [from anchor and ſmith..] The maker or
forger of anchors.
Smithing comprehends all trades, which uſe either forge or
file, from the anchor-ſmith to the watchmaker; they all work-
ing by the ſame rules, though not with equal exactneſs, and all
uſing the ſame tools, though of ſeveral ſizes,
Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
A'Nchor AG E. m. ſ. [from anchor.]
1. The hold of the anchor.
Let me reſolve whether there be indeed ſuch efficacy in nur-
ture and firſt production; for if that ſuppoſal ſhould fail us, all
our anchorage were looſe, and we ſhould but wander in a wild
ſea. J/otton.
2. The ſet of anchors belonging to a ſhip.
Lo as the bark that hath diſcharg’d her freight,
Returns with precious lading to the bay
From whence at firſt ſhe weigh’d her anchorage;
Cometh Andronicus. Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
3. The duty paid for the liberty of anchoring in a port.
Å'N chor Ed. participial adj. [from To anchor.] Held by the an-
chor.
Like a well twiſted cable, holding faſt
The anchor’d veſſel in the loudeſt blaſt. J7aller.
A'NchoRET. Un. ſ. [contraćted from anachoret, dazºlz.] A
A/N chor ITE. } recluſe; a hermit; one that retires to the more
ſevere duties of religion.
His poetry indeed he took along with him; but he made that
an anchorite as well as himſelf. Sprat.
You deſcribe ſo well your hermitical ſtate of life, that none
of the ancient anchorites could go beyond you, for a cave in a
rock, with a fine ſpring, or any of the accommodations that be-
fit a ſolitary life. Pope's Letters.
ANcho'v Y. m. ſ. [from anchova, Span. or anchioe, Ital. of the
ſame fignification.]. A little ſea-fiſh, much uſed by way of
ſauce, or ſeaſoning. Scaliger deſcribes the anchovy as of the her-
ring kind, about the length of a finger, having a pointed
ſnout, a wide mouth, no teeth, but gums as rough as a ſaw.
Others make it a ſort of ſardine, or pilchard ; but others, with
better reaſon, hold it a peculiar ſpecies, very different from ei-
ther. It is caught in the months of May, June, and July, on
the coaſts of Catalonia, Provence, &amp;c. when it conſtantly re-
pairs up the Straits of Gibraltar into the Mediterranean. The
fiſhing is chiefly in the night time; when a light being put on
the ſtern of their little fiſhing veſſels, the anchovies flock found,
and are caught in nets. When the fiſhery is over, they cut off
the heads, take out the galls and guts, then lay them in barrels,
and ſalt them. Savary.
We invent new ſauces and pickles, which reſemble the ani-
mal ferment in taſte and virtue, as the falſo-acid gravies of
meat; the ſalt pickles of fiſh, anchovies, oyſters.
Floyer on the Humours.
ANCIENT. adj. [ancien, Fr. antiquus, Lat.]
1. Old ; that happened long ſince; of old time; not modern.
• Ancient and old are diſtinguiſhed; old relates to the duration of
the thing itſelf, as, an old coat, a coat much worn ; and an-
cient, to time in general, as, an ancient dreſs, a habit uſed in
former times. But this is not always obſerved; for we meu-
tion old cuſions; but though old be ſometimes oppoſed to mo-
derm, ancient is ſeldom oppoſed to new. -
Ancient tenure is that whereby all the manours belonging to the
crown, in St. Edward's or William the Conquerour's days, did
hold. The number and names of which manours, as all others
belºnging to common perſons, he cauſed to be written in a
book, after a ſurvey made of them, now remaining in the ex-
chequer, and ..., book ; and ſuch as by that book
appeared to have belonged to the crown at that time, are called
ancient demeſhcs. Cowell.
2. Old ; that has been of long duration.
With the ancient is wiſdom, and in length of days under-
ſtanding. job, xii. i2.
Thales affirms, that God comprehended all things, and that
God was of all things the moſt arcient, becauſe be never had
any beginning. Raleigh's Hyory ºf the Il orid.
Induſtry
Gave the tall ancient foreſt too his axe. Thomſon's Summer.
3. Paſt; former.
I ſee thy fury: if I longer ſtay,
We ſhall begin our ancient bickerings. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
A'Nci NT. m. ſ. [from ancient, adj.] Thoſe that lived in old time
were called ancients, oppoſed to the moderns.
And though the ancients thus their rules invade,
As kings diſpenſe with laws themſelves have made;
Moderns, beware or if you muſt offend
Againſt the precept, ne'er tranſgreſs its end. Pop. Eff on Crit.
ANCIENT. n.ſ. The flag or ſtreamer of a ſhip, and, formerly,
of a regiment.
ANCIENT. n.ſ. The bearer of a fiag, as was Ancient Piſtol;
whence in preſent uſe, enſign.
A'NcIENTLY, adv. [from ancient.] In old times.
Not far from this is the great city of Trebiſond, which, with
the territory about it, anciently pertained unto this crown; now
unjuſtly poſſeſſed, and as unjuſtly abuſed, by thoſe who have
neither title to hold it, nor virtue to rule it. Sidney, b. ii.
The colewort is not an enemy, though that were anciently re-
ceived, to the vine only ; but it is an enemy to any other plant,
becauſe it draweth ſtrongly the fatteſt juice of the earth.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 480.
ANCIENTN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ancient.] Antiquity; exiſtence from
old times.
The Feſcenine and Saturnian were the ſame; they were
called Saturnian from their ancientneſs, when Saturn reigned in
Italy. Dryden's Dedication to juvena.
A'NcIENTRY. m.ſ.. [from ancient.] The honour of ancient li-
neage; the dignity of birth.
Of all nations under heaven, the Spaniard is the moſt ming-
led, and moſt uncertain. Wherefore, moſt fooliſhly do the
Iriſh think to ennoble themſelves, by wreſting their ancientry.
from the Spaniard, who is unable to derive himſelf from any
in certain. Spenſºr on Ireland.
There is nothing in the between, but getting wenches with
child, wronging the ancientry, ſtealing, fighting.
Shakeſp. If inter's Taſe.
ANC le. See ANK le. - * - -
A'N cony. n.ſ.. [in the iron mills.] A bloom wrought into the
figure of a flat iron bar, about three foot long, with two ſquare
rough knobs, one at each end. - Chambers.
AND. conjunction. - .
1. The particle by which ſentences or terms are joined, which it
is not eaſy to explain by any ſynonimous word. -
Sure his honeſty
Got him ſmall gains, but ſhameleſs flattery
And filthy beverage, and unſeemly thiſt, -
And borrow baſe, and ſome good lady's giſt. Speºſ. Hulb.
What ſhall I do to be for ever known,
And make the age to come my own Cowley.
The Danes unconquer'd offspring march behind ;
And Morini, the laſt of human kind. Dryd.
It ſhall ever be my ſtudy to make diſcoveries of this nature
in human life, and to ſettle the proper diſtinctions between the
virtues and perfections of mankind, and thoſe falſe colours and
reſemblances of them that ſhine alike in the eyes of the vulgar.
- Addiſon. Tatler.
2. And ſometimes ſignifies though, and ſeems a contraction of
and if:
It is the nature of extreme ſelf-lovers, as they will ſet an
houſe on fire, and it were but to roaſt their eggs. Bacon.
3. In and if, the and is redundant, and is omitted by all later
Writers.
I pray thee, Launce, an'§ thou ſeeſt my boy,
Bid him make haſte. hakºff. Two Gentlemen of Perona.
A'N DIRON. m. ſ. [ſuppoſed by Skinner to be corrupted from hand-
iron; an iron that may be moved by the hand, or may ſupply
the place of a hand.] Irons at the end of a fire-grate, in which
the ſpit turns; or irons in which wood is laid to burn. -
if you ſtrike an entire body, as an andiron of braſs, at the
top, it maketh a more treble found, and at the bottom a baſer.
Bacon's Natural Hiſłory, N° 178.
ANDRO'GYNAL. adj. [from arº; and , viz.] Having two ſexes;
hermaphroditical.
AND Rogy NALLY. adv. [from androgynal.] In the form of her-
maphrodites; with two ſexes. -
The examples hereof have undergone no real or new tran-
ſexion, but were androgynally born, and under ſome kind of
hermaphrodites. Brown's Pulgar Erroirs, b. iii.
AND Ro'- .
º
**<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N G
A N G
\
ANDRO'GYNous. adj. The ſame with andrºgynal.
ANDROGYNUS. n.ſ. [Lat. See AND Rocy's A L.] An her-
maphrodite; one that is of both ſexes. -
ANbRotoMY. m. ſ. [from arº; and tºo...] The practice of cut-
ting human bodies. Dić?.
ANEcDoTE. m. ſ. [**}^*..] Something yet unpubliſhed ; ſe-
cret hiſtory.
Some modern anecdotes aver,
He nodded in his elbow-chair. Prior.
ANEMO'GRAPHY. n.ſ.. [avia.o. and y:z:...] The deſcription of
the winds.
ANEMO'METER. m. ſ. [.. pº- and aired..] An inſtrument con-
trived to meaſure the ſtrength or velocity of the wind.
ANE MONE. n.ſ. [*a*..] The wind flower.
Upon the top of its ſingle ſtalk, ſurrounded by a leaf, is pro-
duced one naked flower, of many petals, with many ſtamina in
the center; the ſeeds are collected into an oblong head, and
ſurrounded with a copious down. The principal colours in
anemonies, are white, red, blue, and purple ſometimes curiouſly
intermixed. Millar.
Wind flowers are diſtinguiſhed into thoſe with broad and
hard leaves, and thoſe with narrow and ſoft ones ; of both
which ſorts there are great variety of colours, ſome being dou-
ble, and others ſingle flowered. The broad leaved anemony
roots ſhould be planted about the end of September, and the
ſmall eminences which put forth the leaves ſet uppermoſt.
Theſe with ſmall leaves muſt be ſet after the ſame manner, but
not put into the ground till the end of Oétober.
Mortimer's Art of Husbandry.
From the ſoft wing of vernal breezes ſhed,
Anemonies, auriculas, enrich'd
With ſhining meal o'er all their velvet leaves. Thomſon.
A'NeMoscope. n.ſ. [3-sºº and azórð..] A machine invented to
foretel the changes of the wind. It has been obſerved, that hy-
groſcopes made of cat's gut proved very good anemoſcopes, ſel-
dom failing, by the turning the index about, to foretel the ſhift-
ing of the wind. Chambers.
ANE'NT. prep. A word uſed in the Scotch diale&amp;t.
1. Concerning; about; as, he ſaid nothing anent this particular.
2. Over againſt; oppoſite to ; as, he lives anent the market-houſe.
ANES.
Aw NS. }
A'NEURISM. m. ſ. [3riv;érw.] A diſeaſe of the arteries, in which,
either by a preternatural weakneſs of any part of them, they
become exceſſively dilated, or by a wound through their coats,
the blood is extravaſated amongſt the adjacent cavities.
n.ſ. The ſpires or beards of corn. Dić7.
Sharp's Surgery.
In the orifice, there was a throbbing of the arterial blood, as
in an aneuriſm. Wiſeman's Surgery.
ANE'w. adv. [from a and new.]
1. Over again; another time; repeatedly. This is the moſt
common uſe.
Nor, if at miſchief taken, on the ground
Be ſlain, but pris’ners to the pillar bound,
At either barrier plac'd; nor, captives made,
Be freed, or, arm'd anew, the fight invade. Dryden's Fables.
That as in birth, in beauty you excel,
The muſe might dićtate, and the poet tell:
Your art no other art can ſpeak; and you
To ſhow how well you play, muſt play anew. Prior.
The miſeries of the civil war did, for many years, deter the
inhabitants of our iſland from the thoughts of engaging anew in
ſuch deſperate undertakings. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 28.
2. Newly; in a new manner.
He who begins late, is obliged to form anew the whole diſ-
poſition of his ſoul, to acquire new habits of life, to pračtiſe du-
ties to which he is utterly a ſtranger. Rogers's Sermons.
ANFRActuose. adj. [from amfračius, Lat.] Winding; mazy;
ANFRA'cTUous. ; full of turnings and winding paſſages.
Behind the drum are ſeveral vaults and anſračuoſº cavities in
the ear-bone, ſo to intend the leaſt ſound imaginable, that the
ſenſe might be affected with it; as we ſee in ſubterraneous
caves and vaults, how the ſound is redoubled. Ray.
ANFRA'cTuous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from anſračiuous.] Fulneſs of wind-
ings and turnings.
ANFRA'cTURE. n.ſ.. [from anſračius, Lat.] A turning; a mazy
winding and turning. Dićt.
ANGEL. n.ſ. ['Aylºxo~ ; angelus, Lat.]
1. Originally a meſſenger. A ſpirit employed by God in the ad-
miniſtration of human affairs.
Some holy angel
Fly to the court of England, and unfold
His meſſage ere he come. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Had we ſuch a knowledge of the conſtitution of man, as it is
poſſible angels have, and it is certain his Maker has ; we ſhould
have a quite other idea of his eſſence. Locke.
See HIER ARchy.
2. Angel is ſometimes uſed in a bad ſenſe; as, angels of darkneſs.
And they had a king over them, which was the angel of the
bottomleſs pit. f Revelat. ix. I 1.
3. Angel, in ſcripture, ſometimes means man of God, prophet.
4. Angel is uſed, in the ſtile of love, for a beautiful perſon.
Heav'n bleſs thee!
Thou haſt the ſweeteſt face I ever look'd on.
Sir, as I have a ſoul, ſhe is an angel. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
5. A picce of money anciently coined and impreſſed with an an-
gel, in memory of an obſervation of Pope Gregory, that the
pagan Angli, or Engliſh, were ſo beautiful, that, if they were
chriſtians, they would be Angeli, or angels. The coin was rated
at ten ſhillings.
Take an empty baſon, put an ange' of gold, or what you
will, into it; then go ſo far from the baſon, till you cannot ſee
the angel, becauſe it is not in a right line; then fill the baſon
with water, and you will ſee it out of its place, becauſe of the
reflečtion. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 762.
Couſin, away for England; haſte before,
And, ere our coming, ſee thou ſhake the bags
Of hoarding abbots; their impriſon’d angels -
Set thou at liberty. Shakeſpeare's King john.
A'NG E L. adj. Reſembling angels; angelical.
I have mark'd
A thouſand bluſhing apparitions
To ſtart into her face; a thouſand innocent ſhames
In angel whiteneſs bear away thoſe bluſhes.
Shakeſpeare's Much ado about Nothing.
Or virgins viſited by angel powers,
With golden crowns and wreathes of heav'nly flow’rs.
Pope's Rape of the Lock.
A'No EL-LIKE. adj. [from angel and like..] Reſembling an angel.
In heav'n itſelf thou ſure wer’t dreſt
With that angel-like diſguiſe. Waller.
A'NG E L SHOT. n.ſ.. [from angel and ſhot..] Chain ſhot, being
a cannon bullet cut in two, and the halves being joined toge-
ther by a chain. Dić7
^: 1 ICA. m. ſ. [Lat. ab angelica virtute.] The name of a
plant. - -
It has winged leaves divided into large ſegments; its ſtalks
are hollow and jointed ; the flowers grow in an umbel upon
the tops of the ſtalks, and conſiſt of five leaves, ſucceeded by two
large channelled ſeeds. - -
The ſpecies are, 1. Common or manured angelica. 2. Greater
wild angelica. 3. Shining Canada angelica. 4. Mountain per-
ennial angelica, with columbine leaves.
The common angelica delights to grow in a very moiſt ſoil,
and its ſeeds ſhould be ſown ſoon after it is ripe. This plant is
uſed in medicine, as are its ſeeds; and the confe&amp;tioners make
a ſweetmeat with its tender ſtalks, cut in May. The ſecond
ſort grows wild; and the two laſt ſorts may be propagated like
the firſt. Millar.
ANGELICA. (Berry-bearing) [Aralia, Lat.]
The flower conſiſts of many leaves, expanding in form of a
roſe, which are naked, growing on the top of the ovary: theſe
flowers are ſucceeded by globular fruits, which are ſoft and ſuc-
culent, and full of oblong ſeeds.
The ſpecies are, I. Canada berry-bearing angelica. 2. Berry-
bearing angelica, with a naked ſtalk and creeping root. 3. An-
ge'ica tree.
The two firſt are propagated either by ſowing their ſeeds,
or by parting of their roots. The third ſort grows with us to
the height of ſeven or eight feet, and is only propagated by
feeds, which are frequently brought from America. Millar.
ANGELICAL. adj. [angeſicus, Lat.]
1. Reſembling angels.
It diſcovereth anto us the glorious works of God, and car-
rieth up, with an angelical ſwiftneſs, our eyes, that our mind,
being informed of his viſible marvels, may continually travel
upward. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
2. Partaking of the nature of angels.
Others more mild
Retreated in a filent valley, fing |
With notes angelical to many a harp,
Their own heroick deeds, and hapleſs fall
By doom of battle. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
3. Belonging to angels.
It may be encouragement to conſider the pleaſure of ſpecu-
lations, which do raviſh and ſublime the thoughts with more
clear angelical contentments. //i/kins’s Dardalus.
ANG E'Lic ALN Ess. n. ſ. [from ange'ical.] The quality of being
angelical; reſemblance of angels; excellence more than hu-
Inan.
ANGE'LICK. adj. [angelicus, Lat..] Partaking of the nature of
angels ; angelical; above human.
Here, happy creature, fair angelick Eve,
Partake thou alſo. Aſiſton's Paradiſe Loft, b. v.
My fancy form'd thee of ange'ick kind,
Some emanation of th' all beauteous mind. Pop. Elo. to Ale'.
A's GE Lot. n.ſ. A muſical inſtrument, ſomewhat reſembling a
lute. Dic?.
A/NGER... n.ſ.. [a word of no certain etymology, but, with
moſt probability, derived by Skinner from ange, Sax. vexed;
which, however, ſeems to come originally from the Latin
ang2.J
I. º is uneaſincſs or diſcompoſure of the mind, upon the
receipt of any injury, with a preſent purpoſe of revenge. Locke.
- Anger<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N G
A N I
Anger is like
A full hot horſe, who being allow'd his way,
Self-mettle tires him. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Was the Lord diſpleaſed againſt the rivers ? was thine anger
againſt the rivers ? was thy wrath againſt the ſea, that thou
didſt ride upon thine horſes and thy chariots of ſalvation ?
Habb. iii. 8.
Anger is, according to ſome, a tranſient hatred, or at leaſt ve
like it. . South.
2. Pain, or ſmart, of a fore or ſwelling. In this ſenſe it ſeems
plainly deducible from angor.
I made the experiment, ſetting the moxa where the firſt vio-
lence of my pain began, and where the greateſt anger and ſore-
neſs ſtill continued, notwithſtanding the ſwelling of my foot.
Temple's Miſcellanies.
To A'NGER. v. a. [from the noun..] To make angry; to pro-
voke; to enrage.
Who would anger the meaneſt artiſan, which carrieth a
good mind? Hooker, b. iv. § 12.
Sometimes he angers me,
With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant.
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
There were ſome late taxes and impoſitions introduced,
which rather angered than grieved the people. Clarendon.
It anger'd Turenne, once upon a day,
To ſee a footman kick'd that took his pay. Pope's Dial. ii.
A'NG E R L. Y. adv, [from anger.] In an angry manner; like one
offended.
Why, how now, Hecat, you look angerly. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Such jeſter's diſhoneſt indiſcretion, is rather charitably to be
pitied, than their exception either angerly to be grieved at, or
ſeriouſly to be confuted. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Angio'GRAPHY. m. ſ. [from 27ſ., and 7:4p..] A deſcription of
veſſels in the human body; nerves, veins, arteries, and lympha-
ticks.
ANG1o'logy. n.ſ.. [from ºſtic, and 24x3-.] A treatiſe or diſcourſe
of the veſſels of a human body.
ANGIoMonospe'RMous. adj. [from ºr, pºrº, and arisºa.]
Such plants as have but one ſingle ſeed in the ſeed-pod.
Angio'Tomy. m. ſ. [from 3%tio, and rites, to cut.] A cutting
open of the veſſels, as in the opening of a vein or artery.
A'NGLE. m. ſ. [angle, Fr. angulus, Lat.] The ſpace inter-
cepted between two lines interſecting each other.
Angle of the centre of a circle, is an angle whoſe vertex, or
angular point is at the centre of a circle, and whoſe legs are
two ſemidiameters of that circle. Stone's Die?.
A'NGLE. n.ſ.. [angel, Germ. and Dutch..] An inſtrument to
take fiſh, conſiſting of a rod, a line, and a hook.
She alſo had an angle in her hand; but the taker was ſo ta-
ken, that ſhe had forgotten taking. Sidney.
Give me mine ang'e, we'll to the river there,
My muſick playing far off, I will betray .
Tawny finn'd fiſh; my bended hook haſ pierce
Their ſlimy jaws. Shakeſp. Antony and Ceopatra.
The patient fiſher takes his ſilent ſtand,
Intent, his ang'e trembling in his hand;
With looks unmov’d, he hopes the ſcaly breed,
And eyes the dancing cork, and bending reed. Pop. Windſ.
To A'NGLE. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To fiſh with a rod and hook.
The ladies angling in the cryſtal lake,
Feaſt on the waters with the prey they take. Waller.
2. To try to gain by ſome inſinuating artifices, as fiſhes are caught
by a bait.
By this face,
This ſeeming brow of juſtice, did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for.
The pleaſant'ſt angling is to ſee the fiſh
Cut with her golden oars the ſilver ſtream,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait;
So angle we for Beatrice. Shakespeare Much ado about Nothing.
A'NGLE-Rod. n.ſ.. [angel roede, Dutch..] The ſtick to which
the line and hook are hung.
It differeth much in greatneſs; the ſmalleſt being fit for
thatching of houſes; the ſecond bigneſs is uſed for angle-rods,
and, in China, for beating of offenders upon the thighs.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 656.
He makes a May-fly to a miracle, and furniſhes the whole
country with angle-rods. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 108.
A'NGLE.R. m. ſ. [from angle.] He that fiſhes with an angle.
He, like a patient angler, ere he ſtrook,
Would let them play a while upon the hook. Dryden.
Neither do birds alone, but many ſorts of fiſhes, feed upon
infects; as is well known to anglers, who bait their hooks with
them. Ray on the Creation.
A'NG lic Is M. m. ſ. [from Ang’us, Lat..] A form of ſpeech pecu-
liar to the Engliſh language; an Engliſh idiom.
A's Go B E R. n.ſ. A kind of pear. See PEAR.
A'NGRII.Y. adv. [from angry.] In an angry manner; furiouſly;
peeviſhly. -
I will ſit as quiet as a lamb;
I will not ſtir, nor wince, nor ſpeak a word,
Nor look upon the iron angrily. Shakeſp. King john.
Shakespeare Henry IV.
A'NGR Y. adj. [from anger.j
1. Touched with anger; provoked.
Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will ſpeak: peradyen-
ture there ſhall be thirty found there. Gen. xviii. 30.
2. It ſeems properly to require, when the object of anger is men-
tioned, the particle at before a thing, and with before a perſon;
but this is not always obſerved.
Your Coriolanus is not much miſſed, but with his friends;
the commonwealth doth ſland, and ſo would do, were he angry
at it. Shakeſpeare's Coriolaºui.
Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourſelves,
that ye ſold me hither: for God did ſend me before you to
preſerve life. Gen. xlv. 5.
I think it a vaſt pleaſure, that whenever two people of merit
regard one another, ſo many ſcoundrels envy and are angry at
them. Swift.
3. Having the appearance of anger; having the effect of anger.
The north wind driveth away rain: ſo doth an angry coun.
tenance a backbiting tongue. Prov. xxv. 23.
4. In chirurgery, painful; inflamed ; ſmarting.
This ſerum, being accompanied by the thinner parts of the
blood, grows red and angry; and, wanting its due regreſs into
the maſs, firſt gathers into a hard ſwelling, and, in a few days,
ripens into matter, and ſo diſchargeth. J/iſeman's Surgery.
Asguish, n. ſ. [ançoiſ, Fr. angor, Lat.] Exceſſive pain either
of mind or body; applied to the mind, it means the pain of
ſorrow, and is ſeldom uſed to ſignify other paſſions.
Not all ſo cheerful ſeemed ſhe of fight,
As was her ſiſter; whether dread did dwell,
Oranguiſh in her heart, is hard to tell. Fairy &amp;#een, b. i.
Virtue's but anguiſh, when 'tis ſeveral,
By occaſion wak'd, and circumſtantial;
True virtue's ſoul, always in all deeds all. Donne.
They had perſecutors, whoſe invention was as great as their
cruelty. . Wit and malice conſpired to find out ſuch deaths,
and thoſe of ſuch incredible anguiſh, that only the manner of
dying was the puniſhment, death itſelf the deliverance. South.
Perpetual anguiſh fills his anxious breaſt, -
Not ſtopt by buſineſs, nor compos'd by reſt;
No muſick cheers him, nor no feaſt can pleaſe. Dryd.juv.
A'NGUISHED. adj. [from anguiſh..] Seized with anguiſh; tor-
tured; exceſſively pained.
Feel no touch
Of conſcience, but of fame, and be
' Anguiſh'd, not that 'twas fin, but that 'twas ſhe. Donne.
ANGULAR. adj. [from angle.] Having angles or corners; cor-
nered.
As for the figure of cryſtal, it is for the moſt part hexago-
nal, or ſix cornered, being built upon a confuſed matter, from
whence, as it were from a root, angular figures ariſe, even as
in the amethyſt and baſaltes Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. ii.
The diſtance of the edges of the knives from one another, at
the diſtance of four inches from the angular point, where the
edges of the knives meet, was the eight part of an inch.
Newton's Opticks.
ANGULA'RITY, m ſ [from angular.] The quality of being an-
gular, or having corners.
A'NGULAR ly, adv. [from angular.] With angles or corners.
Another part of the ſame ſolution afforded us an ice angu-
larly figured. Boyle.
A'NGULARNess. n.ſ.. [from angular.] The quality of being :
angular.
A'NGULATED. adj. [from angle.] Formed with angles or cor-
ners.
Topazes, amethyſts, or emeralds, which grow in the fiſ-
ſures, are ordinarily cryſtallized, or ſhot into angulated figures;
whereas, in the ſtrata, they are found in rude lumps, like yel-
low, purple, and green pebbles. Woodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
ANGULO'sity. m. ſ. [from angulous.] Angularity ; cornered
form. Dić?.
A'NGULous. adj. [from angle.] Hooked; angular.
Nor can it be a difference, that the parts of ſolid bodies are
held together by hooks, and angulous involutions; ſince the co-
herence of the parts of theſe will be of as difficult a concep-
tion. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
ANGU's T. adj. [anguſius, Lat.] Narrow; ſtrait. Dić7.
ANG UsTA'tion. n.ſ [from angly?us.] The act of making nar-
row; ſtraitening; the ſtate of being narrowed.
The cauſe may be referred either to the grumouſneſs of the
blood, or to obſtruction of the vein ſomewhere in its paſſage,
by ſome anguſiation upon it by part of the tumour. J/iſeman.
ANHF LA't Ion. m. ſ. [anhelo, Lat..] The act of panting; the
ſtate of being out of breath.
ANHF Lo's E. adj. [anhelus, Lat.] Out of breath; panting; la-
bouring of being out of breath. Dićf.
A'NIENTED. adj. [anneamtir, Fr.] Fruſtrated ; brought to no-
thing.
ANI'GHT.s. adv. [from a for at, and night.] In the night time.
Sir Toby, you muſt come in earlier anights ; your niece,
my lady, takes great exceptions at your ill hours.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
A'NIL. m. ſ. The ſhrub from whoſe leaves and ſtalks indigo is
prepared. A'NILE-
ſ
s
!
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N I
A N I
ANI'leNESs. }'ſ [anilitas, Lat.] The ſtate of being an old
ANI'lity. woman; the old age of women.
ANIMA ble. adj. [from animate.] That which may be put into
life, or receive animation. Die?.
ANIMAD v E'Rsion. ... f. [animadverſio, Lat.]
1. Reproof; ſevere cenſure; blame.
He diſmiſſed their commiſſioners with ſevere and ſharp ani-
madverſions. Clarendon, b. viii.
2. Puniſhment. When the objećt of animadverſion is mention-
ed, it has the particle on or upon before it.
When a bill is debating in parliament, it is uſual to have the
controverſy handled by pamphlets on both ſides; without the
leaſt animadverſion upon the authours. Swift.
3. In law.
An eccleſiaſtical cenſure, and an eccleſiaſtical animadverſion,
are different things; for a cenſure has a relation to a ſpiritual
puniſhment, but an animadverſion has only a reſpect to a tem-
poral one; as, degradation, and the delivering the perſon over
to the ſecular court. Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
ANIMA Dv E'Rs1 v E. adj. [from animadvert.] That has the power
of judging.
The repreſentation of objećts to the ſoul, the only animad-
verſive principle, are conveyed by motions made on the imme-
diate organs of ſenſe. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica, c. 12.
As IMAD VE'Rs 1 v EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from animadverſive.] The power
of animadverting, or making judgment. Diº.
To ANIMAD VERT. v. n. [animadverto, Lat.]
1. To paſs cenſures upon.
I ſhould not animadvert on him, who was otherwiſe a painful
obſerver of the decorum of the ſtage, if he had not uſed ex-
treme ſeverity in his judgment of the incomparable Shakeſpeare
for that fault. Dryden on Dramatick Poſy.
2. To inflićt puniſhments. In both ſenſus with the particle upon.
If the Authour of the univerſe animadverts upon men here be-
low, how much more will it become him to do it upon their
entrance into a higher ſtate of being. Grew's Coſmolog. Sacra.
ANIMADVE'RTER. n.ſ.. [from animadvert.] He that paſſes cen-
ſures, or inflićts puniſhments.
God is a ſtrict obſerver of, and a ſevere animadverter upon,
ſuch as preſume to partake of thoſe myſteries, without ſuch a
preparation. South.
ANIMAL. m. ſ. [animal, Lat.]
1. A living creature corporeal, diſtinét, on the one ſide, from pure
ſpirit, on the other, from mere matter.
Animals are ſuch beings, which, beſides the power of grow-
ing, and producing their like, as plants and vegetables have, are
endowed alſo with ſenſation and ſpontaneous motion. Mr. Ray
gives two ſchemes of tables of them.
Animals are either
Sanguineous, that is, ſuch as have blood, which breathe either
Lungs, having either
Two ventricles in their heart, and thoſe either
|
Terreſtrial, as quadrupeds;
Oviparous, as birds.
But one ventricle in the heart, as frogs, tortoiſes, and
ſerpents.
| "Gills, as all ſanguineous fiſhes, except the whale kind.
Exſanguineous, or without blood, which may be divided into
rCreater, and thoſe either,
Naked,
Terreſtrial, as naked ſnails.
} Aquatick, as the poulp, cuttle-fiſh, &amp;c.
Covered with a tegument, either
&lt; Cruſtaceous, as lobſters and crab-fiſh.
} Teſtaceous, either
} Univalve, as limpets;
Viviparous,
} } Aquatick, as the whale kind,
Bivalve, as oyſters, muſcles, cockles ;
Turbinate, as periwinkles, ſnails, &amp;c.
-Leſſer, as inſe&amp;ts of all ſorts.
Viviparous hairy animals, or quadrupeds, are either
Hoofed, which are either
Whole-footed or hoofed, as the horſe and aſs;
} Cloven-footed, having the hoof divided into
ſTwo principal parts, called biſulca, either
| | Such as chew not the cud, as ſwine;
} Ruminant, or ſuch as chew the cud; divided into
ſ Such as have perpetual and hollow horns.
} Beef-kind,
&amp;
Sheep-kind,
Goat-kind.
Such as have ſolid, branched and deciduous horns, as the
i deer-kind.
| Four parts, or quadriſulca, as the rhinoceros and hippopo-
tannuS.
|Clawed or digitate, having the foot divided into
Two parts or toes, having two nails, as the camel kind;
} Many toes or claws; either
Undivided, as the elephant;
Divided, which have either
Wol. I.
} Broad nails, and an human ſhape, as apes;
Narrower, and more pointed nails,
which, in reſpcét of their teeth, are divided into ſuch as have
Many fore-teeth, or cutters in each jaw;
The greater, which have
} A ſhorter ſnout and rounder head, as the cat-kind;
* } }. A longer ſnout and head, as the dog-kind.
The leſler, the vermin or weazel kind.
Only two large and remarkable fore-teeth, all which are phy-
tivorous, and are called the hare kind. Ray.
Vegetables are proper enough to repair animals, as being near
of the ſame ſpecifick gravity with the animal juices, and as con-
fifting of the ſame parts with animal ſubſtances, ſpirit, water,
ſalt, oil, earth; all which are contained in the ſap they derive
from the earth. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Some of the animated ſubſtances have various organical or
inſtrumental parts, fitted for a variety of motions from place to
place, and a ſpring of life within themſelves, as beaſts, birds,
fiſhes, and inſects; theſe are called animals. Other animated
ſubſtances are called vegetables, which have within themſelves
the principles of another ſort of life and growth, and of various
produćtions of leaves and fruit, ſuch as we ſee in plants, herbs,
and trees. Watts's Logick.
2. By way of contempt, we ſay of a ſtupid man, that he is a ſipid
animal. -
A'N MAL. adj. [animalis, Lat.]
1. That which belongs or relates to animals.
There are other things in the world of ſpirits, wherein our
ideas are very dark and confuſed; ſuch as their union with ani-
mal nature, the way of their acting on material beings, and
their converſe with each other. J/atts's Logick.
2. Animal functions, diſtinguiſhed from natural and vital, are the
lower powers of the mind, as, the will, memory, and imagi-
nation.
3. Animal life is oppoſed, on one ſide, to intellectual, and, on the
othcr; to vegetable.
4. Animal is uſed in oppoſition to ſpiritual or rational; as, the
animal nature.
ANIMA'icule, n.ſ.. [animalculum, Lat.] A ſmall animal; par-
ticularly thoſe which are in their firſt and ſmalleſt ſtate.
We are to know, that they all come of the ſeed of animal-
cules of their own kind, that were before laid there. Ray.
ANIMA'LITY. m. ſ. [from animal.] The ſtate of animal ex-
iſtence.
The word animal there only ſignifies human animality. In
the minor propoſition, the word animal, for the ſame reaſon,
ſignifies the animality of a gooſe: thereby it becomes an ambi-
guous term, and unfit to build the concluſion upon. Watts.
To ANIMATE. v. a. [animo, Lat.]
1. To quicken; to make alive; to give life to: as, the ſoul
animates the body; man muſt have been animated by a higher
power.
2. To give powers to ; to heighten the powers or effect of any
thing. -
But none, ah none can animate the lyre,
And the mute ſtrings with vocal ſouls inſpire;
Whether the learn’d Minerva be her theme,
Or chaſte Diana bathing in the ſtream ;
None can record their heav'nly praiſe ſo well
As Helen, in whoſe eyes ten thouſand Cupids dwell. Dryd.
3. To encourage; to incite. -
The more to animate the people, he ſtood on high, from
whence he might be beſt heard, and cried unto them with a
loud voice. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
A'NIMAT s. adj. [from To animate.] Alive; poſſeſſing animal
life. -
All bodies have ſpirits and pneumatical parts within them;
but the main differences between animate and inanimate, are
two : the firſt is, that the ſpirit of things animate are all con-
tained within themſelves, and are branched in veins and ſecret -
canals, as blood is ; and, in living creatures, the ſpirits have not
only branches, but certain cells or ſeats, where the principal ſpi-
rits do reſide, and whereunto the reſt do reſort: but the ſpirits
in things inanimate are ſhut in, and cut off by the tangible
parts, and are not pervious one to another, as air is in ſnow.
Bacon's Natural Hiſlory, Nº. 601.
Nobler birth
f creatures animate with gradual life,
Of growth, ſenſe, reaſon, all ſumm’d up in man.
Milton's Par. Lºff, b. ix. l. 1 12.
There are ſeveral topicks there uſed againſt the atheiſm and
idolatry of the heathens; ſuch as the viſible marks of divine
wiſdom and goodneſs in the works of the creation, the vital
union of ſouls with matter, and the admirable ſtructure of ani-
mate bodics, and the like. Bentley’s Serviciis.
ANIMAT D. participial adj. [from animate.] Lively; vigorous.
Warriours ſhe fires with animated ſounds ;
Pours balm into the bleeding lover's wounds. Pºpe.
ANIMATEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from animate.] The ſtate of being ani-
mated. Diº.
AN, MA’ſ Ion. ii. ſ. [from animate.]
1. The &amp;t of animating or enlivenºng.
Y Pants
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N N
A N N
Plants or vegetables are the principal part of the third day's
work. They are the firſt producat, which is the word of ani-
mation. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, cent. v.
2. The ſtate of being enlivened.
A'NIMATIv F. adj. Ifrom animate.] That which has the power
of giving life, or animating. - - -
ANIMA/Tor. n.ſ. [from animate.] That which gives life; that
which implants a principle of life. -
Thoſe bodies being of a congenerous nature, do readily re-
ceive the impreſſions of their motor, and, if not fettered by
their gravity, conform themſelves to ſituations, wherein they
beſt unite to their animator. Brown's Wuſ. Err. b. ii. c. 2.
ANIMo's E. adj. [animoſitas, Lat.] Full of ſpirit; hot; vehe-
ment. - - - Dić7.
Animo's ENess. n.ſ.. [from animoſ...] Spirit; heat; vehemence
of temper. Diff.
Animo'sity. n.J. [animºſitas, Lat.] Wehemence of hatred ;
paſſionate malignity. It implies rather the diſpoſition to break
out into outrages, than the outrage itſelf. -
They were ſure to bring paſſion, animoſity, and malice enough
of their own, what evidence ſoever they had from others.
Clarendon, b. viii.
If there is not ſome method found out for allaying theſe heats
and animoſities among the fair ſex, one does not know to what
outrages they may proceed. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 23.
No religious ſe&amp;t ever carried their averſions for each other to
greater heights than our ſtate parties have done; who, the more
to inflame their paſſions, have mixed religious and civil animo-
ſities together; borrowing one of their appellations from the
church. Swift on the Sentinents of a Church of England man.
A'N is E. m. ſ. ſanjum, Lat.] A ſpecies of apium or parſley, with
large ſweet ſcented ſeeds. This plant is not worth propagating
in England for uſe, becauſe the ſeeds can be had much better
and cheaper from Italy. Millar.
The ſeed of this plant has a ſweetiſh taſte, intermixed with
ſomething pungent and bitter, is reputed an aromatick, and pre-
ſcribed not barely as a carminative againſt wind, but alſo as a
pećtoral, ſtomachick, and digeſtive. Chambers.
Ye pay the tithe of mint, and aniſe, and cummin, and have
omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and
faith: theſe ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other
undone. Matt. xxv. 25.
A'NK ER. m. ſ. ſ: Dut..] A liquid meaſure chiefly uſed at
Amſterdam. It is the fourth part of the awm, and contains two
ſtekans: each ſtekan conſiſts of ſixteen mengles; the mengle
being equal to two of our wine quarts. Chambers.
A'NKLE. n.ſ.. [ancleop, Sax. anckel, Dutch..] The joint which
joins the foot to the leg.
One of his ankles was much ſwelled and ulcerated on the in-
ſide, in ſeveral places. J//evan.
My ſimple ſyſtem ſhall ſuppoſe,
That Alma enters at the toes;
That then ſhe mounts by juſt degrees
Up to the ankles, legs and knees. Prior.
A'Nkle-Bone. n.ſ.. [from ankle and bone..] The bone of the
ankle.
The ſhin-bone, from the knee to the inſtep, is made by ſha-
dowing one half of the leg with a ſingle ſhadow, the ankle-bone
will ſhew itſelf by a ſhadow given underneath, as the knee.
Peacham on Drawing.
A'NNAL1st. m. ſ. [from annals.] A writer of annals.
I wonder my author ſhould be offended, eſpecially ſince their
own annaliſt has given the ſame title to that of Syrmium. Atterb.
ANNALS. n.ſ. without ſingular number. [annales, Lat.] Hiſ-
tories digeſted in the exact order of time; narratives in which
every event is recorded under its proper year.
Could you with patience hear, or I relate,
Onymph! the tedious annals of our fate
Through ſuch a train of woes if I ſhould run,
The day wou'd ſooner than the tale be done Dryd, Virg.
We are aſſured, by many glorious examples in the annals of
our religion, that every one, in the like circumſtances of diſ-
treſs, will not act and argue thus; but thus will every one be
tempted to act. Rogers's Sermons.
A'NNATs. n.ſ. without ſingular. [annates, Lat.]
1. Firſt fruits; becauſe the rate of firſt fruits paid of ſpiritual liv-
ings, is after one year's profit. Cowell.
2. Maſſes ſaid in the Romiſh church for the ſpace of a year, or
for any other time, either for the ſoul of a perſon deceaſed, or
for the benefit of a perſon living. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To ANNE'Al. v. a. [aelan, to heat, Saxon.]
1. To heat glaſs, that the colours laid on it may pierce through.
But when thou doſt anneal in glaſs thy ſtory,
then the light and glory
More rev'rend grows, and more doth win,
Which elſe ſhews wat'riſh, bleak, and thin. Herbert.
When you purpoſe to anncal, take a plate of iron made fit
for the oven; or, for want thereof, take a blue ſtone, which
being made fit for the aforeſaid oven, lay it upon the croſs bars
of iron. - Peacham on Drawing.
Which her own inward ſymmetry reveal’d,
And like a picture ſhone, in glaſs anneal’d. Dryden's Fables.
3
2. To heat glaſs after it is blown, that it may not break.
3. To heat any thing in ſuch a manner as to give it the true
temper.
To ANNEX. v. a. ſannecio, annexum, Lat. annexer, Fr.]
1. To unite to at the end ; as, he annexed a codicil to his will.
2. To unite; as, a ſmaller thing to a greater; as, he annexed a
province to his kingdom.
3. To united tºfferiori; annexion always preſuppoſing ſomething:
thus we may ſay, puniſhment is annexed to guilt; but not guilt
to puniſhment.
Concerning fate or deſtiny, of which the opinions of thoſe
learned men, that have written thereof, may be ſafely received,
had they not thereunto annexed and faſtened an inevitable ne-
ceſſity, and made it more general and univerſally powerful than
it is. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Nations will decline ſo low
From virtue, which is reaſon, that no wrong,
But juſtice, and ſome fatal curſe annex’d,
Deprives them of their outward liberty. Miłon's Par. Lºft.
I mean not the authority, which is annexed to your office;
I ſpeak of that only which is inborn and inherent to your per-
ſon. Dryden's juveral, Dedication.
He cannot but love virtue wherever it is, and annex happi-
neſs always to the exerciſe of it. Atterbury's Sermons.
The temporal reward is annexed to the bare performance of
the action, but the eternal to the obedience. Rogers's Sermons.
ANN Ex. n.ſ.. [from To annex.] The thing annexed; addita-
ment. Bount.
Failing in his firſt attempt to be but like the higheſt in
heaven, he hath obtained of men to be the ſame on earth, and
hath accordingly aſſumed the annexes of divinity.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i, c. 10.
ANNExA'tion. m. ſ. [from annex.]
1. Conjunction; addition.
If we can return to that charity and peaceable mindedneſs,
which Chriſt ſo vehemently recommends to us, we have his
own promiſe, that the whole body will be full of light. Matt.
vi. that all other chriſtian virtues will, by way of concomi-
tance or annexation, attend them. Hammond's Fundamentals.
2. Union; coalition; conjunction.
How theſe annexations of benefices firſt came into the church,
whether by the prince's authority, or the pope's licence, is a
very great diſpute. Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
ANNE'xion. m. ſ. [from annex.] The act of annexing; addi-
tion.
It is neceſſary to engage the fears of men, by the annexion of
ſuch penalties as will overbalance temporal pleaſure. Rogers.
ANNE'xM ENT. n. ſ. [from annex.]
1. The aët of annexing.
2. The thing annexed.
When it falls,
Each ſmall annexment, petty conſequence,
Attends the boiſt’rous ruin. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
ANN'HILABLE., adj. [from annihilate.] That which may be
reduced to nothing; that which may be put out of exiſtence.
To ANNIH [L.A.T.E. v. a. ſad and nihilum, Lat.]
I. To reduce to nothing; to put out of exiſtence.
It is impoſſible for any body to be utterly annihilated; but
that as it was the work of the omnipotency of God, to make
ſomewhat of nothing; ſo it requireth the like omnipotency to
turn ſomewhat into nothing. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº ioc.
Thou taught'ſt me, by making me
Love her, who doth neglect both me and thee,
T” invent and practiſe this one way, t'annihilate all three.
Donne.
He deſpaired of God's mercy; he, by a decollation of all
hope, annihilated his mercy. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. z. z.
Whoſe friendſhip can ſtand againſt aſſaults, ſtrong enough
to annihilate the friendſhip of puny minds; ſuch an one has
reached true conſtancy. South.
Some imagined, water ſufficient to a deluge was created, and,
when the buſineſs was done, diſbanded, and annihilated.
//oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. To deſtroy, ſo as to make the thing otherwiſe than it was.
The flood that hath altered, deformed, or rather annihilated,
this place, ſo as no man can find any mark or memory thereof.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
3. To annul; to deſtroy the agency of any thing.
There is no reaſon, that any one commonwealth ſhould an-
nihilate that whereupon the whole world has agreed. Hooker.
ANNIHILATION. m. ſ. [from annihilate.] . The act of reducing
to nothing. The ſtate of being reduced to nothing.
God hath his influence into the very effence of things, with-
out which their utter annihilation could not chooſe but follow.
Hooker, b. v. § 56.
That knowledge, which as ſpirits we obtain,
Is to be valu'd in the midſt of pain:
Annihilation were to loſe heav'n more:
We are not quite exiſ'd, where thought can ſoar. Dryden.
ANNIVERS ARY. n.ſ. [annives.ſºrius, Lºt.]
1. A day celebrated as it returns in the courſe of the year.
For encouragement to follow the czample of martyrs, the
primitive
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N N
A N O
primitive chriſtians met at the places of their martyrdom, to
praiſe God for them, and to obſerve the anniverſary of their fuf-
ferings. Stillingfleet's Defence of Diſc. on Romiſh Idolatry,
2. The aët of celebration, or performance, in honour of the an-
niverſary day.
Donne had never ſeen Mrs. Drury, whom he has made im-
mortal in his admirable anniverſaries, Dryden.
3. Anniverſary is an office in the Romiſh church, celebrated not
only once a year, but which ought to be ſaid ; through
the year, for the ſoul of the deceaſed. Ayliff's Parergon.
ANNIVE'R's ARY. adj. [anniverſarius, Lat.] Returning with the
revolution of the year; annual ; yearly.
The heaven whirled about with admirable celerity, moſt
conſtantly finiſhing its anniverſary viciſſitudes. -
They deny giving any worſhip to a creature, as inconſiſtent
with chriſtianity; but confeſs the honour and eſteem for the
martyrs, which they expreſſed by keeping their anniverſary
days, and recommending their example. , Stillingſ. Defence.
ANNO DOMINI. [Lat.] In the year of our Lord; as, anno
domini, or A. D. 1751; that is, in the ſeventeen hundred and
fifty firſt year from the birth of our Saviour.
ANNo'Is ANce. n.ſ.. [from annoy, but not now in uſe.]
It hath a double ſignification, being as well for any hurt
done either to a publick place, as highway, bridge, or common
river, or to a private, by laying any thing that may breed in-
fection, by encroaching, or ſuch like means; as alſo, for the
writ that is brought upon this tranſgreſſion. See NUs A Nce,
the word now uſed. Blount.
ANNOLIS. m. ſ. An American animal, like a lizard.
ANNot A'tion. m. ſ. [annotatio, Lat..] Explications or remarks
written upon books; notes.
It might appear very improper to publiſh annotations, with-
out the text itſelf whereunto they relate. Boyle.
ANNoTA'tor. m. ſ. [Lat.] A writer of notes, or annotations;
a ſcholiaſt; a commentator.
I have not that reſpect for the annotators, which they gene-
rally meet with in the world. Felton on the Clafficks.
To ANNo'UNcE. v. a. [annoncer, Fr. annuncio, Lat.]
1. To publiſh; to proclaim.
Of the Meſfiah I have heard foretold
By all the prophets; of thy birth at length
Ž. by Gabriel with the firſt I knew. Paradiſe Reg.
2. To pronounce; to declare by a judicial ſentence.
Thoſe, mighty Jove, mean time, thy glorious care,
Who model nations, publiſh laws, announce
Or life or death. Prior.
To ANNOY. v. a. [annoyer, Fr.] To incommode; to vex;
to teaze; to moleſt.
Woe to poor man; each outward thing annoys him;
He heaps in inward grief, that moſt deſtroys him. Sidney.
Her joyous preſence and ſweet company,
In full content he there did long enjoy;
Ne wicked envy, nor vile jealouſy,
His dear delights were able to annoy.
As one who long in populous city pent,
Where houſes thick, and ſewers, annoy the air,
Forth iſſuing on a ſummer's morn to breathe
Among the pleaſant villages, and farms
Adjoin'd, from each thing met conceives delight,
ilton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ix. l. 445.
Inſe&amp;ts ſeldom uſe their offenſive weapons, unleſs provoked:
let them but alone, and annoy them not. Ray on the Creation.
ANNo'Y. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Injury; moleſtation; trouble.
Sleep, Richmond, ſleep in peace, and wake in joy;
Good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy.Shakespeare jp. R.III.
All pain and joy is in their way;
The things we fear bring leſs annoy
Than fear, and hope brings greater joy;
But in themſelves they cannot ſtay. - Donne,
What then remains, but, after paſt annoy,
To take the good viciſſitude of joy.
ANNo'y ANce. n.ſ.. [from annoy.]
'1. That which annoys; that which hurts.
- A grain, a duſt, a gnat, a wand'ring hair,
Any annoyance in that precious ſenſe. Shakeſp. King john.
Crows, ravens, rooks, and magpies, are great annoyances to
COrn. Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. The ſtate of being annoyed; or ačt of annoying.
The ſpit venom of their poiſoned hearts breaketh out to the
annoyance of others. Hooker, b. v. § 2.
The greateſt annoyance and diſturbance of mankind, has been
from one of thoſe two things, force or fraud. South.
For the further annoyance and terrour of any beſieged place,
they would throw into it dead bodies. Hºilkins's Math. Mag.
ANNo'y E.R. m. ſ. [from To annoy..] The perſon that annoys.
ANNUAL. adj. [annuel, Fr. from annus, Lat.]
'1. That which comes yearly.
Annual for me, the grape, the roſe, renew,
The juice neétareous, and the balmy dew. Pope's Eff on M.
2. That which is reckoned by the year.
The king's majeſty
Does purpoſe honour to you; to which
Fairy Queen, b, i.
Dryden's Fables,
A thouſand pounds a year, annual ſupport,
Out of his grace he adds. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
3. That which laſts only a year.
The dying in the winter of the roots of plants that are an-
nual, ſeemeth to be cauſed by the over-expence of the ſap;
which being prevented, they will ſuperannuate, if they ſtand
Warm. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 448.
Every tree may, in ſome ſenſe, be ſaid to be an annual plant,
both leaf, flower, and fruit, proceeding from the coat that was
ſuperinduced over the wood the laſt year. Ray on the Creation.
A'NNUALLY., adv. [from annual.] Yearly; every year.
By two drachms, they thought it ſufficient to ſignify a heart;
becauſe the heart at one year weigheth two drachms, that is, a
quarter of an ounce ; and unto fifty years annually encreaſeth
the weight of one drachm. Brown's Vulgar Errour, b. v. c. zo.
The whole ſtrength of a nation is the utmoſt that a prince
can raiſe annually from his ſubječts. Swift.
ANNU'It ANT. m. ſ. [from annuity.] He that poſſeſſes or re-
ceives an annuity.
ANNUITY. m.ſ.. [annuité, Fr.]
1. A yearly rent to be paid for term of life or years. The diffe-
rences between a rent and an annuity are, that every rent is go-
ing out of land ; but an annuity charges only the granter, or
his heirs, that have aſſets by deſcent. The ſecond difference
is, that, for the recovery of an annuity, no action lies, but only
the writ of annuity againſt the granter, his heirs, or ſucceſſors 3.
but of a rent, the ſame actions lie as do of land. The third
difference is, that an annuity is never taken for aſſets, becauſe
it is no freehold in law; nor ſhall be put in execution upon a
ſtatute merchant, ſtatute ſtaple, or elegit, as a rent may. Cowel.
2. A yearly allowance.
He was generally known to be the ſon of one earl, and bro-
ther to another, who ſupplied his expence, beyond what his an-
nuity from his father would bear. Clarendon.
To ANNU'L. v. a. [from nullus.]
1. To make void; to nullify; to abrogate; to aboliſh.
That which gives force to the law, is the authority that en-
aćts it; and whoever deſtroys this authority, does, in effect,
annul the law. Rogers's Sermons.
2. To reduce to nothing; to obliterate.
Light the pure work of God to me's extinét,
And all her various obječts of delight
Annull'd, which might in part my grief have eas'd.
Milton's Sampſon Agoniſłes, 1.72.
A'NNULAR, adj. [from annulus, Lat.] . In the form of a ring.
That they might not, in bending the arm or leg, riſe up, he
has tied them to the bones by annular ligaments. Cheyne.
A'NNULARY. adj. [from yº. Lat.] In the form of rings.
Becauſe continual reſpiration is neceſſary, the wind-pipe is
made with annulary cartilages, that the fides of it may not fla
and fall together. Fay on the Creation.
A'NNULet. n.ſ.. [from annulus, Lat.]
1. A little ring.
2. [In heraldry.] A difference or mark of diſtinétion, which the
fifth brother of any family ought to bear in his coat of arms.
3. Annulets are alſo a part of the coat-armour of ſeveral families;
they were anciently reputed a mark of nobility and juriſdićtion,
it being the cuſtom of prelates to receive their inveſtiture per
baculum &amp; annulum.
4. [In architecture.] The ſmall ſquare members, in the Dorick
capital, under the quarter round, are called annulets.
5.' Annulet is alſo uſed for a narrow flat moulding common to
other parts of the column; ſo called, becauſe it encompaſſes
the column round. Chambers.
To ANNUMERATE. v. a. [annumero, Lat.] To add to a
former number; to unite to ſomething beforementioned.
ANN UMERA't Ion. n.ſ.. [annumeratio, Lat..] Addition to a for-
mer number.
To ANNU'NCIATE. v. a. [annuncio, Lat.] To bring tid-
ings; to relate ſomething that has fallen out: a word not in
popular uſe. - -
ANNU.NcIA'TION DAY. n.ſ.. [from annunciate.j The day cele-
brated by the church, in memory of the angel's ſalutation of
the bleſſed virgin; ſolemnized with us on the twenty-fifth of
March.
Upon the day of the annunciation, or Lady-day, meditate on
the incarnation of our bleſſed Saviour: and ſo upon all the feſ-
tivals of the year. Taylor’s Guide to Devotion.
A'Noby N.E. adj. [from 2 and 3%,..] That which has the power
of mitigating pain.
Yet durſt ſhe not too deeply probe the wound,
As hoping ſtill the nobler parts were ſound:
But ſtrove with anodynes tº aſſuage the ſmart,
And mildly thus her med'cine did impart. Dryd. Hind and P.
Anodynes, or abaters of pain of the alimentary kind, are ſuch
things as relax the tenſion of the affected nervous fibres, as de-
cočtions of emollient ſubſtances; thoſe things which deſtroy the
particular acrimony which occaſions the pain, or what deadens
the ſenſation of the brain, by procuring ſleep. Arbuthnot.
To ANOINT. v. a. [cindre, encindre; part. oint, encint, Fr.]
1. To rub over with unctuous matter, as oil, or unguents.
Anzinted
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N O
A N S
Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
And die, ere men can ſay, God ſave the queen. Shakespeare R. III.
Thou ſhalt have olive trees throughout all thy coaſts, but
thou ſhalt not anoint thyſelf with the oil: for thine olive ſhall
caſt his fruit. Deut. xxviii. 4o.
2. To ſmear; to be rubbed upon.
Warm waters then in brazen caldrons born,
Are pour'd to waſh his body, joint by joint,
And fragrant oils the ſtiffen'd limbs anoint. Dryd. Æii. vi.
3. To conſecrate by unction.
I would not ſee thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes; northy fierce ſiſter
In his anointed fleſh ſtick boariſh fangs. Shakeſp. King Lear.
ANo'INTER. n.ſ.. [from anoint..] The perſon that anoints.
Axo'MAlis M. n.ſ.. [from anomaly.] Anomaly; irregularity ;
deviation from the common rule. Dić.
ANoMAli'stical. adj. [from anomaly.] Irregular;, applied in
aſtronomy to the year, taken for the time in which the carth
paſſeth through its orbit, diſtinct from the tropical year.
ANo'MAlous. adj. [ 2 priv. and 3.2×8.] Irregular; out of
rule; deviating from the general method or analogy of things:
It is applied, in grammar, to words deviating from the common
rules of infle&amp;tion; and, in aſtronomy, to the ſeemingly irre-
gular motions of the planets.
There will ariſe anomalous diſturbances not only in civil and
artificial, but alſo in military officers. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
He being acquainted with ſome characters of every ſpeech,
you may at pleaſure make him underſtand anomalous pronun-
ciation. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Metals are gold, ſilver, copper, tin, lead, and iron : to which
we may join that anomalous body, quickſilver or mercury.
Locke's Elements of Natural Philºſºphy.
ANo'MA lously. adv. [from anomalous.] Irregularly ; in a
manner contrary to rule.
Eve was not ſolemnly begotten, but º, framed, and
anomalouſly proceeded from Adam. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
ANO'MALY. m. ſ. [anomalie, Fr. anomalia, Lat. 4-2.2×3.]
Irregularity; deviation from the common rule.
If we ſhould chance to find a mother debauching her daugh-
ter, as ſuch monſters have been ſeen, we muſt charge this upon
a peculiar anomaly and baſeneſs of nature. South.
I do not purſue the many pſeudographics in uſe, but intend to
ſhew how moſt of theſe anomalies in writing might be avoided,
and better ſupplicd. Holder's Elements of Speech.
A'NoMY. m. ſ. [ 2 priv. and ºus...] Breach of law.
If ſin be good, and juſt, and lawful, it is no more evil, it is
no ſin, no anomy. Bramham againſt Holbes.
ANo'N. adv. [junius imagines it to be an elliptical form of ſpeak-
ing for in one, that is, in one minute; Skinner from a and mean,
or near ; Minſhew from on on.]
1. Quickly; ſoon ; in a ſhort time.
-- A little ſnow, tumbled about,
Anon becomes a mountain. Shakeſpeare's King john.
Will they come abroad anon P
Shall we ſee young Oberon : , Ben jºſº, Fairy Prince.
However, witneſs, heav'n'
Heav'n, witneſs thou anon / while we diſcharge
Freely our part. Milton's Par. Loft, b. vi. l. 564.
He was not without deſign at that preſent, as ſhall be made
out anon; meaning by that device to withdraw himſelf. Clarend.
Still as I did the leaves inſpire,
With ſuch a purple light they ſhone,
As if they had been made of fire,
And ſpreading ſo, would flame anon. Waller.
2. Sometimes; now and then ; at other times. In this ſenſe is
uſed ever and anon.
Full forty days he paſs'd, whether on hill
Sometimes, anon in ſhady vale, each night,
Or harbour'd in one cave, is not revealed. Par. Regained.
ANO'NYMous. adj. [2 priv. and ºoza.] Wanting a name.
Theſe animalcules ſerve alſo for food to another anonymous
inſe&amp;t of the waters. Ray on the Creation.
They would forthwith publiſh ſlanders unpuniſhed, the au-
thors being anonymous, the immediate publiſhers thereof ſculk-
ing. Notes on the Dunciad.
ANo'NYMous ly, adv. [from anonymous.] Without a name.
I would know, whether the edition is to come out anony-
mouſly, among complaints of ſpurious editions? Swift.
As of É'xy. n.J. [2.93%a.] Inappetency, or loathing ºfood.
2uincy.
ANO'ſ HER. adj. from an and other.] y
1. Not the ſame.
He that will not lay a foundation for perpetual diſorder, muſt
of neceſſity find another riſe of government than that. Locke.
2. One more; a new addition to the former number.
A fourth :
Start eye
What! will the line ſtretch out to th’ crack of doom *
Another yet?—a ſeventh ! I'll ſee no more. Shakespeare Macbeth.
3. Any other; any one elſe.
If one man fin againſt another, the judge ſhall judge him.
- 3 I Santic', ii. 25.
Why not of her ? preferr'd above the reſt,
By him with knightly deeds, and open love profeſs'd; }
So had another been, where he his vows addreſs'd.
r Dryden's Fables.
4. Not one's ſelf.
A man ſhall have diffuſed his life, his ſelf, and his whole con-
cernments ſo far, that he can weep his ſorrows with another's
eyes; when he has another heart beſides his own, both to ſhare,
and to ſupport his grief. South.
5. Widely different; much altered.
- When the ſoul is beaten from its ſlation, and the mounds of
virtue are broken down, it becomes quite another thing from
what it was before. South.
A Not H E R GAIN E s. adj. [See ANot HERGu fss.] Of another
kind. This word I have found only in Sidney.
If my father had not plaid the haſty fool, I might have had
anothergaines huſband than Dametas. Sidney.
ANo'THERGU, ss, adj. [This word, which though rarely uſed
in writing, is ſomewhat frequent in colloquial language, I con-
ceive to be corrupted from another guiſe; that is, of a different
guiſe, or manner, or form.] Of a different kind.
Oh Hocus ! where art thou? It uſed to go in anothergueſ;
manner in thy time. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of John Bull.
ANSATED. adj. [anſatus, Lat.] Having handles; or ſomething
in the form of handles.
To ANSWER. v. n. [The etymology is uncertain ; the Sax-
ons had anbryanian, but in another ſenſe; the Dutch have ant-
woorden.]
1. To ſpeak in return to a queſtion.
Are we ſuccour’d are the Moors remov’d
4ſiver theſe queſtions firſt, and then a thouſand more,
Anſwer them altogether. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
2. To ſpeak in oppoſition.
No man was able to anſwer him a word. Matt. xxii. 46.
If it be ſaid, we may diſcover the elementary ingredients of
things, I anſwer, that it is not neceſſary that ſuch a diſcovery
ſhould be practicable. Boyle.
3. To be accountable for.
Some men have finned in the principles of humanity, and
muſt anſwer for not being men. Brown's Wugar Errours.
If there be any abſurdity in this, our author muſt anſwer for
it. Locke.
4. To vindicate; to give a juſtificatory account of.
The night, ſo impudently fixed for my laſt, made little im-
preſſion on myſelf; but I cannot anſwer for my family. Swift.
5. To give an account.
How they have been ſince received, and ſo well improved,
let thoſe anſwer either to God or man, who have been the au-
thors and promoters of ſuch wiſe council. Temple.
He wants a father to protećt his youth,
And rear him up to virtue. You muſt bear
The future blame, and anſwer to the world,
When you refuſe the eaſy honeſt means
Of taking care of him. Southern's Iºnocent Adultery.
6. To correſpond to; to ſuit with.
In water face anſwereth to face: ſo the heart of man to man.
Prov. xxvii. 19.
7. To be equivalent to ; to ſtand for ſomething elſe.
A feaſt is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry: but
money anſvereth all things. Eccl. x. 19.
8. To ſatisfy any claim or petition.
Revenge the jeering and diſdain’d contempt
Of this proud king, who ſtudies day and night
To anſwer all the debt he owes unto you,
Ev’n with the bloody payments of your deaths. Shakespeare. Hen. IV.
Men no ſooner find their appetites unanſwered, than they
complain the times are injurious. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the Wºrld.
9. To act reciprocally upon.
Say, do'ſt thou yet the Roman harp command
Do the ſtrings anſwer to thy noble hand Dryden's Perſus.
Io. To ſtand as oppoſite or correlative to ſomething elſe.
There can but two things create love, perfection and uſe-
fulneſs; to which anſwer, on our part, I. Admiration ; and,
2. Deſire: and both theſe are centered in love. Taylor.
11. To bear proportion to.
He deſired, that proper officers might ſearch me; for pro-
bably I might carry ſeveral weapons, which muſt needs be dan-
gerous things, if they anſwered the bulk of ſo prodigious a per-
ſon. Swift's Gulliver's Trave's.
12. To perform what is endeavoured or intended by the agent.
Our part is, to chooſe out the moſt deſerving obječts, and
the moſt likely to anſwer the ends of our charity; and when
that is done, all is done that lies in our power: the reſt muſt
be left to providence. Atterbury's Sermons.
13. To comply with.
He dies that touches of this fruit,
Till I and my affairs are anſwered. Shakespeare. As you like it.
14. To ſucceed; to produce the wiſhed event.
Jaſon followed her counſel, whereto, when the event had an-
fivered, he again demanded the fleece. Raleigh's Hiſ of the IP.
We ſee likewiſe, that much water draweth forth the juice of
the body infuſed; but little water is imbibed by the body: and
- this
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N T
this is a principal cauſe, why, in operations upon bodies for
their verſion or alteration, the trial in great quantities doth not
anſwer the trial in ſmall; and ſo deceiveth many.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 92.
15. To appear to any call, or authoritative ſummons; in which
ſenſe, though figuratively, the following paſſage may be, per-
haps, taken.
Thou wert better in thy grave, than to anſwer, with thy
uncovered body, this extremity of the ſkies. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
16. To be over-againſt any thing.
Fire anſwers fire, and, by their paly beams,
Each battle ſees the other's umber'd face. Shakeſp. Henry V.
ANswer. n.ſ.. [from To anſwer.]
1. That which is ſaid, whether in ſpeech or writing, in return to
a queſtion, or poſition.
t was a right anſwer of the phyſician to his patient, that had
ſore eyes: If you have more ſº in wine than in your fight,
wine is good. Locke.
How can we think of appearing at that tribunal, without be-
ing able to give a ready anſwer to the queſtions which he ſhall
then put to us, about the poor and the afflićted, the hungry and
the naked, the ſick and impriſoned 2 Atterbury's Sermons.
2. In law, a confutation of a charge exhibited againſt a perſon.
A perſonal anſwer ought to have three qualities; it ought to
be pertinent to the matter in hand; it ought to be abſolute and
unconditional; it ought to be clear and certain. Ayliffe's Par.
A'Nswer-JoBBER. n.ſ.. [from anſwer and jobber.] He that
makes a trade of writing anſwers.
What diſguſts me from having any thing to do with anſwer-
jobbers, is, that they have no conſcience. Swift.
A'Nsw ERABLE. adj. [from anſwer.]
1. That to which a reply may be made; that which may be an-
ſwered; as, the argument, though ſubtle, is yet anſwerable.
2. Obliged to give an account, or ſtand the trial of an accuſa-
tion.
Every chief of every kindred or family ſhould be anſwerable,
and bound to bring forth every one of that kindred, at all times
to be juſtified, when he ſhould be required, or charged with any
treaſon, felony, &amp;c. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Will any man argue, that if a phyſician ſhould manifeſtly
preſcribe poiſon to all his patients, he cannot be juſtly puniſh-
ed, but is anſwerable only to God Swift.
He cannot think ambition more juſtly laid to their charge,
than to other men; becauſe that would be to make church go-
vernment anſwerable for the errours of human nature. Swift.
3. Correſpondent.
It was but ſuch a likeneſs as an imperfeót glaſs doth give,
anſwerable enough in ſome features and colours, but erring in
others. Sidney.
The daughters of Atlas were ladies, who, accompanying
ſuch as came to be regiſtered among the worthies, brought forth
children anſwerable in quality to thoſe that begot them.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Only add
Deeds to thy knowledge anſwerable; add faith,
Add virtue, patience, temperance; add love
By name to come call'd charity, the ſoul
. Of all the reſt. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii.
5. Suitable; ſuited.
The following, by certain eſtates of men, anſwerable to that
which a great perſon himſelf profeſſeth, as of ſoldiers to him
that hath been employed in the wars, hath been a thing well
taken even in monarchies. - Bacon's Eſſays.
If anſwerable ſtyle I can obtain
Of my celeſtial patroneſs, who deigns
Her mighty viſitation unimplor’d. Milt. Parad. Loſt, b. ix.
6. Equal. -
There be no kings whoſe means are anſwerable unto other
mens deſires. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
7. Relative; correlative.
That, to every petition for things needful, there ſhould be
ſome anſwerable ſentence of thanks provided particularly to fol-
low, is not requiſite. Hooker, b. v. § 43.
ANswer ABLY. adv. [from anſwerable.] In due proportion;
with proper correſpondence; ſuitably.
The broader ſeas are, if they be intire, and free from iſlands,
they are anſwerably deeper. Brerewood on Languages.
t bears light, and more ačtive ſorts, into the atmoſphere, to
a greater or leſſer height, anſwerably to the greater or leſſer in-
tenſeneſs of the heat. J/oodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
ANswer ABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from anſwerable.] The quality of
being anſwerable. }.
ANswer ER. m. ſ. [from anſwer.]
'. He that anſwers; he that ſpeaks in return to what another has
ſpoken.
2. h that manages the controverſy againſt one that has written
lift.
. It is very unfair in any writer to employ ignorance and ma-
lice together; becauſe it gives his anſwerer double work. Swift.
*T. n.ſ.. [aemetz, Sax, which Junius imagines, not without
º to have been firſt contracted to aemº, and then ſof-
'ol. I.
4. Proportionate.
tened to ant.] An emmet; a piſmire. A ſmall inſºft that
lives in great numbers together in hillocks. -
We'll ſet thee to ſchool to an ant, to teach thee there's no
lab'ring in the winter. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Methinks, all cities now but ant-hills are,
Where when the ſeveral labourers I ſee
For children, houſe, proviſion, taking pain, -
They're all but ants, carrying eggs, ſtraw, and grain. Donne.
Learn each ſmall people's genius, policies;
The ant's republick, and the realm of bees;
How thoſe in common all their ſtores beſtow,
And anarchy without confuſion know. Pope’s Eff on Man.
ANT-BEAR. n.ſ.. [from ant and bear.] An animal that feeds on
antS.
Divers quadrupeds feed upon inſe&amp;ts; and ſome live wholly
upon them ; as two ſorts of tamanduas upon ants, which
therefore are called in Engliſh ant-bears. Ray on Creation.
A'NT-HILL, or HILLock. n.ſ.. [from ant and hill.] The ſmall
protuberances of earth in which ants make their neſts.
Put blue flowers into an ant-hill, they will be ſtained with
red; becauſe the ants drop upon them their ſtinging liquour,
which hath the effect of oil of vitriol. Ray on Creation.
Thoſe who have ſeen ant-hillocks, have eaſily perceived thoſe
ſmall heaps of corn about their neſts. Addiſon. Guardian.
AN’T. . A contraction for and it, or rather and if it; as, an’t
pleaſe you ; that is, and if it pleaſe you.
ANTA'GoNIST. n.ſ.. [aſ], and 2,2,2,..]
I. One who contends with another; an opponent.
generally a perſonal and, particular oppoſition.
Our antagoniſts in theſe controverſies may have met with
ſome not unlike to Ithacius. Hocker's Dedication.
What was ſet before him,
To heave, pull, draw, and break, he ſtill perform’d,
None daring to appearantagoniſł. Milton's Sampſºn 42n.
Is it not fit, that the hiſtory of a perſon ſhould appear, till
the prejudice both of his antagoniſts and adherents be ſoftened
and ſubdued. Addiſon. Freehºlder, N° 35.
2. Contrary.
The ſhort club conſiſts of thoſe who are under five feet;
ours is to be compoſed of ſuch as are above ſix. Theſe we look
upon as the two extremes and antagoniſłs of the ſpecies; con-
ſidering all theſe as neuters, who fill up the middle ſpace.
Addiſon. Guardian, N° 1 og.
3. In anatomy, the antagoniſt is that muſcle which counteracts
ſome others. -
A relaxation of a muſcle muſt produce a ſpaſm in its antago-
miſt, becauſe the equilibrium is deſtroyed. Arbuthnot on Diet.
To ANTA'Gonize. v. n. [2], and zywº...] To contend againſt
another. Dić7.
ANTA'LG1ck. adj. [from 25, againſt, and 3.x.yº, pain.] That
which ſoftens pain; anodyne.
ANTANACLASIS. n.ſ. [Lat. from 2%araxxacº, from aftaraxxâw,
to drive back.]
1. A figure in rhetorick, when the ſame word is repeated in a dif-
ferent, if not in a contrary ſignification; as, In thy youth learn
fome craft, that in old age thou may/? get thy living without craft.
Craft, in the firſt place, ſignifies ſcience or occupation ; in the
fecond, deceit or ſubtilty.
2. It is alſo a returning to the matter at the end of a long paren-
theſis; as, Shall that heart (which does not only feel them, but hath
all motion of his life placed in them) ſhall that heart, I ſay, &amp;c.
Smith's Rhetorick.
ANTAPHRodi'Tick. adj. [from 27, againſt, and 23.30%rr, Ve-
nus.] That which is efficacious againſt the venereal diſeaſe.
ANT APOPLE'ctick. adj. [zº, againſt, and arowanés, an apo-
plexy.] Good againſt an apoplexy.
ANT A/R crick. adj. [x;, againſt, and ºxiº-, the bear or nor-
thern conſtellation.] The ſouthern pole, ſo called, as oppoſite
to the northern.
Downward as far as antarélick. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ix.
They that had fail'd from near th’ antarctick pole,
Their treaſure ſafe, and all their veſicls whole,
In fight of their dear country ruin’d be,
Without the guilt of either rock or ſea. J/aller.
ANTARTHRI'tick. adj. [zº, againſt, and 339;ſº, the gout.)
Good againſt the gout. -
ANT Ast HMA'rick, adj. [from aſ and 3-3ºz.] Good againſt
the aſthma.
ANTE. A. Latin particle fignifying befºre, which is frequently
uſed in compoſitions; as, antediluvian, before the flood ; ante-
chamber, a chamber leading into another apartment.
A'NTE Act. m. ſ. [from ante and act.] A former act.
ANTE AMBULA'tion. n.ſ.. [from ante and ambulatio, Lat.]. A
walking before. Dićf.
To ANTECE/DE. v. m. [from ante, before, and cedo, to go.]
To precede; to go before.
It ſeems more conſonant to reaſon, that the fabrick of the
world did not long antecede its motion. Hale's Orig. ºf Mank.
ANTE ce'DEN ce. n.ſ.. [from antecede.j The act or ſtate of go-
ing before ; precedence.
It is impoſſible that mixed bodies can be eternal, becauſe
there is neceſſarily a pre-exiſtence of the ſimple bodies, and
aſl
It implies
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N T
A N T
an aniºcedence of their conſtitution preceding the exiſtence of
mixed bodies. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
As rece'D ENT. adj. [antecedens, Lat.]
1. Going before ; preceding. Antecedent is uſed, I think, only
with regard to time; precedent, with regard both to time and
lace.
p To aſſert, that God looked upon Adam's fall as a fin, and pu-
hiſhed it, when, without any antecedent ſin of his, it was im-
poſſible for him not to fall, ſeems a thing that highly reproaches
eflential equity and goodneſs. South.
2. It has to before the thing which is ſuppoſed to follow.
No one is ſo hardy as to ſay, God is in his debt; that he
owed him a nobler being: for exiſtence muſt be antecedent to
merit. Collier of Envy.
IDid the blood firſt exiſt, antecedent to the formation of the
heart? But that is to ſet the effect before the cauſe. Bentley.
Ast Ece'D ENT. n.ſ.. [antecedens, Lat.]
1. That which goes before.
A duty of ſo mighty an influence, that it is indeed the neceſ-
ſary antecedent, if not alſo the direct cauſe of a ſinner's return to
Gód. South.
2. In grammar, the noun to which the relative is ſubjoined; as,
the man who comes hither.
3. In logick, the firſt propoſition of an enthymeme or argument,
conſiſting only of two propoſitions.
Conditional or hypothetical propoſitions are thoſe whoſe parts
are united by the conditional particle if; as, if the ſun be fixed,
the earth muſt move: if there be no fire, there will be no
ſmoke. The firſt part of theſe propoſitions, or that wherein the
condition is contained, is called the antecedent, the other is called
the conſequent. J/atts's Logick.
ANTE ce'DENTLY. adv. [from antecedent.] In the ſtate of ante-
cedence, or going before; previouſly.
We conſider him antecedently to his creation, while he yet
lay in the barren womb of nothing, and only in the number of
poſſibilities. South.
ANTECESSOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] One who goes before, or leads
another. Dić.
ANTEchA'MBER. m. ſ. [from ante before, and chamber; it is ge-
nerally written, improperly, antichamber.] The chamber that
leads to the chief apartment.
The empreſs has the antichambers paſt,
And this way moves with a diſorder'd haſte. Dryd. Aurengz.
His antichamber, and room of audience, are little ſquare cham-
bers wainſcoted. Addiſon on Italy.
ANIECU RSOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] One who runs before. Dict.
To A'N T F DATE. v. a. [from ante and do, Hatum, Lat.]
1. To date earlier than the real time, ſo as to confer a fictitious
antiquity.
Now thou haſt lov'd me one whole day,
To-morrow when thou leav'ſt, what wilt thou ſay?
Wilt thou then antedate ſome new-made vow,
Or ſay, that now
We are not juſt thoſe perſons, which we were Donne.
By reading, a man does, as it were, antedate his life, and
makes himſelf contemporary with the ages paſt. Collier's Eſſays.
2. To take ſomething before the proper time.
Our joys below it can improve,
And antedate the bliſs above. Pope's St. Cecília.
ANTEDILU'v I AN. adj. [from ante before, and diluvium a deluge.]
1. Exiſting before the deluge.
During the time of the deluge, all the ſtone and marble of the
antediluvian earth were totally diſſolved. Woodw. Nat. Hiſtory.
2. Relating to things exiſting before the deluge. .
The text intends only the line of Seth, conduceable unto the
genealogy of our Saviour, and the antediluvian chronology.
- Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vii. c. 4.
ANTE dilu'v1AN. m. ſ. One that lived before the flood.
We are ſo far from repining at God, that he hath not ex-
tended the period of our lives to the longevity of the antedilu-
vians, that we give him thanks for contracting the days of our
trial. Bentley's Sermons.
A'N TE lop E. m. ſ. [The etymology is uncertain..] A goat with
curled or wreathed horns. -
The antelope, and wolf both fierce and fell. Fairy Queen.
ANTEMER I'd I AN. adj. [from ante, before, and meridian, noon.]
Before noon.
ANTE ME"rick. adj. [27, againſt, and ºut, to vomit.] That
which has the power of calming the ſtomach; of preventing or
ſtopping vomiting.
ANTEM U'ND AN.E. adj. [ante, before, and mundus, the world.]
That which was before the creation of the world.
ANT ENU'MBER. m. ſ. [from ante and number.] The number
that precedes another.
Whatſoever virtue is in numbers, for conducing to conſent
of notes, is rather to be aſcribed to the antenumber, than to the
entire number, as that the ſound returneth after ſix, or after
twelve ; ſo that the ſeventh or thirteenth is not the matter, but
the fixth or the twelfth. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 1 c3.
A'NTE PAST. m. ſ. [from ante, before, and paſºum, to feed.]. A
foretaſte; ſomething taken before the proper time.
Were we to expect our bliſs only in the ſatiating our appe-
tites, it might be reaſonable, by frequent antºpoff, to excite
our guſt for that profuſe perpetual meal. Decay of Piety.
A'NTE PENULT. n.f. [antepenultima, Lat.] The laſt ſyllable but
two, as the ſyllable tº in antepenult: a term of grammar.
ANTEP11 EP tick. adj. [ää and intº...] A medicine againſt
convulſions.
That bezoar is antidotal, lapisjudaicus diuretical, coral ante-
pileptical, we will not deny. Brown's Pu'ar Errours, b. ii.
To ANTE Pos F. v. a. ſant tºne, Lat..] To ſet one thing before
another; to prefer one thing to another. Dićf.
ANTE PREDi'cAMENT. m. ſ. [ºntºprediamenium, Lat.] Some-
thing to be known in the ſtudy of logick, previouſly to the
doctrine of the predicament. -
ANT FR1O'RITY. m. ſ. [from anterizur.] Priority; the ſtate of
being before either in time or ſituation. -
ANTE's Iov R. adj. [anterior, Lat.] Going before, cither with
regard to time or place.
If that be the anteriour or upper part wherein the ſenſes are
placed, and that the poſteriouſ and lower part, which is oppo-
ſite thereunto, there is no inferiour or former part in this ini-
mal; for the ſenſes being placed at both extremes, make both
ends arteriºr, which is impoſſible. Brown's fºr Erreurs.
A NTES. n.J. [Latin.] Pillars of large dimenſions that ſupport
the front of a building.
ANTEsto'MA ch. m. ſ. [from ante, before, and/ºach..] A ca-
vity which lºads into the ſtomach.
n birds there is no mafication or comminution of the meat
in the mouth ; but it is immediately ſwallowed into a kind of
ant/lomach, which I have obſerved in piſcivorous birds. Ray.
ANTHE LM1'N TH cK. adj. [an, againſt, and ºzºs, a worm.]
That which kills worms.
Anthehninthicks, or contrary to worms, are things which are
known by experience to kill them, as oils, or honey taken upon
an empty ſtomach. Arbuthnot on Diet.
A'N T H E M. n.ſ. [****, a hymn ſung in alternate parts, and
ſhould therefore be written anthymn.] A holy ſong; a ſong
performed as part of divine ſervice.
God Moſes firſt, then David did inſpire,
To compoſe anthems for his heavenly quire. Denham.
There is no paſſion that is not finely expreſſed in thoſe parts.
of the inſpired writings, which are proper for divine ſongs and
anthems. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 465.
ANTHo'logy. m. ſ. ſºyia, from a 39, a flower, and ºty, to
gather.]
1. A colle&amp;tion of flowers. .
2. A collection of devotions in the Greek church.
3. A collection of poems.
A'N THoNY’s FIRE. m. ſ. A kind of eryſipelas.
ANTHRAX. m. ſ. [4,3,2}, a burning coal.] A ſcab or blotch
that is made by a corroſive humour, which burns the ſkin, and
occaſions ſharp pricking pains. &amp;aincy.
ANTH RoPo'Loo Y. n.ſ.. [from &amp; Säwſtº, man, and xyz, to diſ-
courſe.] The doctrine of anatomy; the doctrine of the form
and ſtructure of the body of man.
ANT HR opo'PATH Y. m. ſ. [4,3,2-3, man, and zaºs, paſſion.]
The ſenſibility of man; the paſſions of man.
ANTHROPO PHAGI. n ſ. It has no ſingular. [...S.--&gt;, man,
and £4,2, to cat..] .
Man-eatcrs; cannibals; thoſe that live upon human fleſh.
The cannibals that each other eat,
The anthropºphagi, and men whoſe heads
Do grow beneath their ſhoulders. Shakespeare. Othell.
ANTHRoPop HAG 'N IAN. m. ſ. A ludicrous word, formed by
Shakeſpeare fromanthropophagi, for the ſake of a formidable ſound.
Go, knock, and call; he'll ſpeak like an anthropºphaginian
unto thee: knock, I ſay. Shakespeare. Merry Iſives of // indſºr.
ANTHRoPo/PHAG Y. m. ſ. [39;ºº, a man, and ºxy, to cat.]
The quality of eating human fleſh, or man-eating.
Upon ſlender foundations was raiſed the anthropºphagy of
Diomedes his horſes. Brown's /ulgar Errours, h. i c. 6.
ANTHRopo'sophy. m. ſ. [3,3;&amp;#6, man, and ºpia, wiſdom.]
The knowledge of the nature of man.
ANTHYPNo"Tick. adj. [from aº, againſt, and £2.6, ſleep.]
That which has the power of preventing ſleep; that which is
efficacious againſt a lethargy. -
ANTHYPochon DR1'Ack.adj.[from 3ſ.,againſt and wox.3;{2^.]
Good againſt hypochondriack maladies.
ANTH}}*OPHORA. m. ſ. […Soºº...] A figure in rhetorick,
which ſignifies a contrary illation, or inference, and is when an
objection is refuted or diſproved by the oppoſition of a contrary
ſentence. . Smith's Rhetorick.
ANTHYst E'Rick. adj. [from 2%, againſt, and Wrigº..] Good
againſt hyſtericks.
ANT1. [...] A particle much uſed in compoſition with words
derived from the Greek, and ſignifics contrary to ; as, antino-
marchical, oppoſite to monarchy.
ANTIA'cID. adj. [from ami, and acidus, ſour.] Contrary to four-
neſs; alkalis.
Oils are antiacids, ſo far as they blunt acrimony; but as they
are hard of digeſtion, they produce acrimony of ..nother fort.
2 .#ritiſ' not on Alim, nii.
AN : I-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">Astica Achs'e tick, al. [from zº, againſt, and ºzº, , a bad
habit..] Things adapted to the cure of a bad conſtitution.
ANTICHAMBER. m. ſ. This word is corruptly written for ante-
chamber; which ſee.
Antic: R1's T AN. adj. [from 27, againſt, and zºr'a.º..] Op-
poſite to chriſtianity.
That deſpiſed, abſeét, oppreſſed ſort of men, the miniſters,
whom the world would make antichriftian, and ſo deprive them
of heaven. . South.
As Tich R1's TIAN is M. m. ſ. [from antichriſtian.] Oppoſition or
contrariety to chriſtianity. - -
Have we not ſecn many, whoſe opinions have faſtened upon
one another the brand of antichriſtianiſm * Decay of Piety.
As Tich Rus'ſ IA's IT Y. m. ſ. [fºom antichriſtian.] Contrariety
to chriſtianity. -
ANT1'cHRos is M. m. ſ. [27, againſt, and x:yº, time.] Devia-
tion from the right order of account of time.
To ANTICIPATE. v. a. [anticipº, Lat.]
1. To take ſomething ſooner than another, ſo as to prevent him
that comes after.
God hath taken care to anticipate and prevent every man, to
draw him early into his church ; to give piety the prepoſſeſſion,
and ſo to engage him in holineſs. Hammond's Fundamentals.
2. To take up before the time, at which any thing might be re-
gularly had.
I find I have anticipated already, and taken up from Boccace,
before I come to him ; but I am of the temper of kings, who
are for preſent money, no matter how they pay it. Dryd. Fab.
3. To foretaſte, or take an impreſſion of ſomething, which is
not yet, as if it really was. -
The life of the deſperate equals the anxiety of death, who
but act the life of the damned, and anticipate the deſolations of
hell. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i. c. 2.
Why ſhould we
Articipate our ſorrows? 'tis like thoſe
That die for fear of death. Denham's Sophy.
4. To prevent anything by crouding in before it; to preclude.
Time, thou anticipat'ſ my dread exploits:
The flighty purpoſe never is o'ertook,
Unleſs the deed go with it. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I am ſo far from pretending to inſtrušt the profeſſion, or an:
ticipating their directions to ſuch as are under their government.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
If our Apoſtle had maintained ſuch an anticipating principle
engraven upon our ſouls before all exerciſe of reaſon; what
did he talk of ſeeking the Lord, ſeeing that the knowledge of
him was innate and perpetual.
As TicipA"tion. m. ſ. [from articipate.]
1. The act of taking up ſomething before its time.
The golden number gives the new moon four days too late,
by reaſon of the aforeſaid anticipation, and our neglect of it.
Holder on Time.
2. Foretaſte.
It is not enough to be miſerable when the time comes, un-
leſs we make ourſelves ſo beforehand, and by anticipation.
- L’Eſtrange.
If we really live under the hope of future happineſs, we ſhall
taſte it by way of anticipation and forethought, an image of it
will meet our minds often, and ſtay there, as all pleaſing ex-
pectations do. - Atterbury's Sermons.
3. Opinion implanted before the reaſons of that opinion can be
known.
The eaſt and weſt, the north and ſouth, have the ſame anti-
cipation concerning one ſupreme diſpoſer of things. Stillingfleet.
What nation is there, that, without any teaching, have not
a kind of anticipation, or preconceived notion of a Deity ?
Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
A's Tick. ariſ. [probably from antiquus, ancient, as things out of
º appear old.] Odd; ridiculouſly wild; buffoon in geſticu-
at IOI).
What I dares the ſlave
Come hither cover'd with an antick face,
And fleer and ſcorn at our ſolemnity? Shakespeare, Rom. &amp; jul.
Of all our antick fights, and pageantry,
Which Engliſh idiots run in crouds to ſee. Dryden.
The prize was to be conferred upon the whiſtler, that could
gº through his tune without laughing, though provoked by the
antick poſtures of a merry Andrew, who was to play tricks.
f - Addiſon. Speciator, N° 17'9.
A Stick. m. ſ. -
* He that plays anticks; he that uſes odd geſticulation: a buf-
OOn.
Within the hollow crown,
That rounds the mortal temples of a king,
Keeps death his court; and there the antick fits,
Scofing his ſtate. Shakeſp. Richard II.
... If you ſhould ſmile, he grows impatient.—
car not, my lord, we can contain ourſelves,
ere he the verieſt antick in the world. Shakeſp. Tam. Shr.
2. Odd appearance.
A work of rich entail, and curious mold,
Woven with anticks, and wild imagery. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Bently's Sermons.
For ev'n at firſt reflection ſhe eſpies
Such toys, ſuch anticks, and ſuch vanities, -
As ſhe retires and ſhrinks for ſhame and fear. Sir J. Davish
To ANTick. v. a. [from antick.] To make anticks.
Mine own tongue
Splits what it ſpeaks; the wild diſguiſe hath almoſt
Antickt us all. Shakeſp. Antony and Cºpatra,
ANTIckly. adv. [from antick.] In an antick manner; with
odd poſtures, or wild geſticulations. -
Scrambling, outfacing, faſhion-mongring boys,
That lye, and cog, and flout, deprave, and ſlander,
Go antickly, and ifiew an outward hideouſneſs,
And ſpeak of half a dozen dangerous words.
Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
ANTICLIMAX. n.ſ.. [from gº and cºast.] A ſentence in
which the laſt part is lower than the firſt.
A certain figure which was unknown to the ancients, is call-
ed by ſome an anticlimax. Addison's J/hig Extriner.
This diſtich is frequently mentioned as an example.
Next comes Dalhouſey the great god of war,
Lieutenant colºnel to the earl of Mar. -
ANTIconvu'lsive. adj. [from 21, againſt, and convulſive.]
Good againſt convulſions.
Whatſoever produces an inflammatory diſpoſition in the
blood, produces the aſthma, as anticonvulſive medicines. Flyer.
ANTICOR. m. ſ. [from 2, againſt, and or, the heart.]
A preternatural ſwelling of a round figure, occaſioned by a
ſanguine and bilious humour, and appearing in a horſe's breaſt,
oppoſite to his heart. An anticºr may kill a horſe, unleſs it
be brought to a ſuppuration by good remedics. Farrier's Diół.
ANTico'URTLER, i.f. [from 3i, againſt, and courtier.] One
that oppoſes the court.
ANT1'Dot.A.L. adj. [from antidºte.] That which has the quality
of an antidote, or the power of counteracting poiſon.
That bezoar is antidotal, we ſhall nºt deny. Brown's W. Err.
ANTIBott. n.ſ. [...º.º. antidºtus, Lat, a thing given in op-
poſition to ſomething elſe.] -
A medicine given to expel the miſchiefs of another, as of
poiſon. &amp;inºy.
º Truſt not the phyſician,
His antidotes are poiſon, and he ſiys
More than you rob. Shakeſp. Tºmon.
What fool would believe that antidote delivered by Pierus
againſt the ſting of a ſcorpion; to fit upon an aſs, with one's .
face towards his tail. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. c. 7.
Poiſon will work againſt the ſtars: beware;
For ev'ry meal an antidºte prepare. Dryden jun. juv. Sat.
ANTIDysºst E'Rick, adj. [from gº, againſt, and dynteria, a
bloody flux.] Good againſt the bloody flux.
ANTIFE'BRIL F. adj. [from aft, againſt, and fibris, a fever.]
Good againſt fevers.
Antifibrile medicines check the ebullition. Flyer.
ANTILo'GAR1THM.. n.ſ.. [from zº, againſt, and lºgarithm.]
The complement of the logarithm of a ſine, tangent, or ſº-
cant; or the difference of that logarithm from the logarithm
of ninety degrees. Chambers.
ANT1'logy. m.ſ. [4%.] A contradićtion between any words
and paſſages in an authour. Dić7.
ANTI'loquist. m. ſ. [from 27, againſt, and loquor, to ſpeak.]
A contradićtor. Dicf.
ANTIMONA'R chic AL. adj. [from 27, againſt, and was:42, go-
vernment by a ſingle perſon.] Againſt government by a ſingle
perſon. -
When he ſpied the ſtatue of king Charles in the middle of
the croud, and moſt of the kings ranged over their heads, he
concluded that an antimonarchical aſſembly could never chooſe
ſuch a place. Addison. Freeholder, Nº 47.
ANTIMon A'RChical NFss. m.ſ.. [from antimonarchical.] The
quality of being an enemy to regal power.
ANTI Mo'NIAL. adj. [from antimony.] Made of antimony;
having the qualities of antimony; relating to antimony.
They were got out of the reach of antimonial fumes. Crew.
Though antimonial cups prepar'd with art,
Their force to wine through ages ſhould impart;
This diſſipation, this profuſe expence,
Nor ſhrinks their ſize, nor waſtes their ſtores immenſe.
Blackmore on the Creation.
ANTIMONY. n.ſ. [The ſtibium of the ancients, by the
Greeks called Fºwa. The reaſon of its modern denomination
is referred to Baſil Valentine, a German monk; who, as the
tradition relates, having thrown ſome of it to the hogs, ob-
ſerved, that, after it had purged them heartily, they immedi-
ately fattened; and therefore, he imagined, his fellow monks
would be the better for a like doſe. The experiment, how-
ever, ſucceeded ſo ill, that they all died of it; and the medicine
was thenceforward called antimoine; antimonk.j
Antimony is a mineral ſubſtance, of a metalline nature, hºv-
ing all the ſeeming characters of a real metal, except malleabi-
lity; and may be called a ſemimetal, being a foſſile glebe of
ſome undetermined metal, combined with a ſulphurous and
ſtony ſubſtance. Mines of all metals afford it; but chiefly
thºſ.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N T
A N T
thoſe of filver and lead; that in gold mines is reckoned beſt. Asti'podal. adj. [from antipods.] Relating to the countries
It has alſo its own mines in Hungary, Germany, and France.
It is found in clods or ſtones of ſeveral ſizes, bearing a near
reſemblance to black lead, only being lighter and harder. Its
texture is full of little ſhining veins or threads, like needles ;
brittle as gaſs. Sometimes veins of a red or golden colour are
intermixed, which is called male antimony; that without them
being denominated female antimony. It fuſes in the fire, though
with ſome difficulty; and diſſolves more eaſily in water. When
dug out of the earth, it is put into large crucibles, fuſed by a
violent fire, and then poured into cones, which make the crude
antimony of the ſhops. Of theſe cones the top is the pureſt
part, and the baſe the fouleft. It deſtroys and diſſipates all me-
tals fuſed with it, except gold; and is therefore uſeful in re-
fining. It is a common ingredient in ſpeculums, or burning
concaves; ſerving to give them a finer poliſh. It makes a part
in belſ metal; and renders the ſound more clear. It is ming-
led with tin, to make it more hard, white, and ſound ; and
with lead, in the caſting of printers letters, to render them
more ſmooth and firm. i. is a general help in the melting of
metals, and eſpecially in caſting of cannon balls. In pharmacy
it is uſed under various forms, and with various intentions,
chiefly as an emetick. It had no place in medicine before the
fourteenth century; and was generally neglected, till Paracel-
ſus brought it into eſteem, in the beginning of the ſixteenth
century; but much miſchief was done by it, till the proper
methods of preparing it were, after a long courſe of experi-
ments, diſcovered. Chambers.
ANTINEPHRI'tick. adj. [from 27, and viºr….] Medicines
good againſt diſeaſes of the reins and kidneys.
ANTINoMY. m. ſ. [from 27, and 4.2.] A contradićtion between
two laws, or two articles of the ſame law.
ANTIPARALY'Tick. adj. [from an and wagºva..] Efficacious
againſt the palſy.
ANTIPATHETICAL. adi. [from antipathy.] Having a natural
contrariety to any thing.
The ſoil is fat and luxurious, and antipathetical to all vene-
In OuS CreatureS. Howel's Wocal Forg/l.
ANTIPATHETICALNEss. n.ſ.. [from antipathetical.] The qua-
lity or ſtate of having a natural contrariety to any %
ict.
ANTIPATHY. n.ſ.. [from 27, againſt, and z235, feeling;
antipathie, Fr.]
I. A natural contrariety to any thing, ſo as to ſhun it involunta-
rily; averſion; diſlike. It is oppoſed to ſympathy.
No contraries hold more antipathy,
Than I and ſuch a knave. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To this perhaps might be juſtly attributed moſt of the ſym-
pathies and antipathies obſervable in men. Locke.
2. It has ſometimes the particle againſt before the object of anti-
athy.
p I id a mortal antipathy againſt ſtanding armies in times of
peace; becauſe I took armies to be hired by the maſter of the
family, to keep his children in ſlavery. Swift.
3. Sometimes to.
Ask you, what provocation I have had 2
The ſtrong antipathy of good to bad.
When truth, or virtue, an affront endures,
Th' affront is mine, my friend, and ſhould be yours. Pope.
4. Formerly with ; but improperly.
Tangible bodies have an antipathy with air; and any liquid
body, that is more denſe, they will draw, condenſe, and, in ef-
feót, incorporate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº 80.
ANTIPERISTASIS. n ſ [from aſſºrs, ſpace, formed of 20,
and ºri,ºrzaz, to ſtand round..] The oppoſition of a contrary
quality, by which the quality it oppoſes, becomes heightened
or intended; or the action, by which a body attacked by an-
other, collects itſelf, and becomes ſtronger by ſuch oppoſition:
or an intention of the activity of one quality cauſed by the op-
poſition of another. Thus quicklime is ſet on fire by the affu-
fion of cold water ; ſo water becomes warmer in winter than
in ſummer ; and thunder and lightening are excited in the
middle region of the air, which is continually cold, and all by
antiperi/aſis. This is an exploded principle in the Peripatetick
philoſophy.
Th’ antiperiſtaſis of age
More inflam'd his am’rous rage. Cowley.
The riotous prodigal deteſts covetouſneſs; yet let him find
the ſprings grow dry, which feed his luxury, covetouſneſs ſhall
be called in ; and ſo, by a ſtrange antiperiſtoſis, prodigality ſhall
beget rapine. Decay of Piety.
ANTIPESTILE'NTIAL. adj. [from 2%, againſt, and pºſſilential.]
Efficacious againſt the infection of the plague.
Perfumes correct the air before it is attracted by the lungs;
or, rather, antipºſilential unguents, to anoint the noſtrils with.
- Harvey on the Plague.
ANT/PHRASIS. n.ſ.. [from 27, againſt, and 3:42, a form of
ſpeech..] The uſe of words in a ſenſe oppoſite to their proper
meaning.
You now find no cauſe to repent, that you never dipt your
hands in the bloody high courts of juſtice, ſo called only by
antiphrºſ. South's Dedication to his Sermons.
inhabited by the antipodes.
The Americans are antipodal, unto the Indians.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, h. vi. c. 7.
ANTI"PODES. n.ſ. It has no ſingular. [from aſ, againſt, and
zºº, feet.] Thoſepeople who, living on the other ſide of the
globe, have their feet directly oppoſite to ours.
We ſhould hold day with the antipodes,
If you would walk in abſence of the ſun.
Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
So ſhines the ſun, tho' hence remov’d, as clear
When his beams warm th’ antipodes, as here. //aller.
A'N TIPOPE. m. ſ. [from 21, againſt, and pope.] He that uſurps
the popedom, in oppoſition to the right pope.
This houſe is famous in hiſtory, for the retreat of an anti-
pºpe, who called himſelf Felix V. Addiſon on Italy.
ANTIPTO'SIS. n.ſ. [2.2.2, J A figure in grammar, by
which one caſe is put for another.
A'NTIQUARY. m. ſ. [antiquarius, Lat.] A man ſtudious of an-
tiquity; a collector of ancient things.
All thoſe arts, rarities, and inventions, are but the relićts of
an intellect defaced with fin. We admire it now, only as an-
tiquaries do a piece of old coin, for the ſtamp it once bore.
South's Sermons.
With ſharpen'd fight pale antiquaries pore,
Th’ inſcription value, but the ruſt adore. Pope.
The rude Latin of the monks is ſtill very intelligible; had
their records been delivered in the vulgar tongue, they could
not now be underſtood, unleſs by antiquaries. Swift.
A'N TIQUARY. adj. [This word is improper.] Old ; antique.
Here's Neſtor,
Inſtrućted by the antiquary times;
He muſt, he is, he cannot but be wife.
Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Creſſida.
To A's tiqua TE. v. a. [antiquo, Lat..] To put out of uſe; to
make obſolete.
The growth of chriſtianity in this kingdom might reaſon-
ably introduce new laws, and antiquate or abrogate ſome old
ones, that ſeemed leſs conſiſtent with the chriſtian doćtrines.
Hale's Common Law of England.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſt is admirable. But cannot I admire
the height of his invention, and the ſtrength of his expreſſion,
without defending his antiquated words, and the perpetual harſh-
neſs of their ſound 2 Dryden.
Almighty Latium, with her cities crown'd,
Shall like an antiquated fable ſound. Addison on Italy.
A'N TIQUATED NEss. n.ſ.. [from antiquated.] The ſtate of be-
ing antiquated, worn out of uſe, or obſolete.
ANTIQUE, adj. [antique, Fr. antiquus, Lat. It was formerly
pronounced according to the Engliſh analogy, with the accent
on the firſt ſyllable; but now after the French, with the accent
on the laſt, at leaſt in proſe; the poets uſe it variouſly.]
1. Ancient; old; not modern.
Now, good Ceſario, but that piece of ſong,
That old and antique ſong we heard laſt night.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Such truth in love as th’ antique world did know,
In ſuch a ſtile as courts might boaſt of now.
2. Of genuine antiquity.
The ſeals which we have remaining of Julius Cæſar, which
we know to be antique, have the ſtar of Venus over them.
Dryden's Virgil', Aneis, Prºf.
My copper lamps at any rate,
For being true antique I bought ;
Yet wiſely melted down my plate,
On modern models to be wrought;
And trifles I alike purſue,
Becauſe they’re old, becauſe they're new. Prior.
3. Of old faſhion.
Forth came that ancient lord and aged queen,
Array'd in antique robes down to the ground.
And ſad habiliments right well beſeen. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Muſt he no more divert the tedious day ?
Nor ſparkling thoughts in antique words convey
Smith to the A/emory ºf Philips.
JValler.
4. Odd ; wild; antick.
Name not theſe living death-heads unto me;
For theſe not ancient but antique be. Donne.
And ſooner may a gulling weather-ſpy
By drawing forth heav'n's ſcheme, tell certainly
What faſhion'd hats or ruffs, or ſuits next year,
Our giddy-headed antique youth will wear. Donne.
ANT1'QUE. n.ſ.. [from antique, adj.] An antiquity; a remain
of ancient times; an ancient rarity.
I leave to Edward, now early of Oxford, my ſeal of Julius
Caeſar; as alſo another ſeal, ſuppoſed to be a young Hercules ;
both very choice antiques, and ſet in gold. Swift's Laſt //ill.
ANT1'QUEN Ess. m. ſ. [from antique.] The quality of being an-
tique; an appearance of antiquity. -
We may diſcover ſomething venerable in the antiqueñºſ of
the work; but we would ſee the deſign enlarged, the figures re-
formed, and the colour laid on. Addiſon on the º:
I N i I'-
**::::
º:
: --&gt;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A N T
A O R
ANTI'QUIT Y. m. ſ. [antiquitas, Lat.]
1. Old times; time paſt long ago. -
I mention Ariſtotle, Polybius, and Cicero, the greateſt phi-
loſopher, the moſt impartial hiſtorian, and the moſt conſum-
mate ſtateſman of all antiquity. Addison. Freeholder, N° 51.
2. The people of old times; the ancients.
That ſuch pillars were raiſed by Seth, all antiquity has a-
vowed. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
3. The works or remains of old times.
As for the obſervation of Machiavel, traducing Gregory the
Great, that he did what in him lay, to extinguiſh all heathen
antiquities : I do not find that thoſe zeals laſt long; as it ap-
peared in the ſucceſſion of Sabinian, who did revive the former
antiquities. Bacon's Eſſays.
4. Old age: a ludicrous ſenſe.
Is not your voice broken your wind ſhort your chin
double your wit ſingle and every part about you blaſted
with antiquity P and will you yet call yourſelf young
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
5. Ancientneſs; as, this ring is valuable for its antiquity.
ANTISCII. n.ſ. It has no ſingular. [from ºff, and axlz.] In
geography, the people who inhabit on different ſides of the
equator, who, conſequently, at noon have their ſhadows pro-
jected oppoſite ways. Thus the people of the north are An-
tiſcii to thoſe of the ſouth ; the one proječting their ſhadows at
noon toward the north pole, and the other toward the ſouth
pole. Chambers.
ANTIscoRBU'ſ IcAL. adj. [from gº, againſt, and ſorbutum, the
ſcurvy.] Good againſt the ſcurvy.
The warm antiſcorbutical plants, in quantities, will occaſion
ſtinking breath, and corrupt the blood Arbuth. on Aliments.
ANTIscor BU’ſ Ick, adj. [from 25, againſt, and ſcorbutum, the
ſcurvy.] Good againſt the ſcurvy.
The warm antiſ.orbuticks, animal diet, and animal ſalts, are’
roper. Arbuthnot on Diet.
ANTISPASIS. m. ſ. [from 3%, againſt, and awa, to draw.]
The revulſion of any humour into another part. -
ANTISPASMO'Dick. adj. [from 27, againſt, and azaawº, the
cramp.] That which has the power of relieving the cramp.
ANTISPA's TICK. adj. [from 2% and awarºº...] Medicines
which cauſe a revulſion of the humours.
ANTISPL ENE"Tick, adj. [from an and ſplenetick.] Efficacious
in diſeaſes of the ſpleen.
Antiſplencticks open the obſtrućtions of the ſpleen. Floyer.
ANTISTROPHE. m.ſ. [4]-6-pº, from ºil, the contrary way, and
*30th, turning.] In an ode ſuppoſed to be ſung in parts, the
ſecond ſtanza of every three, or ſometimes every ſecond ſtanza;
ſo called becauſe the dance turns about.
ANTISTRUM A'Tick. adj. [from 27, and ſtruma, a ſcrophulous
ſwelling.] Good againſt the king's evil.
I preſcribed him a diſtilled milk, with antiſtrumaticks, and
purged him. J/ſeman's Surgery.
ANT1'THESIS. m. ſ. in the plural antitheſes. [….Sak, plac-
ing in oppoſition.J. Oppoſition of words or ſentiments; con-
traſt; as in theſe lines:
Though gentle, yet not dull,
Strong without rage, without o'erflowing, full.
I ſee a chief, who leads my choſen ſons,
All arm'd with points, antitheſes, and puns. Pope's Dunciad.
A'NTITYPE. n.ſ. [złºtwºre..] That which is reſembled or ſha-
dowed out by the type; that of which the type is the repreſen-
tation. It is a term of theology. See TYPE.
When once upon the wing, he ſoars to an higher pitch, from
the type to the antitype, to the days of the Meſfiah, the aſcen-
ſion of our Saviour, and, at length, to his kingdom and domi-
nion over all the earth. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
He brought forth bread and wine, and was the prieſt of the
moſt high É. ; and imitating the antitype, or the ſubſtance,
Chriſt himſelf. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
ANTITY'P1cAL. adj. [from antitype.] That which relates to
an antitype; that which explains the type.
ANT1 v ENE’REAL. adj. [from 21, and venereal.] Good againſt
the venereal diſeaſe.
If a lues be joined with it, you will ſcarce cure your patient
without exhibiting antivenereal remedies. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Astr. E.R. n.ſ.. [andouillier, Fr.] Properly the firſt branches of
à ſtag's horns; but, popularly and generally, any of his
branches. -
Grown old, they grow leſs branched, and firſt loſe their
row antlers, or loweſt furcations next to the head.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 9.
A well grown ſtag, whoſe antlers riſe
High o'er his front, his beams invade the ſkies.
Bright Diana
Brought hunted wild goats heads, and branching antlers
f ſtags, the fruit and honour of her toil. Prior.
ANZoº Eß. n.ſ. It has no ſingular. [Lat, from 3; and *ē, to
inhabit.] In geography, thoſe inhabitants of the earth, who
ºve under the fame metidian, and at the ſame diſtance from the
SSAuator; the one toward the north, and the other to the ſouth.
ºnce they have the ſame longitude, and their latitude is alſo
the ºame, but of a different denomination. They are in the ſame
ol. I, -
Denham.
Dryden.
ſemicircle of the meridian, but oppoſite parallels. They have
preciſely the ſame hours of the day and night, but oppoſite ſea-
ſons; and the night of the one is always equal to the day of the
other. Chambers.
4.YTONOMASIA. m.ſ.. [from gº, and ºpe, a name.] A
form of ſpeech, in which, for a proper name, is put the name
of ſome dignity, office, profeſſion, ſcience, or trade; or when
a proper name is put in the room of an appellative. Thus aking
is called his majeſty; a nobleman, his lordſhip. We ſay the
philoſopher inſtead of Ariſtotle, and the orator for Cicero. thus
a man is called by the name of his country, a German, an Ita-
Jian; and a grave man is called a Cato, and a wiſe man a So-
lomon. Smith's Rhetorick.
A'N TRE. [antre, Fr. antrum, Lat.] A cavern; a cave; a den.
With all my travels hiſtory:
Wherein of antres vaſt, and deſarts idle,
It was my hent to ſpeak.
A'Nvi L. m. ſ. ſaengille, Sax.]
1. The iron block on which the ſmith lays his metal to be forged.
I ſaw a ſmith ſtand with his hammer, thus,
The whilſt his iron did on the anvil cool. Shakespeare King john.
On their eternal anvils here he found
The brethren beating, and the blows go round.
2. Anything on which blows are laid.
Here I clip
The anvil of my ſword, and do conteſt
Hotly and nobly. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
3. Figuratively; to be upon the anvil, is to be in a ſtate of
formation or preparation. -
Several members of our houſe knowing, ſome time ago, what
was upon the anvil, went to the clergy, and deſired their judg-
ment. - Swift.
ANx1'FTY. m. ſ. [anxietas, Lat.]
1. Trouble of mind about ſome future event; ſuſpenſe with un-
eaſineſs; perplexity; ſolicitude.
To be happy, is not only to be freed from the pains and
diſeaſes of the body, but from anxiety and vexation of ſpirit;
not only to enjoy the pleaſures of ſenſe, but peace of conſci-
ence, and tranquillity of mind. Tillotſon.
2. In the medical language, depreſſion; lowneſs of ſpirits.
In anxieties which attend fevers, when the cold fit is over, a
warmer regimen may be allowed; and becauſe anxieties often
happen by ſpaſms from wind, ſpices are uſeful. Arbuthnot.
A'NXIOUS, adj. [anxius, Lat.]
1. Diſturbed about ſome uncertain event; ſolicitous.
His penſive cheek upon his hand reclin'd,
Shakespeare Othello.
Dryden.
And anxious thoughts revolving in his mind. Dryden.
With beating hearts the dire event they wait, -
Anxious, and trembling for the birth of fate. Pope.
2. Careful; full of inquietude; unquiet.
In youth alone, unhappy mortals live;
But ah! the mighty bliſs is fugitive; º
Diſcolour'd ſickneſs, anxious labour come, . -
And age, and death's inexorable doom. Dryden's Virgil.
3. Careful, as of a thing of great importance.
There being no writings we need to be ſolicitous about the
meaning of, but thoſe that contain truths we are to believe, or
laws we are to obey, we may be leſs anxious about the ſenſe of
other authours. Locke.
4. It has generally for or about before the objećt, but ſometimes of:
Who anxious of neglect, ſuſpecting change,
Conſults her pride, and meditates revenge: Granville.
A'Nxiously, adv. [from anxious.] In an anxious manner; ſo-
licitouſly; unquietly; carefully.
But where the loſs is temporal, every probability of it needs
not put us ſo anxiouſly to prevent it, ſince it might be repaired
again. South.
Thou what befits the new lord mayor,
And what the Gallick arms will do,
Art anxiouſly inquiſitive to know. Dryden,
A'Nxious N Ess. m. ſ. [from anxious...] The quality of being an-
xious; ſuſceptibility of anxiety.
A'NY. adj. [anº, enig, Sax.]
1. Every; whoever he be; whatever it be. It is, in all its ſenſes,
applied indifferently to perſons or things.
I know you are now, Sir, a gentleman born–Ay and have
been ſo any time theſe four hours. Shakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale.
You contented yourſelf with being capable, as much as any
whoſoever, of defending your country with your ſword. Dryd.
How fit is this retreat for uninterrupted ſtudy ? Any one that
ſees it will own, I could not have choſen a more likely place to
converſe with the dead in. Pope's Letters.
2. Whoſoever; whatſoever; as diſtinguiſhed from ſome other.
What warmth is there in your affection towards any of theſe
princely ſuitors that are already come. Shakeſp. Merch. of Wen.
An inverted motion being begun any where below, continues
itſelf all the whole length. Locke.
3. It is uſed in oppoſition to none.
I wound and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver cut
of my hand. Deſt xxxii. 39.
A'oR1st. n. ſ. ſº-3-.] Indefinite; a term in the Greek gram-
Inlar. * *
2 A AJ'R74.
</p></div><p>
            End of Section 1.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809190#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section2" id="Section2"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section 2</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P E.
A P H
AORTA. m. ſ. [2,3,..] The great artery which riſes immedi-
ately out of the left ventricle of the heart. &amp;ſincy.
APACE. adv. [from a and pace; that is, with a great pace.]
1. Quick; ſpeedily: uſed of things in motion.
Or when the flying libbard ſhe did chace,
She could them nimbly move, and after fly apace. F. Queen.
Ay, quoth my uncle Glo'ſter,
Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow apace.
And ſince methinks, I would not grow ſo faſt,
Eccauſe ſweet flow'rs are ſlow, and weeds make haſte.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
He promis'd in his eaſt a glorious race;
Now ſunk from his meridian, ſets apace. Dryden's Aurengz.
Is not he imprudent, who, ſeeing the tide making haſte to-
wards him apace, will ſleep till the ſea overwhelm him. Tillºtſ, i.
2. With haſte; applied to ſome action.
The baron now his diamonds pours apace;
Th’ embroider'd king who ſhows but half his face,
And his refulgent queen. Pope's Rape of the Lock.
3. Haſtily; with ſpeed: ſpoken of any kind of progreſſion from
one ſtate to another.
This ſecond courſe of men,
With ſome regard to what is juſt and right,
Shall lead their lives, and multiply apace. Milton's Par. Loſ’,
The life and power of religion decays apace here and at
home, while we are ſpreading the honour of our arms far and
wide through foreign nations. Atterbury's Sermons.
If ſenſible pleaſure, or real grandeur, be our end, we ſhall
proceed apace to real miſery. J/atts's Improv. of the Afind.
APAGO'G1cAL. adj. [from azayº; compounded of arº, from,
and zya, to bring or draw.] An apagogical demonſtration is
ſuch as does not prove the thing directly ; but ſhews the im-
poſſibility, or abſurdity, which ariſes from denying it; and is
alſo called reduć'io ad impºſſibile, or ad alſºrdum. Chambers.
APART. adv. [apart, Fr.
1. Separately from the reſt in place.
Since I enter into that queſtion, it behoveth me to give rea-
ſon for my opinion, with circumſpection; becauſe I walk aſide,
and in a way apart from the multitude. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
The party diſcerned, that the earl of Eſſex would never ſerve
their turn, they reſolved to have another army apart, that ſhould
be at their devotion. Clarendon, l. viii.
2. In a ſtate of diſtinction; as, to ſet apart for any uſe.
He is ſo very figurative, that he requires a grammar apart, to
conſtrue him. Dryden.
The tyrant ſhall demand yon ſacred load,
And gold and veſſels ſet apart for God. Prior.
3. Diſtinétly.
Moſes firſt nameth heaven and earth, putting waters but in
the third place, as comprehending waters in the word earth;
but afterwards he nameth them apart. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
4. At a diſtance; retired from the other company.
So pleaſe you, madam,
To put apart theſe your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth. Shakespeare. Iſ inter's Tale.
APA'RTMENT. m.ſ.. [apartement, Fr.] A part of the houſe al-
lotted to the uſe of any particular perſon; a room; a ſet of
IOOIIlS.
A private gallery 'twixt th' apartments led,
Not to the foe yet known.
Pale as death, deſpoil'd of his array,
Into the queen's apartment takes his way. Dryden's Fables.
The moſt conſiderable ruin is that on the eaſtern promon-
tory, where are ſtill ſome apartments left, very high and arched
at top. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
A PATH Y. m. ſ. ſa, not, and zºº, feeling.] The quality of
not feeling; exemption from paſſion; freedom from mental
perturbation.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Paſſion, and apathy, and glory, and ſhame.
Milton's Paradiſ Loft.
To remain inſenſible of ſuch provocations, is not conſtancy,
but apathy. South.
In lazy apathy let ſtoicks boaſt
Their virtue fix’d ; 'tis fixed as in froſt,
Contracted all, retiring to the breaſt;
But ſtrength of mind is exerciſe, not reſt. Pope.
A PE. m. ſ. ſap, Icelandiſh.]
1. A kind of monkey remarkable for imitating what he ſees.
I will be more newfangled than an ape, more giddy in my
deſires than a monkey. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Writers report, that the heart of an ape worn near the heart,
comforteth the heart, and increaſeth audacity. It is true, that
the ape is a merry and bold beaſt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
With glittering gold and ſparkling gems they ſhine,
But apes and monkeys are the gods within. Granville.
2. An imitator; uſed generally in the bad ſenſe.
Julio Romano, who, had he himſelf eternity, and could put
breath into his work, would beguile nature of her cuſtom : ſo
perfectly he is her ape. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
To APE. V. a. ſfrom ape.] To imitate, as an ape imitates hu-
man actions.
Sir j. Denham.
Afting the foreigners in cwery dreſs, -
Which, bought at greater coſt, becomes him lºſs. Dryden.
Curſe on the ſtripling how he apes his fire!
Ambitiouſly ſententious ! Addison's Cato.
APEAK, or APF'EK. adv. [probably from a pique.J In a poſ-
ture to pierce the ground.
A'PEPsy. m. ſ. […a..] A loſs of natural conco&amp;ion. 3;incy.
A PER. m. ſ. [from ape.] A ridiculous imitator or mimick.
APERIENT. adj. [aperio, Lat. to open.] That which has the
quality of opening; chiefly uſed in medicine for gently pur-
gative.
There be bracelets fit to comfort the ſpirits; and they be of
three intentions; refrigerant, corroborant, and aperient. Bacon.
Of the ſtems of plants, ſome contain a fine afºrient ſalt, and
are diuretick and ſaponaceous. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
APERITIVE. adj. [from aperio, Lat. to open.] I hat which has
i. quality of opening the excrementious paſſages of the
ody.
They may make broth, with the addition of aparitive herbs.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
APE'Rt. adj. [apertus, Lat..] Open.
APERTION. n.ſ.. [from apertus, Lat.]
1. An opening; a paſſage through any thing; a gap.
The next now in order are the apertions; under which term
I do comprehend doors, windows, ſtaircaſes, chimneys, or
other conduits: in ſhort, all inlets or outlets. // alon's Archit.
2. The act of opening; or ſtate of being opened.
The plenitude of veſſels, otherways called the plethora, when
it happens, cauſeth an extravaſation of blood, either by ruption
or apertiºn of them. // ſeman's Surgery.
APERTLY. adv. [apert, Lat.j Openly; without covert.
APERTNEss. n.f. [from apert.] Openneſs.
In general, the freedom, or cpiringſ, and vigour of pro-
nouncing, and the cloſeneſs and muffling, and, as I may ſay,
lazineſs of ſpeaking, render the ſound conſiderably different.
Holder's Elements of Speech.
A'PERTURE. m. ſ. [from apertus, open.]
1. The act of opening.
Hence ariſeth the facility of joining a conſonant to a vowel,
becauſe from an appulſe to an aperture is eaſier, than from one
appulſe to another. Holder's Elements ºf Speech.
2. An open place.
If memory be made by the caſy motion of the ſpirits through
the opened paſſages, images, without doubt, paſs through the
ſame apertures. Glanville's Scrºſs Scientifica, Preface.
3. The hole next the objećt glaſs of a teleſcope or microſcopé.
The concave metal bore an aperture of an inch; but the
aperture was limited by an opaque circle, perforated in the mid-
d!e. Newton's Opticăs.
4. Enlargement; explanation: a ſenſe ſeldom found.
It is too much untwiſted by the doctors, and, like philoſo-
phy, made intricate by explications, and difficult by the aper-
ture and diſſolution of diſtinctions. Taylor's J/orthy Commimic.
APETAlous. adj. [of a, priv. and zºº, a leaf.j Without
petala or flower leaves.
APE'ſ Alous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from apetalous.] Being without leaves.
Aſ ſº n: ſ apiceſ, plur. [Lat..] The tip or point of any
thing,
The apex, or leſſer end of it, is broken off. J7%zdward.
APHAERESIS. m. ſ. […] A figure in grammar that
takes away a letter of ſyllable from the beginning of a word.
APHELION. n.ſ. aphélia, plur. [from diº, and ºxº, the ſun.]
That part of the orbit of a planet, in which it is at the point re-
moteſt from the ſun. -
The reaſon why the comets move not in the zodiack, is,
that, in their aphelia, they may be at the greateſt diſtances from
one another; and conſequently diſturb one another's motions
the leaſt that may be. Cheyne's Philºſºph. Principl.s.
APHETA. m. ſ. [with aſtrologers.] The name of the plant,
which is imagined to be the giver or diſpoſer of life in a nati-
vity. , Die?.
APHE'TICAL. adj. [from apheta.] Relating to the apheta.
APHILA'N THROPY. m. ſ. [2, without, and pixx,&amp;#ia, love of
mankind.] Want of love to mankind.
APHoNY. n.ſ. [3, without, and fair, ſpeech..] A loſs of ſpeech.
9aincy.
A'PHORISM. m. ſ. [2:26-2:..] A maxim ; a º
tracted in a ſhort ſentence; an unconnected poſition.
He will eaſily diſcern how little of truth there is in the mul-
titude; and though ſometimes they are flattered with that apbo-
riſm, will hardly believe the voice of the people to be the voice
of God. Brown's Pulgar Erreurs, b. i. c. 3.
I ſhall at preſent conſider the aphoriſm, that a man of reli-
gion and virtue is a more uſeful, and conſequently a more va-
luable member of a community. Kogers's Sermons.
APHoRI'stic AL. adj. [from aphoriſºn.] In the form of an apho-
riſm; in ſeparate and unconnected ſentences.
APHoR1's TICALLY. adv. [from aphoriſtical.] In the form of an
aphoriſm.
Theſe being carried down, do ſeldom miſs a cure of the for-
mer, as Hippocrates doth likeways aphoriſtically tell us.
Harvey on Cºſſumptiºns,
2 API. Ro-
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P O -
A P O
APHR op181'AcAL. }". [from 3: ºr, Venus.] Relating to
APHRodisi'Ack. the venereal diſeaſe.
API ARY. m. ſ. [from apis, Lat, a bee.] The place where bees
are kept.
Thoſe who are ſkilled in bees, when they ſee a foreign
ſwarm approaching to plunder their hives, have a trick to di-
vert them into ſome neighbouring apiary, there to make what
havock they pleaſe. - Swift.
AP/CES of a fower. [Lat. from apex the top.] Little knobs
that grow on the tops of the ſtamina, in the middle of a flower.
They are commonly of a dark purpliſh colour. By the micro-
ſcope they have been diſcovered to be a ſort of capſidae ſemina-
les, or ſeed veſſels, containing in them ſmall globular, and often
oval particles, of various colours, and exquiſitely formed.
9aincy.
API'EcE. adv. [from a for each, and piece, or ſhare.] To the
part or ſhare of each.
Men, in whoſe mouths at firſt ſounded nothing but mortifi-
cation, were come to think they might lawfully have ſix or
ſeven wives apiece. Hooker, Preface.
I have to night diſpatched fixteen buſineſſes, a month's length
apiece, by an abſtraćt of ſucceſs. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
One copy of this paper may ſerve a dozen of you, which will
be leſs than a farthing apiece. Swift.
A'Pish. adj. [from ape.]
1. Having the qualities of an ape; imitative.
Report of faſhions in proud Italy,
Whoſe manners ſtill our tardy, apiſh nation
Limps after, in baſe aukward imitation. Shakespeare Richard II.
2. Foppiſh; affected.
Becauſe I cannot flatter, and look fair,
Duck with French nods and apiſh courteſy,
I muſt be held a rancorous enemy. Shakeſp. Richard III.
3. Silly; trifling; inſignificant.
All this is but apiſh ſophiſtry; and, to give it a name divine
and excellent, is abuſive and unjuſt. Glanville's Scºpſ, Scient.
4. Wanton; playful.
Gloomy ſits the queen;
Till happy chance reverts the cruel ſcene;
And api/, folly, with her wild reſort -
Of wit and jeſt, diſturbs the ſolemn court. Prior.
Apishly. adv. [from apiſh..] In an apiſh manner; foppiſhly;
conceitedly.
Aſpish Ness... n.ſ.. [from apiſh.] Mimickry; foppery; inſigni-
ficance; playfulneſs.
API'TPAT, adv. [a word formed from the motion.] With quick
palpitation.
O there he comes—Ay, my Heator of Troy, welcome my
bully, my back; agad my heart has gone apitpat for you.
Congreve's Old Batchelor.
APLUSTRE. m. ſ. [Latin.] The ancient enſign carried in
ſea veſſels.
The one holds a ſword in her hand, to repreſent the Iliad, as
the other has an apluſire, to repreſent the Odyſſey, or voyage of
Ulyſſes. Addiſon.
APOCALYPSE. m. ſ. [from twoxaxº~...] Revelation; diſ-
covery: a word uſed only of the ſacred writings.
O for that warning voice, which he who ſaw
Th' apocalypſe heard cry in heav'n aloud. Milton's Par. Loft.
With this throne, of the glory of the Father, compare the
throne of the Son of God, as ſeen in the apocalypſº.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Apocaly'ptical. adj. [from apocalypſe.] Concerning reve-
lation; containing revelation.
If we could underſtand that ſcene, at the opening of this
apocalyptical theatre, we ſhould find it a repreſentation of the
majeſty of our Saviour. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Apoca LY'PTICALLY. adv. [from apocalyptical.] In ſuch a man-
ner as to reveal ſomething ſecret,
APOCOPE. m. ſ. [3roxo~..] A figure in grammar, when the
laſt letter or ſyllable of a word is taken away; as, ingeni for
ingenu.
Apocru'stick. adj. [3rortérixa, from 2-oxºove, to drive..] Re-
medies enducd with a repelling and aſtringent power, by which
they prevent the too great afflux of humours to a part diſeaſed.
Chambers.
APO'CRYPHA. n.ſ.. [from devºw, to put out of fight.]
Books whoſe authours are not known. It is uſed for the
books appended to the ſacred writings, which, being of doubt-
ul authours, are leſs regarded.
We hold not the apocrypha for ſacred, as we do the holy
cripture, but for human compoſitions. Hooker, b. v.
*S'cRYPHAL. adj. [from apocrypha.]
* Not canonical; of uncertain authority.
Jerom, who ſaith, that all writings not canonical are apocry-
fºal, uſes not the title apºcryphal, as the reſt of the fathers or-
dinarily have done, whoſe cuſtom is ſo to name, for the moſt
Part, only ſuch as might not publickly be read or divulged.
Hooker, b. v. § 2 o.
2. Contained in the apocrypha.
To ſpeak of her in the words of the apocryphal writers, wiſ-
on is glorious, and never fadeth away. Addiſon. Speciator.
3. It is ſometimes uſed for an account of uncertain credit.
A Pock YPHALLY. adv. [from apocryphal.] Uncertainly ; not
indiſputably.
Apo'cRYPHALNEss. m. ſ. [from apocryphal.] Uncertainty ;
doubtfulneſs of credit.
Apodi'cticAL. adj. [from azºº, evident truth 3 demonſtra-
tion.] Demonſtrative; evident beyond contradiction.
Holding an apodičical knowledge, and an aſſured knowledge
of it; verily, to perſuade their apprehenſions otherwiſe, were to
make Euclid believe, that there were more than one centre in
a circle. Brown's Wu'gar Errours, b. i. c. I c.
We can ſay all at the number three; therefore the world is
perfect. Tobit went, and his dog followed him; therefore
there is a world in the moon, were an argument as of dictical.
Glanville's Scºpſis, c. 19.
APODI'XIS. n.ſ. [3rººk.] Demonſtration. Dicf.
APOG.E.ON. n.ſ.. [from 2+, from, and y, the carth.] A
A/Poc E E. { point in the heavens, in v.hich the ſun, or a
APOGE'UM. planet, is at the greateſt diſtance poſſible from
the earth in its whole revolution. The ancient afronomers
regarding the earth as the centre of the ſyſtem, chieńy regarded
the apogeon and perigaeon, which the moderns, making the
ſun the centre, change for the aphelion and perihelion. Chaml.
Thy fin is in his apogaeon placed,
And when it moveth next, muſt needs deſcend. Fairfax.
It is not yet agreed in what time, preciſely, the apºgeum ab-
ſolveth one degree. Brown's Vulgar Errotirs, b. vi c. i.
ApologE"ric AL. Nadj. [from zºoxazio, to defend..] That which
Apolog E"tick. } is ſaid in defence of any thing or perſon.
I deſign to publiſh an eſſay, the greater part of which is apºlo-
getical, for one ſort of chymiſts. Boyle.
Apolog ETIcALLY. adv. [from apologetical.] In the way of de-
fence or excuſe.
Apo'Logist. n ſ. [from 7% apologize.] He that makes an apo-
logy; a pleader in favour of another. -
To APO'Logize. v. n. [from apolºgy.]
1. To plead in favour of any perſon or thing. -
It will be much more ſeaſonable to reform than apºlºgize or
rhetoricate; and therefore it imports thoſe, who dwell ſecure,
to look about them. Decay of Piety.
2. It has the particle fºr before the ſubject of apology.
I ought to apologize for my indiſcretion in the whole under-
taking. J/ake's Preparation fºr Death.
The tranſlator needs not apologize for his choice of this piece,
which was made in his childhood. Pope's Preface to Statius.
A'pologue. m. ſ. [&amp;#3xxo-.] Fable ; ſtory contrived to teach
ſome moral truth. -
An apologue of Æſop is beyond a ſyllogiſm, and proverbs,
more powerful than demonſtration. Brown's Vºlgar Erreurs.
Some men are remarked for pleaſantneſs in raillery; others
for apologues and appoſite diverting ſtories. Locke.
APO'LOGY. m. ſ. [apologia, Lat. drºxya.]
1. Deſence; excuſe. Apology generally ſignifies rather excuſe than
vindication, and tends rather to extenuate the fault, than prove
innocence. This is, however, ſometimes unregarded by writers.
In her face excuſe
Came prologue; and apology too prompt;
Which with bland words at will ſhe thus addreſs'd.
Milton's Parad. Loſt, b. ix. l. 854.
2. It has for before the objećt of excuſe.
It is not my intention to make an apolºgy for my poem:
ſome will think it needs no excuſe, and others will receive none.
Dryden's Prºf. to /b/, and Achit.
I ſhall neither trouble the reader, nor myſelf, with any apo-
logy for publiſhing of theſe ſermons; for if they be, in any
meaſure, truly ſerviceable to the end for which they are de-
ſigned, I do not ſee what apology is neceſſary ; and if they be
not ſo, I am ſure none can be ſufficient. Tillºtſºn.
ApoMEco'METRY. m.ſ.. [are, from, wºzº, diſtance, and pºssia,
to meaſure.] The art of meaſuring things at a diſtance.
APONEURO'SIS. n ſ. [from air, from, and tºo, a nerve.]
An expanſion of a nerve into a membrane.
When a cyſt riſes near the orifice of the artery, it is formed
by the aponeuroſis that runs over the veſſel, which becomes ex-
ceſſively expanded. Sharp's Surgery.
APO'PHASIS. n.ſ. [Lat. 34%aziº, a denying.] A figure in
rhetorick, by which the orator, ſpeaking ironically, ſeems to
wave what he would plainly inſinuate; as, Neither will I men-
tion thoſe things, which if I ſhould, you notwithſtanding cºuld nei-
ther confute or ſpeak againſt them. Smith's Rhetorick.
Apophilº'o M A ; Ick. adj. [ar, and ºxyza.] That which has
the quality of drawing away phlegm.
Apophil F'GMAT is M. n.ſ. ſº and ºxyuz.]. A medicine of
which the intention is to draw phlegm from the blood.
And ſo it is in apophlegmatiſºns and gargariſms, that draw the
rheum down by the palate. Bacon's Natural Hiſ: Nº 38.
ApoPHLEGMA'ſ 1zANT. m. ſ. ſºro and ºza.] Any remedy
which cauſes an evacuation of ferous or mucous humour by
the noſtrils, as particular kinds of ſternutatories. &amp;iſiny.
A'Pop HT H E G M. m. ſ. ſarcºuz.) A remarkable ſaying; a vº-
luable maxim uttered on ſome ſudden occaſion.
We may magnify the apophthegms, or reputed replies "...
On,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P O
A P O
dom, whereof many are to be ſeen in Laertius and Lycoſthe-
IncS. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i. c. 6.
I had a mind to colle&amp;t and digeſt ſuch obſervations and
apophthegms, as tend to the proof of that great aſſertion, Allis
vanitv. Prior's Pref. to Solomon.
APO PHYG.E. n.ſ. […cº, flight, or eſcape.] Is, in archi-
tecture, that part of a column, where it begins to ſpring
out of its baſe; and was originally no more than the ring or
ferrel, which anciently bound the extremities of wooden pil-
lars, to keep them from ſplitting, and were afterward imitated
in ſtone work. We ſometimes call it the ſpring of the column.
Chambers.
APO PHYSIS. m. ſ. ſºvº..] The prominent parts of ſºme
bones; the ſame as proceſs. It differs from an epiphyſis, as
that is a continuance of the bone itſelf; whereas the latter is
ſomewhat adhering to a bone, and of which it is not properly
a part. $2:tincy.
It was the apophyſis, or head of the os tibiae,which makes the
knee. Jºſeman's Surgery.
Apople'ctical, adj. [from apoplexy.] Relating to an apo-
plexy.
We meet with the ſame complaints of gravity in living bo-
dies, when the faculty locomotive ſeems aboliſhed; as may be
obſerved in ſupporting perſons inebriated, apºpletical, or in
lipothymies and ſwoonings. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv.
In an apoplećtical caſe, he found extravaſated blood, making
way from the ventricles of the brain. Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
Apople'crick. adj. [from apoplexy.] Relating to an apo-
lexy.
p y lady was ſeized with an apoplećick fit, which afterward
terminated in ſome kind of lethargy. //iſeman's Surgery.
Apoplex. m. ſ. [See APOPLEXY.] Apoplexy. The laſt
ſyllable is cut away; but this is only in poetry.
Preſent puniſhment purſues his maw,
When ſurfeited and ſwell'd, the peacock raw,
He bears into the bath; whence want of breath,
Repletions, apoplex, inteſtate death. Dryden's juvenal.
A'roPLExED. adj. [from apoplex.] Seized with an apoplexy.
Senſe, ſure, you have,
Elſe could you not have motion: but ſure that ſenſe
Is apoplex'd. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
APOPLEXY. m. ſ. [3rºxytº..] A ſudden deprivation of all
internal and external ſenſation, and of all motion, unleſs of the
heart and thorax. The cauſe is generally a repletion, and in-
dicates evacuation, joined with ſtimuli. $ºuincy.
Apoplexy is a ſudden abolition of all the ſenſes, external and
internal, and of all voluntary motion, by the ſtoppage of the
flux and reflux of the animal ſpirits through the nerves deſtined
for thoſe motions. Arbuthnot on Diet.
Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy, mulled, deaf, ſleepy, in-
ſenſible. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
A fever may take away my reaſon, or memory, and an apo-
plexy leave neither ſenſe nor underſtanding. . Locke.
APO'RIA. n.ſ. […sa.] Is a figure in rhetorick, by which
the ſpeaker ſhews, that he doubts where to begin for the multi-
tude of matter, or what to ſay in ſome ſtrange and ambiguous
thing; and doth, as it were, argue the caſe with himſelf. Thus
Cicero ſays, Whether he took them from his fellows more impu-
dently, gave them to a harlot more laſciviouſly, removed them from
the Roman peºple more wickedly, or altered them more preſumptu-
ouſly, I cannot well declare. - Smith's Rhetºrick.
z/PÖ RRHOE A. m. ſ. [azºn.] Effluvium ; emanation; ſome-
thing emitted by another. -
The reaſon of this he endeavours to make out by atomical
aporrhaeas, which paſſing from the cruentate weapon to the
wound, and being incorporated with the particles of the ſalve,
carry them to the affected part. Glanville's Scepſis, c. 24.
APOSIOPE'SIS. n. ſ. [zzozºwº zºº, from 2wº, after, and awtºº,
to be ſilent.] A form of ſpeech, by which the ſpeaker,
through ſome affection, as ſorrow, baſhfulneſs, fear, anger, or
vehemency, breaks off his ſpeech before it be all ended. . A
figure, when, ſpeaking of a thing, we yet ſeem to conceal it,
though indeed we aggravate it; or when the courſe of the
ſentence begun is ſo ſtayed, as thereby ſome part of the ſen-
tence not being uttered, may be underſtood; as, I might ſay
much more, but mode/ly commands ſilence. Smith's Rhetorick.
Apo'st Asy. n.ſ. [...vºrag..] Departure from what a man has
profeſſed: it is generally applied to religion; ſometimes with
the particle from.
The canon law defines apoſtaſy to be a wilful departure from
that ſtate of faith, which any perſon has profeſſed himſelf to
hold in the chriſtian church. Ayliffe's Parergon.
The affable archangel had forewarn'd
Adam, by due example, to beware
Apoſtaſy, by what befel in heav'n
To thoſe apoſtates. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vi. 1. 43.
Vice in us were not only wickedneſs, but apoſtaſy, degene-
rate wickedneſs. Sprat.
Whoever do give different worſhips, muſt bring in more
gods; which is an apoſtaſy from one God. Stillingfeet.
APO'STATE. m.ſ.. [apoſłata, Lat. azorarr;..] One that has for-
ſaken his profeſſion; generally applied to one that has left his
, religion. 2
The angels, for diſobedience, thou haſt reſerved to a miſe-
rable immortality; but unto man, equally rebellious, equally
apºſtate from thee and goodneſs, thou haſt given a Saviour.
Rogers's Sermons.
Apºſtates in point of faith, are, according to the civil law,
ſubject unto all puniſhments ordained againſt hereticks.
Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
A Post A'TICAL. adj. [from apºſtate.] After the manner of an
apoſtate.
To Apost At 1ze. v. n. [from apoſtate.] To forſake one's pro-
feſſion; it is commonly uſed of one who departs from his reli-
IOIl. -
£ None revolt from the faith; not becauſe they muſt not look
upon a woman to luſt after her, but becauſe they are reſtrained
from the perpetration of their lufts. If wanton glances, and
libidinous thoughts, had been permitted by the goſpel, they
would have apoſtatized nevertheleſs. Bentley's Sermons.
To Apost EM at E. v. n. [from apºſieme.] To become an apo-
ſteme; to ſwell and corrupt into matter.
There is care to be taken in abſceſſes of the breaſt and belly,
in danger of breaking inwards; yet, by opening theſe too ſoon,
they ſome times apºſtomate again, and become crude. //;ſeman.
Apost EMA't los. n.ſ.. [from apoſtemate.] The formation of
an apoſteme; the gathering of a hollow purulent tumour.
Nothing can be more admirable than the many ways nature
hath provided for preventing, or curing of fevers; as, vomit-
ings, apºſtemations, ſalivations, &amp;c. Grew's Cºſmologia Sacra.
A'Post EME. }*ſ [zºrnºz.] A hollow ſwelling, filled with
Apost UM F. S. purulent matter; an abſceſs.
With cqual propriety we may affirm, that ulcers of the lungs,
or apºſłemes of the brain, do happen only in the left ſide.
Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 3.
The opening of apºſłemes, before the ſuppuration be perfect-
ed, weakeneth the heat, and renders them crude. ///eman.
APOSTLE. m. ſ. ſapºſtolus, Lat. aworowo.] A perſon ſent with
mandates by another. It is º applied to them whom
our Saviour deputed to preach the goſpel.
But all his mind is bent to holineſs;
His champions are the prophets and apoſiles. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
I am far from pretending infallibility; that would be to erect
myſelf into an apoſtle : a preſumption in any one that cannot
confirm what he ſays by miracles. Locke.
We know but a ſmall part of the notion of an apoſtle, by
knowing barely that he is ſent forth. Watts's Logicé.
Apost liship. m. ſ. [from apºſile.] The office or dignity of
an apoſtle.
Where, becauſe faith is in too low degree,
I thought it ſome apoſtleſhip in me
To ſpeak things, which by faith alone I ſee. Donne.
God hath ordered it, that St. Paul hath writ epiſtles; which
are all confined within the buſineſs of his apoſileſhip;and ſo con-
tain nothing but points of chriſtian inſtruction.
Locke's Eſſay on St. Paul's Fp:/iles.
Apostolical. adj. [from apºſtolick.] delivered or taught by
the apoſtles; belonging to the apoſtles.
They acknowledge not, that the church keeps any thing as
apoſtolical, which is not found in the apoſtles writings, in what
other records ſoever it be found. Hooker, b. iv. § 2.
Declare yourſelf for that church, which is founded upon
ſcripture, reaſon, apoſtolical practice and antiquity. Hooker.
ApostolicALLY. adv. [from apºſtolical.] In the manner of
the apoſtles.
ApostolicALNEss... n. ſ. [from apºſtolical.] The quality of
relating to the apoſtles; apoſtolical authority.
APosto'Lick. adj. [from apºſile.] Taught by the apoſtles; be-
longing to an apoſtle.
Their oppoſitions in maintenance of publick ſuperſtition a-
gainſt apºſtolick endeavours, were vain and frivolous. Hooker.
Or where did I at ſure tradition ſtrike,
Provided ſtill it were apoſtolick P Dryden's Hind and Panther.
APO'STROPHE. m. ſ. [2xorgºn, from are, from, and rº,
to turn.]
I. In rhetorick, a diverſion of ſpeech to another perſon, than the
ſpeech appointed did intend or require; or it is a turning of
the ſpeech from one perſon to another, many times abruptly.
A figure when we break off the courſe of our ſpeech, and ſpeak
to ſome new perſon, preſent or abſent, as to the people or wit-
neſſes, when it was before directed to the judges, or opponent.
This diverſion or ſpeech is made many ways. 1. To God. 2.
To angels. 3. To men in their ſeveral ranks, whether ab-
ſent or preſent, dead or alive. 4. To the adverſary. 5. To
the heavenly bodies and meteors. 6. To the earth and things
in it....7. To the ſea and things in it. 8. To beaſts, birds,
and fiſhes. 9. To inanimate things. Smith's Rhetorick,
2. In grammar, the contraction of a word by the uſe of a comma;
as, tho’, for though ; rep', for reputation.
Many laudable attempts have been made, by abbreviating
words with apo/trophes; and by lopping polyſyllables, leaving
one or two words at moſt. Swift.
To Apo's TRoPHIz E. v. a. [from apoſłrophe..] To addreſs by
an apoſtrophe. -
There is a peculiarity in Homer's manner of apºſtrophizing
Eumaeus,
it.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P P -
A P P
Eumaeus; and ſpeaking of him in the ſecond perſon, it is ge-
nerally applied only to men of account. Pope's Odyſſey; notes.
A'Postume. n.ſ. See Apost E M E. [This word is properly
apoſtem.] A hollow tumour filled with purulent matter.
How an apoſtume in the meſentery breaking, cauſes a con-
ſumption in the parts, is apparent. Harvey on Conſumptions.
To Apostume. v. n. [from apoſtume.] To apoſtemate. Diff.
A'Porheca RY. n.ſ.. [apotheca, Lat. a repoſitory..] A man whoſe
employment it is to keep medicines for ſale.
Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to ſweeten my
imagination. Shakeſp. King Lear.
They have no other doćtor but the ſun and the freſh air, and
that ſuch an one, as never ſends them to the apothecary. South,
Wand'ring in the dark,
Phyſicians, for the tree, have found the bark;
They, lab'ring for relief of human kind, -
With ſharpen'd ſight ſome remedies may find; }
Th' apothecary-train is wholly blind. Dryd. Fab.
Apo'THEGM. n.ſ. [properly apophthegm ; which ſee..] A re-
markable ſaying.
By frequent converſing with him, and ſcattering ſhort apo-
thegms, and little pleaſant ſtories, and making uſeful applica-
tions of them, his ſon was, in his infancy, taught to abhor va-
nity and vice as monſters. Watſon's Life of Sanderſon.
Apothe'osis. m. ſ. [from 22% and Sºx.] Deification; the rite
of adding any one to the number of gods.
As if it could be graved and painted omnipotent, or the nails
and the hammer could give it an apotheoſis. South.
Allots the prince of his celeſtial line,
An apotheoſis, and rites divine. Garth.
Apo'Tome. m. ſ. [from awaripra, to cut off.]
1. In mathematicks, the remainder or difference of two incom-
menſurable quantities.
2. In muſick, it is the part remaining of an entire tone, after a
greater ſemitone has been taken from it. The proportion in
numbers of the apotome, is that of 2048 to 2187. The Greeks
thought that the greater tone could not be divided into two
equal parts; for which reaſon they called the firſt part arroa",
and the other Arºaz. Chambers.
A'Poz FM. n.ſ. […w3, from, and &amp;a, to boil.] A decočtion; an
infuſion made by boiling ingredients.
During this evacuation, he took opening broths and apo-
Zenns. Jºſeman's Surgery.
To APPA'L. v. a. [appalir, Fr. It might more properly have
been written appale.] To fright; to #. with ſudden fear;
to depreſs; to diſcourage. -
Whilſt ſhe ſpake, her great words did appal
My feeble courage, and my heart oppreſs,
That yet I quake and tremble over all. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy,
Thou dreadful Ajax; that th' appalled air
May pierce the head of thy great combatant. Shakeſp.
The houſe of peers was ſomewhat appalled at this alarum;
but took time to conſider of it till next day. Clarendon.
Does neither rage inflame, nor fear appal,
Nor the black fear of death that ſaddens all. Pope.
The monſter curls
His flaming creſt, all other thirſt appall'd,
Or ſhiv'ring flies, or choak'd at diſtance ſtands. Thomſºn.
APPA'LEMENT. n.ſ. [from appal] Depreſſion; diſcouragement;
impreſſion of fear.
As the furious ſlaughter of them was a great diſcouragement
and appalement to the reſt. Bacon's Henry VII.
A'PPANAGF. n.ſ.. [affanagium, low Latin; probably from pa-
nis, bread..] Lands ſet apart by princes for the maintenance of
their younger children.
He became ſuitor for the earldom of Cheſter, a kind of ap-
panage to Wales, and uſing to go to the king's ſon. Bacon.
Had he though it fit,
That wealth ſhould be the appanage of wit,
The God of light could ne'er have been ſo blind,
To deal it to the worſt of human kind. Swift.
APPARA't us. n. ſ. [Latin.] Things provided as means to any
certain end, as the tools of a trade; the furniture of a houſe;
ammunition for war; equipage; ſhow.
There is an apparatus of things previous, to be adjuſted be-
fore I come to the calculation itſelf. Woodward's Nat. Hiſt.
Ourſelves are eaſily provided for; it is nothing but the cir-
ºumſtantials, the apparatus or equipage of human life, that coſts
o much. Pope's Letters to Gay.
**PAR EL. m. ſ. It has no plural. ſappareil. Fr.
I. Dreſs; º p [appareil, Fr.]
cannot cog and ſay, that thou art this and that, like many
of thoſe liſping hawthorn buds, that come like women in mens
y
“Pareſ, and ſmell like Bucklerſbury in ſimpling time.
Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſºr.
* Fºxternal habiliments. ºff. y of iſ.
Our late burnt London, in apparel new,
Shook off her aſhes to have treated you. I?’aller.
At Publick devotion, his reſigned carriage made religion ap-
s Fºr in the natural apparel of fimplicity. Tatler, N° 54.
•o º L. v. a. [from apparel, the noun.]
1. To dreſs; to cloath. -
With ſuch robes were the king's daughters that were virgins
apparelled. 2 Sam. xiii. 18.
2. To adorn with dreſs.
She did apparel her apparel, and with the preciouſneſs of her
body made it moſt ſumptuous. Sidney.
3. To cover or deck, as with dreſs. -
You may have trees apparelled with flowers, by boring holes
in them, and putting into them earth, and ſetting ſeeds of vio-
lets. . Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 504.
Shelves, and rocks, and precipices, and gulfs, being apparelled
with a verdure of plants, would reſemble mountains and val-
leys. Bentley's Sermons.
APPAR ENT., adj. [apparent, Fr. apparens, Lat.]
I. Plain; indubitable.
The main principles of reaſon are in themſelves apparent.
For to make nothing evident of itſelf unto man's underſtand-
ing, were to take away all poſſibility of knowing anything.
-- - Hooker, b. i.
2. Seeming; in appearance; not real.
The perception intelle&amp;tive often correóts the report of phan-
taſy, as in the apparent bigneſs of the ſun, the apparent crook-
edneſs of the ſtaff in air and water. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
3. Viſible; in oppoſition to ſecret. -
What ſecret imaginations we entertained is known to God:
this is apparent, that we have not behaved ourſelves, as if we
preſerved a grateful remembrance of his mercies. Atterbury.
The outward and apparent ſančtity of ačtions ſhould flow
from purity of heart. Rogers.
4. Open; diſcoverable; known. -
As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent,
In my opinion ought to be prevented. Shakeſp. Richard III.
5. Certain; not preſumptive.
He is the next of blood,
And heir apparent to the Engliſh crown. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
APPA'RENT. n.ſ. Elliptically uſed for heir apparent. -
Ariſe a knight;
And learn this leſſon, Draw thy ſword in right.—
—I’ll draw it as apparent to the crown,
And in that quarrel uſe it. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
APPA'RENTLY. adv. [from apparent.] Evidently; openly.
Arreſt him, officer;
I would not ſpare my brother in this caſe,
If he ſhould ſcorn me ſo apparently. Shakeſp. Comedy of Err.
Vices apparently tend to the impairing of mens health. Tillot.
APPARI'tion. n.ſ.. [from appareo, Lat, to appear.]
1. Appearance; viſibility. - -
When ſuddenly ſtood at ſhy head a dream,
Whoſe inward apparition gently mov’d
My fancy. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt; b. viii.
2. The thing appearing; a form; a viſible objećt.
I have mark'd
A thouſand bluſhing apparitions
To ſtart into her face; a thouſand innocent ſhames
In angel whiteneſs bear away thoſe bluſhes.
Shakeſpeare's Much ado about Nothing.
A glorious apparition 1 had not doubt,
And carnal fear, that day dimm'd Adam's eyes. Parad. Loft.
Any thing beſides may take from me the ſenſe of what ap- .
re: ; which apparition, it ſeems, was you. Tatler, N° 55.
3. A ſpectre; a walking ſpirit.
Horatio ſays 'tis but our phantaſy,
Touching this dreaded ſight twice £n of us;
Therefore I have intreated him,
That if again this apparition come, -
He may approve our eyes, and ſpeak to it. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
Tender minds ſhould not receive early impreſſions of gob-
lins, ſpectres, and apparitions, wherewith maids fright them in-
to compliance. - Locłe.
One of thoſe apparitions had his right hand filled with darts,
which he brandiſhed in the face of all who came up that way.
Tatler, N° 81.
*
4. Something only apparent, not real.
Still there's ſomething
That checks my joys
—Nor can I yet diſtinguiſh
Which is an apparition, this or that. Denham's Sophy,
5. Aſtronomically, the viſibility of ſome luminary, oppoſed to
occultation.
A month of apparition is the ſpace wherein the moon ap-
peareth, deducting three days wherein it commonly diſap-
peareth; and this containeth but twenty-ſix days and twelve
hours. Brown's Pulgar Erroirs, b. iv. c. 12.
APPA'Ritors. n.ſ.. [from appareo, Lat. to be at hand.].
1. Such perſons as are at hand to execute the proper orders of the
magiſtrate or judge of any court of judicature. Ayliffe's Parerg.
2. The loweſt officer of the eccleſiaſtical court.
They ſwallowed all the Roman hierarchy, from the pope to
the apparitor. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To APFA'y. v. a. [appayer, old Fr. to ſatisfy.] To ſatisfy to
content: whence well appayed, is pleaſed; ill appayed, is uneaſy.
It is now obſolete. B
2
How
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P P
A P P
How well appaid ſhe was her bird to find Sidney.
... Ay, Willy, when the heart is ill affay'd,
How can bagpipe or joints be well appaid. Spenſer's Paſº.
I am well appaid that you had rather believe, than take the
pain of a long pilgrimage, you will never be ſo ſtiff in any opi-
nion. Camden.
So only can high juſtice reſt appaid. Parad. Loſt, b. xii.
To APPEACH. v.a. -
1. To accuſe; to inform againſt any perſon. - *
He did, amongſt many others, appeach Sir William Stanley,
the lord chamberlain. - Bacon's Henry Wºź
- Were he twenty times
My ſon, I would appeach him.
Diſcloſe
The ſtate of your affection; for your paſſions
... Have to the full appeached. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
2. To cenſure ; to reproach; to taint with accuſation.
For when Cymochles ſaw the foul reproach,
Which them appeached; prick'd with guilty ſhame,
And inward grief, he fiercely gen approach,
Reſolv'd to put away that lordly ſhame. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
, Nor canſt, nor durſt thou, traitor, on the pain,
Appeach my honour, or thine own maintain. Dryd. Fables.
AppE'AcHMENT. m. ſ. [from appeach..] Charge exhibited a-
ainſt any man ; accuſation.
A buſy headed man gave firſt light to this appeachment; but
the earl did avouch it. Sir j. Hayward.
The duke's anſwers to his appeachments, in number thirteen,
I find civilly couched. J/otton.
To APPEAL. v. n. [appello, Lat.]
1. To transfer a cauſe from one to another; with the particles to
and from,
From the ordinary therefore they appeal to themſelves. Hooker.
2. To refer to another as judge.
Force, or a declared deſign of force, upon the perſon of an-
other, where there is no common ſuperior on earth to appeal to
for relief, is the ſtate of war; and it is the want of ſuch an ap-
peal gives a man the right of war, even againſt an aggreſſor,
Shakespeare. Richard II.
though he be in ſociety and a fellow ſubject. Locke.
They knew no foe, but in the open field,
And to their cauſe and to the gods appealed. Stepney.
3. To call another as witneſs.
Whether this, that the ſoul always thinks, be a ſelf-evident
propoſition, I appeal to mankind. Locke.
4. To charge with a crime; to accuſe.
One but flatters us,
As well appeareth by the cauſe you come,
Namely, t'appeal each other of high treaſon. Shakespeare Rich. II.
APPEAL. m.ſ.. [from the verb To appeal.]
1. An appeal is a provocation from an inferior to a ſuperior judge,
whereby the juriſdiction of the inferior judge is for a while
ſuſpended, in reſpect of the cauſe; the cognizance being de-
volved to the ſuperior judge. Ayliffe's Parergon.
This ring
Deliver them, and your appeal to us
. There make before them. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Our reaſon prompts us to a future ſtate,
The laſt appeal from fortune and from fate,
Where God's all righteous ways will be declar'd. Dryden.
There are diſtributers of juſtice, from whom there lies an
†. to the prince. Addiſon on Italy.
n the common law. .
An accuſation; which is a lawful declaration of another
man's crime before a competent judge, by one that ſets his name
to the declaration, and undertakes to prove it, upon the pe-
nalty that may enſue of the contrary; more commonly uſed
for the private accuſation of a murderer, by a party who had
intereſt in the party murdered, and of any felon, by one of his
accomplices in the fact. Cowell.
The duke's unjuſt,
Thus to retort your manifeſt appeal,
And put your trial in the villain's mouth,
Which here you come to accuſe. Shakespeare MJ/ives of Windſºr.
Haſt thou, according to thy oath and bond,
Brought hither Henry Hereford, thy bold ſon,
Here to make good the boiſt’rous late appeal
Againſt the duke of Norfolk :
3. A ſummons to anſwer a charge,
Nor ſhall the ſacred charaéter of king
Be urg'd to ſhield me from thy bold appeal,
If I have injur'd thee, that makes us equal. Dryd. Don Seb.
4. A call upon any as witneſs.
The caſting up of the eyes, and lifting up of the hands, is a
kind of appeal to the Deity, the authour of wonders. Bacon.
APPEALAN r. m. ſ. [from appeal.] He that appeals.
Lords appealants, -
Your diff'rences ſhall all reſt under gage,
Till we aſſign you to your days of trial. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
APPE'AL FR. m.ſ.. [from appeal.] One who makes an appeal.
To APPEAR. v. n. [apparco, Lat.] -
1. To be in fight; to be viſible; ſometimes with the particle in.
As the leproſy appeareth in the ſkin of the fleſh. Lev. xiii. 43.
2.
Shakespeare.
And half her knee, and half her breaſt appear,
By art, like negligence, diſclos'd and bare. Prior.
2. To become viſible as a ſpirit. -
For I have appeared unto thee for this purpoſe, to make thee
a miniſter and a witneſs. A:is xxvi. 16.
3. To ſtand in the preſence of another; generally uſed of ſtand-
ing before ſome ſuperiour. -
When ſhall I come and appear before God? Pſalm xlii. 2.
4. To be the objećt of obſervation.
Let thy work appear unto thy ſervants, and thy glory unto
their children. Pſalm xc. 16.
5. To exhibit one's ſelf before a court of juſtice.
Keep comfort to you, and this morning ſee
You do appear before them. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
6. To be made clear by evidence. -
Egfrid did utterly waſte and ſubdue it, as appears out of Be-
da's complaint againſt him; and Edgar brought it under his
obedience, as appears by an ancient record. Spenſen’s Ireland.
7. To ſeem in oppoſition to reality.
His firſt and principal care being to appear unto his people,
ſuch as he would have them be, and to be ſuch as he appeared.
Sidney, b. ii.
My noble maſter will appear
Such as he is, full of regard and honour. Shakespeare Julius Caſ:
8. To be plain beyond diſpute.
From experiments, uſeful indications may be taken, as will
appear by what follows. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
APPE'ARANCE. n.ſ.. [from Tº appear.]
1. The act of coming into fight; as, they were ſurpriſed by the
ſudden appearance of the enemy.
2. The thing ſeen ; as, the remarkable appearances in the ſky.
3. Phoenomena; that quality of any thing which is viſible.
The advancing day of experimental knowledge diſcloſeth
ſuch appearances, as will not lie even in any model extant.
Glanville's Scºtſi, Scientifica, Prof.
4. Semblance; not reality.
He encreaſed in eſtimation, whether by deſtiny, or whether
by his yirtues, or at leaſt by his appearances of virtues. Hayw.
Heroic virtue did his actions guide,
And he the ſubſtance not th' appearance choſe. Dryden,
The hypocrite would not put on the appearance of virtue, if
it was not the moſt proper means to gain love. Addiſon. Speciat.
5. Outſide; ſhow.
Under a fair and beautiful appearance there ſhould ever be the
real ſubſtance of good. Rogers.
6. Entry into a place or company:
Do the ſame juſtice to one another, which will be done us
hereafter by thoſe, who ſhall make their appearance in the world,
when this generation is no more. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 35.
7. Apparition; ſupernatural viſibilitv.
I think a perſon terrified with the imagination of ſpectres,
more reaſonable than one who thinks the appearance of ſpirits
fabulous. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 1 I c.
8. Exhibition of the perſon to a court.
I will not tarry; no, nor ever more
Upon this buſineſs my appearance make
In any of their courts.
9. Open circumſtance of a caſe.
Or grant her paſſion be ſincere,
How ſhall his innocence be clear 2
Appearances were all ſo ſtrong,
* The world muſt think him in the wrong. Swift.
Io. Preſence; mien.
Health, wealth, vićtory, and honour, are introduced; wiſ.
dom enters the laſt, and ſo captivates with her appearance, that
he gives himſelf up to her. Addiſon. Guardian, N° 1 1 1.
11. Probability; ſeeming; likelihood.
There is that which hath no apparance, that this prieſt be-
ing utterly unacquainted with the true perſon, according to
whoſe pattern he ſhould ſhape his counterfeit, ſhould think it
poſſible for him to inſtruct his player. Bacon's Henry VII.
APPEARER. m. ſ. [from To appear.] The perſon that appears.
That owls and ravens are ominous appearers, and preſignify
unlucky events, was an augurial conception. Brown's Wul. Err.
APPE'As A BLF. adj. [from To appeaſe.] That may be pacified;
reconcileable.
APPE'AsABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from To appeaſ...] The quality of
being eaſily appeaſed; reconcileableneſs.
To APPEASE. v. a. [appaiſºr, Fr.]
1. To quiet; to put in a ſtate of peace.
By his counſel he appeaſeth i. deep, and planteth iſlands
therein. Ecclus, xliii. 23.
England had no leiſure to think of reformation, till the civil
wars were appeaſed, and peace ſettled. Sir J. Davies on Irel.
2. To pacify; to reconcile; to ſtill wrath.
So Simon was appeaſed towards them, and fought no more
againſt them. 4/ac. xiii. 47.
O God l if my deep prayers cannot appeaſ, thee,
Yet execute thy wrath on me alone. Shakeſp. Richard III.
The reſt ſhall hear me call, and oft be warn’d
Their finful ſtate, and to appeaſ betimes
Th’ incenſed Deity. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii.
APPE'Ase-
Shaieff. Henry VIII.
:
§
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P P
A P P
APPF'Ase Ment. n.ſ.. [from To appeaſ...] A ſtate of peace.
Being neither in numbers nor in courage great, partly by
authority, partly by entreaty, they were reduced to ſome good
abfeaſements. Sir j. Hayward.
Appe'aser. n.ſ.. [from Tº appeaſ...] He that pacifies others;
he that quiets diſturbances.
APPE'LLANT, n.ſ.. [appello, Lat. to call.]
1. A challenger; one that ſummons another to anſwer either in
the liſts or in a court of juſtice.
In the devotion of a ſubjećt's love,
And free from other miſbegotten hate, -
Come I appellant to this princely preſence. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
This is the day appointed for the combat,
And ready are th' appellant and defendant,
Th’ armourer and his man, to enter the liſts. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Theſe ſhifts refuted, anſwer thy appellant,
Though by his blindneſs maim'd for high attempts,
Who now defies thee thrice to fingle #.
2. One that appeals from a lower to a higher power.
AMilton’s sº. Agoniſłes.
An appeal transfers the cognizance of the cauſe to the ſupe-
rior judge ; ſo that, pending the appeal, nothing can be at-
tempted in prejudice of the appellant. Ayliffe's Parergon.
APPE'LLATE. m.ſ.. [appellatus, Lat.] The perſon appealed againſt.
An appellatory libel ought to contain the name of the .
appellant; the name of him from whoſe ſentence it is appeal-
ed; the name of him to whom it is appealed; from what ſen-
tence it is appealed; the day of the ſentence pronounced, and
appeal interpoſed; and the name of the party appellate, or per-
ſon againſt whom the appeal is lodged. Ayliffe's Parergon.
APPELLATION. m. ſ. [appellatio, Lat.] Name; word by which
anything is called.
Nor are always the ſame plants delivered under the ſame
name and appellations. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Good and evil commonly operate upon the mind of man, by
reſpective names or appellations, by which they are notified and
conveyed to the mind. South.
APPELLATIve. m. ſ. [appellativum, Lat.]
Words and names are either common or proper. Common
names are ſuch as ſtand for univerſal ideas, or a whole rank of
beings, whether general or ſpecial. Theſe are called appella-
tives. So fiſh, bird, man, city, river, are common names; and
ſo are trout, eel, lobſter; for they all agree to many indivi-
duals, and ſome to many ſpecies. Watts's Logick.
APPE'll Ative LY. adv. [from appellative..] According to the
manner of nouns appellative; as, this man is a Hercules. Her-
cules is uſed appellative y to ſignify a ſtrong man.
APPE'LLATORY. adj. [from appeal.] That which contains an
appeal. See APPELLATE.
APPE'llee. n.ſ.. [from appeal.] One who is appealed againſt,
and accuſed. - Dić7.
To APPEND. v. a. [appendo, Lat. to hang to any thing.]
1. To hang anything upon another; as, the inſcription was ap-
pended to the column.
2. To add to ſomething as an acceſſory, not a principal part.
APPE'NdAGE. m. ſ. [French J Something added to another
thing, without being neceſſary to its eſſence, as a portico to
the houſe.
Modeſty is the appendage of ſobriety, and is to chaſtity, to
temperance, and to humility, as the fringes are to a garment.
Taylor's Rule of living holy.
None of the laws of motion now eſtabliſhed, will ſerve to
account for the produćtion, motion, or number of bodies, nor
their appendages, though they may help us a little to conceive
their appearances. Cheyne's Philoſophical Principles.
He was ſo far from over-valuing any of the appendages of life,
that the thoughts of life did not affect him. Atterbury's Serm.
APPE'ND ANT. adj. [French.]
1, Hanging to ſemething elſe.
2. Belonging to ; annexed; concomitant.
He that deſpiſes the world, and all its appendant vanities, is
the moſt ſecure. Taylor's Rule of holy living.
He that looks for the bleſfings appendant to the ſacrament,
muſt expect them upon no terms, but of a worthy communion.
- Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
Riches multiplied beyond the proportion of our chara&amp;ter,
3. the wants appendant to it, naturally diſpoſe men to forget
- Rogers.
3. In law.
4ppendant is any thing belonging to another, as acceſſorium
Principali, with the civilians, or adjunctum ſubjećto, with the lo-
gicians. An hoſpital may be appendant to a manour; a com-
nor of fiſhing appendant to a freehold. Cowell.
Appe’s DANT. j. f. That which belongs to another thing, as
*n accidental or adventitious part.
Pliny gives an account of the inventors of the forms and
“Pfendants of ſhipping, Hale's Origin of Mankind.
word, a look, a tread, will ſtrike, as they are appendants
to external ſymmetry, or indications of the beauty of the mind.
Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. ii. c. 6.
Tºr'sbicar. v. a. [appendo, Lat..] To add to another
thing.
in a palace there is the caſe or fabrick of the ſtruáure, and
there are certain additaments; as, various furniture, and cu-
rious motions of divers things appendicated to it.
- Hale's Origin of Mankind.
APPENDIcA'tion. m. ſ. [from appendicate.] Adjunct; appen-
dage; annexion.
There are conſiderable parts and integrals, and affendica-
tions unto the mundus aſpectabilis, impoſſible to be eternal.
Hale's Origin ofMankind. . -
APPE'NDIx. m. ſ. afpendices, plur. [Lat.]
1. Something appended, or added to another thing:
The therubim were never intended as an obječt of worſhip,
becauſe they were only the appendices to another thing. But á
thing is then propoſed as an objećt of worſhip, when it is ſet
up by itſelf, and not by way of addition or ornament to another
thing. Stillingfleet's Defence of Diſcourſes on Romiſh Idºlatry.
Normandy became an appendix to England, the nobler do-
minion, and received a greater conformity of their laws to the
Engliſh, than they gave to it. Hale's Civil Law of England.
2. An adjunct or concomitant.
All concurrent appendices of the action ought to be ſurveyed,
in order to pronounce with truth concerning it. J/atti.
To APPERTAIN. v. n. [appartenir, Fr.]
1. To belong to as of right.
The honour of deviſing this doćtrine, that religion ought to
be inforced by the ſword, would be found appertaining to Ma-
homed the falſe prophet. Raleigh's Eſſay:.
The Father, t' whom in heav'n ſupreme
Kingdom, and power, and glory appertains,
Hath honour'd me, according to his will. Paradiſe Loft, b. vi.
2. To belong to by nature or appointment.
If the ſoul of man did ſerve only to give him being in this
life, then things appertaining to this life would content him, as
we ſee they do other creatures. Hooker, b. i.
And they roaſted the paſſover with fire, as appertaineth as
for the ſacrifices they ſod them in braſ, pots. 1 Eſdras, i. 2.
Both of them ſeem not to generate any other effect, but ſuch
as appertaineth to their proper obječts and ſenſes. Bacon.
Is it expected, I ſhould know no ſecrets
That appertain to you? Shakespeare. julius Cæſar.
Appe RTA'1NMENT. n. ſ. [from appertain..] That which be-
longs to any rank or dignity.
He ſhent our meſſengers, and welay by
Our appertainments, viſiting of him.
Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſia.
Appe'Rºtenance. n.ſ.. [appartenance, Fr.] That which belongs
or relates to another thing.
Can they which behold the controverſy of divinity condemn
our enquiries in the doubtful aºpertenancies of arts, and recep-
taries of philoſophy Brown's Vulgar Errours, Preface.
APPE'RTIN ENT. adj. [from To appertain..] Belonging; relating.
You know how apt our love was to accord
To furniſh him with all appertinents
Belonging to his honour. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
A'PPET EN ce. }". ſ' [appetentia, Lat..] Carnal deſire; ſenſual
A'PPET ENcy. W. deſire.
Bred only and completed to the taſte
Of luſtful appetence; to fing, to dance,
To dreſs, to troule the tongue, and roll the eye.
- Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi. 1619.
APPEtibi'lity. n. ſ. [from appetible.] The quality of being
deſirable.
That elicitation which the ſchools intend, is a deducing of
the power of the will into ačt, merely from the appetibility
of the objećt, as a man draws a child after him with the fight
of a green bough. Bramham againſt Hobies.
Appet IBLE, adj. [appetibilis, Lat..] Deſirable; that which may
be the objećt of appetite.
Power both to ſlight the moſt appetible objećts, and to con-
troul the moſt unruly paſſions. Bramham againſt Hobbes.
APPETITE. m. ſ. [appetitus, Lat.]
1. The natural deſire of good; the inſtinét by which we are led
to ſeek pleaſure. -
The will properly and ſtrićtly taken, as it is of things which
are referred unto the end that men defireth, differeth greatly
from that inferiour natural deſire, which we call appetite. The
objećt of appetite is whatſoever ſenſible good may be wiſhed for;
the objećt of will is that good which reaſon does lead us to ſeek.
Hooker, b. i. § 7.
2. The deſire of ſenſual pleaſure.
Why, ſhe ſhould hang on him,
As if increaſe of appetite had grown
By what it fed on. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Urge his hateful luxury,
And beſtial appetite in change of luſt. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Each tree
Loaden with faireſt fruit, that hung to th’ eye
Tempting, ſtirr'd in me ſudden appetite
To pluck and eat. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. viii.
There is continual abundance, which creates ſuch an appetite
in your reader, that he is not cloyed with anything, but ſatis-
fied with all. Dryden's juvenal, º
3. Vio-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P P
3. Violent longing; eagerneſs after anything. - - - - -
No man could enjoy his life, his wife, or goods, if a mightier
man had an appetite to take the ſame from him. Davies ºn Irel.
Hopton had an extraordinary appetite to engage Waller in a
battle. Clarendon, b. viii.
Power being the natural appetite of princes, a limited mo-
narch cannot gratify it. Swift.
4. Keenneſs of ſtomach; hunger; deſire of food. - -
There be four principal cauſes of appetite; the refrigeration
of the ſtomach, joined with ſome dryneſs; contračtion; vel-
lication, and abſterſion; beſides hunger, which is an empti-
neſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 831.
5. It has ſometimes of before the object of deſire.
The new officer's nature needed ſome reſtraint to his immo-
derate appetite of power. Clarendon.
6. Sometimes to.
We have generally ſuch an appetite to praiſe, that we gree-
dily ſuck it in. overnment of the Tongue, § 8.
APPETI'tion. n.ſ.. [appetitio, Lat.] Deſire.
The aëtual appetition or faſtening our affections on him.
Hammond's Pračtical Catechiſm.
Appetitive. adj. [from appetite.] That which deſires; that
which has the quality of deſiring.
The will is not a bare appetitive power as that of the ſenſual
appetite, but is a rational appetite. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To APPLAUD. v. a. [applaude, Lat.]
1. To praiſe by clapping the hand.
2. To praiſe in general.
I would applaud thee to the very echo,
That ſhould applaud again. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Nations unborn your mighty names ſhall ſound,
And worlds applaud that muſt not yet be found ! Pope.
APPLA/UDER. n.ſ.. [from applaud.] He that praiſes or com-
mends.
I had the voice of my ſingle reaſon againſt it, drowned in
the noiſe of a multitude of applauders. Glanville's Scepſis.
APPLA'Use. n.ſ.. [applauſus, Lat..] Approbation loudly expreſſed ;
raiſe.
P This general applauſe, and chearful ſhout,
Argues your wiſdom and your love to Richard. Shakespeare, R.III.
Sylla wept,
And chid her barking waves into attention;
And fell Charybdis murmur'd ſoft applauſe. . Milton's Comus.
Thoſe that are ſo fond of applauſe, how little do they taſte it
when they have it South.
See their wide ſtreaming wounds; they neither came
For pride of empire, nor deſire of fame;
Kings fight for kingdoms, madmen for applauſe,
But love for love alone, that crowns the lover's cauſe.
Dryden's Fables.
APPLE. n.ſ.. [appel, Saxon.]
1. The fruit of the apple tree.
Tall thriving trees confeſs'd the fruitful mold;
The red’ning apple ripens here to gold. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. The pupil of the eye.
He inſtructed him; he kept him as the apple of his eye.
Deut. xxxii. Io.
Apple of Love.
Apples of love are of three ſorts; the moſt common having
long trailing branches, with rough leaves and yellow joints,
ſucceeded by apples, as they are called, at the joints, not round,
but bunched; of a pale orange ſhining pulp, and ſeeds within.
Mortimer's Art of Husbandry.
APPLE-GRAFT. n.ſ.. [from apple and graft.] A twig of apple
tree grafted upon the ſtock of another tree. *
We have ſeen three and twenty ſorts of apple-grafts upon
the ſame old plant, moſt of them adorned with fruit. Boyle,
APPLE-TART: [from apple and tart.] A tart made of apples.
What, up and down carv'd like an apple-tart.
Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
APPLE TRE e. n.ſ.. [from apple and tree.]
The fruit of this tree is for the moſt part hollowed about the
foot ſtalk; the cells incloſing the ſeed are ſeparated by cartila-
ginous partitions; the juice of the fruit is ſowriſh, the tree
large and ſpreading; the flowers conſiſt of five leaves, expand-
ing in form of a roſe. There is a great variety of theſe fruits.
Thoſe for the deſſert are, the white juniting, Margaret apple,
ſummer pearmain, ſummer queening, embroidered apple, gol-
den reinette, ſummer white Colville, ſummer red Colville, filver
pippin, aromatick pippin, the gray reinette, la haute-bonté,
royal ruſſeting, Wheeler's ruſſet, Sharp's ruffet, ſpice apple, gol-
den pippin, nonpareil, and l’api. Thoſe for the kitchen uſe
are, codling, ſummer marigold, ſummer red pearmain, Holland
pippin, Kentiſh pippin, the hanging body, Loan's pearmain,
French reinette, French pippin, royal ruſlet, monſtruous reinette,
winter pearmain, pomme violette, Spencer's pippin, ſtone pip-
pin, oakenpin. And thoſe generally uſed for cyder are, Devon-
fhire royal wilding, reditreaked apple, the whitſour, Hereford-
ſhire underleaf, John apple, &amp;c. Millar.
Thus apple trees, whoſe trunks are ſtrong to bear
Their ſpreading boughs exert themſelves in air. Dryden.
Apple wom AN. m. ſ. [from apple and woman.] A woman that
ſells apples. I
Yonder are two apple women ſcolding, and juſt ready to un-
coif one another. Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scribſ.
APPLIABLE. adj. [from apply..] That which may be applied.
For this word the moderns uſe applicatle; which ſee.
Limitations all ſuch principles have, in regard of the varie-
ties of the matter whereunto they are appliable. Hooker, b. v.
All that I have ſaid of the heathen idolatry is appliable to the
idolatry of another ſort of men in the world. South.
APPL'Ance. n.ſ.. [from apply..] The act of applying; the
thing applied to. -
Diſeaſes deſp'rate grown,
By deſperate appliance are relieved. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Applicability. n.ſ. [from applicable.] The quality of being
fit to be applied to ſomething.
The action of cold is compoſed of two parts; the one preſ-
fing, the other penetration, which require appliability. Digly.
Applicabi E. adj. [from apply..] That which may be applied,
as properly relating to ſomething.
What he ſays of the portrait of any particular perſon, is ap-
plicable to poetry. In the character, there is a better or a worſe
likeneſs; the better is a panegyrick, and the worſe a libel.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Preface.
It were happy for us, if this complaint were applicable only to
the heathen world. Rogers.
**** ENESS. m. ſ. [from applicable.] Fitneſs to be ap-
Plled.
The knowledge of ſalts may poſſibly, by that little part
which we have already delivered of its applicalleneſs, be of uſe
in natural philoſophy. Boyle.
Applicably. adv. [from applicall..] In ſuch a manner as that
it may be properly applied. -
Applicate. n.ſ. (from apply..] A right line drawn acroſs a
curve, ſo as to biſe&amp;t the diameter thereof. Chambers.
APPLICA"TION. m. ſ. [from apply.]
1. The act of applying any thing to another; as, he mitigated
his pain by the application of emollients.
2. The thing applied; as, he invented a new application, by
which blood might be ſtaunched.
3. The act of applying to any perſon, as a ſolicitor, or peti-
tioner.
It ſhould ſeem very extraordinary, that a patent ſhould be
paſſed, upon the application of a poor, private, obſcure mecha-
nick. Swift.
4. The employment of any means for a certain end.
If a right courſe be taken with children, there will not be
much need of the application of the common rewards and pu-
niſhments. Locke.
5. Intenſeneſs of thought; cloſe ſtudy.
I have diſcovered no other way to keep our thoughts cloſe to
their buſineſs, but by frequent attention and application, getting
the habit of attention and application. Locke.
6. Attention to ſome particular affair; with the particle to.
His continued application to ſuch publick affairs, as may con-
duce to the benefit of his kingdoms, diverts him from pleaſures.
Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 46.
This crime certainly deſerves the utmoſt application and wiſ-
dom of a people to prevent it. Addiſon.
7. The condition of being uſed as means to an end.
There is no ſtint which can be ſet to the value or merit of
the ſacrificed body of Chriſt; it hath no meaſured certainty of
limits, bounds of efficacy unto life it knoweth none, but is al-
ſo itſelf infinite in poſſibility of application. Hooker, b. v.
This principle acts with the greateſt force in the worſt appli-
cation ; and the familiarity of wicked men more ſucceſsfully de-
bauches, than that of good men reforms. Rogers.
A'pplicative. adj. [from apply..] That which applies.
The directive command for counſel is in the underſtanding,
and the applicative command for putting in execution, is in the
will. Bramhal again/? Hobbes.
A'PPLICATORY. adj. [from apply..] That which comprehends
the act of application.
Applicatory. m. ſ. That which applies.
There are but two ways of applying the death of Chriſt:
faith is the inward applicatory, and if there be any outward, it
muſt be the ſacraments. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
To APPLY. v. a. [applico, Lat.]
1. To put one thing to another.
He ſaid, and to the ſword his throat applied. Dryd. Æn.
2. To lay medicaments upon a wound.
Apply ſome ſpeedy cure, prevent our fate,
And ſuccour nature ere it be too late. Addiſon's Ovid's Met.
God has addreſſed every paſſion of our nature, applied re-
medies to every weakneſs, warned us of every enemy. Rogers.
3. To make uſe of as relative or ſuitable to ſomething. -
This brought the death of your father into remembrance,
and I repeated the verſes which I formerly applied to him.
Dryden's Fables, Ded.
4. To put to a certain uſe.
The profits thereof might be applied towards the ſupport of
the year. Clarendon.
5. To uſe as means to an end.
Theſe glorious beings are inſtruments in the hands of º:
Wno
•
º
!
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P P
A P P
who applies their ſervices, and governs their actions, and diſ-
poſes even their wills and affections. Rogers.
6. To fix the mind upon; to ſtudy; with to. -
Apply thine heart unto inſtruction, and thine ears to the words
of knowledge. Prov. xxiii. 1 2.
Every man is conſcious to himſelf that he thinks; and that
which his mind is applied about, whilſt thinking, is the ideas
that are there. Locke.
It is a ſign of a capacious mind, when the mind can apply it-
ſelf to ſeveral objects with a ſwift ſucceſſion. J/atts.
7. To have recourſe to, as a ſolicitor or petitioner; with to:
I had no thoughts of applying to any but himſelf; he deſired
I would ſpeak to others. Swift.
8. To endeavour to work upon.
God knows every faculty and paſſion, and in what manner
they can moſt ſucceſsfully be applied to. Rogers.
9. To ply; to buſy; to keep at work: an antiquated ſenſe.
She was ſkilful in applying his humours; never ſuffering fear
to fall to deſpair, nor hope to haſten to aſſurance. Sidney.
Far away they ſpy'd
A varlet running towards haſtily,
Whoſe flying feet ſo faſt their way apply'd,
That round about a cloud of duſt did fly. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
To Appo'1NT. v. a. [appointer, Fr.]
1. To fix any thing, as to ſettle the exact time for ſome tranſac-
tion.
The time appointed of the father.
2. To ſettle anything by compačt.
He ſaid, Appoint methy wages, and I will pay it. Gen. xxx.2c.
Now there was an appointed ſign between the men of Iſrael
and the liers in wait. judges, xx. 38.
3. To eſtabliſh anything by decree. -
It was before the Lord, which choſe me before thy father,
and before all his houſe, to appoint me ruler over the people of
the Lord. 2 Sam. vi. 21.
Unto him thou gaveſt commandment, which he tranſgreſſed,
and immediately thou appointedſ death in him, and in his ge-
nerations. - 2 Eſdras, iii. 7.
O Lord, that art the God of the juſt, thou haſt not appointed
repentance to the juſt. Manaſſeh's Prayer.
4. To furniſh in all points; to equip; to ſupply with all things
... neceſſary: uſed anciently in ſpeaking of ſoldiers.
The Éiºn being well appointed, did ſo entertain them, that
their ſhips departed terribly torn. Hayward.
Appo'INTER. n.ſ.. [from appoint..] He that ſettles or fixes any
, thing or place. -
Appo'INTM t NT. n.ſ.. [appointement, Fr.] -
1. Stipulation; the act of fixing ſomething in which two or more
are concerned.
They had made an appointment together, to come to mourn
with him, and to comfort him. job, ii. II.
2. Decree; eſtabliſhment.
The ways of death be only in his hands, who alone hath
power over all fleſh, and unto whoſe appointment we ought with
patience meekly to ſubmit ourſelves. Hooker, b. v.
3. Direétion; order. -
That good fellow,
If I command him, follows my appointment;
I will have none ſo near elſe. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
4. Equipment; furniture.
They have put forth the haven: further on,
Where their appointment we may beſt diſcover,
And look on their endeavour. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
Here art thou in appointment freſh and fair,
Anticipating time with ſtarting courage. Shakespeare, Tr. and Creſſ.
5. An allowance paid to any man, commonly uſed of allowances
to publick officers.
To Appo'Rtion. v. a. [from portio, Lat..] To ſet out in juſt
proportions.
Try the parts of the body, which of them iſſue ſpeedily, and
which ſlowly; and, by apportioning the time, take and leave
that quality which you deſire. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
And to theſe it were good, that ſome proper prayer were ap-
portioned, and they taught it. South.
An office cannot be apportioned out like a common, and ſhar-
ed among diſtinét proprietors. Collier of Envy.
APPo'RTIon MENT. n.ſ.. [from apportion.] A dividing of a
rent into two parts or portions, according as the land whence
it iſſues, is divided among two or more proprietors. Chambers.
To Appose. v. a. [appono, Lat.] To put queſtions to. This
word is not now in uſe, except that, in ſome ſchools, to put
&amp;rammatical queſtions to a boy is called, to poſe him; and we
now uſe poſe for puzzle. -
. Some procure themſelves to be ſurpriſed at ſuch times as it
is like the party that they work upon, will come upon them:
and to be found with a letter in their hand, or doing ſomewhat
which they are not accuſtomed ; to the end they may be ap-
Pºſed of thoſe things which cf themſelves they are º to
Auer. - Bacon.
A *Posit E. adj. [appoſitus, Lat.] Proper; fit; well adapted to
time, place, or circumſtances.
The duke's delivery of his mind was not ſo ſharp, as ſolid
Vol. I
Galat. iv. 2.
and grave, and appoſite to the times and occaſions. // 2,2'ſ
Neither was Perkin, for his part, wanting to himſelf, either
in gracious and princely behaviour, or in ready and appºſite ail-
ſwers. Bacon’s Henry VII.
Remarkable inſtances of this kind have been: but it will ad-
miniſter reflections very oppoſite to the deſign of this preſent
ſolemnity. Atterbury's Sermons.
APPositELY. adv. [from appoſite.] Properly; fitly; ſuitably:
When we come into a government, and ſee this place of ho-
nour allotted to a murderer, another filled with an atheiſt or
a blaſphemer, may we not appoſitely and properly ask, Whether
there be any virtue, ſobriety, or religion, amongſt ſuch a peo-
ple - South.
We may affoſtely compare this diſeaſe, of a proper and
improper conſumption, to a decaying houſe. Harvey on Cony.
A'PPosite Ness. m. ſ. [from appoſite.J. Fitneſs; propriety; ſuit-
ableneſs. * - - -
Judgment is either concerning things to be known, or of
things done, of their congruity, fitneſs, rightneſs, appoſitenſ.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Apposi't Ion. m. ſ. ſappoſitio, Lat.]
1. The addition of new matter, ſo as that it may touch the firſt
maſs.
Urine inſpected with a microſcope, will diſcover a black
ſand; wherever this ſand ſticks, it grows ſtill bigger, by the
appoſition of new matter. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. In grammar, the putting of two nouns in the ſame caſe; as,
Liber Maria matris, the book of his mother Mary.
To APPRAISE. v. a. ſapprecier, Fr.] To ſet a price upon any
thing, in order to ſale. -
APPRA'iser. n.ſ.. [from appraiſe.] A perſon appointed to ſe
a price upon things to be ſold.
To APPREHEND. v. a. [apprehendo, Lat. to take hold of..]
1. To lay hold on.
There is nothing but hath a double handle, or at leaſt we
have two hands to apprehend it. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
2. To ſeize in order for trial or puniſhment. -
The governour kept the city with a garriſon, deſirous to ap-
prehend me. 2 Cor. xi. 32.
It was the rabble, of which no body was named; and,
which is more ſtrange, not one apprehended. Clarendom.
3. To conceive by the mind.
The good which is gotten by doing, cauſeth not action; un-
leſs, apprehending it as good, we like and deſire it. Hooker.
Yet this I apprehend not, why to thoſe -
Among whom God will deign to dwell on earth,
So many, and ſo various laws are giv'n. Milton's Par. Iºff.
The Firſt Being is inviſible and incorruptible, aſid can only
be apprehended by our minds. Stillingfleet.
4. To think on with terrour; to fear.
From my grandfather's death I had reaſon to apprehend the
ſtone; and, from my father's life, the gout. Temple.
APPR E HE'NDER. n.ſ.. [from apprehend.] Conceiver; thinker.
Groſs apprehenders may not think it any more ſtrange, than
that a bullet ſhould be moved by the rarified fire. Glanville.
Apprehe'Nsible. adj. [from apprehend..] That which may be
apprehended, or conceived. -
The north and ſouthern poles are incommunicable and fixed
points, whereof the one is not apprehenſible in the other.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 7.
APPRF HE'Nsion. n.ſ.. [apprehenſio, Lat.] -
1. The mere contemplation of things, without affirming or de-
nying any thing concerning them. So we think of a horſe;
high, ſwift, animal, time, matter; mind, death, &amp;c. Watts.
Simple apprehenſion denotes no more than the ſoul's naked in-
telle&amp;tion of an obječt, without either compoſition or deduc-
tion. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica, c. iv.
2. Opinion ; ſentiments; eonceflion.
To be falſe, and to be thought falſe, is all one in reſpe&amp;t of
men who ačt net according to truth, but apprehenſion. South.
The expreſſions of ſcripture are commonly ſuited in thoſe
matters to the vulgar apprehenſions and conceptions of the place
and people where they were delivered. Locke on St. Paul’s Ep.
3. The faculty by which we conceive new ideas, or power of
conceiving them.
I nam'd them as they paſs'd, and underſtood
Their nature, with ſuch knowledge God indu'd -
My ſudden apprehenſion. Milton's Paradiſ: Loft, b. viii.
. Fear.
4. It behoveth that the world ſhould be held in awe, not by a
vain ſurmiſe, but a true apprehenſion of ſomewhat which no man
may think himſelf able to withſtand. Hooker, b. v. § 2.
And he the future evil ſhall no leſs
In apprehenſion, than in ſubſtance, feel. Milt. Paradiſ Loſt.
The apprehenſion of what was to come from an unknown, at
leaſt unacknowledged ſucceſſour to the crown, clouded much
of that proſperity. . . Clarendon.
After the death of his nephew Caligula, Claudius was in no
ſmall apprehenſion for his own life. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
5. Suſpicion of ſomething to happen, or be done.
I'll note you in my book of memory,
And ſcourge you for this tºwn Shakespeare Henry VI.
2. *
That
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P P
A P P
i
That he might take away the apprehenſºn, that he meant
ſuddenly to depart, he ſent out orders, which he was ſure would
come into the enemies hands, to two or three villages next the
houſe, that they ſhould, by the next day noon, ſend propor-
tions of corn into Baſinghouſe. Clarendon, b. viii.
As they have no apprehenſion of theſe things, ſo they need no
comfort againſt them. Tillotſon.
6. Seizure.
See that he be convey’d unto the tower:
And go we brothers to the man that took him,
To queſtion of his apprehenſion. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
APPR E HE'Nsive. adj. [from apprehend.]
1. Quick to underſtand.
And gives encouragement to thoſe who teach ſuch apprehen-
five ſcholars. Holder's Elements of Speech.
If conſcience be naturally apprehenſive and ſagacious, cer-
tainly we ſhould truſt and rely upon the reports of it. South.
2. Fearful.
The inhabitants of this country, when I paſſed through it,
were extremely apprehenſive of ſeeing Lombardy the ſeat of
War. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
They are not at all apprehenſive of evils at a diſtance, nor
tormented with the fearful proſpećt of what may befal them
hereafter. Tillotſon.
APPREHE'NSIVELY. adv. [from apprehenſive..] In an apprehen-
five manner.
APPREHE'NSI v ENEss. n.ſ.. [from apprehenſive.] The quality of
being apprehenſive.
Whereas the vowels are much more difficult to be taught,
you will find, by falling upon them laſt, great help by the ap-
prehenſiveneſs already gained in learning the conſonants.
Holder's Elements of Speech.
APPRENTICE. m. ſ. [apprenti, Fr.] One that is bound by
covenant, to ſerve another man of trade, for a certain term of
years, upon condition, that the artificer, or tradeſman, ſhall,
in the mean time, endeavour to inſtruct him in his art or myſ-
tery. º - Cowell.
'fore enjoined ſuch diligence, that no apprentice, no, no bond
ſlave could ever be more ready than that young princeſs was.
Sidney, b. ii.
He found him ſuch an apprentice, as knew well enough how
to ſet up for himſelf. //ºttom.
This rule ſets the painter at liberty; it teaches him, that he
ought not to be ſubject himſelf ſervilely, and be bound like an
apprentice to the rules of his art. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
To APPRE'Ntice. v. a. [from the noun..] To put out to a
maſter as an apprentice. -
Him portion'd maids, apprentic'd orphans bleſt,
The young who labour, and the old who reſt. Pope's Epiff.
APPRE'NTIce HooD. m. ſ. [from apprentice.] The years of an
apprentice's ſervitude.
Muſt I not ſerve a long apprenticehood
To foreign paſſages, and in the end,
Having my freedom, boaſt of nothing elſe
But that I was a journeyman to grief? Shakeſp. Richard II.
APPRE'Nticeship. m. ſ. [from apprentice.] The years which
an apprentice is to paſs under a maſter.
In every art, the ſimpleſt that is, there is an apprenticeſhip
neceſſary, before it can be expected one ſhould work it in a
faſhionable piece. Digby on the Soul, Dedication.
Many ruſhed into the miniſtry, as being the only calling that
they could profeſs, without ſerving any apprenticeſhip. South.
To APPRI'z E. v. a. [apprendre; part. appris, Fr.] To inform;
to give the knowledge of anything.
He conſiders the tendency of ſuch a virtue or vice; he is
well apprized, that the repreſentation of ſome of theſe things
may convince the underſtanding, and ſome may terrify the con-
ſcience. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
It is fit he be apprized of a few things, that may prevent his
miſtaking. Cheyne's Philoſophical Principles.
But if appriz'd of the ſevere attack,
The country be ſhut up, lur’d by the ſcent
On church yard drear (inhuman to relate),
The diſappointed prowlers fall. Thomſºn's Winter.
To APPROACH. v. n. [approcher, Fr.]
1. To draw near locally.
'Tis time to look about: the powers of the kingdom ap-
proach apace. Shakeſp. King Lear,
We ſuppoſe Ulyſſes approaching toward Polypheme.
Notes on Odyſſey.
2. To draw near, as time.
Hark! I hear the ſound of coaches,
The hour of attack approaches. Gay's Beggar's Opera.
3. º make a progreſs towards, in the figurative ſenſe, as men-
tally.
He ſhall approach unto me: for who is this that engaged his
heart to approach unto me? jer. xxx. 21.
He was an admirable poet, and thought even to have ap-
proached Homer. Temple's Miſcellanies.
To have knowledge in all the objećts of contemplation, is
what the mind can hardly attain unto; the inſtances are few
of thoſe who have, in any meaſure, approached towards it. Locke,
To APPRO'AcH. v. a. To bring near to. This ſenſe is rather
French than Engliſh. - -
This they will nimbly perform, if objećted to the extremes,
but ſlowly and not at all, if approached unto their roots.
Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 20.
By plunging paper thoroughly in weak ſpirit of wine, and
approaching it to a candle, the ſpirituous parts will burn, with-
out harming the paper. Boyle.
Approach'd, and looking underneath the ſun,
He ſaw proud Arcite. - Dryden's Fables.
APPRO'AcH. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The act of drawing near.
If I could bid the ſeventh welcome with ſo good heart as I
can bid the other five farewel, I ſhould be glad of his approach.
Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
'Tis with our ſouls
As with our eyes, that after a long darkneſs
Are dazzled at th' approach of ſudden light.
2. Acceſs.
Honour hath in it the vantage ground to do good; the ap-
Denh. Sophy.
proach to kings and principal perſons; and the raiſing of a
man's own fortunes.
3. Hoſtile advance.
For England his approaches makes as fierce
As waters to the ſucking of a gulph. Shakeſp. Henry V.
4. Means of advancing.
Againſt beleagur'd heav'n the giants move,
Hills pil'd on hills, on mountains mountains lie,
To make their mad approaches to the ſky. Dryden's Ovid.
APPro'AcHER... n.ſ.. [from approach..] The perſon that ap-
proaches or draws near. -
Thou gav'ſt thine ears, like tapſters, that bid welcome
To knaves and all approachers. Shakespeare. Timan.
APPRO'AcHMENT. n.ſ.. [from approach.] The act of coming
Ilcaſ.
As for ice, it will not concrete, but in the approachment of the
air, as we have made trial in glaſſes of water, which will not
eaſily freeze. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 1.
APPROBA'tion. m. ſ. [approbatio, Lat.]
1. The act of approving, or expreſſing himſelf pleaſed.
That not paſt me, but
By learned approbation of my judges. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
2. The liking of any thing.
There is no poſitive law of men, whether received by for-
mal conſent, as in councils, or by ſecret approbation, as in cuſ-
toms, but may be taken away. Hooker, b. iv. § 14.
The bare approbation of the worth and goodneſs of a thing,
is not properly the willing of that thing; yet men do very com-
monly account it ſo. - South.
3. Atteſtation; ſupport.
How many now in health
Shall drop their blood in approbation
Of what your reverence ſhall incite us to. Shał. Henry V.
APPRo'of. m. ſ. [from approve, as proof from prove..] Approba-
tion; commendation: a word rightly derived, but old.
O moſt perilous mouths,
That bear in them one and the ſelf-ſame tongue
Either of condemnation or approofſ Shakespeare Meaſure for M.
To APP Ro'PERATE. v. a. [appropero, Lat.] To haſten; to ſet
forward. Dićf.
To APPROPI'Noy ATE. v. n. [appropinquo, Lat.] To draw nigh
unto ; to approach.
To APPROPI'NQUE. v. n. [appropinquo, Lat.] To approach;
to draw near to.
The clotted blood within my hoſe,
That from my wounded body flows,
With mortal criſis doth portend
My days to appropinque an end. - Hudibrar.
APPROPRIABLE. adj. [from appropriate.] That which may be
appropriated; that which may be reſtrained to ſomething parti-
cular.
This conceit applied unto the original of man, and the be-
Bacon's Eſſays.
ginning of the world, is more juſtly appropriable unto its end.
Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 1.
To APPROPRIATE. v. a. ſapproprier, Fr. approprio, low Lat.]
1. To conſign to ſome particular uſe or perſon.
Things ſančtified were thereby in ſuch ſort appropriated unto
God, as that they might never afterwards again be made com-
. In On, - Hooker, b. v. § zo.
As for this ſpot of ground, this perſon, this thing, I have ſe-
lećted and appropriated, I have incloſed it to myſelf and my own
uſe; and I will endure no ſharer, no rival or companion in
it. South.
Some they appropriated to the gods,
And ſome to publick, ſome to private ends. Roſcommon.
Marks of honour are appropriated to the magiſtrate, that
he might be invited to reverence himſelf. Atterbury.
2. To claim or exerciſe an excluſive right.
To themſelves appropriating
The ſpirit of God, promis'd alike, and giv'n
To all believers, Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
Why
A:
A:
t
!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P P
A P R
Why ſhould people engroſs and appropriate the common be-
nefits of fire, air, and water, to themſelves L’Eſtrange.
Every body elſe has an equal title to it; and therefore he
cannot appropriate, he cannot incloſe, without the conſent of
all his fellow commoners, all mankind. Locke.
3. To make peculiar to ſomething; to annex.
He need but be furniſhed with verſes of ſacred ſcripture; and
his ſyſtem, that has appropriated them to the orthodoxy of his
church, makes them immediately irrefragable arguments.
Locke's Eſſay on St. Paul's Epiffles.
We, by degrees, get ideas and names, and learn their appro-
priated connection one with another. Locke.
4. In law, to alienate a benefice. See Appropri Ation.
Before Richard II, it was lawful to appropriate the whole
fruits of a benefice to any abbey, the houſe finding one to ſerve
the cure; that king redreſſed that horrid evil. Ayliff's Parerg.
Appro'PRIATE. adj. [from the verb.] Peculiar; conſigned to
ſome particular uſe or perſon.
He did inſtitute a band of fifty archers, by the name of
yeomen of his guard; and that it might be thought to be ra-
ther a matter of dignity, than any matter of diffidence appro-
priate to his own caſe, he made an ordinance not temporary,
but to hold in ſucceſſion for ever. Bacon's Henry VII.
The heathens themſelves had an apprehenſion of the neceſ-
fity of ſome appropriate ačts of divine worſhip. Stillingfleet.
Appropriation. n.ſ.. [from appropriate.]
1. The application of ſomething to a particular purpoſe.
The mind ſhould have diſtinét ideas of the things, and re-
tain the particular name, with its peculiar appropriation to that
idea. Locke.
2. The claim of any thing as peculiar.
He doth nothing but talk of his horſe, and make a great ap-
propriation to his good parts, that he can ſhoe him himſelf.
Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
3. The fixing a particular ſignification to a word. -
The name of faculty may, by an appropriation that diſguiſes
its true ſenſe, palliate the abſurdity. Locke.
4. In law, a ſevering of a benefice eccleſiaſtical to the proper and
perpetual uſe of ſome religious houſe, or dean, and chap-
ter, biſhoprick, or college; becauſe, as perſons ordinarily have
no right of fee fimple, theſe, by reaſon of their perpetuity, are
accounted owners of the fee ſimple; and therefore are called
proprietors. To an appropriation, after the licence obtained of
the king in chancery, the conſent of the dioceſan, patron, and
incumbent, are neceſſary, if the church be full: but if the
schurch be void, the dioceſan and the patron, upon the king's
licence, may conclude. Cowel.
Appropria'toR. n.ſ.. [from appropriate.] He that is poſſeſſed
of an appropriated benefice.
Theſe appropriators, by reaſon of their perpetuities, are ac-
counted owners of the fee ſimple; and therefore are called pro-
prietors. Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
Approvable. adj. [from approve.] That which merits ap-
probation.
The ſolid reaſon, or confirmed experience, of any men, is
very approvable in what profeſſion ſoever. Brown's Vulgar Err.
APPro'v AL. m. ſ. [from approve..] Approbation: a word not
much uſed.
There is a cenſor of juſtice and manners, without whoſe
approval no capital ſentences are to be executed. Temple.
Approv A.Nce. n.ſ.. [from approve..] Approbation: a word not
much uſed. -
Should ſhe ſeem
Soft'ning the leaſt approvance to beſtow,
Their colours burniſh, and, by hope inſpir’d,
They brisk advance. Thomſon's Spring.
To Approve. v. a. [approuver, Fr. approbo, Lat.]
1. To like; to be pleaſed with. -
There can be nothing poſſibly evil which God approveth, and
that he approveth much more than he doth command. Hooker.
What power was that, whereby Medea ſaw,
And well approv’d, and prais'd the better courſe,
When her rebellious ſenſe did ſo withdraw
Her feeble pow'rs, that ſhe purſu'd the worſe?
2. To expreſs liking. -
It is looked upon as inſolence for a man to ſet up his own
opinion againſt that of ſome learned doctor, or otherwiſe ap-
proved writer. Locke.
3. To prove; to ſhow; to juſtify.
His meaning was not, that Archimedes could ſimply in no-
thing be deceived; but that he had in ſuch ſort approved his
skill, that he ſeemed worthy of credit for ever after, in matters
*Ppertaining to the ſcience he was skilful in. Hooker, b. ii.
In religion,
What damned errour, but ſome ſober brow
Will bleſs it, and approve it with a text. Shakespeare M. of Venice.
- I’m ſorry
That He approves the common liar, Fame,
Who ſpeaks him thus at Rome. Shakespeare Antony and Cleop.
Would'ſt thou approve thy conſtancy Approte -
Firſt thy obedience. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
Refer all the actions of this ſhort life to that ſtate which will
3 -
Davies.
never end; and this will aptrºve itſelf to be wiſdom at the laſt,
whatever the world judge of it now, Tillºon.
4. To experience. -
- Oh, 'tis the curſe in love, and ſtill ab/rºv’d,
hen women cannot love, where they're belov’d.
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen ºf Perona,
5. To make worthy of approbation.
The firſt care and concern muſt be to approve himſelf to
God by righteouſneſs, holineſs, and purity. Rogers.
6. It has of before the object.
... I ſhewed you a piece of black and white ſtuff juſt ſent from
the dyer; which you were pleaſed to approve ºf, and be my cuſ.
tomer for. Swift,
APPRO'v EMF NT. n ſ [from apprºve..] Approbation ; liking.
It is certain that at the firſt you were all of my opinion, and
that I did nothing without your approvement. Hayward,
APPRO've R. n.ſ.. [from approve.]
1. He that approves.
2. He that makes trial.
Their diſcipline,
Now mingled with their courages, will make known
To their approvers, they are people ſuch
As mend upon the world. Shakespeare Cymbeline,
3. In our common law, one that confeſſing felony of himſelf,
appealeth or accuſeth another, one or more, to be guilty of the
ſame: and he is called ſo, becauſe he muſt prove what he hath
alleged in his appeal. Cowel.
APPRo'XIMATE. adj. [from ad, to, and proximus, near, Lat.]
Near to. -
Theſe receive a quick converſion, containing approximate diſ.
poſitions unto animation. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 21.
APP Rox1 MA'tion. n.ſ.. [from approximate.]
I. Approach to any thing.
Unto the latitude of Capricorn, or the winter ſolſtice, it had
been a ſpring; for, unto that poſition, it had been in a middle
point, and that of aſcent or approximation. Brown's Wulg. Err.
The fiery region gains upon the inferiour elements; a ne-
ceſſary conſequent of the ſun's gradual approximation towards
the earth. Hale's Origin of vamkind.
Quadrupeds are better placed according to the degrees of
their approximation to the human ſhape. Grew’s Muſeum.
2. In ſcience, a continual approach nearer ſtill, and nearer to the
quantity ſought, without a poſſibility of ever arriving at it ex-
ačtly.
Appu'lse. n.ſ. [appulſus, Lat.] The act of ſtriking againſt any
1ng.
A. hećtick fever is the innate heat kindled into a deſtruc-
tive fire, violently abſorbing the radical moiſture, through the
appulſe of ſaline º: Harvey on Conſumptions.
In vowels, the paſſage of the mouth is open and free, with-
out any appulſe of an organ of ſpeech to another: but, in all
conſonants, there is an appulſe of the organs. Holder.
To APRICATE. v. n. [apricor, Lat..] To bask in the ſun. Dić7.
APRI'city. n.ſ.. [apricitas, Lat..] Warmth of the ſun; ſun-
ſhine. Dićf.
A'PR1cot, or A'PRIcock. n.ſ.. [from apricus, Lat, ſunny..] A
kind of wall fruit.
The ordinary ſorts of this fruit cultivated in Engliſh gar-
dens are, 1. The maſculine apricock. 2. The orange apricock.
3. The Algier apricock. 4. The Roman apricock. 5. The Tur-
key apricock. 6. The tranſparent atricock. 7. The Breda apri-
cock. 8. The Bruxelles apricock. They are generally propagat-
ed by budding them on plum ſtocks, and will readily take upon
almoſt any ſort of plum, provided the ſtock be free º:
- illar.
ing.
APRIL. m. ſ. [Aprilis, Lat. Avril, Fr.] The fourth month of
the year, January counted firſt.
April is repreſented by a young man in green, with a garland
of myrtle and hawthorn buds; in one hand primroſes and vio-
lets, in the other the ſign Taurus. Peacham on Drawing.
Men are April when they woo, December when they wed:
Maids are May when they are maids, but the sky changes when
they are wives. Shakeſp. As you like it.
APRöN. m. ſ. [A word of uncertain etymology, but ſuppoſed by
ſome to be contračted from afºre one..] A cloth hung before,
to keep the other dreſs clean. - -
Give us gold, good Timon: haſt thou more ?
- Hold up, you ſluts,
Your atrons mountant. Shakeſpeare. Timon.
The nobility think ſcorn to go in leather aprons. Shakespeare H.V.I.
How might we ſee Falſtaff, and not ourſelves be ſeen ?——
Put on two leather jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at
his table as drawers. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
In both theſe figures the veſt is gathered up before them,
like an atron, which you muſt ſuppoſe filled with fruits, as well
as the cornucopiae. Addison on Medals.
AP Rox. [in gunnery.] A picce of lead which covers the touch-
hole of a great gun. -
Apron of a gooſ. The fat ſkin which covers the belly.
ATRoN-MAN. m. ſ. [from apron and man.] A man that wears an
apron; a workman; an artificer,
You
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A P T
A Q_U
You have made good work,
You and your apron-men, that ſtood ſo much
Upon the voice of occupation, and •
The breath of garlick ... "w - Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Apron f D. adj. [from atron.] Wearing an apron.
A The &amp;# º, iſ the º gown'd. Pope's Eſ: on M.
PSIS. n. ſ. affides, plural. [44.
Is º º two points in the orbits of pla-
nets, in which they are at the greateſt, and the leaſt diſtance
from the ſun or earth. The higher aſſis is more º
denominated aphelion, or apogee; the lower, perihelion, or pe-
rigee. Chambers.
If bodies revolve in orbits that are pretty near circles, and the
aſſides of theſe orbits be fixed, then the centripetal forces of
thoſe bodies will be reciprocally as the ſquares of the diſtances.
Cheyne's Philoſophical Principles.
APT. adj. [aptus, Lat.]
1. Fit.
This ſo eminent induſtry in making proſelytes, more of that
ſex than of the other, groweth; for that they are deemed after
to ſerve as inſtruments in the cauſe. Apter they are through
the eagerneſs of their affection; after through a natural incli-
nation unto piety; after through fundry opportunities, &amp;c.
Finally, after through a fingular delight which they take in
giving very large and particular intelligence how all near abºut
them ſtand affected as concerning the ſame cauſe. Hooker, Pr.
2. Having a tendency to: - - -
Things natural, as long as they keep thoſe forms which give
them their being, cannot poſſibly be apt or inclinable to do
otherwiſe than they do. Hooker.
3. Inclined to ; led to. - - -
You may make her you love, believe it; which, I warrant,
ſhe is apter to do, than confeſs ſhe does. Shakespeare A you like it.
Men are apt to think well of themſelves, and of their nation,
of their courage and ſtrength. Temple.
One, who has not theſe lights, is a ſtranger to what he reads,
and art to put a wrong interpretation upon it. Addiſon. Spect.
Even thoſe who are near the court, are apt to deduct wrong
conſequences, by reaſoning upon the motives of actions. Swift.
What we have always ſeen to be done in one manner, we
are apt to imagine there was but that one way. Bentl. Sermons.
4. Ready ; quick; as, an apt wit.
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain that leads my uſe of anger -
To better vantage. Shakespeare. Coriolanus.
5. Qualified for. - -
All that were ſtrong and aft for war, even them the king of
Babylon brought captive to Babylon. 2 Kings, xxiv. 10.
To Apt. v. a. [apto, Lat.]
1. To ſuit 3 to adapt.
We need a man that knows the ſeveral graces
Of hiſtory, and how to apt their places; -
where brevity, where ſplendour, and where height,
Where ſweetneſs is required, and where weight. B. Johnſon.
- fit; to qualify.
2. To fit; to q The king is melancholy,
Afted for any ill impreſſions. Denham's Sophy.
To A pºr At E. v. a. ſaptatum, Lat.] To make fit. -
To aptate a planet, is to ". the planet in poſition of
houſe and dignities to the greateſt advantage, in order to bring
about the deſired end. Bailey.
Aptitude. n. ſ. [French.] -
1. Fitneſs.
This evinces its perfeót aptitude and fitneſs for the end to
which it was aimed, the planting and nouriſhing all true virtue
among men. Decay of Piety.
2. Tendency. -
In anabortion, the mother, beſides the fruſtration of her hopes,
acquires an aptitude to miſcarry for the future. Decay of Piety.
3. Diſpoſition. -
He that is about children, ſhould ſtudy their nature and ap-
titudes, what turns they eaſily take, and what becomes them;
what their native ſtock is, and what it is fit for. Lºcke.
A'PT LY. adv. [from apt.] -
1. Properly; with juſt conneétion, or correſpondence; fitly.
That part
Was aptly fitted, and naturally perform'd., Shakesp. As you like it.
But what the maſs nutritious does divide :
What makes them aptly to the limbs adhere,
In youth encreaſe them, and in age repair :
2. Juſtly; pertinently.
Blackmore.
Irenaeus very aptly remarks, that thoſe nations, who were not -
poſſeſt of the goſpels, had the ſame accounts of our Saviour,
which are in the Evangeliſts. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Relig.
3. Readily; acutely; as, he learned his buſineſs very aptly.
A'pt.NEss. n. ſ. [from apt.]
1. Fitneſs; ſuitableneſs.
The nature of every law muſt be judged of by the aptneſ;
of things therein preſcribed, unto the ſame end. Hooker.
There are antecedent and independent aptneſſes in things;
with reſpect to which, they are fit to be commanded or for-
bidden. Norris's Miſel.
2. Diſpoſition to any thing.
The nebles receive ſo to heart the baniſhment of that wor-
thy Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptneſs to take all power
from the people. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
3. Quickneſs of apprehenſion; readineſs to learn.
What ſhould be the aptneſs of birds, in compariſon of beaſis,
to imitate ſpecch, may be enquired. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
4. Tendency.
Some ſeeds of goodneſs give him a reliſh of ſuch reflections,
as have an aptneſs to improve the mind. Addiſon. Spectator.
AP Tote. n.ſ. [of 2 and aléziº.] A noun which is not declined
with caſes.
4394 m. ſ. [Latin.] A word ſignifying water, very much uſed
in chymical writings.
4&amp;JA FORTIS. [Latin.] . A corroſive liquor made by diſtill-
ing purified nitre with calcined vitriol, or rectified oil of vitriol
in a ſtrong heat: the liquor, which riſes in fumes red as blood,
being collected, is the ſpirit of nitre or aqua fortis; which ſerves
as a menſtruum for diſſolving of filver, and all other metals, ex-
cept gold. But if ſea ſalt, or ſal ammoniack, be added to aqua
fortis, it commences aqua regia, and will then diſſolve no metal
but gold. Aqua fortis is commonly held to have been invented
about the year 1300; though others will have it to have been
known in the time of Moſes. It is ſerviceable to refiners, in
ſeparating ſilver from gold and copper; to the workers in mo–
ſaick, for ſtaining and colouring their woods; to dyers, in their
colours, particularly ſcarlet; and to other artiſts, for colour-
ing bone and ivory. . With aqua fortis bookbinders marble the
covers of books, and diamond cutters ſeparate diamonds from
metalline powders. It is alſo uſed in etching copper or braſs
plates. - Chamberſ.
The diſſolving of ſilver in aqua ſºrtis, and gold in aqua re-
ia, and not vice verſi, would not be difficult to know. Locke.
AQUA MARINA, of the Italian lapidaries, is of a ſea or bluiſh
green. This ſtone ſeems to me to be the beryllus of Pliny.
- I/oodward's Meth. of Foſſil.
A&amp;UA MIRABILIS. [Latin.]. The wonderful water, is pre-
pared of cloves, galangals, cubebs, mace, cardomums, nutmegs,
ginger, and ſpirit of wine, digeſted twenty four hours, then diſ-
tilled. It is a good and agreeable cordial,
ASUA REGIA, or 4% REGALIS. [Latin.] An acid cor-
roſive ſpirit or water, ſo called becauſe it ſerves as a menſtruum
to diſſolve gold, commonly eſteemed the king of metals. Its
baſis, or eſſential ingredient, is common ſea ſalt, the only ſalt
in nature which will operate on gold. It is commonly pre-
pared by mixing common ſea ſalt, or ſal ammoniack, or the
ſpirit of them, with ſpirit of nitre, or common aqua fortis.
- Chambers.
He adds to his complex idea of gold, that of fixedneſs or ſo-
lubility in aqua regia. Locke.
Aś.AE. [Latin.] It is commonly underſtood of what
is otherwiſe called brandy, or ſpirit of wine, either ſimple
or prepared with aromaticks. But ſome appropriate the term
brandy to what is procured from wine, or the grape; aqua-vite,
to that drawn after the ſame manner from malt. Chambers.
I will rather truſt a Fleming with my butter, parſon Hugh
the Welchman with my cheeſe, an Iriſhman with my aqua vita
bottle, or a thief to walk with my ambling gelding, than my
wife with herſelf. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
AQUA"Tick, adj. [aquaticus, Lat. from aqua, water.]
1. That which inhabits the water.
The vaſt variety of worms found in animals, as well terreſ-
trial as aquatick, are taken into their bodies by meats and drinks.
Ray on Creation.
Brutes may be conſidered as either aerial, terreſtrial, aquatick,
or amphibious. Aquatick are thoſe whoſe conſtant abode is up-
on the water. Lockt.
2. Applied to plants, that which grows in the water.
Flags, and ſuch like aquaticks, are beſt deſtroyed by drain-
ing. Mortimer's Husbandry.
A'QUATILE. adj. [aquatilis, Lat.] That which inhabits the
Water. - * , ,
A'QUE DUCT. n.ſ.. [aquaeduélus, Lat.] A conveyance made for
carrying water from one place to another; made on uneven
ground, to preſerve the level of the water, and convey it by a
canal. Some aqueducts are underground, and others above it,
ſupported by arches.
Among the remains of old Rome, the grandeur of the com-
monwealth ſhews itſelf chiefly in temples, highways, aqueducts,
walls and bridges of the city. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Hither the rills of water are convey’d -
In curious aqueducts, by nature laid
- To carry all the humour. Blackmore, Creation,
A'QUEous. adj. [from aqua, water, Lat.] Watery.
The vehement fire requiſite to its fuſion, forced away all the
aqueous and fugitive moiſture. Ray on Creation.
A'QUEous N Ess. m. ſ. ſaquoſitas, Lat.] Wateriſhneſs.
A'QUILINE. adj. [aquilinus, Lat. from aquila, an eagle.] Reſem-
bling an eagle; when applied to the noſe, hooked.
His noſe was aquiline, his eyes were blue,
Ruddy his lips, and freſh and fair his hue. Dryden's Falks.
I Gryps<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R B
A R B
Gryns ſignifies ſome kind of eage or vulture; from whence
the epithet grypus for an hooked or aquiline noſe. Br. Pul. Err.
Aquosº. adſ. [from aqua, Lat..] Watery; having the quali-
ties of water. Dić7.
Aquosity. n. ſ [from aqueſ...] Waterineſs. Dić'.
A. R. anno regni ; that is, the year of the reign: as, A. R. G. R.
20. Anno regni Georgii regis vigºſimo, in the twentieth year of
the reign of king George.
ARABLE. adj. [from aro, Lat. to plow.] Fit for the plough;
fit for tillage; productive of corn.
His eyes he open'd, and beheld a field,
Part arable, and tilth ; whereon were ſheaves
New reap'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi.
'Tis good for arable, a glebe that asks
Tough teams of oxen, and laborious tasks. Dryden's Virgil.
Having but very little arable land, they are forced to fetch all
their corn from foreign countries. Addiſon's Rem. on Italy.
ARACHNOIDES. n.ſ.. [from agazºr, a ſpider, and #33, form.]
1. One of the tunicks of the eye, ſo called from its reſemblance
to a cobweb.
As to the tunicks of the eye, many things might be taken
notice of; the prodigious fineneſs of the arachnoides, the acute
ſenſe of the retina, &amp;c. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
2. It is alſo a fine thin tranſparent membrane, which, lying be-
tween the dura and the pia mater, is ſuppoſed to inveſt the
whole ſubſtance of the brain. Chambers.
ARAIGN.E.E. n.ſ. [French..] A term in fortification, which
ſometimes denotes a branch, return, or gallery of a mine. Dić.
ARA'N Eous, adj. [from aranea, Lat, a cobweb.] Reſembling a
cobweb.
The curious araneous membrane of the eye conſtringeth and
dilateth it, and ſo varieth its focus. Derham's Ph. Theol.
ARATION. m. ſ. [aratio, Lat..] The aët, or practice of plow-
lilſ.
Aºrony. adj. [from aro, Lat. to plow.] That which contri-
butes to tillage. Dić7.
A'RBAlist. n.ſ. [from arcus, a bow, and baliſta, an engine to
throw ſtoncs.] A croſs-bow.
It is reported by William Brito, that the arcubaliſta, or ar-
#. was firſt ſhewed to the French by our king Richard the
firſt, who was ſhortly after ſlain by a quarrel thereof. Camden.
ARBITER. n.ſ. [Lat.] - -
I. . appointed by the parties, to whoſe determination they
voluntarily ſubmit.
He would put himſelf into the king's hands, and make him
arbiter of the peace. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. One who has the power of deciſion or regulation; a judge.
Next him, high arbiter,
Chance governs all. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ii. 1.900.
His majeſty, in this great conjuncture, ſeems to be generally
allowed for the ſole arbiter of the affairs of chriſtendom. Temple.
A'REITRABLE. adj. [from arbitror, Lat.] Arbitrary; depend-
ing upon the will.
The ordinary revenue of a parſonage is in land, called the
glebe; in tythe, a ſet part of our goods rendered to God; in
other offerings beſtowed upon God by the people, either in ſuch
arbitrable proportion as their own devotion moveth them, or
as the laws or cuſtoms of particular places do require them.
Spelman.
ARB1'tr AMENT. m. ſ. [from arbitror, Lat.] Will; determina-
tion; choice.
Stand faſt! to ſtand or fall,
Free in thine own arbitrament it ſtands,
Perfect within, no outward aid require;
And all temptation to tranſgreſs repel. Milton's Par. Loft.
A'RBITRARILY. adv. [from arbitrary.j With no other rule than
the will; deſpotically; abſolutely.
He governed arbitrarily, he was expelled; and came to the
deſerved end of all tyrants. Dryden's Virgil's AEmeid, Prºf.
ARBITRA'Rious. adj. [from arbitrarius, Lat..] Arbitrary; de-
pending on the will.
Theſe are ſtanding and irrepealable truths, ſuch as have no
precarious exiſtence, or arbitrarious dependance upon any will
or underſtanding whatſoever. Norris's Miſcellanies.
ARBITRA'Riously, adv. [from arbitrarious.] Arbitrarily; ac-
cording to mere will and pleaſure.
Where words are impoſed arbitrariouſly, diſtorted from their
common uſe, the mind muſt be led into miſpriſion. Glanville.
ARPITRARY. adj. [arbitrarius, Lat.]
1. Deſpotick; abſolute; bound by no law; following the will
without reſtraint. It is applied both to perſons and things.
In vain the Tyrian queen reſigns her life
For the chaſte glory of a virtuous wife,
If lying bards may falſe amours rehearſe,
And blaſt her name with arbitrary verſe. J/a/h.
Their regal tyrants ſhall with bluſhes hide -
Their little luſts of arbitrary pride,
Nor bear to ſee their vaſſals ty’d.
2. Depending on no rule; capricious.
It may be perceived, with what inſecurity we aſcribe effects
º on the natural period of time, unto arbitrary calcu-
9L. 1,
Prior.
lations, and ſuch as vary at pleaſure.
To A'RBITRATE. v. a. ſarbitror, Lat.]
I. To decide; to determine.
This might have been prevented, and made whole,
With very eaſy arguments of love,
Which now the manage of two kingdoms muſt
With fearful bloody iſſue arbitrate. Shakeſp. King john.
2. To judge of.
Yet where an equal poiſe of hope and fear
Does arbitrate th' event, my nature is
That I incline to hope, rather than fear.
To AREITRATE. v. n. To give judgment.
It did arbitrate upon the ſeveral reports of ſenſe, not like a
drowſy judge, only hearing, but alſo directing their verdićt. South.
A'RBITRARINEss. n.ſ.. [from arbitrary..] Teſpoticalneſs; ty-
ranny.
He that by harſhneſs of nature, and arbitrarineſ of com-
mands, uſes his children like ſervants, is what they mean by
a tyrant. Temple's Miſcellanies.
ARBit RA"Trox. m. ſ [from arbitror, Lat.] The determination
of a cauſe by a judge mutually agreed on by the parties con-
tending.
ARBITRA'roR. m. ſ. [from arbitrate.]
I. An º judge between party and party, choſen by
Brown's Pulgar Err.
Milton's Comus.
their mutual conſent. Cowel.
Be a good ſoldier, or upright truſtee,
An arbitrator from corruption free. Dryd, juv.
2. A governour; a preſident.
Though heav'n be ſhut,
And heav'n's high arbitrator ſit ſecure
In his own ſtrength, this place may be expos'd. M. Par. Loft.
... 3. He that has the power of acting by his own choice without
limit or controul.
Another Blenheim or Ramillies will make the confederates
maſters of their own terms, and arbitratºrs of a peace.
Addiſon on the State of the ſºar.
4. The determiner; he that puts an end to any affair.
But now the arbitrator of deſpairs,
Juſt death, kind umpire of man's miſeries,
With ſweetenlargement doth diſmiſs me hence. Shakespeare H. VI.
The end crowns all;
And that old common arbitrator, time,
Will one day end it. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
ARB1't REMENT. n.ſ.. [from arbitror, Lat.]
1. Deciſion; determination.
I know the knight is incenſed againſt you, even to a morta
arlitrement; but nothing of the circumſtance more.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Aid was granted, and the quarrel brought to the arbitrement
of the ſword. Hayward.
2. Compromiſe.
Lukewarm perſons think they may accommodate points of
religion by middle ways, and witty reconcilements; as if they
would make an arbitrement between God and man. Bacon's Eſſ.
A'Rbo RARY. adj. [arborarius, Lat..] Ofor belonging to a tree. D.
A'RBoRET. n.ſ.. [arbor, Lat. a tree..] A ſmall tree or ſhrub.
No arboret with painted bloſſoms dreſt,
And ſmelling ſweet, but there it might be found,
To bud out fair, and her ſweet ſmells throw all around.
Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant, 6.
Now hid, now ſeen,
Among thick woven arborets, and flow’rs,
Imbroider'd on each bank. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
ARBO'Reous. adj. [arboreus, Lat.]
1. Belonging to trees.
2. A term in botany, to diſtinguiſh ſuch funguſes or moſſes as
grow upon trees, from thoſe that grow on the ground. Quincy.
They ſpeak properly, who make it an arboreous excreſcence,
or rather a ſuperplant bred of a viſcous and ſuperfluous lopp,
which the tree itſelf cannot aſſimilate. Brown's Wugar Err.
A'RBorist. n.ſ.. [arboriſle, Fr. from arbor, a tree..] A naturaliſt
who makes trees his ſtudy. -
The nature of the mulberry, which the arboriſis obſerve to
be long in the begetting his buds; but the cold ſeaſons being
paſt, he ſhoots them all out in a night. Howel's Vocal Forſt.
A'RBorous. adj. [from arbor, Lat.] Belonging to a tree.
From under ſhady arborous roof
Soon as they forth were come to open fight
Of day-ſpring, and the ſun. Milion's Par. Loft, b. v.
A'Rbour. n.). [from arbor, Lat. a tree..] A bower; a place
covered with green branches of trees. . -
Nay you ſhall ſee mine orchard, where, in an arlour, we will
eat a faſt year's pippin of my own graffing. Sº Henry IV.
Let us divide our labours: thou, where choice
Leads thee, or where moſt nceds, whether to wind
The woodbine round this arbour', or dirºt -
The claſping ivy where to climb. Milton’s Par, Loſº, b. ix.
For noon-day's heat are cloſer arbours made,
And for freſh ev'ning air the op'ner glade. Dryd. State ºf Iºn.
As sous vine. A ſpecies of bind weed; which ſee.
Aanuscle. n.ſ.. [arlºſula, Lat..] Any little ſhrub.
2 D
Dić'.
A'RBUT E.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">- A R C
A R C
A'ſ bºrº. m. ſ. ſarºttus, Lat )
Arºute, or ſtrawberry tree, grows common in Ireland. It
is difficult to be raiſed from the ſeeds, but may be propagated
by layers. It grows to a goodly tree, endures our climate, un-
leſs the weather be very ſevere, and makes beautiful hedges.
A4%rtimer's Art of Husbandry.
Rough arºute flips into a hazel bough
Are of ingrafted; and good apples grow
Cut of a plain tree ſtock. May's Pirgil's Georg.
AR.c. m. ſ. ſarcus, Lat.]
1. A ſegment; a part of a circle ; not more than a ſemicircle.
Their ſegments, cr arcs, for the moſt part, exceeded not the
third part of a circle. Newton's Opticks.
2. An arch.
- Lead ſome vain church with old theatrick ſtate,
Turn arcs of triumph to a garden gate;
Reverſe your ornaments, and hang them all
On ſome patch'd dog-hole ek’d with ends of wall. Pºpe.
AR c\'D E. n.ſ. [French..] A continued arch; a walk arched
OW cr.
Or call the winds through long arcades to roar,
Proud to catch hold at a Venetian door. Pope's Epiſtles.
ARCANU.M. n.ſ. in the plural arcana. A Latin word, ſignify-
ing a ſecret. - -
ARCH. m.ſ.. [arcus, Lat.]
1. Part of a circle, not more than the half.
The mind perceives, that an arch of a circle is leſs than the
whole circle, as clearly as it does the idea of a circle. Locke.
2. A building in form of a ſegment of a circle, uſed for bridges
and other works.
Ne'er through an arch ſo hurried the blown tide,
As the recomforted through the gates. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch
Of the rais'd empire fall! here is my ſpace.
Shakeſpeare's Antary and Cleofatra.
The royal ſquadron marches,
Freet triumphal arches
For Albion and Albanius.
3. The ſky, or vault of heaven.
Hath nature given them eyes
To ſee this vaulted arch, and the rich cope
Of ſca and land. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
4. [from 3;x3 ..] A chief: obſolete.
The noble duke, my maſter,
My worthy arch and patron comes to night. Shakespeare. King. Lear.
To ARCH. v. a. ſarcuo, Lat.]
1. To build arches.
The nations of the field and wood
Build on the wave, or arch beneath the ſand.
2. To cover with arches.
Gates of monarchs
Are arch'd ſo high, that giants may jet through. Shakespeare. Cymbel.
The proud river which makes her bed at her feet, is arched
over with ſuch a curious pile of ſtones, that conſidering the
rapid courſe of the deep ſtream that roars under it, it may well
take place among thc wonders of the world. Howel's Woc. For.
ARCH. adj. [from zºzº, chieſ.]
1. Chief; of the firſt claſs. -
The tyrannous and bloody act is done;
The moſt arch decd of pitcous maſſacre,
That ever yet this land was guilty of Shakespeare . Richard III.
There is ſprung up -
An heretick, an arch one, Cranmer. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
2. Waggiſh; mirthful; triflingly miſchievous. This ſignifica-
tion it ſeems to have gained, by being frequently applied to the
boy moſt remarkable for his pranks; as the arch rogue, &amp;c.
Eugenio ſet out from the ſame univerſity, and about the
ſame time with Coruſades; he had the reputation ºf an arch lad
at ſchool. Swift's Fates of Clergy.
AR CH, in compoſition, ſignifies chief, or of the firſt claſs, [from
&amp;exº, or zºx.] as, archangel, archbiſhop. It is pronounced va-
riouſly with regard to the ch, which before a conſonant ſound
as in cheeſe, as archdeacon; before a vowel like #, as archangel.
ARCHANG E L. m. ſ. [archangeliſs, Lat..] One of the higheſt or-
der of angels.
His form had yet not loſt
All her original brightneſs, nor appear'd
Leſs than archangel ruin'd, and th’ exceſs
Of glory obſcur'd. Milton's Parad'ſ Loft, b, i.
'Tis ſure th' archangel's trump I hear, -
Nature's great paſſing-bell, the only call -
Of gods that will be heard by all. Norris’s Miſcellanies.
Arch ANGE 1. r. ſ. [lamium, Lat.] The name of a plant, called
alſo Dead net:le.
It hath a labiated flower of one leaf, whoſe upper lip is hol-
low like a ſpoon; but the under one divided into two ſeg-
ments, in the form of a heart, and both end in chaps brimmed
and edged ; out of the flower cup, which is fiful us and cut
into ſegments, riſes the pcintal, fixed, like a nail, to the
!...inder part of the flower, with four embryoes which be-
come tºngular ſeeds incloſed in a huſk formed of the flower
cup. The ºccics are fourteen, and ſeven of them grow wild
-
Dryden's Albion.
Poſe.
on dry banks; or under hedges, two ſorts of which are uſed in
medicine. AZillar.
Aºtics. adj. [from archangel.] Belonging to arch-
angelS.
He ceas'd, and th’ archangelick pow'r prepard
For ſwift deſcent; with him the cohort bright
Of watchful cherubim. AMilton's Paradiſ, Ioſº, b. x.
ARCHB Acos. m.ſ.. [from arch and beacon.] The chief place
of proſpect, or of ſignal.
You ſhall win the top of the Corniſh archbeacon Hainbo-
rough, which may for proſpect compare with Rama in Paleſ.
tina. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
ARCHBi's Hop. m. ſ. [from arch and biſhop.] A biſhop of the firſt
claſs, who ſuperintends the conduct of other biſhops his ſuffra-
gans.
Cranmer is return'd with welcome,
Inſtall'd lord archbiſhop of Canterbury. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
The archbiſhop was the known architect of this new fabrick.
'...' Clarendon.
ARCHB1's Hoprick, n.ſ.. [from archbiſhºp.] The ſtate or juriſ-
dićtion of an archbiſhop.
'Tis the cardinal;
And merely to revenge him on the emperor,
For not beſtowing on him, at his aſking,
The archbiſhoprick of Toledo this is purpos'd. Shakespeare H. VIII.
This excellent man, from the time of his promotion to the
archbiſhoprick, underwent the envy and malice of men who
agreed in nothing elſe. Clarendon.
Archcha's TER. m. ſ. [from arch and chanter.] The chief
chanter.
ARCH Deacon. n.ſ.. [archidaconus, Lat.] One that ſupplies
the biſhop's place and office in ſuch matters as do belong to the
epiſcopal function. The law ſtiles him the biſhop's vicar, or
vicegerent. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Left negligence might foiſt in abuſes, an archâacon was ap-
pointed to take account of their doings. Carew's Surv. of Irel.
Akchi PE'Acon R.Y. m. ſ. [archidiaconatiºs, Lat..] The office or
juriſdićtion of an archdeacon.
It oweth ſubjection to the metropolitan of Canterbury, and
hath one only archdeaconry. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Aach DE'Aconship. n.ſ.. [from archdeacon.] The office of an
archdeacon.
Archdu'ke. n.ſ.. [archidux, Lat.] A title given to ſome ſove-
reign princes, as of Auſtria and Tuſcany.
Philip archduke of Auſtria, during his voyage from the Ne-
therlands towards Spain, was weather-driven into Weymouth.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
ARCHDU'cHess. n.ſ.. [from arch and ducheſ...] A title given to
the ſiſter or daughter of the archduke of Auſtria, or to the wife
of an archduke of Tuſcany.
ARCH-FHilo'sopher. n.ſ.. [from arch and philoſºpher.] Chief
philoſopher. -
It is no improbable opinion therefore, which the arch-philº-
ſºpher was of, that the chiefeſt perſon in every houſhold was al-
ways as it were a king. Hosker, b. i.
ARCH-PRE'LATE. n.ſ.. [from arch and prelate.] Chief prelate.
May we not wonder, that a man of St. Baſil's authority and
quality, an arch-prelate in the houſe of God, ſhould have his
name far and wide called in queſtion. Hocker, b. v. § 42.
Arch-PRE's BYTER. n.ſ.. [from arch and preſyter.] Chief preſ-
byter.
* ſimple deacons are in ſubječtion to preſbyters, according
to the canon law; ſo are alſo preſbyters and arch-presbyters in
ſubječtion to theſe archdeacons. Ayliffe's Parergow.
ARCH-PR1'Est. m. ſ. [from arch and prieſ?..] Chief prieſt.
The word decanus was extended to an eccleſiaſtical dignity,
which included the arch-prieſ's. Ayliffe's Parergon.
ARCHAIo'LoG Y. m. ſ. [from aezziº, ancient, and x:yº, a diſ-
courſe.] A diſcourſe on antiquity.
ARchAiolo'G1ck, adj. [from archaiology.] Relating to a dif-
courſe on antiquity.
A'RCHA is M. m. ſ. [2:Xziza's] An ancient phraſe, or mode of
expreſſion.
I ſhall never uſe archaiſms, like Milton. Watts.
A'RCHED. participial adj. [from To arch..] Bent in the form of
an arch.
I ſee how thine eye would emulate the diamond; thou haſt
the right arched bent of the brow. Shakespeare Merry Wives of I/indſ.
A'R CHER. m. ſ. [archer, Fr. from arcus, Lat. a bow.] He that
ſhoots with a bow; he that carries a bow in battle.
Fight, gentlemen of England; fight, bold yeomen!
Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head:
Spur your proud horſes hard. Shakespeare. Richard III.
This Cupid is no longer an archer, his glory ſhall be ours,
for we are the only love-gods. Shakeſp. Much ado about Noth.
Thou frequent bring'ſt the ſmitten deer;
For ſeldom, archers ſay, thy arrows err.
A'RCH FRY. m. ſ. [from archer.]
1. The uſe of the bow.
Among the Engliſh artillery, orchery challengeth the pre-
eminence, as peculiar to our nation. Camden's Remains.
Prior.
2. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R C
A R C
2. The ağ of ſhooting with the bow.
Flower of this purple dye,
Hit with Cupid's archery,
Sink in apple of his eye
3. The art of an archer.
Beſt ſcraphins ſhall leave their quire,
And turn love's ſoldiers upon thee,
To exerciſe their archery. Craſhaw's Steps to Temple.
Shakespeare. Midſ. Night's Dr.
moſt ancient conſiſtory that belongs to the archbiſhop of Can-
terbury, for the debating of ſpiritual cauſes, ſo called from
Bow-church in London, where it is kept, whoſe top is raiſed
of ſtone-pillars, built arch-wiſe. The judge of this court is
termed the dean of the arches, or official of the arches-court :
dean of the arches, becauſe with this office is commonly joined
a peculiar juriſdićtion of thirteen pariſhes in London, termed
a deanery, being exempted from the authority of the biſhop of
Jondon, and belonging to the archbiſhop of Canterbury; of
which the pariſh of Bow is one. Some others ſay, that he was
firſt called dean of the arches, becauſe the official to the arch-
biſhop, the dean of the arches, was his ſubſtitute in his court;
and by that means the names became confounded. The ju-
riſdićtion of this judge is ordinary, and extends through the
whole province of Canterbury: ſo that, upon any appeal, he
forthwith, and without any further examination of the cauſe,
ſends out his citation to the party appealed, and his inhibition
to the judge from whom the appeal is made. Cowell.
ARCHE FYPE. m.ſ.. [archetypum, Lat.] The original of which any
reſemblance is made.
Our ſouls, though they might have perceived images them-
felves by ſimple ſenſe; yet it ſeems inconceivable, how they
ſhould apprehend their archetypes. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
As a man, a tree, are the outward objects of our perception,
and the outward archetypes or patterns of our ideas; ſo our ſen-
- ſations of hunger, cold, are alſo inward archetypes or patterns of
our ideas. But the notions or pićtures of theſe things, as they
are in the mind, are the ideas. JWatts's Logick.
Arch E!TYPAL. adj. [archetypus, Lat.] Original; being a pat-
tern from which copies are made.
Through contemplation's opticks I have ſeen
Him who is fairer than the ſons of men:
The ſource of good, the light archetypal. Norris's Miſcell.
ARCHEUS. m. ſ. [probably from 3;x*..] A word by which
Paracelſus ſeems to have meant a power that preſides over the
animal ceconomy, diſtinét from the rational ſoul.
ARch IDIA'con AL. adj. [from archidiaconus, Lat. an archdea-
con.] Belonging to an archdeacon; as, this offence is liable
to be cenſured in an archidiaconal viſitation.
Arch: Epi'scopa L. adj. [from archiepiſcopus, Lat. an archbiſhop.]
s Belonging to an archbiſhop; as, Canterbury is an archiepiſcopal
- ſee; the ſuffragans are ſubject to archiepiſcopal juriſdićtion.
ARCHITECT. n.ſ.. [architectus, Lat.]
1. A profeſſor of the art of building.
The architeå's glory conſiſts in the deſignment and idea of
the work; his ambition ſhould be to make the form triumph
over the matter. J%tton.
2. A contriver of a building; a builder.
The haſty multitude
Admiring enter'd, and the work ſome praiſe,
And ſome the architect : his hand was known
In heav'n, by many a tow’red ſtructure high,
Where ſcepter'd angels held their reſidence,
And ſat as princes. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. i.
3. The contriver or former of any compound body.
This inconvenience the divine architect of the body obviated.
Ray on the Creation.
4. The contriver of any thing.
An irreligious Moor,
Chief archite&amp;# and plotter of theſe woes. Shakespeare. Tit. Andron.
ARCHITE'ctive. adj. [from architeśī.] That performs the
work of archite&amp;ture.
How could the bodies of many of them, particularly the
laſt mentioned, be furniſhed with archite:five materials?
Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
Architect o'Nick. adj. [from &amp;ex2, chief, and pizzar, an ar-
tificer.] That which has the power or ſkill of an architect; that
which can build or form any thing.
To ſay that ſome more fine part of either, or all the hypo-
ſtatical principle, is the architect of this elaborate ſtructure, is
to give occaſion to demand, what proportion of the tria prima
afforded this architeclonick ſpirit, and what agent made ſo skil-
ful and happy a mixture. Boyle's Scept. Chym.
RCHITE'ctur E. n.ſ [archite&amp;ura, Lat.]
1. The art or ſcience of Building.
Archite&amp;ure is divided into civil architecture, called by way of
cnninence architecture; military archite&amp;ure, or fortification; and
º *aza/archite&amp;ure, which, beſides building of ſhips and veſſels,
includes alſo ports, moles, docks, &amp;c. Some think the Ty-
rians were the firſt improvers of architräure; but others con-
tend, that the rules of this art were delivered by God himſelf
to Solomon, from whom the Tyrians had their inſtruction,
which they afterwards communicated to the Egyptians; theſe
A'RCH Es-court. n.ſ.. [from arches and court.] The chief and
to the Grecians, and theſe again to the Romans. Under Au-
guſtus, architecture arrived to its greateſt glory; but it after-
wards dwindled by degrees, and at laſt fell with the weſtern
empire, in the fifth century, when the Viſigoths deſtroyed all
the moſt beautiful monuments of antiquity; and a new manner
of building took its riſe, called the Gothick, coarſe, artleſs,
and maſſive. Of the ſame kind was the Arabesk, Moorisk or
Mooriſh architecture, brought from the South by the Moors
and Saracens. The architects of the thirteenth, fourteenth,
and fifteenth centuries, who had ſome knowledge of ſculpture,
ſcened to make perfection conſiſt altogether in the delicacy
and multitude of ornaments, which they frequently beſtowed
on their buildings without any condućt or taſte. In the two
laſt centuries, the architects of Italy and France were wholly
bent upon retrieving the primitive ſimplicity and beauty of an-
cient architecture, in which they did not fail of ſucceſs. This
art is divided into five orders; the Tuſcan, Dorick, Ionick,
Corinthian, and Compoſite; which took their riſe from the
different proportions that the different kinds of buildings ren-
dered neceſſary, according to the bulk, ſtrength, delicacy,
richneſs, or ſimplicity required. Chambers.
Our fathers next in architeåure skill'd,
Cities for uſe, and forts for ſafety build:
Then palaces and lofty domes aroſe,
Theſe for devotion, and for pleaſure thoſe. Blackm. Creat.
2. The effect or performance of the ſcience of building.
The formation of the firſt earth being a piece of divine archi-
teåure, aſcribed to a particular providence. Burnet's Theory.
ARCHITRAy E. m.ſ.. [from dºzº, chief, and trabs, Lat. a beam;
becauſe it is ſuppoſed to repreſent the principal beam in timber
buildings.] That part of a column, or order of a column,
which lies immediately upon the capital, and is the loweſt
member of the entablature. This member is different in the
different orders; and, in building architrave doors and win-
dows, the workman frequently follows his own fancy. The
architrave is ſometimes called the reaſon piece, or maſter beam,
in timber buildings, as porticos, cloiſters, &amp;c. In chimnies it
is called the mantle piece; and over jambs of doors, and lintels
cf windows, hyperthyron. Builders Dić.
The materials laid over this pillar were of wood; through
the lightneſs whereof the architrave could not ſuffer, nor the
column itſelf, being ſo ſubſtantial. J/otton's Architecture.
Weſtward a pompous frontiſpiece appear'd,
On Dorick pillars of white marble rear'd,
Crown'd with an architrave of antique mold,
And ſculpture riſing on the roughen’d gold. Pope's T. of F.
ARCHIVES. n.ſ. without a ſingular. [archiva, Lat.] The places
where records or ancient writings are kept. It is perhaps ſome-
times uſed for the writings themſelves.
Though we think our words vaniſh with the breath that ut-
ters them, yet they become records in God's court, and are
laid up in his archives, as witneſſes either for or againſt us.
Government of the Tongue, § 1.
I ſhall now only look a little into the Moſaick archives, to
obſerve what they furniſh us with upon this ſubject.JP'oodward.
A'RCH WISE. adv, [from arch and wife.] In the form of an arch.
Thecourt of arches, ſo called abarcuata º or from Bow
church in London, which is dedicated to the Virgin Mary, by
reaſon of the ſteeple or clochier thereof, raiſed at the top with
ſtone pillars in faſhion of a bow bent archwiſe. Ayliff's Par.
ARCI'TEN ENT. adj. [arcitenens, Lat.] Bow-bearing. Digi-
ARCTA'tion. n.ſ.. [from arête, to ſtreighten..] Streightening;
confinement to a narrower compaſs.
A'RCT cK. m. ſ. [from 'Agde, the northern conſtellation.] Nor-
thern ; lying under the Arétos, or bear. See ARTIck.
Ever during ſnows, perpetual ſhades
Of darkneſs, would congeal their livid blood,
Did not the arºjick tract ſpontaneous yield
A cheering purple berry big with wine.
A'RCTIck Circle. See CIR clf.
ARCUAt E. adj. [arcuatus, Lat.] Bent in the form of an arch:
The cauſe of the confuſion in ſounds, and the inconfuſion of
ſpecies viſible, is, for that the ſight worketh in right lines; but
ſounds that move in oblique and arcuate lines, muſt needs en-
counter and diſturb the one the other. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
In the gullet, where it perforateth the midriff, the carnedus
fibres are inflected and arcuate. Ray on Creation.
A'RCUATILE, adj. [from arcuate.] Bent; inflected. Dić.
AR cuA'TION. m. ſ. [from arcuate.]
1. The aët of bending anything; incurvation.
2. The ſtate of being bent; curvity, or crookedneſs.
3. [In gardening.] The method of raiſing by layers ſuch trces as
cannot be raiſed from ſeed, or that bear no ſeed, as the alm,
lime, alder, willow ; and is ſo called from bending down to
the ground the branches which ſpring from the offsets or ſtools
after they are planted. Chambers.
A'RCUATüRE. m. ſ. [arcuatura, low Latin.] The bending or
curvature of an arch. Dićf.
AR cu HA'List ER. m. ſ. [from arcus, a bow, and balſa, an en-
gine.] A croſsbow man.
King John was eſpied by a very good arcubaliſer, who ſaid,
that he would ſoon diſpatch the cruel tyrant. God forbid, vile
3 variet,
Philips:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R E.
A R G
variet, quoth the earl, that we ſhould procure the death of the
holy one of God. Camden's Remains.
As D. [Saxon.) Signifies natural diſpoſition; as, Goddard is a
divine temper; Reinard, a ſincere temper; Giffard, a bounti-
ful and liberal diſpoſition; Bºrnard, filial affection, &amp;c.
Gibſon's Camden.
AR DExcy. m. ſ [from ardent.] Ardour; eagerneſs; warmth
of affection.
Accepted they ſhall be, if qualified with humility, and ar-
deny, and perſeverance, ſo far as concerns the end immediate
to them. Hammond's Praci. Catechiſm.
The incfiable happineſs of our dear Redeemer muſt needs
bring an increaſe to ours, commenſurate to the ardency of our
love for him. Boyle.
A RDENT, adj. [ardens, Lat. burning.]
1. Hot; burning; fiery.
Chymiſts obſerve, that vegetables, as lavender, rue, marjo-
ram, &amp;c. diſtilled before fermentation, yield oils without any
burning ſpirits; but, after fermentation, yield ardent ſpirits
without oils; which ſhews, that their oil is, by fermentation,
converted into ſpirit. Newton's Opticºs.
2. Fierce; vehement.
A knight of ſwarthy face,
High on a cole-black ſteed purſued the chace;
With flaſhing flames his ardent eyes were filled. Dryd. Fab.
3. Paſſionate; affectionate: uſed generally of deſire.
Another nymph with fatal pow'r may riſe,
To damp the ſinking beams of Caelia's eyes;
With haughty pride may hear her charms confeſt,
And ſcorn the ardent vows that I have bleſt. Prior.
A'RD ENTLY. adv. [from ardent.] Eagerly; affectionately.
With true zeal may our hearts be moſt ardently inflamed to
our religiºn. Sprat's Sermons.
A'R Dou R. n.ſ. ſardor, Lat, heat.]
1. Heat.
2. Heat of affection, as love, deſire, courage.
Joy, like a ray of the ſun, reflects with a greater ardour and
quickneſs, when it rebounds upon a man from the breaſt of his
friend. South.
The ſoldiers ſhout around with gen’rous rage;
He prais’d their ardour, inly pleas'd to ſee
His hoſt. Dryden's Fables.
Unmov’d the mind of Ithacus remain'd,
And the vain ardºurs of our love reſtrain'd. Pope's Odºſy.
3. The perſon ardent or bright. This is only uſed by Milton.
Nor delay'd the winged ſaint,
After his charge receiv'd ; but from among
Thouſand celeſtial ardours, where he ſtood
Veil'd with his gorgeous wings, up-ſpringing light,
Flew thro’ the midſt of heav'n. Paradiſe Lºft, b. v.
ARDu't Ty, n. ſ. [from arduºus.] Height; difficulty. Dić.
A'RDUOUS. adj. [arduus, Lat.]
1. Lofty; hard to climb.
High on Parnaſius' top her ſons ſhe ſhow'd,
And pointed out thoſe arduous paths they trod. Pope.
2. Difficult.
It was a means to bring him up in the ſchool of arts and po-
licy, and ſo to fit him for that great and arduous employment
that God deſigned him to. South.
A'RDuous NFss. n.ſ.. [from arduous.] Height; difficulty.
AR f. The third perſon plural of the preſent tenſe of the verb to
he as, young men are raſh, old are cautious.
ARE, or Alamire. The loweſt note but one in Guido's ſcale of
muſick.
Gamut I am, the ground of all accord,
Are to plead Hortenſio's paſſion;
B mi Bianca take him for thy lord,
C faut, that loves with all affection. Shakespeare. Tam. Shrew.
A'REA. m. ſ. [Latin.] -
1. The ſurface contained between any lines or boundaries.
The area of a triangle is found by knowing the height and
the baſe. //atts's Logick.
2. Any open ſurface, as the floor of a room; the open part of a
church; the vacant part or ſtage of an amphitheatre. An in-
cloſed place, as liſts, or a bowling-green, or graſs-plot.
Let us conceive a floor or area of goodly length, with the
breadth ſomewhat more than half the longitude. J/otton.
The Alban lake is of an oval figure, and, by reaſon of the
high mountains that encompaſs it, looks like the area of ſome
vaſt amphitheatre. Addison on Italy.
In areas vary'd with Moſaic art,
Some whirl the diſk, and ſome the jav'lin dart. Pope's Odyſſ.
To AREAD, or ARE/E D. v. a. [areban, Sax. to counſel.] To
adviſe; to direét.
Knights and ladies gentle deeds,
Whoſe praiſes having ſlept in ſilence long,
Me, all too meane, the ſacred muſe arecds
To blazon broad. Fairy Queen, b, i.
But ingrk what I aread thee now : avant,
Fly thither whence thou fled'ſt | If from this hour
Within theſe hallow'd limits thou appear,
Back to th' infernal pit I drag thee chain'd. Paradiſ: Lºft.
AREFA'ction, n.ſ. ſarºfficio, Lat. to dry.] The flate of grow-
ing dry; the act of drying.
From them, and their motions, principally proceed arºſac-
tion, and moſt of the effects of nature. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
To A R FY. v. a. ſarºfacio, Lat. to dry.] To dry; to exhaſe
moiſture. -
Heat drieth bodies that do eaſily expire, as parchment, leaves,
roots, clay, &amp;c. and ſo doth time or age arºſy, as in the ſame
bodies, &amp;c. Bacon's Nat. Hiſ'. Nº 2.94.
ARENA'ceous, adj. [arena, Lat. ſand.] Sandy; having the
qualities of ſand.
A piece of the ſtone of the ſame mines, of a yellowiſh brown
colour, an arenaceous friable ſubſtance, and with ſome white
ſpar mixed with it. Hºward on Fºſſils.
ARENA'ſ Ios. m. ſ. [from arena, Lat. ſand.] Is uſed by ſºme
phyſicians for a fort of dry bath, when the patient fits with his
feet upon hot ſand. Die?.
AR ENo's E. adj. [from arena, Lat.] Sandy; full of ſand. Dià.
ARE NULous. adj. [from arenula, Lat. ſand.] Full of ſmall
ſand; gravelly. Dić7.
AREoſtick. aff. [***.]. Such medicines as open the pores
of the skin, ſo that the morbifick matter may be carried off by
ſweat, or inſenſible perſpiration. Dić?.
AREto'logy. n.ſ.. [from astrº, virtue, and xya, to diſcourſe.]
That part of moral philoſophy which treats of virtue, its na:
ture, and the means of arriving at it. Dićf.
A'Roſal. n.ſ. Hard lees ſticking to the ſides of wine veſſels,
more commonly called tartar. Dicſ.
A'RºeNT: adj. [from argentum, Lat. ſilver.]
1. The white colour uſed in the coats of gentlemen, knights, and
baronets, ſuppoſed to be the repreſentation of that metal.
Rinaldo flings
As ſwift as fiery light'ning kindled new,
His argent eagle with her ſilver wings
In field of azure, fair Erminia knew.
In an argent field, the god of war
Was drawn triumphant on his iron car. Dryden's Fables.
2. Silver; bright like ſilver.
Thoſe argent fields more likely habitants,
Tranſlated ſaints, or middle ſpirits hold,
Betwixt th' angelical and human kind. Milton.
Or ask of yonder argent fields above,
Why Jove's ſatellites are leſs than Jove. Pope's Eſ: on Man.
ARG ENTATION. n.ſ.. [from argentum, Lat. ſilver.] An over-
laying with ſilver. Dić7.
Arc ENTINE, adj. [argentin, Fr.] Sounding like ſilver. Diº.
ARGIL. n.ſ.. [argilla, Lat..] Potters clay; a fat ſoft kind of
earth of which veſſels are made.
ARGILLA'ceous. adj. [from argil.] Clayey; partaking of the
nature of argil; conſiſting of argil, or potter's clay.
ARGI'llous. adj. [from argil.] Conſiſting of clay; clayiſh;
containing clay.
Albuquerque derives this redneſs from the ſand and argillus
earth at the bottom. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi.
A'RGosy. m. ſ. [derived by Pope from Argo, the name of Jaſon's
ſhip.] A large veſſel for merchandiſe; a carrack.
Your mind is toſſing on the ocean;
There where your argoſes with portly ſail,
Like ſigniors and rich burghers on the flood,
Or as it were the pageants of the ſea
Do overpeer the petty traffickers. Shakespeare March. of Penice.
To ARGUE. v. n. [arguo, Lat.]
1. To reaſon; to offer reaſons.
I know your majeſty has always lov'd her
So dear in heart, not to deny her what
A woman of leſs place might ask by law;
Scholars allow'd freely to argue for her. Shakespeare. Hen. VIII.
Publick arguing oft ſerves not only to exaſperate the minds,
but to whet the wits of hereticks. Decay of Piety.
An idea of motion, not paſſing on, would perplex any one,
who ſhould argue from ſuch an idea. Locke.
2. To perſuade by argument.
It is a ſort of poetical logick which I would make uſe of, to
argue you into a protećtion of this play. Congr. Ded to Old Bat.
3. To diſpute; with the particles with or againſt before the op-
ponent, and againſ; before the thing oppoſed. -
Why do chriſtians, of ſeveral perſuaſions, ſo fiercely argue
againſt the ſalvability of each other. Decay of Piety.
He that by often arguing againſ; his own ſenſe, impoſes falſe-
Faiſax, b. iii.
hoods on others, is not far from believing himſelf. Locke.
I do not ſee how they can argue with any one, without ſet-
ting down ſtrict boundaries. Locke.
To A'RCU F. v. a.
1. To prove anything by argument.
If the world’s age and death be argued well,
By the ſun's fall, which now toward's earth doth bend,
Then we might fear that virtue, ſince ſhe fell -
So low as woman, ſhould be near her cnd. Donjie.
2. To debate any queſtion; as, to argue a cauſe.
3. To prove, as an argument.
So many laws argue ſo many fins
Among them: how can God with ſuch reſide? Parad. Itſ.
ſt
º,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R I
A R I
It argues diſtemper of the mind as well as of the body, when
a man is continually toſſing from one ſide to the other. South.
This argues a virtue and diſpoſition in thoſe ſides of the rays,
which anſwers to that virtue and diſpoſition of the cryſtal.
Newton's Opticks.
4. To charge with, as a crime; with of
I have pleaded guilty to all thoughts and expreſſions of mine,
which can be truly argued ºf obſcenity, profaneneſs, or immo-
rality, and retrašt them. Dryden's Falles, Preface.
The accidents are not the ſame, which would have argued
him of a ſervile copying, and total barrenneſs of invention; yet
the ſeas were the ſame. Dryden's Fal. Prºf.
A'Rouer... n. ſ. [from argue.] A reaſoner; a diſputer; a con-
trovertiſt.
Men are aſhamed to be proſelytes to a weak arguer, as think-
ing they muſt part with their reputation as well as their fin.
º Decay of Piety.
A'RCUMENT. n. ſ. [argumentum, Lat.]
1. A reaſon alleged for or againſt any thing.
We ſometimes ſee, on our theatres, vice rewarded, at leaſt
unpuniſhed; yet it ought not to be an argument againſt the art.
Dryden's Prºf. to Tyrannick Love.
When anything is proved by as good arguments as that thing
is capable of, ſuppoſing it were; we ought not in reaſon to make
any doubt of the exiſtence of that thing. Tillotſon's Preface.
And thus we have our author's two great and only arguments
to prove, that heirs are lords over their brethren. Locke.
2. The ſubject of any diſcourſe or writing.
That ſhe who ev'n but now was your beſt objećt,
Your praiſe's argument, balm of your age,
Deareſt and beſt. Shakeſp. King Lear.
To the height of this great argument
I may aſſert eternal providence,
And juſtify the ways of God to man. Milton's Par. Loſº, b. i.
Sad task! yet argument
Not leſs, but more heroick than the wrath
Of ſtern Achilles. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
A much longer diſcourſe my argument requires; your merci-
ful diſpoſitions a much ſhorter. Sprat's Sermons.
3. The contents of any work ſummed up by way of abſtraćt.
The argument of the work, that is, its principal action, the
oeconomy and diſpoſition of it, are the things which diſtinguiſh
copies from originals. Pryden's AEn. Prºf.
4. A controverſy.
This day, in argument upon a caſe,
- Some words there grew 'twixt Somerſet and me. Shakespeare H. VI.
If the idea be not agreed on betwixt the ſpeaker and hearer,
- the argument is not about things, but names. Loche.
- It was much like an argument that fell out laſt night, where
cach of us fell in praiſe of our country miſtreſſes. Shakespeare. Cymbeline.
5. It has ſometimes the particle to before the thing to be proved,
but generally for.
The beſt moral argument to patience, in my opinion, is the
advantage of patience itſelf. Tilloiſon.
This, before that revelation had enlightened the world, was
the very beſt argument for a future ſtate. Atterbury's Sermons.
6. [In aſtronomy..] An arch by which we ſeek another unknown
w - ~
arch, proportional to the firſt. Chambers.
ARGUM #'s tal. adj. [from argument.] Belonging to argument;
reaſoning.
Afflicted ſenſe thou kindly doſt ſet free,
Oppreſs'd with argumental tyranny,
And routed reaſon finds a ſafe retreat in thee. Pope.
ARGUM ENTA'tion. n.ſ.. [from argument.] Reaſoning; the
ačt of reaſoning.
Argumentation is that operation of the mind, whereby we in-
fer one propoſition from two or more propoſitions premiſed.
Or it is the drawing a concluſion, which before was unknown,
or doubtful, from ſome propoſitions more known and evident;
ſo when we have judged that matter cannot think, and that the
mind of man doth think, we conclude, that therefore the mind
of man is not matter. JWatts's Logick.
I ſuppoſe it is no ill topick of argumentation, to ſhew the pre-
valence of contempt, by the contrary influences of reſpect. South.
His thoughts muſt be maſculine, full of argumentation, and
that ſufficiently warm. Dryden.
It is certain, that the whole courſe of his argumentation comes
to nothing. Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 31.
ARGU M E/Nºr Ativ F. adj. [from argument.] Conſiſting of ar-
gument; containing argument.
This omiſſion, conſidering the bounds within which the ar-
&amp;larrentative part of my .
avoid. Atterb. Prºf. to his Sermons.
**G UTA'tion. m. ſ. [from arguo, Lat..] A proving by argu-
,ºnent ; a diſputing for and againſt. Dict,
* G U ºr F. adj. [arguto, Ital. argutus, Lat.]
I. Subtile ; witty ; ſharp.
2: Shrill.
Aſ RJ4. m. ſ. [Ital in muſick.] An air, ſong, or tune.
A'R1 p. ad;.. [aridus, Lat. dry.] Dry ; parched up.
. My complexion is become aduit, and my body arid, by viſt-
inglands. Arbuthnot and Pop.'s 44. S., it !.
Yol. L
courſe was confined, I could not
His harden'd fingers deck the gaudy ſpring,
Without him ſummer were an arid waſte. Tºomſ. Autºnn.
AR1'D1'ſ Y. m. ſ. [from arid.]
1. Dryneſs; ſiccity.
Salt taken in great quantities will reduce an animal body to
the great extremity of aridity, or dryneſs. A huth. on Airºnts.
2. In the theological ſenſe, a kind of inſenſibility in devotion,
contrary to melting.
Strike my ſoul with lively apprehenſions of thy excellencies,
to bear up my ſpirit under the greateſt aridities and dejec-
tions, with the delightful proſpect of thy glories. Norris.
ARIES. m. ſ. [Lat.] The Ram; one of the twelve ſigns of the
zodiack.
At laſt from Aries rolls the bountedus ſun,
And the bright Bull receives him. Thomſºn's Spring.
To AR 1’E t at E. v. n. [arieto, Lat.]
I. To butt like a ram.
2. T. ſtrike in imitation of the blows which rams give with their
heads. -
ARIETA't Ion. n.ſ.. [from arietate.]
1. The aët of butting like a ram.
2. The act of battering with an engine called a ram.
The ſtrength of the percuſſion, wherein ordnance do exceed
all arietations and ancient inventions. Bacon's Eſſays.
3. The act of ſtriking, or conflicting in general.
Now thoſe heterogeneous atoms, by themſelves, hit ſo ex-
aćtly into their proper reſidence, in the midſt of ſuch tumultu-
ary motions, and arietations of other particles. Glanv. Scepſis.
ARIETTA. m. ſ. [Ital. in muſick.] A ſhort air, ſong, or tune.
ARI'GHT. adv. [from a and right.]
1. Rightly; without mental errour.
How him I lov’d, and love with all my might;
So thought I eke of him, and think I thought aright. F. Q.
Theſe were thy thoughts, and thou could'ſt judge aright,
Till intereſt made a jaundice in thy fight. Dryden's Fables.
The motions of the tongue are ſo eaſy, and ſo ſubtile, that
you can hardly conceive or diſtinguiſh them aright. Holder. ,
2. Rightly; without crime.
A generation that ſet not their heart aright. Pſ. lxxviii. 8.
3. Rightly; without failing of the end deſigned.
Guardian of groves, and goddeſs of the night,
Fair queen, he ſaid, direct my dart aright. Dryden's Áneid.
ARIoLATION, or HARIolation. n.ſ.. [hariolus, Lat. a ſooth-
ſayer.] Soothſaying; vaticination.
The prieſts of elder time have deluded their apprehenſions
with ariolation, ſoothſaying, and ſuch oblique idolatrics.
Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i. c. 3.
ARIO'SO. m.ſ.. [Ital. in muſick.] The movement of a common
air, ſong, or tune. Dićf.
To AR 1's E. v. n. pret. aroſe, particip. ariſºn. [ſrom a and riſe.]
1. To mount upward as the ſun.
He roſe, and, looking up, beheld the ſkies
With purple bluſhing, and the day ariſ. Dryden's AFneid.
2. To get up as from ſleep, or from reſt. -
So Eſdras aroſe up, and ſaid unto them, ye have tranſgreſſed
the law. 1 Eſq. ix. 7.
How long wilt thou ſleep, O ſluggard; when wilt thou ariſe
out of thy ſleep? Prºv. vi. 9.
3. To come into view, as from obſcurity.
There ſhallariſ falſe Chriſts and falſe prophets. Matt. xxiv.
4. To revive from death.
Thy dead men ſhall live, together with my body ſhall they
ariſ : awake and fing, ye that dwell in duſt. Iſaiah xxvi. 19.
5. To proceed, or have its original.
They which were ſcattered abroad upon the perſecution that
aroſ about Stephen, travelled as far as Phoenice. Acºs xi. 19.
I know not what miſchief may ariſ hereafter from the ex-
ample of ſuch an innovation. Dryden.
6. To enter upon a new ſtation.
Another Mary then aroſe,
And did rig'rous laws impoſe. Cowley.
7. To commence hoſtility. - -
And when he aroſe againſt me, I caught him by his beard,
and ſmote him. I Sam. xvii. 35.
For the various ſenſes of this word, ſee RISE.
ARISTO'CRACY. m.ſ. [3-2, greateſt, and ***, to govern.]
That form of government which places the ſupreme power in
the nobles, without a king, and excluſively of the people.
The ariñºracy of Venice hath admitted ſo many abuſes
through the degeneracy of the nobles, that the period of its
duration ſeems to approach. Swift.
AR1s rock A'ſ IcAL, or ARIsrock A" ick. adj. [from ariſłº-
cracy..] Relating to ariſtocracy; including a form of govern-
ment by the nobles. -
Ockham diſtinguiſhes, that the papacy, or eccleſiaſtical mo-
narchy, may be changed in an extraordinary mann'ſ, ſº ſome
time, into an ariſtocratical form of government ºff’s Par.
Aristock A" ic ALN ess. ii. ſ. [from ariſiocratical.] An aſ to:
cratical ſtate. . - * Dić.
ARI'ſ HMAs cy. m. ſ. [from 3:32, number, and Paſº, divinº-
tion.] A foretc/ling future events by numbers. I}ic:.
2 E ARI ſ H-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R M
A R M
As nºir rics: gº. ſº According to the
**** hod of arithmetick. -
º: º of bodies may be iº º º,
beyond ...] naked or 2:::ted ſente, but º º Č. ". º
operation or conception. ſe ri retu J. ſº . w
The ſquares of the º ...!. "...
'1"-------- - 1.
º
A. º cally, a.k. (from arithmetical.] In an arithme-
ºf manner; according tº the principles of arithmeisk.
Though the fifth part of a xeſtes being a ſimple fraction, and
arºutiaº regular, it is yet no proper part ºf that meaſure.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
Astrfºr ri'cIAN. m. ſ. [from arithmeticº.] A maſter of the
-, - umbers.
sº had need be a good arithmetician, to underſtand this
author's works. His deſcription runs on like a multiplication
* table. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
ARITHMETICK. m. ſ. [2: Sº, number, and usic, to mea-
ſure.] The ſcience of numbers; the art of computation. .
we have very little intelligence about the origin and invention
of arithmetic; ; but probably it muſt have taken its riſe from
the introduction of commerce, and conſequently be of Tyrian
invention. From Aſia it paſſed into Egypt, where it was greatly
cultivated. From thence it was tranſmitted to the Grecks,
who conveyed it to the Romans with additional improvements.
But, from ſome treatiſes of the ancients remaining on this ſub-
ject, it appears that their aritºnetick was much inferiour to that
of the modcrins. Chambers.
On fairground I could beat forty of them;
But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetick. Shakespeare. Coriolanus.
The chriſtian religion, according to the Apoſtle's arithmetick,
hath but theſe three parts of it; ſobriety, juſtice, religion. Taylor.
ARK. n.ſ. ſarca, Lat, a cheſt.]
1. A veſſel to ſwim upon the water, uſually applied to that in
which Noah was preſerved from the univerſal deluge.
Make thce an ark of gopher wood; rooms ſhalt thou make
in the ark, and ſhalt pitch it within and without. Gen. vi. 14.
The one juſt man alive, by his command,
Shall build a wond’rous ark, as thou beheld'ſt,
To ſave himſelf and houſhold, from amidſt
A world devote to univerſal wreck. Milton's Par. Loſº, b. xi.
2. The repoſitory of the covenant of God with the Jews.
This coffer was of ſhittimwood, covered with plates or leaves
of gold, being two cubits and an half in length, a cubit and a
half wide, and a cubit and a half high. It had two rings of
gold on each ſide, through which the ſtaves were put for carry-
ing it. Upon the top of it was a kind of gold crown all around
it, and two cherubim were faſtened to the cover. It contained
the two tables of ſtone, written by the hand of God. Calmet.
A R M. m. ſ. ſearm, comm, Sax.] -
1. The limb which reaches from the hand to the ſhoulder.
If I have liſt up my hand againſt the fatherleſs, when I ſaw
my help in the gate, then let mine arm fall from my ſhoulder-
blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone. job, xxxi. 21.
Like helpleſs friends, who vicw from ſhore
The labouring ſhip, and hear the tempeſt roar,
So ſtood they with their arms acroſs.
2. The bough of a tree.
The trees ſpred out their arms to ſhade her face,
But ſhe on elbow lean'd. Sidney.
Hide me, ye foreſts, in your cloſeſt bowers,
Where the tall oak his ſpreading arms entwines,
And with the beech a mutual ſhade combines. Gay.
3. An inlet of water from the ſea.
Full in the centre of the ſacred wood, -
An arm ariſeth of the Stygian flood. Dryden's AEmeid.
We have yet ſeen but an arm of this ſea of beauty. Norris.
4. Power; might. In this ſenſe is uſed the ſecular arm, &amp;c.
Curſed be the man that truſteth in man, and maketh fleſh his
arm, and whoſe heart departeth from the Lord, jer. xvii. 5.
O God, thy arm was here
And not to us, but to thy arm alone,
Aſcribe we all. Shakespeare Hºn.V.
ARM’s Es D. m. ſ. A phraſe taken from boxing, in which the
s
weaker man may overcome the ſtronger, if he can keep him
from cloſing.
Such a one as can keep him at arm's end, need never wiſh
for a better companion. Sidney's Arcad.
For my fake be comfortable, hold death awhile at the arm's
end. Shakespeare. As you like it.
To ARM. º. a. ſarrº, Lat.] ſp. As you like i
1. To furniſh with armour of defence, or weapons of offence.
And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive,
he armed histrained ſervants, born in his own houſe, three hun-
dred ãºd eighteen, and purſued them unto Dan. Gen. xiv. I4.
True cºnſcious honour is to feel no fin 3
He's arº without, that's innocent within. Pºže.
2. To plate with any thing that may add ſtrength. -
-- Their wounded fleeds
** their amºa beds at their dead maſters. Shakespeare H. V.
~ º *; to it up; as, to arm a loadſtone, is to caſe it with
Drydºn.
You muſt arm your hook with the line in the infide of it.
- J/alton's Angler.
Having waſted the callus, I left off thoſe tents, and drciſed
it with others armed with digeſtives. Jºſeman's Surgery.
To ARM. v. n.
1. To take arms.
Think we king Harry ſtrong;
And, princes, look you ſtrongly arm to meet him. Shakespeare H.V.
2. To provide againſt.
His ſervant, throughly arm'd againſt ſuch coverture,
Reported unto all, that he was ſure
A noble gentleman of high regard. Stenſºr's Hubb. Tak.
ARMA DM. n.ſ. [Span. a fleet of war.]. An armament for ſea;
a fleet of war. It is often erroneouſly ſpelt armada.
In all the mid-earth ſeas was left no road
Wherein the pagan his bold head untwines,
Spred was the huge armada wide and broad,
From Venice, Genes, and towns which them confines.
Fairfax, b. i. /fanza 7q.
So by a roaring tempeſt on the flood, f J. 79
A whole armado of collected ſail
Is ſcatter'd and disjoin’d from fellowſhip. Shakespeare King john.
At length reſolv'd tº aſſert the wat'ry ball,
He in himſelf did whole armados bring:
Him aged ſeamen might their maſter call,
And chooſe for general, were he not their king. Dryden.
ARMADI'LLO. m.ſ. [Spaniſh..] A four-footed animal of Braſil,
as big as a cat, with a ſnout like a hog, a tail like a lizard, and
feet like a hedge-hog. He is armed all over with hard ſcales
like armour, whence he takes his name, and retires under them
like the tortoiſe. He lives in holes, or in the water, being of
the amphibious kind. His ſcales are of a bony or cartilaginous
ſubſtance; but they are eaſily pierced. This animal hides him-
ſelf a third part of the year under ground. He feeds upon
roots, ſugar-canes, fruits, and poultry. When he is caught, he
draws up his feet and head to his belly, and rolls himſelf up in
a ball, which the ſtrongeſt hand cannot open; and he muſt be
brought near the fire before he will ſhew his noſe. His fleſh is
white, fat, tender, and more delicate than that of a ſucking pig.
Trevoux.
A'RMAMENT. n.ſ.. [armamentum, Lat..] A force equipped for
war; generally uſed of a naval force.
ARMAME'NTARY. m. ſ. ſarmamentarium, Lat.] An armoury;
a magazine or arſenal of warlike implements. Dić7.
A'RMAN. n.ſ. A confection for reſtoring loſt appetite in horſes.D.
-A'RMATURE. m. ſ. [armatura, Lat.] Armour; ſomething to
defend the body from hurt.
- Others ſhould be armed with hard ſhells; others with pric-
kles; the reſt that have no ſuch armature, ſhould be endued
with great ſwiftneſs and pernicity. Ray on the Creation.
A'RMED. ad. [in heraldry.] Is uſed in reſpect of beaſts and birds
of prey, when their teeth, horns, feet, beak, talons, or tusks,
are of a different colour from the reſt; as, he bears a cock or
a falcon armed, or. Chambers.
ARMED Chair. m. ſ. [from armed and chair.] An elbow chair,
or a chair with reſts for the arms.
ARM E/NIAN Bole. n.ſ. A fatty medicinal kind of earth, of a pale
reddiſh colour, of conſiderable uſe as an abſorbent, aſtringent,
and vulnerary; which takes its name from the country of Ar-
menia, whence it is chiefly brought.
ARMENIAN Stone. m. ſ. A mineral ſtone or carth of a blue co-
lour, ſpotted with green, black and yellow ; anciently brought
only from Armenia, but now found in Germany, and the Ty-
rol. It bears a near reſemblance to lapis lazuli, from which it
ſeems only to differ in degree of maturity; it being ſofter, and
ſpeckled with green inſtead of gold. Boerhaave ranks it among
ſemimetals; and ſuppoſes it compoſed of a metal and earth.
Woodward ſays, it owes its colour to an admixture of copper.
Its chief uſe is in moſaick work, though it has ſome place alſo
in phyſick. Chambers.
ARME's TAL. adj. [armentalis, or armentinus, Lat.] Bclong-
A'RMENTINE. } ing to a drove or herd of cattle. Die?.
ARMENTo's E. adj. [armentºſus, Lat..] Abounding with cattle.D.
A'RMcAUNT. adj. [from arm and gaunt..] Slender as the arm.
So he nodded,
And ſoberly did mount an armgaunt fleed. Shakespeare. Alt. and C.
ARM-Hole. n.ſ.. [from arm and hºle.] The cavity under the
ſhoulder. -
Tickling is moſt in the ſoles of the feet, and under the arm-
Žales, and on the fides. The cauſe is the thinneſs of the ſkin in
thoſe parts, joined with the rareneſs of being touched there.
- Bacº's Natural Hiji. Nº 766.
ARM1'GERous. adj. [from armiger, Lat. an armour-bearer.]
Bearing arms. * — - -
A'RMILL ARY. ad. [from armillº, Lat, a bracelet.] Reſembling
a bracelet. -
When the circles of the mundare ſphere are ſuppoſed to be
deſcribed on the convex ſurface of a ſphere, which is hollow
within, and, after this, you imagine all parts of the ſphere's ſur-
face to be cut away, except thoſe parts on which ſuch circles
are deſcribed ; then that ſphere is called an armillary ſphere, be-
cauſe it appears in the form of ſeveral circular rings, or brace-
3 - - lets,
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R M
A R Q_
s lets, put together in a due poſition. Harris's Dſrººtion of the
- G|cles.
ARM ILLATED. adj. [armillatus, Lat..] Wearing bracelets. Dići.
ARMINGs. n.ſ.. [in a ſhip.] The ſame with waſteclothes, being
red clothes, hung about the outſide of the ſhip's upper works
fore and aft, and before the cubbrige heads. Some are alſo hung
round the tops, called top armings. Chambers.
ARM I'Por Exce. m. ſ. [from arma, arms, and potentia, power,
Lat.] Power in war.
ARM1'Pot ENT. adj. [armipotens, Lat.] Powerful in arms;
mighty in war. -
This is your devoted friend, Sir, the manifold linguiſt, and
the armipotent ſoldier. Shakeſp. Ali’s well that ends well.
- For if our God the Lord armipotent,
Thoſe armed angels in our aid down ſend,
That were at Dathan to his prophet ſent,
Thou wilt come down with them, and well defend
Our hoſt. Fairfax, b. iii. ſtan. 7o.
Beneath the low'ring brow, and on a bent,
The temple ſtood of Mars armipotent. Dryden's Fab.
ARM1'sonous. adj. [armiſnu;, Lat..] Ruſtling with armour.
ARM1stice. m. ſ. [armiſiitium, Lat.] A ſhort truce; a ceſſa-
tion of arms for a ſhort time.
A'RMLET. n.ſ.. [from arm.]
1. A little arm; as, an armlet of the ſea.
2. A piece of armour fºr the arm.
3. A bracelet for the arm.
And, when ſhe takes thy hand, and doth ſeem kind,
Doth ſearch what rings and armlets ſhe can find. Donne.
ARMos1'Ack. m. ſ. ſerroneouſly ſo written for ammoniac.] A
fort of volatile ſalt. See AMMONIAC.
A'RMoRER. m.ſ.. [armorier, Fr.]
1. He that makes armour, or weapons.
Now thrive the armorers, and honour's thought
Reigns ſolely in the breaſt of every man. Shakeſp. Henry V.
The armorers make their ſteel more tough and pliant, by
aſperſion of water and juice of herbs. Bacon's Phyſ. Remains.
The whole diviſion that to Mars pertains,
All trades of death that deal in ſteel for gains
Were there: The butcher, armorer, and ſmith,
Who forges ſharpen'd fauchions, or the ſcythe. Dryd. Fab.
When arm'rers temper in the ford
The keen-edg’d pole-ax, or the ſhining ſword,
The red-hot metal hiſſes in the lake. Pope's Odiſ), b. ix.
2. He that dreſſes another in armour.
The armorers accompliſhing the knights,
With buſy hammers cloſing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation. Shakespeare Henry V.
The morning he was to join battle with Harold, his armorer
put on his backpiece before, and his breaſtplate behind. Cambd.
ARMo'RIAL. adj. [armorial, Fr.] Belonging to the arms or eſ-
cutcheon of a family, as enſigns armorial.
A'RMoRIST. n.ſ.. [from armºur.] A perſon skilled in heral-
dry. .Dict.
A'RMoRy. n.ſ.. [from armour.]
1. The place in which arms are repoſited for uſe.
The ſword
Of Michael, from the armory of God,
Was giv'n him temper’d ſo, that neither keen,
Nor ſolid, might reſiſt that edge. Milton's Par. Loft, b. vi.
With plain heroick magnitude of mind,
And celeſtial vigour arm’d,
Their armories and magazines contemns. Sampſºn Agoniſt.
Let a man conſider theſe virtues, with the contrary fins, and
then, as out of a full armory, or magazine, let him furniſh his
conſcience with texts of ſcripture. South.
2. Armour; arms of defence.
- Nigh at hand
Celeſtial armory, ſhields, helms, and ſpears,
t - Hung high, with diamond flaming, and with gold. Par. Lºft.
3. Enſigns armorial.
Well worthy be you of that armory, -
Wherein you have great glory won this day. Fairy Queen.
A'RMour. n.ſ.. [armateur, Fr. armatura, Lat.] Defenſive arms.
Your friends are up, and buckle on their armour.
- Shakeſp. Richard III.
That they might not go naked among their enemies, the only
armour that Chriſt allows them, is prudence and innocence.
- South.
ARMoUR BEARER. m. ſ. [from armour and lear.] He that car-
ries the armour of another. -
- His armour bearer firſt, and next he kill
/ His charioteer. - Dryder's AFneis.
A'RMPiT. n.ſ. [from arm and pit.] The hollow place under
the ſhoulder.
The handles to theſe gouges are made ſo long, that the han-
dic may reach under the armpit of the workman.
Moxon's Aſºchaſſical Exerciſes.
Others hold their plate under the left arm-fit, the beſt ſitua-
tion for keeping it warm. Swift's Dire?, to the Footnam.
ARMs. m. ſ. without the ſingular number. [arma, Lat.]
1. Weapons of offence, or armour of defence.
* -
Thoſe arms which Mars before
Had giv'n the vanquiſh'd, now the victor bore. Pop.'s Iºad.
2. A ſtate of hoſtility.
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty prelate,
With many more confed’rates, are in arms. Shakespeare. R. III.
3. War in general.
- Arms and the man I ſing. Dryd. Wirgil.
Him Paris follow'd to the dire alarms, . . .
Both breathing ſlaughter, both reſolv’d in arms. Pope's Iliad.
4. Aćtion; the act of taking arms. -
Up roſe the vićtor angels, and to arms
The matin trumpet ſung. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vi.
5. The enſigns armorial of a family.
ARMY. n.ſ.. [armée, Fr.]
1. A collection of armed men, obliged to obey one man. Locke.
Number itſelf importeth not much in armies, where the peo-
ple are of weak courage. Bacon.
The meaneſt ſoldier, that has fought often in an army, has
a truer knowledge of war, than he that has writ whole volumes,
but never was in any battle. - South.
The Tuſcan leaders, and their army ſing,
Which follow'd great Æneas to the war;
Their arms, their numbers, and their names declare. Dryd.
2. A great number.
The fool hath planted in his memory an army of good words.
Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
ARoma’rical. adj. [from aromatick.] Spicy; fragrant; high
ſcented. - - -
All things that are hot and aromatical do preſerve liquors or
powders. Bacon's Natural Hiſt. N° 346.
Volatile oils refreſh the animal ſpirits, but likewiſe are en-
dued with all the bad qualities of ſuch ſubſtances, producing
all the effects of an oily and aromatical acrimony.
Arbuthnot on Aliment,
ARoMA'TICK. adj. [from aroma, Lat. ſpice.]
1. Spicy.
Amidſt whole heaps of ſpices lights a ball,
And now their odours arm'd againſt them fly:
Some preciouſly by ſhatter'd porcelain fall, -
And ſome by aromatick ſplinters die. Dryden's Ann. Mirab
2. Fragrant; ſtrong ſcented.
Or quick effluvia darting through the brain,
Dye of a roſe in aromatick pain. Pºpe's Effy on Man. .
ARoMA'ticks. m. ſ. Spices.
They were furniſhed for exchange of their aromaticks, and
other proper commodities. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the ſºrld.
ARoy ATIzA'tion. n.ſ.. [from aromatize.] The mingling of
a due proportion of aromatick ſpices or drugs with any medi-
CInc.
To ARO'MATIzE. v. a. [from aroma, Lat. ſpice.]
1. To ſcent with ſpices; to impregnate with ſpices.
Drink the firſt cup at ſupper hot, and half an hour before
ſupper ſomething hot and aromatized. Bacon's Phyſ. Remains.
2. To ſcent; to perfume.
Unto converted Jews no man imputeth this unſavoury odour,
as though aromatized by their converſion. Brown's Vulg, Err.
Aro'se. The preterite of the verb ariſ. See ARISE.
ARo'UND. adv. [from a and round.]
I. In a circle.
He ſhall extend his propagated ſway,
Where Atlas turns the rowling heav'ns around,
And his broad ſhoulders with their lights are crown'd. Dryd.
2. On every ſide.
ARound. prep. About.
From young Iülus head
A lambent flame aroſe, which gently ſpread
Around his brows, and on his temples fed.
To ARouse. v. a. [from a and rouſ...]
I. To wake from ſleep.
2. To raiſe up; to excite.
But abſent, what fantaſtick woes arous’d
Rage in each thought, by reſtleſs muſing fed,
Chill the warm cheek, and blaſt the bloom of life. Thomſºn.
ARO'w. adv. [from a and row.] In a row; with the breaſts all
bearing againſt the ſame line. - -
Then ſome green gowns are by the laſſes worn
Dryden's Zn,
In chaſteſt plays, till home they walk arow. Sidney.
But with a pace more ſober and more ſlow,
And twenty, rank in rank, they rode arow. Dryden's Fab.
ARo'YNT. adv. [a word of uncertain etymology, but very ancient
y ~~
uſe..] Be gone; away : a word of expulſion, or avoiding.
Saint Withold footed thrice the wold,
He met the night-mare, and her name told,
Bid her alight, and her troth plight, -
And aroynt thee, witch, arºynt thee right. Shakespeare King Lear.
A'Rou EBUSE. m. ſ. [Fr. ſpelt falſely harqūcluſ;...] A hand gun.
It ſeems to have anciently meant much the ſame as our cara-
bine, or fuſee. -
A harquchiſ, or ordnance, will be farther heard from the
mouth of the piece, than backwards or on the ſides.
- Bacon'; Nat. Hiſ’. Nº 2 c.4.
Air Q 1 E-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R R
A R R
º
A'Roºf Rºsſ ER. *.ſ. [from arquebuſe.] A ſoldier armed with
an arquebuſe.
He compaſſed them in with fifteen thouſand arquebuſers,
whom he had brought with him well appºinted.
Knoles's Hiſtory ºf the Tºrks.
ARRA'ck, or ARA'ck. m. ſ. A ſpirituous liquor imported from
the Eaſt Indies, uſed by way of dram and in punch. The
word araº is an Indian name for ſtrong waters of all kinds;
for they call our ſpirits and brandy Engliſh arack. But what
we underſtand by the name arack, is really no other than a ſpi-
rit procurcd by diſtillation from a vegetable juice called toddy,
which flows by inciſion out of the cocoa-nut tree. There are
divers kinds of it; ſingle, double, and treble diſtilled. The
double diſtilled is commonly ſent abroad, and is preferred to all
other aracks of India. Chambers.
I ſend this to be better known for choice of china, tea, ar-
rack, and other Indian goods. Speciator, N° 288.
A'RRAcH, O'RRAcH, or O'RRAGE. m. ſ. One of the quickeſt
plants both in coming up and running to ſeed. Its leaves are
very good in pottage. It ſhould be uſed as ſoon as it peeps out,
becauſe it decays quickly. It thrives very well in all ſorts of
round. See ORR.A.G.E. Mortimer's Art of Husbandry.
To ARRATGN. v. a. [arranger, Fr. to ſet in order.]
1. To ſet a thing in order, or in its place. One is ſaid to arraign
a writ in a county, that fits it for trial before the juſtices of the
circuit. A priſoner is ſaid to be arraigned, where he is indićted
and brought forth to his trial. Cowel,
Summon a ſeſſion, that we may arraign
Our moſt diſloyal lady; for as ſhe hath
Been publickly accuſed, ſo ſhall ſhe have
A juſt and open trial. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
2. To accuſe; to charge with faults in general, as in contro-
verſy, in a ſatire.
Reverſe of nature! ſhall ſuch copies then
A raign th' originals of Maro's pen : Roſommon.
He that thinks a man to the ground, will quickly endeavour
to lay him there: for while he deſpiſes him, he arraigns and
condemns him in his heart. South.
3. It has fºr before the fault.
My own enemies I ſhall never anſwer; and if your lordſhip
has any, they will not arraign you for want of knowledge.
Dryden's Dedication to the Æneid.
ARRAIGNMENT. n.ſ. [from arraign.] The act of arraigning;
an accuſation; a charge.
In the ſixth ſatire, which ſeems only an arraignment of the
whole ſex, there is a latent admonition to avoid ill women.
Dryden's juv. Dedication.
To ARRA'NGE. v. a. [arranger, Fr.] To put in the proper
order for any purpoſe.
I chanc'd this day
To ſee two knights in travel on my way,
(A ſorry fight !) arrang'd in battle new. Fairy Queen, b. i.
How effectually are its muſcular fibres arranged, and with
what judgment are its columns and furrows diſpoſed Cheyne.
ARRA'NGEMENT. m. ſ. [from arrange.] The act of putting in
proper order; the ſtate of being put in order.
There is a proper arrangement of the parts to be brought
about in claſtick bodies, which may be facilitated by uſe.
Cheyne's Philoſophical Principleſ.
A'RRANT. adj. [a word of uncertain etymology, but probably
from errant, which being at firſt applied to its proper ſignifica-
tion to vagabonds, as an errant or arrant rogue, that is, a ram-
bling ragwe, loſt, in time, its original ſignification, and be-
ing by its uſe underſtood to imply ſomething bad, was applied
at large to any thing that was mentioned with hatred or con-
tempt..] Bad in a high degree.
Country folks, who hallooed and hooted after me, as at the
arrantſ; coward that ever ſhewed his ſhoulders to the enemy.
Sidney, b. ii.
A vain fool grows forty times an arranter ſot than before.
L'E/irange's Fables.
And let him every deity adore,
If his new bride prove not an arrant whore. Dryd juven.
A'RRANTLY. adv. [from arrant..] Corruptly; ſhamefully.
Funcral tears are as arrantly hired out as mourning clokes.
L’E/irange.
A'RRAs. n.ſ.. [from Arras, a town in Artois, where hangings
are woven.] Tapeſtry; hangings woven with images.
Thence to the hall, which was on every ſide
With rich array and coſtly arras dight. Fairy &amp;een, b. i.
He's going to his mother's cloſet;
Behind the arras I'll convey myſelf,
To hear the proceſs.
As he ſhall paſs the galleries, I’ll place
A guard behind the arras. Denham's Sºphy.
ARRA UGHT. v. a. [a word uſed by Spenſºr in the preter tenſe,
of which I have not ſound the preſent, but ſuppoſe he derived
arreach frcin arracher, Fr.] Seized by vicience.
His ambitious ſons unto them twain
Arraight the rule, and from their father drew. Fairy 9.
ARPA'Y. º. f. [arry, Fr. arreo, Sp. arred, Ital. from rºyº, Teut.
orde. It was adopted into the middle Latin, ºil, lºſiºn
ar, aiiwiwi, Knighton.] -
Shakespeare. Hamlet.
I. Order, chiefly of war.
The earl eſpying them ſcattered near the army, ſent one te
command them to their array. Sir J. Hayward.
Wer’t thou ſought to decds,
That might require th’ array of war, thy skill
Of condućt would be ſuch, that all the world
Could not ſuſtain thy proweſs. Milton's Par. Loft, b. iii.
A gen'ral ſets his army in array
In vain, unleſs he fight and win the day.
2. Dreſs.
A rich throne, as bright as ſunny day,
On which there ſat moſt brave j'
With royal robes, and gorgeous array,
A maiden queen.
In this remembrance, Emily ere day
Aroſe, and dreſs'd herſelf in rich array;
Freſh as the month, and as the morning fair. Dryd. Faller.
3. In law. Array, of the Fr. array, i.e. ordo, the ranking or ſetting
forth of a jury or inqueſt of men impannelled upon a cauſe.
Thence is the verb to array a pannel, that is, to ſet forth one
by another the men impannelled. Cowel.
To ARRAY. v. a. [arroyer, old Fr.]
I. To put in order.
2. To deck; to dreſs; to adorn the perſon; with the particle
with.
Deck thyſelf now with majeſty and excellency, and array
thyſelf with glory and beauty. job, xl. 10.
Now went forth the morn,
Such as in higheſt heav'n, array'd in gold
Empyreal. Milton's Paradiſ. Ioff, b. vi.
One veſt array'd the corps, and one they ſpread
O'er his clos'd eyes, and wrapp'd around his head. Dryden.
3. In law. Sce ARRAY in law.
ARRA'YERs. m. ſ. [from array.] Officers who anciently had
the care of ſeeing the ſoldiers duly appointed in their armour.
Cowel.
ARREAR. adv. [arrierz, Fr. behind.] Behind. This is the pri-
mitive ſignification of the word, which, though not now in uſe,
ſeems to be retained by Spenſºr. See REAR.
To leave with ſpeed Atlanta ſwift arrear,
Through foreſts wild and unfrequented land,
To chaſe the lion, boar, or rugged bear. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
ARRE'AR. m. ſ. That which remains behind unpaid, though
due. See ARRE ARA GE.
His boon is giv'n ; his knight has gain'd the day,
But loſt the prize; th’ arrears are yet to pay. Dryd. Fabler.
If a tenant run away in arrear of ſome rent, the land re-
mains; that cannot be carried away, or loſt. Locke.
It will comfort our grand-children, when they ſee a few rags
hung up in Weſtminſter-hall, which coſt an hundred millions,
whereof they are paying the arrears, and boaſting as beggars
do, that their grandfathers were rich. Swift.
ARRE'ARAGE. m.ſ. a word now little uſed. [from arriere, Fr. be-
hind. -
}… is the remainder of an account, or a ſum of mo–
ney remaining in the hands of an accountant; or, more gene-
rally, any money unpaid at the due time, as arrearage of
rent. Cºwel.
Paget ſet forth the king of England's title to his debts and
penſion from the French king; with all arrarages. Hayward.
- I think,
He'll grant the tribute, ſend th’ arrearages,
Ere look upon our Romans. Shakespeare. Cymbeline.
The old arrearages under which that crown had long groan-
ed, being defrayed, he hath brought Lurana to uphold and
maintain herſelf. Hºwe's Vocal Forg/?.
ARREARANCE. n.ſ. The ſame with arrear. See ARREAR. D.
ARRENTA'tion. n.ſ.. [from arrendar, Span. to farm.] Is, in
the foreſt law, the licenſing an owner of lands in the foreſt, to
incloſe them with a low hedge and ſmall ditch, in conſideration
Sir j. Denham.
Fairy Queen, b. i.
of a yearly rent. Dicf.
ARREPTI'tious. adj. [arrºpius, Lat.]
1. Snatched away.
2. Crept in privily. Dž.7.
ARRE's T. n.ſ.. [from arreſter, Fr. to ſtop.] -
1. In law. -
A ſtop or ſtay; as, a man apprehended for debt, is ſaid to
be arreſted. To plead in arrºſi of judgment, is to ſhew cauſe
why judgment ſhould be ſtayed, though the verdićt of the twelve
be paſſed. To plead in arrºſ of taking the inqueſt upon the
former iſſue, is to ſhew cauſe why an inqueſt ſhould not beta-
ken. An arreſt is a certain reſtrăint of a man's perſon, depriv-
ing him of his own will, and binding it to become obedient to
the will of the law, and may be called the beginning of im-
priſonment. Cowel.
If I could ſpeak ſo wiſ-ly under an arrºff, I would ſend for
my creditors; yet I had as licſ have the foppery of freedom, as
the morality of impriſoninent. Shakeſp. Acºſure for Meaſure.
2. Any caption.
‘ſo the rich man, who had promiſed himſelf eaſe for many
years, it was a ſad arryi, that his ſoul was ſurpriſed the firſt
Light. Taylor's Hºly Living.
3. A<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R R.
3. A ſtop.
The ſtop and arreſt of the air ſheweth, that the air hath
little appetite of aſcending. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 24.
To ARREST. v. a. [arrºſier; Fr. to ſtop.]
1. To ſeize by a mandate from a court or officer of juſtice. See
ARRest. - -
Good tidings, my lord Haſtings, for the which -
I do arreſt thee, traitor, of high treaſon. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Well, well; there's one yonder arreſted, and carried to pri-
ſon, was worth five thouſand of you all. Shakespeare Meaſ for M.
2. To ſeize anything by law.
He hath enjoyed nothing of Ford's but twenty pounds of
money, which muſt be paid to maſter Brook; his horſes are
arreſted for it. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor,
3. To ſeize; to lay hands on.
But when as Morpheus had with leaden maze
Arreſted all that goodly company. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Age itſelf, which, of all things in the world, will not be baf-
fled or defied, ſhall begin to arreſt, ſeize, and remind us of our
mortality. South.
4. To with-hold; to hinder. *
This defe&amp;t of the Engliſh juſtice was the main impediment
that did arreſt and ſtop the courſe of the conqueſt.
Sirjohn Davies:
As often as my dogs with better ſpeed t
Arreſt her flight, is ſhe to death decreed. Dryd. Fables.
Nor could her virtues, nor repeated vows
Of thouſand lovers, the relentleſs hand -
Of death arreſt. Philips,
5. To ſtop motion.
To manifeſt the coagulative power, we have arreſted the flui-
dity of new milk, and turned it into a curdled ſubſtance. Boyle.
ARRE's T. n.ſ.. [In horſemanſhip.] A mangey humour between
the ham and paſtern of the hinder legs of a horſe. Dićf.
A'RRETED. adj. [arrečiatus, low Lat.] He that is conven
before a judge, and charged with a crime. It is uſed ſomé-
times for imputed or laid unto ; as, no folly may be arreted to
one under age. Cowel.
To ARRI'DE. v. a. [arrideo, Lat.]
1. To laugh at.
2. To ſmile; to look pleaſantly upon one.
ARRI'ERE. m. ſ. [French..] The laſt body of an army, for which
we now uſe rear. -
The horſemen might iſſue forth without diſturbance of the
foot, and the avant-guard without ſhuffling with the battail or
arriere. Sirj. Hayward.
ARRI'ERE BAN. n.ſ. [Caſſeneuve derives this word from arriere
and ban; ban denotes the convening of the nobleſſe or vaſſals,
who hold fees immediately of the crown; and arriere, thoſe
who only hold of the king mediately..] A general proclama-
tion, by which the king of France ſummons to the war all that
hold of him, both his own vaſſals or the nobleſſe, and the vaſ-
fals of his vaſſals. -
ARRI'ERE Fee, or FIEF. Is a fee dependant on a ſuperior one.
Theſe fees commenced, when the dukes and counts, rendering
their governments hereditary in their families, diſtributed to
their officers parts of the royal domains, which they found in
their reſpective provinces; and even permitted thoſe officers to
gratify the ſoldiers under them, in the ſame manner.
ARRI'ERe vassal. The vaſſal of a vaſſal. Trevoux.
ARRI'sion. n.ſ.. [arriſo, Lat..] A ſmiling upon. IDićf.
ARRI'val. n.ſ.. [from arrive.] -
The act of coming to any place; and, figuratively, the at-
tainment of any purpoſe.
How are we changed, ſince we firſt ſaw the queen
She, like the ſun, does ſtill the ſame appear,
Bright as ſhe was at her arrival here. Waller.
The unravelling is the arrival of Ulyſſes upon his own iſland.
Broom's View of Epick Poetry.
ARRI'vance. n.ſ.. [from arrive..] Company coming.
Every minute is expectancy
Of more arrivance. Shakeſp. Othello.
To ARRIVE. v. n. [arriver, Fr. to come on ſhore.j
1. To come to any place by water.
At length arriving on the banks of Nile, ,
Wearied with length of ways, and worn with toil,
She laid her down. Dryden.
2. To reach any place by travelling. -
hen we were arrived upon the verge of his eſtate, we
ſtopped at a little inn, to reſt ourſelves ...; our horſes.
3. To reach any point.
The bounds of all body we have no difficulty to arrive at;
but when the mind is there, it finds nothing to hinder its pro-
greſs. Locke.
4. To gain anything:
It is the higheſt wiſdom by deſpiſing the world to arrive at
heaven; they are bleſſed who converſe with God. Taylor.
The virtuous may know in ſpeculation, what they could ne-
ver arrive at by practice, and avoid the ſnares of the crafty.
º, Spediator, N° 245:
5. . thing at which we arrive is always ſuppoſed to be
good.
Vol. I.
6. To happen; with to before the perſon. This ſenſe ſeems not
proper.
Happy! to whom this glorious death arrives, -
More to be valued than a thouſand lives. Waller.
To ARRo'DE. v. a. [arrodo, Lat.] To gnaw or nibble. Diet.
A'RRogance. ln.ſ.. [arrogantia, Lat.] The act or quality of
Å...} taking much upon one's ſelf; that ſpecies of
pride which conſiſts in exorbitant claims.
Stanley, notwithſtanding ſhe's your wife,
And loves not me; be you; good lord, aſſurd, -
I hate not you for her proud arrogance. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
- Pride hath no other glaſs
To ſhew itſelf but pride; for ſupple knees -
Feed arrogance, and are the proudman's fees. Sh, Tr. and Cr.
Pride and arrogance, and the evil way, and the froward
mouth do I hate. Prov. viii. 13.
Diſcourſing of matters dubious, and on any controvertible
truths, we cannot, without arrogancy, entreat a credulity.
- Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
Humility it expreſſes by the ſtooping and bending of the
head; arrogance, when it is lifted, or, as we ſay, toſſed up.
- - Dryd. Dufreſh.
A'RRogant, adj. [arrogans, Lat] Given to make exorbitant
claims; haughty; proud.
Feagh's right unto that country which he claims, or the ſig-
niory therein, muſt be vain and arrogant. Spenſer on Ireland.
An arrogant way of treating with other princes and ſtates,
is natural to popular governments. - Temple.
A'RRogantly. adv. [from arrogant..] In an arrogantmanner.
Our poet may
Himſelf admire the fortune of his play;
And arrogantly, as his fellows do,
Think he writes well, becauſe he pleaſes you.
Dryden's Prol to Indian Emperowri
- Another, warm'd
}. high ambition, and conceit of proweſs
erent, arrogantly thus preſum’d;
What if this ſword, full often drench'd in blood,
Should now cleave ſheer the execrable head
. . Of Churchill. Philips.
A'RRogANTNess. n.ſ.. [from arrogant..] The ſame with arro-
gance; which ſee. Die?.
To ARROGATE. v. a...[arrogo, Lat..] To claim vainly; to
exhibit unjuſt claims only prompted by pride. --
I intend to deſcribe this battle fully, not to derogate any
thing from one nation, or to arrogate to the other. Sir /. Hayw.
#. popes arrogated unto themſelves, that the empire was
held of them in homage. Sir Walter Raleigh's Eſſays.
Who, not content
With fair equality, fraternal ſtate,
Will arrogate dominion undeſerv’d, - . -
Over his brethren. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. xii.
Rome never arrogated to herſelf any infallibility, but what
ſhe pretended to be founded upon Chriſt's promiſe. Tillot. Pr:
ARRoga"tion. n.ſ.. [from arrogate.] A claiming in a proud
unjuſt manner. - - Dićf.
ARRo'sion. m. ſ [from arroſus, Lat.] A gnawing. IXić7,
A'RRow, n. ſ. [anepe, Sax.] The pointed weapon which is ſhot
from a bow. Darts are thrown by the hand, but in poetry
they are confounded. -
, I ſwear to thee by Cupid's ſtrongeſt bow,
By his beſt arrow with the golden head.
- Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
Here were boys ſo deſperately reſolved, as to pull arrows out
of their fleſh, and deliver them to be ſhot again by the archers
on their ſide. - - Sirj. Hayward.
A'RRowHEAD. n. ſ. [from arrow and head..] A water plant,
ſo called from the reſemblance of its leaves to the head of an
arrow. - - Dicſ.
A'RRowy, adj. [from arrow.] Conſiſting of arrows.
He ſaw them in their forms of battle rang'd,
How quick they wheel'd, and flying, behind them ſhot
Sharp ſleet of arrowy ſhow'r againſt the face &amp;
Of their purſuers, and o'ercame by flight. Par. Loft, b. iii.
ARse. n.ſ.. [eanre, Sax.] The buttocks, or hind part of an
animal. -
To hang an ARse. A vulgar phraſe, ſignifying to be tardy, ſlug-
giſh, or *.
For Hudibras wore but one ſpur,
As wiſely knowing, could he ſtir
To active trot one ſide of 's horſe,
The other would not hang an arſe. Hudibras, cant. i.
ARse Foot. n. f. A kind of water fowl, called alſo a didapper. D.
Arse-smart. [Perſicaria, Lat.]
It is a plant with an apetalous flower, having ſeveral chives
from the multifid calyx; the pointal becomes an oval pointed
ſmooth ſeed, incloſed in the capſule, which was before the
flower-cup ; it hath jointed ſtaſks, and the flowers are produced
in ſpikes. Several ſpecies of this plant grow wild upon moiſt
ſoils and dunghills. Millar.
A'R senal. n.ſ.. [arſenale, Ital.] A repoſitory of things requiſite
to war; a magazine. -
2 F I would<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R T
r-r-
A R T
* I would have a room for the old Roman inſtruments of war,
where you might ſee all the ancient military, fºrniture, as it
might have been in an arſenal of old Rome. diſ on Ai. Mºd.
ARSE'N1cA1. ad;. [f om arſenick.] Containing arſenick; con-
ſiſting of arſenick.
An hereditary conſumption, or one engendered by arſºnical
fumes underground, is incapable of cure. Harvey on Cºſimp.
There are aſºnical, or other like noxious minerals lodged
underneath. Hºodward's Natural Hiſtory.
A'Rs EN1ck. n.ſ. ſºiº) A ponderous mineral ſubſtance,
volatile and uninflammable, which gives a whiteneſs to metals
in fuſion, and proves a violent corroſive poiſon; of which there
are three ſorts. Native or yellºw arſenick, called alſo auripig-
mentum or orpiment, is chiefly found in copper mines, in a
ſort of glebes or ſtones of different figures and ſizes. Its colour,
though always yellow, yet admits of different ſhades and mix-
tures, as a golden yellow, a reddiſh yellow, or a green yellow.
It contains a ſmall portion of gold, but not worth the expence
of ſeparating it. White or cryſtalline arſenick is extracted from
the native kind, by ſubliming it with a proportion of ſea ſalt,
and is chiefly uſed among us. It is ſaid to be found native in
ſome German mines. The ſmalleſt quantity of cryſtalline
arſenick, being mixed with any metal, abſolutely deſtroys its
malleability; and a ſingle grain will turn a pound of copper
into a beautiful ſeeming ſilver, but without dućtility. There
is a method pračtiſed in Hungary, of procuring yellow and
white arſenick from cobalt. Red a ſenick is a preparation of
the white, made by adding to it a mineral ſulphur. There
are ſeveral chymical preparations of arſenick, intended to blunt
its corroſive ſalts, and render it a ſafe medicine; but experi-
ence proves that it ſhould never be uſed inwardly, in any form.
Chambers.
A ſnick is a very deadly poiſon; held to the fire, it emits
fumes, but liquates very little. J/ºodw, on Fºſſ.
ART. n.ſ.. [arte, Fr. ars, Lat.] - -
1. The power of doing ſomething not taught by nature and in-
ſtinct; as, to walk is natural, to dance is an art.
Art is properly an habitual knowledge of certain rules and
maxims, by which a man is governed and directed in his ac-
tions. South.
Bleſt with each grace of nature and of art. Pope.
Ev’n copious Dryden wanted, or forgot,
The laſt and greateſt art, the art to blot. Pºpe.
2. A ſcience; as, the liberal arts.
Arts that reſpect the mind were ever reputed nobler than
thoſe that ſerve the body. Ben. johnſºn's Diſcovery.
3. A trade.
This obſervation is afforded us by the art of making ſugar.
- Boyle.
4. Artfulneſs; ſkill; dexterity.
The art of our neceſſities is ſtrange,
That can make vile things precious.
5. Cunning.
6. Speculation.
I have as much of this in art as you;
But yet my nature could not bear it ſo. Shakespeare. J. Caeſar.
ARTE'R.I.A.L. adj. [from artery..] That which relates to the ar-
tery; that which is contained in the artery.
Had not the Maker wrought the ſpringy frame,
The blood, defrauded of its nitrous food,
Had cool'd and languiſh'd in th’ arterial road. Blackmore.
As this mixture of blood and chyle paſſeth through the arte-
rial tube, it is preſſed by two contrary forces; that of the
heart driving it forward againſt the ſides of the tube, and the
claſtick force of the air, preſſing it on the oppoſite ſides of thoſe
air-bladders; along the ſurface of which this arterial tube
Creeps. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
ARTER ro'ToMY. m.ſ.. [from zººſa, and rigº, to cut.] The
operation of letting blood from the artery: a practice much in
uſe among the French.
ARTERY. m. ſ. [arteria, Lat.] An artery is a conical canal,
conveying the blood from the heart to all parts of the body.
Each artery is compoſed of three coats; of which the firſt ſeems
to be a thread of fine blood veſſels and nerves, for nouriſhing
the coats of the artery; the ſecond is made up of circular, or
rather ſpiral fibres, of which there are more or fewer ſtrata, ac-
cording to the bigneſs of the artery. Theſe fibres have aſtrong
elaſticity, by which they contract themſelves with ſome force,
when the power by which they have been ſtretched out ceaſes.
The third and inmoſt coat is a fine tranſparent membrane,
which keeps the blood within its canal, that otherwiſe, upon
the dilatation of an artery, would eaſily ſeparate the ſpiral fibres
from one another. As the arteries grow ſmaller, theſe coats
grow thinner, and the coats of the veins ſeem only to be con-
tinuations of the capillary arteries. Quincy.
The arteries are elaſtick tubes, endued with a contračtile
force, by which they drive the blood ſtill forward; it being
hindered from going backward by the valves of the heart. Arb.
A'RT FUL. adj. [from art and full.] -
I. Performed with art. -
The laſt of theſe was certainly the moſt eaſy, but, for the
ſame reaſon, the leaſt artſid. . Dryden's Don Selºftian.
Shakespeare King Lear.
ſelf had been in danger.
2. Artificial; not natural.
. Cunning; skilful; dexterous.
Q ſtill the ſame, Ulyſſes, ſhe rejºin'",
In uſeful craft ſucceſsfully refin'd, {
Artful in ſpeech, in action, and in mind. Pºpe's Od.
A'RTFULLY. adv. [from a ful..] With art; skilfully; dexte-
rouſly. º
The reſt in rank: Honoria chief in place,
Was artfully contriv'd to ſet her face, {
To front the thicket, and behold the chace. Dryd. Fah.
Vice is the natural growth of our corruption. How irreſiſ.
tibly muſt it prevail, when the ſeeds of it are artfully ſown, and
induſtriouſly cultivated Rºgers's Sermons.
A'RTFULNEss. n.ſ.. [from artful.]
1. Skill.
Conſider with how much artfulneſ; his bulk and ſituation is
contrived, to have juſt matter to draw round him theſe maſſy
bodies. Cheyne's Philºſºphical Principle.
2. Cunning.
ARTHRI'Tick.
ARTHRI'TIcAL.
1. Gouty; relating to the gout.
Frequent changes produce all the arthritick diſeaſes, Arbuth.
2. Relating to joints.
Serpents, worms, and leaches, though ſome want bones, and
all extended articulations, yet have they arthritical analogies;
and, by the motion of fibrous and muſculous parts, are able to
make progreſſion. Brown's Pulgar Errotºrs, b. iii, c. i.
ARTHR/7/S. m. ſ. [2: ºr, from &amp;:3;or, a joint.] Any diſtem-
Per that affects the joints, but the gout moſt particularly. Quin.
A'RT1cHoke. n.ſ.. [artichault, Fr.] -
This plant is very like the thiſtle, but hath large ſcaly heads
ſhaped like the cone of the pine tree; the bottom of each ſcale,
as alſo at the bottom of the florets, is a thick fleſhy eatable ſub-
} adj. [from arthritis.]
ſtance. The ſpecies are, 1. The garden artichoke, with prickly
and ſmooth leaves. 2. Garden artichoke, without prickles, and
reddiſh heads. 3. The wild artichoke of Boeotia. There is at
preſent but one ſort of artichoke cultivated in the gardens near
London, which is commonly known by the name of the red
artichoke. It is propagated from ſlips or ſuckers taken from the
old roots in February or March. - AMillar.
No herbs have curled leaves, but cabbage and cabbage let.
tuce ; none have double leaves, one belonging to the ſtalk, an-
other to the fruit or ſeed, but the artichoke. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?.
Artichokes contain a rich, nutritious, ſtimulating juice.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
A'RT1choke of Jeruſalem. See SUN-Flow ER, of which it is:
a ſpecies.
A'RT1ck, adj. [It ſhould be written ariick, from 3;áze.] Nor-
thern ; under the Bear. See ARcrick.
But they would have winters like thoſe beyond the artick
circle; for the ſun would be 80 degrees from them.
- Brºwn's Vulgar Errours, b. i. e. 5.
In the following example it is, contrary to cuſtom, ſpelt af-
ter the French manner, and accented on the laſt ſyllable.
To you, who live in chill degree,
As map informs, of fifty three,
And do not much for cold atone,
By bringing thither fifty one,
Methinks all climes ſhould be alike,
From tropick e'en to pole artique.
ARTICLE. m.ſ.. [articulus, Lat.]
I. A part of ſpeech, as the, an; the man, an ox.
2. A ſingle clauſe of an account; a particular part of any com-
plex thing.
Laws touching matters of order are changeable by the power
of the church; articles concerning doćtrine not ſo. Hooker.
Have the ſummary of all our griefs,
When time ſhall ſerve to ſhew in articles. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Many believe the article of remiſſion of fins, but believe it
without the condition of repentance. We believe the article
otherwiſe than God intended it. Taylor's Hºly Living.
• All the precepts, promiſes, and threatenings of the goſpel
will riſe up in judgment againſt us; and the articles of our
faith will be ſo many artiles of accuſation; and the great
weight of our charge will be this, that we did not obey the
goſpel which we profeſſed to believe; that we made confeſſion
of the chriſtian faith, but lived like heathens. Tilºtſºn.
You have ſmall reaſon to repine upon that article of life.
- - Swift.
Dryden.
3. Terms; ſtipulations. - -
I embrace theſe conditions; let us have articles between us.
- Shakespeare's Cymieli.e.
It would have gall'd his ſurly nature,
Which caſily endures not article,
Tying him to aught.
4. Point of time; exact time.
If Cansfield had not, in that article of time, given them that
brisk charge, by which other troops were ready, the king him-
Clarendorſ, h. viii.
To A'RT1c1 E. v. n. [from the noun article.] To ſtipulate; to
make terms.
Such
Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
º
-
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A R T
A R T
\
Such in love's warfare is my caſe,
I may not article for grace,
Having put love at laſt to ſhow this face. Dojime.
He had not infringed the leaſt tittle of what was articled, that
they aimed at one mark, and their ends were concentrick.
Howel's local Forg/?.
If it be ſaid, God choſe the ſucceſſor, that is manifeſtly not
ſo in the ſtory of Jephtha, where he articled with the people,
and they made him judge over them. Locke.
To ART1c LE. v. a. To draw up in particular articles.
He, whoſe life ſeems fair, yet if all his er: ours and follies
were ar.icled againſt him, the man would ſeem vicious and mi-
ſerable- Taylor's Rule ºf living holy.
ARTI'cun AR. adj. [articularis, Lat. belonging to the joints.] Is,
in medicine, an epithet applied to a diſeaſe, which more imme-
diately infeſts the joints. Thus the gout is called morbus arti-
culariº.
ARTI'c' JLATE. adj. [from articulus, Lat.] -
1. Diſtinét, as the parts of a limb by joints; not continued in
onet one, as articulate ſounds; that is, ſounds varied and chang-
ed at proper pauſes, in oppoſition to the voice of animals,which
admit no ſuch variety. An articulate pronunciation, a manner
off peaking clear and diſtinct, in which one ſound is not con-
founded with another.
In ſpeaking under water, when the voice is reduced to an
extreme exility, yet the articulate ſounds, the words, are not
cc nfounded. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 195.
The firſt, at leaſt, of theſe I thought deny’d
To beaſts; whom God, on their creation-day,
Created mute to all articulate ſound. Milton's Parad. Loft.
2. Branched out into articles. This is a meaning little in uſe.
His inſtructions were extreme curious and articulate; and,
in them, more articles touching inquiſition, than negotiation:
requiring from his ambaſſadors an anſwer in diſtinét articles to
his queſtions. Bacon's Henry VII.
To ARTI'cui.A.T.E. v. a. [from article J
1. To form words; to ſpeak as a man.
The dogmatiſt knows not by what art he direéts his tongue,
in articulating ſounds into voices. Glanvile's Scepſis Scientifica.
Pariſian academiſts, in their anatomy of apes, tellus, that the
muſcles of the tongue, which do moſt ſerve to articulate a word,
were wholly like to thoſe of man. Ray on Creation.
They would advance in knowledge, and not deceive them-
felves with a little articulated air. Locke.
2. To draw up in articles.
Theſe things, indeed, you have articulated,
Proclaim'd at market-croſſes, read in churches,
To face the garment of rebellion
With ſome fine colour. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
3. To make terms. Theſe two latter ſignifications are unuſual.
Send us to Rome
The beſt, with whom we may articulate
For their own good and ours. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
ARTI'culat ELY. adv. [from articulate.] In an articulate voice.
The ſecret purpoſe of our heart, no leſs articulately ſpoken to
God, who needs not our words to diſcern our meaning.
Decay of Piety.
ARTI'cula TEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from articulate.] The quality of be-
ing articulate.
ARTICULATION. n.ſ.. [from articulate.]
1. The junéture, or joint of bones.
With relation to the motion of the bones in their articula-
tions, ºthere is a twofold liquor prepared for the inunction and
lubrification of their heads, an oily one, and a mucilaginous,
ſupplied by certain glandules ſeated in the articulations. Ray.
2. The aët of forming words. -
I conceive that an extreme ſmall, or an extreme great ſound,
cannot be articulate, but that the articulation requireth a me-
diocrity of ſound. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 196.
By articulation I mean a peculiar motion and figure of ſome
parts belonging to the mouth, between the throat and lips.
Holder's Elements of Speech.
3. [In botany.] The joints or knots in ſome plants, as the cane.
A'RTIF Ice. n.ſ. [artificium, Lat.]
1. Trick; fraud; ſtratagem.
It needs no legends, no ſervice in an unknown tongue; none
of all theſe laborious artifices of ignorance; none of all theſe
cloaks and coverings. South.
2. Art; trade. -
ARTI'FIcER. m. ſ. [artifax, Lat.]
1. An artiſt; a manufacturer; one by whom ahy thing is made.
The lights, doors, and ſtairs, rather directed to the uſe of
º
the gueſt, than to the eye of the artificer. - Sidney.
The great artifier would be more than ordinarily exact in
drawing his own pićture. South.
So in the practices of artificers, and the manufactures of fe-
veral kinds, the end being propoſed, we find out ways. Locke.
2. A forger ; a contriver. - - -
He ſoon aware,
Each perturbation ſmooth'd with outward calm,
Artificer of fraud and was the firſt
That practis'd falſehood under flintly ſhew. Parad'ſ Lºft.
3
Th’ artifter of lies -
Renews th'aſſault, and his kit batt'ry tries. Dºjº's F-4.
3. A dexterous or artful fellow. -
Let you alone, cunning artificer. Ben. ),
ARTIFI CIAL. adj. [artificiel, Fr.] 2://ºr.
1. Made by art; not natural.
Baſilius uſed the artificial day of torches to lighten the ſports
their inventions could contrive. Sidney, b. i.
The curtains cloſely drawn the light to skreen,
As if he had contriv'd to lie unſeen : -
Thus cover'd with an artificial night,
Sleep did his office. Dryden's Fables.
There is no natural motion perpetual; yet it doth not hin-
der but that it is poſſible to contrive ſuch an artificial revolu-
tion. //ilkins's Dadalus.
2. Fictitious; not genuine.
Why, I can ſmile, and murder while I ſmile,
And cry, content, to that which grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears. Shakespeare. Hºn. VI.
3. Artful; contrived with skill. -
Theſe ſeem to be the more artificial, as thoſe of a ſingle per-
ſon the more natural governments, orders, and inſtitutions.
- Temple.
ARTIFICIAL Arguments. [in rhetorick.] Are proofs on conſide-
rations which ariſe from the genius, induſtry, or invention of
the orator; ſuch are definitions, cauſes, effects, &amp;c. which are
thus called, to diſtinguiſh them from laws, authorities, citations,
and the like, which are ſaid to be inartificial arguments.
ARTIFICIAL Lines, on a ſe&amp;tor or ſcale, are lines ſo contrived as
to repreſent the logarithmick fines and tangents; which, by
the help of the line of numbers, ſolve, with tolerable exactneſs,
queſtions in trigonometry, navigation, &amp;c. Chambers.
ARTIFICIAL Numbers, are the ſame with logarithms. -
ARTIFI'CIALLY. adv. [from artificial.]
1. Artfully; with skill; with good contrivance.
How cunningly he made his faultineſs leſs, how artificially he
ſet out the torments of his own conſcience. Sidney.
Should any one be caſt upon a deſolate iſland, and find there
a palace artificially contrived, and curiouſly adorned. Ray.
2. By art; not naturally.
It is covered on all ſides with earth, crumbled into powder,
as if it had been artificially ſiſted. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
ARTIF1'cIALNEss. n.ſ.. [from artificial.] Artfulneſs. Dict.
ARTIF1'cious. adj. [from artifice.] The ſame with artificial.
ARTI'll ERY. m. ſ. It has no plural, [artillerie, Fr.]
1. Weapons of war. -
And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and ſaid unto
him, Go, carry them unto the city.
2. Cannon; great ordnance.
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field?
And heav'n's artillery thunder in the skies? Shakespeare T. Shrew.
I'll to the Tower with all the haſte I can,
To view th’ artillery and ammunition. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Upon one wing the artillery was drawn, being ſixteen pieces,
every piece having pioneers to plain the ways. Hayward.
He that views a fort to take it,
Plants his artillery gainſt the weakeſt place. Denh. Sºphy.
ARTISA'N. m. ſ. [French.] -
1. Artiſt; profeſſor of an art.
What are the moſt judicious artiſans, but the mimicks of
nature ? - J/otton's Architecture.
Beſt and happieſt artiſan,
Beſt of painters, if you can,
With your many-colour'd art,
Draw the miſtreſs of my heart. Guardian.
2. Manufacturer; low tradeſman.
I who had none but generals to oppoſe me, muſt have an ar-
tiſan for my antagoniſt. Addiſon. J/hig Examiner.
A'RTIST. n.ſ.. [artiſie, Fr.]
1. The profeſſor of an art, generally of an art manual.
How to build ſhips, and dreadful ordnance caſt,
Inſtruct the artiſts, and reward their haſte. J/aller.
Rich with the ſpoils of many a conquer'd land,
All arts and artiſ's Theſeus could command,
Who ſold for hire, or wrought for better fame:
The maſter painters and the carvers came. Dryden's Falks.
When I made this, an artiſ; undertook to imitate it; but
uſing another way, fell much ſhort. ſcwton's Opticks.
2. A skilful man; not a novice.
If any one thinks himſelf an artſ at this, let him number up
the parts of his child's body. Locke.
A'RTLESLY. adv. [from artieſ;..] In an artleſs manner; natu-
rally; ſincerely.
Nature and truth, though never ſo low or vulgar, are yet
pleaſing when openly and artieſ; repreſented, Pope's Letters.
A'RTLEss. adj. [from art and lºſs.]
1. Unskilful; ſometimes with the particle of:
The high-ſhoo'd plowman, ſhould he quit the land,
Art'ſ of ſtars, and of the moving ſand. Dryden's P.'ſ,
2. Without fraud; as, an art'ſ maid.
3. Contrived without skill; as, an art'ſ tale.
To A. RTUATE. v. a. [art:a::is, Lat...] To tear limb ſlom Jim''. T.
ARU'N-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S
A S A
.
Artispinaceous. adj. [arundinaceuſ, Lat.] Of cr like reeds.
I)ić7.
ARUN pr’Neous. ad;. ſarundinºus, Lat.] Abounding with reeds.
As. coºjanół. [als, Teut.]
1. In the ſame manner with ſomething elſe.
when thou doſt hear I am as I have been,
Approach me, and thou ſhalt be as thou waſt.
Shakeſpeare’ Henry IV.
In ſinging, as in piping, you excel;
And ſcarce your maſter could perform ſo well. Dryden.
I live as I did, I think as I did, I love you as I did; but all
theſe are to no purpoſe: the world will not live, think, or love
as I do. Swift's Letters.
2. In the manner that.
Mad as I was, I could not bear his fate
With ſilent grief, but loudly blam'd the ſtate. Dryden's Aºn.
The landlord, in his ſhirt as he was, taking a candle in one
hand, and a drawn ſword in the other, ventured out of the
ſoon. Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scriblerus.
3. That; in a conſequential ſenſe.
The cunningeſt mariners were ſo conquered by the ſtorm, at
they thought it beſt with ſtricken ſails to yield to be governed
by it. Sidney, b. ii.
He had ſuch a dexterous proclivity, as his teachers were fain
to reſtrain his forwardneſs. J/affon.
The relations are ſouncertain, as they require a great deal of
examination. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſt. Nº 986.
God ſhall by grace prevent fin ſo ſoon, as to keep the ſoul in
the virginity of its firſt innocence. South.
4. In the ſtate of another.
Madam, were I as you, I'd take her counſel;
I’d ſpeak my own diſtreſs. A. Philips, Diſtreſ Mother.
5. Under a particular confideration; with a particular reſpect.
Beſides that law which concerneth men as men, and that
which belongs unto men as they are men, linked with others in
ſome ſociety; there is a third which touches all ſeveral bodies
politick, ſo far forth as one of them hath publick concerns with
another. Hooker's Eccleſiaſtical Polity, b. i.
I ſay 'tis copper. Dar'ſt thou be as good as thy word now?–
Why, Hal, thou knoweſt, as thou art but a man, Idare;
but as thou art a prince, I fear thee, as I fear the roaring of the
lion's whelp. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
The obječtions that are raiſed againſt it as a tragedy, are as
follow. Gay's Prºf. to What d'ye callit.
6. Like; of the ſame kind with.
A ſimple idea is one uniform idea, as ſweet, bitter. Watts.
7. In the ſame degree with.
Where you, unleſs you are as matter blind,
Condućt and beauteous diſpoſition find. Blackmore.
Well haſt thou ſpoke, the blue-eyed maid replies,
Thou good old man, benevolent as wiſe. Pope's Odyſſey.
8. As if ; in the ſame manner.
The ſquire began nigher to approach,
And wind his horn under the caſtle-wall,
That with the noiſe it ſhook as it would fall. Fairy Queen:
They all contended to creep into his humour, and to do that,
as of themſelves, which they conceived he deſired they ſhould
do. Sir j. Hayward.
Contented in a neſt of ſnow
He lies, as he his bliſs did know,
And to the wood no more would go. Waller,
So hot th' aſſault, ſo high the tumult roſe,
As all the Dardan and Argolick race
Had been contračted in that narrow ſpace. Dryden's 4ºn.
Can miſery no place of ſafety know,
The noiſe purſues me wherefoe'er I go,
As fate ſought only me.
9. According to what.
Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but miniſters by
whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man.
1 Car. iii. 5.
Dryden's Aurengz.
- Their figure being printed,
As juſt before, I think, fhinted, gP
Alma inform'd can try the caſe,
As ſhe had been upon the place. - Prior.
The republick is ſhut up in the great duke's dominions, who
at preſent is very much incenſed againſt it. The occaſion is as
follows. - Addiſon on Italy.
Io. As it were; in ſome ſort.
As for the daughters of king Edward IV, they thought king
Richard had ſaid enough for them; and took them to be but
gº of the king's party, becauſe they were in his power, and at
his diſpoſal. Bacon's Henry VII.
11. While; at the ſame time that.
At either end, it whiſtled as it flew,
And as the brands were green, ſo dropp'd the dew;
Infected as it fell with ſweat of ſanguine hue. Dryd. Fab,
Theſe haughty words Alećto's rage provoke,
And frighted Turnus trembled as ſhe ſpoke. Dryden's Aen.
So the pure limpid ſtream, when foul with ſtains
{)f ruſhing torrents, and deſcending rains,
Works itſelf clear, and as it runs refines,
Addiſon's Cato.
12. Becauſe.
He that commanded the injury to be done, is firſt bound;
then he that did it; and they alſo are obliged who did ſo aſſiſt,
as without them the thing could not have been done. Taylor.
13. As being.
The kernels draw out of the earth juice fit to nouriſh the
tree, as thoſe that would be trees themſelves. Bacon's Nat Hiſt.
14. Equally. - -
Before the place
A hundred doors a hundred entries grace;
As many voices iſſue, and the ſound
Of Sibyl's word as many times rebound.
15. How; in what manner.
Men are generally permitted to publiſh books, and contra-
dićt others, and even themſelves, as they pleaſe, with as little
danger of being confuted, as of being underſtood. Boyle.
16. With ; anſwering to like or ſame.
Siſter, well met; whither away ſo faſt 2–
—No further than the Tower; and, as I gueſs,
Upon the like devotion as yourſelves,
To gratulate the gentle princes there. Shakeſp. Richard III.
17. In a reciprocal ſenſe, anſwering to as.
Every offence committed in the ſtate of nature, may, in the
Dryden's Án.
ſtate of nature, be alſo puniſhed, and as far forth as it may in .
a commonwealth. Locke.
As ſure as it is good, that human nature ſhould exiſt; ſo cer-
tain it is, that the circular revolutions of the earth and planets,
rather than other motions which might as poſſibly have been,
do declare God. Bentley's Sermons.
18. Going before as, in a comparative ſenſe; the firſt as being.
ſometimes underſtood.
Sempronius is as brave a man as Cato. Addiſon's Cato.
Bright as the ſun, and like the morning fair. Granville.
19. Anſwering to ſuch.
Is it not every man's intereſt, that there ſhould be ſuch a go-
vernour of the world as deſigns our happineſs, as would govern
us for our advantage. Tillotſon.
20. Having ſo to anſwer it; in a conditional ſenſe.
As far as they carry light and convićtion to any other man's
underſtanding, ſo far, I hope, my labour may be of uſe to
him. Locke.
21. So is ſometimes underſtood.
As in my ſpeculations I have endeavoured to extinguiſh paſ-
ſion and prejudice, I am ſtill deſirous of doing ſome §: in
this particular. Speciator,
22. Anſwering to ſo conditionally.
So may th’ auſpicious queen of love,
To thee, O ſacred ſhip, be kind;
As thou to whom the muſe commends,
The beſt of poets and of friends,
Doſt thy committed pledge reſtore. Dryden.
23. Before how it is ſometimes redundant; but this is in low lan-
ge.
*A, how, dear Syphax P Addiſon's Cato;
24. It ſeems to be redundant before yet; to this time.
Though that war continued nine years, and this hath as yet
laſted but ſix, yet there hath been much more action in the pre-
ſent war. Addiſon.
25. In a ſenſe of compariſon, followed by ſº.
As when a dab-chick waddles through the copſe
On feet and wings, and flies, and wades, and hops;
Solab'ring on, with ſhoulders, hands, and head,
Wide as a windmill all his figure ſpread. Pope's Dunciad.
26. As For ; with reſpect to.
A for the reſt of thoſe who have written againſt me, they
deſerve not the leaſt notice. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
27. As If ; in the ſame manner that it would be, if.
Anſwering their queſtions, as if it were a matter that needed
it. Locke.
28. As to ; with reſpect to.
I pray thee, ſpeak to me as to thy thinkings,
As thou doſt ruminate; and give thy worſt of thoughts
The worſt of words. Shakeſp. Othella.
They pretend, in general, to great refinements, as to what
regards chriſtianity. Addiſon on Italy.
I was miſtaken as to the day, placing that accident about
thirty-ſix hours ſooner than it happened. Swift.
29. As well As; equally with.
Each man's mind has ſome peculiarity, as well as his face,
that diſtinguiſhes him from all others. Locke.
It is adorned with admirable pieces of ſculpture, as well mo-
dern as ancient. Addiſon on Italy.
30. As though ; as if.
Theſe ſhould be at firſt gently treated, as though we expected
an impoſthumation. Sharp's Surgery.
A/SA DULCIS. See BeNzoi N.
ASA FOETIDA. Un. ſ. A gum or reſin brought from the Eaſt
ASSA FOETIDA. § Indies, of a ſharp taſte, and a ſtrong of-
fenſive ſmell; which is ſaid to diſtil, during the heat of ſum-
mer, from a little ſhrub, frequent in Media, Perſia, Aſſyria, and
Arabia. It is at firſt white, bordering on yellow, then on red,
and, laſtly, violet; and melts under the fingers like wax. It is
° 126.
-
:
--
--
--"<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

4. Øf
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S C
A S C
º
of known efficacy in ſome uterine diſorders; but the rankncſ;
of its ſmell occaſions it to be ſeldom uſed but by farriers; yet,
in the Eaſt Indies, it makes an ingredient in their ragouts.
Chambers.
ASARABA"CCM. n.ſ.. [aſarum, Lat.] The name of a plant.
The flower cup is divided into four parts, and the fruit into
fix cells, filled with oblong ſeeds. The leaves are roundiſh,
thick, and almoſt of the colour of thoſe of the ivy tree. There
are two ſorts, the common aſaralacca, and that of Canada. The
firſt ſort is uſed in medicine. It delights in a moiſt ſhady place,
and is increaſed by parting the roots in autumn. Millar.
ASBE's TIN E. adj. [from asbeſtos.] Something incombuſtible, or
that partakes of the nature and qualities of the lapis asbeſtos.
ASBESTOS. n.ſ. [233;º..] A ſort of native foſſile ſtone, which
may be ſplit into threads and filaments, from one inch to ten
inches in length, very fine, brittle, yet ſomewhat tractable,
ſilky, and of a greyiſh colour, not unlike talc of Venice. It
is almoſt inſipid to the taſte, indiſſoluble in water, and endued
with the wonderful property of remaining unconſumed in the
fire, which only whitens it. But, notwithſtanding the com-
mon opinion, in two trials before the Royal Society, a piece
of cloth made of this ſtone was found to loſe a dram of its
weight each time. Paper as well as cloth has been made of
this ſtone; and Pliny ſays he had ſeen napkins of it, which, be-
ing taken foul from the table, were thrown into the fire, and
better ſcowered than if they had been waſhed in water. This
ſtone is found in many places of Aſia and Europe; particularly
in the iſland of Angleſey in Wales, and in Aberdeenſhire in
Scotland. Chambers.
ASCARIDES n. ſ. [2-xagº, from Gazzeº, to leap.] Little
worms in the rectum, ſo called from their continual trouble-
ſome motion, cauſing an intolerable itching. &amp;ſincy.
To ASCEND. v. n. [aſcendo, Lat.]
1. To mount upwards.
Then to the heav'n of heav'ns ſhall heaſtend
With vićtory, triumphing through the air
Over his foes and thine. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
2. To proceed from one degree of knowledge to another.
By theſe ſteps we ſhall aſcend to more juſt ideas of the glory
of Jeſus Chriſt, who is intimately united to God, and is one
with him. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
3. To ſtand higher in genealogy. -
The only inceſt was in the aſcending, not collateral or de-
ſcending branch; as when parents and children married, this
was accounted inceſt. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
To Ascend. v. a. To climb up any thing.
They aſcend the mountains, they deſcend the vallies.
Delane's Revelation examined.
Asce'NDABLE. adj. [from aſ end..] That may be aſcended. Dić.
Asce'ND ANT. n.ſ.. [from aſcend.]
1. The part of the ecliptick at any particular time above the ho-
rizon, which is ſuppoſed by aſtrologers to have great influence.
2. Height; elevation.
He was initiated, in order to gain inſtruction in ſciences that
were there in their higheſt aſcendant. Temple.
3. Superiority; influence.
By the aſcendant he had in his underſtanding, and the dex-
terity of his nature, he could perſuade him very much. Claren.
What ſtar I know not, but ſome ſtar I find,
Has giv'n thee an aſcendant o'er my mind. Dryden's Perſ.
When they have got an aſ endant over them, they ſhould uſe
it with moderation, and not make themſelves ſcarecrows. Locke.
4. One of the degrees of kindred reckoned upwards.
The moſt nefarious kind of baſtards, are inceſtuous baſtards,
which are begotten between aſcendants and deſcendants in in-
finitum; and between collaterals, as far as the divine prohibi-
tion. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Asce'NDANT. adj. -
1. Superiour; predominant; overpowering.
Chriſt outdoes Moſes, before he diſplaces him; and ſhews an
Oſendant ſpirit above him. South.
2. In an aſtrological ſenſe, above the horizon.
Let him ſtudy the conſtellation of Pegaſus, which is about
that time aſcendant. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv.
Asce'NDENéY. m. ſ. [from aſ end..] Influence; power.
Cuſtom has ſome aftendency over underſtanding, and what at
one time ſeemed decent, appears diſagreeable afterwards.I/atts.
Asch'ssion. m. ſ. ſaſeſ, Lat.]
* The act of aſcending or riſing; frequently applied to the vi-
fille elevation of our Saviour to heaven.
Then riſing from his grave,
Spoil'd principalities, and pow'rs, triumph'd
In open ſhew; and, with afterſon bright,
Captivity led captive through the air. Paradiſ. Loft, b. x.
2. The thing riſing, or mounting.
Men err in the theory of inebriation, conceiving the brain
doth only ſuffer from vaporous aſcenſiºns from the ſtomach.
Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Asce'ssion, in aſtronomy, is either right or oblique. Right aſcen-
fion of the ſun, or a ſtar, is that degree of the equinoëtial,
counted from the beginning of Aries, which riſes with the ſun
Ot § º right ſphere. Obliq:e ºftenſion is an arch of the
'oi. I.
equator intercepted between the firſt point of Aries, and that
point of the equator which riſes together with a ſtar in an
oblique ſphere. -
Ascension DAY. The day on which the aſcenſion of our Sa-
viour is commemorated, commonly called Holy Thurſday; the
Thurſday but one before Whitſuntide.
Asce'Nsion Al Difference, is the difference between the right and
oblique aſcenſion, of the ſame point to the ſurface of the ſphere.
Chambers.
Asce'Nsive. adj. [from aſerd..] In a ſtate of aſcent.
The cold augments when the days begin to encreaſe, though
the ſun be then aſcenſive, and returning from the winter tro-
pick. - Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv.
Asce’NT. n.ſ.. [aſcenſus, Lat.]
1. Riſe; the act of riſing.
To him with ſwift aſcent he up return'd,
Into his bliſsful boſom reaſſum'd
In glory, as of old.
2. The way by which one aſcends.
The temple, and the ſeveral degrees of aſſent, whereby men
did climb up to the ſame, as if it had been a ſcala cali, be all
poetical and fabulous. Bacon's New Atlant.
It was a rock
Conſpicuous far; winding with one aſcent
Acceſſible from earth, one entrance high. Par. Loft, b. iv.
3. An eminence, or high place.
No land like Italy erects the fight,
By ſuch a vaſt aſcent, or ſwells to ſuch a height. Addison.
A wide flat cannot be pleaſant in the Elyſian fields, unleſs it
be diverſified with depreſſed valleys and ſwelling aſcents. Bentl.
To ASCERTAIN. v. a. [acertener, Fr.]
I. To make certain; to fix; to eſtabliſh. -
The divine law both aſcertaineth the truth, and ſupplieth unto
us the want of other laws. Hocker, b. i.
Money differs from uncoined ſilver in this, that the quan-
tity of ſilver in each piece is aſcertained by the ſtamp. Locke.
2. To make confident; to take away doubt; often with of:
If it be on right judgment of myſelf, it may give me the
other certainty, that is, aſcertain me that I am in the number
of God’s children. Hammond's Pračical Catechiſm.
This makes us ačt with a repoſe of mind and wonderful
tranquillity, becauſe it aſcertains us of the goodneſs of our
work. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
AscertATNER. m. ſ. [from aſcertain.] The perſon that proves
or eſtabliſhes. -
Asce RTA'INMENT. m. ſ. [from aſertain..] A ſettled rule; an
eſtabliſhed ſtandard.
For want of † how far a writer may expreſs his
good wiſhes for his country, innocent intentions may be charg-
ed with crimes. Swift to Lord Middleton.
Asce"Tick, adj. [3-ºxx.] Employed wholly in exerciſes of
devotion and mortification. -
None lived ſuch long lives as monks and hermits, ſequeſtered
from plenty to a conſtant aſcetick courſe of the ſevereſt abſti-
nence and devotion. South.
Asce"Tick. n.ſ. He that retires to devotion and mortification;
ahermit.
I am far from commending thoſe aſſeticks, that, out of a pre-
tence of keeping themſelves unſpotted from the world, take up
their quarters in deſarts. Norris.
He that preaches to man, ſhould underſtand what is in man;
and that skill can ſcarce be attained by an oſciick in his ſoli-
tudes. Atterbury's Sermons.
ASCII. m.ſ. It has no ſingular. [from a without, and 2x2, a ſha-
dow.] . Thoſe people who, at certain times of the year, have
no ſhadow at nºon; ſuch are the inhabitants of the torrid zone,
becauſe they have the ſun twice a year vertical to them. Die?.
AscI'TEs. m. ſ. [from 32xe, a bladder.] A particular ſpecies of
dropſy ; a ſwelling of the lower belly and depending parts,
from an extravaſation and collection of water broke out of its
proper veſſels. This caſe, when certain and inveterate, is uni-
verſally allowed to admit of no cure but by means of the manual
operation of tapping. Hinºy.
There are two kinds of dropſy, the anaſarca, called alſo leu-
cophlegmacy, when the extravaſated matter ſwims in the cells
of the membrana adipoſa; and the aſites, when the water poſ-
ſeſſes the cavity of the abdomen. Sharp's Surgery.
AscITICAL. ; adj. [from aſcites.] Belonging to an aſcites; drop-
AscI'Tick. º hydropical.
When it is part of another tumour, it is hydropical, cither
anaſarcous or aſ itical. //ſºnan's Surgery.
AscITI'TIOUS. adj. [aſititius, Lat..] Supplemental; additional;
not inherent; not original.
Homer has been reckoned an aſ it, t'at's name, from ſome ac-
cident of his life. Pºpº's Eſly on Hºmer.
Ascr1'BAELE. adj. [from aſ riºr.] That which may be aſcribed.
The greater part have been forward to reječt it, upon a miſ-
taken perſuaſion, that thoſe phoenomena are the effects of na-
ture's abhorrency of a vacuum, which ſeem to be more fity
aſ ribable to the weight and ſpring of the air. Bºyle.
To ASCRIBE. v. a. [aſ ribo, Lat]
1. To attribute to as a cauſe.
2 G The
Milton's Par. Lºft, b. x.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S I
A S K
**
The cauſe of his baniſhment is unknown, becauſe he was
unwilling to provoke the emperor, by aſcribing it to any other
reaſon than what was pretended. Dryden.
To this we may juſtly aſcribe thoſe cnvies, jealouſies, and
encroachments, which render mankind uneaſy to one another.
Rogers's Sermons.
2. To attribute to as a poſſeſſor, or ſubſtance receiving accidents.
Theſe perfections muſt be ſomewhere, and therefore may
much better be aſ riled to God, in whom we ſuppoſe all other
perfections to meet, than to any thing elſe. Tillotſºn.
AscR1'PTION. m. ſ. [aſcriptio, Lat.] - The act of aſcribing. Dić.
AscRIPTI'tious. adj. [aſcriptitius, Lat..] That which is aſcrib-
ed. Dić7.
ASH. n.ſ.. [fraxinus, Lat. aerc, Saxon.]
†ſ ſ. hath º which end in an odd lobe.
The male flowers, which grow at a remote diſtance from the
fruit, have no petals, but conſiſt of many ſtamina. The ovary
becomes a ſecd veſſel, containing one ſeed at the bottom, ſhaped
like a bird's tongue. The ſpecies are, 1. The common aſh
free. 2. The ſtriped aſh. 3. The manna aſh, &amp;c. The firſt
fort is a common timber tree in every part of England. The
ſecond is a variety of the firſt. The third ſort is ſuppoſed to
be the tree from whence the true Calabrian manna is taken.
The timber is of excellent uſe to the wheelwright and cart-
wright. Millar.
Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, where againſt
My grained aſh an hundred times hath broke,
And ſcar'd the moon with ſplinters. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
With which of old he charm'd the ſavage train,
And call'd the mountain aſhes to the plain. Dryd. Silenus.
Ash colour ED. adj. [from aſh and colour.] Coloured between
brown and grey, like the bark of an aſhen branch.
Clay, aſh colºured, was part of a ſtratum which lay above the
ſtrata of ſtone. J%dward on Fºſſils.
AsHA'MED. adj. [from ſhame.] Touched with ſhame; gene-
rally with ºf before the cauſe of ſhame.
Profeſs publickly the doctrine of Jeſus Chriſt, not being a-
famed of the word of God, or of any practices enjoined by it.
Taylor's Hºly Living.
One wou'd have thought ſhe would have ſtirr'd; but ſtrove
With modeſty, and was aſham'd to move. Dryd. Fables.
This I have ſhadowed, that you may not be aſhamed ºf that
hero, whoſe protection you undertake. Dryd. Conq. ºf Gr. Ded.
A'shen, adj. [from aſh.] Made of aſh wood.
At once he ſaid, and threw -
His aſhen ſpear; which quiver'd as it flew. Dryden.
Ashes. n.ſ. wants the ſingular. ſarca, Sax, aſ he, Dutch..]
1. The remains of anything burnt.
Some relicks would be left of it, as when aſhes remain of
burned bodies. Digly on Bodies.
This late diſſenſion, grown betwixt the peers,
Burns under feigned aſhes of forg'd love,
And will at laſt breakout into a flame. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Aſhes contain a very fertile ſalt, and are the beſt manure for
cold lands, if kept dry, that the rain doth not waſh away their
ſalt. Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. The remains of the body; often uſed in poetry for the carcaſe,
from the ancient practice of burning the dead,
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king!
Pale aſhes of the houſe of Lancaſter |
Thou bloodleſs remnant of that royal blood! Shakespeare R. III.
To great Laërtes I bequeath
A taſk of grief, his ornaments of death ;
Left, when the fates his royal aſhes claim, -
The Grecian matrons taint my ſpotleſs name. Pope.
Ashwed Nesday. m. ſ. The firſt day of Lent, ſo called from
the ancient cuſtom of ſprinkling aſhes on the head.
AshLAR. n.ſ. [with maſons.] Free ſtones as they come out of
the quarry, of different lengths, breadths, and thickneſſes.
A's HLERING. m. ſ. [with builders.] Quartering to tack to in
garrets, about two foot and a half or three foot high, perpen-
dicular to the floor, and reaching to the underſide of the raf-
ters. Builder’s Dićf.
As Ho'RE. adv. [from a and ſhore.]
I. On ſhore; on the land.
The poor Engliſhman riding in the road, having all that he
brought thither aſhore, would have been undone. Raleigh.
Moor'd in a Chian creek, aſhore I went,
And all the following night in Chios ſpent. Addiſon's Ovid.
2. To the ſhore; to the land.
We may as bootleſs ſpend our vain command,
As ſend our precepts to the leviathan -
Shakeſp. Henry V.
To come aſhore.
May thy billows rowl aſhore -
The beryl, and the golden ore. Milton’s Comus.
A's Hw EED. m. ſ. [from aſh and weed.] . An herb.
A's HY. adj. [from aſh..] Aſh coloured; pale; inclining to a whitiſh
grey.
Oft have I ſeen a timely parted ghoſt
Of aſhy ſemblance, meagre, pale, and bloodieſ. Shakespeare H. VI.
A: I'DE. atly. [from a and ſide.]
1. To one ſide; out of the perpendicular dire&amp;ion.
The ſtorm ruſh'd in, and Arcite ſtood aghaſt;
The flames were blown aſide, yet ſhone they bright,
Fann'd by the wind, and gave a ruffled light. Dryd. Fulles.
2. To another part; out of the true direction.
He had no brother; which though it be a comfortable thing
for kings to have, yet it draweth the ſubjects eyes a little
aſide. Bacon's Henry VIII.
3. From the company; as, to ſpeak aſl.
He took him aſide from the multitude. Mark, vii. 33.
A's INARY. adj. ſaſinarius, Lat.] Belonging to an aſs. Dict.
A's ININ E. adj. [from aſinus, Lat.] Belonging to an aſ.
You ſhall have more ado to drive our dulleſt youth, our
ſtocks and ſtubs, from ſuch nurture, than we have now to hale
our choiceſt and hopefulleſt wits to that aftime feaſt of ſow
thiſtles and brambles. Milt. on Education.
To Ask. v. a. ſarcian, Saxon.]
1. To petition ; to beg; ſometimes with an accuſative only ;
ſometimes with fºr.
When thou doſt aſ me lºſing, I’ll kneel down,
And aſk of thee fºrgiveneſ. Shakeſp. King Lear.
We have nothing elſe to aſ, but that -
Which you deny already: yet will ºft,
That, if we fail in our requeſt, the blame
May hang upon your hardneſs. Shakespeare Cºricants.
My ſon, haſt thou finned : do ſo no more, but aſ pardon
for thy former fins. Ecclus, xxi. 1.
If he aſk fºr bread, will he give him a ſtone : A Matt. vii. 9.
In long journies, aſ your maſter leave to give ale to the
horſes. Swift.
2. To demand; to claim; as, to aſ a price for goods.
Aſk me never ſo much dowry and gift, and I will give ac-
cording as ye ſhall ſay unto me: but give me the damſel to
wife. - Gen. xxxiv. 1 2.
He ſaw his friends, who, whelm'd beneath the waves,
Their funeral honours claim’d, and oft'd their quict graves.
Pryden's ºncid.
3. To enquire; to queſtion; with fºr before the thing, and ſome-
times of before the perſon, s
Stand ye in the ways, and ſee, and aſ fºr the old paths,
whore is the good way, and walk therein, and yeſhall find reſt
for your ſouls. jºrem. vi. 16.
For aſk now of the days that are paſt, which were before
thee, ſince the day that God created man upon the earth, and
aſk from the one ſide of heaven unto the other, whether there
hath been any ſuch thing as this great thing is, or hath been
heard like it. Deut. iv. 32.
O inhabitant of Aroer, ſtand by the way and eſpy, aſ him
that flieth, and her that eſcapeth, and ſay, what is done *
Jeremiah, xlviii. 19.
4. To enquire; with after before the thing.
He ſaid, wherefore is it that thou doſt aſ after my name 2
And he bleſſed him there. Genºſis, xxxii. 29.
5. To require, as phyſically neceſſry.
A lump of ore in the bottom of a mine will be ſtirred by
two men's ſtrength; which, if you bring it to the top of the
earth, will aſ ſix men to ſtir it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The adminiſtration paſſes into different hands at the end of
two months, which contributes to diſpatch: but any exigence
of ſtate aſks a much longer time to condućt any deſign to its
maturity. Addison's Rem. on Italy.
AsK, ASH, As, do all come from the Saxon arc, an aſh tree.
Gilſºn's Camden.
AskA'Nce.
AsKA'UNCE.
Zelmane, keeping a countenance aftance, as ſhe underſtood
him not, told him, it became her evil. Sidney, b. i.
His wanniſh eyes upon them bent asſance.
And when he ſaw their labours well ſucceed,
He wept for rage, and threaten’d dire miſchance. Faiſº.
Some ſay, he bid his angels turn asſance
The poles of earth, twice ten degrees, and more,
From the ſun's axle; they with labour puſh'd
Oblique the centrick globe. A ſilion's Par. I?, b. x.
AskA'UNT. adv. Obliquely; on one ſide.
At this Achilles roll'd his furious eyes,
Fix'd on the king askaloit; and thus replies,
O, impudent. Drydº.’s Ilia &amp;.
Since the ſpace, that lies on cither ſide
The ſolar orb, is without limits wide,
Grant that the ſun had happen'd to prefer
A ſeat askaunt, but one diameter:
Loſt to the light by that unhappy place,
This globe had lain a frozen loneſome maſs. Black/nore:
A's K.E.R. m.ſ.. [from as...]
1. Petitioner.
}ai. Sideways; obliquely.
Have you
Ere now denied the asker? and, now again
On him that did not aſk, but mock, below
Your ſu'd for tongues. Shakeſp. Coriolanzºr.
The greatneſs of the after, and the ſmallneſs of the thing
asked, had been ſufficient to enforce his requeſt. º
2. E.I.A.-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S P
- A S P
2. Enquirer.
Every asker being ſatisfied, we may conclude, that all their
conceptions of being in a place are the ſame. Digby of Bodies.
As KER. m. ſ. A water newt.
AsK Ew. adv. [from a and skew.] Aſide ; with contempt; con-
temptuouſly ; diſdainfully.
For when ye mildly look with lovely hue,
Then is my ſoul with life and love inſpir'd :
But when ye lowre, or look on me askew,
Then do I die. Spe'ſ r, Sonnet vii.
Then take it, Sir, as it was writ,
Nor look askew at what it faith;
There's no petition in it. Prior.
To As LA'K E. v. a. [from a and ſlake, or ſlack.] To remit; to
mitigate; to ſlacken.
But this continual, crucl, civil war,
No skill can ſtint, nor reaſon can aſlake. Spenſºr, Son. xliv.
Whilſt ſeeking to aſlake thy raging fire,
Thou in me kindleſt much more great deſire. Spenſer.
ASLA'NT. adv. [from a and ſlant..] Obliquely; on one ſide ;
not perpendicularly.
There is a willow grows aſſant a brook,
That ſhews his hoar leaves in the glaſſy ſtream. Shakesp. Hamlet.
He fell; the ſhaft -
Drove through his neck aſſant; he ſpurns the ground,
And the ſoul iſſues through the weazon's wound. Dryden,
Aſlant the dew-bright earth, and colour'd air,
He looks in boundleſs majeſty abroad. Thomſon's Summer,
Asi. E'EP. adv. [from a and ſleep.]
1. Sleeping; at reſt.
How many thouſands of my pooreſt ſubječts
Are at this hour aſleep / O gentle ſleep,
Nature's ſoft nurſe, how have I frighted thee! Shakespeare H. IV.
The diligence of trade, and noiſeful gain,
And luxury more late aſleep were laid:
All was the night's, and, in her ſilent reign,
No ſound the reſt of nature did invade. Dryden's Ann. M.
There is no difference between a perſon aſleep, and in an
apoplexy, but that the one can be awaked, and the other can-
In Ot. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. To ſleep.
If a man watch too long, it is odds but he will fall aſleep.
Bacon's Eſſays.
Thus done the tales, to bed they creep,
By whiſpering winds ſoon lull'd aſleep. , Milton's l'Allegro.
Aslo'PE. adv. [from a and ſlope.] With declivity; obliquely;
not perpendicularly.
Set them not upright, but aſlºpe, areaſonable depth under the
ground. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 425.
The curſe aſlope
Glanc'd on the ground; with labour I muſt earn
My bread: what harm Idleneſs had been worſe:
My labour will ſuſtain me. Milt. Par. Lºft, b. x,
The knight did ſtoop,
And ſate on further ſide aſkpe. Hudibras.
Aso'MAtous. adj. [from 2, priv. and zºuz, a body.] Incorpo-
real, or without a body.
ASP. }" f. [aſpis, Lat.] A kind of ſerpent, whoſe poiſon
A's Pick. 5 is ſo dangerous and quick in its operation, that it
kills without a poſſibility of applying any remedy. It is ſaid
to be very ſmall, and peculiar to Egypt and Lybia. Thoſe that
are bitten by it, die within three hours; and the manner of
their dying being by ſleep and lethargy, without any pain,
Cleopatra choſe it, as the eaſieſt way of diſpatching herſelf.
Calmet.
High-minded Cleopatra, that with ſtroke
Of aſp's ſting, herſelf did kill. . . Fairy Queen, b. i.
Scorpion, and off, and amphiſbaena dire,
And dipſas. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. x.
Asp. n.ſ. A tree. See Aspen.
ASPA LATHUS. n.ſ. [Latin.]
1. A plant called the roſe of Jeruſalem, or our lady's roſe.
2. The wood of a prickly tree, heavy, oleaginous, ſomewhat
ſharp and bitter to the taſte, and anciently in much repute as an
aſtringent, but now little uſed. There are four kinds of this
wood; the firſt of the colour of box, hard, ſolid, heavy, and
ſmelling like roſes; which is therefore called roſewood. The
ſecond, red like yew, and of a very agreeable ſmell. The third,
hard, twiſted, knotty, of a rank ſmell, like that of a goat, and
a diſagreeable taſte. The fourth has an aſh coloured bark, and
the wood is of a purple dye. Affalathus affords an oil of ad-
mirable ſcent, reputed one of the beſt perfumes. Chambers.
I gave a ſweet ſmell like cinnamon and aſpalathus, and I
yielded a pleaſant odour like the beſt myrrh. Ecclus, xxiv. 15.
ASPARA Gus. m. ſ. [Lat.] The name of a plant. It has a ro-
faceous flower of ſix leaves, placed orbicularly, out of whoſe
center riſes the pointal, which turns to a ſoft globular berry,
full of hard ſeeds. The leaves are finely cut. The ſpecies are
twelve, of which all but the two firſt are exoticks. 1. Gar-
den aſparagus. 2. Wild aſparagus, with narrow leaves. The
firſt fort is cultivated for the table, and propagated by the ſeeds,
which ſhould be ſown in the beginning of February. The
next year they ſhould be planted out; the third ſpring, after
planting, they may be begun to be cut, and, by proper manage-
ment, a plot of affaragus may be continued ten or twelve years
in cutting. . The ſecond ſort grows wild in ſome parts, but,
producing ſlender ſhoots, it is rarely cultivated. AZillar.
Aparagus affects the urine with a fetid ſmell, eſpecially if
cut when they are white; and therefore have been ſuſpected
by ſome phyſicians, as not friendly to the kidneys; when they
are older, and begin to ramify, they loſe this quality; but then
they are not ſo agreeable. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
ASPECT. m. ſ. ſaſpečius, Lat. It appears anciently to have been
pronounced with the accent on the laſt ſyllable, which is now
placed on the firſt.] -
1. Look ; air; appearance. -
I have preſented the tongue under a double aſpeº, ſuch as
may juſtify the definition, that it is the beſt and worſt part.
Government of the Tongue.
They are both, in my judgment, the image or picture of a
great ruin, and have the true aſpect of a world lying in its rub-
biſh. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. Countenance; look.
Fairer than faireſt, in his faining eye,
Whoſe ſole aſped; he counts felicity. Spenſ Hymn on Love.
Thoſe eyes of thine from mine have drawn ſalt tears,
Sham'd their aſpe&amp;s with ſtore of childiſh drops. Shakespeare. R. III.
I am fearful: wherefore frowns he thus
'Tis his aſpect of terrour. All's not well. Shakesp. Richard III.
Yet had his affect nothing of ſevere,
But ſuch a face as promis'd him ſincere. Dryden's Falks,
Then ſhall thy Craggs (and let me call him mine)
On the caſt ore another Pollio ſhine; -
With aſpect open ſhall erect his head. Pope.
3. Glance; view; act of beholding.
When an envious or an amorous aſcă doth infe&amp;t the ſpi-
rits of another, there is joined both affection and imagination.
Bacon's Natural Hiſt. Nº 998.
The ſetting ſun -
Slowly deſcended; and with right aſpect
Againſt the eaſtern gate of paradiſe,
Levell'd his ev'ning rays. Paradiſe Lºft, b. iv.
4. Direction towards any point; view; poſition.
I have built a ſtrong wall, faced to the ſouth affect with
brick. - Swift's Loft Will.
5. Diſpoſition of any thing to ſomething elſe; relation.
- The light got from the oppoſite arguings of men of parts,
ſhewing the different ſides of things, and their various aſpecis
and probabilities, would be quite loſt, if every one were obliged
to aſſent to, and ſay after the ſpeaker. Locłº,
6. Diſpoſition of a planet to other planets.
There's ſome ill planet reigns,
I muſt be patient till the heavens look
With an aſpect more favourable. Shakeſp. Iłżnter's Tale.
Not unlike that which aſtrologers call a conjunction of pla-
nets, of no very benign aſpe: the one to the other. J/otton.
- To the blank moon
Her office they preſcrib'd : to th’ other five
Their planetary motions, and aſpects,
In ſextile, ſquare, and trine, and oppoſite. Paradiſe Loſt:
Why does not every ſingle ſtar ſhed a ſeparate influence, and
have aſpects with other ſtars of their own conſtellation ?
Bently’s Sermonſ,
To ASPE'cT. v. a. ſ.aſpicio, Lat.] To behold.
Happy in their miſtake, thoſe people whom
The northern pole aſpects; whom fear of death
(The greateſt of all human fears) ne'er moves. Tºmpk.
ASPE'cTABLE. adj. [aſpeciabilis, Lat..] Viſible ; being the ob-
jest of fight.
He was the ſole cauſe of this aſpeciable and perceivable uni-
verſal. Raleigh's Hiſł. of the //ºrld.
To this uſe of informing us what is in this aſpeciable world,
we ſhall find the eye well fitted. Ray on Creation.
As PE'cTION. m. ſ. [from aſpect.] Beholding; view.
A Mooriſh queen, upon aſpeãion of the picture of Andro-
meda, conceived and brought forth a fair one. Brown's W. Err.
A's PEN, or ASP. m. ſ. [eſpe, Dutch ; aff, Dan, epre, trembling,
Sax. Sommer.] See PopLAR, of which it is a ſpecies. The
leaves of this tree always tremble.
The aften or aſp tree hath leaves much the ſame with the
poplar, only much ſmaller, and not ſo white. 44ortin. Husb.
The builder oak ſole king of foreſts all,
The aſpen, good for ſtatues, the cypreſs funcral. Spenſºr,
AsPEN. adj. [from aſh or aſpen.]
1. Belonging to the aſp tree.
Oh! had the monſter ſeen thoſe lily hands
Tremble like aſpen leaves upon a lute. Shakespeare. Tituſ Audrºn.
No gale diſturbs the trees,
Nor aften leaves confeſs the gentleſt breeze. Gay,
2. Made of aſpen wood.
ASPER. ad. [Lat.] Rough; rugged. This word I have ſound
only in the following paſſage. -
All baſe notes, or very treble notes, give an offer found ; for that
the baſe ſtriketh more air than it can well fl. Kc equally, B., ".
3 Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S P
A. S S
To ASPERATE. v. c. [aftero, Lat.] To roughen; to make
rough or uneven.
Thoſe corpuſcles of colour, inſinuating themſelves into all
the pores of the body to be dyed, may aſperate its ſuperficies,
according to the bigneſs and texture of the corpuſcles. Bºyle.
AsPERATION. n.ſ. [from aſperate.] A making rough. Disi.
ASPERIF o'lious. ad;. [from after, rough, and fºlium, a leaf,
Lat..] One of the diviſions of plants, ſo called from the rough-
neſs of their leaves.
As PE'RITY. m. ſ. [aſperitas, Lat.]
1. Unevenneſs; roughneſs of ſurface.
Sometimes the pores and aſperities of dry bodies are ſo in-
commenſurate to the particles of the liquor, that they glide over
the ſurface. Boyle.
2. Roughneſs of ſound; harſhneſs of pronunciation.
3. Roughneſs, or ruggedneſs of temper; moroſeneſs; ſourneſs;
crabbedneſs.
The charity of the one, like kindly exhalations, will de-
fend in ſhowers of bleſfings; but the rigour and aſperity of
the other, in a ſevere doom upon ourſelves. Govern. Tongue.
Avoid all unſeemlineſs and aſperity of carriage; do nothing
that may argue a peeviſh or froward ſpirit. Rogers.
As PERNATION. m. ſ. [aſpernatio, Lat.] Negleå; diſregard. D.
AsPERous. adj. [aſper, Lat.] Rough; uneven.
Black and white are the moſt aſperous and unequal of co-
lours; ſo like, that it is hard to diſtinguiſh them: black is the
moſt rough. Boyle.
To ASPERSE. v. a. [aſpergo, Lat.] To beſpatter with cenſure
or calumny.
In the buſineſs of Ireland, beſides the opportunity to afferſ.
the king, they were ſafe enough. Clarendon, b. viii.
Curb that impetuous tongue, nor raſhly vain,
And ſingly mad, aſperſe the ſov’reign reign. Pope's Iliad.
Unjuſtly poets we aſperſ,
Truth ſhines the brighter clad in verſe. Swift.
Aspe'RSION. m. ſ. [aſperſio, Lat.]
I. A ſprinkling.
If thou doſt break her virgin knot, before
All ſančtimonious ceremonies,
No ſweet aſperſions ſhall the heav'ns let fall,
To make this contract grow. Shakeſp. 7-mp.ºſ.
It exhibits a mixture of new conceits and old; whereas the
inſtauration gives the new unmixed, otherwiſe than with ſome
little aſperſion of the old, for taſte's ſake. Bacon's Holy Iſ ar.
2. Calumny; cenſure.
The ſame aſperſons of the king, and the ſame grounds of a
rebellion. Dryden's Epiſtle to the J/higs.
Aspha'LTICK. adj. [from aſphaltos.] Gummy; bituminous.
And with aſphaltick ſlime, broad as the gate,
Deep to the roots of hell, the gather'd beach
They faſten’d. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. ix.
ASPHALTOS. m. ſ. [2-paxºs, bitumen.] A ſolid, brittle, black,
bituminous, inflammable ſubſtance, reſembling pitch, and chief-
ly found ſwimming on the ſurface of the Lacus Aſphaltites, or
Dead ſea, where anciently ſtood the cities of Sodom and Go-
morrah. It is caſt up from time to time, in the nature of li-
quid pitch, from the earth at the bottom of this ſea; and, be-
ing thrown upon the water, ſwims like other fat bodies, and
condenſes gradually by the heat of the ſun, and the ſalt that is
in it. It burns with great vehemence. The Arabs uſe it for
pitching their ſhips; and much of it was employed in the em-
balming of the ancients.
ASPHALTUM. m. ſ. [Lat.] A bituminous ſtone found near
the ancient Babylon, and lately in the province of Neufchâtel;
which, mixed with other matters, makes an excellent cement,
incorruptible by air, and impenetrable by water; ſuppoſed to
be the mortar ſo much celebrated among the ancients, with
which the walls of Babylon were laid. Chambers.
A'sPHoDEL, n.ſ. [lilio-aſphodelus, Lat.] Day-lily.
The characters are ; It hath a root like kingſpear; the
flower conſiſts of one leaf, which is deeply cut into ſix ſeg-
ments, and expands in form of a lily; the flower is ſucceeded
by an oval fruit, which contains ſeveral roundiſh ſeeds. The
ſpecies are, 1. The yellow aſphodel. 2. The red affhodel.
Theſe two ſorts are very common in moſt of the Engliſh gar-
dens; the firſt is often called by the gardeners the yellow tube-
roſe, from its having a very agreeable ſcent; but the other is
called the day-lily, or the tuberoſe orange-lily, in moſt places.
They are both hardy plants, and multiply exceedingly, if ſuf-
fered to remain two or three years undiſturbed; eſpecially the
red ſort, which ſends forth offsets. The beſt time to tranſplant
their roots is in September or October. They will grow in any
ſoil or ſituation; the yellow produces its flowers in May and
June; the red a month later. Millar.
Aſphºdels were by the ancients planted near burying-places,
in order to ſupply the manes of the dead with nouriſhment.
By thoſe happy ſouls who dwell
In yellow meads of aſphodºl. Pºpe's St. Caecilia.
A's Pick. m. ſ. [Sce Asp.] The name of a ſerpent.
Why did I ſcape th' invenom'd offick's rage,
And all the fiery monſters of the deſiſt,
To ſce this day : Addison's Cato.
To ASPIRATP. v. a. ſ. ſpiro, Lat.] To pronounce with aſ:
piration, or full breath; as we aſpirate horſe, houſe, and hog.
To A's PIRATE. v. n. [aſpiro, Lat..] To be pronounced with
full breath.
Where a vowel ends a word, the next begins either with a
conſonant, or what is its equivalent; for our w and haſhirat.
Dryd. Dedication to Æneid.
A'sPIRATE. adj. [affiratus, Lat.] Pronounced with full breath.
For their being pervious, you may call them, if you pleaſe,
perſpirate ; but yet they are not aſpirate, i. e. with ſuch an aſ-
piration as h. Holder's Elements ºf Speech.
As PIRA"TION. n.ſ.. [aſpiratio, Lat.] . -
I. A breathing after ; an ardent wiſh; uſed generally of a wiſh
for ſpiritual bleſfings.
A ſoul inſpired with the warmeſt aſpirations after celeſial
beatitude, keeps its powers attentive. Iſºtti's Impr. of the Mind.
2. The act of aſpiring, or deſiring ſomething high and great.
'Tis he ; I ken the manner of his gate ;
He riſes on his toe ; that ſpirit of his
In affiration lifts him from the earth. Shakespeare Trail, and Crºſſ:
3. The pronounciation of a vowel with full breath.
H is only a guttural aſpiration, i. e. a more forcible impulſe
of the breath from the lungs. Holder's Elements of Speech.
To ASPIRE. v. n. [aſpiro, Lat.]
I. To deſire with eagerneſs; to pant after ſomething higher;
ſometimes with the particle to.
Moſt excellent lady, no expećtation in others, nor hope in
himſelf, could affire to a higher mark, than to be thought wor-
thy to be praiſed by you. Sidney, b. ii.
Hence ſprings that univerſal ſtrong deſire, - -
Which all men have of immortality:
Not ſome few ſpirits unto this thought affire,
But all men's minds in this united be. Sir J. Davies.
Horace did ne'er aſpire to epic bays:
Nor lofty Maro ſtoop to lyrick lays. Roſſomyzon.
Till then a helpleſs, hopeleſs, homely ſwain;
I ſought not freedom, nor aſpir'd to gain. Dryden's Pirgil.
Aſpiring to be gods, if angels fell,
Aſpiring to be angels, men rebel.
Pºpe's EAfty on Man.
2. Sometimes with after.
Thoſe are raiſed above ſenſe, and affire after immortality,
who believe the perpetual duration of their ſouls. Tillotſºn.
There is none of us but who would be thought, throughout
the whole courſe of his life, to aſpire after immortality.
- Alterbury's Sermons, Prºf.
3. To riſe higher.
There is betwixt that ſmile we would affire to,
That ſweet aſpect of princes and our ruin,
More pangs and fears than war or women have. Shakespeare H.VIII.
My own breath ſtill foment the fire,
Which flames as high as fancy can aſpire. Waller.
Asportation. m. ſ. [aſportatio, Lat.] A carrying away. D.
Asqu'INT, adv. [from a and ſquint..] Obliquely; not in the
ſtrait line of viſion. -
A ſingle guide may direét the way better than five hundred,
who have contrary views, or look aſquint, or ſhut their eyes.
Swift's Proječi for the Advancement of Religion.
Ass. n.ſ.. [aſinus, Lat.] -
1. An animal of burden, remarkable for ſluggiſhneſs, patience,
hardineſs, coarſeneſs of food, and long life.
You have among you many a purchas'd ſlave,
Which, like your affes, and your dogs and mules,
You uſe in abject and in ſlaviſh part, -
Becauſe you bought them. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
2. A ſtupid, heavy, dull fellow; a dolt.
I do begin to perceive that I am made an aſs.
Shakespeare. Merry I/ives of Windſºr.
That ſuch a crafty mother -
Should yield the world to this aſ /-a woman that
Bears all down with her brain; and her ſon
Cannot take two from twenty for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To ASSA'IL. v. a. ſaſailler, Fr.]
1. To attack in a hoſtile manner; to aſſault; to fall upon ; to
invade.
So when he ſaw his flattºring arts to fail,
With greedy force he 'gan the fort t'affail. Fairy Queen.
2. To attack with argument; cenſure; or motives applied to the
paſſions.
My gracious lord, here in the parliament -
Let us affail the family of York. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
She will not ſtay the ſiege of loving terms,
Norbide th' encounter of affailing eyes. Shakespeare. Romeo and jºl.
How have I fear'd your fate but fear'd it moſt,
When love affail'd you on the Libyan coaſt. Dryden's Jºn.
All books he reads, and all he reads affails,
From Dryden's Fables down to D-y’s ſales. Pope.
In vain Thaleſtris with reproach affails ;
For who can move when fair Belinda fails 2 Pope.
Ass A'i LABLE, adj. [rom affail.] That which may be at-
tacked.
Dear
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S S
A S S
Banquo, and his Fleance, lives.—
- But in them nature's copy's not eternal.—
-There's comfort yet, they are affailable. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Assa'il ANT. n.ſ.. [aſſaillant, Fr.] He that attacks; in oppo-
ſition to defendant.
The ſame was ſo well encountered by the defendants, that
the obſtinacy of the affailants did but increaſe the loſs.
Sir j. Hayward.
I'll put myſelf in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber ſmirch my face,
The like do you; ſo ſhall we paſs along,
And never ſtir affailants. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Assa'ILANT. adj. . Attacking; invading.
And as ev'ning dragon came, -
Affailant on the perched rooſts
Of tame villatick fowl. Milton's Sampſºn Agoniſłes.
Assa'ILER. n.ſ.. [from affail.] One who attacks another.
Palladius heated, ſo purſued our affailers, that one of them
ſlew him. Sidney, b. ii.
Assa PA'Nick. m. ſ. A little animal of Virginia, which is ſaid to
fly by ſtretching out its ſhoulders and its ſkin, and is called in
Engliſh the º ſquirrel. Trevoux.
Assar ABA'cca. See AsaRABAccA.
Assa'RT. n.ſ.. [eſſart, from eſſarter, Fr. to clear away wood in
a foreſt.] An offence committed in the foreſt, by plucking up
thoſe woods by the roots, that are thickets or coverts of the fo–
reſt, and by making them as plain as arable land. Cowel.
To Assa'Rt. v. a. [eſſartir, Fr.] To commit an aſſart. See
Ass ART.
ASSA'SSIN. nºſ. ſaſāſin, Fr. a word brought originally
Ass A'ssINATE. } from Aſia, where, about the time of the holy
war, there was a ſet of men called aſſaſſins, as is ſuppoſed for
Arſacidae, who killed any man, without regard to danger, at the
command of their chief.] A murderer; one that kills by
treachery, or ſudden violence.
In the very moment as the knight withdrew from the duke,
this aſſaſſinate gave him, with a back blow, a deep wound in-
to his left ſide. Wotton.
The Syrian king, who, to ſurprize
One man, aſſaſſin like, had levy'd war,
War unproclaim'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
Here hir'd aſſaſſins for their gain invade,
And treach'rous pois'ners urge their fatal trade. Dryd.juv.
When ſhe hears of a murder, ſhe enlarges more on the guilt
of the ſuffering perſon, than of the aſſaſſin. Addiſon. Speciator.
Oreſtes brandiſh'd the revenging ſword,
Slew the dire pair, and gave to fun'ral flame
The vile aſſaſſin, and adult'rous dame. Pope's Odyſſey.
Uſeful, we grant, it ſerves what life requires,
But dreadful too, the dark aſſaſſin hires. Pope, Epiſt. iii.
Assa's NATE. n.ſ.. [from aſſaſſin.] The crime of an aſſaſſin;
murder.
Were not all aſſaſſinates and popular inſurrečtions wrong-
fully chaſtiſed, if the meanneſs of the offenders indemnified
them from puniſhment? Pope's Dunciad.
To Assa'ssINATE. v. a. [from affaffin.]
1. To murder by violence.
Help, neighbours, my houſe is broken open by force, and
I am raviſhed, and like to be aſſaſſinated. Dryd. Span. Friar.
What could provoke thy madneſs
To aſſaſſinate ſo great, ſo brave a man A. Philips, D.Moth.
2. To way-lay; to take by treachery. This meaning is perhaps
peculiar to Milton.
Such uſage as your honourable lords
Afford me, aſſaſſinated and betray'd,
Who durſt not, with your whole united pow'rs,
In fight withſtand one ſingle and unarm'd. Sampſ. Agonſ.
Assassina'tion. n.ſ.. [from aſſaſſinate.] The act of aſſaſſinat-
ing; murder by violence.
If it were done, when 'tis done, then 'twere well
It were done quickly: if th’ aſſaſſination
Could trammel up the conſequence, and catch,
With its ſurceaſe, ſucceſs. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The duke finiſh'd his courſe by a wicked aſſaſſination. Claren.
Assassin A'ToR. n.ſ.. [from aſſajinate.] Murderer; mankiller;
the perſon that kills another by violence.
Assa'tion. n.ſ.. [aſſatus, roaſted, Lat..] Roaſting.
The egg expiring leſs in the elixation or boiling; whereas,
in the affation or roaſting, it will ſometimes abate a drachm.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
ASSAULT. n.ſ.. [aſſault, French.]
1. Attack; hoſtile onſet; oppoſed to defence.
Her ſpirit had been invincible againſt all aſſaults of affection.
Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
Not to be ſhook thyſelf, but all aſſaults
Baffling, like thy hoar cliffs the loud ſea wave. Thomſºn.
2. Storm; oppoſed to ſap or ſiege.
Jaſon took at leaſt a thouſand men, and ſuddenly made an
aſſault upon the city. 2 Macc. v. 5.
After ſome days ſiege, he reſolved to try the fortune of an
aſſault: he ſucceeded therein ſo far, that he had taken the prin-
cipal tower and fort. Bacon's Henry VII.
Vol. I.
Themſelves at diſcord fell,
And cruel combat join’d in middle ſpace,
With horrible aſſault, and fury fell.
4. Invaſion; hoſtility; attack.
After ſome unhappy aſſaults upon the prerogative by the par-
liament, which produced its diſſolution, there followed a com-
poſure. Clarendon.
Theories, built upon narrow foundations, are very hard to
be ſupported againſt the aſſaults of oppoſition. Locłe.
5. In law. A violent kind of injury offered to a man's perſon.
It may be committed by offering of a blow, or by a fearful
ſpeech. - Cowel,
6. It has upon before the thing aſſaulted.
To Assault. v. a. [from the noun..] To attack; to invade;
to fall upon with violence. 4.
The king granted the Jews to gather themſelves together,
and to ſtand for their life, to deſtroy all the power that would
aſſault them. Eſth. viii. 1 1.
Before the gates the cries of babes new-born,
Whom fate had from their tender mothers torn,
Aſſault his ears. Dryd. Æneid vi.
Curs'd ſteel, and more accurſed gold,
Gave miſchief birth, and made that miſchief bold:
And double death did wretched man invade,
By ſteel aſſaulted, and by gold betray'd. Dryden's Ovid.
Assa'ulter. n.ſ.. [from aſſault..] One who violently aſſaults
another.
Neither liking their eloquence, nor fearing their might, we
eſteemed few ſwords in a juſt defence, able to reſiſt many un-
juſt aſſaulters. Sidney, b. ii.
ASSA'Y. m. ſ. ſeſaye, Fr. from which the ancient writers bor-
rowed aſſay, according to the ſound, and the latter, ºffay, ac-
cording to the writing; but the ſenſes now differing, they may
be conſidered as two words.]
1. Examination.
3. Violence,
Fairy Q:een, b. ii.
This cannot be
By no aſſay of reaſon. 'Tis a pageant,
To keep us in falſe gaze. Shakespeare. Othello,
2. In law. The examination of meaſures and weights uſed by
the clerk of the market. - Cowel.
3. The firſt enterance upon any thing; a taſte.
For well he weened, that ſo glorious bait
Would tempt his gueſt to take thereof affay. Fairy Queen.
4. Attack; trouble.
She heard with patience all unto the end,
And ſtrove to maſter ſorrowful affay. Fairy Queen, b. i.
The men he preſt from Tours and Blois but late,
To hard aſſays unfit, unſure at need,
Yet arm'd to point in well attempted plate.
Be ſure to find,
What I foretel thee, many a hard aſſay
Of dangers, and adverſities, and pains,
Ere thou of Iſrael's ſceptre get faſt hold. Parad, Loft, b. iv.
To Ass A'Y. v. a. [eſſayer, Fr.]
1. To make trial of; to make experiment of.
Gray and Bryan obtained leave of the general a little to aſ:
ſay them; and ſo with ſome horſemen charged them home.
Sirj. Hayward.
What unweighed behaviour hath this drunkard picked out of
my converſation, that he dares in this manner aſſay me?
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſºr,
2. To apply to, as the touchſtone in aſſaying metals.
Whom thus afflićted, when ſad Eve beheld,
Deſolate where ſhe ſat, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce paſſion ſhe affay'd. Par. Lºft, b. x.
3. To try; to endeavour.
David girded his ſword upon his armour, and he aſſayed to
go, for he had not proved it. 1 Sam. xvii. 39.
AššA'y ER. m. ſ. [from affay..] An officer of the mint, for the
due trial of ſilver, appointed between the maſter of the mint
and the merchants that bring ſilver thither for º,
3.0t'.
The ſmelters come up to the affayers within one in twenty.
l/codward on Fºſſils.
Assect A'tion. m. ſ. [aſſºciatio, Lat.] Attendance, or waiting
upon. “ Dićt.
Assecu'TION. n.ſ. [from aſ:yuor, affecutum, to obtain..] Ac-
quirement; the act of obtaining. -
By the canon law, a perſon, after he has been in full poſſeſ-
fion of a ſecond benefice, cannot return again to his firſt ; be-
cauſe it is immediately void by his aſſºcution of a ſecond.
Ayliff's Paregon juris Canonici,
Asse'MBLAGE. m. ſ. ſaſſembl ge, Fr.] A collection; a number
of individuals brought together. It differs from aftmly, by
being applied only, or chiefly, to things; aftmbly being uſed
only, or generally, of perſons.
All that we amaſs together in our thoughts is poſitive, and
the aſſemblage of a great number of poſitive ideas of ſpace or
Fairfax, b, i.
duration. Locke.
O Hartford, fitted or to ſhine in courts
With unaffected grace, or walk the plains,
2 H With
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S S
A S S
With innocence and meditation join'd
In ſoft cºmbacº, hiten to my ſong, Tºſºn's Spring.
To ASSE. M.L.E. v. a. ſºlºr, Fr.] To bring together in-
to one place. It is uſed oth of perſons and things.
And he ſhall ſet up an enſign for the nations, and ſhall aſ-
fºr the outcaſts cf Iſrael, and gather together the diſperſed
of Judah. job, xi. 12.
He wonders for what end you have aſſembled
Such troops of citizens to coine to him. Shakespeare Richard III.
To Assrººpi. E. v. n. To meet together.
Theſe men iſºmºlºl, and found Daniel praying. Dan. vi. 1.
Asse's Ely. m. ſ. ſaſºille, Fr.] A company met together.
Having heard, by fame,
Of this ſo noble, and ſo fair aſſembly,
This night to meet here, they could do no leſs,
Out of the great reſpect they bear to beauty. Shakespeare H. VIII.
Ass ENT. m. ſ. [aſſºſas, Lat.j
1. The act of agreeing to anything.
All the arguments on both ſides muſt be laid in balance, and,
upon the whole, the underſtanding determine its aſſent. Lºcke.
2. Conſent; agreement.
To urge any thing upon the church, requiring thereunto
that religious affºnt of chriſtian belief, where with the words
of the holy prophets are received, and not to ſhew it in ſcrip-
ture; this did the Fathers evermore think unlawful, impious,
and czccrable. Hoºker, b. ii. § 5.
The evidence of God's own teſtimony, added unto the natu-
ral affºrt of reaſon concerning the certainty of them, doth not
a little comfort and confirm the ſame. Hºcker, b. i. § 12.
Without the king's aſſent or knowledge,
You wrought to be a legate. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Faith, on the other ſide, is the aſſent to any propoſition, not
thus made cut by the deduction of reaſon, but upon the credit
of the propoſer. Locke.
To ASSENT. v. n. [affintire, Lat.] To concede; to yield to,
or agree to.
And the Jews alſo aſ ited, ſaying, that theſe things were
ſo. Aéis, xxiv. 9.
Assest A"rion. n.ſ.. [affºntatio, Lat.] Compliance with the
opinion of another out of flattery or diſſimulation. Diff.
Assi's TMENT. n.ſ.. [from affºnt.] Conſent.
We may ſhrink at their bare teſtimonies, whoſe arguments
are but precarious, and ſubſiſt upon the charity of our aſſent-
7/ie/lty. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b, i.
To ASSE RT. v. a. ſaſāro, Lat.]
1. To maintain; to defend either by words or actions.
Your forefathers have aſſerted the party which they choſe till
death, and died for its defence. Dryden's Virgil, Dedication.
2. To affirm.
3. To claim; to vindicate a title to.
Nor can the grovelling mind,
In the dark dungeon of the limbs confin'd,
Ajºrt the native skies, or own its heav'nly kind. Dryden.
Asse'RTIos. m. ſ. [from aſſert.] The act of aſſerting.
If any affirm the earth doth move, and will not belicve with
us it ſtandeth ſtill; becauſe he hath probable reaſons for it, and
I no infallible ſenſe or reaſon againſt it, I will not quarrel with
his affºrtion. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i.
Assf'RT IV. E. adj [from affºrt.] Poſitive; dogmatical; peremptory.
He was not ſo fond of the principles he undertook to illuſtrate,
as to boaſt their certainty; propoſing them not in a confident
and affºrtive form, but as probabilities and hypotheſes. Glaiv.
Ass ER roR. m. ſ. [from affºrt.] Maintainer; vindicator; ſup-
porter; affirmer.
Among th’ affºrtors of free reaſon's claim,
Our nation's not the leaſt in worth or fame. Dryden.
Faithful aſſºrior of thy country's cauſe,
Britain with tears ſhall bathe thy glorious wound. Prior.
It is an uſual piece of art to undermine the authority of fun-
damental truths, by pretending to ſhew how weak the proofs
are, which their affºrtors employ in defence of them. Alterbury.
To Ass 2'Ry E. v. a. [ºffervio, Lat..] To ſerve, help, or fe-
cond. ID;&amp;#.
To ASSESS. v. a. [from aſ ſºare, Ital. To make an equili-
brium, or balance.] To charge with any certain ſum.
Before the receipt of them in this office, they were aſſid
by the affidavit from the time of the inquiſition found. Bacon.
Asse'ssion. n.f. [aſſiz, Lat..] A ſitting down by one; a giv.
ing aſſiſtance or advice. Dicſ.
Assess MEN r. n.ſ.. [from to ºffſ.]
1. The ſum levied on certain property.
2. The act of aſſeſſing.
What greater immunity and happineſs can there be to a pco-
ple, than to be liable to no laws, but what they make them-
ſelves? To be ſubject to no contribution, aſ ºnent, or any
pecuniary levy whatſoever, but what they vote, and volunta-
rily yield unto themſelves Howel's Pre-eminence ºf Parliam.
Assº'ssoR. m. ſ. [aſ ºr, Lat.]
1. The perſon that ſits by another; generally uſed of thoſe who
aſſiſt the judge.
Minos, the ſtriët inquiſitor, appears;
And lives and critics, with his wºrs, hears.
Round in his urn the blended balls he rowls,
Abſolves the juit, and dooms the guilty ſouls. Dryden's En.
2. He that ſits by another as next in dignity.
To his Son,
Th' aſſºr of his throne, he thus began. Par. Iºſº, b. vi.
Twice ſtronger than his fire, who ſat above,
4/./ºr to the throne of thund ring Jove. Lºyden's Iliad.
3. He that lays taxes; derived from q/ſ.
Assets... n.ſ. without the ſingular. ſaſº, Fr.] Goods ſufficient
to diſcharge that burden, which is caſt upon the executor or
heir, in ſatisfying the teſtators or anceflors debts or legacies.
Whoever pleads aſſets, ſayeth nothing; but that the perſon
againſt whom he pleads, hath enough come to his hands, to
diſcharge what is in demand. Cowel.
To ASSE VER. v. 6, [affevero, Lat.] To affirm with great
To Asse'v ERATE. } ſolemnity, as upon oath.
Ass Fv ERA Tios. m. ſ. [from aſſºverate.] Solemn affirmation,
as upon oath.
That which you are perſuaded of, ye have it no otherwiſe
than by your own only probable collection; and therefore ſuch
bold aſſºverations, as in him were admirable, ſhould, in your
mouths, but argue raſhneſs. Hooker, Preface.
Another abuſe of the tongue I might add ; vehement affive-
rations upon flight and trivial occaſions. Ray on Creation.
The repetition gives a greater emphaſis to the words, and
agrees better with the vehemence of the ſpeaker in making his
aſſºveration. Broome's Notes on Odyſſey.
Ash EAD. n.ſ.. [from aſ and head..] One ſlow of apprehen-
ſion ; a blockhead.
Will you help an aſ head, and a coxcomb, and a knave, a
a thin-faced knave, a gull. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
AssiDu'ity. n.ſ.. [aſſiduitº, Fr. aſiduitas, Lat.] Diligence ;
cloſeneſs of application.
Can he, who has undertaken this, want convićtion of the ne-
ceſſity of his utmoſt vigour and aſſiduity to acquit himſelf of
it 2 Rogers.
We obſerve the addreſs and ºffidity they will uſe to corrupt
- Rogers.
I have, with much pains and ºftuity, qualified myſelf for a
nomenclator. - Addison. Guardian, N° 1 C7.
ASSI'DUOUS. adj. [aſſiduus, Lat.] Conſtant in application.
And if by pray’r
Inceſſant I could hope to change the will
Of him who all things can, I would not ceaſe
To weary him with my aſſiduºus cries. Parad. Lºſº, b-xi.
The moſt aſiduous talebearers, and bittereſt reviſers, are of.
ten half-witted people. Gºvernment ºf the Tongue, $6.
In ſummer, you ſee the hen giving herſelf greater freedoms,
and quitting her care for above two hours together; but in win-
ter, when the rigour of the ſeaſon would chill the principles of
life, and deſtroy the young one, ſhe grows more aſiduous in her
attendance, and ſtays away but half the time. Addiſon. Spectator.
Each ſtill renews her little labour,
Nor juſtles her aſſiduous neighbour. Prior.
Assi'ºlously. adv. [from affluous.] Diligently; continually.
The trade, that obliges artificers to be aſſiduouſly converſant
us
with their materials, is that of glaſs-men. Boyle.
The habitable earth may have been perpetually the drier,
ſeeing it is ºffiductſ, drained and exhauſted by the ſeas. Bently.
To Assi’EGF. v. a. ſaſſieger, Fr.] To beſiege. Dićf.
ASSIENTO. m. ſ. [In Spaniſh a contract or bargain..] A
contract or convention between the king of Spain and other
powers, for furniſhing the Spaniſh dominions in America with
negro ſlaves. This contract was transferred from the French
to the Engliſh South Sea company, by the treaty of 17 13, for
thirty years; who were likewiſe permitted to ſend a regiſter
ſhip, of 500 tuns, yearly to the Spaniſh ſettlements, with Euro-
pean goods. Chambers.
To ASSIGN. v. a. ſaſſigner, Fr. aſ gno, Lat.]
I. To mark out; to appoint.
He aſſigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant
Ill Cn W cre. 2 Sam. xi. 16.
Both joining,
As join’d in injuries, one cnmit
Againſt a foe by doom expreſs ºffgn'd us,
That crucl ſerpent. Miſt. Par. Loff, b. x.
True quality is neglected, virtue is oppreſſed, and vice tri-
umphant. The laſt day will aſſign to every one a ſtation ſuit-
able to his charaćtcr. Addison. Spect. Nº 2 9-
2. To fix with regard to quantity or value.
There is no ſuch intrinſick, natural, ſettled value in any
thing, as to make any aſigned quantity of it conſtantly worth
any aſſigned quantity of another. Locke.
3. In law. In general, to appoint a deputy, or make over a right
to another ; in particular, to appoint or ſet forth, as to aſſign
error, is to ſhew in what part of the proceſs error is committed:
to affgº: falſe judgment, is to declare how and where the judg-
ment is unjuſt : to aſſign the ceſſor, is to ſhºw how the plain-
tiff had cºffed, or given over: to aftºn waſte, is to ſhew where-
in eſpecially the waſte is committed. Cºve/.
Assi'GNAELE. adj. [from ºff gº..] That which may be marked
out, or fixed. -
Ariſtotle
!
:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S S
Ariſtºtle held that it ſtreamed by connatural reſult and cºm:-
nation from God; ſo that there was no inſtant aſſignalſe of
God's eternal exiſtence, in which the world did not alſo co-
exiſt. Scºth.
Assio NATION. m. ſ [affgration, French.]
1. An appointment to meet; uſed generally of love appoint-
mentS. -
The lovers expc&amp;cd the return of this ſtated hour with as
much impatience as if it had been a real aſſignation. Spediator.
Or when a whore, in her vocation,
Keeps punctual to an aſſignation. Swift.
2. A making over a thing to another.
Assig N E E'. m. ſ. ſaſſigné, Fr.] He that is appointed or deputed
by another, to do any act, or perform any buſineſs, or enjoy
any commodity. And an aſſignee may be either in deed or in
law; aſſignee in decd, is he that is appointed by a perſon; aſ:
fgnee in law, is he whom the law maketh ſo, without any ap-
pointment of the perſon. Cowel.
Assi'GNER. m. ſ. [from aſſign.] He that appoints.
The Goſpel is at once the aſſigner of our tasks, and the ma-
gazine of our ſtrength. Decay of Piety.
Assi'GNMENT. n.ſ.. [from aſſign.] Appointment of one thing
with regard to another thing or perſon.
The only thing which maketh any place publick, is the pu-
blick aſſignment thereof unto ſuch duties. Hooker, b. v. § 12.
This inſtitution, which aſſigns it to a perſon, whom we have
no rule to know, is juſt as good as an aſſignment to no body at
all. - - Locke.
Assi'MILABLE. adj. [from aſſimilate.] That which may be con-
verted to the ſame nature with ſomething elſe.
The ſpirits of many, long before that time, will find but na-
ked habitations; and meeting no aſſimilables wherein to re-
ačt their natures, muſt certainly participate ſuch natural deſo-
lations. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi.
To ASSIMILATE. v. a. ſaſſimilo, Lat.]
1. To convert to the ſame nature with another thing. '
Birds affimilate leſs, and excern more, than beaſts; for
their excrements are ever liquid, and their fleſh generally more
dry. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Birds be commonly better meat than beaſts, becauſe their
fleſh doth aſſimilate more finely, and ſecerneth more ſubtely.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 680.
Taſting concočt, digeſt, aſſimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn. Milt. Parad. Loft.
Hence alſo animals and vegetables may aſſimilate their nou-
riſhment; moiſt nouriſhment eaſily changing its texture, till it
becomes like the denſe earth. Newton,
2. To bring to a likeneſs, or reſemblance.
A ferine and neceſſitous kind of life would eaſily aſſimilate at
leaſt the next generation to barbariſm and ferineneſs.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
They are not over patient of mixture; but ſuch, whom they
cannot aſſimilate, ſoon find it their intereſt to remove. Swift.
Assi'MILATE NEss. n. ſ. [from aſſimilate.] Likeneſs. Dići.
Assim ILA'TION. m. ſ. [from aſſimilate.] .
1. The act of converting any thing to the nature or ſubſtance of
another.
It furthers the very ačt of aſſimilation of nouriſhment, by
ſome outward emollients that make the parts more apt to aſſi-
milate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 59.
2. The ſtate of being aſſimilated.
A nouriſhment in a large acceptation, but not in propriety,
conſerving the body, not repairing it by aſſimilation, but pre-
ſerving it by ventilation. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii.
3. The act of growing like ſome other being.
It is as well the inſtinét as duty of our nature, to aſpire to
an aſſimilation with God; even the moſt laudable and generous
ambition. Dec. of Piety.
To Assi'MULATE. v. a. ſaſſimulo, Lat.] To feign; to coun-
terfeit. Dić7.
Assimulation. n.ſ.. [aſſimulatio, Lat..] A diſſembling; a
counterfeiting. - Dić.
To ASSIST. J. a. ſaſſier, Fr. aſſo, Lat.] To help.
Receive her in the Lord, as becometh ſaints, and aſſº her in
whatſover buſineſs ſhe hath need. Romn. xvi. 2.
It is neceſſary and aſſting to all our other intelle&amp;tual facul-
ties. Locke.
Acquaintance with method will aſſº one in ranging human
affairs. //atts's Logick.
She no ſooner yielded to adultery, but ſhe agreed to aſſi in
the murder of her huſband. Broome on Odyſſey.
Assi'st AN.cf. n.ſ.. [aff/lance, French.] Help ; furtherance.
The council of Trent commends recourſe, not only to the
prayers of the ſaints, but to their aid and aſſance: What doth
this aid and aſſiance ſignify Stillingfleet.
You have abundant aſſiances for this knowledge, in excellent
books. Iłake's Preparation for Death.
Let us entreat this neceſſary aſſiance, that by his grace he
would lead us. Rogers.
Assist ANT. adj. [from aſſº.] Helping; lending aid.
Some perchance did adhere to the duke, and were aff/lant to
him openly, or at leaſt under hand. Hale's Cºn. Law ºf Łºsſ.
3
Assi's FAST. r. ſ. [from nº/.]
I. A perſon engaged in an affair not a principal, but as auxiliary
or miniſterial.
Some young towardly noblemen or gentlemen were uſually
ſent as aft/arts or attendants, according to the quality of the
perſons. Bacon's Advice to Sir George Willers.
2. Sometimes it is only a ſofter word for an attendant.
The pale aſ /iants on each other ſtar'd,
With gaping mouths for iſſuing words prepard.
ASSIZE. m. ſ. ſaſſº, a fitting, Fr.]
I. An aſſembly of knights and other ſubſtantial men, with the
bailiff or juſtice, in a certain place, and at a certain time.
2. A jury. -
3. An ordinance or ſtatute.
4. The court, place, or time, where and when the writs and pro-
ceſſes of aftze are taken. Cowel.
The law was never executed by any juſtices of a ſize, but
the people left to their own laws. Sir J. Davies on Ireland.
At each aſſize and term we try
A thouſand raſcals of as deep a dye. Dryden's juveral.
5. Any court of juſtice.
The judging God ſhall cloſe the book of fate,
And there the laſt affzes keep,
For thoſe who wake, and thoſe who ſleep. Dryden.
6. Aftze of bread, al., &amp;c. Meaſure, or quantity. Thus it is ſaid,
when wheat is of ſuch a price, the bread ſhall be of ſuch aſſize.
7. Meaſure; rate: for which we now uſe ſize. Sée Size.
On high hill's top I ſaw a ſtately frame,
An hundred cubits high by juſt aftze,
With hundred pillars.
Dryden,
Spen. Wifton of Bellay.
To Assi'zE. v. a. [from the noun..] To fix the rate of any
thing by an affize or writ.
Assi'zER, or Assiser. m. ſ. [from aſſize.] Is an officer that has
the care and overſight of weights and meaſures. Chambers.
Asso'cLABLE. adj. [aſſºcialilis, Lat.] That which may be joined
to another.
To ASSOCIATE. v. a. ſafficier, Fr. aſſºcio, Lat.]
1. To unite with another as a confederate.
A fearful army led by Caius Marcius,
Aſſºciated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories.
2. To adopt as a friend upon equal terms.
Aſſºciate in your town a wand'ring train,
And ſtrangers in your palace entertain. Dryden's Aneid,
3. To accompany; to keep company with another.
Friends ſhould aſſºciate friends in grief and woe.
Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
4. It has generally the particle with; as, he aſſºciated with his
maſter's enemies.
Asso'cſ ATE. adj. [from the verb.] Conſederate; joined in in-
tereſt or purpoſe.
While I deſcend through darkneſs,
To my aſſºciate pow'rs, them to acquaint
With theſe ſucceſſes. Milt. Par. Lºft, b. x.
Asso'ciate. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A perſon joined with another; a partner.
They perſuade the king, now in old age, to make Plangus
his aſſºciate in government with him. Siºn y, b. ii.
2. A confederate.
Their defender, and his aſſºciates, have ſthence propoſed to
the world a form ſuch as themſelves like. Hooker, l. v. § 27.
3. A companion; implying ſome kind of equality.
He was accompanied with a noble gentleman, no unſuitable
aſſºciate. - //otton.
Sole Eve, aſſºciate ſole, to me beyond
Compare, above all living creatures dear.
Milton's Parad'ſ Loft, b. ix.
But my aſſºciates now my ſtay deplore,
Impatient.
Association. m. ſ. [from aſſºciate.]
1. Union; conjunction; ſociety.
The church being a ſociety, hath the ſelf ſame original
grounds, which other politick ſocieties have; the natural in-
clination which all men have unto ſociable life, and conſent to
ſome certain bond of aſſºciation ; which bond is the law ſhºt
appointeth what kind of order they ſhall be aſſociºtº in.
Hºcker, b. i.
Shakespeare ). Criolanus,
Pope's Oºſy.
2. Confederacy; union for particular purpoſes.
This could not be done but with mighty oppoſition: againſt
which, to ſtrengthen themſelves, they ſecretly entered into a
league of aſſociation.
3. Partnerſhip.
Self-denial is a kind of holy aſſºciation with God; and, b
making you his partner, intereſts you in all his happineſs Eyſ.
4. Connection. -
Aſſºciation of ideas is of great importance, and may be of
excellent uſe. j/aiti's Improvement ºf the Mind.
5. Appoſition; union of matter.
The changes of corporeal things are to be place i only in
the various ſeparations, and new aſſºciatiºn; and motº, of
theſe permanciſt particles. Nºvºi's (,
Jºer, Prºſace.
! . . . . . .
• * * * * * ,
-
A'ssos Axce.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S S
A S S
A'ssonANce. n.ſ.. [aſſinance, Fr.] Reference of one ſound to
another reſembling it. Dić?.
A'sson ANT. adj. [aſºnant, French.] Sounding in a manner
reſembling another ſound. Dić7.
To Asso'RT. v. a. [affortir, Fr.] To range in claſſes, as one
thing ſuits with another.
To Asso't. v. a. [from ſet; aſter, Fr.] To infatuate; to be-
ſot: a word out of uſe.
But whence they ſprung, or how they were begot,
Uneath is to aſſure, uneath to weene
That monſtrous errour which doth ſome aſſot. Fairy Queen.
To ASSUA'GE. v. a. [The derivation of this word is uncer-
tain; Minſhew deduces it from adſuadere, or aſſuaviare ; ju-
nius, from rpaer, ſweet; from whence Skinner imagines appae-
ran might have been formed.]
1. To mitigate; to ſoften ; to allay.
Refreſhing winds the ſummer's heats aſſuage,
And kindly warmth diſarms the winter's rage. Addison.
2. To appeaſe; to pacify.
Yet is his hate, his rancour ne'er the leſs,
Since nought aſſuageth malice when 'tis told. Fairfax, b. iv.
This was neceſſary for the ſecuring the people from their
fears; which were capable of being aſſuaged by no other means.
Clarendon, b. viii.
Shall I, t’aſſuage
Their brutal rage,
The regal ſtem deſtroy
3. To eaſe; as, the medecine aſſuages pain.
To Assu A'Ge. v. n. To abate.
God made a wind to paſs over the earth, and the waters aſ-
ſuaged. Gen. viii. 1.
Assua'GEMENT. n.ſ.. [from aſſuage.] What mitigates or ſof-
tenS.
Tell me, when ſhall theſe weary woes have end,
Or ſhall their ruthleſs torment never ceaſe?
But all my days in pining languor ſpend,
Without hope of affagement or releaſe. Spenſer's Sonnets.
Assu A'GER. m. ſ. [from affitage.] One who pacifies or ap-
peaſes.
Assu A'sive. adj. [from affilage.] Softening; mitigating.
If in the breaſt tumultuous joys ariſe.
Muſick her ſoft aſidſive voice applies. Pope's St. Caecilia.
To Assu'BJUGATE. v. a. [ſubjugo, Lat.] To ſubmit to.
This valiant lord
Muſt not ſo ſtate his palm, nobly acquir’d;
Nor by my will affiljugate his merit,
By going to Achilles. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
Assu EFA'ction. n.ſ.. [aſſiuſacio, Lat..] The ſtate of being
accuſtomed to any thing.
Right and left, as parts inſervient unto the motive faculty,
are differenced by degrees from uſe and affileſačiion, or accord-
ing whereto the one grows ſtronger. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Assu'ETUDE. m. ſ. ſaſſietudo, Lat..] Accuſtomance; cuſtom.
We ſee that aſſuetude of things hurtful, doth make them loſe
the force to hurt. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 67.
To ASSU'ME. v. a. [aſſimo, Lat.]
1. To take.
This when the various God had urg'd in vain,
He ſtrait affilm'd his native form again. Pope.
2. To take upon one's ſelf.
With raviſh'd ears,
The monarch hears,
Aſſumes the God,
Affects to nod,
And ſeems to ſhake the ſpheres.
3. To arrogate; to claim or ſeize unjuſtly.
This makes him over-forward in buſineſs, aſſuming in con-
verſation, and peremptory in anſwers. Collier of Confidence.
4. To ſuppoſe ſomething granted without proof.
In every hypotheſis, ſomething is allowed to be aſſumed. Boyle.
5. To apply to one's own uſe; to appropriate.
His majeſty might well aſſume the complaint and expreſſion
of king David. Clarendon, b. viii.
Assu'MER. m. ſ. [from aſſume.] An arrogant man ; a man who
claims more than his due.
Can man be wiſe in any courſe, in which he is not ſafe too
But can theſe high aſſumers and pretenders to reaſon, prove
themſelves ſo * South.
Assu'MING. participial adj. [from affilme.] Arrogant; haughty.
His haughty looks, and his aſſuming air,
The ſon of Iſis could no longer bear. Dryden.
ASSUMPSIT, n. ſ. [aſſimo, Lat..] A voluntary promiſe made
by word, whereby a man taketh upon him to perform or pay
any thing to another: It contains any verbal promiſe made
A upºn conſideration. Cowel.
SSU'MPTION. m. ſ. ſaſſiumptio, Lat.
I. The act of º ſº.. º *. ſelf.
The perſonal deſcent of God himſelf, and his aſſumption of
our fleſh to his divinity, more familiarly to infinuate his pleaſure
to us, was an enforcement beyond all methods of wiſdom.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
2. The ſuppoſition, or act of ſuppoſing of any thing without far-
ther proof.
Dryden's Albion.
Dryden's St. Caecilia.
Theſe by way of aſſumption, under the two general propoſi-
tions, are intrinſically and naturally good or bad. Norris.
For the aſſumption, that Chriſt did ſuch miraculous and ſu-
pernatural works, to confirm what he ſaid, we need only repeat
the meſſage ſent by him to John the Baptiſt. South.
3. The thing ſuppoſed; a poſtulate.
Hold, ſays the Stoick, your aſſumption's wrong:
I grant, true freedom you have well defin'd. Dryd Perſius.
4. The taking up any perſon into heaven, which is ſuppoſed by
the Romiſh church of the Bleſſed Virgin.
Upon the feaſt of the aſſumption of the Bleſſed Virgin, the
pcpe and cardinals keep the veſpers. Stillingſ, on Rom. Idolat.
Had Adam done this after a certain period of years, he would
have been rewarded with an aſſumption to eternal felicity.
//ake's Preparation for Death.
Assu'MPtive. adj. [aſſumptivus, Lat.] That may be aſſumed.
Assu'RANCE. n.ſ.. [aſurance, French.]
1. Certain expectation.
Though hope be, indeed, a lower and leſſer thing than aſ:
Jurance, yet, as to all the purpoſes of a pious life, it may prove
more uſeful. South.
What encouragement can be given to goodneſs, beyond the
hopes of heaven, and the aſſurance of an endleſs felicity Tillot.
2. Secure confidence; truſt.
What man is he, that boºſts of fleſhly might,
And vain aſſurance of mortality,
Which all ſo ſoon as it doth come to fight
Againſt ſpiritual foes, yields by and by. Fairy Queen, b. i.
3. Freedom from doubt; certain knowledge.
I grant that proof from the authority of man's judgment, is
not able to work that aſſurance, which doth grow by a ſtronger
proof. Hooker, b. ii.
'Tis far off,
And rather like a dream, than an aſſurance
That my remembrance warrants. Shakeſp. Temteſ.
The obedient, and the man of practice, ſhall outgrow all
their doubts and ignorances, till perſuaſion paſs into knowledge,
and knowledge advance into aſſurance. South.
Hath he found, in an evil courſe, that comfortable aſſurance
of God's favour, and good hopes of his future condition, which
a religious life would have given him : Tilſo ſon.
4. Firmneſs; undoubting ſteadineſs.
Men whoſe conſideration will relieve our modeſty, and give
us courage and aſſurance in the duties of our profeſſion. Rogers.
5. Confidence; want of modeſty; exemption from awe or sear.
My behaviour ill governed, gave you the firſt comfort = my
affection ill hid, hath given you this laſt aſſurance. Sidney.
Converſation, when they come into the world, will add to
their knowledge and aſſurance. Locke.
6. Ground of confidence; ſecurity given.
The nature of deſire itſelf is no eaſier to receive belief, than
it is hard to ground belief; for as deſire is glad to embrace the
firſt ſhew of comfort, ſo is deſire deſirous of perfect aſſurance.
Sidney, b. ii.
As the conqueſt was but ſlight and ſuperficial, ſo the pope's
donation to the Iriſh ſubmiſſions were but weak and fickle aſ-
Jurances. Sir j. Davies on Ireland.
None of woman born
Shall harm Macbeth.
— Then live, Macduff, what need I fear of thee?
But yet I’ll make aſſurance double ſure,
And take a bond of fate; Thou ſhalt not live. Shakespeare Macb.
I muſt confeſs your offer is the beſt;
And, let your father make her the aſſurance,
She is your own, elſe you muſt pardon me,
If you ſhould die before him, where's her dower.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
7. Spirit; intrepidity.
With all th’ aſſurance innocence can bring,
Fearleſs without, becauſe ſecure within ;
Arm'd with my courage, unconcern'd I ſee
This pomp, a ſhame to you, a pride to me. Dryd. Aureng.
8. Sanguinity; readineſs to hope.
This is not the grace of hope, but a good natural aſſurance
or confidence, which Ariſtotle obſerves young men to be full
of, and old men not ſo inclined to. }. Prači. Cat.
9. Teſtimony of credit.
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,
And from ſome knowledge and aſſurance of you,
Offer this office. Shakeſp. King Lear.
We have as great affarance that there is a God, as we could
expect to have, ſuppoſing that he were. Tillotſon, Preface.
10. Convićtion.
Such an aſſurance of things as will make men careful to avoid
a leſſer danger, ought to awaken men to avoid a greater. Tillot.
11. The ſame with inſurance. See INSURANCE.
To Assu'R.E. v. a. [affeurer, Fr. from affecurare, low Latin.]
1. To give confidence by a firm promiſe.
So when he had affired them with many words, that he
would reſtore them without hurt, according to the agreement,
they let him go for the ſaving of their brethren. 24/dc. xii. 25.
i 2. To
s
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S T
A S T
2. To ſecure to another.
And, for that dowry, I’ll affire her of
Her widowhood, be it that ſhe ſurvives mc,
In all my lands and leaſes whatſoever.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
So irreſiſtible an authority cannot be reflected on, without
the moſt awful reverence, even by thoſe whoſe piety aſſures its
favour to them. Rogers.
3. To make confident; to exempt from doubt or fear; to confer
ſecurity. '
Airey we know, that we are of the truth, and ſhall aſ-
fire our hearts before him. I john, iii. 19.
* , I revive
At this laſt fight; aſir'd that man ſhall live
with all the creatures, and their ſeed preſerve. Parad. Lºft.
4. To make ſecure.
But what on earth can long abide in ſtate
Or who can him aſſure of happy day ? Spenſ. Maiopotmos.
5. To affiance; to betroth. s
This diviner laid claim to me, called me Dromio, ſwore I
was aſſured to her. Shakeſp. Comedy of Errours.
Assu'RED. participial adj. [from aſſire.]
1. Certain; indubitable.
It is an affired experience, that flint laid about the bottom
of a tree makes it proſper. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 422.
2. Certain; not doubting.
Young princes, cloſe your hands,
—- And your lips too; for, I am well aſſured,
That I did ſo, when I was firſt aſſur’d. Shakespeare King john.
As when by night the glaſs
Of Galilaeo, leſs aſſur’d, obſerves
Imagin'd lands, and regions, in the moon. Par. Loft, b. v.
3. Immodeſt; viciouſly confident.
Åssu'REDLY. adv. [from affured.] Certainly; indubitably.
. They promis'd me eternal happineſs,
And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel
I am not worthy yet to wear: I ſhall aſſuredly.
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
God is abſolutely good, and ſo, aſſuredly, the cauſe of all that
is good; but, of anything that is evil, he is no cauſe at all.
Raleigh's Hiſt. of the World.
Aſſuredly he will ſtop our liberty, till we reſtore him his wor-
ſhip. South.
Assu'RED Ness. n.ſ.. [from aſſured.] The ſtate of being aſſured;
certainty.
Assu'RER. n.f. [from aſſure.]
1. He that gives aſſurance.
2. He that gives ſecurity to make good any loſs.
To ASSW/AGE. See ASSUAGE. -
A'stERisk. n.ſ. [ºrigizzº...] A mark in printing or writing, in
form of a little ſtar; as *.
He alſo publiſhed the tranſlation of the Septuagint by itſelf,
having firſt compared it with the Hebrew, and noted by afte-
risks what was defečtive, and by obelisks what was redundant.
Grew's Coſmol. Sacra, b. iv.
Aster Is M. m. ſ. [offerſºnus, Lat.]
1. A conſtellation.
Poetry had filled the ſkies with afteriſins, and hiſtories be-
longing to them; and then aſtrology deviſes the feigned virtues
and influences of each. Bentley's Sermons.
2. An aſteriſk, or mark. This is a very improper uſe.
Dwell particularly on paſſages with an aſteriſm *; for the
obſervations which follow ſuch a note, will give you a clear
light. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Asthm A. m.ſ. [3-322.] A frequent, difficult, and ſhort reſpi-
ration, joined with a hiſing ſound and a cough, eſpecially in
the night-time, and when the body is in a prone poſture; be-
cauſe then the contents of the lower belly bear ſo againſt the
diaphragm, as to leſſen the capacity of the breaſt, whereby the
lungs have leſs room to move. - Quincy.
An aſthma is the inflation of the membranes of the lungs,
and of the membranes covering the muſcles of the thorax, but
does not continue long. ' Floyer on the Humours.
ASTHMATICAL. U adj. [from aſthma.] Troubled with an
ASTHMATIck. } aſthma.
In aſthmatical perſons, we often ſee, that though the lungs
be very much ſtuffed with tough phlegm, yet the patient may
live ſome months, if not ſome years. Boyle.
After drinking, our horſes are moſt offhmatick; and, for a-
voiding the watering of them, we wet their hay.
Floyer on the Humours.
AstE'RN. adv. [from a and ſern..] In the hinder part of the
ſhip; behind the ſhip.
The galley gives her ſide, and turns her prow,
While thoſe aftern deſcending down the ſteep,
Thro' gaping waves behold the boiling deep. Dryden.
To AstE'RT. v. a. [a word uſed by Spenſºr, as it ſeems, for
Jiart, or ſtartle.] To terrify ; to ſtartle; to fright.
We deem of death, as doom of ill deſert;
But knew we fools what it us brings until,
Die would we daily, once it to expert;
No danger there the ſhepherd can aftert.
Spenſºr's Pºff.
Vol. I.
Asto'NIED. particip. adj. A word uſed in the verſion of the
bible for aſtoniſhed.
Many were 6/ionied at thee. Iſaiah, lii. 14.
To ASTONISH. v. a. ſºftonner, Fr. from attonità, Lat] To
confound with ſome ſudden paſſion, as with fear or wonder;
to amaze; to ſurpriſe.
It is the part of men to fear and tremble,
When the moſt mighty gods, by tokens, ſend
Such dreadful heralds to g/ioniſh us. Shakespeare julius Cæſar,
//ioniſh'd at the voice, he ſtood amaz'd,
And all around with inward horror gaz'd.
A genius univerſal as his theme,
A/ioniſhing as chaos. Thomſon's Summer,
AsTo NISHINGNEss. n.ſ. [from aſioniſh.] Of a nature to ex-
cite aſtoniſhment.
As To'NISHMENT. n.ſ. ſºftonnement, Fr.] Amazement; con-
fuſion of mind from fear or wonder.
We found, with no leſs wonder to us, than aftoniſhment to
themſelves, that they were the two valiant and famous bro-
Addison's Ovid.
thers. - Sidney, b. ii.
She eſteemed this as much above his wiſdom, as aſioniſhment
is beyond bare admiration. South.
To Asto'UND. v. a. ſºftonner, Fr.] To aſtoniſh; to confound
with fear or wonder. This word is now ſomewhat obſolete,
Theſe thoughts may ſtartle well, but not aſound
The virtuous mind, that ever walks attended
By a ſtrong ſiding champion, conſcience. Paradiſº Rºgain,
ASTRADDLE, adv. [from a and ſtraddle.] With one's legs a-
croſs any thing. Dić7.
Astra GAL. m. ſ. [3rºyaxº, the ankle, or ankle-bone..] A little
round member, in the form of a ring or bracelet, ſerving as an
ornament at the tops and bottoms of columns. Build. Dié.
We ſee none of that ordinary confuſion, which is the reſult
of quarter rounds of the affragal, and I know not how many
other intermingled particulars. Spećiator, N° 415.
Astral. adj. [from aſtrum, Lat.] Starry; relating to the ſtars.
Some aſtral forms I muſt invoke by pray'r,
Fram'd all of pureſt atoms of the air;
Not in their natures ſimply good or ill;
But moſt ſubſervient to bad ſpirits will. Dryd, Tyran. Love,
Astray, adv. [from a and ſtray.] Out of the right way.
May ſeem the wain was very evilled,
When ſuch an one had guiding of the way,
That knew not, whether right he went, or elſe affroy F. g.
You run aſtray, for whilſt we talk of Ireland, you rip up the
original of Scotland. Speºſer on Ireland.
... Like one that had been led aſ ray
Through the heav'n's wide pathicſ way. Mih. Il Penſºroſ.
To ASTRICT. v. a. ſaſtringo, Lat..] To contract by appliča-
tions, in oppoſition to relax: a word not ſo much uſed as con-
ſiringe.
The ſolid parts were to be relaxed or aſ rifled, as they let the
humours paſs either in too ſmall or too great quantities.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Astri'ction. m. ſ. ſaſāričfio, Lat.] The act or power of con-
tracting the parts of the body by applications. -
Aftriction is in a ſubſtance that hath a virtual cold; and it
worketh partly by the ſame means that cold doth. Jacon.
This virtue requireth an aſtrictiºn, but ſuch an aſſrºom as is
not grateful to the body; for a pleaſing offrićlion doth rather
bind in the nerves than expel them : and therefore ſuch aſ ri-
tion is found in things of a harſh taſte. Bacon's Nat. Hºy.
Such lenitive ſubſtances are proper for dry atrabilarian con-
ſtitutions, who are ſubject to oſtricſſion of the belly and the piles.
Arbuthnot on Diet.
As TRI'ctive. adj. [from gſtrič.J Stiptick; of a binding qua-
lity. Dić7.
Astrictory. adj. [affritorius, Lat.] Aſtringent; apt to
bind. Dić?.
Astri'DE. adv. [from a and ſtride.] With the legs open.
To lay their native arms aſide,
Their modeſty, and ride affride. Hudibras.
I ſaw a place, where the Rhone is ſo ſtraitened between two
rocks, that a man may ſtand g/?ride upon both at once. Bºyle.
ASTRIFEROUS. adj. [a/rifer, Lat.] Bearing, or having ſtars D.
Ast RI'GERous, adj. [a/?riger, Lat..] Adoned with ſtars. Dić.
To ASTRINGE. v. a. ſaſhringo, Lat..] Tó preſs by contrac-
tion; to make the parts draw together.
Tears are cauſed by a contraction of the ſpirits of the brain;
which contraction, by conſequence, aſ ringet, the moiſture of
the brain, and thereby ſendeth tears into the eyes. Bacon.
ASTRI'NGENCY. m. ſ. [from 6/?ringe.] The power of contrac-
ting the parts of the body; oppoſed to the power of relaxa-
tion.
A ſtriótion prohibiteth diſſolution; as, in mcdicines, aſtrin-
gents inhibit putrefaction: aid, 'y ºringency, ſome ſmall quan-
tity of cil of vitrioſ will keep ſºfa water long from putrefying.
Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory, N° 342.
Acid, acrid, auſtere, and bitter ſubſtances, by their aftºn-
gency, create horror:r, that is, ſtimulate the fibres. Aſ, lit!…t.
As TRING ENT. a.º. ſº gº, Lat..] Bindi: g; contracting;
oppoſed to lºwat, ve.
2 I Aft’, i.e.:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A S T
º, Aſiringent medicines are binding, which ačt by the aſperity
of their particles, whereby they corrugate the membranes, and
make them draw up cloſer. $2:1mcy.
The juice is very aſiringent, and therefore of ſlow motion.
- Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 641.
What diminiſheth ſenſible perſpiration, encreaſeth the in-
ſenſible; for that reaſon a ſtrengthening and aſiringent diet of-
ten conduceth to this purpoſe. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
A'st Rod RAPHY. m. ſ. [from 2:32, and ºf…?...] The ſcience of
deſcribing the ſtars. Dićt.
A's TRol ABE. m. ſ. [3+2+3,…, of 2-3, and x23iº, to take.]
1. An inſtrument chiefly uſed for taking the altitude of the pole,
the ſun or ſtars, at ſea.
2. A ſtereographick projection of the circles of the ſphere upon
the plain of ſome great circle. Chambers.
Ast Rolog ER. m.ſ.. [aſtrologus, Lat. from 2:32, and x,yo.]
1. One that, ſuppoſing the influences of the ſtars to have a cauſal
power, profeſſics to foretel or diſcover events depending on
thoſe influences.
Not unlike that which aſtrologers call a conjun&amp;ion of pla-
nets, of no very benign aſpect the one to the other. J/atton.
A happy genius is the gift of nature: it depends on the in-
fluence of the ſtars, ſay the aſtrologers; on the organs of the
body, ſay the naturaliſts; it is the particular gift of heaven,
ſay the divines, both chriſtians and heathens. Dryd. Pr. Dufr.
//irologers, that future fates foreſhew. Pºpe.
I never heard a finer ſatire againſt lawyers, than that of aſtro-
Iogers, when they pretend, by rules of art, to tell when a ſuit
will end, and whether to the advantage of the plaintiff or de-
fendant. Swift.
2. It was antiently uſed for one that underſtood or explained the
motions of the planets, without including predićtion.
A worthy aſtrologer now living, who, by the help of perſpec-
tive glaſſes, hath found in the ſtars many things unknown to
the ancients, affirms much to have been diſcovered in Venus.
Raleigh's Hiſ of the I/orld. .
Ast Rolo'o 1AN. m. ſ. [from oſtrology.] The ſame with aſtro-
/oger.
*fe twelve houſes of heaven, in the form which aſtrologians
uſe. - - Camden.
The ſtars, they fy, cannot diſpoſe,
No more than can the aſtrologian. Hudibras.
ASTROLOGICAL. Uadj. [from aſlrolºgy.] Relating to aſtrology;
Ast Rolo'GICK. } profeſſing aſtrology.
Some ſeem a little aſtrological, as when they warn us from
places of malign influence. //ºtton.
No aſtrologick wizard honour gains,
Who has not oft been baniſh'd, or in chains. Dryd. Yuv.
Aſirological prayers ſeem to me to be built on as good rea-
ſon as the predictions. Stillingſ. Def of Diſc. on R. Idol.
The poetical fables are more ancient than the aſtrological in-
fluences, that were not known to the Greeks till after Alexan-
der the Great. Bentley's Sermons.
Astrolo'o IcALLY. adv. [from aſſrology.] In an aſtrological
nanner. -
To Ast Ro'Logize. v. n. [from aſtrology.] To pračtiſe aſtro-
logy.
ASTROLOGY.. n.ſ. ſaſtrologia, Lat.] The practice of fore-
telling things by the knowledge of the ſtars; an art now gene-
rally exploded, as without reaſon.
I know it hath been the opinion of the learned, who think
of the art of a/lrology, that the ſtars do not force the actions or
wills of men. Swift.
As TRo'NoMER. n.ſ.. [from 3-69, a ſtar, and 4.6, a rule or law.]
He that ſtudies the celeſtial motions, and the rules by which
they are governed.
The mºtions of factions under kings, ought to be like the
motions, as theaſtronomers ſpeak of, in the inferiour orbs. Bacon.
The old and new aſtronomers in vain
Attempt the heav'nly motions to explain. Blackmore.
Since aſtronomers no longer doubt of the motion of the pla-
nets about the ſun, it is fit to proceed upon that hypotheſis.
- Locke.
Ast Rono'MIca L. Nadj. [from affronomy J Belonging to aſtro-
As TRONo'Mick. } nomy.
Our forefathers marking certain mutations to happen in the
ſun's progreſs through the zodiack, they regiſtrate and ſet them
down in their aſtronomical canons. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Can he not paſs an affronomick line,
Or does he dread th’ imaginary ſign,
That he ſhould ne'er advance to either pole. Blackmore.
As TRONo'MicALLY. adv. [from aſtronomical.] In an aſtrono-
mical manner.
ASTRONOMY. m. f [2:32.2%a, from 3rº, a ſtar, and ºve, a
law, or rule.] . A mixed mathematical ſcience teaching the
knowledge of the celeſtial bodies, their magnitudes, motions,
diſtances, periods, eclipſes, and order. The origin of aſtro-
nomy is uncertain ; but from Egypt it travelled into Greece,
where Pythagoras was the firſt European who taught that the
earth and planets turn round the ſun, which ſtands immoveable
in the center ; as he himſelf had been inſtructed by the Egyp-
tian prieſts. From the time of Pythagoras, affronomy ſunk in-
to neglect, till it was revived by the Ptolemys, kings of Egypt*
and the Saracens, after their conqueſt of that country, having
acquired ſome knowledge of it, brought it from Africa to Spain,
and again reſtored this ſcience to Europe, where it has ſince re-
ceived very conſiderable improvements. Cºamºors.
To this muſt be added the underſtanding of the globes, and
the principles of geometry and aſtronºmy. Cowly.
A's TRoscopy. m. ſ. [...ºns, a ſtar, and zºº, to view.] Obſer-
vation of the ſtars. Dićf.
ASTRO-THEology. m. ſ. [from aºrum, a ſtar, and hºlºgia, di-
vinity.] Divinity founded on the obſervation of the Celeſtial
bodies. -
That the diurnal and annual revolutions are the motions of
the terraqueous globe, not of the ſun, I ſhew in the preface of
my Aſtro-Theology. 19erham's Phyſico-Tocolºgy.
As UNDER. adv. [arunbrian, Sax.] Apart; ſeparately; not to-
gether.
Two indirect lines, the further that they are drawn out, the
further they go aſunder. Speºſer on Ireland.
Senſe thinks the planets ſpheres not much aſ: ºdºr;
What tells us then their diſtance is ſo far. Sir J. Davies.
Greedy hope to find
His wiſh, and beſt advantage, us aſunder. Paradiſ: Loft, b. ix.
The fall'n archangel, envious of our ſtate,
Seeks hid advantage to betray us worſe;
Which, when aſunder, will not prove too hard,
For both together are each other's guard. Dryd. State of Inn.
Born far aſunder by the tides of men, -
Like adamant and ſteel they mect agen. Dryd. Fables.
All this metallick matter, both that which continued aſun-
der, and in ſingle corpuſcles, and that which was amaſſed and
concreted into nodules, ſubſided. //acaward's Nat. Hi/?.
As Y'LUM. n.ſ. [Lat. azºo, from a not, and avaiw, to pillage.]
A place out of which he that has fled to it, may not be taken; a
ſančtuary; a refuge.
So ſacred was the church to ſome, that it had the right of an
aſylum, or ſanctuary. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Asy'MMETRY. m.ſ.. [from 2, without, and avut...a, ſymmetry.]
1. Contrariety to ſymmetry; diſproportion.
The aſymmetries of the brain, as well as the deformities of
the legs or face, may be rectified in time. Grew's Cºſm. Sacra.
2. This term is ſometimes uſed in mathematicks, for what is
more uſually called incommenſurability; when between two
quantities there is no common meaſure. -
A's YMptot E. m. ſ. [from 2, priv. 29, with, and 7.1.2, to fall;
which never meet; incoincident.] Aſymptotes are right lines,
which approach nearer and nearer to ſome curve; but which,
though they and their curve were infinitely continued, would
never meet; and may be conceived as tangents to their curves
at an infinite diſtance. Chambers.
Aſymptote lines, though they may approach ſtill nearer toge-
ther, till they are nearer than the leaſt aſſignable diſtance, yet,
being ſtill produced infinitely, will never meet. Grew's Coſìn.
AsyMPto'Tic Al. adj. [from aſymptote.] Curves are ſaid to be
aſymptotical, when they continually approach, without a poſſibi-
lity of meeting.
ASY’NDETON. n. ſ. [3a ſºlor, of 2, priv. and avºia, to bind to-
gether.] A figure in grammar, when a conjunction copula-
tive is omitted in a ſentence; as in veni, widi, vici, 3 is
left out.
AT. prep. [aez, Saxon.]
1. At before a place, notes the nearneſs of the place; as, a man
is at the houſe before he is in it.
This cuſtom continued among many, to ſay their prayers at
fountains. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſc. on Romiſh Idolatry.
To all you ladies now at land
We men at ſea indite. Buckhurſt.
2. At before a word ſignifying time, notes the coexiſtenceof the
time with the event; the word time is ſometimes included in
the adjective.
We thought it at the very firſt a ſign of cold affection. Hooker.
How frequent to deſert him, and at laſt
To heap ingratitude on worthieſt deeds. Milt. Samp. Agon.
At the ſame time that the ſtorm beats upon the whole ſpe-
cies, we are falling foul upon one another. Addison. Spect.
We made no efforts at all, where we could have moſt wea-
kened the common enemy, and, at the ſame time, enriched
ourſelves. Swift.
3. At before a cauſal word ſignifies nearly the ſame as with.
At his touch,
Such ſanétity hath heav'n giv'n his hand,
They preſently amend. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
O fir, when he ſhall hear of your approach,
If that young Arthur be not gone already,
Ev’n at this news he dies. Shakespeare. King john.
Much at the ſight was Adam in his heart
Diſmay’d. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi.
High o'er their heads a moulding rock is plac'd,
That promiſes a fall, and ſhakes at ev'ry blaſt. Drydeit.
4. At before a ſuperlative adjective implies in the ſtate, as at mºſº,
in the ſtate of moſt perfection, &amp;c. f
Con-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A T A
A T H
Conſider any man as to his perſonal powers, they are not
great; for, at greateſt, they muſt ſtill be limited. South.
We bring into the world with us a poor needy uncertain life,
ſhort at the longeſt, and unquiet at the beſt. Temple.
5. At before a perſon, is ſeldom uſed otherwiſe than ludicrouſly;
as, he longed to be at him, that is, to attack him.
6. At before a ſubſtantive ſometimes ſignifies the particular con-
dition or circumſtances of the perſon; as, at peace, in a ſtate of
peace.
Under pardon,
You are much more at taſk for want of wiſdom, -
Than prais'd for harmful mildneſs. Shakeſp. King Lear.
It bringeth the treaſure of a realm into a few hands: for the
uſurer being at certainties, and others at uncertainties, at the
the end of the game moſt of the money will be in the box. Bac.
Hence walk'd the fiend at large in ſpacious field. P. Loſt.
The reſt, for whom no lot is yet decreed,
May run in paſtures, and at pleaſure feed. Dryden's Virgil.
Deſerted, at his utmoſt need,
By thoſe his former bounty fed. Dryden's St. Caecilia.
What hinder'd either in their native ſoil,
At eaſe to reap the harveſt of their toil. Dryden's Fables.
Wiſe men are ſometimes over-borne, when they are taken at
a diſadvantage. Collier of Confidence.
Theſe have been the maxims they have been guided by:
take theſe from them, and they are perfectly at a loſs, their
compaſs and pole-ſtar then are gone, and their underſtanding is
perfectly at a nonplus. - - Locke.
One man manages four horſes at once, and leaps from the
back of another at full ſpeed. Pºpe's Eſſay on Homer's Battles.
They will not let me be at quiet in my bed, but purſue me
to my very dreams. Swift.
. At before a ſubſtantive ſometimes marks employment or atten-
tioll.
We find ſome arrived to that ſottiſhneſs, as to own roundly
what they would be at. South.
How d'ye find yourſelf, ſays the doćtor to his patient : A little
while after he is at it again, with a pray how d'ye find your
body ? L’Eſlrange.
But ſhe who well enough knew what,
Before he ſpoke, he would be at,
Pretended not to apprehend. Hudibras.
The creature's at his dirty work again. Pope.
8. At ſometimes the ſame with furniſhed with, after the French a.
Infuſe his breaſt with magnanimity,
And make him naked foil a man at arms. Shakespeare HenryVI.
9. At ſometimes notes the place where any thing is, or acts.
Your huſband is at hand, I hear his trumpet. Shakesp.M. of Wen.
He that in tracing the veſſels began at the heart, though he
thought not at all of a circulation; yet made he the firſt true
ſtep towards the diſcovery. Grew's Coſmologia Sacra.
There various news I heard, of love and ſtrife,
Of ſtorms at ſea, and travels on the ſhore. Pope.
1c. At ſometimes ſignifies in conſequence of.
Impeachments at the proſecution of the houſe of commons,
have received their determinations in the houſe of lords. Hale.
11. At marks ſometimes the effect proceeding from an act.
Reſt in this tomb, rais'd at thy huſband's coſt. Dryden.
Tom has been at the charge of a penny upon this occaſion.
Addiſon. Speciator, N° 482.
Thoſe may be of uſe to confirm by authority, what they will
not be at the trouble to deduce by reaſoning. Arbuth, on Alim.
12. At ſometimes is nearly the ſame as in, noting ſituation.
She hath been known to come at the head of theſe raſcals,
and beat her lover. Swift.
13. At ſometimes marks the occaſion, like on.
Others, with more helpful care,
Cry’d out aloud, Beware, brave youth, beware
At this he turn'd, and, as the bull drew near,
Shunn'd, and receiv'd him on his pointed ſpear. Dryden.
14. At ſometimes ſeems to ſignify in the power of, or obedient to.
But thou of all the kings, Jove's care below,
Art leaſt at my command, and moſt my foe. Dryd. Iliad.
35. At ſometimes notes the relation of a man to an action.
To make pleaſure the vehicle of health, is a doćtor at it in
good earneſt. Collier of Friendſhip.
16. At ſometimes imports the manner of an action.
One warms you by degrees, the other ſets you on fire all at
once, and never intermits his heat. Dryden's Fables, Pref.
Not with leſs ruin than the Bajan mole,
At once comes tumbling down. Dryden's Aneid.
17. At, like the French chez, means ſometimes application to, or
dependence on.
The worſt authors might endeavour to pleaſe us, and in that
endeavour deſerve ſomething at our hands. Pope.
18. At all. In any manner; in any degree.
Nothing more true than what you once let fall,
Moſt women have no charaćters at all. Pope.
At ABAL. m. ſ. A kind of tabour uſed by the Moors.
Children ſhall beat our atabals and drums,
And all the noiſy trades of war no more
Shall wake the peaceful morn. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
;
ATARA".YIA. }". ſ. [3ragaší2.] Exemption from vexation ;
ATA RAxY. tranquillity.
The ſcepticks affected an indifferent cquiponderous neutra-
lity, as the only means to their ataraxia, and freedom from paſ-
ſionate diſturbances. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
ATE. The preterite of eat. See To EAT.
And by his ſide, his ſteed the graſſy forage ate. Fairy Q.
Even our firſt parents ate themſelves out of paradiſe; and
Job's children junketted and feaſted together often. South.
ATHA"NOR. m. ſ. [a chymical term, borrowed from 33aº, ;
or, as others think, Tin.] A digeſting furnace, to keep heat
for ſome time; ſo that it may be augmented or diminiſhed at
pleaſure, by opening or ſhutting ſome apertures made on pur-
poſe with ſliders over them, called regiſters. 9:tincy.
A't HEIsM., n.ſ...[from athrift. It is only of two ſyllables in poe-
try.] The diſbelief of a God.
God never wrought miracles to convince atheiſm, becauſe
his ordinary works convince it. Bacon's Eſſays.
It is the common intereſt of mankind, to puniſh all thoſe who
would ſeduce men to atheiſm. Tillotſon.
ATHEIST. m. ſ. [39.3, without God..] One that denies the
exiſtence of God.
To theſe, that ſober race of men, whoſe lives
Religious, titled them the ſons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame,
Ignobly to the trains, and to the ſmiles
Of theſe fair atheiſts. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xi.
Though he were really a ſpeculative atheiſt, yet if he would
but proceed rationally, he could not however be a practical
atheiſł, nor live without God in this world. South.
Atheft, uſe thine eyes,
And having view'd the order of the ſkies,
Think, if thou canſt, that matter blindly hurl’d,
Without a guide, ſhould frame this wond’rous world. Creech.
No atheiſt, as ſuch, can be a true friend, an affectionate re-
lation, or a loyal ſubjećt. Bentley's Sermons.
ATHEIST. adj. Atheiſtical; denying God.
Nor ſtood unmindful Abdiel to annoy
The atheiſt crew. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, l. vi.
ATHEI's TIcAL. adj. [from atheiſ#.] Given to atheiſin; im-
1OuS.
p Men are atheiſtical, becauſe they are firſt vicious ; and queſ-
tion the truth of chriſtianity, becauſe they hate the º h
oath.
ATHE1's TIcALLY. adv. [from atheiſtical.] In an atheiſtical
Inanner.
Is it not enormous, that a divine, hearing a great ſinner talk
atheiſtically, and ſcoff profanely at religion, ſhould, inſtead of
vindicating the truth, tacitely approve the ſcoffer. South.
I entreat ſuch as are atheijiically inclined, to conſider theſe
things. Tillotſon.
ATHEI's T1cALNEss. n.ſ.. [from atheiſtical.] The quality of
being atheiſtical.
Lord, purge out of all hearts profaneneſs and atheiſticalneſs.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
ATHEI's Tick. adj. [from atheft.] Given to atheiſm.
This argument demonſtrated the exiſtence of a Deity, and
convinced all atheiſtick gainſayers. Ray on the Creation.
ATHEL, ATHELING, ADEL, and ÆTHEL. [from adel, noble,
Germ.] So AEthelred is noble for counſel; Æthelard, a noble ge-
mius; Æthelbert, eminently noble; Æthelward, a noble protector.
Gibſºn's Camden.
ATHEows. adj. [2%3..] Atheiſtick; godleſs.
Thy Father, who is holy, wife, and pure,
Suffers the hypocrite, or atheous prieſt,
To tread his ſacred courts. Paradiſ? Regained, b. i.
ATHERO'MA. m.ſ. [2Sigºua, from 23:32, pap or pulſe..] A ſpe-
cies of wen, which neither cauſes pain, diſcolours the ſkin, nor
yields eaſily to the touch.
If the matter forming them, reſembles milk curds, the tu-
mour is called atheroma; if it be like honey, meliceris; and
if compoſed of fat, or a ſuety ſubſtance, ſteatoma. Sharp.
ATHERO'MAtous. adj. [from atheroma.] Having the qualities
of an atheroma, or curdy wen.
Feeling the matter fluctuating, I thought it atheromatºus.
- Jºſeman's Surgery.
ATH1'Rst. adv. [from a and thirſt.] Thirſty; in want of drink.
With ſcanty meaſure then ſupply their food;
And, when aſhirſt, reſtrain 'em from the flood. ... Dryden,
ATHLE"tick. adj. [from athleta, Lat. &amp;rº, a wreſtler.]
1. Belonging to wreſtling.
2. Strong of body; vigorous; luſty; robuſt.
Seldom ſhall one ſee in rich families that athletick ſoundneſs
and vigour of conſtitution, which is ſeen in cottages, where
nature is cook, and neceſſity caterer. South.
Science diſtinguiſhes a man of honour from one of thoſe
athletick brutes, whom undeſervedly we call heroes. Dryden,
ATHw A'RT. prºp. [from a and thwart.]
1. Acroſs; tranſverſe to any thing.
Themiſtocles made Xerxes poſt out of Grecia, by giving
out a purpoſe to break his bridge athwart the Helleſpont.
2. Eacon's Eſſays.
- Excerable<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A T O
A T T
Execrable ſhape
That dar'ſt, thoºgh grim and terrible, advance --
Thy miſèreated front athwart my way. Parad. Hºff, b. ii.
2. Through.
Now, athwart the terrors that thy vow
Has planted round thee, thou appear'it more fair. Addison Catº.
ATHw'ART. adv.
1. In a manner vexatious and perplexing; croſsly.
All athwart there came
A poſt from Wales, loaden with heavy news. Sh, Hen. IV.
2. Wrong.
The baby beats the nurſe, and quite athwart
Goes all decorum. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
ATI'lt. adv. [from a and tilt.]
1. In the manner of a tilter; with the action of a man making
a thruſt at an antagoniſt. -
In the city Tours,
Thou ran'ſtatiſt, in honour of my love,
And ſtol'ſ away the ladies hearts from France. Shakesp. Hen. VI.
To run atiſt at men, and wield
Their naked tools in open field. Hudibras, p. i. e. i.
2. In the poſture of a barrel raiſed or tilted behind, to make it
run Out.
Such a man is always atiſt; his favours come hardly from
him. Spectator.
ATLAs. m. ſ.
1. A collection of maps, ſo called probably from a pićture of
Atlas ſupporting the heavens, prefixed to ſome collection.
2. A large ſquare folio; ſo called from theſe folios, which, con-
taining maps, were made large and ſquare.
3. Sometimes the ſupporters of a building.
4. A rich kind of ſilk or ſtuff made for women's cloaths.
I have the conveniency of buying Dutch atlaſes with gold
and ſilver, or without. Speciator, Nº. 288.
A't MosPHERE. m. ſ. [3rº, vapour, and 2:2:4, a ſphere.]
The exteriour part of this our habitable world is the air, or
atmoſphere; a light, thin, fluid, or ſpringy body, that encom-
paſſes the ſolid earth on all ſides. Locke.
It is generally ſuppoſed to be about forty-five miles high.
Immenſe the whole excited atmoſphere
Impetuous ruſhes o'er the ſounding world. Thomſºn's Aut.
At Mospher ic AL. adj. [from atmoſphere.] Conſiſting of the
atmoſphere; belonging to the atmoſphere.
We did not mention the weight of the incumbent atmoſphe-
rical cylinder, as a part of the weight reſiſted. Boyle.
ATOM. n.ſ.. [atomus, Lat. &amp;rop.º.]
1. Such a ſmall particle as cannot be phyſically divided: and theſe
are the firſt rudiments, or the component parts of all bodies. Quin.
Innumerable minute bodies are called atoms, becauſe, by rea-
ſon of their perfect ſolidity, they were really indiviſible. Ray.
See plaſtick nature working to this end,
The ſingle atoms each to other tend,
Attract, attracted to, the next in place,
Form'd and impell'd its neighbour to embrace. Pote.
2. Anything extremely ſmall.
It is as eaſy to count atoms, as to reſolve the propoſitions of
a lover. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Ato'MICAL. adj. [from atom.]
1. Conſiſting of atoms. -
Vitrified and pellucid bodies are clearer in their continuities,
than in powders and atomical diviſions. Brown's Wulgar Err.
2. Relating to atoms.
Vacuum is another principal doctrine of the atomical philo-
ſophy. Bentley's Sermons.
A"Toxiist. n.ſ.. [from atom.] One that holds the atomical phi-
loſophy, or doćtrine of atoms.
The atomiſis, who define motion to be a paſſage from one
place to another, what do they more than put one ſynonymous
word for another ? Locke.
Now can judicious atomiſ's conceive,
Chance to the ſun could his juſt impulſe give
A"roMY. m. ſ. An obſolete word for atom.
Drawn with a team of little atomics,
Athwart men's noſes, as they be aſleep. Shakespeare. Rom. and jul.
To ATO'NE. v. n. [from at one, as the etymologiſts remark,
to be at one, is the ſame as to be in concord. This derivation is
much confirmed by the following paſſage.]
1. To agree; to accord.
He and Aufidus can no more atone,
Than violenteſt contrariety. Shakſ). Coriolanus.
2. To ſtand as an equivalent for ſomething; and particulrly uſed
of expiatory ſacrifices; with the particle for before the thing
for which ſomething elſe is given.
From a meaniloºk the pious Decii came ;
Yet ſuch their virtues, that their loſs alone,
Fºr Rome and all our legions did atone. Dryden's juvenal.
The good intention of a man of weight and worth, or a real
Blººr.
friend, ſeldom atone, fºr the uncafineſs produced by his grave
repreſentations. Loºke.
i.et thy ſublime meridian courſe
For Mary’s ſetting rays atone :
Our luftre, with redoubl’d force,
Muſt now proceed from thee alone. Prior.
His virgin ſword AEgyſthus' veins imbru’d; -
The murd’rer fell, and blood atº'd fºr blood. Pºpe'. O&amp;ſ.
To ATO'NE. v. a. To expiate; to anſwer for.
Soon ſhould yon’ boaſters ceaſe their haughty ſtrife,
Or each atone his guilty love with life. Pºpe', Cºy.
Ato'NEMENT. n.ſ.. [from atone.] -*
1. Agreement; concord.
He ſeeks to make atonement
Between the duke of Glo'ſter and your brothers. Shakespeare. R. III.
2. Expiation; expiatory equivalent; with fºr.
And the Levites were purified, and they waſhed their cloaths:
and Aaron offered them as an offering before the Lord ; and
Aaron made an atonement fºr them to cleanſe them. Num.viii.21.
Surely it is not a ſufficientatonement fºr the writers, that they
profeſs loyalty to the government, and ſprinkle ſome arguments
in favour of the diſſenters, and, under the ſhelter of popular
politicks and religion, undermine the foundations of all pie
and virtue. Swift on the Sentinents of a Church of Englandman.
Ato'P. adv. [from a and tºp.] On the top; at the top.
Atºp whereof, but far more rich, appear'd
The work as of a kingly palace-gate. Par. Hoff, b. iii.
What is extracted by water from coffee is the oil, which
often ſwims atop of the decoction. A luthnot on Aliments.
ATRABILA'RIAN. adj. [from atra lilis, black choler.] Melan-
choly ; replete with black choler.
The atrabi'arian conſtitution, or a black, viſcous, pitchy
conſiſtence of the fluids, makes all ſecretions difficult and ſpar-
Ing. Arbuthnot on Diet.
ATRABILA'Rious, adj. [from atra lilis, black choler.] Melan-
cholick.
The blood, deprived of its due proportion of ſerum, or
finer and more volatile parts, is atrabiarious; whereby it is
rendered groſs, black, unctuous, and earthy. º:
. From this black aduſt ſtate of the blood, they are atralia-
7"tºº. Arbuthnot on Air.
ATRABILA'Rious Ness. m. ſ. [from atralilarious.] The ſtate of
being melancholy; repletion with melancholy.
ATR AMENTAL. adj. [from atramentum, ink. Lat.] Inky; black.
If we enquire in what part of vitriol this atramental and de-
nigrating condition lodgeth, it will ſeem eſpecially to lie in the
more fixed ſalt thereof. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi.
ATR AMENTous. adj. [from atramentum, ink, Lat.] Inky; black.
I am not ſatisfied, that thoſe black and atramentous ſpots,
which ſeem to repreſent them, are ocular. Brown'ſ Wulg. Err.
ATROCIOUS. adj. [atrox, Lat.] Wicked in a high degree;
enormous; horribly criminal.
An advocate is neceſſary, and therefore audience ought not
to be denied him in defending cauſes, unleſs it be an arocious
offence, Ayliffe's Parergon.
At Ro'ciously. adv. [from atrocicus.] In an atrocious man-
ner; with great wickedneſs.
ATRo'cious Ness. n.ſ.. [from atrocious.] The quality of being
enormouſly criminal.
ATRo'city. n.ſ.. [atrocitas, Lat.] Horrible wickedneſs; exceſs
of wickedneſs.
I never recall it to mind, without a deep afloniſhment of the
very horrour and atrocity of the fact in a chriſtian court. Iſotton.
They deſired juſtice might be done upon offenders, as the
atrocity of their crimes deſerved. Clarendon.
ATRoPHY. m.ſ. [2Fe-2,2..] Want of nouriſhment; a diſeaſe in
which what is taken at the mouth cannot contribute to the ſup-
port of the body.
Pining atrºphy,
Maraſmus, and wide-waſting peſtilence. Par. Lºft, b. xi.
The mouths of the lacteals may be ſhut up by a viſcid mucus,
in which caſe the chyle paſſeth by ſtool, and the perſon falleth .
into an atrophy. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To ATTACH. v. a. [attacher, Fr.]
1. To arreſt; to take or apprehend by commandment or writ.
Cowel.
Eftſoons the guard, which on his ſtate did wait,
Attach'd that traitor faiſe, and bound him ſtrait. Fairy Q.
The Tower was choſen, that if Clifford ſhould accuſe great
ones, they might, without ſuſpicion or noiſe, be preſently at-
tached. Pacon's Henry VII.
Bohemia greets you,
Deſires you to attach his ſon, who has
His dignity and duty both caſt off. Shakeſp. Hºiter's Tale.
2. Sometimes with the particle of, but not in preſent uſe.
You, lord archbiſhop, and you, lord Mowbray,
Of capital treaſon I attach you both. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
3. To ſeize.
France hath flaw'd the league, and hath attach'd
Our merchants goods at Bourdeaux. Shaky?. Henry VIII.
4. To lay hold on.
I cannot blame thee,
Who am myſelf attach'd with wearineſs,
To th' dulling of my ſpirits.
5. To win; to gain over ; to enamour.
Songs, garlands, flow’rs,
And charming ſymphonics, attººd the heart
Of Adam. ...ºn's Parcºſ. L37, b. xi.
6. To
Shakespeare . Tºp:/?.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A T T
6. To fix to one's intereſt.
The great and rich depend on thoſe whom their power or
their wealth attaches to them. Rogers.
Atta'ch MENT. n.ſ.. [attachement, Fr.]
1. Adherence; attention; regard.
The Jews are remarkable for an attachment to their own
country. Addison. Freeholder, N° 5.
The Romans burnt this laſt fleet, which is another mark of
their ſmall attachment to the ſea. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. An apprehenſion of a man to bring him to anſwer an action;
and ſometimes it extends to his moveables.
3. Foreign attachment, is the attachment of a foreigner's goods
found within a city, to ſatisfy creditors within a city,
To ATTACK. v.a. [attaquer, Fr.]
1. To aſſault an enemy; oppoſed to defence.
The front, the rear
Attack, while Yvo thunders in the center. A.Philips's Briton.
Thoſe that attack, generally get the vićtory, though with
diſadvantage of ground. Cane's Campaigns.
2. To impugn in any manner, as with ſatire, confutation, ca-
lumny; as, the declaimer attacked the reputation of his adver-
faries.
Att A'ck. m.ſ.. [from the verb.] An aſſault upon an enemy.
Hečtor oppoſes, and continues the attack; in which, after
many actions, Sarpedon makes the firſt breach in the wall.
Pope's Iliad, argum. b. xii.
If appriz'd of the ſevere attack,
The country be ſhut up. Thomſon.
I own’twas wrong, when thouſands call'd me back,
To make that hopeleſs, ill-advis'd attack. Young.
Atta'cKER. n.ſ.. [from attack.] The perſon that attacks.
To ATTATN. v. a. [atteindre, Fr. attineo, Lat.]
I. To gain; to procure; to obtain.
Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high ; I can-
not attain unto it. Pſ. cxxxix. 6.
Is he wiſe who hopes to attain the end without the means,
nay by means that are quite contrary to it? Tillotſon.
2. To overtake; to come up with: a ſenſe now little in uſe.
The earl hoping to have overtaken the Scottiſh king, and to
have given him battle; but not attaining him in time, ſet down
before the caſtle of Aton. Baeon's Henry VII.
3. To come to ; to enter upon.
Canaan he now attains; I ſee his tents
Pitch'd above Sichem. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
4. To reach to equal.
So the firſt precedent, if it be good, is ſeldom attained by
imitation. Bacon's Eſſays.
To have knowledge in moſt objećts of contemplation, is
what the mind of one man can hardly attain unto. Locke,
To ATTA'IN. v. n.
1. To come to a certain ſtate.
Milk will ſoon ſeparate itſelf into a cream, and a more ſerous
liquor, which, after twelve days, attains to the higheſt degree
of acidity. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To arrive at.
Att A/IN. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The thing attained; attain-
ment: a word notin uſe.
Crowns and diadems, the moſt ſplendid terrene attains, are
akin to that which to-day is in the field, and to-morrow is cut
down. Glanville's Scepſis.
Atta'ſ NABLE. adj. [from attain.] That which may be at-
tained ; procurable.
He wilfully neglects the obtaining unſpeakable good, which
he is perſuaded is certain and attainable. Tillotſon.
None was propoſed that appeared certainly attainable, or of
value enough. Rogers.
ATTA'INA BLENEss. n.ſ.. [from attainable.] The quality of be-
ing attainable. -
Perſons become often enamoured of outward beauty, with-
out any particular knowledge of its poſſeſſor, or its attainable-
meſ by them. Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principles.
Att A'INDER. m. ſ. [from to attaint.]
1. The act of attainting in law; convićtion of a crime. See To
ATTAINT. -
The ends in calling a parliament were chiefly to have the
attainders of all of his party reverſed; and, on the other fide,
to attaint by parliament his enemies. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. Taint.
So ſmooth he daub'd his vice with ſhew of virtue,
He liv'd from all attainder of ſuſpect. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Atta'ſ NMENT. n.ſ.. [from attain..]
I. That which is attained; acquiſition.
We diſpute with men that count it a great attainment to be
able to talk much, and little to the purpoſe. Glanville's Scepſis.
Our attainments are mean, compared with the perfection of
the univerſe. Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b, ii.
2- The act or power of attaining.
The Scripture muſt be ſufficient to imprint in us the charac-
ter of all things neceſſary for the attainment of eternal life.
Hooker, b. v.
Education in extent, more large, of time ſhorter, and of at-
*ainment more certain. Milton on Education.
Vol. I.
Government is an art above the attainment of an ordinary
genius. South,
If the ſame aétions be the inſtruments, both of acquiring
ſame and procuring this happineſs, they would nevertheleſ, faii
in the attainment of this laſt end, if they proceeded from a de-
fire of the firſt. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 25-.
The great care of God for our ſalvation muſt appear in the
concern he expreſſed for our attainment of it.
To Atta'INT. v. a. [attenter, Fr.]
1. To attaint is particularly uſed for ſuch as are found guilty of
ſome crime or offence, and eſpecially of felony or treaſon. A
man, is attainted two ways, by appearance, or by proceſs. At-
tainder by appearance is by confeſſion, battle, or verdict. Con-
feſſion is double; one at the bar before the judges, when the
priſoner, upon his indićtment read, being aſked guilty or not
guilty, anſwers guilty, never putting himſelf upon the verdict
of the jury. The other is before the coroner in ſančtuary,
where he, upon his confeſſion, was in former times conſtrained
to abjure the realm; which kind is called attainder by abjura-
tion. Attainder by battle is, when the party appealed, and
chooſing to try the truth by combat rather than by jury, is van-
guiſhed. Attainder by verdićt is, when the priſoner at the
bar, anſwering to the indictment not guilty, hath an inqueſt of
life and death paſſing upon him, and is by the verdićt pro-
nounced guilty., Attainder by proceſs is, where a party flies,
and is not found till five times called publickly in the county,
and at laſt outlawed upon his default. Cowel.
Were it not an endleſs trouble, that no traitor or felon ſhould
be attainted, but a parliament muſt be called. Spenſºr on Ireland.
I muſt offend before I be attainted. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
2. To taint; to corrupt.
My tender youth was never yet attaint
With any paſſion of inflaming love. Shakespeare. Henry VI,
Atta'INT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
I. Anything injurious, as illneſs, wearineſs,
obſolete.
Nor doth he dedicate one jot of colour
Unto the weary and all-watched night;
But freſhly looks, and overbears attaint
With chearful ſemblance.
2. Stain; ſpot; taint.
No man hath a virtue that he has not a glimpſe of; nor any
man an attaint, but he carries ſome ſtain of it.
Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
3. In horſemanſhip. A blow or wound on the hinder feet ºf an
horſe. Farrier's Dići.
Atta'INTURE. n.ſ.. [from attaint..] Reproach; imputation.
Hume's knavery will be the ducheſs's wreck,
And her attainture will be Humphry's fall.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI,
Lat.] To corrupt; to
Rogers.
This ſenſe is now
SJakſº. Henry V.
To Atta'MINATE. v. a. [attamino,
ſpoil.
To Atte'MPER. v. a. [attempero, Lat.]
I. ſº mingle; to weaken by the mixture of ſomething elſe; to
1Iute.
Nobility attempers ſovereignty, and draws the eyes of the
people ſomewhat aſide from the line royal. Bacon's Eſſayſ.
Attemper'd ſuns ariſe,
Sweet-beam’d, and ſhedding oft thro' lucid clouds
A pleaſing calm. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. To regulate; to ſoften.
His early providence could likewiſe have attempered his na-
ture therein. Bacon's Henry VII.
Thoſe ſmiling eyes, attemp'ring ev'ry ray,
Shone ſwectly lambent with celeſtial day. Pºpe's El, to Abel,
3. To mix in juſt proportions.
Alma, like a virgin queen moſt bright,
And to her gueſts doth bounteous banquet dight,
Attemperd, goodly, well for health and for delight. F. Queen,
4. To fit to ſomething elſe.
Phemius' let arts of gods and heroes old,
Attemper'd to the lyre, your voice employ. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
To ATTE'MPERATE. v. a. [attempero, Lat.] To proportion to
ſomething.
Hope muſt be proportioned and attemperate to the promiſe;
if it exceed that temper and proportion, it becomes a tumour
and tympany of hope. Hammond's Pract. Catechiſm.
To Atte‘MPt. v. a. [attenter, Fr.]
1. To attack; to invade; to venture tºpon..
He flatt’ring his diſpleaſure,
Tript me behind, got praiſes of the king,
For him attempting who was ſelf-ſubdu'd. Shakespeare K. Lear,
Who, in all things wiſe and juſt,
Hinder'd not Satan to attempt the mind
Of man; with ſtrength entire, and free-will, arm'd.
A4ilton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. x.
I have been ſo hardy to attempt upon a name, which among
ſome is yet very ſacred. Glanville's Scepſis, Preface.
2. To try; to endeavour. -
I have nevertheleſs attempted to ſend unto you, for the renew-
ing of brotherhood and friendſhip. 1 44acc. xii. 17.
2 K ATTF 'MPT.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A T T
A T T
Atte‘MPt. n.f. [from the verb.]
I. An attack.
If we be always prepared to receive an enemy, we ſhall long
live in peace and quietneſs, without any attempts upon us. Bacon.
2. An eſſay; an endeavour.
Alack! I am afraid, they have awak'd;
And 'tis not done, th’ attempt, and not the deed,
Confounds us. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He would have cry’d; but hoping that he dreamt,
Amazement ty’d his tongue, and ſtopp'd th’ attempt. Dryd.
I ſubjoin the following attempt towards a natural hiſtory of
foſſils. //oodward on Foſſils.
Atte‘MPTABLE. adj. [from attempt.] Liable to attempts or
attacks.
The gentleman vouching his to be more fair, virtuous, wiſe,
and leſs attemptable than the rareſt of our ladies. Shakespeare Cymbel.
ATTE'MPTER. m.ſ.. [from attempt.]
1. The perſon that attempts; an invader.
The Son of God, with godlike force endu'd
Againſt th' attempter of thy Father's throne. Par. Loft, b. iv.
2. An endeavourer.
You are no factors for glory or treaſure, but difintereſted
attempters for the univerſal good. Glanville's Scepſ. Scientifica.
To ATTEND. v. a. [attendre, Fr. attendo, Lat.]
1. To regard; to fix the mind upon.
The crow doth ſing as ſweetly as the ſtork,
When neither is attended. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
2. To wait on ; to accompany as an inferiour.
His companion, youthful Valentine,
Attends the emperour in his royal court. Shakesp.T. Gent. of Wer.
3. To accompany as an enemy.
He was at preſent ſtrong enough to have ſtopped or attended
Walter in his weſtern expedition. Clarendon, b. viii.
4. To be preſent with, upon a ſummons. -
If any miniſter refuſed to admit a lećturer recommended by
him, he was required to attend upon the committee, and not
diſcharged till the houſes met again. Clarendon.
5. To accompany; to be appendant to.
z England is ſo idly king'd,
Her ſceptre ſo fantaſtically born,
That fear attends her not. Shakespeare. Henry V.
My pray'rs and wiſhes always ſhall attend
The friends of Rome. Addiſon's Cato.
A vehement, burning, fixed, pungent pain in the ſtomach,
attended with a fever. Arbuthnot on Diet.
6. To expect. This ſenſe is French.
So dreadful a tempeſt, as all the people attended therein the
very end of the world, and judgment-day. Raleigh's Hi/?.
7. To wait on, as on a charge.
The fifth had charge ſick perſons to attend,
And comfort thoſe in point of death which lay. Fairy Q.
8. To be conſequent to.
The duke made that unfortunate deſcent upon Rhée, which
was afterwards attended with many unproſperous attempts. Clar.
9. To remain to ; to await; to be in ſtore for:
To him, who hath a proſpect of the ſtate that attend; all men
after this, the meaſures of good and evil are changed. Locke.
10. To wait for inſidiouſly.
Thy interpreter, full of deſpight, bloody as the hunter, at-
tends thee at the orchard end. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
11. To be bent upon any object.
Their hunger thus appeas'd, their care attends
The doubtful fortune of their abſent friends. Dryd. Wirgil.
12. To ſtay for.
I died whilſt in the womb he ſtaid,
Attending nature's law.
I haſten to our own ; nor will relate
Great Mithridates, and rich Croeſus' fate;
Whom Solon wiſely counſell'd to attend
The name of happy, till he knew his end.
To ATTE'ND. v. n.
1. To yield attention.
But, thy relation now! for I attend,
Pleas'd with thy words. Milton's Par. Loft, b. viii.
Since man cannot at the ſame time attend to two objects, if
you employ your ſpirit upon a book or a bodily labour, you
have no room left for ſenſual temptation, Taylor's Holy Living.
2. To ſtay; to delay.
This firſt true cauſe, and laſt good end,
She cannot here ſo well, and truly ſee;
For this perfection ſhe muſt yet attend, -
Till to her Maker ſhe eſpouſed be. Sir j. Davies.
Plant anemonies after the firſt rains, if you will have flowers
very forward; but it is ſurer to attend till Oétober, or the
month after. Evelyn's Kalendar.
ATTE'NDANCE. m. ſ. [attendance, Fr.]
1. The act of waiting on another; or of ſerving.
I dance attendance here,
I think the duke will not be ſpoke withal. Shakeſp. R. III.
For he, of whom theſe things are ſpoken, pertaineth to
another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the al-
taſ. Heb. vii. 13.
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Dryden's juv.
The other, after many years attendance upon the duke, was
now one of the bedchamber to the prince. Clarendon.
2. Service.
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
From thoſe that ſhe calls ſervants? Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. The perſons waiting; a train.
Attendance none ſhall need, nor train; where none
Are to behold the judgment, but the judg’d,
Thoſe two. 44ilton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x. l. 80.
4. Attention; regard.
Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doćtrine.
I Tin. iv. 13.
5. Expectation; a ſenſe now out of uſe.
That which cauſeth bitterneſs in death, is the languiſhing
attendance and expectation thereof ere it come. Hooker, b. i.
ATTE'NDANT. adj. [attendant, Fr.] Accompanying as ſubor-
dinate. -
Other ſuns, perhaps,
With their attendant moons, thou wilt deſcry,
Communicating male and female light. Par. Iºff, b. viii.
ATTE'NdANT. n.ſ.
1. One that attends.
I will be returned forthwith ; diſmiſs your attendant there;
look it be done. Shakesp. Othello.
2. One that belongs to the train.
When ſome gracious monarch dies,
Soft whiſpers firſt and mournful murmurs riſe
Among the ſad attendants. Dryden.
3. One that waits the pleaſure of another, as a ſuitor or agent.
I endeavour that my reader may not wait long for my
meaning: to give an attendant quick diſpatch is a civility.
- Burnet's Theory, Preface.
4. One that is preſent at any thing.
He was a conſtant attendant at all meetings relating to cha-
rity, without contributing. Swift's Fates of Clergymen.
5. In law. One that oweth a duty or ſervice to another; or,
after a ſort, dependeth upon another. Cowel.
6. That which is united with another; a concomitant; a con-
ſequent. -
Beware,
And govern well thy appetite, left ſin
Surprize thee, and her black attendant, death. Par. L. h. vii.
They ſecure themſelves firſt from doing nothing, and then
from doing ill; the one being ſo cloſe an attendant on the
other, that it is ſcarce poſſible to ſever them. Decay of Piety.
He had an unlimited ſenſe of fame, the attendant of noble
ſpirits, which prompted him to engage in travels. Pop. Eſſ. on H.
It is hard to take into view all the attendants or conſequents
that will be concerned in the determination of a queſtion.
Hatti's Improvement ºf the Mind.
ATTE'NDER. m. ſ. [from attend.] Companion; aſſociate.
The gypſies were there,
Like lords to appear,
With ſuch their attenders,
As you thought offenders. Benjohnſºn's Gypſies.
Att'ENT. adj. [attentus, Lat..] Intent; attentive; heedful;
regardful.
Now mine eyes ſhall be open, and mine ears attent unto the
prayer that is made in this place. 2 Chron. vii. 15.
What can then be leſs in me than deſire,
To ſee thee, and approach thee, whom I know,
Declar'd the Son of God, to hear attent
Thy wiſdom, and behold thy godlike deeds. Par. Regained.
Read your chapter in your prayers; little interruptions will
make your prayers leſs tedious, and yourſelf more attent upon
them. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
To want of judging abilities, we may add their want of
leiſure to apply their minds to ſuch a ſerious and attent conſide-
ration. - South.
Being denied communication by their ear, their eyes are
more vigilant, attent, and heedful. Holder's El of Speech.
A'TTENTATES. m. ſ. [attentata, Lat.] Proceedings in a court
of iudicature, pending ſuit, and after an inhibition is decreed
and gone out ; thoſe things which are done after an extraju-
dicial appeal, may likewiſe be ſtiled attentates. Ayliff. Par.
Atte'NTION. m. ſ. [attention, Fr.] The act of attending or
heeding; the aët of bending the mind upon any thing.
They ſay the tongues of dying men . .
Inforce attention like deep harmony. Shakespeare Richard II.
He perceived nothing but ſilence, and ſigns of attention to
what he would further ſay. Bacon's Holy War.
But him the gentle angel by the hand
Soon rais'd, and his attention thus recall’d. Par. Loft, b. xi.
By attention the ideas, that offer themſelves, are taken notice
of, and, as it were, regiſtered in the memory. Locke.
Attention is a very neceſſary thing; truth doth not always
ſtrike the ſoul at firſt fight. Iłatts's Improv. of the Mind.
ATTE'NTIVE. adj. [from attent.] Heedful; regardful; full of
attention.
Being moved with theſe and the like your effectual diſ-
courſes, whereunto we gave moſt attentive ear, till they entered
even unto our ſouls, Hazker, Pºłº
'm
*f
s
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A T T
I'm never merry when I hear ſweet muſick,
-The reaſon is, your ſpirits are attentive. Shakespeare M. of Venice,
I ſaw moſt of them attentive to three Sirens, diſtinguiſhed by
the names of Sloth, Ignorance, and Pleaſure. Tatler, Nº 81.
A critick is a man who, on all occaſions, is more attentive to
what is wanting than what is preſent. Addiſon. Guardian.
Muſick's force can tame the furious beaſt;
Can make the wolf, or foaming boar, reſtrain
His rage; the lion drop his creſted main, -
Attentive to the ſong. Prior.
Atte‘NTIVELY. adv. [from attentive..] Heedfully; carefully.
If a man look ſharply and attentively, he ſhall ſee Fortune;
for though ſhe be blind, ſhe is not inviſible. Bacon.
The cauſe of cold is a quick ſpirit in a cold body; as will
appear to any that ſhall attentively conſider of nature. Bacon.
Atte‘NTIVENEss. n.ſ.. [from attentive.] The ſtate of being
attentive ; heedfulneſs; attention.
At the relation of the queen's death, bravely confeſſed and
lamented by the king, how attentiveneſs wounded his daughter.
Shakeſp. JWinter's Tale.
ATTE'NUANT. adj. [attenuans, Lat.] What has the power of
making thin, or diluting.
To ATTENUATE. v. a. [attenuo, Lat.] To make thin, or
ſlender.
The finer part belonging to the juice of grapes, being atte-
nuated and ſubtilized, was changed into an ardent ſpirit. Boyle.
Vinegar curd, put upon an egg, not only diſſolves the ſhell,
but alſo attenuates the white contained in it into a limpid water.
Wiſeman's Surgery.
It is of the nature of acids to diſſolve or attenuate, and of
alkalies to precipitate or incraſſate. Newton's Opticks.
The ingredients are digeſted and attenuated by heat; they
are ſtirred and conſtantly agitated by winds. Arbuth. on Air.
ATTE'NUAT e. adj. [from the verb.] Made thin, or ſlender.
Vivification ever conſiſteth in ſpirits attenuate, which the
cold doth congeal and coagulate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
ATTENUA'TION. m. ſ. [from attenuate.] The act of making
anything thin or ſlender; leſſening.
Chiming with a hammer upon the outſide of a bell, the ſound
will be according to the inward concave of the bell; whereas
the eliſion or attenuation of the air, can be only between the
hammer and the outſide of the bell. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
ATTER. n.ſ.. [aten, Sax. venom.] Corrupt matter. A word
much uſed in Lincolnſhire. Skinner.
To ATTE's T. v. a. [atteſfor, Lat.]
1. To bear witneſs of; to witneſs.
Many particular facts are recorded in holy writ, atteſted by
particular pagan authors. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
2. To call to witneſs; to invoke as conſcious.
The ſacred ſtreams, which heav'n's imperial ſtate
Atteſts in oaths, and fears to violate. Dryden's Aeneid.
ATTE's T. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Witneſs; teſtimony; at-
teſtation.
With the voice divine
Nigh thunderſtruck, th’ exalted man, to whom
Such high atteſt was giv'n, a while ſurvey’d
With wonder. Paradiſe Regained, b. i.
Aºtios. n. ſ. [from atteſ?..] Teſtimony; witneſs; evi-
enCC.
There remains a ſecond kind of peremptorineſs, of thoſe
who can make no relation without an atteſtation of its cer-
tainty. Government of the Tongue.
The next coal-pit, mine, quarry, or chalk-pit, will give at-
teſtation to what I write, theſe are ſo obvious that I need not
ſeek for a compurgator. JWoodward’s Nat. Hiſtory.
We may derive a probability from the atteſtation of wiſe and
honeſt men by word or writing, or the concurring witneſs of
multitudes who have ſeen and known what they relate. J/atts.
ATTI'Guous. adj. [attiguus, Lat.] Hard by; adjoining. Dić.
To Atti's GE. v. a. [attingo, Lat.] To touch lightly or gently.
IDic?.
To ATTIRE. v. a. [attirer, Fr.] To dreſs; to habit; to ar-
Iaw.
y Let it likewiſe your gentle breaſt inſpire
With ſweet infuſion, and put you in mind
Of that proud maid, whom now thoſe leaves attire,
Proud Daphne. Spenſºr, Sonnet xxxvii.
My Nan ſhall be the queen of all the fairies;
Finely attired in a robe of white. Shakeſp. M. Jº. of Iłżndſ.
With the linen mitre ſhall he be attired. Lev. xvi. 4.
Now the ſappy boughs -
Attire themſelves with blooms. Philips.
ATTI'RE. m. ſ. [from the verb J
* Clothes; dreſs; habit.
It is no more diſgrace to Scripture to have left things free to
be ordered by the church, than for nature to have left it to the
Wit of man to deviſe his own attire. Hooker, b. iii.
After that the Roman attire grew to be in account, and the
8°wn to be in uſe among them. Sirjohn Davies on Ireland.
Thy ſumptuous buildings, and thy wife's attire,
Hath coſt a maſs of publicktreaſury.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI, p. ii.
And in this coarſe attire, which I now wear,
With God and with the Muſes [ confer. IP:re.
When laviſh nature, with her beſt attire,
Cloaths the gay ſpring, the ſeaſon of deſire.
I paſs their form, and ev'ry charming grace,
But their attire, like liveries of a kind,
All rich and rare, is freſh within my mind. Dryd.
2. In hunting. The horns of a buck or ſtag.
3. In botany. The flower of a plant is divided into three parts,
the empalement, the foliation, and the attire, which is either
florid or ſemiform. Florid attire, called thrums or ſuits, as in
the flowers of marigold and tanſey, conſiſt ſometimes of two,
but commonly of three parts. The outer part is the floret,
the body of which is divided at the top, like the cowſlip flower,
into five diſtinét parts. Semifºrm attire conſiſts of two parts,
JValler.
the chives and apices; one upon each attire, Dić7.
Atti'RER. m. ſ. [from attire.] One that attires another; a
dreſſer. Dić7.
A'ttitude. n. ſ. [attitude, Fr. from atto, Ital.] The poſture
or action in which a ſtatue or painted figure is placed.
Bernini would have taken his opinion upon the beauty and
attitude of a figure. Prior's Dedication.
They were famous originals that gave riſe to ſtatues, with
the ſame air, poſture, and attitudes. - Addison.
Atto'LLENT, adj. [attallens, Lat.] That which raiſes or lifts up.
I ſhall farther take notice of the exquiſite libration of the
attollent and depriment muſcles. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
Atto'RNEY. m.ſ.. [attornatus, low Lat. from tour, Fr. Celui qui
vient a tour d'autrui; qui alterius vices ſubit.]
1. Such a perſon as by conſent, commandment, or requeſt, takes
heed, ſees, and takes upon him the charge of other men's buſi-
neſs, in their abſence. Attorney is either general or ſpecial :
Attorney general is he that by general authority is appointed to
all our affairs or ſuits; as the attorney general of the king, which
is nearly the ſame with Procurator Caſaris in the Roman em-
pire. Attorneys general are made either by the king's letters
patent, or by our appointment before juſtices in eyre, in open
court. Attorney ſpecial or particular, is he that is employed in
one or more cauſes particularly ſpecified. There are alſo, in
reſpect of the divers courts, attorneys at large, and attorneys ſpe-
cial, belonging to this or that court only. - Cowel.
Attorneys in common law, are nearly the ſame with proctors
in the civil law, and ſolicitors in courts of equity. Attorneys
ſue out writs or proceſs, or commence, carry on, and defend
aćtions, or other proceedings, in the names of other perſons,
in the courts of common law. None are admitted to act
without having ſerved a clerkſhip for five years, taking the
proper oath, being enrolled, and examined by the judges. The
attorney general pleads within the bar. To him come warrants
for making out patents, pardons, &amp;c. and he is the principal
manager of all law affairs of the crown. Chambers.
I am a ſubject,
And challenge law : attorneys are deny'd me,
And therefore perſonally I lay my claim
To mine inheritance.
The king's attorney, on the contrary,
Urg'd on examinations, proofs, confeſſions,
Of divers witneſſes. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Deſpairing quacks with curſes fled the place,
And vile attorneys, now an uſeleſs race. Pope, Epiſt. iii.
2. It was anciently uſed for thoſe who did any buſineſs for an-
other; now only in law.
I will attend my huſband; it is my office;
And will have no attorney but myſelf; -
And therefore let me have him home. , Shakespeare Com. of Err.
Why ſhould calamity be full of words :
– Windy attorneys to their client woes, -
Airy ſucceeders of inteſtate joys. Shakesp. Richard III:
To Atto'RNEY. v. a. [from the noun ; the verb is now no
in uſe.]
1. To perform by proxy.
Their encounters, though not perſonal, have been royally
attornied with interchange of gifts. Slakeſp. Winter's Tale:
2. To employ as a proxy.
Shakespeare. Richard II.
As I was then
Advertiſing, and holy to your buſineſs,
Not changing heart with habit, I am ſtill
Attornied to your ſervice. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Maſure.
Atto'RNEY SHIP. n.ſ.. [from attorney..] The office of an at-
torney.
But marriage is a matter of more worth, --
Than to be deaſt in by attorney/hip. Shakeſp. Henry VI,
Atto'URNMENT. m. ſ. [attournement, Fr.] An yielding of the
tenant to a new lord, or acknowledgment of him to be his
lord; for, otherwiſe, he that buyeth or obtaineth any lands or
tenements of another, which are in the occupation of a third,
cannot get poſſeſſion. Cowel.
To ATTRACT. v. o. [attraho, attradium, Lat.]
1. To draw to ſomething.
A man ſhould ſcarce perſuade the affečtions of the loadſtone,
or that jet and amber attracisth ſtraws and light bodies.
Brown's Pulgar Erratºrſ.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A T T
A V A
The fingle atoms each to other tend,
Attract, attracted to, the next in place,
Form'd and impell'd its neighbour to embrace. Pope.
2. To allure; to invite.
Adorn'd
She was indeed, and lovely, to attra?
Thy love; not thy ſubjection. ... Milton's Par. Lºft, b. x.
Shew the care of approving all ačtions ſo, as may moſt effec-
tually attract all to this profeſſion. Hammond's Fundam.
Deign to be lov’d, and ev'ry heart ſubdue !
What nymph could e'er attract ſuch crowds as you ! Pope.
Attract. n.J. [from to attract.] Attraction; the power of
drawing.
Feel darts and charms, attraffs and flames,
And woe and contraćt in their names. Hudibras.
AttracticAL. adj. [from attrađ.] Having the power to
draw to it. -
Some ſtones are endued with an eleētrical or attractical
virtue. Ray on the Creation.
Attr Action. m. ſ. [from attrać.]
1. The power of drawing any thing.
The drawing of amber and jet, and other eleētrick bodies,
and the attracion in gold of the ſpirit of quickſilver at diſ-
tance; and the attraction of heat at diſtance; and that of fire
to naphtha; and that of ſome herbs to water, though at diſ-
tance; and divers others, we ſhall handle. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Loadſtones and touched needles, laid long in quickſilver,
have not admitted their attra?ion. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Attraction may be performed by impulſe, or ſome other
means; I uſe that word, to ſignify any force by which bodies
tend towards one another. Newton's Opticks.
2. The power of alluring or enticing.
Setting the attraction of my good parts aſide, I have no other
charms. Shakeſp. Merry I/ives of Hindſor.
At TRA'ctive: adj. [from attract.]
1. Having the power to draw any thing.
What if the ſun
Be centre to the world; and other ſtars,
By his attractive virtue, and their own,
Incited, dance about him various rounds.
Some the round earth's coheſion to ſecure,
For that hard taſk employ magnetick power;
Remark, ſay they, the globe, with wonder own
Its nature, like the fam'd attractive ſtone. Blackmore.
Bodies aét by the attractions of gravity, magnetiſm, and
electricity; and theſe inſtances make it not improbable but
there may be more attractive powers than theſe. Newt. Opt.
2. Inviting; alluring; enticing.
Happy is Hermia, wherefoe'er ſhe lies;
For ſhe hath bleſſed and attrađive eyes.
Paradiſ. Loft.
Shakeſp. Midſum. Night's Dream. -
I pleas'd, and with attra‘five graces won,
The moſt averſe, thee chiefly. Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
ATTF Active. n.ſ.. [from attraci.] That which draws or in-
cites allurement; except that attra::ive is of a good or indiffe-
rent ſenſe, and allurement generally bad.
The condition of a ſervant ſtaves him off to a diſtance;
but the goſpel ſpeaks nothing but attractives and invitation.
South.
ATTRA'cTIVELY. adv. [from attraffive..] With the power of
attracting or drawing. -
ATTRA/ctive N Ess. n.ſ.. [from attractive.] The quality of
being attractive.
At TRA'croR. m. ſ. [from attract.] The agent that attracts;
a drawer.
If the ſtraws be in oil, amber draweth them not ; oil makes
the ſtraws to adhere ſo, that they cannot riſe unto the attrac-
tor. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii.
ATTRAHENT. m. ſ. [attrahens, Lat.] That which draws.
Our eyes will inform us of the motion of the ſteel to its at-
trahent. Glanville's Scºpſis.
ATTREct A'tion. n.ſ.. [attrečiatio, Lat.] Frequent handling.D.
ATTRI'BUTABLE. adj. [attribuo, Lat.] That which may be
aſcribed or attributed; aſcribable; imputable.
Much of the origination of the Americans ſeems to be at-
tributable to the migrations of the Seri.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To ATTRIBUTE. v. a. [attribuo, Lat.]
1. To aſcribe; to give; to yield.
To their very bare judgment ſomewhat a reaſonable man
would attribute, notwithſtanding the common imbecillities
which are incident unto our nature.
We attribute nothing to God that hath any repugnancy or
contradiction in it. Power and wiſdom have no repugnancy
in them. Tillotſon.
2. To impute, as to a cauſe.
I have obſerved a Campania determine contrary to appear-
ances, by the caution and conduct of a general, which were
attributed to his infirmities. Temple.
The imperfection of teleſcopes is attributed to ſpherical
glaſſes; and mathematicians have propounded to figure them
by the comical ſcótions. Newton's Opticks.
Hooker, b. ii.
ArtRIBUTE. m. ſ. [from to attribute.]
I. tº thing attributed to another, as perfeótion to the Supreme
eing.
Power, light, virtue, wiſdom, and goodneſs, being all but at-
tributes of one ſimple eſſence, and of one God, we in all ad-
mire, and in part diſcern. Sir Jºalier Raleigh.
Your vain poets after did miſtake,
Who ev'ry attribute a god did make. Dryden's Tyr. Love.
All the perfections of God are called his attributes; for he
cannot be without them. // atts's Logick.
2. Quality; adherent.
They muſt have theſe three attributes; they muſt be men of
courage, fearing God, and hating covetouſneſs. Bacon.
3. A thing belonging to another; an appendant.
His ſceptre ſhews the force of temporal pow'r,
The attribute to awe and majeſty;
But mercy is above this ſcepter'd ſway,
It is an attribute to God himſelf. Shakespeare Merchant of Penice.
The ſculptor, to diſtinguiſh him, gave him, what the me-
dalliſts call his proper attributes, a ſpear and a ſhield. Addiſon.
4. Reputation; honour.
It takes
From our atchievements, though perform'd at height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Attr IBUTION. n.ſ.. [from to attribute.] Commendation.
If ſpeaking truth,
In this fine age, were not thought flattery,
Such attribution ſhould the Douglas have,
As not a ſoldier of this ſeaſon's ſtamp
Should go ſo general current through the world.
Shakespeare Henry IV. p. i.
At TRI'TE, adj. [attritus, Lat.] Ground; worn by rubbing.
Or by colliſion of two bodies, grind
The air attrite to fire. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x.
Attri'TENEss. m. ſ. [from attrite.] The being much worn.
ATTRI'tion. m. ſ. [attritic, Lat.]
1. The act of wearing things, by rubbing one againſt another.
This vapour, aſcending inceſſantly out of the abyſs, and
pervading the ſtrata of gravel, and the reſt, decays the bones
and vegetables lodged in thoſe ſtrata; this fluid, by its conti-
nual attrition, fretting the ſaid bodies. Hºodw. Nat. Hiſtory.
The change of the aliment is effected by attrition of the in-
ward ſtomach, and diſſolvent liquor aſſiſted with heat.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. [With divines.] Grief for ſin, ariſing only from the fear of
puniſhment; the loweſt degree of repentance.
To Attu'NE. v. a. [from tune.]
1. To make anything muſical.
Airs, vernal airs,
Breathing the ſmell of field and grove, attune
The trembling leaves. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. iv.
2. To tune one thing to another; as, he attunes his voice to his
harp.
ATTU'RNEY. m.ſ. See Attor NEY.
At we'EN. adv. or prep. [See BET we EN.] Betwixt; between ;
in the midſt of two things.
Her looſe long yellow locks, like golden wire,
Sprinkled with pearl, and perling flowers atween,
Do, like a golden mantle, her attire. Spenſer's Epithalam.
ATwi'xt. prep. [See Betwixt.] In the middle of two things.
But with outrageous ſtrokes did him reſtrain,
And with his body barr'd the way atwixt them twain.
Fairy Queen, b. i.
To AVATL. v. a. [from valir, Fr. to avail being nearly the
ſame thing with faire valoir.]
1. To profit; to turn to profit; with of before the thing uſed.
Then ſhall they ſeek t' avail themſelves of names,
Places, and titles; and with theſe to join
Secular pow'r, Milton's Par. Lºft, b. xii.
Both of them avail themſelves of thoſe licences, which A-
pollo has equally beſtowed on them. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. To promote; to proſper; to aſſiſt.
Meantime he voyagd to explore the will
Of Jove on high Dodona’s holy hill,
What means might beſt his ſafé return avail. Pope's Odyſſ.
To AvA'IL. v. n. To be of uſe; to be of advantage.
Nor can my ſtrength avail, unleſs by thee
Endu'd with force, I gain the vićtory. Dryden’s Fables.
When real merit is wanting, it avails nothing to have been
encouraged by the great. Pope's Preface to his Works.
AyA'IL. m. ſ. [from to avail.] Profit; advantage; benefit.
For all that elſe did come, were ſure to fail;
Yet would he further none but for avail.
Spenſºr's Hubbard's Tale.
I charge thee,
As heav'n ſhall work in me for thine avail,
To tell me truly. Shakeſp. All’s well that ends well.
Truth, light upon this way, is of no more avail to us than
errour. Locke.
AvA'ILABLE. adj. [from avail.]
1. Profitable; advantageous. -
All things ſubječt to action, the will does ſo far incline unto,
CE
CC
º
2S
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A U D
A U D
as reaſon judges them more available to our bliſs. Hooker, b. i.
2. Powerful; in force.
Laws human are available by conſent. Hooker, b. i.
Mighty is the efficacy of ſuch interceſſions to avert judg-
ments; how much more available then may they be to ſecure
the continuance of bleſfings? Atterbury's Serm.
AVA'il ABLENESS. m. ſ. [from available.] Power of promoting
the end for which it is uſed.
We differ from that ſuppoſition of the efficacy or available-
nºſ, or ſuitableneſs of theſe to the end Hale's Origin of Man.
AVA'ILABLY. adv. [from available.] Powerfully; profitably ;
advantageouſly.
AvA'ILMENT. n.ſ.. [from avail.] Uſefulneſs; advantage; profit.
To AvA'le. v. a. ſavaler, to let ſink, Fr.] To let fall; to de-
preſs; to make abjećt; to ſink: a word out of uſe.
He did abaſe and avale, the ſovereignty into more ſervitude
towards that ſee, than had been among us. //atton.
To AvA'l E. v. n. To ſink.
But when his latter ebb 'gins to avale,
Huge heaps of mud he leaves. Spenſer.
AvA'N.T. See VAN.
AvA'Nt-GUARD. m. ſ. [avantgarde, Fr.] The van; the firſt
body of an army. -
The horſemen might iſſue forth without diſturbance of the
foot, and the avant-guard without ſhuffling with the battail or
arriere. - Sir J. Hayward.
AVARICE. m. ſ. [avarice, Fr. avaritia, Lat..] Covetouſneſs;
inſatiable deſire.
There grows
In my moſt ill compos'd affection, ſuch
A ſtanchleſs avarice, that were I king, -
I ſhould cut off the nobles for their lands. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
This avarice of praiſe in times to come,
Thoſe long inſcriptions crouded on the tomb. Dryd, juv.
Nor love his peace of mind deſtroys,
Nor wicked a varice of wealth. Dryden.
Avarice is inſatiable; and ſo he went ſtill puſhing on for
more. L’Eſtrange.
AvARI'cious, adj. [avaricieux,Fr.] Covetous; inſatiably deſirous.
I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, falſe, deceitful. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
This ſpeech has been condemned, as avaricious; and Euſta-
thius judges it to be ſpoken artfully. Broome on the Odyſſey.
AvAR1'ciously. adv. [from avaricious.] Covetouſly.
AvARI'cious Ness. n.ſ.. [from avaricious.] The quality of be-
ing avaricious. -
AvA'st. adv. [from baſſa, Ital. it is enough..] Enough; ceaſe.
A word uſed among ſeamen. -
AvA'UNT. interječf. [avaunt, Fr.] A word of abhorrence, by
which any one is driven away.
O, he is bold, and bluſhes not at death; -
Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone! Shakesp. King john.
After this proceſs
To give her the avaunt it is a pity
Would move a monſter. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Miſtreſs' diſmiſs that rabble from your throne.
Avaunt 7–is Ariſtarchus yet unknown Dunciad, b. iv.
A'UBURNE. adj. [from aubour, bark, Fr. J. Brown; of a tan
colour. -
Her hair is auburne, mine is perfeót yellow. Shakespeare t. G. of War.
His auburne locks on either ſhoulder flow’d,
Which to the fun'ral of his friend he vow'd. Dryd. Fables.
Lo, how the arable with barley grain
Stands thick, o'erſhadow'd, theſe, as modern uſe
Ordains, infus'd, an auburne drink compoſe,
Wholeſome, of deathleſs fame. -
AUCTION. n.ſ.. [audio, Lat.] -
1. A manner of ſale in which one perſon bids after another, till
ſo much is bid as the ſeller is content to take.
2. The things ſold by aučtion.
Aſk you why Phrine the whole audion buys;
Phrine foreſees a general exciſe.
To Auction. v. a. [from auction.] To ſell by auðtion.
Auction ARY. adj. [from audiion.] Belonging to an auðtion.
And much more honeſt, to be hir'd, and ſtand,
With auðionary hammer in thy hand,
Provoking to give more, and knocking thrice
For the old houſhold ſtuff of picture's price. Dryd, juven.
AuctionIER. m. ſ. [from audion.] The perſon that manages
an auðtion.
Auctive. adj. [from audius, Lat.] Of an increaſing quality. D.
AucuPA'TIon. m.ſ.. [aucupatio, Lat.] Fowling; bird-catching.
AUDA'CIOUS. adj. [audacieux, Fr. audax, Lat.] Bold; im-
pudent; daring; always in a bad ſenſe.
Such is thy audacious wickedneſs,
Thy leud, peſtif’rous, and diſſentious pranks. Shakespeare H. VI.
Till Jove, no longer patient, took his time
Tº avenge with thunder their audacious crime. Dryden.
Young ſtudents, by a conſtant habit of diſputing, grow im-
Pudent and audacious, proud and diſdainful.
Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
“ºw. adv. [from audacious.] Boldly; impudently.
OL. I.
Philips.
Pope.
* An angel ſhalt thou ſee,
Yet fear not thou, but ſpeak audaciouſly. Shakesp. Love's Lab. L.
AUDA'cious N Ess. m. ſ. [from audacious.] Impudence.
AUDA'city. n. ſ. [from audax, Lat.J Spirit; boldneſs; con-
fidence.
Lean, raw-bon'd raſcals who would e'er ſuppoſe,
They had ſuch courage and audacity. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Great effects come of induſtry and perſeverance; for au-
dacity doth almoſt bind and mate the weaker ſort of minds.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 962.
For want of that freedom and audacity, neceſſary in com-
merce with men, his perſonal modeſty overthrew all his pub-
lick actions. Tatler, N° 52.
A'UDIBLE., adj. [audibilis, Lat.]
1. That which may be perceived by hearing.
Viſibles work upon a looking-glaſs, and audilles upon the
places of echo, which reſemble in ſome ſort the cavern of the
C3I. Bacon's Nat. Hiſłory, N° 263.
Eve, who unſeen,
Yet all had heard, with audible lament -
Diſcover'd ſoon the place of her retire. Paradiſ, Lºft, b. xi.
Every ſenſe doth not operate upon fancy with the ſame force.
The conceits of viſibles are clearer and ſtronger than thoſe of
audibles. Grew's Coſmolºgia Sacra, b. ii.
2. Loud enough to be heard. . -
One leaning over a wall twenty-five fathom deep, and ſpeak-
ing ſoftly, the water returned an audible echo. Bacon.
A'UDIBLENEss. n.ſ.. [from audible.] Capableneſs of being
heard.
A'UDIBLY. adv. [from audible.] In ſuch a manner as to be heard.
And laſt, the ſum of all, my Father's voice
Audibly heard from heav'n, pronounc'd me his.
A/UDIENCE. n.ſ.. [audience, Fr.] -
1. The act of hearing or attending to any thing.
Now I breathe again
Aloft the flood, and can give audience
To any tongue, ſpeak it of what it will. Shakespeare King jihn.
Thus far his bold diſcourſe, without controul,
Had audience. Milton's Par. Loff, b. v.
- His look .
Drew audience, and attention ſtill as night,
. Or ſummer's noon-tide air. A^*on’s Par. Loff, b. ii.
2. The liberty of ſpeaking granted; a hearing. . . -
Were it reaſon to give men audience, pleading for the over-
throw of that which their own deed hath ratified: Hooker.
According to the fair play of the world,
Let me have audience: I am ſent to ſpeak,
My holy lord of Milan, from the king.
3. An auditory; perſons collected to hear.
Or, if the ſtar of ev'ning, and the moon,
Haſte to thy audience, night with her will bring -
* Silence. Milton's Par. Loft, b. vii.
The hall was filled with an audience of the greateſt eminence
for quality and politeneſs. Addison. Guard. Nº 5.
It proclaims the triumphs of goodneſs in a proper audience,
even beforé the whole race of mankind. Arterbºy's Sermºns.
4. The reception of any man who delivers a ſolemn meſſage.
In this high temple, on a chair of ſtate,
The ſeat of audience, old Latinus ſate. Dryden’s AFneid.
AUDIENCE Court. A court belonging to the archbiſhop of Can-
terbury, of equal authority with the arches court, though infe-
riour both in dignity and antiquity. The original of this court
was, becauſe the archbiſhop of Canterbury heard ſeveral cauſes
extrajudicially at home in his own palace; in which, before he
would finally determine anything, he uſually committed them
to be diſcuſſed by men learned in the civil and canon laws, whom
thereupon he called his auditors: and ſo in time it became the
power of the man, who is called cauſarum negotiorumque audien-
tia, Cantuarie'ſs auditor, ſeu ºfficinalis. ºwel.
A/UDIT. n.ſ.. [from audit, he hears, Lat.] A final account.
If they, which are accuſtomed to weigh all things, ſhall here
ſit down to receive our audit, the ſum, which truth amounteth
to, will appear to be but this. Hooker, b. v.
He took my father groſsly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, and fluſh as May;
And how his audit ſtands, who knows ſave heav'n? Hamlet.
I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flow'r of all,
And leave me but the bran. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
To A/UDIT. v. a. [from audit.] To take an account finally.
Biſhops ordinaries auditing all accounts, take twelve pence.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
I love exact dealing, and let Hocus audit; he knows hºw the
money was diſburſed. Arbuthnot's Hiſt, of j. Bull.
AUDI'TION. m. ſ. [auditio, Lat...] Hearing.
Auditor. m. ſ. [auditor, Lat.] -
1. A hearer.
Dear couſin, you that were laſt day ſo high in the pulpit
againſt lovers, are you now become ſo mean an auditor *
Sidney, b. ii.
Par. Reg.
Shakeſp. K. john.
What a play towºrd I'll be an auditor;
An actor too, perhaps. Shakeſp. Midfºrmer Night's Drººn.
2 L This
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A V E
A V E
This firſt doarine, though admitted by many of his audi-
tors, is expreſsly againſt the Epicureans. . . Bentley's Sermons.
2. A perſon employed to take an account ultimately.
If you ſuſpect my huſbandry,
Call me before th' exactcit auditors,
And ſet me on the proof.
3. In eccleſiaſtical law.
The archbiſhop's uſage was to commit the diſcuſſing of cauſes
to certain perſons learned in the law, ſtiled his auditors.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
Shakeſp. Timon.
4. In the ſtate.
A king's officer, who, yearly examining the accounts of all
under-officers accountable, makes up a general book. Cowel.
Auditor Y. adj. [auditorius, Lat..] That which has the power
of hearing.
Is not hearing performed by the vibrations of ſome medium,
excited in the auditory nerves by the tremours of the air, and
propagated through the capillaments of thoſe nerves : Newton.
A/UDItoRY. m.ſ. lauditorium, Lat.]
1. An audience; a collection of perſons aſſembled to hear.
Met in the church, I look upon you as an auditory fit to be
waited on, as you are, by both univerſities. South.
Demades never troubled his head to bring his auditory to
their wits, by dry reaſon. L'Eſtrange.
Several of this auditory were, perhaps, entire ſtrangers to the
perſon whoſe death we now lament. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. A place where lectures are to be heard.
Audiº Rºss. n.ſ. (from auditºr.] The woman that hears; a
ſhe hearer.
Yet went ſhe not, as not with ſuch diſcourſe
Delighted, or not capable her ear
Of what was high: ſuch pleaſure ſhe reſerv'd,
Adam relating, ſhe ſole auditreſ. Miſt. Par. Loft, b. viii.
To Ave L. v. a. [avello, Lat.] To pull away.
The beaver in chaſe makes ſome divulſion of parts, yet are
not theſe parts avelled to be termed teſticles. Brown's Vulg. Err.
Ave MARY. n ſ. [from the firſt words of the ſalutation to the
Bleſſed Virgin, Ave Maria.] A form of worſhip repeated by
the Romaniſts in honour of the Virgin Mary.
All his mind is bent on holineſs,
To number Ave Maries on his beads. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
A've NAGE. m. ſ. [of avena, oats, Lat..] A certain quantity of
oats paid to a landlord, inſtead of ſome other duties, or as a
rent by the tenant. Dić7.
To AVENGE. v. a. [venger, Fr.]
1. To revenge. -
I will avenge me of mine enemies. Iſaiah, i. 24.
They ſtood againſt their enemies, and were avenged of their
adverſaries. Jºſd. xi. 3.
I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the houſe of Jehu.
- Hºſea, i, 4.
2. To puniſh. - - -
Till Jove, no longer patient, took his time
Tº avenge with thunder your audacious crime.
Ave'NGEANCE. #ſ [from avenge.] Puniſhment.
- his neglected fear
Signal avengeance, ſuch as overtook .
A miſer. Philips.
Aye'NGEMENT. n.ſ.. [from avenge.] Vengeance; revenge.
That he might work th’ avengement for his ſhame
On thoſe two Caitives which had bred him blame.
Spenſer's Hubberd's Tale.
All thoſe great battles which thou boaſts to win
Through ſtrife and bloodſhed, and avengement
Now praiſed, hereafter thou ſhalt repent. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Av ENGER. n.ſ.. [from avenge.]
I. Puniſher.
That no man go beyond his brother, becauſe that the Lord
is the avenger of all ſuch. 1 Theſ, iv. 6.
Ere this he had return'd, with fury driv'n
By his avengers; ſince no place like this
Can fit his puniſhment, or their revenge. Par. Loſt, b. x.
2. Revenger; taker of vengeance for. -
The juſt avenger of his injured anceſtors, the vićtorious Louis
was darting his thunder. Dryden's Dufrºſnoy.
But juſt diſeaſe to luxury ſucceeds,
And ev'ry death its own avenger breeds. Pope's Eſ, on M.
Avex s. n.ſ.. [caryºphyllata, Lat.] The ſame with herb bennet.
The charaćters are; It hath pennated or winged leaves; the
cup of the flower conſiſts of one leaf, cut into ten ſegments;
the flower conſiſts of five leaves, ſpreading open; the ſeeds are
formed into a globular figure, each having a tail; the roots are
perennial, and ſmell ſweet. The ſpecies are, I. Common avens.
2. Mountain avens, with large yellow flowers, &amp;c. The firſt
fort grows wild in England, Scotland and Ireland; but the ſe-
cond ſort came from the Alps. The firſt is uſed in medicine,
and in confectionary for ſeed-cakes. Millar.
A v ENTURE. m. ſ. [aventure, Fr.] A miſchance, cauſing a man's
death, without felony; as when he is ſuddenly drowned, or
burnt, by any ſudden diſeaſe falling into the fire or water. See
A Dv ENTURE. Cowel.
A v ENUE. n.ſ.. [avenue, Fr. It is ſometimes pronounced with
3
Dryden.
the accent on the ſecond ſyllable, as JWatts obſerves; but it is
generally placed on the firſt.] -
1. A way by which any place may be entered.
Good guards were ſet up at all the avenues of the city, to
keep all people from going out. Clarendon, b. viii.
Truth is a ſtrong-hold, and diligence is laying ſiege to it:
ſo that it muſt obſerve all the avenue, and paſſes to it. South.
2. An alley, or walk of trees before a houſe.
To AVER. v. a. [averer, Fr. from verum, truth, Lat.] To de-
clare poſitively, or peremptorily.
The reaſon of the thing is clear;
Would Jove the naked truth aver. Prior.
Then vainly the philoſopher avers,
That reaſon guides our deed, and inſtinét theirs.
How can we juſtly diff'rent cauſes frame,
When the effects entirely are the ſame Prior.
We may aver, though the power of God be infinite, the
capacities of matter are within limits. Bentley's Sermons.
AVERA.G.E. n ſ [averagium, Lat.]
I. In law, that duty or ſervice which the tenant is to pay to the
king, or other lord, by his beaſts and carriages, Chambers.
2. In navigation, a certain contribution that merchants and
others proportionably make towards the loſſes of ſuch as have
their goods caſt overboard for the ſafety of the ſhip; or of the
goods and lives of thoſe in the ſhip, in a tempeſt; and this con-
tribution ſeems to be ſo called, becauſe it is ſo proportioned,
after the rate of every man's average or goods carried. Cowel.
3. A ſmall duty which merchants, who ſend goods in another
man's ſhip, pay to the maſter thereof for his care of them, over
and above the freight. Chambers.
4. A medium; a mean proportion, *
Ave'RMENT. n. ſ. [from aver.]
1. Eſtabliſhment of any thing by evidence.
To avoid the oath, for averment of the continuance of ſome
eſtate, which is eigne, the party will ſue a pardon. Bacon on Alien.
2. An offer of the defendant to juſtify an exception, and the act
as well as the offer. Blount.
Ave'RNAT. n. ſ. A ſort of grape. See V1Ne.
AVERRUNCA'TION. m. ſ. [from averruncate.] The aët of root-
ing up any thing.
To Aver Ru'NcAt E. v. a. [averrunco, Lat..] To root up; to
tear up by the roots.
Sure ſome miſchief will come of it,
Unleſs by providential wit,
Or force, we averruncate it.
AvHRSA'rion. n.ſ.. [from averſar, Lat.]
1. Hatred; abhorrence; turning away with deteſtation.
Hatred is the paſſion of defiance, and there is a kind of aver-
ſation and hoſtility included in its effence. South.
2. It is moſt properly uſed with from before the obječt of hate.
There was a ſtiff averſation in my lord of Eſſex from apply-
ing himſelf to the earl of Leiceſter. J/otton.
3. Sometimes with to, leſs properly.
There is ſuch a general jºin in human nature to con-
tempt, that there is ſcarce any thing more exaſperating. I will
not deny, but the exceſs of the averſation may be levelled againſt
pride. Government of the Tongue, § 7.
4. Sometimes, very improperly, with towards.
A natural and ſecret hatred and averſation towards ſociety,
in any man, hath ſomewhat of the ſavage beaſt. Bacon.
Ave'RSE. adj. [averſus, Lat.]
I. Malign; not favourable.
Their courage languiſh'd, as their hopes decay’d,
And Pallas, now averſe, reſus'd her aid. Dryden's AFneid.
2. Not pleaſed with ; unwilling to; having ſuch a hatred as to
turn away.
Has thy uncertain boſom ever ſtrove
With the firſt tumults of a real love 2
Haſt thou now dreaded, and now bleſs'd his ſway,
Hudibras.
By turns averſe, and joyful to obey? Prior.
Averſe alike to flatter, or offend,
Not free from faults, nor yet too vain to mend. Pope.
3. It has moſt properly from before the object of averſion.
Laws politick are never framed as they ſhould be, unleſs pre-
ſuming the will of man to be inwardly obſtinate, rebellious,
and averſe from all obedience unto the ſacred laws of his nature.
Hooker, b. i.
They believed all who objećted againſt their undertaking to
be averſe from peace. Clarendon, b. viii.
Theſe cares alone her virgin breaſt employ,
Averſ from Venus and the nuptial joy. Pope.
4. Very frequently, but improperly, 10.
He had, from the beginning of the war, been very averſ to
any advice of the privy council. Clarendon, b. viii.
Diodorus tells us of one Charondos, who was averſe to all
innovation, eſpecially when it was to proceed from particular
perſons. Swift on the Diffiºſions in Athens and Rome.
Ay E'RSELY. adv. [from averſe.]
1. Unwillingly.
2. Backwardly. -
Not only they want thoſe parts of ſecretion, but it is emit-
ted averſy, or backward, by both ſexes. Brown's Pºul ar. Err.
Av ERSE-
:
3.
º
*
-
º,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A U G
A U G.
Awe'rseNES. m. ſ. [from averſ...] Unwillingneſs; backwardneſs.
The corruption of man is in nothing more manifeſt, than in
his averſenſ; to entertain any friendihip or familiarity with
God. Atterbury's Sermons.
AVERSION. m. ſ. [averſion, Fr. averſio, Lat.]
1.Hatred; diſlike; deteſtation; ſuch as turns away from the objećt.
What if with like averſion I reject
Richcs and realms ? Milton’s Par. Loft, b. ii.
2. It is uſed moſt properly with from before the object of hate.
They had an inward averſion from it, and were reſolved to
prevent it by all poſſible means. Clarendon, b. viii.
With men theſe conſiderations are uſually cauſes of deſpite,
diſdain, or averſion from others; but with God, ſo many rea-
ſons of our greater tenderneſs towards others. Sprat's Sermons.
The ſame adheſion to vice, and averſion from goodneſs, will
be a reaſon for rejecting any proof whatſoever. Atterbury.
3. Sometimes, leſs properly, with to.
A freeholder is bred with an averſion to ſubjećtion. Addiſon.
I might borrow illuſtrations of freedom and averſion to re-
ceive new truths from modern aſtronomy. Watts.
4. Sometimes with for. -
The Lucqueſe would rather throw themſelves under the go-
vernment of the Genoeſe, than ſubmit to a ſtate for which,
they have ſo great averſion. Addiſon on Italy.
This averſion of the people fºr the late proceedings of the
commons, might be improved to good uſes. Swift.
5. Sometimes, very improperly, with towards.
His averſion towards the houſe of York was ſo predominant,
as it found place not only in his councils but in his bed. Bacon.
6. The cauſe of averſion. -
They took great pleaſure in compounding law-ſuits among
their neighbours; for which they were the averſion of the
gentlemen of the long robe. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of j. Bull.
Self-love and reaſon to one end aſpire;
Pain their averſion, pleaſure their deſire. Pope's Eſ: on Man.
To AVERT. v. a. [averto, Lat.]
1. To turn aſide; to turn off.
I beſeech you
Tº avert your liking a more worthy way,
Than on a wretch. Shakeſp. King Lear.
At this, for the laſt time, ſhe lifts her hand,
Averts her eyes, and half unwilling drops the brand. Dryden.
2. To put by, as a calamity.
O Lord! avert whatſoever evil our ſwerving may threaten
unto his church. Hooker, b. iv.
Diverſity of conjećtures made many, whoſe conceits averted
from themſelves the fortune of that war, to become careleſs
and ſecure. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Theſe affections earneſtly fix our minds on God, and for-
cibly avert from us thoſe things which are diſpleaſing to him,
and contrary to religion. Sprat's Sermons.
Thro' threaten’d lands they wild deſtrućtion throw,
Tillardent prayer averts the publick woe. Prior.
AUF. n.ſ. [of alf, Dutch..] A fool, or ſilly fellow. Dić7.
A/UGER. m. ſ. [egger, Dut..] A carpenter's tool to bore holes with.
The auger hath a handle and bit; its office is to make great
round holes. When you uſe it, the ſtuff you work upon is
commonly laid low under you, that you may the eaſier uſe
{. ſtrength; for in twiſting the bit about by the force of
oth your hands, on each end of the handle one, it cuts great
chips out of the ſtuff. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
AUGHT. pronoun. [auht, apht, Saxon. It is ſometimes, impro-
perly, written ought.] Anything.
If I can do it,
By aught that I can ſpeak in his diſpraiſe,
She ſhall not long continue love to him. Shakespeare t. G. of Verona.
They may, for aught I know, obtain ſuch ſubſtances as may
induce the chymiſts to entertain other thoughts. Boyle.
But go, my ſon, and ſee if aught be wanting
Among thy father's friends. Addiſon's Cato.
To AUGMENT. v.a. [augmenter, Fr.] To encreaſe; to make
bigger, or more.
Some curſed weeds her cunning hand did know,
That could augment his harm, encreaſe his pain. Fairfax.
Rivers, though they continue the denomination of their firſt
ſtream, have ſtreams added to them in their paſſage, which en-
large and augment them. Hale's Common Law of England.
To Aug MENT. v. m. To encreaſe; to grow bigger.
But as his heat with running did augment,
Much more his fight encreas'd his hot deſire. Sidney.
The rocks are from their old foundations rent;
The winds redouble, and the rains augment;
... The waves on heaps are daſh'd, Dryd. Wirgil, Georg.
Augment. n. f. [augmentum, Lat.]
1. Encreaſe.
You ſhall find this augment of the tree to be without the di-
minution of one drachm of the earth. //alton's Angler.
2. State of encreaſe.
Diſcutients are improper in the beginning of inflammations
it proper, when mixed with repellents, in the augment. Jºſém.
*śNTATION. m. ſ. [from aigment.]
* The act of encreaſing or making bigger.
Thoſe who would be zealous againſt regular troops after a
peace, will promote an augmentation of thoſe on foot. Addison,
2. The ſtate of being made bigger. -
What modification of matter can make one embryo capable
of ſo prodigiouſly vaſt augmentation, while another is confined
to the minuteneſs of an inſe&amp;t.
3. The thing added, by which another is made bigger.
By being glorified, it does not mean that he doth receive any
augmentation of glory at our hands; but his name we glorify,
when we teſtify our acknowledgment of his glory. Hooker.
Aug MENTATION Court. A court erected by king Henry the
eight, for the increaſe of the revenues of his crown, by the
ſuppreſſion of monaſteries. Lič7.
A'UGRE. m. ſ. A carpenter's tool. See Aucer.
Your temples burned in the cement, and
Your franchiſes, whereon you ſtood, confin'd
Into an augre's bore. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
AUGRE-Hole. n.ſ.. [from aigre and hole..] A hole made by bor-
ing with an augre.
What ſhould be ſpoken here,
Where our fate hid within an augre-hole,
May ruſh and ſeize us Shakeſp. Macbeth.
AUGUR. m. ſ. ſaugur, Lat.]. One who pretends to predict by
omens, particularly by the flight of birds. -
What ſay the augurs ?
—They would not have you ſtir forth to-day:
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
They could not find a heart within the beaſt. Shakespeare j. Caſ:
Calchas, the ſacred ſeer, who had in view
Things preſent and the paſt, and things to come foreknew:
Supreme of augurs. Dryden's Fables.
As I and mine conſult thy augur,
Grant the glad omen; let thy favºrite riſe
Propitious, ever ſoaring from the right. Prior.
T; A'UGUR. v. n. [from augur.] To gueſs; to conjećture by
1gns.
The people love me, and the ſea is mine,
My pow'r's a creſcent, and my aug’ring hope
Says it will come to the full. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopat.
Fought for a crown and bright Lavinia's bed;
So will I meet thee hand to hand oppos'd;
My aug’ring mind aſſures the ſame ſucceſs. Dryd.K.Arthur.
To A'ugurate. v. n. [auguror. Lat.] To judge by augury.
AUGURATION: n ſ [from augur.] The practice of augury,
or of foretelling by events and prodigies.
And Claudius Pulcher underwent the like ſucceſs, when he
continued the tripudiary augurations. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
A'UGURER. m. ſ. [from augur.] The ſame with augur.
- Theſe apparent prodigies,
The unaccuſtom'd terrour of this night,
And the perſuaſion of his augurers,
May hold him from the capitol to-day. Shakespeare. julius Cæſ.
A'uguri AL. adj. [from augury. Relating to augury.
On this foundation were built the concluſions of ſouthſayers,
in their augurial and tripudiary divinations. , rown's Wulg. Err.
To A'UGURIse. v. n. [from augur.] To practiſe divination by
augury. 12ićf.
A'u GURous. adj. [from augur.] Predićting; preſcient; fore-
boding.
So fear'd
The fair-man'd horſes, that they flew back, and their chariots
turn'd,
Preſaging in their augurous hearts the labours that they
mourn’d. Chapman's Iliad.
A'UGURY. n.ſ.. [augurium, Lat.]
1. The aët of prognoſticating “y omens or prodigies.
The winds are chang’d, your friends from danger free,
Or I renounce my ſkill in augury. Dryden's AEmeid.
She knew by augury divine,
Venus would fail in her deſign. Swift.
2. The rules obſerved by augurs.
The goddeſs has ſuch an averſion to ye, that you are parti-
cularly excluded out of all auguries. L'E/irange.
3. An omen or prediction.
Thy face and thy behaviour,
Which, if my augury deceive me not,
Witneſs good breeding. Slaſſ. Two Gentlemen of Werona.
What if this death, which is for him deſign'd,
Had been your doom (far be that augury!)
And you not, Aurengzebe, condemn'd to die. Dryden.
he pow'rs we both invoke,
To you, and yours, and mine, propitious be:
And firm our purpoſe with an atºry. Dryden's Aneid.
AUGU'st ad. [auguſtus, Lat.j Great ; grand; royal; magni-
ficent; awful.
There is nothing ſo contemptible, but antiquity can render
it auguſt and excellent. Glanville's Scºpſis, c. 22.
ſhe rojan chief appear'd in open fight,
Auguſt in viſage, and ſerenely bright;
His mother goddeſs, with her hands divine,
Had form'd his curling locks, and made his templesſhine. Dry.
A'u Gus r. m. ſ. ſauguſtus, Lat..] I he name of the eight month
from January incluſive.
Auguſ?
Bentley’s Sermons.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A V O
A V O
Auguſt was dedicated to the honour of Auguſtus Ceſar, be-
cauſe, in the ſame month, he was created conful, thrice tri-
umpher in Rome, ſubdued Egypt to the Roman empire, and
made an end of civil wars; being before called Sextilis, or the
ſixth fron March. Peacham.
Auct's TN Ess. n.ſ.. [from augm/?..] Elevation of look ; dignity;
loftineſs of mien or aſpect,
Avi ARY. m. ſ. [from avis, Lat, a bird J A place incloſed to
keep birds in.
In aviaries of wire, to keep birds of all ſorts, the Italians
beſtow vaſt expence; including great ſcope of ground, variety
of buſhes, trees of good height, running waters, and ſome-
times a ſtove annexed, to contemper the air in the winter.
J/otton's Archite&amp;ure.
Look now to your aviary; for now the birds grow ſick of
their feathers. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Avi'pit ... n.ſ.. [aviditſ, Fr. aviditas, Lat.] Greedineſs; eager-
neſs; appetite; inſatiable deſire.
A'vitous. adj. [avitus, Lat..] Left by a man's anceſtors; an-
cient. Dić?.
To Avi'zE. v. a. [aviſºr, Fr.] A word out of uſe.
1. To counſel. -
With that, the huſbandman 'gan him &amp;vize,
That it for him was fitteſt exerciſe. Spenſ. Hubb. Tak.
2. With a reciprocal pronoun, to bethink himſelf; s’aviſer, Fr.
But him avizing, he that dreadful deed
Forbore, and rather choſe, with ſcornful ſhame,
Him to avenge. Spenſºr's Hubberd's Tale.
3. To conſider.
No power he had to ſtir, nor will to riſe,
That when the careful knight 'gan well avize,
He lightly left the foe. Fairy Queen, b. i.
A'UKw ARD. See Awkw ARD.
AULD. adj. [alb, Sax.] A word now obſolete; but ſtill uſed in
the Scotch dialečt. . - - -
'Tis pride that pulls the country down;
Then take thine auld cloak about thee. Shakeſp. Othello.
AULE"rick, adj. [auleticus, Lat.] Belonging to pipes. Dići.
A'ULIcK. adj. [aulicus, Lat.] Belonging to the court.
AULN. m. ſ. [aulme, Fr.] A French meaſure of length; an ell.
To AUMAIL. v. a. [from maille, Fr. the meſh of a net; whence
a coat of amail, a coat with network of iron.] To variegate ;
to figure.
In golden buskins of coſtly cordwaine,
All hard with golden bendes, which were entail'd
With curious anticks, and full fair aumail'd. Fairy Qween.
AU'MBRY. See AMBRY. -
AUNT. n.ſ. ſtante, Fr. amita, Lat.] A father or mother's ſiſ-
ter; correlative to nephew or niece.
Who meets us here my niece Plantagenet,
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Glo'ſter. Shakespeare R. III.
She went to plain work, and to purling brooks,
Old faſhion'd halls, dull aunts, and croaking rooks. Pºpe.
AWOCA DO. m. ſ. [Span. Perſica, Lat.] The name of a plant.
This plant hath a roſe-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of ſeveral
-
leaves, which are ranged in a circle; from whoſe middle riſes
the pointal, which afterwards becomes a ſoft, fleſhy, pear-ſhaped
fruit, in which is an hard ſtone or ſeed, having two lobes,
which is included in a membrane or pericardium.
The tree grows in great plenty in the Spaniſh Weſt Indies,
as alſo in the iſland of Jamaica; and hath been tranſplanted in-
to the Engliſh ſettlements in America, upon account of its
fruit, which is very neceſſary for the ſupport of life. The
fruit is of itſelf very inſipid, for which reaſon they generally
eat it with the juice of lemons and ſugar, to give it a poignan-
cy. This tree, in warm countries where it is planted, grows to
the height of thirty feet, with a trunk as large as common
apple-trees; the bark ſmooth and of an aſh colour; the branches
are beſet with pretty large oblong ſmooth leaves, of a deep
green colour throughout the year. The flowers and fruit are
produced towards the extremity of the branches. AMillar.
To A/VOCATE. v. a. [avoco, Lat.] To call off from buſi-
neſs; to call away.
Their diveſture of mortality diſpenſes them from thoſe la-
borious and avocating duties to diſtreſſed chriſtians, and their
ſecular relations, which are here requiſite. Boyle.
Avoca'TION. m. ſ. [from avocate.]
1. The aët of calling aſide.
The buſtle of buſineſs, the avocations of our ſenſes, and the
din of a clamorous world, are impediments. Glanville's Scep.
Stir up that remembrance, which his many avocations of bu-
fineſs have cauſed him to lay aſide. Dryd. Aurengz. Prºf.
2. The buſineſs that calls; or the call that ſummons away.
It is a ſubječt that we may make ſome progreſs in its con-
templation within the time, that the ordinary time of life, and
the permiſſion of neceſſary avocations, a man may employ in
ſuch a contemplation. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
God does frequently inječt into the ſoul bleſſed impulſes to
duty, and powerful avocations from ſin. South.
By the ſecular cares and avocations which accompany mar-
riage, the clergy have been furniſhed with skill in common
life. Atterbury.
F = F-Tiiii ==-
To AVOTD. v. a. [vuider, Fr.]
I. To ſhun ; to eſcape.
The wiſdom of pleaſing God, by doing what he commands,
and avoiding what he forbids. Tillotſon.
2. To endeavour to ſhun.
The faſhion of the world is to avoid coſt, and you encoun-
ter it. Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
3. To evacuate ; to quit.
What have you to do here, fellow pray you, avoid the
houſe. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
If any rebel ſhould be required of the prince confederate,
the prince confedederate ſhould command him to avoid the
country. Bacon's Henry VII.
He deſired to ſpeak with ſome few of us: whereupon fix of
us only ſtayed, and the reſt avoided the room. Bacon’s N. Atl.
4. To oppoſe; to hinder effect.
The removing that which cauſed putrefaction, doth prevent
and avoid putrefaction. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. N° 34o.
To Avoid. v. n.
I. To retire.
And Saul caſt the javelin; for he ſaid, I will ſmite David
even to the wall º it: and David avoided out of his pre-
fence twice. i Sam. xviii. 1 1.
2. To become void or vacant.
Biſhopricks are not included under benefices: ſo that if a
perſon takes a biſhoprick, it does not avoid by force of that law
of pluralities, but by the ancient common law.
Ayliffe's Parergon juris Canonici.
Avo'iDABLE. adj. [from avoid.]. That which may be avoided,
ſhunned, or eſcaped.
Want of exactneſs in ſuch nice experiments is ſcarce avoid-
able. Boyle.
To take ſeveral things for granted, is hardly avoidable to any
one, whoſe task it is to ſhew the falſehood or improbability of
any truth. Locke.
Avo IDANCE. n.ſ.. [from avoid.]
1. The act of avoiding.
It is appointed to give us vigour in the purſuit of what is
good, or in the avoidance of what is hurtful. J/atts's Logick.
2. The courſe by which any thing is carried off.
. For avoidances, and drainings of water, where there is too
much, we ſhall ſpeak of. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 6oo.
Avo'IDER. n.ſ.. [from avoid.]
1. The perſon that avoids or ſhuns anything.
2. The perſon that carries any thing away.
3. The veſſel in which things are carried away.
Avo'IDLess. adj. [from avoid.] Inevitable; that which cannot
be avoided.
That avoideſ ruin in which the whole empire would be in-
volved. Dennis's Letters.
Avoir DUPo'Is. n.ſ.. [avoir du paid, Fr.] A kind of weight,
of which a pound contains ſixteen ounces, and is in proportion-
to a pound Troy, as ſeventeen to fourteen. All the larger and
coarſer commodities are weighed by avoirdupois weight.
Chambers.
Probably the Romans left their ounce in Britain, which is
now our avoirdupois ounce: for our Troy ounce we had elſe-
where. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Avol A'TION. n.ſ.. [from avolo, to fly away, Lat..] The act of
flying away; flight; eſcape.
Theſe airy vegetables are made by the relicks of plantal
emiſſives, whoſe avolation was prevented by the condenſed en-
cloſure. Glanville's Scepſis, c. vii.
Strangers, or the fungous parcels about candles, only ſignify
a pluvious air hindering the avolation of the favillous particles.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To Avo'Uch. v. a. [avouer, Fr. for this word we now gene-
rally ſay vouch.]
1. To affirm; to maintain; to declare peremptorily.
They boldly avouched that themſelves only had the truth,
which they would at all times defend. Hooker, Prºf.
Wretched though I ſeem,
I can produce a champion that will prove
What is avouhed here. Shakeſp. King Lear.
2. To produce in favour of another.
Such antiquities could have been avouched for the Iriſh.
Spenſer's Ireland.
3. To vindicate; to juſtify.
You will think you made no offence, if the duke avouch the
juſtice of your dealing. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Avo'UcH. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Declaration; evidence.
I might not this believe,
Without the ſenſible and try'd avouch
Of mine own eyes. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Avo'Uchable. adj. [from avouch..] That may be avouched.
Avo'uch ER. m.ſ.. [from avouch..] He that avouches.
To AVO'W. v. a. ſavouer, Fr.] To declare with confidence;
to juſtify; not to diſſemble.
His cruel ſtepdame ſeeing what was done,
Her wicked days with wretched knife did end;
In death avowing th’ innocence of her ſon. Fairy Queen.
He that delivers them mentions his doing it upon his own
2 particular
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A U S
particular knowledge, or the relation of ſome credible perſon,
avowing it upon his own experience. Boyle.
Left to myſelf, I muſt avow, I ſtrove,
From publick ſhame to skreen my ſecret love. Dryden.
Such affertions proceed from principles which cannot be
avowed by thoſe who are for preſerving church and ſtate. Swift.
Then blaz'd his ſmother'd flame, avow’d and bold. Thomſ.
Avo'w ABLE. adj. [from avow.] That which may be openly de-
clared; that which may be declared without ſhame.
Avo'w AL. m. ſ. [from avow.] Juſtificatory declaration; open
declaration. -
Avo'w EDLY. adv. [from avow.] In an avowed manner.
Wilmot could not avowedy have excepted againſt the other.
Clarendon, b. viii.
Avowe'E. m.ſ.. [avoué, Fr.] He to whom the right of advow-
ſon of any church belongs. Die?.
Avo'w ER... n.ſ.. [from avow.] He that avows or juſtifies.
Virgil makes AFneas a bold avower of his own virtues. Dryd.
Avo'w RY. n.ſ.. [from avow.] In law, is where one takes a diſ-
treſs for rent, or other thing, and the other ſues replevin. In
which caſe the taker ſhall juſtify, in his plea, for what cauſe he
took it; and, if he took it in his own right, is to ſhew it, and
ſo avow the taking, which is called his avowry. Chambers.
Avo'ws AL. m. ſ. [from avow.] A confeſſion. Die?.
Ayo'w TRY. m. ſ. . [See AdvowTRY..] Adultery.
AURATE. m. ſ. A ſort of pear; which ſee.
AURELIA. n.ſ. [Lat.] A term uſed for the firſt apparent change
of the eruca, or maggot of any ſpecies of inſects. Chambers.
The folitary maggot, found in the dry heads of teaſel, is
ſometimes changed into the aurelia of a butterfly, ſometimes
into a fly-caſe. Ray on Creation.
A'URICLE. m. ſ. ſauricula, Lat.]
1. The external ear, or that part of the ear which is prominent
from the head.
2. Two appendagas of the heart; being two muſcular caps,
covering the two ventricles thereof; thus called from the re-
ſemblance they bear to the external ear. They move regu-
larly like the heart, only in an inverted order; their ſyſtole
correſponding to the diaſtole of the heart. Chambers.
Blood ſhould be ready to join with the chyle, before it reaches
the right auricle of the heart. Ray on Creation.
AURI'cula. m. ſ. See BEARS EAR.
AURI'cular. m. ſ. [from auricula, Lat. the ear.]
1. Within the ſenſe or reach of hearing.
You ſhall hear us confer, and by an auricular aſſurance have
your ſatisfaction. Shakeſp. King Lear.
2. Secret; told in the ear; as auricular confeſſion.
AURI'cularLY. adv. [from auricular..] In a ſecret manner.
Theſe will ſoon confeſs, and that not auricularly, but in a
loud and audible voice. Decay of Piety.
AURI'FERous. adj. [aurifer, Lat..] That which produces gold.
Rocks rich in gems, and mountains big with mines,
Whence many a burſting ſtream auriferous plays. Thomſon.
AURIGA"rion. n.ſ.. [auriga, Lat.] The act or practice of driv-
ing carriages. - Dić.
AURI'P1G MENTUM. See ORPIMENT.
AURORA. m. ſ. [Lat.]
1. A ſpecies of crowfoot; which ſee.
2. The goddeſs that opens the gates of day; poetically, the morn-
1119ſ.
c Aurora ſheds,
On Indus’ ſmiling banks the roſy ſhower. Thomſºn's Summ.
AURO'RA Borealis. See STREAM ERs.
AURUM fulminans. [Latin.] A preparation made by diſſolv-
ing gold in aqua regia, and precipitating it with ſalt of tar-
tar; whence a very ſmall quantity of it becomes capable, by a
moderate heat, of giving a report like that of a piſtol. Quincy.
Some aurum fulminans the fabrick ſhook. Garth.
Auscult ATION. m. ſ. [from auſculto, Lat.] A hearkening or
liſtening to. IDić7.
AUSPICE. n.ſ.. [auſpicium, Lat.]
1. The omens of any future undertaking drawn from birds.
2. Protećtion; favour ſhewn by proſperous men.
Great father Mars, and greater Jove,
By whoſe high auſpice Rome hath ſtood
So long. Ben Johnſon's Catiline.
3. Influence; good derived to others from the piety of their pa-
tron.
But ſo may he live long, that town to ſway,
Which by his auſpice they will nobler make,
As he will hatch their aſhes by his ſtay. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
Auspici AL. adj. [from auſpice.]. Relating to prognoſticks.
Aušricious. adj. [from auſpice.]
*. With omens of ſucceſs.
. You are now, with happy and auſpicious beginnings, form-
"g a model of a chriſtian charity. Sprat.
* Proſperous; fortunate; applied to perſons.
4-ſpicious chief! thy race in times to come,
Shall ſpread the conqueſts of imperial Rome. Dryd. Æncid.
3' favourable; kind; propitious ; applied to perſons.
Fortune play upon thy proſprous helm,
v. y auſpicious miſtreſs Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
4. Lucky; happy; applied to things.
- I’ll deliver all,
And promiſe you calm ſeas, auſpicious gales,
And ſails expeditious.
A pure, an active, an auſpicious flame,
And bright as heav'n from whence the bleſfing came.
* Roſcommon.
Shakeſp. Tempſ?,
Two battles your auſpicious cauſe has won;
Thy ſword can perfect what it has begun; {
And, from your walls, diſlodge that haughty ſon. ) Dryden.
Auspiciously, adv. [from auſpicious.] Happily; proſperouſly;
with proſperous omens.
AusP1'ciousness. n.ſ.. [from auſpicious.] Proſperity; happi-
neſs.
AUSTERE. adj. [auſlerus, Lat.]
1. Severe; harſh; rigid.
When men repreſent the Divine nature, as an auffere and
rigorous maſter, º lifting up his hand to take vengeance ;
ſuch conceptions muſt unavoidably raiſe terrour. Rogers.
Auſtere Saturnius, ſay,
From whence this wrath? or who controuls thy ſway Pºpe.
2. Sower of taſte; harſh.
Th' auffere and pond’rous juices they ſublime,
Make them aſcend the porous foil, and climb }
The orange-tree, the citron, and the lime. Blackm.
Aftere wines, diluted with water, cool mºre than water a-
lone, and at the ſame time do not relax. Arbuth. on Aliments.
AUSTE’RELY, adv. [from auſtere.] Severely ; rigidly.
Ah! Luciana, did he tempt thee ſo
Might'ſt thou perceive auſterely in his eye,
That he did plead in earneſt, yea or no
Look'd he or red, or pale, or ſad, or merrily
Shakespeare. Comedy of Errours.
Hypocrites aufferely talk -
Of purity, and place, and innocence. Paradſe Lºſº, b. iv.
Auste'RENEss. n.ſ.. [from auſtere.]
1. Severity; ſtrićtneſs; rigour.
My unſoil'd name, th’ auffereneſ of my life,
May vouch againſt you; and my place i' th' ſtate
Will ſo your accuſation overweigh. Shakespeare Meaſure for M.
2. Roughneſs in taſte.
AustERITY. m. ſ. [from auſtere.]
1. Severity; mortified life; ſtričtneſs. -
Now, Marcus Cato, our new conſul's ſpy, -
What is your ſower auſterity ſent t'explore? B. Johnſ Catil.
What was that ſnaky-headed Gorgon ſhield
That wiſe Minerva wore, unconquer'd virgin,
Wherewith ſhe freez'd her foes to congeal’d ſtone,
But rigid looks of chaſte auſterity,
And noble grace, that daſh'd brute violence
With ſudden adoration and blank awe ? Milton.
This prince kept the government, and yet lived in this con-
vent with all the rigour and auſterity of a capuchin. Addison Italy.
2. Cruelty; harſh diſcipline. -
Let not auſterity breed ſervile fear;
No wanton found offend her virgin ear. Roſſommon.
Austral. adj. [auftralis, Lat.] Southern; as the auſtral ſigns.
To Australize. v. n. [from auſter, the ſouth wind, Lat.] To
tend towards the ſouth.
Steel and good iron diſcover a verticity, or polary faculty;
whereby they do ſeptentriate at one extreme, and auſtralize at
another. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
AustriNE. adj. [from auſtrinus, Lat.], Southern ; ſouthernly.
AuthE'NTIcAL. adj. [from authentick.] The ſame with au-
thentick.
Of ſtatutes made before time of memory, we have no authen-
tical records, but only tranſcripts. Hale's Common Law ºf Engl.
AUTHE'NTIcALLY. adv. [from authentical.] After an authen-
tick manner; with all the circumſtances requiſite to procure
authority.
This point is dubious, and not yet authentically decided.
- Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii., c. 5.
Conſcience never commands or forbids any thing authenti-
cally, but there is ſome law of God which commands or for-
bids it firſt. South.
Authe'NTIcALNEss. n.ſ.. [from authentical.] The quality of
being authentick; genuineneſs; authority. -
Nothing can be more pleaſant than to ſee a circle of theſe
virtuoſo's about a cabinet of medals, deſcanting upon the va-
lue, rarity, and authenticalneſs of the ſeveral pieces.
Addison on ancient Medal.
AuthENT1'city. m. ſ. [from authºriticſ.] Authority; genuine-
neſs; the being authentick. *
AUTHENTICK. adj. [authenticus, Lat.] That which has
every thing requiſite to give it authority, as an authentick re-
giſter. It is uſed in oppoſition to anything by which autho-
rity is deſtroyed, as authentick, not counterfeit. It is never uſed
of perſons.
Thou art wont his great authentick will
Interpreter through higheſt heav'n to bring. Par. Lºft, l. iii.
She joy'd th’ anthºnick news to hear,
Of what ſhe gueſs'd before, with jealous fear. Cºwley.
2 M But
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A U T
A U T
But cenſure's to be underſtood
Th’ authentick mark of the cle&amp;t,
The publick ſtamp heav'n ſets on all that's great and good. Swift.
Auth ENTickly. adv. [from authentick.] After an authentick
nann.cr.
AUTHENTIcKN Ess. n.ſ.. [from authentick.] The ſame with
authenticity.
AUTHOR. m. ſ. ſauðr, Lat.]
1. The firſt beginner or mover of any thing; he to whom any
thing owes its original.
That law, the author and obſerver whereof is one only God,
to be bleſſed for ever. - Hooker, b. i.
The author of that which cauſeth another thing to be, is
author of that thing alſo which thereby is cauſed. Hooker, b. iii.
I'll never
, Be ſuch a goſling to obey inſtinét; but ſtand
As if a man was author of himſelf,
And knew no other kin. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Thou art my father, thou my author, thou
My being gav'ſt me; whom ſhould I obey,
But thee : - Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ii.
But Faunus came from Picus, Picus drew
His birth from Saturn, if records be true.
Thus king Latinus, in the third degree,
Had Saturn author of his family. Dryden, Æneid vii.
If the worſhip of falſe Gods had not blinded the heathen, in-
ſtead of teaching to worſhip the ſun, and dead heroes, they
would have taught us to worſhip our true Author and benefac-
tor, as their anceſtors did under the government of Noah and
his ſons, before they corrupted themſelves. Newton's Opticks."
2. The efficient; he that effects or produces any thing.
That which is the ſtrength of their amity, ſhall prove the
immediate author of their variance. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopat.
Now while the tortur’d ſavage turns around,
And flings about his foam, impatient of the wound;
The wound's great author cloſe at hand provokes
His rage. , Dryden's Fables.
From his loins
New authors of diſſention ſpring; from him
Two branches, that in hoſting long contend
For ſov’reign ſway. Philips.
3. The firſt writer of any thing; diſtinct from the tranſlator or
compiler.
To ſtand upon every point in particulars, belongeth to the
firſt author of the ſtory. 24/acc. ii. 30.
An author has the choice of his own thoughts and words,
which a tranſlator has not. Dryden.
4. A writer in general.
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm,
That the land Salike lies in Germany. Shakespeare Henry V.
AUTHORITATIVE. adj. [from authority.]
1. Having due authority.
2. Having an air of authority.
I dare not give them the authoritative title of aphoriſms,
which yet may make a reaſonable moral prognoſtick. Wotton.
The two worthies have done miſchief, the mock authorita-
tive manner of the one, and the inſipid mirth of the other.
- - Swift's Examiner, N° 15.
AUTHo'RITATIVELY. adv. [from authoritative.]
1. In an authoritative manner; with a ſhew of authority.
2. With due authority.
No law that is foreign binds here in England, till it be re-
ceived, and authoritatively engrafted, into the law of England.
Hale's Hiſtory of Law.
Aur Ho'RITATIVEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from authoritative..] An acting
by authority; authoritative appearance. Dicſ.
AUTHORITY.. n.ſ.. [al:eforitas, Lat.]
1. Legal power.
Idle old man,
That ſtill would manage thoſe authoritics,
That he hath given away ! Shakespeare King Lear.
I know, my lord,
If law, authority, and pow'r deny not,
It will go hard with poor Antonio. Shakespeare. Merch, of Wen.
Power ariſing from ſtrength, is always in thoſe that are go-
verned, who are many: but authority ariſing from opinion, is in
thoſe that govern, who are few. Temple.
Adam's ſovereignty, that by virtue of being proprietor of
the whole world, he had any authority over men, could not have
been inherited by any of his children. Locke.
2. Influence; credit. *
The woods are fitter to give rules than cities, where thoſe
that call themſelves civil and rational, go out of their way, by
the authority of example. Locke.
3. Power; rule.
But I ſuffer not a woman to teach, nor to uſurp authority
over the man, but to be in ſilence. 1 Tim. ii. 1 2.
4. Support; juſtification; countenance.
Do'ſt thou expect th’ authority of their voices,
Whoſe filent wills condemn thee Ben. Johnſ. Catiline.
5. Teſtimony.
Something I have heard of this, which I would be glad to
find by ſo ſweet an authority confirmed. Sidney, b. ii.
We urge authorities in things that need not, and introduce
the teſtimony of ancient writers, to confirm things evident
believed. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. e. §.
Haying been ſo hardy as to undertake a charge againſt the
philoſophy of the ſchools, I was liable to have been overborn
by a torrent of authorities. Glanville's Scºpſis Scientifta, Prºf.
6. Weight of teſtimony; credibility. *
They conſider the main conſent of all the churches in the
whole world, witneſſing the ſacred authority of ſcriptures, ever
fithence the firſt publication thereof, cven till this preſent day
and hour. Hºoker, J. v. § 22.
Avi Horiza'ſ Ios. m.ſ. [ſrom authorize.] Eſtabliſhment by
authority.
The obligation of laws ariſes not from their matter, but
from their admiſſion and reception, and authorization in this
kingdom. Hale's Hiſtory ºf Law.
To A un HoRize. v. a. [autoriſºr, Fr.]
1. To give authority to any perſon.
Making herſelf an impudent ſuitor, authorizing herſelf very
much, with making us ſee, that all favour and power depended
upon her. Sidney, b. ii.
Deaf to complaints they wait upon the ill,
Till ſome ſafe criſis authºrize their ſkill. Dryden.
2. To make anything legal.
Yourſelf firſt made that title which I claim,
Firſt bid me love, and authoriz'd my flame. Dryd. Aarºngz.
My prayers are heard,
And I have nothing farther to deſire,
But Sancho's leave to authorize our marriage. Dryd. Sp. Fr.
To have countenanced in him irregularity and diſobedience
to that light which he had, would have been, to have authorized
diſorder, confuſion, and wickedneſs in his creatures. Locke.
3. To eſtabliſh anything by authority.
Lawful it is to deviſe any ceremony, and to authorize any
kind of regiment, no ſpecial commandment being thereby vić-
lated. Hoºker, b. iii. § 4.
Thoſe forms are beſt which have becn longeſt received and
authorized in a nation by cuſtom and uſe. Temple.
4. To juſtify; to prove a thing to be right.
All virtue lies in a power of denying our own deſires, where
reaſon does not authorize them. Locke.
5. To give credit to any perſon or thing.
Although their intention be ſincere, yet doth it notoriouſly
ſtrengthen vulgar errour, and authorize opinions injurious unto
truth. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. c. 9.
Be a perſon in vogue with the multitude, he ſhall authorize
any nonſenſe, and make incoherent ſtuff, ſeaſoned with twang
and tautology, paſs for rhetorick. Sºuth.
AUTO'CRAsy... n.ſ.. [avrºz ºria, from 3-6, ſelf, and zºo,
power.] Indepe dent power; ſupremacy. Dić7.
Autographical. adj. [from autºg, ºphy..] Of one's own
writing. JDłęż.
AU 1 o'GRAPHY. m. / [2:7-year, from 2.7%, and y:z: , to write.]
A particular perſon's own writing; or the original of a treatiſe,
in oppoſition to a copy.
AU19'logy. m. ſ [aviža.] A ſpeaking of, or to one's own
ſelf. Dići.
AUTOMA'TICAL. adj. [from automaton.] Belonging to an au-
tomaton; having the power of moving themſelves.
AUTO'MA to N. m.ſ. […i.aaº. In the plural, automata.] A ma-
chine that hath the power of motion within itſelf, and which
ſtands in need of no foreign aſſiſtance: uincy.
For it is greater to underſtand the art, whereby the Almighty
governs the motions of the great automaton, than to have learned
the intrigues of policy. Glanville's Scºpſis Scientifica, Prºf.
The particular circumſtances for which the automata of this
kind are moſt eminent, may be reduced to four.
- J/ilkins's Mathematical Magick.
AUTO'MA Tous. adj. [from automaton.] Having in itſelf the
power of motion.
Clocks, or automatous organs, whereby we diſtinguiſh of
time, have no mention in ancient writers. Wulgar Err. b. v.
AutoNoMY. m. ſ. ſºlº-ga.] The living according to one's
mind and preſcription. Diº.
A'U roPSY. m. ſ. [2:12:42.] Ocular demonſtration; ſeeing a
thing one's ſelf. Quincy.
In thoſe that have forked tails, autopſy convinceth us, that it
hath this uſe. Ray on the Creation.
Auto'PTICAL. adj. [from autºpſy..] Perceived by one's own
eyes.
AUTO'PTICALLY. adv. [from autºptical.] By means of one's
own eyes.
Were this true, it would autoptically filence that diſpute, out
of which Eve was framed. Brown's Pulgar Errours, h. vii.
That the galaxy is a meteor, was the account of Ariſtotle;
but the teleſcope hath autºptically confuted it: aid he, who is
not Pyrrhonian enough to the diſbelief of his ſenſes, may ſee
that it is no exhalation. Glanville's Sceſs, c. 20.
AutoTHE'1st. n.ſ.. [from ºvº, and erº, God..] One who be-
lieves God's ſeiſ-ſubſiſtence. Dicº.
A'UTUMN. n.ſ.. [autumnus, Lat.] The ſeaſon of the year be-
tween ſummer and winter, beginning aſtronomically at the
cqui-
º
A.
T.
3.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">equinox, and ending at the ſolſtice; popularly, autumn com-
priſes Auguſt, September, and October.
For I will board her, though ſhe chide as loud
As thunder, when the clouds in autumn crack. As you like it.
I would not be over confident, till he hath paſſed a ſpring or
autumn. - //iſeman's Surgery.
The ſtarving brood,
Void of ſufficient ſuitenance, will yield
A ſlender autumn. Philips.
While autumn nodding o'er the yellow plain,
Comes jovial on ; the Dorick reed once more
Well pleas'd I'll tune. Thomſºn's Autumn.
AUTU'MNAL. adj. [from autumn.] Belonging to autumn; pro-
duced in autumn.
No ſpring, or ſummer's beauty, hath ſuch grace,
As I have ſeen in one autumnal face. IDonne.
Thou ſhalt not long
Rule in the clouds; like an autumnal ſtar,
Or light'ning, thou ſhalt fall. Milt. Par. Loft, b. iv. l. 62o.
Bind now up your autumnal flowers, to prevent ſudden guſts,
which will proſtrate all. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Not the fair fruit that on yon branches glows,
With that ripe red th’ autumnal ſun beſtows. Pope.
Avu'lsion. n.f. [avulſio, Lat.] The act of pulling one thing
from another.
Spare not the little offsprings, if they grow
Redundant; but the thronging cluſters thin
By kind avulſion. Philips.
The preſſure of any ambient fluid can be no intelligible cauſe
of the coheſion of matter ; though ſuch a preſſure may hinder
the avulſion of two poliſhed ſuperficies one from another, in a
line perpendicular to them. Locke.
AUAE'SIS. n. ſ. [Latin.] An encreaſing; an exornation, when,
for amplification, a more grave and magnificent word is put
inſtead of the proper word. Smith's Rhetorick.
Auxi'LIAR. #" ſ, [from auxilium, Lat.] Helper; aſſiſtant;
Auxi'LIARY. § confederate.
In the ſtrength of that power, he might, without the auxi-
liaries of any further influence, have determined his will to a
full choice of God. South.
There are, indeed, a ſort of underling auxiliars to the diffi-
culty of a work, called commentators and criticks. Pope.
Auxi'LIARY. V. confederate.
The giant brood,
That fought at Thebes and Ilium on each ſide,
Mix'd with auxiliar gods. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
Their tractates are little auxiliary unto ours, nor afford us
any light to detenebrate this truth. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
There is not the ſmalleſt capillary vein but it is preſent with,
and auxiliary to it, according to its uſe. Hale's Orig. of Mank.
Nor from his patrimonial heav'n alone
Is Jove content to pour his vengeance down;
Aid from his brother of the ſeas he craves,
To help him with auxiliary waves. Dryden.
Auxili ARY Verb. A verb that helps to conjugate other verbs.
In almoſt all languages, ſome of the commoneſt nouns and
verbs have many irregularities; ſuch are the common auxiliary
AUx1'LIAR. }*. [from auxilium, Lat.] Aſſiſtant; helping;
verbs, to be and to have, to do and to be done, &amp;c. Watts.
Auxilia"TION. n.ſ.. [from auxiliatus, Lat.] Help; aid; ſuc-
COur. Dić7.
To Aw A'IT. v. a. [from a and wait. See WAIT.]
1. To expect; to wait for.
Even as the wretch condemn’d to loſe his life,
Awaits the falling of the murd'ring knife. Fairfax, b. iv.
Betwixt the rocky pillars Gabriel ſat,
Chief of th' angelick guards, awaiting night. Par. Loft, b. iv.
2. To attend; to be in ſtore for.
To ſhew thee what reward
Awaits the good; the reſt, what puniſhment. Par. L. b. xi.
Unleſs his wrath be appeaſed, an eternity of torments awaits
the objects of his diſpleaſure. Rogers.
Awa'it. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Ambuſh. See WAIT.
And leaſt miſhap the moſt bliſs alter may
For thouſand perils lie in cloſe await
About us daily, to work our decay. Spenſºr's Muiapotmos.
To Awa'KE. v. a. ſpeccian, Sax. To awake has the preterite
awoke, or, as we now more commonly ſpeak, awaked.]
1. To rouſe out of ſleep. -
Take heed,
How you awake our ſleeping ſword of war. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
Our friend Lazarus ſleepeth; but I go that I may awake him
out of ſleep. john, xi. 1 1.
2. To raiſe from any ſtate reſembling ſleep.
Hark, hark, the horrid ſound
Has rais'd up his head :
As awak'd from the dead,
And amaz'd he ſtairs round.
3. To put into new action.
The fair
Repairs her ſmiles, awakens ev'ry grace,
And calls forth all the wonders of her face. Popc.
2.
Dryden's St. Cacilia.
/
A W A
To Awa'KE. v. n. To break from ſleep; to ceaſe to ſleep,
Alack, I am afraid, they have awak'd;
And 'tis not done. Shakeſp. Macbeth,
1 awaked up laſt of all, as one that gathereth after the grape-
gatherers. Ecclus, xxxiii. 16.
Aw AKE, adj. [from the verb.] . Without ſleep; not ſleeping.
Imagination is like to work better upon ſleeping men, than
men awake. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, Nº. 955.
Cares ſhall not keep him on the throne awake,
Nor break the golden ſlumbers he would take. Dryden.
To Awa'KEN. v. a. and v. n. See Awake.
To Awa'RD. v. a. [derived by Skinner, ſomewhat improbably,
from peano, Sax. towards.]
I. To adjudge; to give anything by a judicial ſentence.
A pound of that ſame merchant's fleſh is thine;
The court awards it, and the law doth give it.
Shakespeare. Merchant of Venice:
A church which allows ſalvation to none without it, nor
awards damnation to almoſt any within it. Scuth.
It advances that grand buſineſs, and according to which their
eternity hereafter will be awarded. Decay of Piety,
Satisfaction for every affront cannot be awarded by ſtated
laws. Collier on Duelling.
2. To judge; to determine.
Th' unwiſe award to lodge it in the tow’rs,
An off'ring ſacred. Pope's Odyſſey, b. viii. 1 555.
Awa'R.D. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Judgment; ſentence; deter-
In 1nation. - - -
Now hear th' award, and happy may it prove
To her, and him who beſt deſerves her love. Dryden's Fab.
Affection bribes the judgment, and we cannot expect an equi-
table award, where the judge is made a party. Glanville's Sºftſ.
To urge the foe,
Prompted by blind revenge and wild deſpair,
Were to refuſe th' awards of providence. Addison's Cato.
Aw A'R.E. adv. [from a and ware; an old word for cutious; it
is however, perhaps an adječlive; 3epajuan, Sax.] Vigilant;
in a ſtate of alarm; attentive.
Ere I was aware, I had left myſelf nothing but the name of
a king. Sidney.
Ere ſorrow was aware, they made his thoughts bear away
ſomething elſe beſides his own ſorrow. Sidney's Arcadia.
Temptations of proſperity inſinuate themſelves; ſo that we
are but little aware of them, and leſs able to withſtand them.
Atterbury's Sermont.
To Awa’RE. v. n. To beware; to be cautious.
So warn’d he them, aware themſelves; and
Inſtant, without diſturb, they took alarm. Par. Loft, b. vi.
Awa'Y. adv. [apex, Saxon.]
1. Abſent.
They could make
Love to your dreſs, although your face were away.
Ben. Johnſon's Catiline.
It is impoſſible to know properties that are ſo annexed to it,
that any of them being away, that eſſence is not there. Locke.
2. From any place or perſon.
I have a pain upon my forehead here
—Why that's with watching; 'twill away again.
Shakeſp. Othello.
When the fowls came down upon the carcaſes, Abraham
drove them away again. Gen. xv. 11.
Would you youth and beauty ſtay,
Love hath wings, and will away. JWiller.
Summer ſuns roll unperceiv'd away. Pope.
3. Let us go.
Away, old man; give me thy hand; away;
King Lear hath loſt, he and his daughter ta'en;
Give me thy hand. Come on. Shakeſp. King Lear.
4. Begone.
Away, and gliſter like the god of war,
When he intendeth to become the field. Shakeſp. King john.
I'll to the woods among the happier brutes:
Come, let's away; hark, the ſtill horn reſounds.
Smith's Phaedra and Hippolitus.
Away, you flatt’rer'
Nor charge his gen’rous meaning. Rowe's jane Shore.
5. Out of one's own hands; into the power of ſomething elſe.
It concerns every man, who will not trifle away his ſoul,
and fool himſelf into irrecoverable miſery, to enquire into theſe
matterS. Tillotſºn.
6. It is often uſed with a verb; as, to drink away an eſtate; to
idle away a manor; that is, to drink or idle till an eſtate or ma-
nor is gone.
He play’d his life away. Pope.
7. On the way; on the road: perhaps this is the original import
of the following phraſe.
Sir Valentine, whither away ſo faſt? Shakespeare t. G. ºf Pºrona.
8. Perhaps the phraſe, he cannot away with, may mean he cannot
travel with; he cannot bear the company.
She never could away with me. Never, never : ſhe
would always ſay, ſhe could not abide maſter Shailow.
Shºp. Henry IV.
9. ..w-y
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A W K
A W R
9. Away with. Throw away; take away.
If you dare think of deſerving our charms,
Away with your ſheephooks, and take to your arms. Dryd.
AWE. n.ſ. ſee, oza, Saxon.] Reverential fear; reverence.
They all be brought up idly, without awe of parents, with-
out precepts of maſters, and without fear of offence.
Spºnſºr's State of Ireland.
It fixed upon him who is only to be feared, God; and yet
with a filial fear, which at the ſame time both fears and loves.
It was awe without amazement, and dread without diſtrac-
tion. South.
What is the proper awe and fear, which is due from man to
God 2 Rogers.
To Aw E. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtrike with reverence,
or fear.
If you will work on any man, you muſt either know his
nature and faſhions, and ſo lead him ; or his ends, and ſo per-
ſuade him; or his weakneſſes and diſadvantages, and ſo awe
him; or thoſe that have intereſt in him, and ſo govern him.
Bacon.
Why then was this forbid Why, but to awe ?
Why, but to keep you low, and ignorant,
His worſhippers? Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
Heav'n that hath plac'd this iſland to give law,
To balance Europe, and her ſtates to awe. J/aller.
The rods and axes of princes, and their deputies, maye awe
many into obedience; but the fame of their goodneſs, juſtice,
and other virtues, will work on more. Atterbury's Sermons.
A'w EBAND. m. ſ. [from awe and band J A check. Dict.
A'w FUL. adj. [from awe and full.]
1. That which ſtrikes with awe, or fills with reverence.
So awful, that with honour thou may’ſt love
Thy mate; who ſees, when thou art ſeen leaſt wiſe.
Milt. Par. Lºſt, b. viii. l. 577.
I approach thee thus, and gaze
Inſatiate; I thus ſingle; nor have fear'd
Thy awful brow, more §. thus retir’d,
Faireſt reſemblance of thy Maker fair!
Milton's Paradiſ. Loff, b. ix.
2. Worſhipful; in authority; inveſted with dignity. This ſenſe
is obſolete.
Know then, that ſome of us are gentlemen,
Such as the fury of ungovern'd youth
Thruſt from the company of awful men.
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Verona.
3. Struck with awe; timorous; ſcrupulous. This ſenſe occurs
but rarely.
It is not nature and ſtrićt reaſon, but a weak and awful re-
verence for antiquity, and the vogue of fallible men.
Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
A'w FULLY. adv. [from awful..] In a reverential manner.
It will concern a man, to treat this great principle awfully
and warily, by ſtill obſerving what it commands, but eſpecially
what it forbids. South.
A'w FULNess. n.ſ.. [from awful.]
1. The quality of ſtriking with awe; ſolemnity.
Theſe obječts naturally raiſe ſeriouſneſs; and night heightens
the awfulneſs of the place, and pours out her ſupernumerary
horrours upon every thing. Addiſon. Spect. Nº 1 Io.
2. The ſtate of being ſtruck with awe.
An help to prayer, producing in us reverence and awfulneſs
to the divine majeſty of God. Taylor’s Rule of living holy.
To Aw HA'PE. v. a. [This word I have met with only in Spenſer,
nor can I diſcover whence it is derived; but imagine, that the
Teutonick language had anciently wapen, to ſtrike, or ſome
ſuch word, from which weapons, or offenſive arms, took their
denomination.] To ſtrike; to confound.
Ah! my dear goſſip, anſwer'd then the ape,
Deeply do your ſad words my wits awhape,
Both for becauſe your grief doth great appear,
And eke becauſe myſelf am touched near. Hubberd’s Tale.
AwH1'LE. adv. [This word, generally reputed an adverb, is only
a while, that is, a time, an interval.] Some time; ſome ſpace
of time.
- Stay, ſtay, I ſay;
And if you love me, as you ſay you do,
Let me perſuade you to forbear awhile. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Into this wild abyſs the wary fiend
Stood on the brink of hell, and look'd awhile,
Pond'ring his voyage. Milt. Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii. 1. 918.
Aw K. adj. [a barbarous contračtion of the word awkward.] Odd;
Out of order. -
We have heard as arrant jangling in the pulpits, as the
ſteeples; and profeſſors ringing as awk as the bells to give no-
tice of the conflagration. L’Eſtrange.
A'w Kw ARD. adj. [[aeyajib, Saxon; that is, backward, unto-
ward.]
1. Inelegant; unpolite; untaught; ungenteel.
Proud Italy,
Whoſe manners ſtill our tardy, apiſh nation
Limps after in baſe awkward imitation. Shakespeare Rich. II.
Their own language is worthy their care; and they are
judged of by their handſome or awkward way of expreſſing
themſelves in it. 1ocke.
An awkward ſhame, or fear of ill uſage, has a ſhare in this
conduct. Swift.
2. Unready; unhandy; not dexterous; clumſy.
Slow to reſolve, but in performance quick:
So true, that he was awkward at a trick. Dryd. Hind and P.
3. Perverſe; untoward.
A kind and conſtant friend
To all that regularly offend;
But was implacable, and awkward,
To all that interlop'd and hawker’d. Hudibras.
Awkwarply, adv. [from awkward.] Clumſily; unreadily;
inelegantly ; ungainly.
Dametas nodding from the waſte upwards, and ſwearing he
never knew man go more awkwardly to work. Widney.
If any pretty creature is void of genius, and would perform
her part but awkwardly, I muſt nevertheleſs inſiſt upon her
working. Addiſon. Speciator, Nº. 606.
And when any thing is done awkwardly, the common ſay-
ing will paſs upon them, that it is ſuitable to their breed-
ing. Locke.
She ſtill renews the ancient ſcene;
Forgets the forty years between ;
Awkwardly gay, and oddly merry;
Her ſcarf pale pink, her kead-knot cherry. Prior.
If a man be taught to hold his pen awkwardly, yet writes
ſufficiently well, it is not worth while to teach him the accurate
methods of handling that inſtrument. Matts's Imp. of the Mind.
AwkwardNEss. n.J. [from awkward..] Inelegance; want of
gentility; oddneſs; unſuitableneſs.
One may obſerve awkwardneſs in the Italians, which eaſily
diſcovers their airs not to be natural. Addison Rem. on Italy.
All his airs of behaviour have a certain awkwardneſs in them;
but theſe awkward airs are worn away by degrees in company.
J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
A. ſº [ale, ale, Sax.] A pointed inſtrument to bore holes
With. -
He which was minded to make himſelf a perpetual ſervant,
ſhould, for a viſible token thereof, have alſo his ear bored
through with an awl. -- "Hooker, b. iv. § 1.
You may likewiſe prick many holes with an awl, about a
joint that will lie in the earth. Mortimer's Husbandry.
A'wless. adj. [from awe, and the negative lºſs.]
I. Without reverence.
Againſt whoſe fury, and th’ unmatched force,
The awlſ, lion could not wage the fight. Shakespeare King john.
He claims the bull with awlſ, inſolence,
And having ſeiz'd his horns, accoſts the prince. Dryden.
2. Without the power of cauſing reverence.
Ah me! I ſee the ruin of my houſe;
The tyger now hath ſeiz'd the gentle hind:
Inſulting tyranny begins to jut
Upon the innocent and awleſs throne. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
AwME, or AUME. m. ſ. A Dutch meaſure of capacity for li-
quids, containing eight ſteckans, or twenty verges or verteels;
anſwering to what in England is called a tierce, or one ſixth of
a ton of France, or one ſeventh of an Engliſh ton. Arbuth. Tab.
AwN. n.ſ.. [ariſia, Lat..] The beard growing out of the corn
or graſs. Chambers.
A'wNING. m. ſ. A cover ſpread over a boat or veſſel, to keep
off the weather.
Of theſe boards I made an awning over me. Robinſºn Cruſ.
Awo'ke. The preterite from awake. -
And ſhe ſaid, the Philiſtines be upon thee, Samſon. And he
awoke out of his ſleep. judges, xvi. 20.
A work. adv. [from a and work.] On work; into a ſtate of
labour.
So after Pyrrhus' pauſe,
Arouſed vengeance ſets him new awork. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
By preſcribing the condition, it ſets us awork to the perfor-
mances of it, and that by living well. Hammond's Pract. Cat.
A'work ING. adj. [from awork.] In the ſtate of working.
Long they thus travelled, yet never met
Adventure which might them aworking ſet. Hubberd's Tale.
AwRY', adv. [from a and wry.]
1. Not in a ſtrait direction; obliquely.
But her ſad eyes ſtill faſt'ned on the ground,
Are governed with goodly modeſty;
That ſuffers not one look to glance awry,
Which may let in a little thought unſound. Spenſ. Epital.
Like perſpectives which rightly gaz'd upon,
Shew nothing but confuſion ; ey'd awry, -
Diſtinguiſh form. Shakeſp. Richard II.
When lo!
A violent croſs wind, from either coaſt,
Blows them tranſverſe; ten thouſand leagues awry
Into the devious air. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ii.
2. Aſquint; with oblique viſion.
You know the king
With jealous eyes has look'd awry
On his ſon's actions. Denham's Sophy.
:
3. Not
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">A X L
A Z U
!
Not level; unevenly.
I hap to ſtep awry, where I ſee no path, and can diſcern but
few ſteps afore me. Brerewood on Languages.
4. Not equally between two points.
Not tyrants fierce that unrepenting die,
Not Cynthia when her manteau's pinn’d awry,
Ere felt ſuch rage. Pope's Rape ºf the Lock.
5. Not in a right ſtate; perverſely.
All awry, and which wried it to the moſt wry courſe of all,
wit abuſed, rather to feign reaſon why it ſhould be amiſs, than
how it ſhould be amended. Sidney, b. ii.
Much of the ſoul they talk, but all awry,
And in themſelves ſeek virtue, and to themſelves
All glory arrogate, to God give none. Paradiſe Regained.
Axe. m. ſ. ſeax, acre, Sax. oſcia, Lat..] An inſtrument con-
ſiſting of a metal head, with a ſharp edge, fixed in a helve or
handle, to cut with.
No metal can,
No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenneſs
Of thy ſharp envy. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
There ſtood a foreſt on the mountain's brow,
Which overlook'd the ſhaded plains below;
No ſounding axe preſum'd theſe trees to bite,
Coeval with the world; a venerable fight. Dryden's Fables.
AXI LL.A. n.ſ.. [axilla, Lat.] The cavity under the upper part
of the arm, called the arm-pit. &amp;uincy.
Axi'LLAR. N. adj. [from axilla, Lat.] Belonging to the arm-
A'x1LLARY, } pit.
In the ſame manner is the axillary artery diſtributed unto
the hand; below the cubit, it divideth unto two parts.
Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Axiomſ. º [axioma, Lat. 28.2%a, from ačićw.]
1. A propoſition evident at firſt fight, that cannot be made plainer
by demonſtration.
Axioms, or principles more general, are ſuch as this, that the
greater good is to be choſen before the leſſer. Hooker, b. i.
2. An eſtabliſhed principle to be granted without new proof.
The axioms of that law, whereby natural agents are guided,
have their uſe in the moral. Hooker, b. i.
Their affirmations are unto us no axioms ; we eſteem thereof
as things unſaid, and account them but in liſt of nothing.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
Axis. m. ſ. [axis, Lat.] The line real or imaginary that paſſes
through any thing, on which it may revolve.
But ſince they ſay our earth, from morn to morn,
n its own axis is oblig'd to turn;
That ſwift rotation muſt diſperſe in air
All things which on the rapid orb appear. Blackmore.
It might annually have compaſſed the ſun, and yet never
have once turned upon its axis. Bentley's Sermons.
On their own axis as the planets run,
And make at once their circle round the ſun;
So two conſiſtent motions ačt the ſoul,
And one regards itſelf, and one the whole.
Pope's Eſſay on Man, epiſt. iii. 1.313.
A'xle. n. ſ. [axis, Lat.] The pin which paſſes through
Axle-TRE E. } the midſt of the wheel, on which the circum-
volutions of the wheel are performed.
Venerable Neſtor
Should with a bond of air, ſtrong as the axle-tree
On which heav'n rides, knit all the Grecians ears
To his experienc'd tongue. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
The fly ſate upon the axle-tree of the chariot-wheel, and
ſaid, what a duſt do I raiſe Bacon's Eſſays.
And the gilded car of day
His glowing axle doth allay
In the ſteep Atlantick ſtream. Miltºn's Comus,
He ſaw a greater ſun appear,
Than his bright throne or burning axle-tree could bear.
Milton's Chriſt's Nativity:
A.Y. adv. [perhaps from aio, Lat.]
1. Yes; an adverb of anſwering affirmatively.
Return you thither?
-Ay, madam, with the ſwifteſt wing of ſpeed.
Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
What ſay'ſt thou? Wilt thou be of our conſort?
Say ay; and be the captain of us all.
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Verona.
2. It is a word by which the ſenſe is enforced; even; yes, cer-
tainly; and more than that.
Remember it, and let it make thee creſt-fall'n;
Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
A.Y.E. adv. [apa, Saxon.]. Always; to eternity; for ever.
And now in darkſome dungeon, wretched thrall,
Remedyleſs for aye he doth him hold. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Either prepare to die,
Or on Diana's altar to proteſt,
For aye, auſterity and ſingle life.
Shakeſpeare's Midſummer Night's Dream,
The ſoul, though made in time, ſurvives for aye ;
And, though it hath beginning, ſees no end.
Sir John Davies.
And hears the muſes, in a ring,
Aye round about Jove's altar ſing. Milton's Il Penſeroſo.
Th' aſtoniſh'd mariners aye ply the pump;
No ſtay, nor reſt, till the wide breach is clos'd. Philipſ.
A'ygr EEN. n.ſ. The ſame with houſeleek; which ſee. Dić.
A'YR Y. n.ſ. [See AIRY.]
I ſhould diſcourſe on the brancher, the haggard, and then
treat of their ſeveral ayries. Walton's Angler.
A’z.IMUTH. n. ſ. [Arab.]
1. The azimuth of the ſun, or of a ſtar, is an arch between the
meridian of the place and any given vertical line.
2. Magnetical azimuth, is an arch of the horizon contained be-
tween the ſun's azimuth circle and the magnetical meridian ; or
it is the apparent diſtance of the ſun from the north or ſouth
point of the compaſs.
3. Azimuth Compaſs, is an inſtrument uſed at ſea for finding the
ſun's magnetical azimuth.
4. Azimuth Dial, is a dial whoſe ſtyle or gnomon is at right an-
gles to the plane of the horizon.
5. Azimuths, called alſo vertical circles, are great circles interſec-
ting each other in the zenith and nadir, and cutting the horizon
at right angles, in all the points thereof. Chambers.
Azu'RE. adj. [azur, Fr. azurro, Span. lazur, Arab. from lazuli,
a blue ſtone..] Blue; faint blue.
The blue of the firſt order, though very faint and little, may
be the colour of ſome ſubſtances; and the azure colour of the
skies ſeems to be of this order. Newton's Opticks.
Thus replies
Minerva, graceful with her azure eyes. Pope's Odyſſey, b, i.
The ſea,
Far through his azure turbulent domain,
Your empire owns. Thomſon's Spring.
Vol. I.
