§<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 287</div><p class="Text">#
º,
*
*
trº,
S A B
Has in Engliſh the ſame hiſing ſound as in other
languages, and unhappily prevails in ſo many of our
words that it produces in the ear of a foreigner a
9 continued ſibilation.
In the beginning of words, it has invariably its
natural and genuine ſound: in the middle it is ſometimes ut-
tered with a ſtronger appulſe of the tongue to the palate, like
z; as roſe, roſeate, roſy, oſier, noſel, reſident, buſy, buſineſs. It
formetimes keeps its natural ſound; as looſe, deſignation; for
which I know not whether any rules can be given.
In the end of monoſyllables it is ſometimes s, as in this;
and ſometimes z, as in as, has ; and generally where es ſtands
in verbs for eth, as gives. It ſeems to be eſtabliſhed as
a rule, that no noun ſingular ſhould end with ſ ſingle: there-
fore in words written with diphthongs, and naturally long, an
e is nevertheleſs added at the end, as gooſe, houſe; and where
the ſyllable is ſhort the ſ is doubled, and was once ſe, as aſs,
anciently aſſe; wilderneſs, anciently wilderneſe ; diſtreſs, an-
ciently diſtreſſe.
SABA(OTH. (n.ſ: [An Hebrew word ſignifying rºft; ſabbat,
SA’BBATH. ; French ; ſabatum, Latin.]
1. A day appointed by God among the Jews, and from them
eſtabliſhed among Chriſtians for publick worſhip; the ſeventh
day ſet apart from works of labour to be employed in piety.
Holy Lord God of ſabaoth. Common Prayer.
I purpoſe,
And by our holy ſabbath have I ſworn,
To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
Glad we return'd up to the coaſts of light,
Ere ſabbath ev'ning. Milton.
Here ev'ry day was ſabbath: only free
From hours of pray’r, for hours of charity,
Such as the Jews from ſervile toil releaſt,
Where works of mercy were a part of reſt:
Such as bleſt angels exerciſe above,
Vary'd with ſacred hymns and acts of love;
Such ſabbaths as that one ſhe now enjoys,
Ev’n that perpetual one, which ſhe employs:
For ſuch viciſſitudes in heav'n there are,
In praiſe alternate, and alternate pray’r. Dryden.
2. Intermiſſion of pain or ſorrow; time of reſt.
Never any ſabbath of releaſe
Could free his travels and afflićtions deep. Daniel’s C. War.
Nor can his bleſſed ſoul look down from heav'n,
Or break th' eternal ſabbath of his reſt, -
To ſee her miſerics on earth. Dryden.
Peaceful ſleep out the ſabbath of the tomb,
And wake to raptures in a life to come. Pope.
SA'BBATH BREAKER. n.ſ. [ ſabbath and break. J. Violator of
the ſabbath by labour or wickedneſs.
The uſurer is the greateſt ſabbathbreaker, becauſe his plough
goeth every Sunday. - Bacon's Eſſays.
SAABA’tical. adj. [ ſabbaticus, Lat. ſabbatique, Fr. from ſab-
bath.] Reſembling the ſabbath; enjoying or bringing inter-
miſſion of labour. -
The appointment and obſervance of the ſabbatical year, and
after the ſeventh ſabbatical year, a year of jubilee, is a circum-
ſtance of great moment. Forbes.
Saſebatism. n. ſ. [from ſabbatum, Latin.] Obſervance of the
ſabbath ſuperſtitiouſly rigid.
SABINE. n.J. [ſabine, Fr. ſalina, Latin J A plant.
Sabine or ſavin will make fine hedges, and may be brought
into any form by clipping, much beyond any of the ſorts of
trees commonly made uſe of for that purpoſe. Mºrtimer.
SA'ple. n. ſ. [zibella, Latin.] Fur.
Sable is worn of great perſonages, and brought out of Ruſſia,
being the fur of a little beaſt of that name, eſteemed for the
perfectneſs of the colour of the hairs, which are very black.
Hence ſable, in heraldry, ſignifies the black colour in gen-
tlemens arms. Peacham on Blazoning.
Furiouſly running in upon him, with tumultuous ſpeech,
he violently raught from his head his rich cap of ſables. Knoles.
The peacocks plumes thy tackle muſt not fail,
Nor the dear purchaſe of the ſable's tail. Gay.
SA's LE. adj. [Fr.] Black. A word uſed by heralds and poets,
Shakeſpeare.
S A C
By this the drooping daylight 'gan to fade,
And yield his room to ſad ſucceeding night,
Who with her ſable mantle 'gan to ſhade
The face of earth, and ways of living wight. Fairy &amp;#een.
With him inthron’d
Satſable veſted night, eldeſt of things,
The conſort of his reign. Milton's Paradiſe Ly?.
They ſoon begin that tragick play,
And with their ſmoaky cannons baniſh day:
Night, horrour, ſlaughter, with confuſion meet,
And in their ſable arms embrace the fleet. Waller.
Adoring firſt the genius of the place,
And night, and all the ſtars that gild her ſable throne. Dryd.
S4'BLIERE. n.ſ. [French.j -
f. A ſandpit. - Bailey.
2. [In carpentry.] A piece of timber as long, but not ſo thick,
as a beam. Bailey.
SA'BRE. m.ſ. [ ſabre, French; I ſuppoſe, of Turkiſh original.]
A cymetar; a ſhort ſword with a convex edge; a faulchion.
To me the cries of fighting fields are charms;
Keen be my ſabre, and of proof my arms;
I aſk no other bleſfing of my ſtars,
No prize but fame, no miſtreſs but the wars. Dryden.
Seam'd o'er with wounds, which his own ſabre gave,
In the vile habit of a village ſlave,
The foe deceiv'd. Pope's Odyſſey.
Sabulo'sity. n.ſ. [from ſabulous,) Grittineſs; ſandineſs.
SABULOUS. adj. [ſabulum, Latin.] Gritty; ſandy.
84CCADE. n.ſ. [French..] A violent check the rider gives
his horſe, by drawing both the reins very ſuddenly: a cor-
rečtion uſed when the horſe bears heavy on the hand. Bailey.
SA'ccHARINE, adj. Iſaccharum, Latin.] Having the taſte or
*::. of the chief qualities of ſugar.
anna is an eſſential ſaccharine ſalt, ſweating from the
leaves of moſt plants. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Sacerdo"tal. adj. [ſacerdotalis, Latin.] Prieſtly; belonging
to the prieſthood.
They have ſeveral offices and prayers, eſpecially for the
dead, in which functions they uſe ſacerdotal garments. Stillingſ.
He fell violently upon me, without reſpe&amp;t to my ſacerdotal
orders. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
If ample powers, granted by the rulers of this world, add
dignity to the perſons intruſted with theſe powers, behold the
importance and extent of the ſacerdotal commiſſion. Atterbury.
SA'chel. n.ſ.. [ſacculus, Lat..] A ſmall ſack or bag.
SACK. n.ſ. [, pe' Hebrew; qazzG'; ſaccus, Latin; raec, Sax.
It is obſervable of this word, that it is found in all languages,
and it is therefore conceived to be antediluvian.]
1. A bag; a pouch; commonly a large bag.
Our ſacks ſhall be a mean to ſack the city,
And we be lords and rulers over Roan. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Vaſtius cauſed the authors of that mutiny to be thruſt into
Jacks, and in the fight of the fleet caſt into the ſea. Knoles.
2. The meaſure of three buſhels.
3. A woman's looſe robe.
To Sack. v. a. ſfrom the noun.]
1. To put in bags.
Now the great work is done, the corn is ground,
The griſt is Jack'd, and every ſack well bound. Betterton.
2. [From Jacar, Spaniſh.] To take by ſtorm; to pillage; to
lunder.
Edward Bruce ſpoiled and burnt all the old Engliſh pale in-
habitants, and ſacked and raſed all cities and corporate towns.
Spenſer on Ireland.
I'll make thee ſtoop and bend thy knee,
Or ſack this country with a mutiny, Shakespeare . Hºry VI.
What armies conquer'd, periſh'd with thy ſword?
What cities ſack'dº' - Fairfax.
who ſees theſe diſmal heaps, but would demand
what barbarous invader ſack'd the land? Denham.
The pope himſelf was ever after unfortunate, Rome being
twice taken and ſacked in his reign. South's Sermons.
The great magazine for all kinds of treaſure is the bed of
the Tiber: when the Romans lay under the apprehenſions of
ſeeing their city ſacked by a barbarous enemy, they would take
23 A Who
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 288</div><p class="Text">S A C
S A C
i. i.e. this way as could beft bear
care to beflow ſuch of their riches * way as cou Addiſon.
the water.
Sack, n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
f a town ; pillage; plunder.
1. Storm o *i; sº ſon beſtows
of Troy, which he by promiſe owes,
#.."i the §º Greeks thy loſs reſtore, Dryden.
2. A kind of ſweet wine, now brought chiefly from the Cana-
ries. [Sec, French, of uncertain etymology; but derived by
Sºnnºr, after Mandeſlo, from Xeque, a city of Morocco.]
Pleaſe you drink a cup of ſack. Shakeſpeare.
The butler hath great advantage to allure the maids with a
glaſs of ſack. - - Swift.
Sackbut... n.ſ.. [ſacabuche, Spaniſh; ſambuca, Latin; ſankułk,
French.] A kind of pipe. . -
The trumpets, ſackbuts, pſalteries and fife, -
Make the ſun dance. Shakeſp. Crioland.
Sackcloath. n.ſ...[ſack and cleath..] Cloath of which ſacks
are made; coarſe cloath ſometimes worn in mortification.
A ſort of coarſe ſtuff made of goats hair, of a black or
dark colour, worn by ſoldiers and mariners; and uſed as a
habit among the Hebrews in times of mourning and diſtreſs.
It was called ſackcloth, either becauſe ſacks were made of this
ſort of ſtuff, or becauſe haircloaths were ſtraight and cloſe like
a ſack. - Calmet.
To augment her painful penance more,
Thrice every week in aſhes ſhe did fit,
And next her wrinkled ſkin rough ſackcloth wore. F. Queen.
Thus with ſackcloath I inveſt my woe,
And duſt upon my clouded forehead throw. Sands.
Being clad in ſackcloath, he was to lie on the ground, and
conſtantly day and night to implore God's mercy for the fin
he had committed. Ayliffe's Parergon.
SA'cker. n.ſ.. [from ſack..] One that takes a town.
SA'ckful. n.ſ.. [ſack and full.] Top full. . .
Wood goes about with ſackfuls of droſs, odiouſly miſre-
preſenting his prince's countenance. Swift.
SA'ckposs E.T. n.ſ.. [ſack and poſſet.] A poſſet made of milk,
ſack, and ſome other ingredients.
Snuff the candles at ſupper on the table, becauſe the burn-
ing ſnuff may fall into a diſh of ſoup or ſackpoſer. Swift.
SA'CRAMENT. n.ſ.. [ſacrement, Fr. ſacramentum, Latin.]
1. An oath ; any ceremony producing an obligation.
2. An outward and viſible ſign of an inward and ſpiritual grace.
As often as we mention a {. it is improperly under-
ſtood; for in the writings of the ancient fathers all articles which
are peculiar to Chriſtian faith, all duties of religion containing
that which ſenſe or natural reaſon cannot of itſelf diſcern, are
moſt commonly named ſacraments; our reſtraint of the word
to ſome few principal divine ceremonies, importeth in every
ſuch ceremony two things, the ſubſtance of the ceremony it.
ſelf, which is viſible; and beſides that, ſomewhat elſe more
ſecret, in reference whereunto we conceive that ceremony to
be a ſacrament. Hooker.
3. The euchariſt; the holy communion.
Ten thouſand French have ta'en the Jacrament
To rive their dangerous artillery
Upon no Chriſtian ſoul but Engliſh Talbot. Shatſ. H. VI.
As we have ta'en the ſacrament,
We will unite the white roſe with the red. Shakeſp. R. III.
Before the famous battle of Crefly, he ſpent the greateſt
part of the night in prayer; and in the morning received the
Jacrament, with his ſon, and the chief of his officers. Addiſon.
SACRAME'NTAL. adj. [ſacramental, Fr. from ſacrament.] Con-
tituting a ſacrament; pertaining to a ſacrament.
To make complete the outward ſubſtance of a ſacrament,
there is required an outward form, which form ſacramental
elements receive from ſacramental words. Hooker.
. The words of St. Paul are plain; and whatever interpreta-
tion can be put upon them, it can only vary the way of the
Jacramental efficacy, but it cannot evacuate the bleſfing. Taylor.
SACRAME'Ntally, adv. [from Jacramental.] After the man-
ner of a ſacrament.
My body is ſacramentally contained in this ſacrament of
bread. Hall.
The law of circumciſion was meant by God ſacramentally
tº impreſs the duty of ſtrict purity. Hammond.
SACRED. adj. [ſacre, French; Jacer, Latin.]
t. Devoted to religious uſes; holy.
Gods love to haunt her ſacred ſhades. Milton.
2. Dedicated; conſecrate; conſecrated.
- ...This temple and his holy ark,
With all his ſacred things. Milton.
A 9. its eaſtern gate was rais'd above
temple, ſacred to th r ru
3. Iº. , ſacred to the queen of love, Dryden.
S The honour's ſacred, which he talks on now,
uppoſing that I lackt it. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleºpatra.
T ow haſt thou yielded to tranſgreſs
he ſtria forbiddance? how to violate
The ſacred fruit; Milton
T. of marriage ſtill are ſacred held; • * swin-
“re ſweet and bitter by the wiſe conceal’d, Dryden,
SA'c RED ly, adv. [from ſacred.] Inviolably; religiouſly.
When God had manifeſted himſelf in the fleſh, how ſacredy
did he preſerve this privilege 2 South's Sermons.
SA'cred Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſacred.]. The ſtate of being ſacred;
ſtate of being conſecrated to religious uſes; holineſs; ſanctity.
In the ſanctuary the cloud, and the oracular anſwers, were
prerogatives peculiar to the ſacredneſs of the place. South.
This inſinuates the ſacredneſs of power, let the adminiſtra-
tion of it be what it will. L'E/irange.
Sacrifick, adj. [ſacrificus, Latin.] Employed in ſacrific.
Sacrificable. adj. [from ſacrificor, Lat..] Capable of being
offered in ſacrifice.
Although Jephtha's vow run generally for the words, what-
ſoever ſhall come forth; yet might it be reſtrained in the ſenſe,
for whatſoever was ſacrificable, and juſtly ſubjećt to lawful im.
molation, and ſo would not have ſacrificed either horſe or
dog. Brown's Pulgar Errourt.
Sacrificator. m. ſ. [ſacrificateur, Fr. from ſacrificor, Latin.]
Sacrificer; offerer of ſacrifice.
Not only the ſubječt of ſacrifice is unqueſtionable, but alſo
the ſacrificator, which the pićture makes to be Jephtha. Brown.
SA'crificatory, adj. [from ſacrifior, Latin.] Offering a-
* crifice.
To SACRIFICE. v. a. ſ.ſacrifier, French; ſacrifico, Latin.]
1. To offer to heaven; to immolate.
Alarbus' limbs are lopt,
And intrails feed the /acrificing fire. Shakeſp. Titus Andron.
This blood, like ſacrificing Abel's, cries
To me for juſtice. Shakespeare Richard II.
I ſacrifice to the Lord all that openeth the matrix, being
males. Ex. xiii. 15.
Men from the herd or flock
Of ſacrificing bullock, lamb, or kid. Milton.
2. To deſtroy or give up for the ſake of ſomething elſe.
'Tis a ſad contemplation, that we ſhould ſacrifice the peace
of the church to a little vain curioſity. Decay of Piety.
The breach of this rule, To do as one would be done to,
would be contrary to that intereſt men ſacrifice to when they
break it. Lºcke.
Syphax loves you, and would ſacrifice
His life, nay more, his honour, in your ſervice. Addison.
A great genius ſometimes ſacrifices ſound to ſenſe. Broom.
3. To deſtroy; to kill.
4. To devote with loſs.
Condemn'd to ſacrifice his childiſh years
To babbling ign'rance, and to empty fears. Prior.
To SA’crifice. v. m. To make offerings; to offer ſacrifice.
He that ſacrificeth of things wrongfully gotten, his offering
is ridiculous. Eccluſ xxxiv. 18.
Let us go to ſacrifice to the Lord. Ex. iii. 18.
Some miſchief is befallen
To that meek man who well had ſacrific'd, Milton.
SA'crifice. n.ſ.. [ſacrifice, French; ſacrificium, Latin.]
1. The act of offering to heaven.
God will ordain religious rites -
Of ſacrifice. Milton.
2. The thing offered to heaven, or immolated.
Upon ſuch ſacrifice -
The gods themſelves throw incenſe. Shakespeare King Lear.
Go with me like good angels to my end,
And as the long divorce of feel falls on me,
Make of your prayers one ſweet ſacrifice, -
And lift my ſoul to heav'n. Shakeſpeare.
Moloch beſmear'd with blood -
Of human ſacrifice. Milton,
My life if thou preſerv'ſt, my life
Thy ſacrifice ſhall be;
And death, if death muſt be my doom,...
Shall join my ſoul to thee. Addison's Speciatºr.
3. Anything deſtroyed, or quitted for the ſake of ſomething elſe.
4. Anything deſtroyed. -
SA'cRificer. n.ſ.. [from ſacrifice.] One who offers ſacrifice;
one that immolates.
Let us be ſacrificers, but not butchers. Shakespeare
When ſome brawny ſacrificer knocks,
Before an altar led, an offer'd ox,
His eyeballs rooted out are thrown to ground. Dryden.
A prieſt pours wine between the horns of a bull; the prieſ: 1S
veiled after the manner of the old Roman ſacrificers. Addison.
Sacrific, AL. adj. [from ſacrifice J Performing ſacrifice; in
cluded in ſacrifice.
Rain ſacrificial whiſp'rings in his ear; -
Make lſº, his ſtirrop. - - - Shakespeare. Timºn.
Tertullian's obſervation upon theſe ſacrificial rites, is Pºrt.
nent to this rule. Taylor's Horthy Cºmmunicant.
SACRILEGE. m.ſ.. [ſãcrilege, Fr. ſacrilegium, Lat.] I he Crime
of appropriating to himſelf what is devoted to religion; the
crime of robbing heaven; the crime of violating or profaning
things ſacred.
By what eclipſe ſhall that ſun be defac'd,
What mine hath erſt thrown down ſo fair a tower!
- - - - - - - Aſ
What ſacrilege hath ſuch a ſaint diſgrac'd? Sidney.
... atrºg - £ Then
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 289</div><p class="Text">S A. D
S A F
º
4.
}
Then 'gan a curſed hand the quiet womb
Of his great grandmother with ſteel to wound,
And the hid treaſures in her ſacred tomb
With ſacrilege to dig. Fairy Queen.
We need not go many ages back to ſee the vengeance of
God upon ſome families, raiſed upon the ruins of churches,
and enriched with the ſpoils of ſacrilege. South's Sermons.
SAcrile'gious. adj. [ ſacrilegus, Lat. from ſacrilege.] Violating
things ſacred ; polluted with the crime of ſacrilege.
To ſacrilegious perjury ſhould I be betrayed, I ſhould ac-
count it greater miſery. King Charles.
By vile hands to common uſe debas'd,
With ſacrilegious taunt, and impious jeſt. Prior.
Still green with bays each ancient altar ſtands,
Above the reach of ſacrilegious hands. Pope.
Blaſphemy is a maledićtion, and a ſacrilegious detraćtion
from the Godhead. Ayliffe's Parergon.
SACRILE'Giously. adv. [from ſacri'egious.] With ſacrilege.
When theſe evils befell him, his conſcience tells him it was
for moſt ſacrilegiouſly pillaging and invading God's houſe.
South's Sermons.
SA'cR1N G. part. [This is a participle of the French ſacrer.
The verb is not uſed in Engliſh..] Conſecrating.
I’ll ſtartle you,
Worſe than the ſacring bell. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The ſacring of the kings of France is the ſign of their ſo-
vereign prieſthood as well as kingdom, and in the right thereof
they are capable of holding all vacant benefices. Temple.
SA'chist. }". ſ. [ſacriftain, French.] He that has the care
SA'cR1st AN. ; of the utenſils or moveables of the church.
A ſcºriſt or treaſurer are not dignitaries in the church of
common right, but only by cuſtom. Ayliffe's Parergon.
SA'cristy. n.ſ.. [ſacriſiie, French. J. An apartment where
the conſecrated veſſels or moveables of a church are repo-
ſited.
Bold Amycus from the robb’d veſtry brings
A ſconce that hung on high,
With tapers fill'd, to º the ſacriſy. Dryden.
A third apartment ſhould be a kind of ſacriſy for altars,
idols, and ſacrificing inſtruments. Addiſon.
SAD. adj. [Of this word, ſo frequent in the language, the ety-
mology is not known. It is probably a contraction of ſagged,
heavy, burthened, overwhelmed, from To ſag, to load.].
1. Sorrowful; full of grief.
Do you think I ſhall not love a ſad Pamela ſo well as a
joyful? Sidney.
I now muſt change
Thoſe notes to tragick; ſad taſk! Milton.
Six brave companions from each ſhip we loſt:
With ſails outſpread we fly th’ unequal ſtrife,
Sad for their loſs, but joyful of our life. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. Habitually melancholy; heavy; gloomy; not gay; not
cheerful.
It miniſtreth unto men, and other creatures, all celeſtial
influences: it diſſipateth thoſe ſad thoughts and ſorrows, which
the darkneſs both begetteth and maintaineth. Raleigh.
- See in her cell ſad Eloiſa ſpread,
Propp'd on ſome tomb, a neighbour of the dead. Pope.
3. Serious; not light; not volatile ; grave. -
He with utterance grave, and countenance ſad,
From point to point diſcours'd his voyage. Sfenſer.
The lady Katharine, a ſad and religious woman, when
Henry VIII's reſolution of a divorce from her was firſt made
known, ſaid that ſhe had not offended; but it was a judgment
of God, for that her former marriage was made in blood. Bac.
If it were an embaſſy of weight, choice was made of ſome
ſad perſon of known judgment and experience, and not of a
young man, not weighed in ſtate matters. - Bacon.
Aſad wiſe valour is the brave complexion
That leads the van, and ſwallows up the cities:
The gigler is a milk-maid, whom inflećtion,
Or a fir’d beacon, frighteth from his ditties.
4. Afflićtive; calamitous.
3. Bad; inconvenient; vexatious. A word of burleſque com-
laint.
P Theſe qualifications make him a ſad huſband.
6. Dark coloured.
Cryſtal, in its redućtion into powder, hath a vale and
ſhadow of blue; and in its coarſe pieces is of a ſadder hue
than the powder of Venice glaſs. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
I met him accidentally in London in ſad coloured clothes,
far from being coſtly. //alton's Life ºf Bp. Sanderſon.
Scarce any tinging ingredient is of ſo general uſe as woad,
or glaſtum; for though of itſelf it dye but a blue, yet it is uſed
to prepare cloth for green, and many of the ſadder colours,
when the dyers make them laſt without fading. Boyle.
. Woad or wade is uſed by the dyers to lay the foundation of
all fad colours. AMortimer's Huſbandry.
F. Heavy weighty : ponderous.
With that his hand, more ſad than lump of lead,
Uplifting high, he weened with Morddure,
His own good ſword, Morddure, to cleave his head. F. Q.
**
*
º
Herbert.
Addiſon.
8. Coheſive; not light; firm; cloſe. -
Chalkylands are naturally cold and ſad, and therefore re-
quire warm applications, and light compoſt. Mrſiºner.
To SA/DDEN. v. a. [from ſad.]
1. To make ſad.
2. To make melancholy ; to make gloomy,
Her gloomy preſence ſaddens all the ſcene, t
Shades ev'ry flow'r, and darkens ev'ry green; *
Deepens the murmurs of the falling floods,
And breathes a browner horror on the woods. Pope,
3. To make dark coloured.
4. To make heavy; to make coheſive.
Marl is binding, and ſaddening cf land is the great prejudice
it doth to clay lands. Mortimer's Husbandry.
SA'DDLE. m. ſ. ſ rabl, Saxon; fadel, Dutch. I The ſeat
which is put upon the horſe for the accommodation of the
rider.
His horſe hipped with an old moth-eaten ſaddle, and the
ſtirrups of no kindred. Shakeſp. Taming % the Shrew.
The law made for apparel, and riding in ſaddleſ, after the
Engliſh faſhion, is penal only to Engliſhmen. Davies.
One hung a pole-ax at his ſaddle bow,
And one a heavy mace. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
'Tis good to provide ourſelves of the virtuoſo's ſaddle,
which will be ſure to amble, when the world is upon the
hardeſt trot. Dryden.
The vent'rous knight is from the ſaddle thrown; -
But 'tis the fault of fortune, not his own.
To SA/DDLE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover with a ſaddle.
I will ſaddle me an aſs, that I may ride thereon. 2 Sa. xix.
Rebels, by yielding, do like him, or worſe,
Who ſaddled his own back to ſhame his horſe.
No man, ſure, e'er left his houſe,
And ſaddl’d Ball, with thoughts ſo wild,
To bring a midwife to his ſpouſe,
Before he knew ſhe was with child.
2. To load; to burthen.
Reſolv'd for ſea, the ſlaves thy baggage pack,
Each ſadd'd with his burden on his back;
Nothing retards thy voyage. Dryden.
Sa'DDLE BAcked. adj. [ ſaddle and back.]
Horſes, ſaddlebacked, bave their backs low, and a raiſed
head and neck. Farrier’s Diff.
SA’DDLEMAKER. }% [from ſaddle.] One whoſe trade is to
SA'DDLeR. make ſaddles.
Sixpence that I had
To pay the ſaddler for my miſtreſs' crupper,
The ſaddler had it. Shakeſp. Comedy of Errourt.
The utmoſt exactneſs in theſe belongs to farriers, ſaddlers,
and ſmiths. Digby.
The ſmith and the ſaddler's journeyman ought to partake of
your maſter's generoſity. Swift's Direct. to the Groom.
SA'DLY. adv. [from ſad.]
1. Sorrowfully; mournfully.
My father is gone wild into his grave;
For in his tomb lie my affections; - *
And with his ſpirit ſadly I ſurvive,
To mock the expectations of the world. Shakespeare Henry IV.
He griev'd, he wept, the fight an image brought
Dryden.
et
Cleaveland.
Prior.
Of his own filial love; a ſadly pleaſing thought. Dryden.
He ſadly ſuffers in their grief, --
Out-weeps an hermit, and out-prays a ſaint. Dryden.
Common dangers paſt, a ſadly pleaſing theme, Dryden.
2. Calamitouſly; miſerably. .
We may at preſent eaſily ſee, and one day ſadly feel." South.
SA’d Ness. m.ſ. [from ſad.] . . . . -
1. Sorrowfulneſs; mournfulneſs; dejećtion of mind. * * *
The ſoul receives intelligence . . . . . .
By her near genius of the body's end, … . . . . .
And ſo imparts a ſadneſs to the ſenſe. Daniel's Civil War.
And let us not be wanting to ourſelves, - -
Leſt ſo ſevere and obſtinate a Jadneſ;
Tempt a new vengeance. Denham's Sºphy.
A paſſionate regret at fin, a grief and ſadneſ of its memory,
enter into God’s roll of mourners. Decay ºf Piety.
If the ſubjećt be mournful, let everything in it have a ſtroke
ºff: - Dryden.
2. Melancholy look.
Dim ſadneſ, did not ſpare
Celeſtial viſages.
3. Seriouſneſs; ſedate gravity.
SAFE. adj. [ ſauf, French; ſalvuſ, Latin J
1. Free from danger. -
Our ſeparated fortune
Shall keep us both the ſafer; where we are, .
There's daggers in men's ſmiles. Shakespeare . Macbeth.
But Trivia kept in ſecret ſhades alone, --
Her care, Hippolytus, to fate unknown;
And call'd him Virbius in th’ F’gerian grove,
where then he liv'd obſcure, but ſafe from Jove, Dryden.
Milton.
I Beyond<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 290</div><p class="Text">S A F
S A G
wº-_i=T-
- _ -
Beyond the beating ſurge his courſe he bore,
with longing eyes obſerving, “’ ſurvey P.
§. ºth aſ:ent, or ſafe ſequeſter d bay. “pe.
rt. -
2. Fº into the mouth of a wolf, and when you've
brought it out ſafe and ſound, talk of a reward. L’Eſtrange.
, Conferring ſecurity. . . - -
3 To º: the ſame things to you, to me is not grievous,
Phil. iii. 1.
but to you ſafe- -
u ºft follow thee, ſafe guide, the path -
Thou lead'ſt me. Milton.
4. No longer dangerous; repoſited out of the power of doing
harm.
Banquo's ſafe. - ..
—Ay, my good lord; ſafe in a ditch : he lics
with twenty trenched gaſhes on his head,
The leaſt a death to nature. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Our great forbidder ſafe, with all his ſpies
About him. Milton,
Safe. n.ſ. [from the adjećtive.]. A buttery; a pantry. Ainſw.
Sa'FEcospuct. n.ſ.. [ſauf conduit, French.]
. Convoy; guard through an enemy's country.
I A #: was ſent #. fir William Waller, to deſire a ſafe-
conduct for a gentleman. Clarendon.
2. Paſs; warrant to paſs.
SA’F Ecuard. n.ſ.. [ſafe and guard.]
1. Defence; protection; ſecurity. -
We ſerve the living God as near as our wits can reach to
the knowledge thereof, even according to his own will; and
do therefore truſt, that his mercy ſhall be our ſafeguard. Hooker.
If you do fight in ſafeguard of your wives,
Your wives ſhall welcome home the conquerors. Shakeſp.
The ſmalleſt worm will turn, if trod upon;
And doves will peck in ſaf guard of their brood. Shakeſp.
Caeſar, where dangers threatened on the one ſide, and the
opinion that there ſhould be in him little ſafeguard for his
friends on the other, choſe rather to venture upon extremities,
than to be thought a weak protector. Raleigh.
Great numbers, deſcended from them, have, by the bleſſ-
ing of God upon their induſtry, raiſed themſelves ſo high in
the world as to become, in times of difficulty, a protećtion
and a ſafeguard to that altar, at which their anceſtors mini-
{{red. Atterbury's Sermons.
Thy ſword, the ſafeguard of thy brother's throne,
Is now become the bulwark of thy own. Granville.
2. Convoy; guard through any interdićted road, granted by the
poſſeſſor.
3. Paſs; warrant to paſs. -
On ſafeguard he came to me. Shakeſpeare.
A trumpet was ſent to the earl of Eſſex for a ſafeguard or
paſs to two lords, to deliver a meſſage from the king to the
two houſes. Clarendon.
To SAFEGUARD. v. n. [from the noun..] To guard; to pro-
tečt.
We have locks to ſafeguard neceſſaries,
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
SA'FEly. adv. [from ſafe.]
1. In a ſafe manner; without danger.
Who is there that hath the leiſure and means to colle&amp;t all
the proofs, concerning moſt of the opinions he has, ſo asJafely
Shakespeare Hen. V.
to conclude that he hath a clear and full view Locke.
All keep aloof, and ſafely ſhout around;
But none preſumes to give a nearer wound. Dryden.
2. Without hurt.
God ſoftly quit her of her burthen, and with gentle travel,
to the gladding of your highneſs with an heir. Shakespeare H. VIII.
SA'FENESS. m. ſº [from ſafe.j Exemption from danger.
If a man ſhould forbear his food or his buſineſs, ’till he had
certainty of the ſafeneſ of what he was going about, he muſt
ſtarve and die diſputing. South's Sermons.
SA'ſ Ety. n.ſ.. [from ſoft.]
1. Freedom from danger.
To that dauntleſs temper of his mind,
He hath a wiſdom that doth guide his valour
To act in ſafety. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
If her acts have been dire&amp;ed well,
While with her friendly clay ſhe deign'd to dwell,
Shall ſhe with ſafety reach her priſtine ſeat,
Find her reſt endleſs, and her bliſs complete 2 Prior.
2. Exemption from hurt.
3. Preſervation from hurt.
B Let not my jealoufies be your diſhonours,
ºf mine own ſafeties : you may be rightly juſt
Whatever I ſhalſ think. g ”. Macbeth.
4
-
uſtody; ſecurity from eſcape.
Impriſon him;
Deliver him t -
SA'FFlow. .f º” Ieturn. Shakespeare King jºhn.
º herb they call ſafflow, or baſtard ſaffron, dyers uſe for
-" - r 44ortimer's Husbandry.
SAFF Ron. m. ſ. [ſafran, French, from ſaphar, Arabick. It
Was l - - - -
:*: to Davies in his Welſh dićtionary.
It hath a flower conſiſting of one leaf, which is ſhaped like
a lily, fiſtulous underneath, the tube widening into fix ſeg-
ments, and reſting on the footſtalk: the pointal riſes out ºf
the bottom of the flower, and is divided into three-headed or
creſted capillaments; but the empalement afterwards turns to
an oblong triangular fruit, divided into three cells, full of
roundiſh ſeeds. It hath a tuberoſe root, and long nervous
graſſy leaves, with a longitudinal furrow through the middle
of each. There are Spring-flowering crocuſes, and thoſe
which flower in Autumn. Their ſeeds are ripe about the lat-
ter end of April: the time of planting is in July. About the
beginning of September they begin to ſpire, and ſometime af.
ter appear the ſaffron flowers, which are gathered as well be-
fore as after they are full-blown; and the moſt proper time for
this is early in the morning: the chives being all picked out
of the flowers, the next labour about them is to dry them on
the kiln: at firſt they give it a pretty ſtrong heat. The charges
and profits attending the culture of ſaffron, have been coin-
puted in the following manner: the rent of an acre of ground,
and the expence of manuring it, is reckoned at twenty-three
pounds: the value of twenty-ſix pounds of ſaffron, the com.
puted produce of an acre in three years, is, at a mean, ſup-
poſed to be thirty-nine pounds; and conſequently the neat
profits of an acre of ground, producing ſaffron, will in three
years amount to ſixteen pounds. Miller.
Grind your bole and chalk, and five or ſix ſhives of ſaf-
fron. Peacham.
SA'FFR on Baffard. n.ſ.. [carthamus, Latin.] A plant.
This plant agrees with the thiſtle in moſt of its charaders;
but the ſeeds of it are always deſtitute of down. It is very
much cultivated in Germany for the dyers uſe, and is brought
from thence into England. As it grows it ſpreads into many
branches, each producing a flower at the top of the ſhoot,
which, when fully blown, is cut or pulled off, and dried, and
it is the part the dyers uſe. Miller.
SA'FF Ron. adj. Yellow; having the colour of ſaffron.
Are theſe your cuſtomers ?
Did this companion, with the ſaffron face,
Revel and feaſt it at my houſe to-day,
Whilſt upon me the guilty doors were ſhut? Shakeſpeare.
Soon as the white and red mixt finger'd dame
Had guilt the mountains with her ſaffron flame,
I ſent my men to Circe's houſe. Chapman's Odyſſey.
Now when the roſy morn began to riſe,
And wav'd her ſaffron ſtreamer through the ſkies. Dryden.
To SAG. v. n. To hang heavy.
The mind I ſay by, and the heart I bear,
Shall never ſag with doubt, nor ſhake with fear.
To SA G. v. a. To load; to burthen.
SAGA'CIOUS. adj. [ſagax, Latin.]
1. Quick of ſcent.
So ſcented the grim feature, and up-turn'd
His noſtrils wide into the murky air;
Sagacious of his quarry from ſo far. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
With might and main they chas'd the murd’rous fox,
Nor wanted horns tº inſpire ſagacious hounds. Dryden,
2. Quick of thought; acute in making diſcoveries.
Only ſagacious heads light on theſe obſervations, and reduce
them into general propoſitions. Locke.
SAGA'ciously. adv. [from ſagacious.]
1. With quick ſcent.
2. With acuteneſs of penetration.
SAGA'cious Ness. n J. [from ſagacious J The quality of being
ſagacious.
SA9A'city: n ſ. [ ſagacité, French; ſagacitas, Latin.]
1. Quickneſs of ſcent.
2. Acuteneſs of diſcovery.
It requires too great a ſagacity for vulgar minds to draw the
line nicely between virtue and vice. South.
Sagacity finds out the intermediate ideas, to diſcover what
connection there is in each link of the chain, whereby the
extremes are held together. Locke.
Many were eminent in former ages for their diſcovery of
it; but though the knowledge they have left be worth our
ſtudy, yet they left a great deal for the induſtry and ſagacity of
after-ages. Locke.
SA'GAMoR.E. n.ſ.
1. [Among the American Indians.) A king or ſupreme
ruler. Bailey.
2. The juice of ſome unknown plant uſed in medicine. -
SAG F. n.ſ.. [ſauge, French; ſalvia, Latin.] A plant of which
the ſchool of Salernum thought ſo highly, that they left this
verſe:
Cur moriatur homo cui ſalvia creſcit in horto.
It hath a labiated flower, conſiſting of one leaf, whoſe up-
per lip is ſometimes arched, and ſometimes hooked; but the
under lip or beard is divided into three parts, bunching out,
and not hollowed at the clare: out of the flower-cup riſes the
pointal, attended, as it were, by four embryoes, which after-
ward become ſo many ſeeds, which are roundiſh, ſhut up in
an huſk, which before was the flower-cup : to which may be
added, that the ſtamina do ſomewhat reſemble the os hyoides.
Miller.
By
Shake?.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 291</div><p class="Text">S A [
By the colºur, figure, taſte, and ſmell, we have as cicar
ideas of ſage and hemlock, as we have of a circle. Lºcke.
Marbled with ſage the hard'ning cheeſe ſhe preſs'd. Gay.
SAGE. adj. [ſage, Fr. ſaggio, Ital.] Wiſe; grave; prudent.
: Tired limbs to reſt,
O matron ſage, quoth ſhe, I hither came. Fairy Queen.
Vane, young in years, but in ſage councils old,
Than whom a better ſenator ne'er held
The helm of Rome. Milton.
Can you expect that ſhe ſhould be ſo ſage
To rule her blood, and you not rule your rage. Waller.
SAGE. n.ſ. (from the adječtive..] A philoſopher; a man of
gravity and wiſdom.
Though you profeſs
|
t
M Yourſelves ſuch ſages; yet know I no leſs,
§ Nor am to you inferior. Sandys.
|- At his birth a ſtar proclaims him come,
i. And guides the eaſtern ſages, who enquire
t; His place, to offer incenſe, myrrh, and gold. Milton.
!. For ſo the holy ſages once did ſing,
P. That he our deadly forfeit ſhould releaſe,
s And with his father work us a perpetual peace. Milton.
tº Groves, where immortal ſages taught,
r Where heav'nly viſions Plato fir’d. Pope.
#. SA'GELY. adv. [from ſage.] Wiſely; prudently.
ſº SA/G EN P'ss. n.ſ. [from ſage.] Gravity ; prudence. Ainſw.
SAC I'TTAL. adj. [from ſagitta, Lat. an arrow.]
t; 1. Belonging to an arrow. -
º 2. [In anatomy.] A ſuture ſo called from its reſemblance to an
§: arrow,
º His wound was between the ſagittal and coronal futures to
º, the bone. //iſeman's Surgery.
t SAG1't TARY. m. ſ. [ ſagittarius, Latin ; ſagittaire, French.]
A centaur; an animal half man half horſe, armed with a
bow and quiver.
The dreadful ſagittary
Appals our numbers. Shakeſp. Troil, and Creſſida.
SA'go, n, ſ A kind of eatable grain. Bailey.
ºft, SA'ick, n. ſ. [ ſaica, Italian ; ſaique, Fr.] A Turkiſh veſſel
proper for the carriage of merchandiſe. Bailey.
* * Said. preterite and part, paſſ of ſay.
. 1. Aforeſaid.
King John ſucceeded his ſaid brother in the kingdom of
:* England and dutchy of Normandy. Hale.
2. Declared; ſhewed.
* - SAIL. n.ſ. [regl, Saxon ; ſeyhel, ſºyl, Dutch.]
!!!, 1. The expanded ſheet which catches the wind, and carries on
the veſſel on the water.
He came too late; the ſhip was under ſail. Shakeſpeare.
They looſed the rudder-bands, and hoiſed up the main ſail
to the wind. Acis xxvii. 40.
The galley born from view by riſing gales,
º She follow’d with her ſight and flying ſails. Dryden.
2. [In poetry.] Wings. -
* He cutting way
- With his broad ſails, about him ſoared round;
º: At laſt, low ſtooping with unwieldy ſway,
i. Snatch'd up both horſe and man. Fairy Queen.
3. A ſhip; a veſſel.
A ſail arriv'd
From Pompey's ſon, who through the realms of Spain
g Calls out for vengeance on his father's death. . Addison Cato.
4. Sail is a collective word, noting the number of ſhips.
So by a roaring tempeſt on the flood,
A whole armado of colle&amp;ted ſail
Is ſcatter'd. Shakeſpeare.
r It is written of Fdgar, that he increaſed the fleet he found
two thouſand ſix hundred ſail. Raleigh's Eſſays.
A feigned tear deſtroys us, againſt whom
Tydides nor Achilles could prevail,
Nor ten years conflićt, nor a thouſand ſail. Denham.
He had promiſed to his army, who were diſcouraged at the
fight of Seleucus's fleet, conſiſting of an hundred ſail, that at
the end of the Summer they ſhould ſee a fleet of his of five
hundred ſail. Arbuthnot on Coins.
5, 7% / #&amp; SAIL. To lower the ſail. -
Fearing left they ſhould fall into the quickſands, they ſtraße
ſail, and ſo were driven. Aës Xxvii. 17.
6. A proverbial phraſe for abating of pomp or ſuperiority.
Margaret
Muſt /?, #, her ſail, and learn a while to ſerve
Where kings command. Shakespeare Henry VI.
To SAI L. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To be moved by the wind with ſails.
I ſhall not mention any thing of the ſailing waggons. Mart.
2. To paſs by ſea.
When ſailing was now dangerous, Paul admoniſhed them. Afts.
3. To ſwim.
To which the ſtores of Croeſus, in the ſcale,
Would look like little dolphins, when they ſail
In the vaſt ſhadow of the Britiſh whale.
4. To paſs ſmoothly along.
. . Speak again, bright ange!! for thou art
As glorious to this fight, being o'er my head,
Dryden. }
As is a winged meſſenger from heav'n,
When he beſtrides the lazy pacing clouds, . . . . ;
And ſails upon the boſom of the air. Shaft. Row, and Jul.
To SAIL. v. a. • *
1. To paſs by means of ſails.
A thouſand ſhips were mann'd to ſail the ſea.
View Alcinous groves, from whence
Sailing the ſpaces of the boundleſs deep;
To Ariconium precious fruits arriv'd.
2. To fly through.
Sublime ſhe ſail;
Th’ aerial ſpace, and mounts the winged gales. Pope.
SAILE R. Q m.ſ. [ ſailor is more uſual, ſailer more analogical;
SAILoR. } from ſail.] A ſeaman; one who praćtiſes or under-
ſtands navigation.
They had many times men of other countries that were no
Dryden.
Phillips.
ſailors. Bacon.
Batter'd by his lee they lay;
The paſſing winds through their torn canvas play,
And flagging ſails on heartleſs ſailors fall. Dryden.
Young Pompey built a fleet of large ſhips, and had good
failor, commanded by experienced captains. Arbuthnot.
Full in the openings of the ſpacious main
It rides, and, lo, deſcends the ſailer train. Pope's Odyſſey.
SAILY A'RD. m. / [/ai/ and yard.] The pole on which the ſail
is extended.
With glance ſo ſwift the ſubtle lightning paſt,
As ſplit the ſailyards. Dryden's juvena'.
SAIM. n.ſ.. [ſaime, Italian. ; Lard. It ſtill denotes this in
Scotland: as ſwine's ſcim.
SAIN.
Some obſcure precedence, that hath tofore been ſain. Shakespeare
SAINFoin. m. ſ. ſſainfoin, Fr.] A kind of herb.
SAINT. m. ſ. ſſaint, French; ſančius, Latin.] A perſon emi-
ment for piety and virtue.
To thee be worſhip and thy ſaints for aye. Shakeſp.
She will not ſtay the fiege of loving terms,
Nor ope her lap to ſaint ſeducing gold. Shakeſpeare.
Then thus I cloath my naked villainy -
With old odd ends, ſtol’n forth of holy writ, -
And ſeen a ſaint, when moſt I play the devil. Shakeſpeare.
Miracles are required of all who aſpire to this dignity, be-
cauſe they ſay an hypocrite may imitate a ſaint in all other
particulars. Addiſon on Italy.
By thy example kings are taught to ſway,
Heroes to fight, and ſaints may learn to pray. Granville:
So unaffected, ſo compos'd a mind;
So firm, yet ſoft, ſo ſtrong, yet ſo refin'd,
Heav'n, as its pureſt gold, by tortures try’d;
The ſaint ſuſtain'd it, but the woman dy'd. Pope.
To SAINT. v. a. [from the noun 1 To number arhong ſaints;
to reckon among ſaints by a publick decree; to canonize.
Are not the principles of thoſe wretches ſtill owned, and
their perſons ſainted, by a race of men of the ſame ſtamp?South.
Over againſt the church ſtands a large hoſpital, erected by a
ſhoemaker, who has been beatified, though never ſainted. Addison
Thy place is here, ſad ſiſter; come away:
Once, like thyſelf, I trembled, wept, and pray'd;
Love's victim then, though now a ſainted maid. Pope.
To SAINT. v. n. To act with a ſhew of piety.
Whether the charmer finner it or ſaint it,
If folly grows romantick, I muſt paint it. Pope.
SAI'N TED. adj. [from ſaint.]
1. Holy ; pious; virtuous.
Thy royal father
Was a moſt ſainted king: the queen that bore thee,
Oftner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died every day ſhe liv'd.
2. Holy ; ſacred.
I hold you as a thing enſkied and ſainted,
By your renouncement an immortal ſpirit,
And to be talk'd with in ſincerity
As with a ſaint.
The crown virtue gives,
After this mortal change, to her true ſervants,
Amongſt the enthron'd gods on ſainted hills.
SAINT jºhn's Wort. n.ſ. A plant.
This plant hath a fibroſe root: the leaves grow oppoſite by
pairs at the joints of the ſtalks : the flower-cup conſiſts of one
leaf, which is divided into five parts, and expanded: the
flower conſiſts of five leaves expanded like a roſe, having many
ſtamina in the centre ſurrounding a conical ovary, which be-
comes a three-cornered pointed fruit, and is divided into three
cells, containing many ſmall ſeeds. There are thirty ſpecies
of this plant, of which the four firſt ſorts grow wild, and the
reſt are exoticks. The firſt ſort, called common Saint john's
wort, is uſed in medicine. A filler.
SA'1NT like, adj. [ſaint and like. J
1. Suiting a ſaint ; becoming a ſaint.
If ſtill thou do'ít retain
The ſame ill habits, the ſame follies too,
Gloſs'd over only with a ſaintlike ſhow,
Still thou art bound to vice.
23 B -
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
Dryden’s Perſ:
2. Reſembling
-- * *
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 292</div><p class="Text">S A L
S A L
–
--
-
-
wº-
. Reſembling a ſaint. . . . . - -
2 Riº king, in whoſe time it paſſed, whom catholicks count
a ſaintlike, and immaculate prince, was taken away in the
- Bacon.
flower of his age. - - - -
Saintly, adj. [from ſaint, J Like a ſaint; becoming a
ſaint. - -
I mention ſtill h ſaintly pati b
im whom thy wrongs, with ſauntly patience borne,
§. famous à 2. . and times obſcure. Mit. Par. Loft,
SAINtship. n.ſ.. [from ſaint..] The character or qualities of
a ſaint. - -
He that thinks his ſaintſhip licenſes him to cenſures, is ſº be
looked on not only as a rebel, but an uſurper. Pecay ºf Piety.
This favours ſomething ranker than the tenents of the fifth
monarchy, and of ſovereignty founded upon ſaintſhip. South.
The devil was piqu'd ſuch ſaintſhip to behold,
And long'd to tempt him.
SAke. n.ſ. [rac, Saxon; ſaecke, Dutch.]
1. Final cauſe; end; purpoſe.
Thou neither do'ſ perſuade me to ſeek wealth
ire's ſake, nor empire to affect
: . %. &gt; p Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
The prophane perſon ſerves the devil for nought, and ſins
only for fin's ſake, Tillotſon.
wyndham like a tyrant throws the dart,
And takes a cruel pleaſure in the ſmart;
Proud of the ravage that her beauties make,
Delights in wounds, and kills for killing's ſake. Granville.
2. Account; regard to any perſon or thing.
Would I were young for your ſake, miſtreſs Anne! Shakeſp.
The general ſo likes your muſick, that he deſires you, for
love's ſake, to make no more noiſe with it. Shakeſp. Othello.
SA'ker. n.ſ. [Saker originally ſignifies an hawk, the pieces of
artillery being often denominated from birds of prey.]
The cannon, blunderbuſs, and ſaker,
He was th’ inventor of, and maker. Hudibras.
According to obſervations made with one of her majeſty's
Jakers, and a very accurate pendulum-chronometer, a bullet,
at its firſt diſcharge, flies five hundred and ten yards in five
half ſeconds, which is a mile in a little above ſeventeen half
ſeconds. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
SA'KERet. n.ſ.. [from ſaker.] The male of a ſaker-hawk.
This kind of hawk is eſteemed next after the falcon and gyr-
falcon, but differently to be managed. Bailey.
SAL. m. ſ. [Latin.] Salt. A word often uſed in pharmacy.
Salſo acids will help its paſſing off; as ſal prunel. Floyer.
Sal gem is ſo called from its breaking frequently into gem-
like ſquares. It differs not in property from the common ſalt
of the ſalt ſprings, or that of the ſea, when all are equally
pure. Woodward's Met. Foſſ.
Sal Ammoniack is found ſtill in Ammonia, as mentioned by
the ancients, and from whence it had its name. Woodward.
SALA’CIOUS, adj. [ſalaris, Lat. Jalace, Fr. J Luſtful; lecherous.
One more/alacious, rich, and old,
Out-bids, and buys her. Dryden's juven. Sat.
Feed him with herbs
Of generous warmth, and of ſalacious kind. Dryd Virg.
Animals ſpleened, grow extremely ſalacious. Arbuthnot.
Pope.
*ALAciously, adv. [from ſalarious.j Lecherouſly; luſtfully.
SALAcity. n.ſ. [ ſalaritas, ſat. from ſalacious.) Luſt; lechery.
Immoderate Jalacity and exceſs of venery is ſuppoſed to
ſhorten the lives of cocks. Brown's Vulg, Errours.
. A corroſive acrimony in the ſeminal lympha produces ſala-
S º: - Floyer on the Humours.
**'t 3D. m. ſ. [ ſalade, Fr. ſalart, Germ.] Food of raw herbs.
I climbed into this garden to pick a ſalad, which is not
amiſs to cool a man's ſtomach. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
My fallet days,
When I was green in judgment, cold in blood. Shakeſpeare.
You have, to rectify your palate,
An olive, capers, or ſome better ſalad,
Uſh'ring the mutton.
F i. coarſe cold ſalad is before thee ſet;
all On. Dryden's Perſ. Sat.
The happy old Coricyan's fruits and %. On %;
he lived contented, were all of his own growth. Dryden.
Leaves, eaten raw, are termed ſalad: if boiled, they be-
come potherbs; and ſome of thoſe plants which are potherbs
, ſº ºne family, are ſallad in another. JWatts.
SALAMANDER. "...ſ. [ ſalamandre, Fr. ſalamandra, Lat.] An
"imal ſuppoſed to live in the fire, and imagined to be very poi-
ſonous. *rºſe Parey has a picture of the ſalamander, with a
º for her bite; but there is no ſuch creature, the name
". "9" given to a poor harmleſs inſect.
- tiºn,ſºur liveth in the fire, * hath force alſo to ex-
c : - acon's Natural Hiſtory.
dº...".º the whole lunar world is Wº:
y * r * * * : * ~...!--
/* sºlº, *::::::::
fire, wºº i. º ſaid that a ſalamander extinguiſheth
immediatel "*") *Perience, that on hot coals it dieth
- y. º Brºwn's Wulgar Errours.
Ben. johnſon.
*
The artiſt was ſo encompaſſed with fire and ſmoke, what
one would have thought nothing but a ſalamander could have
been ſafe in ſuch a ſituation. **, Guardian
SALAMA'NDER’s Hair. }" ſ. A kind of aſbeſtos, or miner.
SALAMA'NDER's I/ool. A flax.
There may be ſuch candles as are made of ſalamander,
wool, being a kind of mineral, which whiteneth in the burn.
ing, and conſumeth not. Baton.
Of Engliſh talc, the coarſer ſort is called plaiſter or parget;
the finer, ſpaad, earth flax, or ſalamander's hair. Hoºdºº.
SALAMA'N DRIN E. adj. [from ſalamander.] Reſembling a ſala-
mander.
Laying it into a pan of burning coals, we obſerved a certain
Jalamandrine quality, that made it capable of living in the
midſt of fire, without being conſumed or finged. Speciator
SA'LARY. m. ſ. [ſalaire, Fr. ſalarium, Latin.] -
1. Salarium, or ſalary, is derived from ſal. Arbuthnot.
2. Stated hire; annual or periodical payment.
This is hire and ſalary, not revenge. Shakespeare Hamlet.
Several perſons, out of a ſalary of five hundred pounds
have always lived at the rate of two thouſand. Swift.
SALE. n.ſ.. [ſaal, Dutch.]
1. The act of ſelling.
2. Vent; power of ſelling; market.
Nothing doth more enrich any country than many towns;
for the countrymen will be more induſtrious in tillage, and
rearing of all huſbandry commodities, knowing that they ſhall
have ready ſale for them at thoſe towns. Spenſer.
3. A publick and proclaimed expoſition of goods to the market ;
auðtion.
Thoſe that won the plate, and thoſe thus ſold, ought to be
marked ſo as they may never return to the race, or to the
ſale. Temple.
4. State of being venal; price.
The other is not a thing for ſale, and only the gift of the
gods. Shakeſp. Cymbelins.
Others more moderate ſeeming, but their aim
Private reward; for which both God and ſtate
They'd ſet to ſale. Milton's Agoniſes.
The more money a man ſpends, the more muſt he endea-
vour to increaſe his ſtock; which at laſt ſets the liberty of a
commonwealth to ſale. Addiſon.
5. It ſeems in Spenſer to ſignify a wicker baſket; perhaps from
ſallow, in which fiſh are caught.
To make baſkets of bulruſhes was my wont;
Who to entrap the fiſh in winding ſale
Was better ſeen 2 Spenſºr.
SA'Leable. adj. [from ſale.] Wendible; fit for ſale; market-
able.
I can impute this general enlargement of ſaleable things to
no cauſe ſooner than the Č. want of vent and
money. Carew.
This vent is made quicker or ſlower, as greater or leſs quan-
tities of any ſaleable commodity are removed out of the courſe
of trade. Locke.
SA'Leap le Ness. n. J. [from ſaleable.] The ſtate of being
ſaleable. -
SA'LEABLY. adv. [from ſaleable.] In a ſaleable manner.
SA'LE BRous. adj. [ſalebroſus, Latin.] Rough; uneven;
rugged.
SA'Les MAN. n.ſ. [ ſale and man.] One who ſells cloat's
ready made.
Poets make charaćters, as ſaleſmen cloaths;
We take no meaſure of your fops and beaus. Swift.
SA'lework. n.ſ.. [ſale and work.] Work for ſale; work
careleſly done.
I ſee no more in you than in the ordinary - - -
Of nature's ſalework. Shakºp. A yºu like it.
SALIANT. adj. [French.] Denotes a lion in a leaping poſ-
ture, and ſtanding ſo that his right foot is in the dexter point,
and his hinder left foot in the finiſter baſe point of the eſcut-
cheon, by which it is diſtinguiſhed from rampant. Harris.
SALIANT, in heraldry, is when the lion is ſporting
himſelf. Peacham.
SA'LIENT. adj. [ſaliens, Latin.]
1. Leaping; bounding; moving by leaps. -
The legs of both ſides moving together, as frogs, and ſalient
animals, is properly called leaping. Brown's Vulg. Err.
2. Beating; panting.
A ſalient point ſo firſt is call'd the heart,
By turns dilated, and by turns compreſt,
Expels and entertains the purple gueſt.
3. Springing or ſhooting with a quick motion.
Who beſt can ſend on high
The ſalient ſpout, far ſtreaming to the ſky. Pope.
SA'LINE. adj. [ſalinus, Latin.j Conſiſting of ſalt; co"
SA'LINous. } ſtituting ſalt.
We do not eaſily aſcribe their induration to cold; but ra-
ther unto ſalinous ſpirits and concretive juices. i.
This ſaline ſap of the veſſels, by being refuſed recept".”
the parts, declares itſelf in a more hoſtile manner, by dry-
ing the radical moiſture, Harvey on cºttº:
Blackmore,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 293</div><p class="Text">S A [.
º
º
If a very ſmall quantity of any ſalt or vitriol be diſſolved it,
a great quantity of water, the particles of the ſalt or vitriol
will not fink to the bottom, though they be heavier in ſpecie
than the water; but will evenly diffuſe themſelves into all the
water, ſo as to make it as ſaline at the top as at the bottom.
Newton's Opt.
As the ſubſtance of coagulations is not merely ſaline, no-
thing diſſolves them but what penetrates and relaxes at the
ſame time. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
SA'll Gors. n.ſ. A kind of thiſtle. Ainſworth.
SALPWA. n.ſ. [Latin. J. Every thing that is ſpit up; but it
more ſtrićtly ſignifies that juice which is ſeparated by the glands
called ſalival. - *:
Not meeting with diſturbance from the ſaliva, I the
ſooner extirpated them. Wiſeman's Surgery.
§, ład. [from ſaliva, Latin.] Relating to ſpittle.
The woodpecker, and other birds that prey upon flies,
which they catch with their ..". in the room of the ſaid
glands have a couple of bags filled with a viſcous humour,
which, by ſmall canals, like the ſalival, being brought into
their mouths, they dip their tongues herein, and ſo with the
help of this natural birdlime attack the prey. Grew.
The neceſſity of ſpittle to diſſolve the aliment appears from
the contrivance of nature in making the ſalivary dućts of ani-
mals which ruminate, extremely open : ſuch animals as ſwal-
low their aliment without chewing, want ſalivary glands.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To SA'livate. v. a. [from ſaliva, Latin.] To purge by the
ſalival glands.
She was prepoſſeſſed with the ſcandal of ſalivating, and
went out of town. Wiſeman's Surgery.
SAliv Aºtion. n. / [from ſalivate.] A method of cure much
practiſed of late in venereal, ſcrophulous, and other obſtinate
cauſes, by promoting a ſecretion of ſpittle. $2uincy.
Holding of ill-taſted things in the mouth will make a ſmall
falivation. Grew’s Coſmol.
SALI'vous. adj. [from ſaliva.] Conſiſting of ſpittle; having
the nature of ſpittle.
There happeneth an elongation of the uvula, through the
abundance of ſalivous humour flowing upon it, J/iſeman.
#ise } n.ſ. [corrupted by pronunciation from ſalad.]
I tried upon ſallet oil. Boyle.
Sow ſome early ſalleting. Mortimer's Husbandry.
SALLIANce. n.ſ.. [from ſally..] The act of iſſuing forth; ſally.
A word not inelegant, but out of uſe.
Now mote I weet,
Sir Guyon, why with ſo fierce ſaliance
And fell intent, ye did at earſt me meet. Fairy Queen:
SA’llow. n.ſ.. [ſalix, Latin.] A tree of the genus of willow.
See WILLow.
Sallows and reeds on banks of rivers born,
Remain to cut to ſtay thy vines. Dryden.
SA'LLOW. adj. J/alo, German, black; ſale, French, foul.]
Sickly ; yellow.
What a deal of brine
Hath waſht thy ſallow cheeks for Roſaline : Shakeſpeare.
The ſcene of beauty and delight is chang'd :
No roſes bloom upon my fading cheek,
Nor laughing graces wanton in my eyes;
But haggard grief, lean-looking/allow care,
And pining diſcontent, a rueful train,
Dwell on my brow, all hideous and forlorn. Rowe.
SA'llow Ness. m. ſ. [from ſallow.] Yellowneſs; ſickly pale-
neſs.
A fiſh-diet would give ſuch a ſallowneſ to the celebrated
beauties of this iſland, as would ſcarce make them diſtin-
guiſhable from thoſe of France. Addiſon.
SALLY. n.f. [ſallie, French.j
1. Eruption; iſſue from a place beſieged; quick egreſs.
The deputy ſat down before the town for the ſpace of three
Winter months; during which time ſallies were made by the
Spaniards, but they were beaten in with loſs. Bacon.
2. Range; excurſion.
Every one ſhall know a country better, that makes often
fallies into it, and traverſes it up and down, than he that, like
a mill-horſe, goes ſtill round in the ſame track. Locke.
3. Flight; volatile or ſprightly exertion.
Theſe paſſages were intended forſallies of wit; but whence
comes all this rage of wit? Stillingfeet.
4. Eſcape; levity; extravagant flight; frolick; wild gaiety;
exorbitance.
At his return all was clear, and this excurſion was eſteemed
but a ſally of youth. Wotton.
'Tis but a ſally of youth. Denham's Sophy.
We have written ſome things which we may wiſh never to
have thought on: ſome ſallies of levity ought to be imputed
to youth. • . Swift.
The epiſodical part, made up of the extravagant ſallies of
the prince of Wales and Falſtaff's humour, is of his own in-
vention. Shakeſpeare Illuſtrated.
To Sa'ily. v. h. [from the fioun..] To make an eruption; to
iſſue out.
The Turks ſaying forth, received thereby great hurt. Knoll.
The noiſe of ſome tumultuous fight:
They break the truce, and ſally out by night. ... Dryden;
The ſummons take of the ſame trumpet's call,
To ſally from one port, or man one publick wall. Tate.
sºvº. m. ſ. [ſally and port.] Gate at which ſallies are
ſhade.
My ſlippery ſoul had quit the fort,
But that ſhe ſtopp'd the ſallyport. Cleaveland.
ve to our citadel reſorts
Through thoſe deceitful ſallyports; }
Our ſentinels betray our forts. Denham.
SA'LMAGUND1. n. / [It is ſaid to be corrupted from ſelen mon
gout, or ſale à mon goiſt.] A mixture of chopped meat
and pickled herrings with oil, vinegar, pepper, and
Onions,
SALMON. m. ſ. [ ſalmo, Latin; ſaumon, French.]
The ſalmon is accounted the king of freſh-water fiſh, and
is bred in rivers relating to the ſea, yet ſo far from it as ad-
mits no tinéture of brackiſhneſs. He is ſaid to breed or caſt
his ſpawn in moſt rivers in the month of Auguſt: ſome ſay
that then they dig a hole in a ſafe place in the gravel, and there
place their eggs or ſpawn, after the melter has done his natural
office, and then cover it over with gravel and ſtones, and ſo
leave it to their Creator's protection; who, by a gentle heat
which he infuſes into that cold element, makes it brood and
beget life in the ſpawn, and to become famlets early in the
Spring: having ſpent their appointed time, and done this na-
tural duty in the freſh waters, they haſte to the ſea before
Winter, both the melter and ſpawner. Sir Francis Bacon
obſerves the age of a ſalmon exceeds not ten years: his growth
is very ſudden, ſo that after he is got into the ſea he becomes
from a ſamlet, not ſo big as a gudgeon, to be a ſalmon, in as
ſhort a time as a goſling becomes a gooſe. 1/alton's Angler.
They poke them with an inſtrument ſomewhat like the ſal-
mon ſpear. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
They take ſalmon and trouts by groping and tickling them
under the bellies in the pools, where they hover, and ſo throw
them on land. Carew.
Of fiſhes, you find in arms the whale, dolphin, ſalmon and
trout. Peacham.
SA'LMontRout. n.ſ. A trout that has ſome reſemblance to a
ſalmon; a famlet.
There is in many rivers that relate to the ſea ſalmontrouts as
much different from others, in ſhape and ſpots, as ſheep differ
in their ſhape and bigneſs. Pº'alton's Angler.
SALPI'con. n.ſ.. [In cookery.] A kind of farce put into
holes cut in legs of beef, veal, or mutton. Bailey.
SALsAMENTA'Rious. adj. [ſalſamentarius, Latin.] Belonging
to ſalt things. Dić?.
SA'ls IFY. n.ſ. (Latin.] A plant.
Salſify, or the common ſort of goatſbeard, is of a very long
oval figure, as if it were cods all over ſtreaked, and engraven
in the ſpaces between the ſtreaks, which are ſharp pointed
towards the end. 41ortimºr's Huſbandry.
SalsoA'cid. adj. [ ſalus and acidus, Latin.] Having a taſte
compounded of ſaltneſs and ſourneſs.
The ſalſ acids help its paſſing off; as ſal prunel. Floyer.
SALsu'GINous. adj. [ſal/ugo, Latin. J Saltiſh; ſomewhat
ſalt.
The diſtinétion of ſalts, whereby they are diſcriminated
into acid, volatile, or ſalſuginous, if I may ſo call the fugitive
ſalts of animal ſubſtances, and fixed or alcalizate, may appear
of much uſe in natural philoſophy. Boyle.
SALT. n.ſ.. [ſalt, Gothick; realt, Saxon; ſal, Latin; Jel,
French.]
1. Salt is a body whoſe two eſſential properties ſeem to be diſ.
ſolubility in water, and a pungent ſapor: it is an active incom-
buſtible ſubſtance: it gives all bodies conſiſtence, and pre-
ſerves them from corruption, and occaſions all the variety of
taſtes. There are three kinds of ſalts, fixed, volatile, and
eſſential: fixed ſalt is drawn by calcining the matter, then
boiling the aſhes in a good deal of water: after this the ſolu-
tion is filtrated, and all the moiſture evaporated, when the ſalt
remains in a dry form at the bottom: this is called a lixivious
ſalt. Eſſential ſalt is that drawn chiefly from the parts of ani-
: mals, and ſome putrified parts of vegetables: it riſes eaſily,
and is the moſt volatile of any. The eſſential ſalt is drawn
from the juice of plants by cryſtalization. Harris.
Is not diſcourſe, manhood, learning, gentleneſs, virtue and
liberality, the ſpice and ſalt that ſeaſons a man Shakeſp.
He perfidiouſly has given up,
For certain drops of ſalt, your city Rome,
To his wife and mother. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Since ſalts differ much, ſome being fixt, ſome volatile, ſome
acid, and ſome urinous, the two qualities wherein they agree
are, that it is eaſily diſſoluble in water, and affects the palate
with a ſapour, good or evil. Boyle.
A particle<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 294</div><p class="Text">i
j
S A L
d to a chaos, being denſe,
ſoft, and moiſt
Newton's Opt.
and brittle, in ſome degree pellucid,
and diſſoluble in water; but af-
cryſtalizing, and forming
//oodward.
icle of ſalt may be compare
nº. ſº . the centre, and rare,
in the circumference:
Sah, are bodies friable
ſharp or pungent to the taſte, -
ter that is evaporated, incorporating,
themſelves into angular figures.
2. Taſte; ſmack
Though we are juſtices a
Page, we have ſome ſalt of
of women.
3. wit; merriment.
SALt. adj. -
1. Having the taſte of ſalt: as ſalt fiſh.
We were better parch in Africk ſun,
Than in the pride and ſalt ſcorn of his eyes.
Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are ſalter than a younger man's, -
And venomous to thine eyes. Shakespeare Coriolanus:
it hath been obſerved by the ancients, that ſalt water will
diſſolve ſalt put into it in leſs time than freſh water. Bacon.
2. Impregnated with ſalt. - -
Hang him, mechanical ſalt butter rogue: I will awe him
with my cudgel. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſor.
A leap into ſalt waters very often gives a new motion to
the ſpirits, and a new turn to the blood. Addiſon.
3. Abounding with ſalt.
He ſhall inhabit the parched places in the wilderneſs in a
fall land, and not inhabited. er. xvii. 6.
In Cheſhire they improve their lands by letting out the
water of the ſalt ſprings on them, always after rain. Mºrtim.
4. [Salax, Lat..] Lecherous;, ſalacious.
Be a whore ſtill:
Make uſe of thy ſalt hours, ſeaſon the ſlaves
For tubs and baths; bring down the roſe-cheek'd youth
To the tub-faſt, and the diet. Shakeſp. Timon.
All the charms of love,
Salt Cleopatra, ſoften thy wan lip ! Shakespeare Ant. and Cleop.
This new married man, approaching here,
Whoſe ſalt imagination yet hath wrong'd
Your well defended honour, you muſt pardon. Shakeſp.
To SALt. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſeaſon with ſalt.
If the offering was of fleſh, it was ſalted thrice. Brown.
SA'LT-PAN. }". [ſalt and pan, or pit.] Pit where ſalt is
SA’lt-pit. Ot.
Moab and Åmmon ſhall be as the breeding of nettles, ſalt-
pits, and a perpetual deſolation. Zeph. ii. 9.
Cicero prettily calls them ſalinas ſalt-pans, that you may
extract ſalt out of, and ſprinkle where you pleaſe. . Bacon.
The ſtratum lay at about twenty-five fathom, by the duke
of Somerſet's ſalt-pans near Whitehaven. Woodward on Foſſil.
$A'LTANT: adj. [ſalians, Latin.) Jumping; dancing.
SALTATION. n.ſ. [ ſaltatio, Latin.]
1. The act of dancing or jumping.
The locuſts being ordained for faltation, their hinder legs
• do far exceed the others. Brown's Vulgar Error.
2. Beat; palpitation.
ºf the great artery be hurt, you will diſcover it by its ſalta-
tion and florid colour. Wiſeman's Surgery.
SA'Lºrcat. n.ſ.
Many give a lump of ſalt, which they uſually call a
ſaltcat, made at the ſalterns, which makes the pigeons much
affect !he place. Mortimer's Husbandry.
sº LT.A.R. m. ſ. ſ ſalt and cellar.] Veſſel of ſalt ſet on the
When any ſalt is ſpilt on the table-cloth, ſhake it out into
the ſaltcellar. Swift's Direétions to the Butler.
SA'it ER. n.ſ.. [from ſalt.]
1. One who ſalts.
2. One who ſells ſalt.
After theſe local names, the moſt have been derived from
9°cupations; as ſmith, ſalter, armorer. Camden's Remains
SA'LTERN. m.ſ. A ſaltwork. -
A lump of ſalt, which they uſually call a ſaltcat, made for
. Purpoſe at the ſalterns, makes the pigeons much affect the
ace. 4----------&gt;
SALT1'N BAN.co. n. ſ [ſaltare in banco º s Husbandry.
&gt; to climb on a bench, as
a mountebank mounts a bank.] A quack or mountebank
*intancee, quackſalvers, and charlatans deceive them:
****{op alive, the Piazza and Pont-neuf could not ſpeak
their fallacies. Brown's Wulgar E p
H &gt; - • gar Errours.
e play'd the ſaltinbanco's part,
SA' Transform'd tº a Frenchman by my art.
A'L Aºſ #: tiere, French.]
r * * made in the form of a St. Andrew's croſs, and
º º: * taken to be an engine to take wild beaſts with. :
- *** called un ſautoir; it is an honourable bearing.
A Lºt- - Peacham on Blazoning.
sº L s. ſ". ſº J . Somewhat ſalt. &amp;
SA'L', i.ess. adj. fº grounds. Mºrtimer.
SA'L'rly, adv. ifrom ſalt..] Wi ºpºl; not taſting of ſalt.
- --- * taile of ſalt; in a ſalt manner.
nd doćtors, and churchmen, Mr.
our youth in us; we are the ſons
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
Shakeſp.
Hudibras.
S A L
SA’lt Ness. n.ſ. (from ſalt.] Taſtc of ſalt.
Salt water paſſing through earth, through ten veſſels, one
within another, hath not loſt its ſaltneſs, ſo as to become pot-
able; but drained through twenty, become freſh. Bacon.
Some think their wits have been aſleep, except they dart
out ſomewhat that is piquant and to the quick: men ought to
find the difference between ſalineſ; and bitterneſs. Bacon.
SA'ltpet Re. m. ſ. [ſal petra, Latin ; ſal petre, Fr.] Nitre.
Nitre, or ſaltpetre, having a crude and windy ſpirit, by the
heat of the fire ſuddenly dilateth. Bacºn.
Nitre or ſaltpetre, in heaps of earth, has been extracted, if
they be expoſed to the air, ſo as to be kept from rain. Izzie.
Salvabi'lity... n.ſ. [from ſalvable.] Poſſibility of being re-
ceived to everlaſting life.
Why do we Chriſtians ſo fiercely argue againſt the ſºkabi-
lity of each other, as if it were our wiſh that all ſhould be
damned, but thoſe of our particular ſečt. Decay of Piety.
SA'LVABLE. adj. [from ſalvº, Latin.] Poſſible to be ſaved.
Our wild fancies about God's decrees, have in event repro-
bated more than thoſe decrees, and have bid fair to the damn-
ing of many whom thoſe left ſalvable. Decay ºf Piety.
SA'lvage. adj. [ſaulvage, French; ſelvaggio, Italian, from
ſilva, Latin.] Wild; rude; cruel. It is now ſpoken and
written ſavage.
May the Eſſexian plains
Prove as a deſert, and none there make ſtay
But ſavage beaſts, or men as wild as they. //aller.
A ſavage race inur'd to blood. Dryden.
Salva"tion. n.ſ.. [from ſalvo, Latin.] Preſervation from
eternal death; reception to the happineſs of heaven.
As life and death, mercy and wrath, are matters of meer
underſtanding or knowledge, all mens ſalvation, and all mens
endleſs perdition, are things ſo oppoſite, that whoſoever doth
affirm the one muſt neceſſarily deny the other. Hocker.
Him the moſt High,
Wrap'd in a balmy cloud with winged ſteeds,
Did, as thou ſaw'ſt, receive; to walk with God
High in ſalvation, and the climes of bliſs,
Exempt from death. Milton's Parad. Loſº, b. xi.
Sa'lvatory... n.ſ.. [ſalvatoire, French..] A place where any
thing is preſerved.
I confider the admirable powers of ſenſation, phantaſy,
and memory, in what ſalvatories or repoſitories the ſpecies of
things paſt are conſerved. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
SALU'BRIOUS. adj. [ſalubris, Latin.] Wholſome; health-
ful; promoting health. -
The warm limbeck draws
Salubrious waters from the nocent brood. Philips.
Muſt we then reſign our worthy paſtor to the ſalubrious air
of Kiltearn, rather than he ſhould longer breathe in the groſſer
vapours of Inverneſs Macbean's Remon/trance.
SALU'BRITY.. n.ſ.. [from ſalubrious.] Wholſomeneſs; health-
fulneſs.
SALVE. n.ſ. [This word is originally and properly ſalſ, which
having ſalves in the plural, the fingular in time was borrowed
from it: realp, Saxon, undoubtedly from ſalvus, Latin. A
glutinous matter applied to wounds and hurts; an emplaſter.
Let us hence, my ſov’reign, to provide
A ſalve for any ſore that may betide.
Go ſtudy ſave and treacle; ply
Your tenant's leg, or his fore eye.
Sleep is pain's eaſieſt ſale, and doth fulfil
All offices of death, except to kill. Donne.
The royal ſword thus drawn, has cur'd a wound,
For which no other ſalve could have been found. Waller.
Though moſt were ſorely wounded, none were ſlain;
The ſurgeons ſoon deſpoil'd them of their arms,
And ſome with ſaves they cure. Dryden.
2. Help; remedy.
If they ſhall excommunicate me, hath the doğrine ºf
meekneſs any ſalve for me then Hammond.
To Salve. v. a. [ſalvo, Latin; or from the noun.]
1. To cure with medicaments applied.
Many ſkilful leeches him abide,
º: his hurts. Fairy Queen.
It ſhould be to little purpoſe for them to ſalve the wound,
by making proteſtations in diſgrace of their own actions. Hook.
The which if I perform, and do ſurvive,
I do beſeech your majeſty may ſalve
The long grown wounds of my intemperature. Shakespeare
2. To help; to remedy.
Some ſeek to ſalve their blotted name -
With others blot,’till all do taſte of ſhame. Sidney.
Our mother-tongue, which truly of itſelf is both ""
enough for proſe, and ſtately enough for verſe, hath long.”
been counted moſt bare and barren of both; which default,
when as ſome endeavoured to ſalve and cure, they patched up
the holes with rags from other languages. Speºſer.
3. To help or ſave by a ſalvo, an excuſe, or reſervation.
Ignorant I am not how this is ſalved: they do it but after
the truth is made manifeſt. Foaker.
Shakespeare Henry VI.
Cleaveland.
H. IV.
My
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 295</div><p class="Text">S A L
S A N
:
H
- My more particular, -
And that which moſt with you ſhould ſalve my going, -
ls Fulvia's death. Shakeſp. /nt, and Cleopatra.
The ſchoolmen were like the aſtronomers, who, to ſalve
phoenomena, framed to their conceit eccentricks and epicy-
cles; ſo they, to ſalve the practice of the church, had deviſed
a great number of ſtrange poſitions. Bacon.
There mºſt be another ſtate to make up the inequalities of
this, and ſalve all irregular appearances. Atterbury,
This condućt might give Horace the hint to ſay, that when
Homer was at a loſs to bring any difficult matter to an iſſue,
he laid his hero aſleep, and this ſaved all difficulty. Brome.
4. [From ſºlve, Latin.] To ſalute. Obſolete.
That ſtranger knight in preſence came,
And goodly ſalved them; who nought again
Him anſwered as courteſy became Fairy Queen.
SALVER. m. ſ. [A veſſel, I ſuppoſe, uſed at firſt to carry away or
ſave what was left.] A plate on which any thing is pre-
ſented.
He has printed them in ſuch a portable volume, that many
of them may be ranged together on a ſingle plate; and is of
opinion, that a ſalver of ſpectators would be as acceptable an
entertainment for the ladies, as a ſalver of ſweetmeats. Addison
Between each act the trembling ſalvers ring,
From ſoup to ſweet wine. Pope,
SA"L/O. n.ſ.. [from ſalºo jure, Latin, a form uſed in granting
any thing: as ſalvo jure putei.] An exception; a reſerva-
tion ; an excuſe.
They admit many ſalvºes, cautions, and reſervations, ſo as
they croſs not the chief deſign. King Charles.
t will be hard if he cannot bring himſelf off at laſt with
ſome ſalvo or diſtinction, and be his own confeſſor. L'Eſtr.
If others of a more ſerious turn join with us deliberately in
their religious profeſſions of loyalty, with any private ſalvoes
or evaſions, they would do well to conſider thoſe maxims in
which all caſuiſts are agreed. Aidiſºn.
SA'LUTARINEss. n ſ. [from ſalutary.] Wholſomeneſs; qua-
lity of contributing to health or ſafety.
SALUTARY. aaj. [ ſalutaire, Fr. ſalutaris, Latin.] Whol-
ſome; healthful; ſafe; advantageous; contributing to health
or ſafety.
The gardens, yards, and avenues are dry and clean; and
ſo more ſalutary as more elegant. Ray.
It was want of faith in our Saviour's countrymen, which
hindered him from ſhedding among them the ſalutary emana-
tions of his divine virtue; and he did not many mighty works
there, becauſe of their unbelief. Bentley.
SALUTA'TION. m. ſ. [ ſalutation, Fr. ſalutatio, Latin.] The
act or ſtile of ſaluting; greeting.
The early village cock
Hath twice done ſalutation to the morn.
- Thy kingdom's peers
Speak my ſalutation in their minds ;
Whoſe voices I deſire aloud with mine,
Hail, king of Scotland 1
- On her the angel hail
Beſtow'd, the holy ſalutatiºn uſed
To bleſt Mary. Milton.
In all publick mectings, or private addreſſes, uſe thoſe forms
of ſalutation, reverence and decency, uſual amongſt the moſt
ſober perſons. Yaylor's Rule of living holy.
Court and ſtate he wiſely ſhuns;
Nor brib'd, to ſervile ſalutations runs. Dryden's Hºrace.
To SA Lu’t F. v. a. [ ſalutz, Latin ; ſaluer, French.]
1. To greet; to hail.
The golden ſun ſalutes the morn,
And, having gilt the ocean with his beams,
Gallops the zodiack in his gift'ring coach. Shakeſp. Tit. And.
One hour hence
Shall ſalute your grace of York as mother. Shakespeare R. III.
2. To pleaſe ; to gratify.
Would I had no being,
If this ſalute my blood a jot: it faints me,
To think what follows. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
2. To kiſs.
SALU't E. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Salutation; greeting.
The cuſtom of praying for thoſe that ſneeze is more an-
cient than theſe opinions hereof: ſo that not any one diſeaſe
has bech the occaſion of this ſalute and deprecation. Brown.
O, what avails me now that honour high
To have conceiv'd of God, or that ſalute,
Hail highly favour’d, among women bleſt Parad. Reg.
Continual ſalutes and addreſſes entertaining him all the way,
kept him from ſaving ſo great a life, but with one glance of
his eye upºn the paper, 'till he came to the fatal place where
he was ſtabbed. South's Sermons.
I ſhall not trouble my reader with the firſt ſalutes of our
three friends. Addiſon.
2. A kiſs.
There cold ſalutes, but here a lover's kiſs, Roſcomman.
SALU'TFR. m. ſ. [from ſalute.] He who ſalutes.
º
Shakeſp. R. III.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Sººners. adj. Tſalutiſer, Latin.] Healthy; bringing
health. -
The king commanded him to go to the ſouth of Frances
believing that nothing would contribute more to the reſtor-
ing of his former vigour than the gentle ſalutiferºus air of
Montpelier. Dennis's Letterſ.
SAME, adj. Iſanº, Gothick; ſammo, Swediſh.J 4.
1. Not different; not another; identical; being of the like
kind, ſort, or degree. -
Miſo, as ſpitefully as her rotten voice could utter it, ſet
forth the ſame ſins of Amphialus. Sidney,
The tenor of man's woe
Holds on the ſame. Milton.
Th’etherial vigour is in all the ſame, * *
And ev'ry ſoul is fill'd with equal flame. Dryden's Án.
If itſelf had been coloured, it would have tranſmitted all
viſible objects tinctured with the ſame colour; as we ſee what-
ever is beheld through a coloured glaſs, appears of the ſame
colour with the glaſs. Kay on the Cration.
The merchant does not keep money by him ; but if you
conſider what money muſt be lodged in the bankers hands,
the cate will be much the ſame. - Locke,
The ſame plant produceth as great a variety of juices as
there is in the ſame animal. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. That which was mentioned before.
Do but think how well the ſame he ſpends,
Who ſpends his blood his country to relieve. Daniel.
SA’MENEss. n.ſ.. [from ſame.] Identity; the ſtate of being
not another; not different. --
Difference of perſuaſion in matters of religion may eaſily
fall out, where there is the ſameneſs of duty, allegiance, and
ſubjection. King Charles.
If all courts have a ſameneſs in them, things may be as they
were in my time, when all employments went to parliament-
mens fiends. Swift.
SAM1. ET. n.ſ. [ ſalmonet, or ſalmonlet.] A little ſalmon.
Sir Francis Bacon obſerves the age of a ſalmon exceeds not
ten years, ſo his growth is very ſudden; after he is got into
the ſea be becomes from a ſamet, not ſo big as a gudgeon, to
be a ſalinon, in as ſhort a time as a goſling becomes a gooſe.
//altºn's Angler.
SA'MPHIRE. m. / [/.int Pierre, French; rithmun, Latin. I
A plant preſerved in pickle.
The leaves are thick, ſucculent, narrow, branchy, and
trifid: the flowers grow in an umbel, each conſiſting of five .
leaves, which expand in form of a roſe: the empalement of
the flower becomes a fruit, conſiſting of two plain and gently
ſtreaked leaves. This plant grows in great plenty upon the
rocks near the ſea-ſhore, where it is waſhed by the ſalt water.
It is greatly eſteemed for pickling, and is ſometimes uſed in
medicine. Miller. -
Half way down
Hangs one that gathers ſamphire: dreadful trade
Methinks he ſeems no bigger than his head. Shakespeare .
SAMPLE. m. ſ. [from exampſ...] A ſpecimen; a part of the
whole ſhown that judgment may be made of the whole.
He intreated them to tarry but two days, and he himſelf
would bring them a ſample of the oar. Raleigh.
I have not engaged myſelf to any : I am not loaded with a
full cargo: 'tis ſufficient if I bring a ſample of ſome goods in
this voyage. 19ryden.
I deſign this but for a ſample of what I hope more fully to
diſcuſs. //oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Determinations of juſtice were very ſummary and deciſive,
and generally put an end to the vexations of a law-ſuit by the
ruin both of plaintiff and defendant: travellers have recorded
ſome ſamples of this kind. - Addison.
From moſt bodies
Some little bits aſk leave to flow;
And, as through theſe canals they roll,
Bring up a ſample of the whole. Prior.
To SAMPLE. v. a. To ſhow ſomething ſimilar. Ainſworth.
SA'MPLE R. m. / [exemplar, Latin; whence it is ſometimes
written ſamplar.] A pattern of work; a piece worked by
young girls for improvement. t
O love, why do'ſt thou in thy beautiful ſampler ſet ſuch a
work for my deſire to ſet out, which is impoſſible. Sidney.
Fair Philomela, ſhe but loſt her tongue,
And in a tedious ſampler ſew'd her mind. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
We created with our needles both one flower,
Both on one ſamplar, fitting on one cuſhion;
Both warbling of one ſong, both in one key,
As if our hands, our ſides, voices and minds
Had been incorp'rate.
Coarſe complexions,
And cheeks of ſorry grain, will ſerve to ply
The ſampler, and to teize the houſewife's wool. Aftion.
I ſaw her ſober over a ſampler, or gay over a jointed
baby. Pope.
SA'NAble. adi. ſſanabilis, Latin.] Curable; ſuſceptive of re-
medy; remediable.
SANA'ſ ion. m. ſ. [ ſanatio, Latin.] The aët of curing.
23 C Conſider
Shakeſpeare.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 296</div><p class="Text">S A N
S A N
Conſider well the member, and, if you have no probable
hope of ſanatiºn, ºut it off quickly. It iſ man's Surgery.
S.A., rive. adj. [from ſano.] Powerful to cure; healing.
The vapour of coltsfoot hath a ſanative virtue towards the
lungs. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
SANA riveness. n.ſ.. [from ſanative..] Power to cure.
Sanctification. n.ſ.. [ſančification, Fr. from ſanciſco, low
Latin.
1. The it. of being freed, or ağt of freeing from the dominion
of ſin for the time to come.
The grace of his ſančificatiºn and life, which was firſt re-
ceived in him, might paſs from him to his whole race, as ma-
ledićtion came from Adam unto all mankind. Ho:ker.
2. The aët of making holy; conſecration.
The biſhop kneels before the croſs, and devoutly adores and
kiſſes it: after this follows a long prayer for the ſančification
of that new ſign of the croſs. ... Stillingfleet.
SA'Ncrifi ER. n.ſ.. [from ſandiff.] He that ſanétifies or makes
holy.
% be the ſančifier of a people, and to be their God, is all
Onc. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
To SANCTIFY. v. a. ſ. ſančiffer, Fr. ſančiifico, Latin.]
1. To free from the power of ſin for the time to come.
For if the blood of bulls, ſprinkling the unclean, ſančifieth
to the purifying of the fleſh, how much more ſhall the blood
of Chriſt? Heb. ix. 13.
2. To make holy; to make a means of holineſs.
The goſpel, by not making many things unclean, as the
law did, hath ſanctified thoſe things generally to all, which
particularly each man to himſelf muſt ſanétify by a reverend
and holy uſe. Hooker.
Thoſe judgments God hath been pleaſed to ſend upon me,
are ſo much the more welcome, as a means which his mercy
hath ſanāified ſo to me as to make me repent of that unjuſt
aćt. King Charles.
Thoſe external things are neither parts of our devotion, or
by any ſtrength in themſelves direct cauſes of it; but the grace
of God is pleaſed to move us by ways ſuitable to our nature,
and º theſe ſenſible helps to higher purpoſes. South.
What ačtions, can expreſs the intire purity of thought,
which refines and ſančifies a virtuous man f Addison.
3. To make free from guilt.
The holy man, amaz'd at what he ſaw,
Made haſte to ſančify the bliſs by law. Dryden.
4. To ſecure from violation.
Truth guards the poet, ſanāifies the line. Pope.
SANctimo'Nious. adj. [from ſančiimonia, Latin.] Saintly;
having the appearance of ſanétity.
A ſančimonious pretence, under a pomp of form, without
the grace of an inward integrity, will not ſerve the turn. L'Eſ.
SA'NctIMoSY. n.ſ.. [ſančiimonia, Latin. J Holineſs; ſcru-
pulous auſterity; appearance of holineſs.
If ſančimony, and a frail vow between an errant Barbarian
and a ſuperſubtle Venetian, be not too hard for my wit, and
all the tribe of hell, thou ſhalt enjoy her. Shakespeare Othello.
Her pretence is a pilgrimage to St. Jaques le Grand, which
; undertaking, with moſt auſtere Jančimony, ſhe accom-
pliſh’d. Shakeſpeare's All's well that end, well.
There was great reaſon why all diſcreet princes ſhould be-
ware of yielding haſty belief to the robes of ſanāimony. Ral.
SA'Nction. m. ſ. [ ſančion, French; ſanélio, Latin.]
I. The aët of confirmation which gives to anything its obliga-
tory power; ratification. C
I have kill'd a ſlave,
And of his blood caus’d to be mixt with wine:
Fill every man his bowl. There cannot be
A fitter drink to make this ſanciion in. Ben. Johnſ Catil.
Againſt the publick ſančions of the peace,
With fates averſe, the rout in arms reſort,
To force their monarch. Dryden’s AEn.
There needs no poſitive law or ſanāion of God to ſtamp an
obliquity upon ſuch a diſobedience. South.
By the laws of men, enaćted by civil power, gratitude is
not enforced; that is, not enjoined by the ſančion of penal-
ties, tº be inflicted upon the perſon that ſhall not be found
grateful. - - - - South's Sermons.
. The ſatisfactions of the Chriſtian life, in its preſent prac-
tice and future hopes, are not the mere raptures of enthuſiaſm,
* the ſtricteſt profeſſors of reaſon have added the Jančion of
their teſtimony. JWatts.
This word is often made the ſančiion of an oath: it is
º * gºat Sommendation to be a man of honour. Swift.
...* ſanction and authority, it is only yet a private
2. A law; a decre ifi Baker on Learning.
*f; ºratified. Improper.
is the firſt ſanction nature gave to man,
sº º: to aſſiſt in what they can. Denham.
neſs; hiſ/ [from ſančius, Latin.] Holineſs; good-
- The mº º divine
“s. ºr glorious Maker ſhone
Truth, wiſdom, ſam&amp;itude, ſerene and pure. Milton.
SA's crity, n ſ. [ ſančitas, Latin. I
1. Holineſs; the ſtate of being holy.
At his touch,
Such ſanélity hath heaven given his hand,
They preſently amend.
God attributes to place
No ſanſity, if none be thither brought
By men who there frequent. Milton.
2. Goodneſs; the quality of being good; purity; godlineſs.
This youth
I reliev'd with ſuch ſanctity of love,
And to his image, which methought did promiſe
Moſt venerable worth, did I devotion. Shakeſpeare.
It was an obſervation of the ancient Romans, that their
empire had not more increaſed by the ſtrength of their arms
than the ſam&amp;lity of their manners. Addison.
3. Saint; holy being.
About him all the ſamétities of heav'n
Stood thick as ſtars, and from his ſight receiv'd
Beatitude paſt utt'rance. Mlton.
To Sanctuarise. v. n. [ſrom ſančiuary.] To ſhelter by
mcans of ſacred privileges.
No place indeed ſhould murder ſančiuariſe Shakespeare .
SA'NCTUARY. m. ſ. [ſančiuaire, Fr. ſanétuarium, Latin.]
1. A holy place; holy ground. Properly the penetralia, or moſt
retired and awful part of a temple.
Having waſte ground enough,
Shall we deſire to raze the ſanctuary,
And pitch our evils there.
They often plac'd
Within his ſanctuary itſelf their ſhrines. Milton.
Let it not be imagined, that they contribute nothing to the
happineſs of the country who only ſerve God in the duties of
a holy life, who attend his ſančiuary, and daily addreſs his
goodneſs. ogers's Sermons.
2. A place of protećtion; a ſacred aſylum: whence a ſanāuary
man, one who takes ſhelter in a holy place.
Come, my boy, we will to ſanctuary. Shakeſp. R. III.
I'll hence forthwith unto the ſančuary,
To ſave at leaſt the heir of Edward's right. Shakespeare H. VI.
Oft have I heard of ſančuary men;
But ſanāuary children, ne'er 'till now. Shakesp. R. III.
He fled to Beverly, where he and divers of his company
regiſtered themſelves ſančuary men. Bacon's Henry VII.
Howſoever the ſanéiuary man was protećtcd from his credi-
tors, yet his goods out of ſančiuary ſhould not. Bacon's H. VII.
This our high place, our ſanctuary, our hill. Milton.
3. Shelter; protection.
What are the bulls to the frogs, or the lakes to the mea-
dows? Very much, ſays the frog; for he that's worſted will
be ſure to take ſančiuary in the fens. L’Eſtrange.
The admirable works of painting were made fuel for the
fire; but ſome reliques of it took ſanctuary under ground, and
eſcaped the common deſtiny. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
SAND. m. ſ. [ ſand, Daniſh and Dutch..]
1. Particles of ſtone not conjoined, or ſtone broken to powder.
That finer matter called ſand, is no other than very ſmall
pebbles. Woodward.
Here i' th' ſand;
Thee I’ll rake up, the poſt unſanétified. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Hark, the fatal followers do purſue !
The ſands are number'd that make up my life:
Here muſt I ſay, and here my life muſt end. Shakespeare H. VI.
Sand hath always its root in clay, and there be no veins of
Shakespeare eare.
Shakespeare  care.
ſand any great depth within the earth. Bacºn.
Calling for more paper to reſcribe, king Philip ſhewed him
the difference betwixt the ink box and ſandbox. Hºwel.
If quickſilver be put into a convenient glaſs veſſel, and that
veſſel exactly ſtopped, and kept for ten weeks in a ſand fur-
nace, whoſe heat may be conſtant, the corpuſcles that conſti-
tute the quickſilver will, after innumerable revolutions, be ſº
connected to one another, that they will appear in the form of
a red powder. Boyle.
Engag’d with money bags, as bold -
As men with ſand bags did of old. Hudibras.
The force of water caſts gold out from the bowels of
mountains, and expoſes it among the ſands of rivers. Pºº".
Shells are found in the great ſand pit at Woolwich. Wºodw.
Celia and I, the other day, -
Walk'd o'er the ſand hills to the ſea. Prior.
2. Barren country covered with ſands. - - -
Moſt of his army being ſlain, he, with a few of his fiends,
ſought to ſave themſelves by flight over the deſertſandi. Kn:les.
Her ſons ſpread f:
Beneath Gibraltar to the Lybian ſands. Milton.
SA'NDAL. m. ſ. [ſandale, Fr. ſandalium, Latin.] A looſe ſhoe.
Thus ſung the uncouth ſwain to th' oaks and rills, ...
While the ſtill morn went out with ſandal, grey- Aſilton.
From his robe
Flows light ineffable: his harp, his quiver,
And Lycian bow are gold: with golden ſandali
His feet are ſhod. Prior.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 297</div><p class="Text">S A N
S A N
#.
º
rº.
ſºl
The ſandal of celeſtial mold,
Fledg'd with ambroſial plumes, and rich with gold,
Surround her feet. Pope's Odyſſey.
SA’s DARAk. n.ſ. [ſandaraque, French; ſandaraca, Latin.]
1. A mineral of a bright right colour, not much unlike to red
arſenick. Bailey.
2. A white gum oozing out of the juniper-tree. Bailey,
SA'N p all ND. adj [ſand and blind.] Having a defe&amp;t in the
eyes, by which ſmall particles appear to fly before them.
My true begotten father, being more than ſandblind, high
gravelblind, knows me not. Shakeſp. Merch, of Penice.
SAND box Tree. n. ſ. ſhura, Latin.] A plant.
It hath a funnel-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of one leaf, which
is ſpread open at the brim, and ſlightly cut into twelve parts:
at the bottom of the tube is placed the pointal, which after-
ward becomes a globular compreſſed fruit, which has twelve
cells, in each of which is contained one roundiſh flat ſeed.
The fruit of this plant, if ſuffered to remain on 'till they are
fully ripe, burſt in the heat of the day with a violent explo-
ſon, making a noiſe like the firing of a piſtol, and hereby the
ſeeds are thrown about to a conſiderable diſtance. Theſe ſeeds,
when green, vomit and purge, and are ſuppoſed to be ſome-
what a-kin to nux vomica. Miller.
SA'NDE D. adj. [from ſand.]
1. Cyered with ſand; barren.
In well ſanded lands little or no ſnow lies. Mortimer.
The river pours along
Reſiſtleſs, roaring dreadful down it comes;
Then o'er the ſanded valley floating ſpreads. Thomſon.
2. Marked with ſmall ſpots; variegated with duſky ſpecks.
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So flew'd, ſo ſanded, and their heads are hung
With ears that ſweep away the morning dew;
Crook-knee'd and dewlap'd, like Theſſalian bulls;
Slow in purſuit; but match'd in mouth like bells,
Each under each. Shakeſpeare.
SA'ND FRLING. m. ſ. A biºd.
Among the firſt ſort we reckon coots, ſanderling', pewets,
and mews. Carew.
SA'NDERs. n ſ [ſantalum, Latin.] A precious kind of Indian
wood, of which there are three ſorts, red, yellow, and
green. Bailey.
Aromatize it with ſanders. // ſºman's Surgery.
SA'NDEveR. m. ſ.
That which our Engliſh glaſſmen call ſandever, and the
French, of whom probably the name was borrowed, ſuinde-
ver, is that recrement that is made when the materials of
glaſs, namely, ſand and a fixt lixiviate alkali, having been firſt
baked together, and kept long in fuſion, the mixture caſts up
the ſuperfluous ſalt, which the workmen afterwards take off
with ladles, and lay by as little worth. Boyle.
SA's Dish. adj. [from ſand.] Approaching to the nature of
ſand; looſe; not cloſe; not compačt.
Plant the tenuifolia's and ranunculus's in freſh ſandiſh earth,
taken from under the turf. Evelyn's Kalendar.
SA'Nostone. n.ſ. [ ſand and ſome.] Stone of a looſe and
friable kind, that eaſily crumbles into ſand.
Grains of gold inſand/one-grey, variegated with a faint green
and blue, from the mine of Coſta Rica, which is not reckoned
rich; but every hundred weight yields about an ounce of
gold. J/ºodward.
SA'N py. adi, [from ſand.] -
1. Abounding with ſand; full of ſand.
I ſhould not ſee the ſandy hourglaſs run,
But I ſhould think of ſhallows and of flats.
Safer ſhall he be on the ſandy plains, -
Than where caſtles mounted ſtand. Shakeſp. H. VI.
A region ſo deſert, dry, and ſandy, that travellers are fain
to carry water on their camels. Brown's Wug. Errours.
Rough unweildy earth, nor to the plough
Nor to the cattle kind, with ſandy ſtones
And gravel o'er-abounding. . -
O'er ſandy wilds were yellow harveſts ſpread.
2. Conſiſting of ſand; unſolid.
Favour, ſo bottomed upon the ſandy foundation of perſonal
reſpects only, cannot be long lived. Bacon to ſ'illiers.
SAN F. adj. [ſºmus, Latin.]. Sound ; healthy. Baynard wrote
a poem on preſerving the body in a ſame and ſound ſtate.
SANG. The preterite of ſing.
Then ſang Moſes and Iſrael this ſong unto the Lord. Ex. xv.
Thee next they ſang, of all creation firſt. A/ilton,
SANGUI'FE Rous. adj. [ ſanguiſer, Latin.] Conveying blood.
The fifth conjugation of the nerves is branched to the
muſcles of the face, particularly the cheeks, whoſe ſangui-
ferous veſſels it twiſts about. Derham's Phyſico-Theo ogy.
SANGUIFICATION. m. ſ. [ ſangu fication, Fr. ſanguis and facio,
Lat.] The produćtion of blood; the converſion of the chyle
into blood.
Since the lungs are the chief inſtrument of ſanguiſcation,
the animal that has that organ faulty can never have the vital
juices, derived from the blood, in a good ſtate. Arbuthnot.
Aſthmatick perſons have voracious appetites, and conſe-
2
Shakeſpeare.
Philºs.
Pope.
quently, for want of a right ſanguiſcation, are leucophlegma-
tick. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
sººn. n.ſ.. [ſanguis and facio, Latin.j Producer of
OOCl.
Bitters, like choler, are the beſt fanguiſers, and alſo the
beſt febrifuges. Florer on the Humours.
To º u1? Y. v. n. [ſangui, and facio, Latin.] To produce
blood.
At the ſame time I think, I command: in inferior faculties,
I walk, ſee, hear, digeſt, ſanguiſ), and carnity, by the power
of an individual ſoul. Hale.
SA'NGUINARY. adj. [ ſanguinarius, Lat. ſanguinaire, French ;
from ſanguis, Latin.] Cruel; bloody ; murtherous.
We may not propagate religion by wars, or by ſanguinary
perſecutions to force conſciences. Bacºn.
The ſcene is now more ſanguinary, and fuller of actors:
never was ſuch a confuſed myſterious civil war as this. Howel.
Paſſion transforms us into a kind of ſavages, and makes us
brutal and ſanguinary. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
SA'NGUINARY. m. ſ. [ ſangui, Lat.] An herb. Ainſworth.
SA'NGUIN E. adj. [ſanguin, Fr. ſanguineus, from ſanguis, Lat.]
1. Red; having the colour of blood.
This fellow
Upbraided me about the roſe I wear;
Saying, the ſanguine colour of the leaves
Did repreſent my maſter's bluſhing cheeks. Shakespeare H. VI.
A ſtream of nećt’rous humour iſſuing flow'd
Sanguine. Milton.
Dire Tiſphone there keeps the ward,
Girt in her ſanguine gown. Dryden.
Her flag aloft, ſpread ruffling to the wind,
And ſanguine ſtreamers ſeem the flood to fire: .
The weaver, charm'd with what his loom deſign'd,
Goes on to ſea, and knows not to retire. Dryden.
2. Abounding with blood more than any other humour; cheerful.
The cholerick fell ſhort of the longevity of the ſarguine. Bro.
Though theſe faults differ in their complexions as ſanguine
from melancholy, yet they are frequently united. Gov. ºf Tongue.
3. Warm ; ardent; confident.
A ſet of ſanguine tempers ridicule, in the number of fop-
peries, all ſuch apprehenſions. Swift.
SA'NGUINE. m.ſ.. [from ſanguis.] Blood colour.
A griefly wound,
From which forth guſh'd a ſtream of gore, blood thick,
That all her goodly garments ſtain’d around,
And in deep ſanguine dy'd the graſſy ground. Fa. Queen.
SA'NGUINENEss. Un. ſ. [from ſanguine.] Ardour; heat of ex-
SA'NGUINITY. } pećtation; confidence. Sanguinity is per-
haps only uſed by Swift.
Rage, or phrenſy it may be, in ſome perhaps natural cou-
rage, or ſanguinentſ of temper in others; but true valour it is
not, if it knows not as well to ſuffer as to do. That mind is
truly great, and only that, which ſtands above the power of all
extrinſick violence; which keeps itſelf a diſtinct principality,
independent upon the outward man. Decay of Piety.
I very much diſtruſt your ſanguinity. Swift.
SANGUI'NEous. adj. [ſanguineus, Latin; ſanguin, French.]
1. Conſtituting blood. º
This animal of Plato containeth not only ſanguineºus and
reparable particles, but is made up of veins, nerves, and ar-
teries. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
2. Abounding with blood.
A plethorick conſtitution, in which true blood abounds, is
called ſanguineous. w Arbuthnot.
SA'NHED RIM. n.ſ.. [ſºnedrium, Latin.] The chief council
among the Jews, conſiſting of ſeventy elders, over whom the .
high prieſt preſided.
SA’NicLE. m. ſ. [ ſanicle, Fr. ſanicula, Latin.] A plant.
It is an umbelliferous plant, and its flower conſiſts of five
leaves, placed orbicularly; but bent back to the centre of the
flower, and reſting on the empalement, which becomes a fruit
compoſed of two ſeeds, which are gibbous and prickly on one
ſide, but plain on the other. A/iller.
SA'N/ES. m. ſ. [Latin J Thin matter; ſerous excretion.
It began with a round crack in the ſkin, without other mat-
ter than a little ſanies. Jºſeman's Surgery.
SA'NIous, adj. [from ſanies.] Running a thin ſerous matter,
not a well digeſted pus.
Obſerving the ulcerſarious, I propoſed digeſtion as the only
way to remove the pain. J/ſeman.
SA'Nity. n.ſ. [ ſanitas, Latin.] Soundneſs of mind.
How pregnant, ſometimes, his replies are:
A happineſs that often madneſs hits on,
Which ſanity and reaſon could not be
So proſpºrouſly delivered of.
SANk. The preterite of ſink.
As if the opening of her mouth to Zelmane had opened
ſome great floodgate of ſorrow, whereof her heart could not
abide the violent iſſue, ſhe ſank to the ground. Sidney.
Our men followed them cloſe, took two ſhips, and gave divers
others of their ſhips their death's wounds, whereof ſoon after
they ſank and periſhed. Bacon's ºf ºr with Spain.
f S.N.S.,
Shakespeare . Hamlet.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 298</div><p class="Text">S A R
|
|
!,
- ench.] Without. Out of uſe.
SANS, prºp. (Fº lº of all, , ,
That ends this ſtrange º º
ildiſhneſs and mere oblivion,
!...º eyes, ſans taſte, fans every thing. Shakeſp.
For nature ſo prepoſterouſly to cr".
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of ſenſe,
Sans witchcraft could not. Shakespeare . Othell,
SAP. ...f. [rape, Saxon; ſap, Dutch..] The vital juice of
plants; the juice that circulates in trees and herbs.
Now fucking of the ſap of herbs moſt ſweet,
Or of the dew, which yet on them does lie,
Now in the ſame bathing his tender feet. Spenſer.
Though now this grained face of mine be hid
In ſap conſuming Winters drizzled ſnow,
And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
Yet hath my night of life ſome memory. Shakeſpeare.
Wound the bark of our fruit-trees,
Leſt, being over-proud with ſap and blood,
With too much riches it confound itſelf.
His preſence had infus'd
Shakeſp. R. II.
Into the plant ſciential ſap. Milton.
The ſap which at the root is bred
In trees, through all the boughs is ſpread. J/aller.
Vegetables conſiſt of the ſame parts with animal ſub-
ſtances, ſpirit, water, ſalt, oil, earth; all which are con-
tained in the ſap they derive from the earth. Arbuthnot.
To SAP. v. a. Iſaºper, French ; zappare, Italian.] To under-
mine; to ſubvert by digging; to mine.
Their dwellings were ſapp'd by floods,
Their houſes fell upon their houſhold gods. Dryden.
To SAP. v. n. To proceed by mine; to proceed inviſibly.
For the better ſecurity of the troops, both aſſaults are car-
ried on by ſupping. Tatler.
In vain may heroes fight, and patriots rave,
If ſecret gold ſaps on from knave to knave. Pope.
SA'FPHIRE, n ſ. [ſapphirus, Latin: ſo that it is improperly
written ſathyre.] A precious ſtone of a blue colour.
Saphire is of a bright blue colour. //oodward.
In enroll'd tuffs, flow'rs purſled, blue and white,
Like ſaphire, pearl, in rich embroidery. Shakeſpeare.
He tinctures rubies with their roſy hue,
And on the ſaphire ſpreads a heavenly blue. Blackmore.
That the ſºphire ſhould grow foul, and loſe its beauty, when
worn by one that is lecherous, and many other fabulous ſto-
ries of gems, are great arguments that their virtue is equiva-
lent to their value. Derham.
SAPPHIRINE, adj. [ſapphirinus, Latin. J Made of ſapphire;
reſembling ſapphire.
She was too ſaphirine and clear for thee;
Clay, flint, and jet now thy fit dwellings be. Donne.
A few grains of ſhell ſilver, with a convenient proportion
of powdered cryſtal glaſs, having been kept three hours in
fuſion, I found the coliquated maſs, upon breaking the cru-
gible, of a lovely ſafhirine blue. Boyle.
SAT'ID. adi, [ſopiºus, Latin.J. Taſteful; palatable; making
a powerful ſtimulation upon the palate.
Thus camels, to make the water ſapid, do raiſe the mud
with their feet. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The moſt oily parts are not ſeparated by a ſlight decoction,
'till they are diſentangled from the ſalts; for if what remains
of the ſubject, after the infuſion and deco&amp;tion be continued
to be boiled down with the addition of freſh water, a fat,
ſapid, odorous, viſcous, inflammable, frothy water will con-
ſtantly be found floating a-top of the boiling liquor. Arbuthn.
SAPI'dity. }*ſ [from ſapid.] Taſtefulneſs; power of ſti-
SA'PIDNFss. 5 mulating the palate.
As for their taſte, if their nutriment be air, neither can it
be an inſtrument thereof; for the body of that element is in-
guſtible, and void of all ſapidity. Brown's Wulg. Errours.
If ſapidneſs belong not to the mercurial principle of ve-
gºtables and animals, it will ſcarce be diſcriminated from their
- phlegm. Boyle.
SAPIENCE. m. ſ. [ ſatience, Fr. Japientia, Latin. J Wiſdom;
º ..º. &gt;
Y/"Plence. I mean what the ancients did by phi r -
the habit or diſpoſition of mind which impo º º
wiſdom.
Ne only they that dwell in lowly du
The ſons of i. and of º,
But they whom thou, great Jove, by doom unjuſt
Did it to the top of honour eaſt advaňce : &gt;
I hey now, puft up with's deignful inſolence,
Deſpiſe the brood of bleſſed ſapience. Spenſºr.
King James, of immortal memory, among all the lovers
and admirers - - -
#. of divine and human ſpience, accompliſhed at
ds his own days on earth J
łor. - - - /otton.
cº º guided by ill counſels have equal ſuc-
- 9te by the beſt judgment conducted, therefore had
Grew.
violence the ſame external figure with ſapience. Raleigh.
I *ience and love
ºnmenſe, and all his father in him ſhone. Milton.
O ſov’reign, virtuous, precious of all trees
In Paradiſe! of operation bleſt
To ſapience.
Many a wretch in Bedlam,
Though perhaps among the rout
He wildly flings his filth about,
Still has gratitude and ſapience.
To ſpare the folks that give him ha'pence. Swift.
SA/PIE N.T. adj. [ſapiens, Latin.] \\ fe; ſage.
There the Ja icnt king held dalliance.
SA'pless. adj. [ſaploos, Dutch...]
1. Wanting ſap; wanting vital juice.
Pithleſs arms, like to a withel’d vine,
That droops his ſapleſ, branches to the ground. Shakespeare H.VI.
The tree of knowledge, blaſted by diſputes,
Produces ſapleſ leaves inſtead of fruits. Denham.
This fingle ſtick was ſull of ſap ; but now in vain does at
tie that withered bundle of twigs to its ſapieſ, trunk. Swift.
2. Dry; old; huſky.
If by this bribe, well plac'd, he would enſnare
Some ſatleſ, uſurer that wants an heir. Dryden's juven.
SA'PLING. m. ſ. [from ſap.] A young tree; a young plant.
Look how I am bewitch'd; behold, mine arm
Is, like a blaſted ſapling, wither'd up. Shakeſp. R. III.
Nurſe the ſaplings tall, and curl the grove
With ringlets quaint. Milton.
A ſapling pine he wrench'd from out the ground,
The readieſt weapon that his fury found. Dryden.
What planter will attempt to yoke
A ſapling with a falling oak 2 Swift.
Slouch turn'd his head, ſaw his wife's vigºrous hand
Wielding her oaken ſapling of command. King's Laura.
SAP on A'ceous. U adj. [from ſa, º, Latin, ſoap.] Sopy; re-
SA'pon ARY. ſembling ſoap; having the qualities of ſoap.
By digeſting a ſolution of ſalt of tartar with oil of almonds,
I could reduce them to a ſoft ſaponary ſubſtance. loye.
Any mixture of an oily ſubſtance with ſalt, may be called a
ſoap : bodies of this nature are called ſapºnaceous. Arbuthnot.
SA POR. m. ſ. [Latin.j Taſte, power of affecting or ſtimu-
lating the palate.
There is ſome ſapor in all aliments, as being to be diſtin-
guiſhed and judged by the guſt, which cannot be admitted in
air. Brown's Vulgar Erreurs.
The ſhape of thoſe little particles of matter which diſtin-
guiſh the various ſapors, odours, and colours of bodies. Wats.
SAPor 1'Fick, adj. Iſaporij que, Fr. ſapºr and faciº, Latin.]
Having the power to produce taſtes.
SA/PPINEss. n.ſ.. [from ſappy..] The ſtate or the quality of
abounding in ſap; ſucculence; juicineſs.
SA'PPY. adj. [from ſap.]
1. Abounding in ſap ; juicy; ſucculent.
The ſappy parts, and next reſembling juice,
Were turn'd to moiſture for the body's uſe,
Miltºn.
A filton.
Supplying humours, blood, and nouriſhment. Dryden,
Theſ, py boughs
Attire themſelves with blooms, ſweet rudiments
Of future harveſt. Philips.
The green heat the ripe, and the ripe give fire to the green;
to which the bigneſs of their leaves, and hardneſs of their
ſtalks, which continue moiſt and ſuppy long, doth much con-
tribute. A. or timer.
2. Young; not firm; weak. -
This young prince was brought up among nurſes, ’till he
arrived to the age of ſix years: when he had paſſed this weak
and ſappy age, he was committed to Dr. Cox. Hayward.
SA'RABAND. m./. [garabande, Spaniſh ; ſarabandº, French.] A
Spaniſh dance. - -
The ſeveral modifications of this tune-playing quality in *
fiddle, to play preludes, ſaraband, jigs and gavots, *.*
much real qualities in the inſtrument as the thought is in the
mind of the compoſer. Arbuthn. and Pope's Mart. Scribl.
SA'RCASM. n.ſ. [ ſarcaſne, Fr. ſarcaſmus, Latin.] A keen
reproach ; a taunt; a gibe.
Sarcaſms of wit are tranſmitted in ſtory. Gov. ºf the Tºº
Rejoice, O young man, ſays Solomon, in a ſevereſtºſ,
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart;
but know that for theſe things God will bring thee in 9 judg-
Inent. Rºgers's Sermoni.
When an angry maſter ſays to his ſervant it is bravely done,
it is one way of giving a ſevere reproach; for the words. aſ C
ſpoken by way of ſarcaſm, or irony. ſº º
SARCA'stic All Y. adv. [from ſarcaſtick.] Tauntingly ; fe-
verely.
He aſked a lady playing with a lap-dog, whether the *:
men of that country uſed to have any children or no 3. thereby
ſarcaſtically reproaching them for miſplacing that affº" º
brutes, which could only become a mother to her child. sº
SAR ca'stical. adj. [from ſarcaſm.] Keen; taunting; *
SARCA's Tick. ; vere. -
What a fierce and ſºrcaſtick reprehenſion would this º:
drawn from the friendſhip of the world, and yet what ****
- - - - - South.
one did it receive from Chriſt? * South
SARCENET.
-
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 299</div><p class="Text">S A T
º
**
º
l
SA'rceNet... n.ſ. [Suppoſed by Skinner to be ſtricum ſarace-
nicum, Latin.] Fine thin woven ſilk.
Why art thou then exaſperate, thou idle immaterial ſkein
of ſley'd ſilk, thou green ſarcenet flap for a fore eye, thou taſſel
of a prodigal's purſe 2 Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
If they be covered, though but with linnen or ſarcelºt, it
intercepts the effluvium. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Theſe are they that cannot bear the heat
Of figur’d ſilks and under ſarcemets ſweat.
She darts from ſarcemet ambuſh wily leers,
Twitches thy ſleeve, or with familiar airs
Her fan will pat the cheek; theſe ſnares diſdain. Gay.
To SARcle. v. a. [ſarcler, French; ſarculo, Latin.] To
weed corn. Ainſworth.
Sarcoce'ie. m. ſ. ſº, and xian; ſarcocele, Fr.] A fleſhy
excreſcence of the teſticles, which ſometimes grow ſo large as
to ſtretch the ſcrotum much beyond its natural fize. Qincy.
Sarco'MA. n.ſ.. [cººkwºo..] A fleſhy excreſcence, or lump,
growing in any part of the body, eſpecially the noſtrils. Baily.
Sarco'PHAgous. adj. [**68 and payw.] Fleſh-eating; feed-
ing on fleſh.
sºnº. mºſ [gºe; and payw.] The praćtice of eating
Ciſle
There was no ſarcophagy before the flood; and, without the
eating of fleſh, our fathers preſerved themſelves unto longer
lives than their poſterity. Brown's Wulg. Errours.
Sarco'risk. n.ſ.. [from ree; ; ſarcotique, Fr.] Medicines
which fill up ulcers with new fleſh; the ſame as incarnatives.
By this means the humour was moderately repreſſed, and
breathed forth; the eſcar alſo ſeparated in the fontanel: after
which the ulcer incarned with common ſarcoticks, and the ul-
serations about it were cured by ointment of tuty, and ſuch
like epuloticks. Wiſeman on Inflammations.
SARculation. n.ſ.. [ſarculus, Latin.] The aët of weeding;
plucking up weeds. IDićf.
SA'RDEL.
SA'RDINE Stone. }.ſ: A ſort of precious ſtone.
SA'RDIUs.
He that ſat was to look upon, like a jaſper and a ſardine
ſtone. Rev. iv. 3.
Thou ſhalt ſet in it four rows of ſtones: the firſt row ſhall
be a ſardius.
Sa'RDoNYx. n.ſ. A precious ſtone.
The onyx is an accidental variety of the agat kind: 'tis of
a dark horny colour, in which is a plate of a bluiſh white, and
ſometimes of red; when on one or both ſides the white there
happens to lie alſo a plate of a reddiſh colour, the jewellers call
the ſtone a ſardonyx. Woodward.
SARK. n.ſ. [rcynk, Saxen.]
1. A ſhark or ſhirk, - Bailey.
2. In Scotland it denotes a ſhirt.
Flaunting beaus gang with their breaſts open, and their
ſarks over their já. Arbuthn. Hiſt, of john Bull.
SARN. m. ſ. A Britiſh word for pavement, or ſtepping ſtones,
ſtill uſed in the ſame ſenſe in Berkſhire and Hampſhire.
Sa'Rplier. n.ſ.. [ſarpilliere, French.] A piece of canvas for
wrapping up wares; a packing cloth. Bailey.
§AAAAsise. m. ſ. [In botany..] A kind of birthwort. Bailey.
§:ARE'll A. }n. J. Both a tree and a plant. Ainſworth.
SARSE. n.ſ. A ſort of fine lawn ſieve. Bailey.
To SARs E. v. a. [ſaſſer, French..] To fift through a ſarſe or
ſearſe. Bailey.
SART. n.ſ.. [In agriculture.] A piece of woodland turned into
arable. Bailey.
Sash. n.ſ. [Of this word the etymologiſts give no account: I
ſuppoſe it comes from ſtache, of ſº avoir, to know, a ſaſh worn
being a mark of diſtinétion ; and a ſaſh window being made
particularly for the ſake of ſeeing and being ſeen.]
1. A belt worn by way of diſtinétion; a ſilken band worn by
officers in the army.
2. A window ſo formed as to be let up and down by pullies.
She ventures now to lift the ſaſh; -
Dryd, juven.
Ex. xxviii. 17.
The window is her proper ſphere. Swift.
As for the poem he writ on your ſaſh,
My ſiſter tranſcrib'd it laſt night. Swift.
She broke a pane in the ſaſh window that looked into the
yard. Swift.
SA'shoon. n.ſ. A kind of leather ſtuffing put into a boot for
the wearer's eaſe. Ainſworth.
SA'ss A FRAs. n.ſ. A tree: one of the ſpecies of the cornelian
cherry. The wood is medicinal.
SAT. The preterite of ſit.
The pićture of fair Venus, that
For which, men ſay, the goddeſs ſat, -
Was loſt, 'till Lely from your look
Again that glorious image took. J/aller.
I anſwered not the rehearſal, becauſe I knew the author ſat
to himſelf when he drew the pićlure, and was the very Bays
of his own farce. Dryden.
SA' TAN. n.ſ. [..ttoº' Satanas, Latin.] The prince of hell;
the devil; any wicked ſpirit.
I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Lu. x. 18.
S A T
They are much increaſed by the falſe ſuggeſtions of Satan.
Sanderſon's judgment in one Wiew.
The deſpiteful act
S of Satan done in Paradiſe. Miltºn.
ATA'NICAL. - • - a .
SATA’N1ck. }ad. [from Satan.] Deviliſh; infernal.
The faint fatanick hoſt
f Defenſive ſcarce. Milton.
SA'tchel. n.ſ.. [ſeckel, German; fºrculus, Latin.] A little
bag; commonly a bag uſed by ſchoolboys to carry their bocks.
The whining ſchoolboy with his ſatchel,
And ſhining morning face, creeping like ſnail
Unwillingly to ſchool. - Shakespeare As you like it.
To 8 * lag * fatchel; in their hands. Swift.
o BATE. v. a. ſ. ſatio, Latin. To ſatiate; to -
to feed beyond #: : glut; to pall;
Sated at length, ere long I might perceive
Strange alteration in me. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft.
How will their bodies ſtript
Enrich the vićtors, while the vultures ſate -
Their maws with full repaſt. Phillps.
Thy uſeleſs ſtrength, miſtaken king, employ,
Sated with rage, and ignorant of joy. rior.
SAte'llite. n.ſ.. [ſatelles, Lat. ſatellite, Fr. This word is com-
monly pronounced in proſe with the e mute in the plural, as in
theſingular, and istherefore only of three ſyllables; but Pºpe has
in the plural continued the Latin form, and aſſigned it four;
I think, improperly.] A ſmall planet revolving round a larger.
Four moons move about Jupiter, and five about Saturn,
called their ſatellites. Locke.
The ſmalleſt planets are ſituated neareſt the ſun and each
other; whereas Jupiter and Saturn, that are vaſtly greater, and
have many ſatellites about them, are wiſely removed to the ex-
treme regions of the ſyſtem. Bentley.
Ask of yonder argent fields above,
Why Jove's ſatellites are leſs than Jove? Pope.
SATELLITIous. adj. [from ſatelles, Lat..] Conſiſting of ſatellites:
Their ſolidity and opacity, and their ſatellitious attendance,
their revolutions about the ſun, and their rotations about their
axis, are exactly the ſame. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
To SATIATE. v. a. [ſatio, Latin.]
1. To ſatisfy 5 to fill. -
Thoſe ſmells are the moſt grateful where the degree of heat
is ſmall, or the ſtrength of the ſmell allayed; for theſe rather
woo the ſenſe than ſatiate it. Bacon.
Buying of land is the reſult of a full and ſatiated gain; and
men in trade ſeldom think of laying out their money upon
land, 'till their profit has brought them in more than their
trade can well employ. Locke.
The looſen'd winds
Hurl’d high above the clouds; 'till all their force
Conſum’d, her rav'nous jaws th' earth ſatiate clos'd. Phillipſ.
2. To glut; to pall; to fill beyond natural deſire.
They ſatiate and ſoon fill,
Though pleaſant. Milton.
Whatever novelty preſents, children are preſently eager to
have a taſte, and are as ſoon ſatiated with it. Locke.
He may be ſatiated, but not ſatisfy'd. No ris.
3. To gratify deſire. -
I may yet ſurvive the malice of my enemies, although they
ſhould be ſatiated with my blood. King Charles.
4. To ſaturate; to impregnate with as much as can be con-
tained or imbibed.
Why does not ſalt of tartar draw more water out of the
air, than in a certain proportion to its quantity, but for want
of an attractive force after it is ſatiated with water Newton.
SATIAt E. adj. [from the verb.] Glutted; full to ſatiety.
When it has with, it ſeems a participle; when of, an adjećtive.
- Our generals, retir'd to their eſtates,
In life's cool evening, ſatiate of applauſe,
Nor think of bleeding ev’n in Brunſwick's cauſe. Pope.
Now may’rs and ſhrieves all huſh'd and ſatiate lay,
Yet eat, in dreams, the cuſtard of the day. ... Pope's Pune.
Sati’ety. n.ſ.. [ſatistas, Latin; ſatietº, Fr.]. Fulneſs beyond
deſire or pleaſure; more than enough 3 weariſomeneſs of plen-
ty; ſtate of being palled or glutted. . . .
He leaves a ſhallow plaſh to plunge him in the "ºp, /.
And with ſatiety ſeeks to quench his thirſt. - Shakeſpeare.
Nothing more jealous than a favourite, eſpecially ºward,
the waining time and ſuſpect of ſatity. Iſotton.
In all pleaſures there is ſatiety; and after they be uſºl, their
verdure departeth. Hakewill.
They ſatiate and ſoon fill; - - - - - -
Though pleaſant; but thy words, with grace divine -
Imbu'd, bring to their ſweetneſs no ſatiety. - Milton.
N., action, the uſefulneſs of which has made it the matter
of duty, but a man may bear the continual purſuit of, without
loathing or ſatiety. ..., ... . - - South.
The joy unequal’d, if its end it gain,
Without ſatiety, though e'er ſo bleſt,
And but more reliſh'd as the more diſtreſs'd. - Pote.
SA'tin. m.ſ.. [ſatin, French; dra: a di ſetan, Italian; fattin,
Dutch..] A ſoft cloſe and ſhining ſilk. -
23 D Such<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 300</div><p class="Text">S A T
S A T
º t - - - - - y ld u
- littering ſhew it bare, and ſo bravely it was held up
º : º her body ſhe wore a doublet of ſky-colour
fatin covered with plates of gold, and as it were nailed with
precious ſtones, that in it ſhe might ſeem armed. Sidney.
The ladies dreſs'd in rich ſymars were ſeen,
Of Fiorence ſatin, flower'd with white and green,
And for a ſhade betwixt the bloomy gridelin. Dryden.
Her petticoat, transform'd apace, -
Became black ſatin flounc'd with lace. - Swift.
Lay the child carefully in a caſe, covered with a mantle of
blue ſatin. Arbuthn, and Pope.
SATIRE. m.ſ.. [ſatira, anciently ſatura, Lat, not from ſatyruſ,
a ſatyr; ſatire, Fr.] A poem in which wickedneſs or folly isgen-
ſured. Troper ſatire is diſtinguiſhed, by the generality of the
refle&amp;ions, from a lampoon which is aimed againſt a particular
perſon; but they are too frequently confounded.
He dares to fing thy praiſes in a clime.
Where vice triumphs, and virtue is a crime;
Where ev'n to draw the pićture of thy mind,
Isſatyr on the moſt of human kind. . . . Dryden.
SAT1'Rical. adj. [ſatiricus, Latin; ſatirique, French; from
SAt I'R1ck. } ſatire.] - - - - -
1. Belonging to ſatire; employed in writing of invečtive.
You muſt not think, that a ſatyrick ſtyle
Allows of ſcandalous and brutiſh words. Roſcommon.
What human kind deſires, and what they ſhun,
Rage, paſſions, pleaſures, impotence of will,
Shall this ſatirical collection fill. Dryden's juvenal.
2. Cenſorious; ſevere in language.
Slanders, ſir; for the ſatirical ſlave ſays here, that old men
have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled. Shakespeare Hamlet.
He that hath a ſatirical vein, as he maketh others afraid of
his wit, ſo he had need be afraid of others memory. Bacon.
On me when dunces are ſatirick,
I take it for a panegyrick. Swift.
SAti'Rically. adv. [from ſatirical.] With invective; with
intention to cenſure or vilify.
He applies them ſatirically to ſome cuſtoms, and kinds of
philoſophy, which he arraigns. Dryden.
SA'TIRIST. n.ſ.. [from ſatire.] One who writes ſatires.
Wycherly, in his writings, is the ſharpeſt ſatyrſ of his
time; but, in his nature, he has all the ſoftneſs of the ten-
dereſt diſpoſitions: in his writings he is ſevere, bold, under-
taking; in his nature gentle, modeſt, inoffenſive. Granville.
All vain pretenders have been conſtantly the topicks of the
moſt candid ſatyriſis, from the Codrus of Juvenal to the Da-
mon of Boileau. Letter to the Publiſher of the Dunciad.
Yet ſoft his nature, though ſevere his lay;
His anger moral, and his wiſdom gay:
Bleſt ſatyriſt! who touch'd the mean ſo true,
As ſhow'd vice had his hate and pity too. Pope.
To SATIRIze. v. a. [ſatirizer, Fr. from ſatire.] To cenſure
as in a ſatire.
Covetouſneſs is deſcribed as a veil caſt over the true mean-
ing of the poet, which was to ſatirize his prodigality and vo-
luptuouſneſs. Dryden.
Should a writer ſingle out and point his raillery at particu-
lar perſons, or ſatirize the miſerable, he might be ſure of
pleaſing a great part of his readers; but muſt be a very ill man
if he could pleaſe himſelf. Addiſon.
I inſiſt that my lion's mouth be not defiled with ſcandal;
for I would not make uſe of him to revile the human ſpecies,
and ſatirize his betters. Addiſon's Speciator.
It is as hard to ſatirize well a man of diſtinguiſhed vices, as
S to praiſe well a man of diſtinguiſhed virtues. Swift.
*T*FA'ction. n.ſ. [ſatisfacio, Latin; ſatisfasiion -
1. The aët of iſ. ſºlºin, ſaliſadin, Frencſ.)
The mind, having a power to ſuſpend the execution and
Jatiyadion of any of its deſires, is at liberty to conſider the
objećts of them. Locke
2. The ſtate of being pleaſed.
Tisº wretched ſatisfadion a revengeful man takes, even in
loſing his life, provided his enemy go for company. L'E/ir.
There are very few diſcourſes ſo ſhort, clear, and conſiſtent,
to which moſt men may not, with ſatisfacilion enough
- to them-
ſelves, raiſe a doubt. &gt; ſatisf. § en
Locke.
3. Releaſe from ſuſpenſe, uncertainty, or uneaſineſs. 0&amp;A't
Wilt thou leave me ſo unſatisfied ?
—What ſatisfaction can you have Shakeſpeare.
4. Gratification; that which pleaſes.
Run over the circle of earthly pleaſures, and had not
‘... a man a ſolid pleaſure from his own aćtions, he
. be forced to complain that Pleaſure was not ſatisfac-
y - South.
S º ‘'Ty nation each illuſtrious name,
. *}} as theſe have cheated into fame 3.
Xchanging ſolid quiet to obtain
5. Ame º Jºſifaction of the brain. Dryden's juvenal.
Di &gt; atonement for a crime; recompenſe for an injur
ie he or juſt - Jury.
Some oth Jºice muſt ; unleſs for him
9ther able, and as willing, pa
The rigid Jatiyacion, death fºr death,
ſiſt, Par. Loff,
I -
SATISFA'crive. adj. [ſatisfadfus, Lat.] Giving ſatisfaāion,
By a final .#: diſcernment of faith, we lay the laſt
effects upon the firſt cauſe of all things. Brown's Wulg. Err.
SAT Isfactor ILY. adj. [from ſatisfactory..] To ſatisfaction.
Bellonius hath been more ſatisfačiarily experimental, not
only affirming that chameleons feed on flies, but upon exen-
teration he found theſe animals in their bellies. Brown's V. Er.
They ſtrain their memory to anſwer him ſatisfactorily unto
all his demands. Digby.
SAtisfactor INEss. m. ſ. [from ſatisfactory..] Power of ſā-
tisfying; power of giving content.
he incompleatneſs of the ſeraphick lover's happineſs, in
his fruitions, proceeds not from their want of ſatisfactorineſs,
but his want of an intire poſſeſſion of them. Boyle.
SATIsf A'ctory: adj. [ſatisfactoire, Fr. ſatisfačiuſ, Latin.]
1. Giving ſatisfaction; giving content.
An intelligent American would ſcarce take it for a ſatiſfac-
tory account, if, deſiring to learn our archite&amp;ture, he ſhould
be told that a pillar was a thing ſupported by a baſis. Locke.
2. Atoning; making amends.
A moſt wife and ſufficient means of redemption and ſalva-
tion, by the ſatisfactory and meritorious death and obedience of
the incarnate ſon of God, Jeſus Chriſt. Sanderſon.
To SATISFY. v.a. [ſatisfaire, Fr. ſatisfacio, Latin.]
1. To content; to pleaſe to ſuch a degree as that nothing more
is deſired.
A good man ſhall be ſatisfied from himſelf. Prov, xiv. 14.
Will he ſatisfy his rigour,
Satisfy'd never ? Milton.
2. To feed to the fill.
Who hath cauſed it to rain on the earth, to ſatisfy the de-
ſolate and waſte ground, and to cauſe the bud of the tender
tree to ſpring forth : job xxxviii. 27.
I will purſue and divide the ſpoil: my luſt ſhall be ſatisfied
upon them. Ex. xv. 9.
The righteous eateth to the ſatisfying of his ſoul. Prov, xiii.
3. To recompenſe; to pay to content.
He is well paid that is well ſatisfied;
And I, delivering you, am ſatisfied,
And therein do account myſelf well paid.
4. To free from doubt, perplexity, or ſuſpenſe.
Of many things uſeful and curious you may ſatisfy your-
ſelves in Leonardo de Vinci. Dryden.
When come to the utmoſt extremity of body, what can
there put a ſtop and ſatisfy the mind that it is at the end of
ſpace, when it is ſatisfied that body itſelf can move into
it 2 Locke.
This I would willingly be ſatisfied in, whether the ſoul,
when it thinks thus, ſeparate from the body, ačts leſs rational-
ly than when conjointly with it? Locke.
5. To convince.
He declares himſelf ſatisfied to the contrary, in which he
has given up the cauſe. Dryden.
The ſtanding evidences of the truth of the Goſpel, are in
themſelves moſt firm, ſolid, and ſatisfying. Atterbury.
To SA’tisfy. v. n. To make payment. -
By the quantity of ſilver they give or take, they eſtimate
the value of other things, and ſatiſfy for them: thus filver be-
comes the meaſure of commerce. Locke.
SA'tu RABLE. adj. [from ſaturate.] Impregnable with any
thing 'till it will receive no more. -
Be the figures of the ſalts never ſo various, yet if the atoms
of water were fluid, they would always ſo conform to thoſe
figures as to fill up all vacuities; and conſequently the water
would be ſaturalle with the ſame quantity of any ſalt, which
it is not. Grew's Coſmol. Sac.
sºast. adj. [from ſaturans, Lat.] Impregnating to the
ll. **.*
To SATURATE. v.a. [ſature, Latin.] To impregnate 'till
no more can be received or imbibed. -
Rain-water is plentifully ſaturated with terreſtrial mattºº
and more or leſs ſtored with it. - Hºdward.
His body has been fully ſaturated with the fluid ºf light: 9
be able to laſt ſo many years without any ſenſible dimiº
though there are conſtant emanations thereof. Cheyne.
Still night ſucceeds
A ſoften’d ſhade, and ſaturated earth
Awaits the morning beam. Thomſºn.
SATURDAY. n.ſ. [racenrbeg, or raecennrea:3: Saxon, ac-
cording to Verſiegan, from razen, a Saxon idol; more .
bably from Saiurn, dies Saturni.] The laſt day of the w;
This matter I handled fully in laſt Saturday's Spºtato: 4.
SATU'RITY. m. ſ. [ ſaturitas, from ſaturo, Latin.] Fulneſs; the
ſtate of being ſaturated; repletion. -
SATURN. n.J. [ſaturne, French ; ſaturnuſ, Latin: !
1. The remoteſt planet of the ſolar ſyſtem : ſuppoſed by aſtrolo-
gers to impreſs melancholy, dulneſs, or ſeverity of temper. !
The ſmalleſt planets are placed neareſt the ſun and each
other; whereas Jupiter and Saturn, that are vaſtly greater, are
Shakeſpeare.
wiſely removed to the extreme regions. Bentley.
From the far bounds - Thomſºn
Of utmoſt Saturn, wheeling wide his round. Women.
2. [In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 301</div><p class="Text">S A U
.
.
2. [In chimeſtry.] Lead.
Saºrur NINE. adj. [ſaturninus, Lat. ſaturnien, Fr. from Saturn.]
Not light; not volatile; gloomy; grave; melancholy; ſevere
of temper: ſuppoſed to be born under the dominion of Saturn.
I may caſt my readers under two diviſions, the mercurial
and ſaturnine: the firſt are the gay part, the others are of a
more ſober and ſolemn turn. Addiſon.
SATU'RNIAN. adj. [ſaturniuſ, Latin.J Happy; golden: uſed
by poets for times of felicity, ſuch as are feigned to have been
in the reign of Saturn.
Th’Auguſtus, born to bring Saturnian times. Pope:
SATYR. n.ſ.. [ſatyrus, Latin.]. A ſylvan god: ſuppoſed
among the ancients to be rude and lecherous.
Satyrs, as Pliny teſtifies, were found in times paſt in the
eaſtern mountains of India. Peacham on Drawing.
SA'TYRIAsis. n.ſ.. [from ſatyr.]
If the chyle be very plentiful it breeds a ſatyriaſis, or an
abundance of ſeminal lympha's. Floyer on the Humours.
SAVAGE. adj: [ſauvage, French; ſelvaggio, Italian.]
I. Wild; uncultivated.
Theſe godlike virtues wherefore do'ſt thou hide,
Affecting private life, or more obſcure
In ſavage wilderneſs - Milton.
Cornels, and ſavage berries of the wood,
And roots and herbs, have been my meagre food. Dryden,
2. Untamed; cruel.
Chain me to ſome ſteepy mountain's top,
Where roaring bears and ſavage lions roam. Shakeſpeare.
Tyrants no more their ſavage nature kept,
And foes to virtue wonder'd how they wept. Pope.
3. Uncivilized; barbarous; untaught.
Hence with your little ones:
To fright you thus, methinks, I am too ſavage;
To do worſe to you, were fell cruelty. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Thus people lived altogether a ſavage life, ’till Saturn, ar-
riving on thoſe coaſts, deviſed laws to govern them by, Raleigh.
The ſavage clamour drown'd
Both harp and voice. Milton.
A herd of wild beaſts on the mountains, or a ſavage drove
of men in caves, might be ſo diſordered; but never a peculiar
people. Spratt's Sermons.
SA'vage. n.f. [from the adjećtive..] A man untaught and un-
civilized; a barbarian.
Long after theſe times were they but ſavages. Raleigh.
The ſeditious lived by rapine and ruin of all the country,
omitting nothing of that which ſavageſ, enraged in the height
of their unruly behaviour, do commit. Hayward.
To deprive us of metals is to make us mere ſavages; to
change our corn for the old Arcadian diet, our houſes and
cities for dens and caves, and our clothing for ſkins of beaſts:
'tis to bereave us of all arts and ſciences, nay, of revealed re-
ligion. Bentley.
To SA’v AGE. v. a. [from the noun..] To make barbarous,
wild, or cruel. A word not well authoriſed.
Friends, relations, love himſelf,
Savag'd by woe, forget the tender tie. Thomſon.
SA’v AG Ely. adv. [from ſavage.] Barbarouſly; cruelly.
Your caſtle is ſurpris’d, your wife and babes
Savagely ſlaughter'd. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
SA'vAGEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſavage.] Barbarouſneſs; cruelty;
wildneſs.
A ſavageneſ; in unreclaimed blood
Of general aſſault.
Wolves and bears, they ſay,
Caſting their ſavageneſ; aſide, have done
Like offices of pity. Shakespeare Winter’s Tale.
The Cyclops were a people of Sicily, remarkable for ſa-
wageneſs and cruelty. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
SA’va Ger Y. m. ſ. [from ſavage.]
1. Cruelty; barbarity.
This is the bloodieſt ſhame,
The wildeſt ſavag’ry, the vileſt ſtroke,
That ever wall-ey'd wrath, or ſtaring rage,
Preſented to the tears of ſoft remorſe. Shakespeare King john.
2. Wild growth.
Her fallow lees
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,
Doth root upon; while that the culter ruſts,
That ſhould deracinate ſuch ſavagery. Shakeſp. H. V.
SA'v ANNA. m. ſ. [Spaniſh, according to Bailey.] An open mea-
dow without wood; paſture ground in America.
He that rides poſt through a country may tell how, in gene-
ral, the parts lie; here a moraſs, and there a river; woodland
in one part, and ſavanna's in another. - Locke.
Plains immenſe,
And vaſt ſavanna's, where the wand'ring eye,
Unfix'd, is in a verdant ocean loſt. Thomſon's Summer.
SAUCE. m. ſ. [ ſauce, ſauſſe, French; ſalſa, Italian.]
1. Something eaten with food to improve its taſte.
The bitter ſauce of the ſport was, that we had our honours
for ever, loſt, partly by our own faults, but principally by his
faulty uſing of our faults. Sidney.
Shakespeare. Hamlt.
S A U
F To feed were beſt at home ;
rom thence the ſauce to meat is ceremony;
Meeting were bare without it. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Epicurean cooks
Sharpen with cloyleſs ſauce his appeti
- ppetite. Shakeſpeare.
&gt; $ºch was the ſauce of Moab's noble feaſt, ſp
Till night far ſpent invites them to their reſt. Cowley:
He that ſpends his time in ſports, is like him whoſe meat is
ºins but ſauces; they are healthleſs, chargeable, and uſe-
els. - Taylor.
High ſauces and rich ſpices are fetched from the Indies. Fºr.
2. Tº ſerve * the ſame Sauce. A vulgar phraſe to retaliate one
injury with another.
To Sauce. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To accompany meat with ſomething of higher reliſh.
2. To gratify with rich taſtes. Obſolete.
Earth yield me roots;
Who ſeeks for better of thee, ſauce his palate
With thy moſt operant poiſon. Shakespeare.
3: To intermix or accompany with any thing good, or, ironi-
cally, with any thing bad.
Then fell ſhe to ſauce her deſires with threatnings, ſo that
we were in a great perplexity, reſtrained to ſo unworth
a bondage, and yet reſtrained by love, which I cannot tell
how, in noble minds, by a certain duty, claims an anſwer-
1ng. Sidney.
All the delights of love, wherein wanton youth walloweth,
be but folly mixed with bitterneſs, and ſorrow ſauced with
repentance. Spenſer.
Thou ſay'ſt his meat was ſaur'd with thy upbraidings;
Unquiet meals make ill digeſtions. Shakeſpeare.
SA'Ucebox. n.ſ.. [from ſauce, or rather from ſaucy.] An im-
pertinent or petulant fellow.
The fooliſh old poet ſays, that the ſouls of ſome women
are made of ſea-water: this has encouraged my ſaucebox to be
witty upon me. Addiſon's Spectator.
SA'ucepa N. n.ſ. [ ſance and pan.] A ſmall ſkillet with a long
handle, in which ſauce or ſmall things are boiled.
Your maſter will not allow you a ſilver ſaucepan. Swift.
SAU'cER. m. ſ. [ ſauciere, Fr. from ſauce.]
1. A ſmall pan or platter in which ſauce is ſet on the table.
Infuſe a pugil of new violets ſeven times, and it ſhall make
the vinegar ſo freſh of the flower, as, if brought in a ſaucer,
you ſhall ſmell it before it come at you. Bacon.
Some have miſtaken blocks and poſts
For ſpectres, apparitions, ghoſts, • -
With ſaucer eyes and horns. Hudibras.
2. A piece or platter of china, into which a tea-cup is ſet.
SA’ucily. adv. [from ſaucy.] Impudently; impertinently ;
petulantly; in a ſaucy manner. -- -
Though this knave came ſomewhat ſaucily into the world
before he was ſent for, yet was his mother fair. Shakeſp.
A freed ſervant, who had much power with Claudius, very
ſaucily, had almoſt all the words; and amongſt other things,
he aſked in ſcorn one of the examinates, who was likewiſe a
freed ſervant of Scribonianus, I pray, fir, if Scribonianus had
been emperor, what would you have done? He anſwered, I
would have ſtood behind his chair, and held my peace. Bacon.
A trumpet behaved himſelf very ſaucily. Addiſon.
SAu'ciness. n.ſ.. [from ſaucy.] Impudence; petulance; im-
pertinence; contempt of ſuperiours. -
with how ſweet ſaws ſhe blam'd their ſaucineſ,
To feel the panting heart, which through her ſide ...
Did beat their hands. . . Sidney.
By his authority he remains here, which he thinks is a pº
tent for his ſaucineſs. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
Being intercepted in your ſport,
Great reaſon that my noble lord be rated -
For ſaucineſs. Shaespeare. Titus Andronicus.
It is ſaucinºſ; in a creature, in this caſe, to reply. Bramh.
Imputing it to the natural faucineſs of a pedant, they made
him eat his words. knif ſº
You ſaucineſ, mind your pruning-knife, or I may tº
for º cineſ, y p c Dº Don Sebaſhian.
This might make all other ſervants challenge the ſame
liberty, and grow pert upon their maſtes; and when this
Jaucineſ, became univerſal, what leſs miſchief could be expected
than an old Scythian rebellion f Collier on Pride.
Sāticisse, n.f. [French.). In gunnery, a lºgº of pow-
der ſewed up in a roll of pitched cloth, about two inches dia-
meter, in order to fire a bombcheſt. ... - Bailey.
SAUcišSON. n.ſ. [French. J. In military archite&amp;ure, fag-
gots or faſcines made of large boughs of trees bound together.
They are commonly uſed to cover men; to make epaulments,
travčrſes, or breaſtworks in ditches full of water, to fºnder
the way firm for carriages. º
SAtjcy, adj. [I know not how this word can be eaſily deduce
from ſauce; it may come mºre properly from ſal tº 52 Latin.]
Pert; petulant; contemptuous of ſuperiours; inſolent; in-
: impertinent.
pº '... º ſaucy with lords than the heraldry of your
birth and virtue gives you commiſſion. *:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 302</div><p class="Text">S A V
S A V
is like the heav'ns glorious ſun,
riº not be deep ſearch'd with ſaucy looks;
Small have continual plodders ever won,
Save baſe authority from others' books: Shakeſpeare.
And if thou haſt the mettle of a king,
Being wrong'd as we are by this peeviſh town,
Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
As we will ours againſt theſe ſaucy walls. Shakespeare . K. Jºhn.
Power's firſt pedigree from force derives,
And calls to mind the old prerogatives
Of free-born man; and with a ſaucy eye &gt;
Searches the heart and ſoul of majeſty. . Denham's Sophy.
I loſe my patience, when with ſaucy pride
By untun'd ears I hear his numbers try’d.
No ſaucy citizen ſhall dare
To ſtrike a ſoldier, nor, when ſtruck, reſent, ,
The wrong. Dryden's juvenal.
Homer, to expreſs a man both timorous and ſaucy, makes
uſe of a kind of point, namely, that he had the ºyº" of a dog,
but the heart of a deer. Addiſon's Spectator.
To SAVE. v. a. [ſauver, ſaulver, French; falvo, Latin.]
1. To preſerve from danger or deſtrućtion.
Let me die ere men can ſay God ſave the queen: Shakeſp.
One ſhall cry, yet cannot he anſwer, nor ſave him out of
Roſcommon.
his trouble. Iſ xlvi. 7.
A wond’rous ark,
To ſave himſelf and houſhold from amidſt
A world devote to univerſal wreck. Milton.
We may be confident whatever he does is intended for our
good, and whatever we interpret otherwiſe we can get nothing
by repining, nor ſave anything by reſiſting. Temple.
The circling ſtreams, once thought but pools of blood,
From dark oblivion Harvey's name ſhall ſave. Dryden.
2. To preſerve finally from eternal death.
Whatſoever we read in Scripture concerning the endleſs
love and ſaving mercy which God ſheweth towards his church,
the only proper ſubječt thereof is this church. Hooker.
There are ſome that will be ſaved, and ſome that will be
damned. Shakeſpeare.
We are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but
of them that believe, to the ſaving of the ſoul. Heb. x. 39.
His merits ſave them. Milton.
He who feareth God, and worketh righteouſneſs, and per-
ſeveres in the faith and duties of our religion, ſhall certainly
º be ſaved. Fºgers.
º 3. Not to ſpend; to hinder from being ſpent.
With your coſt you terminate the cauſe,
- And ſave th' expence of long litigious laws,
Where ſuits are travers'd, and ſo little won,
That he who conquers is but laſt undone. Dryden.
4. To reſerve or lay by.
He ſhall not feel quietneſs, he ſhall not ſave of that which
he deſired. job xx. 20.
- 5. To ſpare; to excuſe.
Will you not ſpeak to ſave a lady's bluſh Dryden.
Our author ſaves me the compariſon with tragedy. Dryd.
º Theſe finews are not ſo much unſtrung,
To fail me when my maſter ſhould be ſerv'd;
And when they are, then will I ſteal to death,
: Silent and unobſerv'd, to Jave his tears. Dryd. Don Sebaſt.
6. Tc ſalve; to reconcile.
How build, unbuild, contrive
To ſave appearances; how gird the ſphere
With centrick and eccentrick. Milton's Parad. Loft.
7. To take or embrace opportunely, ſo as not to loſe.
The ſame perſons, who were chief confidents to Cromwell,
fºreſeeing a reſtoration, ſeized the caſtles in Ireland, juſt ſaving
the tide, and putting in a ſtock of merit ſufficient. Swift.
! To SAVE. v. m. To be cheap.
. Braſs ordnance ſaveth in the quantity of the material, and
in the charge of mounting and carriage. Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
SA v E. adv. [This word, adverbially uſed, is, like except, origi-
nally the imperative of the verb.j Except; not including.
But being all defeated, Jave a few, o
Rather than fly, or be captiv'd, herſelf ſhe ſlew. Fa $ºw
All the conſpirators, ſave only he, - - - -
Did that they did in envy of great Caeſar. Shakeſp.
He never put down a near ſervant, Jave only Stanley, the
lord chamberlain. Bacon's Hºnºvii
converſe,
Milton.
How have I then with whom to hold
A' . with the creatures which I made
.*.*, *ſ, ſ ſave and all.] A ſmall pan inſ -
S candleſtick to ſave the ends 3 candles. pan inſerted into a
| *...*.ſ. (from ſave.]
I . Preſerver; reſcuer.
ey were "unifoldly acknowledged the Javers of that
country. -
2. One who eſcapes loſs, Sidney.
aws of arms
though without gain.
- - Permit each injur'
To make himſelf a ſaver where . In an
ho dares affirm this -
- 1S 1s no
When charity begins to tread tº:º
Dryden.
When ačlors, who at beſt are hardly ſaverſ,
will give a night of benefit to weavers :
3. A good huſband. -
4. One who lays up and grows rich.
By nature far from profuſion, and yet a greater ſparer than
a ſaver ; for though he had ſuch means to accumulate, yet his
garriſons and his feaſtings ſoaked his exchequer. Iſotton.
SA'v1N. m. J. [ſalina, Latin ; ſavin, ſabin, Fr.] A tree.
It hath compact, rigid, and prickly ever-green leaves: the
fruit is ſmall, ſpherical, and warted; and the whole plant has
a very rank ſtrong ſmell. The ſpecies are three, and com- .
monly cultivated for medicinal uſe. Miller.
SA’v ING. adj. [from ſave.]
1. Frugal; parcimonious ; not laviſh.
She loved money; for ſhe was ſaving, and applied her for-
tune to pay John's clamorous debts. Arbuthn. Hiſt. of j. Bull.
Beſaving of your candle. Swift.
2. Not turning to loſs, though not gainful.
Silvio, finding his application unſucceſsful, was reſolved to
make a ſaving bargain; and ſince he could not get the widow's
eſtate, to recover what he had laid out of his own. Addison.
SA'ving. adv. [This is nothing more than a participle of the
verb ſave adverbially uſed.] With exception in favour of.
All this world's glory ſeemeth vain,
And all their ſhows but ſhadows, ſaving ſhe. Spenſer.
Such laws cannot be abrogated, ſaving only by whom they
were made ; becauſe the intent of them being known unto
none but the author, he alone can judge how long it is re-
quiſite they ſhould endure. º Hºoker.
Saving the reverence due to ſo great a man, I doubt not but
they did all creep out of their holes. Ray on the Creation.
SA'ving. n.ſ.. [from ſave.]
1. Eſcape of expence; ſomewhat preſerved from being ſpent.
It is a great ſaving in all ſuch lights, if they can be made
as fair and right as others, and yet laſt longer. Bacon.
By reducing intereſt to four per cent. there was a conſider-
able ſaving to the nation; but this year they give ſix. Addiſon.
2. Exception in favour.
Contend not with thoſe that are too ſtrong for us, but ſtill
with a ſaving to honeſty; for integrity muſt be ſupported
againſt all violence. L'E/irange.
Savingly. adv. [from ſaving.] With parcimony.
SA'vi NG NEss. n.ſ.. [from ſaving.]
1. Parcimony; frugality.
2. Tendency to promote eternal ſalvation.
SA'viour. n.ſ.. [ſauveur, Latin.] Redeemer; he that has
ſaved mankind from eternal death.
So judg’d he man, both judge and Saviour ſent. Milton.
However conſonant to reaſon his precepts appeared, no-
thing could have tempted men to acknowledge him as their
God and Saviour, but their being firmly perſuaded of the mi-
racles he wrought. Addiſon.
To SA'UNTER. v. n. [aller a la ſainte terre, from idle people who
roved about the country, and aſked charity under pretence of
going a la ſainte terre, to the holy land; or ſans terre, as
having no ſettled home.] To wander about idly; to
loiter; to linger.
The cormorant is ſtill ſauntering by the ſea-ſide, to ſee if he
can find any of his braſs caſt up. L’Eſtrange.
Tell me, why ſaunt'ring thus from place to place
I meet thee? Dryden's juvenal.
Though putting the mind upon an unuſual ſtreſs that may
diſcourage, ought to be avoided; yet this muſt not run it into
a lazy ſauntering about ordinary things. Locke.
Yourſelf look after him, to cure his ſauntering at his buſi-
neſs. Locke.
If men were weaned from their ſauntering humour, wherein
they let a good part of their lives run uſeleſly away, they
would acquire ſkill in hundreds of things. Lºcke.
So the young’ſquire, when firſt he comes
From country ſchool to Will's or Tom's,
Without one notion of his own, -
He ſaunters wildly up and down. Prior.
The brainleſs ſtripling
Spells uncouth Latin, and pretends to Greek;
A ſaunt'ring tribeſ ſuch born to wide eſtates, -
With yea and no in ſenates hold debates. Tickel.
Here ſºuntring prentices o'er Otway weep. Gay.
Led by my hand, he ſaunter'd Europe round, -
Dunciad.
d gather'd ev'ry vice.
S ... . ſ. [. % French; ſatureia, Latin.] A plant.
It is of the verticillate kind, with a labiated flower, whoſe
upper lip or creſt is divided into two parts; but the lower lip
of beard is divided into three parts, the middle part being cre-
nated: theſe flowers are produced from the wings of the leaves
in a looſe order, and not in whorles or ſpikes, as are moſt of
this tribe of plants. Miller.
SA'vou R. n.ſ. [ ſaveur, French.]
1. A ſcent; odour.
What ſavour is better, if phyſick be true,
For places infected, than wormwood and rue?
Benzo calls its ſmell a tartarous and helliſh ſavour.
Taſer.
Abbot.
Turn
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 303</div><p class="Text">S Aw
S A Y
3 ſº.
tit
dº.
£a.
ić.
&amp;
:
º
Turn then my freſheſt reputation to
A ſavour that may ſtrike the dulleſt noſtril? Shakeſpeare.
I ſmell ſweet ſavours, and I feel ſoft things. Shakeſp.
That Jews ſtink naturally, that is, that there is in their
race an evil ſavour, is a received opinion we know not how
to admit. Brown's Wulgar Errouri.
Truffles, which have an excellent oil, and a volatile ſalt of
a grateful favour, are heating: Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. Taſte; power of affecting the palate.
I taſte
The ſavour of death from all things. Milton.
A direéter influence from the ſun gives fruit a better ſavour
and a greater worth. South.
To SA’vour. v. n. [ſavourer, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To have any particular ſmell or taſte.
2. To betoken; to have an appearance or taſte of ſomething.
This ripping of anceſtors is very pleaſing, and ſavoureth of
ood conceit and ſome reading. Spenſer on Ireland.
The duke's anſwers to his appeachments are very diligently
and civilly couched; and though his heart was big, yet they all
favour of an humble ſpirit. J%tton.
If 'twere a ſecret that concern'd my life,
This boldneſs might become thee;
But ſuch unneceſſary rudeneſs ſavours
Of ſome deſign. Denham's Sophy.
I have rejected everything that ſavours of party. Addiſon.
To SA’vour. v. a.
1. To like.
Wiſdom and goodneſs to the vile ſeem vile;
Filths ſavour but themſelves. Shakeſpeare.
2. To exhibit taſte of.
Thou ſavoureſ not the things that be of God. Goſpel.
- That ſavours only of rancour and pride. Milton.
SA'vour ILY. adv. [from ſavoury.]
1. With guſt; with appetite.
The collation he fell to very ſavouriſy. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
This mufti is ſome Engliſh renegado, he talks, ſo ſavourity
of toaping. Dryd. Don Sebaſtian.
2. With a pleaſing reliſh.
There's a dearth of wit in this dull town,
When filly plays ſo ſavouriy go down. Dryden.
SA’vou RIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſavoury.]
1. Taſte pleaſing and picquant.
2. Pleaſing ſmell.
SA'vou RY. adj. [ſavoureux, Fr. from ſavour.]
1. Pleaſing to the ſmell.
The pleaſant ſavoury ſmell
So quicken'd appetite, that I
Could not but taſte! Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
From the boughs a ſavoury odour blown,
Grateful to appetite more pleas'd my ſenſe
Than ſmell of ſweeteſt fennel, or the teats
Of eve, or goat, dropping with milk at ev'n. Milton.
2. Picquant to the taſte.
Savoury meat, ſuch as my father loveth. Gen.
The ſavoury pulp they chew. Milton.
SAvo'Y. n.ſ.. [braſſica ſubaudica, Latin.] A ſort of colwort.
SA/USA G.E. n.ſ. [ ſaiciſe, French; ſalſum, Latin.] A roll or
ball made commonly of pork or veal, and ſometimes of beef,
minced very ſmall, with ſalt and ſpice; ſometimes it is ſtuffed
into the guts of fowls, and ſometimes only rolled in flower.
Saw. The preterite of ſee.
I never ſaw 'till now
Sight more deteſtable. Miltºn.
SAW. n.ſ. [ ſawe, Daniſh ; raža, or rige, Saxon; ſcie, Fr.]
1. A dentated inſtrument, by the attrition of which wood or
metal is cut.
The teeth are filed to an angle, pointing towards the end of
the ſaw, and not towards the handle of the ſaw, or ſtraight
between the handle and end; becauſe the ſaw is deſigned to
act only in its progreſs forwards, a man having in that more
ſtrength than he can have in drawing back his ſaw, and there-
fore when he draws it back, he bears it lightly off the unfawn
ſtuff, which enables him the longer to continue his ſeveral
progreſſions of the ſaw. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
The roach is a leather-mouth'd fiſh, and has ſaw like teeth
in his throat. //alton's Angler.
Then ſºws were tooth'd, and ſounding axes made. Dryd.
If they cannot cut,
His ſaws are toothleſs, and his hatchets lead. Pºpe.
2. [Saza, Sax. ſaeghe, Dut.]. A ſaying; a ſentence; a proverb.
Good king, that muſt approve the common ſaw:
Thou out of heaven's benedićtion com'ſt
To the warm ſun Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
From the table of my memory
I'll wipe away all ſaws of books.
His weapons, holy ſaws of ſacred writ;
His ſtudy in his tilt-yard. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Strićt age and four ſeverity,
With their grave ſaws in ſlumber lie. Milton.
To SAw. part. ſaved and ſawn. [ſcier, French; from the noun.]
To cut timber or other matter with a ſaw.
They were ſtoned, they were ſawn aſunder. Heb. xi. 37.
Shakeſ Hamlet.
- A carpenter, after he hath fawn down a tree, and wrought
1t handſomely, ſets it in a wall. J/i/d. xiii. 1 1.
It is an incaleſcency, from a ſwift motion, ſuch as that of
running, threſhing, or Jawing. Ray on the Creation.
If I cut my finger, I ſhall as certainly feel pain as if my ſoul
. sºme with the limb, and had a piece of it ſawn
rough. Collier.
Maſter-workmen, when they direét any of their underlings
to ſaw a piece of ſtuff, have ſeveral phraſes for the ſawing of
it; they ſeldom ſay, ſaw the piece of ſtuff; but, draw the ſaw
through it; give the piece of ſtuff a kerſ. AMoxºn.
It is the carpenters work to hew the timber, ſaw it out, and
frame it. Mortimer.
SA'wdust. m.ſ.. [ſaw and duſt.] Duſt made by the attrition
of the ſaw.
If the membrane be fouled by the ſawduſ of the bone,
wipe it off with a ſponge. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Rotten ſawduſt, mixed with earth, enriches it very much.
AMortimer’s Haſbandry.
SA'wfish. m. ſ. [ ſaw and fiſh..] A ſort of fiſh. Ainſw.
SA'w pit. m. ſ. [ſaw and pit..] Pit over which timber is laid
to be ſawn by two men.
Let them from forth a ſawpit ruſh at once
With ſome diffuſed ſong. Shakeſp. Merry ſºlves of Windſ.
They colour it by laying it in a ſawpit that hath oak ſaw-
duſt therein. Mortimer's Huslandry.
SAw-wort. n.ſ.. [ſerratula, Latin.] A plant.
It hath a floſculous flower, conſiſting of ſeveral florets di-
vided into many parts, reſting on the embryo, and contained
in a ſcaly empalement, like the greater centaury, from which
this differs in having ſmaller heads, and from the knapweed in
having the borders of the leaves cut into ſmall ſharp ſegments,
reſembling the teeth of a ſaw. Miller.
SAw-w Rest. m. ſ. [ ſaw and wreſt.] A ſort of tool.
With the ſaw-wrºft they ſet the teeth of the ſaw ; that is,
they put one of the notches of the wreſt between the firſt two
teeth on the blade of the ſaw, and then turn the handle hori-
zontally a little about upon the notch towards the end of the
ſaw ; and that at once turns the firſt tooth ſomewhat towards
you, and the ſecond tooth from you. . Moxon's Alech, Exer.
SA'we R. N. m.ſ.. [ſieur, French; from ſaw.] One whoſe trade
SA'w YER. } is to ſaw timber into boards or beams. -
The pit-ſaw is uſed by joiners, when what they have to do
may be as ſoon done at home as ſend it to the ſawyers, 44.xon.
SA'x1FRAGE. n.ſ. [ ſaxifrage, Fr. ſaxifraga, Lat..] A plant.
The flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves placed orbicularly,
which expand in form of a roſe, out of whoſe multifid flower:
cup riſes the pointal, which commonly ends in two horns, and
afterward turns, together with the flower-cup, into a roundiſh
fruit, which has likewiſe two horns and two cells, which are
full of ſmall ſeeds. Miller. -
Saxifrage, quaſi ſaxum frangere, to break the ſtone, is ap:
plicable to anything having this property; but is a term moſt
commonly given to a plant, from an opinion of its medicinal
virtues to this effect. &amp;Minºy.
SA'x1FRAGE Meadow. n.ſ.. [ſlanum, Latin.] A plant,
It hath a roſe and unbelated flower, conſiſting of ſeveral
leaves placed circularly, and reſting upon the empalement,
which afterward becomes a fruit compoſed of two ſhort chan-
nelled ſeeds. - -
SA'x1FR acous. adj. [ſixum and frago, Latin.] Diſſolvent of
the ſtone. - -
Becauſe goat's blood was found an excellent medicine for the
ſtone, it might be conceived to be able to break a diamond; and
ſo it came to be ordered that the goats ſhould be fed on ſaxi-
fragous herbs, and ſuch as are conceived of power tº break
the ſtone. Brown's Pulgar Erroirs.
To SAY. v. a. preter. ſaid. [reczan, Saxon; ſºggen, Dutch.]
1. To ſpeak; to utter in words; to tell. -
Say it out, Diggon, for whatever it hight;
For nought but well mought him betight,
He is ſo meek. Stºſº.
In this ſlumbry agitation what have you heard her ſay? Sºak.
Speak unto Solomon; for he will not ſay thee n°y. ' Kings.
2. To allege. --- a--
Afterålican be ſaid againſt a thing, this will ſtill be º:
that many things poſſibly are, which we know not of Ti £
In vain ſhall we attempt to juſtify ourſelves, as the rich
young man in the goſpel did, by appealing to the gº º:
àf the law; unleſs we can ſºy ſomewhat mo", *.*.*.*
we have been liberal in our diſtributions to the Pº" Aite, bury.
. To tell in any º d ſeeming great pretence
With flying ſpeed, and ſeeming #" :
Came hº letters which his meſſage ſaid. F. &amp;.
To SAY. v. n. to utter -
- : to pronounce ; to -
I. "º. º, I have ſomewhat to ſay unto thee; and
- Kings ii. 14.
ſhe ſaid, ſay on. 1 Airg; i.
.. #: to any man, but go thy way. Aſaſ. 1, 4:.
Tº the others he ſaid, go ye after him. 1.2ek. ix. 5.
The council-table and ſtar-chamber hold, as Thucydides
Jaid of the Athenians, for honourable that which pleaſed, and
- - -*-* --&gt; Narendon.
for juſt that sº profited. cº,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 304</div><p class="Text">S C A
S C A
The lion here has taken his right meaſures, that is to ſay,
- 'Eſrange.
de a true judgment. - ... [. s:
hº iºn as undetermined as if he ºſ:
ociºe.
ino about it. - -
nº. to weigh with thoſe whoſe reading is deſigned
for much täk and little knowledge, and I have nothing º ſº
- 04 Ace.
t. -
to 1 tions it may be difficult to ſay whether, they
Of ſome propoſi
affirm or deny; as when we ſay, Plato was no fool. //atts.
2. In poetry, ſay is often uſed before a queſtion; tell.
Say firſt what cauſe -
Milton.
Mov'd our grand parents to fall off?
Say, Stella, feel you no content,
Reflecting on a life well-ſpent.
SAY. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſpeech; what one has to ſay. - -
He no ſooner ſaid out his ſay, but up riſes a cunning
ſnap. L’Eſtrange.
2. [ For aſſay..] Sample.
[ sº . looks ſo fair and warlike,
And that thy tongue ſome ſay of breeding breathes,
By rule of knighthood I diſdain. Shakeſpeare.
So good a ſay invites the eye,
A little downward to eſpy
The lively cluſters of her breaſts.
3. Trial by a ſample.
This gentleman having brought that earth, to the publick
'ſay maſters, and upon their being unable to bring it to fuſion,
or make it fly away, he had procured a little of it, and with
a peculiar flux ſeparated a third part of pure gold. Boyle.
4. [Soie, French.J Silk. Obſolete.
5. A kind of woollen ſtuff.
SA'YING.. n.ſ.. [from ſay..] Expreſſion; words; opinion ſen-
tentiouſly delivered.
I thank thee, Brutus,
That thou haſt prov'd Lucilius’ ſaying true. Shakeſpeare.
Moſes fled at this ſaying, and was a ſtranger in Median. Acţi.
Many are the ſaying of the wiſe,
Extolling patience as the trueſt fortitude. Milton.
Others try to divert the troubles of other men by pretty and
plauſible ſayings, ſuch as this, that if evils are long, they are
but light. Till ſon's Sermons.
We poetick folks, who muſt reſtrain
Our meaſur'd ſayings in an equal chain,
Have troubles utterly unknown to thoſe,
Who let their fancy looſe in rambling proſe. Prior.
The ſacred funètion can never be hurt by their ſaying, if
not firſt reproached by our doings. Atterbury.
SCAB. m. ſ. [rcaeb, Saxon; ſcabbia, Italian; ſhalle, Dutch ;
ſcabies, Latin.]
1. An incruſtation formed over a ſore by dried matter.
What's the matter, you diſſentious rogues,
That rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourſelves ſabs? Shakeſp. Corio'anus.
That free from gouts thou may’ſ preſerve thy care,
And clear from ſcabs, produc’d by freezing air. Dryden.
2. The itch or mange of horſes.
3. A paltry fellow, ſo named from the itch often incident to
negligent poverty.
I would thou did'ſt itch from head to foot, and I had the
ſcratching of thee, I would make thee the loathſom'ſ ſab in
Swift.
Sidney.
Greece. - Shakespeare Troilus and Creſda.
Well ſaid, wart, thou art a good ſcab : there is a teſter for
thee. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
One of the uſurers,
dudgeon to be ranked,
rier.
This vap'ring ſcal muſt needs deviſe
To ape the thunder of the ſkies. Swift.
ScA'BBARD. n.ſ.. [ſhap, German. junius.] The ſheath of a
ſword.
a head man of the city, took it in
check by joul, with a ſtal of a cur-
L'Eſtrange.
Enter fortune's gate,
Nor in thy ſcabbard ſheath that famous blade,
*Till ſettled be thy kingdom and eſtate.
What eyes! how keen their glances !
'em veil'd:
bard.
ScA'bbed. adj. [from ſab.]
I. º or diſeaſed with ſcabs.
2. º makes thoſe that eat them ſtabled. Bacon.
To you ſuch ſabb'd harſh fruit is giv'n, as raw
Young ſoldiers at their exerciſings gnaw.
Fairfax.
you do well to keep
they are too ſharp to be truſted out o' th' ſcab-
Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Dryden.
º n: ſ [from ſcabbed. J. The ſtate of being
ScA’ r
CA BB IN Ess. n ſ. [ from ſcabby. ] The quality of being
S ſcabby.
*A*BY: adj. [from Jºab.] Diſeaſed with ſcabs.
Her writhled *in, as rough as mapple rind,
So ſtably was, that
» would have loath'd all womankind.
{\ſcally tetter on their pelts will ſtick, nd. F. Q.
When the raw rain his Pierc'd them to the quick. Dryden.
If the grazier ſhould bring me one wether, fat and well
flecced, and expect the ſame price for a whole hundred, with-
out giving me ſecurity to reſtore my money for thoſe that were
lean, ſhorn, or ſcally, I would be none of his cuſtomer. Sw ift.
ScA'Bºots. adj. [ſcabiºſus, Latin.] Itchy; leprous,
In the Spring ſcabious eruptions upon the ſkin were epidemi-
cal, from the acidity of the blood. Arbuthnot on Air.
ScA'bious. n.ſ. (ſabiruſ, Fr. ſalººſa, Latin.] A plant.
It hath a floſculous flower, conſiſting of many unequal flo-
rets, contained in a common empalement: ſome of theſe,
which occupy the middle, are cut into four or five ſegments;
the reſt, which are placed at the edge, are bilabiated: each of
theſe ſits on the top of the embryo, which is crowned, and is
contained in a proper empalement, which afterward becomes
a capſule, either ſimple or funnel: ;hapcd, pregnant with a ſeed
crowned, which before was the cmbryo. Miller.
SCA’BROUS. adj. Iſabreux, Fr. ſaler, Latin.]
1. Rough ; rugged; pointed on the ſurface.
Urine, black and bloody, is occaſioned by ſomething ſharp
or ſcabrous wounging the ſmall blood-veſſels: if the ſtone is
ſmooth and well bedded, this may not happen. Arbuthnot.
2. Harſh; unmuſical.
Lucretius is ſabrous and rough in theſe: he ſeeks them, as
ſome do Chauceriſms with us, which were better expunged.
Ben. Johnſºn's Diſcoveries.
ScA'brous Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſatrcur. J Roughneſs; rugged-
neſs.
ScA'Bw or T. n. ſ. A plant. Ainſworth.
Scad, n. ſ. A kind of fiſh. Probably the ſame with ſºad.
Of round fiſh there are ſprat, barn, ſmelts, and ſºad. Carew.
SCA/FFOLD. m. ſ. ſ ſhafaut, French; ſhavat, Dutch, from
ſhawen, to ſhow J
1. A temporary gallery or ſtage raiſed either for ſhows or ſpec-
tat OTS.
Pardon
The flat unraiſed ſpirit, that hath dar'd
On this unworthy ſcaffold to bring forth
So great an object.
The throng
On banks and ſcaffold, under ſky might ſtand.
2. The gallery raiſed for execution of great malefactors.
Fortune ſmiling at her fortune therein, that a ſtaffold of exe-
cution ſhould grow a ſcaffold of coronation. Sidney.
3. Frames of timber erected on the ſide of a building for the
workmen. -
Theſe outward beauties are but the props and ſtaffold:
On which we built our love, which, now made perfect,
Stands without thoſe ſupports. Denham's Sophy.
Sylla added three hundred commons to the ſenate; then
aboliſhed the office of tribune, as being only a ſcaffold to
tyranny, whereof he had no further uſe. Swift.
To ScAFFold. v. a. [from the noun..] To furniſh with frames
of timber.
ScA'FFold Age. m. ſ. [from ſtaffºld.] Gallery; hollow floor.
A ſtrutting player doth think it rich
To hear the wooden dialogue and ſound,
'Twixt his ſtretch'd footing and the ſcaffoldage.
ScAFFol DiN G. m. ſ. [from ſcaffold.]
1. Temporary frames or ſtages.
What are riches, empire, power,
But ſteps by which we climb to riſe and reach
Our wiſh; and, that obtain'd, down with the ſcaffolding
Of ſceptres and of thrones. Congrave.
Sickneſs, contributing-no leſs than old age to the ſhaking
down this ſaffºlding of the body, may diſcover the inward
ſtructure. Pope.
2. Building ſlightly erected. .
Send forth your lab'ring thought;
Let it return with empty notions fraught,
Of airy columns every moment broke,
Of circling whirlpools, and of ſpheres of ſmoke:
Yet this ſolution but once more affords -
New change of terms and ſtaffolding of words. Priºr.
ScALA’DE. Un.ſ. [French; ſalada, Spaniſh, from ſala, Latin,
ScALA'Do. } a ladder.] A ſtorm given to a place by raiſing
ladders againſt the walls. --- -
What can be more ſtrange than that we ſhould within two
months have won one town of importance by ſalade, batteº
and aſſaulted another, and overthrown great forces in the
field? Pacon.
Thou raiſedſt thy voice to record the ſtratagems, the ardu-
ous exploits, and the noćturnal ſalade of needy heroes, the
terror of your peaceful citizens. Arbuthn. Hiſt. ºf j. Bull.
Sca'LARY, adj. [from ſala, Latin.] Proceeding by ſteps like
thoſe of a ladder.
He made at nearer diſtances certain elevated places and ſa-
lary aſcents, that they might better aſcend or mouſ their
horſes. Brown's Pulgar Errº.
To SCALD. v. a. [ſaldare, Italian; ca idus, Latin.] To
burn with hot liquor.
I am ſalaed with my violent motion,
And ſpleen of ſpeed to ſee you,
2
Shakespeare Henry V.
Milton.
Shakespeare
Shakespeare King john.
() majeſty'<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 305</div><p class="Text">S C A
º
º:
º
º:
O mºiefly
When thou doſt pinch thy bearer, thou do'ſt ſt
Jike a rich armour worn in heat of day,
That ſald, with ſafety. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Thou art a ſoul in bliſs ; but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do ſtald like molten lead.
Here the blue flames of ſcalding brimſtone fall,
Involving ſwiftly in one ruin all. Cowley.
Scalding tears wore a channel where they fell. Dryden.
That I grieve, ’tis true; -
But 'tis a grief of fury, not deſpair
And if a manly drop or two fall down,
It ſcald, along my checks, like the greenwood,
That, ſputt'ring in the flame, works outward into tears.
Dryden's Cleomenes.
It depends not on his will to perſuade himſelf, that what
aćtually ſcalds him, feels cold. Jocke.
Has he any other wound about him, except the accidental
ſcaldings of his wort? Addiſon.
Warm cataplaſms diſcuſs; but ſcalding hot may confirm the
tumour: heat, in general, doth not reſolve and attenuate the
juices of a human body; for too great heat will produce con-
cretions. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The beſt thing we can do is to ſald him ;
For which ºperation there's nothing more proper
Than the liquor he deals in, his own melted copper. Swift.
2. A provincial phraſe in huſbandry.
In Oxfordſhire the four land they fallow when the ſun is
pretty high, which they call a ſtal ſing fallow. 44ortimer.
Scald, n.ſ. (from the verb.] Scurff on the head.
Her head, altogether bald,
Was overgrown with ſcurff and filthy ſcald. Spenſer.
ScAL.D. adj. Paltry; ſorry.
Saucy lićtors
Will catch at us like ſtrumpets, and ſald rhymers
Ballad us out o' tune. Shakeſpeare.
ScA'LD HEAD. m. ſ. [ſkalladur, bald, Iſlandick. Hickes.] A
loathſome diſeaſe; a kind of local leproſy in which the head
is covered with a continuous ſcab.
The ſerum is corrupted by the infection of the touch of
a ſalt humour, to which the ſcab, pox, and ſcaldhead are re-
ſerable. Flyer.
SCALE. n.ſ. [rcale, Saxon; ſchael, Dutch ; ſºal, Iſlandick.j
1. A balance; a veſſel ſuſpended by a beam againſt another
veſſel.
If thou tak’ſ more
Or leſs than juſt a pound, if the ſcale turn
But in the eſtimation of a hair,
Thou dieſt. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
Your vows to her and me, put in two ſcales,
Will even weigh, and both as light as tales. Shakeſpeare.
Here's an equivocator, that could ſwear, in both the ſales,
againſt either ſcale; who committed treaſon enough for God's
ſake, yet could not equivocate to heaven. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Long time in even ſcale
The battle hung. Milton's Parad. Loft, b. vi.
The world's ſales are even; what the main -
In one place gets, another quits again. Cleaveland.
The ſales are turn'd, her kindneſs weighs no more
Now than my vows. //aller.
In full aſſemblies let the crowd prevail;
I weigh no merit by the common ſcale,
The conſcience is the teſt. Dryden.
If we conſider the dignity of an intelligent being, and put
that in the ſcales againſt brute inanimate matter, we may af-
firm, without overvaluing human nature, that the ſoul of one
virtuous and religious man is of greater worth and excellency
than the ſun and his planets. Bentley's Sermons.
2. The ſign Libra in the Zodiack.
Juno pours out the urn, and Vulcan claims
The ſales, as the juſt produćt of his flames. Creech.
3. [Eſaille, French; ſuama, Latin.] The ſmall ſhells or cruſts
which lying one over another make the coats of fiſhes.
He puts him on a coat of mail,
Which was made of a fiſh's ſcale. Drayton.
Standing aloof, with lead they bruiſe the ſales,
And tear the fleſh of the incenſed whales. J/aller.
4. Any thing exfoliated or deſquamated; a thin lamina.
Take jet and the ſcales of iron, and with a wet feather,
when the ſmith hath taken an heat, take up the ſales that fly
from the iron, and thoſe ſcales you ſhall grind upon your
painter's ſtone. Peacham.
When a ſtal of bone is taken out of a wound, burning re-
tards the ſeparation. Sharp's Surgery.
5. [Scala, a ladder, Latin.] Ladder; means of aſcent.
Love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges; hath his ſeat
In reaſon, and is judicious; is the ſcale
By which to heav'nly love thou may’ſ aſcend. Milton.
On the bendings of theſe mountains the marks of ſeveral
Shakeſp. King Lear.
S C A
*cient ſcales of flairs may be ſeen, by which they uſed to
aſcend them. Addiſon on Italy.
6. The act of ſtorming by ladders. ſ 9
Others to a city ſtron
Lay ſiege, encamp'd , by batt'ry, ſcale, and mine
Aſſaulting. - Milt Parad. Lºft.
7. Regular gradation; a regular ſeries riſing like a ladder.
Well haſt thou the ſcale of nature ſt,
From centre to circumference; whereon
In contemplation of created things,
By ſteps we may aſcend to God Mºt. Par. Loft.
The ſcale of the creatures is a matter of high ſpecula-
-
tion. - Grew.
. The higher nature ſtill advances, and preſerves his ſuperio-
rity in the ſcale of being. Addiſon.
All the integral parts of nature have a beautiful analogy to
one another, and to their mighty original, whoſe images are
more or leſs expreſſive, according to their ſeveral gradations
in the ſale of beings. Cheyne', thiſ. Princ.
We believe an inviſible world, and a ſcale of ſpiritual beings
all nobler than ourſelves. Bentley's Sermons.
Far as creation's ample range extends,
The ſcale of ſenſual mental pow'rs aſcends. Pope.
In contemplation's ſcale I'll ſoar,
And be enraptur'd more and more;
Whilſt thus new matter of ſurpriſe
In each gradation ſhall ariſe. Macbean.
8. A figure ſubdivided by lines like the ſteps of a ladder, which
is uſed to meaſure proportions between pićtures and the thing
repreſented.
The map of London was ſet out in the year 1658 by Mr.
Newcourt, drawn by a ſcale of yards. Graunt.
9. The ſeries of harmonick or muſical proportions.
The bent of his thoughts and reaſonings run up and down
this ſcale, that no people can be happy but under good govern-
ments. Temple.
10. Anything marked at equal diſtances.
They take the flow o' th' Nile
By certain ſale i' th' pyramid: they know
By th’ height, the lowneſs, or the mean, if dearth
Or foizon follow. Shakespeare Ant, and Ceopatra.
To ScAL E. v. a. [ſcalare, Italian.]
1. To climb as by ladders.
Often have I ſcal'd the craggy oak,
All to diſlodge the raven of her neſt:
How have I wearied, with many a ſtroke,
The ſtately walnut-tree, the while the reſt
Under the tree fell all for nuts at ſtrife Stemſer.
Upon the ceaſing of the great artillery they aſſailed the
breach, and others with their ſcaling ladders ſcaled the walls.
Knoles’s Hiſtory of the Turks.
The way ſeems difficult, and ſteep, to ſcale
With upright wing againſt a higher foe. Milton.
Heav'n with theſe engines had been ſcal’d,
When mountains heap'd on mountains fail'd. Waller.
When the bold Typhaeus ſcal'd the ſky,
And forc’d great Jove from his own heav'n to fly,
The leſſer gods all ſuffer'd. Dryden.
2. To meaſure or compare; to weigh.
You have found, - -
Scaling his preſent bearing with his paſt,
That he's your fixed enemy. Shakespeare Corio'anus.
3. [From ſcale of a fiſh.] To take off a thin lamina.
Raphael was ſent to ſcale away the whiteneſs of Tobit's
eyes. Tob. iii. 17.
4. To pare off a ſurface.
If all the mountains were ſcaled, and the earth made even,
the waters would not overflow its ſmooth ſurface. Bur ºt.
To ScALE. v. m. To peel off in thin particles.
Thoſe that caſt their ſhell are the lobſter and crab : the old
ſkins are found, but the old ſhells never; ſo as it is like they
ſcale off, and crumble away by degrees. Baron.
Scaled. adj. [from ſcale.j Squamous; having ſcales like
ſhes.
Half my Egypt was ſubmerg'd, and made
A ciſtern for ſcal'd ſnakes. Shakeſp. Ant and Cleºpat.
SCALENE, n.ſ. [French ; ſcalenum, Latin.] In geometry,
a triangle that has its three ſides unequal to each other. Bailey.
Sca'LINEss. n ſ [from ſtay J . The ſtate of being ſcaly.
ScAll. n.ſ.. [ſkalladur, bald, Iſlandick. See ScAld HEAD.]
Leproſy; morbid baldneſs. ---
it is a dry ſall, a leproſy upon the head. Lev. xiii. 30.
Sca'llion. n.ſ.. [ſcaloyna, Italian; aſcalonia, Latin.] A kind
of onion. -
Sca’llop. n.ſ. [...ſcalp, French.] A fiſh with a hollow pec-
tinated ſhell. -
So th’ emperour Caligula,
That triumph'd o'er the Britiſh ſea,
Engag’d his legions in fierce buſtles
with periwincles, prawns, and muſcles;
And led his troops with furious gallops, -
To charge whole regiments of ſcallops, Hai.
c<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 306</div><p class="Text">S C A
S C A
The ſand is in Scilly gliſtering, which may be occaſioned
from freeſtone mingled with white ſcallop ſhells. Mortimer.
To ScA'llop. v. a. To mark on the edge with ſegments of
circles.
Scalp. m. ſ. [ſchelpe, Dutch, a ſhell; ſcalpo, Italian.]
1. The ſcull; the cranium; the bone that incloſes the brain.
High brandiſhing his bright dew-burning blade,
Upon his creſted ſcalp ſo fore did ſmite,
That to the ſcull a yawning wound it made. Fairy Queen.
O gentle Puck, take this transformed ſcalp
From off the head of this Athenian ſwain,
That he awaking, when the others do,
May all to Athens back again repair. Shakeſpeare.
White beards have arm'd their thin and hairleſs ſcalps
Againſt thy majeſty. Shakeſp. Richard II.
The hairy ſcalps -
Are whirl’d aloof, while numerous trunks beſtrow
Th’ enſanguin'd field. Philips.
If the fracture be not complicated with a wound of the
ſcalp, or the wound is too ſmall to admit of the operation,
the fracture muſt be laid bare by taking away a large piece of
the ſºap. Sharp's Surgery.
2. The integuments of the head.
To Scalp. v. a. [from the noun..] To deprive the ſcull of its
integuments.
We ſeldom inquire for a fraćture of the ſcull by ſalping,
but that the ſcalp itſelf is contuſed. Sharp.
SCALPEI, n. / [Fr. ſcalpellum, Latin.] An inſtrument uſed
to ſcrape a bone by chirurgeons.
ScAly. adi, [from ſcale.] Covered with ſcales.
The river horſe and ſtay crocodile. Milton.
His awful ſummons they ſo ſoon obey;
So hear the ſcaly herd when Proteus blows,
And ſo to paſture follow through the ſea. Dryden.
A ſcaly fiſh with a forked tail. Woodward.
To SCA'MBLE. v. n. [This word, which is ſcarcely in uſe,
has much exerciſed the etymological ſagacity of Meric Caſau-
bon; but, as is uſual, to no purpoſe.]
I. To be turbulent and rapacious; to ſcramble; to get by ſtrug-
gling with others.
Have freſh chaff in the bin,
And ſomewhat to ſcamble for hog and for hen. Tuſſer.
Scambling, out-facing, faſhion-mong’ring boys,
That lie, and cog, and flout, deprave and ſlander. Shakeſp.
That ſelf bill is urg'd, and had againſt us paſt,
But that the ſcambling and unquiet time
Did puſh it out of further queſtion. Shakespeare Henry V.
He was no ſooner entered into the town but a ſcambling
ſoldier clapt hold of his bridle, which he thought was in a
begging or a drunken faſhion. J%tton.
2. To ſhift sº
Some ſcambling ſhifts may be made without them. More.
To ScA'MBle. v. a. To mangle; to maul.
My wood was cut in patches, and other parts of itſ ambled
and cut before it was at its growth. Mortimer.
ScA'MBLER. n.ſ. [Scottiſh.] A bold intruder upon one's ge-
neroſity or table.
ScA'MBLING LY. adv. [from ſcambling.] With turbulence and
noiſe; with intruſive audaciouſneſs.
ScAM Mo'NIATE. adj. [from ſcammony.] Made with ſcam-
In On W.
It º be excited by a local, ſcammoniate, or other acrimo-
nious medicines. H/iſeman's Surgery.
SCA/MMONY. m. ſ. [Latin ; ſcammonée, French.] A con-
creted reſinous juice, light, tender, friable, of a greyiſh-brown
colour, and diſagreeable odour. It flows upon inciſion of the
root of a kind of convolvulus, that grows in many parts of
Aſia. Trevaux.
To ScA'MPER. v. n. [ſchampen, Dutch; ſcampare, Italian.]
To fly with ſpeed and trepidation.
A fox ſeized upon the fawn, and fairly ſtampered away with
him. L’Eſtrange.
You will ſuddenly take a reſolution, in your cabinet of
Highlanders, to ſtamper off with your new crown. Addiſon.
He quick, nay very quick, or he'll approach,
And as you're ſcamp'ring ſtop you in your coach. King.
To ScAN. v. a. [ſcandre, French ; ſcando, Latin.]
1. To examine a verſe by counting the feet.
Harry, whoſe tuneful and well meaſur’d ſong
Firſt taught our Engliſh muſick how to ſpan
Words with juſt note and accent, not to ſcan
With Midas' ears, committing ſhort and long. Milton.
They ſcan their verſes upon their fingers, run after con-
ceits and glaring thoughts. JWaſh.
2. To examine nicely.
So he goes to heav'n,
And ſo am I reveng'd: that would be ſcann'd. Shakespeare Ham.
The reſt the great archite&amp;
Did wiſely to conceal; and not divulge
His ſecrets to be ſcann’d by them, who ought
Rather admire. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. viii.
Every man has ſome guilts, which he deſires ſhould not be
rigorouſly ſcanned; and therefore, by the rule of charity and
juſtice, ought not to do that which he would not ſuffer.
Government of the Tºngue.
At the final reckoning, when all mens ačtions ſhall be
ſcanned and judged, the great king ſhall paſs his ſentence, ac-
cording to the good men have done, or neglected to do. Calam.
Sir Roger expoſing his palm, they crumpled it into all
ſhapes, and diligently ſcanned every wrinkle that could be
made in it. Addison.
The aëtions of men in high ſtations are all conſpicuous,
and liable to be ſcanned and fifted. Atterbury.
In full fruition of ſucceſsful pow'r,
One moment and one thought might let him ſtan
The various turns of life, and fickle ſtate of man. Prior.
SCANDAL. n.ſ. [Tzalvºxxov; ſcandle, French.]
1. Offence given by the faults of others.
His luſtful orgies he enlarg'd
Even to the hill of ſtandal, by the grove
Of Moloch homicide. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b.i.
2. Reproachful aſperſion; opprobrious cenſure; infamy. -
If black ſcandal, or foul-fac’d reproach,
Attend the ſequel of your impoſition,
Your meer enforcement ſhall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and ſtains thereof. Shakespeare R. III.
My known virtue is from ſtandal free,
And leaves no ſhadow for your calumny. Dryd, Aurengz.
In the caſe of ſtandal, we are to refle&amp;t how men ought to
judge. Rogers'; Sermont.
To Sca'Ndal. v. a. [from the noun..] To treat oppro-
briouſly; to charge falſely with faults.
You repin'd,
Scandal'd the ſuppliants; for the people call'd them
Time-pleaſers, flatterers. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I do fawn on men, and hug them hard,
And after ſtandal them. Shakespeare julius Caſar.
To Sca'NdA Lize. v. a. [rzavºxxº~ ; ſcandaliſer, French;
from ſcandal J
1. To offend by ſome action ſuppoſed criminal.
I demand who they are whom we ſcandalize by uſing harm-
leſs things Among ourſelves, that agree in this uſe, no man
will ſay that one of us is offenſive and ſcandalous unto an-
other. Hooker.
It had the excuſe of ſome baſhfulneſs, and care not toſan-
dalize others. Hammond on Fundamental.
Whoever conſiders the injuſtice of ſome miniſters, in thoſe
intervals of parliament, will not be ſcandalized at the warmth
and vivacity of thoſe meetings. Clarendon.
Many were ſcandalized at the perſonal ſlander and refle&amp;tion
flung out by ſcandalizing libellers. Addison.
2. To reproach; to diſgrace; to defame.
Thou doſt appear to ſtandalize
The publick right, and common cauſe of kings. Daniel.
ScA'NDAlous, adj. [ſtandaleux, French; from ſtandal]
1. Giving publick offence.
Nothing ſcandalous or offenſive unto any, eſpecially unto
the church of God: all things in order, and with ſeemli-
neſs. Hºoker,
Something favouring
Of tyranny, which will ignoble make you,
Yea, ſcandalºus to the world. Shakespeare . Winter's Tale,
2. Opprobrious; diſgraceful.
3. Shameful; openly vile.
You know the ſtandalous meanneſs of that proceeding,
which was uſed. Pºpe.
ScANDA lously, adv. [from ſandalous.]
1. Cenſoriouſly; opprobriouſly.
Shun their fault, who, ſtandalouſy nice,
Will needs miſtake an author into vice. Pope.
2. Shamefully; ill to a degree that gives publick offence. . .
His diſcourſe at table was ſtandalouſly unbecoming the dig-
nity of his ſtation; noiſe, brutality, and obſceneneſs. Swift.
ScA'NdalousNess. n. ſ. [from ſtandalous.] The quality of
giving publick offence.
Sca'Nsion. m. ſ. [ſtarſi, Latin.] The aël or pračtice of ſcan-
ning a verſe.
To SCANT. v. a. [xercaenan, Saxon, to break; ſkaaner, Da-
niſh, to ſpare.] To limit; to ſtraiten.
You think
I will your ſerious and great buſineſs ſcant,
For ſhe is with me. Shakeſpeare's Othell.
They need rather to be ſtanted in their nouriſhment than
repleniſhed, to have them ſweet. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
We might do well to think with ourſelves, what time of
ſtay we would demand, and he bade us not to ſcant our-
ſelves. Bacon.
Looking on things through the wrong end of the perſpec-
tive, which ſtant; their dimenſions, we neglect and contemn
them. Glanv. Scºpſ,
Starve
1.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 307</div><p class="Text">S C A
S C A
l
t
l,
§
j,
º,
:
Starve them,
For fear the rankneſs of the ſwelling womb
Should ſcant the paſſage and confine the room. Dryden.
I am ſcanted in the pleaſure of dwelling on your ačtions.
Dryden's Fables, Dedication.
ScANT. adj. [from the verb.]
1. Wary ; not liberal; parcimonious.
From this time, -
Be ſomewhat ſcanter of your maiden preſence. Shakeſp.
2. Not plentiful; ſcarce; leſs than what is proper or competent.
White is a penurious colour, and where moiſture is ſcant :
ſo blue violets, and other flowers, if they be ſtarved, turn pale
and white. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A ſingle violet tranſplant:
The ſtrength, the colour, and the ſize,
All which before was poor and ſcant,
Redoubles ſtill and multiplies. Donne.
To find out that,
In ſuch a ſtant allowance of ſtar-light,
Would over-taſk the beſt land-pilot's art. Milton,
ScANT: adv. [from the adjećtive..] Scarcely; hardly.
The people, beſide their travail, charge, and long attend-
ance, received of the bankers ſtant twenty ſhillings for
thirty. Camden's Remains.
We ſtant read in any writer, that there have been ſeen any
people upon the ſouth coaſt. Abbot's Deſcript. of the //orld.
A wild pamphlet, beſides other malignities, would ſcant al-
low him to be a gentleman. Wotton.
O'er yonder hill does ſtant the dawn appear. Gay.
ScA'NTILY. adv. [from ſcanty.]
1. Sparingly; niggardly.
He ſpoke
Scantily of me, when perforce he could not
But pay me terms of honour. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleep.
2. Narrowly; not plentifully.
Sca'N TIN Ess. n. ſ. [from ſcanty.]
1. Narrowneſs; want of ſpace; want of compaſs.
Virgil has ſometimes two of them in a line ; but the ſcanti-
meſ of our heroick verſe is not capable of receiving more than
one. Dryden.
2. Want of amplitude or greatneſs.
Alexander was much troubled at the ſtantineſ of nature
itſelf, that there were no more worlds for him to diſturb. South.
ScA'NTLET. n.ſ.. [corrupted, as it ſeems, from ſcantling.] A
fmall pattern; a ſmall quantity; a little piece.
While the world was but thin, the ages of mankind were
longer; and as the world grew fuller, ſo their lives were ſuc-
ceſſively reduced to a ſhorter ſcantlet, 'till they came to that
time of life which they now have. Hae.
ScA'NTLING. m. ſ. ſeſhantillon, French ; ciantellino, Italian.]
1. A quantity cut for a particular purpoſe. - -
'Tis hard to find out a woman that's of a juſt ſtantling for
her age, humour, and fortune, to make a wife of:
L’Eſtrange.
2. A certain proportion.
- The ſucceſs, -
Although particular, ſhall give a ſtantling
Of good or bad unto the general. Shakespeare. Troil, and Crºſſ
3. A ſmall quantity. -
Reduce deſires to narrow ſantlings and ſmall proportions.
Taylºr's Rule of living holy.
A ſcantling of wit lay gaſping for life, and groaning beneath
a heap of rubbiſh. Dryden.
In this narrow ſcantling of capacity, we enjoy but one plea-
ſure at once. - Locke.
ScA'N TLY. adv. [from ſcant.]
1. Scarcely ; hardly. .
England, in the opinion of the popes, was preferred, be-
cauſe it contained in the eccleſiaſtical diviſion two large pro-
vinces, which had their ſeveral legati nati; whereas France
had ſcantly one. Camden's Remains.
2. Narrowly; penuriouſly; without amplitude.
My eager love, I'll give myſelf the lye ,
The very hope is a full happineſs,
Yet ſtantly meaſures what I ſhall poſſeſs. Dryden.
ScA'N' N Ess. n. ſ. [ from ſcant. J Narrowneſs; meanneſs;
ſmalneſs. -
- He was a man of a fierce ſpirit, and of no evil diſpoſition,
ſaving that he thought ſcantneſs of eſtate too great an evil.
Hayward.
Did we but compare the miſerable ſtantneſs of our capaci-
ties with the vaſt profundity of things, truth and modeſty
would teach us wary language. Glanv. Scepſ,
ScA'N TY. adj. [The ſame with ſant.]
1. Narrow; ſmall; wanting amplitude; ſhort of quantity ſuf-
ficient.
As long as one can increaſe the number, he will think the
idea he hath a little too ſcarity for poſitive infinity. Locke.
His dominions were very narrow and ſcanty; for he had not
the poſſeſſion of a foot of land, 'till he bought a field of the
ſons of Heth. - Zecke.
Now ſ antier limits the proud arch confine,
And ſcarce are ſeen the proſtrate Nile and Rhine;
A ſmall Euphrates through the piece is roll'd,
And little eagles wave their wings in gold. Pope,
2. Small, Poor; not copious; not ample.
Their language being ſtanty, and accommodated only to the
few neceſſaries of a needy ſimple life, had no words in it to
ſtand for a thouſand. Locke:
There remained few marks of the old tradition, ſo they
had narrow and ſcanty conceptions of providence. //codward.
They with ſuch ſcanty wages pay
The bondage and the ſlavery of years.
3. Sparing; niggardly; parcimonious.
In illuſtrating a point of difficulty, be not too ſtanty of
wºrds, but rather become copious in your language. Iſºtti.
To Scape. º. a. [contracted from jape.] To eſcape; to
avoid; to ſhun; not to incur; to fly.
What, have Iſcaped love-letters in the holyday time of my
beauty, and am I now a ſubjećt for them Shakeſpeare.
I doubt not but to die a fair death, if I ſcape hanging. Shakespeare
What can ſcape the eye
Swift.
Of God all-ſeeing? Milton.
To Scape. v. n. To get away from hurt or danger.
Could they not fall unpity'd on the plain,
But ſlain revive, and, taken, ſcape again. Dryden.
Scape. n.ſ. (from the verb.]
1. Eſcape; flight from hurt or danger; the aët of declining or
running from danger; accident of ſafety.
I ſpoke of moſt diſaſtrous chances,
, Of hair-breadth ſcapes in th’ imminent deadly breach. Shakespeare
2. Means of eſcape; evaſion.
Having purpos'd falſhood, you
Can have no way but falſhood to be true !
Vain lunatick, againſt theſe ſcapes I could
Diſpute, and conquer, if I would.
3. Negligent freak. -
No natural exhalation in the ſky,
No ſcape of nature, no diſtemper'd day,
But they will pluck away its nat'ral cauſe,
And call them meteors, prodigies, and ſigns.
4. Looſe act of vice or lewdneſs. .. -
A bearne a very pretty bearnel ſure ſome ſ. : though I
am not bookiſh, yet I can read waiting-gentlewoman in the
ſcape. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale,
Thou lurk'dſt
In valley or green meadow, to way-lay
Some beauty rare, Caliſto, Clymene:
Too long thou laid'ſt thyſcapes on names ador'd.
SCAPULA. n.ſ. [Latin.] The ſhoulder-blade.
The heat went off from the parts, and ſpread up higher to
the breaſt and ſcapula. JWiſeman.
ScA'PULAR. Nadj. [ſcapulaire, Fr. from ſcapula, Lat..] Re-
ScA'PULARY. } lating or belonging to the ſhoulders.
The humours diſperſed through the branches of the axil-
lary artery to the ſcapulary branches. Wiſeman of Ulcers.
The viſcera were counterpoiſed with the weight of the ſca-
pular part. Derham.
SCAR. n.ſ.. [from eſchar, eſcare, French ; tax4ez.] A mark
made by a hurt or fire; a cicatrix.
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some ſcar of it. Shakeſp. As you like it.
The ſoft delicious air,
To heal the ſcars of theſe corroſive fires, -
Shall breathe her balm. - Miltºn.
It may be ſtruck out of the omniſciency of God, and leave
no ſtar nor blemiſh behind. More.
This earth had the beauty of youth and blooming nature,
and not a wrinkle, ſcar, or fracture on all its body. Burnet.
In a hemorrhage from the lungs ſtypticks are often inſig-
IDonne.
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
nificant; and if they could operate upon the affected part, ſo -
far as to make a ſcar, when that fell off, the diſeaſe would re-
turn. Arbuthnot on Diet.
To ScaR. v. a. [from the noun.] To mark as with a fore or
wound.
Yet I’ll not ſhed her blood,
Nor ſºar that whiter ſkin of her’s than ſnow, ..
And ſmooth as monumental alabaſter. Shakespeare Othelo.
ScA'Rap. m. ſ. [ſarabie, Fr. Jarateus, Latin.] A beetle ;
an inſe&amp;t with ſheathed wings.
A ſmall ſcarab is bred in the very tips of elm-leaves?. theſe
leaves may be obſerved to be dry and dead, as alſo turgid, in
which lieth a dirty, whitiſh, rough maggot, from which pro-
ceeds a beetle. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
ScA'RAMouch. n. ſ. ſºftarmouche, Fr.] * buffoon in motly
dreſs. -
iſ makes the ſolemnities of juſtice pageantry, and the bench
reverend poppets, or caramouches in ſcarlet. Collier,
SCAR CE. adj. [yearſo, Italian; /chaeri, Dutch..]
I. Nº. sººn no more ſell you his hemp for leſs ſilver, be-
cauſe you tell him ſilver is ſtarter now in England, and there-
23 F fore<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 308</div><p class="Text">- S C A
S C A
fore riſen one fifth in value, than a tradeſman of London will
fell his commodity cheaper to the Iſle of Man, becauſe money
is ſcarce there. Locke.
2. Rare; not common. - -
The ſarcºſ ºf all is a Pºžennius Niger on a medallion well
preſerved. Addiſon.
tºº. ład. [from the adjećtive.]
1. Hardly; ſcantly.
A thing which we ſo little hoped to ſee, that even they
which beheld it done ſcarcely believed their own ſenſes. Hooker.
When we our betters ſee bearing our woes,
We ſtarrel; think our miſeries our foes. Shakespeare King Lear.
Age, which unavoidably is but one remove from death,
and conſequently ſhould have nothing about it but what looks
like a decent preparation for it, ſcarce ever appears, of late
days, but in the high mode, the flaunting garb, and utmoſt
gaudery of youth. South.
You neither have enemies, nor can ſcarce have any. Dryd.
2. With difficulty.
He ſcarcely knew him, ſtriving to diſown
His blotted form, and bluſhing to be known.
Slowly he ſails, and ſcarcely ſtems the tides;
The preſſing water pours within her ſides.
ScA'RCEN ess. }*ſ [from ſcarce.]
Dryden.
Dryden.
ScA'RCITY.
J. Smalneſs of quantity; not plenty; penury.
Scarcity and want ſhall ſhun you;
Ceres' bleſfing ſo is on you. Shakeſpeare.
Raphael writes thus concerning his Galatea: to paint a fair
one, ’tis neceſſary for me to ſee many fair ones; but, becauſe
there is ſo great a ſcarcity of lovely women, I am conſtrained
to make uſe of one certain idea, which I have formed in my
fancy. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Corn does not riſe or fall by the differences of more or leſs
plenty of money, but by the plenty and ſcarcity that God
ſends. Lºcke.
In this grave age, when comedies are few,
We crave your patronage for one that's new,
And let the ſcarceneſs recommend the fare. Addiſon.
They drink very few liquors that have not lain in freſco, in-
ſomuch that a ſcarcity of ſnow would raiſe a mutiny at
Naples. Addison.
2. Rareneſs; infrequency; not commonneſs.
s They that find fault with our ſtore, ſhould be leaſt willing
. to reprove our ſcarcity of thankſgivings. Hooker.
Since the value of an advantage is enhanced by its ſcarceneſs,
it is hard not to give a man leave to love that moſt which is
moſt ſerviceable. Collier on Pride.
To SCARE. v. a. [ſcorare, Italian. Skinner.] To fright; to
frighten; to affright; to terrify; to ſtrike with ſudden fear.
They have ſcored away two of my beſt ſheep, which, I
fear, the wolf will ſooner find than the maſter. Shakeſpeare.
Poor Tom hath been ſºared out of his good wits. Shakeſp.
My grained aſh an hundred times hath broke,
And ſcar'd the moon with ſplinters. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
The noiſe of thy croſs-bow
Willſ are the herd, and ſo my ſhoot is loſt. Shakespeare H. VI.
Scarecrows are ſet up to keep birds from corn and fruit; and
ſome report that the head of a wolf, whole, dried, and hanged
up in a dovehouſe, will ſcare away vermin. Bacon.
- The wing of the Iriſh was ſo grievouſly either galled or
ſºared therewith, that being ſtrangers, and in a manner neu-
trals, they had neither good heart to go forward, nor good
liking to ſtand ſtill, nor good aſſurance to run away. Hayward.
The light
Waves threaten now, as that was ſtar'd by fire. J/aller.
One great reaſon why mens good purpoſes ſo often fail, is,
that when they are devout, or ſcared, they then in the general
reſolve to live religiouſly. Calamy's Sermons.
Let wanton wives by death beſar'd;
But, to my comfort, I'm prepar’d. Priºr.
ScA'RecRow. n.ſ. [ ſcare and crow.] An image or clapper ſet
up to fright birds: thence any vain terrour. -
Thereat the ſºarecrow waxed wond’rous proud,
Through fortune of his firſt adventure fair,
And with big thundering voice revil'd him loud. Fa. Queen.
No eye hath ſeen ſuch ſcarecrows ; I'll not march through
Coventry with them, that's flat. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
We muſt not make a ſcarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
And let it keep one ſhape, ’till cuſtom make it
Their pearch, and not their terrour. Shakeſpeare.
Many of thoſe great guns, wanting powder and ſhot, ſtood
but as cyphers and ſcareerows. Raleigh.
Aftarecrow ſet to frighten fools away. Dryden.
ScA'RE FIRE. m. ſ. [ſ.are and fire.] A fright by fire; a fire
breaking out ſo as to raiſe terrour.
The drum and trumpet, by their ſeveral ſounds, ſerve for
many kind of advertiſements; and bells ſerve to proclaim a
ſtartſire, and in ſome places water-breaches. Iłolder.
SCARF. n.ſ. [eſharf, French..] Anything that hangs looſe
upon the ſhoulders or dreſs.
The matrons flung their gloves,
Ladies and maids their ſcarſ; and handkerchiefs,
Upon him as he paſs'd. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Will you wear the garland about your neck, or under your
arm, like a lieutenant's ſcarf? Shakeſpeare.
Iris there, with humid bow,
Waters th’ odorous banks, that blow
Flowers of more mingled hew
Than her purſed ſcarf can ſhow. Milton.
Titian, in his triumph of Bacchus, having placed Ariadne
on one of the borders of the picture, gave her a ſarf of a
vermilion colour upon a blue drapery. Dryden.
The ready nymphs receive the crying child;
They ſwath'd him with their ſcarfs. Dryden.
My learned correſpondent writes a word in defence of large
ſcarves. Spectator.
Put on your hood and ſtarſ, and take your pleaſure. Swift.
To ScaRF. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To throw looſely on.
My ſea-gown ſcarft about me, in the dark
Grop'd I to find them out. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. To dreſs in any looſe veſture.
How like a younker, or a prodigal,
The ſcarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hugg’d and embraced by the ſtrumpet wind! Shakeſpeare.
Come, feeling night,
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day. Shakespeare Macbeth.
ScA'RFski N. n.ſ.. [ſcarf and ſkin..] . The cuticle; the epider-
mis; the outer ſcaly integuments of the body.
The ſtarſkin, being uppermoſt, is compoſed of ſeveral lays
of ſmall ſcales, which lie thicker according as it is thicker in
one part of the body than another: between theſe the excre-
tory dućts of the miliary glands of the true ſkin open. Cheyne.
Scarification. n.ſ.. [ſcarificatio, Lat. ſcarification, French;
from ſcarify J Inciſion of the ſkin with a lancet, or ſuch like
inſtrument. It is moſt practiſed in cupping. &amp;uincy.
Hippocrates tells you, that, in applying of cups, the ſtariff-
cation ought to be made with crooked inſtruments. Arbuthnot.
Scarific Attor. n.ſ.. [from ſcariff.] One who ſcarifies.
ScA'R1F1ER. m. ſ. [from ſcarify.]
1. He who ſcarifies.
2. The inſtrument with which ſcarifications are made.
To SCA'RIFY. v.a. [ſarifico, Lat. ſcarifier, Fr.] To let blood
by inciſions of the ſkin, commonly after the application of
cupping-glaſſes.
Waſhing the ſalts out of the eſchar, and ſtariffing it, I
dreſſed it. Wiſeman's Surgery:
You quarter foul language upon me, without knowing whe-
ther I deſerve to be cupped and ſcarified at this rate. Speciator.
SCARLET. n.ſ. [eſcarlate, French; ſcarlatº, Ital.] A colour
deeply red, but not ſhining; cloath dyed with a ſcarlet colour.
If we live thus tamely,
To be thus jaded by a piece of ſcarlet,
Farewel nobility. Shakespeare's Henry VIII.
As a bull
Amid the circus roars; provok'd from far
By fight of ſcarlet and a ſanguine war.
Would it not be inſufferable for a learned profeſſor, and
that which his ſcarlet would bluſh at, to have his authority of
forty years ſtanding in an inſtant overturned. Locke.
ScA'R1. ET. adj. [from the noun..] Of the colour of ſcarlet;
red deeply died.
I conjure thee,
By her high forchead and her ſtarlet lip. Shakespeare Rº, and jul.
Thy ambition,
Thou ſcarlet fin, robb'd this bewailing land
Of noble Buckingham. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
The Chineſe, who are of an ill complexion, being olivafter,
paint their cheeks ſea let. Pacon.
The ſcarlet honour of your peaceful gown. Drydºn.
ScA'RLETBEAN. m. ſ. [ ſcarlºt and bean.] A plant. -
The ſcarlºtbean has a red huſk, and is not the beſt to eat in
the ſhell, as kidneybeans; but is reputed the beſt to be eaten
in Winter, when dry and boiled. Mortimer's Husbandry.
ScA'RLE to Ak. n.ſ. The ilex. A ſpecies of oak.
f
ğ. {m. ſ. [For ſkirmiſh. Sfeſſºr.]
Such cruel game my ſarmage: diſarms;
Another war, and other weapons I,
Do love, when love does give his ſweet alarms. Fa, Queen.
ScARP. n.ſ. [eſcarpe, French.) The ſlope on that ſide of a
ditch which is next to a ſortified place, and looks towards
the fields. Dić7.
Scatch. n.ſ. [ ſache, French. J A kind of horſebit for
bridles. Bailey.
Scatches. n.ſ.. [chaſis, French.] Stilts to put the feet in to
walk in dirty places. Bailey.
ScAt E. n.ſ.. [ſidor, Swediſh; ſºid, Iſlandick.] A kind of
wooden ſhoe, with a ſteel plate underneath, on which they
ſlide over the ice.
Dryden.
I To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 309</div><p class="Text">S C A
S C E
ºff,
*
lſº
º;
**
- - *
iſº,
To ScAt E. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſlide on ſcates.
Sc.A.T.E. n ſ [ſquatus, Latin. J A fiſh of the ſpecies of
thornback.
ScA't EBRous. adj. [from ſcatebrae, Latin.] Abounding with
ſprings. Dić7.
To SCATH. v. a. [rceasan, rcaşan, Saxon; ſchaeden, Dut.]
To waſte; to damage; to deſtroy.
As when heaven's fire
Hath ſºath'd the foreſt oaks, or mountain pines,
With ſinged top their ſtately growth, though bare,
Stands on the blaſted heath. Milton's Parad, Loft, b. i.
ScAth. n.ſ. [rceab, Saxon. J . Waſte; damage; miſchief;
depopulation. Scath in Scotland denotes ſpoil or damage: as,
he bears the ſcath and the ſcorn. A proverb.
She ſuborned hath
This crafty meſſenger, with letters vain,
To work new woe and unprovided ſcath. Fairy Queen.
The ear that budded fair is burnt and blaſted,
And all my hoped gain is turn'd to ſcath. Spenſer.
He bore a ſpiteful mind againſt king Edward, doing him
all the ſath that he could, and annoying his territories. Spºnſer.
My proud one doth work the greater ſcath,
Through ſweet allurement of her lovely hue. Spenſer.
They placed them in Rhodes, where daily doing great ſath
to the Turk, the great warrior Soliman, with a mighty army,
ſo overlaid them, that he won the iſland from them. Knolles.
Still preſerv'd from danger, harm, and ſcath,
By many a ſea and many an unknown ſhore. Fairfax.
ScA'THFUL. adj. [from ſcath..] Miſchievous; deſtructive.
A bawbling veſſel was he captain of,
For ſhallow draught, and bulk unprizable,
With which ſuch ſcathful grapple did he make,
That very envy, and the tongue of loſs,
Cried fame and honour on him. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
To SCATTER. v. a. [rcatenan, Saxon; ſchatteren, Dutch.]
1. To throw looſely about ; to ſprinkle.
Where cattle paſtur'd late, now ſcatter'd lies
With carcaſes and arms th’ enſanguin'd field. Milton.
Teach the glad hours to ſcatter, as they fly,
Soft quiet, gentle love, and endleſs joy. Prior.
Corruption, ſtill
Voracious, ſwallow’d what the liberal hand
Of bounty ſcatter'd o'er the ſavage year.
2. To diffipate; to diſperſe.
A king, that fitteth in the throne of judgment, ſcattereth
away all evil with his eyes. Prov. xx. 8.
The Lord ſhall cauſe his glorious voice to be heard with
Jcattering and tempeſt and ſtones. Iſ, xxx. 30.
Samuel came not to Gilgal, and the people were ſcattered
Thomſon.
from Saul. 1 Sa. xiii. 8.
Adam by this from the cold ſudden damp
Recovering, and his ſcatter'd ſprits return'd. Milton.
3. To ſpread thinly.
Why ſhould my muſe enlarge on Libyan ſwains,
Their ſcatter'd cottages and ample plains. . Dryden.
To ScATTER. v. n. To be diſfipated; to be diſperſed.
Sound diffuſeth itſelf in rounds; but if that which would
fatter in open air, be made to go into a canal, it gives greater
force to the ſound. Bacon.
The ſun
Shakes from his noon-day throne the ſcattering clouds. Thom.
ScA't TERING LY. adv. [from ſcattering.] Looſely; diſperſedly.
The Spaniards have here and there ſcatteringly, upon the
ſea-coaſts, ſet up ſome towns. Abbot.
Thoſe drops of prettineſs, ſcatteringly ſprinkled amongſt the
creatures, were deſigned to defecate and exalt our conceptions,
not to inveigle or detain our paſſions. Boyle.
ScA*tt ERLING.. n.ſ.. [from ſcatter.] A vagabond; one that
has no home or ſettled habitation.
Such loſels and ſ atterlings cannot eaſily, by any ordinary
officer, be gotten, when challenged for any ſuch fact. Spenſer.
Gathering unto him all the ſcatterlings and outlaws out of all
the woods and mountains, in which they long had lurked, he
marched forth into the Engliſh pale. Spenſer on Ireland.
Scat U'RIENT. adj. [ſtaturiens, Latin.] Springing as a foun-
tain. Die?.
ScATURI'GINous. adj. [from ſcaturigo, Latin.] Full of ſprings
or fountains. Die?.
ScA've NGER. m. ſ. [from reapan, to ſhave, perhaps to ſweep,
Saxon J A petty magiſtrate, whoſe province is to keep the
ſtreets clean.
Since it is made a labour of the mind, as to inform mens
judgments, and move their affections, to reſolve difficult places
of Scripture, to decide and clear off controverſies, I cannot
ſee how to be a butcher, ſea enger, or any other ſuch trade,
does at all qualify men for this work. Sºuth's Sermonſ.
Faſting s nature's ſcavenger. Baynard.
Dick the ſa enger, with equal grace,
Flirts from his cart the mud in Walpole's face. Swift.
SCE LERA T. n. ſ. [French ; ſeleratus, Latin. J A vil-
Jain; a wicked wretch. A word introduced unneceſſarily
from the French by a Scottiſh author.
Scelerats can by no arts ſtifle the cries of a wounded con-
ſcience. Cheyne.
Scº'NARY. n.ſ.. [from ſent.]
1. The appearances of place or things.
He muſt gain a reliſh of the works of nature, and be
cºnverſant in the various ſcenar, of a country life. Addison.
2. The “Preſentation of the place in which an agion is per-
formed.
The progreſs of the ſound, and the ſcenary of the border-
ing regions, are imitated from Ain. Wii, -
horn of Alečto. in. vii. on the º:
3. The diſpoſition and conſecution of the ſcenes of a play.
l To º a more º model of a pićture, is, in the
anguage of poets, to draw up the ſcenary of a play, -
SCENE. m. ſ. [ſcana, Latin; gº ſº Dryden
1. The flage ; the theatre of dramatick poctry.
Cedar and pine, and fir and branching palm,
A ſylvan ſcene; and as t e ranks aſcend’
Shade above ſhade, a woody theatre
Of ſtatelieſt view. Mitcm.
2. The general appearance of any action; the whole contexture
of objects; a diſplay; a ſeries; a regular diſpoſition.
Now prepare thee for another ſcene. Milton.
A mute ſcene of ſorrow, mixt with fear;
Still on the table lay the unfiniſh’d cheer. Dryden.
A larger ſcene of action is diſplay'd,
And, riſing hence, a greater work is weigh’d. Dryden.
Ev'ry ſev'ral place muſt be
Aſcene of triumph and revenge to me. Dryden.
When riſing Spring adorns the mead,
A charming ſcene of nature is diſplay’d. Dryden:
Eternity thou pleafing, dreadful thought !
Through what variety of untry'd beings,
Through what new ſcene and changes muſt we paſs Addison
About eight miles diſtance from Naples lies a very noble
ſcene of antiquities: what they call Virgil's tomb is the
firſt. Addiſon on Italy.
Say, ſhepherd, ſay, are theſe refle&amp;tions true?
Or was it but the woman's fear that drew }
This cruel ſcene, unjuſt to love and you. Prior.
3. Part of a play.
It ſhall be ſo my care
To have you royally appointed, as if
The ſcene you play were mine. Shake? Winter's Tale.
Our author would excuſe theſe youthful ſcenes
Begotten at his entrance. Gran "ille.
4. So much of an act of a play as paſſes between the ſame per-
ſons in the ſame place.
If his chara&amp;ters were good,
The ſenes entire, and freed from noiſe and blood,
The action great, yet circumſcrib'd by time,
The words not forc'd, but ſliding into rhime,
He thought, in hitting theſe, his buſineſs done. Dryden.
5. The place repreſented by the ſtage. -
The king is ſet from London, and the ſcene
Is now tranſported to Southampton. Shakespeare Hen. V.
6. The hanging of the theatre adapted to the play.
The alteration of ſcenes feeds and relieves the eye, before it
be full of the ſame object. Bacon.
Sce'Nick. adj. [ ſcenique, Fr. from ſte, e.] Dramatick; theatrical,
With ſenick virtue charm the riſing age. An nym.
Scenographical. adj [axºvii and Yºzºw. J Drawn in
perſpective.
Scenog RAPHIcAlly. adv. [from ſcenographical.] In per-
ſpe&amp;tive.
If the workman be ſkilled in perſpective, more than one
face may be repreſented in our diagram ſcenographically, Mart.
ScE'Nog RAPHY. m. ſ. [gznyń and Yººpw; ſcenographie, Fr.]
The art of perſpective.
SCENT. n.ſ. [ entir, to ſmell, French.]
1. The power of ſmelling; the ſmell.
A hunted hare treads back her mazes, croſſes and con-
founds her former track, and uſes all poſible methods to divert
the ſcent //atts', ſm rovement of the Mind.
2. The obječt of ſmell; odour good or bad.
Belman cried upon it at the meereſt loſs,
And twice to-day pick'd out the dulleſt ſcent. Shakeſpeare.
The plague, they report, hath a ſcent of the ſmell of a mel-
low apple. Bacon.
Good earth, newly turned up, hath a freſhneſs and good
ſcent. Bacon.
Good ſcents do purify the brain, -
Awake the fancy, and the wits refine. Davier.
Partake - -
The ſeaſon, prime for ſweeteſt ſcents and airs. Milton.
Exulting, 'till he finds their nobler ſenſe
Their diſproportion'd ſpeed does recompenſe;
Then curſes his conſpiring feet, whoſe /*
Betrays that ſafety whº hubeir ſwitneſs lent.
Chearful health, - -
His duteous handmaid, through the air improv’d, -
with laviſh hand diffuſ's ſee tº ambroſial. Prior.
3. Chace followed by the ſmell. . .
He gained the obſervations of innumerable ages, and tra-
velled upon the ſame ſcent into AEthiopia. Twº
Q
Denham s<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 310</div><p class="Text">S C H
S C H
To Scent. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſmell; to perceive by the noſe.
So ſcented the grim feature, and upturn'd
His noſtrils wide into the murky air,
Sagacious of his quarry from ſo far. Milton's Par. Lºft.
2. To perfume; or to imbue with odour good or bad.
Balm, from a ſilver box diſtill'd around,
Shall all bedev the roots, and ſcent the ſacred ground. Dryd.
He ſpies
His op'ning hounds, and now he hears their cries;
A gen’rous pack, or to maintain the chace,
Or ſnuff the vapour from theſ: graſs. Addiſon.
Sce's less, adj. [from ſcent.] ſnodorous; having no ſmell.
SCEPTRE. m.ſ. [ſceptrum, Latin; ſceptre, Fr.] The enſign
of royalty born in the hand.
Nor ſhall proud Lancaſter uſurp my right,
Nor hold the ſceptre in his childiſh fiſt, Shakespeare Henry VI.
--- Thou ſceptre's heir,
That thus affect'ſt a ſheephook. Shakeſpeare.
How, beſt of kings, do'ſt thou a ſceptre bear!
How, beſt of poets, do'ſt thou laurel wear ! .
But two things rare the fates had in their ſtore,
And gave thee both, to ſhew they could no more. B. johnſ.
The ſceptre bearers lent
Their free attendance. Chapman's Odyſſey.
The parliament preſented thoſe ačts which were prepared
by them to the royal ſceptre, in which were ſome laws reſtrain-
ing the extravagant power of the nobility. Clarendon.
The court of Rome has, in other inſtances, ſo well atteſted
its good managery, that it is not credible crowns and ſceptres
are conferred gratis. Decay of Piety.
Sce'PTR.Ed. adj [from ſceptre.] Bearing a ſceptre.
The ſceptred heralds call
To council, in the city-gates. . . Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
To Britain's queen the ſcepter'd ſuppliant bends,
To her his crowns and infant race commends. Tickel.
Sc E'ptick. n.ſ. See Skeptick.
Sche'DULE. n.ſ.. [ſchedula, Latin; ſhedule, French.]
1. A ſmall ſcroll.
The firſt publiſhed ſchedules being brought to a grave knight,
he read over an unſavory ſentence or two, and delivered back
the libel. Hooker.
All ill, which all
Prophets or poets ſpake, and all which ſhall
B' annex'd in ſchedules unto this by me,
Fall on that man.
2. A little inventory.
I will give out ſchedules of my beauty: it ſhall be invento-
ried, and every particle and utenſil label'd to my will. Shakespeare
Sche's Atis M. n ſ. [axmudſliguès. J Combination of the
aſpects of heavenly bodies; particular form or diſpoſition of a
thing.
Every particle of matter, whatever form or ſchematiſm
it puts on, muſt in all conditions be equally extended, and
therefore take up the ſame room. Creech.
SchE'MATIST. n.ſ.. [from ſcheme.] A proječtor; one given to
forming ſchemes.
SCHEME. m. ſ. [rzºuz.]
1. A plan; a combination of various things into one view, de-
ſign, or purpoſe ; a ſyſtem.
Were our ſenſes made much quicker, the appearance and
outward ſcheme of things would have quite another face to us,
and be inconſiſtent with our well being. Locke.
We ſhall never be able to give ourſelves a ſatisfactory ac-
count of the divine condućt, without forming ſuch a ſcheme of
things as ſhall at once take in time and eternity. Atterbury.
2. A projećt; a contrivance; a deſign.
t The haughty monarch was laying ſchemes for ſuppreſſing the
ancient liberties, and removing the ancient boundaries of king-
doms. Atterbury's Sermons.
He forms the well-concerted ſcheme of miſchief;
'Tis fix’d, 'tis done, and both are doom'd to death. Rowe.
The ſtoical ſcheme of ſupplying our wants by lopping of
our deſires, is like cutting off our feet when we want
ſhoes. - Swift.
3. A repreſentation of the aſpects of the celeſtial bodies; any
lineal or mathematical diagram.
It hath embroiled the endeavours of aſtrology in the erec-
tion of ſchemes, and the judgment of death and diſeaſes.
Brown's Pulgar Errours.
It is a ſcheme and face of heaven,
As th' aſpects are diſpos'd this even. Hudibras.
Sche'MER. m. ſ. [from ſcheme.] A projećtor; a contriver.
Sc He's is. n ſ [axiwi:..] An habitude; ſtate of any thing
with reſpect to other things.
If that mind which has exiſting in itſelf from all eternity
all the ſimple eſſences of things, and conſequently all their
poſſible ſcheſes or habitudes, ſhould ever change, there would
ariſe a new ſchºſis in the mind, which is contrary to the ſup-
poſition. Norris.
Sci'RR Hus. n.ſ. [ ſtirrhe, French. This ſhould be written ſkir-
thus, not merely becauſe it comes fom a zºos, but becauſe c
Donne.
in Engliſh has before e and i the ſound of ſ. See Skeptick.]
An indurated gland.
Any of theſe three may degenerate into a ſtirrhus, and that
ſcirrhus into a cancer. J/ijeman of Tumours.
Schi'RRHous. adj. [from ſtirrhus...] Having a gland indu-
rated.
How they are to be treated when they are ſtrumous, ſtir-
rhous, or cancerous, you may ſee. Wijeman.
SciRRHo'sity. n.ſ.. [from ſtirrhous J. An induration of the
lands.
£ The difficulty of breathing, occaſioned by ſtirrhºſities of the
glands, is not to be cured. Arbuthnot on Diet.
SCHISM. n.ſ.. [axiapo, ; ſchiſme, Fr.] A ſeparation or divi-
ſion in the church of God.
Set bounds to our paſſions by reaſon, to our errours by
truth, and to our ſchiſms by charity. King Charles.
Oppoſe ſchiſms by unity, hypocriſy by ſober piety, and de-
bauchery by temperance. Spratt's Sermons.
When a ſchiſm is once ſpread, there grows at length a diſ-
pute which are the ſchiſmaticks: in the ſenſe of the law the
ſchiſm lies on that ſide which oppoſes itſelf to the religion of
the ſtate. Swift.
Schism A^tical. adj. [ſchiſmatique, Fr. from ſchiſmatick.] Im-
plying ſchiſm; practiſing ſchiſm.
By theſe tumults all factions, ſeditions, and fchimatical pro-
poſals againſt government, eccleſiaſtical and civil, muſt be
backed. - King Charles.
Here bare anathema's fall but like ſo many bruta fulmina
upon the obſtinate and ſchiſmatical, who are like to think them-
ſelves ſhrewdly hurt by being cut off from that body which
they chuſe not to be of, and ſo being puniſhed into a quiet
enjoyment of their beloved ſeparation. South's Sermons.
Schism A^tic ALLY. adv. [from ſchiſmatical.] In a ſchiſmatical
manner.
Schi's MA tick. n.ſ.. [from ſchiſm...] One who ſeparates from
the true church.
No known heretick nor ſchiſmatick ſhould be ſuffered to go
into thoſe countries. Bacon.
Thus you behold the ſhiſmaticks bravado's :
Wild ſpeaks in ſquibs, and Calamy in granado's. Butler.
The ſchiſmaticks united in a ſolemn league and covenant to
alter the whole ſyſtem of ſpiritual government. Swift.
To Schi's Matize. v. a. [from ſchiſm..] To commit the crime
of ſchiſm; to make a breach in the communion of the
church.
SCHO'LAR. m.ſ.. [ſcholaris, Latin; ecolier, French.]
1. One who learns of a maſter; a diſciple.
Many times that which deſerveth approbation would hardly
find favour, if they which propoſe it were not to profeſs them-
ſelves ſcholars, and followers of the ancients. Ho:étr.
The ſcholars of the Stagyrite,
Who for the old opinion fight,
Would make their modern friends confeſs
The diff'rence but from more to leſs. Prior.
2. A man of letters.
This ſame ſcholar's fate, re; anguſia domi, hinders the pro-
moting of learning. Wilkins's Math. Magic.
To watch occaſions to correót others in their diſcourſe, and
not ſlip any opportunity of ſhewing their talents, ſcholarſ are
moſt blamed for. Locke.
3. A pedant; a man of books.
To ſpend too much time in ſtudies, is ſloth; to make judg-
ment wholly by their rules, is the humour of a ſcholar; they
perfeót nature, and are perfected by experience. Bacon.
4. One who has a lettered education.
My couſin William is become a good ſholar; he is at QX-
ford ſtill, is he not Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Scho'LARSHIP. m. ſ. [from ſcholar.]
1. Learning; literature; knowledge.
It pitied my very heart to think that a man of my maſter's
underſtanding, and great ſcholarſhip, who had a book of his
own in print, ſhould talk ſo outragiouſly. Pope.
2. Literary education. -
This place ſhould be ſchool and univerſity, not needing a
remove to any other houſe of ſcholarſhip. Milton.
3. Exhibition or maintenance for a ſcholar. Ainſworth.
Schola'stic Al. adj. [ſcholaſticus, Latin, J Belonging to a
ſcholar or ſchool.
Schola'stic All Y. adv. [from ſcholaſtick.] According to the
niceties or method of the ſchools.
No moraliſts or caſuiſts, that treat ſcholoſłically of juſtice,
but treat of gratitude, under that general head, as a part of
it. South's Sermons.
Schola'stick. adj. [from ſchola, Latin; ſcholo/lique, French.]
1. Pertaining to the ſchool; practiſed in ſchools.
I would render this intelligible to every rational man, how-
ever little verſed in ſcholaſtick learning. Digby on Bodies.
Scholaſtick education, like a trade, does ſo fix a man in a
particular way, that he is not fit to judge of any thing that
lies out of that way. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
2. Befitting the ſchool; ſuitable to the ſchool; pedantick; need-
leſly ſubtle.
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 311</div><p class="Text">- S C I
º,
!")
f
ſº
:
º,
The favour of propoſing there, in convenient ſort, what&amp;-
ever ye can object, which thing I have known them to grant
of ſcholaſtick courteſy unto ſtrangers, never hath nor ever will
be denied you. Hooker.
Sir Francis Bacon was wont to ſay, that thoſe who left uſe-
ful ſtudies for uſeleſs ſcholaſtick ſpeculations, were like the
Qlympick gameſters, who abſtained from neceſſary labours,
that they might be fit for ſuch as were not ſo. Bacon.
Both ſides charge the other with idolatry, and that is a mat-
ter of conſcience, and not a ſcholaſtick nicety. Stillingfleet.
Scholias T. n.ſ. [ſcholioſte, French; ſcholiaſies, Latin. A
writer of explanatory notes.
The title of this ſatyr, in ſome ancient manuſcripts, was
the reproach of idleneſs; though in others of theſcholiaſts 'tis
inſcribed againſt the luxury of the rich. Dryden,
What Gellius or Stobaeus cook'd before,
Or chew'd by blind old ſcholiaſis o'er and o'er. Dunciad.
SCHO'LION. }" ... [Latin. J A note; an explanatory ob-
SCHO'LIUM. S. ſervation.
Hereunto have I added a certain gloſs or ſcholion, for the
expoſition of old words, and harder phraſes, which manner
of gloſing and commenting will ſeem ſtrange in our lan-
guage. Spenſer,
Some caſt all their metaphyſical and moral learning into the
method of mathematicians, and bring every thing relating to
thoſe abſtraćted or practical ſciences under theorems, problems,
poſtulates, ſcholium, and corollaries. Watts.
Schoºly, n.ſ.. [ſcholie, Fr. ſcholium, Latin.] An explanatory
note. This word, with the verb following, is, I fancy, pe-
culiar to the learned Hooker.
He therefore, which made us to live, hath alſo taught us to
pray, to the end, that ſpeaking unto the Father in the Son's
own preſcript form, without ſcholy or gloſs of ours, we ma
be ſure that we utter nothing which God will deny. Hooker.
That ſcholy had need of a very favourable reader, and a
tractable, that ſhould think it plain conſtruction, when to be
commanded in the word, and grounded upon the word, are
made all one. Hooker.
To Scho'lv. v. n. [from the noun..] To write expoſitions.
The preacher ſhould want a text, whereupon to
Jeholy. Hooker.
SCHOOL. m. ſ. [ſchola, Latin; ecole, French.]
1. A houſe of diſcipline and inſtruction.
Their age the ſame, their inclinations too,
And bred together in one ſchool they grew. Dryden.
2. A place of literary education.
My end being private, I have not expreſſed my conceptions
in the language of the ſchools. Digby.
Writers on that ſubject have turned it into a compoſition
of hard words, trifles, and ſubtilties, for the mere uſe of the
ſchools, and that only to amuſe men with empty ſounds. Watts.
3. A ſtate of inſtruction.
The calf breed to the rural trade,
Set him betimes to ſchool, and let him be
Inſtructed there in rules of huſbandry. Dryden.
4. Syſtem of doćtrine as delivered by particular teachers.
No craz'd brain could ever yet propound,
Touching the ſoul, ſo vain and fond a thought;
But ſome among theſe maſters have been found,
Which in their ſchºols the ſelf-ſame thing had taught. Davies.
Let no man be leſs confident in his faith, concerning the
great bleſſings God deſigns in theſe divine myſteries, by reaſon
of any difference in the ſeveral ſchools of Chriſtians, concern-
ing the conſequent bleſfings thereof. Taylor.
5. The age of the church, and form of theology ſucceeding that
of the fathers.
The firſt principles of Chriſtian religion ſhould not be ſarced
with ſchool points and private tenets. Sanderſon.
A man may find an infinite number of propoſitions in books
of metaphyſicks, ſchool divinity, and natural philoſophy, and
know as little of God, ſpirits, or bodies, as he did before. Locke.
To School. v. a. [from the noun J
1. To inſtruct; to train.
Una her beſought to be ſo good
As in her virtuous rules to ſchool her knight. Fa. Queen.
He's gentle, never ſchool'd, and yet learned. Shakeſpeare.
2. To teach with ſuperiority; to tutor.
You ſhall go with me; -
I have ſome private ſhooling for you both. Shakeſpeare,
Couſin, ſchool yourſelf; but for your huſband,
He's noble, wiſe, judicious. Shakespeare Macbeth.
School your child, -
And aſk why God's anointed he revil'd. Dryden.
If this be ſchºoling, 'tis well for the conſiderer: I’ll engage
that no adverſary of his ſhall in this ſenſe ever ſchool him. Alt.
School Boy. m.ſ.. [ſchool and boy..] A boy that is in his rudi-
ments at ſchool. .
Schoolboy: tears take up
The glaſſes of my ſight. Shakeſpeare.
He grins, ſmacks, ſhrugs, and ſuch an itch endures,
As 'prentices or ſchoºlhºys, which do know
Of ſome gay ſport abroad, yet dare not go. Dºnne.
Aſºlº brought his mother a book he had ſtolen. L'Eſtr.
Once he had heard a ſchoolboy tell,
How Semele of mortal race
By thunder died.
School DAY. n.
ſent to ſchool.
- r Swift.
ſº [ſºol and day.] Age in which youth is
Is all forgot?
All ſchoo'days friendſhip, childhood, innocence? Shakeſp.
School Fellow. n.ſ. [jchool and fellºw.] One bred at the
ſame ſchool.
Thy flatt'ring method on the youth purſue;
Join'd with his ſchoolfºllows by two and two:
Perſuade them firſt to lead an empty wheel,
In length of time produce the labºring yoke. Dryden,
The emulation of ſchºoſellows often puts life and induſtry
into young lads. Lock
!e.
School. House. n.ſ.. [ſchool and houſe J Houſe of diſcipline
and inſtruction.
Fair Una ’gan Fidelia fair requeſt,
- To have her knight unto her ſchoolhouſe plac'd.
SchoolMAN. m. ſ. [ſchool and man.]
1. One verſed in the niceties and ſubtilties of academical diſpu-
tation.
The king, though no good ſchoolman, converted one of
Spenſer,
them by diſpute. Bacon.
Unlearn'd, he knew no ſchoolman's ſubtle art;
No language, but the language of the heart. Pope,
2. One ſkilled in the divinity of the ſchool.
If a man's wit be not apt to diſtinguiſh or find differences,
let him ſtudy the ſchoolmen. Bacon.
To ſchoolmen I bequeath my doubtfulneſs,
My ſickneſs to phyſicians, Donne,
Men of nice palates could not reliſh Ariſtotle, as he was
dreſt up by the ſchoolmen. Baker.
Let ſubtle ſchoolmen teach theſe fiends to fight,
More ſtudious to divide than to unite. Pope.
SchoolMA'ster. n.ſ. [ſchool and maſter.] One who preſides
and teaches in a ſchool.
I, thy ſchoolmaſter, have made thee more profit
Than other princes can, that have more time
For vainer hours, and tutors not ſo careful. Shakeſpeare.
Adrian VI. was ſometime ſchoolmaſter to Charles V. Knoles.
The ancient ſophiſts and rhetoricians lived 'till they were
an hundred years old; and ſo likewiſe did many of the gram-
marians and ſchoolmaſters, as Orbilius. Bacon.
A father may ſee his children taught, though he himſelf
does not turn ſchoolmaſter. South's Sermons.
School Mistress. n.ſ.. [ſchool and miſreſ...] A woman who
governs a ſchool.
Such precepts I have ſele&amp;ted from the moſt conſiderable
which we have received from nature, that exačt ſchoolmiſtreſs.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
My ſchoolmiſtreſ, like a vixen Turk, -
Maintains her lazy huſband. Gay's What dye Call it.
Schreight. n. ſ. A fiſh. Ainſworth.
Sci'AGRAPHY, n.ſ.. [ſciagraphie, French; 7x127 fa?iz. This
ſhould be written with a 4.] - -- - -
1. [In archite&amp;ture.] The profile or ſečtion of a building, to
ſhew the inſide thereof. Bailey.
2. [In aſtronomy.) The art of finding the hour of the day or
night by the ſhadow of the ſun, moon, or ſtars. Bailey.
Sci'ATHERical. adj. [ſtaterique, Fr. rºta&amp;nºix@..]. Be-
Sci’AT H E Rick. ; longing to a ſun-dial. Dići. This ſhould
be written ſkiatherical.
There were alſo, from great antiquity, ſciatherical or ſun-
dials, by the ſhadow of a ſtile or gnomon denoting the hours
of the day; an invention aſcribed unto Anaxamines by Pliny.
Brown's Vulg, Errours.
SCIATICA. }* ſ: [ſciatique, French; iſchiadica poſio, Latin.]
SCIATICK. W. The hip gout. - - -
Which of your hips has the moſt profound ſciatica? Shakespeare .
Thou cold ſciatica,
Cripple our ſenators, that their limbs may halt --
As lamely as their manners. - -- Shakeſp. Timon.
The Scythians, uſing continual riding, were gºally ſno-
leſted with the ſciatica, or hip gout. . . . Brºwn'; Wulg. Err.
Rack'd with ſciatick, martyr'd with the ſtone,
Will any mortal let himſelf alone ... -
Scia'rical. adj [from ſciatica.]. Afflićting the hip.
In obſtinate ſciatical pains, bliſtering and cauteries have -
been found effectual. - - , , Arbuthnot.
SCIENCE. n.ſ.. [ſcience, French; ſcientia, Latin.]
ge. -
I. K; :* God's fight or ſcience, before the creation of
the world, to be extended to all and every part of the world,
ſeeing every thing as it is, his Preſcience, or forefight of any
action of mine, or rather his ſcience or fight, from all eternity,
lays no neceſſity on anything to come to paſs, any more than
my ſeeing the ſun move hath to do in the moving of it. Hamm.
2. Certainty grounded on demonſtration. -
So you arrive at truth, though not at cience.
23 G
Pope.
BerklJ.
3. Art
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 312</div><p class="Text">**
S C I
S C O
.
º
º
º
3. Art attained by precepts, or built on principles.
Science perfeóts genius, and modcrates that fury of the fancy
which cannot contain itſelf within the bounds of reaſon. Dryd.
4. Any art or ſpecies of knowledge.
No ſcience doth make known the firſt principles, whercon
it buildeth; but they are always taken as plain and manifeſt
in themſelves, or as proved and granted already, ſome former
knowledge having made them evident. Hºoker.
Whatſoever we may learn by them, we only attain accord-
ing to the manner of natural ſciences, which mere diſcourſe of
wit and reaſon findeth out. Hooker.
I preſent you with a man -
Cunning in muſick and the mathematicks, -
To inſtrućt her fully in thoſe ſciences. Shakeſpeare.
The indiſputable mathematicks, the only ſcience heaven bath
yet vouchſafed humanity, have but few votaries among the
ſlaves of the Stagirite. Glanv. Scepſ.
5. One of the ſeven liberal arts, grammar, rhetorick, logick,
arithmetick, muſick, geometry, aſtronomy. -
Good ſenſe, which only is the gift of heav'n,
And though no ſcience, fairly worth the ſev’n. Pºpe.
ScIENTIAL. adj. [from ſcience..] Producing ſcience.
From the tree her ſtep ſhe turn'd ;
But firſt low reverence done, as to the pow'r
That dwelt within; whoſe preſence had infus'd
Into the plant ſciential ſap, deriv'd
From nećtar, drink of gods. Milton's Parad'ſ Ioff.
ScIENTI'Fical. }"; [ſcientifique, Fr. ſcientia and facio, Lat.]
Scienti'Fick. Producing demonſtrative knowledge; pro-
ducing certainty.
Natural philoſophy proceeding from ſettled principles,
therein is expected a ſatisfaction from ſcientifical progreſſions,
and ſuch as beget a ſure or rational belief Brown's W. Err.
No where are thcre more quick, inventive, and penetrating
capacities, fraught with all kind of ſcientifical knowledge. Hºwel.
No man, who firſt trafficks into a foreign country, has any
ſcientif:{ evidence that there is ſuch a country, but by report,
which can produce no more than a moral certainty; that is, a
very high probability, and ſuch as there can be no reaſon to
except againſt. South's Sermons.
The ſyſtems of natural philoſophy that have obtained, are
to be read more to know the hypotheſes, than with hopes to
gain there a comprehenſive, ſcientifical, and ſatisfactory know-
ledge of the works of nature. Locke.
SciENTIFIcAll Y. adv. [from ſcientifical.] In ſuch a manner
as to produce knowledge. '
Sometimes it reſts upon teſtimony, becauſe it is eaſier to
believe than to be ſcientifically inſtructed. Lºcke.
Sci'MITAR. n.ſ. [See CIMETER.] A ſhort ſword with a
convex edge.
I'll heat his blood with Greckiſh wine to-night,
Which with my ſcimitar I'll cool to-morrow. Shakespeare.
Sci'NEY Clſ. n.ſ. A ſpecies of violet. Ainſworth.
SciNk. n.ſ. A caſt calf. Ainſworth. In Scotland and in Lon-
don they call it ſlink.
To SCINTILLATE. v. n. [ſtintile, Latin.] To ſparkle;
to emit ſparks.
SciNTILLATION. n.ſ.. [ſcintillatio, Lat. from ſcintilate.] The
act of ſparkling; ſparks emitted. -
He ſaith the planets ſcintilation is not ſeen, becauſe of their
propinquity. Glanv. Scepſ.
Theſe ſcintillations are not the accenſion of the air upon the
colliſion of two hard bodies, but rather the inflammable ef-
fluences diſcharged from the bodies collided. Brown.
Scio'LIST, n.ſ.. [ſciolus, Latin.] One who knows many things
ſuperficially.
'Twas this vain idolizing of authors which gave birth to
that filly vanity of impertinent citations: theſe ridiculous
fooleries ſignify nothing to the more generous diſcerners, but
the pedantry of the affected ſciol/?s. Glanv. Scepſ.
Theſe paſſages, in that book, were enough to humble the
preſumption of our modern ſcio'ſ', if their pride were not as
great as their ignorance. Temple.
Scr'olous. adj. [ſcious, Latin.] Superficially or imperfectly
knowing.
I could wiſh theſe ſciolous zelotiſts had more judgment joined
with their zeal. Hºwel.
Scio'MA chy. n.ſ. (ſchianachie, Fr. rºſz and wax.] Battle
with a ſhadow. This ſhould be written ſkiamachy.
To avoid this ſtimachy, or imaginary combat of words, let
me know, fir, what you mean by the name of tyrant? Cowley.
Scion. n ſ. [ſcion, French.] A ſmall twig taken from one
tree to be engrafted into another.
Sweet maid, we marry
A gentleſtion to the wildeſt ſtock;
And make conceive a bark of baſer kind,
By bud of nobler race. Shakespeare If inter's 7'ale.
March is drawn in his left hand bloſſoms, and ſcions upon his
arm. ... Peacham.
The ſºn; are beſt of an old tree. Mortimer's Husbandry.
SCIRE FiCLAS. n.ſ. (Latin.] A writ judicial, in law, moſt
commonly to call a man to ſhew cauſe unto the court, whence
it is ſent, why execution of a judgment paſſed ſhould not be
made. This writ is not granted before a year and a day is
paſſed, after the judgment given. Coweſ.
Sci'ssi b 1. E. adj. [from ſºff, Latin.] Capable of being di-
vided ſmoothly by a ſharp edge.
The differences of impreſſible and not impreſſible, ſºft'.
and not ſciſſible, and many other paſſions of matter, are ple-
beian notions. Bacºn.
Sci'ssile, ad. [ſciſſile, Fr. ſºft, Latin.] Capable of being
cut or divided ſmoothly by a 'ſharp edge
Animal fat is a ſort of amphibious ſubſtance, ſciſſile like a
ſolid, and reſolveable by heat. Arbuthnºt.
Sci'ssion. m. ſ. [ ſciſſon, French; ſº ſº, Latin.] The act of
cutting. -
Nerves may be wounded by ſciſſion or punčture: the former
way they are uſually cut through, and wholly ceaſe from ac-
tion. // iſºman's Surgery.
Sci'ssor. n.ſ. [This word is variouſly written, as it is ſup-
poſed to be derived by different writers; of whom ſome write
ciſors, from card, or incido ; others ſci/rs, from ſcind ; and
ſome ciſar, cigars, or ſciſſar, ciſeaux, Fr.] A ſmall pair of
ſheers, or blades moveable on a pivot, and intercepting the
thing to be cut.
* His beard they have fing'd off with brands of fire;
And ever, as it blaz'd, they threw on him
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair:
My maſter preaches patience to him, and the while
His man with ſciſſars nicks him for a fool. Słakºffeare.
Wanting the ſciſſars, with theſe hands I'll tear,
If that obſtruct my flight, this load of hair. Priºr.
When the lawyers and tradeſmen brought extravagant bills,
fir Roger wore a pair of ſciſſars in his pocket, with which he
would ſnip a quarter of a yard off nicely. Arbuthno".
Sci'ssu RE. m. ſ. [ſciſſum, Latin J A crack; a rent; a fiſ.
ſure.
The breach ſeems like the ſciſſures and ruptures of an earth-
quake, and threatens to ſwallow all that attempt to cloſe it,
and reſerves its cure only for omnipotence. Decay of Pity.
SCLEROTICK. adj. [ſilerotique, Fr. axxi.;62.] Hard: an
epithet of one of the coats of the eve.
The ligaments obſerved in the inſide of the ſclerotick tunicles
of the eye, ſerve inſtead of a muſcle, by their contračtion, to
alter the figure of the eye. Ray on the Creation.
Sclero ticks. n ſ. [from the adjective..] Medicines which
harden and conſolidate the parts they are applied to. Sºuincy.
To Sco At. Nºv. a. To ſtop a wheel by putting a ſtone or
To Scotch. } piece of wood under it before. Bailey.
To SCOFF. v. m. [ſchoppen, Dutch..] To treat with inſolent
ridicule; to treat with contumelious language. With at.
Of two noblemen of the Weſt of England, the one was given
to ſcºff, but kept ever royal cheer in his houſe; the other would
aſk of thoſe that had beca at his table, Tell truly, was there
never a flout or dry blow given Bacon.
There is no greater argument of a light and inconſiderate
perſon, than prophanely to ſcºff at religion. Tillotſºn.
Such is love,
And ſuch the laws of his fantaſtick empire,
The wanton boy delights to bend the mighty,
And ſº ſº; at the vain wiſdom of the wiſe. Rowe.
Scoff. m / [from the verb.] Contemptuous ridicule; ex-
preſſion of ſcorn; contumelious language.
Our anſwer therefore to their reaſons is no ; to their ſoff,
nothing. Hooker.
With ſoff, and ſcorns, and contumelious taunts,
In open market-place produc’d they me. Shakespeare H. VI.
How could men ſurrender up their reaſon to flattery, more
abuſive and reproachful than the rudeſt ſcoff; and the ſharpeſt
invečtives 2 South.
Some little ſouls, that have got a ſmattering of aſtronomy
or chemiſtry, for want of a due acquaintance with other
ſciences, make a ſºff at them all, in compariſon of their fa-
vourite ſcience. //atts.
Sco FF ER. n. ſ. [from ſtaff.] Inſolent ridiculer; ſaucy ſcorner;
contumelious reproacher.
I muſt tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can ; you are not for all markets:
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer;
Foul is moſt foul, being found to be a ſcºffer. Shakespeare
Divers have herded themſelves amongſt theſe profane ſºf-
frº, not that they are convinced by their reaſons, but ter-
rified by their contumclies. Government of the Tongue.
Conſider what the apoſtle tells theſe ſº fiers they were igno-
rant of, not that there was a deluge; but he tells them, that
they were ignorant that the heavens and the earth of old were
ſo and ſo conſtituted. Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
Sco FFING ! Y. adv. [from ſºff.g. ) In contempt; in ridicule.
Ariſtotle applied this hemiſtick ſºffingy to the ſycophants at
Athens. * wome's Notes to the Odºy.
To Scot D. v. n. [ſhaller, Dutch.J. To quarrel clamorouſly
and rudely. -
Pardon me, ’tis the firſt time that ever
I'm forc'd to ſºld. Shakespeare Cercanus.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
"I he
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 313</div><p class="Text">** S C O
S C O
Wil:
; :
... ºf
* **a
s us
ſº
º
-
-
-
-
-
º
l
The one as famous for a ſºlding tongue,
As the other is for beauteous modeſty. Shakeſpeare.
They attacked me, ſome with pitcous moans, others grin-
ning and only ſhewing their teeth, others ranting, and others
ſolding and reviling. Stillingſ cet.
Pallas meets the queen of love;
For gods, we are by Homer told,
Can in celeſtial language ſco.a. Swift.
Scalding and curſing are her common converſation. Swift.
Scol. D. m. ſ. [from the verb..] A clamourous, rude, meän,
low, foul-mouthed woman.
A ſhrew in domeſtick life, is now become a ſºld in poli-
ticks. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Sun-burnt matrons mending old nets;
Now ſinging ſhrill, and ſcolding oft between;
Scolds anſwer foul-mouth'd ſcolds. Swift.
Sco'Llop. n.ſ. [Written properly ſcallop.] A pećtinated ſhell-
fiſh.
Scolope'NDr A. m. ſ. [ſolipendre, French; axºxárºx.]
1. A ſort of venomous ſerpent.
2. [Scolpendrium, Latin.] An herb. Ainſworth.
Sco M.M. n.ſ. [Perhaps from ſcomma, Latin.] A buffoon. A
word out of uſe, and unworthy of revival.
The ſcomms, or buffoons of quality, are wolviſh in con-
verſation. L’Eſtrange.
Sconce. n. ſ. [ſhantz, German.]
1. A fort; a bulwark. -
Such fellows are perfeót in the great commanders names,
and they will learn you by rote where ſervices were done; at
ſuch and ſuch a ſconce, at ſuch a breach. Shakespeare Henry V.
2. The head: perhaps as being the acropolis, or citadel of the
body. A low word.
Why does he ſuffer this rude knave now to knock him
about the ſconce with a dirty ſhovel, and will not tell him of
his action of battery Shakeſp. Hamlet.
3. A penſile candleſtick, generally with a looking-glaſs to reflect
the light.
Golden f.once hang upon the walls,
To light the coſtly ſuppers and the balls. Dryden's Lucret.
Triumphant Umbriel, on a ſcance's height,
Clapp'd his glad wings, and ſat to view the fight. Pope.
Put candles into ſcances. Swiſt's Direč. to the Butler.
To Sconce. v. a. [A word uſed in the univerſities, and derived
plauſibly by Skinner, whoſe etymologies are generally rational,
from ſcance, as it ſignifies the head ; to ſcance being to fix a fine
on any one's head..] To mulct; to fine. A low word which
ought not to be retained.
Scoop. m. ſ. [ ſchoepe, Dutch.]
1. A kind of large ladle; a veſſel with a long handle uſed to
throw out liquor.
They turn upſide down hops on malt-kilns, when almoſt
dry, with a ſcoop. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Endeavour with thy ſcoop, or fingers, to force the ſtone
outwards. Sharp's Surgery.
2 A ſweep; a ſtroke. Perhaps it ſhould be ſweep.
Oh hell-kite |
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam,
At one fell ſcoop / Shakeſp. Macbeth.
To Scoop. v. a. [ſchoepen, Dutch.]
1. To lade out.
As by the brook he ſtood,
He ſcoop'd the water from the cryſtal flood. Dryden's AEn.
2. This word ſeems to have not been underſtood by Ihomſºn.
Melted Alpine ſnows -
The mountain ciſterns fill, thoſe ample ſtores
Of water ſcoop'd among the hollow rocks. Thomſºn.
3. To empty by lading.
If ſome penurious ſource by chance appear'd,
Scanty of waters, when you ſcoop'd it dry,
And offer'd the full helmet up to Cato,
Did he not daſh th' untaſted moiſture from him Addiſon.
4. To carry off in any thing hollow.
A ſpectator would think this circular mount had been ac-
tually ſcooped out of that hollow ſpace. Spectatºr.
Her fore-feet are broad, that ſhe may ſcoop away much earth
at a time. Addiſon.
5. To cut hollow, or deep.
Whatever part of the harbour they ſcoop in, it has an in-
fluence on all the reſt; for the ſea immediately works the
whole bottom to a level. Addison on Italy.
Thoſe carbuncles the Indians will ſcoop, ſo as to hold above
a pint. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To his ſingle eye, that in his forehead glar'd
Like a full moon, or a broad burniſh'd ſhield,
A forky ſtaff we dext'rouſly apply'd,
Which, in the ſpacious ſocket turning round,
Scoopt out the big round gelly from its orb. Addison.
It much conduces how to ſcare.
The little race of birds, that hop
From ſpray to ſpray, ſcoºping the coſtlieſt fruit, -
Inſatiate, undiſturb’d, Phillips.
Y.
The genius of the place
, Or helps th' ambitious hill the heav'n to ſcale,
r . Or ſoaps in circling theatres the vale. Pºpe.
: coor ER /...","...] One who ſcoops.
Scope. 7. / ſcopus, ..atin.j
1. Aim; intention; drift.
Your ſcºpe is as mine own,
So to inforce or qualify the laws,
As to your ſoul ſeems good. Shakespeare Mºoſ fºr Aſaſ, e.
His coming hither hath no further ſlope Zeoſ. for Maſte
Than for his lineal royalties, and to Éeg
Infranchiſement immediate on his knees. Shakespeare R. II.
Had the whole ſºpe of the author been anſwerable to his
title, he would have only undertaken to prove what every man
is convinced of; but the drift of the pamphlet is to ſtir pour
compaſſion towards the rebels. Addiſon's Freeholder.
2. Thing aimed at ; mark; final end.
The ſcope of all their pleading againſt man's authority is to
overthrow ſuch laws and conſtitutions in the church, as de-
pending thereupon, if they ſhould therefore be taken away,
would leave neither face nor memory of church to continue
long in the world. - H.oker.
Now was time
To aim their counſels to the faireſt ſcope. Hubberd's Tale.
We ſhould impute the war to the ſcope at which it aim-
tth. Raleigh.
He, in what he counſels, and in what excels,
Miſtruſtful, grounds his courage on deſpair,
And utter diffolution, as the ſcope
Of all his aim. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
3. Room ; ſpace; amplitude of intelle&amp;tual view.
An heroick poet is not tied to a bare repreſentation of what
is true, but that he might let himſelf looſe to viſionary objećts,
which may give him a freer ſcope for imagination. Dryden.
Theſe theorems being admitted into opticks, there would
be ſofte enough of handling that ſcience voluminouſly, after
a new manner; not only by teaching thoſe things which tend
to the perfection of viſion, but alſo by determining mathema-
tically all kinds of phenomena of colours which could be pro-
duced by refračtion. Newton's Opt.
4. Liberty; freedom from reſtraint.
If this conſtrain them to grant that their axiom is not to .
take any place, ſave in thoſe things only where the church
hath larger ſcope, it reſteth that they ſearch out ſome ſtronger
reaſon. Płocker.
Ah, cut my lace aſunder,
That my pent heart may have ſome fºops to beat,
Or elſe I ſwoon with this dead killing news. Shakeſpeare.
5. Liberty beyond juſt limits; licence.
Sith 'twas my fault to give the people ſcope,
'Twould be my tyranny to ſtrike and gall them,
For what I bid them do.
Being moody, give him line and ſcope,
*Till that his paſſions, like a whale on ground,
Confound themſelves with working. Shareſp. Henry IV.
6. Aćt of riot; fally.
As ſurfeit is the father of much faſt,
So every ſcope, by the immoderate uſe,
Turns to reſtraint.
7. Extended quantity.
The ſcopes of land granted to the firſt adventurers were
too large, and the liberties and royalties were too great for
ſubjects. Davies on Ireland.
8. It is out of uſe, except in the three firſt ſenſes. -
Scopulous. adj. [ſcºpuloſus, Latin.] Full of rocks. , Dić.
Scorpuſtical. An f 'ſ ſcorhut que, Fr. from ſcorbutus, Latin.]
Scorp U'rick { Diſeaſed with the ſcurvy.
A perſon about forty, of a full and ſcorbutical body, having
broke her ſkin, endeavoured the curing of it; but obſerving
the ulcer ſanious, I propoſed digeſtion. Iłºſeman.
Violent purging hurts ſcorbuſ &amp; conſtitutions; lenitive ſub-
ſtances relieve. Arbuthnot.
Scorpu'rically. adv. [from ſcorbatical.] With tendency to
the ſcurvy; in the ſcurvy. -
A woman of forty, ſºarlutically and hydropically afested,
having a ſoldid ulcer, put herſelf into my hand. ... *ſºn".
Scorce. n.ſ. This word is uſed by Sprºſer for diſcourſe, or
power of reaſon. -
Lively vigour reſted in his mind,
And recompenſed him with a better ſcºre;
Weak body well is chang'd for mind's redoubled force. F9.
To SCORCH. v. a. [rconcheo, Saxon, burnt J
1. To burn ſuperficially. -
Fire "..., in #ay weather, Raº's Nat. H/ory.
The ladies gaſp'd, and ſcarcely cou d reſpire;
The breath they drew, no longer air, but fire;
The ſainty knights were ſcorch'd. Dryden.
To burn.
Power was given to ſcorch men with fire. Rev. xvi. 8.
The ſame that left thee by the cooling ſtream, -
Safe from ſun's heat; but ſcºrch'd with beauty's beam. Fairf.
You
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 314</div><p class="Text">S C O º
You look with ſuch contempt on pain,
That languiſhing you conquer more :
So lightnings which in ſtorms appear, -
Sørh more than when the ſkies are clcar. Waller.
The ſame beams that ſhine, ſcorch too. South.
I rave,
And, like a giddy bird in dead of night,
Fly round the fire that ſcorches me to death. Dryden.
He from whom the nations ſhould receive
Juſtice and freedom, lies himſelf a ſlave;
Tortur’d by cruel change of wild deſires,
Laſh'd by mad rage, and ſcorch'd by brutal fires. Prior.
To Scorch. v. n. To be burnt ſuperficially; to be dried up.
To ſee the chariot of the ſun
So near the ſcorching country run. Roſcommon.
The love was made in Autumn, and the hunting followed
properly, when the heats of that ſcorching country were de-
clining. Dryden.
Scatter a little mungy ſtraw or fern amongſt your ſeedlings,
to prevent the roots from ſcorching, and to receive the moiſture
that falls, Martimer's Husbandry.
Sco'RcHING Fennel. m. ſ. A plant.
SCO'RDIUM. n.ſ. [Latin.] An herb. Ainſworth.
SCORE. m.A.. [ſkora, Iſlandick, a mark, cut, or notch.]
1. A notch of long inciſion.
Our forefathers had no other books but the ſcore and the
tally: thou haſt cauſed printing to be uſed. Shakespeare Henry VI.
2. A line drawn.
3. An account, which, when writing was leſs common, was
kept by marks on tallies, or by lines of chalk.
He's worth no more:
They ſay he parted well, and paid his ſcore. Shakeſp. Mach.
Does not the air feed the flame? And dees not the flame
warm and enlighten the air Does not the earth quit ſcores
with all the elements, in the fruits that iſſue from it. South.
4. Account kept of ſomething paſt.
Univerſal deluges have ſwept all away, except two or three
perſons who begun the world again upon a new ſcore. Tilotſon.
5. Debt imputed.
That thou do'ſ love her, ſtrikes ſome ſcores away
From the great compt. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
He can win widows and pay ſcores,
Out-flatter favourites, or out-lie either
Jovius or Surius, or both together. Donne,
6. Reaſon; motive.
The knight, upon the fore-nam'd ſcore,
In queſt of Sidrophel advancing,
Was now in proſpect of the manſion. Hudibras.
He had been prentice to a brewer,
But left the trade, as many more
Have lately done on the ſame ſcore. Hudibrar.
A lion, that had got a politick fit of ſickneſs, wrote the fox
word how glad he ſhould be of his company, upon the ſcore of
ancient friendſhip. L'Eſtrange.
If your terms are moderate, we'll never break off upon that
ſcºre. Collier on Pride.
7. Sake; account; reaſon referred to ſome one.
You act your kindneſs on Cydaria's ſcore. Dryden.
Kings in Greece were depoſed by their people upon the
fore of their arbitrary proceedings. Swift.
8. Twenty. I ſuppoſe, becauſe twenty, being a round number,
was diſtinguiſhed on tallies by a long ſcore.
How many ſcore of miles may we well ride
*Twixt hour and hour * Shakespeare Cymbeline.
The fewer ſtill you name, you wound the more;
Bond is but one; but Harpax is a ſcore. Pope.
For ſome ſcores of lines there is a perfect abſence of that
ſpirit of poeſy. Watts.
9. A ſong in Scors. The words with the muſical notes of a
ſong annexed.
To Scor E. v. a.
1. To ſet down as a debt.
Madam, I know when
Inſtead of five you ſcor'd me ten. Swift.
2. To impute; to charge.
Your follies and debauches change
With ſuch a whirl, the poets of your age
Are tir’d, and cannot ſcore 'em on the ſtage ;
Unleſs each vice in ſhort-hand they indite,
Ev’n as notcht prentices whole ſermons write.
3. To mark by a line. -
Haſt thou appointed where the moon ſhould riſe,
And with her purple light adorn the ſkies 2
Scar'd out the bounded ſun's obliquer ways,
That he on all might ſpread his equal rays? Sandys.
SCORIA. m.ſ. [Latin.] Droſs; recrement.
The ſcoria, or vitrified part, which moſt metals, when
heated or melted, do continually protrude to the ſurface, and
which, by covering the metals in form of a thin glaſſy ſkin,
cauſes theſe colours, is much denſer than water. Newt. Oft.
Sco'Rious. adj. [from ſcoria, Lat.] Droſly; recrementitious.
By the fire they emit many droſſy and ſcorious parts. Brown.
Dryden.
To SCORN. v. a. [ſhermen, Dutch ; eſcorner, French.] To
deſpiſe; to ſlight ; to revile ; to vility; to contemn.
My friends ſcorn me ; but mine eye poureth out tears unto
God. job xvi. 20.
To Scor N. v. n. To ſcoff. -
He ſaid mine eyes were black, and my hair black;
And now, I am remember'd, /corn’d at me. Shakeſ eart.
Our ſoul is filled with the ſcorning of thoſe that are at caſe,
and with the contempt of the proud. Pſ. cxxiii. 4.
I've ſeen the morning's lovely ray
Hover o'er the new-born day,
With roſy wings ſo richly bright,
As if he ſorn'd to think of night. Craſhaw,
Fame, that delights around the world to ſtray,
Scorns not to take our Argos in her way. Pope's Statius.
Scor N. m. ſ. [eſcorne, old Fr. from the verb.] Contempt; ſcoff;
ſlight; act of contumely.
If he do fully prove himſelf the honeſt ſhepherd Menalcas
his brother and heir, I know no reaſon why you ſhould think
ſcorn of him. Sidney.
Unto thee will I cry, O Lord: think no ſcorn of me, leſt if
thou make as tho' thou heareſt not, I become like them that
go down into the pit. Pſ, xxviii. 1.
We were better parch in Africk's ſun,
Than in the pride and ſalt ſcorn of his eyes. . . . Shakeſpeare:
Why ſhould you think that I ſhould woo in ſcorn ?
Scorn and deriſion never come in tears. Shakeſpeare.
If we draw her not unto us, ſhe will laugh us to ſtorm. jud.
Diogenes was aſked in ſcorn, what was the matter that phi-
loſophers haunted rich men, and not rich men philoſophers?
He anſwered, becauſe the one knew what they wanted, the
others did not. Bacon.
Whoſoever hath anything in his perſon that induces con-
tempt, hath alſo a perpetual ſpur to reſcue himſelf from ſcorn:
therefore all deformed perſons are bold, as being on their own
defence as expoſed to ſcorn. Bacon.
Every ſullen frown and bitter ſcorn,
But fann'd the fuel that too faſt did burn. Dryden.
Is it not a moſt horrid ingratitude, thus to make a ſcorn of
him that made us? Tillotſon.
Numidia's grown a ſcorn among the nations
For breach of publick vows. Addison's Cato.
Sco'RNER. m. ſ. [from ſcorn.]
1. Contemner; deſpiſer. t
They are very active, vigilant in their enterpriſes, preſent
in perils, and great ſcorners of death. Spenſºr on Ireland.
2. Scoffer; ridiculer.
The ſcºrner ſhould conſider, upon the ſight of a cripple, that
it was only the diſtinguiſhing mercy of heaven that kept him
from being one too. L’Eſtrange.
They, in the ſorner's or the judge's ſeat,
Dare to condemn the virtue which they hate. Prior.
Sco'RNFUL. adj. [ſcorn and full.]
1. Contemptuous; inſolent.
Th’ enamour'd deity
The ſcornful damſel ſhuns. Dryden.
2. Aćting in defiance.
With him I o'er the hills had run,
Scornful of Winter's froſt and Summer's ſun: Prior:
Sco'RNFULLY. adv. [from ſcornful..] Contemptuouſly; inſolently.
He us'd us ſcornfully: he would have ſhew'd us
His marks of merit, wounds receiv'd for’s country. Shakespeare
The ſacred rights of the Chriſtian church are ſcornfully
trampled on in print, under an hypocritical pretence of main-
taining them. Atterbury's Sermons.
Sco'RPIon. n.ſ.. [ſcorpion, French; ſcorpiº, Latin.]
1. A reptile much reſembling a ſmall lobſter, but that his tail
ends in a point with a very venomous ſting.
Well, fore-warning winds
Dº ſeem to ſay, ſeek not a ſorpion's neſt. Shakespeare ?, H.VI.
'ull of ſcorpions is my mind, dear wife. Shakespeare Macbeth.
If he ſhall aſk an egg, will he offer him a ſcorpion * Lu, xi.
2. One of the ſigns of the zodiack. - - -
The ſqueezing crab and ſtinging ſcorpion ſhine. Dryden.
3. A ſcourge ſo called from its cruelty. , . -
My father hath chaſtiſed you with whips, but I will chaſtiſe
you with ſcorpions. 1 Kings xii. 1 1.
a. [Scorpiuſ, Latin.J. A ſea fiſh. . Ainſworth.
ScorpióN Sema. m. ſ. [emerus, Latin.] A plant.
The chara&amp;ters are: it hath leaves like thoſe of the colutea:
the flowers are papilionaceous; the pods are ſlender, and con-
tain two or three cylindrical-ſhaped ſeeds in each. Miller.
Scorpion Graft.
Scor ProN's Tail. {-f Herbs.
Scorpion //ort.
Scot. n.ſ. ſecot, French.]
I. Shot; payment.
2. Sco r and Lot. Pariſh payments.
- 'Twas time to counterfeit, or that hot termagant Scot had
Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Ainſworth.
paid me ſcºt and lot too.
Protogenes, hiſtorians note,
Liv'd there a burgeſs, ſcot and lot. Prior.
6
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 315</div><p class="Text">S C O
iſºl,
º,
l, *
tº:
ſni
º:
#ſa
ſº
**!
x:1
º
The chief point that has puzzled the freeholders, as well as
thoſe that pay ſot and lot, for about theſe ſix months, is, whe-
ther they would rather be governed by a prince that is obliged
by law to be good, or by one who, if he pleaſes, may plunder
or impriſon. Addiſon.
To SCOTCH. v. a. To cut with ſhallow inciſions.
He was too hard for him directly: before Corioli, he ſcotcht
and notcht him like a carbonado. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Scotch. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A ſlight cut; a ſhallow in-
ciſion.
We'll beat 'em into bench-holes: I have yet room for fix
ſcotches more. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Give him four ſcotches with a knife, and then put into his
belly and theſe ſcotches ſweet herbs. Walton's Angler.
Scotch Colºpi, or Scotched Colops. n.ſ.. [from To ſcotch, or cut J
Veal cut into ſmall pieces.
Scotch Hoppers. . . ſ. A play in which boys hop over lines or
ſcotches in the ground.
Children being indifferent to any thing they can do, dancing
and ſcotch hoºpers would be the ſame thing to them. Locke.
Sco'Tom Y. n.ſ.. [axórwuz.] . A dizzineſs or ſwimming in the
head, cauſing dimneſs of fight, wherein external objects ſeem
to turn round. - Ainſ, and Bailey.
Sco'TTER ING. A provincial word which denotes, in Here-
fordſhire, a cuſtom among the boys of burning a wad of
peaſe-ſtraw at the end of harveſt. Bailey.
Sco’vel. n.ſ.. [ſcopa, Latin.] A ſort of mop of clouts for
ſweeping an oven; a maulkin. Ainſ, and Bailey.
Sco'UNDREL. n.ſ.. [ſcondaruolo, Italian, a hider. Skinner.] A
mean raſcal; a low petty villain.
Now to be baffl'd by a ſcoundrel,
An upſtart ſe&amp;t'ry, and a mungrel.
Scoundrels as theſe wretched Ombites be,
Canopus they exceed in luxury. Tate.
Go, if your ancient but ignoble blood
Has crept through ſcoundrels ever fince the flood,
Go, and pretend your family is young;
Nor own your #: have been fools ſo long. Pope,
To SCOUR. v. a. ſ.ſkurer, Daniſh; ſcheueren, Dutch.]
1. To rub hard with any thing rough, in order to clean the
ſurface.
Hudibras.
I were better to be eaten to death with a ruſt, than to be
ſcour'd to nothing with perpetual motion.
Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
By dint of ſword his crown he ſhall increaſe,
And ſcour his armour from the ruſt of peace. Dryden's Zn.
Part ſtour the ruſty ſhields with ſeam, and part
New grind the blunted ax, and point the dart. Dryden.
Some blamed Mrs. Bull for grudging a quarter of a pound
of ſoap and ſand to ſcour the rooms. Arbuthnot.
Poor Vadius, long with learned ſpleen devour’d,
Can taſte no pleaſure ſince his ſhield was ſcour’d. Pope.
2. To purge violently.
3. To cleanſe; to bleach; to whiten; to blanche.
In ſome lakes the water is ſo nitrous, as, if foul clothes be
put into it, it ſcoureth them of itſelf; and, if they ſtay, they
moulder away. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A garden-worm ſhould be well ſcoured eight days in moſs,
before you fiſh with him. . //alton's Angler.
Beneath the lamp her tawdry ribbons glare,
The new ſcour'd manteau, and the ſlattern air. Gay,
4. To remove by ſcouring.
Never came reformation in a flood
With ſuch a heady current, ſcouring faults;
Nor ever hydra-headed wilfulneſs
So ſoon did loſe his ſeat, and all at once,
As in this king. -
I will wear a garment all of blood,
And ſtain my favour in a bloody maſk,
Which, waſh'd away, ſhall ſcour my ſhame with it. Shakespeare
Then, in the clemency of upward air,
We'll ſcour our ſpots, and the dire thunder's ſcar. Dryden.
5. To range in order to catch or drive away ſomething; to clear
aWaW.
#e kings of Lacedemon having ſet out ſome gallies, un-
der the charge of one of their nephews, to ſcour the ſea of the
Shakeſp. Henry V.
pyrates, they met us. Sidney.
Divers are kept continually to ſcour theſe ſeas, infeſted
greatly by pirates. Sandys.
If with thy guards thou ſour'ſ; the ſtreets by night,
And do'ſt in murders, rapes, and ſpoils delight,
Pleaſe not thyſelf the flatt’ring crowd to hear,
'Tis fulſome ſtuff. Dryden's Perſ
6. To paſs ſwiftly over. -
- Sometimes
He ſcours the right hand coaſt, ſometimes the left. Milton.
Not half the number in their ſeats are found,
But men and ſteeds lie grov'ling on the ground;
The points of ſpears are ſtuck within the ſhield,
The ſteeds without their riders ſcour the field,
The knights unhors'd. Dryden.
When Ajax ſtrives ſome rock's vaſt weight to throw,
The line too labours, and the words move ſlow;
Not ſo when ſwift Camilla ſcours the plain,
Flies o'er th’ unbending corn, and ſkims along the main,
&gt; -: ºr,
To Scour. v. n. Pope's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
1. To perform the office of cleaning domeſtick utenſils.
I keep his houſe, and was to win. ,
w. b
meat, and make the beds. ing, Drew, *:::::::
2. To clean. peare.
Warm water is ſofter
3. To be purged or lax.
Some apothecaries, upon ſtamping coloquinti
put into a great ſcouring by the : . ida, *:::::
Convulſion and ſcouring, they ſay, do often cauſe one
another. Graunt's Bill of Mortality.
If you turn ſheep into wheat or rye to feed, let it not be too
rank, left it make them /cour. AMortimer's Husbandry.
4. To rove; to range.
Barbaroſa, thus ſcouring along the coaſt of Italy, ſtruck an
exceeding terror into the minds of the citizens of Rome. Knoll,
5. To run here and there.
The enemy's drum is heard, and fearful ſouring
Doth choak the air with duſt. Shakespeare. Timon,
6. To run with great eagerneſs and ſwiftneſs; to ſcamper.
She from him fled with all her pow'r,
Who after her as haſtily 'gan to ſcour. Fairy Queen.
I ſaw men ſcour ſo on their way: Iey'd them
Even to their ſhips. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
- Word was brought him, in the middle of his ſchemes, that
his houſe was robbed; and ſo away he ſcours to learn the
truth. L’Eſtrange.
If they be men of fraud, they'll ſtour off themſelves, and
leave thoſe that truſt them to pay the reckoning. L'E/irange.
So four fierce courſers, ſtarting to the race,
Scour through the plain, and lengthen ev'ry pace;
Nor reins, nor curbs, nor threat'ning cries they fear,
But force along the trembling charioteer. Dryden.
As ſoon as any foreign obječt preſſes upon the ſenſe, thoſe
ſpirits, which are poſted upon the out-guards, immediately
take the alarm, and ſcour off to the brain, which is the head
than cold; for it ſcoureth better. Bac.
quarters. Collier.
Swift at her call her huſband ſcour'd away,
To wreak his hunger on the deſtin'd prey. Pope.
Sco'URER. m. ſ. [from ſcour.]
1. One that cleans by rubbing.
2. A purge.
3. One who runs ſwiftly.
SCOURGE. n.ſ.. [eſcourgee, French; ſcoreggia, Italian; corri-
gia, Latin.]
1. A whip; a laſh; an inſtrument of diſcipline.
When he had made a ſcourge of ſmall cords, he drove them
all out of the temple. jo. ii. 15.
The ſcourge
Inexorable, and the torturing hour,
Calls us to penance. Milton.
2. A puniſhment; a vindićtive afflićtion.
What ſcourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford falſe Clarence? Shakeſpeare.
See what ‘ſ. is laid upon your hate,
That heav'n finds means to kill your joys with love. Shakespeare
Famine and plague are ſent asſourges for amendment.2 Eſd.
2. One that afflićts, harraſſes, or deſtroys. Thus Attila was
called flagellum Dei.
Is this the ſcourge of France
Is this the Talbot ſo much fear'd abroad, -
That with his name the mothers ſtill their babes? Shakespeare H.VI.
Such conquerors are not the favourites, but ſcourges of God,
the inſtruments of that vengeance. Atterbury's Sermoni.
In all theſe trials I have born a part;
I was myſelf the ſcourge that caus’d the ſmart. Pope,
Immortal Jove,
Let kings no more with gentle mercy ſway,
Or bleſs a people willing to obey,
But cruſh the nations with an iron rod, .
And every monarch be the ſcourge of God. Pope.
3. A whip for a top.
If they had a top, the ſcourge ſtick and leather ſtrap ſhould
be left to their own making. Locke.
To Scour G.E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To laſh with a whip; to whip. -
The gods are juſt, and of our pleaſant Vicº ...
Make inſtruments to ſcourge us. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Others had trial of cruel mockings and ſtºlºgi"gº. Hebr.
Is it lawful for you to ſcourge a Roman, and uncondemned?
Acf: xxii. 25.
zz, ro’d wi nv a ſtroke the indignant waves.
He ſºurg'd with many . Paradiſe Loſt.
When a profeſſor of any religion is ſet up to be laughed at,
this cannot help us to judge of the truth of his faith, any
better than if he were ſºurged. Watts.
23 H 2. To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 316</div><p class="Text">S C R.
S C R.
2. To puniſh; to chaſtiſe; to chaſten; to caſtigate with any
niſhment or affliction.
rº that thou haſt been ſourged from heaven, declare the
- ower of God. 2 Mac. iii. 34.
"ß ſourge, and hath mercy. #."#.
He will ſourge us for our iniquitics, and will have mercy
again. 2 ºb. xiii. 5.
Scour GER. m. ſ. [from ſcourge.] One that ſcourges; a pu-
niſher or chaſtiſer. -
To Scours F. v. a. To exchange one thing for another; to
ſwap. Ainſw. It ſeems a corruption of ſcorſa, Ital. exchange;
and hence a horſe ſcourſer.
Scout. n.ſ.. [eſcout, Fr. from eſcouter; auſculiare, Lat. to liſten;
ſcolta, Italian.] One who is ſent privily to obſerve the mo-
tions of the enemy.
Are not the ſpeedy ſcouts return'd again,
That dogg'd the mighty army of the dauphin?
As when a ſout,
Through dark and deſert ways with peril gone
All night, at laſt, by break of cheerful dawn,
Obtains the brow of ſome high-climbing hill. Milton.
This great veſſel may have leſler cabins, wherein ſouts may
be lodged for the taking of obſervations. Wilkins.
The ſcouts to ſev'ral parts divide their way,
To learn the natives names, their towns, explore
The coaſts. Dryden's AFn.
To Scout. v. n. [from the noun..] To go out in order to
obſerve the motions of an enemy privately.
Oft on the bordering deep
Encamp their legions; or with obſcure wing
Scout far and wide into the realm of night,
Scorning ſurprize.
As a hunted panther caſts about
Her glaring eyes, and pricks her liſt'ning ears to ſout,
Shakeſp.
Milton.
So ſhe, to ſhun his toils, her cares employ'd. Dryden.
Command a party out,
With a ſtrict charge not to engage, but ſout. Dryden.
To Scowl. v. n. (rcyhan, to ſquint, Saxon; ſkeela ſig, to look
ſour, Iſlandick.] To frown; to pout; to look angry, ſour,
or ſullen.
Miſo, having now her authority increaſed, came with
ſcowling eyes to deliver a ſlavering good-morrow to the two
ladies. Sidney.
With bent louring brows, as ſhe would threat,
She ſowld and frowned with froward countenance. F. Q.
ven ſo, or with much more contempt, mens eyes
Did ſcowl on Richard. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
Not a courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the king's look, but hath a heart that is
Glad at the thing they ſtowl at. Stakeſp. Cymbeline.
The duſky clouds o'erſpread
Heav'n's cheerful face, the low'ring element
Scowls o'er the darken'd landſchape ſnow or ſhow'r. Milton.
Fly, fly, prophane fogs' far hence fly away,
With your dull influence; it is for you
To ſit and ſcowl upon night's heavy brow.
In rueful gaze
The cattle ſtand, and on the ſcowling heavens
Caſt a deploring eye. Thomſon's Summer.
Scowl. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Look of fullenneſs or diſcon-
tent; gloom.
I've ſeen the morning's lovely ray
Hover o'er the new-born day,
With roſy wings ſo richly bright,
As if he ſcorn'd to think of night;
When a ruddy ſtorm, whoſe ſºwl
Made heaven's radiant face look foul,
Call'd for an untimely night,
To blot the newly-bloſſom'd light. Craſhaw.
Sco'wling LY. adv. [from ſcowl.] With a frowning and ſul-
len look.
To Sc RA’BBLE. v. n. [ºrallelen, ſcraffºlen, to ſcrape or ſcratch,
Dutch..] To paw with the hands.
He feigned himſelf mad in their hands, and ſcrabbled on the
doors of the gate. I Sa. xxi. 13.
SCRAG. m.ſ.. [ſcraghe, Dutch..] Any thing thin or lean.
ScRA'GGED. adj. [This ſeems corrupted from cragged.] Rough;
uneven; full of protuberances or aſperities.
Is there then any phyſical deformity in the fabrick of a
human body, becauſe our imagination can ſtrip it of its muſ-
cles and ſkin, and ſhew us the ſcragged and knotty back-
bone * Bentley's Sermons.
ScRA'GCED Ness. }
/7.
ScRA'GGINESS.
1. Leanneſs; marcour.
2. Unevenneſs; roughneſs; ruggedneſs.
ScRA'GGY.. n. ſ. [from ſcrag.]
1. Lean; marcid; thin
Such a conſtitution is eaſily known by the body being lean,
warm, hairy, ſcraggy, and dry, without a diſeaſe. Arbuthnot.
2. (Corrupted from craggy.] Rough; rugged; uneven.
Craſhaw.
[from ſcragged.]
' [from ſcraggy.]
From a ſcraggy rock, whoſe prominence
Half overſhades the ocean, hardy men,
Fearleſs of rending winds and daſhing waves,
Cut ſampire. Phillips.
To ScRA'Mel E. v. n. [The ſame with ſcralble; ſcrufflin,
Dutch..]
1. To catch at any thing eagerly and tumultuouſly with the
hands; to catch with haſte preventive of another; to contend
tumultuouſly which ſhall catch anything.
England now is left
To tug and ſcramble, and to part by th’ teeth
The unow'd intereſt of proud ſwelling ſtate. Shakeſpeare.
Of other care they little reck'ning make,
Than how to ſcramble at the ſhearer's feaſt,
And ſhove away the worthy bidden gueſt. Milton.
It is not to be ſuppoſed, that, when ſuch a tree was ſhaking,
there would be no ſcrambling for the fruit. Stilingfleet.
They muſt have ſcrambled with the wild beaſts for crabs
and nuts. Ray on the Creation.
2. To climb by the help of the hands: as, he ſcrambled up that
rock.
ScRA'Mble. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Eager conteſt for ſomething, in which one endeavours to get
it before another.
As they were in the middle of their gambols, ſome body
threw a handful of apples among them, that ſet them pre-
ſently together by the ears upon the ſcramble. L'Eſtrange.
Becauſe the deſire of money is conſtantly almoſt every
where the ſame, its vent varies very little, but as its greater
ſcarcity enhances its price and increaſes the ſcramble. Locke.
2. A&amp;t of climbing by the help of the hands.
Sck A'MBle R. n.ſ.. [from ſcramble.]
1. One that ſcrambles.
All the little ſcramblers ºfter fame fall upon him. Addison.
2. One that climbs by help of the hands.
To Scrasch. v. a. [/chrantzer, Dutch..] To grind ſome-
what crackling between the teeth. The Scots retain it.
ScRA'NNEL. adj. [Of this word I know not the etymology, nor
any other example..] Vile; worthleſs. Perhaps grating by
the ſound.
When they liſt, their lean and flaſhy ſongs
Grate on their ſcrannel pipes of wretched ſtraw. Milton.
Scrap. m. / [from ſcrape, a thing ſcraped or rubbed off.]
1. A ſmall particle; a little piece; a fragment.
It is an unaccountable vanity to ſpend all our time raking
into the ſcraps and imperfect remains of former ages, and ne-
glečting the clearer notices of our own. Glanv.
Trencher eſquires ſpend their time in hopping from one
great man's table to another's, only to pick up ſcraps and in-
telligence. L’Eſtrange.
Languages are to be learned only by reading and talking,
and not by ſcraps of authors got by heart. Locke.
No rag, no ſcrap, of all the beau, or wit,
That once ſo flutter'd, and that once ſo writ. Pºpe.
I can never have too many of your letters: I am angry at
every ſcrap of paper loſt. Pope.
2. Crumb; ſmall particles of meat left at the table.
The contract you pretend with that baſe wretch,
One bred of alms, and foſter'd with cold diſhes,
With ſcraps o' th' court, is no contračt. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
The attendants puff a court up beyond her bounds, for
their own ſcraps and advantage. Bacon.
On bones, on ſcraps of dogs let me be fed,
My limbs uncover'd, and expos'd my head
To bleakeſt colds. Granv.
What has he elſe to bait his traps,
Or bring his vermin in, but ſcrap; P
The offals of a church diſtreſt,
A hungry vicarage.
3. A ſmall piece of paper. This is properly ſcrip.
Pregnant with thouſands flits the ſcrap unſeen,
And ſilent ſells a king, or buys a queen. Pope.
To SCRAPE. v. a. [rcneoran, Saxon; ſhrapen, Dutch;
'ſaſcr'pitigh, Erſe; crawn, Welſh.]
1. To deprive of the ſurface by the light ačtion of a ſharp in-
ſtrument, uſed with the edge almoſt perpendicular.
Theſe hard woods are more properly ſcraped than planed. Mox.
2. To take away by ſcraping; to eraze.
They ſhall deſtroy the walls, and I will ſcrape her duſt, and
make her like the top of a rock. Ezek. xxvi. 4.
Bread for a toaſt lay on the coals; and, if toaſted quite
through, ſcrape off the burnt ſide, and ſerve it up. Swift.
3. To act upon any ſurface with a harſh noiſe.
The chiming clocks to dinner call;
A hundred footſteps ſcrape the marble hall. Pope.
4. To gather by great efforts, or penurious or trifling diligence.
JLet the government be ruined by his avarice, if, by the ſame
avarice, he can ſcrape together ſo much as to make his peace.
South's Sermons.
Unhappy thoſe who hunt for a party, and ſcrape together
out of every author all thoſe things only which favour their
OWn tenets. JWatts.
Swift.
5. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 317</div><p class="Text">S C R.
ſº
iº,
1%
*
g !
*
jº,
.
5. To Scrape Acquaintance. A low phraſe. To curry favour, or
inſinuate into one's familiarity.
To Scrap E. v. n.
1. To make a harſh noiſe.
2. To play ill on a fiddle.
3. To make an aukward bow.
ScRAPe. n.ſ.. [ſkrap, Swediſh. J
diſtreſs. This is a low word.
ScRA'PE R. m.ſ.. [from ſcrape.]
1. Inſtrument with which any thing is ſcraped.
Never clean your ſhoes on the ſcraper, but in the entry,
and the ſcraper will laſt the longer. Swift.
2. A miſer; a man intent on getting money; a ſcrapepenny.
Be thrifty, but not covetous; therefore give
Thy need, thine honour, and thy friend his due :
Never was ſcraper brave man. Get to live,
Then live, and uſe it; elſe it is not true
That thou haſt gotten: ſurely uſe alone
Makes money not a contemptible ſtone.
3. A vile fiddler.
Out! ye ſempiternal ſcrapers. Cºwley.
JHave wild boars or dolphins the leaſt emotion at the moſt
elaborate ſtrains of your modern ſcraters, all which have been
tamed and humanized by ancient muſicians? Arbuthnot.
ScRA.T. n.ſ. [rcrutca, Saxon. J An, hermaphrodite. Skinner
and junius.
To SCRATCH. v. a. [kratzen, Dutch.]
1. To tear or mark with ſlight inciſions ragged and uneven.
The lab’ring ſwain
Scratch'd with a rake a furrow for his grain,
And cover'd with his hand the ſhallow ſeed again. Dryden.
A ſort of ſmall ſand-coloured ſtones, ſo hard as to ſcratch
glaſs. Grew's Muſæum.
2. To tear with the nails.
How can I tell but that his talons may
Yet ſcratch my ſon, or rend his tender hand. Fa. Queen.
I ſhould have ſcratch'd out your unſeeing eyes,
To make my maſter out of love with thee. Shakeſpeare.
I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow, than a man ſwear
he loves me.
Keep your ladyſhip ſtill in that mind! ſo ſome gen-
tleman or other ſhall 'ſcape a predeſtinate ſcratcht face.
Scratching could not make it worſe, an 'twere ſuch a face
as yours were. - Shakespeare Much Ad, about Nothing.”
Scots are like witches: do but whet your pen,
Scratch 'till the blood come, they’ll not hurt you then. Cleav.
To wiſh that there were nothing but ſuch dull tame things
in the world, that will neither bite nor ſcratch, is as childleſs as
Ainſworth.
Difficulty; perplexity;
Herbert.
to wiſh there were no fire in nature. More.
Unhand me, or I'll ſcratch your face;
Let go, for ſhame. Dryden.
3. To wound ſlightly.
4. To hurt ſlightly with any thing pointed or keen.
Daphne, roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs, that one ſhall ſwear ſhe bleeds. Shakespeare
5. To rub with the nails.
Francis Cornfield did ſºratch his elbow, when he had ſweet-
ly invented to ſignify his name St. Francis, with a friary cowl
in a corn field. Camden.
Other mechanical helps Aretaeus uſes to procure ſleep, par-
ticularly the ſcratching of the temples and the ears. Arbuthnot.
Be mindful, when invention fails,
To ſcratch your head, and bite your nails. Swift.
6. To write or draw aukwardly.
If any of their labourers can ſcratch out a pamphlet, they
deſire no wit, ſtyle, or argument. Swift.
ScRAtch. n.ſ.. [from the verb. J
1. An inciſion ragged and ſhallow.
The coarſe file cuts deep, and makes deep ſcratches in the
work; and before you can take out thoſe deep ſcratches with
your finer cut files, thoſe places where the riſings were when
your work was forged, may become dents to your hammer
dents. Moxon's M. ch. Exer.
The ſmaller the particles of thoſe ſubſtances are, the ſmaller
will be the fratches, by which they continually fret and wear
away the glaſs until it be poliſhed; but be they never ſo ſmall,
they can wear away the glaſs no otherwiſe than by grating
and ſcratching it, and breaking the protuberances: and there-
fore poliſh it no otherwiſe than by bringing its roughneſs to a
very fine grain, ſo that the ſcratches and frettings of the ſurface
become too ſmall to become viſible, Newton's Opt.
2. Laceration with the nails.
Theſe nails with ſcratches ſhall deform my breaſt,
Leſt by my look or colour be expreſs'd
The mark of aught high-born, or ever better dreſs'd. Prior.
3. A ſlight wound.
The valiant beaſt turning on her with open jaws, ſhe gave
him ſuch a thruſt through his breaſt, that all the lion could
do was with his open paw to tear off the mantle and ſleeve of
Zelmane, with a little ſcratch rather than a wound. Sidney.
Heav'n forbid a ſhallow ſcratch ſhould drive
The prince of Wales from ſuch a field as this. Shakespeare H. IV.
I
__–- - - FT- - - - - --- 1- 4–
S C R.
$cratchER. m. ſ. [from ſcratch..] He that ſcratches.
Scratches. ºf Cracked ulcers or ſcabs in a horſe's foot. Ainſ.
ScRA"rchingly. adv. [from ſcratching.] With the action of
ſcratching.
Making him turn cloſe to the ground like a cat. wh
ſºathingly the wheels about after a . &gt; º
SCR44. *J. (Iriſh and Erſe.] Surface or ſcurf.
Neither ſhould that odious cuſtom be allowed of cuttin
ſcraws, which is flaying off the green ſurface of the º
to cover their cabins, or make up their ditches. swi 1.
To Scrawl. v. a. [I ſuppoſe to be corrupted from ſcrabble.]
I. To draw or mark irregularly or clumſily.
2. To write unſkilfully and inelegantly.
Peruſe my leaves through ev'ry part,
And think thou ſee'ſt its owner's heart,
Serawl"d o'er with trifles thus, and quite
As hard, as ſenſeleſs, and as light. Swift.
Think not your verſes ſterling,
Though with a golden pen youjirawl,
And ſcribble in a Berlin. Swift.
3. [From crawl.] To creep like a reptile. Ainſ.
Scraw L. m. / [from the verb.] Unſkilful and inelegant
writing.
The left hand will make ſuch a ſcrawl, that it will not be
legible. A buthn. Hiſt, of john Bull.
Mr. Wycherly, hearing from me how welcome his letters
would be, writ to you, in which I inſerted myſcrawl. Pope.
Scrawler. n.ſ. (from ſcrawl.] A clumſy and inelegant
Writer.
Scrax. m.ſ. A bird called a ſea-ſwallow. Ainſ and Bailey.
ScRE’ABLE. adj. [ſtreabilis, Latin.] That which may be ſpit
Out. Bailey.
To Screak. v. n. [Properly creak, or ſhriek, fromAkrige, Dan.]
To make a ſhrill or hoarſe noiſe. Bailey.
To Scre AM. v. n. [preman. Saxon.]
1. To cry out ſhrilly, as in terrour or agony.
Soon a whirlwind roſe around,
And from afar he heard a ſcreaming ſound,
As of a dame diſtreſs'd, who cry’d for aid,
And fill'd with loud laments the ſecret ſhade. Dryden.
The fearful matrons raiſe a ſtreaming cry,
Old feeble men with fainter groans reply; }
Ajarring ſound reſults, and mingles in the ſky, Dryden.
If chance a mouſe creeps in her fight,
Can finely counterfeit a fright;
So ſweetly ſcreams, if it comes near her,
She raviſhes all hearts to hear her. Swift.
2. To cry ſhrilly.
I heard the owl ſcream, and the crickets cry. Shakeſp.
Screa M. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A ſhrill quick loud cry of
terrour or pain.
Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they ſay,
Lamentings heard i' th' air, ſtrange ſcreams of death. Shał.
Then flaſh'd the livid lightning from her eyes,
And ſcreams of horror rend th’ affrighted ſkies. Pope.
To SCREECH. v. n. [ſkrakia, to cry, Iſlandick.]
I. To cry out as in terrour or anguiſh.
Screeching is an appetite of expelling that which ſuddenly
ſtrikes the ſpirits. Bacon.
2. To cry as a night owl: thence called a ſcreechowl.
ScRE EcH. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Cry of horrour and anguiſh.
2. Harſh horrid cry.
The birds obſcene, that nightly flock'd to taſte,
With hollow ſcreech; fled from the dire repaſt;
And ravenous dogs, allur’d by ſcented blood,
And ſtarving wolves, ran howling to the wood. Pope.
ScREE'chow L. m.ſ.. [ſcreech and owl.] An owl that hoots in
the night, and whoſe voice is ſuppoſed to betoken danger,
miſery, or death. -
Deep night,
The time of night when Troy was ſet on fire,
The time when ſcreechowls cry, and bandogs howl. Shakeſ?.
Let him, that will a ſcreechowl ay be call’d,
Go into Troy, and ſay there, Hector's dead. Shakeſpeare.
By the ſcreech;wl's diſmal note,
By the black night raven's throat,
I charge thee, Hob. Drayton.
Jupiter, though he had hung the balance, and given it a
jog to weigh down Turnus, ſent the ſcreechowl to diſcourage
him. Dryden.
O, that ſcreechowl at the window ! we ſhall be purſued Im-
mediately. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
Sooner ſhall ſcreechowl, baſk in ſunny day,
Than I forget my ſhepherd's wonted love. Gay.
ScREEN. n.ſ. ſeſºran, French.]
1. Anything that affords ſhelter or concealment.
Now near enough: your leavy/creen: throw down,
And ſhow like thoſe you are: Shakespeare Macbeth.
Some ambitious men ſeem as ſcreens to princes in matters
of danger and envy. Bacon.
Our
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 318</div><p class="Text">S C R.
S C R.
ſelves, are ſettled in thoſe
Our people, who tranſport them “. -
interjacent tracts, as a ſcree” againſt the inſults of "...} -
• vages. My juniors by a year,
Who wiſely thought my "gº a ſcreen,
when death approach'd, to ſtand between, -
The ſcreen remov’d, their hearts are trembling. Swift.
2. Anything uſed to exclude cold or light.
When there is a ſcreen between the candle and the eye, yet
the light paſſeth to the paper whereon one writeth. Bacon.
One ſpeaks the glory of the Britiſh queen,
And one deſcribes a charming Indian ſtree". Pope.
Ladies make their old cloaths into patchwork for fºreens and
{tools. Swift.
3. A riddle to fift ſand.
‘to Screen. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſhelter; to conceal; to hide.
Back'd with a ridge of hills,
That ſcreen'd the fruits of th’earth and ſeats of men,
From cold Septentrion blaſts. Mill. Par. Regain'd.
A good magiſtrate's retinue of ſtate ſcreens him from the
dangers, which he is to incur for the ſake of it. Atterbury.
This gentle deed ſhall fairly be ſet foremoſt,
To ſcreen the wild eſcapes of lawleſs paſſion. Rowe.
2. [Cerno crevi, Latin.] To ſift; to riddle.
Let the caſes be filled with natural earth, taken the firſt
half ſpit, from juſt under the turf of the beſt paſture ground,
mixed with one part of very mellow ſoil ſcreened. Evelyn.
Screw. n.ſ.. [ſcroeve, Dutch ; ſºrºus French.] One of the
mechanical powers, which is defined a right cylinder cut into
a furrowed ſpiral: of this there are two kinds, the male and
female; the former being cut convex, ſo that its threads riſe
outwards; but the latter channelled on its concave ſide, ſo as
to receive the former. Quincy.
The ſcrew is a kind of wedge, that is multiplied or con-
tinued by a helical revolution about a cylinder, receiving its
motion not from any ſtroak, but from a večtis at one end of
it. Wilkins's Math. Magick.
After your apples are ground, commit them to the ſcrew
preſs, which is the beſt. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To ScRew. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To turn by a ſcrew.
If we ſhould fail.—
*—We fail!
But ſcrew your courage to the ſticking place,
And we'll not fail. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Some, when the preſs by utmoſt vigour ſcrew'd,
Has drain'd the pulpous maſs, regale their ſwine
With the dry refuſe. Phillips.
2. To faſten with a ſcrew.
To ſcrew your lock on the door, make wide holes, big
enough to receive the ſhank of the ſcrew. Mºxon.
3. To deform by contorſions.
Sometimes a violent laughter ſcrew'd his face,
And ſometimes ready tears dropp'd down apace. Cowley. -
With ſcrewed face, and doleful whine, they ply you with
ſenſeleſs harangues againſt human inventions on the one hand,
and loud outcries for a further reformation on the other. South.
He ſcrew'd his face into a harden'd ſmile,
And ſaid Sebaſtian knew to govern ſlaves. Dryden.
Let others ſcrew their hypocritick face,
She ſhews her grief in a ſincerer place. Swift.
4. To force; to bring by violence.
He reſolved to govern by ſubaltern miniſters, who £rewed
up the pins of power too high. Howel's Wocal Fore?.
No diſcourſe can be adminiſtered, but they will try to turn
the tide, and draw it all into their own channel; or they will
fºrew in here and there ſome intimations of what they ſaid or
did. Government of the Tongue.
The rents of land in Ireland, ſince they have been ſo
enormouſly raiſed and ſcrewed up, may be computed to be
about two millions. Swift.
5. To ſqueeze; to preſs.
6. To oppreſs by extortion.
. Our country landlords, by unmeaſurable ſcrewing and rack-
ing their tenants, have already reduced the miſerable people
to a worſe condition than the peaſants in France. Swift.
Screw Tree. n ſ. ſi Latin.
Weſt Indies. ſ, [iſora, Latin.] A plant of the Eaſt and
To SCRIBBLE. v. a. ſ. ſºribo, ſcribill, Latin
I. To fill with artleſs or [...; writing. tin.]
- How gird the ſphere
With centrick and eccentrick, ſcribbl’d o'er -
2 Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft.
fo s: write without uſe or elegance.
i". *. v. n. To write without care or beauty.
pen º affirm, that an ape caſually meeting with
exºt r i. Paper, and falling to ſ ribble, did happen to write
a . &gt; ‘. º of Hobbes, would an atheiſt believe ſuch
at. 7 * *nd yet he can eaſily digeſt things as incredible as
th
Bently.
2
If Maevius ſ.ribble in Apollo's ſpite,
There are, who judge ſtill worſe than he can write. Pºpe
Leave flattery to fulſome dedicators, &amp; Pºº a
Whom, when they praiſe, the world believes no more
Than when they promiſe to give ſcribbling o'er. Poºr
ScR1'bble. n ſ [from the verb...] Worthleſs writing. 1 * *
By ſolemnly endeavouring to countenance my conjcótures.
I might be thought dogmatical in a haſty ſcribble. lº.
If it ſtruck the preſent taſte, it was ſoon transferred into tº:
plays and current ſcribbles of the week, and became an addi-
tion to our language. Swift
Scri’BBLER. m. ſ. [from ſcribble.] A petty author; a writer
without worth.
The moſt copious writers are the arranteſt ſcribblers, and in
ſo much talking the tongue runs before the wit. L'E/ºrange.
The actors repreſent ſuch things as they are capable, b
which they and the ſcribbler may get their living. F.
The ſriller, pinch'd with hunger, writes to dine, -
And to your genius muſt conform his line. Granv
To affirm he had cauſe to apprehend the ſame treatment
with his father, is an improbable ſcandal flung upon the nation
by a few bigotted French ſcribblers. - Swift
No body was concerned or ſurpriſed, if this or that ſeriºr
was proved a dunce. letter to Pope's Dunciad.
ScR1b E. m. ſ. [ſcribe, French; ſcriba, Latin.]
1. A writer. -
Hearts, tongues, figures, ſcribes, bards, poets, cannot
Think, ſpeak, caſt, write, ſing, number, ho!
His love to Antony. Shakesp Ant, and Cleopatra.
My maſter, being the ſcribe to himſelf, ſhould write the
letter. - Shakespeare.
A certain ſcribe came and ſaid, maſter, I will follow thee.
4ſat. viii. 19.
We are not to wonder, if he thinks not fit to make any
perfeót and unerring ſcribes. Grew's Cºſino.
The following letter comes from ſome notable young female
ſcribe. Addison Speciatºr.
2. A publick notary. Ainſworth.
ScR1'MER. m.ſ.. [eſcrimeur, French. J A gladiator; a fencing
maſter. Not in uſe.
The ſcrimers of their nation,
He ſwore, had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you oppos'd them. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
ScRINE. n.ſ.. [ſcrinium, Latin.] A place in which writings or
curioſities are repoſited.
Help then, O holy virgin,
Thy weaker novice to perform thy will;
Lay forth, out of thine everlaſting ſcrine,
The antique rolls which there lie hidden ſtill. Fa. Queen,
ScRIP. n.ſ.. [ſkrappa, Iſlandick.]
1. A ſmall bag; a ſatchel.
Come, ſhepherd, let us make an honourable retreat; though
not with bag and baggage, yet with ſtrip and ſcrippage. Shuk.
He’d in requittal ope his leathern ſcrip,
And ſhew me ſimples of a thouſand names,
Telling their ſtrange and vigorous faculties. Milton.
2. [From ſcriptio, Latin, as it ſeems.) A ſchedule; a ſmall
writing.
Call them generally man by man, according to the ſrip.
Shakeſpeare's Midſummer Night': Dream.
Bills of exchange cannot pay our debts abroad, 'till ſcrip: of
paper can be made current coin. Lo Åe.
Scripp AGE. m. ſ. [from ſcrip.] That which is contained iſ a
ſcrip. Diff.
ScR1'ProRy. adj. [ſºrptorius, Latin.] Written; not orally
delivered. Swift.
ScR1'ptural. adj. [from ſcripture.] Contained in the Bible;
biblical.
By creatures, the ſcriptural uſe of that word determines it
ſometimes to men. Atterbury.
SCRIPTURE. m.ſ.. [ſcriptura, Latin.]
1. Writing.
It is not only remembered in many ſcriptureſ, but famous
for the death and overthrow of Craſius. Raleigh.
2. Sacred writing; the Bible. - -
With us there is never any time beſtowed in divine ſervice,
without the reading of a great part of the holy ſcripture,
which we account a thing moſt neceſſary. caker.
The devil can cite ſcripture for his purpoſe:
An evil ſoul producing holy witneſs,
Is like a villain with a ſmiling cheek. Shakeſpeare.
There is not any action which a man ought to do, or to
forbear, but the ſcripture will give him a clear precept, 0. prº-
hibition for it. . . . Sº,
Forbear any diſcourſe of other ſpirits, 'till his reading the
ſcripture hiſtory put him upon that enquiry. Lº:
Scripture proof was never the talent of theſe men, and 'tis
no wonder they are foiled. - Altertury.
Why are ſcripture maxims put upon us, without taking no-
tice of ſcripture examples, that lie croſs 'em : Atterbury.
The author of nature and the ſcripture has expreſly en-
joined, that he who will not work, ſhall not ** Seed's Serm.
ScR 1 v ENER,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 319</div><p class="Text">º:
4.
*:::
*
º,
| 1.
º
S C R.
ScRI've N.E.R. m. ſ. [ſºrivano, Latin.]
1. One who draws contracts.
We'll paſs the buſineſs privately and well:
Send for your daughter by your ſervant here,
My boy ſhall fetch the ſrivener. Shakeſ Tam, of the Shrew.
2. One whoſe buſineſs is to place money at intereſt.
How happy in his low degree,
Who leads a quiet country life,
And from the griping ſcrivener free? Dryden's Horace.
I am reduced to beg and borrow from ſtrivener, and uſurers,
that ſuck the heart and blood. Arbuthn. Hiſt, of john Bull.
SCRQ'FULA. m.ſ.. [from ſcrofa, Latin, a ſow, as zºz.]
A depravation of the humours of the body, which breaks out
in ſores commonly called the king's evil.
If matter in the milk diſpoſe to coagulation, it produces a
ſcrºfula. //ſeman of Tumours.
ScRo'Fulous. adj. [from ſcrofula..] Diſeaſed with the ſcrofula.
Scrºfulous perſons can never be duly nouriſhed; for ſuch as
have tumours in the parotides often have them in the pancreas
and meſentery. Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
Engliſh conſumptions generally proceed from a ſºrofilous
diſpoſition. Arbuthnot.
What would become of the race of men in the next age, if
we had nothing to truſt to, beſide the ſcrofulous conſumptive
production furniſhed by our men of wit and pleaſure? Swift.
ScRoll. n.ſ.. [Suppoſed by Minſhew to be corrupted from rºll;
by Skinner derived from ſcruelle, a ſhrimp given by the heralds:
whence parchment, wrapped up into a reſembling form, has
the ſame name. It may be obſerved, that a gaoler's liſt of
priſoners is ſcrou.] A writing wrapped up.
His chamber all was hanged about with rolls,
And old records from ancient times deriv'd;
Some made in books, ſome in long parchment ſcrolls,
That were all worm-eaten, and full of canker holes. Spenſ.
Accept this ſcroll,
Which, in right of Richard Plantagenet,
We do exhibit to your majeſty. , Shakeſp. H. VI.
See'ſt thou this letter, take it up,
‘And give the king this fatal plotted ſrºll. Shakeſp. Tit. Andr.
We'll add a royal number to the dead,
Gracing the ſcroll, that tells of this war's loſs,
With ſlaughter coupled to the name of kings. Shakeſpeare.
Here is the ſcroll of every man's name, which is thought fit
through all Athens to play in our interlude. Shakeſpeare.
A Numidian prieſt, bellowing out certain ſuperſtitious
charms, caſt divers froll of paper on each ſide the way,
wherein he curſed and banned the Chriſtians. Knolles.
He drew forth a ſcroll of parchment, and delivered it to our
foremoſt man. Bacon.
Such follow him, as ſhall be regiſter'd;
Part good, part bad: of bad the longer ſcroll. Milton.
With this epiſtolary ſroll,
Receive the partner of my inmoſt ſoul. Prior.
May take yon' beauteous, myſtick, ſtarry roll,
And burn it, like an uſeleſs parchmentſ:-oll.
$croy L.E. m. ſ. [This word I remember only in Shakeſpeare:
it ſeems derived from eſtrouelle, French, a ſcrofulous ſwell-
ing; as he calls a mean fellow a ſlab from his itch, or a
patch from his raggedneſs.] A mean fellow ; a raſcal; a
wretch.
The ſtroyles of Angiers flout you kings,
And ſtand ſecurely on their battlements,
As in a theatre. Shakeſpeare's King John.
To SCRUB. v. a. [ſhrºbben, Dutch..] To rub hard with
ſomething coarſe and rough.
Such wrinkles as a ſkilful hand would draw
For an old grandam ape, when, with a grace, - -
She ſits at ſquat, and ſcrubs her leathern face. Dryden.
She never would lay aſide the uſe of brooms and ſcrubbing
bruſhes. - A buthnot.
Now Moll had whirl’d her mop with dext'rous airs,
Prepar'd to ſcrub the entry and the ſtairs. Swift.
ScRUB. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] -
1. A mean fellow, either as he is ſuppoſed to ſcrub himſelf for
the itch, or as he is employed in the mean offices of ſcouring
away dirt.
2. Anything mean or deſpicable.
With a dozen large veſſels my vault ſhall be ſtor'd;
No little ſcrub joint ſhall come on my board. Swift.
3. A worn out broom. Ainſworth.
ScRU'B BE D. }*. [ſcrubet, Daniſh.] Mean; vile; worth-
ScRU'BBY. leſs; dirty; ſorry.
I gave it to a youth,
A kind of boy, a little ſcrubbed boy,
No higher than thyſelf. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
The ſcrubbieſ? cur in all the pack,
Yet if he wills, may change or ſpoil the whole; {
Prior.
Can ſet the maſtià on your back. Swift.
The ſcene a wood, produc’d no more
Than a few ſcrubby trees before. Swift.
ScRUFF. m. ſ. The ſame, I ſuppoſe, with ſcurf, by a meta-
theſis uſual in pronunciation.
- wº- ------
S C R
SCRU'PLE. m. ſ. crupule
1. Doubt; £; of de
about minute things.
- Macduff, this noble paſſion,
Child of integrity, hath from my ſoul
Yip'd the black ſcruples, reconcird my thoughts
§: . good truth. - - Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
his . * more fill foreign nations with admiration of
“ſion, than the conſent of all eſtates of England for
the receiving of the king without the leaſt ſcruple, pauſe, or
queſtion. 1 *-2 lº,
For the matter of your confeſſion, let it be ſevere and ſeri.
ous ; but yet ſo as it may be without any inordinate anxiety
" . . - •
and unneceſſary ſcruples, which only intangle the ſoul. Taylor.
Men make no ſcruple to conclude, that thoſe propoſitions,
of whoſe knowledge they can find in themſelves no original,
were certainly the impreſs of God and nature upon their
minds, and not taught them by any one elſe. Locke.
2. Twenty grains; the third part of a dram.
Milk one ounce, oil of vitriol a ſcruple, doth coagulate;
the milk at the bottom, where the vitriol goeth. Bacon.
3. Proverbially, any ſmall quantity.
Nature never lends
The ſmalleſt ſcruple of her excellence,
But, like a thrifty goddeſs, ſhe determines
Herſelf the glory of a creditor. Shakespeare Meaſ fºr Maſ.
To Scru'PLE. v. m. [from the noun..] To doubt; to heſitate.
He ſcrupled not to eat
Againſt his better knowledge; not deceiv'd,
But fondly overcome with female charms. Miſt. Par. Loft.
Scru'PLER. n.ſ.. [from ſcruple..] A doubter; one who has
ſcruples. -
The ſcruples which many publick miniſters would make of
the worthineſs of parents to have their children baptiſed, forced
ſuch queſtioned parents, who did not believe the neceſſity of
having their children baptiſed by ſuch ſcruplers, to carry their
children unto other miniſters. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
ScRUPU lo's 1TY. m. ſ. [from ſcrupulous.]
1. Doubt; minute and nice doubtfulneſs. .
Amongſt ourſelves there was ſome queſtion moved, by rea-
ſon of a few mens frupuloſity touching certain things. Hooker.
The one ſort they warned to take heed, that ſcrupuloſity did
not make them rigorous in giving unadviſed ſentence againſt
their brethren which were free; the other, that they did not
become ſcandalous, by abuſing their liberty and freedom to the
offence of their weak brethren, which were ſcrupulous. Hook.
So careful, even to ſcrupuloſity, were they to keep their
ſabbath, that they muſt not only have a time to prepare them
for that, but a further time alſo to prepare them for their
very preparations. . South.
2. Fear of a&amp;ing in any manner; tenderneſs of conſcience.
The firſt ſacrilege is looked on with ſome horror; but when
they have once made the breach, theirſº,ſoon }}.
- ecay of Piety.
ScRU'pulous. adj. [ſcrupuleux, French; ſcrupulºſa, Latin;
from ſcruple.] - - -
1. Nicely doubtful; hard to ſatisfy in determinations of con-
ſcience. -
They warned them that they did not become ſcandalous, by
abuſing their liberty, to the offence of their weak brethren
which were ſcrupulºus. Hooker.
Some birds, inhabitants of the waters, whoſe blood is cold
as fiſhes, and their fleſh is ſo like in taſte, that the ſcrupulous
are allowed them on fiſh-days. Locke.
2. Given to objections; captious.
Equality of two domeſtick pow'rs
Breeds ſcrupulous faction. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
3. Nice; doubtful. - - -
As the cauſe of a war ought to be juſt, ſo the juſtice of
that cauſe ought to be evident; not obſcure, not /crupulous.
Bacon's hoy #'ar.
French ; ſcrupulus, Latin.]
determination; perplexity: generally
4. Careful; vigilant; cautious. * - -
I have been the more ſcrupulous and wary, in regard the in-
ferences drawn from theſe obſervations are of ſome in-
portance. //ardward.
Scºupulously. adv. [from ſcrupulouſ.) Carefully; nicely :
anxiouſly. - * - - - - -
The duty conſiſts not frupulouſy in minutes and half
hours. Taylor.
Henry V. manifeſtly derived his courage from his piety,
and was ſcrupulouſly careful not to aſcribe the ſucceſs of it to
himſelf Addiſon's Freeholder.
ScRU'pulous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from frupulous.] The ſtate of being
sº. adj. [from ſcrutor, Latin.] Diſcoverable by
inquiry. -
§. we think God ſo ſcrutable, or ourſelves ſo penetrating,
that none of his ſecrets can eſtapº us? Decay of Piety.
Scºut Arios. n ſ [ſirut” Latin.] Search; examination ;
** * * - *** Dić?.
1 nqul IV.
sºon. n. ſ. [ ſ rutateur, Fr. from ſcrutor, Lat..] En-
quirer; ſearcher; examiner.
23 I In
4–.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 320</div><p class="Text">S C U
S C U
SCRUTINY. m. ſ. [ ſcrutinium, Latin. J Enquiry; ſearch;
examination with nicety. - - -
ſ: In the frutinies for righteouſneſs and judgment, when it is
º inquired whether ſuch a perſon be a good man or no, the
meaning is not, what does he believe or hope, but what he
loves. - Taylor's Rule of living holy.
I thought thee worth my nearer view
And narrower ſcrutiny, that º: tº
ree or meaning thou art ca
'º. * "º.º. Regain'd.
They that have deſigned exactneſs and deep ſcrutiny, have
taken ſome one part of nature. alt'.
Their difference to meaſure, and to reach,
º Reaſon well reëtify’d muſt nature teach ;
- And theſe high ſcrutinies are ſubjećts fit -
For man's all-ſearching and enquiring wit. Denham.
| We are admoniſhed of want of charity towards others, and
º want of a Chriſtian ſcrutiny and examination into ourſelves.
ſ - L’Eſtrange.
| When any argument of great importance is managed with
that warmth, which a ſerious convićtion of it generally in-
ſpires, ſomewhat may eaſily eſcape, even from a wary pen,
which will not bear the teſt of a ſevere ſcrutiny. Attºriar,
Theſe, coming not within the ſcrutiny of human ſenſes,
...cannot be examined by them, or atteſted by any body. Lºck.
o Scru'riNize. lv. a. [from ſcrutiny..] To ſearch; to exa.
To Scru"TINY. } mine.
The compromiſſarii ſhould chuſe according to the votes of
ſuch, whoſe votes they were obliged to ſcrutilize. Ayºff.
Scruto'IRE. m. ſ. [for ſeritoire, or €/critoire. J A caſe of
drawers for writings.
I locked up theſe papers in my ſrutoire, and my ſrutoire
came to be unlocked. Prior.
To Scºuz E. v. a. [Perhaps from ſrew. This word, though
now diſuſed by writers, is ſtill preſerved, at leaſt in its cor-
ruption, to ſºrouge, in the London jargon.] To ſqueeze; to
compreſs.
Though up he caught him 'twixt his puiſant hands,
And having ſiruzed out of his carrion cºrſe
The loathful life, now loos'd from ſinful bands,
Upon his ſhoulders carried him. Pairy Qween.
To SCUD. v. n. [./* ittire, Italian; ſutta, Swediſh; ſºur,
ſwift, Iſlandick.] To fly; to run away with precipitation.
The vote was no ſooner paſſed, but away they ſcudded to the
next lake. L'Eſtrange.
The frighted ſatyrs, that in woods delight,
Now into plains with prick'd-up ears tak: flight;
And ſudding thence, while they their horn-feet ply,
About their fires the little ſylvans cry. Dryden.
Away the frighted ſpectre ſtud, -
And leaves my lady in the ſuds. Swift.
To Scu'DDL.E. v. n. [from ſtud.] To run with a kind of af-
feded haſte or precipitation. A low word.
Scur FLE, n/ [This word is derived by Skinner from ſu fe.]
A confuſed quarrel; a tumultuous broiſ.
His captain's heart,
In the ſuffes of great fights hath burſt
The buckles on his breaft. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
Avowed atheiſts, Placing themſelves in the ſeat of the ſcorner,
take much pleaſing divertiſement, by deriding our eager ſcuffles
about that which they think nothing. Decay of Piety.
The dog leaps "Pºn the ſerpent, and tears it to Pieces; but
in the ſºfte the cradle happened to be overturned º/trange.
In proceſs of time, from being a ſimple ſcrutator, an arch-
- d . became to have juriſdiction more amply. Ayºff.
S º: ad. [from ſcrutiny..] Captious; full of inqui-
C -.
ries. A word little uſed. -
Age is froward, uneaſy, frutinou, h
! ºr Hard to be pleas'd, and parcimonious. Denham.
Popiſh miſſionaries mix themſelve in thºſe dark ſuffe, and
animate the mob to ſuch outrages and inſults. Addison.
To Sgt. FFL.E. v. n. [from the noun.J. To fight confuſedly
- and tumultuouſly. -
- ! muſt confeſs I’ve ſeen, in former days,
The beſt knights in the World, and ſºftdin ſome fravs.
Drayton.
- A gallant man had rather fight to great diſadvantages i. the
field, in an orderly way, than Jºuffle with an undiſciplined
T rabble. - - King Charles.
9 SQUI.K. v. m. [ſuleſ, Daniſh J To lurk in hiding places;
to lie cloſe. 2
*has ſtruck on a ſudden into ſuch a Teputation, that it ſcorns
any longer tº ſº, but owns itſelf publickly. Gov. ºf Tongue.
Fearing to be ſeen, within a bed c
º ºwº he conceal’d his wily head;
jſº th afternoon, and watch'd his time. Dryden.
º Pºphets and my ſophiſts finiſh’d here
N º Civil efforts of the verbal war:
R. * "Yabbins and logicians yield;
ºring ſtill they “mbat; from the field
Open arms unwilling the
And ſºul: behind the ãº. of art. Prior
No news of Phyll the bridegroom came,
And thought his bride had ſculka for ſhame;
Becauſe her father us’d to ſa
The girl had ſuch a baſhful way. Swift.
The immediate publiſhers thereof lay ſtalling under the
wings of an act of parliament. Letter to Publiſher ºf the Dunc.
Scu'iKER. n. ſ. [from ſulk.] A lurker; one that hides him-
ſelf for ſhame or miſchief.
Scull. n.ſ. [It is derived by Skinner from /el, in ſome pro-
Vinces called ſºul!'; as teſła and teſte, or tºtº, ſignify the head.
Mr. Lye obſ, rves more ſatisfactorily, that ſo a is in Iſlandick
the ſkull of an animal.]
1. The bone which incaſes and defends the brain; the arched
bone of the head.
Fraćtures of the ſcull are at all times very dangerous, as the
brain becomes affected from the preſſure. Sharp.
2. A ſmall boat; a cockboat. [Sce Sculle R.]
3. One who rows a cockboat.
Like caitiff vile, that for miſdeed
Rides with his face to rump of ſteed;
Or rowing ſcull, he's fain to love,
Look one way and another move. Hudibras.
4. [Sicole, Saxon, an aſſembly.] In Milon's ſtyle, a ſhoal or
vaſt multitude of fiſh.
Each bay -
With fry innumerable ſwarm, and ſhoals
Of fiſh, that with their fins and ſhining ſcales
Slide under the green wave, in ſºul, that of:
Bank the mid ſea. Miliºn.
Scullcap. n.ſ. [ſcull and cap.]
1. A headpiece.
2. A nightcap.
*%++P*...* / [Of this word I know not the etymology.
** is in Iſlandick a veſſel, and oſcueil, in French a diſh.]
1. A cockboat; a boat in which there is but one rower.
Her ſoul already was conſign'd to fate,
And ſhiv'ring in the leaky ſuffer fate.
They hire the ſcular, and, when once aboard,
Grow fick, and damn the climate like a lord. Pºpe.
2. One that rows a cockboat.
Scºiler Y. n.ſ.. [from ſºioſa, a veſſel, Iſlandick; or eſcueill,
*rench, a diſh.J. The place where common utenſils, as ket-
tles or diſhes, are cleaned and kept.
Pyreicus was famous for counterfeiting baſe things, as pitch-
ers, a ſcullery, and ſetting rogues together by the ears. Peach.
Scu'lláN. n.f. [from ºftweile, French, a diſh.) The loweſt
Gomeſtick ſervant, that waſhes the kettles and the diſhes in the
kitchen.
I muſt, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,
And fall a curfing like a very drab,
A ſºullion, ſye upon't! foh ſ about my brain. Shakespeare Hamlet.
If the gentleman hath lain there, get the cook, the ſtable-
*"...and the ſcullion, to ſtand in his way. Swift.
To Sculp. v. a. [ſº, Latin; ſculper, Fr.] To carve; to
°ngrave. A word not in uſe.
Oh, that the tenor of my juſt complaint
Were ſculpt with ſteel on rocks of adiminºl Sandys.
Scu'LPTILE. 2d. [ſubtilis, Latin.J. Made by carving.
In a ſilver medal is upon one fidê Moſes horned, and on the
reverſe the commandment againſt ſculptile images. Brown.
Scu'lptor. n.ſ. [ſulptor, Latin; ſºilºteur, Fr.] A carver;
one who cuts wood or ſtone into images.
Thy ſhape's in every part
So clean, as might inſtruct the ſculptor's art. Dryden.
The Latin poets give the epithets of trifidim and triſakum
to the thunderbolt, from the /*ptor, and painters that lived
before them, that had given it three forks. Ad//ºn.
Sculpture. m. f [ſculptura, Latin; ſulpture, French.j
1. The art of carving wood, or hewing ſtone into images.
Then ſculpture and her ſiſter arts revive, -
Stones leap'd to form, and rocks began to live. Pope.
2. Carved work.
Nor did there want
Dryden.
Cornice or freeze with boſſy ſulpture; graven. Milton.
There too, in living ſculpture, might be ſeen
The mad affection of the Cretan queen. Dryden.
. The act of engraving.
#, sjº ºv. º [from the noun..] To cut; to en-
Tal VC. -
Gold, filver, ivory vaſes ſculptur'd high,
There are who have not. ... - Pºpe.
Scu M. n.ſ. ſecure, French; ſhiuma, Italian; ſºm, Daniſh;
ſchiºm, Dutch.] -
1. That which riſes to the top of any liquor.
The reſt had ſeveral offices affign'd;
Some to remove the ſºum as it did riſe;
Others to bear the ſame away did mind;
And others it to uſe according to his kind. Fairy®ueen.
The ſalt part of the water doth partly riſe into aſsum on the
top, and partly goeth into a ſediment in the bottom. Eacan.
Gather'd like film, and ſetti'd to itſelf, * * * * *
Self-fed and ſelf confirm’d, Aſiliº,
- Away,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 321</div><p class="Text">S C U
itſ,
º
utiº,
º:
Away, ye ſcum,
That ſtill riſe upmoſt when the nation boils. Drydin.
They mix a med'cine to foment their limbs, 1 *
With ſum that on the molten ſilver ſwims. Dryden.
2. The droſs; the refuſe; the recrement; that part which is to
be thrown away.
There flocked unto him all the ſum of the Iriſh out of all
places, that e're long he had a mighty army. Speºſer.
Some forty gentlemen excepted, had we the very ſum of
the world, ſuch as their friends thought it an exceeding good
aim to be diſcharged. Raleigh's Eſſays.
§ I told the what would Conne c ſay
Cf all thy vapouring, baſe ſcum. Hudibras.
The Scythian and Egyptian ſcum
Had almoſt ruin’d Rome. Roſcommon.
You'll find, in theſe hereditary tales,
Your anceſtors the ſcum of broken jayls. Dryden's juven.
The great and innocent are inſulted by the ſcum and refuſe
of the people. Addiſon’s Freeholder.
To Scu M. v. a. [from the noun..] To clear off the ſcum.
Commonly written and ſpoken ſkim.
A ſecond multitude
Severing each kind, and ſcum'd the bullion droſs. Milton.
Hear, ye ſullen powers below;
Hear, ye taſkers of the dead:
You that boiling cauldrons blow,
You that ſcum the molten lead. Dryd, and Lee's Oedipus.
What corns ſwim upon the top of the brine, ſcum off. A/art.
Scu'MMER. m. ſ. [ ſºumoir, French. J A veſſel with which
liquor is ſcummed, commonly called a ſkimmer.
Scu PPER Holes. n.ſ.. [ſhoepen, Dutch, to draw off.] In a
ſhip, ſmall holes on the deck, through which water is carricd
into the ſea. The leathers over thoſe holes are called ſcupper
leathers, and the nails with which they are faſtened ſcupper
nails. Bailey.
ScuRF. n.ſ. rcump, Saxon; ſºurfa, Iſlandick; ſkurſ, Daniſh;
ſkorf, Swediſh; ſchorſt, Dutch.]
J. A kind of dry miliary ſcab.
Her crafty head was altogether bald,
And, as in hate of honourable eld,
Was overgrown with ſcurf and filthy ſcald. Fairy Queen.
The virtue of his hands
Was loſt among Paëtolus' ſands,
Againſt whoſe torrent while he ſwims,
The golden ſurf peels off his limbs. Swift.
2. A ſoil or ſtain adherent.
Then are they happy, when by length of time
The ſurf is worn away of each committed crime,
No ſpeck is left. Dryden.
3. Any thing ſticking on the ſurface.
There ſtood a hill, whoſe griſly top
Shone with a gloſſy ſurf. Milton.
Upon throwing in a ſtone the water boils; and at the ſame
time are ſeen little flakes of ſurf riſing up. Addiſon,
Scu'RFINEss. n.ſ.. [from ſcurf.] The fiate of being ſcurfy.
Scu'RRIL. adj. [ſcurrilis, Latin.] Low ; mean groſly op-
probrious; loudly jocoſe.
With him, Patroclus,
Upon a lazy bed, the live-long day
Breaks ſcurril jeſts. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſda.
Nothing conduces more to letters than to examine the
writings of the ancients, provided the plagues of judging and
pronouncing againſt them be away; ſuch as envy, bitterneſs,
precipitation, impudence, and ſcurril ſcoffing. Ben. Johnſon.
Thou mov'it me more by barely naming him,
Than all thy ſoul unmanner'd ſcurril taunts. Dryden.
ScuRRI'll T Y. m. ſ. [ſcurrilité, Fr. ſcurrilitas, Lat.] Groſneſs
of reproach; loudneſs of jocularity ; mean buffoonery.
Good maſter Holofernes, purge; ſo it ſhall pleaſe you to
abrogate ſcurrility. Shakeſpeare.
Baniſh ſcurrility and profaneneſs, and reſtrain the licentious
inſolence of poets. Dryden.
Scu'RRIlous. adj. [ ſºurrilis, Latin. J Groſly opprobrious ;
uſing ſuch language as only the licenſe of a buffoon can war-
rant; loudly jocular ; vile; low.
Yet is not their goodneſs ſo intolerable, as, on the contrary
fide, the ſºurrilºus and more than ſatyrical immodeity of Mar-
tiniſm. Hooker.
Let him approach ſinging.
—Forewarn him that he uſe no ſcurrilous words in's tunes.
Shakeſpeare's 1/inter’s Tale.
How often is a perſon, whoſe intentions are to do good by
the works he publiſhes, treated in as ſcurril us a manner as if
he were an enemy to mankind? Addiſon's Freeholder.
Their chara&amp;ters have been often treated with the utmoſt
barbarity and injuſtice by ſºurrilous and enraged orators. Swift.
Scu'RR. Lously. adv. [from ſºurrious. With groſs reproach ;
with low buffoonery , with iewd merriment.
Such men there are, who have written ſºurrilouſy againſt
me, without any provocation. Dryden.
It is barbarous incivility ſºurrilouſy to ſport with that which
others count religion. ºliºtſºn.
S E A
Sct's vily. adv. [from ſurry..] Vilely: ----- fely
is ſeldom uſed º in Yº. ...; baſely; coarſely. It
: Look i' your glaſs now,
3. * how ſºkºvič that countenance ſhews ;
*:::::::::::::...ºf
otherwiſe look but “somplexion of an action, that would
The clergy w very ſurvily, and makes it perfect. South.
treated. gy were never more learned, or ſo ſºft
Scu'Rv Y. m. ſ. 4. He --- - w/t.
nally an iſ ºf This word was, I believe, origi-
a he ſurvy is a diſtemper of the inhabitants of cold coun-
tries, and amongſt thoſe ſuch as inhabit marſhy, fit, i.
moiſt ſoils, near ſtagnating water, freſh or ſić, inºiſ,
chiefly in the Winter ſuch as are ſedentary, or live upon ſaited
or ſmoaked fleſh and fiſh, or quantities of unfermented fari-
naceous vegetables, and drink bad water. Arbuthnot
Scu'RYY. adj. [from ſººf, ſcurfy, ſurvy.] -
1. Scabbed; covered with ſcabs; diſeaſed with the ſcurvy.
Whatſoever man be ſurvy or ſcabbed. Lev. xxi. 20.
2. Vile; bad; ſorry; worthleſs; contemptible; offenſive.
I know him for a man divine and holy;
Not ſurvy, nor a temporary meddler. Shakeſpeare.
This is a very ſurvy tune to fing to a man's funeral. Shakespeare
He ſpoke ſcurvy and provoking terms
Againſt your honour. Shakespeare.
A crane, which is but ſurvy meat, lays but two eggs. Chey.
. . It would be convenient to prevent the exceſs of drink, with
... that ſcurvy cuſtom of taking tobacco. - Swift.
Sc : GRAss. n.ſ.. [ſcurvy and graſ...] The ſpoonwort. A
plant.
The flower conſiſts of four leaves, which are diſpoſed in
form of a croſs: from the flower-cup ariſes the pointal, which
becomes an almoſt globular fruit, divided into two cells by an
intermediate partition, to which the valves adhere on both
ſides, and are furniſhed with many round ſeeds. Miller.
'Scuses. For excuſes.
I ſhifted him away,
And laid good ſcuſes on your exſtaſy. Shakeſp. Othello.
Scut. n.ſ.. [ſºott, Iſlandick j The tail of thoſe animals whoſe
tails are very ſhort, as a hare.
In the hare it is averſely ſeated, and in its diſtenſion inclines
unto the coccix or ſºut. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
He fled to earth; but firſt it coſt him dear,
He left his ſcut behind, and half an ear. Swift.
Scu'rcheon. n.ſ.. [ſcuccione, Italian, from ſcutum, Lat.] The
ſhield repreſented in heraldry; the enſigns armorial of a fa-
mily. See Eschutcheon.
And thereto had ſhe that ſcutcheon of her deſires, ſupported
by certain badly diligent miniſters. Sidney.
Your ſcutcheons, and your ſigns of conqueſt, ſhall
Hang in what place you pleaſe. Shakespeare Ant and Cleopatra.
Honour is a meer ſcutcheon. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
The chiefs about their necks the ſcutcheons wore,
With orient pearls and jewels powder'd o'er. Dryden.
Scut R'll At F D. adj. [ſcutela, Lat.] Divided into ſmall ſurfaces.
It ſeems part of the ſcutellated bone of a ſturgeon, being
flat, of a porous or cellular conſtitution. /Woodward.
Scuttiform. adj. [ ſºutſformis, Latin.] Shaped like a ſhield.
Scu'ttle. n. ſ. [ſcutela, Latin ; ſcutell, Celt. Ainſw.]
1. A wide ſhallow baſket, ſo named from a diſh or platter which
it reſembles in form. -
A ſcuttle or ſkrein to rid ſoil fro’ the corn. Tiſſºr.
The earth and ſtones they are fain to carry from under
their feet in ſcuttles and baſkets. Hakewill on Providence.
2. A ſmall grate.
To the hole in the door have a ſmall ſcutt'e, to keep in what
mice are there. Mortimer's Husbandry.
3. [From ſcud.] A quick pace; a ſhort run; a pace of affected
precipitation.
She went with an eaſy fluttle out of the ſhop. Speſſator.
To Scu'rt le. v. n. [from ſºud or ſcuddle.] To run with aſ-
feółed precipitation.
The old fellow ſcuttled out of the room. Arluthnot.
To SD EIGN. v. a. [Spenſer. Sdegnare, Ital. Milton, for diſdain.]
Lifted up ſo high, -
Iſdeign'd ſubjection. - Milton.
SDE'1óNFul. adj. Contračted for diſdairfºl.
They now, puft up withſdeignful inſolence,
Deſpiſe the brood of bleſſed ſapience. Spenſer.
SEA. n.ſ. [rae, Saxon; ſee, or zee, Dutch.]
1. The ocean; the water oppoſed to the land.
Will all great Neptune's ocean waſh this blood
Clean from my hand: No, this my hand will rather
Thy multitudinousſa incarnardine, y
Nº. the green one red. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The rivers run into the ſea. - Carew.
He made the ſea, and all that is therein. Ex. xx. I 1.
So do the winds and thunders cleanſe the air, -
So working ſeas ſettle and purge the wine. . Davieſ.
Amphibious between ſea and land -
The river horſe. Milton.
2. Some
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 322</div><p class="Text">S E A
S E A -
|
SEA Bu'll r. ºff. [ſia and twit...] Built for the ſea.
Some º f
ſlumbºring on the Norway tºmb, , ,
º: of . ſmall night-founder d ſkiff
Deeming ſome iſland, oft as ſeamen tell,
With fixed anchor in his ſcaly rind, -
Moors by his ſide under the lee, while night
Inveſts the ſea. Milton.
§. fragments of ſhells, broken by ſtorms on ſome ſhores,
are uſed for manuring of ſea land. //oodward.
They put to ſea with a fleet of three hundred ſail. Arbuthn.
Sea racing dolphins are train'd for our motion, -
Moony tides ſwelling to roll us aſhore. , Dryden's Albion.
. But like a rock unmov’d, a rock that braves
The raging tempeſt, and the riſing waves,
Propp'd on himſelf he ſtands: his ſolid ſide
Waſh of theſia weeds, and the ſounding tides. Dryden.
The ſa could not be much narrower than it is, without a
great loſs to the world. Bentley.
So when the firſt bold veſſel dar'd the ſeat,
High on the ſtern the Thracian rais'd his ſtrain,
While Argo ſaw her kindred trees
Deſcend from Pelion to the main. Pops.
2. A collection of water; a lake.
Jeſus walking by the ſea of Galilee, ſaw two brethren.
Aſat. iv. 18.
3. Proverbially for any large quantity.
That ſea of blood which hath in Ireland been barbarouſly
ſhed, is enough to drown in eternal infamy and miſery the
malicious author and inſtigator of its effuſion. King Charles.
4. Anything rough and tempeſtuous.
To ſorrow abandon'd, but worſe felt within,
And in a troubled ſa of paſſion toſt. Milton.
5. Half SEAs of er. Half drunk.
The whole maiſtracy was pretty well diſguiſed before I
gave 'em the ſlip : our friend the alderman was haſ ſeas over
before the bonfire was out. Speºtator.
SEA is often uſed in compoſition, as will appear in the follow-
ing examples.
$E'A BEAT. [ſea and beat..] Daſhed by the waves of the ſea.
The ſovereign of the ſeas he blames in vain,
That once ſeabet will to ſea again. Speºſe ’s Paſtorals.
Darkneſs cover'd o'er
The face of things: along the ſaleat ſhore
Satiate we ſlept. Pope's Od ſy.
SEA Boat. m. ſ. (ſea and boat.j Veſſel capable to bear the
Ča.
Shipwrecks were occaſioned by their ſhips being bad ſºa-
boats, and themſelves but indifferent ſeamen. Arbuthnot.
SEA Boºks adj. [ſea and lorn.] Born of the ſea; produced
by the ſea.
Like Neptune and his ſcalorn niece, ſhall be
The ſhining glories of the land and ſea. J/aller.
- All theſe in order march, and marching ſing
The warlike actions of their ſeahorn king. Dryden.
SFA Boy, n.ſ. [ſea and boy..] Bôy employed on ſhipboard.
Can't thou, O partial ſleep, give thy repoſe
To the wet ſaby in an hour ſo rude,
And in the calmeſt and the ſtilleſ! night
Deny it to a king? - Shakeſpeare.
8. AERE'AcH. r. ſ. Iſa and lycat!...] Irruption of the ſea by
breaking the banks. -
To an impetuous woman, tempeſts and ſeal reaches are
nothing. L'Eſ, range.
sº ZE. m. ſ. [ſea and breeze.] Wind blowing from the
Cl. -
Hedges, in moſt places, would be of great advantage to
ſhelter the graſs from the ſabreeze. 41crimer.
Borne each by other in a diſtant line, -
The ſºakuilt forts in dreadful order move. Dryden.
SEACA ºf Age. m. ſ. ſcramie, Latin.] Seacolewort. A plant.
It hath fleſhy leaves like thoſe of the cabbage. Miller.
SE"A Holly. * f. ſeryngium, Latin.] A plant.
The ſpecies are, ſeaholly, or eryngo. Common eryngo,
&amp;c. The roots of the firſt are candied, and ſent to London
ſor medicinal uſe, being the true eryngo.
SE *** */.. [ſea and calf.] Thé ſeal.
... The ſºft, or ſeal, is ſo called frºm the noiſe he makes
like a caſ: his head Cºmparatively not big, ſhaped rather like
an otter's, with teeth like a dog's, and multaches like thoſe of
º: his body long, and all over hairy: his forefeet, with
º: clawed, but not divided, yet fit for going: his hinder
cel, more Pºoperly fins, and fitter for ſwimming, as being an
º animal. The female gives ſuck, as the porpeſs
º viviparous fiſhes. Grew’s ºn.
tºº. *J. [ſea and cap.] Cap made to be worn on ſhip-
I know your fivour well,
”. Yºu have no ſcatap on your head. Shºeſ,
* / (ſet and ºut.J Map on which only tº
clineated.
Though n
a
SE'Achakº.
... coaſis are d
The ſituation of the parts of the earth are better learned
by a map or ſeachart, than reading the deſcription. J/atts.
SEA coa’l. m. ſ. [ſea and coal.] Coal, ſo called not becauſe
found in the ſea, but becauſe brought to London by ſea; pit-
coal.
We'll have a poſſet ſoon at the latter end of a ſaccal
fire. Shakeſpeare.
Seacoal laſts longer than charcoal. Bacon.
This pulmonique indiſpoſition of the air is very much
heightened, where a grent quantity of ſeacoal is burnt. Harv.
SE'Acoast. n.ſ.. [ſea and coa/?..] Shore; edge of the ſea.
The venturous mariner that way,
Learning his ſhip from thoſe white rocks to ſave,
Which all along the ſouthern ſeacoaſt lay;
For ſafety’s ſake that ſame his ſeamark made,
And nam'd it Albion. Fairy Queen.
Upon the ſeacoaſt are many parcels of land, that would pay
well for the taking in. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Seaco M Pass. n.ſ.. [ſea and compaſs.] The card and needle
of mariners.
The needle in the ſacompaſ ſtill moving but to the north-
point only, with moveor immotus, notified the reſpective con-
ſtancy of the gentleman to one only. Camden's Remains.
"A cow. n.ſ. [ſea and cow.] The manatee.
The ſeacow is a very bulky animal, of the cetaceous kind.
It grows to fifteen feet long, and to ſeven or eight in circum-
ference: its head is like that of a hog, but longer, and more
cylindrick: its eyes are ſmall, and it has no external ears, but
only two little apertures in the place of them; yet its ſenſe of
hearing is very quick. Its lips are thick, and it has two long
tuſks ſtanding out. It has two fins, which ſtand forward on
the breaſt like hands, whence the Spaniards firſt called it ma-
na'ee. The female has two round breaſts placed between the
pectoral fins. The ſkin is very thick and hard, and not ſcaly,
but hairy. This creature lives principally about the mouths
of the large rivers in Africa, the Eaſt Indies, and America,
and feeds upon vegetables. Its fleſh is white like veal, and
very well taſted. The lapis manati, which is of a fine clea-
white colour, and bony texture, is properly the os petroſum
of this animal. This ſtone has been ſuppoſed to be a power-
ful amulet, but is now neglected. Hill's Mat, Med.
SEA dog. n.ſ.. [ſia and dºg.) Perhaps the ſhark.
Fierce ſtadog; devour the mang!'d friends. Roſcommon.
When, ſtung with hunger, ſhe embroils the flood,
The ſeadog and the dolphin are her food. Pope's Odſey,
SEAFa‘RER. n.ſ. [ ſa and fare.] A traveller by ſea; a mariner.
They ſtifly refuſed to vail their bonnets by the ſummons of
thoſe towns, which is reckoned intolerable contempt by the
better enabled ſeafarers. Carew.
A wand'ring merchant, he frequents the main,
Some mean ſeafarer in purſuit of gain;
Studious of freight, in naval trade well ſkill'd;
But dreads th’ athletick labours of the field. Pope.
SEAFA's Ng. adj. Iſa and fare.] Travelling by ſea.
My wife faſten’d him unto a ſmall ſpare maſt,
Such as ſeafaring men provide for ſtorms. Shakespeare.
It was death to divert the ſhips of ſafaring people, againſt
their will, to other uſes than they were appointed. A buthnot.
SEAF E'NNEL. The ſame with SAMPHIRE, which ſee.
SEAF1GHT. n.ſ. (ſea and fight.] Battle of ſhips; battle on
the ſea.
Seafights have been often final to the war; but this is when
princes ſet up their reſt upon the battles. Bacon.
They were full of drink at the time of their ſºof:hts.
J/ſeman's Surgery.
If our ſenſe of hearing were a thouſand times quicker than
it is, we ſhould, in the quieteſt retirement, be leſs able to ſleep
than in the middle of a ſeaſºht. - Lotke.
This fleet they recruited with two hundred ſail, whereof
they loſt ninety-three in a ſeafº.ht. Arbuthnot on Coinſ.
SEA Fowl. n.ſ. [ ſea and fºwl.] Birds that live at ſea.
The bills of curlews, and many other ſeafºwl, are Wºry
long, to enable them to hunt for the ...; dei º:
A ſeafowl properly repreſents the paſſage of a deity over tº
ſeas. Jeaſowl properly rep 7... Notes to the Odyſſey.
A length of ocean and unbounded ſky,
Which ſcarce the ſeafºwl in a year o'er fly. . Pott.
SEAGIRT. adj. [ſea and girt.] Girded or incircled by the
Cal.
S
E.
Neptune, beſides the ſway
Of every ſalt flood and each ebbing ſtream,
Took in by lot, 'twixt high and nether Jove,
Imperial rule of all the ſengi, t iſles. Milt:n.
Telemachus, the blooming heir
Of ſtagirt Ithaca, demands my care:
'Tis mine to form his green unpractis'd years
In ſage debates. l Pope.
SEAGULL. r. ſ. [ ſºa and gull. A water fowl.
Sedg://s, &amp; º: º from the ſea towards the
fores, foreſhow rain and wind. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Bitterns,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 323</div><p class="Text">S E A
lº:
º
it:
Bitterns, herons, and ſºagulls, are great enemies to fiſh,
Mortimer's Husbandry.
SE"A GREEN. adj. [ſea and green.] Reſembling the colour of
the diſtant ſea; cerulean.
White, red, yellow, blue, with their ſeveral mixtures, as
green, ſcarlet, purple, and ſeagreen, come in only by the
eyes. Locke.
Upon his urn reclin'd,
His ſeagreen mantle waving in the wind,
The god appear'd. Pope.
SE'AGREEN. m. ſ. Saxifrage. A plant.
Se AGULL. n ſ. A ſea bird. Ainſworth.
SE'AHEDGE Hog. m. ſ. [ſea, hedge, and hog.] A kind of ſea
ſhell-fiſh.
* The ſeahedgehog is incloſed in a round ſhell, faſhioned as a
loaf of bread, wrought and pinched, and guarded by an outer
ſkin full of prickles, as the land urchin. Carew.
SE'A Hog. m. f. [ſea and hog.] The porpus.
Se’A Holm. n.f. [ſea and holm.]
1. A ſmall uninhabited iſland.
2. Seaholly. A kind of ſea weed.
Cornwal bringeth forth greater ſtore of faholm and ſam-
phire than any other county. Carew.
SE'A Horse. m.J. [ ſea and horſe.]
1. The ſeahorſe is a fiſh of a very fingular form, as we ſee it dried,
and of the needlefiſh kind. It is about four or five inches in
length, and nearly half an inch in diameter in the broadeſt
part. Its colour, as we ſee it dried, is a deep reddiſh brown;
and its tail is turned round under the belly. It is found about
the Mediterranean, and has been celebrated for medicinal vir-
tues; but is at preſent wholly neglected. Hill's Materia Med.
2. The morſe. -
Part of a large tooth, round and tapering: a tuſk of the
morſe, or waltrons, called by ſome the ſeahºrſe. Iłoodward.
3. The medical and the poetical ſeahorſe ſeem very different. By
the feahorſe Dryden means probably the hippopotamus.
- By 'em
Seahorſes, flound'ring in the flimy mud,
Toſs'd up their heads, and daſh'd the ooze about 'em. Dry.
Se’AMAID. n.ſ.. [ſea and maid.] Mermaid.
Certain ſtars ſhot from their ſpheres, .
To hear the ſamaid; muſick.
SE’AMAN. n.ſ.. [ſea and man.]
1. A ſailor; a navigator; a mariner.
- She, looking out,
Beholds the fleet, and hears the ſtamen ſhout. Denham.
Seamen, through diſmal ſtorms, are wont
To paſs the oyſter-breeding Helleſpont. Evelyn.
The whole poem was firſt written, and now ſent you from
a place where I have not ſo much as the converſe of any ſea-
* - frraft. - Dryden.
AEneas order'd -
A ſtately tomb, whoſe top a trumpet bore,
A ſoldier's fauchion, and a ſeaman's oar; -
Thus was his friend interr'd. Dryden.
By undergoing the hazards of the ſea, and the company of
common ſeamen, you make it evident you will refuſe no op-
portunity of rendering yourſelf uſeful. - JDryden.
Had they applicd themſelves to the increaſe of their ſtrength
by ſea, they might have had the greateſt fleet and the moſt ſea-
fren of any ſtate in Europe. Adiſon.
2. Merman; the male of the mermaid.
Seals live at land and at ſea, and porpuſes have the warm
blood and intrails of a hog, not to mention mermaids, or ſea-
ºnent. Locke.
Sea º Aºrk. n.ſ. ſſa and mark.] Point or conſpicuous place
diſtinguiſhed at ſea, and ſerving the mariners as directions of
their courſe.
* Thoſe white rocks,
Which all along the ſouthern ſeacoaſt lay,
Threat'ning unheedy wreck and raſh decay,
For ſafety’s ſake his ſtamark made,
And nam'd it Albion.
Though you do ſee me weapon'd,
Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt, r
The very ſamark of my utmoſt ſail. Shakeſp. Othel's.
They were executed at divers places upon the ſeacoaſt, for
fºamaris or lighthouſes, to teach Perkins's people to avoid the
coaſt. Bacºn's Henry VII.
They are remembered with a brand of infamy fixt upon
them, and ſet as ſeamarks for thoſe who obſerve them to
avoid. Dryden.
The fault of others ſway,
He ſet as ſeamarks for himſelf to ſhun. Dryden.
SEAME'w. n.ſ.. [ſea and mew.] A fowl that frequents the
ſea. - -
Shakeſpeare.
Fairy Queen.
An iſland ſalt and bare,
The haunt of ſeals, and orcks, and ſamews clang. Miltºn.
The chough, the ſeamew, the loquacious crow,
Scream aloft. Pope's Odſey.
SE'A MonstER. m. ſ. [...ea and monſter.] Strange animal af the
ſca.
S E A
Seamonſters give ſuck to their young. La. iv. 3,
f Where luxury once reign'd, ſeamoºſers whelp. Milton,
SE *NYMPH. n.f. [ſea and nymph.J. Goddeſs of the ſea.
Virgil, after Homer's example, gives us a transformation
of Æneas's ſhip into ſcanymphs.
SEAoNion, n.ſ. An herb, 4ttſworth.
SEAoose... n.ſ. (ſea and coſe.] The mud in the ſea or ſhore.
All ſeawºſe, or ooſy mud, and the mud of rivers, are of
reaf advantage to all ſorts of land. Mortimer.
SEAPiscs. n.ſ.. [ſea and piece..] A piāure repreſenting any
thing at ſea.
Great painters often employ their pencils upon ſeatieces.
• Addison's Speciatºr.
Se/apool. n.ſ.. [ſea and pool.] A lake of ſalt water,
I have often heard it wiſhed, that all that land were a ſea-
pool. - Speºſer an Ireland.
SE’Aport. m. ſ. (ſea and port..] A harbour.
SEAR isgy E. m.ſ.. [ſea and riſque.] Hazard at ſea.
He was ſo great an encourager of commerce, that he
charged himſelf with all the ſeariſºur of ſuch veſſels as car-
ried corn to Rome in the Winter. Arbuthnot.
SE'A Rocket. n.ſ. A plant. Miller.
Se’ARoom.. n.ſ.. [ſea and room.] Open ſea; ſpacious main.
There is ſearon enough for both nations, without offend-
ing one another, and it would exceedingly ſupport the navy.
Bacon's Advice to Williers.
The bigger whale like ſome huge carrack lay,
Which wanteth ſearoom with her foes to play. If aller.
SEARo've R. m. ſ. [ſea and rove..] A pirate.
SE'AsHARK. n.ſ. [ſea and ſhark.] A ravenous ſeafiſh.
Witches mummy, maw and gulf -
Of the ravening ſalt ſeaſhark. Shakeſpeare.
Se’As Hsi L n.ſ.. [Jea and ſhell.] . Shells found on the ſhore.
Seaſhells are great improvers of four or cold land. AMortim.
SE'Ashore. n.ſ.. [ſea and ſhore.] The coaſt of the ſea.
That ſeaſhore where no more world is found,
But foaming billows breaking on the ground. Dryden.
Fournier gives an account of an earthquake in Peru, that
reached three hundred leagues along the ſeaſhore. Burnet.
To ſay a man has a clear idea of any quantity, without
knowing how great it is, is as reaſonable as to ſay he has the
Yoſitive idea of the number of the ſands on the ſeaſhore. Locke.
SE'asick, adj. [ſea and ſick.] Sick, as new voyagers an the
3.
She began to be much ſeaſcº, extremity of weather con-
tinuing. - Shakeſpeare
Barbaroſſa was not able to come on ſhore, for that he was,
as they ſaid, ſeaſick, and troubled with an ague. Knolles.
In love's voyage nothing can offend; -
Women are never ſeaſºck. Dryden's juvenal.
Weary and ſeaſcă, when in thee confin'd;
- Now, for thy ſafety, cares diſtraćt my mind. Swift.
SE'Aside. n.ſ.. [ſea and ſide ) The edge of the ſea:
Their camels were without number, as the ſand by the ſea-
ſide. - jud. vii. 12.
There diſembarking on the green ſtaſide,
We land our cattle, and the ſpoil divide. Pope.
SE' as ERPENT. n.ſ. [ſea and ſerpent.] Serpent generated in
the water. -
Sease'rvice. n ſ [ſea and ſervice.] Naval war. .
You were preſſed for the ſeaſervice, and got off with much
ado. Swift's Direct. to Servants.
Seasu'RGEoN. n.ſ.. [ſa and ſurgeon.] A chirurgeon employed
on ſhipboard. - -
My deſign was to help the ſeaſurgeon. . . Wiſeman's Surgery.
SF Asukko'UNDED. adj. [ſea and ſurround.]. Encircled by the
ſea.
To faſurrounded realms the gods aſſign
Small tract of fertile lawn, the leaſt to mine. Pope.
SEATE'R.M. n.ſ.. [ſea and term.] Word of art uſed by the
ſeamen. -
I agree with you in your cenſure of the ſcatºrm in Dryden's
Virgil, becauſe no terms of art, or cant words, ſuit the ma-
jeſty of epick poetry: Pope.
Seawatt ER. m.ſ. (ſea and water.] The ſalt water of the
ſea.
By digging of pits in the ſeaſhore, he did fruſtrate the la-
borious works of the enemies, which had turned the ſea-
water upon the wells of Alexandria: Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
I took off the dreſſings, and bathed the member with ſea-
quarter. - I/ſeman -
Seawater has many groſs, rough, and earthy particles 1n 1t,
as appears from its ſaitneſs; whereº freſh water is more pure
and unmixt. Froome's Note: on the Odyſſey.
SEAL n.ſ. [reol, rele, Saxon; Jºel, Daniſh 1 The ſeacalf.
See Se AcALF. - - - -
The ſeal or ſoyle is in make and growth not unlike a Pig,
ugly faced, and footed like a moldwarp; he delighteth in muſick,
or any loud noiſe, and thereby is trained to ſhew himſelf above
water: they alſo come on land. Carew.
23 K An
Proome.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 324</div><p class="Text">S E A
S E A
iſland ſalt and bare -
The * 7. and orcs, and ſeamaws clang. Milton.
eſ, Saxon; ſkillum, Latin J -
*"...ſ.º. with a ºf: impreſſion, which is fixed
upon the wºx that cloſes letters, or affixed as a teſtimony.
The king commands you
To render up the great ſºil. - Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
If the organs of perception, like wax overharden d with
cold, will not receive the impreſſion of the ſeal; or, like wax
of a temper too ſoft, will not hold it; or elſe ſuppoſing the wax
of a temper fit, but the ſeal not applied with a ſufficient force
to make a clear impreſſion: in any of theſe caſes the print left
by the ſeal will be obſcure. Locke.
The ſame
His grandfire wore about his neck
In three ſeal rings, which after, melted down,
Form'd a vaſt buckle for his widow's gown. Poſe.
2. The impreſfion made in wax.
'Til thou can'ſt rail the ſeal from off my bond,
Thou but offend'ſt thy lungs to ſpeak ſo loud. Shakeſp.
Solyman ſhewed him his own letters, aſking him if he knew
not that hand, and if he knew not that ſeal. Knolles.
He ſaw his monkey picking the ſeal wax from a letter. Arb.
3. Any ačt of confirmation.
They their fill of love -
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the ſeal. Milton.
To Seal. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To faſten with a ſeal.
He that brings this love to thee,
Little knows this love in me;
And by him ſcal up thy mind. Shakeſp. As you like it.
I have ſeen her riſe from her bed, take forth paper, fold it,
write upon't, and afterwards ſcal it. Shakeſpeare.
2. To confirm or atteſt by a ſeal.
God join'd my heart to Romeo's ; thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo ſeal’d,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this ſhall ſlay them both.
3. To confirm; to ratify; to ſettle.
My ſoul is purg'd from grudging hate,
And with my hand 1 ſeal our true hearts love. Shakespeare R. III.
When I have performed this, and ſealed to them this fruit,
I will come into Spain. Rom. xv. 28.
4. To ſhut; to cloſe. -
Seal up your lips, and give no words, but mum ! Shakespeare
At my death
Thou haſt ſeal’d up my expećtation. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
The root of evil is ſealed up from you. . 2 Eſdr. viii. 53.
The ſenſe is like the ſun; for the ſun ſeals up the globe of
heaven, and opens the globe of earth: ſo the ſenſe doth ob-
ſcure heavenly things, and reveals earthly things. Bacon.
Back to th’ infernal pit I drag thee chain'd,
And ſeal thee ſo, as henceforth not to ſcorn
The facil gates of hell too ſlightly barr'd. Milton.
5. To mark with a ſtamp.
You'd rail upon the hoſteſs,
And ſay ſ: would preſent her at the leet,
Becauſe ſhe bought ſtone jugs, and no ſeal’d quarts. Shakespeare
To SEAL. v. n. To fix a ſeal.
I will ſeal unto this bond. Shakeſpeare.
We make a ſure covenant and write it, and our princes and
prieſts ſeal unto it. Neh. ix. 38.
SEAler. n, f, [from ſeal ] One that ſeals.
*****Nºwº, n.ſ. (ſeal and wax.] Hard wax made of roſin
uſed to ſeal letters.
The prominent orifice was cloſed with ſealin-wax. º
SEAM. m. ſ. [ream, Saxon; zoom, i. gwax. Boyle.
‘. The edge of cloath where the threads are doubled; the ſu-
ture where the two edges are ſewed together.
In velvet white as ſnow the troop was gown'd
The ſeams with ſparkling emeralds ſet around. » Dryden.
Precepts ſhould be ſo finely wrought together in the ſame
Pºe, that no coarſe ſºam may diſcover where they join. Addison
2. The juncture of planks in a ſhip.
r − - With boiling pitch the ſeams inſtops,
Which, well laid o'er, the faſt ſea wave withſtand. Dryd.
3. fl. a ſcar.
4 in eam, Saxon, a load.] A meaſure: 2ſ2.1 : - inor
are held; eight tº'ſ Corn. re; a veſſel in º
*Jºiº, ſº wai, Air Fºº,
Shall the proud lord,
... ºnce with his own ſam,
Part . th - Shakeſp. 77 oilus and Crºſſida.
Ne e ruſty ſhields with ſeam, and part
- * grind the blunted ax
- - - D …'....” -
To SEAM. v.a. [from the noun.] ryden's CEn
1. To to
2 #. ..". by future, or otherwiſe.
. .*, * ſcar with a long cigari.
- Seam'd o'er with -
Wounds, which his ow
n ſabre gave.
Say, has the ſmall or greater pox gave. Pope.
Sunk -
down her noſe, or Jean'd her face? Swift
Shakeſpeare.
SE/AMLEss. adj. [from ſcam.] Having no ſcam.
Se’AMRENT. n.ſ.. [ſeam and rent.] A ſeparation of any thing
where it is joined; a breach of the ſtitches. -
SE/AMST R Ess. n.ſ. [reamerºne, Saxon.] A woman whoſe
trade is to ſew.
They wanted food and rainent; ſo they took
Religion for their ſeamſireſ; and their cook. Cleave and,
SE/AM Y. adj. [from ſeam.] Having a ſeam; ſhewing the ſeam.
Some ſuch ſquire he was,
That turn'd your wit the ſeamy ſide without,
And made me to ſuſpect you. Shakespeare Othela.
SEAN. n.ſ. [regne, Saxon; Jagºa, Latin.]. A net. Some-
times written ſeine, or /aine.
SF AR. adj. [reanian, Saxon, to dry J Dry; not any longer
green. Spenſer uſes it.
I have liv'd long enough: my May of life
Is fall’n into the year, the yellow leaf. Shakespeare Macleth.
Ye myrtles brown, with ivy 1 ever ſcar. 4aitor.
Some may be cheriſhed in dry places, as in ſearwood Ray.
To SEA R. v. c. [reaſian, Saxon.) To burn ; to cauterize.
The ſcorching flame ſore finged all his face,
And through his armour all his body ſeard. Fairy Queen.
Some ſhall depart from the faith, ſpeaking lies, having their
conſcience feared with a hot iron. 1 Tim. iv. 2.
Cheriſh veins of good humour, and ſºar up thoſe of ill. Werf.
I'm fear'd with burning feel, 'til the ſcorch d marrow
Fries in the bones. R we's Rºyal Convert.
SE'AR BREAch. n.ſ.. [ſar and breach. J Perhaps ſcal reach.
'Tis one thing for a man to be firm againſt honett dangers;
but to run his head againſt ſtone walls, or to put his ſhoulders
to a ſtarbreach, to attempt inſuperable difficulties, would be
juſt the moral of the ram in the fable. L'E/irange.
SE'ARcloat H. n.ſ. [ranclav, Saxon, from ran, pain, and
claš, a plaſter; ſo that cer ecleath, as it is now written, from
cera, wax, ſeems to be wrong J A plaſier; a large plaſter.
Bees wax is the ground of all ſearcoath ſalves. 41artimer.
To SE AR ce. v. a. [ ſaſſer, French.J. To fift finely.
Put the finely ſearced powder of alabaſter into a flat-
bottomed and well heated braſs veſſel. - Boyle.
For the keeping of meal, bolt and ſtance it from the
bran. 44.rtimer's Husbandry.
SEARce. n.ſ. A ſieve; a bolter.
SEA’R cf R. n.ſ.. [from ſearce..] He who ſearces.
To SEARCH. v.a. [...hercher, French.]
1. To examine; to try; to explore; to look through.
Help to ſearch my houſe this one time: if I find not what I
ſeek, let me for ever be your table ſport. Shakeſpeare.
They returned from ſearching of the land. Num. xiii. 25.
Through the void immenſe
To ſearch with wand'ring queſt a place foretold. Milton.
2. To inquire; to ſeek.
Now clear I underſtand
What oft my ſleddieſ; thoughts have ſearch'd in vain. Mill.
Enough is left beſides to ſearch and know. Alilton.
Draw up ſome valuable meditations from the depths of the
earth, and ſearch them through the vaſt ocean. J/aiti.
3. To probe as a chirurgeon. -
Alas, poor ſhepherd 1 ſearching of thy wound,
I have, by hard adventure, found my own. Shakeſpeare.
With this good ſword,
That ran through Ceſar's bowels, ſearch this boſom. Shakespeare
For the diviſions of Reuben there were great ſearching ºf
heart. judg. v. 16.
The figns of wounds penetrating are diſcovered by the pro-
portion of the ſearching candle, or probe which enters into
the cavity. //ſeman's Surgery.
4. To Se ARch out. To find by ſeeking. -
Who went before you, to ſearch you cut a place to pitch
your tents in Deutr. .33.
They may ſometimes be ſucceſsful to ſearch ºut truth. //atts.
To SEARCH. v. n.
1. To make a ſearch. -
Satisfy me once more; once more ſearch with me. Shakespeare
To aſk or ſearch I blame thce not. Milton.
2. To make inquiry.
Thoſe º: º,ſearch after or maintain truth, ſhould
ſtudy to deliver themſelves without obſcurity, or equivo-
cation. 4.014 f.
it ºffices that they have once with care fifted the matter,
and ſearched into all the particulars that could give any light
to the queſtion. Locée.
With piercing eye ſome ſearch where nature plays, .
And trace the wanton through her darkſome maze. Ticº.
3. To ſeek; to try to find.
Your huſband's coming, woman, to ſearch for a geºleman
that is here now in the hºuſe. Shaft. A ferry five ºf #ind”.
we in vain ſºarch for that conſtitution within a fly, "Pº"
which depend thoſe powers we obſerve in them. Zocke.
SEARch. n.ſ. (from the verb.]
1. Inquiry by looking into every ſuſpečled place.
The orb he roaſn'd **** - -
With narrow ſearch, and with inſpection deep. X ºf zi.
2. Inquiry:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 325</div><p class="Text">S E A
S E A
**
º,
it:
-
º,
2. Inquiry; examination; ačt of ſeeking.
His reaſons are as two grains of wheat hid in two buſhes of
chaff: you ſhall ſeek all day ere you find them, and when you
have them they are not worth the ſearch. Shakeſpeare.
Who great in ſearch of God and nature grow, "
They beſt the wiſe Creator's praiſe declare. Dryden.
Now mourn thy fatal ſearch;
It is not ſafe to have too quick a ſenſe. Dryden.
The mind ſets itſelf on work in ſearch of ſome hidden idea,
and turns the eye of the ſoul upon it. Locke.
By the philoſophical uſe of words, I mean ſuch an uſe as
conveys the preciſe notions of things, which the mind may
be ſatisfied with in its ſearch after knowledge. Locke.
The parents, after a longſearch for the boy, gave him for
drowned in a canal. Addiſon.
This common pračtice carries the heart aſide from all that
is honeſt in our ſearch after truth. JWatts.
3. Queſt; purſuit. -
If zealous love ſhould go in ſearch of virtue,
Where ſhould he find it purer than in Blanch Shakeſp.
Stay him from his intendment, or brook ſuch diſgrace well as
he ſhall run into ; in that it is a thing of his own ſearch, and
altogether againſt my will. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Nor did my ſearch of liberty begin,
*Till my black hairs were chang'd upon my chin. Dryden.
SE'ARcher. n ſ. [from ſearch.]
1. Examiner; inquirer; trier.
The Agarenes that ſeek wiſdom upon earth, the authors of
fables, and ſearchers out of underſtandin Bar. iii. 23.
The ſearchers found a marvellous filence between the
Anakins and themſelves. Raleigh.
Religion has given us a more juſt idea of the divine nature:
he whom we appeal to is truth itſelf, the great ſearcher of
hearts, who will not let fraud go unpuniſhed, or hold him
guiltleſs that taketh his name in vain. Addiſon.
In vain we lift up our preſumptuous eyes
To what our Maker to their ken denies: {
The ſearcher follows faſt; the objećt flies. Prior.
Avoid the man who practiſes any thing unbecoming a free
and open ſearcher after truth. //atts.
2. Officer in London appointed to examine the bodies of the
dead, and report the cauſe of death.
The ſearchers, who are ancient matrons ſworn to their of
fice, repair to the place where the dead corps lies, and by view
of the ſame, and by other inquiries, examine by what diſeaſe
the corps died. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
SEASON. n.ſ. [ ſaiſºn, French.]
1. One of the four parts of the year, Spring, Summer, Au-
tumn, Winter. -
The faireſt flowers o' th' ſeaſºn
Are our carnations and ſtreak'd gillyflowers. Shakeſp.
Then Summer, Autumn, Winter did appear;
And Spring was but a ſeaſon of the year. Dryden.
We ſaw, in ſix days travelling, the ſeveral ſeaſºns of the
year in their beauty. Addison on Italy.
2. A time as diſtinguiſhed from others.
- He's noble, wiſe, judicious, and beſt knows
The fits o' th' ſeaſºn. Shakespeare Macbeth.
The ſeaſºn prime for ſweeteſt ſcents and airs. A4ilton.
3. A fit time; an opportune concurrence.
At ſeaſºn fit let her with thee partake. Miltºn.
All buſineſs ſhould be done betimes; and there's as little
trouble of doing it in ſeaſon too, as out of ſeaſon. L'E/irange.
For active ſports, for pleaſing reſt,
This is the time to be poſſeſt;
The beſt is but in ſeaſon beſt. Dryden.
I would indulge the gladneſs of my heart!
Let us retire : her grief is out of ſeaſon. Philips.
There is no ſeaſon to which ſuch thoughts as theſe are more
ſuitable. - #terbury.
The ſeaſºn when to come, and when to go,
To fing, or ceaſe to fing, we never know. Pope.
4. A time not very long.
We'll ſlip you for a ſeaſºn, but our jealouſy
. Do's yet depend. Soakeſ. Cymbeline.
5. [From the verb.] That which gives a high reliſh.
You lack the ſaſon of all natures, ſleep. Shakespeare Macbeth.
To SF'Asos. v. a. ſaſaiſonner, French.]
1. To mix with food anything that gives a high reliſh.
Every oblation of thy meat-offering ſhalt thou ſeaſon with
falt. Lev. ii. I 3.
They ſeaſºned every ſacrifice, whereof a greater part was
eaten by the prieſts. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
For breakfaſt and ſupper, milk and milk-pottage are very fit
for children; only let them be ſeaſoned with ſugar. Locke.
The wiſe contriver,
To keep the waters from corruption free,
Mixt them with ſalt, and ſeaſon’d all the ſea. Blackmore.
2. To give a reliſh to.
You ſeaſon ſtill with ſports your ſerious hours;
For age but taſtes of pleaſures, youth devours. Dryden.
The proper uſe of wit is to ſeaſon converſation, to repreſent
what is praiſeworthy to the greateſt advantage, and to expoſe
the vices and follies of men. o Tillotſon.
3. To qualify by admixture of another ingredient. -
- Mercy is above this ſcepterºd ſway;
It is an attribute to God himſelf;
And earthly pow'r does then ſhew likeſt God's,
When mercy ſeaſon, juſtice. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
Seaſon your admiration but a while,
With an attentive ear, 'till I deliver
This marvel to you. Shakespeare Hamlet
4. To imbue; to tinge or taint. - -
Whatever thing
The ſcythe of time mows down, devour unſpar'd
Till I, in man reſiding, through the race &gt;
His thoughts, his looks, words, aćtions, all infect,
And ſeaſon him thy laſt and ſweeteſt prey. Milton's Pa. Loft.
Secure their religion, ſeaſon their younger years with pru-
dent and pious principles. Taylor.
Sin, taken into the ſoul, is like a liquor poured into a veſ.
ſel; ſo much of it as it fills, it alſoſeaſons: the touch and tinc-
ture go together. South.
5. To fit for any uſe by time or habit; to mature.
The crow doth fing as ſweetly as the lark,
When neither is attended; and, I think,
The nightingale, if ſhe ſhould ſing by day,
When ev'ry gooſe is cackling, would be thought
No better a muſician than the wren: .
How many things by ſeaſon ſeaſºn'd are,
To their right praiſe and true perfection. Shakeſpeare,
- Who in want a hollow friend doth try,
Direétly ſeaſons him his enemy. Shakeſpeare.
We charge you, that you have contriv'd to take
From Rome all ſeaſon'd office, and to wind
Yourſelf unto a power tyrannical. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The archers of his guard ſhot two arrows every man to-
gether againſt an inch board of well ſeaſºned timber. Hayward.
His plenteous ſtores do ſeaſon'd timber ſend;
Thither the brawny carpenters repair. Dryden.
A man ſhould harden and ſeaſon himſelf beyond the degree
of cold wherein he lives. Addiſon.
To SE(A son. v. m. To be mature; to grow fit for any purpoſe.
Carpenters rough plane boards for flooring, that they may
ſet them by to ſeaſon. - Moxon's Mech. Exerc.
SE'AsonABLE. adſ. [ ſaſºn, French.] Opportune; happen-
ing or done at a proper time; proper as to time.
Mercy is ſeaſonable in the time of afflićtion, as clouds of
rain in the time of drought. Eccluſ. v. 2.
If ever it was ſeaſonable to preach courage in the deſpiſed
abuſed cauſe of Chriſt, it is now, when his truths are reformed
into nothing, when the hands and hearts of his faithful mini-
ſters are weakened. South's Sermons.
SE'Ason AELENEss. n.ſ.. [from ſeaſonable.] Opportuneneſs of
time; propriety with regard to time.
A Britiſh freeholder would very ill diſcharge his part, if he
did not acknowledge the excellency and ſeaſonableneſs of thoſe
laws by which his country has been recovered out of its
confuſions. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Se’AsonABLY. adv. [from ſaſºnable.] Properly with reſpect
to time.
his is that to which I would moſt earneſtly, moſt ſeaſon-
ably adviſe you all. Sprat's Sermont.
SE'ason ER. n.ſ.. [from To ſeaſon.] He who ſeaſons or gives a
reliſh to anything.
SE"A son ING. m. ſ. [from ſeaſon.] That which is added to any
thing to give it a reliſh.
Breads we have of ſeveral grains, with divers kinds of
leavenings and ſeaſonings; ſo that ſome do extremely move ap-
petites, and ſome do nouriſh ſo as divers do live of them
alone. Bacon.
Some abound with words, without any ſeaſoning or taſte of
Inatter. Ben. johnſon.
A foundation of good ſenſe, and a cultivation of learning,
are required to give a ſeaſoning to retirement, and make us taſte
the bleſfing. Dryden.
Political ſpeculations are of ſo dry and auſtere a nature,
that they will not go down with the publick without frºnt
Jea onings. Addison s Freeholder.
The publick accept a paper which has . . none *:
- e writings which are in Vo
ſº recommend th § Addison's Spectatºr.
Many vegetable ſubſtances are uſed by mankind is ſººn-
inº, which abound with a highly exalted arºmatick ºil; as
thyme and ſavory. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
SEAT. n.ſ. [ſedes, Latin; ſett, old German. º
1. A chair, bench, or anything on which one may ſit.
The ſons light high
Haſled, reſorting to the ſummons "g". , -
And tºok their ſeats: • * Milton's Paradiſe Left.
The lady of the leaf ordain’d a feaſt,
And made the lady of the flow'r her gueſt;
when, lo, a bow'r aſcended on the plain,
with ſudden ſeats ordain'd, and large for cither train. Pºd.
2. Chair
r<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 326</div><p class="Text">S E C
S E C
2. Chair of ſtate;
throne; poſt of authority; tribunal.
with due obſervance of thy goodly ſeat,
- gamemnon, Neſtor ſhall ſupp -
jº. 2. sºrºi. and Crºſſida.
y Thus we debaſe -
The nature of our ſeats, and make the rabble • ?
Call our cares fears. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
whatſoever be the manner of the world's end, moſt ser:
tain it is an end it ſhall have, and as certain that then we ſhall
appear before the judgment ſeat of Chriſt, that every man may
ºveaccording to that which he hath done in his body, whe-
ther it be good or evil. Hakewill on Providence.
. Manſion; reſidence; dwelling; abode. . -
it were enough in reaſon to ſuccour with vićtuals, and
other helps, a vaſt multitude, compelled by neceſſity to ſeek a
new ſeat, or to direct them unto a country able to ſeeive
them. Raleigh.
O earth, how like to lº. If º wºrd
Moſt juſtly, ſeat worthier of gods, as built
§§. reforming what was old! Milton.
In Alba he ſhall fix his royal ſeat;
And, born a king, a race of kings beget. Dryden.
Has Winter caus’d thee, friend, to change thy ſat,
And ſeek in Sabine air a warm retreat? Dryden.
The promis'd ſeat of empire ſhall again . -
Cover the mountain, and command the plain. Prior.
4. Situation; ſite.
The fitteſt and the eaſieſt to be drawn
To our ſociety, and to aid the war,
The rather for their ſeat, being next borderers
On Italy. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
He that builds a fair houſe upon an ill ſeat, committeth
himſelf to priſon. Bacºn.
A church by Strand-bridge, and two biſhops houſes, were
pulled down to make a ſeat for his new building..., Hayward.
It followeth now that we find out the ſeat of Eden; for in
it was Paradiſe by God planted. Raleigh.
To SEAT. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To place on feats; to cauſe to ſit down.
The gueſts were no ſooner ſtated but they entered into a
warm debate. Arbuthnot.
2. To place in a poſt of authority, or place of diſtinétion.
Thus high was king Richard ſeated. Shakespeare R. III,
Not Babylon,
Nor great Alcairo, ſuch magnificence
Equal’d in all their glories to inſhrine
Belus or Serapis their gods, or ſeat
Their kings. - Milton.
A ſpirit of envy or oppoſition makes mankind uneaſy to ſee
others of the ſame ſpecies ſtated above them in a ſort of per-
fe&amp;tion. Pope.
3. To fix in any particular place or ſituation; to ſettle.
Should one family or one thouſand hold poſſeſſion of all the
ſouthern undiſcovered continent, becauſe they had ſcated them-
ſelves in Nova Guiana. Raleigh.
By no means build too near a great neighbour, which were,
in truth, to be as unfortunately ſeated on the earth as Mercury
is in the heavens; for the moſt part ever in combuſtion, or
obſcurity, under brighter beams than his own. J/otton.
4. To fix; to place firm. -
Why do I yield to that ſuggeſtion,
Whoſe horrid image doth upfix my hair,
And make my ſeated heart knock at my ribs,
Againſt the uſe of nature. Shakespeare Macbeth.
From their foundations looſening to and fro,
They pluck'd the ſeated hills. Milton.
SEAWARP. adv. [ſã and pearb, Saxon J Towards the ſea.
The rock ruſh'd ſeaward with impetuous roar,
Ingulf'd, and to th’ abyſs the boaſter bore. Pope.
SE'c ANT. n.ſ.. [ſecans, Latin; ſcanºe, Fr.] In geometry, the
right. line drawn from the centre of a circle, cutting and
mººg with another line called the tangent without it."Dż.
Tº SEQEDE. v. W. [ſecºde, Latin.] To withdraw from fºil
lowſhip in any affair.
Sick PER. m. ſ. ſ from ſºrd..] One who diſcovers his diſap-
probation of any proceedings by withdrawing himſelf.
To Sect's N. v. A. (ſcern, Latin.] To ſeparate finer from
º **ter 3 to make the ſeparation of ſubſtances in the
Oi! W.
Birds are commonly better meat than beaſts, becauſe their
fleſh doth aſſimilate more finely, and ſerernth more ſubtilly.
- - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The pituite or mucus ſecerned in the noſe and windpipe, is
º * excrementitious but a laudable humour, neceſſary for
º thoſe parts, from which it is Jºcerned, from exco-
SEcF'ssion. º, ſ. [ ſeceſſio, Latin.] Arbuthnot.
.*. The aćt of departing.
cº of bodies upon, or ſeceſſion thereof from the
• Pºurb not the equilibration of either hemi-
º: B
2. 'I he a - ; : - - j7'07Un.
Št of withdrawing from councils or actions.
SE'cle. n.ſ.. [ſecle, French; ſeculum. Latin.]. A century.
Of a man's age, part he lives in his father's life-time, and
part after his ſon's birth; and thereupon it is wont to be ſaid
that three generations make one ſecle, or hundred years in the
genealogies. - Hammond's Prači. Catech.
To Seclu'DE. v. a. [ſeclude, Latin.] To confine from; to
ſhut up apart; to exclude.
None is ſecluded from that funètion of any degree, ſtate, or
calling. Whitgifte.
Some parts of knowledge God has thought fit to ſeclude from
us, to fence them not only, as he did the interdićted tree, by
precept and commination, but with difficulties and impoſſibi-
lities. Decay of Piety.
The number of birds deſcribed may be near five hundred,
and the number of fiſhes, ſecluding jºi. as many; but if
the ſhell-fiſh be taken in, more than ſix times the number.
- Ray on the Creation.
Incloſe your tender plants in your conſervatory, ſºlding
all entrance of cold. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Let eaſtern tyrants from the light of heaven
Seclude their boſom ſlaves. Thomſºn.
SE'COND. m. ſ. ſ ſecond, French; ſecundus, Latin. It is ob-
ſervable that the Engliſh have no ordinal of twº, as the Latins
and the nations deriving from them have none of duo. What
the Latins call ſecundus, from ſequor, the Saxons term open, or
a pºtena.]
1. The next in order to the firſt; the ordinal of two. .
Sunk were their hearts with horror of the crime,
Nor necded to be warn’d a ſecond time,
But bore each other back. Dryden.
2. Next in value or dignity; inferiour.
I ſhall not ſpeak ſuperlatively of them, leſt I be ſuſpeded of
partiality; but this I may truly ſay, they are ſecond to none in
the Chriſtian world. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
None I know
Second to me, or like; equal much leſs. Milton.
Keep their firſt luſtre, and maintain their place,
Not ſecond yet to any other face. Dryden.
Not theſe huge bolts, by which the giants ſlain,
Lay overthrown on the Phlegrean plain;
‘Twas of a leſler mould and lighter weight;
My eyes are ſtill the ſame; each glance, each grace, }
They call it thunder of a ſecond rate. Addison.
By a ſad train of miſeries alone
Diſtinguiſh'd long, and ſecond now to none. Pºpe.
Perſons of ſecond rate merit in their own country, like birds
of paſſage, thrive here, and fly off when their employments
are at an end. Swift.
SE'cond-HAND. m. ſ. Poſſeſſion received from the firſt poſ-
ſeſſor.
Sa'cond-hand is ſometimes uſed adječtively. Not original;
not primary.
Some men build ſo much upon authorities, they have but a
ſecond-hand or implicit knowledge. - Lock.
They are too proud to cringe to ſecond-hand favourites in a
great family. Swift to Gay.
At Second-H AND. In imitation; in the ſecond place of order;
by tranſmiſſion; not primarily ; not originally. . .
They pelted them with ſatyrs and epigrams, which perhaps
had been taken up at firſt only to make their court, and ºt
ſecºnd-hand to flatter thoſe who had flattered their king. Tºtº.
In imitation of preachers at ſecond-hand, I ſhall tranſº
from Bruyere a piece of raillery. Tatar.
Spurious virtue in a maid; -
A virtue but at ſecºnd-hand. Swift.
SE'con D. m. ſ. [ſecond, French ; from the adještive.3
1. One who accompanies another in a duclto direct or defend
him. -
Their ſecond miniſter an oath,
Which was indifferent to them both,
That on their knightly faith and troth
No magick them ſupplied;
And ſought them that they had no charms,
Wherewith to work each other's harms,
But came with ſimple open arms -
To have their dº. .. Drayton's Nymphid.
Their firſt encounters were very furious, 'till after ſome toil
and bloodſhed they were parted by the ſecondi, 4.
Perſonal brawls cºme in as ſecond to finiſh the diº
opinion. - Haiti.
2. One who ſupports or maintains; a ſupporter; a maintain.
He propounded the duke as a main cauſe of divers º
ties in the ſtate, being ſure enough of ſººd, after º
onſet. … wº—-
Courage, when it is only a ſtrand to injuſtice, and º
without provocation, is a diſadvantage to a charaćter. C. liff.
3. A ſecond minute, the ſecºnd diviſion of an hour by ſixty;
ſixtieth part of a minute. -
Four flames of an equal magnitude will be kep
ſpace of ſixteen ſecºnd minutes, though one of theſe r at
alone, in the ſame veſſel, will not laſt above twenty-five ºr *
moſt thirty ſeconds. J/ijäns's Math. Aſaº
Sounds
talive the
flamts
-
-
the .
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 327</div><p class="Text">S E C
S E C
**
Dr.
º:
0 ºr
!"
**,
:
:
s
Sounds move above I 140 Engliſh fect in a ſecond minute of
time, and in ſeven or eight minutes of time about I co Eng-
liſh miles. Locke.
To SE’, on D. v. a. [ſeconder, Fr. ſecundo, Lat. from the noun.]
1. o ſupport; to forward; to aſſiſt; to come in after the act as
a maintainer.
The authors of the former opinion were preſently ſecºnded
by other wittier and better learned, who being loth that the
form of church polity, which they ſought to bring in, ſhould
be otherwiſe than in the higheſt degree ascounted of, took
firſt an exception againſt the difference between church polity
and matters of neceility to ſalvation. Hooker.
Though we here fall down,
We have ſupplies to ſecond our attempt ;
If they miſcarry, theirs ſhall ſecºnd them. Shaft. Henry VI.
I to be the power of Iſrael's God
Avow, and challenge Dagon to the teſt,
Off'ring to combat thee his champion bold,
With th' utmoſt of his godhead ſeconded. Milton.
Familiar Ovid tender thoughts inſpires,
And nature ſeconds all his ſoft deſires. Rºſcommon.
If in company you offer ſomething for a jeſt, and no body
fºconds you in your laughter, you may condemn their taſte;
but in the mean time you make a very indifierent figure, Swift.
In human works, though labour'd on with pain,
A thouſand movements ſcarce one purpoſe gain;
In God's, o e ſingle can its ends produce,
Yet ſerves to ſecond too ſome other uſe. Pºpe.
2. To follow in the next place.
You ſome permit
To ſecond ills with ills. Shakeſpeare.
Having formerly diſcourſed of a maritimal voyage, I think
it not impertinent to ſecond the ſame with ſome neceſſary rela-
tions concerning the royal navy. Raleigh.
He ſaw his guileful act
Iły Eve, though all unweeting, ſeconded
Upon her huſband. Aji'ton's Paradiº Lo?.
Sin is uſually ſeconded with ſin ; and a man ſeldom commits
one ſin to pleaſe, but he commits another to defend himſelf.
South', Sermºns.
SE'cow D Sight. m. ſ. The power of ſeeing things future, or
things diſtant: ſuppoſed inherent in ſome of the Scottiſh
iſlanders.
As he was going out to ſteal a ſheep, he was ſeiſed with a
fit of ſecºnd ſight : the face of the country preſented him with
a wide proſpect of new ſcenes, which he had never ſeen be-,
fore. Addiſon's Freehºlder.
Second ſººted adj. [from ſecond ſight.] Having the ſecond
ſight.
Sawney was deſcended of an ancient family, renowned for
their ſkill in prognoſticks: moſt of his anceſtors were ſecond
ſighted, and his mother but narrowly eſcaped for a witch, ºad.
SEcoRDARILY, adv. [from ſecondary.] In the ſecond degree;
in the ſecond order; not primarily ; not originally ; not in
the firſt intention.
Theſe atoms make the wind primarily tend downwards,
though other accidental cauſes impel them ſecondariy to a
ſloping motion. Digby.
He confeſſes that temples are erected, and feſtivals kept, to
the honour of ſaints, at leaſt ſecondarily. Stillin, fleet.
It is primarily generated out of the effuſion of melancho-
lick blood, or ſe, andarily out of the dregs and remainder of a
phlegmonous or cedematick tumour. Harvey.
SE con DAR IN Ess. n.ſ. [from ſecondary J. The flate of being
ſecondary. -
That which is peculiar and diſcriminative, muſt be taken
from the primarineſs and ſecºndarineſs of the perception. Norr.
SECONDARY. adj. [ſecundarius, Latin.)
1. Not primary; not of the firſt intention; not of the firſt
rate; next to the firſt.
Two are the radical differences: the ſecºndary differences
are as four. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Wherefoever there is moral right on the one hand, no ſe-
condary right can diſcharge it. L'E/ºrange.
Gravitation is the powerful cement which holds together
this magnificent ſtructure of the world, which ſtretcheth the
North over the empty ſpace, and hang th the earth upon
nothing, to transfer the words of Job from the firſt and real
cauſe to the ſeconday. Bently.
If the ſyſtem had been fortuitouſly formed by the conven-
ing matter of a chaos, how is it conceivable that all the pla-
nets, both primary and ſecondary, ſhould revolve the ſame way
from the Weſt to the Eaſt, and that in the ſame plane; Bentl.
2. Acting by tranſmiſſion or deputation. , -
That we were form'd then, ſay'ſt thou? and the work
Of ſecond ºry hands, by taſk transfer'd
From father to his ſon? 4...ton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. v.
As in a watch's fine machine,
Though many artful ſprings are ſeen,
The added movements which declare
How full the moon, how old the year,
Derive their ſe ondary pow'r
From that which ſimply points the hour. Prior.
3. A ſcondary fever is that which ariſes after a criſis, or the
diſcharge of ſome morbid matter, as after the declenſion of
the ſmall pox or meaſles. 3:ſincy.
$ºcospaky. ºf [from the adjective J A delegate; a deputy.
SE cº DLY adv. [from ecºnd...] In the ſecond place -
Firſt ſhe hath diſobeyed the law, and ſecondly treſpaſſed
againſt her huſband. Eccluſ, xxiii. 23.
Firſt, metals *e more durable than plants; and ſecondy,
they are more ſolid and hard. Bacon.
The houſe of cºmmons in Ireland, and, ſecondly, the privy
council, addreſſed his majeſty againſt theſe half. pence. Swift.
SE'con DRAt E. n, ſ. [ ſecond and rate.]
1. The ſecond order in dignity or value. -
- They call it thunder of the ſecondrate. Addison's Ovid.
2. It is ſometimes uſed adjectively, one of the ſecond order. A
colloquial licenſe.
He was not then a ſecondrate champion, as they would have
him, who think fortitude the firſt virtue in a heró. Dryden.
SE'CR E cy. n ſ [from ſecret.]
1. Privacy; ſtate of being hidden.
That's not ſuddenly to be perform’d,
But with advice and ſilent ſecrecy.
The lady Anne,
Whom the king hath in ſecrecy long married,
This day was view'd in open as his queen. Shakeſ H.VIII.
in nature's book of infinite ſecrecy, -
A little can I read. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
2. Solitude; retirement.
Thou in thy ſecrecy, although alone,
Peſt with thyſelf accompany'd, ſeck'ſt not
Social communication. Milton's Parad. Loft.
There is no ſuch thing as perfect ſecrecy, to encourage a ra-
tional mind to the perpetration of any baſe action; for a man
muſt firſt extinguiſh and put out the great light within him,
his conſcience; he muſt get away from himſelf, and ſhake off
the thouſand witneſſes which he always carries about him, be-
fore he can be alone. South's Sermons.
3. Forbearance of diſcovery.
It is not with publick as with private prayer: in this rather
ſecrecy is commanded than outward ſhew ; whereas that being
the publick act of a whole ſociety, requireth accordingly more
care to be had of external appearance. Hooker.
4. Fidelity to a ſecret; taciturnity inviolate ; cloſe ſilence.
SECRET. adj. [ſecret, French ; ſecretus, Latin.] w
1. Kept hidden; not revealed; concealed; private.
The ſecret things belong unto the Lord our God; but thoſe
things which are revealed belong unto us. Deutr. xxix. 29.
2. Retired ; private; unſeen.
Thou open'ſt wiſdom's way,
And giv'ſt acceſs, though ſecret ſhe retire :
And I perhaps an ſecret. Milton.
3. Faithful to a ſecret entruſted. - -
Secret Romans, that have ſpoke the word,
And will not palter Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
4. Unknown; not diſcovered : as, a ſecret remedy.
5. Privy ; obſcene. -
SE'ck ºr, n.ſ. [ſecret, French ; ſecretum, Latin.]
1. Something ſtudiouſly hidden.
Infected minds
To their deaf pillows will diſcharge their ſecrets. Shakeſp.
There is no ſecret that they can hide from thee. Ezek. xxviii.
We not to explore the ſecrets aſk
Of his eternal empire. Aſilion.
2. A thing unknown; ſomething not yet diſcovered.
All bleſt ſec. ets, -
All you unpubliſh'd virtues of the earth. Shakespeare King Lear.
Shakespeare Henry VI.
All ſecret, of the deep, all nature's works. AMilton.
The Romans ſeem not to have known the ſecret of paper-
credit. - Arbuthnot.
3. Privacy; ſecrecy. - • *
Bread eaten in ſecret is pleaſant. Prºv. ix. 17.
In ſºciet, riding through the air ſhe comes. . A4iltºn.
To SE'cRE r. v. a. [from the noun...] To keep private. .
Great care is to be uſed of the clerks of the council, for the
ſcreting of their conſultations. Bacon's Advice to Willierſ.
Sºck ETAR 1ship. m. ſ. [ſecretaire, Fr. from ſecretary.] The
office of a ſecretary. - - .
Secret ARY. m. ſ. [ſecretaire, Fr. ſecretariº, low Latin.] One
entruſted with the management of buſineſs; one who writes
another.
for Call Gardiner to me, my new ſecretary. . Shakespeare
That which is moſt of all profitable is acquaintance with
the ſecretariº, and employed men of ambaſſadors. Bacon.
Cottington was ſecretary to the Prince. Clarendon,
To SECRE'ſ E. v.a. [ſecretas, Latin.]
...To put aſide; to hide. -
; '[In | am ceconomy.] To ſecern; to ſeparate.
Sec RE"rios. m. ſ. [from ſecrettº, Latin.] . -
... That part of the animal cºconomy that conſiſts in ſeparating
the various fluids of the body.
. The fluid ſecreted.
Šiº. adj. [from ſecretus, Latin.] Parted by ani-
|al ſecretion.
Il 23 L They<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 328</div><p class="Text">S E C
S F. C
They have a ſimilitude or contrariety }. the #!'; hu-
mours in taſte and quality. loyer on tPe Huzmaurf.
Secretist. m. ſ. [from ſecret.] A dealer in ſecrets. l
Some things I have not yet thought fit ſo plainly to reveal,
not out of any envious deſign of having them buried with me,
but that I may barter with thoſe ſecretiſts, that will not part
with one ſecret but in exchange for another. . Boyle.
Seº II.Y. adv. [from ſecret..] Privately; privily; not open-
ly ; not publickly; not ſo as to be known.
Give him this letter, do it ſecretly. Shakeſpeare.
Thoſe thoughts are not wholly mine; but either they are
ſecretly in the poet, or may be fairly deduced from him. Dryd.
Now ſecretly with inward grief ſhe pin'd ; -
Now warm reſentments to his griefs he join'd. Addiſon.
Some may place their chief ſatisfaction in giving ſecretly
what is to be diſtributed; others, in being the open and
avowed inſtruments of making ſuch diſtributions. Atterbury.
SE'cret Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſecret.]
1. State of being hidden.
2. Quality of keeping a ſecret.
I could muſter up
My giants and my witches too,
Which are vaſt conſtancy and ſecretneſs. Donne.
Secretory. adj. [from ſecretus, Latin.] Performing the
office of ſecretion. - -
All the glands are a congeries of veſſels complicated
together, whereby they give the blood time to ſeparate through
the capillary veſſels into the ſecretory, which afterwards exone-
rate themſelves into one dućt. Ray.
SECT. n.ſ.. [ſºle, French; ſºla, Latin, from ſºlando.]
1. A body of men following ſome particular maſter, or united
in ſome ſettled tenets. Often in a bad ſenſe.
We'll wear out,
In a wall'd priſon, packs and ſects of great ones,
That ebb and flow by th’ moon. Shakespeare King Lear.
The greateſt viciſſitude of things is the viciſłitude of ſºls
and religions: the true religion is built upon the rock; the reſt
are toſſed upon the waves of time. Bacon's Eſſays.
The jealous ſects that dare not truſt their cauſe
So far from their own will as to the laws,
You for their umpire and their ſynod take. Dryden.
The academics were willing to admit the goods of fortune
into their notion of felicity; but no ſects of old philoſophers
did ever leave a room for greatneſs. Dryden.
A ſect of free thinkers is a ſum of ciphers. Bentley.
2. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems to be miſprinted for ſet.
Of our unbitted luſts, I take this that you call love to be a
ſet? or cion. Shakeſp. Othello.
Sh'ot ARISM. n.ſ.. [from ſºi..] Diſpoſition to petty ſects in
oppoſition to things eſtabliſhed.
Nothing hath more marks of ſchiſm and ſºariſºn than this
preſbyterian way. King Charles.
Se'cTARY. n.ſ. Iſºlaire, French; from ſcº.]
I. One who divides from publick eſtabliſhment, and joins with
thoſe diſtinguiſhed by ſome particular whims.
My lord, you are a ſe:ſary,
That's the plain truth. Shakespeare
Romiſh catholick tenets are inconſiſtent, on the one hand,
with the truth of religion profeſſed and proteſted by the church
9f England, whence we are called proteſtants; and the ana-
baptiſts, and ſeparatiſts, and ſectaries, on the other hand, whoſe
tenº are full of ſchiſin, and inconſiſtent with monarchy. Bac.
The number of ſºciaries does not concern the clergy in
point of intereſt or conſcience. Swift.
2. A follower; a pupil.
The ſºflaries of my celeſtial ſkill,
That wont to be the world's chief ornament,
And learned imps that wont to ſhoot up ſtill,
They under keep. Spenſºr.
Sectator. mºſ [ſºciateur, Fr. ſºlator, Latin.] A follower:
an imitator; a diſciple. - &gt;
Hereof the wiſer ſort and the beſt learned philoſophers were
not ignorant, as Cicero witneſſeth, gathering the opinion of
Ariſtotle and his ſºlators. c Raleigh
SE'ction. m. ſ. [ſection, French; ſºciio, Latin.] o”
I. The aët of cutting of dividing.
In the ſection of bodies, man, of all ſenſible creatures, has
the fulleſt brain to his proportion. - jºi.
2. A part divided from the reſt. -
3. A ſmall and diſtinét part of a writing or book.
Inſtead of their law, which they might not read openly
they read of the proph - - - - - penly,
prophets, that which in likeneſs of matter
º neareſt to each ſee?ion of their law. Hooker.
them i. º, * with ſalts I reſerve 'till imº
... Without breaking in upon the connection of his lanº.
it is hardly poſible tº . - - - -
- ive a diſt -
ºia ºw of hiºn F.
SE'ctor. -
sºf [ſesſeur, French.] In geometry.
polygons, hours, latitudes, metals and ſolids. It is generally
uſeful in all the practical parts of the mathematicks, and paſſ.
ticularly contrived for navigation, ſurveying, aſtronomy, dial-
ling, and projećtion of the ſphere. All the lines of the ſector
can be accommodated to any radius, which is done by taking
off all diviſions parallelwiſe, and not lengthwiſe; the ground
of which practice is this, that parallels to the baſe of any plain
triangle, bear the ſame proportion to it as the parts of the legs
above the parallel do to the whole legs. Harris.
SECULAR, adj. [ſecularis, Latin; ſeculier, French.]
1. Not ſpiritual; relating to affairs of the preſent world; not
holy; worldly.
This in every ſeveral man's actions of common life, ap-
pertaineth unto moral; in publick and politick ſecular affairs,
unto civil wiſdom. Hooker.
Then ſhall they ſeek t'avail themſelves of names,
Places, and titles; and with theſe to join
Secular pow'r, though feigning ſtill to act
By ſpiritual. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft,
2. [In the church of Rome.] Not bound by monaſtick rules.
Thoſe northern nations eaſily embraced the religion of thoſe
they ſubdued, and by their devotion gave great authority and
reverence, and thereby eaſe to the clergy both ſecular and re-
gular. Temple.
In France vaſt numbers of eccleſiaſticks, ſecular and reli-
gious, live upon the labours of others. Addiſon.
3. [Seculaire, Fr.) Happening or coming once in a ſecle or century.
The ſecular year was kept but once in a century. Addison.
SEcul A'RITY. m. ſ. [from ſecular..] Worldlineſs; attention to
the things of the preſent life,
Littleneſs and ſecularity of ſpirit is the greateſt enemy to
contemplation. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
To Secularize. v. a. [ſeculariſer, Fr. from ſecular.]
1. To convert from ſpiritual appropriations to common uſe.
2. To make worldly.
SE'cula Rly. adv. [from ſecular.] In a worldly manner.
Secula RN Ess. n.ſ. [from ſecularl Worldlineſs.
SE/cus DIN E. n ſ. [ſecondines, ſecondes, Fr. ſecundar, viz. parter
quod naſcentem infantem ſequantur. Ainſw.] The membrane
in which the embryo is wrapped; the after-birth.
The caſting of the ſkin is by the ancients compared to the
breaking of the ſecundine, or cawl, but not rightly; for the
ſecundine is but a general cover, not ſhaped according to the
parts, but the ſkin is. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Future ages lie
Wrapp'd in their ſacred ſecundine aſleep. Cowley.
If the factus be taken out of the womb incloſed in the ſe-
cundines, it will continue to live, and the blood to circulate. Ray.
SECURE. adj. [ſecurus, Latin.]
1. Free from fear; exempt from terrour; eaſy; aſſured.
Confidence then bore thee on ſecure
To meet no danger. Milton.
One maid ſhe had, belov’d above the reſt;
Secure of her, the ſecret ſhe confeſs'd. Dryden.
In Lethe's lake ſouls long oblivion taſte;
Of future life ſecure, forgetful of the paſt. Dryden.
But thou, ſecure of ſoul, unbent with woes ;
The more thy fortune frowns, the more oppoſe. Dryden;
We live and act as if we were perfectly ſecure of the final
event of things, however we may behave ourſelves. Atterbury.
The portion of their wealth they deſign for the uſes of the
poor, they may throw into one of theſe publick repoſitories,
ſecure that it will be well employed. Atterbury.
It concerns the moſt ſecure of his ſtrength, to pray tº God
not to expoſe him to an enemy. Rogers.
2. Careleſs; wanting caution; wanting vigilance.
3. Free from danger; ſafe.
Let us not then ſuſpect our happy ſtate,
As not ſecure to fingle or combin'd. Milton.
Meſãpus next,
Secure of ſteel, and fated from the fire,
Dryden.
In pomp appears.
4. It has ſometimes of before the objećt in all its ſenſes; but
more properly from before evil, or the cauſe ºf evil.
Haply too ſecure of our diſcharge
From penalty. Milton.
Secure from fortune's blows,
Secure of what I cannot loſe,
In my ſmall pinnace I can ſail. Dryden's Horace.
To SE cu'R.E. v. a. [from the adječlive.] -
1. To make certain; to put out of hazard; to aſcertain.
Nothing left
That might his happy ſtate ſecure,
Secure from outward force. Milton.
I ſpread a cloud before the vićtor's fight,
Suſtain'd the vanquiſh'd, and ſecur'd his flight;
Ev’n then ſecur'd him, when I ſought with joy
The vow’d deſtruction of ungrateful Troy. Dryden.
Aétions have their preference, not according to, the ""
ſent pleaſure or pain that accompanies or follºws them here,
but as they ſerve to ſecure that perfect durable happineſs !.
Qº ſº.
after.
ruth
5 T
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 329</div><p class="Text">***
º:
º:
**
wa
ºt:
*
º,
‘. .
*
*
Truth and certainty are not ſecured by innate principles; but
men are in the ſame uncertain floating eſtate with as without
them. Locke.
That prince who ſhall be ſo wiſe as by eſtabliſhed laws of
liberty to ſecure protećtion to the honeſt induſtry of mankind,
againſt the oppreſſion of power, will quickly be too hard for
his neighbours. Locke.
Deeper to wound, ſhe ſhuns the fight;
She drops her arms to gain the field :
Secures her conqueſt by her flight,
And triumphs when ſhe ſeems to yield. Prior.
Nothing can be more artful than the addreſs of Ulyſſes: he
fecures himſelf of a powerful advocate, by paying an ingenu-
ous and laudable deference to his friend.
2. To protećt; to make ſafe.
Where two or three ſciences are purſued at the ſame time,
if one of them be dry, as logick, let another be more enter.
taining, to ſecure the mind from wearineſs. J/atts.
3. To inſure.
4. To make faſt.
Secu'RELY. adv. [from ſecure.] Without fear; careleſly;
without danger; ſafely.
Love, that had now long time ſecurely ſlept
In Venus' lap, unarmed then and naked,
"Gan rear his head, by Clotho being waked. Stenſer.
'Tis done like Hector, but ſecurely done,
A little proudly, and great deal miſprizin
The knight oppos'd. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
Broome.
His daring foe ſecurely him defy'd. Milton.
A ſoul that can ſecurely death defy,
And count it nature's privilege to die. Dryden's juven.
We upon our globe's laſt verge ſhall go,
And view the ocean leaning on the ſky;
From thence our rolling neighbours we ſhall know,
And on the lunar world ſecurey pry. Drydew.
Whether any of the reaſonings are inconſiſtent, I ſºurely
leave to the judgment of the reader. Atterbury.
Secu'REMENT. n.ſ.. [from ſecure.] The cauſe of ſafety; pro-
tečtion ; defence.
They, like Judas, deſire death; Cain, on the contrary, grew
afraid thereof, and obtained a ſecurement from it. Brown.
Secu'RITY. m. ſ... [ſecuritſ, Fr. ſecuritas, Lat. from ſecure.]
1. Careleſſneſs; freedom from fear.
Marvellous ſecurity is always dangerous, when men will not
believe any bees to be in a hive, until they have a ſharp ſenſe
of their ſtings. Hayward.
2. Vitious careleſſneſs; confidence; want of vigilance.
There is ſcarce truth enough alive to make ſocieties ſecure;
but ſecurity enough to make fellowſhips accurſt. Shakeſpeare.
How ſenſeleſs then, and dead a ſoul hath he,
Which thinks his ſoul doth with his body die;
Or thinks not ſo, but ſo would have it be,
That he might fin with more ſecurity. Davies.
3. Protećtion; defence.
If the providence of God be taken away, what ſecurity have
we againſt thoſe innumerable dangers to which human nature
is continually expoſed ? Tilotſon.
4. Anything given as a pledge or caution; inſurance; aſſurance
for any thing. -
When they had taken ſecurity of Jaſon, they let them go.
Acts xvii. 9.
It is poſſible for a man, who hath the appearance of reli-
gion, to be wicked and an hypocrite; but it is impoſſible for
a man, who openly declares againſt religion, to give any rea-
ſonable ſecurity that he will not be falſe and cruel. Swift.
Exchequer bills have been generally reckoned the ſureſt and
moſt ſacred of all ſecurities. Swift's Examiner.
The Romans do not ſeem to have known the ſecret of paper
credit, and ſecurities upon mortgages. Arbuthnot on Coins.
5. Safety; certainty.
Some, who gave their advice for entering into a war, al-
leged that we ſhould have no ſecurity for our trade, while Spain
was ſubječt to a prince of the Bourbon family. Swift.
SFDA'N. n.ſ.. [from ſedes, Latin.] A kind of portable coach;
a chair.
Some beg for abſent perſons, feign them ſick,
Cloſe mew’d in their ſedans for want of air,
And for their wives produce an empty chair. Dryden.
By a tax of Cato's it was provided, that women's wearing
cloaths, ornament and ſedan, exceeding 12 l. s. 10 d. half-
penny, ſhould pay 30 s. in the hundred pound value. Arbuthn.
SEDATE. adj. [ſedatus, Latin.] Calm; quict; flill; un-
ruffled; undiſturbed; ſerene.
With count'nance calm and ſoul ſedate,
Thus Turnus. Dryden's Aºn:
Diſputation carries away the mind from that caſm and fe-
date temper which is ſo neceſſary to contemplate truth. If atts.
SEDATELY. adv. [from ſedate J Calmly ; without diſturbance.
That has moſt weight with them that appears ſedately to
come from their parents reaſon. Locke.
SEPATEN ess. n.ſ.. [from ſedate.] Calmneſs; tranquillity;
ſerenity; frecdom from diſturbance.
There is a particular ſedateneſ; in their converſation and be-
haviour that qualifies them for council, with a great intrepi-
‘lity that fits them for action. Addison on the War.
SººnTARINEss. n.ſ. from ſºdºntary.) Thºſia - .
** *--&gt; S • rº, i. ". te of being
ſedentary; inactivity. [ ſedentary.] c ing
SEDENTARY. adj. [ſedentaire,
Jºdenarius, from ſedeº, Latin J
I. Paſſed in fitting ſtill; wanting motion or ačtion.
A ſedentary life, appropriate to all ſtudents, cruſhes the
bowels ; and, for want of ſtirring the body, ſuffers the ſpirits
to lie dormant. Harvey on Conſumpions.
The blood of labouring people is more denſe and heavy
than of thoſe who live a jedntary life. Arbuthnot.
2. Torpid; inactive; ſluggiſh; motionleſs,
The ſedentary earth,
That better might with far leſs compaſs move,
Serv'd by more noble than herſelf, attains
Her end without leaſt motion. Milton.
*Till length of years
And ſedentary numbneſs, craze my limbs
To a contemptible old age obſcure. Miltºn's Agoniſes.
The ſoul, conſidered abſtraćtedly from its paſſions, is of a
remiſs ſedentary nature, ſlow in its reſolves, and languiſhing
in its executions. Addison's Speciator.
SEDGE. m. ſ. [rzcz, Saxon; whence, in the provinces, a
narrow flag is called a ſag or Jºg.] A growth of narrow
flags; a narrow flag.
Tº one layeth for turf and for ſºdge. Tuſer.
The current, that with gentle murmur glides,
Thou know'ſt, being ſtopp'd, impatiently doth rage;
But when his fair courſe is not hindered,
He makes ſweet muſick with th' enamel'd ſtones,
Giving a gentle kiſs to every ſedge
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage;
And ſo by many winding nooks he ſtrays,
With willing ſport, to the wild ocean. Shakeſpeare.
Adonis, painted by a running brook,
And Cytherea all in ſedges hid;
Which ſeem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the waving ſedges play with wind. Shakespeare.
In hotter countries a fly called lucciole, that ſhineth as the
glow-worm, is chiefly upon fens and marſhes; yet is not
ſeen but in the height of Summer, and ſedge or other green of
the fens give as good ſhade as buſhes. Bacon.
He hid himſelf in the ſedge; adjoining. Sandys.
My bonds I brake,
Fled from my guards, and in a muddy lake,
Amongſt the ſedges, all the night lay hid. Denham.
Niphates, with inverted urn, -
And drooping ſedge, ſhall his Armenia mourn. Dryden.
SE'DGY. adj. [from ſedge.] Overgrown with narrow flags.
On the gentle Severn's ſed; bank,
In ſingle oppoſition, hand to hand,
He did confound the beſt part of an hour,
In changing hardiment with great Glendower. Shakespeare H. IV.
Old father Thames rais’d up his reverend head,
But fear'd the fate of Simoeis would return:
Deep in his ooze he ſought his ſedgy bed,
And ſhrunk his waters back into his urn. Dryden.
Se'DIMENT. n.ſ.. [ſediment, French; ſedimentum, Lat.] That
which ſubſides or ſettles at the bottom.
The ſalt water riſes into a kind of ſcum on the top, and
partly goeth into a ſediment in the bottom, and ſo is rather a
ſeparation than an evaporation. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
It is not bare agitation, but the ſediment at the bottom, that
troubles and defiles the water. South's Sermons.
That matter ſunk not down 'till laſt of all, ſettling at the
ſurface of the ſediment, and covering all the reſt. If oodward.
SED1(TION. m. ſ. [ ſedition, Fr. ſeditio, Latin.] A tumult; an
inſurrection; a popular commotion; an uproar.
That ſunſhine brew’d a ſhow'r for him,
That waſh’d his father's fortunes forth of France,
And heap'd ſedition on his crown at home. Shakespeare H. VI.
In ſoothing them we nouriſh, gainſt our ſenate, -
The cockle of rebellion, inſolence, ſºdition. Shakespeare Cºriº'an.
SED1'tious. adj. [ſeditieux, Fr. ſeditiºus, Latin.J Factious
with tumult; turbulent. -
The cauſe, why I have brought this army hither,
Is to remove proud Somerſet from the king,
Seditiºus to his grace and to the ſtate. Shakeſp. H. VI.
Very many of the nobility in Edenborough, at that time,
French; ſedentario, Italian;
did not appear yet in this ſeditious behaviour. Clarendon,
Thou return'ſt …
From flight, ſeditious angel. Milton,
But if ſhe has deform'd this earthly life
With murd’rous rapine and ſeditious ſtrife,
In everlaſting darkneſs muſt ſhe lie;. -
Still more unhappy that ſhe cannot die. Priºr.
SED1, 1ously. adv. [from ſeditious.] Tumultuouſly; with
factious turbulence. - - -
SFDºriousness. n.ſ. (from ſeditiºus.] Turbulence; diſpoſi-
tion to ſedition. Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 330</div><p class="Text">S E D
|
|
|
To SEDUCE v. a. ſ. ſeduco, Latin; ſºlaire, French.] To
draw aſide from the right; to tempt; to corrupt; to deprave;
to miſlead; to deceive. -
'Tis meet -
That nobleminds keep ever with their likes;
For who ſo firm that cannot be ſºdac'd 2 Shafeſ. jul. Caſ
Me the gold of France did not ſeduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive,
The ſooner to effect what I intended.
A beauty-waining and diſtreſſed widow,
§ººd the pitch and height of all his thoughts
To baſe declenſion. Shakespeare R. III.
In the latter times ſome ſhall depart from the faith, giving
heed to ſºdicing ſpirits. 1 Tim. iv. 1.
I ſhall never gratify the ſpightfulneſs of a few with any
finiſter thoughts of all their allegiance, whom pious frauds
have ſeduced. Aing Charles.
Subtle he needs muſt be who could ſºdice
Angels.
Nor let falſe friends ſauce thy mind to fame,
By arrogating Johnſon's hoſtile name;
Let father Ficknoe fire thy mind with praiſe,
And uncle Ogleby thy envy raiſe. Dryden.
ŠEduce Mºst iſ [from ſºdice. Practice of ſeduction; art
or means uſed in order to ſeduce.
To ſeaſon them, and win them early to the love of virtue
and true labour, ere any flattering ſeducement or vain principle
ſeize them wandering, ſome eaſy and delightful book of edu-
cation ſhould be read to them. 41 lion on Education.
Her hero's dangers touch'd the pitying pow'r,
The nymph's ſeduce” ents, and the magick bow'r. Pope.
Szou'ce R. n ſ. [from ſeduce.] One who draws aſide from the
right; a tempter; a corrupter.
Grant it me, O king; otherwiſe a ſºducer flouriſ es, and a
poor maid is undone. Shakespeare.
There is a teaching by reſtraining ſºdicers, and ſo removing
the hindrances of knowledge. Szutº.
The ſoft ſºducer, with enticing looks,
The bellowing rivals to the fight provokes.
He whoſe firm faith no reaſon could remove,
Will melt before that ſoft ſeducer, love. Dryden.
Sf DU’clei. E. adj. [from ſeduce. J Corruptible ; capable of
being drawn aſide.
The vicious example of ages paſt poiſons the curioſity of
theſe preſent, affording a hint of ſin unto ſeducible ſpirits.
- Brºwn's /ulº. Erreurs.
We owe much of our errour to the power which our af-
feółions have over our ſo eaſy ſeducible underſtandings. Ganv.
SEDuctiox. m. ſ. [ ſedation, Fr. ſeducius, Latin.] The act
of ſeducing; the act of drawing aſide.
Whatſoever mens faith, patience, or perſeverance were,
any remarkable indulgence to this ſin, the ſeductiºn of Balaam,
were ſure to bring judgments. - Hammºnd.
To procure the miſeries of others in thoſe extremitics,
wherein we hold an hope to have no ſociety ourſ lyes, is a
ſtrain above Lucifer, and a project beyond the primary/educ-
tiºn of hell. tºwn's ſugar Érrour.
Whereby is evident the eaſy ſºlutiºn of men, neither in-
quiring into the verity of the ſubſtance, nor reſºrºing upon
repugnance of circumſtances. - Brown's {ug. 1. *r.
The deceiver ſoon found out this ſoft place of Adam's, and
innocency itſelf did not ſecure him from this way of ſº ſuc-
tion. Glanv Sºftſ.
Helen aſcribes her ſedućion to Venus, and mentions nothing
of Paris. - ... P. e.
A woman who is above flattery, and deſpiſes all praiſe, but
that which flows from the approbation of her own heart, is,
Clar/a.
ſpeaking, out of reach of ſedu°ion.
morally ſpeaking Latin. J Diligent aſſiduity; labo-
SEpu'lity. m. ſ. [/edulita, I. - |
Splication ; intenſeneſs of cndeavour.
riouſneſs; induſtry; ºf - * r *
Man oftentime: purſues, with great ſººty and earneſtneſs,
that which cannot ſtand him in **) ſtead for vital pur-
Hooker.
Shakesp. H. V.
Milton.
Drydºn.
"... age tº tº define prºfit, and tº º
and there will be the ſame yeau.ity and indefatigable
es into it. So th:
religion,
Latin.] Aſſiduous; induſtrious;
induſtry in mens enquiri
SEpULOUS. adj. [ſcº,
laborious; diligent; painful. - - -
Not clºus by nature to indite
s, hitherto the only arguincht - -
lº . y arg A Milton’s Paroºſ /g/?.
what ſignifies the ſound of words in prayer, without the
- ation of the proper
ºnion of the heart, and a ſºul” applic » rº
afte&amp;tion of the ally lead us to ſuch an end. L'Aſtrange.
may natur
º now bright amidſt her fellow ſtars,
Kind Amalthºa reach'd her teat, diſtent
with milk, thy early food: the ſºu aus bee -
Diſtill'd her honey on thy purple lips. Prior.
The bare majority of a few repreſntatives is often
procured by great indåſtry and application, wherein thoſe who
engage in the purſuits of malice are much more ſedu/us than
ſuch as would picvent them. Swift.
• SE'ou Lously. adv. [from ſºdulous.] Aſſiduouſly; induſtri-
ouſly; laboriouſly; diligently ; painfully.
The ritual, preceptive, prophetick, and all other parts of
ſacred writ, were moſt ſiduouſly, moſt religiouſly guarded by
them. Government ºf the Zongue.
All things by experience
Are moſt improv’d; then ſedulºuſ'; think
To meliorate thy ſtock, no way or rule
Be uneſſay’d. - - Pº.
SE'dulous N Ess. m.ſ.. [from ſºdaku.] Aſſiduity; aſiduouſ-
neſs; induſtry; diligence. -
SEE. m.ſ. [ ſcº, Latin.] The ſeat of epiſcopal power; the
dioceſs of a biſhop.
You, my lord archbiſhop, . .
Whoſe ſee is by a civil peace maintain'd,
Whoſe beard the ſilver hand of peace hath touch'd,
Whoſe learning and good letters peace hath tutor d,
Whoſe white inveſtments figure innocence,
The dove and every bleſſed ſpirit of peace;
Wherefore do you ſo ill tranſlate yourſelf
Out of the ſpeech of peace that bears ſuch grace,
Into the harſh and boiſt rous tongue of war; Saſſºſ, HIV.
It is a ſafe opinion for their ſes, empires, and kingdoms;
and for themſelves, if they e wiſe. Bacon.
The pope would uſe theſe treaſures, in caſe of any great
calamity that ſhould endanger the holy ſee. Addi, n.
Epiſcopal revenues were ſo low reduced, that three or four
ſees were often united to make a tolerable competency Swift.
To SEE. v. a. preter. A ſaw; part. Paſi, ſeen. [j'con, Saxon;
ſien, Dutch.]
1. To perceive by the eye.
Dear ſon Edgar,
Might I but live to ſee thee in my touch,
I'd ſay I had eyes again. Sºakſ. King Lear.
I was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was diſmayed at
the ſering of it. 1/ ×xi. 3.
I ſpeak that which I have ſeen with my father, and ye do
that which you have ſeen with yours. jo, viii. 38.
He'll lead the life of gods, and be
Pygods and heroes/een, and gods and heroes ſee. Drydºn.
It was a right anſwer of the phyſician to his patient, that
had fore eyes: If you have more pleaſure in the taſte of wine
than in the uſe of your fight, wine is good for you; but if
the pleaſure of ſeeing be greater to you than that of drinking,
Locke.
Pope.
wine is naught.
Iſe her ſober over a ſampler.
2. To obſerve; to find.
Seven other kine came up, lean fleſhed, ſuch as I neverſaw
for badneſs. Gen. xii. 19.
Such command we had,
Toſe that none thence iſſu'd forth a ſpy. Milton.
Give them firſt one ſimple idea, and ſee that they perfectly
comprehend it, before you go any farther. Locke.
The thunderbolt we ſee uſed by the greateſt poct of Auguſ-
tus's age, to expreſs irreſiſtible force in battle. Addison.
. To diſcover ; to deſcry.
Who is ſo groſs
As cannot ſee this palpable device
Yet who ſo hold but ſays he ſees it not
When ſuch ill dealings muſt be ſeen in thought. Sla'ſ care.
4. To converſe with. -
The main of them may be reduced to language, and to an
improvement in wiſdom and prudence by ſeeing men, and con-
verſing with people of different tempers and cuſtoms. Locke.
5. To attend; to remark.
I had a mind to ſee him out, and thcrefore did not care for
contradićting him. Addiſon's Free/clar.
To SF E. v. n.
1. To hºve the power of fight; to have by the eye perception
of things diſtant.
Who maketh the ſºng or the blind? have not I the Lord?
Ex. iv. I 1.
3
owls could not ſee in the night. Pºczn's Natural Hiſtory.
Could you ſee into my ſecret ſoul,
There you might read your own dominion doubled. Dryden,
2. To diſcern without deception.
Many ſagacious perſons will find us out, will look under our
maſk, and ſee through all our fine pretenſions, and diſcern the
abſurdity of telling the world that we believe one thing when
we do the contrary. 7ilºt on.
You may ſee into the ſpirit of them all, and form your pen
from thoſe general notions. Pelion,
3. To enquire; to diſtinguiſh.
Sº whether fear doth make thee wrong her. Shaº.
4. To be attentive.
Mark and perform it, ſº thou; for the ſail
Of any point in't ſhall be death. Shakespeare  car.
5. To ſcheme ; to contrive.
Caſio's a proper man: let meſe now;
To get his place. Sºear.'s Otºº.
SEE.
Air hath ſome ſecret degree of light; otherwiſe cats and<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 331</div><p class="Text">S E E
S E E
Se E. interještion. . [Originally the imperative of the verb ſee.]
Lo; look; obſerve; behold
Sze, ſet upon the banks of Boyne he ſtands, -
By his own view adjuſting his commands. Halifax,
S., f the ſole bliſs heav'n could on all beſtow,
which who but feels can taſte, but thinks can know? Pºe.
Sº, what it is to have a poet in your houſe. Pope.
SEED. m. ſ. [raeb, Saxon; ſeed, Daniſh; ſard, Dutch.]
1. The organiſed particle produced by plants and animals, from
which new plants and animals are generated.
If you can look into the ſeeds of time, .
And ſay which grain will grow and which will not,
Speak then to me. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Sºed of a year old is the beſt, though ſome ſeed and grains
laſt better than others. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
That every plant has its ſeed is an evident ſign of divine
providence. AMore.
Did they ever ſee any herbs, except thoſe of the graſs-
leaved tribe, come up without two ſeed leaves; which to me
is an argument that they came all of ſeed, there being no rea-
Ion elſewhy they ſhould produce two ſeed leaves different from
the ſubſequent. Ray.
Juſt gods ! all other things their like produce;
The vine ariſes from her mother's juice :
When feeble plants or tender flow'rs decay,
They to their ſeed their images convey. Prior.
In the ſouth part of Staffordſhire they go to the north for
ſeed corn. AMortimer.
2. Firſt principle; original.
The ſea of whatſoever perſed virtue groweth from us, is
a right opinion touching things divine. JH.oker.
3. Principle of production.
Praiſe of great acts he ſcatters as a ſeca,
Which may the like in coming ages breed. //aller.
4. Progeny; offspring; deſcendants.
Next him king Lear in happy peace long reign'd;
But had no iſſue male him to ſucceed,
But three fair daughters, which were well uptrain’d
In all that ſeemed fit for kingly ſeed. 1 airy Queen.
The thing doth touch
The main of all your ſtates, your blood, your ſeed. Daniel.
When God gave Canaan to Abraham, he thought fit to put
his ſeed into the grant too. Locke.
5. Race ; generation; birth.
Of mortal ſced they were not held,
Which other mortals ſo excel'd;
And beauty too in ſuch exceſs,
As your's, Zelinda! claims no leſs. J/aller.
To Seed. v. m. [from the noun..] To grow to perfect matu-
rity ſo as to ſhed the ſeed.
Whate'er I plant, like corn on barren earth,
By an equivocal birth,
Sced, and runs up to poetry. Swift.
They pick up all the old roots, except what they deſign for
ſeed, which they let ſtand to ſeed the next year. A1:rtimer.
Se'E DcAK E. m. ſ. [ſed and cake J A ſweet cake interſperſed
with warm aromatick feeds.
Remember, wife,
The ſeedcake, the paſtics, and furmenty pot. Tuſſºr.
SEEDLIP. }". A veſſel in which the ſower carries his
Seedlop. 9 feed. Ainſworth.
SE’ed pear 1... n.ſ. [ſeed and pearl.] Small grains of pearl.
In the diſſolution of ſeedpearl in ſome acid menſtruum, if a
good quantity of the little pearls be caſt in whole, they will be
carried in ſwarms from the bottom to the top. Poyle.
SE/E DPLot. n. ſ. [ſeed and plº J. The ground on which plants
are ſowed to be afterwards tranſplanted.
To counſel others, a man muſt be furniſhed with an uni-
verſal ſtore in himſelf to the knowledge of all nature: that is
the matter and ſeed, lot ; there are the ſeats of all argument and
invention. Ben johnſºn.
Humility is a ſºdºt of virtue, eſpecially, Chriſtian,
which thrives beſt when 'tis deep rooted in the humble
lowly heart. Hammond.
It will not be unuſeful to preſent a full narration of this re-
bellion, looking back to thoſe paſſages by which the feed lots
were made and framed, from whence thoſe miſchiefs have
ſucceſſively grown. Clarendon.
SEED r1M ... n.ſ. [ſeed and time. The ſeaſon of ſowing:
While the earth remaineth, ſeedtime and harveſt ſhall not
ceaſe. Gen. viii. 22.
If he would have two tributes in one year, he muſt give
them two ſeedtimes, and two harveſts. Bacon.
The firſt rain fell upon the ſeedtime about Oétober, and was
to make the ſeed to root; the latter was to fill the ear. Brown.
Their very ſeedtime was their harveſt, and by ſowing tares
they immediately reaped gold. Decay of Piety.
Day and night,
Seedtime and harveſt, heat and hoary froſt,
shall hold their courſe, ’till fire purge all things. Milton.
He that too curiouſly obſerves the face of the heavens, by
miſſing his ſeedtime, will loſe the hopes of his harveſt. Atterb,
SE’EDi ING: n.ſ.. [from ſeed.] A young plant juſt riſen from
the ſeed.
Carry into the ſhade ſuch ſedings or plants as are for their
choiceneſs reſerved in pots. Evelyn's Ka'anaar.
SE'EDN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſeed.] Seedtime; the time of ſowing.
Bloſſoming time
From the ſeedneſs the bare fallow brings
To teeming foyſon. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
SE'EDSMAN. n.ſ.. [ſeed and man.] The ſower; he that ſcat-
ters the ſeed.
The higher Nilus ſwells
The more it promiſes: as it ebbs, the ſeedſman
Upon the ſlime and ooze ſcatters his grain,
And ſhortly comes to harveſt. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleºpat.
SEF'DY. adj. [from ſeed.]. Abounding with ſeed.
SEE'ING.. n.ſ.. [from ſee..] Sight; viſion.
Love adds a precious ſeeing to the eye. Shakeſpeare.
See/ING. }". [vº que, French; from ſee. It would be
SEE'ING that. more grammatically written, as in French,
Jeen that, or provided that..] Since; fith; it being ſo that.
Why ſhould not they be as well vićtualled for ſo long time,
as the ſhips are uſually for a year, ſeeing it is eaſier to keep
vićtuals on land than water Speºſer on Ireland.
How ſhall they have any trial of his doctrine, learning,
and ability to preach, ſeeing that he may not publickly either
teach or exhort, becauſe he is not yet called to the mi-
niſtry? Whitgifte.
Seeing every nation affords not experience and tradition
enough for all kind of learning, therefore we are taught the
languages of thoſe people who have been moſt induſtrious af-
ter wiſdom. Milton on Educaſion.
Seeing they explained the phenomena of viſion, imagina-
tion, and thought, by certain thin fleeces of atoms that flow
from the ſurfaces of bodies, and by their ſubtlety penetrate
any obſtacle, and yet retain the exact lineaments of the ſeveral
bodies from which they proceed: in conſequence of this hy-
potheſis they maintained, that we could have no phantaſy of
anything, but what did really ſubſiſt either intire or in its
ſeveral parts. Bentley’s Sermons.
To SEEK. v. a. pret. I ſought; part, paſſ ſought. Irecan, Sax.
Joecken, Dutch..]
1. To look for; to ſearch for.
He did range the town to ſeek me out.
I have a venturous fairy, that ſhall ſeek
The ſquirrel's hoard, and fetch thee thence new nuts. Shał.
Becauſe of the money returned in our ſacks, are we brought
in, that he may ſeek occaſion againſt us, and take us for bond-
Shakeſpeare.
Inen. Gen. xliii. 18.
He ſeeketh unto him a cunning workman, to prepare a gra-
ven image. Iſ, xl. 20.
Seek thee a man which may go with thee. Tob. v. 3.
. The king meant not to ſeek out nor to decline fighting with
them, if they put themſelves in his way. Clarendon.
Sweet peace, where do'ſt thou dwell?
I humbly crave,
Let me once know ;
I ſºught thee in a ſecret cave,
And aſk'd if peace were there. Pierbert.
So fatal 'twas to ſeek temptations out!
Moſt confidence has ſtill moſt cauſe to doubt. Dryden.
We muſt ſeek out ſome other original of power for the go-
vernment of politicks than this of Adam, or elſe there will be
none at all in the world. Locke.
2. To ſolicit; to endeavour to gain.
Others tempting him, ſought of him a ſign. Lu. xi. 16.
The young lions roar after their prey, and ſeek their meat
from God. Pſ, civ. 21.
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
And not moleſt us, unleſs we ourſelves
See them with wandering thoughts. Milton,
Oft our alliance other lands deſir'd,
And what we ſeek of you, of us requir’d. Dryden.
3. To go to find.
Let us ſeck death, or, he not found, ſupply
His office. Milton.
Dardanus, though born
On Latian plains, yet ſought the Phrygian ſhore. Dryden.
Like fury ſeiz'd the reſt; the progreſs known,
All ſeek the mountains, and forſake the town. Dryden.
Since great Ulyſſºs ſºught the Phrygian plains,
Within theſe walls ing'orious ſilence reigns. Pope.
Indulge one labour more,
And ſeek Atrides on the Spartan ſhore. Pope,
4. To purſue by ſecret machinations.
I had a ſon, -
Now outlaw'd from my blood ; he ſºught my life. Shakeſ?:
David ſaw that Saul was come out to ſeek his life. I Sa. xxiii.
To SF EK. v. n.
1. To make ſearch; to make inquiry; to endeavour.
See: ye out of the book of the Lord, and read. Iſ xxxiv.
Why ſhould he mean me ill, or ſeek to harm Milton,
a 3 M Aſk
—<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 332</div><p class="Text">S E E
S E E
Aſk not what pains, nor further ſº to know
Their proceſs, of the forms of law below. Dryden.
I have been forced to relinquiſh that opinion, and have en-
deavoured to ſeek after ſome better reaſon. Addiſon's Spéſat.
2. To make purſuit.
Violent men have ſºught after my ſoul. P/. vi. 14.
If thy brother's ox or ſheep go ". it aſſº º:
until thy brother ſeek after it. Deut. xxii. 2.
3. To apply to; to uſe ſolicitation.
All the earth ſºught to Solomon, to hear his wiſdom. I K.
Unto his habitation ſhall ye ſeek, and thither thou ſhalt
come. Deutr. xii. 5.
4. To endeavour after.
Being a man of experience, he wiſhed by wiſdom to order
- that which the young prince ſºught for by war. Anoller.
To SEEK. [An adverbial mode of ſpeech..] At a loſs; without
meaſures, knowledge, or experience.
Being brought and transferred from other ſervices abroad,
though they be of good experience in thoſe, yet in theſe they
will be new to ſeek; and before they have gathered experience,
they ſhall buy it with great loſs to his majeſty. Spenſer.
Unpractis'd, unprepard, and ſtill to ſie!. 41itºn.
But they miſplace them all;
And are as much to ſeek in other things,
As he that only can deſign a tree,
Would be to draw a ſhipwreck. Roſcommon.
$EE'KER. m./ [from ſee?..] One that ſeeks; an inquirer.
Though I confeſs that in philoſophy I'm a ſeeker, yet can-
not believe that a ſceptick in philoſophy muſt be one in divi-
Glanv.
nity.
A language of a very witty volatile people, ſeekers after no-
velty, and abounding with variety of notions. Locke.
Sł Ekso R Row. n.ſ. [ſeek and ſorrow.] One who contrives to
give himſelf vexation.
Afield they go, where many lookers be,
And thou ſee'ſorrºw, Klaius, them among:
Indeed thou ſaidſt it was thy friend to ſee,
Strephon, whoſe abſence ſeem'd unto thee long. Sidney.
To SEEL. v. a [ſceller, to ſeal, French..] To cloſe the eyes.
A term of falconry, the eyes of a wild or haggard hawk
being for a time ſceled or cloſed.
Now ſhe brought them to ſee a ſeled dove, who the blinder
ſhe was, the higher ſhe ſtrave. Sidney.
As gentle hind, whoſe ſides with cruel ſteel
Through lanced, her bleeding life does rain;
While the ſad pang approaching ſhe does feel,
Brays out her lateſt breath, and up her eyes doth ſel. F. Q.
Mine eyes no more on vanity ſhall feed,
But ſeekdup with death ſhall have their deadly meed. F. Q.
Come, ſeeling night,
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day.
Some ambitious men ſeen as ſcreens to princes in matters of
danger and envy ; for no man will take ſuch parts, unleſs he
be like the ſeeſed dove, that mounts and mounts, becauſe he
Bacºn.
cannot ſee about him. -
Since, blinded with ambition, he did ſoar
Like aſceled dove, his crime ſhall be his puniſhment,
To be depriv'd of fight. Denham's Sophy.
To SE E L. v. n. [rylan, Saxon.] To lean on one ſide.
When a ſhip ſeſ, or rowls in foul weather, the breaking
looſe of ordnance is a thing very dangerous. Raleigh.
SEE'LY. adj. [from recl, lucky time, Saxon.]
1. Lucky; happy.
My ſely ſheep like well below,
For they been hale enough and trow,
And liken their abode. Spenſer.
2. Silly; fooliſh; ſimple. Speſſºr.
Peacock and turkie, that nibbles off top,
Tºſºr.
Are very ill neighbours to ſeely poor hop.
To SEEM. v. n. [ſembler, French; unleſs it has a Teutonick
original, as ſeemy certainly has.]
1. To appear; to make a ſhow ; to have ſemblance.
My lord, you've loſt a friend, indeed;
And I dare ſwcar, you borrow not that face
Of ſeeming ſorrow; it is ſure your own. Shakespeare , H. IV.
Speak: we will not truſt our eyes
Without our cars: thou art not what thou ſeem'/'. Shakespeare .
So ſpake th' Omnipotent; and with his words
All ſeem'd well pleas'd; all ſeem’d, but were not all. Miſion.
In holy nuptials ty'd ;
A ſeeming widow, and a ſecret bride. Dryden.
Obſerve the youth
Already ſeems to ſhuff the vital air.
2. To have the appearance of truth.
It ſeems to me, that the true reaſon why we have ſo few
** which are tolerable, is becauſe theré are ſo few who
have all the talents requiſite for tranſlation. Dryden.
3. In Shakespeare, "Jº", perhaps ſignifies to be beautiful.
If au iº º ſtands:
ght within that li º:
May fitly like your º ſubſtance
She's there, and ſhe is your's.
Dryden’s An.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
4. I; Sresis. A phraſe hard to be explained. It ſometimes
ſignifies that there is an appearance, though no reality; but
generally it is uſed ironically to condem the thing mentioned,
ike the Latin ſilict, or the old Engliſh ſo ſooth. Id mihi
datur negotii ſcilicet. This, it ſeems, 1, to te my tº/*.
The earth by theſe, 'tis ſaid,
This ſingle crop of men and women bred ;
Who, grown adult, ſo chance, it ſeems, enjoin'd,
Did male and female propagate. Bla. Knore's Creation.
5. It is ſometimes a ſlight affirmation.
A prince of Italy, it ſeems, entertained his miſtreſs upon a
great lake. Add/..n's Guardan.
The raven, urg'd by ſuch impertinence,
Grew paſſionate, it ſeems, and took offence. Addison.
He had been a chief magiſtrate; and had, it ſeems, exe-
cuted that high office juſtly and honourably. Alterlury.
It ſeems that when firſt I was diſcovered ſleeping on the
ground, the emperor had early notice. Gulliver.
. It appears to be.
Here's another diſcontented paper,
Found in his pocket too; and this, it ſeems, -
Rodorigo meant t' have ſent. Shakeſp Othello.
It ſeems the camel's hair is taken by painters for the ſkin
with the hair on. Brown's /u/ar Errours.
SEE'MER. n.ſ.. [from ſtem.] One that carries an appearance.
Angelo ſcarce confeſſes
That his blood flows, or that his appetite
Is more to bread than ſtone: hence ſhall we ſee,
If pow'r change purpoſe, what our ſeemers be. Shakeſ are,
SEE'M IN G. m. ſ. [from ſeem.]
1. Appearance; ſhow; ſemblance.
All good ſeeming,
By thy revolt, oh huſband, ſhall be thought
Put on for villainy. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Give him heedful note;
And, after, we will both our judgments join
In cenſure of his ſeeming. Shakespeare Ham't.
2. Fair appearance.
For you there's roſemary and rue; theſe keep
Seeming and favour all the Winter long. Shakeſpeare.
3. Opinion.
Nothing more clear unto their ſeeming, than that a new Je-
ruſalem, being often ſpoken of in Scripture, they undoubtedly
were themſelves that new Jeruſalem. H.oker.
His perſuaſive words impregn'd
With reaſon to her ſeeming. Milton.
SEE'M ING I. Y. adv. [from ſeeming.] In appearance; in ſhow ;
in ſenblance.
To this her mother's plot,
She, ſemingly obedient, likewiſe hath
Made promiſe to the doćtor. Shakespeare Merry J/ives of Windſ.
They to their viands fell, not ſeeming'y
The angels, nor in miſt. Milton.
I have touched upon them, though ſeemingly collateral to
my ſcope; and yet I think they are more than ſeemingly ſo,
ſince they pertinently illuſtrate my deſign. Glanv. Scepſ.
The city dame was ſo well bred, as ſeemingly to take all in
good part. L’AE/ºrange.
The king and haughty empreſs, to our wonder,
Dryden.
If not aton'd, yet ſeemingly at peace.
This the fatherſeemingly complied with; but afterwards re-
fuſing, the ſon was likewiſe ſet aſide. Addiſon's Freeholder.
»
They depend often on remote and ſeemingly diſproportioned
cauſes. Atterbury.
SF E'MING NEss. n.ſ.. [from ſeeming.] Plauſibility; fair ap-
pearance.
e other
The ſeemingneſ of thoſe reaſons perſuades us on the o
Digby.
fide. - -
See Mliness. n.ſ.. [from ſeemy..] Decency; handſomeneſs;
comelineſs; grace; beauty. - - -
when ſubſtantiaineſs combineth with delightfulneſs, ſeemli-
moſ, with portlineſs, and currentneſs with ſtayedneſs, how Carl
the language ſound other than full of ſweetneſs? Camden.
SEE/MLY. adj. [ſoommeiºt, Daniſh, from ſoone, Iſlandick,
honour or decency..] Decent; becoming; ProPer; fit.
Suſpence of judgment and exerciſe of charity were ſafer and
ſcºnſier for Chriſtian men, than the hot purſuit of theſe con-
Hocker.
troverſies. - -
I am a woman, lacking wit
make a ſemy anſwer to ſuch perſons. Shakespeare . H. VIII.
Tº: º and ſeem/g/? by her huſband ſtays. Milton,
May we enjoy . .
Our humid produćts, and with ſeemly draughts ----
Enkindle mirth and hoſpitable love. Philips.
SFE/M.I.Y. adv. [from the adjective..] In a decent manner; in
a proper manner. -
There, ſeemly rang'd in peaceful order, ſtood
Ulyſſes' arms, now long diſus’d to blood.
See N. adj. [from ſee..] Skilled; verſed.
Pétrichio ſhalſ offer me, diſguis'd in ſober robes,
To old Baptiſta as a ſchoolmaſter /2
Well ſeen in muſick. Shºar.
Noble
Pºpe.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 333</div><p class="Text">S E I
S E L
; :
ontº,
irº
:*
º,
º
Noble Boyle, not leſs in nature ſeen,
Than his great brother read in ſtates and men.
SE'ER. n.ſ.. [from ſee.]
1. One who ſees. f d
We are in hopes that you may prove a dreamer of dreams,
and a ſeer of viſions. Addiſon's Spectator.
2. A prophet; one who foreſees future events.
How ſoon hath thy prediction, ſeer blaſt!
Meaſur'd this tranſient world the race of time, --
*Till time ſtand fix'd : Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xii.
By day your frighted ſeers
Shall call for fountains to expreſs their tears,
And wiſh their eyes were floods: by night from dreams
Of opening gulphs, black ſtorms, and raging flames,
Starting amaz'd, ſhall to the people ſhow -
Emblems of heav'nly wrath and myſtick types of woe. Pri.
SEE’Rwood. n.ſ. See SE AR woop. Dry wood.
Caught, like dry ſtubble fir’d, or like ſearwood;
Yet from the wound enſu'd no purple flood,
Dryden.
Put look’d a bubbling maſs of frying blood. Dryden.
SEE's Aw. n.ſ.. [from ſaw.] A receprocating motion.
His wit all ſeſaw, between that and this;
Now high, now low, now maſter up, now miſs, }
And he himſelf one vile antitheſis. Pope.
To SEE's Aw. v. n. [from ſaw.] To move with a reciprocating
motion.
Sometimes they were like to pull John over, then it went
all of a ſudden again on John's ſide; ſo they went ſeeſawing
up and down, from one end of the room to the other. Arbut.
To o, ETH. v. a. preterite I ſad or ſeethed; part, paſſ ſadden.
revvan, Saxon; Joedºn, Dutch..] To boil; to decoct in hot
1: Quor.
º he Sºythians uſed to ſeeth the fleſh in the hide, and ſo do
the no ºn, in Irºth. Spenſer.
Go, ſack the ſubtile blood o' th' grape,
' ' ' the high ſever ſet your blood to froth,
And tº e hanging. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
* on the great pot, and ſeeth pottage for the ſons of the
pºets. 2 Kings iv.
To St ETH. v. m. To be in a ſtate of ebullition; to be hot.
The boiling baths at Cairbadon,
Which ſeeth with ſecret fire eternally,
And in their entrails, full of quick brimſton,
Nouriſh the flames, which they are warm'd upon. Fa. Qu.
I will make a complimental aſſault upon him; for my buſi-
meſs ſeths. Shakeſp. Troilus and Cre/ida.
Lovers and madmen have their ſeething brains,
Such ſhaping fantaſies, that apprehend
º
More than cool reaſon ever comprehends. Shakespeare eare.
The prieſt's ſervant came, while the fleſh was in ſeething,
with a fleſh-hook, and ſtuck it into the pan. 1 Sa. ii. 1 3.
SEE'THER m. ſ. [from ſeeth.]. A boiler; a pot.
The fire thus form'd, ſhe ſets the kettle on;
Like burniſh'd gold the little ſeether ſhone. Dryden.
SE/GM ENT. n.ſ. [ ſ gment, French ; ſegmentum, Lat..] A figure
contained between a chord and an arch of the circle, or ſo
much of the circle as is cut off by that chord.
Even unto a parallel ſphere, and ſuch as live under the poles
for half a year, ſome ſegments may appear at any time, and
under any quarter, the ſun not ſetting, but walking round.
Brown's /ulgar Errours.
Their ſegments or arcs, which appeared ſo numerous, for
the moſt part exceeded not the third part of a circle. Newton.
SE'GNITY.. n.ſ.. [from ſºgnis, Latin.] Sluggiſhneſs; ina&amp;ti-
vity. - Dićf.
To SE'GREGATE. v. a. [ſºrego, Latin; ſigrger, French.]
To ſet apart; to ſeparate from others.
SE GREGATION. n.ſ.. [ſegregation, Fr. from ſºrºgate.] Sepa-
ration from others.
What ſhall we hear of this
A ſegregation of the urkiſh fleet;
For do but ſtand upon the foaming ſhore,
The chiding billows ſeem to pelt the clouds. Shakespeare Othella.
SEIG NE URIA L. adj. [from ſeignior. J Inveſted with large
powers; independant.
Thoſe lands were ſigneurial. . . Temple.
SE/IGNIOR. m.ſ.. [from ſenior, Latin ; ſeigneur, Fr.] A lord.
The title of honour given by Italians.
SE'IGNio R Y. n.ſ.. [ſeigneurie, É. from ſeignior.] A lordſhip;
a territory. -
O'Neal never had any ſeigniory over that country, but what
by incroachment he got upon the Engliſh. Speºſer.
Were you not reſtor'd
To all the duke of Norfolk's ſeigniories 2 Shakeſp. H. IV.
Hoſea, in the perſon of God, ſayeth of the Jews, they have
reigned, but not by me; they have ſet a ſeigniory over them-
ſelves: which place proveth plainly, that there are govern-
ments which God doth not avow. Bacon.
William Marſhal, earl of Pembroke, being lord of all
Leinſter, had royal juriſdiction throughout that province, and
every one of his five ſons enjoyed that ſeigniory ſucceſſively.
Davies cn Ireland.
Se'io Nor A G F. m.ſ. [ ſºigneuriage, Fr. from ſºgnizr.] Autho-
rity; acknowledgment of power.
They brought work to the mint, and a part of the money
coined to the crown for ſeignorage. Docke.
To SE’, GN or is E. v. a. [from ſºign or..] To lord over.
As fair he was as Cytherea's make,
As proud as he that ſignoriſeth hell. Fairfax.
SEINE, n.ſ. [regne, Saxon; ſine, ſeane, ſºme, French..] A nºt
uſed in fiſhing.
They have cock-boats for paſſengers, and ſeine boats for
taking of pilchards. - Carow.
SE'INE.R. m. ſ. [from ſeine.] A fiſher with nets.
Seiners complain with open mouth, that theſe drovers work
much prejudice to the commonwealth of fiſhermen, and reap
ſmall gain to themſelves. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
To SEIZE. v. a. Iſaíſir, French.]
1. To take poſſeſſion of ; to graſp; to lay hold on ; to faſten on.
In her ſad breaſt the prince's fortunes rowl,
And hope and doubt alternate ſeize her ſoul. Pºpe.
2. To take forcible poſſeſſion of by law.
An eſcheator of London had arreſted a clothier that was
outlawed, and ſeized his goods. Camden.
It was judged by the higheſt kind of judgment, that he
ſhould be baniſhed, and his whole eſtate confiſcated and ſeized,
and his houſes pulled down. - Bacon.
3. To make poſſeſſed. -
So th’ one for wrong, the other ſtrives for right:
As when a griffin, ſeized of his prey,
A dragon fierce encount’reth in his flight,
Through wildeſt air making his idle way. Fa. Queen.
So Pluto, ſeiz'd of Proſerpine, convey'd
To hell's tremenduous gloom th’ affrighted maid,
There grimly ſmil'd, pleas'd with the beauteous prize,
Nor envy'd Jove his ſunſhine and his ſkies. Addison Cato.
To SF 1ze. v n. To fix the graſp or the power on anything.
Faireſt Cordelia,
Thee and thy virtues here I ſeize upon :
Be’t lawful I take up what's caſt away? Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Where there is a deſign of ſupplanting, that neceſſarily re-
quires another of accuſing: even Jezebel proječts not to ſeize
on Naboth's vineyard without a precedent charge. Dec. of Piety.
Se'iz IN. m. ſ. [ ſaſſine, French.]
1. [In law.] Is of two ſorts: ſeiſm in fact, and ſeiſin in law:
Seiſºn in fact, is when a corporal poſſeſſion is taken: ſeiſin in
law, is when ſomething is done which the law accounteth a
Jeſſin, as an inrolment. This is as much as a right to lands
and tenements, though the owner be by wrong diſſeized of
them. Cowel.
2. The aët of taking poſſeſſion.
Every indulged ſin gives Satan livery and ſeiſin of his heart,
and a power to diſpoſe of it as he pleaſes. Decay of Piety.
Seiſin is the ſame in the canon law as livery and ſeiſin at the
common law. Ayliffe's Parerson.
3. The things poſſeſſed.
Many recoveries were had as well by heirs as ſucceſſors of
the ſeizin of their predeceſſors. Hale.
SE'izur E. n.ſ.. [from ſeize.]
1. The act of ſeizing.
2. The thing ſeized.
Sufficient that thy pray'rs are heard, and death,
Then due by ſentence when thou did'ſt tranſgreſs,
Defeated of his ſeizure, many days
Giv'n thee of grace. - Milton's Paradiſ? Loft.
3. The ačt of taking forcible poſſeſſion.
Thy lands, and all things that thou do'ſt call thine,
Worth ſeizure, do we ſeize into our hands. Shakeſpeare.
In the general town he maintained a ſeizure, and poſſeſſion
of the whole. //otton.
Henry continued to burn proteſtants, after he had caſt off
the pope; and his ſeizure of eccleſiaſtical revenues cannot be
reckoned as a mark of the church's liberty. Swift.
4. Gripe; poſſeſſion.
And ſhall theſe hands, ſo lately purg'd of blood,
Unyoke this ſeizure, and this kind regrect? Shakeſpeare:
Make o'er thy honour by a deed of truſt,
And give me ſeizure of the mighty wealth. Dryden.
5. Catch.
Let there be no ſudden ſeizure of a lapſed ſyllable to play
upon it. J/atts.
SE'ícouth. ad;. [rels, rare, Sax, and couth, known.] Un-
common. Spenſer. The ſame with uncouth.
SE"LDOM. adv. [relban, rarely; reloon, more rarely; rel-
borº, moſt rarely. Selwan is ſuppoſed to be contracted from
reloan, or relb, rare, and praenne, when, Saxon. Selden,
Dutch ; ſiltan, German.] Rarely ; not often ; not fre-
uently. -
q Wän and youth are ſe'dom joined in one; and the ordi-
nary courſe of the world is more according to Job's obſerva-
tion, who giveth men advice to ſeek wiſdom amongſt the an-
cients, and in the length of days underſtanding. - Hooker.
There is true joy conveyed to the heart by preventing grace,
which pardoning grace ſeldom gives. Sºuth's º,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 334</div><p class="Text">S E L
S E L
where the flight of fancy is managed with good judgment,
the ſºmer it is ſeen it is the more valuable. Grew.
SELDoxiness. n.ſ. [from /**] . Uncommonneſs; infre-
º "...; . | Little uſed. +
egrees of well-doing there could
in º and oftenneſ, of º except º:
sºws. * [ſºlº and ſhown. j. Seldom exhibited to
Se//own flamins
P9 Pleſs among the popular thrones Shakeſp. Corial
To SELECT ... [...i.ajºr,.....
to others rejected. In preference
º... ." ſele?ed out of all the provinces, were greatly
* bºg now ſcarce eight thouſand ſtrong. Knoleſ.
The pious chief
A hundred youths from all his train ſºis. Dryden.
****** adj. [from the verb.) Nice, choſen; choice; cºlled
out on account of ſuperiour excellence.
To the nuptial bow'r
I led her, bluſhing like the morn: all heav'n,
And happy conſtellations, on that hour
Shed their ſºft influence. Milton's Parad. Loff.
Select from vulgar herds, with garlands gay,
A hundred bulls aſcend the ſacred way. Prior.
SELEction. m. ſ. Iſºkºia, Lat. from ſele?..] The act of
culling or chuāng; choice.
While we ſingle out ſeveral diſhes, and reječt others, the
ſºkºłion ſeems but arbitrary. Brown's /uſgar Errours.
SELE"cts Ess. n.ſ. (from ſelect.] The ſtate of being ſelect.
SELE'croR. m. / [from ſºcci J He who ſelects.
SELExoGRA'PHICAL. }% [ſilenographique, Fr. from ſelenogra-
SELENog RAPHick. § 1/y.j Belonging to ſelenography.
SELE'NoGRAPHY, n.ſ.. [ſelenºgraphie, Fr. G ºn and 7:222.]
A deſcription of the moon.
Hevelius, in his accurate ſelenography, or deſcription of the
moon, hath well tranſlated the known appellations of regions,
ſeas, and mountains, unto the parts of that luminary. Brown.
SELF. pronºun. plur. ſelves. [/lba, Gothick; ryly, rylya, Sax.
ſºſ, ſeve, Dutch..]
1. Its primary ſignification ſecms to be that of an adječtive:
very; particular; this above others; ſometimes, one's own.
Shoot another arrow that yef way
Which you did ſhoot the firſt. Shakespeare . March. of P'en.
The cruel miniſters, by ſºft and violent hands,
Took off her life. Shakespeare.
On theſe ſe/ hills the air is ſo thin, that it is not ſufficient
to bear up the body of a bird. Raleigh.
At that ſºf moment enters Palamon
The gate of Venus. Dryden.
2. It is united both to the perſonal pronouns, and to the neu-
tral pronoun it, and is always added when they are uſed reci-
procally, or return upon themſelves: as, 1 d d not hurt him,
he ſurt himſelf; the people his me, but I clap myſelf; thou / viſt
thyſelf, though the world corns thee.
Self is that conſcious thinking thing, which is ſenſible or con-
ſcious of pleaſure and pain, capable of happineſs and miſery,
and ſo is concerned for iteſ, as far as that conſciouſneſs ex-
tends. Locke.
. It is ſometimes uſed emphatically in the nominative caſe: as,
myſſ will decide it; I myſelf will come; him/ºff ſhall revenge
it. This uſe of ſeſ, thus compounded, without the pronoun
perſonal, is chiefly poetical.
4. Compounded with him, a pronoun ſubſtantive, ſºf is in ap-
pearance an adjective: joined to my, thy, otºr, your, pronoun
adjectives, it ſeems a ſubſtantive. Even when compounded
with him it is at laſt found to be a ſubſtantive, by its variation
in the plural, contrary to the nature of Engliſh adjectives, as
him/º/, temſelves. -
5. Ayeſ, him/ºff, themſelves, and the reſt, may, contrary to
the analogy of my, him, them, be uſed as nominatives.
6. It often adds only emphaſis and force to the pronoun with
which it is compounded.
Next to the knowledge of God, this knowledge of our
fºlves ſeems moſt worthy of our endeavour. Hale.
The fondneſs we have for ſelf, and the relation which other
things have to our ſºlves, furniſhes another long rank of pre-
judices. - - // atts.
7. It ſignifies the individual, as ſubjećt to his own contem-
plation or action.
The ſpark of noble courage now awake,
And ſtrive your excellent ſelf to excel. Fairy Queen.
Since conſciouſneſs always accompanies thinking, and it is
that that makes every one to be what he calls ſelf, and thereby
diſtinguiſhes himſelf from all other thinking things; in this
alone conſiſts perſonal identity, i.e. the ſameneſs of a rational
º Alocke.
** º conſciouſneſs it has of its preſent thoughts and
ſelf, a'a. * Hºſſ to itſelf now, and ſo will be the ſame
8 Or to Come. ame conſciouſneſs can extend to º, º:
w - - ºtArt.
. It is º *" in compoſition, which it is proper to explain
by a train of examples. It is to be obſerved, that its compo"
ſition in Shakeſpeare is often harſh.
Thºm held ſhe her tongue, and caſt down a ſºfaçcuſing
look, finding that in her ſelf ſhe had ſhot out of the bow of
her affaion a more quick opening of her mind, thºn ſhe
minded to have done. Sidney.
Alas! while we are wrapt in foggy miſt
Of our ſelf-love, ſo paſſions do deceive, -
we thiſ k they hurt when moſt they do affiſt. Sidney,
*Till Strephon's plaining voice him nearer drew, ...
where by his words his ſeſ-like caſe he knew, Sidhy.
Ah! where was firſt that cruel cunning found,
To frame of earth a veſſel of the mind,
Where it ſhould be to ſelf-deſtruction bound? Sidney.
Before the door ſat ſe/-conſuming care,
Day and night keeping wary watch and ward. Fa Qºzen.
My ſtrange and ſelf-abuſe,
Is the initiate fear that wants hard uſe. Shakespeare . A/acbeth.
I have heard ſo much,
And with Demetrius thought tº have ſpoke thereof;
But being over-full of ſelf-affairs, -
My mind did loſe it. Shakeſp. Midſum. Night's Dream.
Nor know I aught
By me that's ſaid or done amiſs this night,
Unleſs ſºft-charity be ſometimes a vice,
And to defend ourſelves it be a ſin,
When violence aſſails us. . Shakeſpeare's Othell.
He walks, and that ſelf-chain about his neck,
Which he forſwore. Shake?eare,
It is in my power, in one ſºft-born hour,
To plant and o'erwhelm cuſtom. Shakºp. J/inter's Talk.
His treaſons will ſit bluſhing in his face,
Not able to endure the fight of day,
But ſºft-affrighted tremble at his fin. Shakespeare Rich. II.
The ſtars above us govern our conditions;
Elſe one ſef mate and mate could not beget
Such different iſſues.
I'm made of that ſºft metal as my ſiſter,
And prize me at her worth. Shakespeare King lear.
In my ſchool-days, when I had loſt one ſhaft,
I ſhot his fellow of the ſºf-ſame flight
The ſºft ſame way, with more adviſed watch,
To find the other forth.
He may do ſome good on her: -
A peeviſh ſºft will'd harlotry it is... Shakespeare. Romeo and julict.
But left myſelf be guilty of // wrong,
I'll ſtop mine ears againſt the mermaid's ſong. Slakſtart.
He conjunct and flatt’ring his diſpleaſure,
Tript me behind: being down, inſulted, rail'd,
Shakeſpeare.
Shałºżeare,
Got praiſes of the king,
For him attempting who was ſºft-ſubdu'd. Shakeſpeare.
The Everlifting fixt
Shakespeare Hamlet.
His canon gainſt ſºft-ſlaughter.
Know if his laſt purpoſe hold,
Or whether ſince he is advis'd by aught
To change the courſe He's full of alteration, ...
And ſelf-reproving. Sºakſ. King Lear.
More or leſs to others paying,
Than by ſºft-offences weighing;
Shame to him whoſe cruel ſtriking,
Kills for faults of his own liking ! Shakeſpeare.
Bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
Confronted him with ſelf-capariſons,
Point againſt point rebellious, arm 'gainſt arm,
Curbing his Javiſh ſpirit. ſo vile aſ Shaft. Macbeth.
Self-love, my liege, is not ſo vile a ſin
Aº &amp; Shakesp. H.nry V.
Anger is like -
A full hot horſe, who, being allow'd his way, n
Self-mettle tires him. Shakeſpeare.
His lords deſire him to have borne
His bruiſed helmet and his bended ſword
Before him through the city; he forbids it,
Being free from vainneſs and ſºft-g
You pººl, ineſ
To lay aſide ///-harming heavincts, -
And ...(..." diſpoſition. - Shaiſ Riſ. III.
In their anger they ſlew a man, and in their ſºft-will they
digged down a wall. - - - - - Gen. xlix. $.
I he moſt ordinary cauſe of a ſingle life 1S liberty, eſpecially
in certain /º/*p eaſing and humorous minds, which are ſo ſen-
ſible of every reſtraint as to think their girdles and garters to
Bacon.
be bonds and ſhackles. - - - -
Haſt thou ſet up nothing in competition with God; º
pride, pleaſure, profit, /ºff-love, or ſelf-intereſt of thy }.a.
Up through the ſpacious palace paſſed ſhe,
To where the king's proudly repoſed head,
If any can be ſoft to tyranny,
And ſºft to menting fin, had a ſoft bed. Crºſław.
With
orious pride. Skałęż,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 335</div><p class="Text">S E L
S E L
ſtroys the force of all religion.
with a joyful willingneſs theſe ſºloving reformers took
of ºil vacant preferments, and with reluctance 9thers
on
rº their beloved colleges and ſubſiſtence. Walton.
Repent the ſin; but if the puniſhment -
Thou can'ſ avoid, ſelf-preſervation bids. Milton.
Him faſt ſleeping ſoon he found,
In labyrinth of many a round ſelf-roll’d. Milton.
ð. times nothing profits more
an ſelf-eſteem, grounded on juſt and right,
ºr w "ºperaſ, Lyſ.
Self-knowing, and from thence -
Magnanimous, to correſpond with heav'n, Milton,
So virtue giv'n for loſt,
Depreſt and overthrown, as ſeem’d,
Like that ſelf-begotten bird,
In th’Arabian woods emboſt,
That no ſecond knows nor third,
And lay ere while a holocauſt,
From out her aſhy womb now teem'd. Milton's Agoniſł.
He ſorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
My motions in him: longer than they move,
His heart I know how variable and vain,
Self-left. Milton.
Seneca approves this ſelf-homicide. Hakewill.
Thyſelf from flatt'ring ſelf-conceit defend,
Nor what thou do'ſt not know, to know pretend. Denham.
Man's that ſavage beaſt, whoſe mind,
From reaſon to ſelf-love declin'd,
Delights to prey upon his kind.
Farewel, my tears;
And my juſt anger be no more confin'd
To vain complaints, or ſelf-devouring filence.
Penham. }
Denham.
They are yet more mad to think that men may go to reſt
by death, though they die in ſelf-murder, the greateſt ſin.
Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
Are not theſe ſtrange ſelf-deluſions, and yet atteſted by
common experience? - South's Sermons.
If the image of God is only ſovereignty, certainly we have
been hitherto much miſtaken, and hereafter are to beware of
making ourſelves unlike God, by too much ſelf-denial and
humility. South's Sermons.
If a man would have a devout, humble, ſin-abhorring, ſelf-
denying frame of ſpirit, he cannot take a more efficacious
courſe to attain it than by praying himſelf into it. South.
Let a man apply himſelf to the difficult work of ſelf-exa-
mination by a ſtrićt ſcrutiny into the whole eſtate of his
ſoul. South's Sermons.
A fatal ſºft impoſture, ſuch as defeats the deſign, and de-
South's Sermont.
When he intends to bereave the world of an illuſtrious
perſon, he may caſt him upon a bold ſelf-opinioned phyſician,
worſe than his diſtemper, who ſhall make a ſhift to cure him
into his grave. South's Sermons.
Neglect of friends can never be proved rational, 'till we
prove the perſon uſing it omnipotent and ſelf-ſufficient, and
ſuch as can never need any mortal aſſiſtance. South.
By all human laws, as well as divine, ſelf-murder has ever
been agreed on as the greateſt crime. Temple.
A ſelf-conceited fop will ſwallow anything. L'Eſtrange.
From Atreus though your ancient lineage came;
Yet my ſelf-conſcious worth, your high renown,
Your virtue, through the neighb'ring nations blown. Dryd.
He has given you all the commendation which his ſelf-
ſufficiency could afford to any. Dryden.
Below yon ſphere
There hangs the ball of earth and water mixt,
Self-center'd and unmov’d. Dryden's State of Innocence.
All theſe receive their birth from other things,
But from himſelf the phoenix only ſprings;
Self-born, begotten by the parent flame
In which he burn'd, another and the ſame.
The burning fire that ſhone ſo bright,
Flew off all ſudden with extinguiſh'd light,
And left one altar dark, a little ſpace ;
Which turn'd ſelf-kindled, and renew'd the blaze. Dryden.
Thou firſt, O king ! releaſe the rights of ſway;
Pow'r, ſºft-reſtrain'd, the people beſt obey. Dryden.
Eighteen and nineteen are equal to thirty-ſeven, by the ſame
fºſſ-evidence that one and two are equal to three. Locke.
A contradićtion of what has been ſaid, is a mark of yet
greater pride and ſelf-conceitedneſs, when we take upon us to
Dryden.
ſet another right in his ſtory. Locke. .
I am as juſtly accountable for any action done many years
ſince, appropriated to me now by this ſelf-conſciouſneſs, as I
am for what I did the laſt moment. Locke.
Each intermediate idea agreeing on each ſide with thoſe two,
it is immediately placed between: the ideas of men and ſelf-
determination appear to be connected. Locke. ,
This ſelf-exiſtent being hath the power of perfeótion, as
well as of exiſtence in himſelf; for he that is above, or exiſt-
eth without, any cauſe, that is, hath the power of exiſtence
in himſelf, cannot be without the power of any poſſible exiſt-
ence. Grew's Coſºn. Sacr.
Body cannot be ſelf-exiſtent, becauſe it is not ſelf-movent ;
for motion is not of the eſſence of body, becauſe we may
have a definitive conception of body, abſtraćted from that of
motion: wherefore motion is ſomething elſe beſides body, and
ſomething without which a body may be conceived to exiſt.
Grew's Coſmol. Sac.
Confidence, as oppoſed to modeſty, and diſtinguiſhed from
decent aſſurance, proceeds from ſelf-opinion, occaſioned by
ignorance or flattery. - Collier of Confidence.
Bewilder'd I, my author cannot find,
*Till ſome firſt cauſe, ſome ſelf-exiſtent mind, }
Who form'd, and rules all nature, is aſſign'd. Blackm,
If a firſt body may to any place
Be not determin'd in the boundleſs ſpace,
'Tis plain it then may abſent be from all,
Who then will this a ſelf exiſtence call?
Shall nature, erring from her firſt command,
Self-preſervation fall by her own hand Granville.
Low nonſenſe is the talent of a cold phlegmatick temper:
a writer of this complexion gropes his way ſoftly amongſt
/elf-contradićtion, and grovels in abſurdities. Addiſon.
This fatal hypocriſy and ſºf-deceit is taken notice of in
theſe words, Who can underſtand his errours? Cleanſe thou
me from ſecret faults, Addiſon's Spediator.
The guilt of perjury is ſo ſelf-evident, that it was always
Blackmore.
, reckoned amongſt the greateſt crimes, by thoſe who were
only governed by the light of reaſon. Addiſon.
Self-ſufficiency proceeds from inexperience. Addiſon.
Men had better own their ignorance than advance doćtrines
which are ſlf-contradićtory. Spectator.
Light, which of all bodies is neareſt allied to ſpirit, is alſo
moſt diffuſive and ſelf-communicative. Norris.
Thus we ſee in bodies, the more of kin they are to ſpirit in
ſubtilty and refinement, the more ſpreading are they and ſelf-
diffuſive. orriſ.
God, who is an abſolute ſpiritual ačt, and who is ſuch a
pure light as in which there is no darkneſs, muſt needs be in-
finitely ſelf-imparting and communicative. Norris.
very animal is conſcious of ſome individual, ſelf-moving,
Jef-determining principle. Pope and Arbuthn. Mart. Scrib.
Nick does not pretend to be a gentleman: he is a tradeſ-
man, a ſelf-ſeeking wretch. Arbuthn. John Bull.
By the blaſt of ſelf-opinion mov’d,
We wiſh to charm, and ſeek to be belov’d. Prior.
Living and underſtanding ſubſtances do moſt clearly
demonſtrate to philoſophical inquirers the neceſſary ſelf-
exiſtence, power, wiſdom, and beneficence of their maker.
Bentley's Sermons.
If it can intrinſically ſtir itſelf, and either commence or
alter its courſe, it muſt have a principle of ſelf-aētivity, which
is life and ſenſe. Bentley's Sermons.
This deſire of exiſtence is a natural affection of the ſoul;
'tis ſelf-preſervation in the higheſt and trueſt meaning. Bentley.
The philoſophers, and even the Epicureans, maintained the
ſelf-ſufficiency of the Godhead, and ſeldom or never ſacrificed
at all. Bentley's Sermons.
Matter is not endued with ſelf-motion, nor with a power to
alter the courſe in which it is put: it is merely paſſive, and
muſt ever continue in that ſtate it is ſettled in. Cheyne.
I took not arms, ’till urg’d by ſelf-defence,
The eldeſt law of nature. Rowe's Ambit. Stepmother.
His labour and ſtudy would have ſhewn his early miſtakes,
and cured him of ſelf-flattering deluſions. Watts.
This is not to be done in a raſh and ſelf-ſufficient manner;
but with an humble dependance on divine grace, while we
walk among ſnares. //atts.
The religion of Jeſus, with all its ſelf-denials, virtues, and
devotions, is very pračticable. J/atts.
I heard in Crete, this iſland's name;
For 'twas in Crete, my native ſoil, I came
Self-baniſh'd thence. Pope's Odyſſey.
Achilles's courage is furious and untračtable; that of Ajax
is heavy and ſºf-confiding. Pope.
I doom, to fix the gallant ſhip,
A mark of vengeance on the ſable deep ; .
To warn the thoughtleſs ſelf-confiding train,
No more unlicens’d thus to brave the main. Pope.
What is looſe love? a tranſient guſt,
A vapour fed from wild deſire,
A wand'ring ſelf-conſuming fire. - Pºpe.
In dubious thought the king awaits,
And ſelf-conſidering, as he ſtands, debates. Pope,
- y mighty Jove's command,
Unwilling have I trod this pleaſingland;
For whoſiſ-mov’d with weary wing would ſweep
Such length of ocean : Pope.
23. N They<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 336</div><p class="Text">S E M
S E M
They who reach Parnaſſus' lofty crown,
Employ their pains to ſpurn ſome others down;
And while ſelf-love each jealous writer rules,
Contending wits become the ſport of fools. Pºpe.
It may be thought that Ulyſſes here is too oſtentatious, and
that he dwells more than modeſty allows upon his own accom-
pliſhments; but ſelf-praiſe is ſometimes no fault. Broome.
No wonder ſuch a ſpirit, in ſuch a ſituation, is provoked
beyond the regards of religion or ſelf-convićtion. Swift.
Selfhe AL. m.J. [brunella, Latin.j A plant. The ſame with
SAnicle, which ſee.
Sºsh. adj. [from ſelf.] Attentive only to one's own inte-
reſt; void of regard for others. -
What could the moſt aſpiring ſelfiſh man defire more, were
he to form the notion of a being to whom he would recom-
mend himſelf, than ſuch a knowledge as can diſcover the leaſt
*PPearance of perfection, and ſuch a goodneſs as will propor-
tion a reward to it? Addiſon's Spectator.
Paſſions, though ſelfiſh, if their means be fair,
Liſt under reaſon, and deſerve her care;
Thoſe that imparted court a nobler aim,
Exalt their kind, and take ſome virtue's name. Pope.
Se'lfish Ness. m. ſ. [from ſelf/h.] Attention to his own in-
tereſt, without any regard to others; ſelf-love. -
his ſublimer love, being, by an intimate conjunétion with
its object, throughly refined from all baſe droſs of ſelfiſhneſ;
and intereſt, nobly begets a perfect ſubmiſſion of our wills to
the will of God. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
Sºlfish LY, adv. [from ſelf/h.] With regard only to his own
intereſt; without love of others.
He can your merit ſelfiſhly approve,
And ſhew the ſenſe of it without the love. Pope.
Se'l FSAME. adj. [ſeſ and ſame.] Numerically the ſame."
I have no great cauſe to look for other than the ſelf-ſame
portion and lot, which your manner hath been hitherto to lay
on them that concur not in opinion with you. Hooker, Prºf.
Flight purſu'd one way the Jeſ-ſame hour. Milton.
- I have been baſe, -
Baſe ev'n to him from whom I did receive
All that a ſon could to a parent give:
Behold me puniſh'd in the ſelf-ſame kind;
Th'ungrateful does a more ungrateful find. Dryden.
SE'lion, n.ſ.. [ſelio, low Latin.] A ridge of land. Ain w.
Sell, fronoun. [for ſelf.] Sell is retained in Scotland for ſelf,
and ſells in the plural for ſelves. -
They turn round like grindle-ſtones,
Which they dig out fro’ the dells,
For their bairns bread, wives and ſells. Ben. johnſºn,
Sell. n.ſ.. [ſelle, French; ſella, Latin.] A ſaddle.
Turning to that place, in which
He left his lofty ſteed with golden ſells,
And goodly gorgeous barbes, him found not there. F. Qu.
To SELL. v. a. [ryllan, Saxon ; ſeſa, Iſlandick.] To give
for a price; the word correlative to buy; to vend. -
The Midianites ſºld him unto Egypt, unto Potiphar. Gen.
Let us ſell him to the Iſhmaelites. Gen. xxxvii. 27.
The firſt tenth part I gave to the ſons of Aaron, and another
I ſold away. Tob. i. 7.
All the inns and publick houſes are obliged to furniſh them-
ſelves with corn, which is ſold out at a much deater rate than
'tis bought up. Addison on Italy.
You have made an order that ale ſhould be ſºld for three
half-pence a quart. Swift,
To Seil. v. n. To have commerce or traffick with one.
I will buy with you, ſell with you; but I will not eat with
*Ou, Shakeſp. Merchant ºf ſenice.
Conſult not with a buyer of ſelling. Eccluſ, xxxvii. I 1.
Se'll ANDER. n.ſ. A dry ſcab in a horſe's hough, or paſ-
tern. Ainſworth.
SE/LLER. n.ſ.. [from ſell.] The perſon that ſells; vender.
To things of ſale a ſeller's praiſe belongs. Shakeſpeare.
The name of the agent, of the ſeller, notary, and wit-
neſſes, are in both inſtruments. Addison on Italy.
Seylvage. n.ſ. [Of this word I know not the etymology.
Stinner thinks ſºlvage is ſaid, as ſavage, from its ſaving the
cloath.] The edge of cloath where it is cloſed by compli-
cating the threads. -
Mike loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from
the ſelvage in the coupling. Ex. xxvi. 4.
SElvís. The plural of ſelf.
Conſciouſneſs being interrupted, and we loſing fight of
our paſt ſºlves, doubts are raiſed whether we are the ſame. Locke.
SEMBLABLE adj. [ſemblable, French..] Like; reſembling.
Then be abhorr'd
All feaſis, ſocieties, and throngs of men!
His ſemblable, yea himſelf, Timon diſdains. Shakespeare .
With ſemblable reaſon we might expect a regularity in the
winds. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
SEM blably, adv. [from ſenllable.] With reſemblance.
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt;
Sºmtially furniſh'd like the king himſelf. Shakespeare . H. IV.
SE'Mallance. n.ſ.. [ſemblance, Fr. from ſºantl
1. Likeneſs; reſemblance; ſimilitude; repreſentation.
Solicit Henry with her wond rous praiſe;
Bethink thee on her virtues, that ſurmount
Her natural graces, that extinguiſh art:
Repeat their ſemblance often. Shakespeare eare,
She's but the ſign and ſenblance of her honour:
Behold how like a maid ſhe bluſhes here!
O, what authority and ſhew of truth
Can cunning fin cover itſelf withal'
He with high words, that bore
Semblance of worth, not ſubſtance, gently rais'd
Their fainting courage, and diſpell'd their fears. . Milton.
This laſt effort brought forth the opinion, that theſe bodies
are not what they ſeem to be; that they are no ſhells, but
mere ſportings of active nature, and only ſemblante, or imita-
tions of ſhells. - //oadway d.
It is not his meaning that we put on the outward face and
ſemblance of virtue, only to conceal and diſguiſe our vice. Rºg.
2. Appearance; ſhow; figure.
Be you the ſoldier; for you likeſt are,
For manly ſemblance and for ſkill in war--&gt;
Their ſemblance kind, and mild their geſtures were,
Peace in their hands, and friendſhip in their face. Fairfax.
All that fair and good in thy divine -
Semblance, and in thy beauty's heav'nly ray,
United I beheld. Aſit. Par. Itſ.
SEMBLANT. ad. [ſemblant, French..] Like; reſembling;
having the apperance of anything. Little uſed.
In deſpite of age, of impious flame,
And eating time, thy picture, like thy fame,
Entire may laſt; that as their eyes ſurvey
The ſemblant ſhade, men yet unborn may ſay,
Thus great, thus gracious lock'd Britannia's queen;
Her brow thus ſmooth, her look was thus ſerene. Prior.
SE/M Blant. n.ſ. Show; figure; reſemblance; repreſenta-
tion. Not in uſe. -
Her purpoſe was not ſuch as ſhe did ſeign,
Ne yet her perſon ſuch as it was ſeen; -
But under ſimple ſhew, and ſemblant plain,
Lurks falſe Dueſſä, ſecretly unſeen. Fairy Queen.
Full lively is the ſemblant, tho' the ſubſtance dead. Spºnſ.
Se’Malative. adj. [from ſemtlant..] Suitable; accommodate;
fit; reſembling.
Diana's lip
Is not more ſmooth and ruby ; thy ſmall pipe
Is as the maiden's organ, ſhrill and ſound;
And all is ſºmlative a woman's part. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
To SE'Mble. v. n. [ſembler, French..] To repreſent; to make
a likeneſs. Little uſed.
Let Europe, ſav'd, the column high ereº,
Than Trajan's higher, or than Antonine's,
Where ſem/ling art may carve the fair effect,
And full atchievement of thy great deſigns. Priºr.
SEMI. m. ſ. [Latin.] A word which, uſed in compoſition,
ſignifies half: as ſemicircle, half a circle.
SE'M1AN NULAR. adj. [ſemi and annulu, a ring.] Half round.
Another boar tuſk, ſomewhat ſlenderer, and of a ſemian-
nular figure. Grew's Mºſzun.
SE/MIBREF. m. ſ. [ ſemièreve, French J
Semitref is a note in muſick relating to time, and is the laſt
in augmentation. It is commonly called the maſter-note, or
meaſure-note, or time-note, as being of a certain determinate
meaſure or length of time by itſelf; and all the other notes of
augmentation and diminution are adjuſted to its value. Harris.
He takes my hand, and as a ſtill which flays
A ſemibreſ, 'twixt each drop, he niggardly,
As loth to enrich me, ſo tells many a lye. Dznre.
SEM ic's cle. n /.. [ſºmicircºſus, Lat. ſeri and circle.] A half
round; part of a circle divided by the diameter.
Black brows
Become ſome women beſt, ſo they be in a ſmicircle,
Or a half-moon, made with a pen. Shakespeare .
Has he given the lye
In circle, or oblique, or ſemicircle,
Or dire&amp;t parallel? Shºre.
The chains that held my left leg gave me the liberty of
S walking backwards and forwards in a ſemicircle. Swift.
Sº, }a}. [ſemi and circular.] Half round.
. The firm fixure of thy foot would give an excellent mo-
tion to thy gait, in a ſemicircled farthingle. Shafº feare.
The rainbow is cauſed by the rays of the ſun falling upon a
rorid and oppoſite cloud, whereof ſome reflected, others re-
fracted, beget the ſemicircular variety we call the rainbow.
Brºwn's Pulgar Eircºrs.
The ſeas are incloſed between the two ſmicircular moles
that ſurround it. Addiſon ºn Italy.
SEMico’ion. n ſ [ſºmi and x3xº.) Half a colon; a poiá:
made thus [;] to note a greater pauſe than that of a comina.
3
Shakeſpeare.
Stenºr.
SEx:IRIA's: Ersk.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 337</div><p class="Text">S E M
mix-
tº .
º,
SF MIDIA'M ETER. m. ſ. ſ ſemi and diameter 1 Half the line
which, drawn through the centre of a circle, divides it into
two equal parts; a ſtreight line drawn from the circumference
to the center of a circle. - -
Their difference is as little conſiderable as a ſemidiameter of
the earth in two meaſures of the higheſt heaven, the one
taken from the ſurface of the earth, the other from its centre:
the diſproportion is juſt nothing. - - More.
The force of this inſtrument conſiſts in the diſproportion
of diſtance betwixt the ſemid ameter of the cylinder and the
ſmidiameter of the rundle with the ſpokes. Wiſłins.
S; MIDI AP HANE'. TY. m. ſ. [ ſemi and diaphaneity. ] Half
tranſparency; imperfect tranſparency.
The tranſparency or ſemidiaphaneity of the ſuperficial cor-
puſcles of bigger bodies may have an intereſt in the produc-
tion of their colours. Boyle on Colours.
SEA DIA'PHANous, adj [ſemi and diaphanous.] Half tranſ-
parent; imperfectly tranſparent.
Another plate, finely variegated with a ſemidiațhanows grey
or ſky, yellow and brown. //codward on Foſſils.
SE'MIDou B.L.E. n.ſ.. [ſemi and double.] In the Romiſh bre-
viary, ſuch offices and feaſts as are celebrated with leſs ſolem-
nity than the double ones, but yet with more than the ſingle
Oil C.S. Bailey.
SEM | Flo'sculous. adj. [ſemi and fºſculus, Latin.] Having
a ſemifloret. Bailey.
SE'Mi Flo R.E.T. n.ſ. [ ſemi and floret. J. Among floriſts, an
half flouriſh, which is tubulous at the beginning like a floret,
and afterwards expanded in the form of a tongue. Bailey.
SEMIFLU'ID. adj. [ſemi and fluid..] Imperfectly fluid.
Phlegm, or petuite, is a ſort of ſemiftuid, it being ſo far
ſolid that one part draws along ſeveral other parts adhering to
it, which doth not happen in a perfect fluid, and yet no part
will draw the whole maſs, as happens in a perfect ſolid Arb.
SEM ILU'N A R. }*. [ſemilunaire, Fr. ſemi and luna, Latin.]
SEMILU'NARY. § Reſembling in form a half moon.
The eyes are guarded with a ſemilunar ridge. Grew.
SE'MIM ETA L. m. ſ. [ſemi and metal.] Half metal; imperfect
metal. -
Semimetals are metallick foſſils, heavy, opake, of a bright
glittering ſurface, and not malleable under the hammer; ſuch
as quickſilver, antimony, cobalt, with the arſenicks, biſmuth,
zink, with its ore calamine: to theſe may be added the ſemi-
metallick recrements, ſuch as tutty and pampholyx. Płill.
SE MINA'LITY. m. / [from ſºmen, Latin.]
1. The nature of ſeed.
As though there were a ſeminality in urine, or that, like the
ſeed, it carried with it the idea of every part, they fooliſhly
conceive we viſibly behold therein the anatomy of every par-
ticle. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2. The power of being produced.
In the ſeeds of wheat there lieth obſcurely the ſeminality of
darnel. Brºwn's Vulgar Errours.
SE'M INAL. adj. [ſºminal, French ; ſeminis, Latin.]
1. Belonging to ſeed. -
2. Contained in the ſeed; radical.
Had our ſenſes never preſented us with thoſe obvious ſºminal
principles' of apparent generations, we ſhould never have
ſuſpected that a plant or animal would have proceeded from
ſuch unlikely materials. Glanv. Scepſ.
Though we cannot prolong the period of a commonwealth
beyond the decree of heaven, or the date of its nature, any
more than human life beyond the ſtrength of the ſeminal vir-
tue, yet we may manage a ſickly conſtitution, and preſerve a
ſtrong one. Swift.
SE’MINARY. m. ſ. ſ ſeminaire, Fr. ſeminarium from ſemino, Lat.]
1. The ground where any thing is ſown to be afterwards tranſ-
planted. -
Some, at the firſt tranſplanting trees out of their ſiminaries,
cut them off about an inch from the ground, and plant them
like quickſet. Martimer's Husbandry.
2. The place or original ſtock whence any thing is brought
This ſtratum is ſtill expanded at top of all, ſerving for a
common integument, and being the ſeminary or promptuary
that furniſheth forth matter for the formation and increment of
animal and vegetable bodies. //oºdward.
3. Seminal ſtate.
The hand of God, who firſt created the earth, hath wiſely
contrived them in their proper ſeminaries, and where they beſt
maintain the intention of their ſpecies.
Brown's Wulgar Errours.
4. Original; firſt principles.
Nothing ſubminiſtrates apter matter to be converted into
peſtilent ſeminaries, ſooner than ſteams of naſty folks and
beggars. Harvey on the Plague.
5. Breeding place; place of education, from whence ſcholars
are tranſplanted into life. -
It was the ſeat of the greateſt monarchy, and the ſeminary
of the greateſt men of the world, whilſt it was heathen. Bacon.
The inns of court muſt be the worſt inſtituted ſeminaries
in any Chriſtian country. Swift.
SEM in Aºrt s. n.ſ. ſ from ſmino, Latin. J The aët cf
ſowing. - . . . . .
SEM.INI'FIcAL. }*. [ſºmen and ſcº, Latin J Productive of
SEM.INI'Fick. ſeed. -
We are made to believe, that in the fourteenth year males
are ſeminifical and pubeſcent; but he that ſhall inquire into
the generality, will rather adhere unto Ariſtotle. A’rown.
SEM.INIFucATION. m. ſ.
Seminification is the propagation from the ſeed or ſeminal
parts. - Hale's Origin of Mankind.
SEMio PA'cous. adj. [ſimi and opacus, Latin.] Half dark.
Semio; acaws bodies are ſuch as, looked upon in an ordinary
light, and not held betwixt it and the eye, are not wont to be
diſcriminated from the reſt of opacous bodies. Boyle.
SEM PE'DAL. adj. [ſemi and pedi, Latin.] Containing haſ a
foot. - - " .
SE \; IPER SPI'cuous adj. [ſemi and perfficuus, Latin.] Half
tranſparent; imperfectly clear.
A kind of amethyſtine flint, not compoſed of cryſtals or
grains; but one intire maſſy ſtone, ſemiperſºicu us, and of a
pale blue, almoſt of the colour of ſome cow's horns. Grew.
SEMIo'RDINATE. m. ſ. [In conick ſections.] A line drawn
at right angles to and biſleáed by the axis, and reaching from
one ſide of the ſection to another; the half of which is pro-
perly the ſemiordinate, but is now called the ordinate Harris.
Semipe Llúcid. adj. [ſemi and pelucidus, Latin.) Half clear;
imperfeótly tranſparent. -
A light grey ſemipellucid flint, of much the ſame complexion
with the common Indian agat. // od.card.
SF'Mſproof. n.ſ.. [ſemi and proof..] The proof of a ſingle
evidence. Bailey.
SEMIQUADRATE. } n. ſ. [In aſtronomy..] An aſpe&amp;t of the
S. Miq9 A'Rt ILE. 5 planets when diſtant from each other forty
five degrees, or one ſign and a half. 4 ailey.
SEMI QUA've R. n.ſ. [In muſick..] A note containing half the
quantity of the quaver. - Pai'ey.
SEM Q, I'NT11 E. m. ſ. [In aſtronomy..] An aſpect of the pla-
nets when at the diſtance of thirty-ſix degrees from one an-
other. Bailey.
SEMisextile. n.ſ. [In aſtronomy..] A ſemifixth ; an aſpect of
the planets when they are diſtant from each other one twelfth
part of a circle, or thirty degrees. But y.
SEMISPHE'Rica L. adj. [ſºni and ſpherical.] Belonging to
half a ſphere. 1 ailey.
SEMISPHER o'IDAL. adj. [ ſemi and ſº heroidal.] Formed like a
half ſpheroid.
SEM14 ERTIAN. m. ſ. [ſemi and tertian.] An ague com-
pounded of a tertian and a quotidian. Bailey.
The natural product of ſuch a cold moiſt year are tertians,
ſemite, tians, and ſome quartans. Arbuthnot on Air. .
SEMI To NE. m. ſ. [ſemiton, French. In muſick, one of the
degrees of concinuous intervals of concords. Failey.
SEM Ivo'w EL n. . [ſemi and vowel J A conſonant which
makes an imperfect ſound, or does not demand a total occlu-
ſion of the mouth
When Homer would repreſent any agreeable objećt, he
makes uſe of the ſmootheſt vowels and moſt flowing ſemi-
vowels. . Broome's Note: to the Odyſſey.
SE'MPER v ve. m.ſ. [ ſºnſer and viºus, Latin, that is, always
alive J A plant. -
The greater ſempervive will put out branches two or three
years; but they wrap the root in an oil cloth once in half a
year. B icon.
SEMPITE'RNAL. adj. [ſempiternel, Fr. ſempiternus, from ſemper
and acternus, Latin. -
1. Eternal in futurity; having beginning, but no end.
Thoſe, though they ſuppoſe the world not to be eternal,
a parte ante, are not contented to ſuppoſe it to be ſem-
piternal, or eternal a parte fed; but will carry up the crea-
tion of the world to an immenſe antiquity. Hale.
2. In poetry it is uſed ſimply for eternal.
Should we the long depending ſcale aſcend
Of ſons and fathers, will it never end ?
If 'twill, then muſt we through the order run,
To ſome one man whoſe being ne'er begun;
If that one man was ſem/iternal, why
Did he, ſince independant, ever die? Pl cºlore.
SEMPITE'RNITY.. n.ſ.. [ſºmpilernitas, Latin.] Future dura-
tion without end.
The future eternity, or ſººfitermity of the world, being ad-
mitted, though the eternity a parte ante be denied, there will
be a future infinity for the emanation of the divine good-
neſs. A ſale.
SE'MsTREss. m. ſ. [reamerere, Saxon.] . A woman whoſe
buſineſs is to ſew ; a woman who lives by her necdle.
Two hundred ſºyfreſſes were employed to make me ſhirts,
and Jinnen for bed and table, which they were forced to quilt
together in ſeveral folds. - - Gulliver's Travel.
The tuck'd up ſenſºreſ, walks with haſty ſtrides. Swift.
SE'N ARY. adj. [ſºnariuſ, ſeni, Latin.] Belonging to the nun-
ber ſix; containing fix.
SENATE,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 338</div><p class="Text">S E N
S E N
SENATE. n.f. [ſenatus, Latin; ſºnat, French..] An aſſembly
of counſellors; a body of men ſet apart to conſult for the
publick good,
We debaſe
The nature of our ſeats, which will in time break ope
The locks o' th' ſenate, and bring in the crows
To peck the eagles, Shakespeare Coriolanus.
There they ſhall found
Their government, and their great ſenate chuſe, Mhon,
He had not us'd excurſions, ſpears, or darts,
But counſel, order, and ſuch aged arts;
Which, if our anceſtors had not retain'd,
The ſenate's name our council had not gain'd. Denham.
Gallus was welcom'd to the ſacred ſtrand,
The ſenate riſing to ſalute their gueſt. Dryden.
Se’NATEHouse. n.ſ.. [ſenate and houſe..] Place of publick
council.
The nobles in great earneſtneſs are going
/ All to the ſenatehouſe; ſome news is come. Shakeſpeare.
Se NAtoR. m.ſ.. [ſenator, Latin; ſenateur, French..] A pub-
lick counſellor.
Moſt unwiſe patricians,
You grave but reckleſs ſenators.
As if to ev'ry fop it might belong,
Like ſenators, to cenſure, right or wrong. Granville.
SENAto'Rial. }*. [ſenatorius, Lat. ſenatorial, ſenatorien, Fr.]
SENATO'Rian. V Belonging to ſenators; befitting ſenators.
To SEND. v. a. [ſandgan, Gothick; renban, Saxon; ſenden,
Dutch..]
1. To diſpatch from one place to another.
There ſhalt thou ſerve thine enemies, which the Lord ſhall
ſend againſt thee, in hunger and in thirſt. Deutr. xxviii. 48.
Send our brother with us, and we will go down. Gen. xliii.
His citizens ſent a meſſage after him, ſaying, we will not
have this man to reign over us. u. xix. 14.
The meſſenger came, and ſhewed David all that Joab had
Jent him for. 2 Sa. xi. 22.
My overſhadowing ſpirit and might with thee
I ſend along. Milton.
His wounded men he firſt ſend off to ſhore. Dryden.
Servants, ſent on meſſages, ſtay out ſomewhat longer than
the meſſage requires. Swift.
2. To commiſſion by authority to go and ačt.
There have been commiſſions
Sent down among them, which have flow'd the heart
Of all their loyaltics. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
3. To grant as from a diſtant place: as, if God ſend life.
I pray thee ſend me good ſpeed this day, and ſhew kindneſs
unto my maſter. Gen. xxiv. 12.
Oſend out thy light and thy truth; let them lead me. Pſ,
4. To inflićt, as from a diſtance.
The Lord ſhall ſend upon thee curſing, vexation, and re-
buke, in all that thou ſetteſt thine hand unto. Deutr. xxviii.
5. To emit; to immit; to produce.
The water ſend, forth plants that have no roots fixed in the
bottom, being almoſt but leaves. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The ſenſes ſend in only the influxes of material things, and
the imagination and memory preſent only their pićtures or
images, when the objects themſelves are abſent. Cheyne.
6. To diffuſe; to propagate.
When the fury took her ſtand on high,
A hiſ from all the ſnaky tire went round: }
Pope.
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The dreadful ſignal all the rocks rebound,
And through the Achaian cities ſend the ſound.
7. To let fly; to caſt or ſhoot.
To SEND. v. m.
1. To deliver or diſpatch a meſſage.
- I have made bold to ſend in to your wife:
My ſuit is that ſhe will to Deſdemona
Procure me ſome acceſs. Shakespeare . Othello.
They could not attempt their perfeót reformation in church
and ſtate, ’till thoſe votes were utterly aboliſhed; therefore
they ſent the ſame day again to the king. Clarendon.
2. To SEND for. To require by meſſage to come, or cauſe
ought.
to ãº. ſome few of you, and ſee the place; and then
you may ſend fºr your ſick, which bring on land. Bacon.
Heſent for me; and, while I rais'd his head,
He threw his aged arms about my neck,
And, ſeeing that I wept, he preſs'd me cloſe.
Sr.'s ºr n.ſ. from ſend.] He that ſends.
This was a merry meſſage. -
—We hope to make the ſender bluſh at it. Shakespeare H. V.
Love that comes too late,
1.ike a remorſeful pardon ſlowly carried,
To the great ſender turns a ſour offence. Shakeſpeare.
- Beſt with the beſt, the ſender, not the ſent. Milton.
sent’scesc E. m./ [ſºngſto, Latin.] The ſtate of growing
old; decay by time.
The earth and all t
they now are, without the leaſt ſºngſtence or deca
jarring, diſorder, or invaſion of one another.
Dryden.
hings will continue in the ſtate wherein
, without
%:dward.
SE's eschal. n.ſ.. [ſineſhal, French, of uncertain original.]
1. One who had in great houſes the care of feaſts, or domeſtick
ceremonies.
John earl of Huntingdon, under his ſeal of arms, made ſir
John Arundel, of Trerice, ſenſchal of his houſhold, as well
in peace as in war. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Marſhal’d feaſt,
Serv'd up in hall with ſewers and ſnºſhah’;
The ſkill of artifice, or office, mean! Milton's Par. Lºft.
The ſeneſchal rebuk'd, in haſte withdrew ; -
With equal haſte a menial train purſue. Pope's Odſey.
2. It afterwards came to ſignify other offices. -
SE'NGREEN. m. ſ. A plant. - Ainſworth.
Se'Nile. adj. [ſenilis, Latin.] Belonging to old age; conſe-
quent on old age. -
My green youth made me very unripe for a taſk of that na-
ture, whoſe difficulty requires that it ſhould be handled by a
perſon in whom nature, education, and time have happily
matched a ſenile maturity of judgment with youthful vigour of
fancy. Boyle on Cºlouri.
SENIOR. n.ſ.. [ſenior, Latin.]
1. One older than another; one who on account of longer
time has ſome ſuperiority.
How can you admit your ſeniors to the examination or al-
lowing of them, not only being inferior in office and calling,
but in gifts alſo : Whitgifte.
2. An aged perſon.
A ſenior of the place replies,
Well read, and curious of antiquities. Dryden.
SENIO'RITY. m. ſ. [from ſenior.] Elderſhip; priority of birth.
As in all civil inſurrections the ringleader is looked on with
a peculiar ſeverity, ſo, in this caſe, the firſt provoker has, by
his ſeniority and primogeniture, a double portion of the guilt.
Government of the Tongue.
He was the elder brother, and Ulyſſes might be conſigned to
his care, by the right due to his ſeniority. Broomſ,
SE'NNA. m.ſ.. [ſena, Latin.] A phyſical tree.
The flower, for the moſt part, conſiſts of five leaves,
which are placed orbicularly, and expand in form of a roſe:
the pointal afterwards becomes a plain, incurved, bivalve pod,
which is full of ſeeds, each being ſeparated by a double thin
membrane. The ſpecies are three. The third ſort, that uſed
in medicine, is at preſent very rare. Miller.
What rhubarb, ſenna, or what purgative drug,
Would ſcour theſe Engliſh hence! Shakespeare Maaleth.
Senna tree is of two ſorts: the baſtard ſenna, and the ſcor-
pion ſenna, both which yield a pleaſant leaf and flower. Mºrt.
SE'NNIGHT. n.ſ. [Contračted from ſevennight.] The ſpace of
ſeven nights and days; a week. See FortNIGHT.
Time trots hard with a young maid between the contraćt
of her marriage and the day it is ſolemnized: if the interim
be but a ſennight, time's pace is ſo hard that it ſeems the length
of ſeven years. Shakeſp. As you like it.
SENo'cular, adj. [ſeni and oculus, Latin.] Having ſix eyes.
Moſt animals are binocular, ſpiders oëtonocular, and ſome
Jenocular. Derham's Phyſicz-Theolºgy.
SENSA'tion. n.ſ.. [ſenſation, French; ſenſatio, ſchool Latin.]
Perception by means of the ſenſes.
Diverſity of conſtitution, or other circumſtances, vary the
ſenſations; and to them of Java pepper is cold. Glanv. Sceſſ.
The brain, diſtempered by a cold, beating againſt the root
of the auditory nerve, and protracted to the tympanum, cauſes
the ſenſation of noiſe. Harvey on Conſumptions.
This great ſource of moſt of the ideas we have, depending
wholly upon our ſenſes, and derived by them to the under-
ſtanding, I call ſenſation. Locke.
When we are aſleep, joy and ſorrow give us more vigorous
ſenſations of pain or pleaſure than at any other time. Addiſon.
The happieſt, upon a fair eſtimate, have ſtronger ſenſations
of pain than pleaſure. Rogers.
SENSE. m. ſ. [ſens, French; ſenſus, Latin.]
1. Faculty or power by which external objects are perceived;
the ſight; touch; hearing; ſmell; taſte.
This pow'r is ſenſe, which from abroad doth bring
The colour, taſte, and touch, and ſcent, and ſound,
The quantity and ſhape of ev'rything
Within earth's centre, or heav'n's circle found:
And though things ſenſible be numberleſs,
But only five the ſenſe's organs be;
And in thoſe five, all things their forms expreſs,
Which we can touch, taſte, feel, or hear or fee. Davis,
Then is the ſoul a nature, which contains
The pow'r of ſenſe within a greater pow'r,
Which doth employ and uſe the ſºnſe's pains;
But fits and rules within her private bow'r. Davier,
Both contain
Within them ev’ry lower faculty
Qf ſenſe, whereby they hear, ſee, finell, touch, taſte. Milt.
Of the five ſenſes, two are uſually and moſt properly called
the ſºft of learning, as being moſt capable of receiving com-
munication of thought and notions by ſelected ſigns; and theſe
are hearing and ſeeing. Hºlder's Element ºf Sºc.
There's
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 339</div><p class="Text">S E N
S E N
2. Perception by the ſenſes; ſenſation. -
In a living creature, though never ſo great, the ſºſe and
the affects of any one part of the body inſtantly make a tranſ-
curſion throughout the whole. Bacon's Natural Hyłºry.
If we had nought but ſenſe, then only they
Should have ſound minds which have their ſenſes ſound;
But wiſdom grows when ſenſes do decay,
And folly moſt in quickeſt ſenſe is found. Davies.
Such is the mighty ſwiftneſs of your mind,
That, like the earth's, it leaves the ſenſe behind. Dryden.
3. Perception of intellect; apprehenſion of mind.
This Baſilius, having the quick ſenſe of a lover, took as
though his miſtreſs had given him a ſecret reprehenſion. Sidn.
God, to remove his ways from human ſenſe,
Plac'd heav'n from earth ſo far. Milton.
Why haſt thou added ſenſe of endleſs woes? Milton.
4. Senſibility; quickneſs or keenneſs of perception.
He ſhould have liv'd,
Save that his riotous youth, with dangerous ſenſe,
Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge. Shakespeare .
5. Underſtanding; ſoundneſs of faculties; ſtrength of natural
reaſon.
Oppreſt nature ſleeps: -
This reſt might yet have balm'd thy broken ſenſes. Shakespeare
God hath endued mankind with powers and abilities, which
we call natural light and reaſon, and common ſºnſe. Bentley.
There's ſomething previous ev'n to taſte; 'tis ſenſe,
Good ſenſe, which only is the gift of heav'n,
And, though no ſcience, fairly worth the ſev'n:
A light within yourſelf you muſt perceive;
Jones and Le Nôtre have it not to give.
6. Reaſon; reaſonable meaning.
He raves; his words are looſe
As heaps of ſand, and ſcattering wide from ſenſe:
You ſee he knows not me, his natural father;
That now the wind is got into his head,
And turns his brains to frenzy. Dryd. Spaniſh Fryar.
7. Opinion; notion; judgment.
I ſpeak my private but impartial ſenſe
With freedom, and, I hope, without offence.
8. Conſciouſneſs; convićtion.
In the due ſenſe of my want of learning, I only make a
confeſſion of my own faith. Dryden.
9. Moral perception.
Some are ſo hardened in wickedneſs, as to have no ſenſe of
the moſt friendly offices. L’E/trange.
io. Meaning; import.
In this Jenſe to be preſerved from all fin is not impoſſible.
Hooker, b. v.
Pope.
Roſcommºn.
My hearty friends,
You take me in too dolorous a ſenſe. Shake?eare:
This comes out of a haughty preſumption, that becauſe we
are encouraged to believe that in ſome ſenſe all things are made
for man, that therefore they are not made at all for them-
felves. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
All before Richard I. is before time of memory; and what
is fince, is, in a legal ſenſe, within the time of memory. Hale.
In one ſenſe it is, indeed, a building of gold and ſilver upon
the foundation of Chriſtianity. Tillotſon.
When a word has been uſed in two or three ſenſeſ, and has
made a great inroad for error, drop one or two of thoſe ſenſes,
and leave it only one remaining, and affix the other ſenſes or
ideas to other words. //atts's Logick.
SE'Nsed. part. [from ſenſe..] Perceived by the ſenſes. A word
not in uſe.
Let the ſcioliſt tell me, why things muſt needs be ſo as his
individual ſenſes repreſent them: is he ſure that objećts are
not otherwiſe ſenſed by others, than they are by him And why
muſt his ſenſe be the infallible criterion: It may be, what is
white to us, is black to negroes. Glanv. Scepſ.
SENSEFul. adj. [from ſenſe and full.] Reaſonable; judicious.
Men, otherwiſe ſenſeſul and ingenious, quote ſuch things
out of an author as would never paſs in converſation. Norris.
SE/N seless. adj. [from ſenſe.]
1. Wanting ſenſe; wanting life; void of all life or perception.
The charm and venom, which they drunk,
Their blood with ſecret filth infected hath,
Being diffuſed through the ſenſe ºff trunk,
That through the great contagion direful deadly ſtunk. F.3.
The ears are /en/e/eſs that ſhould give us hearing,
To tell him his commandment is fulfill’d. Shakespeare Hamlet.
You blocks, you worſe than ſºſe ºf things! Shakeſp.
It is as repugnant to the idea of ſenſeeſ; matter, that it ſhould
put into itſelf ſenſe, perception, and knowledge, as it is re-
pugnant to the idea of a triangle, that it ſhould put into itſelf
greater angles than two right ones. Locke.
2. Unſeeling; wanting perception.
The ſen cles grave feels not your pious ſorrows. Rowe.
3. Unreaſonable; ſtupid : doltiſh ; blockiſh.
They would repent this their ſºnſelſ; perverſeneſs when it
would be too late, and when they found themſelves under a
power that would deſtroy them. Clarend.n.
7
If we be not extremely fooliſh, thankleſs, or ſºnſ?'eſ, a great
joy is more apt to cure ſorrow than a great trouble is. Taylor.
The great deſign of this authour's book is to prove this,
which I believe no man in the world was ever ſo ſºftles as to
deny. ill ſon.
She ſaw her favour was miſplac'd;
The fellows had a wretched taſte:
She needs muſt tell them to their face,
They were a ſenſe'ſ ſtupid race. Swift.
4. Cºntrary to true judgment; contrary to reaſon.
. It is a ſenſeleſs thing, in reaſon, to think that one of theſe
intereſts can ſtand without the other, when, in the very order
of natural cauſes, government is preſerved by religion. South.
Other creatures, as well as monkeys, littlé wifer than they,
deſtroy their young by ſenſelºs fondneſs, and too much em-
bracing. Locke.
5. Wanting ſenſibility; wanting quickneſs or keenneſs of per-
ception.
To draw Mars like a young Hippolytus, with an effeminate
countenance, or that hot-ſpurred Harpalice in Virgil, pro-
ceedeth from a ſenſeleſ; and overcold judgment. Peacham.
6. Wanting knowledge; unconſcious. With of:
The wretch is drench'd too deep;
His ſoul is ſtupid, and his heart aſleep,
Fatten’d in vice; ſo callous and ſo groſs,
He fins and ſees not, ſenſeleſ of his loſs.
Hear this,
You unhous'd, lawleſs, rambling libertines,
Senſeleſs of any charm in love, beyond
The proſtitution of a common bed. Southerne.
SENSELEssly adv. [from ſenſeleſ...] In a ſenſeleſs manner;
ſtupidly; unreaſonably.
If any one ſhould be found ſo ſenſeleſ, y arrogant as to ſup-
poſe man alone knowing and wiſe, but yet the produćt of
mere ignorance and chance, and that all the reſt of the uni-
verſe acted only by that blind hap-hazard, I ſhall leave with
him that very rational and emphatical rebuke of Tully. Locke.
SE'NSELESSNEss. n.ſ.. [from ſenſelºſ...] Folly; unreaſonable-
neſs; abſurdity; ſtupidity.
. The ſºnſ.ſºſneft of the tradition of the crocodile's moving
his upper jaw, is plain from the articulation of the occiput
with the neck, and the nether jaw with the upper. Grew.
SENSIBILITY. m. ſ. [ſenſibilite, French. J
1. Quickneſs of ſenſation.
Modeſty is a kind of quick and delicate feeling in the ſoul:
it is ſuch an exquiſite ſenſibility, as warns a woman to ſhun the
firſt appearance of every thing hurtful. Addiſon's Speciator.
2. Quickneſs of perception.
SENSIBLE, adj. [ſenſible, French; ſºnſis, Latin.]
1. Having the power of perceiving by the ſenſes.
Would your cambrick were as ſenſible as your finger, that
you might leave pricking it for pity. Shakeſpeare.
- Theſe be thoſe diſcourſes of God, whoſe effects thoſe that
live witneſs in theniſelves; the ſenſible in their ſenſtle natures,
the reaſonable in their reaſonable ſouls. Kaleigh.
A blind man conceives not colours, but under the notion
of ſome other ſenſible faculty. Glanv. Scepſ.
2. Perceptible by the ſenſes.
By reaſon man attaineth unto the knowledge of things that
are and are not ſeſſible: it reſteth, therefore, that we ſearch how
man attaineth unto the knowledge of ſuch things unſenſible as
are to be known. Hocker.
Is this a dagger which I ſee before me,
The handle tow’rd my hand Come, let me clutch thee:
I have thee not, and yet I ſee thee ſtill:
Art thou not, fatal viſion, ſenſible
To feeling as to fight? Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The ſpace left and acquired in every ſºftle moment in ſuch
flow progreſſions, is ſo inconſiderable, that it cannot poſſibly
move the ſenſe. Glanv. Scepſ.
It is manifeſt that the heavens are void of all ſenſible reſiſt-
ance, and by conſequence of all ſenſible matter. Newton.
The far greater part of men are no otherwiſe moved than
by ſenſe, and have neither leiſure nor ability ſo far to improve
their power of reflection, as to be capable of conceiving the
divine perfections, without the aſſiſtance of ſenſile objects.
- Rogers's Sermony.
Air is ſenſible to the touch by its motion, and by its re-
ſiſtance to bodies moved in it. Arbuthnot on Air.
3. Perceived by the mind.
Idleneſs was puniſhed by ſo many ſtripes in publick, and the
diſgrace was more ſºftbe than the pain. Yeºn le.
4. Perceiving by either mind or ſenſes; having perception by
the mind or ſenſes.
This muſt needs remove
The ſen/ible of pain. Milton.
I ſaw you in the Eaſt at your firſt ariſing: I was as ſoon
ſºftble as any of that light, when juſt ſhooting out, and be-
ginning to travel upwards to the meridian. Dryden.
I do not ſay there is no ſoul in man, becauſe he is not ſenſible
of it in his fieep; but I do ſay, he cannot think at any time,
waking or ſleeping, without being ſeſſible of it. Locke.
- - 23 O The
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E N
S E N
- - - ſcription complete;
n is as beautiful as the dº p -
º ...}}. of it. . Broome's Note: on the£:
- i. moral perception; having the quality of being affecte
&gt; - &gt;
| good or ill.
by mº, wert ſenſºle of courteſy,
I ſhould not make ſo great a ſhew of zeal. Shakespeare.
6. Having quick intellectual feeling; beingeaſilyorſtrongyaſiected.
- Évên I, the bold, the ſenſible of wrong,
Reſtrain’d by º wº º hold my tongue. Dryd.
- inced ; perſuaded. OW uſe. -
/* º ſºft's that they had better have puſhed their
conqueſts on the other ſide of the Adriatick; for then their
territories would have lain together. Addiſon.
8. In low converſation it has ſometimes the ſenſe of reaſonable;
iudicious : wiſe.
J fhave been tired with accounts from ſºfthe men, furniſhed
with matters of fact, which have happened within their own
knowledge. Addiſon.
Se’Nsible Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſenſible.]
1. Poſſibility to be perceived by the ſenſes.
2. Aćtual perception by mind or body.
3. Quickneſs of perception; ſenſibility. . - -
The ſenſileneſ of the eye renders it ſubjećt to pain, as
alſo unfit to be dreſſed with ſharp medicaments. Sharp.
4. Painful conſciouſneſs.
There is no condition of ſoul more wretched than that of
the ſenſeleſs obdurate ſinner, being a kind of numbneſs of
ſoul; and, contrariwiſe, this feeling and ſenſibleneſ, and ſorrow
for fin, the moſt vital quality. Hammond.
5. Judgment; reaſonableneſs. An uſe not admitted but in con-
verſation.
SE'ssibly. adv. [from ſºnſible.}
1. Perceptibly to the ſenſes.
He is your brother, lords; ſºnſibly fed -
Of that ſelf-blood, that firſt gave life to you. Shakeſpeare.
A ſudden pain in my right foot increaſed ſenſibly. Temple.
The ſalts of human urine may, by the violent motion of
the blood, be turned alkaline, and even corroſive; and ſo they
affect the fibres of the brain more ſenſibly than other parts. Arb.
2. With perception of either mind or body.
3. Externally; by impreſſion on the ſenſes.
That church of Chriſt, which we properly term his body
myſtical, can be but one; neither can that one be ſenſibly diſ-
Serned by any, inaſmuch as the parts thereof are ſome in
heaven already with Chriſt. JHooker.
4. With quick intellectual perception.
5. In low language, judiciouſly; reaſonably:
SE'Nsitive. adj. [ſenſiſ, French..] Having ſenſe or percep-
tion, but not reaſon.
The ſºnſitive faculty may have a ſenſitive love of ſome ſºn-
Jºve objects, which though moderated ſo as not to fall into
ºn 5 yet, through the nature of man's ſenſe, may expreſs it-
ºf more ſenſitively towards that inferior object than towards
God; this is a piece of human frailty. Hammond.
All the actions of the ſenſitive appetite are in painting called
paſſions, becauſe the ſoul is agitated by them, and becauſe the
body ſuffers and is ſenſibly altered. Dryden.
Bodies are ſuch as are endued with a vegetative ſoul, as
Plºts; a ſºſitive ſoul, as animals; or a ratiºnal ſoul, as the
body of man. Ray.
SE'Nsitive Plant. m. ſ. ſminoſa, Latin.] A plant.
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, which is ſhaped like a fun-
nel, having many ſtamina in the centre: theſe flowers are co-
leded "ſo a round head: from the bottom of the flower riſes
*Piºtillum, which afterwards becomes an oilº. flat-jointed
pod, which opens both ways, and contains in each partition
:*."oundiſh ſeed. Of this plant the humble plants are a
ſpecies, which are ſo called, becauſe, upon being touched, the
pedicle of their leaves falls downward; but the leaves of the
Jenſitive plant are only contracted. Milºr.
Vegetables have "any of them ſome degrees of motion
and, upon the different application of other bodies to them.
do very briſkly alter their figure and motion, and ſo have o:
tained the name of ſenſitiº, pants, from a motion which has
Hºmelance to that which in animals follows º, º:
Whence does it happen, that the plant which well 0&amp;A't.
We name the ſenſitive, ſhould move j feel 2 -
Whence know her leaves to anſwer her command
And with quick horrour fly the neighb'ring hand ; Prior
- The ſenſitive plant is ſo call’d, becauſe, as ſoon as you touch
º the leaf ſhrinks. Mortimer.
E º º ſenſitive..] In aſºnſive manner.
na ye faculty, through the nature of man's ſenſe,
. sº º fºſitively towards an inferior object
SEVsoºn., 94; this is a piece of frailty. Hammond.
jº. - łºſ [Latin. J
1. The - - -
nº. ºne tranſmit their perceptions to the
piritual ſpecies, both viſib d - -
the ſeniorſ. » Hible and audible, will work upon
- Je ºw, º they move not any other body. e.
As ſound in a bell or muſical ſtring, or other founding
body, is nothing but a trembling motion, and the air nothin
but that motion propagated from the object, in the ſenſºrium
'tis a ſenſe of that motion under the form of ſound. Newton.
Is not the ſenſory of animals the place to which the ſenſitivº
ſubſtance is preſent, and into which the ſenſible ſpecies of
things are carried through the nerves of the brain, that ther.
they may be perceived by their immediate preſence to that ſub-
ſtance 2 Newton's Opt.
2. Organ of ſenſation.
That we all have double ſenſories, two eyes, two ears, is
an effectual confutation of this atheiſtical ſophiſm. Bentley.
SE'NSUAL. adj. [ſenſuel, French.]
1. Conſiſting in ſenſe ; depending on ſenſe; affeóting the ſenſes.
Men in general are too partial, in favour of a ſenſual appe-
tite, to take notice of truth when they have found it. L'Aſir.
Far as creation's ample range extends,
The ſcale of ſenſual, mental pow'rs aſcends. Pºpe.
2. Pleaſing to the ſenſes; carnal; not ſpiritual.
The greateſt part of men are ſuch as prefer their own pri-
vate good before all things, even that good which is ſºjual
before whatſoever is moſt divine. Hooker.
3. Devoted to ſenſe; lewd ; luxurious.
From amidſt them roſe
Belial, the diſſoluteſt ſpirit that fell,
The ſenſuall/?; and, after Aſmodai,
The fleſhlieſt incubus. Paradiſe Regain'd.
No ſmall part of virtue conſiſts in abſtaining from that
wherein ſenſual men place their felicity. Atterbury.
SE'Nsualist. n.ſ.. [from ſenſual.] A carnal perſon; one de-
voted to corporal pleaſures.
Let atheiſts and ſenſualifts ſatisfy themſelves as they are
able; the former of which will find, that, as long as reaſon
keeps her ground, religion neither can nor will loſe her's. South.
SENsu A'Lity. m. ſ. [from ſenſual.] Devotedneſs to the ſenſes;
addiction to brutal and corporal pleaſures.
But you are more intemperate in your blood
Than Venus, or thoſe pamper'd animals
That rage in ſavage ſenſuality. Shakeſpeare.
Kill not her quick'ning pow'r with ſurfeitings;
Mar not her ſenſe with Jenſuality:
Caſt not her ſerious wit on idle things;
Make not her free will ſlave to vanity. Davies.
Senſuality is one kind of pleaſure, ſuch an one as it is. South.
They avoid dreſs, left they ſhould have affections tainted
by any ſenſuality, and diverted from the love of him who is to
be the only comfort and delight of their whole beings. Addison
Impure and brutal ſenſuality was too much confirmed by the
religion of thoſe countries, where even Venus and Bacchus
had their temples. Bentley.
To Se Nsu Alize. v. a. [from ſenſual.] To fink to ſenſual
pleaſures; to degrade the mind into ſubjećtion to the ſenſes.
Not to ſuffer one's ſelf to be ſenſualized by pleaſures, like
thoſe who were changed into brutes by Circe. Pope.
$ENsually. adv. [from ſenſual.] In a ſenſual manner.
SE'N suous. adj. [from ſenſe..] Tender; pathetick; full of
paſſion.
To this poetry would be made precedent, as being leſs
ſubtle and fine; but more ſimple, ſenſuous, and paſſionate. Milt.
SENT. The participle paſſive of ſend.
I make a decree that all Iſrael go with thee; foraſmuch as
thou art ſent of the king. Ezr. vii. 14.
SENTENCE. n.ſ. [ſenience, French; ſententia, Latin.J.
1. Determination or deciſion, as of a judge civil or criminal.
The rule of voluntary agents on earth is the ſentence that
reaſon giveth, concerning the goodneſs of thoſe things which
they are to do. Hooker.
If we have neither voice from heaven, that ſo pronounceth
of them, neither ſentence of men grounded upon ſuch mani-
feſt and clear proof, that they, in whoſe hands it is to alter
them, may likewiſe infallibly, even in heart. and conſcience,
judge them ſo; upon neceſſity to urge alteration, is to trouble
and diſturb without neceſſity. Hooker.
How will I give ſentence againſt them. jer. IV. I 2.
If matter of fact breaks out with too great an evidence to
be denied, why, ſtill there are other lenitives, that friendſhip
will apply, before it will be brought to the decretory rigours
of a condemning ſentence. - South's Sermons.
Let him ſet out ſome of Luther's works, that by them we
may paſs ſentence upon his doctrines. . Atterbury.
It is uſually ſpoken of condemnation pronounced by the
- Oin.
jº: hºm of all laws, in capital cauſes, the evidence
muſt be full and clear; and if ſo, where one man's life is in
queſtion, what ſay we to a war, which is ever the ſºntº; of
death upon many Bacon's holy War.
What reſts but that the mortal ſentence paſs 2 AMilton.
. A maxim ; an axiom, generally moral.
A ſintence may be defined a moral inſtruction couched in 2.
few 4. y Broome’; Notes on the Odyſſey.
4. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E N
S E P
º
*: º
e iſ: º
und. *
º
ºss
siſ, tºº,
ºts.
Aºi.
º
tw) tº,
ſm, is,
º
*****
id: lº
*
tº tº- º
tº sº.
his
4. A ſhort paragraph; a period in writing.
An excellent ſpirit, knowledge, underſtanding, and ſhew-
ing of hard ſentences were found in Daniel. Dan. v. 12.
To SE'N TEN ce. v. a. [ſentencier, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To paſs the laſt judgment on any one.
After this cold conſid’rance, ſentence me;
And, as you are a king, ſpeak in your ſtate,
What I have done that miſbecame my place.
Came the mild judge and interceſſor both,
To ſentence man.
2. To condemn.
Could that decree from our brother come 2
Nature herſelf is ſentenc'd in your doom:
Piety is no more. Dryden.
Idleneſs, ſentenced by the decurions, was puniſhed by ſo
many ſtripes. Temple.
SENTENTIo'sity. n.ſ.. [from ſententious.] Comprehenſion in
a ſentence.
Vulgar precepts in morality carry with them nothing above
the line, or beyond the extemporary ſententioſity of common
conceits with us. - Brown's Wulg. Errours.
SENTE'NT 19Us, adj. [ſentencieux, Fr. from ſentence.] Abound-
ing with ſhort ſentences, axioms, and maxims, ſhort and ener-
getick,
He is very ſwift and ſententious. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Eyes are vocal, tears have tongues:
Sententious ſhowers O let them fall;
Shakeſp.
Milton,
Their cadence is rhetorical. Craſhaw.
Eloquence, with all her pomp and charms,
Foretold us uſeful and ſententiºus truths. Waller,
How he apes his fire,
Ambitiouſly ſententious. Addiſon's Cato.
The making of thoſe figures being tedious, and requiring
much room, put men firſt upon contracting them; as by the
moſt ancient Egyptian monuments it appears they did : next,
inſtead of ſententious marks, to think of verbal, ſuch as the
Chineſe ſtill retain. Grew's Coſmol.
SeNTE'N'riously. adv. [from ſententious.] In ſhort ſentences;
with ſtriking brevity.
They deſcribe her in part finely and elegantly, and in part
gravely and ſententiouſly: they ſay, look how many feathers
ſhe hath, ſo many eyes ſhe hath underneath. Bacon's Eſſays.
Nauſicaa delivers her judgment ſententiouſly, to give it more
weight. Broome.
Sente'NTIous NEss. m. ſ. [from ſententious.] Pithineſs of ſen-
tences; brevity with ſtrength.
The Medea I eſteem for the gravity and ſententiouſneſ of it,
which he himſelf concludes to be ſuitable to a tragedy. Dryd.
SE'NTERY. m. ſ. [This is commonly written ſentry, corrupted
from ſentinel.] One who is ſet to watch in a garriſon, or in
the outlines of an army.
What ſtrength, what art can then
Suffice, or what evaſion bear him ſafe
Through the ſtrićt ſenteries, and ſtations thick
Of angels watching round. Milton.
SE’NTIENT. adj. [ſentiens, Latin.J Perceiving; having per-
ception.
This ačting of the ſentient phantaſy is performed by a pre-
ſence of ſenſe, as the horſe is under the ſenſe of hunger, and
that without any formal ſyllogiſm preſſeth him to eat. Hale.
Se’NTIENT. n.ſ.. [from the adjective.) He that has perception.
If the ſentient be carried, paſſibus acquis, with the body,
whoſe motion it would obſerve, ſuppoſing it regular, the re-
move is inſenſible. Glanv. Scepſ.
SENTIMENT. n.ſ.. [ſentiment, French.]
1. Thought; notion; opinion.
The conſideration of the reaſon, why they are annexed to
ſo many other ideas, ſerving to give us due ſentiments of the
wiſdom and goodneſs of the ſovereign Diſpoſer of all things,
may not be unſuitable to the main end of theſe enquiries. Loc.
Alike to council or th'aſſembly came,
With equal ſouls and ſentinents the ſame. Pope.
2. The ſenſe conſidered diſtinčtly from the language or things;
a ſtriking ſentence in a compoſition.
SENT INFL. m. ſ. [ſentinele, French, from ſentio, Lat.j One
who watches or keeps guard to prevent furpriſe.
Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge;
Uſe careful watch, chuſe truſty ſentinels. Shakespeare. R. III.
Counſellors are not commonly ſo united, but that one
counſellor keepeth ſºrt-rel over another; ſo that if any do
counſel out of faction or private ends, it commonly comes to
the king's ear. - Bacon's Eſſays.
Firſt, the two eyes, which have the ſeeing pow'r,
Stand as one watchman, ſpy, ſº
Being plac'd aloft, within the head's high tow'r, -
And though both ſee, yet both but one thing tell. Davies.
Love to our citadel reſorts,
Through thoſe deceitful ſallyports; {
Our ſentinels betray our forts. Denham.
The ſenſes are ſituate in the head, as ſentinel; in a watch-
tower, to receive and convey to the ſoul the impreſſions of
external objects. Kay on the Creation.
Perhaps they had ſºrtinel, waking while they ſlept; but evºn
this would be unfoldierlike. Broome's Nºtes on the Odyſſey.
SE'NTRY. m. ſ. [Corrupted, I believe, from ſentinel.]
1. A watch; a ſentinel; one who watches in a garriſon, or
army, to keep them from ſurpriſe.
If I do ſend, diſpatch
Thoſe ſentries to our aid; the reſt will ſerve
For a ſhort holding. Shakespeare Corizianuſ.
The youth of hell ſtričt guard may keep,
And ſet their ſentries to the utmoſt deep.
One gooſe they had, 'twas all they could allow,
A wakeful ſentry, and on duty now.
2. Guard; watch; the duty of a ſentry.
Here toils and death, and death's half brother, ſleep,
Dryden.
Bryden.
Forms terrible to view, their ſentry keep. Dryden.
Thou, whoſe nature cannot ſleep,
O'er my ſlumbers ſentry keep ;
Guard me 'gainſt thoſe watchful foes,
Brown.
Whoſe eyes are open while mine cloſe.
SeparaBI'lity. n.ſ.. [from ſparable.] The quality of ad-
mitting diſunion or diſcerption,
Separability is the greateſt argument of real diſtinétion. Glan.
The greateſt argument of real diſtinélion is ſeparability, and
aćtual ſeparation; for nothing can be ſeparated from it-
ſelf. Morris.
SE'PARABLE. adj. [ſparall, Fr. ſeparabºis, Lat. from ſeparate.]
1. Suſceptive of diſunion; diſcerptible.
2. Poſſible to be disjoined from ſomething.
Expanſion and duration have this farther agreement, that
though they are both conſidered by us as having parts, yet
their parts are not ſeparable one from another. Locke:
The infuſions and deco&amp;tions of plants contain the moſt
ſeparable parts of the plants, and convey not only their nutri-
tious but medicinal qualities into the blood. Arbuthnot.
SE'PARAbleNess. n.ſ.. [from ſparable.] Capableneſs of being
ſeparable.
Trials permit me not to doubt of the ſeparableneſ of a yellow
tinéture from gold. Boyle.
To SE'PARATE. v. a. [ſparo, Latin; ſparer, French.]
I. To break; to divide into parts.
2. To diſunite; to disjoin.
I’ll to England.
—To Ireland, I: our ſeparated fortunes
Shall keep us both the ſafer, Shakespeare Macleth.
Reſolv’d,
Rather than death, or aught than death more dread,
Shall ſeparate us.
3. To ſever from the reſt.
Can a body be inflammable, from which it would puzzle a
chymiſt to ſeparate an inflammable ingredient? Boyle:
Death from ſin no power can ſeparate. Milton.
4. To ſet apart; to ſegregate.
Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I
have called them. Aéis xiii. 2.
David ſeparated to the ſervice thoſe who ſhould propheſy.
1 Chron. xxv. 1.
Milton.
5. To withdraw.
Separate thyſelf from me: if thou wilt take the left, I will
go to the right. Gen. xiii. 9.
To SE'PARATE. v. n. To part 3 to be diſunited.
When there was not room enough for their herds to feed;
they by conſent ſeparated, and enlarged their paſture. Locke.
SEPA R At E. adj. [from the verb.]
1. Divided from the reſt.
Eve ſetarate he wiſh'd. Milton.
'Twere hard to conceive an eternal watch, whoſe pieces
were never ſeparate one from another, nor ever in any other
form. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
In a ſecret vale the Trojan ſees
Aſ p'rate grove. Dryden.
2. Diſunited from the body; diſengaged from corporeal nature.
Whatever ideas the mind can receive and contemplate
without the help of the body, it can retain without the help
of the body too; or elſe the ſoul, or any ſparate ſpirit, will
have but little advantage by thinking. Locke.
SE/PARATELY. adv. [from ſeparate.] Apart ; ſingly ; not in
union; diſtinétly; particularly.
It is of ſingular uſe to princes, if they take the opinions of
their council, both ſeparately and together; for private opinion
is more free, but opinion before others is more reſerved. Bac.
If you admit of many figures, then conceive the whole to-
gether, and not every thing ſparately and in particular.
Dryden.
SE'P A R AT EN Ess. m.ſ.. [from ſeparate. J The ſtate of being
ſeparate. -
SEP A R A'Tic N. m.ſ.. [ſºtaratiº, Lat. etaration, Fr. from ſparate.]
1. The act of ſeparating; disjunction.
They have a dark opinion, that the ſoul doth live after the
fparation from the body. . - Abbot.
Any part of our bodies, vitally united to that which is con-
ſcious in us, makes a part of our'elves; but upon ſe are tion
from the vital union, by which that conſciouſneſs is commu-
nicated,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E Q
t ſince was part of ourſelvº, is
nicated, that which a mom” Locke.
now no more ſo.
being ſeparat -
2. Tº º: * . tongues was a mark of ſeparation, ſo
- Bacon.
ino of one language W* * mark of union. ... -
3 **'. ...; or operation of diſuniting things
minºled. - -
mº fifteenth part of ſilver, incorporatº wº
d by any matter of ſeparation, -
be recovered by any which is the laſt refuge in ſparº-
€ $ diſunion.
th gold, will not
unleſs you put a
antity of ſilver
º qu y • Bacon.
4. Divorce; disjunction from a married ſtate.
Did you not hear
A buzzing of a ſeparation
c fº, Shakeſpeare.
Between the king and Cath'rine?
SE'parat is r. m. ſ. [ſeparatiſe, Fr. from ſpºratº] One who
divides from the church; a ſchiſmatick; ." ſeceder.
The anabaptiſts, ſeparatiſts, and ſcºries tenets are full of
i ſchiſm, and inconſiſtent with º, ſe heretical º:
ti ronounce all thoſe heretical, or Sar"
Our modern ſeparatiſts p Decay of Piety.
- i nal, from whom they have withdrawn.
º Says the ſeparatiſt, if thoſe, who have the rule over you,
- ſhould command you any thing about church affairs, you
ought not, in conſcience, to obey them. South s Sermons.
i SEPARA'tor. n.ſ. [from ſparate.] One who divides; a di-
vider. -
º Separatory. adj. [from ſparate.] Uſed in ſeparation.
i The moſt conſpicuous gland of an animal i.he ſyſtem of
| the guts, where the laćteals are the emiſſary veſſels, or ſepara-
| tory dućts. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
- Sepili" ble. adj. [ſpio, Lat..] That may be buried. Bailey.
Seriment, n.f. [ſpimentum, Lat..] A hedge; a fence. Bail.
Seposition. n ſ [jepono, Latin.] The act of ſetting apart;
ſegregation. -
Sept. n.ſ.. [ſptum, Latin.] A clan; a race;
A word uſed only with regard or alluſion to Ireland, and, I
ſuppoſe, Iriſh.
This judge, being the lord's brehon, adjudgeth a better ſhare
- unto the lord of the ſoil, or the head of that ſept, and alſo
unto himſelf for his judgment a greater portion, than untº the
plaintiffs. Spenſºr on Ireland.
The true and ancient Ruſſians, a ſºft whom he had met
with in one of the provinces of that vaſt empire, were white
like the Danes. Boyle.
The Engliſh forces were ever too weak to ſubdue ſo many
warlike nations, or ſepts, of the Iriſh as did poſſeſs this
iſland. Davies on Ireland.
SeptA'scular. adj. Iſºptem and angulus, Latin.] Having
ſeven corners or ſides.
| Septembe R. n.ſ. [Latin; Septembre, French.] The ninth
month of the year; the ſeventh from March.
September hath his name as being the ſeventh month from
March: he is drawn with a merry and cheerful countenance,
- in a purple robe Peacham on Drawing.
Sept ENARY. adj. [ſptenarius, Lat.] Conſiſting of ſeven.
Every controverſy has ſeven queſtions belonging to it; tho’
the order of nature ſeems too much neglected by a confine-
ment to this ſeptenary number. Watts.
SEPTE/NARY. n.ſ. The number ſeven.
The days of men are caſt up by ſeptenaries, and every ſe-
venth year conceived to carry ſome altering charaćter in tem-
per of mind or body. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Theſe conſtitutions of Moſes, that proceed ſo much upon
a ſeptenary, or number of ſeven, have no reaſon in the nature
of the thing. Burnet.
SEPTENNIAL. adj. [ſprennis, Latin.]
1. Laſting ſeven years.
2. Happening once in ſeven years.
. Being once diſpenſed with for his ſºftennial viſit, by a holy
inſtrument from Petropolis, he reſolved to govern them by
ſubaltern miniſters. Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
With weekly libels and ſºftennial ale,
Their wiſh is full, to riot and to rail. Anonym.
SEPTENTRION. n.ſ. [Fr. ſºftentrio, Latin.] The North.
Thou art as oppoſite to every good,
As the antipodes are unto us,
Or as the South to the Septentrion. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
SEPTE'NTR1ON. }*; [ſeptentrionalis, Latin; ſeptentrional,
SEPTENT RIon AL. $ French..] Northern.
Back'd with a ridge of hills,
That ſcreen'd the fruits of th’earth and ſeats of men
- From cold ſeptentrien blaſts. AMilton's Par. Regain'd.
If the Spring
º
a generation.
z
Preceding ſhould be deſtitute of rain,
Or blaſt ſettentrional with bruſhing wings
Sweep up the ſmoaky miſts and vapours damp,
SEP Then woe to mortals. Philips.
- - T EN a - -
s ºrrosa LITY, n.ſ.. [from ſeptentrional.] Northerli-
-- r !--
*FT ENTRIon Ally, adv.
s North; northerly. [from ſeptentrisnal.] Towards the
Se’ptuagiNT. n.ſ. [ſeptuaginta, Latin. J
To SEPU'Lc HRE. v. a. [from the noun.
If they be powerfully excited, and equally let fall, they
commonly ſink down, and break the water, at that extreme
whereat they were ſeptentrionally excited. Brown.
To SEPTEN i R10'N AT E v. n. [from ſeptentrio, Lat.] To tend
northerly.
Steel and good iron, never excited by the loadſtone, ſepten-
trinate at one extreme, and auſtralize at another. Brown.
SE'ptical. adj. [anºlºs...] Having power to promote or
produce putrefaction.
As a ſeptical medicine, Galen commended the aſhes of a
ſalamander. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
SEPTILA'TERAL. adj. ſ ſºftem and lateris, Lat.] Having ſev
ſ I g leven
ſides.
By an equal interval they make ſeven triangles, the baſes
whereof are the ſeven ſides of a ſeptilateral figure, deſcribed
within a circle. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Septua'GENARy. adj. [ſeptuagenarius, Lat. ſptuagenaire, Fr.]
Conſiſting of ſeventy.
The three hundred years of John of times, or Neſtor, can-
not afford a reaſonable encouragement beyond Moſes's ſeptua-
ginary determination. Brown's Wugar Errourt.
Septuage's iMAL. adj. [ſeptuagºſimus, Latin.] Conſiſting of
ſeventy.
In our abridged and ſeptuageſimal age, it is very rare to be-
hold the fourth generation. Brown's Pulgar Erreurs.
The old Greek
verſion of the Old Teſtament, ſo called as being ſuppoſed the
work of ſeventy-two interpreters.
which way ſoever you try, you ſhall find the produćt great
enough for the extent of this earth; and if you follow the
ſptuagint chronology, it will ſtill be far higher. Burret.
SEPTuple. adj. [Jeptuplex, Latin.] Seven times as much.
A technical term.
Sepulch Ral. adj. [ſpukral, Fr. ſepulcralis, from ſepulchrum,
Lat..] Relating to burial; relating to the grave; monumental.
Whilſt our ſouls negotiate there,
We like ſepulchral ſtatues lay;
All day the ſame our poſtures were,
And we ſaid nothing all the day. Donne,
Mine eye hath found that ſad ſepulchral rock,
That was the caſket of heav'n's richeſt ſtore. Milton.
Set ulchral lies our holy walls to grace,
And new-year odes. Pope's Dunciad.
SE'Pulch.R.E. n.ſ.. [ſepulcre, Fr. ſepulchrum, Lat..] A grave;
a tomb.
To entail him and’s heirs unto the crown,
What is it but to make thy ſepulchre P Shakespeare Henry VI.
Flies and ſpiders get a ſepulchre in amber, more durable than
the monument and embalming of any king. Bacon.
There where the virgin's ſon his doctrine taught,
His miracles, and our redemption wrought;
Where I, by thee inſpir’d, his praiſes ſung,
And on his ſepukhi e my offering hung. Sandys.
Perpetual lamps for many hundred years have continued
burning, without ſupply, in the ſepulchrei of the ancients. Wilk.
If not one common ſepulchre contains
Our bodies, or one urn our laſt remains,
Yet Ceyx and Alcyone ſhall join. Dryden.
It is accented on the
ſecond ſyllable by Shakeſpeare and Milton; on the firſt, more
properly, by jºhnſon and Prior.] To bury; to entomb.
Go to thy lady's grave, and call her thence;
Or, at the leaſt, in her’s ſepulchre thine. Shakeſp.
I am glad to ſee that time ſurvive,
Where merit is not ſepulcher'd alive ;
Where good men's virtues them to honours bring,
And not to dangers. Ben. johnſºn.
Thou ſo ſepulcher'd in ſuch pomp do'ſt lie,
That kings for ſuch a tomb would wiſh to die. Milton.
Diſparted ſtreams ſhall from their channe's fly,
And, deep ſurcharg’d, by ſandy mountains lie, Pri
rtor.
Obſcurely ſpucher d.
SE'pulture. n.ſ. [ſepulture, Fr. ſepultura, Latl Interment;
burial.
That Niobe, weeping over her children, was turned into a
ſtone, was nothing elſe but that during her life the erected
over her ſpultures a marble tomb of her own. Brown.
Where we may royal ſepulture prepare;
With ſpeed to Meleſinda bring relief,
Recall her ſpirits, and moderate her grief Dryden.
In England ſepulture, or burial of the dead, may be dº-
ferred and put off for the debts of the perſon deceaſed. Aylºff'.
SEQUA’cious. adj. [ſequacis, Latin.]
1. Following; attendant.
Orpheus could lead the ſavage race,
And trees uprooted left their place,
Sequacious of the lyre; -
But bright Cecilia rais'd the wonder higher:
When to her organ vocal breath was giv'n,
An angel heard and ſtraight appeard,
Miſtaking earth for heav'n, Dryden,
Above<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E Q.
S E R
*
jià,
rº.
ºt.
---
las-
Above thoſe ſuperſtitious horrours that enſlave
The fond ſequacious herd, to myſtick faith
And blind amazement prone, th' enlighten’d few
The glorious ſtranger hail! Thomſºn.
2. Dućtile; pliant. -
In the greater bodies the forge was eaſy, the matter being
dućtile and ſequacious, and obedient to the hand and ſtroke of
the artificer, and apt to be drawn, formed, or moulded. Ray.
Sequa'city. n.ſ.. [from ſequax, Latin.] Dućtility; tough-
neſs.
Matter, whereof creatures are produced, hath a cloſeneſs,
lentor, and ſquacity. Bacon's Natural Hylory.
SE'QUEL. n.ſ.. [ſequelle, French; ſequela, Latin.]
1. Concluſion; ſucceeding part.
If black ſcandal or foul-fac’d reproach
Attend the ſequel of your impoſition,
Your meer enforcement ſhall acquittance me. Shakespeare R. III.
Was he not a man of wiſdom Yes, but he was poor: but
was he not alſo ſucceſsful? True, but ſtill he was poor: and
once grant this, and you cannot keep off that unavoidable ſe-
quel in the next verſe, the poor man's wiſdom is deſpiſed.
South's Sermons.
2. Conſequence; event.
Let any principal thing, as the ſun or the moon, but once
ceaſe, fail, or ſwerve, and who doth not eaſily conceive that
the ſequel thereof would be ruin both to itſelf and whatſoever
dependeth on it Hooker.
In theſe he put two weights,
The ſequel each of parting and of fight. Milton's Par. Loft.
3. Conſequence inferred; conſequentialneſs.
What ſequel is there in this argument? An archdeacon is
the chief deacon: ergo, he is only a deacon. Whitgifte.
SE'QUEN ce. m. ſ. [from ſequor, Latin.]
1. Order of ſucceſſion.
How art thou a king,
But by fair ſequence and ſucceſſion ?
2. Series; arrangement; method.
The cauſe proceedeth from a precedent ſequence, and ſeries
of the ſeaſons of the year. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
SE'QUENT. adj. [ſequens, Latin.]
1. Following; ſucceeding.
Let my tryal be mine own confeſſion:
Immediate ſentence then, and ſequent death,
Is all the grace I beg. Shakespeare Meaſ, for Meaſure.
There he dies, and leaves his race
Growing into a nation; and now grown,
Suſpected to a ſequent king, who ſeeks
To ſtop their overgrowth. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
2. Conſequential.
SEQUEN ... n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive..] A follower. Not in
uſe.
Here he hath framed a letter to a ſequent of the ſtranger
queen's, which accidentally miſcarried. Shakeſpeare.
To SEQUESTER. v. a. ſ. ſequeſtrer, Fr. ſecreſtar, Spaniſh ;
ſequeſtro, low Latin.]
Shakeſp. R. II.
1. To ſeparate from others for the ſake of privacy.
Why are you ſequeſter'd from all your train : Shakeſ?.
To the which place a poor ſequeſter'd ſtag,
That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
Did come to languiſh. Shakespeare As you like it.
In ſhady bow'r,
More ſacred and ſequeſter'd, though but feign'd,
Pan or Sylvanus never ſlept. Milton.
Ye ſacred Nine ! that all my ſoul poſſeſs,
Whoſe raptures fire me, and whoſe viſions bleſs,
Bear me, oh bear me to ſequeſler'd ſcenes
Of bow'ry mazes, and ſurrounding greens. Pope.
2. To put aſide; to remove.
Although I had wholly ſequeſtered my civil affairs, yet I ſet
down, out of long continued experience in buſineſs, and con-
verſation in books, what I thought pertinent to this af-
fair. Bacon.
3. To withdraw; to ſegregate. -
A thing as ſeaſonable in grief as in joy, as decent being
added unto actions of greateſt weight and ſolemnity, as being
uſed when men moſt ſequeſter themſelves from action. Hooker.
4. To ſet aſide from the uſe of the owner to that of others.
5. To deprive of poſſeſſions.
It was his taylor and his cook, his fine faſhions and his
French ragou's, which ſequeſtered him ; and, in a word, he
came by his poverty as ſinfully as ſome uſually do by their
riches. South.
Se QUE's TRABLE. adj. [from ſequeſtrate.]
1. Subječt to privation.
2. Capable of ſeparation.
Hartſhorn, and divers other bodies belonging to the animal
kingdom, abound with a not uneaſily ſeque/ºrable ſalt. Boyle.
To SEQUE's TRATE. v. n. To ſequeſter; to ſeparate from
company.
In general contagions more periſh for want of neceſſaries
than by the malignity of the diſeaſe, they ºº::
from mankind, * - Arbuthnot on Air.
SEQUESTRATION. m. ſ. [ſequeſtration, Fr. from ſequeſtrate.]
1. Separation; retirement.
His addićtion was to courſes vain 3
I never noted in him any ſtudy,
Any retirement, any ſequeſtratiºn
From open haunts and popularity.
- There muſt be leiſure, retirement, ſolitude,
tion of a man's ſelf from the noiſe and toils of
truth ſcorns to be ſeen by eyes too much fixt up
jećts.
2. Diſunion; disjunétion.
The metals remain unſevered, the fire only dividing the
body into ſmaller particles, hindering reſt and continuity,
without any ſequeſtration of elementary principles. Boyle.
3. State of being ſet aſide. y princip oyle
Since Henry Monmouth firſt began to reign,
Before whoſe glory I was great in arms,
This loathſome ſequeſtration have I had. Shakesp. H. VI.
4. Deprivation of the uſe and profits of a poſſeſſion.
If there be a ſingle ſpot in the glebe more barren, the rector
or vicar may be obliged, by the caprice or pique of the biſhop,
to build upon it, under pain of ſequeſ/ration. Swift.
Shakespeare Henry V.
and a ſequeſłra-
the world; for
on inferior ob-
South's Sermons.
SEQUESTRA"roR. m. ſ. [from ſequeſtrate.] One who takes from
a man the profit of his poſſeſſions.
I am fallen into the hands of publicans and ſequeſtrators,
and they have taken all from me. Taylor.
SERA'GLIo. m. ſ. [Italian, perhaps of Oriental criginal. I he
g is loſt in the pronunciation.] A houſe of women kept for
debauchery.
There is a great deal more ſolid content to be found in a
conſtant courſe of well living, than in the voluptuouſneſs of a
ſcraglio. Norris.
SE’RAPH. n.ſ. [...AN-2) One of the orders of angels.
He is infinitely more remote in the real excellency of his
nature, from the higheſt and perfecteſt of all created beings,
than the pureſt ſcraph is from the moſt contemptible part of
matter, and conſequently muſt infinitely exceed what our nar-
row underſtandings can conceive of him. Locke.
As full, as perfect in vile man that mourns,
As the rapt ſeraph that adores and burns. Pope.
SERA'PH1.cal. adj. [ſeraphique, French ; from ſcraſh..] An-
SERA'PHick. ; gelick; angelical.
Love is curious of little things, deſiring to be of angelical
purity, of perfect innocence, and ſeraphical fervour. Taylor.
Seraphick arms and trophies. 1%ilton.
'Tis to the world a ſecret yet,
Whether the nymph, to pleaſe her ſwain,
Talks in a high romantick ſtrain;
Or whether he at laſt deſcends
To like with leſs ſeraphick ends. Swift.
SE/RAPHIM. n.ſ. [This is properly the plural of ſcrath, and
therefore cannot have s added; yet, in compliance with our
language, ſcraphim, is ſometimes written..] Angels of one of
the heavenly orders. -
To thee Cherubim and ſcraphim continually do cry. Com. Pr.
Then flew one of the ſcrap hims unto me, having a live coal
in his hand. Iſ vi. 6.
Of ſcraphim another row. ... Miton.
SERE. adj. [reaſian, Saxon, to dry.] Dry; withered; no
longer green. . See SEAR.
The muſes, that were wont green bays to wear,
Now bringen bitter elder-branches ſere. Spenſer.
He is deformed, crooked, old, and ſere,
Ill-fac'd, worſe bodied, ſhapeleſs every where;
Vicious, ungentle. Shakeſp. Comedy of Erreurs.
Ere this diurnal ſtar
Leave cold the night, how we his gather'd beams
Reflected, may with matter ſere foment. Milton.
They ſere wood from the rotten hedges took,
And ſeeds of latent fire from flints provoke. Dryden:
On a ſere branch,
Low bending to the bank, I ſat me down,
Muſing and ſtill.
SERE. m.ſ. [Of this word I know not the etymology; nor, ex-
cept from this paſſage, the meaning. Can't com"&gt; like ſleerſ,
from ſcynan, Saxon, to cut ) Claw; talon.
Two eagles, -
That, mounted on the winds, together ſtill
Their ſtrokes extended; but arriving n°W
Amidſt the council, over every brow. •
sº... their thick wings, and threatning death's cold fears,
*i.j checkstore with their eager ſerº Cº.
SERENA'pe. m.ſ.. [ſºrenade, Fr. Jº". Italian, whence, in
Milton, ſºrenate, from ſºrº Latin, the lºgº commonly i.
tending their miſtreſſes in fair nights.] Muſick or ſongs Wit
which ladies are entertained by their lovers in the night.
Mixt dance, or wanton maſk, or midnight ball,
Or ſerenate, which the ſtarv'd lover fings º:
To his proud fair; beſt quitted with diſdain. Alºn.
Fooliſh ſwallow, what do'ſt thou
So often at my window do,
With thy tuneleſs ſerenade # cº
23 P Shall
Rowe's Royal Convert.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E R
S E. R.
Shall I the neighbours nightly reſt invade,
At her deaf doors, with ſome vile ſerenade P Dryden
Will. fancies.ht never ſhould have been the man he is. had
not he broke windows, and diſturbed honeſt people with his
Jºel, when he was a young fellow. Addison.
ºil. a. [from the noun..] To entertain with
He conti -aa- - -
continued to ſerenade her every morning, 'till the queen
Yºcharmed with his harmon
SERENE. ad; •. - y. - Speciator.
I. tº: #. ſ 4. French; ſerenus, Latin.]
, Spirits live inſpherd
In *šºns mild, of calm and frene air. Milton.
The moon, ſtrºne in glory, mounts the ſky. Pope.
2. Unruffled; undiſturbed; even of temper; peaceful or calm of
mind; ſhewing a calm mind.
- There wanted yet a creature might ercót
His ſtature, and upright with front ſerene
Govern the reſt. Milton.
Exciting them, by a due remembrance of all that is paſt,
wnto future circumſpection, and a Jereme expectation of the
future life. Grew's Coſmol.
Gutta SERE'NA. n J. An obſtruction in the optick nerve.
- Theſe eyes that roll in vain,
$o thick a drop ſerene hath quench'd their orbs. Milton.
SERENE, nºſ [from the adjective..] A calm damp evening.
Where ever death doth pleaſe tº appear,
Seas, fºreneſ, ſwords, ſhot, ſickneſs, all are there. Ben. johnſ.
To Sere's E. v. a. [ſeriner, French ; ſereno, Latin.]
1. To calm; to quiet.
2. To clear; to brighten. Not proper.
Take care
Thy muddy bev'rage to ſerene, and drive
Precipitant the baſer ropy lees. Philips.
SFRE'NEly, adv. [from ſeren...]
1. Calmly ; quietly.
The ſetting ſun now ſhone ſirenely bright. Pope.
2. With unruffled temper; coolly.
Whatever practical rule is generally broken, cannot be ſup-
poſed innate; it being impoſſible that men would, without
ſhame or fear, confidently and ſeremely break a rule, which they
could not but evidently know that God had ſet up. Locke.
The nymph did like the ſcene appear,
Seremely pleaſant, calmly fair: {
Soft fell her words as flew the air. Prior.
SFRE'NE Ness. n.ſ. [ from ſereme J Serenity.
SERE'NITUDE. m. ſ. [from ſerene. J Calmneſs; coolneſs of
mind. Not in uſe.
From the equal diſtribution of the phlegmatick humour,
will flow quietude and ſerenitude in the affections. //otton.
SERE/NITY.. n.f. [ſerenité, Fr. from ſtrenus, Latin.]
1. Calmneſs; temperature.
In the conſtitution of a perpetual equinox, the beſt part of
the globe would be deſolate; and as to that little that would
be inhabited, there is no reaſon to expect that it would con-
ſtantly enjoy that admired calm and ſtrenity. Bentley.
Pure ſerenity apace -
Induces thought, and contemplation ſtill. Thomſºn.
2. Peace; quietneſs; not diſturbance.
A general peace and ſerenity newly ſucceeded a general
trouble and cloud throughout all his kingdoms. Temple.
3. Evenneſs of temper; coolneſs of mind.
I cannot ſee how any men ſhould ever tranſgreſs thoſe mo:
ral rules, with confidence and ſtrenity, were they *; º
amped upon their minds. - ocke.
sº º 27. yº ſerge, French; xerga, Spaniſh, which Covairu-
vias derives from xirica, Arabick; Skinner from Jerse, Ger-
man, a mat.] A kind of cloath.
The ſame wool one man felts into a hat, another weaves
into cloath, another into kerſey or ſerge, and another into
2II.3S. Hale.
Ye weavers, all your ſhuttles throw,
And bid broad-cloaths and ſerge grow. Gay.
SERGEANT. n.ſ.. [ſergent, French; ſergente, Italian, from
vicus. Latin. -
I /... º buſineſs it is to execute the commands of
tagiſtrates. -
magi Had I but time, as this fell ſergeant, death,
Is ſtria in his arreſt, oh, I could tell. Shakespeare Hamlet.
when it was day the magiſtrates ſent the ſergeºiſ, ſaying,
let theſe men go. 4.75 xvi. 35.
2. A petty officer in the ;
This is the ſergeant,
who, like a good and hardy ſoldier. fought. Shakeſ Macb.
3. A lawyer of the higheſt rank under a judge. -
None ſhould be made ſergeant, but ſuch as probably might
be held fit to be judges afterwards... • Bacºn.
4. It is a title given to ſome of the king's ſervants: as, ſergeant
chirurgeons.
Se'RGEANTRY. m.ſ. [from ſergeant.]
Grand ſergeantry is that where one holdeth lands of the
king by ſervice, which he ought to do in his own perſon unto
him as to bear the kings banner or his ſpear, or to lead his
hoſt, or to be his marſhal, or to blow a horn, when he ſººth
his enemies invade the land; or to find a man at arms to fight
within the four ſeas, or elſe to do it himſelf; or to bear the
king's ſword before him at his coronation, or on that day to
be his ſewer, carver, butler, or chamberlain. Petit ſergeantry
is where a man holdeth land of the king, to yield him yearly
ſome ſmall thing toward his wars: as a ſword, dagger, bow,
knife, ſpear, pair of gloves of mail, a pair of purs, or ſuch
like. Cowel.
SERGEANTSHIP. m. ſ. [from ſerjeant.] The office of a ſergeant.
Se'Ries. n.ſ. [ſerie, Fr. ſeries, Latin.] -
1. Sequence; order.
Draw out that antecedent, by reflecting briefly upon the text
as it lies in the ſeries of the epiſtle. //ard ºf Infideity
The chaſms of the correſpondence I cannot ſupply, having
deſtroyed too many letters to preſerve any ſeries. Pope.
2. Succeſſion; courſe.
This is the ſeries of perpetual woe,
Which thou, alas, and thine are born to know. Pºpe.
SERIOUS. adj. [ſerieux, Fr. ſerius, Latin.]
1. Grave; ſolemn; not volatile; not light of behaviour.
2. Important; weighty; not trifling.
I'll hence to London on a ſerious matter. Shakespeare H. VI.
There's nothing ſerious in mortality ;
All is but toys. Shakespeare ?. Macbeth.
SE’Riously. adv. . [from ſerious.] Gravely; ſolemnly; in
earneſt; without levity.
It cannot but be matter of very dreadful conſideration to
any one, ſober and in his wits, to think ſeriouſly with himſelf,
what horror and confuſion muſt needs ſurprize that man, at
the laſt day of account, who had led his whole life by one
rule, when God intends to judge him by another. South.
All laugh to find
Unthinking plainneſs ſo o'erſpread thy mind,
That thou could'ſt ſeriouſly perſuade the crowd
To keep their oaths, and to believe a god. Dryden.
Juſtin Martyr, Tertullian, Lačtantius, and Arnobius, tell
us, that this martyrdom firſt of all made them ſeriouſly inqui-
ſitive into that religion, which could endue the mind with ſo
much ſtrength, and overcome the fear of death, nay, raiſe an
earneſt deſire of it, though it appeared in all its terrors. Addison
SE'Riousness. n.ſ. [from ſerious...] Gravity; ſolemnity; ear-
neſt attention.
That ſpirit of religion and ſeriouſneſs vaniſhed all at once,
and a ſpirit of libertiniſm and profaneneſs ſtarted up in the
room of it. - Atterbury's Sermons.
The youth was received at the door by a ſervant, who then
conducted him with great filence and ſeriouſneſ, to a long gal-
lery, which was darkened at noon-day. . Addiſon's Speciator.
SERMcCINA"tion. n.ſ.. [ſermolinatio, Latin.] The act or
practice of making ſpeeches.
SER MociNA‘tor. n.ſ.. [ſermocinor, Latin. J A preacher; a
ſpecchmaker.
Theſe obſtreperous ſermocinators make eaſy impreſſion upon
the minds of the vulgar. Howel.
SE'RMon. n.ſ.. [ſermon, Fr. ſermo, Lat.] A diſcourſe of inſtruc-
tion pronounced by a divine for the edification of the people.
As for our ſermons, be they never ſo ſound and perfect, God's
word they are not, as the ſermons of the prophets were; no,
they are but ambiguouſly termed his word, becauſe his word is
commonly the ſubject whereof they treat, and muſt be the
rule whereby they are framed. Hooker.
This our life, exempt from publick haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in ſtones, and good in every thing. Shakeſpeare.
In his ſermons unto the ſoldiers, and in open talk with the
nobility, it ſhould ſeem that he himſelf had been enough to
have overthrown the Turks. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turki.
Sermons he heard, yet not ſo many
As left no time to practiſe any :
He heard them reverently, and then
His practice preach'd them o'er again. Craſhaw.
Many, while they have preached Chriſt in their ſermons,
have read a lecture of atheiſm in their practice. South.
His preaching much, but more his practice wrought;
A living ſermon of the truths he taught. Dryden.
To SER Mos. v. a. ſ. ſermoner, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To diſcourſe as in a ſermon.
Some would rather have good diſcipline delivered plainly by
way of precept, or ſe moned at large, than thus cloudily in-
wrapped in allegorical deviſes. Speºſer.
2. To tutor; to teach dogmatically ; to leſſon.
Come, ſermon me no farther:
No villainous bounty yet hath paſt my heart. Shakespeare Timon.
SE'RMoUNTAIN, or Seſeli, n. ſ. [ſilex, Lat..] A plant.
It hath a roſe and umbellated flower, conſiſting of ſeveral
leaves, which are ranged orbicularly, and reſt on the empale-
ment, which becomes a fruit compoſed of two large oblong
furrowed ſeeds, having foliaceous ridges on one fide. To
theſe notes muſt be added, that the ſobes of the leaves are
large, long, and intire, excepting their extremity, where they
are ſlightly cut into three parts. Ažiller.
- SERoſsity.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E. R.
S E. R.
º
º the
º !)
º
jº
ſº
º
*
º
º
SEROUS. adj. [ ſcrewy, French ; ſeroſus, Latin.]
sº. n, f: [ſºrºſité, Fr J. Thin or watery part of the
(x) (1.
in theſe the ſalt and lixiviated ſcrºfty is divided between the
guts and the bladder ; but it remains undivided in birds. Brown.
The tumour of the throat, which occaſions the difficulty of
fwallowing and breathing, proceeds from a ſºroſity obſtructing
the glands, which may be watery, cedematoſe, and ſchirrous,
according to the viſcoſity of the humour. Arbuthnot.
1. Thin; watery. Uſed of the part of the blood which ſepa-
rates in Congºlation from the grumous or red part.
2. Adapted to the ſerum.
This diſeaſe is commonly an extravaſation of ſerum, re-
ceived in ſome cavity of the body; for there may be alſo a
dropſy by a dilatation of the ſerous veſſels, as that in the ova-
rium Arbuthnºt on Diet.
SERPENT. m. ſ. [ ſerpens, Latin.] An animal that moves
by undulation without legs. They are often venomous. They
are divided into two kinds; the viper, which brings young,
and the ſnake, that lays eggs.
She was arrayed all in lily white,
And in her right hand bore a cup of gold,
With wine and water filled up to the height;
In which a ſerpint did himſelf enfold,
That horror made to all that did behold.
She ſtruck me with her tongue,
Moſt ſerpent like, upon the very heart. Shakespeare . K. Lear.
They, or under ground, or circuit wide,
With ſerpent error wand'ring, found their way. Milton.
Haply piercing through the dark diſguiſe,
The chief I challeng’d: he whoſe practis'd wit
Knew all the ſerpent mazes of deceit,
Eludes my ſearch. , Pope's Odyſſey.
Sº' PENTINE, ad. [ ſerpentinus, Lat. from ſerpent.j
1. Reſembling a ſerpent.
I craved of him to lead me to the top of this rock, with
meaning to free him from ſo ſerpentine a companion as I
2In. Sidney.
This of ours is deſcribed with legs, wings, a ſerpentine and
winding tail, and a creſt or comb ſomewhat like a cock. Brown.
Nothing wants, but that thy ſhape
Like his, and colour Jerpentine, may ſhew
Thy inward fraud. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
The figures and their parts ought to have a ſerpentine and
flaming form naturally: theſe ſorts of outlines have, I know
not what of life and ſeeming motion in them, which very
much reſembles the attivity of the flame and ſerpent. Dryden.
2. Winding like a ſerpent; anfraćtuous.
Nor can the ſun
Perfect a circle, or maintain his way
One inch direct; but where he roſe to-day
He comes no more, but with a cozening line
Fairy Queen.
Steals by that point, and ſo is ſerpentine. Donne.
His hand the adorned firmament diſplay'd,
Thoſe ſerpentine, yet conſtant motions made. Sandys.
How many ſpacious countrics does the Rhine,
In winding banks, and mazes ſerpentine,
Traverſe, before he ſplits in Belgia's plain,
And, loſt in ſand, creeps to the German main? Blackmore.
SE'R PENTINE. m. ſ. An herb. Airſworth.
Se'RPENT, N E Stºne. n.ſ.
There were three ſpecies of this ſtone known among the
ancients, all reſembling one another, and celebrated for the
ſame virtues. They were all of the marble kind: the one
was green, variegated with ſpots of black, thence called the
black ophites; another, called the white ophites, was green
alſo, but variegated with ſpots of white: the third was called
tephria, and was of a grey colour, variegated with ſmall black
ſpots. The firſt ſpecies was chiefly uſed in medicine, and
found by the ancients only in Egypt; but it is frequent in the
deſarts of Arabia, in the iſlands of the Archipelago, in Italy,
and we have whole quarries of it in Wales. The ancients tell
us, that it was a certain remedy againſt the poiſon of the bite
of ſerpents; but it is now juſtly rejected. Hill's Aſat. Med.
Accept in good part a bottle made of a ſerpentine ſtone,
which hath the quality to give any wine or water, that ſhall be
infuſed therein for four and twenty hours, the taſte and opera-
tion of the ſpaw-water, and is very medicinable for the cure
of the ſpleen and gravel. J/ottºn.
Se'RPENT's Tongue. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
Se'RPEt, n ſ. A baſket. Ainſworth.
SERPI'GINous, adj. [from ſerpigo, Latin.] Diſeaſed with a
ſerpigo.
The ſkin behind her ear downwards became ſerpiginous, and
was covered with white ſcales. JWiſeman.
SERPI'GO. m. ſ. [[Latin.] A kind of tetter.
For thy own bowels, which do call thee fire,
Do curſe the gout, ſerpigo, and the rheum,
For ending thee no ſooner. Shakeſpeare.
She had a node with pains on her right leg, and a ſerpigo on
her right hand. //iſeman.
To SERR. v. a. ſ.ſerrer, French.] To drive hard together; to
6
crowd into a little ſpace. Not received into uſe, nor deſerving
reception.
The frowning and knitting of the brows is a gathering or
ſer tº of the ſpirits, to reſiſt in ſome meaſure ; and alſo this
knitting will follow upon earneſt ſtudying, though it be with-
out diſlike. Tacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Heat attenuates and ſends forth the ſpirit of a body, and
upon, that the more groſs parts contract' and /err themſelves
together. Bacon.
SE'RRATE. }*. [ſºrratus, Latin. J. Formed with jags or
Se/RRATED. $ indentures like the edge of a ſaw. o
All that have ſerrate teeth are carnivorous. Ray.
The common heron hath long legs for wading, a long neck
anſwerable thereto to reach prey, a wide throat to pouch it,
and long toes with ſtrong hooked talons, one of which is re-
markably ſerrate on the edge. Derham's Phy ico-Theology.
This ſtick is uſually knotted, and always armed: one ºf
them with a curious ſhark's tooth near an inch long, and in-
dented or ſerrated on both edges: a ſcurvy weapon. Grºw.
SERRATION. m. ſ. [from ſerra, Latin.J. Formation in the
ſhape of a ſaw.
SF'RRATURE. m. ſ. [from ſerra, Latin.] Indenture like teeth
of ſaws. -
Theſe are ſerrated on the edges; but the ſºrratures are
deeper and groſſer than in any of the reſt. //oodward.
To SE(RR Y. v. a. ſ.ſerrer, French; ferrato, Italian.] To preſs
cloſe; to drive hard together. For ſerry Bacon uſes ſer, but
neither ſerr nor ſerry are received. -
With them roſe
A foreſt huge of ſpears; and thronging helms
Appear'd, and ſerried ſhields in thick array,
Of death immeaſurable. A4ilton's Paradiſe Loft.
Foul diſſipation follow'd, and forc’d rout; -
Nor ſerv'd it to relax their ſerried files. Milton's Par. Loſł.
SE’R v ANT. m. ſ. [ſervant, French; ſervus, Latin.]
1. One who attends another, and acts at his command. The
correlative of maſter.
We are one in fortune; both
Fell by our ſervants, by thoſe men we lov'd moſt. Shakespeare
I had rather be a country ſervant maid,
Than a great queen with this condition.
He diſdain’d not -
Shakespeare R. III.
Thenceforth the form of ſervant to aſſume. Milton:
For maſter or for ſervant here to call -
Was all alike, where only two were all. JDryden.
2. One in a ſtate of ſubječtion. Unuſual.
Being unprepar'd,
Our will became the ſervant to defe&amp;t,
Which elſe ſhould free have wrong’d. Shakespeare Macbeth.
3. A word of civility uſed to ſuperiours or equals.
This ſubjećtion due from all men to all men, is ſomething
more than the compliment of courſe, when our betters tell us
they are our humble ſervants, but underſtand us to be their
ſlaves. Swift.
To SE/Rv ANT. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſubječt. Not in uſe.
My affairs
Are ſervanted to others: though I owe
My revenge properly, remiſſion lies
In Volſcian breaſts. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
To SERVE. v. a. [ſervir, French ; ſervio, Latin.]
1. To attend at command.
Becauſe thou art my brother, ſhould'ſt thou therefore ſerve
me for nought? Gen. xxix. 15.
A goddeſs among gods ador'd, and ſerv'd
By angels numberleſs, thy daily train. Milton.
2. To obey ſervilely or meanly. -
When wealthy, ſhew thy wiſdom not to be
To wealth a ſervant, but make wealth ſerve thee. Denham.
3. To ſupply with food ceremoniouſly.
Others, pamper'd in their ſhameleſs pride,
Are ſerv'd in plate, and in their chariots ride. Dryden.
4. To bring as a menial attendant. -
Bid them cover the table, ſerve in the meat, and we will
come in to dinner. Shakeſp. Merch. ºf Wenice.
Soon after our dinner was ſerved in, which was right good
viands, both for bread and meat: we had alſo drink of three
ſorts, all who ſome and good. - Bacon.
Beſmeared with the horrid juice of ſepia, they danced a lit-
tle in phantaſtick poſtures, retired a while, and then returned
ferving up a banquet as at ſolemn funerals. Taylor.
Some part he roaſts; then ſerve it "P ſo dreſt,
And bid me welcome to this humble feaſt:
Mov’d with diſdain, • -
I with avenging flames the palace burn d. Dryden.
The filme ineſſ ſhould be ſerved up again for fupper, and
breakfaſt next morning. .. A buthn. Hiſtory of jºhn Bull.
5. To be ſubſervient or ſubordinate to.
Bodies bright and greater ſhould not ſerve --
The leſs not ". Milton.
ly with any thing. -
6. Tº: ferve ãº city, ſhall ſerve it out of all the tribes
of Iſrael. Ezek. *; +.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E. R.
i
7. To obey in military actions.
8. To be ſufficient to.
If any ſubject, intereſt, or fancy h
- as -
reaſoning is after their fiſſion y recommended, their
9. To be of uſe to ; to aſſiſt. ; it ſerves their turn. Locke.
When a ſtorm of a ſad miſch
turn it into ſome advantage,
another end, either of religio
Io. To promote.
He conſider'd every creature
Moſt opportune might ſerve his wiles
II, º with. -
. They think herein we ſer -
either hold or ſeek º: the time,
12. To ſatisfy; to content.
As the former empty plea ſerved the ſottiſh Jews, this
*"ually ſerves theſe to put them into a ſojº, paradiſe, by feed-
ing their hopes, without changing their lives. South.
Nothing would ſerve them then but riding. L'Eſtrange.
Sº ... them both to dine,
nd is at once their vinegar and wine. 2
13. To ſtand inſtead of any thing to one. Pope.
The dull flat falſhood ſervº, for policy,
And in the cunning, truth itſelf's a lye. Pope.
ance beats upon our ſpirits,
by obſerving where it can ſerve
n or prudence. Taylor.
Milton.
becauſe thereby we
Hooker.
14. [S. ſervirde, French..] To Serve himſelf of. To make ſ:
of. A mere Galliciſm.
. A complete brave man muſt know ſolidly the main end he
is in the world for ; and withal how to ferve himſelf of the
divine's high contemplations, of the metaphyſician's ſubtile
ſpeculations, and of the natural philoſopher's minute obſer-
Vations. Digly on the Soul.
They would ſerve themſelves of this form. Taylor.
I will ſerve myſelf of this conceſſion. Chillingworth.
It is much more eaſy for men to ſerve their own ends of
thoſe principles, which they do not put into men, but find
there ºilotſon's Sermons.
If they elevate themſelves, ’tis only to fall from a higher
place, becauſe they ſerve themſelves of other men's wings,
neither underſtanding their uſe nor virtue. Dryden', Dufrên.
15. To requite: as, he ſerved me ungratefully.
16. [In divinity.] To worſhip the Supreme Being.
Matters hid leave to God, him ſerve and fear. Milton.
17. Tº Serve a warrant. To ſeize an offender, and carry to
juſtice.
To Serve. v. n.
1. To be a ſervant, or ſlave.
Iſrael ſerved for a wife, and for a wife he kept ſheep. Hºſ.
We will give thee this alſo, for the ſervice which thou ſhalt
ferve with me. Gen. xx. 27.
2. To be in ſubjećtion.
Thou haſt made me to ſerve with thy ſins; thou haſt wearied
me with thine iniquities. Iſ, xliii. 24.
3. To attend ; to wait.
Martha was cumbered about much ſerving, and ſaid, Lord,
do'ſt thou not care that my ſiſter hath left me to ſerve alone *
Like x. 40.
4. To act in war. - -
Both more or leſs have given him the revolt;
And none ſerve with but conſtrained things,
Whoſe hearts are abſent too. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Many noble gentlemen came out of all parts of Italy, who
had before been great commanders, but now ſerved as private
gentlemen without pay. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
- 5. To produce the end deſired.
The look bewrayed, that as ſhe uſed theſe ornaments, not
for herſelf, but to prevail with another, ſo ſhe feared that all
would not ſerve. Sidney.
6. To be ſufficient for a purpoſe.
Take it, ſhe ſaid; and when your needs require,
This little brand will ſerve to light your fire.
7. To ſuit; to be convenient. -
We have the ſummary of all our griefs,
When time ſhall ſerve to ſhew in articles. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Yet time ſerveſ, wherein you may redeem
Your baniſh’d honours. Shakesp. H. IV.
As occaſion ſerves, this noble queen -
And prince ſhall follow with a freſh ſupply. Shakespeare H. VI.
Read that; 'tis with the royal ſignet ſign'd,
And given me by the king, when time ſhould ſerve,
To be perus’d by you. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
8. To conduce; to be of uſe. - - -
Churches, as every thing elſe, receive their chief perfec-
tion from the end whereunto they ſerve. - Hooker.
Our ſpeech to worldly ſuperiors we frame in ſuch ſort as
ſerveth beſt to inform and perſuade the minds of them, who
otherwiſe neither could nor would greatly regard our neceſ-
º Hºoker.
Prieſts ſerve unto the example and ſhadow of heavenly
things. Hebr. viii. 5.
Who leſſens thee, againſt his purpoſe ſerves • y
To manifeſt the more thy might. Milton.
Faſhion is, for the moſt part, nothing but the oſtentation
Dryden.
S E R
of riches; and therefore the high price of what ſerves to
that, rather encreaſes than leſſens its vent. Locke.
Firſt inveſtigate the variety of motions and figures made by
the organs which ſerve for articulation, and the variety of
matter to which thoſe articulations are ſeverally applied. Hold.
Our vićtory only ſerved to lead us on to further viſionary
proſpects. Swift.
9. To officiate or miniſter. -
SER vice. n. ſ. [ſervice, Fr. ſervitium, Latin.]
1. Menial office; low buſineſs done at the command of a maſter.
The baniſh’d Kent, who in diſguiſe
Follow'd his king, and did him ſervice
Improper for a ſlave.
2. Attendance of a ſervant.
Both fell by our ſervants, by thoſe men we lov'd moſt:
A moſt unnatural and faithleſs ſervice. Shakeſp.
3. Place; office of a ſervant.
I have ſerved prince Florizel; but now I am out of ſer.
vice. Shakeſpeare.
- By oppreſſing and betraying me,
Thou might'ſt have ſooner got another ſervice. Shakespeare
Theſe that accuſe him are a yoke of his diſcarded men;
very rogues, now they be out of ſervice. Shakeſp.
A court, properly a fair, the end of it trade and gain; for
none would go to ſervice that thinks he has enough to live
well of himſelf. Temple.
4. Anything done by way of duty to a ſuperior.
That ſºrvice is not ſirvice, ſo being done,
But being ſo allow'd. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
This poem was the laſt piece of ſervice I did for my maſter
King Charles. Dryden.
5. Attendance on any ſuperiour.
Madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchaſe with my duteous ſervice. Shakespeare
Riches gotten by ſ.rvice, tho' it be of the beſt riſe, yet when
gotten by flattery, may be placed amongſt the worſt. Bacon.
6. Profeſſion of reſpect uttered or ſent.
I am a woman, lacking wit,
To make a ſeemly anſwer to ſuch perſons,
Pray do my ſervice to his majcity. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
7. Obedience; ſubmiſſion.
Thou nature, art my Goddeſs; to thy law
My ſervices are bound. Shakesp. K. Lear.
God requires no man's ſervice upon hard and unreaſonable
Terms. Till ty. Serm.
8. Act on the performance of which poſſeſſion depends.
Altho' they built caſtles and made freeholders, yet were
there no tenures and ſervices reſerved to the crown; but the
lords drew all the reſpect and dependency of the common
eople unto themſelves. Davies's State of Ireland.
9. Actual duty; office.
The order of human ſociety cannot be preſerved, nor the
ſervices requiſite to the ſupport of it be ſupplied, without a diſ-
tinction of ſtations, and a long ſubordination of offices. Rºger.
10. Employment; buſineſs.
If ſtations of power and truſt were conſtantly made the
rewards of virtue, men of great abilities would endeavour
to excel in the duties of a religious life, in order to qualify
themſelves for publick ſervice. Swift.
11. Military duty. -
When he cometh to experience of ſervice abroad, or is
put to a piece or pike, he maketh a worthy ſoldier. Spenſºr.
At the parliament at Oxford his youth and want of expe-
rience in ſea ſervice had ſomewhat been ſhrewdly touch-
ed, even before the ſluices of popular liberty were yet ſet
open. . Iſotton's Buckingham.
12. A military atchievement.
Such fellows will learn you by rote where ſervices were
done, at ſuch and ſuch a breach. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
13. Purpoſe; uſe.
All the veſſels of the king's houſe are not for uſes of ho-
nour, ſome be common ſtuff, and for mean ſervice, yet pro-
fitable. Spelman.
14. Uſeful office; advantage.
The ſtork's plea, when taken in a net, was the ſervice
ſhe did in picking up venemous creatures. L’Eſtrange.
The clergy prevent themſelves from doing much ſervice to
religion, by affecting ſo much to converſe with each other,
Shakeſp. K. Lear.
and caring ſo little to mingle with the laity. Swift.
Gentle ſtreams viſit populous towns in their courſe, and
are at once of ornament and ſervice to them. Pºpe.
15. Favour. -
To thee a woman's ſervices are due,
My fool uſurps my body.
16. Publick office of devotion.
According to this form of theirs, it muſt ſtand for a rule,
no ſermon, no ſervice. Hooker.
If that very ſervice of God in the Jewiſh ſynagogues,
which our Lord did approve and ſančtify with his own pre-
fence, had ſo large portions of the law and prophets, together
with the many prayers and pſalms read day by day, as equal
in a manner the length of ours, and yet in that reſpect
Shakſº. K. Lear.
5
W33
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E. R.
S E S
º,
º:
lº.
º
º
º
#,
!!,
;
.
:
* -
--_ -- Y__
was never thought to deſerve blame; is it now an offence
that the like ineaſure of time is beſtowed in the like man-
ner * - Hooker.
I know no neceſſity why private and ſingle abilities ſhould
quite juſtle out and deprive the church of the jºint abilities
and concurrent gifts of many learned and godly men, ſuch
as the compoſers of the ſervice-book were, K Charles.
The congregation was diſcompoſed, and divine ſervice bro-
ken off. //atts.
18. Courſe; order of diſhes.
Cleopatra made Antony a ſupper ſumptuous and royal;
howbeit there was no extraordinary ſervice ſeen on the
board. Hakewill.
19. A tree and fruit. [ſorbus, Latin.]
The flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves, which are placed or-
bicularly, and expand in form of a roſe, whoſe flower-cup
afterwards becomes a fruit ſhaped like a pear or medlar : to
which muſt be added, pennated leaves like that of the
aſh. Miller.
Oétober is drawn in a garment of yellow and carnation;
in his left hand a baſket of ſervices, medlars, and other fruits
that ripen late. Peacham.
SE R v Ice A BLE, adj. [ſerviſable, old French, from ſervice.]
1. Aćtive; diligent; officious. -
He was ſent to the King's court, with letters from that
officer, containing his own ſerviceable diligence in diſcovering
ſo great a perſonage; adding withal more than was true of his
conjectures. Sidney.
I know thee well, a ſerviceable villain;
As duteous to the vices of thy miſtreſs
As badneſs could deſire.
2. Uſeful; beneficial.
Religion hath force to qualify all ſorts of men, and to make
them, in publick affairs, the more ſerviceable ; governors the
apter to rule with conſcience; inferiors, for conſcience ſake,
Shakeſp. K. Lear.
the willinger to obey. Alooker.
So your father charg'd me at our parting,
Be ſerviceable to my ſon, Shakeſp.
His own inclinations were to confine himſelf to his own
buſineſs, and be ſerviceable to religion and learning. Atterbury.
A book to juſtify the revolution, archbiſhop Tillotſon re-
commended to the king as the moſt ſerviceable treatiſe could
have been publiſhed then. Swift.
SE'RVIceABLE Ness. n. ſ. [from ſerviceable.]
1. Officiouſneſs; ačtivity.
He might continually be in her preſence, ſhewing more
humble ſerviceableneſ; and joy to content her than ever be-
fore. • Sidney.
2. Uſefulneſs; beneficialneſs.
All action being for ſome end, its aptneſs to be command-
ed or forbidden, muſt he founded upon its ſerviceableneſ; or
diſſerviceableneſs to ſome end. Norris.
SE’R v Il E. adj. [ſerviſ, French; ſervile, Latin.]
1. Slaviſh ; dependant; mean.
Fight and die, is death deſtroying death:
Where fearing dying, pays death ſervie breath. Shakeſp.
From impoſition of ſtričt laws to free
Acceptance of large grace, from ſervile fear
To filial. Milton.
Ev’n fortune rules no more a ſervile land,
Where exil'd tyrants ſtill by turns command. Pºpe.
2. Fawning; cringing.
The moſt ſervile flattery is lodged the moſt eaſily in the
groſleſt capacity; for their ordinary conceit draweth a yield-
ing to their greaters, and then have they not wit to diſcern
the right degrees of duty. Sidney.
She muſt bend the ſervile knee,
And fawning take the ſplendid robber's boon. Thomſºn.
SE’R v II. El Y. adv. [from ſervile.] Meanly; ſlaviſhly.
Tº each changing news, they chang'd affections bring,
And ſerviley from fate expect a King. Dryd, Aurengzebe.
He affects a ſingularity in his ačtions and thoughts, rather
than ſervilely to copy from the wiſeſt. Swift.
SE'Rv1LENEss. -
sº } n. ſ. [from ſ rvile.]
1. Slaviſhneſs; involuntary obedience.
What, beſides this unhappy ſervility to cuſtom, can poſſibly
reconcile men that own chriſtianity, to a practice widely
diſtant from it Govern. of the Tongue.
2. Meanneſs; dependance; baſeneſs.
The angels and daemons, thoſe by their ſubſerviency, and
theſe by the ſervility of their obedience, manifeſtly declared
Chriſt and his apoſtles to be veſted with an authority deri-
ved from their Lord. Weſt.
3. Slavery, the condition of a ſlave.
To be a queen in bondage, is more vile
Than is a ſlave in baſe ſervility;
For princes ſhould be free. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
SE’RYING-MAN. m. ſ. [ſerve and man.] A menial ſervant.
Yºur niece did more favours to the duke's ſerving-man, than
cver ſhe beſtowed on me. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
3
Juſt in the nick; the cook knock'd thrice;
And all the waiters in a trice
His ſummons did obey ; -
Each ſerving-man, with diſh in hand,
March'd boldly up, like our train'd band,
Preſented and away.
With Dennis you did nº’er combine,
Not you, to ſteal your maſter's wine;
Except a bottle now and then,
To welcome brother ſerving-men. Swift.
SE's vitoR. m.ſ. [ſerviteur, French.]
I. Servant; attendant. A word obſolete.
This workman, whoſe ſervitor nature is, being only one,
the heathens imagining to be mºre, gave him in the ſky the
name of Jupiter; in the air, of Juno ; in the water, of Nep-
Sucking:
tune; in the earth, of Veſta; and Ceres. Hooker.
Your truſty and moſt valiant ſervitor,
With his free duty recommends you thus. Shakeſp.
Thus are poor ſervitors,
When others ſleep upon their quiet beds,
Conſtrain'd to watch in darkneſs, rain and cold. Shakeſp.
Our Norman conqueror gave away to his ſervitors the
lands and poſſeſſions of ſuch as did oppoſe his invaſion. Davie.
Fearful commenting
Is leaden ſervitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and ſnail-pac'd beggary.
My noble queen, let former grudges paſs, -
And henceforth I am thy true ſervitor. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
2. One of the loweſt order in the univerſity.
His learning is much of a ſize with his birth and educa-
tion; no more of either than what a poor hungry ſervitor
can be expected to bring with him from his college. Swift.
SE's vitude, n. J. [ſervitude, French ; ſervitus, Lati. J
1. Slavery; ſtate of a ſlave; dependance.
Ariſtotle ſpeaketh of men, whom nature hath framid for
the ſtate of ſervitude, ſaying, they have reaſon ſo far forth
as to conceive when others direét them. Hooker.
You would have ſold your king to ſlaughter,
His princes and his peers to ſervitude,
His ſubječts to oppreſſion and contempt. Shakeſp., Hen V.
Tho' it is neceſſary, that ſome perſons in the world ſhould
be in love with a ſplendid ſervitude, yet certainly they muſt
be much beholding to their own fancy, that they can be
pleaſed at it; for he that riſes up early, and goes to bed
late, only to receive addreſſes, is really as much abridged in
his freedom, as he that waits to preſent one. South Sermons.
Unjuſtly thou deprav'ſt it with the name
Of ſervitude, to ſerve whom God ordains,
Or nature: God and nature bid the ſame,
When he who rules is worthieſt.
2. Servants colle&amp;tively. -
- After him a cum’brous train
Of herds, and flocks, and numerous ſervitude. . Milton.
SE'RUM. n. ſ. [Latin.] -
1. The thin and watry part that ſeparates from the reſt in any
liquor, as in milk from the cream.
2. The part cf the blood, which in coagulation ſeparates from
the grume.
Bicod is the moſt univerſal juice in an animal body : the
red part of it differs from the ſerum, the ſerum from the
lymph, the lymph from the nervous juice, and that frºm the
ſeveral other humours ſeparated in the glands. Arbuthnot.
f -
::::::::::.. ; adj. [ ſºuialtere, Fr. Aftiºn, Lat.]
In geometry, is a ratio, where one quantity or num-
ber contains another once and half as much more, as 6
and 9. Dićf.
In all the revolutions of the planets about the ſun, and of
the ſecondary planets about the primary ones, the periodical
times is in aſſauialter proportion to the mean diſtance. Cheyne.
As the fix primary planets revolve about the ſun, ſo the ſe-
condary ones are moved about them in the ſame /ſquialte-
ral proportion of their periodical motions to their orbs. Bently.
Se’sqūiplicate. adj. [In mathematicks.]. Is the propºrtion
one quantity or rumber has to another, in the ratio of one
half. - - -
The periodical times of the planets are in ſſuiplicate
proportion, and not a duplicate proportion of the diſtances
from the center or the radii; and tºº, the .
- an harmonically circulating
* be carried about by §. Phil. Prin.
SE'squiPEDAL. adj. Iſſuipedalis, Latin.] Containing
sºils.} a foot and a half. . 7 -
As for my own part, I am but a ſeſquipedal, having only
ſix foot and a half of ſtature. - Addison Guard.
Haft thou ever meaſured the gigantisk Ethiopian, whoſe
ſtature is above eight cubits high, or the ſºftpedalian pig-
mey Arbuth and Pºpº's Mart. Scrib.
SEsquite'RT1AN. [in mathematicks.] Having ſuch a ratio, as
that one quantity or number Sontains another once and one
third part more ; as between 6 and 8. Dęż.
23 Q_ - SE:s.
Shakesp.
Milton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E T
S E T
: and his ſſion at the right-hand of God
Sess. ”
tax. ſ, [for "ſºft, teſ, or cenſe.] Rate; ceſs charged;
Hi r - -
º fº. º i. paid and governed, as the Engliſh ſuf.
i profit or .. y the ſºft ºf his ſoldiers than they gain-
| mies. *urity by abating ; pride of their .
- Se'ssio avies's Hiſt. of Ireland
! N. m. ſ. 7 - - - / ºld/la,
1. The act f #. French; Jºſe, Latin.]
He hath as man, not as God only,
over quick and dead; for ſo much his a ſupreme dominion
. into heaven,
- o import. Hooker.
low *... they concede a ºil." will hardly al-
2. An aff "a way of ſºfton. Brown's /uſg. Errors.
• **In a *:: magiſtrates or ſenators. -
ley are ready t'appear
Where you ſhall hold %. %.
Summon aſſion that we may arraign
Our moſt diſloyal lady.
. The old man mindful ſtill of moan,
Weeping, thus beſpake the ſºfton, Chapman's Hem. Odyſ.
Of their ſºftºn ended they bid cry -
The great reſult. Milton.
Shałęſp. K. Lear.
Shake p.
Call'd to council all the Achaian ſtates,
Nor herald ſworn the ſeſſion to proclaim. Pope's Odyſ.
3. The ſpace for which an aſſembly fits, without intermiſſiºn
or receſs.
It was contrary to the courſe of parliament, that any bill
that had been rejected ſhould be again preferred the ſame ſeſ:
Taft. - Clarendon.
The ſecond Nicene council affords us plentiful aſſiſtance,
in the firſt ſeſſion, wherein the pope's vicar declares that Me-
letius was ordained by Arian biſhops, and yet his ordination
was never queſtioned. Stillingfleet.
Many decrees are enacted, which at the next ſeſſion are
repealed. Norrir.
4. A meeting of juſtices: as the ſeſſions of the peace. -
SE'st ERce. n. ſ [ſºfferee, French ; ſºffertium, Latin.] Among
the Romans, a ſum of about 81. 1 s. 5 d. half-penny ſier-
| lig. IDiè?.
Several of them would rather chuſe a ſum in ſºfterces, than
in pounds ſerling. Addison on Medals.
To SET. v. a. preterite Iſet; part, paſſ. I am ſet. [Satgan,
or ſatyam, Gothick; reccan, Saxon; ſetten, Dutch.]
| 1. To place; to put in any ſituation or place; to put.
- E’re I could
Give him that parting kiſs which I had ſet -
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father. Shakespeare .
But that my admirable dexterity of wit, counterfeiting the
aćtion of an old woman, delivered me, the knave conſtable
had ſet mei' th' common ſtocks for a witch. Shakeſp.
They that are younger have me in deriſion, whoſe fathers
I would have diſdained to have ſet with the dogs of my
flock. ob. xxx. I.
He that hath received his teſtimony, hath ſet to his ſeal,
that God is true. john iii. 33.
They have ſet her a bed in the midſt of the ſlain. Ezek. xxxii.
God ſet them in the firmament, to give light upon the
earth. Gen. i. 17.
In their ſetting of their threſhold by my threſholds, they
have defiled my holy name. Ezek. xliii. 8.
I have ſet thee for a tower among my people, jer. vi. 27.
By his aid aſpiring
To ſet himſel; in glory above his peers. Miltºn.
She ſet; the bar that cauſes all my pain;
One gift refuſed, makes all their bounty vain. Dryd.
The lives of the revealers may be juſtly enough ſet over
againſt the revelation, to find whether they agree. Aterb.
To put into any condition, ſtate, or poſture.
They thought the very diſturbance of things eſtabliſhed an
hire ſufficient to ſet them on work. Hooker.
That man that fits within a monarch's heart,
Would he abuſe the count'nance of the king,
Alack what miſchiefs might he ſet abroach
Our princely general,
Will give you audience; and wherein
It ſhall appear that your demands are juſt,
You ſhall enjoy them; ev'rything ſet off
That might ſo much as think you enemies.
This preſent enterprize ſet off his head,
I do not think a braver gentleman
Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
Is now alive.
Ye cauſed every man his ſervant, whom he had ſet at Ji-
berty, to return. jer. xxxiv. 16.
Every ſabbath ye ſhall ſet it in order. Lev. xxiv. 8.
lam come to ſet a man at variance againſt his father. Mat.
2.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
Thou ſhalt pour out into all thoſe veſſels, and ſet aſide that
which is full. 2 Kings iv 4
The beauty of his orname the ſet in majeſty, but they
mºde images; therefore have I ſet it far f
3. - rom them. Ezek.
The gates of thy land ſhall be ſet wide open. Nah. iii. 13.
The fathers have eaten a ſour grape, and the children's teeth
are ſet on edge. jer. xxxi. 20.
The tongue defileth the whole body, and ſºtteth on fire the
courſe of nature, and is ſet on fire of hell. ja. iii. 6.
The ſhipping might be ſet on work by fiſhing, by tranſ-
portations from port to port. Bacon.
This wheel ſet on going, did pour a war upon the Vene-
tians with ſuch a tempeſt, as Padua and Trevigi were taken
from them. Bacon.
That this may be done with the more advantage, ſome
hours muſt be ſet apart for this examination. Duppa.
Finding the river fordable at the foot of the bridge, he fit
over his horſe. Alajwa, d.
Equal ſucceſs had ſet theſe champions high,
And both reſolv'd to conquer, or to die. JWillºr.
Nothing renders a man ſo inconſiderable; for it ſets him
above the meaner ſort of company, and makes him intole-
rable to the better. Gºvern. of the Tongue.
Some are reclaimed by puniſhment, and ſome are ſet right
by good nature. L'Eſtrange.
The fire was form’d, ſhe ſet the kettle on. Dryd.
Leda's preſent came,
To ruin Troy, and ſet the world on game. Dryd.
Set calf betimes to ſchool, and let him be -
Inſtructed there in rules of huſbandry. Dryd.
Over labour'd with ſo long a courſe,
'Tis time to ſet at eaſe the ſmoking horſe. Dryd.
The puniſh'd crime ſhall ſet my ſoul at eaſe,
And murm'ring manes of my friend appeaſe. Dryd.
Jove call'd in haſte
The ſon of Maia with ſevere decree,
To kill the keeper, and to ſet her free. Dryd.
If ſuch a tradition were at any time endeavoured to be ſet
on foot, it is not eaſy to imagine how it ſhould at firſt gain
entertainment. Tillºtſon.
When the father looks four on the child, every body elſe
ſhould put on the ſame coldneſs, till forgiveneſs aſked, and a
reformation of his fault has ſet him right again, and reſtored
him to his former credit. Lºcke on Educat.
His practice muſt by no means croſs his precepts, unleſs he
intend to ſet him wrong. Locłe on Educat.
If the fear of abſolute and irreſiſtible power ſet it on upon
the mind, the idea is likely to ſink the deeper. Locke.
When he has once choſen it, it raiſes deſire that proportion-
ably gives him uneaſineſs which determines his will, and ſets
him at work in purſuit of his choice, on all occaſions. Locke.
This river,
When nature's ſelf lay ready to expire,
Quench'd the dire flame that ſet the world on fire. Addison
The many hoſpitals every where erected, ſerve rather to en-
courage idleneſs in the peºple than to ſet them at work. Addison
A couple of lovers agreed at parting, to ſet aſide one half
hour in the day to think of each other. Addison
Your fortunes place you far above the neceſſity of learn-
ing, but nothing can ſet you above the ornament of it Felton.
Their firſt movement and impreſſed motions demand the
impulſe of an almighty hand to ſet then agoing Cheyne.
Men of quality look upon it as one of their diſtinguiſhing
privileges, not to ſet other people at eaſe, with the loſs of the
leaſt of their own. Pºpe.
That the wheels were but ſmall, may be gueſſed from a cuſ-
tom they have of taking them off, and ſetting them on. Pºpe.
Be frequent in ſºtting ſuch cauſes at work, whoſe effects
you deſire to know. JWaiti.
3. To make motionleſs; to fix immoveably.
Struck with the fight, inanimate ſhe ſeems,
Garth.
Set are her eyes, and motionleſs her limbs.
4. To fix; to ſtate by ſome rule.
Hereon the prompter falls to flat railing in the bittereſt
terms; which the gentleman with a ſet geſture and counter
nance ſtill ſoberly related, until the ordinary, driven at laſt
into a mad rage, was ſain to give over. Carew.
The town of Bern has handſome fountains planted, at ſet
diſtances, from one end of the ſtreets to the other. Addison.
5. To regulate; to adjuſt. - -
In court they determine the king's good by his deſires,
which is a kind of ſetting the ſun by the dial. Suckling.
God bears a different reſpect to places ſet apart and conſe-
crated to his worſhip, to what he bears to places deſigned to
common uſes. - - Soºth.
Our palates grow into a liking of the ſeaſoning and cookery,
which by cuſtom they are ſet to. Locke.
He rules the church's bleſt dominions,
And ſets men's faith by his opinions. Pºor.
Againſt experience he believes,
He argues againſt demonſtration;
Plead's when his reaſon he deceives,
And ſets his judgment by his paſſion. Prior.
6. To fit to muſick ; to adapt with notes.
Set thy own ſongs, and ſing them to thy lute. Dryden.
(Frief
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E T
S E T
Grief he tames that ſetters it in verſe;
But when I have done ſo,
Some man, his art or voice to ſhow,
Doth ſet and ſing my pain;
And by delighting many, frees again {
Grief, which verſe did reſtrain. Donne,
1 had one day ſet the hundredth pſalm, and was ſinging the
firſt line, in order to put the congregation into the tune. Speci.
7. To plant, not ſow.
Whatſoever fruit uſeth to be ſet upon a root or a ſlip, if it
be ſown, will degenerate. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
I proſtrate fell,
To ſhrubs and plants my vile devotion paid,
And ſet the bearded leek to which I pray’d. Prior.
8. To interſperſe or mark with any thing.
As with ſtars, their bodies all
And wings were ſet with eyes. Milton.
High on their heads, with jewels richly ſet,
Each lady wore a radiant coronet. Dryden.
The body is ſmooth on that end, and on this 'tis ſet with
ridges round the point. // oadward.
9. To reduce from a fraćtured or diſlocated ſtate.
Can honour ſet to a leg; no ; or an arm no : honour hath
no ſkill in ſurgery then? no. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Conſidering what an orderly life I had led, I only com-
manded that my arm and leg ſhould be ſet, and my body
anointed with oil. G. Herbert.
The fracture was of both the focils of the left leg: he had
been in great pain from the time of the ſetting. //iſeman.
Credit is gained by courſe of time, and ſºldom recovers a
ſtrain; but if broken, is never well ſet again. Temple.
10. To fix the affection; to determine the reſolution.
Set your affection on things above, not on things on the
earth. Col. iii. 2.
They ſhould ſet their hope in God, and not forget his
works. Pſ. lxxviii. 7.
Becauſe ſentence againſt an evil work is not executed
ſpeedily, the heart of men is fully ſet in them to do evil. Eccl.
Set to work millions of ſpinning worms,
That in their green ſhops weave the ſmooth hair'd filk
To deck her ſons. AMilt.
Set not thy heart
Thus overfond on that which is not thine. Milton.
When we are well, our hearts are ſet,
Which way we care not, to be rich or great. Denham.
Our hearts are ſo much ſet upon the value of the benefits
received, that we never think of the beſtower. L’É/ºrange.
Theſe bubbles of the ſhalloweſt, emptieſt ſorrow,
Which children vent for toys, and women rain
For any trifle their fond hearts are ſet on. Dryd and Lee.
Should we ſet our hearts only upon theſe things, and be able
to taſte no pleaſure but what is ſenſual, we muſt be extremely
miſerable when we come unto the other world, becauſe we
ſhould meet with nothing to entertain ourſelves. Tillotſ,n.
No ſooner is one action diſpatched, which we are ſet upon,
but another uneaſineſs is ready to ſet us on work. Locke.
Minds, altogether ſet on trade and profit, often contračt a
certain narrowneſs of temper. Addiſon.
Men take an ill natured pleaſure in diſappointing us in what
our hearts are moſt ſet upon. Addiſon's Spediator.
An Engliſhman, who has any degree of reflection, cannot
be better awakened to a ſenſe of religion in general, than by
obſerving how the minds of all mankind are ſet upon this im-
portant point, and how every nation is attentive to the great
buſineſs of their being. Addiſon.
I am much concerned when I ſee young gentlemen of for-
tune ſo wholly ſet upon pleaſures, that they neglect all im-
provements in wiſdom and knowledge. Addiſon.
11. To predetermine; to ſettle.
We may ſtill doubt whether the Lord, in ſuch indifferent
ceremonies as thoſe whereof we diſpute, did frame his people
of ſet purpoſe unto any utter diſſimilitude with Egyptians, or
with any other nation. Hooker.
He remembers only the name of Conon, and forgets the
other on ſet purpoſe, to ſhew his country ſwain was no great
{cholar. Dryden.
12. To eſtabliſh; to appoint; to fix.
Of all helps for due performance of this ſervice, the great-
eſt is that very ſet and ſtanding order itſelf, which, framed
with common advice, hath for matter and form preſcribed
whatſoever is herein publickly done. Hooker.
It pleaſed the king to ſend me, and I ſet him a time. Neh. ii.
Am I a ſea, or a whale, that thou ſetteſ; a watch over me?
- job vii. 12.
He ſetteth an end to darkneſs, and ſearcheth out all per-
fe&amp;tion. job xxviii. 3.
In ſtudies, whatſoever a man commandeth upon himſelf,
let him ſet hours for it; but whatſoever is agreeable to his na-
ture, let him take no care for any ſet times: for his thoughts
will fly to it of themſelves, ſo as the ſpaces of other buſineſs
ºr ſtudies will ſuffice. Bacon.
For uſing ſet and preſcribed forms, there is no doubt but
— ––––. |
that wholſome words, being known, are apteſt to excite judi-
cious and ſervent affections. King Charles.
His ſeed, when is not ſet, ſhall bruiſe my head. Milton.
Though ſet form of prayer be an abomination,
Set forms of Petitions find great approbation. Denham.
Set places and ſet hours are but parts of that worſhip we
OWe. South.
That law cannot keep men from taking more uſe than you
Jet, the want of money being that alone which regulates its
price, will appear, if we confider how hard it is to ſet a price
upon unneceſſary commodities; but how impoſſible it is to ſet
a rate upon vićtuals in a time of ſamine. Locke.
Set him ſuch a taſk, to be done in ſuch a time. Locke.
As in the ſubordinations of government the king is offended
by any inſults to an inferior magiſtrate, ſo the ſovereign ruler
of the univerſe is affronted by a breach of allegiance to thoſe
whom he has ſet over us. Addison.
Take ſet times of meditating on what is future. Atterbury.
Should a man go about, with never ſo ſet ſtudy and deſign,
to deſcribe ſuch a natural form of the year as that which ſº
Preſent eſtabliſhed, he could ſcarcely ever do it in ſo few
words that were ſo fit. Woodward.
13. To exhibit; to diſplay; to propoſe. With before.
Through the variety of my reading, I ſet befºre me many
examples both of ancient and later times.
Qc271.
Reject not then what offer'd means: who knows
But God hath ſet before us, to return thee
Home to thy country and his ſacred houſe? Milton.
Long has my ſoul deſir'd this time and place,
To ſet before your fight your glorious race. Dryden.
All that can be done is to ſet the thing beſore men, and to
offer it to their choice. Tillotſon.
A ſpacious veil from his broad ſhoulders flew,
That ſet th' unhappy Phaeton to view:
The flaming chariot and the ſteeds it ſhew’d,
And the whole fable in the mantle glow'd. Addiſon.
When his fortune ſets before him all
The pomps and pleaſures that his ſoul can wiſh,
His rigid virtue will accept of none. Addiſon's Cato.
He ſupplies his not appearing in the preſent ſcene of ačtion,
by ſetting his character before us, and continually forcing his
Patience, prudence, and valour upon our obſervation. Broom.
14. To value; to eſtimate; to rate.
Be you contented
To have a ſon ſet your decrees at nought 2
To pluck down juſtice from your awful bench,
To trip the courſe of law Shakespeare HIV.
The backwardneſs parents ſhew in divulging their faults,
will make them ſet a greater value on their credit themſelves,
and teach them to be the more careful to preſerve the good
opinion of others. Locke.
If we act by ſeveral broken views, and will not only be vir-
tuous, but wealthy, popular, and everything that has a value
ſet upon it by the world, we ſhall live and die in miſery. Addison
Have I not ſet at nought my noble birth,
A ſpotleſs fame, and an unblemiſh'd race,
The peace of innocence, and pride of virtue
My prodigality has giv'n thee all. Rowe's jane Shore.
Though the ſame ſun, with all diffuſive rays,
Bluſh in the roſe and in the diamond blaze,
We prize the ſtronger effort of his pow'r,
And always ſet the gem above the flow'r, Pope.
15. To ſtake at play.
What ſad diſorders play begets'
Deſp'rate and mad, at length he ſets
Thoſe darts, whoſe points make gods adore. Prior.
16. To offer a wager at dice to another.
Who ſets me elſe? I'll throw at all. Shakespeare. R. II.
17. To fix in metal.
Think ſo vaſt a treaſure as your ſon
Too great for any private man's poſſeſſion;
And him too rich a jewel to be ſet
In vulgar metal, or vulgar uſe. Dryden.
He may learn to cut, poliſh, and ſet precious ſtones. 46-ke;
18. To embarraſs; to diſtreſs; to perplex. [This is uſed, I
think, by miſtake, for beſet: as, --
Adam, hard beſet, replied. - Miltºn.]
Thoſe who raiſe popular murmurs and diſcontents againſt
his majeſty's government, that they find ſo very few and ſo
very improper occaſions for them, ſhew how hard they are
ſet in this particular, repreſent the bill as a grievance. Addison
15. To fix in an artificial manner, ſo as to produce a Particular
effect. -
The proud have laid a ſnare for me, they have ſº gins. Pſ
o. To apply to ſomething.
2 tº. § brother thou ſhalt not lend upon uſury, that the
Lord may bleſs thee in all that th9. ſettſ; thine hand to. Deut.
with whate'er gall thou ſetſ thyſelf to write, r
Thy inoffenſive ſatires never bite. Dryden.
- - the eyes. -
2 I $º mi. eyes upon them for good, and bring them
again to this land. jºr. xxiv. 6.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

2 Joy
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E T
S E T
Joy ſalutes me when I/.
My bleſt eyes on Amoret.
22. To offer for a price.
There is **Tºte wicked thing than a covetous man; for
ſuch an one ſetteth his own ſoul to ille. Eccluſ. k
23. To Place in order; to frame, . x. 9.
After it was framed, and ready to be ſt together, he was,
with infinite labour and char - -
ge, carried by land with l
through that hot and ſandy country, from č. to º S&gt;
Knolle's Hiſtory of the Turks.
J/aller.
- 24. To ſtation; to place.
- - Coenus has betray'd
- The bitter truths that our looſe court upbraid:
Your friend was ſet upon you for a ſpy,
And on his witneſs you are doom'd to die,
25. To oppoſe.
Will you ſet your wit to a fool's
26. To bring to a fine edge: as, to ſet a razor.
27. Tº Set about. To apply to.
They ſhould make them play-games, or endeavour it, and
frt themſelves about it. Locke.
28. Tº Set againſ. To place in a ſtate of enmity or oppoſition.
The terrors of God do ſet themſelves in array againſt me.
- job vi. 4.
The king of Babylon ſet himſelf againſt Jeruſalem. Ezek.
The devil hath reaſon to ſet himſelf againſt it; for nothing is
more deſtructive to him than a ſoul armed with prayer. Dupa.
There ſhould be ſuch a being as aſſiſts us againſt our worſt
enemies, and comforts us under our ſharpeſt ſufferings, when
all other things ſit themſelves againſt us. Tilotſon.
”, Tº Set againſ. To oppoſe; to place in rhetorical oppo-
11tion.
This periſhing of the world in a deluge is ſet againſ, or
compared with, the periſhing of the world in the conflagra-
tion. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
30. To SET at art. To negle&amp;t for a ſeaſon.
They highly commended his forwardneſs, and all other
matters for that time ſet apart. Knoles.
31. To Set aſide. To omit for the preſent.
Set your knighthood and your ſoldierſhip aſide, and give me
leave to tell you that you lie in your throat. Shakespeare H. IV.
In 1585 followed the proſperous expedition of Drake and
Carlile into the Weſt Indies; in the which I ſet aſide the
taking of St. Jago and St. Domingo in Hiſpaniola, as ſurprizes
rather than encounters. Bacon.
My higheſt intereſt is not to be deceived about theſe mat-
ters; therefore, ſetting aſide all other confiderations, I will en-
deavour to know the truth, and yield to that. Tillotſºn.
3. Tº Set aſide. To reject.
I'll look into the pretenſions of each, and ſhew upon what
ground 'tis that I embrace that of the deluge, and ſet aſide all
the reſt. //cdward's Nat. Hiſtory.
No longer now does my neglećted mind
Its wonted ſtores and old ideas find:
Fix'd judgment there no longer does abide,
To taſte the true, or ſet the falſe aſide.
33. Tº Set aſide. To abrogate; to annul.
Several innovations, made to the detriment of the Engliſh
merchant, are now intirely ſet aſide. Addiſon.
There may be
Reaſons of ſo much pow'r and cogent force,
- As may ev'n ſet aſide this right of birth:
ſ If ſons have rights, yet fathers have 'em too. Rºwe.
º He ſhows what abſurdities follow upon ſuch a ſuppoſition,
and the greater thoſe abſurdities are, the more ſtrongly do they
evince the falſity of that ſuppoſition from whence they flow,
and conſequently the truth of the doćtrine ſet aſide by that
ſuppoſition. Atterbury.
34. 7, Set by. To regard; to eſteem.
David behaved himſelf more wiſely than all, ſo that his
name was much ſet by. 1 Sa. xviii. 30.
35. To SET hy. To rejećt or omit for the preſent.
You ſhall hardly edify me, that thoſe nations might not, by
the law of nature, have been ſubdued by any nation that had
only policy and moral virtue; though the propagation of the
faith, whereof we ſhall ſpeak in the proper place, were ſet by,
and not made part of the caſe. Bacon.
3%. T, SET down. To mention; to explain; to relate in
wº have ſit down, that a roſe ſet by garlick is ſweeter,
becauſe the more fetid juice goeth into the garlick. Bacon.
Some rules were to be ſet dºwn for the government of the
army. Clarendon.
I ſhall ſit dºwn an account of a diſcourſe I chanced to have
with one of theſe rural ſtateſmen. - Addiſon.
37. Tº Set dºwn. To regiſter or note in any book or paper;
to put in writing. -
ict thoſe that play your clowns ſpeak no more than is ſet
down for them. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Every man, careful of virtuous converſation, ſtudious of
ſcripture, and given unto any abſtinence in diet, was ſet down
in his calendar of ſuſpected Priſcilianiſts. Hooker.
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
Prior.
Take
One half of my commiſſion, and ſet down
As beſt thou art experienc'd, ſince thou know'ſt
Thy country's ſtrength and weakneſs. Shakesp Coriolanu:
The reaſons that led me into the meaning which prevailed
on my mind, are ſet dºwn. Lºcke.
An eminent inſtance of this, to ſhew what uſe can do, I
ſhall ſet down. Locke.
I cannot forbear ſetting down the beautiful deſcription Clau-
dian has made of a wild beaſt, newly brought from the woods,
and making its firſt appearance in a full amphitheatre. Addiſon.
38. To Set down. To fix on a reſolve.
Finding him ſo reſolutely ſet down, that he was neither by
fair nor foul means, but only by force, to be removed out of
his town, he incloſed the ſame round. Knoller.
39. To Set down. To fix; to eſtabliſh.
This law we may name eternal, being that order which God
before all others hath ſet down with himſelf, for himſelf to do
all things by. Hooker.
40. To Set forth. To publiſh; to promulgate; to make ap-
pear.
My willing love,
The rather by theſe arguments of fear,
Set forth in your purſuit. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
The poems, which have been ſo ill ſet forth under his name,
are as he firſt writ them. //aller.
41. To Set forth. To raiſe; to ſend out.
Our merchants, to their great charges, ſet fºrth fleets to
deſcry the ſeas. Abbot.
The Venetian admiral had a fleet of ſixty gallies, ſet fºrth
by the Venetians. Knolles's Hyl, ºf the Turks.
They agreed, all with one conſent, at a prefixed day, to
ſend unto Vienna ſuch warlike forces, as they had in any
time before ſet fºrth, for the defence of the Chriſtian religion.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the la K.
When poor Rutilus ſpends all his worth,
In hopes of ſetting one good dinner forth,
'Tis downright madneſs.
42. To Set forth. To diſplay; to explain.
As for words to ſet forth ſuch lewdneſs, it is not hard for
them to give a goodly and painted ſhew thereunto, borrowed
even from the praiſes proper to virtue. Spenſer.
So little have theſe falſe colours diſhonoured painting, that
they have only ſerved to ſet forth her praiſe, and to make her
merit further known. Dryden's Dufrºny,
43. To §§ To arrange; to place in order.
Up higher to the plain, where we'll ſet forth
In beſt appointment all our regiments. Shakespeare . K. jºhn.
44. To SET forth. To ſhow ; to exhibit.
To render our errours more monſtrous, and what unto a
miracle ſets frth the patience of God, he hath endeavoured to
make the world believe he was God himſelf. Browne.
Whereas it is commonlyſt fºrth green or yellow; it is in-
clining to white. Brown's Vulg. Frr.
To ſet forth great things by ſmall. Milton.
The two humours of a chearful truſt in providence, and a
ſuſpicious diffidence of it, are very well ſet forth here for our
inſtruction. L’Eſtrange,
45. To Set fºrward. To advance; to promote.
They yield that reading may ſet forward, but not begin the
work of ſalvation. Hooker.
Amongſt them there are not thoſe helps which others have,
to ſet them fºrward in the way of life. Hooker.
In the external form of religion, ſuch things as are appa-
rently or can be ſufficiently proved effectual, and generally fit
to ſet forward godlineſs, either as betokening the greatneſs of
God, or as beſeeming the dignity of religion, or as concur-
ing with celeſtial impreſſions in the minds of men, may be re-
verently thought of. Hooker.
They mar my path, they ſet fºrward my calamity, fol.
Dung or chalk, applied ſeaſonably to the roots of trees, doth
frt them forwards. Bacon's Nat. Hylory.
46. To Set in. To put in a way to begin.
If you pleaſe to aſſiſt and ſet me in, I will recollečt my-
ſelf. Colier.
47. To Set off. To decorate; to recommend; to adorn; to
embelliſh. It anſwers to the French relever.
Like bright metal on a fullen ground,
My reformation, glittering o'er my fault,
Shall ſhew more goodly, and attract more eyes,
Than that which hath no foil to ſet it off Shał. H IV.
The prince put thee into my ſervice for no other reaſon
than to ſet me off. Sºake p. Henry IV.
Negle&amp;t not the examples of thoſe that have carried them-
ſelves ill in the ſame place; not to ſet off thyſelf by taxing their
Dryden's juvenal.
memory, but to direct thyſelf what to avoid. Bacºn.
May you be happy, and your ſorrows paſt
Set ºff thoſe joys I wiſh may ever laſt. Jºa'ler.
The figures of the groupes muſt contraſt each other by
their ſeveral poſitions: thus in a play ſome characters muſt be
raiſed to oppoſe others, and to ſet them ºff. Dryden,
Th;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E T
S E T
º' tº
º:
frºm
its:
tº rº
The men, whoſe hearts are aimed at, are the occaſion that
one part of the face lies under a kind of diſguiſe, while the
other is ſo much ſet ºff, and adorned by the owner. Addison.
Their women are perfect miſtreſſes in ſhewing themſelves
to the beſt advantage: they are always gay and ſprightly, and
ſet off the worſt faces with the beſt airs. Addiſon.
The general good ſenſe and worthineſs of his character,
makes his friends obſerve theſe little ſingularities as foils, that
rather ſet off than blemiſh his good qualities. Addison.
The work will never take, if it is not ſet off with proper
ſcenes. - Addiſon.
Claudian ſets off his deſcription of the Eridanus with all the
poetical ſtories. Addiſon on Italy.
48. a SET on or upºn. To animate; to inſtigate; to incite.
You had either never attempted this change, ſet on with
hope, or never diſcovered it, ſtopt with diſpair. Sidney.
He upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch; whereon it came
That I was caſt; and even now he ſpake -
Iago ſet him on. Shakeſp. Othello.
Thou, traitor, haſt ſet on thy wife to this. Shakespeare.
Baruch ſetteth thee on againſt us, to deliver us unto the
Chaldeans. jer. xliii. 3.
He ſhould be thought to be mad, or ſet on and employed by
his own or the malice of other men to abuſe the duke. Claren.
In oppoſition ſits
Grim death, my ſon and foe, whoſts them on. Milton.
The vengeance of God, and the indignation of men, will
join forces againſt an inſulting baſeneſs, when backed with
greatneſs and ſet on by miſinformation. South's Serm.
... The ſkill uſed in dreſſing up power, will ſerve only to
give a greater edge to man's natural ambition: what can this
do but ſet men on the more eagerly to ſcramble Locke.
A prince's court introduces a kind of luxury, that ſets every
particular perſon upºn making a higher figure than is conſiſtent
with his revenue. Addiſon.
49. To SET on or upon. To attack; to aſſault.
There you miſſing me, I was taken up by pyrates, who
putting me under board priſoner, preſently ſet upon another
ſhip, and maintaining a long fight, in the end put them all to
the ſword. Sidney.
Caſio hath here been ſet on in the dark:
He's almoſt ſlain, and Rodorigo dead. Shakespeare Othello.
So other foes may ſet upon our back. Shakeſp. H. VI.
Alphonſus, captain of another of the galleys, ſuffering his
men to ſtraggle too far into the land, was ſet upon by a Turk-
iſh pyrate, and taken. Knoles.
Of one hundred ſhips there came ſcarce thirty to work: how-
beit with them, and ſuch as came daily in, we ſet upon them,
and gave them the chace. Bacon's JWar with Spain.
If I had been ſet upon by villains, I would have redeemed
that evil by this which I now ſuffer. Taylºr.
When once I am ſet upon, 'twill be too late to be whetting
when I ſhould be fighting. L’Eſtrange.
When ſome rival power invades a right,
Flies ſet on flies, and turtles turtles fight. Garth's Diffe'ſ.
50. To SET on. To employ as in a taſk.
Set on thy wife tº obſerve. Shakeſp. Othello.
51. To SET on or upon. To fix the attention; to determine to
any thing with ſettled and full reſolution.
It becomes a true lover to have your heart more ſet upon her
good than your own, and to bear a tenderer reſpect to her
honour than your ſatisfaction. Sidney.
Some I found wond’rous harſh,
Contemptuous, proud, ſet on revenge and ſpite, Milton.
52. To Set out. To aſſign; to allot.
The reſt, unable to ſerve any longer, or willing to fall to
thrift, ſhould be placed in part of the lands by them won, at
better rate than others, to whom the ſame ſhall be ſet out. Spenſ.
The ſquaring of a man's thoughts to the lot that provi-
dence has ſet out for him is a bleſfing. L’Eſtrange.
53. To SET out. To publiſh.
I will uſe no other authority than that excellent proclama-
tion ſet out by the king in the firſt year of his reign, and an-
nexed before the book of Common Prayer. Bacon.
If all ſhould be ſet out to the world by an angry whig, the
conſequence muſt be a confinement of our friend for ſome
months more to his garret. Swift.
54. To SET out. To mark by boundaries or diſtinétions of
ſpace.
Time and place, taken thus for determinate portions of
thoſe infinite abyſſes of ſpace and duration, ſet out, or ſuppoſed
to be diſtinguiſhed from the reſt by known boundaries, have
each a twofold acceptation. Locke.
55. To SE r out. To adorn; to embelliſh.
An ugly woman, in a rich habit ſet out with jewels, nothing
can become. Dryden.
56. Tº SET out. To raiſe; to equip.
The Venetians pretend they could ſet out, in caſe of great
neceſſity, thirty men of war, a hundred gallies, and ten
galeafles. Addiſon on Italy.
57. To SET out. To ſhow; to diſplay; to recommend.
Barbaroſſa, in his diſcourſes concerning the conqueſt of
Africk, ſet him out as a moſt fit inſtrument for ſubduing the
kingdom of Tunis. Knoles.
I could ſet out that beſt ſide of Luther, which our author, in
the pićture he has given us of him, has thrown into ſhade,
that he might place a ſuppoſed deformity more in view. Atterb.
58. Tº SET out. To ſhow; to prove.
Thoſe very reaſons ſet out how heinous his fin was. Atterb.
59. Tº Set up. To erect; to eſtabliſh newly.
There are many excellent inſtitutions of charity lately ſet
up, and which deſerve all manner of encouragement, particu-
larly thoſe which relate to the careful and pious education of
poor children. Atterbury's Sermons.
Who could not win the miſtreſs, woo'd the maid,
Set up themſelves, and drove a ſep'rate trade. Pºpe.
60. To SET up. To build; to erect.
Their ancient habitations they negle&amp;t,
And ſet up new : then, if the echo like not
In ſuch a room, they pluck down thoſe. Ben.johnſºn's Catil.
Jacob took the ſtone, that he had for his pillow, and ſet it
ap for a pillar. Gen. xxviii. 18.
Saul ſet him up a place, and is paſſed on, and gone down
to Gilgal. I Sa. xv. 12.
Such delight hath God in men -
Obedient to his will, that he vouchſafes
Among them to ſet up his tabernacle. Milton's Paradiº I off.
Images were not ſet up or worſhipped among the heathens,
becauſe they ſuppoſed the gods to be like them. Stillingfeet.
Statues were ſet up to all thoſe who had made themſelves
eminent for any noble action. Dryden.
I ſhall ſhew you how to ſet up a forge, and what tools you
muſt uſe. - - A4232n's Mºch. Exer.
Patrons, who ſneak from living worth to dead,
With-hold the penſion, and ſet up the head. Pºpe,
61. To SET up. To raiſe; to exalt; to put in power.
He was ſkilful enough to have lived ſtill, if knowledge
could be ſet up againſt mortality. Shakespeare.
I'll tranſlate the kingdom from the houſe of Saul, and ſet up
the throne of David over Iſrael. 2 Sa. iii. Io.
Of thoſe that lead theſe parties, if you could take off the
major number, the leſſer would govern; nay, if you could
take off all, they would ſet up one, and follow him. Suckling.
Homer took all occaſions of ſetting up his own countrymen
the Grecians, and of undervaluing the Trojan chiefs. Dryd.
Whatever practical rule is generally broken, it cannot be
ſuppoſed innate; it being impoſſible that men ſhould, without
ſhame or fear, ſerenely break a rule which they could not but
evidently know that God had ſet up. Locke.
62. To Set up. To place in view. -
He hath taken me by my neck, ſhaken me to pieces, and
fit me up for his mark. job xvi.12.
Scarecrows are ſet up to keep birds from corn and fruit. Bac.
Thy father's merit ſets thee up to view:
And ſhows thee in the faireſt point of light, -
To make thy virtues or thy faults conſpicuous. Addiſon:
63. Tº SET up. To place in repoſe; to fix; to reſt. .
Whilſt we ſet up our hopes here, we do not ſo ſeriouſly, as
we ought, confider that God has provided another and better
place for us. - Wake.
64. To Set up. To raiſe by the voice. -
My right eye itches, ſome good luck is near;
Perhaps my Amaryllis may appear;
I'll ſet up ſuch a note as ſhe ſhall hear. Dryden. )
65. To Set up. To advance; to propoſe to reception:
The authors that ſet up this opinion were not themſelves
ſatisfied with it. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
66. T. Set up. To raiſe to a ſufficient fortune. -
In a ſoldier's life there's honour to be got, and one lucky hit
ſets up a man for ever. L’Eſtrange.
To SET. v. m.
1. To fall below the horizon, as the ſun at evening. ---
The ſun was ſet. Gen. xxviii. 11.
whereas the ſetting of the pleiades and ſeven ſtars is de-
ſigned the term of Autumn and the beginning of Winter, unto
fomelatitudes theſe ſtars do neverſet. Brºwn's Kugar Brr.
That ſun once ſet, a thouſand meaner ſtars
Gave a dim light to violence and wars. . JWallar.
Now the latter watch of waſting night,
And ſetting ſtars, to kindly reſt invite. -
Not thicker billows beat the Libyan main,
When pale Orion ſets in wintry rain,
Than ſtand theſe ...a t
My eyes no obječt met, * -
But dº i. that | the ocean ſt. º s Ind. Emp.
--- ian eagles here their wings di'Play” * - -
Aº: ſº ſtars the Decii lay. Garth's Ovid.
- rid. -
2. T; º: and ſerring of the ſpirits together to reſiſt,
makeſh the teeth to ſet hard one againſt another. - Bacon.
3. To be extinguiſhed or darkened, as the ſun at night. -
Ahjah could not ſee; for his eyes were ſet, by reaſon of his
1 Aing; xiv. 4.
age. .
23 R 4. To
Dryden's Zn.
Dryden's Án.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E. T
S E T
!
4. To fit muſick to words.
That I might ſing it, madam, to a tune,
Give me a note: your ladyſhip can ſet.
—As little by ſuch toys as may be poſſible. hakeſ,
5. To become not fluid. y be poſſible Shakeſpeare.
That fluid ſubſtance in a few minutes be ins to ſet, as
- s then s the
tradeſmen ſpeak; that is, to exchange ºft, firm-
neſs. - - Bºyle.
6. To begin a journey,
So let him land,
And ſolemnly ſee him ſet on to London. Shakeſ H. V.
On Wedneſsay next, Harry, thou ſhalt ſet forward;
On Thurſday we ourſelves will march. Shake peare.
, The king is ſet from London, and the ſcene º
Is now tranſported to Southampton. Shakespeare Hen. V.
7. To go, or paſs, or put one's ſelf into any ſtate or poſture.
The faithleſs pirate ſoon will ſa to ſea,
And bear the royal virgin far away. Dryden.
When ſets he forward? -
—He is near at hand. Dryden's Ind Emp.
He with forty of his gallies, in moſt warlike manner ap-
Pointed, ſet forward with Solyman's ambaſſador towards Con-
ſtantinople. Knoller's Hiſtory of the Turks.
8. To catch birds with a dog that ſets them, that is, lies down
and points them out; and with a large net.
When I go a hawking or ſetting, I think myſelf beholden
to him that aſſures me, that in ſuch a field there is a covey of
partridges. Boyle.
9. To plant, not ſow.
In gard'ning ne'er this rule forget,
To ſow dry, and ſet wet. Old Proverb.
10. It is commonly uſed in converſation for ſit, which, though
undoubtedly barbarous, is ſometimes found in authors.
If they ſet down before's, 'fore they remove,
Bring up your army.
11. To apply one's ſelf.
If he ſets induſtriouſly and ſincerely to perform the com-
mands of Chriſt, he can have no ground of doubting but it
ſhall prove ſucceſsful to him. Hammond.
12. To Set about. To fall to; to begin.
We find it moſt hard to convince them, that it is neceſſary
now, at this very preſent, to ſet about it: we are thought a
little too hot and haſty, when we preſs wicked men to leave
their fins to-day, as long as they have ſo much time before
them to do it in. Calamy's Sermons.
How prepoſterous is it, never to ſet about works of charity,
whilſt we ourſelves can ſee them performed Atterbury.
13. To Set in. To fix in a particular ſtate.
When the weather ... in to be very bad, I have taken
a whole day's journey to ſee a gallery furniſhed by great maſ-
ters. Addiſon's Spectator.
As November ſet in with keen froſts, ſo they continued
through the whole of that month, without any other altera-
tion than freezing with more or leſs ſeverity, as the winds
changed. Ellis's Woyage.
A ſtorm accordingly happened the following day; for a
ſouthern monſoon began to ſet in. Gulliver's Travels.
14. T, SET on or upon. To begin a march, journey, or enter-
prize.
Shakeſpeare.
Be’t your charge
To ſee perform'd the tenor of our word:
Set on. P Shakespeare's Henry IV.
He that would ſeriouſly ſit upon the ſearch of truth, ought
to prepare his mind with a love of it. Locke.
The underſtanding would preſently obtain the knowledge
it is about, and then ſet upºn ſome new inquiry. Locke.
15. To SET on. To make an attack,
Hence every leader to his charge;
For on their anſwer we will ſet on them. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
6. To Set out...To have beginning. . -
I # any inviſible caſualty there be, it is queſtionable whether
its activity only ſet out at our nativity, and began, not rather in
the womb. Brºwn's /ug. Errours.
The dazzling luſtre to abate,
He ſet not out in all his pomp and ſtate,
Clad in the mildeſt lightning.
- SET out. To begin a journey. - -
17. %. their ſetting out they muſt have their commiſſiºn
king. - alſº?!.
º j put you in mind where you promiſed to ſet out, or
begin your firſt ſtage. . . Hammond.
c Me thou think'ſt not ſlow, *
Who ſince the morning-hour ſet out from º Ily
ſides, and ere mid-day arriv'
Yºgaº. 'º, Parad Lºft.
My ſoul then mov’d the quicker pace;
Your's firſt ſet out, mine reach'd her in the race. Dryden.
Theſe doarines, ſaid down for foundations of any ſcience,
were called principles, as the beginnings from which we º
Jet ºut, and look no farther backwards. Locke.
Addiſon.
He that ſets out upon weak legs will not only go fºrther, but
grow ſtronger too, than one who with firm limbs only fits
ſtill. Locº.
For theſe reaſons I ſhallſ: a t for London to-morrow. 44.
Look no more on man in the firſt ſtage of his exiſtence,
in his ſetting out for eternity. Addison.
If we ſlacken our arms, and drop our oars, we ſhall be hur-
ried back to the place from whence we firſt ſet out. Addison.
18. To Set ºut. To begin the world.
Eudoxus, at his firſt ſetting out, threw himſelf into court.
- Addison's Speciator.
Eugenio ſet out from the ſame univerſity, and about the
ſame time with Coruſodes. Swift.
19. To Set to. To apply himſelf to. -
I may appeal to ſome, who have made this their buſineſ,
whether it go not againſt the hair with them to ſit tº any thing
elſe. Government ºf the Tºngu.
2c. Tº Set up. To begin a trade openly.
We have ſtock enough to ſet up with, capable of infinite
advancement, and yet no leſs capable of total decay.
Decay of Piety.
A man of a clear reputation, though his bark be ſplit, yet
he ſaves his cargo; has ſomething left towards ſtig ºp again,
and ſo is in capacity of receiving benefit not only from his
own induſtry, but the friendſhip of others. Gov. of the Tongue.
Thoſe who have once made their court to thoſe miſtreſſes
without portions, the muſes, are never like to ſet up for for-
tunes. Pope.
This habit of writing and diſcourſing was acquired during
my apprenticeſhip in London, and a long reſidence there after
I had ſet up for myſelf. - Swift.
21. To Set up. To begin a project of advantage.
Eumenes, one of Alexander's captains, ſetting up for him-
ſelf after the death of his maſter, perſuaded his principal off-
cers to lend him great ſums; after which they were forced to
follow him for their own ſecurity. Arbuthnºt.
A ſevere treatment might tempt them to ſet up for a repub-
lick. Addiſon on Italy.
22. To Set up. To profeſs publickly.
Scow'ring the watch grows out of faſhion wit;
Now we ſt up for tilting in the pit. Dryden.
Can Polyphemus, or Antiphates,
Who gorge themſelves with man,
Set up to teach humanity, and give,
By their example, rules for us to live? Dryd juvenal.
It is found by experience, that thoſe men who ſet up for
morality, without regard to religion, are generally but vir-
tuous in part. Swift.
Set, part. adj. [from the verb.] Regular; not lax; made in
conſequence of ſome formal rule.
Rude am I in my ſpeech,
And little bleſs'd with the ſet phraſe of peace. Shakespeare Othello.
Th’ indićtment of the good lord Haſtings,
In a ſet hand fairly is ingroſs'd. Shakespeare Richard III.
He would not perform that ſervice by the hazard of one ſit
battle, but by dallying off the time. Knoles.
Set ſpeeches, and a formal tale,
With none but ſtateſmen and grave fools prevail. Drydºn.
In ten ſet battles have we driv'n back
Theſe heathen Saxons, and regain'd our earth. Dryden.
What we hear in converſation has this general advaitage
over ſet diſcourſes, that in the latter we are apt to attend more
to the beauty and elegance of the compoſure than to the mat-
ter delivered. Rºgers.
Set. m. ſ. [ from the verb. )
1. A number of things ſuited to each other; a number of things
of which one cannot conveniently be ſeparated from the reſt.
Senſations and paſſions ſeem to depend upon a particular ſet
of motions. - Collier.
All corpuſcles of the ſame ſet or kind agree in every
thing. //codward.
'Tis not a ſt of features or complexion,
The tinéture of a ſkin, that I admire. Addison.
I ſhall here lay together a new ſet of remarks, and obſerve
the artifices of our enemies to raiſe ſuch prejudices. Addiſon.
Homer introduced that monſtrous character to ſhow the
marvellous, and paint it in a new ſet of colours. Brcame,
He muſt change his comrades;
"In half the time he talks them round,
There muſt another ſet be found. Swift.
They refer to thoſe criticks who are partial to ſome parti-
cular ſet of writers to the prejudice of others. Pope.
Perhaps there is no man, nor ſet of men, upon earth,
whoſe ſentiments I intirely follow. I/aits.
2. Anything not ſown, but put in a ſtate of ſome growth into
the ground.
'Tis raiſed by ſets or berries, like white thorn, and lies the
ſame time in the ground. Mortimer's Hushandry.
3. The apparent fall of the ſun, or other bodies of heaven,
below the horizon.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E. T
S E T
The weary ſun hath made a golden ſet;
And, by the bright track of his firy car,
Gives ſignal of a goodly day to-morrow.
When the battle's loſt and won.
—That will be ere ſet of fun. Shakespeare Macleth.
Before ſet of ſun that day, I hope to reach my Winter-
quarters. Atterbury to Pºpe.
4. A wager at dice.
That was but civil war, an equal ſet,
Where piles with piles, and eagles eagles fight. Dryden.
5. A game.
Have I not here the beſt cards for the game,
To win this eaſy match plaid for a crown?
And ſhall I now give o'er the yielded ſet 2 Shakeſpeare.
When we have match'd our rackets to theſe balls,
We will, in France, play a ſet
Shall ſtrike his father's crown into the hazard. Shakespeare H. V.
SETA'ceous, adj Iſeta, Latin. J. Briſtly ; ſet with ſtrong
hairs; conſiſting of ſtrong hairs.
The parent inſe&amp;t, with its ſtiff ſetaceous tail, terebrates the
rib of the leaf when tender, and makes way for its egg into
the very pith. Derham.
SE"To N. n.). [ſeton, French, from ſeta, Latin.]
A ſton is made when the ſkin is taken up with a needle,
and the wound kept open by a twiſt of ſilk or hair, that hu-
mours may vent themſelves. Farriers call this operation in
Shakespeare R. III.
cattle rowelling. $ºuin y.
I made a ſet ºn to give a vent to the humour. lſ i, eman.
If the ſinus be of great length depending, make a perfora-
tion in the lower part by a ſeton-needle with a twiſted ſilk.
JWiſeman's Surgery.
SETTE'E. m. ſ. A large long ſeat with a back to it.
SETTER. m.ſ. (from ſet.]
1. One who ſets.
When he was gone I caſt this book away: I could not look
upon it but with weeping eyes, in remembering him who was
the only ſetter on to do it. Aſcham.
Shameleſs Warwick, peace |
Proud ſetter up and puller down of kings! Shakespeare H. VI.
He ſeemeth to be a ſetter forth of ſtrange gods. Afts xvii.
2. A dog who beats the field, and points the bird for the ſportſ-
men.
3. A man who performs the office of a ſetting dog, or finds out
perſons to be plundered.
Another ſet of men are the devil's ſetters, who continually
beat their brains how to draw in ſome innocent unguarded
heir into their helliſh net, learning his humour, prying into
his circumſtances, and obſerving his weak ſide. South.
SE’rt ER wort. n.ſ. An herb ; a ſpecies of hellebore.
SETTING Dog. m. ſ. [cane ſentacchione, Ital. ſetting and dog.]
A dog taught to find game, and point it out to the ſportſman.
Will. obliges young heirs with a ſetting dog he has made
himſelf. Addiſon.
SE' TTLE. m. ſ. [retol, Sax. J A ſeat; a bench; ſomething
to fit on.
From the bottom to the lower ſettle ſhall be two cubits.
Ezek. xliii. 14.
The man, their hearty welcome firſt expreſt,
A common ſettle drew for either gueſt, }
Inviting each his weary limbs to reſt. Dryden.
To SE^+ T LE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To place in any certain ſtate after a time of fluétuation or
diſturbance. -
I will ſettle you after your old eſtates, and will do better
unto you than at your beginnings. Ezek. xxxvi. 1 1.
In hope to find
Better abode, and my afflićted powers
To ſettle here. Milton.
2. To fix in any way of life.
- The father thought the time drew on
Of ſetting in the world his only ſon. Dryden.
3. To fix in any place.
Settl’d in his face I ſee
Sad reſolution. Milton.
4. To eſtabliſh; to confirm.
Juſtice ſubmitted to what Abra pleas'd:
Her will alone could ſettle or revoke,
And law was fix’d by what ſhe lateſt ſpoke. Prior.
5. To determine; to affirm; to free from ambiguity.
This exactneſs will be judged troubleſome, and therefore
moſt men will think they may be excuſed from ſettling the
complex ideas of mixed modes ſo preciſely in their º
ocke.
Medals give a very great light to hiſtory, in confirming
ſuch paſſages as are true in old authors, and ſettling ſuch as are
told after different manners. Addiſon.
6. To fix ; to make certain or unchangeable.
His baniſh'd gods reſtor'd to rites divine,
And ſettl’d ſure ſucceſſion in his line. Dryden's An.
If you will not take ſome care to ſettle our language, and
- L = —4. l
Pºit into a ſtate of continuance, your memory ſhall not be
!. above an hundred years, further than by imperfect
tradition. Swift
7. To fix; not to ſuffer to continue doubtful in opinion, or :
ſultory and wavering in conduct.
This, by a ſettled habit in things, whereof we have fre-
***Pººlence, is performed ſo quick, that we take that for
the P*S*Ption of our ſenſation which is an idea formed by
our judgment. Locke
A pamphlet that talks of ſlavery, France, and the pre-
tender; they deſire no more: it will Jettle the wavering, and
confirm the doubtful. "sºft
y . .
8. To make cloſe or compaśt.
nº up, that the rain ºft the º: before
- artz
9. To fix unalienably by legal ſan&amp;tions. mer's Husbandry.
I have given him the parſonage of the pariſh, and, becauſe
lºw his value, have ſettled upon him º annuity for
IIc. ‘ſon’s
10. To fix inſeparably. Jon's Spectator.
Exalt your paſſion by direéting and ſettling it upon an obječt,
the due contemplation of whoſe lovelineſs may cure perfectly
all hurts received from mortal beauty. Bºyle.
11: To affect ſo as that the dregs or impurities ſink to the
bottom.
So do the winds and thunders cleanſe the air;
So working ſeas ſettle and purge the wine. Davieſ.
12. To compoſe; to put into a ſtate of calmneſs.
When thou art ſettling thyſelf to thy devotions, imagine
thou heareſt thy Saviour calling to thee, as he did to Martha,
Why art thou ſo careful? Duppa.
To Settle. v. n.
1. To ſubſide; to fink to the bottom and repoſe there.
This is mere moral babble, and direct
Againſt the canon laws of our foundation:
I muſt not ſuffer this; yet 'tis the lees
And ſettlings of a melancholy blood. Milton.
2. To loſe motion or fermentation; to depoſite faces at the
bottom.
Your fury then boil'd upward to a foam;
But ſince this meſſage came, you fink and Jettle,
As if cold water had been pour'd upon you. Dryden.
A government, upon ſuch occaſions, is always thick before
it ſettles. Addiſon's Freeholder.
3. To fix one's ſelf; to eſtabliſh a reſidence.
The Spineta, deſcended from the Peleſgi, ſettled at the
mouth of the river Po. Arbuthnot.
4. To chuſe a method of life; to eſtabliſh a domeſtick ſtate.
As people marry now, and ſettle,
Fierce love abates his uſual mettle;
Worldly deſires, and houſhold cares,
Diſturb the godhead's ſoft affairs. Prior.
5. To become fixed ſo as not to change.
The wind came about and ſettled in the Weſt, ſo as we
could make no way. Bacon.
6. To quit an irregular and deſultory for a methodical life.
7. To take any laſting ſtate.
That country became agained ground by the mud brought
down by the Nilus, which ſettled by degrees into a firm
land. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
According to laws eſtabliſhed by the divine wiſdom, it was
wrought by degrees from one form into another, 'till it ſettled
at length into an habitable earth. Burnet.
Chyle, before it circulates with the blood, is whitiſh : by
the force of circulation it runs through all the intermediate
colours, ’till it ſettles in an intenſe red. Arbuthnot.
8. To reſt; to repoſe.
When time hath worn out their natural vanity, and taught
them diſcretion, their fondneſs ſettles on its proper object. Spect.
Warm'd in the brain the brazen weapon lies,
And ſhades eternal ſettle o'er his eyes. Pope.
9. To grow calm. -
*Till the fury of his highneſs ſettle,
Come not before him. Shakeſpeare's ºinter's Tale.
Io. To make a jointure for a wife.
He fighs with moſt ſucceſs that ſettles well. Garth.
11. To crack as work ſinks. -
One part being moiſt, and the other dry, occaſions its ſet-
tling more in one place than another, which cauſes cracks and
ſettlings in the wall. AMortimer's Husſandry.
SE’ttled Ness. n.ſ. [from ſettle.] The ſtate of being ſettled;
confirmed ſtate. -
What one party thought to rivet to a fittledneſ by the
ſtrength and influence of the Scots, that the other rejects and
COntenns. ſettle.] King Charles,
SETTLEMENT. m. ſ. ſ from ſettle.
1. The aët of º: the ſtate of being ſettled.
2. The act of giving poſſeſſion by legal ſanction:
My flocks, my fields, my woods, my paſtures take, r
with ſettlement as good as law can make. Pº,
º 2.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S E V
S E V
ife.
iointure granted to a wº
3. A jº. figh’d ſo loud and ſtrong,
lew a ſettlement along;
º: drove his rivals down
with coach and fix, and houſe in town. Swift.
t : dregs. - -
4. sº. it a thick ſettlement. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Ll
5. Act of quitting a roving for a domeſtick and methodical
life. - - -
man living has a deſign in his head upon wealth,
º ſettlement in the world. - L'A/irange.
6. A colony; a place where a colony is eſtabliſhed. -
šºwal. n.ſ. An herb. Dić7.
SEVEN. adj. [reoron, Saxon.] - -
1. Four and three; º: more than ſix. It is commonly uſed in
one ſyllable.
pº ev'ry iºn be maſter of his time
*Till ſeven at night. Shakeſp. Madeth.
Of cºery clean beaſt thou ſhalt take to thee by ſcient. Gen;
Pharmis, king of the Medes, it is ſaid, he overthrew and
cruelly murdered, with his ſeven children. Raleigh.
Šºv'n bullocks, yet unyok'd, for Phoebus chuſe;
And for Diana ſºv'n unſpotted ewes. Dryden's Żn.
SrºveNFold. adj. Iſeven and ſold.] Repeated ſeven times;
having ſeven doubles. -
Üpon this dreadful beaſt with ſevenfold head,
He ſet the falſe Dueſia for more awe and dread. Fa. Qºren.
Theſivenfold ſhield of Ajax cannot keep -
The battery from my heart. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleºpat.
Not for that filly old morality,
That as theſe links were knit, our loves ſhould be,
Mourn I, that I thy ſevenfold chain have loſt,
Nor for the luck's ſake, but the bitter coſt. Donne.
What if the breath that kindled thoſe grim fires
Awak'd, ſhould blow them into ſevenfold rage. Milton.
Fair queen,
Who ſway'ſt the ſceptre of the Pharian iſle,
And ſev’nfold falls of diſemboguing Nile. Dryden.
Se’ve NFold, adv. Seven times.
Whoſoever ſlayeth Cain, vengeance ſhall be taken on him
ſevenfold. Gen. iv. 15.
Wrath meet thy flight ſº Milton.
SE've NNIGHT. n.ſ.. [ſeven and night.]
1. A week; the time from one day of the week to the next day
of the ſame denomination preceding or following; a week,
numbered according to the practice of the old northern na-
tions, as in fortnight.
Rome was either more grateful to the beholders, or more
noble in itſelf, than juſts with the ſword and lance, main-
tained for a ſevennight together. Sidney.
Iago's footing here anticipates our thoughts
A ſe’nnight's ſpeed. Shakespeare Othello.
Shining woods, laid in a dry room, within a ſevennight loſt
their ſhining. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. We uſe ſtill the word ſevennight or ſºnnight in computing
time; as, it happened on Monday was ſevennight, that is, on
the Mºnday before laſt Monday; it will be done on Monday
fevennight, that is, on the Monday after next Monday.
This cºmes from one ºf thoſe untucker'd ladies whom you
were ſo ſharp upon on Monday was ſººnmight. Addison
SEVENscore... adj. [Seven and ſcore..] Seven times twenty; an
hundred and forty. -
The old counteſs of Deſmond, who lived till ſhe was ſeven-
ſcore years old, did dentire twice or thrice; caſting her old
teeth, and others coming in their place. Bacon.
Seven TEEN. adj. [reorontyne, Saxon.] Seven and ten; fe-
ven added to ten.
SE've NTEENTH. adj. [reoronzeoha, Saxon.] The ſeventh af-
ter the tenth ; the ordinal of ſeventeen.
In the ſix hundredth year of Noah's life, the ſecond month,
the ſeventeenth day, were all the fountains of the great deep
broken up. Gen. vii. 11.
The conqueſt of Ireland was perfected by the king in the
S ſºuth * of his reign. judge Hale.
EVENT H. adſ. I reopoba, Saxon. inal of ſeven .
º, ſº J The ordinal of ſeven;
s child born in the ſeventh month doth commonly
Well. -
So Pharaoh, or ſome greater king tha
Provided for the ſeventh neceſſity : g than he,
Taught from above his magazines to frame;
That famine was prevented e'er it came Dryd.
2. Containing one part in ſeven.
Thy air is like the firſt:
A third is like the former. Filthy hags
Why do you ſhew me this? A fourtā; Start, eyeſ
What' will the line ſtretch to the crack of doom
nother yet? A ſeventh ! I'll ſee no more. Shakespeare.
Sevent Hly. …
• 62&amp;U. F r -
ordinal adverb. [From ſeventh.] In the ſeventh place ; an
Seventh ... livi - -
In Ot. *), living bodies have ſenſe, which plants have
Bacon.
Bacon.
SE'v Esti ETH. adj. [From ſeventy J The tenth ſeven times re-
peated; the ordinal of ſeventy.
SE've NTY. adj. [Hanbreorontº, Saxon.] Seven times ten,
Worthy Marcius,
Had we no quarrel elſe to Rome, but that
Thou art thence baniſh'd, we would maſter all,
From twelve to ſeventy. Shakeſp. Coriol.nº.
We call not that death immature, if a man lives till ſe-
venty. - Taj lor.
The weight of ſeventy winters preſt him down,
He bent beneath the burthen of a crown. Dryd.
In the Hebrew, there is a particle conſiſting but of one
ſingle letter, of which there are reckoned up ſeverty ſeveral
ſignifications. Locke.
To SE've R. v. a. [ſºvrer, French; ſºfarº, Latin.)
1. To part by viºlence from the reſt.
Forgetful queen, who ſever, I that bright head,
Which charm'd two mighty monarchs to her bed. Grant.
2. To divide; to part; to force aſunder.
They are not ſo far disjoined and ſevered, but that they
come at length to meet. J.'coter.
Fortune, divorce
Pomp from the bearer, 'tis a ſuffrance panging,
As ſoul and body's ſev'ring. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
Our force by land
Hath nobly held; our ſwºr'd navy too
Have knit again, and float. Shakeſp. Ant, and Clºp.
What thou art is mine:
Our ſtate cannot be ſever'd, we are one,
One fleſh; to loſe thee were to loſe myſelf. Milton.
3. To ſeparate; to put in different orders or places.
The angels ſhall ſºver the wicked from among the juſt Mat.
He, with his guide, the farther fields attain'd;
Where ſever'd from the reſt the warrior ſouls remain'd. Dryd.
4. To ſeparate by chimical operation.
This axiom is of large extent, and would be ſºvered and
refined by trial. Bacon.
5. To disjoin, to diſunite.
look, love, what envious ſtreaks
Do lace the ſevering clouds in yonder eaſt. Shakespeare .
How ſtiff is my vile ſenſe,
That I ſtand up and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge ſorrows better I were diſtraćt,
So ſhould my thoughts be ſever'd from my griefs;
And woes by wrong imaginations, loſe
The knowledge of themſelves. Shakſ).
The medical virtues lodge in ſome one or other of its prin-
ciples, and may therefore uſefully be ſought for in that prin-
ciple ſever'd from the others. Boyle.
6. To keep diſtinét; to keep apart.
Three glorious ſuns, each one a perfect ſun;
Not ſeparated with the racking clouds,
But ſever'd in a pale clear ſhining ſky. Shakespeare
I will ſever Goſhen, that no ſwarms of flies ſhall be
there. Exod. viii. 22.
To SEVER. v. m. To make a ſeparation; to make a partition.
The Lord ſhall ſever between the cattle of Iſrael and of
Egypt. Exod. ix. 4.
There remains ſo much religion, as to know how to ſever
between the uſe and abuſe of things. K. Charle.
Better from me thou ſever not. Milton.
Se've Ral adj. [from ſever.]
1. Different; diſtinét; unlike one another.
Divers ſorts of beaſts came from ſeveral parts to drink; and
ſo being refreſhed, fall to couple, and many times with ſ:
veral kinds. Bºon's Nat. Hſ.
The conqueſt of Ireland was made piece and piece, by ſº;
veral attempts, in ſeveral ages. Davies's Hiſt. of Ireland.
Four ſeveral armies to the field are led,
Which high in equal hopes four princes head. Dryd.
2. Divers; many. It is uſed in any number not large, and more
than two. le, and ſeve
This country is large, having in it many people, anº!”.'
ral kingdoms. y ge, *..., ºr. of the ſºrld.
This elſe to ſeveral ſpheres thou muſt aſcribe. . Milton.
We might have repaired the loſſes of one campaign by the
advantages of another, and after ſºveral victories gained over
us, might have ſtill kept the enemy from our gates. Addison
3. Particular; ſingle.
Each ſeveral ſhip a vićtory did gain, d
As Rupert, or as Albemarle were there. Dryd.
4. Diſtinét; appropriate. ſ:
The parts and paſſages of ſtate are ſo many, as tº expreſ;
them fully, would require a ſºveral treatiſe. Davies' trº"
Like things to like, the reſt to ſeveral place
Diſparted. Milton.
Each might his ſºv’ral province well command,
Would all but ſtoop to what they underſtand. Pºpe.
Sever AL. m. ſ [from the ad;..] - !
1. A ſtate of ſeparatiºn; or partition. This ſubſtantive has *P*
ral.
More
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">tº:
S E X
º
--
º,
º
º:
--
More profit is quieter found
Where paſtures in ſeveral be,
Of one ſilly aker of ground
Than champion maketh of three.
2. Each particular ſingly taken.
This by ſome ſºveral; --
Of head piece extraordinary, lower meſſes
Tuſſºr, Huſand.
Perchance are to this buſineſs purblind. Shakeſp.
There was not time enough to hear
The ſeverals. Shakeſp.
That will appear to be a methodical ſucceſſive obſervation
of theſe ſºv.ral, as degrees and ſteps preparative the one
to the other. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Several of them neither roſe from any conſpicuous family,
nor left any behind them. Addiſon's Freeholer.
3. Any incloſed or ſeparate place.
They had their ſeveral for heathen nations, their ſeveral
for the people of their own nation, their ſeveral for men, their
ſeveral for women, their ſeveral for their prieſts, and for the
high prieſt alone their ſeveral. Hooker.
4. Incloſed ground.
There was a nobleman that was lean of viſage, but imme-
diately after his marriage he grew pretty plump and fat One
ſaid to him, your lordſhip doth contrary to other married men;
for they at firſt wax lean, and you wax fat. Sir Walter Ra-
leigh ſtood by and ſaid, there is no beaſt, that if you take him
from the common, and put him into the ſeveral, but will wax
fat. Bacon.
Se’ve R ALLY. adv. [from ſeveral.] Diſtinétly ; particularly ;
ſeparately ; apart from others.
Conſider angels each of them ſeverally in himſelf, and their
law is, all ye his angels praiſe him. Hooker.
Nature and ſcripture, both jointly and not ſeverally, either
of them, be ſo compleat, that unto everlaſting felicity we
need not the knowledge of anything more than theſe two may
eaſily furniſh our minds with. Hooker.
Th' apoſtles could not be confin'd
To theſe or thoſe, but ſeverally deſign'd
Their large commiſſion round the world to blow. Dryd.
We ought not ſo much to love likeneſs as beauty, and
to chuſe from the faireſt bodies ſeverally the faireſt parts. Dryd.
Others were ſo very ſmall and cloſe together, that I could
not keep my eye ſteddy on them ſeverally ſo as to number
them. Newt. Opt.
Se’ve RALTY. n.ſ.. [from ſeveral.]Stateofſeparation from the reſt.
The jointure or advancement of the lady was the third part
of the principality of Wales, the dukedom of Cornwal, and
earldom of Cheſter, to be ſet forth in ſeveralty. Bacon.
Having conſidered the apertions in ſeveralty, according to
their particular requiſites, I am now come to the caſting and
contexture of the whole work. J/otton.
SE’, FRAN.cf. n.ſ.. [from ſever.] Separation; partition.
Thoſe rivers encloſe a neck of land, in regard of his fruit-
fulneſs, not unworthy of a ſºverance. Carºw's Survey ºf Cornw.
SEve'RE. m. ſ. [ ſºvere, French; ſeverus, Latin.]
1. Sharp; apt to puniſh; cenſorious; apt to blame; hard ; rigorous.
Let your zeal, if it muſt be expreſſed in anger, be always
more ſevere againſt thy ſelf than againſt others. Taylor.
Soon mov’d with touch of blame, thus Eve:
What words have paſs'd thy lips, Adam ſevere * Milton.
What made the church of Alexandria be ſo ſevere with
Origen for, but holding the incence in his hands, which thoſe
about him caſt from thence upon the altar 2 yet for this he
was caſt out of the church. Stillingfect.
2. Rigid ; auſtere; moroſe; harſh; not indulgent.
Am I upbraided ? not enough ſevere
It ſeems, in thy reſtraint. - Milton.
In his looks ſerene,
When angry moſt he ſeem'd and moſt ſevere,
What clſe but favour ſhone? Milton.
Nor blame ſevere his choice,
Warbling the Grecian woes. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
3. Cruel; inexorable.
His ſevere wrath ſhall he ſharpen for a ſword. Wiſd.
4. Regulated by rigid rules; ſtrict.
Truth, wiſdom, ſanctitude, ſevere and pure,
Severe, but in true filial freedom plac'd, Milton.
5. Exempt from all levity of appearance; grave; ſober; ſedate.
Your looks muſt alter, as your ſubject does,
From kind to fierce, from wanton to ſevere. J/aller.
6. Not lax; not airy; cloſe; ſtrićtly methodical; rigidly exact.
His grave rebuke,
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace. Milton.
Their beauty I leave it rather to the delicate wit of poets,
than venture upon ſo nice a ſubject with my ſeverer ſtyle. More.
7. Painful; afflictive.
8. Cloſe ; conciſe; not luxuriant.
The Latin, a moſt ſevere and compendious language, often
expreſſes that in one word, which modern tongues cannot in
IIlor C. Dryden.
Theſe piercing fires as ſoft as now ſevere. Milton.
Sev E RELY. adv. [from ſevere.]
1. Painfully ; afflićtively.
We have waſted our ſtrength to attain ends different from
thoſe for which we undertoºk the war, and often to effect
others which after a peace, w '.. - -
2. Ferociouſly; hiº. , we may ſeverely repent. Swift.
w. º: Hydra ſtands within:
ote jaws with iron t º,” ... 2
sevº..” º grin. Dryd.
1. Cruel treatment; ſharpneſs of puniſhment
I laugh to ſee your ladyſhip ſo fond,"
- y -
To think that you have ought but Talbot's ſhadow
Whereon to practiſe your ſeverity. Shakespeare
. He ſhall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock ºff.
With rigorous hands; he hath reſiſted law
And therefore law ſhall ſcorn him furthºlial
Than the ſeverity of publick power,
Which he ſo ſets at nought. Shakespeare . Crisianus
Never were ſo great rebellions expiated with folittle bij.
as for the ſeverity uſed upon thoſe taken in Kent, it was but
upon a ſcum of people. - Bacon
There is a difference between an eccleſiaſtical cenſure and
Jºverity; for under a cenſure we only include excommunica-
tion, ſuſpenſion, and an interdićt; but under an eccleſiaſtical
ſeverity, every other puniſhment of the church is intended ; but
according to ſome, a cenſure and a ſeverity is the ſame. Ayliff.
2. Hardneſs; power of diſtreſfing.
Though nature hath given inſects ſagacity to avoid the win-
ter cold, yet its ſeverity finds them out. Hale's Orig. ºf Mank.
3. Strictneſs; rigid accuracy.
Confining myſelf to the ſeverity of truth, becoming, I muſt
paſs over many inſtances of your military ſkill. º Dryd.
4. Rigour; auſterity; harſhneſs; want of mildneſs; want of
indulgence.
SE'vocatios. m. ſ. [ſeveco, Latin.] The aa of calling aſide.
To Sew. for ſue. Spenſer. To follow.
To SEW. v. n. [ſac, Latin.] To anything by the uſe of the
needle.
A time to rent and a time to ſew. Eccl. iii. 7.
To Sew. v. a. Tºjº by threads drawn with a needle.
No man Jeweth a piece of new cloth on an old gar-
ment. Mark. ii. 21.
To Sew up. To incloſe in any thing ſewed. -
If ever I ſaid looſe bodied gown, ſew me up in the ſkirts
of it. Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
My tranſgreſſion is ſealed up in a bag, and thouſeweſt up
mine iniquity. job. xiv. 172
To Sew. v. a. To drain a pond for the fiſh. Ainſworth.
SEw ER. v. n. [eſcuyer trenchant, French; or aſſe-ur, old French;
from affeoir, to ſet down; for thoſe officers ſet the diſhes on
the table. Newton's Milton.]
1. An officer who ſerves up a feaſt.
Marſhall’d feaſt,
Serv'd up in hall with ſewers and ſeneſhals:
The ſkill of artifice or office mean. Milt.
The cook and ſewer, each his talent tries,
In various figures ſcenes of diſhes riſe:
2. [From iſſue, iſier.] Cowel. A paſſage for water to run
through, now corrupted to ſhore.
The fenmen hold that the ſewers muſt be kept ſo, as the
water may not ſtay too long in the ſpring till the weeds and
ſedge be grown up. Bacon.
Men ſuffer their private in judgment to be drawn into the
common ſewer, or ſtream of the preſent vogue. K. Charles.
As one who long in populous city pent,
Where houſes thick, and ſewers annoy the air,
Forth iſſuing on a ſummer's morn, to breathe
Among the pleaſant villages and farms
Adjoin'd, from each thing met conceives delight. Milt.
3. He that uſes a needle.
SEx. n.ſ.. [ſexe, French; ſexus, Latin.]
1. The property by which any animal is male or female.
Theſe two great ſexes animate the world. Milton.
Under his forming hands a creature grew, -
Manlike, but different ſex. Miltºn.
2. Womankind; by way of emphaſis.
Unhappy ſex / whoſe beauty is your ſnare;
Expos'd to trials; made too frail to bear. Dryd.
Shane is hard to be overcome; but if the ſex once gºt the
better of it, it gives them afterwards no more trouble. Garth.
Sex AG ENARY. adj. [ſexagenaire, French; ſexagºn*, Latin.]
Aged ſixty years.
SExºceſsim A. m.ſ. [Latin.] The ſecond Sunday before Lent.
SExace’smal. ‘aj. [from ſexagºſinus, Latin.] Sixtieth ;
numbred by ſixties. - -
SExA'NGLED. adj. [from ſºx and angular, Latin.] Having
SExA'NGULAR. ; ſix corners or angles ; hexagonal.
Snow ſexangular, at leaſt of ſtarry and many pointed figure.
The grubs from their ſex." gular abºº
Crawfºr unfiniſh'd like the maggot's brood. Dryd.
Sexsºly. Adv. [from ſexangular.] With fix angles;
hexagonally. -
sº adj. [ſex and annus, Latin.] Laſting ſix years;
happening once in ºgº.
23 SE'xTAIN.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H A
S H A
f , a.ſ. [from ſº tºº, ſº Latin.J.A flanza offix lines.
ś. :/ º French. J The ſixth part of a circle.
SºxtARY. m. ſ. A pint and a half.
SExtARY. n.ſ. The ſame as ſacriſy; a veſtry. Dić?.
'XT R Y. -
sº. adj [ſextº, Latin.] 's ſuch a poſition or aſpect
when at 60 degrees diſtant, or at the diſtance
of two planets, - -
of two ſigns from one another, and is marked thus *. Har.
planetary motions and aſpects, -
In º ſquare, and trinº, - - - Milton.
The moon receives the duſky light wº diſcern in its effe
aſpect from the earth's benignity. . Glanville.
Sexton, n.ſ.. [corrupted from Jacºğan.] An under officer of
the church, whoſe buſineſs, is to dig graves.
A ſtool and cuſhion for the ſextºn. - Shakeſp.
When any dies, then by tolling a bell, or beſpeaking a graº
of the ſexton, the ſame is known to the ſearchers correſpond-
ing with the ſaid ſºxton. Graunt.
SExtonship. m / [from ſexton ] The office of a ſexton.
They may get a diſpenſation to hold the clerkſhip and ſex-
tonſhip of their own pariſh in commendam: Swift.
Sexºple. adj [ſextuplu, Latin:l Sixfold; ſix times told.
Man's length being a perpendicular from the vertex unto
the ſole of the foot is ſea tºp'e unto his breadth, or a right
jºwn from the ribs of one ſide to another. Brown.
To shap v.m. To play mean tricks; a lºw barbarous cant word.
Snappily adv. [from /ally..] Meanly; reproachſully ; deſ-
picably; paltrily. A caſt word.
Shºppºses. n.f. [from ſhally..] Meanneſs.; paltri eſs.
He exchanged his gay ſlal line's of glºaths fit for a much
younger man, to warm oncs that would be decent for a much
older one. Addſ. Spectatºr,
SHA'bby. adj. [A word that has crept into converſation and
low writing; but ought not to be admitted into the lan-
guage.] Mean; paltry.
The dean was f ſhally, and lock'd like a pinny,
That the captain ſuppos'd he was curate to Jºy. Swift.
ToSHA'ckle. v. a. [from the noun, ſackies, ſhee. Melen, Dutch-J
To chain; to ſetter; to bind.
It is great,
To do that thing that ends all other deeds ;
Which, lºcºls accidents, and bolts up change. Shakespeare.
You muſt not ſlack e and tie him up with rules about indif-
fercnt matters. + Lake.
No trivial price
Should ſet him free, or ſmall ſhould be my praiſe
To lead him ſhackled. Philips.
So the ſtretch'd cord the ſhacklet dancertrics,
As prone to fall as impotent to riſe. Sºni.h.
SHA’ckins. m. ſ wanting the fingular. . [reacul, Saxon,
Jºhaeckels, Dutch..] Fetters; gyves; chains for priſoners.
Himſelf he frees by ſecret means unſeen,
His ſhackles empty left, himſelf eſcaped clean, Fa. Queen.
A ſervant commonly is leſs free in mind than in condition ;
his very will ſeems to be in bonds and ſlacklº, and deſire
itſelf under durance and captivity. South's Sermºns.
The forge in fetters only is employed ;
Our iron mines exhauſted and deſtroyed
In ſhackles. Dryd. Juv.
SHAD. m. ſ. A kind of fiſh.
SHADE. m. ſ. [rcatu, Saxon; ſhade, Dutch..]
1. The cloud or opacity made by interception of the light.
Spring no obſtacle found here nor ſhade,
But all ſunſhine. M.'t:n.
2. Darkneſs; obſcurity.
The weaker light unwillingly declin'd, -
And to prevailingſhad, the murmuring world reſign'd. Rºº.
3. Coolneſs made by interception of the ſun.
Antigonus, when told that the enemy had ſuch volleys of
arrows that hid the ſun, ſaid, that falls out well; for this is
hot weather, and ſo we ſhall fight in the ſhade. Ba, on.
That high mount of God whence light and ſhade
Shine both. Milon.
4. An obſcure place, properly in a grove or cloſe wood b
which the light is ... £ - y
Let us ſeek out ſome deſolate ſhade, and there
Weep our ſad boſoms empty. Sha'ſ).
Regions of ſorrow, doleful ſhades. Milion.
Then to the deſart take; his flight;
Where ſtill from ſode to ſhºd the ſon of God,
After forty days faſting, had remain'd. A ſiſtan.
.The pious prince then ſeeks the ſhade,
Which hides from fight his venerable maid. Dryd.
5. Screen cauſing an excluſion of light or heat; umbrage.
Well fl. Let the arched knife
()f .." d now. affail the ſpreading ſhades
!n ..". and their thirſty limbs diffever. P}} ps.
Jhºde ſº º trees which kill thoſe that fit under their
6. Protoči i \Ours. Arbuthnot.
• ‘rotection; ſhelter.
7. T he pºrts of a picture not brightly coloured.
An º ſy painter's art to hide from fight,
* “at in ſhades what ſeen would not delight. Dºyd,
8. A colour; gradation of light.
white, rºd, yellow, blue, with their ſeveral degrees, or
fºods and mixtures, as green come in only by the eyes. Loeſe.
. The figure formed upon any ſurface correſpending to the bo-
dy by which the light is intercepted. -
Envy will merit as its ſhade purſue. Pfe.
1c. The ſoil ſeparated from the body; ſo called as ſuppoſed by
the ancients to be perceptible to the fight, not to the touch.
A ſpirit; a ghoſt ; manes. -
To Trachin ſwift as thought the flitting ſha e
Thro' air his momentary journey made Dryd.
Ne'er to theſe chambers where the mighty reſt,
Since their foundation, came a nobler gueſt;
Nor e'er was to the bow'rs of bliſs convey'd
A fairer ſpirit ºr more welcome ſhade. Tickell.
To SHADE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To overſpread with opacity.
Thou ſhad'ſ?
The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud
Thy ſkirts appear. Miltºn.
2. To cover from the light or heat; to overſpread.
A ſeraph ſix wings wore to ſhade
His lineaments divine. Milºn.
And after theſe, cºme arm'd with ſpear and ſhield
An hoſt ſo great, as cover'd all the field :
And all their foreheads like the knights before,
With lawrels ever-green were // aded o'er. Dryd.
I went to crop the ſylvan ſcenes,
And ſhade our altars with their leafy greens. Dryd.
Sing, while beſide the ſh ided tomb I mourn,
And with freſh bays her rural ſhrine adorn. Pºte's I??, t,
3. To ſhelter; to hide.
E’re in our own houſe I do ſºdº my head,
The good patricians muſt be viſited. S}a}}.
4. To protect; to cover; to ſcreen.
Leave not the faithful ſide
That gave thee being, ſtill ſºdes thee and protects. Milt.
;. To mark with different gradations of colours.
The portal ſhone, inimitable on earth
By model, or by ſhading pencil drawn. Milton.
6. To paint in obſºnſe colours.
ša ºr 'ºss. m. ſ. [from ſhady] The ſtate of being ſhady;
umbrageouſneſs. -
SHA'dow. n. / [rcabu, Saxon; ſhadºwe, Dutch
1. The repreſentation of a body by which the light is intercepted.
Poor' rom proud of heart, to ride over four inch'd bridges,
to courſe his own ſhadºw for a traitor. Shakesp.
Life's but a walking ſhaº'ow, a poor player,
That flruts and frets his hour upon the ſtage,
And then is heard no more. Slaſſ.
Such a nature,
Tick!’d with good ſucceſs, diſdains the ſhadºw
Which he treads on at noon. Shakespeare .
The body, tho' it moves, yet not changing perceivable
diſtance with ſome other bodies, the ting ſeems to ſtand ſtill,
as in the hands of clocks, and ſhadºws of ſun-dº. 10, Ke.
2. Opacity; darkneſs; ſhade.
By the revolution of the ſkies -
Dz, han.
Night's ſible ſhadºws from the ocean riſe. -
His countrymen probably lived within the tº:
dii on.
earthquake and ſha ºw of the eclipſe.
3. Shelter made by anything that intercep
influence of the air.
In ſecret ſhadºw from the ſunny ray,
On a ſweet bed of lilies foſtly laid.
Here father, take the ſhadºw of t is tree *
For your good hoſt. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
4. Obſcure place.
To tie ſecret ſhºdºws I retire, -
To pay my penance till my years expire. Dryd.
5. Dark part of a picture. -
Aſhād wis a diminution of the firſt and ſecond light. The
firſt light is that which proceeds immediately from a lightned
body, as the beams of the fin. The ſecond is an accidental
light ſpreading itſelf into the air or medium proceeding from
tºotºr Sãºws are threefold: the firſt is : ſingle ſhadº,
jºiºicaſ of aii, and is proper to the plain *. wº
is not wholly poſſeſſed of the light. The ſecond is the double
/had tº, and it is uſed when the ſurface begins once to *.
ſale your eye, as in columns. . The third ſhadºw is º: t
croſing over your double ſlaloº again, which darknet º .
a third part. It is uſed for the inmoſt ſhadow, and farthe
from the light, as in gulfs, wells, and caves. Peacham.
After great lights there muſt be great ſhadºw. Dryden.
6. Anything perceptible only to the ſight ; a ghoſt; a ſpirit,
or ſhade. -
ts the light, heat, or
Fa. Quen.
Hence, terrible ſhadow'
Unreal mock’ry, hence - Shakespeare .
. An imperfect and faint repreſentation; oppoſed to ſº
If ſubſtance might be call d that ſhed?" ſeem’d, Aſ º
In the glorious lights of heaven we Pºº" a ſº
his divine countenance. Raº -
Without
7
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H A
S H A
*
* :
---
º,
Without the leaſt impulſe or ſhadow of fate Milton.
Amongſt the creatures are particular excellencies ſcattered,
which are ſome ſhadºws of the divine perfestions. Tillotſºn.
8. Inſeparable comparion.
Sin and her ſh;dºw, death. Miltºn.
Thou my ſhadºw
Inſeparable muſt with me be long. Milton.
9. Type ; myſtical repreſentation.
Types and ſhadºws of that deſtin'd ſeed. Milton.
Io. Protection; ſhelter; favour.
Keep me under the ſhadow of thy wings. Pſalms.
To SHA'Dºw. v. a. [from the noun J
1. To cover with opacity.
The warlike elf much wondered at this tree,
So fair and great, that ſhadowed all the ground. Fa. 9.
The Aſſyrian was a cedar with fair branches, and with a
ſhadºwing ſhroud. Ezek. xxxi. 3.
2. To cloud; to darken.
Miſlike me not for my complexion;
The ſº adow’d livery of the burning ſun
To whom I am a neighbour. Shakespeare.
3. To make cool or gently gloomy by interception of the light
or heat.
A gentle ſouth-weſt wind comes creeping over flowery fields
and ſhadºw’d waters in the extreme heat of ſummer. Sidney.
4. To conceal under cover ; to hide; to ſcreen.
Let every ſoldier hew him down a bough,
And bear’t before him; thereby ſhall we ſhadow
The number of our hoſt, and make diſcov'ry
Err in report of us. Shakespeare.
5. To protect ; to ſcreen from danger; to ſhroud.
God ſhall forgive you Coeur de Lion's death,
The rather, that you give his offspring life,
Shad wing their right under your wings of war. Shakeſp.
6. To mark with various gradations of colour, or light.
Turnſoil is made of old linnen rags dried, and laid in a
ſaucer of vinegar, and ſet over a chating diſh of coals till it
boil; then wring it into a ſhell, and put it into a little gum
arabick: it is good to ſhadºw carnations, and all yellows. Peach.
From a round globc of any uniform colour, the idea im-
printed in our mind is of a flat circle, variouſly ſhadowed with
different degrees of light coming to our eyes. Lºcke.
More broken ſcene, made up of an infinite varicty of in-
equalitics and ſha low ng, that naturally ariſe from an agree-
able mixture of hills, groves, and vallies. Addison
7. To paint in obſcure colours.
If the parts be too much diſtant, ſo that there be void ſpaces
which are deeply ſhadowed, then place in thoſe voids ome fold
to make a joining of the parts. Dryd. Duf ſnoy.
8. To repreſent imperfectly. -
Whereat I wak'd and found
Pefore mine eyes all real, as the dream
H d lively ſhadºw’d.
Miltºn Parad Loſt.
Auguſtus is ſhadºwºd in the perſon of Æneas. Dryd.
I have ſº...dºwed ſome part of your virtues under another
nannt. Dryd.
9. To repreſent typically.
Many times there are three things ſaid to make up the ſub-
ſtance of a ſacrament; namely, the grace which is thereby
offered, the cement which ſhadow ºth or ſignifieth grace, and
the word which expreſlºth what is done by the element, Hºok.
The fl.ield being to defend the body from weapons, aptly
ſº a ſovs out to us the continence of the emperor, which made
him proof to all the attacks of plc.ſure. Addiſon.
SH 'Low Y. a 'j. [from ſhadºw.]
1. Full of ſhade; gloomy. -
This ſºad w y deſart, unfrcquented woods,
I better broºk than flouriſhing peopled towns. Shakeſp.
With ſhºwy verdure flouriſh’d high,
A ſudden youth the groves enjoy. Fentºn.
2. Not brightly luminous.
More pleaſant light
Sºad wy ſets of the face of things. Milton.
3. Faintly repreſentative; typical.
- When they ſee
Law can diſcover fin, but not remove
Save by thoſe ſº try expiations weak,
The blood of buijs and goats; they may conclude -
Son.e blood more precious muſt be paid for man. Mºlt.
4. Unſubſtantial ; unreal.
Milton has brought into his poems two adors of a ſhadºwy
and fictitious nature, in the re, ſons of fin and death; by which
he hath interwoven in his fable avery beautiful allegory. Addison
5. Dark ; opake.
By command, e're yet dim night
*er ſhadºwy cloud withdraws, I am to haſte
Honeward. Alºilº. Parad. Loſ!.
SHA'oy. adi (from ſcal.]
1. Full of ſhade; mildly gloomy.
The wakeful bird
Sings darkling, and in-ſhadiyi covert hid
‘I uncs her nocturnal note. Milt. Parad. Lºft.
- Sticteh'd at caſe you ſing your happy loves,
And Amarillis fills the ſºady groves. Dry
2. Secure from the glare of light; or ſultrineſs of heat.
* - ſº - ! … ." º
Caſt it alſo that you may have rooins ſhady for ſummer, and
warm for winter. Bacon.
SHAFT. m. ſ. [rceart, Saxon |
I. An arrow ; a miſſive weapon.
- To pierce purſuing ſhield,
P.Parent train'd, the Tartars Wii. taught,
With /4ſ ſhot out from their back-turne. Soº. Sidney.
Who in the ſpring, from the new ſun
Already has a fever got, 5.
Too late begins thoſe ſhafts to ſhun,
Which Phoebus thro' his veins has ſhot. //a'ler.
They are both the archer and ſhaft taking aim afar off, and
then ſhooting themſelves directly upon the deſired maſk. 3.
So lofty was the pile, a Pärthian bow
With vigour drawn, muſt ſend the /laf below. Dryd.
º O'er thee the ſecret ſhºt
That waſtes at midnight, or th’undreaded hour
41ore.
Of noon, flies harmleſs. - Thºmſºn.
2. [Sºft, Dutch..] A narrow, deep, perpendicular pit.
They ſink a ſhaft or pit of fix foot in length. C. rew.
... The fulminating damp, upon its accenſion, gives a crack
like the report of a gun, and makes an exploſion ſo forcible as
to kill the miners, and force bodies of gre-t weight from the
bottom of the pit up through the ſhaft. //codward.
Suppoſe a tube, or as the miners call it, a ſhaft, were ſunk
from the ſurface of the earth to the center. Arbuthnot.
3. Anything ſtrait; the ſpire of a church.
Pračtiſe to draw finali and eaſy things, as a cherry with the
leaf, the ſhaft of a ſteeple. - Peacham.
SHAG. m. ſ. [rceacza, Saxon.]
1. Rough wooly hair.
Full often like a ſhag hair'd crafty kern,
Hath he converſed with the enemy;
And given me notice of their villanies. Shakeſp.
Where is your huſband 2 -
He's a traitor.
Thou lie'ſt thou ſhag-ear'd villain. Shakeſp.
From the ſhag of his body, the ſhape of his legs, his hav-
ing little or no tail, the ſlowneſs of his gate, and his climb-
ing up of trees, he ſeems to come near the bear kind. Grew.
True Witney broad cloth, with its ſhag unſhorn,
Be this the horſeman's fence. Gay.
2. A kind of cloth.
SH A G. m. ſ. A ſea bird.
Among the firſt ſort we reckon ſhags, duck, and mallard. Car.
SHA'GGEd. -
SHA GGY. } adj. [from ſhºg.]
I. Ruggedly ; hairy.
They change their hue, with haggar'd eyes they ſtare,
Lean are their looks, and ſh get are their hair. Dºyd.
A lion's hide he wears;
About his ſhoulders hangs the ſhaggy ſkin,
The teeth and gaping jaws ſeverely grin. Dryd.
From the froſty north
The early valiant Swede draws forth his wings,
In battailous array, while Voiga's ſtream
Sends oppoſite, in ſhaggy armour clad
Her borderers; on mutual ſlaughter bent. Philips.
2. Rough; rug red.
Trey pluck'd the ſeated hills with all their load,
Rocks, waters, woods, and by the ſhaggy tops
Uplifting bore them in their hands. ... Aſilt. Parad. Lºft.
There, where very deſolation dwells,
By grots and caverns ſhagg'd with horrid ſhades,
She may paſs on with unblench'd majeſty,
Be it not done in pride. Milt.
Through Eden went a river large,
Nor chang'd his courſe, but through the ſhaggy hill
Paſs'd underneath ingulph'd. Miltºn.
How would the old king ſmile
To ſee you weigh the paws when tip'd with gold, -
And throw the ſhaggy ſpoils about your ſhoulders. Aldſ.
Ye rugged rocks! which holy knees have worn,
Ye grots and caverns ſhagg’d with horrid thorn. Pºpe.
SHAGRE'EN. m. ſ. [chagrin, French.] The ſkin of a kind
of fiſh, or ſkin made rough in imitation of it... . .
To SHA’or res. v. a. ſcºriner, French.) To irritate; to
provoke. Both ſhould be written chagriº.
To Shail. v. n. To walk ſideways; a low wºrd. ---
Child, you muſt waſ ſtrait, without ſkiewing ºff";
to every ſtep you fºt. L º:
To snake. "... preterit, ſhook; part, paſſ ſ”, or /*
[rceacan, Saxon; ſhecken, Dutch. - ickr.:
1. To put into a vibrating rºotiºn; to mºve with quickr.:*
tuin, backwards and forwards; to 42*.
who honours not his father, k
Henry the fifth that made all France to quake,
º his weapon at us, and paſs by: Shakeſ:
I'...}...mine and upon then, and they ſhall be a ſpºil
to their ſervants. Zero. ii 9.
I ſhook my lap and ſaid, ſo God ſhake out every m n from
his houſe, even thus be he ſhaken out and emptied. ** i.
c<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H A
S H A
|
º
• the earth, even as a fig-tree caſteth her
º º ". is ſhaken of a mighty wind. Rev. vi.
º, the ſacred honours of his head :
with terror trembled heav'n's ſubſiding hill,
And from his ſhaken curls ambroſial dews diſtil. Dryden.
She firſt her huſband on the poop eſpies,
Shaking his hand at diſtance on the main ;
She took the ſign, and ſhook her hand again. Dryden.
. To make to totter or tremble. -
2. l O The rapid wheels ſhake heav'n's baſis. Milton.
Let France acknowledge that her ſhaken throne
Was once ſupported, fir, by you alone. Roſcommon.
3. To throw down by a violent motion.
Macbeth is ripe for ſhaking, and the powers above
Put on their inſtruments. Shakeſp.
The tyrannous breathing of the North
Shakes all our buds from blowing. Shakeſpeare.
When ye depart, ſhake off the duſt of your feet. Mat. x.
He looked at his book, and, holding out his right leg, put
i; into ſuch a quivering motion, that I thought he would have
ſhaked it off. Tatler.
4. To throw away; to drive off.
'Tis our firſt intent
To/*aše a 1 cares and buſineſs from our age,
Conferring them on younger ſtrengths, whilſt we
Unburthend crawl towards death. Shakeſpeare.
5. Tº weaken; to put in danger. -
When his doctrines grew too ſtrong to be ſhook by his ene-
mies, they perſecuted his reputation. Atterbury
6. To drive from reſolution; to depreſs; to make afraid.
A ſly and conflant knave, not to be ſºak'd. Shakespeare Cymb.
This reſpite ſho. 4
The boſon of my conſcience. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
* nºt ſoon /ain in mind, or troubled, as that the day
of Chriſt is at hand. 2 Thºſ. ii. 2.
Not my firm faith -
Can by his fraud be ſaken or ſeduc’d. Milton.
7 ******* ***. This phraſe, from the aaion uſed among
friends at meeting and Parting, ſometimes ſignifies to join with,
but commonly to take ave ºf:
With the ſlave,
He ne'er/º land, nor bid farewel to him,
Till he unſeam'd him from the nape to th’ chops. Shałºff.
Nor can it be ſafe to a king to tarry among them who are
/*king hand, with their allegiance, under pretence of laying
faſter hold of their religion. King Charles.
8. To SHAKE ºff. To rid himſelf of 3 to free from; to diveſt
of.
Be pleas'd that I ſafe ºff theſe names you give me:
Aºtonio never yet was thief or pirate. Shakespeare.
If I could ſhafe ºf but one ſeven years,
From theſe old arms and legs,
I'd with thee every foot.
Say, ſacred bard! what could beflow
Courage on thee, to ſoar ſo high
Tell me, brave friend! what help'd thee ſo
Skałºſº. Cºriolanus.
To ſºake ºff all mortality ? //aller.
Him I reſerved to be anſwered by himſelf, after I had ſº.,
ºf the leſſer and more barking creatures. Stillingfleet.
°ºn I want courage for ſobrave. deed 2
I've ſhook it ºff: my ſoul is free from fear. Dryden.
Here we are free from the formalities of cuſtom and re.
ſpect: we may ſhº, ºff the haughty impertinent. Collier.
How does thy beauty ſmooth
The face of ** and make even horrour ſmile !
At fight of thee my heart ſhakes ºff its ſorrows. Addiſon.
To SHAKE. v. n.
1. To be agitated with a vibratory motion.
ſ ** are counted as ſtubblé; he laugheth at the /*aking of
a ſpear. -
2. To totter. job xli. 29.
3. * * *emble; to be unable to keep the body ſtill.
- Thy ſight, which ſhºj
Make our eyes flow wift, joy, hearts dance with comforts,
Conſtrains them ***P, and ſhake with fear and ſorrow. Shakespeare
What ſaid the Wench, when he roſe up again
-Trembled and / cok; for why, he ſtamp'd,
As if the vicar ºncant to cozen him. Shakeſpeare
A ſhaking through their limbs they find, ſº
Like leaves ſaluted by the wind. J/aller.
4. To be in terrour; to be deprived of firmneſs.
He ſhort of ſuccours, and in deep deſpair,
S sº at the diſmal Proſpect of the war. Dryd. Æn.
*** *.ſ. ( from the verb. )
* Concuſſion.
, , ſ: * thy fame with ev'ry toy be pos'd,
. * thin web, whij, Poiſonous fancies make;
Of * º: great ſoldier's honour was compos’
vić cker fluff, *hich could endure a ſhake :
oºn pick, º civility plays the reſt,
- "fore *Y paſſeth with thee beſt. ºrf.
be freeholder . * baſis of aii ºf titles: dº
ſubſtantial ſtock, without which they are no more than bloſ.
ſoms that would fall away with every ſafe of wind, Addison,
2. Vibratory motion. -
Several of his countrymen probably lived within the ſafe of
the earthquake, and the ſhadow of the eclipſe, which are re-
corded by this author. 4adiſºn.
3. Motion given and received.
Our ſalutations were very hearty on both fides, conſiſtin
of many kind ſhakes of the hand. Žddiſon.
SHAKER. m. / [from ſhake.] The perſon or thing that Shakespeare
Go then, the guilty at thy will chaſtiſe,
He ſaid; the ſhafter of the earth replies. Pºpe', Odºſ.
SHAL.E. m. ſ. [Corrupted, I think, for ſhel.J. A huſk; the
caſe of ſeeds in filiquous plants.
Behold yon poor and ſtarved band,
And your fair ſhew ſhall ſuck away their ſouls,
Leaving them but the ſale, and huſks of men. Shałºń.
SHALL. v. &amp;fective. [rcea, sax. is originally I owe, or i ought.
In Chaucer, the faithe I ſhall to God, means the faith I ow. 19
God: thence it became a ſign of the future tenſe. The French
uſe devoir, do', dºit, in the ſame manner, with a kind of f.
** ſignification; and the Swedes ſº /* and the Iſlandº,
Jºal, in the ſame ſenſe. It has no tenſes but ſhall future, and
ſhould imperfect. *
The explanation of ſall, which foreigners and provincials
confound with will, is not eaſy; and the difficulty is increaſed
by the poets, who ſometimes give to ſhal an emphatical ſenſe
of will: but I ſhall endeavour, craffi 44inervé, to ſhow the
meaning of /all in the future tenſe. J
1. ( SHAll love. It will ſo happen that I muſt love; I am re-
ſolved to love.
2. SHAll I love? Will it be permitted me to love? Will you
Permit me to love? Will it happen that I muſt love?
3. Thou SHALT lºve. I command thee to love; it is permitted
thee to love: [in Poetry or ſolemn dićtion] it will happen that
thou muſt love.
4. SHALt thou love? will it happen that thou muſt love?
Will it be permitted to thee to jº
5. He SHAll love. It will happen that he muſt love; it is
commanded him that he love.
It is a mind, that /all remain a poiſon where it is.
-Shall remain -
Hear you this triton of the minnows? Mark you
His abſolute ſhall 2 Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
See Romulus the great:
This prince a prieſteſ, of your blood ſhall bear,
And like his fire in arms he/al. appear. Dryden's A.m.
That he ſhall receive no benefit from Chriſt, is the affirma.
tion whereon all his deſpair is founded; and the one way of
removing this diſmal *PPrehenſion, is to convince him that
Chriſt's death, and the benefits thereof, either do, or, if he
Perform the condition required of him, ſhall certainly belong
to him. Hammond's Fundamental.
6. SHALL he love 2 Is it permitted him to love? In ſolemn
language, Will it happen that he muſt love?
7. The plural perſons fºllow the ſignification of the fingulars.
SHA'lloon. n.ſ. A ſlight woollen ſtuff.
In blue/all on ſhall Hannibal be clad, -
And Scipio trail an Iriſh purple plaid. Swift.
SHA'ºop. m. / [chaku, French..] A ſmall boat.
You were reſolved, after your arrival into Oroonoque, to
Paſs to the mine; and, to that end, you deſired to have fir
John Fearne's /allºp; I do not allow of that courſe, becauſe
}* **not land ſo ſecretly but that ſome Indians on the river
ſide may diſcover you, who giving knowledge of your paſſage
to the Spaniards, you may be cut off before you can recover
your boat. Raleigh.
There with your ſhallºp ſtay:
The game's not loſt; I have one éard to play. //a/ar.
Our hero ſet
In a ſmall //allop, fortune in his debt;
So near a hope of crowns and ſcepters, more
Than ever Priam, when he flouriſh'd, wore. //aller.
SHA'I, Low, adj. [This word is probably compounded of /oal
and low.] -
1. Not deep; having the bottom at no great diſtance from the
ſurface or edge. -
I had been drowned, but that the ſhore was ſhelvy and
/hallow; a death that I abhor. Shakespeare Merry J/ives of //indſ.
That inundation, though it were ſhallow, had a long con-
tinuance, whereby they of the vale, that were not drowned,
periſhed for want of food. - Bacon.
The like opinion he held of Meotis Palus, that by the
floods of Tanais, and earth brought down thereby, it grew
obſervably ſhallºwer in his days, and would in proceſs of tinić
become a firm land. Brown's Wugar Erreurs,
I am made a ſhallow forded ſtream,
Seen tº the bottom: all my clearneſs ſcorn'd, y
And all my faults expos'd. Dryden's All for Love.
Sballow brooks, that flow’d ſo clear,
The bottom did the top appear. Dryden.
In ſhallow furrows vines ſecurely grow. Bryden.
- 2. Not<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H A
º
º
º
:
2. Not intellectually deep; not profound; not very knowing or
wiſe; empty; trifling; futile; ſilly.
I'll ſhew my mind,
According to my ſhallow ſimple ſkill.
This is a very ſhallow monſter:
Afraid of him : A very ſhallow monſter,
The man i' th' moon! A moſt poor credulous monſter. Shakespeare
The king was neither ſo ſhallow nor ſo ill advertiſed as not
to perceive the intention of the French king, for the inveſting
himſelf of Britaigne. Bacon’s Henry VII.
Uncertain and unſettled he remains,
Deep verſt in books, and ſhallow in himſelf. Milton.
One would no more wonder to ſee the moſt ſhallow nation
of Europe the moſt vain, than to find the moſt empty fellows
in every nation more conceited than the reſt. Addiſon.
3. Not deep of ſound.
If a virginal were made with a double concave, the one all
the length of the virginal, and the other at the end of the
ſtrings, as the harp hath, it muſt make the ſound perfeder,
and not ſo ſhallow and jarring, - Bacon.
SHA'llow. m. ſ. [from the adjećtive..] A ſhelf; a ſand; a
flat; a ſhoal; a place where the water is not deep.
I ſhould not ſee the ſandy hour-glaſs run,
But I ſhould think of ſhallows and of flats;
And ſee my wealthy Andrew dock'd in ſand,
Veiling her high top lower than her ribs,
To kiſs her burial. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
A ſwift ſtream is not heard in the channel, but upon
fallows of gravel. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſtory.
Having but newly left thoſe grammatick flats and ſhallows,
where they ſtuck unreaſonably, to learn a few words with la-
mentable conſtruction, and now on the ſudden tranſported, to
be toſt with their unballaſted wits in fathomleſs and unquiet
deeps of controverſy, they do grow into hatred of learning. Milt.
You that ſo oft have ſounded
And fathom'd all his thoughts, that know the deeps
And ſhallows of his heart, ſhould need no inſtruments
Shakeſpeare.
To advance your ends. Denham.
In arms of the ſea, and among iſlands, there is no great
depth, and ſome places are plain /hallows. Burnet.
He ſounds and fathoms him, to find
The ſhallows of his ſoul. Dryd. Spaniſh Fryar.
The wary Dutch
Behind their treach'rous ſhallows now withdraw,
And there lay ſnares to catch the Britiſh hoſt. Dryden.
Three more fierce Eurus in his angry mood
Daſh'd on the ſhallows of the moving ſand,
And in mid ocean left them moor'd a-land. Dryd. An.
Their ſpawn being lighter than the water, there it would
not ſink to the bottom, but be buoyed up by it, and carried
away to the ſhallows. Ray on the Creation.
With the uſe of diligence, and prudent condućt, he may
decline both rocks and ſhallows. Norris.
The ſea could not be much narrower than it is, without a
great loſs to the world; and muſt we now have an ocean of
mere flats and ſhallows, to the utter ruin of navigation? Bentley.
SHA'llow BRAINE D. adj. "[ſhallow and brain..] Fooliſh; fu-
tile; trifling; empty. - -
It cannot but be matter of juſt indignation to all good men
to ſee a company of lewd ſhallowbrained huffs making atheiſm,
and contempt of religion, the ſole badge of wit. South.
SHA'l Low LY. adv. [from ſhallow.]
1. With no great depth.
The load lieth open on the graſs, or but ſhallow'y co-
vered. Carew.
2. Simply; fooliſhly.
Moſt /allowly did you theſe arms commence,
Fondly brought here, and fooliſhly ſent hence:
Strike up our drums, purſue the ſcatter'd ſtray. Shakeſpeare.
SHA'llow Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſhallow.]
1. Want of depth.
2. Want of thought; want of underſtanding; futility; filli-
neſs; emptineſs.
By it do all things live their meaſur'd hour:
We cannot aſk the thing which is not there,
Blaming the ſhallowneſ of our requeſt. Herbert.
I cannot wonder enough at the ſhallownſ; and impertinent
zeal of the vulgar ſort in Druina, who were carried away .
with ſuch an ignorant devotion for his ſucceſſes, when it little
concerned their religion or ſecurity. Howel.
SHA I.M. n.ſ. [German.] A kind of muſical pipe.
Every captain was commanded to have his ſoldiers in readi-
neſs to ſet forward upon the ſign given, which was by the
ſound of a ſhalm or hoboy. Knolles's Hiſt, ºf the Turks.
SHALt. Second perſon of ſhall.
To SHAM. v. n. [ſhommi, Welſh, to cheat.]
1. To trick; to cheat; to fool with a fraud; to delude with
falſe pretences. A low word.
Men tender in point of honour, and yet with little regard
to truth, are ſooner wrought upon by ſhame than by con-
ſcience, when they find themſelves fooled and ſhammed into a
convićtion. L’Eſtrange.
S H A
2. To obtrude by fraud or folly.
mº: muſt have a care that we do not, for want of laying
things and things together, ſham fallacies upon the world for
current reaſon.
Then all your wits that flear and /ham L'Aſirange.
Down from Don Quixote to Tomºſº.
From whom Ijeſts and puns purloin, &gt;
And ſlily put them off for mine,
Fond to be thought a country wit. Prior.
SHAM. m. ſ. . [from the verb.] Fraud; trick; deluſion fift
pretence; impoſture. A low word. &gt;
No ſham ſo groſs but it will paſs upon a weak man, that is
pragmatical and inquiſitive. L’Eſtrange.
It goes a great way when natural curioſity and vulgar pre-
judice ſhall be aſſiſted with the ſlams of aſtrological jig-
Inlents. L’Eſtrange.
He that firſt brought the ſlam, wheedle, or banter in uſe,
put together, as he thought fit, thoſe ideas he made it ſtand
for. Locke.
That in the ſacred temple needs would try
Without a fire th’ unheated gums to fry,
Believe who will the ſolemn ſham, not I. Addiſon.
SHAM. adj. Falſe; counterfeit; fiétitious; pretended.
Never join the fray,
Where the ſham quarrel interrupts the way. Gay.
SHAMBLEs. n.ſ. (Of uncertain etymology. Scannaclia, Ital.]
1. The place where butchers kill or ſell their meat; a butchery.
Far be the thoughts of this from Henry's heart,
To make a ſhambles of the parliament-houſe. Shakespeare H. VI.
I hope my noble lord eſteems me honeſt.
–Oh, ay, as ſummer-flies are in the ſhambles,
That quicken ev'n with blowing. Shakespeare. Othelio.
He warned a flock of ſheep, that were driving to the ſham-
bles, of their danger ; and, upon uttering ſome ſounds, they
all fled. Arbuthnot.
2. It is here improperly uſed.
When the perſon is made the jeſt of the mob, or his back
the ſhambles of the executioner, there is no more convićtion:
in the one than in the other //atts.
SHA'MBLING. adj. [See ScAMBLING..] Moving aukwardly
and irregularly. A low bad word.
By that ſhambling in his walk, it ſhould be my rich banker,
Gomez, whom I knew at Barcelona. Dryd, Span. Fryar.
So when nurſe Nokes to act young Ammon tries,
With ſhambling legs, long chin, and fooliſh eyes,
With dangling hands he ſtrokes th' imperial robe,
And with a cuckold's air commands the globe. Smith.
SHAME. n.ſ. [rceam, Saxon; ſchaemte, Dutch.]
1. The paſſion felt when reputation is ſuppoſed to be loſt; the
paſſion expreſſed ſometimes by bluſhes.
Lamenting ſorrow did in darkneſs lye,
And ſhame his ugly face did hide from living eye. Fa. Qu.
Peace, peace, for ſhame, if not for charity.
—Urge neither charity nor ſhame to me:
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And ſhamefully my hopes by you are butcher'd:
My charity is outrage, life my ſhame;
And in my ſame ſtill lives my ſorrow's rage. Shakespeare R. III.
Hide, for ſhame,
Romans, your grandſires images,
That bluſh at their degenerate progeny. Dryden.
In the ſchools men are allowed, without ſhame, to deny the
agreement of ideas; or out of the ſchools, from thence have
learned, without ſhame, to deny the connection of ideas. Locke.
2. The cauſe or reaſon of ſhame; diſgrace; ignominy.
The more ſhame for him that he ſends it me;
For I have heard him ſay a thouſand times,
His Julia gave it him at his departure. Shakeſpeare.
Aaron had made them naked unto their ſhame amongſt their
enemies. Ex. xxxii. 25.
God deliver the world from ſuch guides, who are the ſha”
of religion. South.
This jeſt was firſt of the other houſe's making,
And, five times try’d, has never fail'd of taking;
For 'twere a ſhame a poet ſhould be kill'd,
Under the ſhelter of ſo "...i. º b Dryden
O ſhame to manhood! ſhall one dºring boy a , ,
The ſº of all our happineſs deſtroy: Pºpe's 08/9.
3. Reproach.
A foulſhame is upon the thief. Eccluſ. v. 14.
Applauſe -
Turn'd to exploding hiſs, triumph to ſhame, -
Caſion themſelves from their own mouths. Milton.
To SHAME. v. a. [from the nººn.]
1. To make aſhamed; to fill with ſhame.
To tell thee of whom deriv'd,
were ſhameenough to/ame thee, wer; thou??" ſhameleſs, Shakespeare
If thou haſt power to raiſe º bring him hither,
've power to ſhame him hence:
3. §. live { truth and ſame the devil. Shakeſ?.
Hyperbolus by ſuffering did tradice 7
The oſtraciſm, and ſham'd it out of uſe. Claveland.
Deſpoil'd
23 T<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H A
S H A
:.
Deſpoil'd - *
J. ham’d, naked, miſèrable. - Allian.
Of all our goo * tº in all the ſlanders and diſgraces of
an t
º †, are but the arts and methods of provºº
to ſhame us into the glories of the next. South.
were there but one righteous man in the wo ld, he would
hold up his head with confidence and honour; he would ſhame
the world, and not the world him. South.
He in a loathſome dungeon doom'd to lie,
In bonds retain’d his birthright liberty, :
And ſlam'd oppreſſion, 'till it ſet him fºº: Dryden.
ºffic coward bore the man immortal ſpite,
Dryd n.
who ſham'd him out of madneſs into flight:
who ſhames a ſcribbler, breaks a cobweb through ,
He ſpins the flight ſelf-pleaſing thread a new. Pºpe.
2. To diſgrace.
Cºtes, fir knight, ye been too much to blame,
Thus for to blot the honour of the dead,
And with foul cowardice his carcaſs/anº.
so bent, the more ſhall ſame him his repulſe.
To SHAME. v. n. To be aſhamed.
- Great ſhame it is, thing ſo divine in view,
Made for to be the world's moſt ornament,
To make the bait her gazers to embrew ;
Good ſhames to be to ill an inſtrument. Spenſºr.
Shaº'ſ thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy baſe-born heart? Sººkſ are:
- To the trunk of it authors give ſuch a magnitude, as Iſhame
to repeat. - Raleigh', Hjºry ºf the J/orld.
Auſter ſpy’d him,
Cruel Auſter thither hy'd him;
And with the ruſh of one rude blaſt,
Shain’d not ſpitefully to waſte
All his leaves, ſo freſh, ſo ſweet,
And lay them trembling at his feet. Craſaw.
SHA’s EFACE.D. adj. [ſhame and face. J Modeſt; baſhful;
caſily put out of countenance.
Philcclea, who bluſhing and withal ſmiling, making ſhame-
facedneſs pleaſing, and pleaſure //cºfaceſ, tenderly moved
her feet, unwonted to feel the naked ground. Sidney.
Conſcience is a bluſhing ſharifa, a ſpirit, that mutinies in
Fairy Queen.
41ilton.
a man's boſom : it fills one full of ol ºacles. Sºuk. R. III.
A man may be ſh, mººd, and a woman modeſt, to the
degree of fººd.'ous. L'Eſtrarge.
Your ºr fac. virtue ſhunn'd tºe people's praiſe,
And ſenate's honours. Dryden.
From this time we may date that remarkable turn in the
behaviour of our faſhionable Engliſhmen, that makes them
ſhamefaced in the exerciſe of thoſe duties which they were ſent
into the world to perform. Addison's Freeholder.
sºvº. adv. [from ſlam faced.] Modeſtly ; baſh-
ully. -
SHAMEFA'ce DNFss. n.ſ. [from ſhamºſaced.] Modeſty; baſh-
fulneſs; timidity.
Dorus, when he had ſung this, having had all the while a
free beholding of the fair Pamela, could well have ſpared ſuch
horrour, and defended the aſſault he gave unto her face with
bringing a fair ſtain of ſhameface inºſ, into it. Sidney.
Why wonder ye, - -
Fair fir, at that which ye ſo much embrace?
She is the fountain of your modeſty;
You ſhamefac'd are, but ſhamefuſineſ; itſelf is ſhe. Fa. Qu.
None but fools, out of Jhamefacedneſs, hide their ulcers,
which, if ſhown, might be healed. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
SHA'MEFU L. adj. [ſhame and full.] Diſgraceful; ignominious;
infamous; reproachful. -
... Phoebus flying ſo moſt ſham ful fight,
His bluſhing face in foggy cloud implies,
And hides for ſhame. Fairy ºfteen.
This all through that great princeſs pride did fall,
And came to ſhameful end. Fairy Queen.
For this he ſhall live hated, be blaſphem’d,
Seiz'd on by force, judg’d, and to death condemn'd,
A ſhameful and accurſt Milton.
His nayal preparations were not more ſurpriſing than his
quick and ſham fill retreat; for he returned to Carthage with
only one ſhip, having fled without ſtriking one ſtroke. Arbuth.
T he knave of diamonds tries his wiy arts, -
And wins, O ſhameful chance! the queen of hearts. Pope.
SHA’m f : ... ſ.4 - - -
*** Utily adº; [from ſhameful..] Diſgracefully; ignomi-
niouſly; infamouſly; reproachfully. - -
H None but that ſaw, quoth he, would ween for truth,
*/*fully that maid he did to ment.
p But I his holy ſecret
º have publiſh'd, impiouſly,
wº and ſhamſu!y. Milton's Mºoniſter.
*.ſhamefully fail - Q. . - sº.
* of º 9 fail in the laſt ači in this contri, º
tºº.
*** are for the moſt part, very de
him ſham fully in their doings, part, V º: º y
Fairy &amp;#een,
SHA’s Eless, adj. [from ſºme.] Wanting ſhame; wanting
modeſty; impudent; frontleſs; immodcit audacious.
To tell thee whence thou cam'ſt, of whom deriv'd,
Were ſhame enough to ſhame thee, wert thou not ſhauleleſ.
º Shakespeare's Henry VI.
Beyond imagination is the wrong
That ſhe this day hath, ſhameleſ, thrown on me. Shakesp.
The ſhameleſs denial hereof by ſome of their friends, and
the more ſhameleſs juſtification by ſome of their flatterers,
makes it needful to exemplify, which I had rather forbear. Ral.
God deliver the world from ſuch huckſters of ſouls, the
very ſhame of religion, and the ſhamelſ, ſubverters of mora-
lity. South's Sermo.
Such ſºameleſ, bards we have ; and yet 'tis true,
There are as mad abandon'd criticks too. Pote.
SHA'Melessly, adu. [from ſhameleſs.] Impudently; auda-
ciouſly; without ſhame. -
The king to-day, as one of the vain fºllows, ſame'ſ y un-
covereth himſelf. 2 Sa. vi. 26.
He muſt needs be ſhamel'ſ ly wicked that abhors not this
licentiouſneſs. Ilue.
SHA’s El EssN Ess. m. ſ. [from ſhameleſ...] Impudence; want
of ſhame; immodeſty.
Being moſt impudent in her heart, ſhe could, when ſhe
would, teach her checks bluſhing, and make ſhameſaſtneſs
the cloak of ſhameleſſneſs. Sidney.
He that bluſhes not at his crime, but adds ſhamelºftſ, to
hi, ſhame, hath nothing left to reſtore him to virtue. Taylºr.
SHA/MM ER. m. ſ. [from ſlam.] A cheat; an impoſtor. A
low word.
SHA'Mois. n.ſ.. [chamois, Frcnch.] See CHAMois. A kind
of wild goat.
I'll bring thee
To cluſt'ing filberds, and ſometimes I'll get thee
Young ſhamois from the rocks. Shakeſpeare.
SHA's. Rock. m. ſ. The Iriſh name for three leaved graſs.
If they found a plot of watercroſſes, or /kamºks, there
they flocked as to a feaſt for the time. Spºnſer on Ireland.
Sº ANK. m. ſ. [rceanca, Saxon; ſhencke', Dutch. J
1. The middle joint of the leg; that part which reaches from
the ankle to the knee.
Eſtfoons her white ſtrait legs were altered
To crooked crawlingſhanks, of marrow emptied;
And her fair face to foul and loathſome hue,
And her fine corps to a bag of venom grew, Spººr.
The ſixth age ſhifts
Into the lean and ſlipper'd pantaloon,
With ſpectacles on noſe, and pouch on ſide;
His youthful hoſe, well ſav'd, a world too wide
For his ſhrunk ſhanks. - Shakespeare A you li e it.
A ſtag ſays, if theſe pitiful ſanks of mine were but anſwer-
able to this branching head, I can't but think how I ſhould
defy all my enemies. L'E/irange.
2. The bone of the leg.
Shut me nightly in a charnel-houſe,
O'er cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With recky ſhanks, and yellow chapleſs ſkulls. Shakºtarº.
3. The long part of any inſtrument.
The ſank of a key, or ſome ſuch long hole, the punch
cannot ſtrike, becauſe the ſhank is not forged with ſºlº
ſufficient. 1/10.4%ii.
SHA'NKED. adj. [from ſank.] Having a ſhank. -
SHA's KER. n.ſ.. [chancre, French..] A venereal excreſcence.
To SHAPE. . . preter. ſhaped; part, paſſ ſlºped anº ſhafer.
[rcyppan, Saxon; ſhepſen, Dutch.] -
1. To form; to mould with reſpect to external dimenſions.
I that am not ſºap'd for ſportive tricks,
Nor made to court an am’rous looking-glaſs 3.
I, that am rudely ſtampt, and want love's majeſty, R. III
To ſtrut before a wanton ambling nymph. Shakespeare .
, narrow breaſt,
Thoſe nature hath ſhaped with a great head
and ſhoulders ſticking out, ſcem much inclined to a conſump-
tion. Harvey.
Mature the virgin was, of Egypt's race; • *
Grace ſhap’d her limbs, and beauty deck'd her face. Prizr.
The faultleſs form, -
Shap’d by the hand of harmony. Thºſiſ.
2. To mould; to caſt; to regulate; to adjuſt.
Drag the villain hither by the hair, Tit. Aid.
Nor age nor honour ſhall ſhaft privilege. Shºſ. -
Mr. Cânăifi, when without hºpe, and ready to /* his
courſe by the Eaſt homewards, met a ſhip which came ſº
the Philippines. Raleigh.
‘i o the ſtream, when neither friends nor force, lar
Nor ſpeed nor art avail, he ſhape; his courſe. . D. m.º.
Charm'd by their eyes, their manners I acquire,
And ſhape my fooliſhiefs to their deſire.
5. To image; to conceive. -
Lowers and madmen have their feething brain,
Such ſhaping fantaſies that apprehend
More than cool reaſon cyci apprehen's.
Prior.
Sºa 'ºff.
is
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">s
º
º
º
—r
- -
* -
S H A
It is my nature's plague
To ſpy into abuſe, and oft my jealouſy º -
Shapes faults that are not. Shakespeare Othello. .
When fancy hath formed and ſhaped the perfeóteſt ideas of
bleſſedneſs, our own more happy experiences of greater muſt
diſabuſe us. - Boyle.
4: To make ; to create. Obſolete. -
I was ſhapen in iniquity, and in fin did my mother conceive
• ‘nne. - - - Pſ. li. 5.
SHAPE. n ſ [from the verb. )
1. Form ; external appearance. - -
He beat me grievouſly in the ſhape of a woman; for in the
ſhape of a man, maſter Brook, I fear not Goliah with a
weaver's beam. - Shakeſpeare.
The ſhapes of the locuſts were like unto horſes prepared
- - -
for battle. º, - Rev. ix. 7.
- The other ſhape, - . - - - -
If ſhape it may be call'd that ſhafe had none, -
Biſtinguiſhable in member, joint, or limb. Milton.
: In vegetables and animals the ſhape we moſt fix on, and are
!--- - - - Locke,
moſt led by.” “ ”
2. Make of the trunk of the body. .
* Firſt a charming ſhare enſlav'd me,
An eye then gave the fatal ſtroke;
'Till by her wit Corinna ſav'd me;
And all my former fetters broke. Addison.
3. Being, as moulded into ſhape.
- Before the gates there ſat - . . .
On either ſide a formidable ſhape. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
4. Idea ; pattern. . . - -
Thy heart -- -- -
Contains of gºod, wiſe, juſt, the perfect ſhape. Milton.
5. It is row uſed in low converſation for manner.
SHAPE LEss. adj. [from ſhape.J Wanting regularity of form;
wanting ſymmetry of dimenſions. -
- - You are born
To ſet a form upon that indigeſt, - , *
Which he hath left ſo ſhapeleſs and ſo rude. Shakeſpeare:
He is deformed, crooked, old and ſere;
Ill-fac'd, worſe-bodied, ſhapeleſs ev'ry where. Shakeſpeare.
What fools were here,
Diſgui,'d like Muſcovites in ſhapeleſ, gear: Shakeſpeare.
Thrice had I lov'd thee, -
Before I knew thy face or name;
So in a voice, ſo in a ſhapel'ſ flame,
Angels affect us oft, and worſhipp'd be. Donne,
Now the vićtor ſtretch'd his eager hand,
Where the tall nothing ſtood, or ſeem'd to ſtand;
A ſhapelſ, ſhade, it melted from his fight,
Like forms in clouds, or viſions of the night! Pope.
Some objects pleaſe our eyes,
Which out of nature's common order riſe, {
The ſhapelſ, rock, or hanging precipice. Pºpe.
SHAPE sm ºr H. m. ſ. [ſhape and ſmith..] One who undertakes
to improve the form of the body. A burleſque word.
No ſhapeſmith yet ſet up and drove a trade,
To mend the work that providence had made. Garth.
Sri A'PELINEss. n. / [from ſhapely..] Beauty or proportion of form.
SHA'PELY. adv. [from ſhate.] Symmetrical; well formed.
SHARD. m. ſ. [ſchaerde, Triſick.]
1. A fragment of an earthen veſſel.
For charitable prayers,
Shard, flints, and pebbles ſhould be thrown on her;
Yet here ſhe is allow'd her virgin chants,
Her maiden ſtrewments.
2. [Chard J A plant.
Shards or mallows for the pot,
Keep the looſen’d body ſound.
3. It ſeems in Spenſºr to ſignify a frith or ſtrait.
Upon that ſhore he ſpied Atin ſtand,
There by his maſter left, when late he far'd
In Phedria's fleet bark, over that per’lous ſhard. Fa. Queen.
4. A ſort of fiſh.
SHA'Robor N. adj. [ſhard and born.] Born or produced among
broken ſtones or pots. Perhaps ſhard in Shakeſpeare may fig-
nify the ſheaths of the wings of infects.
Ere to black Hecat's ſummons
The ſhardborn beetle with his drowſy hums
Hath rung night's yawning peal, there ſhall be done
A deed of dreadful note Shakespeare.
SHA'RDED. adj. [from ſhard J. Inhabiting ſhards.
Often ſhall we find
The ſharded beetle in a ſafer hold,
Than is the full-wing'd eagle. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
To SHARE. v. n. [rceañan, rcyran, Saxon.]
1. To divide ; to part among many.
Good fellows all,
The lateſt of my wealth I'll ſhare amongſt you. Shakespeare care.
Any man may make trial of his fortune, provided he acknow-
ledge the lord's right, by ſharing out unto him a toll. Carew.
Well may he then to you his cares impart,
And ſhare his burden where he ſhares his heart, Dryden,
Shakespeare Hamlet,
Dryden's Horace.
S H A
... In the primitive times the advantage of prieſthood was
equally ſhared among all the order, and none of that character
had any ſuperiority. Collier.
Though the weight of a falſhood would be too heavy for
ºne tº bear, it grows light in their imaginations when it is
(hared among many. Addison's Spectator.
Suppoſe I ſhare my fortune equally between my children
and a ſtranger, will that unite them Swift
2. To partake with others. ..
The captain, half of whoſe ſoldiers are dead, and the other
quarter never muſtered or ſeen, comes ſhortly to demand pay-
ment of his whole account; where, by good means of ſome
great ones, and privy ſharings with the officers of other ſome
he receiveth his debt. “ Sfºr ºn tº
In vain does valour bleed, -
while avarice and rapine ſhare the land. Milton.
Go, filently enjoy your part of grief, -
And ſhare the ſad inheritance with me. Dryden.
Wav'd by the wanton winds his banner flies,
All maiden white, and ſhares the people's eyes. Dryden.
This was the prince decreed * *
To ſhare his ſceptre. - - - Dryden's Zn:
Not a love of liberty, nor thirſt of honour, -
Drew you thus far; but hopes to ſhare the ſpoil
Of conquer'd towns and plunder'd provinces. Addison Cato.
All night it rains, the ſhews return with day;
Great Jove with Caeſar ſhares his ſov’reign ſway. Logie.
3. To cut; to ſeparate; to ſheer. [From rcean, Saxon.]
With ſwift wheel reverſe deep entring ſhard
All his right fide. “ . Milton,
Scalp, face, and ſhoulders the keen ſteel divides,
And the ſhar'd viſage hangs on equal fides. Dryden.
To SHARE. v. n. To have part; to have a dividend.
I am the prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,
To ſhare with me in glory any more. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Had greater haſte theſe ſacred rites prepar’d,
Some guilty mouths had in your triumphs ſhar'd;
But this untainted year is all your own. Dryden:
A right of inheritance gave every one a title to ſhare in the
goods of his father. - Locke.
This is Dutch partnerſhip, to ſhare in all our beneficial
bargains, and exclude us wholly from theirs. Swift.
SHARE. m. ſ. [from the verb.] -
1. Part; allotment; dividend.
If every juſt man, that now pines with want;
Had but a moderate and beſeeming ſhare,
Of that which lewdly-pamper'd luxury .
Now heaps upon ſome with vaſt exceſs. Milton.
They went a hunting, and cvery one to go ſhare and ſhare
like in what they took. - L’Eſtrange.
The ſubdued territory was divided into greater and ſmaller
/hares, beſides that reſerved to the prince. Temple.
I'll give you arms; burn, raviſh, and deſtroy:
For my own ſhare one beauty I deſign;
Engage your honours that ſhe ſhall be mine. Dryden.
While fortune favour’d,
I made ſome figure; nor was my name -
Obſcure, nor I without my ſhare of fame. Dryd. Æn.
The youths have equal ſhare
In Marcia's wiſhes, and divide their fiſter. Addison Cat:.
In poets, as true genius is but rare,
True taſte as ſeldom is the critick's ſhare. Pope.
He who doth not perform that part aſſigned him, is a very
miſchievous member of the publick; becauſe he takes his ſhare
of the profit, and yet leaves his ſhare of the burden to be born
by others. Swift.
2. A part. * . - -
Theſe, although they bear a ſhare in the diſcharge, yet have
different offices in the compoſition. Brown's Vulgar-Erreur-
3. [Scean, Saxon.] The blade of the plow that cuts the ground.
Nor laws they knew, nor manners, nor the care
Of lab’ring oxen, nor the ſhining ſhare. . . Dryden.
Then let him mark the ſheep, or whet the ſhining ſhare.
Dryden's Wirgil's Georg.
Great cities ſhall with walls be compaſs'd round,
And ſharpen'd ſhares ſhall vex the fruitful ground. Dryden.
Incumbent o'er the ſhining ſhare -
The maſter leans, removes th’obſtrućtive clay. Thomſºn.
For clay the coulter is long and bending, and the ſhare
narrow. Mortimer.
SHARE bone. n.ſ. [ſhare and bºº.] The os pubis; the bone
that divides the trunk from the limbs. -
The cartilage bracing together the two oſſa pubis, or ſhare-
bones, Bartholine ſaith, is twice thicker and laxer in women
Derham.
than men.
SHARER. m.ſ.. [from ſhare] . . - "... •
1. One who divides, or apportions to others; a divider.
2. A partaker; one who participates any thing with others.
Moſt it ſeem'd the French king to import, -
As ſharer in his daughter's injury. David's Civil War.
Peºple not allowed to be ſhirers with their companions in
good fortune, will hardly agree to be ſharer, in bad. tº:
- - in<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">* -
S H A
An overgrown eſtate falling into the hands of one that has
many children, it is broken into ſo many portions as render
the ſharers rich enough. - Addiſon.
You muſt have known it.
—Indeed I did, then favour’d by the king,
And by that means a ſharer in the ſecret. Rºwe.
If, by taking on himſelf human nature at large, he hath a.
compaſſionate and tender ſenſe of the infirmities of mankind
in general, he muſt needs, in a peculiar manner, feel and com-
miſerate the infirmities of the poor, in which he himſelf was
ſo eminent a ſharer. Atterbury’s Sermons.
I ſuffer many things as an author militant, whereof in your
days of probation you have been a ſharer. Pope to Swift.
SHARK. n.ſ.. [canis charcharias, Latin.]
1. A voracious ſea-fiſh. -
His jaws horrifick arm'd with threefold fate,
The direful ſhar}. Thomſon's Summer.
2. A greedy artful fellow; one who fills his pockets by ſly tricks.
}. meſſengers are ſent back to him, like ſo many ſharks
and runnagates, only for endeavouring to compliment an ill-
nature out of itſelf, and ſeeking that by petition which they
might have commanded by their ſword. . South's Sermons.
3. Trick; fraud; petty rapine.
Wretches who live upon the ſhark, and other mens fins,
the common poiſoners of youth, equally deſperate in their
fortunes and their manners, and getting their very bread by
the damnation of ſouls. South's Sermºns.
To SHARK. v. a. To pick up haſtily or ſily.
Young Fontinbras,
Of unimproved mettle, hot and full,
Hath in the ſkirts of Norway, here and there,
Shark'd up a liſt of landleſs reſolutes. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
To SHARK. v. n.
1. To play the petty thief.
The fly leads a lazy, voluptuous, ſcandalous, ſharking life,
hateful wherever ſhe comes. L’Eſtrange.
2. To cheat; to trick. Ainſworth.
There are cheats by natural inclination as well as by cor-
ruption : nature taught this boy to ſhark, not diſcipline. L’E/1.
The old generous Engliſh ſpirit, which heretofore made
this nation ſo great in the eyes of all the world, ſeems utterly
extinét; and we are degenerated into a mean, /harking, falla-
cious, undermining converſe, there being a ſnare and a trapan
almoſt in every word we hear, and every ačtion we ſee. South.
SHARP. adj. [rceamp, Saxon; ſcherpe, Dutch J
1. Keen; piercing; having a keen cdge; having an acute point;
not blunt.
*
She hath tied
Sharptooth’d unkindneſs like a vulture here. Shakeſpeare.
In Ireland have I ſeen this ſtubborn Cade
Oppoſe himſelf againſt a troop of kerns;
And fought ſo long, 'till that his thighs with darts
Were almoſt like a ſharp quill'd porcupine. Shakespeare H. VI.
Thy tongue deviſeth miſchiefs, like a ſharp razor working
deceitfully. - Pſ. lii. 2.
With edged grooving tools they cut down and ſmoothen
away the extuberances left by the ſharp pointed grooving tools,
and bring the work into a pérfect ſhape. Moxon's Mich. Ex.
2. Terminating in a point of edge; not obtuſe.
The form of their heads is narrow and/arp, that they may
the better cut the air in their ſwift flight. 47 e.
There was ſeen ſome miles in the ſea a great pillar of light,
*/*p, but in form of a column or cylinder, riſing a great
way up towards heaven. alſo?.
To come near the point, and draw unto a Jharper angle,
they do not only ſpeak and practiſe truth, but really deſire its
enlargement. - Brown's Vulgar Erreurs.
. ... Their embryon atoms
Light arm'd or heavy, ſharp, ſmooth, light or ſlow. Milton.
It is ſo much the firmer by how much broader the bottom
and ſharper the top. Temple.
In ſhipping ſuch as this, the Iriſh kern,
And untaught Indian, on the ſtream did glide,
Ere ſharp keel'd boats to ſtem the flood did learn,
9, fin-like oars did ſpread from ej ſide. Dryden.
3. Acute of mind; witty; ingenious; inventive.
Now as fine in his *PParel as if he would make me in love
..º.º. and verſe for verſe with the ſharpſ witted lover
If we had nought but ſenſe, each living wight,
hich We call brute, would be moreJharp than we. Davies.
- Sharp to the world, but thoughtleſs of renown,
- º: plot * on the ſtage, but on the town. Dryden.
and . * nothing makes men /*arper, and ſets their hands
Man . at work, than want. Addiſon on Italy.
} other things belong to the material world, wherein
the -
º fºr, have never yet arrived at clear and
Sidney.
* Quick, as of fight or hearing. //atts.
&amp; the ſharpeſt eye diſcerneth nought,
- S . ſun-beams in the air do ſhine:
sº º: ſoul, with her reflecting thought
°t herſelf, without ſome light divine." 2 Davier
S H A
To ſharp ey'd reaſon this would ſeem untrue;
But reaſon I through love's falſe opticks view. Dryden.
5. Sour without aſtringency; four but not auſtere; acid.
So we, if children young diſeaſed we find,
Anoint with ſweets the veſſel's foremoſt parts,
To make them taſte the potions ſharp we give;
They drink deceiv'd, and ſo deceiv'd they live. F. &amp;.
Sharp taſted citrons Median climes produce;
Bitter the rind, but generous is the juice. Dryden.
Different ſimple ideas are ſometimes expreſſed by the fan.
word, as ſweet and ſharp are applied to the objects of hearing
and taſting. Watts.
6. Shrill; piercing the ear with a quick noiſe; not flat.
In whiſtling you contract the mouth, and, to make it more
/harp, men uſe their finger. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Let one whiſtle at the one end of a trunk, and hold your
ear at the other, and the ſound ſtrikes ſo ſharp as you can ſcarce
endure it. - Bacon.
For the various modulation of the voice, the upper end of
the windpipe is endued with ſeveral cartilages to contract or
dilate it, as we would have our voice flat or ſharp. Ray.
7. Severe; harſh; biting; ſarcaſtick.
If he ſhould intend his voyage towards my wife, I would
turn her looſe to him; and what he gets more of her than
/harp words, let it lie on my head. Shakeſpeare.
How often may we meet with thoſe who are one while
courteous, but within a ſmall time after are ſo ſupercilious,
ſharp, troubleſome, fierce and exceptious, that they are not
only ſhort of the true character of friendſhip, but become the
very ſores and burdens of ſociety South.
Ceaſe contention: be thy words ſevere,
Sharp as he merits; but the ſword forbear. Dryden.
8. Severe; quick to puniſh; cruel; ſeverely rigid.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
And to that place the ſharp Athenian law
Cannot purſue us. Shakespeare.
9. Eager; hungry; keen upon a queſt.
My faulcon now is ſharp and paſſing empty,
And, 'till ſhe ſtoop, ſhe muſt not be full gorgd;
For then ſhe never looks upon her lure. Shakeſpeare.
The ſharp deſire I had
Of taſting. Milton.
10. Painful; afflićtive.
That ſhe may feel
How ſharper than a ſerpent's tooth it is,
To have a thankleſs child. Shakeſp. King Lear.
He cauſed his father's friends to be cruelly tortured; grieving
to ſee them live to whom he was ſo much beholden, and there-
fore rewarded them with ſuch ſharp payment. Knoller.
- Death becomes
His final remedy; and after life
Try’d in ſharp tribulation, and refin'd. -
By faith, and faithful works. Milt. Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
It is a very ſmall comfort that a plain man, lying under a
/*arp fit of the ſtone, receives from this ſentence. Tillotſon.
1 1. Fierce; ardent; fiery.
Their piety feign'd, -
In ſharp conteſt of battle found no aid. Milton.
A ſharp aſſault already is begun;
Their murdering guns play fiercely on the walls. Dryden.
12. Attentive; vigilant.
Sharp at her utmoſt ken ſhe caſt her eyes,
And ſomewhat floating from afar deſcriés. - Dryden.
Is a man bound to look out ſharp to plague himſelf, and to
take care that he ſlips no opportunity of being unhappy? Calif.
A clergyman, eſtabliſhed in a competent living, is nºt un-
der the neceſſity of being ſo ſharp and exacting. Swift.
13. Acrid; biting; pinching; piercing, as the cold.
The windpipe is continually moiſtened with a glutinous
humour, iſſuing out of ſmall glandules in its inner coat, to
fence it againſt the ſharp air. Ray.
Nor here the ſun's meridian rays had pow'r, s
Nor wind ſharp piercing, nor the ruſhing ſhow'r,
The verdant arch ſo cloſe its texture kept. Pope's Odyſſey.
14. Subtile; nice; witty; acute.
Sharp and ſubtile diſcourſes procure very great applauſe; but
being laid in the balance with that which ſound experience
Hooker.
The inſtances you mention are the ſtrongeſt and Aft
that can be urged. Digby.
plainly delivereth, they are overweighed.
I5. [Among workmen.] Hard.
Th ke uſe of th eff ſand, that being beſt for mor-
ey make uſe of the ſharp'ſ ſand, . Mech. Exer.
tar, to lay bricks and tiles in.
16. Emaciated; lean.
His viſage drawn he felt to ſharp and ſpare. Milton.
SHARP. m. ſ. [from the adjective.]
I. A ſharp or acute ſound.
It is the lark that ſings ſo out of tune,
Straining harſh diſcords and unpleafing/harps. Shaº?”
2. A pointed weapon; ſmall ſword; rapier.
- n
If butchers had but the manners to go to ſharps, tº:
To
would be contented with a rubber at cuffs.
-
l
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H. A
S H A
****
To SHARP. v. 4. [from the noun..] To make keen.
Whom the whetſtone ſharps to eat,
They cry, milſtones are good meat. Fen. johnſºn.
To SHARP. v. n. [from the noun J. To play thieviſh tricks.
I live upon what's my own, whereas your ſcandalous life
is only cheating or Aarping, one half of the year, and ſtarv-
ing the other. L’Eſtrange.
To SHARPEN. v. a. [from ſharp.]
1. To make keen; to edge; to point.
The weaker their helps are, the more their need is to ſharpen
the edge of their own induſtry. Hooker.
The Iſraelites went down to the Philiſtines to fharpen every
man his ſhare and his coulter. I Sam. xiii. 20.
His ſevere wrath ſhall he ſharpen for a ſword. Wiſd. v. 20.
The grating of a ſaw when ſharpen'd, offends ſo much as
it ſetteth the teeth on edge. Bacon.
Th' tºuadron bright, ſharp'ning in mooned horns
Their phalanx. AMilton.
It may contribute to his miſery, heighten the anguiſh, and
farpen the ſting of conſcience, and ſo add fury to the ever-
latting flames, when he ſhall reflect upon the abuſe of wealth
and greatneſs. South's Sermons.
No : 'tis reſiſtance that inflames deſire ;
Sha'pens the darts of love, and blows the fire. Dryd.
E’re ten moons had ſharpen'd either horn,
To crown their bliſs, a lovely boy was born. Dryd.
Her nails are ſharpen'd into pointed claws,
Her hands bear half her weight and turn to paws. Addison
z. To make quick, ingenious, or acute.
Overmuch quickneſs of wit, either given by nature, or
Aarpen'd by ſtudy, doth not commonly bring greateſt learn-
ing, beſt manners, or happieſt life in the end. Aſcham.
3. To make quicker of ſenſe.
Th’air ſharpen'd his viſual ray
To objects diſtant far. Milton.
4. To make eager or hungry.
Epicurean cooks
Sharpen with cloyleſs ſauce his appetite. Shakeſp.
Such an aſſurance as will ſharpen mens deſires and quicken
their endeavours for obtaining a leſſer good, ought to in-
ſpire men with more vigour in purſuit of what is greater. Tilt.
4. To make fierce or angry.
Mine enemy ſharpeneth his eyes upon me.
5. To make biting, or ſarcaſtick.
My haughty ſoul would ſwell;
Sharpen each word, and threaten in my eyes. Smith.
6. To make leſs flat; more piercing to the ears.
Encloſures not only preſerve ſound, but encreaſe and ſhar-
pen it. Bacon.
7. To make ſour.
SHARPE.R. m. ſ. [from ſharp J A tricking fellow; a petty thief;
a raſcal.
Sharpers, as pikes, prey upon their own kind. L’Eſtrange.
He ſhould retrench what he loſt to ſhapers, and ſpent upon
job xvi. 9.
puppet-plays, to apply it to that uſe. Arbuth.
I only wear it in a land of He&amp;tors,
Thieves, ſupercargo's, ſharpers, and direétors. Pope.
SHA'RPLY. adv. [from ſharp.]
1. With keenneſs ; with good edge or point.
2. Severely; rigorouſly; roughly.
They are more ſharply to be chaſtiſed and reformed than
the rude Iriſh, which being very wild at the firſt, are now be-
come more civil. Spenſer.
3. Keenly ; acutely; vigorouſly.
The mind and memory are more ſharply exerciſed in com-
prehending another man's things than our own. Ben. johnſºn.
4. Afflićtively; painfully.
At the arrival of the Engliſh embaſſadors the ſoldiers were
ſharply affailed with wants. Hayward.
5. With quickneſs.
You contraćt your eye when you would ſee ſharply; and
erect your ear when you would hear attentively. Bacon.
6. Judiciouſly; acutely; wittily.
SHARPNEss. n. ſ. [from ſharp.]
1. Keeneſs of edge or point.
Palladius neither ſuffering us nor himſelf to take in hand
the party till the afternoon; when we were to fight in troops,
not differing otherwiſe from earneſt, but that the ſharpnºſ of
the weapons was taken away. Sidney.
A ſecond glance came gliding like the firſt;
And he who ſaw the ſharpneſ of the dart,
Without defence receiv'd it in his heart. Dryd.
2. Not obtuſeneſs.
Force conſiſteth in the roundings and raiſings of the work,
according as the limbs do more or leſs require it; ſo as the
beholder ſhall ſpy no ſharpneſ, in the bordering lines. Wotton.
3. Sourneſs without auſtereneſs.
There is a ſharpneſs in vinegar, and there is a ſharpneſ; in
pain, in ſorrow, and in reproach ; there is a ſharp eye, a
ſharp wit, and a ſharp ſword: but there is not one of theſe
ſevere ſharpneſſes the ſame as another of them; and a ſharp
eaſt wind is different from them all. JWatts's Logick.
Provoking ſweat extremely, and taking away all /harpneſ,
from whatever you Put in, muſt be of good effect in the
cure of the gout. Temple.
4. Severity cf language; ſatyrical ſarcaſm.
There's gold for thee,
Thou muſt not take my former ſharpneſ, ill,
I will employ thee back again. Shakeſp.
Some did all folly with juſt /harpneſ, blame,
While others laugh’d and ſcorn’d hºnj ſhame:
But, of theſe two, the laſt ſucceeded beſt, 2.
As men aim righteſt when they ſhoot in jeſt. Dryd.
- This is a ſubject of which it is hard to ſpeak without ſaty-
rical/harpneſs and particular reflections on many churches of
chriſtians. Sprat.
- The ſharpneſs of his ſatyr, next to himſelf, falls moſt hea-
vily on his friends. Dryden
5. Painfulneſs; afflićtiveneſs.
At this time
We ſweat and bleed; the friend hath loſt his friend;
And the bett quarrels in the heat are curſt
By thoſe that feel their /harpneſs. Shakeſp.
Nºt a ſingle death only that then attended this profeſſioſ:
but the terror and /harpneſs of it was redoubled in the manner
and circumſtances. South.
6. Intellectual acuteneſs; ingenuity; wit. -
Till Arianiſm had made it a matter of great ſharpneſs, and
ſubtilty of wit to be a ſound believing Chriſtian, mén were
notcurious what ſyllables or particles of ſpeech they uſed. Hoof.
The daring of the ſoul proceeds from thence,
Sharpneſ of wit and active diligence. Dryd.
The ſon returned with ſtrength of conſtitution, ſharpneſs of
underſtanding, and ſkill in languages. Addiſon.
7. Quickneſs of ſenſes.
If the underſtanding or faculty of the ſoul be like unto bo-
dily fight, not of equal ſharpngs in all; what can be more
convenient than that, ever, as the dark-fighted man is direct-
ed by the clear about things viſible, ſo likewiſe in matters of
deeper diſcourſe the wiſe in heart doth ſhew the ſimple where
his way lieth. - Hooker.
SHARP-set. [ſharp and ſet.] Eager; vehemently deſirous.
Baſilius forced her to ſtay, tho' with much ado, ſhe being
ſharp-ſet upon the fulfilling of a ſhrewd office, in overlooking
Philoclea. Sidney.
An eagle ſharp-ſet, looking about her for her prey, ſpy’d
a leveret. L’Eſtrange.
Our ſenſes are ſharp-ſet on pleaſures. I’Eſtrange.
A comedy of Johnſon's, not Ben, held ſeven nights; for
the town is ſharp-ſet on new plays. Pope.
SHARP-visa GED. adj. [ſharp and viſaged.] Having a ſharp
Countenance.
The Welſh that inhabit the mountains are commonly ſharp-
viſaged. Hale's Orig. of Mankind.
SHARP-sighted. adj. [ſharp and ſight.] Having quick fight.
If ſhe were the body's quality,
Then would ſhe be with it ſick, maim’d, and blind;
But we perceive, where theſe privations be, -
An healthy, perfeół, and ſharp-ſighted mind.... Davies.
I am not ſo ſharp-ſighted as thoſe who have diſcerned this
rebellion contriving from the death of Q. Elizabeth. Clarend.
Your majeſty's clear and ſharp-ſighted judgment has as
good a title to give law in matters of this nature, as in any
other. Denham.
Nothing ſo fiercebut love will ſoften, nothingſo ſharp-ſighted
in other matters but it throws a miſt before the eyes on't. L’Eſf.
To SHA’TTER. v. a. [ſchetteren, Dutch.]
1. To break at once into many pieces; to break ſo as to ſcat-
ter the parts.
He rais'd a ſigh ſo piteous and profound,
That it did ſeem to ſhatter all his bulk,
And rend his being. Shakeſp.
Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never ſear,
I come to pluck your berries harſh and crude,
And with forc’d fingers rude - -
Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year. Milt.
They eſcape diſſolution, becauſe they can ſcarce ever meet
with an agent minute, and ſwiftly enough moved, to ſhatter
or diſſociate the combined parts. - - Boyle.
A monarchy was ſhattered to pieces, and divided amongſt re-
volted ſubjeas, into a multitude of little governments. Locke.
Black from the ſtroke above, the ſnoulding Pine
Stands as a ſhatter'd trunk. Thomſ...-
2. To diffipate; to make incapable of cloſe and continued at-
tention. -
A man of a looſe, volatile and ſhattered humour,N.
array.
d ſtarts.
T.. ºf* º To be broken, or to fall, by any force
applied, into fragments. . .
Of bodies, ſome are fragil
fragil; and in the breaking, ſo
; and ſome are tough and not
me fragil bodies break but where
is; ſome ſhatter and fly in many places. Bacon.
s...". ſ. #: the verb.] One part of many into
which any thing is broken at once. Stick
23 U<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">/ S H E
S H E
sick the candle ſo looſe, that it will fall upon the glaſs of
the ſconce and break it into ſhatters. - ºft
SHA’ſ ‘r E R BRAINE D. ! aff. [from ſhatter brain and pate.] ".
sº reºpart p. attentive; not conſiſtent. A low word.
sº. ad. [from ſhatte‘..] Diſunited , not compact ;
eaſily failing into many parts; looſe of texture. -
A brittle ſhºttery fort of ſpar, found in form of a white
ſand chiefly in the perpendicular fiſſures amongſt the ores of
metal. //codward.
To SH Ave. v. a. preterit ſaved, part, ſlaved or ſhaven. [rcearan,
Saxon; ſch even, Dutch j
1. To pare off with a razor. - - - -
He that is to be cleanſed ſhall ſlave off all his hair. Levit.
Zelim was the firſt of the Ottomans that did ſhave his beard ;
a baſhaw aſk'd why he alter'd the cuſtom of his predeceſſors :
He anſwered, becauſe you baſhaws may not lead me by the
beard, as you did them. Bacon.
Doſt thºu not know this/aven pate Truly it is a great
man's held Knoles's Hiſt. ºf the 7 urks.
I cauſed the hair of his head to be ſhaved off. //ſeman.
2. To pare cloſe to the ſurface.
p Sweet bird
Thee chauntreſs, oft the woods among,
I woe to hear the evening ſong:
And miſſing thee, I walk unſeen
On the dry ſmooth ſhaven green. ..! ſiſt.
The bending ſcythe
Shºr: all the ſurface of the waving green. Gay.
3. To ſkim by paſſing near, or ſlightly touching.
He ſaves with level wing the deep; then ſoars
Up to the fiery concave tow'ring high. Miltºn.
4. To cut in thin ſlices.
Make ſome medley of earth, with ſome other plants bruis d
or ſhºrn in leaf or root. Bacon.
5 To ſtrip; to oppreſs by extortion; to pillage. -
SHA've Lièg. 7. / [from ſlave..] A man ſhaved; a friar, or
religious. Uſed in contempt.
Of elfes, there be no ſuch things; only by bald fryars and
knaviſh ſhavdings ſo feigned. Speºſer.
SHA’ve R. m. ſ. [from / are J -
1. A man that practiſes the art of ſaving.
2. A man cloſely attentive to his own intereſt.
My lord
Was now diſpos'd to crack a jeſ,
And bid friend Lewis go in queſt;
This Lewis is a cunning/aver. Swift.
3. A robber; a plunderer.
| bºy fell all into the hands of the cruel mountain people,
living for the moſt part by theft, and waiting for wrecks, as
hºwks fºr their prey; by theſe ſlaver, the Turks wº. ſtript of
all they bad. K oles.
SHA'viº G. n ſ. Iſrom ſlave.] Any thin ſlice pared off from
any body.
Take linum aloes in groſs ſavings, ſteep them in ſack,
changed twice, till the bitterneſ, be drawn forth ; then take
the ſaving forth and dry them in the ſhade, and beat them to
powder. - Bacon.
By electrick bodies I do not conceive only ſuch as take up
fatigs, ſtraws, and light bodies, but ſuch as attract all bo-
dies palpable whatſoever, lºwn's ſugar Errors.
The ſaving are good for the fining of wine. Mart.
$rºw: ", / [rcua, Saxon; ſºaº, Dutch; ſugga, Iſlandick.]
A thicket; a ſmall woºd. A tuit of trees near Lichfield is
caled Gentle ſhaw. .
SHA BANDER. * / [among the Perſians.] A great officer; a
viceroy. Bailey.
SHA'w Fowl. " / [/aw and fººl.] An artificial fowl made
by fowlers on purpoſe to ſhoot at.
SHA'w M. n.ſ. [from Jºkawne, Teutonick.] A hautboy; a cor-
I. Ct.
With trumpets alſo and ſawm. !"ſºn Common Prayer.
SHE, pronoun. Hin ºblique caſes hºr. [/, Gothick; reo, Sax.
Jº, old Engliſh J
1. The female pronoun demonſtrative: the Woman ; the woman
before mentioned.
*e, of whom the ancients ſeem'd to propheſy,
When they call d virtues by the name of ſke;
Sº, in whom virtue was ſo much refin'd,
That for allay unto ſo pure a mind
** took the weaker ſex. - Donne.
This once diſclos'd,
!. ladies did c ange favours, and then we
º, sº
* - y Shakºp.
º: º "Pright of mortal men was he ;
Ino - -
2. It is ſº. tº: ith Dry'em.
* ºf contempt. *1914tcly, with ſome de-
The ſhe of Italy ſhall not betray
Aft intereſt, and hi. honour. Shakespear's Cymbeline.
If ºy, }º are the cruell'ſt ſhe alive,
'º' will lead theſe graces to the grave,
... nd lea
** the world nº copy. Shef peare, Twefth Night,
Í was wont
To load my ſh; with knacks, I wou'd have ranſack'd
The pedlar's ſilken treaſury, and have pour’d it -
To her acceptance. Shººpeare's //inter's 7a,
3. The female ; not the male. -
I would outſtare the ſterneſt eyes that look,
Pluck the young fucking cubs from they, beat
T o win thee, lady. **ſp. 34 rºast ºf Venice.
Let us do it with no ſhew of fear;
No, with no more, than if we heard that England
Were buſied with a Whitſon morris-dance;
For my good liege, ſhe is ſo idly king'd,
That fear attends her not. Sº ſº. Hen. V.
The nightingale, if / would fing by day,
When every gooſe is cackling, wou'd be thought
No better a muſician than the wren. Shakespeare.
He-ſigns are hirſute, and have great manes, the ſh; are
ſmooth like cats. Bacon.
Stand it in Judah’s chronicles confeſt,
That David's ſon, by impious pºſion mov’d,
Smote a ſº-ſlave, and murder'd what he lºyd. Priºr.
SHEAF. "...ſ. Jºaves plural. [rear, Saxºn; ſchooſ, Dutchi
1. A bundle of talks of corn bound to-ether, that the ears may
dry.
y Theſe be the ſheaves that honour’s harveſ: bears,
The ſeed thy valiant acts, the world the field. Fa'ſix,
He beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth; whereon were // aves
New-reap'd : the other part ſheep-walks and ſolds, M.I.
Tie reaper fills his greedy hands,
And binds the gºlden/cave, in brittle bands. Dryden,
| pitch'd the /eaves (oh could I do ſo now) -
Which ſhe in rows pil'd, Guy's Paſiral.
2. Any bundle or collection hell together. - -
She vaniſh'd;
The ſheaf of arrows ſhook and rattled in the caſe. Drydºn.
In the knowledge of bodies, we muſt glean what we can;
ſince we cannot, from a diſcovery of their real eſſences,
graſp at a time whole /eaves; and in binics comprehend
the nature of whole ſpecies. Lºcke.
To SHFA.L. v. a. To ſhell. See SHALE.
Thou art a ſhaled peaſºod. Shakesp. K. Lear.
To SHE AR. preter. ſhºre, or /*ared; part paſſ, ſherſ. [rceaſian,
reynen, Saxon.]
1. To clip or cut by interception between two blades moving
On a rivet. -
So many days, my ews have been with young;
So many weeks, e're the poor fools will yean;
So many months, e're I ſhall ſheer the fleece. Shkºff.
I am ſhepherd to another man,
And do not /ºr the fleeces that I graze. Shakespeare .
Laban went to/her his ſheep. Gen. xxxi. 19.
When wool is new/or”, they ſet pails of water by in the
ſame room to increaſe its weight. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt,
To lay my head and hollow pled e
Qf all my frength, in the lºvious lap
Of a deceitful concubine, who ſhore me,
Like a tame weather, aſ my precious fleece. Milton,
The ſame ill taſte of ſenſe would ſerve to join
Dog foxes in the yoak, and ſº er the ſwine. Dryden,
May'ſt thou henceforth ſwcctly ſleep,
§ºcer, ſwains, oh ſizer your ſofteſt ſheep
To ſwell his couch. Gay.
O'er the congenial duſt injoin'd to/car -
The graceful curl, and drop the tendºr tear. Pºpe.
2. To cut.
The ſharp and toothed edge of the rether chap ſtrikes into
a ‘anal cut into the bone of the upper; and the toothºd pro-
tuberance of the upper into a canã in the nether: by which
means he eaſily /eers the graſs whercon he feeds. Grew.
SHE AR. * / [from the verb. It is ſeldom uſed in the
SHE ARs. } ſingular, but is found once in Dryden.] -
1. An inſtrument to cut, conſiſting of two blades moving on
a pin, between which the thing cut is intercepted. Sºra's
are large, and ſiſars a ſmaller inſtrument of the ſame kind.
Alas, thought Philoclea to herſelf, your / cers come too
late to clip the bird's wings that already is flown away. Sidney.
Why do you bend ſuch ſolemn brows on me?
Think you i bear the /ears of deſtiny?
Have I commandment on the pulſe of life 2 Shakeſpeare.
The fates prepar'd their ſharpen'd / cers. Dryd.
When the fleece is ſhorn,
Then their defenceleſs limbs the trambles tear;
Short of their wool, and naked from the ſheer. Dryden,
That people live and die, I knew,
An hour ago, as well as you;
And iſ fate ſpins us longer years,
Or is in haſte to take the ſeers,
I know, we muſt both fortunes try,
An be ºr our evils, wet or dry. Prior.
How happy ſhould we be if we had the privilege of en-
ploying the ſhers for want of a mint, upºn foreign golf, by
- - - - Sºft
clipping it into half crowns. Sºft.
pping Q I 4tº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H E
gº
Fate urg'd the ſizers and cut the ſyph in twain,
ut airy ſubſtance ſoon unites again. Pºpe.
Beneath the ſhears they felt no laſting ſmart,
They loſt but fleeces, while I loſt a heart. Gay.
2
. The denomination of the age of ſheep. -
When ſheep is one/ear, they will have two broad teeth be.
fore ; when two / ear, four ; when three, ſix; when four,
eight: and after that, their mouths break. 4/ortimer.
3. Any thing in the form of the blades of ſheers.
4. Wings, in Senſºr.
Two ſharp-wing'd ſheers
Deck'd with divers plumes, like painted jays,
Were fix’d at his back to cut his airy ways. Spenſºr.
SHE ARd. m. ſ. [rceanb, Sax.] A fragment. It is now commonly
written ſhard, and applied only to fragments of earthen ware.
In the burſting of it, not a ſherd to take fire from the hearth,
or to take water out of the pit. Iſa. xxx. 14.
SHEARER. m. ſ. [from ſhear.] One that clips with ſhears;
particularly one that fleeces ſheep. -
Of other care they little reck’ninng make,
Than how to ſcramble at the ſhear-rº feaſt,
And ſhove away the worthy bidden gueſt. Milton.
Was he to be led as a lamb to the ſlaughter, patient and
reſigned as a ſheep before her ſhearers ? Rogers.
SHEA'Rx:A.N. m. ſ. [ſhear and man.] He that ſhears.
Thy father was a plaiſerer,
And thou thyſelf aſ ca, man.
SH: A'R warr R. n.ſ. A fowl. Mºſcorth.
SHEATH. T. ſ. ſ rease, Sºxon.] The caſe of any thing;
the ſcabbard of a weapon.
... The dead knight's ſword out of his ſhºoth he drew,
With which he cut a lock off all their hair. Fa. §§een.
Dºth not each look a flaſh of light'ning feel,
Which ſpares the body's ſheath, y, t melts the ſteel? Cleav.
Swords, by the lightning's ſubtile force diſtill'd,
And the cold Żeath with running metal fill’d.
To SHEATH.
To SHEATH E.
1. To incloſe in a ſeath or ſcabbard; to incloſe in any caſe. .
This drawn but now againſt my ſovereign's breaſt,
Before 'tis ſheath'd, ſhall give him peace and reſt. If aller.
Thoſe aétive parts of a body are of differing natures when
feath’d up, or wedged in amongſt others in the texture of a
concrete; and when extricated from theſe impediments. Boyle.
In his hair one hand he wreaths,
His ſword, the other, in his boſom ſcathſ.
Js this her hate to him, his love to me !
'Tis in my breaſt ſhe/heath; her dagger now. Dryden.
The left foot naked, when they march to fight,
But in a bull's raw hide they ſheath the right. Dryden.
The leopard, and all of this kind as goes, keeps the claws
of his forefect turned up from the ground and ſcathed in the
ſkin of his toes, whereby he preſerves them ſharp for rapine,
extending them only when he leaps at the prey. Grew.
Other ſubſtances oppoſite to acrimony are called demºl-
cent or mild; becauſe they blunt or ſheath thoſe ſharp ſalts
as peaſe, and beans. A tuhn:t.
2. To fit with a ſheath. -
There was no ink to colour Peter's hat, -
Walter’s dagger was not come from ſhe ºthing. Shakespeare
3. To defend the main body by an outward covering.
It were to be wiſhed that the whole navy throughout were
ſheathed as ſome are. Raleigh.
SHEATH wi'NGED. adj. [ſheath and wing.] Having hard caſes
which are folded over the wings. -
Some inſects fly with four wings, as all vaginipennous, or
/heat winged inſe&amp;ts, as beetles and dorrs. Brown's /u.g. Er.
SHEATHY, adj. [from ſº eath.] Forming a ſheath. -
With a needle put aſide the ſhort and ſea-hy caſes on ear-
wigs backs, and you may draw forth two wings. Brown,
SHE'ck LA ros. n.ſ.
He went to fight againſt the giant in his robe of ſheckla-
ton, which is that kind of gilded leather with which they
uſe to embroider the Iriſh jackets. Spenſer.
To SH Ep. v. a. [rceban, Saxon.]
1. To effuſe; to pour out; to ſpill.
The painful ſervice, and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankleſs country are requited
But with that ſurname of Coriolanus.
Cromwell, I did not think to ſhed a tear
In all my miſeries. Shakeſp.
Without ſledding of blood is no remiſſion. IHeb. ix. 22.
For this is my blood which is ſhed for many, for the re-
miſſion of fins. Matth. xxvi. 28.
Some think one gen'ral ſoul fills cv'ry brain,
As the bright ſun ſled, light in ev'ry ſtar. Davies.
Around its entry nodding pºppies grow,
And all cool ſimples that ſweet reſt beſtow;
Night from the plants their ſleepy virtue drains,
And paſſing, ſheds it on the filent plains Dryden.
You ſeem'd to mourn another lover dead,
My ſighs you gave him, and my tears you ſhed. Dryden.
Shakespeare.
Addiſon.
}v. a. [from the noun.]
Denham.
*
Shakeſpeare.
-—i. A
. Unhappy man! to break the pious laws
Qi. *re, pleading in his children's cauſe:
#. º honour, and his country's good ; -
* Sºnſul; not the father, ſhed, the bló,d. Dryden,
Tº...". **, their days eternal bound,
.#9% domes with ſpiry turrets crown'd
Where awful arches make a noon-day night &gt;
And the dim windows ſºda ſº º
A. 3. º º ray, ght 5 - -
n cams Of glory brig * * * * -
2. To .. to .*.*. ighten’d all the day. Pope.
Trees that bring forth their leaves late, and caſt them late,
ºre, more laſting than thoſe that ſprout their leaves early, or
Jhed them betimes: Bacon's Nat. H}.
S9 the returning year be bleſt, "/ " -
As his infant months beſtow,
Springing wreaths for William's brow;
As his ſummer's youth ſhall ſhed
Eternal ſweets around Mariá's head. Priºr.
To SHEp. v. n. To let fall its parts. - -
White oats are apt to ſhed moſt as they lie, and black as they
ſtand. 44 rººmer's Huſbandry.
SHED. n: ſ [ſuppoſed by Skinner to be corrupted from ſhade.]
I. A ſlight temporary covering,
The firſt Aletes born in lowly ſled,
Of parents baſe, a roſe ſprung from a bride.
Thºugh he his houſe of poliſh'd marble build
With jaſer floor'd, and carved cedar cºid 5 &gt;
Yet ſhall it ruin like the moth's frail cell,
Or ſhºds of reeds, which ſummer's heat repel. Sandyſ:
So all our minds with his conſpire to grace
The Gentiles great apoſtle, and deface
Thoſe ſtate-obſcuring ſhed, that like a chain
Seem'd to confine and fetter him again.' J72'lr.
In ſuch a ſeaſon born, when ſcarce a ſhed
Could be obtain'd to ſhelter him or me
From the bleak air. Parad. Regain'd.
Thoſe houſes then were caves, or homely ſheds,
With twining offers fenc'd, and moſs their beds. Drdn.
An hoſpitable houſe they found, . -
A homely ſhed; the roof, not far from ground -
Was thatch'd with reeds and ſtraw together bound. Dryd.
Then out he ſteals, and finds where by the head,
Their horſe hung faſten’d underneath a ſhed. Bettertºn.
cº various kinds by various fortunes led,
mmence acquaintance, underneath aſhed. Swift.
2. In compoſition º as º - iſ.
SHE'DDER. m. ſ. [from ſhed] A ſpiller; one who ſheds.
A ſhedder of blood ſhall ſurely die. Ezek, xviii. Io,
SHE EN. } aff. [This was probably only the old pronunciation
SHEE's v. 9. º: Jºne]. Bright; glittering; ſhewy. A word
In OW not in uſe.
That lewd ribbald, with vile luſt advanc'd,
Laid firſt his filthy hands on virgin clean,
To ſpoil her dainty corſe ſo fair and ſheen.
When he was all dight, he took his way
Into the foreſt, that he might be ſeen
Of the wild beaſts, in his new glory ſheen. Huilerd's Tale.
Now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear, or ſpangled ſtar-light ſheen. Shakespeare.
Up aroſe each warrior bold and brave,
Gliſtering in filed ſteel and armour ſeen.
Out of the hierarchies of angels ſheen,
The gentle Gabriel call'd he from the reſt.
By the ruſhy fringed bank,
Where grows the willow and the oſier dank,
My ſliding chariot ſtays,
Which ſet with agat, or the azure ſeen,
Of turcois blue, and emerald green. Milton.
Or did of late earth's ſons beſiege the wall M
Of ſheeny heav'n. ilton.
SHEEN. m. y [from the adjećtive.] Brightneſs; ſplendour.
Mercy will ſit between, -
T. in celeſtial ſheen. Milton.
Far above, in ſpangled ſheen,
Celeſtial Cupid, her fam'd ſon advanc'd, -
Holds his dear Pſyche ſweet entranc'd, Milton.
SHEEP. m. ſ. plural likewiſe ſheep. [recap, Saxon; of which
the plural was reep; ſchºep, Dutch J -
1. The animal that bears wool: remarkable for its uſefulneſs and
Innocence.
Fire the brambles, ſhare the birds, and fleep
In wholeſome water-falls the fleecy ſº?. Drydºn.
Of ſubſtances there are two ſorts of ideas; one of ſingle
ſubſtances, as they exiſt ſeparately, as a man or ſº?, A:
2. In contempt. A fooliſh filly fellow. Ainſworth.
To Sheeppi’re. v. n. [ſhºp and lite J To uſe petty thefts.
Shew your knave's Viſage, with a pox to you ; ſhew your
/eepbiting face, and be hanged. - Shakeſpeare.
Sãº Eſperºr R. i. ſ. [from ſhºplie..] A petty thicſ.
His gate like a Žephiter fleering aſide, Tºſºr.
Wouldſt
Fairfax,
Fa. Queen.
Fairfax.
Fairfax.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H E
S H E
- lad to have the niggardly raſcally
Wºº. ... ſhame. 23 Shakeſpeare.
Af. are political ſheepbiters as, well as paſtoral i.ºrayers
of publick truſts, as well as of private, . L’Eſtrange.
Shºe'rcor. m. ſ. [ſheep and cot.J. A little incloſure for ſheep.
Bedlam beggars, with roaring voices,
From low farms, ſheepcats and mills
Inforce their charity. *
Up to a hill anon his ſteps he rear d,
From whoſe high top to ken the proſpect round,
If cottage were in view, ſheepcot or herd; -
But cottage, herd, or ſheepcot none he ſaw. Milton.
Sheepfold. n.ſ.. [ſhe'p and fold.] The place where ſheep are
incloſed. -
The bear, the lion, terrors of the plain, -
The ſheepfold ſcatter'd and the ſhepherd ſlain. Prior.
Shee'phook. n.ſ.. [ſheep and hook.] A hook faſtened to a pole
by which ſhepherds lay hold on the legs of their ſheep.
The one carried a croſier of balm-wood, the other a paſto-
ral ſtaff of cedar like a ſheep-hook. Bacon's New Atlantis.
If you dare think of deſerving our charms,
Away with your ſheephook, and take to your arms. Dryden.
Shee'fish. adj. [from ſheep.] Baſhful; over-modeſt 5 timo-
rouſly and meanly diffident. -
Wanting change of company, he will, when he comes
abroad, be a ſheepiſh or conceited creature. Locke.
Shee'Pish Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſheepſh.] Baſhfulneſs; mean and
timorous diffidence.
Thy gentry bleats, as if thy native cloth
Transfus'd a ſheepiſhneſs into thy ſtory. Herbert.
Sheepiſhneſs and ignorance of the world, are not conſequen-
ces of being bred at home. º Locke.
Without ſucceſs, let a man be never ſo hardy, he will have
ſome degree of ſheepſhneſs. Grew.
She EPMAster. n.ſ.. [ſheep and maſter.] An owner of ſheep.
A nobleman was a great graſier, and a great Autº:
-&gt; acaº.
SHE FPShea'RING. n ſ [ſheep and ſhear.] The time of ſhear-
ing ſheep; the feaſt made when ſheep are ſhorn.
There happening a ſolemn feſtivity, ſuch as the ſheepſhear-
ings uſed to be, David begs ſome ſmall repaſt. South.
SHEEPs eye. m. ſ... [ſheep and eye ) A modeſt diffident look,
ſuch as lovers caſt at their miſtreſſes.
Caſt a ſleep’s eye behind you: in before me. Dryden.
SHE Epwalk. m. ſ. ſ Jºep and walk..] Paſture for ſheep.
He beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth; whereon were ſheaves
New reap'd ; the other partſheepwalks and folds. Milt.
Shºº...aºj. Irºn, Saxon] Pure; clear; unmingled.
If ſhe ſay, I am not fourteen pence on the ſcore for ſheer
ale...ſcore me up for the lying'ſt rogue in Chriſtendom Šhai.
Sheer argument is not the talent of the man; little wreſt.
ed ſentences are the bladders which bear him up, and he
ſinks downright, when he once pretends to ſwim without
them. - Alterbury.
SHEER. adv. [from the adjective..] Clean; quick; at once.
Thrown by angry Jove
Sheer o'er the cryſtal battlements; from morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A ſummer's day; and with the ſetting ſun,
Drop'd from the zenith, like a falling ſtar,
Shakeſp. K. Lear.
On Lemnos. Milton.
The ſword of Satan, with ſteep force to finite
Deſcending, and in half cut ſº Milton.
Due entrance he diſdain'd, and in contempt
At one flight bound high overleap'd all bound
9f hill or higheſt wall, andſheer within
Lights on his feet. Milton.
To SHEER. v. a. [See SHEAR.]
Ikeep my birth-day; ſend my Phillis home
At ſheering-time. Dryden.
To Sheer off v n. To ſteal away; to ſlip off clandeſtinely.
Sheers. n. 7 [See SHEARs.]
SHEET. n.ſ. [rceae, Saxon.
* A broad and large piece of linen.
aS He ºº ... and a veſſel deſcending unto him,
a great/beet, knit at the fou - -
2. The finen of , i. T COrnerS Acts x. 11
If I die before thee, ſhroud me
one of theſe ſame ſheets. Shakeſpeare.
You think none but Your/eets are privy to your wiſhes. Sha.
Some unequal bride in nobler ſheet,
E cceives her lord. Dryden.
3. tºº." French; echoten, Dutch..] In a ſhip are ropes bent
e *...* ºf the ſails, which ſerve in all the low: ſails to
...'...'." º º clew of the ſail; but in topſails they
CIO r - -
* it º yard arms. Dići.-Dryden ſeems to
* Hºle word behind the back, a - - -
- nd undoing whiſper, like
pulling off a /*eet-rope at ſea, filtºn, the ; š.
Fierce Boreas drov - - - - -
And * againſt his flying ſails,
º the ſheets. Dryden,
4. As much paper as is made in one body.
As much love in rhime,
As could be cramm'd up in a ſheet of paper,
Writ on both ſides the leaf, margin and all. Shakespeare.
When I firſt put pen to paper, I though all I ſhouff have
to ſay would have been contained in one ſheet of paper. L.i.
I let the refracted light fall perpendicularly upon aſ...;
white paper upon the oppoſite wall. Newton's Opticki,
5. A ſingle complication or fold of paper in a book.
6. Anything expanded.
Such ſheets of fire, ſuch burſts of horrid thunder
I never remember to have heard. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear.
Rowling thunder roars,
And ſheets of lightning blaſt the ſtanding field. Dºn.
An azure ſheet it ruſhes broad,
And from the loud reſounding rocks below,
Daſh'd in a cloud of foam. Thomſºn,
Sheet-anchor... n.ſ...[ſheet and anchor.] In a ſhip is the largeſt
anchor; which, in ſtreſs of weather, is the mariners laſt re-
fuge, when an extraordinary ſtiff gale of wind happens. Bailey.
To SHEET v. a... [from the noun.]
1. To furniſh with ſheets.
2. To enfold in a ſheet.
3. To cover as with a ſheet.
Like the ſtag when ſnow the paſture ſheetſ,
The barks of trees thou browſed'ſt. Shakeſpeare.
SHE'kel. n. ſ. ſºpv) An ancient Jewiſh coin equal to four
Attick drachms, or four Roman denarii, in value about 2.s 6d.
ſterling. Diff.
The Jews, albeit they deteſted images, yet imprinted upon
their ſhºckle on one ſide the golden pot which had the manna,
and on the other Aaron's rod. Camden.
The huge iron head ſix hundred ſhekel, weighed,
And of whole bodies but one wound it made,
Able death's worſt command to overdoe
Deſtroying life at once and carcaſe too. Cowley,
This coat of mail weighed five thouſand ſhekel of
braſs. Broºms.
SHE'LDAPLE. n.ſ. A chaffinch.
She'ldrape. n.ſ. A bird that preys upon fiſhes.
SHELF. m. ſ. [rcylp, Saxon; ſelf, Dutch..] A board fixed
againſt a ſupporter, ſo that anything may be placed upon it.
About his ſhelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes. Shakespeare .
Bind faſt, or from their ſhelves -
Your books will come and right themſelves. Swift.
You have the pleaſure of the proſpećt whenever you take
it from your ſhelf, and the ſolid caſh you ſold it for. Blunt.
2. A ſand bank in the ſea; a rock under ſhallow water. -
Qur tranſported ſouls ſhall congratulate each other their
having, now fully eſcaped the numerous rocks, ſhelves, and
quick-ſands. Boyle.
Near the ſhelves of Circe's ſhores they run,
A dang'rous coaſt. Dryden.
He call'd his money in;
But the prevailing love of pelf
Soon ſplit him on the formerſhelf,
He put it out again. Dryden.
3. The plural is analogically ſhelves; Dryden has ſhelft, probab-
ly by negligence.
He fººd the helm, his fellows cheer'd,
Turn'd ſhort upon the ſhelf; and madly ſteer'd. Dryden.
SHE'LFY., adj, [from ſhelf.]
1. Full of hidden rocks or banks; full of dangerous ſhallows:
Glides by the ſyren's cliffs a ſhelſy coaſt,
Long infamous for ſhips and ſailors loſt,
And white with bones. Dryden.
2. I know not well the meaning in this º perhaps rocky.
The tillable fields are in ſome places ſo tough, that the
plough will ſcarcely cut them; and in ſome ſo ſhe'ſ that de
corn hath much ado to faſten its root. Carew.
SHELL. m. ſ. [rcyll, rceal, Saxon; ſhale, ſchell, Dutch.
1. The hard covering of any thing; the external cruſt. l!
The ſun is as the fire, and the exterior earth is as the Jhe
of the eolipile, and the abyſs as the water within f; º
when the heat of the ſun had pierced thro' the ſº! .
reach'd the waters, it rarefy'd them. Burn. Theº. ºf ... :
Whatever we fetch from under ground is only what isl g
ed in the ſhell of the earth. - Lºcke.
2. The covering of a teſtaceous or cruſtaceous animal.
Her women wear
The ſpoils of nations in an ear;
Chang'd for the treaſure of a ſhell,
And in their looſe attires do ſwell.
Albion
Was to Neptune recommended;
Peace and plenty ſpread the ſails:
Venus, in her ſhell before him, * Aſſt.
From the ſands in ſafety bore him. Drydº 4.
The ſhell, ſerved as moulds to this ſand, which, whº º
ſolidated, and afterwards freed from its inveſtient ſº º
the ſame ſhape as the cavity of the ſhell. A codw
He,
Ben. johnſ. Catilint.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H E
S H E
º
ſº
º
º
.
He, whom ungrateful Athens could expel,
At all times juſt, but when he ſign'd the ſhell. Pope.
3. The covering of the ſeeds of ſiliquous plants.
Some fruits are contained within a hard/hell, being the ſeeds
of the plants. Arbuthnºt.
4. The covering of kernels.
Chang'd loves are but chang'd ſorts of meat;
And when he hath the kernel eat,
Who doth not throw away the ſhell ? Donne.
5. The covering of an egg.
Think him as a ſerpent's egg,
Which, hatch'd, would, as his kind, grow miſchievous,
And kill him in the ſhell. Shakespeare julius Cayar.
6. The outer part of an houſe.
The marquis of Medina Sidonia made the ſhell of a houſe,
that would have been a very noble building, had he brought it
to perfeótion. Addiſon on Italy.
7. It is uſed for a muſical inſtrument in poetry, from teſtado,
Latin; the firſt lyre being ſaid to have been made by ſtraining
ſtrings over the ſhell of a tortoiſe.
Leſs than a god they thought there could not dwell
Within the hollow of that ſhell,
That ſpoke ſo ſweetly. Dryden.
8. The ſuperficial part.
So devout are the Romaniſts about this outward ſhell of re-
ligion, that if an altar be moved, or a ſtone of it broken, it
ought to be reconſecrated. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To SH E Ll. v. a. [from the noun..] To take out of the ſhell;
to ſtrip of the ſhell.
To SHELL. v. n.
1. To fall off as broken ſhells.
The ulcers were cured, and the ſcabs ſhelled off. Wiſeman.
2. To caſt the ſhell.
SHE'LLDuck. n.ſ. A kind of wild duck.
To preſerve wild ducks, and ſhellducks, have a place walled
in with a pond. Mortimer's Husbandry.
SHE'llfish. n.ſ.. [ſhell and fſh.] Fiſh inveſted with a hard co-
vering, either teſtaceous, as oyſters, or cruſtaceous, as lobſters.
The ſhells, being ſound, were ſo like thoſe they ſaw upon
their ſhores, that they never queſtioned but that they were the
exuviae of ſhelliſh, and once belonged to the ſea. If oodward.
SHE'LLY. adj. [from ſhell.]
1. Abounding with ſhells.
The ocean rolling, and the ſhelly ſhore,
Beautiful objećts, ſhall delight no more. Prior.
2. Conſiſting of ſhells.
The conceit of Anaximander was, that the firſt men and all
animals were bred in ſome warm moiſture, incloſed in cruſta-
ceous ſkins, as lobſters; and ſo continued 'till their ſhelly pri-
ſons, growing dry and breaking, made way for them. Bentley.
SHE'LTER. m. ſ. [Of this word the etymology is unknown:
Skinner deduces it from ſhell, Davies from rešlo, a ſhield,
Saxon.] -
1. A cover from any external injury or violence.
We hear this fearful tempeſt ſing,
Yet ſeek no ſhelter to avoid the ſtorm. Shakeſp. R. II.
They wiſh'd the mountains now might be again
Thrown on them, as a ſhelter from his ire. Milton.
Heroes of old, when wounded, ſhelter ſought;
But he who meets all dangers with diſdain,
Ev’n in their face his ſhip to anchor brought,
And ſteeple high ſtood propt upon the main. Dryden.
They may learn experience, and avoid a cave as the worſt
fhºlter from rain, when they have a lover in company. Dryd.
The healing plant ſhall aid,
From ſtorms a ſhelter, and from heat a ſhade. Pºpe.
2. A protećtor; a defender; one that gives ſecurity.
Thou haſt been a ſhelter for me, and a ſtrong tower from
the enemy. I'ſ, lxi. 3.
3. The ſtate of being covered; protection; ſecurity.
Low at his foot a ſpacious plain is plac'd,
Between the mountain and the ſtream embrac'd;
Which ſhade and ſhelter from the hill derives,
While the kind river wealth and beauty gives.
To SHE'LTER. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover from external violence.
We beſought the deep to ſhelter us. Milton.
Thoſe ruins ſhelter'd once his ſacred head,
When he from Wor'ſter's fatal battle fled,
Watch'd by the genius of this royal place. Dryden.
2. To defend; to protećt; to ſuccour with refuge; to harbour.
What endleſs honour ſhall you gain,
To ſave and ſhelter Troy's unhappy train.
3. To betake to cover.
They ſheltered themſelves under a rock. Abbot.
Comfort thyſelf with ſuch thoughts, chiefly when all earthly
comforts fail thee: then do thou particularly retreat to thoſe
Denham.
Dryden's AFn.
conſiderations, and ſhelter thyſelf under them. Atterbury.
4. To cover from notice.
In vain I ſtrove to check my growing flame,
Or ſhelter paſſion under friendſhip's name;
You ſaw my heart. - Prior,
== - —
To SHE'LTE R. v. n.
1. To take ſhelter. -
There the Indian herdſman, ſhunning heat,
Shelters in cool. Mººr,
2. To give ſhelter.
Then ſeeks the fartheſt ooze, the ſhelt’ring weed,
The cavern'd bank, his old ſecure abode. Thomſºn.
SHE'L're R less, adj. [from ſhelter.] Harbourleſs; without
home or refuge. -
Now ſad and ſhelterleſ, perhaps, ſhe lies,
Where piercing winds blow ſharp. Rowe's jane Shore.
SH ºo: adj. [from ſhelf.] Sloping; inclining; having de-
clivity. -
Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground;
And built ſo ſhelving, that one cannot climb it,
* Without apparent hazard of his life.
Amidſt the brake a hollow den was found,
With rocks and ſhelving arches vaulted round. Addiſon.
SHE'Lv Y. adj. [from ſhelf.] Shallow ; rocky; full of banks.
I had been drowned, but that the ſhore was ſhelvy and ſhal-
low. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Hindir.
To SHEND. v. a. preter. and part, paſſ ſhent. [rcentan, Saxon;
ſchenden, Dutch.] -
1. To ruin; to ſpoil; to miſchief.
Provide for thy wife, or elſe look to be ſhent,
Good milehcow for Winter, another for Lent. Taſer.
Shepherds, ſhould it not yſhent
Your roundels freſh, to hear a doleful verſe
Of Roſalind, that Colin made? Speºſer.
Such a dream I had of dire portent,
That much I fear my body will be ſhent;
It bodes I ſhall have wars. Dryden.
2. To diſgrace; to degrade; to blame.
Debateful ſtrife, and cruel enmity,
The famous name of knighthood foully ſhend. Fa. Sºº-en.
Sore bruiſed with the fall, he ſlow uproſe,
And all enraged thus, thus him loudly ſhent,
Diſleal knight, whoſe coward courage choſe
To wreak itſelf on beaſt. Fairy Queen.
My tongue and ſoul in this be hypocrites,
How in my words ſoever ſhe be ſhent,
To give them ſeals never my ſoul conſent. . Shakespeare ?, Haml.
3. To overpower; to cruſh; to ſurpaſs.
She paſs'd the reſt as Cynthia doth ſhend
The leſſer ſtars. Spenſºr.
4. It is, though uſed by Dryden, wholly obſolete.
SHE'PHERD. m. ſ. [rceap, ſheep, and pyro, a keeper, Saxon,
rceapapynt ..]
1. One who tends ſheep in the paſture.
I am ſhepherd to another man,
And do not ſheer the fleeces that I graze.
A ſhepherd next -
More meek came with the firſtlings of his flock. Miltºn.
2. A ſwain; a rural lover.
If that the world and love were young,
And truth in ev'ry ſhepherd's tongue,
Theſe pretty pleaſures might me move
To live with thee, and be thy love.
3. One who tends the congregation; a paſtor. ..
Lead up all thoſe who heard thee, and believ'd ;
"Midſt thy own flock, great fhpherd, be receiv'd, -
And glad all heav'n with millions thou haſt ſav'd. Prior.
SHE'pherºess. n.ſ.. [from ſhepherd..] A woman that tends
ſheep; a rural laſs. -
She put herſelf into the garb of a ſhepherdſ, and in that
diſguiſe lived many years; but diſcovering herſelf a little be-
fore her death, did profeſs herſelf the happieſt perſon alive:
not for her condition, but in enjoying him ſhe firſt loved; and
that ſhe would rather, ten thouſand times, live a Jhºpherºſ, i Il
contentment and ſatisfaction. Sidney.
Theſe your unuſual weeds, to each part of you
Do give a life: no ſhepherdeſs, but Flora
Shakeſpeare,
Shakeſpeare.
Raleigh.
Peering in April's front. Shakespeare . Iſinter's Tale.
She like ſome ſhepherdeſ, did ſhew,
Who ſat to bathe her by a river's ſide. Dryden.
His doſick dialea has an incomparable ſweetneſs iſ tº
clowniſhneſs, like a fair ſhepherdeſ; in her cou") ruſſet.
- Dryden.
SHEPHERDs Need'. n.ſ.. [ſtandix, Lat] Venus comb. An
herb. - - - -
SHEPHERDs Purſe, or Pouch. n.ſ. [burſa poſiaris, Latin. J. A
common weed. - - - -
SHE'PHERDs Rod, n.ſ. Teaſel, of which plant it is a ſpecies.
sºpherdish. adj. [from ſhºpkºl Reſembling a ſhepherd;
ſuiting a ſhepherd; paſtoral; ruſtick. Not in uſe.
He would have drawn her eldeſt ſiſter, eſteemed her match
- - - Sidney.
b her ſhepherdiſh attire. - ... "
* % º: #. her-ward a man in *.ap-
l. - - taney.
sº. n. ſ. [ſharhat, Arabick.] The juice cf lemons or
oranges mixed with water and ſugar. Diº.
23 X They<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H I
S H I
our beer above all other drinks; and conſider-
º with the rareſt, eſpecially in this clime, the
ºft of ſºrbets, and plenty of barley, it would prove infi;
nitely profitable to ſuch as ſhould bring in the uſe thereof. Sard.
SHERD. ii. ſ. [rcea, b, Saxon. J. The fragment of broken
earthen ware.
The trivet-table of a foot was lame;
She thruſts beneath the limping leg a ſherd. Dryden.
SHE RIFF. n.ſ.. [rcºcººpera, Saxon, from reºre, a ſhire,
and neve, a ſteward. It is ſometimes pronounced ſhrieve,
which ſome poets have injudiciouſly adopted.] An officer to
whom is intruſted in each county the execution of the laws.
A great pow'r of Engliſh and of Scots
Are by thc/heriff of Yorkſhire overthrown. Shakeſp.
Concerning miniſters of juſtice, the high ſeriff of the
counties have been very ancient in this kingdom. Bacon.
Now may’rs and ſhrieve; all huſh'd and ſatiate lay. Pºpe.
SHE'RIFFALTY.
SHE RIFF dom. Unſ. [ from ſheriff. J. The office or juriſ-
SHE'R IFF's HIP. dićtion of a ſheriff.
SHE'RIFF wick.
There was a reſumption of patents of gaols, and reannex-
ing of them to the ſhriftwick: ; privileged officers being no leſs
an interruption of juſtice than privileged places. Bacon.
SHE's R1s. n: ſ [from Xerez, a town of Andaluſia in
SHE'RRis *} #. A kind of ſweet Spaniſh sº
SHE'RRY.
Your ſherris warms the blood, which before, cold and ſet-
tled, left the liver white, which is the badge of puſilanimity;
but the ſºrris makes it courſe from the inwards to the parts
cxtreme. Shakeſpeare.
Good ſherris ſack aſcends me into the brain, dries méthere
all the fooliſh dull vapours, and makes it apprehenſive. Sº,
SHEw. See Show.
SHIDF. n ſ [from reeab n, to divide, Saxon.] A board; a
cutting. Stinner.
SHIELD, n ſ. [rcy's, Saxon J
1. A buckler; a broad piece of defenſive armour held on the
left arm to ward off blows.
Now put your ſhe'd before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than ſhield. Shakespeare . Coriolanus.
2. Defence; protećtion.
3. One that gives protećtion or ſecurity.
The terror of the Trojan fiejd,
The Grecian honour, ornament, and ſhield,
High on a pile th' unconquer'd chief is plac'd.
To SHIELD. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover with a ſhield.
2. To defend; to protećt; to ſecure.
Weret my fitneſs to let theſe hands obey my boiling blood,
They're apt enough to diſlocate and tear
Thy fleſh and bones: howe'er
A woman's ſhape doth ſhield thee. Shakeſ King Lear.
Shouts of applauſe ran ringing through the field,
Dryden.
To ſee the ſon the vanquiſh’d father ſhed. Dryden.
Hear one that come. to ſhield his injur'd honour,
And guard his life with hazard of her own. Smith.
3. To keep off; to defend againſt.
Qut of their cold caves and frozen habitations, into the ſweet
foil of Europe, they brought with them their (ſual weeds, fit
to ſhield the cold, to which they had been inured. Spenſºr.
My 'º','! muſt intreat the time alone.
TGod ſhield I ſhould diſturb devotion. Shakespeare.
To SHIFT. v. n. [Of this word the original is • //, ,
Runick, is to ãº original is obſcure: ſiſta,
1. To change place.
Vegetables being fixed to the ſame place, and ſo not able to
ſºft and ſeek out after Pºſer, matter for their increment, it
Was neceſſary that it ſhould be brought to them. Iſºodward.
2. To change; to give place to other things.
If the ideas of our minds conſtantly change and ſhift, in a
$ontinual ſucceſſion, it would be impoſſible for a man to think
long of any one thing. Locke.
3. To §. cloaths, particularly the linen.
* *gs you juſt would turn you while ſhe ſhifts. 1%ung.
4. To find ſome expcd.ient; to act º though §.
we cannot ſhift : being in, we muſt go on. Daniel.
Men in diſtreſs will look to themſelves, and leave their
*Panions to ſhift as well as they ... ſ L'E/ºrange.
diº, *compence nor thinks, we ought to be
y e JCave to //) elv -
5. º ſº indirect ºft for ourſelves. Swift.
thoſe ſchoolmen, though they were exceedin it tº,
..º. **ch all their followers £). than to ...
ºf diſtinétions. Ra/ ..
9 take ſome method for ſafety. a/elgø.
*e inſtructs e.,..., - - -
**s of dang. * every creature how to ſhift for itſelf in
To SHIFT. ..., L'Aſirange.
I. o change; to alter
t was not levit t -
- - ut ab r
/*iſt their condi. ſolute neceſſity, that *; fiſh
º/trange.
Come, aſſiſt me, muſe obedient;
Let us try ſome new expedient;
Shift the ſcene for half an hour,
Time and place are in thy pow'r.
2. To transfer from place to place.
Pare ſaffron between the two St. Mary's days,
Or ſet or go ſhift it that knoweſt the ways.
3. To put by ſome expedient cut of the way.
I/ifted him away,
And laid good ſcuſes on your ecſtaſy. Shakespeare Otheſ,
The wiſdom of all theſe latter times, in princes affairs, is
rather fine deliveries, and //iſtings of dangers and miſchiefs,
when they are near, than ſolid and grounded courſes to keep
them aloof. Bacon.
4. To change in poſition.
Neither uſe they ſails, nor place their oars in order upon the
ſides; but carrying the oar looſe, //t it hither and thither at
Swift.
Taſer.
pleaſure. Raleigh.
Where the wind
Veers oft, as oft ſhe ſteers and ſiſts her ſail. Miltºn.
We ſtrive in vain againſt the ſeas and wind;
Now ſhift your ſails. Dryden's A.m.
5. To change, as cloaths.
I would adviſe you to ſiſt a ſhirt: the violence of a&amp;ion
hath made you reek as a ſacrifice. Sla'ſ Cºmline.
6. To dreſs in freſh cloaths.
As it were to ride day and night, and not to have patience
to // if me. Shakespeare Henry IV.
7. Tº SHIFT ºff. To deſcr; to put away by ſome expedient.
The moſt beautiful parts muſt be thé moſt finiſhed, the
colours and words moſt choſen: many things in both, which
are not deſerving of this care, muſt be/liftº ºff, content with
vulgar expreſſions. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Struggle and contrive as you will, and lay your taxes as you
pleaſe, the traders will/iſt it off from their ºwn gain. Locke.
By various illuſions of the devil they are prevailed on to
ſhift off the duties, and neglect the conditions, on which ſal-
vation is promiſed. Rogers', Sermons.
SHIFT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Expedient found or uſed with difficulty; difficult means.
She redoubling her blows, drave the ſtranger to no other
ſºft than to ward and go back; at that time ſeeming the
image of innocency againſt violence. Sidney.
If I get down, and do not break my limbs,
I'll find a thouſand / iſ, to get away. Shakespeare K. john.
This perfect artifice and accuracy might have been omitted,
and yet they have made / iſ to move up and down in the
Watcr. Aſ re's Antidote agaiyi Atheiſm.
Not any boaſt of ſkill, but extreme ſhift
How to regain my ſever'd company,
Compell'd me to awake the courteous echo,
To give me anſwer from her moſſy couch. Milton.
A faſhionable hypocriſy ſhall be called good manners, ſo we
make a ſiſt ſomewhat to legitimate the abuſe. L’Eſtrange.
Thoſe little animals provide themſelves with whéât; but
they can make ſhift without it. Addiſon.
Our herbals are ſufficiently ſtored with plants, and we have
made a tolerable ſhift to reduce them to claſſes. Baker.
2. Indirect expedient; mean refuge; laſt recourſe.
The very cuſtom of ſeeking ſo particular aid and relief at
the hands of God, doth, by a ſecret contradićtion, withdraw
them from endeavouring to help themſelves, even by thoſe
wicked/iſts, which they know can never have his allowance
whoſe aſſiſtance their prayers ſeek. ... Hwier.
To ſay, where the notions cannot fitly be reconciled, that
there wanteth a term, is but a /hift of ignorance. Bacon.
Slow to reſolve, but in performance quick;
So true, that he was aukward at a trick;
For little ſouls on little ſhifts rely. Dryden.
3. Fraud; artifice; ſtratagem. -
Know ye not Ulyſſes' ſiſts *
Denham.
Their ſwords leſs danger carry than their gifts.
, Evaſion ; eluſory practice.
4. As long aS º, º whetting itſelf, is able to find out any
ſhift, be it never ſo ſlight, whereby to eſcape out of the hands
of preſent contradiction, they are never at a ſtand. Hooker.
Of themſelves, for the moſt part, they are ſo cautious and
wily-headed, eſpecially being men of ſo ſmall experience and
practice in law matters, that you would wonder whence they
borrow ſuch ſubtilities and fly ſhifts. Stenſºr.
Here you ſee your commiſſion; this is your duty, theſe are
our diſcouragements: never ſeek for ſhifts and evaſions from
worldly affictions: this is your reward, if you perform it;
this your doom, if you decline it. - South.
5. A woman's linen.
SH (FTER, n.ſ.. [from ſhift.]
of artifice.
' ' was ſuch a ſhifter, that, if truth were known, ...
Death was half glad when he had got him down. Milton.
SH1'FTL Ess. adj. [from ſhift.] Wanting cºpedients; wanting
means to act or live.
One who plays tricks; a man
For
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H I
For the poor ſºft'ſ irrationals, it is a prodigious ačt of the
great Creator's indulgence, that they are all ready furniſhed
with ſuch cloathing. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
‘. SH1'LLING.. n.ſ. [rcyllinx, Sax. and Erſe; ſchelling, Dut..] A coin
- of various value in different times. It is now twelve pence.
3, Five of theſe pence made their ſhilling, which they called
º filling, probably from ſciſingus, which the Romans uſed for
the fourth part of an ounce; and forty-eight of theſe ſtillings
made their pound, and four hundred of theſe pounds were a
legacy for a king's daughter, as appeareth by the laſt will of
king Alfred. Camden's Remains.
The very ſame ſhilling may at one time pay twenty men in
twenty days, and at another reſt in the ſame hands one hun-
dred days. Locke.
SHILL-I-SHALL-I. A corrupt reduplication of ſhall I ? The
º I am ſomewhat dainty in making a reſolution, becauſe when
- I make it, I kcep it: I don't ſtand ſhill-I ſhall-I then; if I ſay't,
lº I’ll do’t. Congreve's Way of the J/orld.
Shi'LY. adv. [from ſhy.] Not familiarly ; not frankly.
SHIN. "." [rcina, Saxon; ſchien, German.] The forepart of
the leg.
Ibrăiſed my ſºin the other day with playing at ſword and
dagger. Shakeſp. Merry #ives of I/indſºr.
The ſhin bone, from the knee to the inſtep, is made by ſha-
dowing one half of the leg with a ſingle ſhadow. Peacham.
tºº queſtion of a man heſitating. To ſtand ſhill-1-ſhall-I, is to
º continue heſitating and proclaſtinating.
n
ºw- -
º His leg, then broke,
Had got a deputy of oak;
For when a ſhin in fight is cropt,
The knee with one of timber's propt. Hudibras.
As when to an houſe we come,
To know if any one's at home,
We knock; ſo one muſt kick your ſhin,
Ere he can find your ſoul's within. Anonymous.
To SHINE. v. m. pretcrite I ſhone, I have ſhore; ſometimes I
fined, I have ſhined. [rcinan, Saxon; ſchijnen, Dutch.]
1. To have bright reſplendence; to glitter; to gliſten; to
gleam.
To-day the French,
All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
Shºme down the Engliſh; and to-morrow
Made Britain Iºdia: ev'ry man that ſtood,
- Shew'd like a mine. Shakeſpeare.
True paradiſe inclos'd with ſhining rock. Milton.
We can diſmiſs thee ere the morning ſhine. Milton.
Fair daughter, blow away theſe miſts and clouds,
ſ And let thy eyes ſhine forth in their full luſtre. Denham.
The ſun ſhines when he ſees it. Lotke.
2. To be without clouds.
The moon ſhines bright: in ſuch a night as this,
When the ſweet wind did gently kiſs the trees,
º And they did make no noiſe. Sºak. Merch. of Venico.
How bright and goodly ſhines the moon |
The moon; the ſun: it is not moonlight now. Shakeſp.
-- Two men flood by them in ſhining garments. Iu. xxiv. 4.
º Clear pools greatly comfort the eyes when the ſun is over-
*::: caſt, or when the moon ſhineth. Bacon.
. 3. To be gloſſy.
- - They are waxen fat, they ſhine. ºr v. 28.
Fiſh with their fins and ſhining ſcales. /l/ilton.
The colour and ſhining of bodies is nothing but the different
arrangement and refraction of their minute parts. Locke.
4. To be gay; to be ſplendid.
º So proud ſhe ſhined in her princely ſtate,
º Looking to heaven; for earth ſhe did diſdain,
º And ſitting high. Fairy 2 ten.
5. To be beautiful.
Of all th’ enamel'd race, whoſe ſilv’ry wing
tº Waves to the tepid zephyrs of the Spring,
•, Or ſwims along the fluid atmoſphere,
Once brighteſt ſhin'd this child of heat and air. Dunciad.
º: 6. To be eminent or conſpicuous.
If there come truth from them,
ºr As upon thee, Macbeth, their ſpeeches ſhine,
º Why, by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my oracles as well? Shakeſpeare.
º ~ Her face was veil'd; yet to my fancied fight
Love, ſweetneſs, goodneſs, in her perſon ſhin'd
º: So clear, as in no face with more delight. Milton.
* Cato's ſoul
… " Shines out in every thing ſhe acts or ſpeaks;
While winning mildneſs and attractive ſmiles
IDwell in her looks, and, with becoming grace,
Soften the rigour of her father's virtues. Addison.
The reformation, in its firſt eſtabliſhment, produced its
proper fruits, and diſtinguiſhed the whole age with ſhining in-
º ſtances of virtue and morality. Addison's Freeholder.
The courtier ſmooth, who forty years had ſlin'd
've An humble ſervant to all human kind. Pope.
º Few are qualified to ſhine in company; but it is in moſt
º mens power to be agreeable. Swift.
s I
-
7. To be propitious.
The Lord make his face ſhine upon thee, and be gracious,
Num. vi. 25.
8. To enlighten corporeally and externally. 771 25
The light of righteouſneſs hath not ſhined unto us, and the
ſun of righteouſneſs roſe not upon us. J//d. v. 6.
Celeſtial light
Shine inward, and the mind throu
Irradiate.
SHINE. n ſ [from the verb.]
1. Fair weather.
Beit fair or foul, or rain or ſhine. Dryden.
He will accuſtom himſelf to heat and cold, and ſhine and
rain; all which if a man's body will not endure, it will ſerve
him to very little purpoſe. Locke.
2. Brightneſs; ſplendour; luſtre. It is a word, though not un-
analogical, yet ungraceful, and little uſed.
He that has inured his eyes to that divine ſplendour, which
reſults from the beauty of holineſs, is not dazzled with the
glittering/hine of gold, and conſiders it as a vein of the ſame
earth he treads on. Decay of Piety.
Say, in what mortal ſoil thou deign'ſt to grow
Fair op'ning to ſome court's propitious ſhine,
Or deep with di'monds in the flaming mine Pope.
SH1'NEss. n.ſ.. [from ſhy.] Unwillingneſs to be tractable or
familiar.
An incurable ſhineſ is the vice of Iriſh horſes, and is hardly
ever ſeen in Flanders, becauſe the Winter forces the breeders
there to houſe and handle their colts. Temple.
They were famous for their juſtice in commerce, but ex-
treme ſhineſs to ſtrangers: they expoſed their goods with the
price marked upon them, and then retired. Arbuthnot.
SH1'NGLE. m. ſ. [ſchindel, Germ.] A thin board to cover houſes.
The beſt to cleave, is the moſt uſeful for pales, laths,
ſhingles, and wainſcot. Mortimer's Husbandry.
SH1'NGLEs. n.ſ. Wants ſingul. [cingulum, Latin; zona morbus,
Plinio.] A kind of tetter or herpes that ſpreads itſelf round
the loins.
Such are uſed ſucceſsfully in eryſipelas and ſhingles, by a ſlen-
der diet of decoctions of farinaceous vegetables, and copious
drinking of cooling liquors. Arbuthnot on Diet.
SH1'NY. adj. [from ſhine.] Bright; ſplendid; luminous.
When Aldeboran was mounted high,
Above the ſhiny Caſſiopeia's chain,
One knocked at the door, and in would fare. Fa. Queen.
The night
Is ſhiny, and they ſay we ſhall embattle
By th' ſecond hour o' th' morn. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
While from afar we heard the cannons play,
Like diſtant thunder on a ſhiny day,
For abſent friends we were aſham'd to fear. Dryden.
SHIP. [rcip, rcyp, Saxon; ſhap, Dutch. J A termination
noting quality or adjunét, as lordſhip; or office, as ſleward-
ſhip.
SHIP. m. ſ. [rcip, Saxon; ſchippen, Dutch..] A ſhip may be
defined a large hollow building, made to paſs over the ſea
with ſails. JWatts.
All my followers to the eager foe -
Turn back, and fly like ſhips before the wind. Shakespeare H. VI.
There made forth to us a ſmall boat, with about eight per-
ſons in it, whereof one of them had in his hand a tipſtaff,
who made aboard our ſhip. Bacon.
Two other ſhips loaded with vićtuals were burnt, and ſome
gh all her powers
Milton.
of the men ſaved by their ſhipboats. Knolleſ,
Nor is indeed that man leſs mad than theſe,
Who freights a ſhip to venture on the ſeas,
With one frail interpoſing plank to ſave
From certain death, roll'd on by ev'ry wave. Dryden:
Inſtead of a ſhip, he ſhould levy upon his country ſuch a
ſum of money, and return the ſame to the treaſurer of the
navy: hence that tax had the denomination of ſhip.money:
by which accrued the yearly ſum of two hundred thouſand
pounds. Clarendon.
A ſhip-carpenter of old Rome could not have talked more
judiciouſly. Addiſon.
To SHIP. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To put into a ſhip.
My father at the road * . , 3
Expeds my coming, there to ſee me ſhit? d. Shakeſp.
--- - ºng his great ordnance, departed down
...” ſhipping his g Knoleſ's Hiſł. of the Turki,
All the timber whereof was cut down in the mountains of
Cilicia, and ſhipted in the bay of Attalia, from whence it was
by ſea tranſported to Peluſium. Knolles.
A breeze from ſhore began to blow,
The ſailors ſhip their oars, and ceaſe to row;
Then hoiſt their yards a-trip, and all their ſails
Let fall. - Dryden.
2. To tranſport in a ſhip. -
Andronicus, would thou wert ſhift to hell,
Rather than rob me of the people's hearts. Shakeſpeare.
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">s H I
S H I
- o: h
ſun no ſooner ſhall the mountains touch,
nº ..". him hence. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Bramhall.
º In Portugal men ſpent with º ſº 2S they ºt hope for
| above a year of life, Jºp themſelves away in a Brazil º,
s gle leaf can waft an army o'er,
oft ſenates to ſome ... ſhore. - Poſe.
:: The canal that runs from the ſea into the Arno gives a con-
• * venient carriage to all goods that are to be/ſpped off. Addison
| Shipboard, n.ſ.. [ſhip and oard. See Board.j ... •
! I. This word is ſeldom uſed but in adverbial phraſes: a ſhip-
board, on ſhipboard, in a ſhip. - -
| Let him go on ſhipboard, and the mariners will not leave
|
their ſtarboard and larboard.
- Friend,
What do'ſt thou make a ſhipboard P. To what end ? Dryden.
Ovid, writing from on ſhipboard to his friends, excuſed the
faults of his ... by his misfortunes. Dryden.
2. The plank of a ſhip. -
They have made all thy ſhipboards of fir-trees, and brought
cedars from Lebanon to make maſts. Ezek. xxvii. 5.
SH1'pboy. n.ſ.. [ſhip and boy..] Boy that ſerves in a ſhip.
Few or none know me: if they did,
This ſhipboy's ſemblance hath diſgui'd me quite. Shałęſº.
Shi'PMAN. n.ſ. [/hip and man.] Sailor; ſeaman.
I myſelf have the very points they blow,
All the quarters that they know
I' th' ſhipman's card. Shakeſ?. Machat}.
Hiram ſent in the navy ſhi men that had knowledge of the
fea. 1 King: ix. 27.
SH1'PMAster. m. ſ. Maſter of the ſhip. -
The ſhipmaſter came to him, and ſaid unto him, what
meaneſt thou, O ſleeper ariſe, call upon thy God, jon. i. 6.
Shi'PPING.. n.ſ. [from ſhip.]
1. Veſſels of navigation.
Before Caeſar's invaſion of this land, the Britons had not
any ſhipping at all, other than their boats of twigs covered
with hides. Raleigh.
The numbers and courage of our men, with the ſtrength
of our ſhipping, have for many ages paſt made us a match for
the greateſt of our neighbours at land, and an overmatch for
the ſtrongeſt at ſea. Teºple.
Fiſhes firſt to ſhipping did impart;
Their tail the rudder, and their had the prow. Dryden.
2. Paſſage in a ſhip.
They took ſhipping and came to Capernaum, ſecking for
elus. jo. vi. 24.
SH1'pwreck. m. ſ. [ſhip and wreck.]
1. The deſtruction of ſhips by rocks or ſhelves.
Bold were the men, which on the ocean firſt
$pread their new ſails, when/ipwreck was the worſt. War.
We are not to quarrel with the water for inundations and
ſhipwrecks. - L'E/ºrange.
This ſea war coſt the Carthaginians five hundred quinqui-
renes, and the Romans ſeven hundred, including their /hip-
wrecks. Arbuthnot.
2. The parts of a ſhattered ſhip.
They might have it in their own Country, and that by ga-
thering up the ſhipwreck, of the Athenian and Roman thº-
tres. 7.3%le/7.
3. Deſtruction; miſcarriage. Dryden
Holding faith and a goºd conſcience, which ſome having
put away, °oncerning faith, have made /*pwreck. 1 Tim, i.
To SH1'pwreck. ... [from the noun.] ".
1. To deſtroy by daſhing on rocks or ſhºws.
- Whence the ſun 'gins his refle&amp;tion,
| Shipwrecking ſtorms and direful thunders break.
2. To make to ſuffer the dangers of a wreck.
Thou that can'ſ ſtill the raging of the ſeas,
| Chain up the winds, and bid the tempeſts ceaſe,
- Redeem myſºpºrº’d ſoul from raging guſts
Of cruel paſión and deceitful luſts. “ Prior.
A ſquare piece of marble thews itſelf to have been a little
Pºšº monument of two perſons wi. Were ſhit wreck -
3. To throw by loſs of the veſſel. eſhipwrecked. Addison
*ipwreck'd upon a kin dom
No friends, gdom,
Shakespeare .
where no pity,
Weep for me.
Shakespeare.
A builder of %
ſhips.
Swift.
and con-
defeated that of
4, buthnot.
&gt;
Roman fleet, although built by ſhipwrights,
duéled by pil... .". -
the Cº. oth without experience,
27. /, Pope.
[reiſ, from Jºhan, to divide, Sax. ſyre, É
A diviſion of the kingdom; a county,
dom as is under one ſheriff.
His blazing eyes, like two bright ſhining ſhields,
Did burn with wrath, and ſparkled living fire;
As two broad beacons, ſet in open field,
Send forth their flames far off to cvery ſºire.
The noble youths from diſtant /jr., reſort.
SHIRT. m. ſ. [/iert, Daniſh ; rºpe, rcºnic,
under linen garment of a man.
Shift a ſhirt: the violence of action hath made you reek as
a ſacrifice. Shałºp. Cymbeline.
I take but two/irt; out with me, and I mean not to ſweat
extraordinarily. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
When we lay next us what we hold moſt déâr,
Like Hercules, envenom'd ſhirts we wear,
And cleaving miſchiefs. Dryden.
Several perſons in December had nothing over their ſhoul-
ders but their ſhirts. Addison on Italy.
To SHIR r. v. a. [from the noun) To cover; to clothe as in
a ſhirt. -
Ah! for ſo many ſouls, as but this morn
Were cloath'd with fleſh, and warm'd with vital blood,
But naked now, or ſhirted but with ai. Drydºn.
SH1'RTLess. adj. [from ſºirſ.J Wanting a ſhirt.
Linſey-woolſey brothers,
Grave mummers! ſleeveleſs ſome, and /irtleſ; others. Pºe.
$H1'tta H. R. m. ſ. A ſort of precious wood, of which Mº,
SH1'T TIM. } made the greateſt part of the tables, altars, and
Planks belonging to the tabernacle. Thew. is hard, tough,
ſmooth, without knots, and extremely beautiful. It grows in
Arabia. Calmett.
I will plant in the wilderneſs theſita} tree. If xli. 19.
Bring me an offering of badgers ſkins and ſhittin-wood #.
SH1'tt Lecock, n.ſ. [Commonly and Perhaps as properly ſºut-
tlecock. Of ſitti, or /attle the etymology is doubtful: Sain-
her derives it from ſhutteln, German, to ſhake; or rceatan,
Saxon, to throw. He thinks it is called a cock from its ſea.
thers. Perhaps it is Prºperly/uttlecork, a cork driven to and
fro, as the inſtrument in weaving, and ſoftened by frequent
and rapid utterance from cr; tº cock.] A cork ſtuck with
feathers, and driven by Players from one to another with bat.
tledoors. -
You need not diſcharge a cannon to treak the chain of his
thoughts: the pat of a /hittlecock, or the creaking of a jack,
will do his buſineſs. Collier.
SHIye. n.ſ.. [ſhyve, Dutch.]
I. A ſlice of bread.
Eaſy it is
Qf a cut loaf to ſteal a ſºve. Shakeſp. Titus Andronicut:
* A thick ſplinter, or lamina cut off from £1. ſubſtance.
Shayings made by the plane are in ſome things differing
from thoſe ſhives, or thin and flexible pieces of wood, that are
obtained by borers. Boyle.
To SHIVER, v. n. [ſlatºren, German.] To quake; ‘to
tremble; to ſhudder, as with cold or fear.
Any very harſh noiſe will ſet the teeth on edge, and make
all the body ſhiver. Bacon.
What religious palſy's this,
Which makes the boughs diveſt their bliſs?
And that they might her footſteps ſtraw,
ſo much of the king-
1 a. &amp;n.
Prior.
Saxon.] The
Drop their leaves with ſhivering awe. Claveland.
Why ſtand we longer ſhºvering under fear? Milton.
The man that/iver'd on the brink of fin,
Thus ſteel'd and harden'd, ventures boldly in. Dryden.
He deſcribed this march to the temple with ſo much horror,
that he ſlivered every joint. Addiſon.
Give up Laius to the realms of day,
Whoſe ghoſt, yet /iv'ring on Cocytus' ſand,
Expects its paſſage to the farther ſtand.
Prometheus is laid
On icy Caucaſus to /iver, -
While vultures eat his growing liver. Swift.
To SHI've R. v. n. [from Žive.] To fall at once into many
parts or ſhives. -
Had'ſt thou been aught but goſſmer, feathers, air,
So many fathom down precipitating, " ---
*. fiver'd like an egg. Shakespeare King john.
Upon the breaking and /ºivºring of a great ſtate, you may
be ſure to have wars. - º:
The natural world, ſhould gravity once ceaſe, or be with-
drawn, would inſtantly ſhiver into millions of atoms. Wºodw.
To SH1'v ER. v. a. To break by one act into many parts; to
fhatter.
Pope.
The ground with ſhiver'd armour frown. Milton,
Show’rs of granado's rain, by ſudden burſt
Diſploding inurd’rous bowels; fragments of ſteel
A thouſand ways at once, the ſºver'd orbs - - -
-' Philipſ.
Fly diverſe, working torment. into
SH1'yER. m. ſ...[from the verb.j One fragment of many i
'hich any thing is broken. - -
W He wº º thee into ſhivers with his fiſt, as a ſailor
breaks a biſket. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
2 As
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H O
ºn tº
º:
ſºn
ſº
*::::::
jº
º
*
As brittle as the glory is the face;
For there it is crack'd in an ". /hivers. Shakeſpeare.
If you ſtrike a ſolid body that is Brittle, it breaketh not only
where the immediate force is, but breaketh all about intoſhi-
vers and fritters. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Surging waves againſt a ſolid rock,
Though all to ſliver, daſh'd, th' aſſault renew,
Vain batt'ry, and in froth or bubbles end. Miltºn.
SH1'v ERY. adj. [from ſhiver.] Looſe of coherence; incom-
pact; eaſily falling into many fragments.
There were obſerved incredible numbers of theſe ſhells
thus flatted, and extremely tender, in ſhivery ſtone. // codward.
Sho'A DST on E. n /.
Sload?one is a ſmall ſtone, ſmooth without, of a dark liver co-
Jour, and of the ſame colour within, only with the addi-
tion of a faint purple. It is a fragment broke of an iron
vein. //coward on Fºſſils.
Certain tin-ſtones ly on the face of the ground which they
call ſhoad, as ſhed from the main load, and made ſomewhat
round by the water. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
The loºds or veins of metal were by this action of the de-
parting water made eaſy to be found out by the ſhoads, or
trains of metallick fragments born off from them, and lying
in trains from thoſe veins towards the ſea, in the ſame courſe
that water falling thence would take. J/oodward.
Sho A l n ſ. [rcole, Saxon.
1. A croud; a great multitude; a throng.
When there be great ſhoals of people, which go on to po-
pulate, without foreſeeing means of ſuſtentation: once in an
age they diſcharge a portion of their people upon other na-
tions. - Bacon.
A league is made againſt ſuch routs and ſholes of people as
have utterly degenerated from nature Baron.
The vices of a prince draw ſho'cs of followers, when his vir-
tuo leaves him the more eminent, becauſe ſingle. Decay ºf Piety.
A ſhoal of ſilver fiſhes glides
And plays about the barges. * J/a'ler.
God had the command of famine, whereby he could have
carried them off by ſhoals. //oodward.
Around the goddeſs roll
Broad hats, and hoods, and caps, a ſable ſhoal,
Thick, and more thick the black blocade extends. Pope.
2. A ſhallow ; a ſand bank.
The haven's mouth they durſt not enter, for the dangerous
Ahzals. Abbot's Deſcript. of the Horld.
He heaves them off the ſh:les. Dryden.
The depth of your pond ſhould be ſix foot; and on the
ſides ſome ſholes for the fiſh to lay their ſpawn. Mortimer.
To SHoAL. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To croud; to throng.
The wave-ſprung entrails, about which fauſens and fiſh
did ſhale. Chapman.
2. To be ſhallow; to grow ſhallow.
What they met
Solid, or ſlimy, as in raging ſea,
Toſt up and down, together crouded drove,
From each ſide ſhaling tow'rds the mouth of hell. Milton.
SH-AL. adj. Shallow ; obſtructed or incumbered with banks.
S:10a'LIN E s. n.f [from ſhaly.] Shallowneſs; frequency of
ſhallow places.
Siio A'LY. adj. [from ſhoal.] Full of ſhoals; full of ſhallow
places.
Thoſe who live
Where, with his ſhoaly foords Vulturnus roars. Dryden.
The watchful heroe felt the knocks, and found
The toſſing veſſel, ſail'd on ſhoay ground. Dryden.
Sriock. m. ſ. [chor, French ; ſchocºen, Dutch J
1. Conflict; mutual impreſſion of violence; violent concourſe.
Thro' the ſhock
Of fighting elements on all ſides round
Environ'd, wins his way. Miltºn.
2. Concuſſion; external violence.
It is inconceptible how any ſuch man that hath ſtood the
flock of an eternal duration, without corruption or altera-
tion, ſhould after be corrupted or altered judge Hale.
Theſe ſtrong unſhaken mounds reſiſt the ſhocks
Of tides and ſeas tempeſtuous, while the rocks,
That ſecret in a long continu’d vein
Paſs through the earth, the pon'drous pile ſuſtain. Black.
Such is the haughty man, his tow'ring ſoul,
*Midſt all the ſhocks and injuries of fortune,
Riſes ſuperior and loºks down on Caeſar. Addison.
Long at the head of his few faithful friends,
He ſtood the ſhºck of a whole hoſt of foes. Addiſon.
The tender apples from their parents rent,
By ſtormy ſhºcks muſt not neglected lye,
The prey of worms. - Philips.
3. The conflict of enemies.
The adverſe legions, not leſs hideous join'd
The horrid ſhock. - Milton.
Thoſe that run away are in more danger than the others
that ſtand the ſhack. L’Eſtrange.
-*—4–
S H O
- Of E - The mighty force
dward twice o'erturn d their deſp'rate king:
Twice he aroſe, and join' - * - I -
- d join'd the horri ſhock. P 5.
4. Offence ; impreſſion of diſguſt. hilip
Fewer ſh: Ås a ſtateſman gives his friend.
5. [****, old Dutch..] A pile of ſheaves of corn.
Corn tithed, fir parſon, together to get, - -
And cauſe it on ſhºcks to be by and by ſet. Taſſ.
In a full age, like as a /hock' of corn cometh in, in his
1%ung.
ſeaſon. job.
Thou, full of days, like weighty ſhocks of corn,
In ſeaſon reap'd, ſhall to thy grave be born. Sandys.
Behind the maſter walks, builds up the ſhocłº,
Feels his heart heave with joy. - Thomſºn.
6. [from ſhagg.] . A rough dog.
I would fain know why a ſhock and a hound are not di-
ſtinét ſpecies. Locke.
To SHock. v. a. ſ. ſchoºken, Dutch.
1. To ſhake by violence.
Theſe her princes are come home again:
Come the three corners of the world in arms,
And we will ſhºck them. Shakeſp. K. john.
2. To offend ; to diſguſt.
Suppoſing verſes are never ſo beautiful, yet if they contain
any thing that ſhocks religion or good manners, they are
Perſus inefes rerum nºgag, a canora. Dyden.
Thoſe who in reading Homer are ſhock'd that 'tis always a
lion, may as well be angry that 'tis always a man. I'ope.
My ſon,
I bade him love, and bid him now forbear:
If you have any kindneſs for him, ſtill
Adviſe him not to ſhock a father's will. Dryden.
To SHock. v. n. To be offenſive.
The French humour, in regard of the libertics they take
in female converſations, is very ſhocking to the Italians, who
are naturally jealos. Addison's encrºs an Italy.
To SHock, v. n. [from the noun J. To build up piles of
ſheaves.
Reap well, ſcatter not, gather clean that is ſhorn,
Bind faſt, ſhock apace, ave an eye to thy corn. Tiſſºr.
SHoD. for ſhoed, the preterit and participle paſſive of to ſho.
Strong exeltreed cart that is clouted and ſood. Tujer.
Shoe. n.ſ. plural ſhoes, anciently ſhown. [rceo, reoe, Saxon;
Jºhoe, Dutch..] I he cover of the foot.
Your hoſe ſhould be ungarter’d, your ſce untied, and every
thing about you demonſtrating a careleſs deſolation. Shakeſp.
Spare none but ſuch as so in clouted ſhoon,
For they are thrifty honeſt men. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
This hollow cylinder is fitted with a ſucker, upon which
is nailed a good thick piece of tanned ſhoe-leather. Boyle.
Unknown and like eſteem’d, and the dull ſwain
Treads on it daily with his clouted ſoon,
And yet more medic'nal than that moly
That Hermes once to wiſe Ulyſles gave;
He call'd it haemony. Milton.
I was in pain, pulled of my ſhoe, and ſome eaſe that gave
ne. Temple.
To shoe. v. a. preterit, I ſhod; participle paſſive/hod. [from
the noun.]
1. To fit the foot witb a ſhoe. -
The ſmith's note for ſhoeing and plough irons. Shakeſ?.
He doth nothing but talk of his horſe; and makes it a
great appropriation to his own good parts, that he can ſhoe
him himſelf. Shakeſpeare.
Tell your maſter that the horſes want ſhoeing. Swift.
2. To cover at the bottom.
The wheel compos'd of crickets bones,
And daintily made for the nonce,
For fear of rattling on the ſtones,
With thiſtle down they ſhod it. Drayt.
Shoeboy. n.ſ. [ſhe and boy..] A boy that cleans ſhºes.
If I employ a ſhºeboy, is it in view to his advantage, or
my own convenience Swift.
How each the publick good purſues, -
Make all true patriots up to ſhoebºy, -
Huzza their brethren. Swift.
Shoe ING-Hop N. m. ſ. [ſhoe and ºn 1 -
I. A horn uſed to facilitate the admiſſion of the foot into ****
row ſhoe. - - - - - - -
2. Any thing by which a tranſaction is facilitated; anything
uſed as a medium. In contempt. . . - -
Moſt of our fine young ladies reta". their ſervice ſuper-
numerary and inſignificant fellows which they uſe º whi-
flers, and commonly call ſhoeing-º’." pêºſator.
I'h... b. an arrant ſhoeing-horn for above theſe twenty
years. I ſerved my miſtreſs in that capacity above five of
the number before ſhe was ſhod. Though ſhe had many who
made their applications to her, I always thought myſelf the
beſt ſhoe in her ſhop. Sºciator.
Sºer, ny. [ ſhoe and maker.] One whoſe trade is to
make ſhoes.
23 Y A<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H O
S H O
—sº---
- with the
zemaker may find ſome little fault wit
A º "... an Appelles had painted, when the
§: is ſuch, as none but an Appelles could paint. J/atts.
sº . n/ [ſhoe and tje J The ribband with which wo-
tie their ſhoe. .
mcIl Madam, I do as is my duty,
Honour the ſhadow of your ſºcłye. IIud bras.
Shog. n.ſ. [from /*] Violent concuſſion.
Aſ other's diving bow he did adore, -
which, with a ſing, caſts all the hair before. Dryden.
He will rather have the primitive man to be produced, in a
kind of digeſting balneum, where all the he vier lees may
fubſide, and a due a quilibrium be maintained, not diſturbed
by any ſuch rude and violent ſhºgs that would ruffle and break
all the little ſtamina of the embryon. - Betly.
To shog. v. a. To ſhake; to agitate by ſudden interrupted in:
pulſes. -
After it is waſhed, they put the remnant into a wooden
diſh, the which they ſoftly / og to and fro in the water, un-
til the earthy ſubſtance be flitted away. Carew.
SHoNE. The preterite of ſºme. -
All his father in him ſhone. Miltºn.
Shook. The preterite and in poetry participle paſſive of /ake.
Taxalian ſººk by Montezuma's pow'rs,
Has, to reſiſt his forces, call d in ours. Dryden.
To SHcor. v. a preterite, I ſhot; participle, ſhot or ſhºtten.
[rcestan, Saxon.] - - -
1. To diſcharge anything ſo as to make it fly with ſpeed or vio-
lence.
Light
Shoots far into the boſom of dim night
A glimmering dawn. AMiltºn.
2. To diſcharge from a bow or gun.
I owe you much, and like a witleſs youth,
That which I owe is loſt; but if you pleaſe
To ſhot an arrow that ſelf way
Which you did ſhoot the firſt, I do not doubt
To find both. Shakeſpeare.
This murtherous ſhaft that's ſhot
Hath not yet lighted; and our ſafeſt way
Is to avoid the aim. Shakeſpeare.
3. To let off.
The men ſhoot ſtrong ſhoots with their bows. Abbot.
The two ends of a bow ſhot off, fly from one another. Boyle.
Men who know not hearts, ſhould make examples;
Which like a warning-piece, muſt be ſhot off,
To fight the reſt from crimes.
4. To ſtrike with any thing ſhot.
Not an hand ſhall touch the mount, but he ſhall be ſtoned
or ſhot thro’. Exod. xix. 13.
The liquid air his moving pinions wound,
And, in the moment, ſhoot him on the ground.
5. To emit new parts, as a vegetable.
None of the trees exalt themſelves, neither ſhoot up their
top among the thick boughs. Ezek. xxxi. 14.
A grain of muſtard groweth up and ſhooteth out great
branches. 44ark. iv. 32.
Tell like a tall old oak, how learning ſhoots,
Dryden.
Dryden.
To heaven her branches, and to hell her roots. Denham.
6. To emit; to dart or thruſt forth.
Ye bucks, who pluck the flow’rs,
Beware the ſecret ſnake that ſhoots a fling. Dryden.
The laſt had a ſtar upon its breaſt, which ſhot forth point-
cd beams of a peculiar luſtre. Addison.
Fir’d by the torch of noon, to tenfold rage,
Th' infuriate hill forth ſloots the pillar'd flame. Thomſºn.
7. To puſh ſuddenly.
I have laugh’d ſometimes when I have refle&amp;ed on thoſe
men who have ſhºt themſelves into the world; ſome bolting
out upon the ſtage with vaſt applauſe, and ſome hiſſed off,
quitting it with diſgrace.
8. To puſh forward.
They that ſee me / cot out the lip, they ſhake the head. Pſ.
9. To fit to each other by planing; a workman's term.
Strait lines in joiner's language are called a joint; that is
twº pieces of wood that are ſhot, that is plained or elſe paired
with a pairing chiffel.
10. To paſs through with ſwiftneſs.
Thus having ſaid, ſhe ſinks beneath the ground,
With furious haſte, and ſhoots the Stygian ſound. Dryden.
To Shoot. v. n.
1. To perform the aët of ſhoºting.
The archers have forely grieved him and ſhot at him. Gen.
When he has Jºot his beſt, he is ſure that none ever did
Jhoºt better.
Dryden.
440xon.
Temple.
yº you ſhoot, and ſhut one eye, p
* Cannot think he would deny
To lend the t'other friendly aid,
* Wink, as coward and afraid. Priºr,
2. To germinate; to -
* 3 to increaſe in vegetable growth.
Such tices a S- g
* love the ſun do not willingly deſcend far into
the earth; and therefore they are commonly trees that /?: ;
up much.
- Onions, as they hang, will ſhoot forth.
The tree at once both upward ſhºots,
And juſt as much grows downward to the roots. Cao.
The monarch oak, the patriarch of the tº ecs,
Shats riſing up, and ſpreads by ſlow degrees.
Nor will the wither'd flock be green again,
But the wild olive/acts and ſhades the ungateful plain. Dr.
New creatures riſe,
A moving maſs at firſt, and ſhort of thighs;
Till ſloting out with legs and imp'd with wings. Dryden.
. The corn laid up by ants would / o t under ground, if
they did not bite off all the buds; and therefore it will pro-
duce nothing. Addison.
This valley of the Tirol lies encloſed on all ſides by the
Alps, though its dominions / o t out into ſeveral branches
among the breaks of the mountains. Addison's Italy.
Expreſs'd juices of plants, boiled into the conſiſtence of a
ſyrup, and ſet into a cool place, the eliential ſalt will/ool up-
on the ſides of the veſſels. A bºth ot on Aimenis.
A wild, where weeds and flow'rs promiſcuous ſhoºt,
Orgarden, tempting with forbidden fruit. Pope.
Bacon.
Bacon.
Dryden.
º
3. To form itſelf into any ſhape.
If the menſtruum be over charged, metals will ſhºt into
chryſtals. Bacºn.
Although exhaled and placcd in cold conſervatories, it will
chryſtalize and ſhoot into glaceous bodies. Bown's Willº. Er.
That rude maſs will ſhoot itſelf into ſeveral forms, till it make
an habitable world: the ſteady hand of Providence being the
inviſible guide of all its motions. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. To be emitted.
There ſhot a ſtreaming lamp along the ſky,
Which on the winged light'ning ſeem'd to fly. Dryden.
Tell them that the rays of light ſhºot from the ſun to our
earth, at the rate of one hundred and eighty thouſand miles
in the ſecond of a minute, they ſtand aghaſt at ſuch talk. Waiti.
The grand aetherial bow
Shoots up immenſe. Thorſºn.
5. To protuberate; to jet out.
The land did ſhoot out with a very great promontory, bend-
ing that way. Abºot's Deſcript. ºf the World.
6. To paſs as an arrow.
Thy words ſhoot thro' my heart,
Melt my reſolves, and turn me all to love. Addison.
7. To become anything ſuddenly.
Let me but live to ſhadow this young plant
From blites and ſtorms: he'll ſoon ſhoot up a heroe. Dryd.
8. To move ſwiftly along.
A ſhooting ſtar in autumn thwarts the ni
A ſhining harveſt either hoſt diſplays,
ght. Milton:
c
And ſhoot, againſt the ſun with equal rays. Dryden.
At firſt ſhe flutters, but at length ſhe ſprings,
To ſmoother flight, and ſhºots upon her wings. Drydºn.
The broken air loud whiſtling as ſhe flies,
She ſtops and liſtens, and ſhoot, forth again,
And guides her pinions by her young ones cries. Dr. dº.
Heav'n's imperious queen ſhot down from high,
At her approach the brazen hinges fly,
The gates are forc’d.
She downward glides,
Lights in Fleet-ditch, and ſº tº beneath the tides. Gºy.
Where the mob gathers, ſwiftly ſloºt along, -
Nor idly mingle in the noiſy throng. Gay.
At the ſummons roll'd her eyes around,
Not half ſo ſwiftly ſhoots along in air, -
The gliding light'ning. Pope.
9. To feel a quick pain.
S.Hoot. m. ſ. [from the verb.) -
1. The act or impreſſion of any thing emitted from a diſtance.
The Turkiſh bow giveth a very forcible ſhºt, inſomuch as
the arrow, hath pierced a ſteel target two inches thick; but
the arrow if headed with wood, hath been known to Pº"
thro' a piece of wood of eight inches thick. . Bagn.
2. The act of Ariking, or endeavouring to ſtrike with * miſſive
weapon diſcharged by any inſtrument.
The noiſe of thy croſs-bow
Dryden.
Will ſcare the herd, and ſo my ſhoot is loſt. Shakesp.
But come the bow; now mercy goes to kill,
And ſhooting well is then accounted ill.
Thus will I ſave my credit in the ſhoºt,
Not wounding, pity would not let me do't. Shakespeare.
As a country fellow was making a ſhoºt at a jº. e
trode upon a ſnake that bit him. L'Aſtrange.
3. [Scheuten, Dutch.j Branches iſſuing from the main ſtock. .
cre
They will not come juſt on the tops where they :
cut, but out of thoſe ſloots which were water boughs. Ba.
I ſaw them under a green mantling vine, 2: .
Plucking ripe cluſters from the tender / cºtſ. . . . *
Prune off ſuperfluous branches and ſhoºts of this º
fpring; but expoſe not the fruit without caves ſufficiº* **
The
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S II O
S H O
º' ..
º
ºr "
The hook ſhe bore,
To lop the growth of the luxuriant year,
To decent form the lawleſs ſhorts to bring,
And teach th'obedient branches where to ſpring, Pºpe.
Now, ſhould my praiſes owe their truth
To beauty, dreſs, or paint, or youth,
*Twere grafting on an annual ſtock
That muſt our expectations mock ;
And making one luxuriant ſhort,
Die the next year for want of root. Swift.
Shoo'ſ ER. n ſ, [from ſhoot..] One that ſhoots; an archer;
a gunner. -
The ſhooter ewe, the broad-leav'd ſycamore.
We are ſhoote's both, and thou doſt deign
To enter combat with us, and conteſt
With thine own clay.
The King with gifts a veſſel ſtores;
And next, to reconcile the ſhooter God,
Within her hollow fides the ſacrifice he ſtow'd. Dryden.
SHOP. m. ſ. [rceoP, Saxon, a magazine; ſchoppe, French ;
//opa, low Latin.] Ai ſworth.
1. A place where any thing is ſold.
Our windows are broke down,
And we for fear compell'd to ſhut our ſhipſ. Shakespeare.
Your moſt grave belly thus anſwer'd;
True is it, my incorporate friends,
That I receive the general food at firſt,
Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
Becauſe I am the ſtore-houſe and the ſhop
Of the whole body. Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
In his needy ſhop a tortoiſe hung,
An alligator fluit, and other ſkins
Of ill-ſhap'd fiſhes; and about his ſhelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes. Shakeſpeare.
Scarce any ſold in ſhºps could be relied on as faithfully pre-
pared. Boyle.
His ſhop is his element, and he cannot with any enjoy-
ment of himſelf live out of it. South's Sermons.
2. A room in which manufactures are carried on. -
We have divers mechanical arts and ſtuffs made by them;
and ſhºps for ſuch as are not brought into vulgar uſe. Bacon.
ShopBoA'R D. m. ſ. [ ſhop and board.] Bench on which any work
is done.
That beaſtly rabble, that came down
From all the garrets in the town, -
And ſtalls, and ſhop oards, in vaſt ſwarms,
With new-chalk'd bills, and ruſty arms. Hudibras.
It dwells not in ſhops or work-houſes; nor till the late age
was it ever known, that any one ſerved ſeven years to a
ſmith or a taylor, that he ſhould commence doctor or divine
from the ſhopboard or the anvil; or from whiſtling to a team,
come to preach to a congregation. South's Sermons.
ShopBoºk. m. ſ. [ſhºp and/ox.] Book in which a tradeſman
keeps his accounts.
Fairfax.
Herbert.
They that have wholly negle3ed the czerciſe of their un-
derſtandings, will be as unfit for it as one unpractiſed in
figures to caſt up a ſhopbook. Locke.
SHopkee'PER. m. ſ. [ ſhºp and keep.] A trader who ſells in a
ſhop; not a merchant who only deals by wholeſale.
Nothing is more common than to hear a ſhopkeeper deſiring
his neighbour to have the goodneſs to tell him what is a
clock. Addiſon.
SHJ/PMAN. m. ſ. [ſhop and man.] A petty trader.
Garth, gen'rous as his muſe, preſcribes and gives,
The ſhºpman ſells, and by deſtruction lives. Dryden.
SHORE. the preterit of ſhear.
I'm glad thy father's dead:
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain. Shakespeare.
SHORE. m. ſ. [rcone, Saxon.]
1. The coaſt of the ſea.
Sea cover'd ſea ;
Sea without ſhore.
2. The bank of a river. A licentious uſe.
Beſide the fruitful ſhore of muddy Nile,
Upon a ſunny bank outſtretched lay,
In monſtrous length a mighty crocodile. Spenſer.
3. A drain; properly fewer.
4. [School en, Dutch; to prop.] The ſupport of a building; abuttreſ.
When I uſe the word ſhore, I may intend thereby a coaſt
of land near the ſea, or a drain to carry off water, or a prop
to ſupport a building. //atts's Lºgick.
To SH or E. v. a. [/cizoren, Dutch.]
1. To prop; to ſupport.
They undermined the wall, and as they wrought, ſhºred it
up with timber. Kºles.
He did not much ſtrengthen his own ſubſiſtence in court,
but ſtood there on his own feet, for the moſt of his allies
rather leaſed upon him than / orcd him up. //ºtton.
There was also made a ſoring or under-propping act for
Milton.
the benevolence; to make the ſums which any perſon had a-
greed to pay, leviable by courſe of law. Bacon's Hºn. VII.
2. To ſet on ſhore. Not in uſe.
. I will bring theſe two blind ones aboard him; if he think
it fit to ſhore them again let him call me rogue. Shakeſpeare.
SHO'RELEss, adj. [from ſhºre.] Having no coaſt.
This ºcean of felicity is ſo ſhoreºſ; and bottomleſs, that
all the ſaints and angels cannot exhauſt it. Bºyle.
Słł'oºlis G. m. ſ. [from ſhear, ſhore J The felt or ſkin of a
ſheep ſhorn.
Shor N. The participle paſſive of ſhear.
So roſe the Danite itrong,
Shorn of his ſtrength. Milton
Vile ſhrubs are ſhorn for browze: the tow'ring height
Of unétuous trees are torches for the night. Drydºn.
He plunging downward ſhot his radiant head;
Diſpel:'d the breathing air that broke his flight;
Shorn of his beams, a man to mortal ſight. Dryder.
SHORT. adj. [rceoſt, Saxon.]
1. Not long; commonly not long enough.
Weak though I am of limb, and ſhort of fight,
Far from a lynx, and not a giant quite,
I’ll do what Mead and Cheſºlden adviſe,
To keep theſe limbs, and to preſerve theſe eyes. Pºpe.
2. Not long in ſpace or extent.
This leſ, voluble earth,
By ſhºrter flight to the eaſt, had left him there.
Though ſort my flature, yet my name extends
To heaven itſelf, and earth's remoteſt ends. Pºpe.
3. Not long in time or duration.
They change the night into day: the light is ſhort, becauſe
of darkneſs job xvii. 12.
Nor love thy life, nor hate, but what thou liv'ſt,
Milton.
Live well, how long or ſhort permit to heav'n. Milton.
Shºrt were her marriage joys: for in the prime
Of youth her lord exprºd before his time. Dryºn.
4. Repeated by quick iterations.
Her breath then ſhort, ſeem'd loth from home to paſs,
Which more it mov’d, the more it ſweeter was. Sidney.
Thy breath comes ſhort, thy darted eyes are fixt
On me for aid, as if thou wert purſu'd. Dryden.
My breath grew ſhort, my beating heart ſprung upward,
And leap'd and bounded in my heaving boſom. Smith.
5. Not attaining an end; not reaching the purpoſed point; not
adequate ; not equal. º
Immoderate praiſes, the fooliſh lover thinks ſhort of his
miſtreſs, though they reach far beyond the heavens. Sidney.
Some cottons here grow, but ſhort in worth unto thoſe of
Smyrna. Sandys.
The Turks give you a quantity rather exceeding than ſhort
of your expectation. Sands.
Since higher I fall ſort, on him who next -
Provokes my envy. Milton.
I know them not; not therefore am I ſhort
Of knowing what I ought. Milton's Paradiſe Reg.
To attain
The height and depth of thy eternal ways,
All human thoughts come ſhort, ſupreme of things. Milton.
O glorious trial of exceeding love,
Engaging me to emulate but ſhort
Of thy perfection, how ſhall I attain. Milton.
To place her in Olympus' top a gueſt,
Among th’ immortals, who with nectar feaſt;
That poor would ſeem, that entertainment ſhort -
Of the true ſplendor of her preſent court. //aller.
We err, and come ſhort of ſcience, becauſe we are ſo fre-
quently miſled by the evil conduct of our imaginations. Gar-
That great wit has ſalien ſhort in his account. Al/are.
As in many things the knowledge of philoſophers was ſhºt
of the truth, ſo almoſt in all things their practice fell ſhort of
their knowledge: the principles by which they walked were as
much below thoſe by which they judged, as their ſect were be-
low their head. South's Sermons.
He wills not death ſhould terminate their ſtrife;
And wounds, if wounds enſue, be ſo t of life: Drydºn.
Virgil exceeds Theocritus in regularity and brevity, and
falls ſhort of him in nothing but ſimplicity and *;
ſtyle. •
‘where reaſon came ſhort, revelation diſcovered on which
ſide the truth lay. Locke.
Defia in out behaviour, coming ſhºrt of the utmoſt gº-
fulneſs, often eſcapes our obſervation. - Locke.
If ſpeculative maxims have not * adual univerſal aſlent
from all mankind, practical principles come ſlort of º:
verſal reception. - º:
Men expreſs their univerſal ideas by ſigns; a faculty which
bcaſts come ſhort in Lºcke.
The people fall ſhºrt of thoſe who border upon them, in
ſtrength of underſtanding: - - Addison.
A neutral indifference falls fort of that obligation they lie
under, who have taken ſuch oaths. - - Addison.
When I made theſe, an artiſt undertook to imitate it; but
uſing another way of poliſhing them, he fell much ſhort of
what I had attained to, as I afterwards underſtood. Nºte:
- t<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H O
S H O
Tt is not credible that the Phoenicians, who had º
colonies in the Perſian gulph, ſtopt ſhort, without pu º:
their trade to the Indies. - Arbut º:
joing is expreſly commanded, and no happineſs allºwe to
any thing/art of it. - South's Sermons.
The finiſcation of words will be allowed to fall much ſhort
of the knowledge of things. Baker.
6. Not far diſtant in time. - -
He commanded thoſe, who were appointed to attend him,
to be ready by a ſhort day. Clarendon.
7. Defective; imperfect.
8. Scanty; wanting. -
The Engliſh were inferior in number, and grew ſhort in
their proviſions. Hayward.
They ſhort of ſuccours, and in deep deſpair,
Shook at the diſmal proſpect of the war. Dryden.
ºf Not fetching a compaſs. -
So ſoon as ever they were gotten out of the hearing of the
cock, the lion turned ſhort upon him, and tore him to
pieces. - L'E/irange.
He ſeiz'd the helm, his fellows cheer'd,
Turn'd ſhort upon the ſhelves, and madly ſleer'd. Dryden.
For turning ſhort, he ſtruck with all his might
Full on the helmet of th' unwary knight. Dryden.
10. Not going ſo far as was intended.
As one condemn'd to leap a precipice,
Who ſees before his eyes the depth below,
Stops ſhort. Dryden.
11. Defective as to quantity.
When the fleece is ſhorn,
When their defenceleſs limbs the brambles tear,
Short of their wool, and naked from the ſheer. Dryden.
12. Narrow; contračled.
Men of wit and parts, but of ſhort thoughts and little me-
ditation, are apt to diſtruſt everything for a fancy. Burnet.
They, ſince their own ſhort underſtandings reach
No farther than the preſent, think ev’n the wiſe
Like them diſcloſe the ſecrets of their breaſts. Rowe.
13. Brittle; friable.
His fleſh is not firm, but ſhort and taſteleſs. J/alton.
Marl from Derbyſhire was very fat, though it had ſo great
a quantity of ſand, that it was ſo ſhort, that, if you wet it,
you could not work it into a ball, or make it hold together.
Aſortimer's Husbandry.
14. Not bending.
The lance broke ſort, the beaſt then bellow'd loud,
And his ſtrong neck to a new onſet bow’d. Dryden.
Shoºr, n.ſ.. [from the adjective..] A ſummary account.
The ſhort and long is our play is prefer'd. Shakeſp.
In ſhort, ſhe makes a man of him at fixteen, and a boy all
his life after. L’E/ºrange.
If he meet with no reply, you may conclude that ſtruſt to
the goodneſs of my cauſe: the ſhort on't is, ’tis indifferent to
your humble ſervant whateveryour party ſays. Dryden.
From Medway's pleaſing ſtream
To Severn's roar be thine:
In ſhort, reſtore my love, and ſhare my kingdom. Dryden.
The proprieties and delicacies of the Engliſh are known to
few : 'tis impoſible even for a good wit to underſtand and
Pºliſe them, without the help of a liberal education and on
reading; in ſhort, without wearing off the ruſt which he con.
trailed while he was laying in a ſtock of learning. Dryden.
The ſhort is, to ſpeak all in a word, the poſſibility of being
found in a ſalvable ſtate cannot be ſufficiently ſecured, with:
out a poſſibility of always perſevering in it. ſorris.
To ſee whole bodies of men breaking a conſtitution; in
/ºrt, to be encompaſſed with the greateſt dangers from with-
ºut, to be torn by many virulent factions within, then to be
ſecure and ſenſeleſs, are the moſt likely ſymptoms, in a ſtate
of ſickneſs unto death. sº
sº adv. [It is, I think, only uſed in compoſition.] Not
ong.
- Beauty and youth,
And ſprightly hope and ſhort-enduring joy. Dryden.
One ſtrange draught preſcribed by Hi
b - Hippocrates, for a ſhort-
reathed man, is half a gallon of hydromel, with a little
vinegar.
To SHo'RT EN. v. a. [from ſort.] . Arbuthnot.
1. To make ſhort, either in time or ſpace.
º they ſee it is not generally fit, or poſſible, that
churches ſhould frame thankſgivings anſwerable to each
P"on, they ſhorten ſomewhat the jºins of their cenſure.
Hooker.
H would You have been ſo brief with him, he would
łave been ſo brief with you, to ſhorten you,
º the head, the whoſe head: length. Shakespeare
mcº. . .*****lege, and make ºach perceptiºn
"Prehenſive, it binds them into bundles. Locke.
With ſhort §. ſhall dare
''/'2' ſend ſword to ſtab ;
* in fair combat. o itab in cloſer War, Dryden
'at?!.
War, and luxury's more direful rage,
Thy crimes have brought, to ſhorten mortal breath,
With all the num'rous family of death. Dryden.
Whatever ſhortens the fibres, by intinuating themſelves into
their parts, as water in a rope, contracts. A lahat.
2. To contract; to abbreviate.
We ſhorten’d days to moments by love's art,
Whilſt our two ſouls
Perceiv'd no pºſing time, as if a part
Our love had been of ſtill eternity. Suckling,
3. To confine ; to hinder from progreſſion.
To be known, ſº ortens my laid intent;
My boon I make it, that you know me not. Sla ºff care.
Here where the ſubject is ſo fruitful, I am ſhºrtened by my
chain, and can only fee what is forbidden me to reach. Dryd.
4. To cut off; to defeat.
The Iriſh dwell altºgether by their ſepts, ſo as they may
conſpire what they will; whereas if there were Engliſh placed
among them, they ſhould not be able to ſtir but that it ſhould
be known, and they ſhortened according to their demeiits. Speºſ.
5. To lop.
Diſhoneſt with lopt arms the youth appears,
Spoil'd of his noſe, and ſhorten’d of his ears. Drydºn.
Sho'RTHAN D. m.ſ.. [ſhort and hand.] A method of witng
in compendious characters.
Your follies and debauches change
With ſuch a whirl, the poets of your age
Are tir’d, and cannot ſcore them on the ſtage,
Unleſs each vice in ſhorthard they indite,
Ev’n as notcht 'prentices whole ſermons write. Dryden.
Boys have but little uſe of ſhºrthand, and ſhould by no
means pračtiſe it, 'till they can write perfectly well. Lak.
In ſhorthand ſkill'd, where little marks compriſe
Whole words, a ſentence in a letter lies. Creech.
As the language of the face is univerſal, ſo 'tis very com-
prehenſive: no laconiſm can reach it: 'tis the ſº or thand of the
mind, and crowds a great deal in a little room. Cºllier.
SHo'RT lived. adj. [ſhort and lºve.] Not living or laſting
long.
Unhappy parent of a ſortiv'd ſon
Why loads he this embitter'd life with ſhame? Dryden.
The joyful ſhortliv'd news ſoon ſpread around,
Took the ſame train. Dryden.
Some vices promiſe a great deal of pleaſure in the com-
miſſion; but then, at beſt, it is but ſhortlived and tranſient, a
ſudden flaſh preſently extinguiſhed. Calamy's Sermoni.
The frequent alterations in publick proceedings, the variety
of ſhortlived favourites that prevailed in their ſeveral turns un-
der the government of her ſucceſſors, have broken us into
theſe unhappy diſtinctions. Addison's Freeholder.
A piercing torment that ſhortlived pleaſure of your's muſt
bring upon me, from whom you never received any offence.
Adjan's Speciator.
All thoſe graces
The common fate of mortal charms may find;
Content our ſhortliv'd praiſes to engage, -
The joy and wonder of a ſingle age. Addison.
Admiration is a ſhortlived paſſion, that immediately decay:
upon growing familiar with its obječt, unleſs it be ſtill ſed
with freſh diſcoveries. Addiſon.
In youth alone its empty praiſe we boaſt;
But ſoon the ſhºrtliv'd vanity is loſt. Pºpe.
Then palaces ſhall riſe; the joyful ſon
Shall finiſh what his ſhºrtliv'd fire begun. Pope.
SHORTLY. adv. [from ſhort.]
1. Quickly; ſoon; in a little time. r
I muſt leave thee, love, and/ortly too. Shałºff.
Thou art no friend to God, or to the king: VI
Open the gates, or I'll ſhut thee out ſhorty. Slº, H. W.I.
The armies came ſhortly in view of each other. cargº.
The time will/orty come, wherein you ſhall more rºjº"
for that little you have expended for the benefit of oº:
in that which by ſo long toil you ſhall have ſaved. Ca º
He celebrates the anniverſary of his father's funeral, an
ſhortly after arrives at Cumae. Dryden.
Ev’n he, whoſe ſoul now melts in mournful lays, P
Shall ſhorty want the gen’rous tear he pays. ope.
2. In a few words; briefly. - d
I could expreſs them more ſhort'; this way than in proſe, an
much of the force, as well as grace of arguments, depends on
their conciſeneſs. Pope.
SHORT NEss. n.ſ.. [from ſort.]
1. The quality of being ſhort, either in time or ſpace.
I'll make a journey twice as far, t' enjoy
A ſecond night of ſuch ſweet ſhortnºſ, which -
Was mine in Britain. Shaieſ. Cymºeline.
They move ſtrongeſt in a right line, which is cauſd by
the / artneſs of the diſtance. Bacon's Natural H/ory.
I will not trouble my readers with the ſortnºſ of the time
in which I writ it. Dryden.
May
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H O
May they not juſtly to our climes upbraid
Shortneſs of night, and penury of ſhade Prior.
2. Fewneſs of words; brevity; conciſeneſs.
The neceſſity of ſhortneſs cauſeth men to cut off imperti-
nent diſcourſes, and to compriſe much matter in few words.
Hooker, b. v.
Sir, pardon me in what I have to ſay,
Your plainneſs and your ſhortneſ; pleaſe me well. Shakeſp.
3. Want of retention.
Whatſoever is above theſe proceedeth of ſhortneſs of me-
mory, or of want of a ſtayed attention. Bacon.
4. Deficience; imperfection.
Another account of the ſhortneſ of our reaſon, and eaſi-
neſs of deception, is the forwardneſs of our underſtanding's
aſſent to ſlightly examined concluſions. Glanv. Scepſ.
From the inſtances I had given of human ignorance, to our
fortneſs in moſt things elſe, ’tis an eaſy inference. Glanv.
It may be eaſily conceived, by any that can allow for the
lameneſs and ſhortneſs of tranſlations, out of languages and
manners of writing differing from ours. Temple.
Sho'Rt.R IBs. n.ſ.. [ſhort and ribs...] The baſtard ribs; the ribs
below the ſternum.
A gentleman was wounded in a duel: the rapier entered
into his right ſide, ſlanting by his ſhortribs under the muſ-
cles. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Sho'RTsIGHTED. adj. [ſhort and ſight.]
1. Unable by the convexity of the eye to ſee far.
Shortſighted men ſee remote obječts beſt in old age, and
therefore they are accounted to have the moſt laſting eyes.
Newton's Opt.
2. Unable by intelle&amp;tual fight to ſee far.
The fooliſh and ſhortſghted die with fear
That they go no where, or they know not where. Denham.
Other propoſitions were deſigned for ſnares to the ſhort-
ſighted and credulous. L’Eſtrange.
Sho'RTsIGHTEDNEss. m. ſ. [ſhort and ſight.]
1. Defect of ſight, proceeding from the convexity of the eye.
2. Defe&amp;t of intelle&amp;tual fight.
Cunning is a kind of ſhortſghtedneſs, that diſcovers the
minuteſt objećts which are near at hand, but is not able to
diſcern things at a diſtance. Addiſon's Speciator.
Sho'Rt waisted. adj. [ſhort and waiſt. J Having a ſhort
body.
'Duckºº, /hortwaiſed; ſuch a dwarf ſhe is,
That ſhe muſt riſe on tip-toes for a kiſs. Dryden's juv.
Sho'RTwin DED. adj. [ſhort and wind.] Shortbreathed; aſth-
matick; breathing by quick and faint reciprocations.
Sure he means brevity in breath; ſhortwinded. Shakespeare H. IV.
So ſhaken as we are, ſo wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
And breathe ſhortwinded accents of new broils,
To be commenc'd in ſtrands afar. Shakespeare H. IV.
With this the Mede ſhortwinded old men eaſes,
And cures the lungs unſavory diſeaſes. May's Virgil.
Sho'RTwin GED. adj. [ſhort and wing. J Having ſhort wings.
Hawks are divided into long and ſhort winged.
Shortwing’d, unfit himſelf to fly,
His fear foretold foul weather. Dryden.
Sho'RY. adj. [from ſhore.] Lying near the coaſt.
There is commonly a declivity from the ſhore to the middle
part of the channel, and thoſe ſhory parts are generally but
ſome fathoms deep. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Shor. The preterite and participle paſſive of ſhoot.
On the other ſide a pleaſant grove
Was ſhot up high, full of the ſtately tree
That dedicated is to Olympick Jove. Fairy Queen.
Their tongue is as an arrow ſhot out, it ſpeaketh deceit.
jer. ix. 8.
The fortifier of Pendennis made his advantage of the com-
modiouſneſs afforded by the ground, and ſhot rather at a ſafe
preſerving the harbour from ſudden attempts of little fleets,
than to withſtand any great navy. Carew.
He only thought to crop the flow'r,
New ſhot up from a vernal ſhow'r, Milton.
From before her vaniſh'd night,
Shot through with orient beams. ... Miltºn's Paradiſe Loſt.
Sometimes they ſhot out in length like rivers, and ſometimes
they flew into remote countries in colonies. Burnet.
The ſame metal is naturally ſhot into quite different figures,
as quite different kinds of them are of the ſame figure. Woodw.
Prone on ocean in a moment flung,
Stretch'd wide his eager arms, and ſhot the ſeas along. Pope.
SHor. n.ſ.. [ſchºt, Dutch; from ſhoot.]
1. The act of ſhooting.
A ſhot unheard gave me a wound unſeen. Sidney.
Proud death
What feaſt is tow'rd in thy infernal cell,
That thou ſo many princes at a ſhot
So bloodily haſt ſtruck 2 Shakespeare Hamlet.
2. The miſfive weapon emitted by any inſtrument.
I ſhall here abide the hourly ſhot
Of angry eyes. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
At this booty they were joyful, for that they were ſupplied
thereby with good ſtēre of powder and ſhot. Hayward.
Above one thouſand great ſhºt were ſpent upon the walls,
without any damage to the garriſon.
H ſed - Clarendon.
...” “"“”ty/hot of his greateſt cannon to be made at
the king's army. Clarendon
Impatient to revenge the fatal ſhot,
His right hand doubly to hi left ſ
3. The flight of a ſhot. y is left ſucceeds. Dryden.
ſh sº ſat over againſt him, a good way off, as it were a bow
7t.
4. [Eſcot, French.] A ſum charged; a ºn." xxi. 16.
A man is never welcome to a place, 'till ſome certain ſhot be
paid, and the hoſteſs ſay welcome. Shakeſpeare
... As the fund of our pleaſure, let each pay his ſhot; -
Far hence be the ſad, the lewd fop, and the ſot. E. johnſ.
Shepherd, leave decoying, -
ipes are ſweet a Summer's day;
But a little after toying, -
Women have the ſhot to pay. Dryden.
He touch'd the pence when others touch'd the pot,
The hand that ſign'd the mortgage paid the ſhot. Swift.
Shote, n.ſ. [rceoca, Saxon.] A fiſh.
The ſhote, peculiar to Devonſhire and Cornwal, in ſhape
and colour reſembleth the trout; howbeit, in bigneſs and good-
neſs cometh far behind him. Carew.
Sho'TFREE, adj. [ſhot and free..] Clear of the reckoning.
Though I could 'ſcapeſhofree at London, I fear the ſhot
here: here's no ſcoring but upon the pate. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Sho". TEN. adj. [from Jhºot.] Having ejected the ſpawn.
Gothy ways, old Jack; die when thou wilt, if good man-
hood be not forgot upon the earth, then am I a ſhotten her-
ring. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Aſk for what price thy venal tongue was ſoldſ
Tough wither'd treuffles, ropy wine, a diſh
Of ſhotten herrings, or ſtale ſtinking fiſh. Dryden.
To Shove. v. a. [rcupan, Saxon; ſchuyven, Dutch.]
1. To puſh by main ſtrength.
The hand could pluck her back, that ſhov'd her on. Shakespeare
In the corrupted currents of this world, -
Offence's gilded hand may ſhove by juſtice;
And oft the wicked prize itſelf
Buys out the law.
I ſent your grace
The parcels and particulars of our grief,
The which hath been with ſcorn ſhov'd from the court. Shakespeare
Of other care they little reck’ning make,
Than how to ſcramble at the ſhearers feaſt,
And ſhove away the worthy bidden gueſt. Milton.
There the Britiſh Neptune ſtood,
Beneath them to ſubmit th' officious flood,
And with his trident ſhow'd them off the ſand. Dryden.
Shoving back this earth on which I fit,
I'll mount. Dryd. Tyrannick Love.
A ſtrongman was going to ſhove down St. Paul's cupola.Arb.
2. To drive a boat by a pole that reaches to the bottom of the
Water.
3. To puſh; to ruſh againſt.
He uſed to ſhove and elbow his fellow-ſervants to get near
his miſtreſs, when money was a-paying or receiving. Arbuthn.
Behold a rev'rend ſire
Crawl through the ſtreets, ſhow'd on or rudely preſs'd
Shakeſpeare.
By his own ſons. Pope.
- You've play’d and lov’d, and eat and drank your fill;
Walk ſober off, before a ſprightlier age
Come titt'ring on, and ſhove you from the ſtage. Pope.
Make nature ſtill incroach upon his plan,
And ſhove him off as far as eler we can. Pope.
Eager to expreſs your love,
You ne'er conſider whom you ſhºve, -
But rudely preſs before a duke. Swift.
To Show E. v. n.
1. To puſh forward before one, --- -
The ſeamen towed, and I ſhoved ’till we arrived within
forty yards of the ſhore. Gulliver's Travels.
2. To move in a boat, not by oars but a pole.
He graſp'd the oar,
Receiv'd his gueſts aboard, and ſhºw'd from ſhore. Garth.
Show E. m. ſ. [from the verb. J. The aćt of ſhowing; a
ul II.
P I was forced to ſwim behind, and puſh the boat forward
with one of my hands; and the tide favouring me, I could
feel the ground: I reſted two minutes, and then gave the boat
another ſhove. Gulliver’s Travel.
SHOVEL. n.ſ. [rcopl; Saxon; ſhoeffºl, Dutch.] An inſtru-
ment conſiſting of a long handle and broad blade with raiſed
dges.
edg A handbarrow, wheelbarrow, ſhovel and ſpade. Tuſſºr.
The trag of the Ottoman, that he would throw Malta
into the ſea, might be performed at an eaſier rate than by th:
/hºvels of his Janizaries. Glanv. Scepſ.
23 Z To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H O
s H O
a. [from the noun.]
'V E L. Ü.
"To SHO've heap with a ſhovel.
1. To throw or
is upon the bed my father dy'd,
ſº º .. by his homeſt bones; but now
Some hangman muſt put on my ſhrowd, and ly me,
where no prieſt ſhovels in duſt. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
2. To gather in great quantities. -
* picºs/ºvel them up as, they ſwim along the waters 3, but
divers infects alſo devour them. Derham.
sºlboarp. m. ſ. ſſ” and board.] A long board on
which they play by ſliding metal pieces at a mark.
so have I ſeen, in hall of lord,
A weak arm throw on a long ſhovelboard;
He barely lays his picce, - Dryden.
Sirov Eller, of Shºvelard. n.ſ. [from ſhovel.] A bird.
sſ...r, or ſpoonbill; the fºrmer º the more proper,
the end of the bill being broad like * ſhovel, but not concave
like a ſpoon, but perfectly flat. Grew's Muſeum.
Pewets, gulls, and ſºvellers feed upon fleſh, and yet are
2.
good meat. Bacon.
This formation o
but common unto the platea,
f the wizzon is not peculiar to the ſwaſ,
or ſhovelard, a bird of no muſi-
cal throat. Brown's Vulgar Errouri.
Smougi. m. ſ. [for ſhock.] A ſpecies of ſhaggy dog; a ſhock.
In the catalogue ye be for men, .
As hound and greyhounds; mungrels, ſpaniels, curs,
Shºughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are 'cleped
All by the name of dogs, Shakespeare Macbeth.
Shoulp. v. m. [ſtude, Dutch; rceolcan, Saxon.]
I. This is a kind of auxiliary verb uſed in the conjunctive
mood, of which the fignification is nºt eaſily fixed.
2. I shºuld go. It is my buſineſs or duty to gº.
3. If I Should go. If it happens that I go.
4. Thºu Should'st go. Thou oughteſt to go.
5. If thou Shoulp'st go. If it happens that thou goeſt.
à i he ſame ſignifications are found in all the other perſons fin-
gular and plural.
- Let not a deſperate ačtion more engage you
Than ſafety ſhould. - Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
Some praiſes come of good wiſhes and reſpećts, when by
telling men what they are, they repreſent to them what they
fhould be. Bacºn.
To do thee honour I will ſhed their blood,
which the juſt laws, if I were faultleſs, ſhould. JPaller.
So ſubjects love juſt kings, or ſo they ſhºuld Dryden.
I conclude, that things are not as they ſhould be. Swift.
7. Should be. A proverbial phraſe of ſlight contempt or irony.
The girls look upon their father as a clown, and the boys
think their mother no better than ſhe ſhould be. Addiſon.
8. There is another ſignification now little in uſe, in which
ſºuld has ſcarcely any diſtinét or explicable meaning. It ſhould
be differs in this ſenſe very little from it is.
There is a fabulous narration, that in the northern coun-
tries there ſhºuld be an herb that groweth in the likeneſs of a
lamb, and feedeth upon the graſs. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
SHOULDER. m. ſ. [rculore, Saxon; ſº older, Dutch.]
1. The joint which connects the arm to the body.
I have ſeen better faces in my time,
Than ſtand on any ſhoulder that I ſee
Before me. Shakeſpeare.
If I have liſted up my hand againſt the fatherleſs, when I ſaw
my help in the gate, then let mine arm fall from my ſhoulder-
blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone. job xxxi. 22.
It is a fine thing to be carried on mens ſhoulders; but give
God thanks that thou art not forced to carry a rich fool upon
thyſhºulders, as thoſe poor men do. Taylor.
I he head of the ſhoulder-bone being round, is inſerted into
ſo ſhallow a cavity in the ſcapula, that, were there no other
guards for it, it would be thruſt out upon every occaſion. Wiſe.
2. The upper joint of the foreleg.
We muſt have a ſhoulder of mutton for a property. Shakespeare.
He took occaſion, fro ld property
l f Enol , from a ſhoulder of mutton, to cry up the
plenty of England. Addiſon's Freehºlder.
3. The upper part of the back.
Emily dreſs'd herſelf in rich array;
Freſh as the month, and as the morning fair,
Adown her ſhoulders fell her length of hair Dryden
4. The ſhoulders are uſed as emblems of ſtrength, or the : of
ſupporting.
F Ev’n as thou wilt, ſweet Warwick, let it be;
o, on tºy ſhºulders do I build my ſeat. Shakespeare. H. VI.
T I he king has cur'd me; and from theſe ſhoulders,
º ruin d pillars, out of pity taken
A load would ſink a navy. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
5. W. part ; a prominence.
ºn yºu rivet a pin into a hole, your pin muſt have a
†. º it thicker than the hole is wide, that the ſhoulder
o SH o' through the hole as well as the ſhank. Mºxon.
1. T "...P.F. R. v. a. [from the noun.]
• 1 O º with inſolence and violence.
As º º billows beat the ragged ſhore,
y the earth would ſºulder from her ſeat. Fairy Queen.
Dudman, a well-known foreland to moſt ſailors, here
ſhoulders out the ocean, to ſhape the ſame a large boſom be-
tween itſelf. - Carew's Survey of Cornwal,
You debaſe yourſelf,
To think of mixing with th’ ignoble herd:
What, ſhall the people know their god-like prince
Headed a rabble, and profan'd his perſon, -
Shoulder'd with filth Drydºn.
So vaſt the navy now at anchor rides,
That underneath it the preſs'd waters fail,
And, with its weight, it ſhoulders off the tides. Dryden.
Around her numberleſs the rabble flow'd,
Should'ring each other, crowding for a view. Rowe's f. Shore.
When Hopkins dies, a thouſand lights attend
The wretch, who living ſav'd a candle's end;
should ring God's altar a vile image ſtands,
Belies his features, nay extends his hands. Pºpe.
2. To put upon the ſhoulder.
Achimedes's lifting up Marcellus's ſhips finds little more
credit than that of the giants ſhouldering mountains. Glanv.
Shoulder belt. m. ſ. [ſhoulder and belt.] A belt that comes
acroſs the ſhoulder.
Thou haſt an ulcer, which no leech can heal,
Though thy broad ſhoulderbºlt the wound conceal. Dryden.
Shoulder clapp ER. m. ſ. [ſhoulder and lap.] One who aſ-
fects familiarity, or one that miſchiefs privily.
A fiend, a fury, pitileſs and rough 3
A back friend, a ſhºulderclapper, one that commands
The paſſages of alleys. Shakespeare Comedy ºf Erreurs.
Shouldershott EN. adj. [/culder and ſhºt.J Strained in
the ſhoulder.
His horſe waid in the back, and ſhºulderſhºtten. Shakespeare .
Shoulderslip. m.ſ. [ſhoulder and ſlip.] Diſlocation of the
ſhoulder.
The horſe will take ſo much care of himſelf as to come off
with only a ſtrain or a ſhoulderſlip. Swift.
To SHOUT. v. n. [A word of which no etymology is known.]
To cry in triumph or exhortation.
They ſhouted thrice: what was the laſt cry for Shakespeare .
showſ into God with the voice of triumph. Pſ xlvii. 1.
It is not the voice of them that ſhout for maſtery. E. xxxii.
The ſhoºting for thy ſummer fruits and harveſt is fallen. Iſ.
Hé ſtorms and ſhouts; but flying bullets now
To execute his rage appear too ſlow:
They miſs, or ſweep but common ſouls away;
For ſuch a loſs Opdam his life muſt pay. J/aller.
There had been nothing but howlings and ſhºuting of poor
naked men, belabouring one another with ſnagged ſticks. More.
All clad in ſkins of beaſts the jav'lin bear,
And ſhrieks and ſhoutings rend the ſuff'ring air. Dryden,
what hinders you to take the man you love?
The people will be glad, the ſoldier ſºut;
And Bertran, though repining, will be aw'd. Dryden.
Shout. n.ſ. [from the verb J A loud and vehement cry of
triumph or exhortation.
Thanks, gentle citizens:
This general applauſe, and chearful ſout,
Argues your wiſdom and your love to Richard. Shakeſ rare.
The Rhodians, ſeeing the enemy turn their backs, gave a
great ſhout in deriſion. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turki,
Then he might have dy'd of all admir’d,
And his triumphant ſoul with ſhºut expir’d. Dryden.
Shout ER. m.ſ.. [from ſhºut..] He who ſhouts.
A peal of loud applauſe rang out,
And thinn'd the air, 'till even the birds fell down
Upon the ſhºuſers heads. Dryden's Cºmert.
To SHOW. v. a. pret. ſhºwed and ſhown ; Paº paſſ ſhowſ.
[rceapan, Saxon; ſhowen, Dutch. This word is frequently
written ſhew; but ſince it is always pronounced and often
written ſhow, which is favoured likewiſe by the Dutch ſhowen,
I have adjuſted the orthography to the pronunciation.
1. To exhibit to vicw. -
If I do feign,
O let me in my preſent wildneſs die,
And never live to ſhºw th’ incredulous word r
The noble change that I have purpoſed. Shakſ. H. IV.
Shºw me a token for good, that they which hate me may ſº
Pſ. lxxxvi. 17.
all the dead ariſe
Pſ lxxxviii. 10.
1t.
wilt thou ſhºw wonders to the dead? Sh
and praiſe thee?
Men ſhould not take a charge upon them that they are not
fit for, as if finging, dancing, and /hewing of tricks, Weſe
qualifications for a governor. L'Eſtrange.
2. To give proof of ; to prove.
This I urge to ſhow • *
Invalid that which thee to doubt it mov’d. Milton.
I'll to the citadel repair, de
And ſhow my duty by my timely care. £, º
ryach.
Achates' diligence his duty ſhows.
3. To publiſh; to make publick; to proclaim; h
Ye are a choſen generation, that ye ſhould ſhºw forth **
praiſes of him who hath called you out of darkneſs. I º:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H O
S H R
4. To make known.
I raiſed thee up to ſhew in thee my power. Ex. ix. 16.
I ſhall no more ſpeak in proverbs, but ſhºw you plainly of
the Father. 72. xvi. 25.
Nothing wants but that thy ſhape may ſlºw
Thy inward fraud. Milton.
5. To point the way; to dire&amp;t.
She taking him for ſome cautious city patient, that came for
privacy, ſhews him into the dining-room. Swift.
6. To offer; to afford.
To him that is afflićted, pity ſhould be ſkewed from his
friend. job. vi. 14.
Felix, willing to ſhew the Jews a pleaſure, left Paul bound.
Acis Xxiv. 27.
Thou ſhalt utterly deſtroy them; make no covenant with
them, nor ſhew mercy unto them. Deutr. vii. 2.
7. To explain; to expound.
Foraſmuch as knowledge and ſhewing of hard ſentences,
and diſſolving of doubts, were found in the ſame, Daniel let
him be called. Dan. v. 12.
8. To teach; to tell.
I'm ſent to /ow thee what ſhall come. Milton.
To Show. v m.
1. To appear; to look; to be in appearance.
She ſhews a body rather than a life,
A ſtatue than a brother. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleºpatra.
Juſt ſuch ſhe ſhows before a riſing ſtorm. Dryden.
Still on we preſs; and here renew the carnage,
So great, that, in the ſtream, the moon ſhow'd purple.
Philips.
2. To have appearance.
My lord of York, it better ſhew’d with you,
When that your flock aſſembled by the bell,
Fncircled you to hear with rev'rence
Your expoſition on the holy text,
Than now to ſee you here an iron man,
Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum. Shakespeare Hanry IV.
SHow. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A ſpectacle; ſomething publickly expoſed to view for money.
I do not know what ſhe may produce me; but, provided it
be a ſhow, I ſhall be very well ſatisfied. Addison.
The dwarf kept the gates of the ſhow room. Arbuthnot.
2. Superficial appearance.
Mild heav'n
Diſapproves that care, though wiſe in ſhow,
That with ſuperfluous burden loads the day. Milton.
3. Oſtentatious diſplay.
Nor doth his grandeur and majeſtick ſhow
Of luxury, though call'd magnificence,
Allure mine eye. Milton's Par. Regain'd.
Stand before her in a golden dream;
Set all the pleaſures of the world to ſhow,
And in vain joys let her looſe ſpirits flow. Dryden.
The radiant ſun
Sends from above ten thouſand bleſfings down,
Nor is he ſet ſo high for ſhow alone. Granville.
Never was a charge, maintained with ſuch a ſhow of gravity,
which had a ſlighter foundation. Atterbury.
4. Object attracting notice.
The city itſelf makes the nobleſt ſhow of any in the world:
the houſes are moſt of them painted on the outſide, ſo that
they look extremely gay and lively. Addiſon.
5. Splendid appearance.
eſus, riſing from his grave,
Spoil'd principalities and pow'rs, triumph'd
In open ſhow, and with aſcenſion bright
Captivity led captive. Milton.
6. Semblance; likeneſs.
When devils will their blackeſt ſins put on,
They do ſuggeſt at firſt with heav'nly ſhows. Shakespeare Othelſo.
He through paſs'd the midſt unmark'd,
In ſhow plebeian angel militant. Milton.
7. Speciouſneſs; plauſibility.
The places of Ezechiel have ſome ſhow in them; for there
the Lord commandeth the Levites, which had committed
idolatry, to be put from their dignity, and ſerve in inferior
miniſtries. JWhitgifte.
The kindred of the ſlain forgive the deed;
Tºut a ſhort exile muſt for ſhow precede. Dryden.
8. External appearance.
Shall I ſay O Zelmane? Alas, your words be againſt it.
Shall I ſay prince Pyrocles Wretch that I am, your ſhºw is
manifeſt againſt it. Sidney.
Fierce was the fight on the proud Belgians ſide,
For honour, which they ſeldom ſought before;
But now they by their own vain boaſts were ty'd,
And forc'd, at leaſt in ſlew, to prize it more. Dryden.
9. Exhibition to view.
I have a letter from her;
The mirth whereof's ſo larded with my matter,
That neither ſingly can be manifeſted,
Without the ſhew of both. Shakeſpeare.
7
10. Pomp; magnificent ſpectacle.
As for triumphs, maſks, feaſts, and ſuch ſhews, men need
not be put in mind of them. Bacon.
11. Phantoms; not realitics.
What you ſaw was all a fairy ow;
And all thoſe airy ſhapes you º tº,
Were human bodies once. Dryden
12. Repreſentative action. yaen.
Florio was ſo overwhelmed with happineſs, that he could
not make a reply, but expreſſed in dumb flow thoſe ſentiments
of gratitude that were too big for utterance. Addiſon.
Shºw BREAD, or Shewbread, nj, [ſº] and bread.]. Among the
Jews, they thus called loaves of bread that the prieſt of the week
Put every Sabbath-day upon the golden table, which was in the
ſančium before the Lord. They were covered with ſea.
gold, and were twelve in number, repreſenting the twelve
tribes of Iſrael. They ſerved them up hot, and at the ſame
time took away the ſtale ones, and which could not be eaten
but by the prieſt alone. This offering was accompanied with
frankincenſe and ſalt. Calmet.
Set upon the table ſhowbread before me. Ex. xxv. 30.
SHOWER. m. ſ. [ſcheure, Dutch.]
1. Rain either moderate or violent.
If the boy have not a woman's gift,
To rain a ſhower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for ſuch a ſhift. Shakeſpeare.
The ancient cinnamon was, while it grew, the dryeſt; and
in ſhowers it proſpered worſt. Bacon.
2. Storm of any thing falling thick.
I'll ſet thee in a ſhower of gold, and hail
Rich pearls upon them. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleºpatra.
With ſhºw’rs of ſtones he drives them far away;
The ſcattring dogs around at diſtance bay. Pope.
3. Any very liberal diſtribution.
He and myſelf
Have travell'd in the great ſhower of your gifts,
And ſweetly felt it. Shakeſp. Timon.
To SHoweR. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To wet or drown with rain.
Serve they as a flow'ry verge, to bind
The fluid ſkirts of that ſame wat'ry cloud,
Left it again diſſolve, and ſhow'r the earth? Milton.
The ſun more glad impreſs'd his beams,
Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow,
When God hath ſhow'r'd the earth. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
Caeſar's favour,
That ſhow’rs down greatneſs on his friends, will raiſe me
To Rome's firſt honours. Addiſon's Cato;
2. To pour down:
Theſe, lull'd by nightingales, embracing ſlept;
And on their naked limbs the flow'ry roof
Shower'd roſes, which the morn repair’d. Milton's Par. Loft.
3. To diſtribute or ſcatter with great liberality.
After this fair diſcharge, all civil honours having ſhowered
on him before, there now fell out great occaſion to action.
Iſotton's Life of the Duke of Buckingham.
To SHo'we R. v. n. To be rainy.
SHo'wer Y. adj. [from ſhower..] Rainy. -
A hilly field, where the ſtubble is ſtanding, ſet on fire in
the ſhowery ſeaſon, will put forth muſhrooms. Bacon.
Murranus came from Anxur's ſhow'ry height,
With ragged rocks and ſtony quarries white,
Scated on hills. Addiſon on Italy.
The combat thickens, like the ſtorm that flies
From weſtward, when the ſhow'ry winds ariſe. Addison:
SHo'wish, or Showy, adj. [from ſhow.]
1. Splendid; gaudy. -
The eſcutcheons of the company are ſhºwiſh, and will look
magnificent. Swift.
2. Oſtentatious. - -
Men of warm imaginations negle&amp;t ſolid and ſubſtantial
happineſs for what is ſhowy and ſuperficial . . . Addiſon.
Show N. pret. and part, paſſ of To ſhow. Exhibited.
Mercy ſhown on man by him ſeduc’d. Milton.
SHRANK. The preterite of ſhrunk. -
The children of Iſrael eat not of the finew which ſhran?
upon the hollow of the thigh. Gen. xxxii. 32.
To SH RED. v. a. pret, ſhred. frcreaban, Saxon.] . To cut into
ſmall pieces. Commonly uſed of cloath or herbs.
It hath a number of ſhort cuts or ſhreddings, which may tº
better called wiſhes than prayers. Hooker.
One gathered wild gourds, and /hred them. 2 Kings iv. 39.
Where did you whet your knife to-night, he cries, -
And ſired the ſeeks that in your ſtomach riſe Py”. Juv.
SHRF D. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A ſmall piece cut off.
Gold, grown ſomewhat churliſh by recovering, is made
more pliant by throwing in /hr.di of tanned leather. Bacon.
‘ihe mighty Tyrian queen, that gain'd
with ſubtle ſhreds a tract of land,
Did leave it with a caſtle fair
To his great anceſtor. *:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H R
S H R
- Żred, like a
- wick is made up of half a dozen / gº
º beaten general topicks: Swift.
º, might patch up a garment with ſuch ſhreds º, the
world throws away. ope.
t.
2. A "ſº they were an hungry; figh’d forth proverbs,
- ... 's . . . ſt eat :
hat hunger broke ſtone walls; that dogs muſt e
Tº º //red, they vented their complainings. Shakespeare
shred, of wit and ſenſeleſs rhimes -
Swift.
ler'd out a thouſand times. -
H]under to clamour.] A peeviſh,
SHREW, n.ſ.. [ſchryen, German, to .
º ſpiteful, vexatious, turbulent woman.
[It appears in Robert of Glouceſter, that this word ſignified an-
ciently any one perverſe or obſtinate of either ſex.]
There dede of hem vor hunger a thouſand and mo,
Andyat noide the ſcrewen to none pes go. Rºbert of Glouceſter.
Be merry, my wife has all ;
For women are ſhrew, both ſhort and tall; Shaft. H. IV.
By this reckoning he is more/nºw than ſhe. Shakeſpeare.
A man had got a ſhrew to his wife, and there could be no
L’Eſtrange.
uiet in the houſe for her. - -
q Her fallow checks her envious mind did ſhew,
And ev'ry feature ſpoke aloud the ſhrew. - Dryden.
Every one of them, who is a ſhrew in domeſtick life, is
now become a ſcold in politicks. Addison Freeholder.
SHREwd. adj. [Contracted from ſhrewed.]. .
1. Having the qualities of a ſhrew; malicious; troubleſome;
miſchievous.
Her eldeſt ſiſter is ſo curſt and ſhrewd,
That 'till the father rids his hands of her,
Your love mułt live a maid.
2. Maliciouſly ſly; cunning; more artful than good. -
It was a ſhrewd ſaying of the old monk, that two kind of
priſons would ſerve for all offenders, an inquiſition and a bed-
lam: if any man ſhould deny the being of a God, and the inn-
mortality of the ſoul, ſuch a one ſhould be put into the firſt, as
being a deſperate heretick; but if any man ſhould profeſs to
believe theſe things, and yet allow himſelf in any known
wickedneſs, ſuch a one ſhould be put into bedlam. Tillotſon.
A ſpiteful ſaying gratifies ſo many little paſſions, that it
meets with a good reception; and the man who utters it is
looked upon as a ſhrewd ſatiriſt. Addiſon.
Corruption proceeds from employing thoſe who have
the charaćter of ſhrewd worldly men, inſtead of ſuch as have
had a liberal education, and trained up in virtue. Addiſon.
3. Bad ; ill-betokening.
Scarce any man paſſes to a liking of fin in others, but by
firſt practiſing it himſelf; and conſequently we may take it
for a ſhrewd indication, and ſign, whereby to judge of thoſe
who have ſinned with too much caution, to ſuffer the world
to charge ſins directly upon their converſation. South's Serm.
4. Painful; pinching; dangerous; miſchievous.
Every of this number,
That have endur'd ſhrewd nights and days with us,
Shall ſhare the good of our returned fortune. Shakeſpeare.
When a man thinks he has a ſervant, he finds a traitor that
eats his bread, and is readier to do him a miſchief, and a
Jhrewd turn, than an open adverſary. South's Sermons.
No enemy is ſo deſpicable but he may do a body a ſhrewd
turn. L’Eſtrange.
SHREwBLY. adv. [from ſhrewd.]
1. Miſchievouſly; deſtructively.
This practice hath moſt ſhrewdy paſt upon thee. Shakeſp.
At Oxford, his youth and want of experience in maritime
ſervice, had ſomewhat been ſhrewdly touched, even before the
ſluices of popular liberty were ſet open. Wotton.
2. Vexatiouſly. It is uſed commonly of ſlight miſchief, or in
ironical expreſſion.
The obſtinate and ſchiſmatical are like to think them-
ſelves fºrewdly hurt, forſooth, by being cut off from that body
which they chooſe not to be of. South's Sermons.
This laſt alluſion rubb’d upon the ſore;
Yet ſeem'd ſhe not to winch, tho' Jhrewdly pain'd. Dryden.
3. With ſtrong ſuſpicion.
Four per cºnt. encreaſes not the number of lenders; as
any man at firſt hearing will ſhrewdly ſuſpect it. Locke.
SHRE'w DNEss. n.ſ. [from ſhrewd.]
1. Sly cunning; archneſs.
- Her garboiles, which not wanted /hrewdneſs of policy too,
did yºu too much diſquiet. Shakeſpeare.
The neighbours round admire his /hrewdneſs,
For ſongs of loyalty and lewdneſs.
2. Miſchievouſneſs; petulance.
sº "...º. ºff (from ſhrew.] Having the qualities of a ſhrew;
oward; Petulantly clamorous.
Mºº you muſt excuſe us;
sº wife is ſhrewiſh when I keep not hours.
". ... [ºn ſhrewſ.j
uſly; frowardly.
H -
nº *y ſºrewiſhly; one would think his mother's
** ſcarce out of him. Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
Swift.
Shakeſpeare.
Petulantly; peeviſhly;
SHR nºw is HN ess. n.ſ.. [from ſhrewiſh j The qualities of a ſhrew;
frowardneſs; pctulance; clamorouſineſs.
I have no gift in /h, civſhneſs,
I am a right maid for my cowardice;
Let her not ſtrike me. Shakeſpeare.
SHRE'w Mouse. m. ſ. [rcreapa, Saxon.] A mouſe of which
the bite is generally ſuppoſed venomous, and to which vulgar
tradition aſſigns ſuch malignity, that ſhe is ſaid to lame the
foot over which ſhe runs. I am informed that all theſe re-
ports are calumnious, and that her feet and teeth are equally
harmleſs with thoſe of any other little mouſe. Our anceſtoſ,
however looked on her with ſuch terrour, that they are
ſuppoſed to have given her name to a ſcolding woman, whom
for her venom they call a ſhrew.
To SHRIEK. v. n. [ſkrieger, Laniſh; ſcricciolare, Italian, )
To cry out inarticulately with anguiſh or horrour; tº
ſcream.
On top whereof ay dwelt the ghaſtly owl,
Shrieking his baleful note. Fa. Queen.
It was the owl that ſhriek'd, the fatal belman
Which gives the ſterneſt good-night. Shakespeare.
Were I the ghoſt that walk'd,
I'd ſtrick, that even your ears ſhould rift to hear me. Shah.
In a dreadful dream
I ſaw my lord ſo near deſtruction,
Then /riek’t myſelf awake. Denham.
Haik / Peace |
At this ſhe ſhriek’d aloud; the mournful train
Eccho'd her grief. Dryden's Knight's Tal.
Why did you ſhriek out? Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
SHRIEK. m. ſ. [ſkrieg, Daniſh; ſtricciº, Italian.] Aninarticu-
late cry of anguiſh or horrour.
Una hearing evermore
His rueful ſhrieks and groanings, often tore
Her guiltleſs garments, and her golden hair,
For pity of his pain.
Time has been my ſenſes wou'd have cool’d,
To hear a night ſhriek, and my fell of hair
Wou'd at a diſmal treatiſe rouſe and ſtir
As life were in’t. Shakeſpeare's Maclath.
The corps of Almon, and the reſt are ſhown,
Shrieks, clamours, murmurs, fill the frighted town. Dryd.
SHRIFT. n. ſ. [rcipt, Saxon.] Confeſſion made to a prieſt.
A word out of uſe.
Off with
Bernardine's head: I will give a preſent ſhrift,
Fa. Qan.
And will adviſe him for a better place. Shakeſpeare.
My lord ſhall never reſt;
I’ll watch him tame, and talk him out :
His bed ſhall ſeem a ſchool, his board a ſhrift. Shakesp.
The duke's commands were abſolute,
Therefore my lord, addreſs you to your ſhrift,
And be yourſelf; for you muſt die this inſtant.
SHRIGHT, for ſhrieked. Spenſer.
SHRILL. [A word ſuppoſed to be made per cnomatºpariam, in
imitation of the thing expreſſed, which indeed it images very
happily.] Sounding with a piercing, tremulous, or vibratory
ſound.
Thy hounds ſhall make the welkin anſwer them,
And fetch ſhrill echoes from the hollow earth. Shakeſpeare:
I have heard
The cock that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and ſhrill ſounding throat
Awake the god of day. Shakeſpeari's Hamlet.
Have I fall'n,
From the dread ſummit of this chalky bourn!
Look up a height, the ſhrill gorg'd lark ſo far
Cannot be ſeen or heard. Shakespeare's K. Lear.
Upſprings the lark,
Shrill voic'd and loud, the meſſenger of morn. Thºmſºn.
To SHRIll. v. n. [from the adjective.] To pierce the car
with ſharp and quick vibrations of found.
The ſun of all the world is dim and dark;
O heavy herſe,
Break we our pipes that ſhrill'd as loud as lark,
O careful verſe. -
Hark how the minſtrels’gin to ſhrill aloud
Their merry muſick that reſounds from far,
The pipe, the tabor, and the trembling crowd
That well agree withouten breach or jar.
A ſhrilling trumpet ſounded from on high,
And unto battle bade themſelves addreſs.
Here, no clarion's ſhrilling note
The muſe's green retreat can pierce;
The grove, from noiſy camps remote,
Is only vocal with my verſe. Fenton's Ode to Lord Gower.
The females round,
Maids, wives, and matrons mix a ſhrilling ſound. Pope.
SHR1'LLY. adv. [from ſhrill.] With a ſhrill noiſe. . ill
Shri'll Ness, n'ſ from ſºil.] The quality of being ſh"
SHRIMP.
Rowe.
Spenſºr.
Spenſºr.
Shakeſpeare.
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H R
º-
****
&amp;
º
§:
º,
--
º
º
º,
SHRIMP. m. ſ. [..ſchrumpe, a wrinkle, German; ſºrympe, Da-
In 11 Il.
1. A ſmall cruſtaceous vermiculated fiſh.
Of ſhell-fiſh there are wrinkles, ſhrimps, crabs. Carew.
Hawks and gulls can at a great height ſee mice on the
earth, and ſhrimps in the waters. Derham.
2. A little wrinkled man; a dwarf. In contempt.
It cannot be, this weak and writhled ſhrimp
Should ſtrike ſuch terrour in his enemies. Shakeſpeare.
He hath found,
Within the ground,
At laſt, no ſhrimp,
Whereon to imp
His jolly club. Ben. johnſºn.
SHRINE, n.ſ. [rcin, Saxon; ſcrinium, Latin.] A caſe in which
ſomething ſacred is repoſited.
You living powers enclos'd in ſtately ſhrine
Of growing trees; you rural gods that wield
Your ſcepters here, if to your cares divine
A voice may come, which troubled ſoul doth yield. Sidney.
All the world come
To kiſs this ſhrine, this mortal breathing ſaint. Shakeſpeare.
Come offer at my ſhrine and I will help thee. Shakesp.
They often plac'd
Within his ſanétu'ry itſelf their ſhrines,
Abominations! and with curſed things
His holy rites profan'd. Milton.
Falling on his knees before her ſhrine,
He thus implor’d her pow'r, Dryden.
Lovers are in rapture at the name of their fair idol; they
laviſh out all their incenſe upon that ſhrine, and cannot bear
the thought of admitting a blemiſh therein. J/atts.
To SHR IN K. v. m. preterite, 1 ſhrunk, or ſhrank; participle,
ſhrunken. [rcnincan, Saxon.]
1. To contračt itſelf into leſs room; to ſhrivel; to be drawn to-
gether by ſome internal power.
But to be ſtill hot ſummer's tantlings, and
The ſhrinking ſlaves of winter. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
I am a ſcribbled form, drawn with a pen
Upon a parchment, and againſt this fire
Do I ſhrink up. Shakespeare’s K. John.
I have not found that water, by mixture of aſhes, will
/hrink or draw into leſs room. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Ill-weav'd ambition how much art thou ſhrunk /
When that this body did contain a ſpirit,
A kingdom for it was too ſmall a bound:
But now two paces of the vileſt earth
Is room enough.
2. To withdraw as from danger.
The noiſe encreaſes,
She comes, and feeble nature now I find
* Shrinks back in danger, and forſakes my mind. Dryden.
Am I become ſo monſtrous, ſo disfigur’d,
That nature ſtands agaſt;
And the fair light which gilds this new made orb,
Shorn of his beams, ſhrinks in. Dryden.
Love is a plant of the moſt tender kind,
That ſhrinks and ſhakes with ev'ry ruffling wind. Granv.
All fibres have a contractile power, whereby they ſhorten;
as appears if a fibre be cut tranſverſly, the ends ſh; ink, and
make the wound gape. A buthnºt.
Philoſophy that touch'd the heav'ns before,
Shrinks to her hidden cauſe, and is no more. Pope.
3. To expreſs fear, horrour, or pain, by ſhrugging, or con-
tracting the body.
There is no particular objećt ſo good, but it may have
the ſhew of ſome difficulty or unpleaſant quality annexed to
it, in reſpect whereof the will may ſhrink and decline it. Hooker.
The morning cock crew loud,
And at the ſound it ſhrunk in haſte away,
And vaniſh’d from our fight. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
I’ll embrace him with a ſoldier's arm,
That he ſhall ſhrink under my courteſy.
When he walks, he moves like an engine,
And the ground ſhrinks before his treading.
4. To fall back as from danger.
Many ſhrink, which at the firſt would dare,
And be the foremoſt men to execute. Daniel's Civil War.
I laugh, when thoſe who at the ſpear are bold
And vent'rous, if that fail them, ſhrink and fear
To endure exile, ignominy, bonds. Milton.
If a man accuſtoms himſelf to ſlight thoſe firſt motions to
good, or ſhrinkings of his conſcience from evil, conſcience will
by degrees grow dull and unconcerned. South's Sermons.
The ſky ſhrunk upward with unuſual dread,
And trembling Tyber div'd beneath his bed. Dryden.
The gold-fraught veſſel which mad tempeſts beat,
He ſees now vainly make to his retreat;
And, when from far the tenth wave does appear,
Shrinks up in ſilent joy, that he's not there. Dryden.
Shakespeare eare.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
S H R
The fires but faintly lick'd their prey,
Then loath'd their impious food, and would have ſhrunk
away.
Dryden.
Fall on: behold a noble beaſt at bay, yden
And the vile huntſmen ſhrink. Dryden.
Inuring children to ſuffer ſome pain, without ſhrinking, is
a way tº gain firmneſs and courage. Locke
What happier natures ſhrini at with affright -
The hard inhabitant contends is right. &gt; Pope
To SHRINK. v. a. participle pe.
To make to ſhrink. Not in uſe.
O mighty Caeſar! d'oſt thou lye ſo low :
Are all thy conqueſts, glories, triumphs,
Shrunk to this little meaſure ?
The ſixth age ſhifts
Into the lean and ſlipper'd pantaloon.
His youthful hoſe well ſav'd, a world too wide
For his ſhrunk ſhank. Shakeſpeare.
ſ If he leſſens the revenue, he will alſo /hrink the neceſ-
ſity.
ſpoils,
Shakeſpeare.
- - Taylºr.
. Keep it from coming too long, leſt it ſhould ſhrink the ºn
in meaſure. Mortimer.
SHRINK m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Corrugation; contračtion into leſs compaſs.
There is, in this, a crack, which ſeems a ſhrink, or con-
traction in the body ſince it was firſt formed. If andward.
2. Contraction of the body from fear or horrour.
This publick death, receiv'd with ſuch a chear,
As not a figh, a look, a ſhrink bewrays
The leaſt felt touch of a degenerous fear. Daniel's Cºv.//ar.
SHRINKER. m. ſ. [from ſhrink.] He who ſhrinks.
ShºwALTY. m.ſ. Corrupted for She'Riffalty, which ſee.
To SHRIVE. v. a. [rcrifan, Saxon.] To hear at confeſſion.
What, talking with a prieſt, lord chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret they do need a prieſt,
Your honour hath no ſhriving work in hand. Shakeſpeare.
He ſhrives this woman,
Elſe ne'er could he ſo long protract his ſpeech. Shakeſp.
If he had the condition of a ſaint, and the complexion of
a devil, I had rather he ſhould ſhrive me than wive me. Shah.
Shrive but their title, and their moneys poize,
A laird and twenty pence pronounc'd with noiſe,
When conſtru’d but for a plain yeoman go2
And a good ſober two pence, and well ſo. Cleaveland.
To SHRI'v E.L. v. n. [ſchrompelen, Dutch..] To contract itſelf
into wrinkles.
Leaves, if they ſhrivel and fold up, give them drink. Evel.
If ſhe ſmelled to the freſheſt noſegay, it would ſhrivel and
wither as it had been blighted. Arbuthnot.
To SHRI'v El. v. a. To contraćt into wrinkles.
He burns the leaves, the ſcorching blaſt invades
The tender corn, and ſhrivels up the blades. Dryden.
When the fiery ſuns too fiercely play,
And ſhrive'd herbs on with'ring ſtems decay.
The wary ploughman, on the mountain's brow,
Undams his watry ſtores. Dryden.
SHRI've R. n.ſ.. [from ſhrive J A confeſſor. -
The ghoſtly father now hath done his ſhrift,
When he was made a ſhriver 'twas for ſhift. Shakeſp.
SHROUD. n. ſ. [rcrub, Saxon.
1. A ſhelter; a cover.
It would warm his ſpirits,
To hear from me you had left Antony,
And put yourſelf under his ſhroud, the univerſal land-
lord. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleop.
By me inveſted with a vail of clouds,
And ſwaddled, as new-born, in ſable ſhroud,
For theſe a receptacle I deſign'd. Sandyt.
The winds
Blow moiſt and keen, ſhattering the graceful locks
Of theſe fair ſpreading trees; which bids us ſeek
Some better ſhroud, ſome better warmth, to cheriſh
Our limbs benumb’d. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
2. The dreſs of the dead; a winding-ſheet.
Now the waſted blands do glow;
Whilſt the ſcreech owl ſcreeching loud,
Puts the wretch that lies in woe
In remembrance of a ſhroud. Shakeſpeare.
3. The ſail ropes. It ſeems to be taken ſometimes for the
ſails.
I turned back to the maſt of the ſhip; there I found my
ſword among ſome of the ſhroud. Sidney.
The viſitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian billows by the top, -
Curling their monſtrous heads, and hanging them
With deafning clamours in the ſlipp'ry ſºroud,
That with the hurley death itſelf awakes.
The tackle of my heart is crackt and burnt; -
And all the ſhrowd, wherewith my life ſhould ſail,
Are turned to one little hair. Shakeſpeare.
24 A A weather-
Paſſ ſhrunk, ſhrank, or ſhrunk.n.
Shakeſpeare. º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H R
S II U
A weather-bcatch veſſel holds
* - Milton.
** he port, tho' ſhroud, and take torn.
Gº. ... ſhroud, ſo dreadful did appear,
a wreck could no proportion bear. Dryden.
- d 'd - - -
Alſº cries of men are mix'd with rattling ſhroudi,
Seas daſh on ſeas, and clouds encounter clouds. Dryden.
He ſummons ſtrait his denizens of air;
The lucid ſquadrons round the ſails repair :
Soft o'er the ſhroºd, aerial whiſpers breathe,
That ſeem'd but zephyrs. Pope.
*To Shroud. v. a. [from the º
ſhelter; to cover from danger.
I. To the your beams I will i. ſafely ſºroud. Fa, Queen.
He got himſelf with his fellows to the town of Mege, in
hope to ſhrºud himſelf, until ſuch time as the rage of the people
were appeaſed. Knolley's Hºl. of the Turkſ.
The governors of Corfu cauſed the ſuburbs, which were
very great, to be plucked down, for fear that the Turks ſhrºud-
ing themſelves in them, ſhould with more caſe beſiege the
Iown. Knoles's Hi/?, of the Turks.
One of theſe trees, with all his young ones, may ſhººd
four hundred horſemen. Kaleigh.
Beſides the faults men commit, with this immediate avowed
aſpect upon their religion, there are others which ſlily ſhroud
themſelves under the ſkirt of its mantle. Decay of Piety.
So Venus, from prevailing Greeks did ſhroud
The hope of Rome, and ſav'd him in a cloud. Wallar.
2. To dreſs for the grave.
If I die before thee, ſhroud me
In one of theſe ſame ſheets. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
The antient Egyptian mummies were ſhrouded in a number
of folds of linen, beſmeared with gums, like ſerecloth. Bacon.
Whoever comes to ſhroud me, do not harm
That ſubtile wreath of hair about mine arm.
3. To clothe; to dreſs.
4. To cover or conceal.
That ſame evening, when all ſhrouded were
In careleſs ſleep, all, without care or fear,
They fell upon the flock. Spenſr.
Under this thick-grown brake we'll ſhroud ourſelves,
For through this land anon the deer will come,
And in this covert will we make our ſtand,
Culling the princi, al. Shakeſpeare's Hen. VI.
Moon, ſlip behind ſome cloud: ſome tempeſt riſe,
And blow out all the ſtars that light the ſkies,
To ſhroud my ſhame.
Thither the loud tumultuous winds reſort,
And on the mountain keep their boiſt’rous court,
That in thick ſhow’rs her rocky ſummit ſhroud,
And darkens all the broken view with clouds.
5. To defend ; to protećt.
To SHROUD. v. m. To harbour; to take ſhelter.
If your ſtray attendance be yet lodg’d,
Or ſhreud within theſe limits, I ſhall know
Ere morrow wake. Milton.
SHRo've T 1D e. }*ſ [from ſhrove, the preterite of ſhrive.]
SHRo'VETUEspa Y. S. The time of confeſſion; the day be-
fore Aſh-wedneſday or Lent, on which anciently they went to
confeſſion.
At ſhrovetide to ſhroving.
SHRUB. m. ſ. [rcribbe, Saxon.]
I. A buſh; a ſmall tree.
Trees generally ſhoot up in one great ſtem or body; and
then at a good diſtance from the earth ſpread into branches;
thus gooſeberries and currans are /* **, oaks and cherries
2IC trees. Locke.
Donne.
Dryden,
Addiſon.
Tuſ, re
He came unto a gloomy glade,
Cover'd with boughs and ſhrub, fºom heav'n's light. Fa. Q,
Th’ humble ſºul and buſh with frized hair." Milton.
All might have been as well bruſhwood and /hrubs. More.
Comedy is a repreſentation of common life, in low ſubjects,
and is a kind of juniper, a ſhrub belonging to the ſpecies of
cedar. Dryd
I’ve liv'd ryaen.
Amidſt theſe woods, gleaning from thorns and Jhrubs
A wretched ſuſtenance. Addison.
2. [A cant word..] Spirit, acid, and ſugar mixed.
SHRU'bby. adj. [from ſhrub.]
1. Reſembling a ſhrub.
Plants appearing weathered, ſhrully and curled, are the
effects of immoderate wet. 4/ortimer’
* Full of ſhrubs; buſhy. ortimer's Huſbandry.
. Gentle villager,
What readieſt Yº...would bring me to that place
9° weſt it riſes from this ſhrubby point. Miſt:
On that cloud-piercing hiſ y p z, ſº 77.
inlimmon, the goats their ſhrubby browze
To S tlaw pendent. Philips.
o SHRUG G. v. n. [ſhric/en, Dutch; to tremble.] To ex-
Preſs horror or diſatisfaction by motion of the ſhoulders or
whole body.
Like a fearful deer that looks moſt about when he CC. Tes
to the beſt feed, with a ſ , u gºng kind of tremor through all
her principal parts, ſhe gave theſe words. Sidney.
The touch of the cold water made a pretty kind of /rº-
ging come over her body like the twinkling of the faireſt
among the fixed ſtars. Sifney,
Le quick, thou wert beſt
To anſwer other buſineſs; ſºrt, ſº thou malice Sha'ſ.
He grins, ſmacks, ſhru's, and ſuch an itch endures,
As prentices or ſchool boys which do know
Of ſome gay ſport abroad, yet dare not go. Dºnne.
! hey grin, they ºrig,
They bow, they ſnarl, they ſcratch, they hug. Swift.
To SH &amp; Co. v. a . To cortračt or draw up.
He/rug his ſhoulders when you talk of ſecurities. A ſºn.
Zealots will ſhrug up their ſhoulders. Bºunt.
He ſhrug’d his ſturdy back,
As if he felt his ſhoulders ake. Hudih rat.
SHR U G. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A motion of the ſhoulders
uſually expreſſing diſlike or averſion.
And yet they ramble not to learn the mode,
How to be dreſt, or how to liſp abroad,
To return knowirgin the Saniſh/ºrug.
As Spaniards talk in dialogues,
Cºf heads and ſhoulders, nods and /rugſ.
Put on the critick's brow, and fit
At Will's, the puny judge ºf wit.
A no!, a ſº ug, a ſcornful ſmile,
With cautiºn us d may ſerve a while.
SHRusk. The preterite and part paſſive of/ºnt.
Leaving the two friends alone. Iſhrunk ſide to the Banquet-
ing houſe where the pićtures were. Sidney.
The wicked ſhrunk for ſcar of him, and all the workers ºf
iniquity were troubled. I 4.ac.alt.
SHRU's KEN. The part, paſſive of ſhirt.
She weighing the decaying plight,
And ſhrunken finews of her choſen knight;
Would not a while her forward curſe purſue. Fa. Queen.
If there were taken ºut of mens minds, vain opinions, it
wºuld leave the minds of a number of men, poor ſhrunken
things, full of melancholy. Bacz7.
To Shu'DDER. v. a. [/juddren, Dutch..] To quake with
fear, or with averſion.
All the other paſſions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts, and raſh embrac'd deſpair,
And ſhudd"ring fear. Sha'ºffeare.
The fright was general; but the female band
With horror ſudd'ring on a heap they run.
I love, -alas ! I ſudder at the name,
My blood runs backward, and my fault'ring tongue
Sticks at the found. Smit'.
Caeſar will ſhrink to hear the wºrds thou utter'ſ,
Cleaveſand.
Hudibras.
Swift.
Dryden.
And ſhudder in the midſt of all his conqueſts. Addison.
Youth's bold courage cools, -
Each ſhudd'ring owns the genius of the ſchools. D neiad.
To SHUFFLE. v. ... [rypeling, Saxon, a buſtle, a tumult...]
I. To throw into diſorder; to agitate tumultuouſly, ſo as that
one thing takes the place of another; to confuſe; to throw
together tumultuouſly.
When the heavens ſhuffle all in one,
The torrid, with the frozen zone,
Then, ſybil, thou and I will greet. Cleaveland.
From a new ſhuffling and diſpoſition of the component
particles of a body, might not nature compoſe a body diſſoluble
in water. * Boyle.
In moſt things good and evil lie ſuffed, and thruſt up to-
gether in a confuſed heap; and it is ſtudy which muſt draw
them forth and range them. South's Sermºn.
When lots are ſº fled together in a lap or pitcher, what
reaſon can a man have to preſume, that he ſhall draw a white
ftone rather than a black. - South's Sermºns.
A glimpſe of moonſhine ſheath'd with red,
A ſhiffid, ſullen and uncertain light -
That dances thro’ the clouds and ſhuts again. Dryden.
Children ſhould not loſe the conſideration of human nature
in the ſhufflings of outward conditions. The more they have,
the better humoured they ſhould be taught to be. Locke.
We ſhall in vain, ſhuffling the little money we have from
one another's hands, endeavour to prevent our wants; decay
of trade will quickly waſte all the remainder. Locke.
Theſe vapours ſoon, miraculous event, º
Shaff'd by chance, and mix’d by accident.
Shuff'd and entang'd in their race, 7
They claſp each other. Blackmore,
He has ſhuffled the two ends of the fºntence together, and
by taking out the middle, makes it ſpeak juſt as º wº
ave it. Zºe bury.
h 'Tis in no wiſe ſtrange that ſuch a one ſhould believe, that
things were blindly ſuffed and hurled about in the wºrld;
that the elements were at conſtant ſtrife with each other. Wºod.
Plackmore.
2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S H U
S H U
r
,
2. To remove, or put by with ſome artifice or fraud.
I can no other anſwer make, but thanks;
And oft good turns
Areſhºff d off with ſuch uncurrent pay. Shakespeare eare.
Her mother,
Now firm for doctor Caius, hath appointed
That he ſhall likewiſe ſhufte her away. Shakespeare .
If any thing hits, we take it to ourſelves; if it miſcarries,
we ſhuffle it off to our neighbours. L’Eſirage.
It was contrived by your enemies, and Jhuffled into the
papers that were ſeiz'd. 1/nydn.
If, when a child is queſtioned for any thing, he perſiſts to
fhºff, it off with a falthood, he muſt be chaſtiſed. Locłe.
3. To ſhake; to diveſt. -
In that ſleep of death, what dreams may come,
When we have ſuffed off this mortal coil,
Muſt give us pauſe. Shakeſpeare.
4. To change the poſition of cards with reſped to each other.
The motions of ſhuffling of cards or caſting of dice, are
very light. - Bacon,
We ſure in vain the cards condemn,
Ouſſºlves both cut and ſhºff'd them. Prior.
5. To form tumultuouſly, or fraudulently.
They ſent forth their precepts to convent them before a
court of commiſſion, and there uſed to ſhuffle up a ſummary
proceeding by examination, without trial or jury. Bacon.
He ſºfted up a peace with the cedar, in which the Bumeli.
ans were excluded. Howel.
To SHUFFLE. v. n.
1. To throw the cards into a new order.
A ſharper both ſhuffles and cuts.
Cards we play
A round or two, when us'd, we throw away,
Jake a freſh pack, nor is it worth our grieving
Who cuts or ſhºes with our dirty leaving. Grarvi le.
2. To play mean tricks; to practiſe fraud; to evade fair queſ-
11 Oil S. f
I myſelf, leaving the fear of heaven on the left hand, and
hiding mine honour in my neceſſity, am fain to ſhuffle. Shakespeare
I have nought to do with that ſhuffling ſect, that doubt
etcrually, and queſtion all things. Glanville's fence.
The crab adviſed his companion to give over ſº ſhing and
doubling, and practiſe good faith. L’d/irange.
It is an unhappineſs that children ſhould be ſo much ad-
dićted to the humour of ſhuffling. L’É/?range.
If a ſteward be ſuffered to run on, without bringing him to
a reckoning, ſuch a ſottiſh forbearance will teach him to
ſhºffe, and ſtrongly tempt him to be a cheat. Sowth.
1 o theſe arguments concerning the novelty of the earth,
there are ſome ſhiffling excuſes made. Burn. Theory ºf the Earth.
Tho' he durſt not directly break his appointment, he made
many a ſhifting excuſe. Arbuthnot's Hiji. ºf John Bull.
3. To ſtruggle; to ſhift.
Your life, good maſter,
Muſt ſhuffle for itſelf.
4. To move with an irregular gait.
Mincing poetry,
'Tis like the forc’d gait of a ſuffing nag.
SHUFF i.e. m. / (from the verb.]
1. The act of diſordering things, or making them take conſu-
ſedly the place of each other.
Is it not a firmer foundation for contentme t, to believe
that all things were at firſt created, and are continually ciſ-
poſed for the beſt, than that the whole univerſe is mere bung-
ling, nothing effected for any purpoſe, but all ill-favouredly
cobied and jumpied together, by the unguided agitation and
rude ſhºffle, of matter. Bentley's Sermons.
2. A trick; an artifice.
The gifts of nature are beyond ali ſhams and ſhuffle. L’Eſir.
SHU’FFLE CAP. m. ſ. [ ſhuffle and cap.] A play at which mo-
nev is ſhaken in a hat.
He loſt his money at chuck farthing, ſuffect, and all-
fours. A, buth ot's Hi/f of john Bull.
SHU FFLER. m.ſ.. [from ſufte.] He who plays tricks or ſhuffles.
SHUFrº. Is G.I.Y. a.º. [from ſhºffle.j With an irregular gait.
i may go ſºftnºy, for 1 was never before walked in
traininels; yet I ſhal, drudge and moil at conſtancy, 'till I
have worn off the hitching in my pace. Dryden.
To SH UN. v. a. [arcunian, Saxon J. To avoid; to decline;
to endeavour to eſcape; to eſchew.
Conſider death in itſelf, and nature teacheth Chriſt to ſhun
Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Shakeſpeare.
it Hooker.
The lark' ſºuns on lofty boughs to build,
Her humble neſt lies ſilent in the field. Jºaº'er.
Birds and beaſts can fly their foe:
So chanticleer, who never ſaw a fox,
Yet fºu'd him as a ſailor/hun, the rocks. Dryden.
Cato will train thee up to great
And virtuous deeds: do but obſerve him well,
1 houl Azia Giisfortunes, or thou'lt learn to bear them. Addiſ
L'E/irange.
*"Slºss. ad [from ſun j Inevitable; unavoid.ble.
Alone he enter'd
The m ral gate of the city, which he painted
With ſºundſ, deſtiny. Shakespeare 's Coriolanur.
To SHUT. v. a. preterite, I/ºut; part, paſſive, ſlut [ſcittan,
Saxon; ſhutten, Dutch J
I. o cloſe ſo as to prohibit ingreſs or regreſs; to make not
open.
Kings ſhall ſhut their mouths at him. Iſaiah lii. 15.
- To a ſtrong tower fled all the men and women, and ſhut
it to them, and gat them up to the top. judge, ix. 1.
We ſee more exquiſitely with one eye ſhut than with both
open ; for that the ſpirits viſual unité more, and become
ſtronger. Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry.
She open'd, but to ſhut
Excell'd her pow'r; the gates wide open flood. Milton.
2. To incloſe; to confine.
Before faith came, we were kept under the law, ſhut
up unto the faith, which ſhould afterwards be revealed.
Gal. iii.
They went in male and female of all fleſh; and the L ra
ſhut him in Gen. vii. 16.
3. To prohibit; to bar, -
Shall hat be ſhut to man, which to the beaſt
Is open Milton.
4. To exclude.
On various ſeas, not only loſt,
But ſhut from ev’ry ſhoar, and barr'd from ev’ry coaſt. Dryd.
5. To contract; not to keep expanded.
Harden not thy heart, nor ſhut thine hand from thy poor
brother. Deut. xv. 7.
6. Tº SHUT cut. To exclude; to deny admiſſion.
Beat in the reed,
The juſter you drive it to ſhut off the rain. Tiffar's Hºſ.
In ſuch a night
To ſhut me out? pour on I will endure. Shakeſpeare.
Wiſdom at one entrance quite ſhºt out. 4/uton.
He in his walls confin'd,
Shut out the woes which he too well divin'd. Dryden’s AFn.
Sometimes the mind fixes itſei, with ſo much earneſtneſs on
the contemplation of ſome objects, that it ſhuts out all other
thoughts. Locke.
7. / o SHUT up. To cloſe; to confine. Up is ſometimes little
more than emphatical.
Thou haſt known my ſoul in adverſities; and not ſhut me
up into the hand of the enemy. Pſalms xxxi. 8.
Woe unto you ſcribes; for you ſhut up the kingdom of hea-
ven againſt men. AMatth. xxiii. 3.
Dangerous rocks ſhut up the paſſage. Raleigh.
What barbarous cuſtoms'
Shºt up a deſart ſhore to drowning men,
And drive us to the cruel ſeas. Dryden's Żneid.
A loſs at ſea, a fit of ſickneſs, are trifles, when we conſi-
der whole families put to the ſword, wretches ſhut up in dun-
geons. Addiſon's Spediator.
His mother ſhut up half the rooms in the houſe, in which
her huſband or ſon had died. dadt on.
Lucullus, with a great fleet, ſhut up Mithridates in Pi—
tany. Arbuthnot on Coins.
8. To SHUT up. To conclude;
The king's a bed,
He is ſhut up in meaſureleſs content. Shakeſp. Macleth.
Altho' he was patiently heard as he delivered his embaſſage;
yet, in the ſhutting up of all, he received no more but an info-
lent anſwer. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
To leave you bleſt, I would be more accurſt,
Than death can make me; for death ends our woes,
And the kind grave ſhu's up the mournful ſcene. Dºyden.
When the ſcene of life is ſhut up, the ſlave will be above
his maſter, if he has acted better. Collier of Envy.
To SHUT. v. n. To be cloſed ; to cloſe itſelf.
SHuT. Participial adjective. Rid; clear; free. - -
We muſt not pray in one breath to find a thief, and in the
next to get ſhut of him. L’Eſtrange.
SHUt. n /. [from the verb.]
1. Cloſe; act of ſhutting. -
I ſought him round his palace, made enquiry
Of all the ſlaves: but had for anſwer, -
That fince the ſhut of evening none had ſeen him. Dryden.
2. Small door or cover. -
The wind gun is charged by the forcible compreſſion of
air, the impriſoned air ſerving, by the help of little fails, ºr
flats within, to ſtop the vents by which it was admitted ſºilſ.
In a very dark chamber, at a round hole, about one third
part of an inch broad, made in the ſhut º 3. window, I
placed a glaſs priſm. Newtºn's Qticº.
There were loſſºt, or ſtopples made for the animal's cars,
that any loud noiſe might awaken it. Ray's Creation.
SHU'TTER. n.ſ.. [from ſºut..]
- that ſhuts, -
I One 2 2. A<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I C
S I C
2. A cover; a door.
The wealthy, d and write
itters born, read and write,
º the ſhutters make it night. Dryden's juven.
Shuttle. n.ſ. [/chieftoele, Dutch; ſkutul, Iſlandick.] The
inſtrument with which the weayºr ſhoots the croſs threads.
I I know life is a /huttle. Shaf. Merry Wives of I/ind ar.
Like ſhuttles through the loom, ſo ſwiftly glide
My feather'd hours. - Sandys.
what curious loom does chance by ev'ning ſpread!
with what fine ſhuttle weave the virgin's thread, {
which like the ſpider's net hangs o'er the mead! Bacºn.
Shuttlecock. n.ſ. [See SH1tt ºf cºck ] A cork ſtuck
with feathers, and beaten backward and forward.
with dice, with cards, with balliards far unfit, -
with ſhuttlecocks miſſeeming manly wit: Hubberd's Tale.
SHY. adj. [ſchºwe, Dutch; ſchiſº, Italian.] .
1. Reſerved; not familiar; not free of behaviour.
She is repreſented in ſuch a ſhy retiring poſture, and covers
her boſom with one of her hands. Addiſ n's Guardian.
What makes you ſo ſhy, my good friend?...There's no body
loves you better than I. Arbuthn. Hiſt. of j lºn Bull.
2. Cautious; wary; chary. - -
I am very ſhy of employing corroſive liquors in the prepa-
ration of medicines. Hoyle.
We are not ſhy of aſſent to celeſtial informations, becauſe
Glanv. S. eſſ.
they were hid from ages.
We grant, although he had much wit,
H' was very ſhy of uſing it,
As being loth to wear it out,
And therefore bore it not about.
3. Keeping at a diſtance; unwilling to approach.
Hudibras.
A ſºy ſellow was the duke; and, I believe, I know the cauſe
Shakeſp. Meaſure for Aſea ure.
The bruiſe impoſthumated, and afterwards turned to a
of his withdrawing.
{tinking ulcer, which made every body ſhy to come near her.
A buthnot's Hiiory of John Hull.
The horſes of the army, having been daily led before me,
were no longer ſhy, but would come up to my very feet, with-
Gulliver's Travels.
out ſtarting.
But when we come to ſeize th' inviting prey,
Like a ſhy ghoſt, it vaniſhes away Norris.
4. Suſpicious; jealous; unwilling to ſuffer near acquaintance.
Princes are, by wiſdom of ſtate, ſomewhat ſhy of their ſuc-
ceſſors; and there may be ſuppoſed in queens regnant a little
proportion of tenderneſs that way more than in kings. I/otton.
I know you ſhy to be oblig'd,
And ſtill more loth to be oblig'd by me. Southern.
S1’BILANT. adj. [ſibilans, Latin.] Hiſling.
It were eaſy to add a naſal letter to each of the other pair
Holaer's Elements of Speech.
of liſping and ſhilant letters.
SIBILATION. m. ſ. [from ſibilo, Latin.] A hiſing found.
Mctals, quenched in water, give a ſibiation or hiſſing found.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A pipe, a little moiſtened on the inſide, maketh a more
ſolemn ſound than if the pipe were dry; but yet with a ſweet
Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
degree of ſibilation or purling.
Si'cAM or e. n.ſ.. [ſicamºrus, Latin.] A tree.
Qf trees you have the palm, olive, and ſcamore. Peacham.
To SICCATE. v. a. [ſiccº, Latin.] To dry.
Siccation. m. ſ. [from ſcate.] The act of drying.
Sicci'Fick, adj. [ſicus and ſo, Latin.] Cauſing drineſs.
Siccity, n.ſ.. [Jiccite, Fr. ſiccital, from ſºccus, Latin.] Dri-
neſs; aridity; want of moiſture.
That which is coagulated by a firy ſiccity will ſuffer coli-
quation from an aqueous humidity, as ſalt and ſugar.
Brown's /ulgar Errours.
Deſpair
Tended the ſick, buſieſt from couch to couch. Milton
A ſpark of the man-killing trade -
Fell ſick. Dryden's Perſ:
Nothing makes a more ridiculous figure in a man's life
than the diſparity we often find in him ſick and well. P.
2. Diſordered in the organs of digeſtion; ill in the ſo.
mach.
3. Corrupted.
What we oft do beſt,
By ſick interpreters, or weak ones, is
Not ours, or not allow'd : what worſt, as oft
Hitting a groſſer quality, is cried up
For our beſt ačt.
4. Diſguſted.
I do not, as an enemy to peace,
Troop in the throngs of military men:
But rather ſhew a-while like fearful war,
To dict rank minds ſick of happineſs,
And purge th' obſtructions, which begin to ſtop
Our very veins of life. Shakespeare eare
He was not ſo ſick of his maſter as of his work L'Éran.
Why will you break the ſabbath of my days, &amp; " -
Now ſick alike of envy and of praiſe Pole.
To Sick. v. m. [from the noun..] To ſicken; to tak: ,
diſeaſe. Not in uſe.
A little time before
Our great grandfire Edward ſick'd and died. Shatſ. HIV.
To S1'ck EN. v. a. [from ſick.]
1. To make ſick; to diſeaſe.
Why ſhould one earth, one clime, one ſtream, one breath,
Raiſe this to fºrength, and ſicken that to death Prior.
2. To weaken ; to impair.
Kinſmen of mine have
By this ſo ſicken'd their eſtates, that never
They ſhall abound as formerly. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
To Sick EN. v. n.
1. To grow ſick; to fall into diſeaſe.
Shakeſp. Henry VIII,
I know the more one ſickens, the worſe he is. Shakespeare.
The judges that ſat upon the jail, and thoſe that attended,
ſickened upon it, and died. Bacon.
Meerly to drive away the time, he ſicken'd,
Fainted, and died; nor would with ale be quicken'd. Mit.
2. To be ſatiated; to be filled to diſguſt.
Though the treaſure
Of nature's germins tumble all together,
Even 'till deſtruction ſicken, anſwer me
To what I aſk you. Shakespeare . Macbeth,
3. To be diſguſted, or diſordered with abhorrence.
The ghoſts repine at violated night,
And curſe th’ invading ſun, and ſicken at the ſight. Dryden.
4. To grow weak; to decay; to languiſh.
Ply'd thick and cloſe, as when the fight begun,
Their huge unwieldy navy waſtes away:
So ſicken waining moons too near the ſun,
And blunt their creſcents on the edge of day. Dryden.
Abſtraćt what others feel, what others think;
All pleaſures ſicken, and all glories ſink. Fºpe.
Si'cKER. adj. [ſicr; Welſh; Jeker, Dutch..] Sure; certain;
run.
Being ſome honeſt curate, or ſome vicar,
Content with little, in condition ſicker.
SI'ck E.R. adv. Surely; certainly.
Sicker thou's but a lazy loord,
And rekes much of thy ſwink,
That with fond terms and witheſs words,
To bleer mine eyes do'ſt think. Senſºr.
Hubbard's Tale.
The ſeaſon ſome attempt to make out from the ſºcity and SICKLE. n.ſ. [rićol, Saxon; ſickel, Dutch, from ſºat, or
drineſs of its fleſh.
and ſiccity is proper.
Sice. n.ſ.. [ſix, French.] The number fix at dice.
y ſtudy was to cog the dice,
And dextrouſly to throw the lucky ſize;
To ſhun ames-ace, that ſwept my ſtakes away. Dryden.
Sich. adj. Such. See Such.
I thought the ſoul would have made me rich;
But now I wote it is nothing ſch;
For either the ſhepherds been idle and ſtill,
And led of their ſheep what they will. Spenſºr's Paſi rals.
SICK. adi, Ireoc, Saxon; ſeck, Dutch.]
1. Afilićted with diſeaſe.
'Tis meet we all go forth,
To view the ſick and feeble parts of France. Shakespeare H. V.
In poiſon there is phyſick; and this news,
º would, had I been well, have made me ſcº,
Where's the ſtoick can his wººth appeaſe,
To ſee his country ſick of Pym's diſeaſe? Cleaveland.
- - Brºwn's Vulgar E. rºurs.
In application of medicaments confider what degree of heat
J/ſeman's Surgery.
eing £3, hath in ſome meaſure made me well. Sºake?.
A Caſſius, I am ſick of many griefs. Shakeſp. jul. Caſar.
*Was ſo vexed, that he fell ſick for Tamar. 2 Saiii.
ſi, ula, Latin.] The hook with which corn is cut; a reaping
hook. -
God's harveſt is even ready for the ſickle, and all the fields
yellow long ago. Speyer on Ireland.
Time ſhould never,
In life or death, their fortunes ſever;
But with his ruſty ſickle mow -
Both down together at a blow. Hudibras.
When corn has once felt the ſickle, it has no more benefit
from the ſunſhine. South's Sermonſ.
O'er whom time gently ſhakes his wings of down:
, Till with his filent ſkil, they are mown. Dryden.
sºs. }n.ſ. [from ſickle..] A reaper.
You ſunburnt ſicklemen, of Auguſt weary,
Come hither from the furrow, and be merry.
Shakespeare.
Their ſicklers reap the corn another ſows. Sandyſ.
SI'ckLINEss. n.ſ.. [from ſickly..] Diſpoſition to ſickneſs; habi-
tual diſeaſe.
Impute
His words to wayward ſicklineſ, and age. Sałºſ. R. II.
8 Next
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I D
S I D
*-
º
!º
Next compare the ſicklineſ, healthfulneſs, and fruitfulneſs
of the ſeveral years. Graunt.
SI'ckly. adv. [from ſick.] Not in health.
We wear our health but ſickly in his life,
Which in his death were perfect. Shakespeare Macbeth.
SI'cKLY. adj. [from ſick.]
1. Not healthy; not ſound; not well; ſomewhat diſordered.
I’m fall’n out with more headier will,
To take the indiſpos'd and ſickly fit
For the ſound man. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Bring me word, boy, if thy lord looks well;
For he went ſickly forth. Shakespeare Julius Caeſar.
A pleaſing cordial, Buckingham,
Is this thy vow unto my ſickly heart.
The moon grows ſickly at the fight of day,
And early cocks have ſummon'd me away.
Time ſeems not now beneath his years to ſtoop,
Nor do his wings with ſickly feathers droop. Dryden.
Would we know what health and eaſe are worth, let us aſk
one that is ſickly, or in pain, and we have the price. Grew.
There affectation, with a ſickly mien,
Shows in her cheek the roſes of eighteen;
Practis'd to liſp, and hang the head aſide,
Faints into airs, and languiſhes with pride. Pope.
When on my ſickly couch I lay,
Impatient both of night and day,
Then Stella ran to my relief. Swift.
2. Faint; weak; languid.
To animate the doubtful fight,
Namur in vain expects that ray;
In vain France hopes the ſickly light
Should ſhine near William's fuller day. Prior.
To Sickly. v. a. [from the adjećtive.] To make diſeaſed;
to taint with the hue of diſeaſe. Not in uſe.
The native hue of reſolution
Is ſickied o'er with the pale caſt of thought.
SI'ck N Ess. n.ſ. [ from ſick. J
1. State of being diſeaſed.
I do lament the ſickneſs of the king,
As loth to loſe him.
2. Diſeaſe; malady.
My people are with ſickneſ; much enfeebled,
My numbers leſſen'd. Shakespeare Henry V.
Himſelf took our infirmities, and bare our ſickneſſes. Mat.
When I ſay every ſickneſs has a tendency to death, I mean
every individual ſickneſ; as well as every kind. //atts.
Truſt not too much your now reſiſtleſs charms;
Thoſe age or ſickneſs ſoon or late diſarms. Pope.
3. Diſorder in the organs of digeſtion.
SIDE. n.ſ. [ribe, Saxon; ſide, Dutch.]
1. The parts of animals fortified by the ribs.,
When two boars with rankling malice meet,
Shakespeare R. III.
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Their gory ſides freſh bleeding fiercely fret. Fairy Queen.
The clamour much,
Ere the ſoft fearful people to the flood
Commit their woolly ſides. Thomſºn.
2. Any part of any body oppoſed to any other part.
The tables were written on both their ſides, on the oneſide
and on the other. Ex. xxxii. 15.
The force of theſe outward ſtreams might well enough
ſerve for the turning of the ſcrew, if it were ſo that both its
Jidºs would equiponderate. //ilkins.
3. The right or left.
4. Margin; edge; verge.
Or where Hydaſpes' wealthy ſide
Pays tribute to the Perſian pride.
oor wretch on ſtormy ſeas to loſe thy life;
For now the flowing tide
Roſcommon.
Had brought the body nearer to the ſide. Drydºn.
The temple of Diana chaſte,
A ſylvan ſcene, with various greens was drawn,
Shades on the ſides, and in the midſt a lawn. Dryden.
I could ſee perſons dreſſed in glorious habits, with garlands
upon their heads, lying down by the ſides of fountains. Addison
5. Any kind of local reſpect.
They looking back, all the eaſtern ſide beheld
Of Paradiſe. Milton.
If our ſubſtance be indeed divine,
And cannot ceaſe to be, we are at worſt
On this ſide nothing. Milton.
6. Party; intereſt; faction; ſe&amp;t.
To take the widow,
Exaſperates, makes mad her ſiſter Goneril;
And hardly ſhall I carry out my ſide,
Her huſband being alive.
Their weapons only
Seem'd on our ſide; but for their ſpirits and ſouls,
This word rebellion, it had froze them up,
As fiſh are in a pond. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Favour, cuſtom, and at laſt number, will be on theſide of
grace. Sprat.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Men he always took to be
His friends, and dogs his enemy;
Who never ſo much hurt had done him,
As his own ſide did falling on him. Hudhras,
Jn the ſerious part of poetry the advantage is wholly on
Chaucer's ſide. Dryden.
That perſon, who fills their chair, has juſtly gained the
eſteem of all ſides by the impartiality of his behaviour. Addison
Let not our James, though foil’d in arms, deſpair,
Whilſt on his ſide he reckons half the fair. Tickell.
Some valuing thoſe of their own ſide, or mind,
Still make themſelves the meaſure of mankind:
Fondly we think we honour merit then,
When we but praiſe ourſelves in other men. Pºpe,
He from the taſte obſcene reclaims our youth,
And ſets the paſſions on the ſide of truth;
Forms the ſoft boſom with the gentleſt art,
And pours each human virtue in the heart. Pope.
7. Any part placed in contradiſtinction or oppoſition to another.
It is uſed of perſons, or propoſitions reſpecting each other.
There began a ſharp and cruel fight, many being ſlain and
wounded on both ſides. Knolles's Hiſt. ºf the Turks.
The plague is not eaſily received by ſuch as continually are
about them that have it: on the other ſide, the plague taketh
ſooneſt hold of thoſe that come out of a freſh air. Bacon.
I am too well ſatisfied of my own weakneſs to be pleaſed
with anything I have written; but, on the other ſide, my rea-
ſon tells me, that what I have long conſidered may be as juſt
as what an º judge will condemn. Dryden.
My ſecret wiſhes would my choice decide;
But open juſtice bends to neither ſide. Dryden.
It is granted on both ſides, that the fear of a Deity doth
univerſally poſſeſs the minds of men. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Two nations ſtill purſu'd
Peculiar ends, on each ſide reſolute
To fly conjunction. Philips.
SIDE. adj. [from the noun..] Lateral; oblique; not direct;
being on either ſide.
They preſume that the law doth ſpeak with all indifferency,
that the law hath no ſide reſpect to their perſons. Hocker.
Take of the blood, and ſtrike it on the two ſide poſts, and
on the upper door poſt of the houſes. Ex. xii. 7.
People are ſooner reclaimed by the ſide wind of a ſurprize,
than by downright admonition. L’Eſtrange.
One mighty ſquadron with a ſide wind ſped. Dryden.
The parts of water, being eaſily ſeparable from each other,
will, by a ſide motion, be eaſily removed, and give way to the
approach of two pieces of marble. Locke.
What natural agent could turn them aſide, could impel
them ſo ſtrongly with a tranſverſe ſide blow againſt that tre-
mendous weight and rapidity, when whole worlds are a fall-
ing. Bentley's Sermons.
He not only gives us the full proſpects, but ſeveral unex-
pećted peculiarities, and ſide views, unobſerved by any painter
but Homer. Pope's Preface to the Iliad.
My ſecret enemies could not forbear ſome expreſſions,
which by a ſide wind reflected on me. Swift.
To Side. v. n. [from the noun.] To take a party; to engage
in a faction.
Vex'd are the nobles who have ſided
In his behalf. Shakeſ Coriolanus.
All riſing to great place is by a winding ſtair; and if there
be factions, it is good to ſide a man's ſelf whilſt riſing, and
balance himſelf when placed. - ... , Bacon.
As ſoon as diſcontents drove men intoſidings, as ill humours
fall to the diſaffected part, which cauſes inflammations, ſo did
all who affected novelties adhere to that ſide. King Charles.
Terms rightly conceived, and notions duly. fitted to them,
require a brain free from all inclination to ſiding, or affection
to'opinions for the authors ſakes, before they be well under-
ſtood. Digby on Bodies.
Not yet ſo dully deſperate
To ſide againſt ourſelves with fate;
As criminals, condemn'd to ſuffer,
Are blinded firſt, and then turn'd over. Hudibraſ.
The princes differ and divide; -
Some followiaw, and ſome with beauty ſide. . . Gº".
It is pleaſant to ſee a verſe of an old post revolting from its
original ſenſe, and ſiding with a modern ſubject. Addiſon.
All ſide in parties, and begin th’ attack. ... Pope,
Thoſe who pretended to be in with the principles ºpºn
which her majeſty proceeded, either abſented themſelves .
the whole cauſe depended, or ſided with * “...i h wift.
The equitable part of thoſe who now ſide againſt t º:
will probably be more temperate. ſide table on ić
Sideboard. n. ſ. [ſide and board.] The º i. h bl
conveniencies are placed º, º º at the Other table.
ſtately ſideboar the wine, - ---&gt;
Tº #ff ...' Milt. Paradiſe Regain'd.
No ſideboard; then with gilded plate were dreſs'd,
No ſweating ſlaves with maſſive diſhes preſs'd. Pºſ.
24 B<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I D
S I G
- ſigns are diſplay'd,
The ſnow white damaſk enfig ...J 1, . ‘ng.
And glitt'ring ſalvers on the ſideboard laid: ing
The ſhining ſidebºard, and the burniſh'd plate,
- iniſters, great Anne, require. -
º º tº: from Carthage to Rome, in ſilver
vº. to the value of 1 1966 l. 1.5 s. 9 d. º
ceeded afterwards by the ſideboard of many **,jºia.
SI'pprox. m.ſ [ſide and box.] Seat for the ladies on the ſide
- heatre.
of "w. round our coaches crowd the white-glov'd beaus
Why bows the fidebox from its inmoſt rows : Pºpe.
SI'defly. m. ſ. An inſe&amp;t. - - - - f
From a rough whitiſh maggot, in the inteſtimum rečtum o
horſes, the /dºſy proceeds. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
To Si'DLE. v. n. [from ſide.J. To go with the body the nar-
roweſt way. - - -
The chaffering with diſſenters is but like opening a few
wickets, and leaving them no more than one can get in at a
time, and that not without ſtooping and ſidling, and ſqueezing
Prior.
- Swift.
his body. - -
"I º very gently and ſaling through the two principal
ſtreets. Gulliver's Travels.
A fellow nailed up maps in a gentleman's cloſet, ſome
ſidling, and others upſide down, the better to adjuſt them. to
the pannels. - Swift.
Si'DeLong, adj. [ſide and long.] Lateral; oblique; not in
front; not direct.
She darted from her eyes a ſidelºng glance,
Juſt as ſhe ſpoke, and, like her words, it flew;
Seem'd not to beg what ſhe then bid me do. Dryden.
The deadly wound is in thy ſoul:
When thou a tempting harlot do'ſt behold,
And when ſhe caſts on thee a ſidelong glance,
Then try thy heart, and tell me if it dance? Dryden.
The reaſon of the planets motions in curve lines is the
attraction of the fun, and an oblique or ſidelong impulſe. Locke.
The kiſs ſnatch'd haſty from the ſidelong maid. Thomſºn.
Si'DeloNG. adv. -
1. Laterally; obliquely; not in purſuit; not in oppoſition.
As if on earth
Winds under ground, or waters, forcing way,
Sid long had puſh'd a mountain from his ſeat, -
Half ſunk with all his pines. - Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
- As a lion, bounding in his way,
With force augmented bears againſt his prey,
Side/ong to ſeize. Dryden's Ceyx and Alcyone:
2. On the ſide.
If it prove too wet, lay your pots ſidelong; but ſhade thoſe
which blow from the afternoon ſun. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Si(DER. m. ſ. See Cider.
Si'DERAL. adj. [from ſidus, Latin.] Starry; aſtral.
Theſe changes in the heav'ns, though ſlow, produc’d
Like change on ſea, and land; ſideral blaſt,
Vapour and miſt, and exhalation hot,
Corrupt and peſtilent! Milton's Paradſ: Left.
The muſk gives
Šure hºpes of racy wine, and in its youth,
Its tender nonage, loads the ſpreading boughs
With large and juicy offspring, that defies
The vernal nippings and cold ſideral blaſts. Philips.
Si'DERATED. adj. [from ſideratus, Latin.] Blaſted; planet
ſtruck.
Parts cauterized, gangrenated, ſiderated, and mortified,
become black; the radical moiſture, or vital ſulphur, ſuffer-
ing an extinction. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Šipkºrios. m. ſ. [ſideratiºn, French ; ſideratio, Latin.]
A ſudden mortification, or, as the common people call it,
a blaſt; or a ſudden deprivation of ſenſe, as in an apo-
plexy.
The contagious vapour of the Very eggs produce a morti-
fication or ſideration in the Parts of plants on which they are
laid. Ray on the Creation.
Si'DESADDle. n.ſ.. I /* and ſaddle.] A woman's ſeat Oil
horſeback.
Si'DESMAN. m. ſ. [ſide and "an.] An aſſiſtant to the church-
warden.
A gift of ſuch goods, made by them with the conſent of
the ſideſmen or veſtry, is void. Ayliffe's Parergon.
SI'DEwAys. }*. [from ſide and way, or wiſe.] Laterally;
SI'd Ewise.
on one ſide.
The fair bloſſom hangs the head
Sideways, as on a dying bed;
And thoſe pearls of dew ſhe wears,
£rove to be preſaging tears. * Milton.
If in the third *Pºriment the image of the ſun ſhould be
*" out into an oblong form, either by a dilatation of every
*}” or by any other caſual inequality of the refractions, the
ſame oblóng image would, by a ſecond refraction made ſide-
*** * drawn out as much in breadin by the like dilatation
º the rays, or other caſual incGuality of the refraction ſide-
ways, Newton's Opt.
S+E GE. n.ſ. [fiege, French.]
1. The act of beſetting a fortified place; a leaguer.
Our caſtle's ſtrength
Will laugh a ſiege to ſcorn: here let them lie,
Till famine eat them up. Shakeſ?. Masletſ,
It ſeemed, by the manner of their Proceeding, that the
Turks purpoſed rather by long firge than by affält to take
the town. Anoles's Hiſtory ºf the Turłº,
The more I ſee pleaſures about me, ſo much more I feel
Torment within me, as from the hateful ſiege
Of contraries. 44iltºn's Paradſ: Lºft, b. ix.
2. Any continued endeavour to gain poſſeſſion.
Beat away the buſy meddling fiend,
That lays ſtrong ſiege unto this wretch', ſoul,
And from his boſom purge this black deſpair. Shakeſ H.VI.
Give me ſo much of your time, in exchange of it, as to
lay an amiable ſiege to the honeſty of Ford's wife. Shakeſp.
Love ſtood the ſiege, and would not yield his breaſt. Dryd.
3. [Siegº, French.] Seat; throne. Obſolère,
Drawing to him the eyes of all around,
From lofty ſiege began theſe words aloud tº found. Fa. &amp;#,
4. Place; claſs; rank. Obſolete.
I fetch my life and being
From men of royal ſize. Shakespeare . Othell.
Your ſum of parts
Did not together pluck ſuch envy from him,
As did that one, and that in my regard
Of the unworthieſt ſege.
5. [Siege, French..] Stool.
It entereth not the veins, but taketh leave of the permeant
Parts, as the mouths of the meſeraicks, and accompanieth the
inconvertible portion unto the ſige. Bºº, Pulg. Errouri.
To Siege. v. a. [/ºger, Fr. from the noun..] To beſiege. A
word not now in uſe.
Him he had long oppreſt with tort,
And faſt impriſoned in ſeged fort. Fairy Queen.
Sºve...". ſ. . [from ſºft.J Hair or lawn ſtrained upon a hoop,
by which flower is ſeparated from bran, or fine powder from
coarſe; a boulter; a ſearce.
Thy counſel
Falls now into my ears as profitleſ,
Shakespeare . Hamlet.
As water in a ſieve. Shakeſpeare.
In a ſieve I'll thither ſail,
And like a rat without a tail,
I'll do—I’ll do—I'll do. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
An innocent found a ſilve, and preſently fell to ſtopping
the holes. L’Eſtrange.
If life ſunk through you like a leaky ſeve,
Accuſe yourſelf you liv'd not while you might. Dryden.
To SIFT. v.a. [ripran, Saxon; ſten, Bj
1. To ſeparate by a fieve.
"...thefting of ſuch favour all that came out could not be
*Pºted to be pure meal, but muſt have a mixture of padar
and bran. //otton.
2. To ſeparate; to part.
When yellow ſands are ſºfted from below,
The glitt'ring billows give a golden ſhow. Dryden.
3. To examine; to try. -
We have ſiſted your objećtions againſt thoſe pre-eminences
royal. Hooker, Preface.
All which the wit of Calvin could from thence draw, by
Jºſting the very utmoſt ſentence and ſyllable, is no more than
that certain ſpeeches ſeem to intimate, that all Chriſtian
churches ought to have their elderſhips. Hocker.
I fear me, if thy thoughts wereſiſted, l
The king thy ſovereign is not quite exempt
From envious malice of thy ſwelling heart. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
As near as I could ſºft him on that argument. Shakeſp.
Opportunity I here have had
To try thee, ſºft thee, and confeſs have found thee
Proof againſt all temptation as a rock - *...*
Of adamant. Milton's Paradiſe Regain d.
One would think, that every member who embraces with
vehemence the principles of either of theſe parties, had
thoroughly ſifted and examined them, and was ſecretly con-
vinced of their preference to º: º reječts, Addiſon.
Si'FTER. m.ſ.. [from ſºft.] He who fifts. ...
SIG was º | .#&amp; for vićtory: Sigbert, famous for
vićtory; Sigward, vićtorious preſerver; Sigard, conquering
temper: and almoſt in the ſame ſenſe are Nicocles, Nicomya-
chus, Nicander, Vićtor, Vićtorinus, Vincentius, &amp;c. Gibſon.
To SIG H. v. n. [rican, ricercan, Saxon ; ſuchten, Dutch..]
To emit the breath audibly, as in grief.
I lov'd the maid I married; never man -
Sigh’d truer breath. Shakeſp, Coriolanuſ,
I'll not be made a ſoft and dull-ey'd fool,
To ſhake the head, relent, and ſigh, and yield -
To Chriſtian interceſſors, Shakespeare March of ſenice.
He ſhed deeply in his ſpirit, and ſaith, why doth this gº-
meration ſeek after a ſign Mar. viii. 1.
For the oppreſſion of the poor, for the ſighing of the need;
ji - Pſ xii. 5.
will I ariſe, º:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I G
S I G
ºº:
º
* *
fº
ºriº
º:
!.
ºt!
º:
---
Happier he,
Who ſeeks not pleaſure through neceſſity,
Than ſuch as once on ſlipp'ry thrones were plac'd,
And chaſing, ſigh to think themſelves are chas'd. Dryden.
The nymph too longs to be alone;
Leaves all the ſwains, and ſighs for one. Prior.
Thus ſighed he away the melancholy night. Arb. and Pope.
To Sig H. v. a. To lament; to mourn. Not in uſe.
Ages to come, and men unborn,
Shall bleſs her name, and / h her fate. Prior.
Sic H. n.ſ.. [from the verb ] A violent and audible emiſſion of
the breath which has been long retained, as in ſadneſs.
Full often has my heart ſwoln with keeping my ſighs im-
priſoned; full often have the tears I drove back from mine
eyes, turned back to drown my heart. Sidney.
Love is a ſmoke rais'd with the fume of ſighs;
Being purg'd, a fire ſparkling in lovers eyes. Shakeſpeare.
What a ſigh is there ! The heart is ſorely charg’d. Shakeſp.
Laughing, if loud, ends in a deep ſigh; and all pleaſures
have a ſting in the tail, though they carry beauty on the
face. Taylor.
In Venus' temple, on the ſides were ſeen
Iſſuing ſight, that ſmok'd along the wall. Dryden.
SIGHT. m. ſ. . [zerſèe, Saxon; ſcht, geſicht, Dutch.]
1. Perception by the eye; the ſenſe of ſeeing.
If bees go forth right to a place, they muſt needs have
ſight. Bacon.
O loſs of ſight, of thee I moſt complain
Blind among enemies, O worſe than chains,
Dungeon or beggary, decrepit age | Milton's Agoniſłes.
Things inviſible to mortal ſight. Milton.
'Tis ſtill the ſame, although their airy ſhape
All but a quick poetick ſight eſcape. Denham.
My eyes are ſomewhat dimiſh grown;
For nature, always in the right,
To your decays adapts my ſight. Swift.
2. Open view; a ſituation in which nothing obſtructs the eye.
Undaunted Hotſpur
Brings on his army, eager unto fight,
And plac'd the ſame before the king in ſight. Daniel.
AEneas caſt his wond'ring eyes around,
And all the Tyrrhene army had in ſight,
Stretch'd on the ſpacious plain from left to right. Dryden.
I met Brutidius in a mortal fright;
He's dipt for certain, and plays leaſt in ſqht. Dryd, juven.
3. Aćt of ſeeing or beholding.
Nine things to ſight required are ;
The pow'r to ſee, the light, the viſible thing,
Being not too ſmall, too thin, too nigh, too far,
Clear ſpace and time, the form diſtinét to bring. Davies.
Mine eye purſu'd him ſtill, but under ſhade
Loſt ſight of him. ... Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv.
What form of death could him affright,
Who unconcern'd, with ſtedfaſt ſight,
Could view the ſurges mounting ſteep,
And monſters rolling in the deep ! Dryden's Horace.
Having little knowledge of the circumſtances of thoſe St.
Paul writ to, it is not ſtrange that many things lie concealed
to us, which they who were concerned in the letter under-
derſtood at firſt ſight. Locke.
4. Notice; knowledge.
It was writ as a private letter to a perſon of piety, upon
an aſſurance that it ſhould never come to any one's ſight but
her own. Wake.
5. Eye; inſtrument of ſeeing.
From the depth of hell they lift their ſight,
And at a diſtance ſee ſuperior light. Dryden.
6. Aperture pervious to the eye, or other point fixed to guide
the eye: as, the ſights of a quadrant.
Their armed ſtaves in charge, their beavers down,
Their eyes of fire ſparkling through ſights of ſteel. Shakeſp.
7. Spe&amp;tacle; ſhow; thing wonderful to be ſeen.
Thus are my eyes ſtill captive to one ſight;
Thus all my thoughts are ſlaves to one thought ſtill. Sidney.
Them ſeem'd they never ſaw a ſight ſo fair
Of fowls ſo lovely, that they ſure did deem
Them heavenly born. Spenſer.
Not an eye .
But is a-weary of thy common ſight,
Save mine, which hath deſir'd to ſee thee more. Shakeſp.
Moſes ſaid, I will turn aſide and ſee this great ſight, why the
buſh is not burnt. Ex. iii. 3.
I took a felucca at Naples to carry me to Rome, that I
might not run over the ſame ſights a ſecond time. Addiſon.
Not proud Olympus yields a nobler ſight,
Though gods aſſembled grace his tow'ring height,
Than what more humble mountains offer here,
Where, in their bleſfings, all thoſe gods appear. Pope.
Before you paſs th’ imaginary ſights
Of lords and earls, and dukes and garter'd knights,
While the ſpread fan o'erſhades your cloſing eyes,
Then give one flirt, and all the viſion flies. Pope.
7
Sighted, adj. [from ſºlº! Seeing in a particular manner,
It is uſed only in compoſition, as £uic{/ghted, ſhortſighted.
As they might, to avoid the weather, pull the joints of the
coach up cloſe, ſo they might put each end down, and remain
as † and openſºred as on horſeback. Sidney.
d ...; *...*y quick ſighted in diſcerning difficulties,
sº i. very ſlow in maſtering them. Claren.
neſs of ſight. - §# #. º /ght and full] Perſpicuity; clear-
But ſtill, although we fail of perſea ri
eót rightful
Seek we to tame theſe childiſh ſº.;º neſs,
Let us not wink, though void of ureſt ſigh -
SI'GHTless. adj. foºj Pureſt ſightfulneſs. Sidney.
1. Wanting ſight; blind.
The latent tracts, the giddy heights ex l
Of all who blindly cº º J ...? ore,
2. Not ſightly; offenſive to the eye; unpleaſing to look at
Full of unpleaſing blots and fightlift ſtains,
Patch'd with foul moles, and eye-offending marks. Shakespeare
Si'ghtLY. adj. [from ſight.j Pleaſing to the eye; ſtriking to
the view.
It lies as ſightly on the back of him,
As great Alcides ſhews upon an aſs. Shakeſp. K. john.
Their having two eyes and two ears ſo placed, is more
fghtly and uſeful. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
A great many brave ſightly horſes were brought out, and only
one plain nag that made ſport. L’Eſtrange.
We have thirty members, the moſt ſightly of all her majeſty's
, ſubjects: we eleēted a preſident by his height. Addiſon.
Sigil. n.ſ. [ſgillum, Latin.] Seal.
orceries to raiſe th' infernal pow'rs,
And ſºil fram'd in planetary hours. Dryd. Knight's Tal.
SiGN. n.ſ.. [ſigne, French; ſignum, Latin.]
1. A token of any thing; that by which any thing is ſhown.
Signs muſt reſemble the things they ſignify. Hooker.
Signs for communication may be contrived from any variety
of objects of one kind appertaining to either ſenſe." Hºdž.
To expreſs the paſſions which are ſeated in the heart by
Qutwardſºns, is one great precept of the painters, and very
difficult to perform. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
When any one uſes any term, he may have in his mind a
determined idea which he makes it the ſign of, and to which
he ſhould keep it ſteadily annexed. Locke.
2. A wonder; a miracle.
If they will not hearken to the voice of the firſt ſign, they
will not believe the latter ſign. Ex. iv. 8.
Cover thy face that thou ſee not; for I have ſet thee for a
fgn unto Iſrael. Ezek. xii. 6.
Compell'd by ſigns and judgments dire. Milton.
3. A pićture hung at a door, to give notice what is ſold within:
I found my miſs, ſtruck hands, and pray'd him tell,
To hold acquaintance ſtill, where he did dwell;
He barely nam'd the ſtreet, promis'd the wine;
But his kind wife gave me the very ſign. Bonne.
Underneath an alehouſe’ paltry ſign. Shakeſp. H. VI.
True ſorrow's like to wine,
Pºpe.
That which is good does never need aſgn. Suckling:
Wit and fancy are not employed in any one article ſo much
as that of contriving ſigns to hang over houſes. Swift.
4. A monument; a memorial.
The fire devoured two hundred and fifty men, and they
became a ſign. Num. xxvi. 10.
5. A conſtellation in the zodiack.
There ſtay until the twelve celeſtial ſigns
Have brought about their annual reckoning. , Shakeſpeare.
Now did the ſign reign, and the conſtellation was come,
under which Perkin ſhould appear. Bacon's Henry VII.
After ev'ry foe ſubdu'd, the ſun
Thrice through the ſigns his annual race ſhall run. Dryden.
6. Note of reſemblance.
7. Enſign.
The enſign of Meſfiah blaz'd,
Aloft by angels borne, his ſign in heaven. Milton.
8. Typical repreſentation; ſymbol. - a- - -
The holy ſymbols or ſigns are not barely ſignificative; but
what they repreſent is as certainly delivered to us as the ſym-
bols themſelves. Brerewood.
9. A ſubſcription of one's name: as, a ſgn manual.
To SIGN. v. a. [ſigno, Latin.]
1. To mark. - - -
Youſign your place and calling in full ſeeming
With meekneſs and humility; but your heart
Is cramm'd with arrogancy. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
2. [Signer, French.] To ratify by hand or ſeal.
Be pleas'd to ſign theſe papers: they are all &gt;
Of great concernſ Dryden s Cleomenes.
3. To betoken; to fignify; tº repreſent typically.
The ſacraments and ſymbols are juſt ſuch as they ſeem ;
but becauſe they are made tº be ſigns of a ſecret myſtery, they
receive the names of what themſelves deſign. . 3|aylor.
SIGNAL. n.ſ.. [ſignal, French; Jennale, Spaniſh ) Notice
given by a ſign; a ſign that gives notice. The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I G.
S I G
The weary ſun hath made golden ſet,
by the bright track of his firy car,
à. %. of º goodly day to-morrow. Shakespeare. R. III.
ediwning day began to ſpring,
As ºº §: with clamours ring. Dryden.
Sional. adj. [Jºnal, French.] Eminent; memorable; re-
mº: eflecmed more by the parliament, for theſºnal acts
of cruelty committed upon the Iriſh. Clarendon.
The Thames frozen twice in one year, ſo as men to walk
on it, is a very ſignal accident. - Swift.
Signality. n.ſ.. [from ſignal.] Quality of ſomething re-
markable or memorable. - - -
Of the ways whereby they enquired and determined its ſig-
mality, the firſt was natural, ariſing from phyſical cauſes. Brºwn.
It ſeems a ſignality in providence, in erecting your ſociety in
ſuch a juncture of dangerous humours. , Glamº; Sceſ. Prof.
To Signalize. v. a. [ſignaler, French.j To make eminent;
to make remarkable. -
Many, who have endeavoured to ſignalize themſelves by
works of this nature, plainly diſcover that they are not ac-
quainted with the moſt common ſyſtems of arts and ſciences.
Addiſon's Speciator.
Some one eminent ſpirit, having ſignalized his valour and
fortune in defence of his country, or by the practice of popu-
lar arts at home, becomes to have great influence on the
people. - Swift.
Siſon Ally. adv. [from ſignal.] Eminently; remarkably 5
memorably.
Perſons ſignally and eminently obliged, yet miſſing of the
utmoſt of their greedy deſigns in ſwallowing both gifts and
giver too, inſtead of thanks for received kindneſſes, have be-
took themſelves to barbarous threatnings. South's Sermons.
SIGNA'tion. n.ſ.. [from ſigno, Latin.]. Sign given; act of
betokening.
A horſeſhoe Baptiſta Porta hath thought too low a ſigna-
tion, he raiſed unto a lunary repreſentation. Brown.
S1'GNATURE. m. ſ. [ſignature, Fr. ſºnatura, from ſignº, Lat.]
1. A ſign or mark impreſſed upon anything; a ſtamp; a mark.
The brain being well furniſhed with various traces, ſigna-
tures, and images, will have a rich treaſure always ready to
be offered to the ſoul. JWatts.
That natural and indelible ſignature of God, which human
ſouls, in their firſt origin, are ſuppoſed to be ſtampt with,
we have no need of in diſputes againſt atheiſm. Bentley.
Vulgar parents cannot ſtamp their race
With ſignatures of ſuch majeſtick grace. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. A mark upon any matter, particularly upon plants, by which
their nature or medicinal uſe is pointed out.
All bodies work by the communication of their nature, or
by the impreſſion and ſignatures of their motions: the diffuſion
of ſpecies viſible, ſeemeth to participate more of the former,
and the ſpecies audible of the latter. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Some plants bear a very evident ſignature of their nature
and uſe. 41ore again/? Atheiſm.
Seek out for plants, and ſignatures,
To quack of univerſal cures. Hudibras.
Herbs are deſcribed by marks and ſignatures, ſo far as to
diſtinguiſh them from one another. Baker on Learning.
3. Proof; evidence. &lt;&gt;
The moſt deſpicable pieces of decayed nature are curiouſly
wrought with eminent ſignatures of divine wiſdom. Ganj.
Some rely on certain marks and ſignatures of their election,
and others on their belonging to ſome particular church or
fe&amp;t. - Rogers's Sermons.
4. [Among printers.] Some letter or figure to diſtinguiſh dif-
ferent ſheets.
'r a ,
SºurisT. n.ſ [from ſignature.] One who holds the
doćtrine of ſignatures.
. Signaturiſts ſeldom omit what the ancients delivered, draw-
ing unto inference received diſtinétions. Brown
Si'GNET. m. ſ. [ſignette, French.] A ſeal -
the ſeal-manual of a king. J eal commonly uſed for
I've been bold,
For that I knew it the moſt gen'ral way,
To them to uſe your ſignet and your name. Shaloſ. 7,
Here is the hand and ſeal of j." you ...ſº
racier, I doubt not, and the ſignet. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Meaſ.
Give thy ſignet, bracelets, and ſtaff. Gen. xxviii. 8.
He delivered him his private ſignet. Kºi.
He knew my pleaſure to diſcharge his bands: -
Proof of my life my royal 6,
Yet ſtill lº' y oya ſignet made,
The impreſſion of a fgnet ring.
SIGNIFIcANce. c
SIGNI'FIcANcy. {n-f [from ſniff.]
I. Pºs, ºf ſignifying; meaning.
by . ***nſible expreſſion of the notions of the mind
by conſ º: of utterance of voice, uſed as ſigns, having
y If . everal determinate ſignificancies. Holder.
takes ... he intends it for the honour of another, he
Y by his words theſignificance of his ačtion. Stillingſ.
Dryden’s Aurengzebe.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. Force; energy; power of impreſſing the mind.
The clearneſs of conception and expreſſion, the boldneſs
maintained to majeſty, the ſignificancy and found of words,
not ſtrained into bombaſt, muſt eſcape our tranſient view upon
the theatre. Dryden.
As far as this duty will admit of privacy, our Saviour hath
enjoined it in terms of particular ſignificancy and force. Alterb.
I have been admiring the wonderful ſignificancy of that word
perſecution, and what various interpretations it hath ac-
quired. Swift.
3. Importance; moment; conſequence.
How fatal would ſuch a diſtinction have proved in former
reigns, when many a circumſtance of leſs ſignificancy has been
conſtrued into an overt ačt of high treaſon f Addiſon.
SIGNIFICANT. adj. [ſignifiant, Fr. ſignificans, Latin.]
1. Expreſſive of ſomething beyond the external mark.
Since you are tongue-ty'd, and ſo loth to ſpeak,
In dumb ſignificants proclaim your thoughts. Shakespeare . H. VI.
2. Betokening; ſtanding as a ſign of ſomething.
It was well ſaid of Plotinus, that the ſtars were ſignificant,
but not efficient. Raiºh.
3. Expreſſive or repreſentative in an eminent degree; forcible to
impreſs the intended meaning. -
Whereas it may be objected, that to add to religious duties
ſuch rites and ceremonies as are ſignificant, is to inſtitute new
ſacraments. Hooker.
Common life is full of this kind of ſºn ficant expreſſions,
by knocking, beckoning, frowning, and pointing; and dumb
perſons are ſagacious in the uſe of them. Holder on Speech.
The Romans joined both devices, to make the emblem the
more ſignificant; as, indeed, they could not too much extol the
learning and military virtues of this emperor. Addison.
4. Important; momentous. A low word.
Signi'FicAN fly. adv. [from ſignificant J With force of ex-
preſſion.
Chriſtianity is known in Scripture by no name ſo ſigniff-
cantly as by the ſimplicity of the Goſpel. South's Sermons.
SIGNIFIcA'tion. n.ſ.. [ſignification, French; ſignificatio, Latin;
from ſºnify. J
1. The act of making known by ſigns.
A lye is properly a ſpecies of injuſtice, and a violation of
the right of that perſon to whom the falſe ſpeech is directed;
for all ſpeaking, or ſignification of one's mind, implies an act
or addreſs of one man to another. South.
2. Meaning expreſſed by a ſign or word.
An adjective requireth another word to be joined with him,
to ſhew his ſignificatiºn. Accidence.
Brute animals make divers motions to have ſeveral ſignifica-
tions, to call, warn, cheriſh, and threaten. Holder.
SIGNI'Ficative. adj. [ſignificatſ, Fr. from ſigniff.]
1. Betokening by an external ſign.
The holy ſymbols or ſigns are not barely ſignificative, but
what by divine inſtitution they repreſent and teſtify unto our
ſouls, is truly and certainly delivered unto us. Brerewººd.
2. Forcible; ſtrongly expreſſive. -
Neither in the degrees of kindred they were deſtitute, ºf
ſignificative words; for whom we call grandfather, they called
ealdfader; whom we call great-grandfather, they called third-
fader. Camden' Remainſ.
SIGNI'ficatory. n.ſ.. [from ſigniff.] That which ſignifies
or betokens. -
Here is a double ſignificatory of the ſpirit, a woºd and a
ſign. + Toyºr.
To SIGNIFY. v. a. [ſºnifier, French; ſignific, Latind
1. To declare by ſome token or ſign.
The maid from that ill omen turn'd her eyes,
Nor knew what ſignify'd the boding ſign,
But found the §. &amp; Dºdº.
Thoſe parts of nature, into which the chaos was divided,
they ſignified by dark and obſcure names; as the pig",
tarus, and oceanus. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
2. To mean ; to expreſs.
Life's but a walking ſhadow; a poor player,
That ſtruts and frets his hour upon the ſtage,
And then is heard no more It is a tale,
Told by an ideot, full of ſound and fury,
sº nothing! Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Stephano, ſignify
Within the houſe your miſtreſs is at hand. shaftarº.
3. To import; to weigh. This is ſeldom uſed but in"&amp;"
tively, what ſignific, 3 or with much, little, or nºtº: !
Though he that fins frequently, and repents ſº
gives reaſon to believe his repentances before God ſºnſ
nothing; yet that is nothing to us. - ºft
Iłżat ſignifie, the ſplendor of courts, conſidering the ſlavi
attendances that go along with it? L Eſrang!.
He hath one way more, which although it /gniff little to
men of ſober reaſon, yet unhappily hits the ſuſpicious humouſ
of men, that governors have a deſign to impoſe. Till tſon.
If the firſt of theſe fail, the power of Adam, were it never
ſo great, will ſigniff nothing to the preſent ſocieties in .
world. - #:
9
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
S I L
S I L
of Wº: -
º What ſignifies the people's conſent in making and repealing
lº. laws, if the perſon who adminiſters hath no tie. Swift.
º 4. To make known.
º I'll to the king, and ſºnify to him,
* That thus I have reſign'd to you my charge. Shakespeare R. III.
º He ſent and ſgnified it by his angel unto John. Rev. i. 1.
º The government ſhould ſignify to the proteſtants of Ireland,
.* that want of ſilver is not to be remedied. Swift.
his: To S1'GNIFY. v. m. To expreſs-meaning with force.
jha, If the words be but comely and ſignifying, and the ſenſe
s gentle, there is juice; but where that wanteth, the language is
º thin. - - Ben. johnſon.
- Si'GNiory. m. ſ. [ſeignoria, Italian.] Lordſhip; dominion.
* If ancient ſorrow be moſt reverent,
it. " Give mine the benefit of ſigniory,
And let my griefs frown on the upper hand. Shakeſ R. III.
At that time -
hrough all the ſigniories it was the firſt,
nd Proſpero the prime duke. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
º: The earls, their titles and their ſigniories
Tº muſt reſtore again. Daniel's Civil War.
y
º brave progenitors, by valour, zeal,
º Gain'd thoſe high honours, princely ſigniories,
º , And proud prerogatives. Iſºft.
º Signpost. n.ſ.. [ſign and poſt.] That upon which a ſign hangs.
º He ſhould ſhare with them in the preſerving
º A ſhed or ſignpoſt. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
º This noble invention of our author's hath been copied by ſo
º many ſignpoſt dawbers, that now 'tis grown fulſome, rather
º by their want of ſkill than by the commonneſs. Dryden.
Si'KER. adv. The old word for ſure, or ſurely. Spenſer.
SI(KERNess. n.ſ.. [from ſiker.] Sureneſs; ſafety.
SI'l ENce. h. ſ. [filence, French; ſilentium, Latin.]
º 1. The ſtate of holding peace.
- v Unto me men gave ear, and waited and kept ſilence at my
counſel. job xxix. 21.
I ſuffer not a woman to teach, nor to uſurp authority over
the man, but to be in ſilence. 1 Tim. ii. 12.
Firſt to himſelf he inward filence broke. Milton.
2. Habitual taciturnity; not loguacity.
I think the beſt grace of wit will ſhortly turn into ſilence,
And diſcourſe grow commendable in none but parrots. Shakespeare
3. Secrecy.
4. Stilneſs; not noiſe.
Here all their rage, and ev'n their murmurs ceaſe,
And ſacred ſilence reigns, and univerſal peace.
5. Not mention.
Thus fame ſhall be atchiev’d,
And what moſt merits fame in ſilence hid.
SI'lenc E. interj. An authoritative reſtraint of ſpeech.
Sir, have pity; I'll be his ſurety.—
—Silence : one word more
Shah make me chide thee, if not hate thee. Shakeſpeare.
*:::: To S1 LENCE. v. a. [from the noun J. To ſtill; to oblige to
* - hold peace.
We muſt ſuggeſt the people, that tos pow'r
He wou'd have made them mules, ſilenc'd their pleaders, and
Diſpropertied their freedoms. Shakeſpeare.
The ambaſſador is ſilenc'd. Shakeſpeare's Hen. VIII.
Silence that dreadful bell; it frights the iſle
From her propriety. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
." This paſſed as an oracle, and ſilenced thoſe that moved
º, the queſtion. Bacon's Hen. VII.
Thus could not the mouths of worthy martyrs be ſilenced,
who being expoſed unto wolves, gave loud expreſſions of their
faith, and were heard as high as heaven. Brown's Wulgar Err.
This would ſilence all further oppoſition. Clarendon.
Since in dark ſorrow I my days did ſpend,
I could not ſilence my complaints.
Theſe dying lovers, and their floating ſons,
Suſpend the fight and ſilence all our guns. J/aller.
Had they duly conſidered the extent of infinite knowledge
and power, theſe would have ſilenced their ſcruples, and they
had adored the amazing myſtery. Rogers's Sermons.
If it pleaſe him altogether to ſilence me, ſo that I ſhall not
only ſpeak with difficulty, but wholly be diſabled to open my
mouth, to any articulate utterance ; yet I hope he will give
me grace, even in my thoughts, to praiſe him. J/ake.
The thund’rer ſpoke, nor durſt the queen reply ;
A reverend horror ſilenc'd all the ſky. Pope's Iliad.
S1'LENT. adj. [ſilens, Latin.]
1. Not ſpeaking; mute.
O my God, I cry in the day time, and in the night ſea-
ſon I am not ſilent. Pſalms xxii. 2.
Silent, and in face
Confounded long they ſat as ſtricken mute. Milton.
Be not ſilent to me: leſt if thou be ſilent, I become like
thoſe that go down into the pit. Pſalms xxviii. I.
2. Not talkative ; not loquacious.
Ulyſſes, adds he, was the moſt eloquent and moſt ſilent of
men; he knew that a word ſpoken never wrought ſo much good
as a word conceal’d, Notes on the Odyſſey.
Pºpe.
Milton.
-&gt;
Denham.
.
3. Still ; having no noiſe. -
Pºp night dark night, the ſent of the night,
The time of night when Troy was ſet on fire,
The time when ſcreech-owls Cry, and ban-dogs howl. Shakespeare
Now is the pleaſant time,
The cool,
the ſilent, ſave where fil -
To the night-warblin. bird. re ſilence yields
4. Wanting efficacy. I think an Hebraiſin.
Second and inſtrumental cauſes, together with nature itſelf.
without that operative faculty which God gave them, would
Milton.
become ſilent, virtueleſ, and 3 - ſo),”, H,
The ſun to me is dark, ead Raleigh s Hiſtory.
And ſilent as the moon, -
When ſhe deſerts the night,
Hid in her vacant interlunar CaVe. Miltºn.
5. Not mentioning.
This new created world, whereof in hell
Fame is not ſent.
Si'LENTLY. adv. [from ſilent.]
1. Without ſpeech.
When with one three nations join to fight,
They ſilently confeſs that one more brave.
For me they beg, each ſlenty
Pemands thy grace, and ſeems to watch thy eye.
2. Without noiſé.
You to a certain vićtory are led;
Your men all arm'd ſtand ſently within.
3. Without mention.
The difficulties remain ſtill, till he can ſhow who is meant
by right heir, in all thoſe caſes where the preſent poſſeſſor hath
ho ſon: this he ſilently paſſes over. Locke.
Silicious. adj. [from cilitium.] It ſhould be therefore written
cilicious. Made of hair. -
The ſilicious and hairy veſts of the ſtrióteſt orders of friars,
derive their inſtitution #. St. John and Elias. Brown.
Siliculose. adj. [ſilicula, Latin.] Huſky; full of huſks, Diä.
SILI'GINose, adj. [ſiliginºſus, Latin.] Made of fine wheat. Dići.
S 1'LIQUA. m. ſ. [Latin J
1. [With gold finers.] . A carat of which ſix make a ſcruple.
2. [Silique, French, with botaniſts.] The ſeed-veſſel, huſk, cod,
or ſhell of ſuch plants as are of the pulſe kind. Dić.
S1'LIQUose. }* [from ſiliqua, Latin.] Having a pod, or
SI'liquous. capſula. . . .
All the tetrapetalous ſliga'ſ plants are alkaleſcent. Arbath.
SILK. n.ſ. [reole, Saxon.]
1. The thread of the worm that turns afterwards to a butterfly.
The worms were hallow'd that did breed the ſilk;
And it was dy'd in mºmmy, which the ſkilful
Conſerv'd of maiden's hearts. Shakeſpeare'. Othell.
2. The ſtuff made of the worms thread. -
Let not the creaking of ſhoes, or ruſtling of ſilks betray
thy poor heart to woman. Shakespeare.
He cauſed the ſhore to be covered with Perſian ſilk for
him to tread upon. . Knolles.
Without the worm, in Perſian ſilk; we ſhine. Waler.
S1’LKEN. adj. [from ſilk.] w
1. Made of ſi'k.
Men counſel and give comfort to that gricf
Which they themſelves not feel; but taſting it,
Their counſel turns to paſſion, which before
Would give preceptial medicine to rage;
Fetter ſtrong madneſs in a ſilken thread;
Charm ach with air, and agony with words.
Now, will we revel it
With ſilken coats, and caps, and golden rings. Shakespeare.
She weeps, -
And words addreſs'd ſeem tears diſſolv’d,
Wetting the borders of her ſilken veil.
2. Soft ; tender.
Full many a lady fair, in court full oft
Beholding them, him ſecretly envide,
And wiſht that two ſuch fans, ſo ſilken ſoft,
And golden fair, her love would her provide.
All the youth of England are on fire,
And ſilken dalliance in the wardrobe lies. Shakespeare. Hen. V.
For then the hills with pleaſing ſhades are crown'd,
And ſleeps are ſweeter on the ſºken ground. Dryden.
Dreſs up virtue in all the beauties of oratory, and you will
find the wild paſſions of men too violent to be reſtrained by
ſuch mild and ſilken language. J/atts's Improv. ºf the A4ind.
3. Dreſſed in ſilk. - - - - - - -
Shall a beardleſs boy,
A cocker'd, ſilken wanton, brave our fields,
And fleſh his ſpirit in a warlike ſoil,
Mocking the air with colours idly ſpread,
And find no check : Shakeſpeare's King jºhn.
Silk Merce R. n.ſ.. [ſilk and mercer.] A dealer in ſilk. . .
SilkweA’ver. n.ſ. (ſilk and weaver.] One whoſe trade is
to weave ſilken ſtuffs. - - . . .
True Engliſh hate your monſieurs paltry arts; ,
For you are all ſilk-weavers in your hearts. Dryden.
The Chineſe are ingenious ſilk-weavers. ///atts.
24 C Si'Lkwor M,
Milton.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Sbake?rare.
Milton.
Spenſºr.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I L
s I M
- : [/ſ; and wºrm.J. The worm that ſpins ſk.
º the green of whole countries, and ſilk-
worms devour leaves ſwiftly. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtºry.
Broad were the banners, and of ſnowy hue,
A purer web the ſilk-worm never drew. Drydºn.
SI'lky adj. [from /*.]
1. Made of ſilk.
. Soft ; pliant. - -
2. CO #. kind of knaves, in plainneſs,
Harbour more craft, and º: corrupter ends
han twenty ſilky ducking obſervants, * -
#. .. duties nicely. Shakeſpeare’s K. Lear.
Sill. n. ſ. [ryl, Sax. ſºil, French ; ſullº, Dutch ; ſugar, to
found, Gothick.] The timber or ſtone at the foot of the door.
The farmer's gooſe,
Grown fat . and fitting ſtill,
Can ſcarce get o'er the barn-door/ill: -
And hardly waddles forth. - Swift.
SI'llabub. n.ſ.. [This word has exerciſed the etymolºgiſts.
Minſhºw thinks it corrupted from /willingballes. famius
omits it. Henſhaw, whom Skinner follows, deduces it from
the Dutch ſui, a pipe, and buº, a paunch ; bºcauſe ſila-
jul, are commonly drunk through, a ſpout, out of a jug with
alarge belly. It ſeems more probably derived from ſil, in old
Engliſh vinegar, eſil a bouc, vinegar fºr the mouth, vinegar
made pleaſant.J. Curds made by milking upon vinegar.
Joan takes her neat rubb'd pail, and now
She trips to milk the ſand-red cow ; .
Where, for ſome ſturdy foot-ball ſwain,
Joan ſtrokes a ſillabub or twain. Wºtton.
A feaſt,
By ſome rich farmer's wife and ſiſter dreſt,
Might be reſembled to a ſick man's dream,
Where all ideas huddling run ſo faſt, -
That ſlabub, come firſt, and ſoups the laſt. King.
SI'llily. Adv. [from ſily.] In a ſilly manner; ſimply; fooliſhly.
I wonder, what thou and I
Did, till we lov’d were we not wean'd till then,
But ſuck'd on childiſh pleaſures ſillily P
Or ſlumber'd we in the ſeven ſleepers den 2 Donne.
We are caught as ſilly as the bird in the net. , L'Eſtrange.
Do, do, look ſillily, good colonel; 'tis a decent melan-
choly after an abſolute defeat. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
SI'llis ess. n.ſſfrom ſilly..] Simplicity; weakneſs; harmleſs folly.
The ſlyneſ of the perſon does not derogate from the dig-
nity of his charaćter. L'Eſtrange.
SI'lly, adj. [ſelig, German. Skinner.]
1. Harmleſs; innocent; inoffenſive ; plain; artleſs.
2. Weak; helpleſs.
- After long ſtorms,
In dread of death and dangerous diſmay,
With which my ſilly bark was toſſed fore,
I do at length deſcry the happy ſhore. Spenſer.
3. Fooliſh; witheſs.
Perhaps their loves, or elſe their ſheep,
Was that did their ſilly thoughts ſo buſy keep. Milton.
The meaneſt ſubjects cenſure the ačtions of the greateſt
prince; the ſillieſ! ſervants, of the wiſeſt maſter. Temple.
I have no diſcontent at living here; beſides what ariſes
from aſily ſpirit of liberty, which I reſolve to throw off. Swift.
Such parts of writings as are ſtupid or ſilly, falſe or miſta-
ken, ſhould become ſubjećts of occaſional criticiſm. //atts.
Silly How. m. ſ. [Perhaps from relig, happy, and people, the
head..] The membrane that covers the head of the foetus.
Great conceits are raiſed, of the membranous covering
called the ſillyhow, ſometimes found about the heads of chil-
dren upon their birth. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Silt. n.ſ. Mud; ſlime.
Several trees of oak and fir ſtand in firm earth below
the moor, near Thorny, in all probability covered by inunda-
tion, and theſilt and mooriſhearth exaggerated upon them. Hale.
Sºlva N. adj. [from ſilva, Latin.] Woody; full of woods.
. . Betwixt two rows of rocks, a ſilvan ſcene
Appears above, and groves for ever green. Dryden.
Si’iyer. n: ſ [reolpen, Saxon; ſilver, Dutch.]
1. Silver is a white and hard metal, next in weight to
gold. J/atts's Logick.
2. Anything of ſoft ſplendour.
Pallas, piteous of her plaintive cries,
In ſlumber clos'd her ſilver-ſtreaming eyes. Pope.
3. Money made of ſilver. - - -
Si'i.v ER. adj.
1. Made of ſilver.
Puš.my ſilver cup in the ſack's mouth. Gen. xliv. 2.
Hence had the huntreſs Dian her dread bow
*Hºº queen for ever chaſte. &gt; Milton.
C /tlver-ſh: - •
3. White like ſº goddeſs of the place. Pope's Odyſſey.
Of all the race of filver-winged flies
Was '* more favourable, nor more fair,
I han Clarion.
Sı'L
- Stenſºr.
Old Saliſbury, ſhame to thy ſºver hair,
Thou mad miſleader of thy brain ſick ſon. Shakeſpecre.
The great in honour are not always wiſe, ./
Nor judgment under ſilver treſſes lies. Sandy.
Others on ſilver-lakes and rivers bath'd
Their downy breaſt. - Milton.
3. Having a pale luſtre.
. So ſweet a kiſs the golden ſun gives not
To thoſe freſh morning drops upon the roſe,
As thy eye beams, when their freſh rays have ſmote
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows;
Nor ſhines the ſilver moon one half ſo bright,
Through the tranſparent boſom of the deep,
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light. Sºftware.
4. Soft of voice. This phraſe is Italian, vice organtina. “
From all their groves, which with the heavenly noiſes
Of their ſweet inſtruments were wont to ſound, 2.
And th’ hollow hills, from which their ſºver voices
Were wont redoubled ecchoes to rebound,
Did now rebound with nought but rueful cries,
And yelling ſhrieks thrown up into the ſkies. Speſºr.
It is my love that calls upon my name,
How ſilver ſweet ſound lovers tongues by night,
Like ſofteſt muſick to attending ears. Shakespeare.
To Silv ER. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover ſuperficially with ſilver.
- There be fools alive, I wis,
Silver'd o'er, and ſo was this. Shakeſpeare.
The ſplendour of filver is more pleaſing to ſome eyes, than
that of gold; as in cloth of ſilver, and ſilver'd rapiers. Bacon.
Silvering will ſully and canker more than gilding. Bacon.
A gilder ſhewed me a ring ſilver'd over with mercurial fumes,
which he was then to reſtore to its native yellow. Bºyle.
2. To adorn with mild luſtre.
Here retir'd the ſinking billows ſleep,
And ſmiling calmneſs ſilver'd o'er the deep. Pºpe.
Si'lve RBEATER. m. ſ. [ſilver and teat..] One that foliates fil-
Wer.
Silverbeaters chuſe the fineſt coin, as that which is moſt ex-
tenſive under the hammer. Boyle.
S1’lv ERLING. m. ſ.
A thouſand vines, at a thouſand ſilverlings, ſhall be for briars
and thorns. Iſaiah vii. 23.
Silv ERLY. adv. [from ſilver.] With the appearance of fil-
Wer.
Let me wipe off this honourable dew
That ſilverly doth progreſs on thy cheeks. Shakeſpeare.
sººn. m. / [ſilver and ſmith..] One that works in
1IWer.
SI' Demetrius a ſilverſmith, made ſhrines for Diana. Ali Xix.
NILVER THIST LE.
SI'lve Rw E E D. }*/ Plants.
Silvert R.E.E. n.ſ. [conocarpodendron, Latin.] A plant.
The leaves throughout the year are of a fine ſilver colour;
it hath an apetalous flamineous flower, which is ſurrounded
by a number of long leaves immediately under the flower-cup,
which conſiſts of five narrow leaves; theſe are ſucceeded by
cenes, in ſhape like thoſe of the larchtree; the ſeeds are each
of them included in a ſquare cell. Miller.
Silva Ry. adj. [from ſilver.] Beſprinkled with ſilver.
A gritty ſtone, with ſmall ſpangles of a white ſºvery talc
in it. IVoodward on Fºſſils.
Of all th’ enamel'd race whoſe ſilv'ry wing
Waves to the tepid zephyrs of the ſpring, -
Once brighteſt ſhin'd this child of heat and air. Dunciad.
Si'MA R. n.ſ.. [ſimarre, French..] A woman's robe.
The ladies dreſs'd in rich ſmars were ſeen,
Of Florence ſattin, flower'd with white and green. Dryden.
§:::::. ład. [ſmºlair, French; from ſimiliº, Latin.]
1. Homogeneous; having one part like another:
Minerals appear to the eye to be perfectly ſimilar, aS metals;
or at leaſt to conſiſt but of two or three diſtinct ingredients,
as cinnabar. Bºyle.
2. Reſembling; having reſemblance.
The laws of England, relative to thoſe matters, were the
original and exemplar from whence thoſe ſimilar or parallel
laws of Scotland were derived. Hale's Hiff. ºf Com. Law ºf En.
SIMILA'R1ty. n.ſ.. [from ſimilar.) Likeneſs. -
The blood and chyle are intimately mixed, and by attº
tion attenuated; by which the mixture acquires a sº .
- - - milarity, or homogenei parts.
gree of fluidity and /im larity, geneity Arbuthnot.
SIMILE. m. ſ. [ ſimile, Latin.] A compariſon by which any
thing is illuſtrated or aggrandized.
Their rhimes,
Full of proteſt, of oath, and big compare,
Want }. ...}} ears' Troilus and Crºftda.
Lucentio ſlip'd me, like his greyhound, -
Which runs himſelf, and catches for his maſter:
A good ſwift ſimile, but ſomething curriſh. sºlº
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I M
S I M
**
is ºn
5. **
&amp;:
sº
3.
ºil.
ºr,
ſº
In argument,
Similes are like ſongs in love, -
They much deſcribe; they nothing prove. Prior.
Poets, to give a looſe to a warm fancy, not only expatiate
in their ſimiles, but introduce them too frequently. Garth.
SiMI'll rude. n. / [ſimilitude, French; ſimilitudo, Latin.]
1. Likeneſs; reſemblance. -
Similitude of ſubſtance would cauſe attrađtion, where the
body is wholly freed from the motion of gravity; for then lead
would draw lead. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Our immortal ſouls, while righteous, are by God himſelf
beautified with the title of his own image and ſimilitude. Ral.
Let us make man in our image, man
In our ſimilitude, and let them rule -
Over the fiſh and fowl. Milton.
Similitade to the Deity was not regarded in the things they
gave divine worſhip to, and looked on as ſymbols of the
god they worſhipped. Stillingfleet.
If we compare the pićture of a man, drawn at the years
of ſeventeen, with that of the ſame perſon at the years of
threeſcore, hardly the leaſt trace or ſimilitude of one face can
be found in the other. South's Sermons.
Fate ſome future bard ſhall join,
In ſad ſimilitude of griefs to mine,
Condemn'd whole years in abſence to deplore,
And image charms he muſt behold no more. Pºpe.
2. Compariſon; ſimile.
Plutarch, in the firſt of his trađates, by ſundry ſimilitudes,
ſhews us the force of education. JWoºton.
Taſſo, in his ſimilitudes, never departed from the woods;
that is, all his compariſons were taken from the country. Dryd
SI'M ITAR. m. ſ. [See C1'METER.] A crooked or falcated
ſword with a convex edge.
To Si'MMER. v. n. [A word made probably from the ſound,
but written by Skinner, ſinber.] To boil gently ; to boil
with a gentle hiſſing.
Place a veſſel in warm ſand, increaſing the heat by de-
grees, till the ſpirit ſimmer or boil a little. Boyle.
Their vital heat and moiſture may always not only ſimber
in one ſluggiſh tenour, but ſometimes boil up higher, and
ſeeth over; the fire of life being more than ordinarily kind-
led upon ſome emergent occaſion.
More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
SIMNEL. [n. ſ. [ſinnellus, low Latin.] A kind of ſweet bread
or cake.
SIMoN1'AcK. m. ſ [ſimoniaque, French ; ſimoniacus, Latin.]
One who buys or ſells preferment in the church.'
If the biſhop alleges that the perſon preſented is a ſimo-
niac, or unlearned, they are to proceed to trial. Ayliffe.
SIM on 1'AcAL. adj. [from ſmoniac.] Guilty of buying or ſell-
ing eccleſiaſtical preferment.
Add to your criminals the ſimoniacal ladies, who ſeduce the
ſacred order into the difficulty of breaking their troth. Specſ.
SI'Mon Y. m. ſ. [ſinonie, French; ſimonia, Latin.] The crime of
buying or ſelling church preferment.
One that by ſuggeſtion
Tied all the kingdom; ſimony was fair play,
His own opinion was his law. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Many papers remain in private hands, of which one is of
Amony; and I wiſh the world might ſee it, that it might un-
deceive ſome patrons, who think they have diſcharged that
great truſt to God and man, if they take no money for a
living, though it may be parted with for other ends leſs juſti-
fiable. Halton's Life of Biſhop Sanderſºn.
No ſimony nor ſinecure is known;
There works the bee, no honey for the drone. Garth.
To SIMPER. v. m. [from rymbelan, Saxon, to keep holiday,
Skinner. He derives ſimmer from the ſame word, and con-
firms his etymology by writing it ſimber. It is perhaps de-
rived from ſimmer, as it may ſeem to imitate the dimples of
water gently boiling..] To ſmile; generally to ſmile fooliſh-
lv.
y A made countenance about her mouth between ſimpering
and ſmiling, her head bowed ſomewhat down, ſeemed to lan-
guiſh with over much idleneſs. Sidney.
I charge you, O men, for the love you bear to women, as
I perceive by your ſimpering none of you hate them, to like
as much as pleaſes them. Shakeſpeare's A you like it.
Stars above ſimper and ſhine,
As having keys unto thy love, while poor I pine. Herbert.
Let then the fair one beautifully cry,
Dreſt in ſmiles of ſweet Cecilia ſhine,
With ſimp'ring angels, palms and harps divine. Pope.
St Mr E.R. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Smile; generally a fooliſh
ſmile.
The wit at his elbow ſtared him in the fice, with ſo be-
witching a grin, that the whiſtler relaxed his fibres into a
kind of ſimper, and at length burſt out into an open laugh. Addison
Great Tibbald nods: the proud Parnaſſian ſneer,
The conſcious ſimper, and the jealous leer,
Mix on his look. Pope's Dunciad.
SiMºle, adj. [ſimplex, Latin; ſimple, French.]
1. Plain; artleſs; unſkilled; undeſigning; ſincere; harmleſs.
Were it not to ſatisfy the minds of the ſimpler ſort of men,
theſe nice curioſities are not worthy the labour which we be-
ſtow to anſwer them.
They meet upon the way,
A ſimple huſbandman in garments grey. Hubberd's 7ale.
I am a ſimple woman, much too weak
T’ oppoſe your cunning. Shakeſbeare’ V
O Ethelinia, eſpeare's Hen. VIII.
My heart was made to fit and pair with thine,
Simple and plain, and fraught with artieſ, tenderneſs. Rºwe.
2. Uncompounded; unmingled ; ſingle; only one ; plain; not
complicated. &gt;
To make the compound paſs for the rich metal ſimple, is
an adulteration or counterfeiting. £º
Simple philoſophically ſignifies fingle, but vulgarly fooliſh.
Hooker.
J/atts.
Among ſubſtances ſome are called ſimple, ſome compº
whether taken in a philoſophical or vulgar ſenſe. it.
If we take ſimple and compound in a vulgar ſenſe, them all
thoſe are ſimple ſubſtances which are generally eſteemed uni-
form in their natures: ſo every herb is calied aſºnple, and
eyery metal a mineral; though the chymiſt perhaps may find
all his ſeveral elements in each of them. //atts's Lºgicks.
Let Newton, pure intelligence, whom God
To mortals lent, to trace his boundleſs works,
From laws, ſublimely ſimple, ſpeak thy fame
- In all philoſophy. Thºmſºn's Summer.
3. Silly; not wiſe; not cunning.
The ſimple believeth every word; but the prudent man
looketh well to his going. Prºv. xv.
I would have you wiſe unto that which is good, and ſimple
concerning evil. Rom. xvi. 19:
Dick, ſimple odes too many ſhow
My ſervile complaiſance to Cloe. Prior.
SIMPLE, n ſ. [ſimple, French..] A ſingle ingredient in a medi.
cine; a drug. It is popularly uſed for an herb.
Of ſimples in theſe groves that grow,
We'll learn the perfect ſkill;
The nature of each herb to know,
Which cures, and which can kill. Drayton's Q. of Cynthia,
Our foſter nurſe of nature is repoſe,
The which he kacks; that to provoke in him,
Are many ſimples operative, whoſe power
Will cloſe the eye of anguiſh. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear,
He would ope his leathern ſcrip,
And ſhew me ſimples of a thouſand names,
Telling their ſtrange and vigorous faculties Milton.
What virtue is in this remedy lies in the naked ſimple itſelf,
as it comes over from the Indies. Temple.
Around its entries nodding poppies grow,
And all cool ſimples that ſweet reſt beſtow;
Night from the plants their ſleepy virtue drains,
And paſſing, ſheds it on the ſilent plains. Dryden.
Med'cine is mine: what herbs and ſimples grow
In fields and foreſts, all their pow'rs I know,
And am the great phyſician call’d. Dryden,
To SIMPLE. v. n. To gather ſimples.
As once the foaming boar he chas'd,
Laſcivious Circe well the youth ſurvey'd, -
As ſimpling on the flow'ry hills he ſtray’d. Garth.
SI'M Pless. n.ſ [ſimpleſe, French..] Simplicity; fillineſs; folly.
An obſolete word.
Their weeds been not ſo nighly were,
Such ſimpleſ, mought them ſhend,
They been yelad in purple and pall,
They reign and rulen over all. Spenſºr's Paſtorals.
SI'MPLEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſimple.] The quality of being ſimple.
I will hear that play:
For never any thing can be amiſs,
When ſimpleneſs and duty tender it, Shakeſpeare.
Such perfect elements may be found in theſe four known
bodies that we call pure ones; for they are leaſt compounded,
and approach moſt to the ſimpleneſ of the elements. Pigby.
SIMPLE'R. n.ſ.. [from ſimple..] A ſimpliſt. An herbariſt.
SIMPLEton. n.ſ.. [from ſimple..] A filly mortal; a trifler; a
fooliſh fellow. A low word.
A country farmer ſent his man to look after an ox; the
fimpleton went hunting up and down till he found him in a
wood. L’Eſtrange.
Thoſe letters may prove a diſcredit, as laſting as mercenary
ſcribblers, or curious ſimpletons can make it. Pope.
Simplicity. n ſ. [ſimplicitas, Latin ; ſimplicit?, French.J.
1. Plainneſs; artleſſneſs; not ſubtilty; not cunning; not deceit.
The ſweet-minded Philoclea was in their degree of well
doing, to whom the not knowing of evil ſerveth for a ground
of virtue, and hold their inward powers in better form, with
an unſpotted ſimplicity, than many who rather cunningly ſeek
to know what goodneſs is, than willingly take unto them-
ſelves the following of it. sitſ,
Il<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I N
S I N
In low ſimplicity, -
He lends out money grati, and brings down
- fuſance. Shale?ear.
§. iº, a man for his harmleſs ſimplicity, neither
miſliked nor much regarded, was created Duke. Haywood.
Suſpicion ſleeps -
At wiſdom's gate, and to ſimplicity -
Reſigns her charge. Milton.
Of manners gentle, of affections mild;
In wit a man, ſimplicity a child. Pope.
Beauty is their ".
The feeling heart, ſimplicity of life,
And elgance and ſº Thomſºn's Summer.
The native elegance and ſimplicity of her manners, were ac-
companied with real benevolence of heart. Female Quixote.
2. Plainneſs; not ſubtilty; not abſtruſeneſs. -
They keep the reverend/implicity of ancienter times. Hooker.
Thoſe enter into farther ſpeculations herein, which is the
itch of curioſity, and content not themſelves with the ſim-
plicity of that doctrine, within which this church hath con-
tained herſelf. Hammond's Fundamentals.
3. Plainneſs; not finery.
They repreſent our poet, when he left Mantua for Rome,
dreſſed in his beſt habit, too fine for the place whence he came,
and yet retaining part of its ſimplicity. - Dryden.
4. Singleneſs; not compoſition; ſtate of being uncompounded.
Mandrakes afford a papaverous and unpleaſant odour in the
leaf or apple, as is diſcoverable in *ſº º:
rown f ug. Err ourſ.
We are led to conceive that great machine of the world, to
have been once in a ſtate of greater ſimplicity than now it is, as
to conceive a watch once in its firſt and ſimple materials. Burnet.
5. Weakneſs; ſillineſs.
Many that know what they ſhould do, would nevertheleſs
diſſemble it, and to excuſe themſelves, pretend ignorance and
Jºnflicity, which now they cannot. Hooker.
How long ye ſimple ones will ye love ſimplicity 2 and fools
hate knowledge? rov. i. 22.
SIMPList. n.ſ.. [from ſimple..] One ſkilled in ſimples.
A plant ſo unlike a roſe, it hath been miſtaken by ſome good
ſimplifts for amomum. Brown's /uſg. Errours.
SIMPLY. adv. [from ſimple.]
1. Without art; without ſubtlety; plainly ; artleſsly.
Accompliſhing great things by things deem'd weak;
Subverting worldy ſtrong and worldly wiſe,
By ſimply meek. Milton's Paradiſ Ioff.
2. Of itſelf; without addition.
This queſtion about the changing of laws concerneth only
ſuch laws as are poſitive, and do make that now good or evil,
by being commanded or forbidden, which otherwiſe of itſelf
were not ſimply the one or the other. Hocker.
3. Merely; ſolely.
Under man, no creature in the world is capable of felicity
and bliſs; becauſe their chiefeſt perfection conſiſteth in that
. º for them, but not in that which is /imply beſt, as
Ours (loth. Hooker.
I will eat and drink, and ſleep as ſoft {er
As captain ſhall; ſimply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Shakespeare.
To ſay, or to do ought with memory and imitation, no pur-
pºſe or reſpect ſhould ſooner move us, thanJimply the love of
God and of mankind. Milton.
4. Fooliſhly ; fillily.
Si'MULAR. m. ſ. (from ſimul, Latin.] One that counterfeits.
Hide thee, thou bloody hand,
Thou perjurer, thou ſimular of virtue,
That art inceſtuous. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
SIMULATION, */ [/ºuſation, French ; ſºari, from ſimulo,
Latin.] That part of hypocriſy which pretends that to b:
which is not.
Simulation is a vice iſing of a natural falſeneſs, or ſear-
fulneſs; or of a mind that hath ſome main fluit', which
becauſe a man muſt needs diſguiſe, it maketh him practiſe
Jimulation. Bacon.
For the unqueſtionable virtues of her perſon and mind,
he well *Preſſed his love in an act and time of no ſimula-
tion towards his end, bequeathing her all his manſion-houſes,
and a Pºwer to diſpoſe of his whole Perſonal eſtate. Iſºtton.
For diſtinétion ſake, a deceiving by word is common
called a lie; and deceiving by actions, geſtures, or .
our, is called /mulation or hypocriſy. South's Sermons.
SIMULTA’Neots. adj. . [ ſimultaneiºs, Latin.] A&amp;ting toge-
ther; exiſting at the ſame time. g tog
If the parts *y all change places at the ſame time, with-
...' reſpect of priority or Poſteriority to each other's
º, ..". º bullets, cloſely crouded in a box,
SI N. m. ſ: [ryn, . * Jimultaneous exchange 2 Glanville.
º the laws of God ; a violation of the laws of
- . How haſ thou the heart
Being a divine, . ghoſtly conſciº,
A ſºn abſolver, and my friend profeſt,
To mangle me with that word baniſhment. Shaºffeare.
But thoſe that ſleep, and think not on their ſºn,
Pinch them. Shakeſpeare's Merry I/ve, ºf ſ/indſºr.
Thou knoweſt, Lord, that I am pure from aſ ſºn with
man. Tºb. iii. 14.
2. Habitual negligence of religion.
Sin, death, and hell, have ſet their marks upon him,
And all their miniſters attend on him. Shakeſpeare.
Diſhoneſt ſhame
Of nature's works: honour diſhonourable
Sin-bred how have ye troubled all mankind? Miłł.
Is there no means, but that a ſin-fickland
Should be let blood with ſuch a boiſt rous hand Daniel.
Vice or virtue chiefly imply the relation of our ačions to
men in this world: ſºn and holineſs rather imply their relation
to God and the other world. //atts's Logist.
Light from her thought, as ſummer's careleſs robe, &lt;&gt;
Fell each affection of this ſin-worn globe. Brooke.
3. It is uſed by Shakeſpeare emphatically for a man enormouſly
wicked,
Thy ambition,
Thou ſcarlet ſin, robb'd this bewailing land
Of noble Buckingham. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
To SIN. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To neglect the laws of religion; to violate the laws of reli-
1On.
g Stand in awe and ſin not. Pſalm; iv. 4.
Many alſo have periſh'd, err'd, and finn'd for women. Eſdr.
He ſhall aſk, and he ſhall give him life for them that ſin not
unto death. 1 John v. 16.
2. To offend againſt right.
I am a man,
More ſinn'd againſt than ſinning.
And who but wiſhes to invert the laws
Of order, ſins againſt th' eternal cauſe. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
Si's woº M. n.ſ.. [ſin and worm. A vie fiful cºur.
I would not ſoil theſe pure ambroſial weeds,
With the rank vapours of the ſin-worn moulá. Miltºn.
SiScF. adv. [formed by contraction from ſthence, or /ith
t!ence, from rise, Saxon.]
1. Becauſe that.
Since the cleareſt diſcoveries we have of other ſpirits, be-
ſides God and our own ſouls, are imparted by revelation,
the information of them ſhould be taken from thence. Z.A.
Since truth and conſtancy are vain,
Since neither love, nor ſenſe of pain,
Nor force of reaſon can perſuade,
Then let example be obey'd, • Granville.
2. From the time that.
Am not I thine aſs, upon which thou haſ ridden ever fina
I was thine unto this day Numb. xxii. 30.
He is the mºſt improved mind ſince you ſaw him, that ever
was, without ſhifting into a new body. Pope.
3. Ago; before this.
About two years ſince, it ſo fell out, that he was brought
to a great lady's houſe. Sidney.
Spies held me in chaſe, that I was forc'd to wheel
Three or four miles about; elſe had I, ſir,
Half an hour ſince, brought my report. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
A law was made no longer ſince than the twenty eighth of
Henry the eighth. Davies's Hiſt. of Ireland.
How many ares ſince has Virgil writ? Ko common.
SINCE. prºpºſitiºn. After ; reckoning from ſome time paſt to the
time preſent. -
He ſince the morning hour ſet out from heav'n. Mºon:
If ſuch a man ariſe, I have a model by which he may build a
Shakeſpeare.
nobler poem than any extant ſince the ancients. Dryden.
S. NCF'R E. adj. [ſinceru, Latin; ſincer, French J
1. Unhurt; uninjured.
He try’d a tough well choſen ſpear;
Th’ inviolable body ſtood ſincere. Dryden.
2. Pure; unmingled. - - - -
Pardon my tears, ’tis joy which bids them flow:
A joy which never was ſincere till now; -
That which my conqueſt gave, I could not prize,
Or 'twas imperfect till I ſaw your eyes. Dryden.
The pleaſures of ſenſe beaſts taſte ſincere and pure always,
without mixture or allay, without befng diſtračied in the pur-
ſuit, or diſquieted in the uſe of them. - Atterbury,
Animal ſubſtances differ from vegetable, in that being re-
duced to aſhes, they are perfectly inſipid, and in that there
is no ſincere acid in any animal juice. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Honeſt; undiſſembling; uncorrupt.
This top proud fellow,
Whom from the flow of gall I name not, but
From ſincere motions by intelligence
I do º to be tº: c Shakeſpeare's Hºn. VIII.
Nor troubled at theſe tidings from the earth,
Which your ſincereſt care could not prevent;
Foretold ſo lately what would come to paſs,
When firſt this temper croſs'd the gulf frºm hell, Miltºn.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">f S I N
S I N
º
|.
jºr
ºf
---.”
In Engliſh I would have all Galliciſms avoided, that our
tongue may be ſincere, and that we may keep to our own lan-
guage. Felton on the Claſſicks.
Since'Rely. adv. [from ſincere.] Honeſtly; without hypocriſy;
with purity of heart.
The purer and perfester our religion is, the worthier effects
it hath in them who ſtedfaſtly and ſincerely embrace it. Hooker.
That you may, fair lady,
Perceive I ſpeak ſincerely, the king's majeſty .
Does purpoſe honour to you. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
In your whole reaſoning, keep your mind ſincerely intent in
the purſuit of truth. Watt's Lºgick.
:::::: º } n.ſ [ſincerité, French; from ſincere.]
1. Honeſty of intention; purity of mind.
Jeſus Chriſt has purchaſed for us terms of reconciliation,
who will accept of ſincerity inſtead of perfection; but then this
ſincerity implies our honeſt endeavours to do our utmoſt. Rogers.
2. Freedom from hypocriſy.
In thy conſort ceaſe to fear a foe;
For thee ſhe feels ſincerity of woe. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
Si'NDoN. n ſ. [Latin.] A fold; a wrapper.
There were found a book and a letter, both written in fine
parchment, and wrapped in ſindons of linen. Bacon.
Sl'NE. n.ſ. . [ſinus, Latin.] A right ſine, in geometry, is a
right line drawn from one end of an arch perpendicularly upon
the diameter drawn from the other end of that arch; or it is
half the chord of twice the arch. Harris.
Whatever inclinations the rays have to the plane of inci-
dence, the ſine of the angle of incidence of every ray, confi-
dered apart, ſhall have to the ſine of the angle of refračtion a
conſtant ratio. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
Si'Necur E. m. ſ. [ſine, without, and cura, care, Latin.] An
office which has revenue without any employment.
A ſinecure is a benefice without cure of ſouls. Ayliffe.
No ſymony nor ſinecure were known,
Nor would the bee work honey for the drone. Garth.
SI'NEW, n.ſ. [renye, Saxon; ſenewen, Dutch.]
1. A tendon; the ligament by which the joints are moved.
The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
With luſty ſinews. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
The rooted fibres roſe, and from the wound
Black bloody drops diſtill'd upon the ground :
Mute and amaz'd, my hair with terror ſtood; -
Fear ſhrunk myſnews, and congeal’d my blood. Dryden.
A ſinew cracked, ſeldom recovers its former ſtrength. Locke.
2. Applied to whatever gives ſtrength or compactneſs: as, money
is the ſinews of war.
Some other ſinews there are, from which that overplus of
ftrength in perſuaſion doth ariſe. Hooker.
Such diſcouraging of men in the ways of an active con-
formity to the church's rules, cracks the ſinews of government; .
y g &gt;
for it weakens and damps the ſpirits of the obedient. South.
In the principal figures of a picture the painter is to em-
ploy the ſinews of his art; for in them conſiſts the principal
beauties of his work. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
3. Muſcle or nerve.
The feeling pow'r, which is life's root,
Through ev'ry living part itſelf doth ſhed
By ſinews, which extend from head to foot;
And, like a net, all o'er the body ſpread. Davies.
To SIN Ew. v. a. [from the noun..] To knit as by ſinews.
Not in uſe.
Aſk the lady Bona for thy queen;
So ſhalt thouſinew both theſe lands together. Shakespeare H. VI.
SI'New ED. adj. [from ſinew.]
1. Furniſhed with ſinews.
Strong ſinew’d was the youth, and big of bone. Dryden.
2. Strong; firm; vigorous.
He will the rather do it, when he ſees
Ourſelves wellſ newed to our defence. Shakespeare King john.
Si's EwsHRUNK. adj. [ſinew and ſhrunk.] A horſe is ſaid to
be ſinewſhrunk when he has been over-ridden, and ſo fatigued
that he becomes gaunt-bellied by a ſtiffneſs and contraction of
the two ſinews which are under his belly. Farriers Dić7.
Si's Ew Y. adj. [from ſinew.]
1. Conſiſting of a finew; nervous. The nerves and ſinews are
in poetry often confounded, from nervus, Latin, which ſigni-
fies a finew.
The ſinewy thread my brain lets fall
Through every part,
Can tie thoſe parts, and make me one of all.
2. Strong; nervous; vigorous; forcible.
And for thy vigour, bull-bearing Milo his addition yields
To ſinciv, Ajax. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Creſſida.
Worthy fellows, and like to prove
Moſt ſinewy ſwordſmen. Shakeſpeare.
The northern Peowº are large, fair-complexioned, ſtrong,
ſnewy, and couragious. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
Fainting as he reach'd the ſhore,
He dropt his ſinewy arms: his knces no more
* Perform'd their office.
Donne.
Pope's Odyſſey.
Si's ºut, adj. [ſin and fall.]
I. Alien from God; not holy; unſanétified. -
- Drive out the ſinful pair,
From hallow'd ground th: unholy. Milton,
2. Wicked; not obſervant of religiº. - -
is uſed both of perſons and ſº ; contrary to religion. It
This happy man, ſaid then the father grave,
Whoſe ſtaggering ſteps thy fteddy hand doth lead
And ſhews the way his/inful ſºul to ſave &gt;
Who better can the way to heaven aread : 2. Fairy Queen
It is great fin to ſwear unto a ſin; y wn.
But greater ſin to keep a ſinful oath. Shakeſp. Henry VI
Nature herſelf, though pure of ſinful thought y v 1.
Wrought in her ſo, that, ſeeing me, ſhe turº." Milton
The ſtoicks looked upon all paſſions asſinful defects and in.
gularities, as ſo many deviations from right reaſon, making
paſſion to be only another word for perturbation. South.
Si'NFULLY. adv. [from ſinful.] Wickedly; not piouſly ; Ilot
according to the ordinance of God.
All this from my remembrance brutiſh wrath
Sinfully pluckt, and not a man of you
Had ſo much grace to put it in my mind. Shakeſp. R. III.
The humble and contented man pleaſes himſelf innocently
and eaſily, while the ambitious man attempts to pleaſe others
fºſully and difficultly, and perhaps unſucceſsfully too. South.
Si'NFULNess. n.ſ.. [from ſinful J Alienation from God;
neglect or violation of the duties of religion; contrariety to
religious goodneſs.
I am ſent
To ſhew thee what ſhall come in future days
To thee, and to thy offspring: good with bad
Expect to hear; ſupernal grace contending
With ſinfulneſs of men. Milton.
Peeviſhneſs, the general fault of fick perſons, is equally to
be avoided for the folly and ſinfulneſs. IWake.
To SING. v. m. preterite Iſang, or ſung; participle paſſ, ſung.
[ringan, Saxon; ſingia, Iſlandick; ſinghen, Dutch..]
1. To form the vºice to melody; to articulate muſically.
Orpheus with his lute made trees,
And the mountain tops that freeze,
Bow themſelves when he did ſing:
To his muſick plants and flowers
Ever ſprung, as ſun and ſhowers
There had made a laſting ſpring.
Then they for ſudden joy did weep,
And ſome for ſorrow ſung.
They rather had beheld
Diſſentious numbers peſtering ſtreets, than ſee
Our tradeſmen ſinging in their ſhops, and going
About their functions friendly. Shakeſp. Coriolanus:
The morning ſtars ſang together. job.
Then ſhall the trees of the wood ſing out at the preſence of
the Lord. 1 Chro. xvi. 33.
Their airy limbs in ſports they exerciſe,
Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Shakespeare King Lear.
Some in heroick verſe divinely ſing. Dryden.
2. To utter ſweet ſounds inarticulately.
The time of the ſinging of birds is come. Cant. ii. 12.
You will ſooner bind a bird from ſinging than from flying. Bac.
Join voices all ye birds,
That ſinging up to heav'n's gate aſcend. Milton.
And parrots, imitating human tongue, -
And ſinging birds, in ſilver cages hung, Dryden's Ovid.
Oh! were I made, by ſome transforming pow'r,
The captive bird that ſings within thy bow'r,
Then might my voice thy liſt'ning ears employ,
And I thoſe kiſſes he receives enjoy. Pºpe's Summer.
3. To make any ſmall or ſhrill noiſe.
A man may hear this ſhower ſing in the wind. Shakeſpeare.
You leaden meſſengers,
Fly with falſe aim; pierce the ſtill moving air,
That ſings with piercing; do not touch my lord. Shºff.
We hear this fearful tempeſt ſing. Shakeſpeare.
4. To tell in poetry.
Bid her exalt her melancholy wing,
And rais'd from earth, and ſav'd from paſſion, ſing
Of human hope by croſs event deſtroy'd, -
Of uſeleſs wealth and greatneſs unenjoy'd. Prior.
To SING. v. a.
1. To relate or mention in poetry. -
All the prophets in their age the times -
Of great Meſfiah ſing. Milºn.
Arms and the man Iſing: Dryden's An.
Well might he ſing the day he could not fear, Smith
fºrtſ/7.
And paint the glories he was ſuie to wear.
2. To celebrate; to give praiſes to:
. To utter harmoniouſly. - -
3 Incies, caddiſſes, cambricks, lawns, why
He ſings them over as they were gods and goddeſſes. Shakespeare
They that waſted us required of us mirth, ſaying, fg us
one of the ſongs of Zion: Pſ. cxxxvii. 3.
How could we to his godhead ſing
Forc'd hallelujahs
24 D
Miltºn:
To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I N
S N
To SINGE.
v. a. [renžan, Saxºn; ſºnghen, Dutch. J. To
- flightly or ſu erficially.
ſcorch; º bound the . -
whoſe beard they have ſºng'4 off with brands of fire. Shakespeare
You ſulph'rous and thought executing fires, -
Singe my white head. - - Shakespeare.
Drake, in the vaunting ſtile of a ſoldier, would call this
enterprize the ſºngºing of the king of Spain's beard. Bacon.
That neither was finged in the combuſtion of Phaeton, nor
overwhelmed by the inundation of Deucalion. Brown.
They leave a ſinged bottom all involy’d -
With ſtench and ſmoke. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
Iſinged the toes of an ape through a burning-glaſs, and he
never would endure it after. L’Eſtrange.
Thus riding on his curls he ſeem'd to paſs -
A rolling fire along, and ſinge the graſs. Dryden.
S1'NGER. n.ſ.. [from ſing.] One that ſings; one whoſe pro-
feſſion or buſineſs is to ſing. -
His filching was like an unſkilful ſinger, he kept not time.
Shakespeare Merry Wives of Iłindſor.
I gat me men ſingers and women ſinger, and the delights of
the ſons of men. Ecºl. ii. 8.
To the chief ſinger on my ſtringed inſtruments. Hab. iii.
Thy heart no ruder than the rugged ſtone, .
I might, like Orpheus, with my num'rous moan
Melt to compaſſion: now my trait'rous ſong
With thee conſpires to do the ſinger wrong. J/aller.
Cockbirds amongſt ſinging birds are ever the better ſingers,
becauſe they are more lively. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The birds know how to chuſe their fare;
To peck this fruit they all forbear:
Thoſe cheerful ſingers know not why
They ſhould make any haſte to die. J/aller.
The Grecian tragedy was at firſt nothing but a chorus of
ſingers. Dryden.
Sºn Gisc MAst ER. m.ſ.. [ſing and mºſter.] One who teaches
to ſing.
He employed an itinerant ſingingmaſter to inſtruct them
rightly in the tunes of the pſalms. Addison's Spectator.
SINGLE. adj. [ſingulus, Latin.]
1. One; not double; not more than one.
The words are clear and eaſy, and their originals are of
ſingle ſignification without any ambiguity. South.
Some were ſingle ačts, though each compleat;
But ev'ry act ſtood ready to repeat. Dryden.
Then Theſeus join'd with bold Pirithous came,
A ſingle concord in a double name. Dryden.
High Alba,
A lonely deſart, and an empty land,
Shall ſcarce afford, for needful hours of reſt,
A ſingle houſe to their benighted gueſt. Addison on Italy.
Where the foeſy or oratory ſhines, a ſingle reading is not
ſufficient to ſatisfy a mind that has a true taſte; nor can we
make the fulleſt improvement of them without proper re-
views. JWatts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. Particular; individual.
As no ſingle man is born with a right of controuling the
opinions of all the reſt, ſo the world has no title to demand
the whole time of any particular perſon. Pºpe.
If one ſingle word were to expreſs but one ſimple idea, and
nothing elſe, there would be ſcarce any miſtake. //atts.
3. Not compounded.
As ſimple ideas are oppoſed to complex, and ſingle ideas to
compound, ſo propoſitions are diſtinguiſhed: the Engliſh
tongue has ſome advantage above the learned languages, which
have no uſual word to diſtinguiſh ſingle from ſimple. If atts.
l - - -
4. Alone; having no companion; having no aſſiſtant.
Servant of God, well haſt thou fought
The better fight, who ſingle haſt maintain'd
Againſt revolted multitudes the cauſe of truth. Milton.
His wiſdom ſuch,
Three kingdoms wonder, and three kingdoms fear,
Whilſt ſingle he ſtood forth. Denham.
. In ſweet poſſeſſion of the fairy place,
Single and conſcious to myſelf alone, -
Of Pleaſures to th’excluded world unknown. Dryden.
5. Unmarried.
Is theſºgle men therefore bleſſed? no: as a walled town is
** worthier than a village, ſo is the forehead of a married
*n more honourable than the bare brow of a batchelor. Shakespeare
Pygmalion -
Abhorr'd all womankind, but moſt a wife;
So ſingle choſe to live, and ſhunn'd to wed,
Well Peas'd to want a conſort of his bed. Drydºn.
6. Nºt “mplicated; not duplicated.
into º make flowers double is effected by often removing them
ºl. earth; as, on the contrary, double flowers, by ne-
r - - -
- ng and not removing, prove ſingle. Bacon’s Nat. Hi/f.
7. Pure; "Sorrupt; not double minded; ſimple. A ſcriptural
ſenſe.
The light of the body - - - -
.. s y is the eye: if t re be ſing'
whole body ſhall be full of light. nine eye º º:
8. That in which one is oppoſed to one.
He, when his country, threaten’d with alarms,
Shall more than once the Punick bands affilight,
Shall kill the Gauliſh king in ſingle fight. Dryde's Fn.
To S1’NGLE. v. a. [from the adjective.]
1. To chuſe out from among others.
I ſaw him in the battle range about,
And how he ſinged Clifford forth. Shałęſ. Henry VI.
Every man may have a peculiar ſavour, which although
not perceptile unto man, yet ſenſible unto dogs, who heriy
can ſingle out their maſter in the dark. Brown.
Do'ſt thou already ſingle me? I thought
Gyves and the mill had tam'd thee. Milton's Agonſlet.
Begin, auſpicious boy, to caſt about
Thy infant eyes, and with a ſmile thy mother ſingle out. Dry.
Single the lowlieſt of the am’rous youth;
Aſk for his vows, but hope not for his truth. Prior.
2. To ſequeſter; to withdraw.
Yea ſimply, ſaith Baſil, and univerſally, whether it be in
works of nature, or of voluntary choice, I ſee not any thing
done as it ſhould be, if it be wrought by an agent ſinging iſ:
ſelf from conſorts. Hair.
3. To take alone.
Many men there are, than whom nothing is more commend-
able when they are ſingled; and yet, in ſociety with others,
none leſs fit to anſwer the duties which are looked for at their
hands. Hooker.
4. To ſeparate.
Hardly they heard, which by good hunters ſingled are. Sidh.
Si'NGLENEss. n.ſ. [from ſingle.] Simplicity; ſincerity; honeſt
plainneſs.
It is not the deepneſs of their knowledge, but the ſingenſ,
of their belief, which God accepteth. Hooker.
SI'NGLY. adv. [from ſingle.]
1. Individually ; particularly.
If the injured perſon be not righted, every one of them is
wholly guilty of the injuſtice, and therefore bound to reſtitu-
tion ſingly and intirely. Taylor’s Rule of living hal.
They tend to the perfection of human nature, and to make
men ſingly and perſonally good, or tend to the happineſs of
ſociety. Tillºtſºn's Sermons.
2. Only; by himſelf.
Look thee, ’tis ſo ; thouſingly honeſt man,
Here take: the gods out of my miſery
Have ſent thee treaſure. Shakeſp. Timon of Atheni.
3. Without partners or aſſociates.
Belinda
Burns to encounter two advent’rous knights,
At ombre ſingly to decide their doom. Pope.
4. Honeſtly ; ſimply ; ſincerely.
SINGULAR. adj. [ ſingulier, Fr. ſingularis, Latin.]
1. Single; not complex; not compound.
That idea which repreſents one particular determinate thing
is called a ſingular idea, whether ſimple, complex, or com-
pound. Watts.
2. [In grammar.] Expreſſing only one; not plural.
If St. Paul's ſpeaking of himſelf in the firſt perſon ſingular
has ſo various meanings, his uſe of the firſt perſon plural has
a greater latitude. Lºcke.
3. Particular ; unexampled.
So ſingular a ſadneſs
Muſt have a cauſe as ſtrange as the effeót. Denham's Sophy.
Doubtleſs, if you are innocent, your caſe is extremely
hard, yet it is not ſingular. Female ºutxote.
4. Having ſomething not common to others. It is commonly
uſed in a ſenſe of diſapprobation, whether applied to perion*
or things.
His zeal -
None ſeconded, as ſingular and raſh. Miltom.
It is very commendai le to be ſingular in any excellency, and
religion is the greateſt excellency: to be ſingular in anything that
is wiſe and worthy is not a diſparagement, but a praiſe. 7ilºſſ.
5. Alone; that of which there is but one.
Theſe buſts of the emperors and empreſſes are all Yºy
ſcarce, and ſome of them almoſt ſingular in the
SINGULARITY. m. ſ. ſingularite, Fr. from ſingular.]
1. Some character or quality by which one is diſtinguiſhed from
others.
Pliny addeth this ſingularity to that ſoil, that the ſecond year
the very falling down of the ſeeds yieldeth corn. - Raleigh.
Though, according to the practice of the world, it be fin-
gular for men thoroughly to live up to the principles of their
religion, yet ſingularity in this matter is a fingular commenda.
tion of it. Jilºtſon's Sermoni.
I took notice of this little figure for the ſing laſt ºf.”
inſtrument: it is not unlike a violin. Addiſon on ſtay.
2. Any thing remarkable; a curioſity.
Your gallery
Have we paſs'd through, not without much conten
In many ſingular it es; but we ſaw not -
That which my daughter came to look upon,
The ſtatue of her mother. Shakespeare Winter'ſ Tale.
3. Particular
ir kind. Addison
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I N
S I N
---
º:
tº r
" -
***
º
ſ:
ſº
3. Particular privilege or prerogative.
St. Gregory, being himſelf a biſhop of Rome, and writing
againſt the title of univerſal biſhop, ſaith thus: none of all
my predeceſſors ever conſented to uſe this ungodly title; no
biſhop of Rome ever took upon him this name of ſingu-
larity. -- Hooker.
4. Charaćter or manners different from thoſe of others.
The ſpirit of ſingularity in a few ought to give place to pub-
lick judgment. Hooker.
Singularity in ſin puts it out of faſhion, ſince to be alone in
any pračtice ſeems to make the judgment of the world againſt
it; but the concurrence of others is a tacit approbation of
that in which they concur. South.
To Si'NGULARize. v. a. [ſe ſingulariſer, Fr. from ſingular.]
To make ſingle.
S1'NGULARLY. adv. [from ſingular.] Particularly; in a man-
ner not common to others.
Solitude and ſingularity can neither daunt nor diſgrace him,
unleſs we could ſuppoſe it a diſgrace to be ſingularly good. South.
S1’NGULT. m. ſ. [ſingulrus, Latin.] A ſigh. Spenſer,
Si'N 1st ER. adj. [ſiniſter, Latin.] .
1. Being on the left hand; left; not right; not dexter.
My mother's blood
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this ſiniſter
Bounds in my fire's. Shakespeare. Troilus and Creſſida.
Captain Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war,
here on his ſiniſter cheek. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
But a rib, crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part ſiniſter from me drawn. Milton's Pa. Loff.
The ſpleen is unjuſtly introduced to invigorate the ſiniſter
ſide, which, being dilated, would rather infirm and debi-
litate it. Brºwn's Wulgar Errours.
In his ſiniſter hand, inſtead of ball,
He plac'd a mighty mug of potent ale. Dryden.
2. Bad; perverſe; corrupt; deviating from honeſty; unfair.
Is it ſo ſtrange a matter to find a good thing furthered by ill
men of a ſiniſter intent and purpoſe, whoſe forwardneſs is not .
therefore a bridle to ſuch as favour the ſame cauſe with a better.
and ſincere meaning. Hoºker.
The duke of Clarence was ſoon after by ſniffer means made
clean away. Spenſer on Ireland.
When are there more unworthy men choſen to offices, when
is there more ſtrife and contention about elections, or when
do partial and ſiniſler affections more utter themſelves, than
when an election is committed to many // hitgifte.
He profeſſes to have received no ſniffer meaſure from his
judge, but moſt willingly humbles himſelf to the determina-
tion of juſtice. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
Thoſe may be accounted the left hands of courts; perſons
that are full of nimble and ſiniſter tricks and ſhifts, whereby
they pervert the plain courſes of courts, and bring juſtice into
oblique lines and labyrinths. Bacon's Eſſays.
The juſt perſon has given the world an aſſurance, by the
conſtant tenor of his pračtice, that he makes a conſcience of
his ways, and that he ſcorns to undermine another's intereſt
by any ſiniſter or inferior arts. South.
3. [Sinifre, French.J. Unlucky; inauſpicious.
Tempt it again: that is thy ačt, or none:
What all the ſeveral ills that viſit earth,
Brought forth by night, with a ſini/ier birth,
Plagues, famine, fire, could not reach unto,
The ſword, nor ſurfeits, let thy fury do. Ben. johnſºn.
.SINISTROUS. adj. [ſiniſer, Latin.j Abſurd; perverſe;
wrong-headed.
A knave or fool can do no harm, even by the moſt
/iniſirous and abſurd choice. Bentley.
SI'N 1st Rous LY. adv, [from ſiniſłrcus.] -
1. With a tendency to the left. -
Many in their infancy are ſiniſłrouſly diſpoſed, and divers
continue all their life left-handed, and have but weak and im-
perfect uſe of the right. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2. Perverſely; abſurdly.
**
. To SINK v. n. pret Iſunk, anciently ſank; part. ſunk or ſunken.
[rencan, Saxon; ſen'en, German.] -
1. To fall down through any medium; not to ſwim ; to go to
the bottom. . -
Make his chronicle as rich with prize,
As is the oozy bottom of the ſea
With ſinken wreck and ſumleſs treaſuries. Shakespeare . H. V.
In with the river ſunk, and with it roſe,
Satan, involv’d in riſing miſt; then ſought -
\Vhere to lie hid. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ix.
He ſwims or ſinks, or wades, or creeps or flies. 41ilton.
The pirate ſinks with his ill-gotten gains,
And nothing to another's uſe remains. Dryden.
Suppoſing ſeveral in a tempeſt will rather periſh than work,
would it not be madneſs in the reſt to chuſe to ſink together,
rather than do more than their ſhare :
2. To fall gradually.
The arrow went out at his heart, and he ſunk down in his
chariot. 2 Kings is. 24.
3. To enter or penetrate into any body.
David took a ſtone and ſlang it, and ſmote the Philiſtine,
that the ſtone ſunk into his forehead, I Sa. xvii. 49.
s To make to fall.
Addiſon on the J/ar.
4. To loſe height; to fall to a level.
- In vain has nature form'd .
Mountains and oceans to oppoſe his paſſage;
He bounds o'er all, victorious in his march;
The Alps and Pyreneans ſink before him.
5. To loſe or want prominence.
What were his marks —A lean cheek, a blue eye and
ſunken. -
- Shakeſp. As you like it.
Deep dinted wrinkles on her checks ſhe * º
Sunº are her eyes, and toothiefs are her jaws. Drydºn;
6. To be overwhelmed or depreſſed.
Our country ſinks beneath the yoke;
It weeps, it bleeds, and each nº day a gaſh
Is added to her wounds. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
They arraign'd ſhall ſink
Beneath thy ſentence. Milton.
But if you this ambitious pray’r deny,
Then let me ſink beneath proud'Arcite's arms;
And, I once dead, let him poſſeſs her charms. Dryden.
7. To be received; to be impreſſed.
Addison's Cats,
Let theſe ſayings ſink down into your ears. Lu. ix. 44.
. Truth never ſinks into theſe mens minds, not gives any
tinčture to them. Locke.
8. To decline; to decreaſe; to decay.
This republick has been much more powerful than it is at
preſent, as it is ſtill likelier to ſink than increaſe in its domi-
In lonS. Addison on Italy.
Let not the fire ſink or ſlacken, but increaſe. Mortimer.
9. To fall into reſt or indolence.
Would'ſt thou have me ſink away
In pleaſing dreams, and loſe myſelf in love,
When, every moment Cato's life's at ſtake? Addison's Cato.
IO. To fall into any ſtate worſe than the former; to tend to
rulil.
Nor urg'd the labours of my lord in vain,
A ſinking empire longer to ſuſtain.
To SINK. v. a.
1. To put under water; to diſable from ſwimming or floating.
A ſmall fleet of Engliſh made an hoſtile invaſion, or incur-
ſion, upon their havens and roads, and fired, ſunk, and carried
away ten thouſand ton of their great ſhipping, beſides ſmaller
veſſels. Bacon.
2. To delve; to make by delving.
At Saga in Germany they dig up iron in the fields by ſink-
ing ditches two foot deep, and in the ſpace of ten years the
ditches are digged again for iron ſince produced. Boyle.
Near Geneva are quarries of freeſtone, that run under the
lake: when the water is at loweſt, they make within the bor-
ders of it a little ſquare, incloſed within four walls: in this
ſquare they ſink a pit, and dig for freeſtone. Addiſon.
3. To depreſs; to degrade.
A mighty king I am, an earthly god;
I raiſe or ſink, impriſon or ſet free;
And life or death depends on my decree. Prior.
Trifling painters or ſculptors beſtow infinite pains upon the
moſt inſignificant parts of a figure, 'till they ſink the grandeur
of the whole. Pºpe's Eſſay on Homer.
Dryden's Aºn.
4. To plunge into deſtrućtion.
Heav'n bear witneſs, -
And if I have a conſcience let it ſink me,
Ev’n as the ax falls, if I be not faithful. Shakespeare .
Theſe are ſo far from raiſing mountains, that they over-
turn and fling down ſome before ſtanding, and undermine
others, ſinking them into the abyſs. JWoodward.
6. To bring low; to diminiſh in quantity.
When on the banks of an unlook’d-for ſtream,
You ſunk the river with repeated draughts, -
Who was the laſt in all your hoſt that thirſted : Addiſon.
7. To cruſh; to overbear; to depreſs. -
That Hedor was in certainty of death, and depreſſed with
the conſcience of an ill cauſe: if you will not grant the firſt of
theſe will ſink the ſpirit of a hero, you'll at leaſt allow the fe-
cond may. Popc.
8. To leſſen; to diminiſh. -
They catch at all opportunities of ruining our trade, and
ſinking the figure which we make. Addiſon on the War.
I mean not that we ſhould ſink our figure out of covetºſ-
neſs, and deny ourſelves the proper cºnvenienº of our ſta-
tion, only that we may lay up a ſuperfluous treaſure, Rºgers.
9. To make to decine.
Thy cruel and unnatural luft of power
Hasſº thy father more than all his years,
And made him wither in a green old age. Rzzve.
To labour for a ſunk corrupted ſtate. Lyttlet:n.
10. To ſuppreſs; to conceal; to intervert.
If ſent with ready money to buy anything, and you happen
to be out of pocket, ſink tº e money, and take up the goods
On 3CCOunt. Swift's Rules to Servants.
Six K. m. ſ. [ring, Saxon.]
1. A drain; a jakes -
should by the cormorant belly be reſtrain'd. -
who is the ſºn; o' th' body. Sakſ?. cº,
d<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
|
S I N
to a bile, or as divers kennels flow to
By jº. their numbers increaſed. Hayward.
*:::.. more filth than any/ink in town. Granville.
Returning home at night, you'll find the ſink -
Strike your offended ſenſe with double ſtink. Swift.
2. Any place where corruption is gathered. -
What ſink of monſters, wretches of loſt minds,
Mad after change, and deſperate in their ſtates,
Wearied and gall'd with their neceſſities,
Durſt have thought it? Ben. ohnſon's Catiline.
Our ſoul, whoſe country's heav'n and God her father,
Into this world, corruption's /ink, is ſent;
Yet ſo much in her travail ſhe doth gather,
. . That ſhe returns home wiſer than ſhe went. Donne.
Si'N less, adj. [from ſin.] Exempt from fin.
Led on, yet ſinleſs, with deſire to know,
What nearer might concern him, how this world
Of heav'n, and earth conſpicuous, firſt began. Milton.
At that taſted fruit,
The ſun, as from Thyeſtean banquet, turn'd
His courſe; elſe how had the world
Inhabited, though ſinleſs, more than now
Avºided pinching cold, and ſcorching heat; Milton.
Infernal ghoſts and helliſh furies round
Environ'd thee; ſome howl'd, ſome yell’d, ſome ſhriek'd,
Some bent at thee their fiery darts, while thou
Satt'ſ unappal'd in calm and ſinleſ, peace. AMilton.
No thoughts like mine his/inleſs ſoul profane,
Obſervant of the right. Dryden's Ovid.
Did God, indeed, inſiſt on a ſinleſ, and unerring obſervance
of all this multiplicity of duties; had the Chriſtian diſpenſa-
tion provided no remedy for our lapſes, we might cry out with
Balaam, Alas! who ſhould live, if God did this? Rogers.
Si'NLEssness. n.ſ. [from ſinkſ; J Exemption from fin.
We may the leſs admire at his gracious condeſcenſions to
thoſe, the ſink/neſ of whoſe condition will keep them from
**ing his vouchſafements into anything but occaſions of joy
and gratitude. Boyle's Seraphick Lºve.
Si'NNER. m. ſ. [from ſin.]
J. º; * enmity with God; one not truly or religiouſly
good. -
. Let the boldeſt ſinner take this one conſideration along with
him, when he is gºing to fin, that whether the fin he is about
to act ever comes to be pardoned or no, yet, as ſoon as it is
acted, it quite turns the balance, puts his ſalvation upon the
Yºnture, and makes it ten to one odds againſt him. South.
2. An offender; a criminal.
Here's that which is too weak to be a ſinner, honeſt water,
which ne'er left man iſ th: mire. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Over the guilty then the fury ſhakes
The ſºunding whip, and brand es her ſnakes,
And the pale ſinner with her ſiſters takes. Dryden's Aen.
Thither, where ſinners may have reſt, I go,
Where flames refiğd in breaſts ſeraphick gi
phick glow. Pope.
Whether the charmer /inner it or ſaint it, p
If folly grows romantick, I muſt paint it. Pope.
Si'NoFFERíNó. */ [ſin and offering. An expiation or ſacri-
fice for ſin.
. The fleſh of the bullock ſhalt thou burn without the camp:
S It is º: Ex. xxix. 14.
ºº:: * * *ſ. A ſpecies of earth, ruddle. Ainſ.
To Si'NUATE. . . ń. º To bend in and out. !/.
Another was *y Perfect, ſomewhat leſs with the margin,
and more ſinuated. Woodward on FÅli.
SisuArion. m.ſ. [from ſinuate.] A bending in and out.
The human brain is, in proportion to the body, much larger
than the brains of brutes, in Proportion to their bodies, and
S fuller of anſraélus, or /inuations. Halº, Origin of Mankind.
".". º [Anurus, French, from finus, Latin.j Bending
Try with what "iſadvantage the voice will be carried in an
horn, which is a line arched; or in a trumpet, which is a line
retorted 3 or in ſome pipe that were ſinuous.
T hºſe, as a line, their lºng dimenſion drew
$treaking the ground with ſinuous trace, Milt. 'Parad Loft
In the diffections of horſes, in the concave or ſinuous part of
the liver, whereaſ the gall is uſually ſeated in quadrupeds, I
diſcover an hollow, long, and membranous ſubſtance. 2
*''', n.ſ.. [Latin.j *rºwn's Pulgar Erzur.
I. A : of the ſea; an 9Pening of the land.
* ſuppoſeth his Atlanti to have ſunk all into
the ſea:
.." that be * or no, I do not think it impoſſible that
º *ms of the ſea, or *'', might have had ſuch an ori-
2. Anº Burnet's Wheºry ºf the Earth.
To S
.*.*.* º Saxon; Tºpen, Dutch.]
of the cup &amp; º draughts; to take it one appoſition
Contain. *uth no more than the mouth will
Soft yielding mi
- - - ds to id
And /. º water glide away
Jip with *}ºphs their elemental tea. 2. Pote.
fold or opening.
S I N
2. To drink in ſmall quantities.
Find out the peaceful hermitage;
The hairy gown and moſſy cell,
Where I may ſit and rightly ſpell
Of ev'ry ſtar that heav'n doth ſhew,
And every herb that ſps the dew. 44ilton,
3. To drink out of. -
The winged nation o'er the foreſt flies:
Then ſtooping on the meads and leafy bow'rs,
They ſkim the floods and ſp the purple flow’rs. Dryden.
To SIP. v. m. To drink a ſmall quantity.
She rais'd it to her mouth with ſober grace;
Then ſpping, offer'd to the next. Dryden's Aen.
Sip. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A ſmall draught; as much as the
mouth will hold.
Her face o' fire
With labºur, and the thing ſhe took to quench it
She would to each one ſp. Shakeſp. Winter's Tal.
One ſp of this
Will bathe the drooping ſpirits in delight,
Beyond the bliſs of dreams. Milton.
Si'PH9N. n.ſ. [rſtow; ſphe, Lat. /phon, Fr.] A pipe through
which liquors are conveyed.
Beneath th' inceſſant weeping of theſe drains
I ſee the rocky ſphon, ſtretch'd immenſe,
The mighty reſervoirs of harden’d chalk,
Of ſtiff compaded clay.
Šipper. n.ſ.. [from ſp.) One that ſips.
$1'Pret: nºſ. Iſrom ſp.) A ſmall ſop.
Siº: n.ſ. [Åre, Fr. ſignior, Ital. /enºr, Spaniſh; ſenior, Latin.]
1. The word of reſpect in compellation.
Speak on, ſir,
Idare your worſt objections: if I bluſh,
It is to ſee a nobleman want manners.
But, ſºrt, be ſudden in the execution 3.
Withal obdurate; do not let him plead. Shakeſp. R. III.
Sir king,
This man is better than the man he flew. Shakeſpeare.
** banquet the ambaſſador defired the wiſemen to deliver
*Very one of them ſome ſentence or parable, that he might re-
Port to his king, which they did: only one was filent, which
the ambaſſador perceiving, ſaid to him, ſir, let it not diſpleaſe
Yº! ; why do not you ſay ſomewhat that I may report? He
anſwered, report to your lord, that there are that can hold their
peace. Bacon's Apophthegms:
2. The title of a knight or baronet. This word was anciently
ſo much held eſſential, that the Jews in their addreſſes expreſſed
it in Hebrew characters.
Sir Horace Vere, his brother, was the principal in the
ačtive part. Bacon's War with Spain.
The court forſakes him, and ſir Balaam hangs. Pope:
3. It is ſometimes uſed forman.
I have adventur'd
To try your taking of a falſe report, which hath
Honour'd with confirmation your great judgment, -
In the election of a ſºr ſo rare. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
4. A title given to the loin of beef, which one of our kings
knighted in a fit of good humour.
He loſt his roaſt beef ſtomach, not being able to touch a
Thºmſon's Autumn,
Shakeſp. H. VIII.
/ºr-loin which was ſerved up. Addiſon.
And the ſtrong table groans
Beneath the ſmoaking/r-loin, ſtretch'd immenſe
From fide to fide. Thomſon's Autumn.
It would be ridiculous, indeed, if a ſpit which is ſtrong
enough to turn a ſºr-loin of beef, ſhould not be able to turn a
lark. Swift.
SIR.E. n.ſ. [ſire, French; ſenior, Latin.]
I. A father, in poetry. -
He, but a duke, would have his ſon a king,
And raiſe his iſſue like a loving/re. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Cowards father cowards, and º /re the baſe. Shać.
A virgin is his mother, but his ſire -
The º of the Moſt High. Milton's Paradiſe Left.
And now I leave the true and juſt ſupports
Of legal princes and of honeſt court, ,
Whoſe ſires, great partners in my father sºares, -
Saluted their young king at Hebron crown'd. Prior.
Whether his hoary ſire he ſpies,
While thouſand grateful thoughts ariſe,
Or meets his j fonder eye. Pope's Chorus to Brutus.
2. It is uſed in common ſpeech of beaſts: as, the horſe had a
d ſire, but a bad dam.
3. */. in compoſition: as, grand-ſire, great-grand-fire.
SI'REN. m. ſ. [Latin.] A goddeſs who enticed men by finging,
and devoured them; any miſchievous enticer.
Oh train me not, ſweet mermaid, with thy note,
To drown me in thy ſiſter's flood of tears:
Sing, ſiren, to thyſelf, and I will dote; -
Spread o'er the ſilver waves thy golden hair,
And as a-bed I'll take thee, and there lie. Shaftºffeare.
SIRI Asis. m. ſ. ſaleſza.s.) An inflammation of the brain
and its membrane, through an exceſſive heat of the ſº
I’RIUS,
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I T
S I T
lº.
SPRIUS. m. ſ. [Latin.] The dogſtar.
SIRocco. m. / [Italian; ſºrus venius, Latin.] The ſouth-eaſt
or Syrian wind. -
Forth ruſh the levant and the ponent winds,
Eurus and Zephyr, with their lateral noiſe,
Sirocco and Libecchio. Milton.
SI'RR A H. m. ſ. [fºr, ha! Miyhew..] A compellation of re-
proach and inſult.
Go, firrah, to my cell;
Take with you your companions: as you look
To have my pardon, trim it handſomely. Shakespeare Tempeſt.
Sirrah, There's no room for faith, troth, or honeſty in
this boſom of thine. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
It runs in the blood of your whole race, ſirrah, to hate
our family. - L'E/irange.
Gueſs how the goddeſs greets her ſon,
Come hither, firrah; no, begone. Prior.
Si'RoP. } m. ſ. [Arabick ] The juice of vegetables boiled
SIRUP, 5 with ſugar. -
Shall I, whoſe ears her mournful words did ſeize,
Her words in ſirup laid of ſweeteſt breath,
Relent. Sidney.
Not poppy, nor mandragora,
Nor all the drowſy ſirups of the world
Shall ever med'cine thee to that ſweet ſleep,
Which thou owed'ſt yeſterday. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
And firſt, behold this cordial jalap here,
That flames and dances in his cryſtal bounds,
With ſpirits of balm, and fragrant ſyrops mixt. Milton.
Thoſe expreſſed juices contain the true eſſential ſalt of
the plant; for if they be boiled into the conſiſtence of a ſy-
rup, and ſet in a cool place, the eſſential ſalt of the plant
will ſhoot upon the ſides of the veſſels. Arbuthnot.
Si'RUPED. adj. [from ſirup.] Sweet, like ſirup; bedeved with
ſweets. *
Yet when there haps a honey fall,
We'll lick the ſyrupt leaves:
And tell the bees that their's is gall. Drayton's Q, of Cynthia.
SI(RUPY. adj. [from ſtrup.] Reſembling ſirup.
Apples are of a ſirupy tenacious nature.
Sise. n.ſ. [contracted from aſſize.]
You ſaid, if I returned next ſize in lent,
I ſhould be in remitter of your grace. Donne.
S1’s KIN. m. ſ. A bird; a green finch.
SI's TER. m. ſ. ſpeopter, Saxon; zºſter, Dutch J
1. A woman born of the ſame parents; correlative to brother.
Her ſiſter began to ſcold. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
I have ſaid to corruption, thou art my father: to the worm,
thou art my mother and my ſºfter. job. xvii. 14.
2. One of the ſame faith; a chriſtian. One of the ſame nature,
human being.
If a brother or ſiſter be naked, and deſtitute of food, and
you ſay unto them, depart in peace, be you warmed and fil-
led: notwithſtanding you give them not thoſe things which
are needful to the body, what doth it profit? james ii. 15.
3. A woman of the ſame kind.
He chid the ſiſters,
And bade them ſpeak to him. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
4. One of the ſame kind; one of the ſame office.
The women, who would rather wreſt the laws,
Than let aſſier-plaintiff loſe the cauſe,
As judges on the bench more gracious are,
And more attent to brothers of the bar,
Cry’d one and all, the ſuppliant ſhould have right:
And to the grandame hag adjudg’d the knight. Dryden.
There grew two olives, cloſeſt of the grove,
With roots entwin'd, and branches interwove :
Alike their leaves, but not alike they ſmil'd
With ſifter-fruits: one fertile, one was wild. Pope.
Si's re R in law. m. ſ. A huſband or wife's ſiſter.
Thyſſier in law is gone back unto her people: return thou
after thy ſifter in law. Ruth i. 15.
Si's TER Hood. m. ſ. [from ſ/her.]
1. The office or duty of a ſiſter.
he abhorr'd
Her proper blood, and left to do the part - -
Of ſ/herhood, to do that of a wife. Daniel's Civil //ar.
2. A ſet of ſiſters.
3. A number of women of the ſame order.
I ſpeak,
Wiſhing a more ſtrićt reſtraint
Upon the ſºłerhood, the votariſts of Saint Clare. S'akeſ).
A woman who flouriſhes in her innocence, amidit that
ſpite and rancour which prevails among her exaſperated ſ/leº-
hood, appears more amiable. Addſ,’s Freeholder.
S1’s TERLY. adj. [from ſ/ler. J. Like a ſiſter ; becoming a
ſiſter.
Mortimer.
After much debatement,
My ſºº'erly remorſe confutes mine honour,
And I did yield to him. Shakespeare.
preterite, I ſat. [ſtan, Gothick; rittan, Sax.
h. -
**- - -
2 * * * * * . ºf
* *
º * . . . . ." ...
* * * : - - - -
I. T; º upon the buttocks.
* Yere ſtays on each ſide of the ſitting place. I Cºron,
He ſat for alms at the beautiful gate. g pſ Acts ili. Io.
Their wives do ſit beſide th di • rº' - -
Aloft in awful ſtate, em carding wool. May's Wirgil.
The godlike hero ſat
On his imperial throne.
2. To perch.
All new faſhions be pleaſant to me,
I will have them whether I thrive or thee
Now I am a friſker, all men on me loºk.'
What ſhould I do but ſit cock on the hoop
Wº do I care if all the world me fail,
will have a garment reach to my tail.
3. To be in a ſtate of reſt, or iº. Bourd.
Shall your brethren go to war, and ſhall ye ſit here? Num.
Why ſit we here each other viewingidly. Milton.
4. To be in any local poſition. -
I ſhould be ſtill
Plucking the graſs to know where ſits the wind:
Peering in maps for ports. Shakeſp. Merch, of Venice.
Thoſe
Appointed to ſit there had left their charge. Milton.
The ſhips are ready, and the wind ſits fair. A. Philips.
5. To reſt as a weight or burthen.
Your brother's death fits at your heart. Shakeſpeare.
When God lets looſe upon us a ſickneſs, if we fear to die,
then the calamity fits heavy on us. Taylor.
To toſs and fling, and to be reſtleſs, only galls our fores,
and makes the burden that is upon us ſit more uneaſy. Tillotſon.
Fear, the laſt of ills, remain’d behind,
And horrour, heavy ſat on every mind. Dryden.
Our whole endeavours are intent to get rid of the preſent
evil, as the firſt neceſſary condition to our happineſs. No-
thing, as we paſſionately think, can equal the uneaſineſs that
fits ſo heavy upon us. Locke.
6. To ſettle; to abide.
That this new comer ſhame,
There ſit not and reproach us. Milton.
When Thetis bluſh'd, in purple not her own,
And from her face the breathing winds were blown;
A ſudden ſilence ſate upon the ſea,
And ſweeping oars, with ſtruggling, urg'd their way. Dryd.
He to the void advanc'd his pace,
Pale horrour ſat on each Arcadian face. Dryden;
7. To brood; to incubate.
As the partridge ſitteth on eggs, find hatcheth them not, ſo
he that getteth riches not by right, ſhall leave them in the
midſt of his days. jer. xvii. 1 1.
The egg laid and ſever'd from the body of the hen, hath
no more nouriſhment from the hen; but only a quickening
Dryden.
heat when ſhe ſitteth. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
She miſtakes a piece of chalk for an egg, and ſits upon it in
the ſame manner. Addiſon.
8. To be adjuſted; to be with reſpect to fitneſs or unfitneſs,
decorum or indecorum.
This new and gorgeous garment, majeſty,
Sits not ſo eaſy on me as you think.
Heav'n knows,
By what by-paths, and indireét crook'd ways
I met this crown; and I myſelf know well,
How troubleſome it ſate upon my head ;
To thee it ſhall deſcend with better quiet. Shakeſpeare,
Your preferring that to all other conſiderations does, in the
eyes of all men, ſit well upon you. Locke.
9. To be placed in order to be painted.
One is under no more obligation to extol every thing he
finds in the author he tranſlates, than a painter is to make
every face that ſits to him handſome. Garth.
10. To be in any ſituation or condition. - -
As a farmer cannot huſband his ground ſo well, if he/ſt at
a great rent; ſo the merchant cannot drive his trade ſo well,
if he ſit at great uſury. Bacon.
Suppoſe all the church-lands were thrown up to the laity;
would the tenants ſit eaſier in their rents than now * Swift.
11. To be fixed, as an aſſembly;
12. To be placed at the table.
Whether is greater he that ſitteth at meat, or he that. ſerv-
cth 2 Luke xxii. 27.
Shakeſheare.
13. To exerciſe authority. * - -
The judgment ſhallſit, and take away his dominion. Dan.
Aſſes are ye that ſit in judgment. judges v. Io.
Down to the golden Cherſoneſe, or where
The Perſian in Echatan ſate. - Milton.
One councilſt, upon life and death, the other is for taxes,
and a third for the diſtributions of juſtice. Addiſon.
Aſſert, ye fair ones, who in judgment ſit,
Your anciënt empire over love and wit. Rowe.
14. To be in any ſolemn aſſembly as a member. . . .
The hundred and twenty men ſat in council daily. I Mac.
15. Tº Sir dºwn. Dºwn is little more than emphatical.
~ ſt dºwn to meat. Luke xvii. 7.
Co and /t º E When<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I T
S I X
dºwn to our meal, we need not ſuſpect the
t -
when weſi d uninvited gueſts. Decay of Piety.
intruſion of armº
. To begin a fiege. - -
16. º enemy have ſate down before it, till they
had done their buſineſs in all other places. Clarendon.
17. Tº Sit down. To reſt; to ceaſe ſatisfied. -
7. Here we cannot ſit dºw", but ſtill proceed in our ſearch,
and look higher for a ſuppºrt. Rogers.
18. To SIt down. To ſettle; to fix abode.
From beſides Tanais, the Goths, Huns, and Getes ſat
down. Spenſer.
19. To Sit out. To be without engagement or employment:
They are glad, rather than fit out, to play...very ſmall
ame, and to make uſe of argumen.” ſuch as will not prove
a bare inexpediency. Bp. Sanderſon's judgment.
26. T. Sir up. To riſe from lying to ſitting. --
He that was dead, ſat up, and began to ſpeak. Luke vii.
21. To Sit up. To watch; not to go to bed.
Be courtly,
And entertain, and feaſt, ſit up, and revel;
Call all the great, the fair and ſpirited dames
Of Rome about thee, and begin a faſhion
Of freedom.
'some/it up late at winter-fires, and fit
Their ſharp-edg’d tools. May.
Moſt children ſhorten that time by ſitting up with the ºom-
pany at night. Locke.
To Sit. v. a. -
1. To keep the ſeat upon.
Hardly the muſe can ſit the head-ſtrong horſe,
Nor would ſhe, if ſhe could, check his impetuous force.Prior.
2. [when the reciprocal pronoun follows ſit, it ſeems to be an
active verb.] To place on a ſeat.
The happieſt youth viewing his progreſs through,
what perils paſt, what croſſes to enſue,
would ſhut the book, and ſit him down and die. Shakeſp.
He came to viſit us, and calling for a chair, ſat him down,
and we ſat down with him. Bacon.
Thus fenc'd,
But not at reſt or eaſe of mind,
They ſat them down to weep. Milton.
3. To be ſettled to do buſineſs.
The court was ſat before fir Roger came, but the juſtices
made room for the old knight at the head of them. Addiſon.
Site. n.ſ.. [ſtus, Latin.]
1. Situation; local poſition.
The city ſelf he ſtrongly fortifies,
Benjohn ºw.
Three ſides by ſiteit well defenced has. Fairfax.
Manifold ſtreams of goodly navigable rivers, as ſo many
chains, environed the ſame ſite and temple. Bacon.
If we conſider the heart in its conſtituent parts, we ſhall
find nothing fingular, but what is in any muſcle. , 'Tis only
the ſite and poſture of their ſeveral parts that give it the form
and functions of a heart. Bentley.
Before my view appear'd a ſtrućture fair,
Its ſite uncertain if on earth or air. Pope.
2. It is taken by Thomſon for poſture, or ſituation of a thing
with reſpect to itſelf: but improperly.
And leaves the ſemblance of a lover fix’d
In melancholy ſite, with head declin'd,
And love-dejected eyes.
Si’t FA st. n. ſ. [ſt and foſ!..]
A hard knob growing under the ſaddle. Farrier's Diff.
SITH. adv. [rice, Saxon.] Since; ſeeing that. Obſolete.
What ceremony of odours uſed about the bodies of the
dead after which cuſtom notwithſtanding, ſith it was their
cuſtom, our Lord was contented that his own moſt precious
blood ſhould be intombed. Hooker.
Not I, my lord; ſith true nobility
Warrants theſe words in princely courteſe. Shakeſpeare.
I thank you for this profit, and from hence
I'll love no friend, ſith love breeds ſuch offence. Shakeſp.
SIT H E. m. ſ. [riče, Saxon. This word is very variouſly writ-
ten by authors: I have choſen the orthography which is at
once moſt ſimple and moſt agreeable to etymology.] The
inſtrument of mowing; a crooked blade joined at right angles
to a long pole. - b
Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live regiſtred upon our brazen tombs;
And then grace us in the diſgrace of death:
When, ſpight of cormorant-devouring time,
Th’ endeavour of this preſent breath may buy
That honour which ſhall 'bate his ſythe's keen edge;
And nake us heirs of all eternity. Shakeſpeare.
l me is commonly drawn upon tombs, in gardens, and other
º an old man, bald, winged with a ſithe, and an hour-
9, "The dei - Peacham on Drawing.
And th rude impetuous rage does ſtorm and fret;
Swinoi ºre, as maſter of this murd'ring brood,
Y.". * huge ſcithe, ſtands impartial death,
ith endleſs buſineſs almoſt out of breath Craſhaw
The milk-maid fingeth blithe, * - -
And the mower whets his ſcithe. Milton.
Thomſºn's Spring.
The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;
But uſeleſs lances into ſythes ſhall bend,
And the broad faulchion in a plough-ſhare end. Pope.
Grav'd o'er their ſeats the form of time was found,
His ſythe revers'd, and both his pinions bound. Pope.
But, Stella, ſay, what evil tongue
. Reports you are no longer young?
That time ſits with his ſythe to mow
Where erſt ſat Cupid with his bow. Swift,
Echo no more returns the chearful ſound
Of ſharpening ſythe. Thomſon's Summer.
Si’thence. adv. [Now contracted to ſince. See Since..] Sinces
in latter times. 3.
This over-running and waſting of the realm was the begin-
ning of all the other evils which ſthence have afflicted that
land. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Sithes. n.ſ. Times. Spenſer.
Si’THNess. adv. Since. Spenſer.
SI'TTER. m. ſ. [from ſit..]
1. One that ſits.
The Turks are great ſitters, and ſeldom walk; whereby
they ſweat leſs, and need bathing more. Bacon.
2. A bird that broods.
The oldeſt hens are reckoned the beſt ſitters; and the young-
eſt the beſt layers. Mortimer's Hºftani.
SITTING. m. ſ. [from ſit.]
1. The poſture of fitting on a ſeat.
2. The act of reſting on a ſeat.
Thou knoweſt my down-ſitting and mine up riſing. Pſal.
3. A time at which one exhibits himſelf to a painter.
Few good pićtures have been finiſhed at one ſitting; nei-
ther can a good play be produced at a heat. Dryden.
4. A meeting of an aſſembly.
I'll write you down;
The which ſhall point you forth at every ſitting,
What you muſt ſay. Shakeſpeare:
I wiſh it may be at that fitting concluded, unleſs the ne-
ceſſity of the time preſs it. Bacon.
5. A courſe of ſtudy unintermitted.
For the underſtanding of any one of St. Paul's epiſtles, I
read it all through at one ſitting. Lock.
6. A time for which one ſits without riſing.
What more than madneſs reigns,
When one ſhort fitting many hundred drains,
And not enough is left him to ſupply
Board-wages, or a footman's livery. Dryden.
7. Incubation.
whilſt the hen is covering her eggs, the male bird take:
his ſtand upon a neighbouring bough, and amuſes her with
his ſongs during the whole time of her ſitting. Addiſon.
Situ At E. part. adj. [from ſitus, Latin.]
1. Placed with reſpect to any thing elſe.
. He was reſolved to chaſe a war, rather than to have Bre-
tagne carried by France, being ſo great and opulent a duchy,
and ſituate ſo opportunely to annoy England. Bacon.
Within a trading town they long abide, -
Full fairly ſituate on a haven's ſide. Dryden's Nun's Prieff.
The eye is a part ſo artificially compoſed, and commodi-
ouſly ſituate, as nothing can be contrived better for uſe, orna-
ment, or ſecurity. Ray on the Creation.
2. Placed; conſiſting.
Earth hath this variety from heav'n,
Of pleaſure ſituate in hill and dale. Milton's Parad, Lºft.
Situation. m. ſ. [from ſituate; ſituatiºn, French.]
1: Local reſpect; poſition. -
Prince Ceſàrini has a palace in a pleaſant ſtº", and
ſet off with many beautiful walks. Addison's Italy.
2. Condition; ſtate. ----
Though this is a ſituation of the greateſt eaſe and tranquilli:
ty in human life, yet this is by no means fit tº be the ſubject
of all men's petitions to God. Rºger's Sermonſ.
Six. m.ſ. [ſix, French.] Twice three; one more than five.
Nóicident in the piece or play but muſt car." the
main deſign; all things elſe are like ſix fingers tº the hand,
when nature can do her work with five. Dryden.
That of ſix hath many reſpects in it, not only for the
days of the creation, but its natural conſideration, as being *
perfect number. Brown's Pulgar Bºº".
Six and ſeven. n.ſ. To be at ſix and ſeven, is to be ** ſtate Q
diſorder and confuſion.
All is uneven,
And everything is left at ſix and ſeven. Shakeſpeare.
In 1588, there ſat in the ſee of Rome a fierce º
friar, that would ſet all at ſix and ſeven, or at ſix and five,
you allude to his name. Bacºn.
What blinder bargain e're was driv'n, -
Or wager laid at ſix and ſeven. Hudibra:
John once, turned his mother out of doors, * his great
ſorrow; for his affairs went on at ſixes and ſeven” Arbuthnol.
The goddeſs would no longer wait;
But raiſing from her chair of ſtate,
Left all below at ſix and ſeven, -
Harneſs'd her doves and flew to heav'n, Swift.
SI'xPENCE-
t
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S I Z.
S K E
Sixpence. n.ſ.. [ſix and pence.] A coin; half a ſhilling:
Where have you left the money that I gave you ?
Oh!—ſixpence that I had. Shakeſpeare.
The wiſeſt man might bluſh,
If D–lov’d ſixpence more than he. Pope.
Sixsco'RE. adj. [ſix and ſcore.] Six times twenty.
Si ſcºre and five miles it containeth in circuit. Sandyr.
The crown of Spain hath enlarged the bounds thereof with-
in this laſt ſixſcore years, much more than the Ottomans. Bacon.
Sixtee'N. adj. [rixtyne, Saxon.] Six and ten.
I have been begging ſixteen years in court. Shake peare.
It returned the voice thirteen times; and I have heard of
others that it would return ſixteen times. Bacon.
If men lived but twenty years, we ſhould be ſatisfied if they
died about ſixteen or eighteen. - Taylor.
Si's TEENTH, adj. [rixteoja, Saxon.] The fixth after the tenth;
the ordinal of ſixteen.
The firſt lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the ſixteenth to Im-
Iner. I Chron. xxiv. 14.
Sixth. 6d. [rixa, Saxon.] The firſt after the fifth ; the
ordinal of ſix.
You are more clement than vile men,
Who of their broken debtors take
A ſixth, letting them thrive again. Shakeſpeare.
. There ſucceeded to the kingdom of England James the
ſixth, then king of Scotland. Bacon.
Sixth. n.ſ. [from the adjećlive..] A fixth part.
Only the other half would have been a tolerable ſeat for
rational creatures, and five ſixth, of the whole globe would
have been rendered uſeleſs. Cheyne's Philoſ Principles.
Sixthly, adv. [from ſix.] In the fixth place.
Sixthly, living creatures have more diverſity of organs than
plants. Bacon.
Sixtieth. adj. rixteozoja, Saxon.] The tenth fix times
repeated; the ordinal of fixty.
Let the appearing circle of the fire be three foot diameter,
and the time of one entire circulation of it the ſixtieth part of
a minute, in a whole day there will be but 864oo ſuch
parts. Digby on Bodies.
Sixty. adj. [rixtº, Saxon.] Six times ten.
When the boats were come within ſixty yards of the pil-
lar, they found themſelves all bound, and could go no far-
ther. Bacon.
Of which 7 times 9, or the year 63, is conceived to carry
with it the moſt conſiderable fatality. Brown's V. lg. Errouri.
Size. n.ſ. [perhaps rath r ciſ, fom incia, Latin; or from
aſſe, French J Bulk; quantity of ſure ficies; comparative
magnitude.
I ever narrified my friends,
With all the ſize that verity
Would without lapſing ſuffer. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
If any decayed ſhip be new made, it is more fit to make her
a ſize leſs than bigger. Raleigh.
The diſtance judg’d for ſhot of ev'ry ſize,
The linſtocks touch, the pond’rous ball expires. Dryden.
Objećts near our view are thought greater than thoſe of a
larger ſize, that are more remote. Locke.
The martial goddeſs,
Like thee, Telemachus, in voice and ſize, -
With ſpeed divine, from ſtreet to ſtreet ſhe flies;
She bids the mariners prepare to ſtand. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. [/ſº, old French..] A ſettled quantity. In the following
paſſage it ſeems to ſignify the allowance of the table: whence
they ſay a ſizer at Cambridge.
'Tis not in thee
To cut off my train, to ſcant my ſizes,
And, in concluſion, to oppoſe the bolt
Againſt my coming in. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. Figurative bulk ; condition.
This agrees too in the contempt of men of a leſs ſize and
quality. L’Eſtrange.
They do not confider the difference between elaborate diſ-
courſes, delivered to princes or parliaments, and a plain ſer-
inon, intended for the middling or lower ſize of people.
Swft.
4. [Siſa, Italian.] Any viſcous or glutinous ſubſtance.
To Size. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To adjuſt, or arrange according to ſize. .
The foxes weigh the geeſe they carry,
And ere they venture on a ſtream, -
Know how to ſize themſelves and them. Hudibras.
Two troops ſo match'd were never to be found,
Such bodies built for ſtrength, of equal age,
In ſtature fiz'd. Dryden's Knights Tale.
2. [From affiſe.] To ſettle ; to fix.
There was a ſtatute for diſperſing the ſtandard of the ex-
chequer throughout England; thereby to ſize weights and
meaſures. Bacon', Henry VII.
3. To cover with glutinous matter; to beſmear with ſize.
Si'zED. adj. [from ſize.] Having a particular magnitude.
What my love is, proof hath made you know,
And as my love is ſiz'd, my fear is ſo. Shakespeare.
9
That will be a great horſe to a Welſhman, which is but a
ſmall one to a Fleming; having, from the different breed
of their countries, taken ſeveral ſized ideas, to which they
compare their great and their litté. Locke.
Sizeable. adi, [from fize.J. Reaſonably bulky.
He ſhould be purged, ſweated, vomited, and ſtarved, till
he come to a ſze ble bulk. A buthnºt.
Size R. or Servitor. m. ſ. A certain rank of ſtudents in the uni-
verſities.
They make a ſcramble for degree:
Maſters of all ſorts and of all ages,
Keepers, ſubſiſers, lackeys, pages. Bp. Corbet.
Size Rs. n. ſ. See Sciss ARs. -
A buttrice and pincers, a hammer and naile,
An apron and fºxer for he d and for taile, Tuſſer.
Srziness. n.ſ.. [from ſizy. Glutinouſneſs; viſcoſity.
In rheumatiſms, the ſzinſ, paſs off thick contents in the
urine, or glutinous ſweats. Aloyer on the Humours.
Cºld is capable of producing a ſzinſ; and viſcoſity in the
blood. . Arbuthnot.
Si’zy, adj. [from ſize.] Viſcous; glutinous.
. The blood is ſz., the alkaleſcent ſalts in the ſerum produ-
cing coriaceous concretions. Arbuthnot on Diet.
Škaddle. n: ſ [rceabnirre, Saxon J Hurt; damage. Dićt.
ŠKA'DDoNs. m. ſ. The embryos of bees. Bailey.
Skein. m. ſ. . [eftaigne, French..] A knot of thread or fift.
wound and doubled.
Why art thou then exaſperate, thou idle immaterial ſtein
of ſley'd ſilk, thou taſſel of a prodigal's purſe 2 Shakeſp.
Qur ſtile ſhould be like a ſkein of filk, to be found by the
right thread, not ravell'd or perplexed. Then all is a knot,
a heap. Ben. johnſon.
- Beſides, ſo lazy a brain as mine is, grows ſoon weary when
it has ſo entangled a ſkein as this to unwind. Digby.
SKA'ssMAT e. n ſ II ſuppoſe from ſtain, or ſkean, a knife,
and mate, a meſſmate.] It is remarkable that mes, Dutch,
is a knife.
Scurvy knave, I am none of his flirt gills;
I am none of his ſain/mates. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet,
SKA" E. m. ſ. [rceaboa, Saxon.]
I. A flat ſea fiſh.
2. A ſort of ſhoe armed with iron, for ſliding on the ice.
- They ſweep
On ſounding ſkate; a thouſand different ways,
In circling poiſe ſwift as the winds. Thomſºn.
SKEA. J. n.ſ. l Iriſh and Erſe; rageme, Saxon.] A ſhort ſword;
a knife.
Any diſpoſed to do miſchief, may under his mantle privily
carry his head-piece, ſea", or piſtol, to be always ready. penſer.
The Iriſh did not fail in courage or fierceneſs, but being
only armed with darts and ſkeines, it was rather an execution
than a fight upon them. Bacon's Henry VII.
SKEG m. ſ. A wild plum.
Ske GGER. m. ſ.
Little ſalmons called ſtaggers, are bred of ſuch ſick ſalmon
that might not go to the ſea, and though they abound, yet
never thrive to any bigneſs. //altºn's Angler.
SK e'le ron. m. ſ. ſaxºx#13;, Greek.]
1. [In anatomy.] The bones of the body preſerved together
as much as can be in their natural ſituation. &amp;incey.
When rattling bones together fly,
From the four corners of the ſky;
When ſinews o'er the ſkeletons are ſpread,
Thoſe cloth'd with fleſh, and life inſpires the dead. Dryden.
A ſkeleton, in outward figure,
His meagre corps, though full of vigour, }
Would halt behind him were it bigger. Swift.
2. The compages of the principal parts.
The great ſtructure itſelf, and its great integrals, the hea-
venly and elementary bodies, are framed in ſuch a poſition
and ſituation, the great ſkeleton of the world. Hale.
The ſchemes of any of the arts or ſciences may be ana-
lyzed in a ſort of ſkeletºn, and repreſented upon tables, with
the various dependencies of their ſeveral parts. ſ/att.
Skellu M. n.ſ.. [ſelin, German.] A villain; a ſcoundrel. Skin.
Ske P. m. ſ. [rceppen, lower Saxon, to draw.] -
1. Skep is a ſort of baſket, narrow at the bottom, and wide
at the top to fetch corn in. -
A †. a doongforke, ſeeve, ſº, and a bin. Tºſºr.
2. In Scotland, the repoſitories where the bees lay their ho-
ney is ſtill called ſkep. -
sº n ſ. tºº. Gr.ſºptique, French.] One who
doubts, or pretends to doubt of every thing,
Bring the cauſe unto the bar; whoſe authority none muſt.
diſclaim, and leaſt of all thoſe ſcepticº in religion. Dec. of Piety.
Survey -
Nature's extended face, then ſepticº ſay,
In this wide field of wonders can you find
No art. - Blackmore.
with too much knowledge for the ſettick; ſide,
with too much weakneſs for the ſtoicks pride,
Man hangs between. Pope's Eſſay on º:
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S K 1
S K I
- a- - - hi d the ſceptick be-
The dogmatiſt is ſure of everything, an } |. Logick.
lieves nothing. - -
lieves n - m ºptick.] Doubtful; pretending to
Sºrºrical, ºff. [**
iverſal doubt. -
"...". Father of mercies confirm the ſceptical and wa-
in minds, and ſo prevent us that ſtand faſt, in all our do-
... further us § his continual help. Bently.
Skepticism. n.ſ.. [ſcepticiſme, French, from ſceptick.] Univer-
ſal doubt; pretence or profeſſion of univerſal doubt. . .
I laid by my natural diffidence and ſcepticiſm for a while, to
take up that dogmatick way. Dryden.
Sketch. m.ſ. [Jihaula, Latin.] An outline; a rough draught;
a firſt plan.
I ſhall not attempt a charader of his preſent majeſty, hav-
ing already given an imperfect ſetch of it. Addiſon.
As the lighteſt ſketch, if juſtly trac'd,
Is by ill colouring but the more diſgrac'd,
So by falſe learning is goºd ſenſe defac'd, Pºpe
To Sketch. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To draw, by tracing the outline. -
If a piéure is daubed with many glaring colours, the vul:
gar eye admires it; whereas he judges very contemptuouſly of
iſome admirable deſign ſketched out only with, a black pen-
cil, though by the hand of Raphael. . - J/atti's Logick.
2. To plan, by giving the firſt or principal notion.
The reader I'll leave in the midſt of ſilence, to contemplate
thoſe ideas which I have only ſketch'd, and which every man
muſt finiſh for himſelf. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Skew ER. n.ſ. [ ſkere, Daniſh..] A wooden or iron pin, uſed
to keep meat in form.
Sweet breeds and collops were with ſkewers prick'd
About the ſides. Dryden's Iliad.
From his rug the ſkewer he takes,
And on the ſtick ten equal notches makes. Swift.
I once may overlook,
A ſkewer ſent to table by my cook. King.
Send up meat well ſtuck with ſkewers, to make it look round;
and an iron ſkewer, when rightly employed, will make it look
handſomer. Swift's Directions to the Cook.
To Skew ER. v. a. [from the noun.J. To faſten with ſkewers.
Ski FF. m. ſ. ſeſquiſe, French; ſcapha, Lat..] A ſmall light boat.
If in two ſkiff of cork, a loadſtone and ſteel be placed with-
in the orb of their activities, the one doth not move, the other
ſtanding ſtill ; but both ſteer into each other.
Brown's Wugar Errours.
In a poor ſkiff he paſs'd the bloody main,
Choak'd with the ſlaughter'd bodies of his train. Dryden,
On Garrway cliffs
A ſavage race by ſhipwreck fed,
Lie waiting for the founder'd ſkiff,
And ſtrip the bodies of the dead. Swift.
Ski'l Ful. adj. [ſkill and full.] Knowing; qualified with ſkill;
poſſeſſing any art; dexterous; able.
His father was a man of Tyre, ſkilful to work in gold and
ſilver. 2 Chron. ii. 14.
They ſhall call the huſbandman to mourning, and ſuch as
are ſkilful of lamentation, to wailing. Arnos v. 16.
Will Vafer is ſkilful at finding out the ridiculous fide of a
thing, and placing it in a new light. Tatler.
Say, Stella, feel you no content,
Reflecting on a life well ſpent;
Your ſkilful hand employ'd to ſave
Deſpairing wretches from the grave:
And then ſupporting with your ſtore
Thoſe whom you dragg'd from death before: Swift.
Inſtructors ſhould not only be ſkilful in thoſe ſciences which
they teach; but have ſkill in the method of teaching, and
patience in the practice. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
SKI'LFULLY. adv. [from ſkilful..] With ſkill; with art; with
uncommon ability; dexterouſly. -
As ſoon as he came near me, in fit diſtance, with much fury,
but with fury ſkiffully guided, he ran upon me. Sidney.
Ulyſſes builds a ſhip with his own hands, as ſºilfully as a
flipwright. Broome.
sº ºutsº n: ſ [from ſkilful..] Art; ability; dextrouſ-
CIS.
He fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and
guided them by the Kilºngſ of his hands. Pſalms lxxviii. 72.
Skill. n.ſ. [ſã, Iſlandick.]
1. Knowledge of any practice or art; readineſs in any pra-
ctice; knowledge; dexterity; artfulneſs.
Skill in the weapon is nothing without ſack. Shakespeare.
- You have -
#. little ſkill to fear, as I have purpoſe
9 put you toºt,
*"ºthing profits more
º ºfeſſºn grounded on juſt and right,
...'..."," ºf that will the more hºnowſ
he more ſhe will ack ore thou know it,...
I will from w As nowledge thee her head. Milton.
"rºus principles ordain
A race unlike the firſt, and try my ſkill again. Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
Phocion the Athenian general, then ambaſſ dor from the
ſtate, by his great wiſdom and fill at negotiations, diverted
Alexander from the conqueſt of Athens, and reſtored the Ath.
nians to his favour. Swift.
2. Any particular art. - -
Learned in one ſkill, and in another kind of learning un-
ſkilful. Hocker.
To Skill. v. m. [ſkilia, Iſlandick.]
1. To be knowing in; to be dextrous at.
They that ſkill not of ſo heavenly matter,
All that they know not, envy or admire. Stenſºr.
The overſeers were all that could ſkill of inſtrument; of
muſick. 2 Ch'an. xxxiv. 12.
One man of wiſdom, experience, learning, and direct.
may judge better in thoſe things that he can ſkill of, than º
thouſand others that be ignorant. // iſºft.
2. [Sáilia, Iſlandick, ſignifies to diſtinguiſh] To differ.’’,
make difference; to intereſt; to matter. Not in uſe.
Whether the commandments cf God in ſcripture be gene.
ral or ſpecial, it ſkilleth not. ii,&amp;r.
What ſkills it, if a bag of ſtones or gold
About thy neck do drown thee raiſe thy head,
Take ſtars for money; ſtars not to be told,
By any art: yet to be purchas'd.
R. is ſo waſtful as the ſcraping dame,
She loſeth three for one; her ſoul, reſt, fame. Herbert.
He intending not to make a ſummer buſineſ of it, but a
reſolute war, without term prefixed, until he had recovered
France, it ſkilled not much when he began the war, eſpecial-
ly having Calais at his back where he might winter. Bacon.
Ski'LLED. adj. [from ſkill.] Knowing; dextrous; acquainted
with.
Of theſe nor skilled nor ſtudious. Milton.
Moſes, in all the Egyptian arts was ſkill'd,
When heav'nly power that choſen veſſel fill’d. Denham.
He muſt be very little ſkill'd in the world, who thinks that
a voluble tongue ſhall accompany only a good underſtand-
ing. Lock.
Ski'l less, adj. [from ſkill.] Wanting art. Not in uſe.
Nor have I ſeen
More that I may call men than you:
How features are abroad I'm ſkilleſ of
Jealouſly what might befal your travel,
Being ſkilleſ, in theſe parts; which to a ſtranger
Unguided and unfriended, often prove
Rough and unhoſpitable. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Thy wit, that ornament to ſhape and love,
Miſhapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a ſkillſ; ſoldier's flaſk
Is ſet on fire. Shakespeare's Romeo and juliet.
SKI'll ET. m. ſ. [ſcuellette, French.] A ſmall kettle or boiler.
When light-wing'd toys
Of feather'd Cupid foil with wanton dullneſs
My ſpeculative and offic’d inſtruments,
Let houſe-wives make a ſkillet of my helm,
And all indign and baſe adverſities
Make head againſt my eſtimation. Shakeſpeare's Otelo.
Break all the wax, and in a kettle or ſkillet ſet it over a
ſoft fire. Mºrtimer's Huſbandy.
Skilt. n.ſ. [A word uſed by Cleaveland, of which I know
not either the etymology or meaning J
Smeitymnus ! haſ what art? -
Syriack? Or Arabick? Or Welſh : What ſkiltº
Ape all the bricklayers that Babel built. Cºveland.
To Skim. v. a. [properly to ſcum, from ſcum ; ſtume, French-l
1. To clear off from the upper part, by paſſing a veſſel a little
below the ſurface.
My coz Tom, or his coz Mary,
Who hold the plough or ſkim the dairy, -
My fav'rite books, and pictures ſell. Prior.
2. To take by ſkimming. -
She bóils in kettles muſt of wine, and ſºns
With leaves the dregs that overflow the brims..... Dryden.
His principal ſtudies were after the work of Titiºn, whoſe
cream he has ſkimm'd. Dryden's Durºſ cy.
The ſurface of the ſea is covered with its bubbles, while
it riſes, which they skim off into their boats, and afterwards
Adijan.
Shakeſpeare.
ſeparate in pots. -
p whilome I’ve ſeen her skim the cloated cream,
And preſs from ſpongy curds the milky ſtream. Gay.
3. To bruſh the ſurface flightly ; to paſs very near the ſurface.
- Nor ſeeks in air her humble flight to raiſe,
Content to ſim the ſurface of the ſeas. Dryde".
The ſwallow ſkims the river's watry face. Dryden,
A winged eaſtern blaſt juſt skimming o'er !---
The ocean's brow, and ſinking on the ſhore. Prior.
4. To cover ſuperficially. Improper.
Dang'rous flats in ſecret ambuſh lay,
Where the falſe tides ſkim o'er the cover'd land,
And ſtamen with diſſembled depths betray. Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2 To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S K I
S K I
*-*.
- -
* -
º
[.
*
.#
º
£,
2
º
To SKIM. v. n. To paſs lightly; to glide along.
Thin airy ſhapes o'er the furrows riſe,
A dreadful ſcene ! and ſim before his eyes. Addison.
When Ajax ſtrives ſome rock's vaſt weight to throw,
The line too labours, and the words move ſlow ;
Not ſo when ſwift Camilla ſcours the plain,
Flies o'er th’unbending corn, and ſkims along the main. Pope.
Such as have ačtive ſpirits, who are ever ſkimming over the
ſurface of things with a volatile ſpirit, will fix nothing in their
memory. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
They ſºn over a ſcience in a very ſuperficial ſurvey, and
never lead their diſciples into the depths of it. // atts.
The boat, light ſkimº i g, ſtretch'd his oary wings. Thomſ.
Ski'MBLE skAMBLE, adj. [A cant word formed by reduplica-
tion from ſcamble.] Wandering; wild.
A couching lion and a ramping cat,
And ſuch a deal of ſkimbleſ&amp;amble ſtuff,
As puts me from my faith. Shakespeare.
SKI'M M.E.R. m. ſ. [from ſkim.] A ſhallow veſſel with which
the ſcum is taken off.
Waſh your wheat in three or four waters, ſtirring it round;
and with a ſkimmer, each time, take off the light. Mortimer.
Sk'ſ MM II. K. m. ſ. [ſkin and milk.] Milk from which the cream
has been taken.
Then cheeſe was brought: ſays Slouch, this e'en ſhall roll;
This is ſkimmilk, and therefore it ſhall go. King.
SKIN: n ſ. [ſkind, Daniſh.]
1. The natural covering of the fleſh. It conſiſts of the cuticle,
outward ſkin, or ſcarf ſkin, which is thin and inſenſible, and
the cutis, or inner ſkin, extremely ſenſible.
The body is conſumed to nothing, the ſºn feeling rough
and dry like leather. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The prieſt on ſkins of off'rings takes his eaſe,
And nightly viſions in his ſlumber ſees. Dryden’s Aºn.
2. Hide; pelt; that which is taken from animals to make parch-
ment or leather.
3. The body; the perſon.
We meet with many of theſe dangerous civilities, wherein
'tis hard for a man to ſave both his ſkin and his credit. L’E/ir.
To Ski N. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To flay; to ſtrip or diveſt of the ſkin.
The beavers run to the door to make their eſcape, are there
intangled in the nets, ſeized by the Indians, and immediately
ſkinned. Ellis's /oyage.
2. To cover with the ſkin.
It will but ſkin and film the ulcerous place,
Whilſt rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unſeen. Shakeſpeare.
Authority, though it err like others,
Has yet a kind of medicine in itſelf, -
That ſkins the vice o' th' top. Shake?, Maſ fºr Maſ.
The wound was ſkinned; but the ſtrength of his thigh was
not reſtored. Dryden.
It only patches up and ſkin; it over, but reaches not to the
bottom of the ſore. Locke.
The laſt ſtage of healing, criſinning over, is called cica-
trization. - Sharp's Surgery.
3. To cover ſuperficially.
What I took for ſolid earth was only heaps of rubbiſh,
finned over with a covering of vegetables. Addison.
Ski NK.. n.ſ. [rcenc, Saxon.]
1. Drink; any thing potable.
2. Pottage.
Scotch ſkink, which is a pottage of ſtrong nouriſhment, is
made with the knees and finews of beef, but long boiled; jel-
ly alſo of knuckles of veal. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
To SKINK. v. n. [rcencan, Saxon.] To ſerve drink. Both
noun and verb are wholly obſolete.
Ski'N KER. m. ſ. [from ſkink.] One that ſerves drink.
I give thee this pennyworth of ſugar, clapt even now into
my hand by an under ſkinker; one that never ſpake other Eng-
liſh in his life, than eight ſhillings and ſix pence, and you are
welcome, ſir. Shakesp. Henry IV.
Hang up all the poor hop-drinkers,
Cries old Sym, the king of ſkinkers. Ben. Johnſºn.
His mother took the cup the clown had fill'd :
The reconciler bowl went round the board,
Which, empty'd, the rude ſkinker ſtill reſtor'd. . . Dryden.
Ski'NNED. adj. [from ſkin...] Having the nature of ſkin or lea-
ther; hard ; callous.
When the ulcer becomes foul, and diſcharges a naſty ichor,
the edges in proceſs of time tuck in, and, growing ſkinned and
hard, give it the name of callous. Sharp's Surgery.
Ski'NNER. m. ſ. [from ſkin J A dealer in ſkins. -
Ski'NNINess. n.ſ. (from ſkinny..] The quality of being ſkinny.
Ski's N.Y. adj. [from ſkin J Conſiſting only of ſkin; wanting
fleſh.
Her choppy finger laying
Upon her ſkinny lips. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Leaſt the aſperity of theſe cartilages of the windpipe ſhould
hurt the gullet, which is tender, and of a ſinny ſubſtance,
theſe annulary griſtles are not made round; but where the gul-
... the windpipe, there, to fill up the circle, is only a
oft membrane, which may eaſily give way. Ray on the Creation,
- His fingers meet
In ſkinny films, and ſhape his oary feet. Aldſ,’s Ovid.
To SKIP. v. n. [ſquittire, Italian; eſquirer, French. I know
not whether it may not come from feape.]
I. ſ o fetch, quick bounds; to paſs by quick leaps; to bound
ightly and joyfully.
Was not Iſrael a deriſion unto thee? was he found among
thieves? For ſince thou ſpakeſt of him, thou ſhifted for
Joy. - - ºr xiviii. 27.
The queen, bound with love's powerful flºha. w
Sat with Pigwiggen arm in arm: &gt;
Her merry maids, that thought no harm,
About the room were ſkipping.
At ſpur or ſwitch no more he ſº,
Or mended pace, than Spaniard whipt. Hºdºras.
The earth-born race - -
Q'er ev'ry hill and verdant paſture ſtray,
$4ip o'er the lawns, and by the rivers play. B. A., c.
John ſkipped from room to room, ran up ſtairs and down
ſtairs, peeping into every cranny. Arbutº. Hi/?. ºf ſ. Lull.
Thus each hand promotes the pleaſing pain,
And quick ſenſations ſkip from vein to vein. Poº, Dune; d.
The lamb thy riot dooms to bleed to-day,
Had he thy reaſon, would he ſip and play'? Pºe,
2. To paſs without notice. 4.
Pope Pius II. was wont to ſay, that the former pop s did
wiſely to ſet the lawyers a-work to debate, whether the cond-
tion of Conſtantine the Great to Sylveſter of St. Peter's patri-
mony were good or v. lid in law or no; the better to ſº p over
the matter in fact, whether there was ever any ſuch thin at all
Or no. Bacon : A of it cºns.
A gentleman made it a rule, in reading, to ſkip over all ten-
tences where he ſpied a note of admiration at the end. Sºft.
Drytºn.
To SKIP. v. a. [equirer, French J. To miſs; to paſs.
Let not thy ſword ſip one:
Pity not honour'd age for his white beard;
He is an uſurer. Shakespeare. Timon ºf ºthº.
Although to engage very far in ſuch a metaphyſical ſpecula-
tion were unfit, wien I only cmdCavour to explicate fluidity,
yet we dare not quite ſºip it over, left we be accuſed of over-
feeing it. Bo le.
They who have a mind to ſee the iſſue may ſºp theſe two
chapters, and proceed to the following. Larnet.
SkiP. m. ſ. [froin the verb.] A light leap or bound.
He loºked very curiouſly upon himſelf, ſometimes fetching
a little ſºft, as if he had ſaid his ſtrength had not yet forſaken
him. - Sidney.
You will make ſo large a ſip as to caſt yourſelf from the
land into the water. gºſz' e's dºtidote againſ? A:.e. m.
Sk'IPJ Ack. m. ſ. [ſkip and jack..] An upſtart. -
The want of ſhame or brains does not preſently entitle
every little ſkifjack to the board's end in the cabinet. L’Eſtr.
SKI'PKENNEL. m. ſ. [ſkip and Kennel.] A lackey; a footboy.
Ski'PPER. m. ſ. [ſchipper, Dutch..] A ſhipmaſter or ſhipboy.
Are not you afraid of being drowned too ! No, not I, ſays
the ſºipper. L’E)} arge.
No doubt you will return very much improved. Yes,
refined like a Dutch ſkipper fiom a whale-fiſhing. Congreve.
Ski'PPET. n.ſ. [Probably from ſkiff.] A ſmal boat.
Upon the bank they ſitting did eſpy
A dainty damſel, dreſling of her hair, -
By whom a little ſkippit floating di appear Fairy ºccº.
SKI'RM is H. m. ſ. [from 95 and carºn, Welſh, the ſhout of war:
whence yºga, ºn, and y garmes, old Britiſh words. Al/ae, a ºn , w
'ſº me; a wan, ſays an ancient writer. Eſcarºnzache, French.J
1. A ſlight fight: leſs than a ſet battle.
One battle, yes, a ſkirmiſh more there was
With adve, ſe fortune fought by Cartiſmand ; -
Her ſubjects moſt revolt. Philips's Britºn.
2. A conteſt; a contention. -
There is a kind of merry war betwixt ſignior Benclick and
her : they never meet but there's a ſkirmiſh of wit. Sha‘eſp.
Theſe ſºirmi/es expire not with the firſt propugners of the
opinions: they perhaps began as ſingle duellers; but then they
ſoon have their partiſans and abettors, who not only enhance,
but intail the feud to poſterity. Decay of Piety.
To Ski'RMish. v. n. [e carmºucher, French ; from the nºun.]
To fight looſely; to fight in parties before or after the ſhock
of the main battle. d ire at will
Ready to charge, and to retire at Will 3. ... -
Though º, ſetterd, fled, they /ºrmſ, ſtill. Faiſºr.
A gentleman volunteer, ſkirmiſſing with the enemy before
Worceſter, wis run through his arm in the middle of the
biceps with a ſword, and ſhot with a muſket-bullet in the ſame
ſhoulder. - - .. If iſºman's Surgery.
III paſs by the little ſºil miſing on either ſide. A tº ºry.
Ski's M1st ER. m.ſ.. [from firmiſh..] He who ſkirmiſhes. Zºſ.
To Skip R. E. v. a. [This word ſeems to be derived from rein,
Saxon, pure, clean ; unleſs it ſhall be rather deduced from
axºlzz.] To ſcour; to ramble over in order to clear.
24 F Send<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S K R
S K Y
ore horſes, ſkirre the country round;
hiº. 4. talk of fear. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
To Sjºg. … n. To ſcour; to ſcud; to run in haſte.
we'll make them ſkirre away as ſwift as ſtones
Enforced from the old Aſſyrian ſlings. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Ski's Ret. n.ſ. [//arum, Latin.] A plant.
It produces its flowers in an umbel, which conſiſts of ſeve-
ral leaves placed circularly, and expanded in form of a roſe:
the empalement afterward becomes a fruit, compoſed of two
narrow ſeeds, that are gibbous, and furrowed on one ſide, but
plain on the other. The roots aſ: ſhaped like long turneps,
and are joined to one head. Miller. -
Shirri, are a ſort of roots propagated by ſeed. Mortimer.
SKIRT. m. ſ. iorte, Swediſh.] -
.*.*. º {{. of a garment; that part which hangs looſe
below the waiſt.
It's but a nightgown in reſpect of yours; cloth of gold and
cuts, fide ſleeves and ſkirts, round underborne with a bluiſh
tinſel. Shakeſp. Much Adº about Nothing.
As Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the
ſhirt of his mantle, and it rent. 1 Sa. xv. 27.
. The edge of any part of the dreſs. -
2 T; #: º: . a ſmall ſkirt of ruffled linen, which runs
along the upper part of the ſtays before, and croſſes the breaſt,
being a part of the tucker, is called the modeſty-piece. Addiſon.
3. Edge; margin; border; extreme part. -
He ſhould ſeat himſelf at Athie, upon the ſkirt of that un-
quiet country. Speºſer an Ireland.
Ye miſts, that riſe
From hill or ſteaming lake, duſky or grey,
*Till the ſun paint your fleecy ſkirts with gold,
In honour to the world's great Author riſe.
Though I fled him angry, yet recall'd
To life prolong'd, and promis'd race, I now
Sladly behold, though but his utmoſt ſkirts.
Qf glory, and far off his ſteps adore. Milt. Parad. Loft.
The northern ſkirts that join to Syria have entered into the
conqueſts or commerce of the four great empires; but that
which ſeems to have ſecured the other is the ſtony and ſandy
Milton.
deſarts, through which no army can paſs. Temple.
Upon the ſkirts
Of Arragon our ſquander'd troops he rallies, Dryden.
To SkiRT. v. a. [from the noun..] To border; to run along
the edge.
Temple ſkirteth this hundred on the waſte ſide. Cartw.
Of all theſe bounds,
With ſhadowy foreſts and with champions rich'd,
With plenteous rivers and wide ſkirted meads,
We make thee lady. Shakeſpeare.
The middle pair
Skirted his loins and thighs with down gold. Milton.
A ſpacious circuit on the hill there ſtood,
Level and wide, and ſkirted round with wood. Addison.
SKITTISH. adj. [ſyc, Daniſh; ſchew, Dutch.]
1. Shy; eaſily frighted
A reſtiff ſkiitiſh jade had gotten a trick of riſing, ſtarting,
and flying out at his own ſhadow. L'E/ºrange.
2. Wanton; volatile; haſty; precipitate.
Now expectation, tickling ſkittiſh ſpirits,
Sets all on hazard.
He ſtill reſolv'd, to mend the matter,
T'adhere and cleave the obſtinater;
And ſtill the ſkittiſher and looſer,
Her freaks appear'd to fit the clºſer.
3. Changeable; fickle.
Some men ſleep in ſittiſh fortune's hall,
While others play the ideots in her eyes.
Such as I am, all true lovers are;
Unſtaid and ſkittiſh in all notions elſe,
Save in the conſtant image of the creature
That is belov’d. Shakespeare Twelfth Nicht
Ski'TTIshly. adv. [from fittiſh.] wº g
fickly. &gt; y;
sºnsis. mºſ [from ſºttiſh.] Wantonneſs; fickle-
nels.
Skonce. n.ſ. (See Sconce.].
Reinard ranſacketh “very Corner of his wily ſº.
beſtirreth the utmoſt of his nimble ſtumps .. £º and
Shakeſpeare.
Hudibras.
Shakeſpeare.
- - Oa
from their Jaws. 8.
S - - - - - -
SKREEN, n.ſ.. [ſºran, *ſºrsin, French, which Aſinſ, ev derives
from Jºrniculum, Latin. Nimi, violenter ut ſºlet, ſays Skin-
*: which may be *.*.* to one of the ſenſes; but if the fift
* of ſºreen be a kind of coarſe frve or riddle, it may per-
*P* Come, if not from critram, from ſome of the deſcendants
of cºrne.
1. A riddle or coarſe ſieve,
uttle or ſkreen to rid ſoil fro”
2. Anything by whº iſ ſº the corn. Tiſſºr.
3. Shelter #, tº: ea! º ſun or weather is kept off.
F y - -
ºne'd from day, by night's eternal fºrcen;
U &gt; → ...?
nknown to heav'n, and to myſelf unfecn. Dryden.
To SKRF FN. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To riddle; to fift. A term yet uſed among naſons when
they fift ſand for mortar.
2. To ſhade from ſun or light, or weather.
3. To keep off light or weather.
The curtains cloſely drawn, the light to ſºrten :
Thus cover'd with an artificial night, -
Sleep did his office. Dryden.
The waters mounted up into the air: their interpoſition be-
twixt the earth and the ſun ſkreen and fence off the heat,
otherwiſe inſupportable. // codward's Na waſ Hºy,
4. To ſhelter; to protect.
Ajax interpos'd
His ſevenfold ſhield, and ſºrten’d Laertes' ſon,
When the inſulting Trojans urg'd him fore. Philºſ.
He that travels with them is to ſkreen them, and get them
out when they have run themſelves into the briars. Locke.
His majeſty encouraged his ſubjects to make mouths at their
betters, and afterwards /&amp;reened them from puniſhment. Sfc.l.
The ſcales, of which the ſcarf-ſkin is compoſed, are de-
ſigned to fence the orifices of the ſecretory ducts of the miliary
glands, and to ſkreen the nerves from external injuries. Cheyne.
Sku e. adj. [Of this word there is found no ſatisfactory deri-
vation.] Oblique; fidelong. It is moſt uſed in the adverb
aſkue.
Several have imagined that this ſue poſture of the axis is a
moſt unfortunate thing; and that if the poles had been erect
to the plane of the ecliptick, all mankind would have enjoyed
a very paradiſe. hois).
To Skulk. v. m. To hide; to lurk in fear or malice.
Diſcover'd, and defeated of your prey,
You ſkulk'd behind the fence, and ſneakd away. Dryden.
SKULL n.ſ.. [ſkiola, Iſlandick; ſkati, Iſlandick, a head.]
1. The bone that incloſes the head: it is made up of ſeveral
pieces, which, being joined together, form a conſiderable cavity,
which contain the brain as in a box, and it is proportionate
to the bigneſs of the brain. Its figure is round, and a little
depreſſed on its ſides. The ſeveral pieces, of which the ſkull
is compoſed, are joined together by futures, which makes it
leſs apt to break: theſe pieces or bones are ſix proper and two
common, and each is made up of two tables, or laminae, be-
tween which there is a thin and ſpongious ſubſtance, made of
ſome bony fibres, which come from cach lamina, called in
Greck dºor, and in Latin meditilliam. In it are a great
many veins and arteries, which bring blood for the nouriſh-
ment of the bones. The tables are hard and ſolid, becauſe in
them the fibres of the bones are cloſe to one another. The
difke is ſoft, becauſe the bony fibres are at a greater diſtance
from one another. The external lamina is ſmooth, and co-
yered with the pericranium: the internal is likewiſe ſmooth;
but on it are ſeveral ſurrows, made by the pulſe of the arteries
of the dura mater, whilſt the cranium was ſoft and yield-
ing. &amp;uincy.
Some lay in dead mens ſkull; and in thoſe holes,
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
As 'twere in ſcorn of eyes, reflecting gems. Shaleſ R. III.
With redoubled ſtrokes he plies his head ;
But drives the batter'd /ºu/ within the brains. Dryden.
2. [8ceole, Saxon, a company.] A ſhoal. See Scull.
Repair to the river where you have ſeen them ſwim in ſºuls
or ſhoals. //alton.
Sku'llcap. n.ſ. A headpiece.
Sku'lica P. m.ſ. ſcaſiºſa, Latin J A plant.
The florets are longiſh, one in each ala of the leaves: the
upper leaf is galeated like an helmet, with two auricles adjoin-
ing: the under leaf, for the moſt part, is divided into two:
the calyx, having a cover, contains a fruit reſembling the heel
of a ſlipper or ſhoe. Miller.
SKY, m / [/y, Daniſh.]
1. The region which ſurrounds this earth beyond the atmo-
ſphere. It is taken for the whole region without the earth.
The mountains their broad backs upheave -
Into the clouds, their tops aſcend the ſy. - Milton.
The maids of Argos, who with frantick cries,
And imitated lowings, fill'd the ſkies. Rºſcºmmºn.
Raiſe all thy winds, with night involve the ſties, -
Sink, or diſperſe. Dryden's 3r.
2. The heavens.
The thunderer's bolt you know, * --
Sky planted, batters all rebelling coaſts. Shakeſp. Cymbelize.
What is this knowledge but the ſºy ſtol’n fire, -
For which the thief ſtill chain’d in ice doth ſit. Davies.
Wide is the fronting gate, and rais'd on high,
With adamantine columns threats the ſky.
3. The weather. -
Thou wert better in thy grave, than to anſwer with thy un-
covered body this extremity of the ſkies. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
SKY'EY. adj. [from ſky. Not very elegantly formed.] Ethereal.
A breath thou art,
Servile to all the ſciey influences,
That do this habitation, where thou keep'ſt,
Hourly afflict. Shakeſp. Aleºſure fºr Meaſure.
I SKY"colou R-
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L A
S L A -
Sky'colour. n.ſ.. [ſky and colour.] An azure colour; the
colour of the ſky.
A ſolution as clear as water, with only a light touch of ſky-
colour, but nothing near ſo high as the ceruleous tinéture of
ſilver. Boyle.
Sky'coloured. adj. [ſky and colour.] Blue; azure; like the
ſky.
'ihi. your Ovid himſelf has hinted, when he tells us that
the blue water nymphs are dreſſed in ſkycoloured garments. Addison
Sky"DYED. adj. [ſºy and dye.] Coloured like the ſky.
There figs, ſkydyed, a purple hue diſcloſe. Pope.
SKYEP. adj. [from ſky.] Envelloped by the ſkies. This is un-
uſual and unauthoriſed.
The pale deluge floats
O'er the ſkyd mountain to the ſhadowy vale. Thomſon.
Sky'ish. adj. [from ſky.] Coloured by the ether; approaching
the ſky.
Of this flat a mountain you have made,
T o'ertop old Pelion, or the ſkyiſh head
Of blue Olympus. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Bººk. n.J. [ſãy and lark.] A lark that mounts and
ings.
He next proceeded to the ſkylark, mounting up by a proper
ſcale of notes, and afterwards falling to the ground with a
very eaſy deſcent. Spee?ator.
Sky'light. m. ſ. [ſky and light.] A window placed in a room,
not laterally, but in the cieling.
A monſtrous fowl dropt through the ſkylight, near his wife's
apartment. Arbuthn. and Pope's Mart. Scriberus.
Sky Rocket. n.ſ. [ſty and rocket.] A kind of firework,
which flies high and burns as it flies.
I conſidered a comet, or, in the language of the vulgar a
blazing ſtar, as a ſkyrocket diſcharged by an hand that is al-
mighty. Addiſon.
SLAB. m. ſ.
1. A puddle. Ainſworth.
2. A plane of ſtone: as, a marble ſlab.
SLAB, adj. [A word, I ſuppoſe, of the ſame original with ſlalbar,
or ſlaver.] Thick; viſcous; glutinous.
Noſe of Turk, and Tartar's lips;
Finger of birth-ſtrangl’d babe,
Ditch-deliver'd by a drab ;
Make the gruel thick and ſlab. Shakeſp. Macbeth. }
To Sla’bber. v. n. [ſlabben, ſlabberem, Dutch.]
1. To let the ſpittle fall from the mouth; to drivel.
2. To ſhed or pour anything.
To SLA'bb ER. v. a.
1. To ſmear with ſpittle.
He ſabbered me all over, from cheek to cheek, with his great
tongue. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
2. To ſhed; to ſpill.
The milk pan and cream pot ſo ſlabber'd and ſoft,
That butter is wanting, and cheeſe is half loſt. Tiſſºr.
SLA/B BERER. m. ſ. [from ſlabber.] He who ſlabbers.
SLA’BBY. adj. [The ſame with ſlab.]
1. Thick; viſcous.
In the cure of an ulcer, with a moiſt intemperies, ſlabby
and greaſy medicaments are to be forborn, and drying to be
uſed. JWiſeman's Surgery.
2. Wet ; floody.
When waggiſh boys the ſtunted beſom ply,
To rid the ſlabby pavements, paſs not by. Gay.
SLACK, adj. [rleac, Saxon; /laken, Iſlandick; ſack, Welſh;
laxus, Latin.]
1. Not tenſe; not hard drawn; looſe.
The vein, in the arm is that which Aretaeus commonly
opens; and he gives a particular caution in this caſe to make
a ſlack compreſſion, for fear of exciting a convulſion. Arbuthn.
2. Remiſs; not diligent; not eager; not fervent.
Thus much help and furtherance is more yielded, in that, if
ſo be our zeal and devotion to Godward be ſlack, the alacrity
and fervour of others ſerveth as a preſent ſpur. Płocker.
Seeing his ſoldiers ſlack and timorous, he reproved them of
cowardice and treaſon. Knoles.
Nor were it juſt, would he reſume that ſhape,
That ſlack devotion ſhould his thunder 'ſcape. lºaller.
Rebellion now began, for lack
Of zeal and plunder, to grow ſlack.
3. Not violent; not rapid.
Their pace was formal, grave, and ſlack:
His nimble wit out-ran the heavy pack. Dryden.
A handful of ſlack dried hops ſpoil many pounds, by taking
away their pleaſant ſmell. Mortimer's Hºſandry.
4. Relaxed; weak; not holding faſt.
All his joints relax'd:
From his ſlack hand the garland wreath'd for Eve
Down dropp'd, and all the faded roſes ſhed. Al Milton.
T. sº {v. n. [from the adjećtive.
1. To be remiſs; to neglect.
When thou ſhalt vow a vow unto the Lord, ſº not to pay
it. Deutr. xxiii. 2 i.
Hudibras.
2. To loſe the power of coheſion.
The fire, in lime burnt, lies hid, ſo that it appears to be cold;
but water excites it again, whereby it ſacks and crumbles into
fine powder. 4/oxon's Mech. Exer.
3. To abate.
- Whence theſe raging fires
Will ſacken, if his breath ſtir not their flames. Milton.
4. To languiſh ; to fail; to flag. Ainſworth,
To SLAck. ~
To SLA'ckEN. }v. 4.
1. To looſen; to make leſs tight.
Ah generous youth, that wiſh forbear;
Slack all thy ſails, and fear to come. Dryden.
Had Ajax been employ'd, our ſlacken'd ſails
Had ſtill at Aulis waited happy gales. Dryden,
2. To relax; to remit.
This makes the pulſes beat, and lungs reſpire;
This holds the finews like a bridle's reins,
And makes the body to advance, retire,
To turn or ſtop, as ſhe them ſlacks or ſtrains. Davies.
Taught power's due uſe to people and to kings,
Taught nor to ſlack nor ſtrain its tender ſtrings. Pope.
3. To eaſe; to mitigate. Philips ſeems to have uſed it by miſ-
take for ſlake.
Men, having been brought up at home under a ſtrićt rule of
duty, always reſtrained by ſharp penalties from lewd beha-
viour, ſo ſoon as they come thither, where they ſee laws more
ſlackly tended, and the hard reſtraint, which they were uſed
unto, now ſlacked, they grow more looſe. Spenſer.
If there be cure or charm
To reſpite or deceive, or ſlack the pain
Of this ill manſion. Milton's Paradiſ: Loft.
On our account has Jove,
Indulgent, to all moons ſome ſucculent plant
Allow'd, that poor helpleſs man might ſlack
His preſent thirſt, and matter find for toil. Philips.
4. To remit for want of eagerneſs.
My guards
Are you, great pow'rs, and th' unbated ſtrength
Of a firm conſcience; which ſhall arm each ñep
Ta’en for the ſtate, and teach me ſlack no pace. Ben. johnſ.
With ſuch delay well pleas'd, they ſlack their courſe. A/iſt.
5. To cauſe to be remitted.
You may ſooner by imagination quicken or ſlack a motion,
than raiſe or ceaſe it; as it is eaſier to make a dog go ſlower
than make him ſtand ſtill. Bacon.
This doćtrine muſt ſuperſede and ſlacken all induſtry and en-
deavour, which is the loweſt degree of that which hath been
promiſed to be accepted by Chriſt; and leave nothing to us to
deliberate or attempt, but only to obey our fate. Hammond.
Extol not riches then, the toil of fools,
The wiſe man's cumbrance, if not ſnare; more apt
To ſlacken virtue, and abate her edge, - -
Than prompt her to do aught may merit praiſe. Miltºn.
Balls of this metal ſlack'd Atlanta's pace,
And on the am’rous youth beſtow'd the race. . . . Waller:
One conduces to the poet's aim, which he is driving on in
every line: the other ſlackens his pace, and diverts him from
his way. Dryden.
6. To relieve; to unbend.
Here have I ſeen the king, when great affairs
Gave leave to ſlacken and unbend his cares,
Attended to the chaſe by all the flow'r
Of youth, whoſe hopes a nobler prey devour.
7. To with-hold; to uſe leſs liberally. - -
He that ſo generally is good, muſt of neceſſity hold his vir-
tue to you, whoſe worthineſs would ſtir it up where it wanted,
rather than ſlack it where there is ſuch abundance. Shakeſp.
8. To crumble; to deprive of the power of coheſion. -
Some unſlacked lime cover with aſhes, and let it ſtand 'till
rain comes to ſlack the lime; then ſpread them together. Mart.
9. To neglect. -
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
From thoſe that ſhe calls ſervants, or from mine?
—If then they chanc'd to ſlack ye, -
We could controul ...” y h f º King Lear.
- hat thus much favourctii,
nº t paniº Civil War.
Slack not the good preſage, while heav’n inſpires
Our minds to dare, and gives the ready fires. Dryden.
ro. To repreſs; to make leſs quick or forcible: ſ
I ſhould be griev’d, young prince, lº think my preſence
Unbent your thoughts, and ſlacken d'em to arms. Addiſon.
Stack. n.f [from the verb ſo /*] Small coal; coal
broken in ſmall parts.
SLA'ckly. adv. [from ſack.]
1. Looſely; not . ; not cloſely.
Jeolio * : renni ISIY.
2. Nº. king's ºften ſhould be ſo convey'd,
So ſlickly guarded, and the ſearch ſo ſlow -
That could not trace them. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Denham,
SLA'ckNESs.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L A
S L A
SLA'ckNess. n.ſ. ſº
s: not tig -
; º º inattention 3. remiſſneſs. -
icºncerneth the duty ºf the church by law to provide, that
the looſeneſs and flººnſ of men may not cauſe the com-
mandments of God tº be unexecuted. Hooker.
Theſe thy offices,
ely kind, are as interpreters -
à. º iºd ſlackneſs. Shakespeare JWinter’s Tale.
From man's effelninate ſlackneſ; it begins,
who ſhould better hold his place -
By wiſdom, and ſuperior gifts receiv'd. Milton's Par. L9/?.
3. Want of tendency. . - - - -
when they havé no diſpoſition to ſhoot out above their lips,
- there is a ſlackneſs to heal, and a cure is very difficulty ef-
fe&amp;ted. Sharp's Surgery.
4. Weakneſs; not force; not intenſeneſs. -
Through the ſackneſs of motion, or long baniſhment from
the air, it might gather ſome aptneſs to putrey. Brerewood.
SLAG. n.ſ. The droſs or recrement of metal. -
Not only the calces but the glaſſes of metal may be of dif-
fering colours from the natural colour of the metal, as I have
obſerved about the glaſs or ſlag of copper. - Boyle.
SLA1E. n.ſ. A weaver's reed. Ainſworth.
SLAIN The participle paſſive of ſlay.
The ſain of the Lord ſhall be many.
The king grew vain,
Fought all his battles o'er again;
And thrice he routed all his foes, and thrice he flew the
ſlain, Dryden.
To Slake. v. a. [from ſlick, Skinner; from ſlack, Iſlandick,
to quench, Mr. Lyel
1. To quench; to extinguiſh.
He did always ſtrive
Himſelf with ſalves to health for to reſtore,
And ſlate the heavenly fire that raged evermore, Fa. Queen.
If I digg’d up thy forefathers graves,
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not ſale mine ire, nor eaſe my heart. Shakeſ H.VI.
She with her cold hand ſlakes
His ſpirits, the ſparks of life, and chills his heart. Craſhaw.
From ſulus' head {
Iſ, lxvi. 16.
A lambent flame aroſe, which gently ſpread
Around his brows, and on his temples fed:
Amaz'd, with running water we prepare
To quench the ſacred fire, and ſake his hair. Dryden.
The fragrant fruit from bending branches ſhake,
And with the cryſtal ſtream their thirſt at pleaſure ſake.
º Blackmore's Creation.
Coarſe are his meals, the fortune of the chace;
Amidſt the running ſtream he ſlakes his thirſt. Addison Cato.
2. It is uſed of lime, ſo that it is uncertain whether the original
notion of Tº ſlack or ſake lime be to powder or quench it.
That which he ſaw happened to be freſh lime, and gathered
before any rain had fallen to ſlake it. //codward.
To SLAKE. v. n. [This is apparently from ſlack.] To grow
leſs tenſe; to be relaxed.
If ſhe the body's nature did partake,
Her ſtrength would with the body's ſtrength decay;
But when the body's ſtrongeſt finews/l. Ke,
Then is the ſoul moſt active, quick, and gay. Davies.
To SLAM. v.a. [lena, Iſlandick; ſchlagen, Dutch..] To ſlaugh-
ter; to cruſh. A word not uſed but in low converſation.
Tº SLANDER. v. a. ſ.ſ.laundrie, French; ſandalum, Latin.]
To cenſure falſely; to belie.
Slander Valentine
With falſhood, cowardice, and poor deſcent. Shakeſpeare.
He hath ſlandered thy ſervant unto the king 2 Sa. xix. 27.
Give me leave to ſpeak as earneſtly in truly commending it,
as you have done in untruly and unkindly defacing and ſlander-
1ng it. J/hitgifte.
Thou do'ſt with lies the throne invade, -
By practice harden'd in thy ſlandering trade;
Obtending heav'n for whate'er ills befal,
And ſputt ring under ſpecious names thy gall. Dryden.
Of all her dears ſhe never ſlander'd one,
But cares not if a thouſand are undone. Dryden.
SLA's DER. n / [from the verb.]
I. Falſe invective.
w henſºr:drº do not live in tongues;
W hen cut-purſes come not to throngs.
Since that, we hear he is in arms,
We think not ſo ;
Yºcharge the conſul with our harms,
That let him go :
° in our cenſure of the flate
We ſtill do wander,
And make the careful magiſtrate
- he mark of ſander.
2. ºf: reproach.
ouſander of thy heavy mother's womb'
Thou cathed iſſue of thy father's loins. Shakeſp. R. III.
Shakespeare K. Lear.
Ben. Johnſºn's Catiline.
3. Diſreputation; ill name.
You ſhall not find me, daughter,
After the ſlander of moſt ſtep-mothers,
Ill-ey'd unto you. Shakeſhed
seaſº. m. ſ. [from ſlander.] One who belies †.
one who lays falſe imputations on another. &gt;
In your ſervants ſuffer any offence againſt yourſelf rather
than againſt God: endure not that they ſhould be railers Or
ſlanderers, tell-tales or ſowers of diffenſion. Taylor
Thou ſhalt anſwer for this, thou ſlanderer. Dº.
Sla'Nde Rous. adj. [from ſlander.]
1. Uttering reproachful falſhoods.
What king ſo ſtrong
Cantic the gall up in the ſlanderºus tongue? ShakespeareI. feare.
To me belongs J
The care to ſhun the blaſt of ſland’rouſ tongues:
Let malice, prone the virtuous to defame,
Thus with vile cenſure taint my ſpotleſs name. Pºpe.
2. Containing reproachful falſhoods; calumnious.
I was never able 'till now to choke the mouth of ſuch de-
tractors, with the certain knowledge of their ſlanderous un-
truths. Spener on Ireland.
We lay theſe honours on this man,
To eaſe ourſelves of divers ſland’rous loads. Sai. jul. Caſ:
As by flattery a man opens his boſom to his moral enemy,
ſo by detraction and a ſlander ous miſreport he ſhuts the ſame to
his beſt friends. South.
SLA'Nd ERously. adv. [from ſanderous.] Calumniouſly; with
falſe reproach.
I may the better ſatisfy them who objećt theſe doubts, and
ſlanderouſly bark at the courſes which are held againſt that trai-
terous earl and his adherents. Speyer ºn Ireland,
They did ſandrouſly objcół,
How that they durſt not hazard to preſent
In perſon their defences. Daniel's Civil War.
SLANG. The preterite of ſing.
David ſlag a ſtone, and ſmote the Philiſtine. I Sa xvii.
Sla Nk. n ſ. An herb. Anſworth.
SLANT. }% [from ſanghe, a ſerpent, Dutch. Sinner.]
SLANTING. Oblique; not direct; not perpendicular.
Late the clouds
Juſtling, or puſh'd with winds, rude in their ſhock,
Tine the ſºnt lightning; whoſe thwart flame driv'n down,
Kindles the gummy bark of fir and pine.
Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft,
The ſun round the globe deſcribes th’Aquator line,
By which wiſe means he can the whole ſurvey
With a direct or with a ſlanting ray, }
In the ſucceſſion of a night and day. Blackmore.
SLA/NTLY. adv. [from ſlant..] Obliquely; not perpendi-
SLA'N Twise. } cularly ; ſlope.
Some maketh a hollowneſ, half a foot deep,
With fower ſets in it, ſet ſlantwiſe aſleep, laſer's Huſband,
SLAP. n.ſ. [ſchlap, German.] A blow. Properly with the
hand open, or with ſomething rather broad than ſharp.
The laugh, the ſlap, the jocund curſe go round. Thºmſºn.
SLAP. adv. [from the noun..] With a ſudden and violent blow.
Peg's ſervants complained; and if they offered to come into
the warehouſe, then ſtrait went the yard ſlap over their
noddle. Arbuthnot'. Hyºry of john Bull
To SLAP. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtrike with a ſlap.
Dick, who thus long had paſſive fat,
Here ſtroak'd his chin, and cock'd his hat;
Then ſlapp'd his hand upon the board, - -
And thus the youth put in his word. Prior,
Sla'PDAsh. interſ. [from ſlap and daſh..] All at once; as any
thing broad falls with a ſlap into the water, and dºes it about.
A low word.
And yet, ſlapdaſh, is all again -
In ... nerve, and º Prior.
To SLAsH. v. a. [ſlaſa, to ſtrike, Iſlandick.]
1. To cut ; to cut with long cuts.
2. To laſh. Slaſh is improper.
Daniel, a ſprightly ſwain, that us’d to ſlaſh
The vig'rous ſteeds that drew his lord's calaſh, -
To Peggy's ſide inclin'd. King.
To Slash. … n. To ſtrike at random with a ſword; tº */
about him.
The knights with their bright burning blades
Broke their rude troops, and orders did confound,
Hewing and ſlaſhing at their idle ſhades. Fairy ºutth.
Not that I'd lop the beauties from his book,
Like ſlaſhing Bentley with his deſp'rate hook. Pºpe.
SLASH. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Cut ; wound.
Some few received ſome cuts and /º/, that had "º"
blood. Clarendon.
2. A cut in cloath.
What I this a ſleeve * d ſliſh and ſaſh,
Here's ſnip and nip, and cut, and ſliſh and /º/”, ,
Like to a tº: º a barber’s ſhop. Shakeſpeare.
Diſtinguiſh'd
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L A
º
::::
º,
i.
ls
º
...”
Diſtinguiſh'd ſaffe, deck the great,
As each excels in birth or ſtate: -
His oylet-holes are more and ampler;
The king's own body was a ſampler. Priºr.
SLATCH. m. ſ. [A, ſea term..] The middle part of a rope or
cable that hangs down looſe. Bailey.
SLATE. m. ſ. [from ſlit.: ſate is in ſome counties a crack; or
from ſºlate, a tile, French..] A grey foſſile ſtone, cafily
broken into thin plates, which are uſed to cover houſes, or to
write upon.
A ſquare cannot be ſo truly drawn upon a ſate as it is con-
ceived in the mind. Grew's Cºſmol.
A ſmall piece of a flat ſlate the ants laid over the hôle of
their neſt, when they foreſaw it would rain. Addison's sp.a.
To SLATE. v. a. [from the noun..] To cover the roof; to tile,
Sonnets and elegies to Chloris,
Would raiſe a houſe about two ſtories,
A lyrick ode would ſlate. Swift,
SLATER. m. ſ. [from ſate.] One who covers with ſlates or
tiles.
SLATTERN. m. ſ. [ ſaetti, Swediſh. J A woman negligent,
not elegant or nice. -
Without the raiſing of which ſum,
You dare not be ſo troubleſome
To pinch the flattern, black and blue,
For leaving you their work to do. Hudibras.
We may always obſerve, that a goſſip in politicks is a ſlat-
tern in her family. Addiſon's Freeholder,
The ſallow ſkin is for the ſwarthy put,
And love can make a ſlattern of a ſlut. Dryden.
Beneath the lamp her tawdry ribbans glare,
The new-ſcour'd manteau and the ſlattern air. Gay.
SLA’t Y. adj. [from ſlate.] Having the nature of ſlate.
All the ſtone that is ſlaty, with a texture long, and parallel
to the ſite of the ſtratum, will ſplit only lengthways, or hori-
zontally; and, if placed in any other poſition, 'tis apt to give
way, ſtart, and burſt, when any confiderable weight is laid
upon it. 17%dward on Foſſils.
SLAVE. n. ſ. ſeſºlave, French. It is ſaid to have its original
from the Slavi, or Sclavonians, ſubdued and ſold by the /e-
netians.) One mancipated to a maſter; not a freeman; a
dependant.
The baniſh’d Kent, who in diſguiſe
Follow'd his enemy king, and did him ſervice -
Improper for a ſlave. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Thou elviſh markt, abortive, rooting hogſ
Thou that waſt ſeal’d in thy nativity
The ſave of nature, and the ſon of hell.
Shakeſp. R. III.
Of gueſts he makes them ſlaves
Inhoſpitably. Milton,
Slaves to our paſſions we become, and then
It grows impoſſible to govern men. Waller.
The condition of ſervants was different from what it is
now, they being generally ſlaves, and ſuch as were bought and
ſold for money. South.
Perſpective a painter muſt not want; yet without ſubjecting
ourſelves ſo wholly to it, as to become ſlaves of it. Dryden.
To-morrow, ſhould we thus expreſs our friendſhip,
Each might receive a ſlave into his arms:
This ſun perhaps, this morning ſun's the laſt, -
That e'er ſhall riſe on Roman liberty. Addiſon's Cato.
To SLAve. v. n. [from the noun J. To drudge; to moil; to
toil.
Had women been the makers of our laws,
The men ſhould ſave at cards from morn to night. Swift.
SLAVER. m. ſ. [ ſaliva, Latin ; //gſa, Iſlandick. J Spittle
running from the mouth ; drivel.
Mathiolus hath a paſſage, that a toad communicates its
venom not only by urine, but by the humidity and ſlaver of its
mouth, which will not conſiſt with truth. Brown.
Of all mad creatures, if the learn’d are right,
It is the ſlaver kills, and not the bite.
To SLA’ve R. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To be ſmeared with ſpittle.
Should I
Slaver with lips, as common as the ſtairs
That mount the capitol; join gripes with hands
Made hard with hourly falſhood as with labour.
2. To emit ſpittle. -
Miſo came with ſcowling eyes to deliver a ſlavering good-
Pope,
Shakeſp.
morrow to the two ladies. Sidney.
Why muſt he ſputter, ſpawl, and ſaver it,
In vain, againſt the people's favºrite : Swift.
To SLA've R. v. a. To ſmear with drivel.
Twitch'd by the ſlave he mouths it more and more,
*Till with white froth his gown is ſlaver'd o'er. Dryden.
SLA’ve RER... n.ſ.. [ſabbaerd, Dutch ; from ſlaver.] One who
cannot hold his ſpittle; a driveller; an ideot.
SLA've RY. n.ſ.. [from ſlave..] Servitude; the condition of a
ſlave; the offices of a ſlave.
If my diſſentings were out of errour, weakneſs, or obſti-
nacy in me, yet no man can think it other than the badge aud
method of ſlavery, by ſavage rudeneſs and importunate ob.
truſions of violence to have the miſt of his errour diſpelled.
, I grº King Charles.
SLA’UGHTER, n.ſ. ſoºrlaugr, Saxon, from raezan, rle3an,
to ſtrike or kill:1. Maſſacre; deſtruction by the ſword.
Sinful Macduff,
They were all ſtruck for thee!
Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
Fell/laughter on their ſouls. Shakſ). Macbeth,
On each hand ſlaughter and gigantick deeds. AMilton.
- . The pair you ſee,
Now friends below, in cloſe embraces join ;
But when they leave the ſhady realms of night,
With mortal heat each other ſhall purſue.”
What wars, what wounds, what ſlaughter ſhall enſue? Dryd.
To Slaughter. v. a. [from the noun..] To maſſacre; to
ſlay ; to kill with the ſword.
Your caſtle is ſurpriz’d, your wife and babes
Savagely ſlaughter'd. Shakeſp. Macleth.
SLA'ughterhouse. m. ſ. [ſlaughter and hºuſe.j Houſe in
which beaſts are killed for the butcher.
Away with me, all you whoſe ſouls abhor
Th'uncleanly favour of a ſlaughterhouſe;
For I am ſtifl'd with the ſmell of ſin. Shakeſpeare.
sºas. nºſ Iſlaughter and man.] One employed
in killing.
The mad mothers with their howls confus'd
Do break the clouds; as did the wives of Jewry, -
At Herod's bloody hunting/laughtermen. Shakespeare Hen. V.
Ten chas'd by one,
Are now each one the ſlaughterman of twenty. Shakeſpeare.
See, thou fight'ſt againſt thy countrymen;
And join'ſt with them, will be thy ſlaughtermen. Shakespeare H.VI.
St.Aughterous, adj. [from ſlaughter.] Deſtructive; mur-
derous. . .
I have ſupt full with horrours:
Direneſs familiar to my ſlaughterous thoughts
Cannot once ſtart me. Shakeſ Macbeth.
SLAvish. adj. [from ſlave..] Servile; mean; baſe; depen-
dant. -
- - A thing
More ſlaviſh did I ne'er, than anſwering
A ſlave without a knock. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
You have among you many a purchas'd ſlave,
Which, like your aſſes, and your dogs and mules,
You uſe in abječt and in ſlaviſh part,
Becauſe you bought them. Shakespeare Merchant ºf Venice.
I believe
That he, the ſupreme God, tº whom all things ill
Are but as ſlaviſh officers of vengeance,
Would ſend a gliſt'ring guardian, if need were,
To keep my life and honour unaffail'd, Milton.
Thoſe are the labour'd births of ſlaviſh brains;
Not the effect of poetry, but pains. enham.
Slaviſh bards our mutual loves rehearſe
In lying ſtrains and ignominious verſe. Prior.
SLAvishly, adv. [from ſlaviſh.] Servilely; meanly.
SLAvish Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſlav/h.] Servility; meanneſs.
To SLAY. v. a. preter ſlºw; part, paſſ ſlaii. ſſahan, Gothick;
J-lean, Sax. ſlachten, Dutch, to ſtrike..] To kill; to butcher;
to put to death. -
Her father's brother -
Would be her lord; or ſhall I ſay her uncle?
Or he that ſlew her brothers and her uncle :
- Tyrant, ſhew thy face: ,
If thou beſt ſlain, and with no ſtroke of mine,
My wife and children's ghoſts will haunt me ſtill Shakespeare ?.
The deadly-handed Clifford ſlew my ſteed. Shakespeare H. VI.
I ſaw under the altar the ſouls of them that were ſlain for
the word of God. Rev. vi. 2;
Thus there was killing of young and old, and ſaying of
virgins and infants. 2 May. I 3-
Slay and make ready. Gen. xliii. 16.
Wrath killeth the fooliſh man, and *; º
one. ſet v. 2.
They ſlew ten thouſand men. - judg. i. 4.
Of Trojan chiefs he view'd a numerous tiaº , , , ,
All much lamented, all in battle ſain. Dryden's Án.
Abraham - - -
By blood and battles muſt his pow'r maintain, Pri
And ſlay the monarchs, eſ: he rule the plain. fi rtar.
Slayer."...ſ. from/h).j, Killer; murder; dººr.
Witneſs the guiltleſs blood poured oft on ground; -
The ºwned in ſlain, theſayer crown'd. Fairy &amp;º
They flew thoſe that were ſlayºr of their countrymen. Abb.
The ſlayer of himſelf yet ſaw I there;
The gore congeal’d was &amp;lotted in his hair:
With eyes half clos'd and gaping mouth he lay,
And grim as when he breath'd his ſullen ſoul away. Dryden.
Sleave. n.ſ. [Of this word I know not well the meaning:
ſleave ſilk is explained by Gouldman foccus ſericus, a lock of ſilk;
and the women ſtill ſayſleave the ſilk, for untwiſt it. Awº
- - C2 IS
24
Shakespeare R. III.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L E
S L E
calls a weaver's ſhuttle or recd a ſay. Tº ſay is to part a
in into fingle fibres.] -
twiſt into ſing I on a fountain light, d
hoſe brim with pnks, was platte »
Yº. with daffadillies dight - -
with graſs like ſeate was matted. Drayton's Cynthia.
Gd. [often written Jeezy. ] Weak; wanting ſub-
SLEAZY. - -
This ſeems to be of the ſame race with/eave, or from
ſtance.
sº [ſaid, Daniſh ; ſedile, Dutch..] A carriage drawn
ithout wheels. -
W1t The ſled, the tumbril, hurdles, and the flail,
Theſe all muſt be prepar’d. Dryden.
SLE'pped. adj. [ſrom ſel,] . Mounted on a ſled.
So frown'd he once when in an angry parle,
He ſmote the ſledded Polack on the lºº. .
SLEDGE. m. ſ. [rlees, Saxon; /*ggiº Iſlandick.]
1. A large heavy hammer. -
They him ſpying, both with greedy force,
At once upon him ran, and him beſet,
with ſtrokes of mortal ſteel, without remorſe, -
And on his ſhield like iron ſlºdges bet. Fairy Queen.
The painful ſmith, with force of fervent heat,
The hardeſt iron ſoon doth mollify,
That with his heavy ſledºe he can it beat,
And faſhion to what he it liſt apply Spenſºr.
The uphand ſledge is uſed by under workmen, when the work
is not of the largeſt, yet requires help to batter and draw it
out: they uſe it with both their hands before them, and ſel-
dom lift their hammer higher than their head. Moxon.
Ariſtotle aſcribes it unto the ſwiftneſs of that motion; but
it would follow that the quick ſtroak of a light hammer ſhould
be of greater efficacy, than any ſofter and more gentle ſtriking
of a great ſledge. Wilkin,’s Alathematical Magick.
2. A carriage without wheels, or with very low wheels; properly
a ſed. See SLED.
In Lancaſhire, they uſe a ſort of ſed:e made with thick
wheels, to bring their marl out, drawn with one horſe. Mort.
SLEEK. n ſ [ſeych, Dutch..] Smooth; nitid; gloſſy.
Let me have men about me that are fat,
Sleek-headed men, and ſuch as ſleep a-nights. Shakeſpeare.
Envy
How eagerly ye follow my diſgrace,
As if it fed ye; and how ſleek and wanton
Y’appear in ev'rything may bring my ruin. Shakespeare.
Yet are the men more looſe than they,
More kemb'd, and bath'd, and rub'd, and trim’d,
More ſleek'd, more ſoft, and ſlacker limb'd. Ben. johnſºn.
What time the groves were clad in green,
The fields all dreſt in flowers,
And that the ſleek-hair'd nymphs were ſeen,
Shakespeare.
To ſeek them ſummer bowers. Drayton.
The pureſt paſteboard, with a ſleek ſtone rub ſmooth, and
as even as you can. Peacham.
As in gaze admiring, oft he bow’d
His turret creſt, and ſleek enamel'd neck,
Fawning. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft.
Thoſe rugged names to our like mouths grow ſek,
That would have made Quintilian ſtare and gaſp. Milton.
Thy head and hair are ſleek,
And then thoukemb'ſt the tuzzes on thy cheek. Dryden.
So f. her ſkin, ſo faultleſs was her make,
Ev’n Juno did unwilling pleaſure take
, To ſee ſo fair a rival. Dryden.
To SLEEK. v. a. [from the adjective.]
1. To comb ſmooth and even.
By dead Parthenope's dear tomb,
And fair Ligea's golden comb,
Wherewith ſhe ſits on diamond rocks,
Sleeking her ſoft alluring locks. Milton.
2. To render ſoft, ſmooth, or gloſſy.
Gentle my lord, ſeek o'er your rugged looks;
He bright and jovial 'mong your gueſts to night. Shakeſp.
- She iſ:
With crumbs of bread and milk, and lics a-nights
n her neat gloves. Ben. Johnſon's Catiline.
A ſheet of well ſleeked marble paper did not caſt any of its
diſtinét colours upon the wall. Boyle.
The perſuaſive rhetorick
Thá'.ſkeº'd his tongue, and won ſo much on Eve,
So little here, nay loſt. Milton.
A cruiſe of fragrance, form'd of burniſh'd gold,
Odour divine ! whoſe ſoft refreſhing ſtreams
c * the ſmooth ſkin, and ſcent the ſnowy limbs. Pºpe.
&gt; L E E KLY. adv [from ſleek.] Smoothly; gloſſily.
Let their heads be ſleekly comb'd, and their blue coats bruſh'd.
Shakeſpeare's Taming ºf the Shrew.
To SLEEp. v. n. Iſºpan, Gothick; reepin, Saxon; ſlap.m,
Dutch.]
1. To take reſt, by ſuſpenſion of the mental powers.
I've watch'd and traveird hard :
Some time I ſhall fleep out; the reſt I’ll whiſtle. Shakeſp.
Where's Pede –go you, and where you find a maid,
That, ere ſhe ſleep, hath thrice her prayers ſaid,
Rein up the organs of her fantaſy;
Seep ſhe as found as careleſs infancy;
But thoſe that ſeep, and think not on their ſins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, ſhoulders, fides, and ſhins.
shakeſeare's A ſerry // ºve, of 1% major.
If the man be poor, thou ſhalt not ſlººp with his pledge. Lout.
Sleep on now, and take your reſt; behold the hour is at
hat; d. ..] ſaith. xxvi. 45.
Peace, good reader do not weep;
Peace the lovers are aſleep:
They, ſweet turtles! folded lie,
In the laſt knot that love could tie.
Let them ſleep, let them ſeep on,
Till this ſtormy night be gone,
And the eternal morrow dawn,
Then the curtains will be drawn,
And they waken with that light,
Whoſe day ſhall never ſleep in night. Croſław,
Thoſe who at any time ſleep without dreaming, can never
be convinced that their thoughts are for four hours buſy with-
out their knowing it. Lake,
2. To reſt; to be motionleſs.
Steel, if thou turn thine edge, or cut not out the burly-
bon'd clown in chines of beef ere thou ſleep in thy ſheath, I
beſeech Jove on my knees thou mayft be turned into hob-
nails. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
How ſweet the moonlight ſleeps upon this bank!
Here will we ſit, and let the founds of muſick
Creep in our ears. Shakeſpeare's Merch. ºf Venice,
The giddy ſhip, betwixt the winds and tides,
Forc’d back and forwards, in a circle rides,
Stunn'd with the different blows; then ſhoots amain,
Till counterbuff'd ſhe ſtops, and ſleeps again. Dryden.
3. To live thoughtleſsly.
We ſleep over our happineſs, and want to be rouzed into
a quick thankful ſenſe of it. Atterbury.
4. To be dead; death being a ſtate from which man will ſome
time awake. -
If we believe that Jeſus died and roſe again, even ſo them
alſo which ſleep in Jeſus will God bring with him. I Thºſ.
A perſon is ſaid to be dead to us, becauſe we cannot raiſe
from the grave; though he only ſleeps unto God, who can
raiſe from the chamber of death. Aylife's Pal ºrgan.
5. To be inattentive; not vigilant.
Heav'n will one day open
The king's eyes, that ſo long have/left upon
This bold, bad man. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII,
6. To be unnoticed, or unattended. -
You ever
Have wiſh'd the ſleeping of this buſineſs, never
Deſir'd it to be ſtirr'd. Shakespeare's Henry VIII.
SLEEP. m. ſ. [from the verb..] Repoſe; reſt; ſuſpenſion of the
mental powers; ſlumber.
Methought I heard a voice cry fleep no more!
Macbeth doth murderſleep; the innocent ſeep;
Sleep that knits up the ravell'd ſleeve of care;
The birth of each day's life, ſore labour's bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great nature's ſecond courſe,
Chief nouriſher in life's feaſt. Shakeſpeare's Marleth.
Cold calleth the ſpirits to ſuccour; and therefore they can-
not ſo well cloſe and go together in the head, which is ever
requiſite to ſleep. And for the ſame cauſe, pain and noiſe
hinder ſleep; and darkneſs furthereth ſleep. - Bagn.
Beaſts that ſleep in winter, as wild bears, during their ſlºp
wax very fat, though they eat nothing. Bacºn.
His faſten’d hands the rudder keep,
And fix’d on heav'n, his eyes repel invadingſeº. Dryden.
Hermes o'er his head in air appear'd,
His hat adorn'd with wings diſclos'd the god,
And in his hand the ſleep compelling rod. Dryden.
Infants ſpend the greateſt part of their time in ſleep, and are
ſeldom awake but when hunger calls for the teat, or ſome pain
forces the mind to perceive it. Lºcke.
SLEF'PER. m. ſ. [from ſleep.]
1. One who ſleeps; one who is not awake. -
Sound muſick; come my queen, take hand with me,
And rock the ground whereon theſe ſleepers be: Shakespeare .
What's the buſineſs,
That ſuch an hideous trumpet calls to parley h
The ſleepers of the houſe 2 Shakeſpeare's Mºſt -
In ſome countries, a plant which ſhutteth in the night,
openeth in the morni g, and openeth wide at noºn; the in-
habitants ſay is a plant that depeth There be fºº"
then ; for almoſt all flowers do the like Ba.ºn.
Night is indeed the province of his reign;
Yet all his dark exploits no more contain ºn
Than a ſpy taken, and a ſleeper ſlain. Dry: j
He muſt be no great eater, drinker, nor ſleeper, that Wi
diſcipline his ſenſes, and exert his mind: every wº un-
- - tºº.
dertaking requires both. r A
- 2.
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L E
* . .
º,
t; (iſ-
itſ'
!:
f:
ſº ſº
i:
rº,
-
ºr,
2. A lazy inačtive drone.
. That which lies dormant, or without effect.
Let penal laws, if they have been ſleepers of long, er if
grown unfit for the preſent time, be by wiſe judges confined
in the execution. Bacon.
4. A fiſh. At ſoarth.
SL E E P11. Y. adv. [from ſeepy.]
1. Drowſily; with deſire to ſleep.
2. Dully; lazily.
I rather chuſe to endure the wounds of thoſe darts, which
envy caſteth at novelty, than to go on ſafely and ſleepiy in
the eaſy ways of ancient miſtakings. Raleigh.
3. Stupidly. -
He would make us believe that Luther in theſe ačtions
pretended to authority, forgetting what he had ſlepily owned
before. Atterbury.
SLEE'PIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſleepy.] Drowſineſs; diſpoſition to
ſleep; inability to keep awake.
Watchfulneſs precedes too great ſleepineſs, and is the moſt
ill bodin, ſymptom of a fever. Arbuthnot.
SLEEP LEss. adj. [from ſleep.J Wanting ſleep.
The field
To labour calls us, now with ſweat impos'd,
Though after ſleepleſ, night. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
While penſive poets painful vigils keep,
Shepleſ; themſelves to give their readers ſleep. Pope.
Slf tºp Y. adj. [from ſleep.]
1. Drowſy ; diſpoſed to ſleep.
2. Not awake. -
Why did you bring theſe daggers from the place
They muſt lie there Go, carry them and ſmear
The ſlee; y grooms with blood. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
She wak'd her ſleepy crew,
And riſing haſty, took a ſhort adieu.
3. Soporiferous; ſomniferous; cauſing ſleep.
We will give you ſcºpy drinks, that your ſenſes unintelli-
gent of our inſufficience, may, though they cannot praiſe us,
as little accuſe us. Shakeſpeare's J/inter's Tale.
Let ſuch bethink them, if the fleepy drench
Of that forgetful lake benumb not ſtill. Milton.
I ſleeped about eight hours, and no wonder; for the phy-
ficians had mingled a ſleepy potion in the wine. Gulliver.
SLEET. n.ſ. [perhaps from the Daniſh, ſlet.] A kind of ſmooth
ſmall hail or ſnow, not falling in flakes, but ſingle particles.
Now van to van the foremoſt ſquadrons meet,
The midmoſt battles haſtning up behind,
Who view, far off, the ſtorm of falling ſleeſ,
Dryden.
And hear their thunder rattling in the wind. Dryden.
Perpetual ſleet and driving ſnow
Obſcure the ſkies, and hang on herds below.
Huge oxen ſtand inclos'd in wintry walls
Of ſnow congeal’d. Dryden.
Rains would have been poured down, as the vapours be-
came cooler; next ſle', then ſnow, and ice, and froſt.
Cheyne.
To SLEE r. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſnow in ſmall par-
ticles, intermixed with rain.
SLEE'ſ Y. adj. [from the noun..] Bringing ſleet.
SLE Eve. n.ſ. [rlip, Saxon.]
1. The part of a garment that covers the arms.
Once my well-waiting eyes eſpy'd my treaſure,
With ſleeves turn'd up, looſe hair, and breaſt enlarged,
Her father's corn, moving her fair limbs, meaſure. Sidney.
The deep ſmock ſleeve, which the Iriſh women uſe, they
fly, was old Spaniſh; and yet that ſhould ſeem rather to be
an old Engliſh faſhion: for in armory, the faſhion of the
Manche, which is given in arms, being nothing clfe but a
fleeve, is faſhioned much like to that ſleeve. And knights, .
in ancient times, uſed to wear their miſtreſs's or love's ſleeve
upon their arms; fir Launcelot wore the ſleeve of the fair
maid of Aſteloth in a tourney. Spenſer’s Ireland.
Your hoſe ſhould be ungarter’d, your ſeeve unbutton'd,
your ſhoe untied, demonſtrating a careleſs deſolation. Shakeſp.
You would think a ſmock a ſhe-angel, he ſo chants to the
fleeve-band, and the work about the ſquare on't. Shaºffeare.
He was cloathed in cloth, with wide ſleeves and a cape. Bacºn.
In velvet white as ſnow the troop was gown'd,
Their hoods and ſleeves the ſame. Dryden.
2. Sleeve, in ſome provinces, ſignifies a knot or ſkein of ſilk,
which is by ſ me very probably ſuppoſed to be its meaning in
the following paſſage. [See SL E A v E.]
Methought I heard a voice cry, ſleep no more
Macbeth doth murder ſleep ; the innocent ſleep;
Sleep that knits up the ravell'd ſleeve of care,
The birth of cach day's life Shakeſpeare.
3. Sleeve, Dutch, fignifies a cover; any thing ſpread over ;
which ſeems to be the ſenſe of ſleeve in the proverbial phraſe.
A brace of ſharpers laugh at the whole roguery in their
ſleeves. - L’E/?range.
Men know themſelves utterly void of thoſe qualitics which
the impudent ſycophant aſcribes to them, and in his ſleeve
laughs at them for believing. South's Scrººns.
John laughed heartily in his ſleeve at the pride of the eſquire,
A buthnot's Hiſ fjohn Bull.
4. To hang on a ſleeve; to make dependent.
It is not for a man which doth know, or ſhould know
what orders, and what peaceable government requireth, to
iſk why we ſhºuld hang our judgment upon the church's
Jºe, and why in matters of orders more than in matters of
dočtrine. Hºcker.
5. [Loligo, Latin.] A fiſh. Ainſwºrth.
SLEE’ved. adj. [from ſleeve.] Having ſleeves.
SLEE’ve less. adj. [from ſleeve.]
1. Wanting ſleeves; having no ſleeves.
H; cloaths were ſtrange, though coarſe, and black, tho’
are ;
Sleeveleſ; his jerkin was, and it had been
Velvet, but 'twas now, ſo much ground was ſeen,
Become tuffraffity. Donne.
They put on long ſleeve'eſ coats of home-ſpun cotton.
Sandys.
Behold yon iſle by palmers, pilgrims trod,
Grave mummers' ſleevelſ; ſome, and ſhirtleſs others. Pope.
2. Wanting reaſonableneſs; wanting propriety; wanting ſo-
lidity. . [This ſenſe, of which the word has been long poſ-
ſeſſed, I know not well how it obtained; Skinner thinks it pro-
perly livelſ or lifeleſs: to this I cannot heartily agree, though
I know not what better to ſuggeſt. Can it come from ſleeve,
a knot, or skein, and ſo ſignify uncºnne?ed, hanging ill to-
gether P or from ſleeve, a cover; and therefore means plainly
alſard; fooliſh without palliation?]
This ſleeveleſs tale of tranſubſtantiation was brought into
the world by that other fable of the multipreſence. Hall.
My landlady quarrelled with him for ſending every one of
her children on a ſleevelſ; errand, as ſhe calls it. Spectator.
SLEIGHT. m. ſ. [ſlagd, cunning, Iſlandick.] Artful trick;
cunning artifice; dexterous practice; as ſleight of hand; the
tricks of a juggler. This is often written, but leſs properly,
ſlight. -
He that exhorted to beware of an enemy's policy, doth not
give counſel to be impolite; but rather to be all prudent
forefight, left our ſimplicity be over-reached by cunning
fleights. Hooker.
Fair Una to the red croſs knight
Betrothed is with joy;
Though falſe Dueſſa it to bar,
Her falſe ſleights do employ.
Upon the corner of the moon,
There hangs a vap'rous drop, profound;
I'll catch it ere it come to ground;
And that diſtill'd by magick ſleights,
Shall raiſe ſuch artificial ſprights,
As, by the ſtrength of their illuſion
Shall draw him on to his confuſion. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Out ſtept the ample ſize
Of mighty Ajax, huge in ſtrength; to him, Laertes' ſon,
That crafty one as huge in ſleight. Chapman.
She could not ſo convey
The maſſy ſubſtance of that idol great,
What ſlight had ſhe the wardens to betray ?
what ſtrength to heave the goddeſs from her ſeat Fairf.
In the wily ſnake
Whatever ſleights, none would ſuſpicious mark,
As from his wit, and native ſubtilty
Proceeding. Milton;
Doubtleſs the pleaſure is as great
Of being cheated, as to cheat;
As lookers on feel moſt delight,
That leaſt perceive the juggler's ſeight. Hudibrar.
Good humour is but a ſleight of hand, or a faculty mak-
ing truths look like appearances, or appearances like truths.
L’E/?range.
when we hear death related, we are all willing to favour
the ſight, when the poet does not too groſsly impoſe upon
uS. Dryden.
Fairy Queen.
While innocent he ſcorns ignoble flight, -
His honeſt friends preſerve him by a ſº. Swift.
SLEINE. n.ſ. [This word is apparently miſprinted for ſºme.]
Is a net of about forty fathoms in length, with which they
encompaſs a part of the ſea, and draw the ſame on land by two
ropes faſtned at its ends, together with ſuch fiſh as lighteth
within his precinét. Carew.
SLENDER. adj. [finder, Dutch.]
1. Thin; ſmall in circumference compaſ
not thick.
ed with the length;
So thick the roſes buſhing round
About her glow'd ; half ſtooping to ſupport
Elch flow'r of ſenter ſtalk.
2. Small in the waii; having." fine ſhape.
what ſender youth he jew d with liquid odouis, ...
Courts thee on roſes in ſome pleaſant cave. Milton.
pauteous Helen ſhines among the reſt,
Tall, /endºr, ſtraight, with all the graces bleſt. Drydºn.
Miltºn.
+--&gt;4–<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

3. Not
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L I
S L I
ky; flight; not ſtrong. -
3. Not ..º. theſe labyrinths his ſlaves detains,
And mighty º are lº. in ſlender chains. Pope.
. . iderable ; weak.
4. sº #. º claim the general aſſent of the whole world
unto that which they teach, and do not fear to give very
hard and heavy ſentence upon as many as refuſe to embrace
the ſame, muſt have ſpecial regard, that their firſt founda-
tions and grounds be more than fender probabilities. Hooker.
where joy moſt revels, grief doth moſt lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on ſender accident. Shakeſheart.
Poſitively to define that ſeaſon, there is no/ender difficul-
tW. Brown's W.ulgar Errourt.
It is a very ſlender comfort that relies upon this nice diſtin-
&amp;tion, between things being troubleſome, and being evils;
when all the evil of afflićtion lies in the trouble it creates to
uS. Tillotſºn.
5. Sparing; leſs than enough: as, a ſlender eſtate and ſlender
parts. -
At my lodging,
The worſt is this, that at ſo ſender warning,
You're like to have a thin and ſlender pittance. Shakeſp.
In obſtructions inflammatory, the aliment ought to be cool,
fender, thin, diluting. Arbuthnot.
6. Not amply ſupplied. - -
The good Oſtorius often deign'd
To grace my ſlander table with his preſence. Philips.
SLE'NDERLY. adv. [from ſlender.]
1. Without bulk.
2. Slightly ; meanly. .
If the debt be not juſt, we know not what may be deemed
juſt, neither is it a ſum to be ſlenderly regarded. Hayward.
If I have done well, it is that which I deſired; but if/en-
derly and meanly, it is that which I could attain to. 2 Mac.
SLE'NDERNEss. n.f. [from ſlender.] *
1. Thinneſs; ſmallneſs of circumference.
Small whiſtles give a ſound becauſe of their extreme ſon-
dermſ, whereby the air is more pent than in a wider pipe.
Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
Their colours ariſe from the thinneſs of the tranſparent
parts of the feathers; that is from the ſendernſ of the very
fine hain or capillamenta, which grow out of the ſides of the
groſſer lateral branches or fibres of thoſe feathers. Newton.
2. Want of bulk or ſtrength.
It is preceded by a ſpitting of blood, occaſioned by its
acrimony, and too great a projectile motion, with ſlendºrneſ,
and weakneſs of the veſſels. Arbuthnot on Diet.
3. Slightneſs; weakneſs; inconſiderableneſs.
The ſlenderneſs of your reaſons againſt the book, together
with the inconveniencies that muſt of neceſſity follow, have
procured a great credit unto it. Whitgifte.
4. Want of plenty.
SLEPT. The preterite of ſleep.
Silence! coeval with eternity,
Thou wert ere nature firſt began to be,
'Twas one vaſt nothing all, and all ſºft faſt in thee. Pºe.
SLEw. The preterite of ſlay.
He ſew Hamet, a great commander among the Numidians,
and chaſed Benchades and Amida, two of their greateſt prin-
ces, out of the country. Anolei's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Tºtº. v. n. [See to SLEAVE.] To part of twiſt intº
threads.
Yº. It thou then exaſperate, thou immaterial ſkein of
ſey'd ſilk? Shak -
To Slice. v n. [rlean, Saxon.] ºak ſpeare.
I. To cut into flat pieces.
* Their cooks make no more ado, but ſlicing it into little
gobbets, prick it on a Prong of iron, and hang it in a fur-
Ila Ce. Sandys's journey.
The ſeſidue, were on foot, well furniſhed with jack and
ſkull, pikes and ſlicing ſwords, broad, thin, and of an excel-
lent temper.
- JHayward.
2. To cut into parts.
Nature loſt one by thee, and therefore muſt
Slice one in two to keep her number juſt. Cleaveland.
3. To cut off.
When hungry thou ſtood'ſt ſtaring, like an oaf,
! ſie'd the luncheon from the barley loaf. Gay.
4. T 9 cut ; to divide.
Ambitious princes and tyrants ſlice the earth among them.
- Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Slic E. n.ſ. [rlize, Saxon; from the verb.] y of
A broad piece cut off.
fo hº of trees in their bark, both downright and acroſs.
}. . ''."º make them rather in ſizes than in continued
acks, doth great good to trees. Bacon.
cutti Yº *** wipe your knife to cut bread; becauſe in
"; a ſlice or two it will wipe itſelf.
He from out the chimney took Swift.
A flitch of bacon off the hook.”
*nd freely, from the fatteſt fi.
Cut out largeſice to be fry'd, 2 Swift
2. A broad piece. -
Then clap four ſlices of pilaſter on't,
That lac'd with bits of ruſtick, makes a front. Pope.
3. A broad head fixed in a handle; a peel; a ſpatula.
The pelican hath a beak broad and flat, much like theſ,
of apothecaries, with which they ſpread plaiſters. Hakºvil.
When burning with the iron in it, with the ſlice, clap the
coals upon the outſide cloſe together, to keep the heatin. Max.
Slick. adj. [ſlickt, Dutch. See SLEEK.]
Glaſs attracts but weakly ; ſome ſlick ſtones, and thick glaſ-
ſes indifferently. Brown's Wugar Errºurt.
SLID. The preterite of ſlide.
At firſt the filent venom ſlid with eaſe, º
And ſeiz'd her cooler ſenſes by degrees. Dryden's Znaid.
Sli'DDEN. The participle paſſive of ſlide.
Why is this people ſlidden back, by a perpetual backſlid-
ing? jºr. viii. 5.
To SLIDDER. v. n. [ſlidderen, Dutch..] To ſlide with inte-
Iuption. *
Go thou from me to fate,
Now die: with that he dragg'd the trembling fire,
Sidd'ring through clotted blood. Dryden.
To Slide. v. m. ſlid, preterite; ſlidden, participle paſſ. [rliban,
rlbenbe, ſliding, Saxon; ſlijden, Dutch ; yſ-lithe, Welſh.]
1. To paſs along ſmoothly; to ſlip; to glide.
Sounds do not only ſlide upon the ſurface of a ſmooth body,
but communicate with the ſpirits in the pores of the body.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Ulyſſes, Stheneleus, Tiſander ſide
Down by a rope, Machaon was their guide.
2. To move without change of the foot.
Oh Ladon, happy, Ladon, rather ſlide than run by her,
left thou ſhouldſt make her legs ſlip from her. Sidney.
Smooth ſliding without ſtep. Milton.
He that once fins, like him that ſlides on ice,
Goes ſwiftly down the ſlippery ways of vice:
Though conſcience checks him, yet thoſe rubs gone o'er,
He ſides on ſmoothly, and looks back no more. Dryden.
3. To paſs inadvertently.
Make a door and a bar for thy mouth: beware thou ſlide
not by it. Ecclus xxviii. 26.
4. To paſs unnoticed.
In the princeſs I could find no apprehenſion of what I
ſaid or did, but with a calm careleſſneſs, letting every thing
ſide juſtly, as we do by their ſpeeches, who neither in mat-
ter, nor perſon do any way belong unto us. Sidney.
5. To paſs along by ſilent and unobſerved progreſſion.
Thou ſhalt
Hate all, ſhew charity to none;
But let the famiſht fleſh ſlide from the bone,
Ere thou relieve the beggar. Shakespeare,
Then no day void of bliſs, of pleaſure leaving,
Denham.
Ages ſhall ſide away without perceiving, Dryden.
Reſcue me from their ignoble hands :
Let me kiſs yours when you my wound begin,
Then eaſy death will/id, with pleaſure in. Dryden.
Their eye ſides over the pages, or the words /ſide over their
eyes, and vaniſh like a rhapſody of evening ta'e. Watts.
6. To paſs ſilently and gradually from good to bad. . .
Nor could they have ſlid into thoſe brutiſh immoralities of
life, had they duly manured thoſe firſt practical notions and
dićtates of right reaſon. South.
7. To paſs without difficulty or obſtruction.
Such of them ſhould be retained as ſlide eaſily of themſelves
into Engliſh compounds, without violence to the car. Pºpº.
Begin with ſenſe, of ev'ry art the ſoul,
Parts anſw'ring parts ſhall ſide into a whole;
Nature ſhall join you, time ſhall make it grow
A work to wonder at. - Pope.
8. To move upon the ice by a ſingle impulſe, without change
of feet.
The gallants dancing by the river ſide,
They bathe in ſummer, and in winter ſide.
9. To fall by errour.
The diſcovering and reprehenſion of theſe colours ºntº
be done but out of a very univerſal knowledge of things,
which ſo cleareth man's judgment, as it is the leſs apt to
ſlide into any errour. Bacon.
Io. To be not firm.
Ye fair |
Pe greatly cautious of your ſiding hearts.
I . To paſs with a free and gentle courſe or flow.
To SLIDE. v. a. To put imperceptibly. - h
Little tricks of ſophiſtry by ſliding in, or leaving out º
words as entirely change the queſtion, ſhould be abandone
by all fair diſputants. //atti.
SLIP E. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
J. Smooth and eaſy paſſage. - -
We have ſome ſide, or reliſhes of the voice or ſtrings,”
tinued without notes, from one to another, riſing or fling,
which are delightful. Bacon's Natural Hiſtº
J/aller.
Thomſºn.
6 King;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L I
*i.
º:
ºt,
º,
Kings that have able men of their nobility ſhall find caſe
in employing them, and a better ſlide into their buſineſs; for
people naturally bend to them. Bacon.
2. Fiow ; even courſe.
There be, whoſe fortunes are like Homer's verſes, that have
a ſide and eaſineſs more than the verſes of other poets. Bac.
SLI'd ER. m. ſ. [from ſlide.} He who ſlides.
Slig HT. adj. [ſlicht, Dutch.]
1. Small; worthleſs; inconſiderable.
Is Caeſar with Antonius priz’d ſo ſlight? . . Shakeſpeare.
Their arms, their arts, their manners I diſcloſe, .
Slight is the ſubject, but the praiſe not ſmall,
If heav'n affiſt, and Phoebus hear my call.
Slight is the ſubject, but not ſo the praiſe;
If ſhe inſpire, and he approve my lays. Pope.
2. Not important; not cogent; weak.
Some firmly embrace doćtrines upon ſlight grounds, ſome
upon no grounds, and ſome contrary to appearance. Locke.
3. Negligent; not vehement; not done with effect.
The ſhaking of the head is a geſture of ſlight refuſal. Bacon.
He in contempt
At one ſight bound high overleap'd all bound. Milton.
4. Fooliſh; weak of mind.
No beaſt ever was ſo ſlight
For man, as for his God, to fight.
5. Not ſtrong; thin; as a ſlight ſilk.
SLIGHT. m. ſ. [from the adjećtive.]
1. Neglect; contempt ; ačt of ſcorn.
People in misfortune conſtrue unavoidable accidents into
flights or neglects. Clariſſa.
2. Artifice; cunning praštice. See SLEIGHT.
As boiſterous a thing as force is, it rarely atchieves any
thing but under the conduct of fraud. Slight of hand has
done that, which force of hand could never do. South.
After Nic had bambouzled John a while, what with ſlight
of hand, and taking from his own ſcore, and adding to John's,
Nic brought the balance to his own ſide. Arbuthnot.
To SLIGHT. v. a. [from the adjećtive.]
1. To neglect; to diſregard.
Beware left they tranſgreſs and ſight that ſole command.
Dryden.
Hudibras:
Milton.
You cannot expect your ſon ſhould have any regard for
one whom he ſees you ſlight. Locke.
2. To throw careleſsly, unleſs in this paſſage to ſlight be the
ſame with to fling.
The rogues flighted me into the river, with as little
remorſe as they would have drowned puppies. Shakeſpeare.
3. [Slighten, Dutch..] To overthrow ; to demoliſh. junius,
Skinner, and Ainſworth.
4. To Slight over. To treat or perform careleſsly.
Theſe men, when they have promiſed great matters, and
failed moſt ſhamefully, ; they have the perfection of bold-
neſs, will but flight it over, and no more ado. Bacon's Eſſays.
- His death and your deliverance
Were themes that ought not to be ſlighted over: Dryden:
St I'GHTER. n.ſ.. [from ſlight.] One who diſregards.
SL "GHTINGLY. adv. [from ſlighting.] Without reverence;
with contempt.
If my ſceptick ſpeaks flightingly of the opinions he oppoſes,
I have done no more than became the part. Boyle.
SLI'GHTLY. adv. [from ſlight.]
1. Negligently; without regard.
Words, both becauſe they are common, and do not ſo
ſtrongly move the fancy of man, are for the moſt part but
flightly heard. Hooker.
Leave nothing fitting for the purpoſe
Untouch'd, or ſlightly handled in diſcourſe.
You were to blame
To part ſo ſlightly with your wife's firſt gift. Shakeſpeare.
The letter-writer diſſembles his knowledge of this reſtrićtion,
and contents himſelf flightly to mention it towards the cloſe of
his pamphlet. Atterbury.
2. Scornfully; contemptuouſly.
Long had the Gallick monarch uncontroul’d,
Enlarg’d his borders, and of human force
Opponent flightly thought. Philips.
3. Weakly; without force.
Scorn not the facilgates of hell too ſlightly barr'd. Milton.
4. Without worth.
SLI'GHTN Ess. n. ſ. [from flight.]
1. Weakneſs; want of ſtrength.
2. Negligence; want of attention; want of vehemence.
Where gentry, title, wiſdom,
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of gen'ral ignorance, it muſt omit
Real neceſſities, and give way the while
Tº unſtable ſlightneſs. Shakeſpeare's Corio'anus.
What ſtrong cries muſt they be that ſhall drown ſo loud a
clamour of impieties 2 and how does it reproach the ſlightneſ;
of our ſleepy heartleſs addreſſes? Decay of Piety.
SLI'lly, adº: [from fly..] Cunningly; with cunning ſecrecy;
with ſubtile covertneſs,
7
Shakeſpeare.
S L I
Were there a ſerpent ſeen with forked tongue,
That ſily glided towards your majeſty,
It were but neceſſary you were wak'd.
He, cloſely falſe and flily wiſe,
Caſt hºw he might annoy them moſt from far. Fairfax.
Satan, like a cunning pick-lock, /ſily robs us of our grand
treaſure. -
- - - Decay of Piety,
With this he did a herd of goats controul; y of Piety
Which by the way he met, and flily ſtole:
Clad like a country ſwain
. . May hypocrites,
That ſlily ſpeak oné thing, another think,
Hateful as hell, pleas'd with the reliſh weak,
Drink on unwarned, till by inchanting cups
Infatuate, they their wily thoughts diſjoſe,
And through intemperance grow a while ſincere, Philipt.
Stºſ. adv. [Acant word as it ſeems, and therefore not tº
uſed.]. Slender; thin of ſhape.
. A thin ſlim-gutted fox made a hard ſhift to wriggle his body
into a henrooſt; and when he had ſtuft his guts . ſqueezed
hard to get out again; but the hole was too little. L’Eſtr.
I was jogg'd on the elbow by a ſlim young girl of ſeven-
teen. Addiſon.
Slime; n.ſ. [rlim, Saxon; ſigm, Dutch..] Viſcous mire; any
glutinous ſubſtance.
The higher Nilus ſwells
The more it promiſes: as it ebbs, the ſeedſman
Upon the ſlime and ooze ſcatters his grain. Shakeſpeare.
Brick for ſtone, and ſlime for mortar. Gen.
The vale of Siddim was full of ſlime-pits. Gen. xiv. Io.
God, out of his goodneſs, cauſed the wind to blow, to
dry up the abundant ſlime and mud of the earth, and make
the land more firm, and to cleanſe the air of thick vapours
and unwholſome miſts. Raleigh.
Some plants grow upon the top of the ſea, from ſome con-
cretion of ſlime where the ſun beateth hot, and the ſea ſtir-
reth little. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
And with Aſphaltick ſlime, broad as the gate,
Deep to the roots of hell, the gather'd beach
They faſten'd. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
Now dragon grown; larger than whom the ſun
Engender'd in the Pythian vale on ſlime,
Huge Python! Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
foul deſcent 1 I'm now conſtrain’d
Into a beaſt, to mix with beſtial flime,
This eſſence to incarnate and imbrute. Milton:
SLIMINess. m. ſ. [from ſlimy.] Viſcoſity; glutinous mat-
ter.
By a weak fermentation a pendulous ſimineſ, is produced,
which anſwers a pituitous ſtate. - Floyer.
Sli'MY. adj. [from flime.]
1. Overſpread with ſlime.
My bended hook ſhall pierce
Their ſlimy jaws; and, as I draw them up,
I'll think them every one an Antony. Shakeſpeare.
Some lay in dead men's ſkulls; and in thoſe holes,
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
As 'twere in ſcorn of eyes, reflecting gems,
That woo'd the ſlimy bottom of the deep,
And mock'd the dead bones that lay ſcatter'd by. Shakespeare
They have cobwebs about them, which is a ſign of a ſlimy
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
dryneſs. Bacon.
The reſt are all by bad example led,
And in their father's ſlimy tract they tread. Dryden.
Eels for want of exerciſe, are fat and ſlimy,
Shoals of flow houſe-bearing do ſnails creep
O'er the ripe fruitage, paring ſlimy tracks
In the ſleek rind. Philips.
The ſwallow ſweeps
The ſlimy pool to build his hanging houſe.
2. Viſcous; glutinous.
Then both from out hell-gates, into the waſte,
Wide anarchy of chaos, damp and dark,
Hovering upon the waters, what they met
Solid or ſlimy, as in raging ſea,
Arbuthnot.
Thomſon.
Toſt up and down, together crowded drove. Milton,
From their groins they ſhed
A ſlimy juice by falſe conception bred. Dryden.
The aſtrological undertakers would raiſe men like vege-
tables, out of ſome fat and ſlimy ſoil, well digeſted by the
kindly heat of the ſun, and impregnated with the influence
of the ſtars. - - Bently.
Sli'Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſ}.] Deſigning artifice.
By an excellent faculty in mimickry, my correſpondent can
aſſume my air, and give my taciturnity a ſynºſ, which di-
verts more than any thing I could ſay. Addiſon.
SLING.. n.ſ. [rlingan, Saxon; ſlingen, Dutch.] -
1. A miſſive weapon made by a ſtrap and two ſtrings; the
ſtone is lodged in the ſtrap, and thrown by looſing one of
the ſtrings. - -
The arrow cannot make him flee: ſing ſtones are turned
with him into ſtubble. job xli. 28.
24 H Dreads<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L I
S L I
- •, - P
Dreads he the twanging of the archer's º
Or ſinging ſtones from the Phºenician ſing
Slings five ſo much greater ſwiftneſs than a ſtone thrown
l
from the hand, by hºw much the end of the ſing is faſheſ of
from the ſhoulder jo" the center of motion, //, lºins.
The Tuſcan king - -
Laid by the lance, and took him to the ſºng;
Thrice whirl'd the thong around his head, and threw r
The heated lead, half melºd as it flew. 1 ryden's ...ºn.
Whirl’d from a ſing, or #" º engine thrown,
midſt the foes, as flies a might) toº -
§. flew the beaſt. Dryden's Ovid.
. A throw ; a ſtroke.
2 *till cram'd and gorg'd, nigh burſt
with ſuckid and glutted offal, at one ſing
Of thy victorious arº, well-pleaſing ſon.
. A kind of hanging bandage.
ºfo SLING. v. a. Ifrom the noun.]
1. To throw by a ſing.
2. To throw; to caſt. Not very proper.
A tha's entrails fraught with fire,
That now caſts out dark fumes and pitchy clouds,
Incenſt, or tears up mountains by the roots,
Sands.
Milt. Par. L3/?.
Orſing; a broken rock aloft in air. Addison.
3. To hang looſely by a ſtring.
From rivers drive the kids, and ſing your hook;
Anon I il waſh 'em in the inallow brook. Dryden.
4. To move by means of a rope.
Coenus I ſaw amidſt the ſhouts
Of mariners, and buſy care to ſing
His horſes ſoon aſhore. Dryden's Clemenzº.
They ſung up one of their largeſt hogſheads, then rolled
it towards my hand, and beat out the top. Gulliver's Travels.
SLI'NGER. m. ſ. [from ſling...] One who lºngs or uſes the ſling.
The ſingers went about it, and ſmote it. 2 Kºng, iii. 25.
To SLINK. J. m. preter. ſunk. [rlingan, Saxon, to creep.] To
ſneak; to ſteal out of the way.
We will ſlink away in ſupper-time, diſguiſe us at my lodg-
ing, and return all in an hour. Shakº/p. 4/erch. Of /enice.
As we do turn our backs
From our companion, thrown into his grave,
So his familiars from his buried fortunes
Slink away. Shakespeare. Timon of Athens.
He, after Eve ſeduc’d, unminded ſunk
Into the wood faſt by. Miltºn's Paradije Ig/?.
Not far from hence doth dwell
A cunning man, hight Sidrophel,
To whom all people far and near
On deep importances repair;
• When braſs and pewter hap to ſtray,
And linen ſlinks out of the way. Hudibras.
She ſunk into a corner, where ſhe lay trembling 'till the
company went their way. L'E//range.
He would pinch the children in the dark, and then ſlink into
a corner, as if no body had done it. Arbuthn. Hiſt. ºf J. Bull.
A weaſel once made ſhift to ſlink
In at a corn-loſt through a chink;
But having amply ſtuff'd his ſkin,
Could not get out as he got in. Pºpe's Epift. of Horace.
We have a ſuſpicious, fearful, and conſtrained countenance,
often turning back, and ſlinkin, through narrow lanes. Swift.
To SLINK. v. a. To caſt; to miſcarry of. A low word.
To prevent a mare's ſinking her foal, in ſnowy weather
- keep her where ſhe may have good ſpring-water to drink. Mºt.
To SLIP. v. n. [rhpan, Saxon; ſiften, Dutch..]
I. To ſlide; not to tread firm.
- If a man walks over a narrow bridge, when he is drunk, it
is no wonder that he forgets his caution while he overlooks his
danger; but he who is ſober, and views that nice ſeparation
between himſelf and the devouring deep, ſo that, if he ſhould
ſip, he ſees his grave gaping under him, ſurely muſt needs take
every ſtep with horrour and the utmoſt caution. South.
A ſkilful dancer on the ropes ſlips willingly, and makes a
ſeeming ſtumble, that you may think him in great hazard,
while he is only giving you a proof of his dexterity. Dryden.
If after ſome diſtinguiſh'd leap
He drops his pole, and ſeems to jº,
Straight gath'ring all his ačtive ſtrength,
He riſes higher half his length. C
2. To ſlide; to glide. ~
Oh Ladon, happy Ladon rather ſide than run by her, leſt
thou ſhouldſ make her legs ſlip from her. Sidney.
They trim their feathers, which makes them oily and flip-
... P.” that the water may ſ/p of them. .1/., timer's Huxlandry.
3. To move or fly out of place.
jº º angle-bone is apt to turn out on either ſide,
iſe i.". sº º you reduce, y; upon
4. To ſneak; to finſ.” the bone ſlips out again. //ſeman.
From her moſt b y
I'gan refrain, in ſº ºy
Soon as appear'd ſafe opportunity. y,
Prior.
Spenſºr.
When Judas ſaw that his hoſt ſºft away, he was fore
troubled. I diac. ix. 7.
I'll ſº down cut of my lodging. Dryden's Don Sºan.
Thus one tradeſman /if's away,
To cive his partner fairer play.
5. To glide; to paſs unexpectedly or imperceptibly.
The banks of either ſide ſeeming arms of the loving earth,
that ſain would cnbrace it, and the river a wanton nymph,
which ſtill would ſlip from it. Side,
The bleſºng of the Lord ſhall ſlip from thee, without doing
thce any good, if thou haſ not ceaſed from doing evil. Taylºr.
slip in from thy mother's eye thou went it
Alone into the temple; there was found
Among the graveſt rabbies diſputant,
Priºr.
On points and queſtions fitting Moſes' chair. Mºon.
‘I hrice aroun his neck his arms he threw,
And thrice the fitting ſhadow ſlipp'd away,
Like winds or empty dreams that fly the day. Dryden.
Though with pale checks, wet beard, and dropping hair,
None but my Ceyx could appear ſo fair,
I would have ſtrain’d him with a ſtrict embrace;
But through my arms he ſlipt, and vaniſh'd from the place.
Dryden,
When a corn ſlips out of their paws, they take hold º: it
again. Addison's Spectatºr.
Wiſe men watch every opportunity, and retrieve every
miſpent hour which has ſlipped from them. Rogers.
I will impute no defect to thoſe two years which have ſiped
by ſince. Swift to Pºpe.
6. To fall into fault or errour.
If he had been as you,
And you as he, you would have ſlipt like him;
But he, like you, would not have been ſo ſtern. Sha'effeare.
One ſlippeth in his ſpeech, but not from his heart. Eccluſ.
An eloquent man is known far and near ; but a man of un-
derſtanding knoweth when he ſlippeth. i.e. ſ. Xxi. 7.
7. To creep by overſight.
Some miſtakes may have ſipt into it; but others will be pre-
vented by the names being now ſet at length. adv, to Dunciad.
8. To eſcape; to fall away out of the memory. *
By the hearer it is ſtill preſumed, that if they be let ſlip for
the preſent, what good ſoever they contain is loſt, and that
without all hope of recovery. Hooker.
The mathematician proceeds upon propoſitions he has once
demonſtrated; and though the demonſtration may have ſlipt
out of his memory, he builds upon the truth. Addison,
Uſe the moſt proper methods to retain the ideas you have
acquired; for the mind is ready to let many of them ſlip, un-
leſs ſome pains be taken to fix them upon the memory. Waiti.
To SLIP. v. a.
1. To convey ſecretly.
In his officious attendance upon his miſtreſs he tried to ſº?
a powder into her drink. Arbuthn. Hiſł. ºf john Bull.
2. To loſe by negligence. -
You are not now to think what's beſt to do,
As in beginnings; but what muſt be done,
Being thus enter'd; and ſlip no advantage - * *
That may ſecure you. Ben johnſºn's Catline.
Let us not ſlip th’ occaſion, whether ſcorn -
Or ſatiate fury yield it from our foe. //iſton.
One ill man may not think of the miſchief he could do. "
ſlip the occaſion. L'Eſt ange.
To ſlip the market, when thus fairly offered, is great ºr
prudence. Cºllier.
For watching occaſions to correót others in their diſcourſe,
and not to ſlip any opportunity of ſhewing their talents, ſchº-
lars are moſt blamed. - Locke.
Thus far my author has ſlipt his firſt deſign; not letter of
what has been yet ſaid promoting any ways the trial. Atterb.
3. To part twigs from the main body by laceration. -
The runners ſpread from the maſter-roots, and ha" little
ſprouts or roots to them, which, being cut four or five inches
long, make excellent ſets: the branches alſo may befifted and
planted. Mºrtimer's Huiland).
4. To eſcape from ; to leave ſlily.
This bird you aim’d at, though you hit it not.
—Oh, fir, Lucentioſiºpºd me like his greyhound,
Which runs himſelf, and catches for his maſter.
5. To let looſe.
On Eryx altars lays !
Shałºff.
A lamb new fallen to the ſtormy ſeas;
Then ſlips his haulſers, and his anchors weighs. Dryden.
6. To let a dog looſe.
The impatient greyhound, ſift from far,
Bounds o'er the glebe, to courſe the fearful hare.
7. To throw off any thing that holds one.
Forced to alight, my horſe fifted his bridle, and ran
away. Sw ift.
8. To paſs over negligently.
If our author gives us a liſt of his doćt
reaſon can that about indulgences be ſlipped over ?
Dryden.
rines, with what
Atterbºry.
2 Slip.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L I
; :
º
º
St. P. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The act of ſlipping; falſe ſtep.
2. Errour; miſtake 5 fault.
There put on him
What forgeries you pleaſe: marry, none ſo rank
As may diſbonour him.
But, fir, ſuch wanton, wild, and uſual ſlip,
As are moſt known to youth and liberty.
of memory, or injury of time.
man, would be the moſt enormous ſlip ſhe could commit.
Gore's Antidote againſt Ætheiſm.
One caſual ſlip is enough to weigh down the faithful ſervice
- L’Eſtrange.
of a long life.
Alonzo, mark the charaćters;
And if th' impoſtor's pen have made a ſit,
That ſhews it counterfeit, mark that and ſave me. Dryden.
Lighting upon a very eaſy ſlip I have made, in putting one
ſeemingly indifferent word for another, that diſcovery opened
Locke.
Any little ſlip is more conſpicuous and obſervable in a
good man's conduct than in another's, as it is not of a piece
Aad ſon's Spe.fator.
to me this preſent view.
with his character.
3. A twig torn from the main ſtock.
In truth, they are fewer, when they come to be diſcuſſed by
reaſon, than otherwiſe they ſeein, when by heat of conten-
tion they are divided into many ſlips, and of every branch an
Hicker.
The ſlips of their vines have been brought into Spain. Abb.
heap is made.
Adoption ſtrives with nature, and choice breeds
A native/p to us from foreign ſeeds.
Thy mother took into her blameful bed
Some ſtern untutor'd churſ, and noble ſtock
Was graft with crab-tree ſliº, whoſe fruit thou art. Shakespeare
Trees are apparelled with flowers or herbs by boring holes
in their bodies, and putting into them earth holpen with muck,
Bacon.
and ſetting ſeeds or ſps of violets in the earth.
So have I ſeen ſome tender ſlip,
Sav'd with care from Winter's nip,
The pride of her carnation train,
Pluck'd up by ſome unheedy ſwain.
The lab’rer cuts -
Young ſps, and in the ſoil ſecurely puts.
Milton.
the root, and ſome by ſºps or cuttings.
4. A leaſh or ſtring in which a dog is held.
I ſee you ſtand like greyhounds in the ſlipſ,
Straining upon the ſtart. Shakespeare. Henry V.
God is ſaid to harden the heart permiſſively, but not ope-
ratively, nor effectively; as he who only lets looſe a grey-
hound out of the ſlip, is ſaid to hound him at the hare. Bramh.
5. An eſcape; a deſertion. I know not whether to give the ſlip,
Ray on the Creation.
be not originally taken from a dog that runs and leaves the
firing or ſlip in the leader's hand.
The more ſhame for her goodyſhip,
To give ſo near a friend the ſlip. Hudibras.
The daw did not like his companion, and gave him the ſlip,
and away into the woods. L’Eſtrange.
Their explications are not your's, and will give you the
Lºcke.
ſip.
6. A long narrow piece.
Between theſe eaſtern and weſtern mountains lies a ſlip of
lower ground, which runs acroſs the iſland. Addiſon.
SLI'PBoARD. m.ſ.. [ſlip and board.) A board ſliding in grooves.
I ventured to draw back the ſlipboard on the roof, contrived
on purpoſe to let in air. Gulliver's Travels.
SLI'PKNot. n.ſ.. [ſlip and knot..] A bowknot; a knot eaſily
untied.
They draw off ſo much line as is neceſſary, and faſten the
reſt upon the line-rowl with a ſlipknot, that no more line turn
off. Moson's Mech. Exer.
In large wounds a ſingle knot firſt; over this a little linen
compreſs, on which is to be made another ſingle knot, and
then a ſlipknot, which may be looſened upon inflammation.
Sharp's Surgery.
SLI'PPER, or Sºſoe. m. ſ. [from ſp.] A ſhoe without lea-
ther behind, into which the foot ſlips eaſily.
A gown made of the fineſt wool,
Which from our pretty lambs we pull;
Fair lined ſlippers for the cold,
With buckles of the pureſt gold;
A belt of ſtraw and ivy buds,
With coral claſps, and amber ſtuds. Raleigh.
If he went abroad too much, ſhe'd uſe
To give him ſlippers, and lock up his ſhoes. King.
Thrice rung the bell, the ſlipper knock'd the ground,
And the preſs'd watch return’d a ſilver ſound. Pope.
SL "Pee R. adj. [riipur, Saxon.] Slippery; not firm. Ob-
ſolete. Perhaps never in uſe but for poetical convenience.
A truſtleſs ſtate of earthly things, and ſlipper hope
Of mortal men, that ſwinke and ſweat for nought. Spenſer.
- Shakeſpeare.
Of the promiſe there made, our maſter hath failed us, by ſlip
//otton's Architecture.
This religious affection, which nature has implanted in
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
They are propagated not only by the ſeed, but many alſo by
Slips Lop. m. ſ. Bad liquor.
SLISH. n.ſ.
S L I
Slipper is ess. n: ſ [from ſppery.]
* Stºº or quality of being ſlippery; ſmoothneſs; glibneſs.
We do not only fall by the ſlipperineſs of our tongues, but
We deliberately diſcipline them to miſchief. Gºv. of the Tºngue.
. The * may be diſtinguiſhed by its want of inflamma.
tion in the ſkin, its ſmoothneſs, and ſº peringſ, deep in the
breaſt. &gt;
- Shar
2. Uncertainty; want of firm footing. harp's Surgery.
Stº PFRY, dº. Iripur, Saxon; ºriº, Swed;
1. Smooth; glib. &gt; ; ſliperig, Swediſh.]
They trim their feathers, which makes them oily and ſp-
pery, that the water ſlips off. ºr.
Oily ſubſtances only lubricate and make the boºſ. flip-
fery.
2. Not affording firm footing. Arbuthnot.
Did you know the art o' th' court,
As hard to leave as keep; whoſe top to climb,
Is certain falling; or ſo ſlipp'ry, that
The fear's as bad as falling. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
His promiſe to truſt to as flippery as ice. Tuffer.
Their way ſhall be asſºpp. ry ways in the darkneſs. jer. xxiii.
The ſlipp'ry tops of human ſtate,
The gilded pinacles of fate. Cowley.
The higher they are raiſed, the giddier they are; the more
flippery is their ſtanding, and the deeper the fall. L'Aſirange.
The higheſt hill is the moſt ſlip'ry place,
And fortune mocks us with a ſmiling face.
Beauty, like ice, our footing does betray;
Who can tread ſure on the ſmooth /ppery way?
3. Hard to hold; hard to keep.
Thus ſurely bound, yet be not overbold,
The ſlipp'ry god will try to looſe his hold;
And various forms aſſume, to cheat thy fight,
And with vain images of beaſts affright. Dryden's Geºrg.
4. Not ſtanding firm.
When they fall, as being ſlipp'ry ſtanders,
The love that lean'd on them as ſlipp’ry too,
Doth one pluck down another, and together
Die in the faſt. Shakespeare A roilus and Creſſida.
5. Uncertain; changeable; mutable; inſtable.
Oh world, thy ſli ery turns' Friends now faſt ſworn,
Whoſe double boſoms ſeem to wear one heart,
Whoſe hours, whoſe bed, whoſe meal and exerciſe,
Are ſtill together; who twine, as 'twere, in love
Unſeparable, ſhall within this hour,
On a diſſenſion of a doit, break out
To bittereſt enmity.
He looking down
With ſcorn or pity on the ſlippery ſtate
Of kings, will tread upon the neck of fate. Denh. Sophy.
Denham.
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
6. Not certain in its effect.
One ſure trick is better than a hundred ſlippery ones. L'Eſtr.
7. [Lubrique, French..] Not chaſte.
My wife is ſlippery. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
SLI'PPY. adv. [from ſlip.] Slippery; eaſily ſliding. A bar-
barous provincial word.
The white of an egg is ropy, ſlippy, and nutritious. Floyer.
SLI'Ps Ho D. adj. [ſlip and ſhod.] Having the ſhoes not pulled
up at the heels, but barely ſlipped on.
The ſlipſhod 'prentice from his maſter's door
Had par'd the dirt, and ſprinkled round the floor. Swift.
A low word formed by redupli-
cation of ſlºp.
A low word formed by reduplicating ſaſh.
What I this a ſleeve
Here's ſnip and nip, and /liſh and ſlaſh,
Like to a cenſor in a barber's ſhop. Shakeſpeare:
To SLIT. v. a. pret. and part, ſlit and ſlitted. [Flican, Saxon.]
To cut longwiſe.
To make plants medicinable ſlit the root, and infuſe into it
the medicine; as hellebore, opium, ſcammony, and then bind
it up. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The deers of Arginuſa had their ears divided, occaſioned at
firſt by ſitting the ears. Brown's Wugar Errours.
Had it hit
The upper part of him, the blow -
Had ſlit, as ſure as that below. Haibai.
Weſſit the preternatural body open. Hºſman's Surgery.
A liberty might be left to the judges to inflićt death, or ſome
notorious mark, by ſitting the noſe, or brands upºn the
cheeks. - Temple.
If a tinned or plated body, which, being of an even thick-
neſs, appears all over of an uniform colour, ſhould be ſit into
threads, or broken into fragments of the ſame thickneſs with
the plate, I ſee no reaſon why every thread or fragment th9uld
not keep its colour. Newton's Opt.
He took a freak
Toft my tongue, and make me ſpeak. Swift.
SLIT. m. ſ. [rlit, Saxon.) A long cut, or narrow opening.
In St. James's fields is a conduit of brick, unto which
joineth a low vault, and at the end of that a round houſe of
'ſtone; and in the brick conduit there is a windºw, and in i
IOW. I.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">s L O
S L O
- - little breadth: if you cry out
round ho uſe º :::..º.º. at the widºw. #.
in the "º: tender rinds of trees diſcloſe
Their ſhooting gems, a ſwelling knot there grows:
Juſt in that place.” narrow ſit we make, -
#heliother buds from bearing tº wº take;
Inſºred thus, the wounded rind we cloſe. Dryden.
I found, by looking through a ſlit or oblong hole, which
was narrower than the pupil of my eyes, and held cloſe to it
aſſaid to the priſms, I could ſee the circles much diſtinéter,
and viſible to a far greater number, than otherwiſe. Newton.
To SLIVE. v. a. [rlpan, Saxon.) To ſplit; to divide
To SLI'VER. } longwiſe; to tear off longwiſe.
Liver of blaſpheming Jew, -
Ball of goat, and ſlips of yew,
º, . the .. º Slałºp. Macbeth.
SLI've R. n.ſ. [from the verb.] A branch torn off. , Sliver, in
Scotland, ſtill denotes a ſlice cut off: as, he took a large ſliver
of the beef.
There on the pendant boughs, her coronet weed
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious ſiver broke,
when down her weedy coronet and herſelf r
Fell in the weeping brook, - Shaft. Hamlet.
Sloars. n.ſ. Of a cart, are thoſe underpieces which keep the
bottom together. - --- Bailey.
Stoºge R. n.ſ. [glavoria, Welſh, J. Slayer. See Slayer:
To Slock... n. [ſock, to quench, Swediſh and Scottiſh.] To
ſlake; to quench. - -
Slog. Aſ fria, Saxon; ſaae, Daniſh, J The fruit of the
blackthorn, a ſmall wild plum. - -
The fair pomgranate might adorn the pine,
The grape the bramble, and the ſloe the vine. Blackmore.
when you fell your underwoods, ſow haws and ſlows in
them, and they will furniſh you, without doing of your woods
any hurt. Martimer's Husbandry.
Stoop. n.ſ. A ſmall ſhip.
To Slop. v. a. [from lap, lap, ſlºp.] To drink groſly and
greedily. -
Slop. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Mean and vile liquor of any
kind. Generally ſome nauſeous or uſeleſs medicinal liquor.
The ſick huſband here wanted for neither ſlops nor doc-
tors. L'Eſtrange.
But thou, whatever ſlºps ſhe will have bought,
Be thankful. Dryden's juvenal.
Slop. n.ſ. [rlop, Saxon; ſoove, Dutch, a covering] Trow-
ſers; open breeches.
What ſaid Mr. Dombledon about the ſattin for my ſhort
cloak and ſlops * Shakeſp. Henry IV.
SLOPE. adj. [This word is not derived from any ſatisfactory
original. junius omits it: Skinner derives it from ſlap, lax,
Dutch; and derives it from the curve of a looſe rope. Per-
haps its original may be latent in loopen, Dutch, to run, ſlope
being eaſy to the runner.] Oblique; not perpendicular. It
is generally uſed of acclivity or declivity; forming an angle
greater or leſs with the plane of the horizon.
Where there is a greater quantity of water, and ſpace
enough, the water moveth with a ſlºper riſe and fall. Bacon.
Murm'ring waters fall
Down the ſlope hills, diſpers'd, or in a lake,
That to the fringed bank with myrtle crown'd
Her cryſtal mirror holds, unite their ſtreams. Milton.
Slope. n.ſ. [from the adječtive.]
1. An oblique direction; any thing obliquely direéted.
2. Declivity; ground cut or formed with declivity.
Growing upon ſlopes is cauſed for that moſs, as it cometh
of moiſture, ſo the water muſt but ſlide, not be in a pool. Bac.
A * º advances with majeſtick mien,
nd when up ten ſteep ſlopes you've dragg'd your thighs
Juſt at his ſtudy door #º your º: y *#).
Slope. adv. Obliquely; not perpendicularly.
Uriel
Return'd on that bright beam, whoſe point now rais'd
Bore him ſlºpe downward to the ſun, now fall'n. Milton.
To Store. v.a. [from the adjeaive.] To form to obliquity
or declivity; to direct obliquely.
Though bladed corn be lodg’d, and trees blown down,
Though palaces and pyramids do ſlope
Their heads to their foundations, Shakeſp. Macbeth.
. . On each hand the flames
Priv'n backward ſlope their pointing ſpires, and rowl'd
In billows, leave i' th' midſt a horrid Vale. Mil. Par. Lºft.
The ſtar, that roſe at evening bright,
Toward ºn's deſcent had ſlºp'd his weſtering wheel. Milt.
A All night I ſlept, oblivious ºf my pain;
§. *Wh'd, and Phoebus ſhin'd in vain:
or 'till oblique he flap'd his evening ray,
Had Somnus dry'd the balmy dews away.
To Slope. v. n. Pope's Odyſſey.
- To take an oblique or declivous direction
Betwixt tº midſt and theſe the gods aſſign'd
Wo habitable ſeats for human kind;
And croſs their limits -
Whi cut a ſlºping way
hich the twelve ſigns in beauteous ºrder ſway. Dryden.
-
Upſtarts a palace, lo! th’ obedient baſe
Slºpes at its foot, the woods its ſides embrace. Pºpe.
There is a ſtrait hole in every ants neſt half an inch deep,
and then it goes down ſlºping into a place where they have
their magazine. Addiſon's Speciator.
Slo'PENEss. n.ſ.. [from ſlope.] Obliquity; declivity; not per-
pendicularity. -
The Italians give the cover a graceful pendence of /ºpeneſ,
dividing the whole breadth into nine parts, whereof two ſhall
ſerve for the elevation of the higheſt ridge. Wotton's Architeå,
Slo'PEwise. adj. [ſlope and wiſe.] Obliquely; not perpendi-
cularly.
#. Wear is a frith, reaching ſlopewiſe through the Oſe
from the land to low water mark, and having in it a bent or
cod with an eye-hook; where the fiſh entering, upon their
coming back with the ebb, are ſtopped from iſſuing out again,
forſaken by the water, and left dry on the Oſe. Carew.
Slo'PINGLY. adv. [from ſloping.] Obliquely; not perpendi-
cularly.
Theſe atoms do not deſcend always perpendicularly, but
ſometimes flopingly. Digby on the Soul.
Sloppy, adj. [from flop.] Miry and wet: perhaps rather
ſlabby. See SLAB.
To Slot. v. a. [ ſºughen, Dutch. J. To ſtrike or claſh
hard.
Slot. n.ſ.. [ſlod, Iſlandick.] The track of a deer.
Sloth. n.ſ. [rlaepºs, rlepº, Saxon. It might therefore be not
improperly written floath, but that it ſeems better to regard
the orthography of the primitive/low.]
1. Slowneſs; tardineſs.
Theſe cardinals trifle with me: I abhor
This dilatory ſloth and tricks of Rome. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
2. Lazineſs; ſluggiſhneſs; idleneſs.
Falſe of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand,
Hog in ſloth, fox in ſtealth. Shakeſp. King Lear.
They change their courſe to pleaſure, eaſe, and ſloth. Milt,
Induſtry approach'd,
And rous'd him from his miſerable ſloth. Thomſon's Autumn.
3. An animal.
The ſloth is an animal of ſo ſlow a motion, that he will be
three or four days at leaſt in climbing up and coming down a
tree; and to go the length of fifty paces on plain ground, re-
quires a whole day. Grew.
Slo'thful. adj. [ſloth and full.] Idle; lazy; ſluggiſh; in-
aćtive; indolent; dull of motion.
He that is ſlothſul in his work, is brother to him that is a
reat waſter. Prov. xviii. 9:
The deſire of the ſlotºſul killeth him; for his hands refuſe
to labour. Prov, xxi. 25.
To vice induſtrious; but to nobler deeds
Timorous and ſlothful.
Flora commands thoſe nymphs and knights,
Who liv'd in ſlothful eaſe and looſe delights,
Who never acts of honour durſt purſue,
The men inglorious knights, the ladies all untrue. Dryden.
The very ſoul of the ſlothful does effectually but lie drowſing
in his body, and the whole man is totally given up to his
ſenſes. L’Eſtrange.
Slo'thfully, adv. [from ſlothful..] With ſloth:
Slothfulness. n.ſ.. [from ſlºthful..] Idleneſs; lazineſs; ſlug-
giſhneſs; inactivity. -
To truſt to labour without prayer, argueth impiety and
prophaneneſs; it maketh light of the providence of God; and
although it be not the intent of a religious mind, yet it is the
fault of thoſe men whoſe religion wanteth light of a mature
judgment to direét it, when we join with our prayer ſlºthful-
meſ and neglect of convenient labour. Hooker.
Slothfulnſ, caſteth into a deep ſleep, and an idle ſoul ſhall
ſuffer hunger. Prov. xix. 15.
SLouch. n.ſ.. [ſloff, Daniſh, ſtupid.]
1. A downcaſt {. a depreſſion of the head. In Scotland,
an ungainly gait, as alſo the perſon whoſe gait it is.
Our doćtor has every quality that can make a man uſeful;
Milton,
but, alas! he hath a ſort of ſlouch in his walk. Swift.
2. A man who looks heavy and clowniſh.
Begin thy carrols then, thou vaunting ſleuch;
Be thine the oaken ſtaff, or mine the pouch. Gay.
To Slouch. v. n. [from the noun..] To have a downcaſt
clowniſh look.
SLOVEN. n.f. [ſeeſ, Dutch; yilºvn, welſh, naſty, ſhaº]
A man indecently negligent of cleanlineſs; a man dirtily
dreſſed.
The miniſters came to church in handſome holiday apparel;
and that himſelf did not think them bound by the law 9: Go
to go like ſlovens. Hºoker.
Affect in things about thee cleanlineſs,
That all may gladly board thee as a flow'r:
Slovens take up their ſtock of noiſomeneſs
Beforehand, and anticipate their laſt hour. Herbert.
For as when ſlavens do amiſs -
At others doors. Hudibraſ.
You
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L O
S L U
º:
º
º:
ºil
º
s:
1%
º
:
º
{
jr
º
º
You laugh, half beau, half ſlaven if I ſtand;
My wig half powder, and all ſnuff my band. Pope.
SlovEN Li Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſlovenly.] Indecent negligence of
dreſs; neglect of cleanlineſs.
Slovenlineſ is the worſt ſign of a hard ſtudent, and civility
the beſt exerciſe of the remiſs; yet not to be exact in the
phraſe of compliment, or geſtures of courteſy. //otton.
SlºvENLY, adj. [from ſlaven.] Negligent of dreſs; negligent
of neatneſs; not neat; not cleanly.
AEſop at laſt found out a ſºven y lazy fellow, lolling at his
eaſe, as if he had nothing to do. L’E/irange.
Slov EN1). adv. [from ſoven.]. In a coarſe inelegant manner.
As I hang my cloaths on ſomewhat ſovenly, I no ſooner
went in but he frowned upon me. Pope.
SlovENR Y. m. ſ. [from ſoven.] Dirtineſs; want of neatneſs.
Our gayneſs and our gilt are all beſmirch'd
With rainy marching in the painful field:
There's not a piece of feather in our hoſt,
And time hath worn us into ſovenry.
Sloug H. n. ſ. [] log, Saxon. J
1. A deep miry place ; a hole full of dirt.
The Scots were in a fallow field, whereinto the Engliſh
could not enter, but over a croſs ditch and a ſough; in paſſ-
ing whereof many of the Engliſh horſe were plunged, and
fome mired. Hayward.
The ways being foul, twenty to one,
He's here ſtuck in a ſlough, and overthrown. Milton.
A carter had laid his waggon faſt in a ſough. L'E/ºrange.
2. The ſkin which a ſerpent caſts off at his periodical renovation.
Thy fates open their hands, let thy blood and ſpirit embrace
them; and to inure thyſelf to what thou art like to be, caſt
thy humble ſough, and appear freſh, Shakespeare Zwefth Night.
When the mind is quicken'd,
The organs, though defunèt and dead before,
Break up their drowſy grave, and newly move,
With caſted ſough and freſh legerity.
As the ſnake, roll'd in a flow'ry bank,
With ſhining checker'd ſlough, doth ſting a child,
That for the beauty thinks it excellent. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Oh let not ſleep my cloſing eyes invade
In open plains, or in the ſecret ſhade,
When he, renew’d in all the ſpeckl’d pride
Of pompous youth, has caſt his ſough aſide;
And in his Summer liv'ry rolls along,
Erect and brandiſhing his forky tongue. Dryden.
The ſough of an Engliſh viper, that is, the cuticula, they
caſt off twice every year, at ſpring and fall: the ſeparation
begins at the head, and is finiſhed in twenty-four hours. Grew.
I he body, which we leave behind in this viſible world,
is as the womb or ſºugh from whence we iſſue, and are
born into the other. - Grew's Cºſmol.
3. The part that ſeparates from a foul ſore.
At the next dreſſing I found a ſough come away with the
dreſſings, which was the ſordes. //iſeman on Ulcers.
Sloug HY. adj. [from ſlough J Miry; boggy; muddy.
That cuſtom ſhould not be allowed of cutting ſcraws in low
grounds ſº tighy underneath, which turn into bog. Swift.
SLOW. adj. [rlap, rleap, Saxon; ſeeuw, Friſick.]
1. Not ſwift; not quick of motion; not ſpeedy; not having
velocity; wanting celerity.
Me thou think'ſt not ſlow,
Who ſince the morning hour ſet out from heav'n,
Where God reſides, and on mid-day arriv'd
In Eden, diſtance inexpreſſible. Milton.
Where the motion is ſo ſlow as not to ſupply a conſtant train
of freſh ideas to the ſenſes, the ſenſe of motion is loſt. Locke.
2. Late; not happening in a ſhort time.
Theſe changes in the heav'ns, though ſow, produc’d
Like change on ſea and land, ſidereal blaſt. Milton.
3. Not ready; not prompt; not quick. -
I am ſlow of ſpeech, and a ſlow tongue. Ex. iv. 10.
Mine ear ſhall not be ſlow, mine eye not ſhut. Milton.
The ſlow of ſpeech make in dreams unpremeditated ha-
rangues, or converſe readily in languages that they are but little
acquainted with. Addiſon.
4. Dull; inactive; tardy; ſluggiſh.
Fix'd on defence, the Trojans are not ſaw
To guard their ſhore from an expected foe. Dryden.
5. Not haſty; acting with deliberation; not vehement.
‘The Lord is merciful, and ſlow to anger. Common Prayer.
He that is ſlºw to wrath is of great underſtanding. Prov.
6. Dull; heavy in wit.
The politick and wiſe
Are ſly ſlow things with circumſpective eyes. Pºpe.
Slow, in compoſition, is an adverb, ſlowly.
This ſlow-pac’d ſoul, which late did cleave
Tº a body, and went but by the body's leave,
Twenty perchance or thirty mile a day,
Diſpatches in a minute all the way
Shakespeare . H. V.
Shakeſpeare.
*Twixt heav'n and earth. Donne.
To the ſhame of ſlow-endeavouring art
Thy eaſy numbers flow. Milton.
This day's death denounc'd, if ought I ſee,
Will prºve no ſudden, but ºrica evil, 2
A long day's dying to augment our pain. Millon's Par. Lºft.
For eight/ow-circling years by tempeſts toſt. Pope.
&gt; Some demon urg'd
T explore the fraud with guile oppos'd to guile,
Slºw-pacing thrice around th’ inſidious pile. Pope.
To Slow. v. a. [from the adjective) To omit by dilatorineſs;
to delay; to procraſtinate. Not iſ uſe. -
Nº. º know the reaſon of this haſle;
- I wou new not whvi &gt; -
Slowly. adv. [from ſow.] y it ſhould be ſlowd. Shakeſpeare.
I. Not ſpeedily; not with celerity; not with velocity.
The gnome rejoicing bears her gift away,
Spreads his black wings, and ſlowly mounts to day.
2. Not ſoon ; not early; not in a little time.
The Poºr remnant of human ſeed peopled their country
again ſlowly, by little and little.
Our fathers bent their baneful induſtry
To check a monarchy that ſlowly grew;
But did not France or Holland's fate forſee,
Whoſe riſing pow'r to ſwift dominion flew. Dryden.
We oft our ſlowly growing works impart,
While images refle&amp;t from art to art. Pºpe.
3. Not haſtily; not raſhly.
4. Not promptly; not readily.
5. Tardily; ſluggiſhly.
The chapel of St. Laurence advances ſo very ſlowly, that 'tis
not impoſſible but the family of Medicis may be extinct before
their burial place is finiſhed. Addiſon on Italy.
Slow Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſlow.
[from ſlow.]
1. Smalneſs of motion; not ſpeed; want of velocity; abſence
of celerity or ſwiftneſs.
Providence hath confined theſe human arts, that what any
invention hath in the ſtrength of its motion, is abated in the
ſlowneſs of it; and what it hath in the extraordinary quickneſs
of its motion, muſt be allowed for in the great ſtrength that is
required unto it. I/ilkins's Math. Magic.
Motion is the abſolute mode of a body, but ſwiftneſs or
J/owneſ are relative ideas. //atts.
2. Length of time in which anything ačls or is brought to paſs;
not quickneſs. -
Tyrants uſe what art they can to increaſe the ſowneſs of
death. Hoºker.
3. Dulneſs to admit convićtion or affection.
Chriſt would not heal their infirmities, becauſe of the hard-
neſs and ſlowneſs of their hearts, in that they believed him
not. Bentley's Sermons.
4. Want of promptneſs; want of readineſs.
5. Deliberation; cool delay.
6. Dilatorineſs; procraſtination.
Slow wor M. n. ſ. [rlapyrim, Saxon.] The blind worm ; a
ſmall viper, venomous, but ſcarcely mortal.
Though we have found formed ſnakes in the belly of the
cecilia, or ſowwºrm, yet may the viper emphatically bear the
Ilanne. Brown's ſugar Errours.
To Slu'BBER. v a. [Probably from lubler J
1. To do any thing lazily, imperfectly, or with idle hurry.
Nature ſhewed ſhe doth not like men, who ſlubber up mat-
ters of mean account. Sidney.
Baſſanio told him, he would make ſome ſpeed
Of his return : he anſwer'd, do not ſo,
Slubber not buſineſs for my fake. Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
As they are ſlubbered over, the malignity that remains will
ſhow itſelf in ſome chronick diſeaſe, or in ſome ſpecies of
the lues venerea. JWiſeman's Surgery.
2. To ſtain; to daub. [This ſeems to be from ſolber, ſlabber,
or ſlaver.]
You muſt be content to ſubber the gloſs of your new for-
tunes, with this more ſtubborn and boiſterous expedition. Shakespeare
3. To cover coarſely or careleſly.
A man of ſecret ambitious ends, and proportionate coun-
ſels, ſmothered under the habit of a ſcholar, and ſubbered over
with a certain rude and clowniſh faſhion, that had the ſem-
blance of integrity. Iſºtton.
Slu'BBERDE Gullion. m. ſ. [I ſuppoſe a cant word without
derivation.] A paitry, dirty, ſorry wretch.
Quoth ſhe, although thou haſt deſerv'd,
Baſe ſlubberdegullion, to be ſerv'd
As thou did'ſt vow to deal with me, r 7.
If thou had'ſt got the vićtory. Hujrat.
Sludge. n.ſ.. [I ſuppoſe from rlog, ſlough, Saxon.] Mire;
dirt mixed with water. -
The earth I made a mere ſoft ſludge or mud. AMortimer.
SLUG. n.ſ. [ ſlºg, Daniſh, and ſock, Dutch, ſignify a glutton,
and thence one that has the ſloth of a glutton.]
1. An idler; a drone; a ſlow, heavy, ſleepy, lazy wretch.
Fie, what a ſlºg is Haſtings, that he comes not Shakespeare
2. An hindrance; an obſtruction. -
Uſury dulls and damps all improvements, wherein money
would be ſtirring, if it were not for this ſlºg. Bacºn.
Pope.
Bacon.
24 I 3. A
T-h-_
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S L U.
S L U
ſlow creeping ſnail.
3. *::: : jmerhead, Saxon.] A cylindrical or oval piece
4. &gt; f a guil.
of wº º: made with bullets or ſlugs, there the
... a. driven in together. Jºſeman's Surgery.
ſcalp . jº, wind-guns, i. itſelf can fly,
2 jig; cut ſwiftly through he ſky. Pope.
To Slug. v. ". [from the noun..] To lie idle; to play the
done; to move ſlowly. -
Allie did was to deceive good knights,
And draw them from purſuit of praiſe and fame,
To ſlug in ſloth and ſenſual delights, -
And end their days with irrenowned ſhame. Fairy Queen.
He lay not all night ſlugging in a cabbin under his mantle,
but uſed commonly to keep others waking to º their
- enjer.
lives. ging on with a thouſand cares. L'Eſtrange.
One went ſlugg - -
SLU'GGARD. ;ſº An idler; a drone; an inactive
lazy fellow.
azy &amp;; mercy, lords, and watchful gentlemen,
That you have ta'en a tardy Juggard here. Shakespeare . R. III.
Up, up, ſays avarice; thou ſnor'ſt again, .
Stretcheſt thy limbs, and yawn'ſt, but all in vain :
The tyrant lucre no denial takes;
At his command th' unwilling ſluggard wºkes.
Sprightly May commands our youth to keep
The vigils of her night, and breaks their ſluggardſleep. Dry.
To Sivagºrdize. v.a. [from ſluggard.] To make idle; to
make droniſh.
Rather ſee the wonders of the world abroad,
Than, living dully ſluggardiz'd at home,
wear out thy youth with ſhapeleſs idleneſs. Shakeſpeare.
Sluſadish. adj. [from ſlug.] Dull; drowſy; lazy; ſlothful;
idle; inſipid; ſlow; inactive; inert.
siggiſh idleneſs, the nurſe of fin,
Upon a ſlothful aſs he choſe to ride.
The dull billows, thick as troubled mire,
whom neither wind out of their ſeat could force,
And pond’rou
Dryden.
Fairy Queen.
Nortides did drive out of their ſluggiſh ſource. Speſſºr.
r One, bolder than the reſt,
with his broad ſword provok'd the ſluggiſh beaſt. . //aller.
Matter, being impotent, ſluggiſh, and inactive, hath no
power to ſtir or move itſelf. J/oodward.
SLU'Gorshly. adv. [from ſluggiſh, J Dully; not nimbly;
lazily; idly; ſlowly.
Slu'6&amp;ishness. n.ſ.. [from ſluggiſh.] Dulneſs; ſloth; lazi-
neſs; idleneſs; inertneſs.
The moſt of mankind are inclined by her thither, if they
would take the pains; no leſs than birds to fly, and horſes to
run; which, if they loſe, it is thro' their own ſluggiſhneſs, and
by that means become her prodigies, not her children. B.jºhnſ.
It is of great moment to teach the mind to ſhake off its
fluggiſhneſ, and vigorouſly employ itſelf about what reaſon
fhall direct. Locke.
SLUICE. m. ſ. [ſuſ, Dutch; eſcluſe, French; ſºluſa, Italian.]
A watergate; a floodgate; a vent for water,
Two other precious drops that ready ſtood,
Each in their cryſtal ſluice, he ere they fell
Kiſs'd, as the gracious ſigns of ſweet remorſe,
And pious awe, that fear'd to have offended. Milton.
Divine Alpheus, who, by ſecret ſluice,
Stole under ſeas to meet his Arethuſe. Milton.
If we receive them all, they were more than ſeven; if only
the natural ſluices, they were fewer. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
As waters from her ſluices, flow'd -
Unbounded ſorrow from her eyes:
And ſent her wailings to the ſkies. Prior.
To Sluice. v. a. [from the noun..] To emit by floodgates.
Like a traitor coward, o
Sluit'd out his inn'cent ſoul through ſtreams of blood. Shal.
Veins of liquid ore ſluic'd from the lake. Milton.
You wrong me, if you think I’ll ſell one drop
Within theſe veins for pageants; but let honour
Call for my blood, I'll ſluice it into ſtreams;
Turn fortune looſe again to my purſuit,
And let me hunt her through embattl’d foes
In duſty plains; there will I be the firſt. Dryd. Span. Fryar.
SLU icy. adj. [from ſluice..] Falling in ſtreams as from a ſluice
or floodgate.
And oft whole ſheets deſcend of ſluicy rain
Suck'd by the ſpongy clouds from .# #: min:
#. lofty º at once come pouring down,
e promis'd crop and golden labours drown. Dryden.
To SLUMBER. v. n. *... Saxon ; ſuymeren, Dj
". Tº ſleep lightly; to be not awake nor in profound ſleep.
He that keepeth Iſrael ſhall neither ſlumber nor ſleep. Pſ.
2. To sº wakes deſpair that ſlumber'd. AMilton.
- ë. 3 to repoſe. Sleep and ſlumber are often confounded.
- Pºketh, yet man perceiveth it not: in a dream, in a
viſion of the ni ht, w d - -
ſlumlerings º i. n deep º falleth }º '...",.
Have ye choſen this place,
After the toil of battle, to repoſe -
Your wearied virtue, for the uſe you find
To ſumber here.
- - - AMiltoft,
To be in a ſtate of negligence and ſupineneſs.
#, SLU'M BER. v. a.
1. To lay to ſleep.
2. To ſtupify; to ſtun.
Then up he took the ſlumbered ſenſeleſs corſe,
And ere he could out of his ſwoon awake,
Him to his caſtle brought. Fairy Queen,
To honeſt a deed after it was done, or to ſlumber his con-
ſcience in the doing, he ſtudied other incentives. Waltºn,
Slu'MBER. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Light ſleep; ſleep not profound.
And for his dreams, I wonder he's ſo fond
To truſt the mock’ry of unquiet ſlumbers. Shakeſp. R. IIſ.
From careleſineſs it ſhall fall into ſlumber, and from a ſlum-
her it ſhall ſettle into a deep and long ſleep; 'till at laſt, per-
haps, it ſhall ſleep itſelf into a lethargy, and that ſuch an one
that nothing but hell and judgment ſhall awaken it. South.
Labour and reſt, that equal periods keep;
Obedient ſlumbers that can wake and weep.
2. Sleep; repoſe.
Boyſ Lucius' faſt aſleep? It is no matter;
Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of ſimilar. Shakespeare jul. Caſ.
Love denies
Reſt to my ſoul, and ſlumler to my eyes:
Three days I promis'd to attend my doom,
And two long days and nights are yet to come.
sº {a}. [from ſlumber.]
1. Inviting to ſleep; ſoperiferous; cauſing ſleep.
The timely dew of ſleep,
Now falling with ſoft ſlumb’rous weight, inclines
Our eyelids.
while penſive in the ſilent ſlumbºrous ſhade,
Sleep's gentle pow'rs her drooping eyes invade;
Minerva, life-like, on embodied air
Impreſs'd the form of Iphthema. Pope's Odyſſey.
There every eye with ſlumb’rous chains ſhe bound,
And daſh'd the flowing goblets to the ground.
2. Sleepy; not waking.
A great perturbation in nature! to receive at once the be-
nefit of ſleep, and do the effects of watching; in this ſlumly
agitation, what have you heard her ſay? Sºft. Macbeth.
Slusc. The preterite and participle paſſive of ſing.
Slunk. The preterite and participle paſſive of ſinº.
Silence accompany'd ; for beaſt, and bird,
They to their graſſy couch, theſe to their neſts,
Were ſunk. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſſ, l. iv.
Back to the thicket ſunk
The guilty ſerpent, and well might; for Eve,
Intent now wholly on her taſte, nought elſ:
Regarded. Mºhºn's Paradiſe Lºſt.
To SLUR. v. a. ſ. ſoorig, Dutch, naſty; /kore, a ſlut.]
1. To fully; to ſoil; to contaminate.
2. To paſs lightly; to balk; to miſs. -
The atheiſts laugh in their ſleeves, and not a little triumph
to ſee the cauſe of theiſm thus betrayed by its proſº" friend,
and the grand argument ſlurred by them, and ſo their work
done to their hands. Cudwºrth.
Studious to pleaſe the genius of the times, .
With periods, points, and tropes he ſir; his crimes;
He robb’d not, but he borrow'd from the Poor,
Pºpe.
Dryden.
Milton,
Pºpe.
And took but with intention to reſtore. Dryden.
3. To cheat; to trick.
what was the publick faith found out for, -
But to ſlur men of what they fought for? Hudibrai,
Come, ſeven's the main,
Cries Ganymede: the uſual trick: Prior.
Seven, ſlur a ſix; eleven, a nick. -
Slu R. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Faint reproach ; flight diſgrace.
Here's an ape made a king for ſhewing ticks; and the fox
is then to put a ſlur upon him, in expoſing him ſº ſport to
the ſcorn of the people. L Eſtrange.
No one can rely upon ſuch an one, either with º:
his affairs, or without a ſur to his reputation; ſince he tha
truſts a knave has no other recompence, but tº beacºn. -
a fool for his pains. South's Sermº-
SLUT. n.ſ. [ſlodde, Dutch.]
1. A dirty woman.
Cricket, to Windſor chimneys ſhalt thou leap:
where fires thou find'ſ unrak'd, and hearths unſwept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry;
Our radiant queen hates ſluts and fluttery. Shakſtart:
The ſallow ſkin is for the ſwarthy put, dºn
And love can make a flattern of a ſlut. - Dººr.
The veal's all rags, the butter's turn'd to oil; Ki
And thus I buy good meat for ſlºts to ſpoil. ing.
2. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S M A
!,
T--A-_
2. A word of ſlight contempt to a woman.
Hold up, you ſluts,
Your aprons mountant; you're not othable, ,
Although I know you'll ſwear. Shakespeare . Tihon.
: The frogs were ready to leap out of their ſkins for joy,
'till one crafty old ſlut in the company adviſed them to conſi-
der a little better on't. L’Eſtrange.
Blu’ttery. n.ſ.. [from ſlut.] The qualities or praćtice of a ſlut.
Slutt'ry, to ſuch neat excellence oppos'd,
Should make deſire vomit emptineſs. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Where fires thou find'ſt unrak'd, and hearths unſwept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry; -
Our radiant queen hates ſluts and ſlutt'ry. Shakeſpeare.
Theſe make our girls their ſluttery rue;
By pinching them both black and blue;
And put a penny in their ſhoe,
The houſe for cleanly ſweeping. Drayton.
A man gave money for a black, upon an opinion that his
ſwarthy colour was rather ſluttery than nature, and the fault of
his maſter that kept him no cleaner. L’E/irange.
Slu't rish. adj. [from ſlut.] Naſty; not nice; not cleanly;
dirty; indecently negligent of cleanlineſs.
All preparations both for food and lodging ſuch as would
make one deteſt niggardneſs, it is ſo ſluttiſh a vice. Sidney.
Albeit the mariners do covet ſtore of cabbins, yet indeed
they are but ſluttiſh dens that breed ſickneſs in peace, ſerving
to cover ſtealths, and in fight are dangerous to tear men with
their ſplinters. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Fortune's diſpleaſure is but ſluttiſh, if it ſmell ſo ſtrongly as
thou ſpeak'ſt of: I will henceforth eat no fiſh of fortune's but-
tering. Shakespeare All's well that end, well.
The naſtineſs of that nation, and ſluttiſh courſe of life, hath
much promoted the opinion, occaſioned by their ſervile condi-
tion at firſt, and inferior ways of parſimony ever ſince. Brown.
Slothful diſorder fill'd his ſtable,
And ſluttiſh plenty deck'd her table. Prior.
SLU'TTIs HLY. adv. [from ſluttiſh. ) In a ſluttiſh manner;
maſtily; dirtily.
SLU't TISHN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſluttiſh.] The qualities or prac-
tice of a ſlut; naſtineſs; dirtineſs.
That is only ſuitable in laying a foul complexion upon a
filthy favour, ſetting forth both in ſºuttſhneſs. Sidney.
I look on the inſtinét of this noiſome and troubleſome crea-
ture, the louſe, of ſearching out foul and naſty clothes to har-
bour and breed in, as an effect of divine providence, deſigned
to deter men and women from ſluttiſhneſ, and ſordidneſs, and to
provoke them to cleanlineſs and neatneſs. Ray on the Creation.
SLY. adj. [rliğ, Saxon, ſlippery and metaphorically deceitful;
flagur, Iſlandick.] Meanly artful; ſecretly inſidious; cunning,
For my ſly wyles and ſubtile craſtineſs,
The title of the kingdom. I poſſiſs. Hubberd's Tale.
And for I doubt the Greekiſh monarch ſy,
Will uſe with him ſome of his wonted craft.
His proud ſtep he ſcornful turn'd,
And with ſºy circumſpection. AMilton's Paradiſe Loft.
Envy is a curſed plant: ſome fibres of it are rooted almoſt
in every man's nature, and it works in a ſly and imperceptible
manner. - J/atts.
It is odious in a man to look ſºy and leering at a wo-
man. Clariſſa.
SLY'LY. adv. [from ſy..] With ſecret artifice; infidiouſly.
To SMACK. v. n. [rmaeckan, Saxon; ſmaecken, Dutch.]
1. To have a taſte; to be tinctured with any particular taſte.
2. To have a tinéture or quality infuſed.
All ſects, all ages, ſmack of this vice, and he
To die for it ! Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
He is but a baſtard to the time,
That doth not ſmack of obſervation. Shakespeare King john.
3. To make a noiſe by ſeparation of the lips ſtrongly preſſed
together, as after a taſte.
4. To kiſs with a cloſe compreſſion of the lips, ſo as to be heard
when they ſeparate.
She kiſs'd with ſmacking lip the ſnoring lout;
For ſuch a kiſs demands a pair of gloves. Gay.
He gives a ſmacking buſs. Pope.
To SMA cK. v. a.
I. To kiſs.
So careleſs flowers, ſtrow'd on the waters face,
The curled whirlpools ſuck, ſmack, and embrace,
Yet drown them.
2. To make any quick ſmart noiſe.
SM Ack. n.ſ.. [ſinaeck, Dutch; from the verb.]
1. Taſte ; favour.
2. Tinéture; quality from ſomething mixed.
The child, that ſucketh the milk of the nurſe, learns his
firſt ſpeech of her; the which, being the firſt inured to his
tongue, is ever after moſt pleaſing unto him, inſomuch, that
though he afterwards be taught Engliſh, yet the ſnack of the
firſt will always abide with him. Spenſer.
Your lordſhip, though not clean paſt your youth, hath yet
ſome ſmack of age in you, ſome reliſh of the ſaltneſs of time,
and have a care of your health. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Fairfax.
Donne.
it cauſed the neighbours to rue, that a petty ſnack only of
popery opened a gap to the oppreſſion of the whole. Carew.
: As the Pythagorean ſoul
Runs through all beaſts, and fiſh and fowl,
And has a ſmack of ev'ry one,
So love does, and has ever done.
3. A pleaſing taſte. -
Stack peaſe upon hovel;
To cover it quickly let owner regard,
Leſt dove and the cadow there finding a ſnack,
With ill ſtormy weather do periſh thy ſtack.
4. A ſmall quantity; a taſte. -
Trembling to approach -
The little barrel, which he fears to broach,
H’ eſſays the wimble, often draws it back,
And deals to thirſty ſervants but a ſmack. Dryden's Parſ.
5. The ačt of parting the lips audibly, as after a pleaſing taſte.
6. A loud kiſs.
Hudibrai,
Tiffr.
He took -
The bride about the neck, and kiſt her lips
With ſuch a clamorous ſnack, that at the parting .
All the church echo'd. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew,
I ſaw the lecherous citizen turn back
His head, and on his wife's lip ſteal a ſmack.
... [8nacca, Saxon; ſneckra, Iſlandick.] A ſmall ſhip.
MALL. adj. [rmall, Saxon; ſmal, Dutch; ſmaar, Iſlandick.]
1. Little in quantity; not great.
For a ſmall moment have I forſaken thee, but with great
mercies will I gather thee. Iſ liv. 7.
Death only this myſterious truth unfolds,
The mighty ſoul how ſmall a body holds. Dryden's juven.
All numeration is but ſtill the adding of one unit more, and
giving to the whole together a diſtinct name, whereby to diſ-
tinguiſh it from every ſmaller or greater multitude of units. Loc:
The ordinary ſmalleſt meaſure we have is looked on as an
unit in number. Locke.
The danger is leſs when the quantity of the fluids is too
ſmall, than when it is too great; for a ſmaller quantity will
paſs where a larger cannot, but not contrariwiſe. Arbuthnot.
Good cooks cannot abide fiddling work: ſuch is the dreſſ-
ing of ſmall birds, requiring a world of cookery. Swift.
2. Slender; exile; minute.
After the earthquake a fire, and after the fire a ſtill ſmall
voice. 1 Kings xix. 12.
Your ſin and calf I burnt, and ground it very ſmall, 'till it
was as ſmall as duſt. Deutr. ix. 21.
Thoſe wav'd their limber fans
For wings; and ſmalleſ lineaments exačt. Milton.
Small grained ſand is eſteemed the beſt for the tenant, and
the large for the landlord and land. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
3. Little in degree.
There aroſe no ſmall ſtir about that way.
4. Little in importance; petty; minute.
Is it a ſmall matter that thou haſt taken my huſband? Gen.
Narrow man being fill'd with little ſhares,
Courts, city, church, are all ſhops of ſmall wares;
All having blown to ſparks their noble fire,
And drawn their ſound gold ingot into wire. Donne.
Some mens behaviour is like a verſe, wherein every ſyllable
is meaſured: how can a man comprehend great matters that
breaketh his mind too much to ſmall obſervations? Bacon.
5. Little in the principal quality, as ſmall beer; not ſtrong;
weak.
Go down to the cellar to draw ale or ſmall beer. Swift.
SMAll. n.ſ. [from the adječtive.] The ſmall or narrow part
of anything. It is particularly applied to the part of the leg
below the calf.
Her garment was cut after ſuch a faſhion, that though the
length of it reached to the ancles, yet in her going one might
Donne.
Aé's Xix. 23.
ſometimes diſcern the ſmall of her leg. Sidney.
Into her legs I’d have love's iſſues fall, -
And all her calf into a gouty ſmall. Suckling.
His excellency, having mounted on the ſmall of my leg, ad-
vanced forwards. Gulliver's Travels.
SMA'LLAGE. m. ſ. [from ſmall age, becauſe it ſoon withers.
Skinner.] A plant. It is a ſpecies of parſley, and a COIIlmoil
weed by the fides of ditches and brooks. Miller. -
Smallage is raiſed by ſlips or ſeed, which is rediſh, and
pretty big, of a roundiſh oval figure; a little more full and
riſing on one fide than the other, and flºaked from one end
to the other. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Small coal. n.ſ.. [ſmall and coal.] Little wood coals uſed
igh - - -
to kº. man, by waking one of theſe diſtreſſed gentle-
men, ſaved him from ten years impriſonment. Spectator.
When ſmallºcal murmurs in the hourſe: throat,
From ſmätty dangers guard hy threaten’d coat. Gay.
Swaii, ºr n.f. [ ſmall and craft.] A little veſſel below
the denomination of ſhip: ".”
Shail he before me ſign, whom t'other day
A ſmall raft veſſel hither did convey;
whereftain'd with prunes, and rotten figs, he lay. Dryd.
SMA'ſ LPox.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S M A
S M E.
Smallpox. n.ſ. [finall and pox.] An eruptive diſtemper of
alignit ; variolae. --
*"...ºf ºſmºs. . . . ... ºf
SMA lly, adv. [fºo" %ajj. In a little quantity; with mi-
in a little or low degree. - -
nº that is ſtill, and ſomewhat hard of wit, is never
- lſe when he
by the father to be made a ſcholar, or e
... º the ſchool, is ſmally regarded. Aſcham.
Sy. Ness n./. [from ſhall.]
Littleneſs; not greatneſs.
I The parts in glaſs are evenly ſpread, but are not ſo cloſe as
- - e ſee by the eaſy admiſſion of light, and by the
}; º: sº y Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Littleneſs ; want of bulk; minuteneſs; exility.
whatſoever is inviſible, in reſpect º º º of the bo-
6 of the parts, or ſubtilty of the motion, is
#...” parts, }. Natural Hiſtory.
The ſmalnſ of the rays of light may contribute very much
to the power of the agent by which they are refracted. Newt.
3. Want of ſtrength; weakneſs.
. 77. J.
sº º blue ſubſtance, produced from two parts of
zaffre being fuſed with three parts common ſalt, and one part
potaſh. Hill on Poſis.
To make a light purple, mingle ceruſe with logwood wa-
ter; and moreover turnſoil with lac mingled with ſmall of bise.
Peacham.
SMARAcorne. adj. [/maragdinus, Latin.] Made of emerald;
reſembling emerald.
SMART. n.ſ. [rmconta, Saxon; ſmert, Dutch; ſmarta, Swe-
diſh.] live! -
1. Quick, pungent, lively pain.
º, p. . ... late, by the ſmart, was brought
to think of the diſeaſe. Sidney.
2. Pain, corporal or intelle&amp;tual.
Miſlaps are maſter'd by advice diſcreet,
And counſel mitigates the greateſt ſmart. Fairy Queen.
It increaſed the ſmart of his preſent ſufferings, to compare
them with his former happineſs. Alterbury.
To SMART. v. n. [rmeoncan, Saxon ; ſmerten, Dutch..]
1. To feel quick lively pain.
When a man's wounds ceaſe to ſmart, only becauſe he has
loſt his feeling, they are nevertheleſs mortal. South.
Human blood, when firſt let, is mild, and will not make
the eye or a freſh wound ſmart. Arbuthnot.
2. To feel pain of body or mind.
He that is ſurety for a ſtranger ſhall ſmart for it. Prov,
No creature ſmarts ſo little as a fool.
Let peals of laughter, Codrus! round thee break,
Thou unconcern'd can'ſt hear the mighty crack. Pºte.
SMART. adj. [from the noun.]
1. Pungent; ſharp; cauſing ſmart.
How ſmart a laſh that ſpeech doth give my conſcience?
Shakeſpeare.
To the fair he fain would quarter ſhow,
His tender heart recoils at every blow;
If unawares he gives too ſmart a ſtroke,
He means but to correct, and not provoke. Granville.
2. Quick; vigorous; active.
That day was ſpent in ſmart ſkirmiſhes, in which many
fell. Clarendon.
This ſound proceeded from the nimble and ſmart percuſſions
of the ambient air, made by the ſwift and irregular motions of
the particles of the liquors. Loyle.
3. Producing any effect with force and vigour.
After ſhow’rs,
The ſtars ſhine ſmarter, and the moon adorns,
As with unborrow'd beams, her ſharpen'd horns. Dryden.
4. Acute ; witty.
It was a ſmart reply that Auguſtus made to one that mini-
fired this comfort of the fatality of things: this was ſo far
from giving any eaſe to his mind, that it was the very thing
that troubled him. Tilotſon.
5. Briſk; vivacious; lively.
You may ſee a ſmart rhetorician turning his hat in his hands,
during the whole courſe of his harangue. A deaf man would
think he was cheapening a beaver. Addiſon.
SMART. m. ſ. A fºllow affecting briſkneſs and vivacity. A
cant word.
SMARTLY. adv. [from ſmart.] After a ſmart manner; ſharp-
ly ; briſkly; vigorouſly; witti] &gt;
; vigorouſly; wittily.
he art, order, and gravity of thoſe proceedings, where
ſhort, ſevere, conſtant rules were ſet, and ſmarty purſued,
made them leſs taken notice of. Clarendon.
SMA *TNESS. m. ſ. [from ſmart.]
I. º of being ſmart; quickneſs; vigour. *
the º ſuch a ſmartneſs in ſtriking the air hath in
the . º of ſound, may in ſome meaſure appear by
which º: a bullet, and that of a ſwitch or other wand,
the air .. º found, if they do but ſlowly paſs through
other ić ſhot as if the one do ſmartly ftrike the air, and the
** of a gun, the celerity of their percuſſions on
the air puts it into an undulating motion, which, reaching
the ear, produces an audible noiſe. Boyle.
2. Livelineſs; briſkneſs; wittineſs. -
I defy all the clubs to invent a new phraſe, equal in wit,
humour, ſmartneſs or politeneſs, to my ſet. Swift -
SMATch. m. ſ. [corrupted from ſnack.]
1. Taſte; tinéture; twang.
Thou art a fellow of a good reſpe&amp;t;
Thy life hath had ſome ſnatch of honour in't. Shakespeare.
Some nations have a peculiar guttural or naſal/natch in their
language. Holder’s E ements of Speech.
Theſe ſalts have ſomewhat of a nitrons taſte, but mixt with
a ſmatch of a vitriolick. Grew.
2. [Caeruleo, Latin.] A bird.
To SMATTER. v. n. [It is ſuppoſed to be corrupted from fact
or taſte.]
I. #. ſight taſte; to have a ſlight, ſuperficial, and im-
perfect knowledge.
Such a practice gives a ſlight ſmattering of ſeveral ſciences,
without any ſolid knowledge. //atts.
Since, by a little ſmattering in learning, and great conceit
of himſelf, he has loſt his religion, may he find it again by
harder ſtudy and an humbler mind. Bently.
2. To talk ſuperficially or ignorantly.
In proper terms, ſuch as men ſº atter,
When they throw out and miſs the matter. Hudibra;.
Of ſtate affairs you cannot ſmattºr;
Are aukward when you try to flatter. Swift.
SMATTER. n ſ [from the verb..] Superficial or ſlight know-
ledge. -
All other ſciences were extinguiſhed during this empire, ex-
cepting only a ſmatter of judicial aſtrology. Temple.
SMA'ſ TE RER. m. ſ. [from ſmaſter.] One who has a ſlight or
ſuperficial knowledge.
Theſe few who preſerve any rudiments of learning, are,
except one or two ſmatterers, the clergy's friends. Swift.
To SMEAR. v. a. [rmeran, Saxon; ſincerem, Dutch.]
1. To overſpread with ſomething viſcous and adheſive; to be-
ſmear.
If any ſuch be here, that love this painting,
Wherein you ſee me ſmear'd,
If any think brave death outweighs bad life,
Let him wave thus. Shakeſpeare'. Othell,
Then from the mountain hewing timber tall,
Began to build a veſſel of huge bulk,
Smear'd round with pitch. Milton.
Smear'd as ſhe was with black Gorgonean blood,
The fury ſprang above the Stygian flood. Dryden.
2. To ſoil; to contaminate.
Why had I not, with charitable hand,
Took up a beggar's iſſue at my gates ?
Who ſincered thus, and mir'd with infamy,
I might have ſaid no part of it is mine. Shaº'ſ eart.
SME A/R Y. adj. [from ſnear.] Dawby ; adheſive.
A ſmeary foam works o'er my grinding jaws,
And utmoſt anguiſh ſhakes my lab'ring frame. Rowe.
SMEATH. m. ſ. A ſea fowl.
To SMEETH. or ſmutch. v. a. [rmſöbe, Saxon.j To ſmoke;
to blacken with ſmoke.
SME GMATIck. adj. [apºyuz.] Soapy; deterſive. Diff.
To SMELL. v. a. (Of this word the etymology is very obſcure.
Skinner, the moſt acute of all etymologiſts, derives it from
frnoel, warm, Dutch ; becauſe ſmells are encreaſed by
heat.] -
1. To perceive by the noſe.
Their neighbours hear the ſame muſick, or ſmell the ſame
perfumes with themſelves: for here is enough. Collier.
2. To find out by mental ſagacity. -
The horſe ſmelt him out, and preſently a crochet came in
his head how to countermine him. L’Eſtrange.
To SM ELL. v n.
1. To ſtrike the noſtrils. -
The king is but a man as I am : the violet ſne's to him *
it doth to me; all his ſenſes have but human conditions. Shaº
The daintieſt ſmells of flowers are out of thoſe plants whº
leaves ſmell not. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. To have any particular ſcent.
Honey in Spain ſmelleth apparently of the roſemary or orangº,
from whence the bee gathereth it. Bacon.
A work of this nature is not to be performed upon one lºg,
and ſhould ſmell of oil if duly handled. Brown.
If you have a ſilver ſaucepan, and the butter ſmell; of ſmoak,
lay the fault upon the coals. Swift.
3. To have a particular tinéture or ſmack of any quality.
My unfoil'd name, the auſtereneſs of my life,
Will ſo your accuſation overweigh,
That you ſhall ſtifle in your own report,
And ſmell of calumny. Shaftart.
Down with the noſe, take the bridge quite away
Of him that his particular to foreſend,
Swells from the general weal. Shakeſpeare:
9 A man<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S M I
S M I
i.º,
º, ".
º
n
º
**
--
:
T:
t
A man ſo ſmelling of the people's lee,
The court receiv'd him firſt for charity. Dryden.
4. To practiſe the act of ſmelling.
Whoſoever ſhall make like unto that, to ſmell thereto, ſhall
be cut off. Exod. xxx. 38.
I had a mind to know, whether they would find out the
treaſure, and whether ſmelling enabled them to know what is
good for their nouriſhment. Addiſon's Spectator.
SM Ell. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] - -
1. Power of ſmelling; the ſenſe of which the noſe is the organ.
Next, in the noſtrils ſhe doth uſe the ſmell,
As God the breath of life in them did give;
So makes he now this pow'r in them to dwell,
To judge all airs, whereby we breathe, and live. Davies.
2. Scent; power of affecting the noſe.
The ſweeteſt ſmell in the air is the white double violet,
which comes twice a-year. Bacon.
All ſweet ſmells have joined with them ſome earthy or crude
odours. Bacon.
Pleaſant ſmells are not confined unto vegetables, but found
in divers animals. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
There is a great variety of ſmelli, though we have but a
few names for them: the ſmell of a violet and of muſk, both
ſweet, are as diſtinct as any two ſmells. Locke.
SME’ll ER, n.ſ.. [from ſmell.] He who ſmells.
SME'll FEAST. n.ſ.. [ſmell and feaſt.] A paraſite; one who
haunts good tables.
The ant lives upon her own, honeſtly gotten; whereas the
fly is an intruder, and a common ſmelfeaſt that ſpunges upon
other people's trenchers. - L'Eſtrange.
SMelt. The preterite and participle paſſ of ſmell.
SMELT. n.ſ. [rmelt, Saxon.] A ſmall ſea fiſh.
Of round fiſh there are brit, ſprat, barn, ſmelts. Carew.
To SMELt. v. a. [ſmalta, Iſlandick; ſmelten, Dutch..] To
melt oar, ſo as to extract the metal.
A ſort of earth, of a duſky red colour, found chiefly in
iron mines. Some of this earth contains as much iron as to
render it worth ſmelting. Woodward.
SME/LTER. m. ſ. [from ſmelt.] One who melts oar.
The ſmelters come up to the affayers. Woodward on Foſſils.
To SM Eak. v. a. [rmercian, Saxon.] To ſmile wantonly.
Certain gentlemen of the gown, whoſe aukward, ſpruce,
prim, ſneering, and ſmirking countenances have got good pre-
ferment by force of cringing. Swift.
SME'RKY.
SMIRK,
Seeſt, how bragg yon bullock bears,
Soſmirk, ſo ſmooth his pricked ears:
His horns been as brade as rainbow bent,
His dew-lap as lith as laſs of Kent. Spenſer.
SM E/RLIN. n.ſ. A fiſh. Ainſworth.
SMI'ckET. m. ſ. [Diminutive of ſmock, ſnocket, ſnicket.] The
under garment of a woman.
To SMIGHT. For ſmite.
As when a griffon, ſeized of his prey,
A dragon fierce encountreth in his flight,
Through wideſt air making his idle way,
That would his rightful ravin rend away:
With hideous horror both together ſmight,
And ſouce ſo ſore that they the heavens affray. Fa. Queen.
To SMILE. v. n. [ſmuylen, Dutch.] -
1. To contračt the face with pleaſure; to expreſs gladneſs by
the countenance.
I would, while it was ſmiling in my face,
Have pluckt my nipple from his boneleſs gums. Shakeſpeare.
The goddeſs of the mountain ſniled upon her votaries, and
ład. Nice; ſmart; jaunty.
cheared them in their paſſage to her palace. Tatler.
'Twas what I ſaid to Crags and Child,
Who prais'd my modeſty, and ſmil’d. Pope.
2. To expreſs ſlight contempt.
Our king replied, which ſome will ſmile at now, but ac-
cording to the learning of that time. Camden.
3. To look gay or joyous.
let their heirs enrich their time
With ſniling plenty and fair proſp'rous days. Shakeſpeare.
All things ſnil'd, -
Birds on the branches warbling. Milton.
4. To be favourable; to be propitious.
- Then let me not let paſs
Occaſion which now ſmiles. Milton.
SMIL E. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A ſlight contračtion of the face;
a look of pleaſure, or kindneſs.
I frown upon him, yet he loves me ſtill.—
—Oh that your frowns would teach my ſhi'es ſuch ſkill.
Shakeſpeare's Midſummer Night's Feaſt.
No man maſks the narrow ſpace
"Twixt a priſon and a ſmile. J/atton,
Sweet intercourſe
Of looks and ſmiles: for ſmiles from reaſon flow,
To brute denied, and are of love the food. Milton.
SMI'LINGLY. adv. [from ſºiling.] With a look of plea-
ſure.
--- - His flaw'd heart,
... wixt two extremes of paſſion, joy and grief,
Burſt ſmilingly. - Shakeſpeare's King Lear,
Carmeadº ſtopping him ſnilingly, told him, we are not ſo
forward to loſe good company Bºyle.
To SMILT. v. n. [corrupted from ſhell, or melt.] -
Having too much water, many corns will ſmilt, or have
their pulp turned into a ſubſtance like thick cream, M, time.
T; iºn. v. a. [from murk or murchy.] To cloud; to duſk;
O 1011.
I'll put myſelf in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber ſmirch my face. Shakespeare.
Like the ſhaven Hercules in the firch worm-eaten ta-
peſtry. Shakeſpeare.
To SMIRK. See SMERK. ſpeare
SMIT. The participle paſſive of ſmite.
Fir’d with the views this glitt'ring ſcene diſplays,
And ſmit with paſſion for my country's praiſe,
My artleſs reed attempts this lofty theme,
Where ſacred Iſis rolls her ancient ſtream. Tickell.
To SMIT.E. v. a. preterite ſmote; participle paſſ. ſmit, ſmitten.
[rmitan, Saxon; ſnijten, Dutch.]
1. To ſtrike; to reach with a blow.
So ſweet a kiſs the golden ſun gives not
To thoſe freſh morning drops upon the roſe,
As thy eye beams, when their freſh rays have ſnote
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows. Shakespeare
I have ſmitten mine hand at thy diſhoneſt gain. Ezek.
2. To kill; to deſtroy.
The ſervants of David had ſmitten of Benjamin's men, ſo
that three hundred and threeſcore died. 2 Sam. ii. 31.
God ſmote him for his errour, and he died. 2 Sam. vi.
3. To afflićt; to chaſten. A ſcriptural expreſſion.
Let us not miſtake God's goodneſs, nor imagine, becauſe
he ſnites us, that we are forſaken by him. JWake.
4. To blaſt.
5. To affect with any paſſion.
I wander where the muſes haunt,
Clear ſpring, or ſhady grove, or ſunny hill,
Smit with the love of ſacred ſong, Milton.
See what the charms that ſmite the ſimple heart,
Not touch'd by nature, and not reach'd by art. Pope.
Smit with the love of ſiſter arts we came,
And met congenial, mingling flame with flame. Pope.
To SMIT E. v. n. To ſtrike; to collide.
The heart melteth, and the knees ſmite together. Nahum.
SM1'TER. n.ſ.. [from ſmite.] He who ſmites.
I gave my back to the ſniters, and my cheeks to them
that pluck off the hair. ... Iſa. l. 6.
SMITH. n.ſ. [rmſö, Saxon; ſºmeth, German ; ſmid, Dutch;
from rmran, Saxon, to beat.] -
1. One who forges with his hammer; one who works in metals.
He doth nothing but talk of his horſe, and can ſhoe him.
I am afraid, my lady, his mother, played falſe with a ſmith.
Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Wenice.
Lawleſs man, the anvil dares profane,
And forge that ſteel by which a man is ſlain:
Which earth at firſt for plough ſhares did afford;
Nor yet the ſmith had learn'd to form a ſword. Tate.
The ordinary qualities obſervable in iron, or a diamond,
that make their true complex idea, a ſmith or a jeweler com-
monly knows better than a philoſopher. Locke.
2. He that makes or effects anything.
The doves repented, though too late,
Become the ſmiths of their own fooliſh fate. Dryden.
SMITHcRAF T. n.ſ. [rmiècnaept, Sax.] The art of aſ mith.
Inventors of paſtorage, ſmithcraft, and muſick. . . Raleigh.
SMITH ERY. n ſ. [from ſmith J The ſhop of a ſmith.
SMITHING.. n.J. [from ſmith.J. Smithing is an art manual, by
which an irregular lump, or ſeveral lumps of iron is wrought
into an intended ſhape. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſe.
SMITHY. n.ſ. [rmièse, Saxon.] The ſhop of a ſmith.
His blazing locks ſent forth a crackling ſound, *
And hiſs'd, like red hot iron, within the /mithydrown'd.
Dryden.
SMITT. m. ſ. The fineſt of the clayey ore, made up into balls,
they uſe {. marking of ſheep, and call it ſnitt. Iſºodward.
SMI'ſ teN. The participle paſſive of ſmitt. Struck; blaſted ;
killed; affected with paſſion. -
And the flax and the barley was ſmitten, but the wheat and
the rye not. Exod. º; 3 #
How agree the kettle and the earthen pot together ſ for 1
the one beſmitten againſt the other, ſhall be broken. Ecclus.
The third part of the ſun was miltºn. Rev. viii. 12.
we did eicºm him ſtricken, ſmitten of God and afflićted.
Iſa. liii. 4.
Tempt not the Lord thy God, he ſaid, and ſtood :
But Sanſmitten with amāºmeº ſº. Miſtem.
By the advantages of a good perſon and a pleaſing conver:
ſation, he made ſuch an impre: on in her heart as could
not i. efficed: and he was himſelf no leſs ſmitten with Con-
ſtantia Adaiſm.
24 K. Sxock,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">*
** *—-
S M C
rock. m. ſ. [rmoc, Saxon.] -
º: f garment of a woman ; a ſhift.
ºvered with a light taffeta garment, ſo cut, as
º ſmºck came through it in many places. sing.
How do'ſt thou look now º ill-ſtarr'd wº -
ale as thy ſm ºf 1 when we ſhall meet at compt;
#. º: thine will hurl my ſoul from heav'n. Shakeſp.
Their apparel was linnen breeches, and over that * ſmock
cloſe girt unto them with a towel. Sandy.
Though Artemiſia talks by fits,
Of councils, claſſicks, fathers, wits;
Reads Malbranche, Boyle, and Locke:
Yet in ſome things, methinks, ſhe fails,
*Twere well, if ſhe would pair her nails, --
And wear a cleaner ſºn:ck. Swift.
2. Smock is uſed in a ludicrous kind of compoſition for anything
relating to women. -
At ſmock treaſ n, matron, I believe you ;
And if I were your huſband; but when I
Truſt to your cob-web boſoms any other,
- Let me there die a fly, and feaſt you, ſpider. Ben. Johnſon.
- Plague on his ſmock-loyalty
I hatc to ſee a brave bold fellow ſotted,
Made ſour and ſenſeleſs, turn'd to whey by love. Dryden.
SMock FA'ce D. adj. [ſmock and face..] Palefaced; maidenly.]
Old chiefs refle&amp;ting on their former deeds,
Diſdain to ruſt with batter'd invalids;
But aftive in the foremoſt ranks appear,
And leave young ſnockfar'd beaux to guard the rear. Fenton.
Sxiok E. m. ſ. [y;-mwg, Welſh; rmec, rmoec, Saxon; ſnoock,
Dutch..] The viſible effluvium, or ſooty exhalation from
any thing burning.
She might utter out ſome ſmoke of thoſe flames wherewith
clſe ſhe was not only burned, but ſmothered. Sidney.
May you a better feaſt never behold,
You knot of mouth-friends: ſmoke, and lukewarm water,
Is your perfection. Shakeſpeare.
Stand off, and let me take the air,
Why ſhould the ſmoke purſue the fair? Cleaveland.
He knew 'twas cauſed by ſmoke, but not by flame. Gowley.
All involv'd with ſtench and ſmoke.
As ſnºke that riſes from the kindling fires, Milton.
Is ſeen this moment, and the next expires. Prior.
Smoke paſſing through flame cannot but grow red hot, and
red hot ſnake can appear no other than flame. Newton.
To SMok F. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To emit a dark exhalation by heat.
When the ſun went down, a ſmoking furnace and a burn-
ing lamp paſſed between thoſe pieces. Gen. xv. 17.
Brave Macbeth
Diſdaining fortune, with his brandiſh'd ſteel,
Which ſmoak'd with bloody execution,
Like valour's minion carvéd out his paſſage,
'Till he had fac'd the ſlaves. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
- Queen Margaret ſaw
Thy murd’rous faulchion ſmoking in his blood. Shakeſpeare.
To him no temple ſtood nor altar finok'd. Milton.
For Venus, Cytherea was invok'd,
Altars for Pallas to Athena ſmok'd. Granville.
2. To burn; to be kindled. Á ſcriptural term.
The anger of the Lord ſhall ſneak againſt that man. Dut.
3. To move with ſuch ſwiftneſs as to kindle; to move very
faſt ſo as to raiſe duſt like ſmoke.
Aventinus drives his chariot round 5
Proud of his ſteeds he ſmoke, along the field;
His father's hydra fills the ample ſhield.
With haſty hand the ruling reins he drew,
He laſh'd the courſers, and the courſers flew;
Heneath the bending yoke alike they held
Their equal pace, and ſmak’d along the field.
4. To ſmell, or hunt out. Sº
He hither came t'obſerve and ſmoke
What courſes other riſkers took. Hudibras.
I began to ſmoke that they were a parcel of mummers, and
wonded that none of the Middleſex juſtices took care to lay
ſºme of them by the heels. Addiſon's Freeholder
5. To uſe tobacco. -
6. To ſuffer to be puniſhed.
Maugre all the world will I keep ſafe,
Or ſome of you ſhall ſmoke for it in Rome.
To S Mok E. v. a.
1. To ſcent by ſmoke, or dry in ſmoke.
Frictions of the back-bone with flannel, ſnºaked with pene-
**g alºmatical ſubſtances, have proved effectual. Arbuthnot
* To finell out; to find Out. -
ºf * * /*d by the old lord Lafea; when his diſ.
guile and he is Parted, tell me what a ſprat you ſhall find him
- Shakespeare 's All's well that ends well.
Tom Tattle paſſes for an impertinent, and Will. Trippet
...?' s to be ſmoked, in caſe I conti his p. *:
3. Tº ſneer; to ridicule to the º this paper, Aldiſ. Spect.
Sºke the fellow there.
Dryden’s AFn.
Pope.
Shakespeare.
Congreve.
S M O
To SMoke-dry v. a. [ſmºke and dry.] To dry by ſmoke.
Smoke-dry the fruit, but not if you plant them. Mortiner,
SMo'kER. m. ſ. [from ſmoke.]
1. One that dries or perfumes by ſmoke.
2. One that uſes tobacco. - -
SMo'kE less. adj. [from ſmoke..] Having no ſmoke.
Tenants with ſighs the ſmoke'ſ tow’rs ſurvey,
And turn th' unwilling ſteed another way.
SMoſky. adj. [from ſmoke.] º
1. Emitting ſmoke; fumid.
O he's as tedious
As a tir’d horſe, or as a railing wife,
Woiſe than a ſmoky houſe.
Vićtorious to the top aſpires,
Involving all the wood in ſmoky fires.
2. Having the appearance or nature of ſmoke.
London appears in a morning drowned in a black cloud,
and all the day after ſmothered with ſmºky fog, the conſe:
Pºs.
Shakeſpear.
Dryden.
quence whereof proves very offenſive to the lungs. Jarvy.
If blaſt ſeptentrional with bruſhing wings
Sweep up the ſmoky miſts, and vapours damp,
Then woe to mortals. Philipi.
3. Noiſome with ſmoke.
Courteſy
Is ſooner found in lowly ſheds,
With ſmoky raſters, than in tap'ſtry halls
And courts of princes. Milton,
Morpheus, the humble god, that dwells
In cottages and ſmoky cells,
Hates gilded roofs and beds of down;
And though he fears no prince's frown, }
Flies from the circle of a crown. Denham
SMooth. [rmes, rmoe's, Saxon; muyth, Welſh.]
1. Even on the ſurface; not rough ; level; having no aſperities.
Behold Eſau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a ſmoºth
1I]aſl. Gen. xxvii. 11.
Miſfing thee, I walk unſeen,
On the dry ſmooth-ſhaven green,
To behold the wandring moon,
Riding near her higheſt noon. Milton.
The outlines muſt be ſmooth, imperceptible to the touch, and
even without eminences or cavities. Dryden.
Nor box nor limes, without their uſe,
Smooth-grain'd, and proper for the turner's trade: -
Which curious hands may carve and ſteel with eaſe invade.
Dryden,
2. Evenly ſpread; gloſſy.
He for the promis'd journey bids prepare
The ſmoºth-hair'd horſes, and the rapid car.
3. Equal in pace; without ſtarts or obſtruction.
By the hand he took me rais'd,
And over fields and waters, as in air,
Smooth-ſliding without ſtep.
The fair-hir’d queen of love
Deſcends ſmooth-gliding from the courts above.
4. Flowing; ſoft ; not harſh.
Smooth Adonis from his rock
Ran purple to the ſea.
When ſage Minerva roſe,
From her ſweet lips ſmooth elocution flows.
So, Dick adept, tuck back thy hair;
And I will pour into thy ear
Remarks, which none did eler diſcloſe,
In ſmooth-pac'd verſe or hobling proſe.
5. Bland; mild; adulatory.
The ſubtle fiend,
Though inly ſtung with anger and diſdain, ...
Diſſembled, and this anſwer ſmºoth return'd. Mill. Par. Reg.
This ſmooth diſcourſe and mild behaviour oft - ~
Conceal a traitor. ds, and ſ ſº
He was ſmooth-tongued, gave good words, and ſºlº"
his .../ g g É. Hiſt. ºf j. Bull.
The madding monarchs to compoſe ickel
The Pylian prince, the ſmºoth-ſpeech'd Neſtor, roſe. Tº
To SMoot H. v. a. [from the adječtive.]
I. To level; to make even on the ſurface.
This man’s a flatt'rer * if one be,
So are they all; for every greeze of fortune
Is ſmooth'd by that below. th
The carpenter encouraged the goldſmith, and he that!” .
ath with the hammer him that ſmote the anvil, ""
Now on the wings of winds our courſe we kºpi
For God had ſmºoth'd the waters of the deep. Pºp.'" Odſ.
2. To work into a ſoft uniform maſs. - al
It brings up again into the mouth that which it had ſw i.
lowed, and chewing it, grinds and ſnºoth it, and aſ "...”
ſwallows it into another ſtomach. Ray on the Creat”
The board on which we ſit- Savif:
Is not ſo ſmooth as are thy verſes, Swift.
3. To make eaſy; to rid from obſtructions.
- Thou, Abelard 1 the laſt ſad office pay,
And ſmooth my paſſage to the realms of day.
Poſt.
Miºt.n.
Pºpe.
Milton,
Gay.
Priºr:
Shakeſp.
Pº'º.
4. TQ
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S M U
wº
*... --
, - .
2 º'
*
4. To make flowing; to free from harſhneſs.
In their motions harmony divine
So ſmooth; her charming tones. Milton.
All your muſe's ſofter art diſplay,
Let Carolina ſmoºth the tuneful lay;
Lull with Amelia's liquid name the Nine,
And ſweetly flow through all the royal line. Pope.
5. To palliate; to ſoften,
Had it been a ſtranger, not my child,
To ſnooth his fault, I would have been more mild. Shakeſp.
6. To calm; to mollify.
Now breathe we, lords; good fortune bids us pauſe,
And ſmooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks. Shakeſp.
Each perturbation ſnooth'd with outward calm. Milion.
Smiling ſhe ſeem’d, and full of pleaſing thought,
From ocean as ſhe firſt began to riſe,
T And ſmooth'd the ruffled ſeas, and clear'd the ſkies. Dryden.
. I o eaſe.
7 Reſtor'd it ſoon will be; the means prepard,
The difficulty ſmooth'd, the danger ſhar'd :
Be but yourſelf. Dryden.
8. To flatter; to ſoften with blandiſhments.
Becauſe I cannot flatter and look fair,
Smile in men's faces, ſmooth, deceive and cog,
Duck with French nods, and apiſh courteſy,
I muſt be held a rancorous enemy. Shakeſheare.
To SMo'oth E.N. v. a. [A bad word among mechanicks for
finaoh.] To make even and ſmooth.
With edged grooving tools they cut down and ſmoothen the
extuberances left. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
SMo'oth f Ace D. adj. [ ſmooth and face. J Mild looking;
having a ſoft air.
§. ſhall I ſay I thank you, gentle wife?
—Not ſo, my lord; a twelve-month and a day,
I'll mark no words that ſnoothſac'd woers ſay. Shakeſpeare.
Let their heirs
Enrich their time to come with ſmoothfae'd peace,
With ſmiling plenty, and fair proſp'rous days. Shakespeare R. III.
SMo'or HLY. adv. [from ſmooth.]
1. Not roughly ; evenly.
2. With even glide.
The muſick of that murm'ring ſpring
Is not ſo mournful as the ſtrains you fing;
Nor rivers winding through the vales below
So ſweetly warble, or ſo ſmoothly flow. Pope.
3. Without obſtruction; eaſily; readily.
Had Joſhua been mindful, the fraud of the Gibeonites could
not ſo ſmoothly have paſt uneſpied 'till there was no help. Hºok.
4. With ſoft and bland language.
SMo'oth Ness. n. ſ. [from ſmooth.]
1. Evenneſs on the ſurface; freedom from aſperity.
The purling, which proceeds of inequality, is bred between
the ſmoothneſs of the inward ſurface of the pipe, which is wet,
and the reſt that remaineth dry. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A countryman feeding his flock by the ſeaſide, it was ſo de-
licate a fine day, that the ſmoothneſs of the water tempted him
to ſet up for a merchant. L’Eſtrange.
The nymph is all into a laurel gone,
The ſmoothneſs of her ſkin remains alone. Dryden.
2. Softneſs or mildneſs on the palate.
Fallacious drink! ye honeſt men beware,
Nor truſt its ſmoothneſs; the third circling glaſs
Suffices virtue. Philips.
3. Sweetneſs and ſoftneſs of numbers.
As French has more fineneſs and ſmoothneſ, at this time, ſo
it had more compaſs, ſpirit, and force in Montaigne's age. Temp.
Virgil, though ſmooth, where ſmoothneſs is required, is ſo
far from affecting it, that he rather diſdains it; frequently
uſing ſynalephas, and concluding his ſenſe in the middle of his
verſe. Dryden.
4. Blandneſs and gentleneſs of ſpeech.
She is too ſubtle for thee; and her ſmoothneſ,
Her very filence, and her patience,
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
SMote. The pret rite of ſmile.
Death with a trident ſmote, Milton.
To SMo' H &amp; R. v. a. [rmonan, Saxon.]
1. To ſuffocate with ſmoke, or by excluſion of the air.
She might give paſſage to her thoughts, and ſo as it were utter
out ſome ſmoke of thoſe flames, wherewith elſe ſhe was not
only burned but ſnothered Sidney.
We ſmother'd
The moſt repleniſhed ſweet work of nature,
That from the prime creation e'er ſhe fram’d. Shakeſpeare.
We are enow yet living in the field,
To ſmo her up the Engliſh in our throngs. Shakespeare. Hen V.
She was warmed with the graceful appearance of the hero:
fhe ſmºthered thoſe ſparkles out of decency, but converſation
yiew them up into a flame. Dryden's Aºn. Dedication.
The helpleſs traveller, with wild ſurpriſe, {
Shakeſpeare.
Sees the dry deſart all around him riſe,
- And ſmother'd in the duity whirlwind dies. Addison's Cats.
2. To ſuppreſs.
Lewd and wicked cuſtom, beginning perhaps at the firſt
amongſt few, afterwards ſpreading into greater multitudes;
and ſo continuing; from time may be of force, even in plain
things, to ſmother the light of natural underſtanding. Hooker.
Smoºth ER. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
I. A ſtate of ſuppreſſion.
This unfortunate prince, after a long fºother of diſcontent,
and hatred of many of his nobility and eople, breaking ſº,
at times into ſeditions, was at laſt diſtreſſed by them. Taº,
A man were better relate himſelf to a ſtatue, than ſuffer his
thoughts to paſs in ſmother. Bacon
Nothing makes a man ſuſpect much, more than to know it.
tle; and therefore men ſhould procure to know more, and not
2 º keep their ſuſpicions in ſmother. Bacon's Eſys.
. Smoke; thick duſk.
Thus muſt I from the ſmoke into the ſnºther,
From tyrant duke into a tyrant brother. Shake feare,
Where yon diſorder'd heap of ruin lies, -
Stones rent from ſtones, where clouds of duſt ariſe,
Amid’ that ſmºther Neptune holds his place. Dryd. Æm.
The greater part enter only like mutes to fill the ſtage, and
ſpend their taper in ſmoke and ſmother. Cºllier on Fame.
To SMo' Her. v. n. [from the noun J
1. To ſmoke without vent. -
Hay and ſtraw have a very low degree of heat; but yet cloſe
and ſmothering, and which drieth not. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. To be ſuppreſſed or kept cloſe.
The advantage of converſation is ſuch, that, for want of
company, a man had better talk to a poſt than let his thoughts
lie ſmoking and ſmothering. Cºllier of Friend, ip.
SMo'uldering. . [This word ſeems a participle; but I know
SMo'UlDRY. ; not whether the verb ſmoulder be in uſe:
rmonan, Saxon, to ſmother; ſnoel, Dutch, hot..] Burning
and ſmoking without vent.
None can breathe, nor ſee, nor hear at will,
Through ſmouldry cloud of duſkiſh ſtinking ſmoke,
That th' only breath him daunts who hath eſcap'd the
ſtroke. Fairy Queen.
In ſome cloſe pent room it crept along, &amp;
And, ſmould'ring as it went, in filence fed;
*Till th’infant monſter, with devouring ſtrong,
Walk'd boldly upright with exalted head. Dryden.
SMUG. adj. [/muck, dreſs, ſmucken, to dreſs, Dutch..] Nice;
ſpruce; dreſſed with affectation of niceneſs, but without
elegance.
There I have a bankrupt for a prodigal, who dares ſcarce
ſhew his head on the Rialto; a beggar, that uſed to come ſo
ſmug upon the mart. Shakespeare Merchant of Wenice.
He who can make your viſage leſs horrid, and your perſon
more ſnug, is worthy ſome good reception. Speciator.
To SMU'GGLE. v. a. [ſmocºelen, Dutch..] To import or
export goods without paying the cuſtoms. -
SMU'ggle R. n.ſ.. [from ſmugle. A wretch, who, in defiance
of juſtice and the laws, imports or exports goods cither con-
traband or without payment of the cuſtoms.
SMU'Gly. adv. [from ſmº.] Neatly; ſprucely.
Lilies and roſes will quickly appear,
And her face will look wond’rous ſmugly. Gay.
SMU'GN ess. n.ſ.. [from ſºng.J Spruceneſs; neatneſs.
SMUT. n.ſ. [rmizza, Saxon; frnette, Dutch.]
1. A ſpot made with foot or coal. -
2. Mu'a or blackneſs gathered on corn ; mildew. -
Farmers have ſuffered by ſmutty wheat, when ſuch will
not ſell for above five ſhillings a buſhel; whereas that which is
free from ſnut will ſell for ten. Mortimer's Husbandry.
. Obſcenity.
#, SMUT. º a. [from the noun J
1. To ſtain; to mark with foot or coal. -
He is far from being ſmutted with the ſoil of atheiſn. More.
A fuller had invitation from a collier to live with him; he
gave him a thouſand thanks; but, ſays he, as faſt as I make
anything clean, you'll be ſnutting, it again. L'Érange.
*Thºſide iſºſmitted with duſt and ſmoke, thº' eithe.”
marble, ſilver, nor braſs works ſhew themſelves. Addison Italy.
I am wonderfully pleaſed to ſee my tenants play their inno-
cent tricks, and ſmitting one another. Addiſon.
2. To taint with mildew. - -
Mildew falleth upon corn, and ſnuttath it. Bacon.
To SMUT. v. n. To gather muſt.
white red-eared wheat is good for clays, and º, a very -
good crop, and ſeldom ſºut: ith ſ * rumºr.
Tösmuté. v. a. [from ſnut.] To black with ſmoke.
East findich'd thy noſe; - • , , -
They ſay ...!a copy out of mine. Shakeſp. Winter s Tale.
Have you ſeen but a brº" Illy grow,
Before rude hands have º º ſnow
Ha you mark'd but the fºll 9 tº "º., -
B.º. }. iod hath mutch'd it Ben. johnſºn . Underwoºds.
Sººyº from /*] -
1. Blackly; ſmokily,
2. Obſcenely. SM U/TT IN ESS.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S N A
|
Smu'rtiness. "...ſ. [from ſnutty.]
1. Soil ºde, upon my beſt ſouth walls, were apt
My ..ºft upon their leaves and upon their fruits,
to a ſoot od for nothing. Temple.
which *...*
. Obſceneneſs.
$º adj. [from ſnut.]
1. Black with ſmoke or coal. -
- The ſmutty grain, - -
With ſudden blaze diffus'd, inflames the air. Aſton.
The ſmutty wainſcot full of cracks. Swift.
He was a ſmutty dog yeſterday, and coſt me near two hours
to waſh the ink off his face. Pope.
. Tainted with mildew. -
2 sºn, corn will ſell dearer at one time than the clean at
another. Locke.
. Obſcene; not modeſt. -
3 oº: is a cenſure of a profane and ſnutty paſſage in the
Old Batchelor. Collier.
Snack. n.ſ. [ from ſnatch. J A ſhare; a part taken by
aćt. - -
*: maſter gets the better on't, they come in for their
L'Eſtrange.
/*. four times talking, if one piece thou take,
That muſt be cantled, and the judge go ſhack. Dryden.
All my demurs but double his attacks;
At laſt he whiſpers, “Do, and we go ſnacks.” Pope.
SNA'cor n.ſ. A fiſh. Ainſworth.
SNA‘FF le. n.ſ.. [ſnavel, Dutch, the noſe.] A bridle which
croſſes the noſe.
The third o' th' world is your's, which with a ſhºff,
You may pace eaſy; but not ſuch a wife. Shakeſpeare.
Sooth him with praiſe;
This, from his weaning, let him well be taught,
And then betimes in a ſoft ſnaffe wrought. Dryden's Georg.
To SNA'FFLE. v.a. [from the noun...] To bridle; to hold in
a bridle; to hold; to manage.
SNAG. m. ſ. [Of this word I know not the etymology or ori-
ginal.]
1. A jag, or ſharp protuberance.
The one her other leg had lame,
Which with a ſtaff, all full of little ſnags,
She did diſport, and impotence her name. Fairy Queen,
The coat of arms,
Now on a naked ſnag in triumph born,
Dryden's AFn.
Was hung on high.
2. A tooth left by itſelf, or ſtanding beyond the reſt.
In China none hold women ſweet,
Except their ſnags are black as jet:
King Chihu put nine queens to death,
Convićt on ſtatute, iv'ry teeth. Prior.
SNA'Gced. }*. [from ſnag.] Full of ſnags; full of ſharp
SNA'GGY. protuberances; ſhooting into ſharp points.
His ſtalking ſteps are ſtay'd
Upon a ſnaggy oak, which he had torn
Out of his mother's bowels, and it made
His mortal mace, wherewith his foemen he diſmay’d. Spenſ.
Naked men belabouring one another with ſnagged ſticks, or
dully falling together by the ears at fifty-cuffs. More.
SNAI1... n.ſ. [rnoegl, Saxon; ſhegel, Dutch.]
1. A ſlimy animal which creeps on plants, ſome with ſhells OI).
their backs.
I can tell why a ſnail has a houſe—Why?—Why, to put's
head in ; not to give it away to his daughters, and leave his
horns without a caſe. Shakespeare . King Lear.
Fearful commenting
Is leaden ſervitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and ſnail pac’d beggary. Shakespeare R. III.
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder:
Snail ſlow in profit, but he ſleeps by day
More than the wild cat. Shakeſpeare.
Seeing theſnail, which every where doth roam,
Carrying his own houſe ſtill, ſtill is at home,
Follow, for he is eaſy-pac'd, this ſnail
Be thine own palace, or the workſ: thy gaol. Donne.
A river ſnail-ſhell decayed, ſhewed ſpar within. Woodward.
There may be as many ranks of beings in the inviſible
"ºld ſuperior to us, as we ourſelves are ſuperior to all the
ranks of being beneath us in this viſible world, even though
we deſcend below the ſnail and the oyſter. Watts.
* A name given to a drone from the flºw motion of a ſnail.
why prat'ſt thou to thyſelf, and anſwer'ſ not?
SN Promio, thou drone, thou ſnail, thou ſlug, thou ſot Shakespeare
Nº. or Snail-trefºil. n. ſ. An herb. Ainſwºrth.
KE. * / [rnaca, Saxon; /nake, Dutch..] A ſerpent of the
º kind, diſtinguiſhed from a viper. The ſnake's bite
IS º *; in poetry is a general name for. viper.
As the lo º S ſhºw beguiles him ;
With ſ: roll’d in a flowry bank,
T bat f º checker d ſlough, doth ſting a child,
* * beauty thinks it ºxceſſiºn. Shakespeare Hºn. VI.
cVCI).
We have ſcotch'd the ſnake, not kill'd it :
She'll cloſe, and be herſelf; whilſt our poor malice
Remains in danger of her former teeth. Shakeſp. Macleth.
The parts muſt have their outlines in waves, reſembling the
gliding of a ſnake upon the ground: they muſt be ſmooth and
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Nor chalk, nor crumbling ſtones, the food of ſhºe;
That work in hollow carth their winding tracks. Drydºn.
SNA'KERoot. n.ſ.. [ſnake and root..] A ſpecies of birthwort
growing in Virginia and Carolina. See RAttlesnake-
ROOt.
SNA‘KESHEAD Iris. n.ſ.. [hermodactylus, Latin.] A plant.
The characters are: it hath a lily-ſhaped flower, of one
leaf, ſhaped exactly like an iris; but has a tuberoſe root,
divided into two or three dugs, like oblong bulbs. Miller.
SNA'Kew EED, or B/fort. m. ſ. [bi/ſorta, Latin. J A plant.
It flowers in May ; and, if the ſeaſon proves moiſt, will
continue to produce new ſpikes of flowers 'till Auguſt: it
may be propagated by planting the roots in a moiſt ſhady bor-
der, and will ſoon furniſh the ground with plants. Miſer.
SNA'KEwood. n.ſ.. [from ſnake and wood.]
What we call ſnakewºod is properly the ſmaller branches of
the root of a tall ſtrait tree growing in the iſland of Timor,
and other parts of the Eaſt. It has no remarkable ſmell; but
is of an intenſely bitter taſte. The Indians are of opinion,
that it is a certain remedy for the bite of the hooded ſerpent,
and from thence its name of lignum colubrinum, or fnakewoºd.
We very ſeldom uſe it. Hill's Mat. Med.
SNA‘KY. adj. [from ſnake.]
1. Serpentine; belonging to a ſnake; reſembling a ſnake.
Venomous tongue, tipt with vile adder's ſting,
Of that ſelf kind with which the furies fell
Their ſnaky heads do comb. Stenſºr.
The true lovers knot had its original from nodus Hºráa.
neu', or Hercules's knot, reſembling the ſay complication in
the caduceus, or rod of Hermes. Brown's Vulgar Erraurs.
So to the coaſt of Jordan he directs
His eaſy ſteps, girded with ſnay wiles. Milton's Par. Rºg.
2. Having ſerpents.
Look, look unto this ſnaky rod,
And ſtop your ears againſt the charming god. Ben.johnſºn.
In his hand
He took caduceus, his ſhaky wand. Hubbard's Tale,
What was that ſnaky-headed gorgon ſhield
That wiſe Minerva wore, unconquer'd virgin,
Wherewith ſhe freez'd her foes to congeal’d ſtone? Milton.
His flying hat was faſten’d on his head;
Wings on his heels were hung, and in his hand
He holds the virtue of the ſhay wand.
To SNAP. v. a. [The ſame with Knap.]
1. To break at once; to break ſhort.
If the chain of neceſſity be no ſtronger, but that it may be
ſnapped ſo eaſily in ſunder; if his will was no otherwiſe deter-
mined from without himſelf, but only by the ſignification of
your deſire, and my modeſt intreaty, then we may conclude,
human affairs are not always governed by abſolute neceſſity.
Bramh. againſt Hobbs.
Light is broken like a body, as when 'tis ſnapped in pieces
Dryden,
by a tougher body. Digby.
Dauntleſs as death, away he walks;
Breaks the doors open, ſnaps the locks;
Searches the parlour, chamber, ſtudy, Pri
rtºr.
Nor ſtops 'till he has culprit's body.
2. To ſtrike with a knacking noiſe, ſnap, or ſharp knap.
The bowzy fire
Firſt ſhook from out his pipe the ſeeds of fire,
Then ſnapt his box.
3. To bite.
A gentleman paſſing by a coach, one of the horſes ſnapt off
the end of his finger. H iſ man', Surgery.
All mungrel curs bawl, ſnarl, and ſnap, where the foe flies
before him. - - L’Eſtrange.
A notion generally received, that a lion is dangerous to all
women who are not virgins, may have given occaſion to a
fooliſh report, that my lion's jaws are ſo contrived as to ſhap
the hands of any of the female ſex, who are not thus qua-
lified. - Addiſon's Speciator.
He ſhaps deceitful air with empty jaws,
The ſubtle hare darts ſwift beneath his paws.
. To catch ſuddenly and unexpectedly. .
4. §. tº: tells the marquis he would ſnap one of
the kids, and make ſome ſhift to carry him cloſe to their
&gt; Wºtton.
Dunciad.
Gay.
lodgings. -
9. Some with a noiſe and greaſy light
Are ſnapt, as men catch larks at night. Butler.
You ſhould have thought of this before you was taken ;
for now you are in no danger to be ſnapt ſinging again. L'A/r.
Did I not ſee you, raſcal, did I not d
When you lay ſnug to ſnap young Damon's goat? Pryden.
Belated ſeem on watch to lie,
And ſnap ſome cully paſſing by. Swift.
5. [Snappen,
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S N A
S N A
".
yº.
ºt-
- ſº
º---
tº---
r:
ºi.
5. [Snappen, Dutch..] To treat with ſharp language.
Capoch'd your rabbins of the ſynod, -
And ſnapp'd their canons with a why not. Hudibrar.
A ſurly ill-bred lord
That chides and ſnaps her up at every word. Granville.
To SNAP. v. n.
1. To break ſhort; to fall aſunder.
- Note the ſhip's ſickneſſes, the maſt
Shak'd with an ague, and the hold and waiſt
With a ſalt dropſy clogg'd; and our tacklings
Snapping, like to too high-ſtretch'd treble ſtrings. Donne.
The backbone is divided into ſo many vertebres for com-
modious bending, and not one intire rigid bone, which, being
of that length, would have been often in danger of ſnapping in
ſunder. Ray on the Creation.
If your ſteel be too hard, that is, too brittle, if it be a
ſpring, it will not bow; but with the leaſt bending it will
ſnap aſunder. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
The makers of theſe needles ſhould give them a due tem-
per; for if they are too ſoft they will bend, and if they
are too brittle they ſnap. Sharp's Surgery.
2. To make an effort to bite with eagerneſs.
If the young dace be a bait for the old pike, I ſee no rea-
ſon but I may ſnap at him. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
We ſnap at the bait without ever dreaming of the hook
that goes along with it. L’Eſtrange.
Towzer ſnaps
At people's heels with frothy chaps. Swift.
SNAP. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The aët of breaking with a quick motion.
2. A greedy fellow.
He had ne ſooner ſaid out his ſay, but up riſes a cunning
ſnap, then at the board. L’Eſtrange.
3. A quick eager bite.
With their bills, thwarted croſſwiſe at the end, they would
cut an apple in two at one ſnap. Carew.
4. A catch; a theft.
SNA‘PDRAGoN, or Calf’s ſnout. n.ſ.. [antirrhinum, Latin. J
1. A plant. -
2. A kind of play, in which brandy is ſet on fire, and raiſins
thrown into it, which thoſe who are unuſed to the ſport are
afraid to take out; but which may be ſafely ſnatched by a quick
motion, and put blazing into the mouth, which being cloſed,
the fire is at once extinguiſhed.
SNA'PPER. n.ſ.. [from ſnap.] One who ſnaps.
My father named me Autolicus, being letter'd under Mer-
cury; who, as I am, was likewiſe a ſnapper up of unconſi-
der'd trifles. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
SNAPPIs H. adj. [from ſnap.]
1. Eager to bite.
The ſnappiſh cur, the paſſenger's annoy,
Cloſe at my heel with yelping treble flies. Swift.
They lived in the temple; but were ſuch ſnappiſh curs, that
they frighted away moſt of the votaries. Spediator.
2. Peeviſh ; ſharp in reply.
SNA‘ppishly. adv. [from ſnappiſh J Peeviſhly; tartly.
SNA‘ppish NFss. n.ſ.. [from ſnappiſh.] Peeviſhneſs; tartneſs:
SNA'PsAck. n.ſ.. [ſnappſack, Swediſh..] A ſoldier's bag.
SNARE. m. ſ. [ſnara, Swediſh and Iſlandick; ſnare, Daniſh;
fnoor, Dutch..]
1. Anything ſet to catch an animal; a gin; a net.
O poor hapleſs nightingale, thought I, -
How ſweet thouſing'ſt, how near the deadly ſhare. Milton.
2. Anything by which one is intrapped or intangled.
This I ſpeak for your own profit, not that I may caſt a
ſnare upon you. I Cor. vii. 35.
A fool's mouth is his deſtruction, and his lips are the ſnare
of his ſoul. Prov. xviii. 7.
Propound to thyſelf a conſtant rule of living, which though
it may not be fit to obſerve ſcrupulouſly, leſt it become a ſnare
to thy conſcience, or endanger thy health, yet let not thy rule
be broken. Taylor’s Rule of living holy.
For thee ordain’d a help, became thy ſnare. Milton.
Beauty, wealth, and wit,
And proweſs, to the pow'r of love ſubmit;
The ſpreading ſnare for all mankind is laid,
And lovers all betray, or are betray'd. Dryden.
To SNARE. v. a. [from the noun. J. To intrap; to in-
tangle.
Glo'ſter's ſhew
Beguiles him, as the mournful crocodile
With ſorrow ſnares relenting paſſengers. Shakespeare H. VI.
The wicked is ſhared in the work of his own hands. Pſ, ix.
Warn all creatures from thee
Henceforth, left that too heav'nly form, pretended
To helliſh falſhood, ſnare them. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
To SNARL. v. n. [ſharren, Dutch.] -
1. To growl as an angry animal; to gnarre.
What! were you ſnarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me? Shakeſp. R. IIL
He is born with teeth
And ſo I was ; which plainly ſignify’d
That I ſhould ſnarl, and bits, and play the dog. Shaj H.VI.
The ſhe's even of the ſavage herd are ſafe.
All, when they ſhar! or bite, have no return
But courtſhip from the male. Dryden's Don Selºftian.
Now, for the bare pick'd bone of majeſty
Doth dogged war brifle his angry creſt, &gt;
And ſnarleth in the gentle eyes of peace Shakespeare . K. john
* An angry cur - - -- -
Snarl, while he feeds. Dry
2. To ſpeak roughly; to talk in rude term.
'Tis malicious and unmanly to ſnarl at the little la
pen, from which Virgil himſelf ſtands n
The honeſt farmer and his wife,
Two years declin'd from prime of life,
Had ſtruggled with the marriage-nooſe,
As almoſt ev'ry couple does:
Sometimes my plague ſometimes my darling!
Kiffingto-day, to-morrow ſnarling. Prior.
. Where haft thou been ſnarling odious truths, and entertain.
ing company with diſcourſe of their diſeaſes? Congreve.
To SNARL v. a. To intangle; to embarraſs. I know not
that this ſenſe is well authoriſed.
Confuſed ſnailed conſciences render it difficult to pull out
thread by thread. Decoy ºf Piety.
d. and Lee's Ordpur.
pſes of a
ot exempted. Dryden.
SNA‘s ler. n.ſ.. [from ſhar!..] One who ſnarls; a growling, .
ſurly, quarrelſome, iſ ſulting fellow.
Should ſtupid libels grieve your mind,
You ſoon a remedy may find;
Lie down obſcure, like other folks,
Below the laſh of ſnarers jokes. . Swift.
SNA‘Ry. adj. [from ſhare.] Intangling; infidious.
Spiders in the vault their ſnay webs have ſpread. Drydºn.
SNAST. n.ſ. The ſnuff of a candle.
It firſt burned fair, 'till ſome part of the candle was con-
ſumed, and the ſawduſt gathering about the ſhaft; but then it
made the ſnoſ' big and long, and burn duſkiſhly, and the candle
waſted in half the time of the wax pure. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
To SNATCH. v. a. [ſhacken, Dutch J
1. To ſeize any thing haſtily.
A virtuous mind ſhould rather wiſh to depart this world
with a kind of treatable diſſolution, than to be ſuddenly cut off
in a moment; rather to be taken than flatched away from the
face of the earth. Hooker.
Death,
So ſnatch'd, will not exempt us from the pain. Milton.
Life's ſtream hurries all too faſt:
In vain ſedate reflections we would make,
When half our knowledge we muſt ſnatch, not take. Pope.
She ſnatch'd a ſheet of Thule from her bed:
Sudden ſhe flies, and whelms it o'er the pyre;
Down ſink the flames. Pope's Dunciad.
They, ſailing down the ſtream,
Are ſnatch'd immediate by the quick-ey'd trout
Of darting ſalmon. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. To tranſport or carry ſuddenly.
He had ſcarce performed any part of the office of a biſhop
in the dioceſs of London, when he was ſnatched from thence,
and promoted to Canterbury. Carendon.
Oh nature !
Inrich me with the knowledge of thy works,
Snatch me to heaven. Thomſºn's Autumn.
To SNATch. v. m. To bite, or catch eagerly at ſomething.
Lords will not let me: if I had a monopoly on't, they
would have part on't; nay, the ladies too will be ſnatching.
Shakeſp. Kºng Lear.
He ſhall ſnatch on the right hand, and be hungry. Iſix. 20.
Lycus, ſwifter of his feet,
Runs, doubles, winds and turns, amidſt the war;
Springs to the walls, and leaves his foes behind,
And ſnatches at the beam he firſt can find. Drydºn't ºn.
SNAtch. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A haſty catch.
2. A ſhort fit of vigorous ačtion.
After a ſhower to weeding a ſnatch ;
More eaſily weed with the root to diſpatch. Tºſºr.
3. A ſmall part of any thing; a broken part.
She chaunted ſnatches of old tunes, r r
As one incapable of her own diſtreſs. Shafe?. Hamlet.
In this work attempts will exceed performances, it being
compoſed by ſnatches of time, as medical vacations would
permit. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
4. A broken or interrupted ačtion; a ſhort fit.
The ſnatches in his voice,
And .. ſpeaking, were as his. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
They move by fits and ſnatches; ſo that it is not conceivable
how they conduce unto a motion, which, by reaſon of its per-
petuity, muſt be regular and equal. Wilkins' Dadalus.
w: have often little ſnatches of ſunſhine and fair weather
in the moſt uncomfortable parts of the year. Speciator.
24 L. 5. A
T-A-...--—<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S N E
S N I
5. A quip; a ſhuffling anſwer.
- - r
C. leave your ſnatches, and Yº!’.” dircót anſwer.
Shakespeare Meaſure for A ſeaſure.
sº Archer. n.ſ.. [from ſhatt”.] One that ſnatches, or takes
hing in haſte.
anything They of thoſe marches
Shall be a wall ſufficient to defend
our inland from the pilfering borderers.
l" we do not mean the courſing ſnatchers only,
But fear the main intendment of the Scot...Shaºff. H. V.
SNA'rchingly. adv. [from ſnatching.] Haſtily with inter-
ruption -
To §Ak. v. n. [rnican, Saxon; ſnige, Daniſh:l
1. To creep ſlily; to come or go as if afraid to be ſeen.
Once the eagle, England, being in prey,
To her unguarded neſt the weazel, Scot,
Comes ſneaking, and ſo ſucks her princely eggs. Shakeſpeare.
Sneak not away, fir; for the friar and you
Muſt have a word anon : lay hold on him. Shakeſpeare.
Diſcover'd, and defeated of your prey,
You ſkulk'd behind the fence, and ſneak'd away. Pryden.
I ought not to turn my back, and to ſneak off in ſilence,
and leave the truth to lie baffled, bleeding, and ſlain. // atti.
He ſneaſ'd into the grave, -
A monarch's half and half a harlot's ſlave. Dunciad.
Are you all ready? Here's your muſick here:
Mºore.
Author, ſneak off; we'll tickle you, my dear.
2. To behave with meanneſs and ſervility; to crouch; to
truckle.
I need ſalute no great man's threſhold, ſneak to none of his
friends to ſpeak a good word for me to my conſcience. South.
Nothing can ſupport minds drooping and ſneaking, and in-
wardly reproaching them, from a ſenſe of their own guilt, but
to ſee others as bad. South's Sermons.
When int’reſt calls off all her ſneaking train,
When all th’ oblig'd deſert, and all the vain,
She waits, or to the ſcaffold, or the cell,
When the laſt ling’ring friend has bid farewel. Pope.
Tom ſtruts a ſoldier, open, bold, and brave;
Will ſneaks a ſcriv'ner, an exceeding knave. Pºpe.
SNE’AK ER. M. ſ. A large veſſel of drink.
I have juſt left the right worſhipful and his myrmidons about
a ſneaker of five gallons. Speciator.
SNE'AKING. participial ad. [from ſneak.]
1. Servile; mean; low.
2. Covetous; niggardly; meanly parcimonious.
SNE'AKINGly. adv. [from ſneaking..] Meanly; ſervilely.
Do all things like a man, not ſneakingly :
Think the king ſees thee ſtill. Herlert.
While you ſneaking'y ſubmit,
And beg our pardon at our feet, t
Diſcourag'd by your guilty fears
To hope for quarter for your ears. Hudibras.
SNE'Akup. nºſ, [from ſneak.] A cowardly, creeping, inſi-
dious ſcoundrel. Obſolete.
The prince is a jack, a ſneakup; and, if he were here, I
would cudgel him like a dog, if he would ſay ſo. Shakespeare H.I.V.
To SNEAP. v. a. [This word ſeems a corruption of ſhit, or of
Jººp, to reprimand. Perhaps ſnap is in that ſenſe from ſnib,
ſnible, Daniſh.
Men ſhulde him ſºil be bitterly. Chaucer.]
1. To reprimand; to check.
2. To nip.
What may
Breed upon our abſence, may there blow
No ſneaping winds at home. a Shakeſpeare.
SNEAP. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A reprimand; a check.
My lord, I will not undergo this ſneap without reply: you
call honourable boldneſs impudent ſaucineſs: if a man will
court’ſy and ſay nothing, he is virtuous. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
To SNEB. v. a. [Properly to ſnib. See SNEAP..]" To check;
to chide; to reprimand.
Which made this fooliſh briar wax ſo bold,
. That on a time he caſt him to ſcold,
And ſhelle the good oak, for he was old. Spenſºr.
To SNEER. v. n. [This word is apparently of the ſame family
with ſnore and ſhort.]
I. To !hºw contempt by looks: raſ, ſufferdare adance.
2. To infinuate contempt by covert expreſſions.
The wolf was by, and the fox in a ſneering way adviſed him
* to irritate a prince againſt his ſubjects. L'E/irange.
I could be content to be a little fneered at in a line, for the
take of the pleaſure I ſhould have in reading the reſt. Pope.
If *has been any thing expreſſed with too much tº
ity, it will fall upon thoſe ſneering or daring writers of the
*** ***inſt religion, who have left ſeaſon and decency. //atts.
- 3. To utter with grimace.
have not been ſneering f -
- t ulſome lies, and nauſeous flatt
at a little tawdry whore. g 3 aſ Cl Ilall º
4. To ſhow aukºard mirth. -
* no power over one m - -
uſcle in their faces, though the
fºrcd at **Y word ſpoken by each other. y sº
SNEER. n.f. [from the verb.]
1. A look of contemptuous ridicule.
Did not the ſneer of more impartial men
At ſenſe and virtue, balance all agen. Pºpe.
2. An expreſſion of ludicrous ſcorn.
Socrates or Caeſar might have a fool's coat clapt upon them
and in this diſguiſe neither the wiſdom of the one north.
majeſty of the other could ſecure them from a ſneer. It'att.
To SNEEZE. v. n. [nieran, Saxon; nieſen, Dutch..] To emit
wind audibly by the noſe.
If one be about to ſneeze, rubbing the eyes 'till tears run
will prevent it; for that the humour deſcending to the noſtrils
is diverted to the eyes. Bacºn.
If the pain be more intenſe and deeper within amongſt
the membranes, there will be an itching in the palate and noſ-
trils, with frequent ſneezing. hiſeman's Surgery,
To thee Cupid ſneez’d aloud;
And every lucky omen ſent before,
To meet thee landing on the Spartan ſhore. Dryden.
If anything oppreſs the head, it hath a power to free itſelf
by {.{ Ray on the Creation.
iolent ſneezing produceth convulſions in all the muſcles of
reſpiration: ſo great an alteration can be produced only by
the tickling of a feather; and if the action of ſneezing ſhould
be continued by ſome very acrid ſubſtance, it will produce head-
ach, univerſal convulſions, fever, and death. Arbuthnot.
An officer put the ſharp end of his half-pike a good way up
into my noſtril, which tickled my noſe like a ſtraw, and made
me ſneeze violently. Gulliver's Travels.
SN E Eze. n.ſ. [from the verb.] Emiſſion of wind audibly by
the noſe.
I heard the rack
As earth and ſky would mingle; but
Theſe flaws, though mortals fear them
As dangerous to the pillar'd frame of heav'n,
Are to the main as wholſome as a ſneeze
To man's leſs univerſe, and foon are gone. Milt. Par. Reg.
We read in Godignus, that upon a ſneeze of the emperor of
Monomotapa, there paſt acclamations ſucceſſively through the
city. Brown's Wugar Errouri,
SNE'Ezewort. m. ſ. [ptarmica, Latin.] A plant.
It hath radiated flowers, whoſe diſk conſiſts of many florets;
but the borders are compoſed of half florets: the embryoes
are lodged in the flowercup, which is ſcaly, each of which
becomes one ſlender ſeed. Miller.
SNET. m. ſ. [Among hunters.] The fat of a deer. Diff.
SNEw. The old preterite of To ſnow. Dić.
To SN1B. v. a. ſ. ſnibbe, Daniſh. See SNEAP..] To check; to
nip; to reprimand.
Aſked for their paſs by every ſquib,
That liſt at will them to revile or ſnib.
SNick and Snee. n.ſ. A combat with knives. -
Among the Dunkirkers, where ſick and ſnee was in faſhion,
a boatſwain with ſome of our mén drinking together, became
quarrelſome : one of our men beat him down; then kneeling
npon his breaſt, he drew out a knife, ſticking in his ſaſh, and
cut him from the ear towards the mouth. If iſºman's Surgery.
To SNI'ck ER, or Snigger. v. n. To laugh ſlily, wantonly, or
contemptuouſly; to laugh in one's ſleeve. Diº.
To SNIFF. v. n. [ſhiffa, Swediſh. To draw breath audibly up
the noſe.
So then you look'd ſcornful, and ſhift at the dean, , ,
As, who ſhould ſay, now am i ſkinny and lean? Suffº.
To SN1(GGLE. v. n.
Sniggling is thus performed : in a warm day, when the war
ter is loweſt, take a ſtrong ſmall hook, tied to a ſtring about a
yard long; and then into one of the holes, where an eel may
hide herſelf, with the help of a ſhort ſtick put in your bait
leiſurely, and as far as you may conveniently: if within the
fight of it, the eel will bite inſtantly, and as certainly gorge
it: pull him out by degrees, Iſatºn's Anglº
To SNip. v.a. [ſhippºn, Dutch. J To cut at once wit"
ſciſſars.
The finus ſhould be laid open, which was fift up about
two inches with a pair of probe-ſciſſars, and the inciſed lips
dreſſed. Iſºſºman's Surgery;
When tradeſmen brought extravagant bills, fir Roger uſed
to bargain to cut off a quarter of a yard: he wore "Pºº
ſciſſars for this purpoſe, and would ſnip it off nicely. Arbuthnºt.
Putting one blade of the ſciſſars up the gut, and the other up
the wound, ſnip the whole length of the fiſtula. Sharp.
SNIP. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A ſingle cut with ſciſſars.
What! this a ſleeve
Here's ſhip and nip, and cut, and ſliſh and ſlaſh,
Like to a cenſor in a barber's ſhop. Shałęſtart.
The ulcer would not cure farther than it was laid oº:
therefore with one ſnip more I laid it open to the very end, ſh iſ.
2. A ſmall ſhred.
Thoſe we keep within compaſs by ſmall ſhips of emplaſt.
hoping to defend the parts about; but, in ſpite of all, they
will ſpread farther. 8 // iſºman's sº
3.
Hubberd's Talk,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S N O
3. A ſhare; a ſnack. A low word. -
He found his friend upon the mending hand, which he was
glad to hear, becauſe of the ſhip that he himſelf expected upon
the dividend. L’Eſtrange.
SNIPE. n.ſ. [ſheppe, German; rhite, Saxon; yºut, Welſh.]
1. A ſmall fen fowl with a long bill.
The external evident cauſes of the atrabilis are a high fer-
menting diet; as old cheeſe, birds feeding in fens, as geeſe,
ducks, woodcocks, ſnipes, and ſwans. Player.
2. A fool; a blockhead.
Thus do I ever make my fool my purſe;
For I mine own gain'd knowledge ſhould profane,
If I ſhould time expend with ſuch a ſnipe,
But for my ſport and profit.
SNI'PPER. m. ſ. [from ſnip.] One that ſnips.
SNI'PPET. n.ſ.. [from ſhip.] A ſmall part; a ſhare.
Witches ſimpling, and on gibbets
Cutting from malefactors ſnippets;
Or from the pill’ry tips of ears. Hudibras.
SNI'PsAAP, n.ſ. [A cant word formed by reduplication of ſnap.]
Tart dialogue.
Dennis and diſſonance, and captious art,
And ſhipſnap ſhort, and interruption ſmart. Pope's Dunciad.
SNItE. n.ſ. [rnrca, Saxon.] A ſnipe. This is perhaps the
true name; but ſnipe prevails.
Of tame birds Cornwal hath doves, geeſe, and ducks: of
wild, quail, rail, ſnite, and wood-dove. Carew.
To SN1T E. v. a. [rnycan, Saxon.] To blow the noſe.
Nor would any one be able to ſnite his noſe, or to ſneeze;
in both which the paſſage of the breath through the mouth,
being intercepted by the tongue, is forced to go through the
noſe. Grew's Coſmol.
SNI'VEL. m. ſ. [ſnavel, ſievel, German.] Snot; the running
of the noſe.
To SNI'vel. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. To run at the noſe.
2. To cry as children. -
Funeral tears are hired out as mourning cloaks; and whe-
ther we go to our graves ſniveling or ſinging, 'tis all mere
form. - L’E/ºrange.
Away goes he ſniveling and yelping, that he had dropt his
ax into the water. L’Eſtrange.
SNI've L.L.E.R. n.ſ. [from ſnivel.] A weeper; a weak lamenter.
He'd more lament when I was dead,
Than all the ſhivellers round my bed. Swift.
To SNor E. v. n. [ſnoreken, Dutch..] To breathe hard through
the noſe, as men in ſleep.
I did unreverently blame the gods,
Who wake for thee, though thouſnore for thyſelf. B. Johnſ.
Whoſe railing heroes, and whoſe wounded gods,
Makes ſome ſuſpect he ſhores as well as nods. Roſcommon.
He may lie quietly in his ſhades, and ſnore on to doomſday
for me; unleſs I ſee farther reaſon of diſturbing his repoſe.
Stillingfleet.
Shakeſp. Othello.
Is not yonder Proteus' cave
It is ; and in it lies the god aſleep;
And ſnoring by
We may deſcry
The monſters of the deep.
'Twas Acme's and Septimius' life;
The lady figh'd, the lover ſhor’d. t Prior.
The giant, gorg'd with fleſh, and wine, and blood,
Lay ſtretcht at length, and ſnoring in his den,
Belching raw gobbets from his maw, o'ercharg’d
With purple wine and cruddl’d gore confus'd. Addison.
SNORE. m.ſ. [rnona, Saxon ; from the verb.] Audible reſpira-
tion of ſleepers through the noſe.
The ſurfeited grooms
Do mock their charge with ſnores: I've drugg’d their poſſets.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To SNort. v. n. [ſhorcken, Dutch J To blow through the
noſe as a high mettled horſe.
The ſnºrting of his horſes was heard.
The fiery war-horſe paws the ground,
And ſhorts and trembles at the trumpet’s ſound. Addiſon.
From their full racks the gen’rous ſteeds retire,
Dropping ambroſial foams and ſhorting fire. Addiſon's Ovid.
He with wide noſtrils, ſhorting, ſkims the wave. Thomſon.
SNOT. m.ſ. [rnoze, Saxon; ſnot, Dutch..] The mucus of
the noſe.
Thus, when a greedy ſloven once has thrown
His ſnot into the meſs, ’tis all his own. Swift.
SNo'TTY. adj. [from ſhot..] Full of ſnot.
This ſquire South my huſband took in a dirty ſnotty-noſed
boy. Arbuthnot.
SNOUT. n.ſ. [ſhuyt, Dutch.]
1. The noſe of a beaſt.
Dryden's Albion,
jer. viii. 16.
His noſe in the air, his ſnout in the ſkies. Tºſſºr.
In ſhape a beagle's whelp throughout,
With broader forehead, and a ſharperſnout. Dryden.
S N U
* The noſe of a man, in contempt.
Her ſubtle ſnout
Did quickly wind his meaning out. Hudibrar:
But when the date of Nock was out,
ff dropt the ſympathetick ſnout. Hudibrar.
What Ethiop lips he has, -
How foul ſhºt; and what a hanging face! Dryd, juven.
Charm'd with his eyes, and chin, and ſnout,
Her pocket-glaſs drew ſlily out;
And grew enamour'd with her phiz,
As juſt the counterpart of his. Swift
3. The noſel or end of any hollow pipe. -
SNo’uted. adj. [from ſnout..] Having a ſnout.
snoº": and tailed like a boar, and footed like a goat. Grew.
- ... n.ſ. [rnap, Saxon; fier, Dutch..] The ſmall par-
ticles of water frozen before they unite into drops. Locke.
Benaiah ſlew a lion in a pit, in time of ſnow.
Drought and heat conſume ſnow waters.
He gives the Winter's ſnow her airy birth,
And bids her virgin fleeces clothe the earth. Sandys.
To Sisow. v. n. [rnayan, Saxon; ſheeuwen, Dutch..] To have
ſnow fall.
To SNow. v. a. To ſcatter like ſnow.
If thou beſt born to ſee ſtrange fights,
Ride ten thouſand days and nights,
'Till age ſnow white hairs on thee. Donne.
SN9'WBALL. n.ſ.. [ſhºw and ball.] A round lump of con-
gelated ſnow.
They paſſed to the eaſt-riding of Yorkſhire, their company
daily increaſing, like a ſnowball in rolling. Hayward.
His bulky folly gathers as it goes,
And, rolling o'er you, like a ſnowball grows. Dryden.
A ſnowball having the power to produce in us the ideas of
white, cold, and round, the powers, as they are in the ſnow-
ball, I call qualities; and as they are ſenſations in our under-
ſtandings, ideas. Locke.
Snow broth. n.ſ.. [ſnow and broth J. Very cold liquor.
Angelo, a man whoſe blood
Is very ſnowbroth, one who never feels
The wanton ſtings and motions of the ſenſe. Shakespeare.
Snow prop. m.ſ.. [narciſſoleucoium, Latin.] An early flower.
The flower is, for the moſt part, compoſed of fix leaves,
in form of a lily, which are ſometimes equal, and ſometimes
unequal and pendulous: the empalement becomes a roundiſh
fruit, which is divided into three cells, and full of roundiſh
ſeeds: to which may be anded, it hath a bulbous root. Miller.
When we tried the experiment with the leaves of thoſe
purely white flowers that appear about the end of Winter,
called ſnowdrºps, the event was not much unlike that newly
mentioned. Boyle on Colours.
The little ſhape, by magick pow'r,
Grew leſs and leſs, contračted to a flow'r;
A flow'r, that firſt in this ſweet garden ſmil'd,
To virgins ſacred, and theiſ...} ſtyl’d. Tickell.
SNow-white. adj. [ſnow and white.] White as ſnow.
A ſnow-white bull ſhall on your ſhore be ſlain;
His offer'd entrails caſt into the main. Dryden's 4ºn.
SNo'w Y, adj. [from ſnow.]
1. White like ſnow.
So ſhews a ſnowy dove trooping with crows,
As yonder lady o'er her fellows ſhews.
Now I ſee thy jolly train:
Snowy headed Winter leads,
Spring and Summer next ſucceeds;
Yellow Autumn brings the rear;
Thou art father of the year. - Rºwe.
The bluſhing ruby on her ſnowy breaſt,
Render'd its panting whiteneſs more confeſt. Prior.
2. Abounding with ſnow.
Theſe firſt in Crete
And Ida known; thence on the ſnowy top
Of cold Olympus rul'd the middle air. Milton's Par. Lºft.
As when the Tartar from his Ruſſian foe,
By Aſtracan, over the ſnowy plains, -
Retires. Milton's Paradiſ: Loſ’.
SNub. n.ſ. [from ſhebbe, Dutch, a noſe, or Anube', a joint of
the finger.] A jag; a ſnag; a knot in wood.
Lifting up his dreadful club on high,
All arm'd with ragged ſnubs and knotty grain, -
Him thought at firſt encounter to have ſlain. Fairy Queen:
To SNub. v. a. [Rather To ſnib. See SNEAP, SNEB, SNIB.]
1. To check; to reprimand.
2. To nip. - -
Near the ſeaſhores the heads and boughs of trees run out
far to landward; but toward the ſea are ſo ſºu%ed by the
winds, as if their boughs had been pared or ſhaven off... Ray.
To SNU B. v. n. [ſnuffºn, Dutch.J. To ſob with convulſion.
To Snudge, v, n. Iſhiger, Daniſh..] To lie idle, cloſe, or
ſnug,
2 Sa. xxiii.
job xxiv. 19.
Shakespeare.
Now<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S N U
S O
Now he will fight it out, and to the wars;
is bread in peace, -
Yº. quiet; now he ſcorns increaſe;
all day ſpares.
st;Éw...f. [/nºſ, Dutch, ſnot..]
Snot. In this ſenſe it is not uſed.
3. *... uſeleſs excreſcence of a candle: whence mouther la
clandel.
Herbert.
My great afflićtion,
If I could bear longer, and not fall
To quarrel with your oppoſeleſs wills,
My ſnuff and loathed part of nature ſhould -
Burn itſelf out. Shakeſp. King Lear.
But deareſt heart, and dearer image, ſtay!
Alas! true joys at beſt are dreams enough:
Though you ſtay here, you paſs too faſt away;
For even at firſt life's taper is a ſnuff. Donne.
The ſnuff-diſhes ſhall be of pure gold. Ex. xxv. 38.
If the liquor be of a cloſe and glutinous conſiſtency, it may
burn without any ſnuff, as we ſee in camphire, and ſome other
bituminous ſubſtances; and moſt of the ancient lamps were of
this kind, becauſe none have been found with ſuch wicks. Wilk.
3. A candle almoſt burnt out.
Lamentable!
To hide me from the radiant ſun, and ſolace
I” th’ dungeon by a ſnuff. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
4. The fired wick of a candle remaining after the flame.
A torch, ſnuff and all, goes out in a moment, when dipped
into the vapour. Addiſon on Italy.
5. Reſentment expreſſed by ſnifting; perverſe reſentment.
What hath been ſeen
Either in ſnuff; or packings of the duke's,
Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
Againſt the old kind king. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Jupiter took ſnuff at the contempt, and puniſhed him: he
ſent him home again. L’Eſtrange.
6. Powdered tobacco taken by the noſe.
Juſt where the breath of life his noſtrils drew,
A charge of ſnuff the wily virgin threw;
The ...ſº to ..., atom juſt
The pungent grains of titillating duſt. Pope.
To SNU FF. v. a. ſ. ſnuffºn, Dutch J
1. To draw in with the breath.
A heifer will put up her noſe, and ſtuff in the air againſt
rain. Bacon.
With delight heſnuff"d the ſmell
Of mortal change on earth. Milton's Paradiſe Left.
He ſhuff; the wind, his heels the ſand excite;
But when he ſtands colle&amp;ted in his might, }
He roars and promiſes a more ſucceſsful fight. Dryden.
The youth,
Who holds the neareſt ſtation to the light,
Already ſeems to ſnuff the vital air,
And leans juſt forward on a ſhining ſpear. Dryden’s ACn.
My troops are mounted; their Numidian fleeds
$nºff up the wind, and long to ſcour the defºrt." Add, 077.
My nag's greateſt fault was ſnuffing up the air about Brack-
denſtown, whereby he became ſuch a lover of liberty, that I
could ſcarce hold him in. Swift.
2. To ſcent.
The cow looks up, and from afar can find
The change of heav'n, and ſniff; it in the wind. Dryden.
For thee the bulls rebellow through the groves,
And tempt the ſtream, and /nuff their abſent loves. Dryden.
O'er all the blood-hound boºſts ſuperior ſkill,
To ſcent, to view, to turn, and boldly kill
His fellows vain alarms rejects with ſcorn,
True to the maſter's voice, and learned horn:
His noſtrils oſt, if ancient fame fing true,
Trace the ſly felon through the tainted dew :
Once ſnuff”4, he follows with unalter'd aim,
Nor odours lure him from the choºn game;
Fº thunders, and inflam'd he views,
Prings on relentleſs, and to de -
3. To º; the candle. &gt; ath purſues. Tickell.
The late queen's gentlewoman!
To be her miſtreſs' #. !
This candle burns not clear: 'tis I muſt ſnuff it
A. gº... Sºft. Henry VIII.
dº." f communion-day our lamps ſhould be better
2 and Our lights ſuffed, and our religion more a&amp;ive.
You have got 7aylor's worthy Cºmmunicant.
#. office for your talents fit,
*! the lights, and itſ he fire,
nd get a di -
To s...}. º * for your hire. Swift.
I. To ſn
*3 to draw breath by the noſe.
The f fi
And º res the pack, they ſnuff, they vent,
their hungry noſtrils with the ſcent. Dryd. Aºn.
Says Humpus, ſir, my maſter bad me pray
Your company to dine with him to-day:
He ſnuffs, then follows, up the ſtairs he goes;
Never pulls off his hat, nor cleans his ſhoes. King.
2. To ſnift in contempt.
Ye ſaid, what a wearineſs is it, and ye have ſnuff"d at it.
44al. ii. 17.
SNu‘FF Box. n.ſ.. [ſnuff and box.] The box in which ſnuff.
carried. .
If a gentleman leaves a ſnuffbox on the table, and goeth
away, lock it up as part of your vails. Swift.
Sir Plume, of amber ſnuffbox juſtly vain,
And the nice conduct of a clouded cane. Pope.
SNu‘FFERS. m. ſ. [from ſnuff..] The inſtrument with which
the candle is clipped.
When you have ſnuffed the candle, leave the /nuffers open.
Swift's Directions to the Butler.
To SNu'ffle. v. n. [ſuffºlen, Dutch.J. To ſpeak through
the noſe; to breath hard through the noſe.
A water-ſpaniel came down the river, ſhewing that he
hunted for a duck ; and with a ſnuffing grace, diſdaining that
his ſmelling force could not as well prevail through the water
as through the air, waited with his eye to ſee whether he could
eſpy the duck's getting up again. Sidney.
Bagpipes of the loudeſt drones,
With ſnuffling broken-winded tones,
Whoſe blaſts of air in pockets ſhut,
Sound filthier than from the gut. Hudibrar.
It came to the ape to deliver his opinion, who ſmelt and
fnuffed, and conſidered on’t. L’Eſtrange.
One clad in purple,
Eats and recites ſome lamentable rhyme;
Some ſenſeleſs Phillis in a broken note,
Snuffing at noſe, and croaking in his throat. Dryden.
To SNUG. v. n. [ſniger, Dutch..] To lie cloſe; to ſnudge.
There ſhugging well, he well appear'd content,
So to have done amiſs, ſo to be ſhent. Sidney.
As the loving couple lay ſnugging together, Venus, to try if
the cat had changed her manners with her ſhape, turned a
mouſe looſe into the chamber. L’Eſtrange.
SNUG. adj. [from the verb.]
I. Cloſe ; free from any inconvenience.
They ſpy'd a country farm,
Where all was ſnug, and clean, and warm;
For woods before, and hills behind,
Secur'd it both from rain and wind. Prior.
2. Cloſe; out of notice.
At Will’s
Lie ſnug, and hear what criticks ſay. Swift.
3. Slily or infidiouſly cloſe.
Did I not ſee you, raſcal, did I not
When you lay ſnug to ſnap young Damon's goat? Dryden.
To SNu'ggie. v. n. [from ſmug.] To lie cloſe; to lie warm.
So... adv. [rpa, Saxon; ſoo, Dutch; ſo, German.]
1. In like manner. It anſwers to as either preceding or follow-
ing. Noting compariſon.
As whom the fables feign of monſtrous ſize,
Titanian or earthborn that warr'd on Jove, -
So ſtretch'd out huge in length the arch fiend lay. Milton.
Thick as autumnal leaves that ſtrew the brooks
In Valombroſa, where th’ Etrurian ſhades
High over-arch'd embow'r, ſo thick beſtrewn
Abječt and loſt lay theſe. -
Tir'd at firſt fight with what the muſe imparts,
In fearleſs youth we tempt the heights of arts;
So pleas'd at firſt the tow'ring Alps we try,
Mount o'er the vales, and ſeem to tread the ſky.
As into air the purer ſpirits flow,
And ſep'rate from their kindred dregs below,
So flew her ſoul to its congeneal place.
2. To ſuch a degree. -
Why is his chariot ſº long in coming?
Can nothing great, and at the height,
Remain ſo long, but its own weight
Will ruin it Or is't blind chance ---
That ſtill deſires new ſtates tº advance. Ben. Johnſ. Catiline.
Amoret, my lovely foe, -
Tell me where thy ſtrength does lie;
Where the pow'r that charms us ſº, Waller.
n thv ſoul. or in thy eye? - -
#. in my . far as I was able, the º:
and progreſs of a riſing world. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Since then our Arcite is with honour dead,
Why ſhould we mourn that he ſo ſoon is freed. º
Upon our firſt going into a company of ſtrangers, . -
nevolence or averion riſes towards ſeveral particular Per”
k, or ſº much as know who
before we have heard them ſpeak, or ſº Addiſon's Spectator.
Milton.
Pope.
Pope.
judg. v. 28.
they are. - • -
we think our fathers fools, ſº wiſe we're grown: Pope
Our wiſer ſons, no doubt, will think us ſo. 3 %.
9
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O
S O A
hiº,
fºr
lº,
º:
*
sºn
tº:
lº,
º,
3. In ſuch a manner.
4. It is regularly anſwered by as or that, but they are ſometimes
omitted. '
So frown'd the mighty combatants, that hell
Grew darker at their frown. Milton.
There's no ſuch thing, as that we beauty call,
It is meer coſenage all;
For though ſome long ago
Lik'd certain colours ming'd ſo and ſº,
That doth not tie me now from chuāng new. Suckling.
There is ſomething equivalent in France and Scotland; ſº
as 'tis a very hard calumny upon our ſoil to affirin that ſo ex-
cellent a fruit will not grow here. 7 emple.
We may be certain that man is not a creature that hath
wings; becauſe this only concerns the manner of his exiſtence;
and we ſeeing what he is, may certainly know that he is not
ſo or ſo. Locke.
I ſhall minutely tell him the ſteps by which I was brought
into this way, that he may judge whether I proceeded ratio-
nally, if ſo be anything in my example is worth his notice. Locke.
This gentleman is a perſon of good ſenſe, and knows that
he is very much in fir Roger's eſteem, ſo that he lives in the
family rather as a relation than dependent. Addiſon.
5. In the ſame manner.
Of ſuch examples add me to the roll;
Me eaſily indeed mine may neglect,
But God's propos'd deliverance not ſo. Milton.
To keep up the tutor's authority, uſe him with great reſpect
yourſelf, and cauſe all your family to do ſo too. Lºcke.
According to the multifariouſneſs of this immutability, ſo
are the poſſibilities of being. Norris.
6. Thus ; in this manner.
Not far from thence the mournful fields appear,
So call'd from lovers that inhabit there. Dryden.
Does this deſerve to be rewarded ſº *
Did you come here a ſtranger or a foe Dryden.
It concerns every man, with the greateſt ſeriouſneſs, to
enquire into thoſe matters whether they be ſo or not. Hilotſon.
No nation ever complained they had too broad, too deep,
or too many rivers ; they underſtand better than ſo, how to
value thoſe ineſtimable gifts of nature. Bentley.
So when the firſt bold veſſel dar'd the ſeas,
High on the ſtern the Thracian rais'd his ſtrain. Pope.
Whether this be from an habitual motion of the animal ſpi-
rits, or from the alteration of the conſtitution, by ſome more
unaccountable way, this is certain that ſ it is. Locke.
7. Therefore; for this reaſon; in conſequence of this.
The god, though loth, yet was conſtrain'd tobey;
For longer time than that, no living wight,
Below the earth, might ſuffer'd be to ſtay:
So back again him brought to living light. Fairy Queen.
If he ſet induſtriouſly and ſincerely to perform the com-
mands of Chriſt, he can have no ground of doubting but it
ſhall prove ſucceſsful to him, and ſo all that he hath to do is to
endeavour by prayer and uſe of the means, to qualify him-
ſelf for this bleſſed condition. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Some are fall'n, to diſobedience fall'n;
And ſo from heav'n to deepeſt hell. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
God makes him in his own image an intellectual creature,
and ſº capable of dominion. Locke.
8. On theſe terms; noting a conditional petition: anſwered by
aſ,
O goddeſs! tell what I would ſay,
Thou know'ſt it, and I feel too much to pray,
So grant my ſuit, as I enforce my might,
In love to be thy champion. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Here then exchange we mutually forgiveneſs :
So may the guilt of all my broken vows,
My perjuries to thee be all forgotten ;
As here my ſoul acquits thee of my death,
As here I part without an angry thought. Rowe.
So may kind rains their vital moiſture yield,
And ſwell the future harveſt of thy field. Pope.
9. Provided that; on condition that ; mod.
Be not ſad:
Evil into the mind of God or man
May come and go, ſo unapprov'd, and leave
No ſpot or blame behind. Milton's Paradiſe Loſ!.
So the doćtrine be but wholſome and edifying, though there
ſhould be a want of exactneſs in the manner of ſpeaking or
reaſoning, it may be overlooked. Atterbury.
Too much of love thy hapleſs friend has prov’d,
Too many giddy fooliſh hours are gone;
May the remaining few know only friendſhip:
So thou, my deareſt, trueſt, beſt Alicia,
Vouchſafe to lodge me in thy gentle heart,
A partner there; I will give up mankind. Rowe.
10. In like manner; noting conceſſion of one propoſition and
aſſumption of another, anſwering to as.
As a war ſhould be undertaken upon a juſt motive, ſº a
prince ought to conſider the condition he is in when he enters
on it. Swift.
II. It ſometimes anſwers to the word or ſentence going before,
and returns the ſenſe.
Who thinks his wife is virtuous, though not fº,
Is pleas'd and patient till the truth he know. Denham.
Angling is ſomething like poetry, men are to be born ſº.
//alton's Anglºr.
One may as well ſay, that the conflagration ſhall be only
national, as to ſay that the deluge was ſo. Burnet.
However ſoft within themſelves they are,
To you they will be valiant by deſpair,
For having once been guilty, well they know
To a revengeful prince they ſtill are ſ. Dryden.
He was great ere fortune made him ſº. Dryden.
I laugh at every one, ſaid an old cynick, who langºs at
me. . Do you ſo * replied the philoſopher; then you live the
merrieſt life of any man in Athens. Addiſon.
They are beautiful in themſelves, and much more ſº in that
noble language peculiar to that great poet. Addiſon.
Common-place books have been long uſed by induſtrious
young divines, and ſtill continue ſo. Swift.
As to his uſing ludicrous expreſſions, my opinion is, that
they are not ſo. Pºpe.
The bleſt to-day is as completely ſº,
As who began a thouſand years ago. Pope.
12. Thus it is; this is the ſtate.
How ſorrow ſhakes him
So, now the tempeſt tears him up by th’ roots,
And on the ground extends the noble ruin. Dryden.
13. At this point; at this time.
When
With wild wood-leaves and weeds Iha' ſtrew'd his grave,
And on it ſaid a century of prayers,
Such as I can, twice o'er, I’ll weep and ſigh;
And, leaving ſº his ſervice, follow you. Shakeſpeare.
14. It notes a kind of abrupt beginning. Well.
O, ſº, and had you a council
Of ladies too? who was your ſpeaker,
Madam : Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
15. It ſometimes is little more than an expletive, though it im-
plies ſome latent or ſurd compariſon.
An aſtringent is not quite ſo proper, where relaxing the
urinary paſſages is neceſſary. Arbuthnot.
16. A word of aſſumption; thus be it.
There is Percy; if your father will do me any honour, ſo;
if not, let him kill the next Percy himſelf. Shakeſpeare.
I will never bear a baſe mind: if it be my deſtiny, ſo : if
it be not, ſo. No man is too good to ſerve his prince. Shakespeare
17. A form of petition. -
Ready are th' appellant and defendant,
The armourer and his man, to enter the liſts,
So pleaſe your highneſs to behold the fight. Shakespeare:
18. So much as. However much. This is, I think, an irregular
expreſſion. - -
So much as you admire the beauty of his verſe, his proſe
is full as good. Pope.
19. So ſº. An exclamation after ſome thing done or known.
I would not have thee linger in thy pain:
So ſo. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
So ſo; it works: now miſtreſs, ſit you faſt. Dryden. .
20. So ſº. [ºft coſì, Italian.j Indifferently; not much amiſs nor
well.
He's not very tall; yet for his years he's tall;
His leg is but ſº ſo; and yet 'tis well. Shakeſ are.
Deliver us from the nauſeous repetition of As and So, which
ſome ſº ſº writers, I may call them ſo, are continually ſound-
ing in our ears. Feltºn on the Claſſicks.
21. So then. Thus then it is that ; therefore.
So then the Volſcians ſtand ; but as at firſt
Ready, when time ſhall prompt them, to make road
Upon's again. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus:
To a war are required a juſt quarrel, fufficient for; and
a prudent choice of the deſigns: ſo then, I will firſt juſtify the
darrel, balance the forces, and propound variety of deſigns.
quarrel, 2 p *. //ar with Spain.
To So Ak. v. m. [roclan, Saxon.]
1. To lie ſteeped in moiſture.
For thy conceit in ſºaking will draw in
More than the common blocks. Shakeſpeare.
2. To enter by degrees into pores.
Lay a heap of earth in great froſts upon a hollow veſſel,
putting a canvaſs between, and pour wº it, ſo as to
Joak through : it will make a harder ice in the veſſel, º lsº
apt to diſſolve than ordinarily. - - he ſi i.
Rain ſºaking into the ſtrata, which lie near t º Ulr acº,
bears with it all ſuch moveable matter ºs 9%;" JJ’oodward.
3. To drink gluttonouſly and intemperately. This is a low term.
Ljinkard ſee that his health decays; his eſtate waſtes,
yet the habitual thirſt after his cups drives him to the tavern,
though he has in his view the loſs of health and plenty; the
leaſt of which he confeſſes is far greater than the ticking of
his palate with a glaſs of wine, or the idle chat of a feating
s pal, o:ke.
To
club.
24 M<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O B
S O B º
--- * - - - wº- -
To SoAK. v. d.
To macerate in any moiſture; to ſteep; to keep wet till
“...ia. is imbibed; to drench.
Many º #ºry blood:
- 'd and ſoak'd in &gt;~ :
gº. *::/ drench their peaſant limbs . Hen. V
In blood of princes. - Shakeſpeare's Hºn.V.
Their land ſhall be ſºaked with bloºd. Iſa. *. 7.
There deep Galeſus ſºaks the yellow ſands. ryaen.
Thou whoſe life's a dream of lazy pleaſure:
'Tis all thy bus'neſs, busineſ, how to ſhun
To baſk thy naked body in the ſun ; -
Suppling thy ſtiffen'd joints with fragrant oil;
Then in thy ſpacious garden walk a while,
To ſuck the moiſture up and ſºak it in. Drydºn.
wormwood, put into the brine you ſºak your corn in, pre-
vents the birds eating it. Mortimer.
in ; to exhauſt. This ſeems to be a cant term. -
2. "ß. draw much nouriſhment from the earth, and ſºak
and exhauſt it, hurt all things that grow by them. Bacon.
A greater ſparer than a ſaver; for though. he had ſuch.
means to accumulate, yet his forts, and his garriſons, and his
feaſings, wherein he was only ſumptuous, could not }:
is exchequer. atton.
sº rape, Saxon; ſapº, Latin.] A ſubſtance uſed
in waſhing, made of a lixivium of vegetable alkaline aſhes
and any unctuous ſubſtance. - -- - - -
Soap is a mixture of a fixed alkaline ſalt and oil; its vir-
tues are cleanſing, penetrating, attenuating, and reſolving;
and any mixture of any oily ſubſtance with ſalt may be called
a ſoap. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
He is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers ſoap. Malachi.
A bubble blown with water, firſt made tenacious by diſ-
ſolving a little ſoap in it, after a while will appear tinged
with a great variety of colours. Newton's Opticks.
Soap-earth is found in great quantity on the land near the
banks of the river Hermus, ſeven miles from Smyrna. Aſ oodw.
Soap-aſhes are much commended, after the ſoap-boilers have
done with them, for cold or ſour lands. Mortimer.
As rain-water diminiſhes their ſalt, ſo the moiſtening of
them with chamber-lee or ſap-ſuds adds thereto. Mortimer.
SoapBo I'll ER. m. ſ. [ſoap and boil.] One whoſe trade is to
make ſoap.
A ſoapboiler condoles with me on the duties on caſtle-ſoap.
Addiſon's Spediator.
Soapwort. m. ſ. Is a ſpecies of campion. AMiller.
To So AR. v. n. [ſorare, Italian.]
I. To fly aloft; to tower; to mount; properly to fly without
any viſible action of the wings.
Feather'd ſoon and fledg’d,
They ſumm'd their pens, and ſoaring th' air ſublime,
With clang deſpis'd the ground. Milton.
2. To mount intellectually; to tower with the mind.
'Tis but a baſe ignoble mind
That mounts no higher than a bird can ſºar. Shakespeare.
How high a pitch his reſolution ſoari. Shakeſpeare.
Valour ſoars above
What the world calls misfortune and afflićtions. Addiſon.
3. To riſe high.
Who aſpires muſt down as low
As high he ſoard. Milton.
Flames riſe and fink by fits; at laſt they ſºar
In one bright blaze, and then deſcend no more. Dryden.
When ſwallows fleetſcar high, and ſport in air,
... He told us that the welkin would be clear. Gay.
SoAA. n. ſ. [from the verb.] Towering flight.
Within ſºar
Qf tow'ring eagles, to all the fowlshe ſeems
A phoenix. Milton.
To Sob. v. n. [reob, zeab, complaining, Saxon. Perhaps it is
* mere anºmatopaia copied from the ſound.] To heave au-
dibly with convulſive ſorrow; to figh with convulſion.
When thy warlike father, like a child,
Told the ſad ſtory of my father's death,
He twenty times made pauſe to ſib and weep. Shakeſpeare.
As if her life and death lay on his ſaying,
Some tears ſhe ſhed, with fighs and ſºbbings mixt,
As if her hopes were dead through his delaying. Fairfax.
She figh'd, ſhe ſolb'd, and furious with deſpair,
She rent her garments, and ſhe tore her hair. Dryden.
when children have not the power to obtain their defire,
they will, by their clamour and ſobbing, maintain their title
to it. Locke on Education.
- He ſºlbing ſees
Th; glades, mild-opening to the golden day. Thomſºn.
oº: m. ſ. [from the verb..] A convulſive figh ; a convulſive act
of reſpiration obſtructed by ſorrow. C
D Break heart, or choak with ſobs my hated breath;
%.ºy own work, admit no foreign death. Dryden.
Th i. oft are heard the notes of infant Woe,
t **t thickſºb, loud ſcream, and ſhriller ſquall. Swift.
A wond’rous bag with both her hands ſhe binds:
There ſhe colleås the force of female lungs,
Sighs, ſºbs, and paſſions, and the war of tongues. P.”
To Sob. v. a. To ſoak. A cant word. 1 - -
The tree being ſobbed and wet, ſwells.
So'BER. adj. [ ſobrius, Latin; ſobre, French.]
1. Temperate, particularly in liquours; not drunken.
Live a ſober, righteous, and godly life. Common Prayer
The vines give wine to the drunkard as well as to theſ,
man. Taylor's //orthy Cºmmunicant.
No ſober temperate perſon, whatſoever other fins he may
be guilty of, can look with complacency upon the drunker.
neſs and ſottiſhneſs of his neighbour.
2. Not overpowered by drink.
A law there is among the Grecians, whereof Pittaeus is au.
thor; that he which being overcome with drink did then ſtrike
any man, ſhould ſufler puniſhment double, as much as if,
had done the ſame being ſober.
3. Not mad; right in the underſtanding.
Another, who had a great genius for tragedy, follow-
ing the fury of his natural temper, made every man and wo.
man in his plays ſtark raging mad: there was not a ſober per-
ſon to be had ; all was tempeſtuous and bluſtering. Dryden.
No ſºber man would put himſelf into danger, for the ap-
plauſe of eſcaping without breaking his neck.
4. Regular; calm; free from inordinate paſſion.
This ſame young ſober-blooded boy a man cannot make
44., timer.
South's Ser?n:nj.
Hoºker.
Dryden.
him laugh. Shakespeare.
Cicca travelled all over Peru, and is a grave and Jºe wri-
ter. Abbot's Deſcription ºf the IWºrld.
Young men likewiſe exhort to be ſºber minded. Til. ii.6.
The governour of Scotland being of great courage, and
ſºber judgment, amply performed his duty both before the battle
and in the field. Hayward.
Theſe confuſions diſpoſed men of any ſºber underſtanding
to wiſh for peace. Clarendºn.
Among them ſome ſºber men confeſſed, that as his maje-
ſty's affairs then flood, he could not grant it. Clarendon.
To theſe, that ſober race of men, whoſe lives
Religious, titled them the ſons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly to the trains and to the ſmiles
Of theſe fair atheiſts. Milton:
5. Serious; ſolemn; grave.
Petruchio ſhall
Offer me, diſguis'd in ſober robes,
*To old Baptiſta as a ſchoolmaſter. Shakespeare care.
Come, civil night,
Thou ſober-ſuited matron, all in black. Shałºffeare,
Twilightgrey
Had in her ſcher liv'ry all things clad. Miltºn.
What parts gay France from ſcher Spain,
A little riſing rocky chain :
f men born ſouth or north th' hill,
Thoſe ſeldom move; theſe ne'er ſtand ſtill. Prior.
Swift and he deſpis’d the farce of ſtate,
The ſober follies of the wiſe and great. Pope.
See her ſaler over a ſampler, or gay over a jointed baby. Pºpe.
To So B.E.R. v. a. [from the adjective.] To make ſober.
A little learning is a dang'rous thing;
Drink deep, or taſte not the Pierian ſpring;
There ſhallow draughts intoxicate the brain,
And drinking largely ſºbers us again. Pºpe.
So"BERLY. adv. [from ſober.]
1. Without intemperance.
2. Without madneſs.
3. Temperately; moderately. - ---
Let any prince think ſherly of his forces, except his mili-
tia of natives be valiant ſoldiers. Bacºn.
4. Cooly; calmly.
Whenever children are chaſtiſed, let it be done without paſ-
fion, and ſoberly laying on the blows ſlowly. Lºcke.
So'BERNEss. n.f. [from ſºber.]
I. Temperance in drink. -
Keep my body in temperance, ſºłernſ, and chaſſity.
Common Prayer.
2. Calmneſs; freedom from enthuſiaſm; coolneſs. -
A perſon noted for his ſºle neſ, and ſkill in ſpagyrical prepa-
rations, made Helmont's experiment ſucceed very well. Bºyle.
The ſoberneſ of Virgil might have ſhewn him the difference.
Dryden's Diffº.
Sobki'ety. m. ſ. [from ſºlºistſ, French; ſºbrius, Latin.]
1. Temperance in drink; ſober, eſs. . . ."
Drunkenneſs is more uncharitable to the ſoul, and in ſcrip-
ture is more declaimed againſt than gluttony; and/ºrity hº
obtained to ſignify temperance in drinking. Iayºr.
2. Preſent freedom from the power of ſtrong liquour.
3. General temperance.
In ſetting down the form of common prayer, there was nº
need that the book ſhould mention either the learning of a fit,
- - - - - 1, ,
or the unfitneſs of an ignorant miniſter, more than º
W ſlici
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O C
S O D
- -
* 1 a
º
which deſcribeth the manner how to pitch a field, ſhould
ſpeak of moderation and ſºbriety in diet, H.oker.
4 Freedom from inordinate paſſion.
The libertine could not prevail on men of virtue and ſo-
briety to give up their religion. Rºgers.
5. Calmneſs; coolneſs.
We will enquire with all ſobriety and ſeverity, whether
there be in the footſteps of nature, any ſuch tranſmiſſion of
immateriate virtues and what the force of imagination is.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Sobriety in our riper years is the effect of a well concočted
warmth; but where the principles are only phlegm, what can
be expected but an inſipid manhood, and ſtupid old infancy *
Dryden.
If ſometimes Ovid appears too gay, there is a ſecret grace-
fulneſs of youth which accompanies his writings, though the
ſtayedneſs and ſobriety of age be wanting. Dryden.
6. Seriouſneſs; gravity.
Mirth makes them not mad;
Norſ:briety ſad. Denham.
Socc AGE. r. ſ. [ ſoc, French, a ploughſhare; ſºccaghum, barba-
rous Latin.] In law, is a tenure of lands for certain inferiour
or huſbandly ſervices to be performed to the lord of the fee.
All ſervices due for land being knight's ſervice, or ſoccage;
ſo that whatever is not knight's ſervice, is ſoccage. This ſoc-
cage is of three kinds ; a ſoccage of free tenure, where a man
holdeth by free ſervice of twelve pence a-year for all manner
of ſervices. Soccage of ancient tenure is of land of ancient
demeſne, where no writ original ſhall be ſued, but the writ
ſecundum conſuetudinem manerii. Soccage of baſe tenure is where
thoſe that hold it may have none other writ but the monſtrave-
runt; and ſuch ſockmen hold not by certain ſervice. Cowel.
The lands are not holden at all of her majeſty, or not
holden in chief, but by a mean tenure in ſoccage, or by knight's
ſervice. Bacon.
SOCIABLE. adj. [ ſºciable, French; ſociabilis, Latin.]
1. Fit to be conjoined.
Another law toucheth them as they are ſociable parts united
into one body; a law which bindeth them each to ſerve unto
other's good, and all to prefer the good of the whole before
whatſoever their own particular. Hooker.
2. Ready to unite in a general intereſt.
To make man mild, and ſºciable to man;
To cultivate the wild licentious ſavage
With wiſdom, diſcipline.
3. Friendly; familiar; converſible.
Them thus employ'd, beheld
With pity heav'n's high King, and to him call’d
Raphael, the ſociable ſpirit, that deign'd
To travel with Tobias. Milton.
4. Inclin'd to company.
In children much ſolitude and ſilence I like not, nor any
thing born before his time, as this muſt needs be in that ſo-
ciable and expoſed age. //ºtton.
So'cIABLEN Ess. [from ſociable.]
1. Inclination to company and converſe.
Such as would call her friendſhip love, and feign
Addison's Catz.
To ſociableneſ, a name profane. Donne.
The two main properties of man are contemplation and
ſºciall-neſs, or love of converſe. More.
2. Freedom of converſation; good fellowſhip.
He always uſed courteſy and modeſty, diſliked of none;
ſometimes ſºciableneſ and fellowſhip well lik’d by many. Hayw.
Soci AB LY. adv. [from ſociable.j Converſibly ; as a compa-
nion.
Yet not terrible,
That I ſhould fear; nor ſºciably mild,
As Raphael, that I ſhould much confide;
But ſolemn and ſublime. Milton's Paradiſ: Loft.
SOCIAL. adj. [ſocialis, Latin.] -
1. Relating to a general or publick intereſt; relating to ſociety;
To love our neighbour as ourſelves is ſuch a fundamental
truth for regulating human ſociety, that by that alone one
might determine all the caſes in ſocial morality. Locke.
2. Eaſy to mix in friendly gaiety; companionable.
Withers adieu ! yet not with thee remove
Thy martial ſpirit or thy ſocial love. Pope.
3. Conſiſting in union or converſe with another.
Thou in thy ſecrecy although alone,
Beſt with thy ſelf accompany'd, ſeek'ſt not Ar-
Social communication. - Mºltºn.
Social Ness. [from ſocial.] The quality of bºing ſocial.
Soci e rY. m. ſ. [ ſociate, French; ſºcietas, Latin.]
1. Union of many in one general intereſt.
2. Numbers united in one intereſt; community.
As the practice of piety and virtue is agreeable to our rea-
ſon, ſo is it for the intereſt of private perſons and publick ſo-
citieſ. Tillotſ,n.
3. Company converſe. -
To make ſºciety
The ſweeter welcome, we will keep ourſelf
Tº ſupper time alone. Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
whilſt I was big in clamour, came there a man,
Who having ſeen me in my worſer ſtate,
Shunn'd my abhorr'd ſºciety. Shakespeare's K. Lear.
Solitude ſometimes is beſt ſociety,
And ſhort retirement urges ſweet return. Milton.
4. Partnerſhip; union on equal terms.
Among unequals what ſociety can fort? Milton.
Heav'n's greatneſs no ſºciety can bear;
Servants he made, and thoſe thou waneſt not here. Dryden.
Sock. n ſ: ſ ſºccur, Latin; rocc, Saxon; ſocke, Dutch.]
I. Something put between the foot and ſhoe.
Ere I lead this life long, I’ll ſow nether ſºcks, and mend
them, and foot them too. Shakespeare 's Henry IV.
A phyſician; that would be myſtical, preſcribeth for the
rheum to walk continually upon a camomile alley; mean-
ing he ſhould put camomile within his ſocks. Bacon:
2. The ſhoe of the ancient comick ačtors, taken in poems for
comedy, and oppoſed to buſkin or tragedy.
Then to the well trod ſtage anon,
If Johnſon's learned ſock be on,
Or ſweeteſt Shakeſpeare, fancy's child,
Warble his native wood-notes wild. Milton.
Great Fletcher never treads in buſkins here,
Nor greater Johnſon dares in ſocks appear;
But gentle Simkin juſt reception finds
Amidſt the monument of vaniſh'd minds. Drden.
On two figures of a&amp;tors in the villa Mathei at Rome, we
ſee the faſhion of the old ſock and larva. Aid'ſ n.
So'cket. n.ſ.. [ſºuchette, French J
1. Any hollow pipe; generally the hollow of a candleſtick.
Two goodly beacons ſet in watches ſtead,
Therein gave light, and flam'd continually;
For they of living fire mºſt ſubtilly
Were made, and ſet in filver ſºckets bright. Fairy Queen.
She at your flames would ſoon take fire,
And like a candle in the ſocket
Diſſolve.
The nightly virgin ſees
When ſparkling lamps their ſputt’ring light advance,
And in the ſockets oily bubbles dance. Dryden.
The ſtars amaz'd ran backward from the ſight,
And, ſhrunk within their ſockets, loſt their light. Lºyden.
Two dire comets
In their own plague, and fire have breath'd their laſt,
Or dimly in their ſinking ſockets frown. JDºyden,
To nurſe up the vital flame as long as the matter will laſt,
is not always good huſbandry; it is much better to cover it
with an extinguiſher of honour, than let it conſume till it
burns blue, and lies agonizing within the ſocket, and at length
goes out in no perfume. Collier.
2. The receptacle of the eye.
His eye-balls in their hollow ſºckets fink;
Bereft of ſleep he loths his meat and drink;
He withers at his heart, and looks as wan
As the pale ſpectre of a murder'd man. Dryden.
3. Any hollow that receives ſomething inſerted. -
The ſºckets and ſupporters of flowers are figured; as in the
five brethren of the roſe, and ſockets of gillyflowers. Bacon.
Gomphoſis is the conneétion of a tooth to its ſocket. Wiſe:
As the weight leans wholly upon the axis, the grating and
rubbing of theſe axes againſt the ſºckets, wherein they are
placed, will cauſe ſome inaptitude and reſiſtency to that rota-
tion of the cylinder which would otherwiſe enſue. Wilkins.
On either ſide the head produce an ear,
And fink a ſºcket for the ſhining ſhare. Dryden.
Sock Etchisel. m. ſ.
Carpenters, for their rougher work, uſe a ſtronger ſort of
chiſels, and diſtinguiſh them by the name of ſocketchiſels; their
ſhank made with a hollow ſocket a-top, to receive a ſtrong
wooden ſprig made to fit into the ſocket. Moxon.
Socle. n.f. [with archite&amp;ts.] A flat ſquare member, under
the baſes of pedeſtals of ſtatues and vaſes: it ſerves as a fºot or
ſtand. - Bailey.
SocMAN, or Soccager. n.ſ. [rocarman, Saxon.) A ſort of
tenant that holds lands and tenements by ſoccage tenure, of
which there are three kinds. See SoccAge. Cºl.
SocoMe. n.ſ. [In the old law, and in Scoland.] . A cuſtom of
tenants being obliged to grind their corn at their lord's mill.
Hudibra.
Bailey.
Sop. m. ſ. I ſad, Dutch..] A turf; a clod.
{{{...} ſhall łº ſºd; on thee beſtow; -
Alas the ſexton is thy banker now. Swift.
Here fame ſhall dreſs a ſweeter ſºd, -
Than fancy's feet have ever trod. Collins.
Soo. The preterite of feethe.
Never Čaldron ſºd
with ſo much fervour, fed with all the ſtore
That could enrage it. Chapman.
- tºe, and Eſau came from the field faint.
Jacob ſºd pottage, Gen. xxv. 29.
Sopality. n.ſ. [ ſºdalitai, Latin.] A felldwſhip; a frater-
ility. A new<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O F
S O F
- *_wº- ºr-
- aternity was inſtituted in Spain, of the flayes
- ..º. lº this ſºda it, eſtabliſhed with large in-
º dulgencies. - *...*
Sodden. [The participle paſſive of ſºthº.] Poiled ; ſeethed.
Can ſoºn water, their barley brºth,
Decoa their cold blood to ſuch valiant heat ? Shakeſ rare.
sºn buſineſs there's a flew'd phraſe indeed. Shakeſp.
Thou ſºdem-witted lord; thou haft no more brain than I
have in my elbows. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſiida.
Try it with milk ſºlden, and with cream. Bacon.
Mix it with ſodaen wines and raiſins. Dryden.
To Sode R. v. a. ſ.ſºnder, French ; ſud-ren, Dutch. It is ge:
nerally written ſºlar, from ſo dare, Italian ; ſºlidare, Latin.]
To cement with ſome metallick mºtter.
He that ſmootheth with the hammer, encourageth him that
ſmote the anvil, ſaying, it is ready for ſºuring. Iſa. xli.
So'DER. n.ſ. Metallick cement.
Still the difficulty returns, how theſe hooks were made:
what is it that faſters this yoder, and links theſe firſt principles
of bodies into a chain : Cºlier on Pride.
Soe. m. ſ. [ſãe, Scottiſh. A large wooden veſſel with hoops,
for holding water; a cowl. - -
A pump grown dry will yield no water; but pouring a little
into it firſt, for one baſon full you may fetch up as many Joe-
fills. Aſºre.
Soe ver, adv. [ſ, and ever.] A word properly joined with a
pronoun or adverb, as whoſoever; whatſoever; howſoever.
What great thing ſºrter a man propoſed to do in his life,
-
he ſhould think of atchieving it by fifty. Temple.
What love ſever by an heir is ſhown,
Or you could ne'er ſuſpect my loyal love. Dryden.
So'F.A. m. ſ. [I believe an eaſtern word..] A ſplended ſeat co-
vered with carpets.
The king leaped off from the ſºfa on which he ſat, and
cried out, 'tis my Abdallah Guardian.
Soft. adj. [ropr, Saxon; ſoft, Dutch.]
1. Not hard.
Hard and ſºft are names we give things, only in relation to
the conſtitutions of our own bodies; that being called hard,
which will put us to pain ſooner than change figure, by the
preſſure of any part of our bodies; and that ſoft, which chan-
ges the ſituation of its parts upon an eaſy touch. Locke.
Some bodies are hard, and ſome ſºft : the hardneſs is cauſed
by the jejuneneſs of the ſpirits, which if a greater degree,
make them not only hard, but fragil.
Hot and cold were in one body fixt,
And ſºft with hard, and light with heavy mixt. Dryden.
2. Not rugged; not rough.
What went ye out for to ſee? a man clothed in ſºft raiment?
behold, they that wear ſºft raiment are in kings houſes. Maith.
3. Ducile; not unchangeable of form.
Spirits can either ſex aſſume; ſo ſt
And uncompounded is their elience pure.
4. Facile; flexible ; not reſolute; yielding. -
A few divines of ſo ſºft and ſervile tempers as diſpoſed
then to ſo ſudden ačiing and compliance. K. Charles.
One king is too ſºft and eaſy; another too fiery. L'E/irange.
| 5. Tonder ; tımorous.
What he hath done famouſly, he did it to that end; tho’
- ſºft conſcienced men can be content to ſay, it was for his
country. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
However ſºft within themſelves they are,
To you they will be valiant by deſpair.
| Curt be the verſe, how well foe'er it flow,
- That tends to make one worthy man my foe;
Give virtue ſcandal, innocence a fear,
Q from the ſoft ey'd virgin ſteal a tear.
6. Mild; gentle; kind; not ſevere.
Wºuld my heart were flint like Edward's;
Or Edward's ſºft and pitiful like mine. Shałeffeare.
Our fºrments may become as ſoft as now ſevere. Ažiltºn.
Yet ſºft his nature, though ſevere his lay,
His anger moral, and his wiſdom gay.
7. Mccl: ; civil; complaiſ. gay
&gt; ; complaiſant.
- Say,
Thou art their ſoldier, and being bred in broils,
Hºſt not the ſºft way, which thou do'ſt confeſs
}. cre fit for thee to uſe, as they to claim
8. Pl º loves. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
On her ſºft axle while ſhe paces even,
a cººl.
Milton.
Dryden.
-
Pope.
She bears thee ſºft with the ſmooth air along. Alſilion.
There ſºft-extended, to the murmuring ſound
ºf the high porch, Ulyſſes ſleeps profound. Pope.
9. Effeminate; viciouſly nice.
!his ſenſe is alſo miſtreſ of an art
W high to ſoft Peºple ſweet perfumes doth ſel;
Since º h º art doth little good impart,
An idle ey º ! beſt, that do of nothing ſmell. Davies.
ſures. */ſt courſe of life is the ſource of criminal plea-
Notes on the Odyſſey.
Pope. ,
10. Delicacy; elegantly tender.
Her form more ſoft and feminine.
Leſs winning ſºft, leſs amiably mild.
11. Weak; ſimple.
The deceiver ſoon found this ſºft place of Adam's, and in-
nocency itſelf did not ſecure him. Glanville.
12. Gentle; not loud; not rough.
Her voice was ever ſºft,
Gentle and low, an excellent thing in women. Shakeſpeare.
‘I he Lorian mood of flutes and ſºft recorders. Milton.
When ſome great and gracious monarch dies,
Soft whiſpers firſt, and mournful inurmurs riſe
Among the ſad attendants; then the ſound
Soon gathers voice.
Sºft whiſpering thus to Neſtor's ſon,
His head reclin'd, young Ithacus begun. Pope.
13. Smooth; flowing.
The ſolemn nightingale tun'd her ſºft lays. Milton'
Sºft were my numbers, who could take offence,
- *-r
./Vatſtºn,
44ilion.
Dryden.
When ſmooth deſcription held the place of ſenſe. Pºpe.
Hark, the numbers ſºft and clear
Gently ſteal upon the ear. Pºpe.
14. Not forcible; not violcnt.
Sleep falls with ſoft ſlumb'rous weight, Miltºn.
Soft. interj. Hold; ſtop ; not ſo faſt.
But ſºft, I pray you; did King Richard then
Proclaim my brother. Shakespeare's Han. IV.
Oh, come in AEmilia;
Soft, by and by, let me the curtains draw. Shakeſpeare.
But ſºft, my muſe, the world is wide,
And all at once was not deſcry’d. Suckling.
To So Fºr EN. v. a. [from ſoft.]
1. To make ſoft; to make leſs hard.
Bodies, into which the water will enter, long ſeething will
rather ſºften than indurate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Their arrow's point they ſºften in the flame,
And founding hammers break its barbed frame. Gay.
2. To intenerate; to make leſs fierce or obſtinate; to mollify.
I will ſoften ſtony hearts. Milton.
Our friends ſee not our faults, or conceal them, or ſºften
them by their repreſentation. Aadiſon.
I would correct the harſh expreſſions of one party, by
Jºftening and reconciling methods. //atti.
3. To make caſy; to compoſe; to make placid; to mitigate;
to palliate; to alleviate.
Call round her tomb each objećt of deſire,
Bid her be all that chears or ſºften, life,
The tender ſiſter, daughter, friend, and wife. Pºſt.
Muſick the fierceſt griefs can charm;
Muſick can ſoften pain to eaſe,
And make deſpair and madneſs pleaſe.
Pºpe.
4. To make leſs harſh. -
He bore his great commiſſion in his look,
But ſweetly temper'd awe, and ſºften’d all he ſpoke. Dryd.
To So' FTEN. v. n.
1. To grow leſs hard. -
Many bodies, that will hardly melt, will ſºften ; as iron in
The forge. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. To grow leſs obdurate, cruel, or obſtinate.
He may ſºften at the fight of the child;
The ſilence often of pure innocence
Perſuades, when ſpeaking fails.
So'ftly, adv. [from ſºft.]
1. Without hardneſs.
2. Not violently; not forcibly.
Solid bodies, if very ſºftly percuſſed, give no ſound; aS
when a man treadeth very ſºftly upon boards. Bacºn.
3. Not loudly.
Ahab rent his cloaths, and went ſºftly.
In this dark ſilence ſºftly leave the town,
And to the general's tent direct your ſteps.
4. Gently ; placidly.
Death will diſmiſs me,
And lay me ſºftly in my native duſt,
To pay the forfeit of ill-managid truſt.
She with a wreath of myrtle crowns the head, y d
And ſºftly lays him on a flow'ry bed. Dryden's futi.
5. Mildly; tenderly.
The king muſt die;
Though pity ſoftly plead within my ſoul,
Yet he muſt die, that I may make you great.
Soft NER. m.ſ.. [from ſoft.]
1. That which makes ſoft.
2. One who palliates.
Thoſe ſoftners, and expedient-mongers, ſhake the
Shakeſpeare.
1 King; xxi. 27.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Dryden.
ir heads
ſo ſtrongly, that we can hear their pockets jingle. Swift.
So'Fi Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſoft.] º
1. The quality of being ſoft.
2. Quality contrary to hardneſs. - - hich
Softneſs cometh by the greater quantity of ſpirit: ".
ever induce yielding and ceſſion; and by the more equal º:
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O I
w
S O L
º
º,
ſ:
---
ºn
tº:
*
º
‘...."
• ,
º
T--A--
ing of the tangible parts, which thereby are more ſliding and
following; as in gold. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory,
3. Mildneſs; kindneſs.
A wiſe man, when there is a neceſſity of expreſſing any evil
aćlions, ſhould do it by a word that has a ſecondary idea of
kindneſs or ſºftneſs; or a word that carries in it rebuke and ſe-
verity. //atts's Lagick.
4. Civility; gentleneſs.
Improve theſe virtues, with a ſºftneſs of manners, and a
ſweetneſs of converſation. Dryden.
5. Effeminacy ; vicious delicacy.
So long as idleneſs is quite ſhut out from our lives, all the
fins of wantonneſs, ſºftnſ, and effeminacy are prevented;
and there is but little room for temptation. Taylor.
He was not delighted with the ſoftneſſes of the court. Clarend.
6. Timorouſneſs; puſilanimity.
This virtue could not proceed out of fear or ſoftneſ; ; for he
was valiant and active. Bacon's Henry VII.
Saving a man's ſelf, or ſuffering, if with reaſon, is virtue:
if without it, is ſoftneſs, or obſtinacy. Grew.
7. Quality contrary to harſhneſs. -
Softneſs of ſounds is diſtinct from the exility of ſounds. Bac.
8. Facility; gentleneſs ; candour; eaſineſs to be affected.
Such was the ancient ſimplicity and ſºftne, of ſpirit, which
ſometimes prevailed in the world, that they whoſe words were
even as oracles amongſt men, ſeemed evermore loth to give
ſentence againſt any thing publickly received in the church of
God. - - Hooker.
9. Mildneſs; meekneſs.
For contemplation he and valour form'd,
For ſoftneſ; ſhe and ſweet attractive grace. Milton.
Her ſtubborn look
This ſoftneſ from thy finger took. Waller.
SoHo. interj. A form of calling from a diſtant place.
To Soil. v. a. [rilian, Saxon; ſoelen, old German; ſuiller,
French.]
1. To foul; to dirt ; to pollute; to ſtain ; to ſully.
A filly man in ſimple weeds forlorn,
And ſailed with duſt of the long dried way. Fairy Queen.
Although ſome hereticks have abuſed this text, yet the ſun
is not ſailed in paſſage. Bacon's Hol, JWar.
If I ſoil
Myſelf with ſin, I then but vainly toil. Sandys.
would not ſoil theſe pure ambroſial weeds,
With the rank vapours of this ſin-worm mould. Milton.
‘Bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know,
Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void,
Of innocence, of faith, of purity,
Our wonted ornaments now ſoil'd and ſtain'd. Milton.
One who cou’d nºt for a taſte o' th' fleſh come in,
Licks the ſail'd earth,
While recking with a mangled Ombit's blood. Tate.
If the eye-glaſs be tinéted faintly with the ſmoke of a lamp
or torch, to obſcure the light of the ſtar, the fainter light
in the circumference of the ſtar ceaſes to be viſible, and the
ſtar, if the glaſs be ſufficiently ſoiled with ſmoke, appears
ſomething more like a mathematical point. Newton.
An abſent hero's bed they ſought to ſºil,
An abſent hero's wealth they ...i. their ſpoil. Pope.
2. To dung ; to manure.
Men now preſent, juſt as they ſoil their ground, nºt that
they love the dirt, but that they expect a crop. - South.
Soil. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Dirt; ſpot; pollution; foulneſs.
By indirect ways
I met this crown; and I myſelf know well
How troubleſome it ſate upon my head :
To thee it ſhall deſcend with better quiet;
For all the ſoil of the atchievement goes
With me into the earth. Shakeſpeare's Henry. IV.
That would be a great ſail in the new gloſs of your mar-
riage. Shakeſpeare.
Vexed I am with paſſions,
Which give ſome ſoil perhaps to my behaviour. Shakeſheare.
I would have the ſoil of her fair rape
Wip'd off. - Shakeſpeare.
A lady's honour muſt be touch'd,
Which, nice as ermines, will not bear a ſoil. Dryden.
2. [Sol, French; ſ.l.m, Latin.] Ground; earth, conſidered with
relation to its vegetative qualities. -
Judgment may be made of waters by the ſºil whereupon
they run.
Her ſpots thou ſee'ſt
As clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce
Fruits in her ſoften’d ſoil. - Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
The firſt cauſe of a kingdom's thriving is the fruitfulneſs
of the ſºil, to produce the neceſſaries and conveniencies of
life; not only for the inhabitants, but for exportation. Swift.
3. Land; country.
Dorſet, that with a fearful ſoul
Leads diſcontented ſteps in foreign ſoil,
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
This fair aliance ſhall call home
To high promotions.
Qunexpected ſtroke, worſe than of death !
Muſt I thus leave thee, Paradiſe ! thus leave
Thee, native ſºil / theſe ha -
Fit haunts of gods. PPY walks and ſhades;
4. Dung; compoſt.
The haven has been ſtopped u
that the ſea has thrown into it
of Ravenna has been left ther
Improve land by manure,
Shºſpeare,
Miltºn.
p by the great heaps of dirt
; for all the ſoil on that ſide
e inſenſibly by the ſea. Addison
dung, and other ſort of ſoils.
AMo ti * -
Sol'LINEss. n.ſ.. [from ſºil.] Stain; pººr. Huſbundry
Make proof of the incorporation of filver and ti
- - - I - - t h
it yield no ſºilineſ more than filver. in, whether
- - Bacon.
Solºiu.º. n.ſ.. [from ſoil.] Stain; pollution. acon
. He merits well to have her,
Not making any ſcruple of her ſailure. Shakeſpeare.
- - c
To dwell any where for a time; to live is not at home; to
inhabit as not in a ſettled habitation, Almoſt out of uſe.
If, till the expiration of your month,
You will return and ſojourn with my ſiſter,
Diſmiſſing half your train, come then to me. Shakeſpeare.
Th' advantage of his abſence took the king,
And in the mean time ſojourn’d at my father's. Shakeſp.
How comes it he is to ſojourn with you ? how creeps ac-
quaintance 2 Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Here dwells he, though he ſºjourn every where
In progreſs, yet his ſtanding houſe is here. Donne.
The ſºjourning of Iſrael, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hun-
dred and thirty years. Exod. xii. 4o.
The ſoldiers firſt aſſembled at Newcaſtle, and there ſojourned
ree days. Hayward.
To So'Journ. v. m. [..ſºjourner, French; Jºggiornare, Italian.]
To ſºjourn in that land
He comes invited. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
He who ſºjourns in a foreign country, refers what he ſees
abroad to the ſtate of things at home Atterbury.
So'Jo!, R.N. m.ſ.. [ſejour, French, from the verb.] A temporary
reſidence; a caſual and no ſettled habitation. This word was
anciently accented on the laſt ſyllable: Milton accents it indif-
ferently. -
The princes, France and Burgundy,
Long in our court have made their am’rous ſºjourn. Shaşſp.
Thee I reviſit now,
Eſcap'd the S., gian pool, though long detain’d
In that obſcure ſºjourn. Milton's Paradiſe Loff.
Scarce view'd the Galilean towns,
And once a-year Jeruſalem, few days
Short ſojourn. Milton's Paradiſe Regained.
Sojournes. m. ſ. [from ſojourn..] A temporary dweller.
We are ſtrangers and ſºjourners, as were all our fathers:
our days on carth are as a ſhadow. 1 Chron. xxix. 16.
Waves o'erthrew
Buſiris, and his Memphian chivalry,
While with perfidious hatred they purſu'd
The ſºjºurners of Goſhen. AMilton's Paradiſe Lºž.
Not for a night, or quick revolving year,
Welcome an owner, not a ſojourner. Dryden,
To Solace. v. a. [ſolacier, old French ; ſolazzare, Italian;
flatium, Latin.]. To comfort; to cheer; to amuſe.
We will with ſome ſtrange paſtime ſolace them. Shakeſpears.
The birds with ſong
Solac'd the woods. Milton.
To Solace. v. n. To take comfort; to be recreated. The
neutral ſenſe is obſolete.
Give me leave to go;
Sorrow would ſolace, and my age would eaſe. Shakespeare H. VI.
One poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and ſlace in,
And cruel death hath catch'd it from my fight. Shakeſpeare.
Were they to be rul’d, and not to rule,
This ſickly land might ſolace as before. Shałºp. R. III.
Solace. m. ſ. [ſlatium, Latin. Comfort; pleaſure; allevia-
tion; that which gives comfort or pleaſure; recreation;
amuſement.
If we have that which is meet and right, although they be
glad, we are not to envy them this their ſºlaº wº do not
think it a duty of ours to be in every ſuch thing their tor-
mentors. . . . liceker.
Therein ſat a lady freſh and fair,
Making ſweet ſolace to herſelf alone; . .
Sometimes ſhe ſung as loud as lark in air, -
Sometimes ſhe laugh'd, that #. º * gone. F.2,
Great joy he promis'd to his thoughts, and "º".
Solace in #. º Milton's Paradiſe Lºft,
If I would delight my private hºuſ"
with muſick or with poem, where ſo ſoon
As in our native langiagº can! find
That ſºlace? Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd,
24 N. Though<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O L
S O L
–----
Though fight be loſt, ‘ov’d
iſe wet hath many ſºlace, "..?'.", i.
º: º . want not their delights,
At home in leiſure and domeſtick caſe, -
Exempt from many a C* and chance, to which, -
Eye-ſight expoſes daily men abroad. Milton s Agoniſter.
Through Waters, and through flames Tilgº,
Suff'rer and ſolace of thy woe:
sola’NDER. n. J. [ſoulandrei, Fr.
§: }ad. [ſclaire, French ; Jolarii, Latin.]
1. Being of the ſun. - -
#. corpuſcles that make up the beams of light be ſºlary
effluviums, or minute particles of ſºme ethereal ſubſtance,
thruſting on one another from the lucid body. Boyle.
Inſtead of golden fruits, º
By genial ſhow’rs and ſolar heat ſupply'd,
Ünſferable Winter hath defac'd
Earth's blooming charms, and made * barren waſte. Blackm.
2. Belonging to the ſun. B
They denominate ſome herbs ſºlar, and ſome lunar. Bacon.
Scripture hath been punctual in other records, concerning
ſolary miracles. - Brown's Wulgar Errouri.
3. Born under or in the predominant influence of the ſun.
The cock was pleas'd to hear him ſpeak ſo fair,
And proud beſide, as ſºlar people are. Dryden.
4. Meaſured by the ſun.
The rule to find the moon's age, on any day of any ſolar
month, cannot ſhew preciſely an exact account of the moon,
becauſe of the inequality of the motions of the ſun and moon,
and the number of days of the ſolar months. Holder ºn Time.
sold. The preterite and participle paſſive of ſell.
Sold. m. ſ. Iſºu'dee, old French. Trevoux.] Military pay;
warlike entertainment.
But were your will her ſºld to entertain,
And number'd be amongſt knights of maidenhead,
Great guerdon, well I wot, ſhould you remain,
And in her favour high be reckoned. Fairy Queen.
Soldan. n.f. [for ſultan.]. The emperor of the Turki:
- They at the ſºldan's chair defy'd the beſt. Milton.
So'LD ANEL. n.ſ.. [ſoldanella, Latin.]. A plant.
It grows on the Alps, and ſeveral other mountainous places
of Italy, Germany, and Hungary. They are plants of humble
growth, ſeldom riſing above fix or eight inches high: their
round leaves grow cloſe to the ground, from between which
the flower-ſtems ariſe, each of which have four or five flowers,
of a fine blue colour, or of a ſnow-white, which hang down,
and are ſhaped like bells. Miller.
To SOLDER. v. a. [ſouder, Fr. ſoldare, Ital. ſºlidare, Latin.]
See SoDER.
1. To unite or faſten with any kind of metallick cement.
A concave ſphere of gold, filled with water, and ſoldered up,
has, upon preſſing the ſphere with great force, let the water
ſqueeze through it, and ſtand all over its outſide in multitudes
of ſmall drops like dew, without burſting or cracking the body
of the gold. Newton's Opt.
2. To mend; to unite any thing broken. -
It booteth them not thus to jolder up a broken cauſe, where-
of their firſt and laſt diſcourſes will fall aſunder. Hooker.
Wars 'twixt you twain would be
As if the world ſhould cleave, and that ſlain men
Should ſolder up the rift. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
Thou viſible god,
That ſould' ºff cloſe impoſſibilities,
And mak’ſt them kiſs |
Learn'd he was in med'c'nal lore;
For by his ſide a pouch he wore,
Replete with ſtrange hermetick powder,
That wounds nine miles point-blank would ſºlder. Hudibras.
The naked cynick's jar ne'er flames; if broken,
'Tis quickly ſºlder'd, or a new beſpoken. Dryd, jun. juv.
At the Reſtoration the preſbyterians, and other ſe&amp;ts, did all
unite and ſlder up their ſeveral ſchemes, to join againſt the
church. b Swift.
$o'LDER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Metallick cement.
- Goºſmiths ſay, the coarſeſt ſtuff -
- sº ſerve for ſolder well enough. - Swift.
* Q f aſ R. m. ſ. [from ſolder.] One that ſolders or mends.
- SQ. LDIER, m. ſ. [ſoldat, Fr. from ſº idarius, low Latin, of ſoli-
º, a picce of money, the pay of a ſoldier; ſºuldee, F rench.]
1. A *'. '. tº: Originally one who ſerved for pay.
Our fifter is the better ſoldier. Shakespeare Ki
Good Siward, f ºf King Lear.
An older and a better ſoldier none.
A ſoldier,
* of frange oaths, and bearded like a pard,
§. in honour, ſudden and quick in quarrel,
$ºking the bubble reputation
Ev’n in the cannon's mouth. Shakeſpeare.
1. T his attempt
ãº to, and will abide it with
Princes courage.
Prior.
] A diſeaſe in horſes. Dićf.
Shakeſp. Timon.
º
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Shakespeare Cymbeline.
I have not yet forgot I am a king:
If I have wrong'd thee, charge me face to face;
I have not yet forgot I am a ſoldier. Dryd, Don Shaftian
2. It is generally uſed of the common men, as diſtinct from th:
commanders. - -
It were meet that any one, before he came to be a captain
ſhould have been a ſoldier. Spenſºr on Iº.
Soldier like, ladj. [ſoldier and like..] Martial; wańkº,
Soldi ERLY. } military; becoming a ſoldier.
Although at the firſt they had fought with beaſtly fury rather
than any ſoldierly diſcipline, practice had now made them com-
parable to the beſt. . . Sidney.
I will maintain the word with my ſword to be a ſoldieri's
word, and a word of good command. Shakespeare Henry IV.
They according to a ſoldierly cuſtom, in caſes of extremit
by interchange of a kiſs by every of them upon the ſwords §
others, ſealed a reſolution to maintain the place Hayward
Enemies as well as friends confeſſed, that it was as fºliº,
an action as had been performed on either ſide. Carend n.
Soldiership. m. ſ. [from ſoldier.] Military charaćler; mar-
tial qualities' behaviour becoming a ſoldier.
Thy father and myſelf in friendſhip
Firſt tried our ſoldierſhip; he did look far
Into the ſervice of the time, and was
Diſcipled of the brav'ſt. Shakespeare All's well that end, well.
By ſea you throw away
The abſolute ſoldierſhip you have by land,
Diſtraćt your army, which doth moſt conſiſt
Cf war mark'd footmen. Shakespeare ear.
Soldiery. n.ſ.. [from ſoldier.]
1. Body of military men; ſoldiers collečtively.
The Memphian ſoldiery,
That ſwell'd the Erythrean wave, when wall'd,
The unfroze waters marvellouſly ſtood. Philip.
I charge not the ſoldiery with ignorance and contempt of
learning, without allowing exceptions. Swiſt.
2. Soldierſhip; martial ſkill.
Offering him, if he would exerciſe his courage in ſºldiery,
he would commit ſome charge unto him under his lieutenant
Philanax. Sidney.
Sole. n.ſ. [ ſalum, Latin.]
1. The bottom of the foot.
I will only be bold with Benedićt for his company; for
from the crown of his head to the ſole of his foot he is all
mirth. Shakeſp. Much Ado alout Nothing.
Tickling is moſt in the ſoles of the feet: the cauſe is the
rareneſs of being touched there. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The ſal; of the feet have great affinity with the head and
the mouth of the ſtomach; as going wet-ſhod, to thoſe that
uſe it not, affecteth both. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory,
Such reſting found the ſole of unbleſt feet. Milton.
In the make of the camel's foot, the ſo e is flat and broad,
being very fleſhy, and covered only with a thick, ſoft, and
ſomewhat callous ſkin; but very fit to travel in ſandy Places.
Ray on the Creation.
2. The foot.
To redeem thy woful parent's head
From tyrant's rage and ever-dying dread,
Haſt wander'd through the world now long a day,
Yet ceaſeſt not thy weary ſoles to lead. Fairy Quitn.
3. The bottom of the ſhoe.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we muſt have you dance.
—Not I, believe me: you have dancing ſhºes, -
With nimble ſoles. Sharj. Rºme, and julid.
A trade that, I hope, I may uſe with a ſaic conſcience;
which is, indeed, fir, a mender of bad ſºles. -
Shałópeare's julius Ceſſ.
On fortune's cap we are not the very button-Nºr the ſºlet
of her ſhoe. Shakespeare's Hamlet.
The caliga was a military ſhoe, with a very thick ſole, tied
above the inſtep with leather thongs. Arbuthnot ºn Cini.
4. The part of any thing that touches the ground. . -
The ſtrike-block is a plane ſhorter than the jºin". having
its ſole made exactly flat and ſtraight, and is uſed for the ſº
ing of a ſhort joint. Mºxºn's Mºl, Exar.
Elm is proper for mills, ſoles of wheels, and pipes. Mortim.
5. A kind of ſea-fiſh.
Of flat fiſh, rays, thornbacks, ſºles, and flowks. Carew.
To sole...a... [from the noun.j To furniſh with ſoles: 2S,
to ſole a pair of ſhoes. •
His feet were ſºled with a treble tuft of a clºſe ſhort tawney
down. Grºw's Muſeum.
SOLE. adj. [ſel, old French; ſº us, Latin.]
1. Single; only. - iudge
Take not upon thee to be judge alone: there is nºſº i.
but only one: ſay not to others, receive my ſentence, Whº"
their authority is above thine. Hot º
Orpheus every where expreſſed the infinite end ſºle powº
one God, though he uſed the name of Jupiter. Raleigº.
To me ſhall be the glory ſºle among * T. I -
glory'ſ. j// an’, Parafſ; Lºft.
Th’ infernal pow'rs.
A rattling
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O L
ſt:
º
º
!,
(4.
:
rtſ.
ſº
A rattling tempeſt through the branches went,
That ſtripp'd them bare, and one ſole way they rent. Dryd.
He, ſºle in power, at the beginning ſaid,
Let ſea and air, and earth and heav'n be made:
And it was ſo; and when he ſhall ordain
In other ſort, has but to ſpeak again,
And they ſhall be no more. Prior.
2. [In law.] Not married.
Some others are ſuch as a man cannot make his wife,
though he himſelf be ſole and unmarried. Ayliffe.
Solecis M. n.ſ. [ coxoixirwo;..] Unfitneſs of one word to
another; impropriety in language. A barbariſm may be in
one word, a ſoleciſm muſt be of more.
There is ſcarce a ſoletiſm in writing which the beſt author is
not guilty of, if we be at liberty to read him in the words of
ſome manuſcript. Addiſon.
So'LELY. adv. [from ſole.] Singly; only.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left ſolely heir to all his lands. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
This night's great buſineſs -
Shall to all our nights and days to come
Give ſolely ſovereign ſway and maſterdom. Shakeſpeare.
That the intemperate heat of the clime ſolely occaſions this
complexion, experience admits not. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
* This truth is pointed chiefly, if not ſolely, upon ſinners of
the firſt rate, who have caſt off all regard for piety. Atterbury.
SOLEMN. adj, [ſolemnel, French; ſolemnis, Latin.]
1. Anniverſary; obſerved once a year with religious ceremonies.
The worſhip of this image was advanced, and a ſolemn ſup-
plication obſerved every year. Stillingfleet.
2. Religiouſly grave.
His holy rites and ſolemn feaſts profan'd. Milton.
3. Awful; ſtriking with ſeriouſneſs.
Then'gan he loudly through the houſe to call,
But no one care to anſwer to his cry;
There reigned a ſolemn ſilence over all. Fairy Queen.
To 'ſwage with ſolemn touches troubled thoughts. Milt.
Nor then the ſolemn nightingale ceas'd warbling. Milton.
M. Grave; affectedly ſerious.
When Steele refle&amp;ts upon the many ſolemn ſtrong barriers
to our ſucceſſion of laws and oaths, he thinks all fear vaniſh-
eth: ſo do I, provided the epithet ſolemn goes for nothing;
becauſe though I have heard of a ſolemn day, and a ſolemn cox-
comb, yet I can conceive no idea of a ſolemn barrier. Swift.
::::::::::: }n. ſ. [ſolemnité, French; from ſolemn.]
1. Ceremony or rite annually performed.
Great was the cauſe; our old ſolemnities
From no blind zeal or fond tradition riſe;
But, ſav'd from death, our Argives yearly pay
Theſe grateful honours to the god of day. Pope.
2. Religious ceremony.
3. Awful ceremony or proceſſion.
The lady Conſtance,
Some ſpeedy meſſenger bid repair
To our ſolemnity.
The moon, like to a ſilver bow,
New bent in heaven, ſhall behold the night
Of our ſolemnities. Shakeſpeare.
There may be great danger in uſing ſuch compoſitions in
churches, at arraignments, plays, and ſolemnities. Bacon.
What fun'ral pomp ſhall floating Tiber ſee,
When riſing from his bed he views the ſad ſolemnity / Dryd.
Though the forms and ſºlemnities of the laſt judgment may
bear ſome reſemblance to thoſe we are acquainted with here,
yet the rule of proceeding ſhall be very different. Atterbury.
4. Manner of a&amp;ting awfully ſerious.
With much more ſkilful cruelty, and horrible ſolemnity, he
cauſed each thing to be prepared for his triumph of tyranny. Sid.
Shaiſ. King jºhn.
5. Gravity; ſteady ſeriouſneſs.
The ſtatelineſs and gravity of the Spaniards ſhews itſelf in
the ſolemnity of their language. - -
6. Awful grandeur; grave ſtatelineſs; ſober dignity.
A diligent decency was in Polycletus, above others; to whom
though the higheſt praiſe be attributed by the moſt, yet ſome
think he wanted ſolemneſs. Wotton's Architecture.
7. Affected gravity.
Pr'ythee, Virgilia, turn thy ſolemnºſ, out o' door; .
And go along with us. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
This ſpeech ended with a ſºlemnity of accent. Fem. &amp;#ixote.
Sole M Niza’tion. n.ſ.. [from ſolemnize.] The act of ſolem-
nizing; celebration. -
Soon followed the ſolemnization of the marriage between
Charles and Anne dutcheſs of Bretagne, with whom he re-
ceived the dutchy of Bretagne. Bacon's Henry VII.
To So'LEMN1z E. v. a. [ſolemniſer, French; from ſolemn.]
1. To dignify by particular formalities; to celebrate.
Dorilaus in a great battle was deprived of life; his obſequies
being no more ſolemnized by the tears of his partakers than the
blood of his enemies. Sidney.
Baptiſm to be adminiſtred in one place, and marriage ſolem-
-
assed in another. Iłooker.
Addiſon's Spectator.
S O L
Then 'gan they ſprinkle all the parts with wine,
And made great feaſt to ſºlemnize that day. Fairy Qizºn.
T he multitude of the celeſtial hoſt were heard to ſºnize
his miraculous birth. Boyle's Seraphick Love,
Their choice nobility and flower
Met from all parts to ſolemniz, this feaſt. Mºon', Agoniſt.
2. To perform religiouſly once a year.
What commandment the Jews had to celebrate their feaſt
of dedication is never ſpoken of in the law, yet ſolemnized
even by our Saviour himſelf. Płooker.
So'LEMNLY. adv. [from ſºlemn.]
1. With annual religious ceremonies.
2. With formal gravity and ſtatelineſs.
There are, in points of wiſdom and ſufficiency, that do
nothing or little very ſolemnly. Bacon' -
3. With formal ſtate. Baan, Eſ).
Let him land,
And ſolemnly ſee him ſet on to London.
4. With affected gravity.
The miniſters of ſtate, who gave us law,
In corners, with ſelečted friends, withdraw;
There in deaf murmurs ſolemnly are wiſe,
Whiſp'ring like winds, ere hurricanes ariſe. Dryden.
5. With religious ſeriouſneſs.
To demonſtrate how much men are blinded by their own
partiality, I do ſolemnly aſſure the reader, that he is the only
perſon from whom I ever heard that obječtion. Swift.
To SOLI'CIT. v. a. [ſolicito, Latin.]
1. To importune; to intreat.
If you bethink yourſelf of any crime,
Unreconcil'd as yet to heav'n and grace,
Solicit for it ſtraight.
We heartily ſolicit
Your gracious ſelf to take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land.
How he ſolicits heav'n
Himſelf beſt knows; but ſtrangely viſited people,
The mere deſpair of ſurgery, he cures. Shakeſpeare.
This in obedience hath my daughter ſhewn me,
And, more above, hath his ſolicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means and place,
All given to mine ear. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Did I requeſt thee, Makerſ from my clay,
To mold me man Did I ſolicit thee
From darkneſs to promote me? Milt. Par. Loft, b. x.
The guardian of my faith ſo falſe did prove,
As to ſolicit me with lawleſs love. Dryden's Aurengzebt.
2. To call to action; to ſummon; to awake; to excite.
This ſupernatural ſoliciting
Cannot be ill, cannot be good.
Solicit Henry with her wond’rous praiſe;
Bethink thee on her virtues that ſurmount
Her nat'ral graces, that extinguiſh art.
Shakeſp. H. V.
Shakeſp. Othello.
Shakespeare R. III.
Shakespeare Macbeth,
Shakeſp. H. VI.
That fruit ſolicited her longing eye. Milton.
Sounds and ſome tangible qualities ſºlicit their proper ſenſes,
and force an entrance to the mind. Locke.
He is ſºlicited by popular cuſtom to indulge himſelf in for-
bidden liberties. - Rogers's Sermons.
3. To implore; to aſk. - - -
With that ſhe wept again, 'till he again ſºliciting the conclu-
ſon of her ſtory, then muſt you, ſaid ſhe, know the ſtory of
Amphialus. - Sidney.
4. To attempt; to try to obtain. -
I view my crime, but kindle at the view,
Repent old pleaſures, and ſºlicit new. Pope.
5. To diſturb; to diſquiet. A Latiniſm. -
Solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid. Milton.
I find your love, and would reward it too;
But anxious fears ſolicit my weak breaſt. Dryd. Span. Fryar.
Solicit Aºtion. n.ſ. from ſolicit.)
1. Importunity; act of importuning.
I can produce a man
Of female ſeed, far abler to reſiſt
All his ſolicitations, and at length -
All his vaſt force, and drive him back to hell. Parad Rºg.
2. Invitation; excitement. - -
Children are ſurrounded with new things, which, by a con-
ſtant ſolicitation of their ſenſes, draw the mind conſtantly to
them. Locke.
Soli'citor. n.ſ.. [from ſºlicit.]
1. One who petitions for another.
Be merry, º di
For thy ſolicitor ſhall rather die,
Than % thy cauſe away. Shatº. Othells.
Honeſt minds will conſider poverty as * .
th ſ ho applies himſelf to them, and make the Jºe
º . powerful ſolicitor in his behalf. Addison.
2. o. i., does in Chancery the buſineſs which is done by
is in other courts. - -
º attorney and flicitor general, their continual
uſe for the king's ſervice requires men every way fit. Bacon.
SOLICITOUS.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O L
S O L
SOLICITOUS. adj. [ſºlicitº, Latin. J. Anxious; careful;
co y - ich cauſes
- -on nly about before that whic -
ncerned. It has commo - -
anxiety; ſometimes for Or of. For is proper before ſomething
- y
İe obtained. - - -
to º: are pure, when we are not ſolicitous of the opi-
- ures of men, but only that we do our duty. Tayl.
nºº i. º, whatſoever { be, and be not ſlicitous for
the ſº Taylor's Rule of living holy.
The colonel had been intent upon other things, and not
enough ſolicitous to finiſh the fortifications. - Claredº
In providing money for diſbanding the armies, upon which
they were marvelouſly ſolicitous, there aroſe a queſtion. Cland.
They wig were in truth zealous for the preſervation of the
laws, were ſºlicitous to preſerve the king's honour from any
indignity, and his regal power from violation. Carendon.
Laud attended on his majeſty, which he would have been
excuſed from, if that deſign had not been in view, to accom-
pliſh which he was ſolicitous for his advice. . . Clarendon.
There kept their * ...” while the grand
In council ſat, ſolicitous what chance -
Might # emperour ſent. Miltºn's Par. Lºft.
Without ſign of boaſt, or ſign of joy,
Salicit.uſ and blank, he thus began. Alton's Parad, Rºg.
No man is ſºlicitous about the cvent of that which he has in
his power to diſpoſe of South's Serm ns.
You have not only been careful of my fortune, the effect
of your nobleneſs, but you have been ſolicitous of my reputa-
tion, which is that of your kindneſs. Dryden.
The tender dame, ſalicitous to know
Whether her child ſhould reach old age or no,
Conſults the ſage Tireſias. Addiſon.
Solicitously... adv, [from ſºlicitous.]. Anxiouſly; carefully.
The medical art being converſant about the health and life
of man, doctrinal errours in it are to be ſolicitot/yavoided. Bºyle.
He would ſurely have as Jolicitouſly promoted their learning,
as ever he obſtructed it. Decay of Piety.
Soli'cit UDE. m. ſ. [ſo icitudo, Latin. J. Anxiety; careful-
neſs.
In this, by compariſon, we behold the many cares and great
labours of worldly men, their ſolicitu 'e and outward ſhºws,
and publick oſtentation, their pride, and vanities. Raleigh.
If they would but provide for eternity with the ſame ſºlid-
tude, and real care, as they do for this life, they could not fail
of heaven. Tillotſor's Sermons.
They are to be known by a wonderful ſºlicitude for the re-
putation of their friends. Tatler.
Solº ſtress. n.ſ. [Feminine of ſºlicitor.] A woman who
petitions for another.
|had the moſt earneſt ſºlicitrſ, as well as the faireſt; and
ºthing could be refuſed to my lady Hyde. - Dryden.
SOLID. adj. [ſolidus, Latin; Jolide, French.]
1. Not liquid; not fluid.
Land that ever burn’d
With ſºlid, as the lake with liquid fire.
2. Not hollow; full of matter; compačt; denſe.
I hear his thund'ring voice reſound,
And trampling feet that ſhake the ſºlid ground.
3. Having all the geometrical dimenſions.
In a ſºlid foot are 1728 ſolid inches, weighing 76 pound of
rain water. Arbuthnot on Coins.
4. Strong; firm.
The duke's new palace is a noble pile built after this man-
ºr, which makes it look very ſºlid and majeſtick. Addiſon.
5. Sound; not weakly. -
If perſons devoté themſelves to ſcience, they ſhould be well
aſſured of a ſºlia and ſtrong conſtitution of body, to bear the
fatigue. * atts's Improvement of the Mind.
6. Real; not empty; true; not fallacious.
This might ſatisfy ſober and wiſe men, not with ſoft and
ſpecious words, but with Prºgnant and ſolid reaſons. K. Charles.
The earth may of ſºld good contain
More plenty than the ſun. Milton.
7. Nºt light; not ſuperficial; grave; profound.
Theſe, wanting wit, affect gravity, and go by the name of
§ men; and a ſolid man is, in plain Engliſh, a Jolid ſolemn
QO}. Dryden.
Solip, n.ſ. [In phyſick.] The part containing the fluff.”
The firſt and moſt ſimple ſºlid of our body are perhaps
ºrely terreſtrial, and incapable of any change or diſeaſe. Arb.
Soil pity, n. f [ſºlid tº, Fr Jºkaitas, Lat. from Jolid.]
* Fulneſs of matter; not hollowneſs.
2. Firmneſs; hardneſs; compactneſs; denſity.
º hat which hinders the *PPrºach of two bodies, when
} * noving one towards another, I call ſºlidity Locke.
he ſtone itſelf, whether naked or inveſted with earth, is
º by its ſolidity ſecured, but waſhed down. hº
3. º ...ſº º ſtrength; certainty.
they have all the *ICS are placed in ſo beautiful alight, that
was bef graces of novelty; and make the reader, who
.*.*luainted with them, ſtill - -
truth and ſºlidity. tul more convinced of their
, Addison's Speciatºr.
MiIton-
Dryden.
His fellow-peers have attended to his elºquence, and eve
been convinced by the ſolidity of his realoning. Prior,
So'r idly. adv. [from ſolid.]
1. Firmly; denſely; compactly.
2. Truly; on good grounds. * r * -
A complete brave man ought to know ſºlidly the main end
he is in the world for. - - Digby.
I look upon this as a ſufficient ground for any rational man
to take up his religion upon, and which I defy the ſubtleſ:
atheiſt in the world ſºlidly to anſwer; namely, that it is good
to be ſure. - - - Avºth.
Solid Ness. m. ſ [from ſha.] Solidity; firmneſs; denſity.
It beareth miſleitge: the cauſe may be the cloſeneſ, and
ſolidneſs of the wood and pith of the oak. Bacon.
It is built with that unuſual ſciidneſs, that it ſeems he intended
to make a ſacrifice to perſetuity, and to conteſt with the iron
teeth of time. Howel". Pocal F ºff.
Solidu's culous. adj. [ſolidus and ungu'a, Latin J Whole.
hoofed. -
It is ſet down by Ariſtotle and Pliny, that an horſe and all
ſºlidungulous or whole-hoofed animals have no gall, which we
find repugnant unto reaſon. Brown', ſºugar Errouri.
So if I'DIAN. n.ſ.. [ſºlu, and fides, Latin.) One who ſuppoſes
only faith, not works, neceſſary to juſtification.
t may be juſtly feared, that the title of fundamentals, being
ordinarily confined to the doćtrines of faith, hath occaſioned
that great ſcandal in the church of God, at which ſo many
myriads of ſoy dians have ſtumbled, and fallen irreverſibly,
by conceiving heaven a reward of true opinions. Hammond.
Soli'loggy: n/ [ſºliloque, Fr. ſolus and quor, Lat..] A diſ-
courſe made by one in ſolitude to himſelf.
The whole poem is a ſºliloquy Solomon is the perſon that
ſpeaks: he is at once the hero and the author; but he tells us
very often what others ſay to him. Prior.
He finds no reſpite from his anxious grief,
Then ſeeks from his ſºil quy relief. Garth', Diſpenſatory.
If I ſhould own myſelf in love, you know lovers are always
allowed the comfort of ſolilyuy. Addison Speciatºr.
Sºrºpe: "...ſ [ſºlu, and pelº, Lat.J An animal whºſeſ.
are not cloven.
Sa'īped , or firm footed animals, as horſes, aſſes, and
mules, are in mighty number. &amp;rown's Pulgar Errouri.
SolIt is F. m. ſ. [ſo i ire, French J
I. A recluſe; a hermit.
Often have I been going to take poſſeſſion of tranquility,
when your converſation his pulled me for a ſtaire. Pºpe.
2. An ornament for the neck.
Sºrtarily adv. (from Joitry.] In ſolitude; with lone-
lineſs; without company. -
How ſhould that ſuffiſt ſºlitarily by itſelf, which hath no
ſubſtance, but individually the very ſame whereby others ſub-
ſiſt with it. Hooker.
Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage,
which dwell ſol tarily in the wood. Mic. vii. 14.
So Lita RINEss. n.ſ. [from ſortary J Solitude; forbearance
of company; habitual retirement.
There is no cauſe to blame the prince for ſometimes hear-
ing them: the blame-worthineſs is, that to hear them he rather
goes to ſºlitarineſ, than makes them come to company. Sidney.
You ſubject yourſelf to ſºlitarineſs, the fly enemy that doth
moſt ſeparate a man from well doing. Sianºy.
At home in wholſome fºlitarineſs,
My piteous ſoul began the wretchedneſs
Of ſuitors at the court to mourn, Donne.
SOLITARY. adj: [ſolitaire, French; ſolitarius, Latin.]
1. Living alone; not having company.
Thoſe rare and ſºlitary, theſe in flocks. Aſſiºn.
Satan explores his ſºlitary flight. Milton.
Him fair Lavinia *
Shall breed in groves to lead a ſºlitary life. Dryden's Án.
2. Retired; remote from company. - -
In reſpect that it is ſolitary, I like it very well; but in reſpea
that it is private, it is a very vile life. Shakeſpeare.
3. Gloomy; diſmal. - - herei h
Let that night beſºlitary, let nojoyful voice come therein job.
. Single. -
4. §. did a ſºlitary vengeance ſerve: the cutting off one head
is not enough; the eldeſt ſon muſt be involved. K. Cha, les.
Relations alternately relieve each other, their mutual con-
currences ſupporting their ſºlitar, inſtabilities. - Brown.
Solitary. n.). [from the adjective..] One that lives alone;
an hermit. - - -
You deſcribe ſo well your heremitical ſtate of life, that
none of the ancient anchorites could go beyond you, for a
cave, with a ſpring, or any of the accommodations º befit
- Pope’s Lett, 13.
a ſºlitary. - ... 1 -
sº m. ſ. ſ ſºlitude, French; ſolitudo, Latin J
1. Lonely life; ſtate of being alone. -
ſt i. been hard to have put more truth and untruth tºge
ther, in few words, than in that ſpeech; whoſoever is dº
with ſlitude, is either a wild beaſt or a god. wi.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">ſº
º:
What call'ſ thou ſºlitude 2 Is not the earth
With various living creatures, and the air,
Repleniſh'd, and all theſe at thy command
To come, and play before thee Milton's Paradiſe Le?.
Such only can enjoy the country who are capable of think-
ing when they are there: then they are prepared for ſolitude,
and in that ſºlitude is prepared for them. Dryden,
2. A lonely place; a deſert.
So'lla R. m. ſ. ſ ſolarium, low Latin. J A garret.
Some ſkilfully drieth their hops on a kel,
And ſome on a ſolar, oft turning them wel. Tuſſºr.
SOLO. m.ſ. [Italian.] A tune played by a ſingle inſtrument.
So'lo Mon’s Loaf. n.ſ. A plant.
So'LoMon’s Seal. n.ſ. [polygonatum, Lat.] A plant.
SO'LSTICE. n ſ. [ſolſtice, French; ſol/litium, Latin.]
1. The point beyond which the ſun does not go; the tropical
point; the point at which the day is longeſt in Summer, or
ſhorteſt in Winter.
2. It is taken of itſelf commonly for the Summer ſolſtice.
The ſun, aſcending unto the northern ſigns, begetteth firſt
a temperate heat in the air, which by his approach unto the
ſol/lice he intendeth, and by continuation increaſeth the ſame
even upon declination. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Let the plowmen's prayer -
Be for moiſt ſolſtices, and Winters fair. May's Virgil,
Solstiti AL. adj. [ſºlſticial, French; from ſolffice.]
1. Belonging to the ſolſtice.
Obſerving the dog-days ten days before and after the equi-
noćtial and ſol/litial points, by this obſervation alone, are ex-
empted a hundred days. Brown's Wulgar Errours,
2. Happening at the ſolſtice.
From the North to call
Decrepit Winter; from the South to bring
Soſiitial Summer's heat. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
The fields labour'd with thirſt ; Aquarius had not ſhed
His wonted ſhowers, and Sirius parch'd with heat
Soliital the green herbs. Philips.
Solvi ble. adj. [from ſolve..] Poſſible to be cleared by reaſon
or inquiry.
Intelle&amp;tive memory I call an act of the intelle&amp;tive faculty,
becauſe it is wrought by it, though I do not inquire how or
where, becauſe it is not ſºlvible. Hale's Origin # Mankind.
Soluble. adj. [ſolubilis, Latin.] Capable of diſſolution or
ſeparation of parts.
Sugar is a ſal oleoſum, being ſoluble in water and fuſible in
re. Arbuthnot.
Solubi'Lity. m. ſ. [from ſºluble.] Suſceptiveneſs of ſepara-
tion of parts.
This cannot account for the indiſſolvable coherence of ſome
bodies, and the fragility and ſolubility of others. Glanv Scepſ.
To SOLVE. v.a. [ſalvo, Latin.] To clear; to explain; to
untie an intelle&amp;tual knot. -
He would ſolve high diſpute
With conjugal careſſes. Milton.
Do thou, my ſoul, the deſtin'd period wait,
When God ſhall ſºlve the dark decrees of fate;
His now unequal diſpenſations clear,
And make all wiſe and beautiful appear. Tickell.
It is mere trifling to raiſe objections, merely for the
ſake of anſwering and ſºlving them. //atts.
Solve Ncy. m. ſ. [from ſolvent..] Ability to pay.
SO'LVENT. adj. [ſolvens, Latin. J
1. Having the power to cauſe diſſolution.
When diſſolved in water, it is not by the eye diſtin-
guiſhable from the ſºlvent body, and appears as fluid. Boyle.
2. Able to pay debts contračted.
Solu N D-Goose. n.ſ. A fowl.
A ſolund gooſe is in bigneſs and feather very like a tame
gooſe, but his bill longer, and ſomewhat pointed; his wings
alſo much longer, being two yards over. Grew.
A Scot, when from the gallow-tree let looſe,
Drops into Styx, and turns a ſoland-goºſe.
Solu'ſ 16N. n.ſ.. [ſolution, French; ſolutiº, Latin.]
1. Diſruption; breach; disjunction; ſeparation.
In all bodies there is an appetite of union, and evitation of
ſºlution of continuity. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. Matter diſſolved; that which contains anything diſſolved.
Aretaeus, to procure ſleep, recommends a ſolution of opium
in water to foment the forehead. Arbuthnot on Coins.
When ſalt of Tartar per deliquium, poured into the ſolutiºn
of any metal, precipitates the metal, and makes it fall down
to the bottom of the liquor in the form of mud, does not this
argue that the acid particles are attracted more ſtrongly by the
ſalt of tartar than by the metal, and by the ſtronger attraction
go from the metal to the ſalt of tartar Newton's Opt.
3. Reſolution of a doubt; removal of an intellcétual difficulty.
Something yet of doubt remains,
Which only thy ſºlution can reſolve. Milton's Parad. Lºft.
They give the reins to wand'ring thoughts,
'Till by their own perplexities involv’d
They ravel more, ſtill leſs reſolv’d,
But never find ſelf-ſatisfying ſolution.
Cleaveland.
Milton's Aoni tje
- With hope and fear
The woman did the new ſolution hear;
The man diffides in his own augury,
And doubts. Drydºn.
This will inſtrućt you to give a plainer ſolution of any diffi-
ºulties that may attend the theme, and refute objećtions. If atts.
Solutive. adj. [from ſalvo, Latin.j Laxative; cauſing re-
laxation. -
Though it would not be ſo abſterfive, opening, and /ºutive
as mead, yet it will be more lenitive in ſharp diſeaſes. Bacon.
SoMAtology. ": ſº [**2 and xiv.º. ) The doctrine of
bodies.
SoMe. A termination of many adjectives, which denote qua-
lity or property of any thing. It is generally joined with a
ſubſtantive: as gameſome. [ ſaam, Dutch.
SOME. adj. [rom, rum, Saxon; ſums, Gothick; fum, Germ.
ſºm, Daniſh ; ſom, ſommig, Dutch.] º
1. More or leſs, noting an indeterminate quantity.
We landed ſome hundred men, where we found ſºme freſh
Water. Raleigh.
2. More or fewer, noting an indeterminate number. ~
Let me leave ſome of the folk that are with me. Gen. xxxiii.
Firſt go with me ſome few of you, and ſee the place, and
how it may be made convenient for you; and then ſend for
your ſick. Bacon.
3. Certain perſons. Some is often uſed abſolutely for ſome people;
part.
Some to the ſhores do fly,
Some to the woods, or whither fear advis'd;
But running from, all to deſtruction hye. Daniel.
Not in the neighbouring moon as ſºme have dream'd. Milt.
Your edićts ſome reclaim from fins,
But moſt your life and bleſt example wins.
4. Some is oppoſed to ſome, or to others.
It may be that the queen's treaſure, in ſo great occaſions of
diſburſements, is not always ſo ready; but being paid as it is,
now ſome, and then ſome, it is no great impoveriſhment to her
coffers. Spenſer on Ireland.
5. It is added to a number, to ſhow that the number is uncertain
and conjećtural.
Being encountered with a ſtrong ſtorm ſome eight leagues
to the weſtward of Scilly, I held it the office of a commander
to take a port. Raleigh.
At the higher end of a creek Milbrook lurketh between
two hills, a village of ſome eighty houſes. Carew.
Old mens ſpirits viſual, contrary to thoſe of purblind men,
unite not, but when the objećt is at ſome good diſtance. Bacon.
Sir Edward Poinings, after he had continued at Sluice ſome
good while, returned unto the king, then before Buloigne. Bac.
The number ſlain on the rebels part were ſome two thou-
Dryden.
ſand. Bacon.
He bore away the prize to the admiration of ſome hun-
dreds. Addiſon.
Your good-natur'd gods, they ſay,
Deſcend ſome twice or thrice a day. Prior,
Paint, patches, jewels laid aſide,
At night aſtronomers agree, -
The evening has the day bely'd, - -
And Phyllis is ſome forty-three. Prior.
6. One; any without determining which.
The pilot of ſºme ſmall night founder'd ſkiff. Milion.
So'ME body. m. ſ. [ſome and body.) -
1. One; not nobody; a perſon indiſcriminate and undetermined.
O that fir John were come, he would make this a bloody
day to ſomebody. Shakespeare . Henry IV.
Jeſus ſaid ſºmebºdy hath touched me; for I perceive that vir-
tue is gone out of me. Lu. viii. 46.
if there be a tacit league, it is againſt ſomewhat or
ſºmebody: who ſhould they be: Is it againſt wild beaſts No.
It is againſt ſuch routs and ſhoals of people as have utterly
degenerated from the laws of nature. Bacon.
We muſt draw in ſomebody, that may ſtand »
*Twixt us and danger. Denham's Sophy,
The hopes that what he has mºſt cºme to ſºmebºdy, and
that he has no heirs, have that effect, that he has every day
three or º: invitations. Addison's Spectator.
2. A perſon of conſideration.
#. roſe up, boaſting himſelf to be ſ”. 43 y.
So'Medeal. adv. [rumbeal, Saxon.] In ſome degree, Ob-
ſolete. -
Siker now I ſee thou ſpeak'ſt of ſpite,
All for thou lackeſt ſomelee their delight. . Spenſer.
So'MERsault. A n.ſ. [Some ſet is the corruptioh. Sommer, a
So'MER SET. ; beam, and ſault, French, a leap...] A leap
by which a jumper throws himſelf from a beam, and turrs
over his head.
So'MEHow. adj. [ſº
not how. - - -
The veſicular cells may be for receiving the arterial and
nervous juices, that, by their action upon one another, they
may be ſwelled ſomehow, ſo as to ſhorten the length of every
fibril. Cheyne.
24 O So'M ET HING.
m, and hºw.] One way or other; I know<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O M
S C N
•um Sinx, Saxon.)
ETHING. m. ſ. ſ rumºtº -
jºg. nothing, ãº it appears not what ; a thing or matter
! - A,” inate.
indeterminat When fierce Bavar
Did from afar the Britiſh chief behold, -
pºwist deſpair and rage, and hope and pain, -
Sºmething within his warring bºſom roll’d. Priºr.
The force of the air upon the pulmonary artery is but
ſmall, in reſpect of that of the heart; but it is ſtill ſome-
thing. Arbuthnot on Ahments.
You'll ſay the whole world has ſºmething to do, ſomething to
talk of, ſomething to wiſh for, and ſºmething to be employed
about; but pray put all theſe ſomethings together, and what is
the ſum total but juſt nothing. Pope's Letters.
Here ſhe beholds the chaos dark and deep,
Where nameleſs ſomethings in their cauſes ſleep. Pope.
2. More or leſs.
Something yet of doubt remains. Milton. .
Years follówing years ſteal ſomething ev'ry day,
At leaſt they ſteal us from ourſelves away. Pope.
3. Part.
Something of it ariſes from our infant ſtate. Watts.
4. Diſtance not great. -
I will acquaint you with the perfečt ſpy o' th' time; for't
muſt be done to-night, and ſomething from the palace. Shakeſp.
So'METHING. adv. In ſome degree.
The pain went away upon it; but he was fºmething diſ-
couraged by a new painfalling ſome days after upon his elbow
on the other ſide. Temple.
So'METIME. adv. [ſome and time.] Once; formerly.
What art thou that uſurp'ſt this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form,
In which the majeſty of buried Denmark
Did ſometime march Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Good ſometime queen, prepare thee hence for France. Shakespeare
So"Met IMEs. adv. [ſome and times.]
1. Not never; now and then; at one time or other.
*Twill render me more equal, ſometime ſuperior. Milton.
It is good that we ſometimes be contradićted, and that we
always bear it well; for perfeót peace cannot be had in this
world. Taylor.
2. At one time, oppoſed to ſºmetimes, or to another time.
The body paſſive is better wrought upon at ſometimes than
at others. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Sometimes the one, and ſºmetimes the other, may be glanced
upon in theſe ſcripture deſcriptions. Burnet.
He writes not always of a piece, but ſºmetimes mixes trivial
things with thoſe of greater moment: ſometimes alſo, though
not often, he runs riot, and knows not when he has ſaid
enough. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
So'M Ew HAT. n. ſ. [ſºme and what..]
1. Something; not nothing, though it be uncertain what.
Upon the ſea ſomewhat methought did riſe
Like blueiſh miſts. Dryden's Indian Emperor.
He that ſhuts his eyes againſt a ſmall light, on purpoſe to
avoid the fight of ſomewhat that diſpleaſes him, would, for
the ſame reaſon, ſhut them againſt the ſun. Atterbury.
2. More or leſs.
Concerning every of theſe, ſºmewhat Chriſt hath com-
manded, which muſt be kept 'till the world's end: on the con-
trary ſide, in every of them ſomewhat there may be added, as
the church judges it expedient. Hooker.
Theſe ſalts have ſomewhat of a nitrous taſte, but mixt with
a ſmatch of vitriolick. Grew.
3. Part greater or leſs.
Somewhat of his good ſenſe will ſuffer in this transfuſion,
and much of the beauty of his thoughts will be loſt. Dryden.
So'MEWHAT. adv. . In ſome degree.
Hºlding of the breath doth help ſomewhat to ceaſe the hic-
cough. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
He is ſºmewhat arrogant at his firſt entrance, and is tooiá.
quiſitive through the whole; yet theſe imperfections hinder
not our compaſſion, Dryden.
SoMEwHERE. adv. [ſome and where.] In one place or other;
not nowhere.
Hopeleſs and forelorn
They are return'd, and ſºmewhere live obſcurely. Denham.
Compreſſing two priſms hard together, that their ſides,
yº by chance were a very little convex, might ſomewhere
. one another, I found the place in which they touched to
ecome abſolutely tranſparent, as if they had there been one
continued piece of glaſs. Newtºn's Opt.
Does ſomething ſtill, and Jomewhere yet remain
Reward or puniſhment? &gt; Prior.
** dead wº muſt ſpeak gently; and therefore, as Mr.
...ſº were, peace be to 11tS manes. - Pope.
of uſe. " ”ſ [ſºme and while.] Once; for a time. Öut
º under colour of the ſhepherds ſºmewhile,
*S*Pt in wolves full of fraud and guile
That often devoured their own ſheep, 3.
And often the ſhepherd that jº. keep. Spenſºr's Paſº.
Sorts i'r E Rous. adj. [ ſºn fºre, Fr. ſºmnifºr, Latin J Cauſing
ſleep; procuring ſleep; ſopcriferous; dormitive. º
I wiſh for ſome ſampliſe ous potion, that might force me to
ſleep away the intermitted time, as it does with m n in for-
roW. J/alton’s 4, gier.
SoMNI'Fick. adj. [ſºmnuſ and facio, Latin.] Cauſing ſcºp.
So'MNoLi Nc Y. m J. Iſºuncientia, Latin.] Sleepineſs; incli-
nation to fleep. -
SON. n.ſ...[/unus, Gothick; runa, Saxon; ſºn, German;
fon, Swediſh; ſome, Dutch; ſyn, Sclavonian.]
1. A male born of one or begotten by one; correlative to father
or mother.
She had a ſºn for her cradle, ere ſhe had a huſband for her
bed. - chakºff, Aing Lear.
Caſt out this bondwoman and her ſºn. Gen. xxi. 10.
He compares the affection of the lºvine Being to the indul-
gence of a wiſe father, who would have his ſºns exerciſd with
labour and pain, that they may gather ſtrength. Addison.
2. Deſcendant however diſtant: as, the ſºns of Adam.
I am the ſon of the wiſe, the ſon of ancient kings. If xix.
3. Compellation of an old to a young man, or of a confeſſor to
his penitent. -
Be plain, good ſºn, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confeſſion finds but riddling ſhriſt.
4. Native of a country.
Britain then
Sees arts her ſavage ſons controul. Pºpe.
5. The ſecond perſon of the Trinity.
If thou be the ſºn of God, come down.
6. Produćt of anything.
Our imperfections prompt our corruption, and loudly tell
us we are ſons of earth. Brown's Vulgar Errouri.
Earth's tall ſons, the cedar, oak, and pine,
Their parents undecaying ſtrength declare. Blackmºre.
7. In ſcripture, ſons of pride, and ſons of light, denoting ſome
quality. 'Tis a Hebraiſm.
This new fav'rite
Of heav'n, this man of clay, ſn of deſpite. Miltºn,
Son-IN-law. m. ſ. One married to one's daughter.
If virtue no benighted beauty lack,
Your ſon-in-law is far more fair than black. Shakespeare Othl.
A foreign ſºn-in-law ſhall come from far,
Whoſe race ſhall bear aloft the Latian name. Dryd. Æt.
So'Nship. n.ſ.. [from ſon.] Filiation; the charaćter of a ſon.
The apoſtle to the Hebrews makes afflićtions not only in-
cident but neceſſary to Chriſtianity, the badge and cognizance
of ſonſhip. Decay ºf licly.
SONATA. m.ſ. [Italian.] A tune. -
He whiſtled a Scotch tune, and an Italian ſºnata. Addison.
- Could Pedro, think you, make no trial
Of a ſonata on his viol,
Unleſs he had the total gut, -
Whence every ſtring at firſt was cut. Prior.
SONG. m. ſ. [from Žerungen, Saxon.]
1. Anything modulated in the utterance. -
Noiſe other than the ſound of dance and ſºng. Milton.
He firſt thinks fit no ſonnetter advance
His cenſure farther than the ſºng or dance. Dryden:
2. A poem to be modulated by the voice; a ballad.
Pardon, goddeſs of the night,
Thoſe that ſlew thy virgin knighta.
For the which, with ſºngs of woe,
Round about his tomb they go! ſ
In her days ev'ry man ſhall ſing
The merry}.} of º to all his neighbours. Shakespeare H. VIII.
3. A poem; lay; ſtrain.
The bard that firſt adorn'd our native tongue, *
Tun'd to his Britiſh lyre this ancient ſong. . Dryden.
4. Poetry; poeſy.
Sha 'ºffeare,
Mat. xxvii. 40.
Shakſtart.
This ſubjećt for heroick ſºng pleas'd me. Milton.
Names memorable long, Pºpe
If there be force in virtue, or in ſong. ºpe. -
5. Notes of birds.
The lark, the meſſenger of day, Dryden.
Saluted in her ſong the morning grey.
6. An old SoNC. A trifle.
I do not intend to be thus put off with an old ſong.
A hopeful youth, newly advanced to great h"
forced by a cobler to reſign all for an old ſºng.
So'NG1sh. adj. [from ſºng...] Containing ſongs; *
ſongs. A low word. jety of
‘I he ſºngiſh part muſt abound in the ſoftneſs and varie .
numbers, its intention being to pleaſe the heaſing: *
So'Ngste R. n.ſ.. [from ſong..] A finger. Uſed of hum
fingers, it is a word of ſlight contempt. - -
The pretty ſongſters of the Spring with their vario
did ſeem to welcome him as he paſſed.
Some ſºngſters can no more ſing in any cha"
own, than ſome clerks read in any book but their 9"
Either ſºngſler holding out their throats,
And folding up their wings, renew'd their motº.
Mºre.
ur, was
/d ſºn,
ſiſting of
us notes
Howel.
hamber but their
* Lº /1.
! fºr,
~
Dryden.
2 SO'NGSTRF.sº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O O
S O O
So'NG stress. n.ſ.. [from ſºng..] A female finger.
Through the ſoft ſilence of the liſtening night,
The ſober-ſuited ſºng/?rºſs trills her lay. Thomſon's Summer.
SO'NNET. m. ſ [ſong t, French ; ſonnetto, Italian.]
1. A ſhort poem conſiſting of fourteen lines, of which the
rhymes are adjuſted by a particular rule. It is not very ſuit-
able to the Engliſh language, and has not been uſed by any
man of eminence ſince Milton.
A book was writ of late call'd Tetrachordon,
And woven cloſe, both matter, form, and ſtile;
The ſubject new: it walk'd the town a-while,
Numb'ring good intellects, now ſeldom por'd on:
Cries the ſtall-reader, Bieſs us, what a word on
A title-page is this! and ſome in file
Stand ſpelling falſe, while one might walk to Mile-
End-green. . Why is it harder, firs, than Gordon,
Colkitto, or Macdonnel, or Galaſp?
Thoſe rugged names to our like mouths grow ſleek,
That would have made Quintilian ſtare and gaſp:
Thy age like ours, ſoul of ſir John Cheek,
Hated not learning worſe than toad or aſp,
When thou taught'ſt Cambridge and king Edward
Greek. Milton.
2. A ſmall poem.
Let us into the city preſently,
To ſort ſome gentlemen well ſkill'd in muſick;
I have a ſonnet that will ſerve the turn. Shakeſpeare.
SoNNette‘ER. m. ſ. [ſonnetier, French; from ſºnnet.] A ſmall
poet, in contempt.
Aſſiſt me, ſºme extemporal god of rhime; for I am ſure I
ſhall turn ſonnetteer. Shakeſp. Love's Labour's Loſt.
He firſt thinks fit no ſonnetteer advance
His cenſure farther than the ſong or dance. Dryden.
There are as many kinds of gardening as of poetry: your
makers of parterres and flower-gardens are epigrammatiſts and
ſonnetteers in this art. Speciator.
What woful ſtuff this madrigal would be,
In ſome ſtarv'd hackney ſonnetteer or me !
But let a lord once own the happy lines,
How the wit brightens ! how the ſtyle refines! Pºpe.
SoNI'FERous. adj. [ſonus and fero, Latin.] Giving or bring-
ing ſound.
This will appear, let the ſubjećt matter of ſounds be what
it will; either the atmoſphere, or the etherial part thereof, or
ſoniferous particles of bodies. Derham.
SoNoR1'Fick, adj. [/anºrus and facio, Lat.] Producing ſound.
If he ſhould aſk me why a clock ſtrikes, and points to the
hour; and I ſhould ſay, it is by an indicating form and ſong-
rifick quality, this would be unſatisfactory. Watts's Logick.
SONO'ROUS. adj. [ ſonore, French; ſonorus, Latin. J
1. Loud ſounding; giving loud or ſhrill ſound. Bodies are diſ-
tinguiſhed as ſonorous or unſºnorous.
All the while
Sonorous metal blowing martial ſounds;
At which the univerſal hoſt up ſent
A ſhout that tore hell's concave.
2. High ſounding; magnificent of ſound.
The Italian opera, amidſt all the meanneſs and familiarity
of the thoughts, has ſomething beautiful and ſonorous in the
expreſſion. Addiſon on Italy.
SoNo'Rously. adv. [from ſºnorous.] With high ſound; with
magnificence of ſound.
SoNo Rous N Ess. n. ſ. [from ſonorous.]
1. The quality of giving found.
Enquiring of a maker of viols and lutes of what age he
thought lutes ought to be, to attain their full and beſt ſeaſon-
ing for ſonorouſneſs, he replied, that in ſome twenty years
would be requiſite, and in others forty. Boyle.
2. Magnificence of ſound.
SOCN. adv. [..ſuns, Gothick; rona, Saxon; ſaen, Dutch.]
1. Before long time be paſt; ſhortly after any time aſſigned or
ſuppoſed.
Nor did they not perceive their evil plight,
Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Yet to their gen'ral's voice they ſºon obey'd. Milton.
You muſt obey me, ſoon or late;
Why ſhould you vainly ſtruggle with your fate? Dryden,
2. Early ; before any time ſuppoſed: oppoſed to late.
O boy! thy father gave thee life too ſoon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Do this, that I may be reſtored to you the ſooner. Heb. xiii.
How is it that you are come ſo ſoon to-day? Ex. ii. 18.
The earlier ſtayeth for the later, and not that the later
cometh ſooner. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
3. Readily; willingly.
I would as ſoon ſee a river winding through woods and mea-
dows, as when it is toſſed up in ſo many whimſical figures at
Verſailles. Addiſon's Guardan.
4. It has in Sidney the ſignification of an adjective, whether
licentiouſly or according to the cuſtom of his time.
He hath preſerved Argalus alive, under pretence of having
him publickly executed after theſe wars, of which they hope
for a ſoon and proſperous iſſue. - Sidney.
5. Soon as. Immediately; at the very time.
As ſººn as he came nigh unto the camp, he ſaw the calf and
the dºce. . . Ex. xxxii. 19.
Nor was his virtue poiſon'd, /ºon as born,
With the too early thoughts of being king. Drydºn.
Soonly. adu. [from ſoon.] Quickly; ſpeedily. This word I
remember in no other place; but if ſoon be, as it ſeems once
to have been, an adjećtive, fºonly is proper. &gt;
A maſon meets with a ſtone that wants no cutting, and
ſoonly approving of it, places it in his work. Air &gt;
So'of BERRY. n.ſ. [ſpindus, Latin J A plant. t’.
It hath a flower, which for the moſt part is compoſed of
four leaves, expanding in form of a roſe; from whoſe four-
leaved empalement ariſes the pointal, which afterward becomes
a ſpherical fruit, incloſing a nut of the ſame form A4 'er
SOOT. n. ſ. [rot, Saxon; ſºot, Iſlandick; ſet Dutch. C -
denſed or embodied ſmoke. &gt; • V-OIl-
Soot, though thin ſpread in a field, is a very good com-
poſt. - - - Pacon.
If the fire be not kept within the tunnel of the chimncy
and ſome appointed to ſweep down the ſºot, the houſe will be in
danger of burning. Hºwel.
Oft they aſſay’d,
Hunger and thirſt conſtraining; drugg’d as oft
With hatefulleſt diſreliſh, writh'd their jaws,
With ſººt and cinders fill’d. Milton's Paradiſ? Ig/?.
Qur houſhold gods, that droop upon our hearths,
Each from his venerable face ſhall bruſh
The Macedonian ſºot, and ſhine again. Dryd. Cleomenes.
sº. adj. [from ſºot.] Smeared, manured, or covered with
OOt.
The land was ſooted before. Mortimer,
Sootºrk, N. n.ſ. A kind of falſe birth fabled to be produced
by the Dutch women from fitting over their ſtoves.
When Jove was, from his teeming head,
Of wit’s fair goddeſs brought to-bed,
There follow'd at his lying-in,
For after-birth, a ſooterkin. Swift.
Soot H. n.ſ. [roë, Saxon.] Truth; reality. Obſolete.
Sir, underſtand you this of me in ſºoth,
Th’ youngeſt daughter, whom you hearken for,
Her father keeps from all acceſs of ſuitors,
Until the eldeſt ſiſter firſt be wed. Shakeſpeare:
That e'er this tongue of mine,
That laid the ſentence of dread baniſhment
On yond proud man, ſhould take it off again
With words of ſºoth. Shakespeare Richard II.
He looks like ſouth: he ſays he loves my daughter;
I think ſo too; for never gaz'd the moon
Upon the water, as he'll ſtand and read
My daughter's eyes. Shakespeare. Winter's Tal.
If I have any ſkill in ſoothſaying, as in ſºuth I have none,
it doth prognoſticate that I ſhall change caps. Camden’s Rem.
The very ſooth of it is, that an ill habit has the force of an
ill fate. L'Aſirange.
I did not mean to chide you;
For, ſooth to ſay, I hold it noble in you
To cheriſh the diſtreſs'd. Rowe.
Soot H. adj. [ros, Saxon.] Pleaſing; delightful.
Some other means I have,
Which once of Melibaeus old I learn'd,
The ſoothſ; ſhepherd that e'er pip'd on plains.
To SOOTH. v. a. [xerobian, Saxon.]
1. To flatter; to pleaſe with blandiſhments.
In ſºothing them, we nouriſh 'gainſt our ſenate
The cockle of rebellion, inſolence, ſedition. Shakespeare.
Can Iſooth tyranny ?
Seem pleas'd to ſee my royal maſter murder'd,
His crown uſurp'd, a diſtaff in the throne *
By his fair daughter is the chief confin'd,
Who ſooth, to dear delight his anxious mind;
Succeſsleſs all her ſoft careſſes prove,
To baniſh from his breaſt his country's love. Pope's Odyſſey.
Thinks he that Memnon, ſoldier as he is,
Thoughtleſs and dull, will liſten to his ſºothing * Rºwe.
I've try’d the force of every reaſon on him,
Sooth'd and careſs'd, been angry, ſºoth'd again;
Laid ſafety, life, and intereſt in his fight;
But all are vain, he ſcorns them all for Cato.
2. To calm; to ſoften ; to mollify.
The beldame
Sooth; her with blandiſhments, and frights with threats. Dry.
3. To gratify; to pleaſe. - - - -
This calm'd his cares; ſecth'd with his future fame,
And pleas'd to hear his propagated name. Dryden,
Soo'ſ HER... n ſ, [from ſºuth.] A flatterer; one who gains by
bandiſhments.
I cannot flatter: I defy
The tongues of ſºthers. - Shake?. Henry IV.
To Soorasaº. v. n. [ſooth and ſay..] To predict, to foretell.
A damſel, poſſeſſed with a ſpirit of divination, met us,
which brought her maſters much gain by ſºothſaying. Acis Xvi.
Soº THSAYER,
Milton:
Dryden.
Addſ Cato.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O P
S C R.
Sooris AYER. m.ſ. [from ſºothſay J A foreteller; a predićier;
2 Pºº". "Kiſſions made partaker of this oft blinding
- M - -
Scarce was were found numbers of fºothſayerſ who at-
light, when there W. - inor f d b
#. ſtrange and incredible things ſhould be per º
"º, bids you beware the ides of March. Shakeſp.
animated to expect the papacy by the predićtion of
..}º that one ſhould ſucce; d pope Leo, whoſe name
hºuld be Adrian, an aged man of mean birth, and of great
learning and wiſdom. - Bacon's Henry VII.
Soºrinºs. n.ſ.. [from ſºoty.] The quality of being ſooty; fu-
liginouſneſs.
Soºry, adj. [from ſºat.]
1. Breeding foot. -
By fire of ſºoty coal th' alchymiſt turns -
Metals to gold. Milon.
2. Conſiſting of ſoot; fuliginous. - -
There may be ſome chymical way ſo to defecate this oil,
that it ſhall not ſpend into a ſooty matter. //i/kins.
3. Black; dark; duſky.
All the griſly legions that troop
Under the ſºoty flag of Acheron;
Harpies and hydras and all monſtrous forms. Milton.
Swift on his ſooty pinions flits the gnome,
And in a vapour reach'd the gloomy dome. Poſe.
Sop. m. ſ. [rop, Saxon; /opa, Spaniſh ; ſoppe, Dutch.]
1. Anything ſteeped in liquour to be eaten.
The bounded waters -
Would lift their boſoms higher than the ſhores,
And make a ſºp of all this ſolid globe. Shakeſpeare.
Draw, you rogue; for though it be night, yet the moon
ſhines: I'í make a ſºp o'th’ moonſhine of you. Shakeſpeare.
Sps in wine, quantity for quantity, inebriate more than
wine of itſelf. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The prudent Sibyl had before prepar’d
A ſºp, in honey ſteep'd, to charm the guard,
Which mix'd with powerful drugs, ſhe caſt before
His greedy grinning jaws, juſt op'd to roar: Dryden.
Ill nature is not to be cured with a ſop; but quarrelſome
men, as well as quarrelſome curs, are worſe for fair uſage.
L’Eſtrange.
2. Any thing given to pacify, from the fop given to Cerberus.
To Cerberus they give a ſºp,
His tripple barking mouth to ſtop. Swift.
To Sop. v.a. To ſteep in liquour.
Sope. n.ſ. [See SoAP.]
SoPH. n.ſ. [from ſophiſła, Latin.] A young man who has been
two years at the univerſity.
Three Cambridge ſophs, and three pert templars came,
The ſame their talents, and their taſtes the ſame;
Each prompt to query, anſwer and debate, -
And ſmit with love of poeſy and prate. Pope's Dunciad.
Sophi. m. ſ. [Perſian.] The emperor of Perſia.
By this ſcimitar
That ſlew the ſºphi and a Perſian prince. Shakeſpeare.
A fig for the ſultan and ſºphi. Congreve.
So'PH is M. m. ſ. [ ſophiſma, Latin.] A fallacious argument; an
unſound ſubtilty; a fallacy.
When a falſe argument puts on the appearance of a true
one, then it is properly called a ſophiſm or fallacy. //atts.
So'PH is T. n.ſ [ſºphiſła, Latin.] A profeſſor of philoſophy.
The court of Croeſus is ſaid to have been much reſorted by
the ſophiſis of Greece in the happy beginning of his reign. Tºm.
So'PH1st ER. n.ſ. [ ſºphiſle, French; ſºphiſia, Latin.]
1. A diſputant fallaciouſly ſubtle; an artful but infidious logi-
Claſ).
A ſubtle traitor needs no ſºphiſler. Shakespeare 's Hen. VI.
If a heathen philoſopher bring arguments from reaſon,
which none of our atheiſtical Jophiſłers can confute, for the
immortality of the ſoul, I hope they will ſo weigh the con-
ſequences, as neither to talk, nor live, as if there was no ſuch
thing. Denham.
Not all the ſubtle objećtions of ſºphiſtºrs and rabbies, againſt
the goſpel, ſo much prejudiced the reception of it, as the re-
proach of thoſe crimes with which they aſperſed the aſſem-
blies of chriſtians. Rogers'; Sermons.
2. Anokº of philoſophy; a ſophiſt. This ſenſe is antiqua-
ted.
Alcidimus the ſºphifter hath many arguments to prove, that
voluntary and extemporal far excelleth premeditated ſpeech.
- - - - Hooker.
Sophiſ's Tical. adi. ſſphiftique, Fr. from ſophiſ?..] Fallaci-
ouſly ſubtle; logically deceitful.
Neither know I whether I ſhould prefer for madneſs, and
Mºhiſtical couzenge, that the ſame body of Chriſt ſhould be
in a thouſand places at once of this ſublunary world. Hall.
diffi hen the ſtate of the controverſy is well underſtood, the
ificulty will not be great in giving anſwers to all his ſo-
phiſtical cavils. Stillingfeet.
º may ſeem a demonſtration for the preſent, which to
Pºcrity will appear a more Jºſh ſlical knot. More.
SoPH1's T. cALLY. cdv. [from ſºphiſ?ica'] With fallacious
ſubtilty.
, Bolingbroke argues moſt ſºftically. Swift.
To Sophistic At E. v. a. [ſofhiſtiquer, Fr from ſhift j io
adulterate ; tocorrupt with ſomething ſpurious.
If the paſſions of the mind be ſtrong, they eaſily ſº liſticate
the underſtanding, they make it apt to believe upon every len-
der warrant, and to imagine infallible truth, where ſcarce any
probable ſhew appeareth. Hºoker.
Here's tº ree of us are ſophiſti ated. Shakespeare  care.
Divers experiments ſucceeded not, becauſe they were at
one time tried with genuine materials, and at another time
with ſo ºfficated ones. Bºſe.
The only perſons amongſt the heathens, who ſº...!
nature and philoſophy, were the Stoicks; who affirmed a 1-
tal, unchangeable concatenation of cauſes, reaching even to
the elicite acts of man's will. South's Sermons.
Yet the rich cullies may their boaſting ſcale;
They purchaſe but ſºphiſłicated ware:
'Tis prodigality that buys deceit,
Where both the giver and the taker cheat. Drydºn.
The eye hath its coats and humours tranſparent and colour.
leſs, left it ſhould tinge and ſºhyºic.te the light that it lets in
by a natural jaundice. Bentry.
Sophi's ricate. part. adj. [from the verb.] Adulterate; not
genuine.
Since then a great part of our ſcientifical treaſure is moſt
likely to be adulterate, though all bears the image and ſuper.
ſcription of truth ; the only way to know what is ſophiliate
and what is not ſo, is to bring all to the examen of the touch-
ſtone. Glanvik.
So truth, when only one ſupply'd the ſtate,
Grew ſcarce and dear, and yet ſºphiſticate. Dryden.
Sophistication. m. ſ. [ſºphiſticatiºn, Fr. from ſpliftiate.]
Adulteration; not genuineneſs.
Sophiſtication is the act of counterfeiting or adulterating any
thing with what is not ſo good, for the ſake of unlawful
gain. &amp;uiny.
The drugs and fimples ſold in ſhops, generally are adulte-
rated by the fraudulent avarice of the ſellers, eſpecially if the
preciouſneſs may make their ſºphiſłication very beneficial. Bºyle.
B-ſides eaſy ſubmiſſion toſophi/fications of ſenſe, we have in-
ability to prevent the miſcarriages of our junior reaſons (, a v.
Sophisticator. n.ſ.. [from ſºphiſticate.] Adulterator; one
that makes things not genuine.
Sophist R.Y. m. ſ. [from ſophiſ?..] Fallacious ratiocination.
His ſºphiſtry prevailed; his father believed. Sidney.
Theſe men have obſcured and confounded the natures of
things, by their falſe principles and wretched ſo hiºry; tho'
an act be never ſo finful, they will ſtrip it of its guilt. South.
To Sopor At E. v. n. [ſoporo, Latin J. To lay aſleep. ſº.
Sopori'Fe Rous. adj. [ſo or and fero.] Productive of ſleep;
cauſing ſleep; narcotick; opiate ; dormitive; ſomniſcrous;
anodyne; ſleepy.
The particular ingredients of thoſe magical ointments are
opiate and ſoporiferous; for anointing of the forehead, neck,
feet, and back-bone, procures dead ſleeps. Bacon.
While the whole operation was performing, I lay in a pſø.
found ſleep, by the force of that ſporiferous medicine infuſed
into my liquor. Gulliver’s Traveli,
SopoR1'FERóusness. n. ſ. [from ſporiferous.] The quality of
cauſing ſleep. -
Sopor 1'Fick. adj. [ſpºr and facio..] Cauſing ſleep; opiate;
narcotick. -
The colour and taſte of opium are, as well as its ſºri;
or anodyne virtues, mere powers depending on its Prº*Y
qualities. - - Lak.
Sopper. n.ſ.. [from ſp.] One that fleeps any thing in liquor.
Sor bile, adj. [from fºrbio, Latin.] That may be drunk “
fipped. - - -
SoRºi"tion. n.ſ. [ſºrbitio, Latin.] The act of drinking *
ſipping. -
Scrbs. . ſ. [ſorbum, Lat.] The berries of the ſorb of ſervice-
tree. - A
So'Rc ER ER. m. ſ. [ ſºrcier, French; ſºrtiarius, low Latin.]
conjurer; an enchanter ; a magician.
They ſay this town is full of cozenage,
As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye, .
Drug-working ſºrcerers that change the mind,
Soul-killing witches that deform the body, º
And many ſuch like libertines of ſin. Shalºt.
The weakneſs of the power of witches upon kings and º
giſtrates may be aſcribed to the weakneſs of imaginatiº §
it is hard for a witch or a ſorcerer to put on a belief hº
can hurt ſuch. Bacon's Natural Hiſ”
He ſaw a ſable ſorcerer ariſe,
All ſudden gorgon's hiſs and dragon's glare, Poff
And ten horn'd fiends. b §:
The Egyptian ſorcerers contended with Moſes; but WCſ
wonders which Moſes wrought did ſo far tranſcend the P9
- - - ºt",
of magicians, as made them confeſs it was the finger of .
Iſºtti's Logi"
So'RCERESS.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O R
S O R
t;
---—
So'Rceress. n.ſ. [Female of ſorcerer.] A female magician;
an enchantreſs.
Bring forth that ſºrcereſ condemn'd to burn.
aid their imagination with high and foul vapours. Bacon.
The ſnaky ſorcereſ; that ſat
Juſt by hell-gate, and kept the fatal key,
Ris'n, and with hideous outcry ruſh'd between, Milton.
How cunningly the ſorcereſ, diſplays
Her own tranſgreſſions, to upbraid me, mine. Milton.
So'rcery. m. ſ. Magick; enchantment; conjuration; witch-
craft; charms.
This witch Sycorax,
For miſchiefs manifold, and ſorceries terrible,
Was baniſh’d.
Adders wiſdom I have learn’d
To fence, my ear againſt thy ſorcerieſ. Milton.
Aétaeon has long tracts of rich ſoil; but had the misfor-
tune in his youth to fall under the power of ſorcery. Tatler.
Sord, n.ſ.. [from ſward.] Turf; graſſy ground.
This is the prettieſt low-born laſs that ever ran on the
green ſord. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
An altar of graſſy ſºrd. Milton.
SO’RDES. m. ſ. [Latin.] Foulneſs; dregs.
The ſea waſhes off the ſºil and ſordes wherein mineral moſ-
ſes were involved and concealed, and thereby renders them
more conſpicuous. Woodward.
So'RDe T. }". f ſourdine, French; ſordina, Italian.] A ſmall
So'R DIN E. 5 pipe put into the mouth of a trumpet to make it
ſound lower or ſhriller.
So RDID. adj. [ſordidus, Latin.]
1. Foul ; groſs; filthy; dirty.
There Charon ſtands
A ſordid god, down from his hoary chin
A length of beard deſcends, uncomb'd, unclean. Dryden.
2. [Sordide, French.] Intelle&amp;tually dirty ; mean ; vile; baſe.
It is ſtrange ſince the prieſts office heretofore was always
ſplendid, that it is now looked upon as a piece of religion,
to make it low and ſordid. South's Sermons.
3. [Sordide, French..] Covetous; niggardly.
He may be old,
And yet not ſordid, who refuſes gold. Denham.
If one ſhould ceaſe to be generous and charitable, becauſe
another is ſºrdid and ungrateful, it would be much in the
power of vice to extinguiſh chriſtian virtues. L’Eſ/range.
So'RDIDLY, adv. [from Jordid.] Meanly; poorly; covetouſly;
So'RDIDNEss. n.ſ.. [from ſºrdid.]
1. Meanneſs; baſeneſs.
I omit the madneſſes of Caligula's delights, and the exe-
crable ſordidneſs of thoſe of Tiberius. Cowley.
2. Naſtineſs; not neatneſs.
Providence deters people from ſluttiſhneſs and ſordidn'ſ,
and provokes them to cleanlineſs. Ray.
Sor e. m. ſ. [ran, Saxon; ſaur, Daniſh.] A place tender and
painful; a place excoriated; an ulcer. It is not uſed of a
wound, but of a breach of continuity, either long continued
or from internal cauſe: to be a ſºre, there muſt be an exco-
riation; a tumour or bruiſe is not called a ſore before ſome
diſruption happen.
Let us hence provide
A ſalve for any ſore that may betide. Shakeſpeare's Hen. VI.
It is a bad exchange to wound a man's own conſcience, to
ſalve ſtate ſores. King Charles.
Receipts abound; but ſearching all thy ſtore,
The beſt is ſtill at hand to launce the ſore,
And cut the head; for till the core be found
Shakeſpeare.
Bailey.
The ſecret vice is fed and gathers ground. Dryden.
By theſe all feſtring ſores her councils heal,
Which time or has diſclos'd, or ſhall reveal. Dryden.
Lice and flies, which have a moſt wonderful inſtinét to find
out convenient places for the hatching and nouriſhment of their
young, lay their eggs upon ſores. Bentley.
SoRE, adj. [from the noun.]
1. Tender to the touch.
We can ne'er be ſure,
Whether we pain or not endure;
And juſt ſo far are ſore and griev'd, -
As by the fancy is believ'd. Hudibrar.
While ſºre of battle, while our wounds are green,
Why ſhould we tempt the doubtful dye again. Dryden.
It was a right anſwer of the phyſician to his patient, that
had ſore eyes, if you have more pleaſure in the taſte of wine
than in the uſe of your fight, wine is good; but if the plea-
ſure of ſeeing be greater to you than that of drinking, wine is
naught. Locke.
2. Tender in the mind; eaſily vexed.
Malice and hatred are very fretting and vexatious, and apt
to make our minds ſore and uneaſy; but he that can mode-
rate theſe affections will find eaſe in his mind. Tillotſon.
Laugh at your friends, and if your friends are ſºre,
So much the better, you may laugh the more.
Pope.
Shakeſp.
Divers witches and ſºrcereſſes have fed upon man's fleſh, to
3. Violent with
Threeſcore and ten I can remember well,
Within the volume of which time I've ſeen
Hours dreadful, and thing ſiraj, :* /---- - -
Hath, trifled former j ge; but *::::.
I will perſevere in my courſe of loyalty, though the conflićt
be ğ. between that and my blood. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear.
y loins are filled with aſºre diſeaſe; and there is no whole
part in my body. Common Prayer.
Sore hath been their fight,
As likelieſt was, when two ſuch foes met arm'd. Mitan
Gentle lady, may thy grave -
Peace and quiet ever have,
After this day's travel fore
Sweet reſt ſeize thee evermore. Milton.
T. are determin'd to live up to the holy rule,
- - - though
Jº evils and great temporal inconveniencies ſhºuld attend the
diſcharge of their duty. Atterbury.
4. Criminal. Out of uſe.
To lapſe in fullneſs
# %. than to lie for need; and falſhood
s worſe in kings than beggars. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline,
5. [From ſaur, F. £8. ſº }
The buck is called the firſt year a fawn; the ſecond, a
pricket; the third, a ſorel; and the fourth year, a ſore. Shakespeare
Sore. adv. [This the etymologiſts derive from ſeer, Dutch; but
ſeer means only an intenſeneſs of anything; ſore almoſt al-
ways includes pain.] With painful or dangerous vehemence;
a very painful degree; with afflictive violence or pertinacity.
It is now little uſed.
Thine arrows ſtick faſt in me, and thy hand preſſeth me
fore. Common Prayer.
The knight, then lightly leaping to the prey,
With mortal ſteel him ſmóte again ſofore,
That headleſs his unweildy body lay.
- Fairy Queen.
He this and that, and each man's blow
Doth eye, defend, and ſhift, being laid to fore. Daniel.
Though iron hew and mangle ſºre,
Would wounds and bruiſes honour more. Hudibras.
Diſtruſt ſhook ſore their minds. Milon.
So that Palamon were wounded fore,
Arcite was hurt as much. Dryden's Knights Tale.
Sore-ſigh'd the knight, who this long ſermon heard:
At length, conſidering all, his heart he cheard. Dryden.
How, Didius, ſhall a Roman ſore repuls'd
Greet your arrival to this diſtant iſle - -
How bid you welcome to theſe ſhatter'd legions? A. Philips.
$o'REHON. An ſ [Iriſh and Scottiſh.] A kind of arbitrary
SoRN. ; exaction or ſervile tenure, formerly in Scot-
land, as likewiſe in Ireland; whenever a chieſtan had a mind
to revel, he came down among the tenants with his followers,
by way of contempt called in the lowlands giliwitſitts, and liv-
ed on free quarters; ſo that ever fince, when a perſon obtrudes
himſelf upon another, ſtays at his houſe, and hangs upon him
for bed and board, he is ſaid to ſorn, or be a ſorner. Maclean.
They exačt upon them all kind of ſervices; yea, and the
very wild exactions, coignie, livery, and ſºrehon ; by which
they poll and utterly undo the poor tenants and freeholders
under them. Spenſer's Ireland.
So'REL. n.ſ. [Diminutive of ſºre.]
The buck is called the firſt year a fawn; the ſecond, a
pricket; the third, a ſorel. Shakeſpeare.
So'RELY. adv. [from/ore.]
1. With a great degree of pain or diſtreſs.
Here's the ſmell of the blood ſtill; all the perfumes of Ara-
bia will not ſweeten this little hand. Oh! oh oh!—What
a figh is there the heart is ſorely overcharged. Shakeſpeare.
The warrior train,
Though moſt were ſorely wounded, none were ſlain. Dryden.
2. With vehemence dangerous or afflićtive.
I have done ill,
Of which I do accuſe myſelf ſo ſerely,
That I will enjoy no more. Shakeſpeare.
So'REN Ess. n. ſ. [from ſore.] Tenderneſs of a hurt. .
He that, whilſt the ſoreneſ of his late pangs of conſcience re-
mains, finds himſelf a little indiſpoſed for ſin, preſently con-
cludes repentance hath had its perfect work. Decay ºf Piety.
My foot began to ſwell, and the pain aſſwaged, though it
left ſuch aſ reneſ, that I could hardly ſuffer the cloaths of
my bed. Temple.
Sorites. n.ſ. [regºry;..] Properly an heap...An argument
where one propolition is accumulated on another.
Chryſippus the Stoick invented a kind of argument, con-
ſiſting of more than three propoſitions, which is called ſºitº,
or a heap. Dryden.
Sorites is when ſeveral middle terms are choſen. to connect
one another ſucceſſively in ſeveral propoſitions, till the laſt
propoſition connects its predicate with the firſt ſubject. Thus,
all men of revenge have their ſouls often uneaſy: uneaſy ſouls
are a plague to themſelves; now to be one's ºwn plague is
folly in the extreme. Iſºtt * Logick.
24 P So'RoRucids.
Pain 3, affióively vehement. SeeSoRE. adverb.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">-
__w = −
- 2, and cºd, J The murder of * ſiſter.
sº ſº. of green tº: or . #:
AXC ... ft - r * ...’rie iſeaſe Ur fore in horſes.
soºn ance. */ [In farriery.] Any diſeaſe 9 Dić?.
- is plant agrees
- ºl. n.ſ. [rune, Saxon ; forel, French J. This plantagº
sº."{{. il its characters, and only differs in .#
- id taſte. liter.
"é. of herbs the root of ſorrel goeth the fartheſt into
the earth. It is a cold and acid herb that loveth the earth, and
is not much drawn by the ſun. Bacon.
Acid auſtere vegetables contract and frengthen the fibres,
as all kinds of ſºrrel, the virtues of which º in º *::::
- - tidote againſt the putreſcent billou.”
ſalt, a ſovereign an § p Arbuthnot on Aliments.
So's Rily, adv. [from ſºrry..] Meanly; poorly; deſpicably ;
wretchedly ; pitiably. - -
Thy º, Ó Faº, ſhall help though Iſing ſºrº: Sidney.
So'RRINess. n.ſ.. [from ſorry] Meanneſs; wretchedneſs; pi-
tiableneſs; deſpicableneſs. - - -
Sorrow. n.ſ. Iſºrº, Daniſh.] Grief; pain for ſomething
paſt; ſadneſs; mourning. Sorrow is not commonly underſtood
is the effea of preſent evil, but of loſt good.
§... is uneaſineſs in the mind, upon the thought of a
good loſt, which might have been enjoyed longer; o; the
ienſe of a preſent evil. Locke.
Sºrrº, on thee, and all the pack of you;
That triumph thus upon my miſery! Shakeſpeare.
A world of woe and ſorrow. AMilton.
Some other hour I will to tears allow;
Put having you, can ſhow no ſºrºw now. Dryden.
To sºr ow. ºn. [ſaurgan, Gothick; ropsian, Sax.] To
grieve; to be ſad; to be dejećted.
The miſerable change, now at my end,
Lament, nor ſorrow at. Shakespearejp. Antony and Cleopatra.
where-ever ſorrow is relief wou'd be,
If you do ſºrrow at my grief in love,
By giving love, your ſorrow and my grief
Were both extermin'd. Shakeſpeare.
Now I rejoice, not that ye were made ſorry, but that ye
Jarrowed to repentance. 2 Cor. vii. 9.
I neither fear to die nor deſire to live; and having maſtered
all grief in myſelf, I deſire no man to ſºrrow for me. Hayw.
Send them forth, though ſorrowing, yet in peace. Milton.
Sad the prince explores'
The neighb'ring main, and ſorrowing treads the ſhores. Pope.
So's Rowe D. adj. [from ſorrow.] Accompanied with ſorrow.
Cut of uſe.
Now the publick body, which doth ſeldom
Play the recanter, feeling in itſelf
A lack of Timon's aid, hath ſenſe withal
Of its own fall, reſtraining aid to Timon ;
And ſends forth us to make their ſorrowed tender. Shakeſp.
Sº 'RRow Ful. adj. Iſorrow and full.]
1. Sad for ſomething paſt; mournful; grieving.
Bleſſed are they which have been ſorrowful for all thy
ſcourges; for they ſhall rejoice for thee, when they have ſeen
all thy glory. Tob. xiii. 14.
2. Deep y ſerious. Not in uſe.
Hannah ſaid, no, my lord, I am a woman of a ſorrowful
ſpirit: I have poured out my ſoul before the Lord. I Sam.
3. Expreſſing grief; accompanied with grief.
The things that my ſoul refuſed to touch are as my ſorrow-
ful meat. job. vi. 7.
Sö RRY. adj. [ranić, Saxon.]
1. Grieved for ſomething paſt. It it generally uſed of ſlight or
caſual miſcarriages or vexations, but ſometimes of greater
things. It does not imply any long continuance of grief.
O, forget
What we are ſorry for ourſelves in thee. Shakespeare. Timon of Athens.
The king was ſºrry : nevertheleſs for the oath's ſake he
commanded the Baptiſt's head to be given her. Matth. xiv. 9.
I’m ſorry for thee, friend; ’tis the duke's pleaſure. Shakespeare
We are ſorry for the ſatire interſperſed in ſome of theſe pieces,
upon a few people, from whom the higheſt provocations have
been received. Swift.
2. [From ſaur, filth, Iſlandick.] Vile ; worthleſs; vexatious.
A ſalt and ſorry rheum offends me:
Lend me thy handkerchief. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
How now, why do you keep alone :
Of ſorrieſ fancies your companions making,
Uſing thoſe thoughts, which ſhould, indeed, have died
With them they think on. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
l; the union of the parts conſiſt only in reſt, it would ſeem
that a bag of duſt would be of as firm a conſiſtence as that of
marble; and Bajazet's cage had been but a ſorry priſon. Glanv.
Coarſe complexions,
And cheeks of, orry grain will ſerve to ply
ſº ſampler, and to teize the houſewife's wool. Milton.
ſu OW i. were all the enſigns of his power, that could not
- i.". againſt one flighting look of a ſºrry ſlave! L'Eſt.
innocent had any relation to his Thebais, the poet
S O R
might have found ſome ſorry excuſe for detaining the reader,
Dryden.
If ſuch a ſlight and ſºrry buſineſs as that could º Onc
organical body, one might reaſonably expect, that now and
then a dead lump of dough might be leavened into an animal.
Bentley's Sermons.
Son T. n.ſ.. [ſºrte, French.]
1. A kind; a ſpecies.
Disfigu'd more than ſpirit of happy ſºrt. Milton.
A ſubſtantial and unaffected piety, not only gives a man a
credit among the ſober and virtuous, but even among the vi-
cious ſort of men. Tilſºn.
Theſe three ſorts of poems ſhould differ in their numbers,
deſigns, and every thought. l/a/h.
Endeavouring to make the ſignification of ſpecificknames
clear, they make their ſpecifick ideas of the ſorts of ſubſtances
of a few of thoſe ſimple ideas found in them. Locke.
2. A manner; a form of being or acting.
Flowers in ſuch ſort worn, can neither be ſmelt nor ſeen
well by thoſe that wear them. Hºoker.
That I may laugh at her in equal ſort
As ſhe doth laugh at me, and makes my pain her ſport.
Spenſer's Sounet.
Ezra iv. 8.
44ilton.
Rheum and Shimſhai wrote after this ſort.
To Adam in what ſort ſhall I appear
3. A degree of any quality.
I have written the more boldly unto you, in ſome ſort, as
putting you in mind. Rom. xv. 15.
I ſhall not be wholly without praiſe, if in ſome ſort I have
copied his ſtile. Dryden.
4. A claſs, or order of perſons.
The one being a thing that belongeth generally unto all,
the other, ſuch as none but the wier and more judicious ſort
can perform. Hooker.
I have bought
Golden opinions from all ſort of people. Shakeſpeare.
Hoſpitality to the better ſort, and charity to the poor, two
virtues that are never exerciſed ſo well as when they accompa-
ny each other. Atterbury's Sermons,
5. A company; a knot of people.
Mine eyes are full of tears: I cannot ſee;
And yet ſalt water blinds them not ſo much,
But they can ſce a ſort of traitors here.
6. Rank; condition above the vulgar.
Is ſignior Montanto returned from the wars ?—I know none
of that name, lady; there was none ſuch in the army.**)
fort. Shakeſpeare's Much ad about Nahin;.
7. [Sort, Fr. ſºrtes, Latin.] A lot. Out of uſe.
Make a lott'ry,
And by decree, let blockiſh Ajax
Shakeſheart.
Draw the ſºrt to fight with Hector. Shakespeare.
8. A pair ; a ſet.
Milton.
The firſt ſºrt by their own ſuggeſtion fell.
To Sort. v. o. [Sortiri, Lat. aſſo, tºº, Italian.]
1. To ſeparate into diſtinét and proper claſſes.
Theſe they ſorted into their ſeveral times and places; ſome
to begin the ſervice of God with, and ſome to end; ſome to
be intja’i between the divine readings of the law"! !"
phcts. Hooker.
I come to thee for charitable licence,
To ſºrt our nobles from our common men; Shakeſtart.
A piece of cloth made of white and black threads though
the whole appear neither white nor black, but grey; yet each
remains what it was before, if the threads were pulled aſunder,
and ſorted each colour by itſelf. - *:::
Shell-fiſh have been, by ſome of the ancients, compa"
and ſorted with the inſects. Bacon's Natural Hiſ").
with this deſire, ſhe hath a native might
To find out ev'ry truth, if ſhe had time;
Th’ innumerable effects to ſort aright, .. ..
And by degrees from cauſe to cauſe to climb. , *...
The number of fimple ideas, that make the nominal e .
of the loweſt ſpecies, or firſt ſorting of individuals, depen."
on the mind of man. †:
The rays which differ in refrangibility, may be parte º
ſºrted from one another, and that either by refraction, or by
reflexion. Newton's Opticº.
But grant that adions beſt diſcover man,
Take the moſt ſtrong and ſort them as you “”;
The few that glare, each character muſt mark:
You balance not the many in the dark.
2. To reduce to order from a ſtate of confuſion.
Let me not be light;
For a light wife doth make a heavy huſband;
And never be Baſlanio ſo from me; 'anit
But God ſort all! Shakeſpeare's March. of Verit.
3. To conjoin; to put together in diſtribution, , , ſt
Foſſ, when ſhe ſort; things preſent with things paſt,
And thereby things to come doth oft foreſee ;
when ſhe doth doubt at firſt, and chute at firſt,
Theſe acts her own, without her body *
Pºpe.
David.
4. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O T
*
º
º:
* .
liº.
*
hº
º
**
".
º
º
º:
º
º
º
ſº
ſ
º
+
4. To cull; to chuſe; to ſelečt.
Send his mother to his father's houſe,
That he may ſort her out a worthy ſpouſe.
To SoRt. v. n.
1. To be joined with others of the ſame ſpecies.
Nor do metals only ſºrt and herd with metals in the earth,
and minerals with minerals; but both in common together.
Woodward.
Chapman.
2. To conſort; to join.
The illiberality of parents towards their children, makes
them baſe and ſort with any company. - Bacon.
3. To ſuit; to fit.
A man cannot ſpeak to a ſon but as a father; whereas a
friend may ſpeak as the caſe requires, and not as it ſorteth
with the perſon. Bacon.
They are happy whoſe natures ſort with their vocations.
Bacon.
Among unequals, what ſociety
Can ſort, what harmony, or true delight?
Which muſt be mutual, in proportion due,
Giv'n, and receiv'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
The Creator calling forth by name
His mighty angels, gave them ſeveral charge,
As ſorted beſt with preſent things. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
For diff'rent ſtiles with diff'rent ſubjects ſort,
As ſeveral garbs with country, town, and court. Pope.
4. To terminate; to iſſue.
It ſorted not to any fight of importance, but to a retreat.
Bacon's War with Spain.
5. To have ſucceſs.
The ſlips of their vines have been brought into Spain, but
they have not ſºrted to the ſame purpoſe as in their native
country. Abbot's Deſcription of the IWorld.
It was tried in a blown bladder, whereunto fleſh and a
flower were put, and it ſorted not; for dry bladders will not
blow, and new bladders further putrefaction. Bacon.
6. To fall out. [from ſort, a lot, or ſortir, to iſſue, French.]
And ſo far am I glad it did ſo ſort,
As this their jangling I eſteem a ſport. Shakeſpeare.
Princes cannot gather this fruit, except they raiſe ſome per-
ſons to be companions; which many times ſorteth to incon-
venience. Bacon.
So'R'r A L. adj. A word formed by Locke, but not yet received.
As things are ranked under names, into ſorts or ſpecies only
as they agree to certain abſtraćt ideas, the effence of each ſort
comes to be nothing but that idea which the ſortal, if I may
ſo call it from ſort, as I do general from genus, name ſtands
for. Locke.
So'RTANce. m. ſ. [from ſort.] Suitableneſs; agreement.
I have received
New dated letters from Northumberland,
Their cold intent, thus :
Here doth he wiſh his perſon, with ſuch power
As might hold ſortance with his quality,
The which he could not levy. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
So'RTILE GE. m. ſ. [ſºrtilege, Fr. ſortilegium, Latin.] The act
or practice of drawing lots.
So'RTMENT. n.ſ.. [from ſºrt.]
1. The act of ſorting ; diſtribution.
2. A parcel ſorted or diſtributed.
To So s. v. n. [A cant word.] To fit lazily on a chair; to fall
at once into a chair.
The winter ſky began to frown,
Poor Stella muſt pack off to town;
From wholeſome exerciſe and air,
To ſeſſing in an eaſy chair. Swift.
SoT. n.ſ. [roz, Saxon; ſot, French; ſot, Dutch.]
1. A blockhead; a dull ignorant ſtupid fellow ; a dolt.
Of Glo'ſter's treachery,
And of the loyal ſervice of his ſon,
When I inform'd him, then he call'd me ſot;
And told me I had turn'd the wrong ſide out. Shakeſpeare.
This by his tongue being made his miſtreſs' pićture,
And then a mind put in't, either our braggs
Were crackt of kitchen trulls, or his deſcription
Prov'd us unſpeaking ſots. Shakespeare.
Tell him that no hiſtory or antiquity can match his con-
dućt; and preſently the ſot, becauſe he knows neither hiſtory
nor antiquity, ſhall begin to meaſure himſelf by himſelf, which
is the only ſure way for him not to fall ſhort. South's Sermons.
2. A wretch ſtupified by drinking.
Every ſign
... That calls the ſtaring ſots to naſty wine. Roſcommon.
º A ſurly ill-bred lord,
That chides and ſnaps her up at every word:
A brutal ſot ; who while ſhe holds his head, -
With drunken filth bedaubs the nuptial bed. Granville.
To Sot. v. a. To ſtupify; to beſot.
Pox on his loyalty
I hate to ſee a brave bold fellow ſotted,
Made ſour and ſenſeleſs, turn'd to whey by love;
A driveling hero, fit for a romance. Dryden's Span. Friar.
The potion
Turns his brain and ſtupifies his mind;
The ſotted moon-calf gapes. Dryden.
Tº Sot. v. n. To tipple to ſtupidity.
So'Trish. adj. [from jet.]
1. Dull; ſtupid ſenſeleſs; infatuate; doltiſh,
- All's but naught:
Patience isſºttiſh, and impatience does
Become a dog that's mad. S hakeſpeare's Ant. and Cleopatra,
Upon the report of his approach, more than half ſell away
and diſperſed; the reſidue, being more deſperate or more ſottiſh,
did abide in the field, of whom many were ſlain. Hayward,
He gain’d a king
Ahaz his ſottiſh conqueror. Milton.
'Tisſºttiſh to offer at things that cannot be brought about.
- - L’Eſtrange.
How ignorant are ſºttiſh pretenders to aſtrology. Swift.
2. Dull with intemperance.
sºnº. adv. [from ſottiſh.] Stupidly; dully; ſenſe-
eisly.
Northumberland ſottiſhly mad with over great fortune, pro-
cured the King by his letters patent under the great ſeal, to
appoint the lady Jane to ſucceed him in the inheritance of
the crown. Hayward.
Atheiſm is impudent in pretending to philoſophy, and ſu-
perſtition ſottiſhly ignorant in fancying that the knowledge of
nature tends to irreligion. Glanville.
So ſottiſhly to loſe the pureſt pleaſures and comforts of this
world, and forego the expectation of immortality in another;
and ſo deſperately to run the riſk of dwelling with everlaſting
burnings, plainly diſcovers itſelf to be the moſt pernicious
folly and deplorable madneſs in the world. Bentley.
Soºt TISHNess. n.ſ.. [from ſettiſh.] Dullneſs; ſtupidity; in-
ſenſibility.
Few conſider what a degree of ſºttiſhneſ, and confirmed ig-
norance men may fin themſelves into. South's Sermons,
No ſober temperate perſon can look with any complacency
upon the drunkenneſs and ſºttiſhneſs of his neighbour. South.
The firſt part of the text, the folly and ſottiſhneſs of Atheiſm,
will come home to their caſe; ſince they make ſuch a noiſy
pretence to wit and ſagacity. Bentley's Sermons.
Sovereign, adj. [ſouverain, French; ſovrano, Spaniſh.]
I. Supreme in power; having no ſuperiour.
As teaching bringeth us to know that God is our ſupreme
truth; ſo prayer teſtifieth that we acknowledge him our ſove-
reign good. Hoºker.
You, my ſºvereign lady,
Cauſeleſs have laid diſgraces on my head. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
None of us who now thy grace implore,
But held the rank of ſovereign queen before,
Till giddy chance, whoſe malice never bears
That mortal bliſs ſhould laſt for length of years,
Caſt us headlong from our bigh eſtate. Dryden.
Whether Eſau, then, were a vaſſal to Jacob, and Jacob his
fovereign prince by birth right, Ileave the reader to judge. Locke.
2. Supremely efficacious.
A memorial of their fidelity and zeal, a ſºvereign preſerva-
tive of God's people from the venomous infection of hereſy.
Hooker.
The moſt ſºvereign preſcription in Galen is but empirick;
and to this preſervative of no better report than a horſe-drench.
Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Love-wounded Protheus,
My boſom, as a bed,
Shall lodge thee, till thy wound be throughly heal’d,
And thus I ſearch it with a ſov’reign kiſs. Shakeſpeare.
A water we call water of paradiſe, by that we do to it,
is made very ſºvereign for health. Bacon.
Like the ſcum ſtarv'd men did draw
From parboil'd ſhoes and boots, and all the reſt
Which were with any ſovereign fatneſs bleſt. Donne.
Be cool, my friend, and hear my muſe diſpenſe
Some ſovereign comforts drawn from common, ſenſe.
Dryden,
So've REIGN. n.ſ. Supreme lord.
O, let my ſovereign turn away his face, !... l.
And bid his ears a little while be deaf. Shakeſpeare,
By my ſovereign, and his fate, I ſwear,
Renown'd for faith in peace, for force in war,
Oft our alliance other lands deſir'd. Dryden.
Sovereignly adv. [from ſovereign J Supremely; in the
higheſt degree. - - - l
He was ſovereignly lovely in himſelf. Boyle.
Soveteronºv. n.f. [ſºuverainsti, French J Supremacy; high-
eſt place; ſupreme power; higheſt degree of excellence.
Give me pardon, - -, 2
That I, your vaſſal, have employed and pain'd -
Your unknown ſovereignty. - - Shakeſpeare.
Happy were England, would this virtuous prince
Takeoff his grace the ſov’reignty thereof. Shakespeare .
To give laws unto a people, to inſtitute magiſtrates and of-
ficers ºver them; to puniſh and pardon malefactors; to h"
tne
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O U
so U
--
.
the ſole authority of making war and peace, are ". º:
- f ſºvereignty. --- d'Ult J.
º i.e. thence he ſhall be g d
Before the Lord ; as in deſpite of heav'n, Milton.
Or from heav'n, claiming ſecond ſºv’re gnty. - -
Nothing does ſo gratify a haughty humour, as this piece
ped ſovereignty over our brethren. Govern. of the Tºngue.
Jove's own tree, -
That holds the woods in awful ſºv’reignty,
Requires a depth of lodging in the ground;
High as his tºpmoſt boughs to heav'n aſcend,
of ufur
So low his roots to hell's dominion tend. Dryden.
I well foreſee, whene'er thy ſuit I grant,
That I my much lov’d ſov’reignty ſhall want,
And her new beauty may thy heart invade. Dryden.
Let us above all things poſſeſs our ſouls with awful appre-
henſions of the majeſty and ſºvereignty of God. Fogers.
Alexander's Grécian colonies in the Indies were almoſt ex-
terminated by Sandrocottus; Seleucus recovered the ſºvereignty
in ſome degree, but was forced to abandon to him the coun-
try along the Indus. Arluthnot on Coins.
Souáh n.ſ. [from ſus, French.] . A ſubterraneous drain.
Yet could not ſuch mines, without great pains, and charges,
if at all, be wrought; the delis would be ſo flown with wa-
ters, it being impoſſible to make any addits or ſoughs to drain
them, that no gºns or machines could ſuffice to lay and keep
them dry. Ray on the Creation.
Another of like ſort, was found in ſinking a ſough-pit at
Haigh in Lancaſhire. J/vodward.
Sou (; it. The preterite and participle paſſ. oſſiek.
I am ſºught of them that aſked not for me: I am found of
them that ſºught me not. Iſa. lxv. 1.
The works of the Lord are great, ſought out of all them
that have pleaſure therein. Pſal. cxi. 2.
Soul. n.ſ. [rapel, Sax. ſael, Dan. ſual, Iſlandick; ſel, Dutch.]
1. The immaterial and immortal ſpirit of man.
When death was overcome, he opened heaven as well to
the believing Gentiles as Jews: heaven till then was no recep-
tacle to the ſou's of either. Hooker.
Fie, fie, unreverent tongue ! to call her bad,
Whoſe ſov’reignty ſo of thou haſt preferr'd
With twenty thouſand ſoul-confirming oaths. Shakeſ are.
Perhaps, for want of food, the ſoul may pine;
But that were ſtrange, ſince all things bad and good;
Since all God's creatures, mortal and divine;
Since God himſelf is her eternal food. Davies.
He remembered them of the promiſes, ſeals and oaths, which
by publick authority had paſſed for concluding this marriage,
that theſe being religious bonds betwixt God and their ſouls,
could not by any politick act of ſtate be diſſolved. Hayward.
Eloquence the ſoul, ſong charms the ſenſe. 41ilton.
a Vital principle.
They ſay this town is full of cozenage,
Drug-working forcerers that change the mind;
Soul-killing witches that deform the body :
And many ſuch like libertines of fin.
Thou almoſt mak’ſt me waver in my faith,
To hold ºpinion with Pythagoras,
That ſºuls of animals infuſe themſelves
Into the trunks of men. Shakeſp. Merch. ºf Venice.
Thou ſun, of this great world both eye and ſoul. Milton.
Join voices all ye living ſouls ye birds,
That ſinging up to heav'n gate aſcend,
Bear on your wings, and in your notes his praiſe. Milton.
In cºmmon diſcourſe and writing, we leave out the words
Yºgetative...ſenſitive, and rational ; and make the word ſoul
Shakeſpeare.
ſerve for all theſe principles. Watts.
3. Spirit; effence; quinteſſence; principal part.
He has the very ſoul of bounty. Shakeſpeare.
Charity the ſoul of all the reſt. 44ilton.
4. Interiour power.
There is ſome ſºul of goodneſs in things evil
Would men obſervingly i. it out. &amp; Shai'ſ ar.
5. A familiar appellation expreſfing the qualities of the mind.
Three wenches where I ſtood, cry’d:
“, Alas, good ſoul!” Shakeſpeare's fulius Caeſar.
This is a poor mad ſºul; and ſhe ſays up and down the
town, that her eldeſt ſon is like you. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
. The poor ſºul ſat ſinging by a ſycamore tree,
Šing all a green willow:
Her hand on her boſ m, her head on her knee. Shakeſp.
ºnenlarged /* are diſguſted with the wonders of the ſºil.
croſcope, diſcovering animals which equal not a peppercorn.
6. Human being. Watts.
The moral is the caſe of
e *** of every ſºul of us. L’Eſrange.
Yo º Poor ſºul no longer in ſuſpenſe, 2/irang
" **ś is ſuch as does not need defence. Dryden.
It i - -
alºº are in it a hundred burgeois, and
0!!! J. *',
- - - - - Addiſon's Italy.
“... "tº of health none care to learn : ſ aly
2
My life is here *9 ſºul's concern. Swift
7. Aëtive power.
Earth, air and ſeas, through empty ſpace would rowl,
And heav'n would fly before the driving ſoul. Dryden.
8. Spirit; fire; grandeur of mind.
9. Intelligent being in general. -
Every ſoul in heav'n ſhall bend the knee. Milton,
Sou'led. adj. [from ſºul] Furniſhed with mind.
Griping, and ſtill tenacious of thy hold,
wou'd'ſt thou the Grecian chiefs, though largely ſºul’d,
Shou'd give the prizes they had gain'd before. Dryden,
Sou’ll ess. adj. [from ſoul..] Mean; low; ſpiritleſs.
Slave, ſºulleſ, villain, dog, O rarely baſe! Shakeſpeare.
Sou'lshot. n.ſ.. [ſoul and ſlot..] Something paid for a ſoul's re-
quiem among the Romaniſts.
In the Saxon times there was a funeral duty to be paid,
called pecunia ſepulchralis &amp; ſymbolum anima, and a Saxon fºul-
ſhot. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Sound. adj. [runb, Saxon J
1. Healthy; hearty; not morbid; not diſeaſed; not hurt.
I am fall’n out with my more headier will,
To take the indiſpos'd and ſickly fit
For the ſound man. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
He hath a heart as ſound as a bell, and his tongue is the
clapper; for what his heart thinks, his tongue ſpeaks. Shakespeare
He hath received him ſafe and ſºund. Luke xv. 27.
We can preſerve
Unhurt our minds, and underſtanding ſound. ilton,
The king viſits all around,
Comforts the ſick, congratulates the ſºund;
Honours the princely chiefs. Dryden.
But Capys, and the reſt of ſºunder mind,
The fatal preſent to the flames deſign'd,
Or to the deep. Dryden.
When a word, which originally ſignifies any particular ob-
jećt, is attributed to ſeveral other objects, on account of ſome
evident reference or relation to the original idea, this is pe-
culiarly called an analogical word; ſo a ſound or healthy pulſe,
a ſound digeſtion, ſound ſleep, are all ſo called, with reference
to a ſºund and healthy conſtitution; but if you ſpeak of ſºund
dočtrine, or ſound ſpeech, this is by way of reſemblance to
health, and the words are metaphorical. JWatts's Lºgick.
2. Right; not erroneous.
Whom although to know be life, and joy to make mention
of his name; yet our ſoundeſt knowledge is to know that we
know him not as indeed he is, neither can know him: and
our ſafeſt eloquence concerning him is ſilence. Hooker.
Let my heart be ſound in thy ſtatutes, that I be not aſhamed.
Pſal. cxix. 80.
The rules are ſound and uſeful, and may ſerve your devo-
tion. J/ake.
3. Stout; ſtrong; luſty.
The men are very ſtrong and able of body; and therefore
either give ſound ſtrokes with their clubs wherewith they
fight, or elſe ſhoot ſtrong ſhots with their bows. Abbot.
4. Valid; not failing.
They reſerved their titles, tenures, and ſigniories whole
and ſound to themſelves. Spenſer's Ireland.
5. Faſt; hearty. It is applied to ſleep.
New wak'd from ſoundeſt ſleep,
Soft on the flow'ry herb I found me laid - -
In balmy ſweat. s Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
Sound. adv. Soundly; heartily; completely faſt.
The meſſenger approaching to him ſpake,
But his waſte words return'd to him in vain;
So ſound he ſlept that nought might him awake. Fa. &amp;c".
Sound. n.ſ.. [ſonde, French.J A ſhallow ſea, ſuch as may be
ſounded. -
The ſound of Denmark, where ſhips pay toll. Camden.
Wake,
Behold I come, ſent from the Stygian ſºund,
As a dire vapour that had cleft the ground, ſ:
T’ingender with the night, and blaſt the day. Éen. johnſºn.
Him young Thooſa bore, the bright increaſe
Of Phorcys, dreaded in the ſounds and ſeas. Pope.
Sound. m. ſ. ſends, Fr.] A probe, an inſtrument uſed by chi-
rurgeons to feel what is out of reach of the fingers. ... .
The patient being laid on a table, paſs the ſound till it meet
with ſome reſiſtance. Sharp's Surgery.
To Sound. v. a. I t; to try depth.
. To ſearch with a plummet; to try. •. -
I º j ł. ãº. is a gºlf, which while we live we ſhall
never ſound. Hoºker.
You are,
To ſºund the bottom of the after-
. To try; to examine. - - - - -
2 #: never before ſounded you in this buſineſs; Shakespear;
invites theſe lords, and thoſe he meant to ſound. I)aniel.
I was injeſt,
Haſti much too ſhallow
ings, times. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
And by that offer meant to ſound Y. breaſt. Dryden,
I've ſounded my Numidians, man by man, .,,...,
And ić 'em ripe for a revolt. Addiſon's Cato.
3 To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O U
S O U
º
Tºº,
º:
º
-
+-
º:
.*
:, ; ,
ſix-
-:
#2,”
º
º
t
º
t !ºf
º
To Sound. v. n. To try with the ſounding line.
The ſhipmen deemed that they drew near to ſome coun-
try and ſºunded and found it near twenty fathoms. Act; xxvii.
Beyond this we have no more a poſitive diſtinét notion of,
infinite ſpace than a mariner has of the depth of the ſea, where
having let down a large portion of his ſºunding-line, he reaches
no bottom. Locke.
Sound. n.ſ. The cuttle-fiſh. Ainſworth.
Sound. m. ſ. [ſon, French ; ſonus, Latin.]
1. Anything audible; a noiſe; that which is perceived by the ear,
- Heaps of huge words uphoarded hideouſly
With horrid ſound, though having little ſenſe,
And thereby wanting due intelligence,
Have marred the face of goodly poeſy,
And made a monſter of their fantaſy. Spenſer.
Come, ſiſters, cheer we up his ſprights,
And ſhew the beſt of our delights;
I'll charm the air to give a ſound,
While you perform your antick round. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Daſh a ſtone againſt a ſtone in the bottom of the water,
and it maketh a ſound: ſo a long pole ſtruck upon gravel in
the bottom of the water, maketh a ſound. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
The warlike ſound of trumpets loud. Milton.
Whene'er he ſpoke his voice was heard around,
Loud as a trumpet with a ſilver fºund Dryden.
That which is conveyed into the brain by the ear is called
ſºund; though, 'till it affect the perceptive part, it be nothing
but motion. Locke.
2. Mere empty noiſe oppoſed to meaning.
He contented himſelf with doubtful and general terms,
which might make no ill ſound in mens ears. Locke.
Let us conſider this propoſition as to its meaning; for it is
the ſenſe and not ſound that muſt be the principle. Locke.
To Sou N'D. v. n.
1. To make a noiſe; to emit a noiſe.
From you fºunded out the word of the Lord. 1 Theſ, i. 8.
Trumpet once more to found at general doom. Milton.
That with one blaſt through the whole houſe does bound,
And firſt taught ſpeaking-trumpets how to ſound. Dryden.
Thither the ſilver ſounding lyres
Shall call the ſmiling loves and young deſires. Pope.
2. To exhibit by likeneſs of ſound.
Why do you ſtart, and ſeem to fear
Things that do ſound ſo fair
They being told there was ſmall hope of eaſe
To be expe&amp;ted to their evils from hence,
Were willing at the firſt to give an ear
To anything that ſounded liberty. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
This relation ſºunds rather like a chymical dream than a
philoſophical truth. JWilkins's Math. Magic.
To Sou N D. v. a.
1. To cauſe to make a noiſe; to play on.
And many nymphs about them flocking round,
Shakeſpeare.
And many tritons, which their horns did ſound. Spenſºr.
Michael bid ſºund
Th’ archangel trumpet. Milton.
Miſenus lay; none ſo renown'd
The warrior trumpet in the field to ſound;
With breathing braſs to kindle fierce alarms,
And rouze to dare their fate in honourable arms. Dryden.
2. To betoken or direét by a ſound.
Once Jove from Ida did both hoſts ſurvey,
And, when he pleas'd to thunder, part the fray;
Here heav’n in vain that kind retreat ſhould ſound,
The louder cannon had the thunder drown'd. JWaler.
3. To celebrate by ſound.
Sun, ſound his praiſe. Milton.
So'UNDboARD. n.ſ.. [ſºund and board.] Board which propa-
gates the ſound in organs. -
Try it without any ſoundboard along, only harpwiſe at one
end of the ſtring. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
As in an organ, from one blaſt of wind,
To many a row of pipes the ſoundboard breathes. Milton.
So'UNDING. adj. [from ſound.] Sonorous; having a magni-
ficent ſound. -
Obſolete words may then be revived, when more ſounding
or more ſignificant than thoſe in practice. Dryden.
So'UNDLY. adv. [from ſºund.]
1. Healthily ; heartily.
2. Luſtily; ſtoutly; ſtrongly.
When Duncan is aſleep,
Whereto the rather ſhall this hard day's journey
Soundly invite him. - Shakeſp. Macbeth.
They did ply -
My feet and hands with cords, and to the maſt
With other halſers made me ſºundly faſt. Chapman's Odyſſey.
Who had ſo often in your aid - -
So many ways been ſºundly paid;
Came in at laſt for better ends. Hudibras.
Have no concern, -
Provided Punch, for there's the jeſt,
Beſundy maul'd, and plague the reſt. Swift,
Their nobility and gentry are one half ruined, baniſhed, of
converted: they all ſoundly feel the ſmart of the laſt Iriſh
war. - Swift.
3. Truly; rightly.
The wiſeſt are always the readieſt to acknowledge, that
Joundly to judge of a law is the weightieſt thing which any man
can take upon him. Hooker.
The doćtrine of the church of England, expreſſed in the
thirty-nine articles, is ſo ſoundly and orthodoxly ſettled, as
cannot be queſtioned without extreme danger to our re-
ligion.
4. Faſt; cloſely.
Now when that idle dream was to him brought,
Unto that elſen knight he bad him fly,
Where he ſlept ſoundly, void of evil thought. Fairy Queen.
When the ſucceſſion of ideas ceaſes, our perception of du-
ration ceaſes with it, which every one experiments whilſt he
, ſleeps ſoundly. - Locke.
Sou’NDNess. m. ſ. [from ſºund.]
I. Health; heartineſs.
I would I had that corporal ſºundneſ, now,
As when thy father and myſelf in friendſhip
Firſt tried our ſoldierſhip.
2. Truth; rectitude; incorrupt ſtate.
In the end, very few excepted, all became ſubjećt to the
fway of time: other odds there was none amongſt them, ſaving
only that ſome fell ſooner away, and ſome later from the ſound.
meſ of belief. Hooker.
Leſly is miſled in his politicks; but he hath given proof of
his ſoundneſs in religion. Swift.
3. Strength; ſolidity.
This preſuppoſed, it may ſtand then very well with ſtrength
and ſoundneſs of reaſon, even thus to anſwer. Hooker.
Soup. m. ſ. [ſoupe, French. J Strong decoction of fleſh for
the table.
Spongy morells in ſtrong ragouſts are found, ,
And in the ſoup the ſlimy ſnail is drown'd. Gay's Trivia.
Let the cook daub the back of the footman's new livery, or,
when he is going up with a diſh of ſoup, let her follow him
ſoftly with a ladle-full. Swift.
SOUR. n.ſ. [run, runiz, Saxon; ſur, Welſh.]
I. Acid ; auſtere; pungent on the palate with aſtringency, as
vinegar, or unripe fruit.
All ſour things, as vinegar, provoke appetite. Bacon.
Their drink is ſºur. Hoſ. iv. 18.
But let the bounds of licences be fix’d,
Not things of diſagreeing natures mix’d, -
Not ſweet with ſour, nor birds with ſerpents join'd. Dryden.
2. Harſh of temper; crabbed; peeviſh; moroſe; ſevere.
He was a ſcholar,
Lofty and ſour to them that lov’d him not. Shakeſ H VIII.
A man of pleaſant and popular converſation, rather free than
Jaur and reſerved. Wotton's Life of the Duke of Buckingham.
Tiberius, otherwiſe a very ſºur man, would punctually per-
Bacon.
Shakeſpeare.
form this rite unto others, and expect the ſame. Brown.
He ſaid a ſour thing to Laura the other day. 7atler.
Sullen and ſour, with diſcontented mien
Jocaſta frown'd. Pope.
3. Aflićtive; painful.
Let me embrace theſe ſºur adverſities;
For wiſe men ſay it is the wiſeſt courſe.
4. Expreſfing diſcontent.
The lord treaſurer often looked on me with a ſour counte-
nancC. Gulliver's Travels.
Sour. m. ſ. [from the adječtive..] Acid ſubſtance.
A thouſand ſours to temper with one ſweet,
To make it ſeem more dear and dainty.
To Sou R. v. a.
I. To make acid.
His angelick nature had none of that carnal leven which
ferments to the ſouring of ours. Decay of Piety.
Thus kneaded up with milk, the new made man
His kingdom o'er his kindred world began;
*Till knowledge miſapply'd, miſunderſtood,
And pride of empire, ſour'd his balmy blood.
One paſſion, with a different turn,
Makes wit inflame or anger burn:
So the ſun's heat, with diff'rent pow'rs, -
Ripens the grape, the liquor ſºuri. Swift.
2. To make harſh. • -
Tufts of graſs ſour land. Mortimer's Husbandry.
3. To make uneaſy; to make leſs pleaſing:
Hail, great ; ſt t
To ſºur your happineſs, I muſt repor -
#. is dead. - - - Shakespeare Cymbeline.
He brought envy, malice, and ambition into Paradiſe, which
foured to him the ſweetneſs of the place. Dryden.
4. To make diſcontented. ..
Not my own diſgrace
Hath ever made me ſour my patient cheek,
Ör bend one wrinkle on my ſovereign's face. Shake?eart.
Shakeſp. H. VI.
Š'perſer.
Dryden,
24 Q- Three<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O U
so U.
* r death
- bbed mouths had ſºur'd themſelv cs to y
rº. thee open thy white hand. Shakeſpeare.
To Sour. v. n.
id.
I. "...ien it ſºurs in the ſtomach, and whey, turned
ſour, will purge ſtrongly. Arbuthnot on Diet.
- ečviſh or crabbed. -
2. Tºº out melancholy from the virtuous, and hinder
the hatred of vice from ſouring into ſeverity. Addiſon.
If I turn my eyes from them, or ſeem diſpleaſed, they ſour
upon it. Spectator.
Source. m. ſ. [ ſºurce, French.]
1. Spring; fountain; head.
Kings that rule
Behind the hidden/* of the Nile.
. Original; firſt courſe.
2 *. ſecond ſource of men, while yet but few,
with ſome regard to what is juſt and right,
Shall lead their lives. Milton's Parad. Loſt.
This is the trueſource and original of this miſchief. South.
Of himſelf is none;
But that eternal Infinite, and One,
Who never did begin, who ne'er can end,
On him all beings, as their ſource, depend. Dryden.
3. Firſt producer.
Famous Greece,
That ſºurce of art and cultivated thought,
which they to Rome, and Romans hither brought. Waller.
Sourish. adj. [from ſur.] Somewhat ſour. -
By diſtillation we obtain a ſouriſh ſpirit, which will diſſolve
coral. Boyle.
So'URLY. adv. [from ſour.]
1. With acidity.
2. With acrimony.
The ſtern Athenian prince
Then ſourly ſmil’d.
So'u RN ess. m. ſ. [from ſºur.]
1. Acidity; auſtereneſs of taſte.
Sournſ, conſiſteth in ſome groſſneſs of the body, and incor-
poration doth make the mixture of the body more equal,
which induceth a milder taſte. Bacon's Natural Hytory.
I' th' Spring, like youth, it yields an acid taſte;
Addison's Cato.
Dryden's Knight's Tale.
* - But Summer doth, like age, the ſournſ, waſte. Denham.
He knew
For fruit the grafted pear-tree to diſpoſe,
And tame to plumbs the ſourneſs of the ſloes. Dryd. Virgil.
Of acid or ſour one has a notion from taſte, ſºurneſs being
one of thoſe ſimple ideas which one cannot deſcribe. Arbuthn.
- Has life no ſºurneſ, drawn ſo near its end? Pope.
2. Aſperity; harſhneſs of temper.
Pelagius carped at the curious neatneſs of mens apparel in
thoſe days, and, through the ſºurneſs of his diſpoſition, ſpoke
ſomewhat too hardly thereof. Hooker.
He was never thought to be of that ſuperſtitious ſourneſs,
which ſome men pretend to in religion. King Charles.
Her religion is equally free from the weakneſs of ſuperſti-
tion and the ſurnſ of enthuſiaſm: it is not of an uncom-
fortable melancholy nature. Addison's Freeholder.
So'UR'sop. m. ſ. ſºuanahanus, Latin.] Cuſtard-apple.
It grows in ſeveral parts of the Spaniſh Weſt-Indies, where
it is cultivated for its fruits. Miller.
$ous. n.ſ.. [ſol, French..] A ſmall denomination of money.
Souse, n. / [ſout, ſalt, Dutch.]
1. Pickle made of ſalt.
2. Anything kept parboiled in ſalt-pickle.
And he that can rear up a pig in his houſe,
Hath cheaper his bacon, and ſweeter his ſouſe. Tuffer.
All-ſaints, do lay for pork and ſºuſe,
For ſprats and ſpurlings for your houſe. Tuſer.
To Souse. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To parboil, and ſteep in pickle.
Oy', though it ſtink, they drop by drop impart;
But ſouſe the cabbage with a bountedus heart. Pope. . .
2. To throw into water. A ludicrous ſenſe.
They ſouſed me into the Thames with as little remorſe as
they drown blind puppies. Shakeſpeare.
Who thoſe were that run away, %
And yet gave out th' had won the day;
Although the rabble ſºu'd them for’t,
O'er head and ears in mud and dirt. Butler.
They ſºuſed me over head and ears in water when a boy,
*...that I am now one of the moſt caſe-hardened of the Iroń.
t". - Addiſon's Guardian.
°ºusf. v. n. (Of this word I know not the original.] To
fall as a bird on its prey. -
Thus on ſome ſilver ſwan, or tim’rous hare,
Jºve's bird comes ſºuſing down from upper air;
Her crooked tallons truſs the fearful prey, *-
Then out of fight ſhe ſoars. Dryden's AFn.
Jove's bird will ſºft upon the tim’rous hare,
To §. tender kids with his ſharp talons tear. Dryden, jun.
º, º, To ſtrike with ſudden violence, as a bird
3
The gallant monarch is in arms;
And like an eagle o'er his airy tow’rs,
To ſouſe annoyance that comes near his neſt. Shakeſ eart,
Souse. adv. W.”h ſudden violence. A low word.
So'UTERRAIN. m. ſ. [ſouter rain, French..] A grotto or
in the ground. §§ J 8. CaVern
Defences againſt extremities of heat, as ſhade, grottoes
or ſouterrains, are neceſſary preſervatives of health. Arium.
SOUTH. n.ſ. [ruº, Saxon; ſuyd, Dutch; ſud, French.] -
1. The part where the ſun is to us at noon.
Eaſt and Weſt have no certain points of heaven, but North
and South are fixed; and ſeldom the far ſouthern people have
invaded the northern, but contrariwiſe.
2. The ſouthern regions of the globe.
The queen of the South. Bible
From the North to call -
Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring
Solſtitial Summer's heat. -
3. The wind that blows from the South.
All the contagion of the South light on you,
You ſhames of Rome, you! Shakeſp. Coriºlanui.
The North-eaſt ſpends its rage, and now
Th’ effuſive South warms the wide air. Thomſºn', Spring
South. adj. [from the noun..] Southern; meridional. 3 *
One inch of delay more is a ſouth ſea off diſcovery. Sha'ſ
How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth
by the ſouth wind. job xxxvii. 17.
Mean while the ſºuth wind roſe, and with black wings
Wide hovering, all the clouds together drove. 4.i.am,
South. adv. .
1. Towards the South.
His regiment lies half a mile
South from the mighty power of the king. Shai. R. III.
2. From the South.
Such fruits as you appoint for long keeping, gather in a fair
and dry day, and when the wind bloweth not ſouth. Bacon.
So'ur H1NG. adj. [from the noun..] Going towards the South.
I will conduct thee on thy way,
When next the ſºuthing ſun inflames the day. Dryden.
Not far from hence, if I obſerv'd aright
The ſºuthing of the ſtars and polar light,
Sicilia lies. - Dryden's Án.
South EA’s T. m. ſ. [South and Eaſt.] The point between the
Eaſt and South; the point of Winter ſunriſe.
The planting of trees warm upon a wall againſt the South,
or Southeaſt ſun, doth haſten their ripening; and the Southcoff
is found better than the Southweſt. Eacon.
The three ſeas of Italy, the Inferiour towards the Soutcoſt,
the Ionian towards the South, and the Adriatick on the North-
eaſt ſide, were commanded by three different nations. Artuth.
So’ut HERLY. adj. [from South.]
1. Belonging to any of the points denominated from the South;
not abſolutely ſouthern.
2. Lying towards the South.
Unto ſuch as live under the Pole that is only north which is .
above them, that is only ſoutherly which is below them. Brºwn.
Two other country bills give us a view of the moſt eaſterly,
weſterly, and ſoutherly parts of England. Graunt.
3. Coming from about the South.
I am but mad north, northweſt: when the wind is ſºuthrö,
I know a hawk from a handſaw. Shakespeare Hamid.
Souther N. adj. Irubenne, Saxon; from South.]
1. Belonging to the South; meridional.
Why mourn I not for thee,
And with the ſouthern clouds contend in tears? Shakespeare H.W.I.
2. Lying towards the South.
3. Coming from the South.
Mens bodies are heavier when ſºuthern winds blow tº"
when northern. Bacon's Natural Hyła).
Frowning Auſter ſeeks the ſºuthern ſphere,
And rots with endleſs rain th' unwholſome year. P.”
South ERN wood, n.ſ. [ruºchnpubu, Saxon; alretanº Lat]
This plant agrees in moſt parts with the wormwood, “”
which it is not eaſy to ſeparate it. Miller.
South Most. adj [from South.] Fartheſt toward the South.
Next Chemos, th' obſcene dread of Moab's ſons,
From Aroar to Nebo, and the wild --
Of ſºuthmg/? Abarim. Milion.
Souths AY. n.ſ. [Properly ſºothſay..] Predićtion.
All thoſe were idle thoughts and fantaſies,
Devices, dreams, opinions unſound,
Shews, viſions, ſouthſays, and prophecies, . . .
And all that #: º as leaſings, tales, and lies. Fa. §§.
To Souths AY. v. n. [See Sooths.AY J. To predićt. ſil
Young men, hovering between hope and fear, might cally
be carried into the ſuperſtition of ſouthſaying by names. Camden.
Souths AY'E.R., n. ſ. [Properly ſoothſayer. See Soothsaye")
A predićter.
Southward, adv. [from Saah..] Towards the South. h
- Countries are more fruitful to the ſouthward than . º:
northern parts. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the I/orld.
A priſoner in a room twenty foot ſquare, is at liberty to
walk twenty foot ſºuthward, but not northward. #,
Bacon,
Milion.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S O W
... 1
Every life, from the dreary months,
Flies conſcious ſouthward. Thomſon's Winter.
Southwe'st. m. ſ. [South and I//?..] Point between the South
and Weſt; Winter ſun-ſet.
Phenice is an haven of Crete, and lieth toward the South-
wºff. Acts xxvii. 12.
The planting of trees warm upon a wall againſt the South,
or Southeaſt ſun, doth haſten their coming on and ripening;
and the Southeaſt is found to be better than the Southweſt, tho’
the Sºuthweſt be the hotter coaſt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
SC/U/ENANCE. n.ſ. [French. J Remembrance; memory.
A French word which with many more is now happily diſuſed.
If thou wilt renounce thy miſcreance,
Life will I grant thee for thy valiance,
And all thy wrongs will wipe out of my ſouvenance. Spenſ
Gave wond’rous great countenance to the knight,
That of his way he had no ſouvenance,
Nor care of vow'd revenge.
Sow. n.ſ. Iruºn, Saxon; ſoeg, ſouve, Dutch J
1. A female pig; the female of a boar.
Boars have great fangs, ſows much leſs. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Aſow beneath an oak ſhall lye along,
Spenſer.
And white herſelf, and white her thirty young. Dryden.
For which they ſcorn and hate them worſe
Than dogs and cats do ſow gelders. Hudibras.
The ſºw gelder's horn has ſomething muſical in it, but this
is ſeldom heard. Addison's Spectator.
2. Perhaps from ſaw might come ſwine, rpma, Saxon.
And was’t thou fain
To hovel thee with ſwine, and rogues forlorn, -
In ſhort and muſty ſtraw Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. An oblong maſs of lead. Ainſworth.
A. An inſect; a millepede. Ainſworth.
So'w BREAD. m. ſ. [cyclamen, Latin.] A plant.
It hath a thick round fleſhy root: the flowers ariſe ſingly
upon pedicles from the root, which conſiſt of one leaf, divided
into five or ſix ſegments, which are reflexed almoſt to the bot-
tom, where they are divided: the pointal of the flower be-
comes a round membranaceous fruit, which contains roundiſh
ſeeds. Miler.
To SOW. v. n. [ſaian, Gothick; rapan, Saxon; ſaeyen,
Dutch..] To ſcatter ſeed in order to a harveſt.
The one belongeth unto them that ſeek, the other unto them
that have found happineſs: they that pray do but yet ſow, they
that give thanks declare they have reaped. Hooker.
The vintage ſhall reach unto the ſowing time. Lev. xxvi. 5.
They that ſow in tears, ſhall reap in joy. Pſ. cxxvi. 5.
He that ſoweth to his fleſh, ſhall reap corruption; but he
that ſoweth to the ſpirit, ſhall reap life everlaſting. Gal. vi. 8.
Sow to yourſelves in righteouſneſs, and reap in mercy. Hoſ.
To Sow. v. a. part, paſt ſown.
1. To ſcatter in the ground in order to growth; to propagate by
ſeed.
Like was not to be found,
Save in that ſoil where all good things did grow,
And freely ſprung out of the fruitful ground
As incorrupted nature did them ſºw.
From Ireland come I with my ſtrength,
And reap the harveſt which that raſcal ſºw'd. Shakeſ H. VI.
I ſaw my law in you, and it ſhall bring fruit in you. 2 Eſdr.
Many plants, which grow in the hotter countries, being ſet
in the colder, will, being ſºwn of ſeeds ſate in the Spring,
come up and abide moſt part of the Summer. Bacon.
The intelle&amp;tual faculty is a goodly field, capable of great
improvement; and it is the worſt huſbandry in the world to
Jow it with trifles or impertinencies. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
- When to turn
The fruitful ſoil, and when to ſaw the corn,
I fing, Mecaenas. Drydn's Giorg.
The proud mother views her precious brood,
And happier branches, which ſhe never ſow'd.
2. To ſpread; to propagate.
Frowardneſs is in his heart: he deviſeth miſchief continual-
ly, he ſoweth diſcord. Prov. vi. 14.
Fairy Queen.
Dryden.
To ſow a jangling noiſe of words unknown. Milton.
Since then they ſtand ſecur'd by being join'd:
It were worthy a king's head, to ſaw diviſion,
And ſeeds of jealouſy, to looſe thoſe bonds. Rowe.
Born to afflićt my Marcia's family,
And ſºw diſſention in the hearts of brothers.
3. To impregnate or ſtock with ſeed.
He ſhall give the rain of thy ſecd, that thou ſhalt ſºw the
ground withal. - If xxx. 23.
4. To beſprinkle. -
º He ſow'd with ſtars the heav'n thick as a field. Milton.
Morn new ſow'd the earth with orient pearl. Milton.
To Sow. v.a. For ſºw.
Some tree, whoſe broad ſmooth leaves together ſºw'd,
Addison Cato.
And girded on, may cover round. Milton.
To Sowcf. v. a. To throw into the water. See Souse.
He ſowced me up to the middle in the pond. L'Aſirange.
S P A
Sow ER, n. ſ. [from ſºw.]
1. He that ſprinkles the ſeed.
A ſwer went fºrth to ſow.
It is thrown round, as grain by a ſkilful -
2. A ſcatterer. , as grain by a ſkilful ſwer
Terming Paul and his doctrine a ſwer of words, a very bab-
bler or trifler. Hakewill on Providence.
3. A breeder; a promoter.
They are Jºwers of ſuits, which make the court ſwell, and
the country pine. Bacon.
So'WINS, nſ. Flummery, ſomewhat ſour’d and made of oatmeal.
Theſe ſowins, that is, flummery, being blended together,
produce good yeaſt. Mortimer's Husbandry.
See where Norah with the ſowin; comes. Swift.
To Sow L. v. 4. [from ſºw, as hogs are pulled by dogs, Skinner;
from ſole, a ſtrap, a rein, Kennet.] To pull by the ears.
He'll go and ſºwl the porter of Rome-gates by th' ears. Shah.
Sown. The participle of ſow. It is barbarouſly uſed by Swift
for ſewed.
An hundred and fifty of their beds, ſown together, made up
the breadth and length. Gulliver.
Sow thistle. n.ſ. A weed.
Sowthiſtles though coneys eat, yet ſheep and cattle will not
touch; the milk of which rubbed on warts weareth them
away, which ſheweth it is corroſive.
SPAAD. m. ſ. A kind of mineral.
Engliſh talc, of which the coarſer ſort is called plaiſter or
parget; the finer, ſpaad, earth-flax, or ſalamander's hair.
//codward's Met. Foſſ.
Mat. Xiii. 3.
Derham.
Bacon.
SPAce. n. ſ. [ſpatium, Latin.]
1. Room; local extenſion.
Space is the relation of diſtance between any two bodies or
points. Locke.
Oh, undiſtinguiſh’d ſpace of woman's wit I
A plot upon her virtuous huſband's life,
And the exchange my brother. Shakespeare King Lear.
This which yields or fills all ſpace. 14ilton.
Pure ſpace is capable neither of reſiſtance nor motion. Locke.
Space and motion can never be actually infinite: they have
a power only and a capacity of being increaſed without end;
ſo that no ſpace can be aſſigned ſo vaſt, but ſtill a larger may
be imagined; no motion ſo ſwift or languid, but a greater ve-
locity or ſlowneſs may ſtill be conceived. Bentley.
2. Any quantity of place.
I would not be the villain that thou think'ſt
For the whole ſpace that's in the tyrant's graſp,
And the rich Eaſt to boot. Shakespeare Macbeth.
There was but two ways to eſcape; the one * the
woods about ten miles ſpace to Walpo. nolles.
In ſuch a great ruin, where the fragments are great and
hard, it is not poſſible they ſhould be ſo adjuſted in their fall,
but that they would lie hollow, and many unfilled ſpace would
be intercepted amongſt them. Burnet.
Meaſuring firſt with careful eyes
The ſpace his ſpear could reach, aloud he cries. Dryden.
3. Quantity of time. -
Nine times the ſpace that meaſures day and night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquiſh'd, rolling in the fiery gulph,
Confounded, though immortal. Milton.
In a lever the motion can be continued only for ſo ſhort a
ſpace, as may be anſwerable to that little diſtance betwixt the
fulciment and the weight. Wilkins's Math. Mag.
God may defer his judgments for a time, and give a people
a longerſpace of repentance: he may ſtay’till the iniquities of
a nation be full; but ſooner or later they have reaſon to expect
his vengeance. Tillotſon's Sermons.
The lives of great men cannot be writ with any tolerable
degree of elegance or exactneſs, within a ſhort ſpace after their
deceaſe. Addiſon's Freeholder.
4. A ſmall time; a while. r
Sith for me ye fight, to me this grace
Both yield, to ſtay your deadly ſtrife a ſpace.
Compaſſion quell'd
His beſt of man, and gave him up to tears -
A ſpace, ’till firmer thoughts reſtrain'd exceſs. Affilm.
SPACIOUS. adj. [ſpacieux, Fr. ſpatiºſus, Latin. J Wide;
extenſive; roomy; not narrow.
The former buildings, which were but mean,
Fairy Queen.
contented
them not: ſpaciºus and ample churches they erected through-
out every city. - - Hºoker.
Convey your pleaſures in a ſpacious plenty;
And yet ſeem cold. Shakespeare
Mérab with ſpacious beauty fills the fight, r
But too much awe chaſtis'd the bold delight. Cow'ey.
Like an Engliſh gen'ral will.' die,
And all the ocean make my ſpatiº grave:
women and cowards on the land may lie;
The ſeas a tomb that's proper for the brave. Dryden,
SpA"crousNess. n. ſ. [from /pacious.] Roomineſs; wide ex-
enſion.
t SPA'DDLE.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">* __ wr *==T-
|
S P A
Diminutive of (i. A º: n
... moles with a ſpaddle, Wºº º the morn-
º ... for them. Alertimer º Hºland).
SpAbe. n. ſ. (r. ; ſpade, Iſlandick and Dutch..]
- a " ent of digging. -
I. Th:..". of .. new turned up, by digging with
the ſpade, or ſtanding by him that diggeth. Bacon.
Many learned men affirm, that ſome iſthmes have been cat
through by the ſea, and others cut by the /pade. Brown.
His next advance was to the ſoldier's trade,
where if he did not nimbly Ply the ſpade,
His ſurly officer ne'er fail'd to crack
His knotty cudgel on his tougher back.
Here nature never diff'rence made
Between the ſceptre and the ſpade.
2. A deer three years old.
3. A ſuit of cards:
Śrºdiceous. adj. [ſpadiº Latin.] -
Of thoſe ºft. iºd, though one was ſpadiceous, or
of a light red, and two inclining to red, yet was there not
any of this complexion among them. Brown's Wugar E. rºurs.
SpApºlle. n. ſ. [ſpadillº, or jpadille, French J The ace of
ſpades at ombre. -
sº yºk, adj. ſpagyricus, Lat. A word coined by Para-
celſus from faher, a ſearcher, Teutonick. J Chymical.
Srºyrist. n.ſ. A chymiſt.
This change is ſo uncxampled, that though among the more
curious ſpagyriſ'; it be very well known, yet many naturaliſts
SpA"ople. n.ſ. [.
Dryden.
Swift.
Ainſworth.
- cannot eaſily believe it. Boyle.
Srºg. The old preterite of ſpºt.
Soſpate the archangel Michael, then paus’d. Milton.
Spall. n.ſ. [effaule, French.) Shoulder. Out of uſe.
Their mighty ſtrokes their haberions diſmay’d, .
And naked made each others manly ſpelle. Fairfax.
Spalt, or Spelt. n.ſ. A white, ſcaly, ſhiningſtone, frequently
uſed to promote the fuſion of metals: Bailey.
SPAN. m. ſ. [rpan, rponne, Saxon; ſpanna, Ital. ſan, Dutch.]
1. The ſpace from the end of the thumb to the end of the little
finger extended.
Å foot, the length of it, is a ſixth part of the ſtatute; a
Jpan, one eight; a palm, or hand's breadth, one twenty-fourth;
a thumb's breadth, or inch, one ſeventy-ſecond; and a fore-
finger's breadth one ninety-ſixth. " Holder on Time.
Will you with counters ſum
The vaſt proportion of his infinite?
And buckle in a waſte moſt fathomleſs,
with ſpans and inches ſo diminutive
As fears and reaſons : Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
Sum how brief the life of man
Runs his erring pilgrimage,
That the ſtretching of a ſpan
Buckles in his ſum of age. Shakeſpeare.
when I removed the one, although but at the diſtance of
a ſpan, the other would ſtand like Hercules's pillar. Brown.
2. Any ſhort duration.
You have ſcarce time
To ſteal from ſpiritual leiſure a brief ſpan,
To keep your earthly audit. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The virgin's part, the mother and the wife,
So well ſhe acted in this ſpan of life. Waller.
Then conſcience, unreſtrain’d by fears, began
w To ſtretch her limits, and extend the ſpan. Dryden.
Life's but a ſpan, I'll ev'ry inch enjoy. Farqhuar,
To SPAN. v. a.
1. To meaſure by the hand extended.
Oft on the well-known ſpot I fix my eyes,
And ſpan the diſtance that between us lies. Tickell.
2. To meaſure.
My ſurveyor is falſe; the o'er great cardinal
Hath ſhew’d him gold; my life is ſann’d already. Shakespeare .
This ſoul doth ſpan the world, and hang content
From either pole unto the centre; -
Where in each room of the well-furniſh'd tent
He lies warm, and without adventure. Herbert.
Harry, whoſe tuneful and well-meaſur’d ſong
Firſt taught our Engliſh muſick how to ſpan
Words with juſt note and accent, not to ſcan
With Midas' cars, counting ſhort and long. Milton.
SPAN. The preterite of ſpin. See SPIN.
Together furiouſly they ran,
That to the ground came horſe and man;
The blood out of their helmets ſpan,
sº º were their encounters. Drayton's Nymphid.
TER. - - - - -
$PA'NFARTHING. }" J. [from ſpan, counter and farthing.]. A
ſpan or mark.
dº king, that for his father's ſake, Henry V. in whoſe
he fi. went to ſpancounter for French crowns, I am content
“. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
oys ſhall not pla
- àt ſtancºunter or blowpoiſt, but ſhall pay
Toll to ſome courtier. Donne.
To SPAR. v. n.
play at which money is thrown within a
S P A
His chief ſolace is to ſteal down, and play at ſanfarthing
with the page. Swift,
SPANG. m. ſ. [ ſºng's Dutch..] This word ſecons to have fig-
nified a cluſter of ſhining bodies.
The colours that ſhew beſt by candiclight are white, carna-
tion, and a kind of ſea-water green; and ouches or ſpangs,
as they are of no great coſt, ſo they are of moſt glory. Bacon.
SPA'NG i.e. n.f ſpangº, German, a buckle, a locket: whence
cher ſpangen, ear-ºngºl
1. A fºalſ plate or boſs ºf ſhining metal.
2. Anything ſparkiigg and ſhining.
As hoary froſt with ſangle; doth attire
The moſſy branches of an oak half dead. Fairy Queen.
Thus in a ſtarry night fond children cry
For the rich ſpangles that adorn the ſky. l/aller.
he twinkling ſpangles, the ornaments of the upper world,
loſe their beauty and magnificence: vulgar ſpectators ſee them
but as a confuſed huddle of petty illuminants. Glanvil.
That now the dew with ſpangles deck'd tie ground,
A ſweeter ſpot of earth was never found. Dryden.
To SpA'NGLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To beſprinkle with
ſpangles or ſhining bodies.
They never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear, or ſpangled ſtarlight ſheen. Shakeſpeare,
what ſtars do ſpangle heaven with ſuch beauty,
As thoſe two eyes become that heavenly face. Shakeſpeare.
Unpin that ſpangled breaſtplate which yºu wear,
That th' eyes of buſy fools may be ſtopt there.
Four faces each
Had, like a double Janus; all their ſhape
spangled with eyes, more numerous than thºſe
ºf Argus. Milton's Par. Iº?.
Donne.
Then appear'd
Spangling the hemiſphere, then firſt adorn'd
With the bright luminaries, that ſet and roſe. Milton,
The ſpacious firmanent on high,
With all the blue etherial ſky,
And ſpangl'd heav'ns, a ſhining frame,
Their great Qriginal proclaim. Addison's Spe:lator.
Spaniel. n.ſ. [Aſpaniºlus, Latin; ſpagnew'. French]
1. A dog uſed for ſports in the ficli, remarkoble for ſagacity and
obedience.
Divers days I followed his ſteps 'till I found him, having
newly met with an excellent /paniel belonging to his dead
companion. Sidney.
There are arts to reclaim the wildeſt men, as there aſ to
make ſpaniel, fetch and carry: chide 'em often, and feed 'em
ſeldom. - Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
2. A low, mean, ſneaking fellow; a courtier; a dedicator; a
penſioner; a dependant; a placeman.
I mean ſweet words,
Low crooked curteſies, and baſe ſpaniel fawning Shakespeare
I am your ſpaniel; and, Demetrius,
The more you beat me I will fawn on you; Shakeſpeare.
To SpA(NIsl. v. n. [from the noun.J. To ſawn 9"; " play
the ſpaniel.
The hearts
That ſpaniel'd me at heels, to whom I gave
Their wiſhes, do diſcandy and melt their ſweets
On bloſſoming Caeſar. Shakeſheart.
SPAN1sh Broom, n.ſ. [geniſia juncta, Lat:] A plant ſo called,
as being a native of Spain: it hath pliant branches, leaves plºt
alternately, flowers of the pea-bloom kind, ſucceeded by
ſmooth pods, containing ſeveral kidney-ſhaped ſeeds in each.
S AMiller. J A pl
panish Nut, n.ſ. [ſſyrinchium, Latin. plant. . .
It hath a ££º. the iris, from whence it differs
in having a double root, one lying over another, after the
ſame manner as thoſe of crocus and gladiolus. Millºr.
SPANK ER. m.ſ. A ſmall coin.
Your cure too coſts you but a ſanker. Dºlan.
SPA'NNER. m. ſ. The lock of a fuſee or carabine. Bailey.
My prince's court is now full of nothing but º
ſpanners, and muſket-reſts. Howel.
SPAR. ſ
1. Marcaſite. - ted
spar is a mixed body, conſiſting of cryſtal incorpº
ſometimes with lac lure, and ſometimes with othº.2
{tony, earthy, or metallick matter. - J/ *.
Sºme ſtones, as far of lead, diſſolved in proper º
ſtruums, become ſalts. Newton's Of”
2. [Sparre, Dutch..] A ſmall beam; the bar of a gate.
To fight with preluſive ſtrokes. Te
To SPAR. v. a. [rparran, Saxon ; ſperren, German]
ſhut; to cloſe; to bar.
And if he chance come when I am abroad,
Sparre the yate faſt for fear of fraud;
Ne for all his worſt, nor for his beſt,
Open the door at his requeſt.
Six gates i' th' city with maſſy ſtaples,
And correſponſive and fulfilling bolts,
Spar up the ſons of Troy.
Spenſer'. Paſirai.
Shakeſpiaſ”
ºff:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P A
:*
:*
* * *
**:
Yet for ſhe yode thereat half agaſt,
And Kiddie the door ſparred after her faſt. Spºnſºr.
SPA(RAble. n.ſ. [rpannan, Saxon, to faiten..] Small nails.
SPA'RADRAP. n.ſ.. [In pharmacy..] A cerecloth.
With application of the common ſparadrap for iſſues, this
ulcer was by a fontanel kept open. //iſeman's Sºrgery.
To SPARE. v. a. [rpanan, Saxon; ſpaeren, Dutch; eſpargne, .
French.]
1. To uſe frugally; not to waſte; not to conſume.
Thou thy father's thunder didſt not ſpare. Milton.
2. To have unemployed; to ſave from any particular uſe.
All the time he could ſpare from the neceſſary cares of his
weighty charge he beſtowed on prayer, and ſerving of God:
he oftentimes ſpent the night, alone in church-praying, his
head-piece, gorget, and gauntlets lying by him. Knoles.
He had no bread to ſpare. L’Eſtrange.
Only the fooliſh virgins entertained this fooliſh conceit, that
there might be an overplus of grace ſufficient to ſupply their
want; but the wiſe knew not of any that they had to ſpare,
but ſuppoſed all that they had little enough. Tiloſºn.
Let a pamphlet come in a proper juncture, and every one
who can ſpare a ſhilling ſhall be a ſubſcriber. Swift.
3. To do without; to loſs willingly.
I could have better ſtar'd a better man. Shakespeare Hºn. IV.
For his mind, I do not care, -
That's a toy that I could ſpare;
Let his title be but great,
“His clothes rich, and band ſit neat. Ben. jºhnſºn.
Senſe of pleaſure we may well
Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine; -
But pain is perfect miſery. Milton,
Now ſhe might ſpare the ocean, and oppoſe
Your condućt to the fierceſt of her foes.
The fair bleſfing we vouchſafe to ſend;
Nor can we ſhare you long, tho' often we may lend. Dryd.
4. To omit; to forbear.
We might have ſpar'd our coming.
Be pleas'd your politicks to ſpare ;
I'm old enough, and can myſelf take care. Dryden.
5. To uſe tenderly; to forbear; to treat with pity; not to
afflict; not to deſtroy; to uſe with mercy.
Spare us, good Lord. Common Prayer.
Who will ſet the diſcipline of wiſdom over mine heart,
that they ſhare me not for my ignorances : Ecclus xxiii. 2.
Doth not each look a flaſh of lightning feel !
Which ſpares the body's ſheath, but melts the ſteel. Cleavel.
Dim ſadneſs did not ſpare
Celeſtial viſages.
Leſs pleaſure take brave minds in battles won
Than in reſtoring ſuch as are undone:
Tygers have courage, and the rugged bear;
But man alone can whom he conquers ſpare.
Spare me one hour ! O ſpare me but a moment.
6. To grant; to allow; to indulge.
Set me in the remoteſt place,
That Neptune's frozen arms embrace;
Where angry Jove did never ſºare
One breath of kind and temperate air.
7. To forbear to inflict or impoſe.
Spare my remembrance; ’twas a guilty day;
And ſtill the bluſh hangs here. Dryd. All fºr Lºve.
O ſpare this great, this good, this aged king,
And ſpare your ſoul the crime ! Drydºn's Spaniſh Fryar.
Spare my fight the pain
Of ſeeing what a world of tears it coſts you.
To SPARE. v. n.
1. To live frugally; to be parcimonious; to be not liberal.
H' has where withal: in him -
Sparing would ſhow a worſe fin than ill doćtrine. Shakespeare
Thoſe wants, which they rather feared than felt, would
well enough be overcome by ſparing and patience. Anoles.
Our labours late and early every morning,
Midſt Winter froſts, then clad and fed with ſºaring,
Riſe to our toils. Otway.
God has not been ſo ſharing to men to make them barely
two-legged creatures, and left it to Ariſtotle to make them
rational. Locke.
When they diſcover the paſſionate deſire of fame in the am-
bitious man, they become ſparing and ſaving in their commen-
dations; they envy him the ſatisfaction of an applauſe. Addſ.
Now a reſervoir to keep and ſºare,
Waler.
Milton.
Milton.
Waller.
Irene.
Rºſcommon.
Dryden.
The next a fountain ſpouting through his heir. Pope.
No ſtatute in his favour ſays
How free or frugal I ſhall paſs my days;
Who at ſome times ſpend, at others ſpare,
Divided between careleſſneſs and care. Pope.
2. To forbear; to be ſcrupulous.
His ſoldiers ſpared not to ſay that they ſhould be unkindly
dealt with, if they were defrauded of the ſpoil. Knolles.
In theſe relations, although he be more ſparing, his prede-
ceſſors were very numerous. Brºwn's Wugar Errours.
To pluck and eat my fill Iſſar'd not. Milton.
S P A
3. To uſe mercy; to forgive; to be tender,
Their king, out ºf a princely feeling, was ſharing and com-
paſſionate towards his ſubjects. Lacon,
SPAR E. adj.
1. Scanty; not abundant; parcimonious.
He was ſpare, but diſcreet of ſpeech ;
delivering; equally ſtout and kind C.
Men ought to beware,
better conceiving than
ew's Surv. of Cºrºwal.
that they uſe not exerciſe and aſ are
diet both. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Join with thee calm peace and quiet;
Spa e faſt, that oft with gods doth diet.
The maſters of the world were bre
and the young gentlemen of Rome fel
becauſe they ate but once a day.
2. Superfluous; unwanted.
- If that no ſpare cloths he had to give,
His own coat he would cut, and it diſtribute glad. F. Q.
As any of our ſick waxed well, he might be removed; for
which purpoſe there were ſet forth ten ſpare chambers. Ea.m.
Learning ſeems more adapted to the female world than to
the mae, becauſe they have more ſpare time upon their hands,
and lead a more ſedentary life. Addiſon's Speciator.
In my ſpare hours you've had your part;
Ev’n now my ſervile hand your ſovereign will obeys. Norr.
3. Lean; wanting fleſh; macilent.
Ogive me your/pare men, and ſpare me the great ones. Shakespeare
f my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I ſhould avoid
So ſoon as that ſpare Caſius. Shakespeare. julius Cºſar.
His viſage drawn he felt to ſharp and ſpare,
His arms clung to his ribs. Alilton's Parad. Loft.
SPARE. m.ſ.. [from the verb.] Parcimony; frugal uſe; huſbandry.
Not in uſe. -
Our vićtuals failed us, though we had made good ſpare of
them.
SPA’RER. n.ſ.. [from ſpare.] One who avoids expence.
By nature far from profuſion, and yet a greater ſºarer than
a ſaver; for though he had ſuch means to accumulate, yet his
forts, garriſons, and his feaftings, wherein he was only ſump-
tuous, could not but ſoak his Exchequer. //otton.
SPA'RER:B. m. ſ. [ſpare and rib.[ Some part cut off from the
ribs: as, a ſpare ib of pork.
SPARGEFA’ction. n.ſ.. [ſpargo, Lat.] The aët of ſprinkling.
SPA'RING. adj. [from ſpare, J
1. Scarce; little.
Of this there is with you ſharing memory or none; but we
have large knowledge thereof. Bacon.
2. Scanty; not plentiful.
If much exerciſe, then uſe a plentiful diet; and if ſparing
diet, then little exerciſe. Bacon.
Good air, ſolitary groves, and ſºaring diet, ſufficient to
make you fancy yourſelf one of the fathers of the deſert. Pope.
3. Parcimonious ; not liberal.
Virgil being ſo very ſparing of his words, and leaving ſo
much to be imagined by the reader, can never be tranſlated as
Milton.
d up with ſ are diet;
t no want of ſtrength,
Locke.
Bacon.
he ought in any modern tongue. Dryden.
Though ſparing of his grace, to miſchief bent,
He ſeldom does a good with good intent. Dryden.
SPA'RINGLY. adv. [from ſparing.]
1. Not abundantly. -
Give us leave freely to render what we have in charge;
Or ſhall we ſparingly ſhew you far off
The dauphin's meaning? Shakespeare Henry V.
The borders whereon you plant fruit-trees ſhould be large;
and ſet with fine flowers; but thin and ſºaringly, left they de-
ceive the trees. Lacon's Eſſays.
2. Frugally; parcimoniouſly; not laviſhly. -
Speech of touch towards others ſhould be ſºaringly uſed;
for diſcourſe ought to be as a field, without coming home to
any man. Bacon's Eſſays.
High titles of honour were in the king's minority ſºaringly
granted, becauſe dignity then waited on deſert: Hayward.
Commend but ſparingly whom thou do'ſt love;
Butleſs condemn whom thou doſt not approve. Pºnham.
The morality of a gave ſentence, affected by Lucan, is
more ſparingly uſed by Virgil. 1/ryden.
3. With abſtinence. - ſ.
Chriſtians are obliged to taſte even the innocent pºſs of
life but ſparingly. Atterbury.
. Not with great frequency. -
4. Our "... had been frequented with ſo much
zeal, were approached more /farnºy. Atterbury's Sermons.
. Cautiouſly; tenderly.
§§§. . ſº, Saxon; ſparke, Dutch.]
1. A ſmall particle of fire, or kindled.” 1 : •.
If any marvel how a thing, in itſelf ſo weak, could import
any great danger, they muſt conſider not ſo much how ſmall
théjark is that flieth up, as how ºpt things about it are } º:
129A tº 4
fire. I am about to weep; but thinking that
We are a queen, my drops of tears I'll turn 2. ~~~
To ſparks of fire. Shake,i.
24 R WaS<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P A
S P A
ciful of the ſharks which ſome mº diffen-
died to kindle in º: K. Charles.
his deep quiet, from what ſource unknown,
Tº º ... that fatal birth diſcloſe:
And firſt, few ſcattringſpark, about were blown,
I was not forg
pers formerly ſtu
Big with the flames that to our ruin roſe. Dryden.
Oh, may ſome ſpark of you! celeſial fire
The laſt, the meaſeſt of your ſons inſpire. Pope.
- ining.
2. A...". there, a little clear light, ſome ſharks
of bright knowledge. ... Locke.
3. Anything vivid or active. - -
If any ſpark of life be yet remºniº ..., º
Down, down to hell, and ſay, I ſent thee thither. Shakespeare
4. A lively, ſhowy, ſplendid, gay man. It is commonly uſed
- t.
1 in iºmy huffing ſparks have we ſeen, that in the ſame
- º- ſame ſlaves :
day have been both the idols and the ſcorn of the º,
Aftarſ like thee, of the mankilling tº
Fell ſick. - Dryden.
As fºr the diſputes of ſharpers, we don't read of any pro-
viſions made for the honours ºf ſuch ſparks. Collier.
The fined ſark, and cleaneſt beaux
*** Drip from the ſhoulders to the toes. Prior.
Í who have been the poet's ſparé to day, -
will now become the champion of his Play. Granville.
Unlucky as Fungoſo in the play,
Theſe ſparks with aukward vanity diſplay
what the fine gentlemen wore yeſterday: - Pope.
To Sragº. v. n. [from the noun..] To emit particles of fire ;
to ſparkle. Not in uſe. º
Fair is my love,
When the roſe in her cheek appears,
or in her eyes the fire of love doſh ſarº, . Spenſºr.
SPARKrul. adj. [ſpark and full.] Livºy; briſk; airy.
Hitherto will our ſpariſul youth laugh at their gº grand-
father's Engliſh, who had more care to do well than to ſpeak
minion-like. Camden's Remains.
Sparkish. adj. [from ſpark.]
1. Airy; gay. A low word. •
Is anything more ſparkiſh and better humour'd than Venus's
accoſting her ſon in the deſarts of Libya J/a!h.
2. Showy; well dreſſed; fine.
A daw, to be ſparkiſh, trick'd himſelf up with all the gay
feathers he could muſter. L'//ºrange.
SpA"rkle n.ſ. [[from ſpark.]
1. A ſpark; a ſmall particle of fire:
He with repeated ſtrokes
Of claſhing flints, their hidden fires provokes;
Short flame ſucceeds, a bed of wither'd leaves
The dying ſarkles in their fall receives:
Caught into life, in fiery fumes they riſe,
And, fed with ſtronger food, invade the ſkies.
2. Any luminous particle.
To detract from the dignity thereof, were to injure ev'n
God himſelf, who being that light which none can approach
unto, hath ſent out theſe lights whereof we are capable, even
as ſo many ſparkles reſembling the bright fountain from which
they riſe. Hooker.
When reaſon's lamp, which, like the ſun in ſky,
Throughout man's little world her beams did ſpread,
Is now become a ſparkie which doth lie
Under the aſhes, half extiné and dead.
Ah then thy once lov'd Eloíſa feel
It will be then no crime to gaze on me.
See from my check the tranſient roſes die,
See the laſt ſparkle languiſh in my eye.
To SPA'RKLE. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. To emit ſparks.
2. To iſſue in ſparks.
The bold deſign
Pleas'd highly thoſe internal ſtates, and joy
Sparkled in all their eyes.
3. To ſhine; to glitter.
A hair ſeen in a microſcope loſes its former colour, and is
in a great meaſure pellucid, with a mixture of ſome bright
ſparkling colours, ſuch as appear from the refraction of dia-
monds. Locke.
Politulus is a fine young gentleman, who ſparkles in all
the ſhining things of dreſs and equipage. //atts.
SPARK LINGLY. adv. [from ſparkling..] With vivid and twink-
tº ling luſtre. -
Diamonds ſometimes would lock more ſhark'ingly than they
were wont, and ſometimes far more dull than ordinar, ſº le.
sºsosº. m.ſ.. [from ſparking.] Vivid and twinkling
illtre.
li I have obſerved a manifeſtly greater clearneſs and ſºar;-
º º ſome times than at others, though I could not re-
- SPA' to je ſuperficial clearneſs or foulneſs of the itone. Boyle.
****Row. W.J. Irpeaſya, Saxon.] A ſmall bird.
Dryden.
Davies.
Pope.
Milton.
Dº not this
Macbeth and Banquo: Yes, -
As ſparrows, eagles; or the hare, the lion. Shakeſpears
There is great probability that a thouſand ſparrows will i.
sºy at the fight of a hawk among them. }}
SPA'RRow HAwk, or ſparhawk. n.ſ. pean)aro -
The female of the º: hawk. J. [rſeaſ paroc, Saxon]
SPARRow GRAss. n.ſ. [Corrupted from aſ aragus J
Your infant peaſe to ſparrowgraſs prefer,
Which to the ſupper you may beſt defer.
SPARRY. adj. [from ſpar..] Conſiſting of ſpar.
In which manner ſpar is uſually found herein, and other
minerals; or ſuch as are of ſome obſervable figure; of which
ſort are the ſparry ſtriae, or icicles called ſtalaćtitae. Woodw,
SPAs M. n.ſ.. [ſpaſme, Fr. awºrºz.] Convulſion; violent
and involuntary contraćtion of any part.
All the maladies
Of ghaſtly ſpaſm, or racking torture, qualms
Of heart ſick agony. Milton
Wounds are ſubject to pain, inflammation, ſpaſm, Wim.
Carminative things dilute and relax; becauſe wind occº.
ſons a ſpaſm or convulſion in ſome part. Arbuthnot.
SPA's Modick, adj. [ſpaſmºdique, Fr. from ſpaſm.] Convulſive,
SPAT. The preterite of ſpit.
And when he had ſpat on the ground, he anointed his eyes.
Goſpel.
a/17/le”.
King,
Spar. m. ſ. The young ſlell-fiſh.
A reticulated film found upon ſea-ſhells, and uſually ſup-
poſed to be the remains of the veſicles of the ſpat of ſome ſort
of ſhell-fiſh. Hoodward on Fºſſ.
To SPA'tiate. v. n. [ſatior, Latin.] To rove; to range;
to ramble at large. 5* *
Wonder cauſeth aſtoniſhment, or an immoveable poſture
of the body, cauſed by the fixing of the mind upon one cog-
tation, whereby it doth not ſpatiate and tranſcur. Bº.
Confined to a narrow chamber, he could ſpatiate at large
through the whole univerſe. Bentler.
To SPATTER. v. a. [rpar, ſpit, Saxon.] -
1. To ſprinkle with dirt, or any thing offenſive.
The pavement ſwam in blood, the walls around
Were ſpatter'd o'er with brains. Addison.
2. To throw out any thing offenfive.
His forward voice now is to ſpeak well of his friend; his
backward voice is to ſpatter foul ſpeeches, and to detract. Slat.
3. To aſperſe; to defame.
‘īo SpA(it ER. v. m. To ſpit; to ſpatter as at any thing nau-
ſeous taken into the mouth.
They fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with guſt, inſtead of fruit
Chew'd bitter aſhes, which th' offended taſte
With ſpattering noiſe rejected. Milton.
SPATTERDAshes. n ſ [/patter and daſh.J. Coverings for the
legs by which the wet is kept off.
SpA"ttiiNg Poppy, n ſ. White behen. A plant which is a
ſpecies of campion. Miller.
SPATula, nſ' [ſhatha, fathula, Latin.] Aſpattle ºf ".
Spatula is an inſtrument uſed by apothecaries and ſurgeons
in ſpreading plaiſters or ſtirring medicines together. Suincy.
In raiſing up the hairy ſcalp ſmooth with myſpatula, I could
diſcover no fault in the bone. Iſºftman'. Surg".
SpAvin. m. ſ. [ eſpavent, Fr. ſavanº, Italian:! This diſeaſe
in horſes is a bony excreſcence or cruſtas hard as a bone,
that grows on the inſide of the hough, not far from the elbow,
and is generated of the ſame matter by which the bones of li-
gaments are nouriſhed: it is at firſt like a tender giffle, but
by degrees comes to hardneſs. Farrier's Diº.
They've all new legs and lame ones; ch: would take it,
That never ſaw them pace before, the ſaviº, -
And ſpringhalt reign'd among them. - Shałęſtart.
If it had been a ſavin, and the aſs had petitioned for *
other farrier, it might have beca reaſonable. L'Eſtrange.
Spaw. n.ſ. [from Sjaw in Germany.] A Place famous for
mineral waters; any mineral water. -
To spawl. v. n. [rice-lan, to ſpit, Saxon.] To throw mol"
ſture out of the mouth.
He who does on ivºry tables dine,
His marble floors with drunken ſpawling ſhinº Dryºt,
What miſchief can the dean have done him,
That Traulus calls for vengeance on him :
Why muſt he ſputter, ſpawl, and ſlaver it, Swift
In vain againſt the people's fav'rite. - -
Spaw L. m. ſ rpatl, Saxon.] Spittle ; moiſture ejećed "
the mouth.
Of ſpittle ſhe luſtration makes ;
Then in the ſº winer middle finger dips,
Anoints the temple, forehead, and the lips.
SPAwN. n.ſ. [ſººne, ſº enre, Dutch...]
1. The eggs of fiſh, or of frogs.
Maſters of the people,
Your multiplying ſpawn how can he flatter ,
That's thouſand to one good one? Shakeſpeare's
t
Dyſkº,
Cºriºlºrui,
Gºd
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">- S P E
tº §
º
-
º
God ſaid, let the waters generate -
Reptile, with ſpawn abundant, living ſoul! Milion.
Theſe ponds, in ſpawning time abounded with frogs, and
a great deal of ſpawn. Ray on tºe Creation,
2. Any product or offspring. In contempt.
'Twas not the ſpawn of ſuch as theſe
That dy'd with Punick blood the conquer'd ſeas,
And quaſht the ſtern AEacides. Roſcommon.
This atheiſtical humour was the ſpawn of the groſs ſuperſti-
tions of the Romiſh church and court. Tilio on.
To Spawn. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To produce as fiſhes do eggs.
Some report a ſea-maid ſpawn'd him. Shakeſpeare.
2. To generate; to bring forth. In contempt.
What practices ſuch principles as theſe may ſpawn, when
they are laid out to the ſun, you may determine. Swift.
To SPAwn. v. m.
1. To iſſue as eggs from fiſh.
2. To iſſue ; to proceed. In contempt.
It is ſo ill a quality, and the mother of ſo many ill ones that
ſpawn from it, that a child ſhould be brought up in the greateſt
abhorrence of it. Locke.
SPAw'NER. m. ſ. [from ſpawn..] The female fiſh.
The barbel, for the preſervation of their ſeed, both the
ſpawner and the melter cover their ſpawn with ſand. iſ alton.
To SPAY. v. a. [ pad, Latin.] To caſtrate female animals.
Be dumb you beggars of the rythming trade,
Geld your looſe wits, and let your muſe be ſpay’d. Cleavel.
The males muſt be gelt, and the ſows ſhay’d; the ſpay’d they
eſteem as the moſt profitable, becauſe of the great quantity of
fat upon the inwards Mortimer's Hºſhandry.
To SPEAK. v. n. [Preterite, ſpake or ſºoke; participle paſſive,
fpoken ; ſpecan, Saxon; ſpreken, Dutch.]
1. To utter articulate ſounds; to expreſs thoughts by words.
Speaking is nothing elſe than a ſenſible expreſſion of the no-
tions of the mind, by ſeveral diſcriminations of utterance of
voice, uſed as ſigns, having by conſent ſeveral determinate
fignificancies. Holder.
Hannah ſpake in her heart, only her lips moved, but her
voice was not heard. 1 Sam, i. 13.
2. To harangue; to make a ſpeech.
Many of the nobility made themſelves popular by ſpeaking
in parliament, againſt thoſe things which were moſt grateful
to his majeſty, and which ſtill paſſed notwithſtanding their
contradićtion. Clarendon.
Therſites, though the moſt preſumptuous Greek,
Yet durſt not for Achilles' armour ſpeak. Bryden.
3. To talk for or againſt; to diſpute
A knave ſhould have ſome countenance at his friend's re-
queſt. An honeſt man, ſir, is able to ſpeak for himſelf when
a knave is not. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
The general and his wife are talking of it;
And ſhe ſpeaks for you ſtoutly. Shakeſpeare's Othells,
When he had no power,
He was your enemy ; ſtill ſpake againſt
Your liberties and charters. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
4. To diſcourſe; to make mention.
Were ſuch things here as we do ſpeak about?
Or have we eaten of the inſane root,
That takes the reaſon priſoner. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Lot went out and ſpake unto his ſons in law. Gen. xix. I4.
The fire you ſpeak of,
If any flames of it approach my fortunes,
I’ll quench it not with water, but with ruin. Ben. johnſºn.
They could never be loſt, but by an univerſal deluge which
has been ſpoken to already. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Lucan ſpeaks of a part of Caeſar's army that came to him,
from the Leman-lake, in the beginning of the civil war. Addison
Had Lutherſpoke up to this accuſation, yet Chryſoſtom's ex-
ample would have been his defence. Atterbury.
4. To give ſound.
Make all your trumpets ſpeak, give them all breath,
Thoſe clam’rous harbingers of blood and death. Shakespeare ?.
5. To SPEAK with. To addreſs; to converſe with.
Thou can'ſ not fear us, Pompey, with thy ſails,
We'll ſpeak with thee at ſea. , Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleºpatra.
I ſpake with one that came from thence,
That freely render'd me theſe news for true. Shakeſpeare.
Nicholas was by a herald ſent for to come into the great
baſſa; Solyman diſdaining to ſpeak with him himſelf. Knoles.
To SPEAK. v.a.
1. To utter with the mouth; to pronounce.
Saul ſpake not any think that day. 1 Sam. xx. 26.
Mordecai had ſpoken good. Eſth., vii. s.
Conſider of it, take advice, and ſpeak your minds. Judges.
They ſat down with him upon the ground, and none ſpake
a word. job ii. 13.
When divers were hardened, and believed not, but ſpake evil
of that way before the multitude, he departed. Aći; xix. 9.
You, from my youth,
Have known and try’d me, ſpeak i more than truth? Sandys.
What you keep by you, you may change and mend,
**, Words once ſpoke can never be rej
- - Wallar,
A Under the tropick is our language jºcke, 4.
And part º Flanders hath receive our ºke. Waller
e no W ºr of , ; - . . " tº a
ſubſtances. *JPrº* it out, or in direct terms alº
- ºrre.
b $º ſpeak all languages, but words are underſtºod only
y ſuch a People or nation. sºcial
2. To proclaim; to celebrate. pectator.
It is my father's muſick
To ſpeak your deeds, not it. of his care
To have them reconſpeiſed hoi. (........” •
3. To addreſs; to .." - Shakespeare's Winter's Tale.
If he have need of thee, he will decei
eceive thee, ſmil
thce, put thee in hope, JPeak thee fair, and ſay, º:
thou ? -
--- -- - ! ---
4. To exhibit. Ecclus xiii. 6.
Let heav'n's wide circuit ſpeak
The Maker's high magnificence.
SPEAKA BLE. adj. [from ſpeak.] Miltºn;
1. Poſſible to be foken.
2. Having the power of ſpeech.
Sav,
How cam'ſt thou ſpeakable of mute. Milton:
SPEA'KER. n.ſ. [from ſpeak.]
1. One that ſpeaks. -
Theſe ſames grew ſo general, as the authors were loſt in
the generality of ſprasers. Bacon's Henry VII.
In converſation or reading, find out the true ſenſe, idea
which the ſpeaker or writer affixes to his words, lºan, Logick.
Common ſpeakers have only one ſet of ideas, and one ſet
of words to cloath them in; and theſe are always ready at the
mouth. Swi
- 1U1/º.
2. One that ſpeaks in any particular manner. iſ?
Horace's phraſe is tºrret fecur;
And happy was that curious plater. Priºr,
3. One that celebrates, proclaims, or mentions.
After my death, I wiſh no other herald,
No other ſpeaker of my liviág actions
To keep mine honour from corruption. Shakespeare.
4. The prolocutor of the commons.
I havediſabled myſelflike an elected ſpeaker of the houſe. Dryd
SPEA'KING Trumpet. nºſ. A ſtentorophonick initrument; a trum-
Pet by which the voice may be propagated to a great diſtance.
That with one blaſt through the whole houſe does bound,
And firſt taught ſteaking tra pet how to ſound. Drydºn.
SPEAR., n ſº [y/-per, Welſh; ſpere, Saxon ; ſpºre, Dutch; ſpare,
old, French; ſparum, low Lat. J
1. Along weapon with a ſharp point, uſed in thruſting or throw-
ing; a lance.
Th’Egyptian, like a hill, himſelf did rear,
Like ſome tall tree; upon it ſeem’d a ſpear. Cowley.
Nor wanted in his graſp
What ſeem'd both ſhield and Jpear. Milton.
The flying ſcar
Sung innocent, and ſpent its force in air. Pope.
The rous’d up lion, reſolute and ſlow,
Advances full on the protended ſpear.
2. A lance generally with prongs, to kill fiſh.
The borderers watching, until they be paſt up into ſome nar-
row creek, below them, caſt a ſtrong corded net athwart the
ſtream, with which, and their loud ſhouting, they ſtop them
from retiring, until the ebb have abandoned them to the hunt-
er's mercy, who, by an old cuſtom, ſhare them with ſuch in-
differency, as if a woman with child be preſent, the babe in
her womb is gratified with a portion: a point alſo obſerved
by the ſpear-hunters in taking of ſalmons. Carew.
To SPEAR. v. a. [from the noun..] To kill or pierce with a
ſpear.
To SPEAR. v. n. To ſhoot or ſprout. This is commonly writ-
ten ſpire.
Let them not lie leſt they ſhould ſpear, and the air dry and
ſpoil the ſhoot. Martimer’s Huſbandry.
SPEAR GRAss. n.ſ.. [ſ, ear and graſ...] Long ſtiff graſs.
Tickle our noſes with ſeargraſ, to make them bleed; and
then beflubber our garments with it. Shakespeare's Henry IV.
SPEARMAN. m.ſ. [ſpear and man.] One who uſes a lance in fight.
The ſpearman's arm by thee, great God, directed,
Sends forth a certain wound. Prior,
SPEA'RMINT. n.ſ. A plant; a ſpecies of mint,
SPEA/Rwort. n.ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
Special. adj [ſpecial, Fr. ſpecialis, Latin.]
1. Noting a ſort or ſpecies. -
A ſpecial idea is called by the ſchools a ſpecies.
2. Particular ; peculiar. -
Moſt commonly with a certain ſºcial grace of her own,
wagging her lips, and grinning inſtead of ſmiling. Sidney,
The ſeveral books of ſcripture having had each ſome ſeve-
ral occaſion and particular purpoſe which cauſed them to be
written, the contents thereof are according to the exigence of
that ſpecial end whereunto they are intended. *g,
Thomſºn.
JWattſ.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P E
S P E
Of all men alive . ! f
et beheld that ſpect” aCº.,
!. }. fancy more than any other.
Nought ſo vile that on the earth doth live, Shake?
But to the earth ſome ſpecial good doth give . ** ‘.
Our Saviour is repreſented every where in ſcripture, as the
ſpecial patron of the poor and the afflicted, and as laying their
intereſts to heart more nearly than thoſe of any other of his
members. f - icul * s Sermons.
iate; deſigned for a particular Purpoº. -
3. Agº upon his º: with a daughter of Kildare,
was made denizen by a ſerial act of parliament. Davies.
. Extraordinary; uncommon. - - - -
4 Fº hat ..., neceſſity of ſome ſpecial time doth cauſe to be
enjoined, bindeth no longer than during that time, but doth
afterward become free. . . Hosier.
Though our charity ſhould be univerſal, yet as it cannºt
be actually exerciſed, but on particular times, ſo. it ſhould
be chiefly on ſpecial opportunities. Spratt's Sermous.
Shakeſpeare.
e bore
A paunch of the ſame bulk before ;
which ſtill he had a ſºcial care -
To keep well cramm'd with thriſty fare. Hudibras.
5. Chief in excellence;
The king hath drawn
The ſpecial head of all the land together. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Specially. adv. [from ſerial J
1. Particularly above others.
special, the day that thou ſtoodeſt before the Lord. Deutr.
A brother beloved, ſpecially to me. Phil. xvi.
2. Not in a common way; peculiarly.
If there be matter of law that carries any difficulty, the jury
may, to deliver themſelves from an attaint, find itſ; †.
allé.
SPE/cIALTY. !" /.. [ſpecialité, French ; from ſpecial] Par-
SPEcIA'LITY. W. ticularity. - - -
On theſe two general heads all other ſpecialties are depen-
dent. Hooker.
The packet is not come,
Where that and other ſpecialties are bound. Shakespeare.
Speciality of rule hath been neglected. Shakeſpeare.
When men were ſure, that in caſe they reſted upon a bare
contract without ſpecialit, the other party might wage his law,
they would not reſt upon ſuch contračis without reducing the
debt into a ſpeciality which accorded many ſuits. Hale.
SPE'cIES. n.ſ. [ ſpecies, Latin.]
1. A ſort; a ſubdiviſion of a general term.
A ſpecial idea is called by the ſchools a ſpecies; it is one
common nature that agrees to ſeveral ſingular individual be-
ings: ſo horſe is a ſpecial idea or ſpecies as it agrees to Buce-
phalus, Trot, and Snowball. //atts.
2. Claſs of nature; ſingle order of beings:
He intendeth only the care of the ſpecies or common natures,
but letteth looſe the guard of individuals or fingle exiſtencies.
Brown's /ukar Lyraurs.
For we are animals no leſs,
Although of differentſ ecies. Hudibras.
Thou nam'ſt a race which muſt proceed from me,
Yet my whole ſpecies in myſelf I fee. Dryden.
A mind of ſuperior or meaner capacities than human would
conſtitute a different ſecies, though united to a human body
in the ſame laws of connexion; and a mind of human capa-
cities would make another ſpecies, if united to a different bo-
dy in different laws of connexion. Bentley's Sarmºns.
3. * to the ſenſes; any viſible or ſenſible repreſenta-
101l.
... An apparent diverſity between the ſeries viſible and audible
is, that the viſible doth not mingle in the medium, but the
audible doth Bacon.
It is a moſt certain rule, how much any body hath of co-
lour, ſo much hath it of opacity, and by ſo much the more
unfit it is to tranſmit the ſpecies. Ray ºn the Creatin.
The ſpecies of the letters illuminated with blue were nearer
to the lens than thoſe illuminated with deep red by about three
inches, or three and a quarter; but the ſºcces of the letters
illuminated with indigo and violet appeared ſo confuſed and
indiſtinct, that I could not read them. Newton's Orticks
4. Repreſentation to the mind. *** *** -
Wit in the poet, or wit-writing is no other than the facul-
ty of imagination in the writer, which ſearches over all the
memory for the ſpecies or ideas of thoſe things which it deſigns
to repreſent. Dryden
5. Show ; viſible exhibition. yacn.
Shews and ſºcie, ſerve beſt with the common people.
- - B icon.
6. Circulating money.
nº WaS º º: time of the greateſ ſplendour of the Ro-
there is º *: S quantity of current ſpecies in Europe than
the circulatiº ome poſſeſſed a much greater proportion of
*ting |exies of its time than any European city.
7. Simples that have place in a compound.
sº łaj, [ſheriffºne, French; Jºecies and facio.]
1. That which makes a thing of the ſpecies of which it is.
That thou to truth the perfect way may it know,
To thee all her ſpecifick forms I'll ſhow. Denham
The underſtanding, as to the exerciſe of this power i.
ſubject to the command of the will, though as to the Jºãº
nature of its ačis it is determined by the object. South
By whoſe direction is the nutriment ſo regularly diſtribu:
ted into the reſpective parts, and how are they kept to their
/pecifick uniformities.” Gºnville.
Theſe principles I conſider not as occult qualities, ſuppoſed
to reſult from the ſpeciſcº forms of things, but as general laws
of nature by which the things themſelves are formed; their
truth appearing to us by placnomena, though their cauſes be
not yet diſcºvered. 1 cwtºn’s (pick,
As all things were formed according to theſe ſpecifica pit.
forms, ſo their truth muſt be meaſured from their conformity
to them. No. ris.
Spec ſº gravity is the appropriate and peculiar gravity or
weight, which any ſpecies of natural bodies have, and by
which they are plainly diſtinguiſhable from all other bodies ºf
different kinds. &amp;uincy
The ſpecińck qualities of plants reſide in their native ſpirit,
oil and eſſential ſalt: for the water, fixt ſalt and earth sº
to be the ſame it all plants. Arbuthnot.
Specifick difference is that primary attribute which diſtin-
guiſhes each ſpecies from one another, while they ſtand rank-
ed under the ſame general nature or genus. Though wine
differs from other liquids, in that it is the juice of a certain
fluit, yet this is but a general or generick difference; for it
does not diſtinguiſh wine from cyder or perry: the ſpeciſcº
difference of wine therefore is its preſſure from the grape; as
cyder is preſſed from apples, and perry from pears. Waiti.
2. [In medicine. J Appropriated to the cure of ſome particular
diſtemper. It is uſually applied to the arcana, or medicines
that work by occult qualities.
The operation of purging medicines have been referred to
a hidden propricty, a ſpecifical virtue, and the like ſhifts of
ignorance. Baco's Natural Fiftory.
If ſhe would drink a good deco&amp;tion of ſarſa, with the uſual
ſpecificks, ſhe might enjoy a good health. J/ſeman.
Specific Ally, adv. [from ſpecificº.] In ſuch a manner as to
conſtitute a ſpecies; acording to the nature of the ſpecies.
His faith muſt be not only living, but lively too; it muſt
be put into a poſture by a particular exerciſe of thoſe ſeveral
virtues that are ſpecifically requiſite to a due performance of
this duty. South's Serººns.
Human reaſon doth not only gradually, but ſpecifically differ
from the fantaſtick reaſon of brutes, which have no conceit
of truth, as an aggregate of divers ſimple conceits, nor of
any other univerſal. Grew.
He muſt allow that bodies were endowed with the ſame aſ-
fe&amp;ions then as ever ſince; and that, if an ax head be ſup-
poſed to float upon water which is ſpecifically lighter, it haſ been
ſupernatural. Bently.
To Specificate. v. a. ſſrom ſpecies and facio..] To mark by
notation of diſtinguiſhing particularities.
Man, by the inſtituted law of his creation, and the common
influence of the divine goodneſs, is enabled to act as a reaſon-
able creature, without any particular, ſpecificating, concurrent,
new imperate act of the divine ſpecial providence. Hale,
Specific Arion, nſ [from ſpecifick; fecificatiºn, Fr.]
1. Diſtinct notation; determination by a peculiar mark.
This ſpecification or limitation of the queſtion hinders the
diſputers from wandering away from the preciſe point ofen;
quiry. //atts's Improvement ºf the Mind.
2. l articular mention. -
The conſtitution here ſpeaks generally without the feti-
fication of any place. - Ayliff.' Parººn.
To Specify v. a. [from ſpecies; ſpecificer, Fr.] To ment";
to ſhow by ſome particular marks of diſtinction: . . .
As the change of ſuch laws as have been ſpecified tº neceſ-
ſary, ſo the evidence that they are ſuch, muſt be great. Hooker.
St. Peter doth not ſpecify what theſe waters were: Burnet.
He has there given us an exact geography of Greece, where
the countries, and the uſes of their ſoils are ſpecift". Pope.
SPE'cIMEN. m.ſ.. [ſpecimen, Latin.] A ſample; a part of any
thing exhibited that the reſt may be known,
Several perſons have exhibited ſºcimens of this art before
multitudes of beholders. Midſºn's Special"
SPE'cious. adj. [ſpecieux, Fr. ſpeciºſus, Latin.]
1. Showy; pleaſing to the view.
The reſt, far greater part,
Will deem in outward rites and ſpecious forms,
Religion ſatisfy'd. Miltºn,
She next I toºk to wife,
O that I never had fond wiſh too late
Was in the vale of Sorec, Dalila, -
Milton.
8 Arbuthnot on Coins,
That ſpecious monſter, my accompliſh d *. Plauſible;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P E
2. Plauſible; ſuperficially, not ſolidly right; ſtriking at firſt
View. -
Bad men boaſt
Their ſpecious deeds on earth which glory excites,
Or cloſe ambition varniſh'd o'er with zeal. Milton.
Somewhat of ſpecious they muſt have to recommend them-
ſelves to princes; for folly will not eaſily go down in its na-
tural form. Dryden.
Temptation is of greater danger, becauſe it is covered with
the ſpecious names of good nature and good manners. Rºgers.
This is the only ſpecious objection which our Romiſh adver-
ſaries urge againſt the doctrine of this church in the point of
celebacy. Atterbury.
Spe'ciously, adv. . [from ſpecious.] With fair appearance.
Piety is oppoſed to hypocriſy and unſincerity; eſpecially to
that perſonated devotion under which any kind of impiety is
wont to be diſguiſed, and put off more ſpeciouſly. Hammond.
Speck. m. ſ. [rpecec, Saxon J A ſmall diſcoloration; a ſpot.
Every ſpeck does not blind a man. Govern. of the Tongue.
Then are they happy, when
No ſpeck is left of their habitual ſtains;
But the pure aether of the ſoul remains.
To Speck. v. a. To ſpot; to ſtain in drops.
Flow’r
Carnation, purple, azure, or ſpeck'd with gold.
SpecKLE. m. ſ. [from ſpeck.] Small ſpeck; little ſpot.
To SPEckle. v. a. [from the noun ) To mark with ſmall
ſpots.
po So dreadfully he towards him did paſs,
Forelifting up aloft his ſpeckled breaſt,
And often bounding on the bruiſed graſs,
As for great joy of his new comen gueſt.
Speckl"d vanity
Will ſicken ſoon and die,
Dryden's AFneid.
Milton.
Fairy Queen.
And leprous ſin will melt from earthly mould. Milton.
Saw'ſt thou not late a ſpeckl’d ſerpent rear
His gilded ſpires to climb on yon fair tree?
Before this happy minute I was he. Dryden,
The ſmiling infant in his hand ſhall take
The creſted baſiliſk and ſpeckled ſnake;
Pleas'd the green luſtre of the ſcales ſurvey,
And with their forky tongue and pointleſs ſting ſhall play.
Pºpe's Meſſiab,
The tortoiſe here and elephant unite,
Transform'd to combs, the ſpeckl’d and the white.
Speckt, or ſpeight, m. ſ. A woodpecker. Ainſworth.
SPE'cracle. n.ſ.. [ſpectacle, Fr. ſpectaculum, Latin.]
1. A ſhow; a gazing ſtock; any thing exhibited to the view as
eminently remarkable.
In open place produc’d they me,
To be a publick ſpectacle to all. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
We are made a ſpectacle unto angels, and men. 1 Cor. iv. 9.
2. Any thing perceived by the ſight.
Forth riding underneath the caſtle wall,
A dunghill of dead carcaſes he ſpy'd,
The dreadful ſpectacle of that ſad houſe of pride, Fa. Queen.
When pronouncing ſentence, ſeem not glad,
Pope,
Such ſpeciacles, though they are juſt, are ſad. Denham.
3. [In the plural.] Glaſſes to affiſt the fight.
The ſixth age ſhifts
Into the lean and ſlipper'd pantaloon,
With ſpectacles on noſe and pouch on ſide. Shakeſpeare.
We have helps for the ſight far above ſpectacles and %.
ºf coſt.
It is no fault in the ſpečiacles that the blind man ſees not.
Glanville's Apology.
Shakeſpeare was naturally learned: he needed not the ſpec-
tacles of books to read nature ; he looked inwards and found
her there. Dryden on Dramatick Poeſy.
The firſt ſºcãacle-maker did not think that he was leading
the way to the diſcovery of new planets. Grew.
This is the reaſon of the decay of fight in old men, and
ſhews why their fight is mended by ſpectacles. Newton.
This day, then let us not be told,
That you are ſick and I grown old;
Northink on our approaching ills,
And talk of ſpectacles and pills. Swift.
Spectacle D. adj. [from the noun..] Furniſhed with ſpec-
tacles.
All tongues ſpeak of him, and the bleared fights .
Are ſpectacled to ſee him. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
SPEc ra’rion. n.ſ.. [ſpeciatio, Latin.] Regard; reſpect.
This ſimple ſpeciation of the lungs is differenced from that
which concomitates a pleuriſy. Harvey.
SPEc ra"roR. m. ſ. [ſpeciateur, Fr. ſpectator, Latin.] A looker
on; a beholder.
More
Than hiſtory can pattern, though devis'd
And play'd, to take ſpectatºrs. Shakeſpeare.
. If it proves a good repift to the ſpectators, the diſh pays
the ſhot. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
An old gentleman mounting on horſeback got up heavily ;
S P F.
but deſired the ſpeciators that they would count fourſcore and
eight before they judged him. Dryd.m.
He mourns his former vigour loſt ſo far,
To make him now ſpectator of a war. Dryden.
What pleaſure hath the owner more than theſeñator 2 Seed.
SPF ctre. m. ſ. [ ſpectre, Fr. ſpectrum, Latin.] Apparition ;
appearance of perſons dead.
The ghoſts of traitors from the bridge deſcend,
With bold fanatick peºires to rejoice. Dryden.
The very poetical uſe of the word for a ſpeare, doth imply
an exact reſemblance to ſome real being it repreſents. Stilling.
Theſe are nothing but ſpeºires the underſtanding raiſes to
itſelf to flatter its own lazineſs. Locke.
Specta"Torship. n.ſ.. [from ſpe:lator.] Aét of beholding.
Thou ſtand'ſt i' th' ſtate of hanging, or of ſome death more
long in ſpectatorſhip, and crueller in ſuffering. Shakeſpeare.
Spect RUM. m. ſ. [Lat n.] An image; a viſible form.
This priſm had ſome veins running along within the glaſs,
from the one end to the other, which ſcattered ſome of the
ſun's light irregularly, but had no ſenſible effect in encreaſing
the length of the coloured ſcºrum. Newton's Opticks.
SPE'cul AR. m. ſ. [ ſpecularis, Latin J
1. Having the qualities of a mirrour or looking glaſs.
It were but madneſs now t' impart
The ſkill of ſpecular ſtone. Donne.
Quickſilver may by the fire alone, in glaſs-veſſels, be turn-
ed into a red body; and from this red body may be obtained
a mercury, bright and ſpecular as before. Boyle.
A ſpeculum of metal without glaſs, made ſome years ſince
for optical uſes, and very well wrought, produced none of
thoſe rings; and thence I underſtood that theſe rings ariſe
not from ſpecular ſurface alone, but depend upon the two ſur-
faces of the plate of glaſs whereof the ſpeculum was made,
and upon the thickneſs of the glaſs between them. Newton,
2. Aſſiſting fight. Improper.
The hidden way
Of nature would'ſt thou know, how firſt ſhe frames
All things in miniature? thy ſpecular orb
Apply to well diffected kernels; lo!
In each obſerve the ſlender threads ---
Of firſt-beginning trees. Philips,
To SPE'culate. v. n. [ſpeculer, Fr.ſpecular, Lat..] To meditate;
to contemplate; to take a view of any thing with the mind.
Conſider the quantity, and not ſpeculate upon an intrinſe-
cal relation. Digby on Bodies.
As our news-writers record many facts which afford great
matter of ſpeculation, their readers ſpeculate accordingly, and
by their variety of conječtures become conſummate ſtateſmen.
- Addiſon,
To SPE'culate. v. a. To conſider attentively; to look through
with the mind. -
Man was not meant to gape, or look upward with the
eye, but to have his thoughts ſublime; and not only behold,
but ſpeculate their nature with the eye of the underſtanding.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Specula'rroN. m. ſ. [ſpeculation, Fr. from ſpeculate.]
1. Examination by the eye; view.
2. Examiner; ſpy.
probably is here miſprinted for ſpeculator. -
They who have, as who have not, whom their great
ſtars
Throne and ſet high ſervants
Which are to France the ſpies and ſpeculations,
Intelligent of our ſtate. -
. Mental view; intelle&amp;tual examination; contemplation. ..
In all theſe things being fully perſuaded, that what . did,
it was obedience to the will of §. and that all men ould
do the like; there remained after ſpeculation, practice whº
unto the whole world might be framed. Hooker.
Thenceforth to ſpeculations high or deep, .
I turn'd my thoughts; and with capacious mind •r
Conſider'd all things viſible. Miltºn.
News-writers afford matter of ſpeculation. Addiſon.
4. A train of thoughts formed by meditation.
From him Socrates derived the principles of monº, and ; :-
emp. ,
º
moſt part of his natural ſpeculations...
5. Mental ſcheme not reduced to practice.
This terreſtrial globe, which before was only round in ſºc-
This word is found no where elſe, and
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
culation, has ſince been ſurrounded by the fortune "#.&lt;g ~4.
of many navigators. *...*
6. Power of fight. Not in uſe. - %
Thy bones are marrowleſ; thy blood is cold; //
Thou haſt no ſpeculation in thoſe eyes
Thou ſtar'ſt with. Shakespeare.
Speculariye, adj. [ſpeculatiſ, Fr. from ſºlate.]
1. Given to ſpeculation; contemplative. ind of
if all other uſes were utterly taken away, yet the miº" 2
man being by nature ſpeculative and delighted with contem-
plation in itſelf, they were to be known even for meer know-
ledge ſake. Hooker.
It encourages ſpeculative perſons who have no turn º:
to encreaſe their fortunes. ſon.
24 S
2. Theo-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P E
S P E
- ional; ideal; not pračical.
. Theoretical; notional; ideal;
2 Some take it for a ſpeculative platform, that reaſon and na-
at the beſt ſhould govern, but no wife to create
Bacon's holy //ar.
ture would t
ight. -
sºrry. alv. [from ſºccuative.]
1. Contemplatively; with meditation. -
2. Ideally; notionally; theoretically ; not pračlically.
Specul.ºroR. m.ſ. (from ſpeculate.]
1. One who forms theories.
He is dexterous in puzzling others, if they be not through-
paced ſpeculatºrs in thoſe great theories. More.
2. [Speculater, French..] An obſerver; a contemplator. -
Although lapidaries and queſtuary enquirers affirm it, yet
the writers of minerals, and natural ſpeculators, conceive the
ſtones which bear this name to be a mineral concretion. Brown.
. A ſpy; a watcher."
All the boats had one ſpeculator, to give notice when the
fiſh approached. B. oome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
SPE'cul AtoR Y. adj. [from ſpeculate.] Exerciſing ſpeculation.
SPE'CULU.M. m. ſ. (Latin. J A mirrour; a looking-glaſs;
that in which repreſentations are formed by reflection.
A rough and coloured object may ſerve for a ſpeculum, to
refle&amp;t the artificial rainbow. Boyle on Colours.
SPE D. The preterite and part, paſſive of ſpeed.
His horſe full of windgalls, ſped with the ſpavins, and rayed
with the yellows. Shakespeare.
Barbaroſla, ſºd of that he deſired, ſaid not long at Con-
ſlantinople, but ſhaped his courſe towards Italy. Knolles.
- With all his harneſs ſoon the god was ſped;
His flying hat, wings on his heels. Dryden.
SPEEch. ii. ſ. [from ſpeak.]
1. The power of articulate utterance; the power of expreſſing
thoughts by vocal words.
There is none comparable to the variety of inſtrućtive ex-
preſſions by ſpeech, wherewith a man alone is endowed, for the
communication of his thoughts. Holder on Speech.
Though our ideas are firſt acquired by various ſenſations
and reflections, yet we convey them to each other by the means
of certain ſounds, or written marks, which we call words;
and a great part of our knowledge is both obtained and com-
municated by theſe means, which are called ſpeech. J/atts.
2. Language; words conſidered as expreſſing thoughts.
In ſpeech be eight parts. Accidence.
The aëts of God to human ears
Cannot without proceſs of ſpeech be told. Milton.
3. Particular language as diſtinét from others.
There is neither ſeech nor language, but their voices are
heard among tº em. Pſ. Common Prayer.
4. Anything ſpoken.
A plague upon your epileptick viſage!
Smile you my ſpeeches as I were a fool.
5. Talk; mention.
The duke did of me demand
What was the ſpeech among the Londoners,
Concerning the French journey.
Speech of a man's ſelf ought to be ſeldom.
6. Oration; harangue.
The conſtant deſign of theſe orators, in all their ſpeeches,
Shakespeare. K. Lear.
Shakeſpeare.
Bacon's Eſſays.
was to drive ſome one particular point. Swift.
7. Liberty to ſpeak.
I, with leave of ſºcch implor’d, reply'd, Milton.
SF E'ECHLEss. adj. [from ſpeech.]
1. Deprived of the power of ſpeaking; made mute or dumb.
He fell down, foam'd at mouth, and was ſpeechlºſs. Shakeſp.
The great god Pan hath broken his pipes, and Apolós
prieſts are become ſpeecheſ. Raleigh.
A ſingle viſion fanſports them: it finds them in the eager-
neſs and height of their devotion; they are ſpeechleſ; for the
time that it continues, and proſtrate when it departs. Dryden.
*'ſ with wonder, and half dead with'ſ. Addiſon.
2. Mute; dumb. -
I kneel'd before him;
I'Twas very faintly he ſaid riſe: diſmiſs'd me
Thus, with his ſeechleſs hand. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
- From her eyes
did receive fair ſeechiºſ, meſſages. Shakeſpeare.
He that ºver hears a word ſpoken, it is no wonder’ſ re.
main ſpeechleſ. ; as any one muſt do, who from an infant ſhould
be bred up among mutes. Holder's Elements ºf Speech.
To SPEED. z. m.
º ** Pret, and part, paſſed and Jºeded, [ſºrden,
* To make haſte; to move with celerity.
. So well they fed that they be come at length
Unto the place whereas the Paynim lay, C
Devoid ºf outward ſenſe and native ſtrength,
$º ºth charmed cloud from view of day. Fa. Queen.
I, in ſº think me a ſwallow, an arrow, or a bullet Have
ſº .." pºor and cold motion, the expedition of thought
_": “cata Initiner * the very extremeſt inch of poſſibility. Shakespeare
pray'rs
Cou'd alter high º, I to that place
W ºld.ſeed before thee, and be louder heard. Milton.
See whicre Idwall ſizeſ, ! a truſty ſoldier.
2. [Spebian, to grow rich, Saxon.] To have ſucceſs.
ſake me not fighted like the baſiliſk:
I've look'd on thouſands, who have ſºd the better
By my regard, but kill'd none ſo. Shakeſp. lf inter', 7.k.
Now if this ſuit lay in Bianca's pow'r,
How quickly ſhould you ſpeed. Sha'effrare.
Macicaus ſhewed them: what an offence it was raſhly to de-
part out of the city, which might be unto them dangerous,
although they ſhould ſpecd never ſo well. An ſles.
When firſt this tempter croſs'd the gulph from heli,
I told you then he ſhould prevail, and ſpeed
In his bad errand. - Mi'ion.
Theſe were violators of the firſt temple, and thoſe that pro-
faned and abuſed the ſecond ſped no better. South.
3. To have any condition good or bad.
Ships heretofore in ſeas like fiſhes ſºrd,
The mightieſt ſtill upon the ſmalleſt fed.
To SPE F D. v. a.
1. To diſpatch in haſte. -
The tyrant's ſelf, a thing unuſed, began
To feel his heart relent with meer compaſſion;
But not diſpos'd to ruth or mercy then,
He ſped him thence home to his habitation.
2. To furniſh in haſte.
3. To diſpatch; to deſtroy ; to kill.
With a ſpeeding thruſt his heart he found:
The lukewarm blood came ruſhing thro’ the wound. Dryd.
A dire dilemma cither way I'm ſºrd;
If foes, they write; if friends, they read me dead.
4. To miſchief; to ruin.
5. To haſten; to put into quick motion.
She,
Hearing ſo much, will ſpeed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love. Shºſp. All's well that ends well.
Satan, tow'rd the coaſt of earth beneath,
Down from th’ ecliptick ſped with hop'd ſucceſs,
Throws his ſteep flight in many an airy wheel.
The prieſt reply'd no more,
But ſped his ſteps along the hoarſe reſounding ſhore. Dryden.
6. To execute; to diſpatch.
Judicial acts are all thoſe writings and matters which re-
late to judicial proceedings, and are ſped in open court at the
inſtance of one or both ºf the parties. Ayliff's Paregon.
7. To aſſiſt; to help forward.
Lucina
Reach'd her midwife hands to ſpeed the throws.
Propitious Neptune ſteer'd their courſe by night
A. Pºlº.
Jalºr,
Fairfax.
Pope.
Miltºn.
Dryden.
With riſing gales, that ſted their happy flight. Drydºn.
Speed the ſoft intercourſe from ſoul to ſoul,
And waft a ſigh from Indus to the Pole. Pºpe.
8. To make proſperous.
If any bring not this doćtrine, receive him not into your
houſe, neither bid him God ſpeed. St. Paul.
Timon is ſhrunk, indeed;
And he, that's once deny'd, will hardly ſeed.
SPEF D. m.ſ. [/poed, Dutch.]
1. Quickneſs; celerity.
Earth receives
As tribute, ſuch a ſumleſs journey brought
Of incorporeal/peed, her warmth and light; -
Steed' to deſcribe whoſe ſwiftneſs number fails. Mº'".
We obſerve the horſe's patient ſervice at the plough,
his ſpeed upon the highway, his docibleneſs, and deſire of
glory. More.
2. Haſle; hurry; diſpatch. - - -
When they ſtrain to their utmoſt ſºred, there is ſtill tº
wonted diſtance between them and their aims: all their º
purſuits bring them no acqueſts. Decay ºf Pit).
3. The courſe or pace of a horſe. -
He that rides at high ſpeed, and with a piſtol, kills a º:
flying. Shakesp. Henry IV.
4. Succeſs; event.
The prince your ſon, with mºre conceit and fºr
Of the queen's ſpeed, is gone. Shakespeare º:
O Lord, I pray thee ſend me good ſpeed. Gen. xx" "
SFI'l dily. adº. (from ſpeedy.) With Eaſte; quickly.
Poſt ſpeedily to your huſband, -
Shew ... ſº h ºft King Lear.
Send ſpedily to Bertran; charge him firictly .
Not to !... Dryden's Spaniſh Fºur.
SPE' E LIN ass. n. ſ. [ from ſpeedy. ] The quality of being
ſpeedy.
sºil. m. ſ. [veronica, Latin J Fluellin. A . ne
The leaves grow oppoſite by pairs: the calyx confisc 3.
leaf, which is divided into four parts, expanding in form .
ſtar: the flower conſiſts of one leaf, divided into ſo" º
ments, expanding in a circular order: when the flower .
the ovary becomes a membranaceous fruit, divided '.
cells, ſhaped like an heart, and filled with ſeeds, ſºme
ſmall, and at other times large and thick. Ažil tr.
Shakespeare .<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P E
S P E
In a ſcarcity in Sileſia a rumour was ſpread of its raining
millet-ſeed; but ’twas found to be only the ſeeds of the ivy-
leaved ſpeedwell, or ſmall henbit, , Derhan's Phyſic-Theology.
Speed Y. adj. [from ſpeed.j Quick; ſwift; nimble; quick of
diſpatch.
How near's the other army
—Near, and on ſpeedy foot: the main deſcry
Stands on the hourly thought. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Back with ſpeedieſt fail -
Zophiel, of cherubim the ſwifteſt wing,
Came flying. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Let it be enough what thou haſt done,
When ſpotted deaths ran arm'd through ev'ry ſtreet,
With poiſon'd darts, which not the good could ſhun,
The ſpeedy could outfly, or valiant meet. Dryden.
SPELL. m. ſ. ſrpel, Saxon, a word. }
1. A charm conſiſting of ſome words of occult power. Thus
Horace uſes words : -
Suit verba &amp; voces quiºus hanc lenire dilarem
Pºſis.
Start not; her ačtions ſhall be holy:
You hear my ſpell is lawful: do not ſhun her,
Until you ſee her die again; for then
You kill her double. Shakespeare IPinter's Ta'.
Some have delivered the polity of ſpirits, that they fland in
awe of charms, ſpells, and conjurations, letters characters,
notes, and daſhes. * Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Thou durſt not thus diſparage glorious arms,
Had not ſpells º
And black enchantments, ſome magician's art,
Arm'd thee or charm'd thee ſtrong. 5 - Milton's Agoniſłes.
Begin, begin, the myſtick ſel, prepare. Milton.
Yourſelf you ſo excel,
When you vouchſafe to breathe my thought,
That like a ſpirit with this ſpell
Of my own teaching, I am caught. Waller.
Mild Lucina
Then reach'd her midwife hands to ſpeed the throes,
And ſpoke the pow'rful/pell, that babes to birth diſcloſe. Dry.
2. A turn of work. -
Their toil is ſo extreme as they cannot endure it above four
hours in a day, but are ſucceeded by ſells: the reſidue of the
time they wear out at coytes and kayles. - Carew.
To SPELL. v. a. [ſpellen, Dutch.]
1. To write with the proper letters.
In the criticiſm of ſpelling, the word ſatire ought to be with
i, and not with y ; and if this be ſo, then it is falſe ſpelled
throughout. Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
2. To read by naming letters ſingly.
I never yet ſaw man,
How wiſe, how noble, young, how rarely featur'd, "
But ſhe would ſpell him backward; if fair fac'd,
She'd ſwear the gentleman ſhould be her ſiſter. Shakeſp.
3. To charin.
I have you faſt:
Unchain your ſpirits now with ſpelling charms,
And try if they can gain your liberty. Shakespeare Henry VI.
This gather'd in the planetary hour,
With noxious weeds, and ſpell'd with words of pow'r,
Dire ſtepdames in the magick bowl infuſe. Dryden.
To SPELL. v. n.
I. To form words of letters.
What ſmall knowledge was, in them did dwell;
And he a god, who could but read or ſpell. Dryden.
By paſting on the vowels and conſonants on the fides of
four dice, he has made this a play for his children, whereby
his eldeſt ſon in coats, has played himſelf into ſpelling. Locke.
The Latin, being written of the ſame character with the
mother-tongue, by the aſſiſtance of a ſpelling book, it is le-
gible. Speciator.
Another cauſe, which hath maimed our language, is a
fooliſh opinion that we ought to ſpell exactly as we ſpeak. Swift.
2. To read.
If I read aught in heav'n,
Or heav'n write aught of fate, by what the ſtars,
Voluminous or ſingle characters,
In their conjunction met, give me to ſpell,
Sorrows and labours, oppoſition, hate,
Attends thee. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
When gowns, not arms, repell'd
The fierce Epirote, and the African bold,
Whether to ſettle peace, or to unfold
The drift of hollow ſtates, hard to be ſpell’d. Milton,
And may at laſt my weary age
Find out the peaceful hermitage,
Where I may fit and rightly ſpell
Of every ſtar that heav'n doth ſhew,
And every herb that ſips the dew. Miltºn.
3. To read unſkilfully.
As to his underſtanding, they bring him in void of all no-
tion, a rude unwritten blank; ſent into the world only to read
and ſell out a God in the works of creation. South.
To Spelt. v.". To ſplit; to break. A bad word.
Feed geeſe with oats, ſpel ed beans, barley-meal, or ground
malt mixed with beer. Aſortimer's Huſbandry.
SPE’lter. m. ſ. A kind of ſemi-metal.
Metals in fuſion do not flame for want of a copious fume,
except ſhelter, which fumes copiouſly, and thereby flames Newt.
To SPEND. v. a. [rpenban, Saxon; ſpendere, Italian.]
1. To conſume ; to exhauſt; to lay oſt. &gt; -
Our cannons malice vainly ſhall be ſpent
Againſt th' invulnerable clouds. - Shake?ea, e.
I will very gladly ſpend and be ſpent for you. 2 Cor. xii. 15.
ſ? T. oil in the dwelling of the wiſe, but a fooliſh man
enaeth it up. Prºv. xxi. zo.
We muſt exaſperate
Th'almighty Vićlor to ſpend all his rage. Mºltzz.
Thus labour could at firſt begin a title of property in the
common things of nature, and ſpending it upon our uſes bound
lt. Lºcłe.
Money is brought into England by nothing but ſpending
here º: foreign commodities than what we carry to market
can pay for. Locke.
2. To beſtow as expence; to expend.
Wherefore do ye ſpend money for that which is not bread?
/ſ. lv. 2.
Eleutherius, perceiving that he was unwilling to Åº any
more time upon the debate, thought not fit to make any men-
tion to him of the propoſed opinion. Bºyle.
3. To effuſe.
Coward dogs -
Moſt ſpend their mouths, when what they ſeem to threaten
Runs far before them. Shakespeare Henry V.
4. To ſquander; to laviſh.
They bend their bows, they whirl their ſings around;
Heaps of ſpent arrows fall, and ſtrew the ground. Dryden.
The whole of our refle&amp;tions terminate in this, what courſe
we are to take to paſs our time; ſome to get, and others to
ſpend their eſtates. J/ake.
5. To paſs.
When we can intreat an hour to ſerve,
Would ſpend it in ſome words upon that buſineſs,
If you would grant the time. Shakespeare Macbeth.
They ſpend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down
to the grave. - job xxi. 13.
Heffend his life with his wife, and * neither
father nor mother. - 1 Eſdr. iv. 21.
When he was of riper years, for his faither accompliſh-
ment, he ſpent a conſiderable part of his time in travelling. Pope.
6. To waſte; to wear out.
In thoſe paſtoral paſtimes a great many days were ſpent, to
follow their flying predeceſſors. Sidney.
The waves aſcended and deſcended, 'till their violence being
ſpent by degrees, they ſettled at laſt. Burmet's Theo. of the Earth.
The winds are rais'd, the ſtorm blows high;
Be it your care, my friends, to keep it up
In its full fury, and direct it right,
*Till it has ſpent itſelf on Cato's head.
7. To fatigue; to harraſs. - -
Nothing but only the hope of ſpoil did relieve them, having
ſcarce clothes to cover their nakedneſs, and their bodies ſpent
with long labour and thirſt. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Or come your ſhipping in our ports to lay,
Spent and diſabled in ſo long a way? Dryden's Án.
Our walls are thinly mann'd, our beſt men ſlain;
The reſt, an heartleſs number, ſpent with watching,
And harraſs'd out with duty. Dryden.
Some ſpent with toil, ſome with deſpair oppreſs'd,
Leap'd headlong from the heights, the flames jº
reſt. ryden's ºn.
Thou oft haſt ſeen me
Wreſtling with vice and faction; now thou ſee'ſt me .
Spent, overpower'd, deſpairing of ſucceſs. Addison's Catº.
To SPEND. v. n.
1. To make expence.
Henceforth your tongue muſt ſend at leſſer rate,
Addiſon's Cato.
Than in its flames to wrap a nation's fate. Drydºn.
He ſpºnd, as a perſon who knows that he muſt come to a
reckoning. Sºuth.
2. To prove in the uſe. - -
Butter ſpent as if it came from the richer ſoil. Temple.
3. To be loſt or waſted. - - -
The ſound ſpendeth and is diſſipated in the open air; but in
ſuch concaves it is conſerved and contracted. . . Bacon.
On mountains, it may be, many dews fall, thºt ſpend before
they come to the valleys. Bacon.
4. To be employed to any uſe. - -
Ther. Havé been cups and an image of Jupiter made of
wild vines; for the vines that they uſe for wine are ſo often
cut, that their ſap ſpendeth into the grapes. Bacon.
Sps's der. n.ſ. (from ſpendl
1. One who ſpends. - -
Let not !. recreations be laviſh ſpenders of your time;
but healthful, ſhort, and apt to refreſh you. T:"A
2.
T-A-...--—<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P E
S P H
; , , , 1 . iſher.
2. º the commiſſioners, who were to levy the
•rre : met with any that were ſparing, tell them
'º, have, tº: they laid up; and if they
t sº they muſt needs have, becauſe it was ſeen in
§ fort and manner of living. ... Bacon's Henry VII.
SPE'NDTHRIFT. m. ſ. [ſpend and thrift. ) A prodigal; a
--- T. -
lº. cold weather ſtarved both the bird and the ſpend-
thrift. L'Eſtrange.
Some fawning uſurer does feed -
With preſent ſums th' unwary /pendthrift's need. Dryden.
Moſt men, like pendthrift heirs, judge a little in hand º:
ter than a great deal to come. - Zocke.
The ſon, bred in ſloth, becomes a ſpendthrift, a profligate,
and goes out of the world a beggar. | Swift.
SPE'Rable. adj [perabili, Latin.J. Such as may be º
We may caſt it away, if it be found but a bladder, an
diſcharge it of ſo much as is vain and not ſperable. Bacon.
SPERM. n: / , ſperme, Fr. Jperma, Lat..] Seed; that by which
the ſpecies is continued.
s: creatures bring forth many young ones at a burthen,
and ſome but one: this may be cauſed by the quantity of ſperm
required, or by the partitions of the womb which may ſever
the ſperm. - Bacon.
There is required to the preparation of the /perm of animals
a great apparatus of veſſels, many ſecretions, concoctions,
c
reflections, and circulations. Ray.
SPA R4/7 CETI. n.ſ. [ Latin. J Corruptedly pronounced
parma/ity.
A particular ſort of whale affords the oil whence this is
made ; and that is very improperly called ſperma, becauſe it is
only the oil which comes from the head of which it can be
made. It is changed from what it is naturally, the oil itſelf
being very brown and rank. The peculiar property of it is
to ſhoot into flakes, not much unlike the cryſtallization of
ſalts; but in this ſtate 'tis yellow, and has a certain rankneſs,
from which it is freed by ſqueezing it between warm metalline
Plates in a preſs, and afterwards expoſing the remainder to the
9pen air: at length it becomes Perfectly pure, inodorous, flaky,
ſmoºth, white, and in ſome meaſure tranſparent. &amp;Hinºy.
f -
§:::::::::::: {a}. [ſpermatique, Fr. from Jperm.]
1. Seminal; conſiſting of ſeed.
The primordials of the world are not mechanical, but ſher-
matical or vital. 44ore's Divine Dialogues.
Metals and fundry meteors rude ſhapes have no need
of any particular Principle of life, or ſpermatical form, diſtinét
from the reſt or motion of the Particles of the matter. Mºre.
2. Bºlonging to the ſperm.
The moiſture of the body, which did before irrigate the
Parts, is drawn down to the Jpermatical veſſels. Bacon.
Two different ſexes muſt £onºurt, their generation: there
is in both a great apparatus of ſpermatick veſſels, wherein the
more ſpirituous part of the blºod is by many digeſtions and
circulations exalted into ſperm. *ay on the Creation.
To SPE'RMATIZE. v., [from ſperm.] To yield ſeed.
Ariſtotle affirming that women. not ſpermatize, and con-
fºr a receptacle rather than eſſential principles of generation,
deductively includes both ſex. in mankind. Brown.
SPERMATode'le. * / [arieux and *] . A rupture cauſed
by the contradion of the ſeminal veſſels, and the Émºn falling
into the ſcrotum. Bailey.
SPER Moºlogist. n. f [*****{y^*..] One who gathers or
treats of ſeeds. Dić7.
To SPERSE. v. a. [ſperſºs, Latin.] To diſperſe; to ſcatter.
A word not now iſ uſe.
The wrathful wind,
Which blows cold ſtorms, burſt out of Scythian mew
That ſperſ? thoſe clouds, and in ſo ſhort as thought
This dreadful ſhape was vaniſhed to nought.
He making ſpeedy way through ſerſ. air,
And through the world ºf Wºrs wide and deep,
To Morpheus' houſe doth haſtily repair. Fairy Queen.
To SP Et. v.a. T., bring or pour abundantly. [spºt in S.
land is a ſuperabundance of Water: as, that tide or freſh was
a high ſpet.]
Myſterious dame,
That ne'er art Call'd, but when the dragon womb
Qf Stygian darkneſs ſets her thickeſt gloom,
And makes one blot of all the air,
-- $ºp ‘hy cloudy ebon chair. Miltºn.
O § Ew. * * [rpepan, Saxon; pelºven, Dutch.]
1. To """ ; to eject from the ſtomach.
A ſwordfiſh ſmall him from the reſt did funder,
hat ºn his throat him Pricking ſoftly under
His wide abyſs, him forced forth to ſpew,
º ſea did roar like heaven's thunder,
2. To eject; to º ſtain'd with filthy hue Spenſºr.
When earth with ſli -
* and mud is cover'd o’
} a tº r - er
Or hollow places ſtew their wat'ry ſtore. Dº, Georg.
I
When yellow ſands are fifted from below,
The glitt'ring billows give a golden ſhow;
And when the fouler bottom.jpew, the black,
The Stygian dye the tainted waters take. Dryden.
3. To ejećt with loathing. -
Keep my ſtatutes, and commit not any of theſe abomina.
tions, that the land ſpew not you out. Zev. xviii. 28.
Contentious ſuits ought to be ſpewed out, as the ſurfeit of
Courts. - Bacon's Effy,
To SPEw. v. n. To vomit; to eaſe the ſtomach.
He could have haul’d in
The drunkards, and the noiſes of the inn;
But better’twas that they ſhould ſleep or ſpew,
Than in the ſcene to offend or him of you. Ben. john 9/?.
SPE'wy, adj. [from ſpew.] A provincial word.
The lower vallies in wet Winters are ſo Jºewy, that the
know not how to feed them. AMortimer'; Butlandry.
To SPHA'celATE. v. a. [from ſphacelus, medical, Latin.] To
affect with a gangrene.
The long retention of matter ſphacelates the brain. Sharp.
To SPHA'cel. At E v. n. To mortify; to ſuffer the gangrene,
The ſkin, by the great diſtenſion, having been rendered
verythin, will, if not taken *way, ſphacelate, and the reſt
degenerate into a cancerous ulcer. Sharp's Surgery.
SPHA'cºlus. n.ſ. [rºaxºgº, /phacele, Fr.] A gangrene; a
mortification.
It is the ground of inflammation, gangrene, ſthacelus. Iſºftm.
SPHERE. m.ſ. [/phere, French; (phera, Latin.]
1. A globe; an orbicular body; a body of which the center is
at the ſame diſtance from ***Ty point of the circumference.
Firſt the ſun, a mighty ſphere, he framid. Milton.
2. Any globe of the mundate ſyſtem
What if within the moºn's fir ſhining ſphere,
What if in every other ſtar unſeen,
Of other worlds he happily ſhould hear?
Fairy &amp;ºn.
And then mortal ears
Had heard the muſick of the ſpheres. Drydºn.
3. A glºbe repreſenting the earthº, i. -
Two figures on the fides emboſſ appear;
Qomon, and what's his name who made the ſphere, }
And ſhew'd the ſeaſons of the ſliding year. Dryden,
4. Orb ; circuit of motion.
Half unſung, but narrower bound
Within the viſible diurnal ſphere. Milton,
5. Province; compaſs of knowledge or ačtion; employment.
[From the ſpher of activity aſcribed to the power emanating
from bodies.]
To be call'd into a h"gºff'ere, and not to be ſeen to move
in’t. Shakeſp. Art, and Cleºpatra.
Of enemies he could not but contract good ſtore, while
mºving in ſo high a ſphere, and withſ, vigorous a luſtre. K C.
Very man, verſed in any particular buſineſs, finds fault
with theſe authors, ſo far as they treat of matters within his
ſphere. Addison's Freeholder.
Ye know the ſphere, and various taſks aſſign'd
By laws eternal to the athereaſ kind. Pºpe,
To SPHERE. v.a. [from the noun.]
1. To place in a ſphere.
The glorious planet Sol,
In noble eminence enthrond and ſpher'd
Amidſt the reſt, whoſe medicinabić eye
Correóts the ill aſpects of planets evil.
2. To form into roundneſs.
Light from her native Eaſt
To journey through the airy gloom began,
Štºr'd in a radiant cloud, for yet the ſun -
č. In Ot. &gt; y Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft.
/
::::::: }a}. [ſpherique, French; from ſphere.]
1. Round; orbicular: globular. - -
what deſcent of waters could there be in a ſpherical and
round body, wherein there is nor high nor low. Raleigh.
Though founds ſpread round, ſo that there is an orb or
ſpherical area of the ſound, yet they go fartheſt IIl º fore-
lines from the firſt local impulſion of the air. 2 (2.0/2.
By diſcernment of the moiſture drawn up in vapours, we
muſt know the reaſon of the ſpherical figures of the drops. Glan,
A fluid maſs neceſſarily falls into a ſpheric ºf ſurface. Kºil.
Where the central nodule was globular, the inner ſurface of
the firſt cruſt would be ſpherick; and if º: in all
-&gt; - ickneſs, that whole cruſt would be ſpie-
rºo is ame tº Wºodward on Foſſils.
anet ; relating to orbs of the planets.
2. Pºi. . of our diſaſters the ſun, the moon, and
ſtars, as if we were villains by ſpherical predominance. Shakespeare
Spºrºsily. adv. [from ſpherica'.] In form of a ſphere.
SPHE RICALNESs. } m. / [from ſphere. J Roundneſs; ro-
SPHE'RICITY. tundity. - -
rº bodies receive their figure and limits from ſuch º: as
hinder them from attaining to that ſpheritantſ they aim at }, º,
Water conſiſts of ſmall, ſmooth, ſpherical particles: thei
&gt; - - - Žhe-
ſmoothneſs makes 'em ſlip eaſily upon one another; the #.
Shakeſpeare.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P I
(
y
*
ºiº
ricity keeps 'em from touching one another in more points than
one. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
SPHEROID. n.ſ. [r?&amp;#3. and #332; ſpheroide, Fr.] A body
oblong or oblate, approaching to the form of a ſphere.
They are not ſolid particles, by the neceſſity they are under
to change their figures into oblong ſpheroid, in the capillary
veſſels. Cheyn's Phil. Prinč.
SPHERo1'pical. adj. [from ſpheroid.] Having the form of a
ſpheroid.
If theſe corpuſcles be ſpheroidical, or oval, their ſhorteſt
diameters muſt not be much greater than thoſe of light. Cheyne.
SPHE RULE. n.ſ.. [ſphae ulo, Latin.] A little globe.
Mercury is a collection of exceeding ſmall, vaſtly heavy
ſpherules. Cheyne's Phil. Prinº,
SPHINx. m. ſ. [ rºyá. J
The ſphinx was a famous monſter in Egypt, that remained
by conjoined Nilus, having the face of a virgin, and the body
of a lion. Peacham on Drawing.
SP1’AL. m. ſ. ſºftial, Fr.] A ſpy; a ſcout; a watcher. Obſolete.
His ears be as ſpials, alarum to crie. Tºſer's Husbandry.
He privy ſpials plac'd in all his way,
To weet what courſe he takes, and how he fares. Fa. &amp;u.
For he by faithful ſpial was aſſured
That Fgypt's king was forward on his way. Fairfax.
Their truſt towards them hath rather been as to goodſial;
and good whiſperers, than good magiſtrates and officers. Bac.
SPICE. n.ſ. [eſpice, French..]
1. A vegetable production, fragrant to the ſmell and pungent to
the palate; an aromatick ſubſtance uſed in ſauces.
Dang'rous rocks,
Which, touching but my gentle veſſel's ſide,
Would ſcatter all the ſpices on the ſtream. Shakeſpeare.
Is not manhood, learning, gentleneſs, and virtue, the ſpice
and ſalt that ſeaſons a man? Shakeſp. Troil. and Creſſida.
The traffick of the ſpice-merchants. 1 Kings x. 15.
Garlick, the northern ſpie, is in mighty requeſt among
the Indians. . Temple.
High ſauces and rich ſpices are fetched from the Indies. Baker.
2. A ſmall quantity, as of ſpice to the thing ſeaſoned.
Think what they have done,
And then run ſtark mad; for all
Thy by-gone fooleries were but ſpices of it. Shakeſpeare.
It containeth ſingular relations, not without ſome ſpice or
ſprinkling of all learning. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
So in the wicked there's no vice,
Of which the ſaints have not a ſpice. Hudibras.
To Spice. v. a. [from the noun J. To ſeaſon with ſpice; to
mix with aromatick bodies.
His mother was a votreſs of my order,
And in the ſpiced Indian air by night
Full often ſhe hath goſſip’d by my ſide. Shakeſpeare.
Theſe hymns may work on future wits, and ſo
May great-grand-children of thy praiſes grow;
And ſo, though not revive, embalm and ſpice
The world, which elſe would putrify with vice. Donne.
What though ſome have a fraught
Of cloves and nutmegs, and in cinnamon ſail,
If thou haſt wherewithal to ſpice a draught,
When griefs prevail?
SPI'ce R. n.ſ. [from ſpice..] One who deals in ſpice.
Names have been derived from occupations, as Salter and
Spicer. Camden.
SP1’ce RY. m. ſ. [epiceries, French; from ſpice.]
1. The commodity of ſpices.
Their camels were loaden with ſpicery, and balm and
myrrh. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
She in whoſe body
The weſtern treaſure, eaſtern ſpicery,
Europe and Africk, and the unknown reſt,
Were eaſily found. Donne.
2. A repoſitory of ſpices.
The ſpicery, the cellar and its furniture, are too well known
to be here inſiſted upon. Addison on Italy.
SP1ck and SPAN. [This word I ſhould not have expected to
have found authoriſed by a polite writer. Span-new is uſed by
Chaucer, and is ſuppoſed to come from rpannan, to ſtretch,
Sax. expandere, Lat. whence ſpan. Span-new is therefore ori-
ginally uſed of cloath new extended or dreſſed at the clothiers,
and ſpick and ſpan is newly extended on the ſpies or tenters:
it is however a low word.] Quite new ; now firſt uſed.
While the honour, thou haſt got,
Is ſpick and ſpan new, piping hot,
Herbert.
Strike her up bravely. Butler.
They would have theſe reduced to nothing, and then others
created ſpick and ſpan new out of nothing. Burnet.
I keep no antiquated ſtuff;
But ſpick and ſpan I have enough. Swift.
Spick N E L. n.ſ. The herb maldmony or bearwort. Dićf.
SP1’cy. adj. [from ſpice ]
1. Producing ſpice; abounding with aromaticks.
For thern the Idumaean balm did ſweat,
And in hot Ceilon ſpicy foreſts grew. Dryden.
S P I
2. Aromatick; having the qualities of ſpice.
Off at ſea north-eaſt winds blow
Šahran odour, from the ſpicy ſhore
Of Araby the bleſt, with ſuch delay
Well pleas'd they ſlack their courſe, and many a league,
Chear'd with the grateful ſmell, old ocean ſmiles, ºn.
. The regimen in this diſeaſe Qught to be of ſpicy and cepha-
lick vegetables, to diſpel the viſcoſity. Arbuthnot on Diet
Under ſouthern ſkies exalt their ſails, -
Led by new ſtars, and borne by ſpicy gales'
- - - Pope.
Spicosity. n: ſ [ſica, Latin.] Thé quality of being flººd
like ears of corn; fulneſs of ears. -&gt; Dić7.
SPIDER m. ſ. [Stinner thinks this word ſoftened from finder
or ſpinner, from ſpin: junius, with his uſual felicity dream.
that it comes from gríčºv, to extend; for the ſpider'exteni.
his web. Perhaps it comes from ſpieden, Dutch: ſpeyden
Daniſh, to ſpy, to lye upon the catch. Don, sº, ś.
is a bettle, or properly an humble bee, or ſingleſ, i.e. May nº
ſpider be ſpy dor, the inſe&amp;t that watches the ºr *] The ani-
mal that ſpins a web for flies.
More direful hap betide that hated wretch,
Than I can wiſh to adders, ſpiders, toads.
The ſpider's web to watch we'll ſtand,
And when it takes the bee,
We'll help out of the tyrant's hand
The innocent to free.
Infidious, reſtleſs, watchful ſpider,
Fear no officious damſel’s broom;
Extend thy artful fabrick wider,
And ſpread thy banners round my room:
While I thy curious fabrick ſtare at,
And think on hapleſs poet's fate,
Like thee confin'd to noiſome garret,
And rudely baniſh'd rooms of ſtate. -
The ſpider's touch how exquiſitely fine !
Feels at each thread, and lives along the line. Pºpe.
SPI’d ER wort. n ſ. ſphalangium, Latin.] A plant with a lily-
flower, compoſed of ſix petals. Miller.
SPI'GNEL. m. ſ. [meum, Latin.] A plant.
The characters are: it is an umbelliferous plant, with very
narrow leaves: the ſeeds are large, oblong, and ſtriated. To
which may be added, it hath a perennial root. It is medi-
cinal. Miller.
SP1’Gor. m. ſ. [ſpijcker, Dutch..] A pin or peg put into the
faucet to keep in the liquor.
Baſe Hungarian wight, wilt thou the ſpigot wield. Shakespeare
Take out the ſpigot, and clap the point in your mouth. Sw.
SPIKE.. n.ſ.. [ſpica, Latin.]
I. An ear of corn.
Drawn up in ranks and files, the bearded ſpikes
Guard it from birds as with a ſtand cf pikes.
Suffering not the yellow beards to rear,
He tramples down the ſpikes, and intercepts the year. Dryd.
The gleaners,
Spike after ſpike, their ſparing harveſt pick, Thomſon.
2. A long nail of iron or wood; a long rod of iron ſharpened:
ſo called from its fimilitude to an ear.
For the body of the ſhips, no nation equals England for the
oaken timber; and we need not borrow of any other iron for
fpikes, or nails to faſten them. Bacon.
The head of your medal would be ſeen to more advantage,
if it were placed on a ſpike of the tower. Dryden.
He wears on his head the corona radiata, another type of
his divinity: the ſpikes that ſhoot out repreſent the rays of the
ſun. Addiſon.
Spike. n.ſ. The name of a plant. This is a ſmaller ſpecies
of lavender.
The oil of ſpike is much uſed by our artificers in their var-
niſhes; but it is generally adulterated. Hill's Mat. Med.
To Spike. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To faſten with long nails.
Lay long planks upon them, pinned or ſpiked down to the
pieces of oak on which they lie. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
Lay long planks upon them, ſpiking or pinning them down
faſt. AMortimer's Husbandry.
2. To ſet with ſpikes. -
A youth, leaping over the ſpiked pales, was ſuddenly frighted
down, and in his falling he was catched by thoſe ſpikes. It ſem.
SP1’KEN ARD. m. ſ. [ſpica º Latin.] A plant, and the oil
or balſam produced from the plant.
There º three ſorts of ºrd. 1. The Indian ſpike-
nard is moſt famous: it is a congeries of fibrous ſubſtances ad-
hering to the upper pºrt of the roof, of an agreeable aroma-
tick and bitteriſh'taſte: it grows plentifully in Java. It has
been known to the medical writers of all ages. 2. Celtick
ſpikenard is an oblong root, of an irregular figure, a. fragrant
and aromatick but not very pleaſant ſmell. It had its name
from Celtick Gaul, and is ſtill found in great abundance on.
the Alpine and Pyrenean mountains: 3. Mountain ſpike-
nard is a moderately large oblong root of a plant of the val:-
rian kind, its ſmell and qualities reſembling thoſe of the Cel-
tick ſpikenard. AIll's A/at. Med.
24. T A woman
Shakeſpeare.
Dryt *1.
Dr. Littleton.
Denham.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P I
S P I
A woman having an alabaſter box of ointment of ſpikenard,
brake and poured it ºn his head. Mar. xiv. 3.
H. ji into the pile bundle of myrrh, and ſheaves of ſpike-
ward, enriching it with “Yºy ſpicy ſhrub, Spectator.
Spill. n.ſ. Iſºjº', Dutch..] . . -
1. A ſmall ſhiver of wood, or thin bar of iron. -
The oyſters, beſides, gathering by hand, have a peculiar
dredge, which is a thick ſtrong net, faſtened to three ſpills of
iron, and drawn at the boat's ſtern. Carew.
Have near the bunghole a little venthole, ſtopped with a
ſpill. Mortimer.
2.”A ſmall quantity of money. I know not whence derived.
The biſhops, who conſecrated this ground, were won to
have a ſhill or ſportule from the credulous laity: Aliffº.
To #. v. 4. [rpillan, Saxon; ſpillen, Dutch; ſpilla,
Iſlandick.]
1. To ſhed; to loſe by ſhedding.
Be ſatisfied, déar God, with our true blood,
which, as thou know'ſt, unjuſtly muſt be ſpilt. Shakeſp.
Friend or brother, -
He forfeits his own blood that ſpills another. Shakespeare. Timon.
Themſelves exact their cruelty,
And I conſtrained am this blood to ſpill. Daniel's Civil War.
They having ſhill'd much blood, and done much waſte,
Subduing nations; and atchiev'd thereby
Fame in the world, high titles, and rich prey,
Shall change their courſe to pleaſure, eaſe, and ſloth. Milton.
Sichaeus' blood, by his falſe brother ſpilt,
I have reveng'd. Denham.
Medea muſt not draw her murth’ring knife,
And ſpill her childrens blood upon the ſtage. Roſcommºn.
Orbellan did diſgrace
With treach'rous deeds our mighty mother's race;
And to revenge his blood, ſo juſtly ſpilt,
What is it leſs than to partake his guilt? Dryden.
Nor the Centaurs tale
Pchere repeated; how, with luſt and wine
Inflam’d, they fought and ſpilt their drunken ſouls
At feaſting hour. Philips.
2. To deſtroy; to miſchief.
Thus is our thought with pain of thiſtle tilled,
Thus be our nobleſt parts dried up with ſorrow ;
Thus is our mind with too much minding ſpilled. Sidney.
Why are ye ſo fierce and cruel
Is it becauſe your eyes have power to kill
Then know that mercy is the Mighty's jewel,
And greater glory think to ſave than ſpill. Spenſer.
Thou all-ſhaking thunder,
Crack nature's mould, all germins ſpill at once
That make ingrateful man. Shakespeare . King Lear.
Be not angry with theſe fires;
For then their threats will kill me:
Nor look too kind on my deſires;
For then my hopes will ſpill me.
All bodies are with other bodies fill'd;
But ſhe receives both heav'n and earth together:
Nor are their forms by raſh encounters ſpill'd;
For there they ſtand, and neither toucheth either. Davies.
3. To throw away.
This fight ſhall damp the raging ruffian's breaſt,
The poiſon ſpill, and half-drawn ſword arreſt. Tickell.
To Spill. v. n.
I . T; sº to be laviſh.
Thy father bids thee ſpare, and chides for ſpilling. Sidney.
2. To be ſhed; to be loſt º being ſhed. ſpilling y
He was ſo topfull of himſelf, that he let it ſpill on all the
Company: he ſpoke well indeed, but he ſpoke too long. Watts.
Sri º: "...ſ. [I know not whence derived.] A kind of fiſh-
Ingr 11ne.
In harbour they are taken by ſpillers made of a cord, to
which divers ſhorter are tied at a little diſtance, and to each
of theſe a hook is faſtened with a bait: this ſpiller they fink in
the ſea where thoſe fiſhes have their accuſtomed haunt carº.
SPI LTH. n.ſ.. [from ſpill.] Any thing poured out or waſted.
Our vaults have wept with drunken ſpilth of wine. Shakespeare
To SPIN. v. a. preter. ſpun or 5 - -
pinnen, Dutch.] Jpun or ſpan; part ſpun. Irpinnan, Sax.
! . To draw out into threads.
The women ſpun goats hair. Ex. xxxv. 26.
2. To form threads by drawing out and twiſting any filamentous
matter. -
You would be another Penelope:
- &gt; pe; yet they ſay all the yarn
the ſºun, in Ulyſſes's abſence, did tº fi Ithaca full of .
Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
T The fates but only ſhin the coarſer ciº,
3. T he fineſt of the wool is left for you. Dryden.
3. * 2 Protract ; to draw out.
...”.” delay after another they ſºn out their whole live
º s no more future left ... 'cm. %.
againſt hº lies among the lawvers let nothing be ſaid
clients. Š"&amp; Pºoperty, ſpinning out cauſes, and ſqueezing
Czkier.
Pen, johnſºn.
why ſhould Rome fall a moment ere her time?
No, let us draw her term of freedom out
In its full length, and ſpin it to the laſt. Addiſon's Cato,
4. To form by degrees; to draw out tediouſly.
I paſſed lightly over many particulars, on which learned and
witty men might ſpin out large volumes. Digby.
en of large thoughts and quick apprehenſions are not to
expe&amp;t any thing here, but what, being ſpun out of my own
coarſe thoughts, is fitted to men of my own ſize. Locłe.
The lines are weak, another's pleas'd to ſay;
Lord Fanny ſpins a thouſand ſuch a day. Pope,
To SPIN. v. m.
1. To exerciſe the art of ſpinning.
We can fling our legs and arms upwards and downwards,
backwards, forwards, and round, as they that ſpin. More.
Ten thouſand ſtalks their various bloſſoms ſpread;
Peaceful and lowly in their native ſoil,
They neither know to ſpin, nor care to toil. Prior.
For this Alcides learn'd to ſpin;
His club laid down, and lion's ſkin. Prior.
2. [Spingare, Italian.] To ſtream out in a thread or ſmall
Current.
Together furiouſly they ran,
That to the ground came horſe and man;
The blood out of their helmets ſpan,
So ſharp were their encounters.
3. To move round as a ſpindle.
Whether the ſun, predominant in heav'n,
Riſe on the earth, or earth riſe on the ſun,
He from the Eaſt his flaming road begin,
Or ſhe from Weſt her ſilent courſe advance
With inoffenſive pace, that ſpinning ſleeps
On her ſoft axle, while ſhe paces ev'n
And bears thee ſoft with the ſmooth air along,
Solicit not thy thoughts. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. viii.
As when a ſhipwright ſtands his workmen o'er,
Who ply the wimble ſome huge beam to bore;
Urg'd on all hands it nimbly ſpins about,
The grain deep piercing 'till it ſcoops it out. Pºpº.
SP1’NAch. - - - -
SPI'Na Ge. }nſ [ſpinachia, Latin.] A plant.
It hath an apetalous flower, conſiſting of many ſtamina in-
cluded in the flower-cup, which are produced in ſpikes upon
the male plants which are barren; but the embryoes are pro-
duced from the wings of the leaves on the female plants,
which afterward become roundiſh or angular ſeeds, which, in
ſome ſorts, have thorns adhering to them. Miller.
Spinage is an excellent herb crude, or boiled. Mortimer.
Sri'Nal. adj. [ſpina, Latin.] Belonging to the back bone.
All ſpinal, or ſuch as have no ribs, but only a back bone,
are ſomewhat analogous thereto. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Thoſe ſolids are entirely nervous, and proceed from the
brain, and ſpinal marrow, which by their bulk appear ſuffici-
ent to furniſh all the ſtamina or threads of the ſolid parts. Arb.
Deſcending careleſs from his couch, the fall ---
Lux’d his joint neck and ſpinal marrow bruis'd, Philipi.
Spi'Ndle. n.ſ. [rpinbl, rpinbel, Saxon.] - - - - -
1. The pin by which the thread is formed, and on which it is
conglomerated.
Bodies fibrous by moiſture incorporate with other thread,
eſpecially if there be a little wreathing; as appeareth by the
twiſting of thread, and twirling about of ſpindleſ. Bacon.
Sing to thoſe that hold the vital ſheers,
And turn the adamantine ſpindle round • ?
On which the fate of gods and men is wound. . Miltºn.
Upon a true repentance, God is not ſo fatally tied.”
ſpindle of abſolute reprobation as not to keep his promiſ,”
ſeal merciful pardons. ir. jaſper Maiº
So Pallas from the duſty field withdrew,
And when imperial Jove appear'd in view,
Reſum'd her female arts, the ſpindle and the clew;
Forgot the ſcepter ſhe ſo well had ſway’d,
And with that mildneſs, ſhe had rul’d, obey'd. Stepney.
Do you take me for a Roman matron, l
. Bred tamely to the ſpinde and the loom A. Philipi.
2. A long ſlender ſtalk. in hag!
The ſpindles muſt be tied up, and, as they grow in haight,
rods ſet by them, left by their bending they ſhould break Mart.
3. Any thing ſlender. In contempt. - ! You
Repoſe yourſelf, if thoſe ſpindle leg of yours willº".
to the next chair. Dryden's Spaniſh Priº
The marriage of one of our heireſſes with an minº;
tier gave us ſpindle ſhanks and cramps. - º
To SPI'Ndle. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſhoot intº * Oſłº,
ſmall ſtalk.
Another ill accident in drought is the ſpinding of the º:
which with us is rare, but in hotter countries commo"; ".
much as the word calamity was firſt derived from *:
when the corn could not get out of the ſtalk. .
When the flowers begin to ſpindle, all but one º r
the biggeſt, at each root, ſhould be nipped off. Martimer.
Drayton's Nymphid.
SP1(NDLFSHANKRP.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P I
º
3. .".
SpindlesHA'NKed, adj. [ſpindle and/hank.] Having ſmall legs.
Her lawyer is a little rivelled, ſpindleſhanked gentleman. Addison
SFI'NdletRE e. n.ſ. Prickwood. A plant.
SPIN e. n.ſ.. [ſpina, Latin.] The back bone.
The rapier entered his right ſide, reaching within a finger's
breadth of the ſpine. Wiſeman's Surgery.
There are who think the marrow of a man,
Which in the ſpine, while he was living, ran;
When dead, the pith corrupted, will become
A ſnake, and hiſs within the hollow tomb. Dryden.
SPI's El. n.ſ. A ſort of mineral. Spinel-ruby is of a bright
roſy red; it is ſofter than the rock or baloſs ruby. JWoodward.
SPINET. m. ſ. [ºſpinette, French..] A ſmall harpſichord, an
inſtrument with keys.
When miſs delights in her ſpinnet,
A fiddler may his fortune get. Swift.
SPINI FERous. adj. [ſpina and fero, Latin.] Bearing thorns.
SPI'NNER: n ſ [from ſpin.]
1. (One ſkilled in ſpinning. -
A pračiſed ſpinner ſhall ſpin a pound of wool worth two
ſhillings for ſixpence. Graunt.
2. A garden ſpider with long jointed legs.
Weaving ſpiders come not here:
Hence you long leg'd ſpinners, hence. Shakeſpeare.
Spi'NNING Wheel. n.ſ.. [from ſpin..] The wheel by which, fince
the diſuſe of the rock, the thread is drawn.
My ſpinning wheel and rake,
Let Suſan keep for her dear ſiſter's ſake. Gay.
SPINN.Y. adj. I ſuppoſe ſmall, ſºnder. A barbarous word.
They plow it early in the year, and then there will come
ſome ſpinny graſs that will keep it from ſcalding in ſummer.
Mortimer's Huſbandry.
SPI'Nosity. m. ſ. [ ſpinoſus, Latin.] Crabbedneſs; thorny or
briary perplexity.
Philoſophy confifted of nought but dry ſpinoſities, lean no-
tions, and endleſs altercations about things of nothing. Glanv.
Spi'Nous, adj. [ſpinoſis, Latin.] Thorny; full of thorns.
SPI'Nst ER. n.ſ.. [from ſpin.]
1. A woman that ſpins.
The ſpin/lers and the knitters in the ſun, |
And the free maids that weave their thread with bones,
Do uſe to chant it. Shakeſpeare’s Twelfth Night.
2. [In law.] The general term for a girl or maiden woman.
One Michael Caſſio,
That never ſet a ſquadron in the field,
Nor the diviſion of a battle knows
More than a ſpinſler. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
I deſire that a yearly annuity of twenty pounds ſhall be
paid to Rebecca Dingley of the city of Dublin, ſpinſter, du-
ring her life. - Swift.
SPI'NSTRY. m. ſ. [from ſpinſter.] The work of ſpinning.
SPI'NY. adj. [ſpina, Latin.] Thorny; briary; perplexed ;
difficult; troubleſome.
The firſt attempts are always imperfeót; much more in ſo
difficult and ſpiny an affair as ſo nice a ſubject. Digby.
SPI's a cle [ſpiraculum, Latin.] A breathing hole ; a vent;
a ſmall aperture.
Moſt of theſe ſpiracles perpetually ſend forth fire, more or
leſs. Woodward.
SPI'RAL. adj. [ſpirale, Fr. from ſpira, Latin.] Curve; wind-
‘ing; circularly involved.
The proceſs of the fibres in the ventricles, running in ſpi-
ral lines from the tip to the baſe of the heart, ſhews that the
ſyſtole of the heart is a muſcular conſtrićtion, as a purſe is
ſhut by drawing the ſtrings contrary ways. Ray.
Why earth or ſun diurnal ſtages keep
In ſpiral tracts why through the zodiack creep 2 Blackmore.
The inteſtinal tube affects a ſtraight, inſtead of a ſpiral cy-
linder. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
SP1’R ALLY. adv. [from ſpiral.] In a ſpiral form. -
The fides are compoſed of two orders of fibres running cir-
cularly or ſpirally from baſe to tip. Ray on the Creation.
SPI'R E. m. ſ. [ſpira, Latin; ſpira, Italian; ſpira, Swediſh.]
1. A curve line; any thing wreathed or contorted ; a curl; a
twiſt; a wreath.
His head
Creſted aloft, and carbuncle his eyes;
With burniſh'd neck of verdant gold, ereºt
Amidſt his circling ſpireſ, that on the graſs
Floated redundant. Milton.
A dragon's fiery form belied the god,
Sublime on radiant ſpires be rode. Dryden.
Air ſeems to conſiſt of ſpires contorted into ſmall ſpheres,
through the interſtices of which the particles of light may free-
ly paſs it is light, the ſolid ſubſtance of the ſpires being very
ſmall in proportion to the ſpaces they take up. Cheyne.
2. Any thing growing up taper; a round pyramid, ſo called per-
haps becauſe a line drawn round and round in leſs and leſs
circles, would be a ſpire; a ſteeple.
With gliſt'ring ſpires and pinnacles adorn'd. Milton.
He cannot make one ſpire of graſs more or leſs than he hath
made. Hale's Orig. of Mankind.
T--A-4-
S P I
Theſe pointed ſpires that wound the ambient ſky; .
Inglorious change" ſhall in deſtructioni. Priºr,
3. The top or uppermoſt point.
Twere no leſs than a traducement to ſilence, that
Which to the ſpire and top of praiſes vouch'd,
Wou'd ſeem but modeſt. Shakeſpeare:
To SPIRE. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To ſhoot up pyramidically. -
It will grow to a great bigneſs; but it is not ſo apt to ſpire
"P as the other forts, being more inclined to brºnch’intº
arms. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
2: [Spiro, Latin.] To breathe. Not in uſe. mer; *:2.
SPIRIT. n.ſ. [ſpiritus, Latin.]
1. Breath ; wind in motion.
All purges have in them a raw Jpirit or wind, which is
the principal cauſe of tenſion in the ſtomach.
The balmy ſpirit of the weſtern breeze.
2. [Eſprit, Fr.] An immaterial ſubſtance. -
Spirit is a ſubſtance wherein thinking, knowing, doubting,
and a power of moving do ſubſiſt. Locłr.
I ſhall depend upon your conſtant friendſhip; like the truſt
we have in benevolent ſpirits, who, though we never ſee or
hear them, we think are conſtantly praying for us. Pºpe.
She is a ſpirit; yet not like air, or wind;
Nor like the ſpirits about the heart, or brain;
Nor like thoſe ſpirits which alchymiſts do find,
When they in ev'ry thing ſeek gold in vain;
For ſhe all natures under heav'n doth paſs,
Being like thoſe ſpirits which God's brightface do ſee,
Qr like himſelf whoſe image once ſhe was,
Though now, alas! ſhe ſcarce his ſhadow be;
For of all forms ſhe holds the firſt degree,
That are to groſs material bodies knit;
Yet ſhe herſelf is bodyleſs and free;
And though confin'd is almoſt infinite. Dav’es.
If we ſeclude ſpace, there will remain in the world but
matter and mind, or body and ſpirit. J/atts's Logick.
3. The ſoul of man.
The ſpirit ſhall return unto God that gave it. Bible.
Look, who comes here! a grave unto a ſoul,
Holding th' eternal ſpirit gainſt her will
In the vile priſon of afflićted breath. Shakeſpeare's K. jºhn.
4. An apparition.
They were terrified, and ſuppoſed that they had ſeen a ſpi-
rit. Luke xxiv. 37.
Perhaps you might ſee the image, and not the glaſs; the
former appearing like a ſpirit in the air. Bacon.
Whilſt young, preſerve his tender mind from all impreſ-
ſions of ſpirits and goblins in the dark. Locke.
5. Temper; habitual diſpoſition of mind.
- He ſits -
typon their tongues a various ſpirit, to raſe -
Quite out their native language. Milton.
That peculiar law of chriſtianity which forbids revenge, no
man can think it grievous who conſiders the reſtleſs torment
of a malicious and revengeful ſpirit. Tillotſºn.
Nor once diſturb their heav'nly ſpirits
With Scapin's cheats, or Caeſar's merits. Prior.
6. Ardour; courage; elevation; vehemence of mind.
'Tis well blown, lads ;
This morning, like the ſpirit of a youth
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
Farewel the big war,
The ſpirit ſtirring drum, th’ ear piercing fife. Shakeſpeare.
7. Genius; vigour of mind. -
More ample ſpirit than hitherto was wont,
Here needs me, whiles the famous anceſtors
Of my moſt dreaded ſovereign I recount,
By which all earthly princes ſhe doth far ſurmount. Fa. Q.
To a mighty work thou goeſt, O king,
Bacon.
-
Shakeſpeare,
That equal ſpirits and equal pow'rs ſhall bring. Daniel,
A wild Tartar, when he ſpies
A man that's handſome, valiant, wiſe,
If he can kill him, thinks tº inherit
His wit, his beauty, and his ſpirit. Butler.
The nobleſt ſpirit or genius cannot deſerve enough of man-
kind, to pretend to the eſteem of heroick virtue. Temple,
A perfect judge will read each work of wit,
With the ſame ſpirit that its author writ:
Survey the whoſe, nor ſeek ſlight fault to find, .
Where nature moves, and rapture warms the mind. Pope.
8. Turn of mind; power of mind moral or intellectual.
You were us'd f ſpirits,"
To ſav extremity was the trier of ſpirits,
That tº: † common men could bear. Shakeſp.
laſk but half thy mighty ſpirit for me. Cowley,
9. Intellectual powers diſtinct from the body. --
Theſe diſcourſes made ſo º impreſſion . the .
irit of the prince, whoſe nature was inclined to adven-
.##. ...”tranſported with the thought of it. Clarendon.
In ſpirit perhaps he alſo ſaw -
Rich Mexico, the ſeat of Montezume, *:::
m C. ºcri-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P I
__V ºr -
S P I
- - eption.
o, Sentiment; perc - ...ſ.º.1 -
I you are too great to be by me gainſaid:
Your ſpirit is too true, your fears too certain. Shakeſpeare.
II. º: mens tempers with the times, and made
a ſpirit of building ſucceed a ſpirit of pulling down. - South.
12. Man of activity; man of life, fire and enterpriſe.
"The watry kingdom is no bar
To ſtop the foreign ſpirits, but they come. Shakeſpeare
13. Perſons diſtinguiſhed º of the mind. A French
appily growing obſolete.
wº %. he ãº to pleaſe, ſuch would I chuſe
for my judges. - - Dryden.
14. That which gives vigour or cheerfulneſs to the mind; the
pureſt part of the body bordering, ſays Sydenham, on immate-
Fialty. In this meaning it is commonly written with the plu-
ination.
ral term Though thou didſt but jeſt:
with my vex'd ſpirit; I cannot take a truce, , , ,
But they will quake. Shakeſpeare's King john.
When I fit and tell
The warlike feats I've done, his ſpirit; fly out
Into my ſtory. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Alas! when all our lamps are burn'd,
Our bodies waſted, and our ſpirits ſpent,
When we have all the learned volumes turn'd,
which yield men's wits both help and ornament; -
What can we know, or what can we diſcern ? Davies.
To fingthy praiſe, wou'd heav'n my breath prolong,
Infuſing ſpirits worthy ſuch a ſong,
Not Thracian Orpheus ſhould tranſcend my lays. Dryden.
By means of the curious lodgment and inoſculation of the
auditory nerves, the orgaſms of the ſpirits ſhould be allayed.
Derham.
In ſome fair body thus the ſecret ſoul
With ſpirits feeds, with vigour fills the whole;
Each motion guides, and ev’ry nerve ſuſtains,
Itſelf unſeen, but in the effects remains. Pope.
The king's party, called the cavaliers, began to recover
their ſpirits. Swift.
15. The likeneſs; eſſential qualities.
Italian pieces will appear beſt in a room where the windows
are high, becauſe they are commonly made to a deſcending
light, which of all other doth ſet off mens faces in their
trueſt ſpirit. JWotton.
16. Anything eminently pure and refined.
Nor doth the eye itſelf,
That moſt pure ſpirit of ſenſe, behold itſelf. Shakeſpeare.
17. That which hath power or energy.
All bodies have ſpirits and pneumatical parts within them;
but the main difference between animate and inanimate are,
that the ſpirits of things animate are all continued within
themſelves, and branched in veins as blood is; and the ſpirits
have alſo certain ſeats where the principal do reſide, and where-
unto the reſt do reſort; but the ſpirits in things inanimate
are ſhut in and cut off by the tangible parts, as air in ſnow.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
18. An inflammable liquour raiſed by diſtillation.
What the chymiſts call ſpirit, they apply the name to ſo
many differing things, that they ſeem to have no ſettled notion
of the thing. ... In general, they give the name of ſpirit to any
diſtilled volatile liquour. Boyle.
All ſpirits, by frequent uſe, deſtroy, and at laſt extinguiſh
the natural heat of the ſtomach. Temple.
In diſtillations, what trickles down the ſides of the receiver,
if it will not mix with water, is oil; if it will, it is /pirit.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
19. It may be obſerved, that in the old poets ſpirit was com-
monly a monoſyllable, being written ſpright or ſprite.
The charge thereof unto a courteous ſpright
Commanded was. Spenſºr.
To SPI'RIT. v. a.
1. To animate graduate as a ſpirit.
So talk'd the ſpirited ſly ſnake.
2. To excite; to animate; to encourage.
He will be faint in any execution of ſuch a counſel, unleſs
ſpirited by the unanimous decrees of a general diet. Temple.
Civil diſſenſions never fail of introducing and ſpiriting the
ambition of private men. Swift on the Cont, in Ahº, and Rome.
Many officers and private men ſpirit up and aſſiſt thoſe ob.
ſtinate people to continue in their rebellion. Swift.
3. To draw; to entice.
In the ſouthern coaſt of America, the ſouthern point of the
needle varieth toward the land, as being diſpoſed and ſpirited
that way, by the meridional and proper hemiſphere. Brown.
The miniſtry had him ſpirited away, and carried abroad as
sº. ºſon. f - - Arbuthuot and Pope.
breath. *** [from ſpiritus, Latin.] By means of the
..ºve one of each pronounced ſpiritaly, the other vo-
SPI'R y. - - - Holder's Elements of Speech.
**D. adj. [from ſpirit Lively; vivacious; full of fire.
Milton's Par. Loft.
Dryden's tranſlation of Virgil is noble and ſpirited. Pºpe.
Spi'RITEDNEss. n.ſ.. [from ſpirited.] Diſpoſition or make of
mind.
He ſhowed the narrow ſpiritedneſs, pride, and ignorance of
pedants. - - Addiſon.
SPIRIT Fulness. n.ſ.. [from ſpirit and full.] Sprightlineſ.
livelineſs. -
A cocks crowing is, a tone that correſponds to ſinging, at-
teſting his mirth and ſpiritfulneſs. Harver.
Spi'Ritless. ad. [from ſpirit J Dejected; low; deprived of
vigour; wanting courage; depreſſed.
A man ſo faint, ſo ſpiritleſ,
So dull, ſo dead in look, ſo woe begone,
Drew Priam's curtain. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Of their wonted vigour left them drain'd, -
Exhauſted, ſpiritleſ, afflićted, fall'n. Mlton', Paradiſ. Lºft
Nor did all Rome, grown ſpiritleſ, ſupply -
A man that for bold truth durſt bravely die. Dryden.
Art thou ſo baſe, ſo ſpiritſºſ, a ſlave? -
Not ſo he bore the fate to which you doom'd him. Smith.
Sp1'Ritous. adj [from ſpirit.]
1. Refined ; defecated; advanced near to ſpirit.
More refin'd, more ſpiritous and pure,
As nearer to him plac'd, or nearer tending. Miltºn.
2. Fine ; ardent; active.
SP1’Ritous Ness. n.ſ. [from ſpirious.J Fineneſs and aćtivity
of parts.
They, notwithſtanding the great thinneſs and ſpirituſneſ;
of the liquor, did, before they broke, liſt up the upper ſurface,
and for a moment form a thin film like a ſmall ſemiſphere.
Boyle.
Sp1R1TUAL. adj. [ſpirituel, Fr. from ſpirit.] !)
1. Diſtinct from matter; immaterial; incorporeal.
Echo is a great argument of the ſpiritual effence of ſounds;
for if it were corporeal, the repercuſſion ſhould be created by
like inſtruments with the original ſound. Bacºn.
Both viſibles and audibles in their working emit no corpo.
real ſubſtance into their mediums, but only carry certain }.
ritual ſpecies. Bacon.
All creatures, as well ſpiritual as corporeal, declare their
abſolute dependence upon the firſt author of all beings, the
only ſelf-exiſtent God. Bentity,
2. Mental; intelle&amp;tual.
The ſame diſaſter has invaded his ſpiritual; the paſſions re-
bel; and there are ſo many governours, that there can be no
government. Suth.
3. Not groſs; refined from external things; relative only to
the mind.
Some who pretend to be of a more ſpiritual and refined
religion, ſpend their time in contemplation, and talk much of
communion with God. Calamy's Sermons,
4. Not temporal; relating to the things of heaven; eccleſiaſtical.
Place man in ſome publick ſociety, civil or ſpiritual. Hooker.
Thou art reverend,
Touching thy ſpiritual function, not thy life. Shakespeare.
I have made an offer to his majeſty,
Upon our ſpiritual convocation,
As touching France, to give a greater ſum
Than ever at one time the clergy did. Shakeſheart.
Spiritual armour, able to reſiſt - }
Satan's aſſaults. Milton.
The clergy's buſineſs lies among the laity; nor is there.”
more effectual way to forward the ſalvation of mens ſouls,
than for ſpiritual perſons to make themſelves as agreeable.”
they can in the converſations of the world. Swift,
SPIRITUALITY.. n.ſ.. [from ſpiritual.]
1. Incorporeity; immateriality; effence diſtinét from matter.
If this light be not ſpirituál, yet it approacheth near tº
ſpirituality; and if it have any corporality, then of all other
the moſt ſubtile and pure. Ratigh.
2. Intelle&amp;tual nature. - - - -
A pleaſure made for the ſoul; ſuitable to its ſpirit alſº and
equal to all its capacities. Sºuth's Sº
3. [Spiritualić, Fr.] A&amp;ts independent of the body; Puſ" atts
of the ſoul; mental refinement. ill ſteal
Many ſecret indiſpoſitions and averſions to duty will ſie
upon the ſoul, and it will require both time and clºſe applic:
tion of mind to recover it to ſuch a frame, as ſhall,” ſe it
for the ſpiritualities of religion. Szutº's Sermons.
4. That which belongs to any one as an eccleſiaſtick. ians of
Of common right, the dean and chapter are guardº '.
the ſpiritualities, during the vacancy of a biſhopticº 4||tº-
SPIRITUALTY. n. / [from ſpiritual.] Eccleſiaſtical body.
We of the ſpiritua ty
Will raiſe your highneſs ſuch a mighty ſum, Shałęſtart:
As never did the clergy at one time. . he act of
SPIRITUAL1zation. n.) [from ſpiritualize.] The a
ſpiritualizing
- - - - - *- --- re-
To SPI'RITUA lize v.a. [ſpiritualiſer, Fr. from ſpirit.] To
fine the intellect ; to purify from the feculencies of º º
This would take it much out of the care of the :
firituali... and repleniſh it with good works. *
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P I
S P I
!.
º
…
º
...
º
We begin our ſurvey from the loweſt dregs of ſenſe, and
ſo aſcend to our more ſpiritualized ſelves. Glanville.
As to the future glory in which the body is to partake, that
load of earth which now engages to corruption, muſt be
calcined and ſpiritualized, and thus be clothed upon with
glory. Decay of Piety.
If man will ačt rationally, he cannot admit any competition
between a momentary ſatisfaction, and an everlaſting happi-
neſs, as great as God can give, and our ſpiritualized capa-
cities receive. Rogers's Sermons.
SPIRITUALLY., adv. [from ſpiritual j . Without corporeal
groſſneſs; with attention to things purely intelle&amp;tual.
In the ſame degree that virgins live more ſpiritually than
other perſons, in the ſame degree is their virginity a more ex-
cellent ſtate. Taylor’s Rule of holy Living.
SPIRI'ſ Uous. adj. [ſpiritueux, Fr. from ſpirit.]
1. Having the quality of ſpirit, tenuity and activity of parts.
More refin'd, more ſpirituous and pure,
As to him nearer tending. Milton.
The moſt ſpirituous and moſt fragrant part of the plant
exhales by the action of the ſun. Arbuthnor,
2. Lively; gay; vivid ; airy.
It may appear airy and ſpirituous, and fit for the welcome
of chearful gueſts. J/otton's Architeffure.
SPIRITUo's iT Y. }*ſ [from ſpirituous.] The quality of be-
SPIRITU ou's N Ess. ing ſpirituous; tenuity and activity.
To SPIRT. v. m. [ſpruyten, Dutch, to ſhoot up, Skinner;
ſpritta, Swediſh, to fly out. Lye.] To ſpring out in a ſud-
den ſtream; to ſtream out by intervals.
Bottling of beer, while new and full of ſpirit, ſo that it ſhirt-
eth when the ſtopple is taken forth, maketh the drink more
quick and windy. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Thus the ſmall jett, which haſty hands unlock,
Spirts in the gard’ner's eyes who turns the cock. Pope.
To SPIRT. v. a. To throw out in a jet.
When weary Proteus
Retir'd for ſhelter to his wonted caves,
His finny flocks about their ſhepherd play,
And rowling round him, ſpirt the bitter ſea. Dryden.
When rains the paſſage hide,
Oft the looſe ſtones ſpirt up a muddy tide -
Beneath thy careleſs foot. Gay.
To SPI'RTLE. v. a. [A corruption of ſpirt.] To diſſipate.
The terraqueous globe would, by the centrifugal force of
that motion, be ſoon diſſipated and ſpirtled into the circum-
ambient ſpace, was it not kept together by this noble contri-
vance of the Creator. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
SPI'RY. adj. [from ſpire.]
1. Pyramidal.
Waſte ſandy valleys, once perplex'd with thorn,
The ſpiry firr, and ſhapely box adorn. Pope's Mºſiah.
In theſe lone walls, their days eternal bound, -
Theſe moſs-grown domes with ſpiry turrets crown'd,
Where awful arches make a noon-day night,
And the dim windows ſhed a ſolemn light;
Thy eyes diffus’d a reconciling ray,
And gleams of glory brighten’d all the day. Pope.
2. Wreathed; curled.
Hid in the ſpiry volumes of the ſnake,
I lurk'd within the covert of a brake. Dryden.
SPIss. adj. [ſpiffus, Latin.] Cloſe; firm; thick.
From his modeſt and humble charity, virtues which rarely
cohabit with the ſwelling windineſs of much knowledge, iſſued
this ſpiſ, and denſe, yet poliſhed; this copious, yet conciſe
treatiſe of the variety of languages. Brerewood.
SPI'ssITUDE. n.ſ.. [from ſpiffus, Latin.] Groſſneſs; thickneſs.
Drawing wine or beer from the lees, called racking, it will
clarify the ſooner; for though the lees keep the drink in heart,
and make it laſting, yet they caſt up ſome ſpi/itude. Bacon.
Spijitude is ſubdued by acrid things, and acrimony by in-
ſpiſlating. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
SPIT. n.ſ. [rprean, Saxon; ſpit, Dutch ; ſpedo, Italian.]
1. A long prong on which meat is driven to be turned before
the fire.
- A goodly city is this Antium;
'Tis I that made thy widows: then know me not,
Leſt that thy wives with ſpits, and boys with ſtones.
In puny battle ſlay me. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
They may be contrived to the moving of ſails in a chimney
corner, the motion of which may be applied to the turning
of a ſºit. //ilkins's Mathematical Magick.
With Peggy Dixon thoughtful fit, -
Contriving for the pot and ſpit. Swift.
2. Such a depth of earth as is pierced by one action of the ſpade.
Where the earth is waſhed from the quick, face it with
the firſt ſpit of earth dug out of the ditch. Mortimer:
To Spit. v. a. Preterite ſpat ; participle paſſ. ſpit, or ſpitted.
[from the noun.]
1. To put upon a ſpit.
I ſee my couſin's ghoſt
Seeking out Romeo, that did ſpit his body
Upon a rapier's point. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
2. To thruſt through.
To S I/pitted frogs, I cruſh'd a heap of emmets. Dryden.
* * * *. [rportan, Saxon; ſpºtter, Daniſh. -iet-
from the mouth. &gt; ; ſpytter, Daniſh..] To eject
A large mouth, indeed,
forth death, and mountains, rocks and ſeas.
- Shakeſpeare' Ki ! -
Commiſſions which compel from º e's King john
The fixth part of his ſubſtance, makes bold mouths
Tongues ſhit their duties out, and cold hearts fre: Že
Allegiance in them. Shakeſpeare
To Spit. v. n. To throw out ſpittle or moiſture of the mºnth."
Very good orators, when they are here, will ſpit. Shakesp.
I dare meet Surrey, -
And ſpit upon him whilſt I ſay he lies. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
You ſpit upon me laſt Wedneſday,
You ſpurn'd me ſuch a day. Shakeſpeare's Merch. of Winice.
The watry kingdom, whoſe ambitious head
Spits in the face of heaven, is no bar
To ſtop the foreign ſpirits; but they come. Shakeſ rare.
He ſat on the ground, made clay of the ſpittle, and anointed
the eyes of the blind man. john ix. 6.
A maid came from her father's houſe to one of the tribu-
ºals of the Gentiles, and declaring herſelf a Chriſtian, ſº in
the judge's face. 'sani.
- A drunkard men abhor, and would even ſpit at him, were
it not for fear he ſhould ſomething more than ſpit at them.
- South's Sermons.
Spit on your finger and thumb, and pinch the ſnuff till
the candle goes out. Swift's Rules for the Servants.
SPITTAL. m. ſ. [Corrupted from hopital.] A charitable foun-
dation. In uſe only in the phraſes, a ſpittal ſermon, and rºb
not the ſpittal.
To SP'ſ &amp; H cock. v. a. To cut an eelin pieces and roaſt him.
Of this word I find no good etymology.
No man lards ſalt pork with orange peel,
Qr garniſhes his lamb with ſpit.hcocit eel. King.
SPITE. m. ſ. [ſpijt, Dutch; deſpit, French.]
1. Malice; rancour; hate; malignity; malevolence.
This breeding rather ſpite than ſhame in her, or, if it were
a ſhame, a ſhame not of the fault, but of the repulſe, ſhe did
That Jpits
thirſt for a revenge. Sidney.
Bewray they did their inward boiling ſpite,
Each ſtirring others to revenge their cauſe. Daniel.
Done all to ſpite
The great Creator; but their ſpite ſtill ſerves
His glory to augment. Milton's Parad'ſ Ly?.
Be gone, ye criticks, and reſtrain your ſpite,
Codrus writes on, and will for ever write. Pope.
2. SPITE of, or In SPITE of. Notwithſtanding; in defiance of.
It is often uſed without any malignity of meaning.
Bleſſed be ſuch a preacher, whom God made uſe of to ſpeak
a word in ſeaſon, and ſaved me in ſpite ºf the world, the devil,
and myſelf. South.
In ſpite of me I love, and ſee too late
My mother's pride muſt find my mother's fate. Dryden.
For thy lov’d ſake, ſpite of my boding fears,
I'll meet the danger which ambition brings. Rowe.
My father's fate,
In ſpite of all the fortitude that ſhines
Before my face in Cato's great example,
Subdues my ſoul, and fills my eyes with tears. Addison Cato.
In ſpite of all applications the patient grew worſe every
day. Arbuthnot.
To SPITE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To miſchief; to treat maliciouſly; to vex; to thwart ma-
lignantly.
Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, ſºighted, ſlain,
Moſt deteſtable death, by thee. Shakeſpeare:
1'll ſacrifice the lamb that I do love,
To ſpight a raven's heart within a dove. Shakeſpeare.
2. To fill with ſpite; to offend.
So with play did he a good while fight againſt the fight of
Zelmane, who, more ſpired with that courteſy, that one that
did nothing ſhould be able to reſiſt her, burned away with
choler any motions which might grow out of her own ſweet
diſpoſition. ... Sidney.
Darius, ſpited at the magi, cndcavoured to aboliſh not only
their learning but their language. Temple.
Spi'te ful. adj. [ſpite and fill.j Malicious; malignant:
The Jews were the deadlieſt and ſpitfull// chemies of
Chriſtianity that were in the world, and in this reſpect their
orders to be ſhunned. Hooker.
All you have done ſ
Hath been but for a wayward ſon, -
Spightful and wrathful. Shakespeare Macleth.
Contempt is a thing made up of an undervaluing of a man,
upon a belief of his utter uſeleſſneſs, and a ſpiteful endeavour
to engage the reſt of the world in the ſame ſlight eſteem of
him. £39, South's Sermons.
The ſitſal flars have ſhed their venom down,
And now the peaceful planets take their turn. Dryden.
24 U - SPI'ſ EFULLY.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P {,
S P L
Sprºsfully, ade. [from ſºiºſºl.J. Maliciouſly; malignantly.
Twice falſe Evadne, ſpitfully forſworn'
That fatal beaſt like this I would have torn. Waller.
- Vaneſſa ſat,
Scarce liſt'ning to their idle chat,
Further than ſometimes by a frown,
When they grew pert, to pull them down;
At laſt ſhe ſpitefully was bent -
To try their wiſdom's full extent. - Swift.
Spi'TEFULNEss. m. ſ. [ from ſpitful. J Malice; malignity;
deſire of vexing. - ---
º looks . like ſpitfulneſ, and ill-nature, than a diligent
fearch after truth. - º: ºw, Burnet.
Spi'TTED. adj. [from ſpit.] Shot out into length. -
wº the head of a deer, that by age is more ſpitted,
may be brought again to be more branched. Bacon.
Spºrt ER. m. ſ. [from ſpit.J.
1. One who puts meat on a .
- ith his mouth.
2. One who ſpits with his Ainſworth.
. A deer. -
§º [Corrupted from h ſpital, and therefore better
written ſpital, or ſpittal.] Hoſpital. It is ſtill retained in
Scotland.
To the ſpittle go, -
And from the powd'ring tub of infamy
Fetch forth the lazar kite of Creſſid's kind.
This is it
That makes the waned widow wed again;
She whom the ſpittle houſe, and ulcerous ſores,
Would caſt the gorge at, this embalms and ſpices
To th’April-day again. Shakeſp. Timon.
Cure the ſpittle world of maladies. Cleaveland.
SPI'TTLE, n.ſ. [rpor:lian, Saxon J Moiſture of the mouth.
The ſaliva or ſpittle is an humour of eminent uſe. Ray.
Maenas and Atys in the mouth were bred, º
And never hatch'd within the lab'ring head;
No blood from bitten nails thoſe poems drew,
But churn'd likeſhittle from the lips they flew. Dryden.
Theſpittle is an active liquor, immediately derived from the
arterial blood: it is ſaponaceous. Arbuthnot.
A genius for all ſtations fit,
Whoſe meaneſt talent is his wit;
His heart too great, though fortune little,
To lick a raſcal ſtateſman's ſpittle. Swift.
SP1’t venom. n.ſ.. [ſpit and venom.] Poiſon eječted from the
mouth.
The ſºilvººm of their poiſoned hearts breaketh out to the
annoyance of others. Hooker.
SPLANéHNology. m.ſ. [. Jºlanchnolºgie, French; arx2yza and
^{9}]...A treatiſe or deſcription of the bowel. Dić7.
To SPLASH. v. a. [plaſia, Swediſh. They have both an affi-
nity with plaſh.] To daub with dirt in great quantities.
sº. ** [from ſplaſh..] Full of dirty water; apt to
aud.
SPLAYFoot, adj. [ſplay or diſplay and foot.] Having the foot
turned inward.
Though ſtill ſome traces of our ruſtick vein,
And ſºlº/”ct verſe remain'd, and will remain.
Shakespeare H. V.
Pope.
SPLAY Mouſh. m. ſ. [ſplay and mouth.] Mouth widened by
deſign.
All authors to their own defects are blind:
Had'ſt thou but Janus-like a face behind,
To ſee the people when fplaymouths they make,
To mark their fingers pointed at thy back,
Their tongues lolid out a foot.
SPLEEN. "...J. [ſplen, Latin.]
1. The milt; one of the viſcera, of which the uſe is ſcarcely
knºwn. It is ſuppoſed the ſeat of anger and melancholy.
If the wound be on the leſ. hypochondrium, under the
Dryden.
ſhort ribs, you ºy conclude the ſpleen wounded. Jºſeman.
* Anger; ſpite; ill-humour.
If ſhe muſt teem,
Create her child of ſpleen, that it may live
And be a thwart diſmatur'd tormentº, her. Shakeſpeare,
Charge not in Yºur ſpleen a noble perſon,
And ſpoil your nobler foul. Shakeſpeare.
Kind pity checks my ſpleen; brave ſcorn forbids
Thoſe tears to iſſue, which ſwell my eye-lids.
All envy'd; but the Theftyan brethren ſhow'd
The leaſt eſpect; and thus they went their ſpleen aloud:
Jay down thoſe honour’d ſpoils. Dryden.
. In noble minds ſome dregs remain,
Yot yet purgdoff, of Jºken and four diſdain. Pope.
3. A fit of anger.
Brief * the lightning in the collied night,
hat, in */Pº' unfolds both heav'n and earth;
*.*.*. º º Power to ſay, behold
Jººs of darkneſs do d - -
4. Melancholy, yº. Shakespean 6.
§§ . *nd ſmall-pox above them all. Pºpe.
* Shang'd to recent forms by ſpleen. Pope,
Donne.
Sple'es ed; adj. [from ſpleen.] Deprived of the ſpleen.
Animals ſpleened grow ſalacious. Arbuthnºt,
SPLE'ENFUL. adj. [ſpleen and full.j Angry; peewiſh; fretful,
melancholy. -
The commons, like an angry hive of bees
That want their leader, ſcatter up and down;
Myſelf have calm'd their ſpleenful mutiny. Shai. H. VI.
The chearful ſoldiers, with new ſtores ſupply'd,
Now long to execute their ſpleenſul will. Dryden.
If you drink tea upon a promontory that over-hangs the
ſea, the whiſtling of the wind is better muſick to Contented
minds than the opera to the ſpleenful. Pope.
SPLE'EN less. adj. [from ſpleen.] Kind; gentle; mild. Cº.
ſolete.
Mean time flew our ſhips, and ſtreight we fetcht
The ſyren's iſle; a ſpeenliſ, wind ſo ſtretcht
Her wings to waft us, and ſo urg'd our keel. Chapman.
SPLEENwokt. m.ſ.. [ſpleen and wort.] Miltwaffe. A plant.
The leaves and fruit are like thoſe of the fern; but the pin-
nulae are eared at their baſis. Miller.
Safe paſs'd the gnome through this fantaſtick band,
A branch of healing ſplenwort in his hand. Pºpe.
SPLE'EN.Y. adj. [from ſpleen.] Angry; peeviſh.
What though I know her virtuous,
And well deſerving; yet I know her for
Aſpleeny Lutheran, and not wholſome to
Our cauſe. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
SPEENDENT, adj. [ſplendens, Latin.] Shining; gloſſy; having
luſtre.
They aſſigned them names from ſome remarkable qualities,
that is very obſervable in their red and Jplendent planets. Brown.
Metallick ſubſtances may, by reaſon of their great denſity,
reflect all the light incident upon them, and ſo be as opake and
ſplendent as it's poſſible for any body to be. Newton.
SPLE'NDID. adj. [ſplendide, Fr. Jplendidus, Latin.] Showy;
magnificent; ſumptuous; pompous.
Unacceptable, though in heav'n, our flate
Of ſplendid vaſſalage. Milton.
Deep in a rich alcove the prince was laid,
And ſlept beneath the pompous colonade:
Faſt by his fide Piſiſtratus lay ſpread,
In age his equal, on a ſplenáid bed. Pope's Odſ.
SPLE'Npidly. adv. [from Jplendid:] Magnificently; ſump-
tuouſly; pompouſly.
Their condition, though it look ſºlendidly, yet when you
handle it on all ſides, it will prick your fingers. Taylºr.
You will not admit you live ſplendidy, yet it cannot be
denied but that you live neatly and elegantly. More.
- How he lives and eats,
How largely gives, how/plendidly he treats. Dryden:
É. of the royal ſtore
Splendidly frugal, ſits whole nights devoid
Of ſweet repoſe. Philipi.
S*H's Dour. n.ſ. [ſplendeur, French; ſplendor, Latin.]
1. Luſtre; power of ſhining.
Splendour hath a degree of whiteneſs, eſpecially if there be
a little repercuſſion; for a looking-glaſs, with the ſteel behind,
looketh whiter than glaſs ſimple. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The dignity of gold above filver is not much; the ſpen-
dºur is alike, and more Pleaſing to ſome eyes, as in cloth of
ſilver. Bacon's Phyſ. Remarks.
The firſt ſymptoms are a chilneſs, a certain ſplendºur or
ſhining in the eyes, with a little moiſture. Arbuthnot.
2. Magnificence; pomp. -
Romulus, being to give laws to his new Romans, found
no better way to procure an eſteem and reverence to them,
than by firſt procuring it to himſelf by ſplendour of habit and
retinue. South's Sermons.
'Tis uſe alone that ſanétifies expence,
And ſlendour borrows all her rays from ſenſe. Pºpe.
Sºº's Efick, adj. [ſplenetique, French.) Troubled with the
ſpleen; fretful; peeviſh. - - -
Horace purged himſelf from theſe /blenetic; refle&amp;tions in
odes and epodes, before he undertook his ſatyrs. - Pryden.
This daughter ſilently lowers, t'other ſteals a kind look at
you, a third is exactly well behaved, and a fourth a ſplene-
tick. Tatler.
You humour me when I am ſick;
Why not when I am ſplenetick # - Pºpe.
SPLE'Nick. adj. [ſplenique, French; ſplen, Latin.] Belonging
the ſpleen. - -
to sº the ſpleen obſtructed in its lower parts and ſplenick
anch, a potent heat cauſeth the orgaſmus to boil. - Harvey.
The ſplenick vein hath divers cells opening into it near its
extremities in human bodies; but in quadrupeds the cells open
into the trunks of the ſplenick veins. Ray on the Creation.
Sple'Nish, adj. [from ſpleen.] Fretful; peeviſh.]
Yourſelves you muſt engage,
Somewhat to cool your ſpleniſh rage,
Your grievous thirſt, and to aſſwage,
That firſt you drink this liquor. Drayton.
SPLE'NITIVE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P L
Fº
tº .
º, ºr:-
is:
it tº:
º
jº
sºvº. adj. [from ſpleen.] Hot ; fiery; paſſionate. Not
In ulc.
Take thy fingers from my throat;
For though I am not ſplenitive and raſh,
Yet I have in me ſomething dangerous.
SPLENT. n.ſ. [Or perhaps ſplint; ſpinella, Italian.]
Splents is a callous hard ſubſtance, or an inſenſible ſwelling,
which breeds on or adheres to the ſhank-bone, and when it
grows big ſpoils the ſhape of the leg. When there is but one,
it is called a ſingle ſplent; but when there is another oppoſite to
it on the outſide of the ſhank-bone, it is called a pegged or
pinned ſplent. Farrier's Dić7.
To Splice. v. a. [ſpliſen, Dutch; plico, Latin.] To join the
two ends of a rope without a knot.
SPLINT. n.ſ.. [ſplinter, Dutch..] A thin piece of wood or other
matter uſed by chirurgeons to hold the bone newly ſet in its
place.
The ancients, after the ſeventh day, uſed ſplints, which
not only kept the members ſteady, but ſtraight; and of theſe
ſome are made of tin, others of ſcabbard and wood, ſowed up
in linnen cloths. Wiſeman's Surgery.
To SPLINT. from th
To SPLI'Nt ER. }v. a. [from the noun. J
1. To ſecure by ſplints.
This broken joint intreat her to ſplinter, and this crack of
your love ſhall grow ſtronger than it was before. Shakespeare Othello.
2. To ſhiver; to break into fragments.
SPLINTER. n.ſ.. [ſplinter, Dutch.]
1. A fragment of anything broken with violence.
He was ſlain upon a courſe at tilt, one of the ſplinters of
Montgomery's ſtaff going in at his bever. Bacon.
Amidſt whole heaps of ſpices lights a ball,
And now their odours arm'd againſt them flie;
Some preciouſly by ſhatter'd porcelain fall,
And ſome by aromatick ſplinters die. Dryden,
2. A thin piece of wood.
A plain Indian fan, uſed by the meaner ſort, made of the
ſmall ſtringy parts of roots, ſpread out in a round flat form,
and ſo bound together with a ſplinter hoop, and ſtrengthened
with ſmall bars on both ſides. Grew's Muſæum.
To Spli'Nter. v. n. [from the noun..] To be broken into
fragments.
To SPLIT. v. a. pret ſplit. [ſpletten, ſplitten, Dutch.]
1. To cleave; to rive; to divide longitudinally in two.
Do't, and thou haſt the one half of my heart;
Do't not, thou ſplit'ſ thine own. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
Mine own tongue ſplits what it ſpeaks. Shakeſpeare.
That ſelf-hand
Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
Wer’t thou ſerv’d up two in one diſh, the rather
To ſplit thy fire into a double father? Cleaveland.
When cold Winter ſplit the rocks in twain,
He ſtript the bearsfoot of its leafy growth. Dryden.
A ſkull ſo hard, that it is almoſt as eaſy to ſplit a helmet of
iron as to make a fraćture in it. Ray on the Creation.
This effort is in ſome earthquakes ſo vehement, that it ſplits
and tears the earth, making cracks or chaſms in it ſome
miles. Woodward.
2. To divide; to part.
Their logick has appeared the mere art of wrangling, and
their metaphyſicks the ſkill of ſplitting an hair, of diſtinguiſh-
ing without a difference. I/atts's Improv. of the AMind.
One and the ſame ray is by refračtion diſturbed, ſhattered,
dilated, and ſplit, and ſpread into many diverging rays. Newt.
He inſtances Luther's ſenſuality and diſobedience; two
crimes which he has dealt with, and to make the more ſolemn
ſhew he ſplit 'em into twenty. Atterbury.
Oh, would it pleaſe the gods to ſplit
Thy beauty, ſize, and years, and wit,
No age could furniſh out a pair
Of nymphs ſo graceful, wiſe, and fair;
With half the luſtre of your eyes,
With half your wit, your years, and ſize. Swift.
3. To daſh and break on a rock.
God's deſertion, as a full and violent wind, drives him in
an inſtant, not to the harbour, but on the rock where he will
be irrecoverably ſplit. Decay of Piety.
Thoſe who live by ſhores, with joy behold
Some wealthy veſſel ſplit or ſtranded nigh;
And from the rocks leap down for ſhipwreck'd gold,
And ſeek the tempeſts which the others fly. Dryden.
4. To divide; to break into diſcord.
In ſtates notoriouſly irreligious, a ſecret and irreſiſtible
power ſplits their counſels, and ſmites their moſt refined poli-
cies with fruſtration and a curſe. South's Sermons.
To SP1. It. v. m.
1. To burſt in ſunder; to crack; to ſuffer diſruption.
A huge veſſel of exceeding hard marble ſplit aſunder by con-
gealed water. Boyle.
What is't to me,
Who never ſail on her unfaithful ſea,
Shakespeare Hamlet.
S P O
If ſtorms ariſe and clouds grow black, -
If the maſt ſplit, and threaten wrack? Drán.
The road that to the lungs this ſtore tranſmits, -
Into unnumber'd narrow channels ſplits. 1/acº mºre.
Each had a gravity would make you ſlit,
And ſhook his head at M—y as a wit. Pºpe.
2. To be broken againſt rocks.
After our ſhip did ſplit,
When you, and the poor number ſav'd with you,
Hung on our driving boat. Shakespeare.
T heſe are the rocks on which the ſanguine tribe of jovers
daily ſplit, and on which the politician, the alchymiſt, and pro-
jector are caſt away. Addiſon's Speciator.
The ſeamen ſpied a rock, and the wind was ſo ſtrong that
we were driven directly upon it, and immediately ſplit. Giv.
Spli" TER. n.ſ. [from ſplit J One who ſplits.
How ſhould we rejoice, if, like Judas the firſt,
Thoſe ſplitters of parſons in funder ſhould burſt! Swift.
SPLUTTE.R. m. ſ. Buſtle; tumult. A low word.
To SPOIL. v. a. [ſpolo, Latin; ſpolier, French.]
1. To rob ; to take away by force.
Ye took joyfully the ſpoiling of your goods, knowing in
yourſelves that ye have in heaven an enduring ſubſtance. Hil.
This mount
With all his verdure ſpoil'd, and trees adrift. Milton:
2. To plunder ; to ſtrip of goods.
Yielding themſelves upon the Turks faith, for the ſafeguard
of their liberty and goods, they were moſt injuriouſly ſpoiled
of all that they had. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Thou ſhalt not gain what I deny to yield,
Nor reap the harveſt, though thou ſpoilſt the field. Prior.
My ſons their old unhappy fire deſpiſe,
Spoil'd of his kingdom, and depriv'd of eyes. Pope.
3. To corrupt; to mar; to make uſeleſs. [This is properly
ſpill, rpillan, Saxon.]
Beware left any man ſpoil you, through philoſophy and vain
deceit. Col. ii. 8.
Spiritual pride ſpoils many graces. Taylor.
To Spoil. v. n.
1. To pračtice robbery or plunder.
England was infeſted with robbers and outlaws, which,
lurking in woods, uſed often to break forth to rob and ſpoil.
Spenſer on Ireland.
They which hate us ſpoil for themſelves. Pſ xliv. 14.
2. To grow uſeleſs; to be corrupted.
He that gathered a hundred buſhels of acorns, or apples,
had thereby a property in them: he was only to look that he
uſed them before they ſpoiled, elſe he robbed others. Locke.
Spoil. n.ſ.. [ſpolium, Latin.]
1. That which is taken by violence; that which is taken from
an enemy; plunder ; pillage; booty.
The cry of Talbot ſerves me for a ſword;
For I have loaden me with many ſpoils,
Uſing no other weapon but his name. , Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Where the cleaver chops the heifer's ſpoil,
Thy breathing noſtril hold.
2. The aët of robbery; robbery; waſte.
The man that hath not muſick in himſelf,
Nor is not mov’d with concord of ſweet ſounds,
Is fit for treaſons, ſtratagems, and ſpoils. Shakeſpeare.
Go and ſpeed!
Havock, and ſpoil, and ruin are my gain. Milt. Parad. Loft.
3. Corruption; cauſe of corruption.
Company, villainous company, hath been the ſpoil of
Shakeſpeare.
Gay's Trivia.
me.
4. The ſlough; the caſt-off ſkin of a ſerpent.
Snakes, the rather for the caſting of their ſpoil, ſive 'till they
be old. Bacon,
Spo'Ile R. m.ſ.. [from ſpoil.]
1. A robber; a plunderer; a pillager.
Such ruin of her manners Rome
Doth ſuffer now, as ſhe's become
Both her own ſpoiler and own prey. Ben. johnſ Catiline.
Providence, where it loves a nation, concerns itſelf to own
and aſſert the intereſt of religion, by blaſting the ſpºilers of re-
ligious perſons and places. South's Sermons.
Came you, then, here, thus far, thro' waves, to conquer,
To waſte, to plunder, out of meer compaſſion?
Is it humanity that prompts you on 2
Happy for us, and happy for you ſpºileri,
Had your humanity ne'er reach'd our world!
2. One who mars or corrupts anything. -
spoilful. adj [ſpoil and full.] Waſteful; rapacious.
Having oft in battle vanquiſhed -
Thoſe ſpoilful Pićts, and ſwarming Eaſterlings, -
Longtime in peace his realm eſtabliſhed. Fairy Queen.
Spoke. n.ſ. [rpaca, Saxon; ſpeiche, German.] The bar of a
wheel that paſſes from the nave to the felly.
All you gods,
In general ſynod take away her power;
Break all the ſpºkes and fellies of her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heav'n. Sººſ,
A. Philipſ.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

I No
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P O
S P O
No heir e'er drove ſo fine a coach;
id told
he ſpokes, we are by Ovid told, -
*::::::. and the º Swift.
- The preterite of ſpeak. -
sºft., '. beſt in the glory of their conqueſt. Sprat.
Sroken. Participle paſſive of ſpeak.
wouldſ thou be ſpoken for to the king? . .2 King, iv., 3.
The original of theſe ſigns for communication is found in
viva voce, in ſpoken language. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Srºkesman. n.ſ.. [ſpoke and man. J One who ſpeaks for
another.
'Tis you that have the reaſon.
—To do what?
—To be a ſpokeſman from madam Silvia: Shakeſpeare.
He ſhall be thy ſpokeſman unto the people. Ex. iv. 16.
To SPOLIATE. v. a. [/polio, Lat.] To rob; to plunder. Diº.
Spoliation. n.ſ. [ſpoliation, French; ſpellatio, Latin.] The
act of robbery or privation. -
An eccleſiaſtical benefice is ſometimes void de jure &amp; fadºo,
and ſometimes de facio, and not de jure; as when a man ſuf-
fers a ſpoliation by his own ačt. Aliſº Parergen.
Spo's dée. n.ſ. ſſponde, French ; ſpondacus, Latin.] A foot of
two long ſyllables.
we ſee in the choice of the words the weight of the ſtone,
and the ſtriving to heave it up the mountain: Homer clogs the
verſe with ſpondees, and leaves the vowels open. Broome.
Spo'NDyle. n ſ. [TrovãvXGP; ſpondile, Fr. ſpondylus, Latin.]
A vertebra; a joint of the ſpine.
It hath for the ſpine or back-bone a cartilaginous ſubſtance,
without any ſpondyles, proceſſes, or protuberances. Brown.
SPONGE. n.ſ.. [ſpongia, Latin.] A ſoft porous ſubſtance ſup-
poſed by ſome the nidus of animals. It is remarkable for
ſucking up water.
Sponges are gathered from the ſides of rocks, being as a large
but tough moſs. Bacon.
They opened and waſhed part of their ſponges. Sandys.
Great officers are like ſponges: they ſuck ’till they are full,
and, when they come once to be ſqueezed, their very heart's
blood come away. L’Eſtrange.
To Spong E. v. a. [from the noun..] To blot; to wipe away
as with a ſponge.
Except between the words of tranſlation and the mind of
Scripture itſelf there be contradićtion, very little difference
ſhould not ſeem an intolerable blemiſh neceſſarily to be ſpunged
Out. Hooker.
To Spong E. v. n. To ſuck in as a ſponge; to gain by mean
arts.
The ant lives upon her own honeſty; whereas the fly is an
intruder, and a common ſmell-feaſt, that ſpunges, upon other
people's trenchers. L’Eſtrange.
Here wont the dean, when he's to ſeck,
To ſpunge a breakfaſt once a week. Swift.
Spo's GER. m.ſ.. [from ſponge.] One who hangs for a main-
tenance on others.
A generous rich man, that kept a ſplendid and open table,
would try which were friends, and which only trencher flies
and ſpungers. - L’Eſtrange.
Spo's GINEss. m.ſ. [from ſpongy.] Softneſs and fulneſs of ca-
vities like a ſponge.
The lungs are expoſed to receive all the droppings from the
brain: a very fit ciſtern, becauſe of their ſponginſ. Harvey.
SP9'sºlous, adj... [ſpººgieux, French; from ſponge.] Full of
ſmall cavities like a ſponge.
All thick bones are hollow or ſpongeous, and contain an
oleaginous ſubſtance in little veſicles, which by the heat of the
body is exhaled through theſe bones to ſupply their fibres. Chey.
Spo'NG Y. adj. [from ſpºnge.
1. Soſt, and full of ſmall interſtitial holes.
The lungs are the moſt ſongy part of the body, and there-
fore ableſt to contract and dilate itſelf. Bacon', 'Na, Hiſtory.
A ſpongy excreſcence groweth upon the roots of the laſer-
tree, * upon cedar, very white, light, and friable, called
aganck. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The body of the tree being very ſpongy within, §
without, they eaſily contrive into canoes. More
Into earth's ſpungy veins the ocean finks,
Thoſe rivers to repleniſh which he drinks. Denham.
Return, unhappy ſwain'
The ſungy clouds are fill'd with gath'ring rain. Dryden.
ºf bºnes are all very ſpongy, and more remark.
a wild bird, which iº. and long º *:::::
2. Wet; drenched; ſoaked; full like a ñong. -
When their drenched natures lie as in a death.
What cannot you and I perform upon &gt;
º unguarded Duncan What not put upon
Spon is ſpungy officers, who ſhall bear the guilt. Shakeſp.
"9NK. m. ſ. A word in Edinburgh which denotes a mató,
or anything dipt i - - - -
ye buy fºur that takes fire: as, any ſponks will
Spo'NSA L. ad; -
- adj. [ſponſºli;
SPONsion. m. ſponſalis,
for another.
Latin.] Relating to marriage.
ſº [ſºft, Latin.] The act of becoming ſurety
Spo'Nsor. n.ſ. [Latin.] A ſurety; one who makes a promiſe
or gives ſecurity for another.
In the baptiſm of a male there ought to be two males and
one woman, and in the baptiſm of a female child two Women
and one man; and theſe are called ſpºnſors or ſureties for their
education in the true Chriſtian faith. ^liff's Parergon.
The ſponſor ought to be of the ſame ſtation with the perſon
to whom he becomes ſurety. Brome.
Spont A’Neity. m.ſ.. [ſpontaneitaſ, ſchool Lat. ſpontaneirº, F.
from ſpontaneous.] Voluntarineſs; willingneſs; accord un-
compelled.
Neceſſity and ſpontaneity may ſometimes meet together, ſ,
may ſpºntaneity and liberty; but real neceſſity and true libert
can new cr. Bramh. againſt Hºbbſ.
Strićt neceſſity they ſimple call;
It ſo binds the will, that things foreknown
By ſpontaneity not choice are done. Drydºn.
SPON I A(NEOUS. ad;... [ſpontance, French; from ſºontº, Lat.]
Voluntary; not compelled; acting without compulſion of re.
ſtraint; acting of itſelf; ačting of its own accord.
Many analogal motions in animals, though I cannot call
them voluntary, yet I ſee them ſpontaneºus: I have reaſon to
conclude, that theſe are not ſimply mechanical. Hak.
They now came foºth -
Spºntaneous; for within them ſpirit mov’d
Attendant on their lord.
While John for nine-pins does declare,
And Roger loves to pitch the bar,
Both legs and arms ſpontaneous move,
Which was the thing I meant to prove.
Begin with ſenſe, of ev'ry art the ſoul,
Parts anſwering parts ſhall ſlide into a whole;
Spontaneous beauties all around advance,
Start ev’n from difficulty, ſtrike from chance,
Nature ſhall join you, time ſhall make it grow. Poſt,
Spont A'Neously. adv. [from ſpontaneous...] Voluntarily; of
its own accord. -
This would be as impoſſible as that the lead of an edifice
ſhould naturally and ſpontaneºuſly mount up to the roof, while
lighter materials employ themſelves beneath it. Bentley.
Whey turns ſpontaneouſly acid, and the curd into cheeſe as
hard as a ſtone. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
Spon TA’Neous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſpontaneous.] Voluntarineſs;
freedom of will; accord unforced.
The ſagacities and inſtincts of brutes, the ſpontaneºuſeſ of
many of their animal motions, are not explicable without
ſuppoſing ſome active determinate power connexed to and in-
herent in their ſpirits, of a higher extraction than the bare
natural modification of matter. Hale's Origin ºf Man'ind.
Spool. n. ſ. [ſpuhl, German; ſpohl, Dutch..] A ſmall piece of
cane or reed, with a knot at each end; or a piece of wood
turned in that form to wind yarn upon ; a quill.
To Spoon1. v. n. [Probably from ſpume, or foam, as a ſhip
driven with violence ſpumes, or raiſes a foam.]
When virtue ſpooms before a proſperous gale,
My heaving wiſhes help to fill the ſail. Dryden.
SPOON. m. ſ. [ſpaen, Dutch; ſpone, Daniſh; ſpoonm, Iſlandick.]
A concave veſſel with a handle, uſed in eating liquids.
Would'ſt thou drown thyſclf,
Put but a little water in a ſpoon,
And it ſhall be as all the occan,
Enough to ſtifle ſuch a villain up. Shakespeare King }}n.
This is a devil, and no monſter: I will leave him; I have
no long ſpoon. State p. Tempºff.
Or o'er cold coffee trifle with the ſpoon,
Count the ſlow clock, and dine exact at noon.
Spo'on Bill. n.ſ. [ſpoon and bill.] A bird.
The ſhoveller, or ſpºonbill; the former name the mºre Prº.
per, the end of the bill being broad like a ſhovel; but not
concave like a ſpoon, but perfectly flat. Grew's Muſeum.
Ducks and geeſe have ſuch long broad bills to quaffºr ill
water and mud; to which we may reckon the bill of de
ſpoonbill. I), rham's Phyſico-Theºlºgy.
Spo'on Ful. n.ſ.. [ſpoon and full.]
1. As much as is generally taken at once in a ſpoon. A
ſpoonful is half an ounce.
Preſcribe him, before he do uſe the receipt, that hº take
ſuch a pill, or a ſpoonful of liquor. Bacon.
2. Any ſmall quantity of liquid. - icſ
Surely the choice and meaſure of the materials of wº
the whole body is compoſed, and what we take daily º
pounds, is at leaſt of as much importance as of what W** e
ſeldom, and only by grains and ſpºonful... . 4.
Spo'o NMEAT. n.ſ. ſſpoon and meat..] Liquid food; nouriſh-
ment taken with a ſpoon. I}}ſ.
We preſcribed a ſlender diet, allowing onlyſoonmeats, ſº
Wretched
Are mortals born to ſleep their lives away!
Go back to what thy infancy began, "
Eat pap and ſpoonmeat; for thy gugaws cry, ºn's Pºſ,
Be ſullen, and refuſe the lullaby. Dryden's Pº.
Miltºn.
Priºr,
Pºpe.
t
medical
9 Dict
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P O
- - – &gt; -º
- Diet moſt upon ſpoon meats, as veal, or cock-broths. Harv.
Spoo'N wort, or Scurvygraſs. n.ſ. See Scur v Y GRA'ss.
To SP99N. v. n. In ſea language, is when a ſhip being un-
der ſail in a ſtorm cannot bear it, but is obliged to put right
before the wind. Bailey.
Spor A'dical, adj. [gwoºzözös; ſporadique, French.]
A ſporadical diſeaſe is an endemial diſeaſe, what in a parti-
cular ſeaſon affects but few people. Arbuthnot.
SPORT. n.ſ.. [ſpott, a make-game, Iſlandick.]
1. Play; diverſion ; game; frolick and tumultuous merriment.
Her ſports were ſuch as carried riches of knowledge upon
the ſtream of delight. Sidney.
As flies to wanton boys, are we to th’ gods;
They kill us for their ſport. Shakespeare's K. Lear.
If I ſuſpect without cauſe, why then makeſport at me; then
let me be your jeſt. Shakeſpeare.
When their hearts were merry, they ſaid, call for Samſon,
that he may make us ſport; and they called for him, and he
made them ſport. judg. xvi. 25.
As a mad-man who caſteth fire-brands, arrows and death;
ſo is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, and ſaith, am not
I in ſºot ” Prov. xxvi. 19.
The diſcourſe of fools is irkſome, and their ſport is in the
wantonneſs of ſin. Ecclus xxvii. 13.
2. Mock ; contemptuous mirth.
They had his meſſengers in deriſion and made a ſport of
his proj hets. 1 Eſdr. i. 51.
To make ſhort with his word, and to endeavour to render
it ridiculous, by turning that holy book into raillery, is a di-
rećt affront to God. Tillo ſon's Sermons.
3. That with which one plays.
Each on his rock transfix’d, the ſport and prey -
Milton.
Of wrecking whirlwinds.
Commit not thy prophetick mind
To flitting leaves, the ſport of every wind,
Leſt they diſperſe in air. Dryden.
4. Play; idle gingle.
An author who ſhould introduce ſuch a ſport of words upon
our ſtage, would meet with ſmall applauſe. Broome.
5. Diverſion of the field, as of fowling, hunting, fiſhing.
Now for our mountain ſport, up to yon hill,
Your legs are young. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
The king, who was exceſſively affected to hunting, and
the ſports of the field, had a great deſire to make a great park
for red as well as fallow deer, between Richmond and Hamp-
ton Court. - Clarendon.
To Sport. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To divert; to make merry.
The poor man wept and bled, cried and prayed, while they
Jported themſelves in his pain, and delighted in his prayers as
the argument of their vićtory. Sidney.
Away with him, and let her ſport herſelf
With that ſhe's big with. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
Againſt whom do ye ſport yourſelves againſt whom make
ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? Iſa. lvii. 4.
What pretty ſtories theſe are for a man of his ſeriouſneſs to
ſport himſelf withal! Atterbury.
Let ſuch writers go on at their deareſt peril, and ſport them-
ſelves in their own deceivings. Watts,
2. To repreſent by any kind of play.
Now ſpating on thy lyre the love of youth,
Now virtuous age and venerable truth;
Expreſſing juſtly Sappho's wanton art
Of odes, and Pindar's more majeſtick part.
To Sport T. v. m.
1. To play; to frolick; to game; to wanton.
They ſpºrting with quick glance,
Shew to the ſun their wav'd coats dropt with gold. Milton.
Lariſia, as ſhe ſported at this play, was drowned in the ri-
ver Peneus. Brome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
2. To trifle.
If any man turn religion into raillery, by bold jeſts, he ren-
ders himſelf ridiculous, becauſe he ſports with his own life. Till.
Sport Fu L. adj. [ſport and full.] Merry; frolick; wanton;
ludicrous; done in jeſt.
How with a ſportful malice it was follow'd,
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge. Shakeſpeare.
His highneſs, even in ſuch a ſlight and ſportful damage, had
Dryden.
a noble ſenſe of juſt dealing. . . //otton.
Down he alights among the ſpºrtful herd -
Of thoſe four-footed kinds. Milton.
He drew his glitt'ring helmet from his head, --
In which the youth to ſportſul arms he led. Dryden.
They are no ſportful productions of the ſoil, but did once
belong to real and living fiſhes ; ſeeing each of them doth ex-
aćtly reſemble ſome other ſhell on the ſea ſhore. Bentley.
A catalogue of this may be had in Albericus Gentilis; which,
becauſe it is too ſportful, I forbear to mention. Baker.
Sportfully. adv. [from ſportful..] ... Wantonly ; merrily.
Spo'RT FULNess. n.ſ.. [from %. Wantonneſs; play;
merriment; frolick.
Behold your own Aſcanius, while he ſaid, {
S P O
w The otter got out of the river, and inweeded himſelf ſo, as
te ladies loſt the further marking of his ſportfulneſs. Sidney,
Sportive. adj. [from ſpºt.] Gay; merry; frolick; wan-
ton; playful; ludicrous.
am not in a ſportive humour now ; -
Tell me, and dally º Yºus is the money? Shakespeare,
S it
That drive thee from the ſport;
- - portive court, where thou
Was't ſhot at with fair ex &gt;
^ - yes, to be the mark
Of ſmoky muſkets : *a*ſpeare's All's well that ends well,
While thus the conſtant pair alternate ſaid,
Joyful above them and around them play'd
Angels and ſportive loves, a numerous crowd,
Smiling they clapt their wings, and low they bow'd. Prior.
We muſt not hope wholly to change their original tem-
Pºrº, no make the gay, penſive and grave; nor the mean-
*ś without ſpoiling them. Locke.
o wonder ſavages or ſubjects ſlain,
Were equal crimes in a deſpotick reign;
Both doom'd alike for ſportive tyrants bled,
But ſubjects ſtarv'd while ſavages were fed. Pope.
Sºo'RTIVEN Ess. n ſ [from ſportivºj Gaiety; play; wantonneſs.
. Shall I conclude her to be ſimple, that has her time to be.
gin, or refuſe ſportiveneſ, as freely as I have Iłalion's Angler.
SportsMAN. m.ſ. [ſpºt and man.] One who purſues the
recreations of the field.
Manilius lets us know the pagan hunters had Meleager for
their patron, as the Chriſtians have their St. Hubert: he ſpeaks
of the conſtellation which makes a good ſportſman. Addiſon.
sº. n ſ. [ſportule, French; ſpºrtula, Latin.] An alms;
a GOle.
The biſhops, who conſecrated the ground, had a ſpill or
fortule from the credulous laity. Ayliffe's Parergon.
SPOT. n.ſ. [ſpette, Daniſh; ſpotte, Flemiſh.]
1. A blot; a mark made by diſcoloration.
This three years day, theſe eyes, though clear
To outward view of blemiſh or of ſpot,
Bereſt of fight, their ſeeing have forgot. Milton.
A long ſeries of anceſtors ſhews the native luſtre with advan-
tage; but if he any way degenerate from his line, the leaſt
ſpot is viſible on ermine. Dryden.
2. A taint; a diſgrace; a reproach.
3. I know not well the meaning of ſpot in this place, unleſs it
be a ſcandalous woman; a diſgrace to her ſex.
Let him take thee,
And hoiſt thee up to the ſhouting plebeians;
Follow his chariot, like the greateſt ſpot
Of all thy ſex. Shakespeare's Antony and Cleopatra.
4. A ſmall extent of place.
That ſpot to which I point is paradiſe,
Adam's abode, thoſe lofty ſhades his bow'r. Milton.
He, who with Plato, ſhall place beatitude in the knowledge
of God, will have his thoughts raiſed to other contemplations
than thoſe who looked not beyond this ſpot of earth, and thoſe
periſhing things in it. Locke.
About one of theſe breathing paſſages is a ſpot of myrtles,
that flouriſh within the ſteam of theſe vapours. Addiſon.
Abdallah converted the whole mountain into a kind of gar-
den, and covered every part of it with plantations or ſpots of
flowers. - The Guardian.
He that could make two ears of corn grow upon a ſpot of
ground where only one grew before, would deſerve better of
mankind than the whole race of politicians. Gulliver.
5. Any particular place.
I would be buſy in the world, and learn,
Not like a coarſe and uſeleſs dunghill weed,
Fix'd to one ſpot, and rot juſt as I grow.
As in this grove I took my laſt farewel,
As on this very ſpºt of earth I fell,
So ſhe my prey becomes ev’n here.
Here Adrian fell ; upon that fatal ſpot
Our brother died.
6. Upon the Spot.
[Sur le champ.] -
The lion did not chop him up immediately upon the ſpot;
and yet he was reſolved he ſhould not eſcape. L’Eſtrange.
It was determined upºn the ſpot, according as the oratory
on either ſide prevailed. Swift.
To Spot. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To mark with diſcolorations; to maculate. ,
They are polluted off'rings, more abhorr'd
Than ſpºtted livers in the ſacrifice.
Have you not ſecn a handkerchief,
Spotted with ſtrawberries in your wife's hand? Shakeſpears
But ſerpents now more amity maintain ; {
Otway,
Dryden.
Granville'
Immediately ; without changing place.
Shakeſpeare.
From ſpotted ſkins the leopard does refrain:
No *: lion's by a ſtronger ſlain. Tate's juvenal.
I counted the patches on both ſides, and found the tory
patches to be about twenty ſtronger than the whig; but next
morning the whole puppet-ſhow was filled with faces ſpºtted
after the whiggiſh manner. Addiſon's Speciator.
24 X - 2. To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">-
. A. W. P. ºn -
S P O
; to taint.
this vow of God's maintain,
atted thoughts ſhall ſtain. Sidney.
have retained the chriſtian faith,
but at this day it is ſpotted with
Abbot's Deſcript. of the World.
a. To corrupt; to diſgrace
This vow º
irgin life, no ſpºt:
*... of Armenia
from the time of the apoſtles;
many abſurdities.
Spo'TLESS. #. [from ſpot.] -
e from ſpots. - - -
; #: from reproach or impurity; immaculate; pure; un-
tainted.
So much fairer ſ
d ſºotleſ, ſhall mine innocence ariſe,
§ #: knows my truth. - Shakeſpeare.
I dare my life lay down, that the queen is ſºotle J
In th’ eyes of heaven. Shakespeare's Winter's Tale.
You grac'd the ſev'ral parts of life,
A ſpotleſ virgin, and a faultleſs wife. - JWaller.
We ſometimes wiſh that it had been our lot to live and con-
verſe with Chriſt, to hear his divine diſcourſes, and to ob-
ſerve his ſpotlſ, behaviour; and we pleaſe ourſelves perhaps
with thinking, how ready a reception we ſhould have given
him and his doctrine. - Atterbury.
to "º. ſunſhine of the ſpotleſ mind,
Each pray’r accepted, and each wiſh reſign'd. Pope.
Sro'ſ TER... n.f. [from ſpot.] One that ſpots; one that maculates.
Špoſity, adj. [from ſpot.] F ull of ſpots; maculated.
The moon whoſe orb
Through optick glaſs the Tuſcan artiſt views
In Valombroſa to deſcry new lands,
Rivers or mountains on her ſpotty globe. Milton.
Spouſsal. adj. [from ſpºuſe.] Nuptial ; matrimonial; conju-
al; connubial; bridal.
There ſhall we conſummate our ſpouſal rites. Shakeſpeare.
Hope's chaſt kiſs wrongs no more joy's maidenhead,
Than ſpºuſal rites prejudice the marriage bed. Craſhaw.
This other in her prime of love, - -
Spouſal embraces vitiated with gold. Milton.
Sleep'ſt thou, careleſs of the nuptial day?
Thy ſpouſal ornament neglected lies;
Ariſe, prepare the bridal train, ariſe. Pope's Odſey.
Spou's Al. n.J. [ ſpouſailles, Fr. ſponſalia, Latin.] Marriage;
nuptials.
As man and wife, being two, are one in love,
So be there 'twixt your kingdoms ſuch a ſpouſal,
That never may ill office, or fell jealouſy
Thruſt in between the pačtion of theſe kingdoms,
To make divorce of their incorporate league. Shakeſpeare.
The amorous bird of night
Sung ſpouſal, and bid haſte the ev'ning ſtar,
On his hill top to light the bridal lamp. Milton.
The ſpouſals of Hippolita the queen,
What tilts and tourneys at the feaſt were ſeen. Dryden.
AEtherial muſick did her death prepare,
Like joyful ſounds of ſpouſal; in the air :
A radiant light did her crown'd temples gild. Dryden.
SPOUSE. n.ſ.. [ſponſa, ſponſus, Latin; eſpouſe, French..] One
joined in marriage; a huſband or wife.
She is of good eſteem;
Beſide ſo qualified as may beſeem
The ſpouſe of any noble gentleman. Shakeſpeare.
At once farewel, O faithful ſpouſe ! they ſaid;
At once th'encroaching rhinds their cloſing lips invade. Dryd.
Spou'sed. adj. [from the noun..] Wedded; eſpouſed; joined
together as in matrimony.
They led the vine
To wed her elm; ſhe ſpous’d about him twins
Her marriageable arms. Milton.
Spou's ELEss, adj. [from ſpºuſe.] Wanting a huſband or wife.
To tempt the ſpouſ leſs queen with am’rous wiles,
Reſort the nobles from the neigh'bring iſles.
Spout. m. ſ. [from ſpuyt, Dutch.]
1. A pipe, or mouth of a pipe or veſſel out of which any thing
is poured.
She gaſping to begin ſome ſpecch, her eyes
Became two ſpouts. Shakeſpeare's Iſinter’s Tale.
In whales that breathe, leſt the water ſhould get unto the
lungs, an ejection thereof is contrived by a fiſtula or ſhout at
the head. Brºwn's Vulgar Errours.
If you chance it to lack,
Be it claret or ſack,
I'll make this ſnout
To deal it about,
Or this to run out,
As it were from a ſpout. Ben. johnſºn,
As waters did in ſtorms, now pitch runs out,
As lead, when a fir’d church becomes one ſpout. Donne.
In Gaza they couch veſſels of earth in their walls to gather
the wind from the top, and to paſs it down in ſpouts into
TOOms. Bacon.
Let the water be fed by ſome higher than the pool, and de-
livered into it by fair ſoul, and -
1. 3. then diſcharged by ſ
cquality of bores that it ây little, en diſcharge 'i.
Pope.
S P R
In this ſingle cathedral the very ſpouts are loaded with orna.
Inents. Addiſon on Italy,
From filver ſpouts the grateful liquors glide,
And China's earth receives the ſmoking tide. Pote.
2. Water falling in a body; a cataraćt, ſuch as is ſeen in the
hot climates when clouds ſometimes diſcharge all their water
at OncC.
Not the dreadful ſhout,
Which ſhipmen do the hurricano call,
Conſtring'd in maſs by the almighty ſun,
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptune's ear
In his deſcent, than ſhall my prompted ſword
Falling on Diomede. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crſida,
The force of theſe motions preſſing more in ſome places than
in others, there would fall not ſhowers, but great ſpout; or
caſcades of water. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
To Spout. v. a. [from the noun..] To pour with violence
or in a colle&amp;ted body as from a ſpout. &gt;
We will bear home that luſty blood again,
Which here we came to ſpout againſt your town. Shakespeare
I intend two fountains, the one that ſprinkleth or ſpoutith
water, the other a fair receipt of water. Bacon.
She ſwims in blood, and blood does ſpouting throw
To heav'n, that heav'n mens cruelties might know. If allºr,
Next on his belly floats the mighty whale;
He twiſts his back, and rears his threatning tail:
He ſpouts the tide.
To Spout. v. n. To iſſue as from a ſpout.
They laid them down hard by the murmuring muſick of
certain waters, which ſpouted out of the ſide of the hills. Sidney.
No hands cou’d force it thence, ſo fixt it ſtood,
Till out it ruſh'd, expell'd by ſtreams of ſpºuting blood. Dryd
It ſpouts up out of deep wells, and flies forth at the top of
Creech.
them, upon the face of the ground. Woodward.
All the glittering hill
Is bright with ſpouting rills. Thºmſºn's Autumn.
To SPRAIN. v. a. [Corrupted from ſtrain..] To ſtretch the li-
gaments of a joint without diſlocation of the bone.
Should the big laſt extend the ſhoe too wide,
The ſudden turn may ſtretch the ſwelling vein,
Thy cracking joint unhinge, or ancle ſprair. Gay.
SPRAIN. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Extenſion of ligaments with-
out diſlocation of the joint.
I was in pain, and thought it was with ſome ſprain attennis.
Temple.
SPRAINts. n.ſ. The dung of an otter. Didi.
SPRANG. The preterite of ſpring.
Mankind ſprang from one common original; whence this
tradition would be univerſally diffuſed. Tillotſ.
SPRAT. n.ſ.. [ſprot, Dutch..] A ſmall ſea fiſh.
So oft in feaſts with coſtly changes clad,
To crammed maws a ſprat new ſtomach brings. Sidney.
All-ſaints do lay for porke and ſowſe,
For ſprats and ſpurlings for their houſe. Tºſºr.
Of round fiſh there are brit, ſprat, barn, ſmelts. Carew.
To Sprawl. v. n. [ſpradle, Daniſh; ſpartelen, Dutch.]
1. To ſtruggle as in the convulſions of death.
Hang the child, that he may ſee it ſprawl;
A fight to vex the father's ſoul. Shaftart,
Some lie ſprawling on the ground, -
Hudibraj,
With many a gaſh and bloody wound.
2. To tumble with agitation and contortion of the limbs;
The birds were not fledged; but upon ſprawling and ſtrug-
gling to get clear of the flame, down they tumbled. L'Aſtrº's"
Telamon hap'd to meet
A riſing root that held his faſten’d feet;
So down he fell, whom ſprawling on the ground,
His brother from the wooden gyves unbound.
Hence, long before the child can crawl, -
He learns to kick, and wince, and ſprawl. Pºir.
Did the ſtars do this feat once only, which gave beginning
to human race? who were there then in the world, to ot-
ſerve the births of thoſe firſt men, and calculate their"
Dryden,
ties, as they ſprawled out of ditches : Bently,
He ran, he leapt into a flood,
There ſprawl"d a while, and ſcarce got out, Swift
All cover'd o'er with ſlime. wji,
SPRAY. n.ſ. [Of the ſame race with ſprit and ſprout.]
1. The extremity of a branch.
At fight whereof each bird that fits on ſpray,
And every beaſt that to his den was fled,
Come forth afreſh out of their late diſmay, '; Tale
And to the light lift up their drooping head. Hallad, tiº-
Thus droops this lofty pine, and hangs hiſtº gré
Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her younger days ** (ſtart,
In hewing Rutland, when his leaves put forth,
Clifford ſet his murth'ring knife to the root, . Shaft,
From whence that tender ſpray did ſweetly ſpring. Sº
The wind that whiſtles through the ſpray,
Maintains the conſort of the ſong;
And hidden birds with native lays,
ºrden.
The golden ſleep prolong. Dryden
2. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P R
:
3. The foam of the ſea, commonly written ſpry.
Winds raiſe ſome of the ſalt with the ſpray. Arbuthnot,
To SPREAD. v. a. [rpreban, Saxon; ſºyden, Dutch.]
i: To extend; to expand; to make to cover or fill a larger ſpace
than before. º
He bought a field where he had ſpread his tent. Gen. xxxiii.
Rizpah ſpread ſackloth for her upon the rock. 2 Sam. xxi.
Make the trees more tall, more ſpread, and more haſty than
they uſe to be. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Silver ſpread into plates is brought from Tarſhiſh. jer. x.
2. To cover by extenſion.
Her cheeks their freſhneſs loſe and wonted grace,
And an unuſual paleneſs ſpreads her face. Granville,
3. To cover over.
The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldſmith
ſpreadeth it over with gold. Iſa. xl. 19.
4. To ſtretch ; to extend.
Spread o'er the ſilver waves thy golden hair. Shakeſpeare.
He aroſe from kneeling, with his hands ſpread up to heaven,
and he bleſſed the congregation. I Kings viii. 54.
The ſtately trees faſt ſpread their branches.
Deep in a rich alcove the prince was laid,
Faſt by his fide Piſiſtratus lay ſpread,
In age his equal, on a ſplendid bed. Pope.
5. To publiſh ; to divulge; to diſſeminate.
They, when departed, ſpread abroad his fame in all that
country. Matth. ix. 31.
6. To emit as effluvia or emanations; to diffuſe.
Their courſe thro’ thickeſt conſtellations held,
They ſ.read their bane.
To SPREAD. v. n. To extend or expand itſelf.
Can any underſtand the ſpreadings of the clouds, or the
noiſe of his tabernacle 2 job xxxvi. 29.
The princes of Germany had but a dull fear of the great-
Milton,
Milton.
'neſs of Spain, upon a general apprehenſion only of their ſpread-
ing and ambitious deſigns. Bacon.
Plants, if they ſpread much, are ſeldom tall. Bacon.
Great Pan, who wont to chaſe the fair,
And lov'd the ſpreading oak, was there. Addiſon's Cato.
The valley opened at the farther end ſpreading forth into
an immenſe ocean. Addiſon.
SPREAD. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Extent; compaſs.
I have got a fine ſpread of improveable lands, and am al-
ready ploughing up ſome, fencing others. Addiſon.
2. Expanſion of parts.
No flower hath that ſpread of the woodbind. Bacon,
SPREADER. m. ſ. [from ſpread.]
1. One that ſpreads.
By conforming ourſelves we ſhould be ſpreaders of a worſe
infection than any we are likely to draw from Papiſts by our
conformity with them in ceremonies. Hooker.
2. Publiſher; divulger; diſſeminator.
If it be a miſtake, I deſire I may not be accuſed for a ſpread-
er of falſe news. Swift.
SPR ENT. part. [from ſprene, to ſprinkle, rpmenzan, rpmenan,
Saxon ; ſprengen, Dutch..] Sprinkled. Obſolete.
Olips, that kiſs'd that hand, with my tears ſprent. Sidney.
SPRIG. m. ſ. ſyſbrig, Welſh, ſo Davies: but it is probably
of the ſame race with ſpring.] A ſmall branch; a ſpray.
The ſubſtance is true ivy, after it is taken down, the friends
of the family are deſirous to have ſome ſprig to keep. Bacon.
Our chilling climate hardly bears
A ſprig of bays in fifty years;
While ev'ry fool his claim alledges,
As if it grew in common hedges. Swift.
SPRIG Chryſtal. n.ſ.
In perpendicular fiſſures, chryſtal is found in form of an
hexangular column, adhering at one end to the ſtone, and
near the other leſiening gradually, till it terminates in a point:
this is called by lapidaries ſprig or rock chryſtal. Woodward.
SPRI'Go Y. adj. [from ſprig. J Full of ſmall branches.
SPRIGHT. n. ſ. [Contračtion of ſpirit, ſpiritus, Latin: it was
anciently written ſprete or ſpryte; and ſpirit, as now written,
was long conſidered in verſe as a monoſyllable: this word
ſhould therefore be ſpelled ſprite, and its derivatives ſpritely,
ſpriteful; but cuſtom has determined otherwiſe.]
1. Spirit; ſhade; ſoul; incorporeal agent.
She doth diſplay
The gate with pearls and rubies richly dight,
Through which her words ſo wiſe do make their way,
To bear the meſſage of her ſpright. Spenſºr.
Forth he called out of deep darkneſs dread,
Legions of ſprights, the which like little flics,
Flutt’ring about his ever damned head,
Await whereto their ſervice he applies.
While with heav'nly charity ſhe ſpoke,
A ſtreaming blaze the filent ſhadows broke;
The birds obſcene to foreſts wing'd their flight,
And gaping graves received the guilty ſpright. Dryden.
Of theſe am I who thy protećtion claim,
A watchful ſprite. Pope,
Fairy Queen,
2, Walking ſpirit; apparition. - :
The ideas of goblins and ſprights have no more to do with
darkneſs than light; yet let but a fooliſh maid inculcate theſe
often on the mind of a child, poſſibly he ſhall never be able to
ſeparate them again. Locke,
3. Power which gives cheerfulneſ, or courage.
O chaſtity, the chief of heav'nly lights,
Which mak’ſt us moſt immortal ſhape to wear, .
Hold thou my heart, eſtabliſh thºu my ſprights:
To only thee my conſtant courſe I bear,
Till ſpotleſs ſoul unto thy boſom fly,
Such life to lead, ſuch death I vow to die. Sidney.
4. An arrow.
..We had in uſe for ſea fight ſhort arrows called ſprights,
without any other heads ſave wood ſharpened; which were
diſcharged out of muſkets, and would pierce through the ſides
of ſhips where a bullet would not. Bacon's Natial Hiſtory.
To SPRIGHT. v. a. To haunt as a ſpright. A ludicrous uſe.
I am ſprighted with a fool. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
SPRI'ghtful. adj. [ſpright and full.] Lively; briſk; gay 5
vigorous.
The ſpirit of the time ſhall teach me ſpeed.—
-Spoke like a ſprightful noble gentleman. Shakeſpeare,
Happy my eyes when they behold thy face:
y heavy heart will leave its doleful beating,
At fight of thee, and bound with ſprightfuljoys. Otway.
SPRI'GHT FULLY. adv. [from ſprightful.j Briſkly; vigorouſly.
Norfolk, ſprightfully and bold,
Stays but the ſummons of the appellant's trumpet. Shake?.
SPRIGHT liness. n.ſ. [from ſrightly J Livelineſs; briſkneſs;
vigour; gaiety ; vivacity.
The ſoul is clogged when ſhe ads in conjunction with a
companion ſo heavy ; but in dreams, obſerve with what a
fprightlineſ, and alacrity does ſhe exert herſelf. Addiſon.
Spri'oh TLY. adj. [from ſpright.] Gay; briſk; lively; vigo-
rous; airy; vivacious.
Produce the wine that makes us bold,
And ſprightly wit and love inſpires. Dryden.
When now the ſprightly trumpet, from afar,
Had giv'n the ſignal of approaching war. Dryden.
Each morn they wak'd me with a ſprightly lay:
Of opening heav'n they ſung, and gladſome day. Prior.
The ſprightly Sylvia trips along the green;
She runs, but hopes ſhe does not run unſeen. Pope.
To SPRING v. n. Preterite ſprung or ſprang, anciently ſprong.
[rprungan, Sax. ſpringen, Dutch.]
1. To ariſe out of the ground and grow by vegetative power.
All bleſt ſecrets,
All you unpubliſh'd virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears; be aidant and remediate
In the good man's diſtreſs.
To his muſick, plants and flowers
Ever ſprung, as ſun and ſhowers
There had made a laſting ſpring. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
To ſatisfy the deſolate ground, and cauſe the bud of the
tender herb to ſpring forth. job xxxviii. 27.
Other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that ſprang
up and encreaſed. Markiv. 8.
Tell me, in what happy-fields
The thiſtle ſprings, to which the lily yields : Pope.
2. To begin to grow.
That the nipples ſhould be made with ſuch perforations as
to admit paſſage to the milk, when drawn, otherwiſe to retain
it; and the teeth of the young not ſprung, are effects of pro-
vidence. - Ray.
3. To proceed as from ſeed.
Ye ſhall eat this year ſuch things as grow of themſelves;
and in the ſecond year that which ſpringeth of the ſame. 2 Kingſ.
Much more good of fin ſhall ſpring. 41iltºn.
4. To come into exiſtence; to iſſue forth.
Had'ſt thou ſway’d as kings ſhould do,
Giving no ground unto the houſe of York,
They never then had ſhrung like ſummer flies. Slałºſ eart.
Ev’n thought meets thought, ere from the lips it part,
And each warm wiſh ſprings mutual from the heart. Pºpe.
5. To ariſe; to appear.
when the day began to ſpring, they let her go. , 7%.
To them which ſat in the region and ſhadow of death, light
is ſprung up. Matth. iv. 16.
6. To iſſue with effećt or force.
Swift fly the years, and riſe th' expeºed morn;
Oh ſpring to light: auſpicious babe be born. Pope,
7. To proceed as from anceſtors. -
How youngly he began to ſerve his country,
How long continued; and what ſtockhº ſpring of . ,
The noble houſe of Marcius. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanut,
Our Lord ſprang out of Judea. Heb. vii. 14.
-/ *… l
all, like the brethren ſprung of dragon's teeth,
i. each other, and | fall amongſt 'em. Fen, Johnſon,
Heroes of old, by rapine, and by ſpoil;
In ſearch of fame did all the world embroil;
Shakeſpeare,
Thus
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P R
S P R
- in ally'd his name
their gods, each then ally’d his * -
Fº jøve, and that from Titan came. Granv.
8. To proceed is from a ground, cauſe, or reaſon.
- They found new hope to ſpring
- Milton.
of deſpair. - - - - -
§. iºn deceived into an opinion, that the inheri-
le over men, and property in things, ſprang from
ſº and were to deſcend by the ſamejº.
Do not blaſt my ſpringing hopes
Which thy kind hand has planted in my ſoul. Rowe.
row; to thrive. -
9. To Rºº. makes all this but Jupiter the king,
At whoſe command we periſh and we ſpring :
Then 'tis our beſt, ſince thus ordain'd to die, -
To make a virtue of neceſſity. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
ro. To bound; to leap; to jump. -
Some ſtrange commotion
Is in his brain; he bites his lip, and ſtarts;
Stops on a ſudden, º º º -
Then lays his finger on his temple; itrait
Springs 3. into faſt gait, then ſtops again. Shakespeare H. VIII.
Iſprang not more in joy at firſt hearing he was a man child,
than now in firſt ſeeing he had proved himſelf a man. Shakſ.
He called for a light, and ſprang in and fell before Paul. Aci.
When heav'n was nam’d, they loos'd their hold again;
Then ſprung ſhe forth, they follow'd her amain. Dryden.
Afraid to ſleep;
Her blood all fever'd, with a furious leap
She ſprung from bed.
Not lies ſhe long; but as her fates ordain,
Spring up to life, and freſh to ſecond pain,
Is ſav'd to-day, to-morrow to be ſlain.
See, aw’d by heaven, the blooming Hebrew flies
Her artful tºngue, and more perſuaſive eyes;
And ſpringing from her diſappointed arms,
Prefers a dungeon to forbidden charms.
The mountain ſtag, that ſprings
From height to height, and bounds along the plains,
Nor has a maſter to reſtrain his courſe;
That mountain flag would Vanoe rather be,
Than be a ſlave.
11. To fly with elaſtick power.
A link of horſehair, that will eaſily ſlip, faſten to the end of
the ſtick that ſprings. 41ortimer's Husbandry.
12. To riſe from a covert.
Mydoors are hateful to my eyes,
Fººd and damm'd up with gaping creditors,
Watchful as fowlers when their game will ſpring. Otway.
A covey of partridges Jpringing in our front, put our in-
fantry in diſorder. Addiſon.
13. To iſſue from a fountain.
Iſrael's ſervants digged in the valley, and found a well of
ſtringing water. Gen. xxvi. 19.
Let the wide world his praiſes ſing,
Where Tagus and Euphrates ſpring;
#ſº from the Danube's froſty banks to thoſe
Where from an unknown head great Nilus flows. Roſcomm.
14. To proceed as from a ſource.
Fly, fly, prophane fogs' far hence fly away,
Taint not the pure ſtreams of the ſº inging day
With your dull influence: 'tis for you
To fit and ſcoule upon night's heavy brow.
15. To ſhoot; to iſſue with ſpeed and violence.
Then ſhook the ſacred ſhrine, and ſudden light
Sºrung thro' the vaulted roof, and made the temple bright:
The pow'r, behold the Pow'r in glory ſhone,
By i. º bow and her keen arrºws known.
° friendly gods a ſpringine gale enlarg’
The fleet º: %. i. i. .* d,
Till Grecian cliffs appeared. Pope
To SPRING. v a. -
1. To ſtart; to rouſe game.
Thus I reclaim'd my buzzard love to fly
At what, and when, and how, and where I choſe:
Now negligent of ſport I lie ;
And now, as other fawkners uſe,
I ſpring a miſtreſs, ſwear, write, figh, and dye,
Dryden.
Dryden.
Backmore.
Philips's Briton.
Craſhaw.
Dryden.
And the game kilid, or loſt, go talk or lie. Donne.
That ſprung the game you were to ſet,
Before you had time to drawn. Ilet. Hudibras.
s A large cock-pheaſant he ſprung in one of the neighbourin
Woods. Addiſon's Speciate;
º I uſe a great deal of diligence before i can ſpring any
*g; whereas in town, whilſt Tam following one character,
*Sºoſted by another, that they przzle the chace. Addiſon.
i. º * well-taught pointeriºds the way!
Cent gro - -
2. To produce . ſº wim, he ſtops, heſprings the Prey, Gay.
he nurſe, ſurpriz'd with fright,
Saits and leaves her bed, and Jºring; a light. Dryden.
Thus man by his own ſtrength to heav'n would ſoar,
And would not be oblig'd to God for more:
Vain, wretched creature, how art thou miſled,
To think thy wit theſe godlike notions bred
Theſe truths are not the product of thy mind,
But dropt from heaven, and of a nobler kind:
Reveal’d religion firſt inform'd thy fight,
And reaſon ſaw not, 'till faith ſºrting the light. Dryden.
He that has ſuch a burning zeal, and ſprings ſuch mighty
diſcoveries, muſt needs be an admirable patriot. cº
3. To make by ſtarting a plank.
People diſcharge themſelves of burdenſome refle&amp;tions, as of
the cargo of a ſhip that has ſprung a leak. ('Aſtrang.
No more accuſe thy pen; but charge the crime
Qn native ſloth, and negligence of time:
Beware the publick laughter of the town,
Thouſºring ºf a leak already in thy crown. - Dryden,
Whether ſhe ſprung a leak, I cannot find,
Or whether ſhe was overſet with wind,
But dºwn at once with all her crew ſhe went. Dryden.
4. To diſcharge a mine.
Our miners diſcovered ſeveral of the cnemies mines, who
have ſprung divers others which did little execution. Hata.
Iſprung a mine, whereby the whole neſt was overthrow."
Addison's Speciatºr.
5. To contrive as a ſudden expedient; to offer unexpectedly.
The friends to the cauſe ſprang a new project, and it was
advertiſed that the criſis could not appear 'till the ladies had
ſhewn their zeal againſt the pretender. Swift.
6. To produce haſtily.
7. To paſs by leaping. A barbarous uſe.
Unbeſeeming ſkill
To ſpring the fence, to rein the prancing ſteed.
SPRING.. n.J. [from the verb.j
1. The ſeaſon in which plants ſpring and vegetate; the vernal
ſeaſon. -
Qrpheus with his lute made trees,
And the mountain-tops, that freeze,
Bow themſelves when he did ſing:
To his muſick, plants and flowers
Ever ſprung, as ſun and ſhowers
There had made a laſting Spring. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
The Spring viſiteth not theſ: quarters ſo timely as the
eaſtern parts. Carew.
Come, gentle Spring, ethereal mildneſs come,
And from the boſom of yon dropping cloud
Upon our plains deſcend. Thºmſºn's Spring.
* Anelaſtick Body; a body which when diflorºſhi, the power
of reſtoring itſelf to its former ſtate. -
This may be better performed by the ſtrength of ſome ſuch
Jºring as is uſed in watches: this ſpring may be applied to one
wheel, which ſhall give an equal motion to both the wings.
//i/kins's Math. Magic.
The ſpring muſt be made of good ſteel, well tempered; and
the wider the two ends of the ſpring ſtand aſunder, the milder
it throws the chape of the vice open. AMoxon's Mech. Exer.
He that was ſharp fighted enough to ſee the configuration of
the minute particles of the ſpring of a clock, and upon what
Peculiar impulſe its elaſtick motion depends, would no doubt
diſcover ſomething very admirable. Locke.
3. Elaſtick force.
Heav'ns, what a ſpring was in his arm, to throw !
How high he held his ſhield, and roſe at ev'ry blow Dyd.
Bodies which are abſolutely hard, or ſo ſoft as to be void of
elaſticity, will not rebound from one another: impenetrability
makes them only ſtop. If two equal bodies meet directly
in vacuo, they will by the laws of motion ſtop where they
meet, loſe their motion, and remain in reſt, unleſs they be
elaſtick, and receive new motion from their ſpring. Newtºn.
The ſoul is gathered within herſelf, and recovers that ſpring
which is weakened, when ſhe operates more in concert with
the body. Addison.
In adult perſons, when the fibres cannot any more yield,
they muſt break, or loſe their ſpring. . . //uthnot.
4. Any active power; any cauſe by which motion is produced or
propagated. - - -
My heart finks in me while I hear him ſpeak,
And every ſlacken'd fibre drops its hold,
Like nature letting down the ſprings of life;
So much the name of father awes me ſtill. Dryden.
Nature is the ſame, and man is the ſame; has the ſame
affections and paſſions, and the ſame ſprings that give them
Rymer.
Thomſºn,
IOI 1.
In Ot Our author ſhuns by vulgar ſprings to move
The hero's glory, or the virgin's love. Pºpe's Prol to Cata.
5. A leap ; a bound; a jump ; a violent effort; a ſudden ſtruggle.
The pris'ner with a ſpring from priſon broke: -
Then ſtretch'd his feather'd fans with all his might, r
And to the neighb'ring maple wing'd his flight. Dryden.
With what a ſpring his furious ſoul broke looſe,
And left the limbs ſtill quivering on the ground! Addison ..",<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º,
S P R
S P R
6. A leak; a ſtart of plank.
Each petty hand
- Can ſteer a ſhip becalm'd ; but he that will
Govern, and carry her to her ends, muſt know
His tides, his currents; how to ſhift his ſails,
Where her ſprings are, her leaks, and how to ſtop 'em.
Ben. Johnſon's Catiline.
7. A fountain; an iſſue of water from the earth.
º, Now ſtop thy ſprings; my ſea ſhall ſuck them dry,
And ſwell ſo much the higher by their ebb. Shakeſp. H. VI.
Springs on the tops of hills paſs through a great deal of pure
º earth, with leſs mixture of other waters. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
º - When in th’ effects ſhe doth the cauſes know,
And ſeeing the ſtream, thinks where the ſpring doth riſe;
And ſeeing the branch, conceives the root below:
º: Theſe things ſhe views without the body's eyes. Davier.
He adds the running ſprings and ſtanding lakes,
- And bounding banks for winding rivers makes. Dryden.
º: - Nile hears him knocking at his ſevenfold gates,
And ſeeks his hidden ſpring, and fears his nephews fates. Dry.
He bathed himſelf in cold ſpring water in the midſt of
Winter. Locke.
The water that falls down from the clouds, ſinking into
beds of rock or clay, breaks out in ſprings, commonly at the
bottom of hilly ground. Locke.
8. A ſource; that by which anything is ſupplied.
To that great ſpring, which doth great kingdoms move,
* The ſacred ſpring, whence right and honour ſtreams;
-- - Diſtilling virtue, ſhedding peace and love
In every place, as Cynthia ſheds her beams. Davies.
I move, I ſee, I ſpeak, diſcourſe, and know,
. . . Though now I am, I was not always ſo :
lº. Then that from which I was, muſt be before,
º Whom, as my ſpring of being, I adore. Dryden.
: tº: Rolling down through ſo many barbarous ages, from the
ſpring of Virgil, it bears along with it the filth of the Goths
and Vandals. Dryden.
He has a ſecret ſpring of ſpiritual joy, and the continual
feaſt of a good conſcience within, that forbids him to be mi-
ſerable. Bentley.
- - - 9. Riſe; beginning.
º About the ſpring of the day Samuel called Saul to the top of
º the houſe. I Sa. ix. 26.
… 10. Courſe; original.
The firſt ſprings of great events, like thoſe of great rivers,
are often mean and little. Swift.
SPRING. adv. [from the noun..] With elaſtick vigour.
Before the bull ſhe pićtur'd winged love,
With his young brother ſport, light fluttering
Upon the waves, as each had been a dove;
The one his bow and ſhafts, the other ſpring
A burning tead about his head did move,
As in their fire's new love both triumphing. Spenſer.
SPRI's GAL. m. ſ. A youth. Spenſer.
SPRING E. m. ſ. [from ſpring.] A gin; a nooſe which faſtened
to any elaſtick body catches by a ſpring or jerk.
As a woodcock to my own ſpringe, Oſrick,
I’m juſtly kill'd with mine own treachery.
Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Let goats for food their loaded udders lend; .
But neither ſpringes, nets, nor ſnares employ.
With hairy ſpringes we the birds betray,
Slight lines of hair ſurprize the finny prey.
SPRI'NGER. m. ſ. [from ſpring.] One who rouſes game.
SPRI'NG IN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſpringy.] Elaſticity; power of re-
ſtoring itſelf.
Where there is a continued endeavour of the parts of a
body to put themſelves into another ſtate, the progreſs may be
much more ſlow, ſince it was a great while before the texture
of the corpuſcles of the ſteel were ſo altered as to make them
* loſe their former ſpringineſs. Boyle.
* - The air is a thin fluid body, endowed with elaſticity and
* ſpringingſ, capable of condenſation and rarefaction. , Bentley.
º:- SFR1'NGHALT. n.ſ.. [ſpring and halt..] A lameneſs by which
º the horſe twiches up his legs.
They’ve all new legs, and lame ones; one would take it,
That never ſaw them pace before, the ſpavin
º And ſpringhalt reign'd among them. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
SPR (NGTIDE. n.ſ.. [ſpring and tide.] Tide at the new moon;
high tide.
º Love, like ſpringtºs, full and high,
sº Swells in every youthful vein;
tº But each tide does leſs ſupply,
º - *Till they quite ſhrink in again:
- If a flow in age appear,
º 'Tis but rain, and runs not clear. Dryd. Tyrannick Love.
gº Moſt people die when the moon chiefly reigns; that is, in
the night, or upon or near a ſpringtide. Grew's Cºſmol.
Dryden.
Pope.
º SPRI'NG le. n.ſ.. [from ſpring.] A ſpringe; an elaſtick nooſe.
. Woodcocks arrive firſt on the north coaſt, where every
* . plaſh-ſhoot ſerveth for ſpring'es to take them. Carew,
º To SPRI'NGLE. v. n. Miſpriated, I ſuppoſe, for /prinkle.
To SPRIT. v. a. [rphyttan, Saxon; ſpruyten, Dutch J
This is Timon's laſt,
Who, ſtuck and ſpangled with your flatteries,
Waſhes it off, and ſpringles in your faces
Your recking villany. Shakeſp. Timºn of Athent.
SPRINgy, adj. [from ſpringe.]
1. Elaſtick; having the power of reſtoring itſelf.
Had not the Maker wrought the ſpringy frame,
Such as it is to fan the vital flame,
The blood, defrauded of its nitrous food,
Had cool'd and languiſh'd in th'arterial road;
While the tir’d heart had ſtrove, with fruitleſs pain,
To puſh the lazy tide along the vein. Blackm. Creation.
This vaſt contračtion and expanſion ſeems unintelligible,
by feigning the particles of air to be ſpringy and ramous, or
rolled up like hoops, or by any other means than a repulſive
power. Newton.
Though the bundle of fibres which conſtitute the muſcles
may be ſmall, the fibres may be ſtrong and ſpringy. Arbuthnot.
If our air had not been a ſpringy body, no animal could
have exerciſed the very function of reſpiration; and vet the
°nds of reſpiration are not ſerved by that ſpringineſs, but by
ſome other unknown quality. Bentley’s Sermons.
2. [From ſpring.] Full of ſprings or fountains. Not uſed.
Where the ſandy or gravelly lands are ſpringy or wet, rather
marl them for graſs than corn. 44ortimer's Huſbandry.
To SPRI'NKLE. v. a. [ſprinkelen, Dutch.]
I. To ſcatter; to diſperſe in ſmall maſſes.
Take handfuls of aſhes of the furnace, and let Moſes ſprinkle
it towards the heaven. Ex. ix. 8.
2. To ſcatter in drops.
Sprinkle water of purifying upon them. Num, viii. 7.
3. To beſprinkle; to waſh, wet, or duſt by ſprinkling.
Let us draw near with a true heart, in full aſſurance of
faith, having our hearts ſprinkled from an evil conſcience. Heb.
Wings he wore
Of many a colour'd plume ſprinkled with gold. Milton.
The prince, with living water ſprinki'd o'er
His limbs and body; then approach'd the door,
Poſſeſs'd the porch. Dryden's AEn.
To SPRINKLE. v. n. To perform the aët of ſcattering in
ſmall drops.
The prieſt ſhall ſprinkle of the oil with his finger. Lev. xiv.
Baptiſm may well enough be performed by ſprinkling, or ef-
fuſion of water. Ayliffe's Parergon.
When dextrous damſels twirl the ſprinkling mop,
And cleanſe the ſpatter'd ſaſh, and ſcrub the ſtairs,
Know Saturday appears. Gay's Trivia.
To
throw out; to ejećt with force. Commonly ſpirt.
Toads ſometimes exclude or ſprit out a dark and liquid
matter behind, and a venomous condition there may be per-
haps therein; but it cannot be called their urine. Brown.
To SPRIT. v. n. [rpryczan, Saxon; ſpruyten, Dutch. J. To
ſhoot; to germinate; to ſprout.
SPRIT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Shoot; ſprout.
The barley, after it has been couched four days, will ſweat
a little, and ſhew the chit or ſprit at the root-end of the
COrn. Martimer's Huſbandry.
SPRI’t sail. n.ſ. [ſprit and ſail.] The ſail which belongs to
the boltſprit-maſt. Dićf.
Our men quitted themſelves of the fireſhip, by cutting the
ſpritſail tackle off with their ſhort hatchets. //iſeman.
SPRITE. m. ſ. [Contračted from ſpirit..] A ſpirit; an incorpo-
real agent.
The ſprites of fiery termagants in flame
Mount up, and take a ſalamander's name. Pote.
SPRI'TEFULLY. adv. [See SPRIGHT FULLY. J Vigorouſly;
with life and ardour.
The Grecians ſpritefully drew from the darts the corſe,
And hearſt it, bearing it to fleet. Chapman's Iliads.
SpRoNG. The preterite of ſpring. Obſolete.
Not miſtruſting, 'till theſe new curioſities ſprong up, that
ever any man would think our labour herein miſpent, or the
time waſtefully conſumed. Hooker.
To Sprout. v. n. [rpryczan, Saxon; ſpruyten, Dutch..]
1. To ſhoot by vegetation; to germinate. - -
Try whether theſe things in the ſprouting do increaſe
weight, by weighing them before they are hanged up; and
afterwards again, when they are ſprouted. Bacon.
That leaf faded, but the young buds'ſ rºuted on, which after-
wards opened into fair leaves. Bacon's Natural H/ory.
We find no ſecurity to prevent germination, having made
trial of grains, whoſe ends, cut off, have notwithſtanding
Jprouted. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Old Baucis is by old Philemon ſeen
Sprouting with ſudden leaves of ſprightly green. Dryden.
Hence ſprouting plants enrich the plain and wood:
For phyſick ſome, and ſome deſign'd for food. Blackmore.
Envy'd Britannia, ſturdy as the oak
which on her mountain top ſhe proudly bears,
Éludes the ax, and ſprouts againſt the ſtroke, -
Strong from her wounds, and greater by her wars. ".
U.
24 Y<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P U -
S P U
--
he come or ſprouting
ctween your hands to get the
Rub malt b y Martime’s Husbandry.
clean away. • *- - -
{ into ramifications:
2. Tº: is apt to ſprout with moiſture. Bacon.
- w.
3. To #. enliv'ning duſt its head begins to rear,
- Tickell.
And on the aſhes ſprouting plumes appear.
Sprout. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A ſhoot of a vegetable.
Stumps of trees, lying out of the ground, will put forth
Jprouts for a time. Bacon.
Early ere the odorous breath of morn
Awakes the ſlumbering leaves, or taſiel'd horn
Shakes the high thicket, haſte I all about, -
Milton.
Number my ranks, and viſit every ſprout. -
To this kid, taken out of the womb, were brought in the
tender ſprouts of ſhrubs; and, after it had taſted, began to eat
of ſuch as are the uſual food of goats. Kay on the Greatiºn.
SPRUCE. adj. [Skinner derives this word from preux, French;
but he propoſes it with heſitation: junius thinks it comes from
ſprout; Caſaubon trifles yet more contemptibly. I know not
whence to deduce it, except from pruce. In ancient bºoks
we find furniture of pruce a thing coſtly and elegant, and
thence probably came fruce.] Nice; trim; neat without
elegance.
The tree
That wraps that cryſtal in a wooden tomb,
Shall be took up ſpruce, fill'd with diamond. Donne.
Thou wilt not leave me in the middle ſtreet,
Tho' ſome more ſpruce companion thou do it meet. Donne.
Along the criſped ſhades and bow'rs
Revels the ſpruce and jocund Spring;
The graces, and the roſy-boſom'd hours,
Thither all their bounties bring. Milton.
I muſt not ſlip into too ſpruce a ſtyle for ſerious matters; and
yet I approve not that dull inſipid way of writing practiſed by
many chymiſts. Boyle.
He put his band and beard in order,
The ſprucer to accoſt and board her. Hudibras.
He is ſo ſpruce, that he can never be genteel. Tatler.
This Tim makes a ſtrange figure with that ragged coat un-
der his livery: can't he go ſpruce and clean? Arbuthnot.
To SPRuce. v. n. [from the noun..] To dreſs with affected
neatneſs.
SPRU'cEBEER. m.ſ.. [from ſpruce, a kind of fir.] Beer tinc-
tured with branches of fir.
In ulcers of the kidneys ſprucebeer is a good balſamick. Arb.
SPRU'cELEather. n.ſ. (Corrupted for Pruſſian leather.] Ainſ.
The leather was of Pruce. Dryden's Fables.
SPRU'cENEss. n.ſ.. [from ſpruce.] Neatneſs without elegance.
SPRung. The preterite and participle paſſive of ſpring.
Tall Norway fir, their maſts in battle ſpent,
And Engliſh oaks, ſprung leaks, and planks, reſtore. Dryd.
Now from beneath Maleas' airy height,
Aloft ſhe ſprung, and ſteer'd to Thebes her flight. Pope.
S. Who ſprung from kings ſhall know leſs joy than I. Pºpe.
Rººst. n. ſ. Anything that is ſhort and will not eaſily bend.
SPU D. m. ſ. A ſhort knife.
My love to Sheelah is more firmly fixt,
Than ſtrongeſt weeds that grow theſe ſtones betwixt:
My ſpud theſe nettles from the ſtones can part,
SPU' No knife ſo keen to weed thee from my heart. Swift.
*******, ºf Tarn, n.ſ. Are ſuch as are employed to ſee that
it be well ſpun, and fit for the loom. IDict.
SPUM.E. n.ſ.. [ſpuma, Latin.jFoam; froth.
- Materials dark and crude,
Qf ſpirituous and fiery ſpume, ’tilitouch'd
º heaven's ray, and temper’d, they ſhoot forth
$º beauteous, op'ning to the ambient light. Milton.
Waters frozen in pans, after their diſſolution, leave a froth
and ſºme upon them, which are cauſed by the airy parts dif-
T fuſed by the congealable mixture. Brown's Pugar Erreurs.
3. ...” [ſpumo, Latin.] To foam; to froth.
sº }*...* Latin; from the noun..] Frothy;
The cauſe is the putrefadion of the bodyb -
the putrifying parts ſuffer a turgeſcence, 'º.
and Jºmºus, aſcend into the ſurface of the water. #.
Not with more madneſs, rolling from afar --
The ſºumy waves proclaim the wat'ry war; 2.
And mounting upwards with a mighty roar,
}º onwards, and inſult the rocky ſhore. Dryden.
the º: and florid ſtate of the blood, in paſſing through
the ...; an es from its own elaſticity, and its violent motion,
PUN #º expanding themſelves. Arbuthnot.
- * Peterite and part, paſſ of ſpin.
cr º nor ſºn, nor dreſs'd with artful pride;
SPUNGE. nºſ r gº d up, her hair was ty’d. Addison.
When he º A ſponge. . See Sponge.
*... you have glean'd, it is but ſqueezing
Ou
y &amp;º. . ſhall be dry again. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
hand upon the ſp. otion that was impreſſed by the painter's
* Sompounded with the ſpecifick gravity
of the ſhunge and the reſiſtance of the air, the ſping, did me.
chanically and unavoidably move in that particular ..".
motion. * Bently, Sºrn, O
To Spunge. v. n. [Rather 7% fºgel To hang on oth. º .
maintenance. h S for
This will maintain you, with the perquiſite o -
while you are young. perq sº
Spu'NG NGHouse. n.ſ.. [ſpunge and houſe..] A houſe to w;
debtors are taken before commitment to Priſon, where i.
bailiffs ſponge upon them, or rict at their coſt.
A bailiff kept you the whole evening in a ſºuncing,
sºvº Jºginghiſ. Sº.
1. Full of ſmall holes, and ſoft like a ſpunge.
Some Engliſh wool, vex'd in a Belgian loom, -
And into cloth of ſpungy ſoftneſs made,
Did into France or colder Denmark roam,
To ruin with worſe air our ſtaple trade. Dryden:
2. Wet ; moiſt; watery. Jaén;
wº is no lady of more ſofter bowels,
ore ſpung, to ſuck in the ſenſe of fear. Shakeſ;zar.
I ić Jove's bird, the Roman eagle, wing'd h *ſtare.
From the ſpungy South to this part of the weſi,
There vaniſh’d in the ſun-beams. Sh ----1-1."
3. Drunken; wet with liquor. ač'ſ Cymbeline.
H What cannot we put upon
is ſpungy officers :
SPUNK. ſ ſ. Rotten wood; touchwood. See s...!?"
To make white powder, the beſt way is by the powder of
rotten willows: ſpunk, or touchwood prepared, might perhaps
make it ruſſet. Brown's /ulgar Érrouſ,
SPUR. n.ſ. [rpura, Sax, ſpore, Daniſh, Iſlandick, and Dºñ.
eſperon, French.j x
1. A ſharp point fixed in the rider's heel, with which he pricks
his horſe to drive him forward.
He borrowing that homely armour for want of a better,
had come upon the ſpur to redeem Philoclea's pidure. Sido.
Whether the body politick be
A horſe whereon the governour doth ride,
Who, newly in the ſeat, that it may know
He can command it, lets it ſtraight feel the ſpur. Shakespeare
He preſently ſet ſpurs to his horſe, and departed with the
reſt of the company. Knolles's Hſiory of the Tarł.
Was I for this entitled, ſir,
And girt with ruſty ſword and ſpur,
For fame and honour to wage battle? Hudibrar.
2. Incitement; inſtigation. -
Seeing then that nothing can move, unleſs there be ſome
end, the deſire whereof provoketh unto motion, how ſhould
that divine power of the ſoul, that ſpirit of our mind, ever ſtir
itſelf into action, unleſs it have alſo the like ſpur 2 Hooker.
What need we any ſpur, but our own cauſe,
To prick us to redreſs Shakespeare julius Cæſar,
His laws are deep, and not vulgar; not made upon the ſpur
of a particular occaſion, but out of providence of the future,
to make his people more and more happy. Bacon.
Reward is the ſpur of virtue in all good arts, all laudable
attempts; and emulation, which is the other ſpur, will never
be wanting, when particular rewards are propoſed. Dryden.
The chief, if not only, ſpur to human induſtry and action,
is uneaſineſs. - Lozie.
The former may be a ſpur to the latter, 'till age makes him
in love with the ſtudy, without any childiſh bait. Chºjnt.
3. A ſtimulus; a prick; any thing that galls and teazes.
Grief and patience, rooted in him both,
Mingle their ſpurs together. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
4. The ſharp points on the legs of a cock with which he fights.
Of birds the bill is of like matter with the teeth: as for
their ſpur, it is but a nail. Bacon.
Animals have natural weapons to defend and offend; ſome
talons, ſome claws, ſome ſpurs and beaks. Ray.
5. Anything ſtanding out; a ſnag.
The ſtrong bas'd promontory
Have I made ſhake, and pluckt up by the ſºuri
Shakeſ eart.
The pine and cedar.
To Spur. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To prick with the ſpur; to drive with the ſpur.
Myfriend, who always takes caſe toº his horſe of ſtart-
ing fits, ſpurred him up to the very ſide of the coach. Addiſon.
Your father, when he mounted,
Rein'd 'em in ſtrongly, and he ſºur'd them hard. Dryden.
Who would be at the trouble of learning, when he finds his
ignorance is carefied? But when you brow-beat and maul
them, you make them men; for though they have no natural
mettle, yet, if they are ſpurred and kicked, they will mend
their pace. Collier on Pride.
2. To inſtigate; to incite; to urge forward.
Lovers break not hours,
Unleſs it be to come before their time:
So much they ſpur their expedition.
Let the awe he has got upon their min
the marks of good-will, that affection may
duty.
uty 8
Shakespeare.
ds be ſo tempered with
ºr them to their
/p Locke.
3. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S P U
S P Y
*:
ºr
3. To drive by force.
Love will not be ſpurr'd to what it loaths. Shakespeare,
To SPUR. v. m.
1. To travel with great expedition.
With backward bows the Parthians ſhall be there,
And, ſpurring from the fight, confeſs their fear:
A double wreath ſhall crown our Caeſar's brows. Drydºn.
2. To preſs forward.
Aſcanius took th' alarm, while yet he led,
And ſpurring on, his equals ſoon o'erpaſs'd. Dryd. Æn.
Some bold men, though they begin with infinite ignorance
and errour, yet, by ſpurring on, refine themſelves. Grew.
Spu'RG Alled, adj. [ſpur and gall.] Hurt with the ſpur.
I was not made a horſe,
And yet I bear a burthen like an aſs,
Spurgall'd and tir’d, by jaunting Bolingbroke. Shakeſpeare.
What! ſhall each ſpurgall'd hackney of the day,
Or each new penſion'd ſycophant, pretend
To break my windows, if I treat a friend. Pope;
SPURGE. r. ſ. [eſºurge, French; ſpurgie, Dutch, from purgo,
Latin.] A plant violently purgative. Spurge is a general
name in Engliſh for all milky purgative plants. Skinner.
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, of the globous bell ſhape,
cut into ſeveral moon-ſhaped ſegments, and encompaſſed by
two little leaves, which ſeem to perform the office of a flower-
cup : the pointal is for the moſt part triangular, which riſes
from the bottom of the flower, and becomes a fruit of the
ſame ſhape, divided into three cells, each containing an oblong
ſeed. Every part of the plant abounds with a milky juice.
There are ſeventy-one ſpecies of this plant, of which wart-
wort is one. The firſt ſort, called broad-leaved ſpurge, is a
biennial plant, and uſed in medicine under the name of cata-
putia minor. The milkyjuice in theſe plants is uſed by ſome
to deſtroy warts; but particular care ſhould be taken in the
application, becauſe it is a ſtrong cauſtick. Miller.
The leaves of cataputia, or ſpurge, being plucked upwards
or downwards, perform their operations by purge or vomit,
is a ſtrange conceit, aſcribing unto plants poſitional opera-
tions. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
SPURG E Laurel, or Mezercom. n.ſ.. [thyme'.ca, Latin.] A plant.
The characters are: the flower conſiſts of one leaf; is, for
the moſt part, funnel-ſhaped, and cut into four ſegments;
from whoſe centre riſes the pointal, which afterward becomes
an oval fruit, which is in ſome full of juice, but in others is
dry. In each is contained one oblong ſeed. It is a rough
purge. Miller.
SPURIOUS. adj. [ſºurius, Latin J
1. Not genuine; counterfeit; adulterine.
The coin that ſhows the firſt is generally rejećled as ſpu-
rious, nor is the other eſteemed more authentick by the preſent
Roman medaliſts. - - Addison on Italy.
If anything elſe has been printed, in which we really had
any hand, it is loaded with ſpurious additions. Swift.
2. Not legitimate; baſtard.
Your Scipio's, Caeſar's, Pompey's, and your Cato's,
Theſe gods on earth, are all the ſpurious brood
Of violated maids. Addiſon's Caio.
SPU'RLING. m. ſ. [ ſperlan, French. J A ſmall ſea-fiſh.
All-ſaints, do lay for porke and ſowſe,
For ſprats and ſpurlings for your houſe. Tuffer.
To SPURN. v. a. [rponnan, Saxon.]
1. To kick; to ſtrike or drive with the foot.
They ſuppos'd I could rend bars of ſteel,
And ſpurn in pieces poſts of adamant. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Say my requeſt's unjuſt,
And ſpurn me back; but if it be not ſo,
Thou art not honeſt. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
You that did void your rheum upon my beard,
And foot me as you ſpurn a ſtranger cur
Over your threſhold. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
He in the ſurging ſmoke
Uplifted ſpurn'd the ground. Milton.
So was I forc'd
To do a ſovereign juſtice to myſelf,
And ſpurn thce from my preſence. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
Then will I draw up my legs, and ſpurn her from me with
my foot. Addiſon's Spectator.
A milk-white bull ſhall at your altars ſtand,
That threats a fight, and ſpurns the riſing ſand. Pope.
When Athens ſinks by fates unjuſt,
When wild barbarians ſpurn her duſt. Pope.
Now they, who reach Parnaſſus’ lofty crown,
Employ their pains to ſpurn ſome others down. Pope.
2. To rejećt; to ſcorn; to put away with contempt; to diſdain.
In wiſdom I ſhould aſk your name;
But ſince thy outſide looks ſo fair and warlike,
What ſafe and nicely I might well delay,
By rule of knighthood, I diſdain and /purn.
3. To treat with contempt.
Domeſticks will pay a more chearful ſervice, when they find
themſelves not ſpurned, becauſe fortune has laid them at their
maſters feet. Locke.
Shakeſpeare.
T--A-4-
To SPUR N. v. n. -
1. To make contem
Ptuous oppoſition; to make inſolent re-
ſiſtance.
A ſon to blunt the ſword
That guards the peace and ſafety of your perſon;
Way joſe, to ſpurn at your moſt royal image. Shakeſp.
* I, Pandulph, do religiouſly demand
Why thou againſt the Church, our holy mother,
So wilfully do'ſt ſpurn 2 -
Inſtruct me why Shakeſp. King john.
Vanoc ſhould Jºurn againſt our rule, and ſtir
The tributary provinces to war. Philips's Briton:
2. To toſs up the heels; to kick or ſtruggle. ilips's Briton:
The drunken chairman in the kenneſburn.
The glaſſes ſhatters, and his charge º Gay.
SPURN. m. ſ: [from the verb.] Kick; inſolent and contemp-
tuous treatment.
The inſolence of office, and the ſpurns
, That patient merit of th' unworthy takes. Shakesp. Hamlet.
SPU'RNEY. m. ſ. A plant.
$ºu'RRER. m.ſ...[from ſpur.] One who uſes ſpurs.
$ºu'RRIER. m.ſ.. [from ſpur.] One who makes ſpurs.
SPU'RRY. m. ſ. [ſperguſa, Latin.] A plant.
, Spurry ſeed is ſown in the low countries in Summer, the firſt
time in May, that it may flower in June and July; and in
Auguſt the ſeed is ripe. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To Spurt. v. n. [See To Spirt.] To fly out with a quick
ſtream.
If from a punéture of a lancet, the manner of the ſpurting
out of the blood will ſhew it. //ſeman's Surgery.
SPU'RWAY. n.ſ.. [ſpur and way.] A horſeway; a bridle-road;
diſtinét from a road for carriages.
SPUTA'tion, n.ſ.. [ſputum, Latin.] The act of ſpitting.
A moiſt conſumption receives its nomenclature from amoiſt
Jputation, or expectoration: a dry one is known: by its dry
cough. Harvey on Conſumption;
To SPUTTER. v. n. [ſpute, Latin.] y Jump
1. To emit moiſture in ſmall flying drops.
If a manly drop or two fall down,
It ſcalds along my cheeks, like the greenwood,
That, ſputt'ring in the flame, works outward into tears. Dry.
2. To fly out in ſmall particles with ſome noiſe.
The nightly virgin, while her wheel ſhe plies,
Foreſees the ſtorms impending in the ſkies,
When ſparkling lamps their ſputt'ring light advance,
And in the ſockets oily bubbles dance. Dryden.
3. To ſpeak haſtily and obſcurely, as with the mouth full; to
throw out the ſpittle by haſty ſpeech.
A pinking owl ſat ſputtering at the ſun, and aſked him what
he meant to ſtand ſtating her in the eyes. L’Eſtrange.
They could neither of them ſpeak their rage; and ſo fell
a ſputtering at one another, like two roaſting apples. Congreve.
'Though he ſputter through a ſeſſion,
It never makes the leaſt impreſſion;
Whate'er he ſpeaks for madneſs goes. Swift.
To Spu’t TER. v. a. To throw out with noiſe and heſi-
tation.
Thou do'ſt with lies the throne invade,
Obtending heav’n for whate'er ills befall;
And ſputt’ring under ſpecious names thy gall. Dryden.
In the midſt of careſſes, and without the leaſt pretended in-
citement, to ſputter out the baſeſt accuſations! Swift.
Spu'r TERER. m. ſ. [from ſputter.] One that ſputters.
SPY. n.ſ. [yſpio, Welſh; eſpion, French; ſpie, Dutch; ſpecula-
tor, Latin. It is obſerved by a German, that ſpy has been in
all ages a word by which the eye, or office of the eye, has been
expreſſed: thus the Arimaſpians of old, fabled to have but one
eye, were ſo called from ari, which, among the nations of
Caucaſus, ſtill ſignifies one, and ſpi, which has been received
from the old Aſiatick languages for an eye, ſight, or one that
fees.] One ſent to watch the condućt or motions of others;
one ſent to gain intelligence in an enemy's camp or country.
We'll hear poor rogues
Talk of court news, and we'll talk with them too,
And take upon's the myſtery of things,
As if we were God's ſpies.
Spies of the Volſcians
Held me in chace, that I was forc’d to wheel -
Three or four miles about. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Every corner was poſſeſſed by diligent ſpies upºn their
maſter and miſtreſs. Clarendon.
I come º diſturb
With purpoſe to explore, or to diſturb, -
The j of jºin Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
Such command we had,
To ſee that none thence iſſu'd forth a ſºy, -
Or enemy, while God was in his work. Miltºn,
Nothing lies hid from radiant eyes;
All they ſubdue become their ſpies:
Secrets, as choſen jewels, are
Preſented to oblige the fair. Waller.
O'er
Shakeſp. King Lear,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">, , S QUU
S Q_U
y men I'll ſet my careful ſpieſ,
T.... '...i. in their very eyes. Dryden.
Theſe wretched ſpie, of wit muſt then confeſs,
They take more pains to pleaſe themſelves the leſs. Dryden.
Thoſe who attend on their ſtate, are ſo many ſpies placed
upon them by the publick to obſerve them nearly. Atterbury.
Špy v.a. [See SPY. m. ſ]
ºfjº, § the eye at a diſtance, or in a ſtate of conceal-
ment; to eſpy. -
Light hath no tongue, but is all eye;
If it could ſpeak as well as ſpy,
This were the worſt that it could ſay,
That being well I fain would ſtay. Donne.
As tigerſpy'd two gentle fawns: Milton.
A countryman ſpied a ſnake under a hedge, half frozen to
death. - L’E/ºrange.
My brother Guyomar, methinks, I ſºy:
Haſté in his ſteps, and wonder in his eye. Dryden.
One in reading ſkip'd over all ſentences where he ſpy'd a
note of admiration. Swift.
2. To diſcover by cloſe examination. - -
Let a lawyer tell he has ſpy'd ſome defect in an entail, how
ſolicitous are they to repair that errour. Decay of Piety.
3. To ſearch or diſcover by artifice. - r
Moſes ſent to ſpy out Jaazer, and took the villages. Numb.
To SPY. v. n. To ſearch narrowly.
It is my nature's plague
To ſpy into abuſe; and oft my jealouſy
Shapes faults that are not. Shakeſpeare's Ohiº.
Spy'boat. n.f. [ſpy and boat.] A boat ſent out for intelli-
gence.
Giving the colour of the ſea to their ſºybeats to keep them
from being diſcovered, came from the Veneti. Arbuthnot.
SQUAB. adj. [I know not whence derived.]
1. Unfeathered; newly hatched.
Why muſt old pidgeons, and they ſtale, be dreſt,
When there's ſo many ſquab ones in the neſt. King.
2. Fat; thick and ſtout; awkwardly bulky.
The nappy ale goes round,
Nor the ſquab daughter nor the wife were nice,
Each health the youths began, Sim pledg'd it twice. Bettert.
SQUAB. m. ſ. A kind of ſofa or couch; a ſtuffed cuſhion.
On her large ſquab you find her ſpread,
Like a fat corpſe upon a bed. Swift.
SQUAB. adv. With a heavy ſudden fall ; plump and flat. A low
word. -
The eagle took the tortoiſe up into the air, and dropt him
down, ſquab, upon a rock, that daſhed him to pieces. L'Eſlr.
SQUA'BPie. n.ſ.. [ſãuab, and pie..] A pie made of many ingre-
dients.
Cornwal ſquabpie, and Devon whitepot brings,
And Leiſter beans and bacon, food of kings. King.
To SQg AB. v. n. To fall down plump or flat; to ſquelſh or
ſquaſh.
SQUA'B Bish. adj. [from ſquab.] Thick; heavy; fleſhy.
º, Dict renders them of a ſquabbiſh or lardy habit of body.
Harvey.
To SQUA’BBLE. v. n. [{iabla, Swediſh.] To quarrel; to de-
bate peeviſhly ; to wrangle; to fight. A low word.
Drunk? and ſpeak parrot and ſquabble 2 ſwagger? oh,
thou invincible ſpirit of wine! Shakeſpeale. Othello.
I thought it not improper in a ſuabbling and contentious
age, to detect the vanity of confiding ignorance. Glanville.
If there muſt be diſputes, is not ſuabbling leſs inconvenient
than murder: Collier on Duelling.
. The ſenſe of theſe propoſitions is very plain, though logi-
cians might ſquabble a whole day, whether they ſhould rank
them under negative or affirmative. //atts's Logick.
Sq9ABBLE, nºſ. [from the verb.] A low brawl; a petty quarrel.
In popular factions, pragmatick fools commonly begin the
Juabble, and crafty knaves reap the benefit. Tºrange.
A man whoſe perſonal courage is ſuſpected, is not to drive
ſºuadrons before him; but may be allowed the merit of ſome
ſquabble, or throwing a bottle at his neighbour's head. Arbuth.
SQUAB Ble R. n.ſ. [from ſquabble.] A quarrelſome fellow; a
brawler.
SQUADDRON. n.ſ. [..ſadron, Fr. /?uadrone, Italian, from
quadratus, Latin.]
I. A body of men drawn up ſquare.
Thoſe half rounding guards
Juſt met, and cloſing ſtood in ſquadron join'd. Milton.
2. A part of an army; a troop.
Nothing the Moors were more afraid of, than in a ſet battle
to fight with ſquadrons coming orderly on. Knolles.
O Then beauteous Atys, with Iulus bred,
f equal age, the ſecond ſquadron led. Dryden.
3. Part of a fleet, a certain number of ſhips.
Rome could not maintain it - -
- - s dominion over ſo many pro-
. without ſquadrons ready equipt. º.
QUA º * [from ſquadron.] Formed into ſquadrons.
Of ey gladly thither haſte; and by a choir
/*adron'd angels hear his carol ſung. Milt. Par. Lºft.
Squa'LID. adj. [ſualidus, Latin.] Foul; naſty; filthy.
A doleful caſe deſires a doleful ſong,
Without vain art or curious compliments,
And ſqualid fortune into baſeneſs flowing,
Doth ſcorn the pride of wonted ornaments. Spenſer,
Uncomb'd his locks, and ſqualid his attire,
Unlike the trim of love and gay deſire. Dryden's Knights Tak,
All theſe Cocytus bounds with ſqualid reeds,
With muddy ditches and with deadly weeds. Dryden.
To SQUALL. v. n. [ſºuala, Swediſh..] To ſcream out as a
child or woman frighted.
In my neighbourhood, a very pretty prattling ſhoulder of
veal ſqualls out at the fight of a knife. Speciator.
I put five into my coat pocket, and as to the ſixth I made a
countenance as if I would eat him alive. The poor manſual.
led terribly. Swift.
Cornelius ſunk back on a chair; the gueſts ſtood aſtoniſhed;
the infant/quawl"d. Arbuthnot and Pºp.
SQUAll. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Loud ſcream.
There oft are heard the notes of infant woe,
The ſhort thick ſob, loud ſcream, and ſhriller ſuall. Swift.
2. Sudden guſt of wind. A ſailor's word.
SQUA'll ER. m.ſ.. [from ſquall.] Screamer; one that ſcreams:
SºLIA LOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] Coarſeneſs; naſtineſs; want of
cleanlineſs and neatneſs.
Take heed that their new flowers and ſweetneſs do not as
much corrupt as the others dryneſs and ſualor. Ben. johnſon.
What can filthy poverty give elſe, but beggary, fulſome
naſtineſs, ſqualor, uglineſs, hunger, and thirſt Burton.
SQUA’ll Y. adj. [from ſuall] Windy; guſty. A ſailor's word.
SQUA'Mous. adj. [ſ/uamºuſ, Latin.] Scaly; covered with ſcales.
The ſea was repleniſhed with fiſh, of the cartilaginous and
ſuamoſe, as of the teſtaceous and cruſtaceous kinds. Wºodw.
Thoſe galls and balls are produced, in the gems of oak, which
may be called ſquamous oak cones. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
To SQUANDER. v. a. [verſchwenden, Teutonick.]
1. To ſcatter laviſhly; to ſpend profuſely; to throw away in
idle prodigality.
We ſquander away ſome part of our fortune at play. Atterb.
They often ſquander'd, but they never gave. Savage.
Never take a favourite waiting maid, to inſinuate how great
a fortune you brought, and how little you are allowed to
ſquander. - Swift,
Then, in plain proſe, were made two ſorts of men,
To ſquander ſome, and ſome to hide agen. Pºpe.
True friends would rather ſee ſuch thoughts as they com-
municate only to one another, than what they ſquander about
to all the world. Pºpe.
How uncertain it is, whether the years we propoſe to our-
ſelves ſhall be indulged to us, uncertain whether we ſhall have
power or even inclination to improve them better than thoſe
we now ſquander away. Rogers.
2. To ſcatter; to diſſipate; to diſperſe.
He hath an argoſie bound to Tripolis, another to the In-
dies, and other ventures he hath ſquandered abroad. Shakespeare.
The troops we ſquander'd firſt, again appear -
From ſev'ral quarters, and encloſe the rear. Dryden.
He is a ſucceſsful warrior,
And has the ſoldiers hearts: upon the ſkirts
Of Arragon our ſquander'd troops he rallies. Dryden.
SQUA'NDERER. n.ſ.. [from ſquander.] A ſpendthrift; a pro-
digal; a waſter; a laviſher. -
Plenty in their own keeping, teaches them from the begin-
ning, to be ſºuanderers and waſters. Lock.
SQUARE. adj. [y/gwār, Welſh; quadratus, Latin.]
1. Cornered; having right angles. -
All the doors and poſts wereſºuare, with the windows. King'.
Water and air the varied form confound; -
The ſtraight looks crooked, and the ſquaregrows round.Priºr.
2. Forming a right angle. -
This inſtrument is for ſtriking lines ſquare to other lines or
ſtreight fides, and try the ſquareneſs of their work. Jº
3. Cornered; having angles of whatever content; as three ſquare,
five ſquare.
Catching up in haſte his three ſºuare ſhield, *
And ſhining helmet, ſoon him buckled to the field. Sºnºr.
The clavicſe is a crooked bone, in the figure of anº. 9".
end of which being thicker and almoſt three ſquare, is inſerte
into the firſt bone of the ſternon. If ſeman's Surge").
4. Parallel; exactly ſuitable. }
She's a moſt triumphant lady, if report be ſquare to her. Shał,
5. Strong; ſtout; well ſet. As, aſuare man.
6. Equal; exact; honeſt; fair. As, ſquare dealing.
All have not offended;
For thoſe that were, it is not ſquare to take
On thoſe thºt are, revenge; crimes, like to land.
Are not inherited. Shakeſpeare'; Timºn of †.
7. [In geometry.] Square root of any number is that wº
multiplied by it ſelf, produces the ſquare, as 4 is the ſºuare 10 f
of 10, becauſe 4×4=16; and likewiſe 6 the ſhare "*"
36, as 6×6=30, SQUARE,
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">**!"
º
tº º
sº
S Q U
SQUARE. m. ſ. ſquadra, Latin.]
1. A figure with right angles and equal ſides.
Then did a ſharped ſpire of diamond bright,
Ten feet each way in ſquare appear to me,
Juſtly proportion'd up unto his height,
So far as archer might his level ſee.
Rais'd of graſſy turf their table was ;
And on her ample ſquare from ſide to ſide
All Autumn pil’d. Milton,
2. An area of four ſides, with houſes on each ſide.
The ſtatue of Alexander VII. ſtands in the large ſquare of
the town. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
3. Content of an angle.
In rectangle triangles the ſºuare which is made of the ſide
that ſubtendeth the right angle, is equal to the ſquares which
are made of the ſides, containing the right angle. Brown.
4. A rule or inſtrument by which workmen meaſure or form
their angles.
5. Rule; regularity; exačt proportion; juſtneſs of workman-
ſhip or conduct.
In St. Paul's time the integrity of Rome was famous: Co-
rinth many ways reproved : they of Galatia much more out
of ſquare. Hooker.
The whole ordinance of that government was at firſt evil
plotted, and through other overſights came more out of ſquare,
to that diſorder which it is now come unto. Spenſºr's Ireland
I have not kept my ſºuare, but that to come
Shall all be done by th' rule. Shakespeare Antony and Cleopatra.
Nothing ſo much ſetteth this art of influence out of ſquare
and rule as education. Raleigh.
6. Squadron; troops formed ſquare.
He alone
Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had
In the brave ſºuares of war.
Our ſuperfluous lacqueys and our peaſants,
Who in unneceſſary action ſwarm
About our ſquares of battle, were enow
To purge this field of ſuch a hilding foe. Shakeſpeare.
7. A ſquare number is when another called its root can be exactly
found, which multiplied by itſelf produces the ſquare. The
following example is not accurate.
Advance thy golden mountains to the ſkies,
On the broad baſe of fifty thouſand riſe;
Add one round hundred, and if that's not fair,
Add fifty more, and bring it to a ſºuare. Pope.
8. Quaternion; number four.
I profeſs
Myſelf an enemy to all other joys
Which the moſt precious ſquare of ſenſe poſſeſſes,
And find I am alone felicitate
In your love.
9. Level; equality.
Men ſhould fort themſelves with their equals; for a rich
man that converſes upon the ſquare with a poor man, ſhall
certainly undoe him. L’Eſtrange.
We live not on the ſºuare with ſuch as theſe, -
Such are our betters who can better pleaſe. Dryden.
10. Quartile ; the aſtrological ſituation of planets, diſtant ninety
degrees from each other.
To th’ other five
Their planetary motions, and aſpects,
In ſextile, ſºuare, and trine and oppoſite
Of noxious efficacy. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
11. Rule; conformity. A proverbial uſe.
I ſhall break no ſºuares whether it be ſo or not. L’Eſtrange:
12. Soy AREs gº. The game proceeds. Cheſsboards being full
of ſquares. -
One frog looked about him to ſee how ſquares went with
their new king. L’Eſtrange.
To SQUARE. v.a. ſquadro, Latin; from the noun.]
1. To form with right angles. -
He employs not on us the hammer and the chizzel, with an
intent to wound or mangle us, but only to ſuare and faſhion
our hard and ſtubborn hearts. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
2. To reduce to a ſquare.
Circles to ſquare, and cubes to double, -
Wou'd give a man exceſſive trouble. Prior.
3. To meaſure; to reduce to a meaſure.
Stubborn criticks, apt, without a theme
For depravation, to ſquare all the ſex
By Creſſid's rule. Shakespeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
4. To adjuſt ; to regulate; to mould; to ſhape.
Dreams are toys ;
Yet for this once, yea ſuperſtitiouſly,
I will be ſquar'd by this. Shakeſpeare's IWinter's Tale.
Spenſer.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
How frantickly Iſºuare my talk! Shakeſpeare.
Thou'rt ſaid to have a ſtubborn ſoul,
That apprehends no further than this world,
And ſº ar'ſ thy life accordingly. Shakeſpeare.
God has deſigned us a meaſure of our undertakings; his
word and law, by the proportions whereof we are to ſquare
our actions. Decay ºf Piety.
i.
S Q U
The oracle was inforced to proclaim Socrates to be the
wifeſt man in the world, becauſe he applied his ſtudies to
the moral part, the ſquaring men's lives. Hamriorid.
His preaching much, but more his pračice wrought;
A living ſermon of the truths he taught;
For this by rules ſevere his life he ſºard,
That all might ſee the doctrine which they heard. Drydºn.
This muſt convince all ſuch who have, upon a wrong inter-
pretation, preſumed to ſquare opinions by theirs, and have in
loud exclamations ſhewn their abhorrence of univerſity edu-
Catl Oil. Swift.
5. To accommodate; to fit.
Eye me, bleſt providence, and ſºuare my trial
To my proportion'd ſtrength. Milton.
6. To reſpect in quartile.
O'er libra's ſign a crowd of foes prevails,
The icy goat and crab that ſºuare the ſcales. Creech.
Some profeſſions can equally ſquare themſelves to, and thrive
under all revolutions of government. South'ſ Sernions.
To SQUARE. v. n.
1. To ſuit with ; to fit with.
I ſet them by the rule, and, as they ſware,
Or deviate from undoubted doćtrine, fare. Dryden.
His deſcription ſquares exactly to lime. Woodward.
Theſe marine bodies do not ſquare with thoſe opinions, but
exhibit phaenomena that thwart them. //oodward.
2. To quarrel; to go to oppoſite ſides. Obſolete.
Are you ſuch fools -
To ſquare for this? would it offend you then
That both ſhould ſpeed! Shakeſpeare's Titus Andronicuſ.
But they do ſquare, that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups, and hide them there. Shakeſpeare.
SQUA'RENEss. n.ſ.. [from ſuore.] The ſtate of being ſquare.
This inſtrument is for ſtriking lines ſquare to other lines or
ſtraight lines, and try the ſquareneſ of their work. Moxon.
Motion, hº, or any particular ſhape, are the acci-
dents of body.
SQUASH. n.ſ.. [from quaſh.]
1. Anything ſoft and eaſily cruſhed.
Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a
boy; as a ſquaſh is before it is a peaſcod, or a coddling, when
it is almoſt an apple. Shakeſpeare's 7 welfth Night.
2. [Melºpepo.] A plant.
The charaćters are, it hath the whole appearance of a
pumpion or gourd; from which this differs in its fruit, which
is roundiſh, fleſhy, ſtreaked, angular, and for the moſt part
divided into five partitions, incloſing flat ſeeds adhering to a
Watts's Logick.
ſpongy placenta. Miller.
Squaſh is an Indian kind of pumpion that grows apace.
Boyle.
3. Any thing unripe; anything ſoft. In contempt.
How like I then was to this kernel, -
This ſquaſh, this gentleman. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
4. A ſudden fall.
Since they will overload my ſhoulders, I ſhall throw down
the burden with a ſquaſh among them. Arbuthnot.
5. A ſhock of ſoft bodies.
My fall was ſtopped by a terribleſłuſh that ſounded louder
than the cataraćt of Niagara. Gulliver’s Travels.
To SQUAsh. v. a. To cruſh into pulp. -
To Squat. v. n. [quattare, Italian.] To ſit cowering; to
fit cloſe to the ground. -
Squat. adj. [from the verb.]
1. Cowering; cloſe to the ground.
Him there they found,
Squat like a toad, cloſe at the ear of Eve. Milton.
Her deareſt com'rades never caught her -
Squat on her hams. Swift.
2. Short and thick; having one part cloſe to another, as thoſe
of an animal contračted and cowering.
The ſquill-infect is ſo called from ſome ſimilitude to the
ſquill-fiſh: the head is broad and ſquat. Grew.
Alma in verſe, in proſe, the mind,
By Ariſtotle's pen defin'd,
Throughout the body ſquat or tall, -
Is bond fide, all in all. Priºr.
SQUAT. m. ſ. - -
1. The poſture of cowering or lying cloſe. -
A ſtitch-fall'n cheek that hangs below the jaw;
Such wrinkles as a ſkilful hand would draw
For an old grandam ape, when with a gºº
She ſits at ſquat, and ſcrubs her leathern face.
2. A ſudden fall. - - -
Bruiſes, ſquats and falls, which often kill others, can bring
little hurt to thoſe that are * Herbert.
- - - - - - ſort of mineral. -
SQU ºff. "...i. of tin ore and ſpar incorporated. Iſoodw.
To SquEAk. v. n. [ſãº. Swediſh.] - - -
1. To ſet up a º dolorous cry; to cry out with pain.
ith a ſhrili acute tone.
2. To cry with a The ſheeted dead
Did ſqueak and gibber in the Roman ſtreets. Shake feare.
- 24 Z Cart
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S Q U
- S Q_U
* * –
- Bacon.
heels/?neak not when they alſº liquored. -
Cart whee ºft ſee the new Arion * il
ſtill trembling underneath thy nail;
A.º thumb from ſhore to ſhore,
The treblesſ|ueak for fear, the baſes roar. Dryden.
Blunderbuſſes planted in every loop-hole, go off conſtantly
- f a fiddle and the thrumming of a guitar.
at the ſqueaking o Fº º:
who can endure to hear one of the rough old Romans
fºueaking through the mouth of an eunuch Addiſon.
How like brutes organs are to ours;
They grant, if higher pow'rs think fit,
A bear might ſoon be made a wit:
And that for any thing in nature,
Pigs might ſqueak love-odes, dogs bark ſatyr.
In florid impotence he ſpeaks,
And as the prompter breathes, the º: Pope.
Zoilus calls the companions of Ulyſſes the ſqueaking pigs of
Pope's Odyſſey.
Prior.
Homer. -
3. To break ſilence or ſecrecy for fear or pain.
If he be obſtinate, put a civil queſtion to him upon the rack,
and he ſqueaks, I warrant him. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
SquEAk. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A ſhrill quick cry; a cry of
all.
p Ran cow and calf, and family of hogs,
In panick horrour of purſuing dogs :
With many a deadly grunt and doleful ſteak,
Poor ſwine! as if their pretty hearts wou'd break. Dryden.
To SQUE A L. v. n. [ſ, wala, Swediſh.] To cry with a ſhrill
ſharp voice; to cry with pain. Squeak ſeems a ſhort ſudden
cry, and ſqueal a cry continued.
SQUEA'MISH. adj. [for quawniſh or qualmiſh, from qualm J
Nice; faſtidious; eaſily diſguſted; having the ſtomach eaſily
turned; being apt to take offence without much reaſon. It is
uſed always in diſlike either real or ironical.
Yet, for countenance fake, he ſeemed very ſqueamiſh in re-
ſpect of the charge he had of the princeſs Pamela. Sidney.
Quoth he, that honour's very ſqueamiſh,
That takes a baſting for a ºff. ;
For what's more honourable than ſcars,
Or ſkin to tatters rent in wars?
His muſick is ruſtick, and perhaps too plain,
The men of ſqueamiſh taſte to entertain. Southern.
It is rare to ſee a man at once ſqueamiſh and voracious.
South.
There is no occaſion to oppoſe the ancients and the mo–
derns, or to be ſqueamiſh on either ſide. He that wiſely con-
dućts his mind in the purſuit of knowledge, will gather what
lights he can from either. Locke.
SQy EAM Ishsess. n ſ. [from ſqueamiſh.J Niceneſs; delicacy;
faſtidiouſneſs.
The thorough-pac'd politician muſt preſently laugh at the
ſqueamiſhneſſ of his conſcience, and read it another lecture.
- South's Sermons.
Upon their principles they may revive the worſhip of the
hoſt of heaven; it is but conquering a little ſqueamiſhneſs of
flomach. Stillingfleet.
To adminiſter this doſe, fifty thouſand operators, conſider-
ing the ſqueamiſhneſs of ſome ſtomachs, and the peeviſhneſs of
young children, is but reaſonable. Swift.
To SQUEEZE. v. a. [Spiran, Saxon; y-gwaſſu, Welſh.]
1. To preſs; to cruſh between two bodies.
It is applied to the ſqueezing or preſſing of things downwards,
as in the preſſes for printing. JWilkins.
The ſinking of the earth would make an extraordinary
convulſion of the air, and that crack muſt ſo ſhake or Jqueeze
the atmoſphere, as to bring down all the remaining vapours.
Burnet’s Theory ºf the Earth.
He reap'd the produćt of his labour'd ground,
And ſqueez'd the combs with golden liquor crown'd. Dryden.
None acted mournings forc'd to ſhow,
Or ſqueeze his eyes to make the torrent flow.
When Florio ſpeaks, what virgin could withſtand,
If gentle Damon did not ſqueeze her hand? Pope.
2. To oppreſs; to cruſh; to haraſs by extortion.
Hudibras.
In a civil war people muſt expect to be cruſhed and ſºueezed
L’Eſtrange.
... toward the burden.
3. To force between cloſe bodies.
To SQUEEze. v. n.
1. To act or paſs, in conſequence of compreſſion.
A concave ſphere of gold fill'd with water and ſolder'd up,
upon preſſing the ſphere with great force,
through it, and ſtand all over its outfi
drops, like dew,
gold.
de in multitudes of ſmall
Newton's Opticks.
What crowds of theſe, impenitently bold, 'pticks
§ founds and jingling ſyllables grown old,
. * ºn poets, in a raging vein,
* ...” the dregs and ſqueezing of the brain.
Tº force way through cloſe bodies.
- Many a pub
Dryden. .
let the water ſqueeze
without burſting or cracking the body of the
Pope.
lick miniſter comes empty in ; but when he has
crammed his guts, he is fain to ſºueeze hard before he can ge:
off. L'El-air.
Soyeeze. n.ſ. [from the verb..] Compreſſion; preſſure. "
A ſubtile artiſt ſtands with wond’rous bag,
That bears impriſon'd winds, of gentler ſort
Than thoſe that erſt Laertes' ſon enclos'd :
Peaceful they ſleep; but let the tuneful ſqueeze
Of labºring elbow rouſe them, out they fly
Melodiºus, and with ſpritely accents charm.
Soy Elch. m. ſ. Heavy fall. A low Judicrous word.
He tore the earth which he had fav'd
From ſqueſch of knight, and ſtorm'd and rav'd. Huajirat.
So ſoon as the poor devil had recovered the ſq.
he ſcampers, bawling like mad. L'Eſtraig.
SQUI.B. n.ſ. Iſchie'en, German, to puſhforward. This etymo-
logy, though the beſt that I have found, is not very probable.]
1. A ſmall pipe of paper filled with wildfire. Uſed in ſport.
The armada at Calais, ſir Walter Raleigh was wont pret-
tily to ſay, were ſuddenly driven away with ſquibs; for it was
no more than a ſtratagem of fire-boats manleſs, and ſent upon
them. Bacon's War with Sphin.
The foreſt of the ſouth, compareth the French valour' to a
ſquib, or fire of flax, which burns and crackles for a time,
but ſuddenly extinguiſhes. Hºwel's Pocal Foreſt.
Lampoons, like ſquibs, may make a preſent blaze;
But time, and thunder, pay reſpect to bays.
Furious he begins his march,
Drives rattling o'er a brazen arch;
With ſquibs and crackers arm'd to throw
Among the trembling crowd below.
2. Any petty fellow.
Åſked for their paſs by every ſºil,
That liſt at will them to revile or ſnub. Spenſer.
The ſquibs, in the common phraſe, are called libellers. Tºtler.
SQUIll. n.ſ.. [ſuilla, ſcilla, Latin; ſquille, Fr.]
1. A plant.
It hath a large acrid bulbous root like an onion; the leaves
are broad; the flowers are like thoſe of ornithogalum, or the
ſtarry hyacinth: they grow in a long ſpike, and come out be-
fore the leaves. Miller.
Seed or kernels of apples and pears put into a ſquill, which
is like a great onion, will come up earlier than in the earth
Philip.
elch, away
l/aler,
Swift.
itſelf. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
*Twill down like oxymel of ſquill. Rºſcommon.
The ſelf ſºme atoms
Can, in the trufle, furniſh out a feaſt ;
And nauſeate, in the ſcaly ſquill, the taſte. Garth.
2. A fiſh.
3. An inſe&amp;t.
The ſquill-inſe&amp;t is ſo called from ſome fimilitude to the
fºuill-fiſh, in having a long body covered with a cruſt, com-
poſed of ſeveral rings: the head broad and ſquat. Grew.
SQUI'NANCY. m. ſ. [ſquinance, ſquinancie, Fr. ſquinatia, Italian-J
An inflammation in the throat; a quinſey.
It is uſed for ſquinancies and inflammations of the throat;
whereby it ſeemeth to have a mollifying and lenifying virtue.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
In a ſuinancy there is danger of ſuffocation. Hiſeman.
SQUINT. adj. [ ſquinte, Dutch, oblique, tranſverſe.] Look-
ing obliquely ; looking not direétly; looking ſuſpiciouſly.
Where an equal poiſe of hope and fear
Does arbitrate the event, my nature is
That I incline to hope rather than fear, •r
And gladly baniſh ſquint ſuſpicion. Milº
To SQUINT. v. n. To look obliquely; to look not in a direct
line of viſion.
Some can ſquint when they will; and children ſet upon”
table with a candle behind them, both eyes will move 0"
wards, as affecting to ſee the light, and ſo induce ſºining.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Not a period of this epiſtle but ſquint, towards another.”
againſt it. Pºpe.
To SQUINT. v. a.
1. To form the eye to oblique viſion. h
This is the foul Flibertigibbet ; he gives the web and the
pin, ſquints the eye, and makes the hairlip. Shakespeare.
2. To turn the eye obliquely. r
Perkin began already to ſquint one eye upon the º
and another upon the ſančiuary. Bacon's Henry VII.
SQUI'N TEYED. adj. [ſºuint and eye.]
1. Having the ſight directed oblique. - n
He was ſo ſquinteyed, that he ſeemed ſpitefully to look .
them whom he beheld. Analley's Hiſtory ºf the Turks.
2. Indirect; oblique; malignant.
This is ſuch a falſe and ſquintered praiſe, , ,
Which ſeeming to look upwards on his glories,
!
Looks down upon my fears. Deniam,
SQUINTIFE/Go, adj. Squinting. A cant word.
The timbrel and the ſquintifego maid
Of Iſis awe thee; left the gods for ſin, Drydin.
Should, with a ſwelling dropſy fluff thy ſkin. I fe”
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
To SQUINY. v. n. To look aſquint. A cant word.
I remember thine eyes well enough:
Do'ſt thou ſquiny at me? Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
sº E. m. ſ. [Contraćtion of eſquire; eſcuyer, French. See
SQUIR E.]
1. A gentleman next in rank to a knight.
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.—Ay, that I will,
come cut and long tail under the degree of a ſuire. Shakeſp.
The reſt are princes, barons, knights, ſquires,
And gentlemen of blood. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
2. An attendant on a noble warriour.
Old Butes' form he took, Anchiſes' ſquire
Now left to rule Aſcanius. Dryden's Aneid.
Knights, ſquireſ, and ſteeds muſt enter on the ſtage. Pope.
3. An attendant at court.
Return with her—
I could as well be brought
To knee his throne, and ſquire-like penſion beg,
To keep baſe life a-foot. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
SQui'RRE L. m. ſ. [ºſcurueil, French; ſciurus, Latin.] A ſmall
animal that lives in woods, remarkable for leaping from tree
to tree.
One chanc'd to find a nut,
In the end of which a hole was cut,
Which lay upon a hazel-root,
There ſcatter'd by a ſquirrel:
Which out the kernel gotten had ;
When quoth this fay, dear queen be glad,
Let Oberon be ne'er ſo mad,
I'll ſet you ſafe from peril. Drayton.
To SQUIRT. v. a. To throw out in a quick ſtream. Of un-
certain etymology.
Sir Roger ſhe mortally hated, and uſed to hire fellows to
fºurt kennel water upon him as he paſſed along. Arbuthnot.
To SQUIRt. v. n. To prate; to let fly. Low cant.
You are ſo given to ſºuinting up and down, and chattering,
that the world would ſay, I had choſen a jack-pudding for a
prime miniſter. L’Eſtrange.
SQUIRT. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. An inſtrument by which a quick ſtream is eječted.
He with his ſquirt-fire cou’d diſperſe
Whole troops. Hudibras.
There is war declared by a lord; his weapons are a pin to
ſcratch, and a ſquirt to beſpatter. Pope.
2. A ſmall quick ſtream.
Water thoſe with ſuirts of an infuſion of the medicine in
dunged water. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
SQUI'RTER. n.ſ.. [from ſuirt J . One that plies a ſquirt.
The ſquirters were at it with their kennel water, for they
were mad for the loſs of their bubble. Arbuthnot.
To STAB. v. a. [ſlaven, old Dutch.]
1. To pierce with a pointed weapon.
Be’t lawful, that I invocate thy ghoſt,
To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy ſlaughter'd ſon;
Stabb’d by the ſelf ſame hand that made theſe wounds. Shakespeare
Thou hid'ſt a thouſand daggers in thy thoughts,
Which thou haſt whetted on thy ſtony heart,
To ſtab at my frail life. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
None ſhall dare
With ſhorten’d ſword to/lab in cloſer war;
But in fair combat fight. Dryden's Knights Tale.
Killing a man with a ſword or a hatchet, are looked on as
no diſtinct ſpecies of action; but if the point of the ſword firſt
enter the body, it paſſes for a diſtinét ſpecies where it has a di-
ſtinét name; as in England, where it is called ſtalling. Locke.
Porcius, think, thou ſeeſt thy dying brother
Stabb’d at his heart, and all beſmear'd with blood,
Storming at thee! Adiſon's Cato.
2. To wound mortally or miſchievouſly.
He ſpeaks poinards, and every word ſtals. Shakeſpeare.
What tears will then be ſhed 1
Then, to compleat her woes, will I eſpouſe
Hermione:—'twill ſlab her to the heart! A. Philips.
Stab. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſtab or wound with a ſharp pointed weapon.
The elements
Of whom your ſwords are temper'd, may as well
Wound the loud winds, or with bemockt at ſtabs
Kill the ſtill cloſing waters. Shakeſpeare.
Cleander,
Unworthy was thy fate, thou firſt of warriours,
To fall beneath a baſe aſſaſſin's ſlab. Rowe.
2. A dark injury; a ſly miſchief.
3. A ſtroke; a blow.
He had a ſuitable ſcripture ready to repell them all; every
pertinent text urged home being a direct ſlab to a temptation.
South's Sermons.
STA'bber, n.ſ. [from ſtab.] One who ſtabs; a privy mur-
derer.
STABI/LIMENT. n. É [from ſlabilis, Latin.] Support; firm-
r
neſs; ačt of making firm.
They ſerve for ſtabiliment, propagation and ſhade. Derham.
S T A
****ity. "./ [/abilité, Fr. from ſatilitar, Latini
I. Stableneſs; #. firing ºften Latin.]
By the ſame degrees that either of theſe happen; the ſta-
bility of the figure is by the ſame leſſened. Temple,
Theſe mighty girder, whichthºrick bind,
Theſe ribs robuſt and waſ in order join'd
§shºrength and ſuch ſali, impº.""
That ſtorms above, and earthquakes under ground -
Break not the pillars. Blackmare:
This and that i. began to try -
his and that hanging flone's ſlability.
2. Fixedneſs; not ; ſtability
Since fluidneſs and ſlability are contrary qualities, we may
conceive that the firmneſs or ſtability of a body conſiſts in this
that the particles which compoſe it do ſo reſt, or are intangiº.
that there is among them a mutual coheſion. Éy.
3. Firmneſs of reſolution.
STABLE. ad. [/lable, Fr. ſabilis, Latin.]
1. Fixed; able to ſtand.
2. Steady; conſtant; fixed in reſolution or condu.a.
If man would be unvariable,
He muſt be like a rock or ſtone, or tree;
For ev'n the perfect angels were not/lable, -
But had a fall more deſperate than we. Davies.
He perfect, ſtable; but imperfect we,
Subject to change. Dryden's Knight; Tale.
3. Strong; fixed in ſtate.
This region of chance and vanity, where nothing is ſtable,
nothing equal; nothing could be offered to-day but what to-
morrow might deprive us of. Rogers's Sermons.
STA’BLE, n.ſ. (Aubulum, Latin.]. A houſe for beaſts.
I will make Rabbah a ſtable for camels. Ezra xxv. 5.
To STA’BLE. v. n. [ſtabulo, Latin.] To kennel; to dwell as -
beaſts.
Cotton.
In their palaces,
Where luxury late reign'd, ſea monſters whelp'd
And ſtabled. Milton.
St A'Ble Boy. Un: ſ [ſtable and bºy, or man.] One who at-
STA'BLEMAN. ; tends in the ſtable.
As ſoon as you alight at the inn, deliver your horſes to the
Jiahleboy. Swift.
If the gentleman hath lain a night, get the ſtablemen and the
ſcullion to ſtand in his way. Swift's Directions to the Butler.
I would with jockeys from Newmarket dine,
And to rough riders give my choiceſt wine;
I would careſs ſome ſtableman of note,
And imitate his language and his coat.
STA’BLENESS. m.ſ.. [from ſtable.]
1. Power to ſtand.
2. Steadineſs; conſtancy; ſtability.
The king becoming graces,
As juſtice, verity, temp'rance, ſtableneſs,
Bounty, perſev’rance, I have no reliſh of them. Shakeſpeare.
STA'Blest AND. n.ſ. [In law.] Is one of the four evidences or
preſumptions, whereby a man is convinced to intend the
ſtealing of the king's deer in the foreſt: and this is when a
man is found at his ſtanding in the foreſt with a croſs bowº
bent, ready to ſhoot at any deer; or with a long bow, or elſe
ſtanding cloſe by a tree with greyhounds in a leaſh ready to
ſlip. Cowel.
I'll keep my ſtableſ?and where I lodge my wife, I'll go in
couples with her. Shakeſpeare.
To STA's lish. v. a. [effablir, Fr. ſtabilio, Latin.] To eſta-
bliſh; to fix; to ſettle.
Then ſhe began a treaty to procure,
And ſtabliſh terms betwixt both their requeſts. Fairy Queen.
Stop effuſion of our Chriſtian blood,
And ſlablih quietneſs on ev'ry ſide. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Comfort your hearts, and ſtabliſh you in every good work.
2 Theſ, ii. 17.
Bramſon.
Poor hereticks in love there be,
Which think to ſtabliſh dangerous conſtancy;
But I have told them, ſince you will be true,
You ſhall be true to them who're falſe to you. Donne.
His covenant ſworn -
To David, ſtabliſh'd as the days of heav'n. Milton.
STAcK. n.ſ. [/?acca, Italian.]
1. A large quantity of hay, corn, or wood, heaped up regularly
together. - -
Againſt every pillar was a ſack of billets above a man's
height, which the watermen that bring wood down the Scine
laid there. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
While the marquis and his ſervant on foot were chaſing the
kid about the ſacſ, the prince from horſeback killed him with
a piſtol. J/otton's Buckingham,
While the cock
To the ſlack or the barn-door --
Stoutly ſtruts his dame before. - AMilton.
Smack, of moiſt corn grow hot by fermentation. Newton,
An inundation, ſays the fable,
O'erflow'd a farmer's barn and ſtable;
whole ricks of hay and ſlacks of corn
Were down the ſudden current born. Swift.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
3 2. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A
f
imneys or funnels ſtanding together.
2. A ". ſº of chimneys, the foundation of the
º º in lºſºman's Surgery.
+". v.a. [from the noun..] To pile up regularly in
..-l
**, likewiſe a hovel will ſerve for a room,
# on the peaſe. - Tuſer.
#'ſ. ...}. up of wood I ſhall give you. Mºrt.
STAct E. m. ſ. An aromatick; the gum that diſtills from the
tree which produces myrrh.
Take ſweet ſpices, ſa&amp;#e, and galbanum.
STA'DL.E. n.ſ. [rtabel, Saxon, a foundation.]
1. Anything which ſerves for ſupport to another.
2. A ſtaff; a crutch. -
He cometh on, his weak ſteps governing
And aged limbs on cypreſs/fade ſtout,
And with an ivy twine his waiſt is girt about. Fa. Queen.
3. A tree ſuffered to grow for coarſe and common uſes, as poſts
or rails. Of this meaning I am doubtful.
Leave growing for ſaddles the likelieſt and beſt,
Though ſeller and buyer diſpatched the reſt. Tuſſºr.
Coppice-woods, if you leave in them ſaddles toothick, will
run to buſhes and briars, and have little clean underwood. Bac.
To STADLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To furniſh with ſtadles.
Firſt ſee it well fenced, ere hewers begin;
Then ſee it wall ſtadled without and within. Tuftr.
STADTHolder: n.ſ.. [ſtadt and houden, Dutch..] The Chief
magiſtrate of the United Provinces. -
STAFF. n.ſ. plur. Javes. [rcaer, Saxon; ſtaff, Daniſh; ſłaf,
Dutch.]
1. A ſtick with which a man ſupports himſelf in walking.
It much would pleaſe him,
That of his fortunes you would make a ſtaff
To lean upon. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
Grant me and my people the benefit of thy chaſtiſements,
that thy rod as well as thy/ſaff may comfort us. K. Charles.
Is it probable that he, who had met whole armies in battle,
ſhould now throw away his ſtaff, out of fear of a dog. Broome.
2. A prop; a ſupport.
. Hope is a lover's ſtaff; walk hence with that,
And manage it againſt deſpairing thoughts. Shakeſpeare.
The boy was the very/ºff of my age, my very prop. Shakespeare
3. A ſtick uſed as a weapon; a club; the haſ die of . edged
or pointed weapon. A club properly includes the notion of
weight, and the ſtaff of length.
I cannot ſtrike at wretched kernes, whoſe arms
* Are hir'd to bear their ſlave. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He that bought the ſkin ran greater riſque than t’other that
ſold it, and had the worſe end of the Jaff. L'Eſtrange.
... With forks and/laves the felon they purſue. Dryden.
4. Any long piece of wood.
He forthwith from the glitt'ringſ off unfurl’d
Th’ imperial enſign. Milton.
To his ſingle eye, that in his forehead glar'd
Like a full moon, or a broad burniſh'd ſhield,
A forky ſtaff we dextrouſly apply'd,
Which, in the ſpacious ſocket turning round,
Scoopt out the big round gelly from its orb. Addiſm.
5. An enſign of an office; a badge of authority.
Methought this ſtaff, mine office-badge in court,
Was broke in twain. Shakeſp. Henry VI,
All his officers brake their ſaves; but at their return new
/ºve were delivered unto them. Hayward on Edward vi.
6. [Stef, Iſlandick J. A ſtanza; a ſeries of verſes regularly diſ-
poſed, ſo as that, when the ſtanza is concluded, the ſame order
begins again.
Cowley found out that no kind of ſtaff is proper for an
heroick poem, as being all too lyrical; yet though he wrote
in couplets, where rhyme is freer from conſtraint, he affects
half verſes. Dryden.
STA'FFish. adj. [from ſtaff.] Stiff; harſh. Obſolete.
A wit in youth not over dull, heavy, knotty, and lumpiſh,
but hard, tough, and though ſomewhat ſtaff, both for learn-
ing and whole courſe of living, proveth always beſt. Aſcham.
STA'FFTRE e. m. ſ. A ſort of ever green privet.
STAG. m.ſ. [Of this word I find no derivation.] The male red
deer; the male of the hind.
To the place a poor ſequeſtred ſlag,
º from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
id come to languiſh. *Shakeſp. / you like -
The ſwift/log from under ground 'ſp. A you like it
Bore up his branching head. Milton.
*''' inhabitants of ſeas and ſkies ſhall change,
And fiſh on "º.and//ags in air ſhall range. Dryden.
- le ag
º, his º feet, and thinks they ſound like more,
STAGE º º lºgs will o'ertake his fore. Pope.
1. A ãºr º [c/ age, French J
** tº view on which any ſhow is exhibited,
2. 'I - -
I he . ; he Place of ſcenick entertainments,
, "" much good dot you then,
Er-ve pluſh and velvet men:
Ex. xxx. 34.
Can feed on ort; and, ſafe in your/iage clothes,
Dare quit, upon your oaths,
The ſtagers and the ſtage wrights too. Ben. Yohmſ,
Thoſe two Mytilene brethren, baſely born, crept ºf d
ſmall galliot unto the majeſty of great kings. Herein admire
the wonderful changes and chances of thºſe worldly things,
now up, now down, as if the life of man were not of much
more certainty than a ſtage play. Knºſe,', Hiſt, of the 7.
I maintain, againſt the enemies of the ſtage, that patterns
of piety, decently repreſented, may ſecond the Precepts. Dryd.
One Livius Andronicus was the firſtAagº player in Rome."
Pryden's juvenal, Dedication.
Knights, ſquires, and fleeds muſt entéron the ſage. Pope.
Among ſlaves, who exerciſed Polite arts, none ſold ſo dear
as ſtage players or actors. Arbuthnot on Cºin.
3. Any place where any thing is Publickly tranſacted or per-
formed.
When we are born, we cry that we are COne
To this great ſtage of fools. Shakeſp. King Lar.
4. A place in which reſt is taken on a journey; as much of a
journey as is performed without intermiſſion. [Statio, Latin.)
I ſhall put you in mind where it was you promiſed to ſet Out,
or begin your firſt ſtage; and beſeech you to go before me my
guide. Hammond's Praß. Catech.
Our next ſtage brought us to the mouth of the Tiber. All,
From thence compell'd by craft and age,
She makes the head her lateſ ſtage. Priºr,
By opening a paſſage from Muſcovy to China, and marking
the ſeveral/loges, it was a journey of ſo many days. Baker.
5. A ſingle ſtep of gradual proceſs.
he changes and viciſſitude in wars are many; but chiefly
in the ſeats or ſtages of the war, the weapons, and the mann;
of the condućt. Bacon's Eſſayſ.
We muſt not expect that our journey through the ſºver.
Jº of this life ſhould be all ſmooth and even. Atterbury.
To prepare the ſoul to be a fit inhabitant of that holy place
to which we aſpire, is to be brought to perfection by gradual
advances through ſeveral hard and laborious ſtages of diſci-
pline. Rºgers's Sermons.
The firſt ſtage of healing, or the diſcharge of matter, is by
ſurgeons called digeſtion. Sharp's Surgery.
To Stage. v. a. [from the noun..] To exhibit publickly,
Out of uſe.
I love the people;
But do not like to ſlage me to their eyes:
Though it do well, I do not refiſh weſi
Their loud applauſe. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Maſºre.
The quick comedians
Extemp'rally will ſlag, us, and preſent
Our Alexandrian revels. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
STA'GEcoach. m./ [/age and coach..] A coach that keeps its
ſtages; a coach that Paſles and repaſſes on certain days for the
accºmmodation of paſſengers.
The ſtory was told me by a prieſt, as we travelled in a
J’agecºach. Addiſon.
When late their miry ſides /?agecoaches ſhow,
And their ſtiff horſes through the town move ſlow,
Then let the prudent walker ſhoes provide. Goy.
STAGE PLAY. n.). [/iage and play. ] Theatrical entertain-
Inent.
This rough-caſt unhewn poetry was inſtead of ſageplays for
one hundred and twenty years. Dryden's juv. Dedzation.
STA'G ER. m.ſ. [from ſtage.]
I. A player.
You ſafe in your ſtage clothes,
Dare quit, upon your oaths,
The/lagers and the ſtage wrights too. Ben. jºhnſºn.
2. One who has long acted on the ſtage of life; a pračlitioner;
a perſon of cunning.
I've heard old cunning/lagers
Say, fools for argument uſe wagers. ſº
One experienced /ſager, that had baffled twenty gaps an
tricks before, diſcovered the plot. L'A/ºrange.
Some ſlagers of the wiſer ſort -
Made all theſe idle wonderments their ſport:
But he, who heard what ev'ry fool could ſay,
Would never fix his thought, but trim his time away. Dryd.
One cries out, theſe //agers
Come in good time to make more work for wagers. Dryd.
Be by a parſon cheated
Had you been cunning /īagers,
You might yourſelves be treated
captains and by majors. Swift.
sº.. n. ſ. A ... in horſes. Diff.
STA (GGARD. m. ſ [from /*ag.] A four year old flag. Ainſw.
To S TAGGER. v. n. [/?aggeren, Dutch.]
1. To reel; not to ſtand or walk ſteadily. fter
He began to appear ſick and giddy, and to ſagger; afte
which he ſell down as dead. . . . Boyle.
He ſtruck with all his might -
Full on the helmet of th' unwary knight: Dryden.
Deep was the wound; he /fagger'd with the bow. Thern<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
-
*..
Them revelſing the Tentyrites invade,
By giddy heads and ſtaggering legs betray'd:
Strange odds ! where cropſick drunkards muſt engage
An hungry foe. Tate's }...m.
The immediate forerunners of an apoplexy are a vertigo,
flaggering, and loſs of memory. Arbuthnot.
2. To faint; to begin to give way.
The enemy/taggers: if you follow your blow, he falls at
your feet; but if you allow him reſpite, he will recover his
ſtrength. - Addiſon.
3. To heſitate; to fall into doubt; to become leſs confident or
determined. -
A man may, if he were fearful, ſtagger in this attempt. Shakespeare
He ſtaggered not at the promiſe of God through unbelief;
but was ſtrong in faith. Rom. iv. 20.
Three means to fortify belief are experience, reaſon, and
authority; of theſe the moſt potent is authority; for belief
upon reaſon, or experience, will ſtagger. Bacon.
No hereticks deſire to ſpread
Their light opinions, like theſe Epicures;
For ſo their ſtaggring thoughts are comforted,
And other mens aſſent their doubt aſſures. Davies.
If thou confidently depend on the truth of this, without any
doubting or ſtaggering, this will be accepted by God. Hamm.
But let it inward ſink and drown my mind:
Falſhood ſhall want its triumph: I begin
‘To ſtagger; but I’ll prop myſelf within.
To St A'Go e R. v. a.
1. To make to ſtagger; to make to reel.
That hand ſhall burn in never-quenching fire,
That ſtaggers thus my perſon. Shakeſp. Richard II.
2. To ſhock; to alarm; to make leſs ſteady or confident.
The queſtion did at firſt ſo ſtagger me,
Bearing a ſtate of mighty moment in't. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
When a prince fails in honour and juſtice, ’tis enough to
Jagger his people in their allegiance. L’Eſtrange.
Whoſoever will read the ſtory of this war, will find him-
ſelf much ſtaggered, and put to a kind of riddle. Howel.
The ſhells being lodged with the belemnites, ſelenites, and
other like natural foſſils, it was enough to ſtagger a ſpectator,
and make him ready to entertain a belief that theſe were ſo
too. J/oºdward.
STA'Go ERs. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
Dryden,
1. A kind of horſe apoplexy.
His horſe paſt cure of the fives, ſtark ſpoil'd with the ſtag-
gerſ. , Shakesp. Taming of the Shrew.
2. Madneſs; wild condućt; irregular behaviour. Out of uſe.
º I will throw thee from my care for ever
Into the ſº ggers, and the careleſs lapſe
Of youth and ignorance. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
STA'GNANCY. n.ſ. [from ſtagnant..] The ſtate of being with-
out motion or ventilation.
STAGNANT, adj. [/?agnans, Latin.] Motionleſs; ſtill; not
agitated; not flowing; not running.
What does the flood from putrefaction keep?
Should it be ſtagnant in its ample ſeat,
The ſun would through it ſpread deſtrućtive heat. Blackm.
"Twas owing to this hurry and ačtion of the water that the
ſand now was caſt into layers, and not to a regular ſettlement,
from a water quiet and ſtagnant. Woodward.
Immur'd and buſied in perpetual ſloth,
That gloomy ſlumber of the ſtagnant ſoul. Irene.
To STAGNATE. v. n. [/iagnum, Latin.] To lye motion-
leſs; to have no courſe or ſtream.
The water which now ariſes muſt have all ſtagnated at the
ſurface, and could never poſſibly have been refunded forth
upon the earth, had not the ſtrata been thus raiſed up. Woodw.
The aliment moving through the capillary tubes ſtagnates,
and unites itſelf to the veſſel through which it flows. Arbuthn.
Where creeping waters ooze,
Where marſhes ſtagnate. Thomſon.
STAGNA'tion. n.ſ.. [from ſtagnate.] Stop of courſe; ceſſa-
tion of motion.
As the Alps ſurround Geneva on all ſides, they form a vaſt
baſon, where there would be a conſtant ſtagnation of vapours,
did not the north wind ſcatter them from time to time. Addiſon.
To what great ends ſubſervient is the wind
Behold, where e'er this ačtive vapour flies,
It drives the clouds, and agitates the ſkies:
This from ſtagnation and corruption ſaves
Th' aerial ocean's ever-rolling waves. Blackmore's Creation.
STAID. participial adje.7ive. [from ſtay. ] Sober; grave; re-
gular; compoſed; not wild; not volatile.
Put thyſelf
Into a 'haviour of leſs fear, ere wildneſs
Vanquiſh myſłaider ſenſes. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
This ſeems to our weaker view,
O'erlaid with black ſaid wiſdom's hue. Milton.
I ſhould not be a perſuader to them of ſtudying much in the
Spring, after three years that they have well laid their grounds;
but to ride out, with prudent and ſaid guides, to all the quar-
ters of the land. AMilton on Education.
S T A
I am the more at eaſe in firroger's famil becauſe it coff-
e it cofia
s fifts of ſober and ſaid perſons. g y, Addiſon,
**"DNESS. n.J. [from jaid.] Sobriety; ity:
contrariety to ºil.” J Sobriety; gravity; regularity;
. The boiling blood of youth, fiercely agitating the fluid air,
hinders that ſerenity and fixed Jłaidhºſ, which is neceſſary to ſo
ſevere an intentneſs. Glanv. Scepſ.
If ſometimes he appears too gay, yet a ſecret gracefulneſs
#. *. his writings, though the ſaidneſs and
... ſobriety of age be wanting. Dryd. Preface to Ovid.
To STAIN. v. a. ſyſłaenio, Welſh, from º º: 1.
Rhag Gwyar or Gnawd,
Afar ſaenawd. Talieſyn, an old Britiſh poet.]
1. To blot; to ſpot; to maculate.
Lend me a looking-glaſs;
If that her breath will miſt or ſlain the ſtone,
Why then ſhe lives. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
From the gaſh a ſtream
His armour ſtain'd, ere while ſo bright. Milton.
Embrace again, my ſons: be foes no more,
Nor ſtain your country with your children's gore. Drydeh.
2. To diſgrace; to ſpot with guilt or infamy.
Of honour void, of innocence, of faith, of purity,
Our wonted ornaments now ſoil'd and ſtain'd. AMilton.
Stain. n.ſ. [from the verb.] -
1. Blot; ſpot; diſcoloration. -
º, Nor death itſelf can wholly waſh their ſlains;
But long contraćted filth ev’n in the ſoul remains:
The reliques of inveterate vice they wear,
And ſpots of fin. Dryden’s AEn.
We no where meet with a more pleaſing ſhow than what
appears in the heavens at the riſing and ſetting of the ſun,
which is wholly made up of thoſe different ſain, of light that
ſhew themſelves in clouds of a different ſituation. Addiſºu.
Swift trouts diverſify'd with crimſon ſlains,
And pikes, the tyrants of the wat'ry plains. Pope.
2. Taint of guilt or infamy. -
To ſolemn actions of royalty and juſtice their ſuitable orna-
ments are a beauty: are they only in religion a ſtain? Hºoker.
Our opinion, concerning the force and virtue which ſuch
places have, is, I truſt, without any blemiſh or ſlain of he-
reſy. Hooker.
Then heav'n and earth renew'd, ſhall be made pure
To ſanctity, that ſhall receive no ſlain. Milton's Par. Lo/?.
Ulyſſes bids his friends to caſt lots; for if he had made the
choice himſelf, they whom he had rejećted might have judged
it a ſtain upon them for want of merit. Broome.
3. Cauſe of reproach; ſhame.
Hereby I will lead her that is the praiſe, and yet the ſtain of
all womankind. Sidney.
STA’INE.R. n.ſ.. [from ſtain. I One who ſtains; one who
blots.
Sta'INLess. adj. [from ſtain.]
1. Free from blots or ſpots.
The phenix wings are not ſo rare
For faultleſs length and ſtainleſ; hue. Sidney.
2. Free from fin or reproach.
I cannot love him;
Yet I ſuppoſe him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great eſtate, of freſh and ſtain'ſ youth. Shakeſpeare.
STAIR. n ſ. [rzaegen, Saxon; ſteghe, Dutch..] Steps by which
we riſe an aſcent from the lower part of a building to the
upper. Stair was anciently uſed for the whole order of ſteps;
but ſtair now, if it be uſed at all, ſignifies, as in Milton, only
one flight of ſteps.
A good builder to a high tower will not make his ſtair up-
right, but winding almoſt the full compaſs about, that the
ſteepneſs be the more inſenſible. Sidney.
How many cowards, whoſe hearts are all as falſe
As ſtairs of ſand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars! Shakeſpeare.
Slaver with lips as common as the ſtairs
That mount the Capitol. . Shaftºff.
I would have one only goodly room above fairs, of fone
forty foot high. - Bacon'. Eſſayſ,
Sir James Tirrel repairing to the Tower by night, attended
by two ſervants, ſtood at the ſtair-foot, and ſent theſe two
villains to execute the murder. Bacon.
There being good ſtairs at either end, they never went
through each other's quarters. Clarendon.
The ſtairs were ſuch as whereon Jacob ſaw
Angels aſcending and deſcending: Milton's Parad. Lºft.
Satan now on the lower/fair,
That ſcal'd by ſteps of gold to heav'n gate,
Looks down with wonder at the ſudden vºw,
Of all this world. - Milton's Parad. Lºft.
Trembling he ſprings, . -
As terror had increas'd his feet with wings;
Nor ſaid for ſlairs; but down the depth he threw
His body: on his back the door he drew. Drydºn.
Sraºrcase. m. ſ. [ſtair and caſe.] The part of a fabrick that
contains the ſtairs.
25 A To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A
To make a complete ſtaircaſe is a curious piece ofſº.
Otto%2.
“... forbear mentioning a ſtaircaſe, where the eaſineſs of
the aſcent, the diſpoſition of the lights, and the convenient
landing, are admirably contrived. Addison on Italy.
STAke. n.ſ. [rzaca, Saxon; ſlatº, Dutch; effaca, Spaniſh.]
1. A poſt or ſtrong ſtick fixed in the ground. -
The more I ſhaked the ſake, which he had planted in the
ground of my heart, the deeper ſtill it ſunk into it. Sidney.
His credit in the world might ſtand the poor town in great
ſtead, as hitherto their miniſters foreign eſtimation hath been
the beſt ſtake in their hedge. Hooker.
He wanted pikes to ſet before his archers;
Inſtead whereof ſharp ſtakes, pluckt out of hedges,
They pitched in the ground. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
In France the grapes that make the wine grow upon low
vines bound to ſmall ſtakes, and the raiſed vines in arbors
make but verjuice. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
Or ſharpen ſtakes, or head the forks, or twine
The ſallow twigs to tie the ſtraggling vine. Dryden.
2. A piece of wood.
While he whirl’d in fiery circles round
The brand, a ſharpen'd ſtake ſtrong Dryas found, }
And in the ſhoulder's joint inflićts the wound. Dryden.
3. Any thing placed as a paliſade or fence.
That hollow I ſhould know: what are you, ſpeak?
Come not too near, you fall on iron ſtakes elſe. Milton.
4. The poſt to which a beaſt is tied to be baited.
We are at the ſtake,
And bay’d about with many enemies. Shakeſp. jul. Caſar.
Have you not ſet mine honour at the ſtake,
And baited it with all th’ unmuzzled thoughts
That tyrannous heart can think? Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
5. Anything pledged or wagered. I know not well whence it
has this meaning.
'Tis time ſhort pleaſure now to take,
Of little life the beſt to make,
And manage wiſely the laſt ſtaše.
O then, what intereſt ſhall I make
To ſave my laſt important/lake,
When the moſt juſt have cauſe to quake!
Cowley. }
Rºſcommon. }
He ventures little for ſo great aftafe. AMºre.
Th’ increaſing ſound is borne to either ſhore,
And for their/lakes the throwing nations fear. Dryden.
The game was ſo contrived, that one particular caſt took
up the whole ſtake; and when ſome others came up, you laid
down. Arbuthnot.
6. The ſtate of being hazarded, pledged, or wagered.
When he heard that the lady Margaret was declared for it,
he ſaw plainly that his kingdom muſt again be put to the ſtate,
and that he muſt fight for it. Bacon's Henry VII.
Are not our liberties, our lives,
The laws, religion, and our wives,
- Enough at once to lie at ſtaše,
For cav'nant and the cauſe's ſake? Hudibras.
Of my crown thou too much care do'ſ take;
That which I value more, my love's at ſºake. Dryden.
Hath any of you a great intereſt at ſafe in a diſtant part of
the world? Hath he ventured a good ſhare of his fortuné: Att.
- Every moment Cato's life's at /lake. Addison Cato.
7. The ſtaše is a ſmall anvil, which ſtands upon a ſmál iron
foot on the work-bench, to remove as occaſion offers; or elſe
it hath a ſtrong iron ſpike at the bottom let into ſome place of
the work-bench, not to be removed. Its office is to ſet ſmall
cold work ſtraight upon, or to cut or punch upon with the
cold chiſel or cold punch. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
To STAKE. v.a. [from the noun.]
1. To faſten, ſupport, or defend with poſts ſet upright.
Stake and bind up your weakeſt plants and flowers againſt
the winds, before they in a moment proſtrate a whole year's
labour. , Evelyn's Kalendar.
2. To wager; to hazard; to put to hazard.
!s a man betrayed in his neareſt concerns? The cauſe is, he
relied upon the ſervices of a pack of villains, who defiºned
nothing but their own game, and to ſtake him while they playºd
for themſelves. South
Perſons, after their priſons have been flung open have
choſen rather to languiſh in their dungeons than jº. their
miſèrable lives on the ſucceſs of a revolūtion. Addison.
They duſt not ſtaše their preſent and future happineſs on
their own chimerical imaginations.
» - Addiſon.
A º * lamb that near the fountain plays, iſon
n - - -
STAf.cº. º: his dancing ſhade ſurveys. Pope.
- - - ſ [from rax…'.
º: only far in the fift º an icicle, accidentally
Stº. º: fiſſures of the ſtone, ſ/oodward.
A cave wa º Reſembling an icicle.
ſides. S lined with *º on the top and
erham's Phyſico-Thology
STALAGMi'Tes. ” ſº Spar formed into the #: ...'.
Woodward's Math. Fºſſ.
STALE. adj. [ſhelle, Dutch.]
1. Old; long kept ; altered by time. Stale is not uſed of per-
ſons otherwiſe than in contempt.
This, Richard, is a curious caſe:
Suppoſe your eyes ſent equal rays
Upon two diſtant pots of ale,
Not knowing which was mild or ſale;
In this ſad ſtate your doubtful choice
Would never have the caſting voice. Prior,
A ſale virgin ſets up a ſhop in a place where ſhe is not
known. Spectator.
2. Uſed 'till it is of no uſe or eſteem; worn out of regard or
notice.
The duke regarded not the muttering multitude, knowing
that rumours grow /ſale and vaniſh with time. Hayward.
About her neck a pacquet mail,
Fraught with advice, ſome freſh, ſome ſale. Butler.
Many things beget opinion; ſo doth novelty: wit itſelf, if
ſale, is leſs taking. Grew's Coſmºl.
Pompey was a perfeót favourite of the people; but his pre-
tenſions grew ſale for want of a timely opportunity of intro-
ducing them upon the ſtage. Swift.
They reaſon and conclude by precedent,
And own ſale nonſenſe which they ne'er invent. Pºpe.
STALE. n.ſ.. [from raelan, Saxon, to ſteal.]
1. Something exhibited or offered as an allurement to draw others
to any place or purpoſe.
His heart being wholly delighted in deceiving us, we could
never be warned; but rather one bird caught, ſerved for a ſtale
to bring in more. Sidney,
Still as he went he crafty ſales did lay,
With cunning trains him to entrap unwares;
And privy ſpials plac'd in all his way,
To weet what courſe he takes, and how he fares. Fa. &amp;.
The trumpery in my houſe bring hither,
For ſale to catch theſe thieves. Shakespeare. Timºff,
Had he none elſe to make a ſale but me?
I was the chief that rais'd him to the crown,
And I'll be chief to bring him down again. Shakeſ H.VI.
A pretence of kindneſs is the univerſal ſale to all baſe pro-
jećts: by this men are robbed of their fortunes, and women
of their honour. Government ºf the Tºngue.
It may be a vizor for the hypocrite, and aftale for the am-
bitious. Decay ºf Pitt).
This eaſy fool muſt be my ſººk, ſet up
To catch the people's eyes: he's tame and merciful;
Him I can manage. Dryden's Dan Seloftian.
2. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems to ſignify a proſtitute.
I ſtand diſhonour'd, that have gone about
To link my dear friend to a common ſale.
3. [From ſale, adj.) Urine; old urine.
4. Old beer; beer ſomewhat acidulated.
5. [Stele, Dutch, a ſtick.] A handle.
It hath a long/tale or handle, with a button at the end for
Satºſtart,
one's hand. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To Stale. v. a. [from the adjećtive J. To wear out; to
make old.
Age cannot wither her, nor cuſtom ſale
Her infinite variety. Shakespeare. Ant, and Cleºpatra,
Were I a common laugher, or did uſe
To ſale with ordinary oaths my love -
To every new proteſtor. Shakespeare .julius Cºſar.
A barren-ſpirited fellow, one that feeds
On abječt orts and imitations;
Which, out of uſe, and /tal’d by other men, . . º
Begin his faſhion. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
To St Ale. v. n. [from the noun..] To make water.
Having ty'd his beaſt t'a pale,
And taken time for both to ſale.
STA'LELY. adv. [from ſia'e.] Of old; long time.
All your promis'd mountains
And ſeas I am ſo ſaleſ, acquainted with. Ben. jºſº.
STA'LENEss. n.ſ.. [from ſale.] Oldneſs; ſtate of being long
kept; ſtate of being corrupted by time. r
The beer and wine, as well within water as abovº, have
not been palled; but ſomewhat better than bottles of the ſame
drinks and ſaleneſ, kept in a cellar. Bacon's Nat. |.
Provided our ſandlord's principles were ſound, we did no
take any notice of the ſalentſ of his proviſions. Addison.
To STALK. v. m. [rzealcan, Saxon.]
1. To walk with high and ſuperb ſteps.
a ſenſe of diſlike.
His monſtrous enemy
With ſturdy ſteps came ſaling in his fight.
Shall your city call us lord,
In that behalf which we challeng'd it?
Or ſhall we give the ſignal to our rage,
And ſtalk in blood to our poſſeſſion?
Unfold th’ eternal door:
You ſee before the gate what /talking ghoſt ſl.
Commands the guard, what ſentries keep the Pott.
Hudibraſ.
It is uſed commonly"
Fairy £ºn.
Shakeſp. K. jºin.
Dryden.
Bertraſt
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
Bertran
Stalks cloſe behind her, like a witch's fiend
Preſfing to be employ'd.
They paſs their precious hours in plays and ſports,
*Till death behind came ſlalking on unſeen. Dryden.
With manly mien he/talk'd along the ground;
Nor wanted voice bely'd, nor vaunting ſound. Dryden.
Then ſtalking through the deep
He fords the ocean, while the topmoſt wave
Scarce reaches up his middle ſide. Addison.
'Tis not to ſºalk about, and draw freſh air
From time to time. Addiſon's Cato.
Vexatious thought ſtill found my flying mind,
Nor bound by limits, nor to place confin'd;
Haunted my nights, and terrify’d my days;
Stalk'd through my gardens, and purſu'd my ways,
Nor ſhut from artful bow'r, nor loſt in winding maze. Pri.
Scornful turning from the ſhore
My haughty ſtep, I ſtalk'd the valley o’er. Pope's Od/y.
2. To walk behind a ſtalking horſe or cover.
The king aſked how far it was to a certain town: they ſaid
ſix miles. Half an hour after he aſked again: one ſaid fix
miles and a half. The king alighted out of his coach, and
crept under the ſhoulder of his led horſe: and when ſome aſked
his majeſty what he meant, I muſt ſtalk, ſaid he, for yonder
town is ſhy, and flies me. Bacon's Apophthegms.
STALK. n.ſ.. [from the verb ]
1. High, proud, wide, and ſtately ſtep.
Behind it forth there leapt
An ugly fiend, more foul than diſmal day;
The which with monſtrous/talk behind him ſtept,
And ever as he went due watch upon him kept. Fa. Qileen.
Great Milton next, with high and haughty ſtalks,
Unfetter'd in majeſtick numbers walks. Addiſon.
2. [Stele, Dutch..] The ſtem on which flowers or fruits grow.
A ſtock-gillyflower, gently tied on a ſtick, put into a ſteep
glaſs full of quickſilver, ſo that the quickſilver cover it; after
five days you will find the flower freſh, and the falº harder
and leſs flexible than it was. Bacon.
Small ſtore will ſerve, where ſtore,
All ſeaſons, ripe for uſe hangs on theſial%. Milton.
That amber attracts not baſil is wholly repugnant unto
truth; for if the leaves thereof, or dried/talks, be ſtripped unto
ſmall ſtraws, they ariſe unto amber, wax, and other electricks,
no otherways than thoſe of wheat and rye. Brown.
Roſes unbid, and ev'ry fragrant flow'r,
Flew from their ſtalks to ſtrew thy nuptial bow'r. Dryden.
3. The ſtem of a quill.
Viewed with a glaſs, they appear made up of little bladders,
like thoſe in the plume ...}} of a quill. Grew.
STAL'KINGHoRs E. m. ſ. [ſialking and horſe.] A horſe either
real or fictitious by which a fowler ſhelters himſelf from the
ſight of the game; a maſk; a pretence.
Let the counſellor give counſel not for faction but for con-
ſcience, forbearing to make the good of the ſtate the ſtalking-
ºft of his private ends. Hakewill on Providence.
ypocriſy is the devil's ſlalkinghorſe, under an affectation of
ſimplicity and religion. L’Eſtrange.
STA’LKY. adj. [from ſtalk..] Hard like a ſtalk.
It grows upon a round ſtalk, and at the top bears a great
ſlalky head. Mortimer.
STALL. n.ſ. [rzeal, Saxon; ſlal, Dutch; ſtalla, Italian.]
1. A crib in which an ox is fed, or where any horſe is kept in
the ſtable.
A herd of oxen then he carv'd, with high rais'd heads,
forg'd all
Of gold and tin, for colour mixt, and bellowing from their
ſtall,
Ruſht to their paſtures.
Duncan's horſes,
Beauteous and ſwift, the minions of the race,
Turn'd wild in nature, broke their/falls, flung out,
Contending 'gainſt obedience. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Solomon had forty thouſand ſlall of horſes. 1 King; iv.
His fellow ſought what lodging, he could find;
At laſt he found aftall where oxen ſtood. Dryden.
2. A bench or form where any thing is ſet to ſale.
Stalls, bulks, windows,
Are ſmother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges hors'd
With variable complećtions; all agreeing
In earneſtneſs to ſee him. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
They are nature's coarſer wares that lie on the ſtall, expoſed
Chapman's Iliad.
to the tranſient view of every common eye. Glanv.
Beſs Hoy firſt found it troubleſome to bawl,
And therefore plac'd her cherries on a ſtall. King.
How pedlars ſtalls with glitt'ring toys are laid,
The various fairings of the country maid. Gay,
Harley, the nation's great ſupport,
Returning home one day from court,
Obſerv'd a parſon near Whitehall,
Cheap'ning old authors on a ſtall. Swift.
Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
3. [Stall, Swediſh; ſal, Armorick.] A ſmall houſe of ſhed in
which certain trades are pračtiſed.
All theſe together in one heap were thrown,
Like Carcaſes of beaſts in butcher's ſtall;
And in another corner wide were ſtrown
The antique ruins of the Roman's fall.
4. The ſeat of a dignified clergyman in the choir.
The pope creates a canon beyond the number limited, and
commands the chapter to aſſign unto ſuch canon a ſlal in the
choir and place in the chapter. - Ayliffe's Parergon.
The dignified clergy, out of mere humility, have called their
thrones by the names of ſmalls. Warkurton,
To St All. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To keep in a ſtall or ſtable.
For ſuch encheaſon, if you go nie,
Few chimneys reeking you will eſpy;
The fat ox, that wont ſigg in the ſtall,
Is now faſt ſtalled in his crumenal. Spenſer’s Paſioral.
For my part, he keeps me ruſtically at home; or, to ſpeak
more, properly, ſties me here at home unkept: for call you
that keeping, for a gentleman of my birth, that differs not
from the ſtalling of an ox Shakeſpeare.
Niſus the foreſt paſs'd,
And Alban plains, from Alba's name ſo call’d,
Where king Latinus then his oxen/lal’d. Dryden,
2. [For inſtall.] To inveſt.
Long may’ſt thou live to wail thy children's loſs;
And ſee another as I ſee thee now,
Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art/all'd in mine. Shakeſp.
To St All. v. m.
1. To inhabit; to dwell.
We could not ſtall together in the world. Shakeſpeare.
2. To kennel.
sºrrº. adj. Iſail and fed..] Fed not with graſs but dry
Stalfed oxen, and crammed fowls, are often diſeaſed in
their livers. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
STA'll worn, adj. [ſhall and worn.] Long kept in the ſtable.
i. it is probably a miſtake for ſtalworth, [rtapalper's, Saxon,
out.]
His ſhallworn ſteed the champion ſtout beſtrode. Shaieff.
STA'llion. n.ſ. [yſdalwyn, an old Welch word: the one is
derived from the other; but which from which I cannot cer-
tainly tell. Wotton. Eſtallion, French; falline, Italian; /a/-
heng/?, Dutch... juniuſ thinks it derived from rvaelan, to leap.]
A horſe kept for mares.
The preſent defects are breeding without choice of ſtallions
in ſhape or ſize. Tempk.
p If fleet Dragon's progeny at laſt p
Prove jaded, and in frequent matches caſt,
No favour for the ſtallion we retain,
And no reſpect for the degen'rate ſtrain. Dryden.
I will not aſk him one of his Egyptians; ”
No, let him keep’em all for ſlaves and/fallionſ. Dryden.
STAMINA. m. ſ. [Latin.]
1. The firſt principles of anything,
2. The ſolids of a human body.
3. [In botany.] Thoſe little fine threads or capillaments which
grow up within the flowers of plants, encompaſſing round the
{tyle, and on which the apices grow at their extremities.
STA'M IN Eous. adj. [/lamineus, Latin)
1. Conſiſting of threads.
2. Stamineous flowers.
Stamineous flowers are ſo far imperfeół as to want thoſe
coloured leaves which are called petala, and conſiſt only of the
ſtylus and the ſtamina; and ſuch plants as do bear theſe ſiami-
neous flowers Ray makes to conſtitute a large genus of plants:
theſe he divides into ſuch as, firſt, have their fruit or ſeed to-
tally divided from the flower; and theſe are ſuch plants as are
ſaid to be of different ſexes: the reaſon of which is, that from
the ſaid ſeed ſome plant ſhall ariſe with flowers and no fruit,
and others with fruit and no flowers; as hops, hemp, ſtinging
nettles. 2. Such as have their fruit only a little disjointed
from their flowers; as the ricinus, and the heliotropium tri-
conon. 3. Such as have their fruit immediately contiguous,
or adhering to their flower. 4. Such whoſe flowers adhere to
the top or uppermoſt of the ſeed; as the beta, aſarum, and
alchimilla. -
STA'MMEL. m. ſ. Of this word I know not the meaning.
Reedhood, the firſt that doth appear
In ſiammel ; ſcarlet is too dear. Ben. Johnſºn.
To STAMMER. J. n. [reamer, a ſtammerer, Saxon; ſame-
len, ſtameren, to ſtammer, Dutch..] To ſpeak with unna-
tural heſitation; to utter words with difficulty.
Sometime to her news of myſelf to tell
I go about; but then is all my bett -
Wry words, and ſamm'ring, or elſe doltiſh dumb: -
Say then, can this but of enchantment come? * Sidney.
I would thou could'ſt ſtammer, that thou might'ſ pour out
of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a narrow-mouth'd bottle,
either too much at once, or none at all. Sha *g.
4. Nºne
Fairy Queen,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A
STA’M
She/?ammers; oh what grace in liſping lies!
If ſhe ſays nothing, to be ſure ſhe's wiſe.
Lagean juice, -_-
whichſammering tongues and ſtagg'ring feet produce. Dryd.
its hoped he would come to ſtammer like De-
...:" op Arbuthn. Mart. Scrib.
Your hearers would rather you ſhould be leſs correót, than
perpetually ſtammering, which is one of the worſt ſoleciſms
- ick. Swift.
in : aſ [from ſiammer.] One who ſpeaks with
heſitation. - - -
Aſiammerer cannot with moderation hope for the gift of
tongues, or a peaſant to become learned as Origen. Taylor.
To Si AMP. v. a. ſ.ſiampen, Dutch; /lamper, Daniſh.]
1. To ſtrike by prefing the foot haſtily downwards.
If Arcite thus deplore
His ſuff'rings, Palamon yet ſuffers more;
He frets, he fumes, he ſtares, he ſtamps the ground;
The hollow tow'r with clamours rings around. Dryden.
- und; to beat as in a mortar.
2 Tº: the calf you had made, burnt it with fire, and/ºamped
and ground it very ſmall. - Deutr. ix. 21.
sºme apothecaries, upon ſtamping of coloquintida, have
been put into a great ſcouring by the vapour only. Bacon.
3. [Eſtamper, French; ſtampare, Italian; ºftampar, Spaniſh.]
To impreſs with ſome mark or figure.
Height of place is intended only to ſtamp the endowments
of a private condition with luſtre and authority. South.
Here ſwells the ſhelf with Ogilby the great;
There, ſtamp'd with arms, Newcaſtle ſhines complete.
Dryden.
Pope.
4. To fix a mark by impreſfing it.
Out of mere ambition, you have made
Your holy hat be ſlampt on the king's coin. Shakeſpeare.
Theſe prodigious conceits in nature ſpring out of framing
abſtraćted conceptions, inſtead of thoſe eaſy and primary no-
tions which nature ſlamps alike in all men of common ſenſe.
Digby on Bodies.
There needs no poſitive law or ſančtion of God to ſtamp an
obliquity upon ſuch a diſobedience. South's Sermons.
No conſtant reaſon of this can be given, but from the na-
ture of man's mind, which hath this notion of a deity born
with it, and ſtamped upon it; or is of ſuch a frame, that in
the free uſe of itſelf it will find out God. Zillotſon.
Though God has given us no innate ideas of himſelf,
though he has ſtampt no original charaćters on our minds,
wherein we may read his being; yet having furniſhed us with
thoſe faculties our minds are endowed with, he hath not left
himſelf without witneſs. Locke.
Can they perceive the impreſſions from things without, and
be at the ſame time ignorant of thoſe charaćters which nature
herſelf has taken care to ſtamp within Locke.
What titles had they had, if nature had not
Strove hard to thruſt the worſt deſerving firſt,
And ſtamp'd the noble mark of elderſhip
Upon their baſer metal? Rowe's Ambitious Stepmother.
What an unſpeakable happineſs would it be to a man en-
gaged in the purſuit of knowledge, if he had but a power of
famping his beſt ſentiments upon his memory in indelible
chara&amp;ters? Watts.
5. To make by impreſfing a mark.
If two penny weight of ſilver, marked with a certain im-
preſſion, ſhall here in England be equivalent to three penny
weight marked with another impreſſion, they will not fail to
Jamp pieces of that faſhion, and quickly carry away your
ſilver. Locke.
6. To mint; to form; to coin.
We are baſtards all;
And that moſt venerable man, which
I did call my father, was I know not where
When I was ſtampt. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To Stamp. v.º. To ſtrike the foot ſuddenly downward.
What a fool art thou,
A ramping fool, to brag, to ſtamp, and ſwear,
Upon my party! Thou cold-blooded ſlave,
Haſt thou not ſpoke like thunder on my fide Shakespeare  care.
The men ſhall howl at the noiſe of the ſtamping of the hoofs
of his ſtrong horſes. jer. xlvii. 3.
- There is ſuch an echo among the old ruins and vaults, that,
if you ſtamp but a little louder than ordinary, you hear the
ſound repeated. - Addison's Spectator.
He cannot bear th’ aſtoniſhing delight,
But ſtarts, exclaims, and ſtamps, and raves and dies. Dennis.
They got to the top, which was flat and even, and ſtamping
, "Pon it, they found it was hollow. Gulliver's Travels.
St AMr. ": ſ [t/lampe, French; ſampa, Italian ]
1. Any inſtrument by which a hollow impreſſion is made.
Añº, º nymphs, with colours faint
A Pºllºw, may Cupid paint,
nd a weak heart in time deſtroy:
She has */lamp, and prints the boy. I/aller.
'Tis gold ſo pure,
It cannot bear the ſtamp without allay.
2. A mark ſet on anything; impreſſion.
That ſacred name gives ornament and grace,
And, like his ſtamp, makes baſeſt metals paſs:
'Twere folly now a ſtately pile to raiſe,
To build a playhouſe, while you throw down plays. Dryd
Ideas are imprinted on the memory; ſome by an objea ar.
fečting the ſenſes only; others, that have more than once
offered themſelves, have yet been little taken notice of; the
mind, intent only on one thing, not ſettling the flamp deep
into itſelf. Lake.
3. A thing marked or ſtamped.
The mere deſpair of ſurgery he cures;
Hanging a golden ſtamp about their necks,
Put on with holy prayers. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
4. A pićture cut in wood or metal; a piéture made by impreſſion;
a cut; a plate. -
At Venice they put out very curious ſtamps of the ſeveral
edifices, which are moſt famous for their beauty and magni-
ficence. Addiſon on Iaş.
5. A mark ſet upon things that pay cuſtoms to the government.
Indeed the paper ſtamp
Did very much his genius cramp;
And ſince he could not ſpend his fire,
He now intended to retire. Swift.
6. . charaćter of reputation, good or bad, fixed upon any
thing. -
The perſons here refleåed upon are of ſuch a pecular/lamp
of impiety, that they ſeem formed into a kind of diabolical
ſociety for the finding out new experiments in vice South.
Where reaſon or ſcripture is expreſſed for any opinion, we
may receive it as of divine authority; but it is not the ſtrength
of our own perſuaſions which can give it that ſamp. Lºº.
7. Authority; currency; value derived from any ſuffrage of
atteſtation.
Of the ſame ſlamp is that which is obtruded upon us, that
an adamant ſuſpends the attraction of the loadſtone. Brown.
The common people do not judge of vice or virtue by mo-
rality, or the immorality, ſo much as by the ſamp that is ſet
upon't by men of figure. L'Eſtrange.
8. Make; caſt; form.
If ſpeaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flatt'ry,
Such attribution ſhould this Douglas have,
As not a ſoldier of this ſeaſon's ſtamp
Should go ſo general current through the world. Shakespeare ,
When one man of an exemplary improbity charges another
of the ſame ſtamp in a court of juſtice, he lies under the diſ-
advantage of a ſtrong ſuſpicion. L'Eſtrange.
Let a friend to the government relate to him a matter of
fačt, he gives him the lye in every look; but if one of his
own ſtamp ſhould tell him that the king of Sweden would be
ſuddenly at Perth, he hugs himſelf at the good news. Addiſon.
STA'Mper. n.ſ.. [from ſtamp.] An inſtrument of pounding:
From the ſtamping-mill it paſſeth through the crazing-mill;
but of late times they moſtly uſe wet ſtampers. Carew.
St AN, amongſt our forefathers, was the termination of the
ſuperlative degree: ſo Atheſian, moſt noble; Beſan, the beſt;
Leoffan, the deareſt; // iſlan, the wiſeſt; Dunſan, the
higheſt. Gibſon's Camden.
To STANCH. v.a. [c/lancher, French; ſtagnare, Italian.] To
ſtop blood; to hinder from running. -
Iron or a ſtone, laid to the neck, doth ſtanch the bleeding
of the noſe. Bacon's Natural Hiſtº.
Of veins of earth medicinal are terra lemnia, terra fight,
communis, and bolus armenus; whereof terra lemnia the
chief: the virtues of them are for curing of wounds, ſtand-
ing of blood, and ſtopping of fluxes and rheums. Baton.
Leeches, inwardly taken, faſten upon the veins, and occa-
fion an effuſion of blood, which cannot be eaſily/anº
Brown's Pulgar Brrºr"
He fought to hinder fighting, and affay'd
To ſtanch blood by breathing of the vein. Dryden.
To St.Anch. v. n. To ſtop. -
A woman touched the hem of his garment, and imme-
diately her iſſue ſtanched. L. viii. 4+
StANch. adj. [This ſeems to come from the verb.]
1. Sound; ſuch as will not run out.
What we endeavoured in vain may be performed by ſome
virtuoſo, that ſhall have /lancher veſſels, and more º
days. - -
2. Firm; ſound of principle; truſty; hearty; dºº, o
The ſtanding abſurdity, without the belief of whic º
man is reckoned a ſlanch churchman, is that there is a C* º
head club. Addison.
In politicks, I hear, you're /?anch,
Dryden,
Directly bent againſt the French. Prior,
Each ſlaunch polemick ſtubborn as a rock,
Each fierce logician ſtill expelling Locke, ad
Dunciad.
Came whip and ſpur. 3. Strong;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A
*:::
3. Strong; not to be broken.
If I knew
What hoop would hold us ſlaunch from edge to edge
O' th' world, I would purſue it. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
You will loſe their love: this is to be kept ſanch, and
carefully watched. Locke.
STA'Nchion. m. ſ. ſeſançon, French.] A prop; a ſupport.
Sta'schless, adj. [from ſtanch.] Not to be ſtopped.
There grows,
In my moſt ill compos'd affection, ſuch
A ſtanchleſs avarice, that, were I king,
I ſhould cut off the nobles for their lands. Shakespeare Macbeth.
To STAND. &amp;n preterite 1 ſºod, I have ſlood. [reanban,
Gothick and Saxon; /laen, Dutch; /lare, Italian; ſlar,
Spaniſh; /?are, Latin.]
I. To be upon the feet; not to fit or lie down.
2. To be not demoliſhed or overthrown.
What will they then what but unbuild
A living temple, built by faith to ſland 2 Milton.
3. To be placed as an edifice,
This poet's tomb ſtood on the other ſide of Naples, which
looks towards Veſuvio. Addiſon on Italy.
4. To remain erect; not to fall.
Chariot and charioteer lay overturn'd,
And fiery foaming ſteeds: what ſtood, recoil'd
O'erweary'd, through the faint ſatanick hoſt
Defenſive ſcarce, or with pale fear ſurpris'd
Fled ignominious. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
5. To become erect.
The rooted fibres roſe, and from the wound
Black bloody drops diſtill'd upon the ground:
Mute, and amaz'd, my hair with horror ſtood;
Fear ſhrunk my ſenſes, and congeal’d my blood.
Her hair ſtood up; convulſive rage poſſeſs'd
Her trembling limbs.
6. To ſtop; to halt; not to go forward.
The leaders, having charge from you to ſland,
Will not go off until they hear you ſpeak. Shakespeare H. VI.
Sun in Gideon ſland,
And thou moon in the vale of Ajalon. Milton.
Mortal, who this forbidden path
In arms preſum'ſt to tread, I charge thee ſland,
And tell thy name. Dryden's An.
7. To be at a ſtationary point without progreſs or regreſſion.
This nation of Spain runs a race ſtill of empire, when all
Dryden.
Dryden's Án.
other ſtates of Chriſtendom/land at a ſtay. Bacon.
Immenſe the pow'r, immenſe were the demand;
Say, at what part of nature will they ſtand? Pope.
8. To be in a ſtate of firmneſs, not vacillation.
Commonwealths by virtue ever ſtood. Davies.
To ſtand or fall,
Free in thine own arbitrement it lies. Milton.
My mind on its own centre ſlands unmov’d,
And ſtable as the fabrick of the world,
Propt on itſelf. Dryden.
9. To be in any poſture of reſiſtance or defence.
Seeing how lothly oppoſite I ſtººd
To his unnat'ral purpoſe, in fell motion
With his prepared ſword he charges home
My unprovided body. Shakeſp. King Lear.
From enemies heav'n keep your majeſty;
And when they ſtand againſt you, may they fall. Shakeſp.
10. To be in a ſtate of hoſtility; to keep the ground.
If he would preſently yield, Barbaroſla promiſed to let him
go free; but if he ſhould /?and upon his defence, he threatened
to make him repent his fooliſh hardineſs, Knolles.
The king granted the Jews to gather themſelves together,
and ſiand for their life. F/?h. viii. I 1.
We are often conſtrained to ſtand alone againſt the ſtrength
of opinion. Brown's Preface to Wu'gar Errours.
It was by the ſword they ſhould die, if they ſtood upon de-
fence; and by the halter, if they ſhould yield. Hayward.
11. Not to yield; not to fly; not to give way.
Who before him ſlood ſo to it? for the Lord brought his
enemies unto him. Ecclus xlvi. 3.
Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to
fand againſt the wiles of the devil. Eph. vi. 11.
Their lives and fortunes were put in ſafety, whether the
Jīood to it or ran away. Bacon's Henry VII.
12. To ſtay ; not to fly.
At the ſoldierly word ſland the flyers halted a little, Clarend.
13. To be placed with regard to rank or order.
Amongſt liquids endued with this quality of relaxing, warm
water ſlands firſt. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Theology would truly enlarge the mind, were it ſtudied
with that freedom and that ſacred charity which it teaches: let
this therefore ſland always chief. Aſ/atts.
14. To remain in the preſent ſtate.
If meat make my brother offend, I will eat no fleſh while
the world ſtandeth. 1 Cor. viii. 13.
That ſots and knaves ſhould be ſo vain
To wiſh their vile reſemblance may remain;
And ſand recorded, at their own requeſt,
To future days a libel or a jeſt. Dryden.
15. [E/?ar, Spaniſh..] To be in any particular ſtate; to be : em-
phatically expreſſed.
The ſea,
Aw'd by the rod of Moſes ſo to ſtand,
Divided. Milton.
Accompliſh what your ſigns foreſhow:
Iſland reſign'd, and am prepar'd to go.
He ſtruck the ſnakes, and ſtood again
New ſex'd, and ſtrait recover'd into man. Addiſon.
They expect to be favoured, who ſtand not poſſeſſed of any
one of thoſe qualifications that belonged to him. Atterbu, y.
Some middle prices ſhew us in what proportion the value ºf
their lands ſtood, in regard to thoſe of our own country. Arbuth.
God, who ſees all things intuitively, does not want theſe
helps; he neither ſtand, in need of logick nor uſes it. Baker.
Perſians and Greeks like turns of nature found,
And the world's vićtor/food ſubdu'd by ſound. Pope.
Narrow capacities, imagining the great capable of being diſ-
concerted by little occaſions, frame their malignant fables ac-
cordingly, and /land detected by it, as by an evident mark of
ignorance. Pºpe’s Eſſay on Homer.
16. Not to become void; to remain in force.
God was not ignorant that the judges, whoſe ſentence in
matters of controverſy he ordained ſhould ſland, oftentimes
would be deceived. Hooker.
A thing within my boſom tells me,
That no conditions of our peace can ſland Shakespeare H. IV.
I will puniſh you, that ye may know that my words ſhall
ſurely ſland againſt you for evil. jer xiv. 29.
My mercy will I keep for him, and my covenant ſhall ſland
faſt with him. Pſ. lxxxix. 28.
17. To conſiſt; to have its being or eſſence.
That could not make him that did the ſervice perfeół, as
pertaining to the conſcience, which ſtoºd only in meats and
Dryden's Żn.
drinks. Heb. ix. I c.
18. To be with reſpect to terms of a contračt.
The hirelings ſland at a certain wages. Carew,
19. To have a place.
If it /land
Within the eye of honour, be aſſured
My purſe, my perſon, my extremeſt means,
Lie all unlock'd to your occaſions. Shakespeare 44erch. of Penice.
My very enemy's dog, -
Though he had bit me, ſhould have ſtood that night
Againſt my fire. Shakeſp. King Lear.
A philoſopher diſputed with Adrian the emperor, and did it
but weakly: one of his friends, that ſtood by, ſaid, Methinks
you were not like yourſelf laſt day in argument with the em-
peror; I could have anſwered better myſelf. Why, ſaid the
philoſopher, would you have me contend with him that com-
mands thirty legions: Bacon.
This excellent man, who ſtood not upon the advantage-
ground before, provoked men of all qualities. Clarendºn.
Chariots wing'd
From th’ armoury of God, where ſtand of old • r
Myriads. Milton.
We make all our addreſſes to the promiſes, hug and careſs
them, and in the interim let the commands ſtand by ne-
glečted. Decay ºf Piety.
20. To be in any ſtate at the time preſent.
Oppreſt nature ſleeps:
This reſt might yet have balm'd thy broken ſenſes,
Which ſland in hard cure. Shakespeare Kºng Lear.
So it ſlands; and this I fear at laſt,
Hume's knavery will be the dutcheſs' wreck. Shakespeare H. VI.
Our company aſſembled, I ſaid, My dear friends, let us
know ourſelves, and how it ſtande h with us. Bacon,
Gardiner was made king's ſolicitor, and the patent, formerly
granted to Saint-John, ſlo.d revoked. Cº.
Why ſtand we longer ſhivering under fears? A/ilton.
As things now ſtand with us, we have no power to do good
after that illuſtrious manner our Saviour did. Calary's Ser”.
21. To be in a permanent ſtate.
The broil doubtful long ſtoºd,
As two ſpent ſwimmers that do cling together,
And choke their art. ſhall rej .
I in thy perſevering ſhall rejoice, - ...
And all the {...}.} faſt. Milton.
22. To be with regard to condition or fortune.
Iſland in need of one whoſe glories may
Redeem my crimes, ally me to his fame.
23. To have any particular reſpect.
3 “. ſ.". in the dark, his ſharp ſword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, conjring the moº.
*"...# auſpicious miſtreſs. Shaeff. King Lear.
An utter unſuitableneſs diſobedience has to the relation
whº man neceſſarily/and in towards his Maker. **
24. To be without action.
: To depend; to reſt; to be ſuppºrted.
This reply ſlandeth all by conjectures.
25 B
Shºar.
Drydºn.
Whitgifte.
I he<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A.
terians of the kirk, leſs forward to declare their
T.. º . point, ſtand upon the latter only. Sanderſ.
º: that will know, muſt by the connexion of the proofs
ſee the truth and the ground it ſland; on. Locke.
26. To be with regard to ſtate of mind. -
ºnj in awe and fin not: commune with your ºn heart
upon your bed, and be ſtill. - Pſal. iv. 4.
I deſire to be preſent, and change my voice, fºr Iſland in
doubt of you. - Gal. iv. 20.
27. To ſucceed; to be acquitted; to be ſafe.
Readers, by whoſe judgment I would ſland, or fall, would
not be ſuch as are acquainted only with th; French and Ita-
lian criticks. - Addiſon's Speciator.
28. To be with reſpect to any particular.
Caeſar entreats, ſland'ſ?
ot to conſider in what caſe thouſand.
}. than he is Caeſar. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
To heav'n I do appeal, |
have lov'd my king and common-weal;
º for my º, I º not how it ſtands. Shakespeare Henry VI.
29. To be reſolutely of a party. -
The cauſe muſt be preſumed as good on our part as on theirs,
till it be decided who have/load for the truth, and who for er-
IOur. Hooker.
Shall we ſound him 2
I think, he will ſland very ſtrong with us. Shakeſpeare.
who will riſe up or ſland up for me againſt the workers of
iniquity ? Pſalm xciv. 16.
30. To be in the place; to be repreſentative.
Chilon ſaid, that kings friends and favourites were like caſt-
ing counters; that ſometimes/loºd for one, ſometimes for ten.
Bacon.
I will not trouble myſelf, whether theſe names ſtand for
the ſame thing, or really include one another. Locke.
Their language being ſcanty, had no words in it to ſland
for a thouſand. Locke.
1. To remain ; to be fixed.
Watch ye, ſland faſt in the faith, quit you like men, be
ſtrong. I Cor. xvi. 13.
How ſoon hath thy predićtion, ſeer bleſt!
Meaſur'd this tranſient world, the race of time,
Till time ſland fix'd. Milton.
32. To hold a courſe.
Behold on Latian ſhores a foreign prince!
From the ſame parts of heav'n his navy ſtands,
To the ſame parts on earth his army lands.
Full for the port the Ithacenſians ſtand,
And furl their ſails, and iſſue on the land. Pope's Odſey.
33. To have direction towards any local point.
The wand did not really ſland to the metals, when placed
under it, or the metalline veins. Boyle.
34. To offer as a candidate.
He ſtºod to be elected one of the pro&amp;tors for the univer-
ſity. - Sanderſºn': Life.
35. To place himſelf; to be placcd.
The fool hath planted in his memory
An army of good words; and I do know
A many fools that ſtand in better place,
Garniſh’d like him, that for a trickſy word
Defy the matter. Shakeſpeare's Merch. of Venice.
He was commanded by the duke to ſtand aſide and expect
his anſwer. Knolles's Hiſtory of the 7 urks.
I ſtood between the Lord and you, to ſhew you the Lord's
word. Deuter. v. 5.
Stand by when he is going. Swift's Directions to the Butler.
36. To ſtagnate ; not to flow.
Where Ufens glides along the lowly lands,
Or the black water of Pomptina/lands.
37. To be with reſpect to chance.
Yourſelf, renowned prince, then ſizzd as fair
As any comer I have look'd on,
For my affection. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Penice.
Each thinks he ſland; faireſt for the great lot, and that he
is poſſeſſed of the golden number. Addison's Spectator.
He was a gentleman of conſiderable pračice at the bar, and
ſtood fair for the firſt vacancy on the bench. Rowe.
38. To remain ſatisfied.
Though Page be a ſecure fool, and ſland ſo firmly on his
wife’s failty; yet I cannot put off my opinion ſo eaſily. Shakespeare
39. Tº be without motion.
. I º who time ambles withal, who time gallops with-
... Whom ſtand; it ſtill withal?—With lawyers in the va-
º ; for they ſleep between term and term, and then they
... i. !. * II].OWCS. Shakeſpeare.
º Will ſuſpect they ſhall make but ſmall progreſs, if,
* books they read, they muſt ſtand to examine and un-
rayºl every argument. Locke.
4 I. º } **well with many words, or much pertinacity.
tº: . . point, and be curious in particulars,
4t author of the ſtory. 2 Micab. ii. 32.
Drydºn.
Dryden.
It is ſo plain that it needeth not to be ſcod upon. Bacon.
42. To be expoſed. -
Have I lived to ſtand in the taunt of one that makes fritters
of Engliſh. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives ºf Windſºr
43. To perſiſt; to perſevere. -
Never ſland in a lie when thou art accuſed, but aſk pardon
and make amends. Taylor's Rule of holy Living
The emperor/fanding upon the advantage he had got by i.
ſeiſure of their fleet, obliged them to deliver. Gulliver's Travel.
Hath the prince a full commiſſion,
To hear, and abſolutely to determine
Of what conditions we ſhall/?and upon : Shaft. Henry IV.
44. To perſiſt in a claim.
It remains,
To gratify his noble ſervice, that
Hath thus ſtoºd for his country.
45. To adhere ; to abide.
Deſpair would ſtard to the ſword,
To try what friends would do, or fate afford. Daniel.
46. To be conſiſtent.
His faithful people, whatſoever they rightly aſk, the ſame
ſhall they receive, ſo far as may ſtand with the glory of God
and their own everlaſting good; unto either of which it is no
virtuous man's purpoſe to ſeek anything prejudicial. Haviºr.
Some inſtances of fortune cannot ſtand with ſome others:
but if you deſire this, you muſt loſe that. jayſ.
It ſtood with reaſon that they ſhould be rewarded liberally
out of their own labours ſince they received pay. Davies.
Sprightly youth and cloſe application will hardly ſland to-
gether. Fellºn.
47. To St AND hy. To ſupport; to defend; not to deſert.
The aſ hoped the dog would ſtand by him, if ſet upon by
the wolf. L'Eſtrange.
If he meet with a repulſe, we muſt throw off the ſox's ſkin,
and put on the lion's : come, gentlemen, you'll ſland by me.
Dryden's ºf aniſh Friar.
Our good works will attend and /?and by us at the hour of
death. Calam).
48. To STAND ly. To be preſent without being an ador.
Margaret's curſe is fall'n upon our heads,
For ſtanding by when Richard kill'd her ſon. Shakſara.
49. To St ANP by. To repoſe on; to reſt in.
The world is inclined to /*and by the Arundelian marble.
Pope's Eſſay on Hºmer.
5.o. To St AND fºr. To propoſe one's ſelf a candidate.
How many ſland/ºr conſulſhips ?—three; but 'tis thought
of every one Coriolanus will carry it. Shakespeare  care.
If they were jealous that Coriolanus had a deſign on their
liberties when he ſtood for the conſulſhip, it was but juſt that
they ſhould give him a repulſe. Dennis.
51. To STAND for. To maintain; to profeſs to ſupport.
Thoſe which ſlood fºr the preſbytery thought their cauſe had
more ſympathy with the diſcipline of Scotland, than the hie-
rarchy of England. Bacon.
Freedom we all /?and fºr. Ben, johnſºn,
52. To STAND off. To keep at a diſtance.
Stand off, and let me take my fill of death, Dryden.
53. Tº ST and ºff. Not to comply.
Stand no more off,
But give thyſelf unto my ſick deſires. Shakespeare.
54. To SrAND off. To forbear friendſhip or intimacy.
Our bloods pour'd altogether
Would quite confound diſtinétion; yet ſland ºff
In differences ſo mighty. Shakeſpeare.
Such behaviour frights away friendſhip, and makes it ſland
off in diſlike and averſion. Collier of Friendſhip.
Though nothing can be more honourable than an acqua",
ance with God, we ſland ºff from it, and will not be tempted
to embrace it. Atterbury.
55. Tº STAND ºff. To have relief; to appear protuberant “
prominent.
Pićture is beſt when it ſºard-th ºff, as if it were carved:
and ſculpture is beſt when it appeareſh ſo tender as if it."
painted; when there is ſuch a ſoftneſs in the limbs, as if not
a chiſel had hewed them out of ſtone, but a pencil had drawn
and ſtroaked them in oil. Iſºttºn's Architàurt.
56. Tº Stand out. To hold reſºlution; to hold *P* *
to yield a point.
King John hath reconcil'd
Himſelf to Rome; his ſpirit is come in,
‘I hat ſo /lood out againſt the holy church.
Pomtinius knows not you, }
While you ſland out upon theſe traiterous terms. Bºn. jºhn.
Let not men flatter themſelves, that though they find 1t
difficult at preſent to combat and ſland cut againſt an ill ;
Čtice; yet that old age would do that for them, which they
in their vouth could never find in their hearts to dº for them-
ſelves. Sºuth's Sermº.
Scarce can a good natured man refuſe a com Misnºw."
the ſolicitations of his company, and ſland ** againſt the ra
- --- - - 5.
lery of his familiars, Rºger's ‘. .
Shakespeare Coriolanut.
Shake part.
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
57. To STAND out. Not to comply; to ſecede.
Thou ſhalt ſee me at Tullus’ face:
What, art thou ſtiff? /?and’ſ' art 2 Shakespeare.
If the ladies will ſland out, let them remember that the jury
is not all agreed. Dryden.
58. To STAND out. To be prominent or protuberant.
Their eyes/land ºut with fatneſs. Pſ. lxxiii. 7.
59. To Sr AND to. To ply; to perſevere.
Palinurus, cry’d aloud,
What guſts of weather from that gath'ring cloud
My thoughts preſage' ere that the tempeſt roars,
Stand to your tackles, mates, and ſtretch your oars. Dryden.
60. To STAND tº. To remain fixed in a purpoſe; to abide
by a contract or aſſertion.
He that will paſs his land,
As I have mine, may ſet his hand
And heart unto this deed, when he hath read;
And make the purchaſe ſpread
To both our goods if he to it will ſland. Herbert.
I ſtill ſland to it, that this is his ſenſe, as will appear from
the deſign of his words. Stillingfleet.
As I have no reaſon to ſland to the award of my enemies;
ſo neither dare I truſt the partiality of my friends. Dryden.
61. To STAND under. To undergo; to ſuſtain.
If you unite in your complaints,
And force them with a conſtancy, the cardinal
Cannot ſand under them. Shakeſpeare's H. VIII.
62. To STAND up. To ariſe in order to gain notice.
When the accuſers ſtood up, he brought none accuſation of
ſuch things as I ſuppoſed. Aºi. xxv. 18.
63. To STAND up. To make a party.
When weſiod up about the corn, he himſelf ſtuck not to
call us the many-headed monſter. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus,
64. To STAND upºn. To concern; to intereſt.
Does it not ſland me now upon Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
The king knowing well that it food him upon : by how
much the more he had hitherto protracted the time, by ſo
much the ſooner to diſpatch with the rebels. Bacon.
It ſtands me much upon
Tº enervate this obječtion. Hadibrar.
Does it not ſland them upon, to examine upon what grounds
they preſume it to be a revelation from God. Locke.
65. To STAND upon. To value; to take pride.
Men ſland very much upon the reputation of their under-
ſtandings, and of all things hate to be accounted fools: the
beſt way to avoid this imputation is to be religious. Tillotſon.
We highly eſteem and ſland much upon our birth, though
we derive nothing from our anceſtors but our bodies; and it
is uſeful to improve this advantage, to imitate their good ex-
amples. Ray on the Creation.
€6. To STAND upon. To inſiſt.
A raſcally, yea—forſooth, knave, to bear a gentleman in
hand, and then ſtand upon ſecurity. Shakeſpeare.
To STAND. v. a.
1. To endure; to reſiſt without flying or yielding.
None durſt ſtand him ;
Here, there, and every where, enrag'd he flew. Shakespeare .
Love/lood the ſiege, and wou’d not yield his breaſt. Dryd.
Oh! had bounteous heav'n
Beſtow'd Hippolitus on Phaedra's arms,
So had I ſtood the ſhock of angry fate. Smith's Phaed.and Hip.
Th"t not for fame, but virtue's better end,
He ſtood the furious foe, the timid friend,
The damning critick. Pope.
2. To await; to abide; to ſuffer.
Bid him diſband the legions,
Submit his actions to the publick cenſure, -
And ſland the judgment of a Roman ſenate. Addison's Cato.
3. To keep; to maintain with ground.
Turning at the length, he ſtoºd his ground,
And miſs'd his friend.
STAND. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A ſtation; a place where one waits ſtanding.
I have found you out a ſland moſt fit,
where you may have ſuch 'vantage on the duke,
He ſhali not paſs you. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
In this covert will we make a ſtand,
Culling the principal of all the deer.
Then from his lofty ſland on that high tree,
Down he alights among the ſportful herds.
The princely hierarch
In their bright ſtand there left his pow'rs, to ſeize
Poſſeſſion of the garden. Milton's Paradiſe Loſ!.
The male bird, whilſt the hen is covering her eggs, gene-
rally takes his ſºund upon a neighbouring bough and diverts
her with his ſongs during her ſitting. Addiſon's Spectator.
I took my ſland upon an eminence which was appointed
for a general rendezvous of theſe female carriers, to look into
their ſeveral ladings. Addiſon's Sprélator.
Three perſons entered into a conſpiracy to aſſaſſinate Timo-
leon, as he was offering up his devotions in a certain temple:
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
Miltºn.
S T A
in order to it they took their ſeveral ſands in the moſt con-
venient places.
Addiſon.
When juſt as by her/land Arſaces paſt, ddiſon
The window by deſign or chance fell down,
And to his view expos'd her bluſhing beauties. Rºwe
º: º from his private/land -
ook aim, and ſhot with all hi - .
2. Rank; poſt. ſtation. ll his ſtrength. - Swift.
S º '. fortune did attain
o high a ſtand; I mean not to º,
3. A i. halt. deſcend. Daniel.
A race of youthful and unhandled colts
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing;
If any air of muſick touch their ears, 5 *
You ſhall perceive them make a mutual ſland;
Their ſavage eyes turn'd to a modeſt gaze. Shakeſpeare
The earl of Northampton followed the horſe ſo &amp;ly,
that they made a ſland, when he furiouſly charged and routed
them. Clarendºn.
Once more the fleeting ſoul came back,
T” inſpire the mortal frame, -
And in the body took a doubtful ſtand,
Hov'ring like expiring flame,
That mounts and falls by turns.
At i. turn ſhe mate a little/?and,
And thruſt among the thorns her lily hand
To draw the roſe.
4. Stop; interruption.
The greateſt part of trade is driven by young merchants,
upon borrowing at intereſt; ſo as, if the uſurer either call in,
or keep back his money, there will enſue preſently a great
fland of trade. Bacon.
Should this circulation ceaſe, the formation of bodies would
be at an end, and nature at a perfect ſland. //cdward.
5. The act of oppoſing.
We are come off
Like Romans; neither fooliſh in our ſand,
Nor cowardly in retire. Shake peº re.
6. Higheſt mark; ſtationary point; point from which the next
motion is regreſſive. -
Our ſons but the ſame things can wiſh and do,
Vice is at ſtand and at the higheſt flow:
Then, ſatire, ſpread thy ſails; take all the winds can blow.
Dryden.
In the beginning of ſummer the days are at a ſland, with
little variation of length or ſhortneſs; becauſe the diurnal
variation of the ſun partakes more of a right line than of a
ſpiral. Dryden.
The ſea, ſince the memory of all ages, hath continued at a
ſland, without conſiderahle variation. Bentley.
7. A point beyond which one cannot proceed.
Every part of what we would, -
Muſt make a ſland at what your highneſs will. Shakºżears.
When fam'd Varelſt this little wonder drew,
Flora vouchſav'd the growing work to vicw;
Finding the painter's ſcience at a /fanº,
The goddeſs ſnatch'd the pencil from his hand :
And finiſhing the piece, ſhe ſmiling ſaid,
Behold one work of mine that ne'er ſhall fade. Prior.
8. Dfficulty; perplexity; embaraſſment; heſitation.
A fool may ſo far imitate the mein of a wiſe man, as at
firſt to put a body to a ſland what to make of him. L’Éſirange.
The well-ſhap’d changeling is a man, has a rational ſoul, tho’
it appear not: this is paſt doubt. Make the ears a little longer,
then you begin to boggle: make the face yet narrower, and
then you are at a ſland. Lºcłe.
9. A frame or table on which veſſels are placed.
Such ſquires are only fit for country towns,
To ſtink of ale, and duſt a ſtand with clowns;
Who, to be choſen for the land's protectors,
Tope and get drunk before the wiſe electors. Dryden.
After ſupper a ſland was brought in, with a braſs veſſel full
of wine, of which he that pleas'd might drink; but no li-
quour was forced. Dryden's Life ºf Cleoments.
STANDARD. m. ſ. ſºftendart, French..]
1. An enſign in war, particularly the enſign of the horſe.
His armies, in the following day, . -
On thoſe fair plains their ſlandard proud diſplay. Fairfax.
Erect the ſandard there of ancient night,
Yours be the advantage all, mine the revenge.
Behold Camillus loaded home,
With ſandard, well redeem'd and foreign foes o'ercome.
Dryden.
Dryden,
Drydºm.
Milton.
To their common ſtandard they repair;
The nimble horſemen ſcour the fields of air. Dryden.
2. [From ſland.] That which is of undoubted authority ; that
which is the teſt of other things ºf the ſame kind.
The dogmatiſt gives the lie to all diſſenting apprehenders,
and proclaims his judgment the fitteſt intellectual ſtandard.
Glanville.
-
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A
- terreſtrial
venly motions are more ſtated than the r
º: º ...'. originals and ſlandards. Holder.
mº. are our meaſures of length, but I cannot call them
- fandard meaſures muſt be certain and fixed.
ſtandard; for ſtanda Holder on Time.
when people have brought the queſtion of right and wrong
to a falſe ſandard, there follows an envious º:
The Romans made thoſe times the ſtandard of their wit,
when they ſubdued the world. Sprat.
From theſe ancient ſtandard; I deſcend to our own jº.
anS. etºn.
When I ſhall propoſe the ſandard whereby I give judg-
ment, any may eaſily inform himſelf of the quantity and mea-
ſure of it. //acaward.
The court which uſed to be the ſandard of propriety, and
correctneſs of ſpeech, ever ſince continued the worſt ſchool in
England for that accompliſhment. Swift.
Firſt follow nature, and your judgment frame,
By her juſt ſtandard which is ſtill the ſame. Pope.
3. That which has been tried by the proper teſt.
The Engliſh tongue, if refined to a certain ſtandard, per-
haps might be fixed for ever. - - Swift.
In comely rank call ev'ry merit forth; -
Imprint on ev'ry act its ſtandard-worth. Prior.
4. A ſettled rate. -
That preciſe weight and fineneſs, by law appropriated to
the pieces of each denomination, is called the ſtandard. Locke.
The device of King Henry VII. was profound in making
farms of a ſtandard, that is, maintained with ſuch a proportion
of lands as may breed a ſubjećt to live in convenient plenty.
Bacon.
A ſtandard might be made, under which no horſe ſhould be
uſed for draught: this would enlarge the breed of horſes. Temp.
By the preſent ſtandard of the coinage, ſixty two ſhillings
is coined out of one pound weight of filver. A but not.
5. A ſtanding ſtem or tree.
Aſtandard of a damaſk roſe with the root on, was ſet up.
right in an earthen pan, full of fair water, half a foot under
the water, the ſtandard being more than two foot above it.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Plant fruit of all ſorts and/?andard, mural, or ſhrubs which
loſe their leaf. Evelyn's Kalender.
In France part of their gardens is laid out for flowers,
others for fruits; ſome ſtandirds, ſome againſt walls. Temple.
STA'NdARDBEARER. m.ſ. [ſtandard and lear.] One who
bears a ſtandard or enſign.
They ſhall be as when a ſtandardhearer fainteth. Iſa. x. 18.
Theſe are the ſtandardbearers in our contending armies, the
dwarfs and ſquires who carry the impreſſes of the giants or
knights. Spectatºr.
STA/NDCR op. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
STANPE L. m. ſ. [from ſland.] A tree of long ſtanding.
The Druinians were nettled to ſee the princely ſlandel of
their royal oak return with a branch of willows. Howel.
STANDER. m. ſ. [from ſland.].
J. One who ſtands. "
2. A tree that has ſtood long.
The young ſpring was pitifully nipt and over-trodden by
very beaſts; and alſo the faireſt/land, of all were rooted up
and caſt into the fire. Žham's Schoolma/leſ.
3. STANDER by. One preſent ; a mere ſpectator.
Explain ſome ſtatute of the ſand to the /*anders by. Hºoker.
I would not be a ſlander by to hear
My ſovereign miſtreſs clouded ſo, without
My preſent vengeance taken. Shakeſpears.
J7 Vº sº is diſpoſed to ſwear, it is not for any
anders by to curtail his oaths. Shake * -
The ſlanders by ſee clearly this event, ſpeare's Cymbeliné.
All parties ſay, they're ſure yet all diſſent. Den/
The ſlanders by ſuſpe&amp;ted her to be a ducheſs. %.
STANDERGRAss. n.ſ. An herb.
STANDING, part. ad;... [from Jiand.] Ainſworth.
1. Settled; eſtabliſhed. -
Standing armies have the place of ſubjećls, and the govern-
ment depends upon the contented and diſcontented humours of
the ſoldiers. Temple
Laugh’d all the pow'rs who favour tyranny, - -
And all the ſtanding army of the ſky. Dryden.
Money being looked upon as the ſtanding meaſure of ºther
commodities, men conſider it as a ſtanding meaſure, though
when it has varied its quantity, it is not ſo. Lº.
h sº a one, by pretending to diſtinguiſh himſelf from the
er h becomes a ſtanding object of raillery. Addiſon.
ful ºmmonſtanding rules of the goſpel are a more power-
u º of convićtion than any miracle. Atterbury
'Tis º ſº miracle that heav'n aſſign'd / -
**y thinking gives thi - -
2. Laſting; not ºft. S this turn of mind. Pºpe.
The landlord had ſwelled his body to a Prodigious fize, and
worked up his complexion to a ſlanding crimſon by his zeal
. 4.diſon's Freeloº.
3. sº º . ſs i
e turned the wilderneſs into a ſand, water. --
This made their º: j. Pſal, cyli.
From /*anding lake to tripping ebb. A4iiton
4. Placed on feet. -
There's his chamber,
His ſtanding bed and truckle bed.
STANDING. m / [from ſland.]
1. Continuance; long poſſeſſion of an office, charader, or
Shakespeare.
place.
Nothing had been more eaſy than to command a patron of
a long ſtanding. Dryden.
Although the ancients were of opinion that Egypt was for-
merly ſea; yet this tract of land is as old, and of as long a
Jagding as any upon the continent of Afriča. //oºdward
I wiſh your fortune had enabled you to have continued long.
er in the univerſity, till you were often years /landing. Swift
2. Station; place to ſtand in. -
Such ordnance as he brought with him, becauſe it was fit.
ter for ſervice in field than for battery, did only beat down the
battlements, and ſuch little /landings. Knolley's Hiſt, of the Tºrii.
His coming is in ſtate, I will provide you a good ſtanding to
ſee his entry. - Bacºn.
3. Power to ſtand.
! ſink in deep mire, where there is nofanding. Pſal. lxix.
4. Rank; condition.
How this grace
Speaks his own ſtanding * what a mental power
This eye ſhoots forth; how big imagination -
Moves in this lip. Shakespeare's Timon of Athent.
5. Competition; candidateſhip.
His former ſtanding for a prodor's Place, and being diſp-
pointed, muſt prove much diſpleaſing. Waltºn.
STANDisłł. m. ſ. [/land and dj.] A caſe for pen and ink.
A grºtirºt patriot does not write to ſecuré, but get ſome-
thing ſhould the government be overturned he has nothing
to loſe but an old ſtandiſh. Addison.
I bequeath to Dean Swift eſq; my large filver/landiſh, con-
fifting of a large ſilver plate, an ink-pot, and a ſand-box. Swift.
STANg n.ſ. [reang, Saxon.j A perch.
Theſe fields were intermingled with woods of half a ſang,
and the talleſt tree appeared to be ſeven feet high. Swift.
STANK, adj. Weak; worn out.
Diggon, I am ſo ſtiff and ſo /?ank,
That unneth I may ſtand any more,
And how the weſtern wind bloweth fore,
Beating the withered leaf from the tree. Spenſir.
STANK. The preterite of ſink.
The fiſh in the river died, and the riverſank. Exod. vii.
STANNARY. adj. [from ſlanum, Latin.] Relating to the
tinworks.
A ſteward keepeth his court once every three weeks: they
are termed /ſannary courts of the Latin /?annum, and hold plea
of action of debt or treſpaſs about whité or blacktin. Cara.
STANZA, n.ſ. [/anza, Ital. ſance, Fr.] A number of lines
regularly adjuſted to each other; ſo much of a poem ascontains
every variation of meaſure or relation of rhyme. Stanza is
originally a room of a houſe, and came to ſignify a ſubdivi-
fion of a poem ; a ſtaff.
Horace confines himſelf ſtriðly to one ſort of verſe or/anza
in every ode. . Dryden.
In quatrains, the laſt line of theſianza is to be confidered
in the compoſition of the firſt. Bryden.
Before his ſacred name flies ev'ry fault,
And each exalted Jºanza teems with thought. Pope.
STAPLE. m. ſ. [...ſºape, Fr./apel, Dutch.j
I. A ſettled mart; an eſtabliſhed emporium.
A //aple of romance and lies, •
Falſe tears, and real perjuries. - - Prior.
The cuſtoms of Alexandria were very great, it having been
the ſtaple of the Indian trade. Arbuthnot ºn Coin.
Tyre, Alexander the Great ſacked, and eſtabliſhing the
//aple at Alexandria, made the greateſt revolution in trade that
ever was known. Arbuthnot.
2. I know not the meaning in the following paſſage. -
Henry II, granted liberty of coining to certain abbies, al-
lowing them one //ap/, and two puncheons at a rate. Camdeº.,
STAPLE. adj. [from the noun.]
1. Settled; eſtabliſhed in commerce.
Some Engliſh wool, vex'd in a Belgian loom,
And into cloth of ſpungy ſoftneſs made:
Did into France or colder Denmark roam,
To ruin with worſe ware our ſtaple trade. Drydºn.
2. According to the laws of commerce.
What needy writer would not ſolicit to work under ſuch
maſters, who will take off their ware at their own rates, and
- - 2
trouble not themſelves to examine whether it be ſtaple º .
- cºv//ſ.
STAPLE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A
ſº
Sta'ple. n.ſ. [rtapul, Saxon, a prop.] A loop of iron; a
bar bent and driven in at both ends.
I have ſeen/?aples of doors and nails born.
The filver ring ſhe pull'd, the door reclos'd :
The bolt, obedient to the ſilken cord, -
To the ſtrong/?aple's inmoſt depth reſtor'd,
Secur'd the valves.
STAR. m.ſ. [rreonna, Saxon; ſerre, Dutch.]
1. One of the luminous bodies that appear in the noćturnal ſky.
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beech
Fillop the ſtars;
Murdering impoſſibility, to make
What cannot be, ſlight work. Shakeſp. Criolanus.
When an aſtronomer uſes the word/far in its ſtrićt ſenſe, it
is applied only to the fixt ſtars; but in a large ſenſe it includes
the planets. JWatts.
Hither the Syracuſan's art tranſlates
Heaven's form, the courſe of things and human fates;
Th’ included ſpirit ſerving the ſtar deck'd ſigns,
Peacham.
Pope's Odyſſey.
The living work in conſtant motions winds. Hakewill.
As from a cloud his fulgent head,
And ſhape ſtar bright, appear'd. Milton.
2. The pole-ſtar.
Well, if you be not turn'd Turk, there is no more ſailing
by the ſtar. Shakespeare Much Ado about Nothing.
3. Configuration of the planets ſuppoſed to influence fortune.
From forth the fatal loins of theſe two foes,
A pair of ſtar croſt lovers take their life. Shakeſpeare.
We are apt to do amiſs, and lay the blame upon our ſtars
or fortune. L’Eſtrange.
4. A mark of reference; an aſteriſk.
Remarks worthy of riper obſervation, note with a marginal
far. //atts.
STAR of Bethlehem. n.ſ.. [ornithogalum, Latin.] A plant.
The charaćters are: it hath a lily-flower, compoſed of ſix
petals, or leaves ranged circularly, whoſe centre is poſſeſſed by
the pointal, which afterwards turns to a roundiſh fruit, which
is divided into three cells, and filled with roundiſh ſeeds: to
which muſt be added, it hath a bulbous or tuberoſe root, in
which it differs from ſpiderwort. Miller.
STA'RApple. m. ſ. A plant.
It hath an open bell-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of one leaf,
and cut into ſeveral ſegments towards the top; from whoſe
cup ariſes the pointal, which afterwards becomes a globular or
olive-ſhaped ſoft fleſhy fruit, incloſing a ſtone of the ſame
ſhape. This plant grows in the warmeſt parts of America,
where the fruit is eaten by way of deſert. It grows to the
height of thirty or forty feet, and has a ſtrait ſmooth ſtem, re-
gularly beſet with branches, which are adorned with leaves of
a ſhining green colour on their upper ſides, but of a ruſſet
colour underneath: from the ſetting on of the footſtalks of the
leaves come out the flowers, which have no great beauty, but
are ſucceeded by the fruit, which is about the ſize of a large
apple, and of the ſame ſhape. Miller.
STAR BoARD. m. ſ. [rzeonboro, Saxon.] Is the right-hand
ſide of the ſhip, as Tarboard is the left. Harris.
On ſhipboard the mariners will not leave their ſtarboard and
larboard, becauſe ſome one accounts it gibriſh. Bramh.
STARCH. n.ſ.. [from ſarc, Teutonick, ſtiff.] A kind of viſ-
cous matter made of flower or potatoes, with which linen is
ſtiffened, and was formerly coloured.
Has he
Diſlik'd your yellow ſtarch, or ſaid your doublet
Was not exačtly Frenchified. Fletcher's Queen of Corinth.
With ſtarch thin laid on, and the ſkin well ſtretched, pre-
pare your ground. Peacham on Drawing.
To STARch. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtiffen with ſtarch.
Her goodly countenance I've ſeen
Set off with kerchief ſtarch'd and pinners clean. Gay.
STA/R chAMBER. m. ſ. [camera ſtellata, Latin. J A kind of
criminal court of equity. Now aboliſhed.
I'll make a ſtar chamber matter of it: if he were twenty fir
John Falſtaffs, he ſhall not abuſe Robert Shallow, eſq; Shakeſ
STA’rch ED adj. [from ſtarch.]
1. Stiffened with ſtarch.
2. Stiff; preciſe; formal.
Does the Goſpel any where preſcribe a ſtarched ſqueezed
countenance, a ſtiff formal gait, or a ſingularity of man-
ners. Swift.
St A/R cher. n.ſ.. [from ſtarch.) One whoſe trade is to
ſtarch.
STAR CHLY. adv. [from ſarch.] Stiffly; preciſely.
St A'rch's Ess. n.ſ. from ſtarch..] Stiffneſs; preciſeneſs.
To STARE. v. n. Iranian, Saxon; ſterren, Dutch..]
1. To look with fixed eyes; to look with wonder, impudence,
confidence, ſtupidity, or horrour.
Her modeſt eyes, abaſhed to behold
So many gazers, as on her do ſtare,
Upon the lowly ground affixed are.
Their ſtaring eyes, ſparkling with ſervent fire,
And ugly ſhapes, did nigh the man diſmay,
‘I hat, were it not for ſhame, he would retire. Fa. &amp;cen:
Spen ty".
Lºok not big, nor ſare nor ſet:
! will be maſter of what is mine own. Shakeſheart.
'... hey were never ſatisfied with faring upon their maſts,
fails, cables, ropes, and tacklings. Abbºt.
I hear
The tread of many feet ſteering this way;
Perhaps ºy enemies, who come to ſtar,
At my affliction, and Perhaps tº inſult. Milton's Agoniſies.
A ſatyr that comes ſtaring from the woods,
Muſt not at firſt ſpeak like an orato.
And while he ſtares around with ſtupid eyes
His brows with berries and his temples dies. •
What do'ſt thou make a ſhipboard;
Art thou of Bethlem's noble college free?
Stark ſtaring mad, that thou ſhould'ſ tempt the ſea? Dryd.
Struggling, and wildly ſtaring on the ſkies
Waller.
Dryden.
With ſcarce recover'd fight. Dryden's AEn.
Trembling the miſcreant ſtood;
Heſar'd and roll'd his haggard eyes around. Dryden.
Break out in crackling flames to ſhun thy ſnare,
Or hiſ a dragon, or a tygerſiare. Dryden's Virgil:
Why do'ſt thou not 2 8
Try the virtue of that gorgon face,
To ſtare me into ſtatue? Dryden.
! was unluckily prevented by the preſence of a bear, which,
as I approached with my preſent, threw his eyes in my way,
and ſtared me out of my reſolution. Addiſon's Guardian.
The wit at his elbow gave him a touch upon the ſhoulder,
and ſºared him in the face with ſo bewitching a grin, that the
whiſtler relaxed his fibres. Addison.
Narciſſa
Has paid a tradeſman once, to make him ſlare. Pope.
Gods! ſhall the raviſher diſplay your hair,
While the fops envy and the ladies/lare. Pºpe.
Through nature and through art ſhe rang'd,
And gracefully her ſubjećt chang'd:
In vain; her hearers had no ſhare
In all ſhe ſpoke, except to/fare. Swift.
2. To STARE in the face. To be undeniably evident.
Is it poſſible for people, without ſcruple to offend againſt
the law, which they carry about them in indelible characters,
and that ſtares them in the face, whilſt they are breaking it? Locke.
3. To ſtand out.
Take off all the ſºaring ſtraws and jaggs in the hive, and
make them ſmooth. Aſortimer's Husbandry.
St ARE. m.ſ.. [from the verb. J
1. Fixed look.
The balls of his broad eyes roll'd in his head,
And glar'd betwixt a yellow and a red:
He look'd a lion with a gloomy ſhare,
And o'er his eyebrows hung his matted hair.
2. [Sturnus, Latin.] Starling. A bird.
StA'RER. n.ſ.. [from ſtare.] One who looks with fixed eyes.
One ſelf-approving hour whole years outweighs
Of ſtupid ſharers, and of loud huzza's. Pope.
STA'RFIsh. m.ſ.. [ſtar and fiſh.] A fiſh branching out into
ſeveral points. -
This has a ray of one ſpecies of Engliſh ſtarfiſh. Wºodw.
STARGA'zer. n.ſ.. [ſtar and gaze.] An aſtronomer, or aſtro-
loger. In contempt.
Let the aſtrologers, the ſargazers, and the monthly progno-
ſticators, ſtand up and ſave thee. Iſ xlvii. 13.
A ſargazer, in the height of his celeſtial obſervations,
ſtumbled into a ditch. L’Eſtrange.
St A'RHAwk. n.ſ.. [aſtur, Latin.] A ſort of hawk. Ainſw.
STARK. adj. [rcenc, renac, Saxon; ſerck, Dutch.]
1. Stiff; ſtrong; rugged.
His heavy head devoid of careful cark,
Whoſe ſenſes all were ſtraight benumed and ſtark. Fa. Qu.
Many a nobleman lies ſtark and ſtiff
Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies. Shakesp. H. IV.
The North is not ſo ſtark and cold. Ben. johnſon.
So ſoon as this ſpring is become ſtark enough, it breaks the
caſe in two, and ſlings the ſeed. Derham's Phyſio-Theology.
2. Deep; full.
Conſider the ſtark ſecurity
The commonwealth is in now ; the whole ſenate
Sleepy, and dreaming no ſuch violent blow. Ben. Johnſºn.
3. Mere; ſimple; plain; groſs.
To turn ſtark fools, and ſubječts fit -
For ſport of boys, and rabble wit. Hudibras.
He pronounces the citation/lark nonſenſe. . . . Collier.
Stark.' adv. Is uſed to intend or augment the ſignification of a
word: as /lark mad, mad in the higheſt degree. It is now
little uſed but in low language. -
Then are the beſt but ſtark naught; for open ſuſpecting
others, comes of ſecret condemning themſelves. Sidney.
The fruitful-headed beaſt, amaz'd
At flaſhing beams of that ſun-ſhiny ſhield,
Became ſark blind, and all his ſenſes doz'd,
Dryden-
That down he tumbled. Speºſer.
Men and women go ſtark naked. Albºt.
25 C He<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
****.
S T A
He is ſari mad, who ever i.
been in love an hour. -
Tº: that ſeemed moderate before, -
deſperate, and thoſe who were deſperate ſeemed ſtark mad;
whº meetſimults, confuſed hollowings and howlings. Hayw.
who, by the moſt cogent arguments, will diſrobe him;
ſelf at once of all his old opinions, and turn himſelf outſia &amp;
naked in queſt of new notions : - - Locke.
In came ſquire South, all dreſſed up in feathers and ribbons,
1) ºr,
cCaine
ará ſtaring mad, brandiſhing his ſword. Arbuthnot.
SIA'RKLY. adv. [from ſtark.) Stifly; ſtrongly.
As faſt lock'd up in ſleep as guiltleſs labour,
When it lies ſtarkly in the traveller's bones. Shakespeare.
STARLEss. adj. [from ſtar.] Having no light of ſtars.
A boundieſs continent, -
Dark, waſte, and wild, under the frown of night, ---
Starlºſ expos'd. Milton's Paradiſe Lø/º, b. iii.
Cato might give them furlo's for another world;
But we, like ſentries, are oblig'd to fland
In ſtarleſ; nights, and wait th' appointed hour. Dryden.
SrA'Right. n.ſ. [/ar and light ] Luttre of the ſtars.
Now they never meet in grove or green,
By ſountain clear or ſpangled Jianlight ſheen. Shakeſpeare.
*Nor walk by moon, -
Or glittering /*arlight, without thee is ſweet. Milton.
They danc'd by ſtarſight and the friendly moon. Dryden.
SrA's LIGHT. adj. Lighted by the ſtars.
Owls, that mark the ſetting ſun, declare -
A/arlight evening and a morning fair. Dryden's Wirg.
STAR LIKE. adj. [/?ar and like.] -
1. Stellated ; having various points reſembling a ſtar in luſtre.
Nightſhade-tree riſes with a wooden ſtem, green-leaved,
and has ſtarlike flowers. Martimer’s Husbandry.
2. Bright; illuſtrious.
The having turned many to righteouſneſs ſhall confer aſſar-
like and immortal brightneſs. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
Theſe reaſons mov’d her ſtarlike huſband's heart;
But ſtill he held his purpoſe to depart. Dryden.
STA'RLINg. m. ſ. [re-enlinx, Saxon.j A ſmall finging bird.
I will have a ſtarling taught to ſpeak
Nothing but Mortimer, and give it him,
To keep his anger ſtill in motion. Shakesp Henry IV.
STARPAVED. adj. [/lar and pave.J Studded with ſtars.
In progreſs through the road of heav'n/larpav'd. Miltºn.
STAR PRoof, a j. [/ar and prººf.] Impervious to ſtarlight.
Under the ſhady roof
Of branching elm /ărproof. Milton.
STAR-READ. n f: [/ar and read..] Doarine of the ſº ;
aſtronomy.
STARRED. adj. [from ſlar.]
* Influenced by the ſtars with reſpeã to fortune.
My third comfort,
Starr'd moſt unluckily, is from my breaſt
Hal'd out to murder. Shakeſp. J/inter’s Tale.
2. Decorated with ſtars.
That ſtarr'd Ethiop queen, that ſtrove
To ſet her beauty's praiſe above
The ſea-nymphs.
He furious hurl’d againſt the ground
His ſceptre/arr'd with golden ſtuds around. Pope.
STA'RRY. adj. [from ſtar J
1. Decorated with ſtars.
Daphne wond'ring mounts on high,
Above the clouds, above the //arry ſky Pºpe.
2. Conſiſting of ſtars; ſtellar.
Such is his will, that paints
The earth with colours freſh,
The darkeſt ſkies with flore
Miltºn.
Of liarry lights. Spenſºr.
Heav'n and earth's compaéted frame, J
And flowing waters, and the /?arry flame,
And both the radiant lights, one common ſoul
Inſpires and feeds, and animate, the whole. Dryden.
3. Reſembling ſtars.
* Tears had dimm'd the luſte of her /farry eyes. Shakespeare Iſhaft.
STA'RRING. adj. [//cllanº, Latin; frºm far...] Shining with
ſtellar light; blazing with ſparkling light. O
Such his fell glances as the fail light
O /arring comets that look kingdoms dead. Croſhaw.
STA'R's Hoor. */ [/ar and/oot..] An emiſſion from . ſtar.
I have ſeen a good quantity of that jelly, by the vulgar called
ºut, as if it remained upon the extinétion of a falling
a
- - Boyle.
To START, a n. ſ/artzen, German.] oyle
". To feel a ſudde. and involuntary twitch or motion of the
º **, on the apprehenſiºn of danger.
kin ſº 1S an ºpprehenſion of the thing feared, and in that
- is a motion of ſhrinking; and likewiſe an inquiſition,
º wº the º ſhould be, and in that kind
- *ºn, and therefore, when
liſten ſuddenly to *º thing, he ſtarteth; for j."
'Pirits to attend. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Speºſer.
A ſhape appear'd
Bending to look on me: I ſtarted back;
It ſtart, a back.
I ſhart as from ſome dreadful dream,
" And often aſk myſelf if yet awake. Dryden's Span. Far.
As his doubts decline, jar.
He dreads juſt vengcance, and he ſart, at fin. Drydn
He ſtarts at every new appearance, and is always waking ani
ſolicitous for fear of a ſurprize. Cºllier on Covetº,
2. To riſe ſuddenly. - º “
Charm'd by theſe ſtrings, trees /arting from the ground
Have follow'd with delight the powerful ſound. Rºmm...
They / arting up beheld the heavy fight. Dº.
The mind often works in ſearch of ſome hidden ide.
though ſometimes they ſtart up in our minds of their ow,
accord. Lºck.
Might Dryden bleſs once more our eyes,
New Blackmores and new Milbourns mºſt ariſe;
Nay, ſhould great Homer lift his awful head,
Zoilus again would /?art up from the dead. Pºpe.
3. To move with ſudden quickneſs.
The flowers, call'd out of their beds,
Start and raiſe up their drowſy heads.
A ſpirit fit to /?art into an empire,
And look the world to law. Dryden's Clement.
She at the ſummons roll'd her cycs around,
And ſnatch'd the ſtarting ſerpents from the ground. Pº.
4. To ſhrink; to winch.
What trick, what ſiarting hole, can'ſ thou find out to hide
thee from this open ſhame? Shakeſp. Henry IV.
With tryal fire touch me his finger end;
If he be chaſte, the flame will back deſcend,
And turn him to no pain; but if he ſart,
It is the fleſh of a corrupted heart.
5. To deviate.
The lords and gentlemen take all the meaneſ ſort upon
themſelves; for they are beſ, able to bring them in, wheſo-
ever any of them ſtarteth out. Speºſer on Ireland.
I rank him with the prodigies of fame,
With things which ſtart from nature's common rules,
With bearded infants, and with teeming mules. Creech.
Keep your ſoul to the work when ready to ſtart aſide, un-
leſs you will be a ſlave to every wild imagination. Hatti.
6. To ſet out from the barrier at a race.
It ſeems to be rather a terminus a quo than a true principle,
as the ſtarting poſt is none of the horſe's legs. Bºyle.
Should ſome god tell me, that I ſhould be born
And cry again, his offer I ſhould ſcorn;
Aſham’d, when I have ended well my race,
Shaºffscre.
Clatcard.
Shakespeare eare.
To be led back to my firſt ſtarting place. Denham.
When from the goal they ſtart,
The youthful charioteers with heaving heart
Ruſh to the race. Dryden's Wirg. Georg.
The clangor of the trumpet gives the ſign;
At once they ſart, advancing in a line. Dryden,
7. To ſet out on any purſuit.
Fair courſe of paſſion, where two lovers ſtart,
And run together, heart ſtill yokt with heart. "aller.
People, when they have made themſelves weary, ſet up
their reſt upon the very ſpot where they ſtarted. L’Eſtrange.
When two ſ'art into the world together, he that is thrown
behind, unleſs his mind proves generous, will be diſpleaſed
with the other. Clir,
To START. v. a.
1. To alarm; to diſturb ſuddenly.
Direneſs, familiar to my ſlaught’rous thoughts,
Cannot once /fart me. Shakespeare.
Being full of ſupper and diſtemp'ring draughts,
Upon malicious bravery do'ſt thou come 2
To ſtart my quiet. Shakeſpeare's Qºl.
The very print of a fox-foot would have/tarted ye. L’Éir.
2. To make to ſtart or fly haſtily from a hiding place.
The blood more ſtirs
To rouze a lion than to /?art a hare. Shakespeare  care.
I /čarted from its vernal bow'r * -
The riſing game, and chac'd from flow'r to flow'r. Pºpe.
3. To bring into motion; to produce to view or notice; to pro-
duce unexpectedly. -
Conjure with 'em! -
Brutus will/art a ſpirit as ſoon as Caeſar. Shakºſcare.
It was unadviſedly done, when I was enforcing a weightier
deſign, to ſtart and follow another of leſs moment. Sprat.
Inſignificant cavils may be ſlared againſt every thing that k3
not capable of mathematical demonſtration. - †:
I was engaged in converſation upon a ſubječ Ş. e
people love to ſtart in diſcourſe. . . Addiſon's Frechtláer.
4. To diſcover; to bring within purſuit.
The ſenſual men agree in purſuit of every pleaſure t
*** * *
. To put ſuddenly out of place. -
5 Ö. by a . in wreſtling, ſtarted the end of the §:
from * IPºſtman º
hey can
Temple.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
*
START. m. ſ. (from the verb.]
1. A motion of terrour; a ſudden twitch or contračtion of the
frame from fear or alarm.
Theſe flaws and ſtarts would well become
A woman's ſtory at a Winter's fire,
Authoriz’d by her grandam. Shakeſpeare.
The fright awaken'd Arcite with a ſtart;
Againſt his boſom bounc'd his heaving heart. Dryden.
2. A ſudden rouſing to action ; excitement.
How much had I to do to calm his rage 1
Now fear I this will give it ſtart again.
3. Sally; vehement eruption; ſudden effuſion.
Thou art like enough, through vaſſal fear,
Baſe inclination, and the ſtart of ſpleen,
To fight againſt me under Percy's pay. Shakeſpeare.
Several ſtarts of fancy off-hand, look well enough; but
bring them to the teſt, and there is nothing in 'em. L'Eſtrange.
Are they not only to diſguiſe our paſſions,
To ſet our looks at variance with our thoughts,
To check the ſtarts and fallies of the ſoul? Addison's Cato.
We were well enough pleaſed with this ſlart of thought. Addison
4. Sudden fit; intermitted ačtion.
Methought her eyes had croſt her tongue;
Shaff. Hamlet.
For ſhe did ſpeak in Aart diſtractedly. Shakeſpeare.
Thy forms are ſtudied arts,
Thy ſubtile ways be narrow ſtraits;
Thy curteſy but ſudden / arts;
And what thou call'ſt thy gifts are baits. Ben. Johnſºn.
Nature does nothing by ſtarts and leaps, or in a hurry; but
all her motions are gradual. L’Eſtrange.
An ambiguous expreſſion, a little chagrin, or a ſtart of
paſſion, is not enough to take leave upon. Collier.
5. A quick ſpring or motion.
In ſtrings, the more they are wound up and ſtrained, and
thereby give a more quick /?art back, the more treble is the
ſound; and the ſlacker they are, or leſs wound up, the baſer is
the ſound. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Both cauſe the ſtring to give a quickerſ?art. Bacon.
How could water make thoſe viſible ſtarts upon freezing,
but by ſome ſubtile freezing principle which as ſuddenly ſhoots
into it. Grew's Coſmol. Sac.
6. Firſt emiſfion from the barrier; ačt of ſetting out.
You ſtand like greyhounds in the ſlips,
Straining upon the ſtart. Shakeſp. Henry V.
All leapt to chariot,
And every man then for the ſtart caſt in his proper lot. Chap.
If a man deal with another upon conditions, the ſtart of
firſt performance is all. Bacon.
7. To get the START. To begin before another; to obtain ad-
vantage over another.
Get the ſtart of the majeſtick world. Shakeſ jul. Caſ:
All pretorian courts, if any of the parties be laid aſleep, un-
der pretence of arbitrement, and the other party, during that
time, doth cautelouſly get the ſtart and advantage at common
law, yet the pretorian court will ſet back all things in ſtatu
quo prius. Bacon's War with Spain.
Doubtleſs ſome other heart
Will get the ſtart;
And, ſtepping in before,
Will take poſſeſſion of the ſacred ſtore
Of hidden ſweets. Craſhaw.
Ere the knight could do his part,
The ſquire had got ſo much the ſtart,
H' had to the lady done his errand,
And told her all his tricks aforehand. Hudibrar.
She might have forſaken him, if he had not got the ſtart of
her. , Dryden’s Aºn. Dedication.
The reaſon why the mathematicks and mechanick arts have
ſo much got the ſtart in growth of other ſciences, may be re-
ſolved into this, that their progreſs hath not been retarded by
that reverential awe of former diſcoverers. Glanville.
The French year has got the ſtart of ours more in the works
of nature than the new ſtile. Addison.
St A'RTER. m. ſ. [from ſtart.] One that ſhrinks from his
purpoſe.
Stand to it boldly, and take quarter, -
To let thee ſee I am no ſtarter. Hudibras.
St A'RTINGly. adv. [from ſtarting J By ſudden fits; with
frequent intermiſſion.
Why do you ſpeak ſo /?artingly and raſh. Shakespeare Othello.
To St A'RTL E. v. m. [from ſtart.] To ſhrink; to move on
feeling a ſudden impreſſion of alarm or terrour.
The ſtartling ſteed was ſeiz'd with ſudden fright,
And bounding o'er the pommel caſt the knight.
Why ſhrinks the ſoul
Back on herſelf, and/artles at deſtrućtion
My frighted thoughts run back, -
And ſtartle into madneſs at the ſound. Addiſon's Cato.
To STARTL E. v. a. To fright; to ſhock; to impreſs with
ſudden terrour, ſurpriſe, or alarm.
They would find occaſions enough, upon the account of his
Drydºn.
Addison Cato.
"-i-mºm.
S T A
known affections to the king's ſervice, from which it was not
Poºle to remove or/art, him.
Wilmot had more ſeru p!
would not have attained tº
neſs.
Such whi
On Adam.
To hear the lark begin his fligh
And finging/artle º night t;
rom his watch-tower in the ſkies,
*Till the dappled dawn doth riſe. Milton,
The "PPoſition that ange's aſſume bodies needs not ſtartle
us, ſince ſome of the moſt ancient and moſt learned
ſeemed to believe that they had bodies.
Inceſt! Oh name it not
The very mention ſhakes my inmoſt ſoul:
The gods are ſtartled in their peaceful manſions,
And nature fickens at the ſhocking ſound. Smith.
His books had been ſolemnly burnt at Rome as heretical:
ſome people, he found, were ſtartled at it; ſo he was forced
boldly to make repriſals, to buoy up their courage. Aterbury.
Now the leaf
Inceſſant ruſtles, from the mournful grove
Qſt ſtartling ſuch as ſtudious walk below,
And ſlowly circles through the waving air. Thomſºn.
St A'RT le. n: / (from the verb.] Sudden alarm; ſhock; ſud-
den impreſſion of terrour.
After having recovered from my firſt ſtarte, I was very well
pleaſed at the accident. Speciator.
STARTUP. m. ſ. [ſtart and up..] One that comes ſuddenly into
notice.
That young ſtartup hath all the glory of my overthrow. Shakespeare
To STARVE. v. n. Irrearran, Saxon; ſerven, Dutch, to die.]
1. To periſh; to be deſtroyed. Obſolete.
To her came meſſage of the murderment,
Wherein her guiltleſs friends ſhould hopeleſs ſharve. Fairfax.
2. To periſh with hunger. It has with or for before the cauſe,
ºf leſs properly.
Were the pains of honeſt induſtry, and of ſtarving with
hunger and cold, ſet before us, no body would doubt which
Carendon.
cs from religion to ſtartle him, and
end by any groſs act of wicked-
• - - Carendon.
ſpring wak'd her, but with J'artled eye
Milton.
fathers
Dºcke.
to chuſe. Locke.
An animal that ſtarves of hunger, dies feveriſh and deli-
rious. Arbuthnºt.
3. To be killed with cold.
Have I ſeen the naked ſtarve for cold,
While avarice my charity controll'd : Sandys.
4. To ſuffer extreme poverty.
Sometimes virtue ſtarves while vice is fed :
What then! Is the reward of virtue bread? Pope:
5. To be deſtroyed with cold.
Had the ſeeds of the pepper-plant been born from Java to
theſe northern countries, they muſt have ſtarved for want of
ſun. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
To St ARVE. v. a.
1. To kill with hunger.
I cannot blame his couſin king,
That wiſh'd him on the barren mountains ſtarv'd. Shakeſp. -
Hunger and thirſt, or guns and ſwords,
Give the ſame death in different words:
To puſh this argument no further, -
To ſtarve a man in law is murther. Prior.
If they had died through faſting, when meat was at hand,
they would have been guilty of ſtarving themſelves. Pºpe.
2. To ſubdue by famine.
Thy deſires
Are wolfiſh, bloody, ſtarv'd, and ravenous. Shakeſpeare.
He would have worn her out by ſlow degrees,
As men by faſting ſtarve th' untam'd diſeaſe. Dryden.
Attalus endeavoured to ſtarve Italy, by ſtopping their con-
voy of proviſions from Africa. A, buthnot on Coins.
3. To kill with cold.
From beds of raging fire to ſtarve in ice
Their ſoft ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immoveable, infix'd, and frozen round. Milton's Par. Lºſt.
4. To deprive of force or vigour. -
The powers of their minds are ſtarved by diſuſe, and have
loſt that reach and ſtrength which nature fitted them to re-
ceive. - Locke,
Starvelisc. n.ſ. [from ſtarve.] An animal thin and weak
for want of nouriſhment.
If I hang, I'll make a fat pair of gallows; for old fir John
hangs with me, and he's noſtarveling. Shakeſpeare.
Now thy alms is giv'n, the letter's read;
The body fiſen again, the which was dead;
And thy poor ſtar veling bountifully fed. Donne.
The ſtºnes would be making ſport with the lean, and
calling them ſtarveling. . . L’Eſtrange,
The thronging cluſters thin.
By kind avulſion; elſe the ſtarving brood,
Void of ſufficient ſuſtenance, will yield • * *
A ſlender Autumn. Płiſpº.
Poor<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A
-
Poor ſtarveling º º ſº thy gains!
tion'd to thy pains !
ST ..ºf aſter, }. See ELEcAMPANE. - -
It hath a fibrous root: the leaves for the moſt part intire,
and placed alternately on the branches: the ſtalks are branched;
the flowers radiated, ſpecious, and have a ſcaly cup: the ſeeds
are incloſed in a downy ſubſtance. Miller.
SpA"ra RY. adj. [from ſtatus, Latin.] Fixed; ſettled. -
The ſet and ſtatary times of pairing of nails, and cutting
of hair, is but the continuation of ancient ſuperſtition. Brown.
STATE. m. ſ. [ſtatus, Latin.]
1. Condition; circumſtances of nature or fortune.
I do not
Infer as if I thought my fiſter's ſtate
Secure.
Relate what Latium was, y
Declare the paſt and preſent ſtate of things. Dryden's Zn.
Like the papiſts is your poets ſtate,
Swift.
Milton.
Poor and diſarm'd. Pope.
2. Modification of anything. - -
Keep the ſtate of the queſtion in your eye. Boyle.
3. Stationary point; criſis; height; point from which the next
movement is regreſſion. - -
The deer that endureth the womb but eight months, and is
compleat at ſix years, cannot live much more than thirty, as
having paſſed two general motions; that is, its beginning and
increaſe; and having but two more to run through, that is, its
fate and declination. Brown's Vulgar Errouri.
Tumours have their ſeveral degrees and times ; as begin-
ning, augment, ſtate, and declination: J/ſeman.
4. [Eſtat, French.J Eſtate; ſigniory; poſſeſſion.
Strong was their plot,
Their ſtates far off, and they of wary wit. Daniel.
5. The community; the publick; the commonwealth.
If anything more than your ſport
Did move your greatneſs, and this noble ſtate,
To call on him, he hopes it is no other
But for your health ſake. Stakeſp. Troilus and Crºffda.
A ſtate's anger
Should not take knowledge either of fools or women.
Ben. Johnſºn't Catiline.
| heather talk of ſtate matters and the ſénat. E. johnſ.
What he got by fortune,
It was the ſtate that now muſt make his right. Daniel.
The/ſate hath given you licence to ſtay on land for the ſpace
of ſix weeks. Bacon.
It is better the kingdom ſhould be in good eſtate, with par-
ticular loſs to many of the people, than that all the people
ſhould be well, and the Jiate of the kingdom altogether
loſt. Hayward.
It is a bad exchange to wound a man's own conſcience,
thereby to ſalve ſtate fores. Ring Charles.
For you we ſtay’d, as did the Grecian ſtate
"Till Alexander came. Waller.
Since they all live by begging, it were better for the ſtate
to keep them. Graunt.
Theſe are the realms of unrelenting fate;
And awful Rhadamanthus rules the ſtate :
He hears and judges. Dryden's Zn.
6. Hence ſingle/ai, in Shakeſpeare for individuality.
My thought, whoſe murther yet is but fantaſtical,
Shakes ſo my ſingle/late of man, that funètion
Is ſmother'd in ſurmiſe. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
7. A republick; a government not monarchical.
They feared nothing from a ſtate ſo narrow in compaſs of
land, and ſo weak, that the ſtrength of their armies has ever
been made up of foreign troops, #
8. Rank; condition; quality. P Temple.
Fair dame, I am not to you known,
Though in your ſtate of honour I am perfeót. Shakeſp.
High ſtate the bed is where misfortune lies. Fairfax.
9. Solemn pomp; *Ppearance of greatneſs.
When in triumphant ſtate the Britiſh muſe,
True to herſelf, ſhall barb'rous aid refuſe. Roſcommon:
here kings receiv'd the marks of ſov’reign pow'r:
In ſtate the monarchs march'd, the lićtors bore
The awful axes and the rod, before. Dryden's Zn.
Pet my attendants wait Tij alone,
Where leaſt of Jiate, where moſt of love is ſhown. Dryden.
**PPear in their robes would be a troubleſome piece of
fate. Collier. -
At home ſurrounded by a ſervile crowd,
Prompt to abuſe, and in detraction loud;
Abroad bºgirt with men, and ſwords, and ſpears,
is very ſtate Acknowledging his fears. Prior
I Q. §". grandeur. -
"; "tructed him how he ſ y -
* modeſt ſenſe of his º keep ſate, and yet with
* - Bacºn's Henry VII.
The ſwan ºw's her ſtate with oary fect, ºl.
$, was ſtaid, and in his gait
Preſtry’ r * - -
da grave majeſtick ſtat. Butler,
Such cheerful modeſty, ſuch humbleſtate,
Moves certain love.
Can this imperious lord forget to reign,
Quit all his ſtate, deſcend, and ſerve again. Pºpe's Statiº.
1 1. A ſeat of dignity.
This chair ſhall be my ſtate, this dagger my ſceptre, and
this cuſhion my crown. Shakespeare Henry IV.
As ſhe affected not the grandeur of a ſtate with a canopy
ſhe thought there was no offence in an elbow-chair. Ariº.
The brain was her ſtudy, the heart her ſtate room, Arbuth,
12. A canopy; a covering of dignity.
Over the chair is a ſtate made round of ivy, ſomewhat
whiter than ours; and the ſtate is curiouſly wrought with
Paler.
ſilver and ſilk. Bacºn.
His high throne, under ſtate
Of richeſt texture ſpread, at th: upper end
Was plac'd. Milton's Paradſ, Lºft,
13. A perſon of high rank. Obſolete.
She is a dutcheſs, a great ſtate. Latimer,
14. The Principal perſons in the government. -
The bold deſign
Pleas'd highly thoſe internal ſtates. 2Milºn.
15. Joined with another word it ſignifies publick.
I am no courtier, nor verſed in ſtate-affairs: my life hath
rather been contemplative than active. Bacon.
Council ' What's that a Pack of bearded ſlaves,
The ſcavengers that ſweep ſtates nuſances,
And are themſelves the greateſt. Dryden's Cleomerº.
I am accuſed of reflecting upon great ſtate-folks. Swift.
To STATE. v. a. [conſtater, French.j
1. To ſettle; to regulate.
This is ſo ſtated a rule, that all caſuiſ's preſs it in all caſes
of damage. Decay of Pity.
This is to ſtate accounts, and looks more like merchandize
than friendſhip. Collier of Friendſhip.
He is capable of corruption who receives more than what
is the ſtated and unqueſtioned fee of his off. Addison.
2. Tº repreſent in all the circumſtances of modification.
Many other inconveniences are conſequent to this ſtating of
this queſtion; and Particularly that, by thoſe which thus ſtate
it, there hath never yet been affigned any definite number of
fundamentals. Hammond on Fundamental.
Its preſent ſtate fateth it to be what it now is. Hale.
Were our caſe /tated to any ſober heathen, he would never
gueſs why they who acknowledge the neceſſity of prayer, and
confeſs the ſame God, may not aſk in the ſame form.
Decay ºf Piety.
To ſtate it fairly, imitation is the moſt advantageous way
for a tranſlator to ſhew himſelf, but the greateſt wrong which
can be done to the memory of the dead. Dryden.
| Pretended not fully to ſtate, much leſs demonſtrate, the
truth contained in the text. Atterbury.
STATELINEss. n.ſ.. [from ſtately.] - -
1. Grandeur; majeſtick appearance; auguſt manner; dignity.
We may colléét the excellency of the underſtanding then by
the glorious remainders of it now, and gueſs at the ſtatelingſ;
of the building by the magnificence of its ruins. South.
For ſtatelineſ and majeſty what is comparable to a horſe?
More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm,
2. Appearance of pride; affected dignity.
She hated ſtatelineſs; but wiſely knew
What juſt regard was to her title due.
STATELY. adj. [from ſtate.] -
1. Auguſt; grand; lofty; elevated; majeſtick; magnificent.
A ſtatelier pyramid to her I'll rear,
Than Khodope's or Memphis' ever was. Shai. Hon. VI.
Theſe regions have abundance of high cedars, and other
Jiately trees caſting a ſhade. Raleigh'. Hiſtory of the Wºrld.
Truth, like a ſtately dome, will not ſhew herſelf at the º
viſit. South.
Bettertºn,
He many a walk travers'd
Of ſtateſieſt covert, cedar, pine, or palm.
2. Elevated in mien or ſentiment. - is ſtateſ
He maintains majeſty in the midſt of plainneſs, and is ſtately
without ambition, which is the vice of Lucan. Dryden.
STATELY. adv. [from the adjećtive..] Majeſtically. Mil
Ye that ſtately tread or lowly creep. 1ſton.
STATESMAN. n.ſ.. [ſtate and man.]
I. A politician; one verſed in the arts of government.
It looks grave enough * ... ºn a "
To ſeem a}.}. O Ben. Yohnſºn's Epigr.
The corruption of a poet is the generation of a ſ:
ºf.
Milton.
777/774. - -
2. One employed in publick affairs.
If ſuch actions may have paſſage free, |
Bond-ſlaves and pagans ſhall our ſtateſmen be. Shakespeare Othele.
It is a weakneſs which attends high and low; º:
who holds the helm, as well as the peaſant who, holds the
!ough. South J iſ:
P A Britiſh miniſter muſt expect to ſee many friends fall off,
whom he cannot gratify, ſince, to uſe the phraſe of a *:::
man, the paſture is not large enough, Here
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A
º
Here Britain's ſtateſmen oft the fall foredoom
... Of foreign tyrants, and of nymphs at home. Pope.
St A’ teswom AN. m. ſ. [ ſtate and woman.] A woman who
meddles with publick affairs. In contempt.
How ſhe was in debt, and where ſhe meant
To raiſe freſh ſums: ſhe's a great ſtateſwoman / B. johnſºn.
Several obječts may innocently be ridiculed, as the paſſions
of our ſtateſwomen. Addiſon.
St A'ticAl. }*; [from the noun...] Relating to the ſcience
STATIck. § of weighing.
A man weigheth ſome pounds leſs in the height of Winter,
according to experience, and the ſtatick aphoriſms of Sanc-
torius. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
If one by a ſtatical engine could regulate his inſenſible per-
ſpiration, he might often, by reſtoring of that, foreſee, pre-
vent, or ſhorten a fit of the gout. Arbuthnot on Diet.
STATIcks. n.ſ. [rºlix; ; /latique, Fr.] The ſcience which
conſiders the weight of bodies.
This is a catholick rule of ſtaticks, that if any body be bulk
for bulk heavier than a fluid, it will ſink to the bottom; and if
lighter, it will float upon it, having part extant, and part im-
merſed, as that ſo much of the fluid as is equal in bulk to the
immerſed part be equal in gravity to the whole. Bentley.
STATION. n.ſ. [/lation, French; ſtatio, Latin.]
1. The aët of ſtanding.
Their manner was to ſtand at prayer, whereupon their
meetings unto that purpoſe on thoſe days had the names of
ſtations given them. Hooker.
2. A ſtate of reſt.
All progreſſion is performed by drawing on or impelling
forward ſome part which was before in ſtation or at quiet,
where there are no joints. Brown's Wugar Errours.
3. A place where any one is placed.
In ſtation like the herald, Mercury,
New-lighted on a heav'n-kiſſing hill. Shakeſp. Timon.
The ſeditious remained within their ſtation, which, by rea-
ſon of the naſtineſs of the beaſtly multitude, might more fitly
be termed a kennel than a camp. Hayward.
The planets in their ſtation liſt’ning ſtood. Milton.
To fingle ſtations now what years belong,
With planets join'd, they claim another ſong. Creech.
4. Poſt aſſigned ; office.
Michael in either hand leads them out of Paradiſe, the fiery
ſerpent waving behind them, and the cherubims taking their
ſtations to guard the place. 44ilton.
5. Situation; poſition.
The fig and date, why love they to remain
In middle ſtation and an even plain ;
While in the lower marſh the gourd is found,
And while the hill with olive-ſhade is crown'd? Prior.
6. Employment; office.
No member of a political body ſo mean, but it may be
uſeful in ſome ſtation or other. L’Eſtrange.
They believe that the common ſize of human underſtand-
ing is fitted to ſome ſtation or other. Swift.
Whether thoſe who are leaders of a party arrive at that
fation more by a ſort of inſtinct, or influence of the ſtars, than
by the poſſeſſion of any great abilities, may be a point of much
diſpute. - Swift.
7. Charaćter; ſtate.
Far the greater part have kept their ſtation. Milton.
8. Rank; condition of life.
I can be contented with an humbler ſtation in the temple of
virtue, than to be ſet on the pinnacle. Dryden.
To STA/Tron. v. a. [from the noun J. To place in a certain
poſt, rank, or place.
STATIos ARy. adj. [from ſtatiºn.] Fixed; not progreſſive.
The ſame harmony and ſtationary conſtitution, as it hap-
pened in many ſpecies, ſo doth it fall out in individuals. Brown.
Between the deſcent and aſcent, where the image ſeemed
ſtationary, I ſtopped the priſm, and fixed it in that poſture, that
it ſhould be moved no more. Newton's Opt.
STA'tion ER. n.ſ.. [from ſtation J
1. A bookſeller.
Some modern tragedies are beautiful on the ſtage, and yet
Tryphon the ſtatiºner complains they are ſeldom aſked for in
his ſhop. Dryden.
With authors, ſtationers obey'd the call;
Glory and gain th’ induſtrious tribe provoke, -
And gentle dulneſs ever loves a joke. Pope's Dunciad.
2. A ſeller of paper.
STAT 1st. n.ſ.. [from ſtate J A ſtateſman; a politician ; one
ſkilled in government.
I once did hold it, as our ſtatiſts do,
A baſeneſs to write fair; and labour'd much
How to forget that learning. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
I do believe,
Statiſt though I am none, nor like to be,
That this ſhall prove a war. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Their orators thou then extoll'ſt, as thoſe
The top of eloquence, ſtatiſts indeed,
And lovers of their country. Milton's Paradiſe Reg.
STATUARY. m. ſ. [/ºuaire, French; from ſatua, Latin.j
* The art of carving images or repreſentations of life.
The northern nations, that overwhelmed it by their num-
bers, were too barbarous to preſerve the remains of learning more
carefully than they did thoſe of architecture and/?atuary. 7 ºf 'e.
2. One that practiſes or profeſſes the art of making ſtatues.
On other occaſions the Jataries took their ſubjects from
the poets. Addison.
How ſhall any man, who hath a genius for hiſtory, under-
take ſuch a wºrk with ſpirit and chearfulneſs, when he conſi.
tlers that he will be read with pleaſure but a very few years 2
This is. like employing an excellent fatuary to work upon
mouldering ſtone. Swift.
STATUE. m. ſ. [/?atue, Fr. ſtatua, Latin.] An image; a ſo.id
repreſentation of any living being. e
The princeſs heard of her mother's ſtatue, a picce many
years in doing, and now newly perform'd by that rare Italian
maſter. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
They ſpake not a word;
But like dumb ſtatues, or unbreathing ſtones,
Star'd each on other. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
Architects propounded unto Alexander to cut the mountain
Athos into the form of a ſtatue, which in his right hand ſhould
hold a town capable of containing ten thouſand men, and in
his left a veſſel to receive all the water that flowed from the
mountain. //ilkins's Math. Magick.
A ſtatue of Polycletus, called the rule, deſerves that name
for having ſo perfect an agreement in all its parts, that it is
not poſſible to find a fault in it. Dryden's Dºfrºſnay.
To STA’rue. v. a. [from the noun..] To place as a ſtatue.
Thou ſhalt be worſhipp'd, kiſs'd, lov d and ador'd;
And were there ſenſe in his idolatry,
My ſubſtance ſhould be ſtatued in thy ſtead. Shakespeare.
St A’t URE. m. ſ. [ſlature, Fr. ſtatura, Latin.] The height of
any animal.
What ſtature we attain at ſeven years we ſometimes double,
moſt times come ſhort of at one and twenty. Brºwn.
A creature who might erect
His ſtature, and upright with front ſerene
Govern the reſt. Miltºn.
Foreign men of mighty ſtature came. Dryden.
Thyſelf but duſt, thy ſtature but a ſpan;
A moment thy duration, fooliſh man Prizr.
We have certain demonſtration from Egyptian mummies,
and Roman urns and rings, and meaſures and edifices, and
many other antiquities, that human ſtature has not diminiſhed
for above two thouſand years. Bentley’s Sermons.
STA’ſ UTABLE. adj. [from ſlatute.] According to ſtatute.
I met with one who was three inches above five feet, the
ſtatutable meaſure of that club. Addison's Guardian.
STATUTE. m.ſ.. [ſtatut, French; ſtatutum, Latin.] A law ;
an edićt of the legiſlature.
. Not only the common law, but alſo the ſtatutes and acts of
parliament were ſpecially intended for its benefit. Speºſer.
Blood hath been ſhed, -
Fre human ſtatute purg'd the gen'ral weal. Shakespeare ea, e.
There was a ſhatute againſt vagabonds; wherein note the
diſlike the parliament had of goaling them as chargeable and
peſterous. Bacºn.
Know the ſtatutes of heaven and laws of eternity, thoſe
immutable rules of juſtice. Till ſon's Sel mons.
O queen, indulg’d by favour of the gods,
To build a town, with ſlatutes to reſtrain
The wild inhabitant beneath thy reign. Dryden's Aneid.
To St Ave. v. a. In the plural ſlaves. [from ſtaff.]
1. To break in pieces ; uſed originally of barrels made of ſmall
parts or ſtaves.
If irreverent expreſſion, or a thought too wanton are crept
into my verſes, let them be Jiav'd or forfeited like contra-
banded goods. Dryaen.
2. To puſh off as with a ſtaff. - -
Hów can they eſcape the contagion of the writings, whom
the virulency of the calumnies have not ſaved off, from read-
ing. -- Pen. johnſºn.
*the condition of a ſervant ſlaves him off to a diſtance s but
the goſpel ſpeaks nothing but allurement, attractiºn, and in-
vitation. South's Sermons.
. To pour out by breaking the caſk.
3 Tº: feared . that might enſue thereof have been an
occaſion that divers times all the wine in the city hath been
aved. Sandys's ſº avels.
... To furniſh with rundles or ſlaves. - •
4. }. º º ſhameful end of Aloyſus Grittus, Solyman's
deputy in Hungary; who climbing too faſt up the evil ſlaved
laideſ of ambition, ſuddenly fell, and never roſe more. Knolley.
To STAvg. v. n. To fight with layº.
Equal ſhame and envy ſtirr'd
I' th' enemy, that one ſhou’d beard
So many warriours, and ſo ſtout, -
As he had done, and ſlav'd it out. - Hudibrat.
To STAVE and Tail. v.a. To part dogs by interpoſing a ſtaff,
ling the tail.
and by pul ". D The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T A
S T A
* | *
º
- ſoon aſſail'd,
conquering foe they • 12
rºß and Cerdon tail'd,
he plural of ſtaff.
STAves. m. ſ. º ſtrange manner arm’d,
- - ~... . . . . ſ. d. Fairy 9a.
flick knives, ſome/laves in fire warme , ºry &amp;
;º: ſº º up in bindies orſlaves. Mortimer's Huſband.
Sravesack E. m. / Larkſpur. A plant.
AY. v. n. [//aen, Dutch.]
**ś. in a place; to forbear departure.
Macbeth, we ſtay upon your leiſure. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
If ſhe do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
As though ſhe bid me ſtay by her a week. Shakeſpeare.
Would ye tarry for them till they were grown would ye
ſtay for them from having huſbands Ruth i. 13.
Not after reſurrection ſhall he ſlay -
Longer on earth than certain times tappear. Milton.
He did ordain that as many might depart as would; but as
many as would ſay ſhould have very good means to º
e ſtate. a cººf.
th They flocked in ſuch multitudes, that they not only ſlayed
for their reſort, but diſcharged divers. Hayward.
Th’ injur'd ſea, which from her wonted place,
To gain ſome acres, avarice did force,
If the new banks negle&amp;ted once decay, r
No longer will from her old channel ſay. J7%iller.
Stay, I command you, ſlay and hear me firſt. Pryden.
Nor muſt he/lay at home, becauſe he muſt he back again
by one and twenty. The father cannot ſay any longer. Locke.
Every plant has its atmoſphere, which hath various effects
on thoſe who ſay near them. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
Servants ſent on meſſages ſlay out longer than the meſſage
requires. Swift.
2. To continue in a ſtate.
The flames augment, and ſay
At their full height, then languiſh to decay. Dryden.
3. To wait; to attend.
I'll tell thee my whole device
When I am in my coach, which /ſays for us, Shakeſpeare.
...We for his royāl preſence only ſlay
To end the rites. Dryden.
I/ay for Turnus, whoſe devoted head
J.owing to the living and the dead;
My ſon and I expect it from his hand. Dryden.
4. To ſtop; to ſtand ſtill.
When ſhe liſt pour out her larger ſpright,
She would command the haſty ſun to/lay,
Qr backward turn his courſe. Fairy Queen.
Perkin Warbeck, finding that when matters once go down
the hill, they ſay not without a new force, reſolved to try
ſome exploit upon England. Bac.n.
Satan
Throws his ſteep flight in many an airy wheel,
Nor ſlay'd, till on N. Phates' top he lights. Milton.
5. To dwell; to be long
Nor will I ſay
9n Amphix, or what death, he dealt that day: Dryden.
I muſt Jay a little on one action, which preferred the re-
lief of others to the conſideration of vourſelf. Dryden.
6. To reſt confidently. -
Becauſe ye truſt'in °PPreſſion, and ſay thereon, this ſhall
be as a breach ready to fall. Ia. xxx. 12.
They call themſelves of the holy city, and ſay themſelves
upon God. Iſa. xlviii. 2.
To STAY. v. a.
1. To ſtop; to withold ; to repreſs. -
All that may ſtay their minis from thinking that true which
they heartily wiſh were falſe, but cannot think it ſo without
ſome ſcruple. - Hooker.
The Syrens ſºng to allure them into danger; but Orpheus
ſang ſo well that he/ſaid them. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the Iłżrld.
He took nothing but a bit of bread º/*ay his ſtomach. Locke.
To ſay theſe ſudden guſts of paſſion *
That hurry you from reaſon, reſt aſſur’d
The ſecret of yºur love lives with me only. Rowe.
Stay her ſtomâch with theſe half hundred plays, till I can
Procure her a romance big enough to ſatisfy her great ſoul with
adventures. Pope.
Why ceaſe we then the wrath of h r
Be iº all. eaven to ſlay?
2. To delay; to obſtruct; to hinder from progreſſion. Pope.
* 10yous time will not be //ay’d
Unleſs the do him by the forelock take. Spenſºr.
Your ſhips are ſaid at Venice. Shakeſpeare.
Unto the ſhore, with tears, with fighs, with mo.
hey him condući; curſing the bounds that ſay &gt;
*... fleet, that would have further gone. Daniel.
h "ºring thee where no ſhadow/lays
Y coming, and thy ſoft embraces. AMilton's Paradiſ, Loft.
Hulilras. .
3. To keep from departure. -
If as a priſoner, I were here, you might
Have then inſiſted on a conqueror's right,
And /lay'd me here. Dryden,
4. [E/layer, French..] To ProP; to ſupport; to hold up.
On this determination we might/lay ourſelves without fur.
ther proceeding herein. Hºoker.
Aaron and Hurſlayed up his hands, the one on the one fide
and the other on the other. **d. xvii. 12.
Sallows and reeds for vineyards uſeful found,
To ſay thy vines.
STAY. n.ſ.. [ºftaye, French.]
I. Continuance in a place; forbearance of departure.
Determine,
Or for her/lay or going; the affair cries haſle. Shaieffear.
Should judges make a longer/?ay in a place than uſually they
do; a day more in a county would be a Very good addition,
Dryden,
Bac:
Her long with ardent look his eye purſu'd, £4/7,
Delighted but deſired more herſłay. Milton,
The Thracian youth inſades
9rpheus returning from th’ Elyſian ſhades,
Embrace the hero, and his ſtay implore. J/aller,
$o long a ſtay will make
The jealous king ſuſpect we have been plotting. Denian,
What pleaſure hop'ſ thou in my ſay,
When I'm conſtrain’d and with myſelf away? Dryden.
When the wine ſparkies, -
Make haſte, and leave thy buſineſs and thy care,
No mortal intreſ can be worth thy ſtay. Dryden.
2. Stand; ceſſation of progreſſion.
Bones, after full growth, continue at aſſay; teeth fland at
a ſtay, except their wearing. Bacon,
Affairs of ſtate ſeemed rather to fland at a ſley, than toad.
vance or decline. Boyward.
Made of ſphere-metal, never to decay,
Until his revolution was at /?ay. Milton,
Almighty crowd thou ſhortºn'ſ all diſpute;
Nor faith nor reaſon make thec at a ſtay,
Thou leap'ſt o'er all. Dryden's Mºdal.
3. A ſtop; an obſtruction; a hindrance from progreſs.
His fell heart thought long that little way,
Griev'd with each ſtep, tormented with each ſoy. Faifax.
4. Reſtraint; Prudence; caution.
Many juſt and temperate proviſos, well ſhewed and fore-
tokened the wiſdom, ſay and moderation of the king. Bacon.
With prudent /*ay he long deferr'd
he rough contention. Philips.
5. A fixed ſtate.
Who have before, or ſhall write after thee,
Their works though toughly laboured will be
Like infancy or age to man's firm ſlay,
Or early and late twilights to mid-day.
Alas, what ſay is there in human flate
And who can ſhun inevitabi. fate
6. A prop ; a ſupport.
* of creatures unto the law of nature is the ſay
of the whole world. Hocker.
What ſurety of the world, what hope, what ſay,
What this was once a king, and now is clay. Shakespeare.
My only ſtrength, and /tay / forlorn of thee, -
Whither ſhall I betake mº ?—where ſubſiſt? Milton.
Trees ſerve as ſo many ſtays for their vines, which hang
like garlands from tree to tró. Addiſon's Remark; on Italy.
7. Tackling. [See STAYs J
With ſays and cordage laſt he rig'd a ſhip,
And roll'd on leavers, launch'd her in the deep.
8. [In the plural.] Boddice.
No ſtubborn ſlay, her yielding ſhape embrace. Gay.
9. Steadineſs of conducí.
STA'YFD. part. adj. [from /*ay.]
1. Fixed; ſettled; ſerious; not volatile.
For her ſon,
In her own hand the crown ſhe kept in flore,
Till riper years he raught, and ſtronger/ay. Fa. Queen.
Whatſoever is above theſe proceedeth of ſhortneſs of me-
mory, or of want of a ſtayed and cqual attentIOn. Bacon.
He was well /čayed, and in his gate 'l-
Preſerv'd a grave majeſtick ſtate. - Hudibras.
A /'ayed man and wife are ſeldom ſo indolent as not to find
2. Stopped.
š. Y. adv. [from ſlayed.] - Compoſedly; gravely; pru-
dently; ſoberly; calmly; judiciouſly.
SLA’YE DNESS. m. ſ. [from /*ayed.]
. Solidity; weight, - -
I º miſſile, combineth with delightfulneſs, and
was willin
to me new, g to ſay *y reader on an argument that º:
4 &amp;t.
conſolation in each other. Pope.
currantneſs with ſtayedneſs, how can the language ſound other
than moſt full of ſweetneſs. Camaen's Remainſ.
Donne.
Dryden.
Pope.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2. Com-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T E
º
º
**
**
! -
2. Compoſure; prudence; gravity; judiciouſneſs.
STA'YER. n.ſ.. [from ſay..] One who ſtops, holds or ſupports.
May Jove, the guardian of the capitol,
He, the great/?ayer of our troops in rout,
Fulfil your hopes, and animate the cohorts. A Philips.
STA'YLAce. m. ſ. [/lay and lace.] A lace with which women
faſten their boddice.
A ſtayſace from England ſhould become a topick for cenſure
at viſits. Swf.
STAYs. n.ſ. Without ſingular.
1. Boddice; a kind of ſtiff waiſtcoat made of whalebone, worn
by ladies.
2. Ropes in a ſhip to keep the maſt from falling aft. All maſts,
topmaſts, and flagſtaves have ſays, except the ſpritſail topmaſt:
the mainmaſt, foremaſt, with the maſts belonging to them,
have alſo back/?ays, which help to keep the maſt from pitch-
ing forward or overboard. Harris.
They were come upon the ſays, when one of the ſailors
deſcried a galley. Sidney.
3. Any ſupport; anything that keeps another extended.
Weavers ſtretch your ſtays upon the weft. Dryden.
STEAD. n.ſ. [rzeb, Saxon.]
1. Place. Obſolete.
Fly therefore, fly this fearful/lead anon, -
Leſt thy fool hardize work thy ſad confuſion. Fairy Queen.
They nigh approached to the ſtead
Where as thoſe maremaids dwelt. Spenſer's Fairy Queen.
The term of life is limited,
Ne may a man prolong nor ſhorten it;
The ſoldier may not move from watchful ſtead, -
Nor leave his ſtand until his captain bed. Fairy Queen.
2. Room ; place which another had or might have.
If we had ſimply taken them clean away, or elſe removed
them, ſo as to place in their ſtead others, we had done worſe.
Hooker.
There fell down many ſlain, and they dwelt in their ſtead;
until the captivity. 1 Chron, v. 22.
Nor do the bold'ſt attempts bring forth
Events ſtill equal to their worth;
But ſometimes fail, and in their ſlead
Fortune and cowardice ſucceed.
Jealouſy then fir’d his ſoul,
And his face kindled like a burning coal ;
Now cold deſpair ſucceeding in her ſtead,
To livid paleneſs turns the glowing red. Dryden.
3. Uſe; help. To ſland in ſtead; to be of great uſe; to help ; to
advantage.
A compleat man hath ſome parts, whereof the want could
not deprive him of his eſſence; yet to have them ſtandeth him
in ſingular ſtead, in reſpect of ſpecial uſes. PHooker.
He makes his underſtanding the warehouſe of lumber ra-
ther than a repoſitory of truth, which will ſland him in ſtead
when he has occaſion for it. Locke.
The ſmalleſt ačt of charity ſhall ſland us in great ſhead.
Atterbury's Sermons.
Butler.
4. The frame of a bed.
- The genial bed, -
Sallow the feet, the i. and the ſed. Dryden.
STEAD, ſhed, being in the name of a place that is diſtant from
any river, comes from the Saxon reep, rºyo, a place; but if
it be upon a river or harbour, it is to be derived from rvače,
a ſhore or ſtation for ſhips. Gibſon's Camden.
To St EAD. v. a. [from the noun.] -
i. To help; to advantage; to ſupport; to aſſiſt. A word ſome-
what obſolete.
We are neither in ſkill, nor ability of power greatly to
ſtead you. Sidney.
It nothing ſtead us
To chide him from our eves. Shakeſpeare.
Rich garments, linnens, ſtuffs, and neceſſaries,
Which ſince have /leaded much. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?.
Madam, ſo it ſtead you I will write. Shakeſpeare.
Can you ſo/lead me
As bring me to the fight of Iſabella. Shakeſpeare.
Your friendly aid and counſel much may ſtead me. Rowe.
2. To fill the place of another. Obſolete.
We ſhall adviſe this wronged maid to ſtead up your ap-
pointment, and go in your place. Shakeſpeare.
STEAD Fast. adj. [/lead and faſt.]
1. Faſt in place; firm; fixed.
Such was this giant's fall, that ſeem'd to ſhake
This ſledſºft globe of earth, as it for fear did quake. F. Qu.
Laws ought to be like ſtony tables, plain, ſteadfaſt, and
immoveable. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
2. Conſtant; reſolute.
I hope her ſtubborn heart to bend,
And that it then more/fedfaſt will endure. Spenſºr.
A generation that ſet not their heart aright, and whoſe ſpirit
was not/fedfaſt with God. Pſal. lxxviii. 8.
Be faithful to thy neighbour in his poverty; abide ſledſºft
unto him in the time of his trouble. Ecclus. xxii. 23.
Him reſiſt ſledſºft in the faith. I Pet. v. 9.
S T E
What form of death could him affright,
Who unconcern'd, with /*edf/? fight
Cou'd view the ſurges mounting ſteep, -
And monſters rolling in the decp? Dryden.
Srey prºstly. * [from ſledſº.] Firmly; conſtantly.
God's omniſcience /leadſaftſ, graſps the greateſt and moſt
Ippery uncertainties. South's Sermons.
In general, A:4%/1% believe that whatever God hath re.
vealed is infallibly true. //ake's Preparatin for Deats.
ST EA'DFAst Ness. n.ſ. [from ſeafoſ!..] -
I. Immutability; fixedneſs.
So hard theſe heavenly beauties be enfir’d,
As things divine, leaſt paſſions do impreſs,
The more of ſteadfaſt minds to be admiºd
. . The more they ſtayed be on ſled aftmºſ.
2. Firmneſs; conſtancy; reſolution.
STEA"Dily. adv. [from/tead).]
I. Without tottering; without ſhaking.
Sin has a tendency to bring men under evils, unleſs hin-
dered by ſome accident which no man can/leadily build upon.
South's Se: mons.
&gt;
Spenſer.
2. Without variation or irregularity.
So ſteadily does fickle fortune ſteer
Th' obedient orb that it ſhould never err.
STATINEss. n. / [from /lead.]
1. State of being not tottering nor eaſily ſhaken.
2. Firmneſs; conſtancy. -
John got the better of his cholerick temper, and wrought
himſelf up to a great/leadingſ of mind, to purſue his intereſt
through all impediments. Arbuthnot.
3. Conſiſtent unvaried condućt.
Steadineſs is a point of prudence as well as of courage. L’E/?.
A friend is uſeful to form an undertaking, and ſecure ſteadi-
neſ of condućt. Collier ºf Friendſhip.
STEA"DY. adj. [reacbiz, Saxon.]
1. Firm; fixed; not tottering. -
Their feet/teady, their hands diligent, their eyes watchful,
and their hearts reſolute. Sidney.
He ſails 'tween worlds and worlds with ſteady wing. Milt.
Steer the bounding bark with ſteady toil,
When the ſtorm thickens and the billows boil. Pope.
2. Not wavering; not fickle ; not changeable with regard to re-
ſolution or attention.
Now clear I underſtand,
What oft my ſteadiº/f thoughts have ſearch'd in vain. Milton:
Ste.dy to my principles, and not diſpirited with my af-
flictions, I have, by the bleſſing of God, overcome all dif-
ficulties. Dryden's AEneid.
A clear fight keeps the underſtanding ſteady. Locke.
Steak n.ſ. [/lyck, Iſlandick and Erſe, a piece; ſ’eka, Swediſh,
to boil. J A ſlice of fleſh broiled or fried; a collop.
The ſurgeon proteſted he had cured him very well, and of-
Blackmore.
fered to eat the firſt ſtake of him. Tatler.
Fair ladies who contrive
To feaſt on ale and ſleaks. Swift.
To STEAL. v. a. Preterite Iſ?ole, part, paſſ ſºo’e”. [itelän,
Saxon; ſhelen, Dutch.] -
1. To take by theft; to take clandeſtinely; to take without right.
To ſeal generally implics ſecrecy, to rob, either ſecrecy or vio-
lence. -
Thou ran'ſt a tilt in honour of my love,
And /º/f away the ladies hearts of France. Shakespeare.
There are ſome ſhrewd contents in yon ſame paper,
That ſteal the colour from Baſſanio's cheek; -
Some dear friend dead. Shakeſpeare's March. of Venicce.
How ſhould we ſteal ſilver or gold Gen. xliv. 8.
A ſchoolboy finding a bird's neſt, ſlews it his companion
and he ſeal, it. Sºakeſ care.
2. To withdraw or convey without notice. -
The law of England never was properly applied to the Iriſh,
by a purpoſed plot of government, but as they could inſinuate
and ſteal themſelves under the ſame by their humble carriage
and ſubmiſſion. Speºſer.
Let us ſhift away, there's warrant in that theſt
Which ſeal; itſelf when there's no mercy left. Shakeſpeare:
Variety of obječts has a tendency to ſteal away the mind
from its ſteady purſuit of any ſubject. //at:s.
3. To gain or effect by private means.
Young Lorenzo
Stole her ſoul with many vows of faith,
And ne'er a true one.
Were it not that my fellow ſchoolmaſter
Doth watch Bianca's ſteps ſo narrowly, r
'Twere good to ſteal our marriage. Shakeſpeare.
They hate nothing ſo much as being alone, for fear ſome
affrighting apprehenſions ſhould Jeal er force their way in.
Calamy.
Shakeſpeare.
To Steal. v. m. . .
1. To withdraw privily ; to paſs filently. -
Fixt of mind to avoid further entreaty, and to fly all com-
pany, one night ſhe/?ºle away. Sidney,
My<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T E
S T E
; , , 'ſelf
My lord of Amiens and my
Dººd him as he lay along
Under an oak. I cannot think it, lik
uld ſeal away ſo guilty like,
!º. y to guilty Shakeſpeare's Othº.
The moſt pcaccable way, if you take a thief, is to let him
ſhew what he is, and ſteal out of your company. Shakeſpeare.
At time that lover's flights doth ſtill conceal,
Through Athens' gate have we devis’d to ſteal. Shakſº.
In my conduct ſhall your ladies come,
From whom you now muſt ſeal and take no leave., Sºak.
Others weary of the long journey, lingering behind, were
/?olen away; and they which were left, moiled with dirt and
Knolles.
Shakespeare.
mire.
A bride
Should vaniſh from her cloaths into her bed,
As ſouls from bodies ſteal and are not ſpy’d. IXonne.
The vapour of charcoal hath killed many; and it is the
more dangerous, becauſe it cometh without any ill ſmell, and
Jealºth on by little and little. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A ſoft and ſolemn breathing ſound,
Roſe like a ſteam of rich diſtill'd perfumes,
And ſole upon the air, that even ſilence
Was took ere ſhe was ware. Milton.
As wiſe artiſts mix their colours ſo,
That by degrees they from each othergo; ...
Black ſteal, unheeded from the neighb'ring white,
Dryden.
So on us/?ole our bleſſed change.
At a time when he had no ſteward, he ſole away. Swift.
Now his fierce eyes with ſparkling fury glow,
Now fighs ſeal out when tears begin to flow. Pope.
2. To practiſe theft; to play the thief; to take any thing thieviſh-
ly; to have the habit of thieving. -
Stealing is the taking from another what is his, without his
knowledge or allowance. Locke.
The good humour is to ſeal at a minute's reſt.—Convey,
the wiſe it call; ſheal / a fico for the phraſe Shakeſpeare.
STEA'l ER. m. ſ. [from ſeal.] One who ſteals; a thief.
The tranſgreſſion is in the ſealer. Shakeſpeare.
St E A LINGLY. adv. [from ſtealing.] Slily; by inviſible mo-
tion; by ſecret practice.
They were diverſe motions, they did ſo ſealing y ſlip one
into another, as the latter part was ever in hand before the
eye could diſcern the former was ended. Sidney.
STEALTH. n ſ. [from ſeal.]
1. The aët of ſtealing; theft.
The owner proveth the ſtealth to have been committed upon
him by ſuch an outlaw, and to have been found in the poſſeſ-
fion of the priſoner. Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
The ſtealth of mutual entertainment
With character too groſs is written on Juliet. Shakeſpeare.
* In the ſecret dark that none reproves,
Their pretty ſtealth, ſhall work, and ſhares ſhall ſpread.
Speyer.
... The gods perſuaded Mercury,
Their good obſerver, to his ſealth.
2. The thing ſtolen.
On his back a heavy load he bare
Qf nightly ſtealths, and pillage ſeveral. Fairy Queen.
Store of cabbins are but ſuttiſh dens, that breed ſickneſs in
peace, ſerving to cover ſtealths, and in fight are dangerous to
tear men with ſplinters. Raleich.
3. Secret act; clandeſline practice. By //ealth means ſecretly;
clandeſtinely ; with deſire of concealment: but, like ſeal, is
often uſed in a good ſenſe.
The wiſdom of the ſame ſpirit borrowed from melody that
pleaſure, which mingled with heavenly myſteries, cauſeth the
fmoothneſs and ſoftneſs of that which toucheth the ear, to
convey as it were by ſealth the treaſure of good things into
man’s mind. Hooker.
I feel this youth's perfections, º
With an inviſive and ſubtle/alth,
To creep in at mine cycs. Shakespeare eare's Twelfth Night.
The monarch blinded with deſire of wealth,
With ſteel invades his brother's life by ſealth
Before the ſacred altar. Dryden.
Let humble Allen, with an aukward ſhame,
Chapman’s Iliad.
Do good by ſealth, and bluſh to find it fame. Pope.
STEA"ltiy. adj. [from/tealth.] Done clandeſtinely: -
cd by ſtealth. ſtealth. nely ; pcſ.crin-
Now wither'd murder with his/rahj aCe
Moyes like a ghoſt. Jealthy pace,
thing moiſt and hot.
Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
STEAM. ":ſ. [rzeme, Saxon.] The ſmoke or vapour of any
Such the figure of a feaſt
Which, were it not for plenty and for ſcam,
Might be reſembled to a ſick inan’s dream. Kinz,
Some it bears in ſteams up into the air, and this in ſuch,
quantity as to be manifeſt to the ſmell, eſpecially the ſulphur.
//oodwara's Natural Hjøry,
To STFAM. v. n. [reman, Saxon.]
1. To ſmoke or vapºur with moiſt heat.
Scarcely had Phoebus, in the gloomy eaſt,
Got harnaſſed his fiery-footed team,
Ne rear'd above the earth his flaming creſt
When the laſt deadly ſmoke aloft did ſcam. Fairy Queen.
See, ſee, my brother's ghoſt hangs hovering there,
O'er his warm blood, that ſteams into the air. Dryden,
Q wretched we Why were we hurry'd down
This lubrick and adult'rate age; -
Nay, added fat pollutions of our own,
Tº increaſe the/teaming ordures of the ſtage? Dºydºn.
Let the crude humours dance
In heated braſs, ſteaming with fire intenſe. Phiłł.
Theſe minerals not only iſſue out at theſe larger exits, tº
ſteam forth through the pores of the earth, occaſioning ſul-
phureous and other offenſive ſtenches. Wºodward,
2. To ſend up vapours.
Ye miſts that riſe from ſeaming lake. Miltºn.
3. To paſs in vapours.
The diſſolved amber plainly ſwam like a thin film upon the
liquour, whence it ſteamed away into the air. Boyle.
STE AN for/fone. Speyer.
STEATo'M.A. n.ſ. […]ºp 2.3
If the matter in a wen reſembles milk-curds, the tumour is
called atheroma; iſ like honey, meliceris; and if compoſed of
fat, ſteatoma. Sharp's "urgery.
STEED, m / [rtesa, Saxon.] A horſe for flate of war.
My noble ſteed I give him,
With all his trim belonging. Shakespeare Madeth,
Impreſſes quaint, capariſons and ſeeds. Milton.
Stout are our men, and warlike are our ſteeds. Iłaller.
She thought herſelf the trembling dame who fled,
And him the griſly ghoſt that ſpurr'd th’ inſernalſtead. Dryd.
Who, like our active African, inſtrućts
The fiery ſteed, and trains him to his hand? Addison's Cato,
Sce' the bold youth ſtrain up the threat'ning fleep;
Hang o'er their courſers heads with eager ſpeed,
And earth rolls back beneath the flyingſteed. Pºpe.
STEEL. m. ſ. [rzal, Saxon; ſtael, Dutch..]
I. Steel is a kind of iron, refined and purified by the fire with
other ingredients, which renders it white, and its grain cloſer
and finer than common iron. Steel, of all other metals, is
that ſuſceptible of the greateſt degree of hardneſs, when well
tempered ; whence its great uſe in the making of tools and
inſtruments of all kinds. Charlers.
Steel is made from the pureſ and ſofteſt iron, by keeping it
red-hot, ſtratified with coal-duſt and wood-aſhes, or other
ſubſtances that abound in the phlogiſion, for ſeveral hours in
a cloſe furnace. It may alſo be made by fuſion, and ſeveral
other ways; but they are greatly in the wrong who preſet
feel to iron for medicinal purpoſés. JHill's Mat. Media.
At her back a bow and quiver gay,
Stuff'd with ſteel-headed darts wherewith ſhe quell'd
The ſavage beaſts in her vićtorious play. Fairy ºften,
With mighty bars of long enduring braſs -
Fairfax.
The ſteel-bound doors and iron gates he ties. -
A looking-glaſs, with the ſteel behind, looketh white than
glaſs ſimple. Bacon's Natural Hiſlºy.
Diamonds, though hard bodics, will not ready ſtrike fire
with ſtºl, much leſs with one another; nor a flint eaſily with
a ſteel, if they both be wet; the ſparks being then quenched
in their eruption. - Brown's ſugar Errouri.
Both were of ſhining ſteel, and wrought ſo pure
As might the ſtrokes of two ſuch arms endure. Dryde".
2. It is often uſed metonymically for weapons or armour.
Brave Macbeth with his brandiſh'd ſteel
Which ſmok'd with bloody execution, -
Carv'd out his paſſage till he had fac'd the ſlave. Shakespeare:
A grove of oaks, - -
whoſe poliſh’d ſº from far ſeverely ſhines,
Are not ſo dreadful as this beauteous queen. Dryden,
He ſudden as the word,
In proud Plexippus' boſom plunged the ſword;
Toxeus amaz'd, and with amazement ſlow,
Stood doubting; and while doubting thus he ſtood,
Receiv'd the ſleel bath'd in his brother's blood. Dryº.
3. Chalybeate medicines.
- - - :ſ.
- - r14C
After relaxing, ſteel ſtre is likewi
ngthens the ſolids, and
- Arbuthnº.
an antiacid.
Cet odours dIC, in ſuch a company aS there 1S //ea ºn aſ d - ſ - S tel.
ſº ! It 1S uſed prover ially Or hardne S : S h d of //
heat, things of great refreſhment. Lacon.
IS offer: - -
offering ſoon Propitious fire from heaven
Conſum'd with nimble glance and grateful ſeam. Miltºn.
While the “mple ſmoak'd with hallow'd ſteam,
They waſh the Virgin. Drydn
To STEEL. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To point or edge with ſteel.
Add proof unto mine armour with thy prº, R. II
And with thy bleſfings/*,my lance's point. She º T.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T E
º
º
*.
tº º
ſº
* --"
º
—–––- T —--→----
2. To make hard or firm. It is uſed, if it be applied to the mind,
very often in a bad ſenſe.
Lies well ſleel'd with weighty arguments.
So ſervice ſhall with ſteeled fingers toil,
And labour ſhall refreſh itſelf with hope. Shakeſpeare's H. V.
From his metal was his party ſleel'd;
Which once in him rebated, all the reſt
Turn'd on themſelves, like dull and heavy lead. Shakeſp.
O God of battles! ſteel my ſoldiers hearts,
Poſſeſs them not with fear. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Why will you fight againſt ſo ſweet a paſſion,
And ſleel your heart to ſuch a world of charms
Man, fooliſh man
Scarce know'ſt thou how thyſelf began;
Yet fleel'd with ſtudy’d boldneſs, thou dar'ſ try
To ſend thy doubted reaſon's dazled eye
Through the myſterious gulph of vaſt immenſity,
Let the ſteel'd Turk be deaf to matrons cries,
See virgins raviſh'd with relentleſs eyes.
St E E'LY. adj. [from ſteel.]
1. Made of ſteel.
Thy brother's blood the thirſty earth bath drunk,
Broach'd with the ſteely point of Clifford's lance. Shakeſp.
Here ſmokes his forge, he bares his finewy arm,
And early ſtrokes the ſounding anvil warm ;
Around his ſhop the ſteely ſparkles flew,
As for the ſteed he ſhap'd the bending ſhoe. Gay.
2. Hard; firm.
That ſhe would unarm her noble heart of that ſteely reſiſt-
ance againſt the ſweet blows of love. Sidney.
STE E'LY ARD. m. ſ. [/leel and yard.] A kind of balance, in
which the weight is moved along an iron rod, and grows hea-
vier as it is removed farther from the fulorum.
Shakeſpeare,
Addiſon.
Prior.
Tickell.
STEEN, or Stean, n.ſ. A fićtious veſſel of clay or ſtone. Ainſworth.
STEEP. adj. [rzeap, Saxon ] Riſing or deſcending with little
inclination.
He now had conquer’d Anxur's ſleep aſcent. Addiſon.
STEEP. m. ſ Precipice; aſcent or deſcent approaching to per-
pendicularity.
As that Theban monſter that propos'd
Her riddle, and him, who ſolv’d it not, devour’d ;
That once found out and ſolv'd, for grief and ſpight
Caſt herſelf headlong from the Iſmenian ſleep.
As high turrets for their airy ſleep
Require foundations, in proportion deep;
And lofty cedars as far upwards ſhoot,
As to the neather heavens they drive the root;
So low did her ſecure foundation lie,
She was not humble, but humility.
Inſtrućts the beaſt to know his native force,
To take the bit between his teeth, and fly
To the next headlong ſteep of anarchy. Dryden:
We had on each ſide naked rocks and mountains, broken
into a thouſand irregular ſleeps and precipices. Addiſon.
Leaning o'er the rails, he muſing ſtood,
And view’d below the black canal of mud,
Where common ſhores a lulling murmur keep,
Whoſe torrents ruſh from Holborn's fatal ſleep. Gay:
To St E Ep. v. a. [ſlippen, Dutch..] To ſoak; to macerate;
to imbue ; to dip.
When his brother ſaw the red blood trail
Adown ſo faſt, and all his armour ſteep,
Milton,
Dryden.
For very fellneſs loud he 'gan to weep. Spenſºr.
He, like an adder, lurking in the weeds,
His wandring thought in deep deſire does ſleep;
And his frail eye with ſpoil of beauty feeds. Fairy Queen.
A napkin ſleeped in the harmleſs blood
Of ſweet young Rutland. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
Preſent to her, as ſometime Margret
Did to thy father, ſleep'd in Rutland's blood,
A handkerchief; which, ſay to her, did drain
The purple tide from her ſweet brother's body. Shakeſp.
The conquering wine hath ſleep'd our ſenſe
In ſoft and delicate Lethe. Shakeſpeare,
Many dream not to find, neither deſerve,
And yet are ſleep'd in favours. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Four days will quickly ſteep themſelves in night:
Four nights will quickly dream away the time. Shakeſpeare.
Moſt of the ſleepings are cheap things, and the goodneſs of
the crop is a great matter of gain. Bacon.
Whole droves of minds are by the driving god
Compell'd to drink the deep Lethean flood:
In large forgetful draughts to ſleep the cares
Of their paſt labours and their irkſome years. Dryden.
Wheat ſteeped in brine twelve hours prevents the ſmuttineſs.
Mortimer's Huſbandry.
STEEPLE. n.ſ. [rzeopl. repel, Saxon.] A turret of a church
generally furniſhed with bells. A ſpire.
Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks; rage, blow !
You cataraćts and hurricanoes ſpout
Till you have drench'd our ſteeples, drown'd the cocks.
Skakeſpeare.
1t.
. 3. That by which any courſe is guided.
S T E
*
What was found in many places, and preached for wheat
fallen on the ground from the clouds, was but the ſeed of ivy-
berries, and though found in ſleeples or high places, might be
conveyed thither or muted by birds. Prº, Wugar Errours.
A raven I ſaw yeſterday Jºeºple-high, juſt over your houſe.
L’Eſtrange.
They far from ſteeples and their ſacred ſound, ſtrang
. In fields their ſullen conventicles found. Dryden.
Stºrty. adv. [from ſteep.] With precipitous declivity.
Sre EPNess. n.ſ.. [from ſizep.] Precipitous declivity.
The craggedneſs or ſteepneſs of that mountain miketh many
parts of it inacceſſible. Bºerewºod on Language.
Lord Lovel ſwam over Trent on horſeback, but could not
recover the farther ſide, by reaſon of the ſteepneſ of the bank
and ſo was drowned. Bacon's Henry wº
Vineyards, meadows, and cornfields lie on the borders, and
run up all the ſides of the Alps, where the barrenneſs of the
rocks, or the ſteepneſs of the aſcent will ſuffer them. Addison.
STEE'PY. adj. [from ſteep.] Having a precipitous declivity.
A poetical word for ſteep.
Who hath diſpos'd, but thou, the winding way,
Where ſprings down from the ſteepy craggs do beat. Iſotton.
A prophet ſome, and ſome a poet cry,
From ſteepy Othrys’ top to Pylus drove
His herd; and for his pains enjoy'd his love. Dryden.
No more, my goats, ſhall I behold you climb
The ſteepy cliffs, or crop the flow'ry thyme ! Dryden.
STEER. m. ſ. [rtyne, reon, ſtione. Saxon; ſier, Dutch..]
A young bullock.
They think themſelves half exempted from law and obedi-
ence; and having once taſted freedom, do, like a ſteer that
hath been long out of his yoke, grudge and repine ever after
to come under rule again. Spenſer's Ireland.
Lacaon, Neptune's prieſt,
With ſolemn pomp then ſacrific'd a ſeer. Dryden.
Nor has the ſteer,
At whoſe ſtrong cheſt the deadly tiger hangs,
E’er plow'd for him. Thomſon.
To STEER. v. a. [rzeonan, reynan, Sax. ſtieren, Dutch..] To
direct; to guide in a paſſage.
A comely palmer, clad in black attire,
Of ripeſt years, and hairs all hoary gray,
That with a ſtaff his feeble ſteps did ſteer,
Leſt his long way his aged limbs ſhould tire. Fairy Queen.
If a pilot cannot ſee the pole ſtar it can be no fault in him
to ſteer his courſe by ſuch ſtars as do beſt appear to him. K.Ch.
To STEER. v. n. To dire&amp;t a courſe.
As when a ſhip by ſkilful ſteerſman wrought,
Nigh river's mouth, or foreland, where the wind
Weers oft, as oft ſo ſteers, and ſhifts her ſail. Milton.
In a creature, whoſe thoughts are more than the ſands, and
wider than the ocean, fancy and paſſion muſt needs run him
into ſtrange courſes, if reaſon, which is his only ſtar and com-
paſs be not that he ſteers by: Lºcke.
STEE/RAGE. m. ſ. [from ſteer.]
1. The aët or pračtice of ſteering.
2. Direétion; regulation of a courſe.
He that hath the ſteerage of my courſe,
Direét my ſuit. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet
Having got his veſſel launched and ſet afloat, he committed.
theſteerage of it to ſuch as he thought capable of conduéting
- Spectator.
His coſtly frame
Inſcrib'd to Phoebus, here he hung on high, -
The ſteerage of his wings, and cut the ſky. Dryden.
4. Regulation, or management of anything.
You raiſe the honour of the peerage, -
Proud to attend you at the ſteerage. Swift.
5. The ſtern or hinder part of the ſhip.
Stee'RsMAt E. l n.ſ. ſteer and man, or mate.] A pilot; one
STEE'RSMAN. } who ſteers a ſhip. -
What pilot ſo expert but needs muſt wreck, -
Embark'd with ſuch a ſteerſmate at the helm Miltºn.
In a ſtorm, though the veſſel be preſſed never ſo hard, a ſkil-
ful ſteerſman will yet bear up againſt it. - L'E/irange.
Through it the joyful ſteeiſman clears his way,
And comes to anchor in his inmoſt bay. Dryden. .
StegaNoſgraphist. n.ſ. [rizzº, and 7:42*] Hº who
pradiſes the art of ſecret writing. - Bailey.
STEGanography. n.ſ. ſºyzvē; and Y:4%.]. The art of
ſecret writing by characters or cyphers, intelligible only to the
perſons who correſpond one with another. Bailey.
STEGNo"Tick, adj. [; tyvilizès.] Binding; rendering co-
ſtive. - Bailey,
Ste'le. n.ſ. [rzela, Sax. ſtele, Dutch..] A ſtalk; a handle.
STELLAK. adj. [from ſtella.] Aſtral; relating to the ſtars.
In part ſhed down
Their ſtellar virtue, on all kinds that grow
On earth; made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the ſun's more potent ray.
25 E Salt
Milton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T E
S T E
ion, returns to its affected cubes, and
sº º '. hexagonal of chryſtal, and
regular figure. me aſteria. Glanville.
ST º º: Latin.] Pointed in the manner of
d º: a regulus of antimony, without iron, found
his ſº adorned with a more conſpicuous ſtar than I have
... in ſeveral ſtellate regulus's of antimony and mars. Boyle.
Srºll Aºrio N. m. ſ. [from ſtella.] Emiſſion of light as from a
sº adj. [ſella and ſero J. Having ſtars. - Dić7.
Stellion. n.ſ.. [ſ]ellio, Latin.] A newt. . . Ainſworth.
S+E'. Lion AT e. n ſ. [ſ]ellionat, French; ſtellionatus, Latin.]
A kind of crime which is committed [in law] by a deceitful
ſelling of a thing otherwiſe than it really is: as, if a man
ſhould ſell that for his own eſtate which is actually another
Innan S. -
it diſcerneth of crimes of ſtelliºnate, and the inchoàtions
towards crimes capital, not actually committed. Bacon.
STEM. m. ſ [femala, Latin.]
1. The ſtalk; the twig.
Two lovely berries molded on one ſtem,
So with two ſeeming bodies, but one heart. Shakeſpeare.
After they are firſt ſhot up thirty foot in length, they ſpread
a very large top, having no bough nor twig in the trunk or
fem. - Raleigh's Hiſtory of the Iſorld.
Set them aſlope a reaſonable depth, and then they will put
forth many roots, and ſo carry more ſhoots upon a ſtem. Bacºn.
This, ere it was in th' earth,
God made, and ev'ry herb, before it grew.
On the green ſtem. Milt. Parad Loft.
The jtem thus threaten’d and the ſap in thee,
Drops all the branches of that noble tree. Iſºaller:
Farewell, you flow’rs, whoſe buds with early care
I watch'd, and to the chearful ſun did rear:
Who now ſhall bind your ſtems ? or, when you fall,
With fountain ſtreams your fainting ſouls recall? Dryden.
The low'ring Spring with laviſh rain
Beats down the ſlender ſtem and bearded grain. I), ydºn.
2. Family; race; generation. Pedigrees are drawn in the form
of a branching tree.
This is a ſtem
Of that vićlorious ſtock, and let us fear
His native mightineſs. Shakespeare eare's Henry V.
I will aſſay her worth to celebrate,
And ſo attend ye toward her glittering ſtate;
Where ye may all, that are of noble ſtem,
Approach. Milton.
Whoſoever will undertake the imperial diadem, muſt have
of his own wherewith to ſupport it; which is one of the rea-
ſons that it hath continued theſe two ages and more in that
ſtem, now ſo much ſpoken of. Hºwel's Vºcal Foreſt.
Do'ſt thou in hounds aſpire to deathleſs fame?
Learn well their lineage and their ancient ſtem. Tickell.
3. [Stammen, Swediſh ) The prow or forepart of a ſhip.
Orante's barque, ev’n in the hero's view,
From ſtem to ſtern, by waves was overborn. Dryden.
To STEM. v. a. [ſtamma, Iſlandick.] To oppoſe a current;
to paſs croſs or forward notwithſtanding the ſtream.
They on the trading flood,
Through the wide Ethiopian to the cape
Ply, ſtemming nightly tow'rd the Pole. Mih. Par. Lºft.
Above the deep they raiſe their ſcaly creſts,
And ſtem the ſlood with their erected breafts. Denham.
In ſhipping ſuch as this, the Iriſh kern
And untaught Indian, on the ſtream did glide,
Ere ſharp-keel'd boats to ſtem the flood did learn,
Or fin-like oars did ſpread from either ſide. Dryden.
At length Eraſmus, that great injur'd name,
Stemm'd the wild torrent of a barb’rous age,
And drove thoſe holy Vandals off the ſtage. Pope.
STENCH. m. ſ...[from reencan, Saxon.]
1. A ſtink; a bad ſmell.
Death, death; ch amiable and lovely death!
Thou odoriferous ſtench, ſound rottenneſs,
Ariſe forth from thy couch of laſting night. Shakespeare K. john.
So bees with ſmoke, and doves with noiſome ſtench,
Are from their hives, and houſes, driv'n away. Shakeſpeare.
Phyſicians by the ſtench of feathers cure the riſing of the
mother. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The miniſtery will be found the ſalt of the earth, the only
thing that keeps ſocieties of men from ſtench and corruption.
South's S -
The hoary Nar, c?"/non1;
Qorrupted with the fench of ſulphur flows,
^* into Tiber's ſtreams th’ infected current th -
- TOWS. -
2. I find it uſed once for a good ſmell. ws. Addison
A black bulls and bearded goats on altars lic,
nd clouds of ſav'ry ſtench involve the ſk -
To ST ENch. v. a. [from the noun.] y. Dryden.
1. To make to ſlink.
The foulneſs of the Ponds only ſentheth the water. A ſortim.
~~
2. [For ſtaunch, corruptly..] To ſtop; to Hinder to flow. -
They had better ſkill to let blood than french it. K. Chari,
Reſtringents to ſtench and incraflatives to thicken the boºi,
w Harvey on Cºnſumpti,.
STE No'or APHY. m. ſ. ſ revos and y:zºw.] Short-hand."
O the accurſt ſtenºgraphy of ſtate
The princely eagle ſhrunk into a bat. Cleave and
STENT oropho'Nick, adj. [from Stentor, the Homerical her.
whoſe voice was as loud as that of fifty men, and 2.
voice.] Loudly ſpeaking or ſounding. T --- ay
Of this ſtentorºphonick horn of Alexander there is a figure
preſerved in the Vatican. Derham's Phyſico-T*. º
To STEP. v. n. [rzoeppan, Saxon; ſºappen, Dutch.] sy.
1. To move by a ſingle change of the place of the foot.
Whoſoever firſt after the troubling the water !tºpped in, was
made whole. - 9. W. 4.
One of our nation hath proceeded ſo far, that he was able
by the help of wings, in a running pace to ſtºp conſtantly tº
yards at a time. Wilkins's Math. Maº,
2. To advance by a ſudden progreſſion. C
Ventidius lately
Bury'd his father, by whoſe death he's ſtºpp'd
Into a great eſtate. Shakeſp. Timon of Athen,
3. To move mentally.
When a perſon is hearing a ſermon, he may give his
thoughts leave to ſtºp back ſo far as to recollect the ſeveral
heads. Wattſ.
They are ſtepping almoſt three thouſand years back into the
remoteſt antiquity, the only true mirrour of that ancient
world. Pope's Preface to the Iliad.
4. To go; to walk.
I am in blood
Stept in ſo far, that, ſhould I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o'er. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
The old poetsſtep in to the aſſiſtance of the medaliſt. Addison
5. To take a ſhort walk.
See where he comes: ſo pleaſe you, ſtep aſide;
I'll know his grievance. Shakespeare Romeo and julist,
My brothers, when they ſaw me wearied out,
Stºpp'd, as they ſaid, to the next thicket-ſide
To bring me berries. Miltºn.
When your maſter wants a ſervant who happens to be
abroad, anſwer, that he had but juſt that minute/tºpt out.
Swift's Directions to Servant.
6. To walk gravely and ſlowly.
Pyrrhus, the moſt ancient of all the baſhaws, ſept forth,
and, appealing unto his mercies, earneſtly requeſted him to
ſpare his life. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
When you ſtepp'd forth, how did the monſter rage,
In ſcorn of your ſoft looks and tender age! Cowley.
Home the ſwain retreats,
His flock before him ſtepping to the fold. Thomſºn's Summer.
STEP. n.ſ. [rcaep, Saxon; ſtap, Dutch.]
1. Progreſſion by one removal of the foot.
Thou ſound and firm-ſet earth, r
Hear not my ſteps, which way they walk. Shakespeare . Matt!.
Ling’ring perdition, worſe than any death
Can be at once, ſhall ſtep by ſtep attend *
You and your ways. Shakeſpeare's Temptſ,
Who was the firſt to explore th' untrodden path,
When life was hazarded in every ſtep 2 Addiſon's Catº.
2. One remove in climbing; hold for the foot; a ſtair. ...
While Solyman lay at Buda, ſeven bloody heads of biſhops,
ſlain in the battle, were all ſet in order upon a wooden ſºft.
(noles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The breadth of every ſingle ſtºp or ſtair ſhould be neºſ leſs
than one foot, nor more than eighteen inches. Mºtiºn.
Thoſe heights where William's virtue might have ſtaid,
And on the ſubjećt world look'd ſafely down,
By Marlbro’ paſs'd, the props and ſteps were made
Sublimer yet to raiſe his queen's renown. - - ll;
It was a ſaying among the ancients, truth lies in a we !
and, to carry on this metaphor, we may juſtly ſay, that º:
does ſupply us with ſtºps, whereby we may go down º
the water. l f:
3. Quantity of ſpace paſſed or meaſured by one removal of the
foot. *
The gradus, a Roman meaſure, may be tranſlated a ſº, or
the half of a paſſus or pace. Arbuthnot on Cºinſ.
4. A ſmall length; a ſmall ſpace.
There is but a ſtep between me and death. I Sa. xx. 3.
5. Walk; paſſage. - - -
O may thy pow'r, propitious ſtill to me,
Conduct my fieps to find the fatal tree
In this deep º dvanci
. Progreſſion; ačt of advancing. - -
6 Pº dº two or three º principles of motion from
phaenomena, and afterwards to tell us how the properties º
actions of all corporeal things follow from thoſe º º
principles, would be a very great ſtep in tºº, *
the cauſes of thoſe principles were not yet diſcovered. Nºw”
One
Prior.
Dryden's Æn,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T E
* ,
--
*
e.
---
--
One injury is beſt defended by a ſecond, and this by a third:
by theſe ſtºps the old maſters of the palace in France became
maſters of the kingdom; and by theſe ſteps a general, during
pleaſure, might have grown into a general for life, and a ge-
neral for life into a kings Swift.
The queriſt muſt not proceed too ſwiftly towards the deter-
mination of his point, that he may with more eaſe draw the
learner to thoſe principles ſtep by ſtep, from whence the final
concluſion will ariſe, JWatts.
7. Footſtep; print of the foot.
From hence Aſtrea took her flight, and here
The prints of her departing ſteps appear. Dryden's Virgil.
8. Gait; manner of walking.
Sudden from the golden throne
With a ſubmiſſive ſtep I haſted down;
The glowing garland from my hair I took,
Love in my heart, obedience in my look. Prior.
9. Aëtion; inſtance of condućt.
The reputation of a man depends upon the firſt ſteps he
makes in the world. Pope.
STEP, in compoſition, ſignifies one who is related only by mar-
riage. [Sceop, Saxon, from repan, to deprive or make an or-
phan : for the Saxons not only ſaid a ſtep-mother, but a ſtep-
daughter, or ſtep-ſon; to which it indeed, according to this
etymology, more properly belongs: but as it is now ſeldom
applied but to the mother, it ſeems to mean, in the mind of
thoſe who uſe it, a woman who has ſtepped into the vacant
place of the true mother.]
How ſhould their minds chuſe but miſdoubt, leſt this diſci-
pline, which always you match with divine doćtrine as her
natural and true ſiſter, be found unto all kinds of knowledge
a ſtep-mother. Hooker.
His wanton ſtep-dame loved him the more;
But when ſhe ſaw her offered ſweets refuſe,
Her love ſhe turn'd to hate. Fairy Queen.
You ſhall not find me, daughter,
After the ſlander of moſt ſtep-mothers,
Ill-ey'd unto you. Shakeſ Cymbeline.
A father cruel, and a ſtep-dame falſe. Shakeſpeare.
Cato the elder, being aged, buried his wife, and married
a young woman: his ſon came to him, and ſaid, Sir, what
have I offended, that you have brought a ſtep-mother into your
houſe? The old man anſwered, Nay, quite the contrary, ſon;
thou pleaſeſt me ſo well, as I would be glad to have more
ſuch. Bacon,
The name of ſtep-dame, your praétis'd art,
By which you have eſtrang'd my father's heart,
All you have done againſt me, or deſign,
Shows your averſion, but begets not mine. Dryd. Aurengz:
Aſtep-dame too I have, a curſed ſhe,
Who rules my hen-peck'd fire, and orders me. Dryden.
Any body would have gueſſed miſs to have been bred up
under the influence of a cruel ſtep-dame, and John to be the
fondling of a tender mother. Arbuthn. Hiſt. of John Bull.
St E(pp1Ngston E. m. ſ. [ſtep and ſtone..] Stone laid to catch
the foot, and ſave it from wet or dirt.
Like ſteppingſtones to ſave a ſtride,
In ſtreets where kennels are too wide. Swift.
STERco RA'ceous. adj. [ſtercoraceus, Latin. J Belonging to
dung; partaking of the nature of dung.
Green juicy vegetables, in a heap together, acquire a heat
equal to that of a human body; then a putrid ſtercoraceous
taſte and odour, in taſte reſembling putrid fleſh, and in ſmell
human feces. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
STER cor ATION. m. ſ. [from ſtercºra, Latin.] The act of
dunging; the act of manuring with dung.
The firſt help is ſercoration: the ſheeps dung is one of the
beſt, and next the dung of kine, and that of horſes. ... Bacon.
Stercoration is ſeaſonable. Evelyn's Kalendar.
The exteriour pulp of the fruit ſerves not only for the ſecu-
rity of the ſeed, whilſt it hangs upon the plant, but, after it is
falſen upon the earth, for the ſtercoration of the ſoil, and pro-
motion of the growth, though not the firſt germination of the
ſeminal plant. Ray on the Creation.
STEREo'c's Aphy. n.ſ. [ript); and yºzºo; ſtereographic, Fr.]
The art of drawing the forms of ſolids upon a plane. Harris:
STEREO’METRY. n.ſ. ſysétº: and pasſé ſtereometrie, French.]
The art of meaſuring all ſorts of ſolid bodies. Harris.
STERIL. adj. [/ſerie, French; ſterilis, Latin J Barren; un-
fruitful; not produćtive; wanting fecundity.
Our elders ſay,
The barren, touched in this holy chaſe,
Shake off their ſteril curſe. Shakespeare. julius Cæſar.
Thy ſea margeſteril, and rocky hard. Shakespeare Tempſt.
In very ſteril years corn ſown will grow to another kind.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To ſeparate ſeeds, put them in water: ſuch as are corrupted
and ſteril ſwim. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
She is grown ſteril and barren, and her births of animals
are now very inconfiderable. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
When the vegetative ſtratum was once waſhed off by rains,
the hills would have become barren, the ſtrata below yield-
S T E
ing only mere ſterile and mineral matter, ſuch as was inept for
the formation of vegetables. Iſoodward.
STER (lity. n.ſ.. [Jerilité, French; ſerilitas, from ſterilis,
Latin.] Barrenneſs; want of fecundity; unfruitfulneſs.
Spain is thin ſown of people, by reaſon of the ſterility of
the ſoil, and becauſe their natives are exhauſted by ſo many
employments in ſuch vaſt territories. Bacon's Iſar with Spain.
An eternal ſterility muſt have poſſeſſed the world, where all
things had been faſtened everlaſtingly with the adamantine
chains of ſpecifick gravity, if the Almighty had not ſaid, Let
the earth bring forth graſs, the herb yielding ſeed, and the
fruit-tree yielding fruit. Bentley's Sermons.
He had more frequent occaſion for repetition than any poet;
yet one cannot aſcribe this to any ſterility of expreſſion, but to
the genius of his times, which delighted in theſe reiterated
verſes. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
To STE’RILIZE. v. a. [from ſteril.] To make barren; to de-
prive of fecundity, or the power of produćtion.
May we not as well ſuppoſe the ſterilizing the earth was
ſuſpended for ſome time, ’till the deluge became the execu-
tioner of it? Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Go! ſterilize the fertile with thy rage. Savage.
STE’RLING. adj. [Of this word many derivations have been
offered; the moſt probable of which is that offered by Cam-
den, who derives it from the Eaſterlings, who were employed
as coiners.]
1. An epithet by which genuine Engliſh money is diſcriminated.
The king's treaſure of ſtore, that he left at his death,
amounted unto eighteen hundred thouſand pounds ſterling.
Bacon's Henry VII.
Several of them would rather chuſe to count out a ſum in
ſeſterces than in pounds ſterling. - Addiſon.
2. Genuine; having paſt the teſt.
There is not one ſingle witty phraſe in this collečtion,
which hath not received the ſtamp and approbation of one
hundred years: he may therefore be ſecure to find them all
genuine, ſterling, and authentick Swift's Polte Converſation,
STE’RLING. m. ſ. [ſterlingum, low Lat. from the adjective.]
1. Engliſh coin; money.
This viſionary various projećts tries,
And knows that to be rich is to be wiſe:
By uſeful obſervation he can tell
The ſacred charms that in true ſterling dwell;
How gold makes a patrician of a ſlave,
A dwarf an Atlas, a Therſites brave, Garth.
Great name, which in our rolls recorded ſtands,
Leads honours, and protećts the learned bands,
Accept this offering to thy bounty due,
And Roman wealth in Engliſh ſterling view. C. Arbuthnot.
2. Standard rate. -
STERN. aaj. [rzynn, Saxon.]
1. Severe of countenance; truculent of aſpect.
Why look you ſtill ſo ſtern and tragical. Shakespeare H. VI.
I would outſtare the ſterneſt eyes that look,
Outbrave the heart moſt daring on the earth,
Pluck the young ſucking cubs from the ſhe-bear,
Yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey,
To win thee, lady. Shakespeare Merchant of Penice.
It ſhall not be amiſs here to preſent the ſtern but lively coun-
tenance of this ſo famous a man. Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
Gods and men
Fear'd her ſtern frown, and ſhe was queen o' th' woods. Milt.
2. Severe of manners; harſh; unrelenting; cruel.
My ſometime general,
I've ſeen thee ſtern, and thou haſt oft beheld -
Heart-hard'ning ſpectacles. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Women are ſoft, mild, pitiful, and flexible;
Thou ſtern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorſeleſs. Shake?.
The common executioner,
whoſe heart th' accuſtom'd fight of death makes hard,
Falls not the ax upon the humbled neck,
But firſt begs pardon: will you ſterner be
Than he that deals and lives by bloody drops? Shakespeare  are:
Did this in Caeſar ſeem ambitious?
When that the poor have cry'd, Caeſº, ºth ºf . , , .
Ambition ſhould be made of fºrmer ſtuff. , ºft. Jºkº
Then ſhall the war, and ſtern debate and ſtrife
Immortal, be the º life;
And in thy fane the duſly ſpoils among”
High on #: burniſh'd lº my banner ſhall be hung. Dryd.
How ſtern as tutors, and as uncles hard, . •
we laſ, the pupil and defraud the ward. Dryden's Perſ.
- - airlicti We, -
3 Haº; sº had at thy gate howl'd that ſtern time,
Thou ſhouldſt have ſaid, Go, Portº, "" the key,
All cruels elſe ſubſcribd. Shakespeare . King Lear.
STERN. n.ſ. [rzeon, Saxºn. Of the ſame original with ſteer.)
1. The hind part of the ſhip where the rudder is placed.
Let a barbarous Indian, who had never ſeen a ſhip, view the
ſeparate and disjointed parts, as the prºw and ſtern, the ribs,
maſts, ropes, and throud, he would form but a very lane
idea of it. I/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
. They<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T E
S T I
They turn their heads to ſea, their ſterns to land. Dryd.
Poſt of management : dire:tion.
2. I’O The king from Eltam I intend to ſend, r
And it at chicſeſiſtern of publick weal. Shakespeare . H. VI.
The hinder part of anything. -
3. 1 º all * once her beaſily body raiſed,
With doubled forces high above the ground,
Though wrapping up her wreathed ſtern around. Fa. Queen.
STE'RN AGE. m. ſ. [from ſtern.] The ſteerage or ſtern. Not
uſed. -
Grapple your minds to ſternage of this navy,
And . ... England as dead midnight ſtill. Shakeſpeare.
STE’RNLY., adj. [from ſtern..] In a ſtern manner; ſeverely ;
truculently. A h d
Sternly he pronounc' • *, *
The rigid interdićtion. Milton's Parad. Loſt.
Yet ſure thou art not, northy face the ſame,
Northy limbs moulded in ſo ſoft a frame;
Thou look'ſt more ſternly, do'ſt more ſtrongly move,
And more of awe thou bear'ſt, and leſs of love. Dryden.
St E'RNN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſtern.]
1. Severity of look.
Of ſtature huge, and eke of courage bold,
That ſons of men amaz'd their ſternneſ to behold. Spenſºr.
How would he look to ſee his work ſo noble
Wildly bound up! or how -
Should I, in theſe my borrow'd flaunts, behold
The ſternneſ of his preſenceſ Shakeſpeare. .
2. Severity or harſhneſs of manners.
I have ſternmºſ in my ſoul enough
To hear of ſoldiers work.
STE'RNoN. n.ſ. [riºvoy.] The breaſt-bone.
A ſoldier was ſhot in the breaſt through the ſermon. Wiſeman.
STER’s tº Aºtion. m. ſ. [ſternutatio, Latin. J The act of
ſneezing.
**ſatiºn is a convulſive ſhaking of the nerves and muſ.
cles, firſt occaſioned by an irritation of thoſe in the º:
9tuincy.
Dryden's Cleomenes.
Concerning ſternutation, or ſneezing, and the cuſtom of
ſaluting upon that motion, it is generally believed to derive its
original from a diſeaſe wherein ſternitation proved mortal,
and ſuch as ſneezed died. Brown's Wugar Errours.
STERNu'tative. adj. [/*ermutatiſ, Fr. from ſternuto, Latin.]
Having the quality of ſneezing.
STERNU/TATóR Y. m. ſ: [/ternutatoire, Fr. from fernute, Lat.]
Medicine that provokes to ſneeze. º
Phyſicians, in perſons near death, uſe fernutatories, or ſuch
medicines as provoke unto ſneezing; when if the faculty ariſe,
and ſternutation enſueth, they conceive hopes of life. Brown.
STEVEN. m. ſ. [rceren, Saxon.] A cry, or loud clamour,
Ne ſooner was out, but ſwifter than thought,
Faſt by the hide, the wolf Lowder caught;
And had not Roſſy renne to the ſteven,
Lowder had been ſlain thiſke ſame even. Spenſºr.
To STEw. v. a. [eſtaver, French; ſtoven, Dutch.]
To ſeeth anything in a ſlow moſt heat.
Fº I was riſen from the place, that ſhowd
My duty kneeling, came a reeking poſt,
Stew'd in his haſte, half breathleſ. Shakſº. King Lear.
! bruiſed my ſkin with playing at ſword and dagger with a
maſter of fence, three Vºneys for a diſh of ſtew’d prunes. Sº,
To STEw. v. n. To be feetfied inaſ, moiſt heat.
STEW m. ſ. [eſtave, French; Jºſa, Italian; ºftuſa, Spaniſh.]
I. A bagnio; a hot-houſe.
As burning Ætna from his boiling ſtew
Doth belch out flames, and rocks in pieces broke,
Andragged ribs of mountains molten new,
Enwrapt in coal-black cloud. and filthy ſmoke. Fa. Sºueen.
The Lydians were inhibited by Cyrus to uſe any ar.
"ºr, and give themſelves to baths and ſtews. Abbot.
* A brothel; a houſe of proſtitut. [This ſignification is by
ſome imputed to this, that there were licenſ. brothels near
the ſtews or fiſhponds in Southwark; but probably ſtew, like
bagnio, took a bad ſignification from bad uſe.]
There be that hate harlots, and never were at the ſtews; that
abhor falſhood, and never brake promiſe. Žºm.
My buſineſs in this flat.
Made me a looker-on here in Vienna,
Yº I have ſeen corruption boil and bubble,
Hill it o'er-run the ſtew. Shakeſpeare.
- With them there aré noſtews, no diſſolute houſes, ſº
teſans. Bacon's New Atlanti.
Her, though ſeven years ſhe in the ſtew, had laid,
"nery durſt receive and think a maid
And though in childbirth's labour ſhe did lie,
Wº: would ſwear 'twere but a tympany. Donne.
W at mod’rate fop would rake thé park or ſtews,
9 among *Ps of faultleſs nymphs. huſe? Roſ.
aking his own houſ "ymphs can chuſe? Rºſam.
lewdneſs,” ouſe a ſtews, a bordel, and a ſchool of
- * *ill the rudiſ. of vice i
- Vice into th
flexible years of his poor children. sº §.
3. ſ.Stºve", Dutch, to ſtore.] A ſtorepond; a ſm.” Pond where
fiſh are kept for the table.
STEVARD. m. ſ. ſirraº, Saxon.]
1. One who manages the affairs of another,
There ſat yolad in red,
Down to the ground, a comely perſonage,
That in his hand a white ród managed;
He ſteward was, hight dict, ripe of age,
And in demeanour ſoter, and in council ſige, Pa. ºur.
Wººl have gold, I'll be his ſºward ſi's...}.
Take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land;
Not as protector, ſteward, ſubſtitute,
Or lowly factor for another's gain. Shakeſ Richard III.
How is it that I hear this of thee? Give an account of thy
ſtewardſhip; for thou mayeſt be no longer ſteward. L. xvi.
When a ſteward defrauds his lord, he muſt connive at the
reſt of the ſervants while they are following the ſame prac-
tice. Swift.
What can be a greater honour than to be choſen one of the
feward, and diſpenſers of God's bounty to mankind? What
can give a generous ſpirit more complacency than to confider,
that great numbers owe to him, under God, their ſubſiſtence,
and the good condućt of their lives? Swift.
2. An officer of ſtate. *
The duke of Suffolk is the firſt, and claims
To be high ſteward. Shakeſ eart.
Stºw ARDSHIP. m. ſ. [ from ſº ward. J The office of a
ſteward.
The earl of Worceſter
Hath broke his ſtaff, reſign'd his ftewardſhip. Shakespeare R.I.
Shew us the hand of God …”
That hath diſmiſs'd us from our ſtewardſhip. Shakeſpeare.
If they are not employed to ſuch purpoſes, we are jº to
our truſt, and the ſtewardſhip committed to us, and ſhall be
one day ſeverely accountable to God for it. Calamy's Sermons,
STI'BIAL. adj. [from ſtilium, Latin.] Antimonial.
The former depend upon a corrupt incinerated melancholy,
and the latter upon an aduſt ſtilial or eruginous ſulphur. Harº.
Śrī'cADos. m.ſ. [ſlicadis, Latin.] Anhº, Ainſworth,
Stick. m. ſ. [rzicca, Saxon; ſtºcco, Italian; teck, Dutch..] A
piece of wood ſmall and long.
Onions as they hang will ſhoot forth, and ſo will the herb
orpin, with which in the country they trim their houſes, bind-
ing it to a lath or ſtick ſet againſ awaii. Fº, N. Hiſtory.
Some ſtrike from claſhing flints their fiery ſeed,
Some gather ſticks the kindled flames toº. Dryden.
To STICK. v. a. preterite Jiac: ; participle paſſ ſtuck. [rican,
Saxon.] To faſten on ſo as that it may adhere.
Two troops in fair array one moment ſhow'd;
The next, a field with falſen bodies frowd.
The points of ſpears are ſtuck within the ſhield,
The feeds without their riders ſcour the field,
The knights unhors'd, Dryden.
Would our ladies, inſtead of ſticking on a patch againſt
their country, ſacrifice their necklaces againſt the common
*nemy, what decrees ought not to be made in their fa-
Wour f Addiſon.
Oh for ſome pedant reign,
Some gentle James to bleſs the and again;
To ſlick the doćtor's chair unto the throne,
Give law to words, or war with words alone. Pºpe,
To Stick. v. n. -
1. To adhere; to unite itſelf by its tenacity or penetrating
power. -
I will cauſe the fiſh of thy rivers to ſtick unto thy ſcales. Ez.
The green caterpillar breedeth in the inward parts of roſes
not blown, where the dew ſticketh. Bacon.
Though the ſword be put into the ſheath, we muſt not ſuſ.
fer it there to ruſt, or ſtick ſo faſt as that we ſhall not be able
to draw it readily, when need requires. - Raleigh.
2. To be inſeparable; to be united with any thing. Generally
in an ill ſenſe. feel
Now does he fee
His ſecret murthers ſticking on his hands. Shakesp. 4.
He is often ſtigmatized with it, as a note of infamy, to ſtic
by him whilſt the world laſteth. - Samſº
In their quarrels they proceed to calling names, ’till they
light upon one that is ſure to ſtick. Swijt,
. To reſt upon the memory painfully. -
3 #. º away of that which had ſtaid ſo long, doth yet
ſick with me Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
4. To ſtop; to loſe motion.
I ſhudder at the name ! fault'ri
My blood runs backward, and my fault'ring tongue .
§. at the ſound. &gt; Smith's Phaedra and Hippolitus.
5. To reſiſt emiſſion.
Wherefore could I not pronounce amen
I had moſt need of bleſfing, and amen ..?
Stuck in my throat. Shakeſp. Macleth.
7 6. To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T I
6. To be conſtant; to adhere with firmneſs. -
The knave will ſtick by thee, I can aſſure thee that: he will
not out, he is true bred. Shakeſpeare's Hºnry IV.
The firſt contains a ſticking faſt to Chriſt, when the Chriſ-
tian profeſſion is perſecuted ; and the ſecond a riſing from fin,
as he roſe, to a new Chriſtian life. Hammond.
Some ſtick to you, and ſome to tºother ſide. Dryden.
They could not but conclude, that to be their intereſt, and
being ſo convinced, purſue it and ſick to it. Tillotſºn.
The advantage will be on our ſide, if we ſtick to its eſſen-
tials. Addiſon's Freeholder.
7. To be troubleſome by adhering.
I am ſatisfied to trifle away my time, rather than let it ſtick
by me. Pope's Letters.
Ś. To remain; not to be loſt.
Proverbial ſentences are formed into a verſe, whereby they
ſick upon the memory. Aſ atts.
!. To dwell upon; not to forſake.
If the matter be knotty, the mind muſt ſtop and buckle to
it, and ſtick upon it with labour and thought, and not leave
it ’till it has maſtered the difficulty. Lºcke.
Every man, beſides occaſional affections, has beloved ſtu-
dies which the mind will more cloſely ſtick to. Locke.
10. To cauſe difficultics or ſcruple.
This is the difficulty that ſticks with the moſt reaſonable
of thoſe who, from conſcience, refuſe to join with the Revo-
lution. Swift.
11. To ſcruple; to heſitate.
It is a good point of cunning for a man to ſhape the anſwer
he would have in his own words and propoſitions; for it makes
the other party ſtic; the leſs. Bacon.
The church of Rome, under pretext of expoſition of Scrip-
ture, doth not ſtick to add and alter. Bacon.
Rather than impute our miſcarriages to our own corruption,
we do not ſlick to arraign providence itſelf. L’Eſtrange.
Every one without heſitation ſuppoſes eternity, and ſticks
not to aſcribe infinity to duration. Locke.
That two bodies cannot be in the ſame place is a truth
that no body any more ſticks at, than at this maxim, that it is
impoſſible for the ſame thing to be, and not to be. Locke.
To ſtick at nothing for the publick intereſt is repreſented as
the refined part of the Venetian wiſdom. Addiſon on Italy.
Someſtick not to ſay, that the parſon and attorney forged a
will. Arbuthnot.
12. To be ſtopped; to be unable to proceed.
If we ſhould fail.
We fail -
But ſcrew your courage to the ſticking place,
And we'll not fail. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
They never doubted the commons; but heard all ſtuck in
the lords houſe, and deſired the names of thoſe who hindered
the agreement between the lords and commons. Clarendon.
He threw : the trembling weapon paſs'd }
Through nine bull-hides, each under other plac'd
On his broad ſhield, and ſtuck within the laſt.
13. To be embarraſſed; to be puzzled.
Where they ſtick, they are not to be farther puzzled by
putting them upon finding it out themſelves. Locke.
They will ſtick long at part of a demonſtration, for want of
perceiving the connexion of two ideas, that, to one more
exerciſed, is as viſible as any thing. Locke.
Souls a little more capacious can take in the connexion of
a few propoſitions; but if the chain be prolix, here they ſtick
and are confounded. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
14. Tº Stick out. To be prominent with deformity.
His fleſh is conſumed away that it cannot be ſeen, and his
bones that were not ſeen ſtick out. job xxxiii. 21.
15. To Stick out. To be unemployed.
To Stick. v. a. [rtician, Saxon; ſteen, Dutch.]
1. To ſlab; to pierce with a pointed inſtrument.
The Heruli, when their old kindred fell ſick, ſuck them
with a dagger. Grew.
2. To fix upon a pointed body.
3. To faſten by transfixion.
Her death ! - .
I'll ſtand betwixt: it firſt ſhall pierce my heart:
We will be ſtuck together on his dart. Dryd. Tyran. Lºve.
4. To ſet with ſomething pointed.
A lofty pile they rear;
The fabrick's front with cypreſs twigs they ſtrew,
And ſtick the fides with boughs of baleful yew. Dryden.
Sri'cKIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſticky.] Adheſive quality; viſcoſity;
glutinouſneſs; tenacity.
To STICKLE. v. m. [from the pračice of prizefighters, who
placed ſeconds with ſtavcº or ſticks to interpoſe occaſionally.]
1. To take part with one ſide or other.
- Fortune, as ſhe's wont, turn'd fickle,
And for the foe began to ſickle. Hudibras.
2. To conteſt; to altercate; to contend rather with obſtimacy
than vehemence.
Let them go to t, and ſickle,
Whether a conclave, or a conventicle.
Dryden.
Craveland.
S T' I
Heralds ſtickle, who got who, -
So many hundred years ago. Hadibrar.
3. Tº trim; to play faſt and looſe; to ad a part between op-
poſites.
When he ſees half of the Chriſtians killed, and the reſt in
*** way of being routed, he ſtickles betwixt the remainder of
S º hoſt and the '. of tº: Dryden's juv. Dedication.
T LEB AG. 77. ſ. |Properly ſlick t; ... 1
The ſmalleſt of | lºſiº, from ſtick, to prick.J.
A little fiſh called a ſtickelag, without ſcales, hath his body
fenced with ſeveral prickles. Walton's Angler.
ST1'ckLF R. m. ſ. [from ſtickle.]
I. A fideſman to fencers; a ſecond to a duelliſt; one who ſlands
to judge a combat. -
Baſilius came to part them, the ſtickler's authority being un-
able to perſuade cholerick hearers; and part them he did. Siºn.
Baſilius, the judge, appointed ſticklers and trumpets,
whom the others ſhould obey. pets;
Sidney.
Our former chiefs, like ſtickers of the war,
Firſt fought tº inflame the parties, then to poiſe:
The quarrel lov’d, but did the cauſe abhor;
And did not ſtrike to hurt, but made a noiſe. Dryden.
2. An obſtinate contender about anything.
Quercetanus, though the grand ſtickler for the tria prima,
has this conceſſion of the irreſolubleneſs of diamonds. Doyle.
The inferior tribe of common women have, in moſt reigns,
been the profeſſed ſticklers for ſuch as have ačted againſt the .
true intereſt of the nation. Addiſn’s Freehºlder.
The tory or high church clergy were the greateſt ſtickers
againſt the exorbitant proceedings of king James II. Swift.
All place themſelves in the liſt of the national church,
though they are great ſticklers for liberty of conſcience. Swift.
Sticky. adj. [from ſtick.] Viſcous; adheſive; glutinous.
Herbs which laſt longeſt are thoſe of ſtrong ſmell and with
a ſticky ſtalk. Bacon's Nataral Hiſtory.
STIFF, adj [rzip, Saxon; ſtiff, Daniſh; ſty, Swediſh; ſtifur,
Iſlandick; ſif, Dutch J
1. Rigid ; inflexible; reſiſting flexure; not flaccid; not limber;
not eaſily flexible; not pliant.
They riſing on ſtiff pinions tower
The mid aerial ſky. Milton.
The glittering robe
Hung floating looſe, or ſtiff with mazy gold. Thomſºn.
2. Not ſoft; not giving way; not fluid; not eaſily yielding to
the touch.
Still leſs and leſs my boiling ſpirits flow;
And I grow ſtiff as cooling metals do. Dryd. Indian Emp.
Mingling with that oily liquor, they were wholly incorpo-
rate, and ſo grew more ſtiff and firm, making but one ſub-
ſtance. Burnet's Theºry of the Earth.
3. Strong; not eaſily reſiſted.
On a ſtiff gale
The Theban ſwan extends his wings.
4. Hardy; ſtubborn; not eaſily ſubdued.
How ſtiff is my vile ſenſe,
That I ſtand up, and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge ſorrows! Better I were diſtract! Shakeſ are:
5. Obſtinate; pertinacious.
We neither allow unmeet nor purpoſe the ſtiff defence of
any unneceſſary cuſtom heretofore received. Hooker.
Yield to others when there is cauſe; but it is a ſhame to
ſtand ſtiff in a fooliſh argument. Taylor.
A war enſues, the Cretans own their cauſe,
Stiff to defend their hoſpitable laws.
6. Harſh; not written with eaſe; conſtrained.
7. Formal; rigorous in certain ceremonies; not diſengaged in
behaviour; ſtarched; affected.
The French are open, familiar, and talkative ; the Italians
ſtiff, ceremonious, and reſerved. Addison on Italy.
8. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems to mean ſtrongly maintained, or aſ-
ſerted with good cvidence.
This is ſtiff news.
To STI'FF EN. v. a. [reiplan, Saxon] -
1. To make ſtiff; to make inflexible; to make unpliant.
When the blaſt of war blows i. º: ears,
Stiffºn the finews, ſummon up the blood,
#: fair nature with hard favour'd rage. Shakespeare  H. v.
He ſtiffned his neck, and hardened his heart from turning
unto the Lord. 2 Chron, xxxvi. 13.
The poor, by them diſrobed, naked lie,
Veird with no ºther covering but the ſky; -
Expos'd to ſtiff’ning froſis, and drenching ſhowers, -/.
which thiékém'd air from her black boſom pours. Sandy:.
Her eyes grow ſtiffºn'd, and with ſulphur burn. Dryden.
2. To make Öbſtinate. . . ief
Her ſtiff’ning grief,
Who ſaw her {{..., ſlaughter'd all at once,
Was dull to mine. Dryden and Let,
p N. J. 77. -
Tºfi, º iš. to grow rigid; to become unpliant.
‘Āghaſt, aſtoniſh'd, and ſtruck dumb with fear,
Iſ...j, ſike briſtles roſe myſtiff'ning hair. Dyden;
25 F Fix'd
Denham.
D ryden.
Shakeſpeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T I
S T I
Fix'd in afloniſhment I gaze upon thee,
Like one juſt blaſted by a ſtroke from heaven,
Who pants for breath, and ſtiffens yet alive;
In dreadful looks, a monument of wrath. Addiſon's Cato.
2. To grow hard; to be hardened.
The tender ſoil, then ſtiffening by degrees,
Shut from the bounded earth the bounding ſeas. Dryden.
3. To grow leſs ſuſceptive of impreſſion; to grow obſtinate.
Some ſouls, we ſee,
Grow hard and ſtiffin with adverſity. Dryden.
STIFFHEARTED. adj [ſtiff and heart. J Obſtinate; ſtub-
born; contumacious.
They are impudent children, and ſtiffhearted. Ezek, ii.
Sti'FFLY, adv. [from ſtiff.] Rigidly; inflexibly; ſtubbornly.
In matters divine, it is ſtill maintained ſtiffly, that they have
no ſtiffnecked force. Hooker.
I commended them that ſtood ſo ſtiff, for the Lord. 2 Eſdr.
The Indian fig of itſelf multiplieth from root to root, the
plenty of the ſap and the ſoftneſs of the ſtalk making the bough,
being overloaden and not ſtifty upheld, to weigh down. Bacon.
Sti'FFN Ecked. adj. [ſtiff and neck.] Stubborn ; obſtinate;
COntumacious.
An infinite charge to her majeſty, to ſend over ſuch an
army as ſhould tread down all that ſtandeth before them on
foot, and lay on the ground all the ſtiffnecked. Spenſer.
This ſtiffneck'd pride, nor art nor force can bend,
Nor high-flown hopes to reaſon's lure deſcend. Denham.
Sti'FFNEss. n.ſ.. [from ſtiff.]
1. Rigidity; inflexibility; hardneſs; ineptitude to bend.
The ſtiffneſ, and dryneſs of iron to melt, muſt be holpen by
moiſtening or opening it. - Bacon.
The willow bows and recovers, the oak is ſtubborn and in-
flexible; and the puniſhment of that ſtiffneſ, is one branch of
the allegory. - L’Eſtrange.
2. Ineptitude to motion.
The pillars of this frame grow weak,
My finews ſlacken, and an icy ſtiffneſs
Benumbs my blood. Denham.
3. Tenſion; not laxity.
To try new ſhrouds, one mounts into the wind,
And one below, their eaſe or ſtiffneſs notes. Dryden.
4. Obſtinacy; ſtubbornneſs; contumaciouſneſs.
The vices of old age have the ſtiffneſ of it too; and as
it is the unfitteſt time to learn in, ſo the unfitneſs of it to un-
learn will be found much greater. South's Sermons.
Firmneſs or ſtiffneſs of the mind is not from adherence to
truth, but ſubmiſſion to prejudice. Locke.
Theſe hold their opinions with the greateſt ſtiff.eſ ; being
generally the moſt fierce and firm in their tenets. Locke.
5. Unpleaſing formality; conſtraint.
All this religion ſat eaſily upon him, without any of that
ſtiffneſs and conſtraint, any of thoſe forbidding appearances
which diſparage the actions of the ſincerely pious. Alterbury.
6. Rigorouſneſs; harſhneſs.
There fill yourſelf with thoſe moſt joyous ſights;
But ſpeak no word to her of theſe ſad plights,
Which her too conſtant ſtiffneſ, doth conſtrain. Spenſer.
7. Manner of writing, not eaſy but harſh and conſtrained.
Rules and critical obſervations improve a good genius,
where nature leadeth the way, provided he is not too ſcrupu-
lous; for that will introduce a ſtiffneſs and affectation, which
are utterly abhorrent from all good writing. Felton.
To Stifle. v. a. ſºftoufer, French.]
1. To oppreſs or kill by cloſeneſs of air; to ſuffocate.
Where have you been broiling
—Among the croud i' th' abbey, where a finger
Cou'd not be wedg'd in more; I am ſhifted
With the mere rankneſs of their joy. Shakeſpeare.
Pray’r againſt his abſolute decree,
No more avails than breath againſt the wind;
Blown ſifting back on him that breathes it forth. Milton.
That part of the air that we drew out, left the more room
for the ſtifting ſteams of the coals to be received into it. Boyle.
Stified with kiſſes a ſweet death he dies. Dryden.
At one time they keep their patients ſo cloſe and warm, as
almoſt to ſtiffe them with care; and all on a ſudden, the
cold regimen is in vogue. Baker.
I took my leave, being half ſtifted with the cloſeneſs of the
r00m. Swift's Account of Partridge's Death.
2. To keep in ; to hinder from emiſſion.
Whilſt bodies become coloured by refle&amp;ting or tranſmitting
this or that ſort of rays more copiouſly than the reſt, they ſtop
and ſtiffe in themſelves the rays which they do not refle&amp;t or
tranſmit. Newton's Opticks.
3. To extinguiſh by hindering communication.
4. To extinguiſh by artful or gentle means.
Every reaſonable man will pay a tax with chearfulneſs for
fifting a civil war in its birth. Addison's Freeholder.
5. To ſºppreſs; to conceal.
If 't prove thy fortune, Polydore, to conquer,
Truſt me, and let me know thy love's ſucceſs,
That I may ever after Jºſie mine, Otway's Orphan,
Theſe concluſions have been acknowledged by the diſputers
themſelves, till with labour and ſtudy they had ſtifted their firſt
convićtions. ageri,
You excel in the art of ſtifting and concealing your reſent-
ment. Swift.
STIGMA. m.ſ. [ſtigma, Latin.]
1. A brand; a mark with a hot iron.
2. A mark of infamy.
Sric MA'ſ IcAl. adj. [from ſtigma.] Branded or marked
STI'GMATICK. ; with ſome token of infamy.
Foul ſtigmatick, that's more than thou can'ſt tell. Shah.
Thou'rt like a foul miſhapen ſtigmatick,
Mark'd by the deſtinies to be avoided. Shakespeare eare,
He is deformed, crooked, old and ere,
Vicious, ungentle, fooliſh, blunt, unkind,
Stigmatical in making, worſe in mind. Shakeſpeare.
To St I’d Matize. v. a. [ſtigmatiſer, French, from ſigma.]
To mark with a brand; to diſgrace with a note of re-
proach.
Men of learning who take to buſineſs, diſcharge it with
greater honeſty than men of the world; becauſe the former in
reading have been uſed to find virtue extolled and vice fig-
matized, while the latter have ſeen vice triumphant and virtue
diſcountenanced. Addiſon.
Sour enthuſiaſts affect to ſtigmatize the fineſt and moſt cle-
gant authors both ancient and modern, as dangerous to reli.
gion. Addiſon's Freehºlder.
The privileges of juries ſhould be aſcertained, and who-
ever violates them ſtigmatized by publick cenſure. Swift.
Sti'l AR. adj. [from ſtile.] Belonging to the ſtile of a
dial.
At fifty one and a half degrees, which is London's latitude,
make a mark, and laying a ruler to the center of the plane and
to this mark, draw a line for the ſtilar line. Mºxon.
STILE. m. ſ. [rtizele, from reigan, Sax. to climb.]
1. A ſet of ſteps to paſs from one encloſure to another.
There comes my maſter and another gentleman from Frog.
mare over the ſtile this way. Shakespeare.
If they draw ſeveral ways, they be ready to hang themſelves
upon every gate or ſtile they come at. L'Eſtrange.
The little ſtrutting pile,
You ſee juſt by the church-yard ſtile. Swift.
2. [Stile, Fr.] A pin to caſt the ſhadow in a ſun dial.
Erect the ſtile perpendicularly over the ſubſtilar line, ſo as
to make an angle with the dial plane equal to the elevation of
the pole of your place. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſe.
STILETTO. m.ſ. [Italian; ſºilet, Fr.] A ſmall dagger, of which
the blade is not edged but round, with a ſharp point.
When a ſenator ſhould be torn in pieces, he hired one,
who entering into the ſenate-houſe, ſhould aſſault him as an
enemy to the ſtate; and ſtabbing him with ſtilettoes leave him
to be torn by others. Hakewill on Providence.
To STILL. v. a. [reillan, Sax ſtillen, Dutch.]
1. To ſilence; to make ſilent.
Is this the ſcourge of France?
Is this the Talbot ſo much fear'd abroad,
That with his name the mothers ſtill their babes, Shahſ,
2. To quiet; to appeaſe.
In all refrainings of anger, it is the beſt remedy to make a
man's ſelf believe, that the opportunity of revenge is not yet
come ; but that he foreſees a time for it, and ſo to ſtill him-
ſelf in the mean time, and reſerve it. Bacon.
3. To make motionleſs. -
He having a full ſway over the water, had power to ſtill
and compoſe it, as well as to move and diſturb it. Woodward.
The third fair morn now blaz'd upon the main,
Then glaſſy ſmooth lay all the liquid plain,
The winds were huſh'd, the billows ſcarcely curl’d,
And a dead ſilence ſtill'd the watry world. Pºpe.
St I LL. adj. [ſtil, Dutch.]
1. Silent; uttering no noiſe. It is well obſerved by juniuſ, that
f is the ſound commanding filence.
We do not act, that often jeſt and laugh:
'Tis old but true, ſtill ſwine eat all the draugh. Shakespeare .
Your wife O&amp;tavia, with her modeſt eyes,
And ſtill concluſion, ſhall acquire no honour,
Demuring upon me. Shakeſpeare's Antºny and Cleopatra,
The ſtorm was laid, the winds retir’d,
Obedient to thy will;
The ſea that roar'd at thy command,
At thy command was fill.
2. Quiet; calm. -
Atin when he ſpied
Thus inſtill waves of deep delight to wade, -
Fiercely approaching to him loudly cry’d. Fairy Queen,
From hence my lines and I depart,
I to my ſoft ſtill walks, they to my heart;
I to the nurſe, they to the child of art. Donne.
Religious pleaſure moves gently, and therefore conſtanº
It does not affect by rapture, but is like the pleaſure of health,
which is ſtill and ſober. South's Sermonſ.
Addison.
Hope
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
Hope quickens all the ſtill parts of life, and keeps the mind
awake in her moſt remiſs and indolent hours. Addison.
Silius Italicus has repreſented it as a very gentle and ſtill
river, in the beautiful deſcription he has given of it. Addiſon:
How all things liſten, while thy muſe complains;
Such filence waits on philomela's ſtrains,
In ſome ſtill ev'ning, when the whiſp'ring breeze
Pants on the leaves, and dies upon the trees. Pope.
. Motionleſs.
Gyrecia ſit ſtill, but with no ſtill penſiveneſs. Sidney.
Though the body really moves, yet not changing perceive-
able diſtance with other bodies, as faſt as the ideas of our minds
follow in train, the thing ſeems to ſtand ſtill, as we find in
the hands of clocks. Locke.
That in this ſtate of ignorance, we ſhort-fighted creatures
might not miſtake true felicity, we are endowed with a power
to ſuſpend any particular deſire. This is ſtanding fill where
we are not ſufficiently aſſured. Locke.
This ſtone, O Syſiphus, ſtands ſtill;
Ixion reſts upon his wheel. Pope.
STIL l. n.ſ. Calm; ſilence.
Herne the hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windſor foreſt,
Doth all the winter time at ſtill of mid-night,
Walk round about an oak with ragged horns.
- Shakeſpeare.
He had never any jealouſy with his father, which might give
occaſion of altering court or council upon the change; but all
things paſs'd in a ſtill. Bacon's Henry VII.
Still adv. [reille, Saxor.]
1. To this time; till now.
It hath been anciently reported, and is ſtill received, that
extreme applauſes of great multitudes have ſo rarified the air,
that birds flying over have fallen down. Bacon.
Thou, O matron ".
Here dying to the ſhore haſ left thy name:
Cajeta ſtill the place is call'd from thee,
The nurſe of great Æneas' infancy.
2. Nevertheleſs; notwithſtanding.
The deſire of fame betrays the ambitious man into inde-
cencies that leſſen his reputation; he is ſtill afraid left any of
his aſſions ſhould be thrown away in private. Addiſon.
3. In an encreaſing degree.
As God ſometimes addreſſes himſelf in this manner to the
hearts of men; ſo, if the heart will receive ſuch motions by a
ready compliance, they will return more frequently, and ſtill
more and more powerfully. South.
The moral perfeótions of the Deity, the more attentively
we confider them, the more perfectly ſtill ſhall we know them.
Atterbury.
Dryden's AEneid.
4. Always; ever; continually.
Unleſs God from heaven did by viſion ſtill ſhew them what
to do, they might do nothing. Hooker.
My brain I'll prove the female to my ſoul;
My ſoul, the father; and theſe two beget
A generation of ſtill-breeding thoughts. Shakeſpeare.
Whom the diſeaſe of talking ſtill once poſſeſſeth, he can ne-
ver hold his peace. Ben. johnſon.
He told them, that if their king were ſtill abſent from them,
they would at length crown apes. Davies on Ireland.
Chymiſts would be rich, if they could ſtill do in great quan-
tities, what they have ſometimes done in little. Boyle.
Trade begets trade, and people go much where many people
are already gone: ſo men run ſtill to a crowd in the ſtreets,
though only to ſee. Temple.
The fewer ſtill you name, you wound the more,
- Bond is but one; but Harpax is a ſcore. Pope.
5. After that. -
In the primitive church, ſuch as by fear being compelled to
ſacrifice to ſtrange gods, after repented, and kept ſtill the of
fice of preaching the goſpel. Whitgifte.
6. In continuance.
I with my hand at midnight held your head;
And, like the watchful minutes to the hour,
Still and anon chear'd up the heavy time,
Saying, what want you? Shakeſpeare's King john.
Still. n.ſ.. [from diſtil..] A veſſel for diſtillation; an alem-
bick.
Nature's confestioner, the bee,
Whoſe ſuckets are moiſt alchimy;
The ſtill of his refining mold,
Minting the garden into gold. Cleaveland.
In diſtilling hot ſpirits, if the head of the ſtill be taken off,
the vapour which aſcends out of the ſtill will take fire at the
flame of a candle, and the flame will run along the vapour
from the candle to the ſtill. Newton's Opticks.
This fragrant ſpirit is obtained from all plants in the leaſt
aromatick, by a cold ſtill, with a heat not exceeding that of
ſumner. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To Still v. a...[from diſtil..] To diſtil; to extract or ope-
rate upon by diſtillation.
T------ º
Tº:šić * [ſtillo, Latin.] To drop; to fill in drops,
His ſceptre'gainſt the ground he threw,
**tears ſtill'd from him which moºd iſ the crew. Chapm.
Short thick ſobs, whoſe thund'ring volleys float,
And roul themſelves over her lubriº throat
* Panting murmurs, ſtill'd out of her breaſt,
That ever-bubbling ſpring. Craſha:
Stillatºrious. adj.ijiimitius, Lati Craſhaw.
drawn by a ſtill. !j. [ſt * Latin.] Falling in drops;
Stillaröky. "..f. [from ſtill or diſtill
I. An alembick; a veſſel in which diſtillation is performed.
In all ſillatories, the vapour is turned back upon itſelf, b
- , by
the encounter of the ſides of the ſtillatory.
2. The room in which ſtills are placed; laboratory.
All offices that require heat, as kitchins, ſtillatories, ſtoves,
ſhould be meridional. Wotton's Archiºi.
. Theſe are nature's ſtillatories, in whoſe cavern, the aſcend-
ºg vapours are congealed to that univerſal aquavitae, that good
freſh water. 4%re's Antidote againſ: Ætheiſm.
sºns. adj. [ſtill and born.] Boºn lifeleſ; dead in tº
Irth.
Grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth,
Should be ſtillborn ; and that we now poſſeſt
The utmoſt man of expectation; we are
A body ſtrong enough to equal with the king. Shakespeare
Many caſualties were but matter of ſenſe, as whether a child
were abortive or ſtillborn. Graunt's Bills of Mirtality.
The pale aſſiſtants on each other ſtar'd,
With gaping mouths for iſſuing words prepar'd :
The ſtillborn ſounds upon the palate hung,
And dy'd imperfect on the faltring tongue. Dryden.
I know a trick to make you thrive;
O, 'tis a quaint device
Your ſtillborn poems ſhall revive,
And ſcorn to wrap up ſpice. Swift.
sº. n: ſ [ſtillicidium, Latin.] A ſucceſſion of
rops.
The ſtillicides of water, if there be water enough to follow,
will draw themſelves into a ſmall thread; becauſe they will
not diſcontinue. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Still.ici'D19Us, adj. [from ſtillicide.] Falling in drops.
Cryſtal is found ſometimes in rocks, and in ſome places not
unlike the ſtirious or ſtillicidious dependencies of ice. Brown.
STI'll Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſtill.]
1. Calm; quiet.
How ſweet the moonlight ſleeps upon this bank
Here will we ſit, and let the ſounds of muſick
Creep in our ears; ſoft ſtillneſ; and the night
Become the touches of ſweet harmony. Shakeſpeare.
When black clouds draw down the lab’ring ſkies,
And horrid ſtillneſ, firſt invades the ear;
And in that filence we the tempeſt fear. Dryden.
Virgil, to heighten the horrour of Æneas' paſſing by this
coaſt, has prepared the reader by Cajeta's funeral and the ſtill-
400M.
neſs of the night. Dryden.
If a houſe be on fire, thoſe at next door may eſcape, by the
ſtillneſs of the weather. Swift.
2. Silence; taciturnity.
The gravity and ſtillneſs of your youth
The world hath noted. Shakeſpeare's Othelio.
STI'llstand. m. ſ. [ſtill and ſtand] , Abſence of motion.
The tide ſwell’d up unto his height,
Then makes a ſtillſtand, running neither way. Shakespeare .
St I'lly. adv. [from ſtill.]
1. Silently; not loudly.
From camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
The hum of either army ſtilly ſounds. Shakeſp. Henry V.
2. Calmly; not tumultuouſly.
Stilts. n.ſ.. [ſtylior, Swediſh; ſtelten, Dutch; recelcan.] Sup-
ports on which boys raiſe themſelves when they walk,
Some could not be content to walk upon the battlements,
but they muſt put themſelves upon ſtilts. Howel's Eng. Tears.
The heron and ſuch like fowl live of fiſhes, walk on long
Jilts like the people in the marſhes. More's Ant, agai ºft Atheiſm.
Men muſt not walk upon ſtilts. . . 1.’Eſtrange.
To STIMULATE. v. a. [ſtimulo, Latin.]
1. To prick. -
2. To prick forward; to excite by ſome pungent motive. -
3. [In phyſick.] To excite a quick ſenſation, with a deriva-
tion towards the part. - -
Extreme cold ſtimulates, producing firſt a rigour, and then
a glowing heat; thoſe things which ſtimulat: in the extreme
g s.”-“: o Arbuthnot on Dief.
degree excite pain. - -
Some medicines lubricate, and others both lubricate and
ftimulate. - - Exci - Sharp.
Srimulation. n.ſ [ſtimulatiº, Latin.] Excitement; pun-
gency.
Some perſons, from the ſecret ſtimulations of . or .
- book, and throw contempt upon it by whole;
º a valuable book, Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
- Tº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T I
S T I
To STING. v. a. Preterite, I ſurg, participle paſſive ſanº,
and ſlung. [rtingan, Saxon; ſtungen, fore pricked, lilan-
dick,
I. To * or wound with a point darted out, as that of waſps
or ſcorpions.
The ſnake, rolled in a flow'ry bank,
With ſhining checker'd ſlough, doth ſing a child
That for the beauty thinks it excellent, Shakespeare.
That ſnakes and vipers ſting and tranſmit their miſchief by
the tail is not eaſily to be juſtified, the poiſon lying about the
teeth and communicated by the bite. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
2. To pain acutely.
His unkindneſs
That ſtript her from his benedićtion, turn'd her
To foreign caſualties, gave her dear right,
To his doghearted daughters: theſe things ſting him
So venomouſly, that burning ſhame detains him
From his Cordelia. Shakespeare .
No more I wave
To prove the hero.—Sander ſtings the brave. Pope.
Sting, n, ſ [from the verb.) -
1. A ſharp point with which ſome animals are armed, and which
is commonly venomous. - -
Serpents have venomous teeth, which are miſtaken for their
ſting. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
His rapier was a hornet's ſting,
It was a very dangerous thing:
For if he chanc'd to hurt the king,
It would be long in healing. Drayton.
2. Any thing that gives pain. -
%. jew º book originally with ſuch ſting in
it, ſhews that the authority was high. Forbes.
3. The point in the laſt verſe. - -
It is not the jerk or ſting of an epigram, nor the ſeeming
contradićtion of a poor antitheſis. Dryden.
Sri'NGILY. adv. [from ſtingy.]. Covetouſly. -
Sti'NGINEss. n.ſ.. [from ſtingy.] Avarice; covetouſneſs; nig-
gardlineſs. dj. [from ſting.] Having no ſting
I'NGLESS. adi. from ſting. aving - -
ST He hugs # #: when he thinks it ſtingſeſs. Decay of Piety.
ST1'Ngo. n.ſ.. [from the ſharpneſs of the taſte.] Old beer. A
rd. - - -
s. adj [A low cant word. In this word, with its de-
rivatives, the g is pronounced as in gem.] Covetous; nig-
dly; avaricious. w
º, narrow hearted º, º º 2 º .. .
fruit, had not the heart to touch it till it bega 'º.
ates it only by parcels, and wont give us the whole,
* º me ...'. his friends º º: º º
* * * * * ºf
. v. n. Preterite Iſlunk or ſtank. Irºnian, Saxon;
º To ... offenſive ſmell, commonly a
- efačtion.
º: º. be ſinking law for his breath. Shakeſpeare.
when the children of Ammon ſaw that they ſtank º:
David, they ſent and hired Syrianº. 2. : x. g
what a fool art thou, to leave thy mother for ºff:
*... º ſmells want names; ſweet and ſtinking ſerve our
turn for theſe ideas, which is little more than to a;
leafing and diſpleaſing: - x * … .Y J. Ka'.
p Chloris, this coſtly way to ſink give o'er,
*Tis throwing ſweet º . ſhore;
J rabia would ſufficient be, ...
Tºº not of thy ſweets, theyſº thee. Granv.
Srink. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Offenſive º: not moſt
Thoſe ſtinks which the noſtrils ſtraight abhor are •
- - irs as have ſome ſimilitude with man's
pernicious, but ſuch airs as Bacon's Natural Hiſtor
body, and ſo betray the ſpirits. acºn's Natu y.
O ”F., ſhare a fin; and ſuch proportion. fall,
That, like a ſunk. º: º º Dryden.
- - - e eat, dye -
By *... 'that for ſtink. Pºpe.
If this is priz [from ſink J. A mean ſinking paltry fellow.
::::::: ". ſº flink.] Something intended to offend by
the ſmell.
The air º
- orious lanes. - - - - -
lº º adv. [from fining.] - with a ſtink.
STI sº thou believe thy living is a life, Shaieffeare
- - - or 2 - - -
S sº pºt.] An artificial compoſition
TI'NK ... /* , f *
cº; º by fires of pitch-barrels, º
ing of ſtinºpots. - -
º %wº º/ º To bound;
osrisr, vº. - ſtrain; to itop.
to º: º º * º which he hath propoſed, and
the ſaw whereby his wit” bath ſtint.d the effects of his
be purified by burning of ſtinkpots “ſiſ.
power in ſuch ſort, that it doth not work infinitely, but cor-
reſpºndently unto that end for which it worketh. Hºer,
Then hopeleſs, heartleſs, 'gan the cunning thief,
Perſuade us die, to ſint all further 1.fife. l'avy Queen.
Nature wiſely ſtints our appetite,
And craves no more than undiſturb’d delight. Drydºn.
I ſhall not go about to extenuate the latitude of the curſe
upon the earth, or ſtint it only to the production of weeds, but
give it its full ſcope in an univerſal diminution of the fruitful-
incſs of the earth. Jºdward.
A ſuppoſed heathen deity might be ſo poor in his attributes,
fo ſtinted in his knowledge, that a Pagan might hope to con.
ceal his perjury from his notice. - Addiſon.
Few countries, which, if well cultivated, would not ſup-
port double their inhabitants, and yet fewer where one tid
are not extremely ſtinted in neceiiaries. Swift.
ST IN. T. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Limit; bound; reſtraint.
We muſt come at the length to ſome pauſe: for if ever
thing were to be deſired for ſome other without any ſtint, theſe
could be no certain end propoſed unto our actions, we ſhºuld
go on we know not whither. - Hºcker.
Touching the ſtint or meaſure thereof, rites and ceremonies,
and other external things of the like nature being hurtful gº,
the church, either in reſpect of their quality, or in regard of
their number ; in the former there could be no doubt ordſ.
ficulty what would be done; their deliberation in the alſº
was more difficult. Hooler,
The exteriours of mourning, a decent funeral, and black
habits are the uſual ſtints of common huſbands. Dryden,
2. A proportion ; a quantity aſſigned.
Our ſtint of woe
Is common; every day, a ſailor's wife,
The maſters of ſome merchant, and the merchant
Have juſt our theºle of woe. Shakºftara,
He that gave the hint,
This letter for to print,
Muſt alſo pay the ſtint. Derham,
. How much wine drink you in a day? my ſtint in company
is a pint at noon. Swift.
STI'PEND. m. ſ. [ſt pendium, Latin.] Wages; ſettled pay.
All the earth,
Her kings and tetrarchs are their tributaries;
People and nations pay them houry ſtipend. Ben. jºbſ".
St. Paul's zcal was expreſſed in preaching without a
- - ny offer-
ings or ſtipend. Taylºr,
Stipe NDIA.R.Y. adj. [ſipendiarius, Latin.] Receiving ſalaries;
performing any ſervice for a ſtated price.
His great ſtipendiary prelates came with troops of evil ap-
pointed horſemen not half full. Knºlls', Hiſt, ºf the Turt.
Place rectories in the remaining churches, which are now
ſerved only by ſtipendary curates, Swift,
Stife's DIARY. m.ſ. [ſãpendiaire, Fr. ſpendarius, Latin.] One
who performs any ſervice for a ſettled payment.
This whole country is called the kingdom of Tunis; the
king whereof is a kind of ſtipendary unto the Turk, Aid.
ST1'P'tick. !". ſºvºlºs.] Having the power to flaunch
STI Prical. 5 blood; aſtringent. This by analogy ſhould be
written ſtyptick.
There is a ſowr ſtiptic; ſalt diffuſed through the earth, which
paſſing a concoction in plants, becometh milder. Brºwn.
From ſpirit of ſalt, carefully dephlegmed and removed into
lower glaſſes, having gently abſtracted the whole, there re-
mained in the bottom, and the neck of the retoft, a great
quantity of a certain dry and Ji?tical ſubſtance, moſtly of 1
yellowiſh colour. Bºyk.
In an effuſion of blood, having doſſils ready dipt in the royal
fºpticº, we applied them. //iſeman's Surgery.
To STI'PULATE. v. n. [ſtipular, Latin; ſtipuler, Fr.] To
contract; to bargain; to ſettle terms.
The Romans very much neglected their maritime affairs;
for they ſtipulated with the Carthaginians to furniſh them
with ſhips for tranſport and war. Arbuthnºt,
STIPULATION. m. ſ. [/lipidation, Fr. from ſtipulate] Birgin;
We promiſe obediently to keep all God's commandments;
the hopes given by the goſpel depend on our performance of
that ſtipulation. Rogers'; Strmini,
To STIR. v. a. [reinian, Saxon; ſcoren, Dutch.]
I. To move; to remove from its place.
My foot I had never yet in five days been able to ſtir but as
it was lifted. - Tempt,
Other ſpirits
Shoot through their tracts, and diſtant muſcles fill:
This ſov’reign, by his arbitrary nod,
Reſtrains or ſends his miniſters abroad,
Swift and obedient to his high command
They ſtir a finger, or they lift a hand. Blackmºrt.
2. To agitate; to bring into debate. -
Preſerve the right of thy place, but für not queſtions of it.
riſdićtion, and rather aſſume thy right in filence than voice it
with claims. Batºn,
8 One
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T I
-- One judgment in parliament, that caſes of that nature ought
- to be determined according to the common law, is of greater
". . weight than many caſes to the contrary, wherein the queſtion
was not ſtirrel yea, even though it ihould be ſtirred and the
- contrary affirmed. Hale.
3. To incite; to inſtigate; to animate.
With him is come the mother queen;
An Até ſtirring him to blood and ſtrife. Shakeſpeare.
If you /ºr theſe daughters hearts
Againſt their father, fool me not ſo much
tº . To bear it tamely. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The ſoldiers love her brother's memory;
‘. And for her ſake ſome mutiny will ſir.
4. To Stir up. To incite; to animate; to inſtigate.
This would ſeem a dangerous commiſfion, and ready to/ºr
up all the Iriſh in rebellion. Spen'er's Ireland.
The greedy thirſt of royal crown,
That knows no kindred, no regards, no right,
Stirred Porrex up to put his brother down. Spenſer.
God ſtirred him up another adverſary. 1 Kings xi. 23.
The words of Judas were very good, and able to/iir them
tº ap to valour. 2 Maccab. xiv. 17.
Having overcome and thruſt him out of his kingdom, he
firred up the Chriſtians and Numidians againſt him. Knolles,
The vigorous ſpirit of Montroſe ſtirred him up to make
ſome attempt whether he had any help or no. Clarendon.
-----&gt; The improving of his own parts and happineſs ſtir him up
* ... to ſo notable a deſign. More's Antid againſt Atheiſm.
To ſtir up vigour in him, employ him in ſome conſtant
Dryden.
bodily labour. Locke.
Thou with rebel inſolence did'ſt dare
- To own and to protećt that hoary ruffian,
To ſtir the factious rabble up to arms. Rowe.
The uſe of the paſſions is to ſtir it up, and put it upon ačtion,
to awake the underſtanding and to enforce the will. Addiſon.
- 5. To STIR up. To put in action.
:- Hell is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming; it ſtir-
reth up the dead for thee. Iſa. xiv. 9.
* , it Such mirth the jocund flute or gameſome pipe
* : *- Stirs up among the looſe unletter'd hinds. Milton.
º: To STIR. v. n.
*.
1. To move one's ſelf; to go out of the place; to change place.
No power he had to ſtir nor will to riſe. Fairy ºueen.
They had the ſemblance of great bodies behind on the other
ſide of the hill, the falſhood of which would have been ma-
nifeſt as ſoon as they ſhould move from the place where they
were, and from whence they were therefore not to ſtir.
- Clarendon.
2. To be in motion; not to be ſtill ; to paſs from inačtivity to
-- motion.
The great Judge of all knows every different degree of hu-
man improvement, from theſe weak ſtirrings and tendencies
- of the will, which have not yet formed themſelves into regu-
- lar purpoſes, to the laſt entire conſummation of a good habit.
Addiſon's Spediator.
º 3. To become the objećt of notice.
... -- If they happen to have any ſuperiour charaćter, they fancy
they have a right to talk freely upon every thing that ſtirs or
º appears. /Watts.
- 4. To riſe in the morning. This is a colloquial and familiar
º:- uſe.
º, tº If the gentlewoman that attends the general's wife be ſtir-
ºf ring, tell her, there's one Caſſio entreats of her a little favour
Cº- - of ſpeech. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
- Stik. n. ſ. [/lur, Runick, a battle; yíwrf, noiſe, Welſh.j
º 1. Tumult; buſtle.
- What halloing and what ſºir is this to-day ?
ſº Theſe are my mates, that make their wills their law,
Have ſome unhappy paſſenger in chace. Shakeſpeare.
º: He hath ſpun a fair thread, to make all this ſtir for ſuch a
º: neceſſity as no man ever denied. Bp. Bramhall.
Tell, ſaid the ſoldier, miſerable fir,
º Why all theſe words, this clamour and this ſºir,
º: Why do diſputes in wrangling ſpend the day : , Denham.
º Silence is uſually worſe than the fierceſt and loudeſt accuſa-
º tions; ſince it proceeds from a kind of numbneſs or ſtupidity
of conſcience, and an abſolute dominion obtained by fin over
the ſoul, ſo that it ſhall not ſo much as dare to complain or
º: make a ſtir, South's Sermons.
º The great ſtirs of the diſputing world are but the conflićts
* . of the humours. Glanville.
After all this ſtir about them they are good for nothing. Til.
Conſider, after ſo much ſtir about genus and ſpecies, how
few words we have yet ſettled definitions of. Locke.
2. Commotion; publick diſturbance; tumultuous diſorder; ſe-
ditious uproar.
Whenſoever the earl ſhall die, all thoſe lands are to come
unto her majeſty; he is like to make a foul ſlir there, though
of himſelf of no power, yet through ſupportance of ſome
others who lie in the wind. Spenſer's (reland.
He did make theſe ſºirs, grieving that the name of Chriſt
was at all brought into thoſe parts. Abbot.
- Rt. 77. /.
§ºmºrrº, had sºori
I. An anvil; the iron body on which the ſmith forges his work.
S T I
, Being advertiſed of ſome ſtir raiſed by his unnatural ſons
in England, he departed out of Ireland without ſtriking a blow.
Daviet,
Raphael, thou hear'ſ what ſºir on earth,
Satan from hell'ſcap'd through the darkſome gulf
Hath rais'd in paradiſe, and how diſturb’d
This night the human pair. Miltºn,
3. Agitation; conflicting paſſion.
He did keep
The deck, with glove or hat, or handkerchief,
Still waving, as the ſtirs and fits of 's mind -
Could beſt expreſs how ſlow his ſoul ſail'd on,
How ſwift his ſhip. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Sti'Rious. adj. [from/liria, Latin.] Reſembling icicles.
Chryſtal is found ſometimes in rocks, and in ſome places
not much unlike the ſtirious or ſtillicidious dependencies of
1Ce. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
sº n: ſ [/tirps, Latin.] Race; family; generation. Not
Sundry nations got footing in that land, of the which there
yet remain divers great families and ſhirps. Spenſer.
Democracies are leſs ſubjećt to ſedition than when there
are ſtirps of nobles. Bacon.
All nations of might and fame reſorted hither; of whom
we have ſome ſtirps and little tribes with us at this day. Bacon.
Sti'RRer, n.ſ.. [from ſtir.]
1. One who is in motion; one who puts in motion,
2. A riſer in the morning
Come on ; give me your hand, fir; an early ſtirrer. Shakespeare
3. An inciter; an inſtigator.
4. STIRR er up. An inciter; an inſtigator.
A perpetual ſpring, not found elſewhere but in the Indies
only, by reaſon of the ſun's neighbourhood, the life and ſtirrer
up of nature in a perpetual activity. Kaleigh.
Will it not reflect on thy character, Nic, to turn barreter
in thy old days; a ſtirrer up of quarrels betwixt thy neigh-
bours ? Arbuthnot.
STI'RR UP. m. ſ. [reixenap, reinap, from reigan, Saxon, to
climb, and nap, a cord..] An iron hoop ſuſpended by a ſtrap,
in which the horſeman ſets his foot when he mounts or rides.
Neither is his manner of mounting unſeemly, though he
lack ſtirrups; for in his getting up, his horſe is ſtill going,
whereby he gaineth way: and therefore the ſtirrup was called
ſo in ſcorn, as it were a ſtay to get up, being derived of the
old Engliſh wordſly; which is to get up, or mount. Spenſer.
Haſt thou not kiſs'd my hand, and held my ſtirrup?' Shakespeare
His horſe hipped with an old mothy ſaddle, the ſtirrups of
no kindred. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
Between the ſtirrup and the ground,
Mercy I aſk'd, mercy I found.
At this the knight began to chear up,
And raiſing up himſelf on ſtirrup, -
Crv'd out Vićtoria. Hudibrary
To STITCH. v. a. [ſlicke, Daniſh; ſicken, Dutch.]
1. To ſew, to work on with a needle.
2. To join; to unite, generally with ſome degree of clumſineſs
or inaccuracy. -
Having ſitched together theſe animadverſions touching ar-
chite&amp;ure and their ornaments, contemplative ſpirits are as
reſtleſs as ačtive. Watton.
3. Tº Sritch up. To mend what was rent. - -
It is in your hand as well to ſlitch up his life again, as it was
before to rent it. Sidney.
I with a needle and thread ſtitch'd up the artery and the
wound. I/ſeman's Surgery.
To Stitch. v. n. To pračtiſe needlework.
Stitch n.ſ.. [from the verb.] -
1. A paſs of the needle and thread through anything.
2. [From rºlcian, Saxon.] A ſharp lancinating pain. ...
If you deſire the ſpleen, and will laugh yourſelf intoſłitcheſ,
follow me; yond gull Malvolio is turned heathen, a very re-
negado. Shakespeare . Twelfth Night.
A fimple bloody ſputation of the lungs is differenced from a
pleuriſy, which is ever painful, and attended with a ſtitch.
Harvey on Conſumption.
3. In Chapman it ſeems to mean ſurrows or ridges, and perhaps
has the ſame meaning in the following pallage of Dryden,
which otherwiſe I do not underſtand.
Many men at plow he made, and drawe earth here and
there, - Fr-
And turn'd up ſtitches orderly. Chapman's Iliadi,
Aftitch-fallin cheek, that hangs below the jaw,
Such wrinkles as a ſkilful hand would draw,
For an old grandam ape: k. I Dryden.
STI'rche RY. n.ſ. [from/titch.] Needlewor . In º;
Come lay aſide your ſtitchery; play the idle houſewife w
me this afternoon. Shakepeare'. Othelle.
Ainſworth.
Camden's Remaints
Camomile.
My imaginations are as foul
As W. ſłithy. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
25 G
Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T O
S T O
To Stive. v.a. [Suppoſed of the ſame original with ſlew.]
1. To ſtuff up cloſe. -
You would admire, if you ſaw them ſlive it in their ſhips.
Sandys's journey.
2. To make hot or ſultry.
His chamber was commonly/lived with friends or ſuitors of
one kind or other. //ºtton.
StoAT. n.ſ. A ſmall ſtinking animal.
Sto'cah. "...ſ.. [Iriſh; ſtochº, Erſe. J An attendant; a wallet-
boy; ºne who runs at a horſeman's foot; a horſeboy.
He holdeth himſelf a gentleman, and ſcorneth to work,
which, he ſaith is the life of a peaſant; but thenceforth be:
coneth an horſeboy, or a ſlocah to ſome kern, inuring himſelf
to his ſword, and the gentlemanly trade of ſtealing. Spenſer.
StoccA'do. n.ſ. [/ºccato, from /focco, a rapier, Italian.]. A
thruſt with the rapier.
I have heard the Frenchman hath good ſkill in his rapier.
-You ſtand on diſtance, your paſſes, ſoccado's, and I know not
what. Shakeſpeare's Merry J/ives of //indſºr.
STOCK. m.ſ. [rzoc, Saxon; ſtock, Dutch; effoc, French.]
1. The trunk; the body of a plant.
That furious beaſt
His precious horn, ſought of his enemies,
Strikes in the ſtock, ne thence can be releas'd. Fa. 9aeen.
There is hope of a tree, if cut down, that it will ſprout
again, though the root wax old in the earth, and the ſtock die
in the ground. job xiv. 8.
2. The trunk into which a graft is inſerted.
The cion over-ruleth the ſtock quite; and the ſtock is but
paſſive only, and giveth aliment but no motion to the graft.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
As fruits, ungrateful to the planter's care,
On ſavage/locks inſerted, learn to bear;
The ſureſt virtues thus from paſſions ſhoot,
Wild nature's vigour working at the root. Pope.
3. A log; a poſt.
That they kept thy truth ſo pure of old,
When all our fathers worſhipp'd ſtocks and ſtones,
Forget not. Milton.
Why all this fury? What's the matter,
That oaks muſt come from Thrace to dance?
Muſt ſtupid ſocks be taught to flatter
And is there no ſuch wood in France 2 Prior.
4. A man proverbially ſtupid.
What tyranny is this, my heart to thrall,
And eke my tongue with proud reſtraint to tie,
That neither I may ſpeak nor think at all,
But like a ſtupid ſtock in ſilence die? Spenſºr.
While we admire
This virtue and this moral diſcipline,
Let's be no ſtoicks, nor no ſtocks. Shakeſpeare.
. The handle of any thing. -
. A ſupport of a ſhip while it is building.
Freſh ſupplies of ſhips,
And ſuch as fitted ſince the fight had been,
Or new from/locks were fall’n into the road. Dryden.
[Stºcco, a rapier, Italian.] A thruſt; a ſtoccado,
To ſee thee here, to ſee thee there; to ſee thee paſs thy
punéto, thy ſtock, thy reverſe. Shakeſpeare.
8. Something made of linen; a cravat; a cloſe neckcloth. An-
ciently a ſtocken.
His lackey with a linen ſtock on one leg, and a kerſey boot-
hoſe on the other. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
9. A race; a lineage; a family.
Say what ſtock he ſprings of.-
§
7
—The noble houſe of Marcius, Shakeſ Coriolanus.
His early virtues to that ancient ſtock
Gave as much honour as from thence he took. Waller.
The like ſhall fing
All propheſy, that of the royal ſtock
Of David, ſo I name this king, ſhall riſe
A ſon, the woman's ſeed. Milton.
Thou haſt ſeen one world begin, and end,
And man, as from a ſecond ſtock, proceed. Milton,
To no human ſtock
We owe this fierce unkindneſs; but the rock,
That cloven rock produc’d thee. Waller.
Thy mother was no goddeſs, nor thy ſtºck
From Dardanus; but in ſome horrid rock,
Perfidious wretch, rough Caucaſus thee bred. Denham.
10. The principal ; capital ſtore; fund already provided.
Prodigal men
Feel not their own ſtock waſting. Ben. Johnſ. Catiline.
Let the exportation of home commodities be more in value
than the importation of foreign; ſo the ſtock of the kingdom
ſhall yearly increaſe; for then the balance of trade muſt be
returned in money or bullion. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
A king, againſt a ſtorm, muſt foreſee to a convenient ftock
of ſeaſº I c. Bacon.
º º place where God promiſes and delights to diſpenſe
*P*P*ons of his favour, that he may fix a maſk of
honour on his ſančtuary, and recommend it to the ſons of
men, upon the ſtock of their own intereſt as well as his own
glory. South.
Some honour of your own acquire;
Add to that ſtock, which juſtly we beſtow,
Of thoſe bleſt ſhades to whom you all things owe. Dryán.
Yet was ſhe not profuſe; but fear'd to waſte,
And wiſely manag'd that the ſtºck might laſt;
That all might be ſupply'd, and ſhe not grieve,
When crouds appear'd, ſhe had not to relieve;
Which to prevent, ſhe ſtill increas'd her ſtore;
Laid up, and ſpar'd, that ſhe might give the more. Drydºn,
Beneath one law bees live,
And with one common ſtock their traffick drive:
All is the ſtate's, the ſtate provides for all. Dryden's Gorg.
If parents die without actually transferring their right
to another, why does it not return to the common ſº
of mankind Locke.
When we brought it out it took ſuch a quantity of air into
its lungs, that it ſwelled almoſt twice as big as before; and it
was perhaps on this ſtock of air that it lived a minute longer
the ſecond time. Addiſon on Italy.
Be ready to give, and glad to diſtribute, by ſetting apart
ſomething out of thy ſtock for the uſe of ſome charities. Airl.
Of thoſe ſtars, which our imperfect eye
Has doom'd and fix'd to one eternal ſky,
Each by a native ſtock of honour great,
May dart ſtrong influence, and diffuſe kind heat. Prior,
They had law-ſuits; but, though they ſpent their income,
they never mortgaged the ſtock. Arbuthnot.
11. Quantity; ſtore; body.
A great benefit ſuch a natural hiſtory, as may be confided
in, will prove to the whole ſtock of learned mankind. Glanv,
Nor do thoſe ills on ſingle bodies prey;
But oftner bring the nation to decay, }
And ſweep the preſent ſtock and future hope away. Dryd.
He propoſes to himſelf no ſmall ſtock of fame in future ages,
in being the firſt who has undertaken this deſign. Arbuthnot.
12. A fund eſtabliſhed by the government, of which the value
riſes and falls by artifice or chance.
An artificial wealth of funds and ſtocks was in the hands of
thoſe who had been plundering the publick. Swift.
Stateſman and patriot ply alike the ſtocks,
Peereſs and butler ſhare alike the box. Pope.
To Stock. v. a...[from the noun.]
1. To ſtore; to fill ſufficiently.
If a man will commit ſuch rules to his memory, and ſº
his mind with portions of Scripture anſwerable to all the heads
of duty, his conſcience can never be at a loſs. South.
I, who before with ſhepherds in the groves,
Sung to my oaten pipe their rural loves,
Manur'd the glebe, and ſtock'd the fruitful plain. Dryden.
The world begun to be ſtocked with people, and human in-
duſtry drained thoſe uninhabitable places. Burnet.
Springs and rivers are by large ſupplies continually ſtocked
with water. Woodward.
2. To lay in ſtore.
3. To put in the ſtocks. See Stocks.
Call not your ſtocks for me: I ſerve the king,
On whoſe employment I was ſent to you:
You ſhall do ſmall reſpect, ſhew too bold malice
Againſt the grace and perſon of my maſter, -
Stocking his meſſenger. Shakespeare King Liar.
4. To Stock up. To extirpate.
The wild boar not only ſpoils her branches, but foci: up
her roots. Decay of Pitt).
Sto'ckDove. n.ſ. Ringdove.
Stockdoves and turtles tell their am’rous pain,
And, from the lofty elms, of love complain. Dryden.
Stockfish. n.ſ.. [ſtºrviſh, Dutch..] Dried cod, ſo calk"
from its hardneſs.
Stocko I'lly flower. n.ſ. [leucoium, Latin.J. A plant.
The charaders are: the flower is compoſed, for the moſt
part, of four leaves, which are placed in form of a croſs : out
of the flower-cup riſes the pointal, which becomes a long flat
pod, divided into two cells by, an intermediate partition, to
which the valves adhere on both ſides, and are furniſhed with
flat ſmooth ſeeds, which are orbicular, and bordered round
their edges: to which may be added, the flowers are ſpecious,
and ſweet ſmelling. Miller. - -
The ſtockgillſtowers are commonly biennial plants, and
there are many different ſpecies of them, including the various
ſorts of wallflowers, of which the common ſort grows on the
walls of ruinous houſes, and is uſed in medicine. The Rave:
nal wallflower is remarkable for the beauty and waſ, of
its flower. ill.
StockIN G. n.ſ. The covering of the leg.
In his firſt approach before my lady he will come to her in
yellow ſtockings, and 'tis a colour ſhe abhors. Shakeſ eart.
By the loyalty of that town he procured ſhoes, ſº
- iers. Clarendon.
and money for his ſoldiers Unleſs
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T O
Unleſs we ſhould expect that nature ſhould make jerkins
and ſtockings grow out of the ground, what could ſhe do better
than afford us ſo fit materials for cloathing as the wool of
ſheep More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
He ſpent half a day to look for his odd ſtocking, when he
had them both upon a leg. D'Eſtrange.
See how he rolls his ſtockings / Spectator.
At am’rous Flavio is the ſtocking thrown,
That very night he longs to lie alone. Pope.
The families of farmers live in filth and naſtineſs, without
a ſhoe or ſtocking to their feet. Swift.
To Stock; Ng., v.a. [from the noun..] To dreſs in ſtockings.
Stocking'd with loads of fat town-dirt, he goes. Dryden.
Stock Job BER. m. ſ. [ſtºck and job.] A low wretch who gets
money by buying and ſelling ſhares in the funds.
The ſtockjobber thus from ‘Change-alley goes down,
And tips you the freeman a wink;
Let me have but your vote to ſerve for the town,
And here is a guinea to drink. Swift.
Sto'ckish. adj. [from ſtock.J Hard; blockiſh.
The poet
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, ſtones, and floods;
Since nought ſo ſtockiſh, hard, and full of rage,
But muſick for the time doth change his nature. Shakeſp.
Sto'cklock. m. ſ. [ſtock and lock.] Lock fixed in wood.
There are locks for ſeveral purpoſes; as ſtreet-door-locks,
called ſtocklocks; chamber-door-locks, called ſpring-locks, and
cupboard-locks. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
S rocks. n.ſ. [Commonly without ſingular.] Priſon for the
legs.
g Fetch forth the ſtocks :
As I have life and honour, there ſhall he ſit ’till noon. Shakespeare
Tom is whipt from tything to tything, ſtock-puniſh'd, and
impriſoned. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
I have ſat in the ſtocks for the puddings he hath ſtol’n, other-
wiſe he had been executed. Shakeſp. Two Gent. of Verona.
Matrimony is expreſſed by a young man ſtanding, his legs
being faſt in a pair of ſtocks. Peacham.
The ſtocks hinder his legs from obeying the determination of
his mind, if it would transfer his body to another place. Locke.
Stocks.TI'l. adj. [ſtock and ſtill.] Motionleſs as logs.
Our preachers ſtand ſtockſtill in the pulpit, and will not ſo
much as move a finger to ſet off the beſt ſermon. Addiſon.
Stoick, n.ſ. [rwixa; ; ſtaique, Fr.] A philoſopher who followed
the ſe&amp;t of Zeno; holding the neutrality of external things.
While we admire
This virtue, and this moral diſcipline,
Let's be no ſtoicks, nor no ſtocks, I pray. Shakeſpeare.
Stoke, ſtoak, ſeem to come from the Saxon reocce, ſignifying
the ſtock or body of a tree. Gibſon's Camden.
Stole. n.ſ.. [ſtala, Latin. J . A long veſt.
Over all a black ſtole ſhe did throw,
As one that inly mourned. Fairy Queen.
The ſolemn feaſt of Ceres now was near,
When long white linen ſtales the matrons wear. Dryden.
Stole. The preterite of ſteal.
A factor ſtole a gem away. Pope.
Stole N. Participle paſſive of ſteal.
Stolen waters are ſweet, and bread eaten in ſecret is plea-
ſant. Prov. ix. 17.
Stoli'DITY. m.ſ.. [ſolidus, Lat. ſtolidité, French..] Stupidity;
want of ſenſe.
Theſe are the fools in the text, indocile untračtable fools,
whoſe ſtolidity can baffle all arguments. Bentley.
STO'MACH. n.ſ. [ ſtomach, French ; ſtomachus, Latin.]
1. The ventricle in which food is digeſted.
If you're ſick at ſea,
Or ſtomach qualm'd at land, a dram of this
Will drive away diſtemper. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
This filthy ſimile, this beaſily line,
Quite turns my ſtomach. Pope.
2. Appetite; deſire of food.
Tell me, what is't that takes from thee
Thy ſtomach, pleaſure, and thy golden ſleep?. Shakeſpeare.
Will fortune never come with both hands full,
But write her fair words ſtill in fouleſt letters?
She either gives a ſtomach, and no food,
Such are the poor in health; or elſe a feaſt,
And takes away the ſtomach; ſuch the rich,
That have abundance and enjoy it not. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
As appetite or ſtomach to meat is a ſign of health in the
body, ſo is this hunger in the ſoul a vital quality, an evidence
of ſome life of grace in the heart; whereas decay of appetite,
and the no manner of ſtomach, is a moſt deſperate progno-
ſtick. - Hammond.
3. Inclination; liking.
He which hath no ſtomach to this fight,
Let him depart. - Shakespeare Henry V.
The unuſual diſtance of time made it ſubječt to every man's
note, that it was an act againſt his ſtomach, and put upon him
by neceſſity of ſtate. Bacon's Henry VII.
The very trade went againſt his ſtomach. L’Eſtrange.
S T O
4. [Stomachat, Latin.] Anger; reſolution.
Diſdain he called was, and did diſdain
To be ſo call'd, and who ſo did him call :
Stern was his look, and full of ſtomach vain,
His portance terrible, and ſtature tall. Fairy Queer,
Is’t near dinner-time? I would it were, -
That you might kill your ſtomach on your meat,
And not upon your maid. Shakespeare Two Gent, of P. ora.
Inſtead of trumpet and of drum,
That makes the warrior's ſtomach come.
5. Sullenneſs; reſentment.
Some of the chiefeſt laity profeſſed with greater ſtomach
their judgments, that ſuch a diſcipline was little better than
popiſh tyranny diſguiſed under a new form. Hºer.
Arius, a ſubtile witted and a marvellous fair-ſpoken man,
was diſcontented that one ſhould be placed before him in
honour, whoſe ſuperior he thought himſelf in deſert, becauſe
through envy and ſtomach prone unto contradiction. Hoºker.
They plainly ſaw, that when ſtomach doth ſtrive with wit,
the match is not equal. Hooker.
Whereby the ape in wond’rous ſlomach wox,
Strongly encouraged by the crafty fox. Hubberd's Tale,
That nobles ſhould ſuch ſlomach, bear !
I myſelf fight not once in forty year. Shakespeare Henry VI.
It ſtuck in the camel's ſiomach, that bulls ſhould be armed
with horns, and that a creature of his ſize ſhould be left de-
Butler.
fenceleſs. L’Eſtrange.
Not courage but ſtomach that makes people break rather
than they will bend. L’Eſtrange.
This ſort of crying proceeding from pride, obſtinacy, and
Jomach, the will, where the fault lies, muſt be bent. 1…cke.
6. Pride; haughtineſs.
He was a man *
Of an unbounded ſtomach, ever ranking
Himſelf with princes. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
To Sto'MacH. v. a. [ſtomachor, Latin. J. To reſent; to
remember with anger and malignity.
Believe not all; or, if you muſt believe,
Stomach not all. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Jonathan loved David, and the people applauded him; only
Saul ſtomached him, and therefore hated him. Hall’s Contempl.
The lion began to ſhew his teeth, and to ſtomach the af-
front. I’Eſtrange's Fables.
To Sto'MAch. v. n. To be angry.
Let a man, though never ſo juſtly, oppoſe himſelf unto
thoſe that are diſordered in their ways, and what one amongſt
them commonly doth not ſtomach at ſuch contradićtion, ſtorm
at reproof, and hate ſuch as would reform them Hooker.
Sto'Mached. adj. [from ſtomach..] Filled with paſſions of re-
ſentment. .
High ſtomach'd are they both, and full of ire;
In rage deaf as the ſea, haſty as fire. Shakeſpeare.
Sto'Macher. n. ſ. [from ſtomach..] An ornamental covering
worn by women on the breaſt.
Golden quoiſs and ſtomachers,
For my lads to give their dears. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
Inſtead of a ſtomacher, a girding of ſackcloth. If iii. 24.
Thou marry'ſt every year
The lyrick lark and the grave whiſpering dove,
The ſparrow that neglects his life for love,
The houſhold bird with the red/lomacher. Donne.
Sto'Machful. adj. [ſtºmachoſus, Latin; ſtomach and full.]
Sullen; ſtubborn; perverſe.
Aſiomachful boy put to ſchool, the whole world could not
bring to pronounce the firſt letter. L’Eſtrange.
Obſtinate crylomachful crying ſhould not be permitted, be-
cauſe it is another way of encouraging thoſe paſſions which
'tis our buſineſs to ſubdue. Locke.
Sto'Machfulness. n.ſ.. [from ſlomachful..] Stubbornneſs;
ſullenneſs; obſtinacy. -
Stoma'chical. Madj. [ſlomachique, Fr.] Relating to the flo-
Stom A'chick. } mach; pertaining to the ſtomach.
An hypochondriack conſumption is an extenuation, occº.
fioned by an infarótion and obſtruction of the ſtomatº veſ-
ſels through melancholy humours. - - - Harvey.
By a catarrh theſiomachical ferment is vitiated. Flyer.
SroMA'chick, n.ſ.[from/lomach.] A medicine for the ſtºmach.
Sto'Machous. adj. [from ſlomach.J Stout; angy; ſullen;
obſtinate. Obſolete. -
That ſtranger knight in preſence came,
And goodly ſalved them; but nought again
Him anſwered, as courteſy became i...
But with ſtern looks, and/lomachou, diſdain, .
Gave figns of grudge and diſcontentment vain. Fa. Queen.
Ston D. n.ſ.. [for ſland.]
. Poſt : ſtation. *
1. Po bºne, ſide, th'aſſieged caſtle's ward
Their fledfaſt ſºond, did mightily maintain. Fairy Queen.
- ; indiſpoſition to proceed. -
2 sº. . nor reſtiveneſs in a man's nature; but
the wheels of his mind keep way with the wheels ºf his
fortune. Bacon's Eſſay:-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
SIONE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T O
S T O
STONE. n.ſ.. [ſtains, Gothick; rean, Saxon; ſeen, Dutch.]
Sro's FP1 r. m. ſ. [/fone and pit.] A quarry; a pit where
ſtones are dug.
1. Stones are bodies inſipid, hard, not dućtile or malleable, nor
ſoluble in water. Woodward's Meth. Foſſ. There's one found in a ſtonepit. I/odward.
We underſtand by the term ſtones foſſile bodies, ſolid, not Sto'NEpitch. m. ſ. [from ſtorie and pitch..] Hard inſpiſſated
dućtile under the hammer, fixed in the fire, not eaſily melted pitch.
The Egyptian mummies are reported to be as hard as ſºn-
in it, and not to be diſſolved by water. Siones are arranged
under two diſtinct ſeries, the ſofter and the harder. Of the
ſofterJones there are three general diſtinétions. 1. The ſo-
liaceous or flaky, as talk. 2. The fibroſe, as the aſbeſtus.
3. The granulated, as the gypſum. Of the harderſtones there
are alſo three general diſtinétions. 1. The opake ſtones, as
limeſtone. 2. The ſemi-pellucid, as agate. 3. The pellu-
cid, as cryſtal and the gems. Hill's Mat. Med.
Should I go to church, and ſee the holy edifice of ſtone,
And not bethink me ſtrait of dang'rous rocks! Shakeſpeare.
The Engliſh uſed the ſtones to reinforce the pier. Hayward.
2. Piece of ſtone cut for building.
He ſhall bring forth the head ſtone with ſhoutings. Zech. iv.
3. Gem; precious ſtone.
I thought I ſaw
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Ineſtimable ſtones, unvalu'd jewels. Shakeſp. Rich, III.
4. Anything made of ſtone.
Lend me a looking-glaſs;
If that her breath will miſt or ſtain the ſtone,
Why then ſhe lives. Shakeſpeare.
5. Calculous concretion in the kidneys or bladder; the diſeaſe
ariſing from a calculus.
A ſpecifick remedy for preventing of the ſtone I take to be
the conſtant uſe of alehoof-ale. Temple.
A gentleman ſuppoſed his difficulty in urining proceeded
from the ſtone. Wiſeman's Surgery.
6. The caſe which in ſome fruits contains the ſeed.
To make fruits without core or ſtone is a curioſity. Bacon.
7. Teſticle,
8. A weight containing fourteen pounds.
Does Wood think that we will ſell him a ſtone of wool for
his counters ? Swift.
9. Stone is uſed by way of exaggeration.
What need you be ſo boiſt’rous rough
I will not ſtruggle, I will ſtandſtone ſtill. Shakeſp. K. john.
And there lies Whacum by my ſide,
Stone dead, and in his own blood dy’d. Hudibras.
The fellow held his breath, and lay ſtone ſtill, as if he was
dead. L’Eſtrange.
She had got a trick of holding her breath, and lying at her
length for ſtone dead. L’Eſtrange.
The cottages having taken a country-dance together, had
been all out, and ſtood ſtone ſtill with amazement. Pope.
ro. To leave no Stone unturned. To do every thing that can
be done for the produćtion or promotion of any effect.
Women, that left no ſtone unturn'd
In which the cauſe might be concern'd,
Brought in their children's ſpoons and whiſtles,
To purchaſe ſwords, carbines, and piſtols. Hudibras.
He crimes invented, left unturn’d no ſtone
To make my guilt appear, and hide his own. Dryden.
Stone. adj. Made of ſtone.
Preſent her at the leet,
Becauſe ſhe bought ſtone jugs, and no ſeal’d quarts. Shakeſp.
To Stone. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To pelt or beat or kill with ſtones.
Theſe people be almoſt ready to ſtone me. Ex. xvii. 4.
Crucifixion was a puniſhment unknown to the Jewiſh laws,
among whom the ſtoning to death was the puniſhment for
blaſphemy. Stephens's Sermons.
2. To harden.
Oh perjur'd woman' thou do'ſt ſtone my heart;
And mak’ſt me call what I intend to do,
A murder, which I thought a ſacrifice. Shakeſp. Othello.
Sto'N E BREAK. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
Sto'NEcHAtter, n.ſ. A bird. Ainſworth.
Sto'Necrop. m. ſ. A ſort of tree.
Stºnecrop tree is a beautiful tree, but not common. Mortim.
Sto'NEcutter. n.ſ.. [from ſtone and cutter.] One whoſe trade
is to hew ſtones.
A ſtonecutter's man had the veſiculae of his lungs ſo ſtuffed
with duſt, that, in cutting, the knife went as if through a heap
of ſand. Derham's Phyſicº-Theology.
My proſecutor provided me a monument at theſionecutters,
and would have erected it in the pariſh-church. Swift.
Sto'NEFERN. m. ſ. A plant. Anſworth.
Sto.NEFLY. n.ſ. An inſe&amp;t. Ainſworth.
ST3'NEFRuit. m. ſ. [/lone and fruit.] Fruit of which the
ſeed is covered with a hard ſhell enveloped in the pulp.
We gathered ripe apricocks and ripe plums upon one tree,
from which we expect ſome other forts of ſongfruit. Boyle.
§. m. ſ. A kind of hawk. Ainſworth.
TO R. "...ſ. [ ſtone and horſe.] A horſe not caſtated.
here here is moſt arablelaid, J'onehorſes or geldings
more neceſſary or geldings are
y. Martimer'; Huſbandry.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
pitch. -
Sto'NEPlove R. n.ſ. A bird. Ainſworth.
Sto'Nesmick le. n ſ. A bird. Ainſworth.
Sºro'N E work. m. ſ. [/fone and work.] Building of ſtone.
They make two walls with flat ſtones, and fill the ſpace
with earth, and ſo they continue the ſtonework. Mortimer.
Sto'Niness. n.ſ.. [from ſtony.] The quality of having many
ſtones. -
The name Hexton owes its original to the ftoningſ of the
place. earne.
Small gravel or ſonineſ is found therein. Mortimer.
Sto'NY adj. [from ſtone.]
1. Made of ſtone. -
Nor ſtony tower, nor walls of beaten braſs,
Can be retentive to the ſtrength of ſpirit. Shakespeare ful caſ
With love's light wings did I o'erperch theſe walls;
For ſtony limits cannot hold love out. Shakespeare Rim, andjul,
Nor ſlept the winds
Within their ſtony caves, but ruſh'd abroad
From the four hinges of the world, and fell
On the vext wilderneſs, whoſe talleſt pines,
Though rooted deep as high and ſturdieſt oaks,
Bow'd their ſtiff necks, loaden with ſtormy blaſts,
Or torn up ſheer. 44ilton's Paradiſe Regain'd.
Here the marſhy grounds approach your fields,
And there the ſoil a ſtony harveſt yields. Dryden's Pirgil.
As in ſpires he ſtood, he turn'd to ſtone;
The ſtony ſnake retain'd the figure ſtill his own. Dryden.
They ſuppoſe theſe bodies to be only water petrified, or
converted into theſe ſparry or ſtony icicles. Woodward.
2. Abounding with ſtones.
From the ſtony Maenalus
Bring your flocks, and live with us, Milton,
3. Petrifick.
Now let the ſtony dart of ſenſeleſs cold
Pierce to my heart, and paſs through every fide. F. Queen.
4. Hard; inflexible; unrelenting.
The ſtony hardneſs of too many patrons hearts, not touched
with any feeling in this caſe. Hºcker.
Thou art come to anſwer
A ſtony adverſary, an inhuman wretch
Uncapable of pity. Shakespeare Merchant ºf Venice.
Eight yards of uneven ground is threeſcore and ten miles
a-foot with me, and the ſtony hearted villains know it. Shakespeare ,
At this ſight
My heart is turn'd to ſtone; and while 'tis mine,
It ſhall be ſtony. Shakespeare Henry WI.
I will clear their ſenſes dark,
What may ſuffice, and ſoften ſtony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due. Milt. Par, Lºft.
Indiff'rence, clad in wiſdom's guiſe,
All fortitude of mind ſupplies;
For how can ſtony bowels melt,
In thoſe who never pity felt Swift.
Stood. The preterite of To ſtand.
Adam, at the news,
Heart-ſtruck with chilling gripe of ſorrow ſtood. Miltºn.
STOOL. m. ſ. [ſtols, Gothick; reol, Saxon; ſteel, Dutch.]
1. A ſeat without a back, ſo diſtinguiſhed from a chair.
If a chair be defined a ſeat for a ſingle perſon, with a back
belonging to it, then aſkol is a ſeat for a ſingle perſon with:
out a back. //atti's Logitº.
Thou fearful fool,
Why takeſt not of the ſame fruit of gold?
Ne fitteſt down on that ſame ſilver ſtcol,
To reſt thy weary perſon in the ſhadow cold?, Fa, Sºuth.
Now which were wiſe, and which were fools?
Poor Alma fits between two ſtools:
The more ſhe reads, the more perplext.
2. Evacuation by purgative medicines. -
There be medicines that move ſtools, and not urine; ſome
other urine, and not ſtools: thoſe that Purge by ſtool, are ſuch
as enter not at all, or little, into the meſentery veins; but
either at the firſt are not digeſtible by the ſtomach, and there-
fore move immediately downwards to the guts; or elſe are aſ:
terwards reječted by the meſentery veins, and ſo turn likewiſe
downwards to the guts. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The periſtaltick motion, or repeated changes of contraction
and dilatation, is not in the lower guts, elſe one would have *
continual needing of going to ſtool. Arbuthnot on Alimentſ.
3. Stool. of Repentance, or cutty ſtool, in the kirks of Scotland, is
ſomewhatanalogous to the pillory. It is elevated above the cº-
gregation. In ſomeplaces there may be a ſeat in it; but it is gº
fierålly without, and the perſon ſtands therein who has been guil-
ty of fornication, for three Sundays in the forenoon; and after
ſermon
Prior.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T O
º:
... ºr
!?.
-
* -
^ -
, --,
iſ.
wº
º --
! --
ſº ſº."
4 ×
Pr
:: *
iſ:
r;”
jº
:*
º
º
ſermon is called upon by name and ſurname, the beadle or kirk-
officer bringing the offender, if refračtory, forwards to his poſt;
and then the preacher proceeds to admonition. Here too are
ſet to publick view adulterers; only theſe are habited in a coarſe
canvas, analogous to a hairy or monaſtick veſt, with a hood
to it, which they call the ſack or ſackcloth, and that every
Sunday throughout a year, or longer.
Unequal and unreaſonable judgment of things brings many
a great man to the ſtool of repentance. L'Aſirange.
Sto'olb All. n.ſ.. [ſicol and ball.] A play where balls are
driven from ſtool to ſtool.
While Betty dances on the green,
And Suſan is at ſtoolball ſeen.
To STOOP. v. n. [reuplan, Saxon; ſluypen, Dutch.]
1. To bend down; to bend forward.
Like unto the boughs of this tree he bended downward,
and ſloped toward the earth. Raleigh.
2. To lean forward ſtanding or walking.
When Pelopidas and Iſmenias were ſent to Artaxerxes,
Pelopidas did nothing unworthy; but Iſmenias let fall his ring
to the ground, and, ſloping for that, was thought to make his
Prior.
adoration. Stillingfleet.
He ſtoºping open'd my left ſide, and took
From thence a rib. Milton.
3. To yield; to bend; to ſubmit.
I am the ſon of Henry the fifth,
Who made the dauphin and the French to ſloop. Shakeſp.
Mighty in her ſhips ſtood Carthage long,
And ſwept the riches of the world from far;
Yet ſhop'd to Rome, leſs wealthy, but more ſtrong. Dryd.
4. To deſcend from rank or dignity.
He that condeſcended ſo far, and ſlooped ſo low, to invite
and to bring us to heaven, will not refuſe us a gracious recep-
tion there. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
Where men of great wealth ſloop to huſbandry, it multi-
plieth riches exceedingly. Bacon.
5. To yield; to be inferiour.
Death his death-wound ſhall then receive,
And ſtoop inglorious. Milton.
Theſe are arts, my prince,
In which your Zama does not ſloop to Rome. Addiſon.
6. To ſink from reſolution or ſuperiority; to condeſcend.
They, whoſe authority is required unto the ſatisfying of
your demand, do think it both dangerous to admit ſuch con-
courſe of divided minds, and unmeet that their laws, which,
being once ſolemnly eſtabliſhed, are to exact obedience of all
men and to conſtrain thereunto, ſhould ſo far ſhop as to hold
themſelves in ſuſpence from taking any effect upon you, 'till
ſome diſputer can perſuade you to be obedient. Booker.
7. To come down on prey as a falcon.
The bird of Jove ſloop'd from his airy tour,
Two birds of gayeſt plume before him drove.
8. To alight from the wing:
Satan ready now
To ſtoºp with wearied wings and willing feet,
On the bare outſide of this world.
Twelve ſwans behold in beauteous order move,
And ſloop with cloſing pinions from above.
g. To fink to a lower place.
Cow'ring low
With blandiſhment, each bird ſloop'd on his wing. Milton.
Sroop. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
r. Aćt of ſtooping; inclination downward.
2. Deſcent from dignity or ſuperiority.
Can any loyal ſubject ſee
With patience ſuch a ſloop from ſovereignty 2
Milton.
Milton.
Dryden.
An ocean pour'd upon a narrow brook? Dryden.
3. Fall of a bird upon his prey. -
- Now will I wander through the air,
Mount, make a ſloop at ev'ry fair. JWaller.
An eagle made a ſloop at him in the middle of his exalta-
tion, and carried him away. L'Eſtrange.
4. [Scoppa, Saxon; ſloope; Dutch..] A veſſel of liquor. .
Come, lieutenant, I have a ſloop of wine; and here with-
out are a brace of gallants, that would fain have a meaſure to
the health of Othello. Shakeſp. Othello.
There's nothing more in me, fir, but may be ſqueez'd out
without racking, only a ſloop or two of wine. Denham.
A caldron of fat beef, and ſtop of ale,
On the huzzaing mob ſhall more prevail,
Than if you give them, with the niceſt art, -
Ragouſts of peacocks brains, or filbert tart. King.
Sto'opingly, adv. [from/?coping.] With inclination downwards.
Nani was noted to tread ſoftly, to walk ſtoºpingly, and raiſe
himſelf from benches with laborious geſture. J/otton.
To STOP. v. a. [eſtauper, Fr. ſloppare, Ital. ſloppen, Dutch.]
1. To hinder from progreſſive motion.
From the oracle
They will bring all; whoſe ſpiritual counſel had
Shall ſtop or ſpur me. Shakespeare.
Can any dreſſes find a way
To ſtop th’ approaches of decay,
And mend a ruin’d face? Dorſet.
S T O
2. To hinder from any change of ſtate, whether to better or worſe,
3. T; º from ačtion.
* the truth of Chriſt is in me, no man ſhall ſtop me of this
º - - - 2 Cor. xi. 1 o.
4 *o put an end to the motion or adion of anything.
Friend, 'tis the duke's pleaſure,
Whoſe diſpoſition, all the world wei knows
Will not be rubb’d nor ſtopp'd. Sºf King Lear
Almon falls, pierc'd with an arrow from the diſtant war: -
Fix'd in his throat the flying weapon ſtood, -
And ſtºpp'd his breath, and drank his vital blood.
5. To ſuppreſs.
Every bold finner, when about to engage; -
of any known ſin, ſhould arreſt his ºº
ºxecution of his purpoſe with this queſtion: Do I believe that
God has denounced death to ſuch a practice, or joi not? South.
He, on occaſion of ſtopping my play, did me a good office
at court, by repreſenting it as long ago deſigned. Dryden
6. To regulate muſical ſtrings with the fingers. -
In inſtruments of ſtrings, if you ſtºp a ſtring high, where-
by it hath leſs ſcope to tremble, the ſound is more treble, but
yet more dead. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
7. To cloſe any aperture.
Smite, every fenced city, ſtop all wells of water, and mar
land with ſtones. 2 Kings iii. 19.
They pulled away the ſhoulder, and ftopped their ears, that
they ſhould not hear. Zech. vii. 1 t.
A hawk's bell, the holes ſtopped up, hang by a thread within
a bottle-glaſs, and ſtop the glaſs cloſe with wax. Bacºn.
His majeſty ſtopped a leak that did much harm. Bacon.
§ºppings and ſuffocations are dangerous in the body. Bacon.
They firſt raiſed an army with this deſign, to ſtop my mouth
or force my conſent. King Charles.
Celſus gives a precept about bleeding, that when the blood
is good, which is to be judged by the colour, that immediately
the vein ſhould be ſtºpped. Arbuthnot.
8. To obſtruct; to encumber. -
Mountains of ice that ſtop th’ imagin'd way.
To Stop. v. n. To ceaſe to go forward.
Some ſtrange commotion
Is in his brain: he bites his lip, and ſtarts;
Stops on a ſudden, looks upon the ground,
Then lays his finger on his temple; ſtrait
Springs out into faſt gait, thenſtops again. Shakespeare H. VIII.
When men purſue their thoughts of ſpace, they ſtop at the
confines of body, as if ſpace were there at an end. Locke.
If the rude throng pour on with furious pace,
And hap to break thee from a friend's embrace,
Stop ſhort, nor ſtruggle through.
Stop. m.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Ceſſation of progreſſive motion.
Thought's the ſlave of time, and lifetime's fool;
And time, that takes ſurvey of all the world,
Muſt have a ſtop.
The marigold, whoſe courtier's face
Ecchoes the ſun, and doth unlace
Her at his riſe, at his full ſtºp
Packs and ſhuts up her gawdy ſhop,
Miſtakes her cue, and doth diſplay. Cleaveland.
A lion, ranging for his prey, made a ſtop on a ſudden at a
hideous yelling noiſe, which ſtartled him. L'Eſtrange.
2. Hindrance of progreſs; obſtruction.
In weak and tender minds we little know what miſery this
ſtričt opinion would breed, beſides the ſtops it would make in
the whole courſe of all mens lives and actions. Hºoker.
Theſe gates are not ſufficient for the communication be-
tween the walled city and its ſuburbs, as daily appears by the
ſtops and embarraſſes of coaches near both theſe gates. Graunt.
My praiſe the Fabii claim,
And thou great hero, greateſt of thy name,
Ordain'd in war to ſave the ſinking ſtate,
And, by delays, to put a ſtop to fate. Dryden's Aºn.
Occult qualities put a ſtop to the improvement of natural
philoſophy, and therefore have been rejećted. Newton's Opt.
Brokers hinder trade, by making the circuit which the mo-
ney goes larger, and in that circuit more ſtops, ſo that the re-
turns muſt neceſſarily be ſlower and ſcantier. - Locke.
Female zeal, though proceeding from ſo good a principle,
if we may believe the French hiſtorians, often put a ſtºp to the
proceedings of their kings, which might have ended in a re-
formation. Addison's Freeholder.
3. Hindrance of ačtion. -
'Tis a great ſtep towards, the maſtery of our deſires to give
Dryden.
Milton,
Gay.
Shakeſpeare.
, this ſtop to them, and ſhut them up in filence. Locke.
4. Ceſſation of a&amp;tion. -
Look you to the guard to-night;
Let's teach ourſelves that honourable ſtop,
Not to outſport diſcretion. Shakeſkeare.
5. Interruption.
Thou art full of love and honeſty,
And weigh'ſt thy words before thou giv'ſ them breath;
Therefore theſe ſtops of thine fright me the more. Shakeſp.
25 H 6. Prohibition<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T O
S T O'
|
6. Prohibition of ſale.
If they ſhould open a war, they foreſee the conſumption
France muſt fall into by the ſtop of their wine and ſalts, wholly
taken off by our two nations. Temple.
7. That which obſtructs; obſtacle; impediment.
The proud Dueſia, full of wrathful ſpight
And fierce diſdain to be affronted ſo,
Inforc'd her purple beaſt with all her might,
Thatſtºp out of the way to overthrow. Fairy Queen.
On indeed they went: but Ol not far;
A fatal ſtop travers'd their headlong courſe. Daniel.
Bleſſed be that God who caſt rubs, fºops, and hindrances in
my way, when I was attempting the commiſſion of ſuch a
fin. South's Sermons.
So melancholy a proſpe&amp;t ſhould inſpire us with zeal to op-
poſe ſome ſtop to the riſing torrent, and check this overflowing
of ungodlineſs. Rogers.
8. Inſtrument by which the ſounds of wind muſick are regulated.
You would play upon me, you would ſeem to know my
flops; you would pluck out the heart of my myſtery. Shakeſp.
Bleſt are thoſe,
Whoſe blood and judgment are ſo well commingl’d,
That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger,
To ſound what ſlop ſhe pleaſe. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
The harp
Had work, and reſted not; the ſolemn pipe,
And dulcimer, all organs of ſweet ſtop. Milt, Par. Loft.
The ſound
Of inſtruments, that made melodious chime,
Was heard of harp and organ; and who mov’d
Their ſtops, and chords, was ſeen; his volant touch
Inſtinét through all proportions, low and high,
Fled, and purſu'd tranſverſe the reſonant fugue. Milton.
A variety of ſtrings may be obſerved on their harps, and of
ſtops on thcir tibiae; which ſhews the little foundation that
ſuch writers have gone upon, who, from a ſhort paſſage in a
claſſick author, have determined the preciſe ſhape of the an-
cient muſical inſtruments, with the exact number of their pipes,
ſtrings, and ſtºps. Addiſon on Italy.
9. Regulation of muſical chords by the fingers.
The further a ſtring is ſtrained, the leſs ſuperſtraining goeth .
to a note; for it requireth good winding of a ſtring before it
will make any note at all: and in the ſtops of lutes, the higher
they go, the leſs diſtance is between the frets. Bacon.
ro. The aël of applying the ſtops in muſick.
Th' organ-ſound a time ſurvives the ſlop,
Before it doth the dying note give up. Daniel's Civil War.
11. A point in writing, by which ſentences are diſtinguiſhed.
Even the iron-pointed pen,
That notes the tragick dooms of men,
Wet with tears ſtill'd from the eyes
Of the flinty deſtinies,
Would have learn’d a ſofter ſtyle,
And have been aſham'd to ſpoil
His life's ſweet ſtory by the haſte
Of a cruel ſlop ill-plac'd. Craſhaw.
Sro'pcock. m. ſ. [/lop and cock.] A pipe made to let out
liquor, ſtopped by a turning cock.
No man could ſpit from him without it, but would drivel
like ſome paralytick or fool; the tongue being as a ſtopcock to
the air, 'till upon its removal the ſpittle is driven away. Grew.
Sro'PPAGF. n.ſ.. [from ſlop.] The act of ſtopping; the ſtate
of being ſtopped.
The effects are a ſloppage of circulation by too great a
weight upon the heart, and ſuffocation. Arbuthnot.
The ſtoppage of a cough, or ſpitting, increaſes phlegm in
the ſtomach. Floyer on the Humours.
Stopple, or Stºpper. n.ſ.. [from ſtºp.]. That by which any
hole or the mouth of any veſſel is filled up.
Bottles ſwinged, or carried in a wheel-barrow upon rough
ground, fill not full, but leave ſome air; for if the liquor
come cloſe to the ſtopple, it cannot flower. Bacon.
There were no ſhuts or ſlopples made for the ears, that any
loud or ſharp noiſe might awaken it, as alſo a ſoft and gentle
murmur provoke it to ſleep. Ray on the Creation.
Sto'RAxtR.E.E. m. ſ. [/lyrax, Latin.]
1. A tree.
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, ſhaped like a funnel, and
cut into ſeveral ſegments, out of whoſe flower-cup riſes the
pointal, which is fixed like a nail in the forepart of the flower:
this afterwards becomes a roundiſh fleſhy fruit, including one
or two ſeeds in hard ſhells. Miller.
2. A reſinous and odoriferous gum.
| yielded a pleaſant odour like the beſt myrrh, as galbanum,
and ſweet /lorax. Ecclus xxiv. 15.
STORE. m.ſ. [/ºr, in old Swediſh and Runick, is much, and
* Prºfixed to other words to intend their ſignification; ſtor,
Daniſh; ſtoor, Iſlandick, is great. The Teutonick dialects
* to Engliſh ſeem not to have retained this word.]
1. Large number; large quantity; plenty.
The ſhips are fraught wi -
tity of treaſure. ught with ſtore of vićtuals, and good}.
None yet, but ſtore hereafter from the earth
Up hither like aereal vapours flew,
Of all things tranſitory and vain, when fin
With vanity had fill'd the works of men. Milt. Par. Lyſ.
Jove, grant me length of life, and years good ſtore
Heap on my bended back. Dryden's juvenal,
2. A ſtock accumulated; a ſupply hoarded.
We liv'd
Supine amidſt our flowing /fore,
We ſlept ſecurely, and we dreamt of more. Dryden.
Thee, goddeſs, thee, Britannia's iſle adores:
How has ſhe oft exhauſted all her ſtoreſ,
How oft in fields of death thy preſence ſought?
Northinks the mighty prize too dearly bought. Addſºn.
Their minds are richly fraught
With philoſophick ſtares. Thomſºn.
3. The ſtate of being accumulated; hoard.
Is not this laid up in ſtore with me, and ſealed up among
my treaſures? Deutr. xxxii. 34.
Divine Cecilia came,
Inventreſs of the vocal frame:
The ſweet enthuſiaſt from her ſacred/fore
Enlarg’d the former narrow bounds,
And added length to ſolemn ſounds. Dryden,
4. Storehouſe; magazine.
Sulphurous and nitrous foam,
Concocted and aduſted, they reduc’d
To blackeſt grain, and into ſtore convey’d. Miltºn.
Stor E. adj. Hoarded; laid up; accumulated.
What floods of treaſure have flowed into Europe by that
ačtion, ſo that the cauſe of Chriſtendom is raiſed ſince twenty
times told: of this treaſure the gold was accumulate and ſº,
treaſure; but the ſilver is ſtill growing. Bacon's Ho, War.
To Store. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To furniſh; to repleniſh.
Wiſe Plato ſaid the world with men was ſlord,
That ſuccour each to other might afford. Denham,
Her face with thouſand beauties blaſt;
Her mind with thouſand virtues ſor'd;
Her pow'r with boundleſs joy confeſt,
Her perſon only not ador'd. Pri.r.
2. To ſtock againſt a future time.
Some were of opinion that it were beſt to ſtay where they
were, until more aid and ſtore of vićtuals were come; but
others ſaid the enemy were but barely ſtored with vićtuals, and
therefore could not long hold out. Knoles's Hſi, of the Turki.
One having ſtored a pond of four acres with carps, tench,
and other fiſh, and only put in two ſmall pikes, at ſeven years
end, upon the draught, not one fiſh was left, but the two
pikes grown to an exceſſive bigneſs. Hol.
The mind refle&amp;ts on its own operations about the ideas
got by ſenſation, and thereby ſtores itſelf with a new ſet of
ideas, which I call ideas of refle&amp;tion. Lºcke.
To ſtore the veſſel let the care be mine,
With water from the rocks and roſy wine,
And life-ſuſtaining bread. Pºpe's Odyſs).
3. To lay up ; to hoard.
Let the main part of the corn be a common ſtock, laid in
and /?ored up, and then delivered out in proportion. Bacon,
Sto's EHouse. n.ſ. [/fore and houſe.J Magazine; treaſury;
place in which things are hoarded and repoſited againſt a ſu-
ture time.
By us it is willingly confeſſed, that the Scripture of God is
a ſtorehouſe abounding with ineſtimable treaſures of wiſdom
and knowledge, in many kinds over and above things in this
kind barely neceſſary. Hoºker.
They greatly joyed merry tales to feign,
Of which a ſtorehouſ did with her remain. Fairy Queen.
Suffer us to famiſh, and their florehouſes cramm'd with
rain | Shakeſp. Coriolanuſ.
Joſeph opened all the ſhorehouſes, and ſold unto the Egyp-
tians. Gen. xli. 50.
To theſe high pow'rs a ſtorehouſe doth pertain,
Where they all arts and gen'ral reaſons lay;
Which in the ſoul, ev’n after death, remain,
And no Lethean flood can waſh away. -
My heart hath been a ſtorehouſe long of things
And ſayings laid up, portending ſtrange events. Parad. Rºg.
The image of God was reſplendent in man's praćtical
underſtanding, namely that ſtorehouſe of the ſoul, in which
are treaſured up the rules of action and the ſeeds of morality.
South's Sermons.
As many different ſounds as can be made by ſingle articula:
tions, ſo many letters there are in the ſhorehouſe of nature. Hold.
Davie',
Sto'Rt. R. n.ſ.. [from ſtore.] One who lays up.
Sto'R1ED. adj. [from ſtory.] Adorned with hiſtorical pićtures.
Let my due feet never fail
To walk the ſtudious cloiſters pale,
And love the high embowed roof,
With antick pillar maſly proof,
And ſtoried windows richly dight, -
Miltºn.
Caſting a dim religious light.
Some
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T O
º,
! . -
º,
º k
Some greedy minion or imperious wife,
The trophy'd arches, ſtory'd halls invade. Pope.
STQR.K. n.ſ.. [rzone, Saxon.j A bird of paſſage famous for
the regularity of its departure. -
Its beak and legs are long and red; it feeds upon ſerpents,
frogs, and inſects; its plumage would be quite white, were
not the extremity of its wings, and alſo ſome part of its head
and thighs black: it ſits for thirty days and lays but four eggs.
Formerly they would not eat the ſtark; but at preſent it is
much eſteemed for the deliciouſneſs of its fleſh: they go away
in the middle of Auguſt, and return in ſpring. Calmet.
The ſtork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times. jer.
Sto'RKSBILL. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
STORM. n.ſ. ſºftorm, Welſh ; rºomm, Saxon ; ſtorm, Dutch;
ſtorms, Italian.]
I. A tempeſt; a commotion of the elements.
O turn thy rudder hitherward a while,
Here may thy ſtorm-beat veſſel fafely ride. Spenſºr.
We hear this fearful tempeſt fing,
Yet ſeek no ſhelter to avoid theſiorm. Shakeſpeare.
Them ſhe upſtays, mindleſs the while
Herſelf, though faireſt unſupported flower,
From her beſt prop ſo far and ſtorm ſo nigh. Milton.
Sulphurous hail ſhot after us in ſtorm. Milton.
Then ſtay my child ſtorms beat and rolls the main;
Oh, beat thoſe ſtºrms and roll the ſeas in vain. Pope.
2. -Aſſault on a fortified place.
How by ſtºrm the walls were won,
Or how the vićtor ſack'd and burnt the town.
3. Commotion; ſedition; tumult; clamour; buſtle.
Whilſt I in Ireland nouriſh a mighty band,
I will ſtir up in England ſome black ſtorm.
Her ſiſter
Began to ſcold and raiſe up ſuch a ſtorm,
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din.
4. Affliction; calamity; diſtreſs.
5. Violence; vehemence; tumultuous force.
As oft as we are delivered from thoſe either imminent or
preſent calamities, againſt the ſtorm and tempeſt whereof we
all inſtantly craved favour from above, let it be a queſtion
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſp.
what we ſhould render unto God for his bleſfings, univerſally, .
ſenſibly, and extraordinarily beſtowed. Hooker.
To SroRM. v. a. [from the noun..] To attack by open force.
From ploughs and harrows ſent to ſeek renown,
They fight in fields, and ſtorm the ſhaken town. Dryden.
There the brazen tow'r was ſtorm'd of old,
When Jove deſcended in almighty gold. Pope.
To Stor M. v. n.
1. To raiſe tempeſts.
So now he ſtorms with many a ſturdy ſtoure,
So now his bluſtering blaſt each coaſt doth ſcoure. Spenſer.
2. To rage; to fume; to be loudly angry.
Hoarſe, and all in rage,
As mock'd they ſtorm. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
When you return, the maſter ſtorms, the lady ſcolds. Swift.
While thus they rail, and ſcold, and ſtorm,
It paſſes but for common form. Swift.
Sto'RMY. adj. [from ſtorm.]
1. Tempeſtuous.
Bellowing clouds burſt with a ſtormy ſound,
And with an armed winter ſtrew the ground. Addiſon's Italy.
The tender apples from their parents rent
By ſtormy ſhocks, muſt not neglected lie.
2. Violent; paſſionate.
The ſtormy ſultan rages at our ſtay. Irene.
STORY.. n.ſ. ſºccer, Saxon; ſtorie, Dutch; floria, Italian ;
1970&amp;12.
I. Hàº, account of things paſt.
The fable of the dividing of the world between the three
Philips.
ſons of Saturn, aroſe from the true ſtory of the dividing of the -
earth between the three brethren the ſons of Noah. Raleigh.
- Thee I have heard relating what was done
Ere my remembrance: now hear me relate
My ſtory which perhaps thou haſt not heard. Milton.
To king Artaxerxes, thy ſervants Rathumnus the ſtory-
writer, and Smellius the ſcribe. 1 Eſdr. ii. 17.
The four great monarchies make the ſubječt of ancient
ſtory, and are related by the Greek and Latin authors. Temple.
Governments that once made ſuch a noiſe, as founded up-
on the deepeſt counſels and the ſtrongeſt force; yet by ſome
ſlight miſcarriage which let in ruin upon them, are now ſo
utterly extinct, that nothing remains of them but a name;
nor are there the leaſt traces of them to be found but only in
for). South's Sermons.
2. Small tale; petty narrative; account of a fingle incident.
In the road between Bern and Soleurre, a monument erect-
ed by the republick of Bern, tells us the ſtory of an Engliſh-
man not to be met with in any of our own writers. Addison.
3. An idle or trifling tale; a petty fićtion.
Theſe flaws and ſtarts, would well become
A woman's ſtory at a winter's fire,
Authoris'd by her grandame.
9
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
3. Hour; time; ſeaſon.
S T O
This ſcene had ſome bold Greek or Briti
Beheld of old, what ſtories had we ºil. bard
Of fairies, ſatyrs, and the nymphs their dames,
Their feaſts, their revels, and their am’rous flames. Denham.
My maid left on the table one of herſtory-books, which I
found full of ſtrange impertinence, of poor ſervants who came
to be ladies. . Swiſ.
4. [rºon, place, Saxon]. A floor; a flight of rooms.
Avoid enormous heights of ſeven ſtories, as well as irre-
gular forms, and the contrary fault of low diffended fronts.
17 otton.
Sonnets or elegies to Chloris,
Might raiſe a houſe about two ſtories;
A lyrick ode wou'd ſlate; a catch -
Would tile; an epigram would thatch. Swift. .
To Story, v.a. [from the noun.]
I. To tell in hiſtory; to relate.
How worthy he is, I will leave to appear hereafter, rather
than ſtory him in his own hearing. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
'Tis not vain or fabulous
What the ſage poets, taught by th’ heav'nly muſe,
Stoy'd of old in high immortal verſe,
Of dire chimera's and enchanted iſles,
And rifted rocks; whoſe entrance leads to hell. Milton.
It is ſtoried of the brazen Coloſſus, in the iſland of Rhodes,
that it was ſeventy cubits high; the thumbs of it being ſo big,
that no man could graſp one of them about with both his arms.
//ikins.
Recite them, nor in erring pity fear,
To wound with ſtoried griefs the filialear. Poſe.
2. To range one under another.
Becauſe all the parts of an undiſturbed fluid are of equal
gravity, or gradually placed or /iuried according to the differ-
ense of it; any concretion that can be ſuppoſed to be natu-
rally and mechanically made in ſuch a fluid, muſt have a like
ſtructure of its ſeveral parts; that is, either be all over of a
ſimilar gravity, or have the more ponderous parts nearer to
its baſis. Bentley's Sermons.
Sto'RYTELLER. m. ſ. [ſtory and tell.] One who relates tales;
An hiſtorian. In contempt.
In ſuch a ſatire all would ſeek a ſhare,
And every fool will fancy he is there;
Old ſtorytellers too muſt pine and die,
To ſee their antiquated wit laid by ;
Like her, who miſs'd her name in a lampoon,
And griev'd to find herſelf decay’d ſo ſoon. Dryden.
Company will be no longer peſtered with dull, dry, tedi-
ous ſtorytellers. Swift's Polite Converſation.
Stoye. n.ſ.. [ſtoo, Iſlandick, a fire place; reopoa, Saxon;
eſtuve, French; /love, Dutch.]
1. A hot houſe; a place artificially made warm.
Fiſhermen who make holes in the ice, to dip up ſuch fiſh
with their nets as reſort thither for breathing, light on ſwallows
congealed in clods, of a ſlimy ſubſtance, and carrying them
home to their ſtoves, the warmth recovereth them to life and
flight. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
The heat which ariſes out of the leſſer ſpiracles brings forth
nitre and ſulphur; ſome of which it affixes to the tops and
ſides of the grotto's, which are uſually ſo hot as to ſerve for
natural/love, or ſweating vaults. J/o:dward.
The moſt proper place for unction is a ſtove. l/ſeman.
2. A place in which fire is made, and by which heat is commu-
nicated.
If the ſeaſon prove exceeding piercing, in your great houſe
kindle ſome charcoals; and when they have done ſmoaking,
put them into a hole ſunk a little into the floor, about the
middle of it. This is the ſafeſt ſlove. Evelyn.
To Stove. v. a. [from the noun..] To keep warm in a houſe
artificially heated.
For December, January, and the latter part of November,
take ſuch things as are green all winter; orange trees, lemon
trees, and myrtles, if they be ſlaved; and ſweet majºram
warm ſet. Bacon.
To Stound. v. n. [ſºunde, º Iſlandick.]
1. To be in pain or ſorrow.
2. For ſlun'd.
Stound. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] - -
1. Sorrow; grief; miſhap. Out of uſe. The Scºts retain it.
ut of uſe. /-
Spenſer.
Begin and end the bitter baleful ſound, "__ tº
If leſs than that I fear. Fair. Queen.
The fox his copeſmate found,
To whom complaining his unhappy/?"}.
He with him fard ſome better chance to find. Hubberd.
2. Aſtoniſhment; amazement.
Thus we ſtood as in a ſound,
And wet with tears, like dew, the ground. Gay.
Spenſer.
... n.f ſºur, Runick, a battle; reedman, Saxon, to diſ-
"...] {{ ; incurſion; tumult. Obſolete.
And he that harrow'd hell with heavy ſour,
The faulty ſouls from thence brought to his heavenly bowr.
- Fairy Queen.
Love<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
S T R
long ſince has to thy mighty powre
r}:º:...y poor captived º, -
And raging now therein with reſtleſs ſlºwre,
Do'ſ tyrannize in every weaker part. Spenſºr.
The giant ſtruck ſo mainly mercileſs,
That cou’d have overthrown a ſtonny tower,
And were not heavenly grace that him did bleſs,
He had been pouldered all as thin as flower, -
But he was wary of that deadly ſlowre. Fairy Queen.
STOUT. m. ſ. [/lout, Dutch; /loſz, proud, German; /*autam,
Gothick, is to ſtrike.]
: luſty : valiant.
I. Strong; y; When I was young,
remember how my father ſaid, r
º: champion #. handled ſword. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Some captain of the land or fleet,
Stout of his hands, but of a ſoldier's wit:
Cries, I have ſenſe to ſerve my turn, in ſtore,
And he's a raſcal who pretends to more. Dryden,
- ve; bold; intrepid. -
2. Bra The jº are ſpoiled, they have ſlept their ſleep.
Pſal. lxxvi. 5.
He loſt the charaćter of a bold, ſºut, and magnanimous
man, which he had been long reputed to be. Clarendºn.
3. Obſtinate; pertinacious ; reſolute; proud.
The lords all ſtand,
To clear their cauſe, moſt reſolutely ſºut, Daniel.
There virtue and ſhout honour paſs'd the guard,
Thoſe only friends that could not be debard. Bathuſ.
4. Strong; firm.
The ſautºff veſſel to the ſtorm gave way,
And ſuck'd through looſen'd planks the ruſhing ſea. Dryden.
Stout, n.ſ. A cant name for ſtrong beer.
Should but his muſe deſcending drop
A ſlice of bread and mutton chop,
Or kindly, when his credit's out,
Surpriſe him with a pint officut;
Exalted in his mighty mind,
He flies and leaves the ſtars behind. Swift.
Stoutly. adv. [from ſºut] Luſtily; boldly; obſtinately.
Stou’tness. n.ſ.. [from ſoul J
1. Strength; valour.
2. Boldneſs; fortitude.
His baſhfulneſs in youth was the very true ſign of his virtue
and ſoutneſs after. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
3. Obſtinacy; ſtubborneſs.
Come all to ruin, let
Thy mother rather feel thy pride, than fear
Thy dangerous/outneſ, for I mock at death
With as ſtout heart as thou. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
ToSTOW. v. a. [rzoy, Sax, ſtoe, old Friſick, a place; ſłowen,
Dutch; to lay "P.] To lay up; to repoſite in order; to lay
in the proper place.
Foul thief where haſ thou ſow'd my daughter Shakespeare
I'th'holſters of the ſaddle-bow,
Two aged piſtols he did ſlow. Hudibrar.
Some ſlow their oars, or ſtop the leaky fides. Dryden.
All the patriots of their ancient liberties were beheaded,
Jºin dungeons, or condemned to work in the mines. Ad.
The goddeſs ſhov'd the veſſeſ from the ſhores,
And ſºw'd within its womb the naval ſtores. Pope.
Stow'AGE. m.ſ. [from ſlow.]
1. Room for laying up.
In every veſſel there isJ’owage for immenſe treaſures, when
the cargo is pure bullion, or merchandize of is great a value.
Addison on the Stale ºf the J/ar.
2. The ſtate of being laid up.
'Tis plate of rare device, and jewels
Of rich and exquiſite form, their value's great;
And I am ſomething curious, being ſtrange,
To have them in ſafe Mowage. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Stowe, /loc. Whether "gy of jointly are the ſame ..., the
Saxon rºof, a place. - Gibſon's Camden.
STRA'Bism. n.ſ. [ſirabiſme, Fr. *:26, wº.] A ſquinting; act
of looking aſquint. to
To STRA'Odle. v. n. [Suppoſed to come fromJiriddle or/ride.]
To fland or walk with the feet removed far from each other
to the right and left.
Let man ſurvey himſelf, diveſted of artificial charms, and
he will find himſelf a forked /rading animal, with bandy legs.
- Arbuthnot and Pº.
To STRAGGLE. [Of this word no etymology is º
".” Probably a frequentative of ſtray, from Jtravviare, Italian
of extraviam, Latin.] &gt;
I. arider without any CC i - -
il iſ - -
o * rta d ečtion &gt; to TOWe &gt; to
But ſtay’s like One that thinks to bring his friend
* ºf two, and ſº. the journey's end:
Araggle on too far.
Having paſſ the S
S *r
Charybdis, and the ſº, .
great ſtore of flames and
5
Suckling.
ſmoke, Raleigh.
**, they came between Scylla and
º, which ſeemed to caſt out
e
A wolf ſpied out affraggling kid, and purſued him. L'Eir,
Children, even when they endeavour their utmoſt, cannot
keep their minds from ſtraggling. Lock,
2. Te wander diſperſedly.
He likewiſe enriched poor ſtraggling ſoldiers with great
• quantity. Shakeſpeare's Timon ºf Athens.
They found in Burford ſome of theſtraggling ſoldiers, who
out of wearineſs ſtayed behind. Clarendin,
From ſtraggling mountaineers for publick good,
To rank in tribes, and quit the ſavage wood;
Houſes to build, and them contiguous make,
For cheerful neighbourhood and ſafety’s ſake. Tatt.
3. To exuberate; to ſhoot too far.
Were they content to prune the laviſh vine,
Of ſtraggling branches, and improve the wine,
Trim off the ſmall ſuperfluous branches on each ſide of the
hedge º: too far out. Mortimer', Husbandry.
4. To be diſperſed; to be apart from any main body; to fland
ſingle.
o Wide was his pariſh, not contraded cloſe
In ſtreets, but here and there a Jiraggling houſe;
Yet ſtill he was at hand. Dryden,
Stra'GGLER. m.ſ. [from ſtraggle.]
1. A wanderer; a rover; one who forſakes his company; one
who rambles without any ſettled direction.
The laſt ſhould keep the countries from paſſage of ſtragger,
from thoſe parts, whence they uſe to come forth, and ºn.
times uſe to work much miſchief. Spenſer's Ireland.
Let's whip theſe ſtragglers o'er the ſeas again,
Iºſh hence theſe over-weening rags of France,
Theſe famiſh'd beggars. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
His pruning hook correàs the vines,
And the looſe/ragglers to their ranks confines. Pope.
Bottles miſſing are ſuppoſed to be half ſtolen by ſtraggler,
and the other half broken. Swift.
* Anything that puſhes beyond the reſt, or flands ſingle.
Let thy hand ſupply the pruning knife,
And crop luxuriantſiragglers, nor be loth
To ſtrip the branches of their leafy growth. Dryden.
STRAIGHT, adj. [/rack, old Dutch’ ºf . well obſerved by
4nſworth, that for not crooked we ought to write ſtraight, and
for narrow ſtrait; but for Areight, which is ſometimes found,
there is no good authority.]
1. Not crooked; right.
Beauty made barren the ſwell'd boaſt
Of him that beſt could ſpeak; feature, laming
The ſhrine of Venus, or ſtraight-pight Minerva.
Shakeſpeare.
A hunter's horn and cornet is oblique; yet they have like-
wiſe ſtraight horns; which, if they be of the ſame bore with
the oblique, differ little in ſound, ſave that theftraight require
ſomewhat a ſtronger blaſt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
There are many ſeveral ſorts of crooked ine, ; but there
is one only which is Jiraight Dryden.
Water and air the varied form confound;
The ſtraight looks crooked, and the ſquare grows ;
riºr,
When I ſee a ſlrait ſtaff appear crooked while half under
the water, the water gives méa falſe idea. Hatti's Lºiº.
2. Narrow; cloſe. This ſhould properly be ſtrait, ºſtroit, Fr.
[See St RAIt..] r
Queen Elizabeth uſed to ſay of her inſtrućtions to great ot-
ficers, that they were like to garments, ſtrait at the firſt put-
ting on, but did by and by wear looſe enough. Boº.
STRAIGHT. adv. [ftrax, faniſh; ſtrack, Dutch.] º
ately; directly. This ſenſe is naturally derived from the ad-
jectivº, as a ſtraight line is the ſhorteſt line betweentwo point.
If the devil come and roar for them,
I will not ſend them. I will afterſtraight,
And tell him ſo. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Thoſe flinks which the noſtrils/traight abhor and expel, are
not the moſt pernicious. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
With chalk I firſt deſcribe a circle here,
Where the aetherial ſpirits muſt appear: | -
Come in, come in; for here they will be ſtrait:
Around, around the place I fumigate. Dryden,
I know thy generous .# well, n it
inor appearance of diſhonour on tt, -
; *:::::: and mounts into a blaze. Addison.
To STRAI'GHTEN. v. a. [from ſtraight.] To make not
: to make ſtraight.
“... ſtick is . ſtraightened except it be as far bent
on the clean contrary ſide. Heir.
Of our ſelves being ſo apt to err, the only way wº .
have to ſtraighten our paths is, by following the rule o Á 1s
will, whoſe footſteps naturally are right. - Hº:
STRA1'GHTNEss. n.ſ. [from ſiraight] Reātitude; the con
trary to crookedneſs.
- - h
ſt fir and pine, becauſe of their leng
Some are for maſts, as p 'Bºº, Nºra Hiſtory.
and ſtraightneſs. - - -
sº HTWAYs, adv, [ſtraight and way. Immediately;
ſtraight. - Let
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
º
--
Let me here for ay in peace remain,
Or ſº aightway on that laſt long voyage fare. Fairy Queen.
Soon as he entred was, the door ſtraightway
Did ſhut. Fairy Queen.
Thus ſtands my ſtate, 'twixt Cade and York diſtreſt;
Like to a ſhip, that, having 'ſcap'd a tempeſt,
Is ſtraitway claim'd and boarded with a pirate.
Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a witch,
And ſtraightway give thy ſoul to him thou" ſerv'ſt.
- Shakeſpeare.
The Turks ſtraightway breaking in upon them, made a
bloody fight. Knolles.
As ſoon as iron is out of the fire, it deadeth ſtraightways.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The ſound of a bell is ſtrong; continueth ſome time after
the percuſſion; but ceaſeth ſtraightways if the bellor ſtring be
touched. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
The ſun's power being in thoſe months greater, it then
fraightways hurries ſteams up into the atmoſphere. J/oodward.
To S I RAIN. v. a. [effreindre, French.]
1. To ſqueeze through ſomething.
Their aliment ought to be light, rice boiled in whey and
trained. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. To purify by filtration.
Shakespeare.
Earth doth not ſtrain water ſo finely as ſand. Bacon.
3. To ſqueeze in an embrace. .
I would have ſtrain'd him with a ſtrićt embrace;
But through my arms he ſlipt and vaniſh'd. Dryden.
Old Evander, with a cloſe embrace,
Strain'd his departing friend; and tears o'erflow his face.
Dryden's AFneid.
4. To ſprain; to weaken by too much violence.
The jury make no more ſcruple to paſs againſt an Engliſh-
man and the queen, though it be to ſtrain their oaths, than to
drink milk unſtrained. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Prudes decay’d about may tack,
Strain their necks with looking back.
5. To put to its utmoſt ſtrength.
By this we ſee in a cauſe of religion, to how deſperate ad-
ventures men will ſtrain themſelves for relief of their own
Swift.
part, having law and authority againſt them. Hooker.
Too well I wote my humble vaine,
And how my rhimes been rugged and unkempt;
Yet as Icon my cunning T will ſtrain. Spenſer.
Thus mine enemy fell,
And thus I ſet my foot on's neck;—even then
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he ſweats,
Strains his young nerves, and puts himſelf in poſture
That acts my words. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
My earthly by his heavenly overpower'd,
Which it had long ſtood under, ſtrain'd to th’ height
In that celeſtial colloquy ſublime,
As with an obječt that excels the ſenſe,
Dazled and ſpent, ſunk down. Milton's Parad. Loft.
The lark and linnet ſing with rival notes;
They ſtrain their warbling throats,
To welcome in the ſpring. Dryden.
Nor yet content, ſhe ſtrain, her malice more,
And adds new ills to thoſe contriv'd before. Dryden.
It is the worſt ſort of good huſbandry for a father not to
frain himſelf a little for his ſon's breeding. Locke.
Our words flow from us in a ſmooth continued ſtream,
without thoſe ſtrainings of the voice, motions of the body, and
majeſty of the hand, which are ſo much celebrated in the ora-
tors of Greece and Rome. Atterbury.
Strain'd to the root, the ſtooping foreſt pours
A ruſtling ſhower of yet untimely leaves.
6. To make ſtrait or tenſe.
A bigger ſtring more ſtrained, and a leſſer ſtring leſsſtrained,
may fall into the ſame tone. Bacon.
Thou, the more he varies forms, beware
To frain his fetters with a ſtrićter care. Dryden's Wirgil.
7. To puſh beyond the proper extent.
See they ſuffer death,
But in their deaths remember they are men,
Strain not the laws to make their torture grievous. Addison.
There can be no other meaning in this expreſſion, how-
ever ſome may pretend to ſtrain it. Swift.
8. To force; to conſtrain; to make uneaſy or unnatural.
The lark ſings ſo out of tune,
Straining harſh diſcords and unpleaſing ſtrains. Shakeſpeare.
He talks and plays with Fatima, but his mirth
Is forc'd and ſtrain'd: in his looks appears
A wild diſtračted fierceneſs.
To STRAIN. v. n. To make violent efforts.
To build his fortune I will ſtrain a little,
For ’tis a bond in men. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
You ſtand like greyhounds in the ſlips,
Straining upon the ſtart.
They ſtroin,
That death may not them idly find t'attend
Their cartain laſt, but work to meet their end.
Thomſºn.
Denham.
Shakeſp. Hen. V.
Daniel.
S T R
wº with too weak a wing,
* *eds will write epiſtles to the king
2. To be filtred by compreſſion. -&gt; Pºpe.
Caeſar thought that all ſea ſandsh
water : but it is the ſea water; beca
to the meaſure of the tide, and the ſea water paſſing or ſtrain-
ing through the ſands leaveth the ſaltneſs behi -
STRAIN. m.ſ. (from the verb.] neſs behind them. Bacon.
1. An injury by too much violence,
lºt. º gained by cuſtom, and ſeldom recovers a /train;
oken, is never well ſet again. Temple.
In all pain there is a deformity by a ſolution of continuity,
*s. or *tendency to ſolution, as in convulſions ºf
2. [rzenge, Saxon.] Race; generation; deſcent. §:
Thus far I can praiſe him; he is of a noble ſtrain
Of approv’d valour. - Shºpar.
Twelve Trojan youths, born of their nobleſt ſtrains,
I took alive; and, yet enrag'd, will empty all their veins
f vital ſpirits. Chapman's Iliad.
Why do'ſ thou fally feign
Thyſelf a Sidney from which noble ſtrain
He ſprung, that could ſo far exalt the name
Of love.
Turn then to Pharamond, and Charlemagne,
And the long heroes of the Gallick/train. Prior.
3. Hereditary diſpoſition.
Amongſt theſe ſweet knaves and all this courteſy " the ſtrain
of man's bred out into baboon and monkey. Shakeſpeare.
Intemperance and luſt breed diſeaſes, which propagated,
ſpoil the ſtrain of a nation. Tillotſon.
4. A ſtile or manner of ſpeaking.
According to the genius and ſtrain of the book of Proverbs,
the words wiſdom and righteouſneſs are uſed to ſignify all re-
ligion and virtue. Tillotſon's Sermons.
In our liturgy are as great ſtrains of true ſublime eloquence,
as are any where to be found in our language. Swift.
Macrobius ſpeaks of Hippocrates' knowlege in very lofty
azz.f. Baker.
5. Song; note; ſound.
Wilt thou love ſuch a woman what, to make thee an in-
ſtrument, and play falſe ſtrains upon thee. Shakeſpeare.
Orpheus ſelf may heave his head
From golden ſlumber on a bed
Of heap'd Elyſian flowers, and hear
Such ſtrains as would have won the ear
Of Pluto, to have quite ſet free
His half-regain’d Eurydice.
Their heav'nly harps a lower/train began,
And in ſoft muſick mourn the fall of man.
When the firſt bold veſſel dar'd the ſeas,
High on the ſtern the Thracian rais'd his ſtrain,
While Argo ſaw her kindred trees
Deſcend from Pelion to the main.
6. Rank; charaćter.
But thou who lately of the commonſtrain,
Wert one of us, if ſtill thou do'ſt retain
The ſame ill habits, the ſame follies too,
Still thou art bound to vice, and ſtill a ſlave.
7. Turn; tendency.
Becauſe hereticks have a ſtrain of madneſs, he applied her
with ſome corporal chaſtiſements, which with reſpite of time
might haply reduce her to good order. Hayward.
8. Manner of violent ſpeech or action.
You have ſhew'd to-day your valiant ſtrain,
And fortune led you well. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Such take too high a ſirain at the firſt, and are magna-
nimous more than tract of years can uphold, as was Scipio
Africanus, of whom Livy ſaith, ultima primiş cedebant. Bacon.
SI RAI'NER. n.ſ.. [from ſtrain.] An inſtrument of filtration.
The excrementitious moiſture paſſeth in birds through a
finer and more delicate ſtrainer than it doth in beaſts; for
feathers paſs through quills, and hair through ſkin. Bacºn.
Shave the goat's ſhaggy beard, leſt thou too late
In vain ſhould'ſt ſeek a ſtrainer to diſpart ---
The huſky terrene dregs from purer muſt. Philips.
The ſtomach and inteſtines are the preſs, and the lasteal veſ-
ſels theſirainers to ſeparate the pure emulſion from its feces. Arb.
Theſe when condens'd, the airy region pours
On the dry earth, in rain or gentle ſhowers,
Th’ infinuating drops ſink through the ſand,
And paſs the porous ſtrainers of the land.
STRAIT. adj. [jiroit, French; ſtrettº, Italian.]
1. Narrow; cloſe; not wide.
Witneſſes, like watches go
Juſt as they're ſet, too faſt or ſlow 3. y
And where in conſcience they're/freight lac'd,
'Tis ten to one that ſide is caſt.
2. Cloſe; intimate. - - - -
He, forgetting all former injuries, had received that naughty
Plexiſtus into a ſtraight degree of favour, his goodneſs being as
apt to be deceived, as the other's craft was to deceive. Aid".
25 I 3. Strict 5
ad natural ſprings of freſh
uſe the pit filled according
JWaller.
Milton:
Dryden.
Pope's St. Cºtilia.
Dryden.
Blackmore.
Hudibras.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
*
S T R
|
3. sº I/rait all thy commandments; and all falſe
- Pſalms, Common Prayer.
wº º: º by the º their lands in Eng-
hº there is a/traighter order taken. Spenſer.
'He now, forſooth, takes on him to reform
Some certain edićts, and ſome ſtrait decrees
That lay too heavy on the commonwealth.
4. Difficult; diſtreſsful. - *
Proceed no ſtraiter 'gainſt our uncle Glo'ſter,
Than from the evidence of good eſteem,
He be approv’d in practice culpable. Shakespeare . Henry VI.
5. It is uſed in oppoſition to crooked, but is then more properly
written ſtraight. [See STREIGHT.] - - - -
A bell or a cannon may be heard beyond a hill which in-
tercepts the fight of the ſounding body, and ſounds are pro-
pagated as readily through crooked pipes as through fºreight
Ones. - - - Newton's Opticks.
STRAIT. n.ſ.
I. A narrow paſs, or frith. - -
Plant garriſons to command the ſtreights and narrow paſſa-
ges. Spenſin.
Honour travels in a ſtrºight ſo narrow,
Whereone but goes abreaſt. Shakeſpeare's Troil, and Crºſſida.
Fretum Magellanicum, or Magellan's Straits. Atlot.
They went forth unto the ſtraits of the mountain. judith.
The Saracens brought together with their vićtories their
language and religion into all that coaſt of Africk, even from
Egypt to the ſtreights of Gibraltar. Brerewood on Languages.
2. Diſtreſs; difficulty.
The independent party which abhorred all motions towards
Peace, were in as great ſireights as the other how to carry on
their deſigns. Clarendon.
It was impoſſible to have adminiſtred ſuch advice to the kin go
in the ſireight he was in, which being purſued might not have
proved inconvenient. Clarendon.
Thyſelf
Bred up in poverty, and ſtreights at home,
Loſt in a deſart here, and hunger-bit. Mihon's Paradiſe Reg.
Thus Adam, fore beſet! reply'd,
9 heav'n in evil/freight this day I ſtand
Before my Judge. Milton's Parad'ſ Loft.
Let no man who owns a Providence grow deſperate under
any calamity or/trait whatſoever, but compoſe the anguiſh of
his thoughts upon this one conſideration, that he comprehends
not thoſe ſtrange unaccountable methods by which Provi-
dence may diſpoſe of him. South's Sermons.
Some modern authors obſerving what ſtraits they have been
Put to in all ages, to find out water enough for Noah's flood,
ſay, Noah's flood was not univerſal, but a national inundation.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
'Tis hard with me, whatever choice I make,
I muſt not merit you, or muſt forſake:
But in this ſireight, to honour ill be true,
And leave my fortune to the gods and you. Dryden.
- Caeſar ſees -
The ſºreights to which you're driven, and as he knows
Cato's high worth, is anxious for your life. Addiſon's Cato.
Wyſſes made uſe of the pretence of natural infirmity to con-
cºal the ſtraits he was in at that time in his thoughts. Broºme.
To STRAit. v. a. [from the noun.] To put to difficulties.
º If your laſs
!ºterpretation ſhould abuſe, and call this
Your lack of love or bounty; you were/traited
For a reply, at leaſt, if you make care
Of happy holding her. Shakeſpeare's I/inter's T.I.,
To STRAI’ſ N. v.a. [from ſtrait.]
1. To make narrow.
The city of Sion has a ſecure haven, yet with ſomething a
*"Sººs, entrance, ſlraitened on the north fide by the ſea-
ruined wall of the mole Sandy's journey.
If this be our condition, thus to dwell
In narrow circuit, Jiraiten’d by a foe,
Subtile or violent. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft.
Whatever ſlraitens the veſſels, ſo as the channels become
. ºw, muſt heat; therefore ſtrait coaths and cold
aths, heat. -
* To contract; to confine. 4, buthnot on Diet.
The/iraitning and confining the profeſſion of the common
ºut naturally extend and enlarge ºntº of the
5... !arendom.
The landed man finds him aggrieved by the falling of his
Tents, and the /ºreightning of his fortune, whilſt the monied
In an keeps up his gain. Locke.
eeling can give us a notion of all ideas that enter at the
ºC,.. colours; but it is Very much ſtreightened and con-
ed º bulk, and diſtance of its objects. Addiſon.
* Which ſtraiten the Britiſh Commerce, will en-
large the French • * &gt;
3. To make “ght; to intend. Addiſon's State ºf the ſpar.
*tch them at their length
And pull theJºshten’d cords with j yºur ſtrength. Dryd,
2.
Shakeſpeare.
Mora'ity, by her falſe guardians drawn,
Shicane in furs, and caſuiſtry in lawn,
Gaſps, as they ſtraiten at each end the cord,
And dies when dulneſs gives her page the word. Dunciad
4. To deprive of neceſſary room.
Waters when ſtraitned as in the falls of bridges, give a roar.
ing noiſe. - Bacon's Natiral Hiſtory.
He could not beſireightned in room or Proviſions, or cºm.
pelled to fight. Clarendºn
Ševeral congregations find themſelves very much ſhatred
and if the mode encreaſe, I wiſh it may not drive many ori.
nary women into meetings. Addiſon's Speciator.
5. To diſtreſs; to perplex.
Men by continually ſtriving and fighting to enlarge their
bounds, and encroaching upon one another, ſeem toº.ſłait-
ned for want of room. Roy.
STRAI’tly, adv. [from ſtrait.]
1. Narrowly.
2. Strictly; rigorouſly.
Thoſe laws he ſtraitly requireth to be obſerved without
breach or blame. Hakur,
3. Cloſely ; intimately. ,
STRAI’t Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſtrait.]
1. Narrowneſs.
The town was hard to beſiege, and uneaſy to come unto,
by reaſon of the ſtraitieſ of all the places 2 43accab. xii.
It is a great errour, and a narrowneſs or ſtraitneſs of mind,
if any man think that nations have nothing to do one with an
other, except there be an union in ſovereignty, or a conjun-
Čtion in pačt. Bacon's Hºly War.
The ſtraitneſs of my conſcience will not give me leave to
ſwallow down ſuch camels. King Charlº.
2. Stričineſs; rigour.
If his own life anſwer the Jiraithſ of his proceeding, it
ſhall become him well. Shakeſpeare.
Among the Romans, the laws of the twelve tables did ex-
clude the females from inheriting, and had many otherſtrait-
nºſe; and hardſhips which were ſucceſſively remedied. Hall.
3. IDiſtreſs; difficulty.
4. Want; ſcarcity.
The ſtraitneſs of the conveniences of life amongſt them had
never, reached ſo far, as to the uſe of fire, till the Spaniards
brought it amongſt them. Lºcłe.
Sr**ºtº'ced, adj. [/trait and late.] Stiff, conſtained, wit.
out freedom.
Let nature have ſcope to faſhion the body as ſhe thinks beſt;
we have few well-ſhaped that are ſtraitlaced, or much tamper'd
with. Locke on Education.
STRAKE... The obſolete preterite offtrike. Struck.
Did'ſ thou not ſee a bleeding hind
Whoſe right haunch earſt my fledfaſt arrow ſirak. Spenſºr.
Fearingleſt they ſhould fall into the quick-ſands, they Jirai,
ſail, and ſo were driven. Aélixxvii. 17.
STRAND. m. ſ. [renanb, Saxon; Jirande, Dutch; ſº end, Iſlan-
dick.] The verge of the ſea or of any water.
I ſaw ſweet beauty in her face;
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand,
When with his knees he kiſs'd the Cretan /irand. Shakſ.
Some wretched lines from this neglected hand,
May find my hero on the foreign/irand, -
Warm'd with new fires. Prior,
To STRANd. v. a. [from the noun..] To drive or force upon
the ſhallows.
Tarchon's alone was koſt, and ſtranded ſtood, -
Stuck on a bank, and beaten by the flood. Dryden's AEnid,
I have ſeen of both thoſe kinds from the ſea, but ſ few
that they can only be ſuch as have ſtrayed from their main re-
fidence, and been accidentally intercepted and ſtranded by gºt
ſtorms. Woodward on Foſhi.
Some from the ſtranded veſſel force their way,
Fearful of fate they meet it in the ſea;
Some who eſcape the fury of the wave, -
Sicken on earth, and ſink into a grave. - Prior,
STRANGE. adj. [e/irange, French; extraneuſ, Latin.]
1. Foreign; of another country.
t the knowledge of ſtrange and divers
ºt In Ot COIntCII) In g Acham's Schoolmaſier,
5****
The natural ſubjećts of the ſtate ſhould bear a ſufficient pro-
portion to the //range ſubjects that they govern. Bacºn.
2. Not domeſtick.
As the man loves leaſt at home to be,
That hath a ſluttiſh houſe, haunted with ſprites;
So ſhe, impatient her own faults to ſee, - -
Turns from herſelf, and in ſtrange things delights. Davitº.
: Wonderful; cauſing wonder. -
3: It is evident, and É. is one of the ſtrong'ſ ſecrets in *
that the whole ſound is not in the whole air only ; but ". O
in every ſmall part of the air. . . . Bacon'; Natural Hiſtory.
Sated at length, ere long I might perceive Milton
Strange alteration in mc. s, 177.
It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
º
º
… '"
…
rº
º
-----
-
...”
lt is ſº ange they ſhould be ſo filent in this matter, when
there were ſo many occaſions to ſpeak of it, if our Saviour had
Plainly appointed ſuch an infallible judge of controverfies. Till,
Strange to relate, from young Illus' head
A lambent flame aroſe, which gently ſpread {
Around his brows, and on his temples fed. Dryden's Zn.
Strange to relate, the flames, involv’d in ſmoke
Of incenſe, from the ſacred altar broke. Dryden’s An.
3- Odd; irregular; not according to the common way.
Deſire my man's abode, where I did leave him:
He's ſtrange and peeviſh. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
A/ºrangº proud return you may think I make you, madam,
when I tell you it is not from every body I would be thus
obliged. Suckling.
4. Unknown ; new.
Long cuſtom had inured them to the former kind alone, by
which the latter was new and/ºrange in their ears. Hoº.
Here is the hand and ſeal of the duke: you know the cha-
raēter, I doubt not; and the ſignet is not ſtrange to you. Shakespeare
Joſeph ſaw his brethren, but made himſelf frange unto
them. Gen. lxii. 7.
Here paſſion firſt I felt,
Commotion ſtrange! Milton.
5. Remote.
She makes it ſtrange, but ſhe would be beſt pleas'd
To be ſo anger'd with another letter. Shakeſpeare.
6. Uncommonly good or bad.
This made David to admire the law of God at that ſhrange
rate, and to advance the knowledge of it above all other know-
ledge. Tillotſon.
7. Unacquainted.
They were now, like ſand without lime, ill bound toge-
ther, at a gaze, looking/trange one upon another, not know-
ing who was faithful. Bacon.
STRANGE. interj. An expreſſion of wonder.
Strange / what extremes ſhould thus preſerve the ſnow,
High on the Alps, or in deep caves below. Waller.
Strange! that fatherly authority ſhould be the only original
of government, and yet all mankind not know it. Locke.
To St RANGE. v. n. [from the adjective.] To wonder; to be
aſtoniſhed.
Were all the aſſertions of Ariſtotle ſuch as theology pro-
nounceth impieties, which we ſtrange not at from one, of
whom a father ſaith, Nec Deum coluit, mec curavit. Glanv.
Stra’NGELY. adv, [from ſtrange.]
1. With ſome relation to foreigners.
As by ſtrange fortune
It came to us, I do in juſtice charge thee
That thou commend it ſtrangely to ſome place,
Where chance may nurſe or end it. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
2. Wonderfully; in a way to cauſe wonder, but with a degree of
diſlike.
My former ſpeeches have but hit }. thoughts,
Which can interpret farther: only, I ſay,
Things have been ſtrangely borne. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
How ſtrangely active are the arts of peace,
Whoſe reſtleſs motions leſs than wars do ceaſe;
Peace is not freed from labour, but from noiſe;
And war more force, but not more pains, employs. Dryden.
We ſhould carry along with us ſome of thoſe virtuous qua-
lities, which we were ſtrangely careleſs if we did not bring from
home with us. Sprat's Sermºns.
In a time of afflićtion the remembrance of our good deeds
will ſtrangely cheer and ſupport our ſpirits. Calamy.
STRANGEN Ess. m. ſ. [from ſtrange.]
1. Foreignneſs; the ſtate of belonging to another country.
If I will obey the Goſpel, no diſtance of place, no ſtrange-
meſ of country can make any man a ſtranger to me. Sprat.
2. Uncommunicativeneſs; diſtance of behaviour.
Ungird thy ſtrangeneſs, and tell me what I ſhall vent to my
lady. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
Will you not obſerve
The ſtrangenſ of his alter'd countenance Shakespeare H. VI.
3. Remoteneſs from common apprehenſion; uncouthneſs.
Men worthier than himſelf
Here tend the ſavage ſtrangeneſ; he puts on ;
And undergo, in an obſerving kind, -
His humourous predominance. Shakeſp. Troil. and Creſſida.
This raiſed greater tumults and boilings in the hearts of
men, than the ſtrangeneſ, and ſeeming unreaſonableneſs of all
the former articles. South's Sermºns.
4. Mutual diſlike.
In this peace there was an article that no º ſhould
enter into Scotland, and no Scottiſhman into England, with-
out letters commendatory: this might ſeem a means to con-
tinue a ſtrangeneſ; between the nations; but it was done to
lock in the borderers. Bacon.
5. Wonderfulneſs; power of raiſing wonder.
If a man, for curioſity or /irangeneſs ſake, would make a
puppet pronounce a word, let him conſider the motion of the
inſtruments of voice, and the like ſounds made in inanimate
bodies. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory,
w
Str A'Not R. h..ſ. [effranger, French.]
1. A foreigner; one of another country.
I am a moſt poor woman, and a /ºranger,
Bºrn out of your dominions; having here
No judge indiff'rent. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Your daughter hath made a groſs revolt;
Tying º: duty, beauty, wit and fortunes
9 ºn extravagant and wheeling/, ang
Qf here and every where. g/tranger Shakeſpeare.
There is no place in Europe ſo much frequented by/irangers
whether they are ſuch as come out of curioſity, or ſuch wn.
are obliged to attend the court of Rome. º on Ital
Melons on beds of ice are taught to bear, ſy.
And/ºrangers to the ſun yet ripºn here Granville.
After a year's inter-regnum from the death of Romulus, the
ſenate of their own authority choſe a ſucceſſor, and Jºaº
merely upon the fame of his virtues. sºft.
2. One unknown. -
Strangers and foes do ſunder, and not kiſs.
You did void your rheum upon my beard,
And foot me, as you ſpura a ſtranger cur
Over your threſhold. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
We ought to acknowledge, that no nations aré wholly
aliens and ſtranger, the one to the other. Bacon.
That ſtranger gueſt the Taphean realm obeys. Pope.
They came, and near him plac'd the ſtranger gueſt. Pope.
3. A gueſt; one not a domeſtick.
He will vouchſafe
This day to be our gueſt: bring forth and pour
Abundance, fit to honour and receive
Shakeſpeare.
Our heavenly ſtranger. Milton,
4. One unacquainted.
My child is yet a ſtranger in the world;
She hath not ſeen the change of fourteen years. Shakespeare
I was no ſtranger to the original: I had alſo ſtudied Virgi's
deſign, and his diſpoſition of it. Dryden.
5. One not admitted to any communication or fellowſhip.
I unſpeak my detraćtion; here abjure
The taints and blames upon myſelf,
For ſtrangers to my nature. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
To Stra's Ger. v. 4. [from the noun..] To eſtrange; to
alienate.
Will you with thoſe infirmities ſhe owes,
Dower'd with our curſe, and /tranger'd with our oath,
Take her or leave her Shakeſpeare.
To STRANGLE. v. a. [ſtrangulo, Latin.] -
I. To choak ; to fuffocate; to kill by intercepting the breath.
His face is black and full of blood;
His eye-balls farther out, than when he liv'd ;
Staring full ghaſtly, like a ſtrangled man. Shakeſ H. VI.
Shall I not then be ſtifled in the vault,
To whoſe foul mouth no healthſome air breathes in,
And there be ſtranged ere my Romeo comes : Shakespeare.
Do'ſt thou not know that thou haſt ſtrangled thine huſ-
bands : 7 ob. iii. 8.
The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and
fºrangled for his lioneſſes, and filled his holes with prey. Neh.
So heinous a crime was the ſin of adultery, that our Saxon
anceſtors compelled the adultereſs to ſtrangle herſelf; and he
who debauched her was to be hanged over her grave. A liffe.
2. To ſuppreſs; to hinder from birth or appearance.
By th' clock, 'tis day;
And yet dark night ſtrangles the travelling lamp:
Is’t night's predominance, or the day's ſhame? Shakespeare Macb.
STRA/NGLeR. n.ſ. [from ſtrangle.] One who ſtrangles..
The band that ſeems to tie their friendſhip together, will be
the very ſtrangler of their amity. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
STRA/Ngles. n.ſ. [from ſtrangle.] Swellings in a horſe's throat.
STRANGULATION. n.ſ. [from ſtrang!..]' The act of ſtrangling;
ſuffocation; the ſtate of being ſtrangled. * -
A ſpunge is miſchievous, not in itſelf, for its powder is
harmleſs; but becauſe, being received into the ſtomach, it
ſwelleth, and, occaſioning its continual diſtenſion, induceth al
ſtrangulation. Brown's /ular Errours.
. The redućtion of the jaws is difficult, and, if they be, not
timely reduced, there happen paralyſis and ſtrangulation.../ſºft.
Str A'NGURY. n.ſ. [šéaſyséſz : ſtrongurić, French..] A diffi-
culty of urine attended with pain. -
STRAF. n.ſ.. [ſtroppe, Dutch; ſtrºfa, Italian ] A narrow
long ſlip of cloath or leather. . . . .
‘I heſe cloaths are good enough to drinkin, and ſo be theſe
boots too; an' they be not, let them hang themſelves in their
Own ft, aps. Shakeſp. ſw. if h Night.
I found but one huſband, a lively cobler, that kicked and
ſpurred all the while his wife was carrying him on; and had
ſcarce paſſed a day without giving her the diſcipline of the
ftrap. Aldſn's Special r.
Sºr’App Apo n.ſ. Chaſtiſement by blows . .
were I at the ſtrappadº, or all the racks in ths woºd, I
would not tell you on compulſion. + º- Shºprare.
STRA'pping. adj. Watt; large; bulky. Uſed of lºgº ſuch
or women in contempt.
- - S. R.?' I.f.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
S T R
-S7RAT4 m / [The plural of ſtratum, Latin.] Beds; layers.
- hical term. - -
A. º matter is diſpoſed into ſtrata, or layers, placed
other; in like manner as any earthy ſediment,
}. *... from a fluid, will naturally be. . . . Wºodward.
with how much wiſdom are the ſtrata laid,
Of different weight and of a different kind,
Of ſundry forms for ſundry ends deſign'd Blackmore.
STRATAGEM. n.ſ. ſºyntz; ſtratagºne, French.J.
1. An artifice in war; a trick by which an enemy is deceived.
John Talbot, I did ſend for thee,
To tutor thee in ſtratagems of war.
Ev'ry minute now
Should be the #. of ſome ſtratagam Shakesp. Henry IV.
2. An artifice; a trick by which ſome advantage is obtained.
Rouſe up your courage, call up all your counſels,
And think on all thoſe ſtratagems which nature -
Keeps ready to encounter ſudden dangers. Denham's Sply.
Thoſe oft are ſtratagems which errours ſeem;
Nor is it Homer nods, but we who dream. Pote.
To Strati FY. v. a. [ſtratifier, Fr. from ſtratum, Lat.] To
range in beds or layers. A chymical term. -
STRATUM. m. ſ. [Latin.] A bed; a layer. A term of phi-
loſophy. -
Another was found in a perpendicular fiſſure of a ſº, atum of
Shakespeare Henry VI.
ftone in Langron iron-mine, Cumberland. //oodward.
Drill'd through the ſandy ſtratum, every way
The waters with the ſandyſłratum riſe. Thomſon.
STRAW, n. ſ. [reneop, Saxon; ſirco, Dutch J - - - - -
1. The ſtalk on which corn grows, and from which it is
threſhed.
I can counterfeit the deep tragedian,
Tremble and ſtart at wagging of a ſtraw, -
Intending deep ſuſpicion. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Plate fin with gold,
And the ſtrong lance of juſtice hurtleſs breaks;
Arm it in rags, a pigmy's ſtraw doth pierce it. Sha'effeare.
Apples in hay and ſtraw ripened apparently; but the apple
in the ſtraw more. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
My new ſtraw hat, that's trimly lin'd with green,
Let Peggy wear. Gay's Paſłoral.
More light he treads, more tall he ſeems to riſe,
And ſtruts a ſtraw breadth nearer to the ſkies. Tickell.
2. Any thing proverbially worthleſs.
Thy arms, thy liberty, beſide
All that's on th’ outſide of thy hide,
Are mine by military law,
Qf which I will not bate one ſiraw. Hudibrar.
'Tis not a ſtraw matter whether the main cauſe be right or
wrong. L'E/trange.
STRAWBERRY. n ſ [fragaria, Latin.] A plant.
It hath a perennial fibroſe root: the leaves are veined, grow-
ing upon each footſtalk; the ſtalks trail upon the ground: the
cup of the flower conſiſts of one leaf, divided into ºn equal
Parts, and expands in form of a ſtar: the flower conſiſts, for
the moſt part, of five leaves, expanded in form of a roſe, and
having many ſtamina in the middle, round the baſe of the ova-
*Y; the fruit is globoſe or oval, and conſiſts of a fleſhy eat-
able pulp, full of protuberances. The ſpecies are ſeven. Mill.
The ſtrawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholeſome berries thrive and ripen beſt,
Neighbour’d by fruit of baſer quality. Shakespeare Henry V.
Content with food, which nature freely bred,
9n wildings and on ſtrawberra, they fed. Dryden.
Strawberries, by their fragrant ſmell, ſeem to be cordial:
the ſeeds obtained by ſhaking the ripe fruit in Winter, are an
excellent remedy againſt the flone. The juice of ſtrawberries
and limmons in 'Pring-water is an excellent driſk in bilious
fevers. Arbuthnot on Diet.
STRA'w BERRY Tree. m. ſ. [arbutus, Latin.]
It is ever green, the leaves roundiſh and ſerrated on the
edges: the flowers conſiſt of one leaf, and ſhaped like a pitcher:
the fruit is of a fleſhy ſubſtance, and very like a ſtrawberry;
divided into five cells, which contain many ſmall ſeeds. Miller.
STRAW BUILT. adj. [ſtraw and *..] Made up of ſtraw.
They on the ſmoothed plank,
The ſuburb of their Jtrawbuilt citadel,
New rubb'd with balm, expatiate. Milton.
STRAwcoloured, adj. [/traw and colºur.] Of a light
yellow. O
I will diſcharge it in your ſtrawcolour'd beard. Shakeſpeare.
º WWORM. m. ſ. [ſtraw and worm.] A worm bred in
ſal W.
STRA'wy, adj. [from /*raw.] Made of ſtraw; conſiſting of
ſtraw.
There the ſºrawy Greeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him, like the mower's ſwiſh. Shakespeare  arc.
In a field of $9", blown upon by the wind, there ºil ap-
Pººr, Waves of a colour differing from that of the reſt; the
wind, by depreſſing ſome of the ears, and not others, makes
th
º *t more fom the intº".Jºrawy parts than the
Bºyle on Q. ouri,
To ST RAY. v. n. [/?roº, Daniſh, to ſcatter; ſtravviare,
to wander. }
1. To wander; to rove.
My eye, deſcending from the hill, ſurveys
Where Thames among the wanton valley ſiray. Denham.
Lo, the glad gales o'er all her beauties Jiray, -
Breathe on her lips, and in her boſom play. ofe
2. To ºf out of the way; to range beyond the proper limit.
What grace hath thee now hither brought this way -
Or doen, thy feeble ſect unweeting hither ſtray. Fai. &amp;#een
No: where can I/hay, -
Save back to England all the world's my way. Shaiſ,
Hath not elſe his eye -
Italian,
Stray'd his affection in unlawful love? Shakeſpeare.
She doth ſtray about
By holy croſſes, where ſhe kneeling prays
or happy wedlock hours. Shakſar,
Wand’reſt thou within this lucid orb,
And ſtray'd from thoſe fair fields of light above,
Amidſt this new creation want’ſ a guide
To reconduct thy ſteps ? Dryden.
3. To err ; to deviate from the right. -
We have erred and ſtrayed.
ST RAY. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Any creature wandering beyond its limits; any thing loſ by
wandering.
She hath herſelf not only well defended,
But taken and impounded as a ſiroy
Common Prayer.
The king of Scots. Shakeſpeare's Henry W.
Should I take you for a ſºray,
You muſt be kept a year and day. Hudibrai.
When he has traced his talk through all its wild rambles,
let him bring home his ſtray; not like the loſt ſheep with joy,
but with tears of penitence. Gºvernment of the Tongue,
Seeing him wander about, I took him up for affray. Dryd.
He cries out, neighbour, haſ thou ſeen a ſtray
Of bullocks and of heifers paſs this way? Addison.
2. Act of wandering.
I would nºt from your love make ſuch a ſtray,
To match you where I hate. Shakespeare care.
STREAK. m. ſ. [renice, Saxon ; ſºreke, Dutch; ſiricia, Ital]
A line of colour different from that of the ground.
The Weſt yet glimmers with ſome ſtreak of day;
Now ſpurs the lated traveller apace,
To gain the timely inn. Shakespeare Macbeth,
What mean thoſe colour'd /?reaks in heav'n,
Diffended, as the brow of God appeas'd? Milton.
The night comes on, we eager to purſue
Till the laſt ſtreaks of dying day withdrew,
And doubtful moonlight did our rage deceive. Dryden,
Ten wildings have I gather'd for my dear;
How ruddy, like your lips, their ſtreaks appear! Dryden,
While the fantaſtick tulip ſtrives to break -
In two-fold beauty, and a parted ſtreak. Priºr,
To STREAK. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſtripe; to variegate in hues; to dapple.
Mark what Jacob did;
When all the yeanings which were ſtreaſſ'd and pied, -
Should fall as Jacob's hire. Shakesp Merchart ºf Priº,
A mule, admirably ſtreaked and dapped with white and
black. Sandys’ journ).
To-morrow, ere freſh morning ſtreak the Eaſt,
With firſt approach of light we muſt be ris'n,
And at our pleaſant labour, to reform º
Yon flow'ry arbours. Miltºn,
Now let us leave this carth, and liſt our eye
To the large convex of yon' azure ſky:
Behold it like an ample curtain ſpread, -
Now ſtreaſ'd and glowing with the morning red;
Anon at noon in flaming yellow bright, !.
And chufing ſable for the peaceful night. Priºr,
2. To ſtretch. Obſolete.
She lurks in midſt of all her den, and ſtreaks
From out a ghaſtly whirlpool all her necks; r
Where, glotting round her rock, to fiſh ſhe falls. Chapman
STREAKY, adj [from ſtreak.] Striped; variegated by hues.
When the hoãry head is hid in ſnow,
The life is in the leaf, and ſtill between r
The fits of falling ſhows appears the ſtreaky green. Dºdº"
STREAM. n.ſ. [rencam, Sax, ſtraum, Iſlandick; ſtrom, Dut]
1. A running water; the courſe of running water; current.
As plays the ſun upon the glaſſy ſtream, ºn. WI
Twinkling another counterfeited beam. Shakespeare Hen. i.
He brought ſtreams out of the rock, and cauſed waters 6
run down like rivers. Pſ. lxxviii it.
Had their cables of iron chains had any great length. they
had been unportable; and, being ſhort, the ſhips º
ſunk at an anchor in any ſteam of weather. . . Raleigh.
Thus from one common ſource our ſtreams divide; i.
Ours is the Trojan, yours th' Arcadian ſide. Drydºn.
Divided intereſts, while thou think'ſt to fway, dºn
Draw like two brooks thy middle ſtream away. º:º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
. . 2. Anything iſſuing from a head, and moving forward with con-
tinuity of parts.
The breath of the Lord is like a ſtream of brimſtone. 1ſ.
You, Drances, never want a ſtream of words. Drydºn.
The ſtream of beneficence hath, by ſeveral rivulets which
have ſince fallen into it, wonderfully enlarged its current. Att.
3. Anything forcible and continued.
The very ſtream of his life, and the buſineſs he hath helmed,
muſt give him a better proclamation. Shakeſpeare.
It is looked upon as inſolence for a man to adhere to his
own opinion, againſt the current ſtream of antiquity. Locke.
To STREAM. v. n. [ſireyma, Iſlandick.] :
1. To flow; to run in a continuous current.
On all ſides round
Steams the black blood, and ſmokes upon the ground. Pºpe.
2. To flow with a current; to pour out water in a ſtream; to
be overflown.
Thengrateful Greece with ſtreaming eyes would raiſe
Hiſtorick marbles to record his praiſe. Pope.
3. To iſſue forth with continuance.
Now to impartial love, that god moſt high,
Do my ſighs ſtream. Shakeſ Al's well that ends well.
To STREAM. v. a. To mark with colours or embroidery in
long tracks.
... The herald's mantle is ſtreamed with gold. Bacon.
STRE'AMER. n.ſ. [from ſtream.]. An enſign; a flag; a pen-
non; any thing flowing looſely from a ſtock.
His brave fleet
With ſilkenſtreamers, the young Phoebus fanning. Shakespeare
The roſy morn began to riſe, -
And wav'd her ſaffron ſtreamer through the ſkies. Dryden.
Brave Rupert from afar appears,
Whoſe waving/treamers the glad general knows.
The man of ſenſe his meat devours;
But only ſmells the peel and flow’rs:
And he muſt be an idle dreamer,
Who leaves the pie, and gnaws the ſtreamer.
STREAMY. adj. [from /?ream]
1. Abounding in running water.
Arcadia,
However ſtreamy now, aduſt and dry,
Deny'd the goddeſs water: where deep Melas,
And rocky Cratis flow, the chariot ſmoak'd
Obſcure with riſing duſt.
2. Flowing with a current.
Before him flaming his enormous ſhield,
Like the broad ſun, illumin’d all the field;
His nodding helm emits a ſtreamy ray. Pope's Iliad.
STREET. n.ſ. [renaez, Saxon; ſtraz, German ; ſtrada, Spa-
niſh and Ital ſtreede, Daniſh; ſtraet, Dutch; //ratum, Lat.]
1. A way, properly a paved way, between two rows of houſes.
He led us through fair ſtreets; and all the way we went there
were gathered people on both ſides, ſtanding in a row. Bacon.
Dryden.
Prior.
Prior.
The ſtreets are no larger than allies. Sandys.
When night
Darkens the ſtreets, then wander forth the ſons
Of Belial, flown with inſolence and wine;
Witneſs the ſtreets of Sodom. Milton.
The Italians ſay the ancients always conſidered the ſituation
of a building, whether it were high or low, in an open ſquare,
or in a narrow ſtreet, and more or leſs deviated from their rule
of art. Addison on Italy.
When you tattle with ſome crony ſervant in the ſame/ret,
leave your own //reet-door open. Swift.
2. Proverbially, a publick place.
That there be no leading into captivity, and no complain-
ing in our ſtreets. - Pſalm czliv. 14.
Our publick ways would be ſo crowded, that we ſhould want
ſtreet-room. Addiſon's Spediator.
Let us refle&amp;t upon what we daily ſee pračtiſed in the world,
and can we believe, if an apoſtle of Chriſt appeared in our
ſtreets, he would retraćt his caution, and command us to be
conformed to the world 2 Rogers's Sermons:
STREET w ALKE.R. m. ſ. [/?reet and walk..] A common proſti-
tute that offers herſelf to ſale in the open ſtreet.
STRENGTH. n.ſ. [remenzº, Saxon.]
1. Force; vigour; power of the body. - - -
Thy youth, thy ſtrength, thy beauty, which will change
To wither'd, weak, and grey. Milton,
Th’ inſulting Trojan came,
And menac'd us with force, our fleet with flame:
Was it the ſtrength of this tongue-valiant lord,
In that black hour, that ſav'd you from the ſword Dryden.
2. Power of endurance; firmneſs; durability; toughneſs;
hardneſs.
Not founded on the brittle ſtrength of bones.
3- Vigour of any kind; power of any kind.
The ailies, after a ſucceſsful Summer, are too apt, upon the
ſtrength of it, to neglect their preparations for the enſuing
campaign. Addiſon.
4. Power of mind; force of any mental faculty.
Ariſtotle's large views, acuteneſs and penetration of thought,
and ſtrength of judgment, few have equalled, Locke.
Milton.
S T R
He enjoyed the greateſt/?rength of good-ſenſe, and the moſt
exquiſite taſte of politeneſs. Addiſon,
5. Potency of liquours. -
6. Fortification; fortreſs.
The raſhneſs of talkin
guard of our heart,
in the mouth.
g ſhould not only be retarded by the
but fenced in by certain ſtrengths placed
Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
He thought
This inacceſſible high ſtrength to have ſeiz'd. Miltºn.
Betray'd in all his ſtrengths, the wood beſet;
All inſtruments, all arts of ruin met, Denham.
7. Support; maintenance of power.
What they boded would be a miſchief to
viding ſhall be one of our principal ſtrengths.
8. Armament; force; power.
What is his ſtrength by land? Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopat.
. Nor was there any other ſtrength deſigned to attend about
his highneſs than one regiment.
9. Perſuaſive prevalence; argumentative force.
This preſuppoſed, it may then ſtand very well with ſtrength
and ſoundneſs of reaſon, thus to anſwer. -
us, you are pro-
Sprat's Sermons.
Clarendon.
Hooker.
To St RENGTH. v. a. To ſtrengthen. Not uſed.
Edward's happy-order'd reign, moſt fertile breeds
Plenty of mighty ſpirits, to ſtrength his ſtate. Daniel.
To STRENGTHEN. v.a. [from ſirength.]
1. To make ſtrong.
2. To confirm; to eſtabliſh.
Let us riſe up and build: ſo they ſtrengthened their hands for
this work. Neh. ii. 18.
Authority is by nothing ſo much ſtrengthened and confirmed
as by cuſtom; for no man eaſily diſtruſts the things which he
and all men have been always bred up to. ... Tem, le.
Thee, bold Longinus' all the Nine inſpire,
And bleſs your critick with a poet's fire:
An ardent judge, who, zealous in his truſt,
With warmth gives ſentence, yet is always juſt;
Whoſe own example ſtrengthen; all his laws,
And is himſelf that great ſublime he draws. Pope.
3. To animate; to fix in reſolution.
Charge Joſhua, and encourage him and ſtrengthen him. Deut.
4. To make to increaſe in power or ſecurity.
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the reſt,
With powerful policy ſtrengthen themſelves. Shafe?. H. VI.
They ſought the ſtrengthening of the heathen. I Mac. vi.
To STRE'NGTHEN. v. n. To grow ſtrong.
Oh men for flatt'ry and deceit renown'd
Thus when y’ are young ye learn it all like him,
*Till as your years increaſe, that ſtrengthens too,
T” undo poor maids. Otway's Orphan.
STRE’NGTHENER. } m. ſ. ſ from ſtrengthen : by contračtion
STRE/NGTH NER. ſtrengthner.]
1. That which gives ſtrength; that which makes ſtrong.
Garlick is a great ſtrengthner of the ſtomach upon decays of
appetite or indigeſtion. Temple.
2. [In medicine.] Strengtheners add to the bulk and firmneſs of
the ſolids: cordials are ſuch as drive on the vital actions; but
theſe ſuch as confirm the ſtamina. &amp;uinty.
STRE/NGTHLEss. adj. [from ſtrength J
1. Wanting ſtrength; deprived of ſtrength.
Yet are theſe feet, whoſe ſirengthºſ; ſtay is numb,
Unable to ſupport this lump of clay. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
As the wretch, whoſe fever-weaken'd joints,
Like ſtrengthleſs hinges, buckle under life,
Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keeper's arms. Shakespeare Henry IV.
2. Wanting potency; weak. Uſed of liquours.
This liquor muſt be inflammable or not, and yet ſubtile and
pungent, which may be called ſpirit; or elſe ſtrengthleſs or in-
ſipid, which may be named phlegm. Boyle.
STRENUOUS. adj. [ſtrenuus, Latin.]
1. Brave; bold; active; valiant.
Nations grown corrupt
Love bondage more than liberty; - -
Bondage with eaſe than ſtrenuous liberty. Milton's 4oniſter.
2. Zealous; vehement. -
He reſolves to be ſtrenuous for taking off the teſt, againſt
the maxims of all wiſe Chriſtian governments, which always
had ſome eſtabliſhed religion, leaving at beſt a toleration to
others. Swift to Pºpe.
Citizens within the bills of mortality have been ſtrºnºus
againſt the church and crown. Swift.
STRE'Nuously. adv. [from ſtrenuous.]
1. Vigorouſly; actively. - - -
Many can uſe both hands, yet will there divºrs remain that
can ſtrenuouſly make uſe of neither, Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2. Zealouſly; vehemently; with ardour. -
Writers diſpute /trenuouſy for the liberty of conſcience, and
inveigh largely againſt all eccleſiaſticks under the name of
high church. .. - Loud: noiſ Swift.
StºpBrous, adj. [ſtrºpo, Latin.]. Loud; noiſy. . .
Porta conceives, becauſe in a ſtrºperous eruption it riſeth
againſt fire, it dºſh therefore reſiſt lightning. Brown.
25 K STR Ess.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
S T R
Sr Ress. n.ſ. [reece, Saxon, violence; or from diſtreſ.]
important part.
I . º . too little as too much ſtreſs upon a
dream ; #: the leſs we heed them the better. L'Eſtrange.
The ſtreſ of the fable lies upon the hazard of having 2.
numerous ſtock of children. L’Eſtrange.
This, on which the great ſtreſ of the buſineſs depends,
would have been made out with reaſons ſufficient. Locke.
Conſider how great a ſtreſs he laid upon this duty, while
upon earth, and how earneſtly he recommended it. Alterbury.
2. Violence; force, either acting or ſuffered.
By ſtreſ of weather driv'n, *
At laſt they landed. Dryden's Aºn.
Though the faculties of the mind are improved by exerciſe,
yet they muſt not be put to a ſtreſs beyond their ſtrength. Locłe.
Tô Stress. v. a. [Evidently from diſtreſs.] To diſtreſs ; to
put to hardſhips or difficulties. -
Stirred with pity of the ſtreſſed plight -
Of this ſad realm. Fairy Queen.
To STRETCH. v.a. [renecan, Saxon; //recken, Dutch.]
1. To extend; to ſpread out to a diſtance.
The ſtretching out of his wings ſhall fill the breadth of thy
land. Iſ. viii. 8.
Stretch thine hand unto the poor. Ecclus vii. 32.
Take thy rod, and ſtretch out thine hand. Ex. vii. 19.
2. To elongate, or ſtrain to a greater ſpace.
3. To expand; to diſplay.
Leviathan on the deep,
Milton.
Stretch'd like a promontory, ſleeps.
What more likely to ſtretch forth the heavens, and lay the
foundation of the earth, than infinite power Tillotſon.
4. To ſtrain to the utmoſt.
This kiſs, if it durſt ſpeak,
Would ſtretch thy ſpirits up into the air.
5. To make tenſe.
So the ſtretch'd cord the ſkackl’d dancer tries. Smith.
6. To carry by violence farther than is right: as, to ſtretch a text.
To STRETch. v. n.
1. To be extended.
Idolatry is a horrible ſin, yet doth repentance ſtretch unto
it. Jºhitgifte.
A third is like the former: a fourth? ſtart eyeſ
What! will the line/tretch out to th’ crack of doom Shakespeare
This to rich Ophir's riſing morn is known,
And ſtretch'd out far to the burnt ſwarthy zone.
Your dungeon ſtretching far and wide beneath.
2. To bear extenſion without rupture.
The inner membrane, that involved the liquors of the egg,
becauſe it would ſtretch and yield, remained unbroken. Boyle.
3. To ſally beyond the truth.
What an allay do we find to the credit of the moſt probable
Shakespeare K. Lear.
Cowley.
Milton.
event, that is reported by one who uſes to ſtretch? Gov. Tºngue.
STR Etch, n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Extenſion; reach; occupation of more ſpace.
At all her ſtretch her little wings ſhe ſpread,
And with her feather'd arms embrac'd the dead:
Then flickering to his pallid lips, ſhe ſtrove
To print a kiſs. Dryden's Ceyx and Alcyo.
Diſruption, as ſtrong as they are, the bones would be in
ſome danger of, upon a great and ſudden ſtretch or contortion,
if they were dry. Ray on the Creation.
2. Force of body extended.
He thought to ſwim the ſtormy main,
By ſtretch of arms the diſtant ſhore to gain.
3. Effort; ſtruggle: from the act of running.
Thoſe put a lawful authority upon the ſtretch to the abuſe of
power, under the colour of prerogative. L’Eſtrange.
Upon this alarm we made incredible firetches towards the
South, to gain the faſtneſſes of Preſton. Addison.
4. Utmoſt extent of meaning.
Quotations, in their utmoſt ſtretch, can ſignify no more than
Dryden's AEm.
that Luther lay under ſevere agonies of mind. Atterbury.
5. Utmoſt reach of power.
This is the utmoſt ſtretch that nature can,
And all beyond is fulfome, falſe, and vain. Granville,
STRE"rcH.E.R. m. ſ. [from ſtretch.]
1. Any thing uſed for extenſion.
ooth in the ſtretching courſe two inches with the firetcher
only. 440xon.
2. The timber againſt which the rower plants his feet. A.
tº fiery ſpeech inflames his fearful friends,
§§g at ev'ry oar, and ev'ry ſtretcher bends. Drydºn.
To STREw. v. a. [The orthography of this word is dº :
''. generally Written ſtrew, and I have followed cuſtom ; but
A. º likewiſe, Propoſes ſtrow, and junius writes ſiraw.
d º will appear in the word from which it may be
}. - dº Gothick; ſtroyen, Dutch; ſtreaplan, Sax.
º 3.ſº º Perhaps ſirow is beſt, being
°Conciles etymology with . .
1. To ſpread by being º with pronunciation.]
The ſhow which does the top of Pindus ſirew,
Did IlCVCr whi
white W
r ſhew. Sprºſer.
Is thine alone the ſeed that ſtrews the plain :
The birds of heav'n ſhall vindicate their grain. Pºpe.
2. To ſpread by ſcattering.
I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, ſweet maid,
And not have ſtrºw'd thy grave. Shakespeare Hamlı.
Here be tears of perfect moan,
Wept for thee in Helicon;
And ſome flowers and ſome bays,
For thy herſe, to ſtrew the ways.
3. To ſcatter looſely.
The calf he burnt in the fire, ground it to powder, and
/trawed it upon the water, and made Iſrael drink of it. Ex.
With furies and noćturnal orgies fir’d,
Whom ev’n the ſavage beſts had ſpar'd, they kill'd,
And ſtrew'd his mangled limbs about the field.
STRE'w MENT. n.ſ.. [from ſtrew.]
decoration.
Her death was doubtful.–For charitable prayers,
Shards, flints, and pebbles ſhould be thrown on her;
Yet here ſhe is allow'd her virgin chants,
Her maiden ſtrewments, and the bringing home
Of bell and burial. Shakeſ Hamlet.
STR1/E. m. ſ. [Latin. J. In natural hiſtory, the ſmall chan-
nels in the ſhells of cockles and ſcallops.
The ſalt, leiſurely permitted to ſhoot of itſelf in the liquor,
expoſed to the open air, did ſhoot into more fair cryſtalline
ſtriae, than thoſe that were gained out of the remaining part
of the ſame liquor by a more haſty evaporation. Boºk.
STRI’AT e. }*. [from Jiriac, Latin; ſtrie, French.] Formed
STRI'ATED. W. in ſtriae.
Theſe effluviums fly by ſtriated atoms and winding par-
ticles, as Des Cartes conceiveth, or glide by ſtreams attracted
from either pole unto the equator. Brown's Vugar Errouri.
Des Cartes imagines this earth once to have been a ſun, and
ſo the centre of a leſſer vortex, whoſe axis ſtill kept the ſame
poſture, by reaſon of the ſtriate particles finding no fit pores
for their paſſages, but only in this direétion. Roy,
Cryſtal, when incorporated with the fibrous talcs, ſhews, if
broke, a ſtriated or fibrous texture, like thoſe tales. Wºodw.
STRI'ATURE. m.ſ.. [from/triae; ſtrieure, Fr.] Diſpoſition of ſtria.
Parts of tuberous hæmatitae ſhew ſeveral varieties in the
cruſts, ſtriature, and texture of the body. JWoodward.
St Rick. n.ſ.. [reſy: ; ſtrix, Latin.] A bird of bad omen.
The ill fac'd owl, death's dreadful meſſenger,
The hoarſe night-raven, trump of doleful drere,
The leather-winged bat, day's enemy,
The rueful ſtrick, ſtill waiting on the bier. Fairy Queen.
STRI'cKEN. The ancient participle of ſtrike.
The cunningeſt mariners were ſo conquered by the ſtorm,
as they thought it beſt with ſtricken ſails to yield to be go-
verned by it. Sidney.
That ſhall I ſhew, as ſure as hound
The ſtricken deer doth challenge by the bleeding wound.E.8.
Abraham and Sarah were old, and well ſtricken in agº. Gen.
With blindneſs were theſe ſtricken. If iſl. xix. 17.
Parker and Vaughan, having had a controverſy touching
certain arms, were appointed to run ſome courſes, when
Parker was ſtricken into the mouth at the firſt tourſe. Bacºn,
Though the earl of Ulſter was of greater power than any
other ſubject in Ireland, yet was he ſo far ſtricken in yº."
that he was unable to manage the martial affairs. . . David.
Starckle, or Stricklſ, or Stritchel. n.ſ. That which ſtrikes
the corn to level it with the buſhel. Ainſworth.
STRICT. adj. [ſtricius, Latin.]
1. Exačt; accurate; rigorouſly nice.
Thou'lt fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping/?rićieſ? watch. -
As legions in the ficlá their front diſplay,
To try the fortune of ſome doubtful day,
And move to meet their foes with ſober Pace,
Strić to their figure, though in wider ſpace.
He checks the bold deſign ;
And rules asſirić his labour'd works confine, Pºp!
As if the Stagyrite o'erlook'd each line. ºpt.
2. Severe; rigorous; not mild 3 "... ſriends
in my voice, that the e
Tº 3. Shakespeare Meaſure fºr Maſure.
Thy will y
By nature free, not over-rul’d by fate
Inextricable, or ſtrict neceſſity.
If a ſtrić hand º § cl
ill in that age be tractable ; an -
jº. aS jº it, gently relaxed, former sº
will increaſe their love.
Numa the rites of ſtrič religion knew ;
Mi ten.
Dryden,
Any thing ſcattered in
Miltºn,
Dryden.
Milton.
mildren from the beginniº
d if, as they grow up, the
- - - rior.
On ev'ry altar laid the incenſe due. p
. Confined; not extenſive. - - , , 72, Oſ
3 As they took the compaſs of their commiſſion ſº jº.
larger, ſo º dealings were more or leſs moderate.
. Cloſe; tight. -
4. &gt; The god, with ſpeedy pace, Drdºn.
Juſ; thought to ſtrain her in a ſtriº embrace. I he<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
S T R
The fatal nooſe performed its office, and with moſt ſtri:
* ligature ſqueezed the blood into his face. Arbuthnot.
- 5. Tenſe; not relaxed.
We feel our fibres grow ſtriël or ſax according to the ſtate
of the air. Arbuthnot.
STRI'cTLY. adv. [from ſt; iii.)
1. Exačtly; with rigorous accuracy.
The other parts being groiler, compoſed not only water,
º
--
ºttº:
* º
!, ſtricºy ſo called, but the whole maſs of liquid bodies. Burnet.
- Charge him ſtrictly
tº Yº Not to proceed, but wait my farther pleaſure. Dryden.
ºf 2. Rigorouſly ; ſeverely; without remiſſion or indulgence.
In the diſcharge of thy place, ſet before thee the beſt ex-
ºù amples; and after a time ſet before thee thine own, and exa-
mine thyſelf ſtrictly whether thou didſt not beſt at firſt. Bacon.
sº God may with the greateſt juſtice ſtricily require endeavours
- -- from us, and without any inconſiſtency with his goodneſs
Cº- inflict penalties on thoſe who are wanting. Rogers'; 'Sermons.
º A weak prince again diſpoſed the people to new attempts,
which it was the clergy's duty to endeavour to prevent, if ſome
º of them had not proceeded upon a topick that, ſirisily ſol-
- lowed, would enſlave all mankind. Swift.
- 3. Cloſely; with tenſeneſs.
*-- Si R1'cº N Ess. n.ſ. (from ſtrić, J
1. Exactneſs; rigorous accuracy; nice regularity.
I could not grant too much or diſtruſt too little to men,
that pretended ſingular piety and religious ſtričneſ. K. Charles.
Such of them as cannot be concealed connive at, though in
the ſtricineſs of your judgment you cannot pardon. Dryden.
º Who were made privy to the ſecrets of heaven, but ſuch as
* * * performed his revealed will at an higher rate of ſtricineſs than
º the rcít 2 South.
- Though in ſtričineſ, our Saviour might have pleaded exemp-
tion from the }. tribute, he exerted his divine power in a
miracle to pay it.
2. Severity; rigour.
Theſe commiſſioners proceeded with ſuchſirićnºſ, and ſeve-
rity as did much obſcure the king's mercy. Bacon's Hen. VII.
* ----
Rogers.
º 3. Cloſeneſs; tightneſs; not laxity.
~ * STRI'ct URE. m. ſ. [from ſtričiura, Latin, a ſpark.]
---- 1. A ſtroke; a touch.
---. The God of nature implanted in their vegetable natures
º certain paſſive ſtrićtures, or ſignatures of that wiſdom which
... º. hath made and ordered all things with the higheſt reaſon. Hale.
2. Contračtion; cloſure by contračtion.
As long as there is thirſt, with a free paſſage by urine, and
ſtričiure of the veſſels, ſo long is water ſafely taken. Arbuthnot.
º: , 3. A ſlight touch upon a ſubječt; not a ſet diſcourſe.
-*. St RIDE. n.ſ. [renaebe, Saxon.] A long ſtep; a ſtep taken
--- with great violence; a wide divarication of the legs.
I'll ſpeak between the change of man and boy,
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing ſteps
Into a manly ſtride. Shakespeare Merchant of Yenice.
The monſter moved on with horrid ſtrides. Milton.
Her voice theatrically loud,
And maſculine her ſtride. Swift.
To STRIDE. v. n. preter. I ſtrode or ſtrid; part, paſſ ſtridden.
[from the noun.]
1. To walk with long ſteps.
Mars in the middle of the ſhining ſhield
Is grav'd, and ſtrides along the liquid field.
To Jove, or to thy father Neptune, pray,
The brethren cry'd, and inſtant ſtrode away.
2. To ſtand with the legs far from each other.
To St RIDE. v. a. To paſs by a ſtep.
See him ſtride
Vallies wide. Arbuthnot.
STRI'DU lous. adj. [ſtriduluſ, Latin J Making a ſmall noiſe.
It ariſes from a ſmall and ſtridulous noiſe, which, being
firmly rooted, maketh a divulſion of parts. Brown.
STRIFE. m. ſ [from ſtrive )
1. Contention; conteſt; diſcord. -
I and my people were at great ſtrife with the children of
Ammon. judg. xii. 2.
Bryden:
Pope.
Some preach Chriſt even of envy and ſtriſe, and ſome of
good-will. - Phil. i.15.
He is proud, knowing nothing; but doating about queſtions
and ſtriſe of words. - 1 Tim. vi. 4.
* Theſe vows, thus granted, rais'd a ſtrife above
Betwixt the god of war and queen of love:
She granting firſt, had right of time to plead;
But he had granted too, and would recede. Dryden.
2. Oppoſition of nature or appearance; contrariety; contraſt.
Artificial ſtrife
Lives in thoſe touches, livelier than life.
How paſſion's well accorded ſiriſe
Makes all the harmony of life.
Shakeſpeare.
johnſºn.
STR (FEFU L. adj. [ſtrife and full.] Contentious; diſcordant.
Th' ape was ſtrfful and ambitious,
And the fox guileful and moſt covetous.
* I know not what new creation may creep forth from the
ſtrifeful heap of things, into which, as into a ſecond chaos,
we are fallen. Dr. A/aine.
2
Hubberd's Tale.
T--&gt; *-*.*-
STRI'd MENT. n.ſ. [/rigmentum, from Jºringo, Lat. to ſcrape.]
Scraping; recrement.
Many, beſides the ſtrigments and ſudorous adheſions from
mens hands, acknowledge that nothing proceedeth from gold
in its uſual decočtion. Brown's Wulgar Errºurs.
To STRIKE v. a. preter. I ſtruck or ſtraok; part, paſſ ſtruck,
frucken, ſtricken. [*rºnican, Saxon; ſtreich.n, German; ad.
Jtrykia, Iſlandick; ſtricker, Daniſh.]
I. To act upon by a blow; to hit with a blow.
He at Philippi kept
His ſword e'en like a dancer, while Iſruck
The lean and wrinkled Caſius. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopat.
We will deliver you the cauſe,
Why I, that did love Caeſar when I ſtruck him,
Proceeded thus. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
I muſt Z
But wail his fall, whom I myſelf ſtruck down. Shakespeare Mack.
2. To daſh; to throw by a quick motion.
The blood ſtrike on the two ſide-poſts. Ex. xii. 7.
3. To notify by the ſound of a hammer on a bell.
The Windſor bell hath ſtruck twelve. Shakeſp.
A judicious friend, moderates the purſuit, gives the figſal
for action, preſſes the advantage, and ſtrikes the critical
minute. Collier of Friendſhip.
4. To ſtamp; to impreſs.
The memory in ſome men is very tenacious; but yet there
ſeems to be a conſtant decay of all our ideas, even of thoſe
which are ſtruck deepeſt, and in minds the moſt retentive. Loc.
5. To puniſh; to afflićt.
To puniſh the juſt is not good, nor to ſtrike princes for
equity. Prov. xvii. 26.
6. To contraćt; to lower; to vale. It is only uſed in the phraſes
to ſtriče ſail, or to ſtrike a flag.
How many nobles then would hold their places,
That muſt ſtrike ſail to ſpirits of vile ſort Shakespeare H. IV.
To this all differing paſſions and intereſts ſhould ſtrike ſail,
and like ſwelling ſtreams, running different courſes, ſhould
yet all make haſte into the ſea of common ſafety. Temple.
They ſtrike ſail where they know they ſhall be maſtered,
and murder where they can with ſafety. Dryden.
Now, did I not ſo near my labours end,
Strike ſail, and haſt'ning to the harbour tend,
My ſong to flow'ry gardens might extend.
7. To alarm; to put into emotion.
The reſt, ſtruck with horror ſtood,
To ſee their leader cover'd o'er with blood.
Jack Straw at London-ſtone, with all his rout,
Struck not the city with ſo loud a ſhout.
His virtues render our aſſembly awful,
They ſtrike with ſomething like religious fear. Addison Cato.
Did'ſt thou but view him right, ſhould'ſt ſee him black
With murder, treaſon, ſacrilege, and crimes
That ſhrike my ſoul with horror but to name them. Addison.
We are no ſooner preſented to any one we never ſaw be-
fore, but we are immediately ſtruck with the idea of a proud,
a reſerved, an affable or a good natured man. Addiſon.
Nice works of art ſtrike and ſurpriſe us moſt upon the firſt
view; but the better we are acquainted with them, the leſs
we wonder. Atterbury.
Court virtues bear, like gems, the higheſt rate,
Born where heav'n's influence ſcarce can penetrate;
In life's low vale, the ſoil the virtues like,
They pleaſe as beauties, here as wonders ſtrike.
8. [Faedus ferire.] To make a bargain. -
Sign but his peace, he vows he'll ne'er again
The ſacred names of fops and beaus profane:
Strike up the bargain quickly; for I ſwear,
As times go now, he offers very fair.
I come to offer peace; to reconcile
Paſt enmities; to ſtrike perpetual leagues
With Vanoc. A. Philips' Briton.
9. To produce by a ſudden action. -
The court paved, ſtriketh up a great heat in ſummer, and
much cold in winter. Bacon.
Waving wide her myrtle wand,
She ſtrike, an univerſal peace through ſea and land. Milton.
Take my caduceus !
With this the infernal ghoſts I can command,
And ſtrike a terror through the Stygian ſtrand.
1o. To affect ſuddenly in any particular manner. , -
When verſes cannot be underſtood, nor a man s good wit
ſeconded with the forward child underſtanding; it/lrikes a
man more dead than a great reckoning in * little room. Shake?.
Strike her young bones,
Dryden. ;
//aller.
Dryden.
Pope.
Dryden.
Dryd 77.
Ye taking airs, with lameneſs. Sha'e?tarr.
He that is ſiricken blind cannot forgºt ſº
The precious treaſure of his eye-fight loſt. Shakespeare.
Soccas'd the rival crew, when Purcell came,
They ſung no more, or only ſung his fame;
St. nº dumb, they all admin'd. - - -
Humility diſarms envy, and ſtrike. 1t dead.
Then do not ſtrike him dead with a den a', , n - - -
Eut hold him u, in life. 4.d.cn's Catº.
11. To
Dry len.
Collier.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
by blows. With tºp only emphatical.
T I. Tº: ºſº. up a march, they º
- ward they go. ??&amp;lºt'ſ.
their sº jº. and º: i. tongue of war. . .
pºſº, our int’reſt, and our being here. Shakeſpeare.
: to n]1I]t.
I 2. 3. rare coins ſhuck of a pound weight, of gold and
ſilver, Conſtantine ſent to Chilperick. Arbuthnot.
13. It is uſed in the participle, I know not well how, for ad-
71 yearſ.
vanced in y The king
Is wiſe and virtuous, and his noble queen
Wellſtruck in years; fair and not jealous. Shakespeare.
14. 70 STRIKE ºff. To eraſe from a reckoning or account.
Deliver Helen, and all damage elſe -
Shall be ſtruck off. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
I have this while with leaden thoughts been preſt;
I ſhall in a more convenient time r
º, off this ſcore of abſence. Shakeſpeare's Olhºlz.
Aſkmens opinions: Scoto now ſhall tell
How trade encreaſes, and º: º goes well :
Strike off his penſion by the ſetting ſun,
And #. º In Ot Fº, is undone. Pope.
15. Tº Strike off. To ſeparate as by a blow. -
Germany had ſtricken ºff that which appeared corrupt in
the doćtrine of the church of Rome; but ſeemed nevertheleſs
in diſcipline ſtill to retain therewith great conformity. Hooker.
They followed ſo faſt that they overtook him, and with-
out further delay ſtruck ºff his head. Knºlles.
He was taken priſoner by Surinas, lieutenant-general for
the king of Parthia, who ſiroke ºff his head. Bakewell.
A maſs of water would be quite ſlruck off and ſeparate
from the reſt, and toſt through the air like a flying river.
Burnſt's Theory of the Earth.
16. To STRIKE out. To produce by colliſion.
My thoughtleſs youth was wing'd with vain deſires;
My manhood long miſled by wand'ring fires,
Follow'd falſe lights; and when their glimpſe was gone,
My pride/iruck out new ſparkles of her own. Dryden.
17. To Strike out. To blot; to efface.
By expurgatory animadverſions, we might ſtrike out great
numbers of hidden qualities, and having once a conceded liſt,
with more ſafety attempt their reaſons. Brown.
To methodize is as neceſſary as to ſirie out. Pope.
18. To Strike out. To bring to light.
19. Tº STRIKE out. . To form at once by a quick effort.
Whether thy hand ſtrike out ſome free deſign,
Where life awakes and dawns at ev'ry line,
Or blend in beauteous tints the colour'd maſs,
And from the canvaſs call the mimick face. Pope.
To STRIKE. v. n.
1. To make a blow.
I in mine own woe charm’d,
Could not find death, where I did hear him groan;
Nor feel him where he ſtruck. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
It pleaſed the king
To Strike at me upon his miſconſtruaion ;
When he tript me behind. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
He wither'd all their ſtrength before he Jirozå. Dryden.
2. To collide; to claſh.
Holling a ring by a thread in a glaſs, tell him that holdeth
it, it ſhall ſtrike ſo many times againſt the ſide of the glaſs,
and no more. Bacon's Natural Hſtory.
3. To act by repeated percuſſion.
Bid thy miſtreſs when my drink is ready,
She ſtrike upon the bell. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
Thoſe antique minſtrels, ſure, were Charles like kings,
Cities their lutes, and ſubjects hearts their ſtrings;
Qn which with ſo divine à hand they //rock,
Conſent of motion from their breath they took. Waller.
4. To ſound by the ſtroke of a hammer,
Caeſar, 'tis ſtrucken eight. Shakeſpeare.
Deep thoughts will often ſuſpend the ſenſes ſo far, that about
a man clocks may ſirike and bells ring, which he takes no no-
tice of. Grew.
5. To make an attack.
- Is not the king's name forty thouſand names?
Arm, arm, my name; a puny ſubjećt ſtrikes
At thy great glory. Shakeſpeare's Richard II,
When by their deſigning leaders taught
To ſtrike at Power, which for themſelves they ſought:
#. *. gull'd into rebellion arm’d, se
Clr blood to ağtion - - ~ * ~ * ---
6. Tº º by external . their prize was warm'd. Dryden.
onfider thºred and white colours in porphyre; hinder light
"...ſº º and its colours vaniſh. Lº.
Whilſt any *"P did ſound, or drum ſtrucku
8. º º did ne'er leave ſtriking in the #. ºwa.
**hed upon ſhallows 3 to be ſtranded.
The admiral !] -
ſaud, and ther. i. ºtein the emperor was, ſtruck upon a
9. To paſs with a quick or ſtrong effect.
Now and then a glittering beam of wit or paſſion ſlºt
through the obſcurity of the poem: any of theſe effect a pre-
ſent liking, but not a laſting admiration.
10. To pay homage, as by lowering the ſail.
We ſee the wind fit fore upon our ſails;
And yet weſtrike not, but ſecurely periſh.
I'd rather chop this hand off at a blow,
And with the other fling it at thy face,
Than bear ſo low a ſail, to ſtriče to thee. Shakeſpear.
The intereſt of our kingdom is ready to ſtrike to flat ºf
your pooreſt fiti.ing towns: it is hard you will not accept our
ſervices. Swift,
I 1. To be put by ſome ſudden aét or motion into any ſtate; to
break forth. 2
It ſtruck on a ſudden into ſuch reputation, that it ſcorns any
longer to ſculk, but owns itſelf publickly. Gov. of the Tºngu.
12; ſº STRIKE in with. To conform; to ſuit itſelf to; º
join with at once.
Thoſe who by the prerogative of their age, ſhould frown
youth into ſobriety, imitate and ſ’rike in with them, and
are really vitious that they may be thought young. South.
They catch at cvery ſhadow of relief, Jrike in at a venture
* the next companion, and ſo the dé commodity be ta-
Dryden.
S*ašepart,
ken off, care not who be the chapman. Norris.
The cares or pleaſures of the world ſtrike in with every
thought. Addison.
He immediately ſtruck in with them, but deſcribed hi.
march to the temple with ſo much horrour, that he ſhivered
every joint. Addiſon's Freehºlder.
13. To STRIKE out. To ſpread or rove; to make a ſudden ex-
curſion.
In this plain was the laſt general rendezvous of mankind;
and from thence they were broken into companies and diſ.
Pººl, the ſeveral ſucceſſive generations, i. waves of
**a over-reaching one another, and ſtriking out farther and
farther upon the land. Burnet's Theºry ºf the Earth.
When a great man/friſes ºut into a ſudden irregularity, he
needs not queſtion the reſ.Pećt of a retinue. Collier of Pºpularity.
*TRººf, n.). A b-ſhel; a dry meaſure of capacity.
Wing, cartnave and buſhel, Peck, ſtrike ready at hand.
Tºſer's Hulandº.
STRIKE block. "...ſ Is a plane ſhorter than the jointer, ha-
Xing its ſole made exactly flat and ſtraight, and is uſed for the
ſhºoting of a ſhort joint. AMoxon's Mechanial Exerciſe.
STRI's ER. m.ſ. [from /*riſe.] One that ſtrikes
A biſhop then muſt be blameleſs, not given to wine, no
/?riker. 1 Tim, iii. 3.
He thought with his ſtaff to have ſtruck the ſtriker. Sandy;.
The ſtriker muſt be denſe, and in its beſt velocity. Digly.
STRIKING. part. adj. [from ſiriſe.] Affecting; ſurpriſing.
S RING.. n. / [Fernz, Saxon; ſtreng, German and Daniſh;
Jºhe Dutch; //rinº, Latin.]
* A ſlender rope; a ſmall cord; any ſlender and flexible band;
a riband; any thing tied.
*y lower bullet hanging upon the other above it, muſt be
conceived, as if the weight of it were in that point where its
Jiling touches the upper. //ilkins's Dedaluſ.
Round Ormond's knee thou ty'ſt the myſtick ſiring,
That makes the knight companion to the king, Prior.
2. A thread on which anythings are filed.
Their prieſts pray by their beads, having a ſtring with a
hundred of nutſhel; upon it; and the repeating of certain
words with them they account meritorious. Stilingfieſt.
3. Any ſet of things filed on a line.
I have caught two of theſe dark undermining vermin, and
intend to make a ſtring of them, in order to hang them up in
one of my papers. Addiſon's Spectatºr,
4. The chord of a muſical inſtrument.
The ſiring that jars
When rudely touch'd, ungrateful to the ſenſe,
With pleaſure feels the maſter's flying fingers,
Swells into harmony, and charms the hearers. - Rowe.
By the appearance they make in marble, there is not on:
Jºng-inſtrument that ſeems comparable to our violins. Aidſ.
5. A finall fibre.
Duckwced putteth forth a little/fring into the water, ſrom
the bottom. leaſt /?rings left behind ſº
In - room up, the leaſt/frings left behind will grow.
pulling broom up, ſº AMortimer's Huſbandy.
6. A nerve; a tendon. - -
The moſt piteous tale which in recounting,
His grief grew puiſſant, and the /?, ings of life -
Began to crack: Shakeſpeare's King Izar
The ſiring of his tongue looſed. Mark xxvii. 35.
7. The nerve of the bow. -
The wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrows
upon the ſºring. Pſalm X1. 2.
8. Any concatenation or ſeries, as a ſtring ofpropoſtions.
9. To have two STRINGs to the bow. To have two *. Or
two expedients; to have double advantage, or double ſecu-
alt. Anoles.
rity. Ne<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
No lover has that pow'r
Tº enforce a deſperate amour,
As he that has two ſirings to's bow,
And burns for love and money too. Hudibras.
To S rRING. v. a. Preterite Iſtring, part. paſſ ſtrung. [from
the noun.]
1. To furniſh with ſtrings.
Has not wiſe nature/trung the legs and feet
With firmeſt nerves, deſign'd to walk the ſtreet Gay.
2. To put a ſtringed inſtrument in tune.
Here the muſe ſo oft her harp has ſirung,
That not a mountain rears its head unſung.
3. To file on a ſtring.
Men of great learning or genius are too full to be exact;
and therefore chuſe to throw down their pearls in heaps before
the reader, rather than be at the pains of ſiringing them. Spei.
4. To make tenſe.
Toil ſtrung the nerves, and purified the blood. Dryden.
Stri'NGED. adj. [from ſhing.] Having ſtrings; produced by
ſtrings.
Addiſon.
Praiſe him with ſtringed inſtruments and organs. Pſalms.
Divinely warbl’d voice,
Anſwering the ſiringed noiſe,
As all their ſouls in bliſsful rapture took. Milton.
STRING ENT. adj. [ſiringens, Latin.] Binding; contračting.
STRI'NGHALT. n. ſ. [ſiring and halt.]
Stringhait is a ſudden twitching and ſnatching up of the
hinder leg of a horſe much higher than the other, or an in-
voluntary or convulſive motion of the muſcles that extend or
bend the hough. Farrier’s Dić.
STRI'NGLess. adj. [from ſtring.] Having no ſtrings.
Nothing; all is ſaid;
His tongue is now a ſtringleſ, inſtrument,
Words, life, and all, old Lancaſter hath ſpent. Shakeſpeare.
STRI'NGY. adj. [from ſtring.] Fibrous; conſiſting of ſmall
threads.
A plain Indian fan, made of the ſmall ſiringy parts of roots
ſpread out in a round flat form. Grew.
To STRIP. v.a. [/?reopen, Dutch ; bertrupee, ſtripped, Sax.]
I. To make naked; to deprive of covering.
They began to ſtrip her of her cloaths when I came in
among them. Sidney.
They ſtript Joſeph out of his coat. Gen. xxxvii. 23.
Scarce credible it is how ſoon they were ſtript and laid na-
ked on the ground. Hayward.
Hadſt thou not committed
Notorious murder on thoſe thirty men
At Aſkelon, who never did thee harm,
Then like a robber ſtrip'dſ: them of their robes. Milton.
You cloath all that have no relation to you, and ſtrip your
maſter that gives you food. L’Eſtrange.
A rattling tempeſt through the branches went,
That ſtript them bare. Dryden's Knights Tale.
He ſaw a beauteous maid
With hair diſhevel'd, iſſuing through the ſhade,
Stript of her cloaths. Dryden.
He left the pillagers, to rapine bred, -
Without controul to ſtrip and ſpoil the dead. Dryden.
The bride was put in form to bed;
He follow'd ſtript. Swift.
2. To deprive; to diveſt.
The apoſtle in exhorting men to contentment, although
they have in this world no more than bare food and raiment,
giveth us to underſtand that thoſe are even the loweſt of things
neceſſary, that if we ſhould be ſtript of all theſe things, with-
out which we might poſſibly be, yet theſe muſt be left. Hooker.
We ſtrip and diveſt ourſelves of our own will, and give our-
ſelves entirely up to the will of God. Duppa.
It is difficult to lead another by words into the thoughts of
things, ſtripped of thoſe ſpecifick differences we give them. Locke.
One would imagine theſe to be the expreſſions of a man
bleſſed with eaſe and affluence, not of one juſt ſtript of all thoſe
advantages, and plunged in the deepeſt miſeries; and now ſit-
ting naked upon a dunghil. Atterbury.
3. To rob ; to plunder; to pillage.
That which lays a man open to an enemy, and that which
Jrips him of a friend, equally attacks him in all thoſe intereſts
that are capable of being weakned by the one and ſupported by
the other.
4. To peel; to decorticate.
If the leaves or dried ſtocks be ſtripped into ſmall ſtraws,
they ariſe unto amber, wax, and other eleēterics, no other
ways than thoſe of wheat or rye. Brown's Vulgar Errouri.
5. To deprive of all.
When ſome fond eaſy fathers ſtrip themſelves before they
lie down to their long ſleep, and ſettle their whole eſtates
upon their ſons, has it not been ſeen that the father has been
requited with beggary 2 South's Sermons.
6. To take off covering.
He ſtript off his cloaths. 1 Sam. xix. 24.
Logick helps us to ſtrip off the outward diſguiſe of things,
and to behold and Judge of them in their own nature. Iſºtti.
South's Sermons.
S T R
His unkindneſs
That ſtrift her from his benediction, turn'd her
To foreign caſualties, gave her dear rights
To her doghearted daughters: theſe things ſting him. Shakespeare
8. To ſeparate from ſomething adheſive or connected
Amongſt men who examine not ſcrupulouſly their own ideas,
and ſtrip them not from the marks men uſe for them, but
confound them with words, there muſt be endleſs diſpute.
Locke.
Strip... n.ſ. [Probably for ſtrife.] A narrow ſhred.
Theſe two apartments were hung in cloſe mourning, and
only a ſtrip of bays round the other rooms, Swift.
To Stripe. v. a. [ſirepen, Dutch..] To variegate with lines
of different colours.
St RIPE, n.ſ.. [ſtrºpe, Dutch.]
1. A lineary variation of colour. This ſeems to be the original
notion of the word.
Gardeners may have three roots among an hundred that
are rare, as purple and carnation of ſeveral Jiripei. Bacon.
2. A ſhred of a different colour.
One of the moſt valuable trimmings of their cloaths was a
long/tripe ſowed upon the garment, called latus clavus. Arbuth.
3. A weal; or diſcolouration made by a laſh or blow.
Cruelty marked him with inglorious ſtripes.
4. A blow; a laſh.
A body cannot be ſo torn with ſtripes, as a mind with re-
membrance of wicked ačtions. Hayward.
To thoſe that are yet within the reach of the ſiripes and
reproofs of their own conſcience; I would addreſs that the
would not ſeek to remove themſelves from that wholſome
diſcipline. - Decay ºf Piety.
STRI'Pling. n.ſ. [Of uncertain etymology.] A youth; one
in the ſtate of adoleſcence.
*Thwart the lane,
He, with two ſtriplings, lads, more like to run
The country baſe, than to commit ſuch ſlaughter,
Made good the paſſage. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Now a ſtripling cherub he appears, -
Not of the prime, yet ſuch as in his face
Youth ſnil'd ºffi Mlton's Paradiſ. Loft.
Compoſitions on any important ſubječts are not matters to
be wrung from poor ſtriplings, like blood out of the noſe, or
the plucking of untimely fruit. Milton on Education.
As when young ſtriplings whip the top for ſport,
On the ſmooth pavement of an empty court;
The wooden engine whirls. Dryden's AFneid.
As every particular member of the body is nouriſhed with
a ſeveral qualified juice, ſo children and ſtriplings, old men and
young men muſt have divers diets. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To STRIVE. v.n. Preterite I ſtrove, anciently Iſtrived; part.
paſſ ſtriven. [ſtreven, Dutch; eſtriver, French.]
1. To ſtruggle; to labour; to make an effort. . -
The immutability of God they ſtrive unto, by working
after one and the ſame manner. Hooker
Many brave young minds have, through hearing the praiſes
and eulogies of worthy men, been ſtirred up to affect the like
commendations, and ſo ſlrive to the like deſerts. Spenſer.
Strive with me in your prayers to God for me. Rom. xv.
So have Iſlrived to preach the goſpel. Rom. xv. 20.
2. To conteſt; to contend; to ſtruggle in oppoſition to another:
with againſ or with before the perſon oppoſed.
Do as adverſaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends. Shakeſpeare.
Thou art caught, becauſe thou haſtſtriven againſt ;:
€7", l. 24.
Strive for the truth unto death. Eccius iv. 28.
Why doſt thouſirive againſt him job xxxiii. 13.
Charge them that they ſtrive not about words to no profit.
2 Tim. ii. I4.
Avoid contentions and ſtrivings about the law. . Tit. iii. 9.
This is only warrantable conflićt . the º of our faith;
- - ing with ſuperior powers.
ſo that theſe ſtrivings are not a contending P L” %.
Thus does every wicked man that contemns God, who
can ſave or deſtroy him who ſrives with his Maker. Tillºtſon.
Now private pity ſtrove with publick hate,
:
7. To caſt off.
Thomſºn.
Reaſon with rage, and eloquence with fate. Denham.
If inteſtine broils alarm the hive, .
For two pretenders oft for empireſtrive,
The vulgar in divided factions jar; . . Dryd
And murm'ring ſounds proclaim the civil war. ryden.
3. To vie; to be comparable to; to emulate; to contend in ex-
cellence.
Nor that ſweet grove ...,
Of Daphne by Orontes, and the ..
... ſl- 1: - ight with this paradiſe
§'. º mig Milton's Parad. Loft.
STRI'v ER. n.ſ.. [from ſtrive..] One who labours; one who
d - -
sº . n.ſ. An inſtrument uſed by glaſs makers. Bailey.
Śrº, or sº. O d preterite of ſtrike, now commonly/***
2.5 L He<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
S T R
He hoodwinked with kindneſs, leaſt of all men knew who
ſłroke him. ite of ſtrik sdney.
SfRoze. n.ſ.. [from ſtro”, the preterite Q ſtrike J
s A blow; a knock; a ſudden act of one body upon another.
Th' oars were ſilver,
which to the tune of flutes kept ſtroke, and made
The water which they beat to follow faſter,
As amorous of their ſtrokes. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
2. A hoſtile blow. -
As cannons overcharg’d with double cracks,
So they redoubled ſtrokes upon the foe. Shakºare.
He entered and won the whole kingdom of Naples, without
ſtriking ſtroke. Bacon.
His white-man'd ſteeds that bow’d beneath the yoke,
He chear'd to courage with a gentle ſtrºke,
Then urg'd his fiery chariot on the foe,
And riſing, ſhook his lance in ačt to throw. Dryden.
Both were of ſhining ſteel, and wrought ſo pure,
As might the ſtrºkes of two ſuch arms endure. Dryden.
I had a long deſign upon the ears of Curl, but the rogue
would never allow me a fair ſtroke at them, though my pen.
knife was ready. - Swift.
3. A ſudden diſeaſe or afflićtion. -
Take this purſe, thou whom the heav'ns plagues
Have humbled to all ſtrºkes. Shakeſp. King Lear.
4. The ſound of the clock.
What is't o'clock 2–
Upon the ſtroke of four. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
5. The touch of a pencil.
Oh, laſting as thoſe colours may they ſhine !
Free as thy ſtroke, yet faultleſs as thy line. Pope.
6. A touch; a maſterly or eminent effort.
Another in my place would take it for a notable /ērzke of
good breeding, to complinent the reader. L’Eſtrange.
The boldeſt ſtrokes of poetry, when managed artfully, moſt
delight the reader. Dryden's State of Innocence.
As he purchaſed the firſt ſucceſs in the preſent war, by for-
cing, into the ſervice of the confederates, an army that was
raiſed againſt them, he will give one of the finiſhing/lroſſes to
it, and help to conclude the great work. Addiſon.
A verdićt more puts me in poſſeſſion of my eſtate, I que-
ſtion not but you will give it the finiſhing ſtroke. Arbuthnot.
Iſiodore's collečtion was the great and bold ſirot, which
in its main parts has been diſcovered to be an impudent for-
gery. Baker's Rºfeſſions on Learning.
7. An effect ſuddenly or unexpectedly produced.
8. Power; efficacy.
Theſe having cqual authority for inſtrućtion of the young
prince, and well agreeing, bare equal ſtroke in divers facuſ:
ties. Hayward.
Perfectly opacous bodies can but reflect the incident beams,
thoſe that are diaphanous refračt them too, and that refraction
has ſuch a ſtroke in the production of colours, generated by
the trajećtion of light through drops of water, that exhibit.
rainbow through divers other tranſparent bodies. Boyle.
He has a great/troke with the reader when he condemns any
of my Poems, to make the world have a better opinion of
them. - - Dryden.
The ſubtile effluvia of the male ſeed have the greateſt /troke
in generation. Ray.
To Stroke. v. a. ſ renacan, Saxon. J
1. To rub gently with the hand by way of kindneſs or endear-
ment; to ſooth.
Thus children do the filly birds they find
With ſtreaking hurt, and tāo much gramming kill. Sidney.
The ſenior weaned, his younger ſhall teach,
More ſtroken and made of, when ought it doth aile,
Mºre gentle ye make it for yoke or the paile. Tiffr.
Thy praiſe or diſpraiſe is to me alike,
Qhe doth not ſº of me, north oth. ſtrike. Ben. Johnſ.
He ſet forth a proclamation Jirºaking the people with fair
promiſes, and humouring them with investive. againſt the
king and government. Bacon.
He dry'd the falling drop', and yet more kind,
He ſtrok'd her checks. Dryden.
Come, let us practiſe death,
Stroke the grim lion till he grow familiar. Dryden.
She pluck'd the riſing flow’rs, and fed
The gentle beaſt, and fondly ſtroak'd his head. Addſon.
* To ſubgently in one direction.
When the big-udder'd cows with patience ſtand,
- Waiting theſtrºkings of the damſers hand. Gay
- To STROLL. j. ”. To wander; to ramble 3 to rove ; to ſº
a vagrant.
Y She's mine, and thine, andſºr:ling up and down. Grano.
• jº, wine lock'd up, your butler ſtrºll'd abroad. Pope.
fants eſe mothers /*k, to beg ſuſtenance for their helpleſ in-
ST Roller. n Swift.
gabond. f [from ſtroll.] A Vagrant; a wanderer; a Ya-
ſºlºis, faints by trade,
#. **ter'd habits, went
**mall village down in Kent;
STRos D. m. ſ. [ſrom ſtrand.] The beach; the bank
Where, in the ſtrollers canting ſtrain,
They begg'd from door to door in vain. ºr
The men of pleaſure, who never go to church, ſo Sºft.
ideas of the clergy from a few poor Jiroſler; they ºto ſm their
In Obſ.
in the ſtreets. * º
Swift.
Water. of the
So looks the ſtrond whereon th’ imperious flood
Hath left a witneſs'd uſurpation. Shakeſpea, 's II, IV
STRONG. adj. Irrfang, Saxon.] Peare's II. IV.
1. Vigorous; forceful ; of great ability of body,
Though 'gan the villain wax ſo fierce and ſtron
That nothing may ſuſtain his furious force Ø
He caſt him down to ground, and an alºn
Drew him through dirt and mire. º &amp;
The ſtrong-wing'd M ercury ſhould fetch thee º &amp;n.
And ſet thee by Joye's ſide. Satºſpºrº...”
That our oxen may be ſtrong to labour.
The Marſian and Sabellian race,
Strong limb'd and ſtout.
Orſes, the ſtrong to greater ſtrength muſt yield;
He, with Parthenius, were by Rapo kill’d. p Drd
2. Fortified; ſecure from attack. Jath,
Within Troy's ſtrong immures
The raviſh'd Helen with wanton Paris fleeps. Shokºffear,
An army of Engliſh engaged in the midſt, between an arm,
of a greater number, freſh and in vigour on the one ſide and
a town /ērong in fortification, and ſtrºng in men on the *.
- - Bacon's War with Spain.
It is no matter how things are, ſo a man obſerve but the
*greement of his own imaginations, and talk conformably, it
is all truth: ſuch caſtles in the air will be as Jiro!g hº of
truth as the demonſtrations of Euclid. Lºck
3. Powerful; mighty. ~.
While there was war between the houſes of Saul and David,
Abner made himſelf/t, ong for Saul. 2 Sam, iii.6.
The merchant-adventurers being a ſtrong company, and
well underſet with rich men and good order, held out bravely.
"d Cleºfatra.
Pal. cxlv. 14.
Dryden,
Ecºn.
Thoſe that are ſtrong at ſea may eaſily bring them to what
terms they pleaſe. Addiſon,
The weak, by thinking themſelves frong, are induced to
proclaim war againſt that which ruins them; and the ſtrong,
by conceiting themſelves weak, are thereby rendered as uſeleſs
as if they really were ſo. South's Sermoni,
4. Supplied with forces.
When he was not ſix and twenty ſtrºng,
Šišk in the world's regard, wretchéd and lºw,
My father gave him welcome to the ſhore, sai. Hºn. IV.
He was, at his riſing from Exeter, between fix and ſeven
thouſand ſtrong. Bacon.
In Britain's lovely iſle a ſhining throng
War in his cauſe, a thouſand beauties ſtrong. Tickell.
5. Hale; healthy.
Better is the poor being ſound and ſiring in conſtitution,
than a rich man afflićled in his body. Ecclus xxx. 14.
6. Forcibly ačting in the imagination.
This is one of the ſtrongeſ examples of a perſonation that
ČVer was. Bacºn,
7. Ardent; eager; poſitive ; zealous.
Her mother, ever ſtrong againſt that match,
And firm for doctor Caius, hath appointed,
That he ſhall ſhuffle her away. Shakespeare Mer. Iſive of Wºrd.
In choice of committees for ripening buſineſs for the
council, it is better to chuſe indifferent perſons, than to make
an indifferency, by putting in thoſe that are ſtrong on both
ſides. Batºn,
The knight is a much ſtronger tory in the country than in
town, which is neceſſary for the keeping up his intereſt. Addison
8. Full; having any quality in a great degree; affecting the
ſight or ſmell forcibly.
Add with Cecropian thymeſtrong-ſcented centaury. Dºyd
By mixing ſuch powders we are not to expect a ſtrong and
full white, ſuch as is that of paper; but ſome duſky obſcuſ’
one, ſuch as might ariſe from a mixture of light and dark-
neſs, or from white and black, that is, a grey or dun, or ſuſ-
fet brown. Newton's Otiº:
Thus ſhall there be made two bows of colours, an interior
and ſironger, by one reflexion in the drops, and an exterior
and fainter by two; for the light becomes fainter by cºy
reflexion. Newton's Opticki.
. Potent; intoxicating. -
9 Gjirº beer to rub your horſes heels. - Swift.
10. Having a deep tincture; affecting the taſte forcibly,
ng of the old
Many of their propoſitions favour very ſtro King Charlei.
leaven of innovations.
11. Affecting the ſmell powerfully.
The prince of Cambay's daily food
Is aſps, and baſiliſk and toad, -
Which makes him have ſo ſtrong a breath, Hudibrar
Each night he flinks a queen to death. 1. "[.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T R
The heat of a human body, as it grows more intenſe,
makes the urine ſmell more ſtrong. Arbuthnºt.
12. Hard of digeſtion; not eaſily nutrimental.
Strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age. Heir.
13. Furniſhed with abilities for anything.
I was ſtronger in prophecy than in criticiſm.
14. Valid; confirmed.
In proceſs of time, an ungodly cuſtom grown ſtrong, was
kept as a law. //ſdom xiv. 16.
15. Violent; vehement; forcible.
In the days of his fleſh he offered up prayers, with ſtrong
crying and tears. Heb. v. 7.
The ſcriptures make deep and/ºrang impreſſions on the minds
of men: and whoſoever denies this, as he is in point of reli-
Drydºn.
gion atheiſtical, ſo in underſtanding brutiſh. j. Corbet.
16. Cogent; concluſive.
Meſſengers
Of ſtrong prevailment in unharden'd youth. Shakespeare.
What ſtrong cries muſt they be that ſhall drown ſo loud a
clamour of impieties. Decay of Piety.
Produce your cauſe; bring forth yourſrong reaſons. Iſa.
17. Able; ſkilful; of great force of mind.
There is no Engliſh ſoul
More ſtronger to direct you than yourſelf,
If with the ſap of reaſon you would quench,
Or but allay the fire of paſſion. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
18. Firm; compact; not ſoon broken.
Full on his ankle fell the pond’rous ſtone,
Burſt the ſirong nerves, and craſh'd the ſolid bone. Pote.
19. Forcibly written; compriſing much meaning in few words.
ST RoNG F 1's TE D. adj. [ſº ong and fift.] Stronghanded.
John, who was pretty ſtron ſiſted, gave him ſuch a ſqueeze
as made his eyes water. Arbuthnot.
STRo'NGHAND. m.ſ.. [ſtrong and hand J Force; violence.
When their captain dieth, if the ſeniory ſhould deſcend to
his child, and an infant, another would thruſt him out by
fronghand, being then unable to defend his right. Spenſer.
They wanting land wherewith to ſuſtain their people, and
the Tuſcans having more than enough, it was their meaning
to take what they needed by ſtronghand. Raleigh.
STRo'NG ly, adv. [from ſtrong.]
1. Powerfully ; forcibly. -
The colewort is an enemy to any plant, becauſe it draw-
eth ſtrongly the fatteſt juice of the earth. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The dazzling light
Had flaſh'd too ſtrongly on his aking ſight. Addiſon.
Water impregnated with ſalt attenuates ſtrongly. Arbuthnot.
When the attention is ſtrºngly fixed to any ſubječt, all that
is ſaid concerning it makes a deeper impreſſion. Watts.
2. With ſtrength; with firmneſs; in ſuch a manner as to laſt;
in ſuch a manner as not eaſily to be forced.
Great Dunfinane he ſtrongly fortifies. Shakeſpeare.
Let the foundations be ſtrongly laid. Ezra vi. 3.
3. Vehemently ; forcibly; eagerly.
All theſe accuſe him ſtrongly. Shakeſpeare.
The ruinous conſequences of Wood's patent have been
frongly repreſented by both houſes. Swift.
Sir Ro'Now At E.R. n.ſ.. [ſtrong and water.] Diſtilled ſpirits.
Metals receive in readily ſtrong waters; and ſtrong waters
do readily pierce into metals and ſtones: and ſome will touch
upon gold, that will not touch upon ſilver. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
STRook. The preterite of ſtrike, uſed in poetry for ſtruck.
A ſudden tempeſt from the deſart flew,
With horrid wings, and thunder'd as it blew:
Then whirling round, the quoins together ſtrock. Sandjº,
That conqu'ring look
When next beheld, like light'ning ſtrook
My blaſted ſoul, and made me bow. Waller.
He, like a patient angler, ere he ſtrook,
Would let them play a while upon the hook. Dryden.
Stroph E. m. ſ. ſtrophe, Fr. £30%.] A ſtanza.
St Roy E. The preterite of ſtrive. -
Having quite loſt the way of nobleneſs, he ſtrove to climb
to the height of terribleneſs. ... Sidney.
To Strout. v. n. [ſtruſ;n, German.]. To ſwell with an ap-
pearance of greatneſs; to wak with affected dignity; to ſtrut.
‘This is commonly written ſirut, which ſeems more proper.
To St Rout. v. a. To ſwell out; to puff out; to enlarge by
affectation. - - -
I will make a bricſ liſt of the particulars in an hiſtorical
truth nowife ſtrouted, nor made greater by language. Bacon.
To St Row. v. n. [See to STREw.]
1. To ſpread by being ſcattered.
Angel forms lay entranc'd,
Thick as autumnal leaves that ſtrow the brooks
In Valombroſa. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſł.
2. To ſpread by ſcattering; to beſprinkle.
All the ground
With ſhiver'd armour ſtrºwn. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
Come, ſhepherds come, and ſtrºw with leaves the plain;
Such funeral rites your Daphnis did ordain. Dryden.
With oſier floats the ſtanding waterſt, ow,
With maſly ſtones make bridges if it flow. Pryden.
S T R
3. To ſpread.
There have been three years dearth of corn, and cycry
place ſtrow'd with beggars. Swift
4. To ſcatter; to throw at random. -
Synah, can I tell thee more ?
ſº : our ladies bowre:
ut little need to ſtrºw my
Suffice this hill º!. y ſtore, - S
The tree in flor
The glad earth about hºrº
With treaſure from her yielding boughs.
Poſſeſſion kept the beaten road, `
And gatherd all his brother ſtrawl.
To St Row L. v. n. To range; to wander.
'Tis ſhe who nightly ſtrowl,
To STRox. v. a. [For deſtroy.]
Dig garden, ſtroy mallow, now may you at eaſe. Tºffer.
St Ruck. The old preterite and participle paſſive of ſtrike.
This meſſage bear: the Trojans and their chief
Bring holy peace, and beg the king's relief;
Struck with ſo great a name, and all on fire,
The youth replies; whatever you'require. Dryden.
In a regular plantation, I can place myſelf in its ſºcial
centers, ſo as to view all the walks ſtruck from them. Speciator.
High on his car Seſoſtris ſtruck my view,
Whom ſcepter'd ſlaves in golden härneſs drew. Pope.
Some to conceit alone their taſte confine,
And glitt'ring thoughts ſtruck out at ev'ry line. Pope.
STRU'cKEN. The old participle paſſive of ſtrike.
Down fell the duke, his joints diſſolv’daſunder,
Blind with the light, and ſtrucken dead with wonder. Fairſ.
All liquours/iructen make round circles, and daſh. Bacon.
Silent, and in face
Confounded, long they ſat, as ſtrucken mute. Milton.
Structure [ſtructure, Fr.ſiručiūra, from ſtructuſ, Latin.]
I. Aćt of building; practice of building.
His ſon builds on, and never is content,
Till the laſt farthing is in ſtructure ſpent.
2. Manner of building; form; make.
Several have gone about to inform them, but for want of
inſight into the ſtructure and conſtitution of the terraqueous
- º
ºn, e?.
.
J/aller.
wift.
inder. [See Srroll j
with ſaunt ring pace. Gy.
Dryden.
globe, have not given ſatisfaction. J%odward.
3. Edifice; building.
Ecbatana her ſtructure vaſt there ſhews,
And Hecatompylos her hundred gates. Milton.
High on a rock of ice the ſtructure lay. Pºpe.
There ſtands a ſtructure of majeſtick frame. Pope:
STRUDE. or Strode. n.ſ. A ſtock of breeding mares.
To STRU'GGLE. v. n. [Of uncertain etymology.]
I. To labour; to ačt with effort.
2. To ſtrive; to contend; to conteſt.
No man is guilty of an act of intemperance but he might
have forborn it; not without ſome trouble from the ſtrugglings
of the contrary habit, but ſtill the thing was poſſible. South.
In the time of Henry VIII. differences of religion tore the
nation into two mighty factions, and, under the name of Papiſt
and Proteſtant, ſtruggled in her bowels with many various
events. - Temple.
I repent, like ſome deſpairing wretch,
That boldly plunges in the frightful deep,
Then pants, and ſtruggles with the whirling waves;
And catches every ſlender reed to ſave him. Smith.
3. To labour in difficulties; to be in agonies or diſtreſs.
Strong virtue, like ſtrong nature, ſtruggles ſtill,
Exerts itſelf, and then throws off the ill.
'Tis wiſdom to beware
And better ſhun the bait, than ſtruggle in the ſnare. Dryden.
If men ſtruggle through as many troubles to be miſerable as
to be happy; my readers may be perſuaded to be good. Spect.
He ſtruggling groans beneath the cruel hands
Even of the clowns he feeds. Thomſon.
St RU'GGle. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Labour; effort.
2. Conteſt; contention.
When, in the diviſion of parties, men only flrove for the
firſt place in the prince's favour, an honeſt man might look
upon the ſtruggle with indifference. Addison.
It began and ended without any of thoſe unnatural ſtruggles
for the chair, which have diſturbed the Peace of this great
city. Alterbury.
. Agony; tumultuous diſtreſs. - - - - - -
| STRUMA, n.ſ. [Latin.] A glandular ſwelling; the king's evil.
A gentlewoman had a ſtruma about the inſtep, yely hard
and deep about the tendons. - Iłiſeman's Sºgº.
STRU'Mots adj. [from ſtrumal Having ſwelling in the glands.
How to treat them when ſtrum.” ſcirrhous, or cancerous.
Ba ly.
Dryden.
JPiſeman:
Strumper. n.ſ. A whore; a proſtitut; Of doubtful original.
Stropo vieux mot palliardie. Stuprum, Lat, Trevoux.
How like a younker or a prodigal
The ſkarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hugg'd<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T U
S T U
i
º
s
3'd and embraced by the ſtrumpet wind
#. i. prodigal doth ſhe return, ind
Lean, rent, and beggar'd by the ſtrumpet wind.
Ne'er could º
- double vigour, art and nature,
yº i. º: temper, i. this virtuous maid
Subdues me quite. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
If to preſerve this veſſel for my lord
From any other, foul, unlawful touch, 2.
Be not to be aſtrumpet; I am none. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Common fame is as falſe and impudent as a commonſtrum-
Shakeſø.
pet. L’Eſtrange.
Honour had his due;
Before the holy prieſt my vows were ty'd:
So came I not a ſtrumpet but a bride. Dryden.
To STRU'MPET. v.a. To make a whore; to debauch.
If we two be one, and º falſe,
I do digeſt the poiſon of thy fleſh,
Being }.}by the contagion. Shakespeare.
Strung. The preterite and participle paſſive of ſtring.
The ſtrung bow points out the Cynthian queen. Gay.
To STRUT. v. n. [ſiruſen, German.] - -
1. To walk with affected dignity; to ſwell with ſtatelineſs.
Adore our errours, laugh at's while we ſtrut
To our confuſion. Shakeſpeare's Ant and Cleopatra.
Does he not hold up his head and ſtrut in his gait? Shakeſp.
Though thou ſirut and paint,
Yet art thou both ſhrunk up and old. Ben. johnſºn.
The falſe ſyren
Struts on th waves, and ſhews the brute below. Dryden.
We will be with you ere the crowing cock
Salutes the light, and ſiruts before his feather'd flock. Dryd.
2. To ſwell; to protuberate.
The goats with ſtrutting dugs ſhall homeward ſpeed. D, yd.
The pow'r appeas'd, with winds ſuffic'd the ſail,
The bellying canvaſs ſtrutted with the gale. Dryden.
As thy ſtrutting bags with money riſe,
The love of gain is of an equal ſize. Dryden.
STRUT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] An affectation of ſatelineſs in
the walk.
Certain gentlemen of the gown, by ſmirking countenances
and an ungainly ſtrut in their walk, have got preferment.
Swift.
STUB. m. ſ. [rzeb, Sax, ſlubbe, Daniſh; /?ob, Dutch ; ſtipes,
Latin.]
1. A thick ſhort ſtock left when the reſt is cut off.
Dametas guided the horſes ſo ill, that the wheel coming
over a great/ful of a tree, overturned the coach. Sidney.
- All about, old ſtocks and ſtubs of trees,
Whereon nor fruit nor leaf was ever ſeen,
Did hang upon the ragged rocky knees. Fairy Queen.
To buy at the ſub is the beſt for the buyer,
More timely proviſion, the cheaper is fire. 7uſer.
Upon cutting down of an old timber tree, the flub hath put
out ſometimes a tree of another kind, Bºonſ, Nat. Hiſtory.
We here
Live on tough roots and ſtubs, to thirſt inur’d,
Men to much miſery and hardſhips born.
Frickly ſtubs inſtead of trees are found,
Cr woods with knots and knares deform'd and old;
Headleſs the moſt, and hideous to behold. Dryd. Knights Tale.
2. A log; a block.
Yºu ſhall have more adoe to drive our dulleſt and lazieſt
Youth, our ſtocks and ſubt, from the infini. deſire of ſuch a
*PPynurture, than we have now to haul. choiceſt wits to
that afinine feaſt of ſow-thiſtles and brambles. Milton.
To STUB. v. a. [from the noun..] To force up; to extirpate.
His two tuſks ſerve for fighting and feeding; by the help
whereof he ſtubs up edible roots ºut of the ground, or tears
off the bark of trees. Grew's Muſcum.
The other tree was griev'd,
Grew ſcrubby, dry'd * top, was ſtunted;
So the next parſon/ulºd and burnt it. Swift.
STU'BBED. adj. [from /lub.] Truncated; ſhort and thick.
A pain he in his head-piece feels,
Againſt a ſtubbed tree he reels,
And up went poor Hobgoblin's heels.
To ſpight the Coy nymphs,
Hang upon our ſailed horns
Garlands, ribbons, and fine poeſies. -
sº *.*.*.*, *ſ,[from ſulb.u.] The flate of being ſhort,
sº "ºr, l, Dutch
- .*/; lººſe, Fr. ſºftpel, utch ; /?ibula in.
The flak ºf cºnjº .# º, and
- This ſuggeſted
{\ºme time, when his ſoaring inſolence
Shall reach the People, will be the fire
°kindle their dr bbl &gt;
Shall darken him º and their blaze
Milton,
Drayton. {
P'Pº open in the morning,
2.
Shakeſpeare.
If a ſmall red flower in the /*le-fields, called the winco-
You may be ſure of a fair day.
Bacon,
His ſucceeding years afford him little more than the ſubble
of his own harveſt. Dryden
Thrice happy Duck, employ'd in threſhing ſubbi,"
Thy toil is leſien’d and thy profits double. Swift,
After the firſt crop is off they plow in the wheat ſºuth.
- artimer’s Huſband).
STU’BBORN. adj. [This word, of which no obvious etymo.
logy appears, is derived by Minſlew from Jłoutborn, referred
by juniuſ to ºzº, and deduced better by M. Lye, from
Jub, perhaps from /lub-horn.]
1. Obſtinate; inflexible; contumacious.
The queen is obſtinate,
Stubborn to juſtice, apt t'accuſe it, and
Diſdainful to be tried by’t. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
You ſtubborn antient knave, you reverend braggart,
We'll teach you.- Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
He believed he had ſo humbled the garriſon, that they would
be no longer ſo ſtubborn. Clarendon.
2. Perſiſting; perſevering; ſteady.
All this is to be had only from the epiſtles themſelves, with
Jubbºrn attention, and more than common application. Lock.
3. Stiff; not pliable; inflexible; not eaſily admitting impreſſion.
Strifeful Atin in their ſtubborn mind,
Coals of contention and hot vengeance tin'd. Spºnſºr,
Love ſoftens me, and blows up fires which paſs
Through my tough heart, and melt theJłubborn maſs. Dºyd
I'll not flatter this tempeſtuous king,
But work his/tubborn ſoul a nobler way. Dryden,
Take a plant of ſtubborn oak,
And labour him with many a ſturdy ſtroak. Dryden.
4. Hardy; firm.
Patience under torturing pain,
Where ſtubborn ſtoicks would complain. Swift.
5. Haſh; rough; rugged.
We will not oppoſe any thing that is hard andſtubborn, but
by a ſoft anſwer deaden their force. Burnet.
6. In all its uſes it commonly implies ſomething of a bad qua-
lity.
Stu’BB or NLY. adv. [fromAubborn.] Obſtinately; contuma.
ciouſly; inflexibly. -
Stubbornly he did repugn the truth,
About a certain queſtion in the law. Shafft. H. VI.
He wilfully neglects his book, and /tubbornly refuſes any
thing he can do. Locke.
So cloſe they cling, ſo ſtubbornly retire,
Their love's more violent than the chymiſt's fire. Garth.
Sty'bbornness. n.ſ.. [from ſtubborn, J Obſtinacy; vicious
ſtoutneſs; contumacy; inflexibility.
Happy is your grace,
That can tranſlate the Jłubbornneſ of fortune - - -
Into ſo quiet and ſo ſweet a ſtyle. Shakeſp. A yºu likit.
He choſe a courſe leaſt ſubječ to envy, between ſtiffſius.
*; and filthy flattery. Hayward.
atriots, in peace, aſſert the people's right,
With noble/ſubbornneſ; reſiſting might. Dryden.
*rnneſ, and an obſtinate diſobedience, muſt be maſ.
tered with blows. Locłe,
It failed, partly by the accidents of a ſtorm, and partly by
the ſtubbornneſ; or treachery of that colony for whoſe relief it
was deſigned. Swift.
Stu'ahy, adj. [from ſtub.] Short and thick; ſhort and ſtrong
The baſe is ſurrounded with a garland of black and ſug
briſtles. Grew's Muſeum.
STANaik, n.ſ. [ſtub and nail.] A nail broken off; a ſhort
thick nail.
STUCCO. m.ſ. [Ital. ſluc, Fr.] A kind of fine plaſter for walls,
Palladian walls, Venetian doors,
Groteſco roofs, and ſtucco floors. - Pope,
Stuck. The preterite and participle paſſive of ſick. -
I had a paſs with rapier, ſcabbard and all, and he . me
the ſtuck in with ſuch a mortal motion, that it is inevita º
Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
What more infamous brands have #: ſº any,
ts for the worſt ends? . .
than thoſe who uſed the beſt par Decay of Pitt}.
The partners of their crime will learn obedience,
When they look up and ſee their fellow-traitors Alliºn.
Stuck on a fork. - yon,
When the polypus from forth his cave,
Torn with full force, reluctant beats the wave,
His ragged claws are ſtºck with ſtones and ſands. .
Stuck o'er with titles, and hung round with ſtrings,
That thou may'ſt be by kings, or whores of kings. ſº
Stuckle n.ſ. [/lºok, Scottiſh.) A number of ſheaves laid .
ther in the field to "g: J Ainſworth.
• 77. J. Llous oaXOſ). - - -
†: ſ. H. 'in ſome ſuch meaning perhaps it if be
taken in the following paſſage, which I do not underſt one
A barn in the country, that hath one ſingle ſº.”
height of ſtud, to the roof, is two ſhillings a foot. :
2. A nail with a large head driven for ornament; any orn
tal knob or protuberance. Handler
Pºpe.
-ºp-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T U
Handles were to add,
For which he now was making ſtud.
A belt of ſtraw, and ivy buds,
With coral claſps and amber ſtudi.
Cryſtal and myrrhine cups emboſs'd with gems,
And ſtuds of pearl. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd.
Upon a plane are ſeveral ſmall oblong ſtuds, placed regularly
Chapman's Iliad.
Raleigh.
in a quincunx order. J/oodward on Foſſils.
A deſk he had of curious work,
With glitt'ring ſtuds about. Swift:
3. [Scobe, Saxon ; ſtod, Iſlandick, is a ſtallion.] A collection
of breeding horſes and mares.
In the ſtud of Ireland, where care is taken, we ſee horſes
bred of excellent ſhape, vigour, and ſize. Temple.
To Stud. v. a. [from the noun..] To adorn with ſtuds or
ſhining knobs.
Thy horſes ſhall be trapp'd,
Their harneſs ſtudded all with gold and pearl. Shakeſpeare.
A ſilver ſtudded ax, alike beſtow'd. Dryden's Án.
STU'D ENT. n.ſ.. [ſtudens, Latin.] A man given to books; a
ſcholar; a bookiſh man.
Keep a gameſter from dice, and a good ſtudent from his
book. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
This grave advice ſome ſober ſtudent bears,
And loudly rings it in his fellow's ears. Dryden's Perſ.
A ſtudent ſhall do more in one hour, when all things concur
to invite him to any ſpecial ſtudy, than in four at a dull ſea-
ſon. Watts's Logick.
I ſlightly touch the ſubječt, and recommend it to ſome
ſtudent of the profeſſion. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Stu'died. adj. [from ſtudy J
1. Learned; verſed in any ſtudy; qualified by ſtudy.
He died
As one that had been ſtudied in his death,
To throw away the deareſt thing he ow'd,
As 'twere a careleſs trifle.
I am well ſtudied for a liberal thanks,
Which I do owe you. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
It will be fit that ſome man, reaſonably ſtudied in the law,
go as chancellor. Bacon.
2. Having any particular .# Out of uſe.
A prince ſhould not be ſo looſely ſtudied as to remember ſo
weak a compoſition. Shakeſpeare.
Sru'DIER. n.ſ.. [from ſtudy.] One who ſtudies.
Lipſius was a great{..., of the ſtoical philoſophy: upon
his death-bed his friend told him, that he needed not uſe ar-
guments to perſuade him to patience, the philoſophy which he
had ſtudied would furniſh him; he anſwers him, Lord Jeſus,
give me Chriſtian patience. Tillotſon.
There is a law of nature, as intelligible to a rational crea-
ture and ſtudier of that law, as the poſitive laws of common-
wealths. Locke.
STU'D1ous. adj. Iſſudieux, French ; ſtudioſus, Latin.]
1. Given to books and contemplation; given to learning.
A proper remedy for wandering thoughts, he that ſhall
propoſe, would do great ſervice to the ſtudious and contempla-
tive part of mankind. Locke.
2. Diligent; buſy.
Studious to find new friends, and new allies,
3. Attentive to ; careful.
The people made
Stout for the war, and ſtudious of their trade.
There are who, fondly ſtudious of increaſe,
Rich foreign mold on their ill-natur'd land
Induce.
4. Contemplative; ſuitable to meditation.
Let my due feet never fail
To walk the ſtudious cloiſter's pale.
Him for the ſtudious ſhade
Kind nature form'd.
Stu'Diously, adv. [from ſtudious.]
1. Contemplatively; with cloſe application to literature.
2. Diligently; carefully; attentively.
On a ſhort pruning hook his head reclines,
And ſtudiouſly ſurveys his gen’rous wines. Dryden's Aen.
All of them ſtudiouſly cheriſhed the memory of their hon-
ourable extraćtion. Atterbury.
Stu'Dious N Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſtudious.] Addićtion to ſtudy.
STUDY. m.ſ. [ ſtude, French ; ſtudium, Latin.]
1. Application of mind to books and learning.
Study gives ſtrength to the mind; converſation, grace. Temp.
Engage the mind in ſtudy by a conſideration of the divine
pleaſures of truth and knowledge. //atts.
2. Perplexity; deep cogitation.
Th’ idea of her life ſhall ſweetly creep
Into his ſtudy of imagination. Shai. Much Ado about Nothing.
The king of Caſtile, a little confuſed, and in a ſtudy, ſaid,
that can I not do with my honour. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. Attention; meditation; contrivance.
What can happen
To me above this wretchedneſs? All your ſtudies
Make me a curſe like this, Slakeſp. Henry VIII.
Shakeſpeare.
Tickell.
Dryden.
Phi"ips-
Milton.
Thomſºn's Summer.
Juſt men they ſeem’d, and all their ſtudy bent
- - tudy bent
To worſhip God aright, and know his works.
4. Any Particular kind of learning.
Studies ſerve for delight in privateneſs and retiring, for or-
nament in diſcourſe, and for ability in the judgment and diſ-
poſition of buſineſs. Bacon's Eſſays
5. Apartment ſet off for literary employment. yj.
Set me a taper in my ſtudy, Lucius. Shakeſ jul. Caſ
they ſay, he keeps,
Knock at the ſtudy, where,
To ruminate ſtrange plots. Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
Let all ſtudies and libraries be towards the Eaſt.
Milion.
- - J/alton.
Some ſervants of the king viſited the lodgings of the accuſed
members, and ſealed up their ſtudies and trink. Clarendon
Both adorn'd their age; - -
One for the ſtudy, t'other for the ſtage. Dryden.
To STU'DY. v. n. [ſtudeo, Latin; eſtudier, French.]
1. To think with very cloſe application; to muſe,
I found a moral firſt, and then ſtudied for a fable. Swift.
2. To endeavour diligently.
Study to be quiet, and do your own buſineſs. I Theſ, iv. 11.
To Stu'd Y. v. a.
1. To apply the mind to.
Nothing lovelier can be found
In woman, than to ſtudy houſhold good. Milton.
If a gentleman be to ſtudy any language, it ought to be
that of his own country. Lake.
2. To conſider attentively.
. He hath ſtudied her well, and tranſlated her out of honeſty
into Engliſh. Shakſ). Merry I/ive of iſ indſor.
Study thyſelf: what rank, or what degree,
The wiſe Creator has ordain’d for thee. Dryden's Perſ.
You have ſtudied every ſpot of ground in Flanders, whičh
has been the ſcene of battles and ſieges. Dryden.
3. To learn by application.
You could, for a need, ſtudy a ſpeech of ſome dozen lines,
which I would ſet down. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
STUFF. n.ſ.. [ſtoffe, Dutch; eſtiffe, French.]
1. Any matter or body.
Let Phidias have rude and obſtinate ſtuff to carve: though
his art do that it ſhould, his work will lack that beauty, which
otherwiſe in fitter matter it might have had. Hooker.
The workman on his ſtuff his ſkill doth ſhow,
And yet the ſtiff gives not the man his ſkill. Davies.
Of brick, and of that ſtuff; they caſt to build
A city and tow’r. Milton.
Pierce an hole near the inner edge, becauſe the triangle
hath there moſt ſubſtance of ſtuff. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
2. Materials out of which any thing is made.
Thy verſe ſwells with ſtuff ſo fine and ſmooth,
That thou art even natural in thine art. Shakeſp. Timon:
Caeſar hath wept ;
Ambition ſhould be made of ſterner ſtuff. Shakespeare jul. Caſ.
Succeſs or loſs, what is or is not, ſerves
As ſtuff for theſe two to make paradoxes.
Thy father, that poor rag, -
Muſt be thy ſubječt, who in ſpight put ſtuff
To ſome ſhe-beggar, and compounded thee
Poor rogue hereditary. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Degrading proſe explains his meaning ill,
And ſhews the ſtuff, and not the workman's ſkill. Roſcom.
3. Furniture; goods.
Fare away to get our ſtuff aboard. Shakeſpeare.
He took away locks, and gave away the king's ſtuff. Hayw.
Groaning waggons loaded high
With ſtuff.
4. That which fills anything.
With ſome ſweet oblivious antidote
Cleanſe the ſtuff'd boſom of that perilous ſtuff
Which weighs upon the heart.
5. Eſſence; elemental part.
Though in the trade of war I have ſlain men,
Yet do I hold it very ſtuff o' th' conſcience
et GO I no y ſtuff Shakeſp. Othell.
Shakeſpeare.
Cowley's Davidris.
Shakeſpeare.
To do no contriv'd murther.
6. Any mixture or medicine.
I did compound for her ld ſei
A certain ſiuff, which, being ta'en, would ſeize -
The .#. of life. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
7. Cloth or texture of any kind. .. -
8. Textures of wool thinner and ſlighter than cloath.
Let us turn the wools of the land into cloaths and ſtuff of
our own growth, and the hemp and flax growing here into
linen cloth and cordage. Bacon's Advice to Williert.
9. Matter or thing. In contempt.
O proper ſtuff!
This is the very painting of your fear. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Such ſtiff as madmen
Tongue .#. not. Shakeſpeare.
At this fuſty ſtuff 1.
The large Achilles, ºn his preſt bed lolling,
From his deep cheſt laughs out a loud applauſe.
Pleaſe not thyſelf the flatt'ring crowd to hear, -
'Tis fulſome ſtiff to feed thy itching ear. Dryden's Perſ.
25 M Anger
Shakeſp;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T Uſ
S T U
Anger would indie |l wri
h woful ſtuff as I or Shadwe Write.
sº be time enough
To hear ſuch mortifying ſtuff. - Swift.
The free things that among rakes paſs for wit and ſpirit,
muſt be ſhocking ſtuff to the ears of perſons of delicacy. Cariſ.
10. It is now ſeldom uſed in any ſenſe but in contempt or
diſlike.
To Stuff, v. a...[from the noun.]
1. To fill very full with any thing.
When we've ſtuff’d
Theſe pipes, and theſe conveyances of blood,
With wine and feeding, we have ſuppler ſouls, Shakeſpeare.
If I find him comforting the king,
It will ſtuff his ſuſpicion more fully.
Though plentecus, all too little ſeems -
Toftuff this maw, this vaſt unhide-bound corps. Miltox.
What have we more to do than to ſtuff our guts with theſe
figs L'Eſtrange.
This crook drew hazel-boughs adown,
And ſtuff"d her apron wide with nuts ſo brown. Gay.
2. To fill to uneaſineſs.
With ſome oblivious antidote
Cleanſe the ſtuff"d boſom of that perilous ſtuff
Which weighs upon the heart.
3. To thruſt into anything.
Put roſes into a glaſs with a narrow mouth, ſtuffing them
cloſe together, but without bruiſing, and they retain ſmell and
colour freſh a year. Bacon's Natural Hylory.
4. To fill by being put into anything.
Grief fills the room up of my abſent child,
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
Stuff; out his vacant garments with his form. Shakeſpeare.
With inward arms the dire machine they load,
And iron bowels ſtuff the dark abode. Dryden's AFn.
A bed,
The ſtuffng leaves, with hides of bears o'erſpread. Dryden.
5. To ſwell out by ſomething thruſt in.
Dryden's jºven.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakespeare.
I will be the man that ſhall make you great.—I cannot
perceive how, unleſs you give me your doublet, and ſtuff me
out with ſtraw. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
The gods for ſin
Should with a ſwelling dropſy ſtuff thy ſkin. Dryden.
Officious Baucis lays
Two cuſhions Jºff'd with ſtraw, the ſeat to raiſe. Dryden.
6. To fill with ſomething improper of ſuperfluous.
It is not uſual among the beſt patterns to ſtuff the report of
Particular lives with matter of publick record. J/otton.
Thoſe accuſations */ºff-d with odious generals, that the
proofs ſeldom make good. Clarendon.
For thee I dim theſe eyes, and /luff this head
With all ſuch reading as was never read. Pope.
7. To obſtruct the 9'gans of ſcent or reſpiration.
Theſe gloves the count ſent ºne; they are an excellent per-
fume. | am ſºft, couſin, I cannot ſmell. Shakeſpeare.
8. To fill meat with ſºmething of high reliſh.
She went for parſly to/ºf a rabbet. Shakeſpeare.
He *iºd at all, yet never could excel
In any thing butJ'uffing of his veal. King's Cºokery.
9. To form by ſtuffing.
An eaſtern king Put a judge to death for an iniquitous ſen-
ºnce; and ordered his hide tº be Jiuffed into a cuſhion, and
Placed upon the tribunal. Swift.
o STUFF. v. n. To fººd gluttonouſly.
Wedg'd in a ſpacious elbow-chair,
And on her plate a treble ſhare,
As if ſhe ne'er could have enough,
Taught harmleſs manºr. and fluff. Swift.
Stu'FFING. hiſ [from ſluff.]
I. That by which anything is filled.
Romé was a farrago out of the neighbouring nations; and
reece, though one monarchy under Alexander, yet the
People that were the ſºftng and materials thereof, exiſted
efore. Płale.
2. Reliſhing ingredients put into meat.
Arrach leaves are Very good in pottage andſuffings. Mort.
TUKE, or Stuck. "...ſ, [ſuc, French ; ſucco, Italian.J. A com:
poſition of lime and marble, powdered very fine, commonly
called plaiſter of Paris, with which figures and other Ornaments
reſembling ſculpture are made. Bailey.
§. * / A ſhaft to draw water out of a mine. Bailey.
º **89*NCE. n.ſ. [/iuhu, and *Tuentia, Lat.J Fooliſ,
- Dićf.
Stum. n.ſ. -
Žluhºſiº Swediſh, ſuppoſed to be contračted from
!. tº .."fermented; the cremor or froth on muſt.
grapes º °lammy vapour, that ariſes from theſ?um of
when en they lie maſhed in the wat, puts out a light
2. New º * it. Addiſon on i.
et º .* raiſe fermentation in dead and vapid wine.
r call u . "thout mixture or /ium be all fine,
P the maſter, and break his dull noji. B. Johnſ.
3. Wine revived by a new fermentation.
Drink ev'ry letter on't in /ium,
And make it briſk champaigne become. Hudibral
To STUM. v. a. [from the noun..] To renew wine by mixi.
freſh wine and raiſing a new fermentation. §
Vapid wines are put upon the lees of noble wines to give
them ſpirit, and we /ium our wines to renew their ſpirits. F.
To STU'MBLE. v. n. [This word Junius derives from ſim,
and ſays the original meaning is to ſtrike or trip waii'.
ſtamp. I rather think it comes from tumble.]
1. To trip in walking.
When ſhe will take the rein, I let her run;
But ſhe'll not ſtumble. ‘haºſ. ſººntºr', Tal,
A headſtall being reſtrained to keep him from ſlumlin.
hath been often burſt. Shakespeare Zaming ºf the .
As we pac'd along -
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Glo'ſter/lumbled; and, in falling,
Struck me, that ſought to ſtay him, overboard. Shalºft
The way of the wicked is as darkneſs: they know not.
what they ſtumble. Prov. iv. 19.
Cover'd o'er with blood,
Which from the patriot's breaſt in torrents flow'd,
He faints: his ſteed no longer hears the rein;
But/ºum les o'er the heap his hand had ſai. Prior,
* To ſlip; to err; to ſlide into crimes or blunders.
He that loveth his brother, abideth in the light, and therei,
none occaſion of /iumbling in him. I jo. ii. 10.
This my day of grace
They who neglect and ſcorn, ſhall never taſte;
But hard be harden'd, blind be blind. more, -
That they may/lumbie on, and deeper fall. Milton.
3. To ſtrike againſt by chance; to light on by chance,
This extreme dealing had driven her to put herſelf with a
great lady of that country, by which occaſion ſhe had fumbled
"Poº ſuch miſchances as were little for the honour of her or
her family. Sidney.
What man art thou, that, thus beſcreen'd in night,
So ſtumbleſt on m y counſel. Shakespeare Romeo and julid.
A mouſe, bred in a cheſt, dropped out over the ſide, and
Jumbled upon a delicious more. L'Eſtrange.
9vid ſtumbled, by ſome inadvertency, upon Livia in ,
bath. Dryden.
*Y of the greateſt inventions have been accidentally
fumbled upon by men buſy and inquiſitive. Raj.
Write down p and b, and make ſigns to him to endeavour
tº Pronounce them, and guide him by ſhewing him the motion
of your own lips; by which he will, with a little endeavour,
ſtumble upon one of them. Holder's Element ºf Sºuth.
To Stu'Mble. v.a.
1. To obſtruct in Prºgreſs; to make to trip or flop.
2. To make to boggle; to offend.
Such terms amus’d them all,
And ſtumbled many. Milton's Paradſ: Lºft.
One thing more ſtumbles me in the very foundation of this
hypotheſis. Lait,
Sruºmble. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A trip in walking.
2. A blunder; a failure.
One ſtumble is enough to deface the character of an hon-
ourable life. L'Eſtrangº,
Stu MBLER. m.ſ. [from ſtumble.] One that ſtumbles.
Be ſweet to all: is thy complexion ſour
Then keep ſuch company; make them thy allay:
Set a ſharp wife, a ſervant that willow'r,
A ſtumbler ſtumbles leaſt in rugged way. Herit.
STU'MBLINGblock. n: / [from ſtumble.] Cauſe of ſtumbling;
Stu'MBLINGstone. } cauſe of errour; cauſe of offence.
We preach Chriſt crucified, unto the Jews a ſtumblingllº,
and unto the Greeks fooliſhneſs. I Cor. i. 23.
This ſtumblingſtone we hope to take away. . . . Burnt.
Shakeſpeare is a ſtumblingilock to theſe rigid criticks. Speciat.
STUMP. m.ſ. [ ſtumpe, Daniſh ; ſtompe, Dutch ; ſtompen, º
to lop.] The part of any ſolid body remaining after the r
is taken away. -
He ſtruck ſo ſtrongly, that the knotty ſting
Of his huge tail he quite in ſunder cleft; -
Fivejoint thereof he hew'd, and but the ſtump him left. Spenſ,
Your colt's tooth is not caſt yet.—Not while I have a
ſtump Shakeſpeare.
He through the buſhes ſcrambles;
Aſtump doth trip him in his pace;
Down comes poor Hob upon his face, * - A 7...., 1.
Amongſt the briers and brambles. Drayton's Nymphid.
Who, 'cauſe they're waſted to the ſtumps, Hudibras.
Are repreſented beft by rumps. - &gt;
A j ſnapt off the end of his finger, and I dreſſed
the ſtamp with common digeſtive. J//eman's Surgery.
- nder his
º poor aſs, now wore out to theſiumpſ, fell º:
Againſt a ſtump his tuſks the monſter grinds, -
And in the ſharpen'd edge new vigour finds. sº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T U
A tongue might have ſome reſemblance to the ſlump of a
feather. Grew's Muſeum.
Worn to the ſtumps in the ſervice of the maids, ’tis thrown
out of doors, or condemned to kindle a fire. Swift.
Stu'MPY. adj. [from ſtump.] Full of ſtumps; hard; ſtiff;
ſtrong. A bad word.
They burn the ſtubble, which, being ſo ſtumpy, they ſeldom
plow in. - Mortimer.
To STUN. v. a. [rtunan, Saxon, zerzun, noiſe.]
1. To confound or dizzy with noiſe.
An univerſal hubbub wild
Of ſunning ſounds, and voices all confus'd,
Aſſaufts his ear. Milton.
Still ſhall I hear, and never quit the ſcore,
Stunn'd with hoarſe Codrus. Theſeid o'er and o'er. Dryden.
Too ſtrong a noiſe ſuns the ear, and one too weak does
not act upon the organ.
So Alma, weary'd of being great,
And nodding in her chair of ſtate,
Stunn’d and worn out with endleſs chat,
Of Will did this, and Nan ſaid that.
Shouts as thunder loud afflićt the air;
And ſun the birds releas'd.
The Britons, once a ſavage kind,
Deſcendents of the barbarous Huns,
With limbs robuſt, and voice that ſtunt,
You taught to modulate their tongues,
And ſpeak without the help of lungs.
2. To make ſenſeleſs or dizzy with a blow.
One hung a pole-ax at his ſaddle-bow,
And one a heavy mace to ſtun the foe.
STUNG. The preterite and participle paſſive of ſing:
To both theſe ſiſters have I ſworn my love:
Each jealous of the other, as the ſung
Are of the adder. Shakespeare  King Lear.
With envy ſtung, they view each other's deeds,
The fragrant work with diligence proceeds. Dryden's Aºn.
Stunk. The preterite of ſink. - -
To STUNT. v. a. [ſºunta, Iſlandick.] To hinder from growth.
Though this uſage ſºunted the girl in her growth, it gave
her a hardy conſtitution; ſhe had life and ſpirit. Arbuthnot.
There he ſtopt ſhort, nor ſince has writ a tittle,
But has the wit to make the moſt of little;
Like ſlunted hide-bound trees, that juſt have got
Cheyne,
Prior.
Prior.
Swift.
Dryden.
Sufficient ſap at once to bear and rot. Pope.
The tree grew ſcrubby, dry'd a-top and ſºunted,
And the next parſon ſtubb'd and burnt it. Swift.
Stupe. n.ſ.. [ſtupa, Latin.] Cloath or flax dipped in warm
medicaments, and applied to a hurt or ſore.
A fomentation was by ſome pretender to ſurgery applied
with coarſe woollen ſupes, one of which was bound upon his
leg. - JWiſeman's Surgery.
To Stupe. v.a. [from the noun..] Tofoment; todreſs with ſtupes.
The eſcar divide, and ſºupe the part affe&amp;ted with wine. Wiſem.
STUPEFA’cTION. "{ [ſupefaction, Fr ſtupefactus, Lat JInſen-
ſibility; dulneſs; ſtupidity; ſluggiſhneſs of mind; heavy folly.
All reſiſtance of the dićtates of conſcience brings a hard-
neſs and ſtupefaction upon it. South.
She ſent to ev'ry child
Firm impudence, or ſupefaction mild;
And ſtrait ſucceeded, leaving ſhame no room, -
Cibberian forehead, or Cimmerian gloom. Dunciad.
Stupef Active. adj. [from ſtupefactus, Latin; ſtupefactſ, Fr.]
Cauſing inſenſibility; dulling; obſtructing the ſenſes; narco-
tick; opiate. -
It is a gentle fomentation, and hath a very little mixture,
of ſome ſupefactive. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Opium hath a ſtupefactive part, and a heating part; the one
moving ſleep, the other a heat. Bacon.
STUPE'Ndous. adj. [ſtupendur, Lat.] Wonderful; amazing;
aſtoniſhing.
All thoſe ſtupendous ačts deſervedly are the ſubjećt of a hiſ-
tory, excellently written in Latin by a learned prelate. Claren.
Great joy was at their meeting, and at fight
Of that ſtupendous bridge his joy increas'd. Milton.
Portents and prodigies their ſouls amaz'd ;
But moſt, when this ſupendous pile was rais'd. Dryden.
Mortals, fly this curſt deteſted race:
A hundred of the ſame ſtupendous ſize,
A hundred Cyclops live among the hills. Addison.
Our numbers can ſcarce give us an idea of the vaſt quantity
of ſyſtems in this ſtupendous piece of archite&amp;ture. Cheyne.
STU'PID. adj. [ſtupide, French; ſtupidus, Latin.] -
1. Dulli wanting ſenſibility; wanting apprehenſion; heavy;
fluggiſh of underſtanding.
O that men ſhould be ſo ſtupid grown
As to forſake the living God.
Milton.
Men, boys and women, ſtupid with ſurpriſe,
Where e'er ſhe paſſes, fix their wond'ring eyes. Dryden.
If I by chance ſucceed,
Know, I am not ſo ſtupid, or ſo hard,
Not to feel praiſe, or fame's deſerv'd reward. Dryden,
S T U
With wild ſurpriſe
A moment ſtupid, motionleſs he ſtood.
2. Performed without ſkill or genius.
Wit, as the chief of virtue's friends,
Diſdains to ſerve ignoble ends: &gt;
Obſerve what loads of Jºupid rhimes
STUP 'ppreſs us y º times.
***P*T.Y. m. ſ. [/tupidité, Fr. ſtupidit - -
heavineſs of mind; ãº f :...] Dulneſs;
Shadwel alone, of all my ſons, is he 9.
Who ſtands confirm'd in fullJłupidity.
Thomſºn:
Swift.
Stu'Piply, adv. [from /tupid.] Dryden;
1. With ſuſpenſion or ina&amp;tivity of underſtanding.
hat ſpace the evil one abſtracted flood
From his own evil, and for the time remaind
Stupidly good. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
2. Dully; without apprehenſion.
On the ſhield there was engraven maps of countries, which
#. could not comprehend, but looked on asJupidly as his
fºllow-heaſt the licn. Dryden's Fables, Deditat.
sººn. m. ſ. [from Jupiff. J That which cauſes ſtu-
pidity. - -
To STUPIFY. v. a. [/tupefacio, Latin. This word ſhould
therefore be ſpelled ſtupefy; but the authorities are againſt it.]
To make ſtupid ; to deprive of ſenſibility; to dull.
It is not º ; but yet is not fluent, but ſtupified. Bac.
- Ole
Will ſtupify and dull the ſenſe a while. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Pounce it into the quickſilver, and ſo proceed to the ſtupi-
fjing. - - Bacon.
Confider whether that method, uſed to quiet ſome con-
ſciences, does not ſtupefy more. Decay of Piety.
. The fumes of his paſſion do as really intoxicate his diſcern-
ing faculty, as the fumes of drink diſcompoſe and ſtupify the
brain of a man overcharged with it. South.
Envy, like a cold poiſon, benumbs and ſtupifies; and con-
ſcious of its own impotence, folds its arms in deſpair. Cºllier.
STU'POR. m. ſ. [Latin; ſupeur, French.) Suſpenſion or dimi-
nution of ſenſibility. -
A pungent pain in the region of the kidneys, a ſtupor, or
dull pain in the thigh and colick, are ſymptoms of an inflam-
mation of the kidneys. - Arbuthnºt on Diet.
To Stu'PRATE. v. a. ſ. ſºupro, Latin.J. To raviſh; to violate.
sºrios. nºſ [ſupratio, from ſtupro, Lat] Rape; vio-
2tion.
Stupration muſt not be drawn into pračice,
Stu'RDily, adv. [from ſturdy.]
1. Stoutly; hardily.
2. Obſtinately; reſolutely.
Then withdraw
From Cambridge, thy old nurſe; and, as the reſt,
Here toughly chew and ſturdily digeſt
Th’immenſe vaſt volumes of our common law.
STU'RDIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſturdy.]
1. Stoutneſs; hardineſs.
Sacrifice not his innocency to the attaining ſome little ſkill
of buſtling for himſelf, by his converſation with vitious boys,
when the chief uſe of that ſturdineſs, and ſtanding upon his
own legs, is only for the preſervation of his virtue. Locke.
2. Brutal ſtrength.
STU'RDY. adv. [eſourdi, French.] -
1. Hardy; ſtout; brutal; obſtinate. It is always uſed of men
with ſome diſagreeable idea of coarſeneſs or rudeneſs.
This muſt be done, and I would fain ſee
Mortal ſo ſturdy as to gainſay. Hudibrat.
Aſturdy hardened finner ſhall advance to the utmoſt pitch
of impiety with leſs reluctance than he took the firſt ſteps,
whilſt his conſcience was yet vigilant and tender. Atterbury.
Aw'd by that houſe, accuſtom'd to command, }
Brown.
Donne.
The ſturdy kerns in due ſubjection ſtand,
Nor bear the reins in any foreign hand.
2. Strong; forcible. -
The ill-apparelled knight now had gotten the reputation of
ſome ſºurdylout, he had ſo well defended himſelf. Sidney.
Ne ought his ſlurdy ſtrokes might ſtand before,
That high trees overthrew, and rocks in pieces tore. F. &amp;
3. Stiff; ſtout. - --
He was not of any delicate contexture, his limbs rather
Pryden.
Jºurdy than dainty. //otton.
Sturdieſ; oaks
Bow'd their ſtiff necks, loaden with ſtormy blaſts,
Or torn up ſheer. Milton's Par. Reg.
Sturgeon. . / [/turio, turfio, Latin.]. A ſea-fiſh.
It is part º bone of a ſurgeon, being flat, of
a porous or cellular conſtitution on one ſide, the cells being
worn down, and ſmooth on the other. , ſº dwºrd.
STURE. m.ſ. freync, Saxon.]. A young ox or heifºr. Bailey,
Thus they are ſtill called in Scotland.
To STUT. v. n. [/lutten, to hinder, Dutch..] To ſpeak
To STUTTER. ; with heſitation; to ſtammer.
Divers/lut: the cauſe is the refrigeration of the tongue, where-
by it is leſs apt to move ; and therefore naturals/ºut, , Baton.
St u'TTER.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S T U
|-
n.ſ. (from ſºut.] One that ſpeaks with heſita-
tion; a ſtammerer. - -
holerick, choler inducing a dryneſs
Bacon's Natural Hytory.
Sru'rrºr. }
STU'TTE RER. -
Many ſtutters are very c
in the tongue.
Sty. n.ſ. [rzºº, Saxon.]
1. A cabbin to keep hogs in:
Tell Richmond, dy bo
hat in the ſty of this moſt bloody boar,
W. ſon &amp; Stanley is frank'd up in hold. Shakespeare . R. III.
When her hogs had miſs'd their way,
Th'untoward creatures to the ſly I drove,
And whiſtl'd all the way.
May thy black pigs lie warm in littleſ', i. **___.
And have no thought to grieve them ‘till they die. King.
2. Any place of beſtial debauchery. . . . . .
They all their friends and native hóme forget,
To rolí with pleaſure in a ſenſual/y.
With what eaſe -
Might'ſ thou expel this monſter frºm his throne, • *
Now made a ſly. Miltºn's Parade Regain'd.
To Sty. v.a. [from the noun..] To ſhut up in a ſty.
Here you ſly me
In this hard rock, while you do keep from me
The reſt of th’ iſland. Shakespeare's Tempeſ'.
To Sry. v. n. To ſoar; to aſcend. Speyer. -
STYolan, adj. [/ſygius, Latin. J . Helliſh; infernal; pertain-
ing to Styx, one of the poetical rivers of hell.
At that ſo ſudden blaze the Stygian throng -
Bent their aſpect. Milton.
Sryle. n.ſ. [/tylus, Latin.]
1. Manner of writing with regard to language.
Gay.
Milton.
Happy
That can tranſlate the ſtubbornneſs of fortune
Into ſo quiet, and ſo ſweet a ſtyle. Shakeſpeare.
Their beauty I will rather leave to poets, than venture upon
ſo tender and nice a ſubject with my ſeverer/ly'e. More.
Proper words in proper places, make the true definition of
a ſile. Swift.
Let ſome lord but own the happy lines,
How the wit brightens, and the ſtyle refines. Pope.
2. Manner of ſpeaking appropriate to particular charaćters.
No ſtyle is held for baſe, where love well named is. Sidney.
There was never yet philoſopher,
That could endure the toothach patiently,
However they have writ the ſtyle of gods,
And make a piſh at chance and ſufferance. Shakespeare eare,
3. Title; appellation. -
Ford's a knave, and I will aggravate his ſile; thou ſhalt
know him for knave and cuckold. Shakespeare.
The king gave them in his commiſſion the ſyle and appella-
tion which belonged to them. Clarendon.
O virgin' or what other name you bear
Above that ſtyle; O more than mortal fair!
Let not an humble ſuppliant ſue in vain.
Propitious hear our pray'r,
Whether the ſtyle of Titan pleaſe thee more,
Whoſe purple rays th' Achaemenes adore. Pope's Statius.
4. Courſe of writing. Unuſual.
While his thoughts the ling’ring day beguile,
To gentle Arcite let us turn our ſtyle. Dryden.
5. A pointed iron uſed anciently in writing on tables of wax.
6. Any thing with a ſharp point, as a graver; the pin of a dial.
Placing two ſiles or needles of the ſame ſteel, touched
with the ſame loadſtone, when the one is removed but half a
ſpan, the other would ſtand like Hercules's pillars. Brown.
. The ſtalk which riſes from amid the leaves of a flower.
Style is the middle prominent part of the flower of a plant,
which adheres to the fruit or feed: 'tis uſually ſlender and
Dryden’s AEn.
long, whence it has its name. $2uincy.
The figure of the flower-leaves, flamina, apices, ſile, and
ſeed-veſſel. Ray.
8. Style ºf Court, is properly the pračice obſerved by any court
in its way of proceeding. Aylſe's Parergon.
To STYLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To call; to term; to
natine.
The chancellor of the Exchequer they had no mind ſhould
be ſtyled a knight. Clarendon.
Err not that ſo ſhall end
The ſtrife which thou call'ſt evil, but weſtyle
The ſtriſe of glory. 41ſton's Paradiſ. Loft.
Fortune's gifts, my adions
May ſtile their own rewards. Denham's Sophy.
Whoever backs his tenets with authorities, thinks he ought
to carry the cauſe, and is ready to ſtile it impudence in any one
who ſhall ſtand out. Locke
A º might have made him ſºil'd -
ather, and th - - - -
stvº. and the nymph his child. Swift.
- - dj. ſºlºs; ſyptique, Fr. This is uſually writ-
º: See Stiprick.) The ſame as sº but
...tº the moſt efficacious fort of aſtringents, or
Fruit lc | are applied to ſtop haemorrhages. - &amp;ſincy.
* 9 trees and ſhrubs contain Phlegm, oil, and an
eſſential ſalt, by which they are ſharp, ſweet, ſour or ſyptic;
A buthnot on Aiºi.
Srypti'city. n.ſ. [Properly ſlipticity.] The power of fland.
ing blood.
Catharticks of mercurials precipitate the viſcidities by their
ſyſticity, and mix with all animal acids. Flower
To Sry't HY. v. a. [See Stithy..] To forge on an anº -
By the forge that ſixthy'd Mars his helm, -
I'll kill the ºyery where, yea, o'er and o'er. Saiſº,
SUA's IBLE, adj. [from ſuadeo, Latin.]. Eaſy to be perſuaded."
SUA’s 1 v E. adj. [from ſuade, Lat..] Having power to pºſsi.
It had the paſſions in perfect ſubjection; and though it.
command over them was but ſaſve and political, yet i. had
the force of coaction, and deſpotical. South's Sermºn;
SUA’so R Y. adj. [ſuaſirius, Latin.] Having tendency to p:
ſuade.
SUAvit Y. m. ſ. [ſuarité, French ; ſuavitas, Latin.]
I. Sweetneſs to the ſenſes.
She deſired them for rarity, pulchritude, and ſuavity. Brºwn,
2. Sweetneſs to the mind.
SUB, in compoſition, ſignifics a ſubordinate degree.
St Ba'cid. adj. [ſub and aciduº, Latin.] Sour in a ſmall dº.
rec.
g The juice of the ſtem is like the chyle in the animal body,
not ſufficiently conco&amp;ted by circulation, and is commonly ſui-
acid in all plants. - Arbuthnot on Aliment.
SubA'cRID. adj. [ſub and acrid.] Sharp and pungent in affnal
degree.
The green choler of a cow taſted ſweet, bitter, ſalarii, or
a little pungent, and turned ſyrup of violets green. Florer,
To SUBA'ct. v. a. [ ſ bacius, Latin.] To reduce; to ſubdue.
Tangible bodies have no pleaſure in the conſort of air, but
endeavour to ſuffaël it into a more denſe body. Batm.
SUBA"ction. n.ſ.. [ſulaelus, Latin.) The act of reducing to
any ſtate, as of mixing two bodies completely, or beatingany
thing to a very ſmall powder.
There are of concoction two periods: the one aſſimilation,
or abſolute converſion and ſubaetion; the other maturation;
whereof the former is moſt conſpicuous in living creatures, in
which there is an abſolute converſion and affimilation of the
nouriſhment into the body. Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry.
Su'e ALTERN. adj. [ſubalterne, French.) Inferiour; ſubordi-
nate; that which in different reſpects is both ſuperiour and in-
feriour. It is uſed in the army of all officers below a captain.
There had like to have been a duel between two ſubaltern,
upon a diſpute which ſhould be governor of Portſmouth. Addison
Love's ſubalterns, a duteous band,
Like watchmen round their chief appear;
Each had his lanthorn in his hand,
And Venus, maſk'd, brought up the rear. Priºr,
One, while a ſubaltern officer, was every day complaining
againſt the pride of colonels towards their officers; yet after
he received his commiſſion for a regiment, he confeſſed the
fpirit of colonelſhip was coming faſt upon him, and it daily
increaſed to his death. Swift,
This ſort of univerſal ideas, which may either be conſidered
as a genus or ſpecies, is called ſubaltern. Hall,
SubALTERNATE. adj. [ſubalternus, Latin.] Succeeding."
turns. Diff.
Sub Ast Ri'NGENT. adj. [ſub and affringent.] Aſtringent in?
ſmall degree.
Sub Be'Adie. n.ſ.. [ſub and beadle.] An under beadle.
They ought not to execute thoſe precepts by ſimple meſſen-
gers, or ſubbeadles, but in their own perſons. Aliff's Party.
Subcele's r1AL. adj. [ſub and celſial.] Placed beneath the
heavens. -
The moſt refined glories of ſubcelºftial excellencies are but
more faint reſemblances of theſe. Glanv, Stſ.
SubcHA'NTER. n.ſ.. [ſub and chanter; ſuccentor, Lat.] The
deputy of the precentor in a cathedral.
SubclaviaN. adj. [ſub and clavus, Latin.] -
Subclavian is applied to any thing under the armpit Øuint
der, whether artery, nerve, vein, or muſcle. .
The liver, though ſeated on the right ſide, yet, by theft -
clavian diviſion, doth equi-diſtantly communic:* * aćtivity
unto either arm. Brown's Vulgar Errº”
The chyle firſt mixeth with the blood in the ſºlº
vein, and enters with it into the heart, where it is "º º:
perfectly mixed, there being no mechaniſm nor ſº
to convert it into blood, which is effected by the lung: .
Sunconstella'rios. n.ſ. [ ſub and com/tellation.] A ſubordi-
nate or ſecondary conſtellation.
. As to the º: of the ſeven ſtars, if thereby be nº
the pleiades, or ſubconſtellation upon the back of T . .
what congruity they are deſcribed in a clear night.” % º
eye may diſcover. Brown', /ulgar trºº i.
SºconfraRy. adj. [ſub and contrary..] Contrary "*"
feriour degree. - -
If tººls: propoſitions differ in quality, they *.
contraries; as, ſome vine is a tree : fome X" 1S º
tree. Theſe may be both true together, but they sº
be both falſe.
4.
or ſial.
SubcontRA’ct”
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U B
SubcontRA’cted, part. adj. [ſub and contračed.] Contraćted
after a former contračt.
Your claim,
I bar it in the intereſt of my wiſe;
'Tis ſhe is ſubcontračied to this lord,
And I her huſband contradićt your banes. Shakespeare . K Lear.
Subcut A’Neous. adj. [ſub and cutaneous...] Lying under the
ſkin.
SUBDE'Acos. m. ſ. [ ſubdeaconus, Latin.]
. In the Romiſh church they have a ſubdeacon, who is the
deacon's ſervant. Aliff's Paregºn.
SUBDF'AN. m. ſ. [ ſubdecanus, Lat.] The vicegerent of a dean.
Whenever the dean and chapter confirm any ačt, that ſuch
confirmation may be valid, the dean muſt join in perſon, and
not in the perſon of a deputy or ſubdean only. Ayliffº.
SUBDEcu'PLE. adj. [ſub and decuplus, Lat..] Containing one
part of ten.
SubDER 1so'Rious. adj. [ſub and deriſºr.] Scofing or ridi-
culing with tenderneſs and delicacy.
This ſubderijorious mirth is far from giving any offence to us:
it is rather a pleaſant condiment of our converſation. More.
SUBDIT I'Tious. adj. [ſubdititius, Latin.] Put ſecretly in the
place of ſomething elſe.
To Subdive'Rsify. v.a. [ſub and diverſ; J To diverſify
again what is already diverſified.
The ſame wool one man felts into a hat, another weaves it
into cloth, another into arras; and theſe variouſly ſubdiverſ-
fied according to the fancy of the artificer. Ha'e.
To Su'BDivid E. v. a. [ſubdiviſer, French; ſub and divide. J
To divide a part into yet more parts.
In the riſe of eight, in tones, there be two beenols, or half
notes; ſo as if you divide the tones equally, the eight is but
ſeven whole and equal notes; and if you ſubdivide that into
half notes, as in the ſtops of a lute, it maketh the number
thirteen. Bacon's Nat. Hiſlory.
When Brutus and Caſſius were overthrown, ſoon after An-
tonius and Oétavianus brake and ſubdivided. Bacon.
The glad father glories in his child,
When he can ſubdivide a fraćtion. Rºſcommon.
When the progenies of Cham and Japhet ſwarmed into
colonies, and thoſe colonies were ſubdivided into many others,
in time their deſcendants loſt the primitive rites of divine
worſhip, retaining only the notion of one deity. Dryden.
SubDiv I'sion. n.ſ.. [ſubdiviſion, French; from ſubdivide.]
1. The act of ſubdividing.
When any of the parts of any idea are farther divided, in
order to a clear explication of the whole, this is called a ſub-
diviſion; as when a year is divided into months, each month
into days, and each day into hours, which may be farther ſub-
divided into minutes and ſeconds. //atti’s Lºgick.
2. The parts diſtinguiſhed by a ſecond diviſion.
How can we ſee ſuch a multitude of ſouls caſt under ſo
many ſubdiviſiºns of miſery, without reflecting on the abſur-
dity of a government that ſacrifices the happineſs of ſo many
reaſonable beings to the glory of one? Addiſon.
In the decimal table the ſubdiviſions of the cubit, as ſpan,
palm, and digit, are deduced from the ſhorter cubit. A buthn.
Su'e polcus. adj. [ſibdolus, Latin.] Cunning; ſubtle; fly.
†: º: {v. a. [ſubduco, ſubdiºus, Latin.]
1. To withdraw; to take away.
Or nature fail'd in me, and left ſome part
Not proof enough ſuch object to ſuſtain;
Or from my fide ſubdućing, took perhaps
More than enough. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
2. To ſubſtract by arithmetical operation. -
Take the other operation of arithmetick, ſubdućtion: if out
of that ſuppoſed infinite multitude of antecedent generations
we ſhould ſubduce ten, the reſidue muſt be leſs by ten than it
was before, and yet ſtill the quotient muſt be infinite. Hale.
Sub DU’ction. n.ſ.. [from ſubd.cf. )
1. The act of taking away.
Poſibly the Divine Beneficence ſubduéting that influence,
which it communicated from the time of their firſt creation,
they were kept in a ſtate of immortality’till that moment of
the ſubduction. Hale's Origin of Mankind,
2. Arithmetical ſubſtraćtion. - - -
Suppoſe we take the other operation of arithmetick, ſubduc-
tion : if out of that infinite multitude of antecedent genera-
tions we ſhould ſubdućt ten, the reſidue muſt be leſs by ten
than it was before that ſubdućliºn, and yet ſtill the quotient be
infinite. Hale.
To SUBDU'E. v. a. [from ſuld, or ſubjugo, Latin.]
1. To cruſh ; to oppreſs; to ſink; to overpower.
Nothing could have ſubdu'd nature
To ſuch a lowneſs, but his unkind daughters. Shakeſpeare.
Them that roſe up againſt me, haſt thou ſubdued under me.
2 Sa. xxii. 40.
If aught were worthy to ſubdue
The ſoul of man.
2. To conquer; to reduce under a new dominion.
Be fruitful, and repleniſh the earth, and ſubdue it. Gen, i. 28.
Milton,
S U B
Auguſtus Ceſar ſºldued Egypt to the Roman empire. Peach
lo overcome in battle, and ſºldue ~.
Nations, and bring home ſpoils. A ſilton.
The Romans made thoſe times the ſtandard of their wit
when they ſubdued the world. •
3. To tame; to ſubact.
Nor is't unwholſome to ſuld e the land
By often exerciſe; and where before
You broke the earth, again to plow.
SUBDu'EMENT. n.ſ. [from ſubdue.
uſed, nor worthy to be uſéd.
I have ſeen thee,
As hot as Perſeus, ſpur thy Phrygian fleed
Bravely deſpiſing forfeits and ſubd em nts. » Sha'ſ care:
SUBDu'E.R. m.ſ.. [from ſubdue J. Conquerour; tamer. “”
Great god of might, that reigneth in the mind
And all the body to thy heſt do it f ame; &gt;
Victor of gods, ſubdue of mankind,
That do'ſt the lions and fell tycers tame, .
Sprat.
Mº', P, gi'.
J Conqueſt. A word not
Who can expreſs the glory of thy might? Spenſºr
Their curious eye - -
Diſcerns their great ſuffauer's awful mien
And correſponding features fair. Philips.
Figs are great ſubdues of acrimony, uſeful in hoarſeneſs
and coughs, and extremely emolient. A. b. tººt.
Subbu ple. !64. Iſºlduplº, Fr. ſub and dupliº, Latin J
SUBDU'P1 ſcAte. § Containing one part of two.
As one of theſe under pulleys doth abate half of that heavi-
neſs which the weight hath in itſelf, and cauſe the power to
be in a ſubdu'le proportion unto it, ſo two of them to abaté
half of that which remains, and cauſe a ſubquadruple propor-
tion, and three a ſubſextuple. J/il ins's Alath. Alaº.
The motion generated by the forces in the whole paſſage of
the body or thing through that ſpace, ſhall be in aſ adºliete
proportion of the forces. - ... evtºn's Cºpt.
Su BJACENT. adj. [ſubjacens, Latin.] Lying under.
The ſuperficial parts of rocks and mountains are waſhed
away by rains, and borne down upon the ſubjacent plains, ſº ....
To UBJECT. v. a. [ſubjecius, Latin.]
I. To put under.
The angel led them dire&amp;t, and down the cliff as faſt
To the ſubjected plain. 44; ton.
The medal bears each form and name:
In one ſhort view, ſºjºc, d to our eye,
Gods, emp'rors, heroes, ſages, beauties lie. Pope.
2. To reduce to ſubmiſſion; to make ſubordinate; to make
ſubmiſſive.
Think not, young warriors, your diminiſh'd name
Shall loſe of luſtre, by ſub eding rage
To the cool dictates of experie, c'd age.
3. To enſlave; to make obnoxious.
I live on bread like you, feel want like you,
Taſte grief, need friends, like you. fbjecie thus,
How can you ſay to me, I am a king? Shakº. Rich. II.
I ſee thee, in that fatal hour,
Subjected to the vićtor's cruel pow'r,
Led hence a ſlave. * Dryden.
The blind will always be led by thoſe that ſee, or f..] into
the ditch; and he is the moſt ſubjected, the moſt enſlaved, who
is ſo in his underſtanding, Locke.
4. To expoſe; to make liable.
If the veſſels yield, it ſubječ's the perſon to all the inconve-
niencies of an erroneous circulation. A luthnºt.
5. To ſubmit; to make accountable.
God is not bound to ſubječf his ways of operation to the
ſcrutiny of our thoughts, and confine himſelf to do nothing
Dryden.
but what we muſt comprehend. Lºcke.
6. To make ſubſervient.
Subječird to his ſervice angel-wings. Milton,
SU'BJECT: adj. [ſº feetus, Latin.]
1. Placed or ſituated under.
Th’ eaſtern tower,
Whoſe height commands, as ſujeº, all the vale -
To ſee the fight. Shakeſp. Troilus and Cºſida.
2. Living under the dominion of another.
Eſau was never ſubject to Jacob, but founded a diſtinét people
and government, and was himſelf prince over them. Locke.
3. Expoſed; liable; obnoxious.
Moſt ſubjeć is the fatteſt ſoil to weeds;
And he the noble image of my youth
Is overſpread with them.
All human things are ſiljeć to decay,
And when fate ſummons, monarchs muſt obey. Dryden.
4. Being that on which any action ºperates, wheth-r intellectual
or material. -
I enter into the ſubjeći matter of my diſcourſe.
SU'BJEct. n.ſ.. [ſuit, French. J .
1. One who lives under the º of another.
Every ſahjº's duty is the king's,
But º º is his own. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Never ſubje? long'd to be a king, -
As I do l ng and with to be aJubject. Shakeſp. Henry y 1.
25 N - - - The
Shakespeare.
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U B
S U B
becauſe God commands
The ſubječi muſt obey his prince, Swift.
equire it. -
it, hº which are governed by the ordinary
laws and magiſtratº of the ſovereign. Davies.
V j, ſo but only by their choice,
A. iº birth did forc’d dominion take,
Öiſ prince alone would have the publick voice. . Dryden.
2: That on which any operation cither mental or material is per-
formed.
Now ſpurs the lated tº: apace, h
To gain the timely inn, and near appº.,
#. of our watch. Shakespeare's Mºth.
This ſubjeć for heroick ſong pleas'd me. 44 ilion.
Here he would have us fix our thoughts; no are thº.”
dry a ſubjeci for our contemplation. . . . Decºy ºf Piety.
I will not venture on ſo nice a ſºjed with my º:
40° e.
Make choice of a ſiljº beautiful and noble, which being
capable of all the graces that colours, and elegance of deſign
ſhall afford a perfect art, an ample field of matter
can give, *
g D 'yaen.
wherein to expatiate. - - - -
The ſºjº'of a propoſition is that concerning which any
thing is affirmed or denied. iſ att's Lºgº.
My real deſign is, that of publiſhing your praiſes to the
world; not upon the ſubject of your noble birth. Swift.
3. That in which anything inheres or exiſts. -
Anger is certainly a kind of baſeneſs, as it appears well in
the weakneſs of thoſeſ ljects in whom it reigns, children, wo—
men, old folks, ſick folks. Bacon.
4. [In Grammar.] The nominative caſe to a verb, is called by
Grammarians the ſubject of the verb. Clarke's Lat. Gram.
SUBJEction. m. ſ [from ſubject.]
1. The act of ſubduing.
After the conqueſt of the kingdom and ſubjećlion of the re-
bels, enquiry was made who there were that fighting againſt
the king had ſaved themſelves by flight. Hale.
2. [Sujettion, Fr.] The ſtate of being under government.
Becauſe the ſubjection of the body to the will is by natural
neceſſity, the Jubječion of the will unto God voluntary ; we
therefore ſtand in need of direétion after what ſort our wills
and deſires may be rightly conformed to his. Hoºker.
How hard it is now for him to frame himſelf to ſºlºccion,
that having once ſet before his eyes the hope of a kingdom,
hath found encouragement. Speºſer.
Both in ſubjection now to ſenſual appetite. A ſilton.
SUBJECTIVE. adj. [from ſubject.] Relating not to the object
but the ſubjećt.
Certainty, according to the ſchools, is diſtinguiſhed into
obječtive and ſubječiive: obječtive is when the propoſition is
certainly true in itſelf; and ſubječiive, when we are certain of
the truth of it. //attſ.
SUBIN GRE'ssion. m.ſ.. [ſub and ingreſſils, Latin.] Secret en-
trance.
The preſſure of the ambient air is ſtrengthened upon the ac-
ceſſion of the air ſucked out; which, forceth the neigh-
bouring air to a violent ſubingreſſion of its parts. Boyle.
To SUBJoi'N. v. a. [ſub and joindre, French ; ſubjungº, Latin.]
To add at the end; to add afterwards.
He makes an excuſe from ignorance, the only thing that
could take away the fault; namely, that he knew not that
he was the high-prieſt, and ſuljoins a reaſon. Soºth's Sermºns.
SUBITANEous...ºff. [ſubitaneºs, Latin.] Sudden ; haſty.
To SU(BJUGATE. v. a. [ſuljuguer, Fr. ſubjugo, Latin.j To
conquer; to ſubdue; to bring under dominion by force.
O favºrite virgin that haſt warm'd the breaſt,
Whoſe ſov’reign dićtates ſubjugate the eaſt ! Prior.
He ſubjugated a king, and called him his vaſſal. Baker.
SUBJEGATION. m. ſ. [from ſubjugate.] The at of ſubduing.
This was the condition of the learned part of the world, af-
ter their ſubjugation by the Turks. Hale.
SUBJUNCI ION., n.ſ.. [from ſubjung, Latin.] The ſtate
of being ſubjoined; the act of ſubjoining.
- The verb undergoes in Greek a different formation; and
in dependence upon, or ſubjunctiºn to ſome other verb. Clarke.
SUBJUNctive. adj. [ſºlinºivus, Latin; ſubjonetſ, Fr.]
1. Subjoined to ſomething elſe. -
2. [In Grammar.]
.The verb undergoes in Greek a different formation, to fig-
nify the ſame intentions as the indicative, yet not abſolutely
but relatively to ſome other verb, which is called the ſubjun-
£ive mood. Clarke.
Suſº APSARY. adj. Iſab and 'aſſus, Latin.] Done after the
fall of man.
§º Arion. m. ſ. [ſºlatio, Latin.] The aët of taking away.
SU ºrios. * / [ſubjevº, Latin.] The act of raiſing on
..º. adj [from ſublime.]. Poſſible to be ſublimed.
tº n-ſ, [from ſublimable.] Quality of admit-
e obtained anot
Jºhnallºngs, aS tº: and ſmell, º
$g'ELIMarE. n.ſ. [from ſulline.] - ſyſé.
1. Anything raiſed by fire in the retort.
Enquire the manner of ſubliming, and what metals endure
ſubliming, and what body the ſublimate makes. Bacºn.
2. Quickſilver raiſed in the retort.
The particles of mercury uniting with the acid particles of
ſpirit of ſalt compoſe mercury ſiblimate, and with the particles
of ſulphur, cinnaber. Yewton's Opticº,
To SU'ELIMATE. v. a. [from ſullime.]
1. To raiſe by the force of chemical fire.
2. To exalt; to heighten; to clevate.
Not only the groſs and illiterate ſouls, but the moſt aerial
and ſiblimated are rather the more proper fuel for an immate-
rial fire. Decay of Piety.
The precepts of Chriſtianity are ſo excellent and refined, and
ſo apt to cleanſe and Julimate the more groſs and Corrupt, as
ſhews fleſh and blood never revealed it. Decay ºf Piety,
SUB IIMA’t 19 N. m. ſ. [/u'limºtion, Fr. from ſºlimat...]
1. A chemical operation which raiſes bodies in the veſſel by the
force of fire.
Sul inction differs very little from diſtillation, excepting that
in diſtillation, only the fluid parts of bodies are raiſed, but
in this the ſolid and dry ; and that the matter to be diſtilled
may be either ſolid or fluid, but ſ binatiºn is only concerned
about ſolid ſubſtances. There is alſo another difference, name-
ly, that rarefaction, which is of very great uſe in diſtillation,
has hardly any room in ſubſtration; for the ſubſtances which
are to be ſublimed being ſolid are incapable of rarefaction;
and ſo it is only impulſe that can raiſe them. &amp;uincy.
Separation is wrought by weight, as in the ſettlement of
liquors, by heat, by precipitation or ſullimatiºn; that is a cal-
ling of the ſeveral parts up or down, which is a kind of at-
traction. Baon's Natural Hiſtºry,
Since oil of ſulphur per campanam is of the ſame nature
with oil of vitriol, may it not be inſerred that ſulphur is a
mixture of volatile and fixed parts ſo ſtrogly cohering by at-
traction, as to aſcend together by ſul imation. Newt. Opt.
2. Exaltation; elevation; act of heightning or improving.
She turns
Bodies to ſpirits, by ſºlinatin ſtrange. Davier,
Shall he pretend to religious attainments, who is defective
and ſhort in moral, which are but the rudiments and firſt
draught of religion, as religion is the perfection, refinement,
and ſublimation of morality Sºuth.
SUBLIME. adj. [ſubºnis, ſlatin.]
I. High in place; exalted aloft.
They ſum'd their pens, and ſoaring th' air ſºme
With clang deſpis’d the ground. Miltºn.
Stºline on theſe a tow'r of ſteel is rear'd,
And dire T iſ phone there keeps the ward. Dryden.
2. High in excellence; exalted by nature.
My earthly ſtrained to the height
In that celeſtial colloquy ſublime.
Can it be, that ſouls ſublime
Return to viſit our terreſtrial clime;
And that the gen'rous mind releas'd by death,
Mi'i:n.
- Can cover lazy limbs ryden,
3. High in file or ſentiment; lofty; grand. -
Eaſy in ſtile, thy work in ſenſe ſubſiºne. Prior.
4. Elevated by joy.
All yet left of that revolted rout,
Heav'n-fall'n, in ſtation ſtood or juſt array,
Sublime with expectation.
Their hearts were jocund and ſºb'ime,
Drunk with idolatry, drunk with wine.
5. Haughty; proud.
He was ſublime, and almoſt tumorous in his looks and geſ-
tuſ C.S. l/ctiºn.
St Bill'ME. n.ſ. The grand or lofty ſtile. The ſºlini. i* *
Galliciſm, but now naturalized.
Longinus ſtrengthens all his laws,
And is himſelf the great ſublime he draws. Pºe.
The ſiblime riſes from the nobleneſs of thoughts, the magn"
ficence of the words, or the harmonious and lively turn 9 th:
phraſe; the perfectſ; blime ariſes from all three t gether. Adºl.
To Su Bii'ME. v. a. [/ublimer, Fr. from the adjectivel
1. To raiſe by a chemical fire. -
Study our manuſcripts, thoſe myriads
Of letters, which have paſt 'twixt thee and me,
Thence write our annals, and in them leſions be
To all, whom love's jubining fire invades.
2. To raiſe on high. -
Although thy trunk be neither large no: ſtrong,
Nor can thy head, not helpt, itſelf Jºãº,
Yet, like a ſerpent, a tall tree can climb.
3. To exalt; to heightºn; to improve... .
Flow’rs, and then fruit,
Man's nouriſhment, by gradual ſcale ſubºim'd -
To vital ſpirits aſpire. - *
The fancies of moſt are moved by the inward ſpringº º c
corporeal machine, which even in the moſt ſubſiºned jº.
als is dangerouſly influential. Glanvillº.
Aft
Milton,
MiItºh.
Dzºn:
Denham,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U B
---,
Art being ſtrengthened by the knowledge of things, may
paſs into nature by ſlow degrees, and ſo be jubičmed into a pure
genius which is capable of diſtinguiſhing betwixt the beauties
of nature and that which is low in her. Dryden's Dufrºſio.
Meanly they ſeek the bleſfing to confine,
And force that ſun but on a part to ſhine;
Which not alone the ſouthern wit ſiblimes,
But ripens ſpirits in cold northern climes. Pope.
To Su BLI'M E. v. n. To riſe in the chemical veſſel by the force
of fire.
The particles of ſal ammoniack in ſublimation carry up the
particles of antimony, which will not ſublime alone. Newt. Opt.
This ſalt is fixed in a gentle fire, and ſublimes in a great
one Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
º Susively adv. [from ſublime.] Loftily; grandly.
This fuſtian's ſo ſublimely bad;
It is not poetry, but proſe run mad. Pºpe.
SuáLIMITY, n.ſ. [from ſublime; ſublimité, Fr. ſublimitas, Lat.]
1. Height of place; local elevation.
2. Height of nature; excellence.
As religion looketh upon him who in majeſty and power
is infinite, as we ought we account not of it, unleſs we eſteem
it even according to that very height of excellency which our
hearts conceive, when divine ſublimity itſelf is rightly conſi-
dered. Hooker.
In reſpect of God's incomprehenſible ſublimity and purity,
this is alſo true, that God is neither a mind, nor a ſpirit like
other ſpirits, nor a light ſuch as can be diſcerned. Raleigh.
3. Loftineſs of ſtyle or ſentiment.
Milton's diſtinguiſhing excellence lies in the ſublimity of his
thoughts, in the greatneſs of which he triumphs over all the
poets, modern and ancient, Homer only excepted. Addiſon.
SUBLI'NGUAL. adj. [ſublingual, French ſub and lingua, Lat.]
Placed under the tongue.
Thoſe ſubliming humours ſhould be intercepted, before they
mount to the head, by ſublingual pills. Harvey on Conſumption.
SUBlu'NAR. N. adj. [ſublunaire, Fr. ſub and luna, Latin.] Si-
Su'BLUNARY. } tuated beneath the moon; earthly; terreſtrial;
of this world. -
Dull ſublunary lovers, love,
Whoſe ſoul is ſenſe, cannot admit
Of abſence, 'cauſe it doth remove
The thing which elemented it. Donne.
Night meaſur'd, with her ſhadowy cone,
Half way up hill this vaſt ſublunar vault. Milton.
Through ſeas of knowledge we our courſe advance,
Diſcov'ring ſtill new worlds of ignorance;
And theſe diſcov’ries make us all confeſs
That ſublunary ſcience is but gueſs, Denham.
The celeſtial bodies above the moon being not ſubjećt to
chance, remained in perpetual order, while all things ſublunary
are ſubječt to change. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Ovid had warn'd her to beware
Of ſtrolling gods, whoſe uſual trade is,
Under pretence of taking air,
To pick up ſublunary ladies. Swift.
SU'BMARINE. adj. [ſub and mare.] Lying or ačting under the
ſea.
This contrivance may ſeem difficult, becauſe theſe ſubma-
rine navigators will want winds and tides for motion, and the
ſight of the heavens for dire&amp;tion. // ilkins.
Not only the herbaceous and woody ſubmarine plants, but
alſo the lithophyta affect this manner of growing, as I obſer-
ved in corals. Ray on the Creation.
To SUBMERGE. v. a. [ſubmerger, Fr. ſubmergo, Lat] To
drown; to put under water.
So half my Egypt were ſubmerg’d and made
A ciſtern for ſcal’d ſnakes. Shakespeare's Aut. and Cleopatra.
SUBME’Rsios. m. ſ. [ſubmerſon, Fr. from ſubmerſus, Latin.]
The act of drowning; ſtate of being drowned.
The great Atlantick iſland is mentioned in Plato's Timaeus,
almoſt contiguous to the weſtern parts of Spain and Africa,
yet wholly ſwallowed up by that ocean : which if true, might
afford a paſſage from Africa to America by land before that
ſubmerſºn. Hale's Originatiºn of Mankind.
To SU BMI'NISTER. v. a. [ſubminiſłro, Latin.] To ſup-
To ś...} ply; to afford. A word not much
in uſe.
Some things have been diſcovered, not only by the induſtry
of mankind, but even the inferiour animals have ſubminiſłred
unto man the invention of many things, natural, artificial,
and medicinal. Hale's Original of Mankind.
Nothing ſubminiſtrates apter matter to be converted into
peſtilent ſeminaries, than ſteams of naſty folks. IHarvey.
To SU BMI'NISTER. v. m. To ſubſerve.
Our paſſions, as fire and water, are good ſervants, but bad
maſters, and ſubminiſter to the beſt and worſt of purpoſes.
L’Eſtrange.
SUBMI'ss. adj. [from ſubmiſus, Lat..] Humble; ſubmiſſive;
obſequious.
King James mollified by the biſhop's ſlimſ; and eloquent
letters, wrote back, that though he were in part moved by his
5
S U B
letters, yet he ſhould not be full
ſati
with him. y ſatisfied except he ſpake
- Bacon's Henry VII.
Nearer his preſence, Adam, though not aw’d, enly
Yet with ſubmiſ approach, and reverence meek,
* to a ſuperior nature, bowed low. Aziº, par. Ioff,
. Rejoicing, but with awe,
In adoration at his feet I fell
Submiſs: he rear'd me. Milton
SubMission. m. ſ. [ſoumiſſiºn, Fr. from ſºbmiſſils, Latin j -
1. Delivery of himſelf to the power of another 5. -
Sºmiſſion, Dauphin' 'tis a meer French word
We Engliſh warriors wot not what it means. Sºar.
2. Acknowledgement of inferiority or dependance; humble or
ſuppliant behaviour. »
In all ſubmiſſiºn and humility,
York doth preſent himſelf unto your highneſs. sºar.
Great prince, by that ſubmiſſiºn you'll gain more -
Thane'er your haughty courage won bet. Halifax
3. ^º of a fault; confeſſion of errour. -
º not as extreme in ſubmiſſion, as in offence, ----
4. Obſequiouſneſs; .."...ſ.l... lice. Shakespeare.
No duty in religion is more juſtly required by God Almigh-
ty than a perfect ſubmiſſiºn to #. º .. all º: jº.
SUBM1'ssive, adj. [ſubmiſus, Lat.] Humble; teſtifying ſus.
miſſion or inferiority. c
Qn what ſubmiſſive meſſage art thou ſent?
- - Shakespeare.
Her at his feet ſubmiſſive in diſtreſ, ºp
He thus with peaceful words upraisd. Miſtor.
Sudden from the golden throne,
With a ſubmiſſive ſtep I haſted down;
The glowing garland from my hair I took,
Love in my heart, obedience in my look. Prior.
Stºssiy ELY. adv. [from ſubmiſſive.] Humbly; with con-
feſſion of inferiority.
The goddeſs,
Soft in her tone, ſubmiſſively replies.
Specchev'n there ſubmiſſively withdraws
From rights of ſubjects, and the poor man's cauſe;
Then pompous ſilence reigns, and ſtilis tic noiſy laws.
Dryden’s AFneid.
- Pºpe.
SUBMI'ssiyssess. n.ſ.. [from ſubmiſſive Humility; conſeſ-
ſion of fault, or inferiority.
If thou fin in wine and wantonneſs,
Boaſt not thereof, nor make thy ſhame thy glory;
Frailty gets pardon by ſubmiſſive eſ;,
But he that boaſts, ſhuts that out of his ſtory:
He makes flat war with God, and doth defy,
With his poor clod of earth, the ſpacious ſky. Herbert.
SUBMI'ssly, adv. [from ſºlmiſ...] Humbly; with ſubmiſſion.
Humility conſiſts, not in wearing mean cloaths, and going
foſtly and ſubmiſsy, but in hearty mean opinion of thy ſelf.
- ºf aylor.
To SUBMPT. v. a. ſ. ſoumitre, Fr. ſubmitt, Latin.] !)
1. To let down ; to ſink.
Sometimes the hillſbmits itſelf a while
In ſmall deſcents, which do its height beguile,
And ſometimes mounts, but ſo as billows play,
Whoſe riſe not hinders, but makes ſhort our way. Djº.
Neptune ſtood,
With all his hoſts of waters at command,
Beneath them to ſubmit th' officious flood,
And with his trident ſhov'd them off the ſand.
2. To ſubject; to reſign without reſiſtance to authority.
Return to thy miſtreſs, and ſubmit thyſelf under her hands.
Gen. xvi. 9.
Will ye ſubmit your neck, and chuſe to bend
The ſupple knee
3. To leave to diſcretion; to refer to judgment.
Whether the condition of the clergy be able to bear a hea-
vy burden, is ſubmitted to the houſe. Swift.
To SUBM "r. v. n. To be ſubject; to acquieſce in the autho-
rity of another; to yield.
To thy huſband's will
Thine ſhall ſubmit : he over thee ſhall rule. Mººn.
Our religion requires from us, not only to forego pleaſure,
but to ſubmit to pain, affliction, diſgrace, and even death.
&amp;gºrs'; Sermons.
SubMu'ltiple. n.ſ. A ſmlmultiple number or quantity is
that which is contained in another number, a certain number
of times exačtly: thus 3 is ſubmultiple of 21, as being contained
in it ſeven times exactly. Harriº.
Supcct Ave. adj. F ſºl and oğavu', Lat, and cºuple..] Con-
SuBocru'PLE. } taining one part of eight. •
As one of theſe under pulleys abates half of that heavincſs
of the weight, and cauſes the power to be in a ſubduple propor-
tion, ſo two of them abate half of that which remains, and
cauſe a ſubquadruple proportion, three a ſubſextuple, four 3.
fºbočºuple. //ilkins's Mathematical M. gick.
Had they ereaed the cube of a foot for their principal con-
cave, and geometrically taken its ſubođave, the congus, from
the cube of half a foot, they would have divided the con-
gius into eight parts, cach cf which would have been ".
- 21 |
Drydºn.
M.ſia 7.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U B
S U B
- Il-known palm :
a quarter foot, their we -
e of a q for our gallon, which has the pint
Arbuthnot on Coins.
for its ſubočave. m./ [from ſ bordinate.] Subºrdinacy is the
(R DIN A CY. -
SU Bo'RD } proper and analogical word.
SUBo'R DINANCY. . -
1. The ſtate of being ſubject. - as :
- ing the imagination through all its extravagancies, is
Purſuing the imag C. : - - - ct in
no improper method of correcting, and bringing º º far
ſubordinety to reaſon. pectator.
. Series of ſubordination. - -
2 The ſibordinancy of the government changing hands, ſo
often, makes an unſteddineſs in the purſuit of the publick in-
2 Timple.
t-
larly the cub
§: the courſe taken
tereſts. - -
SUBORDINATE. adj. [ſub and ºrdinatus, Latin.]
1. Inferiour in order; in nature; in dignity or power.
It was ſ bordinate, not enſlaved to the underſtanding; not
as a ſervant to a maſter, but as a queen to her king, who
acknowledges a ſubjection, and yet retains a mºiety. -
South's Sermonſ.
whether dark preſages of the night proceed from any latent
power of the ſoul, during her abſtraction, or from any ope-
ration of ſubºrdinate ſpirits, has been a diſpute. Aaajan.
2. Deſcending in a regular ſeries. -
The two armies were aſſigned to the leading of two gº-
nerals, rather courtiers than martial men, yet aſſiſted with ſi b-
ordinate commanders of great experience. Bacon.
His nextſ bordinate -
Awak'ning, thus to him in ſecret ſpake. Mººn.
Theſe carry ſuch plain characters of diſagreement or affinity,
that the ſeveral kinds and ſubordinate ſpecies of each are eaſily
diſtinguiſhed. //o3dward,
To Subo'r DINAT e. v. a. [ſub and ordino, Latin j To range
under another. Not in uſe, but proper and elegant.
If I have ſubordinated picture and ſculpture to archite&amp;ure
as their miſtreſs, ſo there are other inferior arts ſubordinate to
them. //ct, on.
SU Bo'RDINATELY. adv. [from ſºbºrdinate.] In a ſeries regu-
larly deſcending. -
It being the higheſt ſep of ill, to which all others ſalardi-
mately tend, one would think it could be capable of no im-
provement. Decay of Piety.
SubcRDINATION. n.ſ. ſſ bºrdinatiºn, Fr. from ſulo, di.ate.]
1. The ſtate of being inferior to another.
Nor can a council national decide,
But with ſubordination to her guide. Dryden.
2. A ſeries regularly deſcending.
If we would ſuppoſe a miniſtry, where every ſingle perſon
was of diſtinguiſhed piety, and all great officers of ſtate and
law diligent in chufing perſons, who in their ſeveral fºbordi-
nations would be obliged to follow the examples of their ſupe-
riors, the empire of irreligion would be ſoon deſtroyed. Swift.
To SUBO'RN. v. a. [ſuborner, Fr. ſalorno, Latin.]
1. To procure privately; to procure by ſecret colluſion.
His judges were the ſelf-ſame men by whom his accuſers
Were #: Hooker.
ond wretch, thou know'ſt not what thou ſpeak'ſt,
Qr elſe thou art ſuborn’d againſt his honour
In hateful practice.
Reaſon may meet
Some ſpecious object, by the foe ſubºrn’d;
And fall into deception. Milton.
His artful boſom heaves diſſembl’d fighs;
And tears ſuborn'd fall dropping from his cycs. Prior.
2. To procure by indirect means. "
Behold
Thoſe who by ling’ring ſickneſs loſe their breath,
And thoſe who by deſpair ſuborn their death. Dryden.
SU BoRNA’t Ion. m. ſ. [ſubormation, Fr. from ſuborn.] The crime
of procuring any to do a bad action. -
Thomas earl of Deſmond was, through faiſe ſubornation
of the Queen of Edward IV. brought to his death at Tredagh
moſt unjuſtly. Speyer's Ireland.
Shakeſpeare.
You ſet the crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man,
And for his ſake wear the deteſted blot
Qf murd’rous ſubornation. Shakeſp. Hºn. IV.
The fear of puniſhment in this life will preſerve men from
few vices, ſince ſome of the blackeſt often prove the ſureſt
ſteps to favour; ſuch as ingratitude, hypocriſy, treachery, and
ſubornation. Swift.
SUBo'RNER. m.ſ. [ſuberneur, Fr. from ſubºrn.] One that
pºſes a bad action to be done.
Suppoe'NA. "...ſ [ſub and poºna, Latin.] A writ command-
S ing attendance in a court under a penalty.
º adj. Iſab and quadruple.] Containing one
* ºf thºſe under pulleys abates half of that heavi.
Tº e weight hath in itſelf, and cauſes the power to be in
*...*.*.proportion unto it, ſo two of theºle half of
that which "Smains, and cauſe a ſubquadruple proportion.
Wilkins's Mathematical Magick,
Suroºrs ru'PIE. adj. [ ſub and quintuple.] Containing one
part of five.
If unto the lower pulley there were added another, then
the power would be unto the weight in a ful quintuple propor-
tion. //ilkin's Ajathrmatiºnſ Aſagick.
SUBRE'croR. m. ſ. [ſh and reá r.] The rector's vicegerent.
He was choſen ſul red/or of the college. Jºhn
SUp R EP Tro N. m. ſ. {ſubrept on, Fr. ſubreptus, Lat.] The act of
obtaining a favour by ſurprize or unfair repreſentatiºn. Diff
SU REPTI'ſ ſous. a 'j. [ſºrrºp ice, French; ſurreptitiº, Latin.]
Fraudulently obtained from a ſuperior, by concealing ſome
truth, which, if known, would have prevented the grant.
+ rºw ºx - - *aily.
To SUBSCRIBE. v. a [ſouſ ire, Fr.ſºſºril, Latin.]
I. To give conſent to, by underwriting the name.
They united by ſºbſcribing a covenant, which they pretend.
ed to be no other than had been ſubſcribed in th: reign of
King James, and that his Majety himſelf had ſºſcribed it;
by which impoſition people of all degrees engaged themſelves
in it. Carendºn.
The reader ſees the names of thoſe perſons by whom this
letter is fºlycribed. «ăjºn.
2. To atteſt by writing the name.
Their particular teſtimony ought to be better credited, than
ſome otherſ ſº ibed with an hundred hands. // hit #2.
3. To contračt; to limit. Not uſed. 2
The king gone to night! ſuſcrib'd his pow'r?
Confin'd to exhibition all is gone. Shakespeare.
To SUP scri'BE. v. n.
I. To give confent.
Oſius, with whoſe hand the Nicene creed was ſet down,
and framed for the whole Chriſtian world to ſºlſ rile unto,
ſo far yielded in the end, as even with the ſané hand to ratify
the Arrians confeſſion. Hºer,
Adviſe thee what is to be done,
And we will all ſulſºribe to thy advice. Shakeſtart,
If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that ſtern time,
Thou ſhould'ſt have ſaid, go porter, turn the key,
All cruels elſe ſubſcrib'd, Shakespeare 's King Lar.
So ſpake much humbled Eve; but fate
Sºbºbº not: nature firſt gave ſigns, impreſs'd
On bird, beaſt, air. Milton's Parad. Lºft.
2. To promiſe a ſtipulated ſum for the promotion of any under-
taking.
Subscrip E.R. n.ſ. [from ſubſcriptio, Lat.]
1. One who ſubſcribes.
2. One who contributes to any undertaking.
Let a pamphlet come out upon a demand in a proper jun-
Čture, every one of the party who can ſpare a ſhilling ſhall
be a ſubſcriber. Swift.
Subscription. n.ſ.. [from ſº ſcriptio, Latin.]
I. Any thing underwritten.
The man aſked, are ye Chriſtians? We anſwered we were;
fearing the leſs becauſe of the croſs we had ſeen in the ſub-
ſº pion. Bac.m.
2. Conſent or atteſtation given by underwriting the name.
3. The act or ſtate of contributing to any undertaking,
The work he ply'd;
Stocks and ſh criptions pour on ev'ry ſide. Pºſt.
South-ſea ſubſcriptions take who pleaſe,
Leave me but liberty. Pºpe.
4. Submiſſion ; obedience. Not in uſe.
1 tax not you, you elements, with unkindneſs;
I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children, ...
You owe me no ſub cription. Shakeſpeare's King Ler.
Subsection. m. ſ. [jul and ſºil, Latin.] A ſubdiviſion ºf
a larger ſection into a leſſer. A ſection of a ſection, Dić.
SU(BSEogence. n.ſ. [from ſºlſequor, Latin.] The ſtate ºf
following; not precedence.
By this faculty we can take notice of the order of preciº
and ſubſequence in which they are paſt. - - Grºw.
SUBSE'cutive. adj. [from ſubſequer J. Following in train.
Su Esf PTU'PLE. ad. [ſub and ſplifius, Latin.] Contain";
one of ſeven parts. h
If unto this lower pully there were added another, thent •
power would be unto the weight in a ſubquintuple Fº
if a third, a ſubſeptuple. º:
SUBSEQUEN I. ad. [ſubſequent, Fr. ſ. ſº ens, Latin: l º
word is improperly pronounced long in the ſecond ſyllable by
Shakeſ rare.} Following in train; not preceding.
In ſuch indexes, although ſmall pricks
To their ſalſ quent volumes, there is ſeen
The baby figure of the giant maſs -
Of i. to come, at large. Shakeſp. Troil and Crºftia,
Th., gauent words come on before the precedent *
- The jutſequen P Bacºn.
niſh. -
why does each conſenting ſign
With prudent harmony combine
In turns to move, and ſubſequent appear Priºr
To gird the globe and regulate the year riºr.
This
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U B
r
-
This article is introduced as ſubſequent to the treaty of
Munſter, made about 1648, when England was in the utmoſt
confuſion. . . Swift.
SUBSE'QUENTLY. adv. [from ſubſequent.] Not ſo as to go be-
fore ; ſo as to follow in train.
To men in governing moſt things fall out accidentally, and
come not into any compliance with their preconceived ends;
but they are forced to comply ſu'ſ quently, and to ſtrike in
with things as they fall out, by poſtliminious after-applica-
tions of them to their purpoſes. Sºuth's Sermons.
To SUBSE’RVE. v. a. ſ. ſubſervio, Latin.] To ſerve in ſub-
ordination; to ſerve inſtrumentally.
Not made to rule,
But to ſubſerve where wiſdom bears command. Milton.
It is a greater credit to know the ways of captivating na-
ture, and making her ſubſerve our purpoſes, than to have learn-
ed all the intrigues of policy. Glanville.
The memory hath no ſpecial part of the brain devoted to
its own ſervice, but uſes all thoſe parrs which ſubſerve our ſen-
ſations, as well as our thinking powers. J/alſh.
SUBSE's vie N ce. }*ſ [from ſubſerve. J Inſtrumental fitneſs
SUps E'Rv1 F Ncy. $, or uſe.
Wicked ſpirits may by their cunning, carry farther in a
ſeeming confederacy or ſubſerviency to the deſigns of a good
angel. Dryden.
We cannot loºk upon the body, wherein appears ſo much
fitneſs, uſe, and ſubſerviency to infinite functions, any other-
wiſe than as the effect of contrivance. Bentley.
There is an immediate and agil ſubſirvience of the ſpirits to
the empire of the ſoul. Hale's Originat. of Mankind.
There is a regular ſubordination and ſubſerviency among all
the parts to beneficial ends. . Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principles.
SU P SE’R VIENT. adj. [ſubſerviens, Latin.] Subordinate; in-
ſtrumentally uſeful.
Philoſophers and common heathens believed one God, to
whom all things are referred ; but under this God they wor-
ſhipped many inferior and ſubſervient gods. Stillingfiest.
Theſe ranks of creatures are ſubſervient one to another,
and the moſt of them ſerviceable to man. Ray.
While awake, we feel none of thoſe motions continually
made in the diſpoſal of the corporeal principles ſubſervient here-
in. Grew.
Senſe is ſubſervient unto fancy, fancy unto intelle&amp;t. Grew.
We are not to conſider the world as the body of God; he
is an uniform being, void of organs, members or parts, and
they are his creatures ſubordinate to him, and ſubſervient to
his will. Newton's Opticks.
Moſt criticks, fond of ſome ſubſervient art,
Still make the whole depend upon a part;
They talk of principles, but notions prize,
And all to one lov'd folly ſacrifice. Pope.
Subsextuple, adj. [ſub and ſextuplus, Latin.] Containing
one part of ſix.
One of theſe under pullies abates half of that heavineſs the
weight hath, and cauſes the power to be in a ſubduple propor-
tion unto it, two of them a ſubquadruple proportion, three
a ſulfºxtºtle. JWilkins's Mathematical Magick.
To SUBSIT)E. v. n. [ſubſide, Latin.] To fink; to tend down-
wards.
He ſhoºk the ſacred honours of his head
With terror trembled heav'ns ſubſiding hill,
And from his ſhaken curls ambroſial dews diſtill. Dryden.
Now Jove ſuſpends his golden ſcales in air,
Weighs the mens wits againſt the lady's hair;
- The doubtful beam long nods from ſide to ſide:
At length the wits mount up, the hairs ſubſide. Pope.
SUBS I'DENCE. }". [from ſubſide.] The ačt of ſinking; ten-
SUBs1'DEN cy. $ dency downward.
This gradual ſubſidency of the abyſs would take up a con-
ſiderable time. - Burmet's Theºry of the Earth.
This miſcellany of bodies being determined to ſubſidence
merely by their different ſpecifick gravities, all thoſe which
had the ſame gravity ſubſided at the ſame time. Iſoodward.
By the alternate motion of thoſe air-bladders, whoſe ſur-
faces are by turns freed from mutual contact, and by a ſud-
den ſubſidence meet again by the ingreſs and egreſs of the air,
the liquour is ſtill farther attenuated.
SUB 1'DiAR Y. adj. [ſubſ: liaire, Fr. ſubſidiarius, Lat. from ſub-
ſidy..] Aſſiſtant ; brought in aid.
Bitter ſubſtances burn the blood, and are a ſort of ſºbſidia-
ry gall. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
SUBSIDY. n.ſ.. [ſulfide, Fr.ſl/idium, Latin.] Aid, common-
ly ſuch as is given in money.
They adviſed the king to ſend ſpeedy aids, and with much
alacrity granted a great rate of ſºftay. Bacon.
'Tis all the ſubſidy the preſent age can raiſe. Dryden.
It is a celebrated notion of a patriot, that a houſe of com-
mons ſhould never grant ſuch ſubſides as give no pain to the
people, left the nation ſhould acquieſce under a burden they
did not feel. Addiſon
To Subsi'GN. v. a. [ſulſºn, Latin.] To ſign under.
Arbuthnot.
Neither have they ſeen any deed before the conqueſt, but
-ſalºned with croſſes and ſingle names without ſurnames. Camd.
To SUBSIST. v. n. [ſubſifer, Fr ſubſ/fo, Latin.]
1. Tº continue; to retain the preſent ſtate or condition.
Firm we ſuff, but poſſible to ſwerve.
The very foundation was removed, and it was a moral im-
Milton.
poſſibility that the republick could ſubſiſt any longer.
2. To have means of living; to be maintainéd.
He ſhone ſo powerfully upon me, that like the heat of a
Ruſſian ſummer, he ripened the fruits of poetry in a cold
climate; and gave me wherewithal to ſubſ? in the long win-
ter which ſucceeded. Dryden.
Let us remember thoſe that want neceſſaries, as we our-
ſelves ſhould have deſired to be remembred, had it been our
ſad lot to ſub/ft on other mens charity. Atterbury.
3. To inhere; to have exiſtence.
Though the general natures of theſe qualities are ſufficient-
ly diſtant from one another, yet when they come to ſubſſ: in
particulars, and to be clothed with ſeveral accidents, then the
diſcernment is not ſo eaſy. . South's Sermons.
SUBs1's TENce, or Suftency, n.ſ. [ſubſtance, Fr. from ſulft.}
1. Real being.
The fleſh, and the conjunction of the fleſh with God be-
gan both at one inſtant, his making and taking to himſelf our
fleſh was but one ačt; ſo that in Chriſt there is no perſonal
Jubſiſtence but one, and that from everlaſting. Hooker.
We know as little how the union is diſſolved, that is the
chain of theſe differing ſubſºlencies that compound us, as how
it firſt commenced. Glanville.
Not only the things had ſulffence, but the very images were
of ſome creatures exiſting. Stillingfleet.
2. Competence; means of ſupporting life.
His viceroy could only propoſe to himſelf a comfortable
ſubſiſtence out of the plunder of his province Addiſon.
SUBs1's TENT. adj. ſ.l/ſiens, Latin.] Having real being.
Such as deny ſpirits ſu'ſſent without bodies, will with dif-
ficulty affirm the ſeparate exiſtence of their own. Brown.
Theſe qualities are not ſu'ſſent in thoſe bodies, but are
operations of fancy begotten in ſomething elſe. Bentley.
SU'BSTANCE. n.ſ.. [ſubſtance, Fr, ſubſtantia, Latin.]
1. Being; ſomething exiſting ; ſomething of which we can ſay
that it is.
Since then the ſoul works by herſelf alone,
Springs not from ſenſe, nor humours well agreeing, .
Her nature is peculiar, and her own;
Swift.
She is a ſubſtance, and a perfeót being. Davies.
The ſtrength of gods,
And this empyreal ſubſtance cannot fail. Miltºn.
2. That which ſupports accidents.
What creatures there inhabit, of what mold,
And ſubſtance. Milton.
Every being is confidered as ſubſiſting in and by itſelf, and
then it is called a ſubſtance; or it ſubſiſts in and by another, and
then it is called a mode or manner of being. J/atts.
3. The eſſential part.
It will ſerve our turn to comprehend the ſubſtance, without
confining ourſelves to ſcrupulous exactneſs, in form. Digby.
This edition is the ſame in ſubſtance with the Latin. Burn.
They are the beſt epitomes, and let you ſee with one caſt
of the eye the ſubſtance of a hundred pages. Addiſon.
4. Something real, not imaginary ; ſomething ſolid, not empty.
Shadows to night
Have ſtruck more terror to the ſoul of Richard,
Than can the ſubſtance of ten thouſand ſoldiers
Arm'd in proof and led by ſhallow Richard. Shakeſpeare.
He the future evil ſhall no leſs -
In apprehenſion than inſul/lance feel. Milton.
Heroick virtue did his ačtions guide,
And he the ſubſtance, not th' appearance choſe:
To reſcue one ſuch friend he took more pride,
Than to deſtroy whole thouſands of ſuch foes.
. Body; corporeal nature. -
Bétween the parts of opake and coloured bodies are many
ſpaces, either empty or repleniſhed with mediums of other
denſities; as water between the tinging corpuſcles where with
any liquor is impregnated, air between the aqueous globules
that cºnſtitute cious or miſts, and for the moſt part. Paçº
void of both air and water; but yet perhaps not wholly void
of all ſubſtance between the parts of hard bodies. Newton.
The qualities of plants are more vario; than thoſe of ani-
mal ſubſtances. rbwthnot on Aliments.
6. Wealth; means of life.
He hitſ, aten me out of houſe and home, , and hath
put all my ſubſtance into that fat belly of his, but I will have
ſome of it out again. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
We are deſtroying many thouſand lives, and exhauſting our
fbſtance, but not for our own intereſt. Swift.
Dryden.
5
Stºrial. adj. [ſul/fantiek, Fr. from fulſance.]
: ağtually exiſting.
I. *:::: .# would have his chance to be a real and ſub-
ſtantial agent, he is more ſtupid than the vulgar. Bentley.
- 25 O 2. True;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U B S U B
Were you ſworn to the duke, or to the deputy
... ſ.l...! . - ly ſeeming. - - -
2. Twº ; Fº...” am af.d, –To him and º: ſubſtitutes. Shakeſpear.
Being in night, all this : º: 3. .." 5 Shakeſ, Under º: º of God,
- tial. 4A-e/pºd/?. - -
Too º: jº. ta. p The ſubjećts of his /ubſtitute, my father,
Out of my ſide to thee, neareſt my heart, And here upſwarm'd them. Shakespeare . Henry IV,
Subſtantial life. Milton. Haſt thou not made me here thy ſubſtitute,
tº And theſe inferior far beneath me ſet Milton.
If happineſs be a ſubſtantial good,
Not fram'd of accidents, nor ſubječt to them, Providence delegates to the ſupreme magiſtrate the ſame
'd to ſeek it in a blind revenge. Denham. power for the good of men, which that ſupreme magiſtrate
#. : ‘. º river, hath jdown to us what is more transfers to thoſe ſeveral ul/titutes gº ačt under him. Addison
light and ſuperficial, while things more ſolid and /abſtantial Substitution. n.ſ. [ uêſtitution, Fr. from fulftitute.] The
have been immerſed. Glanville. act of placing any perſon or thing in the room of another ; the
The difference betwixt the empty vanity of oſtentation, and ſtate of being placed º the room of another.
the ſubſtantial ornaments of virtue. L’Eſtrange. He did believe b/?ituti
Qbſervations are the only ſure grounds whereon to build a He was the duke, from ſulftitution,
laſting and ſubſtantial philoſophy. #oodward. And executing th’ outward face of royalty,
A ſolid and ſubſtantial greatneſs of ſoul, looks down with With all prerogative. Shakeſp. Tempºff.
neglect on the cenſures and applauſes of the multitude. Addiſon. Nor ſal, ſulphur, or mercury can be ſeparateff'ſ. any
3. Corporeal; material. perfeit metals; for every part, ſo ſeparated, may eaſily be ré.
Now ſhine theſe planets with ſubſtantial rays? duced into perfect metal without ſubſtitution of that which chy-
Does innate luſtre gild their meaſur'd days? Prior. miſts imagine to be wanting. Bacºn's Phy. Rift.
The ſun appears flat like a plate of ſilver, the moon as big To Substra’ct. v. a. [ſubtraho, Lat. Jºuffraction, French.]
a. the ſºn, and the rainbow a large ſubſtantial arch in the ſky, 1. To take away part from the whole.
all which are groſs falſhoods. Watts. 2. To take one number from another. -
4. Strong; ſtout; bulky. Substraction. n ſ [ſoul/raire, ſubſtrađion, French.]
Subſtantial doors, 1. The act of taking away part from the whole.
Croſs-barr'd and bolted faſt, fear no aſſault. Milton. I cannot call this piece Tully's nor my own, being much
5. Reſponſible; moderately wealthy. altered not only by the change of the ſtyle, but by addition
Trials of crimes and titles of right ſhall be made by verdia and ſuffraction, - Denham.
of a jury, choſen out of the honeſt and moſt ſubſtantial free- 2. [In arithmetick.] The taking of a leſſer number out of d
holders. Spenſer on Ireland. greater of like kind, whereby to find out a third number,
The merchants, and Jubſtantial citizens, cannot make up being or declaring the inequality, exceſs, or difference be-
more than a hundred thouſand families. Addiſon on the War. tween the numbers given. - Cocker's Arithmetif.
Substa Ntials. n.ſ. [Without fingular.] Eſſential parts. Substru'ction. n.J. [ſubffructio, from ſub and ſtrue, Latin.]
Although a cuſtom introduced againſ the ſubſtantials of an Underbuilding.
appeal be not valid, as that it ſhould not be appealed to a ſupe- To fºund our habitation firmly, examine the bed of earth
rior, but to an inferior judge, yet a cuſtom may be introduced upon which we build, and then the underfillings, or ſuffrut-
againſt the accidentals of an appeal. Ayliffe's Parergon. tion, as the ancients calcd it. Wotton's Architãurt.
Substantiality. n.ſ. [from ſubſtantial.] Substy'LAR, adj. [ſub and ſylus.] Suſlylar line is, in dialing,
1. The ſtate of real exiſtence. a right line, whereon the gnomon or ſtyle of a dial is erected
2. Corporeity; materiality. at right angles with the plane. Diff.
Body cannot ad on any thing but by motion; motion can- Erect the ſtyle Perpendicularly over the ſubffilar line, ſo as
Hot be received but by quantity and matter: "the j is 2 tº make an angle with the dial-plane equal to the elevation of
#ranger to ſuch groſs ſ/fantiality, and owns nothi ºg of theſe. ... the pole of your place. Moxºn's Mech. Exer.
Glanv. Stepſ. Subsu'ltive. Maj. [./*ſūlius, Latin.] Bounding; moving
Substa'NT1Ally. adv. [from ſubſtantial.] SUBSU'Ltory. } by ſtarts.
r. In manner of a ſubſtance; with reality of exiſtence. Subsu'itorily, adv. [from ſubſultºry. ] In a bounding
In him his Father ſhone /*/antially expreſs'd. Mihan. IIlanner.
2. Strongly; ſolidly. The ſpirits ſpread even, and move not Jubſultorily; for that
Having ſoJubſtantially provided for the North, they promiſed will make the parts cloſe and pliant. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
themſelves they ſhould end the war that Summer. Clarendon. Supta'ngent.'. f. In any curve, is the line which deter-
3. Truly; ſolidly; ...; with fixed purpoſe. mines the interſection of the tangent in the axis prolonged. Dić.
The laws of this re igion would make men, if they would To SubTE'nd. …, a. [ſub and tend, Latin.] To be extended
truly obſerve them, Juº/fantially religious towards God, chaſte under.
and temperate. Tillotſon, In rectangles and triangles the ſquare, which is made of the
4. with competent wealth. ſide that ſubtendeth the right angle, is equal to the ſquares
Substa NTIALNess. n.ſ. [from ſubſtantial.] which are made of the ſides containing the right angle. Brºwn.
1. The ſtate of being ſubſtantial. From Aries rightways draw a line, to end
2. Firmneſs; ſtrength; Power of holding or laſting. ln the ſame round, and let that lineſultend
• When ſuftantialn'ſ combineth with delightfulneſs, fulneſs An equal triangle: now ſince the lines
with fineneſs, how can the language which confifteth of theſe Muſt three times touch the round, and meet three ſigns,
ſound other than moſt full of ſweetneſs? Camdºn. Where e'er they meet in angles, thoſe are trines. Craſh.
. In degree of/*/antialneſs next above the dorique, ſuſtain- Subtense. ... /...[ſub and tenſus, Latin.] The chord of an
ng the third, and adorning the ſecond ſtory. Wotton. arch ; that which is extended under an thing.
To Substantiate. J.A. [from /*/ſance.] To make to SU’Bººk. [Latin.] In compoſition, ſignifies under.
exiſt. S f
- UBTERFLU'ENT. - - -
The accidental of ºny at is ſaid to be whatever advenes to Subte’rfluous. } adj, [ſubterfluo, Latin.] Running under.
the aët itſelf already ſuffantiated. 4yliff's Parergon. Sust ERFU'GE, n. ſ. terfuge, French; ſubter and fugio, Lat.]
Su'est ANtive. n. J. [.ſuffanti ; French; Aft: fj A ſhift; an .#º:
A noun betokening the thing, not a quality. The king cared not for fubterfuges, but would ſtand envy,
Claudian perpetually cloſiº hiºn. the end of a verſe, and appear in any thing that was to his mind. Bacon.
commonly called golden, * two ſubſtantives and two adjec- Notwithſtanding all their ſly ſubterfuges and ſtudied evaſions,
tives with a verb betwixt them. Pryden. yet the produćt of all their endeavours is but as the º:
anº).
Substantive. adj. [. Jubſtantivus, Latin.]
- - - ind and emptineſs.
1. Solid; depending only on itſelf. Not in uſe. the labouring mountains, wind and emp
Affect not little ſhifts and ſubterfuges to avoid the for; of
He confidered how ſufficient and Jº/fantive this land was an argument. Watſ
tº maintain itſelf, without any aid of the foreigner. Bacon. Subterrangal. hadj. [ſub and terra, Lat, ſcuſſerraine, Fr.
2. Bºkening exiſtence. Subterra’NEAN. I. Subterranean or ſubterraneous is the .
9" is obliged to join many *in one propoſition, be- sººji jº uſed.] Lying under the earth; placº
cauſe the repetition of theſiſtantive verb wouldi. tedious. Arb. Su'BTERRANy. below the ſurface.
To SU ********, v. a. [ſubſtituer, Fr. Jubſtitutus, from Jub Metals are who'y ſubterrany, whereas plants are part abº"
*†, Latin.]. To put in the place of another. earth, and part under. Bacon's Natural Hijiº,
f . original deſigns of ſpeaking, a man canſubſtitute none In ſubterranies, as the fathers of their tribes, are brimſtone
**that can equally conduji. honour. Gov. of Tongue. and mercury. Bacon's Natural Hiſkſ).
Is und If a ſwarthy tongue The force -
jº his humid palate hung, Of ſubterranean wind tranſports a hill
Ome fº : ſubſtitute another. Dryden. Torn from Pelorus, or the ſhatter'd fide
others. "ºries are inſerted or /*/ituted in the room of Qf thundring Ætna, whoſe combuſtible
Substiture. n Congreve. And fuel'd entrails thence conceiving fire, Milton,
iſ [ſubſtitut, Fr. !—?1 --!-L –- ? - inds.
by another to: §*::: .* verb.] One placed Sublim'd with mineral fury, aid the winds Alteration
teratio
--<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
9
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U B
Alteration proceeded from the change made in the neigh-
bouring ſubterraneal parts by that great conflagration. Boyle.
Tell by what paths, what ſubterranean ways,
Back to the fountain's head the ſea conveys
The refluent rivers. Blackmore.
Let my ſoft minutes glide obſcurely on,
Like ſubterraneous ſtreams, unheard, unknown. Norris.
This ſubterraneous paſſage was not at firſt deſigned ſo much
for a highway as for a quarry. Addiſon.
Rous'd within the ſubterranean world,
Th’ expanding earthquake unreſiſted ſhakes
Aſpiring cities. Thomſon.
Subterra'NITY. m. ſ. [ſub and terra, Lat.] A place under
ground. Not in uſe.
We commonly conſider ſubterranities, not in contempla-
tions, ſufficiently reſpective unto the creation. Brown.
SU'BTILE, adj. [ſubtile, Fr. ſubtilis, Lat. This word is often
written ſubtle.]
1. Thin ; not denſe; not groſs.
From his eyes the fleeting fair
Retir’d, like ſubtle ſmoke diſſolv’d in air. Dryden's Georg.
Deny Des Cart his ſubtile matter,
You leave him neither fire nor water. Prior.
Is not the heat conveyed through the vacuum by the vibra-
tions of a much ſubtiler medium than air, which, after the air
was drawn out, remained in the vacuum ? Newton's Opt.
2. Nice; fine; delicate; not coarſe.
But of the clock which in our breaſts we bear,
The ſubtile motions we forget the while.
Davies.
Thou only know'ſt her nature, and her pow'rs;
Her ſubtile form thou only can'ſt define. Davies.
I do diſtinguiſh plain
Each ſubtile line of her immortal face. Davies.
3. Piercing; acute.
Paſs we the ſlow diſeaſe and ſubtile pain,
Which our weak frame is deſtin'd to ſuſtain;
The cruel ſtone, the cold catarrh. Prior.
4. Cunning; artful; ſly; ſubdolous. In this ſenſe it is now
commonly written ſubtle.
Arrius, a prieſt in the church of Alexandria, a ſubtile
witted and a marvellous fair ſpoken man, was diſcontented
that one ſhould be placed before him in honour, whoſe ſuperior
he thought himſelf in deſert, becauſe through envy and ſto-
mach prone unto contradićtion. Hooker.
Think you this York
Was not incenſed by his ſubtle mother,
To taunt and ſcorn you? Shakeſp. Richard III.
O ſubtile love, a thouſand wiles thou haſt
By humble ſuit, by ſervice, or by hire,
To win a maiden's hold. Fairfax.
A woman, an harlot and ſubtile of heart. Prov. vii. Io.
Northou his malice, and falſe guile, contemn:
Subtile he needs muſt be, who could ſeduce
Angels. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
5. Deceitful.
Like a bowl upon a ſubtle ground,
I've tumbled paſt the throw.
6. Refined; acute beyond exačtneſs.
Things remote from uſe, obſcure and ſubtle.
SU’BTIl ELY. adv. [from ſubtile.]
1. Finely; not groſsly.
The conſtitution of the air appeareth more ſubtilly by worms
in oak-apples than to the ſenſe of man. Bacon.
In theſe plaiſters the ſtone ſhould not be too ſubtilely pow-
dered; for it will better manifeſt its attraction in more ſenſible
dimenſions. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The opakeſt bodies, if ſubtilely divided, as metals diſſolved
in acid menſtruums, become perfectly tranſparent. Newton.
2. Artfully; cunningly. -
By granting this, add the reputation of loving the truth fin-
cerely to that of having been able to oppoſe it ſubtilely. Boyle.
Others have ſought to eaſe themſelves of afflićtion by diſ-
puting ſubtilly againſt it, and pertinaciouſly maintaining that
afflićtions are no real evils. Tillotſ,n's Sermons.
Su'BTILE Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſubtile.] "
1. Fineneſs; rareneſs.
2. Cunning; artfulneſs. -
To SubTI'liate. v.a. [from ſubtile.] To make thin.
A very dry and warm or ſubtiliating air opens the ſurface of
the earth. Harvey on the Plague.
Subtiliation. n.ſ.. [ſubtiliation, French ; from ſubtiliate.]
The act of making thin. -
By ſubtiliation and rarefaction the oil contained in grapes,
if diſtilled before it be fermented, becomes ſpirit of wine. Boyle.
Su'BTILTY. n.ſ.. [ſubtilité, French; from ſultile.]
1. Thinneſs; fineneſs; exility of parts.
The ſubtilties of particular ſounds may paſs through ſmall
crannies not confuſed, but its magnity not ſo well. Bacon.
How ſhall we this union well expreſs
Nought ties the ſoul, her ſubtilty is ſuch. Davies.
The corporeity of all bodies being the ſame, and ſubtilty in
all bodies being eſſentially the ſame thing, could any body by
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Milton.
S U B
Jubtilty become vital, then any degree of ſubtilty would pro-
duce ſome degree of life. Grew's Coſmol.
Bodies the more of kin they are to ſpirit in Jubtilty and re-
2 º the more ſpreading and ſelf-diffuſive are they. Norris.
. Nicety.
Whatſoever is inviſible, in reſpe&amp;t of the fineneſs of the
body, or ſubtilty of the motion, is little enquired. Bacon.
3. Refinement; too much acuteneſs.
You Prefer the reputation of candour before that of ſub-
tilty. ... ... . Boyle.
. Intelligible diſcourſes are ſpoiled by too much ſubtilty in nice
diviſions.
Greece did at length a learned race produce, Locke.
Who needful ſcience mock'd, and arts of uſe;
Mankind with idle ſubtilties embroil,
And faſhion ſyſtems with romantick toil. Blackmore.
They give method, and ſhed ſubtilty upon their author. Baż.
4. Cunning; artifice; ſlyneſs.
Finding force now faint to be,
He thought grey hairs afforded ſubtilty. Sidney.
The rudeneſs and barbarity of ſavage Indians knows not ſo
perfectly to hate all virtues as ſome mens ſubtily. K. Charles.
Sleights proceeding
As from his wit and native ſubtlety.
SUBTILIz Aºtion. n.ſ.. [from ſubtilize.]
1. Subtilization is making anything ſo volatile as to riſe readily
in ſteam or vapour. Quincy.
Fluids have their reſiſtances proportional to their denſities,
ſo that no ſubtilization, diviſion of parts, or refining can alter
theſe reſiſtances. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
2. Refinement; ſuperfluous acuteneſs.
To SU’BTIL1ze. v. a. [ſubtilizer, French; from ſubtile.]
1. To make thin; to make leſs groſs or coarſe.
Chyle, being mixed with the choler and pancreatick juices,
is further ſubtilized, and rendered ſo fluid and penetrant, that
the thinner and finer part eaſily finds way in at the ſtreight ori-
fices of the lačteous veins. Ray on the Creation.
Body cannot be vital; for if it be, then is it ſo either as
Jubtilized or organized, moved or endowed with life. Grew.
2. To refine; to ſpin into uſeleſs niceties.
The moſt obvious verity is ſubtilized into niceties, and ſpun
into a thread indiſcernible by common opticks. Glanville,
To SUBTI'lize. v. n. To talk with too much refinement.
Qualities and moods ſome modern philoſophers have ſub-
tilized on. Digby on Bodies.
Su'btle, adj. [Written often for ſubtile, eſpecially in the ſenſe
of cunning.] Sly; artful; cunning.
Some ſubtle headed fellow will put ſome quirk, or deviſe
ſome evaſion, whereof the reſt will take hold. Spenſer.
Shall we think the ſubtle witted French
Conj'rers and ſorc'rers, that, afraid of him,
By magick verſe have thus contriv'd his end? Shakespeare H. VI.
The ſerpent, ſubtlºſt beaſt of all the field. Milton.
The Arabians were men of a deep and ſubtle wit. Sprat.
SU'BTLY., adv. [from ſubtle.]
1. Slily; artfully; cunningly.
Thou ſee'ſ how ſubtly to detain thee I deviſe;
Inviting thee to hear, while I relate. Milton's Parad, Loſt.
2. Nicely; delicately.
In the nice bee, what ſenſe ſo ſubtly true,
From pois'nous herbs extraćts the healing dew! Pope.
To Su’BTRAct. v.a. [ſubtradio, Latin. They who derive it
from the Latin write ſubtrać; ; thoſe who know the French
original, write ſubſtract, which is the common word..] To
withdraw part from the reſt.
Reducing many things unto charge, which, by confuſion,
became concealed and ſubtraded from the crown. Davieſ.
what is ſubtracted or ſubdućted out of the extent of the
Milton.
divine perfeótion, leaves ſtill a quotient infinite. Hale.
The ſame ſwallow, by the ſubtrading daily of her eggs,
lay nineteen ſucceſſively, and then gave over. Ray.
Subt RA’ction. n.ſ. See Substr Action.
subtrahend. n.f. [ſubtrahendum, Lat.] The number to be
taken from a larger number. - -
Suºrºple. adj.iſubtriple, Fr. ſub and triplus, Latin.] Con-
taining a third or one part of º: ion to the weight
ill be i btriple proportion to the W .
The power will be in a ſubtriple P %. Math. #.
Subventa'neous. adj. [ſubventaneu, Latl Addle; windy.
Suitable unto dºm of the ". in º, * their
alwentaneous conceptions from the Weltº," "": 7-01077.
T! SU’bverse. v. : [ſubverſus, Latin.] To ſubvert. Spenſer
uſes ſubverſ in the ſame ſenſe. ..
#. ſubvers'd, when ruling fate has ſtruck
Th'unalterable hour. Thomſºn's Autumn.
subversion, n.ſ. [ſubverſion, Fr. Jubverſus, Latin.] over-
throw; ruin; deſtruction. - VI
Theſe ſeek ſubverſion of thy harmleſs life. Shakespeare H. VI.
It is far more honourable to ſuffer, than to proſper in their
ruin and ſubverſion. - Ring Charleſ.
Theſe things refer to the opening and ſhutting the abyſs,
with the diſſolution or ſubverſion of the earth, Burnet.
Laws<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U C
S U C
Laws have been often abuſed, to the oppreſſion and the ſub-
verſion of that order they were intended to preſerve. Rogers.
Sºyº'ssive. adj. [from ſubvert.] Having tendency to over-
"ºing is a vice ſubverſive of the very ends and deſign of
converſation. Rogers.
To SUBVERT. v. a. [ſubvertir, French; ſubverto, Latin.]
1. To overthrow; to overturn; to deſtroy; to turn upſide
down.
God, by things deem'd weak, -
Subverts the worldly ſtrong and worldly wiſe. Milton.
No propoſition can be received for divine revelation, if
contradićtory to our clear intuitive knowledge; becauſe this
would ſubvert the principles of all knowledge Locke.
Trees are ſubverted or broken by high winds. Mortimer.
2. To corrupt; to confound. -
Strive not about words to no purpoſe, but to the ſubverting
of the hearers. 2 Tim. ii. 14.
Subve'RTER. n.ſ.. [from ſubvert.] Overthrower; deſtroyer.
O traytorſ worſe than Simon was to Troy;
O vile ſubverter of the Gallick reign,
More falſe than Gano was to Charlemagne.
SU'BURB. n.ſ.. [ſuburbium, Latin.]
1. Building without the walls of a city.
There's a trim rabble let in: are all theſe your faithful
friends o' th' ſuburbs 8 Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
What can be more to the diſvaluation of the power of the
Spaniard, than to have marched ſeven days in the heart of his
countries, and lodged three nights in the ſuburbs of his prin-
cipal city ? Bacon's I/ar with Spain.
2. The confines; the outpart.
The ſuburbs of my jacket are ſo gone,
Dryden.
I have not left one ſkirt to fit upon. Cleaveland.
They on the ſmoothed plank,
The ſuburb of their ſtrawbuilt citadel,
Milton.
Expatiate.
When our fortunes are violently changed, our ſpirits
are unchanged, if they always ſtood in the ſuburbs and expec-
tation of ſorrows. Taylor.
Subu'RBAN. adj. [ſuburlanus, Latin; from ſuburb.] Inhabit-
ing the ſuburb.
Poor clinches the ſuburban muſe affords,
And Panton waging harmleſs war with words. Dryden.
SUB wo'RK ER. n.ſ.. [ſub and worker..] Underworker; ſubor-
dinate helper.
He that governs well leads the blind; but he that teaches
gives him eyes: and it is glorious to be a ſubworker to grace,
in freeing it from ſome of the inconveniences of original
fin. - South.
Succºpa's Eous. adj. [ſuccedaneuſ, Lat..] Supplying the place
of ſomething elſe.
Nor is Ætius ſtrićtly to be believed when he preſcribeth the
ſtone of the otter as a ſuccedaneous unto caſtoeum. Brown.
I have not diſcovered the menſtruum: I will preſent a ſuc-
(edaneºus experiment made with a common liquor. Boyle.
SUCCEDANEUM. n.ſ. [Latin J That which is put to ſerve
for ſomething elſe.
To SUCCEED. v. n. [ſucceder, French; Juccedo, Latin.]
I. To follow in order.
If I were now to die,
Twere to be moſt happy; for I fear,
My ſoul hath her conſent ſo abſolute,
That not another comfort like to this
Succeed in unknown fate. Shakespeare Othello.
Thoſe of all ages to ſucceed will curſe my head. Milton.
2. To come into the place of one who has quitted.
. Workmen let it cool by degrees in ſuch relentings of neal-
ing heats, leſt it ſhould ſhiver in pieces by a violent ſucceeding
of air in the room of the fire. Digby on Bodies.
Enjoy 'till I return o
Short pleaſures; for long woes are to ſucceed. Milton.
If the father left only daughters, they equally ſucceeded to
him in copartnerſhip, without prelation or preference of the
eldeſt to a double portion. Hale.
Revenge ſucceed to love, and rage to grief. Dryden.
While theſe limbs the vital ſpirit feeds,
While day to night, and night to day ſucceeds,
Burn-off'rings morn and ev'ning ſhall be thine,
And fires eternal in thy temples ſhine. Dryden.
Theſe dull harmleſs makers of lampoons are yet of dangerous
-example to the publick; ſome witty men may ſucceed to their
deſigns, and, mixing ſenſe with malice, blaſt the reputation
of the moſt innocent. Dryden.
f The pretenſions of Saul's family, who received his crown
ºte appointment of God, ended with his reign;
an | Xavid, by the ſame title, ſucceeded in his throne, to the
º º of Jonathan. Locke.
3. dº * with 3 to terminate an undertaking in the
'Tis almoſt im - - - -
* — — . . Pºſſible for poets to ſucceed without ambition:
ºlon muſt be raiſed by a deſire of fame to a deſire of
Pleaſing: Dryden
This addreſs I have long thought owing; and if I had
never attempted, I might have been vain enough to think I
might have ſucceeded. Dryden.
A knave's a knave to me in ev'ry ſtate;
Alike my ſcorn, if he ſucceed or fail:
Sporus at court, or Japhet in a jail. Pp.
4. To terminate according to wiſh.
If thou deal truly, thy doings ſhall proſperouſly ſucceed to
thee. Toh. iv. 6.
This was impoſſible for Virgil to imitate, becauſe of the
ſeverity of the Roman language: Spencer endeavoured it in
Sheperd's Kalendar; but neither will it ſucceed in Engliſh. Dry.
5. To go under cover.
Pleaſe that ſilvan ſcene to take,
Where whiſtling winds uncertain ſhadows make;
Or will you to the cooler cave ſucceed,
Whoſe mouth the curling vines have overſpread.
To SU'cceed. v. a.
1. To follow ; to be ſubſequent or conſequent to.
In that place no creature was hurtful unto man, and thoſe
deſtructive cffects they now diſcover ſucceeded the curſe, and
came in with thorns and briars. Brown's Pulgar Errouri.
2. To proſper; to make ſucceſsful.
Now frequent trines the happier lights among,
And high-rais'd Jove from his dark priſon freed,
Thoſe weights took off that on his planet hung,
Dryden.
Will gloriouſly the new laid works ſucceed. Dryden.
Succeed my wiſh, and ſecond my deſign,
The faireſt Deiopeia ſhall be thine, !
And make thee father of a happy line. Dryden's AFn.
Succe'EDER. n.ſ.. [from ſucceed.] One who follows; one who
comes into the place of another.
Why ſhould calamity be full of words?
—Windy attorneys to their client woes,
Airy ſucceeders of inteſtate joys,
Poor breathing orators of miſeries'
Now this great ſucceeder all repairs,
He builds up ſtrength and greatneſs for his heirs,
Out of the virtues that adorn'd his blood. Daniel.
Nature has ſo far imprinted it in us, that ſhould the
envy of predeceſſors deny the ſecret to ſucceeders, they yet
would find it out. Suckling.
They make one man's particular fancies, perhaps fail-
ings, confining laws to others, and convey them to their ſuc-
ceeders, who afterwards miſname all unobſequiouſneſs as pre-
ſumption. Boyle.
SU'CCESS. n.ſ.. [ſucces, French ; ſucceſſis, Latin.]
1. The termination of any affair happy or unhappy. Suttſ;
without any epithet is commonly taken for good ſucceſs. ...
For good ſucceſs of his hands, he aſketh ability to do of him
that is moſt unable. //jd. xiii. 19.
Perplex'd and troubled at his bad ſºcceſ -
The tempter ſtood. Milton.
Not Lemuel's mother with more care
Did counſel or inſtruct her heir;
Or teach, with more ſucceſ, her ſon r. 1
The vices of the time to ſhun. Hºr.
Every reaſonable man cannot but wiſh meſºſ in this *
tempt, becauſe I undertake the proof of that which it is cvery
man's intereſt that it ſhould be true. Till ſon's Sermoni.
Whilſt malice and ingratitude confeſs,
They've ſtrove for ruin long without ſuitſ. Garth.
Gas ſulphuris be given with ſucceſ, in any diſeaſe of the
P is may be given wi ſu ſ Arbuthnot on Diet.
Shakespeare R. III.
lungs. -
Military ſucceſs, above all others, elevate the minº of a
people. Atterbury's Sermoni.
2. Succeſſion. Obſolete.
All the ſons of theſe five brethren reigned
By due ſucceſ, and all their nephews late,
Even thrice eleven deſcents, the crown retained. }. “.
Succe'ssFUL. adj. [ſucceſ; and full.] Proſperous; happy;
fortunate. by
They were terrible alarms to perſons grown wº .
long and ſucceſsful impoſture, by perſuading the world º:
might be honeſt and happy, though they neve. . y
corrupt appetites. South's Sermony.
H’ obſerv'd the illuſtrious throng, -
Their names, their fates, their conduct and their e; dºn
In peaceful ſenates and ſucceſſul war. ryan.
The early hunter
Bleſſes Diana's hand, who leads him ſafe
O'er hanging cliffs; who ſpreads his net ſºft, Priºr
And guides the arrow through the panther's heart. luckil .
Successfully. Adv. [from/acºſſal.] Proſperouſly; *"?
fortunately. - -
He º too young, yet he looks ſucceſſaly. sº
They would want a competent inſtrument tº . º cics
convey their rays ſucceſsfully, or ſo aS º * º:
with any vigour on a dull prejudicate faculty ſucceſſful, Pº,
The rule of imitating God can never be -
c ſuch as that this world is
Atterbury.
poſed but upon Chriſtian principles;
A reformation
a place not of reſt, but of diſaipline.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U C
S U C
-
A reformation ſucceſſfully carried on in this great town,
would in time ſpread itſelf over the whole kingdom. Swift.
Bleeding, when the expeãoration goes on ſucceſſfully, ſup-
preſſeth it. - Arbuthnot on Diet.
Succe’ssful Ness. n.ſ. . [from ſucceſsful..] Happy concluſion;
deſired event; ſeries of good fortune.
An opinion of the ſucceſsfulneſs of the work is as neceſſary
to found a purpoſe of undertaking it, as the authority of com.
mands, or the perſuaſiveneſs of promiſes. Hammond.
Successios. m. ſ. [ſucceſſion, French; ſucceſſi, Latin.]
1. Conſecution; ſeries of one thing or perſon following an-
other.
St. Auguſtine, having reckoned up a great number of the
biſhops of Rome, ſaith, in all this order of Jucceſſion of biſhops
there is not one found a Donatiſt. Hooker.
Reflection on appearances of ſeveral ideas, one after an-
other, in our minds, furniſhes us with the idea of ſue-
reſſion. Locke.
Let a cannon-bullet paſs through a room, and take with it
any limb of a man, it is clear that it muſt ſtrike ſucceſſively
the two fides of the room, touch one part of the fleſh firſt,
and another after, and ſo in ſucceſſion. Locke.
. A ſeries of things or perſons following one another.
Theſe decays in Spain have been occaſioned by ſo long a
war with Holland; but moſt by two ſucceſſions of inactive
..". princes. Bacon.
The ſmalleſt particles of matter may cohere by the ſtrong-
eſt attractions, and compoſe bigger particles of weaker virtue;
and many of theſe may cohere and compoſe bigger particles,
whoſe virtue is ſtill weaker; and ſo on for divers ſucceſſions,
until the progreſſion end in the biggeſt particles, on which the
operations in chymiſtry and the colours of natural bodies de-
pend. Newton's Opt.
3. A lineage; an order of deſcendants.
. . Caffibelan,
--
. And his next ſon the clouded ark of God
:* - Shall in a glorious temple enſhrine. Milt Par. Loff.
º 4. The power or right of coming to the inheritance of an-
And his ſucceſſion, granted Rome a tribute. Shakespeare Cymbel.
A long ſucceſſion muſt enſue;
ceſtors.
What people is ſo void of common ſenſe,
To vote ſucceſſion from a native prince 2
SUCCESSIVE. adj. [ſucceſſ, French.]
1. Following in order; continuing a courſe or conſecution un-
interrupted.
Three with fiery courage he aſſails,
And each ſucceſſive after other quails,
Still wond'ring whence ſo many kings ſhould riſe.
God hath ſet
Labour and reſt, as day and night, to men
Succeſſive. Milt. Par. Loſt.
God, by reaſon of his eternal indiviſible nature, is by one
ſingle act of duration preſent to all the ſucceſſive portions of
Dryden.
Daniel.
time, and all ſucceſſively exiſting in them. South.
º Send the ſucceſſive ills through ages down,
And let each weeping father tell his ſon. Prior.
2. Inherited by ſucceſſion. Not in uſe.
Countrymen,
Plead my ſucceſſive title with your ſwords.
Shakeſpeare's Titus Andronicus.
The empire being elečtive, and not ſucceſſive, the emperors,
in being, made profit of their own times. Raleigh.
Successivley. adv. [ſucceſſivement, Fr. from ſucceſſive..] In
uninterrupted order; one after another.
Three ſons he left,
All which ſucceſſively by turns did reign.
Is it upon record * or elſe reported
Succeſſively from age to age 2 Shakeſp. Richard III.
That king left only by his ſix wives three children, who
Fairy Queen.
reigned ſucceſſively, and died childleſs. Bacon.
We that meaſure times by firſt and laſt,
The fight of things ſucceſſively do take,
When God on all at once his view doth caſt,
And of all times doth but one inſtant make. Davies.
I inclined the paper to the rays very obliquely, that the moſt
refrangible rays might be more copiouſly reflected than the
reſt, and the whiteneſs at length changed ſucceſſively into blue,
indigo, and violet. Newton's Opt.
No ſuch motion of the ſame atom can be all of it exiſtent
at once : it muſt needs be made gradually and ſucceſſively, both
as to place and time, ſeeing that body cannot at the ſame in-
ſtant be in more places than one. Bentley's Sermons.
Succe’ssive Ness. n.ſ. (from ſucceſſive.] The ſtate of being
ſucceſſive. -
All the notion we have of duration is partly by the ſucceſſive-
neſ of its own operations, and partly by thoſe external mea-
ſures that it finds in motion. Hale.
Success LESS. adj. [from ſucceſ...] Unlucky; unfortunate;
failing of the event deſired.
The hopes of thy ſucceſsleſ, love reſign. Dryden.
The Bavarian duke,
Bold championſ brandiſhing his Noric blade,
Beſt temper'd ſteel, ſucceſsleſ; prov’d in field. Philipi,
Paſſion unpity'd, and ſucceſsleſ love,
Plant daggers in my heart. Addiſon's Cato.
Succeſſeſ; all her ſoft careſſes prove,
SU'cc o baniſh from his breaſt his country's love. Pope.
". . "...ſ [ſucceſſeur, French; ſucceſſor, Latin. This
is ſometimes pronounced /*/ºur, with the accent in the
middle.] One that follows in the Place or character of an-
other; correlative to predeceſſour.
This king by this queen had a ſon of tender age, but of
great expectation, brought up in the hope of themſelves and
already acceptation of the inconſtant people, asſucceſſor of his
father's crown. Sidn
The fucceſſor of Moſes in prophecies. Ecclu. xlvi. º
The fear of what was to come from an unacknowledged
/*g/ºur to the crown, clouded much of that proſperity then
which now ſhines in chronicle. Cirº.
- The ſecond part of confirmation is the prayer and benedic-
tion of the biſhop, the ſucceſſour of the apoſtles in this office.
Bammond on Fundamentals.
The ſurly ſavage offspring diſappear,
And curſe the bright ſucceſſºr of the year;
Yet crafty kind with daylight can diſpenſe. Dryden.
Whether a bright ſucceſſor, or the ſame. Tate.
The deſcendants of Alexander's Jucceſſors cultivated naviga-
tion in ſome leſſer degree. Arbuthnot.
SUCCI'NCT, adj. [ fuccinéſ, French; ſuccinduſ, Latin.]
I, Tucked or girded up; having the cloaths drawn up to diſ-
engage the legs.
His habit fit for ſpeed ſuccini. Milton's Par. Loft.
His veſt ſuscind then girding round his waiſt,
Forth ruſh'd the ſwain.
Four knaves in garbs ſuccinº.
2. Short ; conciſe; brief.
A ſtrict and ſucciné; ſtile is that where you can take nothing
away without loſs, and that loſs manifeſt. Ben. johnſºn.
Let all your precepts be ſucciné and clear,
That ready wits may comprehend them ſoon. Roſcommºn.
Succi'Nctly adv...[from ſuccinct.] Briefly; conciſely; with-
out ſuperfluity of diction.
I ſhall preſent you very ſuccinéily with a few reflections that
Pope.
Pope.
moſt readily occur. Boyle.
I'll recant, when France can ſhew me wit
As ſtrong as ours, and as ſuccinéily writ. Roſcommon.
SU'ccor Y. n.ſ.. [cichorium, Latin.] "A plant.
It is one of the milky plants, with a plain radiated flower:
the flowers are produced from the ſides of the branches, at the
ſetting off of the branches upon ſhort footſtalks: the cup of
the flower is like a contračted ſeed-veſſel: the ſeeds are angu-
lar, umbilicated, and ſhaped ſomewhat like a wedge. Miller.
A garden-ſallad
Of endive, radiſhes, and ſuccory. Dryden.
The medicaments to diminiſh the milk are lettuce, purſlane,
endive, and ſuccry. Jºſeman of Tumours.
To SU’CCOUR. v. a. [ſecourir, French; ſuccurro, Lat..] To
help; to aſſiſt in difficulty or diſtreſs; to relieve.
As that famous queen
Of Amazons, whom Pyrrhus did deſtroy,
Did ſhew herſelf in great triumphant joy, - {
To ſuccour the weak ſtate of ſad afflićted Troy. Fa. Qu
A grateful beaſt will ſtand upon record, againſt thoſe that in
their proſperity forget their friends, that to their loſs and
hazard ſtood by and ſuccoured them in their adverſity. L'E/fr.
SU'ccour. n.ſ [from the verb; ſecours, French.]
1. Aid; aſſiſtance; relief of any kind; help in diſtreſs.
My father,
Flying for ſuccour to his ſervant Baniſter,
Being diſtreſs'd, was by that wretch betray'd. Shakespeare eare.
Here's a young maid with travel oppreſs'd,
And faints for ſuccur. Shakeſpeare.
2. The perſon or things that bring help. -
Fear nothing elſe but a betraying of ſuccur; which reaſon
offereth. JWiſd. xvii. 12.
Our watchful general had diſcern'd from far
The mighty ſuccur which made glad the foe. Dryden.
Su’ccourER. m.ſ.. [from ſuccour.] Helper; affiſtant; reliever.
She hath been a ſuccourer of many. ... . ... Ro. xvi. 2;
Su/ccour less. adj. [from ſuccur.] Wanting relief; void of
friends or help.
Succourleſ and ſad,
She with extended arms his aid implores.
Su/cculency. n.ſ. [from ſucculent:1 Juicineſs. -
SU/CCULENT, adj. [ſucculent, French ; ſucculentus, Latin.]
Jº#. have a ſtrong, denſe, and ſucculent moiſture,
which is not apt to exhale. Bacon.
Divine Providence has ſpread her table every where, not
with a juiceleſs green carpet, but with ſucculent herbage and
nouriſhing graſs, upon which moſt beaſts feed. A1are.
Thom 477.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
25 On
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U C
S U C
, our account has Jove,
In º to all lands ſome Jucculent plant
... ºr helples man might ſlack
ilips.
His preſent thirſt. Philips
accumbo, Latin ; ſuccember, French.]
a . U. 71. f - -
Tºº *: ſink º any difficulty. Not in uſe, except
y he Scotch.
t
among To their wills we muſt ſuccum”,
hunt, 'tis º J A trot.
f J. 71. 1. accuſſo, Latin. rot, -
sº * ºof . ſide together, which is º:
tion or ambling, or liſt one foot before and º; ..". e.
hind, which is ſuccuſation or trottº: Brown's /ugar trf.
They rode, but authors do not ſay
Whether tolutation or ſuccuſation.
Succu'ssios. m. ſ [ſuccºſ", Latin.]
1. The aët of ſhaking. .
When any of that ri
and when he conſidere
Hudibras.
c tra
9aocumque
Butler.
fible ſpecies were brought to the doćior;
d the ſpaſms of the diaphragm, and all
the muſcles of reſpiration, with the tremulous ſuccuſion of the
whole human body, he gave ſuch patients over. Mart. Scrib.
2 [In phyſick.] is ſuch a ſhaking of the nervous parts as is pro-
cured by ſtrong ſtimuli, like ſternutatories, friction, and the
like, which are commonly uſed in apoplestick affections.
Such. pronoun. [ſuleiks, Gothick ; ſulk, Dutch; rpile, Saxon.]
1. Of that kind; of the like kind. with as before the thing
to which it relates, when the º: follows: as, ſuch a power
a king's; ſuch a gift as a kingdom.
Q5 *"... ſº marry, a perfum'd one. Shatºſ.
Can we find ſuch a one as this, in whom the ſpirit of God
is ? - Gen. xli. 38.
The works of the fleſh are manifeſt, ſuch are º
relings, and ſuch like. al. V. 2 I .
º : make this a general rule to debar ſuch from
preaching of the Goſpel as have thro' infirmity fallen. J/7 itgift.
S.; iother idol was Manah, worſhipped between Mecca
and Medina, which was called a rock or ſtone. Stillºſe tº
Such precepts as tend to make men good, ſingly conſidered,
av b
}. require the good government of ourſelves. Tillotſon.
If my ſong be ſuch,
That wou will hear and credit me too much,
Attentive liſten. Dryden.
such are the cold Riphean race, and ſuch
The ſavage Scythian. Dryde's. Virg; Georg.
As to be perfectly juſt is an attribute in the Divine Nature,
to be ſo to the utmoſt of our abilities is the glory of a man:
ach an one, who has the publick adminiſtration, acts like the
repreſentative of his Maker. . . Addiſon.
You love a verſe, take ſuch as I can ſend. Pope.
2. The ſame that. With ar.
This was the ſtate of the kingdom of Tunis at ſuch time as
Barbaroſſa, with Solyman's great fleet, landed in Africk. Knoll.
3. Comprehended under the term premiſed.
That thou art happy, owe to God;
That thou continu'ſt ſuch, owe to thyſelf. Milton.
*. To aſſert that God looked upon Adam's fall as a fin, and
puniſhed it as ſuch, when, without any antecedent ſin, he
withdrew that ačtual grace, upon which it was impoſſible for
him not to fall, highly reproaches the eſſential equity of the
Divine Nature. South.
No promiſe can oblige a prince ſo much,
Still to be good, as long to have been ſuch. Dryden.
4. A manner of expreſfing a particular perſon or thing.
I ſaw him yeſterday
With ſuch and ſuch. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
If you repay me not on ſuch a day,
In ſuch a place, ſuch ſum or ſums, as are
Expreſs'd in the condition, let the forfeit
Be an equal pound of your fleſh. Shakespeare Merch. of Venice.
I have appointed my ſervants to ſuch and ſuch place. 1 Sam.
Scarce this word death from ſorrow did proceed,
When in ruſh'd one, and tells him ſuch a knight
ls new arriv'd. Daniel’s Civil //ar.
Himſelf overtook a party of the army, conſiſting of three
thouſand horſe and foot, with a train of artillery, which he left
at ſuch a place, within three hours march of Berwick. Clarend.
The ſame ſovereign authority may enact a law, command-
ing ſuch or fuch an action to-day, and a quite contrary law for-
bidding the ſame to-morrow. South's Sermons.
Thoſe artiſts who propoſe only the imitation of ſuch or ſuch
a particular perſon, without election of thoſe ideas before-
mentioned, have often been reproached for that omiſſion.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
º v. a. [rucan, Saxon; ſugo, ſº, Latin º
* I ench.
1. To draw by making a rarefaction of the air. -
2. Tº draw in with the mouth.
* * **p of aſtoniſhment thou ſhalt drink, and ſuck it out.
Ezek. xxiii. 34.
ediſtributed into ſuch as enjoin piety towards God, or .
We'll hand in hand to the dark manſions go,
Where, ſucking in each other's lateſt breath,
We may transfuſe our ſouls.
Still ſhe drew
The ſweets from ev’ry flow'r, and ſuck'd the dew. Dryden
Transfix’d as o'er Caſtalia's ſtreams he hung, -
He ſuck'd new poiſons with his triple tongue. Pope's Statiuſ,
Dryder,
3. To draw the teat of a female.
Deſire, the more he ſick'd, more ſought the breaſt,
Like dropſy folk ſtill drink to be a-thirſt. Sidney.
A bitch will nurſe young foxes in place of her puppies, if
you can get them once to ſuch her ſo long that her milk may
go through them. Locke.
Did a child ſuck every day a new nurſe, it would be no
more affrighted with the change of faces at ſix months old than
at ſixty. Lºcke.
4. To draw with the milk.
Thy valiantneſs was mine, thou ſack'd? it from me;
But own thy pride thyſelf. Shakespeare Coriolanuſ.
5. To empty by ſucking.
A fox lay with whole ſwarms of flies ſucking and galling of
him. L'Eſtrange.
Bees on tops of lilies feed,
And creep within their bells to ſuck the balmy ſeed. Dryden.
6. To draw or drain.
I can ſuck melancholy out of a ſong, as a weazel fuck
eggs. Shakeſpeare.
Pumping hath tir’d our men;
Seas into ſeas thrown, we ſick in again. Donne.
A cubical veſſel of braſs is filled an inch and a half in half
an hour; but becauſe it ſucks up nothing as the earth doth,
take an inch for half an hour's rain. Burnet.
Old ocean, ſuck'd through the porous globe,
Had long ere now forſook his horrid bed. Thomſºn,
To Suck. v. n.
1. To draw by rarefying the air.
Continual repairs, the leaſt defeóts in ſucking pumps are con-
ſtantly requiring. - Mortimer's Huſbandry.
2. To draw the breaſt.
Such as are nouriſhed with milk find the paps, and ſuck at
them; whereas none of thoſe that are not deſigned for that
nouriſhment ever offer to ſuck. Ray on the Creation.
I would
Pluck the young ſucking cubs from the ſhe-bear,
To win thee, lady. Shakeſp. Merchant ºf Penice.
Why did the knees prevent me or why the breaſis that
I ſhould ſuck? job iii. 12.
A nurſing father beareth with the ſucking child. Numb. xi.
3. To draw ; imbibe.
The crown had ſucked too hard, and now being full...wº
like to draw leſs. Bacon's Henry VIII.
All the under paſſions,
As waters are by whirl-pools ſuck'd and drawn,
Were quite devoured in the vaſt gulph of empire. Prº*.
Suck. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The act of ſucking.
I hoped, from the deſcent of the quick-filver in the tº
upon the firſt ſuº, that I ſhould be able to give * *
gueſs at the proportion of force betwixt the preſiure of the air
and the gravity of quick-ſilver. Boyle.
2. Milk given by females.
They draw with their ſuck the diſpoſition of their nurſes.
Spenſer.
I have given ſuck and know
How tender is to love the babe that milks me. Shaºft”
Thoſe firſt unpoliſh'd matrons
Gave ſuck to infants of gigantick mold. Dryden.
It would be inconvenient for birds to giveſ* Ray.
SU'cKER. n.ſ.. [ſuceur, French; from ſuck.]
1. Any thing that draws.
2. The embolus of a pump. -
Oil muſt be poured into the cylinder that º
ſlip up and down in it more ſmoothly. º
The aſcent of waters is by ſuckers or forceſ.” ſomet *:
equivalent thereunto iſ ilkins's Dadalus.
3. A round piece of leather, laid wet on a ſtone, and º
up in the middle, rarifies the air within, which preſſing uſ”
its edges, holds it down to the ſtone. .
One of the round leathers wherewit - | ſoak-
fuckers, not above an inch and half diameter. being we . u
ed in water, will flick and pluck a ſtone of twelvº pounds º
from the ground. Grew, Muſeu".
4. A pipe through which any thing is ſucked.
Mariners aye ply the pump,
So they, but chearful, unfatigu'd, ſtill move
The draining ſucker. -
5. A young twig ſhooting from the ": This
haps originally ſurcle, [furculuſ, Latin.
The *::::: |ſuckers at the root and º
make trees grow high. Bacon's Natiºnal *6.
h boys play, called
Philips.
word was pºl'
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U D
S U F
Out of this old root a ſucker may ſpring, that with a little
ſhelter and good ſeaſons, may prove a mighty tree. Ray.
SU'cket. nj. [from ſuck J A ſweet meat. -
Nature's confectioner, the bee,
Whoſe ſuckets are moiſt alchimy;
The ſtill of his refining mold,
Minting the garden into gold. Cleaveland.
SU'cKINGBottle. n.ſ. [ſuck and bottle..] A bottle which to
children ſupplies the want of a pap.
He that will ſay, children join theſe general abſtraćt ſpecu-
lations with their ſuckingbottles, has more zeal for his opinion,
but leſs ſincerity. Locke.
To Suckle. v. a. [from ſuck.] To nurſe at the breaſt.
The breaſt of Hecuba,
When ſhe did ſuckle Hector, look'd not lovelier. Shakeſpeare.
She nurſes me up and ſuckle, me. L’Eſtrange.
Two thriving calves ſhe ſuckles twice a-day. Dryden.
The Roman ſoldiers bare on their helmets the firſt hiſtory
of Romulus, who was begot by the god of war, and ſuckled
by a wolf. Addiſon on Italy.
SU'cklis G. m. ſ. [from ſuck.] A young creature yet fed by the
pap.
I provide a ſuckling,
That ne'er had nouriſhment but from the teat. Dryden.
Young animals participate of the nature of their tender
aliment, as ſucklings of milk. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
SU’ction. n. ſ. [from ſuck; ſuccion, Fr.] The act of ſucking.
Sounds exteriour and interiour may be made by ſufion, as
by emifion of the breath. Bacon.
Though the valve were not above an inch and a half in dia-
meter, yet th: weight kept up by ſuction, or ſupported by the
air, and what was caſt out of it weighed about ten pounds.
Boyle.
Cornelius regulated the ſuition of his child. Arbuthnot.
SUDATION. m. ſ. [ſudo, Latin.] Sweat.
Su'DA toRY. n. ſ. [ſudo, Latin.] Hot houſe; ſweating bath.
SUDDEN. adj. [ſoudain, French; roben, Saxon.]
1. Happening without previous notice; coming without the
common preparatives; coming unexpectedly.
We have not yet ſet down this day of triumph;
To-morrow, in my judgment, is too ſudden. Shakeſpeare.
There was never any thing ſo ſudden but Caeſar's thraſoni-
cal brag, of I came, ſaw and overcame. Shakeſpeare.
Herbs ſudden flower'd,
Opening their various colours. Milton.
2. Haſty; violent; raſh; paſſionate; precipitate. Not in uſe.
I grant him
Sudden, malicious, ſmacking of ev'ry fin.
Su’d df N. m.ſ. -
1. Any unexpected occurrence; ſurpriſe. Not in uſe.
Parents ſhould mark the witty excuſes of their children at
ſuddains and ſurpriſals, rather than pamper them. J/otton.
2. On or of a SUDDEN, or upºn a Sudden. Sooner than was ex-
pećted; without the natural or commonly accuſtomed prepara-
tlves.
Following the flyers at the very heels,
With them he enters, who upon the ſ dilen
Clapt to their gates. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
How art thou loſt, how on a ſudden loſt? Milton.
They keep their patients ſo warm as almoſt to ſtifle them,
and all on a ſudden the cold regimen is in vogue. Baker.
When you have a mind to leave your maſter, grow rude
and ſaucy of a ſudden, and beyond your uſual behaviour. Swift.
Su’d DENLY. adv. [from ſudden.] In an unexpected manner;
without preparation ; haſtily.
You ſhall find three of your Argoſies
Are richly come to harbour ſuddenly.
If thou can'ſt accuſe,
Do it without invention ſuddenly. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
If eliſion of the air made the ſound, the touch of the bell or
ſtring could not extinguiſh ſo ſuddenly that motion. Bacon.
To the pale focs they ſuddenly draw near,
Shai-ſpeare.
And ſummon them to unexpected fight. Dryden.
She ſtruck the warlike ſpear into the ground,
Which ſprouting leaves did ſuddenly encloſe,
And peaceful olives ſhaded as they roſe. Dryden.
Su'dden Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſudden.] State of being ſudden; un-
expected preſence; manner of coming or happening unex-
pećtedly.
All in the open hall amazed ſtood,
At ſuddeneſs of that unwary fight,
And wond’red at his breathleſs haſty mood. Fairy Queen.
He ſpeedily run forward, counting his ſuddenneſ; his moſt
advantage that he might overtake the Engliſh. Spenſºr.
The rage of people is like that of the ſea, which once
breaking bounds, overflows a country with that ſuddenneſs and
violence as leaves no hopes of flying. - Temple.
SUDORIFICK. [ſudorifique, Fr. ſudor and facio, Latin.] Pro-
voking or cauſing ſweat.
Phyſicians may do well when they provoke ſweat in bed by
bottles, with a decočtion of ſudorifick herbs in hot water.
- Bacon.
Shakeſpeare.
Exhaling the moſt liquid parts of the blood by ſudorific or
**Y*"aporations brings it into a morbid ſtate. Žtiºn,
SUDoRI'Fick. m. ſ. A medicine promoting ſweat. -
As to ſadºrificks, confider that the liquid which goes off by
ſweat is often the moſt ſubtile part of the blood. Arbuthnot
Su'DoRous. adj. [from ſudor, Latin.] Conſiſting of ſweat -
Beſide the trigments and ſudorºus adheſion. from mens
hands, nothing proceedeth from gold in the uſual decodion
thereof. Brown's Pulgar Errourr.
Subs. n.ſ.. [from reoban, to feeth; when -
- - - ce -
1. A lixivium of ſoap and water. &gt; robben, Saxon.]
2. Tº be in the Sups. A familiar phraſe
To Sue. v. a. ſ. ſuiver, French.j
1. To proſecute by law.
If any ſue thee at the law, and take awa -
have §§. alſo. » y thy coat, let him
2. To gain by legal procedure.
Nor was our bleſſed Saviour only our propitiation to die
for us, but he is ſtill our advocate, continually interceding
with his Father in the behalf of all true penitents, and ſuing
for being in any difficulty.
44at. v. 40.
out a pardon for them in the court of heaven. Calamy.
To Su E. v. n. To beg; to entreat; to petition.
Full little knoweſt thou that haſ not try'd,
What hell it is in ſuing long to bide. +Hubberd’s Tale.
If me thou deign to ſerve and ſue,
At thy command lo all theſe mountains be. Spenſer.
When maidens ſue,
Men give like gods. Shakeſpeare
We were not born to ſue but command. Shakeſpeare.
Ambaſſadors came unto him as far as the mouth of the Eu-
phrates, ſuing unto him for peace. Knoles.
For this, this only favour let me ſue,
Refuſe it not: but let my body have
The laſt retreat of human kind, a grave. Dryden's Aneid.
Deſpiſe not then, that in our hands bear we
Theſe holy boughs, and ſue with words of pray’r. Dryden.
'Twill never be too late,
To ſue for chains, and own a conqueror.
The fair Egyptian
Courted with freedom now the beauteous ſlave,
Now faltring ſued, and threatning now did rave. Blackm.
By adverſe deſtiny conſtrain'd to ſue
For counſel and redreſs, he ſues to you. Pope's Odyſſey.
SU’ET. n.ſ.. [ſuet, an old French word, according to Skinner.]
A hard fat, particularly that about the kidneys.
The ſteatoma being ſuet, yields not to eſcaroticks. Wiſem.
Su'ety... adj. [from ſuet.] Conſiſting of ſuet; reſembling ſuet.
If the matter forming a wen, reſembles fat or a ſusty ſub-
ſtance, it is called ſteatoma. Sharp's Surgery.
To SUFFER. v. a. [ſuffero, Latin; ſuffrir, French..] .
1. To bear; to undergo; to feel with ſenſe of pain.
A man of great wrath ſhall ſuffer puniſhment. Prov, xix.
A woman ſuffered many things of phyſicians, and ſpent all
ſhe had. AMark v. 26.
Addison's Cato.
Obedience impos'd,
On penalty of death, and ſuffering death. Milton.
2. To endure; to ſupport; not to ſink under. -
Our ſpirit and ſtrength entire
Strongly to ſuffer and ſupport our pains. Milton.
3. To allow; to permit; not to hinder.
He wond’red that your Lordſhip
Would ſuffer him to ſpend his youth at home. Shakeſpeare.
Oft have I ſeen a hot o'erweening cur,
Run back and bite, becauſe he was withheld:
Who being ſuffered, with the bear's fell paw,
Hath clapt his tail betwixt his legs and cry’d. Shakespeare .
My duty cannot ſuffer -
Tº obey in all your daughter's hard commands. Shakeſpeare.
Rebuke thy neighbour, and not ſuffer fin upon him. Lev.
I ſuffer them to enter and poſſeſs. Milton.
He that will ſuffer himſelf to be informed by obſervation,
will find few ſigns of a ſoul accuſtomed to much thinking in a
new born child. Löcke.
4. To paſs through 5 to be affected by.
The air now muſt ſuffer change. Milton.
To Su'FF ER. v. n.
1. To undergo pain or inconvenience. --
go p Milton.
My breaſt i arm to overcome by ſuff”; . -
Prudence and good breeding are in all ſtations neceſſary;
and moſt young men ſºffer in the want of them. Locke.
2. To undergo puniſhment.
The father was firſt condemned to ſuffer upon a day ap-
pointed, and the ſon afterwards the day following. Clarendon.
- He thus
was forc'd to ſuffer for himſelf and us !
Heir to his father's ſorrows with his crown.
3. To be injured. - infirmiti d ki
Publick buſineſs ſºffers by private infirmities, and king-
doms fall into weakneſſes by the diſeaſes or decays of thoſe that
Temple.
them.
sº. adj. [from ſuffer.] Tolerable; ſuch as may be
endured. I
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U F
S U F
* . all, in any to uſe what liberty they liſt in their
* .#. but the tº: and extending the lin; and
ſenſe of others would appear a thankleſs office: //otton.
Sº RAhly. adv. [from ſufferable.] Tolerably; ſo as to be
d.
endº infant Titan held ſhe in her arms;
Yet ſufferably bright, the eye might bear
The ungrown glories of his beamy hair. .
Su'ff ERANCE. n.ſ.. [from ſuffer, ſuffrance, French.]
1, Pain; inconvenience; miſery.
He muſt not only die,
But thy unkindneſs ſhall the death draw out
To ling ring ſuffrance. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
How much education may reconcile young people to pain
and ſufferance, the examples of Sparta ſlew. Locke on Education.
2. Patience; moderation.
He thought thave ſlain her in his fierce deſpight,
But haſty heat tempering with ſufferance wiſe,
He ſtaid his hand. Fairy Queen.
He hath given excellent ſufferance and vigorouſneſs to the
ſufferers, arming them with ſtrange courage. Taylor.
And ſhould I touch it nearly, bear it
With all the ſuff’rance of a tender friend. Otway's Orphan.
3. Toleration; permiſſion; not hindrance.
In proceſs of time, ſomewhiles by ſufferance, and ſome-
whiles by ſpecial leave and favour, they erected to themſelves
oratories not in any ſumptuous or ſtately manner. Hooker.
Moſt wretched man
That to affections does the bridle lend;
In their beginning they are weak and wan,
But ſoon through ſufferance grow to fearful end. Fairy Queen.
Some villains of my court
Are in conſent and ſufferance in this.
Both gloried to have 'ſcap'd the Stygian flood,
As gods, and by their own recover'd ſirength;
Not by the ſuff' ance of ſupernal pow'r. Milton’s Par. Loſt.
SU'FF E RER. m. ſ. [from ſuffir.]
1. One who endures or undergoes pain or inconvenience.
This evil on the Philiſtines is fall'n,
The ſufferers then will ſcarce moleſt us here,
Addison.
Shakeſpeare.
From other hands we need not much to fear. Milton.
And when his love was bounded in a few,
That were unhappy that they might be true,
Made you the fav'rite of his laſt ſad times,
That is, a ſuff'rer in his ſubjects crime. Dryden.
She returns to me with joy in her face, not from the fight of
her huſband, but from the good luck ſhe has had at cards;
and if ſhe has been a loſer, I am doubly a ſufferer by it: ſhe
comes home out of humour, becauſe ſhe has been throwing
away my eſtate. Addiſon's Spectator.
The hiſtory of civil wars and rebellions does not make ſuch
deep and laſting impreſſions, as events of the ſame nature in
which we or our friends have been ſufferers. Addiſon.
2. One who allows; one who permits.
SU'FFERING. m. ſ. [from ſuffer] Pain ſuffered.
Rejoice in my ſufferings for you. Col. i. 24.
With what ſtrength, what ſteadineſs of mind,
He triumphs in the midſt of all his ſufferings 2 Addiſon.
We may hope the {{.. of innocent people, who have
lived in that place which was the ſcene of rebellion, will ſe-
cure from the like attempts. Addiſon.
It increaſed the ſmart of his preſent ſufferings to compare
them with his former happineſs. Atterbury.
To SUFFICE. v. n. [ſuffre, French; ſufficio, Latin.] To be
enough 5 to be ſufficient 3 to be equal to the end or purpoſe.
If thou aſk me why, ſuffeth, my reaſons are good. Shakeſp.
A trong and ſucculent moiſture is able, without drawing
help from the earth, to ſuffre the ſprouting of the plant. Bac.
To recount almighty works
What words or tongue of ſeraph can ſuffice,
Or heaſt of man ſuffice to comprehend. Aſhan’, Par. Lo/f.
The indolency we have, ſuffing for our preſent happineſs,
we deſire not to venture the change: being content; and that
is enough. - c Locke.
He !"º in ſuch temperance, as was enough to make the
longeſt life agreeable; and in ſuch a courſe ºf piety, as ſuf-
fººd to make the moſt ſudden death ſo alſo. Pope.
To SUFF 1'cE. v a.
1. To afford; to ſupply.
Thou king of horned floods, whoſe plentedus urn
Sºffices fatneſs to the fruitful corn, -
Shall ſhare my morning ſong and evening vows. Dryden.
tº. *PPeas'd, with winds ſuffºa the ſail;
2. To º canvas ſtrutted with the gale. Dryden.
º let it ſuffre you of all your abominations. Ezek.
*hed corn ſhe did eat and was ſufficed, and left. Ruth.
Let it ſuffice thee that thou know ſtus ha Milton
T When the herd ſuffed, did late repair ppy
}. heaths, and to the foreſt lare. Dryden.
T] * our conqueror left us this our ſtrength,
lat we may ſo ſºff.e his vengeful ire. Milton.
4.
SUFF1 ciency, n.ſ. [ ſuffſance, Fr. from ſiftient.]
1. State of being adequate to the end propoſed.
'Tis all mens office to ſpeak patience
To thoſe that wring under the load of ſorrow;
But no man's virtue nor ſufficiency
To be ſo moral, when he ſhah endure
The like himſelf. Shakeſpeare,
His ſufficiency is ſuch, that he and pbeſtows oſſeſſes, his plenty
being unexhauſted. Boyle,
2. Qualification for any purpoſe.
I am not ſo confident of my own ſufficiency, as not willing.
ly to admit the counſel of others. King Charlº.
The biſhop, perhaps an Iriſhman, being made judge by
that law, of the ſufficiency of the miniſters, may diſliš tº:
Engliſhman as unworthy. Spenſer's Ireland.
Their penſioner De Wit was a miniſter of the greateſt au-
thority and ſufficiency ever known in their ſtate. Temple.
3. Competence; enough.
An elegant ſufficiency, content. Thomſºn.
4. Supply equal to want.
The moſt proper ſubjećts of diſpute, are queſtions not of the
very higheſt importance, nor of the meaneſt kind; but rather
the intermediate queſtions between them: and there is a large
Jufficiency of them in the ſciences. Watt's Improv. of the Miº.
5. It is uſed by Temple for that conceit which makes a man think
himſelf equal to things above him: and is commonly com.
pounded with ſelf.
Sufficiency is a compound of vanity and ignorance. Temple.
SUFF1 cI ENT. adj. [ſuff/unt, Fr. ſufficiens, Latin.]
1. Equal to any end or purpoſe; enough; competent; not deficient,
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. 44at, vi 3+
Heaven yet retains
Number ſuffrient to poſſeſs her realms. Milton.
Man is not ſufficient of himſelf to his own happineſs. Tilt.
It is ſufficient for me, if, by a diſcourſe ſomething out of
the way, I ſhall have given occaſion to others to caſt about
for new diſcoveries. Locłt.
She would ruin me in ſilks, were not the quantity that goes
to a large pin-cuſhion ſufficient to make her a gown and petti-
COat. Addiſon,
Sufficient benefice is what is competent to maintain a man
and his family, and maintain hoſpitality; and likewiſe to pay
and ſatisfy ſuch dues belonging to the biſhop. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Seven months are a ſufficient time to correct vice in a Ya-
hoo. Swift.
2. Qualified for anything by fortune or otherwiſe. -
In ſaying he is a good man, underſtand me, that he is ſuf-
fi, ient. Shakeſpeare's Merchant ºf Venice.
SUFF1'c1 ENTLY. adv. [from ſufficient.] To a ſufficient degree;
enough. -
If religion did poſſeſs fincerely and ſuffiently the heart. of all
men, there would need be no other reſtraint from evil. Hººr.
Seem I to thee ſificiently poſſeſs'd -
Of happineſs? Milº.
All to whom they are propoſed, are by his grace ſuffinſ,
moved to attend and aſſent to them; ſufficiently, but not irre-
ſiſtibly; for if all were irreſiſtibly moved, all wou'd embrace
them, and if none were ſufficiently moved, none would em-
brace them. Rºgers's Sermonſ.
SUFAIS/NCE [French..] Exceſs; plenty. Obſolete.
There him reſts in riotous ſuffſance -
Of all his gladfulneſs and kingly joyance. - *:
To SUFFOCATE. v.a. [ſuffººr, Fr. ſuffice, Latin.] **
choak by excluſion or interception of air.
Let gallows gape for dog, let man go free,
And let not hemp his windpipe ſuff cate.
This chaos, when degree is ſuffºcate, *
Follows the choaking. c º: Trºilus and º:
Air but momentally remains in our bodies, º:
frigerate the heart, which being once º h sº
ſelf-heated again, it ſhould ſuffocate that part, t ha º:
the ſame way it paſſed. º: ſº without
- - - acate an tº... . . a .
pa ſº º diſcontent is apt to ſuffºc Cºller ºf Friendſhip.
All involv’d in ſmoke, the latent foe Thomſºn.
From every cranny ſuffocated falls, The Čt
SUFFOcA"tion, n ſ. [ſuffºcation, Fr. from ſuffºcate.]
of choaking; the ſtate of being choaked. Bacon.
Diſeaſes of ſtoppings and ſuffºcations are dangerous. itive CO-
White conſiſts in an equal mixture of all the º Cheyne,
lours, and black in a ſuffocation of all the rays of light. f *
Muſhrooms are beſt corrected by ving...". º re-
being poiſonous, operate by ſuffocation, in which the ſoon 28
medy is wine or vinegar and ſalt, and º Diet.
oſſible. f 3.
sº. Ative, adj. [from ſºff-cate.] Having the º:
From rain, after great iroſts in the winter, . º Air.
mours, and ſuffºcative catarrhs proceed. Arbut tº
SU'FFRAGAN. m. ſ. [ ſºftagant, Fr. Jiſraganrui,
biſhop conſidered as ſubječt to his ºirs apparitoſ.
Suffragan biſhops ſhall have more than º Paregon.
Becket,
Shake?eart.
|
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U G
S U I
Becket, archbiſhop cf Canterbury, inſolently took upon
him to declare five articles void, in his epiſtle to his ſuffra-
ganj. Hale.
To Su'FFRAGATE. v. n. [ſuffragor, Latin.] To vote with ;
to agree in voice with.
No tradition could univerſally prevail, unleſs there were
ſome common congruity of ſomewhat inherent in nature,
which ſuits and ſuffragates with it, and cloſeth with it. Hale.
Su'FFRAG e. n.ſ. Iſuffrage, Fr. ſuffragium, Latin.] Vote;
voice given in a controverted point.
Noble confederates, thus far is perfeót,
Only your ſuffrages I will expect
At the aſſembly for the chufing of conſuls. Ben. Johnſºn,
They would not abet by their ſuffrages or preſence the de-
ſigns of thoſe innovations. King Charles.
The faireſt of our iſland dare not commit their cauſe againſt
you to the ſuffrage of thoſe who moſt partially adore them.
Addiſon.
Fabius might joy in Scipio, when he ſaw
A beardleſs conſul made againſt the law;
And join his ſºffrage to the votes of Rome. Dryden.
This very variety of ſea and land, hill and dale, is extreme-
ly agreeable, the ancients and moderns giving their ſuffra-
ges unanimouſly herein. J/oodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
Laëtantius and St. Auſtin confirm by their ſuffrage the ob-
ſervation made by the heathen writers. Atterbury.
Suffra'GINous. adj. [ſuffrago, Latin.] Belonging to the
knee joint of beaſts.
In elephants, the bought of the forelegs is not directly back-
ward, but laterally, and ſomewhat inward; but the hough or
ſuffraginals flexure behind, rather outward. Brown.
SUFFUMIGA'TION. m.ſ.. [ſuffumigation, Fr. ſuffamigo, Lat.]
Operation of fumes raiſed by fire.
If the matter be ſo groſs as it yields not to remedies, it may
be attempted by ſuffumigation. Wiſeman's Surgery.
SUFFU'MIGe. n.ſ.. [ſuffumiga, Lat.] A medical fume.
For external means, drying ſuffumiges or ſmoaks are pre-
ſcribed with good ſucceſs; they are uſually compoſed out of
frankincenſe, myrrh, and pitch. Harvey.
To SUFFUSE. v. a. [ſuffuſus, Latin.] To ſpread over with
ſomething expanſible, as with a vapour or a tinéture.
Suſpicions, and fantaſtical ſurmiſe,
And jealouſy ſuffus'd with jaundice in her eyes. Dryden.
To that receſs,
When purple light ſhall next ſuffuſe the ſkies,
With me repair. Pope.
Inſtead of love-enliven'd cheeks,
With flowing rapture bright, dark looks ſucceed,
Suffus’d and glaring with untender fire.
SUFFU'sion. n ſ. [ ſuffuſion, French; from ſuffuſe.]
1. The act of overſpreading with any thing.
2. That which is ſuffuſed or ſpread.
A drop ſerene hath quench'd their orbs,
Or dim ſuffuſion veil’d. Milton.
The diſk of Phoebus, when he climbs on high
Appears at firſt but as a bloodſhot eye ;
And when his chariot downward draws to bed,
His ball is with the ſame ſºff-ſion red. Dryden.
To thoſe that have the jaundice or like ſuffuſion of eyes,
obječts appear of that colour. Ray.
Su G. m. ſ [ſugo, Latin, to ſuck.]
Many have ſticking on them ſugs, or trout-lice, which is
a kind of worm like a clove or pin, with a big head, and
ſticks cloſe to him and ſucks his moiſture. Walton.
SU'GAR. n.ſ. [ſucre, French; ſaccharum, Latin.]
1. The native ſalt of the ſugar-cane, obtained by the expreſſion
and evaporation of its juice. 2 inty.
All the blood of Zelmane's body ſtirred in her, as wine
will do when ſugar is haſtily put into it. Sidney.
Lumps of ſugar loſe themſelves, and twine
Their ſubtile eſſence with the ſoul of wine. Craſhaw.
A grocer in London gave for his rebus a ſugar-loaf ſtand-
ing upon a flat ſteeple. Peacham.
Šaccharum candidum ſhoots into angular figures, by placing
a great many ſlender ſticks a-croſs a veſſel of liquid ſugar.
Grew's Muſeum.
If the child muſt have ſugar-plums when he has a mind,
rather than be out of humour: why, when he is grown up,
muſt he not be ſatisfied too with wine? - Locke.
In a ſugar-baker's drying room, where the air was heated,
fifty fºur degrees beyond that of a human body, a ſparrºw
died in two minutes. Arbuthnot on Air.
A piece of ſome geniculated plant, ſeeming to be part of
a ſugar-cane. - //codward on Foſſils.
2. Anything proverbially ſweet.
Your fair diſcourſe has been as ſugar,
Making the hard way ſweet and delectable.
3. A chymical dry chryſtallization.
Sugar of lead, though made of that inſipid metal, and ſour
Llt of vinegar, has in it a ſweetneſs ſurpaſſing that of com-
mon ſkgar. - 4-yle.
Thomſon.
Shakespeare.
To Su'car. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To impregnate or ſeaſon with ſugar.
- Short thick ſobs
In Panting murmurs, ſtill'd out of her breaſt,
That ever-bubbling ſpring, the ſugara neſt
Ó he jº". tº: lie,
Bathing in ſtreams of liquid melody.
2. To ſweeten.
Thou would'ſt have plung'd thyſelf
In general riot, and never learn'd - -
The icy precepts of reſpect, but followed
The ſugar'd game before thee. Shakeſprare'; Timon of ſihens.
With devotion's viſage,
And pious ačtions we do ſugar o'er
Craſhaw.
The devil himſelf. Shakeſpears.
His gloſing ſire his errand daily ſaid, -
And ſugar'd ſpeeches whiſper'd in mine ear. Fairfax.
Who caſts out threats, no man deceives,
But flatt'ry ſtill in ſugar'd words betrays,
And poiſon in high taſted meats conveys. Denham,
Su'GGARy. adj. [from ſugar..] Sweet; taſting of ſugar.
With the ſugg’ry ſweet thereof allure
Chaſte ladies ears to phantafies impure. Spenſºr.
To SUGGEST. v. a. ſ. ſugger, ſugge/lum, Lat. ſuggerer, Fr.]
1. To hint; to intimate; to infinuate good or ill ; to tell pri-
wately.
Are you not aſham'd
What ſpirit ſuggeſts this imagination ? Shakeſpeare,
I could never have ſuffered greater calamities, by denying
to ſign that juſtice my conſcience ſuggeſted to me. K. Charles.
Theſe Romiſh caſuiſts ſpeak peace to the conſciences of
men, by ſuggeſting ſomething to them, which ſhall ſatisfy
their minds notwithſtanding a known, ačtual, avowed con-
tinuance of their ſins. South's Sermons.
Some ideas make themſelves way, and are ſuggeſted to the
mind by all the ways of ſenſation and reflexion. Locke.
Refle&amp;t upon the different ſtate of the mind in thinking,
which thoſe inſtances of attention, reverie and dreaming natu-
rally enough ſuggeſ?. Locke.
Search for ſome thoughts thy own ſuggeſting mind,
And others dićtated by heav'nly pow'r,
Shall riſe ſpontaneous. Pope's Odyſſey.
Thomſºn.
This the feeling heart
Wou'd naturally ſuggeſt.
2. To ſeduce ; to draw to ill by inſinuation. Out of uſe.
When devils will their blackeſt ſins put on,
They do ſuggeſt at firſt with heav'nly ſhows. Shakeſpeare.
Knowing that tender youth is ſoon ſuggeſted,
I nightly lodge her in an upper tower.
3. To inform ſecretly. Out of uſe.
We muſt ſuggeſ; the people, in what hatred
He ſtill hath held them, that tos pow'r he would
Have made them mules. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Sugge'stion. n.ſ. [[ſuggeſtion, Fr. from ſuggeſt.] Private
hint; intimation; inſinuation; ſecret notification. -
It allayeth all baſe and earthly cogitations, baniſheth and
driveth away thoſe evil ſecret ſuggeſtions which our inviſible
enemy is always apt to miniſter. Hooker.
Í met lord Bigot and lord Saliſbury,
And other more going to ſeek the grave .
Of Arthur, who, they ſay, is kill'd to night -
On your ſuggeſtion. Shakeſpeare's King john.
He was a man
Of an unbounded ſtomach, ever ranking
Himſelf with princes: one that by ſuggeſtion
Tied all the kingdom. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
The native and untaught ſuggeſtions, of inquiſitive º:
0cké-
Another way is letting the mind, upon theJuggeſtion of any
new notion, run after ſimilies. Locke.
To SU'GGILATE. v. a. [ſuggillº, Latin.] To beat black and
blue; to make livid by a bruiſe. - -
The head of the 6s humeri was bruiſed, and remained
ſuggilated long after. I/iſman's Surgerà
Súciº ºft”ffidium, Latin.] Self-murder; the horri
crime of deſtroying one's ſelf. S
Child of deſpair, and ſuicide my name: - - "...#
To be cut off by the ſword of injured friendſhip is the moſ
dreadful of all deaths, next to ſuicide. filth “...
Suſillage. n.ſ. Iſaiage, French.] Pra" of filth. ſo-
ete. - - -
l When they have choſen the plot, and laid out the limits
of the work, ſome Italians dig wells and ciſterns, and other
conveyances for the ſuillage of the houſe. //ºttor,
Su, No. n.ſ. [This word ſeems tº sº"; from ſuer, to ſweat,
French; it is perhaps peculiar to Bacon.] The act of ſoaking
through any thing.
Note the percolation or.
wood; for verjuice of itſelf wou
the wood.
Shakeſpeare.
lation or ſuing of the verjuice through the
ld never have paſſed through
Ba.on.
T1-
25 Q. SUIT.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U I
S U I
:
ite, French J
*...ſ.º. of things correſpondent one to the other.
I. we, ere the day, two ſuits of armour fought,
which borne before him, i. his . he brought. Dryd.
ade one part to anſwer another.
2. Gº". of §: general's cut, and a horrid fuit of the
camp will do among foamingbottles and ale-waſh'd wits is won-
derful. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Him all repute
For his device in handſoming a ſuit; -
To judge of lace, pink, panes, print, cut and plait,
Of all the court to have the beſt conceit. - Donne.
His majeſty was ſupplied with three thouſandſuits of cloaths,
with good proportions of ſhoes and ſtockings. Clarendon.
3. Conſecution; ſeries; regular order. . . -
Every five and thirty years the ſame kind and ſuite of wea-
thers comes about again; as great froſt, great wet, great
droughts, warm winters, ſummers with little heat; and they
call it the prime. Bacon.
4. Out of §. Having no correſpondence. A metaphor, I
ſe, from cards.
ºrrº. this for me; one out of ſuits with fortune,
That would give more, but that her handlacks means. Shakespeare
5. [Suite, French-l Retinue; company. Obſolete.
Plexirtus's ill-led life, and worſe gotten honour, ſhould have
tumbled together to deſtruction, had there not come in Ty-
deus and Telenor, with fifty in their ſuite to his defence. Sidney.
6. [From T. Sue.] A petition; an addreſs of entreaty.
Mine ears againſt your ſuits are ſtronger than
Your gates againſt my force. Shakeſpeare.
She gallops o'er a courtier's noſe;
And then dreams be of ſmelling out a ſuit. Shakeſpeare.
Had I a ſuit to Mr.Shallow, I would humour his men with
the imputation of being near their maſter. Shakeſpeare.
Many ſhall make ſuit unto thee. job xi. 19.
My mind, neither with pride's itch, nor yet hath been
Poiſon'd with love to ſee or to be ſeen;
I had no ſuit there, nor new ſuit to ſhew :
Yet went to court. Donnu.
7. Courtſhip.
He that hath the ſteerage of my courſe,
Direét my ſuit. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
Their determinations are to return to their home and to
trouble you with no more ſuit, unleſs you may be won by
ſome other ſort than your father's impoſition. Skałeſpeare.
8. In Spenſer it ſeems to ſignify purſuit; proſecution.
High amongſt all knights haſt hungthy ſhield,
Thenceforth the ſuit of earthly conqueſt ſhoone,
And waſh thy hands from guilt of bloody field: Spenſer.
9. [In law.] Suit is ſometimes put for the inſtance of a cauſe,
and ſometimes for the cauſe itſelf deduced injudgment. Ayliff.
All that had any ſuits in law came unto them. Suſanna.
Wars are ſuits of appeal to the tribunal of God's juſtice,
where there are no ſuperiors on earth to determine the cauſe.
Bacon's IWar with Spain.
Involve not thyſelf in the ſuits and parties of great perſon-
ages. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
To Alibech alone refer yourſuit,
And let his ſentence finiſh your diſpute. Dryden.
John Bull was flattered by the lawyers that his ſuit would
not laſt above a year, and that before that time he would be
in quiet poſſeſſion of his buſineſs. Arbuthnot.
To Suit. v. a... [from the noun.]
1. To fit; to adapt to ſ mething elſe.
Suit the ağion to the word, the word to the aqion, with
this ſpecial obſervance, that you o'erſtep not the modeſty of
nature. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
The matter and manner of their tales, and of their telling,
are ſo ſuited to their different educations and humours, that
each would be improper in any other. Dryden.
2. To be fitted to; to become.
Compute the gains of his ungovern'd zeal,
Ill ſuits his cloth the praiſe of railing well. Dryden.
Her purple habit ſits with ſuch a grace
On her ſmooth ſhoulders, and ſo ſuits her face. Dryden.
If different ſects ſhould give us a liſt of thoſe innate practi-
ºal principles, they would ſet down only ſuch as ſuited their
diſtinét hypotheſes. Locke.
* ..., Raiſe her notes to that ſublime degree,
...Which ſuits a ſong of piety and thee. Prior.
3. To dreſs; to clothe.
- Such a Sebaſtian was my brother too,
So went he ſuited to his watry tomb:
lf 'Pirits can aſſume both form and ſuit,
You come to fright us. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Theſe Be better ſuited;
I or’v Weeds are memories of thoſe misfortunes:
Prythee put them ; to worſer hours.
'll diſrobe me
Of theſe Italian weeds it mu
ês do's a Briton º,” ſuit myſelf
Shakeſpeare.
Shakespeare eare's Cymbeline.
To Suit. v. n. To agree; to accord.
The one intenſe, the other ſtill remiſs,
Cannot well ſuit with either; but ſoon prove
Tedious alike. - - Miltºn
The place itſelf was ſiting to his care, -
Uncouth and ſavage as the cruel fair. Dryden
Pity does with a noble nature /u.t. Dr.
Conſtraint does ill with love and beauty ſuit. Dryden
. This he ſays, becauſe it ſuits with his hypotheſis, butpos
it not.
Give me not an office Locłe.
That ſuit with me ſo ill; thou know'ſt my temper. Aliſ.
Sui'Table. adj. [from ſuit..] Fitting; according with; agree.
able to. o
Through all thoſe miſeries, in both there appeared a kind
of nobleneſs not ſuitable to that affliction. Sidney.
What he did purpoſe, it was the pleaſure of God that S.
lomon his ſon ſhould perform, in manner ſuitable to their pre-
ſent and ancient ſtate. Hooker.
To ſolemn acts of royalty and juſtice, their ſuitab. o.
naments are a beauty; are they only in religion a ſtain; H, i.
It is very ſuitable to the principles of the Roman Church;
for why ſhould not their ſcience as well as ſervice be in an
unknown tongue 2 Tillºtſºn.
As the bleſſings of God upon his honeſt induſtry had been
great, ſo he was not without intentions of making fuitable re-
turns in acts of charity. Atterbury.
Expreſſion is the dreſs of thought, and ſtill
Appears more decent, as more ſuitable;
A vile conceit in pompous words expreſs'd,
Is like a clown in regal purple dreſs'd. Pºpe.
SuitableNess. n.ſ.. [from ſuitable.] Fitneſs; agreeablendſ.
In words and ſtyles, ſuitableneſ, makes them acceptable and
effective. Glanville,
With ordinary minds, it is the Juitableneſ, not the evi-
dence of a truth that makes it to be yielded to; and it is
ſeldom that any thing practically convinces a man that does
not pleaſe him firſt. South's Sermoni.
He creates thoſe ſympathies and ſuitableneſſes of nature that
are the foundation of all true friendſhip, and by his providence
brings perſons ſo affected together. South's Sermºni.
Conſider the laws themſelves, and their futallenſ or un-
ſuitableneſs to thoſe to whom they are given. Tilotſºn.
SU1 Tably, adv. [from ſuitable.] Agreeably; according to.
Whoſoever ſpeaks upon a certain occaſion may take any
text ſuitable thereto; and ought to ſpeak ſuitably to that text.
South's Sermons.
Some rank deity, whoſe filthy face
We ſuitably o'er ſtinking ſtables place. Dryden;
Suit Covenant. [In law.] Is where the anceſtor of one man
has covenanted with the anceſtor of another to ſue at his;
an ty.
Suit Court. [In law.] Is the court in which tenants owe at-
tendance to their lord. Bailey,
Suit Service. [In law.] Attendance which tenants owe to the
court of their lord. Bail).
§: }, ſ (from ſuit)
1. One that ſues; a petitioner; a ſupplicant. -- - -
As humility is in ſuiters a decent virtue, ſo the teſtification
thereof, by ſuch effectual acknowledgments, not only argueh
a ſound apprehenſion of his ſupereminent glory and miº",
before whom we ſtand, but putteth alſo into his hands a kind
of pledge or bond for ſecurity againſt our unthankfulneſs. Hº.
She hath been a ſuitor to me for her brother,
Cut off by courſe of juſtice. Shakespeare Meaſ, fºr Meaſure.
My piteous ſoul began the wretchedneſs
Of ſuitors at court to mourn, Donn.
Not only bind thine own hands, but bind the hand of ſuit-
ors alſo from offering. bvian,
Yet their port
Not of mean ſuitors; nor important leſs. -
Seem'd their petition, than when the ancient pair,
Deucalion and chaſte Pyrrha, to reſtore -
The race of mankind drown'd, before the ſhrine .
Of Themis ſtood devout. Mººn's Paradiſ, Lºft.
I challenge nothing; ham
But I'm an humbleſuitor for theſe priſoners. P. -
My lord, I come an humble uitar to you. wºut.
2. A woer; one who courts a miſtreſs.
I would I could find in my heart that
for truly I love none.
". dear happineſs to women! they would elſe have been
troubled with a pernicious ſuitor. - *::::
He paſſed a year at Goodby under the counſels of Aiº,
ther, and then became a ſuitºr at London tº ſir *::::: ham.
daughter. Iſotton's Life of the Duke ºf Bucting
By many ſuitor; ſought, ſhe mocks their pains, Dryden:
And ſtill her vow'd virginity maintains. }
He drew his ſeat, familiar, to her ſide,
Far from the ſuitor train, a brutal crowd.
I had not a hardheart;
Pope'e Odſºr.
Suiſ rRESS.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U L
S' U M
Suit Ress. n.f. [from ſuiter.] A female ſupplicant.
'Twere pity
That could refuſe a boon to ſuch a ſuitreſs;
… Y' have got a noble friend to be your advocate.
Su'lcAted. adj. [ſulcus, Latin.] Furrowed.
All are much chopped and ſulcated by their having lain ex-
Rowe,
ºr poſed on the top of the clay to the weather, and to the ero-
*** ſion of the vitriolick matter mixed amongſt the clay.
* : JWoodward.
Laº SULL. n A plough. Ainſworth.
SüTišN aii. (of this word the etymology is obſcuréj
* . 1. Gloomtly angry; ſluggiſhly diſcontented.
º Wilmot continued ſtill ſullen and perverſe, and every day
- grew more inſolent. Clarendon.
ºt. A man in a jail is ſullen and out of humour at his firſt com-
t ing in. L’Eſtrange.
Forc’d by my pride, I my concern ſuppreſs'd ;
Pretended drowſineſs, and wiſh of reſt; }
And ſullen I forſook th’ imperfect feaſt. Prior.
If we ſit down ſullen and inačtive, in expectation that God
ſhould do all, we ſhall find ourſelves miſerably deceived. Rog.
2. Miſchievous ; malignant.
Such ſullen planets at my birth did ſhine,
They threaten every fortune mixt with mine.
º The ſullen fiend her founding wings diſplay'd,
Unwilling left the night, and ſought the nether ſhade. Dryd.
3. Intractable; obſtinate.
Things are as fullen as we are, and will be what they are,
whatever we think of them. Tillotſon's Sermons.
4. Gloomy; dark; cloudy ; diſmal.
!. Why are thine eyes fixt to the ſillen earth,
Dryden.
Night with her ſullen wings to double ſhade,
The deſart fowls in their clay neſts were couch'd,
And now wild beaſts came forth the woods to roam. Milt.
A glimpſe of moon-ſhine, ſtreak'd with red;
| A ſhuffled, ſullen, and uncertain light,
T That dances through the clouds, and ſhuts again. Dryden.
No cheerful breeze this fullen region knows;
The dreaded Eaſt is all the wind that blows. Pope.
5. Heavy; dull; ſorrowful.
Be thou the trumpet of our wrath,
And ſullen preſage of your own decay. Shakeſ K. john.
Su'll ENLY. adv. [from ſullen.] Gloomily; malignantly; in-
tractably.
To ſay they are framed without the aſſiſtance of ſome prin-
ciple that has wiſdom in it, and that they come to paſs from
- ". chance, is ſullenly to aſſert a thing becauſe we will aſſert it.
More's Antidºte againſt Atheiſm.
X: He in chains demanded more -
*::::: Than he impos'd in victory before:
…" He ſullenly reply'd, he could not make
º: T he•e offers now. Dryden's Indian Emperor.
:::::: The gen'ral mends his weary pace,
º: And fulleni, to his revenge he ſails;
§: ..." So glides ſome trodden ſerpent on the graſs,
º And long behind his wounded volume trails. Dryden.
Su'll E N N Ess. m. ſ. [from ſullen.] Gloomineſs; moroſeneſs;
ſluggiſh anger; malignity; intračtability.
Speech being as rare as precious, her ſilence without ſullen-
neſ, her modeſty without affectation, and her ſhameſaſtneſs
without ignorance. Sidney.
To fit my ſulenneſs,
He to another key his ſtile doth dreſs. Donne.
In thoſe vernal ſeaſons, when the air is calm and pleaſant,
it were an injury and ſu'lenn'ſ againſt nature not to go out,
and ſee her riches. 4Milton.
Quit not the world out of any hypocriſy, ſullenneſ, or
ſuperſtition, but out of a ſincere love of true knowledge and
virtue. Mare.
With theſe comforts about me, and ſullenn'ſ enough to uſe
no remedy, monſieur Zulichem came to ſee me. Temple.
Su'll lens. n.ſ. [Without ſingular..] Moroſe temper; gloomi-
neſs of mind. A burleſque word.
Let them die that age, and ſu'lens have. Shakeſpeare.
Su'lliage. n.ſ [from July.] Pollution; filth; ſtain of dirt;
foulneſs. -
Require it to make ſome reſtitution to his neighbour for
what it has detraćted from it, by wiping off that ſulliage it has
caſt upon his fame. Government of the Tongue.
Calumniate ſtoutly; for though we wipe away with never
ſo much care the dirt thrown at us, there will be left ſome ſºl-
º liage behind. Decay of Piety.
To SU'LLY. v. a. [ſouiller, French..] To ſoil; to tarniſh; to
dirt; to ſpot.
Silvering will fully and canker more than gilding.
The falling temples which the gods provoke,
And ſtatues ſu'y'd yet with ſacrilegious ſmoke.
He's dead, whoſe love had ſully'd all your reign,
And made you empreſs of the world in vain.
Lab'ring years ſhall weep their deſtin'd race,
Charg'd with ill omens, fully'd with diſgrace.
Bacon.
Dryden. .
Prior.
Gazing at that which ſeems to dim thy fight? Shakespeare H.VI.
Rºſcommon. -
let there be no ſpots to ſilly the brightneſs of this ſolem-
nity. Atterbury's Sermons,
Ye walkers too, that youthful colours wear,
Three ſullying trades avoid with equal care;
The little chimney-ſweeper ſkulks along,
And marks with ſooty ſtains the heedleſs throng. Gay,
SU'LLY. m.ſ. (from the verb.] Soil; tarniſh; ſpot.
You laying theſe light ſullies on my ſon,
. As 'twere a thing a little ſoil'd i' th' working. Shakſ).
A noble and triumphant merit breaks through little ſpots and
ſullies in his reputation. Addison's Spectator.
SU'LPHUR. n.ſ. (Latin.]. Brimſtone.
In his womb was hid metallick ore,
The work of ſulphur. Milion.
Sulphur is produced by incorporating an oily or bituminous
matter with the foſſil and ſalt. JWoodward.
Thence nitre, ſulphur, and the fiery ſteam
Of fat bitumen. Thomſºn.
SULPHUREOUS. ladj. Iſiphureus, Latin.] Made of brim-
SU’ſ, PHUROUS. } ſtone; having the qualities of brimſtone;
containing ſulphur; impregnated with ſulphur.
- My hour is almoſt come,
When I to ſulphurous and tormenting flames
Muſt render up myſelf. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Dart and javelin, ſtones and ſulphurous fire. Milton.
Is not the ſtrength and vigour of the ačtion between light
and ſulphureous bodies, obſerved above, one reaſon why ſul-
phureous bodies take fire more readily, and burn more vehe-
mently than other bodies do? Newton's Opt.
The fury heard, while on Cocytus' brink,
Her ſnakes unty'd ſulphureous waters drink. Pope.
No ſulphureous glooms
Swell'd in the ſky, and ſent the lightning forth. 7hºmſon,
Sulphu'Recuss Ess. n.ſ.. [from ſulphureaus.] The ſtate of
being ſulphureous.
Su'lphur wort. n.ſ. The ſame with HogsfeNEL.
Su'lphury. adj. [from ſulthur.], Partaking of ſulphur.
* SULTAN. n.J. [Arabick.] The Turkiſh emperour.
By this ſcimitar,
That won three fields of ſultan Solyman. Shakespeare.
Su'lt Ana. Ün. ſ. [from ſultan.] The queen of an Eaſtern
SU'LTANFss. } emperour.
Turn the ſultana's chambermaid. Cleaveland.
Lay the tow'ring ſultaneſ; aſide. Irene.
Su'lt ANRY. n.ſ.. [from ſultan.] An Eaſtern empire.
I affirm the ſame of the ſultanry of the Mamalukes, where
ſlaves, bought for money, and of unknown deſcent, reigned
over families of freemen. Bacon.
Su’ltRINess. n.ſ.. [from ſultry.] The ſtate of being ſultry;
cloſe and cloudy heat.
SU'LTRY. adj. [This is imagined by Skinner to be corrupted
from ſulphury, or ſweltry.] Hot without ventilation; hot
and cloſe; hot and cloudy.
It is very ſultry and hot. Shakespeare Hamlet.
The ſultry breath
Of tainted air had cloy'd the jaws of death.
Such as born beneath the burning ſky,
And ſultry ſun betwixt the tropicks lie.
Our foe advances on us,
And envies us even Lybia's ſalty deſarts. Addison's Cato.
Then would ſultry heats and a burning air have ſcorched
and chapped the earth, and galled the animal tribes in houſes
or dens. Cheyne.
SUM. m. ſ. [ ſumma, Latin ; ſomme, French.]
1. The whole of anything; many particulars aggregated to a total.
We may as well conclude ſo of every ſentence, as of the
whole ſum and body thereof. Hooker.
How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great
is the ſum of them. P/. cxxxix. 17.
Th' Almighty Father, where he ſits
Shrin'd in his ſanctuary of heav'n ſecure,
Conſulting on the ſum of things, foreſeen
Sands.
Dryden's AFn.
This tumult, and permitted all, advis'd. Miltºn.
Such and no leſs is he, on whom depends
The ſum of things. Dryden,
Weighing the ſum of things with wiſe forccaſt,
Solicitous of publick good. Ph.ſipi.
2. Quantity of money.
I did ſend to you
For certain ſums of gold, which you deny'd me. Shakeſp.
Britain, once deſpis'd, can raiſe
As ample ſums as Rome in Caeſar's days. C. Arłuthnot.
3. [Somme, Fr.] Compendium; abridgment; the whole abſtraćted.
This, in effect, is the ſun and ſubſtance of that which they
bring by way of oppoſition againſt thoſe orders, which we
have common with the church of Rome. Hooker.
They repleniſhed the hearts of the neareſt unto them with
words of memorable conſolation, ſtrengthened men in the
fear of God, gave them wholſome inſtructions of life, and
confirmed them in true religion: in fun, they taught the
world no leſs virtuouſly how to die, than they had done before
how to live. Hooker.
This<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U M
S U M
4. The am
This having learn'd, thou haſt attain'd the ſum a • *
Of wiſdom. Milton.
In ſºm, no man can have a greater veneration for Chaucer
than myſelf. - - Dryden.
Thy ſum of duty let two words contain; -
Prior.
ble, and be juſt. -
; º th. Goſpel, conſidered as a law, preſcribes every
yiºto our conduct, and forbids every fin. Rogers.
ount; the reſult of reaſoning or computation.
l to the readers, whether the ſum of what I have ſaid
ca
I app Tillaſon.
be not this.
5. Height; completion.
*Thus I have told thee all my ſtate, and brought
My ſtory to the ſum of earthly bliſs,
tº. { º Milt. Paradiſe Loſt.
In ſaying ay or no, the very ſafety of our country, and the
am of our well-being, lies. L'E/trange.
To SuM. v. a. [ſºmmer, French; from the noun.]
1. To compute; to collect particulars into a total; to caſt up.
It has up emphatical.
You caſt th' event of war,
And ſumm'd th’ account of chance. Shakespeare Henry IV.
The high prieſt may ſum the filver brought in. 2 King xxii.
In fickneſs time will ſeem longer without a glock than with
it; for the mind doth value every moment, and then the hour
doth rather ſum up the moments than divide the day. Bacon.
He that would reckon up all the accidents preferments de-
pend upon, may as well undertake to count the ſands, or ſum
up infinity. South.
2. To compriſe; to comprehend ; to colle&amp;t into a narrow
compaſs.
So lovely fair!
That what ſeem'd fair in all the world, ſeem'd now
Mean, or in her ſumm'd up, in her contain'd. Milton.
To conclude, by ſumming up what I would ſay concerning
what I have, and what I have not been, in the following pa-
per I ſhall not deny that I pretended not to write an accurate
treatiſe of colours, but an occaſional eſſay. Boyle.
Go to the ant, thou ſluggard, in few words ſums up the
moral of this fable. - L’Eſtrange.
This Atlas muſt our ſinking ſtate uphold;
In council cool, but in performance bold:
He ſums their virtues in himſelf alone,
And adds the greateſt, of a loyal ſon. Dryden's Aurengz.
A fine evidence ſumm'd up among you! Dryden.
4. [In falconry..] To have feathers full grown.
With proſperous wing full ſumm'd. AMilton.
SU/MA ch-TRE e. n.ſ.. [ſumach, French.]
The flower conſiſts of five leaves in a circular order, in form
of a roſe; from whoſe flower-cup riſes the pointal, which after-
ward becomes a veſſel, containing one ſeed: the flowers grow
in bunches, and the leaves either winged or have three lobes.
The flowers are uſed in dying, and the branches for tanning,
in America. Miller.
SU'MLEss; adj. [from ſum | Not to be computed.
Make his chronicle as rich with prize,
As is the ouzy bottom of the ſea
With ſunken wreck and ſumleſ; treaſuries. Shakesp Hºn. V.
A ſumleſs journey of incorporeal ſpeed. Milton.
Above, beneath, around the palace ſhines,
The ſum'ſ treaſure of exhauſed mines. Pope.
Su'MMARILY, adv. [from ſummary..] Briefly; the ſhorteſt way.
The decalogue of Moſes declareth ſummarily thoſe things
which we ought to do; the prayer of our Lord, whatſoever
we ſhould requeſt or deſire. Hooker.
While we labour for theſe demonſtrations out of Scripture,
and do ſummarily declare the things which many ways have
been ſpoken be contented quietly to hear, and do not think
my ſpeech tedious. Hooker.
When the parties proceed fummarily, and they chuſe the
ordinary way of proceeding, the cauſe is made plenary. Ayl.
SUMMARy. adj. [ſºmmaire, French; from ſum.] Short; brief;
compendious.
The judge
Directed then to mind their brief,
Nor ſpend their time to ſhew their reading,
She'd have a ſummary proceeding. Swift.
SU'M MARY. m.ſ.. [from the adj] Compendium; abridgment.
We are enforc'd from our moſt quiet ſphere C
By the rough torrent of occaſion;
And have the ſummary of all our griefs,
y hen time ſhall ſervé, to ſhew in articles. Shakespeare H. IV.
n that comprehenſive ſummary of our duty to God, there is
no expreſs -
Preſs mention thereof. Rºgers.
º }º. n.ſ. trumen, Saxon; ſºmer, Dutch.]
• I ſle º " which the ſun arrives at the hither ſolſtice.
And *times hath the brighteſt day a cloud;
* after Summer, evermore ſucceeds
The barren Winter with his nipping cold. Shakespeare II. VI.
And Can't ſuch things be,
*" i.; us like a Summer's cloud
*hout our ſpecial wonder; &gt;
I
Shakespeare . Mac'eth.
Two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred bunches of
raiſins, and an hundred of Sºmmer fruits. 2 Sa. xv.
He was ſitting in a Sammer parlour. judg. iii. 20.
In all the liveries deck'd of Summer's pride. Ali.
They marl and ſow it with wheat, giving it a Summer fill
lowing firſt, and next year ſow it with peaſe. 4/4 timer,
Dry weather is beſt for moſt Summer corn. 4'artimer.
The dazzling roofs,
Reſplendent as the blaze of Summer noon,
Or the pale radiance of the midnight moon. Pºpe.
Child of the fun,
See ſultry Summer comes. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. [T, abs ſummaria. ] The principal beam of a floor.
Oak, and the like true hearty timber, may be better truſted
in croſs and tranſverſe works for juniºners, or girders, or bind-
ing beams. - - Wai, i.
Then enter'd ſin, and with that ſycamore,
Whoſe leaves firſt ſhelter'd man from drought and dew,
Working and winding ſlily evermore,
The inward walls and ſummers cleft and tore;
But grace ſhor'd theſe, and cut that as it grew. Hariat.
To SU(MMER. v. n. [from the noun..] To paſs the Summer.
The fowls ſhall ſummer upon them, and all the beaſts ſhall
winter upon them. Iſ xviii. 6.
To Su’M ºr R. v. a. To keep warm.
Maids well ſummer'd, and warm kept, are like flies at Bar.
tholomew-tide, blind, though they have their eyes. Shake?,
Su'MMER House. m. ſ. [from Summer and houſe..] An apart-
ment in a garden uſed in the Summer.
I'd rather live
With cheeſe and garlick, in a windmill, far,
Than feed on cates, and have him talk to me,
In any ſummerhouſe in Chriſtendom. Shakespeare Henry IV.
With here a fountain, never to be play'd,
And there a ſummerhouſe, that knows no ſhade. Pºpe.
There is ſo much virtue in eight volumes of Spectators, ſuch
a reverence of things ſacred, ſo many valuable remarks for
our condućt in life, that they are not improper to lie in par-
lours or ſummerhouſes, to entertain our thoughts in any mo-
ments of leiſure. lſ atts.
SU'MMERsault. }": [ſºubreſault, French. Some ſet is a
.SU'MMER set. corruption.] A high leap in which the
heels are thrown over the head.
Some do the ſummerſault,
And o'er the bar like tumblers vault. Hudibrar.
Frogs are obſerved to uſe divers ſummerſault. IWaltºn.
The treaſurer cuts a caper on the ſtrait rope: I have ſeen
him do the ſummerſet upon a trencher fixed on the rope, which
is nothicker than a common packthread. Gulliver's Travel.
SU'MMIT. n.ſ. [ſummitas, Lat..] The top; the utmoſt height.
Have I fall’n or no
From the dread ſummit of this chalky bourn!
Look up a-height, the ſhrill-gorg'd lark ſo far . .
Cannot be ſeen or heard. Shakeſ King Lear.
AFtna's heat, that makes the ſummit glow,
Enriches all the vales below.
To SUMMON. v. a. [ſummonzo, Latin.] -
1. To call with authority; to admoniſh to appear; to cite.
Cateſby, ſound lord Haſtings,
And ſummon him to-morrow to the Tower. Shakespeare R.T.
The courſe of method ſummoneth me to diſcourſe of the in-
habitants. Carew's Survey ºf Corºl
The tirſan is aſſiſted by the governour of the city, where
the feaſt is celebrated, and all the perſons of both ſexes “
ſummoned to attend. Haº.
Rely on what thou haſt of virtue, ſummon all. Miltºn,
Nor trumpets ſummon him to war,
Nor drums diſturb his morning ſleep.
Love, duty, ſafety, ſummon us away;
'Tis nature's voice, and nature we obey. -
2. To excite; to call up; to raiſe. With up emphatical.
When the blaſt of war blows in our ears, W
Stiffen the ſinews, ſummon up the blood. Shai'ſ Henry .
SU'MM one R. n.ſ.. [from ſummon.] One who cites; *"
ſummons.
Cloſe pent-up guilts
Rive your concealing continents, and aſk ing Lear
Theſe dreadful ſummoners grace. Shaiſ. King º
SU's Moss. n.ſ. [from the verb.] A call of authority; *"
nition to appear ; citation.
What are you ? d wh ſwer
Your name, your uality, and why you an wer ...
This º 2 Shakespeare King º
He ſent to ſummon the ſeditious, and to offer *; ºt
neither ſtºnmºn: nor pardon was any thing regarde - ayw.
The ſons of light high
Haſted, reſorting to the ſummons high, -
And took their ſeats. J º, Paradiſ, Iº.
Strike your ſails at ſummons, or prepare - Dryden.
To prove the laſt extremitics of war. - A i.
SU'MP'ſ ER. m. ſ. [ ſºmmier, French; ſomaro, Italian.]
that carries the coaths or furniture. Return
iſ
Swift,
Dr} den.
Pºpe.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U N
S U N
º
*
º
Return with her 1
Perſuade me rather to be a ſlave and ſumpter
To this deteſted groom. Shakespeare King Lear.
With full force his deadly bow he bent,
And feather'd fates among the mules and ſumpters ſent. Dry.
Two ſumpter mules, bred of large Flaggers mares.
Martimºr's Hºſandry.
Su'MPTIon. n.ſ.. [from ſumptus, Latin.] The act of taking.
The ſumption of the myſteries does all in a capable ſub-
jećt. Taylor.
SU’MPTU ARY. adj. [ſumptuarius, Latin.] Relating to ex-
pence; regulating the coſt of life.
To remove that material cauſe of ſedition, which is want
and poverty in the eſtate, ſerveth the opening and well
balancing of trade, the baniſhing of idleneſs, the repreſfing of
waſte and exceſs by ſumptuary laws. Bacon.
So MPTUo's IT Y. m. ſ. [from ſumptuows.] Expenſiveaeſs; coſt-
lineſs.
He added ſumptuºſity, invented jewels of gold and flone, and
ſome engines for the war. Raleigh.
SU'MPTUOUS. adj. [ſumptuoſus, from ſºptus, Lat.] Coſt-
ly; expenſive; ſplendid.
We ſee how moſt Chriſtians ſtood then affected, how jov-
ful they were to behold the ſumptuous ſtatelineſs of houſes
built unto God’s glory. Hooker.
We are too magnificent and ſumptuous in our tables and
attendance. - F. Atterbury.
SU'Mptuously, adv. [from ſumptuous.] Expenſively; with
great coſt.
This monument five hundred years hath ſtood,
Which I have ſumptuouſly re-edified, Shakespeare. Titus Andronicus.
Ethelwold, biſhop of Wincheſter, in a famine, ſold all the
rich veſſels and ornaments of the church, to relieve the poor
with bread; and ſaid, there was no reaſon that the dead tem-
ples of God ſhould be ſumptuºuſly furniſhed, and the living
temples ſuffer penury. Bacon’s Apophthegm.
A good employment will make you live tolerably in Lon-
don, or ſumptuouſly here. Swift.
SU's Pruousness. n.ſ. [ from ſumptuºus. J Expenſiveneſs;
coſtlineſs.
I will not fall out with thoſe that can reconcile ſumptuºuſ-
reſs and charity. Boyle.
SUN. m. ſ. [ ſunny, Gothick; runna, runne, Saxon; fºn, Dut.]
1. The luminary that makes the day.
Doth beauty keep which never ſun can burn,
Nor ſtorms do turn ? Sidney.
Bid her ſteal into the pleached bow'r,
Where honeyſuckles, ripen'd by the ſun,
Forbid the ſun to enter. Shakeſpeare.
Though there be but one ſºn exiſting in the world, yet the
idea of it being abſtraćted, ſo that more ſubſtances might each.
agree in it, it is as much a fort as if there were as many ſuns
as there are ſtars. Lºcke.
2. A ſunny place; a place eminently warmed by the ſun.
This place has choice of ſun and ſhade.
3. Anything eminently ſplendid.
I will never conſent to put out the ſun of ſovereignty to
poſterity, and all ſucceeding kings. King Charles.
4. Under the SUN. In this world. A proverbial expreſſion.
There is no new thing under the ſum. Eccl. i. 9.
To SUN. v. a. [from the noun...] To inſolate; to expoſe to the
ſun; to warm in the fun.
The cry to ſhady delve him brought at laſt,
Where Mammon earſt did ſun his treaſury. Fairy Queen.
What aim'ſt thou at ; delicious fare;
Dryden's Perſ.
Milton.
And then to ſºn thyſelf in open air.
SU'N BEAM. m. ſ. [ſiºn and beam.] Ray of the ſun.
The Roman eagle, wing'd
From the ſpungy South to this part of the Weſt,
Vaniſh’d in the ſunbeams. Shakespeare . Cymbeline.
Gliding through the ev'n
On a junbeam. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
There was a God, a being diſtinét from this viſible world;
and this was a truth wrote with a ſunbeam, legible to all man-
kind, and received by univerſal conſent. South.
SU'N BEAT. part. adj. [ſun and beat..] Shone on by the ſun.
Its length runs level with th' Atlantic main,
And wearies fruitful Nilus to convey
His ſunbeat waters by ſo long a way. Dryden's juv. Sat.
SU'N BR 16 HT. adj. [ſun and bright.] Reſembling the ſun in
brightneſs.
Gathering up himſelf out of the mire,
With his uneven wings did fiercely fall
Upon his ſunbright ſhield.
Now would I have thee to my tutor:
How and which way I may beſtow myſelf,
Fairy Queen.
To be regarded in her ſunbright eye. Shakespeare.
High in the midſt, exalted as a God,
Th' apoſtate in his ſunbright chariot fat,
Idol of majeſty divine inclos'd -
With flaming cherubims, and golden ſhields. Aſiſton,
SUN hu'ſ NIN c. n.ſ.. [ſiºn and burning.] The effººt of the ſun
upon the face.
If thou can'ſ love a fellow of this temper, Kate, whoſe
face is not worth ſunburning, let thine eye be thy cook. Shakespeare .
The heat of the ſun may darken the colour of the ſkin,
which we call ſunburning. 1, y!e.
Suº Pu R ST. participial adj. [ſiºn and burnt.] Tanned; diſ-
coloured by the ſun.
Where ſuch radiant lights have ſhone,
No wonder if her cheeks be grown
Sunburnt with luſtre of her own.
Cleaveſand. !
Sunburnt and ſwarthy though ſhe be,
She'll fire for Winter-nights provide. Dryden.
How many nations of the ſunburnt ſoil
Does Niger bleſs how many drink the Nile? Blacºre.
One of them, older and more ſunburnt than the reſt, told
him he had a widow in his line of life. adº ºn.
SU'NcLAD, part, adj. [ſin and clad.] Clothed in radiance;
bright.
SU'NDAY. m. ſ. [ ſun and day.] The day anciently dedicated to
the ſun; the firſt day of the week; the Chriſtian ſabbath.
If thou wilt needs thruſt thy neck into a yoke, wear the
print of it, and figh away Sundays. Shakespeare  care.
An' ſhe were not kin to me, ſhe would be as fair on Friday
as Helen is on Sunday. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºffda.
At prime they enter'd on the Sunday morn;
Rich tap'ſtry ſpread the ſtreets. Dryden.
To SU'NDER. v. a. [rynbjran, Saxon.] To part; to ſeparate;
to divide. - -
Vexation almoſt flops my breath,
That ſundred friends greet in the hour of death. Shaº.
It is ſandred from the main land by a ſandy plain. Carew.
She that ſhould all parts to reunion bow,
She that had all magnetick force alone,
To draw and faſten ſunded parts in one. Donne.
A ſandred clock is piecemeal laid,
Not to be loſt, but by the maker's hand
Repoliſh'd, without error then to ſtand. Dzmire.
When both the chiefs are ſandrºn from the fight,
Then to the lawful king reſtore his right. Dryden's Pirgi'.
Th’ enormous weight was caſt,
Which Crantor's body ſºlder'd at the waiſt.
Bears, tigers, wolves, the lion's angry brood,
Whom heav'n endu’d with principles of blood,
He wiſely ſandred from the reſt, to yell
In foreſts. -
Bring me lightning, give me thunder;
—Jove may kill, but ne'er ſhall ſunder. Granville.
SU'NDER. m. ſ. [runben, Saxon.] Two ; two parts.
He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the ſpear in ſunder. Pſ.
SU'NDEw. n.ſ. An herb. - Ainſwºrth.
SUNDi’Al. n.ſ. [dial and ſun.] A marked plate on which the
ſhadow points the hour.
All your graces no more you ſhall have,
Than a ſundial in a grave. - Donne.
The body, though it really moves, yet not changing per-
ceivable diſtance, ſeems to ſland ſtill; as is evident in the
ſhadows of ſundials. Locke.
SU(NDRY. adj. [ runben, Saxon. J. Several; more than
On 6.
That law, which, as it is laid up in the boſom of God, we
call eternal, receiveth, according unto the different kind of
things which are ſubject unto it, different and ſundry kinds of
Ila ſnes. - Hooker.
Not of one nation was it peopled, but of ſundry people of
different manners. Spenſer.
He cauſed him to be arreſted upon complaint of fundry
Dryden.
Dryden.
grievous oppreſſions. Davieſ.
How can ſhe ſeveral bodies know,
If in herſelf a body's form ſhe bear?
How can a mirröur ſun iry faces ſhow,
If from all ſhapes and forms it be not clear? Davier.
I have compoſed/undry collects, as the Adventual, Quadra-
geſimal, Paſchal or Pentecoſtal. Sanderſon.
Sundry foes the rural realm ſurround. Dryden.
Sundry in all manual arts are as wonderful. Locke.
SU'NFLOWER. m. ſ. [corona ſolºs, Latin.] A plant.
The characters are: it hath a ſquamous cup ; the flowers
are radiated like the great ſtarwort; the embryoes of the ſeeds
are diſtinguiſhed by little imbricated leaves in the diſk; the
top of the ovary is crowned with two ſmall leaves; the ſeeds
are puſhed out from the bottom of the flower, leaving a va-
cuity which appears very like a honeycomb. Miſer.
SU'NFLow ER, ſittle. n.ſ. [helianthemum, Latin.] A plant.
The characters are: the flower-cup conſiſts of three leaves;
the flower, for the moſt part, of five leaves, placed orbicu-
larly, and expanded in form of a roſe; the pointal of the flower
becomes a globular fruit, which divides into three parts, having
three cells, which are filled with roundiſh ſeeds fixed to ſmall
capillaments. 41iller.
25 R SUNG,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U N
S U P
-
i
rite and participle paſſive of ſing.
. The prete - -
SUNG Aſºº rock then heaving from the plain, P
He whiid it round, itſ”&amp; acroſs the main. ope.
From joining ſtones the city ſprung, Pope.
while to his harp divine Amphion Jung.
he preterite and participle paſſive of ſink.
Susº...! large caves: the deepeſt are ſunk ſix hundred
fathom, and ſome digged and made under great hills. Bacºn.
Thus we act and thus we are, -
Or toſs'd by hope or ſunk by care. Prior.
S. in Thaieſtris' arms the nymph he found. ... Pºpe;
His ſpirit quite ſunk with thoſe reflections that ſolitude and
diſappointments bring, he is utterly undiſtinguiſhed and for-
gotten. - - Swift.
Sºss, adj. [from ſun J Wanting ſun; wanting warmth.
He thrice happy on the ſunleſ; ſide,
Beneath the whole colle&amp;ted ſhade reclines. Thomſon.
SU's like. adj. [ſun and like..] Reſembling the ſun. , .
The quantity of light in this bright luminary, and in the
ſunlike fixt ſtars, muſt be continually decreaſing: Cheyne.
SU’NN.Y. adj. [from ſun.]
1. Reſembling the ſun; bright.
She ſaw Dueſſa ſanny bright, -
Adorn'd with gold and jewels ſhining clear. Fairy&amp;ueen.
The eldeſt, that Fidelia hight,
Like ſunny beams threw from her cryſtal face. Fai. 2ueen.
My decay’d fair
A ſunny look of his would ſoon repair. Shakeſpeare.
The chemiſt feeds
Perpetual flames, whoſe unreſiſted force
O'er ſand and aſhes and the ſtubborn flint
Prevailing, turns into a fuſile ſea,
That in his furnace bubbles ſunny red.
2. Expoſed to the ſun; bright with the ſun.
About me round I ſaw
Hill, dale, and ſhady woods, and ſunny plains,
And liquid lapſe of murm'ring ſtreams. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Him walking on a ſunny hill he found,
Back'd on the North and Weſt by a thick wood. Milton.
The filmy goſſamer now flits no more,
Nor halcyons baſk on the ſhort ſunny ſhore.
But what avail her unexhauſted ſtores,
Her blooming mountains and her ſunny ſhores,
With all the gifts that heaven and earth impart,
The ſmiles of nature, and the charms of art,
While proud oppreſſion in her vallies reigns,
And tyranny uſurps her happy plains 2
3. Coloured by the ſun.
Her ſunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece. Shakeſpeare.
SU'NRIs E. n. ſ. [ſun and riſing.] Morning; the appear-
SUNRI's ING. } ance of the ſun.
Send out a purſuivant
To Stanley's regiment; bid him bring his power
Before ſunriſing. Shakeſp. Richard III.
In thoſe days the giants of Libanus maſtered all nations,
from the ſunriſing to the ſunſet. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the I/orld.
They intend to prevent the ſunriſing. J/alton's Angler.
We now believe the Copernican ſyſtem; yet, upon ordi-
nary occaſions, we ſhall ſtill uſe the popular terms of ſunriſe
and ſunſet. Bentley.
SU(NSET, n.ſ. [ ſºn and ſet.] Cloſe of the day; evening.
When the ſun ſets the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the ſunſet of my brother's ſon
It rains downright. Shakeſpeare.
The ſtars are of greater uſe than for men to gaze on after
Philips.
Dryden.
Addiſon.
ſºnſ:t. - Raleigh.
At ſunſet to their ſhip they make return, &amp;
And ſnore ſecure on deck 'till roſy morn. Dryden.
He obſervant of the parting ray,
Eyes the calm ſunſet of thy various day
Through fortune's cloud. Pope.
St’sshis E. M. ſ. [ſun and ſhine.] Ağion of the ſun; place
where the heat and luſtre of the ſun are powerful.
That man that fits within a monarch's heart,
And ripens in the ſunſhine of his favour,
Would be abuſe the count'nance of the king,
Alack, what miſchiefs might be ſet abroach,
In ſhadow of ſuch greatneſs Shakeſp. Henry IV.
He had been many years in that ſunſhine, when a new comet
appeared in court. Clarendºn.
Sight no obſtacle found here, nor ſhade,
But all ſunſhine, as when his beams at noon
Culminate from th' equator.
I that in his abſence
º like a ſtar of the firſt magnitude,
§ in his brighter ſunſhine am not ſeen. Denham's Sophy.
B Nor can we this weak ſhow'r a tempeſt call,
º drops of heat that in the ſunſhine fall.
Jhine º Prevent the bees getting abroad upon every ſun-
The m ſ Mortimer's Husbandry.
9te favourable you are to me, the more diſtinctly I
Milton.
Dryden.
ſee my faults: ſpots and blemiſhes are never ſo plainly diſco-
vered as in the brighteſt ſunſhine. Pope
SU'N's H1NY. adj. [from ſunſhine. It was ancientl -
the ſecond ſyllable.] J y accented on
1. Bright with the ſun.
About ten in the morning, in ſunſhiny weather, we took
ſeveral ſorts of paper ſtained. Byle
2. Bright like the ſun. -
The fruitful-headed beaſt, amaz'd
At flaſhing beams of that ſunſhiny ſhield,
Became ſtark blind, and all his ſenſes daz'd,
That down he tumbled. Fairy Queen
To Sup. v. a. ſ. ſuper, Norman French; rupan, Saxon; Jºn,
º To drink by mouthfuls; to drink by little at âtime,
to 11p.
Then took the angry witch her golden cup,
Which ſtill ſhe bore replete with magick arts,
Death and deſpair did many thereof ſup. Spenſºr:
There find a purer air penſer.
To ſeed my life with ; there I'll ſup
Balm and nećtar in my cup. Craſhaw.
We ſaw it ſmelling to every thing ſet in the room, and when
it had ſmelt to them all, it ſupped up the milk. Ray.
He call'd for drink; you ſaw him ſup
Potable gold in golden cup. Swift.
To SUP. v. n. [ſouper, French.J. To eat the evening meaſ.
You'll ſup with me?
—Anger's my meat; I ſup upon myſelf,
And ſo ſhall ſtarve with feeding.
I have ſupt full with horrours;
Direneſs, familiar to my ſlaught'rous thoughts,
Cannot once ſtart me. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
When they had ſupped, they brought Tobias in. Tab. viii.
I ſee all the pilgrims in the Canterbury tales as diſtinčily as
if I had ſupped with them. - Dryden.
Late returning home, he ſupp'd at eaſe. Dryden.
To SUP. v. a. To treat with ſupper.
He's almoſt ſupp'd; why have you left the chamber. Shah.
Sup them well, and look unto them all. Shakeſpeare.
Let what you have within be brought abroad,
To ſup the ſtranger. Chapman's Odſey.
SUP. m.ſ.. [from the verb.] A ſmall draught; a mouthful of
liquour.
Tom Thumb had got a little ſup,
And Tomalin ſcarce kift the cup. Drayton.
A pigeon ſaw the pićture of a glaſs with water in't, and
flew eagerly up to"t for a ſup to quench her thirſt, L'Eſtrange:
The leaſt tranſgreſſion of your's, if it be only two bits and
one ſup more than your ſtint, is a great debauch. Swift.
SUPER, in compoſition, notes either more than another, or more
than enough, or on the top.
Suſperable, adj. [ſuperabilis, Lat. ſuperall, French] Con-
querable; ſuch as may be overcome. -
SU'PERABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſuperable.] Quality of being
conquerable. -
To Super abou’Np. v. n. [ſuper and alound J. To be exube-
rant; to be ſtored with more than enough.
This caſe returneth again at this time, except the clemency
Shakeſp. Coriolanuſ.
of his majeſty ſuperabound. Han.
She ſuperabound; with corn, which is quickly wº
ºtheſe
CO1n.
Super Abu'Ndance. n.ſ. [ſuper and abundante.] More"
enough; great quantity. -
The precipitation of the vegetative terreſtrial matter.” the
deluge amongſt the ſand, was to retrench the luxury and ſuper-
abundance of the produćtions of the earth. ſºftward.
SUPER A BU'ND ANT. adj. [ſuper and abundant.] Being mo"
than enough.
So much ſuperabundant zeal could have no other deſign than
to damp that ſpirit raiſed againſt Wood. :
Suprºv/NDAstly adv. [from ſperabundant] More than
ſufficiently. fill and
Nothing but the uncreated Infinite can adequately heyne
ſuperabundantly ſatisfy the deſire. º º:i
To SUPERA'D.D. v., n. [ſuperaddo, Latin.] To add over a
above; to join any thing ſo as to make it more. d not the
The peacock laid it extremely to heart that." ha }} ir
nightingale's voice ſuperadded to the beauty of plumes. l ãº
The ſchools diſpute, whether in morals the º . of
ſuperadd any thirg of good or evil to the internal clicit º:
the will; but certainly the enmity of our judgm.” º wº
up to an high pitch before it rages in an ºpe, denial. | m.
The ſtrength of any living creature, in thoſe externa atu-
tions, is ſomething diffind from and ſtºº.” º Jug
ral gravity. I}'ilkins'; Maih. Aleš.
Super addition. n.f. [ſper and additiºn
1. The act of adding to ſomething elſe. .. d the
The fabrick of the eye, its ſafe and uſeful ſituation, º
fuperaddition of muſcles, are a certain pledge of the º,
of God. -
2. That which is added.
-- tºnſ it
Of theſe, much more than of the Nicene ſperaddº ; :
may
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U P
S U P
º
º
!.
*:::
**
---
"…
may be affirmed, that being the explications of a father of the
church, and not of a whole univerſal council, they were not
neceſſary to be explicitly acknowledged. Hammond.
An animal, in the courſe of hard labour, ſeems to be nothing
but veſſels: let the ſame animal continue long in reſt, it will
perhaps double its weight and bulk: this ſuperaddition is no-
thing but fat. Arbuthnot.
SupeRADw E"NIENT. adj. [ ſuperadveniens, Latin.]
1. Coming to the increaſe or aſſiſtance of ſomething.
The ſoul of man may have matter of triumph, when he has
done bravely by a ſuperadvenient aſſiſtance of his God. More.
2. Coming unexpectedly.
To SUPERA'NNUAT E. v. a. I ſuper and annus, Lat..] To im-
pair or diſqualify by age or length of life.
If ſuch depravities be yet alive, deformity need not deſpair,
nor will the eldeſt hopes be ever ſuperannuated. 3rown.
When the ſacramental teſt was put in execution, the juſtices
of peace through Ireland, that had laid down their commiſ-
ſions, amounted only to a dozen, and thoſe of the loweſt for-
tune, and ſome of them ſuperannuated. Swift.
To SupeRA'NNUAt E. v. n. To laſt beyond the year. Not in uſe.
The dying of the roots of plants that are annual, is by the
over-expence of the ſap into ſtalk and leaves, which being
prevented, they will ſperannmate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
SUPER ANNUA"TION. m. ſ. [from ſuperannuate.] The ſtate of
being diſqualified by years.
SUPE’RB. adj. [ſuperbe, French; ſuperbus, Latin.] Grand;
pompous; lofty; auguſt; ſtately; magnificent.
SUPE’RR-LILY. n.ſ.. [methºnica, Lat.] A flower.
SUPERCA'RGo. n.ſ.. [ſuper and cargo.] An officer in the ſhip
whoſe buſineſs is to manage the trade.
I only wear it in a land of Hečtors,
Thieves, ſupercargo's, ſharpers. Pope.
SUPER cele's'ſ IAL. adj. [ſuper and celeſłial J Placed above the
firmament.
I dare not think that any ſupercelºftial heaven, or whatſo-
ever elſe, not himſelf, was increate and eternal. Raleigh.
Many were for fetching down I know not what ſupercelºftial
waters for the purpoſe. //odward’s Nat. Hiſtory.
SUPERCI'LIOUS. adj. . [from ſupercilium, Latin.] Haughty;
dogmatical; dićtatorial; arbitrary; deſpotick; overbearing.
Thoſe who are one while courteous, within a ſmall time
after are ſo ſupercilious, fierce, and exceptious, that they are
fhort of the true charaćter of friendſhip. Youth.
Several ſupercilious criticks will treat an author with the
greateſt contempt, if he fancies the old Romans wore a
girdle. Addison.
SupeRc1(Liously. adv. [from ſupercilious.] Haughtily; dog-
matically; contemptuouſly. .
He, who was a punétual man in point of honour, received
this addreſs ſuperciliouſly enough, ſent it to the king without
performing the leaſt ceremony. Clarendon.
SUPERc1'liousNess. n.ſ.. [from ſupercilious.] Haughtineſs;
contemptuouſneſs.
SUPER conce'ption. n.ſ.. [ſuper and conception.] A concep-
tion made after another conception.
Thoſe ſuperconceptions, where one child was like the father,
the other like the adulterer, ſeem idle. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
SUPER co’NSEQUENCE. m. ſ. [ſuper and conſequence. J Remote
conſequence.
Not attaining the deuteroſcopy, and ſecond intention of the
words, they omit their ſuperconſequences and coherences. Brown.
SUPER CRE'scENCE. n.ſ.. [ſuper and creſco, Lat.] That which
grows upon another growing thing.
Wherever it groweth it maintains a regular figure, like
other ſupercrºſcenceſ, and like ſuch as, living upon the ſtock of
others, are termed paraſitical plants. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
SUPER :::::::::} n. ſ. [ſuper and emineo, Latin.] Uncom-
SUPER e^MINENcy. $ mon degree of eminence ; eminence
above others though eminent. -
The archbiſhop of Canterbury, as he is primate over all
England and metropolitan, has a ſupereminency, and even ſome
power over the archbiſhop of York. Ayliffe's Parergon.
SUPER e^MIN ENT. adj. [ſuper and eminent.] Eminent in a
high degree.
As humility is in ſuiters a decent virtue, ſo the teſtifica-
tion thereof by ſuch effectual acknowledgments not only ar-
gueth a ſound apprehenſion of his ſupereminent glory and ma-
jeſty before whom we ſtand, but putteth alſo into his hands a
kind of pledge or bond for ſecurity againſt our unthankful-
neſs. Hoºker.
To SUPER e^RogATE. v. n. [ſuper and erogatio, Lat.] To do
more than duty requires.
So by an abbey's ſkeleton of late,
I heard an eccho ſuffererogate
Through imperfection, and the voice reſtore,
As if ſhe had the hiccup o'er and o'er. Cleaveland.
Ariſtotle acted his own inſtructions, and his obſequious ſec-
tators have ſupererogated in obſervance. Glanv. Scepſ
SUPER E R O GATION. m. ſ. ſfrom ſupererogate.] Performance of
mºre than duty requires.
There is no ſuch thing as works of ſupererogation; that no
2
man can do more than needs, and is his duty to do, by way of
preparation for another world. Tillºtſon's Sermons.
SUPERE'Roq AtoRy. adj. [from ſupererogate.] Performed be-
yond the ſtrict demands of duty.
Supererogatory ſervices, and too great benefits from ſubjects
to kings, are of dangerous conſequence. Howel.
SUPERE'Xcel LENT. adj. [ſuper and excellent.] Excellent be-
yond common degrees of excellence.
We diſcern not the abuſe: ſuffer him to perſuade us that
we are as gods, ſomething ſo ſuperexcellent, that all muſt reve-
rence and adore. ſecoy of Piety.
SUPER Exck EscENce. n.ſ. [ſuper and excreſcence..] Something
ſuperfluouſly growing.
As the eſcar ſeparated between the ſcarifications, I rubbed
the ſuperexcreſcence of fleſh with the vitrio ſtone. Iſºeman.
To SUPERFE/TATE. v. n. [ſuper and factus, Latin.] To con-
ceive after conception.
The female brings forth twice in one month, and ſo is ſaid
to ſuperfetate, which, faith Ariſtotle, is becauſe her eggs are
hatched in her one after another. Grew's Muſæum.
SUPERFETA'tion. n.ſ.. [ſuperfetation, French; from ſuperfe-
tate.] One conception following another, ſo that both are in
the womb together, but come not to their full time for delivery
together. £uincy.
Superſetation muſt be by abundance of ſap in the bough
that putteth it forth. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
If the ſuperfetation be made with conſiderable intermiſſion,
the latter moſt commonly becomes abortive; for the firſt being
confirmed, engroſſeth the aliment from the other. Brown.
SU'PERFIce. n.ſ.. [ſuperficie, Fr. ſuperficies, Latin.] Outſide ;
ſurface.
Then if it riſe not to the former height
Of ſuperfice, conclude that ſoil is light. Dryden.
SUPERFICIAL. adj. [ſuperficiel, Fr. from ſuperficies, Latin.]
1. Lying on the ſurface; not reaching below the ſurface.
That, upon the ſuperficial ground, heat and moiſture cauſe
putrefaction, in England is found not true. Bacon.
From theſe phaenomena ſeveral have concluded ſome general
rupture in the ſuperficial parts of the earth. 1, urnet.
There is not one infidel living ſo ridiculous as to pretend to
ſolve the phaenomena of fight, or cogitation, by thoſe fleeting
ſuperficial films of bodies. Bently.
2. Shallow; contrived to cover ſomething.
This ſuperficial tale
Is but a preface to her worthy praiſe. Shakespeare Henry VI.
3. Shallow; not profound; ſmattering, not learned.
That knowledge is ſo very ſuperficial, and ſo ill-grounded,
that it is impoſſible for them to deſcribe in what conſiſts the
beauty of thoſe works. Dryden.
SUPERFIcIA'LITY.. n.ſ.. [from ſuperficial.] The quality of
being ſuperficial.
By theſe ſalts the colours of bodies receive degrees of
luſtre or obſcurity, ſuperficiality or profundity. Brown.
SUPERF1 c1ALLY. adv. [from ſuperficial J
1. On the ſurface; not below the ſurface.
2. Without penetration; without cloſe heed.
Perſpective hath been with ſome diligence inquired; but
the nature of ſounds in general hath been ſuperficial, ob-
ſerved. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
His eye ſo ſuperficially ſurveys
Theſe things, as not to mind from whence they grow,
Deep under ground. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
3. Without going deep; without ſearching to the bottom of
things.
You have ſaid well;
But on the cauſe and queſtion now in hand,
Have gloz'd but ſuperficially. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſda.
I have laid down ſuperficially my preſent thoughts. Dryden,
SUPERF 'cIALNess. m.ſ.. [from ſuperficial.]
1. Shallowneſs; poſition on the ſurface.
2. Slight knowledge ; falſe appearance; ſhow without ſubſtance.
SUPERFICIES. n. ſ. [Latin.] Outſide; ſurfacs; ſuperfice.
He on her ſuperficies ſtretch'd his line. Sandys.
A convex mirrour makes objects in the middle to come out
from the ſuperficies: the painter muſt, in reſpect of the light and
ſhadows of his figures, give them more relievo. Dryden.
SUPERF1'NE. adj. [ſuper and fine.] Eminently fine.
Some, by this journey of Jaſon, underſtand the myſtery of
the philoſopher's ſtone: to which alſo other ſuperfine chymiſts
draw the twelve labours of Hercules. L’E/ºrange.
If you obſerve your cyder, by interpoſing it between a
candle and your eye, to be very tranſparent, it may be called
ſuperfine. A49 timer's Husbandry.
SUPERFLU'1t AN ce. n.ſ.. [ſiper and ſuite, Latin.] The aët
of floating above. -
Sperma ceti, which is a ſupefuitance on the ſea, is not the
fperm of a whale. Brown's Wu gar Errotirº.
SUPERF U'it ast. adj. [ ſ perfluºtans, Lat.] Floating above.
A chalky earth, beaten and ſleeped in water, affordeth a
cream or fatneſs on the top, and a groſs ſubſidence at the bot-
tom: out of the cream, or ſuperſuitance, the fineſt diſhes are
made; out of tic reſidence, the coalier. Brown.
St PE R F LU 1 r Y.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U P
S U P
surrrrlutty, n.ſ. [ſºftuitº, Fr. from ſuperfluºus.] More
than enough; plenty beyond uſe or neceſſity. - f ſu-
Having this way eaſed the church, as they thought, o ſ:
prºuily, they went ºn till they had plucked up even thoſe
things which alſo had taken a great deal deeper root. Hooker.
They are as ſick that ſurfeit with too much, as they that
ſtarve with nothing; therefore it is no mean happineſs to be
ſeated in the mean: ſuperſuity comes ſooner by white hairs,
but competency lives longer. Shakeſpeare:
A quiet mediocrity is ſtill to be preferred before a troubled
ſuperſºity. Suck.ing.
Like the ſun, let bounty ſpread her ray, -
And ſhine that ſuperſuity away. Pºpe.
SUPE'RFluous. adj. [/ºper and flºo, Lat. ſpelſ”, Fr. Exu-
berant; more than enough; unneceſſary; offenſive by being
more than ſufficient. - -
I think it ſuperfluous to uſe any words of a ſubject ſo praiſed
in itſelf as it necds no praiſes. Sidney.
When a thing ceaſeth to be available unto the end which
gave it being, the continuance of it muſt then appear ſºft-
d!!!. - Iacover.
t Our ſuperfluous lacqueys and our peaſants,
Who in unneceſſary action ſwarm *
About our ſquares of battle. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
A proper title of a peace, and purchas'd
At a ſuperfluous rate. Shakeſpeare.
As touching the miniſtring to the faints, it is ſpººfluous to
write. 2 Cor. ix. i.
Horace will our ſperfuous branches prune,
Give us new rules, and ſet our harp in tune. Rºſcommon.
* If ye know,
Why aſk ye, and ſpeſinous begin
Your meſſage, like to end as much in vain Milton.
Supe'RFLuous NEss. n.ſ.. [ſtom ſperſuits.] The ſtate of be-
ing ſuperfluous. - - -
SU'PERFLux m. ſ. [ſper and fuxus, Latin.] That which is
more than is wanted.
Take phyſick, pomp ;
Fxpoſe thyſelf to feel what wretches feel,
That thou may ſt ſhake the ſuperflux to them. Shakespeare.
SUPERHUMAN, adj. [ſuper and humanus, Latin.J. Above the
nature or power of man. -
SUPER IMPREGNATION. m.ſ. [ſper and impregnation.] Su-
perconception; ſuperſetation.
SUPERiscu'MBENT. m. ſ. [ſuper and incumbens, Latin.] Ly-
ing on the top of ſomething elſe.
It is ſometimes ſo extremely violent, that it forces the ſº-
perinciambent ſtrata; breaks them all throughout, and thereby
Perfectly undermines and ruins their foundations.
J/oºdward.
To SUPERINDU'ce. v.a. [ſper and induct, Latin.]
I. To bring in as an addition to ſomething clfe.
Relation is not contained in the real exiſtence of things,
but ſomething extraneous and ſaferindiced. Locke.
In children, ſavages, and ill-nātured people, learning not ha-
ving caſt their native thoughts into new moulds, nor by ſuper-
**ing foreign doctrines, confounded thoſe fair charactºrs na-
ture had written, their innate notions might lie open. Locke.
2. To bring on as a thing not originally belonging to that on
which it is brought.
To ſuperinduce any virtue upon a perſon, take the living
creature in which that virtue is moſt eminent. Bacon.
Cuſtom and corruption ſperinduce upon us a kind of neceſ-
fity of going on as we began. L’E/?range.
Father is a notion ſufferinduced to the ſubſtance of man, and
refers only to an act of that thing called man, whereby he con-
tributed to the generation of one of his own kind, let man
be what it will. Locke.
Long cuſtom of finning ſpºrindace, upon the ſoul new and
abſurd deſires, like the dittemper of the ſoul, feeding only up-
on filth and corruption. South's Sermons.
Super Neuction. */ [from ſuper and indice.] The act of
fuperinducing.
A good inclination is but the firſt rude draught of virtue;
the ſuperindu&amp;ion of ill habits quickly deface it. South.
SupeRisje CTION. m. ſ. I ſuper and injection.] An injection
fucceeding upon another. Die?.
SUPERINs. ITU'rios. "...ſ. [ſºfer and inſtitution.] [In law.]
One inſtitution upon another; as if A is inſtituted and ad-
mitted to a benefice upon a title, and B be inſtituted and ad-
mitted by the preſentation of another. Bailey.
To SUPERINT END. v.a. [ſifer and intend..] To overſee:
*9'erlook; to take care of others with authority. &gt;
The king will appoint a council whº may ſuperintend
the works of this nature, and regulate what concerns the co-
ones. Bacon's Advice to Pillie, i.
This *** deſign, and a ſuperintending wiſdom, power
*nd providence in this ſpecial buſineſs of food. Derham.
Angels, good or bad, muſt be furniſhed with prodigious
#. tº overſee Perſia and Grecia of old; or if any
*/"Pºintend the affairs of Great Britain now, //atts.
SUPER INTE'ND ENce. }": [from ſuper and intºnd.] Su
SUPER INTE'NDENCY. 5 riour care ; the act of Supc-
authority.
Such an univerſal ſºferintendency has the eye, and hand of
providence over all, even the moſt minute and intº
things. South’ &amp;
The divine providence, which hath a viſible º:
being of every man, is yet more obſervable in ijº.
dency over ſocieties. Grew
An admirable indication of the divine Jºperintending. mi
management. Derham
SvFERINT ENDENT, n.ſ.. [ſperintendant, Fr. fromſprintendi
One who overlooks others authoritatively. ..]
Next to Brama, one Deuendre is the ſuperintendent deity
who hath many more under him. Stillinºi.
The world Pays a natural veneration to men of virtue, ºi
rejoice to ſee themſelves condućted by thoſe who ad *
the care of a ſupreme being, and whô think th
* - emſelves ac-
Sountable to the great Judge and Superintendº human af.
fairs.
Superiority. "...ſ [from ſperiour.] Pre-eminence; *::
lity of being greater or higher than another in any reſpect.
Bellarmine makes the formal act of adoratio. to be ſub-
jection to a ſuperiour; but he makes the mºre apprehenſion
of excellency to include the formal reaſon of it. whereas mere
$xcellency without ſuperiority doth not require any ſubjećtion
but only eſtimation. Stillingfa.
The perſon who adviſes, does in that particular exerciſe
*/ºperiºrity over us, thinking us defective in our condućt or
underſtanding. Addiſon's Spediatºr,
SUPER Iou R. adj. [ſuperieur, Fr. ſuperior,"Latin.j
1. Higher; greater in dignity or excellence; preferable or pre-
ferred to another.
In commending another you do yourſelf right; for he that
you commend is either ſuperiour to you in that you commend,
or inferiour; if he be inferiour, if he be to be commended,
you much more: if he be ſuperi-ur, if he be not to bººm.
mended, you much leſs glorious. Bºn.
Althºugh ſperior to the people, yet not ſuperior to their
own voluntary engagements once paſſed from them. Tayºr.
Heaven takes part with the oppreſſed, and tyrants are upon
their behaviour to a /uperior power. L'Eſtrange.
Superor beings above us, who enjoy perfeót happineſs, are
more ſteadily determined in their choice of good than we, and
yet they are not leſs happy or leſs free than we are fºº,
He laughs at men of far ſuperiour underſtandings to his,
for not being as well dreſſed as himſelf. Swift.
2. Upper; higher locally. - -
By the refraction of the ſecond priſm, the breadth of the
image was not encreaſed, but its ſuperiour part, which in the
firſt priſm ſuffered the greater refraction, and appeared violet
and blue, did again in the ſecond priſm ſuffer a greater refra-
ction than its inferiour part which appeared red and yellow,
Newton's Optiki,
3. Free from emotion or concern; unconquered.
From amidſt them forth he paſs'd,
Long way through hoſtile ſcorn; which he ſuſtain'd -
Ś perior, nor of violence fear'd ought. Milion,
Here paſſion firſt I felt,
Commotion ſtrangeſ in all enjoyments elſe • ?
Superior and unmov’d. Åſiºn,
There is not in earth a ſpectacle more worthy than a great
man ſuperiour to his ſufferings. Addiſon's Spitfair.
SUPE’RioUR, n.ſ. One more excellent or dignified than al-
other.
Thoſe under the great officers of ſtate, have more fººt
opportunities for the exerciſe of benevolence than their Jºſé
7", 41.7'ſ. Addison's Special”
SUPERLA’rion. m. ſ. [ ſ periatio, Latin.] Exaltation of any
thing beyond truth or propriety.
There are words that as much raiſe a ſtyle as others can
depreſs it; ſuperlation and overmuchneſs amplifies: º
be above faith, but not above a mean. - Ben jºjº
SUPERLATIVE. ad. [ſperiotiſ, Fr.ſuperlativu, Latind
I. Implying or expreſſing the higheſt degree. - -
#. . uſual : tº give the ſuperlative unto thing; º:
nence ; and when a thing is very great, preſently to de º
to be the greateſt of all. Brown's Pºlar #:
Some have a violent and turgid manner of talking and º
ing; they are always in extremes, and pronounce wº
every thing in lºſſ.
2. Riſing to the higheſt degree. - *
The high court of ºnent in England is ſº
Bacon's Advice tº Hill"
Martyrdoms I reckon amongſt miracles; becauſe ſº
to exceed the ſtrength of human nature; and I may 49' Bacºn,
of ſuperative and admirable holineſs. he º
The generality of its reception is with many t º: mº
argument of its ſuperſative deſert; and common *...".-
fute excellency by numbers.
5
overſeeing with
Ingratitude
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U P
- -
º
... .
2-
.
º
Ingratitude and compaſſion never cohabit in the ſame breaſt;
which ſhews the ſuperlative malignity of this vice, and the
baſeneſs of the mind in which it dwells. South's Sermons.
Su PE’R LA Tively. adv. [from ſuperlative J
1. In a manner of ſpeech expreſſing the higheſt degree.
I ſhall not ſpeak ſuperlatively of them; but that I may truly
ſay, they are ſecond to none in the Chriſtian world. Bacon.
2.In the higheſt degree.
Tiberius was bad enough in his youth; but ſuperlatively
and monſtrouſly ſo in his old age. South's Sermons.
The Supreme Being is a ſpirit moſt excellently glorious, ſu-
perlatively powerful, wiſe and good, Creator of all things. Bent.
Supe'RLAT i v ENEss. n.ſ.. [from ſuperlative.] The ſtate of be-
ing in the higheſt degree.
Super Lu's AR adj. [ſuper and luna.] Not ſublunary 5 placed
above the moon; not of this world.
The mind, in metaphyſicks, at a loſs,
May wander in a wilderneſs of moſs;
The head that turns at ſuperlunar things,
Pois'd with a tail, may ſteer on Wilkins' wings. Dunciad.
SUPERN A L. adj. [ſupernus, Latin.]
1. Having an higher poſition; locally above us.
By heaven and earth was meant the ſolid matter and ſub-
france, as well of all the heavens and orbs jupernal, as of the
globe of the earth and waters which covered it Raleigh.
2. ºuting to things above ; placed above ; caeleſtial; heaven-
y.
That ſupernal Judge that ſtirs good thoughts
In any breaſt of ſtrong authority,
To look into the bolts and ſtains of right, Shakeſpeare,
He with frequent intercourſe
Thither will ſend his winged meſſengers,
On errands of ſupernal grace. Milton.
Both glorying to have 'ſcap'd the Stygian flood,
As gods, and by their own recover'd ſtrength,
Not by the ſuff'rance of ſupernal pow'r, Milton.
strºnatast. adj. [ſupernatant, Latin.] Swimming
above.
Whilſt the ſubſtance continued fluid, I could ſhake it with
the ſupernatant menſtruum, without making between them any
true union. Bºyle.
SUPERNATA'tion. m. ſ. [from ſupernata, Latin.] The act of
ſwimming on the top of any thing.
Touching the ſupernatation of bodies, take of aquafortis
two ounces, of quickſilver two drams, the diſſolution will not
bear a flint as big as a nutmeg. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Bodies are differenced by ſupernatation, as floating on wa-
ter; for chryſtal will ſink in water, as carrying in its own
bulk a greater ponderoſity than the ſpace of any water it doth
occupy; and will therefore only ſwim in molten metal and
quickſilver. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
SUPERNATURAL. adj. [ſuper and natural.] Being above the
powers of nature.
There reſteth either no way unto ſalvation, or if any, then
ſurely a way which is ſupernatural, a way which could never
have entered into the heart of a man, as much as once to
conceive or imagine, if God himſelf had not revealed it ex-
traordinarily ; for which cauſe we term it the myſtery or ſe-
cret way of ſalvation. Hooker.
When ſupernatural duties are neceſſarily exacted, natural
are not reječted as needleſs. Hooker.
The underſtanding is ſecured by the perfection of its own
nature, or by ſupernatural aſſiſtance. Tillotſon.
What miſts of providence are theſe,
Through which we cannot ſee :
So ſaints by ſupernatural power ſet free
Are left at laſt in martyrdom to die. Dryden.
SUPERNA’t U R ALLY. adv. [from ſupernatural.] In a manner
above the courſe or power of nature.
The Son of God came to do every thing in miracle, to love
fpernaturally, and to pardon infinitely, and even to lay down
the Sovereign while he aſſumed the Saviour. South's Sermons.
SupeRNU'MERARY. adj. [ ſupernumeraire, Fr ſuper and numeruſ,
Lat.] Being above a ſtated, a neceſſary, an uſual, or a round
number.
Well if thrown out, as ſupernumerary
To my juſt number found ! Mlion's Paradiſe Loſt.
In fixty three years there may be loſt eighteen days, omit-
ting the intercalation of one day every fourth year, allowed
for this quadrant or ſix hours ſupernumerary. Brown.
The odd or ſupernumerary ſix hours are not accounted in
the three years after the leap-year. Holder.
The produce of this tax is adequate to the ſervices for which
it is deſigned, and the additional tax is proportioned to the ſu-
pernumerary expence this year. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Antiochus Eupator began to augment his fleet; but the Ro-
man ſenate ordered his ſºpernumerary veſſels to be burnt.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
A ſupernumerary canon is one who does not receive any of
the profits or emoluments of the church, but only lives and
ſerves there on a future expectation of ſome prebend. Ayliffe.
Su'P ERPLANT. n.ſ.. [ſuper and plant.] A plant growing up-
on another plant.
No ſuperplant is a formed plant but miſletoe. Bacon.
To SUPER poſs D1 RATE. v. a. [ſuper and pondero, Latin.] To
weigh over and above. Diſ?.
SUPER proportion. n.ſ.. [ſper and proportio, Latin.] Over-
plus of proportion.
No defect of velocity, which requires as great a ſuperpropor-
tion in the cauſe, can be overcome in an inſtant. Digby.
SUPERFURGA"tion. m. ſ. [ſupe purgation, Fr. ſuper and purga-
tion.] More purgation than enough.
There happening a ſuperpurgation, he declined the repeating
of that purge. //iſeman's Surgery.
SuperREFLE'x1ON., n.f. [ſuper and reflexion.] Reflexion of
an image reflected.
Place one glaſs before and another behind, you ſhall ſee
the glaſs behind with the image within the glaſs before, and
again the glaſs before in that, and divers ſuch ſuperrºflexions,
till the ſpecies ſpeciei at laſt die. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
SUPERs A‘l IEN cy. m. ſ. [ſuper and ſalio, Latin; this were
better written ſuperſ?iency..] The act of leaping upon any thing.
Their coition is by ſuperſaliency, like that of horſes.
Brown.
To SuperscR1'be. v. a. ſſper and ſcribo, Latin.] To in-
ſcribe upon the top or outſide. -
Fabretti and others believe, that by the two fortunes were
only meant in general the goddeſs who ſent proſperity or aſ-
flićtions, and produce in their behalf an ancient monument,
ſuperſcribed. Addiſon.
SUPERscri'ption. n.ſ.. [ſuper and ſcriptio, Latin.]
1. The aët of ſuperſcribing.
2. That which is written on the top or outſide.
Doth this churliſh ſuperſ: iption -
Portend ſome alteration in good will. Shakeſpeare's H. VI.
Read me the ſuperſcription of theſe letters; I know not
which is which. Shakeſpeare's Timon of Athenſ.
Let me love her my fill
No ſuperſcriptions of fame, ty
Of honour or good name,
No thought but to improve
The gentle and quick approaches of my love.
I learn of my experience, not by talk,
How counterfeit a coin they are who friends
Bear in their ſupeſcription; in proſperous days
They ſwarm, but in adverſe withdraw their head. Milton.
It is enough her ſtone
May honour’d be with ſuperſcription
Of the ſole lady, who had pow'r to move
The great Northumberland. Waller.
To Superse De. v. a. [ſuper and ſedeo, Latin ) . To make
void or inefficacious by ſuperiour power; to ſet aſide.
Paſſion is the drunkenneſs of the mind; and therefore in
its preſent workings not controlable by reaſon; for as much
as the proper effect of it is, for the time, to ſuperſede the work-
ings of reaſon. South's Sermons.
In this genuine acceptation of chance, nothing is ſuppoſed
that can ſuperſede the known laws of natural motion.
- Bentley.
SUPERSE/DEAS. [In law.] Is a writ which lieth in divers
and ſundry caſes; in all which it ſignifies a command or requeſt
to ſtay or forbear the doing of that which in appearance of law
were to be done, were it not for the cauſe whereupon the writ
is granted: for example, a man regularly is to have ſurety of .
peace againſt him of whom he will ſwear that he is afraid; and
the juſtice required hereunto cannot deny him: yet if the
party be formerly bound to the peace, in chancery or elſe-
where, this writ lieth to ſtay the juſtice from doing that,
which otherwiſe he might not deny. Cowel.
The far diſtance of this county from the court, hath here-
tofore afforded it a ſuperſedeas from takers and purveyours.
Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Superse/Rvice Able. adj. I ſuper and ſerviceable J Over offi-
cious ; more than is neceſſary or required.
A glaſs-gazing, ſuperſerviceable finical rogue. Shakeſpeare.
SUPERSTITION. m. ſ. [ſperſition, Fr. Juperſ?itio, Latin.]
1. Unneceſſary fear or ſcruples in religion; obſervance of unne-
ceſſary and uncommanded rites or pračtices; religion without
morality.
Suck'ing.
They the truth
With ſuperſitions and traditions taint. Milton,
A rev'rent fear, ſuch ſuper/lition reigns
Among the rude, ev'n then poſſeſs'd the ſwains. Dryden.
2. Falſe religion; reverence of beings not proper objećts of re-
verence; falſe worſhip.
They had certain queſtions againſt him of their own ſuper-
Jºition. 47s xxv. 19.
3. Over-nicety; exaštneſs too ſcrupulous.
SUPER sti’t lous. adj. [ſuperſ?itieux, Fr. ſuperſitioſus, Latin.]
Addićted to ſuperſtition; full of idle fancies or ſcruples with
regard to religion. -
25 S At<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U P
S U P
- * * * inhting of candics, they
At the kindling of º: ..º. rites, which
ſay certain prayºs, and uſc form ligh Spenſer.
ſhew that they honour the fire and the light. J
Have I him 2
ut of fondneſs ſperſitiºus tº h" ...,
º I thus º * Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Nature's own work it ſeem’d, nature taught art,
And to a ſt erſtitious eye the haunt -
Of º and wood-nymphs. Milton,
A venerable wood, -
where rites divine were paid, whoſe holy h"
Was kept and cut with ſuperſitious care.
2. Over accurate; ſcrupulous beyond need. . -
Superstºriously. adv. [from ſupe/*] In a ſuperſti-
tious manner.
There reigned in this iſland a king: whoſe memory of all
others we moſt adore; not ſuperſitiouſly, but as a divine in-
ſtrument. Bacon.
Neither of theſe methods ſhould be too ſcrupulouſly, and
ſuperſitiouſly purſued. - - //atts's Lºck.
To Supersºr RAI'N. v. a. [ſºper and ſlrain.] To ſtrain be-
yond the juſt ſtretch. - - -
in the ſtraining of a ſtring, the further it is ſtrained, the
leſs ſuper/training goeth to a 1919. Bacºn.
To stfºs TRUCT. v. a [ſuper/true, fuperſº uſ?us, Latin.]
To build upon anything. -
Two notions of fundamentals may be conceived, one ſigni-
fying that whereon our eternal bliſs is immediately ſupeſtrº-
ed, the other whereon our obedience to the faith of Chriſt is
founded. Hammoud.
if his habit offin have not corrupted his principles, tº vi-
tious Chriſtian may think it reaſonable to reform, and the
preacher may hope to ſuperſtrue? good life upon ſuch a foun-
dation. Hammºnd's Fundamental.
This is the only proper baſis on which to ſuperſiruſt firſt
innocency and then virtue. Decay of piety;
Super struction. n.ſ. [from ſuper/truči.] An edifice raiſed
on any thing. -
I want not to improve the honour of the living by impair-
ing that of the dead; and my own profeſſion hath taught me
not to erect new ſuperſtructions upon an old ruin. Denham.
Supersºr Ruſcrivá. adj. [from ſuper/true?..] Built upon ſome-
thing elſe.
He that is ſo ſure of his particular eleētion, as to reſolve
he can never fall, muſt neceſſarily reſolve, that what were
drunkenneſs in another, is not ſo in him, and nothing but
the removing his fundamental error can reſcue him from the
ſuperſiručive, be it never ſo groſs. Hammond.
SupfrºTRU’cture. n.ſ. [ſuper and ſtructure.] That which
is raiſed or built upon ſomething elſe.
He who builds upon the preſent, builds upon the narrow
compaſs of a point; and where the foundation is ſo narrow,
the ſuperſiručiure cannot be high and ſtrong too. South'Sermºnſ.
Purgatory was not known in the primitive church, and is
Dryden.
a ſuperſtructure upon the Chriſtian religion. Tillotſon.
You have added to your natural endowments the ſuperſtric-
tures of ſtudy. Dryden.
Super substà'NTIAL. adj. [ſuper and ſubſtantial.] More than
ſubſtantial.
SUPERVACANEOUS. adj. [ſupervacancus, Lat..] Superflu-
ous; needleſs; unneceſſary; ſerving to no purpoſe. Dić?.
SUPER v Aca's Eously. adv. [from the adjective J Needleſsly.
SUPERVA cA'N EousNess. n.J. [from the adjective.] Need-
leſſneſs. Bailey.
To SUPERVENE. v. n. [ſupervenia, Lat.] To come as an
extraneous addition.
Such a mutual gravitation can never ſupervene to matter, un-
leſs impreſſed by a divine power. Bentley's Sermons.
SUPER ve’NIENT. adj. [ſuperveniens, Latin.] Added; addi-
tional.
If it were unjuſt to murder John, the ſupervenient oath did
not extenuate the fact, or oblige the jurer unto it. Brown.
That branch of belief was in him ſupervenient to Chriſtian
practice, and not all Chriſtian practice built on that. Ham.
Superve'Ntion. n. ſ. [from ſupervene.] The act of ſuperve-
ning.
To SUPERVISE. v. a. [ſuper and viſus, Latin.] To over-
look; to overſee; to intend.
M. Bayle ſpeaks of the vexation of the ſuperviſing of the
preſs, in terms ſo feeling that they move compaſſion. Congreve.
SUPERv1’sor. m. ſ. [from ſuperviſe.] An overſeer; an inſpec-
tor; a ſuperintendant.
A ſuperviſor may ſignify an overſeer of the poor, an inſpec-
tor of the cuſtoms, a ſurveyor of the high ways, a ſupervi-
for of the exciſe. //atts's Logick.
How ſatisfy'd, my lord!
Would you be ſuperviſor, groſsly gape on Shakeſpeare.
I am informed of the author andjuperviſºrs of this pam-
phlet. Dryden.
To SUPERv1’ve - -
- . v. m. ſ ſuper and vivo, Lat.] To overlive;
to outlive. [ſup &gt; j &gt;
Upon what principle can the ſoul be imagined to be natu-
rally mortal, or what revolutions in nature will it not be able
to reſiſt and ſipe, vive. Clarke.
f ~ - - - - -
SUPINA'ſ Ios. m. ſ. [ ſaſination, Fr from ſufino, Latin.] I he
aćt of lying with the face upward.
SUPINE. adj. [ſpinus, Latin.]
1. Lying with the face upward.
Upon theſe divers poſitions in man, wherein the ſpine can
only be at right lines with the thigh, ariſe thoſe remarkable
poſtures, prone, ſupine, and erect. Brown's Vulgar Errors.
At him he lanc'd his ſpear, and pierc'd his breaſt;
On the hard earth the Lycian knock'd his head,
And lay ſtpºne; and forth the ſpirit fled. Dryden.
What advantage hath a man by this erection above other
animals, the faces of moſt of them being more ſupine than
OurS. Ray on tºe Crºatia.
2. Leaning backwards with expoſure to the ſun.
If the vine,
On riſing ground be plac'd or hills ſupine,
Extend thy looſe battalions. Dryden.
3. Negligent; careleſs; indolent; drouſy; thoughtleſs; inat-
tenti Ve.
Theſe men ſuffer by their abſence, ſilence, negligence, or
ſupine credulity. Ang Charles.
Supine amidſt our flowing ſtore --
We ſlept ſecurely. Dryden.
Supine in Sylvia's ſcowy arms he lies,
And all the buſy cares of life defies. Tatler.
He became puſillanimous and ſupine, and openly expoſed to
any temptation. Woodward.
SuſpíN.E. n.ſ.. [ſupin, French; ſupinum, Latin.] In Grammar
a term ſignifying a particular kind of verbal noun.
SUP1’NEly. adv. [from ſupine.]
1. With the face upward.
2. Drowſily; thoughtleſsly; indolently.
Who on the beds of ſin ſupinely lie,
They in the ſummer of their age ſhall die. Sandji.
The old impriſon'd king,
Whoſe lenity firſt pleas'd the gaping crowd;
But when long try’d, and found ſupinely good,
Like AEſop's log, they leapt upon his back. Dryden.
He panting on thy breaſt ſupinely lies,
while with thy heav'nly form he feeds his famiſh'd eyes.
Dryden's Lucretiuſ.
Beneath a verdant laurel's ſhade, -
Horace, immortal bard, ſupinely laid. Prior,
Wilt thou then repine
To labour for thyſelf? and rather chuſe
To lie ſupinely, hoping heaven will bleſs ---
Thy ſlighted fruits, and give thee bread uncarn'd Philipi.
SUPI's ENEss. n.ſ.. [from ſupine.]
1. Poſture with the face upward.
2. Drowſineſs; careleſſneſs; indolence. -
when this door is open to let diſſenters in confidering
their induſtry and our Jupineneſ, they may in a very few years
grow to a majority in the houſe of commons. Swift.
SUPI'N1TY. m. ſ. [from ſupine.]
1. Poſture of lying with the face upwards:
2. Careleſſneſs; indolence; thoughtleſſneſs. -
The fourth cauſe of errour is a ſupinity or negleå of enquiry,
even in matters wherein we doubt, rather believing than go-
ing to ſee. Brown's Vulgar Errº"
SUPPEDA/NEous. adj. [ſub and pei, Latin.] Placed under the
feet.
He had ſlender legs, but encreaſed by riding after meals;
that is, the humour deſcended upon their rº º
having no ſupport or ſuppedaneous ſtability. | º
SUPPER. n.f. [ſouper, French. See Súp.] The laſt m
of the day; the evening repaſt.
Tonight we hold a ſolemn ſupper. Shakeſpeare.
I'll to my book: f
For vet, ere ſupper-time muſt I perform 2
Riº ºft” P sulfarº
Th’ hour of ſupper comes unearn'd. . -
Su/PPERLEss. adj. [from ſupper.] Want"g ſupper;
at night. -
Suppoſe a man's going Jupperleſ to bed, ſhould º:
him to the table of ſome great prince. p
She ey'd the bard, where fupperleſ, he ſat, Pºpe.
And pin'd. b and planta,
To SUPPLA(NT. v. a. [ſupplanter, French; ſubº
Latin.]
1. To trip up the heels.
His legs entwining
Each other, till ſupplanted down he fell; Miltºn,
A monſtrous ſerpent on his belly Pº".
The thronging populace with haſty ſtrides
Obſtruct the eaſy way; the rocking º" Philipi,
Supplants their footſteps; to and fro they reel.
2. To
faſting
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U P
--
it:
2. To diſplace by ſtratagem; to turn out.
It is Philociea his heart is ſet upon ; it is my daughter I
have borne to ſupplant me, Sidney.
Upon a juſt ſurvey, take Titus' part,
And ſo ſupplant us for ingratitude.
3. To diſplace; to overpower; to force away.
If it be fond, call it a woman's fear;
Which fear, if better reaſons can ſupplant,
I will ſubſcribe, and ſay, I wrong'd the duke. Shakeſpeare.
Suppla"NTER. n.ſ.. [from ſupplant..] One that ſupplants; one
that diſplaces.
SUPPLE, adj. [ſºuple, French.]
1. Pliant; flexible.
The joints are more ſupple to all feats of ačtivity in youth
than afterwards. Bacon.
Will ye ſubmit your necks, and chuſe to bend
The ſupple knee Milton's Parad. Lºft.
And ſometimes went, and ſometimes ran -
With ſupple joints, as lively vigour led. Milton.
No women are apter to ſpin linen well than the Iriſh, who
labouring little in any kind with their hands, have their fingers
more ſupple and ſoft than other women of the poorer condi-
Shakeſpeare,
tion in England. Temple.
2. Yielding; ſoft; not obſtinate.
When we’ve ſtuff’d
Theſe pipes ard theſe conveyances of blood
With wine and feeding, we have ſuppler ſouls
Than in our prieſtlike faſts. Shakeſpeare.
Ev’n ſofter than thy own, of ſuppler kind,
More exquiſite of taſte, and more than man refin'd. Dryden.
If puniſhment reaches not the mind, and makes not the
will ſupple, it hardens the offender. Locke.
3. Flattering ; fawning; bending.
There is ſomething ſo ſupple and inſinuating in this ab-
furd unnatural doctrine, as makes it extremely agreeable to a
prince's ear. Addiſon.
4. That which makes ſupple.
Each part depriv'd of ſpple government,
Shall ſtiff, and ſtark, and cold appear, like death. Shakeſp.
To SUPPLE. v. a. [from the adjective.]
1. To make pliant; to make ſoft; to make flexible.
Poultices allaying pain, drew down the humours, and ſup-
pled the parts, thereby making the paſſages wider. Temple.
To ſupple a carcaſs, drench it in water. Arbuthnot.
2. To make compliant.
Knaves having by their own importunate ſuit,
Convinc'd or ſuppl’d them, they cannot chuſe,
But they muſt blab. Shakeſpeare's Othell,
A mother perſiſting till ſhe had bent her daughter's mind,
and ſuppled her will, the only end of correàion, ſhe eſtabliſh-
ed her authority thoroughly ever after. Locke on Education.
To SUPPLE. v. n. To grow ſoft; to grow pliant.
The ſtones
Did firſt the rigour of their kind expel,
And ſuppled into ſoftneſs as they fell. Dryden.
SUPPLEMENT. n.ſ.. [ſupplement, Fr. ſupplementum, Latin.]
Addition to any thing by which its defects are ſupplied.
Unto the word of God, being in reſpect of that end for
which God ordained it, perfeół, exact, and abſolute in itſelf,
we do not add reaſon as a ſupplement of any maim or defect
therein, but as a neceſſary inſtrument, without which we
could not reap by the ſcriptures perfection that fruit and bene-
fit which it yieldeth. Hooker.
His blood will atone for our imperfeótion, his righteouſneſs
be imputed in ſupplement to what is lacking in ours. Rogers.
SUPPLE ME’NTAL. U adj. [from ſupplement.] Additional; ſuch
SUPPLE ME'N TA R Y. } as may ſupply the place of what is loſt
or wanting.
Supplemental ads of ſtate were made to ſupply defeóts of
laws; and ſo tonnage and poundage were collected. Clarendon.
Divinity would not then paſs the yard and loom, nor preach-
ing be taken in as an eaſier ſupplementary trade, by thoſe that
diſliked the pains of their own. Decay of Piety.
Provide his brood next Smithfield fair,
With ſºppºnental hobby horſes; -
And happy be their infant courſes. Prior.
Su’PPLE N Ess. m. ſ. [/ºupleſe, Fr. from ſupple.]
1. Pliantneſs; flexibility; readineſs to take any form.
The fruit is of a pleaſant taſte, cauſed by the ſuppleneſ and
gentleneſs of the juice, being that which maketh the boughs
alſo ſo flexible. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Readineſs of compliance; facility.
Study gives ſtrength to the mind, converſation grace; the
firſt apt to give ſtiffneſs, the other ſupplemſ." Temple.
A compliance and ſuppleneſs of their wills, being by a ſteady
hand introduced by parents, will ſeem natural to them, pre-
venting all occaſions of ſtruggling. Lºcke.
SU’PPLEToR Y. m.ſ.. [ſuppletorium, Latin.] That which is to
fill up deficiencies.
That ſuppletory of an implicit belief is by Romaniſts con-
ceived ſufficient for thoſe not capable of an explicit. Hamm.
Su'PP11ANT, adj. [ſuppliant, Fr.]
precatory; ſubmiſſive.
To thoſe legions your levy -
Muſt be ſpliant. Shaft ſheare's Cymbeline.
To bow and ſue for grace with ſuppliant knee. , 44ilº.
The rich grow ſuppliant, and the poor grow proud :
Thoſe offer mighty gain, and theſe aſk more. Dryden.
Conſtant to his firſt decree,
To bow the haughty neck, and raiſe the/*;
fragra
Su'ppliant. n. ſ. [from the adjećtive..] An humble petitioner;
one who begs ſubmiſſively.
A petition from a Florentine I undertook,
Vanquiſh'd thereto by the fair grace and ſpeech
Of the poor ſuppliant Shakeſpeare.
When corn was given them gratis, you repin’d;
Scandal'd the ſuppliants for the people, call'd them
Time-pleaſers, flatterers. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Hourly ſuitors come:
The eaſt with incenſe and the weſt with gold,
Will ſtand like ſuppliants to receive her doom. Dryden.
Spare this life, and hear thy ſuppliant's prayer. Dryden.
SupplićANT. m. ſ. [from ſupplicate.j One that entreats or
implores with great ſubmiſſion; an humble petitioner.
The prince and people of Nineveh aſſembling themſelves as
a main army of ſupplicants, God did not withſtand them.
Hooker.
The wiſe ſupplicant, though he prayed for the condition he
thought moſt deſirable, yet left the event to God. , Rogers.
Abraham, inſtead of indulging the ſupplicant in his deſire
of new evidence, refers him to what his brethren had. Atterbury.
To SU(PPLICATE. v. n. [ſupplier, Fr. ſupplico, Lat. from/wp-
plex.]. To implore ; to entreat; to petition ſubmiſſively and
humbly.
Many things a man cannot with any comelineſs ſay or do,
a man cannot brook to ſupplicate or beg. Bacon.
Thither the kingdoms and the nations come,
In ſupplicating crowds to learn their doom. Addison.
Supplication... n.ſ.. [ſupplication, Fr. from ſupplicate.]
1. Petition humbly delivered; entreaty.
My lord protećtor will come this way by and by, and then
we may deliver “ſ. in the quill. Shakeſpeare.
y mother bows,
As if Olympus to a mole-hill ſhould
In ſupplication nod. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. Petitionary worſhip ; the adoration of a ſuppliant or petitioner.
Praying with all prayer, and ſupplication, with all perſeve-
Entreating; beſeeching;
rance and ſupplication for all ſaints. Eph. vi. 18.
Bend thine ear
To ſupplication; hear his fighs though mute. Milton.
Theſe prove the common practice of the worſhip of ima-
ges in the Roman church, as to the rites of ſupplication and
adoration, to be as extravagant as among the heathens. Stilling.
We ſhould teſtify our dependence upon God, and our con-
fidence of his goodneſs by conſtant prayers and ſupplications
for mercy. Hillotſon.
To Supply' v. a. I ſuppleo, Lat. ſuppleer, French.]
I. To fill up as any deficiencies happen.
Out of the fry of theſe rakehell horſeboys are their kearn
ſupplied and maintained. Spenſer.
2. To give ſomething wanted; to yield; to afford.
They were princes that had wives, ſons, and nephews; and
yet all theſe could not ſupply the comfort of friendſhip. Bacon.
I wanted nothing fortune could ſupply,
Nor did ſhe ſlumber 'till that hour dény.
3. To relieve.
Although I neither lend nor borrow,
Yet, to ſupply the ripe wants of my friend,
I’ll break a cuſtom. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
4. To ſerve inſtead of.
Burningſhips the baniſh'd ſun ſupply,
Dryden.
And no light ſhines but that by which men die. Waller.
5. To give or bring, whether good or bad.
Nearer care ſupplies
Sighs to my breaſt, and ſorrow to my eyes. Prior.
6. To fill any room made vacant.
Upſtart creatures to ſpply our vacant room. Milton.
The ſun was ſet; and Veſper, to ſupply
His abſent beams, had lighted up the ſky. Dryden.
7. To accommodate; to furniſh.
While trees the mountain-tops with ſhades ſupply,
Your honour, name, and praiſe ſhall never die. Dryden.
. The reception of light muſt be ſupplied by ſome open form
of the fabrick. Wotton.
My lover, turning away ſeveral old ſervants, ſippied me
with others from his own houſe. Swift.
SUPPLY'. n ſ [from the verb..] Relief of want; cure of défi.
ciencies.
I mean that now your abundance may be a ſupply for their
want, that their abunda::ce alſo may be a ſupply for your want.
2 Cº. viii. 14.
Art<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U P
S U P
-- a---
* * ides
that fund each juſt ſupply provideº
wº": ſhow, and without pomp preſides. Pope.
To sº... [ſºrter, French; ſºrt", Ital.]
- . . . . ; to bear up. -
I. To º iº each flow'r of tender ſtalk. Milton.
iſ, Hv, Pi f d proud
The palace built by Picus, vaſt and p 2 *
sº by a hundred pillars ſtood. - Dryden.
'ri. original community of all things appearing from this
donation of God, the ſovereignty of Adam, built upon his pri-
wate dominion, muſt fall, not having any foundation “ſ.
- 6.
port it. - - - - ac
2. ‘To endure any thing painful without being overcome.
Strongly to ſuffer and ſupport our Pains. Milton.
Could'ſt thou ſupport that burden? Milton.
This fierce demeanour, and his inſolence,
The patience of a god could not ſupport. Dryden.
3. To endure.
She ſcarce awake her eyes could keep,
Unable to ſupport the fumes of ſleep. Dryden.
None can ſupport a diet of fleſh and water without acids, as
ſalt, vinegar, and bread, without falling into a putrid ſever.
- Arbuthnot on Aliments.
4. To ſuſtain; to keep from fainting.
- With inward conſolations recompens'd,
And oft ſupported.
Suppo'RT. n.ſ.. [ſuppºrt, French; from the verb.]
1. Aćt or power of ſuſtaining.
Though the idea we have of a horſe or ſtone be but the col-
leółion of thoſe ſeveral ſenſible qualities which we find united
in them, yet, becauſe we cannot conceive how they ſhould
ſubſiſt alone, we ſuppoſe them exiſting in and ſupported by
ſome common ſubječt, which ſupport we denote by the name
ſubſtance, though it be certain we have no clear idea of that
ſupport. Locke.
2. Prop; ſuſtaining power.
Milton.
3. Neceſſaries of life.
4. Maintainance; ſupply.
Suppo'RTABLE. adj. [ſupportable, French; from ſupport. J
Tolerable; to be endured. It may be obſerved that Shake-
... ſpeare accents the firſt ſyllable.
As great to me, as late; and, ſuppºrtable
To make the dear loſs, have I means much weaker -
Than you may call to comfort you. Shakespeare Tempeſt.
Alterations in the project of uniting Chriſtians might be
very ſupportable, as things in their own nature indifferent. Sw.
wiſh that whatever part of misfortunes they muſt bear,
may be rendered ſupportable to them. Pºpe.
Suppo'RTABLE Ness. n.J. [from ſupportable.] The ſtate of
being tolerable.
SUPPO'RTANce. }*ſ [from {{...} Maintenance; ſup-
Support A’t 1o N. S. port. Both theſe words are obſolete.
Give ſome ſupportance to the bending twigs. Shakeſpeare.
His quarrel he finds ſcarce worth talking of, therefore draw
for the ſupportance of his vow. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
The benefited ſubjećt ſhould render ſome ſmall portion of
his gain, for the ſupportation of the king's expence. Bacon.
SUPPo'RTER, n.ſ.. [from ſupport.]
I. One that ſupports.
You muſt walk by us upon either hand,
And good ſupporters are you. . Shakespeare Maſ for Maſure.
Becauſe a relation cannot be founded in nothing, and the
thing here related as a ſupporter, or a ſupport, is not repreſented
to the mind by any diſtinét idea. Locée.
2. Prop; that by which any thing is borne up from falling.
More might be added of helms, creſts, mantles, and ſup-
porters. Camden.
The ſockets and ſupporters of flowers are figured. Bacon.
We ſhall be diſcharged of our load; but you, that are de-
ſigned for beams and ſupporters, ſhall bear. L'Eſtrange.
There is no loſs of room at the bottom, as there is in a
building ſet upon ſupporters. AMortimer's Huſbandry.
3 Suſtainer; comforter.
. The ſaints have a companion and fupporter in all their miſe-
res. . South's Sermons.
4. Maintainer; defender.
The beginning of the earl of Eſſex I muſt attribute in great
Part to my lord of Leiceſter; but yet as an introducer or ſup-
porter, not as a teacher. Wotton.
All examples repreſent ingratitude as ſitting in its throne,
with pride at its right hand, and cruelty at its left; worthy
fupporters of ſuch a reigning impiety. South.
ove was no more, when loyalty was gone,
The great ſupporter of his awful throne. Dryden.
SUPPo **** adj. [from ſuppoſe.] That may be ſuppoſed.
Invincible ignorance is, in the far greateſt number of men,
º to be confronted againſt the neceſſity of their believing
all the ſeverals of any ſuppºſable catalogue. Hammond.
Supposal. n.ſ. from - - . .
gination; tº Jºppºſe..] Poſition without proof; ima-
Holdi Young Fortinbras,
Holding a Yºak ſuppoſal of our worth,
Thinks our ſtate to be out of frame.
4.
Shakeſpeare.
Little can be looked for towards the advancement of nat
ral theory, but from thoſe that are likely to mend our proſ .
the defect of events, and ſenſible appearances, ſuffer us . ro.
ceed no further towards ſcience, than to imperfect gº
timorous ſuppoſals. Glanv. Stepſ. Preface
Intereſt, with a Jew, never proceeds but upon ſuppoſal t
leaſt of a firm and ſufficient bottom. South
Artful men endeavour to entangle thoughtleſs women b.
bold ſuppoſals and offers. Clariſ.
To SUPPOSE. v. a. [ſuppoſer, French; ſºppono, Latin.] -
1. To lay down without proof; to advance by way of argument
or illuſtration without maintaining the truth of the poſition
Suppºſe ſome ſo negligent that they will not be broughto
learn by gentle ways, yet it does not thence follow th: the
rough diſcipline of the cudgel is to be uſed to all, Locke
2. To admit without proof. -
This is to be entertained as a firm principle, that when we
have as great aſſurance that a thing is, as we could poſſibly
Jºppºſing it were, we ought not to make any doubt of i.
exiſtence. - - - - Tilliſon,
3. To imagine; to believe without examination.
Tell falſe Edward, thy ſuppºſed king,
That Lewis of France is ſending over maſkers. Skałºff.
Let not my lord ſuppºſe that they have ſlain all the king's
ſons ; for Ammon only is ſlain. 2 Sa. xiii. 37.
I ſuppoſe we ſhould compel them to a quick reſult. Mººn.
4. To require as previous to itſelf.
This ſuppºſeth ſomething, without evident ground. Hall.
One falſhood always ſuppoſes another, and renders all you
can ſay ſuſpected. Female Quixote.
SU'ppose. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Suppoſition; poſition without
proof; unevidenced conceit.
That we come ſhort of our ſuppºſe ſo far,
That after ſev'n years ſiege, yet Troy-walls ſtand? Shalºft,
Is Egypt's ſafety, and the king's, and your's,
Fit to be truſted on a bare ſuppºſe
That he is honeſt Dryden's Cleomenei,
Suppo's ER. n.ſ.. [from ſppoſe..] One that ſuppoſes.
Thou haſt by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit ſºppoſers bleer'd thine eyne. Shałºńar.
Supposition. n.ſ.. [ſuppºſition, French; from ſuppoſ.j Po-
ſition laid down; hypotheſis; imagination yet unproved.
In ſaying he is a good man, underſtand me that he is ſuff-
cient; yet his means are in ſuppoſition. Shakespeare.
Sing, ſyren, for thyſelf, and I will dote;
Spread o'er the ſilver waves thy golden hairs,
And as a bed I'll take thee, and there lye;
And in that glorious ſuppoſition think -
He gains by death, that hath ſuch means to die. Shakeſp.
This is only an infallibility upon ſuppoſition, that if a thing
be true, it is impoſſible to be falſe. Tilſºn.
Such an original irreſiſtible notion is neither requiſite upon
ſuppoſition of a Deity, nor is pretended to by religion. Bentley.
Suppositi"tious. adj. [from ſuppoſitus, ſuppºſititiuſ, La.) Not
genuine; put by a trick into the place or character belonging
to another.
The deſtruction of Muſtapha was ſo fatal to Solyman's line,
as the ſucceſſion of the Turks from Solyman is ſuſpected to be
of ſtrange blood; for that Selymus II. was thought to beſp-
poſititious. Bacon.
It is their opinion that no man ever killed his father; but
that, if it ſhould ever happen, the reputed ſon muſt have been
illegitimate, ſuppoſititious, or begotten in adultery. Addiſon.
Some alterations in the globe tend rather to the benefit of
the earth, and its produćtions, than their deſtruction, as all
theſe ſuppoſititious ones manifeſtly would do. Woºdward.
Suppositiºtiousness. n. / [from ſuppoſititiouſ. J State ºf
being counterfeit. -
Suppo'sitively. adv, [from ſuppoſe J. Upon ſuppoſition. . .
The unreformed ſinner may have ſome hope ſppoſitively, if
he do change and repent: the honeſt penitent may hºpe Po".
tively. - Hammond.
Suppo'sitory. m. ſ. ſſpºſitoire, Fr. ſuppºſitorium, Latin.]
A kind of ſolid clyſter.
Nothing relieves the head more than the piles, ºft
poſitories of honey, aloes, and rock-ſalt ought to be tried. #. -
Těšū‘PPRESS. v. Jºnº.jpprº, Lat, ſuppºinºſ
1. To cruſh; to overpower; to overwhelm ; to ſubdue ; to re-
duce from any ſtate of ačtivity or commotion.
Glo'ſter would have armour out of the Tower, VI
To crown himſelf king and ſuppreſs the prince. Shakespeare º i.
Every rebellion, when it is ſuppreſſed, doth make º d
jećt weaker, and the prince ſtronger. Davies on Iri º
Sir William Herbert, with a well armed and ordered º
pany, ſet ſharply upon them; and oppreſſing ſome of "; .
wardeſt of them by death, ſuppreſſed the reſidue by fear. Hayw.
2. To conceal; not to tell; not to reveal. r.
Things not reveal’d, ; º: King,
Only omniſcient, hath ſuppreſs'd in night. . . .
sºn. ſuppreſſes the iſ. and this keeps him in a ;
ſuſpenſe; and, if the very cloſe of her ſpeech, the tº
mentions it. - frºm.” Nºte on the Olſº
3. To
Milton.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U P
S U R
---, -
--
--y
-
3. To keepin; not to let out. -
Well did'ſt thou, Richard, to ſuppreſ; thy voice;
For had the paſſions of thy heart burſt out,
I fear we ſhould have ſeen decypher'd there
More ranc'rous ſpight, more furious raging broils. Shakeſp.
SUPPRE'ssion. n.ſ.. [ſuppreſſion, Fr. ſuppreſſio, Lat. from ſuppreſs.]
1. The ačt of ſuppreſſing.
2. Not publication.
You may depend upon a ſuppreſſion of theſe verſes. Pope.
Suppre’ssor. n. ſ. . [from ſuppreſs. J One that ſuppreſſes,
cruſhes, or conceals.
To SU'PPURATE. v. a. [from pus puris, Lat. ſuppurer, Fr.]
To generate pus or matter.
This diſeaſe is generally fatal: if it ſuppurates the pus, it is
evacuated into the lower belly, where it produceth putrefac-
tion. Arbuthnot on Diet.
To SU’PPURATE. v. n. To grow to pus.
SUPPURA'tion. n.ſ.. [ſuppuratin, French; from ſuppurate.]
1. The ripening or change of the matter of a tumour into pus,
If the inflammation be gone too far towards a ſuppuration,
then it muſt be promoted with ſuppuratives, and opened by
inciſion. Wiſeman.
This great attrition muſt produce a great propenſity to the
putreſcent alkaline condition of the fluids, and conſequently
to ſuppurations. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. The matter ſuppurated.
The great phyſician of ſouls ſometimes cannot cure with-
out cutting us: fin has feſtered inwardly, and he muſt launce
the impoſthume, to let out death with the ſuppuration. South.
Suppur Ativ E. adj. [ſuppuratif, French; from ſuppurate.]
Digeſtive; generating matter.
Supputation. n.ſ.. [ſupputation, French ; ſupputo, Latin. 1
Reckoning; account; calculation; computation.
From theſe differing properties of day and year ariſe diffi-
culties in carrying on and reconciling the ſupputation of time in
long meaſures. Holder on 7 ime.
The Jews ſaw every day their Meſfiah ſtill farther removed
from them; that the promiſes of their doćtors, about his ſpeedy
manifeſtations, were falſe; that the predićtions of the prophets,
whom they could now no longer underſtand, were covered
with obſcurity; that all the ſupputations of time either termi-
nated in Jeſus Chriſt, or were without a period. Wºff.
To Suppu'te. v. a. [from ſupputo, Latin.] To reckon; to
calculate. -
SU'PRA, [Latin] in compoſition, ſignifies above, or before.
SUPRALA'PsARy. adj. [ſupra and lapſus, Latin.] Antecedent
to the fall of man.
SUPRAvu'lgAR. adj. [ſupra and vulgar.] Above the vulgar.
None of theſe motives can prevail with a man to furniſh
himſelf with ſupravulgar and noble qualities. Collier.
SUPRE/MAcy. n.ſ.. [from ſupreme.] Higheſt place; higheſt
authority; ſtate of being ſupreme.
No appeal may be made unto any one of higher power, in
as much as the order of your diſcipline admitteth no ſtanding
inequality of courts, no ſpiritual judge to have any ordinary
ſuperior on earth, but as many ſupremacies as there are pariſhes
and ſeveral congregations. Hooker.
As we under heav'n are ſupreme head,
So, under him, that great ſupremacy,
Where we do reign, we will alone uphold. Shakespeare K. john.
I am aſham'd that women
Seek for rule, ſupremacy, and ſway,
When they are bound to ſerve, love, and obey. Shakeſp.
Put to proof his high ſupremacy,
Whether upheld by ſtrength, or chance, or fate. Milton.
Henry VIII. had no intention to change religion: he con-
tinued to burn proteſtants after he had caſt off the pope's
ſupremacy. Swift.
You're formed by nature for this ſupremacy, which is already
granted from the diſtinguiſhing character of your writing.
Dryden to Dorſet.
To deny him this ſupremacy is to dethrone the Deity, and
give his kingdom to another. Rogers.
From ſome wild curs that from their maſters ran,
Abhorring the ſupremacy of man, }
In woods and caves the rebel race began.
SUPREME. adj. [ſupremus, Latin.]
1. Higheſt in dignity; higheſt in authority. It may be obſerved
that ſuperiour is uſed often of local elevation, but ſpreme only
of intelle&amp;tual or political.
As no man ſerveth God, and loveth him not ; ſo neither
can any man ſincerely love God, and not extremely abhor that
fin which is the higheſt degree of treaſon againſt the ſupreme
Guide and Monarch of the whole world, with whoſe divine
authority and power it inveſteth others. Hooker.
The god of ſoldiers,
With the conſent of ſupreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleneſs. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
This ſtrength, the ſeat of Deity ſupreme. Milton.
The monarch oak, the patriarch of the trees,
Shoots riſing up, and ſpreads by ſlow degrees;
Dryden.
Three centuries he grows, and three he ſlays --
Supreme in ſtate, and in three more decays. Dryden,
2. Higheſt; moſt excellent.
My ſoul akes
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither ſupreme, how ſoon confuſion
May enter 'twixt the gap of both. Shakeſp. Coriolanus,
No fingle virtue we could moſt commend,
Whether the wife, the mother, or the friend;
For ſhe was all in that ſuprem: degree,
That as no one prevail'd, ſo all was ſhe. Dryd
To him both heav'n" ryaen.
The right had giv'n,
And his own love bequeath'd ſupreme command. Dryden.
SUPREMELY. adv. [from the adjective..] In the higheſt de-
gree.
The ſtarving chemiſt in his golden views
Supremely bleſt, the poet in his muſe. Pote.
Sur. [ſur, French..] In compoſition, means upon or over and
above.
Su'RADDItion. m. ſ. [ſur and addition.] Something added to
the name.
He ſerv'd with glory and admir'd ſucceſs,
So gain'd the ſuraddition, Leonatus. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
sº. adj. [from ſura, Latin.] Being in the calf of the
eg. -
He was wounded in the inſide of the calf of his leg, into
the ſural artery. //iſeman's Surgery.
SU'RANce. n.ſ. [ from ſure. J Warrant; ſecurity; aſſu-
rance. -
Give ſome ſurance that thou art revenge;
Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot-wheels. Shakeſp.
To SURBA’re. v. a. [ſolhatir, French..] To bruiſe and batter
the feet with travel; to harraſs; to fatigue.
Their march they continued all that night, the horſemen
often alighting, that the foot might ride, and others taking
many of them behind them; however they could not but be
extremely weary and ſurbated. Clarendon.
Chalkyland ſurbates and ſpoils oxens feet. Mortimer.
SURBE’r. The participle paſſive of ſurbeat.
A bear and tyger being met
In cruel fight on Lybick ocean wide,
Eſpy a traveller with feet ſurbet,
Whom they in equal prey hope to divide. Fairy Queen.
To SURce’Ase. v. n. Tſur and ceſſer, French ; ceſ, Latin.]
1. To be at an end; to ſtop; to ceaſe; to be no longer in uſe
or being. -
Small favours will my prayers increaſe:
Granting my ſuit, you give me all;
And then my prayers muſt needs ſurceoſe ;
For I have made your godhead fall.
2. To leave off; to pračtiſe no longer; to refrain finally.
To fly altogether from God, to deſpair, that creatures unwor-
thy ſhall be able to obtain any thing at his hands, and under
that pretence to ſurceaſe from prayers, as bootleſs or fruitleſs
offices, were to him no leſs injurious than pernicious to our
Donne.
own ſouls. Płooker.
Nor did the Britiſh ſquadrons now ſurceaſe ---
To gall their foes o'erwhelm'd. Philips.
To Surcº aſse. v. a. To ſtop; to put to an end. Obſolete.
All pain hath end, and every war hath peace;
But mine no price, nor prayer, may ſºrceaſe. Spenſer.
SURce A's E. m.ſ. Ceflation; ſtop. - - - -
It might very well agree with your principles, if your diſ-
cipline were fully planted, even to ſend out your writs of fir-
ceaſe unto all courts of England for the moſt things handled in
them. Hooker.
SURchA’rce. n.ſ [ſurcharge, French; from the verb ] Over-
burthen; more than can be well born. -
The air, after receiving a charge, doth not º: iſ:
- rge, with like appetite as it doth the
- º or greater charge, ; Natural Hiſtory.
An objećt of ſurcharge or exceſs deſtroyeth the ſenſe; as
the light of the ſun, the eye; a violent ſound near the ear,
the hearing. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The moraliſts make this raging of a lion to be A ſºlarge
of one madneſs upon another, L’Eſtrange.
To SURchARC E. v. a. [ſurcharger, French..] To overload;
to overburthen. - ble
They put upon every portion of land a reaſonab º
which they called Romeſcot, the which might not ſuſcºgrge
the tenant or freeholder. - Spenſer on Ireland.
T. ... .ºned to Tauris, in hope to have ſuddenly
iſ...! ! . . ... ºcharged with the pleaſures of ſo rich a
º his enemy, ſurchang Knolley's Hiſtºry ºf the lurks.
More º ltitud
,'n ſºrchang'd with potent multitute, -
łºś. broils. . . 4Miltºn's Paradiſ. Ioff.
fic ceas'd, diſcerning Adam with ſch joy
Sºh.gºd, as had, like grief, been dew'd in tears.
without the vent of words. Miltºn's Paradiº Lºff.
25 T When<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U R
S U R
--- -- - - - -
; raceful ſorrow in her pomp appears,
s...}. in Meleſinda's tears: .
Your head reclin'd, as hiding grief from view, Dryd
Droops like a roſe furcharg’d with morning dew. ryaen.
SURchA'RGER. º. ſ: [from ſurcharge.] One that overburthens.
U n.ſ. [ſur and cingulum, Latin.]
N11 'NGLE. -
... with which the burthen is bound upon a horſe.
irdle of a caſſock. -
2. Tº: choſe the ſurcingle and gown. - Marvel.
Su'rcle. m.ſ. [ſurculus, Latin.] A ſhoot; a twig; a ſucker.
in general uſe. -
Nº. arboreous excreſcence, or ſuperplant, which the
tree cannot affimilate, and therefore ſprouteth not forth in
boughs and ſurcles of the ſame ſhape unto the tree. Brown.
The baſilica dividing into two branches below the cubit,
the outward ſendeth two ſurcle; unto the thumb. Brown.
Suºcoa.T. n.ſ. [ſarcot, old French; ſur and cºat.]. A ſhort
coat worn over the reſt of the dreſs. - -
The honourable habiliments, as robes of ſtate, parliament-
robes, the ſurcoat, and mantle. . Camden.
The commons were beſotted in exceſs of apparel, in wide
farcoat, reaching to their loins. Camden.
That day in equal arms they fought for fame;
Their ſwords, their ſhields, their ſurcoats were the ſame, Dry.
SURD. adj. [ſurdus, Latin. J -
1. Deaf; wanting the ſenſe of hearing.
2. Unheard; not perceived by the ear.
3. Not expreſſed by any term.
SURE. adj. [ſeure, French.]
1. Certain; unfailing; infallible. - -
The teſtimony of the Lord is ſure, and giveth wiſdom unto
the ſimple. Pſalm xix. 7.
Who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry foe
Can give it, or will ever? How he can, ...
Is doubtful; that he never will, is ſure. Milt. Parad. Lºft.
2. Certainly doomed. -
Our coin beyond ſea is valued according to the filver in it:
ſending it in bullion is the ſafeſt way, and the weightieſt isſure
to go. Locke.
3. Confident; undoubting; certainly knowing.
Friar Laurence met them both ;
Him he knew well, and gueſs'd that it was ſhe;
But, being maſk'd, he was not ſure of it. Shakeſpeare.
Let no man ſeek what may befall;
Evil he may be ſure. Milton.
The youngeſt in the morning are not ſure
That 'till the night their life they can ſecure. Denham.
While ſore of battle, while our wounds are green,
Why would we tempt the doubtful dye agen :
In wars renew'd, uncertain of ſucceſs,
Sure of a ſhare, as umpires of the peace. Dryden.
If you find nothing new in the matter, I am ſure much leſs
will you in the ſtile. Wake.
Be ſilent always, when you doubt your ſenſe; -
And ſpeak, though ſure, with ſeeming diffidence. Pope.
4. Safe; firm; certain; paſt doubt or danger.
Thy kingdom ſhall be ſure unto thee, after that thou ſhalt
have known that the heavens do rule. Dan. iv. 26.
He bad me make ſure of the bear, before I ſell his ſkin. L'Eſt.
They would make others on both fides ſure of pleaſing, in
preference to inſtruction. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
They have a nearer and ſurer way to the felicity of life, by
tempering their paſſions, and reducing their appetites. Templ.
A peace cannot fail us, provided we make ſure of Spain.
- Temple.
Revenge is now my joy; he's not for me,
And I’ll make ſure he ne'er ſhall be for thee. Dryden.
I bred you up to arms, rais'd you to power,
All to make ſure the vengeance of this day,
Which even this day has ruin'd. Dryd. Spaniſh Fryar.
Make Cato ſure, and give up Utica,
Caeſar will ne'er refuſe thee ſuch a trifle. Addiſon's Cato.
They have reaſon to make all actions worthy of obſerva-
tion, which are ſure to be obſerved. Atterbury.
5. Firm; ſtable; not liable to failure.
Thou the garland wear'ſt ſucceſſively;
Yet though thou ſtand'ſt more ſure than fººd do,
Thou art not firm enough. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
I wiſh your horſes ſwift and ſure of foot,
And ſo I do commend you to their backs. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Virtue, dear friend, needs no defence;
The fur'ſ guard is innocence. Roſcommon.
Partition firm and ſure the waters to divide. AMilton.
Doubting thus of innate principles, men will call pulling
*P the old foundations of knowledge and certainty: I per-
*ade myſelf that the way I have purſued, being conformable
to truth, lays thoſe foundations /urer. Locke.
To prove a genuine birth,
Qn female truth affenting faith relies :
Thus manifeſt of right, I build my claim
Sure founded on a fair maternal fame. 2
P ‘pe's Odyſſ.J.
-
6. To be SURF. Certainly. This is a vitious expreſſion: more
properly be ſure.
Objects of ſenſe would then determine the views of all ſuch
to be ſure, who converſed perpetually with them. Aurºr."
Though the chymiſt could not calcine the caput º
to obtain its fixed ſalt, tº be ſure it muſt have ſome, Arbuthnº.
SURE. adv. [ſurement, French.] Certainly ; without dout:
doubtleſs. It is generally without emphaſis; and, notwit.'
ſtanding its original meaning, expreſſes rather doubt than aſ.
ſertion.
Something, ſure, of ſtate
Hath puddled his clear ſpirit. Shakeſ are
Her looks were fluſh'd, and ſullen was her mien, tº
That ſure the virgin goddeſs, had ſhe been
Aught but a virgin, muſt the guilt have ſeen. Addiſon,
Sure the queen would wiſh him ſtill unknown: -
She loaths, deteſts him, flies his hated preſence. Smith.
Sure, upon the whole,
than a bad critick. Pºpe.
Suk efooted, adj. [Jure and ſoot] Treading firmly; not
ſtumbling.
True earneſt ſorrows, rooted miſeries,
Anguiſh in grain, vexations ripe and blown,
Surefooted griefs, ſolid calamities.
Su'Rely. adv. [from ſure.]
1. Certainly; undoubtedly; without doubt. It is often uſed
rather to intend and ſtrengthen the meaning of the ſentence,
than with any diſtinét and explicable meaning.
In the day that thou eateſt thereof thou ſhalt ſurd, die. Gºn.
Thou ſurely hadſt not come ſole fugitive. Milton,
He that created ſomething out of nothing, ſurely can raiſe
great things out of ſmall. South.
The curious have thought the moſt minute affairs of Rome
worth notice; and ſurely the conſideration of their wealth is
at leaſt of as great importance as grammatical criticiſms. Ari.
2. Firmly; without hazard.
He that walketh righteouſly, walketh ſarely.
Su'RENess. n.ſ.. [from ſure.] Certainty.
He diverted himſelf with the ſpeculation of the ſeed of co-
ral; and for more ſareneſ; he repeats it. Woodward.
Su'ret Iship. n.ſ. Ifrom ſurety..] The office of a ſurety or
bondſman; the aët of being bound for another.
Hath not the greateſt ſlaughter of armies been effeded by
ſtratagem And have not the faireſt eſtates been deſtroyed by
furetiſhip? South,
ldly, like priſoners, which whole months will ſwear
That only ſuretiſhip hath brought them there, Donne.
If here not clear'd, no ſuretyhip can bail
Condemned debtors from th’eternal gaol.
SU'RETY. n.ſ.. [ſareté, French.]
1. Certainty; indubitableneſs.
There the princeſſes determining to bathe, thought it was ſo
privileged a place as no body durſt preſume to come thither;
yet, for the more ſurety, they looked round about. Sidney.
Know of a ſurety that thy ſeed ſhall be a ſtranger. Gen. xv.
2. Foundation of ſtability; ſupport.
We our ſtate
Hold, as you your's, while our obedience holds;
On other ſurety none. -
3. Evidence; ratification; confirmation.
She call'd the ſaints to ſurety,
That ſhe would never put it from her finger,
Unleſs ſhe gave it to yourſelf. Shakeſtart.
4. Security againſt loſs or damage; ſecurity for payment.
There remains unpaid -
A hundred thouſand more, inſurety of the which
One part of Acquitain is bound to us. . . *::::::
5. Hoſtage; bondſman; one that gives ſecurity for anº”
one that is bound for another. -
That you may well perceive I have not wrong"y"
One of the greateſt in the Chriſtian world d; well
Shall be my ſurety. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
- - ire him.
I will be ſurety for him; of my hand ſhalt tho'..". 9.
a bad author deſerves better uſage
Herbert,
Denham,
Miltºn.
Yet be not ſurety, if thou be a father;
Love is a perſonal debt: I cannot #. -
My children's right, nor ought he take it. .
Åi, in .. are by others preſented with the º
of the parents, and interceſſion of ſureties, that º º, -
early admitted by baptiſm into the ſchool of Chriſt. - º
Su'rface. n.ſ. [ſur and face, French.] sº O
ſuperfice. It is accented by Milton on the laſt ſyllable.
which of us who beholds the bright ſuff" Miltºn.
Of this ethereous mold, whereon we ſtand. ical º
All their ſurfaces ſhall be truly plain, or truly ſº.
look all the ſame way, ſo as together to compºſe on '; Opt.
furface. Newton
Errours like ſtraws upon the ſurface. flow; Dryden.
He who would ſearch for pearls muſt dive below. ſº
To Su’RFEIT. v.a. [from ſur and faire, French, º : º ſatiety
enough, to overdo.] To feed with meat or drin
and ſickneſs; to cram overnuch. The
Herbert.
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U R
The ſurfeited grooms
Do mock their charge with ſhores.
Shakeſpeare,
To Su'RE eit. v. m. To be fed to ſatiety and ſickneſs.
The commonwealth is ſick of their own choice;
Their over-greedy love hath ſurfeited. Shakespeare Henry IV.
They are as ſick that ſurfeit with too much, as they that
ftarve with nothing. Shakeſp. Merchant of %.
Take heed left your hearts be overcharged with jurfeiting
and drunkenneſs. Luke xxi. 34.
Though ſome had ſo ſurfeited in the vineyards, and with
the wines, that they had been left behind, the generoſity of
the Spaniards ſent them all home. Clarendon.
They muſt be let looſe to the childiſh play they fancy,
which they ſhould be weaned from, by being made to ſurfit of
It. Locke.
Surfeit, "...ſ.. [from the verb.J Sickneſs or ſatiety cauſed
*
by overfulneſs.
When we are ſick in fortune, often the ſurfeits of our own
behaviour, we make guilty of our diſaſters the ſun, the moon
and ſtars. Shakeſp. King Lear.
How ill white hairs become a fool and jeſter!
I have long dream'd of ſuch a kind of man,
So ſurfeit ſwell'd, ſo old, and ſo profane. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Now comes the ſick hour that his ſurfeit madé;
Now ſhall he try his friends that flatter'd him. Shakespeare R. H.
Thou'ſt years upon thee, and thou art too full
Of the wars ſurfeits to go rove with one
That's yet unbruis'd.
Why, diſeaſe, do'ſt thou moleſt
Ladies, and of them the beſt ?
Do not men grow ſick of rites,
To thy altars, by their nights
Spent in ſurfeit * Ben, johnſon.
Surfeits many times turn to purges, both upwards and
downwards. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Peace, which he lov’d in life, did lend
Her hand to bring him to his end;
When age and death call’d for the ſcore,
No ſurfeits were to reckon for.
Our father
Has ta'en himſelf a ſurfeit of the world,
And cries, it is not ſafe that we ſhould taſte it. Otway.
Su'RFEItER. m. ſ. [from ſurfeit.] One who riots; a glutton.
I did not think
This am’rous ſurfeiter would have donn'd his helm
For ſuch a petty war. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
Su'RFEIT water. n.ſ.. [ſurfeit and water. J Water that
cures ſurfeits.
A little cold-diſtilled poppywater, which is the true ſurfeit-
water, with eaſe and abſtinence, often ends diſtempers in the
beginning. Locke.
Surge. n.ſ.. [from ſurgo, Latin.] A ſwelling ſea; wave roll-
ing above the general ſurface of the water; billow; wave.
The realm was left, like a ſhip in a ſtorm, amidſt all the
raging ſurges, unruled and undirected of any. Spenſer.
The wind-ſhak'dſarge, with high and monſtrous main,
Seems to caſt water on the burning bear,
And quench the guards of the ever-fired pole:
I never did like moleſtation view
On the enchafed flood. Shakeſp. Othello.
He trod the water,
Whoſe enmity he flung aſide, and breaſted
The ſurge moſt ſwoln that met him. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
It was formerly famous for the unfortunate loves of Hero
and Leander, drowned in the uncompaſſionate ſurges. Sandys.
The ſulph'rous hail
Shot after us in ſtorm, o'erblown, hath laid
The fiery ſurge, that from the precipice
Of heav'n receiv'd us falling. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
He ſweeps the ſkies, and clears the cloudy North:
He flies aloft, and with impetuous roar
Purſues the foaming ſurges to the ſhore.
Thetis, near Iſmena's ſwelling flood,
With dread beheld the rolling ſurges ſweep
In heaps his ſlaughter'd ſons into the deep. Pope.
To Su Roe. v. n. [from ſurgo, Latin.] To ſwell; to riſe
high.
From midſt of all the main
The ſurging waters like a mountain riſe.
He, all in rage, his ſea-god ſire beſought,
Some curſed vengeance on his ſon to caſt;
From fºrging gulfs two monſters ſtraight were brought. F.2.
Up from the bottom turn'd by furious winds
And ſurging waves, as mountains, to aſſault
Heav'n's height, and with the centre mix the pole. Milton.
Not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as ſince ; but on his rear,
Circular baſe of riſing folds, that tower'd
Fold above fold, a ſurging maze 44ilton's Parad. Loft.
Surging waves againſt a ſolid rock,
Though all to ſhivers daſh'd, th’ aſſault renew,
Vain batt'ry, and in froth or bubbles end. Milton,
Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Craſhaw:
Dryden.
Fairy Queen.
S U R
Su'Roeon. n ſ. [Corrupted by converſation from chirurgeon.]
One who cures by manual operation; one whoſe duty is to
act in external maladies by the direction of the phyſician.
ºº the i. of a better Jurgeon than my-
Ímedie with no wº ome few of her dying words. Sid.
man's matters; but withal, I am aſur-
geon to old ſhoes. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar
He that hath wounded his neighbour, is ...?tº º: aſar.
of the ſurgeon, and other incidence.” e º:cs
hough mºſt were ſorely wounded, none were ſlaſ ºr.
The ſurgeons ſoon deſpoil'd them of the arms an:
And ſome with ſalves they cure. &gt; Dryde
SU'RGEoNRY. n: ſ [for chirurgery.] The act of aft §
swº. ld } manual operation. g by
twould ſeem very evil ſurgery to cut off r
part of the body, which, tº: '. other ..º.
vered, might afterwards do good ſervice. Spenſer
But ſtrangely viſited people, yer.
The mere deſpair of ſurgery, he cures. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
They are often tarr'd over with the ſurgery of our ſheep
and would you have us kiſs tar Shaº.
Su'RGY: adj. [from ſurge.] Riſing in billows.
What cauſe hath led you to the Spartan court?
Do publick or domeſtick cares conſtrain
This toilſome voyage o'er the ſurgy main? Pope.
Sur lily, adv. [from Jury | In a ſurly manner.
sº */ [from ſury.] Gloomy moroſeneſs; ſour
ger.
Thus pale they meet; their eyes with fury burn;
None greets; for none the greeting will return;
But in dumb ſurlineſs, each arm'd with care,
His foe profeſt, as brother of the war. Dryden.
SU'RLING.. n.ſ. [from ſurly.] A four moroſe fellow. Notºſed.
| This ſour ſurlings are to be commended to fieur Gau-
arg. Camden.
SU'RLY. adj. [from run, ſour, Saxon.] Gloomily º3
rough; uncivil; ſour; ſilently angry.
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly ſurly groom,
That take it on you at the firſt ſo roundly.
That ſurly ſpirit, melancholy,
Had bak'd thy blood, and made it heavy thick,
Which elſe runs tickling up and down the veins,
Making that ideot laughter keep mens eyes,
And ſtrain their cheeks to idle merriment. Shakespeare K. john.
Againſt the Capitol I met a lion,
Who glar'd upon me, and went ſurly by,
Without annoying me. Shakespeare. julius Cæſar.
Repuls'd by ſurly grooms, who wait before
The ſleeping tyrant's interdićted door.
What if among the courtly tribe
You loſt a place, and ſav'd a bribe
And then in ſurly mood came here
To fifteen hundred pounds a year,
And fierce againſt the whigs harangu'd : Swift.
The zephyrs floating looſe, the timely rains,
Now ſoften’d into joy the ſurly ſtorms. Thomſon's Summer.
To Sur M1'se. v. a. [ſurmiſ, French.J. To ſuſpect; to image
imperfeółly; to imagine without certain knowledge.
Man coveteth what exceedeth the reach of ſenſe, yea ſome-
what above capacity of reaſon, ſomewhat divine and heavenly,
which with hidden exultation it rather ſurmiſeth than con-
ceiveth; ſomewhat it ſeeketh, and what that is direétly it
knoweth not; yet very intentive deſire thereof doth ſo incite
it, that all other known delights and pleaſures are laid aſide,
and they give place to the ſearch of this but only ſuſpected
deſire. Hooker.
Of queſtions and ſtriſes of words cometh envy, railings,
and evil ſurmiſings. 1 Tim. vi. 4.
Surmiſe not
His preſence to theſe narrow bounds confin'd. Milton.
It waſted nearer yet, and then ſhe knew
That what before ſhe but ſurmis'd, was true. Dryden.
This change was not wrought by altering the form or poſi-
tion of the earth, as was ſurmiſed by a very learned man, but
by diſſolving it. Woodward.
SURMI'se. n.) [ſurmiſ, French.J Imperfeit notion; ſuſpi-
cion; imagination not ſupported by knowledge. - -
To let go private ſurmiſes, whereby the thing itſelf is not
made better or worſe; if juſt and allowable reaſons might lead
them to do as they did, then are theſe cenſures fruſtrate. Ho.k.
They were by law of that proud tyranneſ,
Provok'd with wrath, º envy's ºft,
Condemned to that dungeon mercileſs,
Where they ſhould live in . and die in wretchedneſs, F.3.
Aaron is gone; and my compaſſionate heart
Will not permit my eyes ontº to behold
The thing, whereat it trembles by ſurmiſe. Shakeſpeare.
My thought, whºſe murthering yet is but fantaſtical,
Shakes ſo my ſingle ſtate of man, that function
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
Is ſmother'd in ſurmiſe. - Shakespare. Macbeth.
we double honour gain -
From his ſurmiſe prov’d falſe. Milton.
No<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U R
S U R
No ſooner did they eſpy the Engliſh turning from them,
were of opinion that they fled towards their ſhipping:
h - - -
...). was occaſioned, for that the Engliſh ſhips removed
the day before. - - Hayward.
Hence guilty joys, diſaſtes, farmiſes,
Falſe caths, falſe tears, deceits, diſguiſes. Pope.
No man ought to be charged with principles he actually
diſowns, unleſs his practices contradićt his profeſſion; not
upon ſmall ſuºmſø. Swift.
To SURMO'UNT.
1. To riſe above.
The mountains of Olympus, Atho, and Atlas, over-reach
and ſurmount all winds and clouds. Raleigh.
2. To conquer; to overcome. - -
Though no reſiſtance was made, the Engliſh had much ado
to ſurmount the natural difficulties of the place the greateſt part
of one day. Hayward.
He hardly eſcaped to the Perſian court; from whence, if
the love of his country had not ſurmounted its baſe ingratitude
to him, he had many invitations to return at the head of the
Perſian fleet; but he rather choſe a voluntary death. Swift.
3. To ſurpaſs; to exceed.
What ſurmounts the reach
Of human ſenſe, I ſhall delineate ſo,
By lik'ning ſpiritual to corporeal forms,
As may expreſs them beſt. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
Suk Mo‘UNTABLE. adj. [from ſurmount..] Conquerable; ſu-
perable.
Su’r Mullet. m.ſ.. [mugil, Lat.] A ſort of fiſh. Ainſwºrth.
SU'RNAME. n.ſ. [ ſurnom, French.]
1. The name of the family; the name which one has over and
above the Chriſtian name.
Many which were mere Engliſh joined with the Iriſh againſt
the king, taking on them Iriſh habits and cuſtoms, which
could never ſince be clean wiped away; of which ſort be moſt
of the ſurnames that end in an, as Hernan, Shinan, and Mun-
gan, which now account themſelves natural Iriſh Speºſer.
He, made heir not only of his brother's kingdom, but of
his virtues and haughty thoughts, and of the ſurname alſo of
Barbaroſla, began to aſpire unto the empire of all that part of
Africk. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The epithets of great men, monſieur Boileau is of opinion,
were in the nature of ſurnames, and repeated as ſuch. Pope,
2. An appellation added to the original name. -
Witneſs may
My ſurname Coriolanus: the painful ſervice,
The extreme dangers, and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankleſs country, are requited
But with that ſurname. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
To Su'RNAME. v. a... [ſurnommer, Fr. from the noun.] To
name by an appellation added to the original name. -
The people of Rome have by common voice,
In election for the Roman empire,
Choſen Andronicus, ſurnamed Pius. Shakespeare. Titus Andronicus.
Another ſhall ſubſcribe with his hand unto the Lord, and
ſurname himſelf by the name of Iſrael. Iſ, xliv, 5.
v. a. [ſurmonter, French.]
Pyreicus, only famous for counterfeiting earthen pitchers,
a ſcullery, rogues together by the ears, was ſirnamed Rupo-
graphus. Peacham on Drawing.
How he, ſurnam'd of Africa, diſmiſs'd
Jn his prime youth the fair Iberian maid. Milton.
God commanded man what was good; but the devil ſur-
named it evil, and thereby baffled the command. South.
To SURFA'ss. v. a. ſ. ſurpºſer, French..] To excel; to exceed;
to go beyond in excellence.
The climate's delicate,
Fertile the iſle, the temple much ſurpaſſing
The common praiſe it bears. Shakespeare Winter’s Tale.
O, by what name, for thou above all theſe,
Above mankind, or aught than mankind higher,
Šu paſſeſ' far my naming how may I c
- º: º author of this univerſe 2 Milton.
chilles, Homer's hero, in ſtrength and or ... ... ſº.
the reſt of the Grecian army. g courage /#/.
A nymph of late there was,
Whoſe heavily form her fellows did ſurpaſ,
The Pride and joy of fair Arcadia's plains. Dryden.
"der, or near the Line are mountains, which, for bigneſs
and number, Jººſ, thoſe of colder countrics, as much as
sº º herºſºft, that of thoſe countries. J/oodward.
-&gt; high º: Pºrticipial adj. [from ſurpaſs.] Excellent in an
O thou! that with ſurpaſſing glory crown'd
}º from thy ſole §. god &gt;
} this new world. - Milton's Paradiſ Loſt.
t! º º Proved him to be ſent from God, not more by
º * Power that was ſeen in them, than by that ſur-
sºº they dºmºnſtrated to the world. Calamy.
white º ſºſºli, Fr. ſuperpellicium, Lat J The
It º which the ºlºgy wear in their acts of miniſtration.
| "Wear the ſurplic. of humilit he black
a big heart. mility over the black gown of
-e *a*ſ, All's well that end, well.
The cinétus gabinus is a long garment, not unlike a ſur-
plice, which would have trailed on the ground, had it hun
looſe, and was therefore gathered about the middle with :
girdle. Addison.
SU'RPLUs. }". [ſur and flui, French.] A ſupernume.
SUR PLU's AGE. 5 rary part; overplus ; what remains when uſe
is ſatisfied.
If then thee liſt my offered grace to uſe,
Take what thou pleaſe of all this ſurpluſage;
If thee liſt not, leave have thou to refuſe.
That you have vouchſaf'd my poor houſe to viſit,
It is a ſurplus of your grace. Shakeſpeare.
When the price of corn falleth, men give overſariº, tú.
lage, and break no more ground. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
We made a ſubſtance ſo diſpoſed to fluidity, that by ſo ſmall
an agitation as only the ſurpluſage of that which the ambient
air is wont to have about the middle even of a Winter's day
above what it hath in the firſt part. Bº.
The officers ſpent all, ſo as there was no ſurpluſage of trea.
ſure; and yet that all was not ſufficient. Davies,
Whatſoever degrees of aſſent one affords a propoſition be-
yond the degrees of evidence, it is plain all that ſurpluſage of
aſſurance is owing not to the love of truth.
sº } n. ſ. [ſurpriſe, French; from the verb.]
1. The aët of taking unawares; the ſtate of being taken unawares,
Parents ſhould mark heedfully the witty excuſes of their
children, eſpecially at ſuddains and ſurpriſals; but rather mark
than pamper them. Watton.
This let him know,
Leſt, wilfully tranſgreſſing, he pretend
Supriſal, unadmoniſh'd, unforewarn'd. Miltºn's Par. Lºft.
I ſet aſide the taking of St. Jago and St. Domingo in Hiſ-
Spenſºr.
acke.
paniola, as ſurprizes rather than encounters. Bacon,
This ſtrange ſurpriſal put the knight
And wrathful ſquire into a fright. Hudibras.
There is a vaſt difference between them, as vaſt as between
inadvertency and deliberation, between ſurprize and ſet pur-
poſe. South.
2. A diſh, I ſuppoſe, which has nothing in it.
Few care for carving trifles in diſguiſe,
Or that fantaſtick diſh ſome call ſurpriſe. King's Confery,
. Sudden confuſion or perplexity.
To SURPRISE. v. a. [ſurpris, French, from ſuprendre.]
1. To take unawares; to fall upon unexpectedly.
The caſtle of Macduff I will ſurpriſe,
Seize upon Fife, give to the edge o' th' ſword
His wife, his babes. Shakeſpeare's Madith:
Now do our ears before our eyes, -
Like men in miſts,
Diſcover who'd the ſtate ſurprize,
And who reſiſts.
Bid her well beware,
Leſt, by ſome fair appearing good ſurpris'd,
Ben. jihnſºn,
She dićtate falſe, and miſinform the will. Milton,
How ſhall he keep, what, ſleeping or awake,
A weaker may ſurpriſe, a ſtronger take? Pºpe.
Who can ſpeak
The mingled paſſions that ſurpriz'd his heart! Thºmſºn.
2. To aſtoniſh by ſomething wonderful. - ioneſ
People were not ſo much frighted asſurprized at th: bigneſs
of the camel. - L'Eſirange.
3. To confuſe or perplex by ſomething ſudden.
Up he ſtarts, diſcover'd and ſurpris'd. .
SURPRI'sing, participial adj. [from ſurpriſ.
raiſing ſudden wonder or concern.
The greateſt actions of a celebrated perſon, hº.
priſing and extraordinary, are no more than what are expecte
from him. Adijºn's Spélatºr.
Surprisingly. adv. [from ſurpriſing.] To a “g" that
raiſes wonder; in a manner that raiſes wonder: hat
If out of theſe ten thouſand, we ſhould take tº º t .
are employed in publick buſineſs, the number of º:
remain will be ſurprizingly little. ink. Over-
Su'Rqued R.Y. m.ſ.. [ſur and cuider, old Fr. to think.] -
weening; pride; inſolence. Obſolete.
They overcommen, were deprived .
Of their proud beauty, and the one moiety
Milton.
J Wonderful;
Transform'd to fiſh for their bold ſurquedº). Fairy Qutt".
Late-born modeſty
Hath got ſuch root in eaſy waxen hearts, d parts
That men may not themſelves their own goº
Extol, without ſuſpect of ſurquºdºy. -
SURREBU'TTER. m. ſ. [In law.] A ſecond rebutter;
to a rebutter. A term in the courts: law
SURREJoi'NDER. m. ſ. [ſurrejoindre, French J [In .
ſecond defence of the plaintiff's action, oppoſiº. Bailty.
der of the defendant, which the civilians all triplicatio, tº
To SURRENDER. v.a. [ſurrendre, old French.]
1. To yield up; to deliver up.
Solemn dedication of churches ſerv in
publick, but further alſo to ſurrendº "P that rig
Donne,
anſwer
..]. A
rejoin-
-a them
only to make th:
e not y ht which
... ſ.
otherwitt
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U R
S U S
º
º,º
&amp;
-
* *
.
otherwiſe their founders might have in them, and to make
God himſelf their owner.
Płocker.
2. To deliver up an encmy.
Ripe age bade him ſurrender late,
His life and long good fortune unto final fate. Fairfax.
He willing to ſurrender up the caſtle, forbade his ſoldiers to
have any talk with the enemy Knolles.
To SURREND F R. v. n. To yield; to give ones ſelf up.
This mighty Archimedes too ſurrenders now. Glanville.
sº ; n.ſ. [from the verb ]
1. The act of yielding.
Our general mother, with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreprov’d,
And meek ſurrender, half-embracing lean'd
On our firſt father. A filton's Parad'ſ I off.
Having muſtered up all the forces he could, the clouds above
and the deeps below, he prepares for a ſurrender; aſſerting,
from a miſtaken computation, that all theſe will not come up
to near the quantity requiſite. //oodward.
Juba's furrender
Would give up Africk unto Caeſar's hands. Addiſon.
2. The act of reſigning or giving up to another.
If our father carry authority with ſuch diſpoſition as he
bears, this laſt ſurrender of his will but offend us. Shakespeare.
That hope quickly vaniſhed upon the undoubted intelli-
gence of that ſurrender. * Clarendon.
As oppreſſed ſtates made themſelves homagers to the Ro-
mans to engage their protection, ſo we ſhould have made an
entire ſurrenary of ourſelves to God, that we might have gain-
ed a title to his deliverances. Decay of Piety.
In paſſing a thing away by deed of gift, are required a ſur-
render on the giver's part, ºf all the property he has in it; and
to the making of a thing ſacred, this ſurrender by its right
owner is neceſſary. South's Sermons.
SU R REPTION. n ſ. ſ ſurreptus, Latin.] Surpriſe; ſudden and
unperceived invaſion.
Sins compatible with a regenerate eſtate, are ſins of a ſud-
denſurrºftiºn. Hammond.
SURREP I ITIOUS. adj. [ſurreptitius, Latin.] Done by
ſealth gotten or produced fraudulently.
Scaliger hath not tranſlated the firſt; perhaps ſuppoſing it
firreptitiouſ, or unworthy ſo great an aſſertion. Brown.
The Maſorites numbred not only the ſections and lines, but
even the words and letters of the Old Teſtament, the better to
ſecure it from ſurreptitious practices. Govern. of the Tongue.
A correct copy of the Dunciad, the many ſurreptitious ones
have rendered neceſſary. Letter to Publ. of Pope's Dunciad.
SUR REPTI'tioUSLY. adv. [from ſurreptitious.] By ſtealth;
fraudulently.
Thou haſt got it more ſurreptitiouſly than he did, and with
leſs effect. Govern. of the Tongue.
To Su'RRog Ate. v. a. [ſurrogo, Latin.] To put in the place
of another.
SU'RRog At E. m. ſ. [ ſurrogatus, Latin.]
gate; the deputy of an eccleſiaſtical judge.
To SURRou'ND. v. a. [ſarronder, Fr.] To environ; to en-
compaſs; to encloſe on all ſides.
Yelling monſters that with ceaſeleſs cry
Surround me, as thou ſaweſt.
A deputy; a dele-
Milton.
Cloud and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off. Milton.
Bad angels ſeen
On wing under the burning cope of hell,
*Twixt upper, neather, and ſurrounding fires. Milton.
As the bodies that ſurround us diverſly affect our organs,
the mind is forced to receive the impreſſions. Locke.
SUR'so'LID. [In algebra.] The fourth multiplication or power
of any number whatever taken as the root. Tº evoux.
SURso’il D Problem. [In mathematicks.] That which cannot
be reſolved but by curves of a higher nature than a conick
ſection. Harris.
SURtou'T. n.ſ. [French.] A large coat worn over all the
reſt.
The ſurtout if abroad you wear,
Repels the rigour of the air ;
Would you be warmer, if at home
You had the fabrick, and the loom Prior.
Sir Roger ſhe mortally hated, and uſed to hire fellows to
ſquirt kennel-water upon him, ſo that he was forced to wear
a ſurtout of oiled cloth, by which means he came home pretty
clean, except where the furt ºut was a little ſcanty. A buthnot.
To SURVENE. v. a. [ſurvenir, Fr.] To ſupervene; to come
as an addition.
Hippocrates mentions a ſuppuration that ſurvenes lethargies,
which commonly terminates in a conſumption.
To SURVEY. v. a. [ſurvebir, old French.]
1. To overlook; to have under the view; to view as from a
higher place.
Round he ſurveys, and well might where he ſtood,
So high above. Milton.
Harvey.
Though with thoſe ſtreams he no reſemblance hold,
Whoſe foam is amber and their gravel gold;
His genuine and leſs guilty wealth t'explore,
Search not his bottom, but ſurvey his ſhore.
2. To overſee as one in authority.
3. To view as examining.
The huſbandman's ſelf came that way,
Qf cuſtom to ſurvey his ground,
And his trees of ſtate incompaſs round.
Early abroad he did the world ſurvey,
As if he knew he had not long to ſtay.
With ſuch alter'd looks
All pale and ſpeechleſs, he ſurvey'd me round.
SURVE'Y. m. ſ. [from the verb.j View; proſpect.
Her ſtars in all their vaſt ſurvey
Uſeleſs beſides 1
Under his proud ſurvey the city lies,
And like a miſt beneath a hill doth riſe.
No longer letted of his prey,
He leaps up at it with enrag’d deſire,
Q'erlooks the neighbours with a wide ſurvey,
And nods at ev'ry houſe his threat'ning fire.
SUR v EYor. n. ſ. [from ſurvey.]
I. An overſeer ; one placed to ſuperintend others.
Were’t not madneſs then,
To make the fox ſurveyor of the fold: Shakesp. Henry VI.
Biſhop Fox was not only a grave counſellor for war or peace,
but alſo a good ſurveyor of works. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. A meaſurer of land.
Should we ſurvey
The plot of ſituation, and the model;
Queſtion ſurveyors, know our own eſtate,
How able ſuch a work to undergo,
To weigh againſt his oppoſite. Shakespeare's Henry IV.
Decempeda was a meaſuring rod for taking the dimenſions
of buildings; from hence came decempedator, for a ſurveyor,
uſed by Cicero. Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
SUR v EY'oRSHIP. m. ſ. [from ſurveyor.] The office of a ſur-
veyor.
To SUR'view. v. a. [ſurveoir, old French.] To overlook;
to have in view. Not in uſe. -
That turret's frame moſt admirable was,
Like higheſt heaven compaſſed round,
And lifted high above this earthly maſs,
Which it ſurview'd, as hills do lower ground. Fairy Queen.
To SURVIVE. v. n. [ſupervivo, Latin; ſurvivre, Fr.j
I. To live after the death of another.
Thoſe that ſurvive, let Rome reward with love. Shakespeare
Try pleaſure,
Which when no other enemy ſurvives,
Still conquers all the conquerors.
2. To live after any thing.
Now that he is dead, his immortal fame ſurviveth, and flou-
Denham.
Spenſer.
JWaller.
Dryden.
Milton,
Denham.
Dryden.
Denham.
riſheth in the mouths of all people. Spenſer.
The love of horſes which they had alive,
And care of chariots after death ſurvive. Dryden.
The rhapſodies, called the characteriſticks, would never
have ſurvived the firſt edition, if they had not diſcovered ſo
ſtrong a tincture of infidelity. JWatts.
3. To remain alive.
No longer now that golden age appears,
When patriarch-wits ſurviv'd a thouſand years;
Now length of fame, our ſecond life, is loſt,
And bare threeſcore is all ev'n that can boaſt;
Our ſons their father's failing language ſee,
And ſuch as Chaucer is, ſhall Dryden be. Pºpe.
To SURVI'v E. v. a. To outlive."
I'll aſſure her of
Her widowhood, be it that ſhe ſurvive; me,
In all my lands and leaſes whatſoever. - Shakeſpeare.
SURV1'veR. n.ſ.. [from ſurvive..] One who outlives another.
Your father loſt a father,
That father, his ; and the ſurvivor bound
In filial obligation, for ſome term, * r
To do obſcquious ſorrow. Shaºffeare's Hamlet.
Although ſome died, the father beholding ſo many deſcents,
the number of ſurvivors muſt ſtill be very great. Brown.
I did diſcern
From his{..., I could nothing learn, , , , Denham.
Her majeſty is heir to the ſurvivor of the late king, Swift.
Survivership. n.ſ. [from ſurviver.] The ſtate of outliving
nother. -
a Such offices granted in reverſion were void, unleſ, where
the grant has been by ſurvive ſhip. . 4liff's Parergon.
Susceptibiº Lity. m.ſ. [from Jºſeptible.] Quality of admit-
ing : tendency to admit.
º of thoſe influences, and the effects thereof
is the general providential law whereby other phyſical º
termed. *.
stºße. adj. [ſſºrptile, Fr. Prior has accented
this improperly on the firſt ſyllable.] Capable of admit-
ting. 25 U He<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U S
S U S
__- wr-
ed him platonically tº his own idea, delighting
º º: of * materials, becauſe he found "}.ſº
- * * II]. -
“ſº * years they are more ſuſceptible of virtuous
impreſſions than afterwards, when ſolicited by vulgar incli-
nations. L'Eſtrange;
Children's minds are narrow, and uſually ſuſeptible but of
one thought at once. ... Locke on Education.
Blow with empty words the ſuſceptible flame. Prior.
Susception. m. ſ [ſuſceptu, Latin.] Aét of taking.
A canon, promoted to holy orders, before he is of a law.
ful age for the fºſteſtion of orders, fhall have a voice in the
chapter. Ayliff's Parergon.
Susceptive. adj. [from ſuſceptus, Lat. this word is more *
logical, though leſs uſed than ſuſceptile.] Capable to admit.
Since our nature is ſo ſuſceptive of errours on all ſides, it is
fit we ſhould have notices given us how far other perſons may
become the cauſes of falſe judgments. I/att', lºgick.
Sescºriency. m.ſ. (from ſuftipient..] Reception; admiſſion:
SUSCIPIENT. n.ſ.. [ſ/cipiens, Latin.) One who takes; one
that admits or receives.
To SUSCITATE. v. n. [ſ/riter, French iſſºit, Lat.] To
rouſe; to excite. - -
It concurreth but unto prediſpoſed effects, and only ſºft-
rate; thoſe forms whoſe determinations are ſeminal, and pro-
ceed from the idea of themſelves. Brown's Pulgar Errºrs.
Suscita", 16 N. m. ſ. [ſuſcitation, Fr.from ſuſcitate. J The act
of rouſing or exciting.
To Suspe/c r. v. a. [ ſuſpicio, ſuſpecium, Lat.]
1. To ima_ine with a degree of fear and jealouſy what is not
known.
Nothing makes a man ſuſpect much, more than to know
little; and therefore men ſhould remedy ſuſpicion by procu-
ring to know more. Bacon.
Let us not then ſuſpe: our happy ſtate,
As not ſecure. Milton.
From her hand I could ſuſpect no ill. Milton.
2. To imagine guilty without proof.
Though many poets may ſuſpect themſelves for the partiali-
ty of parents to their youngeſt children, I know myſelf too
well to be ever ſatisfied with my own conceptions. Dryden.
Some would perſuade us that body and extenſion are the
ſame thing, which change the ſignification of words, which I
would not ſuſpe: them of, they having ſo ſeverely condemn-
ed the philoſophy of others. Locke.
3. To hold uncertain.
I cannot forbear a ſtory which is ſo well atteſted, that I
have no manner of reaſon to ſuſpe&amp; the truth. Addiſon.
To SUSPE'ct. v. n. To imagine guilt.
If I ſuſpect without cauſe, why then let me be your jeſt.
Shakeſpeare's Merry I/ives of J/indſor.
Suspe’ct, part. adj. [ſuſpeci, French J Doubtful.
, Sordid intereſts or affectation of ſtrange relations are not
like to render your reports ſuſpect or partial. Glanville.
SUSPE'ct. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Suſpicion ; imagination with-
out proof. Obſolete.
No fancy mine, no other wrong ſuffeół,
Make me, O virtuous ſhame, thy laws neglect.
The ſale of offices and towns in France,
If they were known, as the ſuſpect is great,
Would make thee quickly hop without a head. Shakeſpeare.
My moſt worthy maſter, in whoſe breaſt
Doubt and ſuſpeci, alas, are plac'd too late,
You ſhould have fear'd falſe times, when you did feaſt.Shał.
There be ſo many falſe prints of praiſe, that a man may
juſtly hold it a ſuſpeci. Bacon.
Nothing more jealous than a favourite towards the wain-
ing-time and ſuſpect of ſatiety. // atton.
They might hold ſure intelligence
Among themſelves, without ſuſpect toffend. Daniel.
If the king ends the differences, and takes away the ſuſ-
fe?, the caſe will be no worſe than when two duelliſts enter
the field. Suckling.
To Suspe ND. v. a. ſ. ſuſpendre, French; ſºftendo, Latin.]
1. To hang; to make to hang by any thing.
As 'twixt two equal armies fate
Suſpends uncertain victory;
Qur ſouls, which to advance our ſtate,
Were gone out, hung 'twixt her and me. Donne.
It is reported by Rufinus, that in the temple of Serapis,
there was an i on chariot ſuffended by loadſtones; which ſtones
removed, the chariot felland was daſhed to pieces. Brown.
2. T9 make to depend upon. .
God hath in the ſcripture ſuſpended the promiſe of eternal
*"Pon this condition, that without obedience and holings
ºf life no man ſhall ever ſee the Lord.
Sidney.
* - - - Tillotſon.
3. * 9 interrupt; to make to ſtop for a time.
The harmony
§ſpºnded hell, and took with wiſhment
The thronging audience. Milton.
The guard nor fights nor flies;
At once ſºft end, their courage and
their fate ſo near,
their fear. Denham.
This is the hinge on which turns the liberty of intelledual
beings, in their ſteady proſecution of true felicity, that the
can ſuſpend this proſecution in particular caſes, till they have
looked before them. Locke
4. To delay; to hinder from proceeding. -
Suſpend your indignation againſt my brother, till you can
derive from him better teſtimony of his intent. Shakespeare ear.
His anſwer did the nymph attend; * -- . . .
Her looks, her fighs, her geſtures all did pray him;
But Godfrey wiſely did his grant ſºft end,
He doubts the worſt, and that a while did ſtay him. Fairf.
To themſelves I left them ;
For I ſuſpend their doom. Milton.
The reaſons for ſuſpending the play were ill founded. Dryden.
The Britiſh dame, famed for reſiſtleſs grace,
Contends not now but for the ſecond place;
Our love ſuſpended, we neglect the fair,
For whom we burn'd, to gaze adoring here. Granvil.
A man may ſuſpend his choice from being determined for or
againſt the thing propoſed, till he has examined whether it be
really of a nature to make him happy or no. Locke.
5. To debar for a time from the execution of an office or enjoy-
Inent of a reventie.
Good men ſhould not be ſuſpended from the exerciſe of their
miniſtry, and deprived of their livelihood for ceremonies,
which are on all hands acknowledged indifferent. Sanderſºn.
The biſhop of London was ſummoned for not ſſpending
Dr. Sharp. Swift.
Suspe'N's E. n.ſ.. [ſuſpens, French; fſpºnſº, Latin.]
1. Uncertainty; delay of certainty or determination; indeter-
n)! That! Oſ). -
Till this be done, their good affection towards the ſafety of
the church is acceptable; but the way they preſcribe us to pre-
ſerve it by, muſt reſt in ſuſpenſe. Hºzier. "
Such truejoy's ſuſpenſe
What dream can I preſent to recompenſe?
Ten days the prophet in ſuſpenſe remain'd,
Would no man's fate pronounce; at laſt conſtrain'd
By Ithacus, he ſolemnly deſign'd -
Me for the ſacrifice. . Denham.
In propoſitions, where though the proofs in view are of moſt
moment, yet there are ſufficient grounds to ſuſpect that there
is fallacy, or proofs as conſiderable to be p oduced off the
contrary fide, there ſuffenſe or diſſent are cften voluntary, Lºt.
2. Aćt of withholding the judgment.
Whatever neceſſity determines to the purſuit of real bliſs,
the ſame neceſſity eſtabliſhes ſuſpenſe, deliberation and ſcrutiny,
whether its ſatisfaction miſleads from our true happineſs, Lºk.
3. Privation for a time; impediment for a time.
4. Stop in the midſt of two oppoſites.
For thee the fates, ſeverely kind, ordain
A cool ſuſpenſe from pleaſure or from pain.
Suspe'N's E. adj. Iſºſpenſus, Latin.]
1. Held from proceeding. -
‘I he ſelf-ſame orders allowed, but yet eſtabliſhed in Tºº
wary and ſuſpenſ manner, as being to ſtand in force till God
ſhould give the opportunity of ſome general conference what
might be beſt for every of them afterwards to do; had both
prevented all occaſion of juſt diſlike which other: might take,
and reſerved a greater liberty unto the authors themſº of
entring unto further conſultation afterwards. Hooker. -
The great light of day yet wants º heav’
Much of his race, though ſteep, ſuſpenſe in heaWT ..
Held by thy .* p, ſºft Miltºn, Paradiſ, Lºft.
2. Held in doubt; held in expeºtation. -
This ſaid, he fat; and expectation held
His looks ſupenſe, awaiting who appear'd
To ſecond or oppoſe.
Suspe'ssios. m. ſ. [/uſpenſion, Fr. from ſuſpend]
1. Act of making to hang on any thing.
2. Aćt of making to depend on anything.
3. Aći of delaying:
Had we had time to pray, -
with thouſand vows and tears we ſhould have *...
That ſad decree's ſuſpenſiºn to have wrought. º
4. Aćt of withholding or balancing the jº.
In his Indian relations, wherein are conſ”
accounts, he is ſurely to be read with fiſpenſion; theſe are
they which weakned his authorities with former "gº 7:010/1.
is ſeldom mentioned without derogatory parentheſes: may
The mode of the will, which anſwers to ..". is
be called ſ/penſion; and that which in the fantaſtic Grew.
obſtinacy, is conſtancy in *
Interruption; temporary cellation. • * * ints in
5 Nor * any dº dº for the better adjuſting º
the time of that ſuſpenſion, but every thing left in
ſtate of unconcernedneſs as before.
SUSPE Nso R Y. adj. [ſuſpen/ºire, Fr. ſſpenſuſ, Lat.
which a thing hangs.
There are ſeveral parts peculiar to b
in man, as the ſeventh or ſuſpe"/"y muſcle
Waler.
Pºpe.
Miltºn.
rutes which are wanting
of the eye. Raj.
SUSP1(CION:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S U S
SUSPICION. m. ſ. [ ſuſpicio”, Fr. ſufficia, Lat.] The act of
ſuſpe-ting; imagination of ſomething ill without proof.
This ſuſpicion Miſo for the hoggiſh ſhrewdneſs of her brain,
and Mopſ, for a very unlikely cnvy ſhe hath ſtumbled upon.
Sidney.
Sufficians amongſt thoughts are like bats amongſt birds, *
ever fly by twilight ; they are to be repreſſed, or at the leaſt
well guarded, for they cloud the mind. Bacon.
Suſpicion all our lives ſhall be ſtuck full of eyes;
For treaſon is but truſted like a fox,
Who ne'er ſo tame, ſo cheriſh'd and lock'd up,
Will have a wild trick of his anceſtors. Shakeſpeare.
Though wiſdom wake, ſſpicion ſleeps
At wiſdom's gate; and to ſimplicity
Reſigns her charge, while goodneſs thinks no ill
Where no ill ſeems. - A4ilton's Parad. Loft.
Suspicious. aš. [ſuſpiciºſus, Latin.]
• 1. Inclined to ſuſpect; inclined to imagine ill without proof.
Nature itſelf, after it has done an injury, will for ever be
ſuſpicious, and no man can love the perſon he ſuſpects.
- - South's Sermons.
A wiſe man will find us to be rogues by our faces; we have
a ſuſpicio's, fearful, conſtrained countenance, often turning
and ſlinking through narrow lanes. Swift.
2. Liable to ſuſpicion; giving reaſon to imagine ill.
They, becauſe the light of his candle too much drowned
theirs, were glad to lay hold on ſo colourable matter, and
exceeding forward to traduce him as an author of ſuſpicious
innovations. IHooker.
I ſpy a black ſuſpicious threathing clud,
That will encounter with our glorious fun. Shakespeare.
Authors are ſuſpicious, nor greedily to be ſwallowed, who
pretend to deliver antipathies, ſympathies, and the occult ab-
itruſities of things. Brown's Wugar E! rours.
His life
Private, una&amp;tive, calm, contemplative,
Little fº/piciºus to any king. Milton.
Many miſchievous inſects are daily at work, to make people
of merit ſuſpicious of each other. Pºpe.
SusP1(ciously adv. [fron ſuſpicious.]
1. With ſuſpicion.
2. So as to raiſe ſuſpicion.
His guard entering the place, found Plangus with his ſword
in his hand, but not naked, but ſtanding Juſpiciouſly enough,
to one already ſuſpicious. Sidney.
Suspicious Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſuſpicious...} Tending to ſuſpicion.
To make my eſtate known ſeemed impoſſible, by reaſon
of the ſuſpiciouſneſ of Miſo, and my young miſtreſs. Sidney.
Suspiration. n.ſ.. [ſuſpiratio from ſuſpiro, Latin.] Sigh; act
of fetching the breath deep.
Not cuſtomary ſuits of ſolemn black,
Nor windy ſuſpiration of forc’d breath
That can denote me truly. Shakeſpeare.
In deep ſuſpirations we take more large gulphs of air to cool
our heart, overcharged with love or ſorrow. Mºre.
To Suspi'RE. v n. [ſ/piro, Latin.]
1. To figh; to fetch the breath deep.
2. It ſeems in Shakeſpeare to mean only, to begin to breath; per-
haps miſtaken for reſpire.
Since the birth of Cain, the firſt male child,
To him that did but yeſterday ſuſpire,
There was not ſuch a gracious creature born. Shakeſpeare.
To SUSTAIN. v. a. [/ou/ienir, Fr. ſuffineo, Latin.]
1. To bear; to prop; to hold up.
The largeneſs and lightneſs of her wings and tail ſ/lain her
without laſſitude. 410, e.
Vain is the force of man,
To cruſh the pillars that the pile ſyſłain. Dryden's Aneid.
2. To ſupport; to keep from ſinking under evil.
The admirable curioſity and ſingular excellency of this de-
ſign will ſuſtain the patience, and animate the induſtry of him
who ſhall undertake it. - Holder.
If he have no comfortable expestations of another life to ſu-
fain him under the evils in this world, he is of all creatures
the moſt miſerable. Tillotſon.
3. To maintain; to keep.
What food
Will he convey up thither to ſuſtain
Himſelf and army Milton.
But it on her, not ſhe on it depends;
For ſhe the body doth ſuſtain and cheriſh. Davies.
My labour will ſuſtain me. 4/ilton.
4. To help ; to relieve; to aſſiſt.
They charged on pain of perpetual diſpleaſure, neither to
entreat for him, or any way ſuſtain him. Shakeſpeare.
His ſons who ſeek the tyrant to ſylain,
And long for arbitrary lords again,
He dooms to death, aſſerting publick right. Dryden's AEn.
5. To bear ; to endure.
Were it I thought death menac'd would enſue
This my attempt, I would ſyſłain alone
The worſt, and not perſuade thee. Milton.
Can Ceyx then ſºftain to leave his wife,
And unconcern'd forſke the ſweets of life.
Shall Turnus then ſuch endleſs toil ſuſtain,
In fighting fields, and Conquer towns in vain. Dryden.
The mind ſtands collected within herſ -
- V- ſelf, and ſuffain; the
ſhock with all the force which is natural tº her, {. a heart
in love has its foundations ſapped.
Dryden.
6. To bear without yielding. Addiſon.
Sachariſſa's beauty's wine,
Which to madneſs doth incline;
Such a liquor as no brain
That is mortal can ſuſtain. Waller.
7. To ſuffer; to bear as inflićted.
If you omit
The offer of this time, I cannot promiſe,
But that you ſhall ſuſtain more new diſgraces,
With theſe you bear already. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
SUSTAINABLE, adj. [/ou/tenable, Fr. from ſºftain.) That may
be ſuſtained. - -
Sustai'NER. n.ſ.. [from ſuſtain.]
1. Qne that props; one that ſupports.
2. One that ſuffers; a ſufferer.
Thyſelf haſt a ſºftainer been
Of much afflićtion in my cauſe.
SU's TENANCE. n.ſ.. [ſouffenance, Fr.]
1. Support; maintenance.
Scarcely allowing himſelf fit ſoftenance of life, rather than
he would ſpend thoſe goods for whoſe ſake only he ſeemed to
joy in life. Sidney.
There are unto one end ſundry means; as for the ſºftenance
of our bodies many kinds of food, many ſorts of faiment té
clothe our nakedneſs. AHooker.
Is then the honour of your daughter of greater moment to
her, than to my daughter her’s, whoſe ſuſtenance it was Addison
2. Neceſſaries of life; vićtuals.
The experiment coſt him his life for want of ſuſtenance. L’E.
The ancients were inventers of all arts neceſſary to life and
ſuffenance, as plowing and ſowing. Temple.
Susº ENTATION. m. ſ. [ſiſtentation, Fr. from ſu/ento, Latin.]
1. Support; preſervation from falling.
Theſe ſteams once raiſed above the earth, have their aſcent
and ſu/tentation aloft promoted by the air. Boyle.
2. Support of life; uſe of vićtuals.
A very abſtemious animal, by reaſon of its frigidity, and
latitancy in the winter, will long ſubſiſt without a viſible ſuffen-
tation. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
3. Maintenance.
When there be great ſhoals of people, which go on to
populate, without foreſeeing means of life and ſuffentation; it
is of neceſſity that once in an age they diſcharge a portion of
Chapman's Iliad.
their people upon other nations. Bacon.
Susu RRA/TIon. n.ſ. [from ſuſurro, Latin.J Whiſper; ſoft
murinur. - -
SUTE. m. ſ. [for ſuite J. Sort.
Touching matters belonging to the church of Chriſt, this
we conceive that they are not of one ſute. Hºoker.
SU'tler. n.ſ.. [ſoeteler, Dutch ; ſudler, German.] A man that
ſells proviſions and liquour in a camp.
I ſhall ſiter be
Unto the camp, and profits will accrue. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
Send to the ſutler's; there you're ſure to find
The bully match'd with raſcals of his kind.
SU’t URE. m.ſ. [ ſutura, Latin.] - - -
1. A manner of ſewing or ſtitching, particularly of ſtitching
wounds.
Wounds, if held in cloſe contact for ſome time, reunite by
inoſculation: to maintain this ſituation, ſeveral ſorts of ſutures
have been invented; thoſe now chiefly deſcribed are the inter-
rupted, the glovers, the quill'd, the twiſted and the dry ſº-
tures, but the interrupted and twiſted are almoſt the only
uſeful ones. Sharp's Surgery.
2. Suture is a particular articulation: the bones of the cranium
are joined to one another by four ſutureſ. , &amp;uincy.
Many of our veſſels degenerate into ligaments, and the
ſutures of the ſkull are aboliſhed in old age. A, buthnot.
SWAB. n.ſ. [/wall, Swediſh.] A kind of moP to clean
floors. -
To Swab. v. a. º Saxon.] To clean with a mop.
It is now uſed chiefly at ſea.
He made him }.} the deck. Shelvocº's Woyage.
Swa's Be R. n.ſ [waller, Dutch..] A ſweeper of the deck.
The maſter, the ſwaller, the boatſwain and I,
Lov’d Mall, Meg, and Marrian, and Margery. . . Shakespeare
Was any thing wanting to the extravagance of this degene-
rate age, but the making a tarpawlin and aſwather the hero of
a tragedy. Dennis.
To Swappi. E. v. a. ſ.rpeban, Saxon.] - - -
1. To ſwathe; to bind in cloaths, generally uſed of binding new-
born children.
Dryden.
Inveſted by a veil of clouds,
And fivodeſ as new-born in fable ſhrouds;
For theſe a receptacle I deſign'd, *:::.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S W A
S W A
Sw A'd DLING BAN D.
Swaddlin Gcloat H.
Swa'DDLINGcLout.
M. - f
ſoon doth man decay
wº are taken from a cheſt of ſweets,
To ſwaddle infants, whoſe young breath
Scarce knows º ding ſheets
, clouts are little winding theets,
º conſign and ſend them unto death. Herbert,
led me up in my night-gown with long pieces of
| wad.
nº had wrapt me in about an hundred yards of
ſwathe. - Addiſon.
2. To heat; to cudgel. A low ludicrous word.
Great on the bench, great in the ſaddle,
Hudibras.
That could as well bind o'er as ſwaddle.
Swa’ddle. n.ſ. (from the verb..] Cloaths bound round the
body.
fººd them to uncaſe me: no, no, ſay they ; and upon
that carried me to one of their houſes, and put me to bed in
all my ſwiddles. Addiſon.
{{ [from ſwadle.J Cloath wrapped
round a new-born child.
From thence a fairy thee unweeting reft,
There as thou ſleptºſt in tender ſwaddlingband,
And her baſe elfin brood, there for thee left,
Such men do changelings call, ſo changed by fairies theft.
Fairy Queen.
That great baby you ſee there is not yet out of his ſwaaling-
clºuts. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
The ſwadlingband, were purple, wrought with gold. Dryd.
To SWAG. v. n. [rigan, Saxon; ſweigia, Iſlandick.] To
fink down by its weight; to lay heavy.
They are more apt, in ſwagging down, to pierce with their
points, than in the jacent poſture, and crevice the wall. J/ott.
Being a tall fiſh, and with his ſides much compreſſed, he
hath a long fin upon his back, and another anſwering to it on
his belly; by which he is the better kept upright, or from
ſwagging on his ſides. Grew.
To Sw AGE. v. a. [from aſwage.] To eaſe; to ſoften; to mi-
tigate.
Apt words have pow'r to ſwage
The tumours of a troubled mind,
And are as balm to feſter'd wounds.
Nor wanting pow'r to mitigate and ſwage,
With ſolemn touches, troubled thoughts, and chaſe
Anguiſh, and doubt, and fear from mortal minds. Milton.
I will love thee,
Though my diſtraćted ſenſes ſhould forſake me,
I'd find ſome intervals, when my poor heart
Should ſwage itſelf, and be let looſe to thine.
Milton.
Otway.
To SWA'GGER. v. n. [ſwadderen, Dutch, to make a noiſe;
ryesan, Saxon.] To bluſter; to buily; to be turbulently and
tumultuouſly proud and inſolent.
Drunk? ſquabble? ſwagger ? and diſcourſe fuſtian with
one's own ſhadow Oh thou invincible ſpirit of wine! Shakespeare
'Tis the gage of one that I ſhould fight withal, if he be
alive; a raſcal that ſwagger'd with me laſt night. Shakespeare.
Oſt a terrible oath, with a ſwaggering accent ſharply twang'd
off, gives manhood more approbation than proof itſelf. Sºak.
The leſſer ſize of mortals love to ſwagger for opinions, and
to boaſt infallibility of knowledge. Glanv. Scepſ.
Many ſuch aſſes in the world huff, look big, ſtare, dreſs,
cock, and ſwagger at the ſame noiſy rate. L'E/ºrange.
He chuck'd,
And ſcarcely deign'd to ſet a foot to ground,
But ſwagger'd like a lord. Dryden.
Confidence, how weakly ſoever founded, hath ſome effect
upon the ignorant, who think there is ſomething more than
ordinary in a ſwaggering man that talks of nothing but de-
monſtration. - Tilletſºn.
- To be great, is not to be ſtarched, and formal, and ſuperci-
lious; to ſwagger at our footmen, and browbeat our infe-
riors. Collier on Pride.
What a pleaſure is it to be vićlorious in a cauſe: to ſwag-
ger at the bar for a lawyer I was born, and a lawyer I will
be. Arbuthnot's H/ory of john Bull.
Swagge RER. n.ſ.. [from ſwagger.] A bluſterer; a bully; a
-
turbulent noiſy fellow.
. He's no ſwaggerer, hoſteſs; a tame cheater: you may ſtroke
him as gently as a puppy greyhound. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Swa Go Y. adi. [from ſwag.] Dependent by its weight.
The beaver is called animal ventricoſum, from his ſwaggy
and prominent belly, Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Swain, n.ſ. [rren, Saxon and Runick.]
1. A young man.
That good knight would not ſo nigh repair,
Himſelf ºranging from their joyance vain,
Whoſe fellowſhip ſeem’d far unfit for warlike ſwain. F. Q.
2. A country ſervant employed in huſbandry.
To b i. were a happy life
e no bet ..] ºr ſ.....:
3. A pattoral º than a homely ſwain.
left ſwains 1 -
ſ”, whoſe nymphs in ev'ry grace excel;
Shakespeare Henry VI.
Beſt nymphs! whoſe /* thoſe graces ſing ſo well. Pope.
Swa’IN MoTE. m. ſ. [ ſwainmotus, law Lat..] A court touching
matters of the foreſt, kept by the charter of the foreſt thri.
in the year. This court of ſwainmote is as incident to a foreſt
” as the court of piepowder is to a fair. The fwainmote is .
court of freeholders within the foreſt. Cowel.
To Swale. }* a. [rpelan, Saxon, to kindle.] To waſte or
To Sweal. 5 blaze away; to melt: as, the candle ſwales.
Swa'll ET. m. ſ. Among the tin-miners, water breaking in
upon the miners at their work. Biº.
Swallow. m. ſ. [rpalepe, Saxon. J A ſmall bird of paſ-
ſage, or, as ſome ſay, a bird that lies hid and ſleeps in the
Winter.
The ſwallow follows not Summer more willingly than we
your lordſhip. Shakespeare. Timºn of Athens,
Daffodils,
That come before the ſwallow dares. Shakeſpeare.
The ſwallow, make uſe of celandine, and the linnet of
euphragia. More,
When ſwallows fleet ſoar high and ſport in air,
He told us that the welkin would be clear. Gay.
The ſwallow ſweeps
The ſlimy pool, to build his hanging houſe
Intent. Thomſon's Spring.
To Swallow. v. a. [rpelgan, Saxon; ſwelgen, Dutch.]
1. To take down the throat.
job vii. 19.
I ſwallow down my ſpittle.
If little faults
Shall not be wink'd at, how ſhall we ſtretch our eye,
Whoſe capital crimes chew'd, ſwallow'd, and digeſted,
Appear before us? Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Men are, at a venture, of the religion of the country; and
muſt therefore ſwallow down opinions, as filly people do em-
piricks pills, and have nothing to do but believe that they will
do the cure. Locke.
2. To receive without examination.
Confider and judge of it as a matter of reaſon, and not
ſwallow it without examination as a matter of faith. Locłe.
3. To engroſs; to appropriate.
Far be it from me, that I ſhould ſwallow up or deſtroy. Sa.
Homer excels all the inventors of other arts in this, that he
has ſwallºwed up the honour of thoſe who ſucceeded him. Pope.
4. To abſorb ; to take in ; to ſink in any abyſs; to engulph.
Though you untie the winds, and let them fight
Againſt the churches, though the yeſty waves
Confound and ſwallºw navigation up.
I may be pluck'd into the ſwallowing womb
Of this deep pit, poor Baſſianus' grave. Shakespeare Tit. Andrºn.
Death is ſwallowed up in victory. I Cor. xv. 54.
If the earth open her mouth and ſwallow them up, ye ſhall
underſtand that theſe men have provoked the Lord. Num, xvi.
In bogs ſwallºw'd up and loſt. Milton.
He hid many things from us, not that they would ſwallºw
up our underſtanding, but divert our attention from what is
more important. Decay ºf Pitty,
Nature would abhor
To be forced back again upon herſelf, .
And like a whirlpool ſwallow her own ſtreams.
Shalºſpeare.
Dryden and Let's Oedipui.
Addison,
Should not the ſad occaſion ſwallow up
My other cares, and draw them all into it?
Cities overturn'd,
And late at night in ſwallowing earthquake ſunk. Thomſºn,
5. To devour; to deſtroy.
The neceſſary proviſion for life ſwallows the greateſt º:
ºff.
their time.
Corruption ſwallow’d what the liberal hand
Of bounty ſcatter'd.
The prieſt and the prophet are ſwallowed up of win*:
Swa’llow. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The throat; Vorº.
Had this man of merit and mortification been callº
count for his ungodly ſwallºw, in gorging down the eſtates o
helpleſs widows and orphans, he would have
was all for charitable uſes.
Swallowtail. n.ſ. A ſpecies of willow.
The ſhining willow they call ſwallowtai
pleaſure of the leaf.
Swa’llowwort. n ſ. A plant.
Sw AM. The preterite of ſwim.
SWAMP. n.ſ. [ ſwamins, Gothick; rpam,
Iſlandick; ſwamme, Dutch; ſuomp, Daniſh; fwamp,
A marſh; a bog; a fen.
Swediſh.
Swa'M PY. adj. [from ſwamp.] Boggy; fenny. Thomſon.
Swampy ſens breathe deſtructive myriads. h.]
SWAN. m. ſ. [rpan, Saxon; ſuan, Daniſh; ſwath, Dutch.
The ſwan is a large water-fowl, that has a
ſtraight neck, and is very white, excepting.W
Its legs and feet are black, as is its bill, whic
a gooſe, but ſomething rounder, and a
lower end of it: the two ſides below its eye.
ſhining like ebony. Swans uſe wings like ſails,
Thomſºn's Autumn,
6. To be loſt in any thing; to be given up. Iſ,
to ac-
told them that it
outh.
ºl, becauſe of the
Bºnº, Natural Hiſtº).
Saxon ; ſaam":
long and very
hen it is young;
his like that of
little hooked at the
tS eyes are black an
- which catch
- - he
the wind, ſo that they are driven along in the water. Tº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">tºº.
º S W A
º:
tº: -
º feed upon herbs and ſome ſort of grain like a gooſe, and ſome
º are ſaid to have lived three hundred years. There is a ſpecies
º sº of ſwans with the feathers of their heads, towards the breaſt,
º f marked at the ends with a gold colour inclining to red. The
º ſwan is reckoned by Moſes among the unclean creatures; but
º it was conſecrated to Apollo the god of muſick, becauſe it was
º ſaid to fing melodiouſly when it was near expiring; a tradition
º generally received, but fabulous. Calmet.
With untainted eye
Compare her face with ſome that I ſhall ſhow,
And I will make thee think thy ſwan a crow. Shakespeare.
Let muſick ſound, while he doth make his choice;
Then if he loſe, he makes aſwan like end. Shakeſpeare.
º I have ſeen a ſwan,
tº re- With bootleſs labour, ſwim againſt the tide,
ſº And ſpend her ſtrength with over-matching waves. Shakeſp.
iſ, The birds eaſy to be drawn are planipedes, or water-fowl,
º as the mallard, gooſe, and ſwan. Peacham on Drawing.
Old feeble men with fainter groans reply;
Ajarring ſound reſults, and mingles in the ſky,
Like that of ſwans remurm'ring to the floods. Dryden.
The idea, which an Engliſhman ſignifies by the name ſwan,
is a white colour, long neck, black beak, black legs, and whole
feet, and all theſe of a certain ſize, with a power of ſwim-
ming in the water, and making a certain kind of noiſe. Locke.
Swa'NSKIN. n.ſ.. [ſwan and ſkin..] A kind of ſoft flannel,
imitating for warmth the down of a ſwan.
Swap. adv, [ad ſuipa, to do at a ſnatch, Iſlandick.] Haſtily;
with haſty violence: as, he did it ſwap. A low word.
To Swap. v. a. To exchange. See io Swop.
Swa RD. m. ſ. [ſward, Swediſh.]
1. The ſkin of bacon.
The fearful matrons raiſe a ſcreaming cry, {
*.… 2. The ſurface of the ground: whence green ſward, or green
--- ſword.
Water, kept too long, looſens and ſoftens the ſward, makes
• *- it ſubjećt to ruſhes and coarſe graſs. Avote on I uſer.
The noon of night was paſt, when the foe
Came dreadleſs o'er the level ſwart, that lics
Between the wood and the ſwift ſtreaming Ouſe. A. Philips.
To plant a vineyard in July, when the earth is very dry
and combuſtible, plow up the ſwarth, and burn it. Mortimer.
Sware. The preterite of ſwear.
Sw ARM. n.ſ.. [ſpeanin, Saxon; ſwerm, Dutch J
1. A great body or number of bees or other ſmall animals, par-
ticularly thoſe bees that migrate from the hive.
A ſwarm of bees that cut the liquid ſky,
Upon the topmoſt branch in clouds alight. Dryden's 4ºn.
- 2. A multitude; a croud.
* From this ſwarm of fair advantages,
- You grip'd the general ſway into your hand, -
Forgot your oath to us at Doncaſter. Shakeſpeare.
If we could number up thoſe prodigious ſwarms that had
ſettled themſelves in every part of it, they would amount to
more than can be found. Addiſon on Italy.
:- To Sw ARM. v. n. [rpearman, Saxon; ſwermen, Dutch.]
-*. 1. To riſe as bees in a body, and quit the hive.
All hands employ'd,
&gt; Like labouring bees on a long Summer's day;
Some ſound the trumpet for the reſt to ſwarm. Dryden.
3 * Swarm'd on a rotten ſtick the becs I ſpy’d. Gay.
When bees hang in ſwarm ng time, they will preſently riſe,
º if the weather hold. AMortimer's Husbandry.
2 2. To appear in multitudes; to croud ; to throng.
: The mercileſs Macdone!,
º The multiplying villanies of nature
Do ſwarm upon. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
tº Our ſuperfluous lacqueys, and our peaſants,
º Who in unneceſſary action ſwarm
* About our ſquares of battle. Shakeſp. Henry V.
º - What a multitude of thoughts at once
º Awaken'd in me ſwarm, while I conſider
* What from within I feel myſelf, and hear
What from without comes often to my ears. Milton.
sº Then mounts the throne, high plac’d before the ſhrine;
ºf In crowds around the ſwarming people join. Dryden's 4ºn.
3. To be crouded; to be over-run ; to be thronged.
Theſe garriſons you have now planted throughout all Ire-
'* land, and every place ſwarm, with ſoldiers. Spenſer.
º Her lower region ſwarm, with all fort of fowl, her rivers
º with fiſh, and her ſeas with whole ſhoals. Howel.
Thoſe days ſwarmed with fables, and from ſuch grounds
tº' took hints for fictions,
poiſoning the world ever after. Brown.
4. To breed multitudes. ".
Not ſo thick ſwarm'd once the ſoil
Bedropp'd with blood of Gorgon. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
SWART. }"; ſ.ſvarts, Gothick; Tyeaſt, Saxon; ſwart,
SWAR.TH. W. Dutch.j
1. Black; darkly brown; tawney.
A nation ſtrange, with viſage ſwart,
And courage fierce, that all men did affray,
Through the world then ſwarmed in cvery part. F. Queen,
S W A
A rhan -
Qf ſwarth complexion, and of crabbed hue,
That him full of melancholy did ſhew.
...Wherea: I was black and ſwart before;
With thoſe clear rays which ſhe infusion me,
That beauty am I bieſ with, which you ſee. Shakespeare H.VI.
No goblin, or ſwart fairy of the mine,
Fairy Queen.
Hath hurtful power o'er true virgini: Milton
2. In Milton it ſeems to ſignify black º ºny, malignant. *
Ye valleys low, -&gt;
On whoſe freſh lap the ſwart flar ſparely looks. Miltºn.
To Swa RT. v. a.
duſk.
The heat of the ſun may ſwart a living part, or even black
a dead or diſſolving fleſh. Bººn', Walgar Errºr.
swºrnity. adv. [from ſwarthy.] Blackly; duſkly; taw-
nily. -
Swa'RTHIN Ess. n.ſ. [from ſwarthy J Darkneſs of complexion;
tawnineſs.
Swa'RTHY, adj. [See Swart..] Dark of complexion; black;
duſky; tawney.
Set me where, on ſome pathleſs plain,
The ſwarthy Africans complain. Roſ, mmon.
Though in the torrid climates the common colour is black
or ſwarthy, yet the natural colour of the temperate climates is
more tranſparent and beautiful. Ha'e's Origin of 4/ankind.
Here ſwarthy Charles appears, and there
His brother with de côted air.
Did they know Cato, our remoteſt kings
Would pour embattled multitudes about him;
Their ſwarthy hoſts would darken all our plains,
Doubling the native horrour of the war,
And making death more grim. Addiſon’s Cato.
Swash. n.ſ. [A cant word.] A figure, whoſe circumference
is not round, but oval; and whoſe moldings lie not at right
angles, but oblique to the axis of the work. Moxon.
To SWASH. v. n. To make a great clatter or noiſe: whence
fwaſhbuckler.
We'll have a ſwaſſing and a martial outſide,
As many other manniſh cowards have,
That do outface it with their ſemblances. Shakeſpeare.
Draw, if you be men: Gregory, remember thy ſwaſhing
blow. - Shakespeare. Rome, and juliet.
Swa's HER... n.ſ.. [from ſwaſh..] One who makes a ſhow of
valour or force of arms. -
I have obſerved theſe three ſwaſhers;
not amount to a nan.
Swatch. m. ſ. A ſwathe. Not in uſe.
One ſpreadeth thoſe bands ſo in order to lie,
As barlie in ſwatches may fill it thereby.
Swat H. n.ſ. [ ſwade, Dutch.]
1. A line of graſs cut down by the mower.
With toſſing and raking, and ſetting on cox,
[from the noun. J. To blacken; to
Addison.
three ſuch anticks do
Shakespeare Henry V.
Tiſºr.
Graſſe, lately in ſwaſhes, is meat for an ox. Tºr.
The ſtrawy Greeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him, like the mower's ſivath. Shakespeare.
As ſoon as your graſs is mown, if it lie thick in the ſwath,
neither air nor ſun can paſs freely through it. 44%r, iner.
2. A continued quantity.
An affection'd aſs, that cons ſtate without book, and utters
it by great ſwaths. - Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
3. [Speban, to bind, Saxon.] A band; a fillet.
An Indian comb, a ſtick whereof is cut into three ſharp and
round teeth four inches long: the other part is left for the
handle, adorned with fine ſtraws laid along the ſides, and
lapped round about it in ſeveral diſtinct ſwaths: Grew.
They ſwaddled me up in my night-gown with long pieces of
linen, which they folded about me, ’till they had wrapped nic
in above an hundred yards of ſwathe. Addison's Speciatºr;
To Swathe. v. a. [rpeban, Saxon.] To bind, as a child
with bands and rollers. -
Thrice hath this Hotſpur, Mars in ſwathing cloaths,
This infant warriour, and his enterprizes, -
Diſcomfited great Douglas. Shakespeare Henry IV.
He had two ſons; the eldeſt of them º old,
* AL 7 - ther, from their nurſery
!.ſ; cloaths the other, Shakespeare . Cynleine.
Their children are never ſcathed, or bound about with any
thing, when they are firſt born; but are put naked into the bed
with their parents to lie. Albºt's Deſcript. of the Hºrld.
Swathºd in her lap the bold nurſe bore him out,
with olive branches cover'd round about. Dryden.
Maſter's feet are ſwath'd nº long”
If in the night too oft, he kicks, -
Prizr.
Or ſhows his loco-motive tricks.
To Sway. v.a. [ſhwelen, German, to move. t", -- 1: -
1. To wave in the hand; to move 97 weild with facility: as, o
the ſcepter.
fway §. fire out of the iron play'd,
As ſparkles from the anvil riſe, a * G}.
When heavy hammers on the wedge are wºy'd. Fa. ºf n.
25 X Te<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S W E
S W E
iaſs; to direét to either ſide. º
2. To º forgive them, that ſo much have ſway'd
Your majeſty's good thoughts away from me. Shakeſpeare.
I took your hands; but was, indeed, ! - 1
Swaya from the point, by looking down on Caeſar. Slakeſ.
The only way tº improve our own,
By dealing faithfully with none;
As bowls run true by being made
On purpoſe falſe, and to be ſway’d. -
3. To govern; to rule; to overpower; to influence.
The lady's mad; yet if 'twere ſo,
She could not ſway her houſe, command her followers,
with ſuch a ſmooth, diſcreet, and ſtable bearing. Shakespeare ?.
The will of man is by his reaſon ſway’d;
And reaſon ſays, you are the worthier maid. Shakeſpeare.
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to ſway
The world. Milton's Paradiſ. L9/?.
Agentle nymph, not far from hence,
That with moiſt curbſways the ſmooth Severn ſtream,
Sabrina is her name. Milton.
Take heed leſt paſſion ſway
Thy judgment to do ought, which elſe free will
Would not admit. Milton's Paradiſe I off.
The judgment is ſwayed by paſſion, and ſtored with lubri-
cous opinions, inſtead of clearly conceived truths. Glanv.
This was the race
To ſway the world, and land and ſea ſubdue.
With theſe I went,
Nor idle ſtood with unaffiſting hands,
When ſavage beaſts, and mens more ſavage bands,
Their virtuous toil ſubdu'd; yet thoſe I ſway'd
With pow'rful ſpeech: I ſpoke, and they obey'd. Dryden.
When examining theſe matters, let not temporal and little
advantages ſway you againſt a more durable intereſt. Tillotſon.
To Swa Y. v. n.
1. To hang heavy; to be drawn by weight.
In theſe perſonal reſpects, the balance ſways on our part. Bac.
2. To have weight; to have influence.
The example of ſundry churches, for approbation of one
thing, doth ſway much; but yet ſtill as having the force of an
Hudibrar.
Dryden.
example only, and not of a law. Hooker.
3. To bear rule; to govern.
The mind Iſway by, and the heart I bear,
Shall never ſagg with doubt, nor ſhake with fear. Shakeſp.
Had'ſt thou ſway’d as kings ſhould do,
They never then had ſprung like ſummer flies. Shakespeare
Aged tyranny ſways not as it hath power, but as it is ſuf-
fered. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Here thou ſhalt monarch reign;
There did'ſt not: there let him ſtill vićtorſway. Milton.
Sway. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The ſwing or ſweep of a weapon.
To ſtrike with huge two-handed ſway. Milton.
2. Anything moving with bulk and power.
Are not you mov'd, when all the ſway of earth
Shakes like a thing unfirm Shakespeare julius Cæſar.
Expert
When to advance, or ſtand, or turn the ſway
Of battle.
3. Power; rule; dominion.
This ſort had ſome fear that the filling up the ſeats in the
conſiſtory, with ſo great number of laymen, was but to pleaſe
the minds of the people, to the end they might think their
own ſway ſomewhat. Hooker.
In the end, very few excepted, all became ſubječt to the
Jºy of time: other odds there was none, ſaving that ſome
fell ſooner, and ſome later, from the ſoundneſs of bºlief. Book.
Only retain
The name and all th’ addition to a king;
The ſway, revenue, execution of th’ heſt,
Beloved ſons, be yours. Shakespeare King Lear.
Her father counts it dangerous
That ſhe ſhould give her ſorrow ſo muchfway,
And in his wiſdom haſtes our marriage,
To ſtop the inundation of her tears.
Too truly Tamerlane's ſucceſſors they ;
Each thinks a world too little for his ſway. Dryd. Aurengz.
- When vice prevails, and impious men bear ſway,
The poſt of honour is a private ſtation. Addiſon's Cato.
4. hº direétion.
* ºvil mind in authority doth not only follow the ſway of
the deſires already within . frames . itſelf ..º.º.
Milton.
Shakeſheare.
not before thought of. Sidney.
tº "ſh along, the rattling woods give way,
he branches bend before their ſweepy ſway. Dryden.
To SWEAR. J. 77.
[ſwaran, Gothick ;
1. To obteſt ſome ſupe
If a man vow a
bind his ſoul with a
Thee, thce an
And ſavage India
Preter ſwore or ſware; part, paſſ ſworn.
FPeruan, Saxon; ſweeren, Dutch..]
flour power; to utter an oath.
Wow, unto the Lord, or ſwear an oath to
*", he ſhall not break his word. Num.
hundred languages ſhall claim,
*/wear by Ånna's name.
Tick el.
2. To declare or promiſe upon oath.
We ſhall have old ſwearing
That they did give the rings away to men;
But we'll outface them, and outſwear them too. Shakesp
I gave my love a ring, and made him ſwear
Never to part with it; and here he ſtands,
I dare be ſworn for him, he would not leave it,
Nor pluck it from his finger. Shakeſ
l I would have kept my word; ha'eſhear.
But, when I ſwear, it is irrevocable. Shakespeare Henry VI
Jacob ſaid, ſwear to me; and he ſware unto him. Cº.
Bacchus taken at Rhodes by Demetrius Poliorcetes, which
he ſo eſteemed, that, as Plutarch reports, he Jºware he had rather
loſe all his father's images than that table.
3. To give evidence upon oath.
At what eaſe
Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt
To ſwear againſt you? Shai. Henry VIII
4. To obteſt the great name profanely. -
Becauſe of ſwearing the land mourneth.
Obey thy parents, keep thy word juſtly;
Swear not. Shakespeare King Iar.
None ſo nearly diſpoſed to ſcoffing at religion as thoſ. i.
have accuſtomed themſelves to ſwear on trifling occaſions, i.
To Swe A.R. v. a.
1. To put to an oath. -
Moſes took the bones of Joſeph; for he had ſtraitly ſwºrn
the children of Iſrael. Ex. xiii. 19.
Swom aſhore, man, like a duck; I can ſwim like a duck,
I'll be ſworn. Shakeſpeare's Tempſi.
Let me ſwear you all to ſecrecy;
And, to conceal my ſhame, conceal my life.
2. To declare upon oath.
3. To obteſt by an oath.
Now by Apollo, king, thou ſwearſ! thy gods in vain.
—O vaſſal miſcreant! Shakeſpeare.
Swe'a RER. m.ſ. (from ſwear.] A wretch who obteſts thºget
name wantonly and profanely.
And muſt they all be hang'd that ſwear and lie?
—Every one.
—Who muſt hang them
—Why, the honeſt men.
—Then the liars and ſwearers are fools; for there are liars and
fwearers enow to beat the boneſt men and hang them up. Shakespeare
Take not his name, who made thy mouth, in vain:
It gets thee nothing, and hath no excuſe:
Luſt and wine plead a pleaſure, avarice again;
But the cheap ſwearer through his open ſluice
Lets his ſoul run for nought. Herbert.
Of all men a philoſopher ſhould be no ſwearer; for an oath,
which is the end of controverſies in law, cannot determine
any here, where reaſon only muſt induce. Brºwn,
It is the opinion of our moſt refined ſweareri, that the ſame
oath or curſe cannot, conſiſtently with true politeneſs, be re-
peated above nine times in the ſame company by the ſame ſº-
ſon. Swift's Pºlite Cºnvejatº.
SWEAT. n.ſ. [rpeae, Saxon; ſweet, Dutch..]
1. The matter evacuated at the pores by heat or labour. .
Sweat is ſalt in taſte; for that part of the nouriſhment
which is freſh and ſweet, turneth into blood and fielhi and
the ſweat is that part which is excerned. Batºn,
Some inſenſible effluvium, exhaling out of the ſtone, tº
to be checked and condenſed by the air on the ſuperficies of it,
ºfftare,
Peaham.
jer. xxiii. 10.
Dryden,
as it happens to ſweat on the ſkins of animals. Bojk.
Soft on the flow'ry herb I found me laid l
In balmy ſweat. Miltºn,
When Lucilius brandiſhes his pen,
And flaſhes in the face of guilty men,
A cold ſweat ſtands in drops on ev'ry part, Dryden,
And rage ſucceeds to tears, revenge to ſmart. the
Sweat is produced by changing the balance tº:
fluids and ſolids, in which health conſiſts, ſo as ". . r
motion of the fluids overcome the reſiſtance of the ſolids. Airb.
2. Labour; toil; drudgery. -
This painful labour § abridging was not eaſy, ;t º:
ter of ſweat and watching. 2 /Vlaſ, 11.
The field
/ lic -
To labour calls us, now with ſweat impos'd, Miltºn
What from Johnſon's oil and ſweat did flow,
Or what more eaſy nature did beſtow
On Shakeſpeare's gentler muſe, in thee full gº" Denham.
Their graces both appear.
3. Evaporation of moiſture. be
Beans give in the mow ; and therefore thoſe º * º A
kept are not to be thraſhed 'till March, that. they jºy
thorough ſweat in the mow. Mºrtime J jail.
To SweMT. v. n. preterite ſwet, ſweated; particip: Pº"
[from the noun.]
1. To be moiſt on the body with heat or labour.
Shall I ſay to you, heirs?
Let them be free, Inarry them to you'.hº... "it'
Why ſweat they uſic; tırdens?" Shes. Aſerch. ºff. eſs
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S W E
**
**
-
Miſtreſs Page at the door, ſweating and blowing, and look-
ing wildly, would needs ſpeak with you. Shakeſpeare.
When he was brought again to the bar, to hear
His knell rung out, his judgment, he was ſtirr'd
With ſuch an agony, he ſweat extremely. Shakespeare H. VIII.
About this time, in autumn, there reigned in the city and
other parts of the kingdom a diſeaſe then new ; which, of the
accidents and manner thereof they called the ſweating ſick-
neſs. Bacon's Henry VII.
A young tall ſquire
Did from the camp at firſt before him go;
At firſt he did, but ſcarce could follow ſtrait,
Sweating beneath a ſhield's unruly weight,
2. To toil; to labour; to drudge. -
How the drudging goblin wet
To earn his cream-bowl duly ſet;
When in one night, ere glimpſe of morn,
His ſhadowy flail hath threſh'd the corn,
Our author, not content to ſee
That others write as careleſsly as he;
Though he pretends not to make things complete,
Yet, to pleaſe you, he'd have the poets ſweat. JWaller.
3. To emit moiſture. -
Wainſcots will ſweat ſo that they will run with water.
Cowley.
Milton.
Bacon.
In cold evenings there will be a moiſture or ſweating upon
the ſtool. Mortimer.
To SweAT. v. a. To emit as ſweat.
Greaſe that's ſweaten
From the murtherer's gibbet, throw
Into the flame. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
For him the rich Arabia ſweats her gum. Dryden.
Swe A^TE R. n ſ. [from ſweat J One who ſweats.
Swif A^T Y. adj. [from ſweat.]
1. Covered with ſweat; moiſt with ſweat.
The rabblement houted and clap'd their chop'd hands, and
threw up their ſweaty night-caps. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
A ſweaty reaper from his tillage brought
Firſt-fruits, the green ear, and the yellow ſheaf. Milton.
2. Conſiſting of ſweat.
And then, ſo nice, and ſo genteel,
Such cleanlineſs from head to heel;
No humours groſs, or frowſy ſteams,
No noiſome whiffs, or ſweaty ſtreams. - Swift.
3. Laborious; toilfome.
Thoſe who labour
The fivaty forge, who edge the crooked ſcythe,
Bend ſtubborn ſteel, and harden gleening armour,
Acknowledge Vulcan's aid. Prior.
To Sweep. v. a. [rpapan, Saxon.]
1. To drive away with a beſom.
2. To clean with a beſom. -
What woman, having ten pieces of ſilver, if ſhe loſe one,
doth not ſweep the houſe, and ſeek diligently ’till ſhe find it
Lu. xv. 8.
3. To carry with pomp.
Let frantick Talbot triumph for a while,
And, like a peacock, ſweep along his tail. Shakespeare H. VI.
4. To drive or carry off with celerity and violence.
Though I could,
With barefac’d power, ſweep him from my fight,
And bid my will avouch it; yet I muſt not. Shakeſpeare.
The river of Kiſhon ſwept them away. udes v.
The bluſtering winds, ſtriving for vićtory, ſwept the ſnow
from off the tops of thoſe high mountains, and caſt it down
unto the plains in ſuch abundance, that the Turks lay as men
buried alive. Kn:les’s Hiſtory of the Turks.
Flying bullets now
To execute his rage appear too ſlow;
They miſs or ſweep but common ſouls away;
For ſuch a loſs Opdam his life muſt pay. JValler.
My looking is the fire of peſtilence,
Thatſweep at once the people and the prince. Dryden.
I have already ſwept the ſtakes, and with the common good
fortune of proſperous gameſters can be content to fit. Drydºn.
Is this the man who drives me before him
To the world’s ridge, and ſweeps me off like rubbiſh? Dryd.
Fool time no change of motion knows;
With equal ſpeed the torrent flows
To ſweep fame, pow'r, and wealth away:
The paſt is all by death poſſeſt,
And frugal fate that guards the reſt,
By giving, bids them live, to day. Fenton.
A duke holding in a great many hands, drew a huge heap
of gold; but never obſerved a ſharper, who under his arm
/wept a great deal of it into his hat. Swift.
5. To paſs over with celerity and force.
6. To rub over.
Their long deſcending train
With rubies cdg’d, and ſapphires ſwept the plain. Dryden.
S W E
7. To ſtrike with long ſtroke.
Deſcend ye nine; deſcend and fing;
The breathing inſtruments inſpire,
Xº, voice each ſilent ſtring,
nd ſweep the ſounding lyre. -
To Sweep. º 71. ng lyre Pope.
1. To Paſs with violence, tumult, or ſwiftneſs.
Haſte me to know it, that I with wings as ſwift
As meditation or the thoughts of love
May ſweep to my revenge.
A pºor man that oppreſſeth the poor,
which leaveth no food.
Before tempeſtuous winds ariſe,
Stars ſhooting through the darkneſs gild the night
With ſweeping glories and long trails of light. Dryden,
2. To paſs with pomp 5 to paſs with an equal motion.
She ſweep; it through the court with troops of ladies,
More like an empreſs than duke Humphrey's wife. Shakespeare
In gentle dreams I often will be by,
And ſweep along before your cloſing eye.
- Shakeſpeare.
is like a ſweeping rain
Prov. xxviii. iii.
- Dryden,
3. To move with a long reach.
Nor always errs; for oft the gauntlet draws
A ſweping ſtroke along the crackling jaws. Dryden.
Swee P. m.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The act of ſweeping.
2. The compaſs of any violent or continued motion.
A door drags when by its ill hanging on its hinges, or by
the ill boarding of the room the bottom edge of the door rides
in its ſweep upon the floor. Mxºn's Mechan. Exerciſe.
Lion-hearted Richard like a torrent ſwell'd
With wintry tempeſts, that diſdains all mounds,
Breaking away impetuous, and involves
Within its ſweep, trees, houſes, men.
3: Violent deſtruction.
In countries ſubject to great epidemical ſweeps, men may
live very long, but where the proportion of the chronical diſ.
temper is great, it is not likely to be ſo. Graunt.
4. Direction of any motion not rectilinear.
Having made one inciſion a little circularly, begin a ſecond,
bringing it with an oppoſite ſweep to meet the other. Sharp.
Sweepings... n.ſ.. [from ſweep.] That which is ſwept away.
Should this one broomſtick enter the ſcene, covered with
duſt, though the ſweepings of the fineſt lady's chamber, we
ſhould deſpiſe its vanity. Swift.
Swee'PNET. n.ſ.. [ſweep and net.] A net that takes in a great
compaſs.
She was a ſweepnet for the Spaniſh ſhips, which happily fell
into her net. Camden.
Sweepstake. n.ſ.. [ſweep and ſtake.] A man that wins
all.
Philips.
Is’t writ in your revenge,
That ſweepſtake you will draw both friend and foe,
Winner and loſer. Shakeſpeare.
Swee'PY. adj. [from ſweep.] Paſſing with great ſpeed and vio-
lence over a great compaſs at once.
They ruſh along, the rattling woods give way,
The branches bend before their ſweepy ſway.
Sweet. adj. [rpeze, Sax. ſoet, Dutch.]
1. Pleaſing to any ſenſe. -
Sweet expreſſes the pleaſant perceptions of almoſt every ſenſe:
ſugar is ſweet, but it hath not the ſame ſweetneſs as muſick;
nor hath muſick the ſweetneſs of a roſe, and a ſweet proſpect
differs from them all: nor yet have any of theſe the ſame
ſweetneſs as diſcourſe, counſel, or meditation hath ; yet the
royal Pſalmiſt faith of a man, we took ſweet counſel together;
and of God, my meditation of him ſhall be ſweet. //atts.
2. Luſcious to the taſte.
Dryden.
This honey taſted ſtill is ever ſweet. Davies.
3. Fragrant to the ſmell.
Balm his foul head with warm diſtilled waters,
And burn ſweet wood to make the lodging ſwet. Shakeſp.
Where a rainbow hangeth over or toucheth, there breath-
eth a ſweet ſmell; for that this happeneth but in certain mat-
ters which have ſome ſweetneſs which the dew of the rainbow
draweth forth. - Bacºn.
Shred very ſmall with thime ſweet-margory and a little win-
ter ſavoury. J/alton’s Angler.
The balmy zephyrs, ſilent ſince her death,
Lament the ceaſing of a ſweeter breath. Pope.
The ſtreets with treble voices ring, .
To ſell the bounteous product of the ſpring;
Sweet-ſmelling flow'rs, and elders early bud. Gay.
4. Melodious to the ear.
The dulcimer, all organs of ſweet ſtop. Milton.
Her ſpeech is grac'd with ſwelter ſound
Than in another's ſong is found. JWallar.
No more the ſtreams their murmurs ſhall forbear
A ſweeter muſick than their own tº hear;
Bút tell the reeds, and tell the vocal ſhore,
Fair Daphne's dead, and muſick is no more. Pote.
2
5. Pleaſing<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S W E
S W E
5. Pleaſing to the eye.
6. Not ſalt.
Heav'n bleſs thee!
Thou haſ the ſweet'ſ face I ever look'd on, Shakespeare.
ite of an egg, or blood mingled with ſalt water, ga-
h Tº. and maketh the water ſweeter; this may be
: ºfton. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
y a The ſails drop with rain,
Sweet waters mingle with the briny main. Dryden.
7. Not ſour.
Time changeth fruits from more four to more ſweet; but
contrariwiſe liquors, even thoſe that are of the juice of fruit,
from more ſweet to more ſour. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Trees whoſe fruit is acid laſt longer than thoſe wº
- a tºº.
*ſº. metals are diſſolved in acid menſtruums, and the
acids in conjunction with the metal act after a different man-
ner, ſo that the compound has a different taſte, much milder
than before, and ſometimes a ſweat one; is it not becauſe the
acids adhere to the metallick particles, and thereby loſs much
of their ačtivity. - Newton's Opticks.
8. Mild; ſoft; gentle.
Let me report to him ſhall find
Your ſweet dependency, and you ſha mn,
A gº that will pray in aid for kindneſs. Shakeſp.
The Peleiades ſhedding ſweet influence. Milton.
Mercy has, could mercy's ſelf be ſeen,
No ſweeter look than this propitious queen. J/aller.
9. Grateful; pleaſing:
Sweet interchange of hill and valley. Milton.
Euryalus,
Than whom the Trojan hoſt -
No fairer face or ſweeter air could boaſt. Dryden's £neid.
10. Not ſtale; not ſtinking: as, that meat is ſweet.
Sweet. n.ſ. -
1. Sweetneſs; ſomething pleaſing.
Pluck out
The multitudinous tongue, let them not lick
The ſweet which is their poiſon. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
What ſofter ſounds are theſe ſalute the ear,
From the large circle of the hemiſphere, :
As if the center of all ſweets met here !
Hail! wedded love,
Perpetual fountain of domeſtick ſweets Milton.
Taught to live
The eaſieſt way; nor with perplexing thoughts
To interrupt the ſºvcet of life. .../ilton's Paradiſe Loft.
Now ſince the Latian and the Trojan brood
Have taſted vengeance, and the ſweets of blood,
Ben. Johnſºn.
Speak. Dryden's 4; neid.
Can Ceyx then ſuſtain to leave his wife,
And unconcern d forſake the ſweets of life 2 Dryden.
We have ſo great an abhorrence of pain, that a little of it
extinguiſhes all our pleaſures; a little bitter mingled in our
cup leaves no reliſh cf the ſweat. Locke.
Love had ordain'd that it was Abra's turn
To mix the ſweets, and miniſter the urn. Prior.
2. A word of endearment.
Sweet ! leave me here a while
My ſpirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with ſleep.
Wherefore frowns my ſwe: *
Have I too long been abſent from theſe lips? Ben. Johnſºn.
Shakeſpeare.
3. A perfume.
- As in perfumes,
'Tis hard to ſay what ſcent is uppermoſt ;
Nor this part muſick or civet can we call,
Or amber, but a rich reſult of all:
So ſhe was all a ſweet. Dryden.
- Flowers
Innumerable, by the ſoft ſouth-weſt
Open'd, and gather'd by religious hands,
Rebound their ſweets from th’odoriferous pavement. Prior.
Swee TBREAD. n.ſ. The pancreas of the calf.
Never tie yourſelf always to eat meats of eaſy digeſture, as
veal, pullets, or fiveetbreads. Harvey on Conſumptiºn.
Sive tº eed and collops were with ſkewers prick'd
About the ſides; imbibing what they deck'd. Dryden.
When you roaſt a beaſt of veal, remember your ſweet-
heart the butler loves a ſweetbread. Swift.
Sweſt BRIAR. m. ſ. [ſãºt and briar.] A fragrant ſhrub.
For March come violets and peach-tree in bloſſom, the cor-
nelian-tree in bloſſom, and ſive thriar. Bacon.
Św EE"t BRoom.. n. ſ. Aſ hers. Ainſworth.
SWEET cichly, n.ſ. [...Myrrhus j A plant.
The characters are; it is a umbelliferous plant, with a
roſe-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of ſeveral unequal petals or
flower-leaves that are placed circularly, and reſt upon the em-
Palement, which turns to a fruit, compoſed of two ſeeds re-
fembling a bird's bill channelle -
Plain on the other. 2 °hannelled and gibbous on one º
To Swſ. E.'ſ EN. v. a. [from ſweet.]
1. To make ſweet.
The world the garden is, ſhe is the flow'r
That ſtºctens all the place; ſhe is the gueſt
Of rareſt price. Siiº,
Here is the ſincil of the blood ſtill: all the perfumes of A.
bia will not ſweeten this little hand. Shakeſpeare.
Give me an ounce of civet to ſweeten my imagination.
Shakespeare eare's King Lear.
With faireſt flow’rs Fidele, ºft ng Lear
I'll ſweeten thy ſad grave. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Be humbly minded, know your poſt ; -
Sweeteen your tea, and watch your toaſt. Shift,
2, To make mild or kind.
All kindneſſes deſcend upon ſuch a temper, as rivers of
freſh waters falling into the main ſea; the ſea ſwallows them
all, but is not changed or ſweetened by them. South's Sermon.
. To make leſs painful.
She the ſweetneſs of my heart, even ſweetens the death
which her ſweetneſs brought upon me. Sidney.
Thou ſhalt ſecure her helpleſs ſex from harms,
And ſhe thy cºres will ſweeten with her charms. Drydºn.
Intereſt of ſtate and change of circumſtances may have
fweetened theſe reflections to the politer ſort, but impreſſions
are not ſo eaſily worn out of the minds of the vulgar. Addiſon,
Thy mercy ſweet'ned ev'ry ſoil,
Made ev'ry region pleaſe;
The hoary Alpin hills it warm’d,
And ſmooth'd the Tyrrhene ſeas.
4. To palliate; to reconcile.
Theſe leſions may be gilt and ſweetened as we order pills
and potions, ſo as to take off the diſguſt of the remedy. L'Eſtr.
5. To make grateſul or pleaſing.
- I would have my love
Angry ſometimes, to ſweeten off the reſt
Of her behaviour. Ben. Johnſºn's Catlit,
6. To ſoften; to make delicate.
Corregio has made his memory immortal, by the ſtrength
he has given to his figures, and by ſweetening his lights and
ſhadows, and melting them into each other ſo happily, that
they are even imperceptible. Dryden', Dºſ ſhy.
To Sw EET EN. v. n. To grow ſweet.
Where a waſp hath bitten in a grape, or any fruit, it will
/weeten haſtily. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
Swest ENER. m. ſ [from ſweeten.]
1. One that palliates; one that repreſents thing, tenderly.
But you who, till your fortune's made,
Muſt be a ſwet'ner by your trade, -
Muſt ſwear he never meant us ill. Swiſ.
Thoſe ſoftners, ſweetners, and compounders, ſhake their
heads ſo ſtrongly, that we can hear their pocketsjingle, Swift.
2. That which contemporates acrimony.
Powder of crabs eyes and claws, and burnt eggſhells are
preſcribed as ſweetners of any ſharp humours. Tºmº,
Swee THEARf. n.ſ. [ſweet and heart.j A lover or miliº
Miſtreſs retire yourſelf
Into ſome covert; take your ſweetheart;
And pluck o'er your brows. Shałºffºrt.
Swetheart, you are now in an excellent good temperality,
and your colour, I warrant you, is as red as any roſe, Shał.
One thing, Sweet/eart, I will aſk, '.….]
Take me for a new-faſhion'd maſk. Cleaveland.
A wench was wringing her hands and crying; ſº *
ly parted with her ſweetheart. - L #.
Pry'thee, ſweetſ art, how go matters in the hº
thou haſt been L'E/irangº.
She interprets all your dreams for theſe,
Foretells th eſtate, when the rich uncle dies, , , l
And ſees a ſweetheart in the ſacrifice. Dº" juvenal.
Sweet, NG. m. ſ. [from ſweet.]
I. A ſweet luſcious apple. -
A child will ºwntº becauſe it is preſently º
pleaſant, and refuſe a runnet, becauſe it is then gº ar
and four. Aftham's Sihºolmaſter.
2. A word of endearment. -
Trip no further, pretty ſweeting ; Shakeſpeart.
Journeys end in lovers meeting.
Sweitish adj. [from ſweet.] Somewhat "... habound-
They eſteemed that blood pituitous naturally, whic Foyer.
ed with an exceeding quantity of ſweeth chyle. ith ſweet-
Sweetly. adv. [from ſweet.] In a ſweet mann"; "
neſs. -
The beſt wine for my beloved goeth downſ”
He bore his great éommiſſionin his lººk; ke. Drydº.
But ſweetly temper'd awe, and ſoften’d all he ſpoke.
No poet ever ſweetly ſung,
Unleſ, he were like Phoebus young 3
ë. º i. º §
Inleſs like V cinus in her DTI ſile- ... - O
Sweet Me AT. n.ſ. [ ſweet and mºat.] Delicacies ma"
fruits preſerved with ſugar. 8 Mopſ.
Addiſon's Spediatºr.
Cant,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S W E
-—-ma
Mopſa, as glad as of ſweetmeats to go of ſuch an errand,
*ś Sidney.
hy all the charges of the nuptial feaſt,
Wine and deſerts, and ſweetmeats to digeſt. Dryden.
There was plenty, but the diſhes were ill ſorted; whole
pyramids of ſweetmeats for boys and women, but little ſolid
meat for men. - Dryden.
Make your tranſparent ſweetmeats truly nice,
With Indian ſugar and Arabian ſpice. King's Cookery.
If a child cries for any unwholſome fruit, you purchaſe his
quiet by giving him a leſs hurtful ſweetmeat; this may preſerve
his health, but ſpoils his mind. Locke.
At a lord mayor's feaſt, the ſweetmeats do not make their
appearance till people are cloyed with beef and mutton.
Addiſon,
They are allowed to kiſs the child at meeting and parting;
but a profeſſor, who always ſtands by, will not ſuffer them to
bring any preſents of toys or ſweetmeats. Gulliver's Travels.
Sweet Ness. n.ſ.. [from ſweet.] The quality of being ſweet
in any of its ſenſes; fragrance; melody; luſciouſneſs; delici-
ouſneſs; agreeableneſs; delightfulneſs; gentleneſs of man-
ners; mildneſs of aſpect.
She the ſweetneſs of my heart, even ſweetning the death
which her ſweetneſs brought upon me. Sidney.
The right form, the true figure, the natural colour that is
fit and due to the dignity of a man, to the beauty of a wo-
man, to the ſweetneſs of a young babe. Aſcham.
O our lives ſweetneſ: 1
That we the pain of death would hourly bear,
Rather than die at once. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Where a rainbow toucheth, there breatheth forth a ſweet
ſmell: for this happeneth but in certain matters, which have
in themſelves ſome ſweetneſs, which the gentle dew of the rain-
bow draweth forth. Bacon.
Serene and clear harmonious Horace flows,
With ſweetneſ, not to be expreſt in proſe. Roſcommon.
Suppoſe two authors equally ſweet, there is a great diſtin-
&amp;tion to be made in ſweetneſs; as in that of ſugar and that of
honey. Dryden.
This old man's talk, though honey flow'd
In every word, would now loſe all its ſweetneſs. Addiſon.
Leave ſuch to tune their own dull rhymes, and know
What's roundly ſmooth, or languiſhingly ſlow;
And praiſe the eaſy vigor of a line,
where Denham's ſtrength and Waller's{. Pope.
A man of good education, excellent underſtanding, and
exact taſte; theſe qualities are adorned with great modeſty
and a moſt amiable ſweetneſs of temper. Swift.
Swee’rwill 1 AM. N. m. ſ. Plants. They are a ſpecies of gilli-
SWEE'T WILLOW } flowers. [See Clove Gilliflow ERs.]
Swee’t willow. n.ſ. Gale or Dutch myrtle.
The leaves are placed alternately on the branches: it hath
male flowers which are produced at the wings of the leaves;
are naked, and grow in a longiſh ſpike: the fruit, which is
produced in ſeparate trees, is of a conical figure, and ſqua-
moſe, containing one ſeed in each ſcale. Miller.
To Swell. v. n. Participle paſſ ſwollen. [rpellan, Sax. ſwellen,
Dutch.
1. To ºl. bigger; to grow turgid; to extend the parts.
Propitious Tyber ſmooth'd his wat'ry way,
He roll'd his river back, and pois'd he ſtood,
A gentleſwelling and a peaceful flood. Dryden's Aeneid.
2. To tumify by obſtruction.
But ſtrangely viſited people,
All ſwol'n and ulc’rous; pitiful to the eye,
The meer deſpair of ſurgery he cures. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Forty years didſt thou ſuſtain them in the wilderneſs, ſo
that their cloaths waxed not old, and their feet ſwelled not.
Nehem. ix. 21.
Swol’n is his breaſt; his inward pains encreaſe,
All means are us'd, and all without ſucceſs.
3. To be exaſperated.
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildneſs hath allay'd their ſwelling griefs. Shakeſpeare.
4. To look big.
Here he comes, ſwelling like a turkey-cock. Shakeſpeare.
Peleus and Telephus exil'd and poor,
Forget their ſwelling and gigantick words.
5. To protuberate. -
This iniquity ſhall be as a breach ready to fall, ſwelling out
in a high wall. Iſa. xxx. 13.
6. To riſe into arrogance; to be elated.
In all things elſe above our humble fate,
Your equal mind yet ſwell; not into ſtate.
7. To be inflated with anger.
I will help every one from him that ſwelleth againſt him, and
will ſet him at reſt. Pſalms xii. 6.
We have made peace of enmity
Dryden.
Roſcommon.
Dryden.
Between theſe ſwelling wrong incenſed peers. Shakeſpeare.
The hearts of princes kiſs obedience,
So much they love it; but to ſtubborn ſpirits
They ſwell and grow as terrible as ſtorms. Shakeſpeare.
S W E
8. To grow upon the view.
9 for a muſe of fire, that would aſcend
The brighteſt heaven of inventionſ ce
A kingdom for a ſtage, princes to act, -
And monarchs to behold thefwelling ſcene. Shakeſpeare.
implies commonly a notion of ſomething wrong,
Your youth admires c
The throws and ſwellings of a Roman ſoul,
Cato's bold flights, th’ extravagance of virtue.
9. It
Addi o/7.
To SW * valourſwells into a fault. Addiſon's †.
1. To cauſe to riſe or encreaſe; to make tumid.
Wind, blow the earth into the ſea,
Orſwell the curled waters 'bove the main. Shakeſpeare.
You who ſupply the ground with ſeeds of grain
And you who ſwell thoſe ſeeds with kindly .* Bryan.
2. To aggravate; to heighten.
It is low ebb with his accuſer, when ſuch peccadillos are put
to ſwell the charge. Atterbury.
3. To raiſe to arrogance.
All theſe miſeries proceed from the ſame natural cauſes,
which have uſually attended kingdoms/woln with long plenty,
pride, and exceſs. Clarendon,
Swell. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Extenſion of bulk.
The ſwan's down-feather
That ſtands upon the ſwell at full of tide,
And neither way inclines. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra.
The king of men, /woln with pride,
Refus'd his preſents, and his prayers deny'd.
Swe'lling. n.ſ. [from ſwell.]
1. Morbid tumour.
2. Protuberance; prominence.
The ſuperficies of ſuch plates are not even, but have many
cavities and ſwellings, which how ſhallow ſoever do a little vary
the thickneſs of the plate. Newton's Opticks.
3. Effort for a vent.
My heart was torn in pieces to ſee the huſband ſuppreſſing
and keeping down the ſwellings of his grief. Tatler.
To Swelt, v. n. To puff in ſweat, if that be the meaning.
Chearful blood in faintneſs chill did melt,
Which like a fever fit through all his body ſwelt. Fa...?ueen.
To SWE/LTER. v. n. [This is ſuppoſed to be corrupted from
ſuſtry.]
1. To be pained with heat.
If the ſun's exceſſive heat
Makes our bodies/welter,
To an oſier hedge we get
For a friendly ſhelter;
There we may
Think and pray,
Before death -
Stops our breath. Walton's Angler.
To Swe’lte R. v. a. To parch, or dry up with heat.
Some would always have long nights and ſhort days; others
again long days and ſhort nights; one climate would be ſcorch-
ed and ſweltered with everlaſting dog-days, while an eternal
December blaſted another. Bentley's Sermons.
Swelt Ry. adj. [from ſwelter.] Suffocating with heat.
Swept. The participle and preterite of ſweep.
To Swerd. v. n. To breed a green turf. [See to Swa R D.]
The clays that are long in ſwerding, and little ſubjećt to
weeds, are the beſt land for clover. AMortimer.
To Swerve. v. n. [ſwerven, Saxon and Dutch..]
I. To wander; to rove. -
A maid thitherward did run, -
To catch her ſparrow which from her did ſwerve. Sidney.
The ſwerving vines on the tall elms prevail,
Unhurt by ſouthern ſhow’rs or northern hail,
2. To deviate; to depart from rule, cuſtom or duty.
That which angels do clearly behold, and without any
ſwerving obſerve, is a law celeſtial and heavenly.. . Hooker.
Howſoever theſe ſwervings are now and then incident into
the courſe of nature, nevertheleſs ſo conſtantly the laws of
nature are by natural agents obſerved, that no man denieth;
but thoſe things which nature worketh are wrought either al-
ways, or for the moſt part after one and the ſame º:
20Arer.
The ungodly have laid a ſnare for me 3 but yet I ſwerve
not from thy commandments. Common Prayer.
Were {. the moſt imperial monarch,
Thereof moſt worthy, were I the faireſt youth
That ever made the eyeſwerve,
I would not prize them without her love. Shakeſpeare.
There is a protećtion very juſt which princes owe to their
ſervants, when, in obedience to their juſt commands, upon
extraordinary occaſions, in the execution of their truſts, they
werve from the ſtrict letter of the law. Clar endon.
Till then his majeſty had not in the leaſt ſwerved from that
aćt of parliament. Qarinº.
A.ion in the courſe of nature, deſcºt, and ſºrº:
in the creature without the fin of man would immediately
follow. Hatewill on Providence.
25 Y Firm
Dryden.
Dryden:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S W I
S W I
- ret poſſible to ſwer”: Milton.
Firm we ſubſiſt, . contagion of ill example, ſwerve
ho, through - -
. ſº the rules of their holy faith, yet would up-
. ſuch in extraordinary warning be brought to comply with
Alterbury's Sermons.
them. bend
- - to -
3. To ''... mightieſt quell'd, the battlefiverv'd
With many an inroad gor'd. - Milton.
4. [I know not whence derived.] To climb on a narrow body.
ºn wildings have I gather'd for my dear,
Upon the topmoſt branch, the tree was high,
Yet nimbly up from bough to bough I ſwerv'd. Dryden.
She fled, returning by the way ſhe went,
And ſwerv'd along her bow with ſwift aſcent. Dryden.
SWIFT. adj. [rpºrt, Saxon.] . -
1. Moving far in a ſhort time; quick; fleet; ſpeedy; nimble;
rapid.
Thou art ſo far before, ſl
That ſwiftºff wing of recompence is ſlow
To ſº Shakeſpeare.
yet are theſe feet, whoſe ſtrengthleſs ſtay is numb,
Unable to ſupport this lump of clay,
Swift-winged with deſire to get a grave. Skakeſpeare.
Men of war, whoſe faces were like the faces of lions, and
as ſwift as the roes upon the mountains. 1 Chron. xii. 8.
wäimitate and practiſe to make ſwifter motions than any
out of other muſkets. at 0/1.
To him with ſwift aſcent be up return'd. Milton.
Things that move ſo ſwift as not to affed the ſenſes di-
ſin&amp;ly, with ſeveral diſtinguiſhable diſtances of their motion,
and ſo cauſe not any train of ideas in the mind, are nº Pº
ceived to move. Locke.
It preſerves the ends of the bones from incaleſcency, which
they, being ſolid bodies, would contract from any fwift mo-
tion. Ray.
Thy flumbling founder'd jade can trot as high
As any other Pegaſus can fly ;
So the dull cel moves nimbler in the mud,
Than all the ſwift fin’d racers of the flood. Dorſt.
Clouded in a deep abyſs of light,
while preſent, too ſevere for human fight, {
Nor ſtaying longer than one ſwift-wing'd night. Prior.
Mantiger made a circle round the chamber, and the ſwift-
footed martin purſued him. Arbuthnot.
There too my ſon, —ah once my beſt delight:
Once ſwift of foot, and terrible in fight. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
Swift they deſcend, with wing to wing conjoin'),
Stretch their broad plumes, and float upon the wind. Pºpe.
2. Ready.
Let every man be ſwift to hear, ſlow to ſpeak. Ja.. i. 19.
He made intricate ſeem ſtraight,
To miſchief ſwift. Milton.
Swift. n.ſ.. [from the quickneſs of their flight]
1. A bird like a ſwallow; a maſtinct.
Swifts and ſwallows have remarkably ſhort leg, and their
toes graſp any thing very ſtrongly. Derham.
2. The current of a ſtream.
He can live in the ſtrongeſt ſwifts of the water. I/alton.
Swiftly. adv. [from ſwift.] Flectly; rapidly; nimbly; with
celerity; with velocity.
Theſe move ſwiftly, and at great diſtance; but then they
require a medium well diſpoſed, and their tranſmiſſion is ea-
ſily ſtopped. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
Pleas'd with the paſſage, we ſlide ſwiftly on,
And ſee the dangers which we cannot ſhun. Dryden.
In decent order they advance to light ;
Yet then too ſwiftly fleet by human ſight,
And meditate too ſoon their everlaſting flight. Prior.
Swi'FTNess. n.ſ. [from ſwift.] Speed; nimbleneſs; rapidity;
quickneſs; velocity; celerity. -
et our proportions for theſe wars
Be ſoon collected, and all thing thought upon,
That may with reaſonable ſwiftneſs add
More feathers to our wings. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
We may outrun
By violent ſwiftneſs that which we run at;
And loſe by over running. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII:
Speed to deſcribe whoſe ſwiftn'ſ number fails. Miltºn.
Exulting, till he finds their nobler ſenſe
Their diſproportion'd ſpeed does recompenſe;
Then curſes his conſpiring feet, whoſe ſcent
Betrays that ſafety which their ſwiftneſs lent. Denham.
Such is the mighty ſwiftneſs of your mind,
To º º º º behind. Dryden.
r-R v G. D. m. LiſtUlga, 111and 1ck. o drink by large
To SWILL v.a. tºº, sº k by large draughts.
1. To drink luxuriouſly and groſsly.
tº: wretched, bloody, and uſurping boar
S º poil'd your ſummer fields and fruitful vines,
jº s your warm blood like waſh, and makes his trough
n your embowel'd boſoms, Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
The moſt common of theſe cauſes are an hereditary di
ſition, ſwilling down great quantities of cold :::::::::
Arbuth ~.
suchi, depºt, thinry,”
The third night's profits of his play;
His morning draughts till noon can ſwill,
Among his brethren of the quill. Swift
2. To waſh; to drench. *
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
O'erhang and jutty his confounded baſe,
Swill'd with the wild and waſteful ocean. Shakesp
With that a German oſt has ſwºll'd his throat, akºſheart.
Deluded, that imperial Rhine beſtow'd
The generous rummer. Philipt.
3. To inebriate. hilips,
I ſhould be loth
To meet the rudeneſs and ſwill'd inſolence
Of ſuch late waſſailers. Milton
He drinks a ſwilling draught; and lin'd within, -
- Will ſupple in the bath his outward ſkin. Dryden
Swill. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Drink, luxuriouſly poured dºwn.
Give ſwine ſuch ſwill as you have. Mring.
Thus as they ſwim, in mutual ſwill the talk -
Reels faſt from theme to theme. Thomſºn.
Swiller. m. ſ. [from ſwill.] A luxurious drinker.
To SWIM. v. n. Preterite ſwam, ſwom, or ſwum. [rplmman
Saxon; ſwemmen, Dutch.] 3.
1. To float on the water; not to ſink.
I will ſcarce think you have ſwam in a gondola. Shakeſ art.
We have ſhips and boats for going under water, and brook-
ing of ſeas; alſo ſwimming-girdles and ſupporters. Bacºn.
2. To move progreſſively in the water by the motion of the
limbs.
Leap in with me into this angry flood,
And ſwim to yonder point. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar,
I have ventur'd,
Like little wanton boys that ſwim on bladders,
Theſe many ſummers in a ſea of glory;
But far beyond my depth. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
The ſoldiers counſel was to kill the priſoners, left any of
them ſhould ſwim out and eſcape. Að; xxvii. 42.
The reſt driven into the lake, where ſeeking to ſave their
lives by ſwimming, they were ſlain in coming to land by the
spaniſh horſemen, or elſe in their ſwimming ſhot by the hi-
quebuſiers. Knoller.
Animals ſwim in the ſame manner as they go, and need
no other way of motion for natation in the water, then for
progreſſion upon the land. Brown's Vulgar Errouri.
The frighted wolf now ſwims among the ſheep,
The yellow lion wanders in the deep;
The ſtag ſwims faſter than he ran befor; Dryden,
Blue ºf riton gave the ſignal from the ſhore,
The ready Nereids heard and ſwam before,
To ſmooth the ſeas. Dryden,
3. To be conveyed by the ſtream:
with tenders of our protection of them from * fury of
thoſe who would ſoon drown them, if they refuſed to ſwim
down the popular ſtream with them. King Charleſ.
I ſwºm with the tide, and the water under me was º:
r; :/l,
4. To glide along with a ſmooth of dizzy motion.
She with pretty and withſwimming gate -
Follying, her womb then rich with my young ſquire.
Would imitate. - Shakeſpeari.
A hovering miſt came ſwimming o'er his ſight,
And ſeal’d his eyes in everlaſting night.
My ſlack hand dropt, and all the idle pomp,
Priº, altars, victims ſwam before myºg'. !
Thé fainting ſoul ſtood ready wing" for flight, P
And o'er his eye-balls ſwum the ſhades of night. ºft,
. To be dizzy; to be vertiginous.
5 I am taken with a ºimming in my head, sº
a miſt before my eyes, that I can neither hear nor ſcº, "7"
6. To be floated.
* when the heavens are filled with cloud, when the º
ſwims in rain, and all nature wears.” lowring cº º
withdraw myſelf from theſe uncomfortable ſcenº º .
fionary worlds of art. Addison's # mſºn,
Šaj. ditches ſwell, the meadºws/* th i.
7. To have abundance of any quality; * flow in any thº'
They now ſwim in joy, ich
Fre long to ſwim at large, and |aligh; for whic Miltºn.
The world a word of tears muſt wºP.
To Swim. v. a. To paſs by ſwimming: -
s.she thought to ſwim the flo") malny Dryden.
By ſtretch of arms the diſtan; ſhore to gain: ſhes b º
Swim M. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The bladder of fiſhes")
they are ſupported in the water.
ºffic bººs have the nature and uſe of tendons, ne blad"
ing the ſwim, and thereby transfuſing the air ‘. O Grew.
jºie, or diſcharging it from * “yºtº,
Dryden,
Smith,
in contrač.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S W I
S W I
}.
*
*
º
-
SwiſMMER. m.ſ.. [from ſwim.]
1. One who ſwims.
Birds find eaſe in the depth of the air, as ſwimmers do in a
deep water. Bacon.
Latiroſtrous and flat billed birds, being generally ſwimmers,
the organ is wiſely contrived for ačtion. Brown.
Life is oft preſerv'd
By the bold ſwimmer, in the ſwift illapſe
Of accident diſaſtrous. Thomſºn.
2. The ſwimmer is ſituated in the fore legs of a horſe, above
the knees, and upon the inſide, and almoſt upon the back
parts of the hind legs, a little below the ham: this part is with-
out hair, and reſembles a piece of hard dry horn. Farrier's Dić.
Swi'MMINGLY. adv. [from ſwimming.] Smoothly; without
obſtruction. A low word.
John got on the battlements, and called to Nick, I hope
the cauſe goes on ſwimmingly. Arbuthnot.
SWINE. n.ſ frpin, Saxon; ſwyn, Dutch. It is probably the
plural of ſome old word, and is now the ſame in both num-
bers.] ...A hog; a pig. A creature remarkable for ſtupidity
and naſtineſs.
O monſtrous beaſt ! how like a ſwine he lies! Shałºff.
He will be ſivine drunk; and in his ſleep he does little harm,
ſave to his bedcloaths. Shakeſpeare.
Who knows not Circe,
The daughter of the Sun ? whoſe charmed cup
Whoever taſted, loſt his upright ſhape,
And downward fell into a groveling ſwine. Milton.
Had the upper part, to the middle, been of human ſhape,
and all below ſwine, had it been murder to deſtroy it? Locke.
How inſtinét varies in the grov'ling ſwine,
Compar'd, half reaſ’ning elephant, with thine ! Pope.
Sw1'NEBREAD. n.ſ. A kind of plant; truffles. Bailey.
Swi'NEHERD. m. ſ. [rpin and pyro, Saxon.] A keeper of
hogs.
There ſainthird, that keepeth the hog. Tuffer.
The whole interview between Ulyſſes and Eumeus has
fallen into ridicule: Eumeus has been judged to be of the
ſame rank and condition with our modern ſwineherds. Broome.
Sw1'NF pipe. m. ſ. A bird of the thruſh kind. Bailey.
To Sw1N G. v. n. [rpingan, Saxon.] -
1. To wave too and fro hanging looſely. -
I tried if a pendulum would ſwing faſter, or continue ſwing-
ing longer in our receiver, in caſe of exſučtion of the air,
than otherwiſe. Boyle.
If the coach ſwung but the leaſt to one ſide, ſhe uſed to
ſhriek ſo loud, that all concluded ſhe was overturned. Arbuthn.
Jack hath hanged himſelf: let us go ſee how he ſwings. Arb.
When the ſwinging ſigns your ears offend
With creaking noiſe, then rainy floods impend. Gay.
2. To fly backward and forward on a rope.
To Sw1N G. v. a. preterite ſwang, ſwung.
1. To make to play looſely on a ſtring.
2. To whirl round in the air.
His ſword prepar’d º
He ſwang about his head, and cut the winds. Shakeſpeare.
Take bottles and ſwing them: fill not the bottles full, but
leave ſome air, elſe the liquor cannot play nor flower. Bacon.
Swinging a red-hot iron about, or faſtening it unto a wheel
under that motion, it will ſooner grow cold. Brown.
Swing thee in the air, then daſh thee down,
To th’ hazard of thy brains and ſhatter'd ſides. Milton.
3. To wave looſely.
If one approach to dare his force, -
He ſwings his tail, and ſwiftly turns him round. Dryden.
Swing. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Motion of anything hanging looſely.
In caſting of anything, the arms, to make a greater ſwing,
are firſt caſt backward. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Men uſe a pendulum, as a more ſteady and regular motion
than that of the earth; yet if any one ſhould aſk how he
certainly knows that the two ſucceſſive ſwings of a pendulum
are equal, it would be very hard to ſatisfy him. Locke.
2. A line on which anything hangs looſe.
3. Influence or power of a body put in motion:
The ram that batters down the wall,
For the great ſwing and rudeneſs of his poize,
They place before his hand that made the engine. Shakeſp.
In this encyclopoedia, and round of knowledge, like the great
wheels of heaven, we're to obſerve two circles, that, while we
are daily carried about, and whirled on by the ſwing and rapt
of the one, we may maintain a natural and proper courſe in
the ſober wheel of the other. Brºwn.
The deſcending of the earth to this orbit is not upon that
mechanical account Carteſius pretends, namely, the ſtrong
ſwing of the more ſolid globuli that overflow it. More.
4. Courſe; unreſtrained liberty; abandonment to any motive.
Facts unjuſt
Commit, even to the full ſwing of his luſt. Chapman.
Take thy ſwing ;
For not to take, is but the ſelf-ſame thing. Dryden.
Let them all take their ſwing
Tºº the king,
nd get a blue ribband inſtead o - -
5. Unreſtrained tendency. f a ſtring. Swift.
Where the ſwing goeth, there follow, fawn, flatter, laugh,
and lie luftily at other mens liking. Aſcham’s sºnº.
Theſe exuberant productions only excited and fomented his
luſts; ſo that his whole time lay upon his hands, and gave him
leiſure ºntrive and with full ſwing purſue his foſſie, i.
- Thoſe that are ſo perſuaded, deſire to be wiſe in a way that
will gratify their appetites, and ſo give up themſelves to the
fwing of their unbounded propenſions. Gia. Scepſ. Preface.
Were it not for theſe, civil government were for alſº,
ſtand before the prevailing ſwing of corrupt nature, which
would know no honeſty but advantage. &gt; South
To SWINGE. v. a. Irpinzan, Saxon.j
1. To whip; to baſtinade; to puniſh.
Sir, I was in love with my bed: I thank you, you ſwing'd
me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you for
your's... Shakespeare Two Gent, of Varona.
This very rev'rend letcher, quite worn out
With rheumatiſms, and crippled with his gout,
Forgets what he in youthful times has done,
And ſwinges his own vices in his ſon. Dryd. jun. juvenal.
The printer brought along with him a bundle of thoſe pa-
pers, which, in the phraſe of the whig-coffeehouſes, have
fwinged off the Examiner.
Swift.
2. To move as a laſh. Not in uſe.
He, wroth to ſee his kingdom fail,
Swinges the ſcaly horror of his folded tail. Milton.
Swinge. n. ſ. [from the verb.] A ſway; a ſweep of anything
in motion. Not in uſe.
The ſhallow water doth her force infringe,
And renders vain her tail's impetuous ſwinge. J/aller.
Swi'NGE Buckle R. n.ſ.. [ſwinge and buckler.] A bully; a
man who pretends to feats of arms.
You had not four ſuch ſwingebucklers in all the inns of court
again. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Swi/NGER. m.ſ.. [from ſwing.] He who ſwings; a hurler.
Swi'NG ING, adj. [from ſwing...] Great; huge. A low word.
The countryman ſeeing the lion diſarmed, with a ſwinging
cudgel broke off the match. L’E/?range.
A good/winging ſum of John's readieſt caſh went towards
building of Hocus's countryhouſe. Arbuthnot.
Swi'NG INGLY. adv. [from ſwinging.] Vaſtly; greatly.
Henceforward he'll print neither pamphlets nor linen,
And, if ſwearing can do’t, ſhall be ſwingingly maul’d. Swift.
To Swi'NGLE. v. n. [from ſwing.]
.I. To dangle; to wave hanging.
2. To ſwing in pleaſure.
Swi'NISH. adj. [from ſwine.] Befitting ſwine; reſembling
ſwine; groſs; brutal.
They clepe us drunkards, and with ſwiniſh phraſe
Soil our addition. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Swiniſh gluttony
Ne'er looks to heav'n amidſt his gorgeous feaſt;
But, with beſotted baſe ingratitude,
Crams and blaſphemes his feeder. Milton.
To Sw1NK. v. n. [rpincan, Saxon. J. To labour; to toil; to
drudge. Obſolete.
Riches, renown, and principality,
For which men ſwink and ſweat inceſſantly. Fairy Queen.
For they do ſwink and ſweat to feed the other,
Who live like lords of that which they do gather. Hub. Tale.
To Sw1NK. v. a. To overlabour.
The labour'd ox
In his looſe traces from the furrow came,
And the ſwink'd hedger at his ſupper ſat. Milton.
Sw1NK. n.ſ. Irpinc, Saxon.] Labour; toil; drudgery. Ob-
ſolete.
Ah, Piers, been thy teeth on edge, to think
How great ſport they gaynen with little ſwinke 2 Speſſºr.
Thou's but a lazy loorde,
And rekes much of thy ſwinke. Spenſºr:
Sw1tch. m. ſ. A ſmall flexible twig.
Fetch me a dozen crabtree ſtaves, and ſtrong ones; thºſe
are but ſwitches. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
When a circle 'bout the wriſt
Is made by beadle exorciſt, -
The body feels the ſpur and ſwitch. Hudibras.
Mauritania, on the fifth medal, leads a horſe with ſomething
like a thread; in her other hand ſhe holds, a ſwitch. Addiſon.
To Switch. 9. a. [from the noun..] To laſh; to jerk.
Lay thy bridle's weight - - -
Moſt of thy left ſide; thy right horſe then ſwitching, all thy
throat -
Spent in encouragements, give him; and all the rein let
float. Chapman's Iliad.
Swiveſ, m.ſ. Something fixed in another body ſo as to turn
round in it.
5 Swo BBER,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S W C
S Y C
swo'sses. n.ſ. (See Swan"]
he deck. -
1. A "... on a mattreſs laid,
orge with louſy ſwobbers fed. - pryden.
Fº º that are only incidentally uſed in betting
2. o -
f whiſt. -
at #ºn uſed to play at whiſt and ſwobbers: playing
w and then a ſober game at whiſt for paſtime, it might be
j ; but he could not digeſt thoſe wicked/wobbers. Swift.
Swo'll EN. ' The participle paſſive of ſwell.
**** Udio his aid ſhe haſtily did draw
Her dreadful beaſt, who, ſwoln with blood of late,
Cameramping forth with proud preſumptuous gait. F. 24.
when thus the gather'd ſtorms of wretched love
In my ſwoln boſom with long war had ſtrove, , ,
At length they broke their bounds: at length their force
Bore down whatever met its ſtronger courſe;
Laid all the civil bonds of manhood waſte, -
And ſcatter'd ruin as the torrent paſt. - Prior.
whereas at firſt we had only three of theſe principles, their
number is already ſwoln to five. Baker on Learning.
Swom. The preterite of ſwim.
I ſwim with the tide, and the water was *},*:::
C. ryaen.
Tswoos. v. n. [arpunan, Saxon.] To ſuffer a ſuſpenſion
of thought and ſenſation; to faint. -
So play the fooliſh throngs with one that ſwoons;
Come all to help him, and ſo ſtop the air
By which he ſhould revive. Shakeſpeare.
If thou ſtand'ſt not i' th' ſtate of hanging, or of ſome death
more long in ſpectatorſhip, and crueler in ſuffering, behold
now preſently, and ſwoon for what's to come upon thee. Shakespeare
we ſee the great and ſudden effect of ſmells in fetching
men again, when they ſwoon. - Bacon.
The moſt in years ſwoºn'd firſt away for pain;
Then, ſcarce recover'd, ſpoke. Dryden:
The woman finds it all a trick,
That he could ſwoon when ſhe was fick;
And knows that in that grief he reckon'd
On black-ey'd Suſan for his ſecond. Prior.
There appeared ſuch an ecſtacy in his ačtion, that he ſeemed
ready to ſwoon away in the ſurprize of joy. Tatler.
Swoos. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A lipothymy; a fainting fit.
To Swoop. v. a. [I ſuppoſe formed from the ſound.]
1. To fall at once as a hawk upon his prey.
A fowl in Madagaſcar, called a ruck, the feathers of whoſe
wings are twelve paces, can with as much eaſe ſwºop up an
elephant as our kites do a mouſe. Wilkins.
This mould'ring piecemeal in your hands did fall,
And now at laſt you came to ſwoop it all. Dryden.
2. To prey upon; to catch up.
The phyſician looks with another eye on the medicinal herb
than the grazing ox, which ſwoops it in with the common
graſs. Glanv. Scepſ.
Swoop. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Fall of a bird of prey upon his
quarry.
All my pretty ones?
Did you ſay all? What, all? O hellkite! all!
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam,
At one fell ſwoºp 2 Shakeſ Macbeth.
The eagle fell into the fox's quarters, and carried away a
whole litter of cubs at a ſwoop. L’Eſtrange.
To Swop. v. a. [Of uncertain derivation.] To change; to
exchange one thing for another. A low word.
When I drove a thruſt home, he put it by,
And cried, as in deriſion, ſpare the ſtripling;
Oh that inſulting word! I would have ſwapp'd
Youth for old age, and all my life behind,
To have been then a momentary man. Dryden's Cleomenes.
SWORD. n. ſ. [rpeono, Saxon; ſweerd, Dutch.]
1. A weapon uſed either in cutting or thruſting; the uſual
weapon of fights hand to hand.
Old unhappy traitor, the ſword is out
That muſt deſtroy thee. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Each man took his ſword, and ſlew all the maies. Gen.
Euryalus is the only peer that is deſcribed with a ſword,
which he gives to Ulyſſes to repair his injury. Broome.
2. Deſtruction by war.
The ſword without, and terrour within. Deut. xxxii. 25.
3. Vengeance of juſtice.
4. Emblem of authority.
This I, her ſword bearer, do carry,
For civil deed and military.
****bed, adj. [from ſwordj Girt with a ſword.
The ſworded ſeraphim
Are ſeen in glitt'ring ranks with wings diſplay'J. Milton.
"ººk. n.ſ.. [from ſwºrd.] A cut-throat; a ſoldier. In
contempt.
A Roman ſworder and bandit
Murther'd ſweet Tully. itto ſlave
Hudibrar.
Shakespeare Henry VI.
Caeſar will
Unſtate his happineſs, and be ſlag"d to th’ ſhew
Againſt a ſworder. Shakeſ are
Swo'Rdfish. n ſ. A fiſh with a long ſharp bone iſſuin, i.
his head.
A ſwºrdſ' ſmall him from the reſt did ſunder,
That in his throat him pricking ſoftly under,
His wide abyſs him forced forth to ſpew. Sperºr
Malpighi obſerved the middle of the optick nerve oft.
ſwordfiſh to be a large membrane, folded, according to its
length, in many doubles, like a fan. Derham's Phyſico-Thuſ
Our little fleet was now engag’d ſo far, - --
That, like the ſwordfiſh in the whale, they fought;
The combat only ſeem'd a civil war,
*Till through their bowels we our paſſage wrought. Drid.
Swo'RDGRAss. n.ſ. A kind of ſedge; glader. Ainſw.
Swo'RDKNot. n.ſ. [ſword and knot..] Ribband tied to th:
hilt of the ſword.
Wigs with wigs, ſwordknots with ſwordinot, ſtrive,
Beaus baniſh beaus, and coaches coaches drive. Pºe,
Swo'RDLAw. m. ſ. Violence; the law by which all is yidſ:
to the ſtronger.
So violence
Proceeded, and oppreſſion, and ſwordlaw,
Through all the plain, and refuge none was found. Mihn.
Swo'RDMAN. m. ſ. [ſword and man.] Soldier; fighting man.
Worthy fellows, and like to prove moſt finewyjºrd.
7new1. Shakespeare All's well that end, will.
At Lecca's houſe,
Among your ſwordmen, where ſo many aſſociates
Both of thy miſchief and thy madneſs met. Ben. johnſºn,
Eſſex was made lieutenant-general of the army, the dailing
of the ſwordmen. Clarendon,
Swo'r DPLAYER. n.ſ.. [ſword and play.] Gladiator; fencer;
one who exhibits in publick his ſkill at the weapons by fight.
ing prizes.
Theſe they called ſwordplayers, and this ſpectacle a ſword-
fight. Hakewill on Prºvident.
Swore. The preterite of ſwear.
How ſoon unſay
What feign'd ſubmiſſion ſwore. Miin:
Sworn. The participle paſſive of ſwear.
What does elſe want credit, come to me,
And I'll be ſworn’tis true:
I am ſworn brother, ſweet,
To grim neceflity; and he and I
Will keep a league 'till death. Shakespeare Richard II.
They that are mad againſt me, are ſworn againſt me: , P:
He refuſed not the civil offer of a phariſee, though his ſwºrn
enemy; and would eat at the table of thoſe who ſought his
ruin. Calamy's Sirmºnt.
To ſhelter innocence,
The nation all elects ſome patron-knight,
Sworn to be true to love, and ſlave to fame,
And many a valiant chief enrols his name.
Shakſtart,
Granville,
Swu M. Preterite and participle paſſive of ſwim.
Air, water, earth, *
By fowl, fiſh, beaſt, was flown, was ſwum, was walki
Frequent. Milton's Paradiſt Lºft
Swu NG. Preterite and participle paſſive of ſwing.
Her hand within her hair ſhe wound, 1 **
Swung her to earth, and dragg'd her on the grºund. Alliſ,
Sy B. adj. IProperly fib, rib, Saxon.] Related by blood. The
Scottiſh diale&amp;t ſtill retains it.
If what my grandfire to me ſaid be true, , , ...!
Siker I am very ſyb to you. Spenſar's Paſiral,
Sy’cAMINE.
SY'cAMGR E. }*.ſ. A tree.
Sycamore is our acer majus, one of the kinds ºf ..
is a quick grower. Mortimer's Husband).
Under the grove of ſycamore lif
I ſaw your ſon. Shakespeare Rome, and ſ: ń,
If ye had faith as a grain of muſtard-ſeed, ye º
unto this ſycamine-tree, be thou plucked up, and it ſh t
obey you. Lu. .." 2.
I was no prophet, but an herdman, and a gatherer of ſº
more fruit. Amos * *
Go to yonder ſycamore-tree, and hide your ; %º:
under its hollow root. Walton'ſ 47%
Sycamore, with eglantine were ſpread: Dryden,
A hedge about the fides, a covering over head. ry
SYCOPHANT. n.ſ. [rvzoºpaſn; ; ſycophanta, Latin.] Aflaº
terer; a paraſite. f all
Accuſing ſycophant, of all men,
ture; but #. not ſeeming ſycºphantſ: º#:
they ſaid, they could bring any new or doubtfu g
- mine; 10
him, but ſuch as already he had been apt ºnd more c-
did beſt ſort to his nº
they came but as proofs of his wiſdom, “” ſi-
º, while the fear he had figured in his mind had *º:
bility of event. 2.
Men
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">* * ,
S Y L
º
---
-
Men know themſelves void of thoſe qualities which the
impudent ſycophant, at the ſame time, both aſcribes to them,
and in his ſleeve laughs at them for believing. South.
To Sy'coPHANT. v. n. [Tuxoſpx1%. , from the noun..] To
play the ſycophant. A low bad word.
His ſycºhaiting arts being detected, that game is not to be
played the ſecond time; whereas a man of clear reputation,
though his barque be ſplit, has ſomething left towards ſetting
up again. Government of the Tongue.
Sycoph ANT1ck. adj. [from ſycophant. J Flattering; paraſi-
tical.
To Sycoph ANTIs E. v. n. [avaoſp21.23; ; from ſycophant.] To
play the flatterer. Dić7.
Syll A'Bica L. adj. [from ſyllable.] Relating to ſyllables; con-
fifting of ſyllables.
Syll A'pic ALLY. adv. [from ſyllabical.] In a ſyllabical manner.
SYLLA'Bick. adj. [ſyllabique, French; from ſyllable.] Relating
to ſyllables.
SY'LLABLE, n.ſ.. [auxxzén ; ſyllabe, French.]
1. As much of a word as is uttered by the help of one vowel, or
one articulation.
I heard
Each ſyllable that breath made up between them. Shake?.
There is that property in all letters of aptneſs to be con-
joined in ſyllables and words, through the voluble motions of
the organs from one ſtop or figure to another, that they mo-
dify and diſcriminate the voice without appearing to diſcon-
tinue it. - Holder’s Elements of Speech.
2. Anything proverbially conciſe.
Abraham, Job, and the reſt that lived before any ſyllable of
the law of God was written, did they not ſin as much as we
do in every action not commanded ? Hooker.
To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the laſt ſyllable of recorded time;
And all our yeſterdays have lighted fools
The way to duſty death. Shakespeare Macbeth.
He hath told ſo many melancholy ſtories, without one ſyl-
lable of truth, that he hath blunted the edge of my fears. Swift.
To Sy/LLAB le. v. a. [from the noun..] To utter; to pro-
nounce; to articulate. Not in uſe.
Airy tongues that ſyllable mens names
On ſands and ſhores, and deſart wilderneſſes. Milton.
Sy’ll Abu B. n.ſ.. [Rightly Sillabub, which ſee..] Milk and
acids.
No ſºlahul's made at the milking pail,
But what are compos'd of a pot of good ale. Beaumºnt.
Two lines would expreſs all they ſay in two pages: 'tis
nothing but whipt ſyllabub and froth, without any ſºlidity.
Felton on the Claſſic's.
Sy't LApus. n.ſ. [rºxx2:3:..] An abſtraćt; a compendium
containing the heads of a diſcourſe.
SYLLOGSM. m. ſ. [rvXXoyirač; ; fºllºgiſine, French.] An
argument compoſed of three propoſitions: as, every nun thinks;
Pººr is a man, therefore Peter thinks.
Unto them a piece of rhetorick is a ſufficient argument of
logick, an apologue of AEſop beyond a ſyllºgiſm in Barbara.
rown's Wulgar Errours.
What a miraculous thing ſhould we count it, if the flint
and the ſteel, inſtead of a few ſparks, ſhould chance to knock
out definitions and ſyllogiſms f Bentley.
syllogistical. adj. [avºx,y\rizº; ; from ſyllºſiºn.] Re-
Sy LLo G 1's T1CF. ; taining to a ſyllogiſm; conſiſting of a
ſyllogiſm.
Though we ſuppoſe ſubjećt and predicate, and copula, and
propoſitions and fill-giſtical connexions in their reaſoning,
there is no ſuch matter; but the intire buſineſs is at the ſame
moment preſent with them, without deducing one thing from
another. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Though the terms of propoſitions may be complex, yet
where the compoſition of the whole argument is thº plain,
ſimple, and regular, it is properly called, a ſimple ſyllogiſm,
ſince the complexion does not belong to the ſºlogiſtic: form of
it. //atts's Logick.
syi Logistically, adv. [from ſyllºgiſtical.] In the form of
a ſyllogiſm. - - -
A man knows firſt, and then he is able to prove ſºlºiſh-
cally, ſo that ſyllogiſm comes after knowledge, when a man
has no need of it. ... Lºº.
To Sy’llogiz E. v. n. [ſyllºgiſr, French; •vXXoyſ' ºw.] To
reaſon by ſyllogiſm.
Logick is, in effect, an art of ſyllogizing. Baker.
Mén have endeavoured to transform logick into a kind of
mechaniſm, and to teach boys to ſyllogize, or frame arguments
and refute them, without real knowledge. J/atts.
Sy'i.v.A.N. adj. [Better ſilvan.] Woody; ſhady relating to
woods.
Cedar and pine, and fir and branching palm,
A ſylvan ſceneſ and as the ranks aſcend,
Shade above ſhade, a woody theatre
Of ſtatelieſt view. Mitch's Paradiſ. Lºft.
S Y M
Eternal greens the moſſy margin grace,
z Watch'd by the ſylvan genius of the place.
Sylvan, n.ſ.. [ſylvain, French..] A wood-god, or ſatyr.
. When the ſun begins to fling
His flaring beams, me, goddeſs, bring
To arched walks of twilight groves,
And ſhadows brown, that ſylvan loves,
Of pine or monumental oak.
Pope.
- Milton,
Her private orchards wall'd on ev'ry fide;
*/ To lawleſs ſylvan; all acceſs deny'd. Pope.
SYMBOL. m. ſ. [ſymbole, French; gºtoxov ; ſymbolum,
Latin. J
1. An abſtraćt ; a compendium; a comprehenſive form.
Beginning with the ſymbol of our faith, upon that the au-
thor of the gloſs enquires into the nature of faith. Baker.
2. A type; that which comprehends in its figure a repreſentation
of ſomething elſe.
... Salt, as incorruptible, was the ſymbol of friendſhip; which,
if it caſually fell, was accounted ominous, and their amity of
no duration. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Words are the ſigns and ſymbols of things; and as, in ac-
counts, ciphers and figures paſs for real ſums, ſo words and
names paſs for things themſelves. South's Sermons.
The heathens made choice of theſe lights as apt ſymbol of
eternity, becauſe, contrary to all ſublunary beings, though
they ſeem to periſh every night, they renew themſelves every
morning. Addison on ancient Medals.
SYMBO'LIcAL. adj. [ſymbolique, French; cup.30xx3; ; from
ſymbol..] Repreſentative; typical; expreſfing by ſigns.
By this incroachment idolatry firſt crept in, men convert-
ing the ſymbºlical uſe of idols into their proper worſhip, and
receiving the repreſentation of things unto them as the ſub-
ſtance and thing itſelf. Brown.
The ſacrament is a repreſentation of Chriſt's death, by ſuch
ſymbºlical actions as himſelf appointed. Taylor.
SYMB9'lica LLY. adv. [from ſymbolical.] Typically; by re-
preſentation.
This diſtinétion of animals was hieroglyphical, in the in-
ward ſenſe implying an abſtinence from certain vices, ſymboli-
cally intimated from the nature of thoſe animals. Brown.
It ſymbolically teaches our duty, and promotes charity by a
real ſignature and a ſenſible ſermon. Taylor.
SyMEolization. n.ſ.. [from ſymbolize.] The aët of ſymbo-
lizing; repreſentation; reſemblance.
The hierogliphical ſymbols of Scripture, excellently in-
tended in the ſpecies of things ſacrificed in the dreams of Pha-
raoh, are oftentimes racked beyond their ſymbolizations.
Brown's Pulgar Errours.
To Symboli'zE. v. n. [ſymboliſer, French; from ſymbol.] To
have ſomething in common with another by repreſentative
qualities.
Our king finding himſelf to ſymbolize in many things with
that king of the Hebrews, honoured him with the title of
this foundation. Bacon.
The pleaſing of colour ſºmbolizeth with the pleaſing of any
ſingle tone to the ear; but the pleaſing of order doth ſymbolize
with harmony. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Ariſtotle and the ſchools have taught, that air and water,
being ſymbolizing clements, in the quality of moiſture, are
eaſily tranſmutable into one another. Boyle.
They both ſymbolize in this, that they love to look upon
themſelves through multiplying glaſſes. Hºwel.
I affectedly ſymbolized in careleſs mirth and freedom with
the libertimes, to circumvent libertiniſm. More.
The ſoul is ſuch, that it ſtrangely ſymbolizes with the thing
it mightily deſires. South's Sermons.
To SYM poli'ze. v. a. To make repreſentative of ſome-
thing.
Sºme /ymbolize the ſame from the myſtery of its colours.
Brown's Wulgar Errouri.
SYMM E/TRIAN. m. ſ. [from ſymmetry.] One eminently ſtu-
dious of proportion.
His face was a thought longer than the exact ſºmetrians
would allow. Sidney.
Sy MME TR1cAL. adj. [from ſymmetry.] Proportionate; having
parts well adapted to each other.
SYMME’ſ R1st. n.ſ.. [from ſymmetry.] One very ſtudious or
obſervant of proportion.
Some exact ſymmetrifts have been blamed for being too true.
J/otton's Architeåure.
SYMMETRY. m. ſ. [ſymmetrie, French; a JV and Pºreov. J
Adaptation of parts to each other; proportion; harmony;
agreement of one part to another.
She by whoſe lines proportion ſhould be
Examin'd, meaſure of all ſymmetry;
whom had that ancient ſeen, who thought ſouls made
Of harmony, he would at next have ſaid
That harmóny was ſhe. - Donne.
And in the ſymmetry of her parts is found
A pow'r, like that of harmony in ſound. J/aller.
25 Z Symmetry,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S Y M
S Y N
...narº. equality, and correſpondence of parts, is the
º: ... not the object of º heir *:
Nor were they only animated by him, but thei . 'den
and ſymmetry were owing to him. - Fr. f. ſ . : j
SY MPATHE’ſ ICAL. adj. [ſympathetique, r. from. ymp :
tº- HETICK. } Having mutual ſenſation; being affecte
sº what happens to the other; feeling in conſequence of
- rfecls.
wº: are grounded the groſs miſtakes, in the cure of
diſ..., not only from the laſt medicine and ſympatheticº re-
ceipts, but amulets, charms, and all incantatory applications.
- Brown's Vulgar Errours.
United by this ſympathetick bond,
You grow familiar, intimate, and fond. Roſcommon.
To confer at the diſtance of the Indies by ſympathetick con-
veyances, may be as uſual to future times as to us in a literary
correſpondence. Glanv. Scepſ,
To you our author makes her ſoft requeſt,
who ſpeak the kindeſt, and who write the beſt:
Your ſympathetic; hearts ſhe hopes to move, -
From tender friendſhip and endearing love. Prior.
All the ideas of ſenſible qualities are not inherent in the in-
animate bodies; but are the effects of their motion upon our
nerves, and ſympathetical and vital paſſions produced within
ourſelves. Bentley.
Sympat Heſtic All Y. adv. [from ſympathetick.] With ſym-
pathy; in conſequence of ſympathy.
To SYMPATHIze. v. n. [ſympatiſer, French; from ſympathy.]
To feel with another; to feel in conſequence of what ano-
ther feels; to feel mutually.
The men ſympathize with the maſtiffs in robuſtious and
rough coming on. Shakeſpeare.
The thing of courage,
As rouz'd with rage, with rage doth ſympathize. Shakeſp.
Nature, in awe to him,
Had doff’d her gaudy trim,
With her great maſter ſo to ſympathize. Milton.
Green is a pleaſing colour, from a blue and a yellow mixed
together, and by conſequence blue and yellow are two colours
which ſympathize. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The limbs of his body is to every one a part of himſelf:
heſº. and is concerned for them. Locke.
eir countrymen were particularly attentive to all their
ſtory, and ſympathized with their heroes in all their adven-
tureS. Addiſon's Speciator.
Though the greatneſs of their mind exempts them from
fear, yet none condole and ſympathize more heartily than they.
Collier on Kindneſs.
SYMPATHY, n.ſ.. [ſympathie, French; avºwa. Selz.] Fél-
lowfeeling; mutual ſenſibility; the quality of being affected
by the affection of another.
A world of earthly bleſfings to my ſoul,
If ſympathy of love unite our thoughts. Shakeſp. H. VI.
You are not young; no more am I: go to, then, there's
ſympathy : you are merry, ſo am I; haſ hal then there's
more ſympathy: you love ſack, and ſo do I; would you deſire
better ſympathy P Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
But what it is,
The action of my life is like it, which I'll keep,
If but for ſympathy. Shakeſ, Cymbeline.
If there was a ſympathy in choice,
War, death, or ſickneſs did lay fiege to it.
I ſtarted back;
It ſtarted back: but pleas'd I ſoon return'd;
Pleas'd it return’d as ſoon, with anſwering looks
Of ſmpathy and love. Milton's Paradiſe Left.
They ſaw, but other fight inſtead, a crowd
Qf ugly ſerpents: horror on them fell,
And horrid ſympathy.
Or ſimpathy, or ſome connat'ral force,
Pow'rful at greateſt diſtance to unite,
With ſecret amity, things of like kind,
By ſecreteſt conveyance. Milt. Paradiſ. Loft.
There never was any heart truly great and generous, that
was not alſo tender and compaſſionate: it is this noble quality
that makes all men to be of one kind; for every man would
be a diſtinct ſpecies to himſelf, were there no ſympathy among
individuals. - South's Sermons.
Can kindneſs to deſert, like your's, be ſtrange?
Kindneſs by ſecret ſympathy is ty'd; Sº
For noble ſouls in nature are ally’d. , Dryden.
There are ſuch aſſociations made in the minds of moſt men,
and º * might be attributed moſt of the ſympathies and an-
“Pathies obſervable in them. Locke
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
SYMr Ho's - -
ing º º 44ff. [from ſymphony.] Harmonious; agree-
Up he rode
Follow'd with | • .
Symphonious acclamation and the ſound
of ten thouſand harps, that tund
Angelick harmonies. Milion.
sy'MPHONY. n.ſ.. [ſymphonie, French; gºv and @wwn.] Con-
cert of inſtruments; harmony of mingled ſounds.
A learned ſearcher from Pythagoras's ſchool, where it was a
maxim that the images of all things are latent in numbers.
termines the comelieſt proportion between breadths 'm
heights, reducing ſymmetry to ſymphony, and the harmony of
ſound to a kind of harmony in ſight. Wotton
Speak ye who beſt can tell, ye ſons of light, -
Angels! for ye behold him, and with ſongs
And choral ſymphonies, day without night,
Circle his throne rejoicing. Milton's Par. I ºft
The trumpets ſound, -
And warlike ſymphony is heard around;
The marching troops through Athens take their way;
The great earl-marſhal orders their array. Dryden,
SYMphysis. n.ſ. [rov and (pºw.]
Symphyſis, in its original ſignification, denotes a connaſ.
cency, or growing together; and perhaps is meant of thoſe
bones which in . children are diſtinét, but after ſome
years unite and conſolidate into one bone. Wiſeman.
SYMpo's lack, adj. [ſympoſaque, French; twº worlax...] Re.
lating to merry makings; happening where company is drink.
ing together.
By deſiring a ſecrecy to words ſpoke under the roſe, we
only mean in ſociety and compotation, from the ancient cuſ.
tom of ſympoſack meetings to wear chaplets of roſes about
their heads. Brown's Vulgar Erreur.
In ſome of thoſe 6mpºſack diſputations amongſt my ac-
quaintance, I affirmed that the dietetick part of medicine de-
pended upon ſcientifick principles. Arbuthnot,
SYMPTOM. n.ſ.. [ſymptome, French; a ſºlouz.]
1. Something that happens concurrently with ſomething elſe,
not as the original cauſe, nor as the neceſſary or conſtant
effect.
2. A ſign; a token.
Ten glorious campaigns are paſſed, and now, like the fick
man, we are expiring with all ſorts of good ſymptºms. Swift.
SYMptomA'tical. }% [ſymptomatique, French; from ſº-
SYMptoma"Tick. tom.J. Happening concurrently, or oc-
caſionally.
Symptomatical is often uſed to denote the difference between
the primary and ſecondary cauſes in diſeaſes; as a fever from
pain is ſaid to be ſymptºmatical, becauſe it ariſes from pain
only; and therefore the ordinary means in fevers are not in
ſuch caſes to be had recourſe to, but to what will remove the
pain; for when that ceaſes, the fever will ceaſe, without any
direct means taken for that. Quincy.
By fomentation and a cataplaſm the ſwelling was diſcuſſed;
and the fever, then appearing but ſymptomatical, leſſened as the
heat and pain mitigated. Wiſman's Surgery.
SYMptomatically, adv. [from ſymptomatical] In the na-
ture of a ſymptom.
The cauſes of a bubo are vicious humours abounding in
the blood, or in the nerves, excreted ſometimes critically,
ſometimes ſymptomatically. Wiſeman,
SYNAGo'G1cAL. adj. [from ſynagogue.] Pertaining to a ſyna-
gogue.
SYNAGOGUE. n. ſ: [ſynagogue, French; avyzywº.] An
aſſembly of the Jews to worſhip.
Go, Tubal, and meet me at our ſynagogue. Shalºft.
As his cuſtom was, he went into the ſynagºgue on the ſab-
bath. Gºd.
SYNALE'pha. m. ſ. [ cuvaxo, p?. J A contraćtion or exci-
fion of a ſyllable in a Latin verſe, by joining together two
vowels in the ſcanning or cutting off the ending vowel; *
ill' ego. - Bailey,
Virgil, though ſmooth, is far from affecting it: he ſº-
quently uſes ſºnalpha's, and concludes his ſenſe in the middle
of his verſe. Dºdº.
SYNARTH Ro'sis. n ſ. ſºv and 363;ow.] A cloſe conjunction
of two bones. • rh' -– :
There is a conſpicuous motion where the conjunétion is
called diarthroſis, as in the elbow; an obſcure one, where the
conjunétion is called ſynarthroſis, as in the joining of tº ºr
pus to the metacarpus. d J //jcman'. Surgery.
SYNchoNDR o’sis. n.ſ. ſºv and x6,3:GP.
Synchondroſis is #º ... of the fº the
ribs. iſeman.
SYNCHRo'Nical. adj. [a, and x;&amp;G’.] Happening together
at the ſame time. into the
It is difficult to make out how the air is conveyed in"' t
left ventricle of the heart, the ſyſtole and diaſtole of *:
and lungs being far from ſynchronical. *.
Synch Rösism. n.ſ. I gº, and x849. J. Concur”
events happening at the ſame time. he Mo-
The coherence and ſynchroniſm of all the parts of the i-
ſaical chronology, after the Flood, bears a moſt regular }.
mony to the truth of his hiſtory. ing at *
Sy'Nchronous. adj. [-º, and x&amp;G'.] Happen"? "
ſame time. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S Y N
:
:
:
º
&amp;
º
º
:
º*
º
-
º
The variations of the gravity of the air keep both the ſolids
and fluids in an oſcillatory motion, ſynchronous and proportional
, to their changes. Arbuthnot on Air.
Sx'Ncope. n.ſ.. [ſyncope, French; avyxorm.]
1. Fainting fit.
The ſymptoms attending gunſhot wounds are pain, fever,
delirium, and ſyncope. JWiſeman.
2. Contraćtion of a word by cutting off part.
Sy’NcoPIs T. n.ſ.. [from ſyncope..] Contračtor of words.
To outſhine all the modern ſncopiffs, and thoroughly con-
tent my Engliſh readers, I intend to publiſh a Spectator that
ſhall not have a ſingle vowel in it. Spectator.
To SYND1 cate. v. n. [ſyndiquer, French; adv and 3.x...]
To judge; to paſs judgement on ; to cenſure. An unuſual
word.
Ariſtotle undertook to cenſure and ſyndicate his maſter and
... all law makers before him. Hakewill on Providence.
SYND Rome. m. ſ. Lºvvæoº.] Concurrent action; concur-
Icnce.
All things being linked together by an uninterrupted chain
of cauſes, every ſingle motion owns a dependance on ſuch a
ſyndrome of prerequired motors. Glanville's Scepſ.
SYNE’CDOCHE. n.ſ.. [ſynecdoche, French; avvex}ox.] A
figure by which part is taken for the whole, or the whole for
part.
Becauſe they are inſtruments of grace in the hand of God,
and by theſe his holy ſpirit changes our hearts; therefore the
whole work is attributed to them by a ſynecdoche ; that is, they
do in this manner the work for which God ordained them.
Taylor's Worthy Communicant,
SYNEcDo'chical. adj. [from ſynecdoche.] Expreſſed by a ſy-
necdoche : implying a ſynecdoche.
Should I, Lindamer, bring you into hoſpitals, and ſhew
you there how many ſouls, narrowly lodged in ſynecdochical
bodies, ſee their earthen cottages moulder away to duſt, thoſe
miſerable perſons, by the loſs of one limb after another, ſur-
viving but part of themſelves, and living to ſee themſelves
dead and buried by piecemeal: Boyle's Seraphick Love.
SYNNEuro'sis. n.ſ. ſºv and videov.]
Synneuroſis is when the connexion is made by a ligament.
Of this in ſymphyſis we find inſtances, in the connexion of the
oſſa pubis together, eſpecially in women, by a ligamentous
ſubſtance. In articulations it is either round, as that which
unites the head of the os femoris to the coxa; or broad, as
the tendon of the patella, which unites it to the os tibiae.
Wiſeman's Surgery.
SYNOD. n.ſ.. [ſynods, French; rºvºgº.]
1. An aſſembly, particularly of eccleſiaſticks. A provincial
ſynod is commonly uſed, and a general council.
The glorious gods ſit in hourly ſynod about thy particular
proſperity. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Since the mortal and inteſtine jars
*Twixt thy ſeditious countrymen and us,
It hath in ſolemn ſynod been decreed,
Tº admit no traffick to our adverſe towns. Shakeſpeare.
The opinion was not only condemned by the ſynod, but im-
puted to the emperor as extreme madneſs. Bacon.
Flea-bitten ſynod, an aſſembly brew’d
Of clerks and elders ana, like the rude
Chaos of preſbyt'ry, where laymen guide
With the tame woolpack clergy by their ſide. Cleaveland.
Well have ye judg’d, well ended long debate,
Synod of gods ! and, like to what ye are, -
Great things reſolv’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Let us call to ſynod all the bleſt,
Through heav'n's wide bounds. Milton.
The ſecond council of Nice he ſaith I moſt irreverently call
that wiſe ſynod; upco which he falls into a very tragical ex-
clamation, that I ſhould dare to reflect ſo much diſhonour on
a council. Stillingfleet.
Parent of gods and men, propitious Jove'
And you bright ſynod of the pow'rs above,
On this my ſon your gracious gifts beſtow. Dryden.
2. Conjunction of the heavenly bodies.
Howe'er love's native hours are ſet,
Whatever ſtarry ſynod met,
*Tis in the mercy of her eye,
If poor love ſhall live or die. Craſhaw.
Their planetary motions and aſpects
Of noxious efficacy, and when to join -
In ſynod unbenign. Milton.
As the planets and ſtars have, according to aſtrologers, in
their great ſynod, or conjunctions, much more powºful in-
Huences on the air than are aſcribed to one or two of th out
of that aſpect; ſo divers particulars, which, whilſt they lay
ſcattered among the writings of ſeveral authors, were in-
conſiderable, when they come to be laid together, may of—
tentimes prove highly uſeful to phyſiology in their conjunc-
tions. Boyle,
S Y R
Sy’NoDAL.
SYNo'dical. 9 adj. di º
SYNo'Dick. §. [ſynodique, French; from ſynod.]
1. Relating to a ſynod; tranſaded in a ſynod.
St. Athanaſius writes a ſynod; - -
- ynodical epiſtle to thoſe of Antioch
to compoſe the differences among them upon the ordination
of Paulinus. ----
2. [Synodique, French. jº.
the ſun to another.
tº: diurnal and annual revolutions of the ſun, to us are
the meaſures of day and year; and the /ynodick revolution of
the moon meaſures the month. Holder
The moon makes its ſynodical motion about the carth in
twenty-nine days twelve hours and about forty for minutes
Locke's Element, of N -
SYNo'dically, adv. [from ºf Natural Philoſophy.
Jynodical.] By th -
ſynod or publick aſſembly. J By the authority of a
It ſhall be needful for thoſe churches Jynodically to determine
ſomething in thoſe points. Saunderſºn.
SYNo'NYMA. n.ſ. [Latin; *vyºvº.os.] Names which ſignify
the ſame thing.
To SYNo'NoMise. v.4, [from ſynonyma.] To expreſs the ſame
thing in different words.
This word fortis we may ſynonymiſe after all theſe faſhions,
ſtout, hardy, valiant, doughty, couragious, adventurous, brave,
bold, daring, intrepid. Camden's Remains.
SYNoNYMo'us. adj. [ſynonyme, Fr. ºvvævvº.os.] Expreſfing the
ſame thing by different words.
. Theſe words conſiſt of two propoſitions which are not diſ-
tinét in ſenſe, but one and the ſame thing variouſly expreſſed;
for wiſdom and underſtanding are ſynonymºus words here. Tit.
Fortune is but a ſynonymous word for nature and neceſſity.
Bentley's Sermons.
When two or more words fignify the ſame thing, as wave
and billow, mead and meadow, they are uſually caſſed ſynchy-
mous words. Watts's Logick.
Synº NYMy miſ. [www.vºix.] The quality of expreſſing by
different words the ſame thing. o
SYNOPSIS. m. ſ. ſºvokis.] A general view; all the parts
brought under one view.
Synoptical, adj. [from ſynopſi.] Affording a view of many
parts at once. -
We have collected ſo many ſynoptical tables, calculated
for his monthly uſe. Evelyne's Kalendar.
Syntactical adj. [from ſyntaxis, Latin.]
1. Conjoined; fitted to each other.
2. Relating to the conſtruction of ſpeech.
SYNTAx. r
SYNTA’z Is. ; n, ſº [vſvr&amp;#1:..]
I. A ſyſtem; a number of things joined together.
They owe no other dependance to the firſt than what is
common to the whole ſyntax of beings. Glanville.
2. That part of Grammar which teaches the conſtruction of
words.
I can produce a hundred inſtances to convince any reaſon-
able man that they do not ſo much as underſtand common
Grammar and ſyntax. Swift.
SYNTHE'sis. n.ſ. [ riſ, 3sats.] The ačt of joining, oppoſed to
analyſis.
The ſyntheſis conſiſts in aſſuming the cauſes diſcovered and
eſtabliſhed as principles, and by them explaining the phaeno-
mena proceeding from them, and proving the explanations.
- Newton's Opticks.
SYNTHE"tick. adj. guySsrix?;..] Conjoining; compounding;
forming compoſition.
Synthetick method is that which begins with the parts, and
leads onward to the knowledge of the whole; it begins with
the moſt ſimple principles and general truths, and proceeds by
degrees to that which is drawn from them or compounded of
them; and therefore it is called the method of compoſition.
Jº's Logick.
SYPHoN. n.ſ. [This ſhould be written ſº, c.º.j A
tube; a pipe. -
Take your glaſs, ſºphon, or crane, and draw it off from
its laſt faeces into ſmall bottles. Mortimer.
SYRING e. n.ſ.. [avºyá.] A pipe through which any liquour
is ſquirted.
The heart ſeems not deſigned to be the fountain or conſer-
vatory of the vital flame, but as a machine to receive the blood
from the veins and force it out by the arteries through the
whole body as a ſºringe doth any liquor, though not by the
ſame artifice. Ray,
To Sy/RING F. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſpout by a ſyringe.
A flux of blood from the noſe, mouth, and eye was ſtopt by
the ſyringing up of oxycrate. J/ſeman’s Surgery.
2. To waſh with a ſyringe. r -
Sy’RINGoToMY. n.ſ. [rºyá and t{rowz.] The aët or practice
of cutting fiſtulas or hollow fores.
1 Reckoned from one conjun
S}^RTIS.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">S Y S
S Y S
y S. a. ſ. [Latin. A quick ſand; a bog. - -
S}^ º neither ſea, nor good dry land. Milton.
-- ** M. [ſ/ferre. Fr. a ſºrº 2.] - -
jº. combination of many things acting toge-
ther. -
2. A ſcheme which reduces many things to regular dependence
or co-operation.
. A ſcheme which unites many things in order.
Ariſtotle brings morality into //tem, by treating of happineſs
under heads, and ranges it in claſſes according to its different
objects, diſtinguiſhing virtues into their ſeveral kinds which
had not been handled ſyſtematically before. Baker.
The beſt way to learn any ſcience is to begin with a regu-
lar ſ/hem, or a ſhort and plain ſcheme of that ſcience well
drawn up into a narrow compaſs. //atts.
Systematical. adj. [ ſyſtematique, Fr. rvºnºzrºzo; ; from
ſ/fem.] Methodical; written or formed with regular ſubordi-
nation of one part to another.
It will be neceſſary, in a diſcourſe about the formation of
the world, to give you a brief account of ſome of the moſt
principal and ſº/lematical phaenomena that occur in it. Bentl
Now we deal much in eſſays, and unreaſonably deſ #.
Jºſematical learning; whereas our fathers had a juſt Value ;
regularity and ſyſtems. J/,
SystEMA’tically, adv. [from ſyſtematical.] In form º,
ſyſtem.
I treat of the uſefulneſs of writing books of eſſay, in com-
pariſon of that of writing ſyſtematically. Boyle
Ariſtotle brings morality into ſyſtem, and ranges it into
claſſes according to its different obječts, diſtinguiſhing virtues
into their ſeveral kinds, which had not been handled //tama-
tically before. Baker,
SY's role. n.ſ.. [ſ/?ole, Fr. ruroxº.]
I. [In anatomy..] The contračtion of the heart.
The ſyſłale reſembles the forcible bending of a ſpring, and
the diaſtole its flying out again to its natural fite.
2. [Sy/?ole, French..] In Grammar, the ſhortening of a long 5.
!
able.
