<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">.
!.
-
ºx.
C **-
o *** -
--&gt;
\, *
&gt; A B C A B A. :
C A * --
w * -
The third letter of the alphabet, has two ſounds; uſe after Chriſtmas, and continues good until April. The r
one like K, as, call, clock, craft, coal, companiºn, cº- muſk callage has, through negligence, been almoſt loſt in Eng- ----,
neifºrm ; the other as , as, Caſar, cºffation, cinder. land, though, for eating, it is one of the beſt kinds we have ; . .
It ſounds like k before a, o, u, or a conſonant; and for it is always looſer, and the leaves more criſp and tender, º
9 like s, before e, i, and y. and has a moſt agreeable mºſsy ſcent when cut. It will be fit º
CAB. "ß [sp.j A Hebrew meaſure, containing about three for uſe in October, November, and December. The branch-
pints Éngliſh, or the eighteenth part of the ephah. ing ſea cabbage is found wild in England, and on the ſea coaſt,
CABAL n.ſ.. [cabale, Fr. Tººp, tradition.] and is ſometimes gathered by the poor inhabitants in the ſpring, -
1. The ſecret ſcience of the Hebrew rabbins. and eaten; but it is apt to be ſtrong and bitter. The brov. In t
2. A body of men united in ſome cloſe deſign. A cabal differs tracºli is by many eſteemed, though it does not deſerve a place **
from a party, as fiv from many. in the kitchen garden, where the Roman broccºli can be ob-
She ºften interpoſed her royal authority, to break the cabal, tained, which is much ſweeter, and will continue longer in ſea-
which were forming againſt her firſt miniſters. Addiſon. ſon. The Roman broccoli has large heads, which appear in the
3. Intrigue. º center of the plants like cluſters of buds. The heads ſhould
- When each, by curs'd cabal, of women, ſtrove, be cut before they run up to ſeed, with about four or five
To draw th’ indulgent king to partial love. Dryden's Aureng. inches of the ſtems; the ſkin of theſe ſtems ſhould be ſtrip- -
To CABA. L. v. m. [cal aler, Fr.] To form cloſe intrigues; to ped off, before they are boiled; they will eat very tender, and
intrigue; to unite in ſmall parties.
His mournful friends, ſummon'd to take their leaves,
Are throng’d about his couch, and fit in council:
VVhat thoſe cabaling captains may deſign,
I muſt prevent, by being firſt in action. Dryden's D. Sebaſſ.
CA B A List. n.ſ. [from calal.] One ſkilled in the traditions of
the Hebrews.
Then Jove thus ſpake: With care and pain
VVe form'd this name, renown'd in rhime,
Not thine, immortal Neufgermain!
Coſt ſtudious cabaliſ's more time. Swift.
CA BALLI'sticAL. }". [from cabal.] Something that has an
CA BALLI's Tick. 5 occult meaning. -
The letters are caballiſtical, and carry more in them than it is
proper for the world to be acquainted with. Addiſon. Spect.
He taught him to repeat two caballiſtick words, in pronoun-
little inferiour to aſparagus. The common colewort is now al-
moſt loſt near London, where their markets are uſually ſup-
plied with cabbage or Savoy plants inſtead of them ; which,
being tenderer and more delicate, are better worth cultivating-
The perennial Alpine calewort is alſo little cultivated at preſent-
The other two ſorts of wild cabbage are varieties fit for a bota-
nick garden, but are plants of no uſe. The cauliflowe's have.
of late years, been ſo far improved in England, as to exceed,
in goodneſs and magnitude, what are produced in moſt parts of
Europe; and, by the ſkill of the gardners, are continued for
ſeveral months together; but the moſt common ſeaſon for them.
is in May, June, and July. Miller-
Cole, cabbage, and coleworts, which are ſoft and demulcent.
without any acidity; the jelly, or juice, of red callage, baked
in an oven, and mixed with honey, is an excellent pectoral.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
cing of which the whole ſecret conſiſted. Spectator, N° 578. To CA'BPAGE. v. a. [a cant word among taylors.] To ſteal in
CAB A'll ER. n ſ. [from cabal..] He that engages in cloſe de-
ſigns; an intriguer.
Fačtious and rich, bold at the council board,
But cautious in the field, he ſhun'd the ſword; :
A cloſe caballer, and tongue-valiant lord. Dryden.
CAB A'LLINE. adj. [caballinus, Lat.] Belonging to a horſe; as,
caballine aloes, or horſe aloes. ..
CA/BARET. m. ſ. [French..] A tavern.
Suppoſe this ſervant paſſing by ſome cabaret, or tennis-court,
where his comrades were drinking or playing, ſhould ſtay with
them, and drink or play away his money.
Bramhall againſ? Holles.
CABBAGE. m. ſ. ſcabus, Fr. braſſica, Lat J A plant.
The leaves are large, fleſhy, and of a glaucous colour; the
flowers conſiſt of four leaves, which are ſucceeded by long ta-
per pods, containing ſeveral round acrid ſeeds. The ſpecies
are, 1. The common white cabbage. 2. The red cabbage. 3.
cutting clothcs.
Your taylor, inſtead of ſhreads, cabbages whole yards of
left remaining near plantations, except for ornament; for their
ſtems being exceeding ſtraight, and their leaves being produced
very regularly at top, will afford a moſt beautiful proſpect; for
which reaſon, the planters generally ſpare two or three of them
near their habitations. Al Miller.
The Ruſſian cabbage. 4. The flat-ſided cabbage. 5. The ſu- CA/BBAG E-wor M. m. ſ. An inſe&amp;t.
gar loaf cabbage. 6. The early Batterſea cabbage. 7. The CA/BIN. m. ſ. ſcalane, Fr. chalin, Welch, a cottage.]
white Savoy cabbage. 8. The green Savoy cabbage. 9. The 1.
boorcole. Io. The green broccoli. 1 1. The Italian broccoli.
12. The turnep-rooted cabbage. 13. The cauliflower. 14.
The turnep cabbage. 15. Curled cokwort. 16. The muſk
cabbage. 17. Branching tree cabbage, from the ſea coaſt. 18.
Brown broccoli. 19. Common colewort. 20. Perennial Al- 2.
pine calewort. 21. Perfoliated wild cabbage, with a white
flower. 22. Perfoliated cabbage, with a purple flower. The
common white, red, flat, and long-ſided cabbages, are chiefly
cultivated for winter uſe; the ſeeds of which muſt be ſown in
the middle of March, in beds of good freſh earth. The Ruſ.
A ſmall room.
So long in ſecret cabin there he held
Her captive to his ſenſual deſire,
Till that with timely fruit her belly ſwell'd,
And bore a boy unto a ſavage fire. Fairy ºueen, b. i. e. vi.
A ſmall chamber in a ſhip.
Give thanks you have lived ſo long, and make yourſelf
ready, in your cabin, for the miſchance of the hour, if it ſo
happen. Shakeſp. 3 ºpeft.
Men may not exped the uſe of many cabin; and ſafety at
once, in the ſea ſervice. Raleigh's {{ſay:-
cloth. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of J. Bull. -
CA'EBAGE TREE. m. ſ. A ſpecies of palm-tree; which ſee. º
It is very common in the Caribee iſlands, where it grows to s: º
a prodigious height. The leaves of this tree envelope each i.
other, ſo that thoſe which are incloſed, being deprived of the … "
air, are blanched; which is the part the inhabitants cut for A º
plaits for hats, &amp;c. and the genuine, or young ſhoots, are pick- y º l
led, and ſent into England by the name of cabbage ; but when- º
ever this part is cut out, the trees are deſtroyed; nor do they º 7%,
riſe again from the old roots; ſo that there are very few trees aſ extrem,
*
ºu"/_* 2.
*\e to tre,
ſian cabbage was formerly in much greater eſteem than at pre-
ſent, and is rarely brought to the market. The early Batterſea
and ſugar-loaf cablages, are called Michaelmas cabbage; ; the
ſeaſon for ſowing them is in the middle of July, in an open ſpot
of ground. The Savoy cabbages are propagated for winter uſe,
as being generally eſteemed the better, when pinched by froſt.
The boorºole is never eaten till the froſt has rendered it tender.
The turnep cabbage was formerly more cultivated in England
than at preſent; and ſome eſteem this kind for ſoups, but it is
generally too ſtrong, and ſeldom good, except in hard winters.
The curled cºlºwat is more generally eſteemed, and is fit for
The cheſsboard, we ſay, is in the ſame place it was, if it ſel
main in the ſame part of the cabin, though, perhaps, the ſhip it
is in, ſails all the while. Locke-
3. A cottage, or ſmall houſe. -
Come from marble bow’rs, many times the gay harbour
of anguiſh,
Unto a ſilly cabin, though weak, yet ſtronger againſt woes.
- Siºcy, b. i
Neither ſhould that odious cuſtom be allowed, of flaying *s
&gt; --
the green ſurface of the ground, to cover their calins, or mak, s S- \ º:
heir ditches. ‘. . . . . ~~ s\ ſ
up tnc Swiſs sº sº
- 4. A Siss &amp;
~s<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A C
4. A tent.
Some of green boughs their ſlender cabins frame,
Some lodged were Tortoſh's ſtreets about. Fairfax, b, i.
To CABIN. v. n. [from the noun..] To live in a cabin.
I'll make you feed on berries and on roots,
And feed on curds and whey, and ſuck the goat,
And cabin in a cave. Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
To CABIN. v. a. To confine in a cabin.
Fleance is 'ſcap'd : -
Then comes my fit again; I had elſe been perfeót;
Whole as the marble, founded as the rock;
As broad and gen'ral as the caſing air;
But now I’m cabin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in,
To ſaucy doubts and fear. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
CAEINED. adj. [from cabin.] _Belonging to a cabin.
The nice morn, on the Indian ſteep,
From her cabin'd loophole peep.
CABINET. m. ſ. ſcabinet, Fr.]
1. A ſet of boxes or drawers for curioſities; a private box.
At both corners of the farther ſide, by way of return, let there
be two delicate or rich cabinets, daintily paved, richly hanged,
glazed with cryſtaline glaſs, and a rich cupola in the midſt, and
all other elegancy that may be thought on. Racon's Eſſays.
Who ſees a ſoul in ſuch a body ſet,
Might love the treaſure for the cabinet. Ben. johnſon.
In vain the workman ſhew’d his wit,
With rings and hinges counterfeit,
To make it ſeem, in this diſguiſe,
Milton.
A cabinet to vulgar eyes. Swift.
2. Any place in which things of value are hidden.
Thy breaſt hath ever been the cabinet,
Where I have lock'd my ſecrets. Denham's Sophy.
We cannot diſcourſe of the ſecret, but by deſcribing our
duty; but ſo much duty muſt needs open a cabinet of myſteries.
Taylor's I/orthy Communicant.
3. A private room in which conſultations are held.
You began in the cabinet what you afterwards pračtiſed in
the camp. Dryden.
4. In Spenser it ſeems to ſignify a hut, or houſe.
Hearken awhile in thy green cabinet,
The lawrel ſong of careful Colinet. Spenser's Paſtoral.
CA'BINET-council. m. ſ. A council held in a private manner,
with unuſual privacy and confidence.
The doćtrine of Italy, and practice of France, in ſome kings
times, hath introduced cabinet-councils. Bacon's Eſſays.
From the higheſt to the loweſt it is univerſally read; from
the cabinet-council to the nurſery. Gay to Swift.
CA'BINet-MAKER. m. ſ. [from cabinet and make.] One that
makes ſmall nice work in wood.
The root of an old white thorn will make very fine boxes
and combs; ſo that they would be of great uſe for the cabinet-
makers, as well as the turners, and others. Martimer.
CABLE. m. ſ. ſcabſ, Welch; calel, Dutch..] The great rope of
a ſhip to which the anchor is faſtened.
What though the maſt be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding anchor loſt,
And half our ſailors ſwallow'd in the flood,
Yet lives our pilot ſtill Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
True it is, that the length of the cable is the life of the ſhip in
all extremities; and the reaſon is, becauſe it makes ſo many
bendings and waves, as the ſhip, riding at that length, is not
able to ſtretch it; and nothing breaks that is not ſtretched.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
The cables crack, the ſailors fearful cries
Aſcend; and ſable night involves the skies.
CA'BURNs. n.ſ. Small ropes uſed in ſhips.
CA'cAo. See CHocoLATENUT.
CAcHE'cTIcAL. }*. [from cachexy.] Having an ill habit of
CAcHE'ctick. body; ſhewing an ill habit.
Young and florid blood, rather than vapid and cahedical.
Arbuthnot on Air.
The crude chyle ſwims in the blood, and appears as milk in
the blood, let out of ſome perſons who are generally cachedlick.
Floyer on the Humours.
CACHEXY. n.f. [x2x.3.2.] A general word to expreſs a great
variety of ſymptoms; moſt commonly it denotes ſuch a diſ-
temperature of the humours, as hinders nutrition, and weakens
the vital and animal functions, proceeding from weakneſs of
the fibres, and an abuſe of the non-naturals, and often from
ſevere acute diſtempers. Arbuthnot on Diet.
QACHINNA"tion. n.ſ. cachinnatio, Lat.] A loud laughter. D.
CA'ck ER E1... n.ſ. A fiſh, ſaid to make thoſe who eat it laxative.
To CACKLE. v. n. [AEacºlen, Dutch.]
1. To make a noiſe as a gooſe.
The nightingale, if ſhe ſhould ſing by day,
When every gooſe is cackling, would be thought
No better a muſician than the wren. Shakeſp. M. of Venice.
Gooſe, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
I'd drive thce cackling home to Camelot. Shakespeare. K. Lear.
Or rob the Roman geeſe of all their glories,
And ſave the ſtate, by cackling to the tories.
2. Sometimes it is uſed for the noiſe of a hen.
Vol. I
Dryden's Virg.
Dići.
Pope,
Now to my ſtory I return again:
The trembling widow, and her daughters twain,
This woful cackling cry, with horrour heard,
Of thoſe diſtracted damſels in the yard.
3. To laugh; to giggle.
...Then Nic. grinned, cackled, and laughed, till he was like to
kill himſelf, and ſeemed to be ſo pleaſed, that he fell a friſking
and dancing about the room. Arbuthnot's j. Bull.
°Ackle. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The voice of a gooſe or fowl.
The ſilver gooſe before the ſhining gate
There flew, and, by her cackle, ſav'd the ſtate. .
CAc'KLER... n.ſ.. [from cackle.]
1. A fowl that cackles.
2. A teltale; a tatler.
CAcochy'MIcAL. }*. [from cacochymy.] Having the humours
CAcochy'MIck. corrupted. c
- It will prove very advantageous, if only cacochymick, to clarify
his blood with a laxative. Harvey an Conſumptions:
If the body be cacochymical, the tumours are apt to degene-
rate into very venomous and malignant abſceſſes. Wiſman.
The ancient writers diſtinguiſhed putrid fevers, by putrefac-
tion of blood, choler, melancholy, and phlegm; and this is to
be explained by an efferveſcence happening in a particular caco-
chymical blood. Floyer on the Humours.
CACOCHY'MY. m.ſ. [xxxâxº~..] A depravation of the hu-
mours from a ſound ſtate, to what the phyſicians call by a ge-
neral name of a cacochymy. Spots, and diſcolourations of the
ſkin, are ſigns of weak fibres; for the lateral veſſels, which lie
out of the road of circulation, let groſs humours paſs, which
could not, if the veſſels had their due degree of ſtrićture.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Strong beer, a liquour that attributes the better half of its ill
qualities to the hops, conſiſting of an acrimonious firy nature,
ſets the blood, upon the leaſt cacochymy, into an orgaſmus, by an
ill ferment. Harvey on Conſumptions.
CAco'PHoNY. m. ſ. [xaxopwiſe..] A bad ſound of words.
To CAcu'MINATE. v. a. ſcacumino, Lat.] To make ſharp or
pyramidal. Dić7.
CADA've Rous. adj. [cadaver, Lat.] Having the appearance of
a dead carcaſs; having the qualities of a dead carcaſs.
In vain do they ſcruple to approach the dead, who livingly
are cadaverous, for fear of any outward pollution, whoſe temper
pollutes themſelves. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ix. c. 10.
The urine, long detained in the bladder, as well as glaſs,
will grow red, foetid, cadaverous, and alkaline. The caſe is the
ſame with the ſtagnant waters of hydropical perſons.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Dryden's Fab:
Dryden.
CA'DDIs. n.ſ.
1. A kind of tape or ribbon.
He hath ribbons of all the colours of the rainbow; inkles,
caddiſes, cambricks, lawns; why, he fings them over as if they
were gods and goddeſſes. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
2. A kind of worm or grub found in a caſe of ſtraw.
He eſpecially loves the mayfly, which is bred of the cod-
worm, or caddis ; and theſe make the trout bold and luſty.
JWalton's Angler.
CADE. m. ſ. [It is deduced, by Skinner, from cadeler, Fr. an old
word, which ſignifies to breed up tenderly.] Tame; ſoft; de-
licate; as a cade lamb, a lamb bred at home.
To CADE. v. a. [from the noun..] To breed up in ſoftneſs.
CADE. m. ſ. [cadus, Lat.] A barrel.
We # Cade, ſo termed of our ſuppoſed father.—Or
rather of ſtealing a cade of herrings. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
Soon as thy liquour from the narrow cells
Of cloſe preſs'd huſks is freed, thou muſt refrain
Thy thirſty ſoul; let none perſuade to broach
Thy thick, unwholſome, undigeſted cades.
CADE-worm. n ſ. The ſame with cAddison
/ -
§: }nſ. [cadence, Fr.]
1. Fall; ſtate of ſinking; decline.
Now was the ſun in weſtern cadence low
From noon; and gentle airs, due at their hours,
To fan the earth, now wak'd. Paradiſe Lºft, b. x. 1, 92.
2. The fall of the voice. -
The ſliding, in the cloſe or cadence, hath an agreement with
the figure in rhetorick, which they call prater expº”; for
there is a pleaſure even in being deceived. Bacºn's Nat. Hi/?.
There be words not made with lungs,
Sententious ſhow’rs O' let them fall,
Their cadence is rhetorical.
3. The flow of verſes, or periods. -
The words, the verſification, and all the other elegancies of
ſound, as cadences, and turns of words upon the thought, per-
form exactly the ſame office both in dramatick and epick poe-
try. Dryden's Diſfreſnoy.
The cadency of one line muſt be a rule to that of the next;
as the found Öf the former muſt ſlide gently into that which
follows. Dryden.
4. The tone or ſound. -
Hollow rocks retain
The ſound of bluſtring winds, which all night long
3 X Hºl
Philips.
Craſhaw.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A I
C A L
!
Had rous’d the ſea, now with horſe radº ºil. . .
Sea-faring men, o'erwatch'd. Paraíſº ºff, b. ii. l. 287.
He hath a confuſed remembrance of words ſince he left the
univerſity; he hath loſt half their meaning, and puts them to-
gether with no regard, except to their cadence. Swift.
5. In horſ manſhip. - …
Cad … is an equal meaſure or proportion, which a horſe ob-
ſerves in all his motions, when he is thoroughly managed.
Farrier's Dićt. .
CA'DENT. adj. [cadens, Lat.] Falling down.
CADE"r. m. ſ. [cadet, Fr. pronounced cadº.]
1. The younger brother.
2. The youngeſt brother. -
Joſeph was the youngeſt of the twelve, and David the
eleventh ſon, and the cadet of Jeſſe. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
3. A voluntier in the army, who ſerves in expectation of a com-
miſſion. -
CADew. m. ſ. A ſtraw worm. See CAddison Diº.
CA/D GER. m.ſ. A huckſter; one who brings butter, eggs, and
poultry, from the country to market. -
C# DJ. m. ſ. A magiſtrate among the Turks, whoſe office ſeems
to anſwer to that of a juſtice of peace.
CADI'll Ack. n.ſ. A ſort of pear; which ſce.
C.E CIA.S. m. ſ. [Lat..] A wind from the nºrth.
Now, from the north,
Boreas and Czcias and Argeſtes loud
And Thraſcias rend the woods, and ſeas upturn.
A ſilton's Paradſe Loſt, b. x. 1.699.
UAE’s A'R FAN. See CESAR1AN.
CZSU R.A. m.ſ. [Lat.] A figure in poetry, by which a ſhort
ſyllable after a complete foot is made long.
C/A/A.N. m. ſ. [Perſick.] A Perſian veſt or garment.
CA G. m. ſ. A barrel or wooden veſſel, containing four or five
gallons.
CAGE. n.ſ. ſcage, Fr from cavea, Lat.]
1. An incloſure of twigs or wire, in which birds are kept.
See whether a cage can pleaſe a bird : or whether a dog
grow not fiercer with tying Sidney.
He taught me how to know a man in love; in which cage
of ruſhes, I am ſure, you are not a priſoner.
Shakeſp. A you like it.
Though ſlaves, like birds that ſing not in a cage,
They loſt their genius, and poetick rage;
Homers again and Pindars may be found,
And his great actions with their numbers crown'd. JValler.
And parrots, imitating human tongue,
And ſinging birds in ſilver cages hung;
And ev'ry fragrant flow'r, and od’rous green,
Were ſorted well, with lumps of amber laid between.
Dryden's Fahles.
A man recurs to our fancy, by remembering his garment,
a beaſt, bird, or fiſh, by the cage, or court-yard, or ciſtern,
wherein it was kept. Jſ atts's Improvement of the 4/ind.
The reaſon why ſo few marriages are happy, is, becauſe
young ladies ſpend their time in making nets, not in making
cages. - Swift's Thoughts on various Subjects.
2. A place for wild beaſts, incloſed with paliſadoes.
3. A priſon for petty malefactors.
‘īo CAGE. º. a. [from the noun..] To incloſe in a cage.
He ſwoln, and pamper'd with high fare,
Sits down, and ſhorts, cag'd in his baſket-chair. Donne.
C 71.1//N. m. ſ. The American mame of a crocodile.
To CAJOLE. v. a. [cagºller, Fr.] To flatter; to ſooth; to
coax: a low word.
Thought he, ’tis no mean part of civil
State-prudence, to cajole the devil. Hudibras, cant. ii. p. iii.
The one affionts him, while the other cajoles and pities him;
takes up his quarrel, ſhakes his head at it, claſps his hand upon
his breaſt, and then proteſts and proteſts. L'Eſtrange.
CAjo'LER. m. ſ. [from cajole..] A flatterer; a wheedler.
CAjo'LERY. m. ſ. ſcajolerie, Fr.] Flattery.
CA/SSON. m. ſ. [French.] A cheſt of bombs or powder, laid
in the enemy's way, to be fired at their approach.
CA'It IFF. n.ſ. ſcattivo, Ital. a ſlave; whence it came to fignify
a bad man, with ſome implication of meanneſs; as knave in
Engliſh, and fur in Latin; ſo certainly does ſlavery deſtroy
virtue.
'Høgv t”; 2:7; 2-oxºa, 24xio, **22. Hºmer.
A ſlave and a ſcoundrel are ſignified by the ſame words in many
languages.] A mean villain; a deſpicable knave.
Vile caitiſ, vaſſal of dread and deſpair,
Unworthy of the common breathed air;
Why liveſt thou, dead dog, a longer day,
And doſt not unto death thyſelf prepare : Fairy Queen, b. ii.
'Tis not impoſſible
But one, the wicked ſt caitiſh on the ground,
May ſeem as ſhy, as grave, as juſt, as abſolute,
As Angelo. Shakespeare. Al/caſure for 41 aſure.
The wretched caitiſ, all alone,
As he believ'd, began to moan,
And tell his ſtory to himſelf. Hudºras, p. iii. º. iii.
+
CAKE.. n. ſ. ſcuch, Teutonick]
I. A kind of delicate bread.
You muſt be ſeeing chriſtnings do you look for ale and
cakes here, you rude raſcals : Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
My cake is dough, but I’ll in among the reſt,
Out of hope of all, but my ſhare of the feaſt.
Shakeſp. 7aming of the SAErew.
The diſmal day was come, the prieſts preparé
. Their leaven'd cakes, and fillets for my hair. Dryden's Zºn.
2. Any thing of a form rather flat than high; by which it is
ſometimes diſtinguiſhed from a loaf.
There is a cake that groweth upon the fide of a dead tree,
that hath gotten no name, but it is large and of a cheſnut co-
lour, and hard and pithy. Bacºn's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 55 2.
Then when the fleecy skies new cloath the wºod,
And takes of ruſtling ice come rolling down the floºd.
Dryden's Pirgil, Georg, i. 1.4 8.
To CAKE. v. n. [from the noun..] To hiº. aS º * the
OVen.
This burning matter, as it ſunk very leiſurely, had time to
cake together, and form the bottom, which covers the mouth of
that dreadful vault that lies underneath it. Addi on cm Italy.
This is that very Mab, -
That plats the manes of horſes in the night,
And cakes the clflocks in foul fluttiſh hairs,
Which, once entangſ'd, much mi fortune bodes. Shakespeare/?.
He rins'd the wound,
And waſh'd away the ſtrings and clotted blood,
That cak’d within. Add/ºzz-
CALABA's H Tree.
It hath a flower conſiſting of one leaf, divided at the brim in-
to ſeveral parts; from whoſe cup riſes the pointal, in the hinder
part of the flower; which afterwards becomes a fleſhy fruit,
having an hard ſhell. They riſe to the height of twenty-five or
thirty feet in the Weſt Indies, where they grow naturally in
woods, and the ſavannas. The ſhells are uſed by the negroes
for cups, as alſo for making inſtruments of muſick, by making
a hole in the ſhell, and putting in ſmall ſtones, with which they
make a ſort of rattle. Miller.
CALAMA'sco. m. ſ. [a word derived, probably by ſome acci-
dent, from calamancus, Lat. which, in the middle ages, ſigni-
fied a hat..] A kind of woollen ſtuff.
He was of a bulk and ſtature larger than ordinary, had a red
coat, flung open to ſhew a calamanco waiſtcoat. Tailer, N° 96-
CALAMINE, or Lapis Calaminaris. n.ſ. A kind of foſſile bitu-
minous earth, which, being mixed with copper, changes it in-
to braſs; it is dug in barren rocky ground, and is often found
in lead mines, or has lead mixed with it. It is uſed as an abſor-
bent and drier, in outward medicinal applications, but is ſel-
dom given inwardly.
We muſt not omit thoſe, which, though not of ſo much
beauty, yet are of greater uſe, viz. loadſtones, whetſtones of all
kinds, limeſtones, calamine, or lapis calaminaris. Accée.
CALAMINT. n.ſ. ſcalºmintha, Lat.] The name of a plant.
It hath a long tubulous flower, which opens at the top into
two lips; the upper lip is roundiſh, and divided into two ſeg-
ments: theſe flowers are produced from the joints of the ſtalks,
at the footſtalks of the leaves, in bunches, upon pretty long pe—
dicles, or footſtalks. This plant grows wild, and is uſed in me-
dicine. 4/.427.
CALA/MITots. ad. [calamitºſis, Lat.]
1. Miſerable; involved in diſtreſs; oppreſſed with infelicity;
unhappy; wretched; applied to men.
This is a gracious proviſion God Almighty hath made in fæ-
vour of the neceſſitous and calamitous ; the ſtate of ſome, iºn
this life, being ſo extremely wretched and deplorable, if come-
pared with others. Calam-.
2. Full of miſery; diſtreſsful ; applied to external circum--
ſtances.
- *
What calamitous effects the air of this city wrought upon “S
the laſt year, you may read in my diſcourſe of the plague.
- Harvey on Conſumption
Strict neceſſity ~
Subdues me, and calamitous conſtraint'
Left on my head both ſin and puniſhment,
However inſupportable, be all
Devolv’d.
Much rather I ſhall chuſe
To live the pooreſt in my tribe, than richeſt,
And be in that calamitous priſon left.
preſſour would have even revived them.
miſery; diſtreſs. - - - -
Another ill accident is drought, and the ſpindling of the cor.
which with us is rare, but in hotter countries common; ; º's
much as the word calamity was firſt derived from calamus, wis
the corn could not get out of the ſtalk.
Which infinite calamity ſhall cauſe
To human life, and houſhold peace confound. Par. I. A.
Fre
Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x, l. ! 32. --~
AMilton’s Agoni/? *-5".
In this ſad and calamitous condition, deliverance from an GIP-
- - Sole zzº-
CALA'M1Touss Ess. m. ſ. [from glamitous.] Miſery ; diſtreſs-
CALA/MITY. m. ſ. [alamitas, Lat.] Misfortune; cauſe of
Lacon's N.
d af. A SS n
N
2. To
ſ
A.'
º
Zo Cºle
7%, a
without
isº, ~/.
*
ºne.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A L
From adverſe ſhores in ſafety let her hear
Foreign calamity, and diſtant war;
Of which, great heav'n, let her no portion bear. Prior.
CALA310.8, n. f [Lat.] A ſort of reed or ſweet ſcented wood,
mentioned in ſcripture with the other ingredients of the ſacred
perfumes. It is a knotty root, reddiſh without, and white with-
in, which puts forth long and narrow leaves, and brought from
the Indies. The prophets ſpeak of it as a foreign commodity
of great value. Theſe ſweet reeds have no ſmell when they
are green, but when they are dry only. Their form differs not
from other reeds, and their ſmell is perceived upon entering
the marſhes. Calmet.
Take thou alſo unto thee principal ſpices of pure myrrh, of
ſweet cinnamon, and of ſweet calamus. Exodus, xxx. 23.
CALA's H. m. ſ. ſcaleche, Fr.] A ſmall carriage of pleaſure.
Daniel, a ſprightly ſwain, that us’d to ſlaſh
The vigºrous ſteeds, that drew his lord's caloſh.
King's Mully of Mountown.
The ancients uſed calaſhes, the figures of ſeveral of them be-
ing to be ſeen on ancient monuments. They are very ſimple,
light, and drove by the traveller himſelf. Arbuthnot on Coins.
CA ice ATED. adj. [cal-eatus, Lat.] Shod; fitted with ſhoes.
CALCEDO'NIUS. n.ſ. [Lat.] A kind of precious ſtone.
Calcedonius is of the agat kind, and of a miſty grey, cloud-
ed with blue, or with purple. //oodward on Pºſſils.
To CA'lcINATE. See To CALCINE.
CAlcINATION. n.ſ.. [from calcine; calcination, Fr.] Such a
management of bodies by fire, as renders them reducible to
powder; wherefore it is called chymical pulverization. This
is the next degree of the power of fire beyond that of fuſion;
for when fuſion is longer continued, not only the more ſubtile
particles of the body itſelf fly off, but the particles of fire like-
wife inſinuate themſelves in ſuch multitudes, and are ſo blend-
ed through its whole ſubſtance, that the fluidity, firſt cauſed by
the fire, can no longer ſubſiſt. From this union ariſes a third
kind of body, which, being very porous and brittle, is eaſily re-
duced to powder; for, the fire having penetrated everywhere
into the porcs of the body, the particles are both hindered from
mutual contact, and divided into minute atoms. &amp;uincy.
Divers reſidences of bodies are wont to be thrown away, as
ſoon as the diſtillation or calcination of the body that yielded
them is ended. Boyle.
This may be effected, but not without a calcinatiºn, or re-
ducing it by art into a ſubtiie powder. Brown's Pulgar Err.
CAlci'NATORY. m. ſ. [from calcinate.] A veſſel uſed in calci-
nation.
To CALCINE. v. a. ſcalciner, Fr. from calx, Lat.]
1. To burn in the fire to a calx, or friable ſubſtance.
CINATION.
In hardening, by baking without melting, the heat hath theſe
degrees; firſt, it indurateth, then maketh fragile, and, laſtly, it
doth calcinate. Bacon's Nat Hiſt. Nº 87.
The ſolids ſeem to be earth, bound together with ſome oil;
for if a bone be calcined, ſo as the leaſt force will crumble it,
being immerſed in oil, it will grow firm again.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
See CAL-
2. To burn up.
Firy diſputes that union have calkin'd,
Almoſt as many minds as men we find.
To CALcI'N.E. v. m. To become a calx by heat.
This cryſtal is a pellucid fiſſile ſtone, clear as water, and
without colour, enduring a red heat without loſing its tranſpa-
rency, and, in a very ſtrong heat, calcining without fuſion.
Newton's Opticks.
To CALCULATE. v. a. [calculer, Fr. from calculus, Lat, a
little ſtone or bead, uſed in operations of numbers.]
1. To compute; to reckon.
2. To compute the ſituation of the planets at any certain time.
A cunning man did calculate my birth,
And told me, that by water I ſhould die. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Why all theſe fires, why all theſe gliding ghoſts,
Why old men fools, and children calculate,
Why all thoſe things change from their ordinance 2
Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
Who were there then in the world, to obſerve the births of
thoſe firſt men, and calculate their nativities, as they ſprawled
out of ditches 2 Bentley.
3. To adjuſt; to projećt for any certain end.
The reaſonableneſs of religion clearly appears, as it tends
ſo directly to the happineſs of med, and is, upon all accounts,
calculated for our benefit. Tillotſon.
CALCULATION. m. ſ. [from calitic: )
1. A practice, or manner reckoning ; the art of numbering.
Cypher, that great fººd to cale, 'tion ; or rather, which
changeth calculation, irº, c, ſº cºmputation. Hºlder on Time.
2. A reckoning; the reſult of ºhmetical operation.
If then their calcula, a cºrne; for ſo they recken. Hºoker.
Being different from c.: ºs of the ancients, their obſer-
vations con rm not cººrs. p, ºwn’s Vulgar Errours.
CAI culA"tor. n. / Iºn ºf . A computer; a reckoner.
Calculatoky. a j . º.º.º.º.º. L.,…,ging to calcula-
tion. -
Denham.
Calcule. n. f. [calculus, Lat.] Reckoning; compute.
The general calcule, which was made in the laſt perambula-
tion, exceeded eight millions. Howel's Pocal Foreſt.
CA'Lculose. - - -
CA'Lculous. {a}. [from calculus, Lat..] Stony; gritty.
The volatile ſalt of urine will coagulate ſpirits of wine;
and thus, perhaps, the ſtones, or calculoſe concretions in the
kidney or bladder, may be produced. Brown's Wulgar Err.
I have found, by opening the kidneys of a calculous perſon,
º the ſtone is formed earlier than I have ſuggeſted. Shºw;.
£44Gulus. nºſ. [Latin.] The ſtone in the bladder.
CA *PRON. m. ſ. [chauldron, Fr. from calidus, Lat.] A pot;
boiler; a kettle.
In the midſt of all
There placed was a caldron wide and tall,
Upon a mighty furnace, burning hot. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Some ſtrip the skin, ſome portion out the ſpoil;
The limbs, yet trembling, in the caldrons boiſ;
Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil. Dryden's Żn.
In the late eruptions, this great hollow was like a vaſt caldron,
filled with glowing and melted matter, which, as it boiled over
in any part, ran down the ſides of the mountain. .
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
CALEcHE. See CALASH.
CAL EFA'ction. m. ſ. [from calºfacio, Lat.]
1. The act of heating anything. -
2. The ſtate of being heated. - -
CA LE FA'ctive. adj. [from ca'ºfacio, Lat.] That which makes
anything hot; heating.
CALEFA'croRY. adj. [from calºfacio, Lat.] That which heats.
To CALEFY. v. n. [calºfio, Latin.] To grow hot; to be
heated.
Cryſtal will caleſ; unto eleētricity; that is, a power to at-
tract ſtraws, or light bodies, and convert the needle, freely
placed. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii c. 1.
CA'l EN DAR. m. ſ. ſcalendarium, Lat..] A regiſter of the year,
in which the months, and ſtated times, are marked, as feſti-
vals and holidays.
What hath this day deſerv'd what hath it done,
That it in golden letter ſhould be ſet
Among the high tides, in the calendar P Shakeſp. K. john.
We compute from calendars differing from one another; the
compute of the one anticipating that of the other.
Brown’s Wulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
Curs'd be the day when firſt I did appear;
Let it be blotted from the calendar,
Leſt it pollute the month. Dryden's Fah.
To CALENDER. v. a. ſcalendrer, Fr. Skinner.] To dreſs
cloth; to lay the nap of cloth ſmooth.
CA'LENDER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A hot preſs; a preſs in
which clothiers ſmooth their cloth.
CA'LENDRER. m.ſ.. [from calender.] The perſon who calenders.
CA'LENDs. m. ſ. ſcalenda, Lat. It has no ſingular.] The firſt day
of every month among the Romans.
CA'LENTURE. m. ſ. [from caleo, Lat.] A diſtemper peculiar to
ſailors, in hot climates; wherein they imagine the ſea to be
green fields, and will throw themſelves into it, if not reſtrained.
&amp; inty.
Denham,
And for that lethargy was there no cure,
But to be caſt into a ca'enture.
So, by a calenture miſled,
The mariner with rapture ſees,
On the ſmooth ocean's azure bed,
Enamell'd fields, and verdant trees;
With eager haſte, he longs to rove
In that fantaſtick ſcene, and thinks
It muſt be ſome enchanted grove;
And in he leaps, and down he ſinks. Swift.
CALF. m. ſ. calves in the plural. [cealp, Saxon; Kaf, Dutch..]
1. The young of a cow.
The colt hath about four years of growth; and ſo the fawn,
and ſo the calf. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł. N° 759.
Acoſta tells us of a fowl in Peru, called condores, which
will, of themſelves, kill and eat up a whole cafat a time. . .
- Iſilkins', Mathimatical 4&amp;gicº.
: Ah! Blouzelind, I love thee more by half,
Than does their fawns, or cows the new-fall'n */ ... Gay,
2. Calves of the lips, mentioned by Hoſea, ſignify ſº of
praiſe and prayers, which the captives of Babylºn addreſſed to
God, being no longer in a condition to offer ſacrifices in his
temple. Calmet.
Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, and ſay untº
him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciouſly: ſo will
we render the caves of our lips. Hºſea, XIV. 2.
3. The thick, plump, bulbous part of the leg. [Kaf, Dutch.]
Into her legs I’d have love's iſſues fall, -
And all her caf into a gouty ſmall. Sucking.
The calf of that leg bliſtered. J77ſ man's Surgery.
Caliper. A. ſ. ſcalibre, Fr.] The bore; the diameter of the
barrel of a gun; the diameter of a bullet.
CALice. m.ſ.. [calix, Lat.] A cup ; a chalice.
There is a natural analogy between the ablution of the º
dIl<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A L
C A L
and the purification of the ſoul; between esting the holy bread
and drinking the ſacred ca'ice, and a participation of º
f Chriſt. ayior.
c." º Çakºut in India.] An Indian ſtuff made of
cotton; ſometimes ſtained with gay and beautiful colours.
I wear the hoop petticoat, and am all in calººrs, when the
fineſt are in ſilks. Addison. Speºſ. Nº 293.
Calip. adj. [alidº, Latl. Hof; burning; fervent.
CALI'dity. m. ſ. [from calid.] Heat. - - - - - - -
Ice will diſſolve in any way of heat; for it will diſſºlve with
fire, it will colliquate in water, or warm oil; nor doth t only
ſubmit unto an actual heat, but not endure the potential call-
dity of many waters. Brown's Pulgar Erraurº, b. ii. c. 1.
CA'Li F. Q n.ſ. [Khalifa, Arab. an heir or ſucceſſor.] A title aſ-
CALIPH. } ſumed by the ſucceſſors of Mahomet among the Sa-
racens, who were veſted with abſolute power in affairs, both
religious and civil.
CAiidarios. m. ſ. [from caligo, Lat. to be dark.] Darkneſs;
cloudineſs. -
Inſtead of a diminution, or imperfeót viſion, in the mole, We
affirm an abolition, or total privation; inſtead of caligation, or
dimneſs, we conclude a cecity, or blindneſs. Brºwn'; Pulg. Err.
CA LI'Gi Nous. adj. [cal ginºſus, Lat.] Obſcure ; dim; full of
darkneſs. -
CA LI'GINous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from calºginous.] Darkneſs; obſcu-
rity.
cºrn Y. m. ſ. […×2:2.] Beautiful writing.
This language is incapable of caligraphy. Prideaux's Conn.
CA’r. IPERs. See CALLIPERs.
CA (r. 1 v ER. m. ſ. [from caliber.] A handgun ; a harquebuſe; an
old musket. --
“Come, manage me your caliver. Shakespeare. Henry IV. p. ii.
C/2 - Z.V. n.ſ. (Latin.] A cup ; a word uſed in botany; as, the
carzz.x of a flower.
To CALK. v. a. [from calage, Fr. hemp, with which leaks are
ſtopped; or from cale, Sax, the keel. Skinner.] To ſtop the
leaks of a ſhip. -
There is a great errour committed in the manner of calking
This majeſty's ſhips; which being done with rotten oakum, ls
the cauſe they are leaky. Raleigh's F/ays.
So here ſome pick out bullets from the ſide;
Some drive old oakum through each ſeam and rift ;
Their left-hand does the calking iron guide,
The rattling mallet with the left they lift.
CA'LKER. m. ſ. [from calk..]
of a ſhip. -
The ancients of Gebal, and the wiſe men thereof, were in
thee thy calkers; all the ſhips of the ſea, with their mariners,
were in thee to occupy thy merchandize. Ezek. xxvii. 9.
CA'I, KING. m. ſ. A term in painting, uſed where the backſide is
covered with black lead, or red chalk, and the lines traced
through on a waxed plate, wall, or other matter, by paſſing
iightly over each ſtroke of the deſign with a point, which
leaves an impreſſion of the colour on the plate or wall.
Chambers.
Dryden.
The workman that ſtops the leaks
To CALL. v. a. ſcalo, Lat. Kalder, Daniſh.]
1. To name; to denominate.
And God called the light day, and the darkneſs he called
night. Gen. i. 5.
2. To ſummon, or invite, to or from any place, thing, or perſon.
Be not amazed, call all your ſenſes to you, defend my repu-
tation, or bid farewel to your good life for ever.
Shakeſp. Merry I/ives of Iłżndſºr.
Why came not the ſlave back to me, when I called him :
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Are you call'd forth from out a world of men,
To ſlay the innocent Shakeſp. Richard III.
Lodronius, that famous captain, was called up, and told by
his ſervants, that the general was fled. Knolles's Hiſt.
Or call up him, that left half told
The ſtory of Cambuſcan bold. Milton.
Drunkenneſs calls off the watchmen from their towers; and
then evils proceed from a looſe heart, and an untied tongue.
Taylor's Holy Living.
The ſoul makes uſe of her memory, to call to mind what ſhe
is to treat of. Duppa's Rules to Devotion.
Such fine employments our whole days divide,
The ſalutations of the morning tide
Call up the ſun; thoſe ended, to the hall
We wait the patron, hear the lawyers bawl. Dryden.
Then, by conſent, abſtain from further ſpoils,
Call off the dogs, and gather up the ſpoils. Addison.
By the pleaſures of the imagination or fancy, I mean ſuch as
ariſe from viſible objects, when we call up their ideas into our
minds by paintings, ſtatues, or deſcriptions. Addiſon. Spectator.
Why doſt thou call my ſorrows up afreſh
My father's name brings tears into my eyes. Alliſ. Cato.
I am called off from publick diſſertations, by a domeſtick af-
fair of great importance. Tatler, Nº - 50.
AEſchylus has a tragedy, entitled Perſe, in which the ſhade
of Darius is called up. Broome's Notes on the OAffy.
The paſſions call away the thoughts, with inceſlant impor-
tunity, toward the obſeét that excited them. J/atts.
3. To convoke; to ſummon together.
Now call we our high court of parliament. Shakeſp.
The king being informed of much that had paſſed that night,
ſent to the lord mayor to ca, a common council immediately.
Carendon.
4. To ſummon judicially.
I he king had ſent for the carſ to return home, where he
ſhould be afted to account for all his miſcarriages. Carºndºn.
Once a day, cſpecially in the early years of life and ſtudy,
call yourſelves to an account, what new ideas, what new pro-
poſition or truth, you have gained. //atts.
5. To ſummon by command.
In that day did the Lord God of hoſts call to weeping, and to
mourning, and to baldneſs, and to girding with ſackcloth.
Iſaiah, xxii. 12.
6. In the theological ſenſe, to inſpire with ardours of piety; or
to ſummon into the church.
Paul a ſervant of Jeſus Chriſt, caſed to be an apoſtle, ſpa-
rated unto the goſpel of God. Rom. i. 1.
7. To invoke; to appeal to.
I call God for a record upon my ſoul, that, to ſpare you, I
came not as yet unto Corinth. 2 Cor. i. 23.
When that lord perplexed their counſels and deſigns, with
inconvenient objections in law, the authority of the lord Man-
cheſter, who had trod the ſame paths, was ſtill called upon.
* Clarendon.
8. To proclaim; to publiſh.
Nor ballad-ſinger, plac'd above the croud,
Sings with a note ſo ſhrilling, ſweet, and loud,
Nor pariſh-clerk, who calls the pſalm ſo clear.
9. To make a ſhort viſit.
And, as you go, call on my brother Quintus,
And pray him, with the tribunes, to come to me.
Ben. Jºſon’s Catiline.
He ordered her to call at his houſe once a week, which ſhe
did for ſome time after, when he heard no more of her. Tºp e.
That I might begin as near the fountain-head as poſſible, I
firſt of all called in at St. James's. Addison. Sfc.? Nº. 4 og.
We called in at Morge, where there is an artificial port.
- Alliſon on Italy.
Io. To excite; to put in action; to bring into view.
He ſwells with angry pride,
Gay.
And call forth all his ſpots on every ſide. Czwey.
See Dionyſius Homer's thoughts refine,
And call new beauties forth from ev’ry line. Pope.
II. To ſtigmatize with ſome opprobrious denomination.
Deafneſs unqualifies men for all company, except friends;
whom I can call names, if they do not ſpeak loud enough.
Swift to Pºpe.
12. To call back. To revoke; to retract.
He alſo is wife, and will bring evil, and will not call back his
words; but will ariſe againſt the houſe of the evil doers, and
againſt the help of them that work iniquity. Iſaiah, xxxi. 2.
13. To call for. To demand; to require; to claim.
Madam, his majeſty doth cal for you,
And for your grace, and you, my noble lord. Shakespeare.
You ſee, how men of merit are fought after ; the undeſerver
may ſleep, when the man of action is caſed fºr. Shakeſp.
Among them he a ſpirit of phrenſy ſent,
Who hurt their minds,
And urg'd you on, with mad deſire,
To call in haſte fºr their deſtroyer. Mi ton’s Agoniſies.
For maſter, or fºr ſervant, here to call,
Was all alike, where only two were all. Dryden's Fab.
He commits every fin that his appetite ca's fºr, or perhaps
his conſtitution or fortune can bear.
14. To call in. To reſume money at intereſt.
Horace deſcribes an old uſurer, as ſo charmed with the plea-
ſures of a country life, that, in order to make a purchaſe, he
called in all his money; but what was the event of it? why, in
a very few days after, he put it out again. Maiſºn. Speciatºr.
15. To call in. To reſume anything that is in other hands.
If clipped money be called in all at once, and ſtopped from
paſſing by weight, I fear it will ſtop trade, and put our affairs
all at a ſtand. Locke.
Neither is anything more cruel and oppreſſive in the French
government, than their practice of calling in their money, after
they have funk it very low, and then coining it anew, at a
Rºgers.
higher value. Swift.
16. To call in. To ſummon together; to invite.
The heat is paſt, follow me no farther now ;
Call in the pow'rs, good couſin, Weſtmoreland. Sla’ſ”.
He fears my ſubjects loyalty,
And now muſt call in ſtrangers. Pºham's Sºphy.
17. To call on. To ſolicite for a favour, or a debt.
I would be loth to pay him before his day; what need Ibe ſo
forward with him, that ca's not on me : Shakºp. II.”y IV.
18. To ca 1 on. To repeat ſolemnly.
Thrice call upon my name, thrice beat your breaſt,
And hail me thrice to everläfling reſt. Dryd.º.
The Athenians, when they loſt any men at ſea, went to the
ſhores,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A L
C A L
ſhores, and, calling thrice on their names, raiſed a cenotaph,
or empty monument, to their memories. Broome on the Odyſſ.
10. Tº call over. To read aloud a liſt or muſter-roll.
26. Tº call out. To challenge; to ſummon to fight.
When their ſov’reign's quarrel calls 'em out.
His foes to mortal combat they defy. Dryden's Wirgil.
21. Tº call upon. To implore; to pray to.
Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and
, thou ſhalt glorify me. Pſalm i. 15.
Call. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A vocal addreſs.
But would you ſing, and rival Orpheus' ſtrain,
The wond'ring foreſts ſoon ſhould dance again:
The moving mountains hear the pow'rful call,
And headlong ſtreams hang liſt'ning in their fall.
2. Requiſition.
It may be feared, whether our nobility would contentedly ſuf-
ſer themſelves to be always at the call, and to ſtand to the ſen-
tence of a number of mean perſons. Hooker, Preface.
But death comes not at call; juſtice divine
Mends not her ſloweſt pace, for pray'rs or cries. Par. Loft.
3. Divine vocation; ſummons to true religion.
Yet he at length, time to himſelf beſt known,
Rememb'ring Abraham, by ſome wond’rous call,
May bring them back repentant and ſincere. Par. Regained.
St. Paul himſelf believed he did well, and that he had a call to
it, when he perſecuted the chriſtians, whom he confidently
thought in the wrong: but yet it was he, and not they, who
were miſtaken. Locke.
4. A ſummons from heaven; an impulſe.
How juſtly then will impious mortals fall,
Whoſe pride would ſoar to heav'n without a call? Roſſomm.
Thoſe who to empire by dark paths aſpire,
Still plead a call to what they moſt deſire.
5. Authority; command.
Oh! Sir, I wiſh he were within my call, or your's. Denh.
6. A demand; a claim.
Dependence is a perpetual call upon humanity, and a greater
incitement to tenderneſs and pity, than any other motive what-
ſoever. - Addiſon. Speciator, N° 181.
7. An inſtrument to call birds.
For thoſe birds or beaſts were made from ſuch pipes or calls,
as may expreſs the ſeveral tones of thoſe creatures, which are
repreſented. Wilkins's Mathemat. Magick.
8. Calling; vocation; employment.
Now, through the land, his cure of ſouls he ſtretch'd,
And, like a primitive apoſtle, preach'd :
Still chearful, ever conſtant to his call;
By many follow'd, lov’d by moſt, admir’d by all.
9. A nomination.
Upon the fixteenth was held the ſerjeants feaſt at Ely place,
there being nine ſerjeants of that call. Bacon's Henry VII.
CA'LLAT.
CA'LLET. }n.ſ. A trull.
He call’d her whore; a beggar, in his drink,
Could not have laid ſuch terms upon his callet.
CA'LLING. m. ſ. [from call.]
1. Vocation; profeſſion; trade.
If God has interwoven ſuch a pleaſure with our ordinary
calling, how much ſuperiour muſt that be, which ariſes from
the ſurvey of a pious life : Surely, as much as chriſtianity is
nobler than a trade. South.
We find ourſelves obliged to go on in honeſt induſtry in our
callings. Rogers.
I cannot forbear warning you againſt endeavouring at wit
in your ſermons; becauſe many of your calling have made
Pope.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Shakeſp.
themſelves ridiculous by attempting it. Swift.
I left no calling for this idle trade,
No duty broke, no father diſobey'd. Pope.
2. Proper ſtation, or employment.
The Gauls found the Roman ſenators ready to die with ho-
nour in their callings. Swift.
. Claſs of perſons united by the ſame employment or profeſſion.
It may be a caution to all chriſtian churches and magiſtrates,
not to impoſe celibacy on whole callings, and great multitudes
of men or women, who cannot be ſuppoſable to have the gift of
continence. Hammond.
4. Divine vocation; invitation or impulſe to the true religion.
St. Peter was ignorant of the calling of the Gentiles.
Hakewell on Providence.
CA'1 1 IPERs. n ſ [of this word I know not the etymology, nor
does any thing more probable occur, than that, perhaps, the
word is corrupted from clippers, inſtruments with which an
thing is clipped, incloſed or embraced.] Compaſſes with bowed
ſhanks.
Callipers meaſure the diſtance of any round, cylindrick, co-
nical body, either in their extremity, or any part leſs than the
extreme; ſo that, when workmen uſe them, they open the two
points to their deſcribed width, and turn ſo much ſtuff off the
intended place, till the two points of the callipers fit juſt over
their work. Mºxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
Cºx. n. ſ. [callyſt., Fr.] A kind of ſwelling without
- ol. I.
3
CA'llous. adj. [callus, Lat.]
pain, like that of the skin, by hard labour; and therefore, when
wºunds, or the edges of ulcers, grow ſo, they are ſaid to be
callous. &amp;uincy.
The ſurgeon ought to vary the diet of his patient, as he finds
the fibres looſen too much, are too flaccid, and produce fun-
guſes, or as they harden and produce cally ties; in the firſt
caſe, wine and ſpirituous liquours are uſeful, in the laſt hurtful.
Arbuthnot on Diet.
1. Indurated; hardned; having the pores ſhut up.
In prºgreſs of time, the ulcers became ſinuous and callous,
with induration of the glands. Wiſeman's Surgery.
2. Hardned ; inſenſible.
Licentiouſneſs, has ſo long paſſed for ſharpneſs of wit, and
greatneſs of mind, that the conſcience is grown callous. L’Eſtr.
The wretch is drench'd too deep,
His ſoul is ſtupid, and his heart aſleep:
Fatten’d in vice, ſo callous and ſo groſs,
He fins, and ſees not, ſenſeleſs of his loſs. Dryden's Perſus.
CA'Llous Ness. n. ſ. [from callous.]
1. Hardneſs; induration of the fibres.
The oftner we uſe the organs of touching, the more of theſe
ſcales are formed, and the skin becomes the thicker, and ſo a
callouſneſs grows upon it. Cheyne's Philoſoph. Principles.
2. Inſenſibility. ./
If they let go theirhope of everlaſting life with willingneſs,
and entertain final perdition with exultation, ought they not to
be eſteemed deſtitute of common ſenſe, and abandoned to a
callouſneſ; and numbneſs of ſoul? Bently.
CA'llow. adj. Unfledged; naked; without feathers.
Burſting with kindly rapture, forth diſclos'd
Their callow young. Paradiſe Lºſº, b. vii. l. 429.
Then as an eagle, who, with pious care,
Was beating widely on the wing for prey,
To her now ſilent airy does repair,
And finds her callow infants forc'd away. Dryden.
How in ſmall flights they know to try their young,
And teach the callow child her parent's ſong.
CALLUS. n.ſ. [Latin.]
1. An induration of the fibres.
2. The hard ſubſtance by which broken bones are united.
CALM. adj. [calme, Fr. Kalm, Dutch.]
1. Quiet; ſerene; not ſtormy; not tempeſtuous; applied to the
elements.
Calm was the day, and, through the trembling air,
Sweet breathing Zephyrus did ſoftly play
A gentle ſpirit, that lightly did allay
Hot Titan's beams, which then did gliſter fair. Spenſer.
2. Undiſturb’d ; unruffled; applied to the paſſions.
It is no ways congruous, that God ſhould be frightning men
into truth, who were made to be wrought upon by calm evi-
dence, and gentle methods of perſuaſion. Atterbury.
The queen her ſpeech with calm attention hears,
Her eyes reſtrain the ſilver-ſtreaming tears. Pope's Odyſſey:
CALM. m. ſ.
Prior.
1. Serenity; ſtillneſs; freedom from violent motion.
It ſeemeth moſt agreeable to reaſon, that the waters rather
ſtood in a quiet calm, than that they moved with any raging or
overbearing violence. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Every pilot
Can ſteer the ſhip in calms; but he performs
The ſkilful part, can manage it in ſtorms.
Nor God alone in the ſtill calm we find,
He mounts the ſtorm, and walks upon the wind. Pope.
2. Freedom from diſturbance; quiet; repoſe; applied to the paſ-
ſions.
Great and ſtrange calins uſually portend the moſt violent
ſtorms: and therefore, ſince ſtorms and calms do always follow
one another, certainly, of the two, it is much more eligible to
have the ſtorm firſt, and the calm afterwards: ſince a calm before
a ſtorm is commonly a peace of a man's own making; but a
calm after a ſtorm, a peace of God's. South.
To CALM. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſtill ; to quiet.
Neptune we find buſy in the beginning of the AEneis, to cahn
the tempeſt raiſed by AEolus. Dryden.
2. To pacify; to appeaſe. -
Jeſus, whoſe bare word checked the ſea, as much exerts him-
ſelfin filencing the tempeſts, and calming the inteſtine ſtorms
within our breaſts. Decay of Piety.
Thoſe paſſions, which ſeem ſomewhat calmed, may be entirely
laid aſleep, and never more awakened. Atterbury,
He will'd to ſtay,
The ſacred rites and hecatombs to pay, ---
And calm Minerva's wrath. Pºpe's Odºſº, b. iii. 1. 175.
CA'LMER. m. ſ. [from calm.] The perſon or thing which has
he power of giving quiet.
t Aiº, º ºn. ſtudy, a reſt to his mind, a cheerer
of his ſpirits, a diverter of ſadneſs, a calmer of unquiet thoughts,
a moderator of paſſions, a procurer of contentedneſs. If alton.
Calmly. adv. [from cal”.] -
I. without ſtorms, or violence; ſerenity.
3 Y In
Denham's Sophy.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A L C A M
l
º-
|
º-
.
In nature, things move violently to their place, and cally in
their place; ſo virtue in ambition is violent, in #.N. ſet-
led and calm. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 1 1.
His curled brows
Frown on the gentle ſtream, which calmly flows. Denham.
2. Without paſſions; quietly.
The nymph did like the ſcene appear,
Serenely pleaſant, calmly fair;
Sº fail her words, as flew the air. Prior,
CA'LY!NEss. {{... calm.] -
. T ility; ſcrenity.
1. T “". ſleep horrid roughneſs of the wood
Strives with the gentle calmneſs of the flood. Denham.
2. Milaneſs; freedom from paſſion.
I've been i' th' market-place, and, Sir, 'tis fit
You have ſtrong party, or defend yourſelf
By calmneſs, or by abſence: all's in anger.
I beg the grace,
You would lay by thoſe terrours of your face;
Till cahºneſ, to your eyes you firſt reſtore,
I am afraid, and I can beg no more. Dryden's Conq. of Gran.
CALM Y. adj. [from calm..] Calm; peaceful.
And now they nigh approached to the ſted,
Where as thoſe mermaides dwelt: it was a ſtill
And calmy bay, on th' one ſide ſheltered -
With the broad ſhadow of an hoary hill. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
CA'Loxſel. n ſ. ſcalenelas, a chymical word.] Mercury fix
times ſublimcd.
He repeated lenient purgatives with calmel, once in three or
four days. I/ſeman's Surgery.
CAlor I'Éick. ad. [calºrificus, Lat..] That which has the qua-
lity of producing heat; heating.
Cºrff: principle is cither excited within the heated body,
or transferred to it, through any medium, from ſome other.
Silver will grow hotter than the liquour it contains.
Grew's Cºſmolºgia Sacra, b, i.e. 2. § 9.
r:ALOTTE. n.ſ.. [French.]
* . A cap or coif, worn as an eccleſiaſtical ornament in France.
&gt; . [In architecture.] A round cavity or depreſſure, in form of a
cap or cup, lathed and plaiſtered, uſed to diminiſh the riſe or
elevation of a moderate chapel, cabinet, alcove, &amp;c. Harris.
CALOYERS. n.ſ. [x,x* J Monks of the Greck church.
CALTRops. n. ſ. ſcolºrappe, Saxon.]
1. An inſtrument made with three ſpikes, ſo that which way ſo-
ever it falls to the ground, one of them points upright, to
wound horſes feet.
The ground about was thick ſown with caſtrops, which very
much incommoded the ſhoeleſs Moors.
Dr. Addison's Account of Tangiers.
Shakeſp. Coriol.
2. A plant.
It is very common in the South of France, Spain, and Italy,
where it grows among corn, and on moſt of the arable land,
and is very troubleſome to the feet of cattle; for the fruit be-
ing armed with ſtrong prickles, run into the feet of the cattle,
which walk over the land. This is certainly the plant which is
mentioned in Virgil's Georgick, under the name of tribulus.
Miller.
To CALve. v. m. [from ca'ſ]
1. To bring a calf; ſpoken of a cow.
When ſhe has calv'd, then ſet the dam aſide,
And for the tender progeny provide. Dryden's Virgil.
2. It is uſed metaphorically for any act of bringing forth; and
ſometimes of men, by way of reproach.
I would they were barbarians, as they are,
Though in Rome litter'd ; not Romans: as they are not;
Though calved in the porch o' th' capitol. Shakeſp. Coriolan.
The .." clods now calv'd, now half appear'd
The tawny lion, pawing to get free
His hinder parts. Paradiſe Loft, b. vii. l. 463.
CA Lves-snout. Sce SNAPDRAGON.
CALP'I'LI E. m. ſ. [French.]. A ſort of apple. See APPLE.
To CALU'MN1At E. v. n. [calumnior, Lat.] To accuſe falſely;
to charge without juſt ground.
Beauty, wit, high birth, deſert in ſervice,
Love, friendſhip, charity, are ſubjećt all -
To envious and calumniating time. Shakeſp. Tr. and Creſſ.
He mixes truth with falſehood, and has not forgotten the old
rule of calumniating ſtrongly, that ſomething may remain.
Dryden's Fables, Prºſace.
Do I calumniate / thou ungrateful Vanoc!—
Perfidious prince 1–Is it a º
To ſay, that Gwendolen betroth'd to Yver,
was by her father firſt aſſur'd to Valens: A. Philips, Brit.
To CA LU'MNIATE. v. a. To ſlander.
One trade or art, even thoſe that ſhould be the moſt liberal,
ſhall make it their buſineſs to diſdain and calumniate another.
Sprat.
CALUMNIA'tion. n.ſ.. [from calumniate.] That which wºcall
calumniation, is a malicious and falſe repreſentation of an ene-
my's words or actions, to an offenſive purpoſe. Ayliffe.
CALUMNI/ATOR. m. ſ. [from calumniate.] A forger of accuſa-
tion; a ſlanderer.
He that would live clear of the envy and hatred of potent
calumniators, muſt lay his finger upon his mouth, and keep his
hand out of the ink-pot. L’Eſtrange.
At the ſame time that Virgil was celebrated by Gallus, we
know that Bavius and Maevius were his declared foes and ca-
lumniators. Addiſon. Speciator.
CALU'MNIOUs, adj. [from calumny.] Slanderous; falſely re-
proachful.
Virtue itſelf 'ſcapes not calumnicus ſtrokes. Shakespeare. Haml.
With calumnious art
Of counterfeited truth, thus held their ears. Par. L. h. v.
CATUMN.Y. m. ſ. [calumnia, Lat.] Slander; falſe charge;
groundleſs accuſation.
Be thou as chaſte as ice, as pure as ſnow,
Thou ſhalt not eſcape calumny. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
It is a very hard calumny upon our ſoil or climate, to affirm,
that ſo excellent a fruit will not grow here. Temple.
CALX. n. ſ. [Latin.] Anything that is rendered reducible to
powder by burning. -
Gold, that is more denſe than lead, reſiſts peremptorily all
the dividing power of fire; and will not at all be reduced into
a calx, or lime, by ſuch operation as reduces lead into it.
Digby on Bodier.
CA'Lycle. m. ſ. ſcalyculus, Lat.] A ſmall bud of a plant. Dić.
CAMA'IEU. m. ſ. [from camachuia, which name is given by the
orientals to the onyx, when, in preparing it, they find another
colour.]
1. A ſtone with various figures and repreſentations of landskips,
formed by nature.
2. [In painting.] A term uſed where there is only one colour,
and where the lights and ſhadows are of gold, wrought on a gol-
den or azure ground. This kind of work is chiefly uſed to
repreſent baſſo relievos. Chambers.
CAMBER. m. ſ. [See CAMBERING..] A term among workmen.
Camber, a piece of timber cut arching, ſo as a weight con-
ſiderable being ſet upon it, it may, in length of time, be in-
duced to a ſtraight. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
CAMPERING. m. ſ. A word mentioned by Skinner, as peculiar
to ſhipbuilders, who ſay, that a place is cambering, when they
mean arched. [from chambré, French.]
CA'MBRick. n.ſ. (from Cambray, a city in Flanders, where it
was principally made.] A kind of fine linen, uſed for ruffles,
womens ſleeves and caps.
He hath ribbons of all the colours of the rainbow; inkles,
caddiſes, cambricks, and hawns. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
Rebecca had, by the uſe of a looking-glaſs, and by the fur-
ther uſe of certain attire, made of cambrick, upon her head, at-
tained to an evil art. Tatler, N° 1 I c.
Confed’rate in the cheat, they draw the throng,
And Cambrick handkerchiefs reward the ſong. Gay's Trivia.
CAM E. The preterite of to come.
Till all the pack came up, and ev'ry hound
Tore the ſad huntſman, grov'ling on the ground. Addison.
CA'MEL. m. ſ. [camelus, Lat..] An animal very common in A-
rabia, Judea, and the neighbouring countries. One ſort is
large, and full of fleſh, and fit to carry burdens of a thouſand
pounds weight, having one bunch upon its back. Another
have two bunches upon their backs, like a natural ſaddle, and
are fit either for burdens, or men to ride on. A third kind is
leaner, and of a ſmaller ſize, called dromedaries, becauſe of
their ſwiftneſs; which are generally uſed for riding by men of
quality. See DROMED ARY.
Camels have large ſolid feeet, but not hard; in the ſpring,
their hair falls entirely off, in leſs than three days time, when
the flies are extremely uneaſy to them. Camels, it is ſaid, will
continue ten or twelve days without eating or drinking, and
keep water a long time in their ſtomach, for their refreſhment.
It is reported, that nature has furniſhed them, for this purpoſe,
with a very large ventricle, with many bags cloſed within the
coats of it, round about it, for reſerving the water. But the
Jeſuits in China, where they diffected ſeveral camels, found no
ſuch bags. When a camel is upon a journey, his maſter follows
him, ſinging and whiſtling; and the louder he fings, the better
the camel goes. The fleſh of camel, is ſerved up at the beſt ta-
bles, among the Arabians, Perſians, and other eaſtern nations;
but the uſe of it was forbid the Hebrews, they being ranked by
Moſes among the unclean creatures, Deut. xiv. 7. Calmet.
Patient of thirſt and toil,
Son of the deſart even the camel feels,
Shot through his wither'd heart, the firy blaſt. Thomſºn.
CAME'LoPARD. m. ſ. [from camelus and pardus, Lat.] An Abyſ-
finian animal, taller than an elephant, but not ſo thick. He is
ſo named, becauſe he has a neck and head like a camel ; he is
ſpotted like a pard, but his ſpots are white upon a red ground.
The Italians call him giaraffa. Trevoux.
CA'MELot. n.ſ.. [from camel.] A kind of ſtuff originally made
CA'M LET. }
by a mixture of ſilk and camels hair; it is now
made with wool and ſilk.
This habit was not of camels ſkin, nor any courſe texture of
its hair, but rather ſome finer weave of camelot, grograin, or
the like; in as much as theſe ſtuffs are ſuppoſed to be made of
the hair of that animal. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
" - - Mean-
-
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A M
C A N
Meantime the paſtor ſhears their hoary beards,
And eaſes, of their hair, the loaden herds:
Their camelots warm in tents the ſoldier hold,
And ſhield the ſhiv'ring mariner from cold. Dryden's Virgil.
CAMERA. OBSCURA. [Latin.] An optical machine uſed in
a darkened chamber, ſo that the light coming only through a
double convex glaſs, objećts expoſed to daylight, and oppoſite
to the glaſs, are repreſented inverted upon any white matter
placed in the focus of the glaſs. Martin.
CA'MERADE. m. ſ. [from camera, a chamber, Lat..] One that
lodges in the ſame chamber; a boſom companion. By cor-
ruption we now uſe comrade.
Camerade; with him, and confederates in his worthy deſign,
\ Rymer's Tragedies of laſt ".
CA'MERATED. adj. [cameratus, Lat..] Arched; roofed ſlope-
wiſe. -
CAMERA'tion. adj. [cameratio, Lat.] A vaulting or arching.
CAMIs A'Do. m. ſ. ſcamiſa, a ſhirt, Ital. camiſium, low Lat.] An
attack made by ſoldiers in the dark; on which occaſion they
put their ſhirts outward, to be ſeen by each other.
They had appointed the ſame night, whoſe darkneſs would
have encreaſed the fear, to have given a camiſado upon the En-
gliſh. - Hayward.
CA'MISATED. adj. [from camiſa, a ſhirt.] Dreſſed with the ſhirt
outward.
CA'MLet. See CAMELot.
He had on him a gown with wide ſleeves, of a kind of water
camlet, of an excellent azure colour. Bacon.
CA'M Mock. n ſ. ſcammoc, Saxon.] An herb ; the ſame with
petty whin, or reſharrow.
Its flower is papilionaceous, and ſucceeded by a ſwelling pod,
ſometimes long, and ſometimes ſhort, which is bivalve, and
filled with kidney-ſhaped ſeeds.
There are many ſpecies of this plant, of which four ſorts grow
wild in England; and that called the prickly reſharrow, with
purple flowers, is uſed in medicine. The roots of this plant
ſpread far under ground, and are ſo tough, that, in ploughing,
it often ſtops the oxen. AMiller.
CAMo'y s. adj. [camus, Fr.] Flat ; level; depreſſed. It is only
uſed of the noſe.
Many Spaniards, of the race of Barbary Moors, though after
frequent commixture, have not worn out the camoys noſe unto
this day. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 10.
CAMP. m. ſ [camp, Fr. camp, Sax. from campus, º: The
order of tents, placed by armies when they keep the field. We
uſe the phraſe to pitch a camp, to encamp.
From camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
The hum of either army ſtilly ſounds. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
Next, to ſecure our camp, and naval pow'rs,
Raiſe an embattel'd wall, with lofty tow’rs. Pope's Iliad.
To CAMP. v. a. [from the noun..] To encamp; to lodge in
tents, for hoſtile purpoſes.
Had our great palace the capacity
To camp this hoſt, we would all ſup together.
CAMP-FIGHT. n.ſ. An old word for combat.
º For their trial by camp-fight, the accuſer was, with the peril
of his own body, to prove the accuſed guilty; and, by offering
him his glove organtlet, to challenge him to this trial. Hakewell.
CAMPA'IGN.
º CAMPANIA.
1. A large, open, level tract of ground, without hills.
The contrary of all this happens in countries thinly inhabit-
ed, and eſpecially in vaſt campanias, where there are few cities,
beſides what grow by the reſidence of kings. Temple.
Thoſe grateful groves, that ſhade the plain, ;
Shakeſp.
}n. f. [campaigne, French; campania, Ital.]
Wher Tiber rolls majeſtick to the main,
And fattens, as he runs, the fair campaign. Garth's Ovid.
2. The time for which any army keeps the field, without enter-
1ng into quarters. -
This might have haſtened his march, which would have made
a fair concluſion of the campaign. Clarendon.
An iliad riſing out of one campaign. Addiſon.
CAMPA'NIFoRM. adj. [of campama, a bell, and forma, Lat.] A
term uſed of flowers, which are in the ſhape of a bell. Harris.
C AMPA'NULATE. adj. The ſame with campaniform.
&lt;- AMPE's TRAL. adj. [campºſłris, Lat.] Growing in fields.
The mountain beech is the whiteſt; but the campeſtral, or
wild beech, is of a blacker colour, and more durable.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
*T-'MPHIRE TREE. m. ſ. [camphora, Lat.]
It hath leaves like thoſe of the pear tree, but full of ribs,
which grow alternately on the branches; the flowers conſiſt of
one leaf, divided into five or ſix ſegments; the fruit is ſhaped
like a nut, the ſhell tender, and the kernel bifid. There are
two ſorts of this tree; one is a native of the iſle of Borneo,
irom which the beſt camphire is taken, which is ſuppoſed to be
= natural exſudation from the tree, produced in ſuch places
where the bark of the tree has been wounded or cut. The
&lt;&gt;ther ſort is a native of Japan, which Dr. Kempfer deſcribes
to be a kind of bay, bearing black or purple berries, and from
Yv hence the inhabitants prepare their camphire, by making a
firmple decoction of the root and wood of this tree, cut into
ſmall pieces; but this ſort of camphire is, in value, eighty or an
hundred times leſs than the true Bornean camphire. AZiller.
CA'MPHORATE. adj. [from camphora, Lat..] Impregnated with
camphire.
By ſhaking the ſaline and camphorate liquours together, we
eaſily confounded them into one high coloured liquour. Bºyle.
CA'MPION. m. ſ. [lychnis, Lat.] A plant.
The leaves are whole, and grow oppoſite by pairs upon the
ſtalks; the cup of the flower is whole, and either tubulous or
ſwelling; the flower confiſts of five leaves, which expand in
form of a clove gilliflower, and are generally heart ſhaped; the
ovary, which riſes in the centre of the calyx, becomes a conical
fruit, which is wrapt up in the flower cup, and has commonly
one cell, filled with ſeeds, which are roundiſh, angular, and
kidney-ſhaped. Miller:
CA'MUs. n.ſ. [probably from camiſa, Lat.] A thin dreſs, men-
tioned by Spenſer.
And was yelad, for heat of ſcorching air,
All in ſilken camus, lilly white, -
Purfled upon with many a folded plight. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
CAN. n.ſ. [canne, Sax.] A cup; generally a cup made of metal,
or ſome other matter than earth.
I hate it as an unfill'd can. Shaieff. Twelfth Night.
One tree, the coco, affordeth ſtuff for houſing, cloathing,
ſhipping, meat, drink, and can. Grew's Cºſmologia Sacra.
His empty can, with ears half worn away,
Was hung on high, to boaſt the triumph of the day. Dryden.
CAN. v. n. [konnen, Dutch. It is ſometimes, though rarely uſed
alone; but is in conſtant uſe as an expreſſion of the potential
mood; as, I can do, thou canſ: do, I could do, thou could'ſ do.
It has no other terminations.]
I. To be able; to have power.
In place there is licence to do good and evil, whereof the lat-
ter is a curſe ; for, in evil, the beſt condition is not to will; the
ſecond not to can. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 1 1.
O, there's the wonder |
Mecanas and Agrippa, who can moſt
With Caeſar, are his foes. His wife Oétavia,
Driv'n from his houſe, follicits her revenge,
And Dolabella, who was once his friend.
Dryden's All for Love.
He can away with no company, whoſe diſcourſe goes beyond
what claret and diſſoluteneſs inſpires. Locke.
2. It expreſſes the potential mood; as, I can do it.
If ſhe can make me bleſt ? She only can :
Empire, and wealth, and all ſhe brings beſide,
Are but the train and trappings of her love. Dryden.
3. It is diſtinguiſhed from may, as power from permiſſion; I can do
it; it is in my power: I may do it; it is allowed me: but, in
poetry, they are confounded.
4. Can is uſed of the perſon with the verb ačiive, where may is
uſed; of the thing, with the verb paſſive ; as, I can do it; it
may be done.
CANAILLE, n.ſ. [French..] . The loweſt people; the dregs;
the lees; the offscouring of the people: a French term of re-
proach.
CANA'L. m. ſ [canalis, Lat.]
1. A baſon of water in a garden.
The walks and long canals reply. Pope.
2. Any tract or courſe of water made by art; as the canal; in
Holland.
3. [In anatomy..] A conduit or paſſage through which any of the
juices of the body flow.
CA'NAL-coAL. m.ſ. A fine kind of coal, dug up in England.
Even our canal-coal nearly equals the foreign jet.
Hoodward on Fºſſil.
CANALI'culated. adj. [from canaliculatus, Lat..] Channelled;
made like a pipe or gutter. Dić7.
CANA'RY. m. ſ. [from the Canary iſlands.] Wine brought from
the Canaries; ſack.
I will to my honeſt knight Falſtaff, and drink canary with
him. I think I ſhall drink in pipe wine firſt with him; I'll
make him dance. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Hindſºr.
To CANA'RY. v. a. A cant word, which ſeems to ſignify to
frolick.
Maſter, will you win your love with a French brawl?
How mean'ſt thou, brawling in French No, my compleat
maſter; but to jigg off a tune at the tongue's end, canary to it
with your feet, humour it with turning up your eyelids.
Shakeſp. Love's Labour Loft.
CANA'RY BIRD. An excellent ſinging bird, of a green colour,
formerly bred in the Canaries, and nowhere elſe, but now bred
in ſeveral parts of Europe, particularly Germany.
Of finging birds, they have linnets, goldfinches, ruddocks,
canary birds, blackbirds, thruſhes, and divers other.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
To CANCEL. v. a. ſcanceller, Fr. from cancellis notare, to mark
with croſs lines.]
1. To croſs a writing.
2. To efface; to obliterate in general.
Now welcome night, thou night ſo long expected,
That long day's labour doth at laſt defray,
And<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A N
C A N
-
-
ſ
l
º
:
º
And all my cars which cruel love colle&amp;ted,
Has ſumm'd in ene, and cancelled for aye.
Know then, I here º all .. griefs,
- ge: repeal thee home again.
Cancel all grudge; rºP Shakeſp. }. Gentlemen of Werona.
Thou whom avenging pow'rs obey,
Cancel my debt, too great to pay,
Before the ſad accounting day. { Roſcommon.
I paſs the bills, my lords,
For cancelling your debts. - Southerne's Spartan Dame.
CANcellated. particip, adj. [from cancel.] Croſs-barred,
marked with lines croſſing each other.
The tail of the caſtor is almoſt bald, though the beaſt is very
hairy; and cancellated, with ſome reſemblance to the ſcales of
fiſhes: Grew's Muſeum.
CANcell A'Tron. m. ſ. [from cancel.] According to Bartolus,
is an expunging or wiping out of the contents of an inſtrument,
by two lines drawn in the nanner of a croſs. Ayliffe's Parerg.
CANCER. n. ſ. [cancer, Lat.]
1. A crabfiſh.
2. The ſign of the ſummer ſolſtice.
When now no more th' alternate twins are fir’d,
And Cancer reddens with the ſolar blaze,
Short is the doubtful empire of the night
3. A virulent ſwelling, or fore, not to be cured.
Any of theſe three may degenerate into a ſchirrus, and that
ſchirrus into a cancer. //iſeman.
As when a cancer on the body feeds,
And gradual death from limb to limb proceeds;
So does the chilneſs to each vital part,
Spread by degrees, and creeps into the heart. Addiſon's Ovid.
o CA'NcFRAt E. v. n. [from cancer.] To grow cancerous ;
to become a cancer.
But ſtriking his fiſt upon the point of a nail in the wall, his
h-ind cancerated, he ſell into a fever, and ſoon after died on't.
L’Eſtrange's Fables.
CA scº RA'ſ ros. n.ſ. [from cancerate.] A growing cancerous.
CA' N C E Rous. n.ſ.. [from cancer.] Having the virulence and
Clualities of a cancer.
How they are to be treated when they are ſtrumous, ſchir-
rhous, or cancerous, you may ſee in their proper places. J/iſem.
CA'Nce Rousness. n ſ. [from cancerous.] The ſtate of being
cancerous.
CA'N cRINE. ad". [from cancer.] Having the qualities of a crab.
CA's DENT: adj. [andens, Lat.J Hot; in the higheſt degree of
heat, next to fuſion.
If a wire be heated only at one end, according as that end is
cooled upward or downward, it reſpectively requires a verti-
city, as we have declared in wires totally candent.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
CA'NDIcANT. adj. [candicans, Lat.] Growing white; whitiſh.
Dićf.
Spenser.
Thomſºn.
CANDID. adj. [candidus, Lat.]
1. White. This ſenſe is very rare.
The box receives all black: but, pour'd from thence,
The ſtones came candid forth, the hue of innocence. Dryd.
2. Without malice; without deceit; fair; open; ingenuous.
The import of the diſcourſe will, for the moſt part, if there
be no deſigned fallacy, ſufficiently lead candid and intelligent
readers into the true meaning of it. Locke.
A candid judge will read each piece of wit,
With the ſame ſpirit that its authour writ. Pope.
CA'N DIDATE. m. ſ. ſcandidatºs, Lat..] A competitor; one that
ſolicites, or propoſes himſelf for ſomething of advancement.
So many candidates there ſtand for wit,
A place at court is ſcarce ſo hard to get. Anonymous.
One would be ſurpriſed to ſee ſo many candidates for glory.
Addiſon. Speci. Nº 256.
2. It has generally fºr before the thing ſought.
What could thus high thy raſh ambition raiſe 2
Art thou, fond youth, a candidate for praiſe:
3. Sometimes ºf.
Thy firſtfruits of poeſy were giv'n,
To make thyſelf a welcome inmate there,
While yet a young probationer,
And canaidate of heav'n. - Dryden.
CA'N DIDI. Y. adv. [from candidj Fairly ; without trick; with-
out malice; ingenuouſly.
We have often deſired, they would deal candidly with us;
for if the matter ſtuck only there, we would propoſe, that every
man ſhould ſwear, that he is a member of the church of Ire-
land. Swift.
CAN DIDNFss. m. ſ. [from candid] Ingenuity; openneſs of
temper; purity of mind. -
It preſently ſees the guilt of a ſinful action; and, on the other
ſide, obſerves the candidºſ of a man's very principles, and the
fincerity of his intentions. South.
To CANDIFY. v. a. ſcandiño, Lat.] To make white; to
whiten. Dić.
CANDLE. m. ſ. ſcandela, Lat.] -
I. A light made of wax or tallow, ſurrounding a wick of flax or
COtto Il. - -
Pope.
Here burns my candle out, ay, here it dies,
Which, while it laſted, gave King Henry light. Shakeſp.
We ſee that wax candles laſt longer than tallow candles, be-
cauſe wax is more firm and hard. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Take a child, and, ſetting a candle before him, he ſhall find his
pupil to contračt very much, to exclude the light, with the
brightneſs whereof it would otherwiſe be dazzled. Ray.
2. Light, or luminary.
By theſe bleſs'd candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have begg'd
The ring of me, to give the worthy doćtor.
Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
CA'NDLEBERRY TREE. See Sweet-willow; of which it is
a ſpecies.
CANdleho'ld E.R. m. ſ. [from candle and hold.]
1. He that holds the candle.
2. He that remotely aſſiſts.
Let wantons, light of heart,
Tickle the ſenſeleſs ruſhes with their heels;
For I am proverb'd with a grandfire phraſe,
To be a candleholder, and look on. Shakespeare
CA'NDLELIGHT. n. ſ. [from candle and light.] The light of a
candle. -
In darkneſs, candlelight may ſerve to guide men's ſteps,
which, to uſe in the day, were madneſs. Hooker, b. ii. § 4.
Before the day was done, her work ſhe ſped,
And never went by candlelight to bed. Dryden's Fab.
The boding owl
Steals from her private cell by night,
And flies about the candlelight. Swift.
Such as are adapted to meals, will indifferently ſerve for din-
ners or ſuppers, only diſtinguiſhing between daylight and
candlelight. Swift's Introducf. to gentzel Converſation.
2. The neceſſary candles for uſe.
I ſhall find him coals and candlelight. Molineux to Locke.
Ca'NDLEMAs. n.ſ.. [from candle and maſ...] The feaſt of the
purification of the Bleſſed Virgin, which was formerly cele-
brated with many lights in churches.
The harveſt dinners are held by every wealthy man, or, as
we term it, by every good liver, between Michaelmas and Can-
dlemas. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
There is a general tradition in moſt parts of Europe, that
inferreth the coldneſs of the ſucceeding winter, upon ſhining
of the ſun upon Candlemas day. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Come Candlemas nine years ago ſhe dy'd,
And now lies bury'd by the yew-tree ſide. Gay.
CA'NDLEstick. n.ſ.. [from candle and ſlick.] The inſtrument
that holds candles.
The horſemen ſit like fixed candleſ?icks,
With torch-ſtaves in their hands; and their poor jades
Lob down their heads, dropping the hide and hips.
Shakeſp. Henry V.
Theſe countries were once chriſtian, and members of the
church, and where the golden candleſticks did ſtand. Bacon.
I know a friend, who has converted the eſſays of a man of
quality, into a kind of fringe for his candleſticks. Addiſon.
CA'NDLEstuff. m.ſ.. [from candle and ſtuff..] Kitchen ſtuff;
greaſe; tallow.
But then you will ſay, that their vapour can laſt but a ſhort
time; to that it may be anſwered, that, by the help of oil, and
wax, and other candleſłuff, the flame may continue, and the
wick not burn. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 774.
CANDLEwA's T FR. m. ſ. [from candle and waſie.] That which
conſumes candles; a ſpendthrift.
Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
With candlewa/?ers. Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
CA'NDock. n.ſ. A weed that grows in rivers.
Let them dry ſix or twelve months, both to kill the water-
weeds, as watcr-lilies, candocks, reate, and bulruſhes, and alſo,
that as theſe die for want of water, ſo graſs may grow on the
pond's bottom. // alton’s Angler.
CA'N'Dour. m. ſ. ſcandor, Lat.] Sweetneſs of temper; purity
of mind; openneſs; ingenuity; kindneſs.
He ſhould have ſo much of a natural candour and ſweetneſs,
mixed with all the improvement of learning, as might convey
knowledge with a ſort of gentle inſinuation. J/atts.
To CANDY. v. a. [probably from candare, a word uſed in later
times, for to whiten.]
1. To conſerve with ſugar, in ſuch a manner as that the ſugar
lies in flakes, or breaks into tangles.
Should the poor be flatter'd
No, let the candy'd tongue lick abſurd pomp,
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee,
Where thrift may follow fawning. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
They have in Turky confections like to candied conſerves,
made of ſugar and lemons, or ſugar and citrons, or ſugar and
violets, and ſome other flowers, and ſome mixture of amber.
Bacon.
With candy'd plantanes, and the juicy pine,
On choiceſt melons and ſweet grapes they dine, //aller.
2. To form into congclations,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2 Will
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">w
C A N
C A N
- Will the cold brook,
Candled with ice, cawdle thy morning toaſt,
To cure thy o'er-night's ſurfeit?
3. To incruſt with congelations.
Since when thoſe froſts that winter brings,
Which candy every green,
Renew us like the teeming ſprings,
And we thus freſh are ſeen. Drayton.
To CA'NDY. v. m. To grow congealed.
CA'NDY Lion's foot. [catamance, Lat..] A plant.
The cup of the flower is ſquamoſe; the florets round the
margin are much longer than thoſe in the middle of the flower;
the ſeeds are wrapt up in a leafy or downy ſubſtance within
the cup, or outer covering. This plant begins to flower in
May, and continues tiil Auguſt or September. Miller.
CANE. m. ſ. [canna, Lat.]
r. A kind of ſtrong reed, of which walking ſtaffs are made ; a
walking ſtaff. See REED.
The king thruſt the captain from him with his cane; where-
SShakespeare. Timon.
upon he took his leave, and went home. Harvey.
If the poker be out of the way, or broken, ſtir the fire with
your maſter's cane. Swift.
2. The plant which yields the ſugar.
This cane or reed grows plentifully both in the Eaſt and
Weſt Indies. Other reeds have their ſkin hard and dry, and
their pulp void of juice; but the ſkin of the ſugar cane is ſoft,
and the ſpongy matter or pith it contains very juicy. It uſu-
ally grows four or five feet high, and about half an inch in dia-
meter; though ſome have been mentioned in the iſland of Ta-
bago twenty four feet high. The ſtem or ſtalk is divided by
knots a foot and a half apart. At the top it puts forth a num-
ber of long green tufted leaves, from the middle of which ariſe
the flower and the ſeed. There are likewiſe leaves ſpringing
out from each knot; but theſe uſually fall as the cane riſes.
The ground fit for ſugar canes is light, ſoft, and ſpongy, lying
on a deſcent proper to carry off the water, and well turned to
the ſun. They uſually plant them in pieces cut a foot and a
half below the top of the flower, and they are ordinarily ripe in
ten months, though ſometimes not till fifteen; at which time
they are found quite full of a white ſucculent marrow, whence
is expreſſed the liquour of which ſugar is made. When ripe,
they are cut, their leaves cleared off, and they are carried in
bundles to the mills, which conſiſt of three wooden rollers, co-
vered with ſteel plates. Chambers.
And the ſweet liquour on the came beſtow,
From which prepar'd the luſcious ſugars flow. Blackmore.
3. A lance; a dart made of cane; whence the Spaniſh ingo de
£477777&amp;ſ.
Abenamar, thy youth theſe ſports has known,
Of which thy age is now ſpectator grown;
Judge like thou ſitt'ſt, to praiſe or to arraign,
The flying ſkirmiſh of the darted cane. Dryden's Conq. of Gr.
4. A reed.
Food may be afforded to bees, by ſmall canes or troughs con-
veyed into their hives. Mortimer's Husbandry.
"To * E. v. a. [from the noun..] To beat with a walking
- ſtaff.
CANI'cular. adj. ſcanicularis, Lat.] Belonging to the dog-
ſtar; as, canicular or dog-days.
In regard to different latitudes unto ſome, the canicular days
are in the winter; as unto ſuch as are under the equinoëtial
line; for, unto them, it ariſeth, when the ſun is about the tro-
pick of Cancer, which ſeaſon unto them is winter. -
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
scAN 1's E. adj. [caninus, Lat.]
= - Having the properties of a dog.
A third kind of women are made up of canine particles: theſe
are ſcolds, who imitate the animals out of which they were ta-
Ken, always buſy and barking, and ſnarl at every one that
=omes in their way. Addison. Speciator, N° 260.
2- Canine hunger, in medicine, is an appetite which cannot be
+ = atisfied.
It may occaſion an exorbitant appetite of uſual things, which
* hey will take in ſuch quantities, till they vomit them up like
* Fogs, from whence it is called canine. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
* &gt; → "Nist ER. ii. ſ. ſcaniſłrum, Lat.]
* - -A ſmall basket.
My lovely care,
Take the preſents, which the nymphs prepare:
White lilies in full caniſłers they bring,
With all the glories of the purple ſpring. Dryden's Virg.
* - ---, ſmall veſſel in which any thing, ſuch as tea or coffee, is
==id up.
C-\ ^ NKER. m. ſ: ſcancer, Lat. It ſeems to have the ſame meaning
*** *d original with cancer, but to be accidentally written with a
&lt;- when it denotes bad qualities in a leſs degree; or, canker
** * *ght come from chancre, Fr. and cancer from the Latin.]
worm that preys upon, and deſtroys fruits.
And loathful idleneſs he doth deteſt,
I -
The canºer worm of every gentle breaſt. Spenser.
That which the locuſt hath left, hath the canker worm eaten.
oel, i.
Vol. I, Joel, i. 4.
A huffing, ſhining, flatt'ring, cringing coward,
A canker worm of peace, was rais'd above him. Otway,
2. A fly that preys upon fruits.
There be of flies, caterpillars, canker flies, and bear flies.
- J/alton's Angler.
3. Any thing that corrupts or conſumes.
Yet writers ſay, as in the ſweeteſt bud
The eating canker dwells; ſo eating love
Inhabits in the fineſt wits of all. Shakeſp. Two G. of Verona.
It is the canker and ruin of many men's eſtates, which, in
proceſs of time, breeds a publick poverty. Bacon.
Sacrilege may prove an eating canker, and a conſuming moth,
in the eſtate that we leave them. Atterbury.
No longer live the cankers of my court;
All to your ſeveral ſtates with ſpeed reſort;
Waſte in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feaſt, and late carouſe. Pºpe.
4. A kind of wild worthleſs roſe.
To put down Richard, that ſweet lovely roſe,
And plant this thorn, this canker Bolingbroke. Shakeſp.
Draw a cherry with the leaf, the ſhaft of a ſteeple, a ſingle or
canker roſe. Peacham.
5. An eating or corroding humour.
I am not glad, that ſuch a ſore of time
Should ſeek a plaiſter by a contemn'd revolt,
And health' inveterate canker of one wound,
By making many. Shakeſp. King jo'n.
6. Corroſion; virulence.
As with age his body uglier grows,
So his mind with cankers.
7. A diſeaſe in trees.
To CA'NKER. v. n. [from the noun..] To grow corrupt.
That cunning archite&amp;t of canker'd guile,
Whom princes late diſpleaſure left in bands,
For falſed letters, and ſuborned wile. Fairy Queen, l. ii. c. i.
I will lift the down trod Mortimer
As high i' th' air as this unthankful king,
As this ingrate and canker’d Bolingbroke. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
Silvering will ſully and canker more than gilding; which, if
it might be corrected with a little mixture of gold, will be pro-
Shakeſp. Tempeſ'.
Dićf.
fitable. Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
Or what the croſs dire looking planet ſmite,
Or hurtful worm with canker'd venom bite. Milton.
To ſome new clime, or to thy native sky,
Oh! friendleſs and forſaken virtue, fly:
The Indian air is deadly to thee grown;
Deceit and canker'd malice rule thy throne. Dryden’s Auren.
Let envious jealouſy, and canker'd ſpight -
Produce my ačtions to ſevereſt light, }
And tax my open day, or ſecret night. Prior.
To CA'NKER. v. a.
1. To corrupt; to corrode.
Reſtore to God his due in tithe and time:
A tithe purloin'd, cankers the whole eſtate. Herbert.
2. To infect; to pollute.
An honeſt man will enjoy himſelf better in a moderate for-
tune, that is gained with honour and reputation, than in an over-
grown eſtate, that is cankered with the acquiſitions of rapine and
exaction. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 469.
CA'NKEREIT. particip. adj. [from canker and bit..] Bitten with
an envenomed tooth.
Know thy name is loſt;
By treaſon's tooth baregnawn and cankerbit. Shakespeare K. Lear.
CA'NNABINE. adj. [cannabinus, Lat..] Hempen. Dić7.
CA'NNIBAL. n. y An anthropophagite; a man-eater.
The cannibal, themſelves eat no man's fleſh, of thoſe that die
of themſelves, but of ſuch as arc ſlain. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
They were little better than cannibals, who do hunt one an-
other; and he that hath moſt ſtrength and ſwiftneſs, doth eat
and devour all his fellows. Davies on Ireland.
It was my bent to ſpeak,
Of the cannibals that each other eat;
The anthropophagi, and men whoſe heads
Did grow beneath their ſhoulders. Shakespeare Othelſe.
The captive cannibal, oppreſt with chains,
Yet braves his foes, reviles, provokes, diſdains;
Of nature fierce, untameable, and proud,
He bids defiance to the gaping croud;
And ſpent at laſt, and ſpeechleſs as he lies, -
With firy glances mocks their rage, and dies. Granville.
If an cleventh commandment had been given, Thou ſhalt
not eat human fleſh; would not theſe cannibals have eſteemed
it more difficult than all the reſt ? Bentley.
CANN IBALLY. adv. [from cannibal.] In the manner of a can-
nibal.
Before Corioli, he ſcotcht him and notcht him like a carba-
nado. — Had he been cannibaly given, he might have broiled,
and eaten him too. Shakespeare. Cºriolanus.
CANNIPERs. n.f. [corruptcd from callipers; which fee.]
The ſquare is taken by a pair of cannipers, or two rulers
clapped to the fide of a tree, meaſuring the diſtance between
them. Mortimer's Hushandry.
3 Z CANNON.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A N
C A N
;
——
CANNON. m.ſ. [cannon, Fr. from canna, Lat, a pipe, meaning
a large tube.]
1. A great gun for battery. -
2. A gun larger than can be managed by the hand. They are of
ſo many ſizes, that they decreaſe in the bore from a ball of forty-
eight pounds to a ball of five ounces.
Ås cannons overcharg’d with double cracks, -
So they redoubled ſtrokes upon the foe. Shakespeare, Macbeth.
He had left all the cannon he had taken; and now he ſent all
his great cannon to a garriſon. - Clarendon.
The making, or price, of theſe gunpowder inſtruments, is
extremely expenſive, as may be eaſily judged by the weight of
their materials; a whole cannon weighing commonly eight thou-
ſand pounds; a half cannon, five thouſand; a culverin, four
thouſand five hundred; a demi-culverin, three thouſand; which,
whether it be in iron or braſs, muſt needs be very coſtly.
J/ilkins's Mathematical Magick.
CANNoN-BALL. m. ſ. [from cannon, ball, bullet, and ſhot..]
CANNoN-Bullet. { The balls which are ſhot from great
CANNoN-SHOT. guns. -
He reckons thoſe for wounds that are made by bullets, al-
though it be a cannon-ſhot. Jºſeman's Surgery.
Let a cannon-bullet paſs through a room, it muſt ſtrike ſuc-
ceſſively the two ſides of the room. Locke.
To CANNoNA'DE. v. n. [from cannon.] To play the great guns;
to batter or attack with great guns.
Both armies cannonadºdall the enſuing day. Tatler, N° 63.
To CANNoNA'DE. v. a. To fire upon the enemy with cannon.
CAN NoN1 ER. m. ſ. [from cannon.] The engineer that manages
the cannon.
Give me the cups:
And let the kettle to the trumpets ſpeak,
The trumpets to the cannonier without,
The cannons to the heav'ns, the heav'ns to earth. Shakeſp.
A third was a moſt excellent cannonier, whoſe good skill did
much endamage the forces of the king. Hayward.
CA' N Not. A word compounded of can and not.
I cannot but believe many a child can tell twenty, long before
be has any idea of infinity at all. Locke.
CAN o'A. Un. ſ. A boat made by cutting the trunk of a tree in-
CA'No E. ; to a hollow veſſel.
Others made rafts of wood, and others deviſed the boat of
one tree, called the canna, which the Gauls, upon the river
Roan, uſed in aſſiſting the tranſportation of Hannibal's army.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
They maintained a war againſt Semiramis, in which they
had four thouſand monoxyla, or canoes, of one piece of timber.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
CANON. n.ſ. [zzwº.]
1. A rule; a law.
The truth is, they are rules and canons of that law, which is
written in all mens hearts; the church had for ever, no leſs
than now, ſtood bound to obſerve them, whether the apoſtle
had mentioned them, or no. Hooker, b. iii. § 4.
His books are almoſt the very canon to judge both doctrine
and diſcipline by. Hooker, Prºf.
Religious canons, civil laws are cruel,
Then what ſhould war be Shakespeare Timon.
Canons in logick are ſuch as theſe: every part of a diviſion,
ſingly taken, muſt contain leſs than the whole; and a defini-
tion muſt be peculiar and proper to the thing defined.
J/atts's Logick.
2. The laws made by cccleſiaſtical councils.
Canon law is that law, which is made and ordained in a ge-
neral council, or provincial ſynod of the church. Ayliffe.
Theſe were looked on as lapſed perſons, and great ſeverities
of penance were preſcribed them, as appears by the canons of
Ancyra, and many others. - Stillingfect.
3. The books of Holy Scripture; or the great rule.
Canon alſo denotes thoſe books of Scripture, which are re-
ceived as inſpired and canonical, to diſtinguiſh them from either
profane, apocryphal, or diſputed books. Thus we ſay, that
Geneſis is part of the ſacred canon of the Scripture. Ayliffe.
4. A dignitary in cathedral churches.
For deans and canons, or prebends, of cathedral churches, in
their firſt inſtitution, they were of great uſe in the church;
they were to be of counſel with the biſhop for his revenue, and
for his government in cauſes eccleſiaſtical. Bacon.
Swift much admircs the place and air,
And longs to be a canon there.
A canon / that's a place too mean:
No, doćtor, you ſhall be a dean,
Two dozen canons round your ſtall,
And you the tyrant o'er them all. Swift.
5. Canon; Regular. Such as are placed in monaſteries. Ayliff.
6. Canons Secular. Lay canons, who have been, as a mark of
honour, admitted into ſome chapters.
7. [Among chirurgeons.] An inſtrument uſed in ſewing up
wounds. Dić#.
8. A large ſort of printing letter, probably ſo called from being
firſt uſed in printing a book of canons; or perhaps from its
ſize, and therciore properly written cannon.
5
CA'NoN BIT. m. ſ. That part of the bit let into the horſe's mouth.
A goodly perſon, and could manage fair,
His ſtubborn ſteed with canonbit,
Who under him did trample as the air.
CA'NoNEss. n.f. [canoniſa, low Lat.]
There are alſo, in popiſh countries, women which they call
ſecular canoneſſes, living after the example of ſecular canons.
Ayliff's Parergon.
Fairy Queen, b, i.
CANo'NICAL. adj. ſcanonicus, low Lat.]
1. According to the canon.
2. Conſtituting the canon.
Publick readings there are of books and writings, not canº-
nical, whereby the church doth alſo preach, or openly make
known the doctrine of virtuous converſation. Hooker, b. v.
No ſuch book was found amongſt thoſe canºnical ſcriptures.
Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the hºrlſ.
3. Regular; ſtated; fixed by eccleſiaſtical laws.
Seven times in a day do I praiſe thee, ſaid David; from this
definite number ſome ages of the church took their pattern for
their canonical hours. Taylor.
4. Spiritual; eccleſiaſtical; relating to the church.
York anciently had a metropolitan juriſdićtion over all the
biſhops of Scotland, from whom they had their conſecration,
and to whom they ſwore canonical obedience. Ayliffe.
CANo'Nically, adv. [from canonical.] In a manner agreeable
to the canon.
It is a known ſtory of the friar, who, on a faſting day, bids
his capon be carp, and then very canonically eat it.
Government of the Tongue.
CANo'Nicºls Ess. n.ſ. [from canonial.] The quality of being
canonical.
CANoNist. m. ſ. [from canon.] A man verſed in the eccleſiaſ-
tical laws; a profeſſour of the canon law.
John Fiſher, biſhop of Rocheſter, when the king would have
tranſlated him from that poor biſhoprick, he refuſed, ſaying, he
would not forſake his poor little old wife; thinking of the fif-
teenth canon of the Nicene council, and that of the canonſ's,
Matrimonium inter epiſcopum &amp; eccleſiam ºff contraffum, &amp;c.
Camden's Remains.
Of whoſe ſtrange crimes no canoniſ can tell,
In what commandment's large contents they dwell. Pºpe.
CANoNiza'rios. m. ſ. [from canonize.] The act of declaring
* man a ſaint.
t is very ſuſpicious, that the intereſts of particular families,
or churches, have too great a ſway in their canonizations.
Addison on Italy.
To CA'NoNize. v. a. [from canon, to put into the canon, or rule
for obſerving feſtivals.] To declare any man a ſaint.
The king, deſirous to bring into the houſe of Lancaſter ce-
leftial honour, became ſuitor to pope Julius, to canonize king
Henry VI. for a ſaint. Bacon's Henry VII.
By thoſe hymns all ſhall approve
Us canoniz'd for love. Donne:
They have a pope too, who hath the chief care of religion,
and of canonizing whom he thinks fit, and thence have the ho-
nour of ſaints. Stillingfleet.
CA'NoNRY. m. ſ. [from canon.] An eccleſiaſtical benefice in
CA'NoN ship. } ſome cathedral or collegiate church, which has
a prebend, or a ſtated allowance out of the revenues of ſuch
church, commonly annexed to it. Ayliff's Parergon.
CA'Nopi ED. adj. [from canopy.] Covered with a canopy.
I ſat me down to watch upon a bank,
With ivy canopy’d, and interwove
With flaunting honeyſuckle. Milton
CANOPY. n.ſ. [canopeum, low Lat.] A covering of ſtate over
a throne or bed; a covering ſpread over the head.
She is there brought unto a paled green,
And placed under a ſtately canopy,
The warlike feats of both thoſe knights to ſee. Fairy Queen.
Now ſpread the night her ſpangled canopy,
And ſummon'd every reſtleſs eye to ſleep. Fairfax.
Nor will the raging fever's fire abate,
With golden canopies, and beds of ſtate. Dryden.
To Ca'NoPY. v. a. [from the noun..] To cover with a canopy.
The birch, the myrtle, and the bay,
Like friends did all embrace;
And their large branches did diſplay,
To canopy the place.
CANo'Rous. adj. [canorus, Lat.] Muſical; tuneful.
Birds that are moſt canorous, and whoſe notes we moſt com-
mend, are of little throats, and ſhort. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
CANT, n.ſ. [probably from cantus, Lat. implying the odd tone
of voice uſed by vagrants; but imagined by ſome to be cor-
rupted from quaint.]
1. A corrupt dialect uſed by beggars and vagabonds.
2. A particular form of ſpeaking peculiar to ſome certain claſs or
body of men.
I write not always in the proper terms of navigation, land
ſervice, or in the cant of any profeſſion. Dryden.
If we would trace out the original of that flagrant and avow-
ed impiety, which has prevailed among us for ſome years, we
ſhould find, that it owes its riſe to that cant and hº
WhiCil
Dryden.
ſ
C.
‘.
ſ
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A N
C A P
which had taken poſſeſſion of the people's minds in the times of
the great rebellion. Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 37.
Aſtrologers, with an old paltry cant, and a few pot-hooks
for planets, to amuſe the vulgar, have too long been ſuffered to
abuſe the world. Swift's Predicions for the 1ear 1701.
A few general rules, with a certain cant of words, has ſome-
times ſet up an illiterate heavy writer, for a moſt judicious and
formidable critick. Addiſon. Spectator, Nº. 291.
3. A whining pretenſion to goodneſs, in formal and affected
terrilS.
Of promiſe prodigal, while pow'r you }.
And preaching in the ſelf-denying cant. yden's Aurengz.
A. Barbarous jargon. -
The affectation of ſome late authours, to introduce and
multiply cant words, is the moſt ruinous corruption in any
language. Swift.
5. Auétion. -
Numbers of theſe tenants, or their deſcendants, are now of
fering to ſell their leaſes by cant, even thoſe which were for
lives. Swift.
To CANT. v. n. [from the noun..] To talk in the jargon of
particular profeſions, or in any kind of formal affected lan-
guage, or with a peculiar and {j tone of voice.
Men cant endleſsly about materia and forma; hunt chimeras
by rules of art, or dreſs up ignorance in words of bulk or
found, which may ſtop up the mouth of enquiry.
Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
That uncouth affected garb of ſpeech, or canting language ra-
ther, if I may ſo call it, which they have of late taken up, is
the ſignal diſtinčtion and characteriſtical note of that, which,
in that their new language, they call the godly party. Sanderſon.
The buſy, ſubtile ſerpents of the law,
Did firſt my mind from true obedience draw;
While I did limits to the king preſcribe,
And took for oracles that canting tribe.
Unſkill'd in ſchemes by planets to foreſhow,
Like canting raſcals, how the wars will go. Dryden's juven.
CANTA'LIVER, See CANTILIVE R.
CANTATA, n.ſ. [Ital.] A ſong.
CANTA'TION. m. / [from canto, Lat.] The act of ſinging.
CA'NTER. m. ſ. [from cant.] A term of reproach for hypocrites,
who talk formally of religion, without obeying it.
CAN TER BURY BELLs. See BELF Low ER.
CANTERBURY GALlop. [In horſemanſhip.] The hard gallop of
an ambling horſe, commonly called a canter; and probably de-
rived from the monks riding to Canterbury on eaſy ambling
horſes.
CANTHA'RIDES. n.ſ. [Latin.] Spaniſh flies; uſed to raiſe
bliſters.
The flies, cantharides, are bred of a worm, or caterpillar, but
peculiar to certain fruit trees; as are the fig tree, the pine tree,
and the wild brier; all which bear ſweet fruit, and fruit that
hath a kind of ſecret biting or ſharpneſs: for the fig hath a
milk in it, that is ſweet and corroſive; the pine apple hath a
kernel that is ſtrong and abſterſive. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
C-4NTHUS. m. ſ. [Latin.] The corner of the eye. The in-
ternal is called the greater, and the external the leſſer canthus.
9taincy.
A gentlewoman was ſeized with an inflammation and tu-
mour in the great canthus, or angle of her eye. I/iſeman.
CA'NTICLE. n.ſ.. [from canto, Lat..] A ſong; uſed generally for
a ſong in ſcripture. -
This right of eſtate, in ſome nations, is yet more ſignificantly
expreſſed by Moſes in his canticles, in the perſon of God to the
Jews. Bacon's Holy War.
CANT1'Liv ERs. n.ſ. Pieces of wood framed into the front or
other ſides of an houſe, to ſuſtain the molding and eaves over
Roſcommon.
it- Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
C. A 'INTLE. n.ſ. [Kant, Dutch, a corner; eſchantillon, Fr. a piece.]
L-A piece with corners. Skinner.
See how this river comes, me crankling in,
And cuts me from the beſt of all my land,
A huge halfmoon, a monſtrous cantle out. Shakeſp. H. IV.
To CA'NTLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To cut in pieces.
For four times talking, if one piece thou take,
That muſt be cantled, and the judge go ſnack. Dryden's juv.
CA’==TLET. n.ſ. [from cantle..] A piece; a fragment.
Raging with high diſdain, repeats his blows;
Nor ſhield, nor armour can their force oppoſe;
Huge cantlets of his buckler ſtrew the ground,
And no defence in his bor'd arms is found. Dryden,
G-72 Nzo., f. [Ital.] A book, or ſection of a poem.
Why, what would you do?
—Make a willow cabbin at your gate,
–And call upon my ſoul within the houſe;
VVrite loyal cantos of contemned love. Shakespeare. Tw. Night.
CA’N-FON. n. ſ. [from x2,93, the corner of the eye; and hence
S+++ ie the canions of the Switzers. It is the reward of a prince
st ven to an earl. Peacham.]
* * finall parcel or diviſion of land.
Gnly that little canton of land, called the Engliſh pale, con-
**ining four ſmall ſhires, did maintain a bordering war with the
Iriſh, and retain the form of Engliſh government. Davies,
2. A ſmall community, or clan.
The ſame is the caſe of rovers by land; ſuch, as yet, are
ſome cantons in Arabia, and ſome petty kings of the mountains,
adjacent to ſtraits and ways. Bacon's Holy Iſ ar.
To CA'NTon. v. a. [from the noun..] To divide into little
parts. .
Families ſhall quit all ſubjećtion to him, and canton his em-
pire into leſs governments for themſelves. Locke.
It would certainly be for the good of mankind, to have all
the mighty empires and monarchies of the world cantoned out
into petty ſtates and principalities. Addiſon on Italy.
The late king of Spain, reckoning it an indignity to have his
territories cantoned out into parcels by other princes, during his
own life, and without his conſent, rather choſe to bequeath the
monarchy entire to a younger ſon of France. Swift.
They canton out to themſelves a little province in the intel-
lectual world, where they fancy the light ſhines, and all the reſt
is in darkneſs. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
To CA’NTo Nize. v. a. [from canton.] To parcel out into ſmall
diviſions.
Thus was all Ireland cantonized among ten perſons of the
Engliſh nation. Davies on Ireland.
The whole foreſt was in a manner cantonized amongſt a very
few in number, of whom ſome had regal right. Howel.
CA'NTRED. m. ſ. The ſame in Wales as an hundred in England.
For cantre, in the Britiſh language, ſignifieth an hundred. Cowel.
The king regrants to him all that province, reſerving only the
city of Dublin, and the cantreds next adjoining, with the ma-
ritime towns. Davies on Ireland.
CANVASS. m. ſ. ſcanevas, Fr. cannabis, Lat. hemp..] A kind of
cloth woven for ſeveral uſes, as ſails, painting cloths, tents.
The maſter commanded forthwith to ſet on all the canvaſ;
they could, and fly homeward. Sidney.
And eke the pens that did his pinions bind,
Were like main yards with flying canvaſ lin'd. Fairy Q, b, i.
Their canvaſ, caſtles up they quickly rear,
And build a city in an hour's ſpace. Fairfax, b. ii.
Where-e'er thy navy ſpreads her canvaſ, wings,
Homage to thee, and peace to all ſhe brings. Waller.
With ſuch kind paſſion haſtes the prince to fight,
And ſpreads his flying canvaſ, to the Sound;
Him whom no danger, were he there, could fright;
Now abſent, every little noiſe can wound. Dryden,
Thou, Kneller, long with noble pride,
The foremoſt of thy art, haſt vy'd
With nature in a generous ſtrife,
And touch'd the canvaſ into life. Addison.
To CA'NvAss. v. a. [Skinner derives it from cannabaſer, Fr. to
beat hemp ; which being a very laborious employment, it is
uſed to ſignify, to ſearch diligently into.] -
1. To ſift; to examine.
I have made careful ſearch on all hands, and canvaſid the
matter with all poſſible diligence. J/oodward.
2. To debate; to controvert.
The curs diſcovered a raw hide in the bottom of a river,
and laid their heads together how to come at it: they canvaſſed
the matter one way and t'other, and concluded, that the way to
get it, was to drink their way to it. L’Eſtrange.
To CA'NvAss. v. m. To ſollicite. -
This crime of canvaſing, or ſolliciting for church prefer-
ment, is, by the canon law, called ſimony. Ayliffe's Parergon.
CA'NY. adj. [from cane.]
1. Full of canes.
2. Conſiſting of canes.
But in his way lights on the barren plains
Of Sericana, where Chineſes drive,
With ſails and wind, their cany wagons light. Parad. Loft.
CA'NzoNET. m. ſ. [canzonetta, Ital.] A little ſong.
Vecchi was moſt pleaſing of all others, for his conceit and
variety, as well his madrigals as canzonets. Peacham.
CAP. n.ſ.. [cap, Welch; caeppe, Sax. cappe, Germ. cappe, Fr.
†. * capa, Span. Kappe, Dan. and Dutch ; caput, a head,
at in.
1. The garment that covers the head.
Here is the cap your worſhip did beſpeak.-
Why, this was moulded on a porringer,
A velvet diſh. . Shakeſp. Taming the Shrew.
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortune.—
—Thou haſt ſerv'd me with much faith. Shakeſp.
Firſt, lolling, ſloth in woollen cap,
Taking her after-dinner nap. Swift.
The cap, the whip, the maſculine attire,
For which they roughen to the ſenſe. Thomſºn's Autumn.
2. The enſign of the cardinalate.
Henry the fifth did ſometimes propheſy,
If once he came to be a cardinal, -
He'd make his cap coequal with the crown. Shakeſp. H. VI.
3. The topmoſt ; the higheſt. ... •
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive. Shakeſp. Timon.
4. A reverence made by uncovering the head.
* They
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A P
C A P
-
CAPA BiêNFss. m. ſ. [from capable.]
They more and leſs, came in with cap and knee,
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Should the want of a cap or a cringe ſo mortally diſcompoſe
him, as we find afterwards it did. L'Eſtrange.
5. A veſſel made like a cap. - - -
It is obſerved, that a barrel or cap, whoſe cavity will contain
eight cubical feet of air, will not ſerve a diver above a quarter
of an hour. - - J/ilkins.
6. Cap of a great gun. A piece of lead laid over the touch-hole,
to preſerve the prime.
7. Cap ºf maintenance.
king at the coronation.
To CAP. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover on the top.
The bones next the joint are caped with a ſmooth cartilagi-
nous ſubſtance, ſerving both to ſtrength and motion. Derham.
2. To ſnatch off the cap.
If one, by another occaſion, take any thing from another,
as boys ſometimes uſe to cap one another, the ſame is ſtraight
felony. Spenser on Ireland.
3. To cap verſes. To name alternately verſes beginning with a
particular letter; to name alternately.
Where Henderſon, and th’ other maſſes,
Were ſcnt to cap texts, and put caſes. Hudibras.
Sure it is a pitiful pretence to ingenuity, that can be thus kept
up, there being little necd of any other faculty but memory, to
be able to cap texts. Government of the Tongue, § 3:
There is an author of ours, whom I would deſire him to read,
before he ventures at capping characters. Atterbury.
CAP 3 p. }ſº a piº, Fr.] From head to foot; all over.
CAP a pie.
A figure like your father,
Arm'd at all points exactly, cap a ps,
Appears before them, and, with ſolemn march,
Goes ſlow and ſtately by them. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
There for the two contending knights he ſent,
Arm'd cap a piº, with rev'rence low they bent;
He ſinil'd on both. Dryden's Fables.
One of the regalia carried before the
A woodlouſe,
- That folds up itſelf in itſelf for a houſe,
As round as a ball, without head, without tail,
Inclos'd cap a pe in a ſtrong coat of mail.
CAP-PAPER. A ſort of coarſe browniſh paper.
Having, for trial ſake, filtred it through cap-paper, there re-
mained in the filtre a powder. Poyle.
CAPABILITY.. n.ſ. [from capable.] Capacity; the quality of
being capable.
CAPABLE. adj. [capable, Fr.]
1. Enduct with powers equal to any particular thing.
To ſay, that the more capable, or the better deſerver, hath
ſuch right to govern, as he may compulſorily bring under the
leſs worthy, is idle. Bacon.
When we conſider ſo much of that ſpace, as is equal to, or
capable to receive a body of any aſſigned dimenſions. Locke.
When you hear any perſon give his judgment, conſider with
yourſelf whether he be a catall, judge. Jſ atts.
2. Intclligent ; able to underſtand.
Look you, how pale he glares;
His form and cauſe conjoined, preaching to ſtones,
Would make them capable. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
3. Capacious ; able to receive or underſtand.
. I am much bound to God, that he hath endued you with one
capable of the beſt inſtructions. Digby.
4. Suſceptible.
The ſoul, immortal ſubſtance, to remain,
Conſcious of joy, and capable of pain.
5. Qualified for; without any natural impediment.
There is no man that believes the goodneſs of God, but muſt
be inclined to think, that he hath made ſome things for as long
a duration as they are capable of. Tillotſon.
3. Qualified for ; without legal impediment.
Of my land,
Loyal and natural boy I'll work the means
To make thee capable. Shakeſp. King Lear.
... It has the particle of before a noun.
What ſecret ſprings their eager paſſions move,
How capable of death for injur'd love. Dryden's Wirgil.
S. Hollow. This ſenſe is not now in uſe.
Lean but upon a ruſh,
. The cicatrice, and capable impreſſure,
Thy palm ſome moments keeps.
Swift.
-
Prior.
Shakeſp. As you like it.
The quality or ſtate of
being capable; knowledge; underſtanding; power of mind.
CAPACIOUS. adj. [capax, Lat.]
1. Wide ; large ; able to hold much.
Beneath th' inceſſant weeping of thoſe drains,
I ſee the rocky Siphons ſtretch'd immenſe,
The mighty reſervoirs of harden'd chalk,
Or ſtiff compacted clay, capacious found. Thomſºn's Autumn.
2. Extenſive; equal to much knowledge, or great deſign.
There are ſome perſons of a good genius, and a capacious
mind, who write and ſpeak very obſcuicly. Jºaits.
-
CAPA'cious Ness. n.ſ.. [from capacious.] The power of hold.
ing or receiving; largeneſs.
A concave meaſure, of known and denominate capacity,
ſerves to meaſure the capaciouſneſs of any other veſſel. In liké
manner, to a given weight, the weight of all other bodies ma
be reduced, and ſo found out. Holder on Time.
To CAPA'cit ATE. v. a. [from capacity.] To make capable;
to enable; to qualify.
By this inſtruction we may be capacitated to obſerve thoſe
errouns. Dryden.
Theſe fort of men were ſycophants only, and were endued
with arts of life, to capacitate them for the converſation of the
rich and great. Tatler, N° 56.
CAPA'city. m. ſ. [capacité, Fr.]
1. The power of holding or containing anything.
Had our palace the capacity
To camp this hoſt, we would all ſup together.
Notwithſtanding thy capacity
Receiveth as the ſea, nought enters there,
Of what validity and pitch ſoe'er,
But falls into abatement and low price. Shakespeare. Tw. Night.
For they that moſt and greateſt things embrace,
Enlarge thereby their mind's capacity,
As ſtreams enlarg’d, enlarge the channel's ſpace. Davies.
Space, conſidered in length, breadth, and thickneſs, I think,
may be called capacity. Locke.
2. The force or power of the mind.
No intellectual creature in the world, is able, by capacity, to
do that which nature doth without capacity and knowledge.
Hooker, b. i. § 3.
In ſpiritual natures, ſo much as there is of deſire, ſo much
there is alſo of capacity to receive. I do not ſay, there is always
a capacity to receive the very thing they deſire; for that may be
impoſſible. South.
An heroick poem requires the accompliſhment of ſome ex-
traordinary undertaking; which requires the ſtrength and vi-
gour of the body, the duty of a ſoldier, and the capacity and
prudence of a general. Dryden's juv. Dedication.
3. Power; ability.
Since the world's wide frame does not include
A cauſe with ſuch capacities endu’d,
Some other cauſe o'er nature muſt preſide.
4. Room; ſpace.
There remained, in the capacity of the exhauſted cylinder,
ſtore of little rooms, or ſpaces, empty or devoid of air. Boyle.
5. State; condition; character.
A miraculous revolution, reducing many from the head of a
triumphant rebellion, to their old condition of maſons, ſmiths,
and carpenters; that, in this capacity, they might repair what,
as colonels and captains, they had ruined and defaced. South.
You deſire my thoughts as a friend, and not as a member of
parliament; they are the ſame in both capacities. Swift.
CAPA'RISON. m. ſ. [caparazon, a great cloke, Span.] A horſe-
cloth, or a ſort of cover for a horſe, which is ſpread over his
furniture. Farrier's Dicſ.
Tilting ſurniture, emblazon'd ſhields,
Impreſſes quaint, capariSpenser, and ſteeds,
Baſes, and tinſel trappings, gorgeous knights,
At jouſt, and tournament. Paradiſe Lºſł, l. ix. l. 3 1.
Some wore a breaſtplate, and a light juppon;
Their horſes cloath'd with rich capariſºn. Dryden's Fal.
To CAPA'R1son. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To dreſs in capariſons.
At his command,
The ſteeds, capariſon'd with purple, ſtand;
With golden trappings, glorious to behold,
And champ betwixt their teeth the foaming gold.
2. To dreſs pompouſly; in a ludicrous ſenſe.
Don't you think, though I am capariſºned like a man, I have
a doublet and hoſe in my diſpoſition ? Shakeſp. A you like it.
CAPE. m. ſ. [cape, Fr.]
1. Headland; promontory.
What from the cape can you diſcern at ſea?—
—Nothing at all; it is a high wrought flood. Shakespeare. Oth.
The parting ſun,
Beyond the earth's green cape, and verdant iſles,
Heſpercan ſets; my ſignal to depart. Parad. Lºft, b. viii.
The Romans made war upon the Tarentines, and obliged
them by treaty not to ſail beyond the caſe. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. The neck-piece of a cloke.
He was cloathed in a robe of fine black cloth, with wide
ſleeves and cape. Bacon.
CAPER. n.ſ.. [from caper, Latin, a goat.] A leap; a jump; a
skip.
we that are true lovers, run into ſtrange capers; but as all
is mortal in nature, ſo is all nature in love mortal in folly. -
Shakeſp. As you like it.
Flimnap, the treaſurer, is allowed to cut a caper on the
ſtrait rope, at leaſt an inch higher than any other lord in the
whole empire. Swift'ſ Gulliver's Travels.
CA'PER. m. ſ. [capparis, Lat.] An acid pickle. See CAPER-BUSH-
We invent new ſauces and pickles, which reſemble the
2 animal
Shaº?.
Blackmore.
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A P
C A P
animal ferment in taſte and virtue, as mangoes, olives, and ca-
pers. Floyer on the Humours.
CA'per BUSH. m.ſ.. [capparis, Lat.]
Its flower conſiſts of four leaves, which are expanded in form
of a roſe; the fruit is fleſhy, and ſhaped like a pear; in which
are contained many roundiſh ſeeds. This plant grows in the
South of France, in Spain and in Italy, upon old walls and
buildings; and the buds of the flowers, before they are open,
are pickled for eating. Miller.
To CA'PER. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To dance frolickſomely.
The truth is, I am only old in judgment; and he that will
taper with me for a thouſand marks, let him lend me the mo-
ney, and have at him. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
2. To ſkip for merriment. -
Our maſter
Cap'ring to eye her. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
His nimble hand's inſtinét then taught each ſtring
A cap'ring cheerfulneſs, and made them ſing
To their own dance. Craſhaw.
The family tript it about, and caper’d, like hailſtones bound-
ing from a marble floor. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
3. To dance ; ſpoken in contempt.
The ſtage would need no force, nor ſong, nor dance,
Nor capering monſieur from active France. Rowe.
CA'PERER. n.ſ.. [from caper.] A dancer; in contempt.
The tumbler's gambols ſome delight afford;
No leſs the nimble caperer on the cord:
But theſe are ſtill inſipid ſtuff to thee,
Coop'd in a ſhip, and toſs'd upon the ſea. Dryden's juv.
CAPIAS. m. ſ. [Lat..] A writ of two ſorts, one before judgment,
called capias ad reſpondendum, in an action perſonal, if the ſhe-
riff, upon the firſt writ of diſtreſs, return that he has no effects
in his juriſdićtion. The other is a writ of execution after judg-
+RCnt. Cowel.
CAPILCA'ceous. adj. The ſame with capillary.
CAPI'll AMENT. n.ſ. [capillamentum, Lat.] Thoſe ſmall threads
or hairs which grow up in the middle of a flower, and adorned
with little herbs at the top, are called capillaments. Quincy.
CA'PILLARY. adj. [from capillus, hair, Lat.]
1. Reſembling hairs; ſmall; minute; applied to plants.
Capillary, or capillaceous plants, are ſuch as have no main
ftalk or ſtem, but grow to the ground, as hairs on the head;
and which bear their ſeeds in little tufts or protuberances on
the backſide of their leaves. 9aincy.
Our common hyſſop is not the leaſt of vegetables, nor ob-
ſerved to grow upon walls; but rather, as Lemnius well con-
ceiveth, ſome kind of capillaries, which are very ſmall plants,
and only grow upon walls and ſtony places.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 7.
2. Applied to veſſels of the body. Small; as the ramifications of
the arteries. - Quincy.
Ten capillary arteries in ſome parts of the body, as in the
brain, are not equal to one hair; and the ſmalleſt lymphatick
veſſels are an hundred times ſmaller than the ſmalleſt capillary
artery. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
C APILLATION. n.ſ.. [from capillus, Lat.] A veſſel like a hair;
a ſmall ramification of veſſels.
Nor is the humour contained in ſmaller veins, or obſcurer
capillations, but in a veſicle. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
‘CAPITAL. adj. [capitalis, Lat.]
r – Relating to the head.
Needs muſt the ſerpent now his capital bruiſe
Expedit with mortal pain. Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii. 1,383.
2- Criminal in the higheſt degree, ſo as to touch life.
Edmund, I arreſt thee
On capital treaſon. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Several caſes deſerve greater puniſhment than many crimes
that are capital among us. Swift.
3- "I'hat which affects life.
In capital cauſes, wherein but one man's life is in queſtion,
the evidence ought to be clear; much more in a judgment up-
&lt;a-ra awar, which is capital to thouſands. Bacon.
4- Chief; principal.
I will, out of that infinite number, reckon but ſome that are
rra-oſt capital, and commonly occurrent both in the life and con-
&lt;ditions of private men. Spenſer on Ireland.
As to ſwerve in the leaſt points, is errour; ſo the capital
=r-emies thereof God hateth, as his deadly foes, aliens, and,
vvi thout repentance, children of endleſs perdition. Hooker.
They are employed by me, and do, in themſelves, tend to
ss=&gt;infirm the truth of a capital article in religion. Atterbury.
§ - Chief; metropolitan.
This had been
Ferhaps thy capital ſeat, from whence had ſpread
—All generations; and had hither come,
3From all the ends of th’ earth, to celebrate
4And reverence thee, their great progenitor. Par. Loft, b. xi.
6. * eplied to letters; large; ſuch as are written at the begin-
*****gs or heads of books.
Gur moſt conſiderable ačtions are always preſent, like capi-
fa º Sºº to an aged and dim eye. Taylor's Rule of Living holy.
Tol. I.
The firſt whereof is written in capital letters,without chapters
or verſes. Grew's Coſmolºgia Sacra.
7. Capital Stºck. The principal or original ſtock of a trading
company.
CA'pital. n.ſ.. [from the adjective.]
I. The upper part of a pillar.
You ſee the volute of the Ionick, the foliage of the Corin-
thian, and the uovali of the Dorick, mixed, without any regu-
larity, on the ſame capital. Addiſon on Italy.
2. The chief city of a nation or kingdom.
CA'PITALLY. adv. [from capital.] In a capital manner. ,
Capita"tion. n.ſ.. [from caput, the head, Lat.] Numeration
by heads.
He ſuffered alſo for not performing the commandment of
God, concerning capitation; that, when the people were num-
bered, for every head they ſhould pay unto God a ſhekel.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vii, c. 11.
CAPITE. n. ſ. [from taput, capitis, Lat.]
A tenure which holdeth immediately of the king, as of his
crown, be it by knight's ſervice or ſocage, and not as of any
honour, caſtle, or manour; and therefore it is otherwiſe called
a tenure, that holdeth merely of the king; becauſe, as the
crown is a corporation and ſeigniory in groſs, as the common
lawyers term it, ſo the king that poſſeſſeth the crown, is, in ac-
count of law, perpetually king, and never in his minority, nor
ever dieth. - Cºvel,
CAPITULAR. m. ſ. [from capitulum, Lat, an eccleſiaſtical chap-
ter.]
1. A body of the ſtatutes of a chapter.
That this practice continued to the time of Charlemain, ap-
pears by a conſtitution in his capitular. ‘I aylor.
2. A member of a chapter. -
Canoniſts do agree, that the chapter makes decrees and ſta-
tutes, which ſhall bind the chapter itſelf, and all its members or
capitulars. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To CAPITULATE. v. n. [from capitulum, Lat.]
1. To draw up any thing in heads or articles.
Percy, Northumberland,
The archbiſhop of York, Douglas, and Mortimer, ºr
Capitulate againſt us, and are up. Shakespeare. Henry IV. p. i.
2. To yield, or ſurrender up, on certain ſtipulations.
The king took it for a great indignity, that thieves ſhould
offer to capitulate with him as enemies. Hayward.
I ſtill purſued, and, about two o'clock this afternoon, ſhe
thought fit to capitulate. - - Speciator, N° 566.
CAPITULA'TIon. n.ſ.. [from capitulate.] Stipulation; terms;
conditions. -
It was not a complete conqueſt, but rather a dedition upon
terms and capitulations, agreed between the conquerour and the
eonquered; wherein, uſually, the yielding party ſecured to
themſelves their law and religion. Hale.
CAPI'vi TREE. m.ſ. [copaipa, i. J .
It hath a flower conſiſting of five leaves, which expand in
form of a roſe; the pointal is fixed in the centre of the flower,
which afterwards becomes a pod, containing one or two ſeeds,
which are ſurrounded with a pulp of a yellow colour. This
tree grows near a village called Ayapel, in the province of An-
tiochi, in the Spaniſh Weſt Indies, about ten days journey
from Carthagena. There are great numbers of theſe trees in
the woods about this village, which grow to the height of ſixty
feet; ſome of them do not yield any of the balſam ; thoſe that
do, are diſtinguiſhed by a ridge, which runs along their trunks.
Theſe trees are wounded in their centre, and they apply veſſels
to the wounded part, to receive the balſam, which will all flow
out in a ſhort time. One of theſe trees will yield five or ſix
gallons of balſam. - Miller.
Ca'Pon. n.ſ.. [capo, Lat.] A caſtrated cock.
In good roaſt beef my landlord ſticks his knife;
The capon fat delights his dainty wife. Gay's Paſtoral.
CAPONNPERE. m.ſ. [Fr. a term in fortification.] A covered
lodgment, of about four or five feet broad, encompaſſed with a
little parapet of about two feet high, ſerving to ſupport planks
laden with earth. This lodgment contains fifteen or twenty
ſoldiers, and is uſually placed at the extremity of the counter-
ſcarp, having little embraſures made in them, through which
they fire. Harris.
cº n.ſ. [French.] Is when one party wins all the tricks of
cards at the game of picquet.
To CAP'o'T. v. a. [from the noun..] When one party has won
all the tricks of cards at picquet, he is ſaid to have capotted his
antagoniſt.
CApo'Uch. n.ſ.. [capuce, French J A monk's hood. Dić7,
Ca'PPER. n.f. [from cap.] One who makes or ſells caps.
CapReſolate. adj. [from capreolus, a tendril of a vine, Lat.]
Such plants as turn, wind, and creep along the ground, by
means of their tendrils, as gourds, melons, and cucumbers, are
termed, in botany, capreolate plants. Harrise
CAPRI'CE. n. ſ." [caprice, Fr. capricho, Span.] Freak;
CAPRICHIO. ancy; whim; ſudden change of humour.
It is a pleaſant ſpectacle to behold the ſhifts, windings, and
unexpected caprichios of diſtreſſed nature, when purſued % al
cloſe and well managed cxperiment. Glanville's Scºpſis, Prºf.
4 A fieav'n's
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A P
C A P
º
i
l
-
Heav'n's great view is one, and that the whole ;
"That counterworks each folly and caprice,
That diſappoints th’ effect of ev'ry vice. - Pope.
If there be a ſingle ſpot more barren, or more diſtant from
the church, the rector or vicar may be obliged, by the carriº
or pique of the biſhop, to build, under pain of ſequeſtration.
Swift.
Their paſſions move in lower ſpheres, -
Where'er caprice or folly ſteers. Swift.
All the various machines and utenſils would now and then
play odd pranks and caprices, quite contrary to their proper
Hrúctures, and deſign of the artificers... Bently.
CAPRI'cious. adj. [capricieux, Fr.] Whimſical ; fanciful; hu-
mourſome. -
CApriciously. adv. [from capricious.] Whimſically; in a
manner depending wholly upon fancy. -
CApriciousness. m. ſ. [from capricious.]. The quality of be-
ing led by caprice, humour, whimſicalneſs.
A ſubject ought to ſuppoſe, that there are reaſons, although
he be not appriſed of them; otherwiſe he muſt tax his prince
of catriciouſneſs, inconſtancy, or ill deſign. Swift.
CAPRico R.N. m. ſ. [capricornus, Lat..] One of the ſigns of the
zodiack; the winter ſolítice.
Let the longeſt night in Capricorn be of fifteen hours, the
day conſequently muſt be of nine. Notes to Creech's Manilius.
CMPRIO'LE. n.ſ. [French. In horſemanſhip.] Caprices are
leaps firma a firma, or ſuch as a horſe makes in one and the
ſame place, without advancing forwards, and in ſuch a manner,
that when he is in the air, and height of his leap, he yerks or
ſtrikes out with his hinder legs, even and near. A catriole is
the moſt difficult of all the high manage, or raiſed airs. It is
different from the croupade in this, that the horſe does not ſhow
his ſhoes; and from a balotade, in that he does not yerk out in
a balotade. Farrier's Diº.
CA'pst AN. m. ſ. [corruptly called capſtern ; cabºſian, Fr.] A cy-
linder, with levers to wind up any great weight, particularly
to raiſe the anchors.
The weighing of anchors by the capſian, is alſo new.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
No more behold thee turn my watch's key,
As ſeamen at a capſian anchors weigh. Swift.
§:...} aſ Rºſal., Lt. Hollow like a did.
It aſcendeth not directly unto the throat, but aſcending firſt
into a capſulary reception of the breaſt-bone, it aſcendeth again
into the neck. Brown's Pugar Errours.
-- / * -
º, łaj. [capſula, Lat..] Incloſed, or in a box.
Seeds, ſuch as are corrupted and ſtale, will ſwim ; and this
agreeth unto the ſeeds of plants locked up and capſulated in their
husks. 3rown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. r. vi.
The heart lics immured, or capſulated, in a cartilage, which
includes the heart, as the skull doth the brain. Derham.
CAPTAIN. n.ſ.. [capitain, Fr.]
1. A chief commander.
Diſmay’d not this
Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo: Shakeſp. Macbeth.
2. The commander of a company in a regiment.
A captain / theſe villains will make the name of captain as
odious as the word occupy; therefore captains had need look to
It. Shakespeare. Henry IV. p. ii.
The grim caſtain, in a ſurly tone,
Crics out, pack up, ye raſcals, and be gone.
3. The chief commander of a ſhip. -
The Rhodian captain, relying on his knowledge, and the
lightneſs of his veſſel, paſſed, in open day, through all the
guards. Arbuthnot on Coins.
4. It was anciently written capitain. .
And evermore their cruel capitain
Sought with his raſcal routs tº incloſe them round. Fairy Q.
5. Captain General. The general or commander in chief of an
army.
6. Captain Lieutenant. The commanding officer of the colonel's
troop or company, in every regiment. He commands as
youngeſt captain.
CA/PTAINRY. m. ſ. [from captain.] The power over a certain
diſtrićt; the chieftainſhip.
There ſhould be no rewards taken for captainries of counties,
nor no ſhares of biſhopricks for nominating of biſhops.
- - Spenſer on Ireland.
CA'PTAINship. m. ſ. [from captain.]
1. The rank, quality, or poſt of a captain. -
The lieutenant of the colonel's company might well pretend
to the next vacant captainſhip in the ſame regiment. Iſºtton.
2. The condition or poſt of a chief commander.
Therefore ſo pleaſe thee to return with us,
And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take -
The captainſhip. Shakeſp. Timon.
3. º chieftainſhip of a clan, or government of a certain diſ-
trict. -
To diminiſh the Iriſh lords, he did aboliſh their pretended
and uſurped captainſhips. Davies on Ireland,
Dryden.
CAPTA'riots. n.ſ.. [from catto, Lat.] The pračtice of catch-
ing favour or applauſe; courtſhip; flattery.
I am content my heart ſhould be diſcovered, without any of
thoſe dreſſes, or popular captations, which ſome men uſe in their
ſpeeches. King Charles.
Carrios, nºſ [from rapio, Lat. to take.] The act of taking
any perſon by a judicial proceſs.
CAPTIOUS, adj. [captieux, Fr. captiſts, Lat.]
1. Given to cavils; eager to obječt.
If he ſhew a forwardneſs to be reaſoning about things, take
care, that nobody check this inclination, or miſlead it by cap-
tiºus or fallacious ways of talking with him. Locke.
2. Infidious; enſnaring.
She taught him likewiſe how to avoid fundry ca’tious and
tempting queſtions, which were like to be asked of him. Bacon.
CA'ptiously adv. [from captivus. In a captious manner;
with an inclination to object.
Uſe your words as captiouſly as you can, in your arguing on
one ſide, and apply diſtinctions on the other. Locke.
CA'ptious Ness. m. ſ [from captious.] Inclination to find fault;
inclination to obječt; peeviſhneſs.
Captiouſneſs is a fault oppºſite to civility; it often produces
miſbecoming and provoking expreſſions and carriage. Locke.
To Captivate. v. a. [captiver, Fr. cative, Lat.]
1. To take priſoner; to bring into bondage.
How ill beſeeming is it in thy ſex,
To triumph like an Amazonian trull,
Upon their woes, whom fortune caſtivates º Shakespeare H. VI.
That haſt by tyranny theſe many years
Waſted our country, ſlain our citizens,
And ſent our ſons and huſbands captivate. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
He deſerves to be a ſlave, that is content to have the ratio-
nal ſovereignty of his ſoul, and the liberty of his will, ſo capti-
vated. K. Charles.
They ſtand firm, keep out the enemy, truth, that would cap-
tivate or diſturb them. " Locke.
2. To charm; to overpower with excellence; to ſubdue.
Wiſdom enters the laſt, and ſo captivates him with her ap-
pearance, that he gives himſelf up to her. Addison. Guardian.
3. To enſlave; with to.
They lay a trap for themſelves, and captivate their under-
ſtandings to miſtake, falſehood and errour. Lºcke.
CAPTIVATION. n.ſ.. [from captivate.] The aët of taking one
captive.
CAPTIVE. n.ſ. [captiſ, Fr. captivus, Lat.]
1. One taken in war; a priſoner to an enemy.
You have the captives,
Who were the oppoſites of this day's flife. Shakespeare K. Lear.
This is no other than that forced reſpect a captive pays to
his conquerour, a ſlave to his lord. Rºgers.
Free from ſhame
Thy captives: I enſure the penal claim. Pºpe's Odyſſy.
2. It is uſed with to before the captor.
If thou ſay Antony lives, ’tis well,
Or friends with Caeſar, or not captive to him. Shakeſp.
My mother, who the royal ſceptre ſway’d,
Was captive to the cruel vićtor made. Dryden.
3. One charmed, or enſnarcd by beauty or excellence.
My woman's heart
Groſsly grew captive to his honey words. Shakespeare Richard III.
CA'ptive. adj. [captivus, Lat.] Made priſoner in war; kept
in bondage or confinement.
But fate forbids; the Stygian floods oppoſe,
And with nine circling ſtreams the captive ſouls incloſe.
Dryden, AEm. vi.
To CA'ptive. v. a. [from the noun. It was uſed formerly
with the accent on the laſt ſyllable, but now it is on the firſt.]
To take priſoner; to bring into a condition of ſervitude.
But being all defeated ſave a few,
Rather than fly, or be captiv'd herſelf ſhe flew. Fairy Q. b. ii.
Oft leaveſt them to hoſtile ſword
Of heathen and profane, their carcaſſes -
To dogs and fowls a prey, or elſe captiv'd. Milton's Agoni/?.
What further fear of danger can there be?
Beauty, which captive; all things, ſets me free. Dryden.
Still lay the god : the nymph ſurpriz'd,
Yet, miſtreſs of herſelf, devis'd, -
How ſhe the vagrant might inthral, -
And captive him, who captives all. Prizr.
CAPTI'vity. m. ſ. [captivité, Fr. captivitas, low Lat.]
I. Subjećtion by the fate of war; bondage; ſervitude to ene-
mics.
This is the ſerjeant,
Who, like a good and hardy ſoldier, fought . . .
'Gainſt my captivity. Shakespeare. King Lear.
There in captivity he lets them dwell
The ſpace of ſeventy years; then brings them back;
Rememb'ring mercy. Paradiſe Lºft, b. xii. ſ. 344-
The name of Ormond will be more celebrated in his cº-
vity, than in his greateſt triumphs. Dryden's Fat. Dedicat.
2. Slavery ; ſervitude.
For men to be tied, and led by authority, as it were wº i
- 111
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A R *
kind of captivity of judgment; and though there be reaſon to
the contrary, not to liſten unto it. Hooker.
The apoſtle tells us, there is a way of bringing every thought
into captivity to the obedience of Chriſt. Decay of Piety.
When love's well timed, 'tis not a fault to love
The ſtrong, the brave, the virtuous, and the wiſe,
Sink in the ſoft captivity together. Addiſon's Cato.
CA'proR. m. ſ. [from capio, to take, Lat..] He that takes a pri-
ſoner, or a prize.
CAPTURE. m. ſ. [capture, Fr. captura, Lat.]
1. The act or practice of taking anything.
The great ſagacity, and many artifices uſed by birds, in the
inveſtigation and capture of their prey. Derham's Phyſ. Theol.
2. The thing taken ; a prize.
Capu'cHED. adj. [from capuce, Fr. a hood.] Covered over as
with a hood.
They are differently cucullated and capuched upon the head
and back, and, in the cicada, the eyes are more prominent.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. iii.
Capuchi'N. m. ſ. A female garment, conſiſting of a cloak and
hood, made in imitation of the dreſs of capuchin monks;
whence its name is derived.
CAR, CHAR, in the names of places, ſeem to have relation to the
Britiſh caer, a city. Gibſon's Camden.
CAR. m. ſ. [car, Welch ; Harre, Dut. cnaer, Sax. carrus, Lat.]
1. A ſmall carriage of burden, uſually drawn by one horſe or two.
When a lady comes in a coach to our ſhops, it muſt be fol-
lowed by a car loaded with Mr. Wood's money. Swift.
2. In poetical language, a chariot; a chariot of war, or triumph.
Henry is dead, and never ſhall revive:
Upon a wooden coffin we attend,
And death's diſhonourable vićtory,
We with our ſtately preſence glorify,
Like captives bound to a triumphant car. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Wilt thou aſpire to guide the heav'nly car, -
And with thy daring folly burn the world. Shakeſp.
And the gilded car of day,
His glowing axle doth allay
In the ſteep Atlantick ſtream. Milton.
See, where he comes, the darling of the war !
See millions crouding round the gilded car ! Prior.
3. The Charles's wain, or Bear; a conſtellation.
Ev'ry fixt and ev'ry wand'ring ſtar,
The Pleiads, Hyads, and the Northern Car. Dryden.
CA'RABINE. Un. ſ. [carabine, Fr.] A ſmall ſort of fire-arm,
CA'RBINE. } ſhorter than a fuſil, and carrying a ball of twenty-
four in the pound, hung by the light horſe at a belt over the
left ſhoulder. It is a kind of medium between the piſtol and
the musket, having its barrel two foot and a half long.
CARABIN1'ER. m. ſ. [from carabine.] A ſort of light horſe car-
rying longer carabines than the reſt, and uſed ſometimes on
‘foot. Chambers.
CA'RAck. m. ſ. ſcaraca, Spaniſh..] A large ſhip of burden; the
ſame with thoſe which are now called galleons.
In which river, the greateſt carack of Portugal may ride a-
float ten miles within the forts. Raleigh.
The bigger whale like ſome huge carack lay,
Which wanteth ſea-room with her foes to play. Waller.
CA'RAcol E. m. ſ. [caracole, Fr. from caracol, Span. a ſnail.] An
oblique tread, traced out in ſemi-rounds, changing from one
hand to another, without obſerving a regular ground.
When the horſe advance to charge in battle, they ride ſome-
times in caracoles, to amuſe the enemy, and put them in doubt,
whether they are about to charge them in the front or in the
flank. Farrier’s Dić7.
To CA'RAcol E. v. n. [from the noun..] To move in caracoles.
* ... f
tº. !ºſ. [carat, Fr.]
1. A weight of four grains, with which diamonds are weighed.
2. A manner of expreſſing the fineneſs of gold. -
A mark, being an ounce Troy, is divided into twenty-four
equal parts, called caraćis, and each caraći into four grains;
by this weight is diſtinguiſhed the different fineneſs of their
gold; for, if to the fineſt of gold be put two carađs of alloy,
both making, when cold, but an ounce, or twenty-four caraćis,
then this gold is ſaid to be twenty-two caraćis fine. Cocker.
- Thou beſt of gold, art worſt of gold;
Other, leſs fine in carat, is more precious. Shakeſp. H. IV.
CARAVAN. n.ſ. ſcaravanne, Fr. from the Arabick.j A troop
or body of merchants or pilgrims, as they travel in the Eaſt.
Sct forth
Their airy caravan, high over ſeas
Flying, and over lands, with mutual wing
Eaſing their flight. Milton's Par. Lºſt, b. vii. c. 428.
When Joſeph, and the Bleſſed Virgin Mother, had loſt their
moſt holy Son, they ſought him in the retinues of their kin-
dred, and the caravans of the Galilaean pilgrims. Taylor.
CARAVANSAR Y. m. ſ. [from caravan.] A houſe built in the
Eaſtern countries for the reception of travellers.
The inns which receive the caravans in Perſia, and the Eaſ-
tern countries, are called by the name of caravanſaries.
Spectator, N° 289.
The ſpacious manſion, like a Turkiſh caravamſary, enter-
tºins the vagabond with only bare lodging. Pope's Letters.
CA'RAvel. }" J. ſcaravela, Span.] A light, round, old faſhion-
CA'RVEL. ed ſhip, with a ſquare formerly uſed i
Spain and poºl" q Poop, y uſed in
94% WAY. n.ſ. ſcarui, Lat.] A plant. -
This plant hath winged leaves, cut into ſmall ſegments, and
Placed oppoſite on the ſtalks, having no footſtalk; the petals of
* flowers are bifid, and ſhaped fire a heart; the feds are
long, ſlender, ſmooth, and furrowed. It is ſometimes found
wild in rich moiſt paſtures, eſpecially in Holland and Lincoln-
ſhire. The ſeeds are uſed in medicine, and likewiſe in the
confectionary.
- Miller.
CARBONADO. m.ſ. ſcarlºnnade, Fr. from carbo, a coal, Lat.]
Meat cut croſs, to be broiled upon the coals.
* I come in his way willingly, let him make a carionod, of
ne. Shakeſp. Henry IV;
To CARBONA'do. v. a. [from the noun..] To : or #.
Draw, you rogue, or I'll ſo carbonai,
Your ſhanks. Shakespeare . King Lear.
CARBUNCLE. m. ſ. [carbunculus, Lat. a i. § 1ng Lea,
1. A jewel ſhining in the dark, like a lighted coal or candle.
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not ſo rich a jewel.
His head
Creſted aloft, and carbuncle his eyes,
With burniſh’d neck of verdant gold. Par. Loft, b. ix.
It is commonly related, and believed, that a carbuncle does
ſhine in the dark like a burning coal; from whence it hath its
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
name. Wilkins's Mathematical Magick.
Carbuncle is a ſtone of the ruby kind, of a rich blood-red
colour. Woodward.
2. Red ſpots or pimples breaking out upon the face or body.
It was a peſtilent fever, but there followed no carbuncle,
no purple or livid ſpots, or the like, the maſs of the blood not
being tainted. Bacon's Henry VII.
Red bliſters, riſing on their paps, appear,
And flaming carbuncles, and noiſome ſweat. Dryden.
CA'RBUNcLED. adj. [from carbuncle.]
1. Set with carbuncles.
He gave thee, friend,
An armour all of gold ; it was a king's.—
—He has deſerv'd it, were it carbuncled
Like holy Phoebus' car. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
2. Spotted; deformed with carbuncles.
CARBU'NculAR. adj. [from carbuncle.] Belonging to a car-
buncle; red like a carbuncle.
CARBUNculation. m. ſ. [carbunculatio, Lat.] The blaſting
of the young buds of trees or plants, either by exceſſive heat
or exceſſive cold. Harris.
CA/RCANET. m. ſ. [carcan, Fr.] A chain or collar of jewels.
Say, that I linger'd with you at your ſhop,
To ſee the making of her carcanet. Shakespeare Comedy of Errours.
I have ſeen her beſet and bedeckt all over with emeralds and
pearls, and a carcanet about her neck. Hakewell on Providence.
CA'RCAss. n. ſ. ſcarquaſe, Fr.]
1. A dead body of any animal.
To blot the honour of the dead,
And with foul cowardice his carcaſ ſhame,
Whoſe living hands immortaliz'd his name. Fairy Q. b. ii.
Where cattle paſtur'd late, now ſcatter'd lies,
With carcaſes and arms, th’ inſanguin’d field,
Deſerted. ‘. . Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi. 1. 654.
If a man viſits his ſick friend, in hope of legacy, he is a vul-
ture, and only waits for the carcaſ. Taylor.
The ſcaly nations of the ſea profound,
Like ſhipwreck'd carcaſes, are driv'n aground. Dryden.
2. Body; in a ludicrous ſenſe.
Today how many would have given their honours,
To’ve ſav'd their carcaſes * Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
He that finds himſelf in any diſtreſs, either of carcaſ, or of
fortune, ſhould deliberate upon the matter, before he prays for
a change. L'Eſtrange.
3. The decayed parts of any thing; the ruins; the remains.
A rotten carcaſs of a boat, not rigg'd,
Nor tackle, ſail, nor maſt. Shakespeare Tempºff.
4. The main parts, naked, without completion or ornament; as
the walls of a houſe.
What could be thought a ſufficient motive to have had an
eternal carcaſs of an univerſe, wherein the materials and poſi-
tions of it were eternally laid together? Hale's Origin ºf Mank.
5. [In gunnery.] A kind of bomb uſually oblong, conſiſting of a
ſhell or caſe, ſometimes of iron, with holes, more commonly of
a coarſe ſtrong ſtuff, pitched over, and girt with iron hoops, fill-
ed with combuſtibles, and thrown from * mortar. Harris.
Carcelage. n.ſ. [from career, Lat.) Pºſº ſee: Dićf.
CARCINOMA. n ſ (from ***, a crab.] A particular ulcer,
called a cancer, very difficult to cure. A diſorder likewiſe
in the horny coat of the eye, is thus called by ſome writers.
&amp;incy.
CARcino'Matous. adj. [from carcinoma.] Cancerous; tend-
1ng to a cancer. CARD.
:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A R
C A R
:
:
-
*-
iº
CARD. m. ſ. ſcarte, Fr. charta, Lat.]
I. A ãº with figures, uſed in games of chance or ſkill.
A vengeance on . . . d hide
'd it with a card of ten.
Yet I have fac Shakeſt. Taming of the Shrew.
There all is marr'd, there lies a cooling card. Shakeſp.
Soon as ſhe ſpreads her hand, th’ aerial guard
Deſcend, and fit on each important card;
Firſt, Ariel perch’d upon amatadore. Potr
2. The paper on which the winds are marked under the mari-
ner's needle. -
Upon his cards and compaſs firms his eye, -
The maſters of his long experiment. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
- The very points they blow;
All the quarters that they know,
I' th' ſhipman's card. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
How abſolute the knave is 2 we muſt ſpeak by the card, or
equivocation will undo us. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
On life's vaſt ocean diverſely we ſail,
Reaſon the card, but paſſion is the gale. Pope.
3. [kaarde, Dutch..] The inſtrument with which wool is comb-
ed, or comminuted, or laid over for ſpinning.
To CARD. v. a. [ſrom the noun..] To comb, or comminute
wool with a piece of wood, thick ſet with crooked wires.
The while their wives do ſit
Beſide them, carding wool. May's Virgil's Georgicks.
- - Go, card and ſpin,
And leave the buſineſs of the war to men. Dryden.
To CARD. v. n. To game to play much at cards; as, a card-
ing wife.
cºonſU.M. n.ſ. {j A medicinal ſeed, of the
aromatick kind, contained in pods, and brought from the Eaſt
Indies. Chambers.
C A'rder. n.ſ.. [from card.]
I - One that cards wool.
. The clothiers all have put off
The ſpinſters, carders, fullers, weavers. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
2 - One that plays much at cards. -
CARD1'AcAL. Üadj. [xzºia, the heart.] Cordial; having the
CA'RDIAck. ; quality of invigorating.
CA'R DIALGY.. n.ſ.. [from xagºa, the heart, and ºxye, pain.]
The heart-burn; a pain ſuppoſed to be felt in the heart, but
more properly in the ſtomach, which ſometimes riſes all along
from thence up to the oeſophagus, occaſioned by ſome acrimo-
nious matter. Quincy.
CARDINAL. adj. [cardinalis, Lat.] Principal ; chief.
The diviſions of the year in frequent uſe with aſtronomers,
according to the cardinal interſe&amp;tions of the zodiack; that is,
the two equinočtials, and both the ſolſtitial points.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. e. 3.
His cardinal perfeótion was induſtry. Clarendon.
CA'RD1N Al. n.ſ. One of the chief governours of the Romiſh
church, by whom the pope is elected out of their own number,
which contains ſix biſhops, fifty prieſts, and fourteen deacons,
who conſtitute the ſacred college, and are choſen by the pope.
A cardinal is ſo ſtiled, becauſe ſerviceable to the apoſtolick
ſee, as an axle or hinge on which the whole government of the
church turns; or as they have, from the pope's grant, the hinge
and government of all the affairs of the Romiſh church.
- Ayliffe's Parergon.
You hold a fair aſſembly;
You are a churchman, or, I'll tell you, cardinal,
I ſhould judge now unhappily. . Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
CAR DINAL's Flow ER. m. ſ. [rapuntium, Lat.]
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, of an anomalous figure,
hollowed like a pipe, channelled, and divided into many parts,
in the ſhape of a tongue, defended by a covering, which in-
folds the pointal; when the flowers decay, the flower-cup turns
to a fruit, divided into three cells, full of ſmall ſeeds, which
adhere to a placenta, divided into three parts. The ſpecies are,
1 Greater rampions, with a crimſon ſpiked flower, commonly
called the ſcarlet cardinal's flower. 2. The blue cardinal's flower.
The firſt ſort is greatly prized for the beauty of its rich crim-
ſon flowers, czceeding all flowers in deepneſs. Miller.
CA'RDINALATE. }". J. [from cardinal.] The office and rank
CA'R DINALSHIP. of a cardinal.
An ingenious cavalier, hearing that an old friend of his was
advanced to a cardinalate, went to congratulate his eminence
upon his new honour. L’Eſtrange.
CARD MA'ker. n.ſ.. [from card and make.] A maker of cards.
Am not I Chriſtophero Sly, by occupation a cardmaker?
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
CARDMAtch. m. ſ. [from card and match..] A match made by
dipping pieces of card in melted ſulphur.
Take care, that thoſe may not make the moſt noiſe who have
the leaſt to ſell; which is very obſervable in the venders of
cardmatcher. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 251.
CA'RDUU.S. See THISTLE.
CARE. m. ſ. [care, Saxon.]
1. Solicitude; anxiety; perturbation of mind; concern.
Or, if I would take care, that care ſhould be,
For wit that ſcorn'd the world, and liv'd like me. Dryden.
Nor ſullen diſcontent, nor anxious care, -
Ev’n though brought thither, could inhabit there. Drydºn.
It will raiſe in your ſoul the greateſt care of fulfilling the di-
vine will. J/ake's Preparation for Death.
2. Caution.
Well, ſweet Jack, have a care of thyſelf. Shakespeare H. IV.
The fooliſh virgins had taken no are for a further ſupply,
after the oil, which was at firſt put into their lamps, was ſpent,
as the wiſe had done. Tillotſon-
Begone ! the prieſt expeds you at the altar.—
But, tyrant, have a care, I come not thither.
A. Philips's Di/irc/? Mather.
3. Regard; charge; heed in order to protection and preſerva-
tion.
You come in ſuch a time,
As if propitious fortune took a care
To ſwell my tide of joys to their full height. Dryden.
If we believe that there is a God, that takes care of us, and
we be careful to pleaſe him, this cannot but be a mighty com-
fort to us. Jillotſºn.
4. It is a looſe and vague word, implying attention or inclination,
in any degree more or leſs.
We take care to flatter ourſelves with imaginary ſcenes and
proſpects of future happineſs. Atterbury.
5. The object of care, of caution, or of love.
O my poor kingdom, ſick with civil blows!
When that my care could not with-hold thy riots,
What wilt thou do, when riot is thy care 2 Shakeſp. H.IV.
Fluſh'd were his cheeks, and glowing were his eyes:
Is ſhe thy care P is ſhe thy care 2 he cries. Dryden-
Your ſafety, more than mine, was then my care :
Leſt of the guide bereft, the rudder loſt,
Your ſhip ſhould run againſt the rocky coaſt. Dryden.
The wily fox,
Who lately filch'd the turkey's callow care. Gay's Trivia.
None taught the trees a nobler race to bear,
Or more improv'd the vegetable care. Pope.
o CARE. v. n. [from the noun.]
I- §: be anxious or ſolicitous; to be in concern about any
Ing. -
She cared not what pain ſhe put her body to, ſince the better
part, her mind, was laid under ſo much agony. Sidney, b. ii.
As the Germans, both in language and manners, differed
from the Hungarians, ſo were they always at variance with
them; and therefore much cared not, though they were by him
ſubdued. Knoller's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Well, on my terms thou wilt not be my heir;
If thou ar'ſ little, leſs ſhall be my care.’ Dryden's Perſus.
2. To be inclined; to be diſpoſed; with for or to:
Not caring to obſerve the wind,
Or the new ſea explore. Waller.
The remarks are introduced by a compliment to the works
of an authour, who, I am ſure, would not are for being praiſed
at the expence of another's reputation. ddiſon. Guardian.
Having been now acquainted, the two ſexes did not care to
part. Addiſon.
Great maſters in painting never care for drawing people in
the faſhion. Speciator, N° 129.
3. To be affected with ; to have regard to ; with for.
You dote on her that cares not for your love.
Shakeſp. Jwo Gentlemen of Perona.
There was an ape that had twins; ſhe doted upon one of
them, and did not much care for t'other. L’Eſtrange.
Where few are rich, few care for it; where many are ſo,
many deſire it. Temple.
CA'RECRAzed. adj. [from care and craze.] Broken with care
and ſolicitude.
Theſe both put off, a poor petitioner,
A carecraz'd mother of a many children. Shakespeare Rich. III.
To CARE'EN. v. a. ſcariner, Fr. from carina, Lat.j A term in
the ſea language. To lay a veſſel on one ſide, to caulk, ſtop
up leaks, refit, or trim the other ſide. Chambers.
To CAREEN. v. n. To be in the ſtate of careening.
CAREER. m.ſ.. [carriere, Fr.]
1. The ground on which a race is run.
They had run themſelves too far out of breath, to go back
again the ſame career. Sidney, b. ii.
2. A courſe; a race.
What rein can hold licentious wickedneſs,
When down the hill he holds his fierce career P Shakeſp.
3. Full ſpeed; ſwift motion.
It is related of certain Indians, that they are able, when a
horſe is running in his full career, to ſtand upright on his back.
- J/ilkins's Mathematical Magick.
Praćtiſe them now to curb the turning ſteed,
Mocking the foe; now to his rapid ſpeed
To give the rein, and, in the full career,
To draw the certain ſword, or ſend the pointed ſpear. Prior:
4. Courſe of a&amp;tion; uninterrupted procedure.
Shall quips and ſentences, and theſe paper bullets of the brain,
awe a man from the career of his humour *
Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
- Whera
&amp;
º:
* ,
-A R
un
~!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A R
The heir of a blaſted family has roſe up, and promiſed
fair, and yet, at length, a croſs event has certainly met and ſtopt
him in the career of his fortune. South.
Knights in knightly deeds ſhould perſevere,
And ſtill continue what at firſt they were; }
Continue, and proceed in honour's fair career. Dryden.
To CARE'ER. v. n. [from the noun.] Running with ſwift mo-
tion.
\ With eyes, the wheels
Of beryl, and careering fires between.
CA'REFUL adj.. [from care and full.]
1. Anxious; ſolicitous ; full of concern.
Martha, thou art careful, and troubled about manythings.
Parad. Loft, b. vi.
Luke, x. 41.
Welcome, thou pleaſing ſlumber;
A while embrace me in thy leaden arms,
And charm my careful thoughts. Denham's Sophy.
2. Provident; diligent; cautious; with of or for.
Behold, thou haſt been careful for us with all this care; what
is to be done for thee * 2 Kings, iv. 13.
To cure their mad ambition, they were ſent
To rule a diſtant province, each alone:
What could a careful father more have done?
3. Watchful; with of. -
It concerns us to be careful of our converſations. Ray.
4. Subječt to perturbations; expoſed to troubles; full of anxiety;
full of ſolicitude.
By him that rais'd me to this careful height,
From that contented hap, which I enjoy'd.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
Dryden.
CA'REFULLY. adv. [from careful.]
1. In a manner that ſhews care.
Envy, how carefully does it look? how meager and ill-com-
plexion'd? Collier.
2. Heedfully; watchfully; vigilantly; attentively.
You come moſt carefully upon your hour. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
By conſidering him ſo carefully as I did before my attempt, I
have made ſome faint reſemblance of him. Dryden.
All of them, therefore, ſtudiouſly cheriſhed the memory of
their honourable extraction, and carefully preſerved the evidences
of it. Atterbury.
CA'Refulness. n.ſ.. [from careful..] Vigilance; heedfulneſs;
Caution.
The death of Selymus was, with all carefulneſs, concealed by
Ferhates. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
CA'REl Esly. adv. [from careleſ...] Negligently; inattentively;
without care; heedleſly.
There he him found all carelſly diſplay'd,
In ſecret ſhadow from the ſunny ray. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Not content to ſee,
That others write as careleſly as he. Waller.
CA'Reles Ness. n.ſ.. [from careleſ...] Heedleſneſs; inattention;
negligence; abſence of care; manner; void of care.
For Coriolanus, neither to care whether they love or hate
him, manifeſts the true knowledge he has in their diſpoſition,
and, out of his noble carelºſiſ, lets them plainly ſee it.
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Who, in the other extreme, only doth
Call a rough careleſneſs good faſhion;
Whoſe cloak his ſpurs tear, or whom he ſpits on,
He cares not. Donne.
It makes us to walkwarily, and tread ſure, for fear of our
enemies; and that is better, than to be flattered into pride and
careleſneſs. Taylºr's Rule of living holy.
The ignorance or careleſheſ of the ſervants can hardly leave
the maſter diſappointed. Temple.
I who at ſometimes ſpend, at others ſpare,
Divided between careleſheſ and care. Pope.
CA'RELEss. adj. [from care.]
1. Without care; without ſolicitude; unconcerned; negligent;
inattentive; heedleſs; regardleſs; thoughtleſs; neglectful;
unheeding; unthinking; unmindful; with of or about.
Knowing that if the worſt befal them, they ſhall loſe nothing
but themſelves; whereof they ſeem very careleſs. Spenſer's Irel.
- Nor loſe the good advantage of his grace,
By ſeeming cold, or carelſ of his will. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
A woman the more curious ſhe is about her face, is com-
monly the more careleſ about her houſe. Ben. johnſon.
A father, unnaturally carelſ of his child, ſells or gives him
to another man. Locke.
2. Cheerful; undiſturbed.
Thus wiſely careleſs, innocently gay,
Cheerful he play’d. Pope.
In my cheerful morn of life,
When nurs'd by careleſ; ſolitude I liv'd,
And ſung of nature with unceaſing joy,
Pleas'd have I wander'd through your rough domain.
Thomſon's Autumn, l. 5.
3. Unheeded; thoughtleſs; unconſidered.
The freedom of ſaying as many careleſ, things as other peo-
ple, without being ſo ſeverely remarked upon. Pope.
4. Unmoved by ; unconcerned at.
Vol. I
Careleſs of thunder from the clouds that break,
My only omens from your looks I take. Granville.
To CARESS. v. a. [careffer, Fr. from carus, Lat.] To endear;
to fondle; to treat with kindneſs.
If I can feaſt, and pleaſe, and careſ; my mind with the plea-
ſures of worthy ſpeculations, or virtuous praffices, let greatneſs
and malice vex and abridge me, if they can. South.
CARE'ss. n.ſ. [from the verb.] An act of endearment; an ex-
preſſion of tenderneſs. -
He, ſhe knew, would intermix
Grateful digreſſions, and ſolve high diſupte
With conjugal careff's. Paradiſe Loft, b. viii. l. 54.
- There are ſome men who ſeem to have brutal minds wrapt
up in human ſhapes; their very careſſes are crude and impor-
tune. - L’Eſtrange.
After his ſucceſſour had publickly owned himſelf a Roman
catholick, he began with his firſt careſſes to the church party.
Swift.
CA"RET. m. ſ. [caret, Lat. there is wanting.] A note ..
ſhews where ſomething interlined ſhould be read.
CA"RGASON., n. ſ. [carga; on, Spaniſh..] A cargo.
My body is a cargaſon of ill humours. Howel's Letters.
CA'RGo. n.ſ.. [charge, Fr.] The lading of a ſhip; the merchan-
diſe or wares contained and conveyed in a ſhip.
In the hurry of the ſhipwreck, Simonides was the only man
that appeared unconcerned, notwithſtanding that his whole for-
tune was at ſtake in the cargo. L’Eſtrange.
A ſhip, whoſe cargo was no leſs than a whole world, that
carried the fortune and hopes of all poſterity. Burnet'; Theory,
This gentleman was then a young adventurer in the repub-
lick of letters, and juſt fitted out for the univerſity with a good
cargo of Latin and Greek. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 494.
CA'Rico Us Tumour. [from carica, a fig, Lat..] A ſwelling in the
form of a fig.
CARIES. n.ſ. [Latin.] That rottenneſs which is peculiar to a
bone. Quincy.
Fiſtulas of a long continuance, are, for the moſt part, ac-
companied with ulcerations of the gland, and caries in the
bone. J/ſeman's Surgery.
CARIo'sity. n.ſ.. [from carious.] Rottenneſs.
This being too general, taking in all carioſity and ulcers of
the bones. ///eman's Surgery.
CA'Rious. adj. [carioſus, Lat..] Rotten.
I diſcovered the blood to ariſe by a carious tooth. Wiſeman.
CAR.K. m. ſ. ſceanc, Saxon.] Care; anxiety; ſolicitude; con-
cern; heedfulneſs. This word is now obſolete.
And Klaius taking for his youngling caré,
Leſt greedy eyes to them might challenge lay,
Buſy with oker did their ſhoulders mark.
Down did lay
His heavy head, devoid of careful cark. Fairy Queen, b. i.
To CaRK. v. n. [ceancan, Saxon.] To be careful; to be ſo-
Sidney.
licitous; to be anxious. It is now very little uſed, and always ,
in an ill ſenſe.
I do find what a bleſfing is chanced to my life, from ſuch
muddy abundance of carking agonies, to ſtates which ſtill be
adherent. Sidney, b, i.
What can be vainer, than to laviſh out our lives in the ſearch
of trifles, and to lie carking for the unprofitable goods of this
world ? - L’Eſtrange.
Nothing can ſuperſede our own carkings and contrivances for
ourſelves, but the aſſurance that God cares for us. Decay of Piety.
CARLE. m. ſ. ſceonl, Saxon.] A mean, rude, rough, brutal
man. We now uſe churl.
The carle beheld, and ſaw his gueſt -
Would ſafe depart, for all his ſubtile ſleight. Fairy 3, b, i.
Anſwer, thou carle, and judge this riddle right,
I'll frankly own thee for a cunning wight. Gay's Paſtoral.
The editor was a covetous carle, and would have his pearls
of the higheſt price. Bentley,
CA'RLINE THISTLE. [carlina, Lat.] A plant; placed in the
catalogue of ſimples in the college diſpenſatory, but rarely or-
dered in medicine. - Alſillºr.
CA'RLINGs. n. ſ. [In a ſhip.] Timbers lying fore and aft, along
from one beam to another; on theſe the ledges reſt, on which
the planks of the deck are made faſt. A1arris.
CA'RMAN. m. ſ. [from car and man.] A man whoſe employ-
ment it is to drive cars. -
If the ſtrong cane ſupport thy walking hand,
Chairmen no longer ſhall the wall command;
E’en ſturdy carmen ſhall thy nod obey, x - c.7- - -
And rattling coaches ſtop to make thee way. Gay's Trivia.
CA'RMELITE. m. ſ. ſcarmelite, Fr.] A ſort of pear; which ſee.
CARM1'Native. adj. [ſuppoſed to be ſo called, as having" in
carminis, the power of a charm.] ..
Carminatives are ſuch things as dilute and relax at the ſame
time, becauſe wind occaſions a ſpaſm, or convulſion in ſome
parts. Whatever promotº inſenſible perſpiration, 1S Cañºn??la-
ii.; for wind is perſpirable matter retained in the body
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Carminative and dieuretick - -
will damp all paſſion ſympathetick. Swift.
- 4 B CAR-
*--
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A R
C A R
i
CARMINE, n.ſ. A bright red or crimſon colour, bordering on
uſed by painters in miniature. It is the moſt valuable
. of ãº maſtick, and of an exceſſive price.
Chambers.
CAR Nage. m. ſ. ſcarnage, Fr. from care, carniº, Lat.]
1. Slaughter; havock; maſſacre.
Hå brought the king's forces upon them rather as to carnage
than to fight, inſomuch as without any great loſs or danger to
themſelves, the greateſt part of the ſeditious were ſlain. Hayw.
. Heaps of fleſh.
2. Heaps Such a ſcent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable ! and taſte
The ſavour of death from all things there that live. Milton.
His ample maw, with human carnage fill’d,
A milky deluge next the giant ſwift'd. Pope's Odſey.
CARNAL. adj. [carnal, Fr. carnalis, low Lat.]
1. Fleſhly; not ſpiritual.
Thou doſt juſtly require us, to ſubmit our underſtandings to
thine, and deny our carnal reaſon, in order to thy ſacred myſte-
ries and commands. - King Charles.
From that pretence
Spiritual laws by carnal pow'r ſhall force --
On every conſcience. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xii. l. 521.
Not ſuch in carnal pleaſure: for which cauſe,
Among the beaſts no meat for thee was found. Parad I 0.7.
A glorious apparition had not doubt, -
And carnal fear, that day dim’d Adam's eye. Par. Lºſº, b. xi.
He perceives plainly, that his appetite to ſpiritual things a-
bates, in proportion as his ſenſual appetite is indulged and en-
couraged; and that carnal deſires kill not only the deſire, but
even the power of taſting purer delights. Atterbury.
2. Luſtful; lecherous; libidinous.
This carnal cur
Preys on the iſſue of his mother's body.
C*- RNALITY. m. ſ. [from carnal.]
1. Fieſhly luſt; compliance with carnal deſires.
If godly, why do they wallow and ſleep in all the carnalities
&lt;&gt;f the world, under pretence of chriſtian liberty South.
2. Groſlineſs of mind.
He did not inſtitute this way of worſhip, but becauſe of the
carnality of their hearts, and the proneneſs of that people to ido-
latry. Tillotſon.
CA'RNALLY. adv. [from carnal.] According to the fleſh; not
ſpiritually.
Where they found men in diet, attire, furniture of houſe, or
any other way obſervers of civility and decent order, ſuch they
reproved, as being carnally and earthly minded.
Hºoker, Preface.
In the ſacrament we do not receive Chriſt carnally, but we
receive him ſpiritually; and that of itſelf is a conjugation of
bleſlings and ſpiritual graces. Taylor's Iſ orthy Communicant.
CA'RNAL NEss. º/ The ſame with carnality. Die?.
CARNATION. m. ſ. [carnes, Lat..] The name of the natural fleſh
colour; from whence perhaps the flower is named ; the name
of a flower. Sce ClovEGILLIF Low ER.
And lo the wretch! whoſe vile, whoſe inſe&amp;t luſt
Laid this gay daughter of the ſpring in duſt:
Q puniſh him or to th' Elyſian ſhades
Diſmiſs my ſoul, where no carnation fades. Pºpe.
CARNELION. m. ſ. A precious ſtone.
The common carnelion has its name from its fleſh colour;
which is, in ſome of theſe ſtones, paler, when it is called the
female carmelion; in others deeper, called the male. J/oodward.
CARNE'ous. adj. [carneus, Lat.j Fleſhy.
- I have obſerved in a calf, the umbilical veſſels to terminate
in certain bodies, divided into a multitude of carneous papillae.
- Ray on the Creation.
To CARNI'FY. v. m. [from caro, carnis, Lat..] To breed fleſh;
to turn nutriment into fleſh.
At the ſame time I think, I deliberate, I purpoſe, I command:
in inferiour faculties, I walk, I ſee, I hear, I digeſt, I ſanguify,
I carniſy. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
CA'RNIVAL. m. ſ. ſcarnaval, Fr.] The feaſt held in the popiſh
countries before Lent.
The whole year is but one mad carnival, and we are volup-
tuous not ſo much upon deſire or appetite, as by way of exploit
and bravery. Decay of Piety.
CARNI'voRous, adj. [from carni, and voro.] Fleſh-eating;
that of which fleſh is the proper food.
In birds there is no maſtication or comminution of the meat
in the mouth; but in ſuch as are not carnivorous, it is immedi-
ately ſwallowed into the crop or crow. Ray on the Creation.
Man is by his frame, as well as his appetite, a carnivorous
~ wnimal. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CARYost'ſ Y. m. ſ. [carnoſté, Fr.] Fleſhy excreſcences.
By this method, and by this courſe of dict, with ſudorificks,
the ulcers are healed, and that carnoſity reſolved. //ſeman.
CA'RNous, adj. [from caro, carmis, Lat.] Fleſhy.
... The firſt or outward part is a thick and cárnous covering,
like that of a walnut; the ſecond, a dry and floſculous coat,
commonly called mace, Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 6.
The muſcle whereby he is enabled to draw himſelf toge- Shakespeare R. III.
ther, the academiſts deſcribe to be a diſtinči carnous muſcle, ex-
tended to the ear. Ray on the Creation.
CA'Rob, or St. john's Bread. [ſiliqua, Lat.] A plant.
It hath a petalous flower, having many ſtamina, which grow
from the diviſions of the flower-cup; in the centre of which
riſes the pointal, which afterward becomes a fruit or pod, which
is plain and fleſhy, containing ſeveral roundiſh plain ſeeds.
This tree is very common in Spain, and in ſome parts of Italy,
as alſo in the Levant, where it grows in the hedges, and pro-
duces a great quantity of long, flat, brown-coloured pods, which
are thick, mealy, and of a ſweetiſh taſte. Theſe pods are many
times eaten by the poorer ſort of inhabitants. Miller.
CAR o'ch E. n. ſ. [from caroſe, Fr.] A coach ; a carriage of
pleaſure. It is uſed in the comedy of Albumazar, but now it is
obſolete.
CAROL. m. ſ. [carola, Ital. from choreºla, Lat.]
1. A ſong of joy and exultation.
And let the Graces dance unto the reſt,
For they can do it beſt:
The whiles the maidens do their carol ſing,
To which the woods ſhall anſwer, and their echo ring.
Spenſer's Epithalamium.
Even in the old teſtament, if you liſten to David's harp, you
ſhall hear as many herſe-like airs as caroſs. Bacon.
Oppos'd to her, on t'other ſide advance
The coſtly feaſt, the carol, and the dance,
Minſtrels and muſick, poetry and play, -
And balls by night, and tournaments by day. Dryden's Fab.
2. A ſong of devotion.
No night is now with hymn or carol bleſt. Shakeſp.
They gladly thither haſte; and, by a choir
Of ſquadron'd angels, hear his carol ſung. Par. Lºft, b. xii.
3. A ſong in general. -
The carol they began that hour,
How that a life was but a flower,
In the ſpring time. Shakeſp. A you like it.
To CA'Rol. v. n. [carclare, Ital.] To ſing; to warble; to ſing
in joy and feſtivity.
Hark, how the cheerful birds do chant their lays,
And carol of love's praiſe. -
This done, ſhe ſung, and carol"d out ſo clear,
That men and angels might rejoice to hear.
Hov'ring ſwans their throats releas'd
From native ſilence, carºl ſounds harmonious. Prizr.
To CA'Rol. v. a. To praiſe; to celebrate.
She with precious viol'd liquours heals,
For which the ſhepherds at their feſtivals,
Carol her goodneſs loud in ruſtick ſays. Milton.
CA'Rot ID. adj. [carotides, Lat.] Two arteries which ariſe out
of the aſcending trunk of the acrta, near where the ſubclavian
arteries ariſe. -
The carotid, vertebral, and ſplenick arteries, are not only va-
riouſly contorted, but alſo here and there dilated, to moderate
the motion of the blood; ſo the veins are alſo variouſly di-
lated. Ray on the Creation.
Dryden.
CAR o'UsAL. m. ſ. [from carcuſ. It ſeems more properly pro-
nounced with the accent upon the ſecond ſyllable; but Dryden
accents it on the firſt.] A feſtival. -
This game, theſe ºf: Aſcanius taught,
And building Alba to the Latins brought. Dryden's Zn.
To CAROUSE. v. n. [carouſſºr, Fr. from gar au/z, all out,
Germ.] To drink; to quaff; to drink largely.
He calls for wine: a health, quoth he, as if
H'ad been aboard carouſing to his mates
After a ſtorm. Shakespeare. Taming of the Shrew.
Learn with how little life may be preſerved,
In gold and myrrh they need not to carouſe. Raleigh.
Now hats fly off, and youths carciſe,
Healths firſt go round, and then the houſe,
The brides came thick and thick. Suckling.
Under the ſhadow of friendly boughs
They fit carouſing, where their liquour grows. J/aller.
To CARö'use. va. To drink.
Now my ſick foo!, Roderigo,
Whom love hath turn’d almoſt the wrong ſide out,
To Deſdemona hath tonight carous'd
Potations pottle deep. Shakeſp. Othello.
Our cheerful gueſts carouſ the ſparkling tears
Of the rich grape, whilſt muſick charms their ears. Denham.
CARo'Us E. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A drinking match.
Waſte in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feaſt, and late carciſe. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. A hearty doſe of liquour.
He had ſo many eyes watching over him, as he could not
drink a full carcaſe of ſack; but the ſtate was advertiſed there-
of within few hours after. Davies on Ireland.
Pleaſe you, we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouſes to our miſtreſs' health. Shakespeare.
CARous ER. m. ſ. [from carciſe.] A drinker; a toper.
The bold carouſer, and advent'ring dame,
Nor fear the fever, nor refuſe the flanc: Saſ
ałę
Spenser's Epithalamium.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A R
C A R
Safe in his ſkill from all conſtraint ſet free,
But conſcious ſhame, remorſe, and piety.
CARP. m. ſ. [carpe, Fr.] A pond fiſh.
A friend of mine ſtored a pond of three or four acres with
carps and tench. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To CARP. v. n. [carpo, Lat.] To cenſure; to cavil; to find
fault; with at before the thing or perſon cenſured.
Tertullian, even often through diſcontentment, carpeth inju-
Granville.
riouſly at them, as though they did it even when they were.
free from ſuch meaning.
This your all licens'd fool
Does hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
In rank and not to be endured riots. Shakeſp. King Lear.
No, not a tooth or nail to ſcratch,
And at my actions carp or catch.
When I ſpoke,
My honeſt homely words were carp'd, and cenſur'd,
For want of courtly ſtile. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
CA'RPENTER. m. ſ. [charpentier, Fr.] An artificer in wood; a
builder of houſes and ſhips. He is diſlinguiſhed from a joiner,
as the carpenter performs larger and ſtronger work.
This work performed with adviſement good,
Godfrey his carpenters, and men of skill,
In all the camp, ſent to an aged wood. Fairfax, b. iii.
In building Hiero's great ſhip, there were three hundred car-
penters employed for a year together. JWilkins's Dadalus.
In burden'd veſſels, firſt with ſpeedy care,
His plenteous ſtores do ſeaſon'd timbers ſend,
Thither the brawny carpenters repair, -
And, as the ſurgeons of maim'd ſhips, attend. Dryden.
CA'RPENTRY. m.ſ.. [from carpenter.] The trade or art of a car-
enter.
P It had been more proper for me to have introduced carpentry
before joinery, becauſe neceſſity did doubtleſs compel our fore-
fathers to uſe the conveniency of the firſt, rather than the extra-
vagancy of the laſt. Mºxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
CA'RPER. m. ſ. [from to carp.] A caviller; a cenſorious man.
I have not theſe weeds,
By putting on the cunning of a carper.
CARPET. n.ſ.. [arpet, Dutch.]
1. A covering of various colours, ſpread upon floors or tables.
Be the Jacks fair within, the Jills fair without, carpets laid,
and every thing in order. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
Againſt the wall, in the middle of the halfpace, is a chair
placed before him, with a table and carpet before it. Bacon.
2. Ground variegated with flowers, and level and ſmooth.
Go ſignify as much, while here we march
Upon the graſſy carpet of this plain. Shakeſp. Richard III.
The carpet ground ſhall be with leaves o'erſpread,
And boughs ſhall weave a cov’ring for your head. Dryden.
3. Anything variegated.
The whole dry land is, for the moſt part, covered over with
a lovely carpet of green graſs, and other herbs. Ray.
4. Carpet is uſed, proverbially, for a ſtate of eaſe and luxury; as,
a carpet knight, a knight that has never known the ficki, and
has recommended himſelf only at table.
He is knight, dubbed with unhacked rapier, and on carpet
conſideration. Shakespeare. Twelfth Night.
5. To be on the carpet, [ſur le tapis, Fr.] is the ſubject of confi-
deration ; an affair in hand.
To CA'RPET. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſpread with carpets.
We found him in a fair chamber, richly hanged and carpeted
under foot, without any degrees to the ſtate; he was ſet upon
a low throne, richly adorned, and a rich cloth of ſtate over his
head, of blue ſattin embroidered. Bacon’s New Atlantis.
The dry land ſurface we find every where almoſt naturally
carpeted over with graſs, and other agreeable wholeſome plants.
Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
CA'RPING. particip. adj. [from to carp.] Captious ; cenſorious.
No carping critick interrupts his praiſe,
No rival ſtrives, but for a ſecond place. Granville.
Lay aſide therefore a carping ſpirit, and read even an adver-
ſary with an honeſt deſign to find out his true meaning: do not
fnatch at little lapſes, and appearances of miſtake. //atts.
CA'RPINGLY. adv. [from carting.] Captiouſly; cenſoriouſly.
We derive out of the Latin at ſecond hand by the French,
and make good Engliſh, as in theſe adverbs, carpingly, current.
ly, actively, colourably. Camden's Remains.
CA'RPMEALs. n.ſ. A kind of coarſe cloth made in the North
of England. Phillips's J/orld of ſfºrds.
C.#RPUS. n.ſ. [Latin.] The wriſt, ſo named by anatomiſts,
which is made up of eight little bones, of different figures and
thickneſs, placed in two ranks, four in each rank. They are
ſtrongly tied together by the ligaments which come from the
Hooker, b. iv. § 7.
Herbert.
Sshakeſpeare. Timon.
radius, and by the annulary ligament. &amp;uincy.
I found one of the bones of the carpus lying looſe in the
wound. //ſeman's Surgery.
CA'RRAck. See CARAck.
CA'RRAT. See CARAT.
CARRA'w AY. See CARA way.
Nay, you ſhall ſee mine orchard, where, in an arbour, we
will eat a laſt year's pippin of my own grafting, with a diſh of
£arrawayſ, and ſo forth; come, couſin, ſilence, and then ts
bed. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
CARRIAge. n.ſ. ſcariage, Fr. baggage; from carry.j
1. The act of carrying or tranſporting, or bearing any thing.
The unequal agitation of the winds, though material to the
carriage of ſounds farther or leſs way, yet do not confound the
articulation. Bacon's Natural Hiſt. Nº 193.
If it ſeem ſo ſtrange to move this obeliſk for ſo little ſpace,
what may we think of the carriage of it out of Egypt?
//ilkins's Mathematical Magick.
2. Conqueſt; acquiſition.
Solyman reſolved to beſiege Vienna, in good hope, that, by
the carriage away of that, the other cities would, without re-
ſiſtance, be yielded. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
3. Vehicle; that in which any thing is carried.
What horſe or carriage can take up and bear away all the
loppings of a branchy tree at once? //atts. "
4. The frame upon which cannon is carried.
He commanded the great ordnance to be laid upon carriages,
which before lay bound in great unwieldy timber, with rings
faſtencd thereto, and could not handſomely be removed to or
fro. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
5. Behaviour; perſonal manners.
Before his eyes he did caſt a miſt, by his own inſinuation,
and by the carriage of his youtb, that expreſſed a natural prince-
ly behaviour.
Though in my face there's no affected frown,
Nor in my carriage a feign'd niceneſs ſhown,
I keep my honour ſtill without a ſtain. Dryden.
Let them have ever ſo learned lectures of breeding, that
which will moſt influence their carriage, will be the company
they converſe with, and the faſhion of thoſe about them. Locke.
6. Conduct; meaſures; practices.
You may hurt yourſelf; nay, utterly
Grow from the king's acquaintance by this carriage.
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
He adviſed the new governour to have ſo much diſcretion in
his carriage, that there might be no notice taken in the exerciſe
of his religion. - Clarendon, b. viii.
7. Management; manner of tranſacting.
The manner of carriage of the buſineſs, was as if there had
been ſecret inquiſition upon him. Bacon's Henry VII.
CA'RRIER. m. ſ. [from to carry.]
1. One who carries ſomething.
You muſt diſtinguiſh between the motion of the air, which
is but a vehiculum cauſa, a carrier of the ſounds, and the ſounds
conveyed. Bacon's Nat Hiſł. N° 125.
For winds, when homeward they return, will drive
The loaded carriers from their evening hive. Dryden.
2. One whoſe profeſſion or trade is to carry goods for others.
I have rather made it my choice to tranſcribe all, than to
venture the loſs of my originals by poſt or carrier. Pierce's Lett.
The roads are crouded with carriers, laden with rich manu-
fačtures. Swift.
3. A meſſenger; one who carries a meſſage.
The welcome news is in the letter found;
The carrier's not commiſſion'd to expound;
It ſpeaks itſelf. - Dryden's Religio Laiei.
4. The name of a ſpecies of pigeons, ſo called from the reported
practice of ſome nations, who ſend them with letters tied to
their necks, which they carry to the place where they were bred,
however remote.
There are tame and wild pigeons, and of tame there are
croppers, carriers, runts. J/alton's Angler.
CARRION. n.ſ.. [charogne, Fr.]
1. The carcaſe of ſomething not proper for food.
They did eat the dead carrions, and one another ſoon after;
inſomuch that the very carcaſes they ſcraped out of their graves.
Speºſer on Ireland.
, It is I,
That, lying by the violet in the ſun,
Do, as the carrion does, not as the flower.
This foul deed ſhall ſmell above the earth,
With carrion men groaning for burial. Shakesp.Kºſº. J. Caſar.
You'll ask me why I rather chute to have
A weight of carrion fleſh, than to receive
Three thouſand ducats. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Aſ oftºne.
Ravens are ſeen in flocks where a carrion lies, and wolves in
herds to run down a deer. - Temple.
Sheep, oxen, horſes fall; and heap'd on high,
The diff'ring ſpecies in confuſion lie,
Till, warn’d by frequent ills, the way they found,
To iodge their othſome carrion under ground. Dryden.
Criticks, as they are birds of prey, have ever a natural incli-
nation to carrion. hleſs woman Pope.
2. A name of reproach for a worthleſs WOmº".
Shall we º that fooliſh carrion, Mrs. Quickly, to him, and
:- ing into the water.
excuſe his throwing Shakespeare. Merry I/ives ºf IPinºr.
3. Any fleſh ſo corrupted as not to be fit for food.
* Not all that pride that makes thee ſwell,
As big as thou doſt blown up weal; -
of Nor
Shałęſº.
Bacon's Henry VII.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A R
C A R
.
*
i Nor all thy tricks and flights to cheat,
Sell all thy carrion for good meat. Hudibras.
Ticºs wiłł get a breakfaſt by my death,
a * º Yet ſcarce chough their hunger to ſupply,
For love has made me carrion ere I die. Dryden.
º Canaros. adj. [from the ſubſt.] Relating to carcaſes; feed-
ing upon carcaſes. -
. . . . Match to match I have encounter'd him,
And made a prey for carrion kites and crows,
Ev’n of the Sonny beaſts he lov’d ſo well. Shakesp. H. VI.
The charity of our death-bed viſits from one another, is much
at a rate with that of a carrion crow to a ſheep; we ſmell a car-
- caſe. L’Eſtrange.
CARROT. n.ſ. ſcarote, Fr. daucus, Lat.]
t It hath a fleſhy root; the leaves are divided into narrow ſeg-
ments; the petals of the flower are unequal, and ſhaped like a
heart; the unbel, when ripe, is hollowed and contracted, ap-
pearing ſomewhat like a bird's neſt; the ſeeds are hairy, and in
ihape of lice. The ſpecies are ; 1. Common wild carrot. 2:
Dwarf wild carrot, with broader leaves. 3. Dark red-rooted
garden carrot. 4. The orange coloured carrot, 5. The white
Zarrot. The firſt grows wild upon arable land, and is ſeldom
cultivated. This is the particular ſort which ſhould be uſed in
medicine, and for which the druggiſts commonly ſell the ſeeds
of the garden carrot. The third and fourth ſorts are com-
monly cultivated for the kitchen ; as is the fifth ſort, though
not ſo common in England. The white is generally preferred
for the ſweeteſt. But, in order to preſerve carrots for uſe all
the winter and ſpring, about the beginning of November, when
the green leaves are decayed, dig them up, and lay them in ſand
in a dry place, where the froſt cannot come to them. . Miller.
Carrots, though garden roots, yet they do well in the fields
for ſeed, though the land for them ſhould rather be digged than
plowed. Aaortimer.
His ſpouſe orders the ſack to be immediately opened, and
ga-eedily pulls out of it half a dozen bunches of carrots. Dennis.
CAF Rot INEss. n.ſ.. [from carroty.] Redneſs of hair.
CA R Rot Y. adj. [from carrot.] Spoken of red hair, on account
of its reſemblance in colour to carrots.
CA R Rows. n.ſ.. [an Iriſh word.]
The carrows are a kind of people that wander up and down
to gentlemens houſes, living only upon cards and dice; who,
though they have little or nothing of their own, yet will they
play for much money. Spenſer on Ireland.
To CARRY. v. a. [charier, Fr. from currus, Lat. See CAR.]
1. To convey from a place; oppoſed to bring, or convey to a place.
When he dieth, he ſhall carry nothing away. Pſ. xlix. 18.
h And devout men carried Stephen to his burial. Aſéïs, viii. 2.
- I mean to carry her away this evening, by the help of theſe
two ſoldiers. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
As in a hive's vimineous dome,
Ten thouſand bees enjoy their home;
Each does her ſtudious action vary,
To go and come, to fetch and carry.
Prior.
* - They expoſed their goods with the price marked upon them,
then retired; the merchants came, left the price which they
would give upon the goods, and likewiſe retired; the Seres re-
turning, carried off either their goods or money, as they liked
! beſt. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. To tranſport.
They began to carry about in beds thoſe that were ſick.
s Mark, vi. 55.
The ſpecies of audibles ſeem to be carried more manifeſtly
through the air, than the ſpecies of viſibles. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Where many great ordnance are ſhot off together, the ſound
will be carried, at the leaſt, twenty miles upon the land. Bacon.
sº 3. To bear; to have about one.
Do not take out bones like ſurgeons I have met with, who
- carry them about in their pockets. Wiſeman's Surgery.
|
|
4. To take 3 to have with one.
If the ideas of liberty and volition were carried along with us
in our minds, a great part of the difficulties that perplex men's
thoughts would be eaſier reſolved. Locke.
I have liſtened with my utmoſt attention for half an hour to
. | an oratour, without being able to carry away one ſingle ſentence
s - out of a whole ſermon. Swift.
º 5. To convey by force.
t Go, carry Sir John Falſtaff to the Fleet;
- Take all his company along with him. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
: 6. To effect any thing.
There are ſome vain perſons, that whatſoever goeth alone, or
moveth upon greater means, if they have never ſo little hand
in it, they think it is they that carry it. Bacon.
Oft-times we loſe the occaſion of carrying a buſineſs well
thorºughly by our too much haſte. Ben. johnſon's Diſcovery.
Theſe advantages will be of no effect, unleſs we improve
them to words, in the carrying of our main point. Addiſon.
7. To gain in competition.
And hardly ſhall I carry out my ſide,
Her huſband being alive. Shakeſp. King Lear.
How many ſtand for conſulſhips?–Three, they ſay , but
it is thought of every one Coriolanus will carry it, Sãa£ºp.
I ſee º how many of theſe ſix reaſons can be fairly a-
voided ; and yet if any of them hold good, it is enough to garry
the cauſe. Saunderſon.
The latter ſtill enjoying his place, and continuing a jºint
commiſſioner of the treaſury, ſtill oppoſed, and commonly car-
ried away every thing againſt him. Clarendon.
8. To gain after reſiſtance.
The count wooes your daughter,
Lays down his wantón fiege before her beauty;
Reſolves to carry her; let her conſent,
As we'll direct her now, 'tis beſt to bear it.
What a fortune does the thick lips owe,
If he can carry her thus Shakeſp. Othello.
The town was diſtreſſed, and ready for an aſſault, which, if
it had been given, would have coſt much blood; but yet the
town would have been carried in the end. Bacon's Henry VII.
9. To prevail; with it. [le porter, Fr.]
Are you all reſolved to give your voices
But that's no matter; the greater part carries it. Shakespeare.
By theſe, and the like arts, they promiſed themſelves, that
they ſhould eaſily carry it; ſo that they entertained the houſe
all the morning with other debates. Clarendon.
If the numerouſneſs of a train muſt carry it, virtue may go
follow Aſtraea, and vice only will be worth the courting. Glanv.
Children, who live together, often ſtrive for maſtery, whoſe
wills ſhall carry it over the reſt. Locke.
In pleaſures and pains, the preſent is apt to carry it, and thoſe
at a diſtance have the diſadvantage in the compariſon. Locke.
Io. To bear out; to face through; to cutface.
If a man carries it off, there is ſo much money ſaved; and
if he be detected, there will be ſomething pleaſant in the fro-
lick. L'A/ºrange.
11. To preſerve external appearance.
My niece is already in the belief that he's mad; we ma
carry it thus for our pleaſure, and his penance. Shakespeare T. Night.
12. To manage; to tranſact.
The ſenate is generally as numerous as our houſe of com-
mons; and yet carries its reſolutions ſo privately, that they are
ſeldom known. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
13. To behave ; to condućt; with the reciprocal pronoun.
Neglect not alſo the examples of thoſe that have carried
themſelves ill in the ſame place. Bacon.
He attended the king into Scotland, where he did carry him-
ſelf with much ſingular ſweetneſs and temper. J/otton.
He carried himſelf ſo inſolently in the houſe, and out of the
houſe, to all perſons, that he became odious. Clarendon.
14. To bring forward; to advance in any progreſs.
It is not to be imagined how far conſtancy will carry a man;
however, it is better walking ſlowly in a rugged way, than to
break a leg and be a cripple. Locke.
This plain natural way, without grammar, can carry them to
a great degree of elegancy and politeneſs in their language.
Locke on Education, $ 168.
There is no vice which mankind carries to ſuch wild ex-
tremes, as that of avarice. Swift.
15. To urge; to bear on with ſome kind of external impulſe.
Men are ſtrongly carried out to, and hardly took off from,
the practice of vice. South.
He that the world, or fleſh, or devil, can carry away from
the profeſſion of an obedience to Chriſt, is no ſon of the faith-
ful Abraham. Hammond's Pračfical Catechiſm.
Ill nature, paſſion, and revenge, will carry them too far in
puniſhing others; and therefore God hath certainly appointed
government to reſtrain the partiality and violence of men.
Locłe.
Shakespeare.
16. To bear; to have ; to obtain.
In ſome vegetables, we ſee ſomething that carries a kind of
analogy to ſenſe; they contračt their leaves againſt the cold;
they open them to the favourable heat. Hale's Origin of Mank.
17. To exhibit to ſhow; to diſplay on the outſide; to ſet to
View.
The aſpect of every one in the family carries ſo much ſatiſ-
faćtion, that it appears he knows his happy lot. Addiſon. Speef.
18. To imply; to import.
It carries too great an imputation of ignorance, lightneſs or
folly, for men to quit and renounce their former tenets, pre-
ſently upon the offer of an argument, which they cannot imme-
diately anſwer. Locke.
19. To contain.
He thought it carried ſomething of argument in it, to prove
that doctrine. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
20. To have annexed; to have any thing joined.
There was a righteous and a ſearching law, directly forbid-
ding ſuch practices; and they knew that it carried with it the
divine ſtamp. South.
There are many expreſſions, which carry with them to my
mind no clear ideas. - Locłe.
The obvious portions of extenſion, that affect our ſenſes,
carry with them into the mind the idea of finite. Locke.
2 I. To convey or bear any thing united or adhering, by commu-
nication of motion.
We ſee alſo manifeſtly, that ſounds are carried with wind d
-ºš 3il
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A R
TV sº---
|
-
|
\
\
NS cart rrauch, but for winter ploughing.
S.
and therefore ſounds will be heard further with the wind than
againſt the wind. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 125.
22. To move or continue anything in a certain direction.
His chimney is carried up through the whole rock, ſo that
you ſee the ſky through it, notwithſtanding the rooms lie very
deep. Addiſon on Italy.
23. To puſh on ideas in a train.
Manethes, that wrote of the Egyptians, hath carried up their
government to an incredible diſtance. Hale's Origin of Mank.
24. To receive; to endure.
Some have in readineſs ſo many odd ſtories, as there is no-
thing but they can wrap it into a tale, to make others carry it
with more pleaſure. Bacon, Eſſay 23.
25. To ſupport; to ſuſtain. -
Carry camomile, or wild thyme, or the green ſtrawberry,
upon ſticks, as you do hops upon poles. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
26. To bear, as trees.
Set them a reaſonable depth, and they will carry more ſhoots
upon the ſtem. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 425.
27. To fetch and bring, as dogs. .
Young whelps learn eaſily to carry; young popinjays learn
quickly to ſpeak. Aftham's Schoolmaſter.
28. To carry off. To kill.
Old Parr lived to one hundred and fifty three years of age,
and might have gone further, if the change of air had not car-
ried him off. Temple.
29. To carry on. To promote; to help forward.
It carries on the ſame deſign that is promoted by authours of
a graver turn, and only does it in another manner. Addison.
2 o. To carry on. To continues to advance from one ſtage to
another.
By the adminiſtration of grace, begun by our Bleſſed Sa-
viour, carried on by his diſciples, and to be completed by their
fucceſlours to the world's end, all types that darkened this faith,
are enlightned. Sprat.
AEneas's ſettlement in Italy was carried on through all the
oppoſitions in his way to it, both by ſea and land. Addiſon.
3 1. 72 carry on. To proſecute; not to let ceaſe.
France will not conſent to furniſh us with money ſufficient
to carry on the war. Temple.
32. To carry through. To ſupport; to keep from failing, or be-
ing conquered. -
That grace will carry us, if we do not wilfully betray our
ſuccours, victoriouſly through all difficultics. Hammond.
To CA'RR Y. v. m.
1. A hare is ſaid, by hunters, to carry, when ſhe runs on rotten
ground, or on froſt, and it ſticks to her feet.
2. A horſe is ſaid to carry well, when his neck is arched, and he
holds his head high; but when his neck is ſhort, and ill ſhaped,
and he lowers his head, he is ſaid to carry low.
2. To carry it high. To be proud.
CA'RRY-FAL.E. m. ſ. [from carry and tale.] A talebearer.
Some carry-tale, ſome pleaſeman, ſome ſlight zany,
Told our intents before. Shakeſp. Love's Labour Loſt.
CART. m. ſ. See CAR. [cnaez, crat, Sax.]
r. A carriage in general.
The Scythians are deſcribed by Herodotus to lodge always
irl carts, and to feed upon the milk of mares. Temple.
Triptolemus, ſo ſung the Nine,
Strew’d plenty from his cart divine. Dryden.
2- A wheel-carriage, uſed commonly for luggage.
. Now while my friend, juſt ready to depart,
Was packing all his goods in one poor cart,
He ſtopp'd a little Dryden's juvenal.
3- A ſmall carriage with two wheels, uſed by huſbandmen, diſ-
tira guiſhed from a waggon, which has four wheels.
Alas! what weights are theſe that load my heart 1
I am as dull as winter-ſtarved ſheep,
Tir’d as a jade in overloaden cart. Sidney.
A. The vehicle in which criminals are carried to execution.
The ſquire, whoſe good grace was to open the ſcene,
Novºv fitted the halter, now travers'd the cart,
A raci often took leave, but was loth to depart. Prior.
*Ca = −r. v. a. [from the noun..] To expoſe in a cart by way
of Pt 1 raiſhment.
ID-emocritus ne'er laugh’d ſo loud,
To ſee bawds carted through the croud.
INT-&gt; woman led a better life:
She r- intrigues was een hard-hearted;
She chuckid when a bawd was carted;
A ** si thought the nation ne'er would thrive,
Ti II == Il the whores were burnt alive. Prior.
Hudibras.
To CA = +-- ... n. To uſe carts for carriage.
SR-era are not ſo good for draught, where you have occaſion
Mortimer.
AR". H$2 =se. n.ſ.. [from cart and horſe.] A coarſe unwieldy
horſe, fit only for the cart.
*W*s determined, that theſe fick and wounded ſoldiers
ſhould be carried upon the cart-horſes. Knolles.
C**.**** - n.ſ.. [from cart and jade.) A vile horſe, fit only .
for the *C-art.
wº sevee out with all his clowas, horſed upon ſuch cart-
º --_--
jades, ſo furniſhed, I thought if that were thrift, I wiſhed none
of my friends or ſubječts ever to thrive. Sidney; b. ii.
CART-Lo AD. m. ſ. [from cart and load.]
1. A quantity of any thing piled on a cart. -
A cart-load of carrots appeared of darker colour, when look-
ed upon where the points were cbverted to the eye, than where
the ſides were ſo. Bºyle.
Let Wood and his accomplices travel about a country with
cart-loads of their ware, and ſee who will take it. Swift.
2. A quantity ſufficient to load a cart.
CART-way. m. ſ. [from cart and way.] A way through which
a carriage may conveniently travel.
Where your woods are large, it is beſt to have a cart-way
along the middle of them. Mortimer's Hurbanary,
CARTÉ BLANCHE. [French.] A blank paper ; a paper to
be filled up with ſuch conditions as the perſon to whom it is
ſent thinks proper. -
CA'RTEL. º [cartel, Fr. cartello, Ital.] A writing containing,
for the moſt part, ſtipulations between enemies.
As this diſcord among the ſiſterhood is likely to engage them
in a long and lingring war, it is the more neceſſary that there
ſhould be a cartel ſettled among them.
CARTER. m. ſ [from cart.] The man who drives a cart, or
whoſe trade it is to drive a cart.
If he love her not,
Let me be no aſſiſtant for a ſtate, -
But keep a farm, and carters. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
The divine goodneſs never fails, provided that, according to
the advice of Hercules to the carter, we put our own ſhoulders
to the work. L’Eſtrange.
The criminals are ſeiz'd upon the place:
Carter and hoſt confronted face to face. Dryden.
It is the prudence of a carter to put bells upon his horſes, to
make them carry their burdens cheerfully. Dryden's Difreſnoy.
CARTILAGE. n.ſ.. [cartilago, Lat..] A ſmooth and ſolid bo-
dy, ſofter than a bone, but harder than a ligament. In it are
no cavities or cells for containing of marrow ; nor is it cover-
ed over with any membrane to make it ſenſible, as the bones
are. The cartilages have a natural elaſticity, by which, if they
are forced from their natural figure or ſituation, they return to
it of themſelves, as ſoon as that force is taken away. ;
Thoſe canals, by degrees, are aboliſhed, and grow ſolid;
ſeveral of them united, grow a membrane; theſe membrancs
further conſolidated, become cartilages, and cartilages bones.
-- Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CARTILAG1'NEous. R n.ſ.. [from cartilage.] Conſiſting of car-
CARTILA'GINo Us. } tilages.
By what artifice the cartilagineous kind of fiſhes poiſe them-
ſelves, aſcend and deſcend at pleaſure, and continue in what
depth of water they liſt, is as yet unknown. Ray.
The larynx gives paſſage to the breath, and, as the breath
paſſeth through the rimula, makes a vibration of thoſe cartila-
ginous bodies, which forms that breath into a vocal ſound or
voice. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Carto'on, n.ſ. [cartone, Ital] A painting or drawing upon
large paper. -
It is with a vulgar idea that the world beholds the cartoons of
Raphael, and every one feels his ſhare of pleaſure and enter-
tainment. J/atts's Logick.
CART ouch. n ſ. [cartouche, Fr.] A caſe of wood three inches
thick at the bottom, girt round with marlin, and holding forty-
eight musketballs, and ſix or eight iron balls of a pound weight.
It is fired out of a hobit or ſmall mortar, and is proper for de-
fending a paſs. Harris.
CA'RTRAGE. }'. f. [cartouche, Fr.] A caſe of paper or parch-
CARTRIDGE. S. ment filled with gunpowder, uſed for the greater
expedition in charging guns.
Our careful monarch ſtands in perſon by,
His new-caſt cannons firmneſs to explore; ,
The ſtrength of big-corn'd powder loves to try, -
And ball and cartrage ſorts for every bore. Dryden.
CA'RTRUT. n.ſ.. [from cart and rut; route, a way.] The track
made by a cart wheel.
CA'RTULARY, n.ſ.. [from charta, paper, Lat.] A place where
papers or records are kept.
CARTwRIGHT. n.ſ.. [from cart and wright.] A maker of carts.
After local names, the moſt names have been derived from
occupations or profeſſions; as, Taylor, Potter, Smith, Cº-
wright. Camden's Remains.
To CARVE. v. a. ſceonpan, Sax, Kerven, Dutch..]
1. To cut wood, or ſtone, or other matter, into elegant forms.
Taking the very refuſe among thoſe which ſerved to no uſe,
he hath carved it diligently when he had nothing elſe to do.
- //iſdom, xiii. 13.
Had Democrates really carved mount Athos into a ſtatue of
Alexander the Great, and had the memory of the fact been ob-
literated by ſome accident, who could afterwards have proved it
impoſſible, but that it might caſually have been 2 Bentley.
2. To cut meat at the table. , -
3. To make any thing by carving or cutting.
Yet fearing idleneſs, the nurſe of ill,
ilpture exercis'd his happy skill ;
In ſculptur re - And
Addiſon's Freeholder. .
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A S
C A S
-
-
--
And carv'd in iv'ry ſuch a maid ſo fair,
As nature could not with his art compare,
Were ſhe to work.
4. To engrave.
O'Roſalind theſe trees ſhall be my books,
And in their barks my thoughts I'll chara&amp;ter;
That every eye, which in this foreſt looks,
Shall ſee thy virtue witneſs'd every where.
Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree,
The fair, the chaſte, the unexpreſſive ſhe.
- huſe one's own part.
5 Tº: had been a .. of his flocks, both from the violence
of robbers and his own ſoldiers; who could eaſily have carved
themſelves their own food. South.
How dares ſinful duſt and aſhes invade the prerogative of pro-
vidence, and carve out to himſelf the ſeaſons and iſſues of life
and death South.
The labourer's ſhare, being ſeldom more than a bare ſub-
ſiſtence, never allows that body of men opportunity to ſtruggle
with the richer, unleſs when ſome common and great diſtreſs
emboldens them to carve to their wants. Locke.
6. To cut; to hew.
Or they will buy his ſheep forth of the cote,
Or they will carve the ſhepherd's throat. Spenser's Paſtorals.
Brave Macbeth, with his brandiſh'd ſteel, :
Like valour's minion, carved out his paſſage. Shakeſp.
To CARVE. v. n.
1. To exerciſe the trade of a ſculptor.
2. To perform at table the office of ſupplying the company from
the diſhes.
I do mean to make love to Ford's wife; I ſpy entertainment
in her; ſhe diſcourſes, ſhe carves, ſhe gives the leer of invita-
Dryden.
Shakeſp.
tion. Shakeſp. Merry I/ives of Windſºr.
Well then, things handſomely were ſerv'd;
My miſtreſs for the ſtrangers carv'd. Prior:
CA'Rvel. n. ſ. [See CARA v El..] A ſmall ſhip.
I gave them order, if they found any Indians there, to ſend
in the little fly-boat, or the carvel, into the river; for, with our
great ſhips, we durſt not approach the coaſt. Raleigh.
CA'Rv ER. m. ſ. [from carve.]
I. A ſculptor.
All arts and artiſts Perſeus could command,
Who ſold for hire, or wrought for better fame,
The maſter painters and the carvers came.
2. He that cuts up the meat at the table.
Meanwhile thy indignation yet to raiſe,
The carver, dancing round each diſh, ſurveys
With flying knife, and, as his art directs,
With proper geſtures ev'ry fowl diſſects.
3. He that chooſes for himſelf.
In this kind, to come in braving arms,
Be his own carver, and cut out his way,
To find out right with wrongs it may not be. Shakespeare R. II.
We are not the carvers of our own fortunes. L'Eſtrange.
CA'RVING. m.ſ.. [from carve..] Sculpture; figures carved.
They can no more laſt like the ancients, than excellent carv-
Dryden.
Dryden.
ings in wood, like thoſe in marble and braſs. Temple.
The lids are ivy, grapes in cluſters lurk
Beneath the carving of the curious work. Dryden's Virgil.
CARU'NcLE. m. ſ. [caruncula, Lat.] A ſmall protuberance of
fleſh, either natural or morbid.
Caruncles are a ſort of looſe fleſh, ariſing in the urethra by the
eroſion made by virulent acid matter. JWiſeman.
CAR1CATES. } n. ſ. [from Carya, a city taken by the Greeks,
CARYATIDES. $ who led away the women captives; and, to
perpetuate their ſlavery, repreſented them in buildings as charg-
ed with burdens.] An order of columns or pilaſters under the
figures of women, dreſſed in long robes, ſerving to ſupport en-
tablatures, Chambers.
CAscA'DE. m. ſ. [caſcade, Fr. caſtata, Ital. from caſcare, a low
word, to fall J A cataraćt; a water-fall.
Rivers diverted from their native courſe,
And bound with chains of artificial force,
From large caſcades in pleaſing tumultroll’d,
Or roſe through figur’d ſtone, or breathing gold. Prior.
The moſt enlivening part of all is the river Teverone, which
throws itſelf down a precipice, and falls by ſeveral caſcades,from
one rock to another, till it gains the bottom of the valley.
Addiſon on Italy.
CASF. n.ſ.. [caiſe, Fr. a box.]
1. Something that covers or contains anything elſe; a covering;
a box; a ſheath. .
O cleave, my fides 1
Heart, once be ſtronger than thy continent,
Crack thy frail caſe. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
Each thought was viſible that roll'd within,
As through a cryſtal caſe the figur'd hours are ſeen. Dryden.
“Other caterpillars produced maggots, that immediately made
themſelves up in caſes. Ray on the Creation.
The body is but a caſe to this vehicle. Broome on the Odyſſey.
Juſt then Clariſſa drew, with tempting grace,
A two-cdg’d weapon from her ſhining caſe. Pope,
2. The outer part of a houſe or building.
The caſe of the holy houſe is nobly deſigned, and executed
by great maſters. Addiſon on Italy.
3. A building unfurniſhed.
He had a purpoſe likewiſe to raiſe, in the univerſity, a fair
caſe for ſuch monuments, and to furniſh it with other choice
collections from all parts of his own charge. //attan.
Case-KNIFE. n.ſ.. [from caſe and knife.] A largeſkitchen knife.
The king always ačts with a great caſe-knife ſtuck in his
girdle, which the lady ſnatches from him in the ſtruggle, and
ſo defends herſelf. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
cºlor. n: ſ [from caſe and ſhot..] Bullets incloſed in a
CalC.
In each ſeven ſmall braſs and leather guns, charged with
caſe-ſhot. Clarendon, b. viii.
CASE. m. ſ. [caſus, Lat.]
1. Condition with regard to outward circumſtances.
Unworthy wretch, quoth he, of ſo great grace,
How dare I think ſuch glory to attain
Theſe that have it attain'd, were in like caſe,
Quoth he, as wretched, and liv'd in like pain. Fairy Queen.
Queſtion your royal thoughts, make the caſe yours;
Be now a father, and propoſe a ſon. Shałºff. Henry IV. p. ii.
Some knew the face,
And all had heard the much lamented caſ. Dryden.
Theſe were the circumſtances under which the Corinthians
then were, and the argument which the apoſtle advances, is in-
tended to reach their particular caſe. Atterbury.
My youth may be made, as it never fails in executions, a caſe
of compaſſion. Pope's Preface to his IVorks.
2. State of things.
He ſaith, that if there can be found ſuch an inequality be-
tween man and man, as there is between man and beaſt, or be-
tween ſoul and body, it inveſteth a right of government, which
ſeemeth rather an impoſſible caſe, than an untrue ſentence.
Bacon’s Holy War.
Here was the caſe; an army of Engliſh, waſted and tired
with a long winter's fiege, engaged an army of a greater num-
ber than themſelves, freſh and in vigour. Bacon.
I can but be a ſlave where-ever I am; ſo that taken or not
taken, 'tis all a caſe to me. L’Eſtrange.
They are excellent in order to certain ends; he hath no need
to uſe them, as the caſe now ſtands, being provided for with
the proviſion of an angel. Taylor's Holy Living.
Your parents did not produce you much into the world,
whereby you have fewer ill impreſſions; but they failed, as is
generally the caſe, in too much neglecting to cultivate your
mind. Swift.
3. In phyſick; ſtate of the body.
It was well; for we had rather met with calms and contrary
winds, than any tempeſts; for our ſick were many, and in very
ill caſe. Bacon.
Chalybeate water ſeems to be a proper remedy in hypochon-
driacal caſes. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
4. In ludicrous language, condition with regard to leanneſs, or
health.
Thou lieſt, moſt ignorant monſter, I am in caſe to juſtle a
conſtable. Shakeſp. Tempºff.
Pray have but patience till then, and when I am in little bet-
ter caſe, I'll throw myſelf in the very mouth of you. L’E/ºr.
Quoth Ralph, I ſhould not, if I were
In caſe for action, now be here. Hudibras, p. i. cant. iii.
For if the fire be faint, or out of caſe,
He will be copy’d in his famiſh’d race.
The prieſt was pretty well in caſe,
And ſhew’d ſome humour in his face;
Look'd with an eaſy careleſs mien,
A perſe&amp;t ſtranger to the ſpleen. Swift.
5. Contingence.
The atheiſt, in caſe things ſhould fall out contrary to his be-
lief or expectation, hath made no proviſion for this caſe; if,
contrary to his confidence, it ſhould prove in the iſſue that
there is a God, the man is loſt and undone for ever. Tillotſon.
6. Queſtion relating to particular perſons or things.
Well do I find each man moſt wiſe in his own caſe. Sidney.
. It is ſtrange, that the ancient fathers ſhould not appeal to
this judge, in all caſes, it being ſo ſhort and expedite a way for
the ending of controverſies. Tillotſºn.
7. Repreſentation of any fact or queſtion.
If he be not apt to beat over matters, and to call up one
thing, to prove and illuſtrate another, let him ſtudy the law-
yers caſes : ſo every defect of the mind may have a ſpecial re-
ceipt. Bacon, Eſſay 51.
8. The variation of nouns.
The ſeveral changes which the noun undergoes in the Latin
and Greek tongues, in the ſeveral numbers, are called caſes, and
are defigned to expreſs the ſeveral views or relations under which
the mind conſiders things with regard to one another ; and the
variation of the noun for this purpoſe is called declenſion.
Clark’s Latin Grammar.
9. In caſ... [nel caſ, Ital.] If it ſhould happen; upon the ſuppor
ſition that: a form of ſpeech now little uſed. F
Qr
Dryden's Wirgil.
*
.."<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A S
C A S
For in caſe it be certain, hard it cannot be for them to ſhew
us where we ſhall find it; that we may ſay theſe were the or-
ders of the apoſtles. Hooker, b. iii.
A ſure retreat to his forces, in caſe they ſhould have an ill day,
or unlucky chance in the field. Bacon's Henry VII.
This would be the accompliſhment of their common felicity,
in caſe, either by their evil deſtiny or advice, they ſuffered not
the occaſion to be loſt. Playward.
To CASE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To put in a caſe or cover.
Caſe ye, caſe ye; on with your vizours; there's money of
the king's coming down the hill. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
The cry went once for thee,
And ſtill it might, and yet it may again,
If thou would'ſt not entomb thyſelf alive,
And caſe thy reputation in a tent. Shakeſp. Troil, and Crºſſ.
On whoſe luxuriant herbage, half conceal’d,
Like a fall'n cedar, far diffus'd his train,
Cas'd in green ſcales, the crocodile extends. Thomſon.
2. To cover as a caſe.
Then comes my fit again, I had elſe been perfeót;
As broad, and gen'ral, as the caſing air,
To ſaucy doubts and fears. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. ſ: cover on the outſide with materials different from the in-
1(le.
Then they began to caſe their houſes with marble.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
4. To ſtrip off the covering; to take off the ſkin.
We'll make you ſome ſport with the fox ere we caſe him.
Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
To CASE. v. n. To put caſes; to contrive repreſentations of
fačts.
They fell preſently to reaſoning and caſing upon the matter
with him, and laying diſtinétions before him. L’Eſtrange.
To CASEHARDEN. v. a. [from caſe and harden.] To harden
on the outſide.
The manner of caſchardening is thus : Take cow horn or
hoof, dry it thoroughly in an oven, then beat it to powder ;
put about the ſame quantity of bay ſalt to it, and mingle them
together with ſtale chamberlye, or elſe white wine vinegar.
Lay ſome of this mixture upon loam, and cover your iron all
over with it; then wrap the loam about all, and lay it upon the
hearth of the forge to dry and harden. Put it into the fire,
and blow up the coals to it, till the whole lump have juſt a
blood-red heat. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
CA's EMATE. m. ſ. [from caſa armata, Ital. caſamata, Span. a
vault formerly made to ſeparate the platforms of the lower and
upper batteries.]
1. [In fortification.] A kind of vault or arch of ſtone-work, in
that part of the flank of a baſtion next the curtin, ſomewhat
retired or drawn back towards the capital of the baſtion, ſerv-
ing, as a battery, to defend the face of the oppoſite baſtion, and
the moat or ditch. Chambers.
2. The well, with its ſeveral ſubterraneous branches, dug in the
paſſage of the baſtion, till the miner is heard at work, and air
given to the mine. Harris.
CA’s EMENT. n.ſ. [caſamento, Ital.] A window opening upon
hinges.
Why, then may you have a caſement of the great chamber
window, where we play, open, and the moon may ſhine in
at the caſement. Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
Here in this world they do much knowledge read,
And are the caſements which admit moſt light. Davies.
They, waken'd with the noiſe, did fly
From inward room to window eye,
And gently op'ning lid, the caſement,
Look'd out, but yet with ſome amazement. Hudibras.
There is as much difference between the clear repreſenta-
tions of the underſtanding then, and the obſcure diſcoveries
that it makes now, as there is between the proſpect of a caſe-
ment and a key-hole. South.
CA's Eous. adj. [caſus, Lat..] Reſembling cheeſe; cheeſy.
Its fibrous parts are from the caſeous parts of the chyle.
Floyer on Humours.
CA's ERN. n.ſ.. [caſerne, Fr.] A little room or lodgement erec-
ted between the lampart and the houſes of fortified towns, to
ſerve as apartments or lodgings for the ſoldiers of the garriſon,
with beds. Harris.
CA's EworM. n.ſ.. [from caſe and worm.] A grub that makes it-
ſelf a caſe.
Cadiſes, or caſeworms, are to be found in this nation, in ſe-
veral diſtinét counties, and in ſeveral little brooks. Floyer.
CASH. n.ſ. ſcaiſe, Fr. a cheſt.] Money; properly ready mo-
ney; money in the cheſt, or at hand. -
A thief, bent to unhoard the caſh
Of ſome rich burgher. Paradiſe Loft, b. ii. l. 188.
He is at an end of all his caſh; he has both his law and his
daily bread now upon truſt. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
He ſent the thief, that ſtole the caſh, away,
And puniſh'd him that put it in his way. Pope.
CA's H-keeper. m.ſ.. [from caſh and keep.] A man entruſted with
the money. -
Diſpenſator was properly a caſh-keeper, or privy-purſe.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
CA'shewnut. n.ſ. A tree.
The cup of the flower, which is produced at the cytºcinity
of a footſtalk, is oblong and quinquefid; the flower conſiſts of
one leaf, which is j into five long narrow ſegments; in
the bottom of the calyx is the ovary, which becomes a ſoft
pear-ſhaped fruit; upon the apex of which grows a veſſel, in
which is contained one kidney-ſhaped ſeed. This tree is very
common in Jamaica and Barbadoes, where it grows very largé,
but in England will rarely ſtand through our winters. The in-
habitants of the Weſt Indies plant them from branches taken
from the old trees; which, with them, take root very well,
and in two years time produce fruits. AMiller.
CASH1’ER, n.ſ.. [from caſh..] He that has charge of the money.
- If a ſteward or caſhier be ſuffered to run on, without bring-
ing him to a reckoning, ſuch a ſottiſh forbearance will teach
him to ſhuffle. South.
A Venetian, finding his ſon's expences grow very high, or-
dered his caſhier to let him have no more money than what he
ſhould count when he received it. Locke.
Flight of caſhiers, or mobs, he'll never mind;
And knows no loſſes, while the muſe is kind. Pope.
To CASH1'ER. v. a. ſcaffer, Fr. caffare, Lat.]
1. To diſcard; to diſmiſs from a poſt, or a ſociety, with re-
proach.
Does 't not go well? Caſſio hath beaten thee,
And thou by that ſmall hurt haſt caſhier'd Caffio. Shakespeare.
Seconds in factions many times prove principals; but many
times alſo they prove cyphers, and are caſhiered. Bacon.
If I had omitted what he ſaid, his thoughts and words be-
ing thus caſhiered in my hands, he had no longer been Lucre-
tlus. Dryden.
They have already caſhiered ſeveral of their followers as mu-
tineers. Addiſon's Freeholder.
The ruling rogue, who dreads to be caſhier'd,
Contrives, as he is hated, to be fear'd. Swift.
2. It ſeems, in the following paſſages, to ſignify the ſame as to an-
nul; to vacate; which is ſufficiently agreeable to the deriva-
tion.
If we ſhould find a father corrupting his ſon, or a mother her
daughter, we muſt charge this upon a peculiar anomaly and
baſeneſs of nature; if the name of nature may be allowed to
that which ſeems to be utter caſhiering of it, and deviation
from, and a contradićtion to, the common principles of hu-
manity. South.
Some, out of an overfondneſs of that darling invention,
caſhier, or at leaſt endeavour to invalidate, all other argu-
ments, and forbid us to hearken to thoſe proofs, as weak or
fallacious. Docke.
CASK. n.ſ.. [coſue, Fr. cadus, Lat.]
1. A barrel; a wooden veſſel to ſtop up liquour or proviſions.
The patient turning himſelf abed, it makes a fluctuating kind
of noiſe, like the rumbling of water in a caſk. Harvey.
Perhaps tomorrow he may change his wine,
And drink old ſparkling Alban, or Setine,
Whoſe title, and whoſe age, with mould o'ergrown,
The good old caſk for ever keeps unknown. Dryden.
2. It has taſk in a kind of plural ſenſe, to ſignify the commodity
or proviſion of caſks. -
Great inconveniencies grow by the bad caſk being commonly
ſo ill ſeaſoned and conditioned, as that a great part of the beer
is ever loſt and caſt away. Raleigh.
Cask. }" J. [caſue, #. caſſis, Lat.] A helmet; armour for
CAsqJE. § the head: a poetical word.
Let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
Fall like amazing thunder on the caſque
Of thy pernicious enemy.
And theſe
Sling weighty ſtones, when from afar they fight;
Their º are cork, a covering thick and light. Dryden.
What are his aims ? why does he load with darts
His trembling hands, and cruſh beneath a caſk
His wrinkled brows : Addiſon's Cato.
CA's KET. n.ſ.. [a diminutive of caiſe, a cheſt, Fr. caffº, caſſette.]
A ſmall box or cheſt for jewels, or things of particular value.
O ignorant poor man what doſt thou bear,
Lock'd up within the caſket of thy breaſt
What jewels, and what riches haſt thou there?
What heav'nly treaſure in ſo weak a cheſt ? Davies.
They found him dead, and caſt into the ſtreets,
An empty caſket, where the jewel, life,
By ſome damn'd hand was robb'd, and ta'en away. Shakeſp.
Mine eye hath found that ſad ſepulchral rock,
That was the caſket of heav'n's richeſt ſtore. Milton.
That had by chance pack'd up his choiceſt treaſure
In one dear caſket, and ſav'd only that. Otway's Wen. Preſerv.
This caſket India's glowing gems unlocks,
And all Arabia breathes from yonder box. Pope.
To CA'sket. v. a. [from the noun..] To put in a caſket.
I have writ my letters, caſketed my treaſure, and given order
for our horſes. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
CAssam UNA'iR. m. ſ. An aromatick vegetable, being a ſpecies
of galangal, brought from the Eaſt, and highly valued as a ner-
vous and ſtomachick ſimple, - . &amp;ºy.
To
Shakeſp. Richard II:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A S
º
*
º
s
l
º
CA'ss Awar. E. Sce CAssrow ARY.
CA'ssi A. m. ſ. A ſweet ſpice mentioned by Mºſs, Exod. xxx.
To CA'ss Are. v. a. ſcaffºr, Fr. caſſºre, low Lat.] To vacate;
to invalidate; to make void; to nullify.
This opinion ſuperſedes and caſſates the beſt medium we
have. Ray on the Creation.
Cass ATIon. m. ſ. ſcaſſatio, Lat..] A making null or void. D.
CA'ss AVI.
CA'ss ADA.
It has a ſhort ſpreading bell-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of one
leaf, cut into ſeveral parts, whoſe pointal afterwards becomes a
roundiſh fruit, compoſed of three cells joined together, each
containing one oblong ſeed. To theſe notes ſhould be added,
male flowers having no pointal, and which, growing round the
female flower, fall off, and are never fruitful. The ſpecies are
fix: 1. The common caſſavi, or caſſada. 2. The moſt prickly
caffrºi, with a chaſte tree leaf. 3. Tree-like leſs prickly caſ-
ſavi, with white flowers growing in umbels, and a ſtinging
wolfsbane leaf. 4. Shrubby caſſari, without prickles, and
ſmooth leaves, which are leſs divided, &amp;c. The firſt ſort is
cultivated in all the warm parts of America, where the root,
after being diveſted of its milky juice, is ground to flour, and
then made into cakes of bread. Of this there are two ſorts.
The moſt common has purpliſh ſtalks, with the veins and
leaves of a purpliſh colour; but the ſtalks of the other are
green, and the leaves of a lighter green. The laſt fort is not
venomous, even when the roots are freſh and full of juice;
which the negroes frequently dig up, roaſt, and eat, like pota-
toes, without any ill effects. The caſſada is propagated by cut-
tings, about fifteen or ſixteen inches long, taken from thoſe
plants whoſe roots are grown to maturity. Theſe cuttings are
planted by the Americans in their rainy ſeaſons, a foot or four-
teen inches deep in the ground; and the land in which they are
placed, muſt be well wrought. When the cuttings have taken
root, they require no farther care than to be kept clear from
weeds; and, in about eight or nine months, when grown to
maturity, in good ground they will be as large as the calf of a
man's leg, but commonly equal to the ſize of good parſneps.
AMiller.
!". ſ: An American plant.
24, as an ingredient in the compoſition of the holy oil, which
was to be made uſe of in the conſecration of the ſacred veſſels
of the tabernacle. This aromatick is ſaid to be the bark of a
tree very like cinamon, and grows in the Indics without being
cultivated. Calmet.
All thy garments ſmell of myrrh, aloes, and caſia. Pſ. xlv. 8.
CA'ssi A. m. ſ. The name of a tree.
It hath a cylindrical, long, taper, or flat pod, divided into
many cells by tranſverſe diaphragms; in each of which is con-
tained one hard ſeed, lodged, for the moſt part, in a clammy
black ſubſtance, which is purgative. The flowers have five
leaves, diſpoſed orbicularly. The ſpecies are nine; 1. The
American caſia, with roundiſh pointed leaves. 2. The purg-
ing caſia, or pudding pipe tree, &amp;c. Many of theſe plants will
flower the ſecond year, and ſome of them will produce ripe
ſeeds with us. The ſecond ſort grows to be a very large tree,
not only in Alexandria, but alſo in the Weſt Indies. This is
what produces the purging caſia of the ſhops. Miller.
Cassidony, or Stickadore. m. ſ. [/?oechas, Latin.] The name
of a plant.
CA'ssrow ARY. n. ſ. A large bird of prey in the Eaſt Indies.
Have a clear idea of the relation of dam and chick, between
the two caſiowaries in St. James's Park. Locke.
CA'ssock. n.ſ. [coſaque, Fr.] A cloſe garment; now gene-
rally that which clergymen wear under their gowns.
Half of the which dare not ſhake the ſhow from off their
cºfficks, left they ſhake themſelves to pieces. "
- - Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
His ſcanty ſalary compelled him to run deep in debt for a
new gown and caſſºck, and now and then forced him to write
ſome paper of wit or humour, or preach a ſermon for ten ſhil-
lings, to ſupply his neceſſities. - Swift.
CA'ssWEED. m.ſ. A common weed, otherwiſe called /*pherd's
ouch.
To CAST. v. a. preter, coſ’, particip. paſſ coff. [after, Da-
niſh.]
1. To throw with the hand.
I rather chuſe to endure the wounds of thoſe darts, which
envy caſieth at novelty, than to go on ſafely and ſleepily in the
eaſy ways of ancient miſtakings. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the J/orld.
They had compaſſed in his hoſt, and aſ darts at the people
from morning till evening. 1 Macc. vii. 80.
- Then caſt thy ſword away, -
And yield thee to my mercy, or I ſtrike. Dryden and Lee,
2. To throw away, as uſeleſs or noxious.
Old Capulet, and Montague,
Have made Verona's ancient citizens
Cºff by their grave beſeeming ornaments. Shakeſp.
I have bought -
Gºlden opinion from all ſort of people,
Which would be worn now in their neweſt gloſs, -
Not caſt aſide ſo ſoon. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
When men, preſuming themſelves to be the only maſters of
right reaſon, caff by the votes and opinions of the reſt of man-
kind, as not worthy of reckoning. Locke.
3. To throw dice, or lots.
And Joſhua caſ' lots for them in Shiloh. Jºſh. xviii. Io.
4. To throw from a high place.
Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into deſtruction caſt him. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
5. To throw in wreſtling.
And I think, being too ſtrong for him, though he took my
legs ſometime, yet I made a ſhift to coſt him. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
6. To throw as a net or ſnare.
I ſpeak for your own profit, not that I may coſt a ſnare up-
on you. 1 Cor. vii. 35.
7. To drop; to let fall.
They let down the boat into the ſea, as though they would
have caſt anchor, Acts, xxvii. 30.
8. To expoſe.
His friends contend to embalm his body, his enemies, that
they may caſt it to the dogs. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
9. To drive by violence of weather.
Howbeit we muſt be caſt upon a certain iſland. Afts,xxvii.26.
What length of lands, what ocean have you paſs'd,
What ſtorms ſuſtain'd, and on what ſhore been caſt 2 Dryd.
Io. To build by throwing up earth; to raiſe.
And ſhooting in the earth, ca/?s up a mount of clay.
Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i. c. viii. ſtanz. 9.
The king of Aſſyria ſ not 3. into this city, ſº ñº,
an arrow there, nor come before it with ſhield, nor caſt a bank
againſt it. 2 Kings, xix. 32.
At length Barbaroſſa having cºſt up his trenches, landed fifty-
four pieces of artillery for battery. Knoller's Hiſtory.
Earth-worms will come forth, and moles will caſt up more,
and fleas bite more, againſt rain. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
11. To put into any certain ſtate.
Jeſus had heard that John was coff into priſon. Matt. iv. 12.
At thy rebuke both the chariot and horſe are caſt into a dead
ſleep. Pſalm lxxvi.6.
12. To condemn in a trial.
But oh, that treacherous breaſt ! to whom weak you
Did truſt our counſels, and we both may rue,
Having his falſehood found too late, 'twas he
That made me caſt you guilty, and you me. Donne.
We take up with the moſt incompetent witneſſes, nay, often
ſuborn our own ſurmiſes and jealouſies, that we may be ſure to
cºſt the unhappy criminal. Governm. of the Tongue, $6.
He could not, in this forlorn caſe, have made uſe of the very
laſt plea of a caſt criminal; nor ſo much as have cried, Mercy!
Lord, mercy South.
There then we met; both try’d, and both were coff,
"And this irrevocable ſentence paſt. Dryden's Theod, and Hon.
13. To condemn in a law-ſuit. [from ca/ler, Fr.]
The northern men were agreed, and, in effect, all the other,
to caſt our London eſcheatour. Camden's Remains.
Were the caſe referred to any competent judge, they would
inevitably be ca/?. Decay of Piety.
14. To defeat.
No martial projećt to ſurpriſe,
Can ever be attempted twice;
Nor caſt deſign ſerve afterwards,
As gameſters tear their loſing cards. Hudibras, p. iii. e. iii.
15. To caſhier.
You are but now coſt in his mood, a puniſhment more in po-
licy than in malice; even ſo as one would beat his offenceleſs
dog, to affright an imperious lion. Shakeſp. Othello.
16. To leave behind in a race. ,
In ſhort, ſo ſwift your judgments turn and wind,
You caſt our fleeteſt wits a mile behind. Dryden.
17. To ſhed; to let fall; to lay aſide; to moult.
Our chariot loſt her wheels, their points our ſpears,
The bird of conqueſt her chief feather coff. Fairfax, b. iii.
Of plants ſome are green all winter, others caſt their leavcs.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 592.
The caſting of the ſkin is, by the ancients, compared to the
breaking curd of the ſecundine, or cawl, but not rightly; for
that were to make every caſting of the ſkin a new birth ; and
beſides, the ſecundine is but a general cover, not ſhaped ac-
cording to the parts, but the ſkin is ſhaped according to the
parts. The creatures that caſt the ſkin, are the ſnake, the
viper, the graſhopper, the lizzard, the ſilkworm, &amp;c.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 732.
O fertile head, which ev'ry year
Could ſuch a crop of wonders bear !
Which might it never have been cºſ’,
Each year's growth added to the latt,
Theſe lofty branches had ſupply'd
The earth's bold ſons prodigious pride. Mºlºr.
The waving harveſt bends beneath his blaſt,
The foreſt Shakespeare the groves their honours coff. Dryden.
From hence, my lord, and love, I thus conclude,
That though my homely anceſtors were rude,
Mean as I am, yet may I have the grace
To make you father of a generous race :
..I.
y
!
2<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2. And
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A S
C A S
And noble then am I, when I begin,
In virtue cloath'd, to caſt the rags of fin. Dryden's W. of B.
The ladies have been in a kind of moulting ſeaſon, having
caſt great quantities of ribbon and cambrick, and reduced the
human figure to the beautiful globular form. Addiſon. Spectator.
18. To lay aſide, as fit to be worn no longer.
So may caſt poets write; there's no pretenſion
To argue loſs of wit, from loſs of penſion. Dryden's D. Seb.
He has ever been of opinion, that giving caſt clothes to be
worn by valets, has a very ill effect upon little minds. Addiſon.
19. To have abortions; to bring forth before the time.
Thy ews and thy *::::: have not caſt their young, and the
rams of thy flock have I not eaten. Gen. xxxi. 38.
20. To overweigh; to make to preponderate; to decide by over-
ballancing,
Which being inclined, not conſtrained, contain within
themſelves the caſting ačt, and a power to command the con-
cluſion. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 13.
. . How much intereſt coffs the balance in caſes dubious. South.
Life and death are equal in themſelves,
That which could caſt the balance, is thy falſhood. Dryden.
Not many years ago, it ſo happened, that a cobler had the
caſting vote for the life of a criminal, which he very graciouſly
gave on the merciful ſide. Addiſon on Italy.
Suppoſe your eyes ſent equal rays
Upon two diſtant pots of ale,
In this ſad ſtate, your doubtful choice
Would never have the caſting voice. Prior.
21. To compute; to reckon; to calculate.
Hearts, tongues, figure, ſcribes, bards, poets, cannot
Think, ſpeak, caſt, write, ſing, number, ho! -
His love to Antony. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
Here is now the ſmith's note for ſhoeing and plow-irons.—
Let it be caſt and paid. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
‘You caſt th' event of war, my noble lord, -
And ſumm'd th’ account of chance, before you ſaid,
Let us make head. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
The beſt way to repreſent to life the manifold uſe of friend-
ſhip, is to caſt and ſee how many things thcre are, which a man
cannot do himſelf. Bacon's Eſſays.
I have lately been caſting in my thoughts the ſeveral unhap-
pineſſes of life, and comparing the infelicities of old age to thoſe
of infancy. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 131.
22. To contrive; to plan out. -
The cloiſter facing the South, is covered with vines, and
would have been proper for an orange-houſe; and had, I doubt
not, been caſt for that purpoſe, if this piece of gardening had
been then in as much vogue as it is now. Temple.
23. To judge; to conſider in order to judgment.
If thou couldſt, doćtor, caſt
The water of my land, find her diſeaſe,
And purge it to a ſound and priſtine health,
I would applaud thee to the very echo,
That ſhould applaud again.
Peace, brother, be not over exquiſite
To caſt the faſhion of uncertain evils.
24. To fix the parts in a play.
Our parts in the other world will be new caſt, and mankind
will be there ranged in different ſtations of ſuperiority. J
- Addiſon. Speciator, N° 219.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Milton.
25. To glance; to direét the eye.
Zelmanes's languiſhing countenance, with croſſed arms, and
ſometimes coſt up eyes, ſhe thought to have an excellent grace.
- - - - - - - Sidney, b. ii.
, - - - - ... As he paſt along, -
How earneſtly he caſt his eyes upon me. Shakespeare . H. VIII.
Begin, auſpicious boy, to caſt about.
. Thy infant eyes, and, with a ſmile, thy mother fingle out.
* -- º – e * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Dryden's Virgil, Paſt. iv.
"Far eaſtward caſt thine eye, from whence the ſun, -
And orient ſcience, at a birth begun. Pope's Dunciad.
He then led me to the rock, and, placing me on the top of
it, Coſt thy eyes eaſtward, ſaid he, and tell me what thou
ſeeſt. - * . . . . Addiſon. Spectator, N° 159.
26. To found; to form by running in a mould.
When any ſuch curious work of ſilver is to be caſ, as re-
quires that the impreſſion of hairs, or very ſlender lines, be ta-
ken off by the metal, it is not enough, that the filver be barely
sº melted; but it muſt be kept a confiderable while in a ſtrong
* fuſion. - - Boyle,
How to build ſhips, and dreadful ordnance caſt,
Inſtruct the artiſt. - - J/aller,
The father's grief reſtrain'd his art;
He twice eſſay’d to caſt his ſon in gold, -
Twice from his hands he dropp'd the forming mould. .
- - - º ’. Dryden, Æncid vi.
&gt; 7. To melt metal into figures. . . . . . . .
Yon' ºroud, he might refleå, yon joyful croud
With reſtleſs rage would pull my ſtatue down,
And caſt the braſs anew to his renown. - - Prior.
This was but as a refiner's fire, to purge out the droſs, and
then caſt the maſs again into a new mould, Burnet's Theory.
Vol. I.
28. To model; to form. •
We may take a quarter of a mile for the common meaſue
of the depth of the ſea, if it were coff into a channel of an
equal depth every where. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Under this influence, derived from mathematical ſtudies,
ſome have been tempted to raft all their logical, their metaphy-
fical, and their theological and moral learning into this method.
- - * J/atts's Logick.
29. To communicate by refle&amp;tion or emanation.
So bright a ſplendour, ſo divine a grace,
The glorious Daphniscaff; on his illuſtrious race. Dryden.
We may happen to find a fairer light caff over the ſame
ſcriptures, and ſee reaſon to alter our ſentiments even in ſome
points of moment. f/atts's Improvement of the Åfind.
30. To yield, or give up, without reſerve or condition.
The reaſon of mankind cannot ſuggeſt any ſolid ground of
ſatisfaction, but in making God our friend, and in carrying a
conſcience ſo clear, as may encourage us, with confidence, to
caſt ourſelves upon him. South.
31. To inflićt.
The world is apt to coſ’ great blame on thoſe who have an in-
differency for opinions, eſpecially in religion. Locke.
32. To caſt away. To ſhipwreck.
Sir Francis Drake, and John Thomas, meeting with a ſtorm,
it thruſt John Thomas upon the iſlands to the South, where he
was caſt away. Raleigh's Eſſays.
His father Philip had, by like miſhap, been like to have been
caſt away upon the coaſt of England. Knolles's Hiſtory.
With pity mov'd, for others caſt away
On rocks of hope and fears.
But now our fears tempeſtuous grow,
And coſt our hopes away;
Whilſt you, regardleſs of our woe,
Sit careleſs at a play. Dorſet.
33. ºf away. To laviſh ; to waſte in profuſion; to turn to
In Oule.
They that want means to nouriſh children, will abſtain from
marriage; or, which is all one, they coſt away their bodies up-
on rich old women. Raleigh's Eſſays.
France, haſt thou yet more blood to coſt away?
Say, ſhall the current of our right run on Shakoff. K. j.
He might be ſilent, and not coſt away
His ſentences in vain. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
O Marcia, O my fiſter, ſtill there's hope
Our father will not caſt away a life,
So needful to us all, and to his country.
34. To caſt away. ...To ruin. -
It is no impoſſible thing for ſtates, by an overſight in ſome one
aćt or treaty between them and their potent oppoſites, utterly to
caſt away themſelves for ever. Hooker, b. iii. § 10.
35. To caſt down. To dejećt; to depreſs the mind.
We're not the firſt,
Who, with beſt meaning, have incurr'd the worſt;
For thee, oppreſſed king, I am caſt down;
Myſelf could elſe outfrown falſe fortune's frown.
- Shakeſp. King Lear.
The beſt way will be to let him ſee you are much coſt down,
and afflićted, for the ill opinion he entertains of you.
Addiſon. Spediator, N° 171.
36. To caſt off. To diſcard; to put away.
The prince will, in the perfeótneſs of time,
Coff off his followers. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
He led me on to mightieſt deeds, -
But now hath caſt me off, as never known. Milt. Agoniſes.
How I not call him father? I ſee preferment alters a man
ſtrangely; this may ſerve me for an uſe of inſtrućtion, to caſt
off my father, when I am great. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
I long to claſp that haughty maid,
And bend her ſtubborn virtue to my paſſion:
When I have gone thus far, I'd caſt her off. Addison's Cato.
37. To coſt off. To rejećt. -
It is not to be imagined, that a whole ſociety of men ſhould
publickly and profeſſedly diſown, and coſt off a rule, which
they could not but be infallibly certain was a law. Locke.
38. Tº coſt off. To diſburden one's ſelf of
All conſpired in one to caſt off their ſubječtion to the crown
of England. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
This maketh them, through an unweariable deſire of receiv-
ing inſtrućtion, to caſt off the care of thoſe very affairs, which
do moſt concern their eſtate. Hooker, Preface.
The true reaſon why any man is an atheiſt, is becauſe he is
a wicked man: religion would curb him in his lufts; and
therefore he coſts it off, and puts all the ſcorn upon it he can.
- Tillotſºn, Serm. ii.
Company, in any action, gives credit and countenance to
the agent; and ſo much as the finner gets of this, ſo much he
coſts off of ſhame. South.
* We ſee they never fail to exert themſelves, and to caſt off the
oppreſſion, when they feel the weight of it. Addiſon.
39. To caſt off. To leave behind. -
Away he ſcours croſs the fields, caſts off the dogs, and gains
a wood'; but, preſſing through a thicket, the buſhes held him
*
Roſcommon,
Addison's Cato.
4 D by
--
i-
.
i
--:-
!
!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">i
º
i
º
-º
C A S
- hounds came i Slucked him down.
by the horns, till the S came in, *}º, Fab. xliii.
48. Tº coſt ºff. Thunting term.] To let go, or ſet free; as to
S.
..º To rejećt; to turn out of doors.
Thy brat hath been coſt out, like to itſelf, no father own-
ing it. Shakeſp. ſºinter's Tale.
42. #, caſ out. To vent; to ſpeak; with ſome intimation of
negligence or vehemence.
* 'why doſt thou caſt out ſuch ungenerous terms
Againſt the lords and . i. world 2
. To compute; to calculate.
43. º: **. in . up the goods moſt deſirable in life,
have given them this rank, health, beauty, and riches. Temple.
A man who deſigns to build, is very exact, as he ſuppoſes, in
rafting up the coſt beforehand; but, generally ſpeaking; he is
miſtaken iri his account. Dryden's Fab. Prºface.
44. To coſt up. To vomit.
Thou, beaſtly feeder, art ſo full of him,
That thou provok'ſt thyſelf to caſt him up. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Their villainy goes againſt my weak ſtomach, and therefore
I muſt caſt it up. Shakeſp. Henry V.
O, that in time Rome did not caſt .
Her errours up, this fortune to prevent. Ben. johnſºn's Catil.
Thy fooliſh errour find;
Addison Cato.
Caft up the poiſon that infects thy mind. Dryden.
To Cast. v. n.
1. To contrive; to turn the thoughts.
Then cloſely as he might, he caſt to leave
The court, not asking any paſs or leave. Spenser.
From that day forth, I caſt in careful mind, -
To ſeek her out with labour and long time. Fairy Q. b. i.
We have three that bend themſelves, looking into the expe-
riments of their fellows, and caſt about how to draw out of
them things of uſe and practice for man's life and knowledge.
Bacon's New Atlantis.
But firſt he caff; to change his proper ſhape; ---
Which elſe might work him danger or delay. Par. L. b. iii.
As a fox, with hot purſuit
Chas'd through a warren, caſt about ---
To ſave his credit. Hudibraſ, p. ii. cant. iii.
All events, called caſual, among inanimate bodies, are me-
chanically produced according to the determinate figures, tex-
tures, and motions of thoſe bodies, which are not conſcious of
their own operations, nor contrive and caſt about how to bring
* ſuch events to paſs. Bentley.
This way and that I coſt to ſave my friends,
Tillone reſolve my varying counſel ends. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To admit of a form, by caſting or melting.
It comes at the firſt fuſion into a maſs that is immediately
malleable, and will not run thin, ſo as to caſt and mould, un-
leſs mixed with poorer ore, or cinders. Woodward on Fºſſils.
3. To warp; to grow out of form.
Stuff is ſaid to coſt or warp, when, by its own drought, or
moiſture of the air, or other accident, it alters its flatneſs and
ſtraightneſs. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
CAST. *{ [from the verb.]
1. The aët of caſting or throwing; a thrbw.
So when a ſort of luſty ſhepherds throw
The bar by turns, and none the reſt outgo
So far, but that the reſt are meaſuring coſis,
*
Their emulation and their paſtime laſts. J/aller.
Yet all theſe dreadful deeds, this deadly fray,
A caſt of dreadful duſt will ſoon allay. Dryden's Wirgil.
2. The thing thrown.
Some harrow their ground over, and ſow wheat or rye on it
with a broad coſ’; ſome only with a ſingle caſt, and ſome with
a double. - - Mortimer.
3. State of anything caſt or thrown.
In his own inſtance of caſting ambs-ace, though it partake
more of contingency than of freedom; ſuppoſing the poſiture
of the party's hand, who did throw the dice; ſuppoſing the
figure of the table, and of the dice themſelves; ſuppoſing the
meaſure of force applied, and ſuppoſing all other things which
did concur to the produćtion of that caſt, to be the very ſame
they were, there is no doubt but, in this caſe, the caſt is neceſ-
ſary. Bramhall's Anſwer to Hobber.
File compares life to a game at tables; there what caſt we
ſhall have is not in our power, but to manage it well, that is.
Norris.
4. The ſpace through which anything is thrown.
And he was withdrawn from them about a ſtone's caſ, and
kneeled down and prayed. Luke, xxii. 41.
5. A ſtroke; a touch.
We have them all with one voice for giving him a caſt of
their court prophecy. South.
. . Another coff of their politicks, was that of endeavouring to
ºpºach an innocent lady, for her faithful and diligent ſervice
of the queen. Swift's Examiner, N° 19.
This was a caſt of wood's politicks; for his information was
*''''''y falſº and groundleſs, which he knew very well. Swift.
6. Motion of the eye. S2 º, ift
C A S
Pity cauſeth ſometimes tears, and a flexion or coff of the
eye º: ; for pity is but grief in another's behalf; the caſt of
the eye is a geſture of averſion, or lothneſs, to behold the ob-
jećt of pity. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
If any man deſires to look on this doctrine of gravity, ſet
him turn the firſt caſt of his eyes on what we have ſaid of fire.
Digby on the Soul.
There held in holy paſſion ſtill,
Forget thyſelf to marble, till,
With a ſad leaden downward caſt,
Thou fix them on the earth as faſt. Milton.
They are the beſt epitomes in the world, and let you ſee,
with one cºſt of an eye, the ſubſtance of above an hundred
pages. Addiſon on ancient Medal.
7. The throw of dice.
8. Chance from the caſt of dice.
Were it good,
To ſet the exact wealth of all our ſtates
All at one caſt; to ſet ſo rich a main
9n the nice hazard of ſome doubtful hour Shakespeare HIV.
In the laſt war, has it not ſometimes been an even ca/?, whe-
ther the army ſhould march this way or that way? South.
9. Venture from throwing dice.
When you have brought them to the very laſt coff, they will
offer tº come to you, and ſubmit themſelves. Spenser on Iraland.
With better grace an ancient chief may yield
The long contended honours of the field,
Than venture all his fortune at a caſt,
And fight, like Hannibal, to loſe at laſt. Drydºn.
Will you turn recreant at the laſt coſt 2 you muſt along.
Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
10. A mould; a form.
The whole would have been an heroick poem, but in an-
9ther cºſt and figure, than any that ever had been written be-
fore. Prior.
11. A ſhade; or tendency to any colour.
A flaky maſs, grey, with a caſt of green, in which the talky
matter makes the greateſt part of the maſs. J/ºodward.
The qualities of blood in a healthy ſtate are to be florid, the
red part congealing, and the ſerum ought to be without any
greeniſh caſt. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
12. Exteriour appearance.
The native hue of reſolution
Is ſicklied o'er with the pale caſt of thought. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
New names, new dreſfings, and the modern caſ,
Some ſcenes, ſome perſons alter'd, and outfac'd
The world. Sir j. Denham.
13. Manner; air; mien.
Pretty conceptions, fine metaphors, glittering expreſſions,
and ſomething of a neat coſt of verſe, are properly the dreſs,
gems, or looſe ornaments of poetry. Pope's Letters.
Neglect not the little figures and turns on the words, nor
ſometimes the very caſt of the periods; neither omit or con-
found any rites or cuſtoms of antiquity. Pope's Eff, on Homer.
14. A flight; a number of hawks diſmiſſed from the fiſt.
A caſt of merlins there was beſides, which, flying of a gal-
lant height over certain buſhes, would beat the birds that roſe,
down unto the buſhes, as falcons will do wild fowl over a river.
Sidney, b. ii.
CA'stan ET, n.ſ. ſcaffaneta, Sp.] Small ſhells of ivory, or hard
wood, which dancers rattle in their hands. -
If there had been words enow between them, to have ex-
preſſed provocation, they had gone together by the ears like a
pair of caſianets. Congreve's Iſay of the I/ºrld.
CA'staw AY. m. ſ. [from caſt and away.] A perſon loſt, or
abandoned by providence.
Neither given any leave to ſearch in particular who are the
heirs of the kingdom of God, who caſtaways. Hooker, b. v.
Left that by any means, when I have preached to others, I
myſelf ſhould be a caſtaway. 1 Cor. ix. 27.
CA'st Away. adj. [from the ſubſt.] Uſeleſs ; of no value.
We only prize, pamper, and exalt this vaſſal and ſlave of
death, or only remember, at our caſtaway leiſure, the impri-
ſoned immortal ſoul. Raleigh's Hi/iory.
CA's TED. The participle preterite of coff, but improperly, and
found perhaps only in the following paſſage.
When the mind is quicken'd, out of doubt,
The organs, though defunct and dead before,
Break up their drowſy grave, and newly move
With coſted ſlough and freſh legerity. Shakespeare. Henry wº
Ca's TELLAiN. n.ſ.. [caſtellano, Span.] The captain, governout,
or conſtable of a caſtle.
CA'stELLAN.Y. m. ſ. [from caſtle.] The manour or lordſhip be-
longing to a caſtle; the extent of its land and juriſdićtion.
Phillips's JWorld of Jºrd.
CA's TELLATED. adj. [from caſtle.] Incloſed within a uilding,
as a fountain or ciſtern ca/elated. 19ict.
CA's TER. m.ſ.. [from to #!
I. A thrower; he that caſts.
If, with this throw, the ſtrongeſt coffer vye,
Still, further ſtill, I bid the diſcus fly. Pºpe's Odyſſy.
2. A calculator; a man that calculates fortunes.
ſ
ſ<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
Did
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">-- C A S
| Q l-".
Did any of them ſet up for a caſter of fortunate figures, what
might he not get by his predićtions : . Addiſon. Spect. Nº 191.
To CASTIGATE. v. a. [caſtigo, Lat.] To chaſtiſe; to chaſ-
ten; to correót; to puniſh.
If thou didſt put this ſour cold habit on,
To caſtigate thy pride, 'twere well.
CAstigation; n.ſ.. [from to caſtigate.]
1. Penance; diſcipline.
This hand of yours requires
A ſequeſter from liberty; faſting and prayer,
With caſtigation, exerciſe devout. Shakeſp. Othello.
2. Puniſhment; correótion. -
The ancients had theſe conjećtures touching theſe floods and
conflagrations, ſo as to frame them into an hypotheſis for the
caſtigation of the exceſſes of generation. Hale's Orig. of Mank.
3. Emendation.
Their caſtigations were accompanied with encouragements;
which care was taken, to keep me from looking upon as mere
Sshakeſpeare. Timon.
compliments. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
CA'stic AtoRY. adj. [from caſtigate.] Punitive, in order to
amendment.
There were other ends of penalties inflićted, either proba-
tory, caſtigatory, or exemplary. Bramhall againſt Hobbes.
CA'sting-NET. n.ſ.. [from caſting and net.] A net to be thrown
into the water.
Caſting-nets did rivers bottoms ſweep.
CASTLE. m. ſ. [coffellum, Lat.]
1. A ſtrong houſe, fortified againſt aſſaults.
The caſtle of Macduff I will ſurpriſe. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
And caſtles. Shakespeare . Henry VIII.
2. CAstles in the air. [chateaux d'Eſpagne, Fr.] Projećts with-
out reality.
Theſe were but like caſtles in the air, and in men's fancies
vainly imagined. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
CAstle so Ap. n.ſ.. [I ſuppoſe corrupted from Caſtile ſoap.] A
kind of ſoap.
I have a letter from a ſoap-boiler, deſiring me to write upon
the preſent duties on Caſtle ſº Addiſon. Speciator, N° 488.
CASTLED. adj. [from caſtle.j Furniſhed with caſtles.
The horſes neighing by the wind is blown,
And caſtled elephants o'erlook the town. Dryden's Aurengz.
CA'stlewARD. m.ſ.. [from caſtle and ward.]
An impoſition laid upon ſuch of the king's ſubjećts, as dwell
within a certain compaſs of any caſtle, toward the maintenance
of ſuch as watch and ward the caſtle. Cowel.
CA's TLING.. n.ſ.. [from caſt.] An abortive.
We ſhould rather rely upon the urine of a caſtling's bladder,
a reſolution of crabs eyes, or a ſecond diſtillation of urine, as
Helmont hath commended. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
CA's Tor, CHESTER, are derived from the Sax. cearcer, a city,
town, or caſtle; and that from the Latin caſtrum; the Saxons
chufing to fix in ſuch places of ſtrength and figure, as the Ro-
mans had before built or fortified. Gibſon's Camden.
CA'stor. n.ſ. ſcaffor, Lat.]
1. A beaver. See BEAVER.
2. A fine hat made of the furr of a beaver.
CA STOR and POLLUX. [In meteorology.] A firy meteor,
which, at ſea, appears ſometimes ſticking to a part of the ſhip,
in form of one, two, or even three or four balls. When one
is ſeen alone, it is more properly called Helena, which portends
the ſevereſt part of the ſtorm to be yet behind; two are deno-
minated Caſior and Pollux, and ſometimes Tyndarides, which
portend a ceſſation of the ſtorm. Chambers.
CASTOREU.M., n.ſ.. [from caffor. In pharmacy.] A liquid
matter incloſed in bags or purſes, near the anus of the caſtor,
falſely taken for his teſticles. Theſe bags are about the bigneſs
of a gooſe's egg, and found indifferently in males and females;
when taken off, the matter dries and condenſes, ſo as to be re-
duced to a powder, which is oily, of a ſharp bitter taſte, and a
iſtrong diſagreeable ſmell, and uſed to fortify the head and ner-
vous parts.
May's Virgil.
Chambers.
CAstra META'TIon. n.f. [from caſtrametor, Lat.] The art or
pračtice of encamping.
Tö CASTRATE. v. a. ſcaffro, Lat.]
I - To geld.
2- To take away the obſcene parts of a writing.
SASTRATION. m.ſ. [from caſtrate.] The act of gelding.
S-A'st REL. $n ſ A kind of hawk.
The largeſt needle ſhould be uſed, in taking up the ſperma-
tick veſſels in caſtration. Sharp's Surgery.
-A's TERIL,
Astr ENSIAN. adj. ſcaffrenſ, Lat.] Belonging to a camp. D.
*CASUAL. adj. [caſticſ, Fr. from caſiº, Lat.] Accidental; ariſ-
ing from chance; depending upon chance; not certain.
The revenue of Ireland, both certain and caſual, did not
riſe unto ten thouſand pounds. Davies on Ireland.
That which ſeemeth moſt caſual and ſubjećt to fortune, is
yet diſpoſed by the ordinance of God. Raleigh's Hſiory.
Whether found, where coſal fire
Had waſted woods, on mountain, or in vale
Down to the veins of earth. Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi. i. 566,
, The commiſſioners entertained themſelves by the fire-fide,
in general and caſual diſcourſes. Clarendon, b. viii.
Moſt of our rarities have been found out by caſual emergen-
cy, and have been the works of time and chance, rather than of
philoſophy. - Glanville's Scºtſis, c. 21.
The expences of ſome of them always exteed their certain
annual income; but ſeldom their caſual ſupplies. I call them
caſual, in compliance with the common form. Atterbury:
CA'sually, adv. [from caſual.] Accidentally; without de-
ſign, or ſet purpoſe.
Go, bid my woman
Search for a jewel, that too caſually - -
Hath left mine arm. Shakespeare Cymbeline;
Wool new ſhorn, laid caſually upon a veſſel of verjuice, had
drunk up the verjuice, though the veſſel was without any flaw.
Bacon's Natural Hiſ?. N° 79:
Iſhould have acquainted my judge with one advantage, and
which I now caſually remember. Dryden's Virgil, Dedication.
CA'sual Ness. n.ſ.. [from caſual.] Accidentalneſs.
CA's UALTY. n.ſ.. [from caſual.]
I. Accident; a thing happening by chance, not deſign. • *
With more patience men endure the loſſes that befall them
by mere caſually, than the damages which they ſuſtain by injuſ-
tice. Raleigh's Eſſays.
That Oétavius Caeſar ſhould ſhift his camp that night that it
happened to be took by the enemy, was a mere caſualty; yet
it preſerved a perſon, who lived to eſtabliſh a total alteration of
government in the imperial city of the world. South.
2. Chance that produces unnatural death.
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Ev’n in the force and road of caſualty. .
Shakeſp. Merchant ºf Venice.
It is obſerved in particular nations, that, within the ſpace of
two of three hundred years, notwithſtanding all caſualties, the
number of men doubles. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
We find one caſualty in our bills, of which, though there be
daily talk, there is little effect. Graunt's Bill, of Mortality.
CA's U1st, n.ſ...[caſuiſe, Fr. from caſus, Lat.] One that ſtudies
and ſettles caſes of conſcience. -
he judgment of any caſuiſ', or learned divine, concerning
the ſtate of a man's ſoul, is not ſufficient to give him confi-
dence. South.
You can ſcarce ſee a bench of porters without two or three
caſuiſts in it, that will ſettle you the rights of princes.
Addiſon. Å;, Nº. 53.
Who ſhall decide, when doćtors diſagree,
And ſoundeſt caſuiſ's doubt, like you and me ! Pope.
CAsui'sticAL. adj. [from caſuiſ...] Relating to caſes of con-
ſcience; containing the doćtrine relating to caſes.
What arguments they have to beguile poor, ſimple, unſtable
ſouls with, I know hot; but ſurely the practical, caſuiſtical,
that is, the principal, vital part of their religion favours very
little of ſpirituality. - South.
CA'suistry. n.ſ. [from caſuiſ...] The ſcience of a caſuiſt; the
doćtrine of caſes of conſcience.
Conceſſion would not paſs for good caſuiſºry in theſe ages.
Pope's Odyſſey, Notes.
Morality, by her falſe guardians drawn,
- Chicane in furs, and caſuiſºry in lawn. Pope's Dunciad.
CAT. n.ſ. [Katz, Teuton. chat, Fr.] A domeſtick animal that
catches mice, commonly reckoned by naturaliſts the loweſt or-
der of the leonine ſpecies.
'Twas you incens'd the rabble:
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth,
As I can of thoſe myſteries, which heav'n,
Will not have earth to know. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
A cat, as ſhe beholds the light, draws the ball of her eye
ſmall and long, being covered over with a green ſkin, and di-
lates it at pleaſure. Peacham on Drawing.
CAT. n.ſ. A ſort of ſhip.
CAT in the pan. [imagined by ſome to be rightly written Catipan,
as coming from Catipani, revolted governours. An unknown
correſpondent imagines, very naturally, that it is corrupted
from Cate in the pan.]
There is a cunning which we, in England, call the turning
of the cat in the pan; which is, when that which a man ſays to
another, he lays it as if another had ſaid it to him. Bacon.
CAT o' nine tails. A whip with nine laſhes, uſed for the puniſh-
ment of crimes.
You dread reformers of an impious age,
You awful cat o' nine tails to the ſtage,
This once be juſt, and in our cauſe engage. . .
Prologue io Panirugh's Faſº Friend.
CATACHRESIS. n.ſ. [x:"4xºner, abuſe.] It is, in rhetorick,
the abuſe of a trope, when the words are too far wreſted from
their native ſignification, or when one word is abuſively put for
another, for want of the proper word; as, a voice beautiful to
the ear. Smith's Rhetorick,
CATAcHRF'sticAL. adj. [from catachrºſ...] Contrary to pro-
per uſe; forced ; far fetched.
A
—Amºº –
*
º
-
!
-
i.
|
s
º
º
-
i
-
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A T
C A T
|
-
º
*
-
-
A catachrºftial and far derived ſimilitude it holds with ITiCl,
that is, in a bifurcation. Brown's Pulgar Errºrs.
CATAclys M. r. ſ. ſzózººl . A deluge; an inundation ;
uſed generally for the univerſal deluge.
The opiniºn that held theſe cataclyſm; and empyroſes univer-
ſa!, was ſuch, as held, that it put a total conſummation unto
things in this lower world. Halº: Origin of Mankind.
CATA comes. n.f. [from 2×2 and razºº, a hollow or cavity.]
Subterraneous cavities for the burial of the dead; of which there
are a great number about three miles from Rome, ſuppoſed to
be the caves and cells where the primitive chriſtians hid and aſ-
ſembled themſelves, and where they interred the martyrs, which
are accordingly viſited with devotion. But, anciently, the word
catacomb was only underſtood of the tombs of St. Peter and St.
Paul; and Mr. Monro, in the Philºſºphical Tranſactions, ſup-
poſes the catacombs to have been originally the ſepulchres of the
firſt Romans. Places like theſe might afford convenient re-
ſortments to the primitive chriſtians, but could never be built
by them. Chambers.
CAT AGMA'Tick, adj. [rzºzyaz, a fračture.] That which has
the quality of conſolidating the parts.
I put on a catagmatick emplaſter, and, by the uſe of a laced
glove, ſcattered the pituitous ſwelling, and ſtrengthened it.
- Jºſeman's Surgery.
CATALE'psis. m. ſ. [xº~...] A lighter ſpecies of the apo-
plexy, or epilepſy.
There is a diſeaſe called a catalºpſis, wherein the patient is
ſuddenly ſeized without ſenſe or motion, and remains in the
ſame poſture in which the diſeaſe ſeizeth him. Arbuthnot.
CA't Alogue. m. ſ. ſzázºº...] An enumeration of particu-
lars; a liſt; a regiſter of things one by one.
In the catalogue ye go for men,
As hounds, and greyhounds, mungrels, ſpaniels, curs,
Showghes, water rugs, and demy wolves, are cleped
All by the name of dogs. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Make a catalogue of all the proſperous ſacrilegious perſons,
and I believe they will be repeated much ſooner than the alpha-
bet. South.
I was in the library of manuſcripts belonging to St. Lau-
rence, of which there is a printed catalogue; I looked into the
Virgil which diſputes its antiquity with that of the Vatican.
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
The bright Tygete, and the ſhining Bears,
With all the ſailors catalogue of ſtars. Addison's Ovid.
CATAMo'UNTAIN. m.ſ.. [from cat and mountain..] A fierce ani-
mal, reſembling a cat.
The black prince of Monomotapa, by whoſe ſide were ſeen
the glaring catamountain, and the quill-darting porcupine.
Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scriberus.
CATAPHR Act. n.ſ.. [cataphračia, Lat..] A horſeman in com-
plete armour. -
On each ſide went armed guards,
Both horſe and foot before him and behind,
Archers and ſlingers, cataphrađs and ſpears. Milt. Aroniſł.
CA't A PLASM. n.ſ. [x44+xazza.] A poultice; a ſoft and moiſt
application. - -
I bought an unétion of a mountebank,
So mortal, that but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood, no cataplaſm ſo rare,
Colle&amp;ted from all ſimples that have virtue
Under the moon, can ſave. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Warm cataplaſms diſcuſs, but ſcalding hot may confirm the
tunnoun. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CATAPULT. m. ſ. ſcatapulia, Lat.] An engine uſed anciently
to throw ſtones. - -
The baliſta violently ſhot great ſtones and quarrels, as alſo
the catapults. Camden’s Remains.
CA'rar Act. n.ſ. [x:42.2%.] A fall of water from on high;
a ſhoot of water; a caſcade. - --
Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks; rage, blow !
You cataraëls and hurricanes, ſpout,
Till you have drench'd our ſteeples, drown'd the cocks.
- Shakeſp. King Lear.
What if all l -
Her ſtorcs were open'd, and this firmament
Of hell ſhould ſpout her catarađs of fire -
Impendent horrours Milton's Par. Loft, b. ii. 1, 17o.
No ſooner he, with them of man and beaſt - " -
Sele&amp;t for life, ſhall in the ark be lodg’d,
And ſhelter'd round; but all the cataraćis
Of heav'n ſet open, on the earth ſhall pour
Rain, day and night. Milton's Par. Loſº, b. xi. l. 824.
Torrents and loud impetuous catarać’s,
Through roads abrupt, and rude unfaſhion'd tracts,
Run down the lofty mountain's channel'd fides,
And to the vale convey their foaming tides. Blackmore.
CA'ſ ARAct. [In medicine.] A ſuffuſion of the eye, when little
clouds, motes, and flies, ſeem to float about in the air; when
confirmed, the pupil of the eye is either wholly, or in part,
covered, and ſhut up with a little thin ſkin, ſo that the light has
no admittance. - - - - &amp;#inty.
Saladine hath a yellow milk, which hath likewiſe much acri.
cuſe him. -
9. To ſeize eagerly.
mony; for it cleanſeth the eyes: it is good alſo for cataraćis.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 639.
CATARRH. n.ſ. [x:12:12, diffuo.] A defluxion of a ſharp ſº-
rum from the glands about the head and throat, generally occa-
fioned by a diminution of inſenſible perſpiration, or cold,
wherein what ſhould paſs by the skin, ouzes out upon thoſe
glands, and occaſions irritations. The cauſes are, whatſoever
occaſions too great a quantity of ſerum in the body; whatſo-
ever hinders the diſcharge by urine, and the pores of the skin.
tit?icy.
All fev’rous kinds, Quincy
Convulſions, epilepſies, fierce catarrhs. Par. Loft, b. xi.
Neither was the body then ſubječt to die by piecemeal, and
languiſh under coughs, catarrhs, or conſumptions. Scuth.
CAtARRHAL. adj. from catarrh..] Relating to a catarrh;
CATA'RR Hous. } proceeding from a catarrh.
The catarrhal fever requires evacuations. Flyer.
Old age attended with a glutinous, cold, catarrhous, leuco-
phlegmatick conſtitution. Arbuthnot on Diet.
CATA strophe. n.f. […a...??..] -
1. The change or revolution, which produces the concluſion or
final event of a dramatick piece.
Pat'—He comes like the cataſtrophe of the old comedy.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
That philoſopher declares for tragedies, whoſe cataſtrophes
are unhappy, with relation to the principal characters. Dennis.
2. A final event; a concluſion generally unhappy.
Here was a mighty revolution, the moſt horrible and porten-
tuous cataſtrophe that nature ever yet ſaw ; an elegant and ha-
bitable earth quite ſhattered. //codward’s Nat. Hiſł.
CATCAL. m. ſ. [from cat and call.] A ſqueaking inſtrument,
uſed in the playhouſe to condemn plays.
A young lady, at the theatre, conceived a paſſion for a noto-
rious rake that headed a party of catcals. Spectator, Nº. 602.
- Three catcal be the bribe
Of him, whoſe chatt’ring ſhames the monkey tribe. Pope.
To CATCH. v. a. preter. f catched, or caught; I have catched
or caught. [Frtſºn, Dutch.]
1. To lay hold on with the hand; intimating the ſuddenneſs of
the action.
And when he aroſe againſt me, I caught him by his beard,
and ſnote him, and ſlew him. 1 Sam. xvii. 35.
2. To ſtop anything flying; to receive any thing in the paſſage.
Others, to catch the breeze of breathing air,
To Tuſculum or Algido repair;
Or in moiſt Tivoli's retirement find
A cooling ſhade.
3. To ſeize any thing by purſuit.
I ſaw him run after a gilded butterfly, and, when he caught
it, he let it go again ; and after it again; and over and over he
comes, and up again ; and caught it again. Shakeſp. Coriolan.
4. To ſtop any thing.
A ſhepherd diverted himſelf with toſſing up eggs, and catch-
ing them again. Speciator, N° 16o.
5. To enſnare; to intangle in a ſnare ; to hold in a trap.
And they ſent unto him certain of the Phariſees and of the
Herodians, to catch him in his words. Mar. xii. 13.
Theſe artificial methods of reaſoning are more adapted to
catch and entangle the mind, than to inſtruct and inform the
underſtanding. - Locke.
6. To receive ſuddenly.
The curling ſmoke mounts heavy from the fires,
At length it catches flame, and in a blaze expires. Dryden.
But ſtopp'd for fear, thus violently driv'n, -
The ſparks ſhould catch his axletree of heav'n. Dryden.
7. To faſten ſuddenly upon; to ſeize.
The mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and
his head caught hold of the oak. 2 Sam. xviii. 19.
Would they, like Benhadad's embaſſadours, catch hold of
every amicable expreſſion? Decay of Piety.
Addison on Italy.
8. To ſeize unexpectedly.
To catch ſomething out of his mouth, that they might ac-
-- - - * * Luke, xi. 54.
They have caught up every thing greedily, with that buſy
minute curioſity, and unſatisfactory inquiſitiveneſs, which Se-
neca calls the diſeaſe of the Greeks. Eſſay on Homer.
Io. To pleaſe; to ſeize the affections; to charm. -
For I am young, a novice in the trade,
The fool of love, unpractis'd to perſuade, ,
And wanting the ſoothing arts that catch the fair,
But, caught myſelf, lie ſtruggling in the ſhare. Dryden.
I’ve perus’d her well;
Beauty and honour in her are ſo mingled,
That they have caught the king. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
11. To receive any contagion or diſeaſe. -
I cannot name the diſeaſe, and it is caught
Of you that yet are well. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
- - Thoſe meaſles,
Which we diſdain ſhould tetter us, yet ſeek
The very way to catch them, Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
º
i"<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5
In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A T
C A T
In ſooth I know not why I am ſo ſad:
It wearies me; you ſay it wearies you;
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
I am to learn. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
The ſofteſt of our Britiſh ladies expoſe their necks and arms
to the open air, which the men could not do, without catching
cold, for want of being accuſtomed to it. Addiſon. Guardian.
Or call the winds through long arcades to roar,
Proud to catch cold at a Venetian door.
12. To catch at. To endeavour ſuddenly to lay hold on.
Saucy lićtors
Will catch at us like ſtrumpets, and ſcald rhimers
Ballad us out of tune. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
Make them catch at all opportunities of ſubverting the ſtate.
Addiſon's State of the War.
To Catch. v. m. To be contagious; to ſpread infection.,
'Tis time to give them phyſick, their diſeaſes
Are grown ſo catching. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Sickneſs is catching; oh, were favour ſo I
Your's would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go. Shakeſp.
- Conſidering it with all its malignity and catching nature, it
may be enumerated with the worſt of epidemicks. Harvey.
When the yellow hair in flame ſhould fall,
Pope.
The catching fire might burn the golden cawl. Dryden.
The palace of Deiphobus aſcends
In ſmoaky flames, and catches on his friends. Dryden.
Does the ſedition catch from man to man,
And run among the ranks Addiſon's Cato.
CATch. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Seizure; the act of ſeizing anything that flies, or hides.
And ſurely taught by his open eye,
His eye, that ev'n did mark her trodden graſs,
That ſhe would fain the catch of Strephon fly.
2. The aët of taking quickly from another.
Several quires, placed one over againſt another, and taking
the voice by catches anthem-wiſe, give great pleaſure. Bacon.
3. A ſong ſung in ſucceſſion, where one catches it from another.
This is the tune of our catch, plaid by the pićture of nobody.
Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Far be from thence the glutton paraſite,
Singing his drunken catches all the night. Dryden, jun.
The meat was ſerv'd, the bowls were crown'd,
Catches were ſung, and healths went round.
4. Watch; the poſture of ſeizing.
Both of them lay upon the catch for a great ačtion; it is no
wonder therefore, that they were often engaged on one ſubječt.
- - Addiſon on ancient Medals.
5. An advantage taken; hold laid on.
All which notions are but ignorant catches of a few things,
which are moſt obvious to men's obſervations. Bacon.
The motion is but a catch of the wit upon a few inſtances;
as the manner is in the philoſophy received. Bacon.
Fate of empires, and the fall of kings,
Should turn on flying hours, and catch of moments. Dryden.
6. The thing caught; profit; advantage.
Hećtor ſhall have a great catch, if he knock out either of
your brains; he were as good crack a fuſty nut with no kernel.
SShakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
7. A ſnatch; a ſhort interval of a&amp;tion.
It has been writ by catches, with many intervals.
8. A taint; a ſlight contagion.
We retain a catch of thoſe pretty ſtories, and our awakened
imagination ſmiles in the recolle&amp;tion. Glanville's Scepſis, c. 3.
9. Anything that catches and holds, as a hook.
ro. A ſmall ſwift ſailing ſhip.
CA'rcher. n.f. [from catch.]
1. He that catches.
2. That in which anything is caught.
Scallops will move ſo ſtrongly, as oftentimes to leap out of
the catcher wherein they are caught. Grew's Muſeum.
CA'tchFLY. m. ſ. [from catch and fly.] A plant; a ſpecies of
campion; which ſee. *
‘CA'tchPoll. n.ſ.. [from catch and poll.] A ſerjeant; a bum-
bailiff.
Though now it be uſed as a word of contempt, yet, in an-
cient times, it ſeems to have been uſed without reproach, for
ſuch as we now call ſerjeants of the mace, or any other that
uſes to arreſt men upon any cauſe. Cowel.
They call all temporal buſineſſes underſheriffries, as if they
were but matters for underſheriffs and catchpolls; though many
times thoſe underſheriffries do more good than their high ſpe-
culations. Bacon's Eſſays.
Sidney.
Prior.
Locke.
Another monſter,
Sullen of aſpect, by the vulgar call'd -
A catchpoll, whoſe polluted hands the gods,
With force incredible and magick charms,
Erſt have endu'd, if he his ample palm
Should haply on ill fated ſhoulder lay
Of debtor. Philips.
CA'tchworp. m. ſ. [from catch and word. With printers.)
he word at the corner of the page under the laſt line, which
repeated at the top of the next page.
Vol. I.
CATECHE"Tical. adj. [from zººxi...] Conſiſting of queſtions
and anſwers. -
Socrates introduced a catechetical method of arguing; he
would ask his adverſary queſtion upon queſtion, till he con-
vinced him out of his own mouth, that his opinions were
wrong. Addiſon. Spediator, N° 238.
Gateche'T1c Ally. adv. [from catechetical.] In the way of
queſtion and anſwer.
To CA/TECHISE. v. a. [złºxic.]
1. To inſtrućt by aſking queſtions, and correóting the anſwers.
I will catechiſe the world for him; that is, make queſtions,
and bid them anſwer. Shakeſp. Othello.
Had thoſe three thouſand ſouls been catechiſed by our mo-
dern caſuiſts, we had ſeen a wide difference. Decay of Piety.
2. To queſtion; to interrogate; to examine; to try by inter-
rogatories.
Why then I ſuck my teeth, and catechiſ.
My piked man of countries. Shakeſp. King john.
There flies about a ſtrange report,
Of ſome expreſs arriv'd at court;
I'm ſtopp'd by all the fools I meet,
And catechis'd in ev'ry ſtreet. Swift.
CA'techiser. n.ſ.. [from to catechiſe.] One who catechizes.
CA't Echism. n.J. [from zººxº...] A form of inſtruction by
means of queſtions and anſwers, concerning religion.
Ways of teaching there have been fundry always uſual in
God's church; for the firſt introdućtion of youth to the know-
ledge of God, the Jews even till this day have their catechiſms.
Hooker, b. v. § 10.
He had no catechiſm but the creation, needed no ſtudy but re-
fle&amp;tion, and read no book but the volume of the world. South.
Ca"techist. n.ſ. [radoxºrk.] One whoſe charge is to inſtruct
by queſtions, or to queſtion the uninſtrućted concerning reli-
gion.
None of years and knowledge was admitted, who had not
been inſtructed by the catechift in this foundation, which the
catechiſ? received from the biſhop. Hammond's Fundamentals.
CATEchu'MEN. n.ſ. [xalºxºgeº.] One who is yet in the firſt
rudiments of chriſtianity; the loweſt order of chriſtians in the
primitive church.
The prayers of the church did not begin in St. Auſtin's
time, till the catechumens were diſmiſſed. Stillingfleet.
CAtEcHUMe'Nical. adj. [from catechumen.] Belonging to the
catechumens. #7.
CATEGo'Rical. adj. [from category..] Abſolute; adequate ;
poſitive ; equal to the thing to be expreſſed.
The king's commiſſioners deſired to know whether the par-
liament's commiſſioners did believe, that biſhops were unlaw-
ful ? To which they could never obtain a categorical anſwer.
Clarendon, b. viii.
A ſingle propoſition, which is alſo categorical, may be divided
again into ſimple and complex. Watts's Logick.
Catego'Rically. adv. [from categorical.] Poſitively; ex-
reſsly.
P I * affirm, and that categorically, in all parts where-ever
trade is great, and continues ſo, that trade muſt be nationally
profitable. Child's Diſcourſe of Trade.
CATEGORY.. n.ſ.. [azlºyota.] A claſs; a rank; an order of
ideas; a predicament.
The abſolute infinitude, in a manner, quite changes the na-
ture of beings, and exalts them into a different category. Cheyne.
CateNA'RIAN. adj. [from catena, Lat..] Relating to a chain;
reſembling a chain.
In geometry, the catenarian curve is formed by a rope or chain
hanging freely between two points of ſuſpenſion. Barris.
The back is bent after the manner of the catenarian curve,
by which it obtains that curvature that is ſafeſt for the included
Inarrow. Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principles.
To CATENATE. v. a. [from catena, Lat.] To chain. Dićf.
CATENA'tion. n.ſ.. [from catena, Lat..] Link; regular con-
nexion.
Which catenation, or conſerving union, whenever his plea-
ſure ſhall divide, let go, or ſeparate, they ſhall fall from their
exiſtence. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To CATER. v. n. [from cates.] To provide food; to buy in
vičiuals.
He that doth the ravens feed,
Yea providently caters for the ſparrow, -
Be comfort to my age. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Caſter. n.ſ. Pfrom the verb.] Provider; collector of provi-
ſions, or vićtuals.
The oyſters dredged in this Lyner, find a welcomer accep-
tance, where the taſte is cater for the ſtomach, than thoſe of the
Tamar. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Caſter. n.ſ. ſquatre, Fr.] The four of cards and dice.
CA'ter-cousin. m. ſ. A corruption of quatre-couſin, from the
ridiculouſneſs of calling couſin or relation to ſo remote a de-
ree.
His maſter and he, ſaving your worſhip's reverence, are ſcarce
cater-couſins. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
Poetry and reaſon, how come theſe to be cater-couſins P
Rymer's Tragedies of the laſt Age.
4. E CA'TERE R.
;
}
-
|
• T-
º
--
!
.
.-
s
-
|<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">C A T'
C A T
º
|
CA're RER. m. ſ. [from cater.] One employed to ſelect and buy
in proviſions for the family; the providore or purveyor,
Let no ſcent offenſive the chamber infeſt ,
Let fancy, not coſt, prepare all our diſhes;
Let the caterer mind the taſte of each gueſt,
And the cook in his dreſſing comply with their wiſhes.
Ben. johnſon's Tavern Academy.
He made the greedy ravens to be Elias's caterers, and bring
him food. King Charles.
Seldom ſhall one ſee in cities or courts that athletick vigour,
which is ſeen in poor houſes, where nature is their cook, and
neceſſity their caterer. South.
CATERE'ss. n. ſ. [from cater.] A woman employed to cater,
or provide vićtuals.
Impoſtor! do not charge innocent nature,
As if ſhe would her children ſhould be riotous
With her abundance? ſhe, good caterſ,
Means her proviſion only to the good. Milton.
CATERPI'LLAR. m. ſ. [This word Skinner and Minſhºw are in-
clined to derive from chatte peluſe, a weaſel; it ſeems eaſily de-
ducible from cates, food, and piller, Fr. to rob ; the animal that
eats up the fruits of the earth.] A worm which, when it gets
wings, is ſuſtained by leaves and fruits.
The caterpillar breedeth of dew and leaves; for we ſee in-
finite caterpillars breed upon trees and hedges, by which the
leaves of the trees or hedges are conſumed. Bacon.
Auſter is drawn with a pot pouring forth water, with which
deſcend graſshoppers, caterpillars, and creatures bred by moiſ-
ture. - Peacham on Drawing.
CATERPI'll AR. m. ſ. [ ſcorpioides, Lat.] The name of a plant.
It hath a papilionaceous flower, out of whoſe cmpalement
riſes the pointal, which afterwards becomes a jointed pod, con-
voluted like a ſnail or caterpillar. Miller.
To CATER wa'UL. v. n. [from cat.]
1. To make a noiſe as cats in rutting time.
2. To make any offenſive or odious noiſe.
What a caterwauling do you keep here 2 If my lady has not
called up her ſteward Malvolio, and bid him turn you out of
doors, never truſt me. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Was no diſpute between
The caterwauling bretheren? Hudibras, p. i. e. iii.
CATES. n.ſ. [of uncertain etymology; Skinner imagines it may
be corrupted from delicate; which is not likely, becauſe junius
obſerves, that the Dutch have Kater in the ſame ſenſe with our
cater. It has no ſingular.] Viands; food; diſh of meat; ge-
nerally employed to ſignify nice and luxurious food.
The fair acceptance, Sir, creates
The entertainment perfect, not the cates. Ben johnſºn.
O waſteful riot, never well content -
With low priz'd fare; hunger ambitious
Of cates by land and ſea far fetcht and ſent. Raleigh.
Alas, how ſimple to theſe cates,
Was that crude apple, that diverted Eve! Par. Lºft, b. ii,
They by th’ alluring odour drawn, in haſte
Fly to the dulcet cates, and crouding ſip
Their palatable bane. - Philips.
With coſtly cates ſhe ſtain'd her frugal board,
Then with ill-gotten wealth ſhe bought a lord. , Arbuthnot.
CA't Fish. n.ſ. The name of a ſea-fiſh in the Weſt Indies; ſo
called from its round head and large glaring eyes, by which
they are diſcovered in hollow rocks. Philips's I/orld of Words.
CA'THARPINGs. n.ſ. Small ropes in a ſhip, running in little
blocks from one ſide of the ſhrouds to the other, near the
deck; they belong only to the main ſhrouds; and their uſe is
to force the ſhrouds tight, for the eaſe and ſafety of the maſts,
when the ſhip rolls, Harris.
CATHA'RT1cAl. Nadj. [ x&amp;Sºrºk.] Purging medicines. The
CATHA'RT1ck. } vermicular or periſtaltick motion of the guts
continually helps on their contents, from the pylorus to the
rećtum; and every irritation either quickens that motion in its
natural order, or occaſions ſome little inverſions in it. In both,
what but ſlightly adheres to the coats, will be looſened, and
they will be more agitated, and thus rendered more fluid. By
this only it is manifeſt, how a cathartic haſtens and increaſes the
diſcharges by ſtool; but where the force of the ſtimulus is
great, all the appendages of the bowels, and all the viſcera in
the abdomen, will be twitched; by which a great deal will be
drained back into the inteſtines, and made a part of what they
diſcharge. £uincy,
Quickſilver precipitated either with gold, or without addi-
tion, into a powder, is wont to be ſtrongly enough cathartical,
though the chymiſts have not yet proved, that either gold or
mercury hath any ſalt at all, much leſs any that is purgative.
Boyle's Sceptical Chymiſtry.
Luſtrations and catharticks of the mind were ſought for, and
all endeavour uſed to calm and regulate the fury of the paſ-
ions. - Decay of Piety.
The piercing cauſticks ply their ſpiteful pow'r,
Emeticks ranch, and keen catharticks ſcour. Garth.
Plato has called mathematical demonſtrations the catharticks
or purgatives of the foul. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 507.
CATH ARTICALNESS. n.ſ.. [from cathartical] Purging quality.
CA’riff AD. m. ſ. A kind of foſſil.
Theſe nodules, with leaves in them, called catheads, ſeem tº
conſiſt of a ſort of iron ſtone, not unlike that which is found
in the rocks near Whitehaven in Cumberland, where they call
them catſcaups. //oºdward an Poſſils,
CATHEAD. m. ſ. [In a ſhip.] A piece of timber with two ſhi-
vers at one end, having a rope and a biock, to which is faſten-
ed a great iron hook, to trice up the anchor from the hawſe to
the top of the forecaſtle. Sea Dić7.
CATHE BRAI. adj. [from cathedra, Lat. a chair of authority ;
an epiſcopal ſee.]
1. Epiſcopal ; containing the ſee of a biſhop.
A cathedral church is that wherein there are two or more
perſons, with a biſhop at the head of them, that do make as it
were one body politick. Ayºffe's Parergon.
Methought I ſat in feat of majeſty,
In the cathedral church of Weſtininſter. Shakespeare. Henry VI,
2. Belonging to an epiſcopal church.
His conſtant and regular aſſiſting at the cathedral ſervice was
never interrupted by the ſharpneſs of weather. Lacke,
3. In low phraſe, antique; venerable ; old. This ſeems to be
the meaning in the following lines.
Here aged trees cathedral walks compoſe,
And mount the hill in venerable rows;
There the green infants in their beds are laid. Pºpe,
CATHE'DR Al. n.ſ. The head church of a dioceſe, .
There is nothing in Leghorn ſo extraordinary as the cathedral,
which a man may view with pleaſure, after he has ſeen St. Pe.
ter's. Addison on Jiay.
CATHERINE PEAR. See PEAR. -
For ſtreaks of red were mingled there,
Such as are on a Catherine fear, -
The ſide that's next the ſun. . . Suckling,
CATH E't E.R. m. ſ. […S. rºe.j A hollow and ſomewhat crooked in-
ſtrument, to thruſt into the bladder, to aſſiſt in bringing away
the urine, when the paſſage is ſtopped by a ſtone or gravel,
A large clyſter, ſuddenly injected, hath frequently forced the
urine out of the bladder; but if it fail, a catheter muſt help
you. 11 ſeman's Surgery,
CA't Holes. n.ſ.. [In a ſhip.] Two little holes aftern above the
gun-room ports, to bring in a cable or hawſer through them to
the capſtain, when there is occaſion to heave the ſhip aftern,
Sea Diº,
CATHo'Licism. n. ſ. [from catholick.] Adherence to the catho-
lick church. - -
CATHOLICK, adj. [catholique, Fr. 22%xº~..] Univerſal or ge-
neral. -
1. The church of Jeſus Chriſt is called catholick, becauſe it ex-
tends throughout the world, and is not limited by time,
2. Some truths are ſaid to be catholick, becauſe they are received
by all the faithful.
3. Catholick is often ſet in oppoſition to heretick or ſectary, and
to ſchiſmatick. - -
4. Catholick, or canonical epiſtles, are ſeven in number; that of
St. James, two of St. Peter, three of St. John, and that of St,
Jude. They are called catholick, becauſe they are directed to all
the faithful, and not to any particular church ; and canonical,
becauſe they contain excellent rules of faith and morality.
- Calmet,
- Doubtleſs the ſucceſs of thoſe your great and catholick endca-
vours will promote the empire of man over nature, and bring
plentiful acceſſion of glory to your nation. Glanville's Scepſis,
Thoſe ſyſtems undertake to give an account of the formation
of the univerſe, by mechanical hypotheſes of matter, moved
either uncertainly, or according to ſome catholick laws. Ray.
CATHo'LIcon. n.ſ.. [from catholic: ; xzºuzo, 2.2.] An uni-
verſal medicine.
Preſervation againſt that ſin, is the contemplation of the laſt
judgment. This is indeed a catholicon againſt all; but we find
it particularly applied by St. Paul to judging and deſpiſing our
brethren. Government of the Tongue,
CA't KINs. m. ſ. [Kattekens, Dutch. In botany.] An aſſemblage
of imperfect flowers hanging from trees, in manner of a
rope or cat's tail; ſerving as male bloſſoms, or flowers of the
trees, by which they are produced. Chambers,
CAT LIKE. adj. [from cat and like J Like a cat.
A lioneſs, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay couching head on ground, with catlike watch,
Shakeſp. As yºu like it,
CA'TLING.. n.ſ. -
1. A diſmembring knife, uſed by ſurgeons. Harris,
2. It ſeems to be uſed by Shakeſpeare for catgut ; the materials of
fiddle ſtrings. -
What muſick there will be in him after Hector has knocked
out his brains, I know not. But, I am ſure, none; unleſs the
fidler Apollo get his ſinews to make callings of Tr. and Crºff,
3. The down or moſs growing about walnut trees, reſembling
the hair of a cat. : Harris,
CA/TMINT. n.ſ. [cataria, Lat.] The name of a plant.
º The leaves are like thoſe of the nettle or betony, for the moſt
part hoary, and of a ſtrong ſcent. The flowers are collected in-
to a thick ſpike; the creſt of the flower is broad and bifid
and<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">and the lip divided into three ſegments. It grows wild, and
is uſed in medicine. Miller.
CATo'PTR1cAL. adj. [from catoptricks.] Relating to catop-
tricks, or viſion by reflection.
A catcptrical or dioptrical heat is ſuperiour to any, vitrifying
the hardeſt ſubſtances. Arbuthnot on Air.
CAto'PTR1cks, m. ſ. [x4 roalgo, a looking glaſs.] That part of
opticks which treats of viſion by reflection.
* CA'ſ PIPE. m. ſ. [from cat and pipe.] The ſame with catcal ;
an inſtrument that makes a ſqueaking noiſe.
Some ſongſters can no more ſing in any chamber but their
own, than ſome clerks can read in any book but their own ;
put them out of their road once, and they are mere catpipes
and dunces. - L'E/irange.
CAT’s-EYE. A ſtone.
Cat's-eye is of a gliſtering grey, interchanged with a ſtraw co-
lour. J/oodward on Foſſils.
CAT's-Foot. n.ſ. An herb; the ſame with alchoof, or ground-
ivy; which ſee.
Cat's-HEAD. m. ſ. A kind of apple.
Cat's-head, by ſome called the go-no-further, is a very large -
apple, and a good bearer.
CA't silver. m. ſ. A kind of foſfile. -
Catſilver is compoſed of plates that are generally plain and
parallel, and that are flexible and elaſtick; and is of three ſorts,
the yellow or golden, the white or filvery, and the black.
JWoodward on Fºſſils.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
CAT's-TAIL. m. ſ.
1. A long round ſubſtance, that grows in winter upon nut-trees,
pines, &amp;c.
2. A kind of reed which bears a ſpike like the tail of a cat.
Phillips's Hºrld of Iſords.
CA’TsUP. m. ſ. A kind of pickle, made from muſhrooms.
And, for our home-bred Britiſh cheer, ,
Botargo, catſup, and cavier. Swift.
CA'TTLE. n.ſ.. [a word of very common uſe, but of doubtful or
unknown etymology. It is derived by Skinner, Menage, and
Spelman, from capitalia, quae ad caput pertinent; perſonal goods:
in which ſenſe chattels is yet uſed in our law. Mandeville uſes
catele for price.]
1. Beaſts of paſture; not wild nor domeſtick.
Make poor men's cattle break their necks. Shakeſp. T. Andr.
And God made the beaſt of the earth after his kind, and
cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the
earth after his kind. Gen. i. 25.
2. It is uſed in reproach of human beings.
Boys and women are for the moſt part cattle of this colour.
- - Shakeſp. As you like it.
CAvAlcA'DE. n.ſ. [Fr. from cavallo, a horſe, Ital.] A proceſ-
ſion on horſeback.
Your cavalcade the fair ſpectators view,
From their high ſtandings, yet look up to you:
From your brave train each ſingles out a ray,
And longs to date a conqueſt from your day. Dryden.
How muſt the heart of the old man rejoice, when he ſaw
ſuch a numerous cavalcade of his own raiſing? Addiſon. Spect.
CAVALIER. n.ſ.. [cavalier, Fr.]
1. A horſeman; a knight.
2. A gay ſprightly military man. -
For who is he, whoſe chin is but enrich'd
With one appearing hair, that will not follow
Theſe cull'd and choice drawn cavaliers to France?
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
3. The appellation of the party of king Charles the firſt.
Each party grows proud of that appellation, which their ad-
verſaries at firſt intend as a reproach: of this ſort were the
Guelfs and Gibelines, Hugenots, and Cavaliers. Swift.
CAVALI'E.R. adj. [from the ſubſt.]
1. Gay ; ſprightly; warlike.
2. Generous; brave.
The people are naturally not valiant, and not much cavalier.
Now it is the nature of cowards to hurt, where they can re-
ceive none. Suckling.
3. Diſdainful; haughty.
CAVALI'ERLY. adv. [from cavalier.] Haughtily; arrogantly ;
diſdainfully.
CA'valry. n.ſ. [cavalerie, Fr.] Horſe troops; bodies of men
furniſhed with horſes for war.
If a ſtate run moſt to gentlemen, and the huſbandmen and
plowmen be but as their workfolks, you may have a good ca-
valry, but never good ſtable bands of foot. Bacon's Henry VII.
Their cavalry, in the battle of Blenheim, could not ſuſtain the
ſhock of the Britiſh horſe. Addiſon on the State of the J/ar.
To CA'v At E. v. a. [cavo, Lat..] To hollow out; to dig into
a hollow.
CA v A'zion. n.ſ.. [from cavo, Lat. In archite&amp;ture.] The hol-
lowing or underdigging of the earth for cellarage; allowed to
be the fixth part of the height of the whole building.
Phillips's IWorld of Iſard.
CA'UDEEEck. m. ſ. A ſort of light hats, ſo called from a town
in France where they were firſt made.
- Phillips's Jºrld of IWºrds.
- C A V
CAUDLF. m. ſ. [chaudeau, Fr.] A mixture of wine and other
ingredients, given to women in childbed, and ſick perſons.
Ye ſhall have a hempen caud, then, and the help of a hatchet.
- Shakeſp. Henry VI, p. ii.
He had good broths, caude, and ſuch like; and I believe he
did drink ſome wine. J/jcman's Surgery.
To CAUDLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To make caudle; to mix
as caudle. -
Will the cold brook,
Candied with ice, caude thy morning taſte,
To cure thy o’ernight's ſurfeit?
SShakespeare. Timon.
CAVE. W. ſ. [cave, Fr. cavea, Lat.]
I. A cavern ; a den; a hole entering horizontally under the .
ground; a habitation in the earth.
The wrathful ſkies
Gallow the very wand’rers of the dark,
And make them keep their caves. Shakespeare. King Lear.
Bid him bring his power -
Before ſun-riſing, left his ſon George fall
Into the blind cave of eternal night. Shakespeare. Richard III,
They did ſquare, and carve, and poliſh their ſtone and mar-
ble works, even in the very cave of the quarry. //ºttºn.
Through this a cave was dug with vaſt expence,
The work it ſeem'd of ſome ſuſpicious prince. Dryden.
2. A hollow; any hollow place.
The objećt of ſight doth ſtrike upon the pupil of the eye di-
rectly ; whereas the cave of the eye doth hold off the ſound a
little. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 272,
To CAVE. v. n. [from the noun..] To dwell in a câve. -
It may be heard at court, that ſuch as we
Cave here, haunt here, are outlaws, and in time
May make ſome ſtronger heed. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
CAVE'At. n.ſ.. [caveat, Lat, let him beware.]
A caveat is an intimation given to ſome ordinary or eccleſi-
aſtical judge by the act of man, notifying to him, that he ought
to beware how he acts in ſuch or ſuch an affair. Alſº,
The chiefeſt caveat in reformation muſt be to keep out the
Scots. Spenser on Ireland.
I am in danger of commencing poet, perhaps laureat; pray
deſire Mr. Rowe to enter a caveat. Trumlall to Pope.
CA've RN., n. ſ. ſcaverna, Lat..] A hollow place in the ground.
Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
To mask thy monſtrous viſage Shakeſp. Julius Caeſar.
Monſters of the foaming deep,
From the deep ooze, and gelid cavern rous'd,
They flounce and tremble in unwieldy joy. Thomſºn.
CA'v ERNED. adj. [from cavern.] -
1. Full of caverns ; hollow; excavated.
Embattled troops, with flowing banners, paſs
Through flow'ry meads, delighted; nor diſtruſt
The ſmiling ſurface; whilſt the cavern'd ground
Burſts fatal, and involves the hopes of war
In firy whirles. Philips.
High at his head from out the cavern'd rock,
In living rills a guſhing fountain broke. Pope's Odyſſy.
2. Inhabiting a cavern.
No bandit fierce, no tyrant mad with pride,
. No cavern'd hermit, reſt ſelf-ſatisſy'd. Pope's Eſſay on Man,
CA'veRNous. adj. [from cavern.] Full of caverns.
No great damages are done by earthquakes, except only in
thoſe countries which are mountainous, and conſequently ſtony
and cavernous underneath. // advard's Nat. Hiſtory.
CAWESSON. n.ſ. [Fr. In horſemanſhip.]
A ſort of noſeband, ſometimes made of iron, and ſometimes
of leather or wood; ſometimes flat, and ſometimes hollow or
twiſted; which is put upon the noſe of a horſe, to forward the
ſuppling and breaking of him.
An iron caveſon ſaves and ſpares the mouths of young horſes
when they are broken; for, by the help of it, they are accuſ-
tomed to obey the hand, and to bend the neck and ſhoulders,
without hurting their mouths, or ſpoiling their bars with the
bit. - Farrier’s Dić'.
CAUF. n.ſ. A cheſt with holes on the top, to keep fiſh alive in
the water. Phillips's I/orld ºf //ards.
CAUGHT. particip. paſſ [from to catch; which ſee.]
CAv1A'RE. m. ſ. [the etymology uncertain, unleſs it come from
garum, Lat. ſauce, or pickle, made of fiſh ſalted.]
The eggs of a ſturgeon being ſalted, and made up into a
maſs, were firſt brought from Conſtantinople by the Italians,
and called caviare. Grew's Muſeum.
CAv1'ER. m. ſ. A corruption of caviare. See CATsUP.
To CA/VIL. v. n. [caviller, Fr. cavillari, Lat.] To raiſe cap-
tious and frivolous obječtions.
I'll give thrice ſo much land
To any well deſerving friend;
But, in the way of bargain, markye me,
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair. Shakeſp, Henry IV.
My lord, you do not well, in obſtinac
To cavil in the courſe of this contract. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
He cavils firſt at the poet's inſiſting ſo much upon the effects
of Achilles's rage. Pope's Notes on the Iliad.
To CA/v1.L. v. a. To receive or treat with objections.
3 1. Qū
*
º
*
!
º
-
º -
!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            End of Section 2.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809190#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section3" id="Section3"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section 3</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 1</div><p class="Text">C A U
C A U
|
;
f
|
º
..
i
4
!
*
-
1. *
! :
|
º
t
;
Thou didſt accept them: wilt thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil the conditions? Paradiſe Loſt, b. x. l. 579.
CA'vil. n.ſ. [from the verb.J. Falſe or frivolous objections.
Wiſer men conſider how ſubject the beſt things have been
unto cavil, when wits, poſieſted with diſdain, have ſet them up
as their mark to ſhoot at. Hooker, b. v. § 4.
Several divines, in order to anſwer the cavils of thoſe adver-
ſaries to truth and morality, began to find out farther explana-
tions. Swift.
CA villa'tion. n.ſ.. [from cavil] . The diſpoſition to make
captious obječtion; the practice of objećting.
I might add ſo much concerning the large odds between the
caſe of the eldeſt churches, in regard of heathens, and ours, in
reſpect of the church of Rome, that very cavillation itſelf ſhould
be ſatisfied. Hooker, b. iv. § 7.
CA'viller. n.ſ.. [cavillator, Lat.] A man fond of making ob-
jećtions; an unfair adverſary; a captious diſputant.
The candour which Horace ſhews, is that which diſtinguiſhes
a critick from a caviller; he declares, that he is not offended at
thoſe little faults, which may be imputed to inadvertency.
Addiſon. Guardian, N° 1 to.
There is, I grant, room ſtill left for a caviller to miſrepreſent
my meaning. Atterbury's Prºf. to his Sermons.
CA'v Illingly. adv. [from cavilling.] In a cavilling manner.
CA'villous. adj. [from cavil..] Full of objećtions.
Thoſe perſons are ſaid to be cavilleus and unfaithful advo-
cates, by whoſe fraud and iniquity juſtice is deſtroyed. Ayliff.
CAVIN. m. ſ. [French.] In the military art it ſignifies a natu-
ral hollow, fit to cover a body of troops, and conſequently fa-
cilitate their approach to a place. Dićf.
CA'vity. n.ſ.. [cavitas, Latin.] Hollowneſs; hollow ; hollow
place.
The vowels are made by a free paſſage of breath, vocalized
through the cavity of the mouth; the ſaid cavity being diffe-
rently ſhaped by the poſtures of the throat, tongue, and lips.
Holder's Elements of Speech.
There is nothing to be left void in a firm building; even
the cavities ought not to be filled with rubbiſh, which is of a
periſhing kind. Dryden's Dedication to Æneid.
Materials packed together with wonderful art in the ſeveral
cavities of the ſcull. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 275.
An inſtrument with a ſmall cavity, like a ſmall ſpoon, dipt in
oil, may fetch out the ſtone. Arbuthnot on Diet.
If the atmoſphere was reduced into water, it would not make
an orb above thirty two feet deep, which would ſoon be ſwal-
lowed up by the cavity of the ſea, and the depreſſed parts of the
earth. Bentley.
CAUk. n.ſ. It denotes a coarſe talky ſpar. J/oodward.
CA'Uky. adj. [from cauk.] A white, opaque, cauky ſpar, ſhot
or pointed. J/ccdward on Foſſils.
CAUL. n.ſ.. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. The net in which women incloſe their hair; the hinder part
of a woman's cap.
Ne ſpared they to ſtrip her naked all,
Then when they had deſpoil'd her tire and caul,
Such as ſhe was, their eyes might her behold. Fairy 9, b, i.
Her head with ringlets of her hair is crown'd,
And in a golden caul the curls are bound. Dryden's 4; neid.
2. Any kind of ſmall net.
An Indian mantle of feathers, and the feathers wrought into
a caul of packthread. Grew's Muſeum.
3. !. omentum; the integument in which the guts are in-
CIO1C01.
The caul ſerves for the warming the lower belly, like an
apron or piece of woollen cloth. Hence a certain gladiatour,
whoſe caul Galen cut out, was ſo liable to ſuffer cold, that he
kept his belly conſtantly covered with wool. Ray on the Creation.
The beaſt they then divide, and diſunite
The ribs and limbs, obſervant of the rite:
On theſe, in double caul; involv’d with art,
The choiceſt morſels lay. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iii. 1 585.
CAULI'FERous. adj. [from caulis, a ſtalk, and fero, to bear, Lat.]
A term in botany for ſuch plants as have a true ſtalk, which a
great many have not.
CAUli'Flower. n.ſ.. [from caulis, Lat. the ſtalk of a plant..] A
ſpecies of cabbage; which ſee.
Towards the end of the month, earth up your winter plants
and ſalad herbs; and plant forth your cauliflowers and cabbage,
which were ſown in Auguſt. Evelyn's Kalendar.
To Caulk. See To CAik.
Tº Caupo'NATE. v. n. [caupono, Lat.] To keep a vićtualling-
houſe; to ſell wine or vićtuals. Die?.
CAU's ABLE. adj. [from cauſo, low Lat.] That which may be
cauſed, or effected by a cauſe.
That may be miraculouſly effected in one, which is naturally
cauſable in another. Brown's Vulgar Errourt, k, iii. c. 21.
Cºu'sal. adj. [cauſali, low Lat.] Relating to cauſes; imply-
ingor containing cauſes.
Every motion owning a dependence on prerequired motors,
we can have no true knowledge of any, except we would diſ-
tinétly Pry into the whole method of cauſal concatenations.
Glanville's Scºpff, Scientifica, c. 35.
Cauſal propoſitions are, where two propoſitions are joined by
cauſal particles; as, houſes were not built, that they might be
deſtroyed; Rehoboam was unhappy, becauſe he followed evil
counſel. - //atts's Logick.
Causa'lity. m. ſ. ſcauſalitas, low Latin.] The agency of a
cauſe; the quality of cauſing.
As he created all things, ſo is he beyond and in them all, in
his very eſſence, as being the ſoul of their cauſalitics, and the
eſſential cauſe of their exiſtences. Brºwn's Pulgar Errours.
By an unadviſed tranſiliency from the effect to the remoteſt
cauſe, we obſerve not the connection, through the interpoſal of
more immediate cauſalities. Glanville's Scepſis, c. 14.
CA'usally. adv. [from cauſal.] According to the order or fe-
ries of cauſes.
Thus may it more be cauſally made out, what Hippocrates
affirmeth. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
CAusA'tion. n.ſ.. [from cauſ, low Lat.] The actor power of
cauſing.
Thus doth he ſometimes delude us in the conceits of ſtars
and meteors, beſides their allowable ačtions, aſcribing effects
thereunto of independent cauſation. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Ca'usative. adj. [a term in grammar.] That expreſſes a
cauſe or reaſon.
CA'usator. m.ſ.. [from cauſe, low Lat.] A cauſer; an authour
of any effect.
Demonſtratively underſtanding the ſimplicity of perfection,
and the inviſible condition of the firſt cauſator, it was out of
the power of earth, or the areopagy of hell, to work them from
it. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. c. 10.
CAUSE. m. ſ. [cauſa, Lat.]
1. That which produces or effects anything; the efficient.
The wiſe and learned amongſt the very heathens them-
ſelves, have all acknowledged ſome firſt cauſe, whereupon ori-
ginally the being of all things dependeth, neither have they
otherwiſe ſpoken of that cauſe, than as an agent, which, know-
ing what and why it worketh, obſerveth, in working, a moſt
exact order or law. Hooker, b. i. §2.
Butterflies, and other flies, revive eaſily when they ſeem
dead, being brought to the ſun or fire; the cauſe whereof is the
tliffuſion of the vital ſpirit, and the dilating of it by a little
heat. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº 697.
Cauſe is a ſubſtance exerting its power into act, to make one
thing begin to be. Locke.
2. The reaſon; motive to anything.
The reſt ſhall bear ſome other fight,
As cauſe will be obey'd. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
So great, ſo conſtant, and ſo general a pračtice, muſt needs
have not only a cauſe, but alſo a great, a conſtant, and a gene-
ral cauſe, every way commenſurate to ſuch an effect. South.
Thus, royal ſir! to ſee you landed here,
Was cauſe enough of triumph for a year. Dryden.
AEneas wond'ring ſtood: then ask'd the cauſe,
Which to the ſtream the crouding people draws. Dryden.
Even he,
Lamenting that there had been cauſe of enmity,
Will often wiſh fate had ordain'd you friends.
- Rowe's Ambitious Stepmother.
3. Cauſe of debate; ſubjećt of litigation.
O madneſs of diſcourſe !
That cauſe ſets up with and againſt thyſelf!
Bifold authority. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
Hear the cauſe; between your brethren, and judge righte-
ouſly between every man and his brother, and the ſtranger that
is with him. Deut. i. 16.
4. Side; party; ground or principle of a&amp;tion or oppoſition.
Ere to thy cauſe, and thee, my heart inclin'd,
Or love to party had ſeduc’d my mind. Tickell.
To Cause. v. a. [from the noun.j To effect as an agent; to
produce.
She weeping ask'd, in theſe her blooming years,
What unforeſeen misfortune caus'd her care
To loath her life, and languiſh in deſpair. Dryden's Falks.
Things that move ſo ſwift, as not to affect the ſenſes diſ-
tinétly, and ſo cauſe not any train of ideas in the mind, are not
perceived to move. Locke.
cº, adv. [from cauſºleſ...] Without cauſe ; without
realOn. -
Human laws are not to be broken with ſcandal, nor at all
without reaſon; for he that does it cauſcleſy, is a deſpiſer of
the law, and undervalues its authority. Taylor's Holy Living.
Cau's ELEss. adj. [from cauſe.]
1. Without cauſe; original to itſelf.
Reach th' Almighty's ſacred throne,
And make his cauſeleſs pow'r, the cauſe of all things, known.
Blackmore's Creation.
2. Without juſt ground or motive.
Yet is my truthyplight,
And love avow'd to other lady late,
That, to remove the ſame, I have no might;
To change love cauſeleſs, is reproach to warlike knight.
Speºſer's Fairy Queen, b. ii. ſant. vii./lanz, 50.
C.
[...]
a<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

2 And
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 2</div><p class="Text">C A U.
C E A
And me and mine, threats not with war but death;
Thus cauſºleſ hatred endleſs is uneath. Fairfax, b. iv.
The cauſºleſ; diſlike, which others have conceived, is no ſuf-
ficient reaſon for us to forbear in any place. Hooker, b. v.
As women yet who apprehend
Some ſudden cauſe of cauſeleſs fear,
Although that ſeeming cauſe take end,
A ſhaking through their limbs they find.
Alas! my fears are cauſcleſ; and ungrounded,
Fantaſiick dreams, and melancholy fumes. Denham's Sophy.
CA'User. m. ſ. ſſrom cauſe..] He that cauſes; the agent by
which an effect is produced.
Is not the cauſer of theſe timeleſs deaths,
As blameful as the executioner? Shakeſp. Richard III.
CA'USEY. #": [chauffe, Fr. This word, by a falſe notion of
CAUSEwAY. its etymology, has been lately written cauſe-
way.] A way raiſed and paved; a way raiſed above the reſt
of the ground.
To Shuppim the lot came forthweſtward by the cauſey.
1 Chron. xxvi. 16.
, Th’other way Satan went down,
The cauſeway to hell-gate. Paradiſe Loſº, b. x. l. 415.
But that broad cauſeway will direct your way,
And you may reach the town by noon of day.
Whoſe cauſeway parts the vale with ſhady rows;
Whoſe ſeats the weary traveller repoſe. Pope.
CA'UsTICAL. }* [ xxv-xx.] Medicaments which, by their
CA'UsTick. violent ačtivity and heat, deſtroy the texture
of the part to which they are applied, and eat it away,
or burn it into an eſchar, which they do by the extreme mi-
nuteneſs, aſperity, and quantity of motion, that, like thoſe of
fire itſelf, deſtroy the texture of the ſolids themſelves, and
change what they are applied to, into a ſubſtance like burnt
fleſh; which, in a little time, with detergent dreſſing, falls quite
off, and leaves a vacuity in the part. $24incy.
If extirpation be ſafe, the beſt way will be by cauſtical medi-
Waller.
Dryden.
cines or eſcaroticks. Wiſeman's Surgery.
I propoſed eradicating by eſcaroticks, and began with a cauſ-
tick ſtone. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Air too hot, cold and moiſt, abounding perhaps with cauſ:
tick, aſtringent, and coagulating particles. Arbuthnot.
CA'ustick. m. ſ. A cauſtick or burning application.
It was a tenderneſs to mankind, that introduced corroſives
and cauſticks, which are indeed but artificial fires. Temple.
The piercing cauſticks ply their ſpiteful pow'r,
Emeticks ranch, and keen catharticks ſcour. Garth.
CA'UTEL. m.ſ.. [cautela, Lat.] Caution; ſcruple; a word diſ-
uſed.
Perhaps he loves you now;
And now no ſoil of cautel doth beſmerch
The virtue of his will.
CA'UTELous. adj. [cauteleux, Fr.]
1. Cautious; wary; provident.
Palladio doth wiſh, like a cautelous artiſan, that the inward
walls might bear ſome good ſhare in the burden. J/otton.
2. Wily; cunning; treacherous.
Of themſelves, for the moſt part, they are ſo cautelous and
wily headed, eſpecially being men of ſo ſmall experience and
practice in law matters, that you would wonder whence they
borrow ſuch ſubtilties and ſly ſhifts. Spenser on Ireland.
Your ſon
Will or exceed the common, or be caught
With cautelous baits and practice. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
CA'UTELously. adv. [from cautelous.] Cunningly; ſlily;
treacherouſly ; cautiouſly; warily.
The Jews, not undoubtedly reſolved of the ſciatica ſide of
Jacob, do cautelouſly, in their diet, abſtain from both.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vii. c. 1.
All pretorian courts, if any of the parties be laid aſleep, un-
der pretence of a retirement, and the other party doth caute-
douſly get the ſtart and advantage, yet they will ſet back all
things in ſtatu quo prius. Bacon's War with Spain.
A UTERIZA'tion. n. ſ. [from cauterize.] The aët of burning
fleſh with hot irons, or cauſtick medicaments. -
They require, after cauterization, no ſuch bandage, as that
thereby you need to fear interception of the ſpirits. Wiſeman.
To Caºüterize. v.a. [cauteriſer, Fr.] To burn with the cau-
tery. -
For each true word a bliſter, and each falſe,
Becauterizing to the root o' th' tongue,
Conſuming it with ſpeaking. Shakeſp. Timon.
No marvel though cantharides have ſuch a corroſive and cau-
zerizing quality; for there is not one other of the inſecta, but
is bred of a duller matter. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The deſign of the cautery is to prevent the canal from cloſ-
ing; but the operators confeſs, that, in perſons cauterized, the
tears trickle down ever after. Sharp's Surgery.
GAZUTERY. m. ſ. [zzía, uro.]
Cattery is either adual or potential; the firſt is burning by
a hot iron, and the latter with cauſtick medicines. The actual
cº, is ºnly uſed to ſtop mortification, by burning the
OL. I. - 2
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
dead parts to the quick; or to ſtop the effuſion of blood, by
fearing up the veſſels. &amp;uincy.
In heat of fight it will be neceſſary to have your ačtual cau-
tery always ready ; for that will ſecure the bleeding arteries in
a moment. J/ſeman's Surgery.
CATUTION. m.ſ.. [caution, Fr. cautic, Lat.]
1. Prudence, as it reſpects danger; foreſight; provident care;
warineſs.
2. Security for.
Such conditions, and cautions of the condition, as might aſ-
ſure the people with as much aſſurance as worldly matters bear.
Sidney.
The Cedar, upon this new acqueſt, gave him part of Bac-
charia for caution for his diſburſements. Howeſ's Pocal Foreſt.
The parliament would yet give his majeſty ſufficient caution
that the war ſhould be proſecuted. Clarendon.
He that obječts any crime, ought to give caution by the
means of ſureties, that he will perſevere in the proſecution of
ſuch crimes. Ayliffe's Parergon.
3. Proviſion or ſecurity againſt; direétion. -
In deſpite of all the rules and cautions of government, the
moſt dangerous and mortal of vices will come off. L'Eſtrange.
4. Proviſionary precept.
Attention to the forementioned ſymptoms affords the beſt
cautions and rules of diet, by way of prevention. Arbuthnot.
5. Warning.
To CA/Ution. v. a. [from the noun..] To warn; to give no-
tice of a danger.
How ſhall our thought avoid the various ſnare?
Or wiſdom to our caution'd ſoul declare
The diff'rent ſhapes thou pleaſeſt to employ,
When bent to hurt, and certain to deſtroy
You caution'd me againſt their charms,
But never gave me equal arms;
Your leſſons found the weakeſt part,
Aim'd at the head, but reach'd the heart. Swift.
CA'Ution ARY. adj. [from caution.] Given as a pledge, or in
ſecurity.
I am made the cautionary pledge,
The gage and hoſtage of your keeping it. Southerne.
Is there noſecurity for the iſland of Britain? Has the enemy
no cautionary towns and ſea-ports, to give us for ſecuring
trade 2 Swift.
CA'utious. adj. [from cautus, Lat..] Wary; watchful.
Becautious of him; for he is ſometimes an inconſtant lovers
becauſe he hath a great advantage. Swift.
CA'utiously. adv. [from cautious.] In an attentive, wary
manner.
They know how fickle common lovers are:
Their oaths and vows are cautiouſly believ'd ;
For few there are but have been once deceiv'd. Dryden.
CA/UTIousNess. n.ſ.. [from cautious.] Watchfulneſs; vigi-
lance; circumſpection; provident care; prudence with reſpect
to danger.
I could not but approve their generous conſtancy and cau-
tiouſneſs. K. Charles.
We ſhould always aćt with great cautiouſneſ; and circum-
ſpection, in points where it is not impoſſible that we may be
deceived. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 399.
To Caw. v. n. [taken from the ſound..] To cry as the rook,
raven, or crow.
Ruſſet-pated choughs, many in ſort,
Riſing and cawing at the gun's report. Shakéº.
There is a walk of aged elms, ſo very high, that the rooks
and crows upon the tops ſeem to be cawing in another region.
Addiſon. Spectator, N° 110.
The rook, who high amid the boughs -
In early ſpring, his airy city builds,
And ceaſeleſs caws. Thomſºn's Spring.
CA'y MAN. n.ſ. The American name for the alligator or cro-
codile.
To CEASE. v. n. [cºffer, Fr. ceſſº, Lat.]
1. To leave off; to ſtop; to give over; to deſiſt.
The lives of all, who ceaſe from combat, ſpare;
My brother's be your moſt peculiar care. Drdyen's Aureng.
2. To fail; to be extinét.
The poor man ſhall never ceaſe out of the land. Deut. xv. 11.
The ſoul being removed, the faculties and operations of life,
ſenſe and intellection ceaſe from that moles corporea, and are nº
longer in it. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
3. To be at an end.
But now the wonder ceaſes, ſince I ſee -
She kept them only, Tityrus, for thee. Dryden's Wirgil's Poſt.
4. To reſt. -
The miniſters of Chriſt have ceaſed from their labours. Sprat.
To CEAs E. v. a. To put a ſtop to ; to put an end to.
Haſte you to lord Timon ;
Importune him for monies; be not ceas'd
With ſlight denial. Shakeſp. Timon.
You may ſooner, by imagination, quicken or ſlack a motion,
than raiſe or ceaſe it; as it is eaſier to make a dog go ſlower,
4 F than
Prior.
s
ſ
:
i
---- -----
!
º
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 3</div><p class="Text">C E L
i
-
-
-
*
-
:
than to make !him ſland ſtill. Bacon's Nºitural Hiſt. Ns 996.
Crºſs then this impious rage. Paradſ: Loft, b. v. l. 845.
But he her fears to ceaſº,
Sent down the meck-ey'd peace. Miltºn.
The diſcord is compleat, nor can they ceaſe
The dire debate, nor yet command the peace. Dryden.
CEAs E. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Extinction; failure.
The ceaſe of majeſty
Dies not alone, but, like a gulph, withdraws
What's near it, with it. Shakespeare Hamlet.
CE'A set Ess. adj. [from ceaſ...] Inceflint; perpetual; continual;
without pauſe ; without ſtop 5 without end.
My guiltleſs blood muſt quench the crºſºleſ fire,
On which my endleſs tears were bootleſs ſpent. Fairfax.
All theſe, with ceaſel'ſ praiſe his works behold,
Both day and night. Paradſe Lºſt, l. iv. l. 679.
Like an oak
That ſtands ſecure, though all the winds employ
Their ceaſeleſs roar, and only ſheds its leaves,
Or maſt, which the revolving ſpring reſtores. Philips.
CE'city. m. ſ. [carcitas, Lat.] Blindneſs; privation of fight.
They are not blind, nor yet diſtinctly ſee; there is in them
no crity, yet more than a cecutiency; they have fight enough
to diſcern the light, though not perhaps to diſtinguiſh objects or
colours. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
CEcu'rib Ncy. m. ſ. [carcutio, Lat.] Tendency to blindneſs;
cloudineſs of fight.
There is in them no cecity, yet more than a cecutiency.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, l. iii. c. 18.
CEDAR. n.ſ. [ædrus, Lat.] A tree.
It is evergreen; the leaves are much narrower than thoſe of
the pine-tree, and many of them produced out of one tubercle,
reſembling a painter's pencil; it hath male flowers, or katkins,
produced at remote diſtances from the fruit on the ſame tree.
The ſeeds are produced in large cones, ſquamoſe and turbinat-
cd. The extenſion of the branches is very regular in cedar
trees; the ends of the ſhoots declining, and thereby ſhewing
their upper ſurface, which is conſtantly cloathed with green
leaves, ſo regularly as to appear at a diſtance like a green car-
pet, and, in waving about, make an agreeable proſpect. It is
ſurpriſing that this tree has not been more cultivated in Eng-
land; for it would be a great ornament to barren bleak moun-
tains, even in Scotland, where few other trees would grow; it
being a native of Mount Libanus, where the ſnow continues
moſt part of the year. What we find in Scripture, of the lofty
cedars, is no ways applicable to the ſtature of this tree; for we
find by thoſe now growing in England, and by the teſtimony of
travellers, that have ſeen thoſe few remaining trees on Mount
Libanus, they are not inclined to grow . lofty, but extend
their branches very far; to which the alluſion, made by the
Pſalmiſt, agrees very well, when, deſcribing the flouriſhing
ſtate of a people, he ſays, they ſhall ſpread their branches like the
cedar tree. Maundrel, in his Travels, ſays, he meaſured one of
the largeſt cedars on Mount Libanus, and found it to be twelve
yards ſix inches in circumference, and ſound, and thirty ſeven
yards in the ſpread of its boughs. At about five or ſix yards
from the ground, it was divided into five limbs, each of which
was equal to a great tree. The wood of this famous tree is ac-
counted proof againſt the putrefaction of animal bodies. The
ſaw duſt is thought to be one of the ſecrets uſed by the mounte-
banks, who pretend to have the embalming myſtery. This
wood is alſo ſaid to yield an oil, which is famous for preſerving
books and writings, and the wood is thought by my lord Bacon
to continue above a thouſand years ſound. It is alſo recorded,
that, in the temple of Apollo, at Utica, there was found tim-
ber of near two thouſand years old; and the ſtatue of the god-
deſs, in the famous Epheſian temple, was ſaid to be of this ma-
terial, as well as the timber work of that glorious ſtructure.
This fort of timber is very dry, and ſubject to ſplit; nor does
it well endure to be faſtened with nails; therefore pins of the
ſame wood are much preferable. Miller.
I muſt yield my body to the earth:
Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
Whoſe arms gave ſhelter to the princely eagle;
Under whoſe ſhade the ramping lion ſlept,
Whoſe top branch overpeer'd j. ſpreading tree,
And kept low ſhrubs from winter's pow'rful wind.
Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
CE'oRINE. adj. [.edrinus, Lat..] Of or belonging to the cedar
trec.
To CFIL. v. a. ſcalo, Lat.] To overlay, or cover the inner
roof of a building.
And the greater houſe he ceiled with fir-tree, which he over-
laid with fine gold. 2 Chron. iii. 5.
How will he, from his houſe ceiled with cedar, be content
with his Saviour's lot, not to have where to lay his head?
- Decay ºf Piety.
CE'ILING. m. ſ. [from cºil.] The inner roof.
Varniſh makes ceilings not only ſhine, but laſt. Bacon.
- And now the thicken'd ſky
Like a dark ceiling ſtood; down ruſh'd the rain
Impotuous. 44ilton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi. l. 743.
So when the ſun by day, or moon by night,
Strike on the poliſh'd braſs their trembling light,
The glitt'ring ſpecies here and there divide,
And caſt their dubious beams from ſide to ſide:
Now on the walls, now on the pavement play, -
And to the ceiling flaſh the glaring day. Dryden's Anrid.
CE'LAN pist, (greater.) [chellinium, Lat..] A plant.
The cup of the flower conſiſts of two leaves, which ſoon
fall away; the flower has four leaves, that are expanded in form
of a croſs. It grows wild, and is uſed in medicine. A/iller.
CE LANDINE, (the lºſſºr, or Pilewort.) [cheilºnium minus, Lat.]
It hath a gramoſe or granuloſe root; the leaves are roun:
diſh; the flower ſtalks trail upon the ground; the cup of the
flower conſiſts of three leaves. A ſiller.
CELATURE. m. ſ. ſcalatura, Lat.] The art of engraving or
cutting in metals.
To CELEBRATE. v. a. ſeekiro, Lat.]
1. To praiſe; to commend; to give praiſe to ; to make famous.
The ſongs of Sion were pſalms and pieces of poctry, that
adored or celebrated the Supreme Being. Addison. Sfcºator.
I would have him read over the celebrated works of antiqui-
ty, which have ſtood the teſt of ſo many different ages. Addiſºw.
2. To diſtinguiſh by ſolemn rites; to perform ſolemnly.
He ſlew all them that were gone to celebrate the ſabbath.
2 Maccab. v. 26.
On the feaſt day, the father cometh forth, after divine ſer-
vice, into a large room, where the feaſt is celebrated. Bacon.
3. To mention in a ſet or ſolemn manner, whether of joy or for-
IOW.
This pauſe of pow'r, 'tis Ireland's hour to mourn;
While England celebrates your ſafe return. Dryden.
CELEBRATION. m. ſ. [from elebrate.]
1. Solemn performance; ſolemn remembrance.
He laboured to drive ſorrow from her, and to haſter, the ce-
letration of their marriage. Sidney.
He ſhall conceal it,
While you are willing it ſhall come to note;
What time we will our celebration keep,
According to my birth. Shakespeare. Twelfth Nºt,
During the celebration of this holy ſacrament, you attendear-
neſtly to what is done by the prieſt. Tºyºr.
2. Praiſe; renown; memorial.
No more ſhall be added in this place, his memory deſerving
* particular celebration, than that his learning, piety and virtue,
have been attained by few. Clarendon.
Some of the ancients may be thought ſometimes to have uſed
a leſs number of letters, by the celebration of thoſe who have add-
ed to their alphabet. Hºlder's Elements ºf Speech.
CELEBRIous. adj. [celeber, Lat.] Famous; renowned; noted.
The Jews, Jeruſalem, and the Temple, having been always
ſo celebrious; yet when, after their captivities, they were de-
ſpoiled of their glory, even then, the Aſſyrians, Greeks, and
Romans, honoured, with ſacrifices, the moſt high God, whom
that nation worſhipped. Grew's Caſinologia Sacra.
CELEBRiously. adv. [from celebrious.] In a famous manner.
CELEBRIouss Ess. n.ſ.. [from celebrious.] Renown; fame.
CELE'BRITY. m. ſ. [celebritas, Lat..] Celebration; fame.
The manner of her receiving, and the celebrity of the mar-
riage, were performed with great magnificence. Bacon.
CE LE'RI Ack. m.ſ. A ſpecies of parſley; it is alſo called turnºp-
rooted celery.
CELERITY. m. ſ. [celeritas, Lat..] Swiftneſs; ſpeed; velocity.
We very well ſee in them, who thus plead, a wonderful cele-
rity of diſcourſe; for, perceiving at the firſt but only ſome cauſe
of ſuſpicion, and fear left it ſhould be evil, they are preſently,
in one and the ſelf-ſame breath, reſolved, that what beginning
ſoever it had, there is no poſſibility it ſhould be good. Hooker.
His former cuſtom and practice was ever full of forwardneſs
and celerity, to make head againſt them. Bacon's Henry VII.
Thus, with imagin'd wings, our ſwift ſcene flies,
In motion with no leſs celerity
Than that of thought. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Three things concur to make a percuſſion great; the bigneſs,
the denſity, and the celerity of the body moved. 19.3/y.
Whatever encreaſeth the denſity of the blood, even without
encreaſing its celerity, heats, becauſe a denſer body is hotter than
a rarcr. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CF'LERY. m. f A ſpecies of parſley; which ſee.
CELESTIAL. adj. [cell/lis, Lat.]
1. Heavenly; relating to the ſuperiour regions.
There ſtay, until the twelve celeſtial ſigns
Have brought about their annual reckoning.
Shakespeare Love's Labour Loſ’.
The ancients commonly applied cºlºftial deſcriptions of other
climes to their own. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
2. Heavenly; relating to the bleſſed ſtate.
Play that ſad note
I nam'd my knell; whilſt I ſit meditating
On that crºftial harmony I go to. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
3. Heavenly, with reſpect to excellence.
Cantt thou pretend deſire, whom zeal inflam'd
To worſhip, and a pow'r cel/tial nam, d ? Dryden.
3 Telemachus,
*/<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 4</div><p class="Text">C E M
Telemachus, his bloomy face
Glowing celeſtial ſweet, with godlike grace. Pºpe's Odyſſy.
CELE's TIAL. m. ſ. [from the adj.j An inhabitant of heaven.
Thus affable and mild, the prince precedes,
And to the dome th' unknown celeſtial leads. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
CE LE's TIALLY. adv. [from celeſtial.] In a heavenly manner.
To CELE's T1FY. v. a. [from celeſtis, Lat..] To give ſomething
of heavenly nature to any thing.
We ſhould affirm, that all things were in all things, that
heaven were but earth terreſtrified, and earth but heaven celeſ-
tified, or that each part above had influence upon its affinity be-
low. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Ce'll Ack. adj. [x,x2, the belly..] Relating to the lower belly.
The blood moving ſlowly through the celiack and meſenterick
arteries, produce complaints. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CE'libacy. m. ſ. [from calebs, Latin.] Single life; unmarried
ſtate.
I can attribute their numbers to nothing but their frequent
marriages; for they look on celibacy as an accurſed ſtate, and
generally are married before twenty. Spectator, N° 495.
By teaching them how to carry themſelves in their relations
of huſbands and wives, parents and children, they have, with-
out queſtion, adorned the goſpel, glorified God, and benefited
man, much more than they could have done in the devouteſt
and ſtrićteſt celibacy. Atterbury,
CE'LIBAt E. n.ſ. [carlibatus, Lat.] Single life.
Where polygamy is forbidden, the males oblige themſelves
to celibate, and then multiplication is hindered. Graunt.
CELL. n.ſ.. [cella, Lat.]
1. A ſmall cavity or hollow place.
The brain contains ten thouſand cells,
In each ſome active fancy dwells.
How theſe for ever, though a monarch reign,
Their ſep'rate cells and properties maintain.
2. The cave or little habitation of a religious perſon.
Beſides, ſhe did intend confeſſion
At Patrick's cell this even; and there ſhe was not. Shakeſp.
Then did religion in a lazy cell,
In empty, airy contemplations dwell.
3. A ſmall and cloſe apartment in a priſon.
4. Any ſmall place of reſidence.
Mine eyes he clos'd, but open left the cell
Of fancy, my internal fight. Par. Loſt, b. viii. l. 460.
5. Little bags or bladders, where fluids, or matter of different ſorts
are lodged; common both to animals and plants. 9ttincy.
CE'LLAR. n.ſ.. [cella, Lat..] A place under ground, where ſtores
are repoſited.
If this fellow had lived in the time of Cato, he would, for his
puniſhment, have been confined to the bottom of a cellar during
his life. - Peacham on Drawing.
CELLARAGE. m. ſ. [from cellar.] The part of the building
which makes the cellars.
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage. Shakeſp.
Take care alſo, that it be well watered and wooded; that it
have a good aſcent to it, which makes a houſe wholeſome, and
gives opporturnity for cellarage. Mortimer's Husbandry.
CF7LLARIST. n.ſ.. [cellarius, Lat.] The butler in a religious
houſe. Dić?.
Cellular. adj. [cellula, Lat..] Conſiſting of little cells or ca-
Vities.
The urine, inſinuating itſelf amongſt the neighbouring muſ-
cles, and cellular membranes, deſtroyed four. Sharp's Surgery.
CE'lsit UDE. m. ſ. [celſitudo, Lat..] Height. Dić7.
CEMENT. n ſ. [camentum, Lat.]
1. The matter with which two bodies are made to cohere; as,
mortar or glue.
Your temples burned in their ciment, and your franchiſes
confined into an augre's bore. Shakespeare Coriol.
There is a cement compounded of flower, whites of eggs, and
flones powdered, that becometh hard as marble. Bacon.
You may ſee divers pebbles, and a cruſt of cement or ſtone be-
tween them, as hard as the pebbles themſelves. Bacon.
The foundation was made of rough ſtone, joined together
with a moſt firm cement; upon this was laid another layer,
conſiſting of ſmall ſtones and cement. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Prior.
Pope.
Denham,
2- Bond of union in friendſhip.
Let not the piece of virtue which is ſet
Betwixt us, as the cement of our love,
To keep it builded, be the ram to batter.
Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
What cement ſhould unite heaven and earth, light and dark-
neſs Glanville's Scepſis, c. iv.
Look over the whole creation, and you ſhall ſee, that the
band or cement, that holds together all the parts of this great and
glorious fabrick, is gratitude. South.
so CEME'NT. v. a... [from the noun..] To unite by means of
ſomething interpoſed.
But how the fear of us
May cement their diviſions, and bind up
The petty difference, we yet not know. Shakespeare Ant. and Cl.
Liquid bodies have nothing to cement them; they are all looſe
and incoherent, and in a perpetual flux: even an heap of ſand,
2 -
C E N
or fine powder, will ſuffer no hollowneſs within them, though
they be dry ſubſtances. Earnet's Theory ºf the Lariº.
* * * .. Edgar
Cemented all the long contending powers.
Love with white lead cements his wings;
White lead was ſent us to repair
Two brighteſt, brittleſt earthly things,
A lady's face, and china ware. - Swift.
To CEME'NT. v. n. To come into conjunction ; to cohere.
When a wound is recent, and the parts of it are divided by
a ſharp inſtrument, they will, if held in cloſe contact for ſome
time, reunite by inoſculation, and cement like one branch of a
tree ingrafted on another. - Sharp's Surgery.
CEMENTATION. m. ſ. [from cement.] The act of cementing,
or uniting with cement.
CE'METERY. m. ſ. [xº~...] A place where the dead are re-
poſited. - -
The ſouls of the dead appear frequently in cemeteries, and
hover about the places where their bodies are buried, as ſtill
hankering about their old brutal pleaſures, and deſiring again to
enter the body. - Addiſon. Speciator, Nº 99.
CEN, and CIN, denote Kinsfolk; ſo Cinulph is a help to his kin-
dred; Cinehelm, a protector of his kinsfolk; Cinburg, the de-
fence of his kindred; Cinric, powerful in kindred.
Gibſon's Camden.
CE'NATORY. adj. [from ceno, to ſup, Lat..] Relating to ſupper.
The Romans waſhed, were anointed, and wore a tenatory
garment; and the ſame was practiſed by the Jews.
Brown's Wulgar Errours.
CeNoBI'TICAL. adj. [zºº and 36..] Living in community.
They have multitudes of religious orders, black and gray,
eremitical and cenobitical, and nuns. Stillingfleet.
CE'NotAPH. n.ſ. [xi.e. and 14ps...] A monument for one bu-
ried elſewhere. -
Priam, to whom the ſtory was unknown,
As dead, deplor'd his metamorphos'd ſon;
A cenotaph his name and title kept, - -
And Hector round the tomb with all his brothers wept.
Dryden’s Falles.
The Athenians, when they loſt any men at ſea, raiſed a ce-
notaph, or empty monument. Notes on Odyſſey.
CENSE. n.ſ. ſcenſus, Lat.] Publick rates.
. . We ſee what floods of treaſure have flowed into Europe by
that action ; ſo that the cenſe, or rates of Chriſtendom, are raiſ-
ed ſince ten times, yea twenty times told. - Bacon.
To CENSE. v. a. [encenſºr, Fr.] To perfume with odours.
The Salii ſing, and cenſe his altars round
With Saban ſmoke, their heads with poplar bound. Dryden,
Grineus was near, and caſt a furious look
On the ſide-altar, cens'd with ſacred ſmoke,
And bright with flaming fires. Dryden.
CE'NSER. n.ſ. [encenſoir, Fr.] The pan or veſſel in which in-
cenſe is burned.
Here's ſnip, and nip, and cut, and ſliſh, and ſluſh,
Like to a cenſer in a barber's ſhop.
Shakespeare . Taming of the Shrew.
Antoninus gave piety in his money, like a lady with a cenſer
before an altar. Peacham on Drawing.
Of incenſe clouds,
Fuming from golden cenſers, hid the mount. Par. Loft, b. vii.
CE'Nsor. n.ſ. ſcenſor, Lat.]
1. An officer of Rome, who had the power of correóting man-
nerS.
2. One who is given to cenſure and exprobation.
Ill-natur'd cenſors of the preſent age,
And fond of all the follies of the paſt. Roſcommon.
The moſt ſevere cenſor cannot but be pleaſed with the pro-
digality of his wit, though, at the ſame time, he could have
wiſhed, that the maſter of it had been a better manager. Dryd.
CENso'RIAN. adj. [from cenſor.] Relating to the cenſor.
As the chancery had the pretorian power for equity, ſo the
ſtar-chamber had the cenſorian power for offences under the de-
gree of capital. Bacon's Henry VII.
CENso'RIous. adj. [from cenſor.]
1. Addićted to cenſure; ſevere; full of invečtives.
Do not too many believe no religion to be pure, but what is
intemperately rigid no zeal to be ſpiritual, but what is cenſo-
Philips.
rious, or vindicative 2 Sprat.
O ! let my preſence make my travels light,
And potent Venus ſhall exalt my name
Above the rumours of cenſorious fame. Prior.
2. Sometimes it has of before the object of reproach.
A dogmatical ſpirit inclines a man to be cenſorious ºf his neigh-
bours. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
3. Sometimes on: - - -
He treated all his inferiours of the clergy with a moſt ſanóti-
fied pride; was rigorouſly and univerſally ceſſºrious upon all his
brethren of the gown. Swift.
CENso'Riously, adv. [from cenſºrious.] In a ſevere reflecting
mann Cr. -
CENso'RiousNess. m. ſ [from cenſorious.] Diſpoſition to re-
proach ; habit of reproaching. -
Sourneſs
*
i
º
-:--
*-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 5</div><p class="Text">C E N
C E N
+
--
:
t
--
CE'N TIPEDE. n.ſ.. [from centum and pes.]
Sourneſs of diſpoſition, and rudeneſs of behaviour, cenſori-
euſneſs and finiſter interpretation of things, all croſs and diſ-
taſteful humours, render the converſation of men grievous and
uneaſy to one another. Tillotſon.
CE'Nsorship. n.ſ.. [from cenſor.]
1. The office of a cenſor.
2. The time in which the office of cenſor is born.
It was brought to Rome in the cenſorſhip of Claudius.
- Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 12.
CE'NSURABLE. adj. [from cenſure.] Worthy of cenſure; blame-
able; culpable.
A ſmall miſtake may leave upon the mind the laſting me-
mory of having been taunted for ſomething cenſurable. Locke.
CENsu RABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from cenſurable.] Blamableneſs; liable
to be cenſured.
CENSURE. m. ſ. ſcenſura, Latin.]
1. Blame; reprimand; reproach.
Enough for half the greateſt of theſe days,
To 'ſcape my cenſure, not expect my praiſe.
2. Judgment; opinion.
Madam, and you, my ſiſter, will you go
To give your cenſures in this weighty buſineſs?
Shakeſp. Rilhard III.
Pope.
3. Judicial ſentence.
To you, lord governour,
Remains the cenſure of this helliſh villain. Shakespeare. Othell.
4. A ſpiritual puniſhment inflićted by ſome eccleſiaſtical judge.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
Upon the unſucceſsfulneſs of milder medicaments, uſe that
ſtronger phyſick, the cenſures of the church. Hammond.
To CE'Nsu Re. v. a. [cenſurer, Fr.]
1. To blame; to brand publickly.
The like cenſurings and deſpiſings have embittered the ſpirits,
and whetted both the tongues and pens of learned men one a-
gainſt another. Sanderſºn.
2. To condemn by a judicial ſentence.
CE'NSUR ER. m.ſ.. [from cenſure.] He that blames; he that re-
proaches.
We muſt not ſtint
Our neceſſary ačtions, in the fear
To cope malicious cenſurers. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
A ſtateſman, who is poſſeſt of real merit, ſhould look upon
his political cenſurers with the ſame neglect, that a good writer
regards his criticks. Addiſon, Freeholder, Nº. 17.
CENT. n.ſ. ſcentum, Lat. a hundred.] A hundred; as, five per
cent, that is, five in the hundred.
CE'N TAUR. m. ſ. [centaurus, Lat.]
1. A poetical being, ſuppoſed to be compounded of a man and a
horſe.
Down from the waſte they are centaurs, though women all
above. Shakeſp. King Lear.
The idea of a centaur has no more falſehood in it, than the
nanne ce/7tatºr. Locke.
Feats, Theſſalian centaurs never knew,
And their repeated wonders ſhake the dome. Thomſºn.
2. The archer in the zodiack.
The chearleſs empire of the sky,
To Capricorn, the Centaur archer yields. Thomſºn.
CE'NTAURY, (greater.) [centaurium majus, Lat..] A plant.
It is one of the plantae capitulae, or of thoſe plants whoſe
flowers are collected into a head, as the thiſtle, and hath
a perennial root; its leaves are without ſpines, and are ſaw-
ed on the edges; the cup of the flower is ſquamoſe, but hath
no ſpines; the florets are large and ſpacious. One of the ſpe-
cies, having cut leaves, is uſed in medicine. A Miller.
CE'N TAURY, (leſſer.) [centaurium minus, Lat.]
The leaves grow by pairs, oppoſite to each other; the flowers
conſiſt of one leaf, funnel ſhaped, and divided into five acute
ſegments; they grow on the tops of the ſtalks in cluſters; the
feed veſſel is of a cylindrick form, and is divided into two cells,
wherein many ſmall ſeeds are contained. It grows wild, and
is uſed in medicine. Miller.
Add pounded galls, and roſes dry,
And with Cecropian thyme ſtrong ſcented centaury. Dryden.
CENTENARY, m ſ. ſcentenarius, Lat...] The number of a hun-
dred.
In every centenary of years from the creation, ſome ſmall a-
batement ſhould have been made. Hakewell on Providence.
CENTE's IMAL. m. ſ. ſcenteſimus, Latin.] Hundredth ; the next
ſtep of progreſſion after decimal in the arithmetick of frac-
tions.
The neglect of a few centeſimal; in the fide of the cube,
would bring it to an equality with the cube of a foot.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
CENTIFolious. adj. [from centum and ſolium, Lat..] Having
an hundred leaves.
A poiſonous inſe&amp;t
in the Weſt Indies, commonly called by the Engliſh forty legs.
CENTO. m. ſ. ſcento, Lat..] A compoſition formed by joining
ſcrapes from other authours.
It is quilted, as it were, out of ſhreds of divers poets, ſuch as
ſcholars call a cento. Camden's Remains,
If any man think the poem a cento, our poet will but have
done the ſame in jeſt which Boileau did in earneſt.
Advertiſement to Pope's Dunciad.
CENTRAL, adj. [from centre.] Relating to the Centre; con.
taining the centre.
There is now, and was then, a ſpace or cavity in the central
parts of it; ſo large as to give reception to that mighty maſs
of water. //oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Umbriel, a dusky melancholy ſprite,
Down to the central earth, his proper ſcene,
Repairs. Pope's Rape of the Lock.
CE'NTRALLY. adv. [from central.] With regard to the centre.
Though one of the feet moſt commonly bears the weight,
yet we ſee that the whole weight reſts centrally upon it.
Dryden's Dufreſhoy.
CENTRE. m. ſ. ſcentrum, Lat.] The middle; that which is
equally diſtant from all extremities.
The heav'ns themſelves, the planets, and this centre,
Obſerve degree, priority, and place.
SShakespeare. Troilus and Crºſſa.
If we frame an image of a round body all of fire, the flame
proceeding from it, would diffuſe itſelf every way; ſo that the
ſource, ſerving for the centre there, would be round about an
huge ſphere of fire and light. Digly on Bodies.
To CE'NTRE. v. a. [from the noun..] To place on a centre ;
to fix as on a centre.
One foot he centred, and the other turn'd
Round through the vaſt profundity obſcure.
Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. vii. 1. 228.
By thy each look, and thought, and care, ’tis ſhown,
Thy joys are centred all in me alone. Prior.
He may take a range all the world over, and draw in all that
wide air and circumference of fin and vice, and centre it in his
own breaſt. South.
O impudent, regardful of thy own,
Whoſe thoughts are centred on thyſelf alone !
To CE'N TRE. v. n.
1. To reſt on ; to repoſe on ; as bodies when they gain an equi-
librium; to meet in a point, as lines in a centre.
Where there is no viſible truth wherein to centre, errour is
as wide as men's fancies, and may wander to eternity.
Decay of Piety.
What hopes you had in Diomede, lay down;
Qur hopes muſt centre on ourſelves alone. Dryden's Znaid.
The common acknowledgments of the body will at length
centre in him, who appears ſincerely to aim at the common be-
nefit. Atterbury.
It was atteſted by the viſible centring of all the old prophé-
cies in the perſon of Chriſt, and by the completion of theſe pro-
phecies ſince, which he himſelf uttered. Atterbury.
2. To be placed in the midſt or centre.
As God in heav'n
Is centre, yet extends to all; ſo thou,
Centring, receiv'ſt from all thoſe orbs. Par. Lºft, b. ix.
CE'NTrick. adj. [from centre.] Placed in the centre.
Some that have deeper digg'd in mine than I,
Say, where his centrick happineſs doth lie. Donne.
CENTRI'FuGAL. adj. [from centrum and fugio, Lat..] Having
the quality acquired by bodies in motion, of receding from the
centre.
They deſcribed an hyperbola, by changing the centripetal
into a centrifugal force. Cheyne's Philºſºphical Principles.
CENTRI'PETAL. adj. [from centrum and pelo, Lat..] Having a
tendency to the center; having gravity.
The direction of the force, whereby the planets revolve in
their orbits, is towards their centres; and this force may be
very properly called attractive, in reſpećt of the central body,
Dryden.
and centripetal, in reſpect of the revolving body. Cheyne.
CE'NTRY. See SEN ".
SE'NTRY. } ce SENTINEL.
The thoughtleſs wits ſhall frequent forfeits pay,
Who gainſt the centry's box diſcharge their tea. Gay.
CE'NTUPLE. adj. [centuplex, Lat..] An hundred fold.
To CENTU'plicate. v. a. ſcentuplicatum, of centum and pico,
Lat.] To make a hundred fold; to repeat a hundred times. D.
To CENTU'RIATE. v. a. [centurio, Lat.] To divide into hun-
dreds.
CENTURIA/Tor. m. ſ. [from century.] A name given to hiſ.
torians, who diſtinguiſh times by centuries; which is generally
the method of eccleſiaſtical hiſtory.
The centuriators of Magdeburg were the firſt that diſcovered
this grand impoſture. Aylºff's Parergon.
CENTURion. m. ſ. ſcenturio, Latin. A military officer among
the Romans, who commanded an hundred men.
Have an army ready, ſay you ?– A moſt royal one. The
centurions, and their charges, diſtinctly billeted already in the
entertainment, and to be on foot at an hour's warning.
Shakespeare. Coriolanus.
CENTURY. m. ſ. ſcenturia, Lat.]
1. A hundred ; uſually employed to ſpeciſy time; as, the ſecond
century.
The nature of eternity is ſuch, that, though our joys, after
ſome
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 6</div><p class="Text">C E R
Home centuries of years, may ſeem to have grown older, by
having beca enjoyed ſo many ages, yet will they really ſtill con-
tinue incw. Boyle.
And now time's whiter ſeries is begun,
Which in ſoft centuries ſhall ſmoothly run. Dryden.
The liſts of biſhops are filled with greater numbers than one
would expect ; but the ſucceſſion was quick in the three firſt
centuries, becauſe the biſhop very often ended in the martyr.
Addison on the Chriſtian Religion.
2. It is ſometimes uſed ſimply for a hundred.
Romulus, as you may read, did divide the Romans into
tribes, and the tribes into centuries or hundreds. Spenſer.
When
With wild woodleaves and weeds I have ſtrew'd his grave,
And on it ſaid a century of pray'rs,
Such as 1 can, twice o'er, I'll weep and figh. Shakeſp. Cymb.
CEOL. An initial in the names of men, which ſignifies a ſhip or
veſſel, ſuch as thoſe that the Saxons landed in. Gibſon's Camden.
CE'PHALALGY. m. ſ. [xitxxzxza.] The headach. Dić?.
CEPHA'Lick, adj. [xifax.] That which is medicinal to the
head. -
Cephalick medicines are all ſuch as attenuate the blood, ſo as
to make it circulate eaſily through the capillary veſſels of the
brain. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
I dreſſed him up with ſoft folded linen, dipped in a cephalick
balſam. JWiſeman.
CERA STES. n.ſ. [zigarº; J A ſerpent having horns, or ſup-
poſed to have them.
Scorpion, and aſp, and amphiſbena dire,
Cºrg/?cs horn'd, hydrus, and elops drear. Par. Loft, b. x.
CF'RAt E. m. ſ. [cera, Lat. wax.] A medicine made of wax,
which, with oil, or ſome ſofter ſubſtance, makes a conſiſtence
ſofter than a plaiſter. $2Hincy.
CE'RAt F D. adj. [ceratus, Lat.] Waxed; covered with wax.
To CERE. v. a. [from cera, Lat. wax.] To wax.
You ought to pierce the ſkin with a needle, and ſtrong
brown thread, cered about half an inch from the edges of the
lips. Jºſeman.
CE’REBEL. m. ſ. ſcºrebellum, Lat.] Part of the brain.
In the head of man, the baſe of the brain and cerebel, yea, of
the whole ſcull, is ſet parallel to the horizon. Derham.
CE'RI clor H. m. ſ. [from cere and cloth.] Cloth ſmeared over
with glutinous matter, uſed to wounds and bruiſes.
The ancient Egyptian mummies were ſhrowded in a num-
ber of folds of linen, beſmeared with gums, in manner of cere-
clºth. Bacon.
CE’REM Ent. n.ſ. (from cera, Lat, wax.] Cloaths dipped in
melted wax, with which dead bodies were infolded when they
were embalmed.
Let me not burſt in ignorance, but tell,
Why canonized bones, hearſed in earth,
Have burſt their cerements 2
CE R F Mo'NIAL. adj. [from ceremony.]
1. Relating to ceremony, or outward rite.
What mockery will it be,
To want the bridegroom, when the prieſt attends,
To ſpeak the ceremºnial rites of marriage
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
We are to carry it from the hand to the heart, to improve a
ceremonial nicety into a ſubſtantial duty, and the modes of ci-
vility into the realities of religion. South.
Chriſt did take away that external ceremonial worſhip that
was among the Jews. Stillingfleet.
2. Formal; obſervant of old forms.
Oh monſtrous, ſuperſtitious puritan,
Of refin'd manners, yet ceremonial man,
That when thou meet'ſt one, with enquiring eyes
Doſt ſearch, and, like a needy broker, prize
The ſilk and gold he wears. - Donne.
With dumb pride, and a ſet formal face,
He moves in the dull ceremonial track, -
With Jove's embroider'd coat upon his back. Dryden.
CERE Mo'NIAL. m. ſ. [from ceremony.]
1. Outward form ; external rite. -
The only condition that could make it prudent for the cler-
gy, to alter the cercºnial, or any indifferent part, would be a
reſolution in the legiſlature to prevent new ſects. Swift.
2. The order for rites and forms in the Romiſh church.
CFR FMo'NIALN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ceremonial J The quality of be-
ing ceremonial; over much uſe of ceremony.
CE R F Mo'Nious. adj. [from ceremony.]
1. Conſiſting of outward rites.
Under a different oeconomy of religion, God was more ten-
der of the ſhell and ceremonious part of his worſhip. South.
2. Full of ceremony; awful.
O, the ſacrifice,
How ceremonious, ſolemn, and uncarthly,
It was i' th' offering Shakeſp. Iſinter's Tale,
3. Attentive to the outward rites of religion.
You are too ſenſeleſs obſtinate, my lord;
Too ceremºnizu, and traditional. Shakespeare Richard III.
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Vol. I,
4. Civil ; according to the ſtrict rules of civility; formally re-
ſpectful.
They have a ſet of ceremonious phraſes, that run through all
ranks and degrees among them. Addiſon. Guard. Nº 1.e4.
5. Obſervant of the rules of civility.
Then let us take a ceremonious leave, º
And loving farewel of our ſeveral friends. Shakeſp. R. III.
6. Civil and formal to a fault.
The old caitiff was grown ſo ceremonious, as he would needs
accompany me ſome miles in my way. Sidney, b. ii.
CERFMo'Niously, adv. [from ceremonious.] In a ceremonious
manner; formally; reſpectful.
Ceremoniouſly let us prepare
Some welcome for the miſtreſs of the houſe.
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Verona.
r - -
CEReMo'NiousNess. n: ſ [from ceremonious.] Fondneſs of ce-
remony ; uſing too much ceremony.
CEREMONY. n.ſ. [ceremonia, Lat.]
1. Outward rite; external form in religion.
Bring her up to the high altar, that ſhe ma
The ſacred ceremonies partake. Spenſer's Epithalamium.
He is ſuperſtitious grown of late,
Quite from the main opinion he held once
Of fantaſy, of dreams, and ceremonies. Shakespeare. j. Caſar.
Diſrobe the images,
If you find them deck'd with ceremony. Shakespeare. j. Cºſr.
2. Forms of civility.
The ſauce to meat is ceremony;
Meeting were bare without it. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Not to uſe ceremonies at all, is to teach others not to uſe them
again, and ſo diminiſh reſpect to himſelf. Bacon.
3. Outward forms of ſtate.
What art thou, thou idle ceremony P
What kind of god art thou, that ſuffer'ſt more
Of mortal grief, than do thy worſhippers?
Art thou aught elſe but place, degree, and form 2
Shakeſp. Henry V.
A coarſer place,
Where pomp and ceremonies enter'd not,
Where greatneſs was ſhut out, and bigneſs well forgot.
Dryden's Fables.
CE'Rote. m. ſ. The ſame with cerate; which ſee.
In thoſe which are critical, a cerate of oil of olives, with
white wax, hath hitherto ſerved my purpoſe. Jºſeman.
CERTAIN. adj. [certus, Lat.]
1. Sure; indubitable; unqueſtionable; undoubted; that which
cannot be queſtioned, or denied.
This it is equally certain of, whether theſe ideas be more or
leſs general. Locke.
Thoſe things are certain among men, which cannot be de-
nied, without obſtinacy and folly. Tillotſon.
2. Reſolved; determined.
However I with thee have fix'd my lot,
Certain to undergo like doom of death,
Conſort with thee. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix. l. 953.
3. In an indefinite ſenſe, ſome; as, a certain man told me this.
How bad ſoever this faſhion may juſtly be accounted, certain
of the ſame countrymen do paſs far beyond it. Carew's Survey.
I got them in my country's ſervice, when
Some certain of your brethren roar'd, and ran
From noiſe of our own drums. Shakespeare. Coriolanus.
Let there be certain leather bags made of ſeveral bigneſſes,
which, for the matter of them, ſhould be tračtable. //ilkins.
4. Undoubting; put paſt doubt.
This form before Alcyone preſent,
To make her certain of the ſad event. Dryden.
CE'RTAINLY. adv. [from certain.]
I. Indubitably ; without queſtion; without doubt.
Certainly he that, by thoſe legal means, cannot be ſecured,
can be much leſs ſo by any private attempt. Decay of Piety.
. What preciſe collection of ſimple ideas, modeſty of fruga-
lity ſtand for, in another's uſe, is not ſo wrtainly known. Loºe.
2. Without fail.
CE'RTAINNEss. m. ſ. [from certain..] The ſame with certainty.
CE'RTAINT Y. m. ſ. [from certain.]
1. Exemption from doubt.
Certainty is the perception of the agreement or diſagreement
of our ideas. Lºcłe.
2. That which is real and fixed.
Doubting things go ill, often hurts more
Than to be ſure they do ; for certainties
Or are paſt remedics, or timely knowing, -
The remedy then born. Sºft. Cynºn.
CE'RTES. adv. [certes, Fr.] Certainly ; in truth ; in ſooth : an
old word.
Certes, Sir Knight, ye’ve been too much to blame,
Thus for to blot the honour of the dead,
And with foul cowardice his carcaſe ſhame,
Whoſe living hands immortaliz'd his name. Firy Q. b. ii.
For, certei, theſe are people of the iſland. Sha&amp;ſp. Zºnfeſt.
Cºrtes, our authours are to blame. Iłudibras.
4 G CFR TIFICATE,
</p></div><p>
            End of Section 3.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809190#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section4" id="Section4"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section 4</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 7</div><p class="Text">C F S
C H A
-
º
Certi'ſ ic ATF. n.ſ. [certificat, low Lat, he certifies]
1. A writing made in any court, to give notice to anothcr court
of any thing done therein. Cowel.
2. Any teſtimony. - •
A certificate of poverty is as good as a protećtion. L'E/fr.
I can bring certificates, that I Echºve. myſelf ſoberly before
company. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 577.
To CER+:FY. v. a. [certifier, Fr.]
1. To give certain information of
The Engliſh embaſſadours returned out of Flanders from
Maximilian, and certified the king, that he was not to hope for
any aid from him. Bacon's Henry VII.
This is deſigned to certify thoſe things that are confirmed of
God’s favour. Hammond's Fundamentals.
2. It has of before the thing told.
CERTIOR.? R.I. m. ſ. [Latin.] A writ iſſuing out of the chan-
cery, to call up the records of a cauſe therein depending, that
juſtice may be done; upon complaint made by bill, that the
party, who ſeeks the ſaid writ, hath received hard dealing in
the ſaid court. Cowel.
CE RTITUDE. n.ſ. [certitude, Lat.] Certainty; freedom from
doubt.
They thought at firſt they dream'd ; for 'twas offence
With them, to queſtion certitude of ſenſe. Dryden.
There can be no majus and minus in the certitude we have of
things, whether by mathematick demonſtration, or any other
way of conſequence. Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. ii. c. iv. § 2.
CER vi'cAL. adj. [cervicalis, Lat..] Belonging to the neck.
The aorta bending a little upwards, ſends forth the cervical
and axillary arteries; the reſt turning down again, forms the
deſcending trunk. Cheyne's Philºſºphical Principles.
n/ *
8:::::::. }a}. [carruleus, Lat.] Blue; ſky coloured.
It afforded a ſolution, with, now and then, a light touch of
ſky colour, but nothing near ſo high as the ceruleous tincture of
ſilver. Boyle.
From thee the ſaphire ſolid ether takes,
Its hue cerulean. Thomſºn's Summer.
CE RULI'Fick. adj. [from ceruleous.] Having the power to pro-
duce a blue colour.
The ſeveral ſpecies of rays, as the rubifick, cerulifick, and
others are ſeparated one from another. Grew's Coſmol. Sacra.
CERUMEN. n.ſ. [Latin.] The wax or excrement of the
car.
CE'R Us F. n.ſ.. [ceruſa, Lat.] White lead.
A preparation of lead with vinegar, which is of a white co-
lour; whence many other things, reſembling it in that parti-
cular, are by chymiſts called ceriſe, as the ceruſe of antimony,
and the like. - &amp;iny.
CEs.A'RIAN. adj. [from Caſar.]
The Cºſarian ſection is cutting a child-out of the womb ei-
ther dead or alive, when it cannot otherwiſe be delivered.
Which circumſtance, it is ſaid, firſt gave the name of Caſar
to the Roman family ſo called. Quincy.
CESS. m. ſ. [probably corrupted from cenſe; See CENse; though
imagined by junius to be derived from ſaiſire, to ſeize.]
1. A levy made upon the inhabitants of a place, rated according
to their property.
The like ceſs is alſo charged upon the country ſometimes for
vićtualling the ſoldiers, when they lie in garriſon. Spenſer.
2. The act of laying rates. -
3. [from cºffe, Fr.] It ſeems to have been uſed by Shakeſpeare for
bounds, or limits.
I pr’ythee, Tom, beat Cutts's ſaddle, put a few flocks in the
point; the poor jade is wrung in the withers out of all ceſs.
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
To CF ss. v. a. [from the noun..] To rate; to lay charge on.
We are to conſider how much land there is in all Ulſter,
that, according to the quantity thereof, we may cºſ; the ſaid
rent, and allowance iſſuing thereout. Spenſer on Ireland.
CEssà'TION. m. ſ. [ceſſatio, Lat.]
1. A ſtop ; a reſt; a vacation. -
The day was yearly obſerved for a feſtival, by cºſation from
labour, and by reſorting to church. Hayward.
True piety, without ceſſation toſt
By theories, the practick part is loſt. Denham.
There had been a mighty confuſion of things, an interrup-
tion and perturbation of the ordinary courſe, and a cºffation
and ſuſpenſion of the laws of nature. Iſoodward's Nat. Hiſł.
The riſing of a parliament is a kind of cºffation from poli-
ticks. Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 55.
The ſerum, which is mixed with an alkali, being poured out
to that which is mixed with an acid, raiſeth an efferveſcence; at
the cºffation of which, the ſalts of which the acid was compoſed,
will be regenerated. Arbuthnot on Aliments,
* A pauſe of hoſtility, without peace.
. When the ſuccours of the poor proteſtants in Ireland were
diverted, I was intreated to get them ſome reſpite, by a cºſa-
tion. K. Charles,
CESS/VIT. n.ſ. [Latin.]
A writ that lies upon this general ground, that the perſon,
againſt whom it is brought, hath, for two years, omitted to
3. To perfume.
To CHAFE. v. n.
1. To rage; to fret ; to fume; to rave; to boil.
perform ſuch ſervice, or pay ſuch rent, as he is obliged by his
tenure, and hath not, upon his land or tenement, ſufficient
goods or chattels to be diſtrained. Cowel.
Cessibility. n.ſ.. [from ccdb, cºffin, Latin.] The quality of
receding, or giving way, without reſiſtance.
If the ſubject ſtrucken be of a proportionate cºffbility, it
ſeems to dull and deaden the ſtroke; whereas if the thing ſtruc-
ken be hard, the ſtroke ſeems to loſe no force, but to work a
greater effect. Digly on the Sºul.
CE'ssible. adj. [from ced, cºffm, Lat.], Eaſy to give way.
If the parts of the ſtrucken body be ſo eaſily cºffille, as with-
out difficulty the ſtroke can divide them, then it enters into ſuch
a body, till it has ſpent its force. Digly on the Soul.
CE'ssion. m. ſ. [cºffon, Fr. ceſio, Lat.]
1. Retreat; the act of giving way.
Sound is not produced without ſome reſiſtance either in the
air or the body percuſſed; for if there be a mere yielding or ceſ:
fon, it produceth no ſound. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł. Nº 1 2 s.
2. Reſignation; the act of yielding up or quitting to another.
A parity in their council would make and ſecure the beſt
peace they can with France, by a cºffion of Flanders to that
crown, in exchange for other provinces. Temple.
CE'ssion ARY. adj. [from ceſſion.] As a cºſionary bankrupt, ore
who has delivered up all his effects.
Ce'ssMENT. n.ſ.. [from cºſt.] An aſſeſſment or tax.
CE'ssoR. m. ſ. [from ceſſo, Lat.]
In law, he that ceaſeth or negle&amp;eth ſo long to perform a
duty belonging to him, as that by his ceſs, or ceſſing, he incur-
reth the danger of law, and hath, cr may have, the writ ceſſa-
vit brought againſt him. Where it is }. the tenant ceſſeth,
ſuch phraſe is to be underſtood, as if it were ſaid, the tenant
ceſſeth to do that which he ought, or is bound to do by his
land or tenement. Cowel.
CESTUS. n.ſ. [Latin.] The girdle of Venus. -
Venus, without any ornament but her own beauties, not ſo
much as her own ceſius. Addison. Spectator, N° 425.
CETA'ceous. adj. [from cete, whales, Lat.] Of the whale kind.
Such fiſhes as have lungs or reſpiration, are not without the
wezzon, as whales and cetaceous animals. Brown's Wulg. Err.
He hath created variety of theſe cetaceous fiſhes, which con-
verſe chiefly in the northern ſeas, whoſe whole body being en-
compaſſed round with a copious fat or blubber, it is enabled to
abide the greateſt cold of the ſea-water. Ray on the Creation,
C F AUT. A note in the ſcale of muſick.
Gamut I am, the ground of all accord,
A re, to plead Hortenſio's paſſion;
B mi Bianca, take him for thy lord,
C faut, that loves with all affection.
- Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
CH has, in words purely Engliſh, or fully naturalized, the found
of th; a peculiar pronunciation, which it is hard to deſcribe
in words. In ſome words derived from the French, it has the
ſound of ſº, as chaiſe; and, in ſome derived from the Greek,
the ſound of Æ, as cholerick.
CHAcE. See CHAs E.
CHAD. m. ſ. A ſort of fiſh.
Of round fiſh there are brit, ſprat, whiting, chad, eels,
congar, millet. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
To CHAFE. v. a. ſechauffºr, Fr.]
1. To warm with rubbing.
They laid him upon ſome of their garments, and fell to rub
and chaft him, till they brought him to recover both breath, the
ſervant, and warmth, the companion of living. Sidney.
At laſt, recovering heart, he does begin
To rub her temples, and to chaft her skin.
Soft, and more ſoft, at ev'ry touch it grew ;
Like pliant wax, when chaffng hands reduce
A/artin.
Diet.
Fairy Q. b. i.
The former maſs to form, and frame to uſe. Dryden.
2. To heat.
Have I not heard the ſea, puff’d up with winds,
Rage like an angry boar, chaſed with ſweat? Shakeſp.
Lilies more white than ſnow,
New fall'n from heav'n, with violets mix'd, did grow ;
Whoſe ſcent ſo chaf"d the neighbour air, that you
Would ſurely ſwear Arabick ſpices grew. Suckling.
4. To make angry. -
Her interceſſion chaf'd him ſo,
When ſhe for thy repeal was ſuppliant,
That to cloſe priſon he commanded her. Shakeſp.
An offer of pardon more chaſed the rage of thoſe, who were
reſolved to live or die together. Sir john Hayward.
For all that he was inwardly chºſed with the heat of youth
and indignation, againſt his own people as well as the Rhodi-
ans, he moderated himſelf betwixt his own rage, and the of
fence of his ſoldiers. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
This chaf"d the boar, his noſtrils flames expire,
And his red eyeballs roll with living fire. IDryden.
Therewith he 'gan full terribly to roar, -
And choſ'd at that indignity right ſore. Spenſer's IHub. Taft.
2
My
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 8</div><p class="Text">C H A
C H A
My husband will not rejoice ſo much at the abuſe of Fal.
ſtaff, as he will choſe at the doćtor's marrying my daughter.
Shakeſp. Merry 7/ites of//indſºr.
Be lich mettled, proud, and take no care,
Who chaſes, who frets, or where conſpirers are.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
How did they fume, and ſtamp, and roar, and chaſe,
And ſwear; not Addiſon himſelf was ſafe. Pope.
2. To fret againſt any thing.
Once upon a raw and guſly day,
The troubled Tyber chofing with his ſhores. Shakeſp. j. Caſ.
The murmuring ſurge,
That on th' unnumber'd idle pebbles chafts,
Cannot be heard ſo high. Shakeſp. King Lear.
CHAFF. m.ſ. (from the verb.] A heat; a rage; a fury; a paſ-
ſion ; a fume; a pett; a fret; a ſtorm.
When Sir Thomas More was ſpeaker of the parliament,
with his wiſdom and eloquence, he ſo croſſed a purpoſe of car-
dinal Wolſey's, that the cardinal, in a chaft, ſent for him to
Whitehall. Camden's Remains.
At this the knight grew high in chaſe,
And ſtaring furiouſly on Ralph,
He trembled. Hudibras, p. ii. c. ii.
CHA FE-wax. n.ſ. An officer belonging to the lord high chan-
cellor, who fits the wax for the ſealing of writs. Harris.
CHA'FER. m. ſ. ſceapon, Sax. Kever, Dutch..] An inſe&amp;t; a ſort
of yellow beetle.
CHA'FERY. m. ſ. A forge in an iron mill, where the iron is
wrought into complete bars, and brought to perfection.
Phillips's I/orld of Words.
CHAFF. m. ſ. ſceap, Sax. Kaf, Dutch.]
1. The huſks of corn that are ſeparated by threſhing and win-
nowing.
We ſhall be winnow'd with ſo rough a wind,
That ev’n our corn ſhall ſeem as light as chaff,
And good from bad find no partition. Shakeſp. Hinry IV.
Pleaſure with inſtruction ſhould be join'd;
So take the corn, and leave the chaff behind. Dryden.
He ſet before him a ſack of wheat, as it had been juſt threſh-
ed out of the ſheaf; he then bid him pick out the chaff from
among the corn, and lay it aſide by itſelf. Speciator, N° 291.
2. It is uſed for any thing worthleſs.
To CHA'FFER. j. m. [Kauffºn, Germ. to buy..] To treat about
a bargain ; to haggle; to bargain.
Nor rode himſelf to Paul's, the publick fair,
To chaffer for preferments with his gold,
Where biſhopricks and finecures are ſold. Dryden's Fables.
The chaffering with diſſenters, and dodging about this or
t'other ceremony, is but like opening a few wickets, and leav-
ing them a-jar. Swift.
In diſputes with chairmen, when your maſter ſends you to
chaffer with them, take pity, and tell your maſter that they will
not take a farthing leſs. Swift.
To CHA'FFER. v. a. [The active ſenſe is obſolete.]
1. To buy.
He chaffer'd chairs in which churchmen were ſet,
And breach of laws to privy farm did let. Spenſer.
2. To exchange.
Approaching nigh, he never ſaid to greet,
Ne chaffer words, proud courage to provoke. Fairy Queen.
CHA'FFERER. m. ſ. [from chaffºr.] A buyer; bargainer; pur-
chaſer.
CHA'FFERN. n.ſ.. [from eſchauffer, Fr. to heat..] A veſſel for
heating water. Dić7.
CHA'FFERY. m.ſ.. [from chaffer.] Traffick; the practice of
buying and ſelling.
The third is, merchandize and chaffery, that is, buying and
ſelling. Spenser's State of Ireland.
CHA'F FINCH. m. ſ. [from chaff and finch..] A bird ſo called, be-
cauſe it delights in chaff, and is by ſome much admired for its
ſong. - Phillips's I/orld of Words.
The chaffnch, and other ſmall birds, are injurious to ſome
fruits. Mortimer's Husbandry.
CHA'FF less. adj. [from chaff.] Without chaff.
The love I bear him,
Made me to fan you thus; but the gods made you,
Unlike all others, chaffeſ. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
CHA'FF we ED. m. ſ. [gnaphalium, Lat.] An herb; the ſame with
cudweed; which ſee.
CHA'FFY. adj. [from choff.] Like chaff; full of chaff; light.
If the ſtraws be light and chaffy, and held at a reaſonable diſ-
tance, they will not riſe unto the middle. Brown's Pulgar Err.
CHA'FINGDISH. n.ſ. [from chaft and diſh.] A veſſel to make
any thing hot in ; a portable grate for coals.
Make proof of the incorporation of ſilver and tin in equal
quantities, whether it will endure the ordinary fire which be-
longeth to chaſingdiſhes, poſmets, and ſuch other filver veſſels.
- - Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
CHAGR1'N. m. ſ.[chagrine, Fr.] ‘ Ill humour; vexation; fret-
fulneſs ; peeviſhneſs. It is pronounced ſhagreen.
Hear me, and touch Belinda with chagrin i
That ſingle act gives half the world the ſpleen. Pope.
. I grieve with the old, for ſo many additional inconvenien-
“ies and chagrins, more than their ſmall remain of life ſeemed
deſtined to undergo. Pope's Letters.
To CHAGR1'N. v. a. [chagriner, Fr.] To vex; to put cut of
temper; to teaze; to make uneaſy.
CHAIN. n.ſ...[chaine, Fr.]
* A ſeries of links faſtened one within another.
And Pharaoh took off his ring, and put it upon Joſeph's
hand, and put a gold chain about his neck. Gen. xli. 42.
2. A bond; a manacle; a fetter; ſomething with which priſon-
ers are bound.
Still in conſtraint your ſuff'ring ſex remains,
Qr bound in formal, or in real cºins. Pože.
3. A line of links with which land is meaſured. *
. A ſurveyour may as ſoon, with his chain, meaſure out infi-
nite, ſpace, as a philoſopher, by the quickeſt flight of mind,
reach it, or, by thinking, comprehend it. Locke.
4. A ſeries linked together. -
Thoſe ſo miſtake the Chriſtian religion, as to think it is
only a chain of fatal decrees, to deny all liberty of man's choice
toward good or evil. Hammond.
As there is pleaſure in the right exerciſe of any faculty, ſo
eſpecially in that of right reaſoning; which is ſtill the greater,
by how much the conſequences are more clear, and the jain, of
them more long. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
To CHAIN. v. a. [from the noun.]
I. To faſten or link with a chain.
They repeal daily any wholeſome ačt eſtabliſhed againſt the
rich, and provide more piercing ſtatutes daily to chain up and
reſtrain the poor. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The mariners he chained in his own galleys for ſlaves.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Or, march'd I chain’d behind the hoſtile car,
The vićtor's paſtime, and the ſport of war Prior.
They, with joint force oppreſſion chaining, ſet
Imperial juſtice at the helm. Thomſon.
2. To bring into ſlavery.
This world, 'tis true,
Was made for Caeſar, but for Titus too:
And which more bleſt? who chain’d his country, ſay,
Or he, whoſe virtue ſigh'd to loſe a day : Pope.
3. To put on a chain.
The admiral ſeeing the mouth of the haven chained, and the
caſtles full of ordnance, and ſtrongly manned, durſt not attempt
to enter. Knolles’s Hiſtory of the Turks.
4. To unite.
O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine,
And in this vow do chain my ſoul with thine.
- Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
CHA'INPUMP. m. ſ. [from chain and pump.] A pump uſed in
large Engliſh veſſels, which is double, ſo that one riſes as the
other falls. It yields a great quantity of water, works eaſily,
and is eaſily mended, but takes up a great deal of room, and
makes a §. noiſe. Chambers.
It is not long ſince the ſtriking of the topmaſt, a wonderful
great eaſe to great ſhips both at ſea and in harbour, hath been
deviſed, together with the chainpump, which takes up twice as
much water as the ordinary did; and we have lately added the
bonnet and the drabble. Raleigh's Eſſays.
CHA'INshot. n.ſ.. [from chain and ſhot..] Two bullets or half
bullets, faſtened together by a chain, which,when they fly open,
cut away whatever is before them.
In ſea fights oftentimes, a buttock, the brawn of the thigh,
and the calf of the leg, are torn off by the chainſhot, and ſplin-
ters. J/ſeman's Surgery.
CHA'IN work. m.ſ.. [from chain and work.] 3. with open
ſpaces like the links of a chain. -
Nets of chequerwork, and wreaths of chainwork, for the cha-
piters which were upon the tops of the pillars. 1 Kings, vii. 17.
CHAIR. m.ſ. [chair, Fr.]
1. A moveable feat.
Whether thou chooſe Cervantes’ ſerious air,
Or laugh and ſhake in Rablais' eaſy chair,
Or praiſe the court, or magnify mankind,
Or thy griev'd country's copper chains unbind. - Pºpe.
If a chair be defined a ſeat for a ſingle perſon, with a back
belonging to it, then a ſtool is a ſeat for a ſingle º:
a back. atts &amp; Lºgick.
2. A ſeat of juſtice, or of authority. -
He makes for England, º º º gown—
- - ty Is the ſword unſway'd :
Is º y - sº Richard III.
If thou be that princely eagle's bird,
Show thy deſcent by gazing 'gainſt the ſun;
For chai; and dukedom, throne and kingdom, ſay :
. Either that's thine, or elſe thou werſ.nºthis:
Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
The honour’d gods . . .
Keep Rome in ſafety, and the chairs of juſtice -
ś, with worthy men. Shakespeare. Coriolaºui.
Th: Čommittee of the commons appointed Mr. Pym to take
- / -
the chair. Clarendon
Her
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 9</div><p class="Text">C H A
C H A
Her grace ſat down to reſt a while,
In a rich chair of ſtate. Shakeſp. II. ºry VIII.
In this high temple, on a chair of ſtate,
The ſeat of audience, old Latinus fate.
3. A vehicle born by men; a ſedan.
Think what an equipage thou haſt in air,
And view with ſcorn two pages and a chair.
CHA'IR MAN. n.ſ.. [from chair and man.]
1. The preſident of an aſſembly.
In theſe aſſemblies generally one perſon is choſen chairman or
moderator, to keep the ſeveral ſpeakers to the rules of order.
J/atts's Improvement ºf the ... ſind.
2. One whoſe trade it is to carry a chair.
One elbows him, one juſtles in the ſhole,
A rafter breaks his head, or chairman's pole.
Troy chairmen bore the wooden ſteed;
Pregnant with Greeks, impatient to be freed;
Thoſe buily Greeks, who, as the moderns do,
Initead of paying chairmen, run them through. Swift.
CHAIs E. m. ſ. [chaiſ, Fr.] A carriage of pleaſure drawn by
one horſe.
Inſtead of the chariot he might have ſaid the chaiſ of go-
vernment; for a chaiſ is driven by the perſon that ſits in it.
Midſºn's J/hig Examiner.
CHALco'GRAPHER. m. ſ. ſzz»x-years, of zºo, braſs, and y:z:x,
to write or engrave..] An engraver in braſs.
CHALco'GRAPHY, n.ſ. [xzxzxz2,2..] Engraving in braſs.
Dryden's ME.eid.
Pºpe.
- Dryden.
CHA'LDER. ) n.ſ. A dry Engliſh meaſure of coals, conſiſting
CHA'I, DR on. { of thirty ſix buſhels heaped up, according to the
CHA'UDR on. ) ſealed buſhel kept at Guildhall, London. The
chauldron ſhould weigh two thouſand pounds. Chambers.
CHA'Lic E. m. ſ. ſcalic, Sax. calice, Fr. calix, Lat.]
1. A cup ; a bowl.
When in your motion you are hot,
And, that he calls for drink, I'll have prepar'd him
A chalice for the nonce. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. It is generally uſed for a cup uſed in ads of worſhip.
All the church at that time did not think emblemátical figures
unlawful ornaments of cups or chalices. Stillingfleet.
CHA'Lice D. adj. [from calix, Lat. the cup of a flower.] Having
a cell or cup; applicd by Shakespeare to a flower, but now ob-
ſolete.
Hark, hark' the lark at heav'n's gate fings,
And Phoebus 'gins ariſe,
His ſleeds to water at theſe ſprings,
On challe'd flowers that lies. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
CHALK. m. ſ. [ceale; cealercan, Sax. calk, Welch.]
Chalk is a white foſſile, uſually reckoned a ſtone, but by
ſome ranked among the boles. It is uſed in medicine as an ab-
ſorbent, and is celebrated for curing the heartburn. Chambers.
He maketh all the ſtones of the altar as chalk ſtones, that are
beaten in funder. Iſaiah, xxvii. 9.
Chalk is of two ſorts; the hard, dry, ſtrong chalk, which is
beſt for lime; and a ſoft, unctuous chalk, which is beſt for
lands, becauſe it eaſily diſſolves with rain and froſt. Mortimer.
With cha! I firſt deſcribe a circle here,
Where theſe cthereal ſpirits muſt appear.
To CHA LK. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To rub with chalk.
2. To manure with chalk.
Land that is chalked, if it is not well dunged, will receive but
little benefit from a ſecond chalking. Al/ortimer.
3. To mark or tracc out as with chalk.
Being not propt by anceſtry, whoſe grace
Chalks ſucceſſours their way. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
His own mind chalked out to him the juſt proportions and
meaſures of behaviour to his fellow creatures. South.
With theſe helps I might at leaſt have chalked out a way for
others, to amend my errours in a like deſign. Dryden.
The time falls within the compaſs here chalked out by nature,
very punctually. J/oodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
CHALK-cut TER. m. ſ. [from chalk and cut..] A man that digs
chalk.
Shells, by the ſeamen called chalk eggs, are dug up com-
monly in the chalk-pits, where the chalk-cutters drive a great
trade with them. J/oodward.
CHALK-PIT. n; ſ. [from chalk and pit.] A pit in which chalk
is dug. See CHALK-cutt ER.
CHA'LKY. adj. [from chalk.]
1. Conſiſting of chalk; white with chalk.
As far as I could ken the chalky cliffs,
When from thy ſhore the tempeſt beats us back,
I ſtood upon the hatches in the ſtorm. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
That bellowing beats on Dover's chally cliff.
Rowe's Royal Convert.
Dryden.
2. Impregnated with chalk.
Ghaly Water towards the top of earth is too fretting. Bacon.
TººHALLENGE. v.a.ſ.l...nº, Fr.j
1. To sºil another to anſwer for an offence by combat.
The prince of Wales ſtept forth before the king,
And, nephew, challeng'd you to fingle fight. Shakeſp. H.IV.
2. To call to a conteſt.
Thus form'd for ſpecid, he challenge, the wind,
And leaves the Scythian arrow far behind;
He ſcours along the field with looſen’d reins. Dryden,
I chałºgº any man to make any pretence to power by right
of fatherhood, cither intelligible or poſſible. -.
3. To accuſe.
Were the grac'd perſon of our Banquo preſent,
Whom I may rather chall, nge for unkindneſs. Sº.…. Mºth.
4. In law to object to the impartiality of any one. [Sec the
noun.]
Though only twelve are ſworn, yet twenty four are to be
returned, to ſupply the defects or want of appearance of thoſe
that are challenged off, or make default. Hilº's Common Law.
5. To claim as due.
The utter diſturbance of that divine order, whereby the pre-
eminence of chiefeſt acceptation is by the beſt things worthily
challenged. Hooker, b. i. § 7.
Which of you, ſhall we ſay, doth love us moſt
That we our largeſt bounty may extend,
Where nature doth with merit hallenge. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
And ſo much duty as my mother ſhew'd
To you, preferring you before her father;
So much I challenge, that I may profeſs
Due to the moor, my lord. Shakeſp. Othello.
Had you not been their father, theſe white flakes
Did challenge pity of them. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
So when a tyger ſucks the bullocks blood,
A famiſh'd lion, iſſuing from the wood,
Roars loudly fierce, and challenge, the food.
2…. •
Dryden's Fables.
Haſt thou yet drawn o'er young Juba :
That ſtill would recommend thee more to Caeſar,
And challenge better terms. Addison's Cato.
6. To call any one to the performance of conditions.
I will now challenge you of your promiſe, to give me certain
rules as to the principles of blazonry. Pashan on Drawing.
CHALLENGE. n.ſ.. [from the verb.j
1. A ſummons to combat.
I never in my life
Did hear a challenge urg'd more modeſtly. Shºp. II. IV.
2. A demand of ſomething as due.
There muſt be no challenge of ſuperiority, or diſcounte-
nancing of freedom. Collier of Friendſhip.
3. In law. An exception taken either againſt perſons or things;
perſons, as in aſſize to the jurors, or any one or more of them,
by the priſoner at the bar. Challenge made to the jurours, is
cither made to the array, or to the polls: challenge made to the
array is, when the whole number is excepted againſt, as partially
empannelled: challenge to or by the poll, is when ſome one or
more are excepted againſt, as not indifferent: challenge to the
jurours is divided into challenge principal, and challenge for cauſe:
challenge principal is that which the law allows without cauſe
alleged, or farther examination; as a priſoner at the bar, ar-
raigned upon felony, may peremptorily challenge to the num-
ber of twenty, one after another, of the jury empannelled upon
him, alleging no cauſe. Cowel.
You are mine enemy, I make my challenge,
You ſhall not be my judge. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
CHA'LLENGER. m. ſ. [from challenge.]
1. One that defies or ſummons another to combat.
Young man, have you challenged Charles the wreſtler 2–
No, fair princeſs; he is the general challenger.
Shakeſp. As you like it.
Death was denounc'd;
He took the ſummons, void of fear,
And unconcernedly caſt his cyes around,
As if to find and dare the griefly challenger. Dryden.
2. One that claims ſuperiority. -
- Whoſe worth
Stood challenger on mount of all the age,
For her perfections. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
3. A claimant; one that requires ſomething as of right.
Earneſt challengers there are of trial, by ſome publick diſpu-
tation. - Hºoker, Preface.
CHALY'BF At F. adj. [from chalybs, Lat. ſteel.] Impregiated
with iron or ſteel; having the qualities of ſteel.
The diet ought to ſtrengthen the ſolids, allowing ſpices and
wine, and the uſe of chalybeate waters. Arºut/not on Diet.
CHAMADE. m. ſ. [French..] The beat of the drum which de-
clares a ſurrender.
Several French battalions made a ſhew of reſiſtance; but,
upon our preparing to fill up a little foſſé, in order to attack
them, they beat the chamade, and ſent us charte blanche.
Addison. Speciator, N° 165.
CHAMBER. m.ſ.. [chambre, Fr. camera, Lat, ſtambº, Welch.]
1. An apartment in a houſe; generally uſed for thoſe appropriat-
ed to lodging.
Welcome, ſweet prince, to London, to your chamber.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
Biº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 10</div><p class="Text">C H A
C H A
|
Bid them conic forth, and hear me,
Or at their chamber door I'll beat the drum,
Till it cry fleep to death. Shakespeare . King Lear.
When we have mark'd with blood thoſe ſleepy two,
Of his own chamber. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
A natural cave in a rock may have ſomething not much un-
like to parlours or chambers. Bentley.
2. Any retired room. *
The dark caves of death, and chambers of the grave. Prior.
3. Any cavity or hollow. -
Petit has, from an examination of the figure of the eye, ar-
gued againſt the poſſibility of a film's exiſtence in the poſte-
riour chamber. Sharp.
4. A court of juſtice.
. In the Imperial chamber this vulgar anſwer is not admitted,
viz. I do not believe it, as the matter is propounded and al-
leged. - - Ayliffe's Parergon.
5. The hollow part of a gun where the charge is lodged.
6. A ſpecies of great gun.
Names given them, as cannons, demi-cannons, chambers, ar-
quebuſe, muſket, &amp;c. Camden's Remains.
7. The cavity where the powder is lodged in a mine.
To CHA'MBER. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To be wanton; to intrigue.
Let us walk honeſtly as in the day, not in rioting and drun-
kenneſs, not in chambering and wantonneſs. Rom. xiii. 13.
2. To reſide as in a chamber.
The beſt blood chamber'd in his boſom. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
CHA'MBERER. m. ſ. [from chamber.] A man of intrigue.
I have not thoſe ſoft parts of converſation,
That chamberers have. Shakeſp. Othello.
CHA'MBERF Ellow. n.ſ.. [from chamber and fºllow.] One that
lies in the ſame chamber.
It is my fortune to have a chamberfellow, with whom I agree
very well in many ſentiments. Speciator, N° 286.
CHA'MBERLAIN. m.ſ.. [from chamber.]
1. Lord great chamberlain of England is the fixth officer of the
crown; a conſiderable part of his funétion is at a coronation;
to him belongs the proviſion of every thing in the houſe of
lords; he diſpoſes of the ſword of ſtate; under him are the gen-
tleman uſher of the black rod, yeomen uſhers, and door-keep-
ers. To this office the duke of Ancaſter makes an hereditary
claim. Chambers.
2. Lord chamberlain of the houſhold has the overſight of all offi-
cers belonging to the king's chambers, except the precinét of
the bedchamber. . - Chambers.
Humbly complaining to her deity,
Got my lord chamberlain his liberty. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
He was made lord ſteward, that the ſtaff of chamberlain might
be put into the hands of his brother. Clarendon.
A patriot is a fool in every age,
Whom all lord chamberlains allow the ſtage. Pope.
3. A ſervant who has the care of the chambers.
Think'ſt thou, -
That the bleak air, thy boiſterous chamberlain,
Will put thy ſhirt on warm 2 Shakeſp. Timon.
When Duncan is aſleep, his two chamberlains
We will with wine and waſſel convince. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He ſerv’d at firſt AEmilia's chamberlain. Dryden's Fables.
4. A receiver of rents and revenues; as, chamberlain of the exche-
quer, of Cheſter, of the city of London. Chambers.
CHA'MBERLAINSHIP. m. ſ. [from chamberlain.] The office of
a chamberlain.
CHA'MBERMAID. m.ſ.. [from chamber and maid.] A maid whoſe
buſineſs is to dreſs a lady, and wait in her chamber.
Men will not hiſs,
The chambermaid was named Ciſs. Ben. Johnſon.
Some coarſe country wench, almoſt decay’d,
*
Trudges to town, and firſt turns chambermaid. Pope.
When he doubted whether a word were intelligible or no, he
uſed to conſult one of his lady's chambermaids. Swift.
If theſe nurſes ever preſume to entertain the girls with the
common follies practiſed by chambermaids among us, they are
publickly whipped. Swift's Gulliver's Travels.
To CHA'MBLET. v. a. [from camelot. Sce CAMELoT.] To
vary; to variegate.
Some have the veins more varied and chambleted; as oak,
whereof wainſcot is made. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
CHA'MBREL of a Horſ. The joint or bending of the upper part
of the hinder leg. Farrier's Dić?.
‘CHAM º'l EoN. m. ſ [złºwº.]
The chameleon has four feet, and on each foot three claws.
Its tail is long; with this, as well as with its feet, it faſtensit-
ſelf to the branches of trees. Its tail is flat, its noſe long, and
made in an obtuſe point; its back is ſharp, its ſkin plaited, and
jagged like a ſaw from the neck to the laſt joint of the tail, and
upon its head it has ſomething like a comb; like a fiſh, it has
no neck. Some have aſſerted, that it lives only upon air; but
it has been obſerved to feed on flies, catched with its tongue,
which is about ten inches long, and three thick; made of white
fleſh, round, but flat at the end; or hollow and open, reſembling . . .
an elephant's trunk. It alſo ſhrinks, and grows longer. This
VoI. I.
animal is ſaid to aſſume the colour of thoſe things to which it
is applied; but our modern obſervers aſſure us, that its natural
colour, when at reſt and in the ſhade, is a bluiſh grey; though
ſome are yellow, and others green, but both of a ſmaller kind.
When it is expoſed to the ſun, the grey changes into a darker
grey, inclining to a dun colour, and its parts, which have leaſt
of the light upon them, are changed into ſpots of different co-
lours. The grain of its ſkin, when the light doth not ſhine
upon it, is like cloth mixed with many colours. Sometimes
when it is handled, it ſeems to be ſpeckled with dark ſpots, in-
clining to green. If it be put upon a blackhat, it appears to be
of a violet colour; and ſometimes if it be wrapped up in linen,
when it is taken off, it is white; but it changes colour only in
ſome parts of the body. Calmet.
A chameleon is a creature about the bigneſs of an ordinary
lizard; his head unproportionably big, and his eyes great; he
moveth his head without writhing of his neck, which is inflex-
ible, as a hog doth ; his back crooked, his ſkin ſpotted with
little tumours, leſs eminent nearer the belly; his tail ſlender
and long; on each foot he hath five fingers, three on the out-
ſide, and two on the inſide; his tongue of a marvellous length
in reſpect of his body, and hollow at the end, which he will
launch out to prey upon flies ; of colour green, and of a duſky
yellow, brighter and whiter towards the belly; yet ſpotted with
blue, white, and red. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 360.
I can add colours ev'n to the chameleon;
Change ſhapes with Proteus, for advantage. Shakeſp. Hen.VI.
One part devours the other, and leaves not ſo much as a
mouthful of that popular air, which the chameleons gaſp after.
Decay of Piety.
The thin chameleon, fed with air, receives
The colour of the thing to which he cleaves. Dryden.
To CHA'MFER. v. a. [chambrer, Fr.] To channel; to make
furrows or gutters upon a column. -
CHA'MFER. }". /.. [from to chamfer.] A ſmall furrow or gut-
CHA'MF RET. W. ter on a column.
CHA'MLET. n.ſ. [See CAMELot.]
To make a chamlet, draw five lines, waved overthwart, if
your diapering conſiſt of a double line. Peacham on Drawing.
CHA'Mois. n.ſ.. [chamois, Fr.] An animal of the goat kind,
whoſe skin is made into ſoft leather, called among us ſhammy.
Theſe are the beaſts which you ſhall eat; the ox, the ſheep,
and wild ox, and the chamois. Deut. xiv. 5.
CHA'MoMILE. m. ſ. [xx.asp.º.o..] The name of an odoriferous
lant.
p It hath a fibroſe root; the cup of the flower is ſquamoſe,
which expands, and appears like many leaves; the flowers are
radicated; the petals of the flower are white, and the diſh yel-
low ; the leaves are cut into five ſegments. This plant was
formerly in great requeſt for making green walks, and is ſtill
cultivated in phyſick gardens for medicinal uſe, though it grows
wild in great plenty. * AMiller.
Cool violets, and orpine growing ſtill,
Embathed balm, and cheerful galingale,
Freſh coſtmary, and breathful chamomile,
Dull poppy, and drink-quick’ning ſetuale. Spenſer's Muiop:
For though the chamomile, the more it is trodden on the faſ-
ter it grows; yet youth, the more it is waſted, the ſooner it
WCarS. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
Watery liquours force it, as diſtilled waters with diureticks,
poſſet drink with chamomile flowers. Flyer on the Humours.
To CHAMP. v. a. [champayer, Fr.]
1. To bite with a frequent ačtion of the teeth.
Coffee and opium are taken down, tobacco but in ſmoke, and
betle is but champed in the mouth with a little lime. Bacon.
The fiend reply'd not, overcome with rage;
But, like a proud ſteed rein'd, went haughty on,
Champing his iron curb. Paradiſe Loſt, b. iv. l. 857.
At his command,
The ſteeds capariſon'd with purple ſtand,
And champ betwixt their teeth the foaming gold. Dryden.
2. To devour. -
A tobacco pipe happened to break in my mouth, and the
pieces left ſuch a delicious roughneſs on my tongue, that I
champed up the remaining part. Spediator, N° 431.
To CHAMP. v. n. To perform frequently the aëtion of biting.
Muttering and champing, as though his cud had troubled him,
he gave occaſion to Muſidorus to come near him. . . Sidney.
They began to repent of that they had done, and irefully to
champ upon the bit they had taken into their mouths. Hooker.
His jaws did not anſwer equally to one another; but by his
frequent motion and champing with them, it was evident they
were neither luxated nor fraćtured. Wiſeman.
CHAMPAIGN. n.ſ. [campagne, Fr.] A flat open country.
In the abuſes of the cuſtoms, meſeems, you have a fair cham-
paign laid open to you, in which you may at large ſtretch out
your diſcourſe. Spenſer's State of Ireland,
Of all theſe bounds,
With ſhadowy foreſts and with champaigns rich'd,
We make thee lady. Shakeſp. King Lear.
If two bordering princes have their territory meeting on an
open champaign, the more mº will continually ſeek occaſion
4. to
|
*
º
|
*
*
*
---
º
-*
-
--
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 11</div><p class="Text">C H A
C H A
.
-
:
-
CHA'MPERTY. m. ſ. [champart, Fr.
to extend his limits unto the further border thereof. Raleigh:
Sir John Norris maintained a retreat without diſarray, by the
ſpace of ſome miles, part of the way champaign, unto the city
of Gaunt, with leſs loſs of men than the enemy. Bacon.
From his ſide two rivers flow'd,
Th’one winding, th’ other ſtraight, and left between
Fair champaign, with leſs rivers interveen'd. Paradiſ Reg.
CHA'MPERtoRs. n.ſ.. [from champerty. In law.] Such as move
ſuits, or cauſe them to be moved, either by their own or others
procurement, and purſue, at their proper coſts, to have part of
the land in conteſt, or part of the gains. Cowel.
i. law.] A maintenance of
any man in his ſuit while depending, upon condition to have
part of the thing when it is recovered. Cowel.
CHAMPI'GNoN. n.ſ.. [champignon, Fr.] A kind of muſhroom.
He viler friends with doubtful muſhrooms treats,
Secure for you, himſelf champignons eats. Dryden.
It has the reſemblance of a large champignon before it is open-
ed, branching out into a large round knob at one end.
Iſoodward on Fºſſils.
CHAMPION. n.ſ.. [champion, Fr. campſ, low Lat.]
1. A man who undertakes a cauſe in ſingle combat.
In many armies, if the matter ſhould be tried by duel be-
tween two champions, the victory would go on the one ſide.
Bacon's Coll. of Good and Evil.
For hot, cold, moiſt, and dry, four champions fierce,
Strive here for maſt'ry, and to battle bring
Their embryon atoms. Par. Loft, b. ii. 1.898.
O light of Trojans, and ſupport of Troy,
Thy father's champion, and thy country's joy! Dryden.
At length the adverſe admirals appear,
The two bold champions of each country's right. Dryden.
2. A hero; a ſtout warriour.
A ſtouter champion never handled ſword. Shakespeare. H. VI.
This makes you incapable of convićtion, and they applaud
themſelves as zealous champions for truth, when indeed they are
contending for errour. }.
3. In law.
In our common law, champion is taken no leſs for him that
trieth the combat in his own caſe, than for him that fighteth
in the caſe of another. Cowel.
To CHA'Mpion. v. a. [from the noun..] To challenge to the
combat.
The ſeed of Banquo, kings |
Rather than ſo, come, fate, into the liſt,
And champion me to th’ utterance.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
CHANCE. n.ſ.. [chance, Fr.]
1. Fortune; the cauſe of fortuitous events.
As th' unthought accident is guilty
Of what we wildly do, ſo we profeſs
Ourſelves to be the ſlaves of chance, and flies
Cf every wind that blows. Shakeſp. //7nter's Tale.
The only man of all that chance could bring,
To meet my arms, was worth the conquering. Dryden.
Chance is but a mere name, and really nothing in itſelf; a
conception of our minds, and only a compendious way of ſpeak-
ing, whereby we would expreſs, that ſuch effects as are com-
monly attributed to chance, were verily produced by their true
and proper cauſes, but without their deſign to produce them.
Bently.
2. Fortune; the aët of fortune, or chance.
Theſe things are commonly not obſerved, but left to take
their chance. Bacon's Eſſays.
3. Accident; caſual occurrence; fortuitous event.
To ſay a thing is a chance or caſualty, as it relates to ſecond
cauſes, is not profaneneſs, but a great truth; as ſignifying no
more, than that there are ſome events beſides the knowledge
and power of ſecond agents. South.
The beauty I beheld, has ſtruck me dead;
Unknowingly ſhe ſtrikes, and kills by chance;
Poiſon is in her eyes, and death in ev'ry glance. Dryden.
All nature is but art, unknown to thee;
All chance direction, which thou canſt not ſee. Pope.
4. Event; ſucceſs; luck.
Now we'll together, and the chance of goodneſs
Be like our warranted quarrel ! Shakeſp. Macbeth.
5. Misfortune; unlucky accident.
You were us’d
To ſay, extremity was the trier of ſpirits,
That common chances common men could bear.
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
6. Poſſibility of any occurrence.
A chance, but chance may lead, where I may meet
Some wand'ring ſpirit of heav'n, by fountain ſide,
Or in thick ſhade retir’d. Paradiſe Loſt, b. iv. l. 530.
Then your ladyſhip might have a chance to eſcape this ad-
dreſs. Swift.
CHAN.cf. adj. [It is ſeldom uſed but in compoſition.] Happen-
ing by chance.
Now ſhould they part, malicious tongues would ſay,
They met like chance companions on the way.
Dryden's Hind and Panther.
I would not take the gift,
Which, like a toy dropt from the hands of fortiºne,
Lay for the next chance comer. Dryden and Leº's OPº.
To CHANCE. v. n. [from the noun..] To happen; to fall ºut;
to fortune.
Think what a chance thou chanceſ; on; but think;--—
Thou haſt thy miſtreſs ſtill. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
How chance thou art not with the prince thy brother
Shakeſp. Henry IV, p. ii.
Ay, Caſca, tell us what hath chanc'd today,
That Caeſar looks ſo ſad. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
He chanced upon divers of the Turks victuallers, whom he
eaſily took. Knolles's Hyſory ºf the Tark.
I choſe the ſafer ſea, and chanc'd to find
A river's mouth impervious to the wind. Pºpe's Odſ.
CHAsce-MEDLEY. n: / [from chance and medley. In law.}
The caſual ſlaughter of a man, not altogether without the
fault of the ſlayer, when ignorance or negligence is joined
with the chance; as if a man lop trees by an highway-ſide, by
which many uſually travel, and caſt down a bough, not giving
Warning tº take heed thereof, by which bough one paſſing by is
ſlain: in this caſe he offends, becauſe he gave no warning, that
the party might have taken hecd to himſelf. Cºwel.
If ſuch an one ſhould have the ill hap, at any time, to ſtrike
a man dead with a ſmart ſaying, it ought, in all reaſon and con-
ſcience, to be judged but a chancemedley. South.
CHA'Nceable adj. [from chance..] Accidental.
The trial thereof was cut off by the chanceable coming thither
of the king of Iberia. Sidney, b. ii.
CHANCEL n. ſ [from cancelli, Lat, lettices, with which the
chancel was incloſed.] The eaſtern part of the church, in
which the altar is placed. -
Whether it be allowable or no, that the miniſter ſhould ſay
ſervice in the chancel. Hocker, b. v. § 36.
The chancel of this church is vaulted with a ſingle ſtone of
four feet in thickneſs, and an hundred and fourteen in circum-
ference. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
CHA'Ncellor. m. ſ. ſcancellarius, Lat. chancelier, Fr. from cº-
cellare, literas vel Jéription linea per medium duela damncre, and
ſeemeth of itſelf likewiſe to be derived a cancellis, which ſignify
all one with zºº, a lettice; that is, a thing made of wood or
iron bars, laid croſsways one over another, ſo that a man may
ſee through them in and out. It may be thought that judgment
ſeats were compaſſed in with bars, to defend the judges and
other officers from the preſs of the multitude, and yet not to
hinder any man's view.j
&amp;aſtus regni tibi cancellarius Angli,
Primus ſoliciti mente petendits crit.
Jii, ºſ', qui regni leges cancellat iniguas,
Et mandata pii principis a qua facit.
Verſes of Nigel de //ctºre to the biſhop of Ely, chan-
cellor to Richard I.
• Cancellarius, at the firſt, ſignified the regiſters or ačuaries in
court; grapharios, ſºil. qui conſcribendis &amp; excipiendis judicum
aétis dant ºperam. But this name is greatly advanced, and not
only in other kingdoms but in this, is given to him that is the
chief judge in cauſes of property; for the chancellor hath power
to moderate and temper the written law, and ſubječteth himſelf
only to the law of nature and conſcience. Cowel.
Turn out, you rogue, how like a beaſt you lie:
Go, buckle to the law: Is this an hour
To ſtretch your limbs you'll ne'er be chancellor. Dryd jun.
Ariſtides was a perſon of the ſtrićteſt juſtice, and beſt ac-
quainted with the laws, as well as forms of their government;
ſo that he was in a manner chancellor of Athens. Swift.
. CHANCEllor in the Eccleſiaſtical Court. A biſhop's lawyer;
a man trained up in the civil and canon law, to direct the bi-
ſhops in matters of judgment, relating as well to criminal as to
civil affairs in the church. Ayliff's Parergon.
3. CHANCELLOR of a Cathedral. A dignitary, whoſe office it is
to ſuperintend the regular exerciſe of devotion.
4. CHANcellor of the Exchequer. An officer who ſits in that
court, and in the exchequer chamber, and, with the reſt of the
court, ordereth things to the king's beſt benefit. He has power,
with others, to compound for forfeitures on penal ſtatutes,
bonds and recognizances entered into by the king. He has
great authority in managing the royal revenue, and in matters
of firſt-fruits. The court of equity is in the exchequer cham-
ber, and is held before the lord treaſurer, chancellor, and barons,
as that of common law before the barons only. Cowel. Chamb.
. CHANCEllor of an Univerſity. The principal magiſtrate,
who, at Oxford, holds his office during life, but, at Cambridge,
he may be elected every three years.
6. CHANcellor of the Order of the Garter, and other military
orders, is an officer who ſeals the commiſſions and mandates of
the chapter and aſſembly of the knights, keeps the regiſter of
their deliberations, and delivers their acts under the ſeal of the
order. Chambers.
CHA'Ncellorship. n.ſ. The office of chancellor.
The next Sunday after he gave up his chancellowſhip of Eng-
land, he came himſelf to his wife's pew, and uſed the uſual
words of his gentleman-uſher, Madam, my lord is gone. Card.
I CHA's cFR Y.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 12</div><p class="Text">6. To mend the diſpoſition or mind.
CHA'Ncery. n ſ [from chancellor; probabl y chancellery; then
ſhortened.] The court of equity and conſcience, moderating
the rigour of other courts, that are tied to the letter of the
law; whereof the lord chancellor of England is the chief judge,
or the lord keeper of the great ſeal. Cowel.
The contumacy and contempt of the party muſt be ſignified
in the court of chancery, by the biſhops letters under the ſeal
epiſcopal. Ayliffe's Parergon.
CHA'NCRE. m. ſ. [chancre, Fr.] An ulcer uſually ariſing from
venereal maladies.
It is poſſible he was not well cured, and would have relapſed
with a chancre. JWiſeman.
CHA'NcRous: adj. [from chancre.] Having the qualities of a
chancre; ulcerous.
You may think I am too ſtrićt in giving ſo many internals
in the cure of ſo ſmall an ulcer as a chancre, or rather a chan-
crous callus. Jºſeman.
CHANDELI'ER. m. ſ. [chandelier, Fr.] A branch for candles.
CHA'NDLER. m. ſ. [chandelier, Fr.] An artiſan whoſe trade it is
to make candles, or a perſon who ſells them.
The ſack that thou haſt drunken me, would have bought me
lights as good cheap at the deareſt chandlers in Europe.
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
But whether black or lighter dies are worn,
The chandler's baſket, on his ſhoulder born,
With tallow ſpots thy coat. Gay's Trivia.
CHANFRIN. m. ſ. ſold French.] The forepart of the head of
a horſe, which extends from under the ears, along the interval
between the eyebrows, down to his noſe. Farrier's Dić7.
To CHANGE. v. a. [changer, Fr. cambia, Lat.]
1. To put one thing in the place of another.
He that cannot look into his own eſtate, had need chooſe
well whom he employeth, and change them often; for new are
more timorous, and leſs ſubtile. Bacon's Eſſays.
2. To reſign anything for the ſake of another, with for before the
thing taken or received.
Perſons grown up in the belief of any religion, cannot change
that# another, without applying their underſtanding duly to
conſider and compare both. South.
The French and we ſtill change; but here's the curſe,
They change for better, and we change for worſe.
Dryden's Spaniſh Friar, Prologue.
3. To diſcount a larger piece of money into ſeveral ſmaller.
A ſhopkeeper might be able to change a guinea, or a moi-
dore, when a cuſtomer comes for a crown's worth of goods.
Swift's Intelligencer, N° 19.
4. To give and take reciprocally, with the particle with before
the perſon to whom we give, and from whom we take.
To ſecure thy content, look upon thoſe thouſands, with
whom thou wouldſt not, for any intereſt, change thy fortune
and condition. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
5. To alter.
Thou ſhalt not ſee me bluſh,
Nor change my countenance for this arreſt;
A heart unſpotted is not eaſily daunted. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Whatſoever is brought upon thee, take chearfully, and be
patient when thou art changed to a low eſtate. Ecclus, ii. 4.
For the clements were changed in themſelves by a kind of
harmony, like as in a pſaltery notes change the name of the
tune, and yet are always founds. J/iſdom, xix. 18.
I would ſhe were in heaven, ſo ſhe could
Intreat ſome pow'r to change this curriſh Jew.
Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
7. Tº change a horſ, or to change hand, is to turn or bear the
horſe's head from one hand to the other, from the left to the
right, or from the right to the left. Farrier’s Dić.
To CHANG F. v. n.
1. To undergo change; to ſuffer alteration; as, his fortune may
ſoon change, though he is now ſo ſecure.
One Julia, that his changing thought forgot,
Would better fit his chamber. Shakespeare. Two Gent. of Werona.
2. To change, as the moon; to begin a new monthly revolu-
tion.
I am weary of this moon; would he would change.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
CHANG F. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. An alteration of the ſtate of any thing.
Since I ſaw you laſt, -
There is a change upon you. Shakespeare Antony and Cleºpatra.
2. A ſucceſſion of one thing in the place of another.
O wond’rous changes of a fatal ſcene,
Still varying to the laſt ! Dryden.
Nothing can cure this part of ill breeding, but change and
variety of company, and that of perſons above us. Locke.
Fmpires by various turns ſhall riſe and ſet;
While thy abandon'd tribes ſhall only know
A diff'rent maſter, and a change of time. Priºr.
Hºar how Timotheus' various lays ſurprize,
And bid alternate paſſions fall and riſe!
While, at cach change, the ſon of Libyan Jove
Now burns with glory, and then melts with love. Pºpe.
3. The time of the moon in which it begins a new monthly re-
volution. - .
Take ſeeds or roots, and ſet ſome of them immediately after
the change, and others of the ſame kind immediately after the
full. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, Nº. 893.
4. Novelty. &lt; ar. Hiſtory 93
The hearts
Of all his people ſhall revolt from him, -
And kiſs the lips of unacquainted change. Shakespeare. K. jº.
Qur fathers did, for change, to France repair,
And they, for change, will try our Engliſh air.
- - Dryden's Spaniſh Friar, Prolºgic.
5. In ringing; an alteration of the order in which a ſet of bells
is ſounded.
Four bells admit twenty-four changes in ringing, and five beifs
One hundred and twenty. Holder's Elements of Strºh.
Eaſy it may be to contrive new poſtures, and ring other
changes upon the ſame bells. Norris.
6. That which makes a variety; that which may be uſed for an-
other of the ſame kind.
I will now put forth a riddle unto you ; if you can find it
out, then I will give you thirty ſheets, and thirty change of
garments. judges, xiv. 1:.
7. Small money, which may be given for larger pieces.
Wood buys up our old halfpence, and from thence the pre-
ſent want of change ariſes; but ſuppoſing not one farthing of
thange in the nation, five and twenty thouſand pounds would
be ſufficient. Swift.
CHA'NGEABLE. adj. [from change.]
1. Subject to change; fickle; inconſtant.
A ſteady mind will admit ſteady methods and counſels ; but
there is no meaſure to be taken of a changeable humour.
L’Eſtrange.
As I am a man, I muſt be changeable; and ſometimes the
graveſt of us all are ſo, even upon ridiculous accidents.
Dryden's Aurengzebe, Preface.
2. Poſſible to be changed.
The fibrous or vaſcular parts of vegetables ſeem ſcarce
changeable in the alimentary dućt. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Having the quality of exhibiting different appearances.
Now the taylor make thy doublet of changeable taffata; ſor
thy mind is a very opal. Shakeſp. 7 wefth Night.
CHA'NGEABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from changeable.]
1. Inconſtancy; fickleneſs.
At length he betrothed himſelf to one worthy to be liked, if
any worthineſs might excuſe ſo unworthy a changeableneſ.
Sidney, b. ii.
There is no temper of mind more unmanly than that change-
alleneſ, with which we are too juſtly branded by all our neigh-
bours. Addison. Freeholder, N° 25.
2. Suſceptibility of change.
If how long they are to continue in force, be no where ex-
preſſed, then have we no light to direct our judgment concern-
ing the changeableneſs or immutability of them, but conſidering
the nature and quality of ſuch laws. Hooker, b. iii. § 16.
CHA'NGEABLY. adv. [from changeable.], Inconſtantly.
CH'ANGEFUL. adj. [from change and full.] Full of change;
inconſtant; uncertain; mutable; ſubjećt to variation; fickle.
Unſound plots, and changeful orders, are daily deviſed for
her good, yet never effectually proſecuted or §.
'penſºr on Ireland.
Britain, changeful as a child at play,
Now calls in princes, and now turns away. Pope.
CHA'NGELING.. n.ſ.. [from change; the word ariſes from an odd
ſuperſtitious opinion, that the fairies ſteal away children, and
put others that are ugly and ſtupid in their places.]
1. A child left or taken in the place of another.
And her baſe elfin breed there for thee left;
Such, men do changelings call, ſo chang'd by fairies theft.
Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i. c. x. ſtanz. 65.
She, as her attendant, hath
A lovely boy ſtol'n from an Indian king;
She never had ſo fiveet a changeling.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
2. An ideot; a fool; a natural.
Changelings and fools of heav'n, and thence ſhut out,
Wildly we roam in diſcontent about. Dryden's Tyrr. Love.
Would any one be a changeling, becauſe he is leſs determin-
ed by wiſe conſiderations than a wife man f Locke.
3. One apt to change ; a waverer.
'Twas not long
Before from world to world they ſwung ;
As they had turn’d from ſide to ſide, -
And as they changelings liv'd, they died. - Hudibrar.
CHA'NGER. n.f. [from change.] One that is employed in
changing or diſcounting money. ..
CHANNEL. n.ſ. [cama', Fr. cana’s, Lat.]
1. The hollow bed of running waters. -
It is not ſo eafy, now that things are grown into an habit,
and have their certain courſe, to change the channel, and turn
their ſtreams another way. Speºſer's State ºf Ireland.
Draw<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            End of Section 4.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809190#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section5" id="Section5"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section 5</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 13</div><p class="Text">C H A
C H A
i
-
|
Draw them to Tyber's bank, and weep your tears
Into the channel, till the loweſt ſtream
Do kiſs the moſt exalted ſhores of all. Shakespeare. Julius Caſar.
So th’ injur’d ſea, which, from her wonted courſe,
To gain ſome acres, avarice did force;
If the new banks, neglected once, decay, º
No longer will from her old channel ſtay. J7%iller.
Had not the ſaid ſtrata been diſlocated, ſome of them elevat-
ed, and others depreſſed, there would have been no cavity or
channel to give reception to the water of the ſea. J/oodward.
The tops of mountains and hills will be continually waſhed
down by the rains, and the channels of rivers abraded by the
ſtreams. Bentley.
2. Any cavity drawn longways. -
Complaint and hot deſires, the lover's hell,
And ſcalding tears, that wore a channel where they fell.
Dryden's Fahles.
3. A ſtrait or narrow ſea, between two countries; as the Britiſh
Channel between Britain and France; St. George's Channel be-
tween Britain and Ireland.
4. A gutter or furrow of a pillar.
To CHA'NNEl. v. a. [from the noun..] To cut any thing in
channels.
No more ſhall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruiſe her flowrets with the armed hoofs
Of hoſtile paces. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
The body of this column is perpetually channelled, like a
thick plaited gown. //ation', Architecture.
Torrents, and loud impetuous cataracts,
Roll down the lofty mountain's channel’d ſides,
And to the vale convey their foaming tides.
To CHANT. v. a. [chanter, Fr.]
1. To ſing.
Wherein the chearful birds of ſundry kind
Do chant ſweet muſick. Fairy Queen, b. i. e. vii.
2. To celebrate by ſong. -
The poets chant it in the theatres, the ſhepherds in the
mountains. Bramhall.
3. To fing in the cathedral ſervice.
To CHANT. v. n. To ſing; to make melody with the voice.
They chant to the ſound of the viol, and invent to them-
ſelves inſtruments of muſick. Amos, vi. 7.
Heav'n heard his ſong, and haſten’d his relief;
And chang'd to ſnowy plumes his hoary hair,
And wing'd his flight, to chant aloft in air.
Chant. n.ſ.. [from the verb..] Song; melody.
A pleaſant grove,
With chant of tuneful birds refounding loud.
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii. 1. 290.
CHA'NTER. n.ſ.. [from chant..] A finger; a ſongſter.
You curious chanters of the wood,
That warble forth dame Nature's lays.
Jove's etherial lays, reſiſtleſs É.
The chanter's ſoul, and raptur'd ſong inſpire,
Inſtinét divine ! nor blame ſevere his choice,
Warbling the Grecian woes with harp and voice. Pope.
CHA'N TIcLEER. n.ſ.. [from chanter and clair, Fr.] The name
Blackmore.
Dryden.
J/ºtton.
given to the cock, from the clearneſs and loudneſs of his crow. .
And chearful chanticleer, with his note ſhrill,
Had warned once, that Phoebus' firy car
In haſte was climbing up the eaſtern hill. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Hark, hark, I hear
The ſtrain of ſtrutting chanticleer. Shakeſp. Tempºff.
Ben. Johnſºn's Maſſ.
Stay, the chearful chanticleer
Tells you that the time is near.
Theſe verſes were mentioned by Chaucer, in the deſcription
of the ſudden ſtir, and panical fear, when Chanticleer the cock
was carried away by Reynold the fox. Camden's Remains.
Within this º. liv'd without a peer,
For crowing loud, the noble chanticleer. Dryden's Fab.
CHA'N TREss. ..ſ [from chant..] A woman ſinger.
Sweet bird, that ſhun'ſt the noiſe of folly,
Moſt muſical, moſt melancholy,
Thee, chantreſs of the woods among,
I woo to hear thy even-ſong.
CHA'NTRY. m. ſ. [from chant.]
Chantry is a church or chapel endowed with lands, or other
yearly revenue, for the maintenance of one or more prieſts,
daily to fing maſs for the ſouls of the donors, and ſuch others
as they appoint. Cowel.
Now go with me, and with this holy man,
Into the chantry by ; to thoſe before him,
#. underneath that conſecrated roof,
ight me the full aſſurance of your faith. Shakespeare. T. Night.
CHAOS. n.ſ. [chaos, Lat. x22-.] y ſº - &amp;
I. The maſs of matter ſuppoſed to be in confuſion before it was
divided by the creation into its proper claſſes and elements.
The whole univerſe would have been a confuſed chaos, with-
out beauty or order. Bentley.
2. Confuſion; irregular mixture.
Had I followed the worſt, I could not have brought church
and ſtate to ſuch a chaos of confuſions, as ſome have done.
K. Charles,
Milton.
Their reaſon ſleeps, but mimick fancy wakes,
Supplies her parts, and wild ideas takes
From words and things, ill ſorted, and misjoin'd,
The anarchy of thought, and chaos of the mind.
3. Any thing where the parts are undiſtinguiſhed.
We ſhall have nothing but darkneſs and a chaos within,
whatever order and light there be in things without us. Locke.
Pleas'd with a work, where nothing's juſt or fit,
One glaring chaos and wild heap of wit. Pope.
CHAo"tick. adj. [from chaos.J Reſembling chaos; confuſed.
When the terraqueous globe was in a chaotick ſtate, and the
earthy particles ſubſided, then thoſe ſeveral beds were, in all
probability, repoſited in the earth. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
To CHAP. v. a. [Kappen, Dutch, to cut. This word ſeems ori-
ginally, the ſame with chºp; nor were they probably diſtin-
guiſhed at firſt, otherwiſe than by accident; but they have now
a meaning ſomething different, though referable to the ſame
original ſenſe.] To break into hiatus, or gapings.
It alſo weakened more and more the arch of the earth, dry-
ing it immoderately, and chapping it in fundry places:
Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
Then would unbalanc'd heat licentious reign,
Crack the dry hill, and chºp the ruſlet plain. Backmore.
CHAP. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A cleft; an aper ure; an open-
ing; a gaping; a chink.
What moiſture the heat of the ſummer ſucks out of the
earth, it is repaid in the rains of the next winter; and what
chaps are made in it, are filled up again. Burnet'; Theory.
CHAP. m. ſ. [This is not often uſed, except by anatomiſts, in the
ſingular.] The upper or under part of a beaſt's mouth.
Froth fills his chaps, he ſends a grunting found,
And part he churns, and part befoams the ground. Dryden.
The nether chap in the male ſkeletºn is half an inch brºader
than in the female, as being made to accommodate a bigger
muſcle for the motion of the teeth. Grew's Miyaum.
CHAPE. n / [chappe, Fr.]
1. The catch of any thing by which it is held in its place; as the
hook of a ſcabbard by which it ſticks in the belt; the point by
which a buckle is held to the back ſtrap.
This is Monſieur Parolles, that had the whole theory of the
war in the knot of his ſcarf, and the practice in the chape of his
dagger. Shakeſp. All", well that end, well.
2. A braſs or filver tip or caſe, that ſtrenghtens the end of the
ſcabbard of a ſword. Phillips's I/ºrld of // ords.
CHA'PEL. m. ſ. [capella, Lat.]
A chapel is of two ſorts, either adjoining to a church, as a
parcel of the ſame, which men of worth build, or elſe ſeparate
from the mother church, where the pariſh is wide, and is com-
monly called a #. of eaſe, becauſe it is built for the eaſe of
one or more pariſhioners, that dwell too far from the church,
and is ſerved by ſome inferiour curate, provided for at the
charge of the rector, or of ſuch as have benefit by it, as the
compoſition or cuſtom is. Coweſ.
She went in among thoſe few trees, ſo cloſed in the tops to-
gether, as they might ſeem a little chapel. Sidney.
Will you diſpatch us here under this tree, or ſhall we go
with you to your chapel P Shakeſp. As you like it.
Where truth erecteth her church, he helps errour to rear up
a chapel hard by. Howe's Pºcal Fore/f.
A chapel will I build with large endowment. Dryden.
A free chapel is ſuch as is founded by the king of England.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
CHA'PELEss. adj [from ahape.] Without a chape.
An old ruſty ſword, with a broken hilt, and chapelſ, with
two broken points. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
CHAPE'LLAN.Y. m. ſ. [from chapel.]
A chapellany is uſually ſaid to be that which does not ſubſiſt of
itſelf, but is built and founded within ſome other church, and is
dependent thereon. Ayliffe's Parergon.
CHA'PELRY. m. ſ. [from chapel.] The juriſdićtion or bounds of
a chapel.
CHAPERON. m.ſ. [French.] A kind of hood or cap worn
by the knights of the garter in their habits.
I will omit the honourable habiliments, as robes of ſtate,
parliament robes, chaperons, and caps of ſtate. Camden.
CHA'PFALN. adj. [from chap and faln.] 'Having the mouth
ſhrunk.
A chaffalm beaver looſely hanging by
The cloven helm. Dryden's juv.ſat. 10.
CHA'PITER. m. ſ. [chatiteau, Fr.] The upper part or capital of
a pillar.
He overlaid your chºpiters and your fillets with gold.
Exodus, xxxvi. 38.
CHA'PLAIN. n.ſ. ſcapellanus, Latin.]. He that performs divine
ſervice in a chapel, and attends the king, or other perſon, for
the inſtruction of him and his family, to read prayers, and
Dryden.
preach. - Cowel.
Wiſhing me to permit
John de la Court, my chaplain, a choice hour,
To hear from him a matter of ſome moment. Shakespeare
Chaplain, away ! thy prieſthood ſaves thy life.
£1ain, away thy P Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
A chief
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 14</div><p class="Text">C H A
º
chaplain, fond of a title and precedence.
CHA'PLAINSHIP. m. ſ. [from chaplain.]
1. The office or buſineſs of a chaplain.
2. The poſſeſſion or revenue of a chapel.
CHA'pless. adj. [from chap.] Without any fleſh about the
mouth.
Now my lady Worm's chapleſ, and knocked about the muz-
zard with a ſexton's ſpade. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Shut me nightly in a charnel-houſe,
With reeky ſhanks and yellow chapleſ; bones.
Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
CHA'PLET. m. ſ. [chapelet, Fr.]
1. A garland or wreath to be worn about the head.
Upon old hyems’ chin, and icy crown,
An od’rous chaplet of ſweet ſummer's buds,
Is, as in mockery, ſet. Shakeſp. Midſum. Night's Dream.
I ſtrangely long to know,
Whether they nobler chaplets wear,
Thoſe that their miſtreſs' ſcorn did bear,
Orthoſe that were us'd kindly. Suckling.
All the quire was grac'd
With chaplets green, upon their foreheads plac'd. Dryden.
The winding ivy chaplet to invade,
And folded fern, that your fair forehead ſhade. Dryden.
They with joyful nimble wing,
Flew dutifully back again,
And made an humble chaplet for the king. Swift.
2. A ſtring of beads uſed in the Romiſh church for keeping an
account of the number rehearſed of pater noſters and ave ma-
rias. A different ſort of chaplets is alſo uſed by the Mahome-
tan.S.
* 3. [In archite&amp;ture.] A little moulding carved into round beads,
pearls, or olives.
4. [In horſemanſhip.] A couple of ſtirrup leathers, mounted
each of them with a ſtirrup, and joining at top in a ſort of lea-
ther buckle, which is called the head of the chaplet, by which
they are faſtened to the pummel of a ſaddle, after they have
been adjuſted to the length and bearing of the rider. They
are made uſe of both to avoid the trouble of taking up or let-
º ting down the ſtirrups, every time a perſon mounts on a diffe-
rent horſe and ſaddle, and to ſupply the want of academy ſad-
dles, which have no ſtirrups to them. Farrier’s Dić7.
5. A tuft of feathers on the peacock's head.
CHA'PMAN. m. ſ. ſceapman, Sax.] A cheapner; one that of
fers as a purchaſer.
Fair Diomede, you do as chapmen do,
Diſpraiſe the thing that you intend to buy. -
SShakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
- Yet have they ſeen the maps, and bought 'em too,
And underſtand 'em as moſt chapmen do. Ben. johnſon.
There was a colle&amp;tion of certain rare manuſcripts, exqui-
ſitely written in Arabick; theſe were upon ſale to the Jeſuits at
Antwerp, liquouriſh chapmen of ſuch wares. J/otton.
He dreſſed two, and carried them to Samos, as the likelieſt
place for a chapman. L’Eſtrange.
Their chapmen they betray,
Their ſhops are dens, the buyer is their prey.
CHAPs. n ſ. [from chap.]
1. The mouth of a beaſt of prey.
- So on the downs we ſee
A haſten’d hare from greedy greyhound go,
And paſt all hope, his chaps to fruſtrate ſo. Sidney.
Open your mouth; this will ſhake your ſhaking, I can tell
you, and that ſoundly; you cannot tell who's your friend;
open your chaps again. Shakeſp. Tempſf.
Their whelps at home expect the promis'd food,
And long to temper their dry chaps in blood.
2. It is uſed in contempt for the mouth of a man.
§º {{articip. paſſ [from to chap.]
Like a table upon which you may run your finger withou
rubs, and your nail cannot find a joint; not horrid, rough,
wrinkled, gaping, or chapt. Ben. johnſon's Diſcovery.
Cooling ointment made,
Which on their ſun-burnt cheeks and their chapt ſkins they
laid. Dryden's Fal.
CHA'PTER. n. / [chapitre, Fr. from capitulum, Lat.]
1. A diviſion of a book. -
The firſt book we divide into three ſeótions; whereof the
firſt is theſe three chapters. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
If theſe mighty men at chapter and verſe, can produce then
Dryden.
Dryden.
no ſcripture to overthrow our church ceremonies, I will under-
| take to produce ſcripture enough to warrant them. South.
~. From hence comes the proverbial phraſe, to the end of the chap-
ter; throughout ; to the end.
Money does all things; for it gives and it takes away, it
makes honeſt men and knaves, fools and philoſophers; and ſo
forward, mutatis mutandis, to the end of the chapter. L’E/ºrange.
3. Chapter, from capitulum, ſignifieth, in our common law, as in
the canon law, whence it is borrowed, an aſſembly of the clergy
of a cathedral or collegiate church. Cowel.
Vol. I.
A chief governour can never fail of ſome worthleſs illiterate
Swift.
The abbot takes the advice and conſent of his chapter, before
e enters on any matters of importance. Addiſon on Italy.
4. The place in which aſſemblies of the clergy are held.
Though the canonical conſtitution does not ſtrictly require it
to be made in the cathedral, yet it matters not where it be nade,
either in the choir or chapter houſe. Ay'ſſº's Parcrgon.
5. The place where delinquents receive diſcipline and correction.
A fº’s Parcrgºň.
6. A decretal epiſtle. Ayiſt's Parcrgºſ.
CHA'PTREL. m.ſ. [probably from chafter.] The capitals of pil-
lars, or pillaſters, which ſupport arches, commonly called im-
poſts.
Let the keyſtone break without the arch, ſo much as you
project over the jaums with the chaptrels.
Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
CHAR. m. ſ. [of uncertain derivation.] A fiſh found only in
Winander meer in Lancaſhire.
To CHAR. v. a. [See CHARcoAL.] To burn wood to a black
cinder.
Spraywood, in charring, parts frequently into various cracks.
J7%aiward on Fºſſils.
CHAR. m. ſ. ſcºrine, work, Sax. Iye. It is derived by Skinner,
either from charge, Fr. buſineſs, or canc, Sax. care, or keerer,
Pºh, to ſweep.] Work done by the day; a ſingle job or
alk.
But a meer woman, and commanded
By ſuch poor paſſion, as the maid that milks,
And does the meaneſt chart. Shakeſp. Autony and Cleºpatra.
Harveſt done, to char work did aſpire; -
Meat, drink, and twopence, were her daily hire. Dryden.
To CHAR. v. n. [from the noun..] To work at others houſes
by the day, without being a hired ſervant.
CHA'R-wom AN. n.ſ.. [from char and woman.] A woman hired
accidentally for odd work, or ſingle days.
Get three or four char-women to attend you conſtantly in the
kitchen, whom you pay only with the broken meat, a few
coals, and all the cinders. Swift's Directions to the Cook.
CHARACTER. m. f. [charađer, Lat. zºº.]
I. A mark; a ſtamp; a repreſentation.
In outward alſo her reſembling leſs
His image, who made both ; and leſs expreſſing
The charaćier of that dominion giv'n
O'er other creatures. Paradiſe Lºſº, b. viii. 1,542.
2. A letter uſed in writing or printing.
But his neat cookery ! -
He cut our roots in charađers. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
The purpose is perſpicuous even as ſubſtance,
Whoſe groſſneſs little characiers ſum up.
SShakeſp. Troilus and Creſda,
It were much to be wiſhed, that there were throughout the
world but one ſºrt of character for each letter, to expreſs it to
the eye; and that exactly proportioned to the natural alphabet
formed in the mouth. Holder's Elements of Speech.
. The hand or manner of writing.
I found the letter thrown in at the caſement of my cloſt.—
You know the charaćier to be your brother's. Shakespeare King Lear.
4. A repreſentation of any man as to his perſonal qualities.
Each drew fair charaºſers, yet none
Of theſe they feign'd, excels their own.
5. An account of any thing as good or bad. -
This ſubterraneous paſſage is much mended, fince Seneca
gave ſo bad a chara&amp;#er of it. Addison on Italy.
6. The perſon with his aſſemblage of qualities.
In a tragedy, or cpick poem, the hero of the piece muſt be ad-
vanced foremoſt to the view of the reader or ſpectator; he muſt
outſhine the reſt of all the charaſiers; he muſt appear the
prince of them, like the ſun in the Copernican ſyſtem, encom-
paſſed with the leſs noble planets. Dryden's I uſreſnºy.
Homer has excelled all the heroick poets that ever wrote, in
the multitude and variety of his charađers; every god that is
admitted into his poem, ačts a part which would have been
ſuitable to no other deity. Addison. Spe&amp;#ator, Nº. 273.
7. Perſonal qualities; particular conſtitution of the mind.
Nothing ſo true as what you cnce let fall,
Moſt women have no characiers at all.
8. Adventitious qualities impreſſed by a poſt or office.
The chief honour of the magiſtrate conſiſts in maintaining
the dignity of his charaćier by ſuitable actions. Atterbury.
To CHARAcTER. v. a. [from the noun..] To inſcribe; to en-
grave.
3
Denham.
Pºpe.
Theſe few precepts in thy memory
See thou charaćer. Slaſeſ. Ham't.
Shew me one ſcar charac'er'd on thy ſkin. Shakºp. H. VI.
O Roſalind! theſe trees ſhall be my books,
And in their barks my thoughts I'll ".
Shakeſp. / yºu like it.
CHARAcTERI's T1c A1. adj. [from charaº'erºe.] That which
CHAR Act ERI's rick. } conſtitutes the character, or marks the
peculiar properties of any perſon or thing.
There are ſeveral others that I take to have been likewiſe
ſuch, to which yet i have not ventured to prefix that charatic-
riffick diſtinétion. Jſºdward on Fºſſils.
4 I Thg
|
º
|
º
*-
-
-
*
-º
!
- l
º
s º
º
t
º -
* *
- º
* -
*
: |
º
. .<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 15</div><p class="Text">* * -
| C H A
C H A
t - The ſhining quality of an epick hero, his magnanimity, his
conſtancy, his patience, his piety, or whatever characteriſtical
º virtue nis poet gives him, raiſes our admiration. Dryden.
• CHARAcTER 1st IcALNess. m. ſ. [from characteriſtical.] The
* * * quality of being peculiar to a character.
- CHARACTERI's Tick. m. ſ. That which conſtitutes the charac-
ter; that which diſtinguiſhes any thing or perſon from others.
I ſhall here endeavour to ſhew, how this vaſt invention ex-
erts itſelf, in a manner ſuperiour to that of any poet, as it is
the great and peculiar characteriſtick which diſtinguiſhes him
* from all others. º Eſſay on Homer.
CHARAct ERISTIck of a Logarithm. The ſame with the index
or exponent.
º - To CHA'RAct ER 1z E. v. a. [from charađer.]
- 1. To give a character or an account of the perſonal qualities of
| - - - any man.
It is ſome commendation, that we have avoided publickly to
characterize any perſon, without long experience. Swift.
2. To engrave, or imprint.
They may be called anticipations, premotions, or ſentiments
charačerized and engraven in the ſoul, born with it, and grow-
ing up with it. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
3. To mark with a particular ſtamp or token.
There are faces not only individual, but gentilitious and na-
tional; European, Aſiatick, Chineſe, African, and Grecian
faces are charađerized. Arbuthnot on Air.
CHA'RAct ERLEss. adj. [from charađer.] Without a character.
º When water drops have worn the ſtones of Troy,
i And blind oblivion ſwallowed cities up,
º
;
And mighty ſtates characterlºſ are grated,
To duſty nothing. Shakeſp. Troilus aud Crºſſida.
º - CHA'R Act ERY. n.ſ.. [from character.] Impreſſion; mark; diſ-
tinction.
Fairies uſe flowers for their charaćiery.
Shakeſp. Merry IP?ves of Iſindſºr.
All my engagements I will conſtrue to thee,
All the characiery of my ſad brows. Shakeſp. Julius Caſar.
CHA'RCoAL. m. ſ. [imagined by Skinner to be derived from Char,
buſineſs; but, by Mr. Lye, from to chark, to burn..] Coal made
by burning wood under turf. It is uſed in preparing metals.
* Seacoal laſts longer than charcoal; and charcoal of roots, be-
ing coaled into great pieces, laſts longer than ordinary char-
coal. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 779.
Love is a fire that burns and ſparkles,
In men as nat'rally as in charcoal,
Which ſooty chymiſts ſtop in holes,
When out of wood they extract coals. Hudibras.
Is there, who, lock'd from ink and paper, ſcrawls
With deſp'rate charcoal round his darken'd walls?
CHARD. m. ſ. [charde, Fr.]
1. Chards of artichokes are the leaves of fair artichoke plants,
tied and wrapped up all over but the top, in ſtraw, during the
autumn and winter; this makes them grow white, and loſe
ſome of their bitterneſs. Chambers.
2. Chards of beet, are plants of white beet tranſplanted, produc-
ing great tops, which, in the midſt, have a large white, thick,
downy, and cotton-like main ſhoot, which is the true chard.
Mortimer.
To CHARGE. v. a. [charger, Fr. caricare, Ital, from carrus,
Lat.
I. Tºwn, to commiſſion for a certain purpoſe. It has with
before the thing entruſted.
And the captain of the guard charged Joſeph with them, and
f he ſerved them. Genºſis, xl. 4.
- What you have charged me with, that I have done.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
- 2. To impute as a debt, with on before the debtor.
º - My father's, mother's, brother's death, I pardon:
* That’s ſomewhat ſure; a mighty ſum of murder,
Of innocent and kindred blood ſtruck off,
My prayers and penance ſhall diſcount for theſe,
And beg of heav'n to charge the bill on me. Dryden.
s It is not barely the ploughman's pains, the reaper's and
- threſher's toil, and the baker's ſweat, is to be counted into the
bread we eat; the plough, mill, oven, or any other utenſils,
Pºpe.
º muſt all be charged on the account of labour. Locke.
º º 3. To impute; with on before the perſon to whom anything is
imputed.
No more accuſe thy pen, but charge the crime
On native ſloth, and negligence of time. Dryden.
It is eaſy to account for the difficulties he charges on the peri-
patetick doćtrine. Locke.
Perverſe mankind whoſe wills, created free,
Charge all their woes on abſolute decree;
: • * All to the dooming gods their guilt tranſlate,
And follies are miſcall'd the crimes of fate. Pºpe.
We charge that upon neceſſity, which was really deſired and
choſen. //atts's Logick.
4. To impoſe as a taſk. It has with before the thing impoſed.
The goſpel chargeth us with piety towards God, and juſtice
and charity to men, and temperance and chaſtity in reference
to ourſelves. Tillotſon.
5. To accuſe; to cenſure.
Speaking thus to you, I am ſo far from charging you as guilty
in this matter, that I can ſincerely ſay, I believe the exhorta-
tion wholly needleſs. J/ake's Preparation for Death.
6. To accuſe. It has with before the crime.
And his angels he charged with folly.
7. To challenge.
The prieſt ſhall charge her by an oath.
Thou canſt not, cardinal, deviſe a name
So ſlight, unworthy, and ridiculous,
To charge me to an anſwer as the pope.
8. To command.
I may not ſuffer you to viſit them;
The king hath ſtrictly charg’d the contrary. Shakespeare. R. III.
Why doſt thou turn thy face : I charge thee, anſwer
To what I ſhall enquire. Dryden and Lee's OEdipus.
I charge thee, ſtand,
And tell thy name and buſineſs in the land.
9. To fall upon; to attack; to make an onſet.
With his prepared ſword he charges home
My unprovided body, lanc'd my arm. Shakespeare. King Lear.
The Grecians rally, and their pow'rs unite;
With fury charge us, and renew the fight. Dryde".
Like your heroes of antiquity, he charges in iron, and ſeems
to deſpiſe all ornament, but intrinſick merit. Granville.
Io. To burden; to load.
Here's the ſmell of blood ſtill; all the perfumes of Arabia
will not ſweeten this little hand. Oh oh! oh! What a
figh is there the heart is ſorely charged. Shakeſp. A/acbeth.
When often urg'd, unwilling to be great,
Your country calls you from your lov’d retreat,
And ſends to ſenates, charg’d with common care,
Which none more ſhuns, and none can better bear. Dryden.
Like meat ſwallowed down for pleaſure and greedineſs,
which only charges the ſtomach, or fumes into the brain.
Tºple.
A fault in the ordinary method of education, is the chargº-g
of childrens memories with rules and precepts. Lake.
11. To fill.
It is pity the obeliſks in Rome had not been charged with ſc-
veral parts of the Egyptian hiſtories, inſtead of hieroglyphicks.
Addiſon on Italy.
job, iv. 18.
Numb. v. 19.
Shakeſp. K. Jºhn.
Dryden.
12. To load a gun with powder and bullets.
CHARGE. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Care; truſt; cuſtody.
One of the Turks laid down letters upon a ſtone, ſaying,
that in them was contained that they had in charge.
Anoles's Hyt. ºf the Turks.
A hard diviſion, when the harmleſs ſheep
Muſt leave their lambs to hungry wolves in charge. Fairfax.
He enquired many things, as well concerning the princes
which had the charge of the city, whether they were in hope to
defend the ſame. Knoles's Hiſtory ºf the Turks.
2. Precept; mandate; command.
Saul might even lawfully have offered to God thoſe reſerved
ſpoils, had not the Lord, in that particular caſe, given ſpecial
charge to the contrary. Hooker, b. v. § 17.
It is not for nothing, that St. Paul giveth charge to beware of
philoſophy; that is to ſay, ſuch knowledge as men by natural
reaſon attain unto. Hooker, b. iii. § 8.
The leaders having charge from you to ſtand,
Will not go off until they hear you ſpeak. Shakeſp. H. IV.
He, who requires
From us no other ſervice than to keep
This one, this eaſy charge, of all the trees
In paradiſe, that bear delicious fruit
So various, not to taſte that only tree
Of knowledge, planted by the tree of life. Par. Lºft, b. iv.
, Commiſſion; truſt conferred; office.
If large poſſeſſions, pompous titles, honourable charges, and
profitable commiſſions, could have made this proud man happy,
there would have been nothing wanting to his eſtabliſhment.
L'É/irange.
Go firſt the maſter of thy herds to find
True to his charge a loyal ſwain and kind. Pete.
4. It had anciently ſometimes over before the thing committed to
truſt.
I gave my brother charge over Jeruſalem; for he was a faith-
ful man, and feared God above many. Nehemiah, vii. 2.
5. It has of before the ſubject of command or truſt.
Haſt thou eaten of the tree,
Jºhereºf I gave thee charge thou ſhould it not eat?
Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. x. l. 123.
6. It has upon before the perſon charged.
He loves God with all his heart, that is, with that degree of
love, which is the higheſt point of our duty, and of God's
charge upon us. Taylor's Rule ºf Living Hºy.
7. Accuſation; imputation.
We need not lay new matter to his charge :
What you have ſeen him do, and heard him ſpeak, -
Beating your officers, curſing yourſelves. Sºft. Corioſam.
Theſe very men are continually reproaching the clergy, and
3 laying<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 16</div><p class="Text">- C H A
laying to their charge the pride, the avarice, the luxury, the ig-
norance, and ſuperſtition of popiſh times. Swift.
8. The perſon or thing entruſted to care or management.
Why haſt thou, Satan, broke the bounds preſcrib'd
To thy tranſgreſſions, and diſturb’d the charge
Of others? Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv. l. 879.
More had he ſaid, but, fearful of her ſtay,
The ſtarry guardian drove his charge away,
To ſome freſh paſture. Dryden.
Our guardian angel ſaw them where they ſate
Above the palace of our ſlumb'ring king;
He figh'd, abandoning his charge to fate. Dryden.
This part ſhould be the governour's principal care; that an
habitual gracefulneſs and politeneſs, in all his carriage, may be
ſettled in his charge, as much as may be, before he goes out of
his hands. Locke.
. An exhortation of a judge to a jury. *
12. Expence; coſt.
Being long ſince made weary with the huge charge, which
you have laid upon us, and with the ſtrong endurance of ſo
many complaints. Spenser on Ireland.
Their charge was always born by the queen, and duly paid
out of the exchequer. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Witneſs this army of ſuch maſs and charge, -
Led by a delicate and tender prince. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
He liv'd as º retire, though more at large,
From publick buſineſs, yet of equal charge. Dryden.
11. It is, in later times, commonly uſed in the plural, charges.
A man ought warily to begin charges, which, once begun,
will continue. Bacon's Eſſays.
Ne'er put yourſelf to charges, to complain
Of wrong, which heretofore you did ſuſtain. Dryden,
The laſt pope was at conſiderable charges, to make a little
kind of harbour in this place. Addiſon on Italy.
12. Onſet. -
And giving a charge upon their enemies, like lions, they ſlew
eleven thouſand footmen, and ſixteen hundred horſemen, and
put all the others to flight. 2 Macc. xi. 1 1.
Honourable retreats are no ways inferiour to brave charges;
as having leſs of fortune, more of diſcipline, and as much of
valour. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
13. The ſignal to fall upon enemies.
Our author ſeems to ſound a charge, and begins like the
clangour of a trumpet. Dryden.
14. The poſture of a weapon fitted for the attack or combat.
Their neighing courſers, daring of the ſpur,
Their armed ſtaves in charge, their beavers down.
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
15. The quantity of powder and ball put into a gun.
16. Among farriers.
Charge is a preparation, or a ſort of ointment, of the conſiſ-
tence of a thick decoction, which is applied to the ſhoulder-
ſplaits, inflammations, and ſprains of horſes.
A charge is of a middle nature, between an ointment and
a plaiſter, or between a plaiſter and a cataplaſm.
Farrier's Dići.
17. In heraldry.
The charge is that which is born upon the colour, except it
be a coat divided only by partition.
CHA'RGEABLE. adj. [from charge.]
1. Expenſive; coſtly.
Divers bulwarks were demoliſhed upon the ſea coaſts, in
peace chargeable, and little ſerviceable in war. Hayward.
Neither did we eat any man's bread for nought, but wrought
with labour and travel night and day, that we might not be
chargeable to any of you. 2 Theſ, iii. 9.
There was another accident of the ſame nature on the Sici-
lian fide, much more pleaſant, but leſs chargeable; for it coſt no-
thing but wit. J/ottom.
Conſidering the chargeable methods of their education, their
numerous iſſue, and ſmall income, it is next to a miracle, that
no more of their children ſhould want. Atterbury.
2. Imputable, as a debt or crime.
Nothing can be a reaſonable ground of deſpiſing a man, but
ſome fault or other chargeable upon him. South.
3. Subječt to charge or accuſation; accuſable.
Your papers would be chargeable with ſomething worſe than
indelicacy; they would be immoral. Speciator, N° 286.
CHA'Ro F AELENEss. m. ſ. [from chargeable.] Expence; coſt;
coſtlineſs.
That which moſt deters me from ſuch trials, is not their
chargeablemſ, but their unſatisfactorineſs, though they ſhould
ſucceed. Boyle.
CH : GEABLY. adv. [ſrom chargeable.] Expenſively; at great
CO1t.
He procured it not with his money, but by his wiſdom; not
chargeably bought by him, but liberally given by others by his
Peacham.
means. A chan's Schoolmaſter.
CHA'Ro ER. n.ſ.. [from charge.] A large diſh.
All the tributes land and ſea affords,
Heap'd in great chargers, load our ſumptuous boards.
Denham.
This golden charger, ſnatch'd from burning Troy,
Anchiſes did in ſacrifice employ. Dryden's .E::cid.
Ey'n Lamb himſelf, at the moſt ſolemn feaſt,
Might have ſome chargers not exactly dreſs'd,
Aing's Art ºf Cookery.
- Nor dare they cloſe their eyes, -
Vºid of a bulky charger near their lips,
With which in often interrupted ſleep,
Their frying blood compels to irrigate
Their dry ſurr'd tongues. Philips.
SHA'Rºy. adv. [from chary.J. Warily; frugally.
cº n.J. [from chary.j Caution; nicety; ſcrupulouſ-
I will conſent to ač any villainy againſt him, that may not
fully the charineſ, of our honefly. S.f. Merry //, ºf 1/indſor.
CHARIOT. n.J. ſcar-rhºd, ... cich, a wheeled car, for it is
known the Britons fought in ſuch; charriot, Fr. carretta, Ital.]
I. A carriage of pleaſure, or ſtate.
Thy grand captain Antony
Shall ſet thee on triumphant chariots, and
Put garlands on thy head. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra.
He ſkims the liquid plains,
High on his chariot, and with looſen’d reins,
Majeſtick moves along. Dryden’s AEiicid.
2. A car in which mcn of arms were anciently placed.
: A lighter kind of coach with only back ſeats.
9.CHAR19T. v. a. [from the notin.] To convey in a chariot.
This word is rarely uſed.
An angel all in flames aſcended
As in a firy column charioting _
His godlike preſence. Milton's Aznifes.
CHARIoT E'E.R. m. ſ. [from chariot..] He that drives the chºi..t.
It is uſed only in ſpeaking of military chariots, and thoſe in
the ancient publick games. -
The gaſping charioteer beneath the wheel
Cf his own car.
The burning chariot, and the charioteer,
In bright Boötes and his wane appear. Addſºn on Italy.
Show us the youthful handſome charioteer,
Firm in his ſcat, and running his career. Prior,
CHARIOT RACE. m. ſ. [from chariot and race..] A ſport anci-
ently uſed, where chariots were driven for the prize, as now
horſes run.
There is a wonderful vigour and ſpirit in the deſcription of
the horſe and chariotrace. Alliſon on the Geºrgicks.
CHA'RITABLE. adj. [charitable, Fr. from charit...]
1. Kind in giving alms; liberal to the poor.
He that hinders a charitable perſon from giving alms to a
poor man, is tied to reſtitution, if he hindered him by fraud
or violence. Taylor’s Holy Living.
Shortly thou wilt behold me poor, and kneeling
Before thy charitable door for bread. Rowe's jane Shore.
How ſhall we then wiſh, that it might be allowed us to live
over our lives again, in order to fill every minute of them with
charitable offices ! Atterbury.
Health to himſelf, and to his infants bread
The lab’rer bears: what his hard heart denies,
His charitable vanity ſupplies. Pºpe.
2. Kind in judging of others ; diſpoſed to tenderneſs; benevo-
lent. -
How had you been my friends elſe : Why have you that cha-
ritable title from thouſands, did you not chiefly belong to m
heart Shakespeare. Timon.
Of a politick ſermon that had no divinity, the king ſaid to
biſhop Andrews, Call you this a ſermon : The biſhop anſwer-
cd ; By a charitable conſtruction it may be a ſermon. Bacon.
CHA'RITABLY. adv. [from charity.]
1. Kindly ; liberally ; with inclination to help the poor.
2. Benevolently ; without malignity.
Nothing will more enable us to bear our croſs patiently, in-
juries charitably, and the labour of religion comfortably.
Taylor's Guide to Devotion,
'Tis beſt ſometimes your cenſure to reſtrain,
And charitably let the dull be vain. Pºpe's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
CHA'RITY. n ſ. [charité, Fr. charitas, Lat.]
1. Tenderneſs; kindneſs; love.
By thee,
Founded in reaſon, loyal, juſt, and pure,
Relations dear, and all the charities
Of father, ſon, and brother, firſt were known. . .
Afikon's Paradiſe Lø/?, h. iv. l. 756.
2. Goodwill; benevolence; diſpoſition to think well of others.
My errours, I hope, are only thoſe of charity to mankind,
and ſuch as my own charity has cauſed, me to commit, that of
others may more eaſily excuſe. Dºº” Religio Laici, Preface.
3. The theological virtue of univerſ' love. - -
Concerning charity, the final object whereof is that incom-
prehenſible beauty which ſhineth in the countenance of Chriſt,
the Son of the living Gºd. . Hooker, b. i. p. 38.
Peace, peace, for ſhame, if not for charity.—
—Urge neither charity nor ſhame to me;
Uncharitably with me have you dealt. Shakeſp. Rºº..
nly
Dryden's Faºs.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 17</div><p class="Text">C H A
C H A
ºº
Only add
Deeds to thy knowledge anſwerable, add faith;
Add virtue, patience, temperance, add love,
By name to come call’d charity, the ſoul
Of all the reſt. Milton's Paradiſe Loſ", b. xii. 1.584.
Faith believes the revelations of God; hope expects his pro-
miſes; charity loves his excellencies and mercies. Taylor.
But laſting charity's more ample ſway,
Nor bound by time, nor ſubječt to decay,
In happy triumph ſhall for ever live. Priºr.
Charity, or a love of God, which works by a love of our
neighbour, is greater than faith or hope. Atterbury.
4. Liberality to the poor.
The heathen poet, in commending the charity of Dido to
the Trojans, ſpoke like a chriſtian. Dryden's Fables, Dedicat.
5. Alms; relief given to the poor.
We muſt incline to the king; I will look for him, and pri-
vily relieve him; go you and maintain talk with the duke, that
my charity be not of him perceived. Shakespeare. K. Lear.
The ant did well to reprove the graſshopper for her ſlothful-
neſs; but ſhe did ill then to refuſe her a charity in her diſtreſs.
L’Eſtrange.
To CHARK. v. a. To burn to a black cinder, as wood is burn-
ed to make charcoal.
Exceſs, either with an apoplexy, knocks a man on the head,
or, with a fever, like fire in a ſtrong-water ſhop, burns him
down to the ground; or if it flames not out, charks him to a
coal. . Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. iii. c. v. § 10.
CHARLATAN. n.ſ. [Charlatan, Fr. ciarlatano, Ital. from ciar-
lare, to chatter.] A quack; a mountebank; an empirick.
Saltimbanchoes, quackſalvers, and charlatans, deceive them
in lower degrees. Brown's Wugar Errours. b. i. c. 3.
For charlatans can do no good,
Until they're mounted in a crowd. Hudibras.
CHARLATA'sical. adj. [from charlatan.] Quackiſh; igno-
rant.
A cowardly ſoldier, and a charlatanical doćtor, are the prin-
cipal ſubjects of comedy. Cowley, Preface.
CHA'RLATANR Y. n.ſ.. [from charlatan.] Wheedling ; deceit;
cheating with fair words.
CHARLEs's-wai N. m. ſ. The northern conſtellation, called the
Bear.
There are ſeven ſtars in Urſa minor, and in Charles's-wain,
or Plauſtrum of Urſa major, ſeven. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
CHA'RLock. n.ſ. A weed growing among the corn with a yel-
low flower. It is a ſpecies of Mithridate muſtard.
CHARM. n.ſ.. [charme, Fr. carmen, Latin.)
1. Words, or philtres, or characters, imagined to have ſome oc-
cult or unintelligible power.
I never knew a woman ſo dote upon a man; ſurely I think
you have charms. Not I, I aſſure thee; ſetting the attrac-
tion of my good parts aſide, I have no other charms.
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of JPindſºr.
There have been ever uſed, either barbarous words, of no
ſenſe, left they ſhould diſturb the imagination, or words of ſimi-
iitude, that may ſecond and feed the imagination: and this was
ever as well in heathen charms, as in charms of later times.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 948.
Alcyone he names amidſt his pray'rs,
Names as a charm againſt the waves and wind,
Moſt in his mouth, and ever in his mind. , Dryden.
Antaeus could, by magick charms,
Recover ſtrength, whene'er he fell. Swift.
2. Something of power to ſubdue oppoſition, and gain the affec-
tionS.
Well ſounding verſes are the charm we uſe,
Heroick thoughts and virtue to infuſe.
But what avail her unexhauſted ſtores,
Her blooming mountains and her ſunny ſhores,
With all the gifts that heaven and earth impart,
The ſmiles of nature, and the charms of art,
While proud oppreſſion in her vallies reigns,
And tyranny uſurps her happy plains
To CHARM. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To fortify with charms againſt evil.
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable creſts,
I bear a charmed life, which muſt not yield
To one of woman born.
2. To make powerful by charms.
Arcadia was the charmed circle, where all his ſpirits for ever
ſhould be enchanted. Sidney, b. ii.
3. To ſubdue by ſome ſecret power; to amaze.
}. in mine own woe charm’d,
Could not find death, where I did hear him groan;
Nor feel him where he ſtruck. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
4. To ſubdue the mind by pleaſure.
'Tis your graces
That from my muteſt conſcience to my tongue,
Charms this report out. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Amoret! my lovely foe,
Tell me where thy ſtrength does lie:
Where the pow'r that charms us ſo,
In thy ſoul, or in thy eye *
Rºſcommon.
Addison.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
//allºr.
CHARM.E.R. m. ſ...[from charm.] One that has the power of
charms, or enchantments.
That handkerchief
Did an Egyptian to my mother give;
She was a charmer, and could almoſt read
The thoughts of people.
The paſſion you pretended,
Was only to obtain;
But when the charm is ended,
The charmer you diſdain. Dryden's Sp. Friar.
CHA'RMING. particip. adj. [from charm.] Pleaſing in the higheſt
degree. -
For ever all goodneſ, will be charming, for ever all wicked-
Shakespeare . Othell.
neſs will be moſt odious. Sprat.
O charming youth in the firſt op'ning page,
So many graces in ſo green an age. Dryden.
CHA'RMINGLY. adv. [from charming.] In ſuch a manner as to
pleaſe exceedingly.
She ſmiled very charmingly, and diſcovered as fine a ſet of
tecth as ever eye beheld. Addisonſon's Freeholder, No 1 1.
CHARMING NEss. n.ſ.. [from charming.] The power of pleaſ-
Ing.
CHA RNFL. adj. [charnel, Fr.] Containing fleſh, or carcaſes.
Such are thoſe thick and gloomy ſhadows damp
Qft found in charnel vaults, and ſepulchre,
Ling ring and ſitting by a new-made grave. Mºtzm.
CHARNEl-House. m.ſ.. [charnier, Fr. from care, carnis, Latin.]
The place under churches where the bones of the dead are re.
poſited.
If charnel-houſes and our graves muſt ſend
Thoſe, that we bury, back; our monuments
Shall be the maws of kites. Siaºſ. 2ſacketh.
When they were in thoſe charnel-heºſºs, every one was plac-
ed in order, and a black pillar or coffin ſet by him. Taylor.
CHART. n.ſ.. [charta, Lat..] A delineation or map of coaſts,
for the uſe of ſailors. It is diſtinguiſhed from ama, by repre-
ſenting only the coaſts.
The Portugueſ, when they had doubled the Cape of Good-
Hope, found ſkilful pilates, uſing aſtronomical inſtruments,
geographical chartſ, and compaſſes. arbuthnot on Coins.
CHA'RTER. m. ſ. [charta, Latin.]
1. A charter is a written cvidence of things done between man
and man. Charters are divided into charters of the king, and
charters of private perſons. Charters of the king are thoſe,
whereby the king paſſeth any grant to any perſon or more, or
to any body politick: as a charter of exemption, that no man
ſhall be empannelled on a jury; charter of pardon, whereby
a man is forgiven a felony, or other offence. Cowel.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your charter, and your city's freedom.
Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Here was that charter ſeal’d, wherein the crown
All marks of arbitrary power lays down. Denham.
She ſhakes the rubbiſh from her mounting brow,
And ſeems to have renew'd her charter's date,
Which heav'n will to the death of time allow. Dryden.
2. Any writing beſtowing privileges or rights.
It is not to be wondered, that the great charter whereby God
beſtowed the whole earth upon Adam, and confirmed it unto
the ſons of Noah, being as brief in word as large in effect, hath
bred much quarrel of interpretation. Raleigh's Eſſays.
God renewed this charter of man's ſovereignty over the crea-
tures. South.
3. Privilege; immunity; exemption.
I muſt have liberty,
Withal as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I pleaſe; for ſo fools have ;
And they that are moſt gauled with my folly,
They moſt muſt laugh. Shakºp. As you like it.
My mother,
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When ſhe does praiſe me, grieves me. Shałºff. Coriolants.
CHARTER-PARTY. n.ſ. [chartre partie, Fr.] A paper relating
to a contract, of which each party has a copy.
Charter-parties, or contračts, made evei upon the high ſea,
touching things that are not in their own nature maritime, be-
long not to the admiral's juriſdićtion.
Hale's Cºmmon Law of England.
CHA'RTERED. adj. [from charter.] Inveſted with privileges by
charter; privileged.
When he ſpeaks,
The air, a charter'd libertine, is ſtill. Shakeſp. Henry V.
CHA'RY. adj. [from care.] Careful; cautious ; wary; frugal.
Over his kindred he held a wary and chary care, which boun-
tifully was expreſſed, when occaſion ſo required.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
The chariº/? maid is prodigal enough,
If ſhe unmaſk her beauty to the moon.
To CHASE. v. a. [chaſºr, Fr.]
1. To hunt.
2. To purſue as an enemy.
And Abimelech chaſed him, and he fled before him.judix.4o.
3. To
Shakespeare care.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 18</div><p class="Text">3. To follow as a thing deſirable.
4. To drive.
at laſt to the city of iſ nnis.
The flying ſtars, and light reſtor'd the day.
To CHASE Metals. See To ENch ASE.
CHAs E. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Hunting; purſuit of any thing as game.
Of this fair couple, meets he on the way
The father of this ſeeming lady.
A maid I am, and of thy virgin train;
Oh I let me ſtill that ſpotleſs name retain,
Frequent the foreſts, thy chaſte will obey,
And only make the beaſts of chaſe my prey.
3. Purſuit of an enemy, or of ſomething noxious.
them chºſe.
ſpeedy cxecution.
They ſeek that joy, which us’d to glow,
Expanded on the hero's face;
When the thick ſquadrons preſt the foe,
- And William led the glorious chaſe.
4. Purſuit of ſomething as deſirable.
Yet this mad chaſe of fame, by few purſu'd,
Has drawn deſtruction on the multitude. Dryden's juvenal.
5. Hunting match.
. Tell him, h'ath made a match with ſuch a wran
That all the courts of France will be diſturb’d.
With chaſes.
6. The game hunted.
about, riſing ſo with the leſs ſenſe of riſing.
And recompence the loſs of love with fame.
h
and overſeers. -
He and his lady both are at the lodge,
Upon the northſide of this pleaſant choſe.
taken withinſide.
of the ſhip, fired upon thoſe that are purſued.
Mean time the Belgians tack upon our rear,
Then began
A ſtop i' th' chaſer, a retire ; anon
A rout, confuſion thick.
So faſt he flies, that his reviewing eye
Has loſt the chaſers, and his ear the cry.
At once the clºſer, and at once the prey.
Lo Rufus tugging at the deadly dart,
Bleeds in the foreſt like a wounded hart.
S = As M. m. ſ. [zzzzz.]
l
The water of this orb communicates with that of the occan,
by means of certain hiatuſes or chaſms paſſing betwixt it and the
J%odward’s Nat. Hyl.
bottom of the ocean.
The ground aduſt her riv'n mouth diſparts,
Horrible chaſin ' profound.
* - A place unſºlicd; a vacuity.
Some lazy ages, loſt in eaſe,
No action leave to buſy chronicles;
Vol. I.
Thus chaſed by their brother's endleſ; malice, from prince
to prince, and from place to place, they, for their ſafety, fled
Knoles's Hi/i. of the Hurks.
When the following morn had chas'd away
Whilſt he was haft’ning, in the chaſe, it ſeems,
Shakespeare . Jºinter's Tale.
There is no chaſe more pleaſant, methinks, than to drive a
thought, by good conduct, from one end of the world to an-
other, and never to loſe fight of it till it fall into eternity.
Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
2. Fitneſs to be hunted, appropriation to chaſe or ſport.
Concerning the beaſts of chaſe, whereof the buck is the
firſt, he is called the firſt year a fawn. Shakeſp. Love's L. Loft.
CHAST E-TREE. m. ſ. [vitex, Lat.]
The admiral, with ſuch ſhips only as could ſuddenly be put in
readincſs, made forth towards them ; inſomuch as of one hun-
dred ſhips, there came ſcarce thirty to work: howbeit, with
them, and ſuch as came daily in, we ſet upon them, and gave
One day, upon the ſudden, he fallied out upon them with cer-
tain troops of horſemen, with ſuch violence, that, at the firſt
onſet, he overthrew them, and, having them in chaſe, did
Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
Shakesp. Henry V.
She, ſeeing the towering of her purſued chaſ, went circling
Hold, Warwick: ſeek thee out ſome other chaſe,
For I myſelf muſt put this deer to death. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Honour's the nobleſt chaſe; purſue that game,
7. Open ground ſtored with ſuch beaſts as are hunted.
A receptacle for deer and game, of a middle nature between
a foreſt and a park; being commonly leſs than a foreſt, and not
endued with ſo many liberties; and yet of a larger compaſs,
and ſtored with greater diverſity of game than a park. A chaſe CHAst 1's EMENT. m. ſ. [chaſiment, Fr.]
differs from a foreſt in this, becauſe it may be in the hands of
a ſubject, which a forcſ!, in its proper nature, cannot; and from
a park, in that it is not incloſed, and hath not only a larger
compaſs, and more ſtore of game, but likewiſe more keepers
Shakespeare.Tit. And.
8. The CHAsp ºf a gun, is the whole bore or length of a piece,
C3: As E-G UN. m. ſ. [from.ca/ and gºn.] Guns in the forepart
And raking chaft-guns through our ſtern they ſend. Dryden.
C =IA's ER. m. ſ. [from chºſe.] Hunter; purſuer ; driver.
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Stretch'd on the lawn, his ſecond hope ſurvey,
- A breach uncloſed ; a cleft ; a gape; an opening.
In all that viſible corporeal world, we ſee no chaſis or gaps.
Such, whoſe ſupine felicity but makes,
In ſtory chaſms, in epochas miſtakes. Dryden.
CHASSELAS. n.ſ. [French..] A fort of grape. See Vise.
CHASTE. ad;. ſºft, Fr. caſus, Lat.]
1. Pure from all commerce of ſexes; as a chaº'e virgin.
2. With reſpect to language; pure; uncorrupt; not mixed with
barbarous phraſes.
3. Without obſcenity.
Among words which ſignify the ſame principal ideas, ſome
are clean and decent, others unclean ; ſome cha/e, otºrs ob-
ſcene. //atts's Logick.
4. True to the marriage bed.
Love your children, be diſcreet, chaſe, keepers at home.
Titus, ii. 5;
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, with two lips; the forepart
is tubuloſe, from whoſe flower-cup riſes the pointel, which be-
comes an almoſt ſpherical fruit, divided into four cells. The
leaves are fingered like thoſe of hemp. This tree will grow to
be eight or ten feet high, and produce their ſpikes of flowers at
the extremity of every ſtrong ſhoot in autumn. Miller.
To CHA's TEN. v. a. [chaſtier, Fr. ca/ligo, Lat.] To correct;
to puniſh ; to mortify.
Cha/ten thy ſon while there is hope, and let not thy ſoul ſpare
for his crying. Prov. xix. 18.
I follow thee, ſafe guideſ the path
Thou lead'ſt me; and to the hand of heav'n ſubmit,
However chºſºning. A ſilton's Par. Lºft, b. xi. l. 373.
Some feel the rod,
And own, like us, the father's chaſi'ning hand.
Rowe's Royal Convert.
From our loſt purſuit ſhe wills to hide
Her cloſe decrees, and cha/ien human pride. Prior.
To CHASTISE. v. a. ſca/ligo, Lat. antichtly accented on the
firſt ſyllable, now on the laſt.]
1. To puniſh; to correct by puniſhment; to afflićt for faults.
My breaſt I’ll burſt with ſtraining of my courage,
But I will chaſiſe this high minded ſtrumpet. Sha. Hon.VI.
I am glad to ſee the vanity or envy of the canting chymiſts
thus diſcovered and cha/liſed. Boyle's Sceptical Chymi/?.
How ſeldom is the world affrighted or chºſºſºd with ſigns or
prodigies, earthquakes or inundations, famines or plagues 2
Grew's Coſmologia Sacra.
Like you, commiſſion'd to chaſiſe and bleſs,
He muſt avenge the world, and give it peace. Prior.
2. To reduce to order, or obedience.
Hie thee hither,
That I may pour my ſpirits in thine ear,
And cha/liſe, with the valour of my tongue,
All that impedes thee. Shakſ. King Lear.
Know, Sir, that I
Will not wait pinion’d at your maſter's court,
Nor once be choſiis'd with the ſober eye
Of dull Octavia. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
The gay ſocial ſenſe
By decency cha/iºd. Thomſºn.
Correótion; puniſh-
ment. Theſe words are all commonly, though not always, uſed
of domeſtick ºr parental puniſhment.
Shall I ſo much diſhonour my fair ſtars,
On equal terms to give him cha jºment * Shakespeare. R. II.
He held the chºſiſ ment of one which moleſted the ſee of
Rome, pleaſing to God. Raleigh's Eſſays.
For ſeven years what can a child be guilty of, but lying, or
ill-natur'd tricks; the repeated commiſſion of which ſhall bring
him to the chaſºſºmeºt of the rod. Locke.
He receives a fit of ſickneſs as the kind chºſiſ ment and diſ-
cipline of his heavenly father, to wean his affections from ºne
world. Bºſtºy.
CHA's TITY. m. ſ. ſcºas, Lat.]
1. Purity of the body.
Who can be bound by any ſolemn vow,
To force a ſpotleſs virgin's chºſity 2 Shakespeare. Henry VI.
Chaffity is either abſtinence or continence: abſtinence is that
of virgins or widows; continence of married perſons: chaſte
marriages are honourable and pleaſuyg to God.
Taylºr's Rule ºf Living Hºly.
Ev’n here where frozen chaſſity retires,
Love finds an altar for forbidden fires.
Pope.
2. Freedom from obſcenity.
There is not chaſſity enough in language,
* r -
Without offence to utter them. Shakesp. Much aſ alºit Nºthing.
3. Freedom from bad mixture of any kind.
ČHAs rises. ... ſ. [from chººlſ...] The perſon that chaſtiſes ;
a puniſher; a corrector.
Cºstly. adv, Iſrom chaſe.] Without incontinence; pure-
ly; without contamingtion. - -
You ſhould not paſs here: no, though it were as virtuous to
lie as to live cºaſt y. Shakeſp. Cºriolanus.
Make rſt a ſong of joy and love,
V, hich why?ely flame in royal eyes. JJ attºr.
4 K. Succeſſ, n
;
i
-
.
*
*
*
-
-:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 19</div><p class="Text">C H A
C H A
i
Succeſſion of a long deſcent,
Which chay'ly in the channels ran,
And from our demi-gods began. -
CHA's TN Ess. n.ſ.. [from chafte.] Chaſlity; purity.
To CHAT. v. m. [from caqueter, Fr. Skinner; perhaps from a-
chat, purchaſe or cheapening, on account of the prate naturally
produced in a bargain; or only, as it is moſt likely, contracted
from chatter.] To prate; to talk idly; to prattle; to cackle;
to chatter; to converſe at caſe.
Thus chatten the people in their ſteads,
Ylike as a monſter of many heads. Spenser's Paſtorals.
Becauſe that I familiarly ſometimes,
Do uſe you for my fool, and chat with you,
Your ſaucineſs will jeſt upon my love.
Shakeſp. Comedy of Errours.
All tongues ſpeak of him, and the bleared fights
Are ſpectacled to ſee him. Your prattling nurſe
Into a rapture lets her baby cry,
Dryden.
While ſhe chats him. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The ſhepherds on the lawn
Sat ſimply chatting in a ruſtick row. Milton.
With much goodwill the motion was embrac'd,
To chat a while on their adventures paſs'd. Dryden.
CHAT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Idle talk; prate; ſlight or negli-
gent tattle.
Lords that can prate
As amply and unneceſſarily,
As this Gonzalo, I myſelf would make
A chough of as deep chat. Shakeſp. Tempſ!.
The time between before the fire they ſat,
And ſhorten’d the delay by pleaſing chat. Drdyen.
The leaſt is no inconſiderable good, but ſuch as he confeſſes
is far greater than the tickling of his palate with a glaſs of
wine, or the idle chat of a ſoaking club. Locke.
Snuff, or the fan, ſupplies each pauſe of chat,
With ſinging, laughing, ogling, and all that. Pope.
CHAT. n.ſ. The keys of trees are called chats, as aſh chats.
CHA't ELLANY. m. ſ. ſchâtelenie, Fr.] The diſtrict under the
dominion of a caſtle.
Here are about twenty towns and forts of great importance,
with their chatel anies and dependencies. Dryden.
CHA'tt El. n. ſ. [See CATTLE.] Any moveable poſſeſſion: a
term now ſcarce uſed but in forms of law.
Nay, look not big, nor ſtamp, nor ſtare, nor fret;
I will be maſter of what is mine own;
She is my goods, my chattel. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
Honour's a leaſe for lives to come,
And cannot be extended from
The legal tenant: 'tis a chattle
Not to be forfeited in battle.
To CHATTER. v. m. [caqueter, Fr.]
1. To make a noiſe as a pie, or other unharmonious bird.
Nightingales ſeldom fing, the pie ſtill chattereth.
So doth the cuckow, when the mavis ſings,
Begin his witleſs note apace to chatter. Speºſer's Sonnets.
There was a crow ſat chattering upon the back of a ſheep;
Well, firrah, ſays the ſheep, you durſt not have done this to a
dog. L'E/irange.
Your birds of knowledge, that in duſky air
Chatter futurity. Dryden and Lee's OEdipus.
2. To make a noiſe by colliſion of the tectly.
Stood Theodore ſurpriz'd in deadly fright,
Hudibrat, p. i. e. iii.
Sidney.
With chatt’ring teeth, and briſtling hair upright. Dryden.
Dip but your toes into cold water,
Their correſpondent tecth will chatter. Prior.
3. To talk idly or careleſly.
Suffer no hour to paſs away in a lazy idleneſs, an imperti-
nent chattering, or uſeleſs trifles. //atts's Logick.
CHA'TTER. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Noiſe like that of a pie or monkey.
The mimick ape began his chatter,
How evil tongues his life beſpatter. Swift.
2. Idle prate.
CHATTERER. m. ſ. [from chatter.] An idle talker; a pratler.
CHA'twood. n.ſ. Little ſticks; fuel.
CHA'v ENDER. m. ſ. [Chevſne, Fr.] The chub; a fiſh.
Theſe are a choice bait for the chub, or chavender, or indeed
any great fiſh. J/alton's Angler.
CHAUMONTE'LLE. m. ſ. [Fr.] A ſort of pear; which fee.
To CHAW. v. a. [Kaweſi, Germ.] To champ between the
teeth ; to maſticate; to chew.
I home returning, fraught with foul deſpight,
And chawing vengeance all the way I went. Fairy Q. b. ii.
They come to us, but us love draws;
He ſwallows us, and never chaws;
He is the tyrant pike, and we the fry. Donne.
Whether he found any uſe of chawing little ſponges, dipt in
oil, in his mouth, when he was perfectly under water, and at a
diſtance from his engine.
Boyle.
The man who laught but once to ſee an aſs
Mumbling to make the croſs-grain'd thiſtles paſs,
Might laugh again, to ſee a jūry chaw
The prickles of unpalatable law. Dryden.
CHAw. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
part of a beaſt's mouth.
I will turn thee back, and put hooks into thy Jews, and
will bring thee forth and all thine army. Exek. xxxviii. 4.
CHA'w DRON. m. ſ. Entrails.
Add thereto a tyger's chawdron,
For the ingredients of our cauldron. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
CHEAP. adj. ſceapan, Sax. Koopen, Dutch, to buy.j
1. To be had at a low rate; purchaſed for a ſmall price.
Where there are a great many ſellers to a few buyers, there
the thing to be ſold will be cheap. On the other ſide, raiſe up
a great many buyers for a few ſellers, and the ſame thing will
immediately turn dear. Locke.
2. Of ſmall value; eaſy to be had ; not reſpected.
The goodneſs, that is cheap in beauty, makes
Beauty brief in goodneſs. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Had I ſo º of my preſence been,
So common hackney'd in the eyes of men,
So ſtale and cheap to vulgar company. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
He that is too much in any thing, ſo that he giveth another
occaſion of ſociety, maketh himſelf cheap.
May your ſick fame ſtill languiſh till it die,
And you grow cheap in every ſubject's eye. Dryden.
The uſual titles of diſtinétion, which belong to us, are turn-
ed into terms of derifion and reproach, and every way is taken
by profane men, towards rendering us cheap and contemptible.
Atterbury.
CHEAP. m.ſ. ſchºping is an old word for market; whence Eaſt-
cheap, Cheapſide..] Market; purchaſe; bargain; as good cheap;
[a bon marche, Fr.]
The ſame wine that comes out of Candia, which we pay
ſo dear for now a days, in that good world was very good
cheap. Sidney, b. ii.
It is many a man's caſe to tire himſelf out with hunting af-
ter that abroad, which he carries about him all the while, and
may have it better cheap at home. L’Eſtrange.
Some few inſulting cowards, who love to vapour good cheap,
may trample on thoſe who give leaſt reſiſtance. Decay of Piety.
To CHEAPEN. v. a. ſceapan, Sax. to buy.]
1. To attempt to purchaſe; to bid for any thing; to ask the
price of any commodity.
Rich ſhe ſhall be, that's certain; wiſe, or I'll none; virtu-
ous, or I'll never cheapen her; fair, or I'll never look on her.
Shakeſp. Much ado about Nºthing.
The firſt he cheapened was a Jupiter, which would have come
The chap; the upper or under
- Bacon.
at a very eaſy rate. L’Eſtrange.
So in a morning, without bodice,
Slipt ſometimes out to Mrs. Thody's,
To cheapen tea. Prior.
To ſhops in crouds the daggled females fly,
Pretend to cheapen goods, but nothing buy.
2: To leſſen value.
My hopes purſue a brighter diadem.
Can any brighter than the Roman be -
I find my profer'd love has cheapen'd me. Dryd. Tyrr. Love-
CHE'APLY. adv. [from cheap..] At a ſmall price; at a low rate.
By theſe I ſee
So great a day as this is cheaply bought. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Blood, rapines, maſſacres, were cheaply bought,
So mighty recompence your beauty brought.
CHE/APN Ess. n.ſ.. [from cheap.] Lowneſs of price.
Ancient ſtatutes incite merchant ſtrangers to bring in com-
modities; having for end cheapneſs. Bacon's Henry VII.
The diſcredit which is grown upon this kingdom, has been
the great diſcouragement to other nations to tranſplant them-
ſelves hither, and prevailed farther than all the invitations which
the cheapneſ, and plenty of the country has made them. Temple.
CHEAR. Sce CHEER.
To CHEAT. v. a. [of uncertain derivation; probably from
acheter, Fr. to purchaſe, alluding to the tricks uſed in making
bargains. See the noun.]
1. To defraud; to impoſe upon ; to trick. It is uſed commonly
of low cunning. -
It is a dangerous commerce, where an honeſt man is ſure at
firſt of being cheated; and he recovers not his loſſes, but by
learning to cheat others. - Dryden.
There are a ſort of people who find that the moſt effectual
way to cheat the people, is always to pretend to infallible cures.
Tillotſon, Preface.
2. It has of before the thing taken away by fraud.
I that am curtail'd by this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by diſſembling nature,
Deform’d, unfiniſh’d. Shakeſp. Richard III.
CHEAT. m. ſ. [from the verb. Some think abbreviated from
eſheat, becauſe many fraudulent meaſures being taken by the
jords of manours in procuring eſcheats, cheat the abridgment
was brought to convey a bad meaning.] -
1. A fraud; a trick; an impoſture.
The pretence of publick good is a cheat that will ever paſs,
though ſo abuſed by ill men, that I wonder the good do not
grow aſhamed to uſe it. Temple.
Swift.
Dryden.
6 Emp'rick<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 20</div><p class="Text">º
S saw----T.
- Reſtraint; curb ; government.
C H E
Emp'rick politicians uſe deceit,
Hide what they give, and cure but by a cheat.
When I conſider life, ’tis all a cheat;
Yet, fool'd with hope, men favour the deceit.
Truſt on, and think tomorrow will repay;
Tomorrow's falſer than the former day;
Lyes worſe; and while it ſays, we ſhall be bleſt,
With ſome new joys cuts off what we poſſeſt.
2. A perſon guilty of fraud.
Diffimulation can be no further uſeful than it is concealed;
for as much as no man will truſt a known cheat. South.
Like that notorious cheat, vaſt ſums I give,
Only that you may keep me while I live. Dryden's Cleomenes.
CHE"ATER. "ſ: [from cheat..] One that practiſes fraud.
I will be cheater to them both, and they ſhall be exchequers
to me. [It is here for eſcheater.] Shakeſp.M.//, of //,
They ſay this town is full of couzenage,
As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye;
Diſguiſed cheaters, prating mountebanks,
And many ſuch likelibertines of fin. Shakeſp. Comedy of Err.
He is no ſwaggerer, hoſteſs; a tame cheater i' faith.
Cheater, call you him I will bar no honeſt man my houſe,
nor no cheater. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
All ſorts of injurious perſons, the ſacrilegious, the detainers
of tithes, cheaters of mens inheritances, falſe witneſſes and ac-
cuſers. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
To CHECK. v. a. [from the French echecs, cheſs; from whence
we uſe, at that game, the term checkmate, when we ſtop our
adverſary from carrying on his play any farther.]
1. To repreſs; to curb.
Reſerve thy ſtate; with better judgment check
This hideous raſhneſs. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
How fames may be ſown and raiſed, how they may be ſpread
and multiplied, and how they may be checked and laid dead.
Bacon's Eſſays.
Dryden.
Dryden.
I hate when vice can bolt her arguments,
And virtue has no tongue to check her pride. Milton.
He who ſat at a table, richly and deliciouſly furniſhed, but
with a ſword hanging over his head by one ſingle thread or hair,
ſurely had enough to check his appetite. South.
2. To reprove; to chide.
Richard, with his eye brimful of tears,
Then check'd and rated by Northumberland,
Did ſpeak theſe words, now prov’d a prophecy:
His fault is much, and the good king his maſter
Will check him for’t. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. To compare a bank note or other bill, with the correſpon-
dent cipher.
4. To control by a counter reckoning.
To CHECK. v. n.
1. To ſtop; to make a ſtop; with at.
With what wing the ſtanyel checks at it.
He muſt obſerve their mood on whom he jeſts,
The quality of the perſons, and the time;
And, like the haggard, check at every feather
That comes before his eye. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
The mind, once jaded by an attempt above its power, either
is diſabled for the future, or elſe checks at any vigorous under-
taking ever after. Locke.
2. To claſh; to interfere.
If love check once with buſineſs, it troubleth mens fortunes.
Bacon's Eſſays.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
I'll avoid his preſence;
It checks too ſtrong upon me.
CHEck. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1 - Repreſſure; ſtop; rebuff.
I do know, the ſtate,
However this may gall him with ſome check,
Cannot with ſafety caſt him. Shakeſp. Othello.
Rebellion in this land ſhall loſe his ſway,
Meeting the check of ſuch another day. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
We ſee, alſo, that kings that have been fortunate conquerors
in their firſt years, muſt have ſome check or arreſt in their for-
tuneS. Bacon's Eſſay.
God hath of late years manifeſted himſelf in a very dreadful
manner, as if it were on purpoſe to give a check to this inſolent
impiety. Tillotſon.
It was this viceroy's zeal, which gave a remarkable check to
the firſt progreſs of chriſtianity. Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 32.
God put it into the heart of one of our princes, to give a
check to that ſacrilege, which had been but too much winked
Eat. Atterbury.
The great ſtruggle with his paſſions is in the firſt check.
Rogers.
Dryden's All for Love.
They who come to maintain their own breach of faith, the
&lt;-heck of their conſciences much breaketh their ſpirit. Hayw.
The impetuoſity of the new officer's nature needed ſome
reſtraint and check, for ſome time, to his immoderate pretences
=and appetite of power. Clarendon.
Some free from rhyme or reaſon, rule or check,
Break Priſcian's head, and Pegaſus's neck.
Pope.
C H E
While ſuch men are in truſt, who have no check from with-
in, nor any views but towards their intereſt. Swift.
3. A reproof; a ſlight.
Oh I this life
Is nobler than attending for a check;
Richer than doing nothing for a bauble. Shakespeare. Cymbeliºr,
4. A ºne, a ſudden diſguſt; ſomething that ſtops the pro-
ICIS.
g Say I ſhould wed her, would not my wiſe ſubjects
Take check, and think it ſtrange perhaps revolt Dryden.
5. In falconry,is when a hawk forſakes her proper game to follow
rooks, pies, or other birds that croſs her in her flight.
- Chambers.
A young woman is a hawk upon her wings; and if ſhe be
andſome, ſhe is the more ſubject to go out on check. Suckling.
When whiſtled from the fiſt,
Some falcon ſtoops at what her eye deſign'd,
And with her eagerneſs, the quary miſs'd,
Streight flies at check, and clips it down the wind. Dryden.
6. The perſon checking; the cauſe of reſtraint; a flop.
He was unhappily too much uſed as a check upon the lord Co-
ventry. . Clarendon.
A ſatyrical poet is the check of the laymen on bad prieſts.
Dryden's Fables, Preface.
The letters have the natural produćtion by ſeveral check, or
ſtops, or, as they are uſually called, articulations of the breath or
voice. Holder's Elements J Speech.
7. The correſpondent cipher of a bank bill.
8. A term uſed in the game of cheſs, when one party obliges the
other either to move or guard his king. -&gt;
9. Clerk of the CHECK, in the king's houſhold, has the check
and controulment of the yeomen of the guard, and all the uſh-
ers belonging to the royal family.
10. Clerk of the CHEck, in the king's navy at Plymouth, is alſo
the name of an officer inveſted with like powers. Chambers,
To CHE'ck ER. {* a. [from echecs,cheſs, Fr.] To variegate or
To CHE'QUER. diverſify, in the manner of a chef-board,
with alternate colours, or with darker and brighter parts.
The grey ey'd morn ſmiles on the frowning night,
Check ring the eaſtern clouds with ſtreaks of light.
Shakeſp. Romeo and Juliet.
The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind,
And make a checquer'd ſhadow on the ground.
As the ſnake roll'd in the flow'ry bank,
With ſhining checker'd ſlough doth ſting a child,
That for the beauty thinks it excellent. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
The wealthy ſpring yet never bore
That ſweet, nor dainty flower,
That damask'd not the checker'd floor
Of Cynthia's ſummer bower.
Many a youth and many a maid,
Dancing in the checker'd ſhade. Milton.
In the cheſs-board, the uſe of each cheſs-man is determined
only within that chequered piece of wood. Locke.
In our preſent condition, which is a middle ſtate, our minds
are, as it were, chequered with truth and falſehood. Addiſon.
The ocean intermixing with the land, ſo as to checker it in-
to earth and water. Hºodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Here waving groves a checker'd ſcene diſplay,
And part admit, and part exclude the day. Pope.
CHE'ck ER. Work varied alternately as to its colours or
CHECKER-work. } materials.
Nets of checker-work and wreaths of chain-work for the cha-
piters which were upon the top of the pillars. I Kings, vii. 17.
CHE'cKMATE. n.ſ. [echec et mat, Fr.] The movement on the
cheſs-board, that kills the oppoſite men, or hinders them from
moving.
Love they him called, that gave me the checkmate,
But better might they have behote him hate. Spenser.
CHE'ckRoll. n.ſ.. [from check and roll.] A roll or book, con-
taining the names of ſuch as are attendants on, and in pay to
great perſonages, as their houſhold ſervants. It is otherwiſe
called the chequer-roll. Cowel.
Not daring to extend this law further than to the king's ſer-
vants in checkroll, left it ſhould have been too harſh to the gen-
tlemen and other commons of the kingdom. Bacon's Hen. VII.
CHEEK. m. ſ. [ceac, Saxon.]
1. The ſide of the face below the eye.
And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
Her delicate cheek. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Her beauty hangs upon the cheek of night,
Like a rich jewel in an AEthiop's ear. Shakeſp. Rom. and jul.
I ſhall ſurvey and ſpy
Death in thy checks, and darkneſs in thy eye.
Daughter of the roſe, whoſe checks unite
The diff’ring titles of the red and white,
Who heaven's alternate beauty well diſplay
The bluſh of morning and the milky way. Dryden.
2. A general name among mechanicks for almoſt all thoſe pieces
of thcir machines and inſtruments that are double, and perfectly
alike.
Shakeſp.
Drayton's Cynthia.
Donne.
Chambers,
C. H. E. F. K-
.
º
:
º
º
-*
-
:
º--
---
º º
-
i º
! { }
!
,
!
º
r -
º
-:.
|
:
i<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 21</div><p class="Text">C H E
C H E
:
º
º
r
º
CHE Ek Bos F. m. ſ. [from check and lºne..] .
I cut afterwards ºnto the tumour, and felt the ſlug: it lay
partly under the os jugale, or cheekbone. 1/yeman.
CH º' Kroor H. m. ſ. [from cheek and tooth.] The hinder tooth
or tusk.
He hath the checkteeth of a great lion. joel, i. 6.
CHEER. m. ſ. ſchere, Fr. entertainment; cara, Sp. the counte-
nance. It ſeems to have, in Engliſh, ſome relation to both
theſe ſenſes.]
1. Entertainment; proviſions ſerved at a feaſt.
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part;
Better cheer you may have, but not with better heart.
Shakeſp. Comedy of Errours.
His will was never determined to any purſuit of good cheer,
poignant ſauces, and delicious wines. Locke.
2. Invitation to gaiety.
My royal lord,
You do not give the cheer; the feaſt is ſold
That is not often vouched, while 'tis making
'Tis given with welcºme. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. Gaiety; jollity.
I have not that alacrity of ſpirit,
Nor cheer of mind, that I was wont to have. Shakeſp. R. III.
4. Air of the countenance.
Right faithful true he was in deed and word,
But of his cºver did ſeem too ſolemn ſld. -
Nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad. Senſ Fairy Q.
Which publick death, receiv'd with ſuch a cheer,
As not a figh, a look, a ſhrink bewrays
The leaſt felt touch of a degencrous fear,
Gave life to envy, to his courage praiſe. Danie"; Civil ſ/.
He ended ; and his words their drooping cheer -
Enlighten'd, and their languiſh’d hope reviv'd. Al Miltºn.
At length appear
Her griſly brethren ſtretch’d upon the bicr:
Pale at the ſudden fight, ſhe chang'd her cheer.
Dryden's Falks.
5. Perhaps temper of mind in general.
Then were they all of good cheer, and they alſo took ſome
In Cat. Acis, xxvii. 30.
To CHEF R. v. a. [from the noun.]
I. To incite ; to encourage; to inſpirit.
He complained in vain, that he was betrayed: yet, for all
that, he was nothing diſcouraged, but cheered up the footmen.
Knoles's II://ory ºf the Turks.
He cheer'd the dogs to follow her who fled,
And vow'd revenge on her devoted head. Dryden's Falks.
2. To comfort; to conſole.
I died, ere I could lend thee aid;
But cheer thy heart, and be thou not diſmay’d.
Shakespeare. Richard III.
Diſpleas'd at what, not ſuffering, they had ſeen,
They went to cheer the faction of the green. Dryden.
3. To gladden. - -
Hark! a glad voice the lonely deſert cheers;
Prepare the way, a god, a god appears. Pope's Mºffah.
The ſacred fun, above the waters rais'd,
Thro' heaven's eternal brazen portals blaz'd,
And wide o'er earth diffus'd his cheering ray. Pºpe.
To CHEER. v. n. To grow gay or gladſ me.
At fight of thee my gloomy ſoul cheers up ;
My hopes revive, and gladneſs dawns within me.
A. Phº's D://reft Mºther.
CHE'ERER. m. ſ. [from to cheer.] Gladner; giver of gaiety.
To thee alone be praiſe,
From whom our joy deſcends,
Thou cheerer of our days. Wºttºn.
Angling was, after tedious ſtudy, a reſt to his mind, a cheerer
of his ſpirits, a diverter of ſadneſs, a calmer of unquiet
thoughts. J/alton's Angler.
Saffron is the ſafeſt and moſt ſimple cordiºl, the greateſt re-
viver of the heart, and cheerer of the ſpirits. Temple.
Prime cheerer, light,
Of all matcrial beings firſt and beſt.
CHF ERFUL, a '. [from chºr and ſill.]
1. Gay; full of life; full of mirth.
The cºconful birds of ſundry kind
Do chaunt ſweet muſic to delight his mi:d. Fairy Q. º. ii.
2. Having an appearance of gaiety.
A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance: but by ſorrow
of the heart the ſpirit is broken. Prov. xv. 12.
CH*RFULLY. adº. [from cheerful..] Without dejection; with
willingneſs; with gaiety.
Pluck up thy ſpirits, look cheerfully upon me.
Shakespeare. Tarnºg of the Shrew.
To their known ſtations chºſiſ, they go. Dryden.
Doctrine is that which muſt prepare men for diſcipline;
and men never go on ſo cheerful, as when they ſee where they
go. South.
May the man
That chºſº recounts the female's praiſe,
Find equal love, and love's untainted ſweets
Enjoy with honour. Pºiſs.
Thomſºn's Summer.
Cli E'ERFULN ess. m. ſ. [from cheerful.]
1. Freedom from dejection; alacrity.
With what reſolution and cheerfulneſ, with what courage
and patience did vaſt numbers of all forts of people, in the
firſt ages of chriſtianity, encounter all the rage and malice of
the world, and embrace torments and death : Tilºſºn.
2. Freedom from gloomineſs. -
I remember, then I marvelled to ſee her receive my com-
mandments with fighs, and yet do them with cheerfulneſs.
Sidney, b. ii.
CHE'ERI. Ess. adj. [from cheer.] Without gaiety, comfort, or
gladneſs.
For ſince mine eye your joyous fight did miſs,
My cheerful day is turn'd to cheer'ſ night. Fairy Q. b. i.
On a bank, beſide a willow,
Heav'n her cov'ring, earth her pillow,
Sad Amynta ſigh’d alone,
From the cheerleſ, dawn of morning
Till the dews of night returning. Dryden.
Cheerleſs towns, far diſtant, never bleſs'd. Tºſºn.
CHE'ERLY. adj. [from cheer.]
I. Gay; cheerful.
They are uſeful to mankind, in affording them convenient
ſituations of houſes and villages, reflecting the benign and
cheriſhing ſun beams, and ſo rendering their habitations both
more comfortable and more cheerly in winter. Ray on Crºation.
Under heavy arms the youth of Rome
Their long laborious marches overcome;
Cheerly their tedious travels undergo.
2. Not gloomy.
CHE ERLY. adv. [from cheer.] Cheerfully.
In God's name, cheery on, courageous friends,
To reap the harveſt of perpetual peace,
By this one bloody trial of ſharp war. Shakespeare. Richard III.
Oft liſtening how the hounds and horn
Cheery rouſe the ſlumb'ring morn. Milton.
CHEERY. adj. [from cheer.] Gay; ſprightly; having the
power to make gay.
Come, let us hie, and quaff a cheery bowl;
Let cider new waſh ſorrow from thy foul. Gay's Paſtoral.
CHEESE. m. ſ. [caſus, Lat. cyre, Saxon.] A kind of food
made by preſſing the curd of coagulated milk, and ſuffering
the maſs to dry.
I will rather truſt a Fleming with my butter, parſon Hugh
the Welchman with my cheeſe, than my wife with herſelf.
‘Shakeſp. A/erry //ives of I/indſºr.
CHF'Esecake. n ſ [from chºſe and cake..] A cake made of
ſoft curds, ſugar and butter.
Effeminate he fat, and quiet;
Strange product of a cheeſecake dict. Prior,
Where many a man at variance with his wife,
With ſoft'ning mead and cheeſecake ends the ſtrife.
King's Art of Cookery.
CHE'Es EMoxo ER. m. ſ. [from cheeſe and monger.] One who
deals in cheeſe.
A true owl of London,
That gives out he is undone,
Being a cheeſemonger,
By truſting. Pen jºhnſºn's Owl.
CHE'Es PRFss. m. ſ. [from cheeſ and preſs.] The preſs in
which the curds are preſſed.
The cleanly cheeſepreſ; ſhe could never turn,
Her aukward fiſt did ne'er employ the churn. Gay's Pºº.
CHE's sev A.T. n.ſ. [from cheeſe and wat..] The woodencaſe in
which the curds are confined when they are preſſed into cheeſe.
His ſenſe occaſions the careleſs ruſtick to judge the ſun no
bigger than a cheeſewat. Glanville's Scepſis, c. 10.
CHE'Es Y. adj. [fiom cheeſ...] Having the nature or form of
cheeſe.
Acids mixed with them precipitate atophaceous chalky mat-
ter, but not a cheſ, ſubſtance. Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
CHELY. m. ſ. ſchela, Lat..] The claw of a ſhell fiſh.
It happeneth often, I confeſs, that a lobſter hath the cheff,
or great claw, of one ſide longer than the other.
Brºwn's Wigar Erroirs, b. iii. c. 5.
CHEMISTRY. See CHY MISTRY.
CHF QUER. See CHEck ER.
To CIERISH. º. a. [chºrir, Fr.] To ſupport and forward
with encouragement, help, and protection; to ſhelter; to nurſe
up.
Dryden's Pirgil.
Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate
Upon your grace, and not with deteous love
JDoth heriff you and yours, God puniſh me
With hate in thoſe where I expect moſt love. Shakespeare R. III.
I would I were thy bird.
— Swect, ſo would I;
But I ſhould kill thee with too much cheriſhing.
Shakespeare. Romeo and Juliet.
What doth cherift weeds but gentle air : Shakespeare H. V 1.
Magiſtrates have always thought themſelves cºncerned to
chariſ, religion, and to maintain in the minds of picn the be-
lief of a God and another life, 7 iſ ſºn.
3 Eut
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 22</div><p class="Text">C. H. E.
C H E
But old god Saturn, hich doth all devour, -
Doth cleriſh her, and ſtiaugments her might. Davies.
He that knowingly $omits an ill, has the upbraidings of
is own conſcience; thoſe ho act by error, have its chºriſh-
ings and encouragements to ºnfirm and animate them.
- - Decay of Piety.
CHE'RISHER. m. ſ. [from cher.] An encourager ; al ſup-
orter.
One of their greateſt praiſe it is to be the maintainers
and cherifter of a regular devºion, a reverend worſhip, a
true and decent piety. - Sprat's Serm.
CHERISHMENT. n.ſ.. [from chari/J Encouragement; ſup-
port; comfort. It is now obſolet.
The one lives, her age's ornament,
That with rich bounty and dear teriſhment,
Supports the praiſe of noble poeſi.
Spoſer's Tears of the Muſés,
HERRY. m.ſ. -
gºſ n.ſ. } [ceriſe, Fr. cenſus, Lat.]
The tree hath large ſhining leaves: the fruit grows on
long pedicles, and is roundiſh or eart-ſhaped: the ſtone
is fict, tumid, and roundiſh. Th: ſpecies are ; i. The
common red or garden cherry. 2. Large Spaniſh cherry.
3. The red heart cherry. 4. The white heart cherry.
5. The bleeding heart cherry. 6. The black heart cherry.
;. The May cherry. 8. The black cherry, or mazard.
9. The archduke cherry. 10. The yellow Spaniſh cherry.
11. The Flanders cluſter cherry. 12. The carnation cherry.
13. The large black cherry. 14. The bird cherry. 15. The
red bird or Corniſh cherry. 16. The largeſt double flowered
cherry. 17. The double flowered cherry. 18. The com-
mon wild cherry. 19. The wild northern Engliſh cherry,
with late ripe fruit. 20. The ſhock or perfumed cherry.
21. The cherrytree with ſtriped leaves. And many other
ſorts of cherries; as the amber cherry, lukeward, corone,
Gaſcoigne, and the morello, which is chiefly planted for
preſerving.
This fruit was brought out of Pontus at the time of the
Mithridatick vićtory, by Lucullus, in the year of Rome 680 ;
and was brought into Britain about 120 years afterwards,
which was Am. Dom. 55; and was ſoon after ſpread through
moſt parts of Europe. It is generally eſteemed for its ear-
lineſs, being of the firſt tree-fruits that appears to welcome
in the fruit-ſeaſon. Miller.
Some devils aſk but the parings of one's nail, a pin, a nut,
a cherry ſtone; but ſhe, more covetous, would have a chain.
Shakespeare Com. of Errors.
July I would have drawn in a jacket of light-yellow eat-
‘ing cherries, with his face and boſom ſun-burnt. . Peacham.
All this done by a little ſpark of life, which, in its firſt
appearance, might be incloſed in the hollow of a cherry ſtone.
Hale's Orig. of Mankind.
All the ideas of all the ſenſible qualities of a cherry come
into my mind by ſenſation. - Locke.
CHERRY. adj. [from the ſubſtantive..] Reſembling a cherry
in colour.
Shore's wife hath a pretty foot,
A cherry lip, a paſſing pleaſing tongue. Shakespeare Rich. III.
CHE'RRY BAY. See LAUREL.
CHERRYcHEEKED. adj. [from cherry and check.] Having ruddy
cheeks.
I warrant them cherrycheek’d country girls. Cong. Old Bat.
CHERRYPiT. m. ſ. [from cherry and pit..] A child's play, in
which they throw cherry ſtones into a ſmall hole.
What I man, 'tis not for gravity to play at cherrypit.
- Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
CHERsone's E. n.ſ. [x;2&amp;ng….] A peninſula; a tract of
land almoſt ſurrounded by the ſea, but joined to the continent
by a narrow neck or iſthmus.
CHERT. m. ſ. [from quartz, Germ.] A kind of flint.
Flint is moſt commonly found in form of nodules; but 'tis
ſometimes found in thin ſtratae, when 'tis called chert. Wºodw.
CHERUB. n.ſ. [--&gt; plur. Eºin-o It is ſometimes written
in the plural, improperly, cherubims.]
. A celeſtial ſpirit, which, in the hierarchy, is placed next
in order to the ſeraphim. All the ſeveral deſcriptions which
the Scripture gives us of cherubin, differ from one another;
as they are deſcribed in the ſhapes of men, eagles, oxen, lions,
and in a compoſition of all theſe figures put together. The
hieroglyphical repreſentations in the embroidery upon the cur-
tains of the Tabernacle, were called by Moſes, Exod. xxvi. 1.
cherubim of cunning work. Calmet.
The roof o' th' chamber
With gold cherubims is fretted. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Heav'n's cherubin hors'd,
Upon the fightleſ, courſers of the air,
Shall blow the horrid decd in ev'ry eye,
That tears ſhall drown the wind.
Some cherub finiſhes what you begun,
And to a miracle improves a tune. Prior.
Ch; Rubick, adj. [from cherub.] Angelick; relating to the
cherubim. -
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Thy words
Vol. I,
Attentive, and with more delighted ear,
Divine inſtructor I have heard, than when
Charulick ſongs by night from neighb'ring hills -
Aerial muſick ſend. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. v. l. 547.
And on the eaſt ſide of the garden place,
Where entrance up from Eden eafieſt climbs,
Cºruñº watch. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. xi. 1, 12c.
CHERUBIN. adj. [from cherub.] Angelical.
This fell whore of thine,
Hath in her more deſtruction than thy ſword,
For all her cherubin look. Shakeſp. Timon.
CHE'Ryil. n.ſ. [chaerophyllum, Lat.] It is an umbelliferous plant,
whoſe leaves are divided into many ſegments: the petals of
the flower are bifid and heart-ſhaped; and each flower is ſuc-
ceeded by two long ſeeds, not furrowed. The ſpecies are ;
I. Garden thervil. 2. Wild perennial clervil, or cow-weed.
The firſt of theſe ſpecies is cultivated for ſallads. Miller.
To CHE'R UP. v. m. [from cheer; perhaps from cheer up; cor-
rupted to cherip.] To chirp, to uſe a cheerful voice.
The birds
Frame to thy ſong their cheerful cheriping;
Or hold their peace for ſhame of thy ſweet lays. Spenſ. Paſ?.
CHF'slip. m. ſ. A ſmall vermin, that lies under ſtones or
tiles. Skinner.
CHESS. m. ſ. [ether, Fr.] A nice and abſtruſe game, in which
two ſets of men are moved in oppoſition to each other.
This game the Perſian magi did invent,
The force of Eaſtern wiſdom to expreſs;
From thence to buſy Europeans ſent,
And ſtyl'd by modern Lombards penſive cheſ.
So have I ſeen a king on cheſs,
(His rooks and knights withdrawn,
His queen and biſhops in diſtreſs)
Shifting about, grow leſs and leſs,
With here and there a pawn. Dryden.
CHE'ss-Apple. n.ſ. SeeWILD SER vice, of which it is a ſpecies.
CHE'ss-BoARD. m.ſ.. [from cheſ, and board.] The board or table
on which the game of cheſs is plaid.
And cards are dealt, and cheſsboards brought,
To eaſe the pain of coward thought. Prior.
CHE'ss-MAN. m.ſ.. [from cheſ, and man.] A puppet for cheſs.
A company of cheſsmen, ſtanding on the ſame ſquares of the
cheſsboard where we left them: we ſay, they are all in the ſame
place, or unmoved. Locke.
CHE'ss-play ER. m.ſ.. [from cheſ; and player.] A gameſter at cheſs.
Thus like a ſkilful cheſ player, by little and little, he draws
out his men, and makes his pawns of uſe to his greater per-
ſons. Dryden on Dramatick Poeſy.
CHE'ssoM. º
The tender cheſºm and mellow earth is the beſt, being mere
mould, between the two extremes of clay and ſand; eſpecially
if it be not loomy and binding. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 665.
CHEST. m. ſ. [cypt, Sax. ciſia, Lat.]
1. A box of wood or other materials, in which things are laid up.
He will ſeek there, on my word: neither preſs, cheft, trunk,
well, vault, but he hath an abſtraćt for the remembrance of
ſuch places. Shakeſp. Merry IVives of Windſor,
But more have been by avarice oppreſt,
And heaps of money crowded in the chºff. Dryd.juv. Sat.
2. A. Chest of Drawers. A caſe with boxes or drawers.
3. The trunk of the body, or cavity from the ſhoulders to the
belly.
&amp;n as have round faces, or broad cheſ's, or ſhoulders,
have ſeldom or never long necks. Brown's Wul. Err. b.vii. c. 14.
He deſcribes another by the largeneſs of his cheft, and
breadth of his ſhoulders. Pope's Notes on the Iliad.
To Chest. v. a. [from the noun.] To repoſite in a cheſt;
to hoard.
CHEST-Found ERING.. n.ſ. A diſeaſe in horſes. It comes near
to a pleuriſy, or peripneumony, in a human body. Far: Dić.
CHE's fed. adj. [from cheft.] Having a cheſt; as broad-
cheſted, narrow-cheſted.
CHE'st ER. See CAstor.
f
Šºć. n. ſ. } [chaffaigné, Fr. coſtanea, Lat.]
1. The tree hath katkins, which are placed at remote diſ-
tances from the fruit, on the ſame tree. The outer coat
of the fruit is very rough, and has two or three ºuts
included in each huſk or covering. This tree Wa; for-
merly in greater plenty, as may be proved by the old build-
ings in London, which were, for the moſt Part, of this tim-
ber ; which is equal in value to the beſt oak, and, º º
purpoſes, far exceeds it, particularly for . º . .
liquors ; it having a property, when once thoroughly ſeaſoned,
to maintain its bulk conſtantly, and is not ſubject to ſhr ink
or ſwell, like other timber. Miller;
2. The fruit of the cheſtnut-tree.
A woman's ..
- ot half ſo great a blow to 'ear, -
Tº i. º, in a #º. fire. Shakespeare Tam. of the Shrew.
October has a baſket of ſervices, medlars and chºſinuti, and
fruits that ripen at the latter time. Peacham on Drawing,
3. The name of a º colour, His
Denham.
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 23</div><p class="Text">º
-
t
:
C H I
His hair is of a good colour.
——An excellent colour: your chºſinut was ever the only
colour Shakeſp. A you like it.
C H I
things I know in the world, a lºcal chicaner from a man of
reaſon. Locke z Human Underſlanding, S. 3.
Chica's ER Y. m. ſ. ſchizanerie, J.J Sophiſtry; mean arts of
Merab's long hair was gloſſy chºſlnut brown. Čowl. Dav. wrange.
: ; , , , ; , ; CHE's Tox. m. ſ. See PLUM, of which it is a ſpecies. His anger at his ill ſucceſ cauſed him to deſtroy the
| - º CHEWALIER. m. ſ. [Chevalier, Fr.] A knight; a gallant greateſt part of theſe report, and only to preſerve ſuch as
; ; ; , , , ſtrong man. diſcovered moſt of the ºcary and futility of the practice.
. Renowned Talbot doth expe&amp;t my aid; A buthnot and Pope's dart. Scrib.
And I am lowted by a traitor villain, CHICHES. m. ſ. See CHIck eas.
; : S. And cannot help the noble chevalier. Sh, ºf Hºn.V.I. f. 1. CHI cºl is G VETCH. n.ſ.. [ſathyrº, Lat..] The plants of
- f CHEFA U.Y de Friſe. n.ſ. [Fr. The ſingular Cheval de Friſe this ſpecies produce abūdance of flowers, which are very
: is ſeldom uſed.] The Frieſland horſe, which is a piece of ornamental in baſons of pots of flowers to place in chim-
, ; ; timber, larger or ſmaller, and traverſed with wooden ſpikes, nies, and other parts of arge rooms. In Germany they are
pointed with iron, five or ſix feet long; uſed in defending a cultivated, and eaten a peas, though neither ſo tender nor
paſſage, ſtopping a breach, or making a º ſtop cº"." A1:ler.
- - - - - unil DlkC l - K. m. ſ. . - -
the cavalry. It is alſo called a turnpike, or º, Čº. {/ }ſsiºn Sax. Miecłen, Dut J
- - CHE've N. n.ſ.. [ch veſse, Fr.] A river fiſh ; the ſame with chub. 1. The young of a bird, particularly of a hen, or ſmall bird.
" . CHE've Ril. n.ſ. [..heverau, Fr J A kid; kideather. All ny pretty ones :
* . A ſentence is but a cheveril glove to a good wit: how quickly What, all my prett chickens, and their dam,
- the wrong fide may be turned outward. Shałęſp. 7 weſ. Night. At one fell ſwoop Shakeſpeare’s Macleth.
which gifts the capacity . For when the ſhill is broke, out comes a chick. Davies.
Of your ſoft chºveril conſcience would receive, While it is a chicº, and hath no ſpurs, nor cannot huit,
If you might pleaſe to ſtretch it. Shakeſpeare's Henry VII. nor yet hath ſeen the like motion, yet he readily practiſeth it.
- O, here's a wit of cheveril, that ſtretches from an inch. Ha e's Origin ºf ...ankind.
narrow to an ell broad. Shakespeare's Romeo and /uliet. Ev’n ſince ſhe was a ſe’n-night old, they ſay,
º CHE/ISANCE, n.ſ.. [cheviſance, Fr.] Enterprize; atchievement; Was chaſte ard humble to her dying day;
A word now not in uſe. Nor chick, nor hen, was known to diſobey. Dryd. Fables.
- Fortune, the foe of famous chef iſance, Having the notion that one laid the egg out of which the
º Seldom, ſaid Guyon, yields to virtue's aid, other was hatched, I have a clear idea of the relation of dam
! : But in her way throws miſchief and miſchance. and chick. - Locke.
- Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 9 ſtan. 8. On rainy days alone I dine,
: CHE'WRON. m. ſ. [French..] One of the honourable ordi- Upon a chick and pint of wine:
naries in heraldry. It repreſents two rafters of a houſe, On rainy days I dine alone,
ſet up as they ought to ſtand. Harris. And pick my c ic'en to the bone. Swift's Miſcellanies.
To CHEW. v. a ſceopyan, Sax. Rauwen, Dutch. It is very 2. A word of tenderneſ.
. . frequently pronounced chaw, and perhaps properly.] \"yº::cl, chik, -
. 1. To grind with the teeth; to maſticate. This is thy charge. Shakeſpeare's Tempe/?.
: If little faults, proceeding on diſtemper, 3. A ºn or a young girl.
Shall not be wink'd at, how ſhall we ſtretch our eye, 1 hen, Chloe, ſtill go on to prate
When capital crimes, chew'd, ſwallow'd, and digeſted,
Appear before us. - Shakeſpeare's 11enry V.
Pacing through the foreſt,
Chewing the food of ſweet and bitter fancy. Shakespeare. A you like it.
This pious cheat, that never ſuck'd the blood,
Nor chew'd the fleſh of lambs. Dryden's Fables.
* The vales
Deſcending gently, where the lowing herd
Clews verd’rous paſture. Philipi.
By chewing, ſolid aliment is divided into ſmall parts: in a
human body, there is no other inſtrument to perform this
action bit the teeth. By the action of chewing, the ſpittle
and mucus are ſqueezed from the glands, and mixed with the
aliment; which action, if it be long continued, will turn the
aliment into a ſort of chyle. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To meditate; or ruminate in the thoughts.
While the fierce monk does at his trial ſtand,
He chºws revenge, abjuring his offence:
Guile in his tongue, and murder in his hand,
He ſtabs his judge, to prove his innocence.
3. To taſte without ſwallowing.
Heav'n's in my mouth,
Prior.
1. The art of protraćting a conteſt by petty obječtion and
artifice.
The general part of the civil law concerns not the chicane
of private caſes, but the affairs and intercourſe of civilized
nations, grounded upon the principles of reaſon. Locke on Educ.
His attornies have hardly one trick left; they are at an end
of all their chicane. Arbuthnºt's Hiſtory of john Bull.
Of thirty-ſix and thirty-eight;
Purſue your trade of fºandal-picking,
Your hints, that Stella is no chicken. Swift.
CH1'ck EN HEARTED. adj. [from chicken and heart.] Cowardly ;
timorous; fearful.
Now we ſet up for tilting in the pit,
Where 'tis agreed by bullies chickenhearted,
To fright the ladies firſt, and then be parted. Prol to Sp. Fr.
The CH1'ck NP x. m. ſ. An exanthematous diſtemper, ſo
called from its being of no very great danger.
CH1'ck LING. m. ſ. [from chick.] A ſmall chicken.
CH1'ck PEAs. n. ſ. [from chick and pea.]
It hath a papilionaceous flower, ſucceeded by ſhort ſwelling
pods, like the inflated bladder of a fiſh: the ſeeds are ſhaped
like a ram's head. It is ſeldom cultivated in England, where
peas will do well, which are much preferable. Miller.
CH1'ckwe E.D. n. ſ [chick and weed.] The name of a plant.
Green mint, or chickweed, are common applications, and
of good uſe, in all the hard ſwellings of the breaſt, occaſioned
by milk. //iſman of Timours.
To CHIDE. v. a. preter. chid or chode, part. chid or chidden.
[ciban, Sax.]
As if I did but only chew its name. Shakespeare . Maſ fºr Maſ: 1. To reprove; to check; to correót with words: applied to
i. - Some books are to be taſted, others to be ſwallowed, and perſons.
ſome few to be chewed and digeſted: that is, ſome books are Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
* t to be read only in parts; others to be read, but not curiouſly; When you perceive his blood inclin'd to mirth. Shakesp. Hen.VI.
- and ſome few to be read wholly, with diligence and attention. If he do ſet
º - Bacon, Eſſay 51. The very wings of reaſon to his heels,
To CHEw. v. n. To champ upon; to ruminate. And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove. Shakespeare. Troil &amp; Crºſ.
º I will with patience hear, and find a time; Thoſe, that do teach your babes,
; *Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this. Shakespeare jul. Caſ Do it with gentle means, and eaſy taſks;
: Inculcate the doćtrine of diſobedience, and then leave He might have chid me ſo: for, in good faith,
º the multitude to chew upon't. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 67. I am a child to chiding. Shakeſpeare's Othell.
- - Qld politicians chew on wiſdom paſt, Scylla wept,
a And blunder on in buſineſs to the laſt. Pope's Epiſt. 1. l.244. And chid her barking waves into attention. Milton.
" . CHICANE, n.ſ. [chicane, Fr. derived by Manage from the Above the waves as Neptune ſhew'd his face,
sº Spaniſh word chico, little.] To chide the winds, and ſave the Trojan race. Waller.
You look, as if yon ſtern philoſopher -
Had juſt now chid you. Addiſon's Cato.
If any woman of better faſhion in the pariſh happened to
be abſent from church, they were ſure of a viſit from him, to
chide and to dine with her. Swift.
2. To drive away with reproof.
Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,
: º * Artifice in general. This ſenſe is only in familiar language. Have chid me from the battle. Shakespeare's Henry VI.
* ! Unwilling then in arms to meet, 3. To blame; to reproach: applied to things.
º i He ſtrove to lengthen the campaign, Winds murmur'd through the leaves your long delay,
. . t And ſave his forces by chicane. Prior. And fountains, o'er the pebbles, chid your ſtay. Dryden.
! To CHICA'N E. v. n. [chicaner, Fr.] To prolong a conteſt by I chid the foly of my thoughtleſs haſte; -
! icº. - For, the work perfected, the joy was paſt. Prior.
! | Chica N.E.R. m. ſ. ſchicaneur, Fr.] A petty ſophiſter; a trifling To CHIDE, v m.
: diſputant; a wrangler. 1. To clamour; to ſcold.
This is the only way to diſtinguiſh the two moſt different 2 What
. . º
º º
* :<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 24</div><p class="Text">** -
C H I
C H i
What had he to do to cºde at me. Shakesp. A yºu like it.
Next morn, betimes, the bride was miſſing:
The mother ſcream'd, the father chid,
Where can this idle wench be hid Swift.
2. To quarrel with
The buſineſs of the ſtate docs him offence,
And he does chide with you. Shakeſpeare's Othe''.
5. To make a noiſe.
My duty,
As doth a rock againſt the chiding flood,
Should the approach of this wild river break,
And ſtand unſhaken yours. Shakeſpear's Henry VIII.
CH1'cER. n.f [from chide..] A rebuker; a reprover.
Not her that chides, ſir, at any hand, I pray.—
I love no chide's, ſir. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
CHIFF, adj. [chef, the head, Fr.]
1. Principal; moſt eminent; above the reſt in any reſpect.
Theſe were the chief of the officers that were over Solo-
mon's works. King: ix. 23.
The hand of the princes and rulers hath been chief in this
treſpaſs. Ezra ix. 2.
Your country, chief in arms, abroad defend ;
At home, with morals, arts, and laws amend. Pope's Epiſt.
2. Eminent; extraordinary.
A froward man ſoweth ſtrife, and a whiſperer ſeparateth
chief friends Proverbs xvi. 28.
3. Capital; of the firſt order; that to which other parts are
inferior, or ſubordinate.
I came to have a good general view of the apoſtle's main
purpoſe in writing the epiſtle, and the chief branches of his
diſcourſe wherein he proſecuted it. Locke's Prºf. to St. Paul's Ep.
4. It is uſed by ſome writers in the ſuperlative degree; but, I
think, improperly: the comparative is never found.
We beſeech you, bºnd you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefſ' courtier, couſin, and our ſon. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
Doeg an Edomite, the chiefſ of the herdmen. Saxxi. 7.
He ſometimes denied admiſſion to the chiefeſt officers of
the army. - Clarendon, b. viii.
Chi F. n.ſ.. [from the adječtive.]
1. A commander; a leader.
Is pain to them
Leſs pain, leſs to be fled? or thou than they
Leſs hardy to endure? couragious chief!
The firſt in flight from pain. Miltzi's Paradiſe Lø/?, b. iv.
After or before were never known
Such chief; ; as each an army ſeem'd alone. Dryden's Fab.
A wit’s a feather, and a chief a rod ;
An honeſt man's the nobleſt work of God. Pope's Eff on Man.
A prudent chief not always muſt diſplay
His pow'rs in equal ranks, and fair array;
But with th' occaſion and the place comply,
Conceal his force, nay ſeem ſometimes to fly. Po. Eſ Cit.
2. In CHIEF, in law. In capite, without a ſuperior lord.
All ſuins demandable, either for licence of alienation to be
made of lands holden in chief, or for the pardon of any ſuch
alienation already made without licence have been ſtayed in
the way to the hanaper. Eacon's Off. Alterations.
I ſhall be proud to hold my dependance on you in chief, as
I do part of my ſmall fortune in Wiltſhire. Dryd. Ded, to Cleom.
3. In Spenſer it ſeems to ſignify ſomewhat like atchievement; a
mark of diſtinčtion.
Where be the noſegays that ſhe dight for thee!
The coloured chaplets wrought with a chief,
The knottiſh ruſh-rings, and gilt roſemary. Sºenſ. Paſº.
4. In heraldry.
The chijf is ſo called of the French word chef, the head
or upper part: this poſſeſſes the upper third part of the eſcut-
cheon. Peacham on I'rawing.
CHI'FFL Ess. adj. [from chief] Without a head; without a
leader.
And chiefſ armies doz'd out the campaign,
And navies yawn'd for orders on the main. Dunciad, b. iv.
CH1'EFLY. adv. [from chief] Principally; eminently ; more
than common.
Any man who will ſeriouſly confider the nature of an epic
poem, what actions it deſcribes, and what perſons they are
chifty whom it informs, will find it a work full of difficulty.
Dryden’s juven. Preface.
Thoſe parts of the kingdom, where the number and eſtates
of the diſſenters chifty lay. Swift.
CH1'E FRIE. m. ſ. [from chif..] A ſmall rent paid to the lord
Paramount.
They ſhall be well able to live upon thoſe lands, to yield
her majeſty reaſonable chiefrie, and alſo give a compétent
maintenance unto the garriſons. Spenſer's Ireland.
Would the reſerved rent at this day be any more than a
ſmall chiefrie. Swift.
CH1'EFTAN. n.ſ [from chief, n.ſ. captain.]
1. A leader; a commander.
That forc'd their chieftain, for his ſafety's ſake,
(Their chieftain Humber named was aright)
Unto the mighty ſtream him to betake, -
Where he an eid of battle and of life did make. Fairy Q'ſ,
2. The head of a clan. *~,
It brºke, and abſolutely ſubdued all the lords and chieftains
of º Iriſhry. Lavies on Ireland.
CHE's A ce. n.ſ. [probably from achevance, Fr. purchaſe.]
Traffick, in which money is extorted; as diſcount. Now
obſolete.
There were good laws againſt uſury, the baſtard uſe of
mºney; and againſt unlawful chievinces and exchanges, which
is baſtard uſury. Bacon's Henry VII.
CHILBLA'1N. n: ſ [from chil', cold, and blain; ſo that Tem-
ple ſeems miſtaken in his etymology, or has written it wrong
to ſerve a purpoſe..] Sores made by froſt.
I remembered the cure of childblames when I was a boy,
ºd. may be called the children's gºut) by burning at the
º: - I emple.
CHILD. m.ſ. in the plural Childr rn. [cils, Sax.] {
1. An infant, or very young perſon.
In age, to wiſh for youth is full as vain,
As for a youth to turn a child again. Denham:
We ſhould no more be kinder to one child than to another,
than we are tender of one eye more than of the other L'Eſir.
The young lad muſt not be ventured abroad at cight or ten,
for fear of what may happen to the tender child; though he
then runs ten times leſs riſque than at ſixteen. Locke.
The ſtroak of death is nothing: children endure it, and
the greateſt cowards find it no pain. Wate's Prep for Death.
2. One in the line of filiation, oppoſed to the parent.
Where children have been expoſed, or taken away young,
and afterwards have approached to their parents preſence, the
parents, though they have not known them, have had a ſecret
joy, or other alteration thereupon. Bacon's Nat. Lift. Nº. 239.
I ſhall ſee
The winged vengeance overtake ſuch children. Shakeſp K. L.
So unexhauſted her perfections were,
That for more children, ſhe had more to ſpare. Dryden.
He in a fruitful wife's embraces old,
A long increaſe of children's children told. Addison Ovid's Met.
3. In the language of Scripture.
One weak in knowledge. Iſa. x. 19. 1 Cor. xiii. 11.
Such as are young in grace. I john, ii. 13.
Such as are humble and docile. Matt. xvii. 3, 4.
The deſcendants of a man, how remote ſocver, are called
child cº, as the children of Edom, the children of Iſrael.
The children of light, the children of darkneſs; who follow
light, who remain in darkneſs.
The cle&amp;t, the bleſſed, are alſo called the children of God.
How is he numbered among the children of God, and his
lot is among the ſaints! J/iſdom, v. 5.
In the New Teſtament, believers are commonly called chil-
dren of God.
Ye are all the children of God, by faith in Jeſus Chriſt.
Gal. iii. 26. -- Calmet.
4. A girl child.
Mercy on's, a bearne a very pretty bearne!
A boy, or child, I wonder Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
5. Anything, the product or effect of another.
Macduff, this noble paſſion,
Child of integrity, hath from my ſoul
Wip'd the black ſcruples.
6. To be with CHILD. To be pregnant.
If it muſt ſtand ſtill, let wives with child,
Pray that their burthen may not fall this day,
Left that their hopes prodigiouſly be croſt. Shakeſp. K. john.
To CHILD. v. n. [from the noun..] To bring children.
The ſpring, the ſummer,
The childing autumn, angry winter change
Their wonted liveries. Shakeſp. Midſºmer Night Dream:
As to childing women, young vigorous people, after irregu-
larities of diet, in ſuch it begins with haemorrhages. Arbuthnot.
CHILDBEARING, participial ſubſtantive. [from child and bear.]
The act of bearing children.
To thee,
Pains only in childbearing were foretold,
And, bringing forth, ſoon recompens'd with joy,
Fruit of thy womb. Milton's Paradiſ, Loff, b. x: '.'º'; I.
The timorous and irreſolute Sylvia has demurred 'till ſhe 1s
paſt childbearing. Addison's Speciat. N-. 89.
CH1'lp BED. m.ſ.. [from child and bed.] The ſtate of a woman
bringing a child, or being in labour. -
The funerals of prince Arthur, and of queen Elizabeth,
who died in childbed in the Tower. - Bacon s Henry VII.
Pure, as when waſh’d from ſpot of fººd ſtain. Par. Rºg.
Yet theſe, tho' poor, the pain of thilled bear. , Dryd, Yuv;
Let no one be actually married, 'till ſhe hath the ſhildbed
pillows. - Spect. Nº. 606.
women in chilled are in the caſe of perſons wounded.
Arbuthnot on Diet.
HI'lp pirth. n.ſ. (from child and birth J Travail; labour;
C the time of º forth; the act of bringing forth.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 25</div><p class="Text">C H I
C H I
º
i
ſ
The mother of Pyrocles, ſhortly after her chilliºtº, died.
Sidney, b. ii.
A kernel void of any taſte, but not ſo of virtue, eſpecially
for women travailling in childbirth. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwall.
In the wholeſex of women, God hath decreed the ſharpet
pains of childbirth; to ſhew, that there is no ſtate exempt from
ſorrow. Taylºr's Holy Living.
He to his wife, before the time aſſign'd
For childlirth came, thus bluntly ſpoke his mind. Dryden.
CH1'lped. adj. [from child.] Furniſhed with a child.
How light and portable my pain ſeems now,
when that which makes me bend, makes the king bow;
He child.d as I father'd. Shakeſp care's Aing Lear.
CHILDERMAs DAY. [from child and maſs.]
The day of the week, throughout the year, anſwering to
the day on which the feaſt of the holy Innocents is ſolemnized,
which weak and ſuperſtitious perſons think an unlucky day.
So you talk not of hares, or ſuch uncouth things; for that
proves as ominous to the fiſherman, as the beginning of a
voyage on the day when childermas day fell, doth to the mº:
riner. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwall.
CHI'lphoop. n.ſ.. [from child, cilohab, Sax.]
1. The ſtate of infants; or, according to ſome, the time in
which we are children.
Now I have ſtain'd the childhood of our joy
with blood, remov’d but little from our own. Shakespeare. R. &amp; 7.
The ſons of lords and gentlemen ſhould be trained up in
learning from their childhoºds. Speºſer on Ireland.
Seldom have I ceas'd to eye
Thy infancy, thy childhood, and thy youth. Milt. Pa. Frg.
The ſame authority that the actions of a man have with us
in our childhood, the ſame, in every period of life, has the
practice of all whom we regard as our ſuperiours, Rogers'; Ser.
2. The time of life between infancy and puberty.
Infancy and childhood demand thin, copious, nouriſhingali-
ment. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. The properties of a child.
Their love in early infancy began,
And roſe as childhood ripen'd into man.
CH1'ld Is H. adj. [from child J
1. Having the qualities of a child; trifling; ignorant; fimple.
Learning hath its infancy, when it is but beginning and al-
moſt childiſh : then its youth, when it is luxuriant and juve-
nile. - Bacon's Eſſay, 58.
2. Becoming only children; trivial ; puerile.
Muſiqorus being elder by three or four years, by the dif-
ference there was taken away the occaſion of child/h conten-
tions. Sidney, b. ii.
The lion's whelps ſhe ſaw how he did bear,
And lull in rugged arms withouten childiſh fear. Fairy Qx.
When I was yet a child, no childiſh play
To me was pleaſing; all my mind was ſet
Serious to learn and know. Paradiſe Regained, b. 1.
The fathers looked on the worſhip of images as the moſt
filly and childiſh thing in the world. Stillingfeet's Defence.
One that hath newly learn'd to ſpeak and go,
Loves childiſh plays. Roſcommon.
They have ſpoiled the beauty of the walls with abundance
of childiſh ſentences, that conſiſt often in a jingle of words.
Addiſon on Italy.
By converſation the childiſh humours of their younger days
might be worn out. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of f. Bull.
CHI'ldis HLY. adv. [from childiſh..] In a childiſh trifling way;
like a child.
Together with his fame their infamy was ſpread, who had
ſo raſhly and childiſhly ejected him. Hooker's Preface.
It is a thick miſty error, ſupported by ſome men of excel-
lent judgment in their own profeſſions, but childiſhly unſkilful
in any thing beſides. Hayward on Edward VI.
CH1'LDIs HN Ess. n ſ. [from child/h.]
1. Puerility; triflingneſs.
The actions of childiſhneſ, and unfaſhionable carriage,
time and age will of itſelf be ſure to reform. Locke.
Nothing in the world could give a truer idea of the ſuper-
ſtition, credulity, and childiſhneſs of the Roman catholick
religion. Addison on Italy.
2. Harmleſſneſs.
Dryden's Falks.
Speak thou, boy;
Perhaps thy childiſhneſs will move him more
Than can our reaſons. Shakeſpear's Coriolanus.
º adj. [from child.] Without children; without
offspring.
As th; ſword hath made women childleſs, ſo ſhall thy mo-
ther be childleſs among women. 1 Samuel, xv. 33.
A man ſhall ſee the nobleſt works and foundations have
proceeded from childleſs men; which have ſought to expreſs
the images of their minds, where thoſe of their bodies have
failed: ſo the care of poſterity is moſt in them that have no
pºſterity. Bacon's Eſſay, 7.
Childleſ, thou art, childleſ remain : ſo death
Shall be deceiv'd his glut, Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x. l. 989.
She can give you the reaſon why ſuch a one died ºft.
Speciatºr, Nº. 43.
CHI'ld LIKE, adj. [from child and liſc.] Becoming or beſien.
ing a child.
Who can owe no leſs than childlike obedience to her that
hath more than motherly care. Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 8.
I thought the remnant of mine age
Should have been cheriſh'd by her childſize dutv. Shakespeare.
CHI LiAD. m. ſ. [from zººs J A thouſand; a collection or
ſum containing a thouſand.
We make cycles and periods of years; as decads, centuries,
chilia's, &amp;c. for the uſe of computation in hiſtory. Holder.
cºnses. n.J. [from zºua.] A figure of a thouſand
1ClCS.
In a man, who ſpeaks of a chiliardron, or a body of a
thouſand ſides, the idea of the figure may be very confuſed
though that of the number be very diſtinct. }.
CHILHA cºrve, adj. [from chile.] That which makes chie.
Whether this be not effected by ſome way of corroſion
rather than any proper digeſtion, chiljačive mutation
alimental converſion. trown's Pugar Errors, b. iii. 2. 23.
CHILIF Actory, adj. [ſom chile ] That which has the qua-
lity of making chile.
... We ſhould rather rely upon a chiliſa?ory menſtruum, or
digeſtive preparation drawn from ſpecies or individuals, whº,
ſtomachs peculiarly diſſolve lapideous bodies. Brown's fºal. Er
CHILIFIcarion. n ſ [from chile J The act of making chil.
Nor will we affirm that iron is indigeſted in the ſtomach
of the Oſtriche; but we ſuſpect this effect to proceed not
from any liquid reduction, or tendence to chylification, by the
...Pºwer of natural heat. Brºwn's Pulgar Errors, b. iii. 3. 22
CHILL. adj [cele, Sax.] - ---
1. Cold; that which is cold to the touch.
And all my plants I ſave from nightly ill,
Qf noiſom winds, and blaſting vapours ºf ill. Mi'iziz
2. Cold; having the ſenſation of cold; ſhivering with cºld. -
My heart, and my chill veins, now freezing with deſpair.
Rowe' lomºner
3. Depreſſed; dejcółed; diſcouraged. 3 Royal Convert.
CHILL. m.ſ.. [from the adjective..] Chilneſs; cold.
I very well know one to have a ſort of chill about his prae-
cordia and head. Perham's Phyſico-Theºlºgy.
To CHILL. v. a. [from the adječtive.] -
1. To make cold.
Age has not yet
So ſhrunk my finews, or ſo chill’d my veins,
But conſcious virtue in my breaſt remains. Dryd. Aurengzeb.
Heat burns his riſe, froſt chil's his ſetting beams,
And vex the world with oppoſite extremes. Creech's Mani.
Each changing ſeaſon does its poiſon bring;
Rheums chill the winter, agues blaſt the ſpring. Prior.
Now no more the drum
Provokes to arms; or trumpet's clangor ſhrill
Affrights the wives, or chill; the virgin's blood. Philips.
2. To depreſs; to dejećt; to diſcourage.
Every thought on God chills the gaiety of his ſpirits, and
awakens terrors, which he cannot bear. Fogers's Sermons.
3. To blaſt with cold.
The fruits periſh on the ground,
Or ſoon decay, by ſnows immodºrate chil'd,
By winds are blaſted, or by lightning kill’d. Bacºm. Crºat.
CH1'11 INEss. m. ſ. [from chilly..] A ſenſation of ſhivering cold.
If the patient ſurvives three days, the acuteneſs of the pain
abates, and a chillingſ; or ſhivering affects the body. Artuthnot.
CHI'll Y. adj. [from chill.] Somewhat cold.
A chily ſweat bedev's
My ſhudd'ring limbs. Philips.
CH1't Ness. n.ſ.. [from chill.] Coldneſs; want of warmth.
If you come out of the ſun ſuddenly into a ſhade, there
followeth a chilneſs or ſhivering in all the body. Eac. Nat. Hy?.
This, while he thinks, he lifts aloft his dart, --
A gen’rous chilneſs ſeizes ev'ry part,
The veins pour back the blood, and fortify the heart. Dryd.
CHIM B. m. ſ. ſkine, Dut..] The end of a barrel or tub.
CHIME. m.ſ.. [The original of this word is doubtful. junius
and Minſhew ſuppoſe it corrupted from cimbal; Skinner from
gamme, or gamut ; Henſhaw from chiamare, to call, becauſe
the chine calls to church. Perhaps it is only ſoftened from
chirme, or churme, an old word for the ſound of many voices
or inſtruments making a noiſe together.] &gt;
1. The conſonant or harmonick ſound of many correſpondent
inſtruments.
Hang our ſhaggy thighs with bells;
That, as we do ſtrike a tune,
In our dance, ſhall make a chime. Ben johnſºn's Fairy Pr.
The ſound
Of inſtruments, that made melodious chime,
Was heard, of harp and organ. AZilton's Parad'ſ Lºft, b. xi.
Love virtue, ſhe alone is free;
She can teach you how to climb
Higher than the ſphery chime. Milion.
2. The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 26</div><p class="Text">C H I
C H !
2. The correſpondence of ſound.
Love firſt invented verſe, and form'd the rhime,
The motion meaſur’d, harmoniz'd the chime. Dryden's Fab.
3. The fºund of bells, not rung by ropes, but ſtruck with
hammers. In this ſenſe it is always uſed in the plural, chimes.
We have heard the chime, at midnight. Shakeſp. Iłenry IV.
4. The correſpondence of proportion or relation.
The conceptions of things are placed in their ſeveral de-
grees of ſimilitude; as in ſeveral proportions, one to another:
in which harmonious chimes, the voice of reaſon is often
drowned. Grew's Cºſmol. b. ii. c. 6. ſ 51.
To CHIME. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. To ſound in harmony or conſonance.
To make the rough recital aptly chime,
Or bring the ſum of Gallia's loſs to rhime,
’ l is . hard. Prior.
2. To correſpond in relation or proportion.
Father and ſon, huſband and wife, and ſuch other corre-
lative terms, do belong one to another; and, through
cuſtom, do readily chime, and anſwer one another, in people's
memories. Locke.
3. To agree; to fall in with.
He not only ſat quietly and heard his father railed at, but
often chimed in with the diſcourſe. Arbuth. Hiſt. ºf j. Bull.
4. To ſuit with ; to agree.
Any ſect, whoſe reaſonings, interpretation, and language,
I have been uſed to, will, of courſe, make all chime that
way , and make another, and perhaps the genuine meaning of
the author, ſeem harſh, ſtrange and uncouth to me. Locke.
5. To jingle; to clatter.
But with the meaner tribe I’m forc'd to chime,
And, wanting ſtrength to riſe, deſcend to rhime. Smith.
To CH ME. v. a. To move, or ſtrike, or ſound harmonically,
or with juſt conſonancy.
With lifted arms they order ev'ry blow,
And chime their ſounding hammers in a row: }
With labour'd anvils Aºtna groans below. Dryd. Georg.
z. To ſtrike a bell with a hammer.
CºIME RA, n.ſ. [Chimaera, Lat.] A vain and wild fancy,
as remote from reality as the exiſtence of the poetical chimera,
a monſter feigned to have the head of a lion, the belly of a
goat, and the tail of a dragon.
In ſhort, the force of dreams is of a piece,
Chimeras all; and more abſurd, or leſs. Dryden's Fables.
No body joins the voice of a ſheep with the ſhape of a
horſe, to be the complex ideas of any real ſubſtances, unleſs
he has a mind to fill his head with chimeras, and his diſcourſe
with unintelligible words. Locke.
CHIME'R1cAL. adj. [from chimera.] Imaginary; fanciful;
wildly, vainly, or fantaſtically conceived; fantaſtick.
Notwithſtanding the fineneſs of this allegory may attone
for it in ſome meaſure, I cannot think that perſons of ſuch a
chimerical exiſtence are proper ačtors in an epic poem. Spectat.
CHIME'R1c.ALLY. adv. [from chimerical.] Vainly ; wildly;
fantaſtically.
CHI'M IN AG E. m. ſ. [from chimin, an old law word for a road.]
A toll for paſſage through a foreſt. Cowel.
CHI’MNEY. n. J. [cheminée, French.]
1. The paſſage through which the ſmoke aſcends from the fire
in the houſe.
Chimnies, with ſcorn, reječting ſmoke. Swift.
2. The turret raiſed above the roof of the houſe, for convey-
ance of the ſmoke.
The night has been unruly : where we lay,
Our chimnies were blown down. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. The fireplace.
The chimney
Is ſouth the chamber; and the chimneypiece,
Chaſte Dian bathing. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
The fire which the Chaldeans worſhipped for a god, is
crept into every man's chimney. Raleigh's Hiſt. b. i. c. 68.
Low offices, which ſome neighbours hardly think it worth
ſtirring from their chimney ſides to obtain. Swift on Sac. Teſt.
CHIM N E Y-cor NER. m. ſ. [from chimney and corner.] The
fireſide; the ſeat on each end of the firegrate; uſually noted
in proverbial language for being the place of idlers.
Yet ſome old men
Tell ſtories of you in their chimney-corner. Denh. So hy.
CH1'MNEY PIEcE. m. ſ. [from chimney and piece.] The orna-
mental piece of wood, or ſtone, that is ſet round the fireplace.
Poliſh and brighten the marble hearths and chimneypieces
with a clout dipt in greaſe; nothing maketh them ſhine ſo
well. Swift's Direáions to the Houſemaid.
CH1'MNEysweep ER. m. ſ. [from chimney and ſweeper.]
I. One whoſe trade it is to clean foul chimnies of foot.
To look like her, are chimneyſweepers black:
And ſince her time are colliers counted bright.
The little chimneywrefer ſkulks along,
And marks with ſooty ſtains the heedleſs throng. Gay's Triv.
Even lying Ned the chimneyſweeper of Savoy, and Tom
the Portugal duſtman, put in their claims. Arb. Hiſ of j Lull.
2. It is uſed proverbially for one of a mean and vile occupation.
Vol. I.
Shakeſp.
Golden lads and girls, all muſt,
... As chimneſweepers, come to duſt. Shakeſp. Cºmicine.
CHIN. m. ſ. [cinne, Sax. Kinn, Germ.] The part of the face
beneath the under lip.
But all the words I could get of her, was wrying her waii!,
and thruſting out her chin. Sidney.
With his amazonian chin he drove
The briſtled lips before him. Shakespeare . Coriolanus.
He rais'd his hardy head, which funk again,
And, ſinking on his boſom, knock'd his chin. Dryd. Falls.
H 's A. m. ſ. [from China, the country where it is made.]
China ware; porcelain; a ſpecies of veſſels made in China,
dimly tranſparent, partaking of the qualities of earth and
glºſs. They are made by mingling two kinds of earth, of
which one eaſily vitrifies; the other reſiſts a very ſtrong heat:
when the vitrifiable carth is mºlted into glaſs, they are com-
pletely burnt.
Spleen, vapours, or ſmall pox, above them all,
And miſtreſs of herſelf, tho’ china fall. Pop.'s Epiſt ii.
After ſupper, carry your plate and china together in the ſame
baſket. Swift's Directions to the Butler.
CH1'NA-ORANGE. m. ſ. [from China and orange.] The ſweet
orange; ſuppoſed originally of China.
Not many years has the China-orange been propagated in
Portugal and Spain. Martimer's Art of Huſandry.
CHINA-Root. n.ſ.. [from China and root..] A médicinal root,
brought originally from China. -
CH1's coug H. m. ſ. [perhaps more properly Hincough, from
Åincken, to pant, Dut. and cough..] A violent and convulſive
cough, to which children are ſubjećt.
I have obſerved a chincough, complicated with an inter-
mitting fever. /lo er on the Humours.
CHINE. m. ſ [ºſhine, Fr. ſhiena, Ital. ſpina, Lat. cein, Arm.]
1. The part of the back, in which the ſpine or backbone is found.
She ſtrake him ſuch a blow upon his chine, that ſhe opened
all his body. Sidney, b. i.
He preſents her with the tuſky head,
And chine, with riſing briſtles roughly ſpread. Dryd. Falks.
2. A piece of the back of an animal.
Cut out the burly boned clown in chines of beef ere thou
ſleep. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. 2.
He had killed eight ſat hogs for this ſeaſon, and he had dealt
about his chines very liberally amongſt his neighbours. Speciat.
To CHINE. v. a. [from the noun..] To cut into chines."
He that in his line did chine the long rib'd Apennine. Dry.
CHINK. m. ſ. ſcinan, to gape, Sax.] A ſmall aperture long-
wiſe; an opening or gap between the parts of anything.
Pyramus and Thiſby did talk through the chink of a wall.
- Shakespeare Midſummer Night's Dream.
Plagues alſo have been raiſed by anointing the chinks of
doors, and the like * Bacon's Nat. Hii. Nº. 916.
Though birds have no epiglottis, yet they ſo contract the
chink of their larinx, as to prevent the admiſſion of wet or
dry indigeſted Frºwn's Pºlar Errors.
In vain ſhe ſearch'd each cranny of the houſe,
Each gaping chiné, impervious to a mouſe. Swift.
gaping p
Other inventions, falſe and abſurd, that are like ſo many
chinks and holcs to diſcover the rottenneſs of the whole fa-
brick. South.
To CHINK. v. a. ſqerived by Skinner from the ſound..] To
ſhake ſo as to make a found.
He chinks his purſe, and takes his ſeat of ſtate:
With ready quills the dedicators wait. Pope's Danciad, b. ii.
To CHINK. v. m. To ſound by ſtriking each other.
Lord Strutt's money ſhines as bright, and chinks as well, as
'ſquire South's. Arbuthnot's Hiſt, ºf j. Bull.
When not a guinea chink'd on Martin's boards,
And Atwill's ſelf was drain'd of all his hoards. Swift.
CH1'NKY. adj. [from chink.) Full of holes; gaping; opening
into narrow clefts.
But plaiſter thou the chinly hives with clay. Dryd Wirg, Geo.
Grimalkin, to domeſtick vermin ſworn
An everlaſting foe, with watchful eye
Lies nightly brooding o'er a chinky gap,
Protending her fell claws, to thoughtleſs mice -
Sure ruin. Philip's Poems.
CHINTs. n.ſ. Cloath of cotton made in India, and printed
with colours.
Let a charming chints, and Bruſſels lace, •
Wrap my cold limbs, and ſhade my lifeleſs face. Pºpe's E.
CH1'oppis r. n.ſ. [from chapin, Span.] A high ſhoe, formerly
worn by ladies.
Your ladyſhip is nearer heaven than when I ſaw you laſt,
by the altitude of a chieppine. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
The woman was a gianteſs, and yet walked always in
chioppines. - Cowly.
CHIP, CHEAP, CHIPPING, in the names of places, imply a
market; from the Sax. Cyppan ce. Pºh, to buy. Gibſon’s Cam.
To CHIP. v. a. [probably corrupted from chºp.] To cut into
ſmall pieces; to diminiſh, by cutting away a little at a
(*.
ºf. return to cur ſtatue in the block of marble, we ſee it
4 M - fometimes
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 27</div><p class="Text">C H I
C H I
ſometimes only begun to be chipped; ſometimes rºugh hewn,
and juſt ſketched into an human figure. . Addſ. Speciat.
The critick ſtrikes out all that is not juſt;
And 'tis ev'n ſo the butler ºf his cruſt.
Induſtry
Taught him to chip the wood, and hew the ſtone. Thomſ,
CHIP. m. ſ. [from the verb. J - -
1. A ſmall piece taken off by a cutting infrument. -
Cucumbers do extremely affect moiſture, and over-drink
themſelves, which chaff or chips forbideth. Bacon's Yat. Hiſł.
That chip made the iron ſwim, not by any natural power.
Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
The ſtraw was laid below ;
Of chips and ſerewood was the ſecond row. Dryd. Fables.
2. A ſmall piece, however made. - -
The manganeſe lics in the vein in lumps wrecked, in an ir-
regular manner, among clay, coarſe ſpar, and chip of ſtone.
Woodward on Fºſſils.
Chipping. m. ſ. [from to chip.] A fragment cut off.
They dung their land with the chippings of a ſort of ſoft
ſtone. A fortimer's Husbandry.
The clippings and filings of theſe jewels, could they be pre-
, ſerved, are of more value than the whole maſs of ordinary
authors. Pelton on the Claſſicks.
Chik A/G R1c A1. adj. [chiragra, Lat..] Having the gout in
the hand; ſubject to the gout in the hand. -
Chiragrial perſons do ſuffer in the finger as well as in the reſt,
and ſometimes firſt of all. Brown's Wugar Errors, b. iv. c. 5.
Chi Ro'o RAPHE R. m. / [ xiàº, the hand, ºtº, to write.]
He that exerciſes or profeſſes the act or buſineſs of writing.
Thus paſſeth it from this office to the chirºgrapher's, to be
engroſſed. Bacon's Office of Alienation.
Chirco RAPHist. n.ſ. [See CH 1 Rog RAPH R.] This word
is uſed in the following paſſage, I think improperly, for one
that tells fortunes, by examining the hand: the true word is
chiroſophiſ', or chiromancer. S -
Let the phiſiognomiſts examine his features; let the chiro-
graphiſis behold his palm ; but, above all, let us conſult for
the calculation of his nativity. Arbuth. and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
CHIRo'cRAPHY. m. ſ. [See CHIRog RAPHER..] The art of
writing.
Chiro'MANcer. n ſ. [See CHIRoMANcy..] One that fore-
tells future events by inſpecting the hand.
The middle ſort, who have not much to ſpare, }
Jing's Cºokery.
To chiromancers' cheaper art repair,
Who clap the pretty palm, to make the lines more fair.
Dryden's juvenal, ſat. vi.
CH1'Rom ANCY. m. ſ. [xile, the hand, and ºzºk, a prophet.]
The art of foretelling the events of life, by inſpecting the
hand.
There is not much conſiderable in that doćtrine of chira-
many that ſpots in the top of the nails, do ſignify things
paſt; in the middle, things preſent; and at the bottom, events
to conne. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v. c. 22.
To CHIRP. v. n. [perhaps contračted from cheer up. The
Dutch have circken.] To make a cheerful noiſe ; as birds,
when they call without ſinging.
She chirping ran, he peeping flew away,
*Till hard by them both he and ſhe did ſtay. Sidney.
Came he right now to ſing a raven's note;
And thinks he, that the chirping of a wren
Can chaſe away the firſt conceived ſound. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
No chirping lark the welkin ſheen invokes. Gay's Poſt.
The careful hen
Calls all her chirping family around. Thomſon's Spring.
To CHIRP. v. a. [This ſeems apparently corruptcd from
cheer up..] To make cheerful.
Let no ſober bigot here think it a fin,
To puſh on the chirping and moderate bottle. johnſ Tav. A.
Sir Balaam now, he lives like other folks;
He takes his chirping pint, he cracks his jokes. Pope.
CHIRP, [from the verb.] The voice of birds or inſe&amp;ts.
Winds over us whiſper'd, flocks by us did bleat,
And chirp went the grafhopper under our feet. Spe.?at.
CH1'ºper. a. ſ. [from chirp.] One that chirps; one that is
chearful.
To Chi RRE. v. n. [ceonian, Sax.] See CHURME.
To coo as a pigeon. junius.
CHIRURGEON. n.ſ. [zºvº, from zig, the hand, and
tºy, work.] One that cures ailments, not by internal me-
dicines, but outward applications. It is now generally pro-
nounced, and by many written, ſurgeon.
When a man's wounds ceaſe to ſmart, only becauſe he has
loſt his feeling, they are nevertheleſs mortal, for his not ſeeing
his need of a chirurgeon. South's Sermons.
CHIRU'RGERY. m. ſ. [from chirurgeon.] The art of curing by
external applications.
Gynecia having ſkill in chirurgery, an art in thoſe days
much eſtecmed. Sidney, b. i.
Nature could do nothing in her caſe without the help of
chirurgery, in drying up the luxurious fleſh, and making way
to pull out the rotten bones, //ſeman,
tº 7:
-- ad. Sce CHIR URGEoN.
CH 1 RU'RG1ck. : oc --
1. Having qualities uſeful in outward applications to hurts.
As to the chirurgical or phyſical virtues of wax, it is
reckoned a mean between hot and cold. A ſºrtiºn. Hisbandry.
2. Relating to the manual part of healing. -
3. Manual in general, conſiſting in operations of the hand.
This ſenſe, though the firſt, according to crymology, is now
ſcarce found.
The chirurgical or manual, doth refer to the making in-
ſtruments, and exerciſing particular experiments. l/ ilkins,
CH1'SEL. m. ſ. [ciſeau, Fr. of ſciſſiºn, Lat..] An inſtrument
with which wood or ſtone is pared away.
What fine chiſe/
Could cver yet cut breath Let no man mock me,
For I will kiſs her. Shakespeare. J/inter’s Tak.
There is ſuch a ſeeming ſoftneſs in the limbs, as if not a
chiſel had hewed them out of ſtone, but a pencil had drawn
and ſtroaked them in oil. J/otton's Architecture.
Imperfect ſhapes: in marble ſuch are ſeen,
When the rude chiſel does the man begin. Dryden.
To CH1's El. v. a. [from the noun..] To cut with a chiſel.
CHIT. m. ſ. [according to Dr. Hickes, from kind, Germ. child;
perhaps from chico, little, Span.] *
1. A child; a baby. Generally uſed of young perſons in con-
tempt.
Theſe will appear ſuch chit; in ſtory,
'Twill turn all politicks to jeſt. Anonymous.
2. The ſhoot of corn from the end of the grain. A cant term
with maltſters.
Barley, couched four days, will begin to ſhew the chit or
ſprit at the root-end. Mortimer's Husbandry
3. A freckle, [from chick-peaſe.] In this ſenſe it is ſeldom uſed.
To CHIT. v. m. [from the noun..] To ſprout; to ſhoot at the
end of the grain.
I have known barley chit in ſeven hours after it had been
thrown forth. Mortiner's Husbandry.
CH1'tchat. m. ſ. [corrupted by reduplication from chat..]
Prattle; idle prate; idle talk. A word only uſed in ludicrous
converſation.
I am a member of a female ſociety, who call ourſelves the
chitchat club. Speciat. Nº. 56,o.
CH1'TTERLINGs. n ſ, without ſingular. [from ſchyterlingh,
Dut. Minſhew; from Kutteln, Germ. Skinner.] The guts;
the bowels. Skinner.
CH1'tty, adj. [from chit..] Childiſh; like a baby.
CH1'v Al Rous. adj. [from chivalry..] Relating to chivalry,
or errant knighthood; knightly ; warlike; adventurous;
daring. A word now out of uſe.
And noble minds of yore allied were
In brave purſuit of chivalrous empriſe. Fairy Queen, b. i.
CHI'VALRY. n.ſ.. [chevalerie, Fr. knighthood, from cheval, a
horſe; as eques in Latin.]
1. Knighthood; a military dignity.
There be now, for martial encouragement, ſome degrees
and orders of chivalry; which, nevertheleſs, are conferred
promiſcuouſly upon ſoldiers and no ſoldiers. Bacon's Eſſay, 30.
2. The qualifications of a knight; as valour; dexterity in arms.
- Thou haſt ſlain
The flow'r of Europe for his chivalry. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
I may ſpeak it to my ſhame,
I have a truant been to chivalry. Shakeſp. Hen. IV. part i.
3. The general ſyſtem of knighthood.
Solemnly he ſwore,
That by the faith which knights to knighthood bore,
And whate'er elſe to chivalry belongs,
He would not ceaſe 'till he reveng'd their wrongs. Dryd, Fab.
4. An adventure; an exploit.
They four doing acts more dangerous, though leſs famous,
becauſe they were but private chivalries. Sidney, b. ii.
5. The body or order of knights.
And by his light
Did all the chivalry of England move
To do brave acts. Shakespeare Henry IV, part ii.
6. In law.
Servilium militare, of the French, chevalier; a tenure of
land by knights ſervice. There is no land but is holden me-
diately or immediately of the crown, by ſome ſervice or
other; and therefore are all our freeholds, that are to us and
our heirs, called feuda, fees, as proceeding from the benefit of
the king As the king gave to the nobles large poſſeſſions for
this or that rent and ſervice, ſo they parcelled out their lands,
ſo received for rents and ſervices as they thought good : and
thoſe ſervices are by Littleton divided into chivalry and ſocage.
The one is martial and military; the other, clowniſh and
ruſtick. Chivalry, therefore, is a tenure of ſervice, whereby
the tenant is bound to perform ſome noble or military office
unto his lord, and is of two ſorts; either regal, that is, ſuch
as may hold only of the king; or ſuch as may alſo hold of a
common perſon, as well as of the king. That which may
hold only of the king is properly called ſergeantry, and is again
divided into grand or petit, i. e. great or ſmall. Chivalry that
ſ
1.
6
may
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 28</div><p class="Text">C H O
C H O
may hold of a common perſon, as well as of the king, is
called ſcutagium. Cowel.
7. It ought properly to be written chevahy. It is a word not
much uſed, but in old poems or romancés.
CH1'yes... n.ſ.. [cive, Fr. Skinner.]
I. º threads or filaments riſing in flowers, with ſeeds at the
end.
The maſculine or prolifick ſeed contained in the chives, or
apices of the ſtamina. Ray on the Creation.
2. A ſpecies of ſmall onion. Skinner.
Chloro's Is. n.f. [from x 4 s, green.] The green-ſickneſs.
To ChoAK. See CHoke.
CHO.COLATE. m. ſ. ſchocºlate, Span.]
1. The nut of the cacao-tree.
The tree hath a roſe flower, of a great number of petals,
from whoſe empalement ariſes the pointal, being a tube cut
into many parts, which becomes a fruit ſhaped ſomewhat like
a cucumber, and deeply furrowed, in which are contained
ſeveral ſeeds, collected into an oblong heap, and ſlit down,
ſomewhat like almonds. It is a native of America, and is
found in great plenty in ſeveral places between the Tropicks,
and grows wild. See Coco A. AZiller.
2. The cake or maſs, made by grinding the kernel of the cacao-
nut with other ſubſtances, to be diſſolved in hot water.
The Spaniards were the firſt who brought chocolate into
uſe in Europe, to premote the conſumption of their cacao-
nuts, achiot, and other drugs, which their Weſt Indies fur-
niſh, and which enter the compoſition of hocolate. Chambers.
3. The liquor, made by a ſolution of chocolate in hot water.
Choco ate is certainly much the beſt of theſe three exotick
liquors: its oil ſeems to be both rich, alimentary, and ano-
dyne. Ari uthnot on Aliments.
In fumes of burning chocolate ſhall glow,
And tremble at the ſea that froths below ! Pope.
Cho'col. At E-H Us E. m. ſ. ſchocolate and houſe..] A houſe where
company is entertained with chocolate.
Ever ſince that time, Liſander has been twice a day at the
chocolate-houſe. Tatler, Nº. 54.
CHope. [the old preterite, from chide J See CHIDE.
And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban. Gen. xxxi.
Choice. m. ſ. ſchoix, French.]
1. The aët of chooſing; determination between different things
propoſed; election.
If you oblige me ſuddenly to chuſe,
The choice is made; for I muſt both refuſe. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
Soft elocution doth thy ſtyle renown,
Gentle or ſharp, according to thy choice,
To laugh at follies, or to laſh at vice.
2. The power of chooſing; election.
Choice there is not, unleſs the thing which we take to be ſo
in our power, that we might have refuſed it. If fire conſume
the ſtable, it chooſeth not ſo to do, becauſe the nature thereof
is ſuch that it can do no other. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 7.
There's no liberty like the freedom of having it at y own
choice, whether I will live to the world, or to myſelf. L'E/fr.
To talk of compelling a man to be good, is a contradic-
tion ; for where there is force, there can be no choice. Where-
as all moral goodneſs conſiſteth in the elective ačt of the un-
derſtanding will. Grew’s Coſmol. b. iii. c. 2. ſ. 23.
Whether he will remove his contemplation from one idea
to another, is many times in his choice. Locke.
3. Care in chooſing; curioſity of diſtinction.
Julius Caeſar did write a collection of apophthegms: it is pity
his book is loſt; for I imagine they were collected with judg-
ment and choice. Bacon's Apºphthegms.
4. The thing choſen; the thing taken or approved, in preference
to others.
Your choice is not ſo rich in birth as beauty:
That you might well enjoy her. Shakeſp. I?’inter's Tale.
Take to thee, from among the cherubim,
Thy choice of flaming warriors. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
Now Mars, ſhe ſaid, let fame exalt her voice;
Nor let thy conqueſts only be her choice. - Prior.
5. The beſt part of any thing, that is more properly the object
- of choice.
The choice and flower of all things profitable in other books,
the pſalms do both more briefly contain, and more movingly
alſo expreſs. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 37.
Thou art a mighty prince: in the choice of our ſepulchres
bury thy dead. Gen. xxiii. 6.
Their riders, the flow'r and choice
Of many provinces, from bound to bound. Milt. Par. Rºg.
6. Several things propoſed at once, as objects of judgment and
election.
A braver choice of dauntleſs ſpirits,
Did never float upon the ſwelling tide. Shakeſp. K. john.
7. To make CHoice of. To chooſe; to take from ſeveral things
propoſed.
Wiſdom, of what herſelf approvcs, makes choice,
Nor is led captive by the common voice. Denham.
Choice. adj. [chaiſ, French J
1. Selečt; of extraordinary value.
After having ſet before the king the choicſ of wines and
Dryd. Perſ' ſat. v.
fruits, told him the bºt part of his entertainment was to
COrne. Guardian, Nº. 167.
Thus in a ſea of folly toſs'd, 2 /
My choiceſ hours of life are loſt. Swift.
2. Chary; frugal ; careful. Uſed of perſons.
He that is choice of his time, will alſo be choice of his com.
Pany, and choice of his actions. Taylor's Holy Living.
/ - - -
CHQ'Iceless, adj. [from choice..] Without the power of .
chooſing; without right of choice; not free.
Neither the weight of the matter, of which the cylinder is
made, nor the round voluble form of it, are any more im-
putable to that dead chºicelºſ creature, than the firſt motion of
it was ſuppoſed to be ; and, therefore, it cannot be a fit re.
ſemblance to ſhew the reconcile bleneſs of fate with choice.
/ r - Iſaºnand on Fundamentals.
Cho'Icel Y. adv. [from choice.]
1. Curiouſly; with exact choice.
Colle&amp;ted choicely f A band of men,
ed choicely from each county ſome. Sº r
2. Valuably; excellently. y ſome. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
It is certain it is chºicey good. I/alton's Angler.
Cho?ceness. n.f. [from Chºice.] Nicety; particular vai.
º * ſhade ſuch auriculas, ſeedlings or plants, as
are for their choiceme/s reſerved in pots. Evelyn's ".
cºś. º ſyn's Kalendar
1. An aſſembly or band of fingers.
They now aſſiſt the choir
Of angels, who their ſongs admire.
2. The fingers in divine worſhip.
The choir,
With all the choiceſt muſick of the kingdom,
Together ſung Te Deum. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
3. The part of the church where the choriſters or fingers are
placed.
The lords and ladies, having brought the queen
To a prepar'd place in the choir, fell off
At diſtance from her. Shakſ). Henry VIII.
To CHOKE. v. a. [accocan, Sax. from ceoca, the cheek or
mouth. According to .1 in/cw, from ET; from whence, pro-
bably, the Spaniſh, ahogar. J
1. To ſuffocate; to kill by ſtopping the paſſage of reſpiration.
But when to my good lord I prove untrue,
I'll choke myſelf. - Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
While you thunder'd, clouds of duſt did choke
Contending troops.
2. To ſtop up; to obſtrućt; to block up a paſſage.
Men troop'd up to the king's capacious court,
Whoſe portico's were chok'd with the reſort. Chapm. Oāſīy.
They are at a continual expence to cleanſe the ports, and
keep them from being choked up, by the help of ſeveral en-
gines. Addiſon on Italy.
While prayers and tears his deſtin'd progreſs ſtay,
And crowds of mourners choke their ſov’reign's way. Tickell.
3. To hinder by obſtrućtion.
As two ſpent ſwimmers, that do cling together,
And choke their art. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
She cannot loſe her perfeót pow'r to ſee,
Tho' miſts and clouds do choke her window-light. Davies.
It ſeemeth the fire is ſo choked, as not to be able to remove
the ſtone. . Bacon’s Nat. Hiſł. Nº. 301.
You muſt make the mould big enough to contain the whole
fruit, when it is grown to the greateſt; for elſe you will choke
the ſpreading of the fruit. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
The fire, which chok'd in aſhes lay,
A load too heavy for his ſoul to move,
Was upward blown below, and bruſh'd away by love. Dryd.
4. To ſuppreſs.
And yet we ventur'd ; for the gain propos'd
Chok'd the reſpect of likely peril fear'd. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
Confeſs thee freely of thy fin:
For to deny each article with oath,
Cannot remove nor choke the ſtrong conception
That I do groan withal. Shakespeare. Othello.
5. To overpower; to ſuppreſs.
And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when
they have heard, go forth, and are hoked with cares, and
riches, and pleaſures of this life, and bring no fruit to Per-
fection. Luke, viii. 14.
No fruitful crop the ſickly fields return;
But oats and darnel choke the riſing corn. Dryden's Pºſ.
Choke. n ſ. [from the verb.] I he filamentous or capillary
part of an artichoke. A cant word.
Choke-peAR. m.ſ. [from choke and pear.]
1. A rough, harſh, unpalatable pear. -
2. Any aſpérſion or ſarcaſm, by which another is put to ſilence.
A low term. - -
Pardon me for going ſo low as to talk of giving choke-
pears. Clarija.
A Cho'ke R. n. ſ. [from choke.]
1. One that chokes or ſuffocates another.
2. One that puts another to ſilence.
3. Any thing that cannot be anſwered.
JValler.
J/aller.
CHO'KY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 29</div><p class="Text">C H O
C H O
t
:
Cho'ky. adj. [from cho’e.] That which has the power of
furlocation.
Cºo Accº, U Es. m. ſ. [ x^*, lie. J
the power of purging bile or choler,
CHOLE.R. r. ſ. [...bºera, Lat from zºº.]
1. The bile.
Marcilius Ficinius increaſes theſe proportions, adding two
more of pure chºr. //ºtion on Education.
There would be a main defect, if ſuch a feeding animal,
and ſo ſubject unto diſeaſes from bilious cauſes, ſhould want a
proper conveyance for chºler. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
2. The humour, which, by its ſuper-abundance, is ſuppoſed to
produce iraſcibility.
It engenders cºlºr, planteth anger;
And better 'twere that both of us did faſt,
Since, of ourſelves, ourſelves are cholerick,
Than feed it with ſuch over-roaſted fleſh. Shakespeare. Tam. ºf Shrew.
3. Anger; rage.
Put him to clºr ſtraight: he hath been uſed
* Ever to conquer, and to have his word
Off contradiction.
He, methinks, is no great ſcholar,
Who can miſtake deſire for chaſer.
Crio'LER Ick. adj. [chºricts, Latin.]
1. Abounding with choler. - -
Our two great poets being ſo different in their tempers, the
one cholarick and ſanguine, the other phlegmatick and me-
lancholick. Dryden's Fables, Prºf.
2. Angry; iraſcible: of perſons. -
Buſi, in the main, was an honeſt plain-dealing fellow,
cholerick, bold, and of a very unconſtant temper. Arb. j. Bull.
3. Angry; offenſive: of words or actions.
There came in cholerick haſte towards me about ſeven or
eight knights. Sidney, b ii.
Becanus threatneth all that read him, uſing his confident,
or rather cholerick ſpeech. Raleigh's Hºſt ºf the lººrld.
Cho'll ERick Ness. n.ſ. [from chalerick.] Anger; iraſcibility;
peewiſhneſs.
To CHOOSE. v. a. I choſe, I have choſen or choſe. [chºiſir,
Fr. ceoſan, Sax. Kiſen, Germ.]
1. To take by way of preference of ſeveral things offered ; not
to reječt.
Did I choºſe him out of all the tribes of Iſrael to be my
prieſt. 1 Sam. ii. 28.
I may neither chooſe whom I would, nor refuſe whom I
diſlike. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
If he ſhould offer to choºſe, and chºſe the right caſket, you
ſhould refuſe to perform your fathcr's will, if you ſhould re-
fuſe to accept him. Shakeſp. Merchant ºf Penice.
2. To take; not to reſuſe.
Let us chºſe to us judgment; let us know among ourſelves
what is good. job, xxxiv. 4.
The will has ſtill ſo much freedom left as to enable it to
chooſe any act in its kind good ; as alſo to refuſe any act in its
kind evil. South's Sermons.
3. To ſelect; to pick out of a number.
Chooſe you a man for you, and let him come down to me.
I Sa. xvii. 8.
How much leſs ſhall I anſwer him, and choºſe out my words
to reaſon with him job, ix. 14.
4. To eleēt for eternal happineſs; to predeſtinate to life. A
term of theologians.
To CHoos E. v. m. To have the power of choice between dif-
ferent things. It is generally joined with a negative, and
fignifies muſt neceſſarily be.
Without the influence of the Deity ſupporting things, their
utter annihilation could not choºſe but follow. Hooker, b. v.
Knaves abroad, -
Who having by their own importunate ſuit,
Convinced or ſupplied them, they cannot choºſe
But they muſt blab. Shakespeare Othello.
When a favourite ſhall be raiſed upon the foundation of
merit, then can he not choſe but proſper. Bacon’s Adv. to Pil.
Threw down a golden apple in her way;
For all her haſte, ſhe could not chooſe but ſtay. Dryden.
Thoſe who are perſuaded that they ſhall continue for ever,
cannot choºſe but aſpire after a happineſs commenſurae to their
duration. Tillotſon.
CHo'os E R. m. ſ. [from choºſe..] He that has the power or office
of chooſing; elector.
Come all into this nut, quoth ſhe ,
Come cloſely in, be rul’d by me;
Each one may here a chooſer be,
For room you need not wreſtle. Drayton's Nymphid.
In all things to deal with other men, as if I might be my
own chººſer. Hammond's Pract. Catechiſºn.
This generality is not ſufficient to make a good chºſer,
without a more particular contraction of his judgment. I, oft.
To CHOP. g. a. [Åappen, Dut. couper, French.]
1. To cut with a quick blow.
- What ſhall we do, if we perceive
Lord Haſtings will not yield to our complots?
Medicines which have
º
Shakeſp. Coriolanuſ.
Prior.
Chºp off his head, man. Shakespeare. Kish. III.
Within theſe three days his head is to be choſ: off. Sº...º.
And where the cleaver chops the heifer's ſpoil,
Thy breathing noſtri hold. Gay's Trivia.
2. To devour eagerly, with up.
You are for making a hºſty meal, and for ºf irº tº your
entertainment, like an hungry clown. 12 ya. Span. Fryar.
Upon the opening of his mouth he drops his breakfaſt,
which the fox preſently chºpp'd up. L'Eºrange's Pales.
3. To mince; to cut into ſmall pieces.
They break their bones, and chºp them in pieces, as for
the pot. 41ic. iii. 3.
Some grannaries are made with clay, mixed with hair,
chºpped ſtraw, mulch, and ſuch like. A ſºrtimer's Husbandy.
By dividing of them into chapters and verſes, they are ſo
chºped and minced, and ſtand ſo broken and divided, that
the common people take the verſes uſually for different
aphoriſms Lºcke's Preface to St. Paul's Epiſtles.
4. To break into chinks.
I remember the cow's dugs, that her pretty chopf hands had
milked. Shakeſp A, you like it.
To CH op. v. n.
1. To do any thing with a quick and unexpeded motion, like
that of a blow: as we ſay, the wind chºps about, that is
changes ſuddenly.
If the body repercuſſing be near, and yet not ſo near as to
make a concurrent echoe, it chºppeth with you upon the
ſudden. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?. Nº. 248.
Out of greedineſs to get both, he claſs at the ſhadow, and
loſes the ſubſtance. L'Aſirange, Fab. 9.
2. To light or happen upon a thing ſuddenly, with upon.
To CH op. v. a. ſceapan, Sax. &amp;copen, Dut. to buy.]
1. To purchaſe generally by way of truck; to give one thing
for another.
The chºpping of bargains, when a man buys, not to hold,
but to ſell again grindeth upon the ſeller and the buyer. Bacon.
2. To put one thing in the place of another.
Scts up communities and ſenſes,
To choſ, and change intelligencies. Hudib. p. iii. cant. 3.
Affirm the Trigons chºpp'd and chang'd,
The watry with the fiery rang'd. Hudib. p. ii cant. 3.
We go on hºping and changing our friends, as well as our
horſes. L'E/irange.
3. To bandy; to altercate; to return one thing or word for
another.
Let not the council at the bar chop with the judge, nor wind
himſelf into the handling of the cauſe a-new, after the judge
hath declared his ſentence. Bacon, Eſſay 57.
You'll never leave off your chºpping of logick, 'till your
ſkin is turned over your ears for prating. L'E/irange's Fables.
CHOP. m. ſ. [from the verb.] -
1. A piece chopped off. See CHIP.
Sir William Capel compounded for ſixteen hundred pounds,
yet Empſon would have cut another chop out of him, if the
king had not died. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. A ſmall piece of meat, commonly of mutton.
Old Croſs condemns all perſons to be fops,
That can't regale themſelves with mutton chops. King’s Cook.
3. A crack, or cleft.
An infuſion in water will make wood to ſwell; as we ſee
in the filling of the chops of bowls, by laying them in water.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 8o.
CHOP-Hous E. m. ſ. ſchop and houſe..] A mean houſe of enter-
tainment, where proviſion ready dreſſed is ſold.
I loſt my place at the chop-houſe, where every man eats in
publick a meſs of broth, or chop of meat, in ſilence. Speciat.
CHO PIN. m. ſ. [French.]
1. A French liquid meaſure, containing nearly a pint of Wincheſter.
2. A term uſed in Scotland for a quart, of wine meaſure.
CHO'PPING, participial, adj. [In this ſenſe, of uncertain
etymology.] An epithet frcquently applied to infants, by way
of ludicrous commendation: imagined by Skinn r to ſignify
luſty, from car, Sax. by others to mean a child that would
bring money at a market. Perhaps a greedy, hungry child,
likely to live.
Both Jack Freeman and Ned Wild,
Would own the fair and chopping child. Fentom.
CHOPPING-Block. m. ſ. [chop and block.] A log of wood, on
which any thing is laid to be cut in pieces.
The ſtrait ſmooth elms are good for axel-trees, boards,
chopping-blocks. Mortimer's Husbandry.
CHOPPING-KNIFE. n.ſ.. [shºp and Knife.] A knife with which
cooks mince their meat.
Here comes Dametas, with a ſword by his ſide, a forreſt-
bill on his neck, and a chºpping-knife under his girdle. Sidney.
CHO/PPY. adj. [from chop.] Full of holes, clefts, or cracks.
You ſeem to underſtand me,
By each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her ſkinny lips. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
Chops. n.ſ. without a ſingular. [corrupted probably from
CHAPs, which ſee.]
1. The mouth of a beaſt.
So
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 30</div><p class="Text">**
C H O
. So ſoon as my chºps begin to walk, yours muſt be walking
too, for company. L’Eſtrange's Fab.
2. The mouth of a man, uſed in contempt.
He ne'er ſhook hands, nor bid farewel to him,
*Till he unſeam'd him from the nape to th’ chºps. Shakeſp
. The mouth of anything in familiar language; as of a river;
of a ſmith's vice.
Cho'RAL. adj. [from chorus, Lat.]
1. Belonging to or compoſing a choir or concert.
Choral ſymphonies. AMilton.
2. Singing in a choir.
And choral ſeraphs ſung the ſecond day. Amhurſt.
CHORD. m. ſ. [chorda, Lat. When it ſignifies a rope or ſtring
in general, it is written cord: when its primitive ſignification
is preſerved, the h is retained.]
1. The ſtring of a muſical inſtrument.
Who mov’d
Their ſtops and chords, was ſeen; his volant touch
Inſtinét thro' all proportions, low and high,
Fled, and purſu'd tranſverſe the reſonant fugue. Milt. P. L.
2. In geometry a right line, which joins the two ends of any
arch of a circle.
To Chorp. v. a. [from the houn..] To furniſh with ſtrings
or chords; to ſtring.
What paſſion cannot muſick raiſe and quell?
When Jubal ſtruck the chorded ſhell,
His liſt'ning brethren ſtood around. Dryden.
Chorpe'E. n.ſ.. [from chorda, Lat.] A contraćtion of the
frosnum.
Cho'Rion. n ſ [xºgliº, to contain.] The outward membrane
that enwraps the foetus.
Cho'R1st ER. m. ſ. [from chorus.]
1. A finger in cathedrals; uſually a ſinger of the lower order;
a ſinging boy.
2. A finger in a concert. This ſenſe is, for the moſt part, con-
fined to poetry. -
And let the roaring organs loudly play
The praiſes of the Lord in lively notes;
The whiles, with hollow throats,
The choriſters the joyous anthem ſing. Spenſer's Epithal.
The new-born phoenix takes his way;
Of airy choriſters a numerous train
Attend his progreſs. Dryden.
The muſical voices and accents of the aerial chor:ffers. Ray.
CHORO'GRAPHER. m. ſ [from xagº, a region, and yºapa, to
deſcribe..] He that deſcribes particular regions or countries.
CHORog Ra'phical. adj. [See Choa ocs a PHER..] Deſcrip-
tive of particular regions or countries; laying down the boun-
daries of countries.
I have added a chorographical deſcription of this terreſtrial
paradiſe. - Raleigh's Hiſt. of the World.
ChorogRA'phically. adv. [from choragraphical.j In a cho-
rographical manner; according to the rule of chorography;
in a manner deſcriptive of particular regions.
CHOR o'GRAPHY. n.ſ. [See CH orog RAPHER..] The art or
practice of deſcribing particular regions, or laying down the
limit. and boundaries of particular provinces. It is leſs in
its object than geography, and greater than topography.
CHO'R Us. m. ſ. º § pography
1. A number of ſingers; a concert.
The Grecian tragedy was at firſt nothing but a chorus of
ſingers; afterwards one actor was introduced. Dryden.
Never did a more full and unſpotted chorus of human crea-
tures join together in a hymn of devotion. Addison Guardian.
In praiſe ſo juſt let every voice be join'd,
And fill the gen'ral chorus of mankind! Peº's Fſ Crit.
2. The perſons who are ſuppoſed to behold what paſſes in the
ačts of a tragedy, and ſing their ſentiments between the aëts.
For ſupply,
Admit me chorus to this hiſtory. Shakeſp. Henry V. Prol.
3. The ſong between the acts of a tragedy.
4. Verſes of a ſong in which the company join the finger.
CHose. [the preter tenſe, from To chooſe.]
Our ſovereign here above the reſt might ſtand,
And here be choſe again to rule the land.
Cho's EN: [the participle paſſive, from To chooſ...}
If king Lewis vouchſafe to furniſh us
With ſome few bands of choſen ſoldiers,
I'll undertake to land them on our coaſt. Shakespeare. Hºn. VI.
CHough, n.f. [ceo, Sax. choucas, Fr.] A bird which frequents
the rocks by the ſea fide, like a jackdaw, but bigger. Hanmer.
In birds, kites and keſtrels have a reſemblance with hawks,
crows with ravens, daws and choughs. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
To crows the like impartial grace affords,
And thoughs and daws, and ſuch republick birds. Dryden.
CHoule; n.f. [commonly pronounced and written jowl.] The
crop of a bird.
The chaule or crop, adhering unto the lower fide of the bill,
and ſo deſcending by the throat, is a bag or ſachel. Br. Pul Er.
To CHouse. v a [The original of this word is much doubted
by S&amp;inner, who tries to deduce it from the French goſºr, to
laugh at ; or joncher, to whecdle; and from the Teutonick
Vol. I.
Dryden.
* –-º-º:
*ſº, to prattle. It is perhaps a fortuitous and cant word,
without etymology.]
1. To cheat; to trick; to impoſe upon. -
Freedom and zeal have cheus'd you o'er and o'er ;
Pray give us leave to bubble you once more. Dryd. Pr. to Ab.
Frºm London they came, filly people to choºſe,
Their lands and their faces unknown.
2. It has of before the thing taken away by fraud.
When geeſe and pullen are ſedáchá,
And ſows ºf ſucking pigs are chouf'd. Hud, partii, cant. 3.
A Chouse. n. J. [from the verb. This word is derived by
Henſhaw from Kiaus, or chians, a meſſenger of the Turkiſh
court; who, ſays he, is little better than a fool.]
1. A bubble; a tool; a man fit to be cheateå,
* A ſottiſh chouſe,
. ‘. #. has robb'd his houſe,
pplies himſelf to cunning men. Hudib. iii. cant. 3.
2. A trick or ſham. § dib. part ii. cant. 3
To CHowTER. v. m. To grumble or mutter like a froward
child. Philips.
CHRISM, n.ſ. [x;,&amp;º, an ointment.] Unguent; or unaion:
it is only applied to ſacred ceremonies.
One act never to be repeated, is not the thing that Chriſt's
eternal prieſthood, denoted eſpecially by his unction or Chriſm,
refers to. Hammond's Prači. Catech.
CHRI'som. n.ſ. [See CHRISM.] A child that dies within a
month after its birth. So called from the chriſom-cloath, a
cloath anointed with holy unguent, which the children an-
ciently wore till they were chriſtened.
When the convulſions were but few, the number of chriſm;
and infants was greater. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
To CHRI'stEN. adj. [chrinenian, Sax.]
1. To baptize; to initiate into chriſtianity by water.
2. To name; to denominate. -
Where ſuch evils as theſe reign, chriften the thing what you
will, it can be no better than a mock millenium. Barnet.
CHRI'stENDom. n.ſ.. [from Chrift and dom] . The collec-
tive body of chriſtianity; the regions of which the inhabitants
profeſs the chriſtian religion.
What hath been done, the parts of Chriſtendom moſt af-
flićted can beſt teſtify. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
An older and a better ſoldier, none
That Chriſtendom gives out. Shakeſp.
His computation is univerſally received over all Chriſſen-
dom. Holder on ºf iºne.
CHRI'st ENING. m.ſ.. [from the verb.] The ceremony of the
firſt initiation into chriſtianity. -
The queen was with great ſolemnity crowned at Weſt-
minſter, about two years after the marriage; like an old
chriftening, that had ſtaid long for godfathers. Bacon's H. VII.
We ſhall inſert the cauſes, why the account of chriftenings
hath been neglečted more than that of burials. Graunt's B. Af.
The day of the chriftening being come, the houſe was filled
with goſſips.
Swift.
Arbuth, and Pope's Mart. Scribierus.
CHRISTIAN. n.ſ. [Chriſtianus, Lat.] A profeſſor of the re-
ligion of Chriſt. -
we chriftions have certainly the beſt and the holieſt, the
wiſeſt and moſt reaſonable religion in the world. Tilleſºn.
CHRI'stian. adj. Profeſſing the religion of Chriſt. -
I’ll not be made a ſoft and dull-ey'd fool,
To ſhake the head, relent, and figh, and yield
To chriſtian interceſſors. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
CHRISTIAN-NAME. n.ſ. The name given at the font, diſtinct
from the Gentilitious name, or ſurname.
CHRI's TIAN is M. m. ſ. [chriftianiſmus, Lat J
1. The chriſtian religion.
2. The nations profeſſing chriſtianity. -
Christia/NITY... n.ſ. [Chrétientº, French.] The religion of
chriſtians.
God doth will that couples, which are married, both infi-
dels, if either party be converted unto chriſtianity, this ſhould
not make ſeparation. Hooker, b. z. ſ. 5.
Every one, who lives in the habitual practice of any yolun:
tary fin, cuts himſelf off from chriſtianity. Addiſ on Cº. Kºſ.
To CHRI'stianize. v. a. [from chriſtian.] To make chriſtian ;
to convert to chriſtianity. - - -
The principles of platonick philoſophy, as it is now chriſ.
tianized. Dryden's juv. Dedicat.
Christianly, adv. [from chriftian.] Like a chººl ; * *
comes one who profeſſes the holy religiºn of Chriſt -
CHRI's TMAs. n.ſ.. [from Chriſ? and meſ;,] The day on which
the nativity of our bleſſed Saviour is celebrated, by the parti-
cular ſervice of the church. - -
A CHR ist Mas-box. n.ſ. (from criſings and $ox.] A box in
which little preſents are collected at Chriſtmas.
when ſºme comes round, a Chriſ” they lºſ.. .
And one day makes them rich for all the year. Gay's Trivia.
Christmas-Flówer. n.ſ. Scº Hellº?" * . .
Christ's-thor N. m. ſ [So called, as Skinner fancics, becauſe
the thorns have ſomé likeneſs to a croſs.] - -
it hath iong ſharp ſpines: the flower has five leaves, inform,
4 N
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 31</div><p class="Text">C H R
C H U
*
* * * *
*
* . . . .
|
* .
i
º
-
-
-
º
- -
*
º
= * *
º
, ,
.
*-
of a roſe: out of the flower-cup, which is divided into ſeveral
ſegments, riſes the pointal, which becomes a fruit, ſhaped like
a bonnet, having a ſhell almoſt globular, which is divided
into three cells, in each of which is contained a roundiſh
ſeed. This is by many perſons ſuppoſed to be the plant from
which our Saviour's crown of thorns was compoſed. Miller.
Cú Rom A^rick, adj. [x;ºx, colour.]
1. Relating to colour. -
I am now come to the third part of painting, which is called
the chromatick, or colouring. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. Relating to a certain ſpecies of antient muſic, now unknown.
It was obſerved he never touched his lyre in ſuch a truly
chromatick and enharmonick manner, as upon that occaſion.
Arbuth, and Pope's Mart. Scribierus.
'-- - º -
$º }a}. [from zºº, time.]
A chronical diſtemper is of length; as dropſies, Aſthma's,
and the like. Sºuincy.
Of diſeaſes ſome are chronical, and of long duration ; as
quartane agues, ſcurvy, &amp;c. wherein we defer the cure unto
more advantageous ſeaſons. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
The lady's uſe of all theſe excellencies is to divert the old
man, when he is out of the pangs of a chronical diſtemper.
Speciat. Nº. 449.
CHRONICLE, n ſ. [chronique, Fr. from xiàº, time.]
1. A regiſter or account of events in order of time.
No more yet of this ;
For 'tis a chronicle of day by day,
Not a relation for a breakfaſt. Shakeſp. Temptſ?.
2. A hiſtory.
You lean too confidently on thoſe Iriſh chronicles, which
are moſt fabulous and forged. Spenſer on Ireland.
If from the field I ſhould return once more,
I and my ſword will earn my chronicle. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleop.
I'm traduc’d by tongues, which neither knows
My faculties nor perſon, yet will be
The chronicles of my doing. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
I give up to hiſtorians the generals and heroes which crowd
their annals, together with thoſe which you are to produce
for the Britiſh chronicle. - Dryden.
To CHRO'Nicle. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To record in chronicle, or hiſtory.
This to rehearſe, ſhould rather be to chronicle times than
to ſearch into reformation of abuſes in that realm. Spenſ. Irel.
2. To regiſter; to record.
For now the devil, that told me I did well,
Says that this deed is chronicled in hell. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Love is your maſter; for he maſters you:
And he that is ſo yoked by a fool,
Methinks, ſhould not be chronicled for wiſe. Shakeſp.
I ſhall be the jeſt of the town; nay, in two days I expect to
be chronicled in ditty, and ſung in woful ballad. Cong. Old Bat.
CHR o'N1c1, E R. m. ſ. [from chronicle.]
1. A writer of chronicles; a recorder of events in order of time.
Here gathering chroniclers, and by them ſtand
Giddy fantaſtick poets of each land. Donne.
2. A hiſtorian; one that keeps up the memory of things paſt.
I do herein rely upon theſe bards, or Iriſh chroniclers. Spenſ.
This cuſtom was held by the druids and bards of our an-
tient Britons, and of latter times by the Iriſh chroniclers,
called rimers. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the J/orld.
CHR o'Nog RAM. m. ſ. [x:4's, time, and yºzºa, to write.] An
inſcription including the date of any action.
Of this kind the following is an example:
Gloria lauſque Deo, ſeCLor/M in ſec/la ſunt.
A chronogrammatical verſe, which includes not only this
year 1660, but numerical letters enough to reach above a
thouſand years further, until the year 2867. Howel's Parley.
CHR on 96 RAMMA'tical. adj. [from chronogram J Belonging
to a chronogram. See the laſt example.
CH Rosog RAMMATIST. m. ſ. [from chronogram J A writer of
chronograms.
There are foreign univerſities, where, as you praiſe a man
in England for being an excellent philoſopher or poet, it is an
ordinary character to be a great chronogrammati/?. Addiſon.
CHR on o’log ER. m. ſ. [x:23, time, and 2,5, doćtrine J He
that ſtudies or explains the ſcience of computing paſt time, or
of ranging paſt events according to their proper years.
Chronologers differ among themſelves about moſt great
epocha's. Holder on Time.
CHRONo lo'gical. adj. [from chronology.] Relating to the
doctrine of time.
Thus much touching the chronological account of ſome times
and things paſt, without confining in; ſelf to the exactneſs of
years. Halº’s Origin of Mankind.
CHRosolo'o cally. adv. [from chronolºgical.j In a chrono-
logical manner; according to the laws or rules of chronology;
according to the exact ſeries of time.
CHRONo'Loo is T. n. ſ. [See CHRONoLoc, F.R..] One that ſtudies
or explains time; one that ranges paſt events according to the
order of time; a chronologer.
According to theſe 'rººs, the prophecy of the Rabin
that the world ſhould laſt but fix thouſand years, has been long
diſproved. Brown's Pulgar Ernours.
All that learned noiſe and duſt of the chrono ogiſt is wholly
to be avoided. Locke on Education.
CHR on o’loc Y. m. ſ. [zzº, time, and x^, doctrine J The
ſcience of computing and adjuſting the periods of time; as
the revolution of the fun and moon; and of computing time
paſt, and referring each event to the proper year.
And the meaſure of the year not being ſo perfeótly known
to the ancients, rendered it very difficult for them to tranſmit
a true chronology to ſucceeding ages. A folder on Time.
Where I allude to the cuſtoms of the Grecks, I believe I
may be juſtified by the ſtrićteſt chronology; though a poet is
not obliged to the rules that confine an hiſtorian. Prior.
A CHRoso'METER. m. ſ. [x:43, and airs...] An inſtrument for
the exact menſuration of time.
According to obſervation made with a pendulum chronome-
ter, a bullet, at its firſt diſcharge, flies five hundred and ten
yards in five half ſeconds. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
CHRY's A Lis. n. ſ. [from zeta^, gold, becauſe of the golden
colour in the nymphae of ſome inſects.]
A term uſed by ſome naturaliſts for aurelia, or the firſt ap-
parent change of the maggot of any ſpecies of infects. Chamu.
CHRY'solite. m. ſ. [x, tºº, gold, and 2.82, a ſtone.]
A precious ſtone of a duſky green, with a caſt of yellow.
J/oodward's Meth. F.ſ.
Such another world,
Qf one intire and perfect chryſalite,
I’d not have ſold her for. Shakeſp. Othells.
If metal, part ſeem'd gold, part ſilver clear:
If ſtone, carbuncle moſt, or chrjolite. A ſilt. Par. Loff, b. iii.
CHRYso'PRAsus. n.ſ. [x:veº, gold, and profinus, green 1 A
precious ſtone of a yellow colour, approaching to green.
The ninth a topaz, the tenth a chryſºpraſus. Rev. xxi. 20.
CHUB. n.ſ. [from cop, a great head, Skinner.] A river fiſh.
The chevin. -
The chub is in prime from Midmay to Candlemas, but beſt
in winter. He is full of ſmall bones: he eats wateriſh; not
firm, but limp and taſteleſs: nevertheleſs, he may be ſo dreſſed
as to make him very good meat. J/alton's Angler.
CHU'BEf D. adj. [from chub.] Big-headed like a chub.
To CHUCK. v. n. [A word probably formed in imitation of
the ſound that it expreſſes; or perhaps corrupted from chick.]
To make a noiſe like a hen, when ſhe calls her chickens.
To CHUck. v. a.
1. To call as a hen calls her young.
Then crowing, clapp'd his wings, th' appointed call,
To chuck his wives together in the hall. Dryden's Fables.
2. To give a gentle blow under the chin, ſo as to make the
mouth ſtrike together.
Come, chuck the infant under the chin, force a ſmile, and
cry, ay, the boy takes after his mother's relations. Cong. O. B.
CHUck. m. ſ [from the verb.]
1. The voice of a hen.
He made the chuck four or five times, that people uſe to
make to chickens when they call them. Temple.
2. A word of endearment, corrupted from chicken or chick.
Come, your promiſe.—What promiſe, chuck Shakespeare. Othello.
3. A ſudden ſmall noiſe.
Chuck-FARTHING. n ſ. [chuck and farthing...] . A play, at
which the money falls with a chuck into the hole beneath.
He loſt his money at chuck-farthing, ſhuffle-cap, and all-
fours. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
To CHU'ckle. v. n. [ſhaecken, Dut..] To laugh vehemently;
to laugh convulſively.
What tale ſhall I to my old father tell?
'Twill make him chuckle thou'rt beſtow'd ſo well. Dryd.
She to intrigues was elen hard hearted;
She chuckl"d when a bawd was carted. Prior.
To CHU'cKLE. v. a. [from chuck.]
1. To call as a hen.
I am not far from the women's apartment, I am ſure; and
if theſe birds are within diſtance, here's that will chuckle 'cin
together. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
2. To cocker; to fondle. -
Your confeſſor, that parcel of holy guts and garbidge; he
muſt chuckle you, and moan you. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
CHU'E.T. m. ſ. [probably from To chew.] An old wºrd, as it
ſeems, for forced meat.
As for chucts, which are likewiſe minced mcat, inſtead of
butter and fat, it were good to moiſten them partly with
cream, or almond or piſtacho milk. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 54.
CHUFF. n.ſ. [A word of uncertain derivation; perhaps cor-
rupted from chub, or derived from #wſ, Welſh, a ſtock.] A
coarſe, fat-headed, blunt clown.
Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are you undone : No, ye fat
chuff, I would your ſtore were here. Shakeſp Henry IV.
A leſs generous chuff than this in the fable, would have
hugged his bags to the laſt. L’Eſtrange.
CHU'FFILY. adv [from cluff;...] Surlily; ſtomachfully.
John anſwered chuffly. Clariſſa.
CHU'FF1N Ess. n.ſ.. [from chiff; J Clowniſhneſs; furlineſs.
I CHU'FFY.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 32</div><p class="Text">C H U
C H Y
l
Chu'FFY. adj. [from chuff.J. Blunt; furly; fat.
CHUM. n.ſ. ſchem, Armorick, to live together.] A chamber
fellow; a term uſed in the univerſities.
CHUMP. n.ſ. A thick heavy piece of wood, leſs than a block.
When one is battered to ſhivers, they can quickly, of a
chump of wood, accommodate themſelves with another.
Moxon's Mech. Exer.
CHURCH. 7t. f. [cince, Sax. xvelax...]
1. The colle&amp;tive body of chriſtians, uſually termed the catho-
lick church.
The church being a ſupernatural ſociety, doth differ from
natural ſocieties in this ; that the perſons unto whom we aſſo-
ciate ourſelves in the one, are men, fimply confidered as men;
but they to whom we be joined in the other, are God, angels,
and holy men. Hooker, b. i. p. 45.
2. The body of chriſtians adhering to one particular opinion,
or form of worſhip.
The church is a religious aſſembly, or the large fair building
where they meet; and ſometimes the ſame word means à
ſynod of biſhops, or of preſbyters; and in ſome places it is
the pope and a general council. Watts's Logick.
3. d; place which chriſtians conſecrate to the worſhip of
od.
That churches were conſecrated unto none but the Lord
only, the very general name chiefly doth ſufficiently ſhew :
church doth ſignify no other thing than the Lord's houſe. Hook.
Tho' you unty the winds, and let them fight
Againſt the churches. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
4. It is uſed frequently in conjunction with other words; as
church-member, the member of a church; church-power,
ſpiritual or eccleſiaſtical authority.
To CHURCH. v. a. [from the noun..] To perform with any
one the office of returning thanks in the church, after any
fignal deliverance, as from the danger of childbirth.
CHURCH-ALE, n.ſ.. [from church and ale.] A wake, or feaſt,
commemoratory of the dedication of the church.
For the church-ale, two young men of the pariſh are yearly
choſen to be wardens, who make colle&amp;tion among the pa-
riſhioners of what proviſion it pleaſeth them to beſtow. Carew.
CHURCH-AT TIRE. m. ſ. The habit in which men officiate at
divine ſervice.
Theſe and ſuch like were their diſcourſes, touching that
church-attire, which with us for the moſt part is uſed in pub-
lick prayer. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 29.
Church-Authority. m. ſ. Eccleſiaſtical power; ſpiritual
juriſdićtion.
In this point of church-authority, I have fifted all the little
feraps alleged. - Alterbury.
Church-burial. n.ſ. Burial according to the rites of the
church.
The biſhop has the care of ſeeing that all chriſtians, after
their deaths, be not denied church-burial, according to the
uſage and cuſtom of the place. Ayliff's Paergon.
CHURCH-FoundER. n.ſ. He that builds or endows a church.
Whether emperors or biſhops in thoſe days were church-
founders, the ſolemn dedication of churches they thought not
to be a work in itſelf either vain or ſuperſtitious. Hooker.
CHURCH MAN. m. ſ. [church and man.]
1. § eccleſiaſtic; a clergyman; one that miniſters in ſacred
things.
If any thing be offered to you touching the church and
churchmen, or church-government, rely not only upon your-
ſelf. Bacon’s Advice to Willers.
A very difficult work to do, to reform and reduce a church
into order, that had been ſo long negle&amp;ted, and that was ſo
ill filled by many weak and more wilful churchmen. Clarend.
Patience in want, and poverty of mind,
Theſe marks of church and churchmen he deſign'd,
And living taught, and dying left behind. Dryden's Fables.
2. An adherent to the church of England.
Church-w AR DENs. n.ſ. [See WARPEN.] Are officers yearly
choſen, by the conſent of the miniſter and pariſhioners, ac-
cording to the cuſtom of each place, to look to the church,
church-yard, and ſuch things as belong to both ; and to ob-
ſerve the behaviour of the pariſhioners, for ſuch faults as ap-
pertain to the juriſdićtion or cenſure of the eccleſiaſtical court,
They are a kind of corporation, enabled by law to ſue for any
thing belonging to their church, or poor of their pariſh. Cowel.
There ſhould likewiſe church-wardens, of the graveſt men
in the pariſh, be appointed, as they be here in England. Spenſ,
Our church-wardens
Feaſt on the ſilver, and give us the farthings. Gav.
CHUR chy A R D. m. ſ. The ground adjoining to the church,
in which the dead are buried; a cemetery.
I am almoſt afraid to ſtand alone
Here in the churchyard, yet I will adventure. Shakeſpeare.
In churchyards, where they bury much, the earth will con-
fume the corps in far ſhorter timé than other earth will. Bacon.
No place ſo ſacred from ſuch fops is barr'd ;
Nor is Paul's church more ſafe than Paul's churchyard. Pºpe.
CHURL., n.f. [ccord, Sax. cari, in German, is ſtrong, ruſticks
being always obſerved to be ſtrong bodied.]
1. A ruſtick; a countryman; a lábourer.
One of the baſer ſort, which they call chºrls, being re-
Proved for his oath, anſwered confidently, that his lord Com-
manded him, Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
All the pow'r this chârm doth owe. Shakespeare Midſ. Night's Dr.
From this light cauſe th' infernal maid prepares
The country churls to miſchief, hate, and 'wºs. Dryd. Æn.
2. A rude, furly, iii-bred man.
# ºr's courteſy rarely comes, but either for gain of
falſhood. . . . - Sidney; b. ii.
3. A miſer; a niggard; a ſelfiſh or greedy wretch.
Poiſon, Iſee, hath been his timeleſs end
Q churl, drink all, and leave no friendly drop
To help me after. Shakeſp *.*.
CHU'Rlish. adj. [from churl) Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
1. Rude; brutal; harſh; auſtere; ſour; mercileſs; unkind;
uncivil. - - -
A ſea ºf melting pearl, which ſome call tears,
Thoſe at her father's churiſh feet ſhe tenderd, Shakeſp.
The interruption of their churliſh drums -
Cuts off more circumſtance: they are at hand
To parly, or to fight. Shakeſp. King john.
A lion in love with a laſs, deſired her father's conſen.”The
anſwer was churliſh enough, He'd never marry his daughter to
a brute. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
He the purſuit of churliſh beaſts,
Preferr'd to ſleeping on her breaſts. JWaller;
2. Selfiſh; avaritious.
The man was churliſh and evil in his doings. 1 Sa: xxv. 3:
This ſullen churliſh thief,
Had all his mind plac'd upon Mully's beef. King's M. of M.
3. [Of things.] Unpliant; croſs-grained; unmanageable; harſh;
not yielding. -
If there be emiſſion of ſpirit, the body of the metal will be
hard and churliſh. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 326.
The Corniſh men were become, like metal often fired and
quenched, churliſh, and that would ſooner break than bow.
- Bacon's Henry VII.
In the hundreds of Eſſex they have a very churliſh blue
clay. Mortimer's Husbandry;
4. Intraćtable; vexatious: -
Will you again unknit --
This churliſh knot of all abhorred war. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Spain found the war ſo churliſh and longſome, as they found
they ſhould conſume themſelves in an endleſs war. Bacon.
Spreads a path clear as the day,
Where no churliſh rub ſays nay. Craſhaw.
Chu'rlishly. adv. [from churliſh.] Rudely; brutally.
To the oak, now regnant, the olive did churliſhly put over
the ſon for a reward of the ſervice of his fire. Howel's Woc. For
CHU'RLISHNEss. m. ſ. . [from churliſh; cynlırcnerre, Saxoni
Brutality; ruggedneſs of manner.
Better is the churliſhneſs of a man than a courteous woman.
Ecclus. xlii. 14.
In the churliſhneſ, of fortune, a poor honeſt man ſuffers in
this world. L’Eſtrange:
CHURME. m. ſ. [more properly chirm, from the Saxon cynme,
a clamour or noiſe; as to chirre is to coo as a turtle..] A con-
fuſed ſound; a noiſe.
He was conveyed to the Tower with the churnie of a
thouſand taunts and reproaches. Bacon's Henry VII.
A CHURN. n.ſ. [properly chern, from kern, Dut. certene, Sax.]
The veſſel in which the butter is, by long and violent agita-
tion, coagulated and ſeparated from the ſerous parts of the
milk.
Heraukward fiſt did ne'er employ the churn. Gay's Paſº:
To CHURN. v. a. [Kermen, Dutch.]
1. To agitate or ſhake any thing by a violent motion,
Perchance he ſpoke not; but
Like a full acorn'd boar, a churning on,
Cried Oh. Shaky?:
Froth fills his chaps, he ſends a grunting ſound,
And part he churns, and part befoams the ground. Dryder.
Churn'd in his teeth, the foamy venom roſe. Ad. Ov. Met.
The mechaniſm of nature, in converting our aliment, con-
ſiſts in mixing with it animal juices, and, in the action of the
ſolid parts, churning them together. Arbuthnot on Alimentis
2. To make butter by agitating the milk: -
The churning of milk bringeth forth butter: Prov, xxx. 33.
You may try the force of imagination, upon, ſtaying the
coming of butter after the churning: Bacon's Nat. Hiſt,
Chu'RRworm. n.ſ.. [from cºnnan, Sax.] An inſcº hat turns
about nimbly; called alſo a fancricket. Skinner. Philips.
To CHUs E. See To CHoos F. - - i. -
Chylaceous. adj. [from chyle..] Belonging to chyle; con-
ſiſting of chyle. -
When .ſpirits of the chyle have half fermented the thy-
laceous maſs, it has the ſtate of drink, not ripened by fermen-
tation. Player on the Humourf,
CHYLE, n.ſ. [xºe.) The white juice formed in the ſtomach
by digeſtion of the aliment, and afterwards changed into
blood, This
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 33</div><p class="Text">C I N
C I C
incling with the parts, -
In 1 #. Blackm, Creation.
ugh the ſmalleſt veſſels.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Chylir Action. n.ſ. [from chyk.] The act or proceſs of
making chyle in the body.
Drinking exceſſively during the time of chylfaſhion, ſtops
erſpiration. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
cºve. adj. [from chylus and facio, to make, Lat.]
Having the power of making chyle. , -
Cºloroetick, adj. [xº, and *.] Having the power,
or the office, of forming chyle. -
According to the force of the chylºpoeticº, organs, more or
leſ, chyle may be extracted from the ſame food. , Arbuthnot.
Cºlous adj. [from chyle..] Conſiſting of chyle; partaking
f chyle.
O Miik is the chylus part of an animal, already prepared. Arb.
CHY'MIca L. '. c atin.
CHY'Mick. łº, [chymicus, Latin.]
. Made by chymiſtry.
I ...} ºiting for this chymick gold,
which fools us young, and beggars us when old. Dryden.
The medicines are ranged in boxes, according to their
diſtinét natures, whether chymical or Galenical preparations.
J/atts's Improvement of Mind, p. i. c. 17.
2. Relating to chymiſtry. -
Methinks already, from this chymick flame, -
I ſee a city of more precious mold. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
With thymic art exalts the min'ral pow'rs,
And draws the aromatick ſouls of flow'rs. Pope's Windſ. For.
Chy'Mically, adv. [from chymical.] In a chymical manner.
CHYMIST. n.ſ. [See CHY'Mistry.] A profeſſor of chy-
miſtry; a philoſopher by fire. -
The ſtarving chymiſ, in his golden views - *- --
Supremely bleſt. Pope's Eſſay on Man, Epiſt. ii.
CHY'Mist RY. n.ſ. [derived by ſome from xv.19, juice, or xºa,
to melt; by others from an oriental word, kema, black. Ac-
cording to the etymology, it is written with y or e.]
An art whereby ſenſible bodies contained in veſſels, or
capable of being contained therein, are ſo changed, by means
of certain inſtruments, and principally fire, that their ſeveral
powers and virtues are thereby diſcovered, with a view to
philoſophy, or medicine. Boerhaave.
Operations of chymiſtry fall ſhort of vital force: no chymiſt
can make milk or blood of graſs. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
CiBA'Rious. adj. [cibarius, Lat. from cibus, food.] Relating to
food; uſeful for food; edible.
Ci'Bol. n.f. [ciboule, Fr.] A ſmall ſort of onion uſed in ſal-
lads. See ONIon. This word is common in the Scotch
diale&amp;t; but the l is not pronounced.
Ciboules, or ſcallions, are a kind of degenerate onions. Mort.
CI'CATRICE. - . . -
CI'CATRIX. } n. ſ. ſcicatrix, Latin.]
1. The ſcar remaining after a wound.
One captain Spurio with his cicatrice, an emblem of war,
here on his finiſter cheek. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
2. A mark; an impreſſure: ſo uſed by Shakeſpeare leſs properly.
- Lean but upon a ruſh
The citatrice and capable impreſſure
Thy palm ſome moment keeps. Shakeſp. As you like it.
CIcarris ANT. n. ſ. [from cicatrice.] An application that in-
duces a cicatrice.
Creat Risive. adj. [from cicatrice.J Having the qualities pro-
Per to induce a cicatrice.
CiçATRIzA'tion. m. ſ. [from cicatrice.]
1. The ačt of healing the wound.
A vein burſted, or corroded in the lungs, is looked upon to
be for the moſt part incurable, becauſe of the continual mo-
tion and coughing of the lungs, tearing the gap wider, and
hindering the conglutination and cicatrization of the vein.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
2. The ſtate of being healed, or ſkinned over.
To Ci'cAtrize. v. a. [from cicatrix.]
1. To apply ſuch medicines to wounds, or ulcers, as heal and
ſkin them over. Jºuincy.
2. To heal and induce the ſkin over a ſore. -
We incarned, and in a few days cicatrized it with a ſmooth
cicatrix. Jºſeman on Tumours.
Cicely n ſ A ſort of herb. SeeSweet Cicely.
CŞHor Aſceous, adj. [from ci.horium, Lat.] Having the qua-
lities of ſuccory.
... Piureticks plentifully evacuate the ſalt ſerum; as all acid
*ticks, and the teſtaceous and bitter cichoraceous plants.
"I" – rºttrº y + Floyer on the Humours.
To CICURATE. v. a. ſcicuro, Lat.] To tame; to reclaim
from wildneſs; to make tame and tractable. -
- After carnal converſation poiſons may yet retain ſome por-
ºn of their natures; yet are ſo refracted, cicurated, and
tubducd, as not to make good their deſtructive malignities.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. 7. c. 18.
- f -
Cicus A º: "...ſ from circurate.] The act of taming or
rºclaiming from wildneſs.
This powerful ferment,
The leven'd maſs to milky chyle
The clyle itſelf cannot paſs thro
This holds not only in domeſtick and manſuete birds; for
then it might be the effect of cicuration or inſtitution; but in
the wild. Ray on the Creation.
CIDER, n.ſ.. [cidre, Fr. ſidra, Ital, ſcera, Lat. exi;2, "Dº")
1. All kind of ſtrong liquors, except wine. This ſenſe is now
wholly obſolete.
2. Liquor made of the juice of fruits preſſed.
We had alſo drink, wholſome and good wine of the
grape, a kind of cider made of a fruit of that country; a won-
derful pleaſing and refreſhing drink. Bacon's New Atlant.
3. The juice of apples expreſſed and fermented.
To the utmoſt bounds of this
Wide univerſe Silurian cider born,
Shall pleaſe all taſtes, and triumph o'er the vine.
C1'DER1st. n.ſ.. [from cider.] A maker of cider.
When the cideriffs have taken care for the beſt fruit, and
ordered them after the beſt manner they could, yet hath their
cider generally proved pale, ſharp, and ill taſted. Mortimer.
CI'der KIN. m.ſ.. [from cider.]
A low word uſed for the liquor made of the murk or groſs
matter of apples, after the cider is preſſed out, and a conve-
nient quantity of boiled water added to it; the whole infuſing
for about forty-eight hours. Philips's IP'orld of Iłord.
Ciderkin is made for common drinking, and ſupplies the
place of ſmall beer. Mortimer.
CIELING. m.ſ. See Ceiling.
CIERGE, n.ſ. [French..] A candle carried in proceſſions.
Ci'l ARY. adj. [cilium, Lat.] Belonging to the eyelids.
The ciliary proceſſes, or rather the ligaments, obſerved in
the inſide of the ſclerotick tunicles of the eye, do ſerve inſtead
of a muſcle, by the contraction, to alter the figure of the
eye. Ray on Creation.
Cilicious. adj. [from cilicium, hair-cloth, Lat.] Made of hair.
A garment of camel's hair; that is, made of ſome texture
of that hair, a coarſe garment, a cilicious or ſackcloth habit,
ſuitable to the auſterity of his life. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
C1'MA. See CYMATIUM.
CIMA'R. See SIMAR.
CIME'LIARCH. m. ſ. [from xiiazºtzºxys.] The chief keeper of
plate, veſtments, and things of value belonging to a church;
a church-warden. Dićf.
CIME: ER. m.ſ. [cimitarra, Span. and Portug. from chimeteir,
Turkiſh. Bluteau's Portugueſe Dictionary.] A ſort of ſword
uſed by the Turks; ſhort; heavy ; and recurvated, or bent
backward. This word is ſometimes erroneouſly ſpelt ſcimitar,
and ſymeter; as in the following examples.
By this ſcimitar,
That ſlew the ſophy and a Perſian prince,
That won three fields of ſultan Solyman. Shakespeare Mr. of Pan.
Our armours now may ruſt, our idle ſymiters
Hang by our ſides for ornament, not uſe. Dryd. Don Selaſt.
C1'Nct URE. m. ſ. [cinéiura, Latin J
1. Something worn round the body.
Now happy he, whoſe cloak and cin?ure
Hold out this tempeſt. Shakeſp. King john.
Columbus found th’ American, ſo girt
With feather'd cincture, naked elſe, and wild. Mill. Pa. Loſt.
He binds the ſacred cincture round his breaſt. Pope's Odſ.
2. An incloſure.
The court and priſon being within the cinélure of one wall.
Bacon's Henry VII.
3. [In archite&amp;ture.] A ring or liſt at the top and bottom of the
ſhaft of a column; ſeparating the ſhaft at one end from the
baſe, at the other from the capital. It is ſuppoſed to be in
imitation of the girths or ferrils anciently uſed, to ſtrengthen
and preſerve the primitive wood-columns. Chambers.
CINDER. m. ſ. ſceindre, Fr. from cineres, Latin.]
1. A maſs ignited and quenched, without being reduced to aſhes.
I ſhould make very forges of my cheeks,
That would to cinders burn up modeſty,
Did but I ſpeak thy deeds. Shakespeare Othello.
There is in ſmiths cinders, by ſome adheſion of iron, ſome-
times to be found a magnetical operation. Brown's Pul. Err.
So ſnow on AFtna does unmelted lie,
Philips.
Whoſe rolling flames and ſcatter'd cinders fly. Waller.
2. A hot coal that has ceaſed to flame.
If from adown the hopeful chops
The fat upon a cinder drops, -
To ſtinking ſmoke it turns the flame. Swift.
A woman
CINDER-wench. m. ſ. [cinder and wºman
CINDER-woman. } whoſe trade is to rake in heaps of aſhes
for cinders. -
'Tis under ſo much naſty rubbiſh laid, -
To find it out's the cinder-woman's trade. Eſſay on Satire.
She had above five hundred ſuits of fine cloaths, and yet
went abroad like a cinder-wench. Arbuth. Hiſł. ºf john Bull.
In the black form of cinder-wen h ſhe came, -
When love, the hour, the place had baniſh'd ſhame. Gay.
CINERATION. n.ſ.. [from cineres, Lat.] The reduction of
any thing by fire to aſhes. A term of chymiſtry.
CINERI'TIows.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 34</div><p class="Text">Č I P
C I R.
ÜINER ºr rous. adj. [cinericius, Lat.] Having the form or ſtate
of aſhes.
The nerves ariſe from the glands of the circritist's part of
the brain, and are terminated in all the parts of the body.
Cheyne's Philºſºphical Principles.
CINE'RULE NT. adj. [from cineres, Lat.] Full of aſhes Diº.
CI's G.L.E. n.ſ.. [from cingulum, Lat..] A girth for a horſe. Dicº.
C1'NNA EAR. m. ſ. [cinnabaris, Latin.] Cinnabar is native or
factitious : the factitious cinnabar is called vermilion.
China'ar is the ore out of which quickſilver is drawn, and
conſiſts partly of a mercurial, and partly of a ſulphureo-
ochreous matter. iſ toºvard's Meth. Foſſi.
The particles of mercury uniting with the particles of ſul-
phur, compoſe cinnahar. Newt. Oft.
CINNA has ºf antimony, is made of mercury, ſulphur, and
crude antimony.
CINNAN:GN. m. ſ. [cinnamomum, Lat J The fragrant bark
of a low tree in the iſland of Ceylon, poſſeſſed by the Dutch,
in the Eaſt Indies. Its leaves reſemble thoſe of the olive,
both as to ſubſtance and colour. The fruit reſembles an
acorn or olive, and has neither the ſmell nor taſte of the
bark. When boiled in water, it yields an oil, which, as it
cools and hardens, becomes as firm and white as tallow ; the
ſmell of which is agreeable in candles. The trees are chiefly
propagated by a ſort of pigeons which feed on the fruit, and,
carrying it to their young, drop it where it takes root. Cin-
namon is chiefly uſed in medicine as an aſtringent. The
cinnamon of the ancients was different from ours. Chambers.
Let Araby cztol her happy coaſt,
Her cirnamon and ſweet amomum boaſt. Dryden's Fables.
CIN's A:ox Pºater is made by diſtilling the bark, firſt inſuſed in
barley water, in ſpirit of wine or white wine. Chambers.
CINº. 7 ſ. [Fr.] A Five. It is uſed in games alone; but is
often compounded with other words.
CINQUE-F of L. m. ſ. [cinque feuille, Fr.] A kind of five leaved
clover.
CINQUE-PACE. n.ſ. ſciºtte par, Fr.] A kind of grave dance.
Wooing, wedding, and repenting is a Scotch jig, a mea-
ſure, and a cinque pace. The firſt ſuit is hot and haſty, like a
Scotch jig, and full as fantaſtical; the wedding, mannerly and
modeſt, as a meaſure, full of ſtate and gravity; and then
comes repentance, and, with his bad legs, falls into the cinque
pace faſter and faſter, till he finks into his grave. Shakeſp.
CNQUE-Pokºrs. n.ſ. [cinque ports, Fr.]
Thoſe havens that lie towards France, and therefore have
been thought by our kings to be ſuch as ought moſt vigilantly
to be obſerved againſt invaſion. In which reſpect, the places
where they are have a ſpecial governour or keeper, called by
his office J.ord Warden of the cinque ports ; and divers privi-
leges granted to them, as a particular juriſdiction, their war-
den having the authority of an admiral among them, and
ſending out writs in his own nane. The cinque ports are
Dover, Sandwich, Rye, Haſtings, Winchelſea, Rumney, and
Hithe ; ſome of which, as the number czcecds five, muſt
either be added to the firſt inſtitution by ſome later grant, or
accounted as appendants to ſome of the reſt. Cowel.
They, that bear
The cloth of ſtate above her, are four barons
Of the cinque pºrts. Stakeſp. Henry VIII.
CINQUE-sport L.D. adj. Having five ſpots.
On her left breaſt
A mole, cinque ſpotted, like the crimſon drops
I' th' bottom of a cowſlip. Sºakſp. Cymbeline.
CI'on. n ſ [ſion, or ſtion, French.]
1. A ſprout ; a ſhoot from a plant.
We have reaſon to cool our raging motions, our carnal
ſings, our unbitted lufts; whereof I take this that you call
love, to be a ſcét or cion. Shakespeare Othello.
The ſtately Caledonian oak, newly ſettled in his triumphant
throne, begirt with cions of his own royal ſtem,
Howel's Pocal Forſ.
2. The ſhoot cngrafted or inſerted on a ſtock.
The cion over-ruleth the ſtock quite; and the ſtock is but
paſſive only, and giveth alim.cnt, but no motion to the graft.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 42 1.
CIPHER. m. ſ. ſchifre, Fr. 2ifra, Ital. cifra, low Lat. from
an oriental root J
1. An arithmetical chara&amp;er, by which ſome number is noted;
a figure.
2. An arithmetical mark, which, ſtanding for nothing itſelf, in-
creaſes the value of the other figures.
Mine were the very cipher of a funétion,
To find the faults, whoſe fine ſtands in record,
And let go by the actor. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
If the people be ſomewhat in the election, you cannot
nake them nulls or ciphers in the privation or tranſlation. Bar.
As, in accounts, ciphers and figures paſs for real ſums, ſo
names paſs for things. South's Sermons.
3. An intertexture of letters engraved uſually on boxes or plate.
Troy flam'd in burniſh’d gold; and o'er the throne,
Arms and the man in golden ciphers ſhone. Pop, Temp, ºf F.
Some mingling ſtir the melted tar, and ſome
VoI. I.
7. Any ſeries ending as it begins, and perpetually repeated.
Decp on the new-ſhorn vagrant's heaving ſide, .
To ſtamp the maſter's cipher, ready ſtand. Thºſ S ºr
4. A character in general. -
In ſucceeding times this wiſdom began to be w tº n in
ciphers and chaiaélers, and letters bearing the cº-
tures. - Rºgº, º º º 'º',
5. A ſecret or occult manner of writing, or the kº tº ".
This book, as long liv'd as the clements.
In cipher writ, or new made idioms nº
He was pleaſed to command me to ſtay at on ..., to º
and receive all his letters; and I was furn!!!… " ' " 'º
ſeveral ciphers, in order to it. Leº tº º
To Ci'PH £R. v. m. [from the noun.]
To practice arithmetick.
You have been bred to buſineſ, ; you can citier. f vºº'."
you never uſed your pen and ink. Aºith. Hºſt. ºf j . º.
To C1 PHE R. v a. To write in occult characters. -
He frequented ſermons, and penned notes: his nºte, he
ciphered with Greek characters. Hayward on Edward VI.
To Ci'Rc INATE. v. a. [circino, Lat.] To rake a circle; to
compaſs round, or turn round. jºi.º.
CIR cINA'TION. m. ſ. [ciºlinatio, Lat..] An orbicular ºctiºn;
a turning round; a meaſuring with the compaſſes. tº ailey.
CIRCLE. m. ſ [cir, uſus, Latin.]
1. A line continued 'till it ends where it begun, having all its
parts equidiſtant from a common center.
Any thing, that moves round about in a circle, in leſs time
than our ideas are wont to ſucceed one another in our rinds,
is not perceived to move; but ſeems to be a perfect intire circle
of that matter, or colour, and not a part of a circle in mo-
tion. Loºke.
Then a deeper ſtill,
In circle following circle, gathers round
To cloſe the face of things.
2. The ſpace included in a circular line.
3. A round body; an orb. º º
It is he that fitteth upon the circle of the earth. If xi. 22.
4. Compaſs; incloſure.
Tºomſºn's Summer:
A great magician, º
Obſcured in the circle of the foreſt. Shakespeare. A you lie it.
5. An aſſembly ſurrounding the principal perſon.
To have a box where eunuchs ſing,
And, foremoſt in the circle, eye a king. Pope', Hor. Ep. i.
6. A company; an aſſembly.
I will call over to him the whole circle of beauties that arc
diſpoſed among the boxes. Addison's Guardian, Nº. . .
Ever ſince that time, Liſander viſits in every circle. Yati, º,
. There be divers fruit-trees in the hot countries, which have
bloſſoms and young fruit, and young fruit and ripe fruit, al-
moſt all the year, ſucceeding one another ; but this circ of
ripening cannot be but in ſucculent plants, and hot countries.
Bacon's Natural 1 ſtory, Nº. 581.
Thus in a circle runs the peaſant's pain,
And the year rolls within itſelf again. Dryd. Pirg, Geor.
8. An inconcluſive form of argument, in which the foregoing
propoſition is proved by the following, and the following pro-
poſition inferred from the foregoing.
That heavy bodies deſcend by gravity; and again, that
gravity is a quality whereby an heavy body deſcends, is an im-
pertinent circle, and teacheth nothing. Glanv. Scºtſ. c 2.0.
That fallacy called a circle, is when one of the premiſes in
a ſyllogiſm is queſtioned and oppoſed, and we intend to prove
it by the concluſion. - //atts's Lagick.
9. Circumlocution ; indireét form of words.
Has he given the lye
In circle or oblique, or ſemicircle,
Or direct parallel You muſt challenge him. Fet, Q. ºf Cor.
10. CIR cles of the German Empire. Such provinces and prin-
cipalities as have a right to be preſent at diets. They are in
number ten. - Tº evoux.
To CI'RCLE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1: To move round any thing.
The lords that were appointed to circle the hill, had ſome
days before planted themſelves in places convenient. Bacon.
Another Cynthia her new journey runs,
And other planets circle other ſuns. Pope's Danciad, b. iii.
2. To incloſe ; to ſurround.
What ſtern ungentle hands
Have lopp'd and hew'd, and made thy body bare
Of her two branches, thoſe ſweet ornaments,
Whoſe circling ſhadows kings have ſought to ſleep in. Shakesp.K.
While theſe fond arms, thus circling you, may prove
More heavy chains than thoſe of hopeleſs love.
Unſeen, he glided thro' the joyous crowd,
with darkneſs circled, and an ambient cloud. Popº's Odſ.
3. To C1RcLE in. To confine; to keep together, -
We term thoſe things dry which have a conſiſtence within
themſelves, and which, to enjoy a determinate figure, do not
require the ſtop or hindrance of another body to limit and
circle them in. Digby on Bodies.
To Ci'Rclf. v. m. To move circularly ; to end where it begins.
4 O - The
Prior.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 35</div><p class="Text">C I R
C I R
The well fraught bowſ
tirº, inceſant; whilſt the humble cell
With quavering laugh, and rural jeſts, reſounds. Philips;
Now the circl ng years diſcloſe
The day predeſtin'd to reward his woes. Pope's Odſ.
Circle D. ad . [from circle.] iiaving the form of a circle; round.
Th’ inconſtant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb. Shakesp. R. andj.
Ci'RcLF r. m. ſ. [from circle J A circle; an orb.
‘I hen take repaſt, 'till Heſperus diſplay'd
His goºd n circlºt in the weſtern ſhade. Pºpº's Odſ.
C1'Rcline. f articipial adj. [from To circle.] Having the form
of a circle; circular; round.
Round he ſurveys, and well might, where he ſtood
So high above the circling canopy
Of night's extended ſhade. A ſilton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. iii.
CIRCUIT. n.ſ.. [circuit, Fr. circuitus, Latin J
1. The act of moving round any thing.
The circuits, in former times, went but round about the
pale; as the circuit of the cynoſura about the pole. Davies.
There are four moons alſo perpetually rolling round the
planet Jupiter, and carried along with him in his periodical
circuit round the ſun. // atts's Improvement.
2. The ſpace incloſed in a circle.
He led me up
A woody mountain, whoſe high top was plain
A circuit wide inclos'd. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. viii.
3. Space; extent; meaſured by travelling round.
He attributeth unto it ſmallneſs, in reſpect of circuit.
Hocker, b. v. ſ. 19.
The lake of Bolſena is reckoned one and twenty miles in
circuit. Addison on Italy.
4. A ring; a diadem; that by which anything is incircled.
And this fell tempeſt ſhall not ceaſe to rage,
Until the golden circuit on my head
Do calm the fury of this mad-bain'd flaw. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
5. The viſitations of the judges for holding aſ:ſes.
6. The tract of country viſited by the judges.
7. C1R cuir of Acţiºn. In law, is a longer courſe of proceed-
ing to recover the thing ſued for than is needful. Cowel.
To C1rcuit. v. n. [from the noun...] To move circularly.
Pining with equinoëtial heat, unleſs
The cordial cup perpetual motion keep,
Quick circuiting. Philips.
CIRCUITEER. m. ſ. [from circuit..] One that travels a circuit.
Like your fellow circuiteer the ſun : you travel the round of
the earth, and behold all the iniquities under the heavens. Pope.
C1R cul'tion. n.ſ.. [circuitio, Lat.]
1. The act of going round any thing.
2. Compaſs; maze of argument; comprehenſion.
To apprehend by what degrees they lean to things in ſhow,
though not indeed repugnant one to another, requireth more
ſharpneſs of wit, more intricate circuitions of diſcourſe, and
depth of judgment, than common ability doth yield. Hooker.
CIR cu LAR. adj. [circularis, Latin.]
1. Round, like a circle; circumſcribed by a circle.
The frame thereof ſecm'd partly circular,
And part triangular. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
He firſt inclos'd for liſts a level ground;
The form was circular. Dryd. Fables.
Nero's port, compoſed cf huge moles running round it,
in a kind of circular figure. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
2. Succeſſive in order; always returning.
From whence th' innumerable race of things,
By circular ſucceſſive order ſprings.
3. Vulgar; mean ; circumforaneous.
Had Virgil been a circular poet, and cloſely adhered to
hiſtory, how could the Romans have had Dido Dennis.
4. CIRCULAR Letter. A letter dire&amp;ted to ſeveral perſons, who
have the ſame intereſt in ſome common affair; as in the con-
vocation of aſſemblies.
5. CIR cul AR lines. Such ſtrait lines as are divided from the
diviſions made in the arch of a circle; as the lines of ſines,
tangents, and ſecants on the plain ſcale and ſector.
6. CIR culAR Sailing, is that performed on the arch of a great
circle.
Circul A'RITY. n ſ [from circular, J A circular form.
The heavens have no diverſity or difference, but a ſimpli-
city of parts, and equiformity in motion, continually ſucceed-
ing cach other; ſo that, from what point ſoever we compute,
the account will be common unto the whole circularity. Brown.
Ci'Reu LARLY. adj. [from circular.]
1. In form of a circle.
The internal form of it conſiſts of ſeveral regions, in-
volving one another like orbs about the ſame centre, or of
the ſeveral elements caſt circularly about each other. Burnet.
2. With a circular motion.
Trade, which, like blood, ſhould circularly flow,
Stopp'd in their channels, found its freedom ioſt. Dryden.
Every body moved circularly about any center, recede, or
endeavour to recede, from that center of its motion. Ray.
Roſcommon.
To Ciºcular E. v. M. (from circulus | To move in a circle;
to rin round; to return to the place whence it departed in a
conſtant courſe. .
If our lives motions theirs muſt imitate,
Our knowledge, like our blood, muſt circulate. Denham.
Nature is a perpetual motion; and the work of the uni-
verſe circulates without any interval or repoſe. L’E/irange.
In the civil wars, the money ſpent on both ſides was cir-
culated at home; no publick debts contracted. Swift.
To C1'RCULATE. v. a. To put about.
CIR cul A'TIos. n.f. [from circulate.]
1. Motion in a circle; a courſe in which the motion tends to
the point from which it began.
What more obvious, one would think, than the circulation
of the blood, unknown 'till the laſt age Burnet's Theory.
As much blood paſſeth through the lungs as through all the
reſt of the body: the circulation is quicker, and heat greater,
and their texture extremely delicate. Arbuthnot on aliments.
2. A ſeries in which the ſame order is always obſerved, and
things always return to the ſame ſtate.
As for the fins of peace, thou haſt brought upon us the
miſeries of war; ſo for the fins of war, thou ſeeſt fit to
deny us the blººding of peace, and to keep us in a circulation
of miſeries. K. Charles.
God, by the ordinary rule of nature, permits this continual
circulation of human things. Swift on 41.4ern Education.
3. A reciprocal interchange of meaning.
When the apoſtle faith of the Jews, that they crucified the
Lord of glory; and when the ſon of man, being on earth,
affirmeth that the ſon of man was in heaven at the ſame
inſtant, there is in theſe two ſpeeches that mutual circulation
before mentioned. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 53.
C1'Rculato R Y. m. ſ. [from circulate.] A chymical veſſel, in
which that which riſes from the veſiel on the fire, is collected
and cooled in another fixed upon it, and falls down again.
CI'Rculator Y. adj. [from circulate J Circulatory Letters are
the ſame with CIR culA R Letters.
CIR cu M A MBI ENcy. m. ſ. [from circumambient.] The act of
encompaſſing.
Ice receiveth its figure according unto the ſurface whereof
it concreteth, or the circumambiency which conformeth it.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 1.
CIRCUMAMBIENT. adj. [circum and ambio, Latin.] Sur-
rounding; encompaſſing; incloſing.
The circumambient coldneſs towards the ſides of the veſſel,
like the ſecond region, cooling and condenſing of it. Wilkins.
To Circum A'MBULATE. v. n. [from circum and ambulo, Lat.]
To walk round about. - Dićt.
To CIRCUMCISE. v. a. [circumcido, Latin.] To cut the
prepuce or foreſkin, according to the law given to the Jews.
They came to circumciſe the children. Luke i. 59.
One is alarmed at the induſtry of the whigs, in aiming to
fºrengthen their routed party by a reinforcement from the cir-
cumciſed. Swift's Examiner, Nº. 47.
CIR cumci'sion. n.ſ.. [from circumciſe.] The rite or act of
cutting off the foreſkin.
They left a race behind
Like to themſelves, diſtinguiſhable ſcarce
From Gentiles, but by circumciſion vain. Milt. Par. Rºg.
To CIRCUMDUCT. v. a. [circumduco, Lat..] To contra-
vene ; to nullify.
Aéts of judicature may be cancelled and circumdućted by the
will and direction of the judge; as alſo by the conſent of the
parties litigant, before the judge has pronounced, and given
ſentence. Ayliffe's Parergon.
CIR cu MDU'ction. m. ſ. [from circumdući.]
1. Nullification; cancellation.
The citation may be circumdućted, though the defendant
ſhould not appear; and the defendant muſt be cited, as a cir-
cumduéïion requires. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. A leading about.
CIRCU'MFERENCE. n.ſ.. [circumferentia, Latin.]
1. The periphery; the line including and ſurrounding any thing.
Extend thus far thy bounds,
This be thy juſt circumference, O world ! Milton's Par. Loſt.
Becauſe the hero is the center of the main action, all the
lines from the circumference tend to him alone. Dryd. Dufreſ.
A coal of fire, moved nimbly in the circumference of a cir-
cle, makes the whole circumference appear like a circle of fire.
Newton's Opticks.
2: The ſpace incloſed in a circle.
So was his will
Pronounc'd among the gods, and by an oath,
That ſhook heav'n's whole circumference, confirm'd. Milton.
He firſt inclos'd for liſts a level ground,
The whole circumference a mile around.
3. The external part of an orbicular body.
The bubble, being looked on by the light of the
clouds reflected from it, ſeemed red at its apparent circumfe-
rence. If the clouds were viewed through it, the colour at its
circumference would be blue. Newton's Opticks.
4. An orb ; a circle; anything circular or orbicular.
Dryden's Fables.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

3 His
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 36</div><p class="Text">C I R.
His pond’rous ſhield, large and round,
Behind him caſt; the broad circumference
Hung on his ſhoulders like the moon. Milton's Par. Iyſł.
To Circu'MFERENCE. v. a. [from the noun..] To include in
a circular ſpace.
Nor is the vigour of this great body included only in itſelf,
or circumferenced by its ſurface; but diffuſed at indeterminate
diſtances. Brown's Wugar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
Circusſ FERE'NToR m. ſ. [from circumfero, Lat. to carry about...]
An inſtrument uſed in ſurveying, for meaſuring angles, con-
ſiſting of a braſs circle, an index with ſights, and a com-
paſs, and mounted on a ſtaff, with a ball and ſocket. Chambers.
C1'rcu M FLEx. m. ſ. [circumflexus, Lat.] An accent uſed to
regulate the pronunciation of ſyllables, including or partici-
pating the acute and grave.
The circumflex keeps the voice in a middle tune, and there-
fore in the Latin is compounded of both the other. Holder.
CIRcu'M FLUENCE. m. ſ [from circumfluent.] An incloſure of
waters.
CIRCU'MFLUENT. adj. [circumfluens, Lat..] Flowing round
any thing.
I rule the Paphian race,
Whoſe bounds the deep circumfluent waves embrace,
A duteous people, and induſtrious iſle. Pope's Odyſſ.
Circu'MFluous. adj. [circumfluus, Lat.J Environing with
watcrS.
He the world
Built on circumfluous waters calm; in wide -
Cryſtalline ocean. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii. 1.269.
Laertes' ſon girt with circumfluous tides. Pope's Odyſſ.
CIRCUM For A'Neous. adj. [circumforaneus, Lat.] Wandering
from houſe to houſe. As a circumforaneous fidler; one that
plays at doors. -
To CIRCUMFU'SE. v. a. [circumfuſus, Lat..] To pour round;
to ſpread every way.
Men ſee better, when their eyes are againſt the ſun, or
candle, if they put their hand before their eye. The glaring
fun, or candie, weakens the eye; whereas the light circum-
jºſed, is enough for the perception. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
His army, circumfus'd on either wing. Milt. Par. Loft.
Earth, with her nether ocean, circumfus'd
Their pleaſant dwelling-houſe. . . Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
This nymph the god Cephiſus had abus'd,
With all his winding waters circumfu'd. Addison Ov. Met.
CircumfU'sile. adj. [circum and fiftlis, Lat.] That which
may be poured or ſpread round any thing.
Artiſt divine, whoſe ſkilful hands infold
The victim's horn with circumfuſile gold: Pope's Odyſſ.
CIR cum Fu'sion. n ſ. [from circumfuſe.] The act of ſpread-
inground; the ſtate of being poured round.
To CIRCUMGYRATE. v. a. [circum and gyrus, Lat..] To
roll round. -
All the glands of the body be congeries of various
forts of veſſels, curled, circumgyrated, and complicated to-
gether. . . Ray on Creation.
Circum GYRA'tion. n.ſ.. [from circumgyrate.] The act of
running round.
The ſun turns round his own axis in twenty-five days,
which ariſes from his firſt being put into ſuch a circumgyration.
- - Cheyne's Philoſophical Prin.
CIRCUMJA'cèNT. adj. [circumjacens, Lat..] Lying round any
thing; bordering on every fide. -
Ciacum INCE'ssios. m. ſ. [from circum and intedo, Lat.]
A term uſed by the ſchool-divines to expreſs the exiſtence
of three divine perſons in one another, in the myſtery of the
trinity. . Chambers.
CIR cum I'tion. n.ſ. ſ from circumco, circumitum, Latin. )
The act of going round. - IDići.
CIF cum lic A'tion. m. ſ. [circumligo, Latin.]
1. The act of binding round.
2. The bond with which any thing is encompaſſed.
CIR cum Locu'tion. m. ſ. [circumlocutio, Latin.]
1. A circuit or compaſs of words; periphraſis.
Virgil, ſtudying brevity, could bring theſe words into a
narrow compaſs, which a tranſlator cannot render without
circumlocutions. Dryden.
I much prefer the plain Billingſgate way of calling names,
becauſe it would ſave abundance of time, loſt by circumlo-
cution. Swift's Miſcellanies.
2. The uſe of indire&amp;t expreſſions. - -
Theſe people are not to be dealt withal, but by a train of
myſtery and circumlocution. - L’Eſtrange.
Circu MMU'RED. adj. [circum and murus, Lat.] Walled round;
encompaſſed with a wall.
He hath a garden circummur'd with bricks.
CIR cu MNA'v IGABLE, adj.
which may be ſailed round.
The being of Antipodes, the habitableneſs of the torrid
zone, and the rendering the whole terraqucous globe circum-
navigable. Ray on the Creation.
To C1R cuxi N.A'vigATE. v. a. [circum and naviga, Lat.] To
ſail round.
Shakeſp.
[from circumnavigate. J That
CIR cux, NA vic A'ric.N. m.ſ.. [from circumravigate.] The aćt
of ſailing round. . . . . . ** - *
What he ſays concerning the circumnavigation of Africa,
from the ſtraits of Gibraltar to the Red Sea, is very remark-
able. Arbuthnot on Coinſ.
CIRCUMplica"tion. n.ſ. [circumplico, Lat.]
I. The act of enwrapping on every ſide.
2. The ſtate of being enwrapped. - - -
Circumpola R. adj [from ircum and polar.] Stars near the
North pole, which move round it, and never ſet in the
Northern latitudes, are ſaid to be circumpolar/lars,
Circumposition. n.ſ.. [from circum and poſition.] The act
of placing any thing circularly. - - - - - - - -- * -
Now is your ſeaſon for circumpºſition, by tiles or baſkets of
earth. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Circumra'sion. n.ſ.. [circumroſio, Latin.] The act of
ſhaving or paring round. Dicſ.
CIR cum RotA'tion. n.ſ.. [circum and roto, Lat.]
1. The act of whirling round with a motion like that of a
wheel. Circumvolution. -
2. The ſtate of being whirled round.
To CIRCUMSCRIBE. v. a. [circum and ſcribe, Latin.]
1. To incloſe in certain lines or boundaries.
2. To bound; to limit; to confine.
The good Andronicus,
With honour and with fortune is return'd;
From whence he circumſcribed with his ſword, -
And brought to yoke th' enemies of Rome. Shakeſp. Tit. An.
Therefore muſt his choice be circumſcrib'd
Unto the voice and yielding of that body,
Whereof he's head. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
And form'd the pow'rs of heav'n
Such as he pleas'd, and circumſcrib'd their being ! Milton.
The action great, yet circumſcrib'd by time; -
The words not forc'd, but ſliding into rhime. . . Dryden.
We ſee that the external circumſtances which do accom-
pany mens ačts, are thoſe which do circumſcribe and limit
them. - Stillingſlett,
You are above
The little forms which circumſcribe your ſex.
CIR cu Mscri'ption. m. ſ [circumſcriptio, Latin.]
1. Determination of particular form or magnitude. . .
in the circumſcription of many leaves, flowers, fruits and
ſeeds, nature affects a regular figure. Ray on the Creation.
2. Limitation; boundary; contraction; confinement.
I would not my unhouſed free condition,
Put into circumſcription and confine. Shakeſp. Othello.
CIRCUMscriptive. adj. [from circumſcribe J Incloſing the
ſuperficies; marking the form or limits on the outſide. -
Stones regular, are diſtinguiſhed by their external forms:
ſuch as is circumſcriptive, or depending upon the whole ſtone,
as in the eagle-ſtone; and this is properly called the figure.
- Grew's Muſeum.
CIRCUMSPECT. adj. [circumſpecium, Lat.] Cautious; atten-
tive to every thing; watchful on all ſides.
: . . . None are for me,
That look into me with conſid’rate eyes.
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumſpeci. Shakespeare R.H.I.
Men of their own nature circumſpect and ſlow, but at the
time diſcountenanced and diſcontent. - Haywood.
. The judicious doćtor had been very watchful and circum-
ſpett, to keep himſelf from being impoſed upon. Boyle.
Circumspect 1 on. n.ſ.. [from circumſpect.] Watchfulneſs on
every ſide; cautious; general attention.
Obſerve the ſudden growth of wickedneſs, from want of
care and circumſpection in the firſt impreſſions. Clarendon.
So ſaying, his proud ſtep he ſcornful turn'd, -
But with ſly circumſpection. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv.
CIRCUMSPE'ctive. adj. [circumſpicio, circumſpecium, Latin.]
Looking round every way; attentive; vigilant; cautious.
No leſs alike the politick and wiſe,
All fly ſlow things, with circumſpeciive eyes. Pope's Eſſay.
CIRCUMSPE'ctively, adv. [from circumſpeciive..] Cautiouſly;
ºnly ; attentively; with watchfulneſs every way; watch-
fully. - -
CIRCUMSPE'ctly. adv. [from circumſpe?..] With watchful-
neſs every way; cautiouſly; watchfully; vigilantly.
. Their authority weighs more with me than the concurrent
ſuffrages of a thouſand eyes, who never examined the thing
ſo carefully and circumſpecily. Ray on the Creation.
CIRCUM spectNess. n.ſ. [from circumſhed.] Caution; vigi-
lance; watchfulneſs on every ſide.
Travel forces circumſpecinſ on thoſe abroad, who at home
are nurſed in ſecurity. . . . * - ... - Wotton.
CIRCUMSTANCE, n.ſ. [circumſtantia, Latin.]
1. Something appendant or relative to a fact: the ſame to a
moral action as accident to a natural ſubſtance.
When men are ingenious in picking out circumſtances of
contempt, they do kindle their anger much. Baron's Eſſays.
Our confeſſing or concealing perſecuted truths, vary and
change their very nature, according to different circumſances
of time, place and perſons. South.
2. The
Southern.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 37</div><p class="Text">C I R.
C I Tº
:
i
º
•. The adjunds of a faā, which make it mºre or leſs crimi-
nal; or make an accuſation more or leſs probable.
Of theſe ſuppoſed crimes give me leave, /º, Iº.
By circumſtance, but to acquit myſelf. Shakespeare Riº. III.
3. Accident; ſomething adventitious, which may be taken away
without the annihilation of the principal thing conſidered.
Senſe outſide knows, the ſoul thro' all things ſees: .
Senſe, circumſtance; ſhe doth the ſubſtance yiew. Davies.
4. Incident; event; generally of a minute or ſubordinate kind.
He defended Carliſle with very reaiarkable circumſtanics of
courage, induſtry, and patience. Clarendon, b. viii.
The ſculptor had in his thoughts the conqueror's weeping
for new worlds, or ſome other the like circumſtance in hiſtory.
Addison on Italy.
The poet has gathered thoſe circumſtance, which moſt ter.
rify the imagination, and which really happen in the raging of
a tempeſt. Addison's Spºtator, Nº. 480.
5. Condition; ſtate of affairs. It is frequently uſed with reſpect
to wealth or poverty; as good or ill circumſtances.
None but a virtuous man can hope well in all circum-
Jºances. Bacon's Ornan. Ratiºn.
We ought not to conclude, that if there be rational inha-
bitants in any of the planets, they muſt therefore have human
nature, or be involved in the circumſtance of our world. Bentley.
When men are eaſy in their circum/ºccº, they are natural-
ly enemies to innovations. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 42.
To CI'Rcu Mst AN ce. v. a. [from the noun..] To place in
particular ſituation, or relation to the things.
- To worthieſt things,
Virtue, art, beauty, fortune, now i ſee,
Rareneſs or uſe, not nature, value brings,
And ſuch as they are circumſtanc'd, they be. IXonme.
CI'Rcum:st ANT. adj. [circumyians, Lat.] Surrounding; en-
vironing.
Its beams fly to viſit the remoteſt parts of the world, and it
gives motion to all circumſtant bodies. Digby on the Soul.
C1R cux1st ANTIAL. adj. [circumſtantialis, low Lat.]
1. Accidental; not eſſential.
- This fierce abridgment
Hath to it circumſtantial branches, which
Diſtinction ſhould be rich in. Shakespeare. Cym'cline.
This juriſdiction in the eſſentials of it, is as old as chriſtia-
nity; and thoſe circumſtantial additions of ſecular encourage-
ment, chriſtian princes thought neceſſary. South's Sermons.
Who would not prefer a religion that differs from our own
in the circumſtantials, before one that differs from it in the
eſſentials. "Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 54.
2. Incidental; happening by chance; caſual.
Virtue's but anguiſh, when 'tis ſeveral,
By occaſion wak'd, and circumſtantial.
3. Full of ſmall events; particular; detailed.
He had been provoked by men's tedious and circumſtantial
recitals of their affairs, or by their multiplied queſtions about
his own. Prior's Dedication.
CIR cu Mst ANT1A/LITY. m. ſ [from circumſtantial.] The ap-
tº of circumſtances; the ſtate of any thing as modified
y circumſtances.
CIR cux1st A'NTIALLY. adv. [from circumſ'antial.]
1. Accordingly to circumſtance; not eſſentially; accidentally.
Of the fancy and intellect, the powers are only circum-
ſtantially different. Glanv. Scepſ, c. xiii.
2. Minutely; exactly ; in every circumſtance or particular.
Lucian agrees with Homer in every point circumſtantially.
Broome's Notes on the Odºy.
To CIR cumst A'NTIATE. v. a. [from circumſtance.]
1. To place in particular circumſtances; to inveſt with parti-
cular accidents or adjuncts.
If the act were otherwiſe circumſtantiated, it might will
that freely, which now it wills freely. Bramh, agaiº). Holls.
2. To place in a particular condition, as with regard to power
or wealth.
A number infinitely ſuperior, and the beſt circumſtantiated
imaginable, are for the ſucceſſion in the houſe of Hanover.
- - Swift's Miſellanies.
To CIRCUMVATLLATE. v. a. [circumvalle, Lat.] To in-
cloſe round with trenches or fortifications.
CIRCUM v A. LATION. m. ſ. [from circumvallate, Lat.]
1. The art or act of caſting up fortifications round a place.
When the czar firſt acquainted himſelf with mathematical
learning, he practiſed all the rules of circumvallation and con-
tºyallation at the ſiege of a town in Livonia. It atts's Lºgick.
2. The fortification or trench thrown up round a place beſieged.
This gave reſpite to finiſh thoſe ſtupendious circumvallations
and barricadoes, reared up by ſea and land to begirt Petrina.
Howel's Pocal Forg/?.
Ciscº MvP'ction. m.ſ.. [circumvrºſio, Latin.]
I. The act of carrying round.
2. The ſtate of being carried round.
To CIRCUMVENT. v. a. [circumvenia, Lat.] To deceive;
to cheat; to impoſe upon; to dclude.
He fearing to be betrayed, or circumvented by his crucl bro-
Donne.
ther, fled to Barbaroſa. Kºlºs's II; ſory of the Tºrº,
As his malice is vigilant, he reſle h not to in ºnvent the
ſons of the firſt deceived. Brºwn's Pulgar Errours, b. vii.
Should man
Fall circumvented thus by fraud. Aſtºn's Paradiſ. Lºft.
Gºſtinately bent
To die undaunted, and to circurrent.
CIRCUM v EN rios. n.ſ. [from circumvent.]
I. Fraud; impoſture; cheat; deluſion.
The inequality of the match between him and the ſubtleſt
of us, would quickly appear by a fatal circum, ention: there
muſt be a wiſdom from above to over-reach this helliſh
wiſdom. South's Sermors.
. If he is in the city, he muſt avoid haranguing againſt
circumvention in commerce. Colier of Pºpularity.
2. Prevention; pre-occupation: this ſenſe is now out of uſe.
Whatever hath been thought on in this ſtate,
That could be brought to bodily act, cre Rome
Had circumvention. Sº a ſp. Coricantºr.
To Cºrcuxive's r. v. a. [...ircumvgº, Lat..] To cover round
with a garment.
Who on this baſe the earth did'ſ firmly found,
And mad'ſt the deep to circurveſ; it round. IV’tton.
CIRCUM of A Tios. n.ſ.. [from air involº, Lat.] The act of
flying round. -
To Circ cºvolvſ. v. a [circumvolve, Lat.] To roll round;
to give a circular motion.
Could ſolid orbs be accommodated to phaenomena, yet to
aſcribe each ſphere an intelligence to cir, unvolve it, were un-
philoſophical. Glanv. Scºtſ. c. 20.
C. Rºux v Lu'ric N. m. ſ. ſcºrcumvºlutus, Lat.]
1. The act of rolling round.
2. The ſtate of being rolled round.
The twiſting of the guts is really either a circumvolution, or
inſertion of one part of the gut within the other. Arbuthnot.
3. The thing rolled round another.
Conſider the obliquity or cloſeneſs of theſe circum: clutiºns;
the nearer they are, the higher may be the inſtrument. If il.
CI"R(, U.S. }". [circus, Latin.] An open ſpace or area for
C1'Rque. ſports, with ſeats round for the ſpectators.
A pleaſant valley, like one of thoſe circuſe, which, in grea
cities ſomewhere, doth give a pleaſant ſpectacle of running
horſes. Sidney, b. ii.
The one was about the cirque of Flora, the other upon the
Tarpeian mountain. Stilingfeet.
See the cirque falls' th' unpillar'd temple nods;
Streets pav'd with heroes, Tyber choak'd with gods. Pºpe.
CIST. m. ſ. [riſia, Latin.) A caſe; a tegument; commonly
uſed in medicinal language for the coat or incloſure of a
turnour.
C1's TED. adj. [from ci/?..] Incloſed in a ciſt, or bag.
C1's TERN. m. ſ. [cifterna, Latin.]
1. A receptacle of water for domeſtick uſes.
'Tis not the rain that waters the whole earth, but that
which falls into his own ci/?ern, that muſt relieve him. South.
2. A reſervoir; an incloſed fountain.
Had no part as kindly ſtaid behind,
In the wide ci/?ermſ of the lakes confin'd;
Did not the ſprings and livers drench the land,
Our globe would grow a wilderneſs of ſand.
3. Any watry receptacle or repoſitory.
So half my Egypt were ſubmerg'd, and made
A ciſtern for ſcal’d ſnakes. Shakespeare Anthony and Cleopatra.
But there's no bottom ; none
In my voluptuouſneſs: your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons and your maids, could not fill up
The ci/?ºrn of my luſt. Shakesp. Macleth.
CISTUS. m.ſ. (Lat..] The name of a plant. The ſame with
Rockroſe.
Cit. m.ſ [contraćted from citizen.] An inhabitant of a city,
in an ill ſenſe. A pert low townſman; a pragmatical trader.
We bring you now to ſhow what different things,
The cits or clowns are from the courts of kings. Jºhnſºn.
Study your race, or the ſoil of your family will dwindle
into cits or ſquires, or run up into wits or madmen. Tatler.
Barnard, thou art a cit, with all thy worth ;
Put Bug and D–l, their honours, and ſo forth. Pºp. Hºr.
C1'TADE L. m. ſ. [citadelle, French..] A fortreſs; a caſtle, or
place of arms in a city.
As he came to the crown by unjuſt means, as unjuſtly he
kept it; by force of ſtranger ſoldicrs in citadels, the neſts of
tyranny and murderers of liberty. -
'll to my charge, the cited..!, repair.
C1't al. n.ſ.. [from cite.]
1. Reproof; impeachment. -
He made a bluſhing cital of himſelf,
And chid his truant youth. Shaky?. Henry IV. P. i.
2. Summons; citation; call into a court.
3. Quotation ; citation.
CITATIon. n ſ. [citatio, Latin.] e
The calling a perſon before the judge, for the ſake of
trying
Dryden's &amp;n. ii.
Blackmore.
Sidney, b. ii.
Dºyd. Au, e.g.
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 38</div><p class="Text">c I T
C I V
trying the cauſe of aaion commenced againſt him. Ælft.
2. Quotation; the addućtion of any paſſage from another au-
thor; or of another man's words.
3. The paſſage or words quoted; a quotation. -
The letter-writter cannot read theſe citations without bluſh-
ing, after the charge he hath advanced. . Atterb. Prof. Serm.
View the principles of parties repreſented in their own
authors, and not in the citations of thoſe who would confute
them. . JWatts's Improvement on the Mind.
4. Enumeration ; mention. -
Theſe cauſes effect a conſumption, endemick to this iſland:
there remains a citation of ſuch as may produce it in any
country. Harvey on Conſumptions.
CITATory. adj. [from To cite.] Having the power or form
of citation. -
If a judge cite one to a place, to which he cannot come
with ſafety, he may freely appeal, though an appeal be inhi-
bited in the letters citatory. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To CITE. v. a. [cito, Latin.]
1. To ſummon to anſwer in a court.
He held a late court, to which
She oft' was cited by them, but appear'd not. Shakesp. Hen. VIII.
Forthwith the cited dead
Of all paſt ages, to the general doom
Shall haſten. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii. 1.327.
This power of citing, and dragging the defendant into court,
was taken away. Ayliff's Parergon.
2. To enjoin; to call upon another authoritatively; to direct;
ſummon.
I ſpeak to you, Sir Thurio;
For Valentine, I need not cite him to it. Shakespeare
This ſad experience cites me to reveal,
And what I dićtate is from what I feel. Prior.
3. To quote.
Demonſtrations in ſcripture, may not otherwiſe be ſhewed
than by citing them out of the ſcripture. Hooker, b. ii.
That paſſage of Plato, which I cited before. Bacon.
In baniſhment he wrote thoſe verſes, which I cite from his
letter. Bryden's Dedicat. to Æn.
Ci'TER. n.ſ [from cite.]
I. One who cites into a court.
2. One who quotes; a quoter.
I muſt deſire the citer henceforward to inform us of his
editions too. Atterbury.
CiB. ss. n.ſ. [from cit..] A city woman. A word peculiar to
ryden.
Cits and citeſſes raiſe a joyful ſtrain;
, 'Tis a good omen to begin a reign. Dryd Albion and Alba.
Ci'THERN. n.ſ.. [cithara, Latin.] A kind of harp; a muſical
inſtrument.
At what time the heathen had profaned it, even in that
was it dedicated with ſongs and citherns, and harps and cym-
bals. - 1 Mac. iv. 54.
Citizen. n.ſ.. [ivis, Lat. citoyen, French.]
1. A freeman of a city; not a foreigner; not a ſlave.
All inhabitants within theſe walls are not properly citizens,
but only ſuch as are called freemen. Raleigh's Hiſt. JWorld.
2. A townſman ; a man of trade; not a gentleman.
When he ſpeaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a ſoldier. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
3. An inhabitant; a dweller in any place.
Far from noiſy Rome, ſecure, he lives;
And one more citizen to Sibyl gives. Dryden's juvenal.
Citizen. a j. [This is only in Shakeſpeare.] Having the
qualities of a citizen; as cowardice, meanneſs.
So ſick I am not, yet I am not well;
But not ſo citizen a wanton, as -
To ſeem to die ere ſick. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Ci'TRINE. adj. [citrinus, Lat.] Lemon coloured; of a dark
ellow.
The Butterfly, papilio major, has its wings painted with
citrine and black, both in long ſtreaks and ſpots. Grew's Muſ.
By citrine urine of a thicker conſiſtence, the ſaltneſs of
phlegm is known. Floyer on the Humours.
CITRINE. n.ſ.. [from citrinus, Latin.]
A ſpecies of cryſtal of an extremely pure, clear, and fine
texture, generally free from flaws and blemiſhes. It is ever
found in a long and ſlender column, irregularly hexangular,
and terminated by an hexangular pyramid. It is from one to
four or five inches in length. Theſe cryſtals are of an ex-
tremely beautiful yellow, differing in degrees from that of a
ſtrong ochre colour to that of the peel of a lemon; and they
have a very elegant brightneſs and tranſparence. This ſtone
is very plentiful in the Weſt Indies. Our jewellers have
learned from the French and Italians to call it citrine; and
often cut ſtones for rings out of it, which are generally miſ-
taken for topazcs. - Hill on Foſſils.
CITR on-TREE. n.ſ.. [from citrus, Latin.] -
It hath broad ſtiff leaves, like thoſe of the laurel. The
flowers conſiſt of many leaves, expanded like a roſe: the cup
of the flower is ſlender and fleſhy, and is divided into five ſeg-
ments at the top. The piſtil becomes an oblong, thick,
fleſhy fruit, which is very full of juice, and contains ſeveral
Vol. I.
hard ſeeds. Genoa is the great nurſery of Europe for theſe
ſorts of trees. One ſort, with a pointed fruit, is in ſo great
eſteem, that the fingle fruits are ſold at Florence for two ſhil-
lings each. This fruit is not to be had in perfection in any
part of Italy, but the plain between Piſa and Leghorn. Miller.
May the ſun * ...:
With citron groves adorn a diſtant ſoil. . . Addiſon;
CITRoN-water. n.ſ. Aqua vitae, diſtilled with the rind of
citrons.
- Like citron-waters matrons cheeks inflame. Pope,
Ci’tkul. n.ſ. The ſame with pumpion, ſo named from its
yellow colour. - - -
CITY. m. ſ. [cité, French, divitas, Latin.]
1. A large collection of houſes and inhabitants. -
Men ſeek their ſafety from number better united, and from
walls and other fortifications; the uſe whereof is to make the
few a match for the many, and this is the original of cities.
Temple:
City, in a ſtrićt and proper ſenſe, means the houſes incloſed
within the walls: in a larger ſenſe it reaches to all the ſuburbs.
- JWatts's Logick.
2. In the Engliſh law. . . . , - .
A town corporate, that hath a biſhop and a cathedral
thurch., , , - - Cowel.
3. The inhabitants of a certain city, as diſtinguiſhed from other
ſubjećts.
What is the city but the people?— -
True, the people are the city. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I do ſuſpect I have done ſome offence,
That ſeems diſgracious in the city's eye. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
City. adj.
I. Relating to the city. . . . - - - -
His enforcement of the city wives. Shakeſp. Richard III.
*.* He, I accuſe, -
The city ports by this hath enter'd. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. Reſembling the manners of the citizens. -
Make not a city feaſt of it, to let the meat cool ere we can
agree upon the firſt cut. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
CI'vet. n.ſ. [civette, Fr. 2iletta, Arabic, ſignifying ſcent.] A
perfume from the civet cat.
The civet, or civet cat, is a little animal, not unlike our
cat, excepting that his ſnout is more pointed, his claws leſs
Jangerous, and his cry different. It is a native of the Indies,
Peru, Braſil, Guinea. The perfume is formed like a
kind of greaſe, or thick ſcum, in an aperture or bag under its
tail, between the anus and pudendum. It is gathered from
time to time, and abounds in proportion as the animal is fed.
It is much uſed by perfumers and confectioners; but ſeldom
preſcribed in medicine. Trevoux,
Civet is of a baſer birth than tar: the very uncleanly flux
of a cat. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
He rubs himſelf with civet : can you ſmell him out by
that * Shakeſpeare's Much ado about Nothing.
Some putrefactions and excrements do yield excellent
odours; as civet and muſk, and, as ſome think, amber-
greaſe. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Civick. adj. [civicus, Latin.] Relating to civil honours or
practiſes; not military.
With equal rays immortal Tully ſhone:
Behind, Rome's genius waits with civick crowns, -
And the great father of his country owns. Pop. Tem, of Fame.
CIVIL. adj. [civilis, Latin.] ! -
1. Relating to the community; political; relating to the city or
government.
God gave them laws of civil regimen, and would not per-
mit their commonweal to be governed by any other laws than
his own. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 11.
Part ſuch as appertain
To civil juſtice; part, religious rites
Of ſacrifice. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii. l. 231.
But there is another unity, which would be moſt advan-
tageous to our country; and that is your endeavour after a
*ivil, a political union in the whole nation. Sprat's Sermon.
2. Relating to any man as a member of a community.
Break not your promiſe, unleſs it be unlawful or impoſſible;
either out of your natural, or out of your civil power. Taylor.
3. Not in anarchy; not wild; not without rule or government.
For rudeſt minds with harmony were caught,
And civil life was by the muſes taught. Roſcommon,
4. Not foreign; inteſtine. . . .
From a civil war, God of his mercy defend us, as that which
is moſt deſperate of all others. Bacon to Willer.
5. Not eccleſiaſtical; as, the eccleſiaſtical courts are controlled
by the civil. - -
6. Not natural; as, a perſon baniſhed of outlawed is ſaid to
ſuffer civil, though not natural death. -
7. Nº. military; as, the civil magiſtrates authority is obſtrućted
* War.
8. $. criminal; as, This is a civil proceſs, not a criminal pro-
ſecution. - -
9. Civiliſed; not barbarous. , , -
England was very rude and barbarous; for it is but even
the other day º grew civil, Spenser on Ireland.
4. I Os<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 39</div><p class="Text">C I Z
C L. A
1c, Complaiſant; civiliſed; gentle; well bred; ciegant of man-
ners; not rude; not brutal; not coarſe.
I heard a mermaid, on a dolphin's back,
Uttering ſuch dulcet and harmonious breath,
That the rude ſea grew civil at her ſong. Shakeſpeare.
He was civil and well natured, never refuſing to teach
another. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
And fall theſe ſayings from that gentle tongue, -
where civil ſpecch and ſoft perſuaſion hung. Prior.
11. Grave; ſober; not gay or ſhºwy.
This night oft ſee me in thy pale career, , ,
*Till civil ſuited morn appear. Milton's Poems.
12. Relating to the ancient conſular or imperial government;
as, civil law.
No woman had it, but a civil doćtor. Shakespeare Merch. of Ven.
Civi'L1AN. n.ſ.. [civilis, Lat..] One that profeſſes the know-
ledge of the old Roman law, and of general equity.
The profeſſors of that law, called civilians, becauſe the civil
law is their guide, ſhould not be diſcountenanced nor diſ-
couraged. Bacon's Advice to Willers.
A depending kingdom is a term of art, unknown to all
ancient civilians, and writers upon government. Swift.
Civilis ATIon. n.ſ.. [from civil.]
A law, act of juſtice, or judgment, which renders a cri-
minal proceſs civil; which is performed by turning an infor-
mation into an inqueſt, or the contrary. Harris.
Civil IT Y. m. ſ. [from civil.]
1. Freedom from barbarity; the ſtate of being civiliſed.
The Engliſh were at firſt as ſtout and warlike a people as
ever the Iriſh; and yet are now brought unto that civility,
that no nation in the world excelleth them in all goodly con-
verſation, and all the ſtudies of knowledge and humanity.
Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Divers great monarchies have riſen from barbariſm to civi-
lity, and fallen again to ruin. Davies on Ireland.
Wherefoe'er her conquering eagles fled, -
Arts, learning, and civil ty were ſpread. Denham's Poemſ.
2. Politeneſs; complaiſance; elegance of behaviour.
Art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy diſtreſs;
Or elſe a rude deſpiſer of good manners,
That in civility thou ſeem'it ſo empty Shakespeare As you like it.
He, by his great civility and affability, wrought very much
upon the people. Clarendon, b. viii.
I ſhould be kept from a publication, did not what your civi-
lity calls a requeſt, your greatneſs, command. South.
We, in point of civility, yield to others in our own
houſes. . Swift.
• Rule of decency; praśliſe of politeneſs.
Love taught him ſhame; and ſhame, with love at ſtrife,
Soon taught the ſweet civilities of life. Dryd. Cym. and Iphig.
To CI'v11.1zE. v. a. [from civil..] To reclaim from ſavage-
neſs and brutality; to inſtruct in the arts of regular life.
We ſend the graces and the muſes forth,
To civilize and to inſtruct the North. J/aller.
Muſaeus firſt, then Orpheus civilize
Mankind, and gave the world their deities. Denham.
Amongſt thoſe who are counted the civilized part of man-
kind, this original law of nature ſtill takes place. Locke.
Oſiris, or the Bacchus of the antients, is reported to have
civilized the Indians, and reigned amongſt them fifty-two
years. - - Arbuthnot on Coins.
C1'vilize R. m. ſ. [from civilize.] He that reclaims others from
a wild and ſavage life; he that teaches the rules and cuſtoms
of civility.
The civilizers 1—the diſturbers, ſay 5–
The robbers, the corrupters of mankind'
Proud vagabonds !
C1'y Illy, adv. [from civil.]
1. In a manner relating to government, or to the rights or cha-
racter of a member of a community; not naturally; not
eccleſiaſtically; not criminally.
Men that are civil lead their lives after one common law;
for that a multitude ſhould, without harmony amongſt them-
ſelves, concur in the doing of one thing; for this is civilly to
live; or ſhould manage community of life, it is not poſſible.
- Hooker, b. i. p. 46.
That accuſation, which is publick, is either civilly com-
menced for the private ſatisfaction of the party injured ; or
elſe criminally, that is, for ſome publick puniſhment. Ayliffe.
2, º complaiſantly ; gently; without rudeneſs; without
rutality.
I wide. civilly with his poems: nothing ill is to be ſpoken
of the dead. Dryden's Preface to his Fables.
. I would have had Almería and Oſmyn parted civily; as if
it was not proper for lovers to do ſo. Collier's View of the Stage.
He thought them folks that loſt their way,
And aſk'd them civil} to ſtay. Prior.
3. Without gay or gaudy colours.
. The chambers were handſome and cheerful, and furniſhed
* civily. Eacon’s New Atlantis.
CIzE. m. ſ. [perhaps from inciſa, Lat. ſhaped or cut to a certain
Philips's Briton.
magnitude.] The quantity of anything, with regard to its
external form ; often written ſize.
If no motion can alter bodies, that is, reduce them to ſome
other size or figure, then there is none of itſelf to give them
the cize and figure which they have. Grew's Coſmol. b. . c. 2.
Clack. m. ſ. [Ålatſchen, Germ. to rattle; to make a noiſe.]
1. Anything that makes a laſting and importunate noiſe; gene-
rally uſed, in contempt, for the tongue.
But ſtill his tongue ran on,
And with its everlaſting clack,
Set all mens ears upon the rack. Hudibras, Part it. canto 2.
Fancy flows in, and muſe flies high;
He knows not when my clack will lie. Prior.
2. The Clack of a Mill. A bell that rings when more corn
is required to be put in. -
Says John, juſt at the hopper will I ſtand,
And mark the clack how juſtly it will ſound. Betterton.
To Clack. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To make a chinking noiſe.
2. To let the tongue run.
To Clack. v. a. As to clack wool, is to cut off the ſheep's
mark, which makes it to weigh leſs, and ſo yield the leſs
cuſtom to the king. Cowel.
Clap. part. pret. [This participle, which is now referred to
clothe, ſeems originally to have belonged to claden, or ſome
ſuch word, like Aleeden, Dutch..] Clothed; inveſted; garbed.
He had clad himſelf with a new garment. 1 King: xi. 29.
Beyond
The flow'ry dale of Sibma, clad with vine. Mit. Par. Lºft.
But virtue too, as well as vice, is clad
In fleſh and blood. //aller.
To her the weeping heav'ns become ſerene;
For her the ground is clad in cheerful green. Dryden.
The courtiers were all moſt magnificiently clad. Swift.
To CLAIM. v. a. [clamer, French..] To demand of right; to
require authoritatively; not to beg or accept as favour, but to
exact as due. -
If only one man hath a divine right to obedience, no body
can claim that obedience but he that can ſhew his right Locke.
We muſt know how the firſt ruler, from whom any one
claims, came by his authority, before we can know who has a
right to ſucceed him in it. Locke-
Poets have undoubted right to claim,
If not the greateſt, the moſt laſting name. Congreve.
CLAIM. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
I. A demand of anything, as due.
You, in the right of lady Blanch your wife,
May then make all the claim that Arthur did. Slak. K. john.
. Forſworn thyſelf! The traitor's odious name
I firſt return, and then diſprove thy claim. Dryden.
Will he not, therefore, of the two evils chuſe the leaſt,
by ſubmitting to a maſter, who hath no immediate claim upon
him, rather than to another, who hath already revived ſeveral
claims upon him Swift.
2. A title to any privilege or poſſeſſion in the hands of another.
Either there muſt have been but one ſovereign over them
all, or elſe every father of a family had been as good a prince,
and had as good a claim to royalty as theſe. Locke.
3. In law.
A demand of anything that is in the poſſeſſion of another,
or at the leaſt out of his own: as claim by charter, claim by
deſcent. Cowel.
4. The phraſes are commonly to make claim, or to lay claim.
The king of Pruſſia lays in his claim for Neuf-Châtel, as he
did for the principality of Orange. Addiſon on Italy.
If God, by his poſitive grant, gave dominion to any man,
primogeniture can lay no claim to it, unleſs God ſo º:
04: Kaº.
CLA'IMA ble. adj. [from claim.] That which may be de-
manded as due.
Cla'IMANT. m. ſ. [from claim.] He that demands any thing
as unjuſtly detained by another. -
A CLA'IMER. m. ſ. [from claim.] He that makes a demand;
he that requires anything, as unjuſtly with-held from him.
CLAIR-obscur E. m. ſ. See CLARE-obscure.
To CLA'MBER. v. n. [probably corrupted from climb; as
climber, clamber.] To climb with difficulty; as with both
hands and feet.
The kitchen malkin pins
Her richeſt lockram 'bout her reechy neck, -
Clambºring the walls to eye him. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
When you hear the drum,
Clamber not you up to the caſements then. Shakeſpeare.
The men there do not without ſome difficulty clamber up
the acclivities, dragging their kine with them. Ray on the Creat.
They were forced to clamber over ſo many rocks, and to
tread upon the brink of ſo many precipices, that they were
very often in danger of their lives. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 27.
To CLAMM. v. a. [in ſome provinces, to cleam, from clarmian,
Sax. to glew together.] To clog with any glutinous matter.
A ſwarm of waſps got into a honey-pot, and there they
I cloyed
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 40</div><p class="Text">C L A
C L A
cloyed and clammed themſelves, ’till there was no getting out
again. L’Eſtrange, Fab. cxxvi.
‘The ſprigs were all dºwbed with lime, and the birds
dammed and taken. L’Eſtrange.
CLAMMIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from clammy.] Wiſcoſity ; viſcidity;
tenacity; ropineſs. º -
Agreaſy pipkin will ſpoil the clammineſ of the glew. Moxon.
CLA'MMY. adj. [from clamm.] Viſcous; glutinous; tenacious;
adheſive; ropy.
Bodies clammy and cleaving, are ſuch as have an appetite,
at once, to follow another body, and to hold to themſelves.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 293.
Neither the brain nor ſpirits can conſerve motion: the for-
mer is of ſuch a clammy conſiſtence, it can no more retain it
than a quagmire. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 6.
Aghaſt he wak'd, and, ſtarting from his bed,
Cold ſweats, in clammy drops, his limbs o'erſpread. Dryden.
I drop with clammy ſweat. Dryden's Fables.
Joyful thou’lt ſee
The clammy ſurface all o'er ſtrown with tribes
Of greedy inſects. Philips.
There is an unctuous clammy vapour that ariſes from the
ſtum of grapes, when they lie maſhed together in the vat,
which puts out a light, when dipped into it. Addison on Italy.
The continuance of the fever, clammy ſweats, paleneſs, and
at laſt a total ceſſation of pain, are ſigns of a gangrene and
approaching death. Arbuthnot on Diet.
CLA'MoRous, adj. [from clamour.] Vociferous; noiſy; tur-
bulent; loud.
It is no ſufficient argument to ſay, that, in urging theſe
ceremonies, none are ſo clamorous as Papiſts, and they whom
Papiſts ſuborn. Hooker, b. iv. ſect. 9.
- He kiſs'd her lips
With ſuch a clamorous ſmack, that at the parting
All the church eccho'd. Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew,
At my birth
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were ſtrangely clam’rous in the frighted fields. Shakeſpeare.
With the clam’rous report of war,
Thus will I drown your exclamations. Shakeſp Richard III.
Then various elements againſt thee join'd,
In one more various animal combin'd,
And fram'd the clam’rous race of buſy humankind. Pºpe.
A pamphlet that will ſettle the wavering, inſtruct the igno-
rant, and inflame the clamorous. Swift.
CLA'MOUR. m.ſ.. [clamor, Latin.]
1. Outcry; noiſe; exclamation; vociferation:
Revoke thy doom,
Or whilſt I can vent clamour from my throat,
I’ll tell thee, thou do'ſt evil. Shakeſp. King Lear.
The people grew then exorbitant in their clamours for
iuſtice. King Charles.
The Maid
Shall weep the fury of my love decay’d ;
And weeping follow me, as thou do'ſt now,
With idle clamours of a broken vow. Prior.
2. It is uſed ſometimes, but leſs fitly, of inanimate things.
Here the loud Arno's boiſt’rous clamours ceaſe,
That with ſubmiſſive murmurs glides in peace. Addison.
To CLA'MoUR. v. n...[from the noun..] To make outcries;
to exclaim; to vociferate; to roar in turbulence.
.The obſcure bird clamour'd the live-long night. Shakoff.
Claratºr your tongues, and not a word more. Shakeſpeſire.
Let them not come in multitudes, or in a tribunitious
manner; for that is to clamour counſels, not to inform
them. Bacon's Eſſay, 21.
CLAMP. n.ſ.. [clamp, French.j
1. A piece of wood joined to another, as an addition of
ſtrength.
2. A quantity of bricks.
To burn a clamp of brick of ſixteen thouſand, they allow
ſeven ton of coals. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To CLAMP. v. a. [from the noun.]
When a piece of board is fitted with the grain to the end
of another piece of board croſs the grain, the firſt board is
clamped. Thus the ends of tables are commonly clamped, to
preſerve them from warping. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
C.A.N. m. ſ. [probably of Scottiſh original: Klaan, in the High-
lands, ſignifics children.]
1. A family; a race,
They around the flag
Of each his fačtion, in their ſeveral clans, -
Swarm populous, un-number'd. A ſilton's Paradºſ Ioff, b. ii.
Milton was the poetical ſon of Spenſer, and Mr. Waller of
Fairfax; for we have our lineal deſcents and clans as well as
other families. - Drydºn's Falks, Prºſace.
2. A body or ſect of perſons, in a ſenſe of contempt:
Patridge and the reſt of his clan may hoot me for a cheat,
if I fail in any ſingle particular. Swift's Preditions fºr 1708.
CLA'Ncular. adj. [cancularius, Latin.] Clandeſtine; ſecret;
private; concealed ; obſcure ; hidden. -
Let us withdraw all ſupplies from our luſts, and not by any
ſecret reſerved affection give them clancular aids to maintail
, their rebellion. Decay of Piety.
CLANDESTINE. [adj. cland, ſinus, Lat.] Secret; Hidden ;
private ; in an ill ſenſe. - -
Tho' nitrous tempeſts, and cland/line death, , --
Fill'd the deep caves, and num’rous vaults beneath. Bidh.
CLAND E'stiNELY. adv. [from clandºſtine.] Secretly; private-
ly; in private; in ſecret. - s
There have been two printed papers clandºffey ſpread
about, whereof no man is able to trace the original. Swift.
CLANG. m. ſ. [Flangor, Lat.] A ſharp, ſhrill noiſe.
With ſuch a horrid cang
As on mount Sinai rang,
While the red fire and ſmould'ring clouds outbrake. Milton,
- An iſland, ſalt and bare,
The haunt of ſeals and orcs, and ſea-mews clang. Milton.
What clangs were heard in German ſkies afar,
Of arms and armies ruſhing to the war. Dryd. Wirg, Georg.
Guns, and trumpets clang, and ſolemn ſound
... Of drums, o'ercame their groans. Philips:
To CLANG. v. n. [clargo, Lat..] To clatter; to make a loud
ſhrill noiſe.
Have I not in a pitched battle heard - -"
Loud larums, neighing ſteeds, and trumpets clang. Shakespeare .
The Libyans clad in armour, lead -
The dance; and clanging ſwords and ſhields they beat. Prior.
To Clanc. v.a. To ſtrike together with a noiſe.
The fierce Curetes trod tumultuous
Their myſtick dance, and clang'd their ſounding arms;
Induſtrious with the warlike din to quell -
Thy infant cries. - Priºri
CLA'Ndou R. n.ſ.. [clangor, Lat.] . A loud ſhrill ſound.
- In death he cried,
Like to a diſmal clangour heard from far, ---
Warwick, revenge my death. Shakeſp. Henry VI. P. iii.
With joy they view the waving enſigns fly, .
And hear the trumpet's clangour pierce the ſky. Dryd. Æn.
CLA'NGous. adj. [from clang.J. Making a clang.
'We do not obſerve the cranes, and birds of long necks,
have any muſical, but harſh and clangºus throats. Brown.
CLANK. m. ſ. [from clang.] A loud, ſhrill, ſharp noiſe, made
by the colliſion of hard and ſonorous bodics:
They were joined by the melodious clank of marrow-bone
and clever. - Speciator, Nº. 617.
To CLAP. v. a. ſclappan, Sax. Klappen, Dutch..] -
1. To ſtrike together with a quick motion, ſo as to make a noiſe
by the colliſion.
Following the fliers, -
With them he enters; who, upon the ſudden; - -
Clapt to their gates. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Mén ſhall clap their hands at him, and ſhall hiſs him out of
his place. job, xxvii. 23.
Have you never ſeen a citizen, in a cold morning, clapping
his fides, and walking before his ſhop Dryd. Spaniſh Fryar.
He crowing clapp'd his wings, th' appointed call
To chuck his wives together in the hall. Dryden's Fablet.
Each poet of the air her glory ſings,
And round him the pleas'd audience clap their wings. Dryd;
He had juſt time to get in and clap to the door, to avoid
the blow. Locke on Education.
In flow'ry wreaths the royal virgin dreſt
His bending horns, and kindly clapt his breaft.
Glad of a quarrel, ſtraight I clap the door,
Sir, let me ſee your works and you no more. Pºpe's Epiffles.
2. To add one thing to another, implying the idea of ſomething
haſty, unexpected, or ſudden.
As ſummer weareth out, they clap mouth to mouth, wing
to wing, and leg to leg; and ſo, after a ſweet ſinging, fall
down into lakes. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwall.
This pink is one of Cupid's carriers: clap on more ſails;
purſue. Shakespeare’s Merry //ives of J/indſºr.
Smooth temptations, like the ſun, make a maiden lay b
her veil and robe; which perſecution, like the northern wind,
made her hold faſt, and clap cloſe about her. Taylor.
If a man be highly commended, we think him ſufficiently
leſſened, if we clap fin, or folly, or infirmity into his ac-
COunt. Taylor's Rale of living hºly.
Razor-makers generally clap a ſmall bar of Venice ſteel be-
tween two ſmall bars of Flemiſh ſteel. Moxon's 41 ch, Exºr.
The man capt his fingers one day to his mouth, and blew
upon them. L'Eſtrange.
His ſhield thrown by, to mitigate the ſmart, -
He clapp'd his hand upon the wounded part. Pryd, ºneid.
If you'leave ſome ſpace empty for the air; then º'a? your
hand upon the mouth of the veſſel, and the fiſhes will contend
to get uppermoſt in the water. Ray on the Creation.
It would be as abſurd as to ſay, he clapped ſpurs to his horſe
at St. Jamics's, and galloped away to the Hague. Addison.
. By having their minds yet in their perfect freedom and in-
differency, the likelier to purſue truth the better, having no
Addison.
biaſ, yet clapped on to miſlead them. Locke.
I have obſerved a certain chearfulneſs in a bad a ſyſtem of
features
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 41</div><p class="Text">C L A
features as ever was clapped together, which hath appeared
lovely. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 86.
Let all her ways be unconfin'd,
And clap your padlock on her mind. Prior.
Socrates or Alexander might have a fool's coat clapt upon
them, and perhaps neither wiſdom nor majeſty would ſecure
them from a ſneer. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
3. To do anything with a ſudden haſty motion, or unexpectedly.
- We were dead aſleep,
And, how we know not, all clapt under hatches. Shakeſp.
He was no ſooner entered into the town, but a ſcambling
ſoldier clapt hold of his bridle, which he thought was in a
begging or in a drunken faſhion. J/ºtton's Life of Duke of Buck.
So much from the reſt of his countrymen, and indeed from
his whole ſpecies, that his friends would have clapped him into
bedlam, and have beggcd his eſtate. Speciator, Nº. 576.
Have you obſerv'd a fitting hare,
Liſt'ning and fearful of the ſtorm
Of horns and hounds, clap back her ear. Prior.
We will take our remedy at law, and clap an action upon
you for old debts. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
4. To celebrate or praiſe by clapping the hands; to applaud.
I have often heard the ſtationer wiſhing for thoſe hands to
take off his melancholy bargain, which clapped its performance
on the ſtage. Dedication to Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
5. To infect with a venereal poiſon. [Sce the noun.]
If the patient hath been formerly clapt, it will be the more
difficult to cure him the ſecond time, and worſe the third.
J/ſeman's Surgery.
Let men and manners ev'ry diſh adapt;
Who'd force his pepper where his gueſts are claptº King.
6. To Clap up. To complete ſuddenly, without much pre-
caution.
No longer than we well could waſh our hands,
To clap this royal bargain up of peace. Shakespeare King john.
Was ever match clapt up ſo ſuddenly Shakeſpeare.
A pèace may be clapped up with that ſuddenneſs, that the
forces, which are now in motion, may unexpectedly fall upon
his ſkirts. Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
To CLAP. v. n.
1. To move nimbly with a noiſe.
Every door flew open
Tº admit my entrance; and then clapt behind me,
To bar my going back. Dryden's Cleomenes.
A whirlwind roſe, that, with a violent blaſt,
Shook all the dome: the doors around me capt. Dryden.
2. To enter with alacrity and briſkneſs upon any thing,
Come, a ſong.
—Shall we clap into't roundly, without ſaying we are hoarſe 2
Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
3. To ſtrike the hands together in applauſe.
All the beſt men are ours; for 'tis ill hap
If they hold, when their ladies bid 'em clap.
Epilºgue to Henry VIII.
CLAP. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A loud noiſe made by ſudden colliſion.
Give the door ſuch a clap as you go out, as will ſhake the
whole room, and make every thing rattle in it. Swift.
2. A ſudden or unexpected act or motion.
It is monſtrous to me, that the South-ſea ſhould pay half
their debts at one clap. Swift's Letters.
3. An exploſion of thunder.
There ſhall be horrible claps of thunder, and flaſhes of
lightning, voices and earthquakes. . . Hakewill on Providence.
The clap is paſt, and now the ſkies are clear. Dryd, juv.
4. An act of applauſe.
The aëtors, in the midſt of an innocent old play, are often
ſtartled in the midſt of unexpected clap; or hiſſes. Addiſon.
5. A venereal infection. [from clapoir, Fr.]
Time, that at laſt matures a clap to pox. Pope's Sat.
6. [With Falconers..] The nether part of the beak of a hawk.
Cla'PPER. m. ſ. [from clap.]
1. One who claps with his hands; an applauder.
2. The tongue of a bell.
He hath a heart as ſound as a bell, and his tongue is the
clapper; for what his heart thinks, his tongue ſpeaks. Shakespeare
I ſaw a young lady fall down the other day, and ſhe much
reſembled an overturned bell without a clapper. Addison Guard.
3. The CLA'PPER of a Mill. A piece of wood for ſhaking the
hopper.
To Cºrºne, w, v, a. [from clap and claw.] To tongue-
beat; to ſcold.
Now they are clapperclawing one another, I’ll go look on.
Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
They've always been at daggers-drawing,
, And one another clapperclawing. Hudibras, partii, canto 2.
C.A'Rºss Eux, or CLA'ſ Escieux. m. ſ. The ſecond king at
arms: ſo named from the dutchy of Carence.
Sºº-oºsey RE. m. ſ. (from clarus, bright, and obſcurus, Lat.]
Light and ſhade in painting.
A maſters in the clare-ºbſºre,
With various light your eyes allure;
A flaming yellow here they ſpread,
1)raw off in blue, or charge in red;
Yet from theſe colours, oddly mix’d, . . .
Your fight upon the whole is fix’d. Prior.
CLA'RET. m. ſ. ſclairet, Fr.] French wine, of a clear pale-
red colour. -
Red and white wine are in a trice confounded into claret. Boyle.
The claret ſmooth, red as the lips we preſs
In ſparkling fancy, while we drain the bowl. Thomſ. Autumn.
CIA'R1co R.D. n.ſ.. [from clarus and chorda, Latin.]
A muſical inſtrument in form of a ſpinette, but more ancient.
It has forty-nine or fifty keys, and ſeventy ſtrings. Chambers.
Clarific A'tion, n.ſ.. [from clarify.] The act of making
*. clear from impurities. -
iquors are, many of them, at the firſt, thick and trou-
bled; as muſte, wort, &amp;c. but to know the means of accele-
rating clarification, we muſt firſt know the cauſes of clarift-
cation. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 361.
To CLA'RIFY. v. a. [clarifier, French.]
1. To purify or clear any liquor; to ſeparate ſeculences or im-
purities.
The apothecaries clarify their ſyrups by whites of eggs,
beaten with the juices which they would clarify; which whites
of eggs gather all the dregs and groſſer parts of the juice to
them; and after, the ſyrup being ſet on the fire, the whites of
eggs themſelves harden, and are taken forth. Bac, Nat. Hiſt.
2. To brighten; to illuminate: this ſenſe is rare.
The will was then dućtile and pliant to all the motions of
right reaſon: it met the dićtates of a clarified underſtanding
half way. South's Sermons.
The Čiridian religion is the only means that God has ſanéti-
ficd, to ſet fallen man upon his legs again, to clariff his rea-
ſon, and to rectify his will. South's Sermons.
CLA'Rion. n ſ. ſºlarin, Span. from clarus, loud, Lat.] A
trumpet; a wind-inſtrument of war.
And after, to his palace he them brings,
With ſhams, and trumpets, and with clarions ſweet;
And all the way the joyous people ſings. Jairy Queen.
Then ſtrait commands, that at the warlike ſound
Of trumpets loud, and clarions, be uprear'd
The mighty ſtandard. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, l. i. l. 53.
Let fuller notes th' applauding world amaze,
And the loud clarion labour in your praiſe. Pope.
Cla'RITY. n.ſ.. [clarté, French, clarita, Latin.) Brightneſs;
ſplendour.
A light by abundant clarity inviſible; an underſtanding
which itſelf can only comprehend. Sir J/alter Raleigh.
Cla'RY. m. ſ. An herb.
It hath a labiated flower of one leaf, whoſe upper lip is
ſhort and creſted; but the under one is divided into three
parts: the middle diviſion is hollowed like a ſpoon. Out of
the flower-cup ariſes the pointal, fixed like a nail to the hin-
der part of the flower, and attended with four embryo's,
which turn to ſo many roundiſh ſeeds, incloſed in the cup of
the flower. It grows wild on dry banks. Miller.
Plants that have circled leaves do all abound with moiſture.
The weakeſt kind of curling is roughneſs; as in clary and
burr. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 651.
To CLASH. v. m. [Åletſen, Dut. to make a noiſe.]
1. To make a noiſe by mutual colliſion; to ſtrike one againſt
another.
Three times, as of the cloſhing ſound
Of arms, we heard. Denham.
Thoſe few that ſhould happen to claſh, might rebound after
the colliſion; or if they cohered, yet, by the real conflict with
other atoms, might be ſeparated again. Bentley.
How many candles may ſend out their light, without claſh-
ing upon one another; which argues the ſmallneſs of the
parts of light, and the largeneſs of the interſtices between par-
ticles of air and other bodies. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
2. To act with oppoſite power, or contrary direction.
Neither was there any queen-mother who might claſh with
his counſellors for authority. Bacon's Henry VIII.
Thoſe that will not be convinced what a help this is to the
magiſtracy, would find it, if they ſhould chance to claſh.
South's Sermons.
3. To contradićt; oppoſe.
Wherever there are men, there will be cloſhing ſometime
or other; and a knock, or a conteſt, ſpoils all. L'Eſtrange.
The abſurdity in this inſtance is obvious ; and yet every
time that claſhing metaphors are put together, this fault is com-
mitted. Spectator, Nº. 595.
To Clash. v. a. To ſtrike one thing againſt another, ſo as te
produce a noiſe.
The nodding ſtatue claſſ'd his arms,
And with a ſullen ſound and feeble cry,
Half ſunk, and half pronounced the word of vićtory. Dryd.
Clash. n. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A noiſy colliſion of two bodies.
The claſh of arms and voice of men we hear. Denham,
He nobly ſeiz'd thee in the dire alarms
Of war and ſlaughter and the claſh of arms. Pºpe's Odyſſ.
T
!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 42</div><p class="Text">C L A
}
2. Oppoſition; contradićtion. -
Then from the claſhes between popes and kings,
Debate, like ſparks from flint's colliſion, ſprings. Denham.
In the very next line he reconciles the fathers and ſcripture,
and ſhews there is no claſh betwixt them. Atterbury.
A CLASP. m. ſ. [cheſpe, Dutch.]
1. A hook to hold any thing cloſe; as a book, or garment.
The ſcorpion's claws here graſp a wide extent,
And here the crabs in leſſer claſps are bent. Addison Ovid. Met.
Hereupon he took me aſide, and opening the claſps of the
parchment cover, ſpoke, to my great ſurprize, in Engliſh.
Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart, Scrib.
2. An embrace, in contempt.
Your fair daughter,
Tranſported with no worſe nor better guard,
But with a knave of hire, a gondalier,
To the groſs claſps of a laſcivious Moor. Shakeſp. Othello.
To CLAsp. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſhut with a claſp. -
Sermons are the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and do
open the ſcriptures; which being but read, remain, in com-
pariſon, ſtill claſped. Hooker, b. v. ſee?. 22.
There Caxton ſlept, with Wynkin at his ſide,
One claſſ'd in wood, and one in ſtrong cow-hide. Pºpe.
2. To catch and hold by twining.
Direét
The claſhing ivy where to climb. , Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
*... hold with the hands extended; to incloſe between the
- nus.
Occaſion turneth the handle of the bottle firſt to be re.
- ceived, and after the belly, which is hard to claſp. Bacon's Eſ.
4. To embrace.
Thou art a ſlave, whom fortune's tender arm
With favour never claſpt, but bred a dog. Shakeſp. Timon.
Thy ſuppliant
I beg, and claſp thy knees. . Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. -
He ſtoop'd below
The flying ſpear, and ſhun'd the promis'd blow;
Then creeping, claſp'd the hero's knees, and pray'd, Dryd.
Now, now he claſps her to his panting breaſt;
Now he devours her with his eager eyes. Smith,
5. To incloſe.
Boys, with women's voices, ,
Strive to ſpeak big, and claſp their female joints
In ſtiff unweildy arms againſt thy crown. Shakespeare Richard II.
CLA'sPER. m. ſ. [from claſp.] The tendrels or threads of
creeping plants, by which they cling to other things for
ſupport.
The tendrels or claſpers of plants are given only to ſuch
ſpecies as have weak and infirm ſtalks. Ray on the Creation.
CLASPKNIFE. m. ſ. [from claſp and knife.] A knife which
folds into the handle. - -
CLASS. n.ſ.. [from claſſis, Latin.]
1. A rank or order of perſons.
Segrais has diſtinguiſhed the readers of poetry, according to
their capacity of judging, into three claſſis. Dryd. Æn. Dedic.
2. A number of boys learning the ſame leſſon at the ſchool.
. We ſhall be ſeized away from this lower claſs in the ſchool
of knowledge, and our converſation ſhall be with angels and
illuminated ſpirits. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i.
3. A ſet of beings or things; a number ranged in diſtribution,
under ſome common denomination.
Among this herd of politicians, any one ſett make a very
conſiderable claſs of men. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 53.
Whate'er of mungrel, no one claſs admits
A wit with dunces, and a dunce with wits. Dunciad, b. iv.
. To Class. v. a. [from the noun..] To range according to
ſome ſtated method of diſtribution; to range according to
different ranks. -
I confidered that by the claſſing and methodizing ſuch paſ. .
ſages, I might inſtruct the reader.
- §: }a}. [claſſicus, Latin J
1. Relating to antique authors; relating to literature.
Poetick fields encompaſs me around,
And ſtill I ſeem to tread on claſſick ground. Addiſon.
With them the genius of claſſick learning dwelleth, and
from them it is derived. Felton on the Claſſicks.
2. Of the firſt order or rank. -
From this ſtandard the value of the Roman weights and
Arbuthnot on Coins.
coins are deduced: in the ſettling of which I have followed .
Mr. Greaves, who may be juſtly reckoned a claſſical author on . .
. Cla/Usure. m. ſ [clauſura, Lat..] Confinement; the act of ſhut-
this ſubject. Arbuthnot on Coins.
CIA'ssick. n.ſ. [claſſ-us, Lat.] An author of the firſt rank:
uſually taken for ancicnt authors.
CL 4 SSIS. m. ſ. [Latin.] Order; ſort; body.
He had declared his opinion of that claſſis of men, and did
all he could to hinder their growth. Clarendon.
, To CLATTER. v. n. [claznunze, a rattle, Saxon.]
1. To make a noiſe by knocking two ſonorous bodies frequently
together. -
Now the ſprightly trumpet, from afar,
Wei. I. *
Had rouz'd the neighing ſteeds to ſcour the fields. -
While the fierce riders clatter'd on their ſhields. Dryū. 3.",
2. To utter a noiſe by being ſtruck together.
All that night was heard an unwonted clattering of weapons;
and of men running to and fro. Knoll.'s Hiſtory of the Turks.
Down ſunk the monſter-bulk, and preſs'd the ground ;
His arms and clatt'ring ſhield on the vaſt body ſound. . Dryd.
Their clattering arms with the fierce ſhocks reſound,
Helmets and broken launces ſpread the ground. Grenville.
3. To talk faſt and idly. *
Here is a great deal of good matter
Loſt for lack of telling;
Now, ſiker, I ſee thou do it but clatter; -
Harm may come of melling. Spenser's Paſtoraß:
All thoſe airy º which bettered not men's man-
ners, were only a noiſe and clattering of words. Decay ºf Piety.
To CLA't TER. v. a.
1. To ſtrike any thing ſe as to make it ſound and rattle.
I only with an oaken ſtaff will meet thee, *
And raiſe ſuch outcries on thy clatter'd iron,
That thou oft’ ſhalt wiſh thyſelf at Gath. Milion's Agoniſt.
When all the bees are gone to ſettle,
You clatter ſtill your brazen kettle. Swift.
2. To diſpute, jar, or clamour. Martin. A low word.
A CLA'TTER. m.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A rattling noiſe made by the frequent and quick colliſion of
ſonorous bodies. A clatter is a claſh often repeated with great
quickneſs, and ſeems to convey the idea of a ſound ſharper
and ſhriller than rattle. [See the verb ] -
I have ſeen a monkey overthrow all the diſhes and plates in
a kitchen, merely for the pleaſure of ſeeing them tumble, and
hearing the clatter they made in their fall. Swift to Ld. Bolingb.
2. It is uſed for any tumultuous and confuſed noiſe.
By this great clatter, one of greateſt note
Seems bruited. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Grow to be ſhort,
Throw by your clatter,
And handle the matter.
O Rourk's jolly boys
Ben. johnſon's Under-wrodt.
Ne'er dreamt of the matter, \
*Till rous’d by the noiſe,
And muſical clatter. - Swift.
The jumbling particles of matter; -
In chaos make not ſuch a clatter. Swift.
Cla’v At ED. adj. [clavatus, Lat.] Knobbed; ſet with knobs.
Theſe appear plainly to have been clavated ſpikes of ſome
kind of echinus ovarius. - Woodward on Foſſils.
Claudent, adj. [claudent, Lat.] Shutting; incloſing; Con-
fining. Dić7.
To CLAUDICATE. v. n. [claudico, Latin.] To halt; to
limp. Dić7.
CLAUDicATION. n.ſ.. [from claudicate.] The aët or habit of
halting. - Dić7.
CLAve. [the preterite of cleave..] See CLEAVE.
CLA've liated. adj. [clavellatus, low Latin.] Made with
burnt tartar. A chymical term. Chambers.
Air, tranſmitted through clavellated aſhes into an exhauſted
receiver, loſes weight as it paſſes through them. Arbuthnºt.
CLA've R. m. ſ. [claren Fyne, Sax.] This is now univerſally
written clover, though not ſo properly. See ClovER.
CLA'vicle. n. ſ. [clavicula, Lat.] The collar bone.
Some quadrupeds can bring their fore feet unto their
mouths; as moſt that have the clavicles, or collar bones. .
- Brown's Vulgar Errours.
A girl was brought with angry wheals down her neck,
towards the clavicle. . J/iſeman's Surgery.
CLAUSE. n.ſ.. [clauſula, Latin.]
1. A ſentence; a ſingle part of a diſcourſe; a ſubdiviſion of a larger
ſentence; ſo much of a ſentence as is to be conſtrued together.
God may be glorified by obedience, and obeyed by per-
formance of his will, although no ſpecial clauſe or ſentence of
ſcripture be in every ſuch action ſet before men's eyes to war-
rant it. - - Hooter; b. ii. ſ..?. 2.
2. An article, or particular ſtipulation.
The clauſe is untrue which they add, concerning the
biſhop. Hooker, b. iv. ſecſ. 4.
When, after his death, they were ſent both to Jews and
Gentiles, we find not this clauſe in their commiſſion. South.
Cla/UsTRAL. adj. [from clauſirum, Lat..] Relating to a cloy-
ſter, or religious houſe. -
Clauſtral priors are ſuch as preſide over monaſteries, next
to the abbot or chief governour in ſuch religious houſes. Ayliffe,
ting; the ſtate of being ſhut.
In ſome monaſteries the ſeverity of the clauſure is hard to
be born. - Geddes.
A CLAW, n.ſ.. [clapan, Saxon.] . .
1. The foot of a beaſt or bird, armed with ſharp nails; or the
pincers or holders of a ſhell-fiſh. . .
I ſaw her range abroad to ſeek her food, -
Tº embrue her teeth and claws with lukewarm blood. . .
Spºnſer's J'ſ, ºf Belay.
4 Q. What's
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 43</div><p class="Text">C L E
What's juſtice to a man, or laws,
That never comes within their claw, P
He ſoftens the harſh rigour of the laws,
Blunts their keen edge, and grinds their harpy claws. Garth.
2: Sometimes a hand, in contempt.
o Claw. v. a. ſclajan, Saxon.]
1. To tear with nails or claws. º
Look, if the wither'd elder hath not his poll claw'd like
a parrot. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
2. To pull, as with the nails.
Adding to the former theſe many changes that have hap-
pened ſince, I am afraid we ſhall not ſo eaſily claw off that
name. South's Sermons.
3. To tear or ſcratch in general.
But we muſt claw ourſelves with ſhameful
And heathen ſtripes, by their example. Hudibras, p. ii.
They for their own opinions ſtand faſt,
Only to have them clawd and canvaſt. Hudibras, p. ii.
4. To ſcratch or tickle. -
I muſt laugh when I am merry, and claw no man in his
humour. Shakeſpeare's Much ado about Nothing.
5. To flatter: an obſolete ſenſe. See Clawback.
6. Tº Claw off, or away. To ſcold; to rail at.
You thank the place where you found money; but the jade
fortune is to be clawed away for’t, if you ſhould loſe it. L’Éſir.
CLA'whack. n.ſ.. [from claw and back..] A flatterer; a ſyco-
phant; a wheedler. The pope's clawbacks. ewel.
Cla'wed. adj. [from claw.] Furniſhed or armed with claws.
Among quadrupeds, of all the clawed, the lion is the
ſtrongeſt. Grew's Coſmol. b. ii. c. 8. ſect. 6.
CLAY. n.ſ.. [clai, Welſh; #ley, Dutch.]
1. Uncluous and tenacious earth, ſuch as will mould into a cer-
tain form.
Clays are earths firmly coherent, weighty and compačt,
ſtiff, viſcid, and dućtile to a great degree, while moiſt; ſmooth
to the touch, not eaſily breaking between the fingers, nor
readily diffuſible in water; and, when mixed, not readily ſub-
Hudibra, p. ii.
ſiding from it. Hill on Foſſils.
Deep Acheron,
Whoſe troubled eddies, thick with ooze and clay,
Are whirl’d aloft. Dryden's AEneid.
Expoſe the clay to the rain, to drain it from ſalts, that the
bricks may be more durable. JWoodward on Fºſſils.
The ſun, which ſoftens wax, will harden clay. JWatts.
Clover is the beſt way of improving clays, where manure
is ſcarce. Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. In poetry, earth in general; the terreſtrial element.
- Why ſhould our clay,
Over our ſpirits ſo much ſway. Donne.
To Clay. v. 4. [from the noun.J. To cover with clay; to
manure with clay.
This manuring laſts fifty years: then the ground muſt be
clayed again. Mortimer's Husbandry.
CLAY cold, adj. [clay and cold.] Lifeleſs; cold as the unani-
mated earth. *
I waſh’d his clay-cold corſe with holy drops,
And ſaw him laid in hallow'd ground. Rowe's jane Shore.
Clay-p1t. n.ſ.. [clay and pit.] A pit where clay is dug.
'Twas found in a clay pit. JWoodward on Foſſils.
CLAyes. n.ſ. [caye, Fr. In fortification.]. Wattles made with
ſtakes interwove with oſiers, to cover lodgments. Chambers.
CLA'YEY, adj [from clay.] Conſiſting of clay; abounding with
clav.
- &amp;m. delight in a lax or ſandy, ſome a heavy or clayey ſoil.
Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
Cla'yish. adj. [from clay.] Partaking of the nature of clay;
containing particles of clay.
Small beer proves an unwholſom drink; perhaps, by being
brewed with a thick, muddiſh, and clayiſh water, which the
brewers covet. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Cla'YMARL. m. ſ. [clay and marl.] A whitiſh, ſmooth, chalky
- clav. - -
Claymarl reſembles clay, and is near a-kin to it; but is
more fat, and ſometimes mixed with chalk-ſtones. Mortimer.
CLEAN. adj. [glan, Welſh; clane, Saxon.]
1. Free from dirt or filth.
Both his hands, moſt filthy feculent,
Above the water were on high extent,
And fain'd to waſh themſelves inceſſantly;
Yet nothing cleaner were for ſuch intent,
But rather fouler. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 7, ſtan. 61.
They make clean the outſide of the cup and of the platter,
but within they are full of extortion and exceſs. Mat. xxiii.25.
2. Free from moral impurity; chaſte; innocent; guiltleſs.
* 3: ººgant; neat; not unweildy; not encumbered with any
thing uſeleſs or diſproportioned.
The timber and wood are in ſome trees more clean, in ſome
more knotty. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Yet thy waiſt is ſtrait and clean,
As Cupid's ſhaft, or Hermes' rod. J/aller.
4. Not foul with any loathſome iſeaſe; not leprous.
- If the plague be ſomewhat dark, and ſpread not in the ſkin,
the prieſt ſhall pronounce him clean. Levit. xiii. 6.
CiêAN. adv. Quite; perfeółly; fully; completely. This ſenſe
is now little uſed.
Their actions have been clean contrary unto thoſe before
mentioned. . Hooker, b. i. ſect. 4.
Being ſeated; and domeſtick broils -
Clean overblown. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
A philoſopher, preſſed with the ſame objećtion, ſhapes an
anſwer clean contrary. Hakewell on Providence:
TºClean. v. a. [from the adjećtive.] To free from dirt of
th.
Their tribes adjuſted, clean'd their vigºrous wings,
And many a circle, many a ſhort eſſay,
Wheel'd round and round. Thomſºn's Autumn, 1865.
Cie'anlily, adv. [from cleanly.] In a cleanly manner.
CLE'anliness. n.ſ.. [from cleanly.)
1. Freedom from dirt or filth.
I ſhall ſpeak nothing of the extent of this city; the cleanli-
neſ of its ſtreets, nor the beauties of its piazza. Addison Italy.
2. Neatneſs of dreſs; purity; the quality contrary to negligence
and naſtineſs.
The miſtreſs thought it either not to deſerve, or not to need
any exquiſite decking, having no adorning but teaningſ. Sidn.
From whence the tender ſkin aſſumes
A ſweetneſs above all perfumes;
From whence a cleanlineſs remains,
Incapable of outward ſtains. Swift.
Such cleanlineſs from head to heel;
No humours groſs, or frowzy ſteams,
No noiſome whiffs, or ſweaty ſtreams. Swift.
Cleanly. adj. [from clean.]
1. Free from dirtineſs; careful to avoid filth; pure in the perſon.
Next that ſhall mountain 'ſparagus be laid,
Pull'd by ſome plain but cleanly country maid. Dryden.
An ant is a very cleanly inſe&amp;t, and throws out of her neſt
all the ſmall remains of the corn on which ſhe feeds. Addiſon.
2. That which makes cleanlineſs.
In our fantaſtick climes, the fair
With cleanly powder dry their hair. Prior.
3. Pure; innocent ; immaculate.
Perhaps human nature meets few more ſweetly reliſhing
and cleanly joys, than thoſe that derive from ſucceſsful trials.
Glanv. Scepſ. Prºfact.
4. Nice; addreſsful; artful.
We can ſecure ourſelves a retreat by ſome cleanly evaſion.
D'Eſtrange's Fables.
Cle'anly. adv. [from clean.]
1. Elegantly ; neatly; without naſtineſs.
If I do grow great, I'll have ſack, and live e'eanly as a
nobleman ſhould. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Cle'an Ness. n.ſ. [from clean.]
1. Neatneſs; freedom from filth.
2. Eaſy exactneſs; juſtneſs; natural, unlaboured correótneſs.
He ſhewed no ſtrength in ſhaking of his ſtaff; but the fine
cleanneſs of bearing it was delightful. Sidney, b. ii.
He minded only the clearneſs of his ſatyr, and the cleanneſs
of expreſſion. Dryden's juvenal's Dedication.
3. Purity; innocence.
The cleanreſs and purity of one's mind is never better
proved than in diſcovering its own faults at firſt view. Pope.
To Clf AN's E. v. a. [clanrian, Saxon.]
1. To free from filth or dirt, by waſhing or rubbing.
Cleanſe the pale corps with a religious hand,
From the polluting weed and common ſand. Prior.
2. To purify from guilt.
The blueneſs of a wound cleanſeth away evil. Prov.xx. 30.
Not all her od’rous tears can cleanſe her crime,
The plant alone deforms the happy clime. Dryden's Ovid.
3. To free from noxious tumours by purgation.
Can'ſt thou not miniſter to a mind diſeas'd,
And with ſome ſweet oblivious antidote,
Cleanſe the ſtuff'd boſom of that perilous ſtuff
Which weighs upon the heart. Shakespeareear.'s Macleth.
This oil, combined with its own ſalt and ſugar, makes it
ſaponaccous and cleanſing, by which quality it often helps di-
geſtion, and excites appetite. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
4. To free from leproſy. -
Shew thyſelf to the prieſt, and offer for thy cleanſing thoſe
things which Moſes commanded. Mark i. 44.
5. To ſcour; to rid of all offenſive things.
This river the Jews proffered the pope to cleanſ, ſo they
might have what they found. Addiſon on Italy.
A Cle’AN's ER. n.ſ. [clanrene, Sax.] That which has the
quality of evacuating any foul humours; or digeſting a ſore;
a detergent.
If there happens an impoſthume, honey, and even honey
of roſes, taken inwardly, is a good cleanſer. Arbuth. on Aim.
CLEAR. adj. [clair, Fr. Alaer, Dut. clarus, Latin.]
1. Bright; tranſpicuous; pellucid ; tranſparent; luminous;
without opacity or cloudineſs; not nebulous; not opacous;
not dark.
The ſtream is ſo tranſparent, pure and clear,
That had the ſelf-enamour'd youth gaz'd here,
3 He
!,
</p></div><p>
            End of Section 5.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809190#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section6" id="Section6"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section 6</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 44</div><p class="Text">C L E
He but the bottom, not his face had ſeen. Denham.
A tun about was ev'ry pillar there;
A poliſh'd mirrour ſhone not half ſoccur. Dryden's Fables.
a Free from clouds; fºrene; as a clear day.
3. Without mixture; pure; unmingled.
A. Perſpicuous; not obſcure; not hard to be underſtood; not
ambiguous.
We pretend to give a clear account how thunder and
fightning is produced. Temple.
Many men reaſon exceeding clear and rightly, who know
not how to make a ſyllogiſm. Locke.
5. Indiſputable; evident; undeniable.
Remain'd to our almighty foe
Clear vićtory; to our part loſs, and rout
Through all the empyrean. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
6. Apparent; manifeſt; not hid; not dark.
Unto God, who underſtandeth all their ſecret cogitations,
they are clear and manifeſt. Hooker, b. iii. ſect. 1.
The pleaſure of right reaſoning is ſtill the greater, by how
much the conſequences are more cear, and the chains of them
more long. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
7. Unſpotted; guiltleſs; irreproachable.
Duncan has been ſo cear in his great office. Shakeſpeare.
Think that the cleareſt gods, who make them honours
Of mens impoſſibilities, have preſerv'd thee. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Tho' the peripatetick philoſophy has been moſt eminent in
this way, yet other ſe&amp;ts have not been wholly clear of it. Locke.
Stateſman, yet friend to truth, in ſoul ſincere,
In action faithful, and in honour clear. Pope.
8. Unprepoſſeſſed; not preoccupied; impartial.
, Leucippe, of whom one look, in a clear judgment, would
have been more acceptable than all her kindneſs, ſo prodigally
beſtowed. Sidney, b. ii.
9. Free from diſtreſs, proſecution, or imputed guilt.
The cruel corp'ral whiſper'd in my ear,
Five pounds, it rightly tipt, would ſet me clear. Gay.
10. Free from dedućtions or incumbrances. -
Hope, if the ſucceſs happens to fail, is clear gains, as long as
it laſts. Collier againſt Deſpair.
Whatever a foreigner, who purchaſes land here, gives for
it, is ſo much every farthing clear gain to the nation; for that
money comes clear in, without carrying out any thing for
it. Locke.
I often wiſh'd that I had clear,
For life, ſix hundred pounds a year. Swift.
11. Unincumbered; without let or hindrance; vacant; unob-
ſtructed.
- If he be ſo far beyond his health,
Methinks he ſhould the ſooner pay his debts, -
And make a clear way to the gods. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
A poſt boy winding his horn at us, my companion gave
him two or three curſes, and left the way clear for him. Addiſ,
A clear ſtage is left for Jupiter to diſplay his omnipotence,
and turn the fate of armies alone. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
12. Out of debt.
13. Unintangled; at a ſafe diſtance from any danger or enemy.
Finding ourſelves too ſlow of ſail, we put on a compelled
valour, and in the grapple I boarded them: on the inſtant they
got clear of our ſhip. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
It requires care for a man with a double deſign to keep
elcar ºf claſhing with his own reaſonings. L’E/irange.
14. Canorous; founding diſtinétly, plainly ; articulately.
I much approved of my friend's inſiſting upon the qualifica-
tions of a good aſpect and a clear voice. Addiſon's Spectator.
15. With frºm; free; guiltleſs.
I am clear from the blood of this woman. - Suſan. 46.
None is ſo fit to corre&amp;t their faults, as he whe is clear from
any in his own writings. Dryden's juv. Dedication.
16. Sometimes with of -
The air is clearer of groſs and damp exhalations. Temple.
17. Uſed of perſons. Diſtinguiſhing; judicious ; intelligible:
this is ſcarcely uſed but in converſation.
CLEAR. adv. Clean; quite; completely. A low word.
He put his mouth to her ear, and, under pretext of a whiſ-
per, bit it clear off. L'A//range, Fable 98.
C.E.A.R. m. ſ. A term uſed by builders for the inſide work of
a houſe. - Die?.
To CLEAR. v. a. [from the adjećtive.]
1. To make bright, by removing opacous bodies; to brighten,
Like Boreas in his race, when ruſhing forth,
He ſweeps the ſkies, and clears the cloudy North. Dryden.
A favoury diſh, a homely treat,
Where all is plain, where all is neat, }
Clear up the cloudy foreheads of the great. Dryden.
2. To free from obſcurity, perplexity, or ambiguity.
To clear up the ſeveral parts of this theory, H was willing
to lay aſide a great many other ſpeculations. Burmet's Theory.
When, in the knot of the play, no other way is left for the
diſcovery, then let a god deſcend, and clear the buſineſs to the
audience. Dryden's Án. Dedication.
By myſtical terms and ambiguous phraſes, he darkens what
he ſhould clear up. Bºyle's Scepſ. Chym.
- Many knotty points there are,
Which all diſcuſs, but few can clear. - Prior.
3. To purge from the imputation of guilt; to juſtify; to vindi-
cate ; to defend: often with from before the thing.
Somerſet was much cleared by the death of thoſe who were :
executed, to make him appear faulty. Sir john Hayward.
- To clear the Deity from the imputation of tyranny, injuſ-
tice, and diſlimulation, which none do throw upon God with
more preſumption than thoſe who are the patrons of abſolute
neceſſity, is both comely and chriſtian. Bramh. againſt Holbs.
To clear herſelf,
For ſending him no aid, ſhe came from Egypt. Dryden.
I will appeal to the reader, and am ſure he will clear me
from partiality. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
How I wouldſt thou clear rebellion? Aidiſ. Cato.
Before you pray, clear your ſoul from all thoſe fins which
you know to be diſpleaſing to God. Wake's Prepar. for Death.
4. To cleanſe, with of.
My hands are of your colour; but I ſhame
To wear a heart ſo white:
A little water clear us of this deed. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
5. To diſcharge; to remove any incumbrance, or embarraſſ-
Inent. -
A man digging in the ground did meet with a door, having
a wall on each hand of it; from which having cleared the
earth, he forced open the door. Wilkins's Math. Magick.
This one mighty ſum has clear'd the debt. Dryden.
A ſtatue lies hid in a block of marble; and the art of th
ſtatuary only clears away the ſuperfluous matter, and removes
the rubbiſh. Addiſon's Spe:lator, Nº. 215.
Multitudes will furniſh a double proportion towards the
clearing of that expence. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 20.
6. To free from anything offenfive or noxious.
To clear the palace from the foe, ſucceed -
The weary living, and revenge the dead. Dryden's Mºneit.
It ſhould be the ſkill and art of the teacher to clear their
heads of all other thoughts, whilſt they are learning of any
thing. Locke on Education.
Auguſtus, to eſtabliſh the dominion of the ſeas, rigged out
a powerful navy to clear it of the pirates of Malta. Arbuthnºt.
7. To clarify; as to clear liquors.
8. To gain without deduction. -
He clear; but two hundred thouſand crowns a year, after
having defrayed all the charges of working the ſalt. Addiſon.
9. To confer judgment or knowledge. -
Our common prints would clear up their underſtandings,
and animate their minds with virtue. Addiſon's Spediator.
ro. Tº Clear a ſhip, at the cuſtom-houſe, is to obtain the
liberty of failing, or of ſelling a cargo, by ſatisfying the
cuſtoms.
To Clear. v. n.
1. To grow bright; to recover tranſparency.
So foul a ſky clears not without a ſtorm. Shakeſp K. john.
2. Sometimes with up.
The miſt, that hung about my mind, clears up. Ad Cato.
Take heart, nor of the laws of fate complain;
Tho' now 'tis cloudy, 'twill clear up again. Norrir.
Adviſe him to ſtay ’till the weather clears up, for you are .
afraid there will be rain. Swift's Directions to the Groºm.
3. To be diſengaged from incumbrances, diſtreſs, or entangle-
neptS.
He that clears at once, will relapſe; for, finding himſelf out
of ſtraits, he will revert to his cuſtoms: but he that cleareth
by degrees, induceth a habit of frugality, and gaineth as well
upon his mind as upon his eſtate. Bacon's Eſſays, 29.
CLE'ARAN ce. n. ſ. [from clear.] A certificate that a ſhip has
been cleared at the cuſtomhouſe.
CLE'ARER. n.ſ.. [from clear.] Brightener; purifier; enlightener.
Gold is a wonderful clearer of the underſtanding: it diffi-
pates every doubt and ſcruple in an inſtant. Addiſon's Speciat.
Ci.e.'ARLY. adv. [from clear.]
1. Brightly; luminouſly.
Thoſe myſteries of grace and ſalvation, which were but
darkly diſcloſed unto them, have unto us more gear} ſhined.
Hooter, b. iii. ſ.47. II.
2. Plainly; evidently; without obſcurity or ambiguity:
Chriſtianity firſt clearly proved this noble and impºrtant
truth to the world. Rogers.
3. With diſcernment; acutely; without embarraſſment; or per-
plexity of mind.
There is almoſt no man but ſees clearlier and ſharper the
vices in a ſpeaker than the virtues: Ben Johnſon's Diſcov.
4. Without entanglement, or diſtration of affairs. - -
He that doth not divide, will never enter into buſi-
neſs; and he that divideth too much, will ºver come out of
it clearly. - - . Bacºn's Eſſays, 26.
5. Without by-ends; without ſtiffer views; honeſtly. -
When you are examining the "- matters, do not take into
conſideration any fenſual or worldly intereſt; but deal cka, y
and impartially with yourſ."&lt;s. Tillotſon,
6. Without dedućtion or coſt.
;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 45</div><p class="Text">C L E
C L E
i
-
º
:-
.
:
:
7. Without reſerve; without evaſion; without ſubterfuge.
- . By a certain day they ſhould clearly relinquiſh unto the
king all their lands and poſſeſſions. JXavies on Ireland.
CLR'ARN Ess n.ſ.. [from clear.]
1. Tranſparency; brightneſs.
It may be, percolation doth not only cauſe clearneſ, and
ſplendour, but ſweetneſs of favour. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Glaſs in the furnace grows to a greater magnitude, and re-
fines to a greater clearneſ, only as the breath within is more
powerful, and the heat more intenſe.
2. Splendour; luſtre. -
Love, more clear than yourſelſ, with the clearnſ, lays
a night of ſorrow upon me. Sidney, b. ii.
3. Diſtinctneſs; perſpicuity.
If he chances to think right, he does not know how to
convey his thoughts to another with clearneſs and perſpicuity.
Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 291.
CLEARs1'GHTED. adj. [clear and ſight.] Perſpicuous; diſcern-
ing; judicious.
Clear/ghted reaſon, wiſdom's judgment leads;
And ſenſe, her vaſſal, in her footſteps treads. Denham.
To CLEARSTARch. v. a. [from clear and ſtarch..] To ſtiffen
with ſtarch.
. He took his preſent lodging at the manſion-houſe of a tay-
lor's widow, who waſhes, and can clear/larch his bands. Addison
To CLEAVE. v. n, pret. I clave, part, clºven. [cleopan, Sax.
Åleven, Dutch J
1. To adhere; to ſtick; to hold to. -
. . The clarifying of liquors, by adheſion, is effected, when
... ſome cleaving body is mixed with the liquors, whereby the
grºſſer part ſticks to that cleaving body. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Water, in ſmall quantity, cleaveth to any thing that is
ſolid. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 293.
When the duſt groweth into hardneſs, and the clods cleave
faſt together. - job, xxxviii. 38.
. . The thin camelion, fed with air, receives
. The colour of the thing to which he cleaves. Dryd. Fables.
2. To unite aptly; to fit.
New honours come upon him,
Like our ſtrange garments, cleave not to their mould,
But with the aid of uſe. Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
3. To unite in concord and intercſt.
The apoſtles did thus conform the Chriſtians, according to
the pattern of the Jews, and made them cleave the better.
- - - - - - - - Hooker, b. iv. ſect. I 1.
If you ſhall cleave to my conſent, when 'tis,
It ſhall make honour for you. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
. . The people would revolt, if they ſaw any of the French
nation to cleave unto. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
4. To be concomitant to ; to join with.
We cannot imagine, that, in breeding or begetting faith,
his grace doth cleave to the one, and utterly forſake the other.
~ * - Hooker, b. v. ſe&amp;. 22.
To CLEAVE. v. a. preterite, I clºve, I clave, I cleft; part, paſſ.
cloven, or clºſt. [cleopan, Sax. Kloven, Dutch.]
1. To divide with violence; to ſplit; to part forcibly into
picces. -
And at their paſſing cleave th' Aſſyrian flood. Milton.
. The fountains of it are ſaid to have been cloven, or burſt
open. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
The bleſſed miniſter his wings diſplay'd,
And, like a ſhooting ſtar, he cºft the night. Dryden.
Rais'd on her duſky wings, ſhe cleaves the ſkies. Dryden.
Whom with ſuch force he ſtruck, he fell'd him down,
And cleft the circle of his golden crown. Dryden's Fables.
Or had the ſun
Elećted to the earth a nearer ſeat,
His beams had cleft the hill, the valley dry'd. Blackmore.
Where whole brigades one champion's arms o'erthrow,
And cleave a giant at a random blow. Tickell.
Not half ſo ſwift the trembling doves can fly,
When the fierce eagle cleaves the liquid ſky.
2. To divide. -
And every beaſt that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft
into two claws. Deutr. xiv. 6,
To CLEAve. v. n.
1. To part aſunder.
- Wars 'twixt you twain, would be
As if the world ſhould cleave, and that ſlain men -
Should ſolder up the rift. Shakeſp. Anthony and Cleopatra.
The ground clave aſunder that was under them. Num. xvi.
He cut the cleaving ſky,
And in a moment vaniſh'd from her eye.
2. To ſuffer diviſion.
It “eaves with a gloſſy polite ſubſtance, not plane, but with
ſome little unevenneſs. Newton's Opt.
A CLE'Av FR. n: ſ [from cleave.]
!. A butcher's inſtrument to cut animals into joints. -
You; gettlemen, keep a parcel of roaring bullies about me
day and night, with huzza's and hunting-horns, and ringing
the changes on butcher's cleavers. Arbuth. Hiſt. of john Bull.
Pope.
Pº's Odyſſey,
1.
Though arm'd with all thy cleavers, knives, -
And axes made to hew down lives. Hudibras, p. iv. cani. 2.
2. A weed. Improperly written CL1 v ER, which ſce.
Cle Es. n.ſ. The two parts of the foot of beaſts which are
cloven-footed. Skinner.
corrupted from claws. -
Clef, n.ſ. [from clf, key, Fr.] In muſick, a mark at the
beginning of the lines of a ſong, which ſhews the tone or
key in which the piece is to begin. Chambers.
CLEFT. part. paſſ. [from cleave..] Divided ; parted aſunder.
Fat, with incenſe ſtrew'd,
On the cleft wood. Milton's Par. Loff, b. xi. 1. 443.
I never did on cleft Parnaſſus dream,
Nor taſte the ſacred Heliconian ſtream.
Cle FT. n.ſ.. [from cleave.]
1. A ſpace made by the ſeparation of parts; a crack; a creviſe."
The caſcades ſeem to break through the clºfts and cracks of
rocks. - Addiſon's Guardian, N°. ol.
The extremity of this cape has a long cleft in it, which
was enlarged and cut into ſhape by Agrippa, who made this
the great port for the Roman fleet. Addiſon on Italy.
The reſt of it, being more groſs and ponderous, does not
move far; but lodges in the clefts, craggs, and fides of the
rocks, near the bottoms of them. Woodward’s Nat. Hiſtory.
2. In farriery.
Clefts appear on the bought of the paſterns, and are cauſed
by a ſharp and malignant humour, which frets the ſkin; and
it is accompanied with pain, and a noiſom ſtench. Farr. Dict.
His horſe it is the heralds weft;
No, 'tis a mare, and hath a cleft. B. Johnſon's Under-wood.
To Cle'ftgraft. v. a. [cleft and graft.] To engraft by
cleaving the ſtock of a tree, and inſerting a branch.
Filberts may be clfigrafted on the common nut. Mortimer.
CLE'MENcy. n. J. º: Fr. clementia, Lat.] Mercy;
remiſſion of ſeverity; willingneſs to ſpare; tenderneſs in
puniſhing.
I have ſtated the true notion of clemency, mercy, compaſ-
fion, good-nature, humanity, or whatever elſe it may be
called, ſo far as is conſiſtent with wiſdom. Addiſon's Freeholder.
CLE'MENT, adj. [cemens, Latin.] Mild; gentle ; merciful,
kind; tender; compaſſionate. • *
Clench. See Clinch.
To CLEPE. v. a [clypian, Saxon.] To call. Obſolete.
Three crabbed months had ſowr'd themſelves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand,
And clepe thyſelf my love. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
CLERGY. m. ſ. [clergi, Fr. clerus, Lat. xxºs, Greek.] The
3. of men ſet apart by due ordination for the ſervice of
od.
We hold that God's clergy are a ſtate which hath been,
and will be as long as there is a church upon earth, neceſſary,
by the plain word of God himſelf; a ſtate whereunto the reſt
of God's people muſt be ſubject, as touching things that ap-
pertain to their ſoul's health. Hooker, b. iii.
The convocation give a greater ſum, - :
Than ever, at one time, the clergy yet
Did to his predeceſſors part withal. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Cle'RGYMAN. n.ſ. [clergy and man.] A man in holy orders;
a man ſet apart for miniſtration of holy things; not a laick.
How I have ſped among the clergymen,
The ſums I have collected ſhall expreſs. Shakespeare. K. john.
It ſeems to be in the power of a reaſonable clergyman to
make the moſt ignorant man comprehend his duty. Swift.
CLE'Rical. adj. [clericus, Lat.] Relating to the clergy; as, a
clerical man; a man in orders. :
In clericals the keys are lined, and in colleges they uſe to
line the table-men. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, Nº. 158.
Unleſs we may more properly read clarichords. -
A CLERK. n.f. [clenic, Sax, clericus, Latin.] ſ
1. A clergyman. -
All perſons were ſtiled clerks that ſerved in the church of
Chriſt, whether they were biſhops, prieſts, or deacons. Ayliff.
2. A ſcholar; a man of letters. -
They might talk of book-learning what they would; but,
for his part, he never ſaw more unfeaty fellows than great
clerks were. Sidney.
The greateſt clerks being not always the honeſteſt, any more
than the wiſeſt men, South.
3. A man employed under another as a writer. *
My lord Baſſanio gave his ring away
Unto the judge; and then the boy, his clerk,
That took ſome pains in writing, he begg'd mine. Shakespeare
My friend was in doubt whether he ſhould not exert the
juſtice upon ſuch a vagrant; but not having his clerk with him,
who is a neceſſary counſellor, he let the thought drop Addison
4. A petty writer in publick offices: an officer of various kinds.
Take a juſt view, how many may remark
Who's now a lord, his grand-fire was a clerk. Granville.
It may ſeem difficult to make out the bills of fare for the
ſuppers of Vitellius, I queſtion not but an expert clerk of a
kitchen can do it. Arbuthnot.
* 5.
It is a country word, and probably
Dryden's Perſus.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 46</div><p class="Text">5. The layman who reads the reſponſes to the congregation in
the church, to direct the reſt. -
C1. E'RKSHIP. m. ſ. [from clerk.]
1. Scholarſhip. '.
2. The office of a clerk of any kind. - - -
He ſold the clerſhip of his pariſh, when it became vacant.
Swift's .4/ſcellanies.
CLEve. ). In compoſition, at the beginning or end of the
CLIF. proper name of a place, denotes it to be ſituated on
CI. Iv E. the ſide of a rock or hill; as Cleveland, Clifton,
Stºnicliff.
CLE/VE.R. adj. [of no certain etymology.]
1. Dextrous; ſkilful. - -
It was the clºverer mockery of the two. L'Eſtrange's Fableſ.
I read Dyer's letter more for the ſtile than the news. The
man has a clever pen, it muſt be owned. Addison's Free!older.
2. Juſt ; fit; proper; commodious.
. I can't but think 'twould ſound more clever, -
To me, and to my heirs for ever. Pope.
3. Well-ſhaped; handſome. * * -
. She called him gundy-guts, and he called her louſy Peg,
tho' the girl was a tight clever wench as any was. Arbuthnot.
4. This is a low word, ſcarcely ever uſed but in burleſque or
converſation ; and applied to any thing a man likes, without
a ſettled meaning.
Cle've RLY. adv. [from clever.] Dextrouſly; fitly; handſomely.
Theſe would inveigle rats with th' ſcent,
And ſometimes catch them with a ſnap,
As c'every as th’ ableſt trap. Hudibras, p. ii. canto 1.
A rogue upon the highway may have as ſtrong an arm, and
take off a man's head as cleverly as the executioner. South.
CLE VERN Ess. n ſ. [from clever.] Dexterity; ſkill; accom-
pliſhment.
CLEVV. m. ſ. [clype, Sax. Alouwen, Dutch.]
1. Thread wound upon a bottom ; a ball of thread.
Eftsoons untwiſting his deceitful clew ; --
He'gan to weave a web of wicked guile. Spenſ. Fairy Queen.
While guided by ſome clew of heav'nly thread,
The perplex'd labyrinth we backward tread. Roſcommon.
They ſee ſmall clews draw waſteſt weights along,
Not in their bulk but in their order ſtrong. Dryden.
2. A guide; a direction: becauſe men direct themſelves by a
clew of thread in a labyrinth.
This alphabet muſt be your own clew to guide you. Holder.
Is there no way, no thought, no beam of light?
No clew to guide me thro’ this gloomy maze,
To clear my honour, yet preſerve my faith ? Smith.
The reader knows not how to tranſport his thoughts over
to the next particular, for want of ſome clew, or connecting
idea, to lay hold of. Watts's Lºgick, p. iv. c. 2.
3. Clew of the ſail of a Ship, is the lower corner of it, which
reaches down to that earing where the tackles and ſheets are
faſtened. º Harris.
To CLEw. v. a. [from clew, a ſea-term.]
To Clew the Sails, is to raiſe them, in order to be furled,
which is done by a rope faſtened to the clew of a ſail, called
the clew-garnet. Harris.
To CLICK. v. n. [clicken, Dut, cliqueter, French..] To make a
ſharp, ſmall, ſucceſſive noiſe.
The ſolemn death-watch click'd, the hour ſhe dy'd ;
And ſhrilling crickets in the chimney cry’d. Gay's Paſtorals.
“C1.1'ck ER. n.ſ.. [from click.] A low word for the ſervant of a
ſaleſman, who ſtands at the door to invite cuſtomers.
“CLI'ck E.T. n.f. [from click.] The knocker of a door. Skinner,
“CLI'ENT. n.ſ.. [cliens, Latin.]
*. One who applies to an advocate for counſel and defence. .
There is due from the judge to the advocate ſome commen-
dation, where cauſes are well handled; for that upholds in the
client the reputation of his counſel. Bacon's Eſſays.
Advocates muſt deal plainly with their clients, and tell the
true ſtate of their caſe. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
=. It may be perhaps ſometimes uſed for a dependant in a more
general ſenſe.
I do think they are your friends and clients,
And fearful to diſturb you. Ben johnſºn's Catiline.
*CLI'ENTED. particip, adj. [from client.] Supplied with clients.
This due occaſion of diſcouragement, the worſt condi-
tioned and leaſt cliented petivoguers, do yet, under the ſweet
bait of revenge, convert to a more plentiful proſecution of
actions. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
F-1 ENT E'l E. m. ſ. [clientcla, Lat.] The condition or office of
a clicnt. A word ſcarcely uſed.
There's Varus holds good quarters with him;
And, under the pretext of clientele,
Will be admitted. Benj. johnſºn's Catiline.
Sr. 1's Nºrship, m ſ: [from client.] The condition of a client
Patronage and clientſhip among the Romans always de-
fº-ended : the plebeian houſes had recourſe to the patrician line
which had formerly protećled them. Dryd Wing. Dedication.
* - r FF. m. ſ. ſciºus, Låt. clip, clior, Saxon J
A ſteep rock; a rock, according to Skinner, broken and
&lt;raggy.
- Vol. I.
The Leucadians did uſe to precipitate a man from a high
cliff into the ſea. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtºry, Nº. 886.
Mountaineers, that from Severus came,
And from the craggy cliffs of Tetrica. Dryden's ºt.
Where-ever 'tis ſo found ſcattered upon the ſhores, there is
it as conſtantly found lodged in the cliff; thereabouts. Iſººd-w
2. The name of a charaćter in muſick. Properly CLEF.
CLIFT. r. ſ. The ſame with CLIFF, now diſuſed.
Hi Down he tumbled, like an aged tree,
Tigh growing on the top of rockv cliff. Sºemſ. Fair; 9;,&amp;n.
cº", &amp;n º of ſº, or
progreſſion of years, which is ſuppoſed to end in a critical
and dangerous time. -
Elder times, ſettling their conceits upon climaiers, differ
from one another. Brown's Wu'gar Errours.
CLIMACTE'Rick. }". [from climacier.] Containing a cer-
CLIMACTE'RICAL. S. tain number of years, at the end of which
ſome great change is ſuppoſed to befal the body.
Certain obſervable years are ſuppoſed to be attended with
ſome conſiderable change in the body; as the ſeventh year;
the twenty-firſt, made up of three times ſeven ; the forty-
ninth, made up of ſeven times ſeven ; the ſixty-third, being
nine times ſeven; and the eighty-firſt, which is nine times
nine: which two laſt are called the grand c imažericks. Shakespeare
The numbers ſeven and nine, multiplied into themſelves,
do make up fixty-three, commonly eſteemed the great climac-
ten ical of our lives. Brown's }. Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
Your lordſhip being now arrived at your great climacierique,
yet give no proof of the leaſt decay of your excellent judg-
ment and comprehenſion. - Dryden.
My mother is ſomething better, tho', at her advanced age,
every day is a climaéïerick. Pºpe.
CLIMATE. m. ſ. [xxpa.] -
1. A ſpace upon the ſurface of the earth, meaſured from the
equator to the polar circles; in each of which ſpaces the long-
eſt day is half an hour longer than in that nearer to the equa-
tor. From the polar circles to the poles climates are mea-
ſured by the increaſe of a month.
2. In the common and popular ſenſe, a region, or trađt of land,
differing from another by the temperature of the air.
Betwixt th' extremes, two happier climates hold
The temper that partakes of hot and cold. Dryden's Ovid.
On what new happy climate are we thrown Dryden.
This talent of moving the paſſions cannot be of any great
uſe in the northern climates. . . Swife.
To Cli'MATE. v. n. To inhabit. A word only in Shaftſpráre.
The bleſſed gods
Purge all infection from our air, whilſt you
Do climate here. Shakespare’s Hºrter's Tale.
CLI'M ATURE. m. ſ. The ſame with climate, and not in uſe.
Such harbingers preceding ſtill the fates,
Have heav'n and earth together demonſtrated
Unto our climatures and countrymen. Shałºffeare.
CLI'MAx. m. ſ. [2xpač.] , Gradation; aſcent: a figure in rhe-
torick, by which the ſentence riſes gradually; as Cicero ſays
to Catiline, Thou do'ſt nothing, moveſt, nothing, thinkeſt
nothing; but I hear it, I ſee it, and perfectly underſtand it.
Choice between one excellency and another is difficult;
and yet the concluſion, by a due clincx, is evermore the
beſt. Dryden's juv Dedication.
Some radiant Richmond every age has grac'd,
Still riſing in a climax, 'till the laſt, - {
Surpaſſing all, is not to be ſurpaſt. Granville.
To CLIMB. v. n. pret, clomb or climbed; part comb or climbed.
It is pronounced like cime. [climan, Sax. Alimmen, Dutch.]
To aſcend up any place; to mount by means of ſome hold or
footing. It implies labour and difficulty, and ſucceſſive efforts.
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Lean famine, quartering ſteel, and climbing fire. Shakespeare .
Things, at the worſt, will ceaſe; or elſe climb upward
To what they were before. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Jonathan climbed up upon his hands, and upon his feet. 1Sam.
Thou, ſun of this great world both eye and ſoul,
Acknowledge him thy greater; ſound his praiſe
In thy eternal courſe, both when thou climb/?,
And when high noon haſt gain'd, and when thou fall'ſt.
- Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. v. l. 174.
No rebel Titan's ſacrilegious crime,
By heaping hills on hills, can thither climb.
Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day.
- What controuling cauſe
Makes waters, in contempt of nature's laws,
Climb up, and gain th'aſpiring mountain's height. Pliºn.
To CLIM B. v. a. To aſcend.
When ſhall I come to th’ top of that ſºme hill?—
—You do climb up it now. Look, how we labour. Sia'ºſº.
Is’t not enough to break into my garden,
Rºſommºn.
Dryden.
Climbing my walls, in ſpight of me the owner Shałęſp.
Thy arms purſue
Paths of renown, and climb aſcents of fame, P; ; tr.
Forlorn he muſt, and perſecuted fly;
C#ml the ſteep mountain, in the cavern lic. Priºr.
4 R C11'M P L *.
-
sº
-
ſ
|
:
-
-*
-
º
*
|
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 47</div><p class="Text">- C L I
C L O
.
Cli'M H E R. º. f. (from climb.]
1. One that mounts or ſcales any place or thing;
a rifer.
I wait not at the lawyer's gates,
Ne ſhoulder climbers down the ſtairs.
2. A plant that creeps upon other ſupports.
Ivy, briony, honey-ſuckles, and other climbers, muſt be
dug up. Mortimer.
. The name of a particular herb.
It hath a perennial fibroſe root: the leaves grow oppoſite
upon the ſtalks. The flowers, moſtly of four leaves, placed
in form of a croſs, are naked, having no calyx; in the center
of the flower are many hairy ſtamina ſurrounding the pointal,
which becomes a fruit; in which the ſecds are gathered into
a little head, ending in a kind of rough plume; whence it is
called by the country people cla man's beard. The ſpecies are
twelve, two of which grow wild. Al/iller.
CLIME. m. ſ. [contračted from c imate, and therefore properly
poetical.] Climate; region; tract of earth.
He can ſpread thy name o'er land and ſeas,
Whatever clime the ſun's bright circle warms. Milt. Par. R.
They apply the celeſtial diſcription of other climes unto
their own. Brºwn's hugar Erratºrs, b. iv. c. 12.
Of beauty ſing, her ſhining progreſs view,
a mounter;
Carew's Survey.
From clime to clime the dazzling light purſue. Granville.
We ſhall meet
In happier climes, and on a ſafer ſhore. Addison's Cato.
Health to vigorous bodies, or fruitful ſeaſons, in temperate
clines, are common and familiar bleſlings. Atte‘ bury's Sermons.
To CLiNCH. v. a. [clºniza, Sax. to knock, junius. Clingo,
in Feſtus, to encompaſs, AMinſhew.]
1. To hold in the hand with the fingers bent over it.
Simois rowls the bodies and the ſhields
Of heroes, whoſe diſmember'd hands yet bear
The dart aloft, and clinch the pointed ſpear. Lºryd. Wirg. Æn.
2. To contračt or double the fingers.
Their talleſt trees are about ſeven feet high, the tops
whereof I could but juſt reach with my fiſt clinched. Swift.
3. To bend the point of a nail in the other ſide.
4. To confirm; to fix; as, to clinch an argument.
CLINch. n. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A word uſed in a double meaning; a pun; an ambiguity;
a duplicity of meaning, with an identity of expreſſion.
Such as they are, I hope they will prove, without a clinch,
luciferous ſearching after the nature of light. Boyle.
Pure clinches the ſuburbian muſe affords,
And Panton waging harmleſs war with words. Dryden.
Here one poor word a hundred clinches makes. Pope.
2. That part of the cable which is faſtened to the ring of the
anchor.
CL1'Nc HER. m.ſ.. [from clinch J A cramp; a holdfaſt; a piece
of iron bent down to faſten planks.
The wimbles for the work, Calypſo found;
With thoſe he pierc'd 'em, and with clinchers bound. Pope.
To CLING. v. n. pret. I clung; part. I have cºung. [Kynger,
Daniſh.]
1. To hang upon by twining round; to ſtick to; to hold faſt
upon.
The broil long doubtful ſtood;
As two ſpent ſwimmers that do cling together,
And choak their art. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Moſt popular conſul he is grown, methinks:
How the rout cling to him Benj. johnſºn's Catiline.
The fontanel in his neck was deſcried 5; the clinging of
his hair to the plaiſter.
Jºſeman's Surgery.
When they united and together clung,
When undiſtinguiſh'd in one heap they hung. Blackmore.
See in the circle, next Eliza plac'd,
Two babes of love, cloſe clinging to her waiſt. Pope.
That they may the cloſer cling,
Take your blue ribbon for a ſtring. Swift.
2. To dry up ; to conſume ; to waſte; to pine away. [Leclun-
5en ºneop, a withered tree.]
If thou ſpeak'ſt falſe,
Upon the next tree ſhalt thou hang alive, .
*Till famine cling thee. Shakespeare care's Macbeth.
Cli'NG Y. adj. [from cling.] Apt to cling; adheſive.
CLI'NICAL. Üadj. [xx…, to lie down.] Thoſe that keep their
CLI's Ick. ; beds; thoſe that are ſick, paſt hopes of recovery.
A clinical convert, one that is converted on his death-bed.
This word occurs often in the works of Taylor.
To CLINK. v. a. [perhaps ſoftened from clanſ, or corrupted
from click.] To ſtrike ſo as to make a ſmall ſharp noiſe
Five years! a long leaſe for the clinking of pewter. Shakespeare.
To CLINK. v. n. To utter a finall, ſharp, interrupted noiſe.
The ſever'd bars,
Submiſſive, clink againſt your brazen portals. Prior.
Underneath th' umbrella's oily ſhed,
Safe thro' the wet on clinking pattens tread. Gay's Trivia.
CLINK. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A ſharp ſucceſſive noiſe; a knocking.
I heard the clink and fall of ſwords, Shakespeare Othel”.
2. It ſeems in Spenser to have ſome unuſual ſenſe.
Tho' creeping cloſe, behind the wickct's clink,
Privily he peeped out thro' a chink. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
CLIM&amp;VANT. n.ſ. [Fr.] Embroidery; ſpangles; falſe gli:-
ter; tinſel finery.
To day the French,
All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
Shone down the Engliſh. Soakeſp. Henry VIII.
To CLIP. v. a. [clippan, Saxon.]
1. To cmbrace, by throwing the arms round; to hug; to en-
fold in the arms.
He, that before ſhunn’d her, to ſhun ſuch harms,
Now runs and takes her in his cipping aims.
Here I clip
The anvil of my ſword, and do conteſt
Hotly, and nobly, with thy love Shakespeare. Corizianas.
O nation, that thou couldſt remove
That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about.
Enter the city, clp your wives; your friends,
Tell them your ſeats. Shakeſpeare's A.thony and Cleºpatra.
The jades
That drag the tragick melancholy night,
Who with their dr wſy, ſlow, and flagging wings,
Clip dead mens graves. S a 'e feare's Henry VI. p. ii.
The male reſteth on the back of the female, clipping and
embracing her with his legs about the neck and body. Aay.
2. To cut with ſheers. [Kipper, Daniſh; ºf cº, Dutch ; ap-
parently from the ſame radical ſenſe, ſince 1.cc.is cut by in-
cloſing and embracing.]
Your ſheers come too late to clip the bird’s wings, that al-
ready is flown away. Sia'ºey, b. ii.
Then let him, that my love ſhall blame,
Sidney.
Shakesp.
Or clip love's wings, or quench love's flame. Suckling.
He clips hope's wings, whoſe airy bliſs
Much higher than fruition is. Dem'am.
But love had clipſ’d his wings, and cut him ſhort,
Confin'd within the purlieus of his court. Drydº's Faller.
If mankind had had wings, as perhaps ſome extravagant
atheiſt may think us deficient in that, all the world muſt have
conſented to clip them. Bently.
By this lock, this ſacred lock, I ſwear,
Which never more ſhall join its parted hair,
Clipp'd from the lovely head, where late it grew. Pope.
He ſpent every day ten hours dozing, clipping papers, or
darning his ſtockings. Swift.
3. Sometimes with off.
We ſhould then have as much feeling upon the chºping off
a hair, as the cutting of a nerve. Bentley’s Sermºns.
4. It is particularly uſed of thoſe who diminiſh coin, by paring
the edges.
This deſign of new coinage, is juſt of the nature of
clipping. Lºcke.
5. To curtail; to cut ſhort.
All my reports go with the modeſt truth,
Nor more, nor clipt, but ſo. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Mrs. Mayoreſs clipp'd the king's Engliſh. Addison Speciator.
Even in London, they clip their words after one manner
about the court, another in the city, and a third in the
ſuburbs. Swift.
6. To confine; to hold; to contain.
Where is he living, clipt in with the ſea,
Who calls me pupil Shake peare's Henry IV. p. i.
To CLIP. v. n. A phraſe in falconry.
Some falcon floops at what her eye deſign'd,
And with her eagerneſs the quarry miſs'd,
Streight flies at check, and clips it down the wind. Dryden.
CL1'PPER. m. ſ. [from clip.) Onc that debaſes coin by cutting.
it is no Engliſh treaſon to cut
French crowns, and to-morrow the king
Himſelf will be a clipper. Shake fea's Henry V.
No coins pleaſed ſome medall ſts more than thoſe which
had paſſed through the hands of an old Roman cºiffer. Aadi/.
CLI'PPING. n ſ [from clip.] The part cut or clipped oſh.
Beings purely material, without ſenſe, pºrception; or
thought, as the clippings of our beards, and parings of our
nails. Locke.
CLI've R. m.ſ. An herb. More properly written cleaver.
It grows wild, the ſeeds ſticking to the clothes of ſuch as
paſs by them. It is ſometimes uſed in medicine. A1: ler.
A CLOAK n.ſ [lach, Saxon.]
1. The outer garment, with which the reſt are covered.
You may bear it, -
Under a cloše that is of any length. Shakesp. I wo Gen". of Pºrona.
Their clokes were cloath of ſilver, mix d with gold. 1 ſyd.
All arguments will be as ſittle able to prevail, as the wind
did with the traveller to part with his cºat, which he held only
the faſter. Locke.
Nimbly he roſe, and caſt his garment down;
That inſtant in his c oak I wrapt me round. Pºpe's Odyſty.
. A concealment; a cover.
Not uſing your liberty for a clock of maliciouſneſs.
1 Pet. ii. 16.
2
3 - To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 48</div><p class="Text">* -
C L O
C L O
To Clo Ak. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover with a cloak.
2. To hide ; to conceal. - -
Moſt heavenly fair, in decd and view,
She by creation was, ’till ſhe did fall; ---
Thenceforth ſhe ſought for helps to cloak her crimes withal.
Fairy &amp;een, b. ii. cant. 7. /ianz. 45.
Clo'AKBAG. m. ſ [from cloak and bag..] A portmanteau ; a
bag in which cloaths are carried.
Why do'ſt thou converſe with that trunk of humours, that
ſtuffed cloakbag of guts. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. i.
- I have already fit
('Tis in my coaxlag) doublet, hat, hoſe, all
That anſwer to them. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
CLOCK. n.ſ.. [clocc, Welſh, from clich, a bell, Welſh and
Armorick; clocºe, French.]
1. The inſtrument which, by a ſeries of mechanical move-
ments, tells the hour by a ſtroke upon a bell.
If a man be in ſickneſs or pain, the time will ſeem longer
without a cock or hour-glaſs than with it. Bacon.
The picture of Jerome uſually deſcribed at his ſtudy, is
with a clock hanging by. Brºwn's Pulgar Errours, b. v. c. 17.
I told the clocks, and watch'd the waſting light. Dryden.
2. It is an uſual expreſſion to ſay, What is it of the clock, for
JWhat hour is it * Or ten o'clock, for the tenth hour.
JWhat is't o’clock 2
——Upon the ſtroke of four. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Macicaus ſet forward about ten o'clock in the night, towards
Andruſia. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
About mine of the clock at night the king marched out of
the North-port. - Clarendon, b. viii.
3. The clock of a ſtocking; the flowers or inverted work about
the ankle.
His ſtockings with filver clocks were raviſhed from him.
Swift on Modern Education.
4. Clock is alſo the name of an inſect; a ſort of beetle. Dić7.
Clo'cKMAK ER. m. ſ [clºck and make.] An artificer whoſe pro-
feſſion is to make clocks. -
This inequality has been diligently obſerved by ſeveral of
our ingenious clockmakers, and equations been made and uſed
by them. Derham.
Clo'ckwork. n.ſ.. [clock and work.] Movements by weights
or ſprings, like thoſe of a clock.
So if unprejudic'd you ſcan
The goings of this clockwork, man;
You find a hundred movements made
By fine devices in his head:
But 'tis the ſtomach's ſolid ſtroke,
That tells its being, what's a clock. … Prior.
Within this hollow was Vulcan's ſhop, full of fire and
clockwork. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 oz.
You look like a puppet moved by clockwork. Arbuthnot.
CLOD. n.ſ.. [club, Sax. a little hillock; klotte, Dutch.]
1. A lump of earth or clay; ſuch a body of earth as cleaves or
hangs together.
The earth that caſteth up from the plough a great clad, is
not ſo good as that which caſteth up a ſmaller clod. Bacon.
I'll cut up, as plows
Do barren lands, and ſtrike together flints
And clods, th’ungrateful ſenate and the people. B. johnſon.
Who ſmooths with harrows, of who pounds with rakes
The crumbling clods. Dryden's Georg.
2. A turf; the ground.
Byzantians boaſt, that on the clod,
Where once their ſultan's horſe has trod,
Grows neither graſs, nor ſhrub, nor tree. Swift.
3. Any thing vile, baſe, and earthy; as the body of man, com-
pared to his ſoul. -
And ye high heavens, the temple of the gods,
In which a thouſand torches, flaming bright,
Do burn, that to us wretched earthly clods,
In dreadful darkneſs, lend deſired light. Spenſer's Epithalan.
The ſpirit of man,
Which God inſpir'd, cannot together periſh
With this corporeal clad. AMilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
How the purcr ſpirit is united to this clod, is a knot too
hard for our degraded intellects to untie. Glanv Scepſ, c. 4.
In moral reflections there muſt be heat as well as dry rea-
ſon, to inſpire this cold clod of clay, which we carry about
with us. Burnet's Theory, Preface.
4. A dull, groſs, ſtupid fellow; a dolt.
The vulgar a ſcarce animated clod,
Ne'er pleas'd with aught above 'em. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
To CLod. v. n. [from the noun..] To gather into concre-
tions; to coagulate: for this we ſometimes uſe clot.
Let us go find the body, and from the ſtream,
With layers pure, and cleanſing herbs, waſh off
- The cladded gore. Milton's Agon. / 1727.
To Clod. v. a. [from the noun..] To pelt with clods.
Clo'DD v. adj. [from cºod.]
1 - Conſiſting of earth or clods; earthy; muddy; miry; mean ;
groſs; baſe.
*
- The glorious ſun, -
Turning, with ſplendour of his precious eye,
The meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold.
2. Full of clods unbroken. -
Theſe lands they ſow always under furrow about Michael-
mas, and leave it as cloddy as they can. Mortimºr's Husbandry,
CL 9'DPATE. m. ſ. [clad and pate.] A ſtupid fellow; a dolt; a
thickſcull.
CL 9'DPATED. adj. [from cladpate.] Stupid; dull; doltiſh;
thoughtleſs, -
My clºpated relations ſpoiled the greateſt genius in the
world, when they bred me a mechanick. Arbuthnot.
Ciºpºll; n.ſ.. [from clod and poll.] A thickſcull; a dolt; a
blockhcad.
... This letter being ſo excellently ignorant, he will find that
it comes from a clodpoll. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
To CLOG. v.a. [It is imagined by Skinner to come from log;
by Caſauban derived from ºffs, a dog's collar, being thought
to be firſt hung upon fierce dogs.]
1. To load with ſomething that may hinder motion; to en-
cumber with ſhackles; to impede, by faſtening to the neck or
leg a heavy piece of wood or iron. -
If you find ſo much blood in his liver as will clog the foot
of a flea, I’ll eat the reſt of the anatomy. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
Let a man wean himſelf from theſe worldly impediments,
that here clog his ſoul's flight. Digby on the Soul, Dedication.
The wings of birds were clog'd with ice and ſnow. Dryd.
Fleſhly luſts do debaſe men's minds, and clog their ſpirits,
º, tº .
Shakespeare.
make them groſs and foul, liſtleſs and una&amp;ive. Tillotſon.
Gums and pomatums ſhall his flight reſtrain,
While clogg'd he beats his ſilken wings in vain. Pope.
2. To hinder; to obſtruct.
The gutter'd rocks and congregated ſands,
Traitors enſteep'd to clog the guiltleſs keel. Shakeſpeare,
His majeſty's ſhips were not ſo over-peſtered and clogged
with great ordnance as they are, whereof there is ſuperfluity.
Sir Walter Raleigh's Eſſays:
3. To load; to burthen; to embarraſs.
Since thou haſt far to go, bear not along
The clogging burthen of a guilty ſoul. Shakeſp. Richard II.
You'll rue the time
That clogs me with this anſwer. Shakespeare Macbeth.
They lanc'd a vein, and watch'd returning breath;
It came, but clogg’d with ſymptoms of his death. Dryden.
All the commodities that go up into the country, are clºgged
with impoſitions as ſoon as they leave Leghorn. Addiſon.
4. In the following paſſage it is improper.
Clocks and Jacks, though the ſcrews and teeth of the
wheels and nuts be never ſo ſmooth, yet, if they be not oiled,
will hardly move ; though you clog them with never ſo much
weight. Ray on the Creation.
To Clog. v. n.
1. To coaleſce; to adhere.
ruptly uſed for clod or clot. - -
Move it ſometimes with a broom, that the ſeeds clºg not
together. Evelyn's Kalendar.
2. To be encumbered or impeded by ſome extrinſick matter.
In working through the bone, the teeth of the ſaw will
begin to clog. Sharp's Surgery.
Clog. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] -
1. A load; a weight; any incumbrance hung upon any animal
or thing to hinder motion.
I’m glad at ſoul I have no other child;
For thy eſcape would teach me tyranny,
To hang clogs on them. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
I did but prompt the age to quit their clogs,
By the known rules of ancient liberty. Milt. Par. Reg:
As a dog committed cloſe,
For ſome offence, by chance breaks looſe,
And quits his clog; but all in vain,
He ſtill draws after him his chain. Hudibrar.
2. An incumbrance; a hindrance; an obſtruction; an impe-
diment.
The wearineſs of the fleſh is an heavy clog to the will.
Hooker.
In this ſenſe, perhaps, only cor-
They're our clogs, not their own: if a man be
Chain'd to a galley, yet the galley's free. . . Denne.
Their prince made no other ſtep than reječting the Popº's
ſupremacy, as a cog upon his own power and paſſions; Swift.
Slavery is, of all things, the greateſt clºg and obſtacle to
ſpeculation. Swift,
3. A kind of additional ſhoe worn by women, to keep them
from wet.
. A wooden ſhoe.
4 In France the peaſantry goes barefoot; and the middle ſort,
throughout all that kingdom, makes uſe of wooden cogs.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
Clo'co INEss. m. ſ. [from clogy.] The ſtate of being clogged.
Cloggy. adj. [from clog.] That which has the power of
clogging up.
By
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 49</div><p class="Text">w C L O
C L G
ſ
;
|
By allºitaments of ſome ſuch nature, ſome groſſer and
clºgy parts are retained ; or elſe much ſubtilized, and other-
wife altered. Boyle's Hiſlory of Filmneſs.
CLOISTER. m. ſ. ſchis, Welſh; clauren, Sax. cloſer, Germ.
Hºer, Dut. laurº, Ital. cloiſtre, Fr. clauffrum, Lat J
1. A religious retirement; a monaſtery; a nunnery.
Nor in a ſecret cloiſter doth he keep
Theſe virgin ſpirits, until their marriage-day.
Some ſolitary clºſer will I chooſe,
And there with holy virgins live immur’d. Dr. d. Sp. Fryar.
How could he have the leiſure and retiredneſs of the cloiſi, r,
to perform thoſe acts of devotion. Atterbury.
2. A periſtile; a piazza.
To Clo's tº R. v. a. [from the noun J. To ſhut up in a reli-
gious houſe; to confine ; to immure; to ſhut up from the
world.
Chifer thee in ſome religious houſe. Shakespeare. Rich. II.
They have by commandment, though in form of courteſy,
cki/?ered us within theſe walls for three days. Eacon.
It was of the king's firſt acts to cloſer the queen dowager
in the nunnery of Bermondſey. Bacon's Henry VII.
Nature affords plenty of beauties, that no man need com-
plain if the deformed are cloiſtered up. Rymer’s Tragedies.
The gloom of cloiſter'a monks. Thomſºn's Summer.
CLo's TER AL. adj. [from cloiſter.] Solitary; retired; religi-
ouſly recluſe.
Upon this ground many cºſºral men of great learning and
devotion, prefer contemplation before action. // alton's Angler.
Clo'1st FRED. parti pial adj. [from cloiſter.]
1. Solitary; inhabiting cloiſters.
Ere the bat hath flown
His clºſer'd flight, there ſhall be done
A deed of dreadful note. Shakespeare's "Macbeth.
2. Built with periſtiles or piazzas.
The Greeks and Romans had commonly two cloiſtered open
courts, one ſerving for the women's ſide, and the other for
the men. J/otton's Architré?ure.
Cloist R Ess. n.ſ.. [from cloſer.] A nun; a lady who has
vowed religious retirement.
Like a cºreſ; ſhe will veiled walk,
And water once a day her chamber round
With eye-offending brine. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
CLok E. m. ſ. See Clo Ak.
Clo M.B. [pret. of 70 climb.]
Aſk to what end they comb that tedious height. Stenſºr.
So clomb this firſt grand thief into God's fold. Milton.
To Cloom. v. a. [corrupted from cleam, clasman, Sax, which
is ſtill uſed in ſome provinces.] To cloſe or ſhut with glu-
tinous or viſcous matter.
Rear the hive enough to let them in, and cloon up the
ſkirts, all but the door. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
To CLOSE. v. a. [clºſa, Armorick; Kuys, Dutch; clos, French;
clauſus, Latin.]
1. To ſhut ; to lay together.
Sleep inſtantly fell on me, call’d
By nature as in aid, and clos'd mine eyes. Mih. Par. Ly?.
When the ſad wife has clos'd her huſband's eyes;
Davies.
Lics the pºle corps, not yet intirely dead? Prior.
I ſoon ſhall viſit Hector, and the ſhades
Of my great anceſtors. Cephiſa, thou
Wilt lend a hand to clºſ, thy miſtreſs' eyes, Philips.
2. To conclude; to end; to finiſh. -
One frugal ſupper did our ſtudies clºſ. Dryden's Perſ. Sat.
I clºſe this with my earneſt deſires that you will ſeriouſly
conſider your eſtate. //ake's Preparation fºr Death.
Edward and Henry, now the boaſt of fame;
And virtuous Alfred, a more ſacred name;
After a life of generous toils endur'd,
Glºd their long glories with a figh, to find
Th'unwilling gratitude of baſe mankind. Pope's Ep. of Hºr.
3. To incloſe; to confine; to repoſite. -
- very one
According to the gift which bountcous nature
Hath in him clas'd Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
4. To join ; to unite fraćtures; to conſolidate fiſſures.
The armourers accompliſhing the knights, -
With buſy hammers cloſing livets up. Shakespeare Henry V.
There being no winter yet to cloſe up and unite its parts,
and reſtore the earth to its former ſtrength and compactneſs.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
As ſoon as any publick rupture happens, it is immediately
clºſed up by moderation and good offices. Addiſon on Italy.
All the traces drawn there are immediately cloſed uſ, as
though you wrote them with your finger on the ſurface of a
river. J/atti's Improvement ºf the A4ind.
To CLos E. v. n.
1. To coal.cſce; to join its own parts together.
They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive
into the pit, and the earth cloſed upon them. Nun. xvi. 33.
In plants you may try the force of imagination upon the
lighter ſort of motions; as upon their cloſing and opening,
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 991.
2. To Close upon. To agree upon ; to join in. -
The jealouſy of ſuch a deſign in us, would induce France
and Holland to cºſe upon ſome meaſures between them to our
diſadvantage. ºf cºmple.
3. 72 Close with. R. To come to an agreement with ; to
73 Close in with. comply with : to unite with.
Jntire cowardice makes thee wrong this virtuous gentle-
woman, to coſ with us. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
It would become me better, than to caſe
In terms of friendſhip with thine enemics Sºak. jul. Caſ
There was no ſuch defect in man's underſtanding, but that
it would cloſe with the evidence. South's Sermons.
He took the time when Richard was depos'd,
And high and low with happy Harry cºd. Drydºr.
Pride is ſo unſociable a vice, that there is no cloſing with
Collier of Friendſhip.
This ſpirit, poured upon iron, unites with the body, and
lets go the water: the acid ſpirit is more attracted by the fixed
body, and lets go the water, to clºſe with the fixed body.
Newton's Opticks.
Such a proof as would have been clºſed with certainly at
the firſt, ſhall be ſet aſide eaſily afterwards. Afterbury.
Theſe governours bent all their thoughts and applications
to clºſe in with the people, who were now the ſtrongºr party.
Swift on the Dijºntions in Athens and Komic.
4. To grapple with in wreſtlin
Clos E. m.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Anything ſhut ; without outlet.
The admirable effects of this diſtillation in cºſ, which is
like the wombs and matrices of living creatures. Eccº.
2. A ſmall field incloſed.
I have a tree, which grows here in my clºſe,
That mine own uſe invites me to cut down,
And ſhortly muſt I fell it. Shakeſpeare's Timor.
Certain hedgers dividing a cºſº, chanced upon a great
cheft. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwal'.
3. The manner of ſhutting.
The doors of plank were; their cºſº exquiſite,
Kept with a double key. Chapman's fiads, t. ii.
4. The time of ſhutting up.
In the cloſe of night,
Philomel begins her heav'nly lay.
5. A grapple in wreſtling.
The king went of purpoſe into the North, laying an open
ſide unto Perkin, to make him come to the cºſt, and ſo to trip
up his heels, having made ſure in Kent beforehand. Bacon.
Both fill'd with duſt, but ſtarting up, the third cloſe they
had made,
Had not Achilles' ſelf ſtood up.
6. A pauſe, or ceſiation, or reſt.
The air, ſuch pleaſure loth to loſe,
With thouſand eccho's ſtill prolongs each heav'nly clºſe. Mº.
At ev'ry caſe ſhe made, th’ attending throng -
Reply'd, and bore the burden of the ſong. Dryden's Fabies.
7. A concluſion or end.
Speedy death,
The cloſe of all my miſeries, and the balm.
Thro' Syria, Perſia, Grece ſhe goes;
And takes the Romans in the clºſe.
Close, adj. [from the verb.]
1. Shut faſt; ſo as to leave no part open; as a cloſe box; a cloſe
houſe.
We ſuppoſe this bag to be tied cloſe about, towards the
window. J/ilkins.
2. Without vent; without inlet; ſecret; private; not to be
ſeen through.
Nor could his acts too cloſe a wizard wear,
To 'ſcape their eyes whom guilt had taught to fear. Dryden.
3. Confined; ſtagnant; without ventilation.
If the rooms be low roofed, or full of windows and doors,
the one maketh the air cloſe, and not freſh ; and the other
maketh it exceeding unequal. Bacon's Nat Hiſtory, Nº. 937.
4. Compačt ; ſolid; without interſtices or vacuities.
The inward ſubſtance of the earth is of itſelf an uniform
maſs, clºſe and compact. Barnet's They y ºf the Earth.
The golden globe being put into a preſs, which was driven
by the extreme force of ſkrews, the water made itſelf way
thro’ the pores of that very cloſe metal. Lºck.
5. Viſcous; glutinous; not volatile.
This oil, which nouriſhes the lamp, is ſuppoſed of ſo cloſe
and tenacious a ſubſtance, that it may ſlowly evaporate. JP.Kins.
6. Conciſe; brief; without exuberance or digreſſion.
You lay your thoughts ſo clºſe together, that were they
clºſer they would be crouded, and cven a due connection
would be wanting. Dryden's jºen. Dedication.
Where the original is clºſe, no verſion can reach it in the
ſame compaſs. Dryden.
Read theſe inſtrućtive leaves, in which conſpire
Freſnoy’s clºſe art and Dryden's native fire. Pope.
7. Immediate ; without any intervening diſtance or ſpace, whe-
ther of time or place.
Was I a man bred great as Rome herſelf,
it.
Øſ.
5
Drydez.
Chapman's Iiad;.
Miſt. Agon.
Prior.
Fºual
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 50</div><p class="Text">C L O
Equal to all her titles! that could ſtand
Cloſe up with Atlas, and ſuſtain her name
As ſtrong as he doth heaven Ben. Johnſºn's Catiline.
-
We muſt lay aſide that lazy and fallacious method of cen- .
ſuring by the lump, and muſt bring things clºſe to the teſt of
true or falſe. . . - Burnet's Theory of the Earth, Preface.
Plant the ſpring crocus's cloſe to a wall. Mort. Husbandry.
Where'er my name I find; .
Some dire misfortune follows clºſe behind. Pºpe's El, to Abel.
8. Approaching nearly; joined one to another.
Now ſit we clºſe about this taper here,
And call in queſtion our neceſſities. Shakeſp julius Caeſar.
. 9. Narrow; as a cloſe alley.
10. Admitting ſmall diſtance.
Short crooked ſwords in clºſer fight they wear. Dryden.
11. Undiſcovered; without any token by which one may be
found.
Cloſe obſerve him for the ſake of mockery. Cloſ, in the
name of jeſting ! lie you there. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
12. Hidden; ſecret; not revealed.
A clºſe intent at laſt to ſhew me grace. Spenser.
Some ſpagyriſts, that keep their beſt things clºſe, will do
more to vindicate their art, or oppoſe their antagoniſts, than
to gratify the curious, or benefit mankind. Boyle.
13. Having the quality of ſecrecy; truſty.
Conſtant you are,
But yet a woman; and for ſecreſy,
No lady cloſer. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
14. Having an appearance of concealment; cloudy; ſly.
That cloſe aſpect of his,
Does ſhew the mood of a much troubled breaſt. Shakespeare
15. Without wandering; without deviation; attentive.
I diſcovered no way to keep our thoughts cloſe to their buſi-
neſs, but by frequent attention getting the habit of atten-
tion. Locke.
16. Full to the point; home.
I am engaging in a large diſpute, where the arguments are
not like to reach cloſe on either ſide. Dryd, on Dram. Poeſy.
17. Retired; ſolitary.
18. Secluded from communication; as a cloſe priſoner.
19. Applied to the weather, dark, cloudy, not clear.
Close. adv. It is uſed ſometimes adverbially by itſelf; but
more frequently in compoſition. As,
Close-BANDED. adj. In cloſe order; thick ranged; or ſecretly
leagued, which ſeems rather the meaning in this paſſage.
Nor in the houſe, with chamber ambuſhes
Cloſe-banded, durſt attack me. Milton's Agon. l. I 121.
Close-bodied. adj. Made to fit the body exactly.
If any clergy ſhall appear in any cloſe-bodied coat, they ſhall
be ſuſpended. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Close-HANDED. adj. Covetous.
Galba was very cloſe-handed: I have not read much of his
liberalities. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Close-PENT. adj. Shut cloſe; without vent.
Then in ſome cloſe-pent room it crept along,
And, ſmould'ring as it went, in ſilence fed. Dryden.
CLo's FLY, adv. [from cloſe.]
1. Without inlet or outlet.
Putting the mixture into a crucible clºſy luted at the top:
Boyle's Chym, Princ.
2. Without much ſpace intervening; nearly.
My lord of Warwick, and my brother Gloſter,
Follow Fluellen cloſely at the heels. Shakeſp. Henry V.
If we look more cloſely, we ſhall find
Moſt have the ſeeds of judgment in their mind. Pope.
3. Secretly; ſlily.
A Spaniard, riding on the bay, ſent ſome clºſely into the
village, in the dark of the night. Carew's Surv. of Cornwal.
4. Without deviation.
I hope I have tranſlated clºſely enough, and given them the
ſame turn of verſe which they had in the original. Dryden.
Clo's EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from clºſe.j
1. The ſtate of being ſhut ; or the quality of admitting to be
ſhut without inlet or outlet.
In drums, the cloſeneſ; round about that preſerveth the
ſound, maketh the noiſe come forth of the drum-hole more
loud, than if you ſhould ſtrike upon the like ſkin extended in
the open air. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 142.
2. Narrowneſs; ſtraitneſs.
3. Want of air, or ventilation.
I took my leave, being half ſtifled by the cloſineſ of the
room. Swift's Account ºf Partridge's Death.
4. Compačineſs; ſolidity.
How could particles, ſo widely diſperſed, combine into that
rººf neſs of texture? Bentley's Sermons.
The haſte of the ſpirit to put forth, and the clºſeneſs of the
bark cauſe prickles in boughs. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N°. 559.
5. Recluſeneſs; ſolitude; retirement.
I thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
To cºlºſ, and the bettering of my mind. Shakespeare Tempeſt.
6. Secrecy; privacy.
v To º confederate; he was conſtant and juſt, but not open.
(2). I.
Such was his enquiry, and ſuch his clºſineſs, as they flood in
the light towards him, and he ſtood in the dark towards
them. Bacon's Henry VII.
A journey of much adventure had been not communicated
with any of his majeſty's counſellors, being carried with great
clºſingſ, liker a buſineſs of love than ſtate. J/otton.
e riſe not againſt the piercing judgment of Auguſtus, not
the extreme caution or cloſeneſs of Tiberius. Bacon's Eſſays.
This prince was ſo very reſerved, that he would impart his
ſecrets to no body: whereupon this clºſenºſ did a little periſh
his underſtanding. Collier of Friendſhip.
7. Covetouſneſs; ſly avarice. -
Irus judged, that while he could keep his poverty a ſecret,
he ſhould not feel it: he improved this thought into an affecta-
tion of cloſeneſ, and covetouſneſs. Addiſon's Speciat. Nº. 264.
8. Connection; dependance.
The ağtions and proceedings of wiſe men run in a much
greater clºſeneſ, and coherence with one another, than thus to
drive at a caſual iſſue, brought under no forecaſt or deſign.
- South's Sermons.
Slo'ser. m. ſ. [from clºſe.j A finiſher; a concluder.
Closes tool. n.ſ. [clºſe and ſtool] A chamber implement.
A peſtle for his truncheon, led the van;
And his high helmet was a cloſe-ſtool pan. Garth's Differſ.
Clo'sÉt... n.ſ.. [from cloſe.]
I. A ſmall room of privacy and retirement. -
The taper burneth in your cloſet. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
He would make a ſtep into his cloſet, and after a ſhort
prayer he was gone. // atton.
2. A private repoſitory of curioſities and valuable things.
He ſhould have made himſelf a key, wherewith to open the
cloſet of Minerva, where thoſe fair treaſures are to be found
in all abundance. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
He furniſhes her clºſet firſt, and fills
The crowded ſhelves with rarities of ſhells. Dryd. Falks.
To Clo'set. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſhut up, or conceal in a cloſet.
The heat
Of thy great love once ſpread, as in an urn;
Doth cloſet up itſelf. FHerbert.
2. To take into a cloſet for a ſecret interview.
About this time began the project of clºſeting, where the
principal gentlemen of the kingdom were privately catechiſed
by his majeſty. Swift.
Closh, n.ſ. A diſtemper in the feet of cattle; called alſo the
founder. Dić?.
Clo's URE. m. ſ. [from cloſe.]
1. The ačt of ſhutting up. - - -
The chink was carefully cloſed up: upon which cloſure
there appeared not any change. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
2. That by which anything is cloſed or ſhut. •
I admire your ſénding your laſt to me quite open, without
a ſeal, wafer, or any cloſure whatever. Pope to Swift.
3. The parts incloſing; incloſure.
O thou bloody priſon'
Within the guilty clºſure of thy walls - -
Richard the ſecond here was hack'd to death. Shakesp. Rich. III.
4. Concluſion; end.
We'll hand in hand all headlong caſt us down,
And make a mutual cloſure of our houſe. Shakespeare. Tit. Andrºn.
CLOT. n.ſ. [probably, at firſt, the ſame with clad; but now
always applied to different uſes.] Concretion; coagulation;
grume.
The white of an egg, with ſpirit of wine, doth bake the
egg into clots, as if it began to poch Bacon's Phyſ. Remarks.
The opeiiing itſelf was ſtopt with a clºt of , grumous
blood. I/iſeman's Surgery.
To Clot. v. n. [from the noun, or from Klºtteren, Dutch.]
1. To form clots, or clods; to hang together.
Huge unweildy bones, laſting remains
Of that gigantick race; which as he breaks - - - -
The clotted glebe, the plowman haply finds. - Philips.
2. To concrete; to coagulate; to gather into concretions; as
clotted milk, clotted blood. -
Here mangled limbs, here brains and gore, . . . . .
Lie clotted. Philips.
CLOTH. n. ſ. plural cloths or clºthes. [claš, Saxon.]. . .
1. Any thing woven for dreſs or covering, whether of animal
or vegetable ſubſtance. - - Szw.
The Spaniards buy their linen cloths in that kingdom. Swift.
2. The piece of linnen ſpread upon a table.
Norlet, like Navius, every error Paſº, , -
The muſty wine, foul cloth, or greaſy glaſs. Pºpe's Hor. Init.
3. The canvaſs on which pictures are delineated.
I anſwer you right painted clºth, from whence you have
ſtudied your queſtions. Shakespeare. A you like it.
who fears a ſentence, or an old man's ſaw:
Shall by a painted clºth be kept in awe. Shakespeare Tarq. and Luº:
This iáca, which we may call the goddeſs of painting and
of ſculpture, deſcends upon the marble and the cloth, and be-
comes the original of theſe arts. Dryden's Prºf. to Dufºſºy.
4. In the plural. Dreſs; habit; g.ºrment; veſture; vett-
4 S ments.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 51</div><p class="Text">C L O
}
_-
ments. Including whatever covering is worn on the
body. In this ſenſe always clothes. Pronounced clo's.
He with him brought Pryene, rich array'd
In Claribellae's clothes. Spenſer, B. ii. cant. 4. ſtanz. 28.
Take up theſe clot'es here, quickly: carry them to the
laundreſs in Datchet-mead. Shakespeare . Merry I/ves of Windſor.
Strength grows more from the warmth of exerciſes than of
c'eaths. Temple.
5. The covering of a bed.
Gazing on her midnight foes,
She turn'd each way her frighted head,
Then ſunk it deep beneath the clothes. Prior.
To Cloth E. v. a. pret. I clothed, or clad; particip. I have
clothed, or clad. [from cloth.]
1. To inveſt with garments; to cover with dreſs, from cold and
injuries.
Care no more to clothe and eat. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
An inhabitant of Nova Zembla having lived in Denmark,
where he was clothed, took the firſt opportunity of making his
cſcape into nakedneſs. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 5.
The Britons in Caeſar's time painted their bodies, and
clothed themſelves with the ſkins of beaſts. Swift.
With ſuperior boon may your rich ſoil
Exuberant nature's better bleſfings pour
O'er every land, the naked nations clothe,
And be th' exhauſtleſs granary of a world. Thomſ. Spring.
2. To adorn with dreſs.
We clothe and adorn our bodies: indeed, too much time
we beſtow upon that. Our ſouls alſo are to be clothed with
holy habits, and adorned with good works. Ray on Creation.
Embroider'd purple clothes the golden beds. Pope's Statius.
3. To inveſt; as with clothes.
They leave the ſhady realms of night,
And, cloth'd in bodies, breathe your upper light. Dryden.
Let both uſe the cleareſt language in which they can clothe
their thoughts. J/atti's Improvement ºf the Mind, p. i.
4. To furniſh or provide with clothes.
Clo'TH ER. m. ſ. [from cloth J A maker of cloth.
The clothiers all, not able to maintain
The many to them 'longing, have put off
The ſpinſters, carders, fullers, weavers. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
His commiſſioners ſhould cauſe clothiers to take wool, pay-
ing only two parts of the price. Hayward.
They ſhall only ſpoil the clothier's wool, and beggar the
preſent ſpinners, at beſt. Graurt's Bills of Mort.
Clo'THING. m. ſ. [from To clºthe..] Dreſs ; veſture; garments.
Thy boſom might receive my yielded ſpright,
And thine with it, in heav'n's pure clothing dreſt,
Through cleareſt ſkies might take united flight. Fairfax.
Your bread and clothing, and, every neceſſary of life, en-
tirely depend upon it. - Swift.
Clor HSHE'ARER. m. ſ. [from cloth and ſhear.] One who
trims the cloth, and levels the nap.
My father is a poor man, and by his occupation a cloth-
fearer. Hakewill on Providence.
Clo"rPoll. n.ſ [from clot and poll.] Thickſkull; blockhead.
What ſays the fellow, there call the cloipoll back. Shakespeare
2. Head, in ſcorn.
I have ſent Clotens clotpoll down the ſtream,
In embaſſy to his mother. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
To Cl9'TTER. v. n. [Alteren, Dutch..] To concrete; to
coagulate; to gather into Jumps.
He dragg'd the trembling fire,
Slidd'ring thro' clotter'd blood and holy mire. Dryd. Æn.
Clo"rry, adj. [from clot..] Full of clods; concreted; full of
COPYC retions. -
The matter expcétorated is thin, and mixt with thick,
clºtty, bluiſh ſtreaks. Harvey on Cºnſumptions.
Where land is cotty, and a ſhower of rain ſoaks through,
you may make uſe of a roll to break it. Mortimer's Husbandry.
A CI.OUD. m. ſ. [The derivation is not known. Minſhaw
d;rives it from claude, to ſhut ; Soviner from clod; Caſaubin
from *º darkneſs; Skinner from Aladde, Dutch, a ſpot.]
1. The dark collection of vapours in the air.
Now are the clºuds that lower'd upon our houſe,
In the deep boſom of the ocean buried. Shakespeare Rich. III.
As a miſt, is a multitude of ſmall but ſolid globules, which
therefore deſcend; ſo a vapour, and therefore a watry cloud,
is nothing elſe but a congeries of very ſmall and concave glo-
bules, which therefore aſcend, to that height in which
they are of equal weight with the air, where they remain
ſuſpended, 'till, by ſome motion in the air, being broken, they
deſcend in ſolid drops; either ſmall, as in a miſt, or bigger,
when many of them run together, as in rain. Grew's Coſmol.
Clºids are the greateſt and moſt confiderable of all the
meteors, as furniſhing water and plenty to the carth. They
ºf it of very ſmall drops of water, and are elevated a good
liſtance above the ſurface of the carth; for a cloud is nothing
but a miſt flying high in the air, as a miſt is nothing but a
cloud here below. Locke's Elem. Nat. Philºſ.
How vapours, turn'd to cloud, obſcure the ſky;
And cloud, º the thirſty ground ſupply. Rºſammon.
2. The veins, marks, or ſtains in ſtones, or other bodies.
3. Any ſtate of obſcurity or darkneſs.
Tho' poets may of inſpiration boaſt,
Their rage, ill govern'd, in the cloud, is loſt. J/aller,
How can I ſee the brave and young,
Fall in the cloud of war, and fall unſung Addison.
4. Anything that ſpreads wide; as a croud, a multitude.
The objection comes to no more than this, that amongſt a
cloud of witneſſes, there was one of no very good reputa-
tion. - Atterbury.
To Cloud. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To darken with clouds; to cover with clouds; to obſcure.
What ſullen fury clouds his ſcornful brow. Pope's Statius.
2. To obſcure; to make leſs evident.
If men would not exhale vapours to cloud and darken the
cleareſt truths, no man could miſs his way to heaven for want
of light. Decay of Piety.
3. To variegate with dark veins.
The handle ſmooth and plain,
Made of the clouded olive's eaſy grain. Pope's Odyſy.
To Cloud. v. n. To grow cloudy; to grow dark with clouds.
Clou DBERRY. m. ſ. [from cloud and berry..] The name of a
plant, called alſo knotherry.
It hath a perpetual flower: the fruit is compoſed of many
acini, in form of the mulberry. This plant is found upon
the tops of the higheſt hills in the North of England. Miller.
CloupçAPT. adj. [from cloud and cap.] Topped with clouds;
touching the clouds.
The cloudcapt towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The ſolemn temples, the great globe itſelf,
Yea, all which it inherit, ſhall diſſolve. Shakespeare Tempeſt.
Cloud.com PE'LLING. adj. [A word formed in imitation of
“pºisºr”, ill underſtood.] An epithet of Jupiter, by whom
clouds were ſuppoſed to be collected.
Health to both kings, attended with a roar
Of cannons, eccho'd from th’ affrighted ſhore;
With loud reſemblance of his thunder, prove
Bacchus the ſeed of clºudcompelling Jove. J/aller.
Supplicating move
Thy juſt complaint to cloudcompelling Jove. Dryd. Homer:
Clo'Udily. adv. [from cloudy.]
1. With clouds; darkly.
2. Obſcurely; not perſpicuouſly.
Some had rather have good diſcipline delivered plainly, by
way of precepts, than cloudily enwrapped in allegories. Spenſer.
He was commanded to write ſo cloudily by Cornutus. Dryd.
Clo'UDIN Ess. m. ſ. [from cloudy.]
1. The ſtate of being covered with clouds; darkneſs.
You have ſuch a February face,
So full of froſt, of ſtorm and cloudineſs. Shakespeare.
The ſituation of this iſland expoſes it to a continual cloudi-
neſs, which in the ſummer renders the air cooler, and in the
winter warm. Harvey on Conſumptions.
2. Want of brightneſs.
I ſaw a cloudy Hungarian diamond made clearer by lying in
a cold liquor; wherein, he affirmed, that upon keeping it
longer, the ſtone would loſe more of its cloudineſs. Boyle.
Cloudless. adj. [from cloud.] Without clouds; clear; un-
clouded; bright; luminous; lightſome; pure; undarkened.
This Partridge ſoon ſhall view in cloudlºſs ſkies,
When next he looks thro' Galileo's eyes. Pope.
How many ſuch there muſt be in the vaſt extent of ſpace, º
a naked eye in a cloudleſs night may give us ſome faint
glimpſe. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Clo'UDY. adj. [from cloud.]
1. Covered with clouds; obſcured with clouds; conſiſting of
clouds.
As Moſes entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar de-
ſcended, and ſtood at the door. Exod. xxxiii. 9.
2. Dark; obſcure; not intelligible.
If you content yourſelf frcquently with words inſtead of
ideas, or with cloudy and confuſed notions of things, how im-
penetrable will that darkneſs be. J/atts's Improv. of the Mind.
3. Gloomy of look; not open, nor cheerful.
So my ſtorm-beaten heart likewiſe is cheer'd
With that ſun-ſhine, when cloud, looks are clear'd. Sfeſſºr.
Witneſs my ſon, now in the ſhade of death,
Whoſe bright outſhining beams thy cloudy wrath.
Hath in eternal darkneſs folded up. Shakeſp. Richard III.
4. Marked with ſpots or veins.
CLovE. m. ſ. [the preterite of cleave..] See To CLEAVE.
CLOVE. n.ſ.. [clou, Fr. a nail, from the ſimilitude of a clove
to a nail.]
1. A valuable ſpice brought from Ternate in the Eaſt Indies.
It is the fruit or ſeed of a very large tree.
Clove ſeems to be the rudiment or beginning of a Ruit
growing upon clove-trees. Brown's Pugar Errours, b. ii.
2. Some of the parts into which garlick ſeparates, when the
outer ſkin is torn off.
'Tis mortal fin an onion to devour;
Each clove of garlick is a ſacred pow'r. Tate's ºven. Sat.
Cloy E-CILI YF Low ER. m. ſ. [from its ſincling like *}. -
liş
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 52</div><p class="Text">C L O
C L U
|
This plant bath an intire, oblong, cylindrical, ſmooth cup,
which is indented at the top: the petals of the flower are nar-
row at bottom, and broad at top; and are, for the moſt part,
cut about the edges. The ſeed-veſſel is of a cylindrical
figure, containing many flat rough ſeeds. This genus may
be divided into three claſſes: 1. The clove-gillyflower, or
carnation. 2. The pink. 3. The ſweet William. The
carnation, or clove-gillyflower, are diſtinguiſhed into four
claſſes. The firſt, called flakes, having two colours only, and
their ſtripes large, going quite through the leaves. The ſecond,
called bizars, have flowers ſtriped, or variegated with three
or four different colours.
flowers have always a white ground, and are ſpotted with
ſcarlet, red, purple, or other colours. The fourth are called
painted ladies: theſe have their petals of a red or purple co-
lour on the upper ſide, and are white underneath. Of each
of theſe claſſes there are numerous varieties. The true clove-
gillyflower has been long in uſe for making a cordial ſyrup.
There are two or three varieties commonly brought to
the markets, which differ greatly in goodneſs; ſome having
very little ſcent, when compared with the true ſort. The
varieties of the pink are ; t e damaſk pink; white ſhock,
fearlet, pheaſant-eyed pink, of which there are great varieties,
both with ſingle and double flowers; old man's head; painted
lady. Among the ſweet Williams are, 1. The broad-leaved
ſweet William, with red flowers. 2. The broad-leaved
ſweet William, with variegated ſlowers. 3. The double ſweet
ſweet William, with red flowers, which burſt their pods.
4. The roſe-coloured double ſweet William. 5. The narrow-
leaved ſweet William, called ſweet John. Miller.
Clo'v EN. part, pret. [from cleave..] See To CLEAVE.
There is Aufidius, liſt you what work he makes
Among your cloven army. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Now, heap'd high,
The cloven oaks and lofty pines do lie.
A chap-fallen beaver, looſely hanging by .
The cloven helm, and arch of vićtory. Dryd, juv. Sat. x.
Clov EN-footed. Nadj. [cloven and foot, or hoof.] Having the
Clov EN-Hoof ED, $ foot divided into two parts; not a round
hoof; biſulcous.
There are the biſulcous or cloven-hoof: ; as camels and bea-
vcıs. - rown's Vulgar Errours.
The cloven-fºoted fiend is baniſh'd from us. Dryden.
Great variety of water-fowl, both whole and cloven-footed,
frequent the waters. Ray on the Creation.
$º : ASS. } n.ſ.. [more properly claver, claspen, Saxon.]
1. A ſpecies of TREFoil, which ſee.
The even mead, that erſt brought ſweetly forth
The freckled cowſlip, burnet, and green clover. Shakesp. Hen. V.
Nature ſhall provide
Green graſs and fatt'ning clover for their fare. Dryd. Virgil.
Clºver improves land, by the great quantity of cattle it
maintains. Mortimer's Husbandry.
My Blouzelinda is the blitheſt laſs,
Than primroſe ſwecter, or the clover-graſs. Gay.
2. To live in CLow ER, is to live luxuriouſly; clover being ex-
tremely delicious and fattening to cattle.
Well, Laureat, was the night in clover ſpent
Clo'v ERED. adj. [from clover.] Covered with clover.
Flocks thick-nibbling thro’ the clover'd vale. Thom. Summ.
Cloug H. n.ſ.. [clough, Saxon.] The cleft of a hill; a cliff.
In compoſition a hilly place.
CLou G.H. n. ſ...[in commerce..] . An allowance of two pounds
in every hundred weight for the turn of the ſcale, that the
commodity may hold out weight when ſold by retail.
A CLOUT. m. ſ. ſcluz, Saxon.]
1. A cloth for any mean uſe.
His garment, nought but many ragged clouts,
With thorns together pinn'd, and patched was. Spenſ. F. Q.
A clout upon that head,
Where late the diadem ſtood.
In pow'r of ſpittle and a clout,
When e'er he pleaſe to blot it out. Swift.
2. A patch on a ſhoe or coat.
3. Anciently, the mark of white cloth at which archers ſhot.
He drew a good bow: he ſhot a fine ſhoot: he would have
clapt in the cout at twelve ſcore. Shakespeare. Hen. IV. p. ii.
4. An iron plate to keep an axle-tree from wearing.
To Clout. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To patch; to mend coarſely.
I thought he ſlept, and put
My clouted brogues from off my feet, whoſe rudeneſs
Anſwer'd my ſteps too loud. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
The dull ſwain
Waller.
Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Treads on it daily with his clouted ſhoon. Milton.
2. To cover with a cloth.
Milk ſome unhappy ewe,
Whoſe clºſed leg her hurt doth ſhew. Spenser's Paſtoral.
3. To join awkwardly or coarſely together.
Many ſentences of one meaning be cluted up together.
Afthan's Schoolmoſer.
The third are piquettes: theſe
Ogle. ,
Clout: B. participial ad. Congealed; coagulated: corruptly
uſed for clotted.
I’ve ſeen her ſkim the clouted cream; -
And preſs from ſpongy curds the milky ſtream. Gay's Paſſ.
Clo'UTERLY. adj. [probably by corruption from lauterly 1
Clumſy ; awkward; as a cloisterly fellow. -
The ſingle wheel plough is a very clouterly ſort. Mortimer.
CLOWN. m.ſ.. [imagined by Skinner and junius to be con-
tracted from colonus. It ſeems rather a Saxon word, corrupted
from lown ; loen, Dut. a word nearly of the ſame import.]
1. A ruſtick; a country fellow ; a churl.
He came out with all his clowns, horſt upon cart-jades.
- - Sidney, b. ii.
The clowns, a boiſt’rous, rude, ungovern'd crew, -
With furious haſte to the loud ſummons flew. Dryden's 4ºn.
2. A coarſe ill-bred man.
In youth a coxcomb, and in age a clown. Speciator.
A country ſquire, repreſented with no other vice but that
of being a clown, and having the provincial accent. ... Swift.
Clo'w NERY. n.ſ.. [from clown.] Ill-breeding; churliſhneſs ;
rudeneſs; brutality. - -
. The fool's conceit had both clownery and ill-nature. L’Eſtr.
Clown is H. adj. [from clown.]
1. Conſiſting of ruſticks or clowns. - . -
Young Silvia beats her breaſt, and cries aloud
For ſuccour from the clowniſh neighbourhood. Dryd. Æn.
2. Coarſe; rough; rugged. -
But with his clowniſh hands their tender wings
He bruſheth off. Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. i.
3. Uncivil; ill-bred; ill-mannered.
What if we eſſay’d to ſteal
. The clowniſh fool out of your father's court. Shakeſpeare.
4. Clumſy; ungainly. . • *
With a grave look, in this odd equipage,
The clowniſh mimick traverſes the ſtage. Prior.
Clo'w NISH L Y. adv.
brutally.
Clow Nish Ness. n.ſ.. [from clowniſh.]
1. Ruſticity; coarſeneſs; unpoliſhed rudeneſs. .
Even his Dorick dialect has an incomparable ſweetneſs in
its clowniſhneſs. Dryden.
If the boy ſhould not make legs very gracefully, a dancing
maſter will cure that defeót, and wipe off that plainneſs which
the a-la-mode people call clowniſhneſs. Locke on Education.
2. Incivility; brutality.
Clown's Must ARD. m. ſ. An herb. Diff.
To CLOY. v. a. [enclouer, Fr. To nail up; to ſtop up.]
1. To ſatiate; to ſate; to fill beyond deſire; to ſurfeit 3 to fill
to loathing.
The length of thoſe ſpeeches had not cloyed Pyrocles, though
he were very impatient of long deliberations. Sidney.
The very creed of Athanaſius, and that ſacred hymn of
glory, are now reckoned as ſuperfluities, which we muſt in any
caſe pare away, leſt we cloy God with too much ſervice.
- - Hooker, b. v. ſei?. 42.
Who can clay the hungry edge of appetite,
By bare imagination of a feaſt : Shakeſp. Richard II.
Continually varying the ſame ſenſe, and taking up what he
had more than enough inculcated before, he ſometimes cloys
his readers inſtead of ſatisfying them. Dryden.
Whoſe little ſtore her well-taught mind docs pleaſe,
Nor pinch'd with want, nor cloy'd with wanton eaſe. Roſcom.
Intemperance in eating and drinking, inſtead of delighting
[from clowniſh J Coarſely; rudely;
and ſatisfying nature, doth but load and clay it. Tillotſon.
Settle, cloy'd with cuſtard and with praiſe,
Is gather'd to the dull of ancient days. Pope’; Dunciad.
2. It ſeems to have, in the following paſſage, another ſenſe:
perhaps to ſtrike the beak together.
- His royal bird
Prunes the immortal wing, and cloys his beak,
As when his god is pleas'd. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
3. To nail up guns, by ſtriking a ſpike into the touch-hole.
Clo'YLEss. adj. [from cloy..] That of which too much cannot
be had ; that which cannot cauſe ſatiety.
Epicurean cooks . . .
Sharpen with clºyleſ, ſauce his appetite. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleºp.
Clo'YMENT. n. ſ. [from cloy..] Satiety ; repletion beyond ap-
petite.
Alas! their love may be call'd appetite:
No motion of the liver, but the palate, - - - - -- - -
That ſuffers ſurfeit, clºyment, and revolt. Shakesp. Twelfth Night.
CLUB. m.ſ. [...ſuppa, Welſh; Klºppel, Dutch.]
1. A heavy ſtick; a ſtaff intended for offence. .
He ſtrove his combred club to quit
Out of the earth. Spenſir's Fairy Qeen, b. i. cant.8.
As he pulled off his helmet, a butcher ſlew him with
the ſtroak of a club. Haywººd.
Arm'd with a knotty club another came. Dryden's ºn.
2. The name of one of the ſuits of cards.
The clubs black tyrant firſt her victim died,
Spite of his haughty mien and barb'rous pride. Pºe.
3. [From cleopan, to divide. Skinner.] The ſhot or i.
en
|
s
*
i
i
i
| || ; :
!
! s
- |
- g
.
- * *
- s
* -
º ! :
* *
º
# * : . . . .
-
* . º
º s'
º º
sº
a
º - * * º
- : ; | -
. - s
- * s º
! . . . -
- º - º
* º
sº º
* , -
- * -
, . " ! !
* -
º
º º - º
i.
s -
|
*
!
-
i º
i * * º
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 53</div><p class="Text">C L U
l
ss
--
dend of a reckoning, paid by the company in juſt pro-
portions.
A fuddling couple ſold ale: their humour was to drink
• ‘drunk, urch their own liquor: they laid down their club, and
• ul | y &gt;
this they called forcing a trade. L’Eſtrange.
4. An aſſembly of good fellows, meeting under certain con-
Gitl OnS.
What right has any man to meet in factious clubs to vilify
the government? Dryden's 41&amp;dal. Dedication.
5. Concurrence; contribution; joint charge.
He's bound to vouch them for his own,
Tho' got b' implicite generation,
And general club of all the nation. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 1.
To Club. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To contribute to a common expence in ſettled proportions.
2. To join to one effect; to contribute ſeparate powers to one
crld.
'Till groſſer atoms, tumbling in the ſtream
Of fancy, madly met, and club'd into a dream. Dryden.
Every part of the body ſeems to club and contribute to the
feed, elſe why ſhould parents, born blind or deaf, ſometimes
generate children with the ſame imperfections. Ray.
Let ſugar, wine, and cream together club,
To make that gentle viand, ſyllabub. King.
The owl, the raven, and the bat,
Club'd for a feather to his hat.
To Club. v. a. To pay to a common reckoning.
Plums and directors, Shylock and his wife,
Will club their teſters now to take your life. Pope's Horace.
Fibres being diſtinct, and impregnated by diſtinct ſpirits,
how ſhould they club their particular informations into a com-
mon idea. Collier on Thought.
CLUBHE'An Ep. adj. [club and head.] Having a thick head.
Small clubheaded anterinae. Derham's Phyſicotheolºgy.
CLUPLA'w. n.ſ.. [club and law.] Regulation by force ; the
law of arms.
The enemies of our happy eſtabliſhment ſeem to have re-
courſe to the laudable method of clublaw, when they find all
other means for enforcing the abſurdity of their opinions to
be ineffectual. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 50.
CLUBRo'ox. n.ſ. ſclºb and room..] The room in which a club
or company aſſembles.
Theſe ladies reſolved to give the pićtures of their deceaſed
huſbands to the clubroom. Addison Speciator, Nº. 361.
To Cluck. v. m. ſcoccian, Welſh; clochał, Armorick; cloccan,
Saxon; &amp;locken, Dutch..] To call chickens; as a hen.
She, poor hen, fond of no ſecond brood,
Has cluck'd thee to the wars. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Ducklings, though hatched by a hen, if ſhe brings them to
a river, in they go, though the hen clucks and calls to keep
them out. Ray on the Creation.
CLUMP. m. ſ. [formed from lump.] A ſhapeleſs piece of wood,
or other matter, nearly equal in its dimenſions.
C1 tº 1ps. n.ſ. A numbſcull. Skinner.
CLU'M's 11. Y. adv. [from clumſy lawkwardly; without readi-
neſs; without nimbleneſs; without grace.
Upon the ground he walks very clumſily and ridiculouſly.
Ray on the Creation.
This lofty humour is clumſy and inartificially managed,
when affected. - Collier on Pride.
Ct c M six Ess. m. ſ. [from climſ...] . Awkwardneſs; ungainli-
neſs; want of readineſs, nimbleneſs, or dexterity. .
The drudging part of life is chiefly owing to clumſineſ; and
ignorance, which cither wants proper tools, or ſkill to uſe
them. Collier on Fame.
C.U.MSY. adi, [This word, omitted in the other etymolo-
gifts, is rightly derived by Bailey from lompſh, Dutch, ſtupid.
In Engliſh, lump, clump, lumpiſh, clumtiſh, clumpiſhly, clumſily,
clumſy..] Awkward; heavy ; artleſs; unhandy; without
dexterity, readineſs, or grace. It is uſed either of perſons or
actions, or things.
The matter ductile and ſequacious, apt to be moulded into
fuch ſhapes and machines, even by clumſy fingers. Ray.
But thou in clumſy verſe, unlick'd, unpointed,
Swift.
Hot! ſhamefully defy'd. Dryden.
That clumſ, outſide of a porter,
How could it thus conceal a courtier * Swift.
CLUN G. The preterite and participle of cling.
To CLUNG. v. n. [clingan, Sax.]. To dry as wood does, when
it is laid up after it is cut. See To CLING.
Clus G. adj. [clungu, Sax.[ Waſted with leanneſs; ſhrunk
up with cold. -
CLUSTER. m. ſ. [clyrzer, Sax. Hiſler, Dutch.]
* A bunch ; a number of things of the ſame kind growing or
joined together.
Grapes will continue freſh and moiſt all winter, if you
hang them clºſer by clºſer in the roof of a warm room. Bacon.
A ſwelling knot is rais'd ;
Whence, in ſhort ſpace, itſelf the clºſer ſhows,
And from earth's moiſture, mixt with ſun-beams, grows.
I D, nhim.
The ſaline corpuſcles of one liquor do variouſly ad upon
the tinging corpuſcles of another, ſo as to make many of them
aſſociate into a cluſter, whereby two tranſparent liquors may
compoſe a coloured one. Newton's Opt.
An elm was near, to whoſe embraces led,
The curling vine her ſwelling cluſters ſpread. Pope.
2. A number of animals gathered together.
As becs
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive , ,
In cluſters. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. i. 1.771.
There with their claſping feet together clung,
And a long cliffer from the laurel hung. Dryden's 4ºn,
3. A body of people collected: uſed in contempt.
We lov’d him ; but like beaſts
And coward nobles, gave way to your cluſters,
Who did hoot him out o' th' city. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
My friend took his ſtation among a cluffer of mob, who
were making themſelves merry with their betters. Addison.
To CLU'st ER. v. n. [from the noun..] To grow in bunches;
to gather themſelves into bunches, to congregate.
Forth flouriſh'd thick the cluffering vine. Milt. Par. Lºft.
Great father Bacchus to my ſong repair;
For cluſtering grapes are thy peculiar care. Dryd. Virg. Geor.
Or from the foreſt, falls the cluſter'd ſnow,
Myriads of gems, that in the waving gleam
Gay-twinkle as they ſcatter. Thomſon's Winter, 1.796.
To Clu'st ER. v. a. To colled any thing into bodies. -
Clust ER-GRAPE. m. ſ. [from cluſter and grape.]
The ſmall black grape is by ſome called the currant, or
cluſter-grape; which I reckon the forwardeſt of the black
ſort. Martimer's Husbandry.
CLU's TERy. adj. [from cluſter.] Growing in cluſters.
To CLUTCH. v. a. [Of uncertain etymology.]
1. To hold in the hand; to gripe; to graſp.
Is this a dagger I ſee before me,
The handle tow'rd my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
They,
Like moles within us, heave and caſt about;
And, 'till they foot and clutch their prey,
They never cool. Herbert.
A man may ſet the poles together in his head, and clutch
the whole globe at one intelle&amp;tual graſp. Collier on Thought.
2. º contract; to double the hand, ſo as to ſeize and hold
faſt.
Not that I have the power to clutch my hand,
When his fair angels would ſalute my palm. Shakespeare K. john.
Clutch. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The gripe; graſp; ſeizure.
2. Generally, in the plural, the paws, the talons.
It was the hard fortune of a cock to fall into the clutches of
2 Cat. L’Eſtrange, Fab. ii.
3. Hands, in a ſenſe of rapacity and cruelty.
Your greedy ſlav'ring to devour,
Before 'twas in your clutches pow'r. Hudibras, p. iii. cant, 2.
Set up the covenant on crutches, -
'Gainſt thoſe who have us in their clutches. Hudibras, p. iii.
I muſt have great leiſure, and little care of myſelf, if I ever
more come near the clutches of ſuch a giant. Stillingfleet.
A CLUTTER. m. ſ. [See Clatter.] A noiſe; a buſtle;
a buſy tumult; a hurry; a clamour. A low word.
He ſaw what a clutter there was with huge, over-grown
pots, pans, and ſpits. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 120-
The favºrite child that juſt begins to prattle,
Is very humorſome, and makes great clutter,
*Till he has windows on his bread and butter. King.
Prithee, Tim, why all this clutter P
Why ever in theſe raging fits Swift.
To CLU'TTER. v. n. [from the noun..] To make a noiſe, or
buſtle. -
A CLY's TER. m. ſ. [xxº~%.] An injećtion into the anus.
If nature relieves by a diarrhaea, without ſinking the
ſtrength of the patient, it is not to be ſtopt, but promoted
A gently by emollient clºſers. Arbuthnot on Diet.
To COACERVATE. v. a. [coacervo, Latin.] To heap up
together.
The collocation of the ſpirits in bodies, whether the ſpirits
be coacervate or diffuſed. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſtory, Nº. 846.
CoAce R v A'TION. n.ſ.. [from coacervate.] The act of heap-
ing, or ſtate of being heaped together.
The fixing of it is the equal ſpreading of the tangible parts,
and the cloſe coacervation of them. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſtory.
COACH. m. ſ. [coche, Fr. Kotczy, among the Hungarians, by
whom this vehicle is ſaid to have been invented. Minſhºw.}
A carriage of pleaſure, or ſtate, diſtinguiſhed from a chariot
by having ſeats fronting each other.
Baſilius attended for her in a coach, to carry her abroad to
ſee ſome ſports. Sidney, b. ii.
- A better would you fix? -
Then give humility a coach and fix. Pºpe's Eſſay on Man.
Suppoſe that laſt week my cºach was within an inch of over-
turning
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 54</div><p class="Text">w
C O A
C O A
turning in a ſmooth even way, and drawn by very gentle
horſes. Swift.
To CoAcH. v. a. [from the noun..] To carry in a coach.
The needy poet ſticks to all he meets,
Coach'd, carted, trod upon ; now looſe, now faſt,
And carry'd off in ſome dog's tail at laſt. Poe's Dunciad.
CoAcH-Box. n ſ [coach and box.] The feat on which the
driver of the coach ſits.
Her father had two coachmen: when one was in the coach-
box, if the coach ſwung but the leaſt to one ſide, ſhe uſed
to ſhriek. A buthnot's Hiſtory of John Bull.
CoAcH-HIRE. m.ſ. Money paid for the uſe of a hired coach.
You exclaim as loud as thoſe that praiſe,
For ſcraps and coach-hire, a young noble's plays. Dryden.
My expences in coach-hire make no ſmall article. Speciator.
CoAcH-Hous E. m. ſ. [coach and houſe.] The houſe in which the
coach is kept from the weather.
Let him lie in the ſtable or the coach-houſe. Swift.
CoAcH-MAKER. m. ſ. [coach and maker.] The artificer whoſe
trade is to make coaches. -
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut,
Made by the joyner, Squirrel, or old Grub,
Time out of mind, the fairies coach-makers. Shakeſpeare.
Take care of your wheels: get a new ſett bought, and
probably the coach-maker will conſider you. Swift.
CoAcH-MAN. m. ſ. [coach and man.] The driver of a coach.
She commanded her trembling coachman to drive her chariot
near the body of her king South.
To COACT. v. n. [from can and ad?..] To act together; to
act in concert.
But if I tell how theſe two did cºaf,
Shall I not lie in publiſhing a truth : Shakespeare.
CoA'ction. m. ſ. [coastus, Lat.] Compulſion; force, either
reſtraining or impelling
It had the paſſions in perfeół ſubjećtion; and though its
command over them was perſuaſive and political, yet it had
the force of coačion, and deſpotical. Scººth's Sermons.
CoActiv F. adj. [from coact.]
1. Having the force of reſtraining or impelling; compulſory ;
reſtrictive.
The Levitical prieſts in the old law, never arrogate unto
themſelves any temporal or coalive power. Raleigh's Eſſays.
2. A&amp;ing in concurrence. Obſolete.
Imagination,
With what's unreal thou coactive art. Shakºp. 127mte,’, Tale.
CoADJUMENT. n.ſ. [from con and adjumentum, Latin.] Mu-
tual aſſiſtance. Die?.
CoADJU'ſ ANT. n. ſ. [from con and adjuto.] Helping; co-
operating.
Thracius coadjutant, and the roar
Of fierce Euroclydon. Philips.
CoADJU'Tor. m. ſ. [from con and adutor, Latin.]
1. A fellow helper ; an aſſiſtant; an aſſociate; one engaged in
the affiſtance of another. -
I ſhould not ſucceed in a project, whereof I have had no
hint from my predeceſſors the poets, or their ſeconds or coad-
jutors the criticks. Dryden's juv. Dedication.
Away the friendly coadjutor flies. Garth's Differſary.
A gownman of a different make,
Whom Pallas, once Vaneſia's tutor,
Had fix'd on for her coadjutor. Swift.
2. In the canon law, one who is empowered or appointed to
perform the duties of another.
A biſhop that is unprofitable to his dioceſe ought to be de-
poſed, and no coadjutor aſſigned him. Ayliffes Parergon.
CoADJU'v ANCY. n.ſ.. [from con and adjuvo, Lat.] Help; con-
current help; contribution of help; co-operation.
Cryſtal is a mineral body, in the difference of ſtones, made
of a lentous percolation of earth, drawn from the moſt pure
and limpid juice thereof, owing to the coldneſs of the earth
ſome concurrence and coadjuvancy, but not immediate deter-
mination and efficiency. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b ii.
CoADUNI'tion. n.ſ.. [from con, ad, unitio, Lat..] The con-
junction of different ſubſtances into one maſs.
Bodies ſeem to have an intrinſick principle of, or corrup-
tion from, the coadunition of particles endued with contrary
qualitics. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To COAGMENT. v. a. [from con and aginen, Lat..] To
congregate or heap together. I have only found the participle
in uſe. -
Had the world been coagmented from that ſuppoſed fortuitous
jumble, this hypotheſis had been tolerable. Glanv. Scepſ. c. 20.
CoAGMENTA"rios. n.ſ. [from coagment J. Collection, or coa-
ccrvation into one maſs; union; conjunétion.
The third part reſts in the well joining, cementing,
and cºagmentation of words, when it is ſmooth, gentle, and
ſweet. Benj. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
CoA'GULA BLE. adj. [from coagulate.] I hat which is capable
of concretion.
Stones that are rich in vitriol, being often drenched with
rain-water, the liquor will then extract a fine and tranſparent
º cºagulatle into vitriol. Boyle's Scºpt. Chyn.
OL. I.
To COAGULATE. v. a. ſcoagulº, Lat.] To force into cen-
Crº ; as, by the affuſion of ſome other ſubſtance, to turn
Ill Ilk.
Roaſted in wrath and fire,
And thus o'erſized with coagulate gore. Shakespeare . Hamlet.
Vivification ever conſiſteth in ſpirits attenuate, which the
cold doth congeal and coagulate Bacon's Nat. Hi°ory, N°. 836.
Bitumen is found in lumps, or coagulated maſſes, in ſome
ſprings. // oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
The milk in the ſtomach of calves, which is coagu ated by
the runnet, is again diſlolved and rendered fluid by the gall in
the duodenum.
To CoA'Gul Air E. v. n.
lations.
Spirit of wine commixed with milk, a third part ſpirit of
wine, and two parts milk, coagulateth little, but mingleth;
and the ſpirit ſwims not above. Bacon's Pºyſ Rem.
. About the third part of the oil olive, which was driven over
into the receiver, did there coagulate into a whitiſh body, al-
moſt like butter. Boyle's Hiſtory of fluidity.
CoAGULA'tion. n: ſ [from coagulate.]
1. Concretion; congelation; the act of coagulating; the ſtate
of being coagulated.
2. The body formed by coagulation.
As the ſubſtance of coagulations is not merely ſaline, no-
thing diſſolves them but what penetrates and relaxes at the
ſame time. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
CoA'Gu LA rive. adj. [from coagulate.] That which has the
power of cauſing concretion, or coagulation.
And to manifeſt yet further the coagulative power of them,
we have ſometimes in a minute arreſted the fluidity of new
milk, and turned it into a curdled ſubſtance, only by dex-
terouſly mingling with it a few drops of good oil of vitriol.
To run into concretions, or conge-
Poºl’s Hiſlory of Firmneſ.
CºAGULA'toR. m. ſ. [from coagulate.] That which cauſes
coagulation.
Coagulators of the humours are thoſe things which expel
the moſt fluid parts, as in the caſe of incraſiating, or thick-
ening; and by thoſe things which ſuck up ſome of the fluid
parts, as abſorbents Arbuthnot on Diet.
COAL. m / [col, Sax. Kol, Germ. Åole, Dut. Kul, Daniſh.]
1. The common foſſil fewel.
Coal is a black ſulphurous, inflammatory matter, dug out
of the earth, ſerving for ſcº e!. It is ranked among the mi-
nerals, and is common in rope, though the Engliſh coal is
of moſt repute. One ſpecies of pit-coal is called cannel, or
cano'e coal, which is found in the northern counties; and is
hard, gloſſy and light, apt to cleave into thin flakes, and,
when kindled, yields a continual blaze 'till it be burnt out.
Chambers.
Coal are ſolid, dry, opake, inflammable ſubſtances, found
in large ſtrata, ſplitting horizontally more eaſily than in any
other direction; of a gloſſy hue, ſoft and friable, not fuſible,
but eaſily inflammable, and leaving a large reſiduum of aſhes.
Hill on Foſſils.
Put age, enforc'd, falls by her own conſent;
As ca's to aſhes, when the ſpirit's ſpent. Denham.
We ſhall meet with the ſame mineral lodged in coal, that
elſewhere we found in marle. Jłºodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. The cinder of burnt wood, charcoal.
Whatſoever doth ſo alter a body, as it returneth not again
to that it was, may be called alteratio major; as when cheeſe
is made of curds, or coals of wood, or bricks of earth. Bacon.
3. Fire ; any thing inſlamed or ignited.
You are no ſurer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
Or hailſtones in the ſun Shakespeare. Criolanus.
The rage of jealouſy then fir’d his ſoul,
And his face kindled like a burning coal.
You
Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me. Shakespeare H. VIII.
To CoA.L. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To burn wood to charcoal.
Add the tinner's care and coſt, in buying the wood for this
ſervice, felling, framing, and piling it to be burnt; in fetch-
ing the ſame when it is coaled, through ſuch far, foul, and
cumberſome ways. Carew's Sºy ºf Cºrnwal.
2. To delineate with a coal.
Marvailing, he ceaſed out rhimes upon the wall, near
to the picture. Cºnſºn's Remains.
Coal-black, adj. [coal and black.) Black in the higheſt de-
gree; of the colour of a coal. ---
As burning Ætna, from his boiling flew,
Doth belch out flames, and rocks in pieces broke,
And ragged ribs of mountains moltºn new,
Enwrapt in cºal-back clouds and filthy ſmoak. Fairy Queen.
Ethiopians and negroes become cºal-black from fuliginous
efforeſcencies, and complectional tinctures. Brºwn's Kal. Err.
Cºal-back his colour, but like jet it ſhone;
His legs and flowing tail were white alone. Dryden.
Coal-box. m. ſ. [coal and box.] A box to carry coals to the
fire.
Dryd. Falles.
4T Leave
Arbuthnot on Aiments.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 55</div><p class="Text">C O A
C O A
"Leave a pail of dirty water, a coal-lov, a bottle, a broom,
and ſuch other unfightly things. Swift.
CoAl-M IN E. m. ſ. [coal and mine.] A mine in which coals are
dug; a coal-pit.
Springs are injurious to land, that flow from coalmines.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
CoAL-pit. m. ſ. [from coal and fit. J A pit made in the earth,
generally to a great depth, for digging goals.
A leaf of the polypody kind, found in the ſinking of a
coal it. //oodward on Foſſils.
CoA:1-s rose. m. ſ. [coal and /?ºne..] A fort of cannel coal.
See CoA L.
Coal ſtºne flames eaſily, and burns frcely; but holds and en-
dures the fire much longer than coal. // 3-dward on Fºſſils.
CoAL-work. n.f. [coal and work J A coalery; a place where
coals are found.
There is a vaſt treaſure in the old Engliſh, from whence
authors may draw conſtant ſupplies; as our officers make their
ſureſt remits from the coal-works and the mines. Fººton.
Co'ALERY. n ſ [from coal.] A place where coals are dug.
Two fine ſtalactitae were found hanging from a black ſtone,
at a deſerted vault in Benwell coaſery. //cdward on Pºſis.
To COALESCE. v. m. [coaleſto, Latin.]
1. To unite in maſſes by a ſpontaneous approximation to each
other.
When vapours are raiſed, they hinder not the tranſparency
of the air, being divided into parts too ſmall to cauſe any re-
fle&amp;tion in their ſuperficies; but when they begin to coa ºfte,
and conſtitute globules, thoſe globules become of a convenient
ſize to reflect ſome colours. Newton's Opt.
2. To grow together; to join.
CoALE scence. m. ſ. [from coa'ſ e ] The act of coaleſcing;
concretion; union.
CoA 1.1't to N. m. ſ. [from coal ſo coalitum, Latin.] Union in
one maſs or body; conjunction of ſeparate parts in one
whole.
The world's a maſs of heterogeneous conſiſtences, and every
part thereof a coalition of diſtinguiſhable varieties Glanv. Scepſ.
In the firſt coalition of a people, their proſpect is not great:
they provide laws for their preſent exigence and convenience.
Hale's Common Law of England.
'Tis neceſſary that theſe ſquandered atoms ſhould convene
and unite into great maſſes: without ſuch a cºalition the chaos.
muſt have reigned to all etermity. Bently.
Co'Al Y. adj. [from coal.] Containing coal.
Or coay Tine, or ancient hallow'd Dee. Mi tom.
CoAPTA'tion. m. ſ. [from con and apt, Lat J The adjuſt-
ment of parts to each other.
In a clock the hand is moved upon the dial, the bell is
ſtruck, and the other actions belonging to the engine are per-
formed by virtue of the ſize, ſhape, bigneſs, and coaptation of
the ſeveral parts. Boyle's Scep. Chym.
The ſame method makes both proſe and verſe beautiful,
which conſiſts in the judicious coaptation and ranging of the
words. Broome on the Odyſſey.
To COA'RCT. v. a. ſcaráz, Latin.]
1. To ſtraighten; to confine into a narrow compaſs.
2. To contract power.
If a man czarets himſelf to the extremity of an act, he muſt
blame and impute it to himſelf, that he has thus coarcied or
ſtraightened himſelf ſo far. Ayſſe's Parergon.
C A R cºra"r Ion. º [from coarſ?..]
1. Confinement; reſtraint to a narrow ſpace.
The greateſt winds, if they have no coarélation, or blow
not hollow, give an interiour ſound. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. Contraction of any ſpace.
Straighten the artery never ſo much, provided the ſides of it
do not meet, the veſſel will continue to beat below, or be-
yond the coarctation. Ray on the Creation.
3. Reſtraint of liberty.
Election is oppoſed not only to coaction, but alſo to co-
aréiation, or determination to one. Bramb. againſ? Hobbs.
COARSE. adj.
1. Not refined; not ſeparated from impuritics or baſer parts.
I feel
Of what coarſ metal ye are molded. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
2. Not ſoft or fine: uſed of cloath, of which the threads are
large.
3. Rude; uncivil; rough of manners.
4. Groſs; not delicate.
'Tis not the coarſer tye of human law
That binds their peace.
5. Inelegant; rude; unpoliſhed.
Praiſe of Virgil is againſt myſelf, for preſuming to copy,
in my cºarſe Engliſh, his beautiful expreſſions. Dryd. 4, n.
6. Unaccompliſhed; unfiniſhed by art or education.
Prićtical rules may be uſeful to ſuch as are remote from
advice, and to coarſ practitioners, which they are obliged to
make uſe of. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
7. Mean; not nice ; not elegant; vile.
Ill conſort, and a coarſe perfume,
Diſgrace the delicacy of a feaſt. Rºſommon.
Thomſºn's String.
A cºarſe and uſeleſs dunghill weed,
Fix'd to one ſpot, to rot juſt as it grows. Otway's Orphan.
From this coarſe mixture of terreſtrial parts,
Deſire and fear by turns poſſeſs their hearts. Dryden's Zºn.
Co'ARs. 1. Y. adv. [from coarſ..]
1. Without fineneſs; without refinement.
2. Meanly; not elegantly.
John came neither eating nor drinking, but fired carºl,
and poorly, according to the apparel he wore. Br. Wul. Err.
3. Rudely ; not civilly.
The good cannot be too much honoured, nor the bad too
coarſely uſed. Dryden's Fableſ, Preface.
4. Inelegantly.
Be pleaſed to accept the rudiments of Virgil's poetry,
coarſely tranſlated; but which yet retains ſome beauties of the
author. Dryden's Wirgi', Dedicatiºn.
CoARSEN ess. m. ſ. [from coarſe.]
1. Impurity; unrefined ſtate.
Firſt know the materials whereof the glaſs is made; then
confider what the reaſon is of the coarſeneſs or dearneſs. Ba.on.
2. Roughneſs; want of fineneſs.
3. Groſſneſs; want of delicacy.
'Tis with friends (pardon the coarſeneſ of the illuſtration)
as with dogs in couples; they ſhould be of the ſame ſize.
L'Eſtrange, Fabe 25.
4. Roughneſs; rudeneſs of manners.
A baſe wild olive he remains;
The ſhrub the coarſeneſ of the clown retains. Garth's Ovid.
5. Meanneſs; want of nicety.
Conſider the penuriouſneſs of the Hollanders, the coarSpenser;
of their food and rainent, and their little indulgences of plea-
ſure. Addison on the //ar.
COAST. n.ſ.. [coffe, Fr. coſa, Latin.]
1. he edge or margin of the land next the ſea; the ſhore.
It is not uſed for the banks of leſs waters.
He ſees in Engliſh ſhips the Holland coaſt. Dryden.
2. It ſeems to be taken by Newton for fide, like the French cºſie.
Some kind of virtue, lodged in ſome ſides of the cryſtal,
inclines and bends the rays towards the coaſt, of unuſual re-
fraction; otherwiſe the rays would not be refracted towards
that coaſt rather than any other coaſt, both at their incidence
and at their emergence, ſo as to emerge by a contrary ſitua-
tion of the coa/?. Newton's Opt.
3. The CoAst is clear. A proverbial expreſſion. The danger
is over; the enemies have marched off.
Going out, and ſeeing that the coaſt was clear, Zelmane
diſmiſſed Mufidorus. Sidney.
The royal ſpy, when now the coaſt was clear,
Sought not the garden, but retir'd unſeen. Dryden.
To CoA. T. v. n. [from the noun J To ſail cloſe by the coaſt;
to ſail within fight of land.
But ſteer my veſſel with a ſteady hand,
And coaſt along the ſhore in fight of land. Dryden's Virgil.
The antients coa/ied only in their navigation, ſeldom taking
the open ſea. Arbuthnot on Co.ns.
To CoAst. v. a. To ſail by ; to ſail near to.
Nearchus, the admiral of Alexander, not knowing the
compaſs, was fain to cºaſt that ſhore. Brown's Puig. Errours.
The greateſt entertainment we found in coaſting it, were
the ſeveral proſpects of woods, vineyards, meadows, and corn-
fields which lic on the borders of it. Addiſon on Italy.
Co'Ast ER. m. / [from coa/? J He that ſails timorouſly near
the ſhore.
In our ſmall ſkiff we muſt not launch too far;
We here but coaſters, not diſcov’rers are. Dryd Tyran. Love.
COA.T. m. ſ. [cotte, Fr. c.tta, Italian.]
1. The upper garment.
He was armed with a coat of mail, and the weight of the
coat was five thouſand ſhekels of braſs. 1 Sam. xvi. 5.
The coat of many colours they brought to their father, and
ſaid, this have we found: know now whether it be thy ſon's
Cºat Or Il O. Gen. xxxvii. 30.
2. Petticoat; the habit of a boy in his infancy; the lower part
of a woman's dreſs.
A friend's younger ſon, a child in coats, was not eaſily
brought to his book. Lºcke.
3. The habit or veſture, as demonſtrative of the office.
For his intermeddling with arms, he is the more excuſeable,
becauſe many of his coat, in thoſe times, are not only martial
directors, but commanders. Howel's lºcal Forryi.
Men of his coat ſhould be minding their pray'rs,
And not among ladies, to give themſelves airs. Swift.
4. The hair or fur of a beaſt; the covering of any animal.
He clad
Their nakedneſs with ſkins of bcaſts; or ſlain,
Or, as the ſnake, with youthful coat repaid ;
And thought not much to clothe his enemies. Milton.
Give your horſe ſome powder of brimſtone in his oats, and
it will make his coat lie fine. AMortimer's Hussandry.
You have given us milk
In luſcious ſtreams, and lent us your own cºat
Againſt the winter's cold. Thomſºn's Spring.
2. - 5. Any
!.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 56</div><p class="Text">5. Any tegument; tunick; or covering.
C O B .
The eye is defended with four coats or ſkins. Peacham.
The optick nerves have their medullary parts terminating
in the brain, their teguments terminating in the coats of the
cyc. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
Amber is a nodule, inveſted with a coat, called rock-amber.
- J/oodward on Foſſils.
6. That on which the enſigns armorial are portrayed.
The herald of love's mighty king,
In whoſe coat armour richly are diſplay'd
All ſorts of flowers the which on earth do ſpring. Spenſer.
Cropp'd are the flower de-luces in your arms;
Of England's coat one half is cut away. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
At each trumpet was a banner bound,
Which, waving in the wind, diſplay’d at large
Their maſter's coat of arms and knightly charge. Dryden.
To CoA r. v. a. [from the noun..] To cover; to inveſt; to
overſpread: as, to coat a retort; to coat a ceiling.
To COAX. v. a. To wheedle; to flatter; to humour. A
low word,
The nurſe had changed her note; for ſhe was then muz-
zling and coaxing the child; that's a good dear, ſays ſhe.
L’E/?range.
I coax / I wheedle ! I'm above it. Farquhar's Rer. Officer.
CoAxER. m. ſ. [from the verb J A wheedler; a flatterer.
CoB. A word often uſed in the compoſition of low terms;
CoR. n ſ. A ſort of ſea-fowl; called alſo ſea-cob.
corrupted from cop, Sax. Kopf, Germ. the head or top.
Philips.
Co'BAL.T. n.ſ. A marcaſte frequent in Saxony.
Cobait is plentifully impregnated with arſenick; contains
copper and ſome ſilver. Being ſublimed, the flores are of a blue
colour: theſe German mineraliſts call zaffir. J%zdward.
Cobalt is a denſe, compačt, and ponderous mineral, very
bright and ſhining, and much reſembling ſome of the anti-
monial ores. It is found in Germany, Saxony, Bohemia, and
England; but ours is a poor kind. From cobalt are pro-
duced the three ſorts of arſenick, white, yellow, and red; as
alſo zaffre and ſmalt. Hill on Foſſils.
To COBBLE. v. a. [Åobler, Daniſh.]
1. To mend any thing coarſely : uſed generally of ſhoes.
If you be out, fir, I can mend you.-Why, fir, colble
you. Shakeſp. }
They’ll ſit by th’ fire, and preſume to know
What's done i' th' capitol; making parties ſtrong,
And feeble ſuch as ſtand not in their liking,
Below their cobbled ſhocs. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Many underlayers, when they could not live upon their
trade, have raiſed themſelves from cobbling to fluxing. L'Eſlr.
2. To do or make any thing clumſily, or unhandily.
Rejećt the nauſeous praiſes of the times:
Give thy baſe poets back their cobbled rhimes. Dryden.
Believe not that the whole univerſe is mere bungling and
blundering, nothing effected for any purpoſe or deſign, but all
ill-favouredly cobbled and jumbled together. Bentley.
Co's PL ER. m. ſ. [from coille ]
1 - A mender of old ſhoes.
Not many years ago it happened that a cobbler had the
caſting vote for the life of a criminal. Addiſon on Italy.
z - A clumſy workman in general,
What trade are you ?—
Truly, fir, in reſpect of a fine workman, I am but, as you
would ſay, a cobbler. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
3 - In a kind of proverbial ſenſe, any mean perſon.
Think you the great prerogative t'enjoy
Of doing ill, by virtue of that race;
As if what we eſtcem in cobblers baſe,
Would the high family of Brutus grace.
Dryd. juv. !
*C. o'ei RoNs. n.ſ.. [cob and iron..] Irons with a knob at the
upper end.
The implements of the kitchen; as ſpits, ranges, cobirons,
and pots. Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
C*- B 1's Hop. n ſ. [con and biſhºp.] A coadjutant biſhop.
== Cobiſhop, for the benefit of the church of Hippo.
C. - E NUT. n. ſ. [cob and nºt.]
I -
Valerius, advanced in years, and a Grecian by birth, not
*H* ialified to preach in the Latin tongue, made uſe of Auſtin as
Ayliffe.
*See HAzel, of which it is a ſpecies.
* : * boy's game; the conquering nut.
Cº- He swºrn. n, ſ. [cob, head, and ſwan.] The head or leading
* ---an. -
I’m not taken
\Vith a colſwan, or a high-mounting bull,
Co-" ^s fooliſh Leda and Europa were. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
I- - * NY F. B. m. ſ. [Kopwel, Dutch..]
he web or net of a ſpider.
The luckleſs Clarion,
VVith violent ſwift flight, forth carried
Tito the curſed cºbweb, which his foe
ad framed for his final overthrow. Sponſºr.
&lt;= 2 * * ſupper ready, the houſe trimmed, ruſhes ſtrewed, and
Stºcks ſwept. Sºakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
The ſpider went into the houſe of a burgher, and fell pre-
ulius Caſar.
C O C
ſently to her net-work of drawing cobwebs up and down.
L’Eſtrange's Fabies.
2. Any ſnare, or trap; implying inſidiouſneſs and weakneſs.
For he a rope of ſand could twiſt,
As tough as learned Sorboniſt;
And weave fine cobwebs fit for ſcull
That's empty, when the moon is full. Hudibras, p. ii.
Chronology at beſt is but a cobweb law, and he broke
through it with his weight. Dryden's Dedicat. A. m.
Laws are like cobwebs, which may catch ſmall flies; but
let waſps and hornets break through. Swift.
Co'co A. m. ſ See Cacao.
Cocci'FERous, adj. [from zozzº, and fero, Lat J All plants or
trees are ſo called that have berries, &amp;incy.
Co'chi NEAL. m. ſ. [cochinilla, Span. a woodlouſe.]
An inſect gathered upon the opuntia, and dried; from
which a beautiful red colour is extracted. Hill.
Co'cHLEARY. adj. [from cochlea, Lat, a ſcrew.] Screwform;
in the form of a ſcrew.
That at St. Dennis, near Paris, hath wreathy ſpires, and
cochleary turnings about it, which agreeth with the deſcription
of the unicorn's horn in AFlian. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Co'CH1 EATED. adj. [from cºchlea, Lat J Of a ſcrewed or tur-
binated form.'
Two pieces of ſtone, ſtruck forth of the cavity of the
umbilici of ſhells, of the ſame ſort with the foregoing: the
are of a cochleated figure.
COCK. m. ſ [cocc, Saxon; coq, French.]
1. The male to the hen; a domeſtick fowl, remarkable for his
gallantry, pride, and courage.
Cocks have great combs and ſpurs; hens, little or none.
Bac n's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 85.
True cocks o' th' game,
That never aſk for what, or whom, they fight;
But turn 'em out, and ſhew 'em but a foe,
Cry liberty, and that's a cauſe of quarrel. Dryd. Span. Fryar.
The careful hen
Calls all her chirping family around,
Fed and defended by the fearleſs cock.
2. The male of any ſmall birds.
He was confirmed in this by obſerving, that calves and
philoſophers, tygers and ſtateſmen, cock ſparrows and coquets,
exactly reſemble one another in the formation of the pineal
gland. Arbuth. and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
3. The weathercock, that ſhews the direction of the wind by
turning
You cataraćts and hurricanoes ſpout,
*Till you have drench'd our ſteeples, drown'd the cocks /
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
4. A ſpout to let out water at will, by turning the ſtop.
When every room
Hath blaz'd with lights, and bray'd with minſtrelſy,
I have retir'd me to a waſteful cock,
And ſet mine eyes at flow. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
It were good there were a little cock made in the belly of
the upper glaſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 16.
Thus the ſmall jett, which haſty hands unlock,
Spirts in the gard’ner's eyes who turns the cock. Pope's Dunc.
5. The notch of an arrow. -
6. The part of the lock of a gun that ſtrikes with the flint. [From
cocca, Ital, the notch of an arrow. Skinner. Perhaps from
the action, like that of a cock pecking.]
With haſty rage he ſnatch'd
His gunſhot, that in holſters watch'd,
And bending coºk, he levell'd full
Againſt th’ outſide of Talgol's ſkull. Hudibra', p. i. cant. 2.
A ſeven-ſhot gun carries powder and bullets for ſeven
charges and diſcharges. Under the breech of the barrel is one
bex for the powder; a little before the lock another for the
bullets; behind the cock a charger, which carries the powder
from the box to a funnel at the further end of the lock. Grew.
7. A conquerour; a leader ; a governing man.
Sir Andrew is grown the cock of the club fince he left us.
*. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 130.
My ſchoolmaſter call'd me a dunce and a fool; -
But at cuffs I was always the cock of the ſchool. Swift.
8. Cockcrowing; a note of the time in a morning.
We were carouſing 'till the ſecond cock. Shakeſp Macleth.
He begins at curfew, and goes 'till the firſt cock. Shakeſp.
9. A cockboat; a ſmall boat.
They take view of all ſized cocºs, barges, and fiſherboats
hovering on the coaſt. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
The fiſhermen that walk upon the beach,
Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
Diminiſh'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy,
Almoſt too ſmall for fight. Shakeſp. King Lear.
10. A ſmall heap of hay. [Properly co".]
As ſoon as the dew is off the ground ſpread the hay again,
and turn it, that it may wither on the other ſide : then handle
it, and, if you find it dry, make it up into cocks. AMortimer.
11. The form of a hat. [From the comb of the cock.]
You may ſee many a ſmart rhetorician turning his bat
1Il
Thomſon's Spring.
Woodward on Foſſils. -
iº
;iº
*
i
º
º
;
º
!
;
*
|
|
-
-
º
- -
--|
-
|
|
.
i
-
|
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 57</div><p class="Text">C O C
C O C
in his hands, moulding it into ſeveral different corks.
- Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 408.
12. The ſtyle or gnomon of a dial. Chambers.
13. The needle of a balance. -
14. Cºck on the Hºp. Triumphant; exulting:
Now I am a friſker, all men on me look;
What ſhould I do but ſet coºk on the hoop º' Camden's Remains.
You'll make a mutiny among my gueſts
You will ſet cock a hoop / Shakeſp. &amp;omeo and Juliet.
For Hudibras, who thought h’ had won
The field, as certain as a gun,
And having routed the whole troop,
With victory was cock a hoºp.
To Cock. v. a. [from the noun )
1. To ſet erect; to hold bolt upright, as a cock holds his head.
This is that muſcle which performs the motion ſo often
mentioned by the Latin poets, when they talk of a man's
Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
cocking his noſe, or playing the rhinoceros. Addiſon's Spect.
Our Lightfoot barks, and cocks his ears;
O'er yonder ſtile ſee Lubberkin appears. Gay's Paſtorals.
Dick would cock his noſe in ſcorn,
But Tom was kind and loving. Swift.
2. To ſet up the hat with an air of petulance and pertneſs.
Dick, who thus long had paſſive fat,
Here ſtrok'd his chin and cº’d his hat. Prior.
An alert young fellow cock'd his hat upon a friend of his
who entered. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 403.
3. To mould the form of the hat.
4. To fix the cock of a gun ready for a diſcharge.
Some of them holding up their piſtols cocked, near the door
of the houſe, which they kept open. Dryd. Dedicat. Æn.
5. To raiſe hay in ſmall heaps.
Sike mirth in May is meeteſt for to make,
Or ſummer ſhade, under the cocked hay. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
To Cock. v. n.
1. To ſtrut; to hold up the head, and look big, or menacing,
or pert.
Sir Fopling is a fool ſo nicely writ,
The ladies would miſtake him for a wit;
And when he ſings, talks loud, and cocks, would cry,
I vow, methinks, he's pretty company. Dryden.
Every one cocks and ſtruts upon it, and pretends to over-
look us. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 ob.
2. To train or uſe fighting cocks.
- Cries out 'gainſt cocking, ſince he cannot bet. B. Johnſºn.
Cock, in compoſition, ſignifies ſmall or little.
Cock A/D E. m. ſ. [from cock.] A ribband worn in the hat.
A Cock ATR ice. m. ſ. [from cock and arren, Sax, a ſerpent.]
... A ſerpent ſuppoſed to riſe from a cock's egg.
They will kill one another by the look, like cockatrices.
Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
This was the end of this little cockatrice of a king, that
was able to deſtroy thoſe that did not eſpy him firſt. Bacon.
This cockatri e is ſooneſt cruſhed in the ſhell; but, if it
grows, it turns to a ſerpent and a dragon. Taylor.
My wife 'tis ſhe, the very cockatrice / Congr. Old Batchelor.
Cockbo AT. m. ſ. [cock and beat J A ſmall boat belonging to
a ſhip.
That invincible armada, which having not ſo much as fired
a cottage of ours at land, nor taking a cockboat of ours at
ſea, wandered through the wilderneſs of the northern ſeas.
Bacon on the J/ar with Spain.
Did they, indeed, think it leſs diſhonour to God to be like
a brute, or a plant, or a coºkboat, than to be like a man
Stillin fleet's Defence of Diſc. on Rom. Idolatry.
Co'ck BRoat H. n. ſ. Broath made by boiling a cock.
Diet upon ſpoon-meats; as veal or cock broaths, prepared
with French barley. Harvey on Conſumptions.
CockcrowING. m. ſ. ſcock and crow J The time at which
cocks crow ; the morning.
Ye know not when the maſter of the houſe cometh; at
even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morn-
ing. Mar. xiii. 35.
To Co'cKER. v. a. ſcoqueliner, French J To cade; to fondle;
to indulge.
Moſt children's couſtitutions are ſpoiled by cocºering and
tenderneſs. Locke on Education, ſe?. 4.
He that will give his ſon ſugar-plums to make him learn,
does but authorize his love of pleaſure, and cocker up that pro-
penſity which he ought to ſubdue. Locke on Education, ſ. 52.
Bred a fondling and an heireſs;
Coºker'd by the ſervants round,
Was too good to touch the ground. Swift.
Cock ER. m. ſ. [from cºck.] One who follows the ſport of
cockfighting.
Co'ck ER E1. m.ſ.. [from cock.] A young cock.
Which of them firſt begins to crow —
The old cock –The cockerel. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?.
What wilt thou be, young cockerel, when thy ſpurs
Are grown to ſharpneſs Dryden's Cleomenes.
Cock E.T. n.ſ. (Of uncertain derivation J
A ſeal belonging to the king's cuſtomhouſe: likewiſe a
ſcroll of parchment, ſcaled and delivered by the officers of
the cuſtomhouſe to merchants, as a warrant that their mer-
chandize is entered. Cowel.
The greateſt profit did ariſe by the cocket of hides; for wool
and woolfells were ever of little value in this kingdom. Davies.
cºlour. n: ſ ſtock and fight.] A battle or match of
COCKS.
In cocłfghts, to make one cock more hardy, and the other
more coward! /. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 990.
At the ſeaſons of football and co-ſighting, theſe little re-
publicks reaſſume their national hatred to each other. Addison.
Cock Hoss E. [cock and horſe.] On horſeback; triumphant;
exulting.
Alma, they ſtrenuouſly maintain,
Sits cockhorſe on her throne the brain. Prior.
COCKLE. n.ſ [coquille, French..] A ſmall teſtaceous fiſh.
It is a cockle, or a walnut-ſhell. Slak. Ham. of Shrew.
We may, I think, from the make of an oyſter, or coºle,
reaſonably conclude, that it has not ſo many, nor ſo quick
ſenſes, as a man. Lo Åe.
Three common cockle ſhells, out cf gravel pits. // dward.
Cockle-sta IRS. n.ſ. Winding or ſpiral ſtairs. Chambers.
Cockle. n.ſ. [coccel, Saxon.] A weed that grows in corn.
The ſame with corn-roſe; a ſpecies of Poppy.
In ſoothing them we nouriſh, 'gainſt our ſenate,
The coºke of rebellion, inſolence, ſedition. Shakeſpeare.
Good ſeed degenerates, and oft’ obeys
The ſoil's diſeaſe, and into coºke ſtrays. Donne.
To Cockle. v. a. [from cockle.] To contračt into wrinkles
like the ſhell of a cockle.
Show’rs ſoon drench the camblet's cockled grain. Gay.
Co'ck LED. adj. [from cock.e.] Shelled; or perhaps cochleate,
turbinated.
Love's feeling is more ſoft and ſenſible,
Than are the tender horns of cockled ſnails. Shakeſpeare.
Co'ckloft. n.ſ. ſcock and loft.] The room over the garret,
in which fowls are ſuppoſed to rooſt.
If the loweſt floors already burn,
Cocklºfts and garrets ſoon will take their turn. Dryd juv.
My garrets, or rather my coºfts indeed, are very indie-
rently furniſhed; but they are rooms to lay lumber in. Swift.
CockMaster. m. ſ. [cock and maſter.] One that breeds
ame cocks.
A cockmaſter bought a patridge, and turned it among the
fighting cocks. L' ſtrange.
Co cKMAtch. n.ſ.. [cock and match..] Cockfight for a prize.
At the ſame time that the heads of parties preſerve
towards one another an outward ſhew of good breeding, their
tools will not ſo much as mingle together at a lockmatch.
Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 1 26.
Though quail-fighting is what is moſt taken notice of, they
had doubtleſs cockmatches alſo. Arbuth, and Pope's Aſart. Scrib.
Co'ck N E Y. n.ſ. [A word of which the original is much con-
troverted. The French uſe an expreſſion, Pais dº cocaigne,
for a country of dainties.
Paris eſ? four un riche un País de cºcaigne. Boikau.
Of this word they are not able to ſettle the original. It ap-
pears, whatever was its firſt ground, to be very ancient, being
mentioned in an old Normanno-Saxon poem:
Far in ſee by weſt Spayng,
Is a lond yhoze cocayng.
On which Dr. Hicies has this remark:
Nunc cºquin, coquine. Quae olim apud Gallas otio, gulae &amp;
ventri deditos, ignavum, ignavam, dºſſaioſum, deſidiºſam, ſeg-
mem ſignificabant. Hinc ºriano, utpote a ruſticis laboribus ad
vitam ſedentariam, &amp; quaſi deſidioſam avocatos pagani noſtri
olim cokaignes, quod nunc ſcribitur cockneyi, vocabant. Et
poeta hic noſter in monachos &amp; moniales, ut ſegne genus
hominum, qui defidiae dediti, ventri indulgebant, &amp; coquinae
amatores erant, malevolentiflime invchitur, monaſteria &amp; mo-
naſticam vitam in deſcriptione terræ cockainea, parabolice
perſtringens.]
1. A native of London, by way of contempt.
So the cockney did to the ceſs, when ſhe put them ' th' paſty
alive. Shakeſp. King L. ar.
For who is ſuch a cockney in his heart,
Proud of the plenty of the ſouthern part,
To ſcorn that unión, by which we may
Boaſt ’twas his countryman that writ this play. Doſt.
The cockney, travelling into the country, is ſurprized at
many common practices of rural affirs. . . . J/atts.
2. Any effeminate, ignorant, low, means deſpicable citizen.
I am afraid this great lubber, the world, will prove a
cºckney. Shakeſp. Twelft, Night.
Co'cKPIT. m. ſ. [cock and pit.]
1. The arca where cocks fight.
Can this cockpit hold
The vaſty field of France: S}a}ºff. Henry V.
And now have I gained the cock; it of the weſtern world,
and academy of arms, for many years. Howe.’s P. ca. Forrºff.
2. A place on the lower deck of a man of war, where are ſub-
diviſions for the purſer, the ſurgeon, and his mates. Harris.
CJ'ckscow. B.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 58</div><p class="Text">º -
C O HD
Corºccox B. m. ſ. ſcº and cºnt.] A plant. The ſame with
Loss Ewok T, which ſee.
Cock H &amp; A.D. m. ſ. A plant, named alſo ſaiſºn.
It ath a papilionaceous flower, out of whoſ: empalement
riſes the pointal; which afterwards becomes a creſted pod,
ſometimes rough and full of ſeeds, ſhaped like a kidney. The
flowers grow in a thick ſpike. It is an abiding plant, and
eſteemed one of the beſt ſorts of fodder for cattle. A4iler.
CocksHUT: m / [from cock and ſhut J The cloſe of the cven-
ing, at which time poultry go to rooſt.
Surrey and himſelf,
Much about cºck/hut time, from troop to troop,
Went through the army. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Cockspur. m. ſ. [cock and ſºur.] Virginian hawthorn. A
ſpecies of MEDLAR, which ſee.
Its large and beautiful flowers are produced in great bunches
at the extremities of the branches; and its fruit, which is
ripe in autumn, makes a fine appearance, growing in great
cluſters; and is eſteemed good food for deer. Miller.
Cock URE. [from cock and ſire.] Confidently certain; with-
out fear or diffidence. A word of contempt.
We ſteal, as in a caſtle, cocºſire. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. i.
I thought myſelf coeſire of his horſe, which he readily
promiſed me. Pope's Letters.
Cocksw AIN. m. ſ. ſco; paine, Saxon.] The officer who
has the command of the cockboat. Corruptly Coxon.
Cockw EED. m. ſ. [from cock and weed.] The name of a plant,
called alſo DITT ANDER, or Pepperwort, which ſee.
Coco A. m. ſ. [ cacaoſal, Span. and therefore more properly
written cacao.)
A ſpecies of palm-tree, cultivated in moſt of the inhabited
parts of the Eaſt and Weſt Indies; but thought a native of
the Maldives. It is one of the moſt uſeful trees to the inha-
bitants of America. The bark of the nut is made into cor-
dage, and the ſhell into drinking bowls. The kernel of the
nut affords them a wholeſome food, and the milk contained in
the ſhell a cooling liquor. The leaves of the trees are uſed
for thatching their houſes, and are alſo wrought into baſkets,
and moſt other things that are made of oſiers in Europe.
Miller.
The cacao or chocolate nut is a fruit of an oblong figure,
much reſembling a large olive in ſize and ſhape. It is com-
poſed of a thin but hard and woody coat or ſkin, of a dark
blackiſh colour; and of a dry kernel, filling up its whole
cavity, fleſhy, dry, firm, and fattiſh to the touch, of a duſky
colour, an agreeable ſmell, and a pleaſant and peculiar taſte.
It was unknown to us 'till the diſcovery of America, where
the natives not only drank the liquor made from the nuts, in
the manner we do chocolate, but alſo uſed them as money.
The tree is not very tall, but grows regularly, and is of a
beautiful form, eſpecially when loaded with its fruit. Its ſtem
is of the thickneſs of a man's leg, and but a few feet in height;
its bark rough, and full of tubercles; and its leaves ſix or
eight inches long, half as much in breadth, and pointed at the
ends. The flowers ſtand on the branches, and even on the
trunk of the tree, in cluſters, each having its own pedicle, an
inch and ſometimes leſs in length: they are ſmall, of a yel-
lowiſh colour, and are ſucceeded by the fruit, which is large
and oblºng, reſembling a cucumber, five, ſix, or eight inches
in length, and three or four in thickneſs; and, when fully
ripe, it is of a purple colour. Within the cavity of this fruit
are lodged the cocoa nuts, uſually about thirty in number.
This tree flowers twice or three times in the year, and ripens
as many ſeries of fruits. Hill's Hiſtory of the Aſat. Medica.
Amid’ thoſe orchards of the ſun,
Give me to drain the cocoa's milky bowl, -
And from the palm to draw its freſhening wine. Thomſºn.
Co'cTIL E. adj. [coºliis, Lat.] Made by baking, as a brick.
Co'ction. m. ſ. ſcoºio, Lat.] The act of boiling.
The diſeaſe is ſometimes attended with expectoration from
the lungs, and that is taken off by a coºlion and reſolution of
the feveriſh matter, or terminates in ſuppurations or a gan-
grene. Arbuthnot on Dict.
COD.
Co'DF is H. ! ſ A ſea fiſh. - -
COD. m. ſ. ſcoobe, Saxon.] Any caſe or huſk in which ſeeds
are lodged.
Thy corn thou there may’ſ ſafely ſow,
Where in full cod; laſt year rich peaſe did grow. May's Jºrg.
They let peaſe lie in ſmall heaps as they are reaped, 'till they
find the hawm and cod dry. Motimer's Husbandry.
To Cop. v. n. [from the noun..] To incloſe in a cod.
All cadded grain being a deſtroyer of weeds, an improver
of land, and a preparer of it for other crops. Mºrt. Husband.
Copp E Rs. m. ſ. [from cod.j Gatherers of peaſe. Dićf.
Cop E. n ſ. [codex, Latin J
1. A book.
2. A book of the civil law. -
We find in the Theodoſian and Juſtinian code the intereſt
of trade very well provided for. Arbuthnot of Coins.
indentures, cov'nants, articles they draw,
Wo L. I.
t C O F.
Large as the fields themſelves; and larger far º
Than civil codes with all their gloſſes are. Poe's Sat.
Copieſ. n.ſ. ſodius, Latin.] "An appendage to a will.
The man ſuſpects his lady's crying,
Was but to gain him to appoint her, -
By cºdici, a larger jointure. Prior.
Copiilº n.f. [codile, Fr. cºdillº, Span.] A term at ombre,
when the game is won againſt the player.
She ſces, and trembles at th' approaching ill,
Juſt in the jaws of ruin, and codile. Pope's Rape ºf the Lock.
To CO'DLE. J. a. [cquo coefulo, Lat, Skinner.] To paiboil;
to ſoften by the heat of water.
Co DLING. * f [from To codle J An apple generally codled,
to be mixed with milk.
In July come gilliflowers of all varieties, early pcars and
plums in fruit, gennitings and codlings. Bacon, Eſſay 4, .
Their entertainment at the height,
In cream and gºdlings revºling with delight. King's Coºkery.
He let it lic all winter in a gravel walk, ſouth of a coding
hedge. - - Martinier's Husſandy.
A coding, e're it went his lip in,
Wou'd ſtrait become a golden pippin. Swif:
CoEFFICAcx. n.ſ. [con and ºff-drià, Lat.] The power of
ſeveral things ačting together to produce an effect.
We cannot in general infer the efficacy of thoſe ſtars, or
cºfficacy particular in medications. Brown's Walgar Errours.
Cor FF1'cIENCY. m. ſ. [con and ºffio, Latin Cooperation;
the ſtate of a&amp;ting together to ſome ſingle end.
The managing and carrying on of this work, by the ſpirits
inſtrumental cºfficiency, requires, that they be kept together,
without diſtinétion or diſſipation. Glanville's Sceſſ. Scient.
CoEFF1'cIENT. n ſ. [con and ºfficiens, Latin.]
1. That which unites its action with the action of another.
2. In algebra.
Such numbers, or given quantities, that are put before
letters, or unknown quantities, into which letters they are
ſuppoſed to be multiplied, and ſo do make a rectangle, or pro-
duct with the letters; as 4 a, b x, c xx; where 4 is the coeffi-
cient of 4 a ; b of b x, and c of c &lt;x. Chambers.
3. In fluxions.
The coefficient of any generating term (in fluxions) is the quan-
tity ariſing by the diviſion of that term, by the generated
quantity. Chambers.
Co'ELIACK Paſſion. A diarrhaea, or flux, that ariſes from
the indigeſtion or putrefaction of food in the ſtomach
and bowels, whereby the aliment comes away little altered
from what it was when eaten, or changed like corrupted ſtink-
ing fleſh. Quincy.
CoEMPTIon, n.ſ.. [coemptio, Lat.] The act of buying up
the whole quantity of any thing.
Monopolies and coemption of wares for reſale, where they
are not reſtrained, are great means to enrich. Bacon's Eſſays.
CoE’QUAL. adj. [from can and equalis, Lat.] Equal ; being in
the ſame ſtate with another. -
Henry the fifth did ſometime prophecy,
If once he came to be a cardinal,
He'll make his cap coequal with the crown. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
CoEQUALITY. m.ſ. (from coequal] The ſtate of being equal.
To COE/RCE. v. a. [coerced, Latin.] To reſtrain; to keep
in order by force.
Puniſhments are manifold, that they may coerce this profli-
gate ſort. Aylºff's Parergon.
CoE'RCIBLE. adj. [from coerce.]
1. That may be reſtrained. ,
2. That ought to be reſtrained. .
CoE Rcion, n.ſ.. [from cºerce J Penal reſtraint; check. -
The cºercion or execution of the ſentence in eccleſiaſtical
courts, is only by excommunication of the perſon contuma-
cious. Hale's Hiſtory of the Commºn Law.
Government has coercion and animadverſion upon ſuch as
neglect their duty; without which coercive power, all govern-
ment is toothleſs and precarious. South's Sermonſ.
CoE’Rc1 v E. adj. [from coºrce J
1. That which has the power of laying reſtraint.
All things on the ſurface ſpread, are bound
By their coercive vigour to the ground ! Blackmore.
2. That which has the authority of reſtraining by puniſhment.
For miniſters to ſeek that themſelves might have cºercive
power over the church, would have beca hardly conſtrued.
Hooker, Preface.
The virtues of a magiſtrate or gencial, or a king, are pru-
dence, counſel, active fortitude, carrive power; awful.com-
mand, and the exerciſe of magnanimity, as Wºll as juſtice.
Dryden's juv. Dedication:
CoEsse's ti A. adj. [cºn and eſcºtia, Latin.) Participating
of the ſame eſſence. .
The Lord our God is but one God, in which indiviſible
unity we adore the father, as being altºgether of himſelf; we
glorify that conſubſtantial word which is the ſon ; we bleſs
and magnify that coeffºrtial ſpirit cternally proceeding from
both, which is the holy ghoſt. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 51.
4 U CoESSENTIALITY.
*.
4––.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 59</div><p class="Text">C O F
C O F
eos ssRN via'ſ try. m. ſ. [from conſºrtia'.] Participation of
the ſame cſlence. -
CoE A'N Fous, adj. [ron and a tas, Latin J
1. Of the ſame age with another. Sometimes with to.
Eve was old as Adam, and Cain their ſon ractaneous unto
both, Brºwn's Wulgar Errours, b. i. e. 3.
Every fault hath ſome penal effects, coetaneous to the act.
Government of the Tºngue, ſ. 6.
1. Sometimes with.
Through the body every member ſuſtains another; and all
are coltaneous, becauſe none can ſubſiſt alone. Bently's Serm.
Co F re'RNAL. adj. [con and a terrius, Lat J Equally eternal
with another.
Or of the eternal cºeternal beam Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
CoETERNALLY. adv. [from coeterna...] In a ſtate of equal
eternity with another.
Arius had already diſhonoured his coeternally begotten ſon.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 52.
Cof TERNITY. m. ſ. [from coeternal.] Having exiſtence from
eternity equal with another cternal being.
The eternity of the ſon's generation, and his coeternity and
conſubſtantiality with the father, when he came down from
heaven, and was incarnate. Hammond's Fund.
COEVAL. adj. [coavus, Latin.]
1. Of the ſame age.
Even his teeth and white, like a young flock,
Coeval, and new ſhorn, from the clear brook
Recent. - Prior.
2. Of the ſame age with another, followed by with.
This religion cannot pretend to be coeval with mankind.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
The monthly revolutions of the moon, or the diurnal of
the earth upon its own axis, by the very hypotheſis are coequal
with the former. Bentley's Sermºns.
Silence coeval with eternity;
Thou wert, e're nature firſt began to be :
'Twas one vaſt nothing all, and all ſlept faſt in thee. Pope.
3. Sometimes by to.
Although we had no monuments of religion ancienter than
idolatry, we have no reaſon to conclude, that idolatrous reli-
gion was coeval to mankind. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Co.'VAL. m. ſ. [from the adjective..] A contemporary.
As it were not enough to have outdone all your coeval in
wit, you will excel them in good nature. Pºpe.
CoE'vous. adj. [coavus, Lat] Of the ſame age.
Then it ſhould not have been the firſt, as ſuppoſing ſome
other thing coevous to it. South's Sermons.
To Coexist. v. n, [con and exiſto, Latin.]
1. To exiſt at the ſame time.
The three ſtars that coexiſt in heavenly conſtellations, are a
multitude of ſtars. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Of ſubſtances no one has any clear idea, farther than of
certain ſimple ideas coexiſting together. Locke.
2. Followed by with.
It is ſufficient that we have the idea of the length of any
regular periodical appearances, which we can in our minds
apply to duration, with which the motion or appearance ne-
ver coexiſted. Locke.
CoEx1's TENCE. n.ſ.. [from coexiſt.]
1. Having exiſtence at the ſame time with another.
The meaſuring of any duration, by ſome motion, depends
not on the real coexiſtence of that thing to that motion, or
any other periods of revolution. Locke.
2. More commonly followed by with.
We can demonſtrate the being of God's eternal ideas, and
their coexiſtence with him. Grew's Coſmol. b. ii. c. 4. ſ. 24.
CoExi's TENT. adj. [from coexiſt.]
1. Having exiſtence at the ſame time with another, with to.
To the meaſuring the duration of any thing by time, it is
not requiſite that that thing ſhould be coexiſtent to the motion
we meaſure by, or any other periodical revolution. Locke.
2. Sometimes with.
This proves no antecedent neceſſity, but coexiſtent with the
act. Bramh. Anſwer to Hobbs.
Time is taken for ſo much of infinite duration as is co-
exiſtent with the motions of the great bodies of the univerſe.
Locke’s J/orks.
All that one point is either future or paſt, and no parts
are coexiſtent or contemporary with it. Bentley's Sermons.
To CoEx Exp. v. a. [con and extendo, Lat.] To extend
to the ſame ſpace or duration with another.
Every motion is, in ſome ſort, coextended with the body
moved. Grew’s Coſmol. b. ii. c. 1. ſ. 2.
CoEx E'ssion. n.ſ.. [from coextend J The act or ſtate of ex-
tending to the ſame ſpace or duration with another.
And though it be a ſpirit, yet I find it is no inconvenience
to have ſome analogy, at leaſt of cºextenſion, with my body.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
COFFEE. m. ſ. [It is originally Arabick, pronounced
caheu by the Turks, and cahua, by the Arabs.] The tree is
a ſpecies of Arabick JEss A MINE, which fee.
It is found to ſucceed as well in the Caribbee iſlands as in
their native place of growth: but whether the coffee produced
in the Weſt Indies will prove as good as that from Mocha in
Arabia Felix, time will diſcover. The berry brought from
the Levant is moſt eſteemed ; and the berry, when ripe, is
found as hard as horn. A ſillar.
CoFFEE alſo denotes a drink prepared from the berries,
very familiar in Europe for theſe eighty years, and among the
Turks for one hundred and fifty Some refer the invention
of coffee to the Perſians; from whom it was learned, in the
fifteenth century, by a mufti of Aden, a city near the mouth
of the Red Sea, where it ſoon came in vogue, and paſſed
from thence to Mecca, and from Arabia Felix to Cairo.
From Egypt the uſe of coffee advanced to Syria and Conſtan.
tinople. Theyenot, the traveller, was the firſt who brought
it into France; and a Greek ſirvant, called Paſqua, brought
into England by Mr. Daniel Edwards, a Tuſky merchant, in
1652, to make his coffee, firſt ſet up the profeſſion of
coffeeman, and introduced the drink among us; though ſome
ſay Dr. Harvey had uſed it before. Chambers.
They have in Turky a drink called coffee, made of a
berry of the ſame name, as black as ſoot, and of a ſtrong
ſcent, but not aromatical; which they take, beaten into pow-
der, in water, as hot as they can drink it. I his drink com-
forteth the brain and heart, and helpeth digeſtion. Bacon.
To part her time 'twixt reading and bohea,
Or o'er cold cºffe trifle with the ſpoon. Pºpe.
Co'FFE E Hous E. m. ſ. [cºffee and houſe. J A houſe of cntertain-
ment where coffee is ſold, and the gueſts are ſupplied with
newspapers.
At ten, from cºff, clºſe or play,
Returning, finiſhes the day. Prior.
It is a point they do not concern themſelves about, farther
than per aps as a ſubject in a cºffehouſe. wift.
CofFE E MAN. m.ſ.. [cºffee and mal.] One that keeps a coſice-
houſe.
Conſider your encimies the Lacedemonians; did ever you
hear that they preferred a cºfferian to Ageſilauº 4 ºn.
Co'FFEE poºr. m. ſ. [cºffee and pot.] The covercd pot in which
coffee is boiled.
COFFER. m. ſ. ſcorre, Saxon.] . *
1. A cheſt generally for keeping money.
Two iron coffers hung on either ſide,
With precious metal full as they could hold. Fairy Queen.
The lining of his coffers ſhall make coats
To deck our ſoldiers for theſe Iriſh wars. Shakeſp. Ricº. II:
If you deſtroy your governour that is wealthy, you muſt
chuſe another, who will fill his cºffers out of what is left. L'Eyr.
2. Treaſure.
He would diſcharge it without any burthen to the queen's
cffers, for honour ſake. Bacon's Advice to / illiers.
3. [In architcéture.] A ſquare depreſſure in each interval be-
tween the modillions of the Corinthian cornice, uſually filled
with ſome enrichment, Charlers.
4. [In fortification.] A hollow lodgment acroſs a dry moat,
from fix to ſeven foot deep, and from ſixteen to cighteen
broad; the upper part being made of pieces of timber, raiſed
two foot above the level of the moat; which little clevation
has hurdles laden with earth for its covering, and ſerves as a
parapet with embraſures. Chambers.
To Co'FF ER. v. a. [from the noun..] To treaſure up in chefts.
Treaſure, as a war might draw forth, ſo a peace ſucceeding
might cºffer up. Bacon's Henry VII.
Co'FFERER ºf the King's Hºtſhºld. n.ſ. A principal officer of
his majeſty's court, next under the comptroller, that, in the
comptinghouſe and clſewhere, hath a ſpecial overſight of other
officers of the houſhold, for their good demeanour in their
offices. Cowel.
COFFIN. n.ſ.. [coff, French.
1. The box or cheft in which dead bodies are put into the
ground. It is uſed both of wood and other matter.
He went as if he had been the cºffin that carried himſelf to
his ſepulchre. - Sidney, b. ii.
Not a flower ſweet
On my black cºffin let there be ſtrown. Sh, Twº Night.
One fate they have, …
The ſhip their cºffin, and the ſea their grave. Jjº'er.
The joiner is fitting ſcrews to your cºffin. Swift.
2. A mould of paſte for a pye.
3. A paper caſe, in form of a cone, uſed by grocers.
4. In farriery.
Cof FIN of a horſ, is the whole hoof of the foot above the
coronet, including the cºffin bone. The cºff, bone is a ſmall
ſpongy bone, incloſed in the midſt of the hoof, and poſſeſſing
the whole form of the foot. Farriºr's Dict.
To Co'FFIN. v. a. [from the noun J. To incloſe in a coffin.
Would'ſt thou have laugh'd, had I come ºffin's home,
That weep'ſt to ſee me trigmph : Shaº. Coriolants.
Let me lie
In priſon, and here be cºffº'd, when I die. Damme.
Co'FFINMAKER. m. ſ. [cºffin and maker.] One whoſe trade is
to make coffins.
Where will be your ſextons, cºnmaker, and plummers: Tatl.
3 To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 60</div><p class="Text">- say imT.
:*º
--- _-T
- - |
º
- -
2. • ** ... . - - - - |
C O G C O H i º
- r - - - - - - * -- - -- º ºu
T°COG. v. 4. [A word of uncertain original, derived by Skin- COGNI"TION. n.ſ. [cognitio, Latin.] Knowledge; completc
ner from coqueliner, French.]
1. To flatter; to wheedle; to ſooth by adulatory ſpeeches.
I'll mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home belov'd
Of all the trades in Rome. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. To obtrude by falſehood. - -
The outcry is, that I abuſe his demonſtration by a falſifica-
tion, by cogging in the word. Tilotſon, Preface.
I have cogged in the word to ſerve my turn. Stillin ſect.
Fuſtian tragedies, or inſipid comedies, have, by concerted
applauſes, been cogged upon the town for maſterpieces. Dennis.
3. To CoG a die. To ſecure it, ſo as to direct its fall; to falſify.
But then my ſtudy was to cog the dice, -
And dextrouſly to throw the lucky fice. Dryden's Perſ. Sat.
For guineas in other men's breeches,
Your gameſters will palm and will cog. Swift.
Ye gallants of Newgate, whoſe fingers are nice -
In diving in pockets, or cogging of dice. Swift.
To Co.G. v. n. To lye; to wheedle. -
Mrs. Ford, I cannot cog; I cannot prate, Mrs. Ford: now
ſhall I ſin in my wiſh. Shakeſp. Mºrry //ives of J/indſor.
COG. m. ſ. The tooth of a wheel, by which it acts upon
another wheel. - - -
To Cog. v. a. [from the noun..] To fix cogs in a wheel.
Coºg ENCY. n.ſ. [from cogent J Force; ſtrength; power of
compelling; convićtion. -
Maxims and axioms, principles of ſcience, becauſe they are
ſelf-evident, have been ſuppoſed innate; although nobody ever
ſhewed the foundation of their clearneſs and cogency. Locke.
CO GENT. adj. [cogens, Latin.] Forcible; reſiſtleſs; con-
vincing; powerful; having the power to compel convićtion.
- Such is the cogent force of nature. Prior.
They have contrived methods of deceit, one repugnant to
another, to evade, if poſſible, this moſt cogent proof of a
Deity. - Bently.
Co'GENTLY. adv. [from cogent.] With reſiſtleſs force; forcibly;
ſo as to force convićtion.
| They forbid us to hearken to thoſe proofs, as being weak
or fallacious, which our own exiſtence, and the ſenſible parts
of the univerſe, offer ſo clearly and cogently to our thoughts.
Locke.
Co'CoER. n.ſ.. [from To cog.] A flatterer; a wheedler.
Co'GG L Eston E. m. ſ. [cuogo'o, Ital j . A little ſtone; a ſmall
pebble. Skinner.
Co'GITABLE. adj. [from cogito, Lat.] That which may be
thought on ; what may be the ſubject of thought.
To CO'GITATE. v. n. [cogito, Lat.] To think. Diff.
CoGITA'TION. n.ſ.. [cogitatio, Latin.]
1. Thought ; the ačt of thinking. - -
Having their cogitations darkened, and being ſtrangers from
the life of God, from the ignorance which is in them. Hooker.
A pićture puts me in mind of a friend: the intention of
the mind in ſeeing, is carried to the obječt repreſented, which
is no more than ſimple cogitation, or apprehenſion of the per-
ſon. Stillingfleet's Defence of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
This Deſcartes proves, that brutes have no cogitation, be-
cauſe they could never be brought to ſignify their thoughts by
any artificial ſigns. Ray on the Creation.
Theſe powers of cogitation, and volition and ſenſation, are
neither inherent in matter as ſuch, nor acquirable to matter by
any motion and modification of it.
2. Purpoſe; reflection previous to action.
The king, perceiving that his deſires were intemperate,
and his cogitations vaſt and irregular, began not to brook him
well... . Bacon's Henry VII.
3 - Mcditation. -
On ſome great charge employ'd
He ſeem’d, or fixt in cogitation deep. Milt. Paradiſ Loft.
*C. o'GITATIVE. adj. [from cogito, Latin.]
* - Having the power of thought and reflection.
If theſe powers of cogitation and ſenſation are neither inhe-
rent in matter, nor acquirable to matter, they proceed from
iſome cogitative ſubſtance, which we call ſpirit and ſoul. Bentley.
2 - Given to thought and deep meditation.
The earl had the cloſer and more reſerved countenance,
Feing by nature more cogitative. //atton.
C-&gt; &lt;= NA"tion. n.ſ. [cognatio, Latin.]
* - Kindred; deſcent from the ſame original.
Two vices I ſhall mention, as being of near cognation to in-
= "Tatitude, pride and hard-heartedneſs, or want of com-
F-i ziion, South's Sermons,
Lct the criticks tell me what certain ſenſe they could put
** Pºn either of theſe four words, by their mere cognation with
*L-3 ch other. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
slation; participation of the ſame nature.
*--&gt; re induceth us to aſcribe effe; unto cauſes of no cºg-
Co -&gt; J "..., Brºwn's Pulgar Erreurs, b. i. e. i 1.
*s-,-, *se"F. m. ſ. [In law.]. He to whom a fine in lands or
C. . . . . . sinents is acknowledged. Gowel.
is sº sour, n.ſ. . [In law.] Is he that paſſeth or acknow-
seth a fine in lands or tenements to another. Cowel.
* **
Bentley.
2-
convićtion. -
I will not be myſelf nor have cºgnition
Of what I feel: I am all patience. Shakespeare. Troil. and Creºda.
God, as he created all things, ſo is he beyond and in them
all, not only in power, as under his ſubjection, or in his pre-
fence, as in his cºgnition; but in their very effence, as in the
foul of their caſualties. Brown's Jºwzar Erreurs, b. i. c. 2.
Co'GN; Tiv E. adj. [from cºgnitus, Latin.] Having the power
of knowing. - - - - -
Unleſs the underſtanding cmploy and exerciſe its cognitive
or apprehenſive power about theſe terms, there can be no
actual apprehenſion of them.
Co GN1zA PLE. ad. [cºgnoiſable, French.j
I. That falls under judicial notice.
2. Proper to be tried, judged, or examined.
Some are merely of eccleſiaſtical cognizance, others of a
mixed nature, ſuch as are cognizable both in the eccleſiaſtical
and ſecular courts. - Ayºffe's Parcrgan.
Co'GNIZANCE. n.ſ. [connoiſ.nce, French.]
I. Judicial notice; trial; judicial authority. . .
It is worth the while, however, to conſider how we may
diſcountenance and prevent thoſe evils which the law can take
no cognizance of. - - L'Eſtrange.
Happineſs or miſery, in converſe with others, depends upon
things which human laws can take no cognizance of. South.
The moral crime is completed, and there are only circum-
ſtances wanting to work it up for the cognizance of the law.
º Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 6.
2. A badge, by which any one is known. -
And at the king's going away the earl's ſervants ſtood, in a
ſeemly manner, in their livery coats, with cognizances, ranged
on both ſides, and made the king a bow. Bacon's Henry VII.
Theſe were the proper cognizances and coat-arms of the
tribes. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v. c. 10.
COGNOMINAL. adj. [cºgnomen, Lat.] Having the ſame
Ilanne. - - º -
Nor do thoſe animals more reſemble the creatures on earth,
than they on earth the conſtellations which paſs under animal
names in heaven; nor the dogfiſh at ſea much more make
out the dog of the land, than his cºgnominal or nameſake in the
heavens. Brown's Wu gar Erreurs, b. iii. c. 24.
Cog NoMINA'tion. n.ſ.. [cognomen, Latin J
1. A ſurname; the name of a family.
2. A name added from any accident or quality.
Pompey deſerved the name great: Alexander, of the ſame
cognomination, was generaliſimo of Greece. Brown'; 'u'. Err.
COGNOSCENCE. m. ſ. [cognoſco, Latin.] Knowledge; the
ſtate or act of knowing. Diº.
Cog No'scible. adj. [cognoſco, Latin.] That may be known;
being the objećt of knowledge. * * - - - - -
The ſame that is ſaid for the redundance of matters intelli-
gible and cognoſible in things natural, may be applied to things
artificial. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To COHA'BIT. v. n. [cohabito, Latin.]
1. To dwell with another in the ſame place. -
The victorious Philiſtines were worſted by the captivated
ark, which foraged their country more than a conquering
army: they were not able to cºhabit with that holy thing.
South's Sermons.
South', Sexion.
2. To live together as huſband, and wife.
He knew her not to be his own wife, and yet had a deſign
to cohabit with her as ſuch. - Fiſk’s Sermons.
Coh ABITANT. n.ſ.. [from cohabit..] An inhabitant of the
ſame place. º - -
The oppreſſed Indians proteſt againſt that heaven where
the Spaniards are to be their cohabitants. Decay of Piety.
CoHABITA't los. m. ſ. [from cohabit.] - -
1. The act or ſtate of inhabiting the ſame place with another.
2. The ſtate of living together as married perſons. .
Which defect, though it could not evacuate a marriage after
cohabitation, and adual conſummation, yet it was enough to
make void a contračt. Bacon's Henry VII.
Monſieur Brumars, at one hundred and two years, died for
love of his wife, who was ninety-two at her death, after
ſeventy years cohabitation. Tatler, Nº. 56.
Cofie'If... n.ſ. [cohares, Lat..] One of ſeveral among whom
an inheritance is divided. - - -
Married perſons, and widows and virgins, are all coheir in
the inheritance of Jeſus, if they live within the laws of their
eſtate. Taylor's Hºly Living:
Coheſi RFss. n.ſ.. [from coheir.]. A woman who has an equal
ſhare of an inheritance with other women.
To COHERE. v. n. [coharco, Latin.] * - * -
1. To ſtick together; to hold faſt one to another, as parts of
the ſame body. -
Two pieces of marble, having their ſurface exatly plain,
polite, and applied to each other in ſuch a manner as to inter;
cept the air, do cohere firmly together as one. . JWoºdward.
We find that the force, whereby bodies cohere, is very much
greater when they come to immediate contact, than when
they are at cwer ſo ſmall a finite diſtance. Cºyne's Pºil. º
One
*
º-ºº
º
-
|
-
º
--
i
|
-
º
ſ
:
-
|<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 61</div><p class="Text">G O H.
C O I
Fº
. . None wart a place for all their center ſoºnd;
I ſugg to the goddeſ, and cºhºr'ſ around ;
Not cloſer, orb in crb cong!ob'd, are ſeen
The buzzing bees about their duſky queen. Pºpe's Punciad.
2. To be well connected; to follow regularly in the order of
diſcourſe.
3. To ſuit; to ſt; to be fifted to
Had time cohe, d with place, or place with wiſhing. Shakespeare .
4. To agree.
º: º !". ſ. […rentia, Latin J
1. That ſtate of bodies in which their parts are joined toge-
ther, from what cauſe ſocycr it proceeds, ſo that they re-
ſiſt divulſion and ſeparation ; nor can be ſeparated by the ſame
force by which they might be ſimply moved, or being only
laid upon one another, might be parted again. &amp;ſincy.
The weight or picture of the air will not explain, nor can
be a cauſe of the coherence of the particles of air themſelves.
- Locke.
Matter is either fluid or ſolid; words that may comprehend
the middle degrees between extreme fixedneſs and coherency,
and the moſt rapid inteiline motion. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Connection; dependency; the iciation of parts or things one
to another.
It ſhall be no trouble to find cach controverſy's reſting
place, and the coherence it hath with thing, either on which
it dependeth, or which depend on it. Hooker, Preface.
Why between ſermons and faith ſhould there be ordinarily
that coherence, which cauſes have with their uſual effects? Hooker.
3. The texture of a diſcourſe, by which one part follows another
regularly and naturally.
4. Conſiſtency in reaſoning, or relating, ſo that one part of the
diſcourſe does not deſtroy or contradict the reſt.
Coherence of diſcourſe, and a direct tendency of all the parts
of it to the argument in hand, are moſt eminently to be found
in him. Loc'e's Prºſace to St. Paul's Epiſles.
CoHE'R ENT. adj. [charrens, Latin.j
1. Sticking together, ſo as to reſiſt ſeparation.
By coagulating and diluting, that is, making their parts
more or leſs cohc ent. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Where all muſt full, or not coherent be;
And all that riſes, riſe in due degree. Pºpe's Eſſay on Man.
2. Suitable to ſomething elſe; regularly adapted.
Inſtruct my daughter,
That time and place, with this deceit ſo lawful,
May prove coherent. Shakſº. 41's well that ends well.
3. Conſiſtent; not contradićtory to itſelf. -
A coherent thinker, and a ſtrict reaſoner, is not to be made
at once by a ſet of rules. //atts's Logick.
Coh Eſsion. n ſ. [from cohere.]
1. The act of ſticking together.
Hard particles, heaped together, touch in a few points, and
muſt be ſeparable by leſs force than breaks a ſolid particle,
whoſe parts touch in all the ſpace between them, without any
pores or interſtices to weaken their coheſion. Newton's Opt.
Solids and fluids differ in the degree of coheſion, which,
being increaſed, turns a fluid into a ſolid. Arbuth, on Aliments.
2. The ſtate of union or inſeparability.
What cauſe of their coheſin can you find
What props ſupport, what chains the fabrick bind. Blackm.
3. Connection ; dependence.
In their tender years, ideas that have no natural coheſion,
come to be united in their heads. Locke.
CoH E's v E. adj. [from cohere.] That has the power of ſtick-
ing to another, and of reſiſting ſeparation.
CoHE's v ENEss. n.ſ.. [from cohſive.] The quality of being
coheſive; the quality of reſiſting ſeparation.
To CoH1'BIT. v. a. [cohibco, Lat..] To reſtrain; to hinder. Dić.
To CO'HOBATE. v. a. To pour the diſtilled liquor upon
the remaining matter, and diſtill it again. -
The juices of an animal body are, as it were, cohobated,
being excreted and admitted again into the blood with the
frcſh aliment. - Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
Conop A"rios. m. ſ [from cohºl ate J A returning any diſtilled
liquor again upon what it was drawn from, or upon freſh in-
gredients of the ſame kind, to have it the more impregnated
with their virtues. - - - - - Quincy.
( choſation is the pouring the liquor diſtilled from anything
back upon the remaining matter, and diſtilling it again. Locke.
This oil, dulcified by cºholation with an aromatized ſpirit,
is of uſe to reſtore the digeſtive faculty. Grew's Muſa um.
Co'HoR r. m. ſ. [cohors, Latin.]
1. A troop of ſoldiers in the Roman armies, containing about
five hundred foot.
The Romans levied as many cohorts, companics, and en-
ſigns from hence as from any of their provinces. Camden.
2. In poetical language, a body of warriours.
Th’ arch-angelic pow'r prepard
For ſwift deſcent; with him the cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi. ſ. 127.
Here Churchill, not ſo prompt
To vaunt as fight, his hardy cohort, join'd
With Eugene. Pilips's Błºnkin.
Conor ºr Arios. m. ſ. [cºhortatic, Latin.] Encouragement by
words; incitement. Diez.
CQIF. n.ſ. [ cºffe, French, from cofa, for cucufa, low
Latin. J. The head-dreſs; a lady's cap; the ſerjeant's
Cip. -
The judges of the four circuits in Wales, although they
are not of the firſt magnitude, nor need be of the degree of
the coiſ, yet are they conſiderable. Bacºn’s Advice to ſiliers.
No leſs a man than a brother of the coºf began his ſuit, be-
fore he had been a twelvemonth at the Temple. Addison Specſ.
Co'I FED. adj. [from cºif J. Wearing a coif.
CoIFF URE. m. ſ. [coeffºre, French..] Head-dreſs.
I am highly pleaſed with the coiffure now in faſhion, and
think it ſhews the good ſenſe of the valuable part of the ſex.
Zºlliſon's Speciator, Nº. 98.
Colo N.E. m. ſ. [An Iriſh term, as it ſeeins.]
FitzThomas of Deſmond began that extortion of cºigne
and livery, and pay; that is, he and his army took horſe-
meat and man's-meat, and money, at pleaſure. Davies on Irel.
CO/G NE. m. ſ. [French..]
1. A corner.
2. A wooden wedge uſed by printers.
To COIL. v. a. [cueilir, French.) To gather into a narrow
compaſs; as to coil a rope, to wind it in a ring
The lurking particles of air ſo expanding themſelves, muſt
neceſſarily plump out the ſides of the bladder, and ſo keep
them turgid, until the preſſure of the air, that at firſt coiled
them, be re-admitted to do the ſame thing again. Loyle.
Coil. n.ſ. [Åolleren, Germ.]
1. Tumult; turmoil; buſtle; ſtir; hurry; confuſion.
Who was ſo firm, ſo conſtant, that this coil
Would not infect his reaſon. Shakespeare , Tºmpºſt.
You, miſtreſs, all this cºil is long of you. Shakeſpeare.
In that ſleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have ſhuffled off this mortal coil,
Muſt give us pauſe. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
2. A rope wound into a ring.
Coi N. m / [coigne, French. J A corner; anything ſtanding out
angularly; a ſquare brick cut diagonally; called often quan,
or quine.
No jutting frieze,
Puttrice, nor coigne of vantage, but this bird
Hath made his pendant bed. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Sce you yond' coin o' th' capitol, yond' corner ſtone : Shakespeare
COIN. m. ſ. [by ſome imagined to come from cuneus, a wedge,
becauſe metal is cut in wedges to be coined.]
1. Money ſtamped with a legal impreſion.
He gave Dametas a good ſum of gold in ready coin, which
Menalcas had bequeathed. Sidney, b. i.
You have made
Your holy hat be ſtamp'd on the king's coin. Shakespeare H. VIII.
I cannot tell how the poets will ſucceed in the explication
of coins, to which they are generally very great ſtrangers. Addſ,
She now contracts her vaſt deſign,
And all her triumphs ſhrink into a cºin. Pope.
2. Payment of any kind.
The loſs of preſent advantage to fleſh and blood, is repaid
in a nobler coin. Hammond's Fundamentals.
To Cors. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To mint or flamp metals for money.
They cannot touch me for coining : I am the king himſelf.
Shake peare's King Lear.
They never put in practice a thing ſo neceſſary as cºined
money is. Peacham of Antiquities.
Tenants cannot coin rent juſt at quarter-day, but muſt ga-
ther it by degrees. Locke.
Can we be ſure that this medal was really coined by an arti-
ficer, or is but a product of the ſoil from whence it was
taken. Bently’s Sermons.
2. To make or forge any thing, in an ill ſenſe.
My lungs
Coin words 'till their decay, againſt thoſe meaſles,
Which we diſdain ſhould tetter us. Shakeſp. Cori.lanus.
Never coin a formal lye on't,
To make the knight o'ercome the giant. Hudibras, p i.
Thoſe motives induced Virgil to coin his fable. Dryden.
Some tale, ſome new pretence, he daily coin'd,
To ſooth his ſiſter, and delude her mind. Dryd. Wirg. Æn.
A term is coined to make the conveyance caſy. Atterbury.
Co'INA.G.E. n.ſ.. [from coin.]
1. The act or practice of coining money.
The care of the cºinage was committed to the inferior ma-
giftrates; and I don't find that they had a publick trial as
we ſolemnly practiſe in this country. Arbuthnot.
2. Coin ; money; ſtamped and legitimated metal.
This is conceived to be a coinage of ſome Jews, in deri-
ſon of Chriſtians, who firſt began that portrait. Brown.
3. The charges of coining money. -
4. Forgery; invention.
This is the very coinage of your brain;
C
This
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 62</div><p class="Text">w
C O L
C O L
This bodileſ, creation ecſtacy
Is very cunning in.
To CONCI’DE. v. n. [cºincide, Latin.]
1. To fall upon the ſame point; to meet in the ſame point.
If the equator and ecliptick had coincided, it would have
rendered the annual revolution of the earth quite uſeleſs.
- Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
2. To concur ; to be conſiſtent with.
The rules of right judgment, and of good ratiocination,
often cºincide with each other. //atts's Logicſ.
Coi'NCIDENCE. m. ſ. [from coincide.]
1. The ſtate of ſeveral bodies, or lines, falling upon the ſame
point.
An univerſal equilibrium, ariſing from the coincidence of in-
finite centers, can never be naturally acquired. Bentley's Serm.
2. Concurrence; conſiſtency; tendency of many things to the
ſame end.
The very concurrence and coincidence of ſo many evidences
that contribute to the proof, carries with it a great weight.
Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
3. It is followed by with.
The coincidence of the planes of this rotation with one
another, and with the plane of the ecliptick, is very near the
truth. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Co.'Nc IDENT. adj. [from coincide.]
1. Falling upon the ſame point.
Theſe circles I viewed through a priſm; and as I went from
them, they came nearer and nearer together, and at length
becºme coincident. cwt. Opt.
2. Concurrent; conſiſtent; equivalent; tantamount.
Chriſtianity teaches nothing but what is perfectly ſuitable
to and coincident with the ruling principles of a virtuous and
well inclined man. South's Sermons.
Theſe words of our apoſtle are exactly cºincident with that
controverted paſſage in his diſcourſe to the Athenians. Hºtley.
Cox pic A"rio N. m.ſ.. [from con and indico, Latin.j Many
ſymptoms, betokening the ſame cauſe.
Co IN ER. m.ſ.. [from coin.]
1. A maker of money; a minter; a flamper of coin.
My father was I know not where
When I was ſtampt: ſome coiner with his tools
Made me a counterfeit. Shakeſpeare’s Cymºeline.
It is eaſy to find deſigns that never entered into the thoughts
of the ſculptor or the coiner. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
There are only two patents referred to, both leſs advan-
tageous to the coiner than this of Wood. Swift.
2. A counterfeiter of the king's ſtamp; a maker of baſe money.
3. An inventor.
Dionyſius, a Greek coiner of etymologies, is commended
by Athenaeus. Camden’s Remains.
To Cojo'1N. v. n. [conjungo, Lat.] To join with another in
the ſame office.
Thou may’ſ coſoin with ſomething, and thou doſt,
And that beyond commiſſion. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Co'1st R.I.. n.ſ. A coward cock; a runaway.
He's a coward and a coſłril, that will not drink to my
niece. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
CoIT. m. ſ. [Kate, a die, Dutch..] A thing thrown at a certain
mark. See Quo IT.
The time they wear out at coits, kayles, or the like idle
exerciſcs. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Cortion. n. ſ [coitio, Latin.]
1. Copulation; the act of generation.
I cannot but admire that philoſophers ſhould imagine frogs
to fall from the clouds, conſidering how openly they act their
citizm, produce ſpawn, tadpoles and frogs. Ray on Creation.
He is not made produćtive of his kind, but by coition with
a female. Grew's Coſinoſ. b. i. ſ. 25.
2. The act by which two bodies come together.
By Gilbertus this motion is termed coition, not made by any
faculty attractive of one, but a ſyndrome and concourſe of
each. Brown's ſugar Errours, b. ii. c. 3.
Cok E. n.ſ. [Perhaps from coquo, Skinner.]. Fewel made by
burning pit-coal under earth, and querching the cinders; as
charcoal is made with wood. It is frequently uſed in drying
malt. -
CoLAN Dr R. n.ſ.. [colo, to ſtrain, Lat..] A ſieve either of hair,
twigs or metal, through which a mixture to be ſeparated is
poured, and which retains the thicker parts.
Take a thick woven of ar colander,
Through which the preſſed wines are ſtrained clear. May.
All the viſcera of the body are but as ſo many colanders to
ſeparate ſeveral juices from the blood. Ray on the Creation.
The brains from noſe and mouth, and cither ear,
Cºme iſſuing forth, as through a colander
The curdled milk. Dryden.
Col. A rios. n.ſ.. [from colo, Lat.] The art of filtering or
ſtraining.
Co'LATURE. m. ſ. [from colo, Latin.]
1. The art of ſtraining; filtration.
2. The matter ſtrained.
Vol. I.
Co'LBERTINE, n.ſ. A kind of lace worn by women.
Go, hang out an old friſoneer gorget, with a yard of yel-
low cºllertine again. Congreve's Hay of the I/ºrld,
Colcot H.A.R. n.ſ. A term in chymiſtry.
Colºthar is the dry ſubſtance which remains after diſtilla-
tion, but commonly meant of the caput mortuum of vitriol.
&amp;incy:
. Cºkºthar, or vitriol burnt, though unto a redneſ, contain-
ing the fixed ſalt, will make good ink. Brºwn's Aug. Errours.
COLD. adj. [colo, Saxon; Kali, German.]
I. Nº. hot; not warm; geld; without warmth; without
Cat.
The diet in the ſtate of manhood ought to be ſolid; and
their chief drink water cold, becauſe in ſuch a ſtate it has its
own natural ſpirit. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Chill; ſhivering; having ſenſe of cold.
- O noble Engliſh, that could entertain,
With half their force, the full power of France;
And let another half ſtand laughing by,
All out of work, and c la for action. Shakespeare Henry V.
3. Having cold qualities; not volatile; not acrid.
Cold plants have a quicker perception of the heat of the
fun than the hot herbs; as a cºld hand will ſooner find a little
warmth than an hot. Bacon's Natural Hi/ory, Nº. 577.
4. Unaffected; frigid ; without paſſion; without zeal; without
concern ; una&amp;tive ; unconcerned.
There ſprung up one kind of men, with whoſe zcal and
forwardneſs the reſt being compared, were thought to be mar-
vellous cold and dull. Hºoker, Preface, ſ. 8.
Infinite ſhall be made cold in religion, by your example,
that never were hurt by reading books. Aſhan's Schºolingſtar.
Temp'rately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redreſs. Sir, theſe cold ways,
That ſeem like prudent helps, are very poiſonous. Shakeſp.
New daed letters theſe,
Their cold intent, tenour and ſubſtance thus;
Here doth he wiſh his perſon, and his power,
The which he could not levy. S/ºff. Henry IV. p. ii.
We ſhould not, when the blood was cºld, have threatned
Our priſoners with the ſword. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
, To ſee a world in flames, and an hoſt of angels in the
clouds, one muſt be much of a ſtoick to be a cºld and uncon-
cerned ſpectator. Burnet's Prºſace to the Theory of the Earth.
No drum or trumpet needs
Tº inſpire the coward, or to warm the cold,
His voice, his ſole appearance, makes them bold. Dryden.
O, thou haſt touch'd me with thy ſacred theme,
And my cold heart is kindled at thy flame. Rowe.
A man muſt be of a very cold or degenerate temper, whoſe
heart doth not burn within him in the midſt of praiſe and ado-
ration. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 49.
5. Unaffecting ; unable to move the paſſions.
The rabble are pleaſed at the firſt entry of a diſguiſe; but
the jeſt grows cºld even with them too, when it comes on in
a ſecond ſcene. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
6. Reſerved; coy; not affectionate; not cordial; not friendly.
Let his knights have cºlder looks
Among you. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The commiſſioners grew more reſerved and colder towards
each other.
7. Chaſte,
You may
Convey your pleaſures in a ſpacious plenty,
And yet ſeem cold, the time you may ſo hoodwink:
We've willing dames enough. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
8. Not welcome; not received with kindneſs or warmth of
affection.
My maſter's ſuit will be but cold,
Since ſhe reſpects my miſtreſs' love. Shakesp. Two Gent. of Perona,
9. Not haſty; not violent. -
10. Not affecting the ſcent ſtrongly.
She made it good
At the hedge corner, in the coldſ' fault.
11. Not having the ſcent ſtrongly affected.
Smell this buſineſs with a ſenſe as cold
As is a dead man's noſe. Shakeſpeare's J/inter's Talk.
Col. D. m. ſ [from the adjective.]
1. The cauſe of the ſenſation of cold; the privation of heat 3
the figorifick power.
Fair lined ſlippers for the cold. Shakeſpeare.
Heat and cold are nature's two hands, whereby the chiefly
worketh; and heat we have in readineſs, in reſpest of the fire;
but for coa we muſt ſtay 'till it cometh, or ſeek it in deep
caves, or high mountains; and when all is done, We Cannot
obtain it in any great degree. Bacon's Natural Hylory, Nº. 09.
2. The ſenſation of cold; coldneſs; childeſs.
When ſhe ſaw her lord prepar'd to part,
A deadly cold ran ſkiy'ring to hºr heart. Dyſºn's Fables,
3. A diſeaſe cauſed by cold; the obſtruction of perſpiration.
What diſeaſe haſt thou?—
A who ſon cold, fir; a cough. Sl...ſp. Henry IV. p. 2.
4. X Let
Shakespeare care.
Clarendon, b, viii.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 63</div><p class="Text">-
C O L
Let no ungentle cold deſtroy
All taſte we have of heav'nly joy. Rºſammºn.
Thoſe rains, ſo covering the carth, might providentially
contribute to the diſruption of it, by ſtopping all the pores,
and all evaporation, which would make the vapours within
ſtruggle violently, as we get a fever by a cold. Burnet.
Co'ldly. adv. [from cold.]
1. Without heat.
2. Without concern; indifferently; negligently; without
warmth of temper or expreſſion.
What England ſays, ſay briefly, gentle lord;
We coldly pauſe for thee. Shakeſpeare's King john.
Swift ſeem'd to wonder what he meant,
Nor would believe my lord had ſent;
So never offer'd once to ſtir,
But coldly ſaid, your ſervant, ſir. Swift:
Co'l DN Ess. n.ſ.. [from cold.]
1. Want of heat; power of cauſing the ſenſation of cold.
He relates the exceſſive coldneſs of the water they met with
in ſummer in that icy region, where they were forced to
winter. Boyle's Experiments.
Such was the diſcord, which did firſt diſperſe
. Form, order, beauty through the univerſe;
While drineſs moiſture, coldneſ; heat reſiſts,
*
All that we have, and that we are ſubſiſts. Denham.
2. Unconcern; frigidity of temper; want of zeal; negligence;
diſregard.
Diviſions of religion are not only the fartheſt ſpread, be-
cauſe in religion all men preſume themſelves intereſted; but
they are alſo, for the moſt part, hotlier proſecuted: for as
much as coldneſs, which, in other contentions, may be thought
to proceed from moderation, is not in theſe ſo favourably
conſtrued. Hooker, Dedicat.
If upon reading the admired paſſages in ſuch authors, he
finds a coldneſs and indifference in his thoughts, he ought to
conclude, that he himſelf wants the faculty of diſcovering
them. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 409.
It betrayed itſelf at firſt in a ſort of indifference and care-
leſſneſs in all her actions, and coldneſs to her beſt friends.
- Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
3. Coyneſs; want of kindneſs; want of paſſion. -
Unhappy youth how will thy coldneſs raiſe
Tempeſts and ſtorms in his afflićted boſom 1 Addison Cato.
Let ev'ry tongue its various cenſures chuſe,
Abſolve with coldneſs, or with ſpite accuſe. Prior.
4. Chaſtity; exemption from vehement deſire.
The filver ſtream her virgin coldneſ, keeps,
For ever murmurs, and for ever weeps. Pope's IWindſ. For.
COLE. n.ſ. [cap!, Saxon.] A general name for all ſorts of
CABBAG e, which ſee.
Co'l Ese e D. m. ſ. [from cole and ſeed.]
Where land is rank, it is not good to ſow wheat after a
fallow; but colºſed or barley, or both, and then wheat.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
Co'lewoº T. n.ſ. ſcaylpynt, Sax.] See CABBAGE, of which
it is a ſpecies.
The deco&amp;tion of coleworts is alſo commanded to bathe
them. ///eman of an Eryſipelas.
Next took the col-worts, which her huſband got
From his own ground (a ſmall well-water'd ſpot);
She ſtrip'd the ſtalks of all their leaves; the beſt
She cull'd, and then with handy care ſhe dreſs'd. Dryden.
How turnips hide their ſwelling heads below,
And how the cloſing caleworts upwards grow. Gay.
Co'Lick. m. ſ. ſcolicus, Latin.]
It ſtrictly is a diſorder of the colon; but looſely, any diſor-
der of the ſtomach or bowels that is attended with pain.
There are four ſorts: 1. A bilious colick, which proceeds from
an abundance of acrimony or choler irritating the bowels, ſo
as to occaſion continual gripes, and generally with a looſeneſs;
and this is beſt managed with lenitives and emollients. 2. A
flatulent colicſ, which is pain in the bowels from flatus's and
wind, which diſtend them into unequal and unnatural capaci-
ties; and this is managed with carminatives and moderate
openers. 3. An hyſterical colick, which ariſes from diſorders
of the womb, and is communicated by conſent of parts to
the bowels; and is to be treated with the ordinary hyſtericks.
4. A nervous colick, which is from convulſive ſpaſms and con-
tortions of the guts themſelves, from ſome diſorders of the
ſpirits, or nervous fluid, in their component fibres; whereby
their capacities are in many places ſtreightened, and ſometimes
ſo as to occaſion obſtinate obſtructions: this is beſt remedied
by briſk catharticks, joined with opiates and emollient dilu-
ters. There is alſo a ſpecies of this diſtemper which is com-
monly called the ſtone colick, by conſent of parts, from the
irritation of the ſtone or ºf in the bladder or kidneys;
and this is moſt commonly to be treated by nephriticks and
oily diureticks, and is greatly aſfifted with the carminative
turpentine clyſters. $ºuincy.
Cººks of infants proceed from acidity, and the air in the
*incht expanding itſelf, while the aliment ferments, Arbuth.
Co'Lick, adj. Affecting the bowels. - I
C O Í,
Inteſtine ſtone, and ulcer, coli. pangs. Milton.
To Coll A'pse. v. n. [collabor, collapſu, Latin.] To fall to-
gether; to cloſe ſo as that one ſide touches the other. -
In conſumptions and atrophy the liquids are exhauſted, and
the fides of the canals collapſe; therefore the attrition is in-
creaſed, and conſequently the heat. Arbuthnot on Diet.
CoLLA'Psion., n. ſ. [from collapſe.] -
1. The ſtate of veſſels cloſed
2. The act of cloſing or collapſing.
COLLAR. m. ſ. [collare, Latin.]
1. A ring of metal put round the neck.
That's nothing, ſays the dog, but the fretting of my collar :
nay, ſays the wolf, if there be a collar in the caſe, I know
better things than to ſell my liberty. L'A/trange, Fab. 68.
Ten brace and more of greyhounds,
With golden muzzles all their mouths were bound,
And collars of the ſame their neck ſurround. Dryden's Fah.
2. The part of the harneſs that is faſtened about the horſe's neck.
Her waggon-ſpokes made of long ſpinners legs,
The traces of the ſmalleſt ſpider's web,
The collars of the moonſhine's watry beams. Shakeſpeare.
3. The part of the dreſs that ſurrounds the neck.
4.7% ſlip the Coll AR. To get free; to eſcape; to diſentangle
himſelf from any engagement or difficulty.
When as the ape him heard ſo much to talk
Of labour, that did from his liking baulk,
He would have ſlipt the collar handſomely. Hubberd's Tale.
5. A º LLAR of Brawn, is the quantity bound up in one
parcel.
Collar-bone. m. ſ. [from collar and bone.] The clavicle; the
bones on each ſide of the neck. -
A page riding behind the coach, fell down, bruiſed his face,
and broke his right collarbone. //ſeman's Surgery.
To Co'll AR. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſeize by the collar; to take by the throat.
2. To Collar beef, or other meat; to roll it up, and bind it
hard and cloſe with a ſtring or collar.
To COLLATE. v. a. [confºro collatum, Latin.]
1. To compare one thing of the ſame kind with another.
Knowledge will be ever a wandering and indigeſted thing,
if it be but a commixture of a few notions that are at hand
and occur, and not excited from a ſufficient number of inſtances,
and thoſe well collated. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 839.
They could not relinquiſh their Judaiſm, and embrace
Chriſtianity, without conſidering, weighing, and collating both
religions. - South.
2. To collate books; to examine if nothing be wanting.
3. With to. To place in an eccleſiaſtical benefice.
He thruſt out the invader, and collated Amſdorf to the bene-
fice: Luther performed the conſecration. Atterbury.
If a patron ſhall neglect to preſent unto a benefice, that has
been void above ſix months, the biſhop may collate thereunto.
- Ayliffe's Parergon.
CoLLA't ERAL. adj. [con and latus, Latin.]
1. Side to ſide.
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Muſt I be comforted, not in his ſphere. Shakeſpeare.
Thus ſaying, from his radiant ſeat he roſe,
Of high collateral glory. Milton's Paradiſe lºft, b. x. 1.86.
2. Running parallel.
3. Diffuſed on either ſide.
But man by number is to manifeſt
His ſingle imperfection; and beget
Like of his like, his image multiply'd;
In unity defective, which requires -
Callateral love, and deareſt amity. Miltºn's Paradiſe Loft.
4. In genealogy, thoſe that ſland in equal relation to ſome com-
mon anceſtor.
The eſtate and inheritance of a perſon dying inteſtate, is,
by right of devolution, according to the civil law, given to
ſuch as are allied to him ex latere, commonly ſtiled collaterals,
if there be no aſcendants or deſcendants ſurviving at the time
of his death. Ayliffe's Parergon.
5. Not direct; not immediate.
They ſhall hear and judge 'twixt you and me,
If by direct or by collateral hand
They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give
To you in ſatisfaction. Shakespeare.
6. Concurrent.
All the force of the motive lies entirely within itſelf: it
receives no collateral ſtrength from external confiderations.
Atterbury's Sermons.
Co. LATER ALLY. adv. [from colateral.]
1. Side by ſide.
Theſe pullies may be multiplied according to fundry dif-
ferent ſituations, not only when they are ſubordinate, but alſo
when they are placed collaterally. //ilkins.
2. Indirectly.
By aſſerting the ſcripture to be the canon of our faith, I
have created two enemics: the papiſts more directly, becauſe
they have kept the ſcripture from us; and the fanaticks more
cºllaterally,
wº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 64</div><p class="Text">C O L
co'aierally, becauſe they have aſſumed what amounts to an
infallibility in the private ſpirit. Dryden.
2. In collateral relation. - -
Colla"tion. m. ſ. ſcollatio, Latin.]
1. The ačt of conferring or beſtowing; gift.
Neither are we to give thanks alone for the firſt collation of
theſe benefits, but alſo for their preſervation. Ray on the Creat.
2. Compariſon of one copy, or one thing of the ſame kind, with
another.
In the diſquiſition of truth, a ready fancy is of great uſe ;
provided that collation doth its office. Grew's Coſmol. b. 21.
I return you your Milton, which, upon collation, I find to
be reviſed and augmented in ſeveral places. Pope.
3. In Law.
Collation is the beſtowing of a benefice, by the biſhop that
hath it in his own gift or patronage; and differs from inſtitu-
tion in this, that inſtitution into a benefice is performed by
the biſhop at the preſentation of another who is patron, or
hath the patron's right for the time. Cowel.
Biſhops ſhould be placed by collation of the king under his
letters patent, without any precedent election or confirmation
enſuing. Hayward.
4. A repaſt. -
Coll ATI'tious adj. [colatitius, Lat.] Done by the contri-
bution of many. Dići.
Colla"to R. m. ſ [from collate.]
1. One that compares copies, or manuſcripts. -
To read the titles they give an editor, or collator of a manu-
ſcript, you would take him for the glory of letters. Addiſon.
2. One who preſents to an eccleſiaſtical benefice.
A mandatory cannot interrupt an ordinary collator, 'till a
month is expired from the day of preſentation. Ayliffe's Parerg.
To Coll A'U D. v. a. [collaud, Lat...] To join in praiſing. Dić.
COLLEAGUE. n.ſ.. [collega, Lat..] A partner in office or
employment. Anciently accented on the laſt ſyllable.
Eaſy it might be ſeen that I intend
Mercy colleague with juſtice, ſending thee. Milton’s P. Loft.
The regents, upon demiſe of the crown, would keep the
peace without colleagues. Swift.
To Col LE'AGUE. v. a. [from the noun.] To unite with.
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not fail'd to peſter us with meſſage,
Importing the ſurrender of thoſe lands. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
To COLLECT. v. a. [colligo collegium, Latin.]
1. To gather together; to bring into one place.
'Tis memory alone that enriches the mind, by preſerving
what our labour and induſtry daily colle&amp;#. Watts.
2. To draw many units, or numbers, into one ſum.
Let a man collect into one ſum as great a number as he
pleaſes, this multitude, how great ſoever, leſiens not one jot
the power of adding to it. * Locke.
3. To gain from obſervation.
The reverent care I bear unto my lord,
Made me colle: theſe dangers in the duke. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
4. To infer as a conſequence; to gather from premiſes.
How great the force of ſuch an erroneous perſuaſion is, we
may collect from our Saviour's premonition to his diſciples.
Decay of Piety.
They conclude they can have no idea of infinite ſpace, be-
cauſe they can have no idea of infinite matter; which conſe-
quence, I conceive, is very ill collected. Locke.
5. To Collect himſelf. To recover from ſurpriſe; to gain
command over his thoughts; to aſſemble his ſentiments.
Be collečied;
No more amazement.
Affrighted much,
I did in time colle&amp; myſelf, and thought
This was ſo, and no ſlumber. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
Proſperity unexpected often maketh men careleſs and re-
miſs; whereas they who receive a wound, become more
vigilant and collected. Hayward.
Co'L1. Ect. m. ſ. ſcollecha, low Lat.] A ſhort comprehenſive
- prayer, uſed at the ſacrament ; any ſhort prayer.
Then let your devotion be humbly to ſay over proper
colle&amp;ts. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
Collect A'N Fous. adj. [colle&amp;aneus, Lat..] Gathered up to-
gether; collected; notes compiled from various books.
Col. LE"ct 1B L E. adj. [from collect.] That which may be ga-
thered from the premiſes by juſt conſequence.
Whether thereby be meant Euphrates, is not colleśible from
the following words. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 8.
CoLLE'ction. n.ſ.. [from colleå.]
1. The act of gathering together.
2. An aſſemblage; the things gathered.
No perjur'd knight deſires to quit thy arms,
Faireſt cºllection of thy ſex's charms. Priºr.
The gallery is hung with a numerous colleftion of pictures.
Addiſon on Italy.
3. The aët of deducing conſequences; ratiocination; diſcourſe.
This ſenſe is now ſcarce in uſe.
If once we deſcend unto probable colle&amp;ions, we are then in
the territory where free and arbitrary determinations, the tºr-
ritory where human laws take place. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 8.
Shakeſpeare's Tempg/?.
4. A corollary; a conſectary deduced from premiſes; de-
dućtion; conſequence.
It ſhould be a weak colle&amp;ion, if whereas we ſay, that when
Chriſt had overcome the ſharpneſs of death, he then opened
the kingdom of Heaven to all believers; a thing in ſuch ſort
affirmed with circumſtance, were taken as inſinuating an op-
Poſite denial before that circumſtance be accompliſhed. Hooker.
This label
!s ſo from ſenſe in hardneſs, that I can
Make no collection of it. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
When ſhe, from fundry arts, one ſkill doth draw ;
Gah'ring from divers fights, one act of war;
From many caſes like, one rule of law:
- Theſe her collections, not the ſenſes are. Davies.
Sollecti"rious. ad; ſcolleciitius, Lat..] Gathered up.
CoLLEctive. adj. [from colled, collectif, French.]
1. Gathered into one maſs; aggregated; accumulative.
A body collective, becauſe it containeth a huge multitude.
- Hooker, b. iii. ſ.37.81.
The three forms of government differ only by the civil ad-
miniſtration being in the hands of one or two, called kings,
in a ſenate called the nobles, or in the people collective or re-
preſentative, who may be called the commons. Swift.
The difference between a compound and a co’lºve idea
is, that a compound idea unites things of a different kind;
but a colle&amp;five idea, things of the ſame. Watts's Logick.
2. Employed in deducing conſequences; argumentative.
Antiquity left unto us many falſities, controulable not only
by critical and colleftive reaſon, but contrary obſervations.
Brown's Wulgar Errours, b i. c. 6.
3. [In grammar.] A collećtive noun is a word which expreſſes
a multitude, though itſelf be ſingular; as a company; an
army.
CoLLE'ctiveLY. adv. [from collective..] In a general maſs; in
a body; not ſingly; not numbered by individuals; in the ag-
gregate; accumulatively; taken together; in a ſtate of com-
bination or union.
Although we cannot be free from all ſin collectively, in ſuch
ſort that no part thereof ſhall be found inherent in us, yet
diſtributively all great actual offences, as they offer themſelves
one by one, both may and ought to be by all means avoided.
Hooker, b. v. ſº. 48.
Singly and apart many of them are ſubject to exception,
yet collectively they make up a good moral evidence. Hale.
The other part of the water was condenſed at the ſurface
of the earth, and ſent forth collečfively into ſtanding ſprings
and rivers. //oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Collector. n.ſ.. [collectºr, Latin.]
1. A gatherer; he that collects ſcattered things together.
The grandfather might be the firſt collector of them into a
body. Hale's Common Law of England.
Volumes, without any of the collector's own reflečtions.
Addiſon on Italy.
2. A tax-gatherer; a man employed in levying duties, or
tributes.
A great part of this treaſure is now embezzled, laviſhed,
and feaſted away by collectors, and other officers. Temple.
The commiſſions of the revenue are diſpoſed of, and the
colleºlors are appointed by the commiſſioners. Swift.
Colle'GATARY. n.ſ.. [from con and legatum, a legacy, Latin.]
In the civil law, a perſon to whom is left a legacy in common
with one or more other perſons. - Chambers.
CO'LLEGE. m. ſ. [collegium, Latin.]
1. A community; a number of perſons living by ſome common
rules. -
On barbed ſteeds they rode in proud array,
Thick as the college of the bees in May.
2. A ſociety of men ſet apart for learning or religion.
He is return'd with his opinions, which
Have ſatisfied the king for his divorce,
Gather'd from all the famous colleges : * , -
Almoſt in Chriſtendom. Skałęſcare's Henry VIII.
I would the college of the cardinals
Would chuſe him pope, and carry him to Rome. Sh, H. VI.
This order or ſociety is ſometimes called Solomon's
houſe, and ſometimes the cºllege of the ſix days work. Bacºn.
3. The houſe in which the collegians reſide. • -
Huldah the propheteſs dwelt in Jeruſalem in the tºº.
2 Kings xx11 I4.
4. A college in foreign univerſities is a lečture read in publick.
CoLLE'G1 AL. adj. [from college.] Relating to a college ; poſ-
ſeſſed by a college. * 1 - 1-2 = &lt; .. 4
Colleci', N. n.f. [from colºgº.] An inhabitant of a college;
a member of a college. -
Colle'GIATE. adj. [collegiatus, low Latin.] , - -
1. Containing a college; inſtituted after the manner of a college:
I wiſh that yourſelves did well conſider hºw oppoſite cer-
tain of your poſitions are unto the ſtate of collegiate ſocieties,
whereon the two univerſitics conſiſt. Hocker, Preſ, ſcº. 8.
2. A coſº, tº church, was ſuch as was built at a convenient
diſtance from the cathedral church, wherein a number of
preſbyters were ſettled, and lived together in one congre-
- Ayliffe's Parergºn.
CoLLE GIATE,
Dryden.
gation.
4----
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 65</div><p class="Text">C O L
C O L
Celi.f crate. m.ſ.. [from college.] A member of a college ;
a man bred in a college; an univerſity man.
Theſe are a kind of empiricks in poetry, who have got a
receipt to pleaſe; and no collegiate like them, for purging the
paſſions. Rymer’s Tragedies of the laſt Age.
Cöllet. n.ſ. [Fr. from collum, Lat, the neck.] -
1. Anciently ſomething that went about the neck: ſometimes
the neck. -
2. That part of a ring in which the ſtone is ſet.
. A term uſed by turners.
#, Collı'd E. . a. [collid, Lat ) To ſtrike againſt each
other; to beat, to daſh, to knock together. -
Scintillations are not the accenſion of air upon colliſion,
but inflammable effuencies from the bodies collided. Brown.
Colli ER. n.ſ. (from coal.] -
1. A digger of coals; one that works in the coal pits.
2. A coal-merchant; a dealer in coals.
I knew a nobleman a great grafier, a great timberman, a
great collier, and a great landman. Bacon, Eſſay 35.
3. A ſhip that carries coals.
Co'LLIERY. m. ſ. [from collier.]
1. The place where coals are dug.
2. The coal trade.
Co'LLIF Lowe R. m. ſ. [from cap!, Sax. cabbage, and fower.]
See CAULIFlow ER and CA BºA.G.E.
CoLLIGATIon. m. ſ. [coligatio, Lat..] A binding together.
Theſe the midwife contriveth into a knot, whence that
tortuoſity or nodoſity, the navel, occaſioned by the calligation
of veſſels. Brown's ſugar Frrours, b. v. e. 5.
ColliMA'tion. m. ſ. [from collinº, Lat..] The act of aiming
at a mark; aim. Dict.
Collis FA'tion. n.ſ. ſcallineo, Lat.] The act of aiming.
Co'll QUABLE. adj. [from colliquate.] Eaſily diſſolved; liable
to be melted.
The tender conſiſtence renders it the more coliquable and
conſumptive. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Col.1.1'QUAMENT. m. ſ. [from collºquate.] The ſubſtance to
which any thing is reduced by being melted.
Co LLIQUANT. adj. [from colliquate.] That which has the
power of melting or diſtolving.
To COLLIQUATE. v. a. [colliqueo, Latin.] To melt; to
diſſolve ; to turn from ſolid to fluid.
The fire melted the glaſs, that made a great ſhew, aſter
what was colliquated had been removed from the fire. Boyle.
The fat of the kidneys is apt to be colliquated through a
great heat from within, and an ardent colliquative fever.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
Colliot A'tion. m. ſ. ſcolliquatio, Latin.]
The melting of any thing whatſoever by heat, more parti-
cularly ſuch a temperiment or diſpoſition of the animal fluids
as proceeds from a lax compages, and wherein they flow off
through the ſecretory glands, and particularly through thoſe of
the ſkin, faſter than they ought; which occaſions fluxes of
many kinds, but moſtly profuſe, greaſy, clammy ſweats. Quincy.
From them proceed arefaction, colliquation, concoction, ma-
turation, and moſt effects of nature Hacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Any kind of univerſal diminution and colliquation of the
body. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Colli'QUative adj. [from colliquate.] Melting; diſſolvent.
A colºuative fever is ſuch as is attended with a diarrhaea,
or profuſe ſweats, from too lax a contexture of the fluids.
&amp;uincy.
It is a conſequent of a burning colliquative ſever, whereby
the humours, greaſe, fat, and fleſh of the body are melted.
- - Harvey on Conſumptions.
Coº LºgFFA'ction. n.ſ. [colºurfacio, Latin.] The act of
ºis together ; reduction to one maſs by fluxion in the
re.
After the incorporation of metals by fimple colliquºfaşion,
for the better diſcovering of the nature, and conſents and diſ.
ſents of metals, it would be tried by incorporating of their
diſlolutions. Bacon's Phyſical Remarks.
Col. 1's Ios. m. ſ. [from colliſi, Latin.] -
1. The act of ſtriking two bodies together.
Or by colliſion of two bodies grind,
The air attrite to fire. Milton's Paradºſ. Lºft, b. x. l. 1072.
The devil ſometimes borrowed fire from the altar to Cón.
fame the votaries; and by the mutual colliſion of well-meant
zeal, ſet even orthodox Chriſtians in a flame. De of Piety.
The flint and the ſteel you may move apart as long as you
pleaſe 3. but it. is the hitting and colliſion of them that muſt
make them ſtrike fire. Bently's Sermons.
2. I he ſtate of being ſtruck together; a claſh.
I hen from the claſhes between popes and kings,
To dº, ºº from ñº. colliſion, ſpring. Denham.
ſtation." v. a. ſºlº, Latin.] To place; to
- a"º", º any virtue upon a perſon, take
Creature take º ich that virtue is moſt eminent: of that
Parts wherein that virtue chiefly is collocate.
º f - Ta ar’s Natural Hiſtºry.
Coluog Arios. ºf [cºlºcatiº, Latin.] ſtory
1. The aët of placing; diſpoſition.
2. The ſtate of being placed.
In the colºcation of the ſpirits in bodies, the cºllocation is
equal or uncºlual ; and the ſpirits are coacervate or diffuſed.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 846.
CoLLocu'TION. m. ſ. [callocatio, Latin.j Conference; conver-
ſation. -
To Col. Lo'ou E. v. n. [probably from collºquor, Latin.] To
wheedle; to flatter; to pleaſe with kind word. A low
word.
Co'Lºop, n.ſ. . [It is derived by Aſºſºv from coal and ot, a
raſher broiled upon the coals; a carbonade. J
1. A ſmall ſlice of meat.
Sweetbread and colºps were with ſkewers prick'd
About the ſides. Dryd. Fºller,
A cook perhaps has mighty things profeſs'd; l
Then ſent up but two diſhes nicely dreſt:
What ſignifies Scotch cºlºps to a feaſt King's Cºry. §
2. A piece of any animal.
The lion is upon his death-bed: not an enemy that does
not apply for a cºlºp of him. Lºrange, ſale i4. Rººt.
3. In burleſque language, a child.
Come, fir page,
Look on me with your we!kin cye, ſweet villain,
Moſt dear ft, my coloſ. Shakeſpeare's J/ inter's Taz.
Thou art a cºlºp of my fleſh,
And for thy ſake I have ſhed many a tear. Shakesp Hºn VI.
Colloquy, n.f. [colloquium, Latin.] Conference; converſa-
tion ; alternate diſcourſe; talk.
My earthly by his heav'nly over-power'd,
In that celeſtial colloquy ſublime,
As with an object that excels the ſenſe,
Dazzled, and ſpent, ſunk down. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft.
In retirement make frequent colloquies, or ſhort diſcourſing,
between God and thy own ſoul. Taylor.
Collow. n.ſ [Moré properly cally, from coal.]
Colow is the word by which they denote black grime of
burnt coals, or wood. //oodward on Foſſils.
CoLLU'cTANcy. n: / [colluđor, Lat.] A tendency to conteſt;
oppoſition of nature.
Collucta'rios. m. ſ. [colučiatio, Lat J Conteſt; ſtruggle;
contrariety; oppoſition; ſpite. - -
The thermae, natural baths, or hot ſprings, do not owe
their heat to any collutation or efferveſcence of the mi-
nerals in them. //oodward's Natural Hiſory.
To COLLU'DE. v. n. [calludo, Lat.] To conſpire in a fraud;
to act in concert; to play into the hand of each other.
Collu's Ion. n. ſ. [colluſio, Latin.]
Colluſion is, in our common law, a deceitful agreement or
compact betwcen two or more, for the one part to bring an
action againſt the other to ſome evil purpoſe; as to defraud a
third of his right. Coweſ.
By the ignorance of the merchants, or diſhoneſty of wea-
vers, or the colluſion of both, the ware was bad, and the price
exceſſive. Swift.
Collu'sive. adj. [from colude..] Fraudulently concerted.
See Co LLUSION.
Collu's v El Y. adv. [from colluſive ) In a manner fraudulently
concerted.
Col. Lu'sor Y. adj. [from colludo, Lat..] Carrying on a fraud
by ſecret concert.
Co LLY. m. ſ. [from coal.] The ſmut of coal.
Suppoſe thou ſaw her dreſſed in ſome old hirſute attire, out
of faſhion, coarſe raincut, beſmeared with foot, colly, per-
fumed with opopanax. B ſton on Melancholy.
To Co'LLY. v. a. To grime with coal; to ſmut with coal.
Brief as the lightning in the cºllied night, -
That, in a ſpecn, unfolds both heav'n and earth;
And, ere a man hath pow'r to ſay behold,
The jaws of darkneſs do devour it up. Shakespearerare.
COLLYRIUM. m. ſ. [Latin.] An ointment for the eyes.
CO'L11/R. m. ſ. [Fr.] A fort of PEAR, which ſee.
Cologs Earth. n.ſ. Is a deep brown, very light ballardochre,
which, though generally citecmed an earth, is no pure native
foſſii; but contains more vegetable than mineral matter, and
owes its origin to the remains of wood long buried in the
earth. It is dug in France and Germany, particularly about
Cologn, nor is England without it. 1. ill on Foſſi's.
Co LoN. m. ſ [zºo...]
1. A point [:] uſed to mark a pauſe greater than that of a com-
ma, and icſ, than that of a period. Its uſe is not very exactly
fixed, nor is it very neceſſary, being confounded by moſt
with the ſemicolon. It was uſed before punétuation was
refined, to mark almoſt any ſenſe leſs than a period. To P.
ply it properly, we ſhould place it, perhaps, only where the
fenſe is continued without dependence of grammar or cº-
ſtruction; as, I love him, 1 deſpiſe º : I have lºng crºſºd tº
truſt, but ſhall never fºrbear to ſuccour hiºn. -
2. #. º and * * the inteſtines, about eight
or nine hands breadth long. It begins where the ilium ends,
in the cavity of the os ilium on the right ſide ; from thence
aſcending by the kidney, on the ſame fide, it paſſes under the
- 2 COſiCave
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 66</div><p class="Text">C O L
roncave ſide of the liver, to which it is ſometimes tied, as
likewiſe to the gall-bladder, which tinges it yellow in that
place: then it runs under the bottom of the ſtomach to the
ſpleen in the left ſide, to which it is alſo knit : from thence it
turns down to the left kidney; and thence paſſing, in form of
an S, it terminates at the upper part of the os ſacrum, in the
rectum. &amp;#inty.
Now, by your cruelty hard bound,
I ſtrain my guts, my colon wound. - Swift.
The contents of the colon are of a ſower, fetid, acid ſmell in
rabbits. Floyer on the Humours.
COLONEL m. ſ. [Of uncertain etymology. Skinner ima-
gines it originally colonialis, the leader of a colony. Minſhew
deduces it from colonna, a pillar; as patriae cºlumen; exercitus
columen. Each is plauſible.] The chief commander of a
regiment; a field officer of the higheſt rank, next to the ge-
neral officers. It is now generally ſounded with only two
diſtinét ſyllables, colºnel. -
The chiefeſt help muſt be the care of the colonel, that hath
the government of all his garriſon. Spenſer on Ireland.
-* Captain or colone', or knight in arms,
Whoſe chance on theſe defenceleſs doors may ſeize,
If deed of honour did thee ever pleaſe,
- Guard them, and him within protećt from harms. Milton.
Co'LoNE1's HIP. n.ſ.. [from colonel.] The office or character of
colonel
While he continued a ſubaltern, he complained againſt the
pride of colonels towards their officers; yet, in a few minutes
after he had received his commiſſion for a regiment, he con-
feſſed that colone/hip was coming faſt upon him. Swift.
To Co'LoNIs E. v. a, [from colony.] To plant with inhabi-
tants; to ſettle with new planters; to plant with colonies.
There was never an hand drawn, that did double the reſt
of the habitable world, before this; for ſo a man may truly
term it, if he ſhall put to account as well that that is, as that
which may be hereafter, by the farther occupation and colo-
nizing of thoſe countries: and yet it cannot be affirmed, if
one ſpeak ingenuouſly, that it was the propagation of the
Chriſtian faith that was the adamant of that diſcovery,
entry, and plantation; but gold and ſilver, and temporal pro-
fit and glory; ſo that what was firſt in God's providence, was
but ſecond in man's appetite and intention. Bacon's Holy Iſar.
Druina hath advantage by acqueſt of iſlands, which ſhe
colonizeth and fortifieth daily. Howel's Vocal Forg/?.
CoLoRNA'DE. n.f [from colonna, Ital. a column.]
1. A periſtyle of a circular figure, or a ſeries of columns, diſ-
poſed in a circle, and inſulated within ſide. Builder's Dić.
Here circling colonnades the ground incloſe, - .
And here the marble ſtatues breathe in rows. Addiſ on Italy.
2. Any ſeries or range of pillars.
For you my colonnades extend their wings. Pope.
COLONY. n.ſ. [colonia, Latin J
1. A body of people drawn from the mother-country to inhabit
ſome diſtant place.
To theſe new inhabitants and colonies he gave the ſame law
under which they were born and bred. Spenſer on Ireland.
Rooting out theſe two rebellious ſepts, he placed Engliſh
colonies in their rooms. Davies on Ireland.
Oſiris, or the Bacchus of the ancients, is reported to have
civilized the Indians, planting colonies and building cities.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. The country planted; a plantation.
The riſing city, which from far you ſee,
Is Carthage; and a Trojan colony. Dryd. Virg. Æn.
Co'LoPHoNY. m. ſ. [from Colophon, a city whence it came.]
Roſin.
Of Venetian turpentine, ſlowly evaporating about a fourth
or fifth part, the remaining ſubſtance ſuffered to cool,
would afford me a coherent body, or a fine colophony. Boyle.
Turpentines and oils leave a colophony, upon the ſeparation
of their thinner oil. Floyer on the Humours.
“Coloqui'N TED A. m. ſ. [colocynthis, Lat. xxxvºrs J The fruit
of a plant of the ſame name, brought from the Levant, about
the bigneſs of a large orange, and often called bitter apple.
Its colour is a ſort of golden brown: its inſide is full of ker- .
nels, which are to be taken out before it be uſed. Both the
feed and pulp are intolerably bitter. It is a violent purgative,
of conſiderable uſe in medicine. Chambers.
*--&gt; Lorate. adj. [coloratus, Latin.] Coloured; died; marked
or ſtained with ſome colour.
Had the tunicles and humours of the eye been colorate, many
rays proceeding from viſible objećts would have been ſtopt.
C Ray on the Creation.
*&gt; 1 or A'tion. m. ſ. [coloro, Latin.]
+ - The art or practice of colouring.
- The ſtate of being coloured.
Amongſt curioſities 1 ſhall place coloration, though it be
+omewhat better; for beauty in flowers is their preheminence.
G- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 50.
$ 1- or 1'Fick. adj. [colorificus, Latin.] That which has the
*Sowcr of producing dies, tints, colours, or hues.
In this compoſition of white, the ſeveral rays do not ſuffer
ol. I. - -
C O Í,
any change in their colorifik qualities by acting upon one
another ; but are only mixed, and by a mixture of their co-
lours produce white. - Newton's Of t.
COLO'SSE. R. n.ſ.. [colºſſºs, Latin.] A ſtatue of enormous
COLO'SSUS. magnitude. , - - -
Not to mention the walls and palace of Babylon, the pyra-
mids of Egypt, or colºſſ of Rhodes. Teºple.
There huge colºſſus roſe, with trophics crown'd,
And runick characters were grav'd around. Pope.
Colosse’AN. adj. [coloff us, Lat. J . In form of a coloſſus; of
the height and bigneſs of ſuch a ſtatue; giantlike.
COLOUR. n.ſ.. [color, Latin.]
1. The appearance of bodies to the eye only; hue ; die.
It is a vulgar idea of the colours of ſolid bodies, when we
perceive them to be a red, or blue, or green tinéture of the
ſurface; but a philoſophical idea, when we conſider the various
colºurs to be different ſenſations, excited in us by the refracted
rays of light, reflected on our eyes in a different manner, ac-
cording to the different ſize, or ſhape, or ſituation of the par-
ticles of which the ſurfaces of thoſe bodies are compoſed.
Hatts's Logick.
Her hair ſhall be of what colour it pleaſe God. Shakeſp.
For though our eyes can nought but colours ſee, .
Yet colours give them not their pow'r of ſight. Daviri.
The lights of colours are more refrangible one than an-
other in this order; red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo,
deep violet. Newton's Opt. Exp. 7.
2. The freſhneſs; or appearance of blood in the face.
My cheeks no longer did their colour boaſt.
A ſudden horror ſeiz'd his giddy head,
And his ears trickled, and his colºur fled.
3. The tint of the painter. -
When each bold figure juſt begins to live,
The treach'rous colours the fair art betray, -
And all the bright creation fades away. Pºpe's Eff Crit.
4. The repreſentation of any thing ſuperficially examined.
, Whoſe wiſdom is only of this world, to put falſe colourt
upon things, to call good evil, and evil good, againſt the
convićtion of their own conſciences. Swift.
5. Concealment; palliation; excuſe; ſuperficial cover.
It is no matter if I do halt; I have the wars for my colour,
and my penſion ſhall ſeem the more reaſonable. Shakesp. Hen. IV.
Their ſin admitted no colour or excuſe. King Charles-
6. Appearance; pretence; falſe ſhew.
Under the colour of commending him, - -
I have acceſs my own love to prefer. Shakeſpeare.
Merchants came to Rhodes with a great ſhip laded with
corn, under the colour of the ſale whereof they noted all that
was done in the city. Knollei's Hiſtory of the Turks.
7. Kind; ſpecies; chara&amp;ter. - e
Boys and women are, for the moſt part, cattle of this
colour. - Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
8. In the plural, a ſtandard; an enſign of war: they ſay the
colours of the foot, and ſtandard of horſe.
He at Venice gave
His body to that pleaſant country's earth, -
And his pure ſoul unto his captain Chriſt, - -
Under whoſe colours he had fought ſo long, Shakespeare Rich. II:
Againſt all checks, rebukes, and manners,
I muſt advance the colours of my love,
And not retire. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of JP'indſºr.
The banks on both ſides were filled with companies, paſſing
all along the river under their colours, with trumpets ſounding.
Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
An author compares a ragged coin to a tattered colours. Addison
To Co'Lour. v. a. [coloro, Latin.]
1. To mark with ſome hue, or die. -
The rays, to ſpeak properly, are not coloured; in them there
is nothing elſe than a certain power and diſpoſition to ſtir up
a ſenſation of this or that colour. Newton's Opt.
2. To palliate; to excuſe; to dreſs in ſpecious colours, or fair
appearances. -
I told him, that I would not favour or colour in any ſort his
former folly. Raleigh's Eſſayt.
He colours the falſhood of Æneas by an expreſs command
from Jupiter to forſake the queen. Dryden's Dedic. Mºn.
3. To make plauſible.
We have ſcarce heard of an inſurrečtion that was not co-
loured with grievances of the higheſt kind, or countenanced
by one or more branches of the legiſlature. Addison Freeholder.
4. % Colour a ſiranger's good, is when a freeman allows a
foreigner to enter goods at the cuſtomhouſe in his name; ſo
that the foreigner pays but ſingle duty, when he ought to pay
- double. - Phill ps.
To Co'Lou R. v. n. To bluſh. A low word, only uſed in
converſation.
Colour ABLE. adj. [from colour J Specious; plauſible. He is
now little uſed.
They have now a colºurable pretence to withſtand innova-
tions, having accepted of other laws and rules already. Spenſer.
They were glad to lay hold on ſo colourable a matter, and to
traduce him as an author of ſuſpicious innovation. Hoºker.
4 Y Ki-4
Dryden.
Dryden.
gl
-
º
º
º
s º
|
* ,
!
: .
|
!
i
º
* . !
|
;
º º
*
* -
*
-
º
º º
• * ,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 67</div><p class="Text">\
:
!-g .-
-
º
To Colt. v. a.
- Had I ſacrificed eccleſiaſtical government and revenues to
their covetouſneſs and ambition, they would have found no
colourable neceſſity of an army. K. Charles.
We hope the mercy of God will conſider us unto ſome
mineration of our offences; yet had not the fincerity of our
parents ſo colourable expectations. Brown's Pugar Errours.
Co/Lou RABLY. adv. [from colourable.] Spcciouſly; plauſibly.
The proceſs, howſoever colourably awarded, hath not hit
the very mark whereat it was directed. Bacon.
Co'Lou RED. participial adj. [from colour.] Streaked; diver-
ſified with variety of hues.
The coloured are coarſer juiced, and therefore not ſo well,
and equally concocted. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
* Colour ING... n.ſ. [from colºur ) The part of the painter's
art that teaches to lay on his colours with propriety and beauty.
From lines drawn true, our eye may trace
A foot, a knce, a hand, a face;
Yet if the colouring be not there,
At beſt 'twill only not diſpleaſe. Prior.
Co'Lou R1st. m. ſ. [from colour.] A painter who excels in
giving the proper colours to his deſigns.
Titian, Paul Veroneſe, Van Dyck, and the reſt of the
good colºuriſ’s, have come neareſt to nature. Dryd. Dufreſnoy.
Co'Lou R1. Ess. adj. [from colour.] Without colour; not diſtin-
guiſhed by any hue; tranſparent.
Tranſparent ſubſtances, as glaſs, water and air, when made
very thin by being blown into bubbles, or otherways formed
into plates, exhibit various colours, according to their various
thinneſs; although, at a greater thickneſs, they appear very
clear and colourleſs. Newton's Opt.
Pellucid colourleſ; glaſs or water, by being beaten into a
powder or froth, do acquire a very intenſe whiteneſs. Bentley.
COLT. n.ſ. ſcolt, Saxon.]
1. A young horſe: uſed commonly for the male offspring of a
horſe, as fºal for the female. -
The cºlt hath about four years of growth, and ſo the fawn,
and ſo the calf. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 759.
Like colts or unmanaged horſes, we ſtart at dead bones and
lifeleſs blocks. Taylor's Holy Living.
No ſports, but what belong to war, they know ;
To break the ſtubborn colt, to bend the bow. Dryd. Æn.
2. *...* fooliſh fellow. -
y, that's a colt, indeed; for he doth nothing but talk of
his horſe. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
- To Colt. v. n. [from the noun..] To friſk; to be licentious;
to run at large without rule; to riot; to frolick.
As ſoon as they were out of fight by themſelves, they ſhook
off their bridles, and began to colt anew more licentiouſly
than before. Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
Shakesp. Hen. IV.
To befool.
What a plague mean ye, to coſt me thus?
Colts-foot. n.ſ.. [from colt and fºot.]
It hath a radiated flower, whoſe diſk conſiſts of many florets,
but the crown compoſed of many half florets: the embryoes
are included in a multifid flowercup, which turns to downy
ſecds fixed in a bed. The ſpecies are, 1. Common colts-
foot. 2. Round leaved ſmooth colts-foot of the Alps. The
firſt common in watery places in England; the ſecond grows
wild upon the Alps: the flowers of this are purple, and thoſe
of the common ſort yellow. Miller.
Colts-tooth. m. ſ. [from colt and tooth.]
1. An imperfect or ſuperfluous tooth in young horſes.
2. A º of youthful pleaſure; a diſpoſition to the practices of
youth. -
Well ſaid, lord Sands;
Your colts-tooth is not caſt yet?—
—No, my lord; nor ſhall not, while I have a ſlump. Shakxx.
Co'LT FR. m. ſ. ſculcon, Sax. culter, Lat.] The ſharp iron of
'a plough that cuts the ground perpendicularly to the ſhare.
Co'LTISH. adj. [from colt..] Having the tricks of a colt ;
Wanton.
Co'LUBRINE. adj. [colubrinus, Latin.]
1. Relating to a ſerpent.
2. Cunning; crafty.
Co'LUM BARY. n.ſ. [columbarium, Lat..] A dovecot; a pigeon-
houſe.
The earth of columbaries or dovehouſes, is much deſired in
the artifice of ſaltpetre. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 3.
Co'LUMBINE. m. ſ. [columbina, Latin.]
A plant with leaves like the meadow rue. the flowers are
pendulous, and of an anomalous figure: the piſtil of the
flower becomes a membranaceous fruit, conſiſting of many
pods, each containing many ſhining black ſeeds. Millar.
Columbines are of ſeveral ſorts and colours. They flower
in the end of May, when few other flowers ſhew themſelves.
Martimer’s Huſlandry.
Colt MBINE. m. ſ. [columbinus, Lat.] A kind of violet colour,
or changcable dove colour. Dićf.
COLUMN. m. ſ. [columna, Latin.]
1. A round pillar.
Some of the old Greek columni, and altars were brought
from the ruins of Apollo’s temple at Delos Peacha’n.
Ü O Mſ.
Round broken cºlumns claſping ivy twin'd. Pºe.
2. Any body of certain dimenſions preſſing vertically upon its
baſe.
The whole weight of any column of the atmoſphere, and
likewiſe the ſpecifick gravity of its baſes, are certainly known
by many experiments. Bentley's Sermºns.
3. [In the military art.] The long file or row of troops, or of
baggage, of an army in its march. An army marches in one,
. three, or more columns, according as the ground will
all OW.
4. [With printers..] A column is half a page, when divided
into two equal parts by a line paſſing through the middle,
from the top to the bottom; and, by ſeveral parallel lines,
pages are often divided into three or more columns.
Colu'MNAR.
Colum NA'RIAN.
White columnar ſpar, out of a ſtone-pit.
Colu'REs. m. ſ. [coluri, Latin ; xxvs...]
Two great circles ſuppoſed to paſs through the poles of the
world : one through the equinoctial points Aries and Libra;
the other through the ſolſtitial points, Cancer and Capricorn.
They are called the equinoëtial and ſolſtitial colure, and divide
the ecliptick into four equal parts. The points where they
interfect the ecliptick are called the cardinal points. Harris.
Thrice the equinoëtial line
He circled; four times croſs'd the car of night
From pole to pole, traverfing each colure. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Co'Lwox T. n.ſ. See Cole wort.
CQMA. m. ſ. […a J A morbid diſpoſition to ſleep; a
lethargy.
CoMA'RT. n.ſ.
}a}. [from coluxºn.] Formed in columns.
J/oodw, on Fºſſils.
By the ſame comart,
And carriage of the articles deſign'd,
His fell to Hamlet. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
CoMA'TE. n.ſ.. [con and mate.] Companion.
My comates and brothers in exile. Shakeſp. As you like it.
cºlor. adj. [from coma.] Lethargick; ſleepy to a diſ-
calc.
Our beſt caſtor is from Ruffa; the great and principal
uſe whereof, inwardly, is in hyſterical and comatoſe caſes.
Grew's Muſeum.
COMB in the end, and CoMP in the beginning of names, ſeem
to be derived from the Britiſh kum, which ſignifics a low
ſituation. Gibſon's Camden.
CoMB, in Corniſh, ſignifies a valley, and had the ſame mean-
ing anciently in the French tongue.
COMB. n.ſ.. [camb, Saxon; kam, Dutch.]
1. An inſtrument to ſeparate and adjuſt the hair.
By fair Ligea's golden comb,
Wherewith ſhe ſits on diamond rocks,
Sleeking her ſoft alluring locks. Milton.
I made an inſtrument in faſhion of a comb, whoſe teeth,
being in number ſixteen, were about an inch and a half broad,
and the intervals of the teeth about two inches wide. Newton.
2. The top or creſt of a cock, ſo called from its pectinated in-
dentures.
Cocks have great combs and ſpurs, hens little or none. Bacon.
High was his comb, and coral-red withal,
With dents embattl’d, like a caſtle-wall. Dryden.
3. The cantons in which the bees lodge their honey. Perhaps
from the ſame word which makes the termination of towns,
and ſignifies hollºw or deep.
This in affairs of ſtate,
Employ'd at home, abides within the gate,
To fortify the combs, to build the wall,
To prop the ruins, left the fabrick fall.
To CoM B. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To divide, and clean, and adjuſt the hair with a comb.
Her care ſhall be
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd ſtool. Shakeſpeare.
Divers with us, that are grown grey, and yet would appear
young, find means to make their hair black, by combing it,
as they ſay, with a leaden comb, or the like. Bacon's Nat. Hi/.
She with ribbons tied
His tender neck, and comb'd his ſilken hide. Dryden's AFn.
There was a ſort of engine, from which were extended
twenty long poles, wherewith the man-mountain cºmbs his
head. Swift.
2. To lay any thing conſiſting of filaments ſmooth, by draw-
ing through narrow interſtices; as, to cºmb wool.
CoM B-BRUSH. n.ſ.. [comb and bruſh.] A bruſh to clean combs.
CoMB-MAKER, m ſ. [comb and maker.] One whoſe trade is to
make combs. -
This wood is of uſe for the turner, engraver, carver, and
combmaker. Mortimer's Husbandºy.
To COMBAT. v. m. ſcombattre, Fr.] To fight; generally
in a duel, or hand to hand.
Dryd. Virg. Georg.
Pardon me, I will not combat in my ſhirt. Shakespeare care.
To Co'MB AT. v. a. To oppoſe; to fight.
Love yields at laſt, thus combated by pride,
And ſhe ſubmits to be the Roman's bride. Granville.
Co'MBAT, n. J. [from the verb.] Conteſt; battle; duel;
I - ſtrife;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 68</div><p class="Text">C O M
ſtrife; oppoſition generally between two; but ſometimes it is
uſed for battle. - -
Thoſe regions were full both of cruel monſters and mon-
ſtrous men; all which, by private combats, they delivered the
countries of Sidney, b. ii.
But, ch, the noble combat that, 'twixt joy and ſorrow, was
fought in Paulina | She had one eye declined for the loſs of
her huſband, another elevated that the oracle was fulfilled.
Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
The combat now by courage muſt be try’d. Dryden.
Co'M BAT ANT. n.f [cºmbattant, French.]
1. He that fights with another; duelliſt; antagoniſt in arms.
So frown'd the mighty combatants, that hell
Grew darker at their frown. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
Who, ſingle combatant,
Duel'd their armies rank'd in proud array,
Himſelf an army. Milton's Agoniſtes, l. 344:
He with his ſword unſheath'd, on pain of life,
Commands both combatants to ceaſe their ſtrife. Dryden.
Like deſpairing combatants they ſtrive againſt you, as if they
had beheld unveiled the magical ſhield of Arioſto, which daz-
zled the beholders with too much brightneſs. Dryden.
2. A champion,
When any of thoſe combatants ſtrips his terms of ambi-
guity, I ſhall think him a champion for knowledge. Locke.
3. With for before the thing defended.
Men become combatants for thoſe opinions. Locke.
Co'MBER. m. ſ. [from comb ] He whoſe trade it is to diſen-
tangle wool, and lay it ſmooth for the ſpinner.
Co'MBINATE. adj. [from combine.] Bethrothed; promiſed;
ſettled by compačt. A word of Shakeſpeare. -
She loſt a noble brother; with him the ſinew of her for-
tune, her marriage dowry; with both, her combinate huſband,
this well ſeeming Angelo. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
CoMBINATION. n.ſ.. [from combine.]
1. Union for ſome certain purpoſe; aſſociation; league. A
combination is of private perſons, a confederacy of ſtates or
ſovereigns.
This cunning cardinal
The articles o' th' combination drew,
As himſelf pleas'd. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
2. It is now generally uſed in an ill ſenſe; but was formerly in-
different. -
They aim to ſubdue all to their own will and power, un-
der the diſguiſes of holy combinations. K. Charles.
3. Union of bodies, or qualities; commixture; conjunction.
- Theſe natures, from the moment of their firſt combination,
have been and are for ever inſeparable. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 52.
Reſolution of compound bodies by fire, does not ſo much
enrich mankind as it divides the bodies; as upon the ſcore of
its making new compounds by new combinations. Boyle.
Ingratitude is always in combination with pride and hard-
heartedneſs. South's Sermons:
4. Copulation of ideas in the mind.
They never ſuffer any ideas to be joined in their under-
ſtandings, in any other or ſtronger combination than what their
own nature and correſpondence give them. Locke.
5. CoMBINATION is uſed in mathematicks, to denote the va-
riation or alteration of any number of quantities, letters,
ſounds, or the like, in all the different manners poſſible.
Thus the number of poſſible changes or combinations of the
twenty-four letters of the alphabet, taken firſt two by two,
then three by three, &amp;c. amount to 1,391,724,288,887,252,
999,425, 128,493,462,200. Chambers,
To COMBINE. v. a. [combiner, Fr. binos jungere.]
1. To join together.
Let us not then ſuſpect our happy ſtate,
As not ſecure to ſingle or combin'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
2. To link in union.
God, the beſt maker of all marriages,
Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one. Shakespeare H. W.
3. To agree; to accord; to ſettle by compačt.
My heart's dear love is ſet on his fair daughter;
As mine on her’s, ſo her’s is ſet on mine,
And all combin'd, ſave what thou muſt combine
By holy marriage. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
4. To join words or ideas together; oppoſed to analyſe.
To CoMBI'N E. v. m.
1. To coaleſce; to unite each with other. Uſed both of things
and perſons.
Honour and policy, like unſever'd friends
I' th' war, do grow together: grant that, and tell me
In peace what each of them by th’ other loſes,
That they combine not there Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. To unite in friendſhip or deſign.
Cºmbine together gainſt the enemy;
For theſe domeſtick and particular broils
Are not the queſtion here. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
You with your foes combine,
And ſeem your own deſtruction to deſign. Dryd. Aarºngz.
Co'MBLESS. adj. [from comb.J Wanting a comb or creſt.
What, is your creſt a coxcomb —
C O M
-A cºmbieſ, cock, ſo Kate will be my hen. Sha'eſpeare.
COMBU'ST. adj. [from cumburo, cumlºſium, Latin.]
When a planet is not above eight degrees and a half diſtant
from the ſun, either before or after him, it is ſaid to be cam-
buff, or in combuſtion. Harris,
CoMº'stible. Adj. [comburo combuffum, Lat.] Having the
quality of catching fire; ſuſceptible of fire.
harcoals, made out of the wood of oxycedar, are white,
becauſe their vapours are rather ſulphurous than of any other
combuſtible ſubſtance. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 12.
Sin is to the ſoul like fire to combuſtible matter, it aſſimilates
before it deſtroys it. South's Sermons.
They are but ſtrewed over with a little penitential aſhes;
and will, as ſoon as they meet with combuſtible matter, flame
Out. D.cay of Piety.
The flame ſhall ſtill remain;
Nor, 'till the fucl periſh, can decay,
By nature form'd on things combuffible to prey. Dryden.
cºvernºrsº. n.J. [from combuſtible.]. Aptneſs to take
ſe.
CoMBu'stion. n.ſ. [French.]
1. Conflagration; burning; conſumption by fire.
The future combuſtion of the earth is to be uſhered in and
accompanied with all ſorts of violent impreſſions upon nature.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. Tumult; hurry; hubbub; buſtle; hurly burly.
Mutual combuſtions, bloodſheds, and waſtes may enforce
them, through very faintneſs, after the experience of ſo end-
leſs miſeries. Hooker, b. iv. ſect. 14.
Prophecying, with accents terrible,
Of dire combuſtion, and confus'd events,
New-hatch'd to th' woeful time. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Thoſe long and cruel wars between the houſes of York and
Lancaſter, brought all England into an horrible combuſtiºn.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
How much more of pow'r,
Army againſt army, numberleſs, to raiſe
Dreadful combuſtion warring, and diſturb,
Though not deſtroy, their happy native ſeat Mih. Pa. Lºft,
But ſay, from whence this new combuſtion ſprings? Dryd.
It moves in an inconceiveable fury and combuſtion, and at
the ſame time with an exact regularity. Addison's Guardian.
To COME. v. n. pret. came, particip. come. [coman, Saxon 3
Åomen, Dut. Rommen, German.]
1. To remove from a diſtant to a nearer place; to arrive. Op-
poſe to go.
And troubled blood through his pale face was ſeen
To come and go, with tidings from the heart. Fairy Queen.
Caeſar will come forth to-day. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
Iſpake unto the crown as having ſenſe. Shakespeare, Hen. IV.
The colour of the king doth come and go,
Between his purpoſe and his conſcience. Shakeſp. K. john.
The Chriſtians having ſtood almoſt all the day in order of
battle, in the ſight of the enemy, vainly expecting when he
ſhould come forth to give them battle, returned at night into
their camp. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
'Tis true that ſince the ſenate's ſuccour game, .
They grow more bold. Dryden's Tyrannick Love,
This Chriſtian woman
Ah! there the miſchief comes. Rowe's Royal Convert.
2. To draw near ; to advance towards.
By the pricking of my thumbs, -
Something wicked this way comes. Shaieff. Marietº.
3. To move in any manner towards another; implying the idea
of being received by another, or of tending towards another.
The word always reſpects the place to which the motion
tends, not that place which it leaves; yet this meaning is
ſometimes almoſt evaneſcent and imperceptible.
I did hear
The galloping of horſe: who was’t came by ? Shakesp. Macbeth.
Bid them cover the table, ſerve in the meat, and wº will
come in to dinner. Shakeſp. Merchant ºf Wenice,
As ſoon as the commandment came abroad, the children of
Iſrael brought in abundance the firſt fruits, 2 Chrºn X*.5.
Knowledge is a thing of their own invention ºf which
they come to by fair reaſoning. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
t is impoſſible to come near your lordſhip at any º:
without receiving ſome favour. Cºngr. Dedic, tº Old Batchelor.
None may come in view, but ſuch as are pertinent. ſº
No perception of bodies, at a diſtance, may be sº
for by the motion of particles coming from them, and *;
on our organs. - - - | jº
They take the colour of what is laid before them, and as
ſoon loſe and reſign it to the next that happens to come in their
"...a has made the intellectual world harmonious and bºau-
tiful without us; but it will never come into our heads i.
6. Kt.
Once.
. To proceed; to iſſue.
4. #. my ſon, which came forth of my bowels, ſeeketh
- 2 Sa. xvi. 1 i.
my life. I came
- -
Locke. ,
4---
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 69</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
|º
I came forth from the father, and am come into the world.
jo. xvi. 28.
5. To advance from one ſtage or condition to another.
Truſt me, I am excecding weary.
—Is it come to that I had thought wearineſs durſt not have
attacked one of ſo high blood Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Though he would after have turned his teeth upon Spain,
yet he was taken order with before it came to that. Bacon.
Seditious tumults, and ſeditious fames, differ no more but
as brother and fiſter; eſpecially if it come to that, that the
beſt actions of a ſtate are taken in ill ſenſe, and traduced.
Bacon, Eſſay 16.
His ſoldiers had daily divers ſkirmiſhes with the Numidians,
ſo that once the ſkirmiſh was like to come to a juſt battle.
Knºller's Hiſtory of the Turks.
When it came to that once, they that had moſt fleſh wiſhed
they had had leſs. L'Eſtrange.
Every new ſprung paſſion is a part of the aëtion, except we
conceive nothing to be action 'till the players come to blows.
Dryden on Dramatick Poetry.
The force whereby bodies cohere is very much greater
when they come to immediate contact, than when they are at
ever ſo ſmall a finite diſtance. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
6. To change condition either for better or worſe.
One ſaid to Ariſtippus, "Tis a ſtrange thing why men ſhould
rather give to the poor than to philoſophers. He anſwered,
becauſe they think themſelves may ſooner come to be poor
than to be philoſophers. Bacon's Apophthegms.
His ſons come to honour, and he knoweth it not job xiv. 21.
He being come to the eſtate, keeps on a very buſy family.
Locke.
You were told your maſter had gone to a tavern, and come
to ſome miſchance. Swift.
7. To attain any condition or character.
A ſcrpcnt, c'er he comes to be a dragon,
Does cat a bat. Benj. johnſºn's Catiline.
How came the publican juſtiſcil, but by a ſhort and humble
prayer Duppa's Rules for Devotion.
He wonder'd how ſhe came to know
What he had done, and meant to do. Hudibras, p. iii. c. 1.
The teſtimony of conſcience, thus informed, comes to be
ſº authentick, and ſo much to be relied upon. South's Sermons.
8. To become.
So came I a widow;
And never ſhall have length of life enough
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
When he returns from hunting,
I will not ſpeak with him; ſay I am ſick.
If you come ſlack of former ſervices,
You ſhall do well. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
9. To arrive at ſome ačt or habit, or diſpoſition. -
+ They would quickly come to have a natural abhorrence for
that which they found made them ſlighted. Locke.
Io. To change from one ſtate into another deſired; as the but-
ter comes when the parts begin to ſeparate in the churn.
It is reported, that if you lay good ſtore of kernels of grapes
about the root of a vine, it will make the vine come earlier,
and proſper better. Bacºn’s Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 35.
Then butter does refuſe to come,
And love proves croſs and humourſome. Hudibras, p. ii.
In the coming or ſprouting of malt, as it muſt not come
too little, ſo it muſt not come too much. Mort. Husbandry.
I 1. To become preſent, and no longer future.
A time will come, when my maturer muſe,
In Caeſar's wars, a nobler theme ſhall chuſe. Dryd. Pirg, Geo.
12. To become preſent; no longer abſent.
That's my joy
Not to have ſeen before; for nature now
Conſes all at once, confounding my delight. Dryd. K. Arth.
Mean while the gods the dome of Vulcan throng,
Apollo comes, and Neptune came along. Pope's Odyſ: b. viii.
Cºre then, my friend, my genius, come along,
Thou maſter of the poet and the ſong. Pope's Eſſays.
13. To happen; to fall out. -
The duke of Cornwal, and Regan his dutcheſs, will be
here with him this night.—
—How comes that Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Jet me alone that I may ſpeak, and let come on me what
will. - job xiii. 13.
i4. To follow as a conſequence.
Thoſe that are kin to the king, never prick their finger but
they ſay, there is ſome of the king's blood ſpilt. How comes
that ſays he, that takes upon him not to conceive: the an-
fwer is, I am the king's poor couſin, ſir. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
15. To ceaſe very lately from ſome act or ſtate; to have juſt
done or ſuffered any thing.
David ſaid unto Uriah, camºff thou not from thy journey
- 2 Sa. xi. Io.
16. 7 CoME abºut. To come to paſs; to fall out; to come into
being. Probably from the French veira bout.
... And let me ſpeak to th’ yet unknowing world,
How theſe things came about. Shakeſpeare.
That cherubim, which now appears as a God to a human
ſoul, knows very well that the period will come abºut in eter-
nity, when the human ſoul ſhall be as perfect as he himſelf
now is. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 3.
I conclude, however it comes about, that things are not as
they ſhould be. Swift.
How comes it about, that, for above ſixty years, affairs have
been placed in the hands of new men. Swift.
17. To CoME about. To change; to come round
The wind came alout, and ſettled in the Weſt for many
days. Bacon's New Atlanti.
On better thoughts, and my urg'd reaſons,
They are come alcºt, and won to the true ſide. B. Johnſºn.
18. To CoME again. To return.
There came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his
ſpirit came again, and he revived. judg. xv. 19.
19. To CoME after. To follow.
If any man will came after me, let him deny himſelf, and
take up his croſs and follow me. Mat xvi. 24.
20. To CoME at. To reach ; to get within the reach of ; to
obtain; to gain.
Neither ſword nor ſceptre can come at conſcience; but it is
above and beyond the reach of both. Suckling.
Cats will eat and deſtroy your marum, if they can come at
it. Evelyn's Kalendar.
In order to come at a true knowledge of ourſelves, we ſhould
conſider, on the other hand, how far we may deſerve praiſe.
Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 399.
Nothing makes a woman more eſteemed by the oppoſite
ſex than chaſtity, and we always prize thoſe moſt who are
... hardeſt to come at. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 99.
21. To CoME by. To obtain; to gain ; to acquire.
Things moſt needful to preſerve this life, are moſt prompt
and eaſy for all living creatures to come by. Hooker, b. 5. ſ. 22.
Love is like a child,
That longs for every thing that he can come by. Shakeſpeare.
Thy caſe
Shall be my precedent; as thou got'ſt Milan,
I'll come by Naples. Shakeſpeare's Tempºff.
Are you not aſhamed to inforce a poor widow to ſo rough
a courſe to come by her own. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
The ointment wherewith this is done is made of divers in-
gredients, whereof the ſtrangeſt and hardeſt to come by is the
moſs of a dead man unburied. Bacon's Natural Hiſory.
And with that wicked lye
A letter they came ty, -
From our king's majeſty. Denham.
He tells a ſad ſtory, how hard it was for him to come by the
book of Trigantius. Stillingſ. Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idals.
Amidſt your train, this unſeen judge will wait,
Examine how you came by all your ſtate. Dryd. Aurengzebe.
22. To CoME in. #. enter.
What, are you there? come in, and give ſome help. Shakespeare
Yet the ſimple ideas, thus united in the ſame ſubječt, are
as perfectly diſtinct as thoſe that come in by different ſenſes.
Locke.
23. Tº CoME in. To comply; to yield; to hold out no longer.
If the arch-rebel Tyrone, in the time of theſe wars,
ſhould offer to come in, and ſubmit himſelf to her majeſty,
would you not have him received. Spenser on Ireland.
24. To CoME in. To arrive at a port, or place of rendezvous.
At what time our ſecond fleet, which kept the narrow ſeas,
was come in and joined to our main fleet. Bacon.
There was the Plymouth ſquadron now come in,
Which in the Streights laſt winter was abroad. Dryden.
25. To CoME in. To become modiſh; to be brought into uſe.
Then came rich cloaths and graceful action in,
Then inſtruments were taught more moving notes. Rºſſom.
Silken garments did not come in 'till late, and the uſe of them
in men was often reſtrained by law. Arbuthnot on Coins.
26. Tº CoME in. To be an ingredient; to make part of a com-
poſition.
A generous contempt of that in which too many men place
their happineſs, muſt come in to heighten his character. Atterb.
27. To CoME in fr. To be early enough to obtain : taken
from hunting, where the dogs that are ſlow get nothing.
Shape and beauty, worth and education, wit, and under-
ſtanding, gentle nature and agreeable humour, honour and
virtue, were to cºme in for their ſhare of ſuch contraćts. Temple.
If thinking is eſſential to matter, ſtocks and ſtones will
come in for their ſhare of privilege. Collier on Thought.
One who had i' the rear excluded been,
And cou’d not for a taſte o' th' fleſh come in,
Licks the ſolid earth. Tate's juv. Sat. 15.
The reſt came in for ſubſidies, whereof they ſunk conſi-
derable ſums. Swift.
28. To CoM e in to. To join with ; to bring help.
They marched to Wells, where the lord Audley, with
whom their leaders had before ſecret intelligence, came in to
them ; and was by them, with great gladneſs and cries of joy,
accepted as their general. Bacon's Henry VII.
29. 7 &amp; CoME in to. To comply with 5 to agree to. T
he
3.
t
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 70</div><p class="Text">. T-
w -
.C O M
The fame of their virtues will make men ready to come into
every thing that is done or deſigned for the publick good.
Atterbury's Sermons.
30. To CoME near. To approach; to reſemble in excellence:
a metaphor from races.
Whom you cannot equal or come near in doing, you would
deſtroy or ruin with evil ſpeaking. Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
The whole atchieved with ſuch admirable invention, that
nothing ancient and modern ſeems to come near it. Temple.
31. To CoME of To proceed; as a deſcendant from anceſtors.
Of Priam's royal race my mother came. Dryden's Án.
Self-love is ſo natural an infirmity, that it makes us partial
even to thoſe that come of us, as well as ourſelves. L’Eſtrange.
32. To CoME of... To proceed; as effects from their cauſes.
Will you pleaſe, ſir, be gone.
I told you what would come of this. Shakeſp. IVinter's Ta'e.
We ſee that the hiccough comes of fulneſs of meat, eſpe-
cially in children, which cauſeth an extenſion of the ſtomach.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
What came on't at laſt but that, after the dogs had deſerted,
the wolves worried one part of the enemies. L'Eſtrange.
This comes of judging by the eye, without conſulting the
reaſon. L’Eſtrange.
My young maſter, whatever comes on't, muſt have a wife
looked out for him by that time he is of age. Locke.
33. To CoME off. To deviate; to depart from a rule or di-
rečtion.
The figure of a bell partaketh of the pyramis, but yet
coming off and dilating more ſuddenly. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
34. To CoME off. To eſcape.
. I knew the foul enchanter, though diſguis'd,
Enter'd the very lime-twigs of his ſpells,
And yet came off. Milton.
How thou wilt here come off, ſurmounts my reach. Milt.
If, upon ſuch a fair and full trial, he can come off, he is
then clear and innocent. South.
Thoſe that are in any ſignal danger implore his aid; and,
... if they come off ſafe, they call their deliverance a miracle.
Addison on Italy.
35. Tº CoME off. To end an affair; to be diſmiſſed with our
lot. -
Oh, bravely came we off,
When with a volley of our needleſs ſhot,
After ſuch bloody toil, we bid good-night. Shakeſp K. john.
Ever ſince Spain and England have had anything to debate
one with the other, the Engliſh, upon all encounters, have
come off with honour and the better. Bacon on War with Spain.
We muſt expect ſometimes to come off by the worſt, before
we obtain the final conqueſt. Calamy.
He oft', in ſuch attempts as theſe,
Came off with glory and ſucceſs. Hudibras, p. 1. cant. I.
36. To Come off from. To leave; to forbear. -
To come off from theſe grave diſquiſitions, I would clear the
point by one inſtance more. Felton on the Clafficks.
37. Tº CoME on. To advance; to make progreſs.
Of late, things ſeem to come on apace to their former ſtate.
Bacon on the IWar with Spain.
There was in the camp both ſtrength and vićtual ſufficient
for the obtaining of the victory, if they would not protract
the war until winter were come on. Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
The ſea came on, the ſouth with mighty roar
Diſpers'd and daſh'd the reſt upon the rocky ſhoar. Dryden.
So Travellers, who waſte the day,
Neting at length the ſetting ſun,
They mend their pace as night comeſ on.
38. To CoME on. To advance to combat.
The great ordnance once diſcharged, the armies came faſt
on, and joined battle. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Rhymer, come on, and do the worſt you can ;
I fear not you, nor yet a better man.
39. To CoME on. To thrive; to grow big.
Come on, poor babe ;
Some powerful ſpirit inſtruct the kites and ravens
To be thy nurſes. Shakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale.
It ſhould ſeem by the experiments, beth of the malt and of
the roſes, that they will come far faſter on in water than in
earth; for the nouriſhment is eaſier drawn out of water than
out of earth. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 648.
40. To CoME over. To repeat an act.
I ſaw him run after a gilded butterfly ; and when he caught
it, he let it go again, and after it again; and over and over he
comeſ, and caught it again. Sºak. Criolanus.
41. To CoM E over. To revolt. e
They are perpetually teizing their friends to come over to
them. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 185.
A man, in changing his fide, not only makes himſelf hated
by thoſe he left, but is ſeldom heartily eſteemed by thoſe he
cºnes over to. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 162.
42. To CoME over. To riſe in diſtillation.
Perhaps alſo the phlegmatick liquor, that is wont to come
over in this analyſis, may, at leaſt as to part of it, be pro-
duced by the operation of the fire. Boyle.
Vol. I.
Granville.
Dryden.
C O M
43. Tº CoME out. To be made publick.
Before his book came out, I had undertaken the anſwer of
ſeveral others. Stillingfleet.
! have been tedious; and, which is worſe, it come out
from the firſt draught, and uncorreóted. Dryden.
44. To Come out. To appear upon trial; to be diſcovered.
. º: come out at laſt, that we are to look on the ſaints
* Inferior deities. Stilling flet's Defence of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
The weight of the §. . {:}; of a Roman
°º comes out ſixty-two grains and four ſevenths. Arbuthn.
45. To CoMe out with. To give a vent to ; to let fly.
Thoſe great maſters of chymical arcana muſt be provoked,
before they will come out with them. Boyle.
46. Tº CoMº to To conſent or yield.
What is this, if my parſon will not cºme tº 2 Swift.
47. To CoME to. To amount to.
The emperour impoſed ſo great a cuſtom upon all corn to
be tranſported out of Sicily, that the very cuſtoms came to as
much as both the price of the corn and the freight toge-
ther. Knolles's Hiſtory fihe Turºs.
You ſaucily pretend to know
More than your dividend comes to. Hudibras, p. ii.
Animals either feed upon vegetables immediately, or, which
comeſ to the ſame at laſt, upon other animals which have fed
upon them. J/ºodward's Na ural Hiſtory.
He pays not this tax immediately, yet his purſe will find
it by a greater want of money than that comes to. Locke.
48. To CoME to himſelf. To recover his ſenſes.
He falls into ſweet ecſtacy of joy, wherein Iſhall leave him
'till he comes to himſelf. Temple.
49. To CoME to paſs. To be cffeited; to fall out.
It cometh, we grant, many times to pas that the works of
men being the ſame, their drifts and purpoſe therein are
divers. Hooker, b. v. ſeół. 14.
How comes it to paſs, that ſome liquors cannot pierce into
or moiſten ſome bodies, which are eaſily pervious to other
liquors Boyle's Hiſtory of Firmneſs.
50. To CoMe up. To grow out of the ground.
Another ill accident is over-wet at ſowing time, which
with us breedeth much dearth, inſomuch as the corn never
cometh up. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Good intentions are at leaſt the ſeeds of good actions, and
every man ought to ſow them, whether they come up or no.
Temple.
51. To CoME up. To make appearance.
If wars ſhould mow them down never ſo faſt, yet they
may be ſuddenly ſupplied, and come up again. Bacon.
52. To CoME up. To come into uſe, as a faſhion comes up.
53. Tº CoM E up to. To amount to.
He prepares for a ſurrender, aſſerting that all theſe will not
come up to near the quantity requiſite. J/oodw. Nat. Hiſtory.
54. To CoME up to. To riſe to.
Whoſe ignorant credulity will not
Come up to th’ truth. Slakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale,
Conſiderations there are, that may make us, if not come up
to the character of thoſe who rejoice in tribulations, yet at
leaſt ſatisfy the duty of being patient. Iłake's Prep. for Death.
The veſtes byſſinae, which ſome lades wore, muſt have
been of ſuch extraordinary price, that there is no ſtuff in our
age comes up to it. Arbuthnot on Coins.
When the heart is full, it is angry at all words that cannot
come up to it. - Swift.
55. To CoME up with. To overtake.
56. To CoME upon. To invade; to attack.
Three hundred horſe, and three thouſand foot Engliſh,
commanded by Sir John Norris, were charged by Parma,
coming upon them with ſeven thouſand horſe. Bacon.
When old age comes upon him, it comes alone, bringing no
other cvil with it but itſelf. South.
CoM E. [participle of the verb.]
Thy words were heard, and I am come to thy words. Dan.
CoME. A particle of exhortation; be quick; make no delay.
Come, let us make our father drink wine. Gen. xix. 32.
CoMe. A particle of reconciliation, or incitement to it.
Come, come, at all I laugh he laughs no doubt;
The only difference is, I dare laugh out. Pope.
Cov. E. A kind of adverbial word for when it ſhall come 5 as,
come I/cdneſſay, when Wedneſday ſhall come;
Come Candlemas, nine years ago ſhe dy’d. Gay.
Tº CoME. In futurity; not preſent; to happen hereafter.
It ſerveth to diſcover that which is hid, as well as to foretel
that which is to come.
In times to cºme, . .
My waves ſhall waſh the walls of mighty Rome. Dryden.
Tăking a leaſe of land for years to cºme, at the rent of one
hundred pounds. Locke.
Cox. e. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] . A ſprout: a cant term,
That the malt is ſufficiently well dried, you may know both
by the taſte, and alſo by the falling off of the come or ſprout.
Mortimer's Husband y,
CoME'd I AN. m. / [from comedy.]
1. A player or actor of comick parts.
Z 2. A
-
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
- -
f
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 71</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
player; an actreſs or aćtor.
bec, when of a comedian ſhe be-
came a wealthy man's wife, would be ſaluted madam Pithias,
or Prudence Camden's Remains.
cºns on the ſtage ſhºw all their ſkill,
And after do as love and fortune will.
3. A writer of comedies. :... IX J; - b
Scaliger willeth us to admire Plautus as a comedian, but
o
Terence as a pure and elegant ſpeaker: Patham of Poetry.
COMEDY. m.ſ.. [comedia, Lat. A dramatick repreſentation
of the lighter faults of mankind.
Your honour's players -
Are come to play a pleaſant comedy. Shakespeare Tan. of the Shrew.
A long, exact, and ſerious conicº,
In every ſcene ſome moral let it teach,
And, if it can, at once both pleaſe and preach. ... Pºpe.
Comrij's ess. n.ſ.. [from corney.J. Grace; beauty; dignity.
A careleſs come ineſs with comely care. . . . Sidney.
The ſervice of God hath not ſuch perfection of grace and
combineſs as when the dignity of the place doth concur. Hooker.
They ſkilled not of the goodly ornaments of poetry, yet
were ſprinkled with ſome pretty flowers, which gave good
grace and cºmeſineſs. Spenſer azz Ireland.
Hardly ſhall you meet with man or woman to aged or ill-
favoured, but, if you will commend them for comelinſ, nay
and for youth too, ſhall take it well. . South.
There is great pulchritude and comelineſs of proportion in
the leaves, flowers, and fruits of plants. Ray on the Creation.
A horſeman's coat ſhall hide
Thy taper ſhape and comelineſs of ſide. Prior.
COMELY. adj. [from lecome; or from cpeman, Sax. to pleaſe.]
1. Graceful; decent; having dignity or grandeur of micn or
look. Comclineſs ſeems to be that ſpecies of beauty which
excites reverence rather than pleaſure.
If the principal part of beauty is in decent motion, no
marvel though perſons in years ſeem many times more ami-
able; for no youth can be concly but by pardon, and conſider-
ing the youth as to make up the comelineſs. Bacon, Eſſay 44.
He that is comely when old and decrepit, ſurely was very
beautiful when he was young. South.
Thou art a come y, young, and valiant knight. Dryden.
2. Uſed of things, decent; according to propriety.
Oh, what a world is this, when what is comely
Envenoms him that bears it! Shakeſp. As you like it.
This is a happier and more cºmely time,
Than when theſe fellows ran about the ſtreets,
Crying confuſion. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Co'MELY. adv. [from the adjcótive..] Handſomely; gracefully.
..To ride comey, to play at all weapons, to dance comely, be
very neceſſary for a courtly gentleman. Afthan's Schºolmaſter.
Co'MFR. m. ſ. [from come j Onc that comes.
Plants move upwards; but if the ſap puts up too faſt, it
maketh a ſlender ſtalk, which will not ſupport the weight;
and therefore theſe are all ſwift and haſty comers. Bacon.
Time is like a faſhionable hoſt,
That ſlightly ſhakes his parting gueſt by th’ hand;
But with his arms outſtretch'd, as he would fly,
Graſps in the comer: welcome ever ſmiles,
And farewel goes out fighing. Shakespeare. Troilus and Craſda.
Yourſelf, renowned prince, then ſtood as fair
As any comer I have look'd on yet,
For my affection. Shakespeare. Merchant of Venice.
Houſe and heart are open for a friend; the paſſàgé is eaſy,
and not only admits, but even invites the comer. South's Serm.
2. A player in general; a ſtage-
Meliſſarion, pretty honey-
It is natural to be kind to the laſt corner. L'E/irange.
Now leave thoſe joys, unſuiting to thy age,
To a freſh comer, and reſign the ſtage. Dryden.
The renowned champion of our lady of Loretto, and the
miraculous tranſlation of her chapel, about which he hath
Pºliſhed a defiance to the world, and offers to prove it againſt
all comers. Stillingfiest.
There it is not ſtrange, that the mind ſhould give itſelf up
to the common opinion, or render itſ f to the firſt comer. Lock.
COMET. m. ſ. ſºleta, Latin, a hairy ſtar.j
A heavenly body in the planetary region appearing ſud-
denly, and again diſappearing; and, during the time of its ap-
Fºrance, moving through its proper orbit, like a planet.
The orbits of cºnts are clipſes, having one of their foci in
the center of the ſun; and being very long and eccentrick,
they become inviſible, when in that part moſt remote from the
fun. Comets, Popularly called blazing ſtars, are diſtinguiſhed
from other ſtars by a long train or tail of light, always op-
polite to the ſun; hence ariſes a popular diviſion of comets
"... º º tailed, and haired comets; though
fame comet º her relates to the different circumſtances of the
when the *" to the phaenomena of the ſeveral Thus
the comet is iſ' º of the ſun, and moves from it,
marches before º 'W', bearded, barbatus, becauſe the light
the comet is fi to b en the light is weſtward of the ſun,
\When th - O be tailed, becauſe the train follows it.
" * *t and the ſun are diametrically oppoſite, the
- &gt;
Co'METARY.
CoM E/TICK.
COMFIT. n.ſ. [Åºfit, Dutch.
earth being between them, the train islid behind the body of
the comet, excepting a little that appears around it, in form
of a border of hair, hence called crimitus.
According to Sir Iſaac Newton, the tail of a comet is a
very thin ſlender vapour, emitted by the head or nucleus of
the comet, ignited by their near neighbourhood to the ſun,
and this vapour is furniſhed by the atmoſphere of the comet.
The tails are of various lengths; and being produced in the pe-
rihelions of the comets, will go off along with their heads into
remote regions, and there gradually vaniſh, 'till the comets
return towards the ſun . The vapours of comets being thus
dilated, rarefied, and diffuſed through all the celeſtial regions,
may probably, by little and little, by means of their own gra-
vity, be attracted down to the planets, and become inter-
mingled with their atmoſpheres. For the conſervation of the
water, and moiſture of the planets, comets ſeem abſolutely
requiſite; from whoſe condenſed vapours and exhalations all
that moiſture which is ſpent in vegetations and putrefactions,
and turned into dry earth, may be reſupplied and recruited;
for all vegetables grow and increaſe wholly from fluids; and,
as to their greateſt part, turn by putrefaction into earth again,
an earthy ſlime being perpetually precipitated to the bottom of
putrefying liquors. Hence the quantity of dry carth muſt
continually increaſe, and the moiſture of the globe decreaſe,
and at laſt be quite evaporated, if it have not a continual ſup-
ply from ſome part or other of the univerſe. And I ſuſpect,
adds Sir Iſaac, that the ſpirit which makes the fineſt, ſubtileſt,
and beſt part of our air, and which is abſolutely requiſite for
the life and being of all things, comes principally from the
comets. On this principle there ſeems to be ſome foundation
for the popular opinion of preſages from comets; ſince the
tail of a comet, thus intermingled with our atmoſphere, may
produce changes very ſenſible in animal and vegetable bodies.
The ſame great author has computed that the ſun's heat,
in the comet of 1680, was, to his heat with us at Midſummer,
as twenty-eight thouſand to one ; and that the heat of the body
of the comet, was near two thouſand times as great as that of
red-hot iron. He alſo calculates, that a globe of red-hot
iron, of the dimenſions of our earth, would ſcarce be cool in
fifty thouſand years. If then the comet be ſuppoſed to cool
a hundred times as faſt as red-hot iron, yet, ſince its heat was
a thouſand times greater, ſuppoſing it of the bigneſs of the
earth, it would not be cool in a million of years. Hitherto
no comet has threatened the earth with a nearer approach than
that of 1680; for, by calculation, Dr. Halley found, on No-
vember 11, that comet was not above one ſemidiameter of
the earth to the northward of the way of the earth; at which
time, had the earth been in that part of its orbit, the comet
would have had a parallax equal to that of the moon. What
might have been the conſequence of ſo near an appulſe? a
contact or ſhock of the celeſtial bodies a deluge, Mr. Whiſ-
ton ſays. Aſtronomers have beca divided about the return of
connets, and time and obſervation muſt determine the queſtion.
However, Dr. Halley has foretold the return of one in 1758,
which formerly appeared in 1456. Trevaux. Chambers.
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they ſaw ſome wond’rous monument,
Some comet, or an unuſual prodigy. Shakespeare Tam, of the Shrew.
Such his fell glances as the fatal light -
Of ſtaring comets. Craſhaw.
I conſidered a comet, or, in the language of the vulgar, a
blazing ſtar, as a ſky-rocket diſcharged by an hand that is
almighty. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 103.
Fierce meteors ſhoot their arbitrary light, -
And comets march with lawleſs horrors bright. Prior.
{a}. [from comet..] Relating to a comet.
Refractions of light are in the planetary and cometary regions,
as on our globe. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
It ſhould ſeem that both are
formed by haſty pronunciation from confect.] A dry ſweet-
meat; any kind of fruit or root preſerved with ſugar, and
dried.
By feeding me on beans and peaſe,
He crams in naſty crevices,
And turns to comfits by his arts,
To make me reliſh for deſſerts. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. i.
To Co's fit. v. a. [from the noun J. To preſerve dry with
ſugar.
The fruit that does ſo quickly waſte,
Men ſcarce can ſee it, much leſs taſte,
Thou comfitſ in ſtreets to make it laſt. Cowley. }
Co'MF URE. m. / [from comfit, or confºure.] Sweetmeat.
From country graſs to cºmfitures of court,
Or city’s quelque-choſes, let not report
My mind tranſport
Donne. {
To COMFORT. a [comfºrto, low Latin. Salvia conſºrtat
nervos. Schol. Sal.]
1. To ſtrengthen ; to enliven; to invigorate.
The evidence of God's own teſtimony, added unto the
natural aſſent of reaſon, concerning the certainty of ".
Q
6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 72</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
.3 oth not a little comfort and confirm the ſame. Hooker, b. i.
Light excelleth in comforting the ſpirits of men: light varied
...] oth the ſame effect, with more novelty. This is the cauſe
~hy precious ſtones comfort. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 960.
Some of the abbots had been guilty of comforting and affiſt-
ing the rebels. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. To conſole; to ſtrengthen the mind under the preſſure of
calamity.
They bemoaned him, and comfºrted him over all the evil
that the Lord had brought upon him. job, xlii. 1 i.
Co’rif or T. m. ſ [from the verb.]
x - Support; aſſiſtance; countenance.
Poynings made a wild chace upon the wild Iriſh; where,
in reſpect of the mountains and faſtneſſes, he did little good,
~which he would needs impute unto the comfort that the rebels
ſhould receive underhand from the earl of Kildare. Bacon.
The king did alſo appoint commiſſioners for the fining of
all ſuch as were of any value, and had any hand or partaking
in the aid or comfort of Perkins, or the Corniſhmen. Bacon.
Conſolation; ſupport under calamity or danger.
I will keep her ign'rant of her good,
To make her heavenly comforts of deſpair,
When it is leaſt expected. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
As they have no apprehenſion of thoſe things, ſo they need
no comfºrt againſt them. Tillotſon, Serm, i.
3- That which gives conſolation or ſupport.
Your children were vexation to your youth,
But mine ſhall be a comfort to your age. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
“Co'Mfont ABLE. adj. [from comfºrt.]
* - Receiving comfort; ſuſceptible of comfort.
For my ſake be comfortable; hold death -
A while at the arm’s end. Shakeſp. As you like it.
My lord leans wond’rouſly to diſcontent;
His comfortable temper has forſook him:
He is much out of health. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
What can promiſe him a comfºrtable appearance before his
dreadful judge 2 South.
→ - Diſpenſing comfort; having the power of giving comfort.
He had no brother, which though it be comfortalle for kings
to have, yet draweth the ſubječts eyes aſide. Bacon's Hen. VII.
The lives of many miſerable men were ſaved, and a com-
fortable proviſion made for their ſubſiſtence. Dryd. Fab. Dedic.
*Co'MFoRTABLY. adv. [from comfortable.] In a comfortable
manner; with comfort; without deſpair.
Upon view of the ſincerity of that performance, hope com-
fortably and chearfully for God's performance. Hammond.
*Co'MFort E.R. m. ſ. [from comfort.] -
r . One that adminiſters conſolation in misfortunes; one that
ſtrengthens and ſupports the mind in miſery or danger.
This very prayer of Chriſt obtained angels to be ſent him,
as comforters in his agony. Hooker, b. v. ſect. 48.
The heav'ns have bleſt you with a goodly ſon,
To be a comforter when he is gone. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Nineveh is laid waſte, who will bemoan her ? whence ſhall
I ſeek comfºrters for thee * Neh. iii. 7.
-&gt; . º title of the Third Perſon of the Holy Trinity; the Pa-
raClete.
*Co'M Fort Lºss, adj. [from comfºrt.] Without comfort; with-
out any thing to allay misfortune: uſed of perſons as well as
things.
Yet ſhall not my death be comfortly, receiving it by your
ſentence. Sidney, b. ii.
Where was a cave, ywrought with wond’rous art,
Deep, dark, uneaſy, doleful, comfortleſ. Fairy Queen, b, i.
News fitting to the night;
Black, fearful, comfortleſs, and horrible. Shakeſp. K. john.
- On thy feet thou ſtood'ſt at laſt,
Though comfºrtif, as when a father mourns
His children, all in view deſtroyed at once. Milt. Par. Loft.
That unſociable comfort'ſ deafneſs had not quite tired
ne. - Swift.
*Co'MF Rey. m. ſ. ſcomfrie, French J A plant.
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, ſhaped like a funnel,
having an oblong tube, but ſhaped at the top like a pitcher:
out of the flower-cup, which is deeply cut into five long nar-
row ſegments, riſes the pointal, attended with four embryoes,
which afterwards become ſo many ſecds, in form ſomewhat
like the head of a viper, which ripen in the flower-cup. It
grows wild on the ſides of banks and rivers, and is gathered
for medicinal uſes. Miller.
So'MicAl... adj. [comicus, Latin.]
* - Raiſing mirth; merry; diverting.
The greateſt reſemblance of our author is in the familiar
ſtile and pleaſing way of relating comical adventures of that
nature. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
Something ſo comical in the voice and geſtures, that a man
can hardly forbear being pleaſed. Addiſon on Italy.
- Relating to comedy; befitting comedy.
That all might appear to be knit up in a comical concluſion,
the duke's daughter was afterwards joined in marriage to the
lord Liſle. Hayward.
They deny it to be tragical, becauſe its cataſtrophe is a
wedding, which hath ever been accounted comical. Gay.
2-
Co Mic ALLY. adv. [from comical.]
1. In ſuch a manner as raiſes mirth.
2. In a manner befitting comedy. -
Co'Mic ALNEss. n.ſ.. [from comical.] The quality of being
comical; the power of raiſing mirth.
COMICK. adj. [comicus, Lat. comique, French.]
1. Relating to comedy.
When I venture at the comick ſtile,
Thy ſcornful lady ſeems to mock my toil. //aller.
A comick ſubject loves an humble verſe,
Thyeſtes ſcorns a low and comick ſtile ;
Yet comedy ſometimes may raiſe her voice. Roſommon.
Thy tragick muſe gives ſmiles, thy comick ſleep. Dryden.
2. Raiſing mirth.
Stately triumphs, mirthful comick ſhows,
Such as befit the pleaſure. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
Co'MING.. n.ſ.. [from To come.]
1. The aët of coming; approach.
Where art thou, Adam wont with joy to meet
My coming, ſeen far off? AMilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
Sweet the coming on
Of grateful ev’ning mild. A4ilton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. iv.
2. State of being come ; arrival.
May't pleaſe you, noble madam, to withdraw
Into your private chamber; we ſhall give you
The full cauſe of our coming. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Some people in America counted their years by the coming
of certain birds amongſt them at their certain ſeaſons, and
leaving them at others. Locke.
CoM ING-IN. n.ſ. Revenue; income.
Here’s a ſmall trifle of wives, eleven widows and nine
maids is a ſimple cºming-in for one man. Shakeſpeare.
What are thy rents what are thy comings-in
O ceremony, #!, me but thy worth:
What is thy toll, O adoration :
Co'MING. participial adj. [from come.]
1. Fond; forward; ready to come.
Now will I be your Roſalind in a more coming on diſpoſi-
tion; and aſk me what you will, I will grant it. Shakeſpeare.
That very lapidary himſelf, with a coming ſtomach, and in
the cock's place, would have made the cock's choice. L’E/fr.
That he had been ſo affectionate a huſband, was no ill ar-
gument to the coming dowager. Dryd. Wirg. Æn. Dedic.
On morning wings, how active ſprings the mind,
How eaſy every labour it purſues, -
How coming to the poet every muſe ! Pope's Imit. of Horace.
2. Future ; to come.
Praiſe of great ačts, he ſcatters as a ſeed,
Which may the like in coming ages breed. Rºſcommon.
CoM1'TIAL. adj. [comitia, Lat. an aſſembly of the Romans.]
Relating to the aſſemblies of the people of Rome.
Co'M1TY. m. ſ. [comitas, Latin.] Courteſy; civility; good-
breeding. Dić7.
Co'MMA. n.ſ. [xéºza.]
1. The point which notes the diſtinétion of clauſes, and order
of conſtruction in the ſentence, marked thus [,].
Comma's and points they ſet exactly right. Pope.
2. The ninth part of a tone, or the interval whereby a ſemitone
or a perfect tone exceeds the imperfect tone. It is a term uſed
only in theorical muſick, to ſhew the exact proportions be-
tween concords. Harris.
To COMMAND. v. a. [commander, Fr. mando, Latin. J
1. To govern; to give orders to ; to hold in ſubjection or obe-
dience; contrary to obey.
Look, this feather,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater guſt;
Such is the lightneſs of you common men. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Chriſt could command legions of angels to his reſcue.
Decay of Piety.
Should he, who was thy lord, command thee now,
With a harſh voice, and ſupercilious brow,
To ſervile duties. Dryden's Perſ Sat. 5.
2. To order; to direct to be done; contrary to prohibit: ſome-
times formerly with of before the perſon.
My conſcience bids me aſk, wherefore you have
Commanded of me theſe moſt pois'nous compounds; Shakespeare.
We will ſacrifice to the Lord our God, as he ſhall command
uS. Ex. viii. 27.
3. To have in power.
If the ſtrong cane ſupport thy walking hand, - -
Chairmen no longer ſhali the wall command. . Gay's Trivia.
4. To overlook; to have ſo ſubject as that it may be ſeen or an-
noyed.
Shakeſp. Henry V.
Up to the Eaſtern tower,
Whoſe height command, as ſubject all the vale,
To ſee the fight. Shakeſpeare's Trºilus and Crºſſida,
His eye might there command, wherever ſtood
City, of old or modern fame; the ſeat
Of mightieſt empire.
Milton's Paradiſ. Loff, b. xi. 1 385.
Cne
º
;
-
|<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 73</div><p class="Text">- C O M
C O M
One ſide commands a view of the fineſt garden in the
world. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 oi.
To CoMMA'ND. v. m. To have the ſupreme authority; to poſ-
feſs the chief power; to govern.
Thoſe two commanding powers of the ſoul, the underſtand-
ing or the will. South's Sermons.
CoMMA'ND. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The right of commanding; power; ſupreme authority. It
is uſed in military affairs, as magiſtracy or government in
civil life; with over.
Take pity of your town and of your people,
While yet my ſoldiers are in my command. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
Nothing in love. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Command and force may often create, but can never cure,
an averſion ; and whatever any one is brought to by compul-
fion, he will leave as ſoon as he can. Locke on Education.
3. The act of commanding; the mandate uttered; order.
Of this tree we may not taſte nor touch ;
God ſo commanded, and left that command
Sole daughter of his voice. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ix.
As there is no prohibition of it, ſo no command for it. Taylor.
The captain gives command, the joyful train
Glide through the gloomy ſhade, and leave the main. Dryd.
4. The power of overlooking, or ſurveying any place.
The ſteepy ſtand,
Which overlooks the vale with wide command. Dryd. Aºn.
branchy. At ſetting on of the branches, between the wing
of the leaf and the ſtalk, is produced a flower of two leaves.
From the upper part of the flower are produced three ſhort
ſtamina, upon which are faſtened yellow apices, which re-
ſemble the head of a muſhroom: in the under part of the
flower are produced three other male ſtamina. The ovary is
produced in the center of the flower, which is extended into
a long intorted tube, and becomes an oblong fruit, divided
into two cells, each containing one oblong ſeed. Miller.
CoMME'MoRABLE. adj. [from commemorat...] Deſerving to be
mentioned with honour; worthy to be kept in remembrance.
To CoMME'MoRATF. v. a. [con and memoro, Latin.] To
| ! With lightning fill her awful hand, preſerve the memory by ſome publick act; to celebrate ſo-
| º And make the clouds ſeem all at her command. //aller. lemnly.
He aſſumed an abſolute command over his readers. Dryden. Such is the divine mercy, which we now commemorate; and
º 2. Cogent authority; deſpotiſm. , if we commemorate it, we ſhall rejoice in the Lord. Fiddes.
º Thoſe he commands move only in cºmmand, CoMME MoRA'tion. m. ſ. [from commemorate.] An act of pub-
lick celebration; ſoleiºnization of the memory of anything.
But that which is daily offered in the church, is a daily com-
memºration of that one ſacrifice which was offered on the croſs.
Taylor's worthy Communicant.
St. Auſtin believed that the martyrs, when the commemora-
tions were made at their own ſepulchres, did join their prayers
with the churches, in behalf of thoſe who there put up their
ſupplications to God. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſc. on Ram. Idols.
Cºmmemoratiºn was formerly made with thankſgiving, in
honour of good men departed this world. Ayliffº Parºrgon.
CoMME'MoRATIVE. adj. [from commemorate.j Tending to
preſerve memory of any thing.
The annual offering of the Paſchal lamb was commemorative
of that firſt Paſchal lamb. Atterbury.
º CoMMA'NDER. m. ſ. [from command.] To COMMENCE. v. n. [commencer, French.]
º 1. He that has the ſupreme authority; a general; a leader; a 1. To begin; to take beginning.
! chief. Why hath it given me earneſt of ſucceſs,
! We'll do thee homage, and be rul’d by thee, Commencing in a truth. Shakespeare's Macbeth. 3.
Love thee as our commander and our king. Shakeſpeare. Man, conſcious of his immortality, cannot be without con-
i. I have given him for a leader and commander to the people. cern for that ſtate that is to commence after this life. Rogers.
º: - Iſ ly. 4. 2. To take a new character.
- The Romans, when commanders in war, ſpake to their If wit ſo much from ign'rance undergo,
army, and ſtyled them, My ſoldiers. Bacon's Apophthegms. Ah! let not learning too commence its foe! Pope.
Charles, Henry, and Francis of France, often adventured To CoMME'Nc E. v. a. To begin; to make a beginning of; as C.
rather as ſoldiers than as commanders. Hayward. to commence a ſuit. - |
º Sir Phelim O'neil appeared as their commander in chief. Clar. CoMME'Nck MENT. n ſ [from commence.] Beginning; date.
* Supreme commander both of ſea and land. J/aller. The waters were gathered together into one place, the third !
The heroick action of ſome great commander, enterpriſed day from the commencement of the creation. Woodw. Nat. Hiſł. i
i for the common good, and honour of the Chriſtian cauſe. To COMMEND. v. a. [commendo, Latin J
Dryden's juvenal, Dedication. 1. To repreſent as worthy of notice, regard, or kindneſs; to t
Their great commanders, by credit in their armies, fell into recommend. t
the ſcales as a counterpoiſe to the people. Swift. After Barbaroſa was arrived, it was known how effectually
2. A paving beetle, or a very great wooden mallet, with an the chief baſia had commended him to Solyman. Knoles's Hiſtory.
. handle about three foot long, to uſe in both hands. Mºxon. Among the objects of knowledge, two eſpecially commend
* 3. An inſtrument of ſurgery. themſelves to our contemplation; the knowledge of God, and Co
The gloſſocomium, commonly called the commander, is of the knowledge of ourſelves. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
. uſe in the moſt ſtrong tough bodies, and where the laxation Vain-glory is a principle I ſhall commend to no man.
º hath been of long continuance. //iſeman's Surgery. Decay of Piety. C.
CoMMA'NDERY. m. ſ. [from command..] A body of the knights Theſe draw the chariot which Latinus ſends,
of Malta, belonging to the ſame nation. And the rich preſent to the prince commendi. Dryd. Æn.
: CoMMA'NDMENT. m. ſ. [commandement, French J 2. To deliver up with confidence.
. 1. Mandate; command; order; precept. To thee I do commend my watchful ſoul,
They plainly require ſome ſpecial commandment for that Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes: C
- which is exacted at their hands. Hooker, b. iii. ſect. 7. Sleeping and waking, O defend me ſtill. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Say, you choſe him more after our commandment, , Father, into thy hands I commend my ſpirit. Luke xxiii. 46.
º Than guided by your own affections. Shakeſp. Coriolanus. 3. To praiſe ; to mention with approbation.
By the eaſy commandment by God given to Adam, to for- Who is Silvia? What is ſhe,
* bear to feed thereon, it pleaſed God to make trial of his obe- That all our ſwains commend her
º dience. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the //orld. Holy, fair, and wife is ſhe. Shakeſpeare.
- 2. Authority; coactive power. Old men do moſt exceed in this point of folly, commending
º I thought that all things had been ſavage here, the days of their youth they ſcarce remembered, at leaſt well
- * And therefore put I on the countenance underſtood not. Brºwn's Vulgar Errours.
i - ; Of ſtern commandment. Shakespeare's A you like it. He lov'd my worthleſs rhymes; and, like a friend, C.
* : 3. By way of eminence, the precepts of the decalogue given Would find out ſomething to commend. Cowley.
. * * by God to Moſes. - Hiſtorians commend Alexander for weeping when he read
: . . . And he wrote upon the tables the words of the convenant the actions of Achilles. Dryden's Wirg. Æn. Dedicat. C.
- and the ten commandments. Exod. xxxiv. 28. Each finding, like a friend,
. . . . CoMMANDRESS. m.ſ.. [from commander.] A woman veſted Something to blame, and ſomething to commend. Pope. I
* with ſupreme authority. - 4. To mention by way of keeping in memory; to recommend
* * To preſcribe the order of doing in all things is a peculiar to remembrance. C.
º prerogative, which wiſdom hath, as queen or ſovereign com- Signior Anthonio 7.
; : . . mandréſ, over all other virtues. Hooker, b v. ſe?. 8. Cºmmends him to you. ()
* -: Be you commandrºſ; therefore, princeſs, queen Ere I ope his letter, I
! Of all our forces, be thy word a law. Fairfax, b. ii. I pray you tell me how my good friend doth, Shakesp. Mºr, of P'en,
: | CoMMATE'RIAL. adj. [from con and materia.] Conſiſting CoMM F'N D. m. ſ. [from the verb..] Commendation: not now
* . -i. of the ſame matter with another thing. in uſe. cº
. The beaks in birds are commaterial with teeth. Bacon. Tell her I ſend to her my kind commends : I
. . . The body adjacent and ambient is not commaterial, but Take ſpecial care my greetings be deliver'd. Shakespeare Rich. II. -
* - merely heterogeneal towards the body that is to be preſerved. CoMME'N DARLE. adj. [from commend..] Laudable; worthy b;
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 17 1. of praiſe. Anciently accented on the firſt ſyllable. .'
. CoMMATER IA'LITY. m. ſ. ſſrom commaterial.] Reſemblance And power, unto itſelf moſt commendable, sº
* } : to ſomething in its matter. Hath not a tomb ſo evident, as a chair -
* . . . . Co'MME LIN E. m. ſ. [ commelina, Latin.] A plant. Textol what it hath done. Shakeſpeare's Criolanus. |
| | t The leaves are produced alternately, and ſurround the ſtalks Order and decent ceremonies in the church, are not only º
* at their baſe : the ſtalks trail upon the ground, and grow very comely, but commendable. Bacon's Advice to '#. º
* any tº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 74</div><p class="Text">--" - *
* C O M
Many heroes, and moſt worthy perſons, being ſufficiently
*** frºm true and unqueſtionable merit, have received
advance incint from fal{hood. Brown's Pºlar Errours.
Pritannia is not drawn, like other countries, in a ſoft peace-
fulºiture; but is adorned with emblems, that mark out the
military genius ºf her inhabitants. This is, I think, the only
cººr quality that the old poets have touched upon in
the deſcription of our country. …iſºn on ancicºt 44°ºa's.
CoMºtt St. A : I. Y. dav. [from commendall...] Laudably; in a
manner worthy of commendation.
Of Preachers the ſhire holdeth a number, all commendably
labouring in their vocation. ‘Carew's Survey ºf Cornwal.
CO4/.441. V12.7. J. [commenda, low Latin J -
Cººl endani is a benefice, which, being void, is commended
to the chºrge and care of ſome ſufficient clerk to be ſupplied,
until it be conveniently provided of a paſtor Cowel.
It had been once mentioned to him, that his peace ſhould
be made, if he would reſign his biſhoprick, and deanry of
Weſtminſter; for he had that in commendan. Clarendow.
CoMME's DATAR Y. m. ſ [fºom commendam..] One who holds
a living in commendam.
CoMMENDA"rios. m. ſ. [from commend.]
1. Recommendation ; favourable repreſentation.
This jewel and my gold are your’s, provided I have your
commendation for my more free entertainment. Shah. Cynleine.
The choice of them ſhould be by the commendation of the
great officers of the kingdom.
2. Praiſe; declaration of eſteem.
His fame would not get ſo ſweet and noble an air to fly in
as in your breath, ſo could not you find a fitter ſubject of com-
mendation. Sidney, b. ii.
Good-nature is the moſt godlike commendation of a man.
Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
3. Meſſage of love. -
Mrs. Page has her hearty commendations to you too. Shakeſp.
Hark you, Margaret,
No princely commendations to my king'
—Such commendations as become a maid,
A virgin, and his ſervant, ſay to him. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
CoMME'NDA toRY. adj. [from commend..] Favourably repre-
ſentative; containing praiſe. -
It doth much add to a man's reputation, and is like perpe-
tual letters commendatory, to have good forms: to attain them,
it almoſt ſufficeth not to deſpiſe them. Bacon, Eſſay 53.
We beſtow the flouriſh of poetry on thoſe commendatory
conceits, which popularly ſet forth the eminency of this crea-
ture. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 5.
If I can think that neither he nor you deſpiſe me, it is a
greater honour to me, by far, than if all the houſe of lords
writ commendatory verſes upon me. Pope.
CoMME'NDER. m.ſ.. [from commend] Praiſer.
Such a concurrence of two extremes, by moſt of the ſame
cºmmenders and diſprovers. J%tton.
CoMMEN'sA'LITY. m. ſ. [from commenſalis, Lat.] Fellowſhip
of table ; the cuſtom of eating together.
They being enjoined and prohibited certain foods, thereby
to avoid community with the Gentiles, upon promiſcuous
commenſality. Brown's Pulgar Errºurs, b. iii. c. 25.
CoMM ENSURAbi'l-ITY. m. ſ. [from commenſurable.] Capacity
of being compared with another, as to the meaſure; or of
being meaſured by another. Thus an inch and a yard are
commenſurable, a yard containing a certain number of inches.
The diameter and circumference of a circle are incommen-
ſurable, not being reduceable to any common meaſure. Pro-
portion. - -
Some place the effence thereof in the proportion of parts,
conceiving it to conſiſt in a comcly commenſurability of the
whole unto the parts, and the parts between themſelves. Brown.
CoMM E/Nsu R A BLE. adj. [con and menſura, Lat.] Reducible
to ſome common meaſure; as a yard and a foot are meaſured
by an inch.
CoMM E/NSU R A B1 EN Ess. m. ſ. [from commenſurable.] Com-
menſurability; proportion. -
There is no commenſuralleneſ between this objećt and a
created underſtanding, yet there is a congruity and connatu-
rality. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To COMMENSURATE. v. a. ſºon and mejira, Lat.] To
reduce to ſome common meaſure.
That diviſion is not natural, but artificial, and by agree-
ment, as the apteſt terms to commenſurate the longitude of
placcs. Brown's Pulgar Errours, l. vi. c. 7.
Cox ME's URAt F. adj. [from the verb.]
1. Reducible to ſome common meaſure.
They permitted no intelligence between them, other than
by the mediation of ſome organ cqually commenſurate to ſoul
and body. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 1.
2. Equal; proportionable to each other. -
ls our knowledge adequately commenſarate with the nature
of things Glanville's Scºtſ, c. 2.
Thoſe who are perſuaded that they ſhall continue for ever,
cannot chuſe but aſpire after a happineſs com/venſurate to their
duration. Tillºtſºn.
Vol. I.
Bacon's Advice to Williers. .
C O M
Nothing commenſurate to the deſires of human nature, on
which it could fix as its ultimate end, without being carried
on with any farther deſire. Rogers's Sermons.
Matter and gravity are always commenſurate. Bentley.
Cox waſ NSURA't ELY. adv. [from commenſurate.] With the
*pacity of meaſuring, or being meaſured by ſome other
thing - - -
We are conſtrained to make the day ſerve to meaſure the
Year as well as we can, though not commenſirately to each
Yºr; but by collecting the fraction of days in ſeveral years,
'till they amount to an even day. Hºlder on Time.
CoMMENsu Raº lon. n.ſ. [from commenſurate.} Proportion;
reduction of Tome things to ſome common meaſure.
A body over great, or over ſmall, will not be thrown ſo far
as a body of a middle ſize; ſo that, it ſeemeth, there muſt be
a commenſuratiºn or proportion between the body moved and
the force, to make it move well. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
All fitneſs lies in a particular commenſuration, or proportion
of one thing to another. South.
To COMMENT. v. n. [commentor, Lat.] To annotate; to
write notes upon an author; to expound; to explain; with
ipon before the thing explained. -
Enter his chamber, view his lifeleſs corps,
And comment then upon his ſudden death. Shakeſp Henry VI.
Such are thy ſecrets, which my life makes good,
And comments on thce; for in ev'rything
Thy words do find me out, and parallels bring,
And in another make me underſtand. Herbert.
Criticks having firſt taken a liking to one of theſe poets,
proceed to comment on him, and illuſtrate him. Dryd.juv. Ded.
They have contented themſelves only to comment upon thoſe
texts, and make the beſt copies they could after thoſe ori-
ginals. Temple.
Indeed I hate that any man ſhould be idle, while I muſt
tranſlate and comment. Pºpe.
Co'MMENT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Annotations on an au-
thor; notes; explanation; expoſition; remarks.
In ſuch a time as this, it is not meet
That every nice offence ſhould bear its comment. Shakespeare.
Forgive the comment that my paſſion made
Upon thy feature; for my rage was blind. Shakeſp K. john.
All that is behind will be by way of comment on that part
of the church of England's charity. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Adam came into the world a philoſopher, which ſufficiently
appeared by his writing the nature of things upon their names:
he could view eſſences in themſelves, and read forms without
the comment of their reſpective properties. South's Sermons.
All the volumes of philoſophy,
With all their comments, never could invent
So politick an inſtrument. Prior.
Proper geſtures, and vehement exertions of the voice, are
a kind of comment to what he utters. Addiſon's Speci. Nº. 407.
Still with itſelf compar'd, his text peruſe;
And let your comment be the Mantuan muſe. Poſe.
Co'MMENTARY. m. ſ. [commentarius, Latin.]
I. An expoſition ; annotation; remark.
In religion, ſcripture is the beſt rule; and the church's uni-
verſal practice, the beſt commentary. Aïng Charles.
2. Memoir; narrative in familiar manner.
Vere, in a private commentary which he wrote of that ſer-
vice, teſtified that cight hundred were ſlain. Bacon.
They ſhew ſtill the ruins of Caeſar's wall, that reached
eighteen miles in length, as he has declared it in the firſt book
of his commentaries. Addiſon on Italy.
CoMMENTA'toR. n.ſ.. [from comment J Expoſitor; annotator.
I have made ſuch expoſitions of my authors, as no commen-
tator will forgive me. Dryden.
Some of the commentators tell us, that Marſya was a lawyer
who had loſt his cauſe. Addiſon on Italy.
Galen's commentator tells us, that bitter ſubſtances engender
choler, and burn the blood. Arb: thmat on Aliments.
You will have variety of commentators to explain the difficult
paſſages to you. Gay.
No commentator can more ſlily paſs
O'er a learn'd unintelligible place. Pope.
Co'MMENTER. n.ſ. [from comment.] One that writes com-
ments; an explainer; an annotator.
Slily as any commenter goes by
Hard words or ſenſe. Donne.
CoMMENT1'tious. adj. [comrientitiuſ, Lat J Invented ; fićti-
tious ; 1 maginary. - -
it is eaſy to dºw a paralleliſm between that ancient and this
modern nothing, and make good its reſemblance to that com-
mentitious inanity. Glanville's Sºpſ c. 18.
CO'MMERCE. m.ſ. [commercium, Latin. It was anciently ac-
cented on the liſt ſyllable.] Intercourſe; exchange of one
thing for another; interchange of any thing; trade; traffick.
Places of publick reſort being thus provided, our repair
thither is eſpecially for mutual conference, and, as it were,
cºmmerce to be had between God and us. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 17.
How could communities,
Degress in ſchools, and brotherhoods in citics,
5 A Peaceful
i<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 75</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
Peaceful cºrrºrce from dividable ſhores,
But by degree ſtand in authentick place Shakesp. Tril, and Crºſſ.
Inſtructed ſhips ſhall ſail to quick commerce,
By which icinoteſt regions are ally'd;
Which makes one city of the univerſe,
where ſome may gain, and all may be ſupply'd, Pryden.
Theſe people had not any comme ce with the other known
parts of the world - 7ilºtſºn.
In any country, that hath commerce with the reſt of the
world, it is almoſt impoſſible now to be without the uſe of
ſilver coin. Lockº.
To Commerce. v. n. [from the noun J. To hold intercourſe
with.
Come, but keep thy wonted ſtate,
With even ſtep and muſing gait,
And looks commercing with the ſkies, -
Thy rapt ſoul ſitting in thine eyes. - Milton.
CoMME'Rc1AL. adj. [from commerce..] Relating to commerce
or traffick. --
COMMERE. m.ſ. [French J A common mother.
As peace ſhould ſtill her wheaten garland wear,
And ſtand a commere 'tween their amities. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
To COMMIGRATE. v. n. [cºn and migrº, Latin. J. To re-
move in a body, or by conſent, from one country to
another
CoMMIGRA’Tros. m. ſ [from colºnic rate J A removal of a
| large body of people from one country to another. -
Both the inhabitants of that and of our world loſt all
memory of their commigration hence. Hºward's Nat. Hiſt.
COMMINA' TION. n.f ſcamminatio, Latin.] -
1. A threat; a denunciation of puniſhment, or of vengeance.
Some parts of knowledge God has thought fit to ſeclude
from us, to fence them not only by precept and commination,
but with difficulty and impoſſibilities.
2. The recital of God's threatenings on ſtated days.
CoMMI'NATORY. adj. [from commination J Denunciatory;
threatening. -
- To CoMMI'NGLE. v. a. [commiſſeo, Latin J. To mix into
| one maſs; to unite intimately; to mix; to blend.
. ." - Bleſt are thoſe,
Whoſe blood and judgment are ſo well commingled,
That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger,
To ſound what ſtop ſhe pleaſe. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
To CoMMI'NGLE. v. m. To unite with another thing.
Diſſolutions of gum tragacanth and oil of ſweet almonds do
not commingle, the oil remaining on the top 'till they be
ſtirred. - Pacon's Phyſical Rem.
CoMMINU'IBLE. adj. ſº comminute.] Frangible; reducible
to powder; ſuſceptible of pulveriſation.
The beſt diamonds are comminuible without it; and are ſo
far from breaking hammers, that they ſubmit unto peſtillation,
and reſiſt not any ordinary peſtle. Browne's Wu'gar Errours.
To COMMINUTE. v. a. ſcamminuo, Latin.] To grind; to
pulveriſe; to break into ſmall parts.
Parchment, ſkins, and cloth drink in liquors, though them-
ſelves be intire bodies, and not comminuted, as ſand and aſhes.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 8oo.
CoMMINU'tion. n.ſ.. [from comminute.] The act of grinding
into ſmall parts; pulveriſation.
Cauſes of fixation are the even ſpreading of the ſpirits and
tangible parts, the cloſeneſs of the tangible parts, and the
jejuncheſs or extreme comminution of ſpirits; of which the
two firſt may be joined with a nature liquefiable. Bacon.
The jaw in men and animals furniſhed with grinders, hath
an oblique or tranſverſe motion, neceſſary for comminution of
the meat. Ray on the Creation.
This ſmiting of the flecl. with the flint doth only make a
cºnminution, and a very rapid whirling and melting of ſome
particles; but that idea of flame is wholly in us. Bentley.
CoMMI's ERABLE. adj. [from commiſerate.] Worthy of com-
pation; pitiable; ſuch as muſt excite ſympathy or ſorrow.
It is the finfulleſt thing in the world to deſtitute a plantation
once in forwardneſs: for, beſides the diſhonour, it is the
guiltineſs of blood of many commiſerable perſons. Bacon'; Eſ.
This was the end of this noble and commiſèrable perſon,
Edward eldeſt ſon to the duke of Clarence. Bačn's Hºn. VII.
To COMM1(SERATE. v.a. [con and miſèreor, Lat.] To pity;
to look on with compaſſion; to compaſſionate.
Then we muſt thoſe, who groan beneath the weight
Qf age, diſeaſe, or want, commiſèrate. Denham.
We ſhould cºniſtrate our mutual ignorance, and endea-
vour to remove it. Locke.
Cox Miser Arios. m. ſ. [from commiſèrate.] Pity; compaſ-
*; tenderneſs, or concern for another's pains.
** Poor ſeduced creatures, whom ºn neither ſpeak
not think of but with much commiſeration and pity. Hooker.
- Live, and hereafter ſay
A mad man's mercy bade thee run away.
I do defy thy commiſeration,
And *PPrehend thee for a félon here. Shakespeare Rom. and Juliet.
God knows with how much commiſeration, and ſolicitous
Decay of Piety.
caution, I carried on that buſineſs, that I might neither cn-
courage the rebels, nor diſcourage the Proteſtants. K. Charles.
She ended weeping; and her lovely plight
Immoveable, 'till peace obtain'd from fault
Acknowledg'd and deplor d, in Adam wrought
Commiſ ration. A, ilton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x. 1. d40.
From you their eſtate may expect effectual comfort, ſince
there are none from whom it may not deſerve conriſeration.
Sprat's Sermons.
No where fewer beggars appear to charm up cºmmiſèration,
yet no where is there greater charity. Grant Bil, ºf Mºri.
I prevailed with myſelf to go and ſee him, partly out of
commiſeration, and partly out of curioſity. Swift.
COMMISSARY. n / ſcommiſſºrius, low Latin.]
1. An officer made occaſionally for a certain purpoſe; a dele-
gate; a deputy.
2. It is a title of eccleſiaſtical juriſdićtion, appertaining to ſuch
as exerciſes ſpiritual juriſdiction (at leaſt ſo far as his com-
miſſion permits) in places of the dioceſe ſo far diſtant from
the chief city, as the chancellor cannot call the ſubjects. Cowel.
The commiſſaries of biſhops have authority only in ſome
certain place of the dioceſe, and in ſome certain cauſes of the
juriſdiction limited to them by the biſhop's commiſſion. Ayliff.
3. An officer who draws up liſts of the numbers of an army,
and regulates the procuration and conveyance of proviſion or
annnnunition.
But is it thus you Engliſh bards compoſe?
With Runick lays thus tag inſipid proſe?
And when you ſhould your heroes deeds rehearſe,
Give us a cºmmiſſary's liſt in verſe? Prior.
Co'M Miss ARIship. n.ſ.. [from commiſſary..] The office of a
commiſſary.
A commiſſarſhip is not grantable for life, ſo as to bind the
ſucceeding biſhop, though it ſhould be confirmed by the dean
and chapter. Ayliffe's Parergon.
COMMISSION. m. ſ. [commiſſio, low Latin.]
1. The act of entruſting any thing.
2. A truſt; a warrant by which any truſt is held, or authority
exerciſed.
Commiſſion is the warrant, or letters patent, that all men
exerciſing juriſdiction, either ordinary or extraordinary, have
for their power. Cowel.
Omiſſion to do what is neceſſary,
Scals a commiſſion to a blank of danger. Shakespeare. Troil and Crºſſ
The ſubjects grief
Comes through commiſſions, which compel from each
The ſixth part of his ſubſtance, to be levied
Without delay. Shaiºſpeare's Henry VIII.
He led our powers;
Pore the cºmmiſſion of my place and perſon;
The which immediacy may well ſtand up,
And call itſelf your brother. Shafe?. King Lear.
He would have them fully acquainted with the nature and
extent of their office, and ſo he joins commiſſion with inſtruc-
tion: by one he conveys power, by the other knowledge. South.
3. A warrant by which a military officer is conſtituted. -
Solyman, filled with the vain hope of the conqueſt of Per-
ſia, gave out his commiſſions into all parts of his cmpire, for
the raiſing of a mighty army. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
I was made a colonel; though I gained my commiſſion by the
horſe's virtues, having leapt over a ſix-bar gate. Addiſ, Fréch.
He for his ſon a gay commiſſion buys,
Who drinks, whores, fights, and in a duel dies. Poſe.
4. Charge; mandate; office; employment.
It was both a ſtrange commiſſiºn, and a ſtrange obedicnce to
a commiſſion, for men, in the midſt of their own blood, and
being ſo furiouſly affailed, to hold their hands contrary to the
laws of nature and neceſſity. Bacon's War with Spain.
Such commiſſion from above
I have receiv'd, to anſwer thy deſire
Of knowledge within bounds: beyond, abſtain .
To aſk. Milton's Paradjº Lø/7.
At his command the ſtorms invade;
The winds by his commiſſion blow;
*Till with a nod he bids them ceaſe. Dryden.
He bore his great cºmmiſſion in his look; r
But ſweetly temper'd awe, and ſoften’d all he ſpoke. Dºyd.
5. Aćt of committing a crime; perpetration. Sins of commiſ-
ſon are diſtinguiſhed in theology from fins of omiſſion. -
Every cominiſion of fin introduces into the ſoul, a certain
degree of hardneſs. Scath’s Sermons.
He indulges himſelf in the habit of known ſin, whether
commiſſiºn of ſomething which God hath forbidden, or the
omiſſion of ſomething commanded. Rogers'; Sermons.
6. A number of people joined in a truſt or office. - -
7. The ſtate of that which is intruſted to a number of joint
officers; as the broad ſeal was put into cºmm 'ſion.
8. [In commerce J The order by which a factor trades for
another perſon. -
To CoMM'ssion, v. a. [from commiſſion.] To empower; *
appoint. The
C
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 76</div><p class="Text">- C O M
C O M
The peace polluted thus, a choſen band
He firſt commiſſions to the Latian land,
In threat'ning embaſſy. Dryden's Am. b. vii. l. 648.
To CoMM Ission At F. v. a. [from commiſſion.] To coin-
miſſion ; to empower.
As he was thus ſent by his father, ſo alſo were the apoſtles
ſolemnly cºiffonated by him to preach to the Gentile world,
who, with indefatigable induſtry and reſolute ſufferings, pur-
ſued the charge; and ſure this is competent evidence, that the
deſign was of the greateſt and moſt weighty importance.
- Decay of Piety.
CoMMI'ssion ER. m. ſ. [from commiſſion J Cne included in a
warrant of authority. -
A commiſſioner is one who hath commiſſion, as letters patents,
or other lawful warrant, to execute any publick office Cowel.
One article they ſtood upon, which I with your commiſſioners
have agreed upon. Sidney.
Theſe commiſſioners came into England, with whom cove-
nants were concluded. Hayward.
‘I he archbiſhop was made one of the commiſſioners of the
treaſury. Clarendon.
Suppoſe itinerary commiſſioners to inſpect, throughout the
kingdom, into the conduct of men in office, with reſpect to
morals and religion as well as abilities. Swift.
Like are their merits, like rewards they ſhare,
That ſhines a conſul, this commiſſioner. Pºpe's Dunciad.
CoMMI'ssu R E. n.ſ. [commiſſira, Latin.] Joint; a place where
one part is joined to another.
All theſe induccments cannot countervail the inconvenience
of disjointing the commiſſures with ſo many ſtrokes of the
chizel. //ºtton's Archite.7ure.
This animal is covered with a ſtrong ſhell, jointed like ar-
mour by four tranſverſe commiſſires in the middle of the body,
conne&amp;ted by tough membranes. Ray on the Creation.
To COMMIT. v. a. [committ, Latin J
1. To intruſt; to give in truſt; to put into the hands of
another.
It is not for your health thus to cºmmit -
Your weak condition to the raw, cold morning. Shakeſp.
They who are deſirous to commit to memory, might have
eaſe. 2 Mac. ii. 25.
2. To put in any place to be kept ſafe.
Is my muſe controul’d
By ſervile awe ? Born free, and not be bold !
At leaſt I’ll dig a hole within the ground, .
And to the truſty earth commit the ſound. Dryd. Perſ. Sat.
3. To ſend to priſon; to impriſon.
Here comes the nobleman that committed the prince, for
ſtriking him about Bardolph. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV, p. ii.
They two were committed, at leaſt reſtrained of their
liberty. Clarendon.
So though my ankle ſhe has quitted,
My heart continues ſtill committed;
And, like a bail'd and main priz'd lover, -
Although at large, I am bound over. Hudibras, p. ii.
4. To perpetrate; to do a fault; to be guilty of a crime.
Keep thy word juſtly ; ſwear not; commit not with man's
ſworn ſpouſe. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Letters out of Ulſter gave him notice of the inhumane mur-
ders committed there upon a multitude of the Proteſtants Claren.
A creeping young fellow committed matrimony with a briſk
gameſome laſs. L'Eſtrange.
'Tis policy
For ſon and father to take different ſides;
Then lands and tenements commit no treaſon. Dryden.
CoMMI"r MENT. m. ſ. [from cºmmit.] Aét of ſending to pri-
ſon ; impriſonment.
It did not appear by any new examinations or commitments,
that any other perſon of quality was diſcovered or appeached.
Bacon's Henry VII.
They were glad to compound for his bare commitment to the
Tower, whence he was within few days enlarged. Clarendon.
I have been conſidering, ever ſince my commitment, what it
might be proper to deliver upon this occaſion. Swift.
2. An order for ſending to priſon.
CoMMI'TTE E. m. ſ. [from commit.]
Thoſe to whom the confideration or ordering of any mat-
ter is referred, either by ſome court to whom it belongs, or
by conſent of parties. As in parliament, after a bill is read,
it is either agreed to and paſſed, or not agreed to ; or neither
of theſe, but referred to the conſideration of ſome appointed
by the houſe, to examine it farther, who thereupon are called
a cºmmittee. Cowel.
Mancheſter had orders to march thither, having a committee
of the parliament with him, as thcre was another committee of
the Scottiſh parliament always in that army; there being alſo
now a committee of both kingdoms reſiding at London, for the
carrying on the war. Clarendon.
All corners were filled with covenanters, confuſion, com-
mittee men, and ſoldiers, ſerving each other to their ends of
revenge, or power, or profit; and theſe committee men and
ſoldiers were poſſeſt with this covenant. J/altern.
- - *** === - I-
CoMMI'rter. n.ſ.. [from commit.J Perpetrator; he that
COmnits.
| Such an one makes a man not only a partaker of other
men's ſins, but a deriver of the whole guilt to himſelf; yet
ſo as to leave the committer as full of guilt as before. South.
CoMMI'rrible. ad. [from commit.] Liable to be com-
mitted.
Beſides the miſtakes committible in the ſolary compute of
years, the difference of chronology diſturbs his computes.
- Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
To CoMM1's. v. a. ſcommiſſeo, Lat.j To mingle; to blend;
to mix; to unite with things in one maſs.
A dram of gold, diſſolved in aqua regia, with a dram of
copper in aqua fortis commixed, gave a great colour. Bacon.
. I have written againſt the ſpontaneous generation of frogs
in the clouds; or, on the caith, out of duſt and rain-water
commixed. Ray on the Creation.
It is manifeſt by this experiment, that the commixed impreſ.
fions of all the colours do ſtir up and beget a ſenſation of
white; that is, that whiteneſs is compounded of all the
colours. - Newton's Opt.
CoMM1(xios. n.ſ.. [from commix...] Mixture; incorporation
of different ingredients.
Were thy commixion Greek and Trojan, ſo
That thou could'ſt ſay, this hand is Grecian all,
And this is Trojan. Shakespeare's Troilus and Crºffda.
CoMMI'xtion. n.ſ.. [from commix.] Mixture; incorporation;
union of various ſubſtances in one maſs.
Some ſpecies there be of middle and participating natures,
that is, of birds and beaſts, as batts, and ſome few others,
ſo confirmed and ſet together, that we cannot define the be-
ginning or end of either; there being a commixtion of both in
the whole, rather than adapation or cement of the one unto
the other. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii.
CoMMI'xture. m. ſ. [from commix.]
1. The aët of mingling; the ſtate of being mingled; incorpo-
ration; union in one maſs.
In the commixture of any thing that is more oily or ſweet,
ſuch bodies are leaſt apt to putrefy, the air working little upon
them. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 35o.
2. The maſs formed by mingling different things; compoſition;
compound. -
Fair ladies, maſk'd, are roſes in the bud;
Orangels veil'd in clouds: are roſes blown,
Diſmaſk'd, their damaſk ſweet commixture ſhewn, Shake?.
My love and fear glew'd many friends to thee;
And now I fall, thy tough commixtures melt,
Impairing Henry, ſtrength'ning miſproud York. , Shakeſp.
There is ſcarcely any riſing but by a commixture of good and
evil arts. Bacon, Eſſay 15.
All the circumſtances and reſpe&amp;t of religion and ſtate inter-
mixed together in their commixture, will better become a royal
hiſtory, or a council-table, than a ſingle life. J/otton.
CoMMo'de. n.ſ. [French..] The head-dreſs of women.
Let them reflect how they would be affected, ſhould they
meet with a man on horſeback, in his breeches and jack-boots,
dreſſed up in a commode and a nightrail. Spe'fat. Nº. 435.
She has contrived to ſhew her principles by the ſetting of
her commode; ſo that it will be impoſſible for any woman that
is diſaffected to be in the faſhion. Addiſon's Freeholder, N’. 8.
She, like ſome penſive ſtateſman, walks demure,
And ſmiles, and hugs, to make deſtruction ſure;
Or under high commodes, with looks erect,
Barefac’d devours, in gaudy colours deck'd. Granville.
COMMO'DIOUS. adj. [commodus, Latin.]
1. Convenient; ſuitable; accommodate to any purpoſe; fit;
proper; free from hindrance or uneaſineſs. -
Such a place cannot be commodious to live in ; for being ſo
near the moon, it had been too near the ſun. Raleigh's Hiſſ.
To that receſs, commodious for ſurprize, .*
When purple light ſhall next ſuffuſe the ſkies, . .
With me repair. Pope's Odyſ. b. iv. 1.55c.
2. Uſeful; ſuited to wants or neceſſities. - -
If they think we ought to prove the ceremonies commºdious,
they do greatly deceive themſelves. Hooker, b. iv. ſee?. 4.
Bacchus was grown a proper young man, had found Out
the making of wine, and many things elſe commodiºus for
mankind. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the Wºrld, b. i, c. 6. ſ. 5.
The gods have done their part, - -
By ſending this commodious plague. Dryden's Oedipus.
Maro's muſe, .
Thrice ſacred muſe, commodious precepts £W*** 7 * r * *
Inſtructive to the ſwains. - Philipſ,
CoMºMo'orously. adv. [from commodious.]
1. Conveniently.
At the jarge foot of an old hollow tree,
In a deep cave ſeated commºdiouſly,
There dwelt a good ſubſtantial country mouſe. Cowley.
2. Without diſtreſs.
We need not fear
To paſs commodiouſly this life, ſuſtain'd
3 By
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 77</div><p class="Text">.
|
:
i
--
C O M
I'v hiri with many comforts, 'till we end -
In du: , our final reſt, and native home. A/lt. Par. I ºft.
Sui ably to a certain purpoſe -
Wiſdom may have framed one and the ſame thing to ſerve
coºn, cºy for divers ends. Hoºk r, b v. ſect. 42.
Galen, upon the conſideration of the body, challenges any
one to find lºw the leaſt fibre might be more commoaizºſ.y
placed for uſe or coniclineſ. South's Sermans.
Comix10/1, 1ous N Ess, ºr ſ. [from commodious.] Convenience;
advantate.
The place requireth many circumſtances; as the ſituation
near the ſea, for the commºdºzuſieſ of an intercourſe with
England. Bacon.
Of cities, the greatneſs and riches increaſe according to the
commodiouſneſs of their ſituation in fertile countries, or upon
rivers and havens. Temple.
Cox; 10'11, Y. m. ſ. [commoditas, Latin J
1. Intereſt; advantage; profit.
They knew, that howſoever men may ſeek their own com-
modity, yet if this were done with injury unto others, it was
not to be ſuffered. Hoºker, b. v. Jecz. Io.
Commodity, the biaſs of the world, -
The world, which of itſelf is poiſed well,
'Till this advant.ge, this vile drawing biaſs,
This ſway of motion, this commodity,
Makes it take head from all indifferency,
From all direction, purpoſe, courſe, intent. Shakeſp K. jºhn.
After much debatement of the commodities or diſcommodi-
ties like to enſue, they concluded. Hayward.
2. Convenience of time or place.
There came into her head certain verſes, which, if ſhe had
had preſent commodity, ſhe would have adjoined as a retraction
to the other. Sidney, b. ii.
She demanded leave, not to loſe this long ſought for con-
rºcaity of time, to eaſe her heart. Sidney.
Travellers turn out of the highway, drawn cither by the
roºmedity of a foot-path, or the delicacy or the freſhneſs of the
fields. Fen. Johnſºn's Diſcov.
3. VV arcs; merchandiſe; goods for traffick.
All my fortunes are at ſea;
Nor have I money, nor commodity
To raiſe a preſent ſum. Shakespeare. Mirchant ºf Penice.
It had been difficult to make ſuch a mole where they had
not ſo natural a commodity as the earth of Puzzuola, which
immediately hardens in the water. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Commodities are moveables, valuable by money, the common
meaſure. Lºcke.
Of money in the commerce and traffick of mankind, the
principal uſe is that of ſaving the commutation of more bulky
commºdites. Arbuthnot on Coins.
CoM Mo'DoRE. m. ſ. [probably corrupted from the Spaniſh
comendador.] The captain who commands a ſquadron of ſhips.
COMMON. m. ſ [communis, Latin.]
1. Belonging equally to more than one.
Though life and ſenſe be common to man and brutes, and
their operations in many things alike; yet by this form he
lives the life of a man, and not of a brute, and hath the ſenſe
of a man, and not of a brute. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
He who hath received damage, has, beſides the right of
puniſhment common to him with other men, a particular right
to ſeek reparation. Locke.
2. Having no poſſeſſor or owner.
Where no kindred are to be found, we ſee the poſſeſſion of
a private man revert to the community, and ſo become again
perfectly common, no body having a right to inherit them; nor
can any one have a property in them, otherwiſe than in other
things common by nature. Locke.
3. Vulgar; mean; not diſtinguiſhed by any excellence; often
ſeen ; eaſy to be had of little value; not rare; not ſcarce.
Or as the man whom princes do advance,
Upon their gracious mercy-ſeat to fit,
Doth common things, of courſe and circumſtance,
To the reports of common men commit. Davies.
4. Publick; general ; ſerving the uſe of all.
He was adviſed by a parliament-man not to be ſtrict in
rcading ail the common prayer, but make ſome variation. J/alt.
I need not mention the old common ſhore of Rome, which
ran from all parts of the town, with the current and violence
of an ordinary river. Addiſon on Italy.
5. Of no rank; mean ; without birth or deſcent.
Look, as I blow this ſcather from my face,
And as the air blows it to me again,
Such is the lightneſs of you common men. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Flying bullets now,
To execute his rage, appear too ſlow ;
They miſs, or ſweep but common ſouls away,
For ſuch a loſs Opdam his life muſt pay. J/aller.
é. Frequent ; uſual ; ordinary.
There is an evil which I have ſeen common among men.
Ecces. vi. I.
The Papiſts were the moſt common place, and the butt
againſt whom all the arrows were directed. Clarendon.
*
*
C O M
Neit. c. is it ſtrange that there ſhould be myſeries in divº-
nity, as well as in the commºngſt operations in nature. Swift.
7. Proſtitute.
'Tis a ſtrange thing, the impudence of ſome women' was
the word of a dame, who herſelf was cºmmon. L'Aſtrange.
Hipparchus was going to marry a common woman, but con-
ſulted Philander upon the occaſion. Speciator, Nº. 475.
8. [In grammar.] Such verbs as ſignify both ačtion and paſſion
are called common ; as aſ error, I deſ; iſc, or am deſpiſed ; and
alſo ſuch nouns as are both maſculine and feminine, as parens.
CoM Mos. m. ſ.[from the adjective..] An open ground equal-
ly uſed by many perſons.
Then take we down his load, and turn him off,
Like to the empty aſs, to ſhake his ears,
And graze in commons. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
ls not the ſeparate property of a thing the great cauſe of its
endearment : 1)oes any one reſpect a common as much as he
does his garden South.
Co'Mxon. adv. [from the adječtive..] Commonly; ordinarily.
I am more than cºmm. ºn tall, Shakeſp. As you like it.
In Co'M Mon. -
1. Equally to be participated by a certain number.
By making an explicite conſent of every commoner neceſ-
ſary to any one's apprºpriating to himſelf any part of what is
given in comm.o., children or ſervants could not cut the meat
which their father or maſter had provided for them in common,
without aſſigning to every one his peculiar part. Locke.
2. Equally with another; indiſcriminately.
In a work of this nature it is impoſſible to avoid puerilities,
it having that in toº man with dictionaries, and books of anti-
quities. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To CoMMos. v. n. [from the noun..] To have a joint right
with others in ſome common ground.
CoM Mon Law contains thoſe cuſtoms and uſages which have,
by long preſcription, obtained in this nation the force of laws.
It is diſtinguiſhed from the ſtatute law, which owes its autho-
rity to acts of parliament.
CoM Mon Ple As. The king's court now held in Weſtminſter-
hall; but anciently moveable. Gwin obſerves, that 'till Henry
III. granted the magna charta there were but two courts, the
exchequer, and the king's bench, ſo called becauſe it followed
the king ; but upon the grant of that charter, the court of
common pleas was erected, and ſettled at Weſtminſter. All
civil cauſes, both real and perſonal, are, or were formerly,
tried in this court, according to the ſtrićt laws of the realm;
and Forteſcue repreſents it as the only court for real cauſes.
The chief judge is called the lord chief juſtice of the common
pleas, and he is aſſiſted by three or four aſſociates, created by
letters patent from the king. Cowel.
Co'M Mon ABLE. adj. [from common. J What is held in
Connnnon.
Much good land might be gained from foreſts and chaſes,
and from other commonable places, ſo as there be care taken
that º poor commoners have no injury. Bacon's Ad to Pillers.
Co'MM (NAG E. m. ſ. [from common.] The right of feeding on
a common; the joint right of uſing any thing in common
with others.
Co'MMONALty. n.ſ. [communauts, French.J
1. The common people; the people of the lower rank.
Bid him ſtrive
To gain the love o' th' commonalty; the duke
Shall govern England. Shakeſp Henry VIII.
There is in every ſtate, as we know, two portions of ſub-
jećts; the nobles and the commonalty. Bacon, Eſſay 16.
The emmet joined in her popular tribes
Of commonaſty. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. vii. 1. 489.
All gentlemen are almoſt obliged to it; and I know no rea-
ſon we ſhould give that advantage to the commonaſty of Eng-
land, to be foremoſt in brave actions. Dryd. Prºf. to An. Mir.
2. The bulk of mankind.
I myſelf too will uſe the ſecret acknowledgment of the
commonalty bearing record of the God of Gods. Hooker, b. iii.
Co'MM on E R. n.ſ.. [from common.]
1. One of the common people ; a man of low rank; of mean
condition.
Doubt not
The commoners, for whom we ſtand, but they, -
Upon their ancient malice, will forget. Shake p Coriolanus.
His great men durſt not pay their court to him, 'till he had
ſatiated his thirſt of blood by the death of ſome of his loyal
cº///7,0/iery. * Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. io.
2. A man not noble. -
This commoner has worth and parts,
Is prais'd for arms, or lov'd for arts:
His head achs for a coronet;
And who is bleſs'd, that is not great Priºr.
3. A member of the houſe of commons.
4. One who has a joint right in common ground.
Much land might be gained from commonable places, ſo as
there be care taken that the poor commoners have no injury.
Bacon's Advice to Pillers.
5. A
T
lº
} A
wº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 78</div><p class="Text">~~
C O M
5 • A ſtudent of the ſecond rank at the univerſity of Oxford; one
that eats at the common table.
e. A proſtitute.
Behold this ring, t
Whoſe high reſpect, and rich validity,
Did lack a parallel: yet, for all that,
He gave it to a commoner o' th' camp. Shakeſpeare'
Cox Moxi"r Ion. m. ſ. [cominonitio, Latin.] Advice ; warning
inſtrućtion.
Co'n' Mo'N I. Y. adv. [from common.] Frequently ; uſually ; or-
dinarily.
This hand of your's requires
Much caſtigation, exerciſe devout;
For here's a ſtrong and ſweating devil here,
That commonly rebels. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
A great diſeaſe may change the frame of a body, though,
if it lives to recover ſtrength it commonly returns to its natural
conſtitution. - Temple.
Co'Mºon N Ess. n ſ. [from common.]
1 - Equal participation among many.
Nor can the commonneſs of the guilt obviate the cenſure,
there being nothing more frequent than for men to accuſe their
own faults in other perſons. Government of the Tongºle, ſ. 6.
2. Frequent occurrence ; frequency.
Elot out that maxim, r s nolunt diu male adminiſłrari : the
commonneſ, makes me not know who is the author; but ſure
he muſt be ſome modern. - Swift.
To CoM Mox PLA'ce. v. a. To reduce to general heads.
I do not apprehend any difficulty in collecting and common-
placing an univerſal hiſtory from the whole body of hiſtorians.
- Feltºn on the Claſſicks.
CoM Mon P1. AcE-Book. n.ſ. A book in which things to be
remembered are ranged under general heads.
1 turned to my cºmmonplace-back, and found his caſe under
the word cºquette. Tatler, Nº. 107.
*Co'M Moss. n. ſ.
1. The vulgar; the lower people; thoſe who inherit no honours.
Little office
The hateful commons will perform for us;
Except, like curs, to tear us all in pieces. Shakeſp. Richard II.
Iath he not paſs'd the nobles and the commºns º Shakeſp.
Theſe three to kings and chiefs their ſcenes diſplay,
The reſt before the ignoble commons play. Dryden's Fables.
The gods of greater nations dwell around,
And, on the right and left, the palace bound;
The commons where they can: the nobler ſort,
With winding doors wide open, front the court. Dryden.
-2. The lower houſe of parliament, by which the people are re-
preſented, and of which the members are choſen by the
- people.
My good lord,
How now for mitigation of this bill
Urg’d by the commons P Doth his majeſty
Incline to it, or no Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
In the houſe of commºns many gentlemen, unſatisfied of his
guilt, durſt not condemn him. King Charles.
==. Food; fare; diet: ſo called from colleges, where it is eaten
in COIn ſiloll.
He painted himſelf of a dove-colour, and took his commons
with the pigeons. - * L’Eſtrange.
Meanwhile ſhe quench'd her fury at the flood,
And with a lenten fallad cool'd her blood:
Their commons, though but coarſe, were nothing ſcant;
Nor did their minds an equal banquet want. Dryden.
The doćtor now obeys the ſummons,
Likes both his company and commons ;
Diſplays his talent; ſits 'till ten;
Next day invited, comes again. Swift.
v. E.'
*Eom Moswº. }n. ſ: [from common and weal, or wealth.]
O M M ON WE'A L T H.
= . A polity; an eſtabliſhed form of civil life.
Two foundations bear up publick ſocieties; the one incli-
nation, whereby all men deſire ſociable life; the other an or-
der agreed upon, touching the manner of their union in living
together: the latter is that which we call the law of a common-
weal. Hooker.
It was impoſſible to make a commonweal in Ireland, without
ſettling of all the eſtates and poſſeſſions throughout the king-
dom. Davies on Ireland.
A continual parliament would but keep the commonweal in
tune, by preſerving laws in their vigour. King Charles.
There is no body in the commonwealth of learning who does
not profeſs himſelf a lover of truth. Locke.
T^ - The publick; the general body of the people.
Such a prince,
So kind a father of the commonweal. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
Their ſons are well tutored by you : you are a good mem-
ber of the commonwealth. Shakeſpeare's Love's Labour Loft.
- A government in which the ſupreme power is lodged in the
people; a republick.
Did he, or do yet any of them, imagine
The gods would ſleep to ſuch a Stygian practice,
'ol. I.
C O M
Againſt that cºmmonwealth which they have founded. jºhnſºn,
Commonwealths were nothing more, in their original, but
free cities; though ſometimes, by force of orders and diſci-
pline, they have extended themſelves into mighty domi-
In 10ns. - Tºm’ le.
Co'MMORANCE. l n ſ [from commorant.], Dwelling; habita-
Co'MMORANcy. tion; abode ; reſidence.
The very quality, carriage, and place of commorance of
witneſſes, is by this means plainly and evidently ſet forth.
Hale's Hiºry of the Common Law ºf Ergland.
An archbiſhop, out of his dioceſe, becomes ſubječt to the
archbiſhop of the province where he has his abode and com-
morancy. - ..y'ſſe's Parergon.
COMMORANT, adj. [commorans, Latin.] Reſident; dwell-
ing; inhabiting.
The abbot may demand and recover his monk, that is com-
morant and reſiding in another monaſtery. Aft's Parergon.
CoM Motion. n.ſ. (commotio, Latin.j
1. Tumult; diſturbance; combuſtion; ſedition; publick diſor-
der; inſurreótion.
By flatt'ry he hath won the common hearts;
And when he'll pleaſe to make comm zºom,
'Tis to be fear'd they all will follow him. Shakespeare Henry VI.
When ye ſhall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified.
Luº Xxi. 9.
The Iliad conſiſts of battles and a continual contº otion;
the Odyſſey in patience and wiſdom. Broom's Notes on the Odºſ.
2. Perturbation; diſorder of mind; heat; violence; agitation.
Some ſtrange commotion
Is in his brain; he bites his lips, and ſtarts. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
He could not debate any thing without ſome commotion,
when the argument was not of moment. Clarendon.
3. Diſturbance; reſtleſneſs.
Sacrifices were offered when an earthquake happened, that
he would allay the commotions of the water, and put an end
to the earthquake. //codward’s Natural Hiſtory, p. iii.
CoMMO'TIONER n.ſ.. [from cony otiºn.] One that cauſes com-
motions; a diſturber of the peace. A word not in uſe.
The people more regarding ºnctioners than commiſſioners,
flocked together, as clouds cluſter againſt a ſtorm Hayward.
To CoMºMo'y E. v. a. [.oninovce, Latin. To diſturb ; to agi-
tate; to put into a violent motion; to unſettle.
Strait the ſands,
Commov’d around, in gathering eddies play. Thomſ. Summer.
To COMMUNE. v. n. [communico, Lat.] To converſe; to
a together ; to impart ſentiments mutually.
So long as Guyon with her communed,
Unto the ground ſhe caſt her modeſt eye;
And ever and anon, with roſy red,
The baſhful blood her ſnowy cheeks did dye. Fairy Queen,
I will commune with you of ſuch things,
That want no ears but your's. Shakespeare Meſſure for Maſure.
They would forbear open hoſtility, and reſort unto him
peaceably, that they might commune together as friends. Hayw.
Then commune, how that day they beſt may ply
Their growing work. Milton's Paradſ, Lºft, b. ix. l. 201.
Ideas, as ranked under names, are thoſe that, for the moſt
part, men reaſon of within themſelves, and always thoſe
which they commune about with others. Locke.
CoMMUNIcAB 1'LIt Y. m. ſ. [from communicable.] The quality
of being communicated; capability to be imparted.
CoMMU'N IcABLE, adj. [from communicate.]
1. That which may become the common poſſeſſion of more
than one ; with to.
Sith eternal life is communicable unto all, it behooveth that
the word of God be ſo likewiſe. Hooker, b. v. ſect. 20.
2. That which may be imparted, or recounted; with to.
Nor let thine own inventions hope
Things not reveal’d, which th' inviſible king,
Only omniſcient, hath ſuppreſs'd in night,
Yo none communicable in earth or heav'n. Milton's Par. Lº/?.
The happy place
Rather inflames thy torment, repreſenting
Loſt bliſs, to thee no more communicable. Milton's Par. Rºg.
CoMMU'NICANT. m. ſ. [from communicate.] One who is pre-
ſent, as a worſhipper, at the celebration of the Lord's Supper ;
one who participates of the bleſſed ſacrament.
Communicants have ever uſed it; and we, by the form of the
very utterance, do ſhew we uſe it as communicants. Hºoker.
A conſtant frequenter of worſhip, and a never-failing
monthly communicant. Atterbury's Sermons.
To COMMU'NICATE. v. a. [communico, Latin.)
1. To impart to others what is in our own power; to make
others partakers; to confer a joint poſſeſſion; to beſtow.
Common benefits are to be communicated with all, but pecu-
liar benefits with choice. Bacon, Eſſay I 3.
Where God is worſhipped, there he commºnicates his bleſſ-
ings and holy influences. Taylor's ſ/orthy Cºmmunicant.
Which of the Grecian chiefs conſorts with thee
But Diomede deſires my company,
And ſtill cºmmunicates his praiſe with me. Drydº's Fºx'ſe.
2. To reveal; to impart knowledge.
5 B I learned
* --_*T
:
-
º
º
s
º º |
*
*
º ! .
. . . .
; * a
•
i
|
! . - i.
A s º
|
. . . . .
i. • *
* - º
; :
|
a º
. . . !
-
º l
, - ' !
-
i.
a
". º º
| | | | |
* . . . :
- -
* . . , -
- I - º
: |
: - ! l
\ . . . . .<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 79</div><p class="Text">:
.
|
.
.
C O M
I learned diligently, and do communical, wiſdom liberally: I
do not hide her riches. - J/iſd. vii. 13.
Charles the hardy would communicate his ſecrets with none;
and leaſt of all, thoſe ſecrets which troubled him moſt. Bacon.
He communicated thoſe thoughts only with the lord Digby,
the lord Colepeper, and the chancellor of the exchequer.
Clarendon, b. viii.
3. It had anciently the prepoſition with before the perſon, to
whom communication either of benefits or knowledge was made.
A journey of much adventure, which, to ſhew the ſtrength
of his privacy, had been before not communicated with any
other. //otton.
4. Now it has only to.
Let him, that is taught in the word, communicate unto him
that teacheth. Gal. vi. 6.
His majeſty frankly promiſed, that he could not, in any
degree, communicate to any perſon the matter, before he had
taken and cºmmunicated to them his own reſolutions. Clarendon.
Thoſe who ſpeak in publick, are better heard when they
diſcourſe by a lively genius and ready memory, than when
they read all they would communicate to their hearers. J/atts.
To CoMMU's IcAt E. v. m. -
1. To partake of the bleſſed ſacrament.
The primitive Chriſtians communicated every day. Taylºr.
2. To have ſomething in common with another ; as, the houſes
cºmmunicate, there is a paſſage between them common to both,
by which either may be entered from the other.
The whole body is nothing but a ſyſtem of ſuch canals,
which all communicate with one another, mediately or imme-
diately. Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
CoM MüN1cArios. n.ſ. [from communicate.]
1. The act of imparting benefits or knowledge. .
Both together ſerve completely for the reception and com-
zºnication of learned knowledge. Holder's Elements of Speech.
2. Common boundary or inlet; paſſage or means, by which
from one place there is a way without interruption to another.
The map ſhews the natural communication providence has
formed between the rivers and lakes of a country at ſo great a
diſtance from the ſea. Addison on Italy.
The Euxine ſea is conveniently ſituated for trade, by the
cºunicatiºn it has both with Aſia and Europe. Arbuthnot.
3. Interchange of knowledge; good intelligence between ſeveral
perſons.
Secrets may be carried ſo far, as to ſtop the communication
neceſſary among all who have the management of affairs. Swift.
4. Conference; converſation.
Abner had cºmmunication with the elders of Iſrael, ſay-
ing, ye ſought for David in times paſt to be king over you:
now then do it. 2 Sam. iii. 17:
The chief end of language, in communication, being to be
underſtood, words ſerve not for that end, when any word does
not excite in the hearers the ſame idea which it ſtands for in
the mind of the ſpeaker. Locke.
CoMMU'N1cATIVE. adj. [from communicate.] Inclined to
make advantages common; liberal of benefits or knowledge;
not cloſe; not ſelfiſh.
We conceive them more than ſome envious and mercenary
gardeners will thank us for; but they deſerve not the name of
that communicative and noble profeſſion. Evelyn's Kalendar.
We think we have ſufficiently paid for our want of pru-
dence, and determine for the future to be leſs communicative.
Swift and Pºpe's Preface.
CoMMU'N1cATIVEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from communicative..] The qua-
lity of being communicative, of beſtowing or imparting be-
nefits or knowledge.
He is not only the moſt communicative of all beings, but
he will alſo communicate himſelf in ſuch meaſure as entirely
to ſatisfy ; otherwiſe ſome degrees of communicativeneſ, would
be wanting. Norris.
Coy MU'NION. m. ſ. [communio, Latin.[
1. Intercourſe; fellowſhip; common poſſeſſion; participation
of ſomething in common; interchange of tranſactions.
Conſider, finally, the angels, as having with us that com-
miſſion which the apoſtle to the Hebrews noteth; and in re-
gard whereof, angels have not diſdained to profeſs themſelves
our fellow ſervants. Hooker, b. i. ſº. 4.
We are not, by ourſelves, ſufficient to furniſh ourſelves
with competent ſtores for ſuch a life as our nature doth deſire;
therefore we are naturally induced to ſeek communion and fel-
lowſhip with others. - Hooker, b. i. ſecº. 10.
The Iſraelites had never any communion or affairs with the
Ethiopians. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the //orld.
Thou, ſo pleas'd,
Can'ſ raiſe thy creature to what height thou wilt
Of union, or communion, deify’d. Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft.
We maintain communiºn with God himſelf, and are made
in the ſame degree partakers of the Divine Nature. Fiddes.
2. The common or publick celebration of the Lord's Supper;
the participation of the bleſſed ſacrament.
They reſolved, that the ſtanding of the communion table in
all churches ſhould be altercd. Clarendon.
C O M
Tertullian reporteth, that the pićture of Chriſt was engraven
Peacham on Drawing.
upon the communion cup.
. A common or publick ačt.
Men began publickly to call on the name of the Lord ;
that is, they ſerved and praiſed God by communion, and in
Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the I/orld.
publick manner.
4. Union in the common worſhip of any church.
Bare communion with a good church, can never alone make
a good man ; for, if it could, we ſhould have no bad ones.
- South's Sermons.
Ingenuous men have lived and died in the communion of
that church. Stillingflect.
CoMMU'NITY. m. ſ. [communitas, Latin.]
1 The commonwealth ; the body politick.
How could communities,
Degrees in ſchools, and brotherhood in cities,
But by degree, ſtand in authentick place? Shakesp. Trail. and Croſſ.
Not in a ſingle perſon only, but in a community or multi-
Hammond's Fundamentals.
This parable may be aptly enough expounded of the laws
tude of men.
that ſecure a civil community. L’E/?range.
It is not deſigned for her own uſe, but for the whole con-
munity. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 157.
The love of our country is impreſſed on our mind, for the
preſervation of the community.
Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 5.
He lives not for himſelf alone, but hath a regard in all his
aćtions to the great community. Atterbury.
2. Common poſſeſſion; the ſtate contrary to property or appro-
priation.
This text is far from proving Adam ſole proprietor, it is
a confirmation of the original community of all things. Locke.
3. Frequency; commonneſs.
He was but, as the cuckow is in June,
Heard, not regarded; ſeen, but with ſuch eyes,
As, ſick and blunted with community,
Afford no extraordinary gaze. Shakespeare.
Cox Mutability. n.ſ. [from commutable.] The quity of
being capable of exchange.
Cox Mu'ta BLE, adj. [from commute.] That may be ex-
changed for ſomething elſe; that may be bought off, or ran-
ſomed.
CoMMUTA'tion. m. ſ. [from commute.]
1. Change; alteration.
An innocent nature could hate nothing that was innocent:
in a word, ſo great is the commutation, that the ſoul then hated
only that which now only it loves, i. e. fin. South's Sermons.
2. Exchange; the act of giving one thing for another.
The whole univerſe is ſupported by giving and returning,
by commerce and commutation. outh's Sermons.
According to the preſent temper of mankind, it is abſolute-
ly neceſſary that there be ſome method and means of commu-
tation, as that of money. Ray on the Creation.
The uſe of money in the commerce and traffick of man-
kind, is that of ſaving the commutation of more bulky com-
modities. Arbuthnot on Coins.
3. Ranſom; the aët of exchanging a corporal for a pecuniary
puniſhment. -
The law of God had allowed an evaſion, that is, by way
of commutation or redemption. Brºwn's Wugar Errours, b. v.
CoMMU'TATIVE. adj. [from commute.] Relative to exchange;
as commutative juſtice, that honeſty which is exerciſed in traf-
fick, and which is contrary to fraud in bargains.
To COMMUTE. v. a. [commuto, Latin.]
1. To exchange; to put one thing in the place of another; to
give or receive one thing for another.
This will commute our taſks, exchange theſe pleaſant and
gainful ones, which God aſſigns, for thoſe uneaſy and fruit-
leſs ones we impoſe on ourſelves. Decay of Pity.
2. To buy off, or ranſom one obligation by another.
Some commute ſwearing for whoring; as if forbearance of
the one were a diſpenſation for the other. L'E/ºrange.
To CoMMU't E. v. n. To attone; to bargain for exemption. .
Thoſe inſtitutions which God deſigned for means to further
men in holineſs, they look upon as a privilege to ſerve inſtead
of it, and to commute for it. South's Sermons.
CoMMU'TUAL. adj. [can and mutual.] Mutual; reciprocal:
uſed only in poetry.
Love our hearts, and hymen did our hands,
Unite commutual in moſt ſacred bands. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
There, with commutual zeal, we both had ſtrove
In acts of dear benevolence and love;
Brothers in peace, not rivals in command. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
COMPACT. n.ſ. [pačium, Latin.] A contračt; an accord 5
an agreement; a mutual and ſettled appointment between two
or more, to do or to forbear ſomething.
I hope the king made peace with all of us;
And the compači is firm and true in me. Shakespeare. Rich. III.
In the beginnings of ſpeech there was an implicit compaº,
founded upon common conſent, that ſuch words, voices, or
geſtures, ſhould be ſigns whereby they would expreſs their
thoughts. South.
.
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 80</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
To CoMPA'ct. v. a. ſcoºpingo compasium, Latin.]
1. To join together with firmneſs; to unite cloſely; to conſo-
lidate.
Inform her full of my particular fears;
And thereto add ſuch reaſons of your own,
As may compač; it more. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Nor are the nerves of his comta&amp;ied ſtrength
Stretch'd, and diſſolv’d into unfinew'd length. Denham.
By what degrees this earth's compacted ſphere
Was harden'd, woods, and rocks, and towns to bear. Roſſom.
This diſeaſe is more dangerous as the ſolids are more ſtrićt
and cºmpačed, and conſequently more ſo as people are ad-
vanced in age. - Arbuthnot on Diet.
Now the bright ſun compači; the precious ſtone,
Imparting radiant luſtre, like his own. Blackmore's Creation.
2. To make out of ſomething.
If he, compact of jars, grow muſical,
We ſhall have ſhortly diſcord in the ſpheres.
3. To league with.
Thou pernicious woman,
Cºmpaſſ with her that's gone, think'ſt thou thy oaths,
Though they would ſwear down each particular fact,
Were teſtimonies. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Maſure.
4. To join together; to bring into a ſyſtem.
We ſee the world ſo compačied, that each thing preſerveth
other things, and alſo itſelf, Hooker, b. i. ſ. 9.
CoMPAct, adj. [compačius, Latin.]
1. Firm ; ſolid; cloſe; denſe; of firm texture.
is not the denſity greater in free and open ſpaces, void of
air and other groſſer bodies, than within the pores of water,
glaſs, cryſtal, gems, and other compačf bodies. Newton's Opt.
Without attraction the diſſevered particles of the chaos
could never convene into ſuch great compači maſſes as the
planets. Bentley.
2. Brief; as a compač diſcourſe.
CoMFA'cº EDN Ess. n.ſ.. [from compačied.] Firmneſs; denſity;
Sticking or compactedneſs, being natural to denſity, requires
ſome exceſs of gravity in proportion to the denſity, or ſome
other outward violence, to break it. Digby on Bodies.
Thoſe atoms are ſuppoſed infrangible, extremely compacted
and hard ; which compaºledneſs and hardneſs is a demonſtra-
tion, that nothing could be produced by them. Cheyne.
CoMPActly, adv. [from compaº.]
1. Cloſely; denſely
2. With neat joining; with good compačture.
CoMPACTN Ess. n.ſ. [from compact.] Firmneſs; cloſeneſs;
denſity.
". reſt, by reaſon of the compa?neſ of terreſtrial
matter, cannot make its way to wells. 17%adw. Nat. Hiſtory.
CoMPA'cTURE. m. ſ. [from compač.] Structure; manner in
which any thing isjoined together; compagination.
And over it a fair portcullis hong,
Which to the gate directly did incline,
With comely compaſs and compacture ſtrong,
Neither unſeemly ſhort, nor yet exceeding long. Fai. Queen.
COMPA GES. n.ſ. [Latin.) A ſyſtem of many parts united.
The organs in animal bodies are only a regular compages of
pipes and veſſels, for the fluids to paſs through. Ray.
CoM PAGINATION. n.ſ. [compago, Latin.] Union ; ſtruc-
ture; junction; connexion; contexture.
The intire or broken compagination of the magnetical
fabrick under it. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
Co'MPA NABLENEss. m. ſ. [from company.] The quality of
being a good companion; ſociableneſs; a word not now in
uſe.
His eyes full of merry ſimplicity, his words of hearty com-
fanahl, lºſs. Sidney, b. ii.
Cox PA'Níos. m. ſ. [compagnon, French.] See COMPANY.
1. One with whom a man frequently converſes, or with whom
he ſhares his hours of relaxation. It differs from friend, as
acquaintance from confidence.
How now, my lord, why do you keep alone *
Of ſorrieſt fancies your companions make Shakespeare Macbeth.
Some friend is a companion at the table, and will not con-
tinue in the day of thy affliction. Ecclus. vi. 10.
With anxious doubts, with raging paſſions torn,
No ſweet companion near, with whom to mourn.
2. A partner; an aſſociate.
Epaphroditus, my brother and companion in labour, and
fellow ſoldier. Phil. ii. 25.
3. A familiar term of contempt; a fellow.
I ſcorn you, ſcurvy companion / What? you poor, baſe,
raſcally, cheating, lack-linnen mate : away, you mouldy
rogue, away. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
It gives boldneſs to every petty companion to ſpread ru-
mours to my defamation, in places where I cannot be preſent.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
CoMFA's Ion API. E. adj [from companion.] Fit for good fel-
lowſhip; ſocial; agreeable.
He had a more companionalle wit, and ſwayed more among
the good fellows. Clarendon, b. viii.
CoM ra's losa Bly, adv. [from companionalle.] In a compa-
nionable manner.
Shakeſpeare.
*
Prior.
r
º
CošPA'sionship. n.ſ. [from companion.] -
1. Company; train.
Alcibiades, and ſome twenty horſe,
All of companionſhip. Shakeſpeare's Timon,
2. Fellowſhip; aſſociation. -
If it be honour in your wars, to ſeem
The ſame you are not, which, for your beſt ends,
You call your policy; how is't leſs, or worſe,
That it ſhall hold companionſhip in peace
f With honour as in war. - Shakeſpeare's Coriolanur.
CO'MPANY. m. / [cºmpagnie, French; either from con and
Pºgº ºne of the ſame town; or con and panis, one that eats
of the ſame meſs.]
1. Perſons aſſembled together; a body of men.
Go, carry fir John Falſtaff to the Fleet;
Take all his company along with him. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Honeſt company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away myſelf
To this moſt patient, ſweet, and virtuous wife. Shakeſp.
2. Perſons aſſembled for the entertainment of each other; an
aſſembly of pleaſure.
A crowd is not company, and faces are but a gallery of pic-
tures, where there is no love. Bacon, 'É. 28.
3. Perſons confidered as aſſembled for converſation; or, as ca-
pable of converſation and mutual entertainment.
Monſieur Zulichem came to me among the reſt of the good
company of the town. Temple.
Knowledge of men and manners, the freedom of habitudes,
and converſation with the beſt company of both ſexes, is ne-
ceſſary. Dryden:
4. The ſtate of a companion; the aët of accompanying; con-
verſation; fellowſhip.
It is more pleaſant to enjoy the company of him that can
ſpeak ſuch words, than by ſuch words to be perſuaded to fol-
low ſolitarineſs. Sidney.
Nor will I wretched thee
In death forſake, but keep thee company. Dryd. Fables.
Abdallah grew by degrees ſo enamoured of her converſa-
tion, that he did not think he lived when he was not in com-
pany with his beloved Balfora. Guardian, Nº. 167.
5. A number of perſons united for the execution or performance
of any thing; a band.
Shakeſpeare was an ačtor, when there were ſeven companies
of players in the town together. Dennis.
6. Perſons united in a joint trade or partnerſhip.
7. A number of ſome particular rank or profeſſion, united by
ſome charter; a body corporate; a corporation.
This emperor ſeems to have been the firſt who incorpo-
rated the ſeveral trades of Rome into companies, with their
particular privileges. Arbuthnot on Coins.
8. A ſubdiviſion of a regiment of foot; ſo many as are un-
der one captain.
Every captain brought with him thrice ſo many in his com-
pany as was expe&amp;ted. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
9. To bear CoMPANY. {T} accompany; to aſſociate with 5 to
To keep CoMPANY. be a companion to.
I do deſire thee
To bear me company, and go with me. Shakeſpeare.
Thoſe Indian wives are loving fools, and may do well to
Keep company with the Arrias and Portias of old Rome. Dryd.
Admitted to that equal ſky,
His faithful dog ſhall bear him company. Pºpe's Eſſay on Man.
10. To keep CoMPANY. To frequent houſes of entertainment.
I 1. Sometimes in an ill ſenſe.
Why ſhould he call her whore? Who keeps her company?
Shakeſpeare's Othello.
To Co'MPANY. v. a. [from the noun..] To accompany; to
attend ; to be companion to ; to be aſſociated with.
I am
The ſoldier that did company theſe three. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Thus, through what path foe'er of life we rove,
Rage companies our hate, and grief our love.
To Co'MPANY. v. m. To aſſociate one's ſelf with.
I wrote to you not to company with fornicators. I Cor. v. 9.
Co'MPARABLE. adj. [from 7% compare.] Worthy to be com-
pared; of equal regard; worthy to contend for preference.
This preſent world affordeth not any thing comparable unto
the publick duties of religion. Hºoker, tº v. ſº. 6.
A man comparable with any of the captains of that agº, an
excellent ſoldier both by ſea and land. Knolles's Hiſ of the Turks.
There is no bleſſing of life comparable to the enjoyment of
a diſcreet and virtuous friend. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 93.
Co'MPARABLY. adv. [from comparable.] In a manner worthy
to be compared.
There could no form for ſuch a royal uſe be comparally
imagined, like that of the foreſaid nation. Iłºtº's Ar. hitect.
CoMFARATEs. n.ſ.. [from compare.] In logick, the two things
compared to one another. - -
Co/MPARA rive. adj. [ comparativus: Latin }
1. Eſtimated by compariſon; not poſitive; not abſolute.
Thou wert dignified enough,
Ev’n to the point of envy, if 'twere made
Prior.
Comparative
Y. 4–
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 81</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
Comparative for your virtues, to be ſtiled
The under hangman of his realm. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
There reſteth the comparative that is, granted that it is
either lawful or binding; yet whether other things be not to
be preferred before the extirpation of hereſies. Bacon.
The flower or bloſſom is a poſitive good; although the re-
move of it, to give place to the fruit, be a comparative good.
Bacon's Colours of Good and Evil.
This bubble, by reaſon of its comparative levity to the fluid
that incloſes it, would neceſſarily aſcend to the top. Bently.
2. Having the power of comparing different things.
Beauty is not known by an eye or noſe: it conſiſts in a
ſymmetry, and it is the comparative faculty which notes it.
Glanville's scºpſis Sientifica.
3. [In grammar.] The comparative degree expreſſes more of
any quantity in one thing than in another; as, the right hand
is the ſtronger.
CoMPA'RATIVELY. adv. [from comparative..] In a ſtate of
compariſon; according to eſtimate made by compariſon; not
poſitively. -
The good or evil, which is removed, may be eſteemed
good or evil cºmparatively, and not poſitively or ſimply. Bacon.
In this world whatever is called good is comparative y with
other things of its kind, or with the evil mingled in its com-
poſition; ſo he is a good man that is better than men com-
monly are, or in whom the good qualitics are more than the
bad. Temple.
The vegetables being comparatively higher than the ordinary
terreſtrial matter of the globe, ſubſided laſt. //oodward.
But how few, comparatively, are the inſtances of this wiſe
application' Rºgers.
To COMPARE. v. a. ſcorparº, Latin.]
1. To make one thing the meaſure of another; to eſtimate the
relative goodneſs or badneſs, or other qualities, of any one
thing, by obſerving how it differs from ſomething elſe.
I will hear Brutus ſpeak.
I will hear Caſſius, and cºmpare their reaſons. Shakeſpeare.
They meaſuring themſelves by themſelves, and comparing
themſelves among themſelves, are not wife. 2 Cor. x. 12.
No man can think it grievous, who confiders the pleaſure
and ſweetneſs of love, and the glorious vićtory of overcoming
evil with good; and then compares theſe with the reſtleſs tor-
ment, and perpetual tumults, of a malicious and revengeful
ſpirit. Tilºtſon, Sermon vi.
He that has got the ideas of numbers, and hath taken the
pains to compare one, two, and three to ſix, cannot chuſe but
know they are equal. Locke.
Thus much of the wrong judgment men make of preſent
and future pleaſure and pain, when they are compared together,
and ſo the abſent conſidered as future. Locke.
. It may be obſerved, that when the compariſon intends only
ſimilitude or illuſtration by likeneſs, we uſe to before the thing
brought for illuſtration; as, he compared anger to a fire.
Solon compared the people unto the ſea, and orators and
counſellors to the winds; for that the ſea would be calm and
quiet, if the winds did not trouble it. Bacon's Apophthegms.
. When two perſons or things are compared, to diſcover their
relative proportion of any quality, with is uſed before the
thing uſed as a meaſure.
Black Macbeth
Will ſeem as pure as ſnow, being compar'd
//ith my confineleſs harms. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
- To compare
Small things with greateſt. Aſilion's Paradſ: Rºgained, b. iv.
He carv'd in iv'ry ſuch a maid ſo fair,
As nature could not with his art comfare. Dryden.
If he compares this tranſlation with the original, he will
find that the three firſt ſtanzas are rendered almoſt word for
word. - Addison's Speciator, Nº. 229.
4. To compare is, in Speſſºr, uſed after the Latin comparo, for
to get ; to procure; to obtain.
But, both from back and belly, ſtill did ſpare
To fill his bags, and riches to compare. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Cox PARE. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The ſtate of being compared; comparative eſtimate; com-
pariſon; poſſibility of cntering into compariſon.
There I the rareſt things have ſeen,
Oh, things without compare. Such ing.
As their ſmall galleys may not hold comfare
With our tall ſhips. J/aller.
Beyond compare the Son of God was ſeen
Moſt glorious. Milton's Paradiſe Lo/?, b. iii. l. 138.
2. Simile ; ſimilitude; illuſtration by compariſon.
True ſwains in love ſhall in the world to come,
Approve their truths by Troilus ; when their rhines,
Full of proteſt, and oath, and big compare,
Want ſimilies. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
Cox PA'Riso N. m. ſ [comparaſºn, French..]
1. The act of comparing.
Natalis Comes, comparing his parts with thoſe of a man,
reckons his claws among them, which are much more like
thoſe of a lion: ſo eaſy it is to drive on the compariſºn too
far, to make it good. Grew's Muſeum.
Our author ſaves me the compariſºn with tragedy; for he
ſays, that herein he is to imitate the tragick poet. Dryden.
2. The ſtate of being compared.
If we will rightly eſtimate what we call good and evil, we
ſhall find it lies much in compariſon. Locke.
Objects near our view are apt to be thought greater than
thoſe of a larger ſize that are more remote; and ſo it is with
pleaſure and pain: the preſent is apt to carry it, and thoſe at
a diſtance have the diſadvantage in the compariſon. Loºe.
3. A comparative eſtimate ; proportion.
If men would live as religion requires, the world would be
a moſt lovely and deſireable place, in compariſºn of what now
it is. Tillotſon, Sermon iii.
One can ſcarce imagine how ſo plentiful a ſoil ſhould be-
come ſo miſerably unpeopled, in compariſºn of what it once
Was. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
4. A fimile in writing or ſpeaking; an illuſtration by ſimilitude.
As fair and as good a kind of hand in hand compariſºn, had
been ſomething too fair and too good for any lady in Britany.
Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
5. [In grammar ] The formation of an adjective through its
various degrees of ſignification ; as ſtrong, ſtronger, ſhrongeſ.
To COMPART. v. a. ſ.com/artir, Fr. from con and fartiar,
Lat..] To divide; to mark out 2 gencral deſign into its va-
rious parts and ſubdiviſions.
I make haſte to the caſting and comparting of the whole
work. //otton's Archite&amp;ure.
CoM PARTIMENT. m. ſ. [compartiment, French..] A diviſion of
pićture, or deſign.
The circumference is divided into twelve comfartiments,
each containing a complete picture. Pºpe.
CoMPART1'TIox. n.ſ.. [from compart J
1. The act of comparting or dividing.
2. The parts marked out, or ſeparated; a ſeparate part.
Their temples and amphitheatres needed no compartitions.
//ºtton's Archite:ſure.
CoMPA'RTMENT. m. ſ. [compartiment, French..] Diviſion; ſe-
parate part of a deſign.
The ſquare will make you ready for all manner of compart-
ments, baſes, pedeſtals, and buildings. Peacham on Drawing.
To COMPASS. v. a. [compaſſir, Fr. compaſare, Ital. pºſſibus
metiri, Latin.]
I. To encircle; to environ; to ſurround; to incloſe.
A darkſome way,
That deep deſcended through the hollow ground,
And was with dread and horrour compaſºd around. Fairy Q.
I ſee thee compaſs'd with thy kingdtin's peers,
That ſpeak my ſalutation in their minds. Shakeſp. A/aclºth.
Now all the bleſºngs
Of a glad father compoſ, thee about Shakeſpeare's 7&amp;mpºſſ.
The ſhady trees cover him with their ſhadow: the willows
of the brook compoſs him about. job, xl. 22.
Obſerve the crowds that cºmpaſ him around. Dryd. Wiig.
To dare that death, I will approach yet nigher;
Thus, wert thou compaſſed with circling fire. Dryden.
2. To walk round anything.
Old Chorineus compoſ’d thrice the crew,
And dipp'd an olive-branch in holy dew,
Which thrice he ſprinkl’d round. Dryden's Żn.
3. To beleaguer; to beſiege; to block.
Thine enemies ſhall caſt a trench about thee, and compoſs
thee round, and keep thee in on every ſide. Luke, xix. 43.
4. To graſp ; to incloſe in the arms; to ſeize.
5. To obtain; to procure; to attain; to have in the power.
That which by wiſdom he ſaw to be requiſite for that
people, was by as great wiſdom compaſſed. Hooker's Prºface.
His maſter being one of great regard,
In court to compaſs any ſuit not hard. Hulhard's Ta'º.
If I can check my erring love, I will;
If not, to compaſs her I'll uſe my ſkill. Sha'eſpeare.
How can you hope to compoſ, your deſigns,
And not diſſemble them * Denham's Sophy.
The knowledge of what is good and what is evil, what
ought and what ought not to be done, is a thing to O large to
be compaſſed, and too hard to be maſtered, without brains and
ſtudy, parts and contemplation. South.
He had a mind to make himſelf maſter of Weymouth, if
he could compaſ; it without engaging his army before it. Claren.
The church of Rome createth titular patriarchs of Con-
ſtantinople and Alexandria; ſo loth is the pope to loſe the re-
membrance of any title that he hath once cºfa'ed. Brerewood.
Invention is the firſt part, and abſolutely neceſſary to them
both ; yet no rule ever was, or ever can be given, how to
compaſs it. Dryden's Diffney.
În ev'ry work regard the writer's end,
Since none can compaſs more than they intend. Pºpe.
6. [In law.] To take meaſures preparatory to any thing; as,
to compaſs the death of the King.
Co'MPAss. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Circle; round,
This
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 82</div><p class="Text">C O M
This day I breathed firſt; time is come round;
And where did begin, there ſhall I end :
My life is run its compaſs. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
2. Extent; reach; graſp.
O, Juliet, I already know thy gricf;
It ſtrains me paſt the compaſs of my wits. Shakeſpeare.
That which is out of the compaſs of any man's power, is
to that man impoſſible. South's Sermons.
How few there are may be juſtly bewailed, the compaſs of
them extending but from the time of Hippocrates to that of
Marcus Antoninus. Tem; le.
Animals in their generation are wiſer than the ſons of men;
but their wiſdom is confined to a few particulars, and lies in a
very narrow compaſs. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 120.
This author hath tried the force and compaſs of our lan-
guage with much ſucceſs. Swift.
3. Space; room; limits.
No leſs than the compaſs of twelve books is taken up in
theſe. Pope's Eſſay on Homer’s Battles.
The Engliſh are good confederates in an enterprize which
may be diſpatched in a ſhort compaſs of time. Addiſ Freeholder.
You have heard what hath been here done for the poor by
the five hoſpitals and the workhouſe, within the cºmpaſs of one
year, and towards the end of a long, expenſive war. Atterb.
4. Encloſure; circumference.
And their mount Palatine,
Th’ imperial palace, compaſs huge, and high
The ſtructure. Milton's Paradiſe Regained, b. iv. l. 50.
Old Rome from ſuch a race deriv'd her birth,
Which now on ſev’n high hills triumphant reigns,
And in that cºmpaſs all the world contains. Dryd. Wirg Geor.
5. A departure from the right line; an indire&amp;t advance; as, to
fetch a compaſs round the camp.
6. Moderate ſpace; moderation; due limits.
Certain it is, that in two hundred years before (I ſpeak
within compaſ) no ſuch commiſſion had been executed in
either of theſe provinces. Davies on Ireland.
Nothing is likelier to keep a man within compaſs than the
having conſtantly before his eyes the ſtate of his affairs, in a
regular courſe of account. Locke.
7. The power of the voice to expreſs the notes of muſick.
You would ſound me from my loweſt note to the top of my
compaſs. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
From harmony, from heavenly harmony,
This univerſal frame began :
From harmony to harmony,
Through all the compaſs of the notes it ran,
The diapaſon cloſing full in man. Dryden.
8. [This is rarely uſed in the fingular J The inſtrument with
which circles are drawn.
If they be two, they are two ſo,
As ſtiff twin compaſſes are two :
Thy ſoul, the fixt foot, makes no ſhow
To move; but doth, if th’ other do. Donne.
In his hand
He took the golden compaſſés, prepard
In God's eternal ſtore, to circumſcribe
This univerſe, and all created things. Milton's Parad Loft.
To fix one foot of their compaſs wherever they think fit,
and extend the other to ſuch terrible lengths, without deſcrib-
- ing any circumference at all, is to leave us and themſelves in
a very uncertain ſtate. Swift on Diſſentiºns in Athens and Rome.
9. The inſtrument compoſed of a needle and card, whereby
mariners ſteer.
The breath of religion fills the ſails, profit is the compaſs by
which factious men ſteer their courſe. King Charles.
Rude as their ſhips was navigation then;
No uſeful cºmpoſ, or meridian known :
-. Coaſting, they kept the land within their ken,
And knew no North but when the pole-ſtar ſhone. Dryden,
With equal force the tempeſt blows by turns,
From ev’ry corner of the ſeamen's cºmpaſs. Row's 7. Shore.
He that firſt diſcovered the uſe of the compaſs, did more for
the ſupplying and increaſe of uſeful commodities than thoſe
who built workhouſes. l Locke.
CoMP Ass-saw. m. ſ.
The compaſs-ſaw ſhould not have its tecth ſet, as other ſaws
have ; but the edge of it ſhould be made ſo broad, and the
back ſo thin, that it may eaſily follow the broad edge, without
having its teeth ſet. Its office is to cut a round, or any other
compaſs kerf; and therefore the edge muſt be made broad,
and the back thin, that the back may have a wide kerf to turn
in. Moxon's Mechan. Exer.
CQMPA'SSION n ſ [compaſſion, Fr. from can and patior, Lat.]
Pity ; commiſeration; ſorrow for the ſufferings of others;
painful ſympathy.
Ye had cºmpoſion of me in my bonds.
Their angry hands
My brothers hold, and vengeance theſe exact;
This pleads compaſſion, and repents the fact. Dryd. Fab'es.
The good-natured man is apt to be moved with compaſſion
Vol. I.
Heb. x. 34.
C O M
for thoſe misfortunes or infirmities, which another would turh
into ridicule. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. g.
To CoMPA'ssion. v. a. [from the noun..] ſo pity; to com-
Paſſionate; to commiſerate: a word ſcarcely uſed
O, heavens ! can you hear a good man groan,
And not relent, or not compaſſ n him Shakeſp. Tit. Aſhdººn.
CoMFA'ssion At E. adj. [from compaſſion.] Inclined to com-
paſſion; inclined to pity; merciful : tender; melting; ſoft ;
eaſily affected with ſorrow by the miſery of others.
here never was any heart truly great and generous, that
was not alſo tender and compaſſionate. South's Sermons.
To CoMPA'ssion A1 E. v. a. [from the noun..] To pity; to
commiſerate. -
Experience layeth princes torn eſtates before their eyes,
and withal perſuades them to comfahonate themſelves. Ra eigh.
Compaſſionates my pains, and pities me !
what is compaſſion, when 'tis void of love? Addiſon's Cato.
CoMPA'ssionATELY. adv. [from compaſſionate.] Mercifully;
tenderly.
The fines were aſſigned to the rebuilding St. Paul’s, and
thought therefore to be the more ſeverely impoſed, and the
leſs compaſſionately reduced and excuſed. Clarendan.
CoMPATERNITY.. n.ſ. [con and paternitas, Latin J
Goſlipred, or compaternity, by the canon law, is a ſpiritual
affinity; and a juror that was goſſip to either of the parties
might, in former times, have been challenged as not indiffe-
rent by our law. Davie's State ºf Ireland.
Compatibility. n.f. [from compatitle.) Conſiſtency; the
power of co-exiſting with ſomething elſe; agreement with
any thing.
COMPATIBLE. adj. [corrupted, by an unſkilful compliance
with pronunciation, from competible, from competo, Latin, to
ſuit, to agree. Competible is found in good writers, and ought
always to be uſed.]
1. Suitable to ; fit for ; conſiſtent with ; not incongruous to.
The object of the will is ſuch a good as is compatible to an
intellectual nature. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
2. Conſiſtent; agreeable.
Our poets have joined together ſuch qualities as are by na-
ture the moſt compatible; valour with anger, meekneſs with
piety, and prudence with diſſimulation. Broome.
CoMPATIELENEss. m. ſ [from c.mpatible.] Conſiſtency;
agreement with any thing.
CoMPA't Bly. adv. [from compatible.] Fitly; ſuitably.
CoMPA'TIENT. adj. [from con and patior, Łº. Suff ring
together. - Die?.
CoMPATRIOT. n.ſ.. [from con and patria, Lat] One of the
ſame country. Die?.
CoMPE'E.R. m. ſ. [compar, Latin.] Equal; companion; col-
league; aſſociate.
Seſoſtris,
That monarchs harneſs'd, to his chariot yok'd
Baſe ſervitude, and his dethron’d compeers
Laſh'd furiouſly. Philips.
To Cox, pe'ER. v.a. [from the noun..] To be equal with; to mate.
In his own grace he doth exalt himſelf
More than in your advancement.
In my right,
By me inveſted, he cºmpeers the beſt. Shakespeare King Lear.
To COMPEL. v. a. [ccmpe lo, atin.]
1. To force to ſome act; to oblige; to conſtrain; to neceſſi-
tate; to urge irreſiſtibly.
You will compel me then to read the will? Sh jul. Caſar.
The ſpinners, carders, fullers, compell'd by hunger,
And lack of other means, in deſp'rate manner,
Daring th' event to the teeth, are all in uproar. Shakeſp.
He refuſed, and ſaid, I will not eat : but his ſervants, toge-
ther with the woman, compelled him. I Sa. xxvii. 23.
All theſe bleſlings could but enable, not compel us to be
happy. Clarendon.
2. To take by force or violence; to raviſh from ; to ſeize.
This ſignification is uncommon and harſh.
The ſubjećts grief
Comes through commiſſions, which compel from each
The fixth part of his ſubſtance, to be levied
Without delay. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
CoMPE'LLABLE, adj. [from compel ) That may be fºrced.
Compell. Arion. ... j. [from onjºl, Latin J The ſtile of
addreſs; the word of ſalutation.
The ſtile beſt fitted for all perſons on all occaſions to uſe,
is the cºmpellation of father, which our Saviour firſt taught.
Dºppa's Rt. ei ºf Devotion.
The peculiar cºmpellation of the kings in France, is by ſire,
which is nothing elſe but father: Temple.
Cox, pºſite R. n.) [from ºpeſ.J. He that forces another.
COMPEND. n.ſ.. [coºperaiºn, º Abridgment; ſum-
. …, : contraction; breviate.
º jº, the diſcourſes, and abſtra: them into brief
contends. I/atts's ſº provement ºf the Mind p. i c. 17.
Cowpendia's rous. ad. [cºpeidiarius, Latin J Short; con-
traded; ſummary; abridged. !--
5 C CoMPEN LIo's I T Y.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 83</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
CöMPF N bio's ſty. m. ſ. [from compendious.] Shortneſs; con-
tracted brevity. IXicſ.
CoMº's pi Us. adj. [from compendium.] Short; ſummary;
abridged; direct; comprehenſive; holding much in a narrow
ſpºº, near; by which time is ſaved, and circuition cut off.
They had learned more compendious and expeditious ways,
whereby they ſhortened their labours, and ſo gained time.
J/oºdward's Natural Hiſtory.
- * - -
CoMPE'Ndrously. adv. [from compendious.] Shortly; in a
ſhort method; ſummarily; in epitome.
By the apoſtles we have the ſubſtance of Chriſtian belief
cºndiºſ' drawn into few and ſhort articles. Hooker, b. v.
The ſtate or condition of matter, before the world was a-
making, is compendiouſly expreſſed by the word chaos. Bentley.
CoMPE'NdrousNess. n.ſ.. [from compendious.] Shortneſs; bre-
vity; comprehenſion in a narrow compaſ.
I he inviting eaſineſs and compendiouſneſ of this aſſertion,
ſhould dazzle the eyes. Bentley’s Sermons.
COMPENDIUM. m. ſ. [Latin.) Abridgment; ſummary;
breviate; abbreviature; that which holds much in a narrów
room; the near way.
After we are grown well acquainted with a ſhort ſyſtem or
*::::fum of a ſcience, which is written in the plaineſt and
moſt ſimple manner, it is then proper to read a larger regular
treatiſe on that ſubject. I/atti's Improvement of the Mind.
Compe'ssani E. adj [from compenſate.] That which may be
recompenſed.
To COMPENSATE. v. a. ſomeºſ, Lat.] To recompenſe;
to be equivalent to; to counterballance; to countervaiſ; to
make amends for.
The length of the night, and the dews thereof, do compen-
fºr the heat of the day. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 398.
The pleaſures of life do not compenſate the miſeries. Prior.
Nature to theſe, without profuſion kind,
The proper organs, proper pow'rs aſſign'd;
Each ſeeming want compenſated of courſe,
Here with degrees of ſwiftneſs, there of force. Pope.
Co.; Pessation. m. ſ. [from compenſate.] Recompenſe; ſome-
thing equivalent; amends.
Poynings, the better to make compenſation of his ſervice in
the wars, called a parliament. Bacon's Henry VII.
All other debts may compenſation find;
But love is ſtrict, and will be paid in kind. Dryd. Aurengz.
CoMPF'ssative. adj. [from compenſate.] That which com-
penſates; that which countervails.
To CoMPE'NSE. v. a. [compenſ, Latin.] To compenſate; to
countervail; to be equivalent to ; to counterballance; to re-
compenſe.
It ſecmeth, the weight of the quickſilver doth not com-
prºſe the weight of a ſtone, more than the weight of the
aqua-fortis. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The joys of the two marriages were compenſed with the
mournings and funerals of prince Arthur. Bacon’s Henry VII.
Tº ºr NDNATE v. a. [comperendino, Latin.] To
e ay.
Coºpi RENDINA'rios. m. ſ. [from comperendinate J Delay;
dilatorineſs.
, N. -
tº ºf ſomeº
I. i. a quantity of any thing as is ſufficient, without ſuper-
uity.
Something of ſpeech is to be indulged to common civility,
more to intimacies and endearments, and a competency to thoſe
recreative diſcourſes which maintain the chearfulneſs of ſo-
ciety. Government ºf the Tongue.
2. Such a fortune as, without exuberance, is equal to the neceſ-
fitics of life.
For competence of life I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evil. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
It is no mean happineſs to be ſeated in the mean: ſuper-
fluity comes ſooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.
Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Penice.
A diſcreet learned clergyman, with a competency fit for one
of his education, may be an entertaining, an uſeful, and
ſometimes a neceſſary companion. Swift.
Reaſon's whole pleaſure, all the joys of ſenſe,
Lie in three words, health, peace, and competence. Pope.
3. [In law J The power or capacity of a judge, or court, for
taking cogniſance of an affair.
COMPETENT. adj. [competens, Latin.]
1. Suitable; fit ; adequate; proportionate. ,
If there be any power in imagination, the diſtance muſt be
competent, the medium not adverſe, and the body apt and pro-
portionate. Facon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 950.
The greateſt captain cf the Engliſh brought rather a guard
than a comtetent army to recover Ireland. Davies on Ireland.
2 Adapted to any purpoſe without defect or ſuperfluity.
To draw men from great exceſs, it is not amiſs, though
we uſe them unto ſomewhat leſs than is competent. Hooker.
3. Reaſonable ; moderate.
A ºctent number of the old being firſt read, the new
ſhould ſucceed. Iłºer, h. v. ſº. 40.
The clergy have gained ſome inſight into men and things,
and a competent knowledge of the world. Atterbury's Sermons.
4. Qualified; fit.
Let us firſt conſider how competent we are for the office.
Government of the Tongue, ſect. 6.
5. Conſiſtent with ; incident to. -
That is the privilege of the Infinite Author of things, who
never ſlumbers nor ſleeps, but is not competent to any finite
being. Locke.
Co'MPETENTLY. adv. [from competent J
1. Reaſonably; moderately; without ſuperfluity or want.
Some places require men competently endowed; but none
think the appointment to be a duty of juſtice, bound to reſpect
deſert. Wotton.
2. Adequately; properly.
I think it hath been competently proved. Pentley.
COMPETIBLE. adj. [from competo, Latin. For this word a
corriſpt orthography has introduced compatible.] Suitable to ;
conſiſtent with.
It is not competible with the grace of God ſo much as to in-
cline any man to do evil. Hammond on Fundamentals.
Thoſe are properties not at all competible to body or matter,
though of never ſo pure a mixture. Glanville.
CoMPETIBLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from competible.] Suitableneſs; fit-
neſs. -
COMPETITION. m. ſ. [from con and petitio, Latin.]
1. The act of endeavouring to gain what another endeavours to
gain at the ſame time; rivalry; conteſt.
The ancient flames of diſcord and inteſtine wars, upon the
competition of both houſes, would again return and revive.
Bacon's Henry VII.
A portrait, with which one of Titian's could not come in
competition. Dryden's Duffy.
Though what produces any degree of pleaſure, be in itſelf
good, and what is apt to produce any degree of pain be evil,
yet often we do not call it ſo, when it comes in competition :
the degrees alſo of pleaſure and pain have a preference. Locke.
We ſhould be aſhamed to rival inferiours, and diſhonour
our nature by ſo degrading a competition. Rogers, Serm. v.
2. Double claim; claim of more than one to one thing; an-
ciently with to.
Competition to the crown there is none, nor can be. Bacon.
3. Now with for.
The prize of beauty was diſputed 'til you were ſeen; but
now all pretenders have withdrawn their claims: there is no
competition but for the ſecond place. Dryden,
CoMPE't ItoR. m. ſ. [con and petitor, Latin.]
1. One that has a claim oppoſite to another's ; a rival; with
for before the thing claimed.
How furious and impatient they be,
And cannot brook competitors in love. Shakeſp. Tit. Andron.
Some undertake ſuits with purpoſe to let them fall, to gra-
tify the competitor. Bacon, Eſſay 50.
Cicereius and Scipio were competitors for the office of
praetor. Tatler, Nº. 86.
He who truſts in God has the advantage in preſent felicity;
and, when we take futurity into the account, ſtands alone, and
is acknowledged to have no competitor. Rogers, Sarm. 19.
2. It had formerly of before the thing claimed.
Selymes, king of Algiers, was in arms againſt his brother
Mechemetes, competitor ºf the kingdom. Knoller's Hiſtory.
3. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems to ſignify only an opponent.
The Guilfords are in arms,
And every hour more competitors - -
Flock to the rebels. Saxºſpeare's Richard III.
CoMPI LATION. n.ſ.. [from compil, Latin.]
1. A colle&amp;tion from various authors.
2. An aſſemblage; a coacervation.
There is in it a ſmall vein filled with ſpar, probably ſince
the time of the compilation of the maſs. iſ codward on Fºjili.
To COMPILE. v. a. [compile, Latin.]
1. To draw up from various authors; to colle&amp;t into one body.
2. To write; to compoſe.
In poetry they compile the praiſes of virtuous men and aç-
tions, and ſatyrs againſt vice. Temple.
By the accounts which authors have left, they might learn
that the face of ſea and land is the ſame that it was, when
thoſe accounts were compiled. Iłºdward's Natural Hiſtory.
The regard he had for his ſhield, had cauſed him formerly
to compile a diſſertation concerning it. A buthnot and Pºpe.
3. To contain; to compriſe: not in uſe.
After ſo long a race as I have run -
Through fairy-land, which thoſe ſix books compile,
Give leave to reſt me. Spenſer, Somet So.
CoMP,'lf MENT. n.ſ [from compile.] Coacervation; the act
of piling together; the act of heaping up. . .
I was encouraged to aſſay how I could build a man; for
there is a moral as well as a natural or artificial compilement,
and of better materials. Iſºtton on Education.
CoMP1'LER. n.ſ.. [from compile J A colle&amp;or; one who frames
a compoſition from various authors.
Some
3.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 84</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
Some draw experiments into titles and tables; thoſe we
call compilers. Bacon's New Atalantis.
Some painful compiler, who will ſtudy old language, may
inform the world that Robert earl of Oxford was high trea-
ſurer. Swift.
CoMP LA'cENce.
CoMPLA'ce Ncy. } * f. [complacentia, low Latin.]
1. Pleaſure; ſatisfaction; gratification.
1 by converfing cannot theſe crea
From prone, nor in their ways complacence find. Milton.
When the ſupreme faculties move regularly, the inferior
affections following, there ariſes a ſerenity and complacency
upon the whole ſoul. South.
- Diſeaſes extremely leſſen the complacence we have in all the
good things of this life. Atterbury's Sermons.
Others proclaim the infirmities of a great man with ſatiſ.
faction and complacency, if they diſcover none of the like in
themſelves. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 256.
2. The cauſe of pleaſure; joy.
O thou, in heav'n and earth the only peace
Found out for mankind under wrathi O thou,
My ſole complacence / Milon's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii. 1, 274.
3. Civility; complaiſance; ſoftneſs of magner.
They were not ſatisfied with their governour, and appre-
henſive of his rudeneſs and want of complacency. Clarendon.
His gºat humanity appeared in the benévolence of his
aſpect, the complacency of his behaviour, and the tone of his
voice. Addiſon's Freeholder, No. 39.
Complacency and truth, and manly ſweetneſs,
Dwell ever on his tongue, and ſmooth his thoughts. Allſ.
With mean complacence ne'er betray your truſt,
Nor be ſo civil as to prove unjuſt. Pope's fºſſ. Crit.
COMPLACEN I. adj. [complacens, Lat..] Civil; affable ; ſoft;
complaiſant.
To COMPLAIN. v. n. [complaindre, French.]
1. To mention with ſorrow of reſentment; to murmur ; to la-
ment. With of before the cauſe of ſorrow.
Lord Haſtings,
Humbly complaining to her deity,
Got my lord chamberlain his liberty . Shakespeare. Richard III.
I will ſpeak in the anguiſh of my ſpirit, I will complain in
the bitterneſs of my ſoul - job, vii. 1 1.
Shall I, like thee, on Friday night complain P
For on that day was Coeur de Lion flain. Dryden's Fables.
Do not all men complain, even theſe as well as others, of the
great ignorance of mankind? Burmet', Prºf. , Theory of Earth.
Thus accurs'd,
In midſt of water I complain of thirſt. Dryden.
2. Sometimes with for before the éauſal noun.
Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the pu-
niſhment of his fins 2 - Lam, iii. 39.
3. To inform againſt.
Now, maſter Shallow, you'll complain of me to the
council Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſºr.
To CoMPLA'1N. v.a. [This ſenſe is rare, and perhaps not very
Proper.] To lament; to bewail.
Gaufride, who couldſt ſo well in rhime complain
The death of Richard, with an arrow ſlain. Dryd. Fables.
CoMPLA'1N ANT. "...ſ [from complain.) One whá urges a
ſuit, or commences a proſecution againſt another.
Congreve and this author are the moſt eager complainants
of the diſpute. Coller's D fence.
CoMPLA'INER, n.ſ.. [from cºmplain..] One who complaims; a
murmurer; a lamenter.
St. Jude obſerves, that the murmurers and complainers are
the ſame who ſpeak ſwelling words. Government of the Tongue.
Philips is a complainer; and on this occaſioni ſºldioſdó.
tºret, that complainers never ſucceed at court, though railers
do. Swift.
CoMPLA'INT. n.ſ. [complainte, French J
1. Repreſentation of pains or injuries; lamentation.
I cannot find any cauſe of complaint, that good laws have ſo
much been wanting unto us, as we to them. Hooker, Dedicat.
As for me, is my complaint to man. job, xxx. 4.
*. The cauſe or ſubject of complaint; grief.
The poverty of the clergy in England hath been the com-
plaint of all who wiſh well to the church. - Swift.
3. A malady; a diſeaſe.
One, in a cºmplaint of his bowels, was let blood till he had
ſcarce any left, and was Perfectly cured. Arbuthnot on Coins.
4. Remonſtrance againſt; information againſt.
Full of vexation, come I with complaint
Againſt my child. Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
Againſt the goddeſs theſe complaints he made. Dryd. A. m.
CoMPLA is A'nce. "...ſ. [complaiſance, French.] Civility; deſire
of Pleaſing; act of adulation.
Her death is but in complaiſance to her. Dryden.
You muſt alſo be induſtriots tº diſcover the opinion of your
enemies; for you may be aſſured, that they will give you no
quarter, and allow nothing to complaiſance. Dryd. Dufreſnoy.
Fair Venus wept the ſad diſaſter
Of having loſt her favºrite dove;
In cºmplaiſance poor Cupid mourn’d ; -
#: grief reliev'd his mother's pain. Prior.
COMPLAISANT. adj. [complaiſant, French.) Civil; deſirous
to pleaſe.
There are to whom my ſatire ſeems too bold;
Scarce to wiſe Peter complaiſant enough,
And ſomething ſaid of Čhaſters much tºo rough. Pºpe.
CoMPLAisantly. ..., [from complaſant..] Civilly; with
deſire to pleaſe; ceremoniouſly.
In plenty ſtarving, tantaliz'd in ſtate,
And com/ iaiſantly help'd to all I hate 5
Treated, careſs'd, and tir’d, I take my leave. Pote.
Cºrraisastness. * / [from complaiſant..] Civility; com-
pilance. -
Didž.
To CoMPLA'NATE. v. a. [from flanus, Lat..] To level; to
To CoMPLA'Ne. : reduce to a flat and cven ſurface.
The vertebrae of the nº and back-bone are made ſhorf
and complanated, and firmly braced with muſcles and tendons.
Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
CoMPLEA't. Sce COMPLETE.
CoMPLEMENT. n. / [complementum, Latin.]
I. Perfection; fulnéſ, completion ; completement. -
Our cuſtom is both to place it in th; front ºf our prayers
as a guide, and to add it in the end of ſome principal limbs
* Pºº,” a cººleºent which fully perfecteth whatſoever
may be defective in the reſt. Ho'er, b. v. ſect. 35.
They as they feaſted had their fill,
For a full complement of all their ill Hubberd's Tale.
For a coºlerent of theſe bleſſings, they were enjoyed by
the protection of a king of the moſt harmleſs diſpoſition, the
moſt exemplary piety, the greateſt ſobriety, chaſtity, and
mercy. Clarendon.
The ſenſible nature, in its complement and integrity, hath
five exterior powers or faculties. ' Halº's Origin of Mankind.
* Complete ſet; complete proviſion; the fill quantity or
number.
The god of love himſelf inhabits there,
With all his rage, and dread, and grief and care; - }
His comple, ent of ſtores, and total war. Prior.
3. Adkititious circumſtances; appendages; parts not neceſſary,
but ornamental.
If the caſe be ſuch as permitteth not baptiſm, to have the
decent complements of baptiſm, better it were to enjoy the body
without his furniture than to wait for this, 'til the opportunity
of that, for which we deſire it, be loſt. Hooter, b.v. / 58.
Theſe, which have laſtly ſprung up, for complement, rites,
and ceremonies of church-aētions, are, in truth, for the great-
eſt part, ſuch ſilly things, that very eaſineſs doth make. them
hard to be diſputed of in ſerious manner. Hooker, Dedication.
A doleful caſe deſires a doleful ſong,
Without vain art or curious complements. Stenſºr:
Garniſh'd and deck'd in modeſt complement,
Not working with the ear, but with the eye. Shah. Hen.V.
4. [In geometry..] What remains of a quadrant of a circle, or
of ninety degrees, after any certain arch hath been retrenched
from it. *A* .
5. [In aſtronomy..] The diſtance of a ſtar from the zenith.
6. Co'MPLE MENT of the Curtain, in fortification, that part in
the interiour ſide of it which makes the demigorge.
7. Arithmetical CoMPLEMENT of a Logarithm, is what the lo-
garithm wants of 1¢, ooooooo. Chambers.
COMPLETE. adj. [completus, Latin.]
1. Perfect; full; without any defects. -
With us the reading of ſcripture in the church is a part of
our church liturgy, a ſpecial portion of the ſervice which we
do to God; and not an exerciſe to ſpend the time, when one
doth wait for another coming, 'till the aſſembly of them that
ſhall afterwards worſhip him be complete. Hooker, b. v. J. 19.
And ye are complete in him which is the head of all princi-
pality and power. Col. ii. 1 o.
Then marvel not, thou great and complete man,
That all the Greeks begin to worſhip Ajax. Shakeſpeare.
If any diſpoſition ſhould appear towards ſo good a work,
the aſſiſtance of the legiſlative power would be neceſſary to
make it more complete. Swift.
2. Finiſhed; ended; concluded.
This courſe of vanity almoſt complete, Pr;
Tir'd in the field of life, I hope retreat. fi #.
To CoMPLETE. v. a [from the *] º º -
- eted ind -
In 1608, Mr. Sanderſon was *:: #on's life of Sanderſºn.
town he comes, completes the nation's hope,
wº the bold triºd hands, and burns a pope. Pope.
CoMPLE'rt ly, adv. [from compete.] Fully; perfectly.
Then tell us, how you can your lºſol, Blackn
Through ſpace of matter, ſo completely full ſtackmore.
Whatever perſon would aſpire to be completely witty, ſmart,
humorous and polite, muſt, by hard labour, be able to retain
in his memory every ſingle ſentence. contained in this work.
Swift's Introdućlion to Genteel Cºnverſation.
Comple'ſ FM frt. m. ſ. [from completement, French..] The act
of completing. - Allow
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 85</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
º
Allow me to give you, from the beſt authors, the origin,
the antiquity, the growth, the change, and the completerment
of ſatire among the Romans. Dryden's Dedic. to fiverſal.
CoMPLETE NES. m. ſ. [from complete.] Perfection; the ſtate
of being complete.
I cannot allow their wiſdom ſuch a comfleteneſs and inerrabi-
lity, as to exclude myſelf. K ng Charles.
Theſe parts go to make up the completeneſ of any
ſubject. //atts's Lºgick.
Comple". LoN. m. ſ [from complete.]
1. Accompliſhment ; act of fulfilling; ſtate of being fulfilled.
There was a full entire harmony, and conſent of all the
divine predictions, receiving their completion in Chriſt. South.
2. Utmoſt height; perfect ſtate.
He makes it the utmoſt completion of an ill charaćter to bear
a malevolence to uhe beſt men. Pºpe's Nºtes on the Iliad.
COMPLEX. adj. [com, lexus, Latin J Compoſite; of many
parts; not ſimple; including many particulars.
Ideas made up of ſeveral ſimple ones, I call complex ; ſuch
as beauty, gratitude, a man, the univerſe ; which though
complicated of various ſimple ideas, or complex ideas made up
of ſimple ones, yet are confidered each by itſelf as one Lºcke.
A ſecondary eſſential mode, called a property, ſometimes
goes toward making up the eſſence of a com, ex being. Watts.
With ſuch perfection fram’d,
Is this complex ſtupendous ſcheme of things. Thomſ. Spring.
Co'MP 1. Ex. m. ſ. [from the adjective..] Complication; col-
lection.
This parable of the wedding-ſupper comprehends in it the
whole conflex of all the bleſſings and privileges exhibited by
the goſpel. South's Sermºns.
CoM Pi. Ex; DNFss. m. ſ. [from complex.] Complication ; in-
volution of many particular parts in one integral; contrariety
to ſimplicity; compound ſlate or nature.
From the cºmplexedneſs of theſe moral ideas, there follows
another inconvenience, viz. that the mind cannot eaſily retain
thoſe preciſe combinations. Locke.
CoM PLE'x1ON. m. ſ. [complexio, Latin.] -
1. The incloſure or involution of one thing in another.
Though the terms of propoſitions may be complex, yet
where the compoſition of the whole argument is thus plain,
ſtinple and regular, it is properly called a ſimple ſyllogiſm,
ſince the complexion does not belong to the ſyllogiſtick form of
it. //atts's Logick.
2. The colour of the external parts of any body.
Men judge by the comflexion of the ſk
The ſtate and inclination of the day.
How ſweetly doſt thou miniſter to love,
That know love's grief by his complexion /
What ſee you in thoſe papers, that you loſe
So much complexion ? Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
He ſo takes on yonder, ſo rails againſt all married mankind,
ſo curſes all Eve's daughters, of what com: le: ion ſoever. Shakespeare
Why doth not beauty then refine the wit,
And good complexion rectify the will? Davies.
Niceneſs, though it reſiders them inſignificant to great pur-
poſes, yet it poliſhes their complexion, and makes their ſpirits
ſeem more vigorous. Collier on Pride.
If I write on a black man, I run over all the eminent per-
ſons of that com le: ion. Addiſon's Spe’ator, Nº. 262.
3. The temperature of the body according to the various pro-
portions of the four medical humours.
'Tis ill, though different your complexions are,
Shakespeare Rich. II.
Shakeſpeare.
The family of heav'n for men ſhould war. Dryden's Falles. -
For from all tempers he could ſervice draw,
The worth of each, with its allay, he knew ;
And, as the confident of nature, ſaw
How ſhe cºmplexioms did divide and brew. Dryden.
The methods of providence men of this complexion muſt be
unfit for the contemplation of Purmet's Theory of the Earth.
Let melancholy rule ſupreme,
Choler preſide, or blood or phlegm,
It makes no diff'rence in the caſe,
Nor is complexion honour's place. Swift.
Cox; Pl. Ex1ONAL. adj. [from comflexion.] Depending on the
complexion or temperament of the body.
Men and other animals receive different tinétures from
complexional effloreſcencies, and deſcend ſtill lower as they par-
take of the fuliginous and denigrating humours. Brown.
Ignorance, where it proceeds from early or complexional pre-
judices, will not wholly exclude us from the favour of God.
Fiddles's Sermons.
CoMPLE'x10'N ALLY. adv. [from comflexion.] By complexion.
An Indian king ſent unto Alexander a fair woman, fed with
poiſons, either by converſe or copulation comple: ionally to
deſtroy him. Brown's ſugar Errours, b. vii. c. 18.
CoMPLEXLY. adv. [from complex.] In a complex manner;
not ſimply.
CoMPL E xN ESS. m. ſ. [from cºmplex.]
complex.
Cox; Pi. ExURE. m. ſ. [from conflex.] The involution or com-
plication of one thing with others.
The ſtate of being
Coºpli'ANCE. m. ſ [from cºmply.]
1. The act of yielding to any deſire or demand ; accord ; ſub-
miſſion.
I am far from excuſing that compliance, for plenary conſent
it was not, to his deſtruction. King Charles.
We are free from any neceſſary determination of our will
to any particular action, and from a neceſſary compliance with
our deſire, ſet upon any particular, and then appearing prefer-
able good. Lovće.
Let the king meet compliance in your looks,
A free and ready yielding to your wiſhes. Rowe.
The actions to which the world ſolicits our compliance are
ſins, which forfeit eternal expectations. Rºgers.
What compliances will remove diſſention, while the liberty
continues of profeſſing what new opinions we pleaſe ? Swift.
2. A diſpoſition to yield to others; complaiſance.
He was a man of few words, and of great cºmpliance; and
uſually delivered that as his opinion, which he foreſaw would
be grateful to the king. Clarendon, b. viii.
CoM Pll'ANT. adj. [from confly.]
1. Yielding; bending.
The compliant boughs
Yielded them. A ſilton's Paradiſe Lºſº, b. iv. l. 332.
2. Civil; complaiſant.
To CO'MPLICATE. v. a. [complio, Latin.]
1. To entangle one with another; to join.
Though the particular ačtions of war are complicate in fact,
yet they are ſeparate and diſtinct in right. Bacon.
In caſe our cffence againſt God hath been complicated with
injury to men, we ſhould make reſtitution. Tillotſºn's Sermºns.
When the diſeaſe is compliated with other diſeaſes, one muſt
confider that which is moſt dangerous. Arbuthnot on Diet.
There are a multitude of human actions, which have ſo
many complicated circumſtances, aſpects, and ſituations, with
regard to time and place, perſons and things, that it is impoſ-
fible for any one to paſs a right judgment concerning them,
without entering into moſt of theſe circumſtances. Ji atts.
2. To unite by involution of parts one in another.
Commotion in the parts may make them apply themſelves
one to another, or complicate and diſpoſe them after the man-
ner requiſite to make them ſtick. Boyle's Pºiſºry ºf Firm neſ.
3. To form by complication; to form by the union of ſeveral
parts into one integral.
Dreadful was the din
Of hiſſing through the hall ! thick ſwarming now
With complicated monſters, head and tail. A ſilt. Par. Loſł.
A man, an army, the univerſe, are com/licated of various
ſimple ideas, or complex ideas made up of ſimple ones. Locke.
Co'MPLic At E. adj. [from the verb.] Compounded of a mul-
tiplicity of parts.
What pleaſure would felicitate his ſpirit, if he could graſp
all in a ſurvey; as a painter runs over a complicate piece
wrought by Titian or Raphael. J/atts's Improv. of the Mind.
Co'MPI IcATEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from complicate.] The ſtate of being
complicated; intricacy; perplexity.
There is great variety of intelligibles in the world, ſo much
objected to our ſenſes, and every ſeveral object is full of ſub-
divided multiplicity and complicaterſ. Hale's Origin of Mank.
CoMPLICA"Tio N. m. ſ. [from complicate.] -
1. The act of involving one thing in another.
2. The ſtate of being involved one in another.
All our grievances are either of body or of mind, or in
complications of both. L’E/irange.
The notions of a confuſed knowledge are always full of
perplexity and complications, and ſeldom in order. J/ilkins.
3. The integral conſiſting of many things involved, perplexed,
and united.
By admitting a complication of ideas, and taking too many
things at once into one queſtion, the mind is dazzled and be-
wildered. Jſ atts's Logick.
Co'MPLIce. m. ſ. [Fr. from complex, an aſſociate, low Latin.]
One who is united with others in an ill deſign; an aſſociate ;
a confederate; an accomplice.
To arms, vićtorious noble father,
To quell the rebels and their complices. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
Juſtice was afterwards done upon the offenders, the prin-
cipal being hanged and quartered in Smithfield; and divers of
his chief complices executed in divers parts of the realm. Hayw.
The marquis prevailed with the king, that he might only
turn his brother out of the garriſon, after juſtice was done
upon his complices. Clarendºn, b. viii.
CoMP Li'ER. n. / [from comply..] A man of an eaſy temper;
a man of ready compliance. -
COMPLIMENT. n.ſ [compliment, Fr.] An act, or expreſ-
fion of civility, uſually underſtood to include ſome hypocriſy,
and to mean leſs than it declares.
He obſerved few con; liments in matter of arms, but ſuch
as proud anger did indite to him. Sidney, b. ii.
My ſervant, ſir? 'Twas never merry world
Since lowly feigning was call'd compliment :
Y are ſervant to the duke Orſino, youth. Shakeſpeare.
One
tº:
cic
CoM.
Cox
T.
!
(.
º
*
(<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 86</div><p class="Text">C O M
C O M
One whom the muſick of his own vain tongue
Doth raviſh, like inchanting harmony:
A man of compliments, whom right and wrong
Have choſe as umpire of their meeting. Shakespeare.
- What honour that,
But tedious waſte of time, to ſit and hear
So many hollow compliments and lics,
Outlandiſh flatteries Milton's Paradiſ. Rºgain'd, b. iv.
Virtue and religion, heaven and eternal happineſs, are not
trifles to be given up in a compliment, or ſacrificed to a jeſt.
- Rogers, Sermon x.
To Co'MPLIMENT. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſooth with
ačts or expreſſions of reſpect; to flatter; to praiſe.
It was not to compliment a ſociety, ſo much above flattery
and the regardleſs air of common applauſes. Glanv. Scepſ. Prºf.
Monarchs ſhould their inward ſoul diſguiſe,
Diſſemble and command, be falſe and wiſe;
By ignominious arts, for ſervile ends,
Should compliment their foes, and ſhun their friends. Prior.
The watchman gave ſo very great a thump at my door,
that I awaked, and heard myſelf complimented with the uſual
ſalutation. Tatler, Nº. 1 1 1.
She compliments Menelaus very handſomely, and ſays he
wanted no accompliſhment either of mind or body. Pope.
CoMPLIME'N TAL. adj. [from compliment.] Expreſſive of re-
ſpect or civility; implying compliments.
I come to ſpeak with Paris from the prince Troilus: I will
make a complimental aſſault upon him. Shakespeare. Troil, and Creſſida.
Languages, for the moſt part, in terms of art and erudi-
tion, retain their original poverty, and rather grow rich
and abundant in complimental phraſes, and ſuch froth. //otton.
This falſehood of Ulyſſes is intirely complimetal and offi-
cious. Pope's Odyſſey, Notes.
CoMPLIME'NT ALLY. adv. [from complimental.] In the nature
of a compliment; civilly; with artful or falſe civility.
This ſpeech has been condemned as avaricious: Euſtathius
judges it ſpoken artfully and complimentally. Broom on the Odyſſ.
Complime'NTER. n.ſ.. [from compliment.] One given to com-
pliments; a flatterer.
Co'MPLINE. n.ſ.. [compline, Fr. completinum, low Lat.] The laſt
aćt of worſhip at night, by which the ſervice of the day is
completed.
At morn and eve, beſides their anthems ſweet,
Their peny maſſes and their complines meet. , Hubb. Tale.
To CoMPlo'RE. v. n. [complero, Lat.] To make lamentation
together.
COMPLOT. n.ſ. [Fr. from completum for complexum, low
Latin, Menage] A confederacy in ſome ſecret crime; a
plot; a conſpiracy.
I cannot, my life, my brother, like but well
The purpoſe of the complet which ye tell. Hubberd's Tale.
I know their complet is to have my life. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
To CoMPLoſt. v.a. [from the noun..] To form a plot; to
conſpire; to join in any ſecret deſign, generally criminal.
Nor ever by adviſed purpoſe meet, -
To plot, contrive, or compot any ill. Shakespeare Richard II.
A few lines after, we find them completting together, and con-
triving a new ſcene of miſeries to the Trojans. Pope.
CoMPLo'TTER. m. ſ [from complat...] A conſpirator; one
joined in a plot.
Jocaſta too, no longer now my ſiſter,
Is found complatter in the horrid deed. Dryd and Lee's Oedip.
To COMPLY”. v. n. [Skinner derives it from the French com-
plaire; but probably it comes from complier, to bend to. Plier
is ſtill in uſe.] To yield to ; to be obſequious to ; to accord
with ; to ſuit with. It has with before as well perſons as
things. -
The riſing ſun complis with our weak fight,
Firſt gilds the clouds, then ſhews his globe of light. //aller.
They did ſervilely comply with the people in worſhipping God
by ſenſible images and repreſentations. Tillotſon.
The truth of things will not comply with our conceits, and
bend itſelf to our intereſt. Tilliſon.
Remember I am ſhe who ſav'd your life,
Your loving, lawful, and complying wife. Dryden.
He made his wiſh with his eſtate comply,
Joyful to live, yet not afraid to die. Prior.
Compo'NENT. adj. [componens, Latin.] That which conſtitutes
the compound body.
The bigneſs of the component parts of natural bodies may
be conjećtured by their colours. Newton's Opticks.
To COMPORT. v. n. [comporter, Fr. from porto, Lat..] To
agree ; to ſuit. Followed by with.
Some piety's not good there, ſome vain diſport
On this ſide ſin, with that place may comport. Donne.
To be ſuch does not comport with the nature of time.
Holder on Time.
It is not every man's talent to diſtinguiſh aright how far
cur prudence may warrant our charity, and how far our
charity may comport with our prudence. L’Eſtrange.
Children, in the things they do, if they comport with their
º * difference, ſo they may be doing. Locke.
OL. i.
To CoMpo'RT. v. a. To bear; to endure. This is a Gallick
ſignification, not adopted among us.
The malecontented ſort,
That never can the preſent ſtate cºmport,
Co. But would as often change as they change will. Daniel.
****T. n. / [from the verb ] Réhaviour; condućt; man-
ner of acting and looking.
I ſhall account concerning the rules and manners of de-
portment in the receiving, our comfort and converſation in
and after it. Taylor's //orthy Communicant.
I know them well, and mark'd their rude comport;
In times of tempeſt they command alone, -
And he but ſits precarious on the throne. Dryden's Fables.
r
CoMº'RTABLE. adj. [from cºmport..] Conſiſtent; not con-
tradićtory.
We caſt the rules and cautions of this art into ſome com-
portable method. J/otton's Architecture.
/
CoMpo'RTANce, n. ſ. [from comport l Behaviour; geſture of
ceremony.
Goodly comfortance each to other bear,
And entertain themſelves with court'ſies meet. Fairy Queen.
CoMpo'RTMENT. n.ſ.. [from comport.] Behaviour. av
By her ſerious and devout comportment on theſe ſolemn occa-
ſions, ſhe gives an example that is very often too much
wanted. Addiſon's Freeholder.
To COMPOSE. v. a. [compoſer, Fr. compono, Latin.]
1. To form a maſs by joining different things together.
Zeal ought to be compºſed of the higheſt degrees of all pious
affections. Sprat.
2. To place any thing in its proper form and method,
In a peaceful grave my corps compoſe. Dryden's AEn.
3. To diſpoſe ; to put in the proper ſtate for any purpoſe.
The whole army ſeemed well cºmpoſed to obtain that by their
ſwords, which they could not by their pen. Clarendon, b. viii.
4. To put together a diſcourſe or ſentence.
Words ſo pleaſing to God, as thoſe which the ſon of God
himſelf hath compoſed, were not poſſible for men to frame.
Hocker, b. v. ſect. 35.
5. To conſtitute by being parts of a whole.
Nor did Iſrael 'ſcape
Th’ infection, when their borrow'd gold compos'd -
The calf in Oreb. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i. 1. 483.
A few uſeful things, confounded with many trifles, fill their
memories, and compoſe their intellectual poſſeſſions. J/atis.
6. To calm; to quiet.
He would undertake the journey with him, by which all
his fears would be compoſed. Clarendon, b. viii.
You, that had taught them to ſubdue their foes,
Cou'd order teach, and their high ſprits compºſe. Waller.
Compoſe thy mind; -
Nor frauds are here contriv'd, nor force deſign'd. Dryden.
He, having a full ſway and command over the water, had
power to ſtill and compoſe it, as well as to move and diſturb it.
Iłºodward's Natural Hiſtory, p. iii.
Yet to compoſe this midnight noiſe,
Go, freely ſearch where-e'er you pleaſe. Prior.
7. To adjuſt the mind to any buſineſs, by freeing it from diſ-
turbance. - -
The mind being thus diſquieted, may not be able eaſily to
compoſe and ſettle itſelf to prayer. Duppa's Rules for Devotion.
We beſeech thee to compoſe her thoughts, and preſerve her
reaſon, during her ſickneſs. Swift.
8. To adjuſt ; to ſettle; as, to compoſe a difference.
9. [With printers..] To arrange the letters; to put the letters
in order in the forms.
10. [In muſick.] To form a tune from the different muſical
notes.
CoMpo's Ed. participial adj. [from compoſe.] Calm; ſerious;
even ; ſedate.
In Spain there is ſomething ſtill more ſerious and compºſed
in the manner of the inhabitants. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
The Mantuan there in ſober triumph ſate,
Compos'd his poſture, and his look ſedate. Pope.
CoMpo's Edly, adv. [from compoſed.] Calmly ; ſeriouſly; ſe-
dately. -
A man was walking before the door very compoſedly without
a hat: one crying, Here is the fellow that killed the duke,
every body aſked which is he, the man without the hat very
compoſedly anſwered, I am he. Clarendon.
CoMºoseps ess. n ſ. [from compºſed J Sedateneſs; calmneſs,
tranquillity. -
He that will think to any purpoſe, muſt have fixedneſ, and
compoſedneſs of humour, as well as ſmartneſs of parts. Norris.
Comfo's ER. m. ſ. [from compºſe.]
I. An author; a writer. -
Now will be the right ſeaſon of forming them to be able
writers and compºſers in every excellent matter. A1 ton.
If the thoughts of ſuch authors have nothing in them, they
at leaſt do no harm, and ſhew an honeſt induſtry and a good
intention in the conſºr. Addiſon's Freehºlder, N°. 40.
2. He that adapts the muſick to words ; he that forms a
tune.
5 D For
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 87</div><p class="Text">i
C O M
-.t
C O M
|
:
For compoſition I prefer next Ludovico, a moſt judicious
and ſweet compºſer. Peacham ºf Muſick.
The compoſer has ſo expreſſed my ſenſe, where 1 intended
to move the paſſions, that he ſeems to have been the poet as
well as the compoſer. Dryden's Albion and Alanius, Preface.
CoM Po's IT E. adj. [compºſitus, Latin.]
The compºſite order in architecture is the laſt of the five or-
ders of columns; ſo named becauſe its capital is compoſed out
of thoſe of the other orders; and it is alſo called the Roman
and Italick order. Harris.
Some are of opinion, that the compºſite pillars of this arch
were made in imitation of the pillars of Solomon's temple.
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
CoM posi'TION. m. ſ. [compoſitio, Latin.]
1. The act of forming an integral of various diſfimilar parts.
We have exact forms of compºſition, whereby they incorpo-
rate almoſt as they were natural ſimples. Bacon's New Atlantiſ.
In the time of the yncas reign in Peru, no compoſition was
allowed by the laws to be uſed in point of medicine, but on-
ly ſimples proper to each diſeaſe. - Temple.
2. The act of bringing ſimple ideas into complication, oppoſed
to analyſis, or the ſeparation of complex notions.
The inveſtigation of difficult things, by the method of
analyſis, ought ever to precede the method of cºmpºſition. Newt.
3. A maſs formed by mingling different ingredients.
Heat and vivacity in age, is an excellent compoſition for
buſineſs. Bacºn, Eſſay 43.
Vaſt pillars of ſtone, caſed over with a compºſition, that locks
the moſt like marble of any thing one can imagine. Addiſon.
Jove mix’d up all, and his beſt clay employ'd,
Then call'd the happy compoſition Floyd. Swift.
4. The ſtate of being compounded; union; conjunction; com-
bination.
Contemplate things firſt in their own ſimple natures, and
afterwards view them in compoſition with other things. J/atts.
5. The arrangement of various figures in a picture.
The diſpoſition in a picture is an aſſembling of many parts:
this is alſo called the compoſition, by which is meant the diſtri-
bution and orderly placing of things, both in general and in
particular. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
6. Written work.
Writers are divided concerning the authority of the greater
part of thoſe compoſitions that paſs in his name. L’Eſtrange.
That divine prayer has always been looked upon as a com-
pºſition fit to have proceeded from the wiſeſt of men. Addison.
When I read rules of criticiſm, I enquire after the works
of the author, and by that means diſcover what he likes in a
compºſition. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 15.
7. Adjuſtment; regulation.
A preacher in the invention of matter, ele&amp;tion of words,
compºſition of geſture, look, pronunciation, motion, uſeth all
theſe faculties at once. Benj. johnſºn's Diſcov.
8. Compact; agreement; terms on which differences are
ſettled.
To take away all ſuch mutual grievance, injuries and
wrongs, there was no way but only by going upon compo-
ſitiºn and agreement amongſt themſelves. And again, all pub-
lick regiment, of what kind ſoever, ſeemeth evidently to have
ariſen from deliberate advice, conſultation, and compoſition be-
tween men, judging it convenient and behoveful. Booker.
Thus we are agreed;
I crave our compoſition may be written,
And ſeal’d between us. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
Their courage droops, and, hopeleſs now, they wiſh
For compoſition with th' unconquer'd fiſh. J/aller.
9. The act of diſcharging a debt by paying part; the ſum paid.
10. Conſiſtency; congruity.
There is no compºſition in theſe news,
That gives them credit.
—Indeed they are diſproportion'd. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
1 1. [In grammar.]. The joining of two words together, or the
prefixing a particle to another word, to augment, diminiſh, or
change its ſignification.
12. A certain method of demonſtration in mathematicks, which
is the reverſe of the analytical method, or of reſolution. It
proceeds upon principles in themſelves ſelf-evident, on defi-
nitions, poſtulates and axioms, and a previouſly demonſtrated
feries of propoſitions, ſtep by ſtep, 'till it gives a clear know-
ledge of the thing to be demonſtrated. This is called the ſyn-
thetical method, and is uſed by Euclid in his Elements. Harris.
CoM Positiv F. adj. [from compoſe..] Compounded; or having
the power of compounding. Dić.
CoM Po's 11 or. m. ſ. [from compºſ...] He that ranges and adjuſts
the types in printing; diſtinguiſhed from the preſſman, who
makes the impreſſion upon paper. -
COMPOST. m. ſ. [Fr. compºſitum, Lat.] A mixture of various
ſubſtances for enriching the ground; manure.
We alſo have great variety of compoſs and ſoils, for the
making of the earth fruitful. Bacon’s Atlantis.
Avoid what is to come,
And do not ſpread the compy? on the weeds,
To ºn...c them ranker. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Water young planted ſhrubs, amomum eſpecially, which
you can hardly refreſh too often, and it requires abundant
compºſł. Evelyn's Aalendar.
There, as his dream foretold, a cart he found,
That carry'd compºſt forth to dung the ground. Dryden.
In vain the nurſling grove
Seems fair a while, cheriſh'd with foſter earth;
But when the alien cºmpoſ! is exhauſt,
Its native poverty again prevails. Philiff.
To CoMpo's T. v. a. [from the noun..] To manure; to enrich
with ſoil. -
By removing into worſe earth, or forbearing to compºſ the
earth, water-mint turneth into field-mint, and the colewart
into rape. Facon’s Natural Hiſtºry, Nº. 518.
As for earth, it cºmfº/eth itſelf; for I knew a garden that
had a field poured upon it, and it did bear fruit excellently.
Bacºn’s Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 5 96.
CoMpo's TURE. m. ſ. [from compºſt.] Soil; manure.
The earth's a thief,
That feeds and breeds by a compºſiure ſtol’n
From gen'ral excrements. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Coxipo's URE. m. ſ. [from compoſ.]
1. The act of compoſing or inditing.
Their own forms are not like to be ſo ſound, or compre-
henſive of the nature of the duty, as forms of publick com—
pºſitre. King Charles-
2. Arrangement; combination; mixture; order.
Hence languages ariſe, when, by inſtitution and agreement,
ſuch a compoſure of letters, i.e. ſuch a word, is intended to
ſignify ſuch a certain thing. Holder on Elements ºf Speech.
From the various compºſiures and combinations of theſe
corpuſcles together, happen all the varieties of the bodies
formed out of them. It ocaiward's Natural Hiſtory.
3. The form ariſing from the diſpoſition of the various parts.
In compoſure of his face,
Liv'd a fair, but manly grace.
4. Frame; make; temperament.
To reel the ſtreets at noon, and ſtand the buffet
With ſlaves that ſmell of ſweat; ſay this becomes him:
As his compºſure muſt be rare indeed,
Whom theſe things cannot blemiſh. Shakespeare Ant, and Cººp-
5. Diſpoſition; relative adjuſtment.
The duke of Buckingham ſprung, without any help, by a
kind of congenial compºſure, to the likeneſs of our late ſove—
reign and maſter. J/ction-
6. Compoſition; framed diſcourſe.
Diſcourſes on ſuch occaſions are ſeldom the produćtions of
leiſure, and ſhould be read with thoſe favourable allowances
that are made to haſty compºſures. Atterbury's Prºf. to Sermons.
In the compoſures of men, remember you are a man as well
as they ; and it is not their reaſon, but your own, that is
given to guide you. J/atts's Improvement of the 4/ind.
7, Sedateneſs; calmneſs; tranquillity. -
To whom the virgin majeſty of Eve,
As one who loves, and ſome unkindneſs meets,
With ſweet auſtere compºſure thus reply'd Milt. Par. Ioff.
The calmeſt and ſereneſt hours of life, when the paſſions of
nature are all ſilent, and the mind enjoys its moſt perfect
compoſire. //atts's Logick.
8. Agreement; compoſition; ſettlement of differences.
The treaty at Uxbridge gave the faireſt hopes of an happy
compoſiure. King Cha, le.
Van guard' to right and left the front unfold,
That all may ſee, who hate us, how we ſeek
Peace and compoſure. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vi. l. 56c.
Things were not brought to an extremi y where I left the
ſtory: there ſeems yet to be room left for a compoſure; here-
after there may be only for pity. Dryd. Prºf. to Abſ and A.hit.
CoMPotA'tion. m. ſ. [compºtatic, Lat.] The act of drinking
or tippling together. -
Secrecy to words ſpoke under the roſe, only mean, in corn-
potation, from the ancient cuſtom in ſympoſiack meetings, to
wear chaplets of roſes. Brown's /ugar Erroars.
If thou wilt prolong
Dire compotation, forthwith reaſon quits
Her empire to confuſion and miſrule,
And vain debates; then twenty tongues at once
Conſpire in ſenſeleſs jargon; naught is heard
But din and various clamour, and mad rant.
Craſhaw.
Phillips.
To COMPOUND. v. a. [compono, Latin J
1. To mingle many ingredients together in one maſs.
2. To form by uniting various parts.
Whoſoever compound th any like it, ſhall be cut off. Ex. xxx.
It will be difficult to evince, that nature docs not make de -
compounded bodies; I means mingle together ſuch bodies a =
are already compºunded of clementary, or rather of ſimple
On CS. Bºyle's Scºptical Cºyºff.
The ideas, being each but one fingle perception, are eaſier
got than the more complex ones; and therefore are not liable
to the uncertainty, which attends thoſe cºfºunded ones. Locke-
. To mingle in different poſitions; to combine.
We cannot have a ſingle image that did not cnter throug| +
+ ther
ſ
Tº
on
fººt,
4
ſpit
Cº. p
;
º
Com
Co MP
l, Oh,
not
To C
I. T.
fend
as th
nice,
. Pºrts,
Joo.
R. r<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 88</div><p class="Text">*- C O M
C O Mí
IT
the fight; but we have the power of altering and compounding
thoſe images into all the varieties of picture. Addison Speciator.
... [In grammar.]. To form one word from two or more words.
~4- Where it and Tigris embrace each other under the city of
Apamia, there do they agree of a joint and compounded name,
and are called Piſ-Tigris. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
5 - To compoſe by being united.
Who'd be ſo mock'd with glory, as to live
But in a dream of friendſhip ;
To have his pomp, and all what ſtate compoºnds,
But only painted, like his varniſh'd friends ! Shakeſp Timon.
es. To adjuſt a difference by ſome receſſion from the rigour of
claims.
I would to God all ſtrifes were well compounded. Shakeſp.
If there be any diſcord or ſuits between any of the family,
they are compounded and appeaſed. Bacon's New Atlantis.
-- To diſcharge a debt by paying only part.
Shall I, ye gods, he cries, my debts compound? Gay.
To CoM Po'UND. v. n.
* - To come to terms of agreement by abating ſomething of the
firſt demand. It has for before the thing accepted or remitted.
They were, at laſt, glad to compound for his bare commit-
ment to the Tower. Clarendon.
Pray but for half the virtues of this wife;
Compound for all the reſt, with longer life. Dryden.
2. To bargain in the lump.
Here's a fellow will help you to-morrow : compound with
him by the year. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
3 - To come to terms.
Cornwal compounded to furniſh ten oxen after Michaelmas
for thirty pounds. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Once more I come to know of thee, king Harry,
If for thy ranſom thou wilt now compound,
Before thy moſt aſſured overthrow º'
Made all the royal ſtars recant,
- Compound and take the covenant. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 3.
But uſeleſs all, when he, deſpairing, found
Catullus then did with the winds compound. Dryd. Juvenal.
Paracelſus and his admirers have compounded with the Ga-
Jeniſts, and brought a mixed uſe of chymical medicines into
the preſent pračtice. Temple.
_º - To determine. This is not in uſe.
We here deliver,
Subſcribed by the conſuls and patricians,
Together with the ſeal of the ſenate, what
We have compounded on. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus:
*C.C.'Mpound. adj. [from the verb.]
= - Formed out of many ingredients; not ſingle.
The ancient eleētrum had in it a fifth of filver to the gold,
=nd made a compound metal, as fit for moſt uſes as gold. Bacon.
Compºund ſubſtances are made up of two or more ſimple
+ſubſtances. * JWatts's Logick.
[In grammar.] Compoſed of two or more words; not
ifimple.
Thoſe who are his greateſt admirers, ſeem pleaſed with them
=s beauties; I ſpeak of his compound epithets. Pope.
CoM Pou ND or aggregated Flower, in botany, is ſuch as con-
iſiſts of many little flowers, concurring together to make up
&lt;ne whole one; each of which has its ſtyle and ſtamina, and
==dhering ſeed, and are all contained within one and the ſame
&lt;-alyx : ſuch are the ſunflower and dandelion. Harris.
*G =&gt; *Mpound. n. ſ [from the verb.] The maſs formed by the
= 1nion of many ingredients.
For preſent uſe or profit, this is the rule: confider the price
&lt;&gt;f the two ſimple bodies; confider again the dignity of the
&lt;&gt;ne above the other in uſe; then ſee if you can make a com-
_z-zzand, that will ſave more in price than it will loſe in dignity
&lt;&gt;f the uſe. Bacon's Phyſical Rem.
As man is a compound and mixture of fleſh, as well as
++=&gt;irit. South's Sermons.
Love, why do we one paſſion call? -
When 'tis a compºund of them all;
Where hot and cold, where ſharp and ſweet,
In all their equipages meet. - Swift.
Pe'UNDABLE. adj. [from compound.] Capable of being
&lt;--. Tºmpounded.
II* * &gt; *Pó'UNDER. n.ſ. [from To compound.]
- ne who endeavours to bring parties to terms of agreement.
Thoſe ſoftners, ſweetners, compounders, and expedient-
Shakespeare Henry V.
– —
*C*=&gt; →
+* - ongers, who ſhake their heads ſo ſtrongly. Swift.
‘...I T-- mingler; one who mixes bodies.
- SOMPREHEND. v. a. [comprehendo, Latin.]
o compriſe; to include; to contain; to imply.
--&gt; - º other .."#. is º ºl.
= ~-ºrded in this ſaying, namely, Thou ſhalt love thy neighbour
T = Thyſelf. e Rom. xiii. 9.
It would be ridiculous to grow old in the ſtudy of every
~~
—- =~ eſſary thing, in an art which comprehend, ſo many ſeveral
- rts. -
—sº- +
* Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
C contain in the mind ; to underſtand; to conceive.
ome was not better by her Horace taught,
I han we are here to comprehend his thought. J/aller.
'Tis unjuſt, that they who have not the leaſt notion of
heroic writing, ſhould therefore condemn the pleaſure which
others receive from it, becauſe they cannot comprehend it. Dryd.
CoMPR EHENSIBLE. adj. [comprehenſible, Fren. comprehenſilii!,
Lat j . Intelligible; attainable by the mind; conceiveable by
the underſtanding
The horizon ſets the bounds between the enlightened
and dark parts of things, between what is and what is not
comprehenſible by us. Locke.
CoMPR EHF'NSIBLY. adv. [from comprehenſible.] With great
power of ſignification or underſtanding; ſignificantly ; with
great extent of ſenſe. .
The words wiſdom and righteouſneſs are commonly uſed
very comprehenſibly, ſo as to fignify all religion and virtue. Tillor,
CoMPR E HE'NSION. m. ſ. [comprehenſio, Latin.]
1. The act or quality of compriſing or containing; incluſion.
In the Old Teſtament there is a cloſe comprehenſiºn of the
New, in the New an open diſcovery of the Old. Hoºker, b. v.
The comprehenſion of an idea regards all eſſential modes and
properties of it; ſo body, in its comprehenſion, takes in ſoli-
dity, figure, quantity, mobility. // atts's Logick.
2. Summary; epitome; compendium ; abſtraćt ; abridgment in
which much is compriſed.
If we would draw a ſhort abſtraćt of human happineſs,
bring together all the various ingredients of it, and digeſt
them into one preſcription, we muſt at laſt fix on this wife
and religious aphoriſm in my text, as the ſum and comprehen-
fion of all. Rºgers, Ser” on g.
3. Knowledge; capacity; power of the mind to admit and
contain many ideas at once.
You give no proof of decay of your judgment, and con-
prehenſion of all things, within the compaſs of an human un-
derſtanding. - Dryden.
4. [In rhetorick.] A trope or figure, by which the name of a
whole is put for a part, or that of a part for the whole, or a
definite number for an indefinite. Harris.
CoMPREHE'Nsive. adj. [from comprehend.]
1. Having the power to comprehend or underſtand many things
at Once.
He muſt have been a man of a moſt wonderful comprehenſive
nature, becauſe he has taken into the compaſs of his Canter-
bury tales the various manners and humours of the whole
Engliſh nation in his age ; not a ſingle character has eſcaped
him. Dryden's Falſes, Prºſace.
His hand unſtain'd, his uncorrupted heart,
His comprehenſive head; all int’reſts weigh'd,
All Europe ſav’d, yet Britain not betray'd. Pºpe's Epiſºles.
2. Having the quality of compriſing much ; compendious; ex-
tenſive.
So diffuſive, ſo comprehenſive, ſo catholick a grace is charity,
that whatever time is the opportunity of any other virtue, that
time is the opportunity of charity. Sprat's Sermons.
CoMPREHF'NSIVELY. adv. [from comprehenſive..] In a com-
prehenſive manner.
CoMPREHE'Nsive Ness. n.ſ.. [from comprehenſive.] The qua-
lity of including much in a few words or narrow compaſs.
Compare the beauty and comprehenſiveneſ of legends on an-
cient coins. Addiſon on Ancient 4.1cdals.
To COMPRESS. v. a. [compreſis, Latin J
1. To force into a narrower compaſs; to ſqueeze together.
2. To embrace. -
Her Neptune ey'd, with bloom of beauty blºſt, ,
And in his cave the yielding nymph com/reft. Pºpe's Odyſſ,
There was in the iſland of Io a young girl compreſſed by a
genius, who delighted to aſſociate with the muſes. Pote.
Compress. n.ſ.. [from the verb J Bolſters of linen rags, by
which ſurgeons ſuit their bandages for any particular part or
purpoſe. $24fncy.
I applied an intercipient about the ankle and upper part of
the foot, and by cºmpreſ; and bandage dreſſed it up. //iſtman:
CoMPR Essibility. m. ſ. [from compreſſible.] The quality of
being compreſſible; the quality of admitting to be brought by
force into a narrower compaſs; as air may be compreſſed, but
water can by no violence be reduced to leſs ſpace than it na-
turally occupies. -
CoMPRf'ssible. adj. [from comºrºſ...] Capable of being forced
into a narrower compaſs; yielding to preſſure, ſo as that one
part is brought nearer to another. - - -
Their being ſpiral particles, accounts for the claſticity of
air; their being ſpherical particles, which gives free paſſage
to any heterogeneous matter, accounts for airs being con-
preſſible. Chyre's Phil Prin,
CoMPRE'ssIE LEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from compreſſible.] Capability of
being preſſed cloſe. Diä.
CoMPR'ssion. n.ſ. [compreſſio, Latin.] The aët of bringing
the parts of any body more near to each other by violence ;
the quality of admitting ſuch an effort of force as may com-
pel the body compreſſed into a narrower ſpace. . -
whenſoever a ſolid body is preſſed, there is an inward
tumult in the parts thereof, ſeeking to deliver themſelves from
the confrºſion; and this is the cauſe of all violent mºtion.
Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 9.
* The
º
!
i
i
i
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 89</div><p class="Text">!-
l-
:-
C O M
The powder in ſhot, being dilated into ſuch a flame as cn-
dureth not compreſſion, moveth likewiſe in round, the flame
being in the nature of a liquid body, ſometimes reçºing.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Tears are the effects of the compreſſion of the moiſture of
the brain, upon dilatation of the ſpirits. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
He that ſhall find out an hypotheſis, by which water may
be ſo rare, and yet not be capable of compreſſion by force,
may doubtleſs, by the ſame hypotheſis, make gold and water,
and all other bodies, as much rarer as he pleaſes; ſo that light
may find a ready paſſage through tranſparent ſubſtances. Newt.
Coxifre'ssure. n ſ. [from compreſs.] The act or force of the
body preſſing againſt another.
We tried whether heat would, notwithſtanding ſo forcible
a compreſſiºne, dilate it. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
To CoMPRI'N r. v. m. [comprimere, Latin.]
The word properly ſignifics to print together; but it is
commonly taken, in law, for the deceitful printing of another's
copy or book, to the prejudice of the rightful proprietor.
Philips's I/orld of I/ords.
. To Cox PRI's E. v. a. [comprendre compris, French J. To con-
tain; to comprehend; to include.
The neceſſity of ſhortneſs cauſeth men to cut off imperti-
ment diſcourſes, and to compriſe much matter in few words.
Hooker, b. v. ſe?. 32.
Do they not, under doćtrine, comprehend the ſame that we
intend by matters of faith ? Do not they, under diſcipline,
compriſe the regimen of the church 3 Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 3.
'Tis the polluted love that multiplies;
But friendſhip does two ſouls in one compriſe. Roſcommon.
CoMPRob A'TION. m. ſ. [comprobo, Latin.] Proof; atteſtation.
That is only eſteemed a legal teſtimony which receives com-
probation from the mouths of at leaſt two witneſſes. Brown.
COMPROMISE. n.ſ.. [compromiſim, Latin.]
1. Compromiſe is a mutual promiſe of two or more partics at dif-
ference, to refer the ending of their controverſies to the arbi-
trement or equity of one or more arbitrators. Cowel.
2. A compačt or bargain, in which ſome conceſſions are made
on each ſide.
Wars have not waſted it; for warr'd he hath not;
But baſely yielded, upon compromiſe,
That which his anceſtors atchiev'd with blows. Shakesp. Rich. II.
To Co'MPROMISE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To compound ; to adjuſt a compact by mutual conceſſions;
as, they compromiſed the affair at a middle rate.
2. In Shakeſpeare it means, unuſually, to accord; to agree.
Laban and himſelf were compromis'd,
That all the yearlings, which were ſtreak'd and pied,
Should fall as Jacob's hire. Shakespeare. Merchant of Venice.
CoMPROMIsso'RIAL. adj. [from compromiſe.] Relating to a
compromiſe.
CoMPRovi'NcIAL. m. ſ. [from con and provincial] Belonging
to the ſame province.
At the conſecration of an archbiſhop, all his comprovincials
ought to give their attendance. Ayliffe's Parergon.
COMPT. m. ſ. [compte, Fr. computus, Lat.] Account; com-
putation; reckoning.
Your ſervants ever
Have theirs, themſelves, and what is theirs, in compt,
To make their audit at your highneſs' pleaſure,
Still to return your own. Shakeſp. King john.
To Compt. v. a. [compter, French..] To compute; to num-
ber. We now uſe To Cou NT, which ſee.
Co'MPTIBLE, adj. [from compt..] Accountable; reſponſible;
ready to give account; ſubjećt; ſubmiſſive.
Good beauties, let me ſuſtain my ſcorn; I am very comptible
even to the leaſt finiſter uſage. Shakeſp.
To COMPTROLL. v. a. TThis word is written by ſome
authors, who did not attend to the etymology, for controll;
and ſome of its derivatives are written in the ſame manner.]
To controll; to over-rule; to oppoſe.
CoM PTRo'LLER. m. ſ. [from comptrol. J Director; ſuperviſor;
ſuperior intendent; governour.
This night he makes a ſupper, and a great one,
To many lords and ladies:
I was ſpoke too, with Sir Henry Guilford,
This night to be comptrollers. Shakeſp Henry VIII.
The comptrollers of vulgar opinions pretend to find out ſuch
a ſimilitude in ſome kind of baboons. Temple.
My fates permit me not from hence to fly;
Nor he, the great comptroller of the ſky. Dryden's Aneir.
CoM PTRo'LLERSHIP. m. ſ. [from comptroller.] Superinten-
dence.
The gayle for ſtannery-cauſes is annexed to the comptroller-
ſhip. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
CoMPULSATIVELY. adv. [from compulſatory J With force;
by conſtraint. Clariſſa.
CoMPULSA To R Y. m. ſ. [from compulſºr, Latin.] Having the
force of compelling; coactive.
Which is no other
But to recover from us by ſtrong hand,
I
C O M -
And terms compulatory, thoſe 'foreſaid lands
So by his father loſt. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
oMPu'lsion, n. ſ. [comfuſio, Latin.]
1. The act of compelling to ſomething; force; violence of the
agents.
If reaſons were as plenty as blackberries, I would give no
man a reaſon on compulſion. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Thoughts, whither have ye led me! with that ſweet
Compulſion thus tranſported. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ix.
Such ſweet compulſion doth in muſick lyc,
To lull the daughters of neceſſity. Milton.
2. The ſtate of being compelled; violence ſuffered. -
Compulſion is in an agent capable of volition, when the
beginning or continuation of any action is contrary to the
preference of his mind. Locke.
When the fierce foe hung on our broken rear,
With what compulſion and laborious flight
We ſunk thus low : Aſ ton’s Paradiſe Lºſt, b. ii. l. 8o.
This faculty is free from compulſion, and ſo ſpontaneous,
and free from determination by the particular object. Hale.
Poſſibly there were others who aſſiſted Harold, partly out of
fear and compulſion. Hale ºn Common Law.
CoMPU'lsive. adj. [ from compulſºr, Fr. confuſus, Latin.]
Having the power to compel; forcible.
The Danube, vaſt and decp,
Supreme of rivers, to the frightful brink,
Urg'd by compulſive arms, ſoon as they reach'd,
New terror chill'd their veins. Philºts.
The clergy would be glad to recover their dues by a more
ſhort and compulſive method. Swift.
cºwº. adv. [from compulſive..] By force; by vio-
ence.
Compu'lsive NEss. m. ſ [from compulſive | Force; compulſion.
CoMPu'lso RILY. adv. [from compulſory.] In a compulſory or
forcible manner; by force; by violence.
To ſay that the better deſerver hath ſuch right to govern,
as he may compulſºrily bring under the leſs worthy, is idle. Bac.
CoMPU'lso RY. adj. ...” French.J. Having the power
of neceſſitating or compelling
He erreth in this, to think that actions, proceeding from
fear, are properly compulſºry actions; which, in truth, are not
only voluntary, but free ačtions; neither compelled, nor ſo.
much as º; neceſſitated. Bramh. againſt Hibbs.
Kindly it would be taken to comply with a patent, al-
though not compulſory. - Swift.
COMPUNCTION. n.ſ.. [componélion, Fr. from pungo punctum,
to prick, Latin.]
1. The power of pricking; ſtimulation; irritation.
This is that acid and piercing ſpirit, which, with ſuch ac-
tivity and compunchion, invadeth the brains and noſtrils of thoſe
that receive it. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 12.
2. The ſtate of being pricked by the conſcience; repentance;
COntrition.
He acknowledged his diſloyalty to the king, wih expreſſions
of great compunction. Clarendon.
CoMPU'Nctious, adj. [from compunélion.] Repentant; ſorrow-
ful; tender.
Stop up th’ acceſs and paſſage to remorſe,
That no compunčious viſitings of nature
Shake my fell purpoſe. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
CoMPU'Nctive. adj. [from compuné?ion.] Cauſing remorſe.
CoMPURGA"TIon. n.ſ. [cºmpurgatio, Latin.] The practice of
juſtifying any man's veracity by the teſtimony of another.
CoMPURGA"Tor. n.ſ. [Latin.] One who bears his teſti-
mony to the credibility of another.
The next quarry, or chalk-pit, will give abundant atteſta-
tion: theſe are ſo obvious, that I need not be far to ſeek for a
compurgator. //codward’s Natural Hiſſary.
CoMPUTABLE. adj. [from compute.] Capable of being num-
bered or computed. -
If, inſtead of twenty-four letters, there were twenty-four
millions, as thoſe twenty-four millions are a finite number ;
ſo would all combinations thereof be finite, though not eaſily
computable by arithmetick. Hale's Origin ºf Alankind.
CoMPUTA'TION, n f [from compute.]
1. The act of reckoning; calculation.
My princely father
Then, by juſt cºmputation of the time,
Found that the iſſue was not his. Shakespeare . Richard III.
2. The ſum collected or ſettled by calculation.
We paſs for women of fifty : many additional years are
thrown into female computations of this nature. Addison Guardia”.
To COMPUTE. v. a. [computo, Latin.J. To reckon; to cal-
culate; to number ; to count.
Cºmpute how much water would be requiſite to lay the
earth under water. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Where they did compute by weeks, yet ſtill the year was
meaſured by Inonths. Hallºr on lime.
Alas! not dazzled with their noon-tide ray,
Compute the morn and ev'ning to the day;
The whole amount of that enormous fame,
A tale that blends their glory with their ſhame. Pºpe.
Cox Puºr E.
d
-
º
Tº
As
To CON
tyren
knowl.
1. To ki
O
Enct
2. To ſtu,
a word I
You
quainted v
Here ar.
by to-morr
Our und
the knowl.
tº over
Shew it hi
the ºper, ſhe
ºuiſe it of hi
The two
Are ſuch as
All this w!,
wºr's, as wer,
3. T. Con tº
ſame with a
I can him tº
&gt;
-&gt;&lt;s
over , to
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 90</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
CoMPUTE. m. ſ. [computus, Lat.] Computation; talculation,
CoMFUTER, nºſ. [from compute.] Reckoner; accountant;
calculator.
The kalendars of theſe computers, and the accounts of theſe
days, are different. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 4.
I have known ſome ſuch ill computers, as to imagine the
many millions in ſtocks ſo much real wealth. Swift.
Co'MPUTIs T. m. ſ. [computiſle, Fr.] Calculator; one ſkilled
in the art of numbers or computation.
The treaſurer was a wiſe man, and a ſtrićt computſ/º. Pºtton.
We conceive we have a year in three hundred and ſixty-five
days exact : compºtiſ's tell us, that we eſcape ſix hours. Brown.
Co'MRADE. m / [camerade, Fr. from camera, a chamber, one
, that lodges in the ſame chamber, contubernio fruitur.]
1. One who dwells in the ſame houſe or chamber.
Rather I abjure all roofs, and chuſe
To be a comrade with the wolf and owl. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
2. A companion; a partner in any labour or danger.
• He permitted them
To put out both thine eyes, and fetter'd ſend thee
Into the common priſon, there to grind
Among the ſlaves and aſſes, thy comrades,
As good for nothing elſe. Milton's Agoniſłes, l. 1159.
A footman, being newly married, deſired his comrade to tell
him freely what the town ſaid of it. Swift.
CoN. A. Latin inſeparable prepoſition, which, at the beginning
of words, ſignifies union or aſſociation; as concourſe, a running
together; to convene, to come together.
CoN. ſabbreviated from contra, againſt, Lat.] A cant word for
one who is on the negative ſide of a queſtion; as the pros and
tons.
To CON. v. a. [connan, Sax. to know; as in Chaucer, Old
wymen connen mochil thinge; that is, Old women have much
knowledge.]
1. To know.
Of muſes, Hobbinol, I conne no ſkill
Enough to me to paint out my unreſt. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
2. To ſtudy; to commit to memory; to fix in the mind. It is
a word now little in uſe, except in ludicrous language.
You are full of pretty anſwers: have you not been ac-
quainted with goldſmiths wives, and conn'd them out of rings.
Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Here are your parts; and I am to intreat you to con them
by to-morrow night. Shatſ. Midſummer Night's Dream.
Our underſtanding cannot in this body arrive ſo clearly to
the knowledge of God, and things inviſible, as by orderly
conning over the viſible and inferior creatures. AMilton.
Shew it him written; and, having the other alſo written in
the paper, ſhew him that, after he has conn'd the firſt, and re-
quire it of him. Holder's Elements of Speech.
The books of which I’m chiefly fond,
Are ſuch as you have whilom conn'd. Prior.
All this while John had conn'd over ſuch a catalogue of hard
words, as were enough to conjure up the devil. Arbuthnot.
3. To Con thanks; an old expreſſion for to thank. It is the
ſame with ſº avoir grº.
I con him no thanks for’t, in the nature he delivers it. Shakespeare
To CONCA'MERATE v. a. [concamero, Lat..] To arch
over; to vault; to lay concave over.
Of the upper beak, an inch and a half conſiſteth of one
concamerated boile, bended downwards, and toothed as the
other. Grew’s Muſeum.
CoNCAMERA'tion. m. ſ. [from concamerate.] Arch; vault.
What a romance is the ſtory of thoſe impoſſible concamera-
tions, and feigned rotations of ſolid orbs Glanville's Scepſ.
To CONCATENATE. v. a. [from catena, Lat. a chain.]
To link together; to unite in a ſucceſſive order.
Conca re NA’tion n.ſ.. [from concatenate.] A ſeries of links;
an uninterrupted unvariable ſucceſſion.
The ſtoicks affirmed a fatal, unchangeable concatenation
of cauſes, reaching even to the elicit acts of man's will.
South's Sermons.
CoscAvA'tion. m. ſ. [from concave.] The act of making
Concave.
CONCAVE adj. [concavus, Latin J
1. Hollow without angles; as, the inner ſurface of an eggſhell,
the inner curve of an arch: oppoſed to convex.
Theſe great fragments falling hollow, incloſed under their
can ave ſurface a great deal of air. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
2. Hollow.
Have you not made an univerſal ſhout,
That Tyber trembled underneath his banks,
To hear the replication of your ſounds
Made in his concave ſhores? Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
For his verity in love, I do think him as concave as a co-
vered goblet, or a worm-eaten nut. Shakeſp. As you like it.
CoNCA've Ness. n ſ [from concave..] Hollowneſs. Dić?.
CoNCAVITY.. n.ſ.. [from concave..] Internal ſurface of a hol-
low ſpherical or ſpheroidical body.
They have taken the impreſſes of theſe ſhells with that czqui-
ſite niceneſs, that no metal, when melted and caſt in a mould,
can ever poſſibly repreſent the concavity of that mould with
Vol. I. -
greater exačneſs than theſe flints do the concavities of the
ſhells, wherein they were moulded. Woodw. Natural Hiſtory.
Sosca vo-coxcave. adº. Concave or hollow on both ſides.
ConcAvo-convex, adj. [from concave and convex.] Concave
one way, and convex the other.
I Procured therefore another corrawo-convex plate of glaſs,
ground on both ſides to the ſame ſphere with the former pate.
Newton's Opticks.
A concavo convex peatangular plate, part of a ſhell that be-
lºngs to the enrochus. //codward on Foſſils,
Co'NcAvous. ač. [cºncavus, Latin.) Concave; hollow with-
out angles. - z
Co'N cAvously. adv. [from concavus.] With hollowneſs; in
ſuch a manner as diſcovers the internal ſurface of a hollow
ſphere. -
The dolphin, that carrieth Arion is concavouſly inverted,
and hath its ſpine depreſſed. Brºwn'; Wulgar Errours, b. v.
To CONCEAL...w.. a. [concel, Latin.] To hide; tº keep
ſecret ; not to divulge; to cover; not to detect.
He oft’ finds med'cine, who his grief imparts;
But double griefs afflict concealing hearts. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Come, Cateſby; thou art ſworn
As deeply to effect what we intend,
As cloſely to cºnceal what we impart. Shaieff. Richard III.
Ulyſſes himſelf adds, he was the moſt eloquent and the
moſt ſilent of men: he knew that a word ſpoke never wrought
ſo much good as a word cºncealed. Broome's Notes on the Odyſy,
There is but one way I know of converſing ſafely with all
men, that is, not by concealing what we ſay or do, but by ſay-
ing or doing nothing that deſerves to be concealed. Pope.
Conce'ALABLE, adj. [from conceal ] Capable of being con-
cealed; poſſible to be kept ſecret, or hid.
Returning a lye unto his Maker, and preſuming to put of
the ſearcher of hearts, he denied the omniſciency of God,
whereunto there is nothing concealable. Brown's Wulg. Errours,
CoNcE'ALED NE *s. n.ſ. . [from conceal.] The ſtate of being
concealed; privacy; obſcurity. Dićf.
Conce'al ER. n.ſ.. [from conceal.] He that conceals anything.
They were to undergo the penalty of forgery, and the con-
cealer of the crime was equally guilty.
CoNce'ALMENT, n.ſ.. [from conceal.]
.1. The ačt of hiding; ſecreſy.
She never told her love;
But let concealment, like a worm in the bud,
Feed on her damaſk cheek. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night,
He is a worthy gentleman,
Exceedingly well read, and profited
In ſtrange concealments. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Though few own ſuch ſentiments, yet this concealment de-
rives rather from the fear of man than of any Being above.
Glanville's Scetſ. Preface.
2. The ſtate of being hid; privacy; deliteſcence.
A perſon of great abilities is zealous for the good of man-
kind, and as ſolicitous for the concealment as the performance
of illuſtrious ačtions. - Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 33.
3. Hiding place; retreat; cover; ſhelter.
The choice of this holy name, as the moſt effectual conceal-
ment of a wicked deſign, ſuppoſes mankind ſatisfied that no-
thing but what is juſt is directed by the principles of it. Rogers.
The cleft tree
Offers its kind concealment to a few ;
Their food its inſects, and its moſs their neſts. Thomſºn.
To CONCE'DE. v. a. [concedo, Latin.] To yield; to admit;
to grant; to let paſs undiſputed. º
This muſt not be conceded without limitation. . Boyle;’
The atheiſt, if you do but concede to him that fortune majº
be an agent, doth preſume himſelf ſafe and invulnerable.
Bentley's Sermons.
CONCE'IT. m. ſ. [concept, French; conceptus, Latin.]
1. Conception; thought; idea; image in the mind. - \º
Here the very ſhepherds have their fancies lifted to ſo high”
conceits, as the learned of other nations are content both to
borrow their names and imitate their cunning. Sidney.
Impoſſible it was, that ever their will ſhould change or in:
cline to remit any part of their duty, without ſome object
having force to avert their cºnceit from God... Hooker, b, i.
His grace looks chearfully and ſmooth this morning:
There's ſome conceit, or other, likes him well; .
When that he bids good-morrow with ſuch ſpirit. Shakespeare
In laughing there ever precedeth a conceit of ſomewhat ridi-
culous, and therefore it is proper to man. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
2. Underſtanding; readineſs of apprehenſion.
How often, alas I did her eyes ſay unto me, that theyloved?
and yet, I not looking for ſuch a matter, had not my conceit
open to underſtand them. - Sidney, b. ii.
The firſt kind of things appointed by laws humane, con-
taineth whatſoever is good or evil, is notwithſtanding more
ſecret than that it can be diſcerned by every man's preſent cºn-
ceit, without ſome deeper diſcourſe and judgment. Hooker, b, i.
I ſhall be found of a quick conceit in judgment, and ſhall be
admircd. J//d, viii. 11.
5 E 3. Opinion,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 91</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
3. Opinion, generally in a ſenſe of contempt; fancy; imagina-
gination ; fantaſtical notion.
I know not how conceit may rob
The treaſury of life, when life itſelf
Yields to the theft. Shakeſpear.’s King Lear.
Strong cºnceit, like a new principle, carries all eaſily with
it, when yet above common ſenſe. Locke.
Malbranche has an odd conceit,
As ever enter'd Frenchman's pate.
4. Opinion in a neutral ſenſe.
Seeſt thou a man wiſe in his own conceit * There is more
hope of a fool than of him.
I ſhall not fail tº approve the fair conceit
The king hath of you. Shakespeare's Henry VIII.
5. A pleaſant fancy.
His wit is as thick as Tewkſbury muſtard : there is no more
conceit in him than is in a mallet. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
While he was on his way to the gibbet, a freak took him in
the head to go off with a conceit.
Prior.
Prov. xxvi. 12.
L’Eſtrange.
6. Sentiment, as diſtinguiſhed from imagery.
Some to conceit alone their works confine,
And glitt'ring thoughts ſtruck out at ev'ry line. Pºpe.
7. Fondneſs; favourable opinion; opinionative pride.
Since by a little ſtudying in learning, and great conceit of
himſelf, he has loſt his religion; may he find it again by
harder ſtudy under humbler truth. Bentley.
8. Out of Cosce it with. No longer fond of.
Not that I dare aſſume to myſelf to have put him out of con-
ceit with it, by having convinced him of the fantaſticalneſs of
it. Tillotſon, Preface.
What hath chiefly put me out of conceit with this moving
manner, is the frequent diſappointment. Swift,
To Conce'it. v. a. [from the noun..] To conceive; to ima-
gine; to think; to believe.
One of two bad ways you muſt conceit me,
Either a coward, or a flatterer. Shakespeare julius Caſar.
They looked for great matters at their hands, in a cauſe
which they cºncited to be for the liberty of the ſubject. Bacon.
He conceits himſelf to be ſtruck at, when he is not ſo much
as thought of - L'E/lrange.
The ſtrong, by concriting themſelves weak, are thereby ren-
dered as unactive, and conſequently as uſeleſs, as if they really
were ſo. South's Sermons.
CoNcEITED. particip. adj. [from conceit.]
1. Endowed with fancy.
He was of countenance amiable, of feature comely, adive of
body, well ſpoken, pleaſantly conceited, and ſharp of wit.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
2. Proud; fond of himſelf; opinionative; affected; fantaſtical.
There is another extreme in obſcure writers, which ſome
empty conceited heads are apt to run into, out of a prodigality
of words, and a want of ſenſe. Felton on the Claſſicks.
If you think me too conceited,
Or to paſſion quickly heated. Swift.
What you write of me, would make me more conceited than
what I ſcribble myſelf. Pope.
3. With of before the objećt of conceit.
Every man is building a ſeveral way, impotently conceited of
his own model and his own materials. Dryden.
If we conſider how vicious and corrupt the Athenians were,
how conceited ºf their own wit, ſcience, and politeneſs. Bentley.
CoNCE'ite DLY. adv. [from conceited J Fancifully; whimſi-
cally.
Conceited, dreſs her, and be aſſign'd
By you fit place for every flower and jewel; -
Make her for love fit fuel. IDonne.
GoNce"ITEDN Ess. m. ſ. [from conceited.] Pride; opinionative-
neſs; fondneſs of himſelf.
When men think none worthy eſteem but ſuch as claim
under their own pretences, partiality and conceitedneſs makes
them give the pre-eminence. Cºllier on Pride.
CoNc E'1't L Ess. adj. [from conceit.] Stupid ; without thought ;
dull of apprehenſion.
Think'ſt thou, I am ſo ſhallow, ſo conceithſ,
To be ſeduced by thy flattery. Shakespeare Two Gent. of Werona.
CoN ce'i v A BI. E. adj. [from conceive l
1. That may be imagined or thought.
If it were poſſible to contrive an invention, whereby any
conceivable weight may be moved by any conceivable power with
the ſame quickncſs by the hand, without other inſtrument,
the works of nature would be too much ſubjected to art.
- }} ilkins's 41ath. Magick.
2. That may be underſtood or believed.
The freezing of the words in the air in the Northern climes,
is as conceivable as this ſtrange union. Glanv. Scepſ. c. 4.
It is not conceivable that it ſhould be indeed that very perſon,
whoſe ſhape and voice it aſſumed. Atterbury’s Sermons.
CoN ce'iv AEL EN Ess. m. ſ. [from conceivable.] The quality of
being conceivable. Dicſ.
Coscº VABLY. ade. [from cºnceivable.] In a conceivable or
intelligible manner.
To CONCEIVE. v. a. [concevoir, Fr. concipere, Latin.]
4.
1. To admit into the womb.
I was ſhapen in iniquity, and in ſin did my mother conceive
rene. Pſalm li. 5.
2. To form in the mind; to imagine.
Nebuchadnezzar hath conceived a purpoſe againſt you. }er.
*º. comprehend; to underſtand. He conceives the whoſe
y/lem.
y This kiſs, if it durſt ſpeak,
Would ſtretch thy ſpirits up into the air:
Conceive, and fare thee well. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
4. To think; to be of opinion.
If you compare my gentlemen with Sir John, you will
hardly conceive him to have been bred in the ſame climate. Sw.
To CoNCE'1 vs. v. n.
1. To think; to have an idea of
The gricv'd commons
Hardly conceive of me: let it be nois'd,
That, through our interceſſion, this revokement
And pardon comes. Shºp are’s Henry VIII.
Conceive of things clearly and diſtinétly in their own natures;
conceive of things completely in all their parts; conceive of
things comprehenſively in all their properties and relations;
conceive of things extenſively in all their kinds; conceive of
things orderly, or in a proper method. J/atti's Logi }.
2. To become pregnant.
The flocks ſhould conceive when they came to drink. Gen.
The beauteous maid, whom he beheld, poſſeſs'd :
Conceiving as ſhe ſlept, her fruitful womb
Swell'd with the founder of immortal Rome. Addiſon.
Conce've R. m. ſ. [from conceive.) One that underſtands or
apprehends.
Though hereof prudent ſymbols and pious allegories be
made by wiſer conceivers, yet common heads will fly unto ſu-
perſtitious applications. Brown's Wugar Errours, b. 7, c. 1.
CoNCE'N.T. n.ſ.. [concentus, Latin.]
1. Concert of voices; harmony; concord of found.
It is to be confidered, that whatſoever virtue is in num-
bers, for conducing to concent of notes, is rather to be aſcribed
to the ante-number than to the entire number. Bacon.
2. Conſiſtency.
'Tis in concent to his own principles, which allow no me-
rit, no intrinſick worth to accompany one ſtate more than
another. Atterbury.
To CONCENTRATF. v. a. [concentrer, Fr. from con and
centrum, Lat.] To drive into a narrow compaſs; to drive
towards the center.
Spirit of vinegar, concentrated and reduced to its greateſt
ſtrength, will coagulate the ſerum. Arluthnot on Aliments.
CoNCENTRA'tion. n.f. [from concentrate.] Collection into a
narrow ſpace round the center; compreſſion into a narrow
compaſs.
All circular bodies, that receive a concentration of the light,
muſt be ſhadowed in a circular manner Peacham on Drawing.
To Conce'N'ſ R.E. v. n. [concentrer, Fr. from con and centrum,
Latin.] To tend to one common centre; to have the ſame
centre with ſomething elſe.
The bricks having firſt been formed in a circular mould,
and then cut, before their burning, into four quarters or more,
the ſides afterwards join ſo cloſely, and the points concentre ſo
exactly, that the pillars appear one intire piece. li otton.
All theſe are like ſo many lines drawn from ſeveral objećts,
that ſome way relate to him, and concentre in him. Hale.
To CoNCE'N TRE. v. a. To emit towards one centre.
The having a part leſs to animate, will rather ſerve to con-
centre the ſpirits, and make them more ačtive in the reſt.
Decay ºf Piety.
In thee concentring all their precious beams
Of ſacred influence! A4ilton’s Paradiſe Lºft, b. Q. l. 1 ob.
CoscE'Nº Rica L. adj. [cºncentricus, Lat.] Having one com-
CoNc E'N T Rick. } non Centre.
If, as in water ſtirr'd, more circles be
Produc’d by one, love ſuch additions take;
Thoſe, like ſo many ſpheres, but one heav'n make :
For they are all cºncentrick unto thee. - Donne.
Any ſubſtance, pitched ſleddy upon two points, as on an
axis, and moving about on that axis, alſo deſcribes a circle
concentrick to the axis. Moxon's 41ech, Exer.
If the cryſtalline humour had been concentrical to the ſcle-
rodes, the eye would not have admitted a whole hemiſphere
at one view. Ray on the Creation.
If a ſtone be thrown into ſtagnating water, the waves ex-
cited thereby continue ſome time to ariſe in the place where the
ſtone fell into the water, and are propagated from thence into
concentrick circles upon the ſurface of the water to great
diſtances. Newton's Opt.
The manner of its concretion is by concentrical rings, like
thoſe of an onion about the firſt kerne). Arbut ºn ton Die!.
Circular revolutions in concentrick orbs about the ſun, or
other central body, could in no wife be attained without the
power of the Divine Arm. Ecnt’ey’s Sermºns.
Cos CF'PT Aci. e. n.f. [conceptaculum, Lat.) That in which any
thing is contained ; a veſſel.
TV here
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 92</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
There is at this day reſident, in that huge conceptacle, water
enough to effect ſuch a deluge. Iſoodward's Nat. Hºff. Prºf.
Concºrrible, adj. [from coccipio conceptum, Latin.] That
may be conceived; intelligible; capable to be underſtood.
Some of his attributes, and the manifeſtations thereof, are
not only highly delegrable to the intelle&amp;tive faculty, but are
moſt ſuitable and eaſily conceptible by us, becauſe apparent in
his works. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Conceptios. n.ſ. [conceptio, Latin.] -
1. The act of conceiving, or quickening with pregnancy.
I will greatly multiply thy ſorrow, and thy conception; in
ſorrow thou ſhalt bring forth children. Gen. iii. 16.
Thy ſorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy cºnception; children thou ſhalt bring
In ſorrow forth. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x. l. 194.
2. The ſtate of being conceived.
Joy had the like conceptiºn in our eyes,
And at that inſtant, like a babe, ſprung up. Shakeſpeare.
Our own produćtions flatter us: it is impoſſible not to be
fond of them at the moment of their conception. Dryd. Dufreſ.
3. Notion; idea; image in the mind.
As conceptions are the images or reſemblances of things to
the mind within itſelf, in the like manner are words or names
the marks, tokens, or reſemblances of thoſe conceptions to the
minds of them whom we converſe with. South's Sermons.
Conſult the acuteſt poets and ſpeakers, and they will confeſs
that their quickeſt, moſt admired conceptions were ſuch as darted
into their minds, like ſudden flaſhes of lightning, they knew
not how, nor whence; and not by any certain conſequence,
or dependence of one thought upon another, as it is in mat-
ters of ratiocination. South's Sermons.
To have right conceptions about them, we muſt bring our
underſtandings to the inflexible natures and unalterable rela-
tions of things, and not endeavour to bring things to any pre-
conceived notions of our own. Locke.
4. Sentiments; purpoſe.
Thou but remember'ſt me of my own conception. I have
perceived a moſt faint neglect of late; which I have rather
blamed as my own jealous curioſity, than as a very pretence
and purpoſe of unkindneſs, Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
º Pleaſe your highneſs, note
His dangerous conception in this point:
Not friended by his wiſh to your high perſon,
His will is moſt malignant, and it ſtretches
Beyond you to your friends. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
5. Apprehenſion; knowledge.
And as if beaſts conceiv'd what reaſon were,
And that conception ſhould diſtinétly ſhow
They ſhould the name of reaſonable bear;
For, without reaſon, none could reaſon know.
6. Conceit ; ſentiment; pointed thought.
He is too flatulent ſometimes, and ſometimes too dry;
many times unequal, and almoſt always forced ; and, beſides,
is full of conceptions, points of epigram, and witticiſms; all
which are not only below the dignity of heroic verſe, but
contrary to its nature.
CoNc ºptious. adj. [conceptum, Latin.] Apt to conceive ;
fruitful; pregnant.
Davies.
Common mother,
Enſearthy fertile and conceptiºus womb ;
Let it no more bring out to ingrateful man. Shakeſp. Timon.
CoNCE'PTIVE. adj. [conceptum, Latin.] Capable to conceive.
In hot climates, and where the uterine parts exceed in heat,
by the coldneſs of this ſimple they may be reduced into a con-
ceptive conſtitution. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 7.
To CONCE'RN. v. a. ſ.concerner, Fr. concerno, low Latin.]
1. To relate to ; to belong to.
Exclude the uſe of natural reaſoning about the ſenſe of holy
ſcripture, concerning the articles of our faith; and then, that
the ſcripture doth concern the articles of our faith, who can
aſſure us? Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 8.
Count Claudio may hear; for what I would ſpeak of con-
cerns him. Shakeſpeare's Much ado about Nothing.
Gracious things
Thou haſt reveal’d; thoſe chiefly which concern
Juſt Abraham, and his feed. Miltºn's Paradiſe Ioff, b. xii.
This place concerns not at all the dominion of one brother
over the other. Locke.
2. To affect with ſome paſſion; to touch nearly; to be of im-
portance to.
- I would not
The cauſe were known to them it moſt concerns. Shakeſpear.
Our wars with France have affected us in our moſt tender
intereſts, and concerned us more than thoſe with any other
nation. Addison on the State of the J/ar.
It much concerns them not to ſuffer the king to eſtabliſh his
authority on this ſide. Addiſon's R. marks on Italy.
The more the authority of any ſtation in ſociety is ex-
tended, the more it concerns publick happineſs that it be com-
mitted to men fearing God. Rogers's Sermons.
3. To intereſt; to engage by intereſt.
I knew a young negroe who was ſick of the ſmall-pox: I
Dryden's juvenal, Dedication. .
found by enquiry, at a perſon's concerned for him, that the little
tumours left whitiſh ſpecks behind them. Hoye on Colours.
Above the reſt twº goddeſſes appear,
Cºncern'd for each : here Venus, Juno there. Dryden's Żn.
Providence, where it loves a nation, concerns itſelf to
ºn and aſſert the intereſt of religion, by blaſting the ſpoilers
of religious perſons and places. South's Sermons,
hatever paſt actions it cannot reconcile, or appropriate
to that Preſent ſelf by conſciouſneſs, it can be no more cº-
termed in than if they had never been done. Locke.
They think themſelves out of the reach of providence, and
nº longer concerned to ſolicit his favour. Rogers, Serm n. ii.
4. To diſturb; to make uneaſy. * -
In one compreſſing engine I ſhut a ſparrow, without forcing
any air in ; and in an hour the bird began to pant, and be con-
termed, and in leſs than an hour and a fift to be fisk Derham.
CoNCE'RN. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Buſineſs; affair; confidered as relating to ſome one.
Let early care thy main concern, fºcure,
Things of leſs moment may delays endure. Denh m.
This manner of expoſing the private anºrms of families,
and ſacrificing the ſecrets of the dead to the curioſity of the
living, is one of thoſe licentious practices, which might well
deſerve the animadverſion of our government. Addison Freeholder.
A heathen emperor ſaid, if the gods were offended, it
Was their own concern, and they were able to vindicate thém-
ſelves. Swift.
Religion is no triflng concern, to be performed in any carcieſ,
and ſuperficial manner. Rºgers, Sermon xiii.
2. Intereſt; engagement.
No plots th' alarm to his retirements give;
'Tis all mankind's concern that he ſhould live. Dryden.
When we ſpeak of the conflagration of the world, theſe
have no concern in the queſtion. Burnet's The ry ºf the Earth.
3. Importance; moment.
Myſterious ſecrets of a high concern,
And weighty truths, ſolid convincing ſenſe,
Explain’d by unaffected eloquence. Roſcommon.
The mind is ſtunned and dazzled amidſt that variety of ob-
jećts: ſhe cannot apply herſelf to thoſe things which are of the
utmoſt concern to her. Addison's Specia.or, Nº. 465.
4. Paſſion; affection; regard.
Ah, what concerns did both your ſouls divide
Your honour gave us what your love deny'd.
O Marcia, let me hope thy kind concerns,
And gentle wiſhes, follow me to battle Addison's Cato.
Why all this concern for the poor? We want them not, as
the country is now managed : where the plough has no work,
one family can do the buſineſs of fifty. Swift.
CoNce'RNING. prep. [from concern : this word, originally a par-
ticiple, has before a noun the force of a prepoſition.] Relating
to ; with relation to.
There is not anything more ſubjećt to errour than the true
judgment concerning the power and forces of an eſtate. Bacon.
The ancients had no higher recourſe than to nature, as may
appear by a diſcourſe concerning this point in Strabo. Brown.
Dryden.
None can demonſtrate that there is ſuch an iſland as Ja-
maica, yet, upon teſtimony, I am free from all doubt concern-
ing it. Tillotſon, Preface.
CoNCE'RNMENT. m. ſ. [from concern.]
1. The thing in which we are concerned or intereſted ; affair;
buſineſs; intereſt.
To mix with thy concernments I defiſt
Henceforth, nor too much diſapprove my own. Milt. Agon.
This ſhews how uſeful you have been,
To bring the king's concernments in Hadiba, p. iii. cart. 2.
Yet when we're ſick, the doctor's fetcht in haſte,
Leaving our great concernment to the laſt. Deſhaw.
When my concernment takes up no more room or compaſs
than myſelf, then, ſo long as I know where to breathe and to
exiſt, I know alſo where to be happy. Soath.
He that is wiſe in the affairs and concernments of other men,
but careleſs and negligent of his own, that man may be ºld
to be buſy, but he is not wife. Tillºtſon.
Our ſpiritual intereſts, and the great concernments of a future
ſtate, would doubtleſs recur often. Atterbury.
Propoſitions which extend only to the preſent life, are
ſmall, compared with thoſe that have influence upon ºur ºf:
laſting concernments. If atts's Improvement ºf the A4iºd.
2. Relation ; influence. -
Sir, 'tis of near concernment, and imports *: c
No leſs than the king's life and honour: Derham's Sophy.
He juſtly fears a peace with me would prove
Ofiliancernment to his haughty love. Pºd. Ind. Emperor.
3. Intercourſe; buſineſs.
The great concernme
another.
4. Importance; moment.
I'look upon experimental truths as matters of great,”
cernment to mankind. Boyle.
5. Interpoſition; regard ; meddling.
He married a daughter to the earl, without any other ap-
probation
rt of men is with men, one amongſt
Locke.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 93</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
probation of her father, or cºncernment in it, than ſuffering
him and her to come into his preſence.
6. Paſſion; emotion of mind.
While they are ſo eager to deſtroy the fame of others, their
ambition is manifeſt in their concernment. Dryden.
If it carry with it the notion of ſomething extraordinary,
if apprehenſion and cºncernment accompany it, the idea is like-
!y to ſink the deeper. Lºcke.
To CONCERT. v. a. ſcancerter, French, from concertare, Lat.
to prepare themſelves for ſome publick exhibition or per-
fºrmance, by private encounters among themſelves )
1. To ſettle anything in private by mutual communication.
2. To ſett c : to contrive; to adjuſt.
Mark how already in his working brain
He forms the well-concerted ſcheme of miſchief.
Co'NCERT. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Communication of deſigns; eſtabliſhment of meaſures among
thoſe who are engaged in the ſame affair.
All thoſe diſcontents, how ruinous foever, have ariſen from
the want of a due communication and concert. Swift.
2. A ſymphony; many performers playing to the ſame tune.
Coscº RTA'ſ los. m. ſ. [ concertatio, Latin. J Strife; con-
tention.
CoscERTATIVE. adj. [concertativus, Latin.] Contentious;
quarrelſome recriminating. 19ict.
CONCESSION. m. ſ. [concºſ”, Latin.]
1. I he act of granting or yielding.
The conceſ on of theſe charters was in a parliamentary
way. Hale's Common Law of England.
2. A grant; the thing yield.d.
I ſtill counted myſelf undiminiſhed by my largeſt conceſſions,
if by them I might gain the love of my people. King Charles.
When a lover becomes ſatisfied by ſmall compliances, with-
out further purſuits, then expect to find popular aſſemblies
content with ſmall conceſſions. Swift.
Cox CE's Ios ARY. adj. [from concºſion.] Given by indulgence
or allowance.
Cox CE's-1 v El Y. adv. [from conceſſon.] By way of conceſſion;
as yielding, not controverting by aſſumption.
Some have written rhetorically and con ºffively; not contro-
verting, but aſſuming the queſtion, which, taken as granted,
advantaged the illation. Brown's ſugar Errours, b. iii. c. 12.
Cosch. m. ſ. [cºncha, Latin.] . A ſhell; a ſea-ſhell.
He furniſhes her cloſet firſt, and fills
The crowded ſhelves with rarities of ſhells:
Adds orient pearls, which from the conchs he drew,
And all the ſparkling ſtones of various hue. Dryden's Fables.
Co's C Hoi D. m. ſ. The name of a curve.
To CONCILIATE. v. a. [concilio, Lat..] To gain; to pro-
cure good will; to reconcile.
It was accounted a philtre, or plants that conciliate affec-
tion. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 7.
Coscil IATION. m. ſ. [from conciliate, J The act of gaining
or reconciling. Dis?.
Coscilla'roR. n. ſ. [from conciliate.] One that makes peace
between others.
Clarendon.
Rowe,
Cox ci'L1A roRY. adj. [from conciliate.] Relating to recon-
ciliation.
Conci'NN It Y. m. ſ. [from concinnitas, Latin.]
fitncfs.
CONCINNOU.S. adj. [concinnus, Latin.] Becoming; pleaſant;
agreeable r
CONCISE. adj. [conciſis, cut, Latin.] Brief; ſhort; broken
into ſhort periods.
The conciſe ſtile, which expreſſeth not enough, but leaves
ſomewhat to be underſtood. Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
Where the author is obſcure, enlighten him ; where he is
too brief and conciſe, amplify a little, and ſet his notions in
a fairer view. //atts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i. c. 4.
Conci's El Y. adv. [from conciſc.] Briefly ; ſhortly ; in few
words; in ſhort ſentences. -
Ulyſſes here ſpeaks very conciſely, and he may ſeem to break
abruptly into the ſubject. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey, b. vii.
Cosci’s Es Ess. m. ſ. [from conciſe.] Brevity; ſhortneſs.
Giving more ſcope to Mezentius and Lauſus, that verſion,
which has more of the majeſty of Virgil, has leſs of his con-
ciſingſ. Dryden.
Coscisſos. m. ſ. [conciſum, Latin.] Cutting off ; exciſion;
deſtruction.
Die?.
Decency;
Coscir A'ſ 10s. n.ſ.. [concitatio, Latin.] The act of ſtirring
up, or putting in motion.
The revelations of heaven are conceived by immediate il-
lumination of the ſoul; whereas the deceiving ſpirit, by con-
ºftation of humours, produces conceited phantaſmes. Brown.
Cºst LAMA rios. m. ſ. [conclamatic, Latin.] An outcry or
#hout of many together. 19icf.
CoscLA v. E. n ſ. ſconclave, Latin.]
i. A private apartment.
2. The room in which the cardinals mect; or the aſſembly of
the cardinals.
I thank the holy conclave for their loves;
They've ſent me ſuch a man I would have wiſh'd for, Shakespeare
3.
It was ſaid of a cardinal, by reaſon of his apparent likeli-
hood to ſtep into St. Peter's chair, that in two conclaves he
went in pope and came out again cardinal. South's Sermº.
3. A cloſe aſſembly. •
Forthwith a conclave of the godhead meets, f
Where Juno in the ſhining ſenate ſits. Garth.
To CONCLU'DE. v. a. [conclud, Latin J
1. To ſhut.
The very perſon of Chriſt therefore, for ever and the ſelf-
ſame, was only, touching bodily ſubſtance, concluded within
the grave. Hºcker, b. v. ſ. 52.
2. To include; to comprehend.
God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might
have mercy upon all. Romans, xi. 32.
3. To collect by ratiocination.
he providences of God are promiſcuouſly adminiſtred in
this world; ſo that no man can conclude God's love or hatred
to any perſon, by any thing that befals him. Tillotſon.
4. To decide; to determine.
Youth, ere it ſees the world, here ſtudies reſt;
And age, returning thence, concludes it beſt. Dryden.
But no frail man, however great or high,
Can be concluded bleſt before he die. Addiſon's Ovid's Aſst.
5. To end; to finiſh.
Is it concluded he ſhall be protećtor
It is determin'd, not concluded yet;
But ſo it muſt be, if the king miſcarry. Shakespeare, Rich. III. --
I will conclude this part with the ſpeech of a counſellor of
ſtate.
Bacon.
Theſe are my theme, and how the war began,
And how concluded by the godlike man. Dryden's ACn. b.vii.
6. To oblige, as by the #: determination.
If therefore they will appeal to revelation for their creation,
they muſt be concluded by it. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
He never refuſed to be concluded by the authority of one
legally ſummoned. atterbury,
To Conclu'DE. v. n.
1. To perform the laſt ačt of ratiocination; to colle&amp;t the con-
ſequence; to determine.
For why ſhould we the buſy ſoul believe,
When boldly ſhe concludes of that and this;
When of herſelf ſhe can no judgment give,
Nor how, nor whence, nor where, nor what ſhe is Davies.
The blind man's relations import no neceſſity of concluding,
that though black was the rougheſt of colours, therefore white
ſhould be the ſmootheſt. Poyle on Colours.
There is ſomething infamous in the very attempt: the world
will conclude I had a guilty conſcience. Arbuth. Hiſł. ºf f. Bull.
2. To ſettle opinion.
Can we conclude upon Luther's inſtability, as our author has
done, becauſe, in a ſingle notion no way fundamental, an
enemy writes that he had ſome doubtings? Atterbury.
I queſtion not but your tranſlation will do honour to our
country; for I conclude of it already from thoſe performances.
Addiſon to Pope.
3. Finally to determine.
They humbly ſue unto your excellence,
To have a goodly peace concluded of, -
Between the realms of England and of France. Shakeſpeare,
4. To end.
And all around wore nuptial bonds, the ties
Of love's aſſurance, and a train of lics,
That, made in luſt, conclude in perjuries. Dryden's Fables.
Cosciu'DENcy. m. ſ. [from concludent.] Conſequence; regu-
lar proof; logical deduction of reaſon.
Judgment concerning things to be known, or the neglect
and concludency of them, ends in deciſion. Hale.
CoNCLU'D ENT, adj. [from conclude ) Decifive; ending in juſt
and undeniable conſequences.
Though theſe kind of arguments may ſeem more obſcure,
yet, upon a due confideration of them, they are highly con-
ſequential and concludent to my purpoſe. Hale's Orig. of Mank.
CoNCLU's IBLE. adj. [from concude.) Determinable; certain
by regular proof.
'I is as certainly concluſible from God's preſcience, that they
will voluntarily do this, as that they will do it all. Hammond.
CoNCLU's Ion. n.f. [from conclude.)
1. Determination; final deciſion.
Ways of peaceable conclºſion there are but theſe two cer-
tain ; the one a ſentence of judicial deciſion, given by autho-
rity thcreto appointed within ourſelves; the other, the like
kind of ſentence given by a more univerſal authority. Hooker.
2. The collection from propoſitions premiſed ;
ſequence.
The concluſion of experience, from the time paſt to the time
preſent, will not be ſound and perfect. Facon's Iſar with Spain.
And marrying divers principles and grounds,
the con-
Out of their match a true concluſion brings. Davies.
Then doth the wit
Buildford concluſions on thoſe ièle grounds;
Then doth it fly the good, and ill purſue. Davies.
I only deal by rules of art,
Such
!
i:
l
* *
º:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 94</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O. N
Such as are lawful, and judge by
Concluſions of aſtrology. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. iii.
It is of the nature of principles, to yield a concluſiºn different
from themſelves. Tillotſon, Preface.
He granted him both the major and the minor; but denied
him the concluſion. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 32.
. The cloſe ; the laſt reſult of argumentative dedućtion.
Let us hear the concluſion of the whole matter, fear God and
keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.
Eccles. xii. 13.
I have been reaſoning, and in concluſion have thought it beſt
4. The event of experiments.
Her phyſician tells me,
She has purſu'd concluſions infinite
Of eaſy ways to die. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
We practiſe likewiſe all concluſions of grafting and inocu-
lating, as well of wild trees as fruit trees. Bacon's New Atlant.
;. The end; the upſhot; the laſt part. - -
6. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems to ſignify filence; confinement of the
thoughts.
Your wife Oétavia, with her modeſt eyes
And ſtill concluſion, ſhall acquire no honour,
Demuring upon me. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleofatra.
CoNclu's Ive. adj. [from conclude.]
1. Decifive; giving the laſt determination to the opinion.
The agreeing votes of both houſes were not by any law or
reaſon concluſive to my judgment. King Charles.
The laſt dićtate of the underſtanding is not always abſolute
in itſelf, nor concluſive to the will, yet it produces no antece-
dent nor external neceſſity. Bramh. Anſwer to Hobbs.
They have ſecret reaſons for what they ſeem to do, which,
whatever they are, they muſt be equally concluſive for us as
they were for them. Rogers, Serm. iv.
2. Regularly conſequential. -
Thoſe that are not men of art, not knowing the true forms
of ſyllogiſm, cannot know whether they are made in right
and concluſive modes and figures. Lot: e.
CoNCLU's i v ELY. adv. [from concluſive..] Deciſively; with
final determination: - -
This I ſpeak only to deſire Pollio and Eupolis not to ſpeak
peremptorily, or concluſively, touching the point of poſſibility,
'till they have heard me deduce the means of the execution.
- Bacon’s Hoy //ar.
Conclu'siveness. n.ſ.. [from cºncluſive J Power of determin-
ing the opinion; regular conſequence. . . - * *
Conſideration of things to be known, of their ſeveral
; weights, concluſiveneſs, or evidence. Hale's Orig. ºf Mankind.
To Conco A'Gul at E. v. a. [from con and coagulate.] To
curdle or congeal one thing with another.
The ſaline parts of thoſe, upon their ſolution by the rain,
may work upon thoſe other ſubſtances, formerly concoagulated
with them. - Boyle's Experiments.
They do but coagulate themſelves, without concoagulating
with them any water. Boyle's Hiſtory of Firmneſs.
Coscoagul A'tion. n.ſ.. [from concoagulate.] A coagulation
by which different bodies are joined in one maſs.
To CONCO'CT. v. a. [concoquo, Latin.]
1. To digeſt by the ſtomach, ſo as to turn food to nutriment.
The working of purging medicines cometh two or three
hours after the medicines taken ; for that the ſtomach firſt
maketh a proof, whether it can conco? them. Bac. Nat. Hiſł.
Aſſuredly he was a man of a feeble ſtomach, unable to con-
roºf any great fortune, proſperous or adverſe. Hayward.
The vital functions are performed by general and conſtant
laws; the food is concočied, the heart beats, the blood circu-
lates, the lungs play. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
The notions and ſentiments of others judgment, as well
as of our own memory makes our property: it does, as it were,
concocł our intelle&amp;tual food, and turns it into a part of our
, ſelves. JWatts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i. c. 2.
2. To purify or ſublime by heat; or heighten to perfection.
The ſmall cloſe-lurking miniſter of fate,
Whoſe high concoded venom through the veins
A rapid lightning darts. 7homſon's Summer.
CoNco'ction. n.ſ.. [from conco?..] Digeſtion in the ſtomach;
naturation by heat; the acceleration of any thing towards
purity and perfection.
This hard rolling is between conczélion and a ſimple matu-
ration. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 324.
The conſtanteſt notion of concoëtion is, that it ſhould ſig-
nify the degrees of alteration of one body into another, from
crudity to perfeót concoction, which is the ultimity of that ac-
tion or proceſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſ ry, Nº. 324.
He, though he knew not which ſoul ſpake,
Becauſe both meant, both ſpake the ſame,
Might thence a new conczélion take,
And part far purer than he came. Donne,
Conco'lour. adj. [concolor, Latin.] Of one "colour without
variety.
In concolour animals, and ſuch as are confined unto the ſame
Vol. I.
to return to what fortune hath made my home. Swift.
$ºlour, we meaſure not their beauty thereby; for if a cow or
blackbird grow white, we account it more pretty. Brown.
Qosco Mºrānce. }*ſ [from contomitor, Latin.] Subſiſtence
Conco'MITANcy. together with another thing.
The ſecondary action ſubſiſteth not alone, but in cºncomi-
*y with the other; ſo the noſtrils are uſeful for reſpiration
and ſmelling, but the principal uſe is ſmelling. Brown.
To argue from a concomitancy to a cauſality, is not infallibly
concluſive. Glanville's Scep. c. 23.
CONCOMITANT. adj. [concomitans, Latin.] Conjoined
with concurrent with; coming and going with, as collateral,
not cauſative, or conſequential.
!! is the ſpirit that furthereth the extenſion or dilatation of
bodies, and it is ever concomitant with porofity and dryneſs.
- ... Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 841.
It has pleaſed our wiſe Creator to annex to ſeveral objećts,
aS alſo to ſeveral of our thoughts, a concomitant pleaſure; and
... that in ſeveral objects, to ſeveral degrees. Docke.
Conco'MITANT. n.ſ. Companion; perſon or thing colla-
terally connected.
- Theſe effects are from the local motion of the air, a conce-
mitant of the ſound, and not from the ſound. Bac, Nat. Hi/?.
He made him the chief concomitant of his heir apparent and
only ſon, in a journey of much adventure. //otton.
In conſumptions the preternatural concomitants, an univerſal
heat of the body, a torminous diarrhaea, and hot diſtilla-
tions, have all a corroſive quality. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The other concomitant of ingratitude is hard-heartedneſs, or
want of compaſſion.
Horrour ſtalks around,
Wild ſtaring, and his ſad concomitant,
Deſpair, of abječt look. Philips.
Reproach is a concomitant to greatneſs, as ſatires and invec-
tives were an eſſential part of a Roman triumph. Addiſon.
And for tobacco, who could bear it *
... Filthy concomitant of claret ! Prior.
* - Where antecedents, concomitants and conſequents, cauſes
and effects, ſigns and things ſignified, ſubječts and adjuncts,
are neceſſarily connected with each other, we may infer.
- Watts's Logick.
Cosco'Mita Ntly, adv. [from concomitant.] In company
with others.
To onco ºf it at E. v. a [conczmitatus, Lat.] To be collate-
rally conne ted with any thing; to come and go with another.
This ſimple bloody ſpectation of the lungs, is differenced
from that which concomitates a pleuriſy. Harvey on Conſumptions.
CONCORD. m.ſ.. [concordia, Latin.]
1. Agreement between perſons or things; ſuitableneſs of one to
another ; peace; union; mutual kindneſs.
Had I power, I ſhould
Pour the ſweet milk of concord into hell,
Uproar the univerſal peace. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
What concºrd hath Chriſt with Belial : 2 Cor. vi. 15.
Kind concord, heavenly born whoſe bliſsful reign
Holds this vaſt globe in one ſurrounding chain;
Soul of the world ! Tickell.
2. A compačt.
It appeareth by the concord made between Henry and Ro-
derick the Iriſh king. Davies on Ireland.
3. Harmony; concent of ſounds.
The man who hath not muſick in himſelf,
Nor is not mov’d with concord of ſweet ſounds,
Is fit for treaſons. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
4. Principal grammatical relation of one word to another.
Have thoſe who have writ about declenſions, concords, and
ſyntaxes loſt their labour * Locke.
CoNco'RDANCE. n.ſ.. [concordantia, Latin.]
1. Agreement.
2. A book which ſhews in how many texts of ſcripture any
word occurs. - -
I ſhall take it for an opportunity to tell you, how you are
: to rule the city out of a concordance. South's Serm. Dedicat.
Some of you turn over a concordance, and there, having
the principal word, introduce as much of the verſe as will
ſerve your turn. Swift.
An old concordance bound long ſince. Swift.
3. A concord in grammar; one of the three chief relations
in ſpeech. It is not now in uſe in this ſenſe.
After the three concordance; learned, let the maſter read unto
him the epiſtles of Cicero. Aſſam's Schºolmaſter.
CoN.co'RDANT. adj. [concordans, Lat.] Agreeable; agreeing ;
correſpondent; harmonious. - -
Were every one employed in points concordant to their na-
tures, profeſſions, and arts, commonwealth; would riſe up of
themſelves. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 4.
concorps E. m. ſ. ſcorcºrdat, Fr. concordatum, Lat.] A com-
- vention.
P". * he to number the want of ſynods in the Gal-
lican church among the grievances of that ºncordate, and as
a mark of their ſlavery, ſince he reckons all convocations of
the clergy in England to be uſeleſs and dangerous : Swift.
5 F - CoNco'RPoRal.
ºf.
South's Sermons.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 95</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
Conco'RPoRAL. adj. [from concorpora, Latin, to incorporate.]
Of the ſame body. Die?.
To Conco'RPoRATE., v. a. ſ from con and corpus. J. To
unite in one maſs or ſubſtance.
When we concorporate the ſign with the ſignification, we
conjoin the word with the ſpirit. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
Concorpor ATION. n.ſ.. [from concorporate.] Union in one
, maſs; intimate mixture. - Dićf.
Co'N course. n.ſ. [concurſus, Latin.]
1. The confluence of many perſons or things to one place.
- - - - - Do all the nightly guards,
The city's watches, with the people's fears,
The concourſe of all good men, ſtrike thee nothing? B joinſ
The coalition of the good frame of the univerſe was not
the product of chance, or fortuitous concourſ of particles of
matter, Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Vain is his force, and vainer is his ſkill,
With ſuch a concourſe comes the flood of ill. Dryden's Fables.
2. The perſons aſſembled.
The prince with wonder hears, from ev’ry part,
The noiſe and buſy concourſe of the mart. Dryd. Virg. Æn.
3. The point of junction or interſection of two bodies.
So ſoon as the upper glaſs is laid upon the lower, ſo as to
touch it at one end, and to touch the drop at the other end,
making, with the lower glaſs, an angle of about ten or fifteen
minutes; the drop will begin to move towards the concourſe
of the glaſſes, and will continue to move with an accelerated
motion, 'till it arrives at that concourſe of the glaſſes. Newton.
CoN cRE MA"rio N. m. ſ. [from concremo, Lat. to burn together.]
The act of burning many things together. Dic?.
Co'Nck EMENT. n.ſ. ſ from concreſco, Latin. ) The maſs
formed by concretion; a collection of matter growing to-
gether.
º
There is the coheſion of the matter into a more looſe con-
ſiſtency, like clay, and thereby it is prepared to the concrement
of a pebble or flint. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Coscrºscence. m. ſ. [from contrºſco, Lat..] The act or qua-
lity of growing by the union of ſeparate particles.
Sceing it is neither a ſubſtance perfect, nor inchoate, how
any other ſubſtance ſhould thence take concrºftence hath not
been taught. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the I/orld.
To CONCRETE. v. n. [concreſco, Latin.] To coaleſce into
one maſs; to grow by the union and coheſion of parts.
The mineral or metallick matter, thus concreting with the
cryſtalline, is equally diffuſed throughout the body of it. Iſoodw.
When any ſaline liquor is evaporated to a cuticle, and let
cool, the ſalt concretes, in regular figures; which argues that
the particles of the ſalt, before they concreted, floated in the
liquor at equal diſtances, in rank and file. Newton.
The blood of ſome who died of the plague, could not be
made to concrete, by reaſon of the putrefaction already begun.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To CoNCRE"r E. v. a. To form by concretion; to form b
y y
the coalition of ſcattered particles.
That there are in our inferiour world divers bodies, that
are concreted out of others, is beyond all diſpute: we ſee it in
the meteors. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Co'NcRet E. adj. [from the verb.]
1. Formed by concretion; formed by coalition of ſeparate par-
ticles into one maſs.
The firſt concrete ſtate, or conſiſtent ſurface of the chaos,
muſt be of the ſame figure as the laſt liquid ſtate.
2. In logick. Not abſtract; applied to a ſubject.
A kind of mutual commutation there is, whereby thoſe
concrete names, God and man, when we ſpeak of Chriſt, do
take interchangeably one another's room; ſo that, for truth of
ſpeech, it ſkilleth not whether we ſay that the ſon of God
hath created the world, and the ſon of man by his death hath
ſaved it; or elſe that the ſon of man did create, and the ſon of
God died to ſave the world. Hooker, b. v. ſect. 53.
Concrete terms, while they expreſs the quality, do alſo either
expreſs or imply, or refer to ſome ſubjećt to which it belongs;
as white, round, long, broad, wiſe, mortal, living, dead:
but theſe are not always noun adjectives in a grammatical
ſenſe ; for a fool, a philoſopher, and many other concretes, are
ſubſtantives, as well as knavery, folly and philoſophy, which
are the abſtraćt terms that belong to them. J/atts's Logick.
Co'NcRETE. m. ſ. A maſs formed by concretion; or union of
various parts adhering to each other.
If gold itſelf be admitted, as it muſt be, for a porous con-
crete, the proportion of void to body, in the texture of com-
mon air, will be ſo much the greater.
Burnet.
Bentley’s Sermons.
CoN cRE'TELY. adv. [from concrete.] . In a manner including
the ſubječt with the predicate; not abſtraćtly.
- Sin conſidered not abſtraćtedly for the mere ačt of obli-
quity, but concretely, with ſuch a ſpecial dependance of it upon
the will as ſerves to render the agent guilty.
Norris.
CoN cRE're N ess. n. ſ. [from concrete.] Coagulation; collec-
tion of fluids into a ſolid maſs. Dić7.
CoNCRE"rios. m. ſ. [from concrete.]
1. The act of concreting ; coalition.
2. The maſs formed by a coalition of ſeparate particles.
*
Some plants upon the top of the ſea, are ſuppoſed to grow
of ſome concretion of ſlime from the water, where the ſea
ſtirreth little. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 568.
Heat, in general, doth not reſolve and attenuate the juices
of a human body; for too great heat will produce concretions.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Co'Ncretive. adj. [from concrete.] Having the power to pro-
duce concretions; coagulative.
When wood and other bodies petrify, we do not aſcribe
their induration to cold, but unto ſalinous ſpirit, or concretive
juices. Brown's Pugar Errours, b. ii. c. 3.
ConcRE'TURE. n.ſ.. [from concrete.] A maſs formed by coa-
gulation.
CoNcu'BINAGE. n. ſ. [concubinage, Fr. concubinatus, Latin.]
The act of living with a woman not married.
Adultery was puniſhed with death by the ancient heathens:
concubinage was permitted. Broome's Notes on the Odſey. '
CONCUBINE. n.ſ.. [concubina, Lat..] A woman kept infor-
nication; a whore; a ſtrumpet.
I know, I am too mean to be your queen;
And yet too good to be your concubine. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
When his great friend was ſuitor to him to pardon an of-
fender, he denied him : afterwards, when a concubine of his
made the ſame ſuit, he granted it to her; and ſaid, Such ſuits
were to be granted to whores. Bacon.
He cauſed him to paint one of his concubines, called
Campaſpe, who had the greateſt ſhare in his affection.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The wife, though a bright goddeſs, thus gives place
To mortal concuſines of freſh embrace. Granville.
To CONCULCA1 E. v. a. [conculco, Latin.] To tread or
trample under foot Dićt.
Cowculcaſtion. n.ſ. [conculcatio, Latin.] Trampling with
the feet. Diff.
CoNcu'PiscENce. m. ſ. [concupiſcentia, Latin.] Irregular de-
fire; libidinous wiſh; luſt; lechery.
We know even ſecret concupiſcence to be ſin, and are made
fearful to offend, though it be but in a wandering cogitation.
Hooker, b. i.
In our faces evident the ſigns
Of foul concupiſcence; whence evil ſtore,
Ev’n ſhame, the laſt of evils. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
Nor can they ſay, that the difference of climate inclines
one nation to concupiſcence and ſenſual pleaſures, another to
blood-thirſtineſs: it would diſcover great ignorance not to
know, that a people has been over run with recently invented
vice. Bentley's Sermons.
CONCUPISCENT. adj. [cºncupiſ ens, Latin.] Libidinous;
lecherous.
He would not, but by gift of my chaſte body
To his concupiſcent intemperate luſt,
Releaſe my brother Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
ConcupiscE'Ntial. adj. [from concupiſcent.] Relating to
concupiſcence. Dićt.
Concupi'scible. adj. [concupiſcibilis, Lat.] Impreſſing deſire;
eager; deſirous; inclining to the purſuit or attainment of any
thing. -
The ſchools reduce all the paſſions to theſe two heads, the
concupiſcible and iraſcible appetite.
To CONCU'R. v. n. [concurro, Latin.]
1. To meet in one point.
Though reaſon favour them, yet ſenſe can hardly allow
them; and, to ſatisfy, both theſe muſt concur. Temple.
2. To agree 3 to join in one action, or opinion.
Acts which ſhall be done by the greater part of my execu-
tors, ſhall be as valid and effectual as if all my executors had
concurred in the ſame. Swift's Laſt Will.
3. It has with before the perſon with whom one agrees.
It is not evil ſimply to concur with the heathens, either in
opinion or action; and that conformity with them is only
then a diſgrace, when we follow them in that they do amiſs,
or generally in that they do without reaſon. Hºoker, b. iv.
4. It has to before the effect te which one concurs.
Their affections were known to concur to the moſt deſperate
counſels.
Extremes in nature equal good produce,
Extremes in man concur to general uſe. Pope, Epiſt. iii.
5. To be united with 5 to be conjoined.
To have an orthodox belief, and a true profeſſion, concurring
with a bad life, is only to deny Chriſt with a greater ſo.
lemnity. South's Sermons.
Teſtimony is the argument; and, if fair probabilities of
reaſon concur with it, this argument hath all the ſtrength it
can have. Tillotſon, Sermon i.
6. To contribute to one common event with joint power.
When outward cauſes concur, the idle are ſooneſt ſeized
by this infection.
3.4 n.f them marl
1. Union ; aſſociation ; conjunction.
We have no other meaſure but our own ideas, with the
cºncurrence of other probable reaſons, to perſuade us.
South's Sermons.
Clarendon.
Collier cn the Spleen.
Locke.
2. Agreement ;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 96</div><p class="Text">C O N
:
2. Agreement; act of joining in any deſign, or meaſures.
Their concurrence in perſuaſion, about ſome material points
belonging to the ſame polity, is not ſtrange. Hºoker, Preface.
The concurrence of the peers in that fury, can be imputed
to the irreverence the judges were in. Clarendon.
Tarquin the proud was expelled by an univerſal concurrence
of nobles and people. Swift on the Diſſent. in Athens and Rome.
3. Combination of many agents or circumſtances.
Struck with theſe great concurrences of things. Craſhaw.
He views our behaviour in every concurrence of affairs, and
ſees us engage in all the poſſibilities of action. Addison Speciat.
4. Aſſiſtance; help.
From theſe ſublime images we collečt the greatneſs of the
work, and the neceſſity of the divine concurrence to it. Rogers.
5. Joint right; common claim.
A biſhop might have officers, if there was a concurrency
of juriſdićtion between him and the archdeacon. Ayliffe.
CoNcu'RRENT. adj. . [from concur.]
1. Acting in conjunction; agreeing in the ſame ačt; contri-
buting to the ſame event; concomitant in agency.
I join with theſe laws the perſonal preſence of the king's
ſon, as a concurrent cauſe of this reformation. Davies on Ireland.
For without the concurrent conſent of all theſe three parts
of the legiſlature, no ſuch law is or can be made. Hale.
All combin'd,
Your beauty, and my impotence of mind;
And his concurrent flame, that blew my fire;
For ſtill our kindred ſouls had one deſire. Dryden's Fables.
2. Conjoined; aſſociate; concomitant.
There is no difference between the concurrent echo and the
iterant, but the quickneſs or ſlowneſs of the return. Bacon.
CoNCU'RRENT. m. ſ. [from concur.] That which concurs; a
contributory cauſe.
To all affairs of importance there are three neceſſary con-
currents, without which they can never be diſpatched; time,
induſtry, and faculties. Decay of Piety.
CONCU'SSION. m. ſ. [concuffo, Lat.] The act of ſhaking;
agitation; tremefaction.
It is believed that great ringing of bells in populous cities,
hath diſſipated peſtilent air; which may be from the concuſſion
of the air. Bacon's Natural Hiſ ry, Nº. 27.
There want not inſtances of ſuch an univerſal concuſſion of
the whole globe, as muſt needs imply an agitation of the
whole abyſs. I/oodward’s Natural Hiſtory, p. iii.
The ſtrong concuſſion on the heaving tide,
Roll'd back the veſſel to the iſland’s ſide. Pope's Odſey.
ConcU'ssive. adj. [concuſſus, Latin.] Having the power or
quality of ſhaking.
To CONDE'MN. v. a. [condemno, Latin.]
1. To find guilty; to doom to puniſhment; contrary to abſolve.
My conſcience hath a thouſand ſeveral tongues,
And every tongue brings in a ſev'ral tale,
And ev'ry tale condemns me for a villain. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Is he found guilty
Yes truly, is he, and condemn'd upon't. Shakesp. Hen. VIII.
Conſidered as a judge, it condemns where it ought to ab-
ſolve, and pronounces abſolution where it ought to condemn.
Fiddes's Sermons.
2. It has to before the puniſhment.
The ſon of man ſhall be betrayed unto the ſcribes, and
they ſhall condemn him to death. Mat. xx. 18.
3. To cenſure; to blame; to declare criminal; contrary to
approve.
Who then ſhall blame
His peſter'd ſenſes to recoil and ſtart,
When all that is within him does condemn -
Itſelf for being there Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The poet who flouriſhed in the ſcene, is condemned in the
ruelle. Dryden's AEn. Preface.
He who was ſo unjuſt as to do his brother an injury, will
ſcarce be ſo juſt as to condemn himſelf for it. Locke.
They who approve my condućt in this particular, are much
more numerous than thoſe who condemn it. Speciator, Nº. 488.
4. To fine. -
And the king of Egypt put him down at Jeruſalem, and
condemned the land in an hundred talents of ſilver. 2 Chro.
5. To ſhow guilt by contraſt.
The righteous that is dead ſhall condemn the ungodly which
are living. Wiſd. iv. 16.
CoNDE'MNABLE. adj. [from condemn.] Blameable; culpable.
He commands to deface the print of a cauldron in aſhes,
which ſtrićtly to obſerve were condemnable ſuperſtition. Brown.
CoN DEMNA'tion. n.ſ.. [condemnatio, Latin.] The ſentence
by which any one is doomed to puniſhment; the act of con-
demning; the ſtate of being condemned.
There is therefore now no condemnation to them. Rom. viii.
CoNDE'MNATORY. adj. [from condemn.] Paſſing a ſentence of
condemnation, or of cenſure.
He that paſſes the firſt condemnatory ſentence, is like the
incendiary in a popular tumult, who is chargeable with all
thoſe diſorders to which he gave riſe.
Government of the Tongue.
Cosph'MNER. m.ſ. (from condemn.] A blamer; a cenſurer;
a cenſor.
Sºme few are the only refuſers and condemner of this ca-
tholick practice. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
CoNDE'NSABLE. adj [from condenſate.] That which is capable
9f condenſation; that which can be drawn or compreſſed
intº a narrower compaſs.
This agent meets with reſiſtance in the moveable, and not
being in the utmoſt extremity of denſity, but condenſable yet
further, every reſiſtance works ſomething upon the mover
to condenſe it. Digby on the Soul.
To Conde'ssate. v. a. [condenſe, Latin.] To condenſe ;
to make thicker.
To CoNDE'Nsate. v. n. To grow thicker.
CoNDE'Nsate. adj. [condenſatu, Latin J Made thick; con-
denſed; compreſſed into leſs ſpace.
Water by nature is white; yea, thickened or condenſate,
moſt white, as it appeareth by the hail and ſnow. Paſham.
Condensa'rion. n.J. [from condenſate.] The act of thicken-
ing anybody, or making it more groſs and weighty. Oppoſite
to rarefaction.
If by natural arguments it may be proved, that water, by
condenſation, may become earth; the ſame reaſon teacheth,
that earth, rarefied, may become water. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
By water-glaſſes the account was not regular; for, from
attenuation and condenſation, the hours were ſhorter in hot
weather than in cold. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b.v. c. 18.
The ſupply of its moiſture is by rains and ſnow, and dews
and condenſation of vapours, and perhaps by ſubterraneous
paſſages. Bentley.
To CONDENSE. v. a. [condenſ, Latin.] To make any body
more thick, cloſe, and weighty; to drive or attract the parts
of any body nearer to each other. Oppoſed to rarefy 5 to in-
ſpiſſate.
Moving in ſo high a ſphere, he muſt needs, as the ſun,
raiſe many envious exhalations; which, condenſed by a popular
odium, were capable to caſt a cloud upon the brighteſt merit.
King Charles.
Some lead their youth abroad, while ſome condenſe
Their ºuid ſhore, and ſome in cells diſpeſne. Dryd. Virg.
Such denſe ind ſolid ſtrata arreſt the aſcending vapour,
ſtop it at the ſurface of the earth, and colle&amp;t and comacnſe
it there. Woodward’s Natural Hiſtory, p. iii.
To CNDE'NSE. v. m. To grow cloſe and weighty; to with-
draw its parts into a narrow compaſs.
The water falling from the upper parts of the cave, does
preſently there condenſe into little ſtones. Boyle's Scepſ. Chym.
All vapours, when they begin to condenſe and coaleſce into
ſmall parcels, become firſt of that bigneſs whereby azure muſt
be refle&amp;ted, before they can conſtitute other colours. Newton.
CoNDE'Nse, adj. [from the verb.] Thick; denſe; conden-
ſated; cloſe; maſſy; weighty.
They might be ſeparated without conſociating into the huge
condenſe bodies of planets. Bentley's Sermons.
CoNDE'NSER. n.ſ.. [from condenſe..] A ſtrong metalline veſſel,
wherein to crowd the air, by means of a ſyringe faſtened
thereto. $2uincy.
CoNDE'Nsity. n.ſ.. [from condenſe.] The ſtate of being con-
denſed; condenſation; denſeneſs; denſity.
Co'NDERs. *{ [conduire, French.]
Such as ſtand upon high places near the ſea-coaſt, at the
time of herring-fiſhing, to make ſigns to the fiſhers which
way the ſhole of herrings paſſeth, which may better appear to
ſuch as ſtand upon ſome high cliff, by a kind of blue colour
that the fiſh cauſeth in the water, than to thoſe that be in the
ſhips. Theſe be likewiſe called huers, by likelihood of the
French huyer, exclamare, and balkers. Cowel.
To CONDESCEND. v. n. [cºndeſcendre, Fr. from deſcendo,
Latin.
1. To àn from the privileges of ſuperiority by a voluntary
ſubmiſſion; to ſink willingly to equal terms with inferiours;
to ſooth by familiarity. -
This method carries a very humble and condeſcending air,
when he that inſtructs ſeems to be the enquirer. //atti.
2. To conſent to do more than mere juſtice can require.
Spain's mighty monarch,
In gracious clemency does cond ſend,
On theſe conditions, to become your friend. Dryd. Ind. Em.
He did not primarily intend to appoint this way; but ºn-
deſcended to it as moſt accommodate to their preſent ſtate.
Tillotſon, Sermon 5.
3. To ſtoop; to bend; to yield; to ſubmit; tº become ſubject.
Can they think me ſo broken, ſo debas'd
with corporal ſervitude, that my mind ever -
Will cond ſcend to ſuch abſurd commands? Milton.
Nor ſhall my reſolution
Diſarm itſelf, nor cond ſcend to Parly
With fooliſh hopes. Denham's Sophy.
CoNDEscendence. n.ſ. [condeſcendance, French..] Voluntary
ſubmiſſion to a ſtate of equality with inferiours.
Condesce's dingly. adv. [from cond ſending.] By way of
voluntary humiliation; by way of kind conceſſion.
2 We
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 97</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
We cond ſendingly made Luther's works umpires in the
controverſy. Atterbury.
CeNDEscE'Nsion. m. ſ. [from cond ſend J Voluntary humilia-
tion; deſcent from ſuperiority ; voluntary ſubmiſſion to equa-
lity with inferiours. -
It forbids pride and ambition, and vain glory ; and com-
mands humility and modeſty, and condeſcenſion to others. Tillotſ.
Courteſy and condeſcenſiºn is an happy quality, which never
fails to make its way into the good opinion, and into the very
heart, and allays the envy which always attends a high
ſtation. º Atterbury's Sermons.
Raphael, amidſt his tenderneſs, ſhews ſuch a dignity and
cond ſcenſion in all his behaviour, as are ſuitable to a ſuperiour
nature. Addiſon's Spediatºr, Nº. 273.
CoN desce'ssive. adj. [from cond ſcend.] Courteous; willing
to treat with inferiours on equal terms; not haughty; not
arrogant.
CONDI'GN, adj. [condigmu, Latin.] Worthy of a perſon;
ſuitable; deſerved; merited: it is always uſed of ſomething
deſerved by crimes.
Unleſs it were a bloody murtherer,
I never gave them condign puniſhment. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Conſider who is your friend, he that would have brought
him to condign puniſhment, or he that has ſaved him. Arbuthn.
CoNDI'GNEss. n.ſ.. [from candign.] Suitableneſs; agreeableneſs
to deſerts. Dić7.
CoNDI'GNLY, adv. [from condign.] Deſervedly; according to
merit. Dići.
Co'NDIMENT. n.ſ. [condimentum, Latin.] Seaſoning; ſauce;
that which excites the appetite by a pungent taſte.
As for radiſh and the like, they are for condiments, and not
for nouriſhment. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
Many things are ſwallowed by animals rather for condiment,
guſt, or medicament, than any ſubſtantial nutriment. Brown.
CoND1sci'PL E. m. ſ. [condiſcipulus, Lat.] A ſchoolfellow.
To CONDITE. v. a. [condi, Lat..] To pickle; to preſerve
by ſalts or aromaticks.
Much after the ſame manner as the ſugar doth, in the con-
diting of pears, quinces, and the like. Grew's Muſeum.
The moſt innocent of them are but like condited or
pickled muſhrooms, which, carefully corrected, may be harm-
leſs, but can never do good. Taylor’s Rule of living holy.
Co'NDITE MENT, n.ſ.. [from condite.] A compoſition of con-
ſerves, powders, and ſpices in the form of an electuary. Dict.
CONDITION. m. ſ. [condition, Fr. conditio, Latin.]
1. Quality; that by which any thing is denominated good or
bad.
A rage, whoſe heat hath this condition,
That nothing can allay, nothing but blood. Shakespeare K. john.
2. Attribute; accident; property.
The king is but a man: the violet ſmells, the element
ſhews to him as to me: all his ſenſes have but human con-
ditions. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
It ſeemed to us a condition and property of Divine Powers
and Beings, to be hidden and unſeen to others. Bacon.
They will be able to conſerve their properties unchanged in
paſſing through ſeveral mediums, which is another condition of
the rays of light. Newton's Opt.
3. Natural quality of the mind; temper; temperament; com-
plexion.
The child taketh moſt of his nature of the mother, beſides
ſpeech, manners, and inclination, which are agreeable to the
conditions of their mothers. Spenſer on Ireland.
‘I he beſt and ſoundeſt of his time hath been but raſh: now muſt
we look, from his age, to receive not alone the imperfeótions
of long engrafted condition, but therewithal the unruly way-
wardneſs that infirin and cholerick years bring with them.
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
4. Moral quality; virtue, or vice.
Jupiter is hot and moiſt, temperate, modeſt, honeſt, ad-
venturous, liberal, merciful, loving and faithful, that is,
giving theſe inclinations; and therefore thoſe ancient kings,
beautified with theſe conditions, might be called there after
Jupiter. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the I/orld, b. i. c. 6. ſ. 5.
Socrates cſpouſed Xantippe only for her extreme ill condi-
tions, above all of that ſex. South.
5. State; circumſtances.
- To us all,
That feel the bruiſes of the days before,
And ſuffer the condition of theſe times
To lay an heavy and unequal hand
Upon our humours.
of innocence.
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
It was not agreeable unto the cºndition of Paradiſe and ſtate
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. v. c 4.
Eſtimate the greatneſs of this mercy by the condition it finds
the finner in, when God vouchſafes it to them. South’s Serm.
Did we perfectly know the ſtate of our own cºndition, and
what was moſt proper for us, we might have reaſon to conclude
our prayers not heard, if not anſwered. Jºake's Preparation.
This is a principle adapted to every paſſion and faculty of
otir nature, to every ſtate and condition of our life. Rogers.
Some deſponding people take the kingdom to be in no cº-
dition of encouraging ſo numerous a breed of beggars. Swift.
Condition, circumſtance, is not the thing;
Bliſs is the ſame in ſubject as in king. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
6. Rank.
I am, in my conditiºn,
A prince, Miranda. Sašoffeare's 7-mp.ºſ.
The king himſelf met with many entertainments, at the
charge of particular men, which had been rarely practiſed 'till
then by the perſons of the beſt cºndition. Clarendºn.
7. Stipulation; terms of compact.
Condition /
What cºndition can a treaty find
I' th' part that is at mercy Shakeſpeare's Coriolanui.
I yield upon conditions.—We give none
To traitors: ſtrike him down. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
He could not defend it above ten days, and muſt then ſub-
mit to the worſt conditions the rebels were like to grant to his
perſon, and to his religion. Clarenden.
Many are apt to believe remiſſion of ſins, but they believe
it without the condition of repentance.
Thoſe barb'rous pirates willingly receive
Conditions, ſuch as we are pleas'd to give. J/aller.
Make our conditions with yon’ captive king.—
Secure me but my ſolitary cell;
'Tis all I aſk him. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
8. The writing in which the terms of agreement are compriſed;
compačt; bond.
Go with me to a notary, ſeal me there
Your fingle bond; and in a merry ſport,
If you repay me not on ſuch a day,
In ſuch a place, ſuch ſum or ſums as are
Expreſs'd in the condition, let the forfeit
Be nominated. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
To CoND1'tion, v. n. [from the noun ) To make terms; to
ſtipulate.
It was conditioned between Saturn and Titan, that Saturn
ſhould put to death all his male children. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Small towns, which ſtand ſtiff, 'till great ſhot
Enforce them, by war's law, condition not, Donne.
'Tis one thing, I muſt confeſs, to condition for a good office,
and another thing to do it gratis. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 137.
CoND1'tional. adj. [from condition.]
1. By way of ſtipulation; not abſolute; with limitations; on
particular terms.
For the uſe we have his expreſs commandment, for the
effect his conditional promiſe; ſo that, without obedience to the
one, there is of the other no aſſurance. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 57.
Many ſcriptures, though as to their formal terms they are
abſolute, yet as to their ſenſe they are conditional. South.
This ſtrict neceſſity they fimple call;
Another ſort there is conditional. Dryden's Fabies.
2. In grammar and logick. Expreſſing ſome condition or ſup-
poſition.
CoNDI'tion Al. n.f. [from the adjećtive..] A limitation. A
word not now in uſe.
He ſaid, if he were ſure that young man were king Ed-
ward's ſon, he would never bear arms againſt him. This caſe
ſeems hard, both in reſpect of the conditional, and in reſpect
of the other words. Bacon’s Henry VII.
CoND ſtrona'lity. m. ſ. [from conditional.] The quality of
being conditional; limitation by certain terms.
And as this clear propoſal of the promiſes may inſpirit our
endeavours, ſo is the conditionality moſt efficacious to neceſſitate
and engage them. Decay of Piety.
CoND1't los All Y. adv. [ from conditional. 1 . With certain
limitations; on particular terms; on certain ſtipulations.
I here intail
The crown to thee, and to thine heirs for ever;
Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
To ceaſe this civil war. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI, p. iii.
A falſe apprehenſion underſtands that poſitively, which was
but conditionally expreſſed. Brown’s Vulgar Errours, b. vii.
We ſee large preferments tendered to him, but conditionail,
upon his doing wicked offices: conſcience ſhall here, accord-
ing to its office, interpoſe and proteſt. South.
CoND1't Ion ARY. adj. [from cºndition.) Stipulated.
Would God in mercy diſpenſe with it as a conditionary, yet
we could not be happy without it, as a natural qualification
for heaven. Norris,
To Con D1't Ios At E. v. a. [from condition.] To make con-
ditions for ; to regulate by certain conditions.
That ivy ariſeth but where it may be ſupported ; we cannot
aſcribe the ſame unto any ſcience therein, which ſuſpends and
conditionates its eruption. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
CoN D1'T Ios ATE. adj. [from the verb.] Eſtabliſhed on certain
terms or conditions.
That which is miſtaken to be particular and abſolute,
duly underſtood, is general, but conditionate, and belongs to
none, who ſhall not perform the condition? Hammond.
CoN DI'ſ Ios ED. adj. [from condition.) Having qualities or pro-
Perties good or bad.
7 a.or.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 98</div><p class="Text">C O N
The deareſt friend to me, the kindeſ: In 1211, -
The beſt condition'd. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Wenice.
-I-O CONDOLE. v. n. [condoko, Latin.) To lament with
thoſe that are in misfortune; to expreſs concern for the miſe-
ries of others. It has with before the perſon for whoſe miſ-
fortune we profeſs grief.
Your friends would have cauſe to rejoice, rather than con-
arole with you. Temple.
I congratulate with the republick of beaſts upon this honour
done to their king; and muſt condo e with us poor mortals,
who, by diſtance, are rendered incapable of paying our re-
fpects. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 18.
- Some three or four of you, -
Go, give him courteous condud to this place. Slakeſpeare.
5. A warrant by which a convoy is appointed, or ſafety is
aſſured.
6. Behaviour; regular life.
Though all regard for reputation is not quite laid aſide, it is
ſo low, that very few think virtue and conduct of abſolute ne-
ceſſity for preſerving it. Swift.
o CoN DU'cºr. v. a. [conduire, French.]
1. To lead; to direct; to accompany in order to ſhew the way.
I ſhall ſtrait conduct you to a hill ſide, where I will point
you out the right path. Milton on Education.
To CoNDo'l E. v. a. To bewail with another.
I come not, Sampſon, to condole thy chance,
As theſe perhaps, yet wiſh it had not been,
Though for no friendly intent... Milton's Agoniſles, l ic?6.
Why ſhould our poet petition Iſis for her ſafe delivery, and
afterwards condole her miſcarriage. Dryden.
*Con Do'LEMENT. m. ſ. [ from condole. J Grief; ſorrow ;
mourning.
To perſevere
In obſtinate condolement, is a courſe
Of impious ſtubbornneſs, unmanly grief. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
CoNDo'LENcE. m. ſ. [condalance, French..] The expreſſion of
grief for the ſorrows of another; the civilities and meſſages of
friends upon any loſs or misfortune.
The reader will excuſe this digreſſion, due by way of con-
doence to my worthy brethren. Arbuth. Preface to j. Bull.
A ConDo'LER. m. ſ. [from condole.] One that compliments
another upon his misfortunes.
CoNDoNA'tion. m. ſ. [condonatio, Lat.] A pardoning; a for-
iving. Dić.
To CONDU'CE. v. n. [cºnduco, Lat..] To promote an end;
to contribute; to ſerve to ſome purpoſe. Followed by to.
The boring of holes in that kind of wood, and then laying
it abroad, ſeemeth to conduce to make it ſhine. Bac. Nat. %
The means and preparations that may conduce unto the en-
terprize. Bacon's Hºly //ar.
; man does love or hate things, according as he ap-
prehends them to conduce to this end, or to contradićt it. Tillºtſ.
They may conduce to farther diſcoveries for compleating the
theory of light. - Newton.
To ConDu'cE. v. a. To condućt; to accompany in order to
ſhew the way. In this ſenſe I have only found it in the fol-
lowing paſſage.
He was ſent to conduce hither the princeſs Henrietta-
Maria. Wotton.
CoNDU'cIBLE. adj. [conducibilis, Latin.] Having the power of
conducing; having a tendency to promote or forward.
To both, the medium which is moſt propitious and condu-
cible, is air. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 265.
Thoſe motions of generations and corruptions, and of the
conducibles thereunto, are wiſely and admirably ordered and
contemporated by the wiſe providence of the reëtor of all
things. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
None of theſe magnetical experiments are ſufficient for a
perpetual motion, though thoſe kind of qualities ſeem moſt
conducible unto it.
Our Saviour hath enjoined us a reaſonable ſervice: all his
laws are in themſelves conducible to the temporal intereſt of
, them that obſerve them. Bentley's Sermons.
CoNDU'cIBLEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from conducible.] The quality of
contributing to any end. Dić?.
CoNDU'cIve. adj. [from cºnduce.] That which may contribute
to any end; having the power of forwarding or promoting.
An action, however conducive to the good of our country,
will be repreſented as prejudicial to it. Addison's Freehºlder.
Thoſe proportions of the good things of this life, which
are moſt conſiſtent with the intereſts of the ſoul, are alſo moſt
conducive to our preſent felicity. Rogers, Serm. 2.
CoNDU'civ EN ess. m. ſ. [from conducive.] The quality of con-
ducing.
I mention ſome examples of the conduciveneſ of the ſmall-
neſs of a body's parts to its fluidity. Bºyle's Hiſt, of Fluidity.
CONDUCT. n.ſ.. [conduit, Fr. con and duºus, Latin.]
1. Management; economy.
Young men, in the condući and manage of a&amp;ions, em-
brace more than they can hold, ſtir more than they can quiet,
and fly to the end without conſideration of the means. Bacon.
How void of reaſon are our hopes and fears!
What in the condué; of our life appears
So well deſign'd, ſo luckily begun, -
But when we have our wiſh, we wiſh undone Dryd, jaw.
2. The act of leading troops; the duty of a general.
Condući of armies is a prince's art.
3. Convoy; eſcorte; guard.
I was aſhamed to aſk the king footmen and horſemen, and
conduct for ſafeguard againſt our adverſaries. 1 1/dr. viii. 51.
His majeſty,
Tend'ring my perſon's ſafety, hath appointed
This conduci to convey me to the Tower. Shakespeare Rich. III.
4. The act of convoying or guarding.
Vol. I.
J/aler.
Iſilkins's Math. Magic.
O may thy pow'r, propitious ſtill to me,
Condućt my ſteps to find the fatal tree,
In this deep foreſt.
2. To uſher, and to attend in civility.
Pray, receive them nobly, and cordućf them -
Into our preſence. Sha'ſfeare's Henry VIII.
Aſcanius bids 'em be conduffed in. Dryden's 4 n.
3. To manage; as, to conduct an affair.
4. To head an army; to order troops.
CoNDU cri'TIous. adj. [condućiitius, Latin.] Hired; employed
for wages. -
The perſons were neither titularies nor perpetual curates,
but perſons intirely conduciitiºus and removeable at pleaſure.
Ayliffº's Parengºr.
Dryden's ºn.
CoNDU'ctor. m. ſ. [from conduć.]
I. * leader; one who ſhews another the way by accompanying
1Ill. -
Shame of change, and fear of future ill,
And zeal, the blind conductor of the will.
2. A chief; a general.
Who is conductor of his people 2–
As 'tis ſaid, the baſtard ſon of Gio'íter.
3. A manager; a director.
If he did not intirely projećt the union and regency; none
will deny him to have been the chicf conductor in both. Addiſon.
4. An inſtrument to put up into the bladder, to direct the knife
in cutting for the ſtone. £uincy.
CoNDu'cTREss. n.ſ.. [from cond.&lt;!..] A woman that directs;
dire&amp;treſs.
Co'NDUIT. n.ſ.. [conduit, French.]
1. A canal of pipes for the conveyance of waters; an aquedućt.
Water, in conduit pipes, can riſe no higher
Than the well-head from whence it firſt doth ſpring. Davies.
This face of mine is hid
In ſap conſuming winter's drizzled ſnow,
And all the conduits of my blood froze up. Shakespeare.
God is the fountain of honour; and the conduit, by which,
he conveys it to the ſons of men, are virtuous and generous
practices. South's Sermºns.
Theſe organs are the nerves which are the conduits to con-
vey them from without, to their audience in the brain. Lo Åe.
Wiſe nature likewiſe, they ſuppoſe,
Has drawn two conduits down our noſe. Prizr.
2. The pipe or cock at which water is drawn.
I charge and command, that the conduit run nothing but
claret wine. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
CoNDUPL. cA'tion. m. ſ. [conduplicatio, Latin.] A doubling ;
a duplicate. -
CoNE. m. ſ. [*2, 2. Tà z.'s £a'at; rºzzº Fº, Ari'iate.] A ſolid
body, of which the baſe is a circle, and which ends in a point.
Co'NEY. See Con Y.
To CONFA'EULATE. v. n. [confihalo, Lat.] To talk eaſily
or careleſsly together; to chat; to prattle.
CoNFA BULA’t 10 N. m. ſ. ſcomfabulatio, Lat.] Eaſy converſa-
\tion; chearful and careleſs talk.
CoNFA'bulAtoRy. adj. [from confabulate J Belonging to talk
or prattle.
CoNFARREATIos. m. ſ. ſcomfarrcatio, Lat. from fºr cºrn.]
The ſolemnization of marriage by eating bread together.
By the ancient laws of Romulus, the wife was by confar-
reation ioined to the huſband. Ayliffe's Parerg n.
To ğNº. v. a. [conſºlus, Latin J. To make up intº
ſweetmeats; to preſerve with ſugar. It ſeems now corrupted
into coºfit.
Co'NF Ecº. m. ſ. ſſrom the verb..] A ſweetmeat.
CoN E'ction. m. ſ. [conſe “io, Latin.j -
1. A preparation of fruit, or juice of fruit, with ſugar; a ſweat-
Illcat.
Haſt thou not learn'd me to preſerve yea ſo,
That our great king himſelf doth woo me oft -
For my conſectiºns º' Shakeſp care's Cymbine.
They have in Turky and the Eaſt certain confesſions, which
they call ſervets, which are like to candicò conſerves, and are
made of ſugar and lemons. Pacon's Natural Hiſtory.
He ſaw him devour fiſh and fleſh, ſwallow wines and ſpic, s,
confºions and fruits of numberleſs ſweets and flavours. Addison
2. An aſſemblage of different ingredients; a compoſition ; a
mixture -
Of beſt things then, what world ſhall yicló coºf ºtion
To liken her - Shakeſpea: e.
5 G I here
Dryden.
Shah ſp. K. Lear.
--
.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 99</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
There will be a new conſºn of mould, which perhaps
will alter the ſeca. Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry, Nº. 528.
on FE crios ARY. m. ſ. [from cºſºcºion.] One whoſe trade
is to make ſweetmeats.
- Myſelf,
Who had the world as my confºionary, -
The mouths, the tongues, the eyes, the hearts of men
At duty, more than could frame employments. Slakºff.
CoNFE cºtion FR n. J. [from ºf...?ion One whoſe trade is
to make confections or ſweetmeats.
Cºnſºline's make much uſe of whites of eggs. Bºyle.
CoNFEDER Acy. m. ſ. ſcarfed ration, Fr. foedus, Latin.] A
league; a contract by which ſeveral perſons or bodies of men
engage to ſupport each other; union; engagement; federal
compact.
What cºnfederacy have you with the traitors? Shakespeare K. Lear.
Judas ſent them to Rome, to make a league of amity and
confederacy with them. 1 Mac. viii. 17.
Virgil has a whole cºnfederacy againſt him, and I muſt en-
deavour to defend him. Tryden's Wing. Æºn. Dedication.
The friendſhips of the world are oft
Goºfederacies in vice, or leagues of pleaſure. Addiſor.
An avaricious man in office is in onfederacy with the whole
clan of his diſtrict, or dependance; which, in modern terms
of art, is called to live and let live Swift's Examiner, Nº. 27.
To CONFEDERATE. v. a. [coſidrº, French.) To join
in a league; to unite; to ally.
They were ſecretly cºnfederated with Charles's enemy.
Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turki.
To Cox re'DERATE. v. n. To league; to unite in a league.
By words men come to know one another's minds; by
thoſe they covenant and confederate, South’s Sermons.
It is a confederating with him to whom the ſacrifice is
offered. Atterbury.
CoNF EDERATE, adj. [from the verb.] United in league.
For they have conſulted together with one conſent: they
are conſide ate againſt thee. Pſ. lxxxiii.
All the ſwords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
While the mind of man looketh upon ſecond cauſes ſcat-
tered, it may ſometimes reſt in them, and go no farther; but
when it beholdeth the chain of them confederate and linked
together, it muſt need fly to providence and deity. Bacon.
Oh race confed"rate into crimes, that prove
Triumphant o'er th' eluded rage of Jove | Pope's Statius.
In a confederate war, it ought to be conſidered which party.
has the deepeſt ſhare in the quarrel. Swift.
CoNF EDERAT E. m. ſ. [from the verb.] One who engages
to ſupport another; an ally.
Sir Edmond Courtney, and the haughty prelate,
With many more confederate, are in arms. Shakesp. Richard III.
We ſtill have freſh recruits in ſtore,
If our confed rates can afford us more. Dryden’s Fn.
CoN FEDERA"rio N. m. ſ. [ confederation, French. I League ;
compačt of mutual ſupport; alliance.
The three princes enter into ſome firićt league and confide-
ration amongſt themſelves. Bacºn’s Henry Vil.
Nor can thoſe cºnfederations or deſigns be durable, when
ſubjects make bankrupt of their allegiance. King Charles.
To CONFER. v. n. [cºnfro, Lat. confirer, French, J To
diſcourſe with another upon a ſtated ſubject; to ventilate any
queſtion by oral diſcuſſion; to converſe ſolemanly; to talk
gay cly together; to compare ſentiments.
You will hear us confer of this, and by an auricular aſſu-
rance have your ſatisfaction. Shakespeare's King Lear.
Reading makes a full man, conference a ready man, and
writing an ex-ºt man; and therefore, if a man write little,
he had need have a great memory; if he confer little, he had
reed have a preſent wit; and if he read little, he had need
have much cunning, to ſeem to know that he doth not. Bacon.
When they had commanded them to go aſide out of the
council, they cºnferred among themſelves. Acis, iv. 5.
He was thought to confer with the lord Colepeper upon the
ſubject; but had ſome particular thoughts, upon which he
then cºnferred with nobody. Clar end.n, b. viii.
The Chriſtian princeſs in her tent confers
With fifty ºf your learn'd philoſophers;
Whom with ſuch eloquence ſhe does perſuade,
That they are captives to her reaſons made. Dryd. Tyr. Love.
To Co N E E R. v. a.
1. To compare; to examine by compariſon with other things
of the ſame kind.
The words in the 8th verſe, conferred with the ſame words
in the 26th, make it manifeſt. Kaleigh's i.i./?ory of the It ord.
If we confer theſe obſervations with others of the like na-
ture, we may find cauſe to rectify the general opinion. Boyſe.
Pliny conferring his authors, and comparing their works
tºgether, found thoſe that went before tranſcribed by thoſe
that followed. Brown's ſugar Errours, b. i. c 6.
- º give; to beſtow; with on before him who receives the
gift.
5 *
Reſt to the limbs, and quiet I comfºr -
On troubled minds. J/aller.
The confering this honour upºn him would increaſe
the credit he had. Carendºn, b. viii.
Coronation to a king, conſºrs no royal authority upon
him. - South.
There is not the leaſt intimation in ſcripture of this privi-
lege conferred upon the Roman church. Tillotſon.
Thou conferre/? the benefits, and he receives them; the firſt
produces lºve, and the laſt ingratitude. Arbuth. Hiſt. of j. Bul.
3. To contribute; to conduce. With to.
The cloſeneſs and compactneſs of the parts reſting toge-
ther, doth much cºnfer to the ſtrength of the union. Glanv.
CoNFERENCE. n.ſ. [conference, French.]
1. The act of converſing on ſerious ſubjects; formal diſcourſe;
oral diſcuſſion of any queſtion.
I ſhall grow ſkilful in country matters, if I have often con-
ference with your ſervant. Sidne, b. ii.
Sometime they deliver it, whom privately zeal and piety
moveth to be i. of others by conference; ſometime of
them it is taught, whom the church hath called to the publick,
either reading thereof, or interpreting. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
What paſſion hangs theſe weights upon my tongue!
I cannot ſpeak to her; yet ſhe urgid cºnference. Shaffrare.
2. ſº appointed mecting for diſcuſſing ſome point, by perſonal
clºalte.
3. Compariſon; examination of different things by compariſon
of each with other.
Our diligence muſt ſearch out all helps and furtherances,
which ſcriptures, councils, laws, and the mutual conference of
all men's collections and obſervations may afford. Hºcker.
The conference of theſe two places, containing ſo excellent
a piece of learning as this, expreſſed by ſo worthy a wit as
Tully's was, muſt needs bring on pleaſure to him that maketh
true account of learning. Aſcham's Schoolmaſier.
CoNFE's RER. m. ſ. [from conſºr.]
1. He that converſes.
2. He that beſtows.
To CONFE'SS. v. a. [confſſºr, Fr. conſter cºſſim, Latin.]
1. To acknowledge a crime; to own a failure.
He doth in ſome ſort confeſs it. If it be cºnfeſſed, it is not
redreſled. Shakeſpeare's Merry ſ/ives of J/indſor.
Human faults with human grief confeſs;
'Tis thou art chang'd. Prior.
2. It has ºf before the thing confeſſed, when it is uſed reci-
procally.
Conſeſ, thce frcely of thy fin;
For to deny cach article with oath,
Cannot remove nor choke the ſtrong conception. Shakespeare Othello.
3. To diſcloſe the ſtate of the conſcience to the prieſt, in order
to repentance and pardon.
If our fin be only againſt God, yet to conſiſ, it to his mi-s,
niſter may be of good uſe. If aº's P, eparatiºn for Death.
4. To hear the confeſſion of a penitent, as a prieſt.
5. To own ; to avow ; to profeſs; not to deny.
Whoſoever therefore thall canºſ; me before men, him will
I confºſs alſo before my father which is in heaven; but who-
focycr ſhall deny me before men, him will I alſo deny before
my father which is in heaven. 41ait, x. 32, 33.
0. To grant; not to diſpute.
They may have a clear view of good, great and confeſſed
good, without being concerned, if they can make up their
happineſs without it. Lºcke.
7. To ſhew ; to prove; to atteſt.
Tall thriving trees confeſs'd the fruitful mold;
The red’ming apple ripens here to gold Pope's Odyſſy, b.vii.
8. It is uſed in a looſe and unimportant ſenſe by way of intro-
dućtion, or as an affirmative form of ſpeech.
I muſt confeſs I was moſt pleaſed with a beautiful proſpe&amp;t,
that none of them have mentioned. Addiſon on Italy.
To CoN FE'ss. v. n. To make confeſſion; to diſcloſe; to re-
veal ; as, he is gone to the priſi tº confeſs.
CoN FE'ss EDLY. adv. [ from confuſed. Avowedly; indiſ-
utablv.
p fºur is confeſſºdy a great part of the curſe, and therefore
no wonder if men fly from it. South.
Great genius's, like great miniſters, though they are con-
fºſedly the firſt in the commonwealth of letters, muit be en-
vyed and calumniated. Pºpe's F ſay on Homer.
CoN FE'ssion. m. ſ. [from confſ.] -
1. The acknowledgment of a crime; the diſcovery of one's own
uilt.
£, Your engaging me firſt in this adventure of the Moxa, and
deſiring the ſtory of it from me, is like giving one the tor-
ture, and then aſking his confeſſion, which is hard uſage. Temple.
2. The act of diſburdening the conſcience to a prieſt.
You will have little opportunity to practiſe ſuch a confeſ-
ſon, and ſhould therefore ſupply the want of it by a due per-
formance of it to God. Jºake's Preparation for Death.
3. Profeſſion , avowal.
Who, before Pontius Pilate, witneſſed a good confeſſiºn 2
1 Tim. vi. 1 3.
3
li
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 100</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
If there be one amongſt the fair'ſt of Greece,
That loves his miſtreſs more than in confeſſion,
And dare avow her beauty and her worth, -
In other arms than her's; to him this challenge. Shakespeare.
4. A formulary in which the articles of faith are compriſed.
CoNFr'ssion AL. m. ſ. [French..] The ſeat or box in which
the confeſſor ſits to hear the declarations of his penitents.
In one of the churches I ſaw a pulpit and confeſſional, very
finely inlaid with lapis-lazuli. Addiſon's Rema. As on Italy.
CoNFE'ssion ARY. m. ſ. [conſeſonaire, Fr.] The confeſſion-
chair or ſeat, where the prieſt fits to hear confeſſions. Dići.
Co'NFEssoR. m.ſ.. [confeſſeur, French.]
1. One who makes profeſſion of his faith in the face of danger.
He who dies for religion is a martyr; he who ſuffers for it is
a confeſſor.
The doćtrine in the thirty-nine articles is ſo orthodoxly
ſettled, as cannot be queſtioned without danger to our reli-
gion, which hath been ſealed with the blood of ſo many mar-
tyrs and confeſſors. Bacon's Advice to / illiers.
Was not this an excellent confeſſºr at leaſt, if not a martyr
in this cauſe * Stillingfleet.
The patience and fortitude of a martyr or confeſſor lie con-
cealed in the flouriſhing times of Chriſtianity. Addison's Speci.
It was the aſſurance of a reſurrečtion that gave patience to
the confeſſºr, and courage to the martyr. Rogers, Sermon viii.
2. He that hears confeſſions, and preſcribes rules and meaſures
of penitence.
See that Claudio
Be executed by nine to-morrow morning:
Bring him his confeſſºr, let him be prepard;
For that's the utmoſt of his pilgrimage. Shakeſpeare.
If you find any fin that lies heavy upon you, diſburthen
{. of it into the boſom of your coºfeſſºr, who ſtands
etween God and you to pray for you. Taylor.
One muſt be truſted; and he thought her fit,
As paſſing prudent, and a parlous wit:
To this ſagacious confeſſºr he went,
And told her. Dryden's Wife of Bath.
3. He who confeſſes his crimes. Dićf.
CoNFe'st, adj. [a poetical word for confeſſed J Open; known;
acknowledged; not concealed; not diſputed.
But wherefore ſhould I ſeek,
Since the perfidious author ſtands confº/**
This villain has traduc’d me. owe's Royal Convert.
CoNFE'stly. adv. [from confſt.] Undiſputably; evidently;
without doubt or concealment.
They addreſs to that principle which is confeſſly predomi-
nant in our nature. Decoy of Piety.
CoNF1'cient. adj. [conficiens, Lat..] That cauſes or procures;
effective. Dić.
Co'NFIDANT. n.ſ.. [confident, French.) A perſon truſted with
private affairs, commonly with affairs of love.
Martin compoſed his billet-doux, and intruſted it to his
confidant. Arbuthnot and Pºpe's Mart. Scriberus.
To CONFIDE. v. n. [confid, Latin.] To truſt in ; to put
truſt in.
He alone won't betray, in whom none will confide. Congr.
Co'NFIDENCE. m. ſ. [confidentia, Latin J
1. Firm belief of another's integrity or veracity; reliance.
Society is built upon truſt, and truſt upon confidence of one
another's integrity. South's Sermons.
2. Truſt in his own abilities or fortune; ſecurity; oppoſed to
dejection or timidity.
Alas, my lord,
Your wiſdom is conſum'd in confidence:
Do not go forth to-day. Shakeſpeare's julius Ceſar.
His times, being rather proſperous than calm, had raiſed
his confidence by ſucceſs. Bacon's Henry VII.
He had an ambition and vanity, and a confidence in himſelf,
which ſometimes intoxicated, and tranſported, and expoſed
him. Clarendon.
3. Vitious boldneſs; falſe opinion of his own excellencies; op-
poſed to modeſty.
Theſe fervent reprehenders of things eſtabliſhed by publick
authority, are always confident and bold-ſpirited men; but
their confidence, for the moſt part, riſeth from too much credit
given to their own wits, for which cauſe they are ſeldom free
from errors. • Hooker, Dedication.
4. Conſciouſneſs of innocence; honeſt boldneſs; firmneſs of
integrity.
Be merciful unto them which have not the confidence of good
works. 2 Eſd. viii. 36.
Juſt confidence, and native righteouſneſs,
And honour. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix. l. Ioj6.
5. Truſt in the goodneſs of another.
Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we conft-
dence towards God. 1 jo. iii. 21.
6. That which gives or cauſes confidence, boldneſs, or ſecurity.
Co's FIDENT, adj [from confide.]
1. Aſſured beyond doubt.
He is ſo ſure and confident of his particular eleētion, as to
reſolve he can never fall. Hammond on Fundamental.
- I am confident, that very much may be done towards th:
improvement of philoſophy. Boyle,
2. Poſitive ; affirmative; dogmatical.
3. Secure of ſucceſs; without fear of miſcarriage.
Both ‘aliant, as men deſpiſing death; both confident, as un-
wonted to be overcome. - Sidney.
Douglas, and the Hot-ſpur both together, -
Are cºnfident againſt the world in arms. Shakeſp. Hen. IV,
He nºt conſident in a plain way. Ecclus. xxxii. 21.
People forget how little they now, when they grow conft-
*ht upon any preſent ſtate of things. South's Sermons.
4. Without ſuſpicion; truſting without limits.
He, true knight,
No leſſer of her honour confident,
Than I did truly find her, ſtakes this ring. Shaſ, Cymleline.
Rome, be as juſt and gracious unto me,
As I am confident and kind to thce. Shakespeare. Tit, and Ahdr.
5. Bold to a vice; clated with falſe opinion of his own cºcel-
lencies; impudent.
Co'NFIDENT. n.ſ.. [from confide.] One truſted with ſecrets.
If ever it comes to this, that a man can ſay of his confident;
he would have deceived me, he has ſaid enough. South.
You love me for no other end,
But to become my confident and friend;
As ſuch; I keep no ſecret from your fight. Dryden's Aurºng.
Co'NFIDENTLY. adv. [from confident.]
1. Without doubt; without fear of miſcarriage.
We ſhall not be ever the leſs likely to meet with ſucceſs, if
we do not expect it too confidently. Att.rº iry's Sermons.
2. With firm truſt. º
The maid becomes a youth; no more delay
Your vows, but look, and confidently pay. Dryden,
3. Without appearance of doubt; without ſuſpecting any failure
or deficiency; poſitively; dogmatically.
Many men leaſt of all know what they themſelves moſt
•onfidently boaſt. Ben. Johnſon's Diſcoveries,
It is ſtrange how the ancients took up experiments upon
credit, and yet did build great matters upon them : the ºbſer-
vation of ſome of the beſt of them, delivered conſidently, is,
that a veſſel filled with aſhes will receive the like quantity of
water as if it had been empty; but this is utterly untrue.
Eacºn's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 34.
Every fool may believe, and pronounce confidently : but wiſe
men will conclude firmly. South.
Co'NFIDENTN Ess. n.ſ.. [from confident.] Favourable opinion
of one's own power; aſſurance. Dić.
CoNF1GURA'ſ 16N. n.ſ.. [configuration, French.J
1. The form of the various parts of any thing, as they are
adapted to each other.
The different effects of fire and water, which we call heat
and cold, reſult from the ſo differing configuratiºn and agitation
of their particles. Glaſsile's Scºtſ c. 12.
No other account can be given of the different animal ſe:
cretions, than the different configuration and action of the ſolid
parts. Artiſtinct on Aliments.
There is no plaſtick virtue concerned in ſhaping them, but
the configurations of the particles whereof they confift. Wºodw.
2. The face of the horoſcope, according to the aſpects of the
planets towards each other at any time. . - - -
Tô Cos F.'s of E. v. a. [from figura, Latin.] To diſpoſe into
any form. - -
Mother earth brought forth legs, arms, and other members
of the body, ſcattered and diſtinct, at their full growth;
which coming together, cementing, and ſo cºnfiguring them-
ſelves into human ſhape, made luſty men. Hentley's Sermons.
CONFINE, n.ſ.. [confinis, Lat. It had formerly the accent on
the laſt ſyllable.] Common boundary ; border ; edge.
Here in theſe confines ſlily have lurk'd, -
To watch the waining of mine cnemics. Shalºff, Rich. III.
You are old: .
Nature in you ſtands on the very verge -
Of her confine. S.Heffrare's Kºng Lear.
The conſics of the river Niger, where the negºes are:
are well watered. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 399.
'Twas ebbing darkneſs, paſt the noon of night, Fables
And Poſphor on the confines of the night: Dryd. Fabieſ.
The idea of duration, equal to a revolution of the !" º
applicable to duration, where no motion *** * * º: 1Cica O
a foot, taken from bodies here, to diſtances beyond the ºfte:
of the world, where are no bodies. - b Locke.
CoNFIRE. adj. [cºnfis, Latin.] Bordering upon | eginning
where the other ends; having one cont” bound ary.
To CoNF1's E. v. n. To border upon ; 19 touch on different
citritor 1CS. Half loſt, I ſeek
What readieſt path leads where your gloomy bounds - - -
Confine with heav'n, A ſilton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. ii. l. 975.
Full in the midſt of this created ſpace,
Petwixt heav'n, earth, and ſkies, there ſtands a place
Confining on all three. - - - Dryden.
To Cº. v.a. [.onfiner, Fr. cºfiº, Latin.]
: to limit. -
1. To bound; t - 2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 101</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
-
|
•. To ſhut up; to impriſon; to immure; to reſtrain within
certain limits.
I'll not over the threſhold.
Fy, you confine yourſelf moſt unreaſonably: come, you
muſt go viſit the good lady. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
- I had been
As broad and gen'ral as the caſing air;
But now I'm cabbin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in
To ſaucy doubts. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
3. To reſtrain; to tie up to.
He is to confine himſelf to the compaſs of numbers, and the
ſlavery of rhime. Dryden.
CoN F 1'NFLFss. adj. [from confine.] Boundleſs; unlimited; un-
bounded; without end.
Black Macbeth
Will ſeem as pure as ſnow, and the poor ſtate
E ſteem him as a lamb, being compar'd
With my confineleſ, harms. Shakeſpeare's Macheth.
CoNF1'NEMENT. m. ſ. [from confine.] Impriſonment; incar-
ceration; reſtraint of liberty.
Our hidden foes,
Now joyful from their long confin, ment roſe. Dryd Pirgil.
The mind hates reſtraint, and is apt to fancy itſelf under
confinement, when the fight is pent up in a narrow compaſs.
Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 412.
As to the numbers who are under this reſtraint, people do
not ſeem ſo much ſurpriſed at the cºnfinement of ſome as the
liberty of others. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 16.
Cos F 1'N FR. m. ſ. [from confine.]
1. A borderer; one that lives upon confines; one that inhabits
the extreme parts of a country.
The ſenate hath ſtirr'd up the confiners. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Happy confiners you of other lands,
That ſhift your ſoil.
2. A near neighbour.
Though gladneſs and grief be oppoſite in nature, yet they
are ſuch neighbours and confiners in art, that the leaſt touch
of a pencil will tranſlate a crying into a laughing face. J/ atton.
3. One which touches upon two different regions.
The participles or confiners between plants and living crea-
tures, are ſuch as have no local motion ; ſuch as oyſters Bacon.
CoN F1'NITY. m. ſ. [.onfinitas, Latin.] Nearneſs; neighbour-
hood. Dićf.
To CONFIRM. v. a. [confirm, Latin.] -
1. To put paſt doubt by new evidence. -
The teſtimony of Chriſt was confirmed in you. I Cor. i. 6.
Whilſt all the ſtars, that round her burn,
And all the planets in their turn,
Confirm the tidings as they roll, -
And ſpread the truth from pole to pole. Addison's Speciator.
2. To ſettle; to eſtabliſh either perſons or things.
I confirm thee in the high prieſthood, and appoint thee
ruler. 1 Mac. xi. 57.
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs. Shakesp. Henry VI.
3. To fix; to radicate.
Fernelius never cured a confirmed pox without it. Wiſman.
4. To complete; to perfect.
He only liv'd but 'till he was a man;
The which no ſooner had his proweſs confirm’d,
But like a man he died. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
5. To ſtrengthen by new ſolemnities or ties.
That treaty, ſo prejudicial, ought to have been remitted
rather than confirmed. w Swift.
6. To admit to the full privileges of a Chriſtian, by impoſition
of hands.
Thoſe which are thus confirmed, are thereby ſuppoſed to be
fit for admiſſion to the ſacrament. Hammond's Fundamentals.
CoNF1'RMA BL E. adj. [from confirm.] That which is capable
of inconteſtible evidence.
It may receive a ſpurious inmate, as is confirmable by many
examples. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 17.
CoNFIRMA'tion. m. ſ [from confirm.]
1. The act of eſtabliſhing any thing or perſon; ſettlement;
eſtabliſhment.
Embrace and love this man.—
—With brother's love I do it.—
And let heav'n
Witneſs how dear I hold this confirmation / Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
2. Evidence by which any thing is aſcertained; additional
proof.
Daniel's Civil War.
A falſe report hath
Honour'd with confirmation your great judgment. Shakeſp.
The ſea-captains anſwered, that they would perform his
command; and, in confirmation thereof, promiſed not to do
any thing which beſeemed not valiant men. Knolles's Hiſtory.
3. Proof; convincing teſtimony.
Wanting frequent confirmation in a matter ſo confirmable,
their affirmation carrieth but ſlow perſuaſion. Brown.
The arguments brought by Chriſt for the confirmation of his
doctrine, were in themſelves ſuicient. South's Sermons,
4. An eccleſiaſtical rite.
What is prepared for in catechiſing, is, in the next place,
performed by confirmation; a moſt profitable uſage of the
church, tranſcribed from the practice of the apoſtles, which
conſiſts in two parts: the child's undertaking, in his own
name, every part of the baptiſmal vow, (having firſt approved
himſelf to underſtand it); and to that purpoſe, that he may
more ſolemnly enter this obligation, bringing ſome godfather
with him, not now (as in baptiſm) as his procurator to un-
dertake for him, but as a witneſs to teſtify his entering this
obligation. Hammond on Fundamentals.
CoNFIRMA'toR. m. ſ. [from confirma, Latin.] An atteſter;
he that puts a matter paſt doubt.
There wants herein the definitive confirmator, and teſt of
things uncertain, the ſenſe of man. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
CoNF1'RMAT or Y. adj. [from confirm.] Giving additional
teſtimony; eſtabliſhing with new force.
CoNF1'RMEDN Ess. n.f. [from confirmed.] Confirmed ſtate;
radication.
If the difficulty ariſe from the confirmedneſs of habit, every
reſiſtance, as it weakens the habit, abates the difficulty.
Decay of Piety.
CoNE1’R MER. n.ſ.. [from confirm.] One that confirms; one
that produces evidence or ſtrength ; an atteſter; an eſta-
bliſher. - -
Be theſe ſad fighs confirmers of thy words?
Then ſpeak again. Shakespeare's King jºhn.
The oath of a lover is no ſtronger than the word of a
tapſter: they are both the co-firme, of falſe reckonings. Shakespeare
CoNF1'scabi. E. adſ. [from confiſcate.] Liable to forfeiture.
To CONFISCATE. v. a. ſ.anfiſcare, confiſquer, i.e. in publicum
addicere, from fſcus, which originally ſignifieth a hamper,
pannier, baſket, or freil; but inctonymically the emperor's
treaſure, becauſe it was anciently kept in ſuch hampers. Cowel.]
To transfer private property to the prince or publick, by way
of penalty for an offence.
It was judged that he ſhould be baniſhed, and his whole
eſtate confiſcated and ſeized, and his houſes pulled down. Bacon.
Whatever fiſh the vulgar fry excel,
Belong to Caeſar, wherefoe'er they ſwim,
By their own worth confiſcated to him. Dryd. Juv. Sat. iv.
CoNF1'scAt E. adj. [from the verb.] Transferred to the pub-
lick as forfeit.
t Thy lands and goods
Are, by the laws of Venice, confiſcate .
Unto the ſtate of Venice. Shakespeare. Merchant of Penice.
CoN FiscA't los. m. ſ. [from confſtate J The aël of tiaisſerr-
ing the forfeited goods of criminals to publick uſe.
It was in every man's eye, what great forfeitures and cºnfiſ-
cations he had at that preſent to help himſelf baco.’s H. VII.
CoN FIT ENT. n.ſ.. [conſters, Latin.] One confeſling; one
who confifles his faults.
A wide difference there is between a meer conſtant and a
true pºnitent. Decay ºf Piety.
Co'NFITURE. m. ſ. [French, from confedura, Latin.] A ſweet-
meat; a confection.
It is certain, that there be ſome houſes wherein cºmfitures
and pies will gather mould more than in others. Bacon.
We contain a comfiture houſe, where we make all ſweet-
meats, dry and moiſt, and divers pleaſant wines. Aacon.
To CoNE1'x. v. a. [configo conſixum, Latin.] To fix down; to
faſten.
As this is true,
Let me in ſafety raiſe me from my knees;
Or elſe, for ever be confixed here,
A marble monument Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
CoNF LAGRANT. adj. [conflagrams, Latin.] Burning toge-
ther; involved in a general fire.
Then raiſe
From the conflagrant maſs, purg’d and refin'd,
New heav'ns, new earth. AMilton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xii.
CoNFLAGRATION. n.f. [conflagratic, Latin.]
1. A general fire ſpreading over a large ſpace.
The opinion deriveth the complexion from the deviation of
the ſun, and the cºnflagration of all things under Phaeton.
Brown's Pugar Errours, b. vi. c. 1 o.
Next o'er the plains, where ripen'd harveſts grow,
The running conflagration ſpreads below. Addison Ovid's Met.
Mankind hath had a gradual increaſe, notwithſtanding what
floods and conflagrations, and the religious profeſſion of celi-
bacy, may have interrupted. Bentley's Sermons.
2. It is generally taken for the fire which ſhall conſume this
world at the conſummation of things.
CoNFLA'tion. m. ſ. [conflatum, Latin.]
1. The act of blowing many inſtruments together.
The ſweeteſt and beſt harmony is, when every part or in-
ſtrument is not heard by itſelf, but a conflation of them all.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 225.
2. A caſting or melting of metal.
CoNFL ExURE. m. ſ. [coffexura, Latin.] A bending or turning.
To CONFLICT. v. M. (confligo, Lat.] To ſtrive; to conteſt :
to fight; to ſtruggle; to contend ; to encounter; to º
are
ſº ſweet
If he .
fº muſt
Th'un
On dy
Ce's Fit FN
1. I he jun
- You
Nimroç
in the ver,
diſc.
Bugdet is
In the rei
into the great
1 ſhe act of
You had Î
jº, and f.
: Aconcourſe;
This wild.
tºy.
CONFLUENT
cººr; Histº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 102</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
Bare unhouſed trunks
To the conft jing elements expoſed, -
Anſwer meer nature. Shakespeare's Timon.
You ſhall hear under the earth a horrible thundering of fire
and water corfiićling together. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A man would be content to ſtrive with himſelf, and conſº
with great difficulties, in hopes of a mighty reward. Tillotſon.
Laſh'd into foam, the fierce conſisting brine
Seems o'er a thouſand raging waves to burn. Thomſ. Jºinter.
A Co'NFL ict. n.ſ.. [conflicius, Latin.]
1. A violent colliſion, or oppoſition of two ſubſtances.
Pour dephlegmed ſpirit of vinegar upon ſalt of tartar, and
there will be ſuch a confict or ebullition, as if there were ſcarce
two more contrary bodies in nature. Boyle's Scept. Chym.
2. A combat; a fight between two. It is ſeldom uſed of age-
neral battle.
The luckleſs conflict with the giant ſtout,
Wherein captiv'd, of life or death he ſtood in doubt.
Fairy Queen, b. i. can. 7. /fanz. 26.
It is my father's face,
Whom in this conflic? I unawares have kill’d. Shakespeare H. VI.
3. Conteſt; ſtrife; contention.
There is a kind of merry war betwixt ſignior Benedick and
her: they never meet but there's a ſkirmiſh of wit between
them.—Alas! he gets nothing by that. In our laſt conflict,
four of his five wits went halting off. Shakeſpeare.
4. Struggle; agony; pang.
No aſſurance touching vićtories can make preſent conflić's
ſo ſweet and eaſy, but nature will ſhun and ſhrink from them.
Hooker, b. v. ſect. 48.
If he attempt this great change, with what labour and con-
fict muſt he accompliſh it? Rogers's Sermon.
He perceiv'd
Th’ unequal conflići then, as angels look
On dying faints. Thomſon's Summer, l. 1 190.
Co'NFLUENCE. n.ſ.. [confuo, Latin.]
1. The junction or union of ſeveral ſtreams.
You ſee this confluene, this great flood of viſiters. Shakespeare
Nimrod, who uſurped dominion over the reſt, ſat down
in the very confluence of all thoſe rivers which watered Para-
diſe. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Bagdet is beneath the confluence of Tigris and Euphrates.
Brerewood on Languages.
In the veins innumerable little rivulets have their confluence
into the great vein, the common channel of the blood. Bently.
2. The act of crowding to a place.
You had found by experience the trouble of all men's con-
fuence, and for all matters, to yourſelf. Bacon's Adv. to Williers.
3. A concourſe; a multitude crouded into one place. -
This will draw a confluence of people from all parts of the
country. - - Temp.e.
CONFLUENT. adj. [conſiens, Lat.J Running one into an-
other; meeting.
At length, to make their various currents one,
The congregated floods together run:
Theſe coºftuent ſtreams make ſome great river's head;
By ſtores till melting and deſcending fed. Blackm. Creation.
Co's Flux. m. ſ. [confuſiº, Latin.]
1. 1 he union of ſeveral currents; concourſe.
He quickly, by the general conflux and concourſe of the
whole people, ſtreightened his quarters. Clarendon, b. viii.
2. Crowd; multitude collected.
To the gates caſt round thine eye, and ſee
What coſiux iſſuing forth, or ent'ring in. Milt. Par. Rºg.
Cox Fo'R.M. ad. [co-fºrmis, Latin.] Aſiuming the ſame form;
wearing the ſame form ; reſembling.
Variety of tunes doth diſpoſe the ſpirits to variety of paſ-
ſions conform unto them. Ba, on's Natural Hiſtory, b. x.
To CONFOR M. v. a. [coforma, Latin.] To reduce to the
like appearance, ſhape, or manner with ſomething elſe.
Then followed that moſt natural effect of conforming one's
ſelf to that which ſhe did like. Sidney, b. ii.
The apoſtles did to fºrm the Chriſtians as much as might
be, according to the pattern of the Jews. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 1 r.
Demand of them wherefore thcy conform not themſelves
unto the order of the church Hooker, b. iii.
To Cox H o'R.M. v. n. To comply with ; to yield to.
Among mankind ſo few there are,
Who will conform to philoſophick fare. Dryden jun. juv.
Cox FoRMA LE. adj. [from conform.]
1. Having the ſame form ; uſing the ſame manners; agreeing
either in exterior or moral characters; ſimilar ; reſembling.
The Gentiles were not made conformable unto the Jews,
in that which was neceſſarily to ceaſe at the coming of Chriſt.
Hoºker, b. iv. ſect. 11.
2. It has ſometimes to before that with which there is agree-
Ineſºt.
He gives a reaſon confºrmiable to the principles.
3. Sometimes with.
The fragments of Sappho give us a taſte of her way of
writing, perfectly confºrmable with that character , e. find of
her. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 223.
4. A º ſuitable; not oppoſite; conſiſtent. -
OL. l.
Arbuthnot.
Nature is very conſonant and confºrmalle to herſelf. Newton.
The productions of a great genius, with many lapſes, are
Pººlerable to the works of an inferiour author, ſcrupulouſly ex-
act, and confºrmable to all the rules of correct writing. Addison,
5. Compliant; ready to follow directions; ſubmiſſive; peace-
able; obſequious.
I've been to you a true and humble wife,
At all time to your will conformable. Shakeſpeare's Hem. VIII.
For all the kingdoms of the earth to yield themſelves willingly
ºfºrmable, in whatever ſhould be required, it was their
duty. . . . . Hooker, b. iv. ſed?. 14.
. Such ſpiritual deluſions are reformed by a conformalle devo-
** and the well-tempered zeal of the true Chriſtian ſpirit.
--~/ Spratt's Sermonſ.
Cosfo'RMABLY. ade. [from conformable.] With conformity;
agreeably; ſuitably.
So a man obſerve the agreement of his own imaginations,
and talk conformably, it is all certainty. - Locke.
I have treated of the ſex conformally to this definition. Addison
CoNFor MA'tion. n.ſ. [French; conformatio, Latin.]
1. The form of things as relating to each other; the par-
ticular texture, and conſiſtence of the parts of a body, and
their diſpoſition to make a whole; as, light of different co-
lours is refleáled from bodies according to their different confor-
ination.
Varieties are found in the different natural ſhapes of the
mouth; and ſeveral conformations of the organs. Holder's Elm.
Where there happens to be ſuch a ſtructure and confºrma-
tion of the earth, as that the fire may paſs freely unto theſe
ſpiracles, it then readily gets out. J/ºodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. º: act of producing ſuitableneſs, or conformity to any
thing.
Virtue and vice, fin and holineſs, and the cºnformation of
our hearts and lives to the duties of true religion and mora-
lity, are thing of more conſequence than the furniture of
underſtanding. Watts.
CoNFo'RM1st. n. ſ. [from confºrm.] One that complies
with the worſhip of the church of England; not a diſſenter.
CoNFo'RMITY. m.ſ. (from conform.]
I. Similitude; reſemblance; the ſtate of having the ſame cha-
raćter of manners or form.
By the knowledge of truth, and exerciſe of virtue, man,
amongſt the creatures of this world, aſpireth to the greateſt
conformity with God. - Hooker, b. i. ſect. 5.
Judge not what is beſt
By pleaſure, though to nature ſeeming meet;
Created as thou art to nobler end
Holy and pure, confºrmity divine Mºun', Paradiſ, Loft.
Space and duration have a great º: in this, that they
are juſtly reckoned amongſt our ſimple ideas. Locke.
This metaphor would not have been ſo general, had there
not been a conformity between the mental taſte and the ſenſitive
taſte. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 4oo.
2. It has in ſome authors with before the model to which the
conformity is made.
The end of all religion is but to draw us to a conformity with
God. Decay of Piety.
3. In ſome to. -
We cannot be otherwiſe happy but by our conformity to
God. Tillotſon.
Confºrmity in building to other civil nations, hath diſpoſed
us to let our old wooden dark houſes fall to decay. Graunt.
4. Conſiſtency. -
Many inſtances prove the confºrmity of the eſſay with the
notions of Hippocrates. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CoN For TA"rio N. m.ſ.. [from conforto, a low Latin word.]
Collation of ſtrength; corroboration. -
For corroboration and comfortation, take ſuch bodies as are
of aſtringent quality, without manifeſt cold. Bacon's Nat Hiff.
To CONFOUND v. a. ſcomfºndre, Fr. confundo, Latin J
1. To mingle things ſo that their ſeveral forms or natures can-
not be diſcerned.
Let us go down, and there cºnfºund their language, that
they may not underſtand one another's ſpeech. Gen. xi. 7.
2. To pérplex; to compare or mention without due diſ-
tinétion.-
A fluid body and a wetting liquor are wont, becauſe they
agree in many things, to be comfºnded. Boyle's Hiſ ºf Phidity.
They who ſtrip not ideas frºm the marks men uſe for them,
but confºund them with words, muſt have endleſs diſpute. Locke.
3. To diſturb the apprehenſion by indiſtinct words or notions.
I am yet to think, that men find their ſimple ideas agree,
though, in diſcourſe, they cofºund one another with different
nannes.
amaze; to aſtoniſh; to ſtupify.
So ſpake the ſon of God; and Satan ſtood.
A while as mute, confounded what to ſay. 41ilt. Par. Ref.
Now with furies ſurrounded,
Deſpairing, confounded,
He trembles, he glows,
Amidſt Rhodope's ſnows.
5. To deſtroy ; to overthrow.
5 H Let
Pºpe's St. Cecilia.
Lºcke.
4. To throw into conſternation; to perplex; to terrify 3 to
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 103</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
—
y
Let thern be confºunded in all their power and might, and
- - broken. Dan. xxi.
let their ſtrength %. I do'ſ thou hold there ſtill Shakespeare
The gods co
corrºsiºn. parizip. adj. [from confound..] . Hateful; de-
teſtable; enormous; odious; a low callſ word.
A moſt confºunded reaſon for his brutiſh conceptien. Grew.
Sir, I have heard another ſtory,
He was a moſt confºunded Tory;
And grew, or he is much bely'd, -
Extremely dull before he dy'd. Swift.
Cox Foundeity. adu [from confounded.] Hatefully; ſhame-
fully: a low or ludicrous word. . . .
You are confoundedy given to ſquirting up and down, and
chattering. L’Eſtrange.
Thy ſpeculations begin to ſmell confoundedly of woods and
meadows. Addiſon's Spectator, N•. 131.
Confound ER. n.ſ.. [from confºund.] He who diſturbs, per-
plexes, terrifies, or deſtroys. - -
CoNFRATE's Nity. n.ſ.. [from con and fraternitas, Latin.]. A
brotherhood; a body of men united for ſome religious
purpoſe.
We find three days appointed every year, to be kept, and
a cºnfraternity eſtabliſhed for that purpoſe with the laws of it.
Stilingfleet's Defence of the Diſcourſe on Rom. Idol.
CoNFR1cA'tion. n.J. [from con and frico, Lat..] The act of
rubbing againſt anything. '
It hath been ; that ivy hath grown out of a ſtag's
horn; which they ſuppoſe did rather come from a confrication
of the horn upon the wy, than from the horn itſelf. Bacon.
To CONFRONT. v. a. [confronter, French.]
1. To ſtand againſt another in full view ; to face.
He ſpoke, and then confronts the bull;
And on his ample forehead, aiming full,
The deadly ſtroke deſcended. Dryden's Virg. Æºn.
2. To ſtand face to face, in oppoſition to another.
We began to lay his unkindneſs unto him: he ſeeing him-
ſelf confronted by ſo many, went not to denial, but to juſtify
his cruel falſhood. Sidney, b. ii.
In theſe two things the Eaſt and Weſt churches did inter-
changeably both confront the Jews and concur with them.
Hooker, b. i. ſect. 1 1.
Blood hath bought blood, and blows have anſwer'd blows,
Strength match'd with ſtrength, and power confronted power.
Shakeſpeare's King john.
Bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
Confronted him with ſelf compariſons,
Point againſt point rebellious, arm 'gainſt arm. Shakespeare Macb.
3. To oppoſe one evidence to another in open court.
4. To compare one thing with another.
When I confront a medal with a verſe, I only ſhew you the
ſame deſign executed by different hands. Addiſon on Medals.
CoNFroNTA'tion. n.f. [French. J The act of bringing
two evidences face to face.
To CONFUSE. v. a. [confuſus, Latin.]
1. To diſorder; to diſperſe irregularly.
2. To mix, not ſeparate.
3. Tº perplex, not diſtinguiſh; to obſcure.
• may have a clear and diſtinčt idea of the exiſtence of
may things, though our ideas of their intimate effences and
ºuſe; are very confuſed and obſcure. J/atts's Logick.
4. To hurry the mind.
Cººſas'd and ſadly ſhe at length replics. Pope's Statius.
Cosru'sibl. Y. adv. [from º
1. In a mixed maſs; without ſeparation.
Theſe four nations are every where mixt in the Scriptures,
- becauſe they dwelt confuſed; together. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
2. Indiffinály; one mingled with another.
'**'.court with horror, noiſe and tears,
Çºfo'dy fill'd ; the women's ſhrieks and crics
The arched vaults re-echo.
Q" mount Veſuvius next he fix’d his eyes,
And ſaw the ſmoaking tops confus'd, riſe;
A hideous ruin Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
- I viewed through a priſin, and ſaw them moſt confuſedly de-
fined, ſo that I could not diſtinguiſh their ſmaller parts from
ºne another. Newton's Opt.
Heroes and heroines ſhouts confus'dly riſe,
And baſe and treble voices ſtrike the ſkies. Pope.
3. Not clearly; not plainly.
He confiſed, and obſcurely delivered his opinion. Clarendon.
4. Tºuliãouſly ; haſtily ; not deliberately; not exactly.
de he Pºpriety of thoughts and words, which are the hid-
mº * ºf a play, are but confiftſ; judged in thºvº.
ice of action. Dryden's Dedicat. to the Spaniſh Fryar.
º º / [from confuſed.] Want of diſtinctneſs;
º **Into theſe titles of honour carry a kind of confuſed-
Iº. rather betokened a ſucceſſive oft. than an ºft
The cauſe of the id: Carew's Survey ºf Cornwal.
inability, is want ºffſ intſ; of our notions, next to natural
*os Fu'sion. n attention. Norris.
# I *...* / [from confuſ.
* *regular mixture, tumultuous medly; diſorder.
Denham.
God, only wiſe, to puniſh pride of wit,
Among men's wits hath this confuſion wrought;
As the proud tow'r, whoſe points the clouds did hit,
By tongues confuſion was to ruin brought. Davier.
2. Tumult. -
God is not a god of ſedition and confuſion, but of order and
of peace. Hooker, Preface.
This is a happier and more comely time,
Than when theſe fellows ran about the ſtreets
Crying confuſion. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
3. Indiſtinct combination.
The confuſion of two different ideas, which a cuſtom
connexion of them in their minds hath made to them almoſt
one, fills their head with falſe views, and their reaſonings with
falſe conſequences. Locke.
4. Overthrow; deſtrućtion.
The ſtrength of their illuſion,
Shall draw him in to his confuſion. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
5. Aſtoniſhment; diſtraćtion of mind; hurry of ideas.
Confuſion dwelt in ev'ry face,
And fear in ev'ry heart,
When waves on waves, and gulphs in gulphs,
O'ercame the pilot's art. Spectator, Nº. 489.
CoNFu'table. adj. [from confute.] Poſſible to be diſproved ;
poſſible to be ſhewn falſe.
At the laſt day, that inquiſitor ſhall not preſent to God a
bundle of calumnies, or confutable accuſations; but will offer
unto his omniſcience a true liſt of our tranſgreſſions. Brown.
CoN Futa"tion. m. ſ. [confutatio, Latin J The act of con-
futing; diſproof.
To CONFUTE. v. a. [confuta, Latin.] To convićt of errour
or falſhood; to diſprove.
He could on either ſide diſpute;
Confute, change hands, and ſtill confute. Hudibras.
For a man to doubt whether there be any hell, and there-
upon to live as if there were none, but, when he dies, to find
himſelf confuted in the flames, muſt be the height of woe. South.
CONGE. n.ſ.. [conge, French.]
1. Act of reverence; bow; courteſy.
The captain ſalutes you with conge profound,
And your ladyſhip curt'ſies half way to the ground. Swift.
2. Leave; farewel.
So, courteous conge both did give and take,
With right hands plighted, pledges of good will. Fairy Qu.
To Co'NGE. v. n. [from the noun.J. To take leave.
I have congeed with the duke, and done my adicu with his
neareſt. Shakeſpeare's All’s well that ends wel.
CONGE D'ELIRE is French; and ſignifies, in common law,
the king's permiſſion royal to a dean and chapter, in time of va-
cation, to chuſe a biſhop. The king, as ſovereign patron of
all archbiſhopricks, biſhopricks, and other eccleſiaſtical bene-
fices, had, in ancient times, the free appointment of all ec-
cleſiaſtical dignities; inveſting them firſt per baculum &amp; an-
mulum, and afterwards by his letters patent. In proceſs of
time he made the election over to others, under certain forms
and conditions; as, that they ſhould, at every vacation, before
they chuſe, demand of the king a congé d'elire, that is, licence
to procecd to election. Cowel.
A woman, when ſhe has made her own choice, for form's
ſake, ſends a conge d’eſire to her friends. Spectator, Nº. 475.
Co'NG E. m.ſ. [In architecture.] A moulding in form of a quar-
ter round, or a cavetto, which ſerves to ſeparate two members
from one another: ſuch is that which joins the ſhaft of the
column to the cinéture. Chambers.
To CONGEAL. v. a. [congeh, Latin.]
1. To turn, by froſt, from a fluid to a ſolid ſtate.
What more miraculous thing may be told,
Than ice, which is congral'd with ſenſeleſs cold,
Should kindle fire by wonderful device Spenser.
In whoſe capacious womb -
A vapoury deluge lies, to ſnow congealed. Thomſºn's Irinter.
2. To bind or fix, as by cold.
Oh, gentlemen, ſee ſee, dead Henry's wounds
Open their congeal’d mouths, and bleed afreſh. Shakespeare R. III.
Too much ſadneſs hath congcai’d your blood. Shakespeare
To Cong EAL. v. n. To concrète; to gather into a maſs by
cold.
When water congeal, the ſurface of the ice is ſmooth, and
level, as the ſurface of the water was before. Burret's Theºry.
Conceal MENT. n.ſ. [from congra.] The clot formed by
congelation; concretion. -
Enter the city, clip your wives, your friends;
Tell them your feats, whilſt they with joyful tears
Waſh the Congealment from your wounds. Sh; Aut, and Clº.
CoNGE'LABL E. adj. [from congeal.] Suſceptible of congela-
tion; capable of loſing its fluidity. - -
The conſiſtencies of bodies are very divers: denſe, rare,
tangible, pneumatical, fixed, hard, ſoft, congelable, not ſº-
geable, liquefiable, not liquefiable. - Pacon, Nº. 839.
The chymiſts define ſalt, from ſome of its properties, tº be
a body fixable in the fire, and cºngclable again by cold into
brittle glebes or cryſtals. Arbuthnot on 4 mºnt.
Cox GE LAT: ON:-
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 104</div><p class="Text">C O N.
C O N
congela'tron. m. ſ. [from congeal.]
Iſ - Aét of turning fluids to ſolids.
The capillary tubes are obſtrućted either by outward com-
reſſion or congelation of the fluid. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
There are congelations of the redundant water, precipita-
tions, and many other operations. Arbuthnot on Air.
State of being congealed, or made ſolid.
Many waters and ſprings will never freeze; and many
arts in rivers and lakes, where there are mineral erruptions,
~will ſtill perſiſt without conge'ation. Brown's Wugar Errours.
co'NGENER. m. ſ. [Latin.] Of the ſame kind or nature,
The cherry-tree has been often grafted on the laurel, to
vhich it is a congener. Aºiller.
c.ors GENEROUS. adj. [congener, Latin.] Of the ſame kind;
ariſing from the ſame original.
Thoſe bodies, being of a congenerous nature, do readily re-
ceive the impreſſions of their nature. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
From extreme and laſting colds proceeds a great run of
apoplexies, and other congenerous diſeaſes. Arbuthnot on Air.
CoNGE'N E Rous Ness. n.ſ.. [from congenerous.] The quality of
being from the ſame original; belonging to the ſame
claſs. I);&amp;#.
CONGENIAL, adj. [con and genius, Lat.] Partaking of the
ſame genius; kindred; cognate.
He ſprung, without any help, by a kind of congenial com-
poſure, as we may term it, to the likeneſs of our late ſove-
reign and maſter. //attan.
You look with pleaſure on thoſe things which are ſome-
what congenial, and of a remote kindred to your own con-
ceptions. Dryden's Dedication of juvenal.
Smit with the love of ſiſter arts we came,
And met congenial, mingling flame with flame. Pope's Epiſ?.
He acquires a courage, and ſtiffneſs of opinion, not at all
congenial with him. Swift on the Diſſentions in Athens and Rome.
CoNG ENIA'LITY.. n.ſ.. [from congenial J Participation of the
ſame genius; cognation of mind.
- CoNGE'NIALNEss. n.ſ.. [from congenial.] Cognation of mind.
CoNGE'N IT.E. adj. [congenitus, Latin.] Of the ſame birth;
born with another; connate; begotten together.
Many concluſions of moral and intelle&amp;tual truths, ſeem,
- upon this account, to be congenite with us, connatural to us,
| and engraven in the very frame of the ſoul. Hale's Origin.
Did we learn an alphabet in our embryo-ſtate And how
comes it to paſs, that we are not aware of any ſuch congenite
apprehenſions Glanville's Scepſ. c. 5.
º Co'N GER. m. ſ. [congrus, Latin.] The ſea-eel.
Many fiſh, whoſe ſhape and nature are much like the eel,
frequent both the ſea and freſh rivers; as the mighty conger,
taken often in the Severn. Walton's Angler.
CoNGE'R1Es. m. ſ. [Latin.] A maſs of ſmall bodies heaped up
together. -
The air is nothing but a congeries or heap of ſmall, and,
for the moſt part, of flexible particles, of ſeveral ſizes, and
of all kinds of figures. Boyle.
To CONGE'ST. v. a. [congero, congºſum, Lat.] To heap up;
- to gather together.
CoNGE's TIBLE, adj. [from congeſ?..] That may be heaped
2 -
up Dićt.
CoNGE's Tron. n.ſ.. [congeſtio, Latin.]
* A collection of matter, as in abſceſſes and tumours. Quincy.
Congeſtion is then ſaid to be the cauſe of a tumour, when
the growth of it is ſlow, and without pain. J/iſman.
Co'NGIARY. n.ſ. ſºongiarium, from congius, a meaſure of corn,
Lat J A gift diſtributed to the Roman people or ſoldiery,
originally in corn, afterwards in money.
We ſee on them the emperor and general officers, ſtanding
as they diſtributed a congiary to the ſoldiers or people. Addison.
To CONGLA CIATE. v. n. [conglaciatus, Latin.] To turn
to ICC.
No other doth properly conglaciate but water; for the de-
termination of quickſilver is properly fixation, and that of
milk coagulation. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 1.
on Glaci A"rion. m. ſ. [from conglaciate.] The ſtate of being
changed, or act of changing into ice.
If cryſtal be a ſtone, it is concreted by a mineral ſpirit and
lapidifical principles; for, while it remained in a fluid body,
it was a ſubject very unfit for proper cºnglaciation. Brown.
TPFe CONGLOBATE. v. a ſongislatu, Latin.] To gather
into a hard firm ball. -
The teſticle, as is ſaid, is one large conglobated gland, con-
fiſting of ſoft fibres, all in one convolution. Grºw's Cºſmol.
*-To's dio:ATE. adj. [from the verb.] Moulded into a firm
ball, of which the fibres are not diſtinétly viſible.
Fluids are ſeparated from the blood in the liver, and the
~ other conglobate and conglomerate glands. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
*&gt; oºlºgy. ... [from conglºbate J. In a ſpherical
form. - Die?.
S--Nºob Arios. n, f: [from conglobate.] A round body;
colle&amp;tion into a round maſs.
In this ſpawn are diſcerned many ſpecks, or little congloba-
ti.ns, which in time become black.
- - Brown's Pulgar Errours.
To Coxolo're. v. a. ſ. conglo'o, Lat..] To gather into a round
maſs; to conſolidate in a ball.
Then he founded, then corgkb’d
Like things to like. A4ilton’, Paradiſe Lºft, b. vii. 1.239.
For all their centre found,
Hung to the goddeſs, and coher'd around:
Not cloſer, orb in orb conglob'd, are ſeen
The buzzing bees about their duſky queen. Pope's Dunciad.
To CoNGLo'BE. v. n. To coaleſce into a round maſs.
Thither they
Haſted with glad precipitance, up-roll'd -
As drops on duſt congloting from the dry. Milton's Par. Lºft.
To CONGLO'MERATE. v. a. [conglo" ero, Lat..] To gather
. ball, like a tall of thread; to inweave into a round
maſs.
The liver is one great conglomerated gland, compoſed of in-
numerable ſmall glands, each of which conſiſteth of ſoft
fibres, in a diſtinét or ſeparate convolution. Grew's Coſmoſ.
CoNGlo'MERATE. adj. [from the verb.] -
1. Gathered into a round ball, ſo as that the conſtituent parts
and fibres are diſtinét.
Fluids are ſeparated in the liver, and the other conglobate
and conglomerate glands. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
2. Collected; twiſted together.
The beams of light, when they are multiplied and conglº-
merate, generate heat.
CoNGLoMERA'tion. m. ſ. [from conglomerate.]
1. Collection of matter into a looſe ball.
2. Intertexture; mixture. -
The multiplication and cong! meration of ſounds doth gene-
rate rarefaction of the air. Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry. Nº. 267.
To CONGLUTINATE. v. a. [ conglutino, Latin.] To ce-
ment; to reunite ; to heal wounds.
To Cox Glu't INATE. v. n. To coaleſce; to unite by the in-
tervention of a callous.
CoNGLUTINA'tion. n.ſ.. [from conglutinate J The aët of
uniting wounded bodies; reunion; healing.
The cauſe is a temperate conglutination; for both bodies are
clammy and viſcous, and do bridle the deflux of humours to
the hurts. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 677.
To this elongation of the fibres is owing the union or cin-
glutination of parts ſeparated by a wound. Arbuth, on Aliments.
CoNGLU'TINATIVE. adj. [from conglutinate. J Having the
power of uniting wounds.
CoNGLUTINA'tor. n.ſ.. [from conglutinate.] That which has
the power of uniting wounds. -
The oſteocolla is recommended as a conglutinator of broken
bones. //ozdward on Foſſils.
CoN GRATULANT. ad. [from congratulate.] Rejoicing in par-
ticipation; expreſfing participation of another's joy.
. Forth ruſh'd in haſte the great conſulting peers,
Rais'd from the dark divan, and with like joy
Congratulant approach'd him. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
To CONGRATULATE. v. a. [gratular, Latin.]
1. To compliment upon any happy event; to expreſs joy for
the good of another.
I congratulate our Engliſh tongue, that it has been enriched
with words from all our neighbours. JWatts's Logick.
2. It has ſometimes the accuſative caſe of the cauſe of joy, and
to before the perſon.
An eccleſiaſtical union within yourſelves, I am rather ready
to congratulate to you. Spratt's Sermoni.
The ſubječts of England may congratulate to themſelves,
that the nature of our government and the clemency of our
king ſecure us. Dryden's Preface to Aurengzebe.
To Congr A'TULAT e. v. n. To rejoice in participation.
I cannot but, with much pleaſure, congratulate with my
dear country, which hath outdone all Europe in advancing
converſation. Swift's Introdućliºn to Genteel Converſation.
CoNGRATULA't Ion. n.ſ.. [from congratulate.] -
1. The act of profeſſing joy for the happineſs or ſucceſs of
another.
2. The form in which joy for the happineſs of another is pro-
feſſed.
CoNGRA'TUI. AroRY. adj. [from congratulate.] Expreſſing joy
for the good fortune of another.
To Cos GRE/e. v. m. [from gre, French..] To agree ; to
accord; to join ; to unite.
For government,
Put into parts, doth keep in one concent,
Congreeing in a full and natural cloſe. Shºkeſpeare's Henry V.
To Congre'E.T. v. m. [from con and greet.] To ſalute reci-
procally. - -
My office hath ſo far prevail'd,
That face to face, and royal eye to eye,
You have congrected. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
To CONGREGAT. E. v. a. ſ.cºngrego, Lat.] To collect to-
gether; to aſſemble; to bring into one place.
Any multitude of Chriſtian men congregated, may be termed
by the name of a church. Hooker, b. iii. ſecº. 1.
Theſe waters were afterwards congregated, and called the
ſea. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the Jºrld.
Tempeſts
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 207.
!
i
a ,
º :
.
- a
- sº
.
º
* -
* ! º
t
| º
-
l
º
- . .
- - * ,
* . -
º º l
* *
:
- º
!
| | | |
|
, ; |
. .
t
! . . . .
*
: ".
º
s
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 105</div><p class="Text">*
º
*
º
-
C O N
Tempeſts themſelves, high ſeas, and howling winds,
The gutter'd rocks and congregated ſands,
As having ſenſe of beauty, do omit -
Their mortal natures. Shakespeare's Othello.
The dry land, earth ; and the great receptacle
Of congregated waters, he call'd ſeas;
And ſaw that it was good. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. vii.
Heat congregates homogeneal bodies, and ſeparates hete-
rogeneal ones. Newton's Of t.
... Light, congregated by a burning glaſs, ačts moſt upon ful-
phureous bodies, to turn them into fire. Newton's Opt.
To Co NGREGAT. E. v. n. To aſſemble; to meet; to gather
together.
He rails,
Ev’n there where merchants moſt do congregate, -
On me, my bargains. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Penice.
'Tis true, (as the old proverb doth relate)
Equals with equals often congregate. Denham.
Co'N GRE GATE. adj. [from the verb.] Collected; campact.
Where the matter is moſt congregate, the cold is the greater.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 72.
CoNGREGA"tion. m. ſ. [from congregate.]
1. A collection; a maſs of various parts brought together.
This brave o'erhanging firmament appears no other thing
to me, than a foul and peſtilent congregation of vapours. Shakespeare
2. An aſſembly met to worſhip God in publick, and hear
doćlrine. -
The words which the miniſter firſt pronounceth, the whole
congregation ſhall repeat after him. Hºoker, b. v. ſe?. 36.
The practice of thoſe now-a-days that prefer houſes
before churches, and a conventicle before the cºngregation.
j South's Sermons.
If thoſe preachers, who abound in epiphonema's, would
look about them, they would find part of their congregatiºn
out of countenance, and the other aſleep. Swift.
3. Congr EGATIONs of Cardina's, are aſſemblies diſtributed by
the pope into ſeveral chambers, like our offices and courts.
Chambers.
CoNGREGA'TIONAL. adj. [from congregation.] Publick; per-
taining to a congregation or aſſembly.
CONGRESS. n.ſ.. [congreſſus. Latin.]
1. A mecting; a ſhock; a conflićt.
jºi. urges on, and Lauſus there;
Their congreſ; in the field great Jove withſtands,
Both doom'd to fall, but fall by greater hands. Dryd. Æn.
From theſe laws may be deduced the rules of the congreſſes
and reflections of two bodies. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
2. An appointed meeting for ſettlement of affairs between dif-
ferent nations.
CoN GRE'ssiv E. adj. [from congreſs.] Meeting; encountering;
coming together.
If it be underſtood of ſexes conjoined, all plants are fe-
male; and if of disjoined, and ...}. generation, there is
no male or female in them. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii c. 6.
To CONGRUE. v. n. [from congruo, Latin.] To agree; to
be conſiſtent with 5 to ſuit; to be agreeable to any purpoſe.
Our ſovereign proceſs imports at full,
By letters congruing to that effect,
The preſent death of Hamlet. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
, CoNGRU'EN ce. n. / [congruentia, Latin.] Agreement; ſuit-
ableneſs of one thing to another; conſiſtency.
Cos CRU'ENT, adj. [cong uens, Latin.] Agreeing; correſpon-
dent. -
Theſe planes were ſo ſeparated as to move upon a common
, fide of the congruent ſquares, as an axis. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
CoNGRU'ity. n ſ [from congrue.]
1. Suitableneſs; agreeableneſs.
Congruity of opinions to our natural conſtitution, is one
great incentive to their reception. Glanville.
2. Fitneſs; pertinence.
A whole ſentence may fail of its congruity by wanting one
particle. - Sidney.
3. Conſequence of argument; reaſon; conſiſtency.
With what congruity doth the church of Rome deny, that
her enemies do at all appertain to the church of Chriſt? Hook.
4. [In geometry.] Figures or lines which exactly correſpond,
when laid over one another, are in congruity.
Co'NGRUMENT. m. ſ. [from congrue..] Fitneſs; adaptation.
The congrumºnt and harmonious fitting of periods in a ſen-
tence, hath almoſt the faſtening and force of knitting and con-
nexion. Ben. Johnſºn's Diſcov.
Cox C R cous. adj. [congruus, Latin.]
1. Agreeable to ; conſiſtent with.
The exiſtence of God is ſo many ways manifeſt, and the
obedience we owe him ſo congruous to the light of reaſon,
that a great part of mankind give teſtimony to the law of
nature. Locke.
2. Suitable to ; accommodated to ; proportionate or commen-
furate.
The faculty is infinite, the object infinite, and they in-
finitely congruous to one another. Cheyne's Plil. Prin.
3. Rational; fit.
Gº O N
Motives that addreſs themſelves to our reaſon, are fitteſt to
be cmployed upon reaſonable creatures: it is no ways con-
gruous, that God ſhould be always frightening men into an
acknowledgment of the truth. Atterbury.
Co'NGRU ously, adv. [from congruous.] Suitably; pertinent-
ly; conſiſtently.
This conjecture is to be regarded, becauſe, cºngruouſy unto
it, one having warmed the bladder, found it then lighter than
the oppoſite weight. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
Co'Nic Al. N. adj. [ conicus, Latin. J Having the form of a
Co'Nick. } cone, or round pyramid.
Tow'ring firs in conick forms ariſe,
And with a pointed ſpear divide the ſkies. Prior.
A brown flint of a comick figure: the baſis is oblong. Iſºodw.
They are conical veſſels, with their baſes towards the heart;
and as they paſs on, their diameters grow ſtill leſs and leſs.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Co'Nic ALLY. adv. [from comical j In form of a cone.
In a watering pot, ſhaped conically, or like a ſugar loaf,
filled with water, no liquor falls through the holes at the bot-
tom, whilk the gardener keeps his thumb upon the orifice at
the top. Bºyle's Spring ºf the Air.
Co'NICALNFss. n.ſ.. [from comical.] The ſtate or quality of
being conical.
CoNick Seáion. m. ſ. A curve line ariſing from the ſection of
a cone by a plane.
Co'Nick Sections. }* /. That part of geometry which conſiders
Cox ic Ks. the cone, and the curves ariſing from its
ſections. -
To CONJECT. v. n. [conječium, Lat.] To gueſ. ; to con-
jećture.
I intreat you then,
From one that but imperfectly conjeś,
Your wiſdom would not build yourſelf a trouble. Shakespeare
CoNJE'croR. m. ſ. [from conjest J A gueſſºr; a conjecturer.
For ſo conjećto would obtrude,
And from thy painted ſkin conclude. Swift.
CoNJE/ct URA ble, adj. [from conje: ure.] Being the object of
conjecture; poſſible to be gueſſed.
CoNJE'ct URAL. adj. [from conjecture.] Depending on con-
jecture; ſaid or dore by gueſs.
They’ll ſit by th' fire, and preſume to know
Who thrives, and who declines, fide factions, and give out
Conjectural marriages. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Thou ſpeak'ſt it falſely, as I love mine honour,
And mak’ſt conjectural fears to come into me. Sha'eſhear."
It were a matter of great profit, ſave that I doubt it is too
conje.ºural to venture upon, if one could diſcern what corn,
herbs, or fruits, are likely to be in plenty or ſcarcity. Bucci.
The two laſt words are not in Callimachus, and conſe-
quently the reſt are only conječural, and an erroneous addi-
tion. Proom's Notes on the Odyſſey.
CoNJ Ect URA'lity. n.ſ.. [from conjectural.] That which de-
pends upon gueſs.
They have not recurred unto chronology, or the records of
time, but taken themſelves unto probabilities, and the conjec-
turality of philoſophy. Frown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 1.
CoNJ E cru RAlly, adv. [from conjectural.] By gueſs; by
conjecture. - -
Whatſoever may be at any time out of Scripture, but pro-
bably and conječurally ſurmiſed. Hooker, b. i.
CoNJE"cture. n.ſ.. [conjectura, Latin.]
1. Gueſs; imperfect knowledge; preponderation of opinion
without proof.
In the caſting of lots a man cannot, upon any ground of
reaſon, bring the event of them ſo much as under conjecture.
South's Sermons.
2. Idea; notion; conception: not now in uſe.
Now entertain conječure of a time,
When creeping murmur, and the poring dark,
Fills the wide veſſel of the univerſe. Shakespeare . Henry V.
To Con J E'cTURE. v. a. [from the noun..] To gueſs; to
judge by gueſs; to entertain an opinion upon bare probability.
When we look upon ſuch things as equally may or may not
be, human reaſon can then, at the beſt, but conje'ure what
will be. South’s Sermons.
A Conje'ct UR ER. m. ſ. [from conjejure.] A gueſſer; one
who forms opinion without proof.
If we ſhould believe very grave conječiurers, carnivorous
animals now were not fleſh devourers then. Brown's Pºwl. Err.
I ſhall leave the wiſe conječiurers to their own imaginations.
A/diſºn, Spectator, Nº. 27 1.
CoN1'FERous. adj. [conus and fºre, Latin.]
Such trees, ſhrubs, or herbs are cºniferºus as bear a ſqua-
moſe ſcaly fruit, of a woody ſubſtance, and a figure approach,
ing to that of a cone, in which there are many ſeeds; and
when they are ripe, the ſeveral cells or partitions in the cone
ape or open, and the ſeeds drop out. Of this kind are the
#. pine, becch, and the like. - $2; incy.
To Cosjø'BB.E. v. a. [from con, together, and jollerhol, the
head.) To concert; to ſettle; to diſcuſs. A low cant word.
What would a body think of a miniſter that ſhould cº-
jºbbe
} }
To Co
C
Cºxſº
ſociº
C. sº
date
and •
Cox jº
aſſºci
A
uſe ol
pro c
T}
of th
Co'Nisº
CON ||
ingº
T
And
I cou.
cºura.
Ilan at ſh
He
Nell rº
Cosmical
nºbi."y.
To Cosgro
1. To jºin :
Thoſe º
bºth power
ar. the Sax
2. To inflat
Pinations
- s JUGATE.
tion wºn
ſºnºcº
*~~~~~ :<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 106</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
jºſe matters of ſtate with tumblers, and conſer politicks with
tinkers ? . L’Eſirange.
To CONJOIN. v. a...[conjoindre, Fr. conjungo, Latin.]
1. To unite; to conſolidate into one.
Thou wrong'ſt Pirithous, and not him alone;
But, while I live, two friends conjoin'd in one.
2. To unite in marriage.
If either of you know any inward impediment,
Why you ſhould not be conjºin'd, I charge
You on your ſouls to utter it. Shakeſp. Much aſſº, &amp;c.
3. To aſſociate; to connect.
Common and univerſal ſpirits convey the aëion of the
remedy into the part, and conjoin the virtue of bodies far
disjoined. Brown's Wugar Erroirs, h. ii. c. 3.
Men of differing intereſts can be reconciled in one com-
munion ; at leaſt, the deſigns of all can be conjoined in liga-
tures of the ſame reverence, and piety, and devotion. Taylor.
Let that which he learns next be nearly conjoined with what
he knows already. Locke.
To Conjo'IN. v. n.
Dryd, n.
To league; to unite.
This part of his
Cºnjoins with my diſeaſe, and helps to end me.ak Shakesp. Henry IV.
CoNJo'1NT. adj. [ conjoint, Fr. J United; connected; aſ-
ſociate.
CoNJo'INT Degrees. [In muſick J. Two notes which imme-
diately follow each other in the order of the ſcale; as ut
and re. Diff.
CoNJo'INTLY, adv. [from conjoint.] In union; together; in
aſſociation; jointly ; not apart. -
A groſs and frequent error, commonly committed in the
uſe of doubtful remedies, conjointy with thoſe that are of ap-
proved virtues. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 5.
The parts of the body ſeparately, make known the paſſions
of the ſoul, or elſe conjointly one with the other. Dryden.
Co'Nisor. See CoGN1sor.
CONJUGAL. adj. [conjugalis, Lat.] Matrimonial; belong-
ing to marriage; connubial.
Their conjugal affection ſtill is ty'd,
And ſtill the mournful race is multiply'd. Dryd. Fables.
I could not forbear commending the young woman for her
conjugal affection, when I found that ſhe had left the good
man at home. Spediator, Nº. 499.
He mark’t the conjugal diſpute; -
Nell roar'd inceſſant, Dick ſat mute. - Swift.
Co'N Jug ALLY. adv. [from conjugal.] Matrimonially; con-
nubially.
To Co'N Jug ATF. v. a. [conjugo, Latin 1
1. To join ; to join in marriage; to unite.
Thoſe drawing as well marriage as wardſhip, gave him
both power and occaſion to conjugate at pleaſure the Norman
and the Saxon houſes. J%tton.
2. To inflect verbs; to decline verbs through their various ter-
nº inations.
Co'NJUGAt E. m. ſ. [conjugatus, Latin.] Agreeing in deriva-
tion with another word, and therefore generally reſembling in
ſignification.
His grammatical argument, grounded upon the derivation
of ſpontaneous from ſponte, weighs nothing: we have learned
in logick, that conjugates are ſometimes in name only, and not
in deed. Bramh. Anſwer to Hobbs.
Co'N, UGA'ſ F Diameter, or Axis. [In geometry..] A right line
biſecting the tranſverſe diameter. Chambers.
CoNJUGA"rio N. m. ſ. [conjugatio; Latin.]
1. A couple; a pair.
The heart is ſo far from affording nerves unto other parts,
that it receiveth very few itſelf from the fixth conjugation or
pair of nerves. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 4.
2. The aët of uniting or compiling things together.
All the various mixtures and conjugations of atoms do beget
nothing. Bentley's Sermons.
3. The form of inflecting verbs through their ſeries of termi-
Ilattoll.S.
Have thoſe who have writ ſo much about declenſions and
conjugations, about concords and ſyntaxes, loſt their labour,
and been learned to no purpoſe 2 Locke.
4. Union ; aftemblage.
The ſupper of the Lord is the moſt ſacred, myſterious, and
uſeful conjugation of ſecret and holy things and duties. Taylor.
CON3 UN C F. adj. [conjunéius, Latin.) Corjoined, concur-
rent; united.'
It pleas'd the king his maſter to ſtrike at me,
When he, conjun: and flatt’ring his diſpleaſure,
Tript me behind. Shakeſpeare's King Lear. .
CoNJu'Ncries. n.ſ. [conjunºjº, Latin.]
1. Union; aſſociation; league.
With our ſmaji cºion we ſhould on,
To ſee hºw fortune is diſpos'd to us. Shakespeare . Henry IV.
He will unite the white roſe and the red;
Smile, heaven, upon his fair conjundžion,
That long hath frown'd upon their enmity. Sha'. Rih. III.
The treaty gave abroad a reputation of a ſtrict conj.nction
º between then. Bac: ; Henry VII.
O L. l.
Man can effect no great matter by his perſonal ſtrength,
tut, as he acts in ſociety and conjunction with others. South.
An inviſible hand from heaven mingles hearts and ſouls
by ſtrange, ſecret, and unaccountable conjunéïions. South.
2. The congreſs of two plaflets in the ſame degree of the zodiack,
where they are ſuppoſed to have great power and influence.
God, neither by drawing waters from the deep, nor by any
cºnjunction of the ſtars, ſhould bury them under a ſecond
flood. Raleigh's Hºſicry of the J/orld.
Has not a poet more virtues and vices within his circle?
Cannot he obſerve their influences in their oppoſitions and
ºthetions, in their altitudes and depreſſions? He ſhall ſooner
find ink than nature exhauſted. Ryner's 7 rogºdies ºf lºft Age.
Pompey and Caeſar were two ſtars of ſuch a magnitude,
that their conjunction was as fatal as their oppoſition. Swift.
3. A word made uſe of to connect the clauſes of a period toge-
ther, and to ſignify the relation they have to one another.
- Clarke's Latin Grammdr.
CoNJu'Ntc1 v E., adj. ſcorjunclivus, Latin.]
1. Cloſely united : a ſenſe not in uſe.
She's ſo conjundžive to my life and ſoul,
That as the ſtar moves not but in his ſphere,
I could not but by her. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
2. [In grammar.] The mood of a verb, uſed ſubſequently to
a conjunétion.
CoNJU'Nctively. adv. [from conjunctive..] In union; not
apart.
Theſe are good mediums conjunčively taken, that is, not
one without the other. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 9
CoNJu'Nctive N Ess. m. ſ. [from conjunctive J The quality of
Joining or uniting.
CoNJU'NcTLY. adv. [from conjuna?..] Jointly; together; not
apart.
CoNju'Nctur F. n.f. [conjonºiure, French.]
1. Combination of many circumſtances, or cauſes.
I never met with a more unhappy conjuncture of affairs than
in the buſineſs of that earl. King Charles.
Every virtue requires time and place, a proper objećt, and
a fit conjuncture of circumſtances. Addisonn's Speciator, Nº. 257.
2. Occaſion ; critical time.
Such cenſures always attend ſuch conjuné?ures, and find fault
for what is not done, as with that which is done. Clarendon.
3. Mode of union; connection.
He is quick to perceive the motions of articulation, and
conjunflure of letters in words. Holder's Elements ºf Speech.
4. Conſiſtency. -
I was willing to grant to preſbytery what with reaſon it cant
pretend to, in a conjuncture with epiſcopacy. King Charles.
CoNJURA'tion. n.ſ.. [from conjure.]
1. The form or ačt of ſummoning another in ſome ſacred name.
We charge you, in the name of God, take heed :
Under this conjuration ſpeak, my lord. Shakeſp. Henry V.
2. A magical form of words; an incantation; an enchantment.
Your conjuration, fair knight, is too ſtrong for my poor
ſpirit to diſobey. Sidney.
What drugs, what charms,
What conjuration, and what mighty magick,
For ſuch proceeding I am charg’d withal, -
I won his daughter with ? Shakeſpeare's Othell.
3. A plot; a conſpiracy. Dić7.
To CONJURE. v. a. [conjuro, Latin.]
1. To ſummon in a ſacred name; to enjoin with the higheſt
ſolemnity. - -
He cºncluded with fighs and tears to conjure them, that
they would no more preſs him to conſent to a thing ſo contrary
to his reaſon. Clarendºn.
The church may addreſs her ſons in the form St. Paul does
the Philippians, when he conjures them to unity. Dec. of Pitty.
- I conjure you! Let him know, ... . -
Whate'er was done againſt him, Cato did it. Addſ: Catz.
2. To conſpire; to bind many by an oath to ſome common de-
ſign. This ſenſe is rare.
He in proud rebellious arms
Drew after him the third part of heav'n's ſons, --
Cºjur’d againſt the higheſt. Miltºn's Paradi ºff. *. 11.
3. To influence by magick; to affect by enchantment; to
charm. - - - this fiend,
What black magician conjure; up - - -
To ſtop devoted Charitable j : . Shakespeare. Richard III.
what is he whoſe griefs
Bear ſuch an emphaſis; whoſe phraſe of º d
Conjures the wand ring ſtars, and makes them an
Like wonder-wounded hearers? Shakespeare's Hamlet.
ſthought their own ſcars, whoſe black arts firſt raiſed up
thoſe turbulent ſpirits, would force them to cºnjure them down
-, King Charles.
again. -
You have conjured up perſons that exiſt no where elſe but
on old coins, and have made our paſſions and virtues viſible.
Addison on Ancient Medal -
when this word is uſed for ſummon
he laſt ſyllable, conjºre; when for
-
4. It is to be obſerved, that
or conſºre, its accept IS on t
Aarºn, on the firſt, cºnjarº.
5 I
ne
‘I c.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 107</div><p class="Text">C O N
i
-º
i
-
i
|
To Co'NJur E. v. n. To pračtiſe charms or enchantments; to
enchant. - - -
My invocation is honeſt and fair; and in his miſtreſs's
name I conjure only but to raiſe up him. Shakespeare Rom. and ful. .
Out of my door, you witch! you hag, you baggage, you
poulcat, you runaway ! ... Out, out, out; I'll conjure you, I'll
fortunetell you. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of J/indſor.
Ce/NJURER. m. ſ. [from conjure.]
1. An enchanter ; one that uſes charms.
Good doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer;
Eſtabliſh him in his true ſenſe again. Shakespeare Com, of Errouri.
Figures in the book
Of ſome dread conjurer, that would enforce nature. Donne.
Thus has he done you Britiſh conſorts right,
Whoſe huſbands, ſhould they pry like mine to-night,
Would never find you in your condućt ſlipping,
Though they turn'd conjurers to take you tripping. Addison.
z. An impoſtor who pretends to ſecret arts; a cunning man.
From the account the loſer brings,
The conj'rer knows who ſtole the things. Prior.
3. By way of irony; a man of ſhrewd conjećture; a man of
ſagacity.
Though ants are very knowing, I don't take them to be
conjurers; and therefore they could not gueſs that I had put
ſome corn in that room. Addiſon, Guardian, Nº. 156.
Cox Ju'REMENT. m. ſ. [from conjure.] Serious injunction;
ſolemn demand.
I ſhould not be induced but by your earneſt intreaties and
ſerious conjurements. Milton on Education.
CoNNA'scence. n.ſ. [con and naſcor, Latin.]
1. Common birth; production at the ſame time; community
of birth.
2. The aët of uniting or growing together: improperly.
Symphyſis denotes a connaſcence, or growing together.
I/ſeman's Surgery.
CoNNA'te. adj. [from con and natus, Latin J Born with an-
other; being of the ſame birth.
Many, who deny all connate notions in the ſpeculative in-
tºlle&amp;t, do yet admit them in this. South.
Their diſpoſitions to be reflected ſome at a greater, and
others at a leſs thickneſs, of thin plates or bubbles, are con-
mate with the rays, and immutable. Newton's Opt.
CoNNATURAL. adj. [can and natural.]
1. Suitable to nature.
Whatever draws me on,
Or ſympathy, or ſome connat'ral force,
Pow'rful at greateſt diſtance to unite,
With ſecret amity. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. l. 246.
2. United with the being; connected by nature.
Firſt, in man's mind we find an appetite
To learn and know the truth of ev'rything,
Which is connatural, and born with it. Davier.
Theſe affections are connatural to us, and as we grow up
fo do they. L'É/irange.
3. Participation of the ſame nature.
Is there no way, beſides
Theſe painful paſſages, how we may come
To death, and mix with our connatural duſt? Mih. Pa. Loft.
CoNNATURA'LITY. m.ſ.. [from connatural J Participation of
the ſame nature; natural inſeparability.
There is a connaturality and congruity between that know-
ledge and thoſe habits, and that future eſtate of the ſoul. Hale.
CoNNa'rurally, adv. [from connatural.] By the act of na-
ture; originally.
Some common notions ſeem connaturally engraven in the
ſoul, antecedently to diſcuſſive ratiocination. Hale.
CoNNA't URALNEss. n.ſ.. [from connatural] Participation of
the ſame nature; natural union.
Such is the connaturalneſs of our corruptions, except
we looked for an account hercaſter. Pearſon on the Creed.
To CONNECT. v. a. [connecto, Latin.]
1. To join ; to link; to unite; to conjoin ; to faſten together.
The corpuſcles that conſtitute the quickſilver will be ſo con-
nečied to one another, that, inſtead of a fluid body, they will
appear in the form of a red powder. Boyle.
2. To unite by intervention, as a cement.
The natural order of the connecting ideas muſt direét the
ſyllogiſms, and a man muſt ſee the connection of each inter-
mediate idea with thoſe that it connects, before he can uſe it in
a ſyllogiſin. Locke.
3. To join in a juſt ſeries of thought, or regular conſtruction
of language; as, the authour connects his reaſons well.
To Cos NE'cºr. v. n. To cohere; to have juſt relation to
things precedent and ſubſequent. This is ſeldom uſed but in
converſation.
Cos N E cri v ELY. adv. [from conneč.] In conjunction; in
union ; jointly ; conjointly; conjunctly.
The people's power is great and indiſputable, whenever they
can unite cºnnectively, or by deputation, to exert it. , Swift.
To Cos NEX. v. a. [connexum, Latin.] To join or link toge-
ther ; to faſten to each other.
Theſe birds who are taught ſome words or ſentence, can
not connex their words or ſentences in coherence with the
matter which they ſignify. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
They fly,
By chains connes'd, and with deſtructive ſweep
Behead whole troops at once.
CoN NE'xion. m. ſ. [from connex, or connexio, Lat.]
1. Union ; junction ; the act of faſtening together; the ſtate
of being faſtened together. -
My heart, which, by a ſecret harmony,
Still moves with thine, join'd in connexion ſweet. Milton.
There muſt be a future ſtate, where the eternal and inſe-
parable connexion between virtue and happineſs ſhall be mani-
feſted. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. Juſt relation to ſome thing precedent or ſubſequent; conſe-
quence of argumentation; coherence.
The contemplation of the human nature doth, by a neceſ-
ſary cannexion and chain of cauſes, carry us up to the Deity.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Each intermediate idea muſt be ſuch as, in the whole chain,
hath a viſible connexion with thoſe two it is placed between. Locke.
A conſcious, wiſe, reflecting cauſe,
That can deliberate, means elect, and find
Their due connexion with the end deſign'd. Blackm. Creation.
CoNN exive. adj. [from connex.] Having the force of con-
nexion ; conjunctive.
The predicate and ſubječt are joined in a form of words by
connexive particles. J/atts's Logicº.
Cossictation. m. ſ. [[from connière, Lat..] A winking. Dict,
CosNiva Nce. n. ſ. [from connive.]
1. The act of winking: not in uſe.
2. Voluntary blindneſs; pretended ignorance; forbearance.
It is better to mitigate uſury by declaration, than to ſuffer
it to rage by cannivance. Bacon, Eſſay 42.
Diſobedience, having gained one degree of liberty,’ will
demand another: every vice interprets a connivance an appro-
bation. South's Sermons.
A connivance to admit half, will produce ruinous effects.
Swift's Addreſs to Parliament.
To CONNIVE. v. n. [connivec, Latin.]
1. To wink.
This artiſt is to teach them how to nod judiciouſly, to con-
mive with either eye. Speciator, N°. 305.
2. To pretend blindneſs or ignorance; to forbear; to paſs un-
cenſured. •
The licentiouſneſs of inferiours, and the remiſſneſs of ſu-
periours, is ſuch, that the one violates, and the other con-
nites. Decay ºf Piety.
With whatever colours he perſuades authority to cºnnive at
his own vices, he will deſire its protection from the effects of
other men's. Rogers, Sermon 16.
• He thinks it a ſcandal to government to connive at ſuch
tracts as reject all revelation. Swift.
CONNOISSL'U.R. m. ſ. [French.] A judge; a critick: it is
often uſed of a pretended critick.
Your leſſon learnt, you'll be ſecure
To get the name of connoiſſºur. Swift.
To CO'NNOTATE. v. a. ſººn and nºta, Lat..] To deſignate
ſomething beſides itſelf; to imply ; to infer.
God's foreſceing doth net include or comotate predeter-
mining, any more than I decree with my intellect. Hammond.
CoNNotA'tion. n.ſ.. [from cannotate.] Implication of ſome-
thing beſides itſelf; inference; illation.
By reaſon of the co-exiſtence of one thing with another,
there ariſeth a various relation or cºnnotation between them.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To Cos No're. v. a. [con and nota, Latin.] To imply ; to
betoken ; to include.
Good, in the general notion of it, connotes alſo a certain
ſuitableneſs of it to ſome other thing. South's Sermons.
CoNNU'Bia L. adj. [connubialis, Latin.] Matrimonial; nup-
tial; pertaining to marriage; conjugal.
Should ſecond love a pleaſing flame inſpire,
And the chaſte queen connubial rites require. Pope's Odſey.
CO’NOID. m. ſ. […?...] A figure partaking of a cone; ap-
proaching to the form of a cone.
The tympanum is not capable of tenſion as a drum : there
remains another way, by drawing it at the center into a concid
form. Holder's Elements of Speech.
CoNo1'dical. adj. [from conoid.] Approaching to a conick
form, to the form of a round pyramid.
To CONQUASSATE. v. a. [conquaſo, Latin.] To ſhake;
to agitate.
Vomits do violently conquiſite the lungs. Harvey.
CoNQUAss A'TION. n. ſ. [from conquaffate.] Agitation; con-
cuſſion.
To CONQUER. v. a. [conquerir, Fr. conquirers, Latin.]
1. To gain by conqueſt; to over-run ; to win.
They had conquered them, and brought them under tribute.
1 4 ſac. viii. 2.
Philips.
'Twas fit,
Who conquer'd nature, ſhould preſide o'er wit. Pope.
We conquer’d France, but felt our captive's charms. Pope.
3 2. i. e.
-
:
f
Corqº
* The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 108</div><p class="Text">C O N
c o N
2. To overcome; to ſubdue; to vanquiſh.
Both tugging to be victors, breaſt to breaſt;
Yet neither conqueror, nor conquer'd. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Anna conquers but to ſave,
And governs but to bleſs. Smith.
3. To ſurmount; to overcome; as, he conquered his relušance.
To Co'NQUER. v. m. To get the vićtory; to overcome.
Put him to choler ſtraight: he hath been uſed
Ever to conquer, and to have his word
Off contradićtion. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Equal ſucceſs had ſet theſe champions high,
And both reſolv'd to conquer, or to die. Waller.
* The logick of a conquering ſword has no great propriety.
Decay of Piety.
Co'NQUERABLE. adj. [from conquer.] Poſſible to be overcome.
While the heap is ſmall, and the particulars few, he will
find it eaſy and conquerable. South's Sermons.
Co'NQUERoR. m. ſ. [from conquer.]
1. A man that has obtained a vićtory; a vićtor.
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come,
And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed. Shakeſp Rich.III.
A critick that attacks authors in reputation, is as the ſlave
who called out to the conqueror, Remember, Sir, that you are a
771azz. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 110.
2. One that ſubdues and ruins countries.
Deſerving freedom more
Than thoſe their conquerors, who leave behind
Nothing but ruin wherefoe'er they rove. Milt. Parad, Rºg.
That tyrant god, that reſtleſs conqueror,
May quit his pleaſure, to aſſert his pow'r,
Co'NQUEst. m. ſ. [conqueſte, French.]
1. The aët of conquering; ſubječtion.
A perfect conqueſt of a country reduces all the people to the
condition of ſubjects. Davies on Ireland.
a. Acquiſition by vićtory; thing gained.
More willingly I mention air,
This our old conqueſt; than remember hell,
Our hated habitation. Milton's Paradiſe Regained, b. i.
3. Vićtory; ſucceſs in arms.
I muſt yield my body to the earth,
And by my fall, the conqueft to my foe. Shakespeare Henry VI.
I'll lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
To whom I will retail my conqueſ? won,
And ſhe ſhall be ſole vićtreſs. Shakespeare's Richard III.
Not to be o'ercome, was to do more
Than all the conqueſts former kings did gain. Dryden.
In joys of conqueſt he reſigns his breath,
And, fill'd with England's glory, ſmiles in death. Addiſon.
CONSANGUINEOUS. adj. [.onſanguineus, Lat..] Near of kin;
of the ſame blood; related by birth, not affined.
Am I not conſanguineous P Am I not of her blood Shakeſp.
CoNs ANGUI'N1TY. m. ſ. [conſanguinitas, Latin.] Relation by
blood; relation by deſcent from one common progenitor.
Diſtinguiſhed from affinity, or relation by marriage. Near-
neſs of kin.
-
Prior.
I've forgot my father;
I know no touch of conſanguinity. Shakeſp. Troil. and Crºſſida.
There is the ſupreme and indiſſoluble conſanguinity and ſo-
ciety between men in general; of which the heathen poet,
whom the apoſtle calls to witneſs, ſaith, We are all his ge-
neration. Bacon's Holy War.
The firſt original would ſubſiſt, though he outlived all
terms of conſanguinity, and became a ſtranger unto his pro-
ny. Brown's Vulgar Errourt, b. vi. c. 6.
Chriſt has condeſcended to a cognation and conſanguinity
with us. South's Sermons.
CoNsarcina"tion. n.ſ.. [from conſarcino, Latin, to piece.]
The act of patching together. IDić7.
CONSCIENCE. m. } [conſcientia, Latin.]
1. The knowledge or faculty by which we judge of the goodneſs
or wickedneſs of ourſelves.
When a people have no touch of conſcience, no ſenſe of their
evil doings, it is bootleſs to think to reſtrain them. Speºſer.
On earth,
Who againſt faith, and conſience, can be heard
Infallible 2 Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii. 1, 529.
Such a cºnſcience has not been wanting to itſelf, in endea-
routing to get the cleareſt information about the will of God.
". South's Sermons.
But why muſt thoſe be thought to 'ſcape, that feel
Thoſe rods of ſcorpions, and thoſe whips of ſteel,
Which conſcience ſhakes Dryden's juv. Sat. 13.
No courts created yet, nor cauſe was heard;
But all was ſafe, for conſience was their guard. Dryd. Ovid.
Conſcience ſignifies that knowledge which a man hath of his
own thoughts and actions; and, becauſe if a man judgeth
fairly of his actions, by comparing them with the law of
God, his mind will approve or condemn him, this knowledge
or conſcience may be both an accuſer and a judge. Swift.
2. Juſtice; the eſtimate of conſcience; the determination of
conſcience; honeſty.
—-
This is thank worthy, if a man, for conſince toward God,
endure grief. i Pet. ii. 19.
Now is Cupid a child of conſcience; he makes reſtitution.
Shakeſpeare's Aſe, ry ſtºves of I/indſºr.
- He had, againſt right and conſience, by ſhameful treachery,
intruded himſelf into another man's kingdom in Africk.
Knolle's Hiſtory of the Turks.
in conſcience, be deferred beyond
Milton.
Her majeſty is, without queſtion, obliged in conſience to
endeavour this by her authority, as much as by her praélice.
- Swift's Projeći for the Advancem nt of Religion.
3. Conſciouſneſs ; knowledge of our own thoughts or actions.
Merit, and good works, is the end of man's motion; and
conſcience of the ſame is the accompliſhment of man's reſt. Bac.
. The reaſon why the ſimpler ſort are moved with authority,
is the conſcience of their own ignorance. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 6.
The ſweeteſt cordial we receive at laſt,
Is cºnſcience of our virtuous actions paſt. Denham.
Hector was in an abſolute certainty of death, and depreſſed
with the conſcience of being in an ill cauſe. Pope.
4- Real ſentiment; veracity; private thoughts.
Do'ſ thou in conſcience think, sell me, Æmilia,
That there be women do abuſe their huſbands,
In ſuch groſs kind Shakeſpeare's Othello.
They did in their conſiences know, that he was not able to
ſend them any part of it. Clarendon, b. viii.
5. Scruple; difficulty.
We muſt make a conſcience in keeping the juſt laws of ſu-
periours. Taylor's Holy Living.
Why ſhould not the one make as much conſcience of be-
traying for gold, as the other of doing it for a cruſt. L’E/ir.
Children are travellers newly arrived in a ſtrange country;
we ſhould therefore make conſcience not to miſlead them. Locke.
6. In ludicrous language, reaſon; reaſonableneſs.
Why do'ſt thou weep? Can'ſt thou the conſcience lack,
To think I ſhall lack friends : Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Half a dozen fools are, in all conſcience, as many as you
ſhould require. Swift.
Conscie's fious. adj. [from conſcience.] Scrupulous; exactly
juſt; regulated by conſcience.
Lead a life in ſo conſcientious a probity, as in thought, word
and deed to make good the charaćter of an honeſt man. L’Eſtr.
CoNscIE'N trously-adv. [from conſcientious...] According to
the direction of conſcience.
More ſtreſs has been laid upon the ſtrićtneſs of law, than
conſcientiouſly did belong to it. L’Eſtrange.
There is the erroneous as well as the rightly informed con-
ſcience; and if the conſcience happens to be deluded, fin does
not therefore ceaſe to be ſin, becauſe a man committed it con-
frientiouſly. South's Sermons.
CoNscie’NTIous NEss. n.ſ. [from conſcientious.] Exactneſs of
juſtice; tenderneſs of conſcience. - -
It will be a wonderful conſcientiouſneſ, in them, if they will
content themſelves with leſs profit than they can make. Locke.
Co'Nscion ABLE. adj. [from conſience..] Reaſonable; juſt ;
according to conſcience. -
A knave, very voluble ; no farther conſcionable than in
putting on the micer form of civil and humane ſeeming. Sºak.
Conscios ABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from conſcionable.) Equity; rea-
ſonableneſs. w
Co's scſon ABLY. adv. [from conſcionable.] In a manner agree-
able to conſcience; reaſonably; juſtly.
A prince muſt be uſed conſcionally as well as a common
perſon. Taylr’s Holy Living.
Co'Nscious. adj. [conſcius, Latin.]
1. Endowed with the power of knowing one's own thoughts
and ačtions.
Matter hath no life nor perception, and is not conſcious of
its own exiſtence. Bentley's Sermons.
Among ſubſtances ſome are thinking or conſciºus beings, or
have a power of thought. Jſ atti's Logick.
2. Knowing from memory; having the knowledge of anything
without any new information.
The damſel then to Tancred ſent,
Who conſcious of th’ occaſion, fear'd th’ cvent.
3. Admitted to the knowledge of any thing; with tº:
The reſt flood trembling, ſtruck with awe divine,
AEneas only conſcious to the ſign, º
Preſig'd ; event. Dryden's AF ".
Roſe or honey cannot be thought to ſmell ºr taſte their
own ſweetneſs, or an organ be conſcious to its muſick, or gun-
powder to its Haſhing or noiſe. Bently's Sermont.
4. Bearing witneſs by conſcience to any thing. - -
The queen had been ſolicitous with the king on his be-
half, being coſious to herſelf that he had been encouraged by
her. Clarºndon, b. viii.
Consciously. adv. [from conſciouſ.] With knowledge of
one's own actions. - -
If theſe perceptions, with their conſciouſneſs, *:::: re-
mained in the mind, the ſame thinking thing would be always
conſciou reſent. Locke.
jºiouſly p Co'Nscious Niss.
w hat you require cannot,
this time.
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 109</div><p class="Text">t
C O N
C O N
!
t
|
*
!
3.
i
:
:
|
:
Rio's 13ths, Ess. º. f. [from conſcious...}
1. The perception of wait paſſes in a man's own mind. Loºe.
If ſpirit be without thinking, I have no idea of any thing
isit; therefore cºſº, ſº muſt be its eſſential attribute. //atts.
Such ideas, no doubt, they would have had, had not their
sºci ºneſs to themicives, of their ignorance of them, kept
them from ſo idle an attempt. Loºke.
2. listernal ſenſe of guilt, or innocence.
No man doubts of a Supreme Being, until, from the con-
fºreſs of his provocations, it become his intereſt there
ihoºd be none. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 3.
An honeſt mind is not in the power of a diſhoneſt: to
break its peace, there muſt be ſome guilt or conſciouſneſs. Pope.
Co'Nsc RIFT. adj. [from conſ, ribo, Latin J A term uſed in
ſpeaking of the Roman ſenators, who were called Patres
co'ſ riºti, from their names being written in tie regiſter of
the ſenate.
CoN scription. m. ſ. [conſcriptio, Latin.] An enrolling or re-
giſtering. - Lief.
To CONSECRATE. v. a. [conſecro, Latin.]
1. To make ſacred; to appropriate to ſacred uſes.
Enter into the holieſt by the blood of Jeſus, by a new and
living way which he hath cºnſecrated for us. 11eb. x. 2 c.
- The water conſecrate for ſacrifice,
- Appears all black. J/aller.
A biſhop ought not to conſecrate a church which the patron
has built for filthy gain to himſelf, and not for true devotion.
- Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. To dedicate inviolably to ſome particular purpoſe, or per-
ſon ; with tº.
He ſhall cºnſecrate unto the Lord the days of his ſeparation,
and ſhall bring a lamb of the firſt year for a treſpaſs offering.
Num. vi. 1 2.
3. To canonize.
Co'N ECRATF. adj. [from the verb.] Conſecratcd; ſacred ;
devoted ; devote; dedicated.
Shouldſt thou but hear I were licentious;
And that this body, conſecrate to thee,
- By ruſhan luſt ſhould be contaminate. Shakespeare Com. of Err.
s The cardinal ſtanding before the choir, lets them know
that they were aſlembled in that conſecrate place to fing unto
God. Lacon's Henry VII.
- Into theſe ſecret ſhades, cry’d ſhe,
* I ſow dar'ſt thou be ſo bold º
To enter, conſecrate to me;
º Or touch this hallow'd mold Drayton's Queen of Cynth.
Co'NsrcRAt ER. m. ſ. [from conſecrate J One that performs
- the rites by which anything is devoted to ſacred purpoſes.
Whether it be not againſt the notion of a ſacrament, that
the conſcrater alone ſhould partake of it. Atterbury.
Cox's Ecſ: ATION. m. ſ. [from conſecrate.]
. . . A rite or ceremony of dedicating and devoting things or per-
ſons to the ſcrvice of God, with an application of certain
proper ſolemnitics. Ayliffe's Parergon.
At the erection and conſecration as well of the tabernacle as
cf the temple, it pleaſed the Almighty to give a ſign. Hoºker.
The conſecration of his God is upon his head. Num. vi. 7.
We muſt know that conſecration makes not a place ſa-
cred, but only ſolemnly declares it ſo : the gift of the owner
to God makes it God's, and conſequently ſacred. South.
2. The act of declaring one holy by canonization.
- The Roman calendar ſwells with new cºnſecrations of ſaints.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
CONSECTARY. adj. [from conſºlarius, Lat..] Conſequent;
conſcquential; following by conſequence.
From the inconſiſtent and contrary determinations thereof,
co’ſºciary impieties and concluſions may ariſe. Brown.
Coss Ecº &amp; R Y. m. ſ. [from the adječtive..] Dedućtion from
premiſes; conſequence; corollary.
Theſe propoſitions are conſecaries drawn from the obſerva-
tions. - A codward's Natural Hiſtory.
Cossi cu'rios. m. ſ. [conſecutio, Latin. J
. . . ; rain of conſequences; chain of deductions; concatenation
of propoſitions. -
... Some co’ſ cutions are ſo intimately and evidently connexed
to tyr found in the premiſes, that the concluſion is attained,
and without any thing of ratiocinative progreſs. I ſale.
2. Succeſſion.
In a quick co ſºution of the colours, the impreſſion of every
colour remains in the ſenſorium. Newton's Opt.
3. In aſtronomy.
The month of conſºlitiºn, or, as ſome term it, of progreſ-
ſon, is the ſpace between one conjunction of the moon with
the ful unto another. Prºvº's J ulgar Erº ours, l. iv. c. 12.
CONSE CU’ſ IV E. ad ſºftcºtſ, French.]
1. Following in train; uninterrupted; ſucceſſive.
That obligation upon the lands did not come into diſuſe
but by fifty cºſecutive years of exemption. Arbuth, on Coins.
2. Conſequential ; regularly ſucceeding.
This is ſecnning to comprehend only the ağions of a man,
cºſºcutive to volition. Locke.
Coss-cut ly Ely, adv. [from cºſºcutive J A term uſed in the
ſchool philoſºphy, in oppoſition to antecedently, and ſºme-
times to etiectively or cauſ.ly. 1): 7.
To Coss E'M IN AT E. v. a. [conſºnino, Latin.] To ſow diffe-
rent ſeeds together. - 1) iſ?.
Coss ENSION. m. ſ. ſcºrſºſo, Latin.] Agreement; accord.
. A great number of ſuch living and thinking particles could
not poſſibly, by their mutual contact, and preſling and ſtriking,
compoſe one greater individual animal, with one mind and
underſtanding, and a vital conſenſion of the whole body. Bent cy.
CONSE/NT. n. /. [cºſtºſis, Latin. J
1. The act of yielding or conſenting.
If you ſhall cleave to my conſent, when 'tis, -
It ſhall make honour for you. Sºakeſpeare's Alſacłeth.
I am far from excuſing or denying that compliance; for
plenary cºnſint it was not. King Charles.
When thou can it truly call theſe virtues thine,
Be wiſe and free, by heav'n's conſent and mine. Dryd. Perſ.
2. Concord; agreement; accord; unity of opinion.
The fighting winds would ſtop there and admire,
Learning, conſent and concord from his lyre. Cowley's David.
3. Coherence with ; relation to ; correſpondence.
Demons found
In fire, air, flood, or under ground,
Whoſe power hath a true conſent
With planet or with element.
4. Tendency to one point; joint operation.
Such is the world's great harmony that ſprings
From union, order, full conſent of things. Pºpe's Eſ on Man.
5. In phyſick.
The perception one part has of another, by means of ſome
fibres and nerves common to them both; and thus the ſtone in
the bladder, by vellicating the fibres there, will cffect and
draw them ſo into ſpaſms, as to affect the bowels in the ſame
manner by the intermediation of nervous threads, and cauſe a
colick; and extend their twiches ſometimes to the ſtomach,
and occaſion vomitings. Qiling.
To Coss ENT. v. n. [...oſ.mitic, Latin.]
1. To be of the ſame mind; to agree.
2. To co-operate to the ſame end.
3. To yield; to give conſent; to allow; to admit. With to.
Ye comets, ſcourge the bad revolting ſtars
That have cºnſented into Henry's death. Shakespeare Henry VI.
In this we conſent unto you, if ye will be as we be. Geneſs.
Their num’rous thunder would awake
Dull earth, which does with heav'n conſent
To all they wrote. If a 'ler.
Coss ENTA'Neous. adj. [coſºntaneus, Latin. J Agreeable to ;
conſiſtent with.
In the picture of Abraham ſacrificing his ſon, Iſaac is de-
ſcribed a little boy; which is not conſentaneous unto the cir-
cumſtance of the text. Brown's Pugar Errours, b. v. c. 8.
It will coſt no pains to bring you to the knowing, nor to
the practice, it being very agreeable and conſentaneous to every
one's nature. Hammond's Practical Catechiſm.
CossFSTA's Eously, adv, [from conſentaneous.) Agreeably;
conſiſtently; ſuitably.
Paracelſus did not always write ſo confintaneouſly to himſelf,
that his opinions were confidently to be collected from every
AllŁtort.
place of his writings, where he ſeems to cxpreſs it. Boyle.
CossFNTA NEousNEs... n.ſ.. [from conſentaneous.] Agree-
ment; conſiſtence. Die?.
Coss EN i Irs T. adj. [conſentiens, Latin.] Agreeing; united
in opinion ; not differing in ſentiment.
The authority due to the conſentient judgment and pračtice
of the univerſal church. Oxford ReaSpenser againſt the Covenant.
CONSEQUENCE. m. ſ. [conſequenna, Latin.j
1. That which follows from any cauſe or principle.
2. Event; effect of a cauſe.
Spirits that know
All mortal conſ quences have pronounc'd it. Shakespeare Macketh.
Shun the bitter conſequence; for know, -
The day thou eateſt thereof, thou ſhalt die. A ſiſt. Pa.. I off.
3. Propoſition collected from the agreement of other previous
propoſitions; deduction; concluſion. -
Jt is no good conſequence, that becauſe reaſon aims at our
being happy, therefore it forbids us all voluntary ſufferings.
Decay of Piety.
4. The laſt propoſition of a ſyllogiſm ; as, what is commanded by
our Saviour is our duty : frayer is commanded, ther fore frayer is
our duty.
Can ſyllogiſm ſet things right 2
No, majors ſoon with minors fight:
Or both in friendly conſort join'd,
The conſequence limps falſe behind.
5. Concatchation of cauſes and effects. *
Sorrow being the natural and dire&amp; offer of ſin, that which
firſt brought fin into the world, muſt, by neceſſary conſequence,
bring in ſorrow too. South's Serºnous.
P ri&lt; *.
- I felt
That I muſt after thee, with this thy ſon:
Such fatal conſequence unites us three. Aliſton’s Paradiſe Left.
6. That which produces conſequences; influence; tendency.
;
c
Th:
always
H. :
tflects
Cºsts rat
~3
(ſ
he may
Tſing
1, º &amp;
Thi
tº
dººr<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 110</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
As it is aſſerted without any colour of ſcripture-proof, ſo
it is of very ill conſequence to the ſuperſtructing of good life.
Hammond on Fundamentali.
7. Importance; moment.
The inſtruments of darkneſs
Win us with honeſt trifles, to betray us
In deepeſt conſequence. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The anger of Achilles was of ſuch conſequence, that it em-
broiled the kings of Greece. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 267:
Their common people are ſunk in poverty, ignorance and
cowardice; and of as little conſequence as women and children.
Swift's Preſyterian Plea of Merit.
Co'N's E QUENT. adj. [c ſequens, Latin.]
1. Following by rational deduction.
2. Following as the effect of a cauſe. With to.
It was not a power poſſible to be inherited, becauſe the
right was conſequent to, and built on, an act perfectly per-
ſonal. Locke.
. Sometimes with upon.
This ſatisfaction or diſſatisfaction, conſequent upon a man's
ačing ſuitably or unſuitably to conſcience, is a principle not
eaſily to be worn out. South's Sermons.
Co Nsequ ENT. m. ſ. -
1. Conſequence; that which follows from previous propoſitions
by rational deduction.
Doth it follow that they, being not the people of God, are in
nothing to be followed This conſequent were good, if only
the cuſtom of the people of God is to be obſerved. Hooker.
2. Effect; that which follows an acting cauſe.
They were ill paid ; and they were ill governed, which is
always a conſequent of ill payment. Davies on Ireland.
He could ſee conſequents yet dormant in their principles, and
effects yet unborn. South's Sermons.
CoN sequ ENTIAL. adj. [from conſequent.]
1. Produced by the neceſſary concatenation of effects to cauſes.
We ſometimes wrangle, when we ſhould debate;
A conſequential ill which freedom draws;
A bad effect, but from a noble cauſe. Prior.
2. Having the conſequences juſtly connected with the premiſes;
concluſive.
Though theſe kind of arguments may ſeem obſcure; yet,
upon a due conſideration of them, they are highly conſequen-
tial, and concludent to my purpoſe. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
CoNSEQUE'NTIALLY. adv. [from conſequential.]
1. With juſt deduction of conſequences; with right conneétion
of ideas.
No body writes a book without meaning ſomething, though
he may not have the faculty of writing conſequentially, and ex-
preſſing his meaning. Addiſon's 1/hig Examiner.
2. By conſequence; not immediately; eventually,
This relation is ſo neceſſary, that God himſelf cannot diſ-
charge a rational creature from it; although conſequentially in-
deed he may do ſo, by the annihilation of ſuch creatures. South.
3. In a regular ſeries. -
Were a man a king in his dreams, and a beggar awake,
and dreamt conſequentially, and in continued unbroken
ſchemes, would he be in reality a king or a beggar? Addison.
CoN sequ F'NTIALNEss. n.ſ.. [from conſequential.] Regular
conſecution of diſcourſe. Dićf.
Co'NSEQUENTLY. adv. [from cºnſequent J
1. By conſequence; neceſſarily ; inevitably ; by the connection
of effects to their cauſes.
In the moſt perfect poem a perfeót idea was required, and
tonſequently all poets ought rather to imitate it. Dryd. Dufreſh.
The place of the ſeveral ſorts of terreſtrial matter, ſuſtained
in the fluid, being contingent and uncertain, their intermix-
tures with each other are cºnſequently ſo. //oodward.
2. In conſequence ; purſuantly.
There is conſequently, upon this diſtinguiſhing principle, an
inward ſatisfaction or diſlatisfaction in the heart of every man,
after good or evil. South's Sermons.
CoN seq; ENTN Ess. n.ſ.. [from conſequent.] Regular connec-
tion of propoſitions; conſecution of diſcourſe.
Let them examine the conſequentneſs of the whole body of
the doctrine I deliver. Digby on the Soul, Dedication.
CoNSER v ABLE. adj. [from conſervo, Latin, to keep.] Capable
of being kept, or maintained.
Conse'R v ANCY. m. ſ. [from conſervans, Latin J Courts held
by the Lord Mayor of London for the preſervation of the
fiſhery on the river Thames, are called Courts of Conſervancy.
CoN SER v A'ſ 10 N. m. ſ. [...onſervatio, Latin. )
1. he act of preſerving; care to keep from periſhing; conti-
nuance; protection.
Though there do indeed happen ſome alterations in the
globe, yet they are ſuch as tend rather to the benefit and con-
ſervatiºn of the earth, and its productions, than to the diſor-
der and deſtruction of both. //ccd.vard’s Natural Hyłory.
2. Preſervation from corruption. -
It is an enquiry of excellent uſe, to enquire of the means
of preventing or ſtaying of putrefaction; for therein conſiſt-
eth the means of conſervation of bodies. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtºry.
Cosse'R v ATIVE: adj. from cºmervo, Latin.J Having the
power of oppoſing diminution or injury.
Vol. I -
The ſpherical figure, as to all heavenly bodies, ſo it agree;
eth to fight, as the moſt perfect and conſervative, of ali
others. Peacham:
CoN serva"roR. n. / [Latin.] Preſerver; one that has the
care or office of keeping any thing from detriment, diminu-
tion, or extinétion.
For that you declare that you have many ſick amongſ you;
he was warned by the cºſervator of the city, that he ſhould
keep at a diſtance. Bacon's New Atlantis.
The lords of the ſecret council were likewiſe made cºnſºr-
vatars of the peace of the two kingdoms, during the intervals
of parliament - Clarendon.
Such individuals as are the fingle cºnſervators of their own
ſpecies. Halº's Origin of Mankind.
CoNSE'RVAToRY. m.ſ.. [from conſervo, Latin.j A place where
any thing is kept in a manner proper to its peculiar nature ;
as, fiſh in a pond, corn in a granary. w
A conſervatory of ſnow and ice, ſuch as they uſe for deli-
cacy to cool wine in ſummer. Bacon's Natural Hiſloy, Nº. 70.
You may ſet your tender trees and plants, with the win-
dows and doors of the greenhouſes and conſervatories open,
for eight or ten days before April. Evelyn's Kalendar.
The water diſpenſed to the earth and atmoſphere by the
great abyſs, that ſub-erranean conſervatory is by that means
reſtored back. //oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
CoNSERVATORy. adj. Having a preſervative quality. Dić.
To CONSERVE. v. a. [conſervo, Latin.]
1. To preſerve without loſs or detriment. -
Nothing was loſt out of theſe ſtores, ſince the part of con-
ſerving what others have gained in knowledge is eaſy. Temple.
They will be able to conſerve their properties unchanged in
paſſing through ſeveral mediums, which is another condition
of the rays of light. Newtºn's Opt.
2. To candy or pickle fruit.
CoNSE'R v E. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſweetmeat made of the inſpiſſated juices of fruit, boiled with
ſugar 'till they will harden and candy.
Will't pleaſe your honour, taſte of theſe conſerves P Shakespeare
They have in Turkey and the Eaſt certain confections,
which they call ſervets, which are like to candied conſerves,
and are made of ſugar and lemons. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The more coſt they were at, and the more ſweets they be-
ſtowed upon them, the more their conſerves ſtunk. Dennis.
2. A conſervatory or place in which anything is kept. This
ſenſe is unuſual.
Tuberoſes will not endure the wet of this ſeaſon, therefore
ſet the pots into your conſerve, and keep them dry. Evelyn.
CoNSE’R v ER. n.ſ.. [from conſerve.]
I. A layer up; a repoſiter; one that preſerves any thing from
loſs or diminution.
He hath been moſt induſtrious, both collečter and conſerver
of choice pieces in that kind. Hayward on Edward VI.
In the Eaſtern regions there ſeems to have been a general
cuſtom of the prieſts having been the perpetual conſervers of
knowledge and ſtory. Temple.
2. A preparer of conſerves.
CoN sessio N. m. ſ. ſcom/ºffin, Latin.] A ſitting together. Diº.
CoNSE'ssoR. m. ſ. [Latin.] One that ſits with others. Dief.
To CONSIDER. v. a. [conſidero, Latin.]
1. To think upon with care; to ponder; to examine; to ſiſt;
to ſtudy. -
At our more cºſider'd time we’ll read,
Anſwer, and think upon this buſineſs. Shakeſp. Ham'et.
It is not poſible to act otherwiſe, conſidering the weakneſs
of our faculties. - Spectator, Nº. 465.
2. To take into the view ; not to omit in the examination.
It ſeems neceſſary, in the choice of perſons for greater em-
ployments, to conſider their bodies as well as their minds, and
ages and health as well as their abilities. Tempſe.
3. To have regard to ; to reſpect; not to deſpiſe. -
Let us conſider one another to provoke unto love, and to
good works. Heb. x. 24.
4. A kind of interječtion; a word whereby attention is ſum-
Inoncé.
Conſºr,
Thy life hath yet been private, moſt part ſpent
At home. Aſitan’s Paradiº Regained, b. iii. 1, 229.
5. To requite; to reward one for his trouble.
Take away with thee the very ſervices thou haſt done,
which, if I have not enough conſidered, to be more thankful to
thee ſhall be my ſtudy. Shakespeare's J/inter's Tae.
To CoN si'D ER. v. m.
1. To think maturely; not to judge haſtily or raſhly.
None conſidereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge
nor underſtanding. Iſaiah xliv, 1.
2. To deliberate; to work in the mind.
Widow, we will conſider of your ſuit;
And come ſome other time to know our mind. Shakespeare H.VI.
Such a treatiſe might be conſulted by Jurymen, before they
conſider of their verdićt. Swi, t.
3. To doubt; to heſitate.
Many maz'd conſiderings did throng,
And preſs'd in with this caution. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
5 K * I was
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 111</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
--
|--
'Twas grief no more, or grief and rage were onc
Within her ſoul; at laſt ’twas rage alone,
Which burning upwards, in ſucceſſion dries
The tears that ſtood conſidering in her eyes. Dryden's Falles.
Cossi'DERABLE. adj. [from cºnſidºr.] -
1. Worthy of confideration; worthy of regard and attention.
Eternity is infinitely the moſt conſiderable duration. Tilotſºn.
It is cºnſºlerable that ſome urns have had inſcriptions on
them, expreſſing that the lamps were burning. Wilkins.
2. Reſpectable ; above neglect; deſerving notice. - -
Men conſiderable in all worthy profeſſions, eminent in many
ways of life. Sprat's Sermons.
am ſo conſiderable a man, that I cannot have leſs than forty
ſhillings a year. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 1.
3. Important; valuable.
Chriſt, inſtead of applauding St. Peter's zeal, upbraided
his abſurdity that could think his mean aids conſiderable to him,
who could command legions of angels to his reſcue. Dec. of Pi.
In painting, not every action nor every perſon is cºnſider-
able enough to enter into the cloth. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Many can make themſelves maſters of as conſiderable eſtates
as thoſe who have the greateſt portions of land. Addison.
4. More than a little. It has a middle ſignification between
little and great.
Many had brought in very conſiderable ſums of money.
Carendon, b. viii.
Thoſe earthy particles, when they came to be collected,
would conſtitute a body of a very conſiderable thickneſs and
ſolidity. Burnet'; I heary of the Earth.
CoNs 1'DERABLE N Ess. m. ſ. [from conſiderable.] importance;
dignity; moment; value; deſert; a claim to notice.
We muſt not always meaſure the conſiderableneſ of things
by their moſt obvious and immediate uſefulneſs, but by their
fitneſs to make or contribute to the diſcovery of things highly
uſeful. Boyle's Proemial Eſſay.
Their moſt ſlight and trivial occurrences, by being theirs,
they think to acquire a conſiderableneſ, and are forcibly in-
poſed upon the company. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 9.
CoNsi'DERABLY. adv. [from conſiderable.]
1. In a degree deſerving notice, though not the higheſt.
And Europe ſtill conſiderably gains,
Both by their good example and their pains.
2. With importance; importantly.
I deſire no ſort of favour ſo much, as that of ſerving you
more conſiderably than I have been yet able to do. Pope.
CoNs 1'DER ANCE. m. ſ. [from conſider.] Conſideration; reflec-
tion; ſober thought.
After this cold conſid’rance, ſentence me;
And, as you are a king, ſpeak in your ſtate,
What I have done that miſbecame my place. Shakespeare H. IV.
CoNSI'd ERATE. adj. [conſideratus, Latin.]
1. Serious; given to conſideration; prudent; not raſh; not
negligent.
I will converſe with iron-witted fools,
And unreſpective boys: none are for me,
That look into me with conſid’rate eyes. Shakespeare Rich III.
A neas is patient, conſiderate, and careful of his people.
Dryden's Fables, Prºſace.
I grant it to be in many caſes certain, that it is ſuch as a
conſiderate man may prudently rely and proceed upon, and
hath no juſt cauſe to doubt of. Tillotſon, Prºface.
The expediency in the preſent juncture, may appear to
every conſiderate man. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 16.
2. Having reſpect to ; regardfil.
Though they will do nothing for virtue, yet they may be
preſumed more conſiderate of praiſe. Decay of Piety.
3. Moderate; not rigorous. This ſenſe is much uſed in con-
verſation. -
CoNSIDERATELY. adv. [from conſiderate.] Calmly; coolly;
prudently.
Circumſtances are of ſuch force, as they ſway an ordinary
judgment of a wife man, not fully and conſiderately pondering
the matter. Bacon's Colours of Good and Evil.
CoNSI'DERATEN Ess. m. ſ. [from coſiderate.] The quality of
being conſiderate; prudence. Dić.
CoNSIDERATION. n.ſ.. [from conſider.]
1. The act of conſidering; mental view; regard; notice.
As to preſent happineſs and miſery, when that alone comes
in conſideration, and the conſequences are removed, a man
never chuſes amiſs. Locke.
2. Mature thought; prudence; ſerious deliberation.
Let us think with conſideration, and conſider with acknow-
ledging, and acknowledge with admiration. Sidney.
The breath no ſooner left his father's body,
But that his wildneſs mortified in him;
Conſideration, like an angel, came,
And whipt th' offending Adam out of him. Shakeſp. H. V.
3. Contemplation; meditation upon any thing.
The love you bear to Mopſa hath brought you to the conſ-
deration of her virtues, and that conſideration may have made
you the more virtuous, and ſo the more worthy. Sidney.
4. Importance; claim to notice; worthineſs of regard.
Lucan is the only author of conſideration among the Latin
poets, who was not explained for the uſe of Nie dauphin,
becauſe the whole Pharſalia would have been a ſatire upon the
French form of government. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 40.
5. Equivalent; compenſation.
We are provident enough not to part with any thing ſer-
viceable to our bodies under a good conſideration, but make lit-
tle account of our ſouls. Ray on the Creation.
Foreigners can never take our bills for payment, though
they might paſs as valuable conſiderations among your own
people. Locke.
6. Motive of a&amp;ion; influence; ground of condućt.
He had been made general upon very partial, and not
enough deliberated conſiderations. Clarendon, b. viii.
He was obliged, antecedent to all other conſiderations, to
ſearch an aſylum. Dryden's /irg. Æn. Dedication.
The world cannot pardon your concealing it, on the ſame
cºnſideration. Dryden's juv. Dedication.
7. Reaſon; ground of concluding.
Not led by any commandment, yet moved with ſuch conſ-
derations as have been before ſet down. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 95.
Uſes, not thought upon before, be reaſonable cauſes of re-
taining that which other conſiderations did procure to be in-
ſtituted. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
8. [In law.] Conſideration is the material cauſe of a contract,
without which no contract bindeth. It is either expreſſed, as
if a man bargain to give twenty ſhillings for a horſe; or elſe
implied, as when a man comes into an inn, and taking both
meat and lodging for himſelf and his horſe, without bargain-
ing with the hoſt, if he diſcharge not the houſe, the hoſt may
ſtay his horſe. - Cowel.
The conſideration, in regard whereof the law forbiddeth
theſe things, was not becauſe thoſe nations did uſe them. Hook.
CoNSI'd F.R.E.R. m. ſ. [from conſider.] A man of refle&amp;tion;
a thinker.
A vain applauſe of wit for an impious jeſt, or of reaſon
for a deep conſiderer. Government ºf the Tongue.
To CONSI'GN. v. a. [conſigno, Latin.]
1. To give to another any thing, with the right to it, in a
formal manner; to give into other hands; to transfer.
Sometimes with to, ſometimes over to.
Men, by free gift, conſign over a place to the Divine Wor-
ſhip. South.
Muſt I paſs
Again to nothing, when this vital breath
Ceaſing, conſigns me o'er to reſt and death? Prior.
At the day of general account, good men are then to be
conſigned over to another ſtate, a ſtate of everlaſting love and
charity. Atterlury.
2. To appropriate; to quit for a certain purpoſe.
The French commander com/gned it to the uſe for which it
was intended by the donor. Dryden's Fables, Dedication.
3. To commit; to entruſt.
The four evangeliſts conſigned to writing that hiſtory. Addison
Atrides, parting for the Trojan war,
Conſign'd the youthful conſort to his care.
To Consi'GN. v. n.
1. To yield; to ſubmit; to reſign. This is not now in uſe.
Thou haſt finiſh d joy and moan;
All lovers young, all lovers muſt
Conſign to thee, and come to duſt. Shakespeare care's Cymbeline.
2. To ſign; to conſent to. Obſolete.
A maid yet roſed over with the virgin crimſon of modeſty:
it were, my lord, a hard condition for a maid to cºnſign to. Shakespeare
CoNs: GNATION. m. ſ. [from conſign.]
1. The act of conſigning; the act by which any thing is deli-
vered up to another. -
As the hope of ſalvation is a good diſpoſition towards it, ſo
is deſpair a certain conſignation to eternal ruin. Taylºr.
2. The act of ſigning.
If we find that we increaſe in duty, then we may look
upon the tradition of the holy ſacramental ſymbols as a direct
conſignation of pardon. Taylor's A orthy Communicant.
CoNs I'GNMENT. n.ſ. [from conſign.]
1. The act of conſigning.
2. The writing by which any thing is conſigned.
CoNs.'MILAR. adj. [from conſimilis, Latin. Having one com-
mon reſemblance. : Diº.
To CONSI/ST. v. n. [conſic, Latin.]
1. To ſubſiſt ; not to periſh.
He is before all things, and by him all things conſ/?. Col. i.
2. To continue fixed; without diſſipation.
Flame doth not mingle with flame, as air doth with air, or
watcr with water, but only remaineth contiguous; as it
cometh to paſs betwixt conſiſting bodies. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
It is againſt the nature of water, being a flexible and pon-
derous body, to com/ſ and ſtay itſelf, and not fall to the lower
parts about it. Brerewood on Language?
3. To be compriſed; to be contained. y
I pretend not to tie the hands of artiſts, whoſe ſkill conſis
only in a certain manner which they have affected. Dryden.
A great beauty of letters does often conſiſt in little paſſages of
private converſation, and references to particular matters. H alſh.
4. To be compoſed.
Pope's Odyſſey.
The
º
Roſammon.
2
2.
_*:
_- f7;
regime
luliºtſ,
gºt it,
I ca,
“ssld.
Ss
l,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 112</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
º
The land would conſiſt of plains and valleys, and mountains,
according as the pieces of this ruin were placed and diſpoſed.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
5. To agree; not to oppoſe; not to contradićt.
Neceſſity and election cannot conſiſt together in the ſame
- Bramhal againſt Hobbs.
His majeſty would be willing to conſent to anything that
could conſiſt with his conſcience and honour. Clarendon, b. viii.
Nothing but what may eaſily com/ſt with your plenty, your
proſperity, is requeſted of you. Sprat's Sermons.
You could not help beſtowing more than is conſiſting with
the fortune of a private man, or with the will of any but an
Alexander. Dryden's Fables, Dedication.
It cannot conſiſ? with the Divine Attributes, that the im-
pious man's joys ſhould, upon the whole, exceed thoſe of the
upright. Atterbury.
Health conſ?, with temperance alone. Pope's Eſ, on Man.
The only way of ſecuring the conſtitution will be by leſ-
ſening the power of domeſtick adverſaries, as much as can
aft with lenity. Swift's Thoughts on the State of Affairs.
§... }, ſ ſºlatia, low Latin.]
1. State with reſpect to material exiſtence.
Water, being divided, maketh many circles, ’till it reſtore
itſelf to the natural conſiſtence. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The conſiſtencies of bodies are very divers: denſe, rare,
tangible, pneumatical, volatile, fixed, determinate, indeter-
minate, hard, and ſoft. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 839.
There is the ſame neceſſity for the Divine influence and
regimen to order and govern, conſerve and keep together the
univerſe in that conſiſtence it hath received, as it was at firſt to
give it, before it could receive itr Hale's Origin of Mankind.
I carried on my enquiries farthcr; to try whether this riſing
world, when formed and finiſhed, would continue always the
ſame, in the ſame form, ſtructure, and conſiſtency. Burnet.
2. Degree of denſeneſs or rarity.
Let the expreſſed juices be boiled into the conſiſtence of a
ſyrup. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Subſtance; form; make.
His friendſhip is of a noble make, and a laſting conſiſtency.
- South's Sermons.
4. Agreement with itſelf, or with any other thing; congruity;
uniformity.
That conſiſtency of behaviour, whereby he inflexibly pur-
ſues thoſe meaſures, which appear the moſt juſt and equitable.
Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 2.
5. A ſtate of reſt, in which things capable of growth or decreaſe
continue for ſome time at a ſtand, without either; as the
growth, conſiſtence, and return of a tree. Chambers.
CoNsi's TENT. adj. [conſiſtens, Latin.]
1. Not contradićtory; not oppoſed.
With reference to ſuch a lord, to ſerve and to be free, are
terms not conſiſtent only, but equivalent. South's Sermons.
A great part of their politicks others do not think conſiſtent
with honour to pračtiſe. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
On their own axis as the planets run,
Yet make at once their circle round the ſun;
So two conſiſłent motions ačt the ſoul,
And one regards itſelf, and one the whole. Pope's Eſſays.
Shew me one that has it in his power
To act conſiſtent with himſelf an hour. Pope's Epift. of Hor.
The fool com/i/ient, and the falſe ſincere;
Prieſts, princes, women, no diſſemblers here. Pope's Epiſ.
2. Firm; not fluid. -
The ſand, contained within the ſhell, becoming ſolid and
conſiſtent, at the ſame time that of the ſtratum without it
did. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory, p. v.
CoN51's TENTLY. adv. [from conſient.] Without contradic-
tion; agreeably.
The Phoenicians are of this charaćter, and the poet de-
ſcribes them conſiſtently with it: they are proud, idle, and effe-
minate. Broon's Notes on the Odyſſey, b. vii.
Cossisto'RIAl, adj. [from com/ſtory..] Relating to the eccle-
ſiaſtical court.
An official, or chancellor, has the ſame cºſ/?orial audience
with the biſhop himſelf that deputes him. Ayliff's Parergon.
CONSISTORY. m. ſ. [conſiſtorium, Latin.]
1. The place of juſtice in the court Chriſtian. Cowel.
An offer was made, that, for every one minſter, there
ſhould be two of the people to ſit and give voice in the eccle-
ſiaſtical coºftory. Hooker, Preface.
Pius Quintus was then hearing of cauſes in conſiſtºry.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 98.
Chriſt himſelf, in that great conſiſtory, ſhall deign to ſtep
down from his throne. South's Sermons.
2. The aſſembly of cardinals.
How far I've proceeded,
Or how far further ſhall, is warranted
By a commiſſion from the conſiſtory,
%. the whole conſiſt'ry of Rome. Shakeſpeare's Hen. VIII.
A late prelate, of remarkable zeal for the church, were
religions to be tricd by lives, would have lived down the pope
and the whole com/ſtory. Atterbury.
3. Any ſolemn aſſembly.
In mid air
To council ſummons all his mighty peers
Within thick clouds, and dark tenfold involv'd, .
A gloomy conſiſtory. Milton's Paradiſe Regained, b. i.
At Jove's aſſent the deities around,
In ſolemn ſtate the com/ſtory crown'd.
4. Place of reſidence. |
My other ſelf, my counſel's conſ/lory, my oracle,
I, y child, will y by thy ... Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Conso'cl Are... n.ſ. [ from conſcio, Latin. J An accom-
plice; a confederate; a partner. -
Patridge and Stanhope were condemned as conſºciates in the
conſpiracy of Somerſet. Hayward.
To CONSOCIATE. v. a. [conſcio, Latin.]
1. To unite; to join.
Generally the beſt outward ſhapes are alſo the likelieſt to
be conſociated with good inward faculties. Iſºtton on Educat.
2. To cement; to hold together.
The ancient philoſophers always brought in a ſupernatural
principle to unite and conſºciate the parts of the chaos. Burnet.
To Co'Nsocia T E. v. n. To coaleſce; to unite.
If they cohered, yet by the next conflićt with other atoms
they might be ſeparated again, without ever conſºciating into
the huge condenſe bodies of planets. Bentley's Sermons.
CoNsociation, n. ſ. [from conſociate.]
1. Alliance.
There is ſuch a conſociation of offices between the prince
and whom his favour breeds, that they may help to ſuſtain his
power, as he their knowledge. Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
2. Union; intimacy; companionſhip.
By ſo long and ſo various cºnſociation with a prince, he had
now gotten, as it were, two lives in his own fortune and
greatneſs. Wotton.
CoNso'LABLE. adj. [from conſºle. J That which admits
comfort.
To Co'Nso LATE. va. [co'ſ lor, Latin J. To comfort; to con-
ſole; to eaſe in miſery.
I will be gone,
That pitiful rumour may report my flight,
To conſolate thine ear. Shakeſp. All's well that end well.
What may ſomewhat conſºlate all men that honour virtue,
we do not diſcover the latter ſcene of his miſery in authors of
antiquity. Brown's Wulgar Erreurs, b. vii. c. 17.
CoNso LA'TION. m. ſ. [conſºlatio, Latin.]' Comfort; alleviation
of miſery; ſuch alleviation as is produced by partial
remedies.
We that were in the jaws of death, were now brought into
a place where we found nothing but conſºlations. Bacon.
Againſt ſuch cruelties,
With inward cºnſºlations recompens'd;
And oft ſupported ſo, as ſhall amaze
Their proudeſt perſecutors. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. xii.
Let the righteous perſevere with patience, ſupported with
this conſºlation, that their labour ſhall not be in vain. Rogers:
CoNsol A'Tor. n.ſ. [Latin.] A comforter.
Conso'LATory... n.ſ. [from conſolate.] A ſpeech or writing
containing topicks of comfort.
Conſolatories writ
With ſtudied argument, and much perſuaſion ſought,
Lenient of grief and anxious thought. Milton's Agoniſes.
Conso'LA to Ry. adj. [from conſºlate. J Tending to give
comfort.
To CONSOLE. v. a. [cºnſºor, Lat.] To comfort; to cheer;
to free from the ſenſe of miſery.
Others the ſyren ſiſters compaſs round,
And empty heads conſole with empty ſound. Pope's Dunciad.
CONSOLE. m. ſ. [French J In architecture, is a part or
member projecting in manner of a bracket, or ſhoulder-piece,
ſerving to ſupport a cornice, buſt, vaſe, bcam, and frequently
uſed as keys of arches. Chambers.
Conso'LER. m. ſ. [from conſºle.] One that gives comfort.
Pride once more appears upon the ſtage, as the great con-
ſaler of the miſeries of man. Comment, on Pºpe's Eff an Man.
CoNso'LIDANT, adj. [from conſolidate.] That which has the
uality of uniting wounds.
Pºpe's Statius.
To CONSOLIDATE. v. a. [conſolider, Fr. ſºlidus, Latin.]
1. To form into a compact and ſolid body; to harden; to unite
into a ſolid maſs.
The word may be rendered either he ſtretched, or he fixed
and conſºlidated the earth above the waters. Burmet's Theory.
The effects of ſpirits in ſtopping hemorrhages, and conſo-
lidating the fibres, is well known to chirurgeons. Arbuthnºt.
2. To combine or unite two parliamentary bills into one.
To Cossolidate. v. n. To grow firm, hard, or ſolid.
In hurts and ulcers in the head, dryneſs maketh them more
apt to conſºlidate. Baen's Natural Hijoy, Nº. 78s.
The ſand, ſparry, and flinty matter was then ſoft, and ſuſ-
ceptible of any form in theſe ſhelly moulds ; and it conſºli-
dared, and became hard afterwards: Woodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
Consolid Arios. m. ſ. [from cºſºlidate J
1. The act of uniting into a ſolid mals.
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 113</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
º
-
º
The conſ, idation of the marble, and of the ſtone, did not
fall out at random. I/22dward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. The annexing of one bill in parliament to another.
3. In law, it is uſed for the combining and uniting of two be-
nefices in one. - - Cºwel.
Conso'lrd Arive. adj. [from conſºlidate.] That which has the
quality of healing wounds. Dicf.
§º º: }n. J. [conſonance, Fr. conſonans, Latin.]
1. Accord of ſound.
The two principal conſonances that moſt raviſh the ear, are,
by the conſent of all nature, the fifth and the octave. Wºtton.
And winds and waters flow'd
In conſºnance.
2. Conſiſtency; congruence; agreeableneſs.
Such deciſions held conſºnancy and congruity with reſolutions
and deciſions of former times. Hale's Law of England.
I have thus largely ſet down this, to ſhew the perfect conſºnancy
of our perſecuted church to the doStrine of ſcripture and an-
tiquity. Hammond on Fundamentals.
3. Agreement; concord; friendſhip. A ſenſe now not uſed.
Let me conjure you by the rights of our fellowſhip, by
the conſºnancy of our youth. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
CONSONANT, adj. [conſºnans, Lat..] Agreeable; accord-
ing; conſiſtent: followed by either with or to.
Were it conſonant unto reaſon to divorce theſe two ſen-
tences, the former of which doth ſhew how the latter is re-
{trained Hoºker.
That where much is given there ſhall be much required, is
a thing conſonant with natural equity. Decay of Piety.
Religion looks conſºnant to itſelf. Decay of Piety.
He diſcovers how conſºnant the account which Moſes hath
left, of the primitive earth, is to this from nature. Iſoodward.
Co'Nson ANT. m. ſ. [conſºnans, Latin.] A letter which cannot
be ſounded, or but imperfectly, by itſelf.
In all vowels the paſſage of the mouth is open and free,
without any appulſe of an organ of ſpeech to another: but in
all conſonants there is an appulſe of the organs, ſometimes (if
you abſtract the conſonants from the vowels) wholly precluding
all ſound; and, in all of them, more or leſs checking and
abetting it. Hºlder's Elements of Speech.
He conſidered theſe as they had a greater mixture of vowels
or conſºnants, and accordingly employed them as the verſe re-
quired a greater ſmoothneſs. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
cºastix. adv. [from conſºnant..] Conſiſtently; agree-
ally.
This as conſºnantly it preacheth, teacheth, and delivereth,
as if but one tongue did ſpeak for all. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
Ourſelves are formed according to that mind which frames
things conſºnantly to their reſpective natures. Glanv. Scºpſ. c. 1.
If he will ſpeak conſonantly to himſelf, he muſt ſay that hap-
pened in the original conſtitution. Tillotſºn.
Co'Nson ANTN Ess. n.ſ.. [from conſºnant..] Agreeableneſs; con-
fiſtency. - Dićf.
Co'NSoNous. adj. [conſºnus, Latin.] Agreeing in ſound;
ſymphonious.
CoNsop1A"tion. m. ſ. [from conſpio, Latin J The act of lay-
ing to ſleep.
Thomſºn's Spring.
One of his maxims is, that a total abſtinence from intem-
perance is no more philoſophy than a total conſpiation of the
ſenſes is repoſe. Digly to Pºpe.
CONSORT. n.ſ.. [conſºrs, Latin. It had anciently the accent
on the latter ſyllable, but has it now on the former.]
1. Companion ; partner; generally a partner of the bed; a
wife or huſband.
Male he created thee; but thy cºnſºrt
Female for race : then bleſs'd mankind, and ſaid,
Be fruitful, multiply, and fill the earth. Milton's Par. Ig/?.
Thy Bellona, who the conſort came,
Not only to thy bed, but to thy fame.
He ſingle choſe to live, and ſhun'd to wed,
Well pleas'd to want a conſºrt of his bed. Dryden's Falks.
His warlike amazon her hoſt invades,
Th’ imperial conſort of the crown of Spades. Pope.
2. An aſſembly ; a divan; a conſultation.
In one conſort there ſat
Cruel revenge, and rancorous deſpite,
Denham.
Diſloyal treaſon, and heart-burning hate. Fairy Queen, h. ii.
3. A number of inſtruments playing together; a ſymphony.
This is probably a miſtake for concert.
A conſºrt of muſick in a banquet of wine, is as a ſignet of
carbuncle ſet in gold. Ecclus. xxxii. 5.
4. Concurrence; union.
Take it ſingly, and it carries an air of levity; but, in con-
ſºrt with the reſt, you ſee, has a meaning quite different.
- Atterbury.
To CoNso'RT. v. m. [from the noun.] To aſſociate with ; to
unite with 5 to keep company with.
What will you do? Let's not conſºrt with them. Shakoff.
Which of the Grecian chiefs conſºrts with thee Dryden.
To Conso'RT. v. a.
1. To join ; to mix; to marry.
He, with his conſºrted Eye,
The ſtory heard attentive. Liter's Paradºſ Lºft, 1. vii.
He begins to conſort himſelf with men, and thinks himſelf
one. Lºcke on Education, ſº 2 13.
2. To accompany.
I'll meet with you upºn the mart,
And afterward cºnſort you 'till bed-time. Shakeſpea, e.
CoNso'RT Arl E. adj. [from conſort.] To be compared with ;
to be ranked with ; ſuitable.
He was conſortable to Charles Brandon, under Henry VIII.
who was equal to him. //attan.
CoNso'RTIoN. n ſ. [cºnſºrtio, Latin.] Partnerſhip; fellow-
ſhip; ſociety. Dićf.
ConspE'cTABLE. adj. [from conſºcefus, Latin.] Eaſy to be
ſeen. Dići.
CoNspecTu'ity. n.ſ.. [from conſe&amp;ut, Latin J Sight; view;
ſenſe of ſeeing. This word is, I believe, peculiar to Shake-
ſpeare, and perhaps corrupt.
What harm can your biſon conſpeciuities glean out of this
character 2 Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
CoNs PE'Rsion. m. ſ. [conſperſo, Lat.] A ſprinkling about. Dić.
CoNspicu'ity. n.ſ. [from conſpicuous.] Brightneſs; favour-
ableneſs to the fight.
If this definition be clearer than the thing defined, midnight
may vie for conſticuity with noon. Ganv. Sceſſ. c. 18.
CONSPICUOUS.. [conſpicuus, Latin.]
1. Obvious to the fight; ſeen at diſtance.
Or come I leſs conſpicuous * Or what change
Abſents thee * Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x. . . c.7.
2. Eminent; famous; diſtinguiſhed.
He attributed to each of them that virtue which he thought
moſt conſpicuous in them. Dryden's juven. Desication.
Thy father's merit points thee out to view,
And ſets thee in the faireſt point of light,
To make thy virtues or thy faults conſpicuous. Addiſ Cato.
The houſe of lords,
Cºfficuºus ſcene Pope’s Epiſt. of Hºrace.
CoNspi'cuously. adv. [from conſpicuous. J
1. Obviouſly to the view.
Theſe methods may be preſerved conſi.uouſly, and intirely
diſtinct. J/aſis's Logick, p. iv. c. 1.
2. Eminently; famouſly; remarkably. -
CoNSPI'cuous N Ess. n.f. [from cºfficuous
1. Expoſure to the view; ſtate of being viſible at a diſtance.
Looked on with ſuch a weak light, they appear well pro-
portioned fabricks; yet they appear ſo but in that twilight,
which is requiſite to their conſpicuouſneſs. Poyle's Przemi. H. ay.
2. Eminence; fame; celebrity. º
Their writings attract more readers by the author's confi-
Cl/02/ %. Boyle on Colºurs.
CoN sp1/RA cy. m. ſ. [conſpiratio, Latin.]
1. A private agreement among ſeveral perſons to commit ſome
crime; a plot; a concerted treaſon. -
O conſpiracy /
Sham'ſ thou to ſhew thy dang'rous brow by night,
When evils are moſt free ? Shakespeare’s julius Cºſar.
I had forgot that foul conſpiracy
Of the beaſt Caliban, and his confed’rates, -
Againſt my life. Shakespeare are’s Tempeſ?.
When ſcarce he had eſcap'd the blow -
Of faction and conſpiracy,
Death did his promis'd hopes deſtroy. Dryden.
2. In law, an agreement of men to do any thing; always taken
in the evil part. It is taken for a confederacy of two at the
leaſt, falſely to indićt one, or to procure one to be indicted of
felony. Cowel.
3. A concurrence; a general tendency of many cauſes to one
cVent. -
When the time now came that miſery was ripe for him,
there was a conſpiracy in all heavenly and earthly things, to
frame fit occaſions to lead him unto it. Sidney, b. ii-
Coss P1’RANT. adj. [conſpirans, Latin.] Conſpiring; engaged
. .
in a conſpiracy or plot; plotting.
Thou art a traitor, -
Conſpirant 'gainſt this high illuſtrious prince. Shaº. K. Lear-
CoNspi RATION. m. ſ. [conſpiratio, Lat..] A plot. I) i.". -
CoNSPIRA To R. m. ſ. [from conſpiro, Latin.] A man engaged
in a plot; one who has ſecretly concerted with others com—
miſſion of a crime; a plotter.
Achitophel is among the conſpiratºrs with Abſalom. 2 San-
Stand back, thou manifeſt coiſ irator;
Thou that contriv'ſt to murder our dread lord. Shakesp. Hen, VI-
But let the bold conſpirator beware;
For heav'n makes princes its peculiar care, Dryd. Spa. Fryz --
One put into his hand a note of the whole conſpi–
racy againſt him, together with all the names of the coºftº–
rators. South's Sermºzs.
To CONSPIRE. v. n. [conſpiro, Latin.]
1. To concert a crime; to plot; to hatch ſecret treaſon.
Tell me what they deſerve,
That do conſpire my death with deviliſh plots
Of damned witchcraft Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
W inst
– riſ.
Come
ſtrates
franch
of Ed
- Ssss
A
what t
2. Tº
\e ſº
wh: :
cºst,
Coº.
º
and
Qo \s
I. It
2
º
-
§
3.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 114</div><p class="Text">C O N
, ºr
\ll,
!!!,
|ſ.
•
.
- What was it º
That mov’d pale Caffius to confire? Shakespeare Alt. and Chºp.
They took great indignation, and conſpired againſt the
king. Bel. 28.
Let the air be excluded; for that undermineth the body,
and conſpirºth with the ſpirit of the body to diſſolve it. Bacon.
There is in man a natural poſſibility to deſtroy the world;
that is, to conſpire to know no woman. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
The preſs, the pulpit, and the ſtage,
Conſpire to cenſure and expoſe our age. Roſcommon.
2. To agree together; as, all things conſpire to make him happy.
ConsP1’RER. n.ſ.. [from cºnſpire.] A conſpirator; a plotter.
Take no care,
Who chafes, who frets, and where conſºirers are ;
Macbeth ſhall never vanquiſh’d be. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
CoNspi'RING Powers. [In mechanicks.] All ſuch as aét in di-
rečtion not oppoſite to one another. Harris.
Conspur cA'tro N. m. ſ. [from conſpurco, Latin.] The act of
defiling; defilement; pollution.
CONSTABLE. m. ſ. [comes ſlabuli, as it is ſuppoſed.]
1. Lord high conſtable is an ancient officer of the crown, long
diſuſed in England, but lately ſubſiſting in France; where the
conſtate commanded the mareſchals, and was the firſt officer of
the army. The function of the conſtable of England conſiſted
in the care of the common peace of the land in deeds of arms,
and in matters of war. To the court of the conſtable and
marſhal belonged the cognizance of contračts, deeds of arms
without the realm, and combats and blaſonry of arms within it.
The firſt conſtable of England was created by the Conqueror,
and the office continued hereditary 'till the thirteenth of Henry
VIII. when it was laid aſide, as being ſo powerful as to be-
come troubleſome to the king. From theſe mighty magi-
ſtrates are derived the inferiour conſtables of hundreds and
franchiſes; two of whom were ordained, in the thirteenth
of Edward I. to be choſen in every hundred for the conſerva-
tion of the peace, and view of armour. Theſe are now called
high conſtables, becauſe continuance of time, and increaſe both
of people and offences, have occaſioned others in every town
of like nature, but inferiour authority, called petty conſtables.
Beſides theſe, we have conſtables denominated from particular
places; as conſtable of the Tower, of Dover caſtle, of the caſtle
of Carnarvon; but theſe are properly caſtellani, or governours
of caſtles' Cowel. Chambers.
When I came hither, I was lord high com/iable,
And duke of Buckingham; now poor Edward Bohun. Shakespeare
The knave cºnſtable had ſet me i' th' ſtocks, i' th' common
ſtocks, for a witch. Shakespeare Merry Wives of I/indſºr.
The com/iable being a ſober man, and known to be an ene-
my to thoſe ačts of ſedition, went among them, to obſerve
what they did. Clarendon.
2. Tº over-run the Const ABLE. [Perhaps from conteſtable, Fr.
the ſettled, firm and ſtated account.] To ſpend more than
what a man knows himſelf to be worth: a low phraſe.
Co'Nst ABLESHIP. n.ſ.. [from conſtable. J The office of a
conſtable.
This keeperſhip is annexed to the conſtableſhip of the caſtle,
and that granted out in leaſe. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Co'NSTANCY. m. ſ. [conſ?antia, Latin.]
1. Immutability; perpetuity; unalterable continuance.
The laws of God himſelf no man will ever deny to be of
a different conſtitution from the former, in reſpect of the
one's conſiancy, and the mutability of the other. Hºoker, b. i.
2. Conſiſtency; unvaried ſtate. -
Incredible, that coº/fancy in ſuch a variety, ſuch a multi-
plicity, ſhould be the reſult of chance. Ray on the Creation.
3. Reſolution; firmneſs; ſteadineſs; unſhaken determination.
In a ſmall iſle, amidſt the wideſt ſeas,
Triumphant com/lancy has fix’d her ſeat;
In vain the ſyrens ſing, the tempeſts beat.
4. Laſting affection ; continuance of love, or friendſhip.
Cºm/fancy is ſuch a ſtability and firmneſs of friendſhip, as
overlooks and paſſes by leſſer failures of kindneſs, and yet ſtill
retains the ſame habitual good-will to a friend. South.
5. Certainty ; veracity; reality.
But all the ſtory of the night told over,
More witneſſeth than fancy's images,
And grows to ſomething of great conſtancy,
But, however, ſtrange and admirable.
CONSTANT. adj. [com/lans, Latin.]
1. Firm; fixed; not fluid.
If you take highly reëtified ſpirit of wine, and dephlegmed
ſpirit of urine, and mix them, you may turn theſe two fluid
liquors into a conſtant body. Boyle's Hiſtory of Firmingſ.
2. Unvaried ; unchanged; immutable; durable.
3. Firm; reſolute; determined; immoveable; unſhaken.
Some ſhrewd contents,
Now ſteal the colour from Baſſanio's cheek:
Some dear friend dead; elſe nothing in the world
Could turn ſo much the conſtitution
Of any cºnſtant man. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
4. Fº º change of affečtion. -
OL. 1.
Prior.
Shakeſpeare.
Both loving one fair maid, they yet remained cºast
friends. Sidney, b. ii.
5. Certain; not various; ſteady : firmly adherent.
Now, through the land, his care of ſouls he ſtretch'd,
And like a primitive apoſtle preach'd;
Still chearful, ever coyant to his call ; - -
By many follow'd, lov’d by moſt, admir’d by all. Pryden.
He ſhewed his firm adherence to religion as modelled by
our national conſtitution, and was com/iant to its offices in de-
votion, both in publick and in his family. Addison, Freeholder.
CoNstantly. adv. [from com/iant..] Unvariably; perpetual-
ly; certainly ; ſteadily. -
It is ſtrange that the fathers ſhould never appeal; hay, that
they ſhould not conſtantly do it. Tillotſon.
To CONSTELLATE. v. n. [confiellatus, Latin.] To join
luſtre; to ſhine with one general light.
The ſeveral things which moſt engage our affections, do;
in a tranſcendent manner, ſhine forth and conſiellate in God.
Boyle.
To CoNste'll Ate. v. a. To unite ſeveral ſhining bodies in
one ſplendour.
Theſe ſcattered perfeótions, which were divided amon
the ſeveral ranks of inferiour natures, were ſummed up an
conſtellated in ours. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 1.
CoNSTELLA'tion. m. ſ. [from conſtellate.]
1. A cluſter of fixed ſtars. -
For the ſtars of heaven, and the couſiellations thereof, ſhall
not give their light. Iſ, xiii. ic.
The earth, the air reſounded,
The heav'ns and all the conſtellations rung. Milt. Par. Loft.
A conſiellation is but one ; -
Though 'tis a train of ſtars. Dryden.
2. An aſſemblage of ſplendours, or excellencies, -
The condition is a com/tellatiºn or conjuncture of all thoſe
goſpel-graces, faith, hope, charity, ſelf-denial, repentance,
and the reſt. Hammond's Pract. Cat.
CoNste RNA'tion. m.ſ.. [from conſermo, Latin J Aſtoniſh-
ment; amazement; alienation of mind by a ſurpriſe; fur-
priſe; wonder. -
They find the ſame holy conſternation upon themſelves that
Jacob did at Bethel, which he called the gate of heaven. South.
The natives, dubious whom
They muſt obey, in conſternation wait,
*Till rigid conqueſt will pronounce their liege.
To CONSTIPATE. v. a. [from conſiſpo, Latin.]
1. To croud together into a narrow room; to thicken; to
condenſe.
Of cold, the property is to condenſe and conſtipate. Bacon.
It may, by amaſſing, cooling, and com/lipating of waters,
turn them into rain. Ray on the Creation.
There might ariſe ſome vertiginous motions or whirlpools
in the matter of the chaos, whereby the atoms might be
thruſt and crouded to the middle of thoſe whirlpools, and
there com/?ipate one another into great ſolid globes. Bentley.
2. To ſtuff up, or ſtop by filling up the paſſages.
It is not probable that any aliment ſhould have the quality
of intirely conſtipating or ſhutting up the capillary veſiels.
, Arbuthnot on Aliments,
3. To bind the belly; or make coſtive.
CoNSTIPA't los. m. ſ. [from conſtipate.] -
1. The act of crouding anything into leſs room; condenſation.
This worketh by the detention of the ſpirits, and cºnſiipa-
tion of the tangible parts. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 341.
It requires either abſolute fulneſs of matter, or a pretty
cloſe conſtipation and mutual contact of its particles. Bently.
2. Stoppage; obſtruction by plenitude.
The inactivity of the gall occaſions a conſtipation of the
belly. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Constitu ENT. adj. [conſtituens, Latin.] That which makes
any thing what it is; neceſſary to exiſtence; elemental; eſ-
ſential; that of which any thing conſiſts. -
Body, ſoul, and reaſon, are the three parts neceſſarily con-
ſtituent of a man. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
All animals derived all the conſtituent matter of their bodies,
ſucceſſively, in all ages, out of this fund. Iſoodw: Nat. Hiſł.
It is impoſſible that the figures and ſizes of its conſii-
tuent particles, ſhould be ſo juſtly adapted as to touch one
another in every point. Bentley's Sermoni.
Coxsti'TUENT. m. ſ. - -
1. The perſon or thing which conſtitutes or ſettles any thing in
its peculiar ſtate. - -
Their firſt compoſure and origination requires a higher
and nobler conſtituent than chance. Hale's Orig. ºf 44ankind.
2. That which is neceſſary to the ſubſiſtence of anything.
The obſtruction of the meſentery is a great impediment to
nutrition; for the lymph in thoſe glands is a neceſſary conſti-
tuent of the aliment. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. He that deputes another. - -
ºfo CONSTITUTE. v. a. [conſtitue. Latin.] - - -
1. To give formal exiſtence; to make any thing what it is 3 to
produce.
Philipſ,
5 L Prudence
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 115</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
º
l but chriſtian virtue ſuch aS
a moral Du Bºf Pity.
Prudence is not only
is neceſſary to the º of all others,
- tabliſh. -
2. Tº:º laws appointed and conſtituted by º au-
thority, not againſt the law : º, ...!?" s Holy Living.
- ºte : to appoint another to - -
&amp;."º: # º ...} [from conſtitute.] He that conſtitutes or
appoints. -
"...ºrios. m. ſ. ſſrom cºnſtitute.] - - -
º, ºiáš. enacting; deputing; eſtabliſhing;
producing. -
2. 'State of being; particular texture of parts; natural qua-
"Hi, is more beneficial to us than any other conſtitution.
Bentley's Sermons.
This light being trajećted through the parallel priſms, if it
ſuffered any change by the refraction of one, it loſt that im-
preſſion by the contrary refraction of the other; and ſo, being
reſtored to its priſtine conſtitution, became of the ſame condi-
tion as at firſt. Newton's Opt.
. Corporeal frame. -
Amongſt many bad effects of this eily conſtitution, there is
one advantage; ſuch who arrive to age, are not ſubječt to
firićture of fibres. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
4 Temper of body, with reſpe&amp;t to health or diſeaſe.
If ſuch men happen, by their native conſtitutions, to fall
hto the gout, either they mind it not at all, having no leiſure
to be fick, or they uſe it like a dog. Temple.
Beauty is nothing elſe but a juſt accord and mutual har-
mony of the members, animated by a healthful conſtitution.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
3
5. Temper of mind.
Dametas, according to the com/?itution of a dull head, thinks
no better way to ſhew himſelf wiſe than by ſuſpecting every
thing in his way. Sidney.
Some dear friend dead; elſe nothing in the world
Could turn ſo much the com/?itution
Of any conſtant man. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
He defended himſelf with undaunted courage, and leſs
paſſion than was expected from his conſtitution. Clarendon.
6. Eſtabliſhed form of government; ſyſtem of laws and
cuſtoms.
The Norman conqu'ring all by might,
Mixing our cuſtoms, and the form of right,
With foreign conſtitutions he had brought. Daniel's Civ.//ar.
. Particular law; eſtabliſhed uſage; eſtabliſhment ; inſtitu-
tlon.
We lawfully may obſerve the poſitive conſtitutions of our
own churches. - Hooker, b. iv. ſect. 5.
Conſtitution, prºperly ſpeaking in the ſenſe of the civil law,
is that law which is made and ordained by ſome king or em-
peror; yet the canoniſts, by adding the word ſacred to it,
make it to ſignify the ſame as an eccleſiaſtical canon. Ayliff.
CoNSTITU'TIon Al: adj. [from conſiitution.]
1. Bred in the conſtitution; radical,
It is not probable any conſtitutional illneſs will be communi-
cated with the ſmall-pox by inoculation. Sharpe's Surgery.
2. Conſiſtent with the conſtitution; legal.
Constitu'rive. adj. [from conſtitute.]
1. That which conſtitutes anything what it is; elemental; eſ.
ſential; produćtive.
Although it be placed among the non-naturals, that is, ſuch
as neither naturally conſtitutive, nor merely deſtructive, do
preſerve or deſtroy. Brown's Hºugar Errours, b. iii. c. 9.
The very elements and conſtitutive parts of a ſchiſmatick,
being the eſteem of himſelf, and the contempt of others.
- Decay of Piety.
2. Hºgg the power to enact or eſtabliſh. y of y
ſo CONST RAIN. v. a. ſ.com/?raindre, Fr. conſºringo, Latin.]
1. To compel; to force to ſome action.
Thy fight, which ſhould
Make our eyes flów, with joy,
Conſtrains them weep.
2. To hinder by force; to reſtrain.
..My fire in caves conſtrains the winds,
Can with a breath their clam’rous rage appeaſe;
They fear his whiſtle, and forſake the ſeas. Dryden.
3. To neceſſitate.
The ſcars upon your honour, therefore, he
Poes pity as coyºrained blemiſhes,
Nothing deſerv’d. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleºpatra.
When to his luſt AEgyſthus gave the rein,
Did fate or we th’ adultºrous a: conſtrain &amp; Pope's Odyſſey.
7
Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
4. To violate; to raviſh.
Her ſpotleſs chaſtity,
"human traitors, you confirmini and fore
5. To confine; to ...' conſtrain’d and forc'd. Shakespeare. Tit. And.
How the ſtrait ſtays the ſlender waſte conſtrain 2 Gay.
CoN str A'is - -
b ** INA BLE. adj. [from com/irain.] Liable to conſtraint -
*ious to compulſion. &gt;
* * before ſtood bound in conſcience to do as
reaſon teacheth, they are now, by virtue of human law, con-
Jirainable; and, if they outwardly tranſgreſs, puniſhable. Hooker.
CoNSTRA'INER. m. ſ. [from conſtrain.] He that conſtrains.
CoNst RA'INT. m. f. [contrainte, French..] Compulſion; com-
pelling force; violence; ačt of over-ruling the deſire; con-
finement.
I did ſuppoſe it ſhould be on conſtraint;
But, heav'n be thank'd, it is but voluntary. Shakespeare K. john.
Like you a man; and hither led by fame,
Not by conſtraint, but by my choice, I came. Dryd. In. Emp.
The conſtant deſire of happineſs, and the conſtraint it puts
upon us to act for it, no body, I think, accounts an abridg-
ment of liberty. Locke.
To §§§T. v. a. [conſtringo, conſºričium, Latin J
1. To bind; to cramp; to confine into a narrow compaſs.
2. To contraćt; to cauſe to ſhrink.
Such things as conſ?, iël the fibres and ſtrengthen the ſolid
parts. Arbuthnot on Diet.
CoNst Ri'cTien. n.ſ.. [from conſirić.] Contraction; com-
preſſion.
The air which theſe receive into. the lungs, may ſerve to
render their bodies equiponderant to the water; and the con-
ſtriëlion or dilatation of it, may probably aſfift them to aſcend
or deſcend in the water. Ray on the Creation.
CoNst Ri'ctor. m. ſ. [conſºričior, Latin.] That which com-
preſſes or contracts.
He ſuppoſed the conſtričlors of the eye-lids muſt be ſtrength-
ened in the ſupercilious, Arbuth, and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
To CONSTRI'NGE. v. a. [conſºringo, Lat.] To compreſs;
to contract; to bind.
The dreadful ſpout,
Which ſhipmen do the hurricano call,
Conſtring'd in maſs by the almighty ſun. Shakespeare. Tro. and Craft.
Strong liquors, eſpecially inflammatory ſpirits, intoxicate,
conſtringe, harden the fibres, and coagulate the fluids. Arbuth.
CoNst RI'NG ENT. adj. [conſºringens, Latin.] Having the qua-
lity of binding or compreſſing.
Try a deep well, or a conſervatory of ſnow, where the cold
may be more conſºringent. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 380.
It binds
Our ſtrengthen'd bodies in a cold embrace
Conſºringent. Thomſon's J/inter, 1.700.
To CONSTRUCT. v. a. [conſtrudius, Lat.] To build; to
form; to compile; to conſtitute.
Let there be an admiration of thoſe divine attributes and
prerogatives, for whoſe manifeſting he was pleaſed to conſtruct
this vaſt fabrick. Boyle's Uſefulneſs of Natural Philoſºphy.
CoNstru’ction. m.ſ.. [conſtrućlio, Latin.
1. The ačt of building, or piling up in a regular method.
2. The form of building; ſtructure; conformation.
There's no art
To ſhew the mind's conſtruction in the face. Shakespeare Macbeth.
The ways were made of ſeveral layers of flat ſtones and
flint: the conſtruction was a little various, according to the
nature of the ſoil, or the materials which they found. Arbuth.
3. [In grammar.] The putting of words, duly choſen, together
in ſuch a manner as is proper to convey a complete ſenſe.
Clarke's Eatin Grammar.
Some particles conſtantly, and others in certain conſtruſionſ,
have the ſenſe of a whole ſentence contained in them. Lºcke.
4. The act of arranging terms in the proper order, by diſen-
tangling tranſpoſitions; the aët of interpreting; explanation.
This label, whoſe containing
Is ſo from ſenſe in hardneſs, that I can
Make no colle&amp;tion of it, let him ſhew -
His ſkill in the conſtruction. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
5. The ſenſe; the meaning; interpretation.
In which ſenſe although we judge the apoſtle's words to
have been uttered, yet hereunto we do not require them to
yield, that think any other conſtrućlion more ſound. Hºoker.
He that would live at eaſe, ſhould always put the beſt ºn-
ſtruction on buſineſs and converſation. Collier on the Spleen.
Religion, in its own nature, produces good will towards
men, and puts the mildeſt conſtruction upon every accident that
befals them. Spectator, Nº. 483.
6. Judgment; mental repreſentation. -
It cannot, therefore, unto reaſonable conſtruńions ſeem
ſtrange, or ſavour of ſingularity, that we have examined this
point. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 13.
7. The manner of deſcribing a figure or problem in geometry.
8. Construction of Equation, in algebra, is the method of
reducing a known equation into lines and figures, in order to
a geometrical demonſtration. - -
Constructure. n.ſ.. [from conſtruct.] Pile; edifice; fa-
brick.
They ſhall the earth's cºnſtructure cloſely bind,
And to the center keep the parts confin'd. Blackmore.
To CONSTRUE. v. a. [conſtrue, Latin.] ..
1. To range words in their natural order; to diſentangle tranſ-
poſition. ---
I'll teach mine eyes with meek humility,
Love-learned letters to her eyes to read; Which
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 116</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
nd
d
l,
Which her deep wit, that true heart's thought can ſpell,
Will ſoon conceive, and learn to com/rue well. Spenser.
Virgil is ſo very figurative, that he requires (I may almoſt
fay) a grammar apart to com/irue him. Dryden.
Thus we are put to com/true and paraphraſe our own words,
to free ourſelves either from the ignorance or malice of our
adverſaries. Stillingfice's Defence of Diſcourſe on Rºman Idol.
2. To interpret; to explain; to ſhew the meaning.
I muſt crave that I be not ſo underſtood or conflrued, as if
any ſuch thing, by virtue thereof, could be done without the
aid and aſſiſtance of God's moſt bleſſed ſpirit. Hooker, b. iii.
Conſtrue the times to their neceſſities,
And you ſhall ſay, indeed, it is the time,
And not the king, that doth you injuries. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
When the word is com/?rued into its idea, the double mean-
ing vaniſhes. Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
* To ğrüprATE. v. a. [.com/?upro, Lat.] To violate;
to debauch; to defile.
CoNst UPRA'tion. m. ſ. [from conſuprate.] Violation; de-
filement.
CONSUBSTANTIAL. adj. [conſºl/antialis, Latin.]
1. Having the ſame eſſence or ſubſiſtence.
The Lord our God, is but one God: in which indiviſible
unity, notwithſtanding we adore the Father, as being altoge-
ther of himſelf, we glorify that conſubſtantial word which is
the Son; we bleſs and magnify that co-eſſential Spirit, eternally
proceeding from both, which is the Holy Ghoſt. Hooker, b. v.
2. Being of the ſame kind or nature.
It continueth a body conſubſtantial with our bodies; a body
of the ſame, both nature and meaſure, which it had on earth.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 54.
In their conceits the human nature of Chriſt was not con-
ſubffantial to ours, but of another kind. Brerewood.
CoNSUBSTANTIA'LITY. m.ſ.. [from conſib/fantial.] Exiſtence
of more than one, in the ſame ſubſtance.
The eternity of the Son's generation, and his co-eternity
and conſubſtantiality with the Father, when he came down
from heaven. Hammond on Fundamentals.
To CoN substa'NTIATE. v. a. ſ from con and ſuſ/lantia,
Lat.] To unite in one common ſubſtance or nature.
CoNsu ſist ANT1A"T10 N. m. ſ. [from conſubº antiate.] The
union of the body of our bleſſed Saviour with the ſacramental
element, according to the Lutherans. -
In the point of conſubſtantiation, toward the latter end of
his life, he changed his mind. Atterbury.
CONSUL. m. ſ [conſul, conſidendo, Latin.]
1. The chief magiſtrate in the Roman republick.
Or never be ſo noble as a conſul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Conſuls of mod’rate pow'r in calms were made;
- When the Gauls came, one ſole dićtator ſway’d. Dryden.
2. An officer commiſſioned in foreign parts to judge between
the merchants of his nation, and protećt their commerce.
Co'Nsu LAR. adj. [conſularis, Latin.]
1. Relating to the conſul.
The conſular power had only the ornaments, without the
force of the royal authority. Spectator, N°. 287.
2. Consu LAR Man. One who had been conſul.
Riſe not the conſular men, and left their places,
So ſoon as thou ſat'ſt down Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
Co'NSULATE. m. ſ. [conſulatus, Latin.] The office of conſul.
His name and conſulate were effaced out of all publick re-
giſters and inſcriptions. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Co'Nsulship. m. ſ. [from conſul..] The office of conſul.
The patricians ſhould do very ill,
To let the conſulſhip be ſo defil’d. Ben. Johnſºn's Catiline.
The lovely boy, with his auſpicious face,
Shall Pollio's conſulſhip and triumph grace. Dryden.
To CONSULT. v. n. [conſulto, Latin.] To take counſel to-
gether; to deliberate in common. It has with before the per-
ſon admitted to conſultation.
Every man,
After the hideous ſtorm that follow'd, was
A thing inſpir’d; and, not conſulting, broke
Into a general prophecy, that this tempeſt,
Daſhing the garment of this peace, aboded
The ſudden breach on't. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
A ſenate-houſe, wherein three hundred and twenty men ſat
conſulting always for the people. 1 Mac. viii. 15.
Conſult not with the ſlothful for any work. Ecclus, xxxvii.
He ſent for his boſom friends, with whom he moſt confi-
dently conſulted, and ſhewed the paper to them, the contents
whereof he could not conceive. Clarendon,
To Consu'Lt. v. a.
1. To aſk advice of; as, he conſulted his friends.
2. To regard; to ačt with view or reſpect to.
We are, in the firſt place, to conſult the neceſſities of life,
rather than matters of ornament and delight. L'Eſtrange.
The ſenate owes its gratitude to Cato,
Who with ſo great a ſoul conſults its ſafety,
And guards our lives, while he neglects his own. Addison Cato.
3. To plan; to contrive.
3
Thou haſ tonfilted ſhame to thy houſe, by cutting off many
people. Heb. ii. 1 o.
Many things were there conſulted for the future, yet nothing
WaS poſitively reſolved. Clarendon, b. viii.
4. To ſearch into; to examine; as, to conſult an author.
Co'Nsult. n.ſ.. [from the verb. It is variouſly accented.]
1. The act of conſulting.
Yourſelf in perſon head one choſen half,
And march t' oppreſs the faction in conſult -
With dying Dorax. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian,
2. The effect of conſulting; determination.
He ſaid, and roſe the firſt; the council broke;
And all their grave conſults diſſolv’d in ſmoke. Dryd. Falkſ.
3. A council; a number of perſons aſſembled in deliberation.
Divers meetings and conjults of our whole number, to con-
ſider of the former labours. Bacon.
A conſult of coquets below
Was call'd, to rig him out a beau. Swift.
CoNsulta'rion. n.J. [from conſult.]
1. The act of conſulting; ſecret deliberation.
The chief prieſts held a conſultation with the elders and
ſcribes. Mark, xv. 1.
2. A number of perſons conſulted together; a council.
A conſultation was called, wherein he adviſed a ſalivation.
//?ſeman of Abſceſſes.
3. [In law.] Conſultatio is a writ, whereby *:::::::::::
merly removed by prohibition from the eccleſiaſtical count, or
court chriſtian, to the king's court, is returned thither again:
for the judges of the king's court, if, upon comparing the
libel with the ſuggeſtion of the party, they do find the ſug-
geſtion falſe, or not proved, and therefore the cauſe to be
wrongfully called from the court chriſtian; then, upon this
conſultation or deliberation, decree it to be returned again. Cowel.
CoNsu'LTER. m. ſ. [ from conſult. J One that conſults or
aſks council or intelligence.
There ſhall not be found among you a charmer, or a con-
flier with familiar ſpirits, or a wizard. Deutr. xviii. 1 1:
CoNsu'MABLE. adj. [from conſume.] Suſceptible of deſtruc-
tion; poſſible to be waſted, ſpent, or deſtroyed.
It does truly agree in this common quality aſcribed unto
both, of being incombuſtible, and not conſumable by fire; but
yet there is this inconvenience, that it doth contračt ſo much
fuliginous matter from the earthy parts of the oil, though it
was tried with ſome of the pureſt oil which is ordinary to be
bought, that in a very few days it did choak and extinguiſh
the flame. J/ilkins's Mathem. Magick.
Our growing rich or poor depends only on, which is
greater or leſs, our importation or exportation of conſumable
commodities. Locke.
To CONSU'ME. v. a. [conſumo, Latin.] To waſte; to ſpend;
to deſtroy.
Where two raging fires meet together,
They do conſume the thing that feeds their fury. Shakeſpeare.
Thou ſhalt carry much ſeed out into the field, and ſhalt
gather but little in; for the locuſts ſhall conſume it. Deut.xxviii.
Thus in ſoft anguiſh ſhe conſumes the day,
Nor quits her deep retirement. Thomſon's Spring.
To Consu'ME. v. n. To waſte away; to be exhauſted.
Theſe violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph die; like fire and powder,
Which, as they meet, conſume. Shakeſp. Romeo and julist.
CoNSU'MER. m. ſ. . [from conſume.] One that ſpends, waſtes,
or deſtroys any thing.
Money may be conſidered as in the hands of the conſumer,
or of the merchant who buys the commodity, when made
to export. - Locke.
To CONSUMMATE. v. a. [conſºmmer, Fr. conſummare, Lat.]
To complete; to perfect; to finiſh; to cnd. Anciently ac-
cented on the firſt ſyllable.
Yourſelf, myſelf, and other lords, will paſs
To conſuminate this buſineſs happily. , Shakespeare. King john.
There ſhall we conſummate our ſpouſal rites. Sha&amp;ſjeare.
The perſon was cunning enough to begin the deceit in the
weaker, and the weaker ſufficient to conſummate the fraud in
the ſtronger. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i. c. 1.
He had a mind to conſummate the happineſs of the day. Tatl.
Cowsu'MMAt E. adj. [from the verb.] Complete; perfect;
finiſhed; omnibus numeris alſºlutus.
I do but ſtay 'till your marriage be conſummate. Shakespeare.
Earth, in her rich attire
Conſummate, lovely ſmil’d. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. vii.
Gratian, among his maxims for raiſing a man to the moſt
conſummate greatneſs, adviſes to perform extraordinary actions,
and to ſecure a good hiſtorian. Addiſon, Freehºlder, Nº. 35.
If a man of perfect and conſummate virtue falls into a miſ-
fortune, it raiſes our pity, but not our terrour. Addison Speciat.
CoNsu MMA'rion. n.ſ.. [from conſummate.]
1. Completion; perfection; end. - - -
That juſt and regular proceſs, which it muſt be ſuppoſed te
take from its original to its conſummation. Addison Speciatºr.
z. The end of the preſent ſyſtem of things; the end of the
world. -
From the firſt beginning of the world unto the laſt con-
/unmation
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 117</div><p class="Text">C O N
famination thereof, it neither hath been, nor can be other-
wiſe, Hoºker, b. ii. ſect. 4.
3. Death; end of life.
Ghoſt, unlaid, forbear thee!
Nothing ill come near thee!
Quict conſummation have,
And renowned be thy grave' Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Cossº'MPT 10N. m. ſ. [conſumptio, Latin.]
1. The act of conſuming; waſte; deſtruction.
In commodities the value riſes as its quantity is leſs and
vent greater, which depends upon its being preferred in its
conſumption. Locke.
Etna and Veſuvius have ſent forth flames for this two or
three thouſand years, yet the mountains themſelves have not
ſuffered any confiderable diminution or conſumption; but are,
at this day, the higheſt mountains in thoſe countries. Woºdw.
2. The ſtate of waſting or periſhing.
3. [In phyſick.] A waſte of muſcular fleſh. It is frequently
attended with a he&amp;tick fever, and is divided by phyſicians into
ſeveral kinds, according to the variety of its cauſes. Quincy.
Conſumptions ſow -
In hollow bones of man. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
The ſtoppage of women's courſes, if not ſuddenly looked
to, ſets them into a conſumption, dropſy, or other diſeaſe.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
Consu'Mptive. adj [from conſume.]
1. Deſtructive; waſting; exhauſting; having the quality of
conſuming.
A long conſumptive war is more likely to break this grand
alliance than diſable France. Addiſon on the State of the War.
2. Diſeaſed with a conſumption.
Nothing taints ſound lungs ſooner than inſpiring the breath
of conſumptive lungs. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The lean, conſumptive wench, with coughs decay’d,
Is call'd a pretty, tight, and ſlender maid. Dryden.
By an exact regimen a conſumptive perſon may hold out for
years. Arbuthnot on Diet.
CoNsu'MPtiveness. n.ſ.. [from conſumptive..] A tendency to
a conſumption.
CoNsu'Tile. adj. [conſutilis, Latin.] That is ſewed or ſtitched
together. Dićf.
To CONTABULATE. v. a. [contabulº, Latin.] To floor
with boards.
CoNTA Bulation. n.ſ.. [contabulatio, Latin.] A joining of
boards together; a boarding a floor.
CONTACT. n.ſ.. [contactus, Latin.] Touch; cloſe union;
juncture of one body to another.
The Platoniſts hold, that the ſpirit of the lover doth paſs
into the ſpirits of the perſon loved, which cauſeth the deſire
of return into the body; whereupon followeth that appetite
of contaët and º Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 944.
When the light fell ſo obliquely on the air, which in other
places was between them, as to be all reflected, it ſeemed in
that place of contact to be wholly tranſmitted. Newton's Opt.
The air, by its immediate contaci, may coagulate the blood
which flows along the air-bladders. Arbuthnot cn Diet.
CoNTA'ction. m. ſ. [contadius, Latin J The act of touch-
ing ; a joining one body to another.
That deleterious it may be at ſome diſtance, and deſtruc-
tive without corporal contaction, there is no high improba-
bility. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 7.
CONTAGION. m. ſ. [contagio, Latin.j
1. The emiſſion from body to body by which diſeaſes are com-
| municated. -
If we two be one, and thou play falſe,
I do digeſt the poiſon of thy fleſh,
Being ſtrumpeted by thy contagion. Shakespeare Com. of Errours.
In infection and contagion from body to body, as the Flague
and the like, the infection is received many times by the body
paſſive ; but yet is, by the ſtrength and good diſpoſition there-
of, repulſed. Bacon.
2. Infection; propagation of miſchief, or diſeaſe.
Nor will the goodneſs of intention excuſe the ſcandal and
contagion of example. King Charles.
Down fell they,
And the dire hiſs renew'd, and the dire form
Catch'd by contagion. Miltºn's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x. l. 544.
3. Peſtilence ; venomous emanations.
Will he ſteal out of his wholſome bed,
To dare the vile contagion of the night Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
CoNTA'Gious. adj. [from contagio, Latin.] Infectious; caught
-by approach; poiſonous ; peſtilential.
The jades
That drag the tragick melancholly night,
From their miſty jaws
Breathe ſoul, contagious darkneſs in the air. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
We ſicken ſoon from her contagious care,
Grieve for her ſorrows, groan for her deſpair. Prior.
CoNTA'giousness. n.ſ.. [from contagious.] The quality of
being contagious.
To CONTA'IN. v. a. [cºntineo, Latin.]
1. To hold as a veſſel.
2. To compriſe; as a writing. -
There are many other things which Jeſus did, the which,
if they ſhould be written every one, I ſuppoſe that even the
world itſelf could not contain the books that ſhould be written.
john, xxi. 25.
Wherefore alſo it is contained in the ſcripture. 1 Pet. ii. 6.
3. To reſtrain; to with-hold; to keep within bounds.
All men ſhould be contained in duty ever after, without the
terrour of warlike forces. Spenſer on Ireland.
I tell you, ſirs,
If }. ſhould ſmile, he grows impatient.
—Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourſelves.
To CoNTA'1N. v. n. To live in continence.
I felt the ardour of my paſſion increaſe, ’till I could no
longer contain. Arbuthnºt and Pope.
Conta'inable. adj. [from contain.) Poſfible to be contained.
The air, containable within the cavity of the colipile,
amounted to eleven grains. oyº.
To CONTA'MINATE. v. a. [contamino, Lat.] To defile;
to pollute; to corrupt by baſe mixture.
Shall we now
Contaminate our fingers with baſe bribes? Shakesp jul. Caſar.
A baſe pander holds the chamber-door,
Whilſt by a ſlave, no gentler than a dog,
His faireſt daughter is contaminated. Shakespeare Henry V.
Do it not with poiſon; ſtrangle her in her bed,
Even in the bed ſhe hath contaminated. Shakeſpeare's Othelle.
I quickly ſhed
Some of his baſtardablood; and, in diſgrace,
Beſpoke him thus: contaminated, baſe,
And miſbegotten blood I ſpill of thine. Shakespeare Hºn. VI. p. i.
Though it be neceſſitated, by its relation to fleſh, to a ter-
reſtrial converſe; yet 'tis like the ſun, without contaminating
its beams. Glanv. Apol.
He that lies with another man's wife, propagates children
in another's family for him to keep, and contaminates the honour
thereof as much as in him lies. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Conta'MINATE. adj. [from the verb.] Polluted; defiled.
What if this body, conſecrate to thee,
By ruffian luſt ſhould be contaminate? Shakespeare Com, of Err.
CoNtAMINA'tion. m. ſ. [from contaminate.] Pollution; de-
filement.
CoNTE'MERATE D. adj. [contemeratus, Latin.] Violated; pol-
luted. Dićf.
To CONTEMN. v. a. [contemno, Latin ) To deſpiſe; to
ſcorn; to ſlight; to diſregard; to neglect ; to defy.
Yet better thus, and known to be contemned,
Than ſtill contemned and flattered. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Pygmalion then the Tyrian ſceptre ſway’d;
One who contemn'd divine and human laws,
Then ſtrife enſu’d. Dryden's Virgil’s AEneid.
CoNte'MNER. m. ſ. [from contemn.] One that contemns; a
deſpiſer; a ſcorner.
He counſels him to perſecute innovators of worſhip, not
only as contemners of the gods, but diſturbers of the ſtate. South.
To CONTEMPER. v. a. [contempero, Latin.] To moderate;
to reduce to a lower degree by mixing ſomething of oppoſite
qualities.
The leaves qualify and contemper the heat, and hinder the
evaporation of moiſture. Ray on the Creation.
CoNTE'MPERAMENT. n.ſ.. [from contempero, Latin J The de-
gree of any quality.
There is nearly an equal cºntemperament of the warmth of
our bodies to that of the hotteſt part of the atmoſphere. Derh.
To CoNTE'MPERATE. v. a. [from contemper.] To diminiſh
any quality by ſomething contrary; to moderate; to temper.
The mighty Nile and Niger do not only moiſten and con-
temperate the air, but refreſh and humectate the earth. Brown.
If blood abound, let it out, regulating the patient's diet,
and contemperating the humours. J/iſeman's Surgery.
CoNTEMPERATION. m. ſ. [from contemperate.]
1. The act of diminiſhing any quality by admixture of the con-
trary; the act of moderating or tempering.
The uſe of air, without which there is no continuation in
life, is not nutrition, but the contemperation of fervour in the
heart. Brown's Wugar Errours.
2. Proportionate mixture; proportion.
There is not greater variety in men's faces, and in the
contemperations of their natural humours, than there is in their
phantaſies. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To CONTEMPLATE. v. a. [contemplor, Lat..] To confider
with continued attention; to ſtudy; to meditate.
There is not much difficulty in confining the mind to con-
template what we have a great deſire to know. J/atts.
To Cost EMPLATE. v. n. To muſe; to think ſtudiouſly
with long attention.
So many hours muſt I take my reſt;
So many hours muſt I contemplate. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
Sapor had an heaven of glaſs, which he trod upon, contem-
plating over the ſame as if he had been Jupiter. Peacham.
How can I conſider what belongs to myſelf, when I have
been ſo long contemplating on you. Dryd. juv. Preface.
I CoNTEMPLA" ic N.
Shakespeare.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 118</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
iſ,
ſ
CoNTEMPLA'tion. m. ſ. [from contemplate.]
1. Meditation; ſtudious thought on any ſubjećt; continued at-
tention.
How now, what ſerious contemplation are you in
Shakespeare's King Lear.
Contemplation is keeping the idea, which is brought into the
mind, for ſome time actually in view. Locke.
2. Holy meditation; a holy exerciſe of the ſoul, employed in at-
tention to ſacred things.
I have breathed a ſecret vow,
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Neriſh here. Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
3. The faculty of ſtudy; oppoſed to the power of a&amp;tion.
There are two functions, contemplation and pračtice, ac-
cording to that general diviſion of objects; ſome of which en-
tertain our ſpeculation, others employ our actions. South.
Cost E/MPLAT 1 v E. adj. [from contemplate.]
1. Given to thought or ſtudy; ſtudious ; thoughtful.
Fixt and contemplative their looks,
Still turning over nature's books. - Denham.
2. Employed in ſtudy; dedicated to ſtudy. -
I am no courtier, nor verſed in ſtate affairs: my life hath
rather been contemºlative than active. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Contemplative men may be without the pleaſure of diſcovering
the ſecrets of ſtate, and men of a&amp;tion are commonly without
the pleaſure of tracing the ſecrets of divine art. Grew's Coſmol.
3. Having the power of thought or meditation.
So many kinds of creatures might be to exerciſe the con-
templative faculty of man. Ray on the Creation.
Cost EMPLA rively. adv. [from contemplative.] Thought-
fully; attentively; with deep attention.
CoNTEMPLA'roR. m. ſ. [Latin.] One employed in ſtudy;
an enquirer after knowledge; a ſtudent.
In the Perſian tongue the word magus imports as much as a
contemplator of divine and heavenly ſcience. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
The Platonick contemplators rejećt both theſe deſcriptions,
founded upon parts and colours. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
CONTEMPORARY. adj. [contemporain, French.]
1. Living in the ſame age; coetaneous.
Albert Durer was contemporary to Lucas. Dryd. Dufreſnºy.
2. Born at the ſame time.
A grove born with himſelf he ſees,
And loves his old contemporary trees. Cowley.
3. Exiſting at the ſame point of time.
It is impoſſible to make the ideas of yeſterday, to-day, and
to-morrow, to be the ſame; or bring ages paſt and future to-
gether, and make them contemporary. Locke.
CoNTE'M Pora RY. m. ſ. One who lives at the ſame time with
another.
All this in blooming youth you have atchiev'd ;
Nor are your foil'd contemporaries griev'd. Dryden.
As he has been favourable to me, he will hear of his kind-
neſs from our contemporaries; for we are fallen into an age il-
literate, cenſorious, and detracting. Dryd. juv. Preface.
The active part of mankind, as they do moſt for the good
of their contempºraries, very deſervedly gain the greateſt ſhare
in their applauſes. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 40.
To Conté'MpoRISE. v. a [con and tempus, Latin.] To make
contemporary ; to place in the ſame age.
The indifferency of their exiſtences contemporiſed into our
aćtions, admits a farther conſideration.
Brown's /uſgar Errours, b. i. c. 11.
CONTEMPT. m. ſ. [contemptus, Latin.]
1. The act of deſpiſing others; ſlight regard; ſcorn.
It was neither in cºmtempt nor pride that I did not bow. Eſh.
The ſhame of being miſerable,
Expoſes men to ſcorn and baſe contempt,
Even from their neareſt friends. Denham.
There is no action in the behaviour of one man towards
another, of which human nature is more impatient than of
contempt ; it being a thing made up of theſe two ingredients,
an undervaluing of a man, upon a belief of his utter uſeleſſ-
neſs and inability, and a ſpiteful endeavour to engage the reſt
of the world in the ſame belief and ſlight eſteem of him.
South's Sermons.
His friend ſnil'd ſcornful, and with proud contempt
Rejects as idle what his fellow dreamt. Dryden's Fables.
2. The ſtate of being deſpiſed; vileneſs.
The place was like to come unto contempt. 2 Mac. iii. 18.
Cost EMPT B I. E. adj. [from contempt.]
1. Worthy of contempt; deſerving ſcorn.
No man truly knows himſelf, but he groweth daily more
contemptible in his own eyes. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
From no one vice exempt,
And moſt contemptible to ſhun contempt. Pope's Epiſtles.
2. Deſpiſed; ſcorned; neglected.
There is not ſo contemptible a plant or animal that does not
confound the moſt enlarged underſtanding. Locke.
3. Scornful; apt to deſpiſe. This is no proper uſe.
If ſhe ſhould make tender of her love, ’tis very poſſible he'll
ſcorn it; for the man hath a contemptille ſpirit. Shakeſpeare.
CoNTE'MPT 1 el Es Ess. m. ſ. [from contemptible.] The ſtate of
Vo L. I. 2
being contemptible; the ſtate of being deſpiſed; meanneſs;
vileneſs; baſeneſs; cheapneſs. -
Who, by a ſteddy practice of virtue, comes to diſcern the
contemptilleneſ of thoſe baits wherewith he allures us....
Pecay of Piety.
CoNTE'MPTIRLY. adv. [from contemptible.] Meanly; in a
manner deſerving contempt.
Know'ſt thou not
Their language, and their ways? They alſo know, ---
And reaſon not contemptibly. Milton's Paradiſ: Loſº, b. viii.
CoNTE'MPTuous. adj. [from contempt..] Scornful; apt to de-
ſpiſe ; uſing words or actions of contempt; inſolent.
To neglect God all our lives, and know that we neglect
him; to offend God voluntarily, and know that we offend
him, caſting our hopes on the peace which we truſt to make
at parting, is no other than a rebellious preſumption, and even
a contemptuous laughing to ſcorn and deriding of God, his laws
and precepts. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the J/ºrld.
Some much averſe I found, and wond’rous harſh,
Contemptuous, proud, ſet on revenge and ſpite. Milt. Agon.
Rome, the proudeſt part of the heathen world, entertained
the moſt contemptuous opinion of the Jews. Atterbury.
CoNTE Mptuously. adv. [from contemptuous J. With ſcorn;
with deſpite ; ſcornfully; deſpitefully.
I throw my name againſt the bruiſing ſtone,
Trampling contemptuouſly on thy diadem. Shakeſpeare.
The apoſtles and moſt eminent Chriſtians were poor, and
uſed contemptuºuſly. Taylor's Holy Living.
If he governs tyrannically in youth, he will be treated con-
temptuouſly in age; and the baſer his enemies, the more in-
tolerable the affront. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 14. AMoral.
A wiſe man would not ſpeak contemptuouſly of a prince,
though out of his dominions. Tillºtſon.
CoNtE'Mptuous Ness. n.ſ.. [from contemptuous.] Diſpoſition
to contempt; inſolence. Dić7.
To CONTEND. v. n. [contendº, Latin.]
1. To ſtrive 5 to ſtruggle in oppoſition.
Hector's forehead ſpit forth blood
At Grecian ſwords contending. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
When he reads
Thy perſonal venture in the rebels flight,
His wonders and his praiſes do contend
Which ſhould be thine or his. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Death and nature do contend about them,
Whether they live or die. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Diſtreſs not the Moabites, neither contend with them in
battle; for I will not give thee of their land. Deutr. ii. 9.
2. To vie; to act in emulation.
3. It has for before the ground or cauſe of contention.
You ſit above, and ſee vain men below
Contend for what you only can beſtow. Dryden,
The queſtion which our author would contend for, if he did
not forget it, is what perſons have a right to be obeyed. Locke.
4. Sometimes about.
He will find that manythings he fiercely contended about were
trivial. Decay of Piety.
5. It has with before the opponent.
This battle fares like to the morning's war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light. Shakespeare H. VI.
If we conſider him as our maker, we cannot contend with
him. 7 emple.
6. Sometimes againſ.
In ambitious ſtrength I did
Contend againſt thy valour. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
To CoNTE'ND. v. a. To diſpute anything; to conteſt.
Their airy limbs in ſports they exerciſe,
And on the green contend the wreſtler's prize. Dryd. Æneid.
A time of war at length will come,
When Carthage ſhall contend the world with Rome. Dryd.
Thus low we lie,
Shut from this day and that contended ſky. Dryden.
CoNTE'NDENT. n.ſ.. [from contend..] Antagoniſt; opponent;
champion; combatant. -
In all notable changes and revolutions the contendents have
been ſtill made a prey to the third party. L’É/irange, Fab. 15.
CoNTE'NDER. m. ſ. [from contend.] Combatant; champion.
The contenders for it, look upon it as an undeniable ;
- acke.
Thoſe diſputes often ariſe in good earneſt, where the two
contender, do really believe the different propoſitions which they
ſupport. //atts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i. c. 16.
CONTENT. adj. [contentus, Latin.]
1. Satisfied ſo as not to repine; eaſy, though not highly
pleaſed. -
Born to the ſpacious empire of the Nine,
One wou'd have thought ſhe ſhou'd have been cºntent,
To manage well that mighty government. Dryden.
Who is content, is happy. Locº.
A man is perfectly content with the ſtate he is in, when he
is perfectly without any uneaſineſs. Lºcke.
Foe to loud praiſe, and friend to learned eaſe,
Cºntent with ſcience in the vale of peace. Pºp.' Epiſ?'es,
5 § 1 2. Satisfied
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 119</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
2. Satisfied ſo as not to oppoſe. -
Submit you to the people's voices,
Allow their officers, and be content
To ſuffer lawful cenſure. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
To Con TE's r. v. a. (from the adjećtive.]
1. To ſatisfy ſo as to ſtop complaint; not to offend; to appeaſe
without plenary happineſs or complete gratification.
Content thyſelf with this much, and let this ſatisfy thee,
that I love thee. Sidney.
ſt doth much content me
To hear him ſo inclin'd. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
If a man ſo temper his actions, as in ſome one of them he
doth content every faction, the muſick of praiſe will be fuller. Bac.
Great minds do ſometimes content themſelves to threaten,
when they could deſtroy. Tillotſon, Preface.
Do not content yourſelves with obſcure and confuſed
ideas, where clearer are to be attained. J/atts's Logick.
2. To pleaſe; to gratify.
Is the adder better than the eel,
Becauſe his painted ſkin contents the eye?
CoNTE'NT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Moderate happineſs; ſuch ſatisfaction as, though it does not
fill up defire, appeaſes complaint.
Nought's had, all's ſpent,
Where our deſire is got without content. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
One thought content the good to be enjoy'd;
This every little accident deſtroy'd.
A wiſe content his even ſoul ſecur'd;
By want not ſhaken, nor by wealth allur'd. Smith on Philips.
2. Acquieſcence; ſatisfaction in a thing unexamined.
Others for language all their care expreſs,
And value books, as women men, for dreſs:
Their praiſe is ſtill—the ſtyle is excellent;
The ſenſe they humbly take upon content. Pope's Epiſºes.
3. [From contentus, contained.] That which is contained, or
included in anything.
Though my heart's content firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that ſhall from mine eyes appear. Shakeſpeare.
Scarcely any thing can be certainly determined of the
particular contents of any ſingle maſs of ore by mere inſpection.
//oodward's Natural Hiſtory, p. iv.
Theſe experiments are made on the blood of healthy ani-
mals: in a lax and weak habit ſuch a ſerum might afford other
contents. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
4. The power of containing; extent; capacity.
This iſland had then fifteen hundred ſtrong ſhips, of great
toºtent. Bacon.
It were good to know the geometrical content, figure, and
ſituation of all the lands of a kingdom, according to natural
bounds. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
5. That which is compriſed in a writing. In this ſenſe the
plural only is in uſe.
I have a letter from her -
Of ſuch contents, as you will wonder at. Shakeſpeare.
I ſhall prove theſe writings not counterfeits, but authen-
tick, and the contents true, and worthy of a divine original.
Grew's Coſmol. b. iv. c. 1. ſ. 1.
The contents of both books come before thoſe of the firſt
book, in the thread of the ſtory. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 267.
CoNTENTA"tion. n.ſ.. [from content.] Satisfaction; content.
I ſeek no better warrant than my own conſcience, nor no
greater pleaſure than mine own contentation. Sidney.
The ſhield was not long after incruſted with a new ruſt,
and is the ſame ; a cut of which hath been engraved and ex-
hibited, to the great contentation of the learned. Arbu, and Pope.
CoNTE'NtE D. participial adj. [from content.] Satisfied; at
quiet; not repining; not demanding more ; eaſy, though
not plenarily happy.
Barbaroſla, in hope by ſufferance to obtain another king-
dom, ſeemed contented with the anſwer. Knolles's Hiſtory.
Dream not of other worlds,
Contented that thus far has been reveal’d,
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
Not of earth only, but of higheſt heav'n. Milt. Par. Left.
If he can deſcry
Some nobler foe approach, to him he calls,
And begs his fate, and then contented falls. Denham.
To diſtant lands Vertumnus never roves,
Like you, contented with his native groves. Pºpe.
CoNTE'Ntion. m. ſ. [contentio, Latin.]
1. Strife; debate; conteſt; quarrel; mutual oppoſition.
Can we with manners aſk what was the difference
Safely, I think; 'twas a contention in publick. Shakeſp.
But avoid fooliſh queſtions and genealogies, and contentions
and ſtrivings. Tit. iii. 9.
Can they keep themſelves in a perpetual contention with
their eaſe, their reaſon, and their God, and not endure a ſhort
combat with a ſinful cuſtom. Decay of Piety.
The ancients made contention the principle that reigned in
the chaos at firſt, and then love; the one to expreſs the divi-
ſions, and the other the union of all parties in the middle and
common bond. Bºrnet's Tºry ºf the Earth.
2. Emulation; endeavour to excel.
Sons and brother at a ſtrife!
What is your quarrel how began it firſt? .
No quarrel, but a ſweet cºntention. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
3. Eagerneſs; zeal; ardour; vehemence of endeavour.
Your own earneſtneſs and contention to effect what you are
about, will continually ſuggeſt to you ſeveral artifices. Holder.
This is an end, which, at firſt view, appears worthy our
utmoſt contention to obtain. Rogers.
CoNTE'N Tious. adj. [from contend J Quarrelſom ; given to
debate; perverſe; not peaceable.
Thou think'ſt much that this contentious ſtorm
Invades us to the ſkin. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
There are certain contentious humours that are never to be
pleaſed. L’Eſtrange.
Reſt made them idle, idleneſs made them curious, and cu-
rioſity contentious. Decay of Piety.
CoNTE'Ntious juriſdiction. [In law.] A court which has a
power to judge and determine differences between contending
parties. The lord chief juſtices, and judges, have a conten-
tious juriſdićtion; but the lords of the treaſury, and the com-
miſſioners of the cuſtoms, have none, being merely judges
of accounts and tranſačtions. Chambers.
CoNTE'Ntiously, adv. [from contentious.] Perverſely; quar-
relſomely.
We in not contentiouſly rejoin, or only to juſtify our own,
but to applaud and confirm his maturer aſſertions. Brown.
CoNTE'Ntious Ness. n.ſ.. [from contentious.] Proneneſs to
conteſt; perverſeneſs; turbulence; quarrelſomeneſs.
Do not cºntentiouſneſs and cruelty, and ſtudy of revenge,
ſeldom fail of retaliation ? Bentley’s Sermons.
CoNTE'N'ſ less, adj. [from content.] Diſcontented; diſſatiſ-
fied; uneaſy.
Beſt ſtates, contentleſ,
Have a diſtracted and moſt wretched being,
Worſe than the worſt, content. Shakesp eart's Timon.
CoNTE'NTMENT. n.ſ.. [from content, the verb.]
1. Acquieſcence without plenary ſatisfaction.
Such men's contentment muſt be wrought by ſtratagem: the
uſual method of fare is not for them. Hooker, b. iv. f. 8.
Submiſſion is the only reaſoning between a creature and its
Maker, and contentment in his will is the beſt remedy we can
apply to misfortunes. Temple.
Contentment, without external honour, is humility; without
the Pleaſure of eating, temperance. Grew's Cºſmol.
Some place the bliſs in ačtion, ſome in eaſe,
Thoſe call it pleaſure, and contentment theſe. Pope's Eſſays.
But now no face divine contentment wears,
'Tis all blank ſadneſs, or continual tears. Pºpe.
2. Gratification.
At Paris the prince ſpent one whole day, to give his mind
ſome contentment in viewing of a famous city. //otton.
CoNTE'RMINous. adj. [conterminus, Latin.] Bordering upon;
touching at the boundaries.
This inſenſibly conformed ſo many of them, as were con-
terminous to the colonies and garriſons, to the Roman laws.
Hale's Law of England.
CoNTERRA'NEous. adj. [conterraneus, Lat..] Of the ſame
COuntry. Dići.
To CONTEST. v. a...[conteſter, Fr. probably from contra
teffari, Latin.] To diſpute; to controvert; to litigate; to
call in queſtion.
'Tis evident, upon what account none have preſumed to
conteſt the proportion of theſe ancient pieces. Dryd. Dufreſh.
To Conºre'st. v. m. Followed by with.
1. To ſtrive; to contend.
The difficulty of an argument adds to the pleaſure of con-
teſting with it, when there are hopes of victory. Burnet.
2. To vie; to emulate.
I do conteſt
As hotly and as nobly with thy love,
As ever in ambitious ſtrength I did
Contend againſt thy valour. Shakeſpeare's Cºriolanus.
Of man, who dares in pomp with Jove conte//,
Unchang'd, immortal, and ſupremely bleſt ? Pope's Odyſſey.
CoNTE'st. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Diſpute; difference; debate.
This of old no leſs conteſts did move,
Than when for Homer's birth ſev’n cities ſtrove. Denham.
A definition is the only way whereby the meaning of words
can be known, without leaving room for conteſ? about it. Locke.
Leave all noiſy contº/fs, all immodeſt clamours, and brawl-
ing language. //attr.
CoNTE's TABLE. adj. [from conteſt.] That may be conteſted;
diſputable; controvertible.
CoNTE's TABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from contſºalle.] Poſſibility of
conteſt. Dićf.
CoN rest A'Tion. n.ſ.. [from conteſ?..] The act of conteſting;
debate; ſtrife.
Doors ſhut, viſits forbidden, and, which was worſe, divers
conteſtations, even with the queen herſelf. J/otton.
After years ſpent in domeſtick, unſociable conteſtations, ſhe
found means to withdraw, Clarendon, b. viii.
I
To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 120</div><p class="Text">C O N
To CONTE'X. v. a. [contexo, Lat.] To weave together; to
unite by interpoſition of parts.
The fluid body of quickſilver is contexed with the ſalts it
carries up in ſublimation. Boyle.
Co'NT ExT. n.f. [contextus, Latin.] The general ſeries of a
diſcourſe; the parts of the diſcourſe that precede and follow
the ſentence quoted.
That chapter is really a repreſentation of one, which hath
only the knowledge, not practice of his duty; as is manifeſt
from the context. Hammond on Fundamentals.
CoNTE's T. adj. [from contex.] Knit together; firm.
Hollow and thin, for lightneſs; but withal context and firm,
for ſtrength. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
CoNTE's TURE. m. ſ. [from contex.] The diſpoſition of parts
one amongſt others; the compoſition of anything out of ſepa-
rate parts; the fyſtem ; the conſtitution; the manner in which
anything is woven or formed.
He was not of any delicate cºntexture; his limbs rather ſturdy
than dainty. Wotton.
Every ſpecies, afterwards expreſſed, was produced from
that idea, forming that wonderful contexture of created beings.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Preface.
Hence 'gan relax,
The ground's contexture; hence Tartarian dregs,
Sulphur, and nitrous ſpume, enkindling fierce,
Bellow’d within their darkſome caves.
This apt, this wiſe contexture of the ſea,
Makes it the ſhips, driv'n by the winds, obey;
Whence hardy merchants ſail from ſhore to ſhore. Blackm.
Philips.
. ContiGNATION. m.ſ.. [contignatio, Latin.]
1. A frame of beams or boards joined together.
We mean a porch, or cloiſter, or the like, of one contigna-
tion, and not in ſtoried buildings. Wotton's Architecture.
2. The aët of framing or joining a fabrick.
ContiGU'ITY. m. ſ. [from contiguous.] Aétual contaët; ſitua-
tion in which two bodies or countries touch upon each other.
He defined magnetical attraćtion to be a natural imitation
and diſpoſition conforming unto contiguity. Brown, b. ii.
The immediate contiguity of that convex were a real ſpace.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
CONTI'GUOUS. adj. [contiguus, Latin.]
1. Meeting ſo as to touch; bordering upon each other; not
ſeparate.
Flame doth not mingle with flame as air doth with air, or wa-
ter with water, but only remaineth contiguous, as it cometh to
• paſs betwixt conſiſting bodies. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, Nº. 31.
- The loud miſrule
Of chaos far remov’d ; leſt fierce extremes,
Contiguºus, might diſtemper the whole frame. Milt, Pa. Ioff.
The Eaſt and Weſt
Upon the globe, a mathematick point
Only divides: thus happineſs and miſery,
And all extremes, are ſtill contiguous. Denham's Sophy.
Diſtinguiſh them by the diminution of the lights and ſha-
dows, joining the contiguous objećts by the participation of
their colours. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
When I viewed it too near, the two halfs of the paper did
not appear fully divided from one another, but ſeemed conti-
guous at one of their angles. Newton's Opt.
2. It has ſometimes with.
Water, being contiguous with air, cooleth it, but moiſteneth
it not. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 865.
CoNT1'Guously. adv. [from contiguous.] Without any inter-
vening ſpaces.
Thus diſembroil'd, they take their proper place,
The next of kin contiguouſly embrace, }
And foes are ſunder'd by a larger ſpace. Dryden's Ovid.
CoNT1'GuousNEss. n.ſ.. [from contiguous.] Cloſe connection;
coherence. Dići.
f -
§: } n. ſ. [continentia, Latin.]
1. Reſtraint; command of one's ſelf.
He knew what to ſay; he knew alſo when to leave off, a
continence which is practiſed by few writers. Dryd. Fab. Prºf.
2. Chaſtity in general.
Where is he 3—
—In her chamber, making a ſermon of continency to her,
and rails, and ſwears, and rates. Shakespeare Tam. of the Shrew.
Suffer not diſhonour to approach
Th’ imperial ſeat; to virtue conſecrate,
To juſtice, continence, and nobility. Shakespeare. Titus Andronicus.
3. Forbearance of lawful pleaſure.
Content without lawful venery, is continence; without un-
lawful, chaſtity. Grew's Coſmol.
4. Moderation in lawful pleaſures.
Chattity is either abſtinence or continence: abſtinence is that
of virgins or widows; continence, of married perſons. Taylor.
5. Continuity; ui interrupted courſe.
Anſwers ought to be made before the ſame judge, before
whom the depoſitions were produced, left the continence of the
courſe ſhould be divided; or, in other terms, left there ſhould
be a diſcontinuance of the cauſe. Ayliffe's Parergon.
CONTINENT, adj. [continens, Latin.]
1. Chaſte; abſtemious in lawful pleaſures.
Life
Hath been as continent, as chaſte, as true,
As I am now unhappy. Shakeſpeare's J/inter’s Tale.
2. Reſtrained; moderate; temperate.
. I pray you, have a continent forbearance, ’till the ſpeed of
his rage goes ſlower. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. Continuous; connected.
Th; North-eaſt part of Aſia is, if not continent with the
Weſt ſide of America, yet certainly it is the leaſt disjoined by
ſea of all that coaſt of Aſia. Brerewood on Languages.
CoNTINENT, n.ſ.. [continens, Latin.]
1. Land not disjoined by the ſea from other lands.
Whether this portion of the world were rent,
By the rude ocean, from the continent;
Or thus created, it was ſure deſign'd
To be the ſacred refuge of mankind. Jłaller.
The declivity of rivers will be ſo much the leſs, and there-
fore the continents will be the leſs drained, and will gradually
increaſe in humidity. Bentley's Sermons.
2. That which contains anything. This ſenſe is perhaps only
in Shakespeare.
You ſhall find in him the continent of what part a gentle-
man would ſee. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
O cleave my ſides
Heart, once be ſtronger than thy continent,
Crack thy frail caſe. Shakeſp. Anthony and Cleopatra,
Cloſe pent-up guilts,
Rive your contending continents. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To CONTINGE. v. n. [contingo, Lat.] To touch; to reach;
to happen. Die?.
CoNT1'NGENce. }": [from contingent.] The quality of being
CoNT1'NGENcy. fortuitous; accidental poſſibility. w
Their credulities aſſent unto any prognoſticks, which, con-
ſidering the contingency in events, are only in the preſcience of
God. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i. c. 3.
For once, O heav'n' unfold thy adamantine book;
If not thy firm, immutable decree,
At leaſt the ſecond page of great contingency,
Such as conſiſts with wills originally free. Dryden.
Ariſtotle ſays, we are not to build certain rules upon the
contingency of human actions. South's Sermons.
CoNT1'NG ENT. adj. [ contingens, Latin.] Falling out by
chance; accidental; not determinable by any certain rule.
Hazard naturally implies in it, firſt, ſomething future; ſe-
condly, ſomething contingent. South.
I firſt thoroughly informed myſelf in all material circum-
ſtances of it, in more places than one, that there might be
nothing caſual or contingent in any one of thoſe circumſtances.
JWoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
CoNT1'NGENT. m. ſ.
1. A thing in the hands of chance.
By contingents we are to underſtand thoſe things which come
to paſs without any human forecaſt. Grew's Coſmol. b. iii. c. 2.
His underſtanding could almoſt pierce into future contingents,
his conjećtures improving even to prophecy. South's Sermons.
2. A proportion that falls to any perſon upon a diviſion; thus,
in time of war, each prince of Germany is to furniſh his
contingent of men, money, and munition.
Conti'NGENTLY. adv. [from contingent. J Accidentally ;
without any ſettled rule.
It is digged out of the earth contingently, and indifferently,
as the pyrita and agates. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory, p. iv.
CoNT1'NGENTN Ess. n.ſ.. [from contingent.] Accidentalneſs.
CoNT1'NUAL. adj. [continuus, Latin.]
1. Inceſſant; proceeding without interruption; ſucceſſive without
any ſpace of time between. Continual is uſed of time, and
continuous of place.
He that is of a merry heart, hath a continual feaſt. Prov. 15:
'Tis all blank ſadneſs, or continual tears. Pºpe.
2. [In law.] A continual claim is made from time to time,
within every year and day, to land or other thing, which, in
ſome reſpect, we cannot attain without danger: For exam.
ple, if I be diffeiſed of land, into which, though I have fight
into it, I dare not enter, for fear of beating; it behooveth me
to hold on my right of entry to the beſt opportunity of me
and mine heir, by approaching as near it as I can, once every
year as long as 1 live , and ſo I ſave the right of entry to my
heir. Coweſ.
Conti'Nually, adv. [from continual.]
1. Without pauſe; without interruption.... .
The drawing of the boughs into, the inſide of a room,
wher: a fire is ºntinually kept, hath been tº with grapes.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 495.
* 7; - or.
-- wº all animals cºntinually increaſe in bigneſs,
during the whole ſpace of their lives? Bentley's Sermºns.
CoNT, Nuance. n.ſ.. [from continue.]
1. Succeſſion uninterrupted.
The brute immediately regards his own preſervation, or the
continuance cf his ſpecies. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 1 20.
2. Permanence
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 121</div><p class="Text">-C O N
C O N
º, Permanence in one ſtate.
Continuance of evil doth in itſelf increaſe evil. Sidney.
A chamber where a great fire is kept, though the fire be
at one ſtay, yet with the continuance continually hath its heat
increaſed. Sidicy, b. ii.
Theſe Romiſh caſuiſts ſpeak peace to the conſciences of .
men, by ſuggeſting ſomething which ſhall ſatisfy their minds,
notwithſtanding a known, avowed continuance in fins. South.
3. Abode in a place.
4. Duration; laſtingneſs.
You either fear his humour, or my negligence, that you
call in queſtion the continuance of his love. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
Their duty depending upon fear, the one was of no greater
continuance than the other. Hayward.
That pleaſure is not of greater continuance, which ariſes
from the prejudice or malice of its hearers. Addiſ, Freeholder.
5. Perſeverance.
To them who, by patient continuance in well-doing, ſeek
fºr glory, and honour, and immortality, eternal life. Ro. ii. 7.
6. Progreſſion of time.
In thy book all my members were written, which in conti-
*umnce were faſhioned. Pſ. cxxxix. 16.
CoNT1'Nu At E. adj. [continuatus, Latin.]
1. Immediately united.
We are of him and in him, even as though our very fleſh
and bones ſhould be made continuate with his. Hooker, b. v.
2. Uninterrupted; unbroken.
A moſt incomparable man breath'd, as it were,
To an untirable and continuate goodneſs. Shakeſp. Timon.
CoNTINUA'tion. n ſ [from continuate.] Protraction, or ſuc-
ceſſion uninterrupted.
Theſe things muſt needs be the works of providence, for
the cºntinuation of the ſpecies, and upholding the world. Ray.
The Roman poem is but the ſecond part of the Illias; a
continuation of the ſame ſtory. Dryd. Fables, Preface.
Costi'NU Ative. n ſ. [from continuate.] An expreſſion noting
permanence or duration.
To theſe may be added continuatives; as Rome remains to
this day, which includes at leaſt two propoſitions, viz. Rome
was, and Rome is. //atts's Logick.
CoNTINUA"toR. m. ſ. [from continuate.] He that continues or
keeps up the ſeries or ſucceſſion.
It ſeems injurious to providence to ordain a way of produc-
tion which ſhould deſtroy the producer, or contrive the conti-
nuation of the ſpecies by the deſtruction of the continuator.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 15.
To CONTINUE. v. m. [continuer, Fr. continuo, Latin.]
1. To remain in the ſame ſtate.
The multitude continue with me now three days, and have
nothing to eat. Mat. xv. 32.
2. To laſt; to be durable.
Thy kingdom ſhall not continue. 1 Sa. xiii. 14.
For here have we no continuing city, but we ſeek one to
Conle. Heb. xiii. 14.
3. To perſevere.
If ye continue in my word, then are ye my diſciples in-
deed. jo. viii. 31.
To Con TI'NU E. v. a.
1. To protraćt, or repeat without interruption.
O continue thy loving kindneſs unto them. Pſ. xxxvi. Io.
2. To unite without a chaſm, or intervening ſubſtance.
The dark abyſs, whoſe boiling gulph
Tamely endur'd a bridge of wond’rous length,
From hell continu’d reaching th' utmoſt orb
Of this frail world. Milton's Paradſe Loff, b. ii. l. 1029.
Here Priam's ſon, Deiphobus, he found,
Whoſe face and limbs were one continu’d wound;
‘Diſhoneſt, with lop'd arms, the youth appears,
Spoil'd of his noſe, and ſhorten’d of his ears. Dryd. Æn.
Where any motion or ſucceſſion is ſo ſlow, as that it keeps
not pace with the ideas in our minds, there the ſeries of a
conſtant continued ſucceſſion is loſt; and we perceive it not
but with certain gaps of reſt between. Locke.
You know how to make yourſelf happy, by only continuing
ſuch a life as you have been long accuſtomed to lead. Pope.
CoN ri'NUEDLY. adv. [from continued.] Without interruption;
without ceaſing.
By perſeverance, I do not underſtand a continuedly uniform,
equal courſe of obedience, and ſuch as is not interrupted with
the leaſt ad of fin." Norris.
CoNT1'NU ER. n.ſ.. [from continus.] Having the power of per-
ſeverance.
I would my horſe had the ſpeed of your tongue, and ſo
good a continier. Shakeſpeare's Much ado about Nothing.
CoNTINU'it Y. n.ſ. [continuitas, Latin.]
1. Connection uninterrupted ; coheſion ; cloſe union.
It is certain, that in all bodies there is an appetite of union,
and evitation of ſolution of continuity. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
After the great lights there muſt be great ſhadows, which
we call repoſes, becauſe in reality the fight would be tired,
if it were attracted by a continuity of glittering objects. Dryd.
it wraps itſelf about the flame, and by its continuity hinders
any air or nitre from coming. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
. In phyſick.
That texture or coheſion of the parts of an animal body,
upon the deſtruction of which there is ſaid to be a ſolution of
continuity. &amp; inty.
As in the natural body a wound or ſolution of continuity is
worſe than a corrupt humour, ſo in the ſpiritual. Bac. Eſſays.
The ſolid parts may be contracted by diſſolving their con-
tinuity; for a fibre, cut through, contraćts itſelf. Arbuthnºt.
CoN TI'Nuous. adj. [continuus, Latin.j Joined together with-
out the intervention of any ſpace.
As the breadth of every ring is thus augmented, the dark
intervals muſt be diminiſhed, until the neighbouring rings be-
come continuous, and are blended. Newton's Opt.
To whoſe dread cxpanſe,
Continuous depth, and wond rous length of courſe,
Our floods are rills. Thomſon's Summer, l 835.
To CONTORT. v. a. [contortus, Latin.] To twiſt; to
writhe.
The vertebral arteries are variouſly contorted. Ray.
Air ſeems to conſiſt of ſpires contorted into ſmall ſpheres,
through the interſtices of which the particles of light may
2
freely paſs. Cheyne.
CoNTo'Rtion. n.ſ.. [from contart.] Twiſt; wry motion;
flexure.
Diſruption they would be in danger of, upon a great and
ſudden ſtretch or contortion. Ray on the Creation.
How can ſhe acquire thoſe hundred graces and motions,
and airs, the contortions of every muſcular motion in the
face # Swift.
CONIOUR. m. ſ. [French.] The outline; the line by which
any figure is defined or terminated.
Co'N TRA. A Latin prepoſition uſed in compoſition, which
ſignifies againſ?.
CONTRA'BAND. adj. [contrabando, Ital. contrary to procla-
mation.] Prohibited; illegal; unlawful.
If there happen to be found an irreverent expreſſion, or a
thought too wanton, in the cargo, let them be ſlaved or for-
feited, like contraband goods. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
To Co'N TRABAND. v. a. [from the adjective.] To import
goods prohibited.
To CONTRACT. v. a. [contračius, Latin.]
1. To draw together; to ſhorten.
Why love among the virtues is not known,
Is, that love contracts them all in one. Ponne.
2. To bring two parties together; to make a bargain.
On him thy grace did liberty beſtow;
But firſt contračied, that, if ever found,
His head ſhould pay the forfeit.
3. To betroth; to affiance.
The truth is, ſhe and I, long ſince contračied,
Are now ſo ſure that nothing can diſſolve us. Shakeſpeare.
She was a lady of the higheſt condition in that country,
and contracted to a man of merit and quality. Taker, Nº. 58.
4. To procure; to bring; to incur ; to draw; to get.
Of enemies he could not but contrač good ſtore, while
moving in ſo high a ſphere. King Charles.
He that but conceives a crime in thought,
Contrač's the danger of an ačtual fault. Dryden's juv.
Like friendly colours, found them both unite,
And each from each contrač new ſtrength and light. Pope.
Such behaviour we contract by having much converſed with
perſons of high ſtations. Swift.
5. To ſhorten; to abridge; to epitomiſe.
To ContRAct. v. n.
1. To ſhrink up; to grow ſhort.
Whatever empties the veſſels, gives room to the fibres to
contract. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To bargain; as, to contračt fºr a quantity of proviſions.
CoNTRA'cT. part. adj. [from the verb.] Affianced; contračted.
Firſt was he contract to lady Lucy;
Your mother lives a witneſs to that vow. Shakespeare Rich. III.
Co'N TRAct. n.ſ.. [from the verb. Anciently accented on the firſt.]
1. An act whereby two parties are brought together; a bargain;
a compačt.
The agreement upon orders, by mutual contra.7, with the
conſent to execute them by common ſtrength, they make the
Dryden's Fables.
riſe of all civil governments. Temple.
Shall Ward draw contraº's with a ſtateſman's ſkill 2
Or Japhet pocket, like his grace, a will Pope.
2. An act whereby a man and woman are betrothed to one
another.
Touch'd you the baſtardy of Edward's children?—
—I did, with his contrač with lady Lucy,
And his contract by deputy in France. Shakespeare . Richard III.
3. A writing in which the terms of a bargain are included.
CoNTR act EDNEss. m. ſ. [from contracted.] The ſtate of
being contraćted; contračtion. Dąż.
CoNTRActibility. m. ſ. [from contradiº.j Poſſibility of
being contracted; quality of ſuffering contračtion.
By
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 122</div><p class="Text">By this continual contradibility and dilatibility by different
degrees of heat, the air is kept in a conſtant motion. Arbuthn.
ontRA'cTIBLE. adj. [from contrač, J Capable of con-
traction.
Small air-bladders, dilatable and contračible, are capable to
be inflated by the admiſſion of air, and to ſubſide at the ex-
pulſion of it. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CoNTRA'cTIBLEN Ess. n. ſ. [from contračiible.] The quality
of ſuffering contračtion. Dić7.
CoNTRA'ctile. adj. . [from contrać.] Having the power of
contračtion, or of ſhortening itſelf.
The arteries are elaſtick tubes, endued with a contračfile
force, by which they ſqueeze and drive the blood ſtill
forward. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CoNTRA’ction. n.ſ.. [contračio, Latin.]
1. The ačt of contračting or ſhortening.
The main parts of the poem, ſuch as the fable and ſenti-
ments, no tranſlator can prejudice but by omiſfions or con-
trađions. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
2. The act of ſhrinking or ſhriveling.
Oil of vitriol will throw the ſtomach into involuntary con-
trations. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. The ſtate of being contračted, or drawn into a narrow
compaſs.
Some things induce a contračiion in the nerves, placed in the
mouth of the ſtomach, which is a great cauſe of appetite. Bacon.
Comparing the quantity of contračiion and dilatation made
by all the degrees of each colour, I found it greateſt in the
red: Newton's Opt.
4. [In grammar.] The redućtion of two vowels or ſyllables
to One.
5. Anything in its ſtate of abbreviation or contračtion; as, the
writing is full of contračtions.
CoNTRA'ctor. n.ſ.. [from contrač.] One of the parties to a
contračt or bargain.
Let the meaſure of your affirmation or denial be the un-
derſtanding of your contračior; for he that deceives the buyer
or the ſeller by ſpeaking what is true, in a ſenſe not under-
ſtood by the other, is a thief. Taylor's Rule of Living Haly.
All matches, friendſhips, and ſocieties are dangerous and
inconvenient, where the contractors are not equals. L’Eſtrange.
To CONTRADI'CT. v. a. [contradico, Latin.]
1. To oppoſe verbally; to aſlert the contrary to what has been
aſſerted.
It is not lawful to contradić, a point of hiſtory which is
known to all the world, as to make Hannibal and Scipio con-
temporaries with Alexander. Dryden's Dedication, Æn.
2. To be contrary to ; to repugn; to oppoſe.
No truth can contradić any truth. Hooker, b. ii. ſect. 7.
I contradići your banes:
If you will marry, make your loves to me. Shakespeare K. Lear.
CoNTRADI’cter. n.ſ.. [from contradić.] One that contra-
dićts; one that oppoſes; an oppoſer.
If no contradićter appears herein, and the ſuit was only
commenced againſt ſuch as openly reproached him, in reſpect
of his legitimacy, it will ſurely be good for the inheritance
itſelf. Ayliffe's Parergon.
If a gentleman is a little ſincere in his repreſentations, he
is ſure to have a dozen contradićiers. Swift's View of Ireland.
CoNTRADI’ction. n.ſ.. [from contradić.]
1. Verbal oppoſition; controverſial aſſertion.
That tongue,
Inſpir'd with cºntradićlion, durſt oppoſe
A third part of the gods. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vi.
2. Oppoſition.
Conſider him that endureth ſuch contradićlion of ſinners
againſt himſelf, leſt ye be wearied. Heb. xii. 3.
3. Inconſiſtency; incongruity in words or thoughts.
The apoſtle's advice to be angry and fin not, was a contra-
diction in their philoſophy. South's Sermons.
If truth be once perceived, we do thereby alſo perceive
whatſoever is falſe in contradition to it. Grew's Cºſmol. b. ii.
4. Contrariety, in thought or effect.
All contradičians grow in thoſe minds, which neither abſo-
lutely climb the rock of virtue, nor freely ſink into the ſea of
vanity. Sidney, b. ii.
Laws human muſt be made without contradićlion unto any
poſitive law in ſcripture. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 9.
Can he make deathleſs death 2 That were
Strange contradiction, which to God himſelf
Impoſſible is held; as argument
Of weakneſs, not of pow'r. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
CoNTRADI'cºrious. adj. [from contradić.]
1. Filled with contradictions; inconſiſtent.
The rules of decency, of government, of juſtice itſelf,
are ſo different in one place from what they are in another,
ſo party-coloured and contradićiizus, that one would think
the ſpecies of men altered according to their climates. Collier.
2. Incided to contradićt; given to cavil.
CoNTRADI'cºrious N Ess. m. ſ. [fron contradišious.) Incon-
fiſtency; contrariety to itſelf.
V of... I.
C O N
This opinion was, for its abſurdity and contradiºiºſºft,
unworthy of the contemplation and refined ſpirit of Plato.
r Norris's Miſcellanies.
Costkº Dictorily, adv. [from contradiº'ory. ] Inconſiſtent-
ly with himſelf; oppoſitely to others.
- Such as have diſcourſed hereon, have ſo diverſely, contra-
ily, or contradiºiorily delivered themſelves, that no affirmative
from thence can be reaſonably deduced. Brown's Wulg. Err.
CoNTRADI’ctoriness. n. ſ. [from contradićlory..] Oppoſition
in the higheſt degree. Dić7.
CoNTRADI’ctory. adj. [contradićtorius, Latin J
I. Oppoſite to; inconſiſtent with.
The Jews hold, that in caſe two rabbies ſhould happen to
contradiºt one another, they were yet bound to believe the
contradićtory aſſertions of both. South's Sermons.
The ſchemes of thoſe gentlemen are moſt abſurd, and
cºntradičory to common ſenſe. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 7.
2. [In logick.] That which is in the fulleſt oppoſition, where
both the terms of one propoſition are oppoſite to thoſe of
andther.
CoNTRADI’ctor Y. m. ſ. A propoſition which oppoſes another
in all its terms; contrariety; inconſiſtency.
It is common with princes to will contradišiories; for it is
the ſoleciſm of power to think to command the end, and yet
not to endure the means. Bacon, Eſſay 20.
To aſcribe unto him a power of eleētion, not to chuſe this or
that indifferently, is to make the ſame thing to be determined
to one, and to be not determined to one, which are contra-
dićtories. Bramh. Anſwer to Hobbs.
CoNTRADISTI'Nction. n.ſ.. [from contradiſlinguiſh..] Diſtinc-
tion by oppoſite qualities.
We muſt trace the ſoul in the ways of intelle&amp;tual actions,
whereby we may come to the diſtinct knowledge of what is
meant by imagination, in contradiſlinétion to ſome other
powers. Glanville's Scepſ, c. 13.
That there are ſuch things as fins of infirmity, in contra-
diffinétion to thoſe of preſumption, is a truth not to be
queſtioned. South.
To CONTRADISTINGUISH. v. a. [from contra and diſt
tinguiſh.] To diſtinguiſh not ſimply by differential but by
oppoſite qualities.
The primary ideas we have peculiar to body, as contradiſ-
tinguiſhed to ſpirit, are the coheſion of ſolid, and conſequently
ſeparable parts, and a power of communicating motion by
impulſe. Locke.
Theſe are our complex ideas of ſoul and body, as contra-
diffinguiſhed. Locke.
CoNTRAF1'ssure. m. ſ. [from contra and fiſſure.] --
Contuſions, when great, do uſually produce a fiſſure or
crack of the ſcull, either in the ſame part where the blow was
inflićted, and then it is called fiſſure; or in the contrary part,
in which caſe it obtains the name of contraſſure. Wiſeman.
To CONTRAINDICATE. v. a. [contra and indico, Lat.] To
point out ſome peculiar or incidental ſymptom or method of
cure, contrary to what the general tehour of the malady
requires.
Vomits have their uſe in this malady; but the age and ſex
of the patient, or other urgent or contraindicating ſymptoms,
muſt be obſerved. Harvey on Conſumptions.
ContRAINDIcA'tion. m.ſ.. [from contraindicate.] An indica-
tion or ſymptom, which forbids that to be done which the
main ſcope of a diſeaſe points out at firſt. ...Quincy.
I endeavour to give the moſt ſimple idea of the diſtemper,
and the proper diet, abſtraćting from the complications of the
firſt, or the contraindications to the ſecond. Arbuth, on Aliments.
ContraMu'RE. m. ſ. [contremur, French.] In fortification, is
an out wall built about the main wall of a city. . Chambers.
CoNTRANI'TENcy. n.ſ.. [from cºntra and nitens, Latin.] Re-
aćtion; a reſiſtency againſt preſſure. Dićf.
CoNTRAposition. n.ſ.. [from cºntra and pºſition.]
1. A placing over againſt.
2. In logick. See Conversion. -
ContRAREGula'RITY.. n.ſ.. [from contra and regularity.]
Contrariety to rule. -
It is not only its not promoting, but its oppoſing, or at
leaſt its natural aptneſs to oppoſe the greateſt and beſt of ends;
ſo that it is not ſo properly an irregularity as a “****
larity. - - Norris.
CoNTRA'RIANT. adj. [contrariant, from contrarier, French..]
Inconſiſtent; contradictory: a term of law. being fal
The very depoſitions of witneſſes themſely; leg alſº
various, contrariant, fingle, inconclud:nt. Ayliff's Parºgon.
Contraries. n.ſ. [from contraryl In logisk, propoſitions
which deſtroy each other ; but of which the falſhood of one
oes not eſtabliſh the truth of the other: - -
If two univerſals differ in quality, they are contrart's 3 as;
every vine is a tree, no zine is a tree. Theſe can never be both
true together, but they may be both falſe. . JWatts'; Logick.
CoNTRAR1'ety. n.ſ.. [from contrarieta, Latin.]
1. Repugnance; oppoſition. - - - - -
#. will about one and the ſame thing may, in contrary
5 N reſpects,
–
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 123</div><p class="Text">- C O N
C O N
reſpects, have contrary inclinations, and that without con-
trariety. Hooker, b. v. Jeº. 48.
It principally failed by late ſetting out, and by ſome contra-
rict; of weather at ſea. l/ction.
Their religion had more than negative contrariety to virtue.
Decay of Piety.
There is a contrariety between thoſe things that con-
ſcience inclines to, and thoſe that entertain the ſenſes. South.
There is nothing more common than contrariety of opi-
nions; nothing more obvious than that one man wholly diſ-
believes what another only doubts of, and a third ſtedfaſtly
believes and firmly adheres to. Lºcke.
2. Inconſiſtency; quality or poſition deſtrućtive of its op-
poſite. -
Making a cºntrariety the place of my memory, in her foul-
neſs, beheld Pamela's fairneſs, ſtill looking on Mopſa, but
thinking on Pamela. Sidney.
He which will perfectly recover a ſick and reſtore a diſeaſed
body unto health, muſt not endeavour ſo much to bring it to
a ſtate of ſimple cºntrariety, as of fit proportion in cºntrariety
unto thoſe evils which are to be cured Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 8.
He will be here, and yet he is not here;
How can theſe contrarieties agree ? Shake p. Henry IV. p. i.
Theſe two intereſts are of that nature, that it is to be feared
they cannot be divided; but they will alſo prove oppoſite, and
not reſting in a bare diverſity, quickly riſe into a contrariety.
South's Sermons.
Cost RA'ſ I. Y. adv, Iſrom contrary.]
1. in a manner contrary.
Many of them conſpire to one and the ſame action, and all
this contrari', to the laws of ſpecifick gravity, in whatever
poſture the body be formed. Ray on the Creation.
2. Different ways; in different directions.
Though all men deſire happineſs, yet their wills carry them
ſo contrarily, and conſequently ſome of them to what is
evil. Locke.
CoNº RA'RINEss. n.f. [from cºntrary..] Contrariety; oppoſi-
tion. Dićf.
CoNTRA'Rious. adj. [from contrary..] Oppoſite; repugnant
the one to the other.
God of our fathers, what is man'
That Thou towards him, with hand ſo various,
Or might I ſay contrariºus,
Temper'ſt thy providence through his ſhort courſe? Milton.
CoNTRA'Riously. adv. [from contrarious.] Oppoſitely; con-
trarily.
Many things, having full reference
To one conſent, may work contariouſly. Shakeſp. Henry V.
CoNTRA'Riwise. adv. [contrary and wiſe.] See Wise.
1. Converſely.
Divers medicines, in greater quantity move ſtool, and in
ſmaller urine; and ſo, contrariwiſe, ſome in greater quantity
move urine, and in ſmaller ſtool. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Everything that acts upon the fluids, muſt, at the ſame
time, act upon the ſolids, and contrariwiſe. Arbuth, on Alin.
2. On the contrary.
The matter of faith is conſtant, the matter, contrariwiſe, of
ačtions daily changeable. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 10.
This requeſt was never before made by any other lords;
but, contrariwiſ, they were humble ſuiters to have the benefit
and protection of the Engliſh laws. 19avies on Ireland.
The ſun may ſet and riſe:
But we, contrariwiſe,
Scep, after our ſhort light,
One everlaſting night. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the I/orld.
CONTRARY. adj. [cºntrarius, Latin.]
1. Oppoſite; contradictory; not ſimply different, or not alike,
but repugnant, ſo that one deſtroys or obſtructs the other.
Perhaps ſome thing, repugnant to her kind,
By ſtrong antipathy the ſoul may kill;
But what can be contrary to the mind,
Which holds all contraries in concord ſt;!!. Davies.
2. Inconſiſtent; diſagreeing.
He that believes it, and yet lives contrary to it, knows that
he hath no reaſon for what he does. ‘7 iſlatſon, Serm. v.
The various and contrary choices that nich make in the
world, do not argue that they do not at all purſue good; but
that the ſame thing is not good to every man alike. Locke.
3. Adverſe; in an oppoſite direction. -
The ſhip was in the midſt of the ſca, toſſed with the waves;
for the wind was coxºrary. 44at. xiv. 24.
Co'N TRARY. m. ſ. ſſiom the adjective )
1. A thing of oppoſite qualities.
No contraries hold more antipathy, -
Than I and ſuch a knave. Shakeſpeare’s King Lear.
He ſung -
Why contraries feed thunder in the cloud. Cowley’s Davidci.
Honour ſhould be concern’d in honour's cauſe ;
hat is not to be cur'd by contraries,
As bodies are, whoſe health is often drawn
From rankeſt poiſons. S...thºrn's Oroonºo.
2. A propoſition contrary to ſome other; a fast contrary to the
allegation.
The inſtances brought by our author are but ſlender proofs.
of a right to civil power and dominion in the firſt-born, and
do rather ſhew the contrary. Lake.
3. On the Cosº RARY. In oppºſition; on the other ſide.
- He pleaded ſtill not gºilty;
The king's attorney, ºn the contrary, -
Urg'd on examinations, proofs, confeſſions -
Of diverſe witneſſes. Shakespeareea º's Inry VIII.
If juſtice ſtood on the ſide of the fºrge perſon, it ought to
ive good men pleaſure to ſee that tight ſhould take place;
i. when, on the contraly, the commonweal of a whole nation
is overborn by private intereſt, what good man but muſt
lament? Stift.
4. To the Cost RARY. To a contrary purpoſe; to an opioſite
intent.
They did it, not for want of inſtruction to the contrary. Still.
To Co Nºr RARY. v. a. [contarier, French..] To oppoſe; to
thwart; to contradićt.
When I came to court I was adviſed not to cºntrary the
king. Latimer.
Finding in him the force of it, he would no further ºn-
tray it, but employ all his ſervice to medicine it. Sidº, y.
CONTRAST. n.ſ.. [contraſt, Fr.] Oppoſition and diſlim-
litude of figures, by which one contributes to the viſibility or
cffect of another.
To Co's rRAst, v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To place in oppoſition, ſo that one figure ſhews another to
advantage.
2. To ſhew another figure to advantage by its colour or ſitua-
t|Oll.
The figures of the groups muſt not be all on a ſide, that is,
with their face and bodies all turned the ſame way; but muſt
contraſt each other by their ſeveral poſitions. Dryd. Dufreſnoy.
CoN tra v All A"tion, n.ſ. [from contra and vallo, Latin.]
The fortification thrown up, by the beſiegers, round a city, to
hinder the fallies of the garriſon.
When the late czar of Muſcovy firſt acquainted himſelf
with mathematical learning, he practiſed all the rules of cir-
cumvallation and contravallation at the ſiege of a town in
Livonia. Watts's Logick.
To CONTRAVENE. v. a. [contra and venia, Lat.] To op-
poſe; to obſtruct; to baffle.
CoNTRA v ENER. m. ſ. [from contravene.] He who oppoſes
another.
ContRA v E'NTion. m. ſ. [French.] Oppoſition.
Yet if Chriſtianity did not lend its name to ſtand in the
gap, and to employ or divert theſe humours, they muſt of
neceſſity be ſpent in contraventions to the laws of the land. Swift.
CoNTRAYE/Rv A. m. ſ. [contra, againſt, and yerva, a name by
which the Spaniards call black hellebore; and, perhaps, ſome-
times poiſon in general.] . A ſpecies of birthwort growing in
Jamaica, where it is much uſed as an alexipharmick. Miller.
CoNTRECTA'tion. m. ſ. [contrečiatio, Latin.] A touching or
handling. Dići.
CoN tri'But ARY. adj. [from con and tributary.) Paying tri-
bute to the ſame ſovereign.
Thus we are engaged in the objećts of geometry and arith-
metick; yea, the whole mathematicks muſt be contributary,
and to them all nature pays a ſubſidy. Glanville's Scºtſ. c. 25.
To CONTRI'BUTE. v. a. [contribuo, Latin.] To give to
ſome common ſtock; to advance towards ſome common
deſign.
England contributes much more than any other of the
allies. Addiſon ºn the State of the II ar.
His maſter contributed a great ſum of money to the Jeſuits
church, which is not yet quite finiſhed. Addiſon on Italy.
To CoNTRI'EUTE. v. n. To bear a part; to have a ſhare in
any act or effect. -
Whatever praiſes may be given to works of judgment, there
is not even a ſingle beauty in them to which the invention
muſt not contribute. Pope's Eſſay on Horner.
CoN TRIBU'T 1 on. m. ſ [from contribute.]
1. The act of promoting ſome deſign in conjunction with other
perſons.
2. That which is given by ſeveral hands for ſome common
purpoſe. -
It hath pleaſed them of Macedonia to make a certain con-
tribution for the poor ſaints. A. m. xv. 26.
Beggars are now maintained by voluntary contributions.
Graw.t's Bill of AAErta #y.
3. That which is paid for the ſupport of an army lying in a
country.
The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground,
Do ſtand but in a forc'd affection;
For they have grudg'd us contribution. Sha'ſ jº. Cºſar.
Cos TRIBUTIy E. adj [from contribute.] That which has the
power or quality of promoting any purpoſe in concurrence
with other motives.
As the value of the promiſes renders them moſt proper in-
centives
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 124</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
centives to virtue, ſo the manner of propoſing we ſhall find
alſo highly contributive to the ſame end. Deay of Piety.
CoNTRIBUTOR. m.ſ.. [from cºntribute.] One that bears a part
in ſome common deſign; one that helps forward, or exerts his
endeavours to ſome end, in conjunction with others.
I promis'd we would be contributors,
And bear his charge of wooing, whatſoe'er. Shakespeare.
A grand contributor to our diſientions is paſſion. Dec. of Piety.
Art thou a true lover of thy country? Zealous for its reli-
gious and civil liberties : And a chearful contributor to all thoſe
publick expences which have been thought neceſſary to ſecure
them : Atterbury.
CoN TRIBUTORY. adj. [from contribute.] Promoting the ſame
end; bringing affiliance to ſome joint deſign, or increaſe to
ſome common ſtock.
To CON | RISTATE. v. a. [contriſto, Latin.] To ſadden;
to make ſorrowful; to make melancholy.
Blackneſs and darkneſs are but privatives, and therefore
have little or no activity: ſomewhat they do contriſlate, but
very little. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 73.
Con TRISTATION. m. ſ. [from contriſlate.] The act of making
ſad ; the ſtate of being made ſad ; ſorrow; heavineſs of heart;
ſadneſs; ſorrowfulneſs; gloomineſs; grief; moan; mourn-
fulneſs; trouble ; diſcontent; niclancholy.
Incenſe and nidorous ſmells, ſuch as were of ſacrifices,
were thought to intoxicate the brain, and to diſpoſe men to
devotion; which they may do by a kind of ſadneſs and con-
triº'ation of the ſpirits, and partly alſo by heating and exalting
them. Bacon's Natural Hylory, Nº. 932.
CONTRITE. adj. [ contritus, Latin. J
1. Bruiſed; much worn.
2. Worn with ſorrow; harraſſed with the ſenſe of guilt; pe-
nitent. In the books of divines contrite is ſorrowful for fin,
from the love of God and deſire of pleaſing him; and attrite
is ſorrowful for ſin, from the fear of puniſhment.
I Richard's body have interred now ;
And on it have beſtow'd more contrite tears,
Than from it iſſu'd forced drops of blood. Shakespeare Henry V.
With tears
Wat’ring the ground, and with our ſighs the air
Frequenting, ſent from hearts contrite, in ſign
Of ſorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. Milt. Pa. Loff.
The contrite finner is reſtored to pardon, and, through faith
in Chriſt, our repentance is intitled to ſalvation. Rogers's Serm.
CoN TRI'TENEss. n.ſ.. [from contrite.] Contrition; repen-
tance. Dići.
CoNTRI'tion. m. ſ. [from contrite.]
1. The act of grinding; or rubbing to powder.
Some of thoſe coloured powders, which painters uſe, may
have their colours a little changed, by being very elaborately
and finely ground; where I ſee not what can be juſtly pre-
tended for thoſe changes, beſides the breaking of their parts
into leſs parts by that contrition. Newton's Opt.
2. Penitence; ſorrow for ſin : in the ſtrićt ſenſe, the ſorrow
which ariſes from the deſire to pleaſe God, diſtinguiſhed from
attrition, or imperfect repentance produced by dread of hell.
What is ſorrow and contrition for fin A being grieved with
the conſcience of fin, not only that we have thereby incurred
fuch danger, but alſo that we have ſo unkindly grieved and
provoked ſo good a God. Hammond's Prači. Cat.
Fruits of more pleaſing ſavour, from thy ſeed
Sown with contrition in his heart, than thoſe
Which, his own hand manuring, all the trees
Of paradiſe could have produc’d. Miton's Paradiſ Loft.
Your faſting, contrition, and mortification, when the church
and ſtate appoints, and that eſpecially in times of greater riot
and luxury. Sprat's Sermons.
My future days ſhall be one whole contrition;
A chapel will I build with large endowment,
Where every day an hundred aged men
Shall all hold up their wither'd hands to heav'n. Dryden.
CoNT RI'v A PLE. adj. [from contrive..] Poſſible to be planned
by the mind; poſſible to be invented and adjuſted.
It will hence appear how a perpetual motion may ſeem
eaſily contrivable, JWilkins's Dadalus.
CoNTRI'v A.Nc E. m. ſ. [from contrive.] -
1. The act of contriving; excogitation; the thing contrived.
There is no work impoſible to theſe contrivances, but there
may be as much ačtcd by this art as can be fancied by imagi-
nation. J/ilkins's Math. Mag.
Inſtructed, you’ll explore
Divine contrºvance, and a God adore. Blackmore's Creation.
2. Scheme ; plan; diſpoſition of parts or cauſes.
Our bodies are made according to the moſt curious artifice,
and orderly contrivance. Glanville's Scepſ, c. 7.
3. A conceit: a plot ; an artifice.
Have I not manag'd my cºntrivance well,
To try your love, and make you doubt of mine? Dryden.
There might be a feint, a contrivance in the matter, to
draw him into ſome ſecret ambuſh. Atterbury's Sermons.
To CONTRI'VE. v. a. [controuver, French.]
1. To plan out ; to excogitate.
2
One that ſlept in the contriving luſt, and waked to do it.
Shakeſpeare's King Lear,
What more likely to contrive this ić. frame º: the
univerſe than infinite wiſdom. Tillo’ſºr.
Quº poet has always ſome beautiful deſign, which he firſt
eſtabliſhes, and then contrive, the means which will naturally
conduct him to his end. Dryden.
2. To wear away. Out of uſe.
Three ages, ſuch as mortal men contrive. Fairy Queen.
To CoNTRI'v E. v. n. To form or deſign; to pian; to
ſcheine; to complot.
Pleaſe Ye, we may contrive this afternoon,
, And quaff carouſes to our miſtreſs health. Shakeſpeare.
CoNTRI've MENT. m / [from contrive..] Invention. Dick.
"… --..... ." - -
CoN TRI'v E.R. m. ſ. [from contrive..] An inventer; one that
plans a deſign; a ſchemer.
I, the miſtreſs of your charms,
The cloſe contriver of all harms, -
Was never call'd to bear my part. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Epeus, who the fraud's cºntriver was. Denhayn.
Plain loyalty, not built on hope, -
I leave to your contriver, Pope'.
None loves his king and country better,
Yet none was ever leſs their debtor. Swift.
Scenes of blood and deſolation, I had painted as the
common effects of thoſe deſtructive machinés; whereof, he
ſaid, ſome evil genius, enemy to mankind, muſt have been
the firſt contriver. Gulliv. Travel.
CONTROL. n.ſ.. [control, that is, cºntre role, F rench.]
1. A regiſter or account kept by another officer, that each may
be examined by the other.
2. Check; reſtraint.
Let Partial ſpirits ſtill aloud complain,
Think themſelves injur'd that they cannot reign;
And own no liberty, but where they may,
Without control, upon their fellows prey, J/aller.
He ſhall feel a force upon himſelf from within, and from
the cºntrol of his own principles, to engage him to do
worthily. South.
If the ſinner ſhall win ſo complete a vićtory over his con-
ſcience, that all thoſe conſiderations ſhall be able to ſtrike no
terrour into his mind, lay no reſtraint upon his luſts, no c.n-
trol upon his appetites, he is certainly too ſtrong for the
means of grace. South's Sermons.
Speak, what Phoebus has inſpir'd thy ſoul
For common good, and ſpeak without control. Dryd. Hom.
3. Power; authority; ſuperintendence.
The beaſts, the fiſhes, and the winged fowls,
Are their male's ſubječts, and at their control. Shakespeare.
To ContRo'l. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. To keep under check by a counter reckoning.
2. To govern; to reſtrain; to ſubject.
Authority to convent, to control, to puniſh, as far as with
excommunication, whomſoever they ſhould think worthy.
Hooker, Preface.
Give me a ſtaff of honour for mine age; f
But not a ſceptre to control the world. Shakeſp. Tit. Andron.
Who ſhall control me for my works? Ecclus. v. 3.
I feel my virtue ſtruggling in my ſoul;
But ſtronger paſſion does its pow'r control. Dryd. Aurengz.
O, deareſt Andrew, ſays the humble droll,
Henceforth may I obey, and thou control Prior.
3. To overpower; to confute; as, he controlled all the evidence
of his adverſary.
As for the time while he was in the Tower, and the man-
ner of his brother's death, and his own eſcape, ſhe knew they
were things that a very few could control. Bacon's Henry VII.
CoNTRO'LLABLE. adj. [from control.] Subject to control;
ſubject to command; ſubject to be over-ruled.
aſſion is the drunkenneſs of the mind, and therefore, in
its preſent workings, not controllable by reaſon. 'outh.
CoNTRo'll ER. m. ſ. [from control.] One that has the power
of governing or reſtraining; a ſuperintendent.
He does not calm his contumelious ſpirit,
Nor ceaſe to be an arrogant controller. Shakespeare. Herry VI.
The great controller of our fate, -
Deigº to be man, and liv'd in low eſtate. Drydºm.
CoNTRo'll ERSHIP. n.ſ.. [from controller.] The office of a
controller.
CoNTRo LMENT. m. ſ. [from cºntrol.] - - -
1. The power or act of ſuperintending or reſtraining; reſtraint;
ſuperintendence. - -
They made war and peace one with another, without corn-
trolment. Davies on Ireland.
2. Cppoſition; reſiſtance; confutation.
Were it reaſon that we ſhould ſuffer the ſame to paſs with-
out controlment, in that current meaning whereby every where
it prevaileth. Hocker, b. iii. ſºci, 7.
Here have we war for war, and blood for blood,
Cºntrolment for controlment. Shakespeare's King john.
CoNTRoy ERs1AL. adj. [from controverſy..] Relating to diſ-
putes; diſputatious. If
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 125</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
º
i
* It happens in controverſial diſcourſes as it does in the aſſault-
ing of towns, where, if the ground be but firm whereon the
batteries are erected, there is no farther enquiry of whom it
is borrowed, nor whom it belongs to, ſo it affords but a fit
riſe for the preſent purpoſe. Docke.
Co'Nt Row ER sy. m. ſ. [controverſa, Latin.]
1. Diſpute; debate; agitation of contrary opinions: a diſpute
is commonly oral, and a controverſy in writing.
How cometh it to paſs that we are ſo rent with mutual con-
tentions, and that the church is ſo much troubled : If men had
been willing to learn, all theſe controverſies might have
died the very day they were firſt brought forth. Hooker, b. i.
Without controverſy great is the myſtery of godlineſs. 1Tim.
Wild controverſy then, which long had ſlept,
Into the preſs from ruin'd cloiſters leapt. Denham.
This left no room for controverſy about the title, nor for en-
croachment on the right of others. Locke.
2. A ſuit in law.
If there be a controverſ between men, and they come unto
judgment, that the judges may judge them, then they ſhall
juſtify the righteous and condemn the wicked. Deutr. xxv. 1.
3. A quarrel.
The Lord hath a controverſy with the nations. Jer. xxv. 31.
4. Oppoſition; enmity: this is an unuſual ſenſe.
The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
With luſty finews; throwing it aſide,
And ſtemming it with hearts of controverſy. Shakespeare jul. Caſ
To CONTROVERT. v. a. [controverto, Lat..] To debate; to
ventilate in oppoſite books; to diſpute anything in writing.
If any perſon ſhall think fit to controvert them, he may do
it very ſafely for me. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
CoNTRow E'R'rible. adj. [from controvert J Diſputable; that
may be the cauſe of controverſy.
Diſcourſing of matters dubious, and many controvertible
truths, we cannot without arrogancy intreat a credulity, or
implore any farther aſſent than the probability of our reaſons
and verity of our experiments. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i.
CoNTRove'RT 1st. n ſ. [from controvert.] Diſputant; a man
verſed or engaged in literary wars or diſputations.
Who can think himſelf ſo confiderable as not to dread this
mighty man of demonſtration, this prince of controvertiſts,
this great lord and poſſeſſor of firſt principles. Tillotſon, Preface.
Contu'Macious, adj. [ contumax, Latin.] Obſtinate; per-
verſe; ſtubborn; inflexible.
He is in law ſaid to be a contumacious perſon, who, on his
appearance afterwards, departs the court without leave. Ayliff.
There is another very efficacious method for ſubduing of
the moſt obſtinate contumacious ſinner, and bringing him into
the obedience of the faith of Chriſt. Hammond's Fundamental.
CoNTUMA'ciously, adv. [from contumacious.] Obſtinately;
fluºnly; inflexibly ; perverſely.
CoNTUMA'clocsNEss. m. ſ. [from cantumacious.] Obſtinacy;
perverſeneſs; inflexibility; ſtubbornneſs.
From the deſcription I have given of it, a judgment may be
given of the difficulty and contumaciouſneſs of cure. Wiſeman.
CONTUMACY. n.f. [from contumacia, Latin.]
1. Obſtinacy ; perverſeneſs; ſtubbornneſs; inflexibility.
Such ačts
Of contumacy will provoke the Higheſt
To make death in us live. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. x.
2. [In law.] A wilful contempt and diſobedience to any lawful
ſummons or judicial order. Ayliffe's Parergan.
Theſe certificates do only, in the generality, mention the
party's contumacies and diſobedience. Ayliffe's Parergºn.
CoNTUME'Lious. adj. [contumeiºſus, Latin.]
1. Reproachful; rude; ſarcaſtick; contemptuous.
With ſcoffs and ſcorns, and contumelious taunts,
In open market-place produc’d they me
To be a publick ſpectacle. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. i.
In all the quarrels and tumults at Rome, though the people
frequently proceeded to rude contumelicus language, yet no
blood was ever drawn in any popular commotions, ’till the
time of the Gracchi. Swift on the Diſſent. in Athens and Rome.
2. Inclined to utter reproach; brutal; rude.
There is yet another ſort of contumelicus perſons, who, in-
deed, are not chargeable with that circumſtance of ill employ-
ing their wit; for they uſe none in it. Governm, of the Tongue.
Giving our holy virgins to the ſtain
Of contumelious, beaſtly, madbrain'd war. Shakeſp. Timon.
3. Productive of reproach ; ſhameful; ignominious.
As it is in the higheſt degree injurious to them, ſo is it con-
tumelious to him. Decay of Piety.
CoNTU M E'Liously, adv. [from contumeſians J Reproachfully;
contemptuouſly; rudely.
The people are not wont to take ſo great offence, when they
are excluded from honours and offices, as when their perſons
are cºſtumeliouſly trodden upon. Hooker, b. i. ſect. 1 c.
Fie, lords; that you, being ſupreme magiſtrates,
Thus contameliouſly ſhould break the peace. Shakeſp Hen. VI.
Cost U M Elious N Ess. n.f. [from contumcious.] Rudeneſs; re-
proach.
CONTUMELY. m. ſ. [contamelia, Latin.] Rudeneſs; cori-
temptuouſneſs; bitterneſs of language; reproach.
If the helm of chief government be in the hands of a few
of the wealthieſt, then laws, providing for continuance there-
of, muſt make the puniſhment of contamely and wrong, offered
unto any of the common ſort, ſharp and grievous, that ſo the
evil may be prevented. Hooker, b. 1. ſecº. 10.
Th' oppreſſor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pang of deſpis'd love, the law's delay. Shakespeare Hamlet.
It was undervalued and depreſſed with ſome bittérneſs and
contumely. Clarendon, b. viii.
Why ſhould any man be troubled at the contumelies of thoſe
whoſe judgment deſerves not to be valued Tillotſon.
Eternal contumeſ, attend that guilty title which claims
y guity
exemption from thought, and arrogates to its wearers the pre-
rogative of brutes. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 123.
To CONTU'SE. v. a. [cºntuſus, Latin.]
1. To beat together; to bruiſe.
Of their roots, barks, and ſeeds, contuſed together, and min-
gled with other earth, and well watered with warm water,
there came forth herbs much like the other. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
2. To bruiſe the fleſh without a breach of the continuity.
The ligature contuſes the lips in cutting them, ſo that they
require to be digeſted before they can unite. Wiſeman's Surgery.
CoNtu'sion. m. ſ. [from contºſío.]
1. The act of beating or bruiſing.
2. The ſtate of being beaten or bruiſed.
Take a piece of glaſs, and reduce it to powder, it acquiring
by contuſion a multitude of minute ſurfaces, from a diaphanous,
degenerates into a white body. Boyle on Colours.
3. A bruiſe; a compreſſion of the fibres, diſtinguiſhed from a
wound.
That winter lion, who in rage forgets
Aged contuſions, and all bruiſe of time. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
The bones, in ſharp colds, wax brittle; and all contuſions, in
hard weather, are more difficult to cure. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
CoNval Lily. See Lily of the VAlley.
CoNvAle'sch Nce. A n.ſ. (from convaleſco, Latin.] Renewal
CoN v Ale'sce Ncy. } of health; recovery from a diſeaſe.
Being in a place out of the reach of any alarm, ſhe reco-
vered her ſpirits to a reaſonable convaliſtence. Carendon, b. viii.
CONVALESCENT. adj. [convaliſteni, Latin.] Recovering;
returning to a ſtate of health.
CoNve'NAble. adj. [convenable, French.]
1. Conſiſtent with; agreeable to ; accordant to. Not now
in uſe. -
He is ſo meek, wiſe, and merciable,
And with his word his work is convenable. Spenser's Paſ?.
2. That may be convened. -
To CONVENE. v. n. [convºnio, Latin.] To come together;
to aſſemble; to aſſociate; to unite.
The fire ſeparates the aqueous parts from the others where-
with they were blended in the concrete, and brings them into
the receiver, where they convene into a liquor. Boyle.
There are ſettled periods of their convening, or a liberty
left to the prince for convoking the legiſlature. Locke.
In ſhort-ſighted men, whoſe eyes are too plump, the re-
fraćtion being too great, the rays converge and convene in the
eyes, before they come at the bottom. Newton's Opt.
To Conve'NE. v. a.
1. To call together; to aſſemble; to convoke.
No man was better pleaſed with the convening of this par-
liament than myſelf. King Charles.
All the factious and ſchiſmatical people would frequently,
as well in the night as the day, convene themſelves by the ſound
of a bell. Clarendon.
And now th’ almighty father of the gods
Convenes a council in the bleft abodes, Pope's Statius.
2. To ſummon judicially. -
By the papal canon law, clerks, in criminal and civil cauſes,
cannot be convened before any but an eccleſiaſtical judge. Ayliffe.
CoN v ENIENCE. - - -
* - - - Cºve?, Jenſ 1 -
CoN v ENIENcy. } n.J. [convenientia, Latin.]
1. Fitneſs; propriety.
In things not commanded of God, yet lawful, becauſe per-
mitted, the queſtion is, what light ſhall ſhew us the conve-
niency which one hath above another. Hocker, b. ii. ſ. 4.
2. Commodiouſneſs; eaſe; freedom from difficulties.
A man putting all his pleaſures into one, is like a traveller's
putting all his goods into one jewel : the value is the ſame,
and the convenience greater. South's Sermons.
Every man muſt want ſomething for the conveniency of his
life, for which he muſt be obliged to others. Calamy’s Serm.
There is another convenience in this method, during your
waiting. Swift's Directions to the Footman.
3. Cauſe of eaſe; accommodation.
If it have not ſuch a convenience, voyages muſt be very
uncomfortable. Hºlins's Math. Magic.
A man alters his mind as the work proceeds, and will have
this or that convenience more, of which he had not thought
when he began. Dryden's Fabies, Pºface.
&amp; There
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 126</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
There was a pair of ſpečtacles, a pocket perſpective, and
ſeveral other little conveniencies, I did not think myſelf bound
in honour to diſcover. Gulliver's Travels.
3. Fitneſs of time of place.
Uſe ne farther means;
But with all brief and plain conveniency,
Let me have judgment. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Wenice.
CONVENIENT. adj. [conveniens, Latin.]
1. Fit; ſuitable; proper; well adapted ; commodious.
The leaſt and moſt trivial epiſodes, or under ačtions, are
either neceſſary or convenient ; either ſo neceſſary that without
them the poem muſt be imperfect, or ſo convenient that no
others can be imagined more ſuitable to the place in which
they are. Dryd. Dedication to the Æneid.
Health itſelf is but a kind of temper, gotten and preſerved
by a convenient mixture of contrarieties. Arbuth, an Aiments.
2. It has either to or fºr before the following noun: perhaps it
ought generally to have for before perſons, and to before
things. -
Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food con-
venient for me. Prov. xxx. 8.
There are ſome arts that are peculiarly convenient to ſome
Conve'N'tual. n.ſ.. [from convent.] A monk; a nun; one
that lives in a convent.
I have read a ſermon of a conventual, who laid it down, that
Adam could not laugh before the fall. Addiſon's Spectator.
To CONVERGE. v. n. [convergo, Latin.] To tend to one
point from different places.
Where the rays from all the points of any objećt meet
again, after they have been made to converge by reflexion or
refračtion, there they will make a pićture of the objećt upon
a white body. Newton's Opt.
Enſweeping firſt
The lower ſkies, they all at once converge
High to the crown of heaven. Thomſon's Autumn.
CoN VE'RGENT. }* [from converge.] Tending to one point
CoNve'RGING. from different places.
CoN we'r GING Series. See SERIes.
CoNVE'RSABLE. adj. [from converſe. It is ſometimes written
converſible, but improperly; converſant, converſation, converſable.]
Qualified for converſation; fit for company; well adapted to
the reciprocal communication of thoughts; communicative.
That fire and levity which makes the young ones ſcarce
converſible, when tempered by years, makes a gay old age.
- º Guardian, Nº. 1 or.
CoNye'RSABLE Ness. m. ſ. [from converſable.] The quality of
being a pleaſing companion; fluency of talk.
CoN v ERs ABLY. adv. [from converſable.] In a converſable
manner; with the qualities of a pleaſing communicative com-
panion,
Conve'R's ANT. adj. [converſant, French.]
1. Acquainted with ; having a knowledge of anything acquired
by familiarity and habitude; familiar: with in.
The learning and ſkill which he had by being converſant in
their books. Hooker, b. iii. ſeei. 8.
Let them make ſome towns near to the mountain's ſide,
where they may dwell together with neighbours, and be con-
verſant in the view of the world. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Thoſe who are converſant in both the tongues, I leave to
make their own judgment of it. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
He uſes the different diale&amp;ts as one who had been conver-
ſant with them all. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
Having intercourſe with any ; acquainted; familiar by coha-
bitation or fellowſhip; cohabiting: with among or with.
All that Moſes commanded, Joſhua read before all the con-
gregation of Iſrael, with the women, and the little ones, and
the ſtrangers that were converſant among them. Joſ. viii. 35.
Never to be infected with delight,
Nor converſant with eaſe and idleneſs. Shakeſp. King john.
Old men who have loved young company, and been con-
verſant continually with them, have been of long life. Bacon.
Gabriel, this day by proof thou ſhalt behold,
Thou, and all angels converſant on earth
With man, or men's affairs, how I begin
To verify that ſolemn meſſage. Milton's Parad. Regained.
To ſuch a one, an ordinary coffeehouſe-gleaner of the city
particular nations. - Tillotſon.
Conve'NIENTLY. adv. [from convenient.]
1. Commodiouſly ; without difficulty.
- I this morning know
Where we ſhall find him moſt conveniently. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. Fitly; with proper adaptation of part to part, or of the
whole to the effect propoſed.
It would be worth the experiment to inquire, whether or
no a ſailing chariot might be more conveniently framed with
moveable ſails, whoſe force may be impreſſed from their mo-
tion, equivalent to thoſe in a wind-mill. Wilkins's Mat. Mag.
CONVENT. n.ſ.. [conventus, Latin.]
. An aſſembly of religious perſons; a body of monks or nuns.
He canne to Leiceſter;
Lodg'd in the abbey, where the reverend abbot,
With all his convent, honourably receiv'd him. Shakespeare H. VIII.
2. A religious houſe; an abbey; a monaſtery; a nunnery.
One ſeldom finds in Italy a ſpot of ground more agreeable
than ordinary, that is not covered with a convent. Addiſon. 2.
To Conve'NT. v. a. [convenio, Latin.] To call before a judge
or judicature.
He with his oath
By all probation will make up full clear,
Whenever he's convented. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
They ſent forth their precepts to attach men, and convent
them before themſelves at private houſes. Bacon's Henry VII.
'o'NVENTICLE. n.ſ.. [conventiculum, Latin.] -
. An aſſembly; a meeting.
They are commanded to abſtain from all conventicles of men
whatſoever; even out of the church, to have nothing to do
with publick buſineſs. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. An aſſembly for worſhip. Generally uſed in an ill ſenſe,
including hereſy or ſchiſm.
It behoveth, that the place where God ſhall be ſerved by the
whole church be a publick place, for the avoiding of privy
is an arrant ſtateſman, and as much ſuperiour too, as a man
converſant abºut Whitehall and the court is to an ordinary
ſhopkeeper. - Lºcke.
conventicles, which, covered with pretence of religion, may
ſerve unto dangerous practices. Hocker, b. v. ſect. 12.
A ſort of men, who are content to be ſtiled of the church
of England, who perhaps attend its ſervice in the morning,
and go with their wives to a conventicle in the afternoon. Swift.
3. A ſecret aſſembly; an aſſembly where conſpiracies are formed.
Ay, all of you have laid your heads together,
(Myſelf had notice of your conventicles)
And all to make away my guiltleſs life. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Conve'NT1c1 ER. m.ſ.. [from conventicle.] One that ſupports
or frequents private and unlawful aſſemblies.
Another crop is too like to follow ; nay, I fear, it is un-
avoidable, if the conventiclers be permitted ſtill to ſcatter. Dryd.
CoN v ENTion. m. ſ. [conventio, Latin.]
1. The act of coming together; union; coalition; junétion.
They are to be reckoned amongſt the moſt general affec-
tions of the conventions, or aſſociations of ſeveral particles of
matter into bodies of any certain denomination. Boyle.
2. An aſſembly.
Publick conventions are liable to all the infirmitics, follies,
and vices of private men. Swift.
3. A contračt; an agreement for a time, previous to a definitive
treaty.
Cox v ENTion AL. adj.
on by compačt.
Conventional ſervices reſerved by tenures upon grants, made
out of the crown or knights ſervice. Hale's Com. Law of Engl.
CoNVE'N TIon ARY. adj. [from convention.] Aéting upon con-
tract; ſettled by ſtipulations.
The ordinary covenants of moſt conventionary tenants are,
to pay due capon and due harveſt journeys. Carew's Survey,
Conve's tu AL. adj. [conventuel, French..] Belonging to a con-
vent; monaſtick.
3. Relating to ; having for its obječt; concerning: with about,
formerly in.
The matters wherein church polity is converſant, are the
publick religious duties of the church. Hocker, b. iii.
If anythink education, becauſe it is converſant about chil-
dren, to be but a private and domeſtick duty, he has been
ignorantly bred himſelf. //otton on Education.
Diſcretion, conſidered both as an accompliſhment and as a
virtue, not only as is cºnverſant about worldly affairs, but as
regarding our whole exiſtence. Addison, Speſſator, Nº. 226.
Indifference cannot but be criminal, when it is converſant
about objects which are ſo far from being of an indifferent na-
ture, that they are of the higheſt importance to ourſelves and
our country. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 13.
CoNv ERSA'tion. m. ſ. [converſatio, Latin.]
1. Familiar diſcourſe; chat; eaſy talk: oppoſed to a formal
conference.
She went to Pamela's chamber, meaning to joy her thoughts
with the ſweet converſation of her ſiſter. Sidney, b. ii.
What I mentioned ſome time ago in converſatiºn, was not
a new thought, juſt then ſtarted by accident or occaſion. Swift.
2. A particular act of diſcourſing upon any ſubject; as, we had
a long converſation on that queſtion.
3. Commerce; intercourſe; familiarity.
The knowledge of men and manners, the freedom of habi-
tudes, and converſation with the beſt company of both ſexes.
Dryden.
[from convention.] Stipulated; agreed
His apparent, open guilt;
I mean his converſation with Shore's wife. Shakespeare Rich. III.
4. Behaviour; manner of acting in common life.
Having your cºnverſation honeſt among the Gentiles. 1 Pet.
CoNversative. adj. [from converſe.] Relating to publick
life, and commerce with men ; not contemplative.
Thoſe are called conventual priors that have the chief ruling Finding him little ſtudious and contemplative, ſhe choſe to
power over a monaſtery. Ayliffe's Parergon. endue him with converſative qualities of youth. Wºotton.
Vol. I. 2 5 Q To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 127</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O N
"To CONVERSE. v. n. [converſer, Fr. converſºr, Latin.]
1. To cohabit with 5 to hold intercourſe with; to be a com-
panion to : followed by with.
Men then come to be furniſhed with ſewer or more ſimple
ideas from without, according as the obječis they converſe
with afford greater or leſs variety. Locke.
By approving the ſentiments of a perſon with whom he
converſed, in ſuch particulars as were juſt, he won him over
from thoſe points in which he was miſtaken. Addison Freeholder.
- For him who loncly loves
To ſeek the diſtant hills, and there converſ:
J/ith nature. Thomſon's Summer, l, 130.
2. To be acquainted with 5 to be familiar to:
I will converſe with iron-witted fools,
And unreſpective boys: none are for me,
That look into me with eonſiderate eyes Shakeſp Rich. III.
3. To convey the thoughts reciprocally in talk.
Go therefore half this day, as friend with friend,
Converſe with Adam. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. v. l. 230.
Much leſs can bird with beaſt, or fiſh with fowl,
So well converſ. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. viii. l. 396.
4.To diſcourſe familiarly upon any ſubject: with on before the thing.
We had converſed ſo often on that ſubject, and he had com-
municated his thoughts of it ſo fully to me, that I had not
the leaſt remaining difficulty. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
5. To have commerce with a different ſex.
Being aſked by ſome of her ſex, in how long a time a wo-
man might be allowed to pray to the gods, after having con-
verſed with a man If it were a huſband, ſays ſhe, the next
day; if a ſtranger, never. Guardian, N°. 165.
Co'N v ERs E. m. ſ. [from the verb. It is ſometimes accented on
the firſt ſyllable, ſometimes on the laſt. Pope has uſed both:
the firſt is more analogical J
1. Converſation; manner of diſcourſing in familiar life.
His converſe is a ſyſtem fit,
Alone to fill up all her wit. Swift.
Gen’rous converſe; a ſoul exempt from pride,
And love to praiſe with reaſon on his ſide. Pope's Eff. on Crit.
Form'd by thy converſ, happily to ſteer
From grave to gay, from lively to ſevere. Pope's Eſ on Man.
2. Acquaintance; cohabitation; familiarity.
Though it be neceſſitated, by its relation to fleſh, to a ter-
reſtrial converſe; yet it is like the ſun, without contaminating
its beams. Glanville's Apol.
By ſuch a free converſe with perſons of different ſe&amp;ts, we
ſhall find that there are perſons of good ſenſe and virtue, per-
fons of piety and worth. I/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. [In geometry.] A propoſition is ſaid to be the converſe of
another, when, after drawing a concluſion from ſomething
firſt propoſed, we proceed to ſuppoſe what had been before
concluded, and to draw from it what had been ſuppoſed.
Thus, if two ſides of a triangle be equal, the angles oppoſite
to thoſe ſides are alſo equal: the converſe of the propoſition is,
that if two angles of a triangle be equal, the ſides oppoſite to
thoſe angles are alſo equal. Chambers.
Conve'Rsfly. adv. [from converſ...] With change of order;
in a contrary order; reciprocally.
CoN we'Rsion. n.ſ. [converſio, Latin.]
1. Change from one ſtate into another; tranſmutation.
Artificial converſion of water into ice, is the work of a few
hours; and this of air may be tried by a month's ſpace. Bacon.
There are no ſuch natural gradations, and converſions of one
metal and mineral into another, in the earth, as many have
fancied. JWoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
The converſion of the aliment into fat, is not properly nu-
triticn. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Change from rebrobation to grace, from a bad to a holy life.
3. Change from one religion to another.
They paſſed through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the
cºnverſiºn of the Gentiles. Acts xv. 4.
4. The interchange of terms in an argument; as, no virtue is
vice; no vice is virtue. Chambers.
5. Conversion ºf Equations, in algebra, is the reducing of a
fractional equation into an integral one.
CoN v E'Rsive. adj. [from converſe.] Converſable; ſociable.
To CONVERT. v. a. [converto, Latin.]
1. To change into another ſubſtance; to tranſmute.
If the whole atmoſphere was converted into water, it would
s make no more than eleven yards water about the earth. Burnet.
2. To change from one religion to another.
3. To turn from a bad to a good life.
He which converteth the ſinner from the errour of his way,
ſhall ſave a ſoul from death, and ſhall hide a multitude of fins.
- ja. v. 29.
Then will I teach tranſgreſſors thy ways, and ſinners ſhall
be cºnverted unto thcc. Pſ. li. 13.
4. To turn towards any point.
Cryſtal will cality into electricity, and convert the needle
freely placed. Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 1.
5. Tº apply to any uſe; to appropriate.
The abundance of the ſea ſhall be converted unto thee, the
forces of the Geatiles ſhall come unto thee. Iſ, lx. 5.
He acquitted himſelf not like an honeſt man; for he con-
verted the prizes to his own uſe. Arbuthnot on Coins.
6. To change one propoſition into another, ſo that what was
the ſubject of the firſt becomes the predicate of the ſecond.
The papiſts cannot abide this propoſition converted: all fin
is a tranſgreſſion of the law; but every tranſgreſſion of the
law is fin. The apoſtle the cfore turns it for us: all un-
righteouſneſs, ſays he, is ſin; but every tranſgreſſion of the
law is unrighteouſneſs, ſays Auſtin, upon the place. Hale.
To CoNVE'RT. v. n. To undergo a change; to be tranſ-
muted.
The love of wicked friends converts to fear;
That fear, to hate. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
Co's vert. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A perſon converted from
one opinion or one practice to another.
The Jeſuits did not perſuade the cºnverts to lay aſide the uſe
of images. Stillingfleet's Defence of Diſcourſe on Rºm. Idol.
When Platoniſm prevailed, the converts to Chriſtianity of
that ſchool, interpreted Holy Writ according to that philo-
ſophy. Lºcke.
Let us not imagine that the firſt converts only of Chriſtianity
were concerned to defend their religion. Rogers, Sermonix.
CoNvE'RTER. n.ſ.. [from convert..] One that makes converts.
CoNve RTIBI'lity. m. ſ. [from convertible.] The quality of
being poſſible to be converted.
CoN VERTIBLE. adj. [from convert.]
1. Suſceptible of change; tranſmutable; capable of tranſmu-
tation.
Minerals are not convertible into another ſpecies, though of
the ſame genus ; nor are they reducible into another genus.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
The gall is not an alcali; but it is alcaleſcent, conceptible
and convertible into a corroſive alcali. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. So much alike as that one may be uſed for the other.
Though it be not the real eſſence of any ſubſtance, it is
the ſpecifick eſſence, to which our name belongs, and is con
vertible with it. Lock.
Many, that call themſelves Proteſtants, look upon our we-
ſhip to be idolatrous as well as that of the Papiſts, and Fit
prelacy and popery together, as terms convertible. Swift.
Conve'RTIbly, adv. [from convertible.] Reciprocally; win
interchange of terms.
There never was any perſon ungrateful, who was not alſ
proud; nor, convertibly, any one proud, who was not equall:
ungrateful. South's Sermons
Co'Nvert Ire. n.ſ.. [converti, French.] A convert; one con
verted from another opinion. -
Since you are a gentle convertite,
My tongue ſhall huſh again this ſtorm of war. Shakespeare K. john,
Nor would I be a convertite ſo cold,
As not to tell it. Donne.
CONVEX. adj. [convexus, Latin.] Riſing in a circular form;
oppoſite to concave.
It is the duty of a painter, even in this alſo, to imitate the
convex mirrour, and to place nothing which glares at the bor-
der of his pićture. - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
An orb or ball round its own axis whirl;
Will not the motion to a diſtance hurl
Whatever duſt or ſand you on it place,
And drops of water from its convex face Blackm, Creation.
Co'NV Ex. m. ſ. A convex body; a body ſwelling externally into
a circular form.
A comet draws a long extended blaze;
From Eaſt to Weſt burns through th' ethereal frame,
And half heav'n's convex glitters with the flame. Tickel.
CoNv E'xed. particip. adj. [from convex.] Formed convex;
protuberant in a circular form.
In their natural figure they are ſtraight; nor have they
their ſpine convexed, or more conſiderably embowed than
either ſharks, porpoſes, whales, and other cetaceous animals.
Brown's Pulgar Erreurs, b. v. c. 2.
Conve'xED.L.Y. adv. [from convexed J In a convex form.
They be drawn convexedly crooked in one piece; yet the
dolphin, that carrieth Arion, is concavoufly inverted, and
hath its ſpine depreſſed. Brown’s Wugar Errours, b. v. c. 2.
Cox v Exity. n.ſ.. [from convex.] Protuberance in a circular
form. -
Convex glaſſes ſupply the deſcót of plumpneſs in the eye,
and, by increaſing the refraction, make the rays converge
ſooner, ſo as to convene diſtinctly at the bottom of the eye,
if the glaſs have a due degree of convexity, Newtºn's Opt.
If the eye were ſo piercing as to deſcry even opake and
little objects a hundred leagues off, it would do us little ſº-
vice; it would be terminated by neighbouring hills and woods,
or in the largeſt and eveneſt plain, by the very convexity of the
earth. Bently.
CoNye's ly, adv. [from convex.) In a convex form. . -
Almoſt all, both blunt and ſharp, are convexly conical, i.e.
they are all along convex, not only per ambitiºn, but lºween
both ends. - Grºw's Muſicum.
Conve's Ness, n.ſ.. [from convex.] Spheroidical protuberance;
convexity.
- Convexo-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 128</div><p class="Text">C O N *
C O N
*
º,
all
ſºn,
Oſl
'ºhn
Convexo-concAve. adj. Having the hollow on the inſide,
correſponding to the external protuberance.
Theſe are the phenomena of thick convexo-concave plates of
glaſs, which are every where of the ſame thickneſs. Newton.
To CONVE'Y. v. a. [conveh, Latin.]
1. To carry ; to tranſport from one place to another.
Let letters be given me to the governours beyond the river,
that they may convey me over 'till I come into Judea. Neh. ii. 7.
I will convey them by ſea in floats, unto the place thou ſhalt
appoint me. 1 Kings, v. 9.
2. To hand from one to another.
A divine natural right could not be conveyed down, without
any plain, natural, or divine rule concerning it. Locke.
3. To remove ſecretly.
There was one conveyed out of my houſe yeſterday in this
baſket. Shakeſpeare's Merry lºves of //indſor.
4. To bring any thing, as an inſtrument of tranſmiſſion; to
tranſmit.
Since there appears not to be any ideas in the mind, before
the ſenſes have conveyed any in, I conceive that ideas in the
underſtanding are coeval with ſenſation. Locke.
5. To transfer ; to deliver to another.
Adam's property or private dominion could not cºnvey any
ſovereignty or rule to his heir, who, not having a right to in-
herit all his father's poſſeſſions, could not thereby come to have
any ſovereignity over his brethren. Locke.
6. To impart, by means of ſomething.
What obſcured light the heav'ns did grant,
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
A doubtful warrant of immediate death. Shakespeare Com. of Err.
Men fill one another's heads with noiſe and founds, but con-
vey not thereby their thoughts. Locke.
That which uſes to produce the idea, though conveyed in by
the uſual organ, not being taken notice of, there follows no
ſenſation. Lºcke.
Some ſingle imperceptible bodies muſt come from them to
the eyes, and thereby convºy to the brain ſome motion which
produces thoſe ideas. Locke.
They give energy to our expreſſions, and convey our thoughts
in more ardent and intenſe phraſes, than any in our own
tongue. Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 405.
7. To impart; to introduce.
Others convey themſelves into the mind by more ſenſes than
One. - Locke.
8. To manage with privacy.
I will convey the buſineſs as I ſhall find means, and acquaint
you withal. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
CoNvD'YANce. n.ſ.. [from cºnvey.]
1. The aët of removing any thing.
Tell her, thou mad'ſt away her uncle Clarence,
Her uncle Rivers; ay, and for her ſake,
Mad'ſt quick conveyance with her good aunt Ann. Shakespeare. R. III.
2. Way for carriage or tranſportation.
Following the river downward, there is conveyance into the
countries named in the text. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
Iron works ought to be confined to places, where there is
no conveyance for timber to places of vent, ſo as to quit the
coſt of the carriage. Temple.
3. The method of removing ſecretly from one place to another.
Your huſband's here at hand; bethink you of ſome convey-
ance : in the houſe you cannot hide him. Shakeſpeare.
4. The means or inſtrument by which anything is conveyed.
We powt upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we've
Stuff'd theſe pipes, and theſe conveyances of blood,
With wine and fecding, we have ſuppler ſouls. Shakesp. Coriolan.
5. Tranſmiſſion; delivery from one to another.
Our author has provided for the deſcending and conveyance
down of Adam's monarchical power, or paternal dominion,
to poſterity. Locke.
6. Act of transferring property; grant.
Doth not the act of the parent, in any lawful grant or con-
veyance, bind their heirs for ever thereunto ? Spenſ, on Ireland.
7. Writing by which property is transferred.
The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box;
and muſt the inheritor himſelf have no more ? Shakespeare Hamlet.
This begot a ſuit in the Chancery before the lord Coventry,
who found the conveyances in law to be ſo firm, that in juſtice
he muſt decree the land to the earl. Clarendon, b. viii.
8. Secret management; juggling artifice; private removal;
ſecret ſubſtitution of one thing for another.
It cometh herein to paſs with men, unadviſedly fallen into
error, as with them whoſe ſtate hath no ground to uphold it,
but only the help which, by ſubtile conveyance, they draw out
of caſual events, ariſing from day to day, 'till at length they
be clean ſpent. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 4.
Cloſe conveyance, and each pračtice ill
Of cofinage and knavery. Spenſer's Hubbard's Tale.
I am this day come to ſurvey the Tower;
Since Henry's death, I fear, there is conveyance. Shakespeare H. VI.
Can they not juggle, and with ſlight
Conveyance play with wrong and right. Hudibras, p. ii. c. 2.
CoNve'YAN cer. m. ſ. ſ from conveyance. J A lawyer who
draws writings by which property is transferred.
CoNve'YER. n.ſ.. [from convey.) One who carries or tranſ-
mits any thing from one place or perſon to another. -
The conveyers of waters of theſe times content themſelves
with one inch in ſix hundred feet. Brerewood on Languages.
Thoſe who ſtand before earthly princes, in the neareſt de-
gree of approach, who are the diſpenſers of their favours,
and conveyers of their will to others, do, on that very account,
challenge high honours to themſelves. Atterbury's Sermon.
To CONVICT. v. a. [convince, Latin.]
1. To prove guilty; to detect in guilt.
And they which heard it, being convić’ed by their own con-
ſcience, went out one by one. jo. viii. 9.
Things, that at the firſt ſhew ſeemed poſſible, by ripping
up the performance of them, have been convičed of im-
poſſibility. Bacon's Holy War.
2. To confute ; to diſcover to be falſe.
Although not only the reaſon of any head, but experience
of every hand, may well convict it, yet will it not by divers
be reječted. Brown's Wugar Errours, b. ii. c. 6.
CoNvi'ct. adj. [rather the participle of the verb.] Convićted;
detected in guilt.
Before I be convić by courſe of law,
To threaten me with death is moſt unlawful. Slak. R. III.
By the civil law a perſon convić', or confeſſing his own
crime, cannot appeal. Ayliffe's Parergen.
Convić a papiſt he, and I a poet. Pope's Epiſt, of Hor.
Co'Nvict. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A perſon caſt at the bar; one
found guilty of the crime charged againſt him; a criminal de-
te&amp;ted at his trial.
On the ſcore of humanity, the civil law allows a certain
ſpace of time both to the convić and to perſons confeſſing, in
order to ſatisfy the judgment. Ayliffe's Parergon.
CoNv 'ction. n.ſ.. [from convict.] .
1. Detection of guilt, which is, in law, either when a man is
outlawed, or appears and confeſſes, or elſe is found guilty by
the inqueſt. Cowel.
The third beſt abſent is condemn'd,
Convićt by flight, and rebel to all law;
Convićlion to the ſerpent none belongs. Milton's Par. Isſ?.
2. The act of convincing; confutation; the aët of forcing
others, by argument, to allow a poſition.
When therefore the apoſtle requireth hability to convićt
hereticks, can we think he judgeth it a thing unlawful, and
not rather needful, to uſe the principal inſtrument of their
convićion, the light of reaſon. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 8.
The manner of his convićlion was deſigned, not as a pecu-
liar privilege to him; but as a ſtanding miracle, a laſting ar-
gument, for the conviction of others, to the very end of the
world. Atterbury's Sermons.
Their wiſdom is only of this world, to put falſe colours
upon things, to call good evil, and evil good, againſt the con-
vićtion of their own conſciences. Swift.
CoNv1'ctive. adj. [from convići.] Having the power of con-
vincing.
To CONVINCE. v. a. [convinco, Latin.]
1. To force another to acknowledge a conteſted poſition.
That which I have all this while been endeavouring to con-
vince men of, and to perſuade them to, is no other but what
God himſelf doth particularly recommend to us, as proper for
human conſideration. Tillotſon.
But having ſhifted ev'ry form to 'ſcape,
Convinc'd of conqueſt, he reſum’d his ſhape. Dryd. Wirg.
Hiſtory is all the light we have in many caſes, and we re-
ceive from it a great part of the uſeful truths we have, with a
convincing evidence. Locke.
2. To convićt; to prove guilty of.
To convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their
ungodly deeds. jude 15.
The diſcovery of a truth, formerly unknown, doth rather
convince man of ignorance, than nature of errour. Raleigh.
O ſeek not to convince me of a crime,
Which I can ne'er repent, nor can you pardon. Dryden,
3. To evince; to prove ; to manifeſt; to vindicate.
Your Italy contains none ſo accompliſhed a courtier, to
convince the honour of my miſtreſs. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
4. To overpower; to ſurmount. This ſenſe is now obſolete.
There are a crew of wretched ſouls
That ſtay his cure; their malady convinces
The great eſſay of art. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Knaves be ſuch abroad,
Who having, by their own importunate ſuit,
Or voluntary dotage of ſome miſtreſs,
Convinc'd or ſuppled them, they cannot chuſe
But they muſt blab. Shakeſpeare's Otheſlo.
When Duncan is aſleep, his two chamberlains
Will I, with wine and waſſel, ſo convince,
That memory, the warder of the brain,
Shall be a fume. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
CoNvi'NcEMENT. n. ſ. [from convince..] Convicton.
If
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 129</div><p class="Text">C O N
C O O
If that be not convincement enough, let him weigh the other
alſo. Decay of Piety.
CoNvi'Ncible. adj. [from convince.]
1. Capable of convićtion.
2. Capable of being evidently diſproved, or dete&amp;ted.
Upon what uncertaintics, and alſo convincible falſities, they
often erected ſuch emblems, we have elſewhere delivered.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 9.
CoNvi'NcINGly. adv. [from convince..] In ſuch a manner as
to leave no room for doubt or diſpute; ſo as to produce con-
vićtion. -
This he did ſo particularly and convincingly, that thoſe of
the parliament were in great confuſion. Clarendon, b. viii.
The reſurrečtion is ſo convincingly atteſted by ſuch perſons,
with ſuch circumſtances, that they who conſider and weigh
the teſtimony, at what diſtance ſoever they are placed, can-
not entertain any more doubt of the reſurre&amp;tion than the
crucifixion of Jeſus. Atterbury's Sermons.
Convi'scINGNEss. n.ſ.. [from convincing.) The power of
convincing.
To CONVI'VE. v. a. [cºnvivo, Latin.] To entertain; to
feaſt. A word, I believe, not elſewhere uſed.
Firſt, all you peers of Greece, go to my tent,
There in the full convive you. Shakeſp Trºilus and Crºſſida.
CoN v1'v A1. }*. [convivalis, Latin.] "Relating to an enter-
CoNVI'vial. tainment; feſtal; ſocial.
I was the firſt who ſet up feſtivals;
Not with high taſtes our appetites did force,
But fill'd with converſation and diſcourſe;
Which feaſts, convivial meetings we did name. Denham.
CoNU'NDRUM. m. ſ. A low jeſt; a quibble; a mean conceit:
a cant word.
Mean time he ſnoaks, and laughs at merry tale,
Or pun ambiguous, or conundrum quaint. Philips.
To CO'NVOCATE. v. a. [convocº, Lat J. To call together ;
to ſummon to an aſſembly.
Convocation. m. ſ. [convocatio, Latin.]
1. The act of calling to an aſſembly.
Diaphantus making a general convºcation, ſpake to them in
this manner. Sidney.
2. An aſſembly.
On the eighth day ſhall be an holy convocation unto you.
Lev. xxiii. 20.
3. An aſſembly of the clergy for conſultation upon matters ec-
cleſiaſtical, in time of parliament; and as the parliament con-
ſiſts of two diſtinét houſes, ſo does this; the one called the
upper houſe, where the archbiſhops and biſhops ſit ſeverally
by themſelves; the other the lower houſe, where all the reſt
of the clergy are repreſented by their deputies. Cºwel.
I have made an offer to his majeſty,
Upon our ſpiritual convocation,
As touching France, to give a greater ſum
Than ever at one time the clergy yet -
Did to his predeceſſors part withal. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
This is the declaration of our church about it, made by
thoſe who met in convocatiºn Still ngſ. Def of Diſc. on Ra. Idol.
To CONVOKE. v. a. [convoco, Latin.] To call together;
to ſummon to an aſſembly. -
Aſſemblies exerciſe their legiſlature at the times that their
conſtitution, or their own adjournment appoints, if there be
no other way preſcribed to convoke them. Locke.
When next the morning warms the purple Eaſt,
Convoke the peerage. Pope's Odyſſey, b, i. l. 354.
The ſenate originally conſiſted all of nobles, the people
being only convoked upon ſuch occaſions as fell into their cog-
nizance. Swift.
To CONVOLVE. v. a. [convolvo, Latin.] To roll together;
to roll one part upon another.
He writh'd him to and fro convolvd.
Us’d to milder ſcents, the tender race
By thouſands tumble from their honey'd domes,
Convolvd and agonizing in the duſt. Thomſºn's Autumn.
Co'N volute D. part. [of the verb I have found no example ]
Twiſted; rolled upon itſelf.
This differs from Muſcovy-glaſs only in this, that the plates
of that are flat and plain, whereas theſe are convoluted and
infle&amp;ted. Woodward on Fºſſils.
CoNvolution. n.ſ. [convolutio, Latin.] -
1. The act of rolling any thing upon itſelf; the ſtate of being
rolled upon itſelf.
Obſerve the convolution of the ſaid fibres in all other glands,
in the ſame or ſome other manner. Grew's Coſmol. b. i. e. 5.
A thouſand ſecret, ſubtle pipes beſtow,
From which, by num’rous convolutions wound,
Wrap'd with th'attending nerve, and twiſted round. Blackm.
2. The ſtate of rolling together in company.
- And toſs'd wide round,
Q'er the calm ſea, in convolution ſwift
The feather'd eddy floats. Thomſon's Autumn, 1.845:
To CONVOY. v. a. [convoyer, Fr. from conviare, low Latin.]
To accompany by land or ſea for the ſake of defence ; as, he
was convoyed by ſhips of war.
Milton.
Co'N voy. m. ſ. [from the verb. Anciently the accent was on
the laſt ſyllable; it is now on the firſt.j
1. Attendance on the road by way of defence.
Siſter, as the winds give benefit,
And convoy is aſſiſtant, do not ſleep,
But let me hear from you. Shakespeare's Hamlet.
Such fellows will learn you by rote where ſervices were
done; at ſuch a breach, at ſuch a convoy. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Had not God ſet peculiar value upon his temple, he would
not have made himſelf his people's convoy to ſecure them in
their paſſage to it. South's Sermons.
My ſoul grows hard, and cannot death endure,
Your convoy makes the dangerous way ſecure. Dryd. Aureng.
Convoy ſhips accompany their merchants 'till they may pro-
ſecute the voyage without danger. Dryde'.'s Prºf. Dufreſnoy.
2. The act of attending as a defence.
Swift, as a ſparkle of a glancing ſtar,
I ſhoot from heav'n to give him ſafe convoy. Mit. Par. Rºg.
Co'NUs ANCE. m. ſ. [conoiſance, French J Cogniſance; notice;
knowledge. A law term.
To CONVULSE. v. a. [convulſus, Latin.] To give an irre-
gular and involuntary motion to the parts of any body.
Follows the looſen'd, aggravated roar,
Enlarging, deepening, mingling, peal on peal,
Cruſh'd horrible, convulſing heaven and earth. Thomſ. Summ.
CoNvu'lsion. m. ſ. [convulſio, Latin.]
1. A convulſion is an involuntary contračtion of the fibres and
muſcles, whereby the body and limbs are preternaturally
diſtorted. Quincy.
If my hand be put into motion by a convulſion, the indiffe-
rency of that operative faculty is taken away. Locke.
2. Any irregular and violent motion; tumult; commotion;
diſturbance.
All have been ſubječt to ſome concuſſions, and fallen under
the ſame convulſions of ſtate, by diffentions or invaſions. Temple.
CoNvu'lsive, adj. [convulſiſ, French..] That which produces
involuntary motion; that which gives twiches or ſpaſms.
They are irregular and convulſive motions, or ſtrugglings of
the ſpirits. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Shew me the flying ſoul's convulſive ſtrife,
And all the anguiſh of departing life. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
Her colour chang'd, her face was not the ſame,
And hollow groans from her deep ſpirit came :
Her hair ſtood up; convulſive rage poſſeſs'd
Her trembling limbs, and heav'd her lab'ring breaſt. Dryd.
In ſilence weep,
And thy convulſive ſorrows inward keep. Prior.
CO'NY. m.ſ. [ Hanin, Germ. conni! or connin, Fr. cuniculus,
Latin.] Arabit; an animal that burroughs in the ground.
With a ſhort-legg'd hen,
Lemons and wine for ſauce; to theſe a cony
Is not to be deſpair'd of, for our money. Ben. johnſ. Epig.
The huſbandman ſuffers by hares and conys, which eat the
corn, trees. Mortimer's Huſlandry.
CoNY-Boroug H. n ſ. A place where rabbits make their
holes in the ground.
To Co'NY catch. v. m. To catch a cony, is, in the old cant
of thieves, to cheat; to bite; to trick. -
I have matter in my head againſt you, and againſt your
conycatching raſcals. Shakeſp. Merry iſ ives ºf J/indſor.
Co'NycAtch ER. m. ſ. A thief; a cheat; a ſharper; a
tricking fellow; a raſcal. Now obſolete. -
To Coo. v. m. [from the ſound.] To cry as a dove or pigeon.
The ſtock-dove only through the foreſt cºdeſ,
Mournfully hoarſe. Thomſon's Summer, l. 610.
COOK. n.ſ. (coautis, Latin.] . One whoſe profeſſion is to
dreſs and prepare vićtuals for the table. -
One miſtreſs Quickly, which is in the manner of his nurſe;
or his dry nurſe, or his cººk, or his laundry, his waſher, and
his wringer. Shakeſpeare's Merry IVives of Windſor.
The new born babe, by nurſes overlaid,
And the cook caught within the raging fire he made. Dryden.
Their cooks could make artificial birds and fiſhes, in default
of the real ones, and which exceeded them in the exquiſite-
neſs of the taſte. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Cook-MAID. n.ſ.. [cook and maid.]. A maid that dreſſes Pro-
viſions. - -
A friend of mine was lately complaining to me, that his
wife had turned off one of the beſt cook-maid, in England.
Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 32.
Cook-Room. n.ſ.. [cook and room.] A Room in which provº-
fions are prepared for the ſhip's crew.
To Cook. v. a. ſcoque, Latin.]
1. To prepare vićtuals for the table: - -
Who can but think, that had either of the crime”
been ºad to their palates, they might have changed mº:
Decay ºf Piety.
. To prepare for any purpoſe.
2 #. is the %. Sir; if you be ready for that, You
are well cookt. Shakeſpare’s Q.ymbºline.
Cooks RY. n.ſ.. [from cook 1 The art of dreſſing vićtuals.
Some man's wit
Found
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 130</div><p class="Text">Found th’ art of cook'ry to delight his ſenſe:
More bodies are conſum’d and kill'd with it,
Than with the ſword, famine, or peſtilence. Davies.
Ev'ry one to cookery pretends. Åing's Art of Cookery.
Theſe are the ingredients of plants before they are pre-
pared by cºokery. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
COOL. adi. [Åoelen, Dutch.]
1. Somewhat cold; approaching to cold.
He ſet his leg in a pale-fulf, as hot as he could well endure
it, renewing it as it grew cool. Tºmple.
2. Not zealous; not ardent; not angry; not fond ; without
aſſion.
cº, m.ſ. Freedom from heat; ſoft and refreſhing coldneſs.
But ſee, whore Lucia, at her wonted hour,
Amid’ the cººl of yon high marble arch,
Enjoys the noon-day breeze. Addi ºn's Cato.
Philander was enjoying the cool of the morning, among the
dews that lay on cyerything about him, and that gave the air
a freſhneſs. Addison on Ancient 4/edals.
To Cool. v. a. ſºde'em, Cutch..]
1. To make cool; to allay heat.
Snow they uſe in Naples inſtead of ice, becauſe, as they
ſay, it coo's or congeals any liquor ſooner. Addison on Jaly.
Jelly of currants, or the jelly of any ripe ſubacid fruit, is
co ling, and very agreeable to the ſtomach. A hutinct on Diet.
2. To quiet pawon; to calm anger; to moderate zeal.
It is but as a body ſlight diſtemper'd,
Which to its former ſtrength may be reſtor d,
With good advice and little medicine;
My lord Northumberiend will ſoon be col'ſ. Shakesp H. IV.
He will keep his jealouſy to himſelf, and repine in private,
becauſe he will be apt to fear ſome ili cffect it may produce in
cooling your love to him. Addiſon’s ‘pediator, Nº. 171.
They tell us, that had they thought they had been fighting
only other people's quarrels, perhaps it might have cooled their
zeal. Swift.
To Cool. v. m.
1. To grow leſs hot. - -
2. To grow leſs warm with regard to paſſion or inclination.
My humour ſhall not cool; I will incenſe Ford to deal with
poiſon; I will poſſeſs him with yellowneſs. Shakespeare M.I/. of I/.
You never cool while you read Homer. Dryd. Fab. Preface.
I'm impatient 'till it be done; I will not give myſelf liberty
to think, leſt I ſhould cool. Congreve's Old Batchelor.
Co'ol. ER. m. ſ. [from cºol.] -
1. That which has the power of cooling the body.
Coºlers are of two ſorts; firſt, thoſe which produce an im-
mediate ſenſe of cold, which are ſuch as have their parts in
leſs motion than thoſe of the organs of feeling; and ſecondly,
ſuch as, by particular viſcidity, or groſſneſs of parts, give a
greater conſiſtence to the animal fluids than they had before,
whereby they cannot move ſo faſt, and therefore will have
leſs of that inteſtine force on which their heat depends. The
former are fruits, all acid liquors, and common water; and
the latter are ſuch as cucumbers, and all ſubſtances producing
viſcidity. Quincy.
In dogs or cats there appeared the ſame neceſſity for a cooler
as in man. - Harvey on Conſumptiºns.
Acid things were uſed only as coolers. Arbuthn. on Aliments.
2. A veſſel in which any thing is made cool.
Your firſt wort being thus boiled, lade off into one or more
coºrs, or cool-backs, in which leave the ſullage behind, and
let it run off fine. Al/ºrtimer's Art ºf Husbandry.
Co'o LLY. adv. [from cool.]
1. Without heat, or ſharp cold.
She in the gelid caverns, woodbine wrought,
And freſh bedev'd with ever-ſpouting ſtreams,
Sits coolly calm. 7 homºſon's Summer, l. 455.
2. Without paſſion. º
Motives that addreſs themſelves coolly to our reaſon, are
fitteſt to be employed upon reaſonable creatures. Atterbury.
Cool. N Ess. m. ſ. [from coal.]
1. Gentle cold; a ſoft or mild degree of cold.
This difference conſiſteth not in the heat or coolneſs of
ſpirits; for cloves, and other ſpices, naptha and patroleum,
have exceeding hot ſpirits, hotter a great deal than oil, wax,
or tallow, but not inflamed. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The toad loveth ſhade and co-hºſt. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſtory.
Yonder the harveſt of cold months laid up,
Gives a freſh cºln'ſ to the royal cup;
There ice, like cryſtal, firm and never loſt,
Tempers hot July with December's froſt.
The ſheep enjoy the cooliºſ of the ſhade.
2. 'Vant of affection; difinclination.
They parted with ſuch coolnſ; towards each other, as if
they ſcarce hoped to mect again. Clarendon, b. viii.
3. Freedom from paſſion.
Coo M. n.ſ.
1. Soot that gathers over an oven's mouth. Philips.
2. That matter that works out of the wheels of carriages. Bailey.
3. It is uſed in Scotland for the uſeleſs duſt which falls from
large coals. - 2
- VC. L. I.
J/aller.
Dryd. Wing.
Coomb, or Comb. n.ſ. [comile, Fr. cumulus, Lat, a heap,
Skinner.] A meaſure of corn containing four buſhels. Bailey,
COOP. n.ſ. [Åuyte, Dutch..]
1. A barrel; a veſſel for the preſervation of liquids.
2. A cage; a penn for animals; as poultry or ſheep.
When Gracchus was ſlain, the ſame day the chickens refuſed
to eat out of the coop; and Claudius Pulcher underwent the
like ſucceſs, when he contemned the tripudiary augurations.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. e. I 1.
There were a great many crammed capons together in a
rºof. L’Eſtrange.
To Coop. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſhut up in a narrow
compaſs; to confine; to cage; to impriſon. -
That pale, that white-fac'd ſhore,
Whoſe foot ſpurns back the ocean's roaring tides,
And coºps from other lands her iſlanders. Shakesp. K. john.
The Engliſhmen did coop up the lord Ravenſtein, that he
ſtirred not; and likewiſe held in ſtrait ſiege the maritime part
of the town. Bacon's Henry VII.
In the taking of a town the poor eſcape better than the
rich; for the one is let go, and the other is plundered and
cooped up. L’Eſtrange.
Twice conquer'd cowards, now your ſhame is ſhown,
Coop’d up a ſecond time within your town
Who dare not iſſue forth in open field. Dryden's AFneid:
One world ſuffic’d not Alexander's mind;
Coop’d up, he ſeem'd in earth and ſeas confin'd. Dry.juv.
Coop'd in a narrow iſle, obſerving dreams
With flattering wizards. Dryden's juv. Sat. 19.
The Trojans, coop'd within their walls ſo long,
Unbar their gates, and iſſue in a throng. Dryden's AFneid.
The contempt of all other knowledge, as if it were nothing
in compariſon of law or phyſick, of aſtrology or chymiſtry,
coofs the underſtanding up within narrow bounds, and hinders
it from looking abroad into other provinces of the intellectual
world. Locke.
They are cooped in cloſe by the laws of their countries, and
the ſtrict guards of thoſe whoſe intereſt it is to keep them ig-
norant, leſt, knowing more, they ſhould believe the leſs in
them. Locke.
What coop whole armies in our walls again. Pope.
Coope'F. n.ſ. [coupé, French..] A motion in dancing.
A Co'oper. m. ſ. [from coop.] One that makes coops or
barrels.
Societies of artificers and tradeſmen, belonging to ſome
towns corporate, ſuch as weavers and coopers, by virtue of
their charters, pretend to privilege and juriſdiction. Child.
Co'oPERAGE. m. ſ. [from cooper.] The price paid for cooper's
work.
To COOPERATE. v. n. [con and opera, Latin.]
1. To labour jointly with another to the ſame end.
It puzzleth and perplexeth the conceits of many, that per-
haps would otherwiſe cooperate with him, and makes a man
walk almoſt alone to his own ends. Bacon, Eſſay 6.
By giving man a free will, he allows man that higheſt ſatiſ-
faction and privilege of cooperating to his own felicity. Boyle.
2. To concur in producing the ſame effect.
His mercy will not forgive offenders, or his benignity co-
operate to their converſions. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. e. 2.
All theſe cauſes cooperating, muſt, at laſt, weaken their
motion. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
The ſpecial acts and impreſfions by which the Divine Spirit
introduces this charge, and how far human liberty coºperates
with it, are ſubjects beyond our reach and comprehenſion.
- Rogers, Sermon 14.
Cooper ATION. m. ſ. [from coºperate.] The act of contri-
buting or concurring to the ſame end.
We might work any effect without and againſt matter; and
this not hopen by the cooperation of angels or ſpirits, but only
by the unity and harmony of nature. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Coo'PERative. adj. [from cooperate.] Promoting the ſame
end jointly.
Coop ERA'tor. n.ſ.. [from cooperate.] He that, by joint en-
deavours, promotes the ſame end with others.
CooptATION. n. ſ. [coºpto, Latin.] Adoption; aſſumption.
COO'RDINATE. adj. [con and ordinatus, Latin.]. Holding
the ſame rank; not being ſubordinate. Thus ſhell-fiſh may
be divided into two coordinate kinds, cruſtateous and teſta-
ceous; each of which is again divided into many ſpecies,
ſubordinate to the kind, but coordinate to each other.
The word Analyſis fignifies the general and particular heads
of a diſcourſe, with their mutual connexions, both coordinate
and ſubordinate, drawn out into one or more tables. Watts.
Coo'R DINATELY. adv. [from coºrdinate.] In the ſame rank;
in the ſame relation; without ſubordination.
Coo'RDIN AT EN Ess. m. ſ. [from coordinate.] The ſtate of being
coordinate.
Coordin Arios. n.ſ.. [from cººrdinate.] The ſtate of holding
the ſame rank; of ſtanding in the ſame relation to ſomething
higher; collateralneſs. -
In this high court of parliament there is a rare coordination
-
2 - of
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 131</div><p class="Text">C O P
*
C O P
of power, a wholſome mixture betwixt monarchy, optimacy,
and democracy. Howe's Pre-eminence of Parliament.
When theſe petty intrigues of a play are ſo ill ordered,
that they have no coherence with the other, I muſt grant that
Lyſidius has reaſon to tax that want of due connexion; for
coordination in a play is as dangerous and unnatural as in a
ſtate. - Dryden on Dramatick Poeſy.
Coor. n.ſ.. [maer-Roet, Dut. cotee, French..] A ſmall black
water-fowl, ſeen often in fens and marſhes.
A lake, the haunt
Of coots, and of the fiſhing cormorant. Dryden's Fables.
COP. n.ſ. [kop, Dut. cop, Sax.] The head; the top of any
thing; any thing riſing to a head. As a cop, vulgarly cock of
hay; a cob-caſtle, properly cop-coſtle, a ſmall caſtle or houſe on
a hill. A cob of cherryſtones for cop, a pile of ſtones one laid
upon another; a tuft on the head of birds.
Co'PAL. m. ſ. The Mexican term for a gum.
CoPA'RCENARY. m. ſ. [from coparcºner.] Joint ſucceſſion to
any inheritance.
In the deſcent to all the daughters in coparcenary, for want
of ſons, the chief houſe is allotted to the eldeſt daughter.
Hale's Hiſtory ºf Common Law.
COPA'RCENER. n.ſ.. [from con and particip;, Lat.]
Cafarceners are otherwiſe called parceners; and, in com-
mon law, are ſuch as have equal portion in the inheritance of
the anceſtor. Cowel.
This great lordſhip was broken and divided, and partition
made between the five daughters: in every of theſe portions,
the coparceners ſeverally exerciſed the ſame juriſdiction royal,
which the earl marſhal and his ſons had uſed, in the whole
province. t Davies on Ireland.
Cop'ARch NY. m.ſ. [Sce COPARCENER ] An equal ſhare
of coparceners. Philips's Iſ ord of I/ords.
COPA'RTNER. m. ſ. [co and partner.j One that has a ſhare in
ſome common ſtock or affair; one equally concerned; a
ſharer; a partaker; a partner.
Our faithful friends,
Th' aſſociates and copartners of our loſs. Milt. Parad. Loft.
Shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake
Full happineſs with me? Or rather not;
But keep the odds of knowledge in my pow'r,
Without cofartner * Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ix. l. 825.
Rather by them
I gain'd what I have gain'd, and with them dwell
Copartner in theſe regions of the world. Milt. Parad. Reg.
CoPA'RTNERSHIP. m. ſ. [from copartner.] The ſtate of bear-
ing an equal part, or poſſeſſing an equal ſhare.
In caſe the father left only daughters, and no ſons, the
daughters equally ſucceeded to their father as in copartnerſhip.
Hale's Hiſtory of Common Law.
Co'PATAIN. adj. [from cope.] High raiſed; pointed. Hanmer.
Oh, fine villain a ſilken doublet, a velvet hoſe, a ſcarlet
cloke, and a copatain hat. Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
CoPA'y v A. m. ſ. [It is ſometimes written capivi, capivi, catayva,
copayva, cupayva, cupayla.] A gum which diſtils from a tree
in Braſil. It is much uſed in diſorders of the urinary paſ-
ſages.
Cope. m. ſ. [See Cop. 1
1. Any thing with which the head is covered.
2. A ſacerdotal cloak, or veſtment worn in ſacred miniſtration.
3. Anything which is ſpread over the head; as the concave of
the ſkies; any archwork over a door.
All theſe things that are contained
Within this goodly cope, both moſt and leaſt,
Their º have, and daily are increaſt.
ver head the diſmal hiſs
Of fiery darts in flaming volleys flew ;
And, flying, vaulted either hoſt with fire;
So, under fiery cºpe, together ruſh'd
Both battles main. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. vi. 1. 215.
The ſcholar believes there is no man under the cope of
heaven, who is ſo knowing as his maſter. Dryd. Dufreſnoy.
To CoPE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover, as with a cope.
A very large bridge, that is all made of wood, and coped
over head. Addison on Italy.
2. To reward; to give in return.
- I and my friend
Have, by your wiſdom, been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties; in lieu whereof,
Three thouſand ducats, due unto the Jew,
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.
3. To contend with 5 to oppoſe.
Know my name is loſt;
By treaſon's tooth bare gnawn, and canker bit;
Yet I am noble as the adverſary I come to cope. Shakespeare K. Lear.
To Cop E. v. n. -
1. To contend ; to ſtruggle; to ſtrive. It has with before the
thing or perſon oppoſed.
In this ſenſe it is a word of doubtful etymology. The con-
jećture of junius derives it from Koopen, to buy, or ſome other
Spenser.
Shakeſpeare.
word of the ſame import ; ſo that to cºpe with, ſignifies to in-
terchange bowſ, or any thing elk, with another.
Lct our trains
March by us, that we may peruſe the men
We ſhould have cop'd withal. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
It is likely thou wilt undertake
A thing, like death, to Chide away this ſhame,
That “pes rºith death itſelf, to 'ſcape from it. Shakeſpeare.
But Eve was Eve;
This far his over-match, who, ſelf deceiv'd
And raſh, beforehand had no better weigh'd
The ſtrength he was to cope with, or his own. A4iii. P. R.
• They perfectly underſtood both the hares and the enemy
they were to cope with al. L'E/ºrange's Faller.
On every plain,
Hoſt cop'd with hoſt, dire was the din of war. Philºs.
Their generals have not been able to cope with the troops of
Athens, which I have conducted. Addison's Iſ'hig Examiner.
If the mind apply itſelf firſt to eaſier ſubjects, and things
near a-kin to what is already known ; and then advance to
the more remote and knotty parts of knowledge by flow de-
grees, it will be able, in this manner, to cope with great diffi-
culties, and prevail over them with amazing and happy
ſucceſs. !at,’s Introvement of the Alind.
2. To encounter; to interchange kindneſs or ſcntiments.
Thou freſh piece -
Of excellent witchcraft, who of force muſt know
The royal fool thou co: /; with. Shakesp. Jºinter's Tale.
I will make him tell the tale anew ;
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath, and is again to cope your wife. Shakeſp. Othell.
Thou art e'en as juſt a man,
As e'er my converſation oped withal. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Co'PE L. See CoPPEL.
Co'PEs M.A.T.E. n.ſ. [perhaps for cutſmate, a companion in
drinking, or one that dwells under the ſame cope, for houſe.]
Companion; friend. An old word.
Ne ever ſtaid in place, ne ſpake to wight,
*Till that the fox his copyinate he had found. Hulberd's Tale.
Co'PIER. m. ſ. [from copy.]
1. One that copies; a tranſcriber.
A coin is in no danger of having its characters altered by
coffers and tranſcribers. Addiſon on Ancient Coins.
2. One that imitates; a plagiary; an imitator.
Without invention a painter is but a copier, and a poet
but a plagiary of others. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Let the faint copier, on old Tyber's ſhore,
Nor mean the taſk, each breathing buſt explore;
Line after line with painful patience trace,
This Roman grandeur, that Athenian grace. Tickel.
Co'PING. m. ſ. [from cope.] The upper tire of maſonry which
covers the wall.
All theſe were of coſtly ſtones, even from the foundation
unto the cºping. 1 Kings, vii. 9.
The coping, the modilions, or dentils, make a noble ſhew
by their graceful projections. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 415.
COPIOU.S. adj. [copia, Latin.]
1. Plentiful; abundant; exuberant; in great quantities.
This alcaline acrimony indicates the co’ious uſe of vinegar
and acid fruits, Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The tender heart is peace,
And kindly pours its copious treaſures forth
In various converſe. Thomſºn's String.
2. Abounding in words or images; not barren; not confined ;
not conciſe.
Co'Pious I.Y. adv. [from copious J
1. Plentifully ; abundantly; in great quantities.
2. At large; without brevity or conciſeneſs; diffuſely.
Theſe ſeveral remains have been ſo copio'ſy deſcribed by
abundance of travellers, and other writers, that it is very dif-
ficult to make any new diſcoveries on ſo beaten a ſubject. Addison
Co'Pious N Ess. n.ſ.. [from copious J .
1. Plenty; abundance; great quantity; exuberance.
2. Diffuſion; exuberance of ſtile.
The Roman orator endeavoured to imitate the copiºuſneſs of
Homer, and the Latin poet made it his buſineſs to reach the
concifeneſs of Demoſthenes. Dryden.
Copist. n.f. [ from copy. J A copyer; a tranſcriber; an
imitator.
Co'PlaN D. m. ſ. A piece of ground in which the land termi-
nates with an acute angle. Dići.
Co'PPED. adj. [from cap.] Riſing to a top or head.
It was broad in its baſis, and roſe cºpped like a ſugar-
loaf. //iſeman's Surgery.
Co'PPE L. m. ſ. [This word is variouſly ſpelt; as cºpel, cupel,
ciple, and cuppel; but I cannot find its etymology ) An in-
ſtrument uſed in chymiſtry in the form of a diſh, made of
aſhes, well waſhed, to cleanſe them from all their ſalt; or of
bones thoroughly calcined. Its uſe is to try and purify gold
and filver, which is done by º, lead with the metal,
and expoſing it in the coppel to a violent fire a long while,
The impurities of the metal will then be carried off in droſs,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
which
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 132</div><p class="Text">C O P
C O P
which is called the litharge of gold and filver. The refiners
call the coppel a teſt. Harris.
COPPER. n.ſ. [Koper, Dut. tuprum, Latin.] One of the fix
primitive metals.
Copper is the moſt dućtile and malleable metal, after gold
and ſilver. Of a mixture of copper and lapis calaminaris is
formed braſs; a compoſition of copper and tin makes bell-
metal; and copper and braſs, melted in equal quantities, pro-
duces what the French call bronze, uſed for figures and
ſtatues. Chambers.
Copper is heavier than iron or tin; but lighter than filver,
lead, and gold. It is not unfrequently found native in a mal-
leable ſtate, but in ſmall quantities. In the ſtate of ore it
makes, according to its various admixtures, many very dif-.
ferent appearances. The richer copper ores are found in many
parts of Germany and Sweden; and we have ſome in England
little inferior to the fineſt Swediſh. Hill on Foſſils.
Two veſſels of fine copper, precious as gold. Ezra, viii. 27.
Co'PPER, n. ſ. A veſſel inade of copper; commonly uſed for a
boiler larger than a moveable pot.
They boiled it in a copper to the half; then they poured it
into earthen veſſels. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 848.
CoPPER-Nos E. m. ſ. [cºpfer and noſe..] A red noſe.
He having colour cnough, and the other higher, is too
flaming a praiſe for a good complexion: I had as lieve Helen's
golden tongue had commended Troilus for a copper-nºſe.
Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Creſide.
Gutta roſacea ariſeth in little hard tubercles, affecting the
face all over with great itching, which, being ſcratched, looks
red, and riſe in great welks, rendering the viſage fiery ; and,
in progreſs of time, make copper-noſes, as we generally expreſs
them. J//man.
Coppe R-PLATE. m. ſ. A plate on which pićtures are engraven
for the neater impreſſion: diſtinguiſhed from a wooden cut.
CoPPER-work. m. ſ. [copper and work J A place where cop-
per is worked or manufactured.
This ſort is like thoſe now wrought at the copper-works.
J/oodward on Fºſſils.
Co'PPERAs. n.ſ. [Kopperooſe, Dut. couperouſe, Fr. ſuppoſed to
be found in copper mines only..] A name given to three forts
of vitriol ; the green, the bluiſh green, and the white, which
are produced in the mines of Germany, Hungary, and other
countries. But what is commonly ſold here for copperas, is an
artificial vitriol, made of a kind of ſtones found on the ſea-
ſhore in Eſſex, Hampſhire, and ſo weſtward, ordinarily called
gold ſtones from their colour. They abound with iron, and
are expoſed to the weather in beds above ground, and receive
the rains and dews, which in time breaks and diſſolves the
ftones: the liquor that runs off is pumped into boilers, in
which is firſt put old iron, which, in boiling, diſſolves. When
the boiling is finiſhed, the liquor is drawn off into coolers,
where it ſhoots into cryſtals of a fine green colour. This
factitious copperas, in many reſpects, perfeótly agrees with the
native green vitriol of Germany; and is uſed in dying hats and
cloths black, and in making ink. Chambers. Hill.
It may be queſtioned, whether, in this operation, the iron
or copperas be tranſmuted, from the cognation of copperas with
copper, and the iron remaining after converſion. Brown.
Co'PPERSMITH. n.ſ.. [copper and ſmith..] One that manufac-
tures copper.
Salmoneus, as the Grecian tale is,
Was a mad copperſmith of Elis;
Up at his forge by morning-peep. Swift.
Co'PPER wox M. n.ſ. ſteredo, in Latin.]
1. A little worm in ſhips.
2. A moth that fretteth garments.
3. A worm breeding in one's hand. Ainſworth.
Co'PPERY. adj. [from copper.] Containing copper; made of
copper.
Some ſprings of Hungary, highly impregnated with vitrio-
lick ſalts, diſſolve the body of one metal, ſuppoſe iron, put
into the ſpring, and depoſite, in lieu of the irony particles
carried off, coºpery particles brought with the water out of the
neighbouring copper-mines. // dward on Fºſſils.
COPPICE. n.ſ.. [coupeaux, Fr. from couper, to cut or lop. It
is often written copſe.] Low woods cut at ſtated times for
fuel; a place over-run with bruſhwood.
A land, each ſide whereof was boarded both with high
timber trees, and copſes of far more humble growth. Sidney.
Upon the edge of yonder coppice,
A ſtand, where you may have the faireſt ſhoot. Sha&amp;ſjeare.
In coppic, woods, if you leave ſtaddles too thick, they will
run to buſhes and briars, and have little clean underwood.
Bacon's Henry VII.
The willows and the hazel copſes green,
Shall now no more be ſeen, -
Fanning their joyous leaves to their ſoft lays. Milton.
Raiſe trees in your ſeminaries and nurſeries, and you may
tranſplant them for coppice ground, walks, or hedges. Mortim.
The rate of coppice lands will fall upon the diſcovery of coal-
mines. Locke.
Copple-Dust. a. ſ. ſprobably for coppel, or cupel du/.] Pow-
der uſed in purifying metals, or the groſs parts ſeparated by
the cupel.
It may be alſo tried by incorporating powder of ſteel, or
cºpfle-duſt, by pouncing into the quickſilver. Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
Copple-stones are lumps and fragments of itone or marble,
broke from the adjacent cliffs, rounded by being bowled and
tumbled to and again by the action of the water. J/oodward,
Co'PPLED. adj, [from cop.] Riſing in a conick form; riſing
to a point.
There is ſome difference in this ſhape, ſome being flatter
on the top, others more copped. J%odward on Foſſi's.
Copse., n.ſ.. [abbreviated from coppice..] Short wood cut at a
certain growth for fuel; a place overgrown with ſhort wood.
The Eaſt quarters of the ſhire are not deſtitute of copſe
woods. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Oaks and brambles, if the copſ be burn'd,
Confounded lie, to the ſame aſhes turn'd. J/aller.
But in what quarter of the cºpſe it lay,
His eye by certain level could ſurvey. Dryden's Fables.
To Copse. v. a. [from the noun..] To preſerve underwoods.
The neglect of copſing wood cut down, hath been of very
evil conſequence. Swift's Addreſs to Parliament.
COPULA. m. ſ. [Latin.] The word which unites the ſubject
and predicate of a propoſition; as, books are dear.
The copula is the form of a propoſition; it repreſents the
aćt of the mind, affirming or denying. J/atts's Lo ick.
To COPULATE. v. a. [copulo, Latin.] To unite; to con-
join; to link together. -
If the force of cuſtom, ſimple and ſeparate, be great, the
force of cuſtom copulate and conjoined, and collegiate, is far
greater. Bacon, Effay 40.
To Co'PULATE. v. n. To come together as different ſexes.
Not only the perſons ſo copulating are infected, but alſo their
children. JWiſeman's Surgery.
CoPULATION. m.ſ.. [from copulate.] The congreſs or embrace
of the two ſexes.
Sundry kinds, even of conjugal copulation, are prohibited as
unhoneſt. Hooker, b iv. ſei?. I 1.
Co'PULATIve, adj. [copulativus, Latin.] A term of grammar.
Copulative propoſitions are thoſe which have inore ſubjects
or predicates connected by affirmative or negative conjunc-
tions; as, riches and honours are temptations to pride :
Caeſar conquered the Gauls and the Britons: neither gold nºr
jewels will purchaſe immortality, J/atts's Logick.
COPY. m. ſ. [cºpie, Fr. copia, low Latin, ºwed cuipiam facia
eft copia exſcribendi. junius much inclines, after his manner,
to derive it from zºrs, labour; becauſe, ſays he, to copy
another's writing is very painful and laborious.]
1. A tranſcript from the archetype or original.
If virtue's ſelf were loſt, we might
From your fair mind new copies write. JWaller.
I have not the vanity to think my copy equal to the ori-
ginal. Denham.
He ſtept forth, not only the copy of God's hands, but alſo
the copy of his perfections, a kind of image or repreſentation
of the Deity in ſmall. South's Sermons.
The Romans having ſent to Athens, and the Greek cities
of Italy, for the copies of the beſt laws, choſe ten legiſlators
to put them into form. Swift on the Diſſent. in Athens and Rome.
2. An individual book; one of many books; as, a good or fair
CODV.
#he very having of the books of God was a matter of no
ſmall charge, as they could not be had otherwiſe than in writ-
ten copies. Hooker, b. v. ſº. 22.
3. The autograph; the original; the archetype ; that from
which any thing is copied.
It was the copy of our conference:
In bed he ſlept not, for my urging it;
At board he fed not, for my urging it. Shakespeare Com, of Err.
Let him firſt learn to write, after a copy, all the letters in
the vulgar alphabet. Holder's Elements of Sreech.
The firſt of them I have forgotten, and cannot eaſily re-
trieve, becauſe the coty is at the preſs. Dryden.
4. An inſtrument by which any conveyance is made in law.
Thou know'ſt that Banquo and his Fleance lives;
But in them nature's copy's not eternal. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
5. A pićture drawn from another pićture.
Copy-book. n.ſ. [copy and book.j A book in which copies
are written for learners to imitate.
Copy-hold. m. ſ. [copy and hold.] . A tenure, for which the
tenant hath nothing to ſhew but the copy of the rolls made
by the ſteward of his lord's court: for the ſteward, as he en-
rolls other things done in the lord's court, ſo he regiſters ſuch
tenants as are admitted in the court, to any parcel of land or
tenement belonging to the manor; and the tranſcript of this
is called the court-roll, the copy of which the tenant takes
from him, and keeps as his only evidence. This is called a
baſe tenure, becauſe it holds at the will of the lord; yet not
ſimply, but according to the cuſtom of the manor: ſo that if
a copy-holder break not the cuſtom of the manor, and thereby
forfeit his tenure, he cannot be turned out at the lord's plea-
ſure. Theſe cuſtoms of manors vary in one point or other,
4 almoſt
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 133</div><p class="Text">C O R
C O R
!
aimoſ in every manor. Some copy-hºld, are finable, and ſome
certain : that which is finable, the lord rates at what fine or
income he pleaſes, when the tenant is admitted into it: that
which is certain is a kind of inheritance, and called in many
places cuſtomary ; becauſe the tenant dying, and the hold
being void, the next of blood paying the cuſtomary fine, as
two ihillings for an acre, or ſo, cannot be denied his admiſ-
ſion. Some copy-holders have, by cuſtom, the wood growing
upon their own land, which by law they could not have.
Some hold by the verge in ancient demeſne; and though they
hold by copy, yet are they, in account, a kind of freeholder:
for, if ſuch a one commit felony, the king hath annum, die!",
and vaſºum, as in caſe of freehold. Some others hold by com-
mon tenure, called mere cºpy-hºld; and they committing felony,
their land eſcheats to the lord of the manor. Cowel.
If a cuſtomary tenant die, the widow ſhall have what the
law calls her free bench in all his copy-hold lands. Addison Spºłat.
Copy-Hold ER. m. ſ. [from cºpyhold J One that is poſſeſſed of
land in copyhold.
To Copy, va. [from the noun
1. To tranſcribe; to write after an original.
He who hurts a harmleſs neighbour's peace,
Who loves a lie, lame ſlander helps about,
Who writes a libel, or who copies out. Pope's Epiſils.
2. To imitate; to propoſe to imitation; to endeavour to re-
ſemble.
He that borrows other men's experience, with this deſign of
cºying it out, poſſeſſes himſelf of one of the greateſt advan-
tages. Decay of Piety.
Set the examples, and their ſouls inflame,
To cºpy out their great forefathers fame. Dryd. K. Arthur.
To copy her few nymphs aſpir’d,
Her virtues fewer ſwains admir’d. Swift.
To Co'PY. v. n.
1. To do anything in imitation of ſomething elſe.
Some imagine, that whatſoever they find in the pićture of a
maſter, who has acquired reputation, muſt of neceſſity be ex-
cellent; and never fail, when they copy, to follow the bad as
well as the good things. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. It has ſometimes from before the thing imitated.
When a painter cºpies from the life, he has no privilege to
alter features and lineaments, under pretence that his picture
will look better. Dryden.
3. Sometimes after. -
Several of our countrymen, and Mr. Dryden in particular,
ſeem very often to have cºpied after it in their dramatick
writings, and in their poems upon love. Addiſon's Speciator.
To Coque'r. v. a. [from the noun..] To entertain with com-
pliments and amorous tattle ; to treat with an appearance of
amorous tenderneſs.
You are coquetting a maid of honour, my lord looking on
to ſee how the gameſters play, and I railing at you both. Swift.
To Coqu'E.T. v. n. To act the lover.
Phyllis, who but a month ago
Was marry'd to the Tunbridge beau,
I ſaw coquetting t'other night,
In publick, with that odious knight. wift.
Co'QUETRY. m. ſ. [coqueterie, French..] Affeciation of amorous
advances; deſire of attracting notice.
I was often in company with a couple of charming women,
who had all the wit and beauty one could deſire in female
companions, without a daſh of cºquetry, that from time to
time gave me a great many agreeable torments. Addiſ Spect.
COQUETTE. n.ſ. [coquette, Fr. from coquart, a prattler. J
A gay, airy girl; a girl who endeavours to attract notice.
The light coquettes in ſylphs aloft repair,
And ſport and flutter in the fields of air. Pope's Ra. of Lock.
A coquette and a tinder-box are ſparkled. Arbuthn, and Pope.
Co'RAcLE. m. ſ. ſcwrwgle, Welſh, probably from corium, lea-
ther, Lat.] A boat uſed in Wales by fiſhers; made by draw-
ing leather or oiled cloath upon a frame of wicker work.
CORAL. m. ſ. ſcorallium, Latin.]
1. Red coral is a plant of great hardneſs and ſtony nature,
while growing in the water, as it has after long expoſure to
the air. The vulgar opinion, that coral is ſoft, while in the
ſea, proceeds from a ſoft and thin coat, of a cruſtaceous mat-
ter, covering it while it is growing, and which is taken off
before it is packed up for uſe. This external bark is of a
fungous ſpongy texture, of a yellowiſh or greeniſh colour,
and is full of an acrid juice reſembling milk. It covers every
part of the plant, and is eaſily ſeparated from the internal or
ſtony part by friction, while it is moiſt; but adheres to it
very firmly, if ſuffered to dry on it. The whole coral plant
grows to a foot or more in height, and is variouſly ramified.
It is thickeſt at the ſtem, and its branches grow gradually
ſmaller to the extremities. It grows to ſtones, or any other
ſolid ſubſtances, without a root, or without any way pene-
trating them, as plants do the earth. It has been doubted
whether coral were properly a plant or not; but as it is found
to grow, and take in its nouriſhment in the manner of plants,
and to produce flowers and ſeeds, or at leaſt a matter analogous
to ſeeds, it properly belongs to the vegetable kingdom. The
ancients aſcribed great virtues to red coal; but now it is only
uſed internally as an aſtringent and abſorbent, with other mé-
dicines of the ſame intention. We hear of white coral, of
which the ancients make no mention; and what is ſold under
this name is a ſpecies of the madrepora, another ſea-plant.
There is a black coral of the ſame ſtony ſubſtance with the red,
and as gloſſy as the blackeſt marble; but what is ſold in the
ſhops under that name, is a plant of a different genus, and of
a tough horny texture. Hill's 44ateria Medica.
In the ſea, upon the ſouth-weſt of Sicily, much coral is
found. It is a ſubmarine plant: it hath no leaves: it branch-
eth only when it is under water It is ſoft, and green of co-
Jour; but being brought into the air, it becometh hard and
ſhining red, as we ſee. Pacº's Natural Hyºry, N°. 780.
This gentleman, deſirous to find the nature of coral, cauſed
a man to go down a hundred fathom into the ſea, with expreſs
orders to take notice whether it were hard or ſoft in the place
where it groweth. Brºwn's ſugar Err urs, b. ii. c. 5.
He hears the crackling ſound of coral woods,
And ſees the ſccret ſource of ſubterranean floods. Dryd. Wirg.
A turret was inclos'd
Within the wall, of alabaſter white,
And crimſon cora', for the queen of night, !
Who takes in Sylvan ſports her chaſe delight. Dryden.
Or where's the ſenſe, direct or moral,
That teeth are pearl, or lips are cora. A Prior.
2. The piece of coral which children have about their necks,
imagined to aſſiſt them in breeding teeth.
Her infant grandame's coral next it grew ;
The bells ſhe gingled. Pope.
Coral-TRE E. n.J. ſcorallodendron, Latin.]
It is a native of America, and produces very beautiful
ſcarlet flowers; but never any ſeeds in the European gar-
dens. Miller.
Co'R ALLIN E. adj. [corallinus, Latin.] Conſiſting of coral;
approaching to coral.
At ſuch time as the ſea is agitated, it takes up into itſelf ter-
reſtrial matter of all kinds, and in particular the coralline mat-
ter, letting it fall again, as it becomes more quiet and calm.
//codward on Fºſſils.
Co'R ALLINE. m. ſ. [from the adjective.]
Coralline is a ſea-plant uſed in medicine; but much infe-
riour to the coral in hardneſs. It is naturally very ramoſe or
branched, and forms a bunch of filaments two or three inches
long, and each of them of the thickneſs of a ſmall pack-
thread, and jointed. They are ſometimes greeniſh, ſome-
times yellowiſh, often rediſh, and frequently white. Hill.
In Falmouth there is a ſort of ſand, or rather coralline, that
lies under the owſe, which they are forced to remove before
they can come to the bed of ſand. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Co'RALloID.
Co'R A Lloid A.L.
Now that plants and ligneous bodies may indurate under
water, without approachment of air, we have experiment in
coralline, with many coralloidal concretions. Brown.
The pentadrous, columnar, coralloid bodies, that are com-
poſed of plates ſet lengthways of the body, and paſſing from
the ſurface to the axis of it. //oodward on Fºſſils.
CoRA'NT. m. ſ. [courant, French.) A nimble ſprightly dance.
It is harder to dance a corant well than a jigg; ſo in con-
verſation, even, eaſy, and agreeable, more than points of
wit. 7 emple.
I would as ſoon believe a widow in great grief for her huſ-
band, becauſe I ſaw her dance a corant about his coffin. 1/aſb.
Co'RBAN. n.ſ. [...]inp} An alms-baſket; a receptacle of
charity; a gift; an alms.
They think to ſatisfy all obligations to duty by their corban
of religion. King Charles.
Corban ſtands for an offering or gift made to God, or his
temple. The Jews ſometimes ſwore by corlan, or the gifts
offered unto God. If a man made all his fortune corlan, or
devoted it to God, he was forbidden to uſe it. If all that he
was to give his wife, or his father and mother, was declared
corban, he was no longer permitted to allow them neceſſary
ſubſiſtence. Even debtors were permitted to defraud their
creditors, by conſecrating their debt to God. Our Saviour
reproaches the Jews, in the Goſpel, with theſe uncharitable
and irreligious vows. By this word ſuch perſons were like-
wiſe meant as devoted themſelves to the ſervice of God and his
temple. Corban ſignifies alſo the treaſury of the temple,
where the offerings, which were made in money, were de-
poſited. Calmet.
CoR BE. adj. [courhe, French..] Crooked.
For ſiker thy head very tottie is,
So thy corbe ſhoulder it leans anniſs. Sfeſſºr’s Pºſkra's.
Co'RE FILs. n. / Little baſkets uſed in fortification, filled with
earth, and ſet upon the parapet, to ſhelter the men in firing
upon the beſiegers. -
Co'REEL. a. ſ. [In architecture. The repreſntation of a
baſket, ſometimes placed on the heads of the caryatides.
Co'R BE L. } n f
Co'RBIL. -
ław. [xºgawaii?...] Reſembling coral.
3
2,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 134</div><p class="Text">N
C O R
C O R
R. A ſhort piece of timber ſticking out ſix or eight inches from
a wal, ſometimes placed for ſtrength under the ſemi-girders
of a platform. -
2. A niche or hollow left in walls for figures or ſtatues. Chambers.
CORD. m. ſ. ſcºrt, Welſh; chºrda, Latin; corde, French.]
1. A rope; a ſtring compoſed of ſeveral ſtrands or twiſts.
Such ſmiling rogues as theſe,
Like rats, oft bite the holy card, in twain,
Too intrinſicate t' unlooſe. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
She let them down by a cord through the window.joſ. ii. 5.
Form'd of the fineſt complicated thread,
Theſe num’rous cords are through the body ſpread. Blackm.
2. The cords extended in ſetting up tents, furniſh ſeveral meta-
phors in ſcripture.
Thine eyes ſhall ſee Jeruſalem a quiet habitation, a taber-
nacle that ſhall not be taken down; none of the ſtakes there-
of ſhall ever be removed, neither ſhall any of the cords thereof
be broken. Iſaiah, xxxiii. 20.
3. A quantity of wood for fuel, ſuppoſed to be meaſured with a
cord; a pile eight feet long, four high, and four broad.
CoRD-MAKER. m. ſ. [cord and make J One whoſe trade is to
make ropes; a ropemaker.
CoRD-wooD. n.ſ.. [cord and wood.] Wood piled up for fuel,
to be ſold by the cord.
To Corp. v. a. [from the noun..] To bind with ropes; to
faſten with cords; to cloſe by a bandage.
Co'RDAGE. m. ſ. [from cord.]. A quantity of cords; the ropes
of a ſhip.
fººdened their ſhips to the ground, and rid at anchor
with cables of iron chains, having neither canvas nor cordage.
- Raleigh, Eſſay i.
Spain furniſhed a ſort of ruſh called ſpartum, uſeful for
cordage and other parts of ſhipping. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To the cordage glued
The ſailor, and the pilot to the helm. Thomſºn's I/inter.
Co'RDED. adj. [from cord..] Made of ropes.
This night he meaneth, with a corded ladder,
To climb celeſtial Silvia's chamber-window. Shakeſpeare.
CoRDEli'ER. m. ſ. A Franciſcan frier; ſo named from the cord
which ſerves him for a cinéture.
And who to aſſiſt but a grave cordelier. Prior.
CO'RDIAL. n.ſ.. [from cor, the heart, Latin.]
1. A medicine that increaſes the force of the heart, or quickens
the circulation.
2. Any medicine that increaſes ſtrength.
A cordial, properly ſpeaking, is not always what increaſeth
the force of the heart; for, by increaſing that, the animal may
be weakened, as in inflammatory diſeaſes. Whatever in-
creaſeth the natural or animal ſtrength, the force of moving
the fluids and muſcles, is a cardial: theſe are ſuch ſubſtances
as bring the ſerum of the blood into the propereſt condition
for circulation and nutrition; as broths made of animal ſub-
ſtances, milk, ripe fruits, and whatever is endued with a
wholſome but not pungent taſte. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Any thing that comforts, gladdens, and exhilerates.
Then with ſome cordials ſeek for to appeaſe
The inward languor of my wounded heart,
And then my body ſhall have ſhortly eaſe;
But ſuch ſweet cordials paſs phyſicians art. Spenser.
Comfort, like cordials after death, comes late. Dryden,
Your warrior offspring that upheld the crown,
The ſcarlet honour of your peaceful gown,
Are the moſt pleaſing obječts I can find, -
Charms to my ſight, and cºrdials to my mind. Dryden.
Co'RDIAL. adj.
1. Reviving; invigorating; reſtorative.
It is a thing I make, which hath the king
Five times redeem'd from death: I do not know
What is more cordial. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
He only took cordial waters, in which we infuſed ſometimes
purgatives. Wiſeman's Surgery.
2. Sincere; hearty; proceeding from the heart; without hypo-
crl
obſtruct or intercept the cordial ſuperſtrućting of Chriſtian
life or renovation, where the foundation is duly laid, Hammºnd.
With looks of cordial love,
Hung over her enamour'd. AMilton.
CoR DIALITY. m. ſ. [from cordial.]
1. Relation to the heart. -
That the antients had any ſuch reſpect of cordiality, or re-
ference unto the heart, will much be doubted. Brown.
2. Sincerity ; freedom from hypocriſy.
Co'RDIALLY. adv. [from cordial.] Sincerely ; heartily; with-
out hypocriſy.
Where a ſtrong inveterate love of fin has made any doc-
trine or propoſition, wholly unſuitable to the heart, no argu-
ment or demonſtration, no nor miracle whatſoever, ſhall be
able to bring the heart cordialy to cloſe with and receive
it. South's Sermons.
Co'RDIN ER. n ſ. ſcardºnnier, French..] A ſhoemaker. It is
ſo uſed in divers ſtatuics. Cowel.
Vol. I.
ſy. -
Baine are infuſed among Chriſtians, which are apt to
CORDON. n.ſ. [Fr.] In fortification, a row of ſtones jutting
out before the rampart and the baſis of the parapet. Chººters.
CO'RDWAIN. m. ſ. [Cordºvan leather, from Cºrcova in Spain.]
Spaniſh leather.
Her ſtraight legs moſt bravely were embay'd
In golden buſkins of coſtly cordwain. Fairy ºeen, b. ii.
CoR Dwa'1NER. m.ſ. [Uncertain whether from Cordovan, Spa-
niſh leather, or from cord, of which ſhoes were formerly
made, and are now uſed in the Spaniſh Weſt Indics. . . . vºltz.J
A ſhoemaker.
CORE. m. ſ. [carur, French ; cor, Latin.]
1. The heart. -
Give me that man
That is not paſſion's ſlave, and I will wear him
In my heart's core; ay, in my heart of heart. Shakespeare Hamlet,
2. The inner part of any thing. -
In the core of the ſquare ſhe raiſed a tower of a furlong
high. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the //orla.
Dig out the cores below the ſurface. Mortimer's Husbandry.
They waſteful eat,
Through buds and bark, into the blacken'd core. Thomſºn.
3. The inner part of a fruit which contains the kerºic's.
It is reported that trees, watered perpetually with warm
water, will make a fruit with little or no core or ſtone. Bacon.
4. The matter contained in a boil or fore. -
- Launce the fore,
And cut the head; for, 'till the core be found,
The ſecret vice is fed, and gathers ground. Dryd. Wirgi'.
5. It is uſed by Bacon for a body or collection [from corps,
French, pronounced core.]
He was more doubtful of the raiſing of forces to reſiſt the
rebels, than of the reſiſtance itſelf; for that he was in a core
of people whoſe affections he ſuſpected. Lacon's Henry VII.
CoRIA'ceous. adj. ſcoriaceus, Latin.] -
1. Conſiſting of leather.
2. Of a ſubſtance reſembling leather.
A ſtronger projectile motion of the blood muſt occaſion
greater ſecretions and loſs of liquid parts, and from thence
perhaps ſpiffitude and coriaceous concretions. Arbuthnot on Alin.
CoRIA’NDER. m. ſ. ſcoriandrum, Latin.]
It hath a fibroſe annual root: the lower leaves are broad,
but the upper leaves are deeply cut into five ſegments: the
petals of the flower are unequal, and ſhaped like an heart:
the fruit is compoſed of two hemiſpherical, and ſometimes
ſpherical ſeeds. The ſpecies are, 1. Greater coriandºr.
2. Smaller teſticulated coriander. The firſt is cultivated for
the ſeeds, which are uſed in medicine: the ſecond ſort is ſel-
dom found. - Miller.
Iſrael called the name thereof manna; and it was, like
coriander ſeed, white. Exod. xiii. 31.
CO'RINTH. n.ſ.. [from the city of that name in Greece..] A
ſmall fruit commonly called currant.
The chief riches of Zant conſiſteth in corinths, which the
inhabitants have in great quantities. Lºcom's Notes on the Odyſſ.
CoR1'N THIAN Order, is generally reckoned the fourth, but by
ſome the fifth, of the five orders of architecture; and is the
moſt noble, rich, and delicate of them all. Vitruvius aſcribes
it to Callimachus, a Corinthian ſculptor, who is ſaid to have
taken the hint by paſſing by the tomb of a young lady, over
which a baſket with ſome of her playthings had been placed
. her nurſe, and covered with a tile; the whole having been
placed over a root of acanthus. As it ſprung up, the branches
encompaſſed the baſket; but arriving at the tile, bent down-
wards under the corners of it, forming a kind of a volute.
Hence Calimachus imitated the baſket by the vaſe of his ca-
pital, the tile in the abacus, and the leaves in the volute.
This ſtory is treated as a fable by Villalpandus, who imagines
the Corinthian capital to have taken its original from an order
in the temple of Solomon, whoſe leaves were thoſe of the
palm-tree. This order is diſtinguiſhed from the reſt by ſeveral
charaćters. The capital is adorncq with two rows of leaves,
between which little ſtalks ariſe, of which the fixteen volutes
are formed, which ſupport the abacus. Harris.
Behind theſe figures are large columns of the Corinthian
Order, adorned with fruit and flowers. Dryden.
CORK. m. ſ ſcortex, Lat. Korck, Dutch.
Hic dies, anno redeunte, fiftus
Corticem aſtricium pice dimoved it
Amthorae, fumum bibere inſtitulae
phorae, fi y? Conſºle Tah. Hor.)
1. A glandiſerous tree, in all reſpešis like the ilex, excepting the
bark, which, in the cork tree, is thick, ſpongy, and ſoft. Miller.
The cork tree grows near the Pyrenaean hils, and in ſeveral
parts of Italy, and the North of New England. Mºrtimer.
2. The bark of the cork tree uſed for ſtopples, or burnt into
Spaniſh black. It is taken off without injury to the tree.
3. A piece of cork cut for the ſtopple of a bottle or barrel.
I pr’ythee take the cork out of thy mouth, that I may drink
thy tidings. Shakeſpeare's A you like it.
Be ſure, nay very ſure, thy coº be good;
Then future ages ſhall of Peggy tºll,
That nymph that brew’d and bottled ale ſo well. Ring.
5 Q. - Nor
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 135</div><p class="Text">C O R
C O R
Nor ſtop, for one bad cork, his butler's pay. Pope.
CoRKING-PIN. m. ſ. A pin of the largeſt ſize.
When you put a clean pillow-caſe on your lady's pillow,
be ſure to faſten it well with three corking-pins, that it may
not fall off in the night. Swift's Direct. to the Chambermaid.
Co'RKY. adj. [from cork.] Conſiſting of cork.
Bind faſt his corky arms. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Co'RMoRANT, n.ſ.. [cormoran, Fr. from corvils marinus, Latin J
1. A bird that preys upon fiſh. It is nearly of the bigneſs of a
capon, with a wry bill and broad feet, black on his body, but
greeniſh about his wings. He is eminently greedy and ra-
pacious.
Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live regiſter'd upon our brazen tombs;
When, ſpight of cormorant devouring time,
Th’ endeavour of this preſent breath may bu -
That honour which ſhall 'bate his ſcythe's keen edge. Shakespeare
, Thoſe called birds of prey, as the eagle, hawk, puttock,
and cormorant. Peacham on Drawing.
Thence up he flew, and on the tree of life
Sat like a cormorant. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv. l. 194.
Not far from thence is ſeen a lake, the haunt
Of coots, and of the fiſhing cormorant. Dryden's Fables.
2. A glutton.
CORN. m. ſ. [conn, Sax. Korn, Germ. It is found in all the
Teutonick dialects; as, in an old Runick rhyme,
Haguler Kaldaſlur corna.
Hail is the coldeſt grain.]
1. The ſeeds which grow in ears, not in pods; ſuch as are
made into bread.
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it
abideth alone. ohn xii. 25.
The people cry you mock'd them; and, of late,
hen corn was given them gratis, you repin'd. Shakesp. Coriolan.
2. Grain yet unreaped, ſtanding in the field upon its ſtalk.
Why he was met even now,
Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our ſuſtaining corn. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Landing his men, he burnt the corn all thereabouts, which
was now almoſt ripe. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Still a murmur runs
Along the ſoft inclining fields of corn. Thomſon's Autumn.
3. Grain in the ear, yet unthreſhed.
Thou ſhalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a ſhock
of corn cometh in in his ſeaſon. job, v. 26.
4. An excreſcence on the feet, hard and painful; probably ſo
called from its form, though by ſome ſuppoſed to be denomi-
nated from its corneous or horny ſubſtance.
Ladies, that have your feet
Unplagu'd with corns, we'll have a bout with you. Shakeſp.
The man that makes his toe,
What he his heart ſhould make,
Shall of a corn cry woe,
And turn his ſleep to wake. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Even in men, aches and hurts and corns do engrieve either
towards rain or towards froſt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The hardeſt part of the corn is uſually in the middle, thruſt-
ing itſelf in a nail; whence it has the Latin appellation of
clavis. Wiſeman's Surgery.
He firſt that uſeful ſecret did explain,
That pricking corns foretold the gath'ring rain. Gay's Paſ?.
It looks as there were regular accumulations and gatherings
of humours, growing perhaps in ſome people as corns. Arbuth.
Thus Lamb, renown'd for cutting corns,
An offer'd fee from Radcliff ſcorns. Swift.
To CoRN. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſalt; to ſprinkle with ſalt. The word is ſo uſed, as Skin-
ner obſerves, by the old Saxons.
2. To granulate.
CoRN-FIELD. m. ſ. A field where corn is growing.
It was a lover and his laſs,
That o'er the green corn-field did paſs. Shakespeare As you like it.
You may ſoon enjoy the gallant fights of armies, encamp-
ments, and ſtandards waving over your brother's cornfields. Pope.
CoRN-FLAG. m. ſ. ſcorn and flag.]
It hath a fleſhy double tuberoſe root: the leaves are like
thoſe of the fleur-de-lys: the flower conſiſts of one leaf,
ſhaped like a lily, open at the top, in two lips; the upper im-
bricated, the under divided into five ſegments: the ovary be-
comes an oblong fruit, divided into three cells, filled with
roundiſh feeds wrapt up in a cover. Miller enumerates eleven
ſpecies of this plant, ſome with red flowers, and ſome with
white. It is a proper ornament for borders.
CoRN-Floor. n.ſ. The floor where corn is ſtored.
Thou haſt loved a reward upon every corn-floor. Hºſ. ix. 1.
CoRS: Low ER. n.ſ. [from corn and flºwer.]
There be certain corn-flowers, which come ſeldom or
never in other places, unleſs they be ſet, but only amongſt
corn; as the blue-bottle, a kind of yellow marygold, wild
poppy, and furnitory. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 482.
Corºfºvers are of many ſorts: ſome of them flower in
June and July, and others in Auguſt. The ſecds ſhould be
ſown in March: they require a good ſoil. Morti, er's Iſustaid.
CoRN-LAND. m. ſ. [corn and land..] Land appropriated to the
produćtion of grain.
Paſtures and meadows are of ſuch advantage to huſbandry,
that many prefer them to corn-lands. Mortin cr's Hasbailºy.
CoRN-MASTER. n.ſ. [corn and maſter.] One that cultivates
corn for ſale.
I knew a nobleman in England, that had the greateſt audits
of any man in my time; a great graſier, a great ſheep-maſter,
a great timberman, a great collier, a great corn-maſier, and a
great leadman. Bacon, Eſſay 35.
CoRN-MARIGold. n. ſ. [from corn and marigºld.]
It hath an annual root: the cup of the flower is hemiſphe-
rical and ſcaly: the flowers are radiated; the rays being, for
the moſt part, of a yellow flower, and the ſeeds are fur-
rowed. 4.'i/er.
CoRN-Mill. n.ſ. ſcorn and mill.] A mill to grind corn into
meal.
Save the more laborious work of beating of hemp, by
making the axle-tree of the corn-mills longer than ordinary,
and placing pins in it to raiſe large hammers. A ſort. Husband.
CoRN-Pipe. n.ſ.. [from corn and pipe.] A pipe made by ſlitting
the joint of a green ſtalk of corn.
Now the ſhrill corn-pipes, echoing loud to arms,
To rank and file reduce the ſtraggling ſwarms. Tickel.
CoRN-Rock ET. n.ſ.. [from corn and rocket.]
The flower conſiſts of four leaves, in form of a croſs: the
pointal becomes a four-cornered fruit, reſembling a creſted
club, divided into four cells, in which are contained roundiſh
ſeeds with a beak. This plant grows wild in the warm parts
of France and Spain. : Miller.
CoRN-Rose. m. ſ. See Poppy, of which it is a ſpecies.
CoRN-sAll AD. m. ſ. [from corn and ſallad J
The leaves grow by pairs oppoſite on the branches, which
are always divided into two parts, and appear at the top like
an umbrella. The flower conſiſts of one leaf, cut into many
ſegments, and ſucceeded by one naked ſeed, having no down
adhering to it, in which it differs from the valerian. Some
ſorts of it grow wild. Miller.
Corn-ſallad is an herb, whoſe top-leaves are a ſallet of them-
ſelves. A/ortimer's Husbandry.
Co'RN AGE. n.ſ.. [from corne, Fr. cornu, Latin.] A tenure
which obliges the landholder to give notice of an invaſion by
blowing a horn.
Co'RNchandler. n.ſ.. [corn and chandler.] One that retails
corn.
Co'RNcutter. m. ſ. [from corn and cut.] A man whoſe pro-
feſſion is to extirpate corns from the foot.
The nail was not looſe, nor did ſeem to preſs into the fleſh;
for there had been a corncutter, who had cleared it. If iſºman.
I have known a corncutter, who, with a right education,
would have been an excellent phyſician. Speciatºr, Nº. 307.
Co'RNEL. }*{ [cornus, Latin.] See CoRNELIAN-
CoRNELIAN-TRE E. CHERRY.
The Cornel-tree beareth the fruit commonly called the cornel
or cornelian cherry, as well from the name of the tree as the
cornelian ſtone, the colour whereof it ſomewhat repreſents.
The fruit is good in the kitchen and conſervatory. The wood
is very durable, and uſeful for wheelwork. Mortin, Husbandry.
Take a ſervice-tree, or a cornelian-tree, or an elder-trec,
which we know have fruits of harſh and binding juice, and
ſet them near a vine or fig-tree, and ſee whether the grapes or
figs will not be the ſweeter. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 485.
Mean time the goddeſs, in diſdain, beſtows -
The maſt and acorn, brutal food l and ſtrows
The fruits of cornel, as they feaſt around. Pope's Odyſſy.
Co'RNEl -
- m. ſ. ſcornus. Latin.
CoRN ELIAN-cHERRY. } ſ: [ 2 J
The flower-cup conſiſts of four ſmall rigid leaves, ex-
panded in form of a croſs; from the center of which are pro-
duced many ſmall yellowiſh flowers, conſiſting of four leaves,
diſpoſed in form of an umbrella: theſe flowers are ſucceeded
by fruit, oblong or of a cylindrical form, ſomewhat like an
olive, containing an hard ſtone, which is divided into two
cells, each containing a ſingle ſeed. The ſpecies are ten, of
which the cornelian-cherry, or male cornel-tree, is very com-
mon, being propagated for its fruit, which, by many people,
is preſerved to make tarts: it is alſo uſed in medicine as an
aſtringent and cooler. There is likewiſe an officinal prepara-
tion of this fruit, called Rob de cornus. Dogberry, or gatten-
tree, is very common in hedges, and the fruit of this plant is
often brought into the markets, and ſold for buckthornberries;
but in this fruit is but one ſtone, and in the buckthorn four,
The ſaſſafras ſort is a native of America; and its root is much
uſed in England to make a tea, which is greatly commended
by ſome againſt violent defluxions. Moſt of the other ſorts
are brought from America, except what is commonly called
the dwarf honeyſuckle, which grows wild on the high moun-
tains in the northern countics; but is with difficulty preſerved
in gardens. Aáiller.
Cn wildings and on ſtrawberries they fed;
Corne';<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 136</div><p class="Text">:
C O R
C O R
5.
Cornel; and brambleberries gave the reſt,
And falling acorns furniſh'd out a feaſt. Dryden's Ovid.
CoRNELIAN-stone. See CARNElia N.
CORNEA/USE. m. ſ. [French.] A kind of ruſtick flute.
Co'RNEogs. adj. [corneus, Latin.] Horny; of a ſubſtance
reſembling horn.
Such as have corneous or horny eyes, as lobſters, and cruſta-
ceous animals, are generally dimfighted. Brown's Wulº. Err.
The various ſubmarine ſhrubs are of a corneous or ligneous
conſtitution, conſiſting chiefly of a fibrous matter. J/oodward.
CO'RNER. m. ſ. ſcornel, Welſh; cornier, French.]
1. An angle; a place incloſed by two walls or lines, which
would interſect each other, if drawn beyond the point where
they meet.
2. A ſecret or remote place.
There's nothing I have done yet, o' my conſcience,
Deſerves a corner. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
It is better to dwell in a corner of a houſe top, than with a
brawling woman and in a wide houſe. Proverbs, xxv. 24.
I am perſuaded that none of theſe things are hidden from
him; for this thing was not done in a corner. Aćis, xxvi. 26.
All the inhabitants, in every corner of the iſland, have been
abſolutely reduced under his immediate ſubjection. Davies.
Thoſe vices, that lurk in the ſecret corners of the ſoul. Addison
Your active ſearch
Leaves no cold wintry corner unexplor’d. Thomſon's Spring.
3. The extremities; the utmoſt limit: thus every corner is the
whole or every part.
Might I but through my priſon, once a day,
Behold this maid, all corner elſe o' th' earth
Let liberty make uſe of. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
I turn'd, and try'd each corner of my bed,
To find if ſleep were there; but ſleep was loſt. Dryden.
CoRN FR-steNE. m. ſ. ſcorner and /lone.] The ſtone that unites
the two walls at the corner; the principal ſtone.
See you yond’ coin o'th’ capitol, yond’ corner-ſlone? Shakeſp.
A maſon was fitting a cornerºſione. Howel's Vocal Foreſ.
CoRNER-teeth of a Horſe, are the four teeth which are placed
between the middling teeth and the tuſhes; and are two above
and two below, on each ſide of the jaw, which ſhoot forth
when the horſe is four years and a half old. Farrier's Dići.
Co'RNERwise. adv. [corner and wiſ...] Diagonally; with the
corner in front.
Co'RNET. n.ſ.. [cornette, French.]
I. A muſical inſtrument blown with the mouth: uſed anciently
in war, probably in the cavalry.
Iſrael played before the Lord on pſalteries and on timbrels,
and on cornets. 2 Sa. vi. 5.
Other wind inſtruments require a forcible breath; as trum-
pets, cornets, and hunters horns. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Cornets and trumpets cannot reach his ear,
Under an actor's noſe, he's never near. Dryden's juvenal.
2. A company or troop of horſe; perhaps as many as had a cor-
net belonging to them. This ſenſe is now diſuſed.
Theſe noblemen were appointed, with ſome cornets of horſe
and bands of foot, to put themſelves beyond the hill where
the rebels were encamped. Bacon.
Seventy great horſes lay dead in the field, and one cornet
was taken. Hayward.
They diſcerned a body of five cornets of horſe very full,
ſtanding in very good order to receive them. Clarendon.
3. The officer that bears the ſtandard of a troop.
4. CoRNet of a Horſe, is the loweſt part of his paſtern that runs
round the coffin, and is diſtinguiſhed by the hair that joins
and covers the upper part of the hoof. Farrier's Dić7.
5. A ſcarf anciently worn by doćtors. Dić7.
6. A head-dreſs. Dić7.
7. A CoRNet of Paper, is deſcribed by Skinner to be a cap of
paper, made by retailers for ſmall wares.
*Co'RNett ER. m. ſ. [from cornet.] A blower of the cornet.
So great was the rabble of trumpetters, cornetters, and other
muſicians, that even Claudius himſelf might have heard
them. Hakewill on Providence.
*Co'RNice. n.ſ.. [corniche, French.] The higheſt projection of
a wall or column.
The cornice of the Palazzo Farneſe, which makes ſo beau-
tiful an effect below, when viewed more nearly, will be found
not to have its juſt meaſures. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The walls were maſſy braſs, the cornice high
Blue metals crown'd, in colours of the ſky. Pope's Odyſſey.
CoRNice Ring. [In gunnery..] The next ring from the muz-
zle backwards. Chambers.
SoR'N1cle. n. ſ. [from cºrnu, Latin.] A little horn.
There will be found, on either ſide, two black filaments,
or membranous ſtrings, which extend unto the long and
ſhorter cornicle, upon protruſion. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
CoRNI'culate, adj. [frºm cornu, Lat..] A term in botany.
Cornicºlate plants are ſuch as produce many diſtinét and
horned pods; and cornicu ate flowers are ſuch hollow flowers
as have on their upper part a kind of ſpur, or little horn. Chamb.
CoRNI'Fick, adj. [from cornu and facio, Latin | Productive of
horns; making horns, Dićt.
CoRNi'GE Rous. adj. [ corniger, Latin. J Horned; having
horns.
Nature, in other cºrnicerous animals, hath placed the horns
higher, and reclining; as in bucks. Brºwn's l'ulgar Errours.
CORNUCOPIE. n.ſ. [Lat..] The horn of plenty; a horn
topped with fruits and flowers in the hands of a goddeſs.
To CoRNU't E. v. a. [cornutus, Latin.] To beſtow horns; to
cuckold.
CoRNU'TED. adj. [cornutus, Latin.] Grafted with horns;
horned; cuckolded.
CoRNU to. m. ſ. [from cornutus, Latin.] A man horned; a
cuckold.
The peaking cornuto her huſband, dwelling in a continual
larum of jealouſy. Shakeſpeare's Merry //ives of //indſor.
Co'RN.Y. adj. [from cornu, horn, Latin.] +
1. Strong or hard like horn; horny.
Up ſtood the corny reed,
Embattel'd in her field. Milton's Paradiſ? Iºſº, b. vii.
2. [from corn.] Producing grain or corn.
Tell me why the ant,
"Midſt Summer's plenty, thinks of Winter's want,
By conſtant journeys, careful to prepare -
Her ſtores; and bringing home the cºrny ear. Pr;2;".
Co'Roll ARY. m. ſ. ſcorellarium, Lat. from cºrola; finis coronat
opus; or from corollair, Fr. a ſurplus.]
1. The concluſion: a corollary ſeems to be a concluſion, whether
following from the premiſes neceſſarily or not.
Now ſince we have conſidered the malignity of this ſin of
detraction, it is but a natural corollary, that we enforce our
vigilance againſt it. Government of the Tongue.
As a corollary to this preface, in which I have done juſtice
to others, Iowe ſomewhat to myſelf. Dryden's Fab. Preface.
2. Surplus.
Bring a corollary,
Rather than want. Shakeſpeare's Tºmpºſt.
CORONA. m. ſ. [Latin.] A large flat member of the cornice, .
ſo called becauſe it crowns the entablature and the whole or—
der. It is called by workmen the drip. Chambers.
In a cornice the gola or cymatium of the corona, the coping,
the modillions or dentelli, make a noble ſhew by their grace-
ful projećtions. Spectator, Nº. 415.
Co'RoNAL.. n.ſ.. [corona, Latin.] A crown; a garland.
Crown ye god Bacchus with a coronal,
And Hymen alſo crown with wreaths of vine. Spenſ r.
Co'RoNAL. adj. Belonging to the top of the head.
A man of about forty-five years of age came to me, with
a round tubercle between the ſagittal and coronal ſuture. Wiſem.
Co'RoNARY. adj. [coronarius, Latin.]
1. Relating to a crown; ſeated on the top of the head like a
Crown.
The baſiliſk of older times was a proper kind of ſerpent,
not above three palms long, as ſome account; and differenced
from other ſerpents by advancing his head, and ſome white
marks, or coronary ſpots upon the crown. Brown's Vulg. Err.
2. It is applied in anatomy to arteries, which are fancied to en-
compaſs the heart in the manner of a garland.
The ſubſtance of the heart itſelf is moſt certainly made and
nouriſhed by the blood, which is conveyed to it by the coro-
nary arteries. Bentley's Sermons.
CoR on A'rion, n.ſ.. [from corona, Latin.]
1. The aët or ſolemnity of crowning a king.
Fortune ſmiling at her work therein, that a ſcaffold of exe-
cution ſhould grow a ſcaffold of coronation. Sidney, b, ii.
Willingly I came to Denmark, *
To ſhew my duty in your coronation. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
A cough, ſir, which I caught with ringing in the king's
affairs upon his coronation day. Shakespeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Now empreſs fame had publiſh'd the renown
Of Sh 's coronation through the town. Dryden's Maj7.
2. The pomp or aſſembly preſent at a coronation.
In penſive thought recal the fancy'd ſcene,
See coronations riſe on ev'ry green. Pºpe.
Co'RoNER. n.ſ.. [from corona.J. An officer whoſe duty is to
enquire, on the part of the king, how any violent death was
occaſioned; for which purpoſe a jury of twelve perſons is im-
pannelled. -
Go thou and ſeek the coroner, and let him fit o' my uncle;
for he's in the third degree of drink; he's drowned. Shakespeare
Co'RoNET. n.ſ. [ coronetta, Ital. the diminutive of corona, a
crown.] An inferiour crown worn by the nobility. . The
coronet of a duke is adorned with ſtrawberry leaves; that of
a marquis has leaves with pearls interpoſed; that of an earl
raiſes the pearls above the leaves; that of a viſcount is fur-
rounded with only pearls; that of a baron has only four
pearls. - -
The reſt was drawn into a car.net of gold, richly ſet with
pearl. Sidney.
In his livery
Walk'd crowns and coronets, realms and iſlands were -
As plates dropt from his pocket. Shakespeare -ínt. and Cleo'atra.
All the reſt are counteſſes. -
—Their coron-ti ſay ſo. Shakespeare’s Henry VIII.
I Under
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 137</div><p class="Text">C G R
C O R
tºlder a car nºt his flowing hair,
In curls, on either cheek play d. M. iºn's Paradºſ. Lºft.
Nor could our nobles hope their bold attempt,
Who ruin’d crowns, would coronets exempt.
Peers and dukes, and all their ſweeping train,
And garters, ſtars, and coronets appear. Pope's Ra. of Lock.
Co'RpoN A. m. ſ. [ corrupted from caporal, French. J. The
loweſt officer of the infantry, whoſe office is to place and re-
move the ſentinels.
The crucl corpºral whiſper'd in my ear,
Five pounds, if rightly tipt, would ſet me clear. Gay.
Co'RPoRAL ºf a Ship. An officer that hath the charge of
ſetting the watches and ſentries, and relieving them; who
fees that all the ſoldiers and ſailors keep their arms meat and
clean, and teaches them how to uſe them. He has a mate
under him. Harris.
CORPORAL. adj. [corporel, Fr. corpus, Latin.]
1. Relating to the body belonging to the body.
To relief of lazars and weak age,
Of indigent faint ſouls, paſt cºrporal toil,
A hundred alms-houſes, right well ſupplied. Shakespeare Hen. V.
Render to me ſome corporal ſign about her,
More evident than this. Shakespeare's Cymbeline.
That God hath been otherwiſe ſeen, with corporal eyes,
cxceedeth the ſmall proportion of my underſtanding. Raleigh.
They enjoy greater ſenſual pleaſures, and feel fewer corporal
pains, and are utter ſtrangers to all thoſe anxious and tor-
thenting thoughts, which perpetually haunt and diſquiet man-
kind. - Atterbury.
2. Material; not ſpiritual. In the preſent language, when bºdy
is uſed philoſophically in oppoſition to ſpirit, the word corpo-
real is uſed, as a corporeal being; but otherwiſe corporal.
Car oreal is having a body; corporal relating to the body.
This diſtinction ſeems not ancient.
Whither are they vaniſh'd?
Into the air: and what ſeem'd corporal
Melted, as breath, into the wind.
And from theſe corporal nutriments, perhaps,
Your bodies may at laſt turn all to ſpirit. Milt. Par. Loft.
CoR Po RA'LITY. m. ſ. [from corporal.] The quality of being
embodied.
If this light be not ſpiritual, yet it approacheth neareſt
unto ſpirituality; and if it have any corf orality, then, of all
other, the moſt ſubtile and pure. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the J/orld.
Co'RPoR A LLY. adv. [from cor oral.] Bodily.
The ſun is cºrporally conjoined with baſiliſcus. Brown.
CORPORATE. adj. [from cºrpus, Latin | United in a body
º enabled to act in legal proceſſes as an indi-
W1Gual. -
Breaking forth like a ſudden tempeſt, he over-run all Mun-
fter and Connaught, defacing and utterly ſubverting all cor-
pºrate towns that were not ſtrongly walled. Spenſer on Ireland.
They anſwer in a joint and corporate voice,
That now they are at fall. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
The nobles of Athens being not at this time a corporate
aſſembly, therefore the reſentment of the commons was uſual-
ly turned againſt particular perſons. Swift.
Co'RPoRAT EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from corporate.] The ſtate of a body
corporate ; a community. Dići.
CoR poR.A." ion. n.ſ.. [from corpus, Latin.]
A corporation is a body politick, authorized by the king's
charter to have a common ſeal, one head officer or more, and
members, able, by their common conſent, to grant or receive,
in law, any thing within the compaſs of their charter: even
as one man may do by law all things, that by law he is not
forbidden; and bindeth the ſucceſſors, as a ſingle man binds
his executor or heir. Cowel.
Of angels we are not to conſider only what they are, and
do, in regard of their own being; but that alſo which con-
cerneth them, as they are linked into a kind of corporation
amongſt themſelves, and of ſociety or fellowſhip with men.
Hooker, b. i. ſeeſ. 4.
Of this we find ſome foot-ſteps in our law,
Which doth her root from God and nature take;
Ten thouſand men ſhe doth together draw,
And of them all one corporation make. Davies.
Co'ſ por ATURE. m. ſ. [from corpºs, Latin.] The ſtate of a
being embodied. Dić7.
CoR Po REAL. adj. [corpºrcus, Latin.]
1. Having a body; not immaterial. Sce Con Poº A1.
The ſwiftneſs of thoſe circles attribute,
Though numberleſs, to his omnipotence,
That to corporeal ſubſtances could add
Speed almoſt ſpiritual. Milton's Paradºſ Ioff, b. viii.
*
Dryden.
Having ſurveyed the image of God in the ſoul, we are not
to omit thoſe characters that God imprinted upon the body,
as much as a ſpiritual ſubſtance could be pictured upon a c r-
foreal. South's Sermons.
God being ſuppoſed to be a pure ſpirit, cannot be the ob-
ject of any cºrporeal ſenſe. Tillotſon.
The courſe is finiſh’d which thy fates decreed,
And thou from thy cºrporeal priſon freed. Dryden's Falles.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Fix thy corpºrtal and internal eye
On the young gnat, or new-engender'd fly.
2. It is uſed by Swift inaccurately for corporal.
I am not in a condition to make a true ſtep even on Aimſ-
bury Downs; and I declare, that a cºrporcal falſe ſtep is worſe
than a political one. Swift.
CoRPop E11 Y, m ſ. [from corporcus, Latin.] Materiality; the
quality of being embodied; the ſtate of having a body; bodi-
lineſs.
Since philoſophy affirmeth, that we are middle ſubſtances
between the ſoul and the body, they nuit admit of ſome cor-
pareity which ſuppoſeth weight or gravity. Brºwn's Jug. Err.
It is the ſaying of divide Plato, that man is nature's hori-
zon, dividing betwixt the upper hemiſphere of immaterial
intellects and this lower of corporcity, Glanville's Scºpſ. c. iv.
The one attributed corporely to God, and the other ſhape
and figure. Stillingſlet.
Cof Porifica'rion. m. ſ. [from corporiff.] The act of giving
body or palpability.
To CoR po'º I FY. v. a. [from corpus, Lat..] To embody; to
inſpiñate into body.
A certain ſpirituous ſubſtance, extrađcd out of it, is miſ-
taken for the ſpirit of the world corporified. Boyle's Scept. Chym.
tºº. {n. ſ. [corps, Fr. cºrpus, Latin.]
1. A body, in contempt.
Though plenteous, all too little ſeems
To ſtuff this man, this vaſt unhide-bound corps.
He looks as man was made, with face erect,
That ſcorns his brittle cºrps, and ſeems aſham'd
He's not all ſpirit. Dryden's Lon Seld/?an.
2. A carcaſe; a dead body; a corſe.
Not a friend greet
My poor corpſ, where my bones ſhall be thrown. Shakeſp.
There was the murder'd cºrfs in covert laid,
And violent death in thouſand ſhapes diſplay’d. Dryd. Fables
See where the cºrps of thy dead ſon approaches. Addiſon.
The corpſe was laid out upon the floor by the emperor's
command : he then bid every one light his flambeau, and
ſtand about the dead body. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 99.
3. A body of ſorces.
Co'RPULENce. }ºſ. [corpulenia, Latin.]
Prizr.
Miltºn.
Co'RPULENcy.
1. Bulkineſs of body; fleſhineſs; fulneſs of fleſh.
To what a cumberſome unwieldineſs,
And burdenous corpulence my love had grown. Doºr.
It is but one ſpecies of corpulency; for there may be bulk
without fat, from the great quantity of muſcular fleſh, the caſe
of robuſt people. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Spitfitude; groſſneſs of matter.
The muſculous fleſh ſerves for the vibration of the tail, the
heavineſs and corfuſency of the water requiring a great force to
divide it. Kay on the Creation.
Co'RPUL ENT. adj. [ corpulentus, Latin. J. Fleſhy; bulky;
having great bodily bulk.
We ſay it is a fleſhy ſtile, when there is much periphraſes,
and circuit of words; and when with more than enough, it
grows fat and corpulent. Ben. Johnſºn's Diſcoveries.
Exceſs of nouriſhment is hurtful; for it maketh the child
corpulent, and growing in breadth rather than in height. Bacca.
CO'RPUSCLE. m. ſ. [cºrpuſ alºn, Lat..] A ſmall body; a
particle of matter; an atom; a little fragment.
It will add much to our ſatisfaction, if thoſe corpuſ's can
be diſcovered with microſcopes. Newton's Opt.
Who knows what are the figures of the little corpuſcles that
compoſe and diſtinguiſh different bodies : //att,’s Logick.
CoR PU'scul A.R. adj. [from corpuſculum, Lat..] Relating
CoRPuscul A'r IAN, { to bodies; compriſing bodies. It is
the diſtinguiſhing epithet of that philoſophy which attempts
the rational ſolution of all phyſical appearances by the action
of one body upon another.
As to natural philoſophy I do not expe&amp;t to ſce any prin-
ciples propoſed, more comprehenſive and intelligible than the
corpſ'ſ ularian or mechanic al. Boyle.
This may be ſaid, that the modern cer uſuarians talk, in
moſt things, more intelligibly than the peripateticks. Fently.
The mechanical or corpº ºr philoſophy, thºugh perad-
venture the eldeſt, as well as the beſt in the world, had Îain
dead for many ages in contempt and oblivion. Bently's Serm.
Co'ſ. R AcL E. See CoR Ric LE.
To CoRRA/D E. v. a [cºrradº, Latin J. To rub cff; to wear
away by frequent rubbing ; to ſcrape together. - - -
CoR RADisºrios. a. ſ. ſººn and radius, Lat.) A conjunction
of rays in one point.
The impreſſion of colour wo:keth not but by a cone of
direct beams, or right lines, whereof the baſis is in the object,
and the vertical point in the eye; ſo as there is a corradiation,
and conjunction of beams. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtºry, Nº. 277.
To CORRECT. v. a. i cºrrigo cºrrejºn, Latin.]
1. To puniſh; to chaſtiſe; to diſcipline. -
Sad accidents, and a flate of afficion, is a ſchool of virtue;
it correct: i.evity, and interrupts the conſidence of finning Jayſ.
After
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 138</div><p class="Text">* - • * *
C O R
C O R
mº- Lº-
After he has once been correóżed for a lie, you muſt be ſure
never after to pardon it in him. Locke on Education.
Children being to be reſtrained by the parents only in vici-
ous things, a look or nod only ought to correół them, when
they do amiſs. Locłe on Educatiºn.
2. To amend ; to take away faults, in writings or life.
This is a defect in the firſt make of ſome men's minds,
which can ſcarce ever be correſſed afterwards, either by learn-
ing or age. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, Preface.
Ca' recting nature, from what ačtually ſhe is in individuals,
to what ſhe ought to be, and what ſhe was created. Dryden.
I writ, becauſe it amuſed me; I corrected, becauſe it was as
pleaſant to me to co, reef as to write. Pope's Preface.
The mind may cool, and be at leiſure to attend to its
domeſtick concern; to conſider what habit wants to be cor-
re:ted, and what inclination to be ſubdued. Rogers's Sermons.
3. To obviate the qualities of one ingredient by another, or by
any method of preparation.
As in habitual gout or ſtone,
The only thing that can be done,
Is to correct your drink and diet, º
And keep the inward foe in quiet. - Prior.
In caſes of acidity, water is the proper drink: its quality of
relaxing may be corrected by boiling it with ſome animal ſub-
ſtances; as ivery or hartſhorn. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
4. To remark faults.
CoRR E cT. adj. [correºus, Latin.] Reviſed or finiſhed with
exactneſs; free from faults.
What verſe can do, he has perform'd in this,
Which he preſumes the moſt correct of his. Dryd. Aur. Prol.
Always uſe the moſt correct editions: various readings will
be only troubleſome where the ſenſe and language is com-
plete. Felton on the Clafficks.
CoRRE'ction. n.ſ.. [from torreół.]
1. Puniſhment; diſcipline; chaſtiſement; penalty.
Wilt thou, pupil like,
Take thy correction mildly, kiſs the rod? Shakeſp. Rich. II.
- An offenſive wife,
That hath enrag'd him on to offer ſtrokes,
As he is ſtriking, holds his infant up,
And hangs reſolv’d cºrrection in the arm -
That was uprear'd to execution. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
We are all but children here under the great maſter of the
family; and he is pleaſed, by hopes and fears, by mercies and
corrections, to inſtruct us in virtue. //atts.
2. Alteration to a better ſtate; the act of taking away faults;
amendment.
Another poet, in another age, make take the ſame liberty
with my writings; if, at leaſt, they live long enough to deſerve
correction. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
3. That which is ſubſtituted in the place of anything wrong.
Corrections or improvements ſhould be adjoined, by way of
note or commentary, in their proper places. //atts.
4. Reprehenſion; animadverſion.
They proceed with judgment and ingenuity, eſtabliſhing
their aſſertions not only with great ſolidity, but ſubmitting
them alſo unto the correction of future diſcovery. Brown.
One fault was too great lenity to her ſervants, to whom ſhe
always gave good counſel, but often too gentle correction.
Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bul'.
5. Abatement of noxious qualities, by the addition of ſomething
contrary.
To make courts hot, ambitious, wholeſome, do not take
A dram of country's dulneſs; do not add
Correółions, but as chymiſts purge the bad. Donne.
CoRRE'ction E.R. m. ſ. [from correction.] One that has been
in the houſe of correction; a jayl-bird. This ſeems to be
the meaning in Shakeſpeare.
I will have you ſoundly ſwinged for this, you blue-bottle
rogue' you filthy famiſhed correctioner. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Corr E/ctive. adj. [from correct.] Having the power to alter
or obviate any bad qualities. -
Mulberries are pectoral, correófive of the bilious alcali.
Arbuthnot ºn Aliments.
CoRRE'ctive. m. ſ.
I. º which has the power of altering or obviating anything
anxi is. -
The hair, wool, feathers, and ſcales, which all animals of
prey do ſwallow, are a ſeaſonable and neceſſary corrective, to
prevent their greedineſs from filling themſelves with too ſuc-
culent a food. - Ray on the Creation.
Humanly ſpeaking, and according to the method of the
world; and the little correctives ſupplied by art and diſcipline,
it ſeldom fails but an ill principle has its courſe, and nature
makes good its blow. South's Sermons.
2. Limitation; reſtričtion.
There ſeems to be ſuch an inſtance in the regiment, which
the human ſoul exerciſeth in relation to the body, that with
certain correółives and exceptions, may give ſome kind of ex-
plication or adumbration thereof. Halº's Origin of Mankind.
CoRº; crly, adv. . [from correct.] Accurately; appoſitely;
exactly ; without faults, - -
Vol. I.
* * * *
Thére fire ladies, without knowing what tenſes and pºrti-
ciples, adverbs and prepoſitions are, ſpeak as properly and as
correctly as moſt gentlemen who have been bred up in the or-
dinary methods of grammar ſchools. Locke on Education.
... Such lays as neither ebb nor flow, 2-- - - -
Correctly colá, and regularly low. Pope's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
CoRRE'ct Kess. n.ſ.. [from correº.] Accuracy; exactneſs;
freedom from faults. - - . . .
Too much labour often takes away the ſpirit, by adding to
the poliſhing ; ſo that there remains nothing but a dull cºr-
rečineſs, a piece without any conſiderable faults, but with few
beauties. Dryden's Lufreſhay.
The ſoftneſs of the fleſh, the delicacy of the ſhape, air
and poſture, and the corretingſ of deſign in this ſtatue, are
inexpreſſible. Addison on Italy.
Late; very late, correfineſ, grew our care, -
When the tir'd nation breath'd from civil war. . . Pºpe.
Thoſe pieces have never before been printed from the true
copies, or with any tolerable degree of correcineſs. Swift.
CoRRE'ctor. m. ſ. [from correct.] * *
1. He that amends, or alters, by puniſhment or animadverſion.
. How many does zeal urge rather to do juſtice on ſome fins,
than to forbear all ſin: How many rather to be correctors than.
practiſers of religion. . - Sprat's Sermons.
With all his faults he ſets up to be an univerſal reformer
and corrector of abuſes, and a remover of grievances. Swift.
2. He that reviſes any thing to free it from faults; as the cor-
rector of the preſs, that amends the errours committed in
printing. -
I remember a perſon, who, by his ſtyle and literature,
ſeems to have been the corrector of a hedge preſs in Little Bri-
tain, proceeding gradually to an author. Swift.
3. In medicine. - . . . . ." -
Such an ingredient in a compoſition, as guards againſt or
abates the force of another; as the lixivial ſalts prevent the
grievous vellications of reſinous purges, by dividing their par-
ticles, and preventing their adheſion to the inteſtinal mem-
branes, whereby they ſometimes occaſion intolerable gripings;
and as ſpices and carminative ſeeds alſo aſſiſt in the eaſier ope-
ration of ſome catharticks, by diffipating collections of wind.
In making a medicine, ſuch a thing is called a corrector which
deſtroys or diminiſhes a quality that it could not otherwiſe
be diſpenſed with : thus turpentines are correctors of quick-
ſilver, by deſtroying its fluxility, and making it capable of
mixture; and thus reëtified ſpirit of wine breaks off the
points of ſome acids, ſo as to make them become ſafe and
good remedies, which before were deſtructive. &amp;aincy.
To CORRELATE. v. n. [from con and relatus, Latin.] To
have a reciprocal relation; as father and ſon.
Co'RRELATE., n. ſ. One that ſtands in the oppoſite relation.
It is one thing for a father to ceaſe to be a father, by caſt-
ing off his ſon; and another for him to ceaſe to be ſo, by the
death of his ſon: in this the relation is at an end, for want
of a correlate. South's Sermons.
CoRRE'LATIVE. adj. [con and relativus, Latin.] Having a re-
ciprocal relation, ſo that the exiſtence of one in a particular
ſtate depends upon the exiſtence of another.
, Father and ſon, huſband and wife, and ſuch other correla-
tive terms, ſeem nearly to belong one to another. South.
Giving is a relative action, and ſo requires a correlative to
anſwer it: giving, on one part, transfers no property, unleſs
there be an accepting on the other. South's Sermons.
CoRRE LATIVEN ess. n. ſ. [from correlative.] The ſtate of
being correlative. . -
CoRREPTION. m. ſ. […orripio correptum, Latin J Objurgation;
chiding; reprehenſion; reproof.
If we muſt needs be talking of other people's faults, let it
not be to defame, but to amend them, by converting our de-
traction and backbiting into admonition and fraternal co, rep-
tion, Government of the Tongue, ſect. o.
To CORRESPOND. v. n. [c n and reſpºndeo, Latin.]
1. To ſuit; to anſwer; to be proportionate; to be adequate to:
to be adapted; to fit. - * -
The days, if one be compared with another ſucceſſively
throughout the year, are found not to be equal, and will not
juſtly correſpºnd with any artificial or mechanical equal mea-
ſures of time. . - Holder on Time.
Words being but empty ſounds; any farther than they are
ſigns of our ideas, we cannot but aſſent tº them, * they tº-
reſpond to thoſe ideas we have, but no farther than that. Lockº.
2.’īo keep up commerce with another by alternate letters.
CoRREspo's desce. $n ſ [from corrºſpond.]
Co R RESPO'N DEN cy. A - -
1. Relation; reciprocal adaptation of one thing to another.
Between the law of their heavenly operations, and the ac-
tions of men in this our ſtate of mortality, ſuch cºrreſpondence
there is as maketh it expedient to know in ſome ſort the one,
for the others more perfect direction. - Hooker, b. 1.
Whatever we fancy, things keep their courſe; and their
habitudes, correſpondencies, and relations keep the ſame to one
another. 1.ocke.
2. Intercourſe; reciprocal intelligence.
5 R - I had
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 139</div><p class="Text">C O R
C O R
f had diſcovercd thoſe unlawful correſpondencies they had
tiſed, and engagements they had made to embroil my king-
doms. King Charles.
Sure the villains hold a correſpondente
With the enemy, and thus they would betray us. Denham.
. It happens very oddly, that the pope and I ſhould have the
ſame thought much about the ſame time: my enemies will be
apt to ſay, that we hold a correſpondence together, and act by
concert in this matter. Addison's Guardian, Nº. 1 16.
3. Friendſhip; interchange of offices or civilities,
Let ſuch military perſons be aſſured, and well reputed of,
rather than factious and popular; holding alſo good correſpºn-
dence with the other great men in the ſtate. Bacon, Eſſay 17.
CoRREspo'NDENT: adj. [from correſpond..] Suitable; adapted;
agreeable; anſwerable.
What good or evil is there under the ſun, what ačtion cor-
reſpondent or repugnant unto the law which God hath im-
poſed upon his creatures, but in or upon it God doth work,
according to the law which himſelf hath eternally purpoſed to .
keep. Płocker.
And as five zones th' etherial regions bind,
Five correſpondent are to earth aſſign'd. Dryden's Ovid.
CoRREspo'NDENT. n.ſ. One with whom intelligence or .
commerce is kept up by mutual meſſages or letters.
He was pleaſed to command me to ſend to him, and receive
from him all his letters from and to all his correſpondents at
home and abroad. Denham's Dedication.
Cora Espo'ssive. adj. [from correſpond..] Anſwerable; adapted
to *; thing.
riam's ſix gates i' th' city, with maſſy ſtaples,
And correſponſive and fulfilling bolts,
Sperre up the ſons of Troy. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
CORRIDOR. m. ſ. [French. J
1. [In fortification.] The covert way lying round the whole
compaſs of the fortifications of a place.
2. [In architecture.] A gallery or long iſle round about a build-
ing, leading to ſeveral chambers at a diſtance from each
other. Harris.
There is ſomething very noble in the amphitheatre, though
the high wall and corridors that went round it are almoſt in-
tirely ruined. Addiſon on Italy.
CoRRi'GIELE. adj. [from corrigo, Latin.]
1. That which may be altered or amended.
2. He who is a proper obječt of puniſhment; puniſhable.
He was taken up very ſhort, and adjudged corrigible for ſuch
preſumptuous language, Bowel's Wocal Foreſ?.
3. Corrective ; having the power to correół.
Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are gar-
deners; ſo that, if we will either have it ſteril with idleneſs,
er manured with induſtry, the power and corri ible authority
of this lies in our will. Shakeſpeare's Cth.l.o.
Cox RI'val. n.ſ. [con and rival.] Rival; competitor.
They had governours commonly out of the two families of
the Geraldines and Butlers, both adverſaries and corrival; one
againſt the other. Spenſer on Ireland.
He that doth redeem her thence, might wear
Without corrival all her dignities. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
cºRRI'valry. n.ſ.. [from corrival.] Competition; oppo-
1tion
CoR ro'Bor ANT, adj. [from corroborate J Having the power
to give ſtrength.
There be divers ſorts of bracelets fit to comfort the ſpirits,
and they be of three intentions, refrigerant, corroborant, and
aperient. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 961.
To CORRO'BORATE. v. a. [can and roboro, Latin.] -
1. To confirm; to eſtabliſh.
Machiavel well noteth, though in an ill-favoured in-
flance, there is no truſting to the force of nature, nor to the
bravery of words, except it be corroborate by cuſtom. Bacon.
2. To ſtrengthen ; to make ſtrong.
To fortify imagination there be three ways; the authority
whence the belief is derived, means to quicken and corroborate
the imagination, and means to repeat it and refreſh it. Bacon.
It was ſaid that the prince himſelf had, by the fight of ſo-
reign courts, and obſervations on the different natures of
people, and rules of government, much excited and awaked
his ſpirits, and corroborated his judgment. J%tton.
As any limb well and duly exerciſed grows ſtronger, the
nerves of the body are corroborated thereby. JWatts.
€oR RoRo RA'tion. n.ſ.. [from corroborate. J The ačt of
ſtrengthening or confirming; confirmation by ſome additional
ſecurity; addition of ſtrength.
. The lady herſelf procured a bull, for the better corrobora-
tion of the marriage. Bacon's Henry VII.
©oºko'borative. adj. [from corroborate.] Having the power
of increaſing ſtrength.
In the cure of an ulcer, with a moiſt intemperies, as the
heart is weakened by too much humidity, you are to mix cor-
roboratives of an aſtringent faculty; and the ulcer alſo requireth
to be dried. Jºſeman's Surgery.
To CORRO'DE. v. a. [corrod, Latin.] To at away by dé-
Gº, as a mºnſtruum ; to prey upon; to conſume to wear
away gradually,
Stateſmen purge vice with vice, and may corride
The bad with bad, a ſpider with a toad;
For ſo ill thralls not them, but they tame ill,
And make her do much good againſt her will. Donne.
We know that aqua-fortis corroding copper, which is it
that gives the colour to verdigreaſe, is wont to reduce it to a
green blue ſolution. Boyle on Colouri.
The nature of mankind, left to itſelf, would ſoon have
fallen into diſſolution, without the inceſlant and corroding in-
vaſions of ſo long a time. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Hannibal the Pyreneans paſt,
And ſteepy Alps, the mounds that nature caſt,
And with corroding juices, as he went,
A paſſage through the living rock he rent. Dryd. Juvenal.
Fiſhes, which neither chew their meat nor grind it in their
ſtomachs, do, by a diſſolvent liquor there provided, corrºde
and reduce it into a chylus. Ray on the Creation.
The blood turning acrimonious, corrodes the veſſels, pro-
ducing almoſt all the diſeaſes of the inflammatory kind. Arbuth.
Through the heart,
Should jealouſy its venom once diffuſe,
'Tis then delightful miſery no more,
But agony unmixt, inceſlant gall,
Corrading every thought, and blaſting all -
Love's paradiſe. Thomſon's Spring, l. 1075,
CoRRo'DENT, adj. [from cºrrode.] Having the power of cor-
roding or waſting any thing away.
CoRRo'dible. adj. [from corrode J Poſſible to be conſumed
or corroded.
Metals, although corrodible by waters, yet will not ſuffer a
liquation from the powerfuleſt heat communicable unto that
element. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 1.
Co'RRody. m.ſ.. [from corrodo, Latin.] A defalcation from
an allowance or ſalary for ſome other than the original
purpoſe.
In thoſe days even noble perſons, and other meaner men,
ordered corrodies and penſions to their chaplains and ſervants
out of churches. Ayliff's Parergºn.
CoRRosibility. m.ſ.. [from corroſible.] The quality of being
corroſible; poſſibility to be conſumed by a menſtruum.
CoRRo'sible. adj. [from corrode..] Poſſible to be conſumed
by a menſtruum.
CoRRo's Bleness. n.ſ.. [from corrºſible.] Suſceptibility of cor-
roſion. Dić?.
CoRRo's Ion, n.ſ. [corrodo, Latin.] The power of cating of
wearing away by degrees. -
Cºrrºſion is a particular ſpecies of diſſolution of bodies,
either by an acid, or a ſaline menſtruum. It is almoſt wholly
deſigned for the reſolution of bodies moſt ſtrongly compacted,
as bones and metals; ſo that the menſtruums here employed,
have a conſiderable moment or force. Theſe liquors, whe-
ther acid or urinous, are nothing but ſalts diſſolved in a little
phlegm ; therefore theſe being ſolid, and conſequently con-
taining a conſiderable quantity of matter, do both attract one
another more, and are alſo more attracted by the particles of
the body to be diſſolved; ſo when the more ſolid bodies are
put into ſaline menſtruums, the attraction is ſtronger than in
other ſolutions; and the motion, which is always proportional
to the attraction, is more violent: ſo that we may eaſily con-
ceive, when the motion is in ſuch a manner increaſed, it
ſhould drive the ſalts into the pores of the bodies, and open
and looſen their coheſion, though ever ſo firm. &amp;uincy.
If there be any medicine that purgeth, and hath neither
of the firſt two manifeſt qualities, it is to be held ſuſpected as
a kind of poiſon; for that it worketh either by cºrroſion, or by
a ſecret malignity and enmity to nature. Bacºn's Nat. Hiſtory.
That corroſion and diſſolution of bodics, even the moſt ſolid
and durable, which is vulgarly aſcribed to the air, is cauſed
merely by the action of water upon them; the air being
ſo far from injuring and preying upon the bodies it environs,
that it contributes to their ſcurity and preſervation. Iłºodw.
CoRRosive. adj. [from corrod, Latin. It was anciently pro-
nounced with the accent on the firſt ſyllable, now indif-
ferently.]
1. Having the power of conſuming or wearing away.
Gold, after it has been divided by corroſive liquors into in-
viſible parts, yet may preſently be precipitated, ſo as to appear
again in its own form. Grew's Cºſmol, b, i. c. 2. f. 12.
The ſacred ſons of vengeance, on whoſe courſe
Corroſive famine waits, and kills the year. Thomſon's Spring,
2. Having the quality to fret or vex.
If the maintenance of ceremonics be a corrºſive to ſuch as
oppugn them, undoubtedly to ſuch as maintain them it can be
no great pleaſure, when they behold that which they reverence
is oppugned. Hooker, b. iv. ſee?. to.
Cor Rosive. m. ſ.
1. That which has the quality of waſting any thing away, as
the fleſh of an ulcer.
He meant his corroſives to apply,
And with ſtrićt diet tame his ſtubborn malady. Fairy Queen.
2. That which has the power of fretting, or of giving pain.
Such ſpeeches favour not of God in him that uſeth them,
3. and
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 140</div><p class="Text">C O R
and unto virtuouſly diſpoſed minds they are grievous cºr-
roſves. Hooker, b. v. ſeči. 33.
Away; though parting be a fretful corroſive,
It is applied to a deathful wound. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. i.
Care is no cure, but rather corroſive,
For things that are not to be remedied. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
CoRRo'sively. adv. [from corroſive.]
1. Like a corroſive.
At firſt it taſted ſomewhat corroſively.
2. With the power of corroſion.
CoRRo'sive N Ess. n.ſ.. [from corroſive.] The quality of cor-
roding or eating away; acrimony.
We do infuſe, to what he meant for meat,
Corroſiveneſs, or intenſe cold or heat. Donne.
Saltpetre betrays upon the tongue no heat nor corroſiveneſ;
at all, but coldneſs, mixt with a ſomewhat languid reliſh re-
taining to bitterneſs. Boyle,
Co'RRUGANT. adj. [from corrugate.] Having the power of
. . contračting into wrinkles.
"To CORRUGATE. v. a. [corrugo, Latin.] To wrinkle or
purſe up ; as the ſkin is drawn into wrinkles by cold, or any
other cauſe. - &amp;tincy.
The cramp cometh of contraćtion of ſinews: it cometh
either by cold or dryneſs; for cold and dryneſs do both of them
contračt and corrugate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 964.
CoR RUGA'ſ Ion. n.ſ.. [from corrugate.] Contračtion into
wrinkles.
The pain of the ſolid parts is the corrugation or violent agi-
tation of fibres, when the ſpirits are irritated by ſharp hu-
mours. - Floyer on the Humours.
To CORRUPT. v. a. [corrumpo corruptus, Latin.]
i. To turn from a ſound to a putreſcent ſtate; to infect.
2. To deprave; to deſtroy integrity; to vitiate; to bribe.
I fear leſt by any means, as the ſerpent beguiled Eve
through his ſubtilty, ſo your minds ſhould be corrupted from
the ſimplicity that is in Chriſt. 2 Cor. xi. 3.
Even what things they naturally know, in thoſe very things,
as hearts void of reaſon, they corrupted themſelves. jude, v. 19.
Evil communications corrupt good manners. I Cor. xv. 33.
All that have miſcarried
By underhand, corrupted, foul injuſtice. Shakespeare Richard III.
I have heard it ſaid, the fitteſt time to corrupt a man's wife,
is when ſhe's fallen out with her huſband. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
But ſtay, I ſmell a man of middle earth;
With tryal fire touch me his finger-end ;
If he be chaſte, the flame will back deſcend,
And turn him to no pain; but if he ſtart,
It is the fleſh of a corrupted heart. Shakespeare M. JP, of Windſºr.
Language being the conduit whereby men convey their
knowledge, he that makes an ill uſe of it, though he does not
corrupt the fountains of knowledge, which are in things, yet
Boyle on Saltpetre.
- he ſtops the pipes. Locke.
Hear the black trumpet through the world proclaim,
That not to be corrupted is the ſhame. Pope.
3. To ſpoil; to do miſchief.
Te CoRRU'pt. v. n. To become putrid; to grow rotten; to
putrefy.
The aptneſs or propenſion of air or water to corrupt or
putrefy, no doubt, is to be found before it break forth into
manifeſt effects of diſeaſes, blaſting, or the like. Bacon.
Corru'pt, adj. [from corrupt..] Witious; tainted with wick-
edneſs; without integrity. -
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth,
but that which is good to the uſe of edifying. Eph. iv. 29.
Cºrrupt, corrupt, and tainted in deſire, Shakespeare M. J/, of Windſ.
Theſe kind of knaves I know, which in this plainneſs
Harbour more craft, and more corrupter ends,
Than twenty ſilky ducking obſervants. Shakespeare King Lear.
Some, who have been corrupt in their morals, have yet been
infinitely ſolicitous to have their children piouſly brought
up. South's Sermons.
CoRRU'PTER. n.ſ.. [from corrupt..] He that taints or vitiates;
he that leſſens purity or integrity.
What is here?
The ſcriptures of the loyal Leonatus,
All turn'd to hereſy Away, away,
Corrupters of my faith !
From the vanity of the Greeks, the corrupters of all truth,
who, without all ground of certainty, vaunt their antiquity,
came the errour firſt of all. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the ſterd, b, i.
Thoſe great corrupters of Chriſtianity, and indeed of natu-
ral religion, the Jeſuits. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 6.
CoRRUPTIbi'LITY.. n.ſ.. [from corruptible.] Poſſibility to be
corrupted.
CoRRU'PTIBLE. adj. [from corrupt.]
1. Suſceptible of deſtruction by natural decay, or without
violence.
Our corruptible bodies could never live the life they ſhall
live, were it not that they are joined with his body,
which is incorruptible, and that his is in ours as a cauſe of
immortality. Hooker.
It is a devouring corruption of the eſſential mixture, which
Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
conſiſting chiefly of an oily moiſture, is corruptible th;origh
diſſipation. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The ſeveral parts of which the world conſiſts, being in
their nature corruptible, it is more than probable, that, in all
infinite duration, this frame of things would long ſince have
been diſſolved. Tillotſ, ºs Sermons.
2. Suſceptible of corruption; poſſible to be tainted or vitiated.
CoRRU'ptibleNEss. n.ſ.. [from corruptible.] Suſceptibility of
corruption.
Cor RU'ptibly. adv. [from corruptible.] In ſuch a manner as
to be corrupted, or vitiated. -
It is too late; the life of all his blood
Is touch'd corruptibly. - Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
CoRRU'PT Ion. m. ſ. [corruptio, Lat.]
1. The principle by which bodies tend to the ſeparation of their
arts.
.."wºkeinº, perverſion of principles; loſs of integrity.
Precepts of morality, beſides the natural corruption of our
tempers, which makes us averſe to them, are ſo abſtraćted
from ideas of ſenſe, that they ſeldom get an opportunity for
deſcriptions and images. Addiſon's Eſſay on the Georgiº.
Amidſt corruption, luxury and rage,
Still leave ſome ancient virtue's to our age. Poke.
3. Putreſcence.
The wiſe contriver, on his end intent;
Careful this fatal errour to prevent,
And keep the waters from corruption free; -
Mix'd them with ſalt, and ſeaſon'd all the ſea. Blackmore.
4. Matter or pus in a ſore.
5. The means by which anything is vitiated; depravation.
After my death I wiſh no other herald;
No other #: of my living ačtions,
To keep mine honour from corruption, , , -
But ſuch an honeſt chronicler as Griffith. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
The region hath by conqueſt, and corruption of other lan-
guages, received new and differing names. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
All thoſe four kinds of corruption are very common in their
language; for which reaſons the Greek tongue is become
much altered. Brerewood on Languages.
6. [In law.] An infe&amp;tion growing to a man attainted of felony
or treaſon, and to his iſſue: for as he loſeth all to the prince;
or other lord of the fee, ſo his iſſue cannot be heir to him, or
to any other anceſtor, of whom they might have claimed by
him; and if he were noble, or a gentleman, he and his chil-
dren are made ignoble and ungentle, in reſpect of the
father. Cowel,
CoR RU'ptive. adj. [from corrupt..] Having the quality of
tainting or vitiating.
Not reſembling themſelves according to ſeminal condition,
yet carrying a ſettled habitude unto the corruptive originals.
- - Brown's Wulgar Errours, b, ii. c. 6.
It ſhould be endued with an acid ferment, or ſome cor-
riptive quality, for ſo ſpeedy a diſſolution of the meat
and preparation of the chyle. Ray on the Creation.
CoRRU'Ptless. adj. [from corrupt..] Inſuſceptible of corrupt
tion; undecaying.
All around
The borders, with corruptlºſ, myrrh are crown'd. Dryden.
CoR.Ru'ptly. adv. [from corript.]
1. With corruption; with taint; with vice; without integrity.
O, that eſtates, degrees, and offices,
Were not deriv'd corruptly, that clear honour
Were purchas'd by the merit of the wearer. Shakeſpeare.
We have dealt very corruptly againſt thee, and have not
kept the commandments. Neh. i. 7.
2. Vitiouſly; improperly; contrary to purity.
We have corruptly contračted moſt names, both of men
and places. Camden's Remaint.
CoRRU'PTNFss. h.ſ.. [from corrupt..] The quality of corruption;
putreſcence; vice.
CO'RSAIR. m. ſ. [French..] A pirate; one who profeſſes to
ſeize merchants.
CoRs E. n.ſ.. [corps, French J
1. A body.
For he was ſtrong, and of ſo mighty corſº,
As ever wielded ſpear in warlike hand Spenser, can. iii.
2. A dead body; a carcaſe: a poetical word.
That from her body, full of filthy fin,
He reſt her hateful head, without remotſe ; -
A ſtream of coal-black blood forth guſhed from her corſe:
Fairy Queen, b. i. eant. I. ſtan. 24.
Set down the corſe; or, by ſaint Paul, -
I'll make a corſe of him that diſobeys. Shakespeare. Richard III.
- What may this mean
That thou, dead corſº, again, in complete ſteel,
Reviſit'ſt thus the glimpſes of the moon,
Making night hideous Shakeſpeare's Hamlet,
Herc lay him down; my friends,
Full in my fight, that I may view at leiſure -
The bloody corſe, and count thoſe glorious wounds. Addison.
- You heard the groans,
Heard nightly plung’d, amid’ the ſullen waves,
The frequent corſ. Thomſºn's Summer, 1 to 35.
Co'R5kist.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 141</div><p class="Text">C O S
Coºks: E.T. n.ſ. ſcoſºlet, French.] A light armour for the
forepart of the body. -
Some ſhirts of maile, ſome coats of plate put on,
Some don’d a cuirace, ſome a corſet bright. Fairfax, b. i.
They laſh, they foin, they paſs, they ſtrive to bore
Their cºſts, and their thinneſt parts explore, Dryd. Fab.
But heroes, who o'ercome or die,
Have their hearts hung extremely high ;
The ſtrings of which, in battle's heat,
Againſt their very cors’lts beat. Prior.
CO'RTICAL. adj. ſcortex, bark, Lat.] Barky ; belonging to
the outer part; belonging to the rind ; outward.
Their laſt extremities form a little gland, (all theſe little
glands together make the cortical part of the brain) termi-
nating in two little veſſels. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Co'RT1cATE D. adj. [from corticatus, Lat..] Reſembling the
bark of a tree.
This animal is a kind of lizard, a quadruped corticated and
depilous ; that is, without wool, fur, or hair. Brown.
Co'Rticose. adj. [from corticoſus, Lat J Full of bark. Dići.
CoRVE"tto. n.ſ. The curvet. See CUR v ET.
You muſt draw the horſe in his career with his manage,
and turn, doing the corvetto and leaping. Peacham on Drawing.
cºast. adj. [coruſco, Latin.] Glittering by flaſhes;
flaſhing.
CoR UscA"tion. n.ſ. ſcortſcatio, Latin.] Flaſh; quick vibra-
tion of light.
We fee that lightnings and coruſcations, which are near at
hand, yield no ſound. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 14.
We may learn that ſulphureous ſteams abound in the bowels
of the earth, and ferment with minerals, and ſometimes take
fire with a ſudden coruſcation and exploſion. Newton's Opt.
How heat and moiſture mingle in a maſs,
Or belch in thunder, or in lightning blaze;
Why nimble coruſiations ſtrike the eye,
And bold tornado's bluſter in the ſky. Garth's Diſpenſatory.
CoRY'MBIATED. adj. [ corymbus, Latin J Garniſhed with
branches of berries. Dić?.
CoR YMBI'FERous. adv. [from corymbus and fero, Lat..] Bear-
ing fruit or berries in bunches.
Corymbiferous plants are diſtinguiſhed into ſuch as have a
radiate flower, as the ſun-flower; and ſuch as have a naked
flower, as the hemp-agrimony, and mugwort: to which are
added thoſe a-kin hereunto, ſuch as ſcabious, teaſel, thiſtle, and
the like. &amp;uincy.
CORY MEUS. n.ſ. [Latin.]
- It in general ſignifies the top of any thing; but amongſt
the ancient botaniſts it was uſed to expreſs the bunches or
cluſters of berries of ivy, or the like: amongſt modern bota-
niſts it is uſed for a compounded diſcous flower, whoſe ſeeds
are not pappous, or do not fly away in down ; ſuch are the
flowers of daiſies, and common marygold ; and therefore Mr.
Ray makes one genus of plants to be ſuch as have a compound
diſcous flower, without any downy wings to carry off their
ſeeds. &amp; nºy.
Cosci'NoMANcy. m. ſ. [from 24-ºwo, a ſieve, and warría, divi-
nation.] The art of divination by means of a ſieve. A ver
ancient pračtice mentioned by Theocritus, and ſtill uſed in
ſome parts of England, to find out perſons unknown. Chambers.
Cose'cANT. n.ſ.. [In geometry.] The ſecant of an arch,
which is the complement of another to ninety degrees. Harris.
Co's HE RING. m. ſ. [Iriſh.]
Coſherings were viſitations and progreſſes made by the lord
and his followers among his tenants; wherein he did eat them
(as the Engliſh proverb is) out of houſe and home. Davies.
Co's.I.E.R. m.ſ. [from cowſer, old Fr. to ſew.] A botcher. Hanmer.
Do you make an alehouſe of my lady's houſe, that ye
fºlucak out your coſier catches, without any mitigation or re-
morſe of voice : Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Cosi NE. m. ſ. [In geometry.] The right fine of an arch,
which is the complement of another to ninety degrees. Harris.
Cosm ETICK. adj. [zoºrizº;..] Having the power of im-
proving beauty; beautifying.
No better coſmeticks than a ſevere temperance and purity,
modeſty and humility, a gracious temper and calmneſs of
ſpirit; no true beauty without the ſignatures of theſe graces
in the very countenance. Ray on the Creation.
Firſt, rob’d in white, the nymph intent adores,
With head uncover'd, the cºſmetick pow'rs.
CO'SMICAL, adj. […]
1. Relating to the world.
2. Riſing or ſetting with the ſun; not acronychal.
The coſmical aſcenſion of a ſtar we term that, when it ariſeth
together with the ſun, or in the ſame degree of the ecliptick
wherein the ſun abideth. Erown's Vulgar Errºurs, b. iv. c. 13.
Co's Mica L. adv. [from coſmical J. With the ſun ; not
acronychally. - -
From the riſing of this ſtar, not cºſmically, that is, with the
ſun, but heliacally, that is, its emerſion from the rays of the
ſun, the ancients computed their canicular days. Brown.
Co's MogoNY. ii. ſ. [kºwº, and yºn. The riſe or birth of
the world; the creation.
Pºpe.
Cosſío'GRAPHER. m. ſ. [xº~. and y:2:...] One who writes
a deſcription of the world; diſtinct from geographer, who
deſcribes the ſituation of particular countries.
Thus the Antient coſmographers do place the diviſion of the
Eaſt and Weſtern hemiſphere; that is, the firſt term of longi-
tude in the Canary or Fortunate Iſlands, conceiving theſe parts
the extremeſt habitations weſtward. Brºwn’s Pºgar Errouri.
Co. MooR A'P HIcAL. adj [from cºſmºgraphy j Relating to the
general deſcription of the world. -
Cos Mog RAPHICALLY. adv. [from coſmographical.] In a manner
relating to the ſcience by which the ſtructure of the world is
diſcovered and deſcribed.
This it doth more plainly upon the terrella, or ſpherical
magnet, coſºnographically ſet out with circles of the globe.
- Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
COSMO'GRAPHY. h. ſ. [...g49. and 7:22:…] The ſcience of
the general ſyſtem or affections of the world, diſtinct from
geography, which delivers the ſituation and boundaries of
particular countries.
Here it might ſee the world without travel; it being a leſſer
ſcheme of the creation, nature contracted, a little coſmogra-
phy, or map of the univerſe. South’s Sermons.
Cosmopolitan. Un ſ. [zegº, and Toxºrze. A citizen of the
Cosmopolº re. } world; one who is at home in every place.
Co'ssET. n.ſ. A lamb brought up without the dam.
If thou wilt bewail my woful teen,
I ſhall thee give yond coffat for thy pain. Spenſer's Paſº.
COST. m. ſ. [AE/?, Dutch. As this word is found in the re-
moteſt Teutonick diale&amp;ts, even in the iſlandick, it is not pro-
bably derived to us from the Latin con/io; though it is not un-
likely that the French couſier comes from the Latin.]
1. The price of any thing.
2. Sumptuouſneſs; luxury.
The city woman bears
The coſt of princes on unworthy ſhoulders. Shakeſpeare.
Let foreign princes vainly boaſt
The rude effects of pride and coſt
Of vaſter fabricks, to which they
Contribute nothing but the pay. //aller.
3. Charge; expence.
While he found his daughter maintained without his cºſt,
he was content to be deaf to any noiſe of infamy. Sidney, b. ii.
I ſhall never hold that man my friend,
Whoſe tongue ſhall aſk me for one penny coff,
To ranſom home revolted Mortimer. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Have we eaten at all of the king's coſt 2 or hath he given us
any gift : 2 Sa. xix. 42.
And wilt thou, O cruel boaſt !
Put poor nature to ſuch coſt P
O! 'twill undo our common mother,
To be at charge of ſuch another. Craſhaw.
It is ſtrange to ſee any eccleſiaſtical pile, not by eccleſiaſti-
cal coſt and influence, riſing above ground; eſpecially in an
age in which men's mouths are open againſt the church, but
their hands ſhut towards it, South's Sermons.
He whoſe tale is beſt, and pleaſes moſt,
Should win his ſupper at our common cºff. Dryden's Falks.
Fourteen thouſand pounds are paid by Wood for the pur-
chaſe of his patent: what were his other viſible cy!; I know
not; what his latent, is variouſly conjectured. Swift.
4. Loſs; fine; detriment. -
What they had fondly wiſhed, proved afterwards to their
coſts over true. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks. *
To Cost. v. n. pret, coff; particip, cºff. [couſier, French..] To
be bought for; to be had at a price.
The dagger and poiſon are always in readineſs; but to bring
the action to extremity, and then recover all, will require the
art of a writer, and coſt him many a pang. Dryden.
Co's TA:... adj. [cºſia, Lat, a rib.] Belonging to the ribs.
Hereby are excluded all cetaceous and cartilaginous fiſhes,
many pećtinal, whoſe ribs are rectilineal ; and many cºſial,
which have their ribs embowed. L'rown's Julgar Err.
Co's TARD. m. ſ. [from cºſter, a head ||
1. A head.
Take him over the cºffard with the belt of thy ſword.
Shakeſp. are’s Kichard III.
2. An apple round and bulky like the head.
Many country vicars are driven to ſhifts; and, if our greedy
patrons hold us to ſuch conditions, they will make us turn
cºſtard mongers, graſiers, or ſell ale Burton on Melancholy.
COS IV.E. ad;. ſºoº ti atts, Lat. conſ pē, French.]
1. Bound in the body; having the excretions obſtructed.
When the paſſage of the gall becomes obſtructed, the body
grows coffive, and the excrements of the belly white. Brown.
While faſter than his coffive brains indites,
Philo's quick hand in flowing letters writes;
His caſe appears to me like honeſt Teague's,
When he was run away with by his legs.
2. Cloſe; unpermeable.
Clay in dry ſeaſons is coffive, hardening with the ſun and
wind, 'till unlocked by induſtry, ſo as to admit of the air and
heavcnly influences. Mºrtimer’s Hºuſandry.
- Co's rive N Ess.
Prior.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 142</div><p class="Text">w
G O T
Co U
Co'stryENESS. m. ſ. [from coffive.] The flate of the body in
which excretion is obſtrućted. -
Cº/liveneſs diſperſes malign putrid fumes out of the guts and
meſentery into all parts of the body, occaſioning head-aches,
fevers, loſs of appetite, and diſturbance of conco&amp;tion. Harvey.
Co/liveneſs has ill effects, and is hard to be dealt with by
phyſick; purging medicines rather increaſing than removing
the evil. Locke on Education, ſed. 23.
Co's T LIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from coſtly..] Sumptuouſneſs; expenſive-
neſs.
Though not with curious cofflineſ, yet with cleanly ſuff-
ciency it entertained me. Sidney, b, i.
Nor have the frugaller ſons of fortune any reaſon to obječt
the cºfflineſs ; ſince they frequently pay dearer for leſs advan-
tageous pleaſures. Glanville's Scepſ. Preface.
Co's TLY. adj. [from cy!..] Sumptuous; expenſive; of a high
IICC.
p Coffly thy habit as thy purſe can buy,
But not expreſt in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
For the apparel oft proclaims the man. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Leave for a while thy coſily country-ſeat;
And to be great indeed, forget
The nauſeous pleaſures of the great, Dryden.
The chapel of St. Laurence will be perhaps the moſt coſtly
piece of work on the face of the earth, when completed.
//diſon's Remarks on Italy.
He is here ſpeaking of Paradiſe, which he repreſents as a
moſt charming and delightful place; abounding with things
not only uſeful and convenient, but even the moſt rare and
valuable, the moſt coſtly and deſireable. J/oodw. Nat. Hiſtory.
Co's TMARY. m. ſ. [coſius, Latin.] An herb whoſe flowers are
naked, and of a yellow colour, growing in umbels on the top
of the ſtalks: the leaves are intire, and crenated about the
edges. AZiller.
Co's TRE.L. n.ſ. [ ſuppoſed to be derived from cºff. r. J A
bottle. Skinner.
Core. rally from the Saxon cot, a cottage.
CoA.T. Gibſon’s Camden.
COT. m. ſ. ſcot, Sax. cwt, Welſh.] A ſmall houſe; a cot-
tage; a hut; a mean habitation.
What that uſage meant,
Which in her cot ſhe daily practiſed. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. 6.
Beſides his cot, his flocks, and bounds of feed,
Are now on ſale; and at our ſheep cot now,
By reaſon of his abſence, there is nothin
That you will feed on. Shakeſpeare’s As you like it:
Hezekiah made himſelf ſtalls for all manner of beaſts, and
cots for flocks. 2 Chron. xxxii. 28.
CoT. {" the end of the names of places, come gene-
My feeble goats,
With pains I drive from their forſaken cotes. Dryden's Wirgil.
A ſtately temple ſhoots within the ſkies:
The crotchets of their cot in columns riſe;
The pavement, poliſh'd marble they behold;
The gates with ſculpture grac'd, the ſpires and tiles of gold.
- Dryden's Baucis and Philemon.
As Jove vouchſaf’d on Ida's top, 'tis ſaid,
At poor Philemon's cot to take a bed.
Coºp. m. ſ. An abridgment of cotºucan.
Col A'NG ENT. n.ſ. [In geometry.] The tangent of an arch
which is the complement of another to ninety degrees. Harris.
To Cot E. v. a. This word, which I have found only in
Chapman, ſeems to ſignify the ſame as To leave behind, To
over paſs.
Fenton.
Words her worth had prov'd with decds,
Had more ground been allow'd the race, and coted far his
ſleeds. Chapman's Iliads.
CoT E'MP'or ARY. adj. [con and tempus, Latin.] Living at the
fame time ; coctaneous ; contemporary.
What would not, to a rational man, cotemporary with the
firſt voucher, have appeared probable, is now uſed as certain,
becauſe feveral have ſince, from him, ſaid it one after
another. Locke.
Co'r LAND. m. ſ. ſcot and laid] Land appendant to a cot-
tage.
o
Co'Toye AN. m. ſ. [probably from coquin, French.J. A man
who buſies himſelf with women's affairs. .
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
Spare not for coſt,
- Go, go, you catgutan, go;
Get you to bed. Shakespeare's Romeo and juliet.
A ſtateſwoman is as ridiculous a creature as a cotgutan :
each of the ſexes ſhould keep within its particular bounds.
* Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 38.
You have given us a lively picture of huſbands hen peckid;
but you have never touchéd upon one of the quite different
character, and who goes by the name of cºtºucan. Addison Spect.
Co" ºr AGF. n.ſ.. [from cot.j A hut; a méan habitation; a
cot; a little houſe.
The ſea-coaſt ſhall be dwellings and cottages for ſhepherds,
*folds for flocks. Zeph. ii. 6.
Vol. I.
They were right glad to take ſome corner of a poor cºttage,
and there to ſerve God upon their knees. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 2.
The ſelf ſame ſun that ſhines upon his court,
Hides not his viſage from our cottage, but
Looks on both alike. Shakeſpeare's J/inter's Tale.
Let the women of noble birth and great fortunes nurſe
their children, look to the affairs of the houſe, viſit poor cot-
tages, and relieve their neceſſities. Taylor's Holy Living.
It is difficult for a peaſant, bred up in the obſcurities of a
Cottage, to fancy in his mind the unſeen ſplendors of a court.
South's Sermºns.
Beneath our humble cºttage let us haſte,
And here, unenvied, rural dainties taſte. Pope's Odyſſey.
Co'TTAGER. m. ſ. [rom cottage J -
I. One who lives in a hut or cottage.
Let us from our farms,
Call forth our cottagers to arms. Swift.
The moſt ignorant Iriſh cottager will not ſell his cow for a
groat. Swift's Adreſs to Parliament.
2. A cottager, in law, is one that lives on the common, with-
out paying rent, and without any land of his own.
The huſbandmen and plowmen be but as their work-folks
and labourers, or elſe mere cottagers, which are but houſed
beggars. Bacon's Henry VII.
he yeomenry, or middle people, of a condition between
gentlemen and cºttagers. Bacon's Henry VII.
Co'ſ TIER. m.ſ.. [from coi..] Cne who inhabits a cot. Dić.
CO'TTON. m. ſ. [named, according to Skinner, from the down
that adheres to the ma'a cotonea, or quince, called by the Italians
cºtogri ; whence cottºne, Ital, cotton, French.] The down of
the cotton-tree.
The pin ought to be as thick as a rowling-pin, and covered
with cotton, that its hardneſs may not be offenſive. //ſman.
Co'TTo N. n.ſ. A plant. -
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, cut into ſeveral ſegments
almoſt to the bottom, and is of the expanded bell ſhape: from
the center riſes a pyramidal hollow tube, adorned and loaded
with chives: from the empalement ſhoots up the pointal, fixed
like a nail in the bottom of the flower and of the tube,
which is changed into a roundiſh fruit, divided into four or
more ſeminal cells, gaping at the top, and incloſing ſects, co-
vered over and wrapped within that ſoft dućtile wool, com-
monly known by the name of cotton. The ſpecies are,
1. Hot or ſhrubby cotton. 2. The moſt excellent American
cotton, with a greeniſh ſeed. 3. Annual ſhrubby cotton, of
the iſland of Providence, with a large quinquefid vine-leaf.
4. The tree cotton. 5. Tree cotton with a yellow flower. The
firſt ſort is cultivated plentifully in Candia, Lemnos, Cyprus,
Malta, Sicily, and at Naples; as alſo between Jeruſalem and
Damaſcus, from whence the cotton is brought annually into
theſe northern parts of Europe. It is ſown upon tilled
grounds in the ſpring of the year, and cut down and reaped
in harveſt, as corn with us. This cottºn is the wool which
incloſes or wraps up the ſeeds, and is contained in a kind of
brown huſk or ſeed-veſſel growing upon this ſhrub. It is
from this ſort that the vaſt quantities of cotton are taken,
which furniſh our parts of the world. It is brought from the
iſlands, where the natives take great care of its culture.
There are ſeveral ſorts of cottºn ſold, which differ according
to the countries from whence they come, and the various pre-
parations made of them. The firſt is the cotton in the wool;
that is, that which comes from the ſhell, from which only
we take the ſeed: thoſe come from Cyprus, Smyrna, &amp;c.
The ſecond is the cotton in the yarn; the ſecond and third
ſorts are alſo annual: theſe are cultivated in the Weſt Indies
in great plenty. But the fourth and fifth ſorts grow in Egypt:
theſe abide many years, and often arrive to be trees of great
magnitude, from which the inhabitants are annually furniſhed
with great quantities of cotton. One of theſe trees has a pur-
pliſh and the other a yellow flower, which is the only diffe-
rence between them. AMiller.
Cotton. m. ſ. Cloath or ſtuff made of cotton.
To Cotto N. v. m.
1. To riſe with a nap.
2. To cement; to unite with : a cant word.
A quarrel between you will end in one of you being turned
off, in which caſe it will not be eaſy to cotton with another.
Swift's Directions to the Cook.
To COUCH. v. m. [coucher, French.)
1. To lie down on a place of repoſe. -
If I court more women, you'll couch with more men. Slak.
Doth not the gentleman
Deſerve as full, as fortunate a bed,
As ever Beatrice ſhall cºach “pon.
When love's fair goddeſs
Cauch'd with her huſband in his golden bed. Dryden's 4:ii.
2. To lie down on the knees, as a beaſt to reſt.
Trees bent their heads to hear him ſing his wrongs,
Fierce tygers coach'd around, and loll'd their fawning
tonges. Dryden's Pirg, Geor. t. iv. l. 4: .
Theſe when death
Shake fea: e.
Comics
5 S
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 143</div><p class="Text">C O U
C O V
z
Comes like a ruſhing lion, couch like ſpaniels,
With lolling tongues, and tremble at the paw. Dryden.
3. To lye down in ſecret, or in ambuſh.
We'll couh i' th' caſtle-ditch, 'till we ſee the light of our
fairies. Shakespeare's Merry I/ives of I/indſor.
The earl of Angus couched in a furrow, and was paſſed over
for dead, until a horſe was brought for his eſcape. Hayward.
4. To lye in a bed, or ſtratum.
Bleſſed of the Lord be his land for the dew, and for the
deep that coucheth beneath. Deutr. xxxiii. 13.
5. To ſloop; or bend down; to lower in fear, in pain, in
reſpect.
To couch down between Iſſachar, is a ſtrong aſ couching
down between two burdens. Gen. xlix. 14.
Theſe couchings, and theſe lowly curteſies,
Might ſtir the blood of ordinary men. Shakespeare. ful. Caſar.
To Couch. v.a.
1. To repoſe; to lay on a place of repoſe.
Where unbruiſed youth, with unſtuff'd brain,
Dºth tºuch his limbs, there golden ſleep doth reign. Shakeſp.
2. To lay down any thing in a bed, or ſtratum.
If the weather be warm, we immediately couch malt about
a foot thick; but if a hotter ſeaſon require it, we ſpread it on
the floor much thinner. Aſortimer's Husbandry.
The ſea and the land make one globe; and the waters couſh
themſelves, as cloſe as may be, to the centre of this globe, in a
ſpherical convexity. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
3. To bed; to hide in another body.
It is at this day in uſe at Gaza, to couch potſherds, or veſſels
of earth, in their walls, to gather the wind from the top, and
tº paſs it down in ſpouts into rooms. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
4. To involve; to include; to compriſe.
But who will call thoſe noble who deface,
By meaner acts, the glories of their race;
Whoſe only title to our father's fame,
I. ouch'd in the dead letters of their name Dryden's jav.
That great argument for a future ſtate, which St. Paul'hath
tºhed in the words I have read to you. Atterbury's Sermont.
5. To include ſecretly; to hide: with under.
The foundation of all parables is ſome analogy or ſimili-
tide, between the topical or alluſive part of the parable and
the thing touched under it, and intended by it. South's Sermons.
There is all this, and more, that lies naturally couched under
this allegory. L'E/ºrange, Fable 3.
The true notion of the inſtitution being loſt, the tradition
of the deluge, which was couched under it, was thereupon at
length ſuſpended and loſt. JWoodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
6. To lay cloſe to another.
And over all, with brazen ſcales was arm’d,
Like plated coat of ſteel, ſo couched near,
That nought might pierce. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 11.
7. To fix the ſpear in the reſt; in the poſture of attack.
The knight 'gan fairly couch his ſteady ſpear,
And fiercely ran at him with rigorous might. Fairy Queen.
Before each van
Prick forth the aery knights, and couch their ſpears,
*Till thickeſt legions cloſe. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ii.
The former wav'd in air
His flaming ſword, AEneas couch'd his ſpear. Dryden's Żn.
8. To depreſs the film that overſpreads the pupil of the eye.
This is improperly called touching the eye, for couching the
cataraći with equal impropriety they ſometimes ſpeak of
couching the patient.
Some artiſt, whoſe nice hand
Çouches the cataraćts, and clears his eyes,
And all at once a flood of glorious light
Comes ruſhing on his eyes. Dennis.
Whether the cataraćt be waſted by being ſeparated from its
veſſels, I have never known poſitively, by diffecting one that
had been couched. Sharp.
Couch, n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſeat of repoſe, on which it is common to lye down
dreſſed.
So Satan fell; and ſtraight a firy globe
Qf angels on full ſail of wing flew nigh,
Who on their plumy vans receiv'd him ſoft,
From his uneaſy ſtation, and upbore
As on a floating couch through the blithe air. Milt. Par. Reg.
To loll on couches, rich with citron ſteds,
... And lay their guilty limbs in Tyrian beds. Dryd. Firg, Geo.
2. A bed; a place of repoſe.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A tºuch for luxury and damned inceſt. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Dire was the toſſing ! deep the groans' deſpair
Tended the fick, buſieſt from couch to couch. Milt. Pa. Loft,
This gentle knight, inſpir’d by jolly May,
Forſook his early couch at early day. Dryden's Fables.
9, ye immortal pow'rs that guard the juſt, -
Watch round his cºuch, and ſoften his repoſe. Addison Cato.
3. A layer, or ſtratum.
This heap is called by maltſters a couch, or bed of raw
myalt, Mortimer's Husbandry.
Co'UcHANT. adj. [couchant, Fr.] Lying down; ſquatting.
If a lion were the proper coat of Judah, yet were it not
probably a lion rampant, but rather couchant or dormant.
Brown's ſugar Erroar, b. v. c. 1 o.
As a tiger, who by chance hath ſpy'd,
In ſome purlieu, two gentle fawns at play,
Strait couches cloſe; then riſing, changes oft
His couchant watch. Milton's Paradiſe Loº, b. iv. 1. 403.
COUCHE&amp;. m. ſ. [French..] Bedtime; the time of viſiting late
at night. º
None of her ſylvan ſubječts made their court;
Levees and cºuchees paſs'd without reſort. Dryden.
Co'Uche R. m. ſ. [from couch..] He that couches or depreſſes
cataraćts.
Co'Uchfellow. n.ſ. ſcouch and fºllow.] Bedfellow; com-
panion.
I have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for
you, and your coachfelow, Nim; or elſe you had looked
through the grate like a geminy of baboons. Shakeſpeare.
CouchGrass. n.ſ. A weed.
The couchgraſs, for the firſt year, inſenſibly robs moſt
plants in ſandy grounds apt to graze. Mºrtimer's Husbandry.
COVE. m.ſ.
1. A ſmall creek or bay.
2. A ſhelter; a cover.
CO'VENANT. m. ſ. [convenant, Fr. conventum, Latin.]
1. A contračt; a ſtipulation. -
He makes a covenant never to deſtroy
The earth again by flood; nor let the ſea
Surpaſs his bounds. Milton's Paradiſe I ºff, b. xi. l. 892.
The Engliſh make the ocean their abode,
Whoſe ready ſails with ev'ry wind can fly,
And make a cov'nant with th' unconſtant ſky. J/aller.
2. An agreement on certain terms; a compačt.
A covenant is a mutual compact, as we now conſider it, be-
twixt God and man; conſiſting of mercies on God’s part,
made over to man, and of conditions on man's part, required
by God. Hammond’s Prač, Catech.
Some men live as if they had made a covenant with hell:
let divines, fathers, friends ſay what they will, they ſtop their
ears againſt them. L'E/ºrange.
3. A writing containing the terms of agreement.
I ſhall but lend my diamond 'till your return; let there be
covenants drawn between us. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
To Co've NANT. v. m. [from the noun.] -
I. To bargain; to ſtipulate.
His lord uſed commonly ſo to covenant with him, which if
at any time the tenant diſliked, he might freely depart at his
pleaſure. Spenser's State of Ireland.
It had been covenanted between him and the king of Eng-
land, that neither of them ſhould treat of peace or truce with
the French king. Hayward on Edward VI.
By words men come to know one another's minds; by
theſe they covenant and confederate. South's Sermons.
Jupiter covenanted with him, that it ſhould be hot or cold,
wet or dry, calm or windy, as the tenant ſhould direct. L'Eft.
2. To agree with another on certain terms: with for.
They covenanted with him for thirty pieces of ſilver, Mat.
Pointing to a heap of ſand,
For ev'ry grain to live a year demand;
But, ah! unmindful of th’ effect of time,
Forgot to covenant for youth and prime. Garth's Ovid.
Cove NANTE/e. m. ſ. [from covenant..] A party to a covenant;
a ſtipulator; a bargainer. -
Both of them were reſpective rites of their admiſſion into
the ſeveral covenants, and the covenantees become thereby en-
titled to the reſpective privileges. Ayliff's Parergon.
Cove NA'NT E R. n.ſ.. [from covenant..] One who takes a cove-
nant. A word introduced in the civil wars.
The covenanters ſhall have no more aſſurance of mutual
affiſtance each from other, after the taking of the covenant,
than they had before. Oxford ReaSpenser againſ; the Covenant.
Co've Nous. adj. [from cavin. J. Fraudulent; colluſive; trickiſh.
I wiſh ſome means deviſed for the reſtraint of theſe inor-
dinate and covenous leaſes of lands, holden in chief, for hun-
dreds or thouſands of years. Bacon's Off. of Alienation.
To COVER. v. a. ſcouvrir, French J
1. To overſpread any thing with ſomething clfe.
The paſtures are cloathed with flocks, the valleys alſo are
covered over with corn. Pſ. lxy. 13.
A man ought not to cover his head. 1 Cor. xi. 7.
Go to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, ſerve in the
meat, and we will come in to dinner. Shakespeare Aſerch. ºf lenice.
2. To conceal under ſomething laid over.
Or lead me to ſome folitary place,
And cover my retreat from human race.
3. To hide by ſuperficial appearances.
4. To overwhelm ; to bury.
Raillery and wit ſerve only to cover nonſenſe with ſhame,
when reaſon has firſt proved it to be mere nonſenſe, Jatts.
5. To ſhelter ; to conceal from harm.
Dou Wrg, Geor.
Charity
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 144</div><p class="Text">C O V
Charity ſhall cover the multitude of fins.
6. To incubate; to brood on.
Natural hiſtorians obſerve, that only the male birds have
voices; that their ſongs begin a little before breeding-time,
and end a little after; that whilſt the hen is covering her eggs,
the male generally takes his ſtand upon a neighbouring bough
within her hearing, and by that means amuſes and diverts her
with his ſongs during the whole time of her ſitting. Addison Spect.
7. To copulate with a female.
8. To wear the hat, or garment of the head, as a mark of
ſuperiority.
That king had conferred the honour of grandee upon him,
which was of no other advantage or ſignification to him, than
to be covered in the preſence of that king. Dryd. Dedicat. Æn.
Cover. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Anything that is laid over another.
The ſecundine is but a general cover, not ſhaped according
to the parts, but the ſkin is ſhaped according to the parts.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 732.
The fountains could be ſtrengthened no other way than by
making a ſtrong cover or arch over them. Burnet's Theory.
- Oreſtes' bulky rage,
Unſatisfy'd with margins cloſely writ,
Foams o'er the covers, and not finiſh'd yet. Dryd, juv. Sat.
With your hand, or any other cover, you ſtop the veſſel,
ſo as wholly to exclude the air. Ray on the Creation.
2. A concealment; a ſcreen; a veil; a ſuperficial appearance,
under which ſomething is hidden.
The truth and reaſon of things may be artificially and ef-
fečtually infinuated, under the cover either of a real fast, or
of a ſuppoſed one. L’Eſtrange.
As the ſpleen has great inconveniences, ſo the pretence of
it is a handſome cover for imperfections. Collier on the Spleen.
3. Shelter; defence. t
In the mean time, by being compelled to lodge in the field,
which grew now to be very cold, whilſt his army was under
cover, they might be forced to retire. . Clarendon, b. viii.
Cove R-shAM E. m. ſ. [cover and ſhame.] Some appearance
uſed to conceal infamy.
Does he put on holy garments for a cover-ſhame of lewd-
neſs 2 Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
CoverING. m. ſ... [from cover.] Dreſs; veſture; any thing
ſpread over another.
The women took and ſpread a covering over the well's
, mouth. * * 2 Sam. xvii. 19.
Bring ſome covering for this naked ſoul,
Whom I'll intreat to lead me. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Sometimes providence caſts things ſo, that truth and intereſt
: lie the ſame way; and when it is wrapt up in this covering,
men can be content to follow it. South.
Then from the floor he rais'd a royal bed,
With cov'rings of Sidonian purple ſpread. Dryden's Fables.
Co've RL ET. m. ſ. [couvrelići, French.] The outermoſt of the
bedcloaths; that under which all the reſt are concealed.
Lay her in lillies and in violets,
And filken curtains over her diſplay,
And odour'd ſheets, and arras coverlets. Spenſer's Epithal.
With ſilken curtains and gold coverlets,
Therein to ſhrowd her ſumptuous Bellamoure. Fairy Queen.
This done, the hoſt produc’d the genial bed,
Which with no coſtly coverlet they ſpread. Dryden's Fables.
The difficulties I was in, for want of a houſe and bed,
being forced to lie on the ground, wrapt up in my coverlet.
- Gulliver's Travels.
Co'v ERT. n. ſ. [from cover, couvert, French.]
1. A ſhelter; a defence.
Let mine outcaſts dwell with thee, Moab; be thou a covert
to them from the face of the ſpoiler. Iſaiah, xvi. 4.
. . There ſhall be a tabernacle for a ſhadow in the day-time
from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from
ſtorm and rain. Iſ iv. 6.
They are by ſudden alarm, or watch-word, to be called out
to their military motions, under ſky or covert, according to
the ſeaſon, as was the Roman wont. Milton on Education.
It was the hour of night, when thus the Son
Commun'd in ſilent walk, then laid him down
Under the hoſpitable covert nigh
Of trees thick interwoven. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. ii.
Now have a care your carnations catch not too much wet,
therefore retire them to covert. Evelyn's Kalendar.
2. A thicket, or hiding place.
Tow'rds him I made; but he was 'ware of me,
And ſtole into the covert of the wood. Shakespeare Rom, and jul.
I ſhall be your faithful guide,
Through this gloomy covert wide. Milton.
Thence to the coverts, and the conſcious groves,
The ſcenes of his paſt triumphs and his loves. Denham.
Deep into ſome thick covert would I run,
Impenetrable to the ſtars or ſun. Dryden's State of Innocence.
The deer is lodg’d; I’ve track'd her to her covert :
Be ſure ye mind the word; and when I give it,
Ruſh in at once, and ſcize upon your prey. Addiſ Cato,
I
1 Pet. iv. 8.
Co've RT, adj. [couvert, French.] . .
1. Sheltered; not open; not expoſed.
You are, of either fide the green, to plant a covert alley;
upon carpenter's work, about twelve foot in height, by which
you may go in ſhade into the garden. Bacon, Eſſay 47.
The fox is a beaſt alſo very prejudicial to the huſbandman,
eſpecially in places that are near foreſt-woods and covert
places. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Together let us beat this ample field,
Try what the open, what the covert yield. Pope's Eſſays.
2. Secret; hidden; private; inſidious.
And let us preſently go ſit in council,
How covert matters may be beſt diſclos'd,
And open perils ſureſt anſwered. Shakespeare julius Cæſar.
By what beſt way,
Whether of open war, or covert guiſe, -
We now debate. Milton's Paradiſ? Loº, b. ii. 1. 41.
Co've RT. adj. [couvert, French.] The ſtate of a woman ſhel-
tered by marriage under her huſband; as covert baron, feme
4:00, 7-f.
Inſtead of her being under covert baron, to be under cºvert
feme myſelf; to have my body diſabled, and my head for-
tified. - Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Cover T-way. m. ſ. [from covert and way.] -
It is, in fortification, a ſpace of ground level with the field,
on the edge of the ditch, three or four fathom broad, ranging
quite round the half moons, or other works toward the coun-
try. One of the greateſt difficulties in a ſiege is to make a
lodgment on the covert-way, becauſe uſually the beſieged pal-
liſade it along the middle, and undermine it on all ſides. It
is ſometimes called the corridor, and ſometimes the counter-
ſcarp, becauſe it is on the edge of the ſcarp. Harris.
Co've RTLY. adv. [from covert.] Secretly; cloſely; in private;
with privacy.
Yet ſtill Aragnol (ſo his foe was hight)
Lay lurking, covertly him to ſurpriſe. Spenſer's Muipotmºs.
ow can'ſt thou croſs this marriage 2
—Not honeſtly, my lord; but ſo covertly, that no diſho-
neſty ſhall appear in me. Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
Amongſt the poets, Perſius covertly ſtrikes at Nero ; ſome
of whoſe verſes he recites with ſcorn and indignation. Dryden.
CovertNess. n.ſ.. [from covert.] Secrecy; privacy. Dict.
Covertur E. m.ſ.. [from covert.] -
I. Shelter ; defence; not expoſure. -
. It may be it is rather the ſhade, or other coverture, that they
take liking in, than the virtue of the herb. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
He ſaw his guileful ačt
By Eve, though all unweeting, ſeconded
. Upon her huſband; ſaw their ſhame that ſought
Vain covertures. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. 1.337.
The winds being ſo fierce, and the weather ſo ſevere, as
not to ſuffer anything to proſper or thrive beyond the height
of a ſhrub, in any of all thoſe iſlands, unleſs it be protećted
by walls; as in gardens, or other like coverture. Woodward.
2. In law. -
The eſtate and condition of a married woman, who, by
the laws of our realm, is in pot/fate viri, and therefore diſ-
abled to contračt with any, to the prejudice of herſelf or her
huſband, without his allowance or confirmation. Cowel.
The infancy of king Edward VI. and the coverture of queen
Mary, did, in fact, diſable them to accompliſh the conqueſt of
Ireland. Davies on Ireland.
To COVET. v. a. [convoiter, French.] -
1. To deſire inordinately; to deſire beyond due bounds.
- If it be a ſin to covet honour, -
I am the moſt offending man alive. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
I am vet
Unknown to woman, never * forſworn,
Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
At no time broke my faith. Shakeſpeare's Macketh.
O father can it be that ſouls ſublime, -
Return to viſit our terreſtrial clime
And that the gen’rous mind, releas'd by death,
Can covet lazy limbs and mortal breath: Dryden's &amp;n.
2. To deſire earneſtly.
But covet earneſtly the beſt gifts.
To Co'vet. v. n. To have a ſtrong deſire. -
The love of money is the root of all evil, which while
ſome coveted after, they have erred from the faith. . . Tim. vi.
Co've TABLE. adj. [from covet.] To be wiſhed for ; to be
I Cor. xii. 31.
coveted. - - Dić?.
Co'vetise. n.ſ. [convaitiſ, French.] Avarice; covetouſneſs
of money.
Moſt wretched wight, whom nothing might ſuffice,
Whoſe greedy luſt did lack in greateſt ſtore; ,
Whoſe need had end, but no end covetiſe. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Co'v ETous. adj. [convoiteux, French.]
1. Inordinately deſirous. - -
While cumber'd with my dropping cloaths I ſay,
The cruel nation, covetoss of prey,
Stain'd with my blood the unhoſpitable coaſt. Dryden's #n.
2. Inordinately cager cf money; avaricious.
An
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 145</div><p class="Text">C O U
C O U
An heart they have exerciſed with covetous practices.
- 2 Pet. ii. 14.
What he cannot help in his nature, you muſt not account a
vice in him : you muſt in no ways ſay he is covetous. Shakeſp.
Let never ſo much probability hang on one ſide of a covetous
man's reaſoning, and money on the other, it is eaſy to fore-
ſee which will outweigh. - Locłe.
3. Defirous; eager : in a good ſenſe.
Sheba was never
More covetous of wiſdom and fair virtue,
Than this fair ſoul ſhall be. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
He that is envious or angry at a virtue that is not his own,
at the perfection or excellency of his neighbour, is not covet-
cus of the virtue, but of its reward and reputation, and then
his intentions are polluted. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
Co'vetously. adv. [from covetzus.] Avariciouſly; eagerly.
If he care not for’t, he will ſupply us eaſily; if he cºvetouſly
reſerve it, how ſhall's get it? Shakeſpeare.
Co'v stous Ness. n.ſ.. [from covetous.] Avarice; inordinate
deſire of money; eagerneſs of gain.
When workmen ſtrive to do better than well,
They do confound their ſkill in covetouſneſs. Shakeſp K. john.
He that takes pains to ſerve the ends of covetouſneſs, or
miniſters to another's luſt, or keeps a ſhop of impurities or
intemperance, is idle in the worſt ſenſe. Taylor’s Holy Living.
Covetouſneſs debaſeth a man's ſpirit, and ſinks it into the
earth. Tillotſon.
Co'v EY. m. ſ. [couver, French.]
1. A hatch; an old bird with her young ones.
2. A number of birds together.
A flight of waſps and covey of partridges went to a farmer,
and begged a ſup of him to quench their thirſt. L’Eſtrange.
A covey of patridges ſpringing in our front, put our infantry
in diſorder. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 3.
There would be no walking in a ſhady wood without
ſpringing a covey of toaſts. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 112.
COUGH. n.ſ. [kuch, Dutch..] A convulſion of the lungs,
vellicated by ſome ſharp ſeroſity. It is pronounced cºff. .
In conſumptions of the lungs, when nature cannot expel
the cough, men fall into fluxes of the belly, and then they
die. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 63.
For his dear ſake long reſtleſs nights you bore,
While rattling cough; his heaving veſſels tore. Smith.
To Couch. v. n. [Auchen, Dutch..] To have the lungs con-
vulſed; to make a noiſe in endeavouring to evacuate the pec-
cant matter from the lungs.
Thou didſt drink
The ſtale of horſes, and the gilded puddle
Which beaſts would cough at Shakeſp. Anth. and Cleopatra.
Thou haſt quarrelled with a man for caughing in the ſtreet,
becauſe he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain aſleep in the
ſun. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet,
The firſt problem enquireth why a man doth cough, but not
an ox or cow ; whereas the contrary is often obſerved. Brown.
If any humour be diſcharged upon the lungs, they have 2.
faculty of clearing themſelves, and caſting it up by coughing.
- - Ray on the Creation.
There are who to my perſon pay their court,
I cough like Horace, . though lean, am ſhort. Pope's Ep.
To CouëH. v. a. To eječt by a cough 3 to expectorate.
If the matter be to be diſcharged by expectoration, it muſt
firſt paſs into the ſubſtance of the lungs, then into the aſpera
arteria, or weaſand, and from thence be coghed up, and ſpit
out by the mouth. Iſºſºman's Surgery.
Cougher. n.ſ. [from cºugh:l One that coughs. Diff.
Co'vi N. 1 n A deceitful agreement between two or more,
Co'v IN E. } to the hurt of another. Cowel.
Covinc. n.ſ.. [from cove.]. A term in building, uſed of houſes
that proječt over the gröund-plot and the turned pº
archéd with timber, lathed and plaiſtered. arj'ſ f.
Could. [the imperfect preterite of can. See Can.] Was
able to ; had power to:
And if I have done well, and as is fitting the ſtory, it is
that which I deſired; but if ſlenderly and meanly, it is that
which I could attain unto. 2 Mac. xv. 38.
What if he did not all the ill he could º
Am I oblig'd by that tº aſſiſt his rapines,
And to maintain his murders? Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Coulter. n.ſ. [culter, Latin.] The ſharp iron of the plow
which cuts the earth, perpendicular to the ſhare. -
The Iſraelites went down to ſharpen every man his ſhare,
and his couſter, and his ax, and his mattock. I Sa. xiii. 20.
Literature is the grindſtone to ſharpen the cºultºrº, to whet
their natural faculties. Pſammond on Fundamentals.
The plough for ſtiff clays is long and broad, and the coulter
long, and very little bending, with a very large wing: Aſortiºn.
COUNCIL. m. ſ. [concilium, Latin -
1. An aſſembly of perſons met together in conſultation.
The chief prieſts, and all the council, ſought falſe witneſs.
Alſat. xxvi. 59.
In hiſtories compoſed by politicians, they are for drawing
up a perpetual ſcheme of cauſes and events, and preſerving a
*
conſtant correſpondence between the camp and the counciſ
table. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 170.
2. An aſſembly of divines to deliberate upon religion. -
Some borrow all their religion from the fathers of the
Chriſtian church, or from their ſynods or councils. . //atts.
3. Perſons called together to be conſulted on any occaſion, or
to #: advice.
They being thus aſſembled, are more properly a council to
the king, the great council of the kingdom, to adviſe his ma-
jeſty in thoſe things of weight and difficulty, which concern
both the king and people, than a court. Bacºn's Adv. to Williers.
4. The body of privy counſellors.
Without the knowledge
Either of king or council, you made bold
To carry into Flanders the great ſeal. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Council-BoA R D. m. ſ. ſourcil and board J Council-table;
table where matters of ſtate are deliberated.
He hath conmanded,
To-morrow morning to the council-board, -
He be convened. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
When ſhip-money was tranſacted at the council-board, they
looked upon it as a work of that power they were obliged to
truſt. Clarendon.
And Pallas, if ſhe broke the laws,
Muſt yield her foe the ſtronger cauſe;
A ſhame to one ſo much ador'd
For wiſdom at Jove's council board. Swºff.
COUNSEL. m. ſ. [conſºlium, Latin.]
I. Advice; direction.
Let me give thee counſel, that thou mayeſt ſave thine own
life. 1 Kings, i. 1 2.
There is as much difference between the counſel that a friend
giveth, and that a man giveth himſelf, as there is between
the counſel of a friend and of a flatterer. Bacºn, Eſſay 28.
The beſt counſel he could give him was, to go to his parlia-
ment. Clarendon, b. viii.
2. Conſultation; interchange of opinions.
They that lay wait for my ſoul, take *# together.
'ſalm lxxi. Io.
I hold as little counſel with weak fear
As you, or any Scot that lives. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Deliberation; examination of conſequences.
They all confeſs therefore, in the working of that firſt
cauſe, that counſel is uſed, reaſon followed, and a way ob-
ſerved. Hocker, b. i. ſº. 2.
4. Prudence; art; machination.
O how comely is the wiſdom of old men, and underſtand-
ing and counſel to men of honour. Ecclus. xxv. 5.
There is no wiſdom, nor underſtanding, nor counſel againſt
the Lord. Prov. xxi. 30.
5. Secrecy; the ſecrets intruſted in conſulting.
The players cannot keep counſel; they'll tell all. Shakeſpeare:
6. Scheme ; purpoſe; deſign.
The cºunſel of the Lord ſtandeth for ever, the thoughts of
his heart to all generations. Pſal. xxxiii. 1 1.
The Lord will bring to light the hidden things of darkneſs,
and will make manifeſt the counſels of the heart. 1 Cor. iv. 5.
7. Thoſe that plead a cauſe; the counſellors. This ſeems only
an abbreviature uſual in converſation.
Your hand, a covenant; we will have theſe things ſet down
by lawful counſel. Shakespeare's Cymbeline.
For the advocates and counſel that plead, patience and gra-
vity of learning is an eſſential part of juſtice; and an over-
ſpeaking judge is no well tuned cymbal. Bacon, Eſſay 57.
What ſays my counſel learned in the law Pope.
To Co'UNSEL. v. a. [conſilior, Latin.]
1. To give advice or counſel to any perſon.
But ſay, Lucetta, now we are alone,
Would'ſt thou then counſel me to fall in love? Shakeſpeare.
- Truth ſhall nurſe her; -
Holy and heav'nly thoughts ſtill counſel her. Shakespeare Hen.VIII.
Ill fortune never cruſhed that man whom good fortune de-
ceived not; I therefore have counſelled my friends never to truſt
to her fairer ſide, though ſhe ſeemed to make peace with
them. Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
He ſupports my poverty with his wealth, and I counſel and
inſtruct him with my learning and experience. Taylor.
2. To adviſe any thing.
The leſs had been our ſhame, -
The leſs his cºunſell'd crime which brands the Grecian
Inanne. Dryden's Falles.
Co'Ussella BLF. adj. [from counſel J Willing to receive and
follow the advice or opinions of others.
Very few men of ſo great parts were more cºunſellalle than
he ; ſo that he would ſeldom be in danger of great errours: if
he would communicate his own thoughts to diſquiſition. Clar.
Co'UN SELLOR. m.ſ. [from counſel.]
1. One that gives advice. - --
His mother was his counſelor to do wickedly. 2 Chr. xxii. 3.
She would be a counſelºr of good tings, and a comfort in
caſes, Hºſa. viii. 9.
2. Death
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 146</div><p class="Text">C O U
Death of thy ſoul? Thoſe linen checks of thine -
Are counſellors to fear. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. Confidant; boſom friend.
In ſuch green palaces the firſt kings reign'd,
Slept in their ſhades, and angels j
With ſuch old counſellors they did adviſe,
And by frequenting ſacred groves grew wiſe. J/aller.
3. One whoſe province is to deliberate and adviſe upon publick
affairs.
s
You are a counſellor,
And by that virtue no man dare accuſe you. Shakespeare H.VIII,
Of counſellors there are two ſorts: the firſt, conſiliarii nati,
as I may term them; ſuch are the prince of Wales, and others
of the king's ſons: but the ordinary ſort of counſellors are ſuch
as the king, out of a due conſideration of their worth and
abilities, and, withal, of their fidelity to his perſon and to his
crown, calleth to be of council with him, in his ordinary
government. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
4. One that is conſulted in a caſe of law; a lawyer.
Co'UNsellorship. n.ſ.. [from counſellor.] The office or poſt
of a privy counſellor. -
Of the great offices and officers of the kingdom, the
moſt part are ſuch as cannot well be ſevered from the coun-
fellorſhip. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
To COUNT. v. a. [compter, Fr. computare, Latin.]
1. To number; to tell.
Here through this grate I can count every one,
And view the Frenchmen. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. i.
The vicious count their years; virtuous, their acts. johnſ.
For the preferments of the world, he that would reckon up
all the accidents that they depend upon, may as well under-
take to count the ſands, or to ſum up infinity. South's Sermons.
When men in fickneſs ling’ring lie,
They count the tedious hours by months and years. Dryden.
Argos now rejoice, for Thebes lies low;
Thy ſlaughter'd ſons now ſmile, and think they won,
When they can count more Theban ghoſts than theirs. Dryd.
2. To preſerve a reckoning. -
Some people in America counted their years by the coming
of certain birds amongſt them at their certain ſeaſons, and
leaving them at others. Locke.
3. To reckon; to place to an account.
He believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for
righteouſneſs. Gen. xv. 6.
Not barely the plowman's pains is to be counted into the
bread we eat; the labour of thoſe who broke the oxen, muſt
all be charged on the account of labour. Locke.
4. To eſteem; to account; to reckon; to conſider as having a
certain charaćter, whether good or evil.
When once it comprehendeth anything above this, as the
differences of time, affirmations, negations, and contradic-
tions in ſpeech, we then count it to have ſome uſe of natural
reaſon. Hooker, b. i. ſect. 6.
Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial. 1 Sam, i.
Nor ſhall I count it heinous to enjoy
The publick marks of honour and reward
Conferr'd upon me. Milton's Agoniſt. l. 991.
You would not wiſh to count this man a foe
In friendſhip, and in hatred, obſtinate. Philips's Briton.
5. To impute to ; to charge to.
All th’ impoſſibilities, which poets
Count to extravagance of looſe deſcription,
Shall ſooner be. Rowe's Ambitious Step-mother.
To Count. v. n. To found an account or ſcheme: with upon.
I think it a great errour to count upon the genius of a nation
as a ſtanding argument in all ages. Swift.
Count. n.ſ.. [compte, French; computus, Latin.]
1. Number.
That we up to your palaces may mount, -
Of bleſſed ſaints for to increaſe the count. Spenſer's Epithal.
By my count,
I was your mother much upon theſe years. Shakesp. Ro, and jul.
2. Reckoning.
Since I ſaw you laſt,
There is a change upon you.
Well, I know not
What counts hard fortune caſts upon my face. Shakeſpeare.
Count. n.ſ. [comte, Fr. comes, Latin.] "A title of foreign
nobility; an earl.
cºurt. adj. [from count.] That which may be num-
Cred.
The evils which you deſire to be recounted are very many,
and almoſt countable with thoſe which were hidden in the
baſket of Pandora. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
COUNTENANCE. n. f. [contenance, French.]
1. The form of the face ; the ſyſtem of the features.
So ſpake our fire, and by his count'nance ſeem'd
Entering on ſtudious thoughts abſtruſe. Milton's Parad, Loſt.
To whom, with count'nance calm, and ſoul ſedate,
Thus Turnus. Dryden's Aen.
2. Air; look.
Vol. I.
well, Suffolk, yet thou ſhalt hot ſee me buſh;
Nor change my contenance for this arreſt; . . . .
A heart unſpotted is not eaſily daunted. Shaft. Henry VI.
3. Calmneſs of look; compoſure of face.
She ſmil’d ſevere; nor with a troubled look;
Or trembling hand, the fun'ral preſent took;
Ev’n kept her count'nance, when the lid remov’d, - - - -
Diſclos'd the heart unfortunately lov’d. Dryden's Fable:
The two maxims of any great man at court are, always.”
keep his countenance, and never to keep his word. Swift.
4. Confidence of mien ; aſpect of aſſurance.
The night beginning to perſuade ſome retiring place, the
gentlewoman, even out of countenance before ſhe began her
ſpeech, invited me to lodge that night with her father. Sidney.
We will not make your cºuntenance to fall by the anſwer
ye ſhall receive. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Their beſt friends were out of countenance, becauſe they
found that the imputations, which their enemies had laid upon
them, were well grounded. Clarendon, b. viii.
Your examples will meet it at every turn, and put it out of
countenance in every place; even in private corners it will ſoon
loſe confidence. Sprat's Sermons.
If the outward profeſſion of religion and virtue were once
in practice and countenance at court, a good treatment of the
clergy would be the neceſſary conſequence. Swift.
If thoſe preachers would look about, they would find one
part of their congregation out of countenance, and the other
aſleep. Swift.
It is a kind of ill manners to offer obječtions to a fine wo-
man, and a man would be out of countenance that ſhould gain
the ſuperiority in ſuch a conteſt: a coquette logician may be
rallied, but not contradićted. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 32.
It puts the learned in countenance, and gives them a place
among the faſhionable part of mankind. Addiſon's Freeholder.
5. Affection or ill-will, as it appears upon the face.
Yet the ſtout fairy, mongſt the middeſt crowd,
Thought all their glory vain in knightly view,
And that great princeſs too, exceeding proud,
That to ſtrange knight no better countenance allow'd. Fa. Q.
The king hath on him ſuch a countenance,
As he had loſt ſome province, and a region
Lov’d, as he loves himſelf. Shakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale.
6. Patronage; appearance of favour; appearance on any ſide;
ſupport.
ºf: church of Chriſt, which held that profeſſion which had
not the publick allowance and countenance of authority, could
not ſo long uſe the exerciſe of Chriſtian religion but in pri-
Watc. Hooker, b. v. ſº. 1 1.
His majeſty maintained an army here, to give ſtrength and
countenance to the civil magiſtrate. Davies on Ireland.
Now then, we'll uſe
His countenance for the battle; which being done,
Let her who would be rid of him, deviſe -
His ſpeedy taking off. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
This is the magiſtrate's peculiar province, to give countenance
to piety and virtue, and to rebuke vice and profaneneſs. Atterb.
7, Superficial appearance; ſhow; reſemblance. -
The eleótion being done, he made countenance of great diſ-
content thereat. Aſham's Schoolmaſter.
Oh, you bleſſed miniſters above!
Keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time
Unfold the evil, which is here wrapt up
In countenance. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
Bianca's love
Made me exchange my ſtate with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town. Shakespeare.
To Co'UNTENANce. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſupport; to patroniſe; to vindicate.
Neither ſhalt thou countenance a poor man in his cauſe. Exod.
This conceit, though countenanced by learned men, is not
made out either by experience or reaſon, Brown'; Vulg, Err.
This national fault of being ſo very talkative, looks natural
and graceful in one that has grey hairs to countenance it. Adèſ.
2. To make a ſhew of
Each to theſe ladies love did countenance, -
Andrºmiſtreſ each himſelfärove to advance. Fai &amp;
3. To act ſuitably to anything; to keep up any appearanº”
Malcolm | *...* ſprights
As from your graves riſe up, and walk like ſprights.
To º horrour. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
4. To encourage; to appear in defence. - -
At the firſt deſcent on ſhore he was not immured with 2.
wooden veſſel, but he did countenance the landing in º, .
(otton.
cº ANceR. m. ſ. [from countenance.] One that coun-
tenances or ſupports another.
Co'UNTER. n.f. [from count.) -
1. A falſe piece of money uſed as a means of reckoning. .
Though theſe º i. to be º aS º: in
ret in trade they are no better than counters.
the Exchequer, y S . Conſiderations on Wood's Coin.
2, Money in º When
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 147</div><p class="Text">º C O U
C O U
When Marcus Brutus grows ſo covetous,
To lock ſuch raſcal counters from his friends,
Be ready, gods with all your thunder-bolts,
Daſh him to pieces. Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
3. The form on which goods are viewed and money told in a
fhop.
* fine gaudy minx, that robs our counters every night; and
then goes out, and ſpends it upon our cuckold-makers. Dryden.
In half-whipt muſlin, needles uſeleſs lie;
And ſhuttle-cocks a-croſs the counter fly:
Theſe ſports warm harmleſs. Gay's Trivia.
Sometimes you would ſee him behind his counter ſelling
broad-cloth, ſometimes meaſuring linen. Arbuth. Hiſt, off. B.
Whether thy counter ſhine with ſums untold,
And thy wide-graſping hand grows black with gold. Swift.
4. Count ER of a Horſe, is that part of a horſe's forehand that
lies between the ſhoulder and under the neck. Farrier's Diér.
Co'UNTER. adv. [contre, Fr. contra, Latin.]
1. Contrary to ; in oppoſition to.
Shall we erect two wills in Gods, and make the will of his
purpoſe and intention run counter to the will of his appro-
bation a South’s Sermons.
The profit of the merchant, and the gain of the kingdom,
are ſo far from being always parallels, that frequently they run
counter one to the other. Child's Diſcourſe on Trade.
He thinks it brave, at his firſt ſetting out, to ſignalize him-
ſelf in running counter to all the rules of virtue. Locke.
2. The wrong way. -
How chearfully on the falſe trail they cry,
Oh, this is counter, you falſe Daniſh dogs. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
3. Contrary ways.
A man whom I cannot deny, may oblige me to uſe perfua-
fions to another, which, at the ſame time I am ſpeaking, I
may wiſh may not prevail on him: in this caſe, it is plain, the
will and the defire run counter. Locke.
4. This word is often found in compoſition, and may be placed
before any word uſed in a ſenſe of oppoſition.
That deſign was no ſooner known, but others of an oppo-
ſite party were appointed to ſet a counter-petition on foot. Clar.
To Count ERA'cT. v. a. [counter and act.] To hinder any
thing from its effect by contrary agency.
In this caſe we can find no principle within him ſtrong
enough to counteraćf that principle, and to relieve him. South.
To Count ERBA'LANCE. v. a. [counter and balance.] To
weigh againſt; to act againſt with an oppoſite weight.
There was ſo much air drawn out of the veſſel, that the
remaining air was not able to counterbalance the mercurial
cylinder. Boyle.
Few of Adam's children are not born with ſome biaſs,
which it is the buſineſs of education either to take off, or
counterbalance. Locke.
Count ERBA'la Nce. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Oppoſite weight;
cquivalent power.
But peaceful kings, o'er martial people ſet,
Each others poize and counterbalance are. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
Money is the counterbalance to all other things purchaſeable
by it, and lying, as it were, in the oppoſite ſcale of com-
merce. - Locke.
To Count ERBU'FF. v. a. [from counter and buff..] To im-
pell in a direction oppoſite to the former impulſe; to ſtrike
back.
The giddy ſhip, betwixt the winds and tides,
Forc’d back and forwards, in a circle rides,
Stunn'd with the diff'rent blows; then ſhoots amain,
*Till counterbuff’d ſhe ſtops, and ſleeps again. Dryden.
Count ERBU'FF. m. ſ. ſcounter and buff..] A blow in a con-
trary direction; a ſtroke that produces a recoil.
He at the ſecond gave him ſuch a counterbuff, that, becauſe
Phalantus was not to be driven from the ſaddle, the ſaddle
with broken girths was driven from the horſe. Sidney.
Go, captain Stub, lead on, and ſhow
What houſe you come of, by the blow
You give fir Quintin, and the cuff
You 'ſcape o' th' ſandbags countarbuff. Ben. Johnſon.
Co'UNTER cast ER. m. ſ. [from counter, for a falſe piece of mo-
ney, and caſter.] A word of contempt for an arithmetician;
a book-keeper; a caſter of accounts; a reckoner.
I, of whom his eyes had ſeen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, muſt be let and calm'd
By debtor and creditor, this counterco/ter. Shakeſp. Othello.
Co'UNTERCHANGE. m. ſ. [counter and change.] Exchange;
reciprocation.
She, like harmleſs lightning, throws her eye
On him, her brothers, me, her maſter, hitting
Each object with a joy. The cºunterchange
Is ev'rally in all. - Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
To Count Ef cHANGE. v. a. To give and receive.
Count ERCHA'R.M. n.f. [counter and charm.] That by which
a charm is diſſolved; that which has the power of deſtroying
the cffects of a charm. -
Now touch'd by countercharms they change again,
And ſtand majeſtick, and recall'd to men. Pope's Odyſſey.
To Count Erch A'R.M. v. a. [from counter and charm.] To
deſtroy the effect of an enchantment.
Like a ſpell it was to keep us invulnerable, and ſo counter-
charm all our crimes, that they ſhould only be active to pleaſe,
not hurt us. Decay ºf Piety.
To CounterchE'ck... v. a. ſcounter and check.] To op-
poſe; to ſtop with ſudden oppoſition.
Count ERCHE'ck. n.ſ.. [from the verb.J Stop; rebuke.
If again I ſaid his beard was not well cut, he would ſay I
lye: this is called the countercheck quarrelſome. Shakeſpeare.
To Count ERDRA'w. v. a. [from cºunt, r and draw. J . With
painters, to copy a deſign or painting by means of a fine linen
cloth, an oiled paper, or other tranſparent matter, whereon
the ſtrokes appearing through are traced with a pencil. Chamb.
Countere'v1DENCE. m. ſ. [counter and evidence.J. Teſtimony
by which the depoſition of ſome former witneſs is oppoſed.
Senſe itſelf detects its more palpable deceits by a counter-
evidence, and the more ordinary impoſtures ſeldom outlive the
firſt experiments. Glanville's Scºpſ, c. 10.
We have little reaſon to queſtion his teſtimony in this
point, ſeeing it is backed by others of good credit, and all
becauſe there is no counterevidence, nor any witneſs that appears
againſt it. Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
To COUNTERFEIT. v. a. ſcontrºſaire, French.J
1. To copy with an intent to paſs the copy for an original; to
forge.
- What art thou,
That counterfeits the perſon of a king Shakeſp. Henry IV.
It came into this prieſt's fancy to cauſe this lad to counter-
feit and perſonate the ſecond ſon of Edward IV. ſuppoſed to
be murdered. Bacon's Henry VII.
There have been ſome that could counterfeit the diſtance of
voices, which is a ſecondary obječt of hearing, in ſuch ſort,
as when they ſtand faſt by you, you would think the ſpeech
came from afar off in a fearful manner. Bacon's Nat. Hiſlory.
Say, lovely dream, where could'ſt thou find
Shadows to counterfeit that face J/aller.
It happens, that not one ſingle line or thought is contained
in this impoſture, although it appears that they who counter-
feited me had heard of the true one. Swift.
2. To imitate; to copy; to reſemble.
. And, Oh, you mortal engines, whoſe rude throats
Th’ immortal Jove's dread clamours counterfeit,
Farewel ! Shakeſpeare's Othello.
O Eve 1 in evil hour thou did'ſt give ear
To that falſe worm, of whomſoever taught
To counterfeit man's voice. Milton’s Paradiſe Loſº, b. ix.
To counterfeit, is to put on the likeneſs and appearance of
ſome real excellency: Briſtol-ſtones would not pretend to be
diamonds, if there never had been diamonds. Tillotſon's Serm.
Co'UNTERFE it. adj. [from the verb.]
1. That which is made in imitation of another, with intent to
paſs for the original; forged; fićtitious.
I learn
Now of my own experience, not by talk,
How counterfeit a coin they are, who friends
Bear in their ſuperſcription; in proſperous days
They ſwarm, but in adverſe withdraw their head. Milton.
* General obſervations drawn from particulars, are the jewels
of knowledge, comprehending great ſtore in a little room;
but they are therefore to be made with the greater care and
caution, left, if we take cºunterfeit for true, our ſhame be the
greater, when our ſtock comes to a ſevere ſcrutiny. Locke.
2. Deceitful; hypocritical.
True friends appear leſs mov'd than cºunterfeit. Roſcomm.
Co'UNTERFEIT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
I. One who perſonates another; an impoſtor.
I am no cºunterfeit ; to die is to be a counterfeit; for he is
but the counterfeit of a man, who hath not the life of a man.
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
This prieſt, being utterly unacquainted with the true perſon,
according to whoſe pattern he ſhould ſhape his counterfeit,
yet could think it poſſible for him to inſtruct his player, either
in geſture or faſhions, or in recounting paſt matters of his life
and education, or in fit anſwers to queſtions, any ways to come
near the reſemblance of him whom he was to repreſent. Bacon.
But truſt me, child, I’m much inclin'd to fear
Some counterfeit in this your Jupiter. Addison's Ovid Metam.
2. Something made in imitation of another, intended to paſs for
that which it reſembles; a forgery. -
My father was I know not where,
When I was ſtampt. Some coiner, with his tools,
Made me a counterfeit ; yet my mother ſeem'd
The Dian of that time. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
There would be no counterfeits but for the ſake of ſomething
that is real; for though all pretenders ſeem to be what they
really are not, yet they pretend to be ſomething that really is.
Tillotſºn's Sermons.
Co'UNTERFFITER. n.ſ.. [from counterfeit.] A forger; one who
contrives copies to paſs for originals.
Henry the ſecond altered the coin, which was corrupted by
counterfeiters, to the great good of the commonwealth. Camden.
I Co'UNTERFEITLY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 148</div><p class="Text">C O Ú
Co'UNTERFEITLY. adv. [from counterfeit.] Falſely; fiółiti-
ouſly; with forgery. -
Since the wiſdom of their choice is rather to have my cap
than my heart, I will pračtiſe the inſinuating nod, and be off
to them moſt counterfeity. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Count ERFE'RMENT. n.ſ. [counter and ferment.] Ferment
oppoſed to ferment. -
What unnatural motions and counterferments muſt a medly
of intemperance produce in the body When I behold a
faſhionable table, Í ſancy I ſee innumerable diſtempers lurking
in ambuſcade among the diſhes. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 195.
Counterfe's ANce. n.ſ.. [contrefaiſance, French..] The aët
of counterfeiting; forgery. º
And his man Reynold, with fine counterfiſance, -
Supports his credit and his countenance. Hubberd's Tale.
Such is the face of falſhood, ſuch the ſight
... Of foul Dueſſa, when her borrow'd light
Is laid away, and counterfſance known. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Co'UNterFort. n.ſ.. [from counter and fort.] -
• Counterforts, buttreſſes or ſpurs, are pillars ſerving to ſup-
port walls or terraſſes, ſubjećt to bulge, or be thrown down.
Chambers.
Counterga'oe. m. ſ. [from counter and gage.] In carpentry,
a method uſed to meaſure the joints by transferring the breadth
of a mortiſe to the place where the tenon is to be, in order to
make them fit each other. Chambers.
Count ERGUA'RD. n.ſ.. [from counter and guard.] A ſmall
rampart with parapet and ditch, to cover ſome part of the
body of the place. Military Dić.
Count ERLI'GHT. n.ſ.. [from counter and light.] A window or
light oppoſite to any thing, which makes it appear to a diſad-
vantage. - Chambers.
To Count ERMAND. v. a. [contremander, French.]
1. To order the contrary to what was ordered before; to con-
tradićt, annul, or repeal a command.
In ſtates notoriouſly irreligious, a ſecret and irreſiſtible
power countermands their deepeſt proječts, and ſmites their
policies with fruſtration and a curſe. South's Sermons.
Avicen countermands letting blood in cholerick bodies, be-
cauſe he eſteems the blood a bridle of the gall. Harvey.
2. To oppoſe; to contradićt the orders of another. -
For us to alter anything, is to lift up ourſelves againſt God,
and, as it were, to countermand him. Płooker.
CountERMA'ND. n.ſ.. [contrmand, Fr.] Repeal of a former order.
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
But he muſt die to-morrow Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
To Count ERMA'RCH. v. n. [ counter and march. J . To
march backward; to march in indire&amp;t ways.
Count ERMA'RCH. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Retroceſſion; march backward; march in a different direc-
tion from the former.
How are ſuch an infinite number of things placed with ſuch
order in the memory, notwithſtanding the tumults, marches,
and countermarches of the animal ſpirits? Collier on Thought.
2. Change of meaſures; alteration of condućt. -
They make him do and undo, go forward and backwards
by ſuch countermarches and retraćtions, as we do not willingly
impute to wiſdom. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Counter MA'RK. m. ſ. [from counter and mark.j
1. A ſecond or third mark put on a bale of goods belonging to
ſeveral merchants, that it may not be opened but in the pre-
fence of them all.
2. The mark of the goldſmiths company, to ſhew the metal is
ſtandard, added to that of the artificer.
3. An artificial cavity made in the teeth of horſes, that have out-
grown their natural mark, to diſguiſe their age.
4. A mark added to a medal a long time after it is ſtruck, by
which the curious know the ſeveral changes in value which
they have undergone.
To Count ERMA'RK. v. a. [counter and mark.]
A horſe is ſaid to be countermarked when his corner-teeth
are artificially made hollow, a falſe mark being made in the
hollow place, in imitation of the eye of a bean, to conceal the
horſe's age. Farrier’s Diff.
Count ERMI'NE. m. ſ. [counter and mine.]
1. A well or hole ſunk into the ground, from which a gallery or
branch runs out underground, to ſeek out the enemy's mine,
and diſappoint it. Military Dić.
After this they mined the walls, laid the powder, and
rammed the mouths; but the citizens made a countermine, and
thereinto they poured ſuch a plenty of water, that the wet
powder could not be fired. Hayward.
2. Means of oppoſition; means of counteraćtion.
He thinking himſelf contemned, knowing no countermine
againſt contempt but terror, began to let nothing paſs, which
might bear the colour of a fault, without ſharp puniſhment.
Sidney, b. ii.
3. A ſtratagem by which any contrivance is defeated.
The matter being brought to a trial of ſkill, the countermine
was only an 'aét of ſelf-preſervation. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 37.
To Counter M1'NE. v. a. [from the noun ,
-
Chambers. -
1. To delve a paſſage into an enemy's mine, by which the pow-
der may evaporate without miſchief. -
2. To counterwork; to defeat by ſecret meaſures.
Thus infallibly it muſt be, if God do not miraculouſly coun-
termine us, and do more for us than we can do againſt our-
ſelves. Decay of Piety.
CountERMo'tion. n.ſ.. [counter and motion.] Contrary mo-
tion; oppoſition of motion. -
That reſiſtance is a countermotion, or equivalent to one, is
plain by this, that any body which is preſſed, muſt needs
preſs again on the body that preſſes it. Digby on the Soºl.
If any of the returning ſpirits ſhould happen to fall foul
upon others which are outward bound, theſe cºuntermotions
would overſet them, or occaſion a later arrival. Collier.
Count ERMU'RE. m. ſ. [contremur, French..] A wall built up
behind another wall, to ſupply its place. - -
The great ſhot flying continually through the breach, did
beat down houſes; but the countermure, new built againſt the
breach, ſtanding upon a lower ground, it ſeldom touched. .
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
CounterNA't URAL. adj. [counter and natural.J. Contrary to
Inature. , -
A conſumption is a counternatural he&amp;tick extenuation of the
body. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Counter No'Ise. m. ſ. ſcounter and nºiſe.] A found by which
any other noiſe is overpowered.
They endeavoured, either by a conſtant ſucceſſion of ſen-
ſual delights, to charm and lull aſleep, or elſe, by a counternoiſe
of revellings and riotous exceſſes, to drown the ſofter whiſpers
of their conſcience. Calamy's Sermons.
Count ERo'PENING. m. ſ. [counter and opening.] An aperture
or vent on the contrary ſide.
A tent, plugging up the orifice, would make the matter re-
cur to the part diſpoſed to receive it, and mark the place for a
counteropening. Sharp's Surgery.
Count ERPA'ce. n.ſ.. [counter and face..] Contrary meaſure;
attempts in oppoſition to any ſcheme.
When the leaſt counterpaces are made to theſe reſolutions, it
will then be time enough for our malecontents. Swift.
Co'UNTERPANE. m. ſ. [contrepoint, French..] A coverlet for
a bed, or anything elſe woven in ſquares. It is ſometimes
written, according to etymology, counterpoint.
In ivory coffers I have ſtufft my crowns; -
In cypreſs cheſts my arras counterpanes. Shakespeare.
Count ERPA'RT. n.ſ.. [counter and part.] The correſpondent
part; the part which anſwers to another, as the two papers
of a contraćt; the part which fits another, as the key of a
cipher. -
In ſome things the laws of Normandy agreed with the
laws of England; ſo that they ſeem to be, as it were, copies
or counterparts one of another. Hale's Common Law of England.
An old fellow with a young wench, may paſs for a counter-
part of this fable. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 82.
Oh counterpart -
Of our ſoft ſex; well are you made our lords:
So bold, ſo great, ſo god-like are you form’d,
How can you love ſo ſilly things as women? Dryd. K. A th:
He is to conſider the thought of his author, and his words,
and to find out the counterpart to each in another language.
Dryden.
In the diſcovery the two different plots look like counter-
parts and copies of one another. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 267.
Count ERPLE'A. m. ſ. [from counter and plea.] In law, a repli-
cation: as if a ſtränger to the aëtion begun, deſire to be ad-
mitted to ſay what he can for the ſafeguard of his eſtate; that
which the demandant allegeth againſt this requeſt is called a
counterplea. - Cºwel.
To Count ERPLo'T. v. a. [ counter and plot. J . To oppoſe
one machination by another; to obviate art by art.
Count ERPLo'T. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] An artifice oppoſed
to an artifice. .
The wolf here, that had a plot upon the kid, was con-
founded by a counterplot of the kid's upon the wolf; and ſuch
a counterplot it was too, as the wolf, with all his ſagacity, was
not able to ſmell out. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 174.
Co'UNTERPoint. n.ſ. A coverlet woven in ſquares, com-
monly ſpoken counterpain. See Count ERPANE.
To Count ERPo'Is E. v. a. [counter and poiſe.] -
1. To counterbalance; to be equi-ponderant to 3 to at againſt
with equal weight.
Our ſpoil we have brought home,
Do more than counterpoiſe a full third part
The charges of the aëtion. Shakeſpeare's Cºriolanus.
The force and the diſtance of weights, counts; ºiſing one
another, ought to be reciprocal. Digby on the Soul.
2. To produce a contrary action by an equal weight.
The heavineſs of theſe bodies muſt be counterpriſed by a
plummet, that may be faſtened about the pulley to the axis.
- - h’ilkins's Math. Magic.
3. To act with equal power againſt any perſon or cauſe.
So many freeholders of Engliſh will be able to beard and to
counterpriſe the reſt. Spenser on Ireland.
Cous T &amp; RPo'Is E.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 149</div><p class="Text">C O Ú
C O U
Count ERPoise. n.ſ.. [from counter and pºiſe.]
1. Equiponderance; equivalence of weight; equal force in the
oppoſite ſcale of the balance.
Take her by the hand,
And tell her ſhe is thine; to whom I promiſe
A counterpoiſe, if not in thy eſtate,
A balance more replete. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
Faſtening that to our exact balance, we put a metalline coun-
terpoiſe into the oppoſite ſcale. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
2. The ſtate of being placed in the oppoſite ſcale of the
balance.
Th’Eternal hung forth his golden ſcales,
Wherein all things created firſt he weigh'd,
The pendulous round earth, with balanc'd air
In counterpoiſe. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. iv. l. 999.
3. Equipollence; equivalence of power.
The ſecond nobles are a counterpoiſe to the higher nobility,
that they grow not too potent. Bacon, Eſſay 20.
Their generals, by their credit in the army, were, with the
magiſtrates and other civil officers, a ſort of counterpoiſe to the
power of the people. Swift on the Diſſent, in Athens and Rome.
Count ERPo'Ison. m. ſ. [counter and poiſon.] Antidote ; medi-
cine by which the effects of poiſon are obviated.
Counterpoiſons muſt be adapted to the cauſe ; for example, in
poiſon from ſublimate corroſive, and arſenick. Arbuthnot.
Counterpre'ssure. n.ſ.. [counter and preſſure.] Oppoſite
force; power acting in contrary directions.
Does it not all mechanick heads confound,
That troops of atoms from all parts around,
Of equal number, and of equal force, w
Should to this ſingle point direét their courſe;
That ſo the counterpreſſure ev'ry way,
Of equal vigour, might their motions ſtay, }
And, by a ſteady poiſe, the whole in quiet lay ? Blackm,
Count ER project. m. ſ. [cºunter and project.] Correſpondent
part of a ſcheme.
A clear reaſon why they never ſent any forces to Spain, and
why the obligation not to enter into a treaty of peace with
France, until that entire monarchy was yielded as a prelimi-
nary, was ſtruck out of the coxnterproject by the Dutch. Swift.
To Count ER PRo've. v. a. [from counter and prove.] To take
off a deſign in black lead, or red chalk, by paſſing it through
the rolling-preſs with another piece of paper, both being
moiſtened with a ſponge. Chambers.
To COUNTERROL. v. a. [counter and roll. This is now
generally written as it is ſpoken, control.] To preſerve the
power of detecting frauds by a counter account.
Count ERRo'LMENT. n.ſ.. [from counterral.] A counter ac-
count; controlment.
This preſent manner of exerciſing of this office, hath ſo
many teſtimonies, interchangeable warrants, and counter-
rolments, whereof each, running through the hands, and reſt-
ing in the power of ſo many ſeveral perſons, is ſufficient to
argue and convince all manner of falſhood. Bacon.
Co'UNTERscARP. m.ſ.. [from counter and ſcarp.] In fortifica-
tion, is that ſide of the ditch which is next the camp, or pro-
perly the talus that ſupports the earth of the covert-way ; al-
though by this term is often underſtood the whole covert-way,
with its parapet and glacis; and ſo it is to be underſtood when
it is ſaid the enemy lodged themſelves on the counterſcarp.
Harris.
To Count ERs1'GN. v. a. [from counter and ſign.] To ſign an
order or patent of a ſuperiour, in quality of ſecretary, to ren-
der the thing more authentick. Thus charters are ſigned by
the king, and counter/gned by a ſecretary of ſtate, or lord
chancellor. Chambers.
Count ERTE'Nor. n.ſ.. [from counter and tenor.] One of the
mean or middle parts of muſick; ſo called, as it were, oppo-
fite to the tenor. Harris.
I am deaf for two months together: this deafneſs unquali-
fies me for all company, except a few friends with countertenor
voices. Swift.
• Counterti'pe. n.ſ.. [counter and tide.] Contrary tide; fluc-
tuations of the water.
Such were our countertides at land, and ſo
Preſaging of the fatal blow,
In your prodigious ebb and flow. Dryden.
Count ERTI'ME. n.ſ. ſcounter and time, contretemps, French.]
1. The defence or reſiſtance of a horſe, that intercepts his ca-
dence, and the meaſure of his manage. Farrier's Dić7.
2. Defence; oppoſition.
Let cheerfulneſs on happy fortune wait,
And give not thus the countertime to fate. Dryd, Aurengz.
Count ERTU'RN. m. ſ. [counter and turn.]
The cataſtaſis, called by the Romans ſtatus, the height and
full growth of the play, we may call properly the counter-
turn, which deſtroys that expectation, embroils the action in
new difficulties, and leaves you far diſtant from that hope in
which it found you. Dryden on Dramatick Poeſy.
To COUNTERVA/IL. v. a. [contra and valeo, Latin.] To be
equivalent to ; to have equal force or value; to act againſt
with cqual power.
In ſome men there may be found ſuch qualities as are able
to countervaiſ thoſe exceptions which might be taken againſt
them, and ſuch men's authority is not ſightly to be ſhaken
off. f{ooker, b. ii. ſee?, 7.
And therewithal he fiercely at him flew,
And with important outrage him affail'd;
Who, ſoon prepar'd to field, his ſword forth drew,
And him with equal valour countervaiſ'd. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
The outward ſtreams, which deſcend, muſt be of ſo much
ſorce as to countervail all that weight, whereby the aſcending
ſide, in every one of theſe revolutions, does exceed the other;
and though this may be effected by making the water-wheels
larger, yet then the motion will be ſo ſlow, that the ſcrew will
not be able to ſupply the outward ſtreams. Wilkins's Dedalus.
We are to compute, that, upon balancing the account, the
profit at laſt will hardly countervail the inconveniencies that go
along with it. L'E/ºrange, Fable 112.
Count ERva'il. n. / [from the verb.]
1. Equal weight; power or value ſufficient to obviate any effect
or objećtion.
2. That which has equal weight or value with ſomething eſſe.
Surely, the preſent pleaſure of a finful act is a poor cºunter-
vail for the bitterneſs of the review, which begins where the
aćtion ends, and laſts for ever. South's Sermons.
Count ER v IE'w. n.f. [counter and view.]
1. Oppoſition; a poſture in which two perſons front each other.
Mean while, ere thus was fin’d and judg’d on earth,
Within the gates of hell ſat fin and death,
In counterview. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. x. 1. 231.
2. Contraſt; a poſition in which two diſfimilar things illuſtrate
each other.
I have drawn ſome lines of Linger's charaćter, on purpoſe
to place it in counterview or contraſt with that of the other
company. Swift's Introduction to Genteel Converſation.
To CountER wo'RK. v.a. [counter and work.] To counter-
aćt; to hinder any effect by contrary operations.
But heav'n's great view is one, and that the whole:
That counterworks each folly and caprice;
That diſappoints th’ effect of ev'ry vice. Pope's Eſſon Man.
Countess; n.f. [comitiſa, Lat. comicſ, French.] "The lady
of an earl or count. -
I take it, ſhe that carries up the train,
Is that old noble lady, the dutcheſs of Norſplk.
—It is, and all the reſt are counteſts. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
It is the peculiar happineſs of the countſ of Abingdon to
have been ſo truly loved by you, while ſhe was living; and ſo
gratefully honoured after ſhe was dead. Dryden.
Counting-house. n.ſ. ſcºunt and houſe.] The room appro-
priated by traders to their books and accounts.
Men in trade ſeldom think of laying out money upon land,
'till their profit has brought them in more than their trade can
well employ; and their idle bags, cumbering their counting-
houſes, put them upon emptying them. Locke.
Countless. adj. [from count.] Innumerable; without num-
ber; not to be reckoned.
Ay, tear for tear, and loving kiſs for kiſs,
Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips:
O, were the ſum of theſe that I ſhould pay
Coºtlºſ, and infinite, yet would I pay them. Shakeſpeare.
But oh, her mind, that orcus which includes
Legions of miſchief, countleſ; multitudes
Of former curſes. Donne.
By one countleſ, ſum of woes oppreſt,
Hoary with cares, and ignorant of reſt,
We find the vital ſprings relax'd and worn;
Thus, thro' the round of age, to childhood we return, Prior.
I ſee, I cry’d, his woes, a countleſs train;
I ſee his friends o'erwhelm'd beneath the main. Pºpe's Odyſ.
The ſeats which, ſhining through the chearful land,
In countleſs numbers, bleſt Britannia ſees. Thomſ. Autumn.
COUNTRY. n.ſ.. [contrée, Fr. contrata, low Latin; ſuppoſed
to be contraćted from conterrata.]
I. A tract of land; a region.
Send out more horſes, ſkirre the cºuntry round,
Hang thoſe that talk of fear. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
They require to be examined concerning the deſcriptions of
thoſe countries of which they would be informed. Sprat.
2. The parts of a region diſtant from cities or courts; rural
parts. -
I ſee them hurry from country to town, and then from the
town back again into the country. Speciator, Nº. 626.
3. The place which any man inhabits.
4. The place of one's birth; the native ſoil.
The king ſet on foot a reformation in the ornaments and
advantages of our country. Sprat.
O, ſave my country, heav'n, ſhall be your laſt. Pope.
5. The inhabitants of any region.
All the country, in a general voice,
Cry’d hate upon him; all their prayers and love
Were ſet on Hereford. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Co'UNTRY. adj. [This word is ſcarcely uſed but in com-
poſition.]
1. Ruſtick;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 150</div><p class="Text">N
C O U
C O U
Y. Ruſtick; rural; villatick. - -
Cannot a country wench know, that having received a ſhil-
ling from one that owes her three, and a ſhilling alſo from
another that owes her three, that the remaining debts in each
of their hands are equal : Locke.
I never meant any other, than that Mr. Trot ſhould con-
fine himſelf to country dances. Speciator, Nº. 308.
He comes no nearer to a poſitive, clear idea of a poſitive in-
finite, than the country fellow had of the water which was yet
to paſs the channel of the river where he ſtood. Locke.
Talk but with cºuntry people, or young people, and you
ſhall find that the notions they apply this name to, are ſo odd
that nobody can imagine they were taught by a rational
man. Locke.
The low mechanicks of a country town do ſomewhat outdo
him. Locke.
Come, we'll e'en to our cºuntry ſeat repair,
The native home of innocence and love. Norris.
2. Remote from cities or courts, and of an intereſt oppoſite to
that of courts.
A country gentleman, learning Latin in the univerſity, re-
moves thence to his manſion-houſe. Locke.
3. Peculiar to a region or people.
She laughing the cruel tyrant to ſcorn, ſpake in her country
lasguage. 2 Macabees, vii. 27.
4. Rude ; ignorant; untaught.
We make a cºuntry man dumb, whom we will not allow to
ſpeak but by the rules of grammar. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Count R Y MAN. n.ſ. [from country and man J
1. One born in the ſame country, or tract of ground. Locke.
See, who comes here 2
My countryman; but yet I know him not. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Horace, great bard, ſo fate ordain'd, aroſe ;
And bold as were his cºuntrymen in fight,
Snatch'd their fair actions from degrading proſe,
And ſet their battles in eternal light. Prior.
The Britiſh ſoldiers ačt with greater vigour under the con-
dućt of one whom they do not conſider only as their leader,
but as their countryman. Addiſon on the State of the J/ar.
2. A ruſtick; one that inhabits the rural parts. -
All that have buſineſs to the court, and all countrymen
coming up to the city, leave their wives in the country. Graunt.
3. A farmer; a huſbandman. -
A countryman took a boar in his corn. L’Eſtrange.
Co'UNTY. m. ſ. [comté, Fr. comitatus, Latin.]
1. A ſhire; that is, a circuit or portion of the realm, into
which the whole land is divided, for the better government
thereof, and the more eaſy adminiſtration of juſtice; ſo that
there is no part of the kingdom, but what lieth within ſome
county. Every county is governed by a yearly officer, called a
fheriff, who, among other duties belonging to his office, puts
in execution all the commands and judgments of the king's
courts. Of theſe counties four are termed county-palatines,
as that of Lancaſter, Cheſter, Durham, and Ely. A county-
palatine is a juriſdiction of ſo high a nature, that whereas all
pleas, touching the life and the maiming of a man, called
pleas of the crown, and ordinarily held in the king's name,
and which cannot paſs in the name of any other; the chief
governors of theſe, by ſpecial charter from the king, ſemt
out all writs in their own name, and did all things touching
juſtice as abſolutely as the prince himſelf in other counties,
only acknowledging him their ſuperior and ſovereign. But
this power has, by a ſtatute in Henry VIII. his time, been
much abridged. Beſides the above counties of both ſorts,
there are likewiſe counties corporate, which are certain cities
or ancient boroughs upon which our princes have thought
good to beſtow extraordinary liberties. Of theſe London is
one, York another, the city of Cheſter a third, and Canter-
bury a fourth. And to theſe may be added many more; as
the county of the town of Kingſton upon Hull, the county
of the town of Haverfordweſt, and the county of Litchfield.
County is, in another ſignification, uſed for the county-court
which the ſheriff keeps every month within his charge, either
by himſelf or his deputy. Of theſe counties, one with an-
other, there are reckoned thirty-ſeven in England, beſides
twelve in Wales. Cowel.
Diſcharge your powers unto their ſeveral counties,
As we will ours. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
He caught his death the laſt county ſeſſions, where he would
go to ſee juſtice done to a poor widow-woman and her father-
Jeſs children. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 517.
2. An earldom.
2 - A count ; a lord: now wholly obſolete.
- The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The county Paris. Shakeſpeare's Rome, and juliet.
He made Hugh Lupus county palatine of Cheſter, and gave
that earldom to him and his heirs, to hold the ſame ita liber;
ad gladium ſicut rex tenºbat Angliam ad coronam. Davies.
COUPE'E. n. ſ. [French..] A motion in dancing, when one
Ieg is a little bent and ſuſpended from the ground, and with
the other a motion is made forwards. Chambers.
COUPLE. m. ſ. ſcouple, Fr. copula, Latin.]
Vol. I.
1. A chain or tye that holds dogs together.
I'll keep my ſtable-ſtand where
I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her,
Than when I feel and ſee no further truſt her. Shakespeare.
... It is in ſome ſort with friends as it is with dogs in couples;
they ſhould be of the ſame ſize and humour. L'Ejirange's Fab.
2. Two ; a brace.
He was taken up by a couple of ſhepherds, and by them
brought to life again. Sidney.
A ſchoolmaſter, who ſhall teach my ſon and your's, I will
provide; yea, though the three do coſt me a couple of hundred
pounds. Aſcham.
A piece of chryſtal incloſed a cºuple of drops, which looked
like water when they were ſhaken, though perhaps they are
nothing but bubbles of air. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
By adding one to one, we have the complex idea of a
couple. Locke.
3. A male and his female.
So ſhall all the couples three,
Ever true in loving be. Shakeſpeare's Midſum, Night's Dream.
Oh! alas!
I loſt a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth
Might thus have ſtood, begetting wonder, as
You gracious couple do. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
I have read of a feigned commonwealth, where the mar-
ried couple are permitted, before they contračt, to ſee one
andther naked. Bacon's New Atlantis.
He ſaid: the careful couple join their tears,
And then invoke the gods with pious prayers. Dryden.
All ſucceeding generations of men are the progeny of one
primitive couple. Bentley's Sermons.
To Couple. v. a. [copulo, Latin.]
1. To chain together.
Huntſman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds;
Leech Merriman, the poor cur is imboſt;
And couple Clowder with the deep-mouth'd Brach. Shakeſp.
2. To join one to another.
What greater ills have the heaven's in ſtore,
To couple coming harms with ſorrow paſt. Sidney, b. ii.
And wherefoe'er we went, like Juno's ſwans,
Still we went coupled and inſeparable. Shakespeare As you like it.
Put the taches into the loops, and couple the tent together,
that it may be one. Exod. xxvi. 1 1.
They behold your chaſte converſation coupled with fear.
* * 1 Pet. iii. 2.
Their concernments were ſo cºupled, that if nature had not,
yet their religions would have made them brothers. South.
That man makes a mean figure in the eyes of reaſon, who
is meaſuring ſyllables and coupling rhimes, when he ſhould be
mending his own ſoul, and ſecuring his own immortality. Pope.
3. To marry; to wed; to join in wedlock.
I ſhall rejoice to ſee you ſo coupled, as may be fit both for
your honour and your ſatisfaction. Sidney.
I am juſt going to aſſiſt with the archbiſhop, in degrading a
parſon who couples all our beggars, by which I ſhall make one
happy man. Swift.
To Co'UPL E. v. n. To join in embraces.
The fountains of waters there being rare, divers ſorts of
beaſts come from ſeveral parts to drink; and ſo being re-
freſhed, fall to couple, and many times with ſeveral kinds.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 77.
Thou with thy luſty crew,
Caſt wanton eyes on the daughters of men,
And coupled with them, and begot a race. Milt. Parad. Reg.
That great variety of brutes in Africa, is by reaſon of the
meeting together of brutes of ſeveral ſpecies, and waters, and
the promiſcuous couplings of males and females of ſeveral
ſpecies. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
After this alliance,
Let tigers match with hinds, and wolves with ſheep,
And every creature couple with his foe. Dryd. Span. Fryer.
Couple-BEGGAR. m. ſ. [couple and beggar..] One that makes
it his buſineſs to marry beggars to each other.
No couple-beggar in the land,
E'er join'd ſuch numbers hand in hand. Swift.
Co'UPLET. n.ſ. [French.]
1. Two verſes; a pair of rhimes.
Then would they caſt away their pipes, and, holding hand
in hand, dance by the only cadence of their voices, which
they would uſe in ſinging ſome ſhort couplets, whereto the one
half beginning, the other half ſhould anſwer. Sidney, b. i.
Then at the laſt, an only couplet fraught -
With ſome unmeaning thing they call a thought ;
A needleſs Alexandrine ends the ſong,
That, like a wounded ſnake, drags it flow length along.
Pºpe's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
In Pope I cannot read a line, -
But with a ſigh I wiſh it nine;
When he can in one couplet fix
More ſenſe than I can do in ſix,
It gives me ſuch a jealous fit,
I cry, pox take him and his wit. Swift.
5 U 2. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 151</div><p class="Text">C O U
C O U r
2. A pair; as of doves.
Anon, as patient as the female dove,
E’re that her golden couplets are diſclos'd,
His ſilence will ſit drooping. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
COURAGE. m. ſ. [courage, Fr. from car, Latin.] Bravery;
active fortitude; ſpirit of enterpriſe.
- The king becoming graces,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude ;
I have no reliſh of them. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Their diſcipline -
Now mingled with their courage. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Hope aims their courage : from their tow’rs they throw
Their darts with double force, and drive the foe. Dryden.
Courage, that grows from conſtitution, very often forſakes
a man when he has occaſion for it; and when it is only a kind
of inſtinét in the ſoul, it breaks out on all occaſions, without
judgment or diſcretion. That courage which ariſes from the ſenſe
of our duty, and from the fear of offending Him that made
us, acts always in an uniform manner, and according to the
dićtates of right reaſon. Addison's Guardian.
Nothing but the want of common courage was the cauſe of
their misfortunes. Swift.
Cour A'G Eous. adj. [from courage.] Brave; daring; bold;
enterpriſing; adventurous; hardy; ſtout.
His is very courageºus mad, about his throwing into the
Water. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of I/indſor.
And he that is courageous among the mighty, ſhall flee away
naked in that day. Amos, ii. 16.
Let us imitate the courageous example of St. Paul, who
choſe then to magnify his office when ill men conſpired to
leſſen it. Atten bury's Sermons.
Cour A'GEously. adv. [from courageous.] Bravely; ſtoutly;
boldly.
†. king the next day preſented him battle upon the plain,
the fields there being open and champaign: the earl courage-
ouſly came down, and joined battle with him. Bacon’s H. VII.
Cour A'GEous N Ess. m. ſ. [from courageous...] Bravery ; bold-
neſs; ſpirit; courage.
Nicanor hearing of the manlineſs and the courageouſneſs
that they had to fight for their country, durſt not try the
matter by the ſword. 2 Mac. xiv. 18.
tºº. {nſ. [courante, French..] See CoR ANT.
1. A nimble dance.
I'll like a maid the better, while I have a tooth in my
head: why, he is able to lead her a cºuranto. Shakeſpeare.
2. Anything that ſpreads quick, as a paper of news.
To Cour B. v. n. [courber, French.] To bend; to bow; to
ſtoop in ſupplication.
In the fatneſs of theſe purſy times,
Virtue itſelf of vice muſt pardon beg,
Yea, courb and woo, for leave to do it good. Shakespeare Hamlet.
Co'URIER. m.ſ.. [courier, French..] A meſſenger ſent in haſte;
an expreſs; a runner.
I met a courier, one mine ancient friend. Shakeſp. Timon.
This thing the wary baſſa well perceiving, for more aſſu-
rance, by ſpecdy couriers advertiſed Solyman of the taking of
Tauris, and of the enemy's purpoſe, requeſting him with all
ſpeed to repair with his army to Tauris. Knolles's Hiſtory.
COURSE. m. ſ. [cºurſe, Fr. cuiſits, Latin.]
1. Race ; career. -
And ſome ſhe arms with ſinewy force,
And ſome with ſwiftneſs in the courſe. Cowley.
2. Paſſage from place to place; progreſs. To this may be re-
ferred the courſe ºf a river.
And when we had finiſhed our courſe from Tyre, we came
to Ptolemais. Aé's Xxi. 7.
A light, by which the Argive ſquadron ſteers
Their filent courſ to Ilium's well known ſhore.
3. Tilt; ačt of running in the liſts.
But this hot knight was cooled with a fall, which, at the
third courſe, he received of Phalantus. Sidney.
4. Ground on which a race is run.
5. Track or line in which a ſhip ſails, or any motion is per-
formed.
6. Sail; means by which the courſe is performed.
To the courſes we have deviſed ſtudding-ſails, ſprit-ſails,
and top-ſails, Raleigh's Eſſays.
7. Progreſs from one gradation to another.
If ſhe live long,
And in the end meet the old courſe of death,
Women will all turn monſters. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
When the ſtate of the controverſy is plainly determined, it
muſt not be altered by another diſputant in the courſe ºf the
diſputation. //atts.
8. Order of ſucceſſion; as, every one in his courſe.
If any man ſpeak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two,
or at the moſt by three, and that by courſe ; and let one in-
terpret. I Cor. xiv. 27.
9. Stated and orderly method.
- The duke cannot deny the courſe of law. Shakeſpeare-
If God, by his revealed declaration, firſt gave rule to any
Denham.
man, he, that will claim by that title, muſt have the ſame
poſitive grant of God for his ſucceſſion; for, if it has not
directed the courſe of its deſcent and conveyance, no body can
Locke.
ſucceed to this title of the firſt Ruler.
ro. Series of ſucceſſive and methodical procedure.
The glands did reſolve during her courſe of phyſick, and
///ºran's Sargery,
11. The elements of an art exhibited and explained, in a me-
Hence our courſes of philoſophy, anatomy,
Chambers.
ſhe continueth very well to this day.
thodical ſeries
chemiſtry, and mathematicks.
12. Conduct; manner of proceeding.
Grittus perceiving the danger he was in, began to doubt
Ano/es.
That worthy deputy finding nothing but a common miſery,
took the beſt courſe he poſſibly could to eſtabliſh a common-
with himſelf what courſe were beſt for him to take.
wealth in Ireland. Davies on freſalid.
He placed commiſfioners there, who governed it only in a
courſe of diſcretion, part martial, part civil. Davies on Ireland.
Give willingly what I can take by force;
And know, obedience is your ſafeſt †. Dryd, Aurengz.
But if a right courſe be taken with children, there will not
be ſo much need of common rewards and puniſhments. Locke.
* I is time we ſhould decree
What courſe to take. Addiſon's Cato.
The ſenate obſerving how, in all contentions, they were
forced to yield to the tribunes and people, thought it their
wiſeſt courſe to give way alſo to time. Swift.
13. Method of life; train of ačtions.
A woman of ſo working a mind, and ſo vehement ſpirits,
as it was happy ſhe took a good courſe ; for otherwiſe it would
have been terrible. Sidney.
His addićtion was to courſes vain;
His companies unletter'd, rude and ſhallow;
His hours fill'd up with riots, banquets, ſports. Shakespeare H. V.
Men will ſay,
That beauteous Emma vagrant courſes took,
Her father's houſe and civil life forſook.
14. Natural bent; uncontrolled will.
It is beft to leave nature to her courſe, who is the ſovereign
phyſician in moſt diſeaſes. - Temple.
So every ſervant took his courſe,
And, bad at firſt, they all grew worſe. Prior.
15. Catamenia.
The like happens upon the ſtoppage of women's courſes,
which, if not ſuddenly looked to, ſets them undoubtedly into
a conſumption, dropſy, or ſome other dangerous diſeaſe.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
Prior.
16. Orderly ſtructure.
The tongue defileth the whole body, and ſetteth on fire
the courſe of nature. James, iii. 6.
17. [In archite&amp;ture.] A continued range of ſtones, level or of
the ſame height, throughout the whole length of the building,
and not interrupted by any aperture. Harris.
18. Series of conſequences.
Senſe is of courſe annex'd to wealth and power;
No muſe is proof againſt a golden ſhow’r. Garth.
With a mind unprepoſſeſſed by doctors and commentators
of any ſect, whoſe reaſonings, interpretation and language,
which I have been uſed to, will of courſe make all chime that
way; and make another, and perhaps the genuine meaning of
the author, ſeem harſh, ſtrained, and uncouth to me. Loºke.
19. Number of diſhes ſet on at once upon the table,
Worthy fir, thou bleed'ſt:
Thy exerciſe hath been too violent
For a ſecond courſe of fight. Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
Then with a ſecond courſ the tables load,
And with full chargers offer to the god. Dryden's £n.
You are not to waſh your hands 'till after you have ſent up
your ſecond courſe. Swift's Directions to the Cook.
So quick retires each flying courſe, you'd ſwear
Sancho's dread doćtor and his wand was there. Pºpe.
20. Regularity; ſettled rule.
Neither ſhall I be ſo far wanting to myſelf, as not to deſire
a patent, granted of courſe to all uſeful proječtors. Swift.
21. Empty form.
Men talk as if they believed in God, but they live as if
they thought there was none; their vows and promiſes are no
more than words of courſe. L'Eſtrange, Fab. 47.
To Cours F. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To hunt; to purſue.
The big round tears
Cºur;'d one another down his innocent noſe
In piteous chaſe. Shakeſpeare's A you like it.
The king is hunting the deer ; I am cºuſing myſelf.
Shakeſpeare's Love's Labour lºft.
where's the thane of Cawdor?
We cour’d him at the heels, and had a purpoſe
To be his purveyor. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. To purſue with dogs that hunt in vicw.
It would be tried alſo in flying of hawks, or in couſing of
a deer, or hart, with greyhounds. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
I am continually ſtarting bares for you to courſe: we were
2. certainly
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 152</div><p class="Text">C O U
C O U
*
certainly cut out for one another; for my temper quits an
amour juſt where thine takes it up. Congreve's Old Batchelor,
3. To put to ſpeed ; to force to run.
When they have an appetite
To venery, let them not drink nor eat,
And cauſe them oft, and tire them in the heat, Moy's Pirg,
To Cours E. v. n. To run; to rove about.
Swift as quickſilver it courſes through
The natºral gates and allies of the body. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
The blood, before cold and ſettled, left the liver white and
pale, which is the badge of puſillanimity and cowardice; but
the ſherris warms it, and makes it courſe from the inwards to
the parts extreme.
She did ſo cºurſe o'er my exteriours, with ſuch a greedy in-
tention, that the appetite of her eye did ſeem to ſcorch me up
like a burning glaſs. Shakespeare's Merry Wives of I/indſºr.
Ten brace and more of greyhounds, ſnowy fair,
And tall as ſtags, ran looſe, and cours'd around his chair. Dry.
All, at once
Relapſing quick, as quickly re-aſcend
And mix, and thwart, extinguiſh, and renew,
All ether courſing in a maze of light. Thomſon's Autumn,
Co'u Rs E.R. m. ſ. [from courſe; couſier, French.]
1. A ſwift horſe; a war horſe: a word not uſed in proſe.
So, proudly pricketh on his courſºr ſtrong,
And Atin ay him pricks with ſpurs of ſhame and wrong.
Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 5. Jianz. 38.
Then to his abſent gueſt the king decrecd
A pair of courſers, born of heav'nly breed;
Who from their noſtrils breath'd etherial fire,
Whom Circe ſtole from her celeſtial fire.
Th’ impatient courſer pants in every vein,
And, pawing, ſeems to beat the diſtant plain;
Hills, vales, and floods appear already croſs'd,
And, e're he ſtarts, a thouſand ſteps are loſt.
2. One who purſues the ſport of courſing hares.
A leaſh is a leathern thong, by which a falconer holds his
hawk, or a courſºr leads his greyhound. Hanmer.
COUR T. n.ſ. ſcour, Fr. Koert, Dut. curtis, low Latin.]
1. The place where the prince reſides; the palace.
Here do you keep a hundred knights and ſquires,
Men ſo diſorderly, ſo debauch'd and bold,
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Shews like a riotous inn; Epicuriſm and luſt,
Make it more like a tavern, or a brothel,
Than a grac'd palace. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
It ſhall be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls.
Iſaiah, xxvi. 13.
His care and exactneſs, that every man ſhould have his
due, was ſuch, that you would think he had never ſeen a court:
the politeneſs and civility with which this juſtice was admi-
niſtred, would convince you he never had lived out of one.
- Prizr’s Dedication.
A ſuppliant to your royal court I come. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
2. The ball or chamber where juſtice is adminiſtred.
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this preſent queſtion in the court º Shakeſheare.
St. Paul being brought unto the higheſt court in Athens, to
give an account of the doćtrine he had preached, concerning
Jeſus and the reſurrečtion, took occaſion to imprint on thoſe
magiſtrates a future ſtate. Alterbury's Sermons.
3. Open ſpace before a houſe.
You muſt have, before you come to the front, three court; :
a green coºrt plain, with a wall about it; a ſecond court of
the ſame, but more garniſhed, with little turrets, or other
embelliſhments upon the wall; and a third court, to ſquare
with the front, not to be built but incloſed with a naked
wall. Bacon, Eſſay 46.
Suppoſe it were the king's bedchamber, yet the meaneſt
man in the tragedy muſt come and diſpatch his buſineſs, rather
than in the lobby or court yard (which is fitter for him), for
fear the ſtage ſhould be cleared, and the ſcenes broken. Dryd.
4. A ſmall opening incloſed with houſes and paved with broad
ſtones.
5. Perſons who compoſe the retinue of a prince.
Their wiſdom was ſo highly eſteemed, that ſome of them
were always employed to follow the courts of their kº. to
adviſe them. emple,
6. Perſons who are aſſembled for the adminiſtration of juſtice.
7. Any juriſdićtion, military, civil, or eccleſiaſtical.
If any noiſe or ſoldier you perceive
Near to the wall, by ſome apparent ſign
Let us have knowledge at the court of guard. Shakespeare H. VI.
The archbiſhop
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Learned and reverend fathers of his order,
Held a late court at Dunſtable. Shakespeare's Henry VIII.
I have at laſt met with the proceedings of the court baron,
held in that behalf. Speciator, N°. 623.
8. The art of pleaſing; the art of inſinuation.
Haſt thou been never baſe ? Did love ne'er bend
Thy frailer virtue, to betray thy friend ?
Dryden's Żn.
Pope.
Flatter me, make thy court, and ſay it did;
Kings in a crowd would have their vices hid. Dryd, Aureng,
. Sºme ſort of people, placing a great part of their happineſs
in ſtrong drink, are always forward to make court to m
Yºung maſter, by offering that which they love beſt them.
ſelves. Locke, ſect. 18.
I have been conſidering why poets have ſuch ill ſucceſs in
making their court, ſince they are allowed to be the greateſt
and beſt of all flatterers: the defect is, that they flatter only
in print or in writing. wift to Gay.
9. It is often uſed in compoſition in moſt of its ſenſes.
To Court. v. a. [from the noun.]
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii. " I. To woo; to ſolicit a woman to marriage.
Follow a ſhadow, it flies you;
Seem to fly it, it will purſue:
So court a miſtreſs, ſhe denies you;
Let her alone, ſhe will court yéu. Ben. johnſºn's Forg/?.
Fir’d with her love, and with ambition led,
The neighbºring princes court her nuptial bed. Dryden's Aºn,
Alas! Sempronius, wouldſt thou talk of love
To Marcia, whilſt her father's life's in danger ?
Thou might'ſt as well court the pale trembling veſtal,
While ſhe beholds the holy flame expiring Addison's Cato.
Ev’n now, when filent ſcorn is all they gain,
... A thouſand court you, though they court in vain.
2. To ſolicit; to ſeek.
Their own eaſe and ſatisfaction would quickly teach chil-
dren to court commendation, and avoid doing what they found
condemned. Zocºe on Education, ſcă. 59.
3. To flatter ; to endeavour to pleaſe.
Court-chaplain. m. ſ. ſcourt and chaplain..] One who at-
tends the king to celebrate the holy office.
The maids of honour have been fully convinced by a famous
court-chaplain. Swift.
Court-B.A.Y. m. ſ. ſcourt and day.] Day on which juſtice is
ſolemnly adminiſtred. -
The judge took time to deliberate, and the next court-day
he ſpoke. Arbuth, and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
Court-DRESSER. n.f. [court and dreſſºr.] One that dreſſes
the court, or perſons of rank; a flatterer.
There are many ways of fallacy; ſuch arts of giving co-
lours, appearances and reſemblances, by this court-arºſer,
fancy. océe.
Court-Favour. n.ſ. Favours or benefits beſtowed by princes.
We part with the bleſſings of both worlds for pleaſures,
court favours, and commiſfions; and at laſt, when we have
fold ourſelves to our luſts, we grow ſick of our bargain. L'E/?.
Court-H AND. n.ſ.. [court and hand.] The hand or manner
of writing uſed in records and judicial proceedings.
He can make obligations, and write court hind. Shakespeare H. VI.
Court-LADY. n.f. [court and lady..] A lady converſant or
employed in court. -
. The ſame ſtudy, long continued, is as intolerable to them,
as the appearing long in the ſame clothes or faſhion is to a
court-lady. - Locke.
Co'UR Teous. adj. [cºurtois, French.] Elegant of manners;
polite; well-bred; full of acts of reſpect.
He hath deſerved worthily of his country;
, And this aſcent is not by ſuch eaſy degrees,
As thoſe who have been ſupple and courteºus to the people.
Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
They are one while courteous, civil, and obliging;
but, within a ſmall time after, are ſupercilious, ſharp, trou-
bleſome, fierce, and exceptious. South's Sermons.
Co'URTEously. adv. [from courteous.] Reſpectfully; civilly;
complaiſantly.
He thought them to be gentlemen of much more worth
than their habits bewrayed, yet he let them courteºuſly
paſs. //ºtton.
Whilſt Chriſt was upon earth, he was not only eaſy of acceſs,
he did not only courteouſly receive all that addreſſed themſelves
to him, but alſo did not diſdain himſelf to travel up and down
the country. Calamy’s Sermons.
He arrived at the coaſt of Alcinous, who, being prevailed
upon by the glory of his name, entertained him courtrouſly.
Broom's Notes on the Odyſſey.
n ſ. [ from courteous. J Civility; com-
Pope.
Co'URTEousNess.
plaiſance.
Co'URTESAN. Un. ſ. ſcortſna, low Latin.] A woman of the
Co'URTEzAN. } town; a proſtitute; a ſtrumpet.
'Tis a brave night to cool a coutezan. Shakespeare  King Lear.
With them there are no ſtews, no diſſolute houſes, no
courteſans, nor any thing of that kind; nay, they wonder,
with deteſtation, at you in Europe, which permit ſuch -
things. Bacon's New Atlantis.
The Corinthian is a column, laſciviouſly decked like a
courteſan. - - //otton.
Charixus, the brother of Sappho, in love with Rhodope the
courtezan, ſpent his whole eſtate upon her. Addison's Speciatºr.
Co'URTESY. m. ſ. ſcourtojić, Fr. corºſia, É'ſ
1. Elegance of manners; civility; complaiſance.
Sir, you are very welcome to our houſe :
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 153</div><p class="Text">C O U
It muſt appear in other ways than words,
Therefore Iſcant this breathing courteſy. Shakespeare Merch. of Ven.
Who have ſeen his eſtate, his hoſpitality, his courteſy to
Itrangers. Peacham.
He, who was compounded of all the elements of affability
and courteſy towards all kind of people, brought himſelf
to a habit of neglect, and even of rudeneſs, towards the
queen. Clarendon.
So gentle of condition was he known,
That through the court his courteſy was blown. Dryd. Fab.
2. An adt of civility or reſpect.
Fair fir, you ſpit on me laſt Wedneſday;
You ſpurn'd me ſuch a day; another time
You call'd me dog; and for theſe courteſies,
I'll lend you thus much money. Shakespeare Marchant ºf Penice.
Repoſe you there, while I to the hard houſe
Return, and force their ſcanted cºurteſy. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
- When I was laſt at Exeter,
The mayor in courtſ, ſhew'd me the caſtle. Shakespeare . R. III.
Sound all the lofty inſtruments of war,
And by that muſick let us all embrace;
For heav'n to earth ſome of us never ſhall
A ſecond time do ſuch a courteſy. Shakespeare care's Henry IV.
Other ſtates, aſſuredly, cannot be juſtly accuſed for not
ſtaying for the firſt blow ; or for not accepting Polyphemus's
courteſy, to be the laſt that ſhall be eaten up. Bacon.
3. The reverence made by women.
Some country girl, ſcarce to a court'ſ bred,
Would I much rather than Cornelia wed;
If, ſupercilious, haughty, proud and vain,
She brought her father's triumphs in her train. Dryd, juven.
The poor creature was as full of courtſics as if I had been
her godmother: the truth on’t is, I endeavoured to make her
look ſomething Chriſtian-like. Cºngreve's Old Batchelor.
4. A tenure, not of right, but by the favour of others; as, to
hold upon courteſy.
5. Court F.sy of England. A tenure by which, if a man marry
an inheritance, that is, a woman ſeiſed of land, and getteth
a child of her that comes alive into the world, though both
the child and his wife die forthwith ; yet, if ſhe were in poſ-
ſeſſion, ſhall he keep the land during his life, and is called
tenant per legem Angliae, or by the courteſy of England. Cºwel.
To Co'URTESY. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. To perform an act of reverence.
Toby approaches, and court'ſſes there to me. Shakeſpeare.
The petty traffickers,
That court'ſ to them, do them reverence. Shakeſpeare.
2. To make a reverence in the manner of ladies.
If I ſhould meet her in my way,
We hardly court'ſ to each other. Prior.
Co'URTIER. m. ſ. [from court.]
1. One that frequents or attends the courts of princes.
He hath been a courtier, he ſwears.
If any man doubts that, let him put me to my purgation. I
have trod a meaſure; I have flattered a lady; I have been
politick with my friend, ſmooth with mine enemy; I have
undone three taylors; I have had four quarrels, and like to
have fought one. Shakeſpeare's A you like it.
You are a flattering boy; now, I ſee you'll be a courtier.
Shakeſpeare's Merry Iłżves of I/indſºr.
You know I am no courtier, nor verſed in ſtate-affairs. Bac.
The principal figure in a pićture, is like a king among his
courtiers, who ought to dim the luſtre of all his attendants.
Dryden's Dufrºſtoy.
2. One that courts or ſolicits the favour of another.
What
Made thee, all honour’d honeſt Roman Brutus,
With the arm'd reſt, courtiers of beauteous freedom,
To drench the capitol? Shakespeare Anthony and Cleºpatra.
There was not among all our princes a greater courtier of
the peofile than Richard the IIId. not out of fear, but
wiſdom. Suckling.
Co'URT IN E. See CURTAIN.
Co'URTLIKE, adj. [court and like..] Elegant; polite.
Our Engliſh tongue is, I will not ſay as ſacred as the He-
brew, or as learned as the Greek, but as fluent as the Latin,
as courteous as the Spaniſh, as courtlike as the French, and as
amorous as the Italian. Camden's Remains.
Co'URTLINEss. n.ſ.. [from courtly..] Elegance of manners;
grace of mien ; complaiſance; civility.
Cou RTLY. adj. [from court.]. Relating or retaining to the
court; elegant; ſoft ; flattering.
In our own time, (excuſe ſome courtly ſtrains)
No whiter page than Addiſon's remains. Pºpe's Ep. of Hor.
Co'URTLY. adj. In the manner of courts; elegantly.
They can produce nothing ſo courtly writ, or which ex-
preſſes ſo much the converſation of a gentleman, as fir John
Suckling. Dryden on Dramatick Poetry.
Co'URTs Hip. n.ſ. [from court.]
1. The act of ſoliciting favour.
He paid his courtſhip with the croud,
As far as modeſt pride allow'd. Swift,
2. The ſolicitation of a woman to marriage.
Be merry, and employ your chiefeſt thoughts
To cºurtſhip, and ſuch fair oftents of love,
As ſhall conveniently become you there. Shakespeare Mr.h. of Wer.
In tedious courtſhip we declare our pain,
And e're we kindneſs find, firſt meet diſdain. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
Every man in the time of courtſhip, and in the firſt cntrance
of marriage, puts on a behaviour like my correſpondent's holi-
day ſuit. Aldſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 13.
3. Civility; elegance of manners.
My courtſhip to an univerſity,
My modeſty I give to ſoldiers bare;
My patience to a gameſter's ſhare. Donne.
COUSIN. n.ſ. ſcouſin, Fr. cºnſanguineus, Lat.] Any one col-
laterally related more remotely than a brother or ſiſter.
Macbeth unſeam'd him from the nape to th’ chops,
And fix’d his head upon our battlements.
–Oh, valiant couſin ' worthy gentleman. Shakespeare Macleth.
Tybalt, my cºuſin ' O, my brother's child !
Unhappy fight ! alas, the blood is ſpill'd
Of my dear kinſman. Shakeſpeare's Rºmeo and juit.
Thou art, great lord, my father's ſiſter's ſon,
And couſin german to great Priam's ſeed. Shakesp. Trail, and Creſ.
2. A title given by the king to a nobleman, particularly to thoſe
of the council.
COW. m. ſ. [in the plural, anciently kine, or keen, now com-
monly cows; cu, Sax. £ot, Dutch..] The female of the bull;
the horned animal with cloven fect, kept for her milk and
calves. -
We ſee that the horns of oxen and cows, for the moſt part,
are larger than the bulls; which is cauſed by abundance of
moiſture, which in the horns of the bull faileth. Bacon.
After the fever is diminiſhed, affes and goats milk may be
neceſſary; yea, a dict of cows milk alone. // iſºman's Surgery.
Then, leaving in the fields his grazing cows,
He ſought himſelf ſome hoſpitable houſe:
Good Creton entertain’d his godlike gueſt. Dryden's Falks.
To Cow. v. a. [from coward, by contraction.] To depreſs
with fear; to oppreſs with habitual timidity.
Macduff was from his mother's womb
Untimely ripp'd.
Accurſed be that tongue that tells me ſo;
For it hath cow'd my better part of man. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
By reaſon of their frequent revolts they have drawn upon
themſelves the preſſures of war ſo often, that it ſeems to have
fomewhat cowed their ſpirits. Howel's V.cal Forſt.
For when men by their wives are cow'd,
Their horns of courſe are underſtood. Hudibras, p. ii. c. 2.
Cow-her D. m. ſ. ſcow and hyrb, Sax. a keeper.] One whoſe
occupation is to tend cows. -
Cow-House. n.ſ.. [cow and houſe ] The houſe in which kine
are kept.
You muſt houſe your milch-cows, that you give hay to in
your cow-houſe all night. - Martimer.
Cow-LEEcH. m. ſ. [cow and lecch.] One who profeſſes to
cure diſtempered cows.
To Cow-LEEcH. v. n. To profeſs to cure cows.
Though there are many pretenders to the art of farriering
and cow-leeching, yet many of them are very ignorant, eſpe-
cially in the country. - Mºrtimer’s Husbandry.
Cow-weed. n.ſ.. [cºw and weed.] A ſpecies of chervil; which
ſee. -
Cow-wheat. m. ſ. [from cow and wheat.]
The leaves of this plant grow oppoſite by pairs: the flower
conſiſts of one leaf; is of an anomalous figure, and di-
vided into two lips, the uppermoſt of which has a ſpur, but
the under one is intire: the fruit is round, and divided into
two cells, containing ſeeds reſembling grains of wheat. This
plant is very common in woods, and ſhady places. Miller.
COWARD. m. ſ. ſcoua, d, Fr. of uncertain derivation.]
1. A poltron; a wretch whoſe predominant paſſion is fear.
Pyrocles did ſuch wonders, beyond belief, as was able to
lead Muſidorus to courage, though he had been born a
coward. Sidney, b. ii.
There was a ſoldier that vaunted, before Julius Cæſar, of
the hurts he had received in his face. Caeſar knowing him to
be but a coward, told him, You were beſt take heed, next
time you run away, how you look back Bacon, Apºphth. 188.
Some are brave one day, and cowards another, as great cap-
tains have often told me, from their own experience and ob-
ſervation. Temple.
A coward does not always eſcape with diſgrace, but ſome-
times alſo he loſes his life. Scith.
What can ennoble ſots, and ſlaves, and cºward, º'
Alas! not all the blood of all the Howards. Pope.
Tremble ye not, Oh friends! and coward, fly,
Doom'd by the ſtern Telemachus to die Pºpe's Ody, ty.
2. It is ſometimes uſed in the manner of an adječive.
Having more man than wit about me, I drew ;
And rais’d the houſe with loud and ºward cries S*ašjeare.
Invading fears repel my coward joy, -
And ills foreſeen the preſent bliſs deſtroy. Prior.
- Cow ARLI&amp; S.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 154</div><p class="Text">C O W,
C O Z
Co'war Dice. n. ſ. [from coward.] Fear; habitual timidity;
puſillanimity; want of courage.
Certes, fir knight, ye been too much to blame,
Thus for to blot the honour of the dead;
And with foul cowardice his carcaſe ſhame,
Whoſe living hands immortaliz'd his name. Fairy Queen.
Gallant and fearleſs courage will turn into a native and
heroick valour, and make them hate the cowardice of doing
wrong. Milton on Education.
None was diſgrac'd; for falling is no ſhame,
And cowardice alone is loſs of fame;
The vent’rous knight is from the ſaddle thrown,
But 'tis the fault of fortune, not his own. Dryden's Fables.
This great, this holy, this terrible Being, is preſent to all
our affections; ſees every treacherous inclination of our heart
to deſert his ſervice; and treaſures up, againſt the day of his
wrath, the ſecret cowardice which deters us from aſſerting his
cauſe, which prevails on us to compliment the vices of the
great, to applaud the libertine, and laugh with the prophane.
- Rogers, Sermon 4.
Cowardliness. n.ſ.. [from cºwardly..] Timidity; cowardić.
Co'w ARDLY. adj. [from coward.]
i. Fearful; timorous; puſillanimous. -
An Egyptian ſoothſayer made Antonius believe that his
genius, otherwiſe brave and confident, was in the preſence of
Oćtavius poor and cowardly. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 940.
Let all ſuch as can enlarge their conſciences like hell, and
ſtyle a cowardly ſilence in Chriſt's cauſe diſcretion, know, that
Chriſt will one day ſcorn them. South's Sermons.
2. Mean; befitting a coward. -
I do find it cowardly, and vile,
For fear of what might fall, ſo to prevent
The time of life. Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar.
Co'w ARD LY. adv. In the manner of a coward; meanly;
vilely.
#. ſharply reproved them as men of no courage, who had
moſt cowardly turned their backs upon their enemies. Knolles.
Cow ARDSHIP. n.ſ.. [from coward J
ties of a coward; meanneſs: a word not now in uſe.
A very diſhoneſt paltry boy, and more a coward than a
hare: his diſhoneſty appears in leaving his friend here in ne-
ceſſity, and denying him; and for his cowardſhip, aſk Fabian.
Shakeſheare's Twelfth Night.
To CoweR. v. n. [currian, Welſh; courber, Fr. or perhaps
borrowed from the manner in which a cow finks on her knees.]
To ſink by bending the knees; to ſtoop; to ſhrink.
Let the pail be put over the man's head above water, and
then he cower down, and the pail be preſſed down with him.
Bacon's Natural Hi/?ory, Nº. 155.
The ſplitting rocks cower'd in the ſinking ſands,
And would not daſh me with their ragged ſides. Shakeſpeare.
As thus he ſpake, each bird and beaſt beheld,
Approaching two and two ; theſe cºw’ring low
With blandiſhment, each bird ſtoop'd on his wing. Milton.
Our dame ſits cow'ring o'er a kitchen fire;
I draw freſh air, and natur’s works admire. Dryden's Fahles.
Co'wis H. adj. [from To cow, to awe.] Timorous; fearful;
mean ; puſillanimous; cowardly.
It is the cowiſh terrour of his ſpirit,
That dares not undertake: he'll not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an anſwer. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Cowk EEPER. m. ſ. ſcow and keeper.] One whoſe buſineſs is
to keep cows.
The terms cowkeeper and hogherd, are not to be uſed in
our poetry; but there are no finer words in the Greek lan-
guage. Broom's Notes on the Odyſſey.
COWL. m. ſ. [cuxle, Saxon; cucullus, Latin.]
1. A monk’s hood.
You may imagine that Francis Cornfield did ſcratch his
elbow, when he had ſweetly invented, to ſignify his name,
ſaint Francis with his friery cowl in a cornfield. Camden's Rem.
What differ more, you cry, than crown and cowl 2
I'll tell you, friend, a wiſe man and a fool. Pope's Eſſays.
2. A veſſel in which water is carried on a pole between two.
CowL-st AFF. m. ſ. . [cowl and ſtaff.] The ſtaff on which a
veſſel is ſupported between two men.
Mounting him upon a cºwl-ſtaff,
Which (toſing him ſomething high)
He apprehended to be Pegaſus. Suckling.
The way by a cowl-ſtaff is ſafer: the ſtaff muſt have a
bunch in the middle, ſomewhat wedge-like, and covered with
a ſoft bolſter. Wiſeman.
Cowslip. n.ſ. ſcurlippe, Sax. as ſome think, from their re-
ſemblance of ſcent to the breath of a cow; perhaps from
growing much in paſture-grounds, and often meeting the
cow's lip.]
Cowſlip is alſo called pagil, grows wild in the meadows,
and is a ſpecies of PRIMRose, which ſee. Miller.
... He might as well ſay, that a cowſlip is as white as a
lily. Sidney.
Where the bee ſucks, there ſuck I;
In a cowſlip's bell I lie.
Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?.
Vol. I
The chara&amp;ter or quali-
Thy little ſons
Permit to range the paſtures: gladly they
Will mow the cowſlip poſes, faintly ſweet. Philip;,
Cows. LUNgwort. n.ſ. See MULLEN, of which it is a
ſpecies. AMiller.
Co'xcom B. m. ſ. [cock and comb, corrupted from cock's comb.]
1. The top of the head.
As the cockney did to the eels, when ſhe put them i'the
paſty alive; ſhe rapt them o' th' coxcombs with a ſtick, and
cried down, wantons, down. Sakeſpeare's Kinº Lear.
2. The comb reſembling that of a cock, which licenſed fools
wore formerly in their caps.
There take my coxcomb : why, this fellow has baniſhed two
of his daughters, and did the third a bleſfing againſt his will:
if thou follow him, thou muſt needs wear my coxcomb. Shakespeare
3. A fop; a ſuperficial pretender to knowledge or accompliſh-
Inents. .
I ſent to her,
By this ſame coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
Tokens and letters, which ſhe did reſend.
I ſcorn, quoth ſhe, thou coxcomb filly, -
Quarter or council from a foe. Hudibras, p. i. cant iii.
It is a vanity common in the world, for every pretending
coxcomb to make himſelf one of the party ſtill with his betters.
* L’Eſtrange, Fable 1 35.
They overflowed with ſmart repartees, and were only diſ-
tinguiſhed from the intended wits by being called coxcombs,
though they deſerved not ſo ſcandalous a name. Dryd. Dufºſ.
Some are bewilder'd in the maze of ſchools,
And ſome made coxcombs, nature meant but fools. Pope,
Coxco'Mical. adj. [from coxcomb.] Foppiſh; conceited : a
low word unworthy of uſe. -
Becauſe, as he was a very natural writer, and they were
without prejudice, without prepoſſeſſion, without affeciation,
and without the influence of coxcomical, ſenſeleſs cabal, they
were at liberty to receive the impreſſions which things natural-
Shakeſpeare.
ly made on their minds Dennis.
COY. adi. [.oi, French, from quietus, Latin.]
1. Modeſt; decent.
Jaſon is as cºy as is a maide;
He loked piteouſly, but naught he ſaid. Chaucer.
*...* ; not acceſſible; not eaſily condeſcending to fami-
13 IItW.
'And vain delight ſhe ſaw he light did paſs,
A foe of folly and immodeſt toy;
Still ſolemn ſad, or ſtill diſdainful coy. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Like Phoebus ſung the no leſs am’rous boy;
Like Daphne ſhe, as lovely and as coy. Waller.
At this ſeaſon every ſmile of the ſun, like the ſmile of a coy
lady, is as dear as it is uncommon. Pope.
To Coy. v. n. [from the adjective.]
1. To behave with reſerve; to reječt familiarity.
What, coying it againſ
No more; but make me happy to my guſt,
That is, without your ſtruggling Dryden's King Arthur.
Retire I beg you, leave me.
—Thus to cºy it ! .
With one who knows you too! Rowe's jane Shºre.
2. To make difficulty; not to condeſcend willingly.
If he coy’d
To hear Cominius ſpeak, I'll keep at home. Shakespeare Coriolan.
Co'yly. adv. [from coy..] With reſerve; with diſinclination to
familiarity.
This ſaid; his hand he cºyly ſnatcht away
From forth Antinous’ hand. Chapman's Odyſſey, b. ii.
Co'YN Ess. m. ſ. [from coy..] Reſerve ; unwillingneſs to become
familiar.
When the fun hath warmed the earth and water, three or
four male carps will follow a female; and ſhe putting on a
ſeeming coyneſs, they force her through weeds and flags. Walton.
When the kind nymph would coyneſ, feign,
And hides but to be found again.
Co'Ysts el. n.ſ. A ſpecies of degenerate hawk.
One they might truſt, their common wrongs to wreak:
The muſquet and the coyſtrel were too weak,
Too fierce the falcon. Dryden’s Hind and Panther.
Coz. n.ſ. A cant or familiar word, contračted from couſin.
Be merry, c. 2; ſince ſudden ſorrow
Serves to ſay thus, ſome good thing comes to-morrow, Shakespeare
To COZEN.J. a. [To coſ is in the old Scotch dialect, as junius
obſerves, to chop or change; whence cozen, to cheat, becauſe
in ſuch traffick there is commonly fraud..] To cheat; to
trick; to defraud.
Let the queen pay never ſo fully, let the muſter-maſter
view them never ſo diligently, let the deputy or general look
to them never ſo exačtly, yet º can cozen them all. Spenſer.
Goring loved no man ſo well but that he would cozen him,
and then expoſe him to publick mirth for having been cozen'd.
- Clarendon, b. viii:
He that ſuffers a government to be abuſed by careleſſneſs or
neglect, does the ſame thing with him that maliciouſly and
corruptly ſets himſelf to cozen it. L’Érange, Fab. 21. Rºffé”.
5 X You
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 155</div><p class="Text">C R A
C R A
Yoa are not obliged to a literal belief of what the poet
Hays; but you are pleaſed with the image, wº,;
zzºned by the fiction. - ryaen.
C what if I pleaſe to lengthen out his date
A day, and take a pride to cozen fate. Dryde's Aurengzebe.
Children may be cºzened into a knowledge of the letters,
aud be taught to read, without perceiving } to be #} thing
but a ſport. ocłe on Education.
cº, n. ſ. [from cozen.] Fraud; deceit; artifice; fal-
lacy; trick; cheat.
d wºm without honeſty is meer craft and cozenage, and
therefore the reputation of honeſty muſt firſt be gotten, which
cannot be but by living well: a good life is a main argument.
T ſuch thi hat º .. Diſoveries.
There's no ſuch thing as that we beauty call,
It is meer Jºnº, all;
For though ſome long ago
Lik'd certain colours mingl’d ſo and ſo,
That doth not tie me now from chufing new. Suckling.
Imaginary appearances offer themſelves to our impatient
minds, which entertain theſe counterfeits without the leaſt
ſuſpicion of their cozenage. Glanv Scepſ c. 14.
p Strange coz'nage 1 none would live paſt years again,
Yet all hope pleaſure in what yet remain;
And from the dregs of life, think to receive
What the firſt ſprightly running could not give Dryd, Aur.
But all theſe are trifles, if we conſider the fraud and cozenage
of trading men and ſhopkeepers Swift.
Co'zENER. n.ſ.. [from cozºn.] A cheater; a defrauder.
Indeed, ſir, there are cozeners abroad, and therefore it be-
hoves men to be wary. Shakeſpeare's J/inter's Tale.
CRAB. m. ſ. ſcrabba, Sax. krable, Dutch.]
1. A cruſtaceous fiſh.
Thoſe that caſt their ſhell are, the lobſter, the crab, the
crawfiſh, the hodinandod or dodinan, and the tortoiſe. The
old ſhells are never found; ſo as it is like they ſcale off and
crumble away by degrees. - Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
The fox catches ºral fiſh with his tail, which Olaus Mag-
nus faith he himſelf was an eye-witneſs of. Derham.
2. A wild apple ; the tree that bears a wild apple.
Noble ſtock
Wasgraft with crab-tree ſlip, whoſe fruit thou art. Shakespeare.
Fetch me a dozen cral-tree ſtaves, and ſtrong ones: theſe
are but ſwitches. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
When roaſted crabs hiſs in the bowl,
Then nightly ſings the ſtaring owl. Shakeſpeare.
Imagine you ſee him laid forth, newly ſlain, upon a bier of
crab-tree and oaken rods. Peacham on Drawing:
Let him tell why a graft, taking nouriſhment from a crab
ſtock, ſhall have a fruit more noble than its nurſe and parent.
3. A peeviſh moroſe perſ Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
. A peevi oroſe perſon.
4. A wooden engine with three claws for launching of ſhips, or
heaving them into the dock. Philips.
5. The ſign in the zodiack.
Then parts the Twins and Crab, the Dog divides,
And Argo's keel, that broke the frothy tides. Creech's Manil.
CRAB, adj. It is uſed by way of contempt for any ſour or de-
generate fruit; as, a crab cherry, a crab plum.
Better gleanings their worn ſoil can boaſt,
C I han º º vintage º the neighb'ring coaſt. Dryden.
‘RA'BBED. adj. [from crab.
1. Peeviſh ; moroſe; cynical; ſour.
à man of years, yet freſh, as mote appear,
Of ſwarth complexion, and of crabbed hue,
That him full of º did ſhew. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
ſhe is
. i. more gentle, tiºn her father's crabled;
nd he's compos'd of harſhneſs. Sbak 's Tempeſ?.
2. Harſh; unpleaſing. S. akeſpeare's Tempºff
That was when
Three crabbed months had ſour'd themſelves to death,
Fre I could make thee open thy white hand,
And clepe thyſelf my love. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
How charming is divine philoſophy!
Not harſh and trailed, as dull fools ſuppoſe,
But muſical as is Apollo's lute,
§. a perpetual feaſt of nečiar'd ſweets,
Where no crude ſurfeit reigns. Milton.
3. Difficult; Perplexing.
Beſide, he was a ſhrewd philoſopher,
And had read ev'ry text and gloſs over;
}. the crabbed'ſ author hath,
**erſtood b' implicit faith. Hudibras, p. i. cant. I.
Your crabbed rogues that read Lucretius
º *S*inſt gods, you know, and teach us,
CR wº ... makes not the poet. Prior.
X' adv. [from crabbed.]. Peeviſhly.
- f
CRA *P.S.F. s. n.f. [from crabbed.]
1. Sourneſs of taff.
Q sº -
2: Sourneſs of **tenance; aſperity of manners.
Lucretius had choſen a ſubject naturally crabbed. Dryden.
3. Difficulty.
CRA'BER. m. ſ.
The poor fiſh have enemies enough, beſide ſuch unnatural
fiſhermen; as otters, the cormorant, and the craker, which
ſome call the water-rat. I/alton's Angler.
CRAbs-Eyes. n.ſ. . They are whitiſh bodies, from the big-
neſs of a pea to that of the largeſt horſe-bean, rounded on
one ſide and depreſſed on the other, heavy, moderately hard,
and without ſmell. They are not the eyes of any creature,
nor do they belong to the crab; but are produced by the com-
mon crawfiſh: the large ſea crawfiſh alſo affords them ; and
the ſtones are bred in two ſeparate bags, one on each ſide of
the ſtomach. In July, and part of June and Auguſt, when
the creature caſts its ſhell, the ſtones are not found in their
places. We have them from Holland, Muſcovy, Poland,
Denmark, Sweden, and many other places. They are alka-
line, abſorbent, and in ſome degree diuretick. Hill's Mat. Med.
Several perſons had, in vain, endeavoured to ſtore them-
ſelves with cr. by-eyes. Boyle's Experiments.
CRACK. n.ſ. [Kraeck, Dutch.]
1. A ſudden diſruption, by which the parts are ſeparated but a
little way from each other.
2. The chink, fiſſure, or vacuity made by diſruption; a narrow
breach.
Contuſions, when great, do uſually produce a fiſſure or
crack of the ſkull, either in the ſame part where the blow was
inflicted, or in the contrary part. Wiſeman.
At length it would crack in many places; and thoſe cracks,
as they dilated, would appear of a pretty good, but yet obſcure
and dark ſky-colour. Newton's Opt.
3. The ſound of any body burſting or falling,
If I ſay ſooth, I muſt report, they were
As cannons overcharg’d with double cracks. Shakespeare Ma.beth.
Now day appears, and with the day the king,
Whoſe early care had robb'd him of his reſt:
Far off the cracks of falling houſes ring,
And ſhrieks of ſubječts pierce his tender breaſt. Dryden.
4. Any ſudden and quick ſound.
A fourth —ſtart eye
What will the line ſtretch out to th’ crack of doom Shakespeare
Vulcan was employed in hammering out thunderbolts,
that every now and then flew up from the anvil with dreadful
cracks and flaſhes. Addison's Guardian, Nº. 103.
5. Any breach, injury, or diminution; a flaw.
And let us, Paladour, though now our voices
Have got the manniſh crack, ſing him to th’ ground. Shakespeare .
I cannot
Believe this crack to be in my dread miſtreſs,
So ſovereignly being honourable. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
6. Crazineſs of intellect.
7. A man crazed.
I have invented projećts for raiſing millions, without bur-
thening the ſubject; but cannot get the parliament to liſten to
me, who look upon me as a crack and a projećtor. Addison Spetſ.
8. A whore; in low language.
9. A boaſt.
Leafings, backbitings, and vain-glorious cracks,
All thoſe againſt that fort did bend their batteries. Spenser,
1c. A boaſter. This is only in low phraſe.
To CRAck. v. a. [Araecken, Dutch.]
1. To break into chinks; to divide the parts a little from each
other.
Look to your pipes, and cover them with freſh and warm
litter out of the ſtable, a good thickneſs, left the froſts track
them. Mortimer.
2. To break; to ſplit.
O, madam, my heart is crack'd, it's crack'd. Shakeſpeare.
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
other reaſon but becauſe thou haſthaſel-eyes. Shakespeare. Rom, and jul.
Should ſome wild fig-tree take her native bent,
And heave below the gaudy monument,
Would crack the marble titles, and diſperſe
The characters of all the lying verſe. Dryd, juv. Sat. 10.
Or as a lute, which in moiſt weather rings
Her knell alone, by cracking of her ſtrings. Donne.
Honour is like that glaſſy bubble,
That finds philoſophers ſuch trouble;
Whoſe leaſt part crack'd, the whole does fly,
And wits are crack'd to find out why. Hudibras, p. ii. cant, 2.
3. To do anything with quickneſs or ſmartneſs.
Sir Balaam now, he lives like other folks; -
He takes his chirping pint, he cracks his jokes, Pope's Epift.
4. To break or deſtroy any thing.
You'll crack a quart together! Ha, will you not : Shakespeare.
Love cools, friendſhip falls off, brothers divide: in cities,
mutinies; in countries, diſcord; in palaces, treaſon; and the
bond cracked 'twixt ſon and father. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
5. To craze; to weaken the intelle&amp;t.
I was ever of opinion, that the philoſophers ſtone, and an
holy war, were but the rendezvous of cracked brains, that
wore their feather in their heads. Bacon's Holy JWar.
He thought none poets 'till their brains were crazº. *:
o
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 156</div><p class="Text">C R A
C R A
To CRAck. v. n.
1. To burſt; to open in chinks. -
By misfortune it cracked in the cooling, whereby we were
reduced to make uſe of one part, which was ſtraight and
intire. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
2. To fall to ruin.
The credit not only of banks, but of exchequers, cracks
when little comes in, and much goes out. Dryd. Dedic. &amp;n.
3. To utter a loud and ſudden found.
I will board her, though ſhe chide as loud
As thunder, when the clouds in autumn crack. Shakeſpeare.
4. To boaſt: with of
To look like her, are chimney-ſweepers black.
And ſince her time are colliers counted bright.
And Ethiops of their ſweet complexion crack.
Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light. Shakespeare
CRAck-BRAIN ED. adj. [crack and brained.] Crazy; without
right reaſon.
We have ſent you an anſwer to the ill-grounded ſophiſms
of thoſe crack brained fellows. Arbuth, and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
CRAck-H EMP. n.ſ.. [crack and hemp..] A wretch fated to the
gallows; a crack-rope. Furcifer.
Come hither, crack-hemp.
I hope I may chuſe, fir.
—Come hither, you rogue:
What, have you forgot me? Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
CRAck-Rope. n.ſ.. [from crack and rope.] A fellow that de-
ſerves hanging.
CRA'cKER. m.ſ. [from crack.]
1. A noiſy boaſting fellow.
What cracker is this ſame that deafs our ears -
With this abundance of ſuperfluous breath. Shakespeare K. john.
2. A quantity of gunpowder confined ſo as to burſt with great
noiſe.
The bladder, at its breaking, gave a great report, almoſt
like a cracker. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
And when, for furious haſte to run,
They durſt not ſtay to fire a gun,
Have don't with bonfires, and at home
Made ſquibs and crackers overcome. Hudibras, p. iii. c.3:
Then furious he begins his march,
Drives rattling o'er a brazen arch,
With ſquibs and crackers arm’d, to throw
Among the trembling crowd below. Swift.
To CRA'ck L. E. v. n. [from crack ] To make ſlight cracks;
to make ſmall and frequent noiſes; to decrepitate.
- All theſe motions, which we ſaw,
Are but as ice, which crackles at a thaw. Donne.
I fear to try new love,
As boys to venture on the unknown ice
That crackles underneath them. Dryden:
Caught her diſhevell'd hair and rich attire;
Her crown and jewels crackled in the fire. Dryden's. Æneid.
Marrow is a ſpecifick in that ſcurvy which occaſions a crack-
ding of the bones; in which caſe marrow performs its natural
function of moiſtening them. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CRA'ckNEL. m. ſ. [from crack.] A hard brittle cake.
Albee my love he ſeek with daily ſute,
His clowniſh gifts and curteſies I diſdain,
His kids, his cracknel, and his early fruit. Spenſer's Paſº.
Pay tributary cracknels, which he ſells;
And with our offerings, help to raiſe his vails. Dryd juv.
CRA'DLE. m. ſ. ſcrabel, Saxon.]
1. A moveable bed, on which children or ſick perſons are agitated
with a ſmooth and equal motion, to make them ſleep.
She had indeed, ſir, a ſon for her cradle, e're ſhe had a huſ-
band for her bed. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
No jutting frieze,
Buttrice, nor coigne of vantage, but this bird,
Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle. Shakeſp.
His birth, perhaps, ſome paltry village hides,
And ſets his cradle out of fortune's way. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
A child knows his nurſe and his cradle, and by degrees the
playthings of a little more advanced age. Locke.
The cradle and the tomb, alas! ſo nigh:
To live, is ſcarce diſtinguiſh'd from to die. Prior.
Me let the tender office long engage,
To rock the cradle of repoſing age;
With lenient arts extend a mother's breath, -
Make languor ſmile, and ſmooth the bed of death. Pope.
2. It is uſed for infancy, or the firſt part of life.
He knew them to be inclined altogether to war, and therefore
wholly trained them up, even from their cradles, in arms and
military exerciſes. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
The new duke's daughter, her couſin, loves her; being
ever, from their crades, bred together. Shakeſp. As you like it.
They ſhould ſcarcely depart from a form of worſhip, in
which they had been educated from their cradle. Clarendon.
3. [With ſurgeons.] A caſe for a broken bone, to keep off
preſſure. -
4. [With ſhipwrights.] A frame of timber raiſed along the
outſide of a ſhip by the bulge, ſerving more ſecurely and comi-
modiouſly to help to launch her. Fiarris.
To CRA'Die. v. a. [from the ſubſtantive.] To lay in a cradle;
to rock in a cradle.
He that hath been cradled in majeſty, will not leave the
throne to play with beggars. Glanv. Apol.
The tears ſteal from our eyes, when in the ſtreet
With ſome betrothed virgin's herſe we meet;
Or infant's fun'ral from the cheated womb,
Convey'd to earth, and cradled in a tomb. Dryden.
He ſhall be cradled in my ancient ſhield, ſo famous through
the univerſities. Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scriblerus.
CRADLE-cloaths. n.ſ.. [from tradle and cleaths.] Bed-cloaths
belonging to a cradle.
O could it be prov’d,
That ſome night-tripping fairy had exchang'd,
In cradle-cloaths, our children where they lay,
And call mine Piercy, his Flantagenet;
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine. Shakespeare H. IV.
CRAFT. m. ſ. ſcnaept, Sax. crafft, in old Welſh.]
1. Manual art; trade.
I hear an obječtion, even from ſome well-meaning men,
that theſe delightful crafts may be divers ways ill applied in a
land. Wotton's Architecture.
2. Fraud; cunning; artifice.
Th' offence is holy, that ſhe hath committed;
And this deceit loſes the name of craft,
Of diſobedience, or unduteous title. Shakeſpeare.
This gives us a full view of wonderful art and craft, in
raiſing ſuch a ſtructure of power and iniquity. Ayliffe's Parerg.
3. Small ſailing veſſels.
To CRAFT. v. n. [from the noun..] To play tricks; to prac-
tiſe artifice. Now out of uſe.
You've made fair hands,
You and your crafts' You've crafted fair. Shakeſp Coriolanus.
CRA'ftily. adv. [from crafty.] Cunningly; artfully; with
more art than honeſty.
But that which moſt impaired his credit was the common
report that he did, in all things, favour the Chriſtians; and
had, for that cauſe, craftily perſuaded Solyman to take in
hand the unfortunate Perſian war. Knollei's Hiſi. of the Turks.
May he not craftily infer
The rules of friendſhip too ſevere,
Which chain him to a hated truſt; *
Which make him wretched to be juſt 2 Prior.
CRA'FTIN ess. m. ſ. [from crafty.] Cunning; ſtratagem.
He taketh the wiſe in their own craftineſ. job, v. 13.
CRA'FTSMAN. m. ſ. [craft and man.] An artificer; a manu-
facturer; a mechanick.
That her became, as poliſh’d ivory,
Which cunning craftſman's hand hath overlaid
With fair vermillion. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. ix. ſtan. 41.
What reverence he did throw away on ſlaves; -
Wooing poor craftſmen with the craft of ſmiles, Shakespeare R. II.
What a reſemblance this advice carries to the oration of
Demetrius to his fellow craftſmen / Decay of Piety.
CRA'FT's MasTER. m. ſ. [craft and maſter.] A man ſkilled in
his trade.
He is not his craftſmaſter, he doth not do it right. Shakeſp.
There is art in pride: a man might as ſoon learn a trade.
Thoſe who were not brought up to it, ſeldom prove their
craftſmaſter. Collier on Pride.
CRA’rty, adj. [from craft.] Cunning; artful; full of arti-
fices; fraudulent; fly.
Nay, you may think my love was crafty love,
And call it cunning. Shakeſpeare's King john.
This oppreſſion did, of force and neceſſity, make the Iriſh
a crafty people; for ſuch as are oppreſſed, and live in ſlavery,
are ever put to their ſhifts. Davies on Ireland.
Before he came in fight, the crafty god
His wings diſmiſs'd, but ſtill retain’d his rod. Dryden.
No body was ever ſo cunning as to conceal their being ſo ;
and every body is ſhy and diſtruſtful of crafty men. Locke.
CRAG. n.ſ.
1. Crag is, in Britiſh, a rough ſteep rock; and is uſed in the
ſame ſenſe in the northern counties at this day. Gilſon's Camd.
2. The rugged protuberances of rocks.
And as mount Etna vomits ſulphur out,
With clifts of burning crags, and fire and ſmoke. Fairfax.
Who hath diſpos'd, but thou, the winding way,
Where ſprings down from the ſteepy crags do beat. Wotton.
A lion ſpied a goat upon the crag of a high rock, L'Eſtran.
3. The neck.
They looken bigge, as bulls that been bate,
And bearen the cragg ſo ſtiff and ſo ſtate. Spenſer's Pºſt.
4. The ſmall end of a neck of mutton: a low word.
CRA'Go Ed. adj. [from trag..] Full of inequalities and pro-
minences.
On a huge hill,
Cragged and ſteep, truth ſtands. Craſhaw,
CRA'GoºdNess. n.ſ.. [from cragged.] Fulneſs of crags or pro-
minent rocks. 4.
That
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 157</div><p class="Text">C R A
C. R. A
That craggedneſs or ſteepneſs of that mountain, maketh
which, even in the midſt of ačtion, cramps and ties up his
º
i
|--:
:
:
:
many parts of it in a manner inacceſſible. • Brerewood.
CRA'GGINEss. n.ſ.. [from craggy.] The ſtate of being craggy.
CRA'GGY, adj. [from crag..] "Rugged; full of prominences;
rough to walk on, or climb.
That ſame wicked wight
His dwelling has low in an hollow cave,
Far underneath a craggy clift ypight, -
Dark, doleful, dreary, like a greedy grave. Fairy Queen, b.i.
It was impoſſible to paſs up the woody and craggy hills,
without the loſs of thoſe commanders. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Mountaineers that from Severus came,
And from the craggy cliffs of Tetrica. Dryden’s AFn. b. viii.
The town and republick of St. Marino ſtands on the top
of a very high and craggy mountain. Addiſon on Italy.
To CRAM. v. a. ſcnamman, Saxon.]
1. To ſtuff; to fill with more than can conveniently be held.
As much love in rhime, -
As would be cramm'd up in a ſheet of paper,
Writ on both fides the leaf, margent and all. Shakespeare.
Being thus crammed in the baſket, a couple of Ford's
knaves were called. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of JP'indſor.
Thou haſt ſpoke as if thy eldeſt ſon ſhould be a fool, whoſe
ſkull Jove cram with brains. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Cram not in people by ſending too faſt company after
company; but ſo as the number may live well in the planta-
tion, and not by ſurcharge be in penury. Bacon, Eſſay 34.
2. To fill with food beyond ſatiety.
You'd mollify a judge, would cram a ſquire;
Or elſe ſome ſmiles from court you may defire. King.
I am ſure children would be freer from diſeaſes, if they
were not crammed ſo much as they are by fond mothers, and
were kept wholly from fleſh the firſt three years. Locke.
As a man may be eating all day, and, for want of digeſtion,
is never nouriſhed; ſo theſe endleſs readers may cram them-
ſelves in vain with intellectual food. Watts's Improvement.
But Ahnius, crafty ſeer,
Came cramm'd with capon, from where Pollio dines. Dunciad.
3. To thruſt in by force.
You cram theſe words into mine ears, againſt
The ſtomach of my ſenſe. Shakeſpeare's Tºmpſ?.
Huffer, quoth Hudibras, this ſword
Shall down thy falſe throat cram that word. Huailras, p. ii.
: Fate has cramm'd us all into one leaſe,
And that even now expiring. Dryden's Cleomenes.
In another printed paper it is roundly expreſſed, that he will
cram his braſs down our throats. Swift.
To CRAM. v. n. To eat beyond ſatiety.
The godly dame, who fleſhly failings damns,
Scolds with her maid, or with her chaplain cramr.
Pope's Epilogue to jane Shore.
CRA'Mbo. m. ſ. [a cant word, probably without etymology.) A
play at which one gives a word, to which another finds a
rhyme; a rhyme. :
So Maevius, when he drain’d his ſkull
To celebrate ſome ſuburb trull,
His ſimiles in order ſet,
And ev'ry crambo he could get.
CRAMP. m. ſ. [Årampe, Dut. crampe, French.]
1. A ſpaſm or contračtion of the limbs, generally removed by
warmth and rubbing.
For this, be ſure, to-night thou ſhalt have cramp,
Side-ſtitches that ſhall pen thy breath up. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
In a retreat, he outruns any lacquey; marry, in coming on,
he has the cramp. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
The cramp, no doubt, cometh of contračtion of ſinews;
which is manifeſt, in that it cometh either by cold or dryneſs.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 964.
Hares, ſaid to live on hemlock, do not make good the tra-
dition; and he that obſerves what vertigoes, cramps, and con-
vulſions follow thereon, in theſe animals, will be of our
belief. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 27.
2. A reſtrićtion; a confinement; obſtruction; ſhackle.
A narrow fortune is a cramp to a great mind, and lays a
man under incapacities of ſerving his friend. L'Eſtrange.
3. A piece of iron bent at each end, by which two bodies are
held together. -
To the uppermoſt of theſe there ſhould be faſtened a ſharp
graple, or cramp of iron, which may be apt to take hold of
any place where it lights. Wilkins's Mathem. Magick.
CRAM.P. adj. Difficult; knotty: a low term.
To CRAMF. v. a... [from the noun.]
1. To pain with cramps or twiches.
When the contračted limbs were cramp'd, ev'n then
A wat'riſh humour ſwell'd, and coz'd again. Dryden's Wirgil.
2. To reſtrain; to confine; to obſtruct; to hinder.
It is impoſſible to conceive the number of inconveniences
that will enſue, if borrowing be cramped. Bacon, Eſſay 42.
There are few but find that ſome companies benumb and
tramp them, ſo that in them they can neither ſpeak nor do any
thing that is handſome. Glanville's Sceſſ, c. 24.
Swift.
aćtivity. South's Sermons.
Dr. Hammond loves to contračt and cramp the ſenſe of
prophecies. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
The antiquaries are for cramping their ſubjects into as nar-
row a ſpace as they can, and for reducing the whole extent
of a ſcience into a few general maxims. Addiſon on Italy.
Marius uſed all endeavours for depreſfing the nobles, and
raiſing the people; particularly for cramping the former in
their power of judicature. Swift on the Diſſent, in Ath. and Rome.
No more
Th’ expanſive atmoſphere is cramp'd with cold,
But full of life, and vivifying foul. Thomſon's Spring.
3. To bind with crampirons. -
CRAMP-Fish. n.ſ.. [from cramp and fiſh..] The torpedo, .
which benumbs the hands of thoſe that touch it.
CRAMPIRoN. n.ſ. [from cramp and iron.] See CRAMP, Senſe 3.
CRA/NAG E. m. ſ. ſcronagium, low Latin.] A liberty to uſe a
crane for drawing up wares from the veſſels, at any creek of
the ſea or wharf, unto the land, and to make profit of it. It
ſignifies alſo the money paid and taken for the ſame. Cowel.
CRANE, n. ſ. [chan, Sax. Kraen, Dutch.]
1. A bird with a long beak. .
Like a crane, or a ſwallow, ſo did I chatter. I. xlviii. 14.
That ſmall infantry warr'd on by cranes. Milt. Par. Loſſ.
2. An inſtrument made with ropes, pullies, and hooks, by which
great weights are raiſed.
In caſe the mould about it be ſo ponderous as not to be re-
moved by any ordinary force, you may then raiſe it with a
crane. - Mortimer's Art of Husbandry.
Then commerte brought into the publick walk
The buſy merchant, the big warehouſe built,
Rais'd the ſtrong crane. Thomſon's Autumn.
3. A ſiphon; a crooked pipe for drawing liquors out of a caſk.
CRANES-Bill. n. / [from crane and bill.]
1. An herb,
The leaves are conjugate: the cup conſiſts of one leaf,
divided into five parts, expanded in form of a ſtar: the flowers
confift of five leaves, ſomewhat reſembling a creſted or lipped
flower, with ten ſtamina ſurrounding the ovary. The fruit is
of a pentagonal figure, with a beak, containing five ſeed-
veſſels, in each of which is one tailed ſeed, which, when
ripe, is caſt forth by the twiſting of the beak. It is common
in ſeveral parts of England, growing in almoſt any ſoil or
fituation. Miller.
2. A pair of pincers terminating in a point, uſed by ſurgeons.
CRANIUM. m. ſ. [Latin.] The ſkull.
In wounds made by contuſion, when the cranium is a little
naked, you ought not preſently to croud in doſſils; for if that
contuſed fleſh be well digeſted, the bone will incarn with the
wound without much difficulty. Wiſeman's Surgery.
CRANK. m. ſ. [This word is perhaps a contraction of crane-
neck, to which it may bear ſome reſemblance, and is part of
the inſtrument called a crane.]
1. A crank is the end of an iron axis turned ſquare down, and
again turned ſquare to the firſt turning down; ſo that, on the
laſt turning down, a leather thong is ſlipt to tread the
treddle-wheel about. 44%xon's 44ech. Exerciſes.
2. Any bending or winding paſſage.
I ſend it through the rivers of your blood,
Even to the court, the heart; to th' ſeat o' th' brain;
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The ſtrongeſt nerves, and ſmall inferiour veins,
From me receive that natural competency,
Whereby they live. Shakeſpeare's Corio anus.
3. Any conceit formed by twiſting or changing, in any manner,
the form or meaning of a word. -
Haſte thee, nymph, and bring with thee
Jeſt and youthful jollity,
Quips and cranks, and wanton wiles,
Nods and becks, and wreathed ſmiles,
Such as hang on Hebe's cheek,
And love to live in dimple ſleek. Milton.
CRANK. adj. [from onkranck, Dutch. Skinner.]
1. Healthy; ſprightly: ſometimes corrupted to cranky.
They looken bigge, as bulls that been bate,
And bearen the cragg ſo ſtiff and ſo ſtate,
As cockle, on his dunghil crowing cranke. Steºſer’s Poſt.
2. Among ſailors, a ſhip is ſaid to be crank, when, by the form
of its bottom, or by being loaded too much above, it is liable
to be overſet. [from Åranck, Dut, ſick.]
To CRA'NKLE. v. n. [from crank.] To run in and out; to
run in flexures and windings.
See how this river comes me crankling in,
And cuts me from the beſt of all my land,
A huge half-moon, a monſtrous cantle out. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
To CRA'Nkle. v. a. To break into unequal ſurfaces; to break
into angles. - -
Old Vaga's ſtream,
Forc’d by the ſudden ſhock, her wonted track
Forſook, and drew her humid train aſlope,
Philips.
- - - He, who ſerves, has ſtill reſtraints of dread upon his ſpirits,
* CRA'NKLEs.
Crankling her banks.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 158</div><p class="Text">C R A
C R A
Crs's: LEs n.ſ. (from the verb ] Incºualitics; angular pro-
in! nell Ces.
CRA'NKN Ess. m. ſ. [from crank.]
1. Health ; vigour.
2. Diſpoſition to overſet. -
CRA'NN i I.D. adj. [from cranny..] Full of chinks.
A will it is, as I would have you think,
That had in it a crannied hole or chink. Shakeſpeare.
A very fair fruit, and not unlike a citron; but ſomewhat
rougher chopt and crannical, vulgarly conceived the marks of
Adam's teeth. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vii. c. 1.
CRANNY. n.ſ. [cren, Fr. crena, Latin.] A chink; a cleft;
a fiſłure. -
The eye of the underſtanding is like the eye of the ſenſe ;
for as you may ſee great objects through ſmall crannies or
holes, ſo you may ſee great axioms of nature through ſmall
and—contemptible inſtances. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 91.
And therefore beat, and laid about,
To find a crammy to creep out. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. I.
In a firm building, even the cavities ought not to be filled
with rubbiſh, but with brick or ſtone, fitted to the crannies.
- Dryden's Dedication to the Æneid.
Within the ſoaking of water and ſprings, with ſtreams and
currenys in the veins and crannies. Burnet's Theo, ºf the Earth.
He ſkipped from room to room, ran up ſtairs and down
ſtairs, from the kitchen to the garrets, and he peeped into
every cranny.
of which the dreſs of the clergy is ſometimes made.
And proud Roxana, fir'd with jealous rage,
With fifty yards of crafe ſhall ſweep the ſtage. Swift.
Northou, lord Arthur, ſhall eſcape:
To thee I often call'd in vain,
Againſt that aſſaſſin in crape;
Yet thou could'ſt tamely ſee me ſlain. Swift.
'Tis from high life high charaćters are drawn;
A ſaint in crape, is twice a ſaint in lawn. Pope, Epiſtle i.
CRA'PULENce. m. ſ. [crapula, a ſurfeit, Latin.] Drunkenneſs;
ſickneſs by intemperance. Dić7.
CRA'Pulous. adj. [crapu'oſus, Lat.] Drunken; intemperate;
ſick with intemperance. Dić7.
To CRASH. v. m. [a word probably formed from the thing.]
1. To make a loud complicated noiſe, as of many things falling
or breaking at once.
There ſhall be a great craſhing from the hills.
When convulſions cleave the lab’ring earth,
Before the diſmal yawn appears, the ground
Trembles and heaves, the nodding houſes craſh. .
To CRAs H. v. a. To break or bruiſe.
My maſter is the great rich Capulet; and if you be not of
the houſe of Montague, I pray you come and craſh a cup of
wine. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
Mr. Harburton has it, cruſh a cup of wine.
Tº croſh, ſays Hanmer, is to be merry : a craſh being a word ſtill
uſed in ſome counties for a merry bout.
It is ſurely better to read crack. See CRAck.
CRASH. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A loud ſudden mixed ſound,
as of many things broken at the ſame time.
Senſcleſs Ilium,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his baſe; and, with a hideous craſh,
Takes priſoner Pyrrhus' ear. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Moralizing ſat I by the hazard-table: I look'd upon the
uncertainty of riches, the decay of beauty, and the craſh of
worlds, with as much contempt as ever Plato did. Pope.
CRASIS. n.f. [x:42:..] Temperature; conſtitution ariſing from
the various properties of humours.
The fancies of men are ſo immediately diverſified by the
individual crafts, that every man owns, ſomething wherein
none is like him. s Glanville's Sceſſ, c. 15.
A man may be naturally inclined to pride, luſt, and anger,
as theſe inclinations are founded in a peculiar craft, and con-
ſtitution of the blood and ſpirits. South's Sermons.
CRASS. adj. [craffils, Latin.] Groſs; coarſe; not thin ; not
comminuted; not ſubtle; not conſiſting of ſmall parts.
Metals are intermixed with the common terreſtrial matter,
, ſo as not to be diſcoverable by human induſtry; or, if diſco-
verable, ſo diffuſed and ſcattered amongſt the craffir and more
unprofitable matter, that it would never be poſſible to ſeparate
and extraćt it. I/oodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
CRA's ITUDE. r. ſ. ſcraſtudo, Latin.] Groſſneſs; coarſeneſs;
thickneſs.
They muſt be but thin, as a leaf, or a piece of paper, or
parchment; for if they have a greater craffitude, they will alter
in their own body, though they ſpend not. Bacºn's Nat. Hiſt.
The Dead Sea, which vomiteth up bitumen, is of that
craffitide, as living bodies, bound hand and foot, caſt into it,
have been born up, and not ſunk. Bacon's Narural Hiſtory.
The terreſtrial matter carried by rivers into the ſea, is
ſuſtained therein partly by the greater craſhtude and gravity of
the ſea-water, and partly by its conſtant agitation. iſºard.
Vol. I.
Smith,
Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
CRApé. m. ſ." [crºpa, low Latin.] A thin ſtuff, looſely woven,
Zeph. i. I O.
CRASTINA'tion. n.ſ.. [from craftino, Latin, to-morrow. 1
Delay. - Dić?.
CRA’rch. n.ſ.. [creche, French; crates, Latin.] The paliſaded
frame in which hay is put for cattle.
When being expelled out of Paradiſe, by reaſon of ſin, thou
wert held in the chains of death; I was incloſed in the virgin's
womb, I was laid in the cratch, I was wrapped in ſwathling-
cloaths. - Hakewill on Providence.
CRA v A'T. m. ſ. [of uncertain etymology.] A neck-cloath ;
any thing worn about the neck.
Leſs delinquents have been ſcourg'd,
And hemp on wooden anvils forg'd;
Which others for cravats have worn -
About their necks, and took a turn. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 1.
The reſtrictives were applied, one over another, to her
throat: then we put her on a cravat. J/ſeman's Surgery.
To CRAVE. v. a. [chaplan, Saxon.]
1. To aſk with earneſtneſs; to aſk with ſubmiſſion; to beg; to
• entreat.
What one petition is there found in the whole litany,
whereof we ſhall ever be able at any time to ſay, that no mán
living needeth the grace or benefit therein craved at God's
hands? Hooker.
As for my nobler friends, I crave their pardons;
But for the mutable rank-ſcented many,
Let them regard me as I do not flatter. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The poor people not knowing where to hide themſelves
from the fury of their enemies, nor of whom to crave help,
fled as men and women diſmayed. Knoles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
I would crave leave here, under the word ačtion, to com-
prehend the forbearance too of any action propoſed. Lºcke.
Fach ardent nymph the riſing current craves,
Each ſhepherd's pray’r retards the parting waves. Prior.
2. To aſk inſatiably.
The ſubjećts arm'd ; the more their princes gave,
Th' advantage only took the more to crave. . Denham.
Him doſt thou mean, who, ſpite of all his ſtore,
Is ever craving, and will ſtill be poor
Who cheats for halfpence; and who doffs his coat,
To ſave a farthing in a ferry-boat. Dryden's Perſ. Sat. iv.
3. To long; to wiſh unreaſonably.
Levity puſhes us on from one vain deſire to another, in a
regular viciſłitude and ſucceſſion of cravings and ſatiety. L'Eſtr.
He is actually under the power of a temptation, and the
ſway of an impetuous luſt; both hurrying him to ſatisfy the
cravings of it, by ſome wicked action. South's Sermons.
4. To call for importunately.
Our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your boſom; and beſtow
Your needful counſel to our buſineſſes, -
Which crave the inſtant uſe. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The antecedent concomitants and effects of ſuch a conſti-
tution, are acids, taken in too great quantities; four erućta-
tions, and a craving appetite, eſpecially of terreſtrial and ab-
ſorbent ſubſtances. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
5. Sometimes with for before the thing ſought.
Once one may crave fºr love,
But more would prove
This heart too little, that too great. Suckling.
CRA'v EN. m. ſ. [derived by Skinner from crave, as one that
craves or begs his life: perhaps it comes originally from the
noiſe made by a conquered cock.]
1. A cock conquered and diſpirited.
What, is your creſt a coxcomb?
A combleſs cock, ſo Kate will be my hen.
—No cock of mine; you crow too like a craven. Shakespeares
2. A coward; a recreant. -
Upon his coward breaſt
A bloody croſs, and on his craven creſt
A bunch of hairs diſcolour'd diverſly.
Is it fit this ſoldier keep his oath – -
—He is a traven and a villain elſe. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Whether it be
Beſtial oblivion, or ſome craven ſcruple,
Of thinking too preciſely on th' event;
A thought, which quarter'd, hath but one part wiſdom,
And ever three parts coward. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet,
Yet if the innocent ſome mercy find
From cowardice, not ruth did that proceed;
His noble foes durſt not his craven kind
Exaſperate by ſuch a bloody decd. Fairfax, b, i. ſtan. 88.
To CRA'v EN. v.a. [from the noun..] To make recreant or
cowardly. - Hanmer.
Fairy Queen, b. i.
- 'Gainſt ſelf-ſlaughter
There is a prohibition ſo divine,
That cravens my weak hand. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
CRA v ER. m. ſ. [from crave..] A weak-hearted ſpiritleſs fellow.
It is uſed in Clariffa.
To CRAusch. v.a. [ſhrantſºn, Dutch; whence the vulgar ſay
more properly to ſräunch..] To cruſh in the mouth. The
word is uſed by Swift. -
CRAw. n.ſ. ºpiniº The crop or firſt ſtomach of birds.
5 In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 159</div><p class="Text">C R A
C R E
In birds there is no maſtication, or comminution ºf.”
meat in the mouth; but in ſuch as are not **** It is
immediately ſwallowed into the crop or craw, or at leaſt 1nto
a kind of ante-ſtomach, which I have obſerved in many,
eſpecially piſcivorous birds. Ray on tº creatiºn.
CRA'wfish. n.ſ.. [ſometimes whº crayfiſh, properly ‘revice;
in French ecreviſe.] h ſmall cruſtaceous fiſh found in brooks;
- ſter of freſh water.
º º: caſt their ſhell are the lobſter, the crab, the
Crawfiſh, the hodmandod or dodman, and the tortoiſe. Bacon.
Íet me to crack live crawſ.ſh recommend. Pope's Hor. Im.
The common crawfiſh, and the large ſea crawfiſh, both
produce the ſtones called crabs-eyes. In part of June, 1n
July, and part of Auguſt, this animal not only caſts its ſhell,
but its very ſtomach is alſo conſumed and digeſted, by a new
one growing in its place. Hill on the Materia Medica.
To CRAWL v. n. [Arielen, Dutch..]
1. To creep; to move with a ſlow motion; to move without
riſing from the ground, as a worm.
That crawling inſect, who from mud began ;
Warm'd by my beams, and kindled into man' Dryd. Auren.
The ſtreams but juſt contain'd within their bounds,
By ſlow degrees into their channels crawl;
And earth increaſes as the waters fall. Dryden,
A worm finds what it ſearches after, only by feeling, as it
crawk from one thing to another. Grew's Coſmoſ. b. ii. c. 8.
The vile worm, that yeſterday began
To crawl; thy fellow-creature, abject man! Prior.
2. To move weakly, and ſlowly.
'Tis our firſt intent
To ſhake all cares and buſineſs from our age,
While we unburthen’d crawl tow’rd death. Shakespeare K. Lear.
They like tall fellows crept out of the holes; and ſecretly
crawling up the battered walls of the fort, got into it. Knºlles.
A look ſo pale no quartane ever gave ;
Thy dwindled legs ſeem crawling to a grave. Dryd, juvenal.
He was hardly able to crawl about the room, far leſs to look
after a troubleſome buſineſs. . . Arbuthn. Hiſtory of john Bull.
Man is a very worm by birth,
Wile reptile, weak and vain
A while he crawls upon the earth,
Then ſhrinks to earth again. Swift.
It will be very neceſſary for the threadbare gownman, and
every child who can crawl, to watch the fields at harveſt-
time. Swift.
3. To move about hated and deſpiſed. ift
Cranmer
Hath crawl"d into the favour of the king,
And is his oracle. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Reflect upon that litter of abſurd opinions that crawl about
the world, to the diſgrace of reaſon. - Scuth's Sermons.
How will the condemned finner then crawl forth, and ap-
pear in his filth and ſhame, before that undefiled tribunal?
South's Sermons.
Behold a rev'rend fire, whom want of grace
Has made the father of a nameleſs race,
Grawl through the ſtreet, ſhov'd on, or rudely preſs'd
By his own ſons, that paſs him by unbleſs'd Pºpe, Eºſ, i.
CRA'wler. m. ſ. [from crawl.] A creeper; any thing that
creeps.
CRA'YFISH. n.ſ. [See CRAwfish J The river lobſter.
The cure of the muriatick and armoniack ſaltneſs requires
to uſe ſlimy meats; as ſnails, tortoiſes, jcllies, and crayfiſhes.
Floyer on the Humours.
CRA'Yon, n.ſ. ſcrayºn, French.]
* A kind of pencil; a roll of paſte to draw lines with.
Let nº day paſs over you without drawing a line; that is to
ſay, without working, without giving ſome ſtrokes of the
pencil or the crayon. Dryden's Dufre noy.
2: A drawing or deſign done with a pencil or crayon.
To CRAZE. v. a. ſecraſer, French, to break to pieces.]
1. To break 3 to cruſh; to weaken.
In this conſideration the anſwer of Calvin unto Farrel, con-
“rning the children of Popiſh parents, doth ſeem crazed. Hick.
Relent, ſweet Hermia; and, Lyſander, yield
Thy crazed title to my certain right. Shakeſpeare.
Then through the firey pillar, and the cloud,
God looking forth, will trouble all his hoſt,
2 1. º their chariot-wheels. Milton's Parad. Loft, b. xii.
. 1 o powder.
The tin ore paſſeth to the crazing mill, which, between two
gfinding ſtones, bruiſeth it to a fine ſand. Carew's Survey.
3. To crack the brain; to impair the intellect.
I lov’d him, friend
Sº father his ſon dearer: true, to tell thee,
That grief hath craz'd my wits. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
º is a kind of voluntary frenzy, and a choſen
l raction; and every ſinner does wilder and more extrava-
* º than any man can do that is crazed and out of his
e d. y with this ſad difference, that he knows better what
- Tillotſºn.
A’z FDN Ess
CR - - - - - ----- n. ſ. [from crazed Decrepitude : brok
• * , - - roKennels -
diminution of intellect. l P 2 leſs;
The nature, as of men that have ſick bodies, ſo likewiſe of
the people in the crazedneſs of their minds, poſſeſſed with diſ-
like and diſcontentment at things preſent, is to imagine that
any thing would help them. Hooker, Preface.
CRA'ziness. n.ſ.. [from crazy. J
1. State of being crazy; imbecillity; weakneſs.
Touching other places, ſhe may be ſaid to hold them as one
ſhould do a wolf by the ears; nor will I ſpeak now of the
crazineſ of her title to many of them. Howel's Wºcal Foreſt.
2. Weakneſs of intelle&amp;t.
CRA'zY. adj. [ecraft, French.]
1. Broken; decrepit.
Come, my lord,
We will beſtow you in ſome better place;
Fitter for ſickneſs and for crazy age. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
When people are crazy, and in diſorder, it is natural for
them to groan. L'Aſtrange.
2, Broken witted; ſhattered in the intelle&amp;t.
The queen of night, whoſe large command
Rules all the ſca and half the land,
And over moiſt and crazy brains,
In high ſpring-tides, at midnight reigns. Hudibras, p. iii.
3. Weak; feeble; ſhattered. - -
Phyſick can but mend our crazy ſtate,
Patch an old building, not a new create. Dryden's Falks.
Were it poſſible that the near approaches of eternity, whe-
ther by a mature age, a crazy conſtitution, or a violent ſick-
neſs, ſhould amaze ſo many, had they truly conſidered. Jºake.
CREAGHT. n ſ. [an Iriſh word.]
In theſe faſt places they kept their creaghts, or herds of cat-
tle, living by the milk of the cow, without huſbandry or
tillage. Davies on Ireland.
To CREAk. v. n. [corrupt from crack.]
1. To make a harſh protracted noiſe.
Let not the creaſſing of ſhoes, nor the ruſtling of ſilks, be-
tray thy poor heart to women. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
No door there was th' unguarded houſe to keep,
On creaking hinges turn'd, to break his ſleep. Dryd. Fables.
2. It is ſometimes uſed of animals.
The creaking locuſts with my voice conſpire,
They fry'd with heat, and I with fierce deſire. Dryd. Pirgil.
CREAM. m. ſ. [cremor, Latin.]
1. The unétuous or oily part of milk, which, when it is cold,
floats on the top, and is changed by the agitation of the churn
into butter; the flower of milk.
It is not your inky brows, your black ſilk hair,
Your bugle eye-balls, nor your cheek of cream,
That can entame my ſpirits to your worſhip. Shakºſºfare.
I am as vigilant as a cat to ſteal cream. Shakesp, Hºnry IV.
Cream is matured and made to riſe more ſpeedily, by putting
in cold water; which, as it ſeemeth, getteth down the whey.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 3, 4.
How the drudging goblin ſwet,
To earn his cream-bowl duly ſet; -
When in one night, ere glimpſe of morn,
His ſhadowy flail hath threſh'd the corn. Milton.
Let your various creams incircled be
With ſwelling fruit, juſt raviſh'd from the tree. King.
Milk, ſtanding ſome time, naturally ſeparates into an oily
liquor called creaſºn, and a thinner, blue, and more ponderous
liquor called ſkimmed milk. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. It is uſed for the beſt part of any thing; as, the cream ºf a
eſſ.
To CREAM. v. n. [from the noun..] To gather cream.
There are a ſort of men, whoſe viſages
Do cream and mantle like a ſtanding pond ;
And do a wilful ſtiffneſs entertain,
With purpoſe to be dreſt in an opinion
Of wiſdom, gravity, profound conceit. Shakespeare Merch. of Pen.
To CREAM. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſkim off the cream.
2. To take the flower and quinteſſence of any thing: ſo uſed
ſomewhere by Swift.
CREAM-F Ace D. adj. [ cream and faced.] Pale ; coward-
looking.
Thou cream-fac'd lown,
Where got'ſ thou that gooſe-look. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
CREAMY. adj. [from cream.] Full of cream; having the na-
ture of cream.
CREANCE. n.ſ. [French.] Is, in falconry, a fine ſmall line,
faſtened to a hawk's leaſh when ſhe is firſt lured.
CREASE. m.ſ.. [from creta, Latin, chalk. Skinner.] A mark
made by doubling any thing.
Men of great parts are unfortunate in buſineſs, becauſe
they go out of the common road: I once deſired lord Boling-
broke to obſerve, that the clerks uſed an ivory knife, with 2.
blunt edge, to divide paper, which cut it even, only requirº
a ſtrong hand; whereas a ſharp penknife would go out of the
creaſe, and disfigure the paper. Swift.
To CREASE. v.a. [from the noun..] To mark anything by
doubling it, ſo as to leave the impreſſion.
To CREATE. v. a. [cree, Latin.]
4. - 1. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 160</div><p class="Text">w -
C R E
C R E
. 1. To form out of nothing; to cauſe to exiſt.
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth:
- Gen. i. 1.
We having but imperfect ideas of the operations of our
minds, and much imperfeóter yet of the operations of God,
run into great difficulties about free created agents, which rea-
ſon cannot well extricate itſelf out of. Locke.
2. To produce; to cauſe; to be the occaſion.
Now is the time of help: your eye in Scotland
Would create ſoldiers, and make women fight,
To doff their dire diſtreſſes. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
His abilities were prone to create in him great confidence of
undertakings, and this was like enough to betray him to great
errours and many enemies. King Charles.
They eclipſe the cleareſt truths, by difficulties of their
own creating, or no man could miſs his way to heaven for
want of light. Decay of Piety.
None knew, 'till guilt created fear,
What darts or poiſon’d arrows were. Roſcommon.
Muſt I new bars to my own joy create,
Refuſe myſelf what I had forc’d from fate? Dryd. Aurengz.
Long abſtinence is troubleſome to acid conſtitutions, by
the uneaſineſs it creates in the ſtomach. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. To beget.
And the iſſue there create,
/
Ever ſhall be fortunate. Shakespeare. Midſummer-Night's Dream.
4. To inveſt with any new character.
- Ariſe my knights of the battle: I create you
Companions to our perſon, and will fit you
With dignities becoming your eſtates. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
5. To give any new qualities; to put any thing in a new ſtate.
The beſt Britiſh undertaker had but a proportion of three
thouſand acres for himſelf, with power to create a manor, and
holy a court-baron. Davies on Ireland.
CR FA’rion. n.ſ.. [from create.]
1. The aët of creating or conferring exiſtence.
Conſider the immenſity of the Divine Love, expreſſed in
all the emanations of his providence; in his creation, in his
conſervation of us. - Taylor.
2. The act of inveſting with new qualities or chara&amp;ter; as, the
creation of peers.
3. The things created; the univerſe.
As ſubjećts then, the whole creation came;
And from their natures Adam them did name. Denham.
Such was the ſaint, who ſhone with ev'ry grace,
Reflecting, Moſes like, his maſter's face:
God ſaw his image lively was expreſs'd,
And his own work as his creation bleſs'd.
Nor could the tender new creation bear
Th’ exceſſive heats or coldneſs of the year. Dryden's Virgil.
In days of yore, no matter where or when,
Before the low creation ſwarm'd with men.
4. Anything produced, or cauſed.
Art thou not, fatal viſion, ſenſible
To feeling as to ſight : Or art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a falſe creation,
Proceeding from the heat-oppreſſed brain Shakespeare Macbeth.
CR FA'TIVE. adj. [from create J
F. Having the power to create.
2. Exerting the act of creation.
To trace the outgoings of the ancient of days in the firſt
inſtance, and of his creative power, is a reſearch too great
º for mortal enquiry. So th’s Sermons.
But come, ye generous minds, in whoſe wide thought,
Of all his works, creative beauty burns
With warmeſt beam.
*CREATOR. m. ſ. [creator, Latin.]
exiſtence.
Open, ye heavens, your living doors; let in
The great creator, from his work return'd
Magnificent; his fix days work, a world Milt. Parad. Loft.
When you lie down, cloſe your eyes with a ſhort prayer,
commit yourſelf into the hands of your faithful creator; and
when you have done, truſt him with yourſelf, as you muſt do
when you are dying. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
*CR F 'Atur E. m. ſ. ſcreatura, low Latin.]
* - A being not ſelf-exiſtent, but created by the ſupreme power.
Were theſe perſons idolaters for the worſhip they did not
give to the Creator, or for the worſhip they did give to his
creaflºres. Stilingſleet's Defence ºf Diſcourſe on Rom. Idol.
- - Any thing created. -
God's firſt creature was light. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Imperfect the world, and all the creatures in it, muſt be
acknowledged in many reſpects to be. Tillotſon, Sermon i.
3- An animal not human.
The queen pretended ſatisfaction of her knowledge only
In killing creatures vile, as cats and dogs. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
4. A general term for man. -
Yet crime in her could never creature find;
But for his love, and for her own ſelf-ſake,
She wander'd had from one to other Ind. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Dryden's Fables.
Parnel.
Thomſºn's Spring.
The being that beſtows
Moſt curſed of all creatures under ſky,
Lo Tantalus, I here tormented lye. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. 7,
Though he might burſt his lungs to call for help,
No creature would aſſiſt or pity him. Roſcommon.
5: A word of contempt for a human being.
Hence; home, you idle creatures, get you home;
Is this a holiday ! Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
He would into the ſtews,
And from the common creatures pluck a glove,
And wear it as a favour. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
I’ve heard that guilty creatures, at a play,
Have, by the very cunning of the ſcene,
Been ſtruck ſo to the ſoul, that preſently
They have proclaim'd their malefactions. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Nor think to-night of thy ill-nature,
But of thy follies, idle creature. Prior.
A good poet no ſooner sommunicates his works, but it is
imagined he is a vain young creature, given up to the ambi-
tion of fame. - Pope.
6. A word of petty tenderneſs. -
And then, ſir, would he gripe and wring my hand;
Cry, Oh ſweet creature, and then kiſs me hard. Shakeſpeare.
Ah, cruel creature, whom do'ſt thou deſpiſe
The gods, to live in woods, have left the ſkies. Dryd. Wirg.
Some young creatures have learnt their letters and ſyllables
by having them paſted upon little tablets. // atts.
7. A perſon who owes his riſe or his fortune to another.
He ſent to colonel Maſſey to fend him men, which he,
being a creature of Eſſex's, refuſed. Carendon.
The duke's creature he deſired to be eſteemed. Clarendon.
Great princes thus, when favourites they raiſe,
To juſtify their grace, their creatures praiſe. Dryd. Aurengz.
The deſign was diſcovered by a perſon whom every body
knows to be the creature of a certain great man. Swift.
CRE'ATURELY. adj. [from creature.] Having the qualities of
a Creature.
The ſeveral parts of relatives, or creaturely infinites, may
have finite proportions to one another. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
CRE'BRITUDE. n.f. [from creber, frequent, Latin.] Frequent-
neſs. Dićf.
CRE'BRous. adj. [from creber, Latin.] Frequent. Dić7.
CREDENCE. n.ſ.. [from credo, Lat. credence, Norman Fr.]
1. Belief; credit.
Ne let it ſeem, that credence this exceeds;
For he that made the ſame was known right well,
- To have done much more admirable deeds;
It Merlin was. Fairy &amp;cen, b. i. cant. 7, ſtan. 36.
Love and wiſdom,
Approv’d ſo to your majeſty, may plead
For ample credence. Shakeſpeare's All's well that end, well.
They did not only underhand give out that this was the
true earl, but the friar, finding ſome credence in the people,
took boldneſs in the pulpit to declare as much. Bacon's H. VII.
2. That which gives a claim to credit or belief.
After they had delivered to the king their letters of credence,
they were led to a chamber richly furniſhed. Hayward.
CRED ENDA, n. ſ. [Latin.] Things to be believed; articles
of faith; diſtinguiſhed in theology from agena, or practical
duties. -
Theſe were the great articles and crederida of Chriſtianity,
that ſo much ſtartled the world, South's Sermons.
CREDENT, adj. [credens, Latin.]
1. Believing; eaſy of belief. -
Then weigh what loſs your honour may ſuſtain,
If with too credent ear you liſt’ his ſongs. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. Having credit; not to be queſtioned.
My authority bears a credent bulk,
That no particular ſcandal once can touch,
But it confounds the breather. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
CREDE'NTIAL. m.ſ.. [from credens, Latin j That which gives
a title to credit; the warrant upon which belief or authority
is claimed. -
A few perſons of an odious and deſpiſed country could not
have filled the world with believers, had they not ſhown un-
doubted credentials from the Divine Perſon who ſent them on
ſuch a meſſage. Addison on the Chriſtian Religion.
CREDIBI'lity n. ſ. [from credible.] Claim to credit; poſſibi-
lity of obtaining belief; probability.
The firſt of thoſe opinions I ſhall ſhew to be altogether in-
credible, and the latter to have all the credibility and evidence
of which a thing of that nature is capable. Tilºſº, Setºn, i.
Calculate the ſeveral degrees of edibility and convićtion,
by which the one evidence ſurpaſſ-th the other. Atterbury.
CREDIBLE, adj. [credibilis, Latin.] Worthy of credit; de-
ſerving of belief; having a juſt claim to belief, -
The ground of credit is the credibility of things credited;
and things are made credible, either by the known condition
and quality of the utterer, or by the manifeſt likelihood of
truth in themſelves. Hºoker, b. ii. ſ. 4.
None can demonſtrate to me, that there is ſuch an iſland as
Jamaica; yet, upon the teſtimony of creditle perſons, I am
free from doubt. Tillotſon, Preface.
CREDIBLENEss.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 161</div><p class="Text">C. R. E.
C R E
Carpinºrsrs. n ſ [from credible.] Credibility; worthineſs
of belief; juſt claim to belief. -
The credillºngſ of a good part of theſe narratives has been
confirmed to mé by a practiſer of phyſick in the Eaſt Indies.
Hºyle's Hiſtory of Firmneſs.
Cs Edibly. adv. [from credible.] In a manner that claims
belief. - -
º, with the loſs of ſo few of the Engliſh as is ſcarce
credible, being, as hath been rather confidently than credibly
reported, but of one man, though not a few hurt. Bacon.
CREDIT. n ſ. [credit, French.]
1. Belief. -
When the people heard theſe words, they gave no credit
unto them, nor received them. 1 Mac. x. 46.
I may give credit to reports. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 13e.
Some ſccret truths, from learned pride conceal’d,
To maids alone and children are reveal’d :
What though no credit doubting wits may give,
The fair and innocent ſhall ſtill believe. Pope's Ra. of Lock.
2. Honour; reputation.
I publiſhed, becauſe I was told I might pleaſe ſuch as it was
a credit to pleaſe. Pope.
3. Eſteem; good opinion.
There is no decaying merchant, or inward beggar, hath ſo
many tricks to uphold the credit of their wealth, as theſe empty
perſons have to maintain the credit of their ſufficiency. Bacon.
His learning, though a poet ſaid it,
Before a play, would loſe no credit. Swift.
Yes, while I live, no rich or noble knave,
Shall walk the world in credit to his grave. Pope's Hor. b. ii.
4. Faith; teſtimony.
We are contented to take this upon your credit, and to
think it may be. Hooker, b. iv. ſect. 12.
. The things which we properly believe, be only ſuch as are
received upon the credit of divine teſtimony. Hooker, b. v.
The author would have done well to have left ſo great a
paradox only to the credit of a ſingle aſſertion. Locke.
5. Truſt repoſed.
Credit is nothing but the expectation of money, within
ſome limited time. Locke.
6. Promiſe given.
They have never thought of violating the publick credit,
or of alienating the revenues to other uſes than to what they
have been thus aſſigned. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
7. Influence; power not compulſive; intereſt.
She employed his uttermoſt credit to relieve us, which was
as great as a beloved ſon with a mother. Sidney.
They ſent him likewiſe a copy of their ſupplication to the
king, and deſired him to uſe his credit that a treaty might be
entered into. Clarendon, b. ii.
. Having credit enough with his maſter to provide for his own
intereſt, he troubled not himſelf for that of other men. Claren.
To CRE'Dit. v. a. [credo, Latin.]
1. To believe.
Now I change my mind,
And partly credit things that do preſage. Shakeſp. Yul. Caſ.
. To credit the unintelligibility both of this union and mö-
tiºn, we need no more than to conſider it. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 4.
2. To procure credit or honour to anything,
May here her monument ſtand ſo,
To credit this rude age; and ſhow
To future times, that even we
Some patterns did of virtue ſee. JWaller.
It was not upon deſign to credit theſe papers, nor to com-
Pliment a ſociety ſo much above flattery. Glanv. Scepſ. Prºf.
At preſent you credit the church as much by your govern-
ºnt, as you did the ſchool formerly by your wit. South.
3. To truſt; to confide in.
4. To admit as a debtor.
CREDITABLE. adj. [from credit.]
1. Reputable; above contempt.
He ſettled him in a good creditable way of living, having
tº: him by his *::: * *i; beſt Pº of the
2. Honourable; eſtimable. rbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
The cºntemplation of things, that do not ſerve to promote
ºr happineſs, is but a more ſpecious and ingenious ſort of
*"eneß, a more pardonable and radial. King of ignorance.
CRE' Tillotſon, Sermon i.
*** PITABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from creditable.] Reputation; eſti-
Illation.
th *mong all theſe ſnares, there is none more entangling than
C º reditatiºnſ, and repute of cuſtomary vices. Decay of Piety.
º: *****, adv. [from creditable.] Reputably; without
iſgrace.
º wº chuſe rather to neglect. their duty ſafely and
only to t t º to get a broken pate in the church's ſervice,
too. ° rewarded with that which will * ; hearts
"r, ºf outb's Sermons.
º: . ſ. [creditor, Latin.) He to whom a debt is
* * * gives credit: correlative to debtor.
There came divers of Anthonio's creditors in my company
to Venice, that ſwear he cannot chuſe but break. Shakespear.
I am ſo uſed to conſider myſelf as creditor and debtor, that
I often ſtate my accounts after the ſame manner, with regard
to heaven and my own ſoul. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 549.
No man of honour, as that word is uſually underſtood, did
ever pretend that his honour obliged him to be chaſte or ten-
peraſe, to pay his creditors, to be uſeful to his country, to do
ood to mankind, to endeavour to be wiſe or learned, to re-
gard his word, his promiſe, or his oath. Swift.
CREDU'LITY, n. ſ. ſcredu'itº, French ; credulitas, Latin.] Eaſi-
neſs of belief; readineſs of credit.
The poor Plangus, being ſubject to that only diſadvantage
of honeſt hearts, credu.ity, was perſuaded by him. Sidney.
The prejudice of credulity may, in ſome meaſure, be cured
by learning to ſet a high value on truth. J/att,’s logić.
CREDULOUS. adj. [credulus, Latin.] Apt to believe; un-
ſuſpecting; eaſily deceived.
A credulous father, and a brother noble,
Whoſe nature is ſo far from doing harm,
That he ſuſpects none. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
CRE'Dulous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from credulous.] Aptneſs to believe;
credulity.
CRE e.p.. n.ſ. (from cred, the firſt word of the apoſtles creed.]
1. A form of words in which the articles of faith are compre-
hended.
The larger and fuller view of this foundation is ſet down in
the creeds of the church. Hammond ox Fundamentals.
Will they, who decry creed, and creedmakers, ſay that one
who writes a treatiſe of morality ought not to make in it any
colle&amp;tion of moral precepts Fiddles's Sermons.
2. Any folemn profeſſion of principles or opinion.
For me, my lords,
I love him not, nor fear him; there's my creed. Shakeſp.
To CREEK. v. a. [See To CREAk.] To make a haiſh
noiſe.
Shall I ſtay here,
Creeking my ſhoes on the plain maſonry.
CREEK. m. ſ. [checca, Sax. Kreke, Dutch.]
1. A prominence or jut in a winding coaſt.
As ſtreams, which with their winding banks do play,
Stopp'd by their creeks, run ſoftly through the plain. Davies.
They on the bank of Jordan, by a cree",
Where winds with reeds and oſiers whiſp'ring play,
Their unexpected loſs and plaints outbreath'd. Parad. Rºg.
2. A ſmall port; a bay; a cove.
A law was made here to ſtop their paſſage in every port
and creek. - Davies on Ireland.
3. Any turn, or alley.
A back-friend, a ſhoulder-clapper; one that commands
The paſſages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands. Shakeſp.
CRE'EKY. adj. [from creek. J Full of creeks; uncqual;
winding.
Who, leaning on the belly of a pot,
Pour'd forth a water, whoſe outguſhing flood
Ran bathing all the creeky ſhore a-flot,
Whereon the Trojan prince ſpilt Turnus' blood. Stenſºr.
To CREEP. v. n. [preter crept; crypan, Sax. krepan, Germ.]
I. To move with the belly to the ground without legs; as a
WOrin.
Shakeſpeare.
Ye that walk
The earth, and ſtately tread, or lowly creep! Mit. Pa L'ſ.
And every creeping thing that creeps the ground. Miltºn.
If they cannot diſtinguiſh creeping from flying, let them lay
down Virgil, and take up Ovid de Ponto. Dryd. Dedicat, Æn.
2. To grow along the ground, or on other ſupports.
The grottos cool, with ſhady poplars crown'd,
And creeping vines on arbours weav'd around. Dryden,
3. To move forward without bounds or leaps; as inſects.
4. To move ſlowly and feebly.
To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the laſt ſyllable of recorded time. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Why ſhould a man
Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice -
By being peeviſh * Shakeſpeare's Afrchant of Venice.
He who creeps after plain, dull, common ſenſe, is ſafe from
committing abſurdities; but can never reach the excellence of
wit. Dryden's Tyrannick Love.
5. To move ſecretly and clandeſtinely.
I'll creep up into the chimney.—
—There they always uſe to diſcharge their birding-pieces:
creep into the kiln-hole. Shakespeare. Aſerry Jºves ºf ſº indſor.
Whate'er you are,
That in this deſart inacceſſible,
Under the ſhade of melancholy boughs,
Loſe and neglect the creeping hours of time. Shakespeare care.
Of this ſort are they which creep into houſes, and lead cap-
tive ſilly women. 2 Tim. iii. 6.
Thou makeſt darkneſs, and it is night wherein all the beaſts
of the foreſt do creep forth. Pſal civ. 29.
3 - Now
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 162</div><p class="Text">C. R. E.
-
Now and then a work or two has crpt in to keep his firſt
deſign in countenance. Atterbury.
6. To move timorouſly without ſoaring, or venturing into
dangers.
Paradiſe Loſt is admirable; but am I therefore bound to
maintain, that there are no flats amongſt his clevations, when
it is cvident he creeps along ſometia es for above an hundred
lines together Dryden.
We here took a little boat, to cree” along the ſea-ſhore as
far as Genoa. - Aſad ſon's Rema. As an Ital,.
7. To come unexpected; to fleal forward unheard and unſeen.
By thoſe gifts of nature and fortune he creeps, ray he flies,
into the favour of poor ſilly women. Sidney, b. ii.
It ſeems, the marriage of his brother's wife
Has crett too near his conſcience. -
No, his conſcience
Has crept too near another lady. Shaſ ſpeare's Henry VIII.
Neceſſity enforced them, after they grew full of people, to
ſpread themſelves, and creep out of Shinar, or Babylonia.
- Raleigh's Hiſtory.
- None pretends to know from how remote corners of
thoſe frozen mountains, ſome of thoſe fierce nations firſt crept
Out. - Temple.
It is not to be expected that every one ſhould guard his un-
derſlanding from being impoſed on, by the ſophiſtry which
creeps into moſt of the books of argument Lo.4c.
8. To behave with ſervility; to fawn; to bend.
They were us’d to bend,
To ſend their ſmiles before them to Achilles,
To come as humbly as they us’d to creep
To holy altars. Shakespeare’s Troilus and Crºffda.
CR E'E PER. m. ſ. [from creep.]
1. A plant that ſupports itſelf by means of ſome ſtronger body.
Plants that put forth their ſap haſtily, have bodies not pro-
portionable to their length; therefore they are winders or
creepers ; as ivy, briony, and woodbine. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſtory.
2. An iron uſed to ſlide along the grate in kitchens.
&amp; A kind of patten or clog worn by women.
REE PHOLE. m. ſ. ſcreep and hole.]
1. A hole into which any animal may creep to eſcape danger.
2. A ſubterfuge; an excuſe.
CREE'PINGLY. adv. [from creeping.] Slowly; after the man-
ner of a reptile.
The joy, which wrought into Pygmalion's mind, was even
ſuch as, by each degree of Zelmane's words, creqingly entered
into Philoclea's. Sidney, b. ii.
CR FMATION. m. ſ. [crematio, Latin.] A burning.
CREMOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] A milky ſubſtance; a ſoft liquor re-
ſembling cream.
The food is ſwallowed into the ſtomach, where, mingled
with diſſolvent juices, it is reduced into a cºyle or cremor. Ray.
CRE/NATE D. adj. [from crena, Latin J Notched; indented.
The cells are prettily crenated, or notched quite round the
edges; but not ſtraited down to any depth. // codw. on Fºſſils.
CRE'PAN E. m. ſ. [With farriers. J. An ulcer ſeated in the
midſt of the forepart of the foot, cauſed by a bilious, ſharp,
and biting humour that ficts the ſkin, or by a hurt given by
ſtriking of the hinder fect. Farrier's Dić'.
To CR}. PITA i E. v. n. [crepitº, Latin.] To make a ſmall
crackling noiſe.
CR EPI . A rios. m. ſ. [from crepitate J
noiſe.
CREP'r. tarticip. [from crºp.]
A ſmall crackling
There are certain men creſt in unawares. jude, iv.
This fair vine, but that her arms ſurround
- &gt;
Her marry'd clim, had crept along the ground. Pope.
CREPU'S ULE. n. ſ. ſcrepuſculum, Lat.j Twilight. Dić.
CR FPU's culous, adj. [c, ºf uſculum, Latin.j Glimmering; in a
ſtate between light and darkneſs. -
A cloſe apprehenſion of the one, might perhaps afford a
glimmering light and crºſºftulous glance of the other. Brown.
The beginnings of philoſophy were in a creſ uſculous obſcu-
rity, and it is yet ſcarce paſt the dawn. Glanv. Scepſ. c. 22.
CRESCENT, adj. [from creſco, Latin.] Increaſing; growing;
in a ſtate of increaſe. -
I have ſeen him in Britain : he was then of a creſent
In Otc. Shakeſp. are’s Cymbeline.
With theſe in troop
Came Aſtoreth, whom the Phoenicians call’d
Aſtarte, queen of heavch, with crºftent horns Aſīt. P. L.
CRE's CENT. m. ſ [crºſºens, Lat.) The moon in her ſlate of
increaſe; any ſimilitude of the moon increaſing.
My pow'r's a crºſſent, and my auguring hope
Says it will come to th’ full. Shakſ. Althony and Cleopatra.
Or Bactrian ſophy, from the horns
Of Turkiſh creſent, leaves all waſte beyond
The realm of Aladule, in his retreat. .4/ilton's Parad. Loft.
Jove in duſky clouds involves the ſkies,
And the faint crºſent ſhoots by fits before their eyes. Dryd.
And two fair creſcents of tranſlucent horn,
The brows of all their young increaſe adorn. Pope's Odyſſy.
/* ,- º ~ .
Crse'scive, adv. [from crºſco, Latin.] Increaſing; growing:
Vol. I.
So the prince obſcur'd his contemplation
Under the veil of wildneſs, which, no doubt, .
Grew like the ſummer-graſs, faſteſt by night,
Unſeen, yet creſcive in his faculty. Shakespeare Henry V.
CR ess, n. ſ. [perhaps from crºſco, it being a quick grower.]
An herb.
Its flower conſiſts of four leaves, placed in form of a croſs:
the pointal ariſes from the center of the flower-cup, and be-
comes a roundiſh ſmooth fruit, divided into two cells, and
furniſhed with ſeeds, generally ſmooth. It is cultivated as a
fallad-herb, and chiefly eſteemed in the Winter and Spring,
being one of the warm kind. 44iller.
His court with nettles and with creſſes ſtor'd,
With ſoups unbought, and fallads, bleſt his board. Pope.
CRE'ssET. n. J. [croiſſºte, Fr. becauſe beacons had croſſes an-
ciently on their tops J A great light ſet upon a beacon, light-
houſe, or watch-tower. Hanmer. They ſtill raiſe armics
in Scotland by carrying about the fire croſs.
At my nativity
The front of heav'n was full of firy ſparks,
Of burning crºſſets. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
- From the arched roof,
Pendent by ſubtle magick, many a row
Of ſtarry lamps, and blazing crºſſets, fed
With naphtha and aſphaltus, yielded light
As from a ſky. 41ilion's Paradiſe Lº, h i. 1, 7-6.
CREST. m. ſ. [.. iſła, Latin.]
1. The plume of feathers on the top of the ancient helmet.
His valour, ſhewn upon our crºſs to-day,
Hath taught us how to cheriſh ſuch high deeds,
Ev’n in the boſom of our adverſaries. Shakºp. Henry IV.
2. The comb of a cock.
Others, on ground
Walk'd firm; the crºſſed cock, whoſe clarion ſounds
The ſilent hours. Miltºn's Paradiſe Lºſi, b. vii. 1.442.
3. The ornament of the helmet in heraldry.
Of what eſteem crºſs were, in the time of king Edward
the third's reign, may appear by his giving an eagle, which he
himſelf had formerly born, for a crºft to William Montacute,
earl of Saliſbury. Camden's Remains.
* * The horn;
It was a creſ? ere thou waſt born:
Thy father's father wore it. Shakeſpeare's A you like it.
4. Any tuft or ornament on the head; as ſome which the poets
aſſign to ſerpents.
Their crºft, divide, - -
And, tow'ring o'er his head, in triumph ride. Dryd. Wirgi'.
5. Pride; ſpirit; fire; courage; loftineſs of mien.
When horſes ſhould endure the bloody ſpur,
They fall their creſts.
CRE's TED. adj. [from creſ?; criſiatus, Latin.]
1. Adorned with a plume or creſt.
The bold Aſcalonites, -
Then grov'ling ſoil'd their crºſſed helmets in the duſt. Aſ t.
At this, for new replics he did not ſtay;
But lac'd his crºſłed helm, and ſtrode away.
2. Wearing a comb.
The croſted bird ſhall by expericnce know, -
Jove made not him his maſter-piece below. Dryden's Falles.
CREST-FALLEN. adj. [ cºſt and fall. J Dejected; ſunk 3
diſpirited ; cowed; heartleſs; ſpiritleſs. -
I warrant you, they would whip me with their fine wits,
'till I were as crºſºfallen as a dried pear. Sh, AZ. r. lſ of ſ! indſ.
They prolate their words in a whining kind of querulous
tone, as if they were ſtill complaining and crºſſ-fallen. Howe'.
CRE's, Less. adj. [from cry?..] ... Not dignified with coat-
armour; not of any eminent family.
His grandfather was Lionci duke of Clarence,
Third ſon to the third Edward king of England,
Sprung crºſºlſ, yeomen from ſo deep a root. Shakespeare.
CRETA'CEOUS adj. [creta, chalk, Lat.] Abounding with
chalk; having the qualities of chalk; chalky. -
What gives the light, ſeems hard to ſay , whether it be the
cretaceºus ſalt, the nitrous fait, or ſome igneous particles. Grew.
Nor from the ſable ground expect ſucceſs, • * *
Nor from cretaceous, ſtubborn and jejune. . . Philips:
CRETATED. cd ſcretatus, Latin.] Rubbed with chalk. Dici.
CRE'vice. n.ſ. [from crever, Fr. crpare, Latin, to burſt A
crack; a cleft; a narrow opening.
I pried me through the crevice of a wall,
when for his hand he had his two ſons heads. Shaº'ſ care.
I thought it no breach of good-manners to Pºp Atº
and look in at people ſo well employed. Addiſon's Spectator.
CREW, n.ſ. [probably from cºub, Saxon] !
1. A company of people aſſociated for any purpoſe; as gallant
crºw, for troops. Chevy-chºſe.
- There a noble, crew
Of lords and ladies ſtood on every ſide, -
Which, with their preſence fair, the place much beautify’d.
Fairy &amp;c., b. i. cant. 4, Jianz. 7.
2. The company of a ſhip.
Shakespeare.
Dryden.
5 Z Anchors<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 163</div><p class="Text">C R I
C R I
The anchors drop'd, his .. º moor, Dryd. En.
- generally uſed in a bad ſenſe.
3. It is now g %. of the baniſh'd º
ar, hath ventur'd from the deep, to raiſe . .
§. troubles. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. iv. l, 573.
He with a crew, whom like ambition joins
ith him, or under him to tyrannize,
Nº. from Eden tow'rds the weſt, ſhall find .
The plain. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii. l. 38.
The laſt was he, whoſe thunder ſlew -
The Titan race, a rebel ſº Addison.
* [the pre-crit of crow.
t; º, fſ. [4ewel, Dutch..] Yarn twiſted and wound on
lot or ball.
d *:::: ſilk or crewel, gold or ſilver thread, and make theſe
faſt at the bent of the hook. Walton's Angler.
CRIB. n.ſ.. [crºbbe, Sax, crib, German.]
1. The rack or manger of a ſtable.
ict a beaſt be lord of beaſts, and his crib ſhall ſtand at the
king's meſſe. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
The ſteer and lion at one crib ſhall meet,
And harmleſs ſerpents lick the pilgrim's feet. Pope.
2. The ſtall or cabbin of an ox.
3. A ſmall habitation; a cottage. *
Why rather, ſleep, lieſt thou in ſmokey cribs,
Upon uneaſy pallets ſtretching thee,
Than in the perfum’d chambers of the great? . Shakeſpeare.
To CRin. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſhut up in a narrow
habitation; to confine; to cage.
Now I’m cabbin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in
To ſaucy doubts and fears. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
CR1'BBAG E. m. ſ. A game at cards.
CR1'BBLE. m. ſ. [critrum, Latin.] A corn-ſieve. Dić7.
CR1bRA'tion. m. ſ. ſcribro, Latin.] The act of fifting, or
ſeparating by a ſieve.
CRick. m. ſ.
1. [from cricco, Italian.] The noiſe of a door.
2. [from cryce, Saxon, a ſtake..] A painful ſtiffneſs in the
neck. - -
CR1'cket. n.ſ. [Krekel, from Kreken, to make a noiſe, Dutch.]
1. An inſect that ſqueaks or chirps about ovens and fireplaces.
Didſt thou not hear a noiſe 2
—I heard the owl ſcream, and the crickets cry. Shakespeare Macb.
Far from all reſort of mirth,
Save the cricket on the hearth. Milton.
The ſolemn death-watch click'd the hour ſhe dy'd,
And ſhrilling crickets in the chimney cry’d. Gay's Paſtorals.
2. [from cryce, Saxon, a ſtick.] A ſport, at which the con-
tenders drive a ball with ſticks in oppoſition to each other.
The judge, to dance, his brother ſerjeant call;
The ſenator at cricket urge the ball. Pope's Dunciad, l. iv.
3. [from Kriechen, Germ. to creep J A low ſeat or ſtool.
CR 1'E.R. m. ſ. [from cry..] The officer whoſe buſineſs is to
cry or make proclamation.
He openeth his mouth like a crier. Ecclus. xx. 15.
The criers command ſilence, and the whole multitude
preſent ſtand in a ſuſpence. Brerewood on Languages.
The crier calls aloud
Our old nobility of Trojan blood,
Who gape among the crowd for their precarious food. Dry.
CRIME. n.ſ. [crimen, Lat, crime, French.] An act contrary
to right; an offence; a great fault; an act of wickedneſs.
High God be witneſs, that I guiltleſs am;
But if yourſelf, fir knight, ye guilty find,
Or wrapped be in loves of former dame,
With crime do not it cover, but diſcloſe the ſame. Fairy Qu.
`... . / No crime was thine, if 'tis no crime to love. Pope.
CR MEFul. adj. [from crime and full.] Wicked; criminal;
faulty in a high degree; contrary to duty; contrary to virtue.
You proceeded not againſt theſe feats,
~ so crimeful and ſo capital in nature. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
CRIMEEEss, adj. [from crime.] Innocent; without crime.
My foes could not procure me any ſcathe,
So long as I am loyal, true, and crimeleſ. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
CRIMINAL. adj. [from crime.]
l. aulty; contrary to right; contrary to duty; tontrary to
a W.
Live thou, and to thy mother dead atteſt,
That clear ſhe died from blemiſh criminal. Fairy Quen, b. ii.
What wº APPrºve in our friend, we can hardly be induced
tº think criminal in ourſelves. Rogers, Serm. iv.
3. Guilty; tainted with crime; not innocent.
- . neglect ºf any of the relative duties, render us criminal
, '' the fight of God. - Rogers's Sermons,
ū * Sivil; as a criminal proſecution.
R1 MINAL.. n.ſ. [from crime.]
1. A man accuſed.
Was ever criminal forbid to plead
Curb your ill-mannerd -
zeal. ”, St. ---
* A man guilty of a crime Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
th All three per 'oni, that had held chief place of authority in
*ºr Countrics; all three ruined, not by war, or by any other
diſaſter, but by juſtice and ſentence, as delinquents and cri-
minals. Bacon.
CR 1'MINALLY. adv. [from criminal.] Not innocently; wick-
edly; guiltily.
As our thoughts extend to all ſubjećls, they may be crimi-
mally employed on all. Rogers's Sermons.
CR 1'MINALNEss. n.ſ.. [from criminal.] Guiltineſs; want of
innocence.
CRIMINA'tion. m. ſ. [criminatio, Latin.] The act of accuſing;
accuſation; arraignment; charge.
CRI'M INA toRY., adj. [from crimina, Latin.] Relating to ac-
cuſation; accuſing ; cenſorious.
CRI'M INous, adj. [ criminºſus, Latin.] Wicked; iniquitous;
enormouſly guilty.
The puniſhment that belongs to that great and criminous
guilt, is the forfeiture of his right and claim to all mercies,
which are made over to him by Chriſt. Hammond on Fundam.
CRIMINously. adv. [from criminous.] Enormouſly; very
wickedly.
Some particular duties of piety and charity, which were
moſt criminouſly omitted before. Hammond's Pract. Catech.
CR1'MINous N Ess. n.ſ. [from criminous.] Wickedneſs; guilt;
crime.
I could never be convinced of any ſuch criminouſh'ſ in
him, as willingly to expoſe his life to the ſtroke of juſtice and
malice of his enemies. King Charles.
CR 1'Mos IN. adj. [crimoſino, Italian.] A ſpecies of red colour.
Upon her head a crimoſin coronet,
With damaſk roſes and daffadilies ſet,
Bay-leaves between,
And primroſes green,
Embelliſh the white violet.
CRIMP. adj. [from crumble, or crimble.]
1. Friable; brittle; eaſily crumbled; eaſily reduced to powder.
Now the fowler, warn'd
By theſe good omens, with ſwift early ſteps,
Treads the crimp carth, ranging through fields and glades.
Philips.
Spenſer's Paſłorals.
2. Not conſiſtent; not forcible: a low cant word.
The evidence is crimp; the witneſſes ſwear backwards and
forwards, and contradićt themſelves; and his tenants ſtick by
him. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
To Cri'MPLE. v. a. [from rumple, crumple, crimple..] To con-
tract; to corrugate; to cauſe to ſhrink or contračt.
He paſſed the cautery through them, and accordingly crim-
pled them up. J/ ſeman's Surgery.
CRIMSON. m.ſ. [cremeſino, Italian.]
1. Red, ſomewhat darkened with blue.
As crimſon ſeems to be little elſe than a very deep red, with
an eye of blue; ſo ſome kinds of red ſeem to be little elſe
than heightened yellow. Boyle on Colours.
2. Red in general.
Can you blame her then, being a maid yet roſed over with
the virgin crimſon of modeſty, if ſhe deny the appearance of
a naked blind boy, in her naked ſeeing ſelf? Shakespeare Henry V.
Beauty's enſign yet
Is crimſºn in thy lips, and in thy cheeks.
The crimſon ſtream diſtain’d his arms around,
And the diſdainful ſoul came ruſhing through the wound.
Dryden's Aneir.
Shakeſpeare.
Why does the ſoil endue
The bluſhing poppy with a crimſon hue? Priºr.
To CRI'M son. v. a [from the noun.]
1. To dye with crimſon.
Fº me, Julius.-Here waſ thou bay'd, brave hart:
Here didſt thou fall; and here thy hunters ſtand
Sign'd in thy ſpoil, and crimſon'd in thy lethe. Shakeſpeare.
CR 1'Ncu M. m. ſ. [a cant word..] A cramp; a contraction;
whimſy.
For jealouſy is but a kind
Of clap and crincum of the mind. Hudibras, p. iii. cant, 1.
CRING e. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Bow; ſervile civility.
Let me be grateful; but let far from me
Be fawning cringe, and falſe diſſembling looks. Philips:
To CRINGE. v. a. [from Kriechen, German.] To draw to-
gether; to contračt.
Whip him, fellows,
*Till, like a boy, you ſee him cringe his face,
And whine aloud for mercy. Shakespeare Anthony and Cleopatre.
To CRINGE. v. n. Kriechen, German.] To bow; to pay court
with bows; to fawn; to flatter.
Flatterers have the flexor muſcles ſo ſtrong, that they are
always bowing and cringing. Arbuthnot.
The cringing knave, who ſeeks a place
Without ſucceſs, thus tells his caſe. Swift.
CR INI'GERous. adj. [criniger, Latin.J Hairy; overgrown
with hair. I)i&amp;f.
To CRINKLE. v. m. [from Årincke'en, Dutch..] To go in
and out; to run in flexures. -
Unleſs ſome ſweetneſs at the bottom lie,
Who cares for all the crinkling of the pye? King's Cookery.
To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 164</div><p class="Text">C R I,
wº-
To CR1'NKLE. v. a. To mould into inequalities.
CR1's KLF. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A wrinkle; a ſinuoſity.
CRINOSE. adj. [from crimis, Latin J Hairy. Dić7.
CRINo's IT Y. m. ſ. [from crinoſe.J Hairyneſs. Dić7.
CPI'PPLE. m. ſ. ſcnýpel, Sax. Aretel, Dutch..] A lame man;
one that has loſt or never enjoyed the uſe of his limbs.
He, poor man, by your firſt order died,
And that a winged Mercury did bear:
Some tardy cripple had the countermand,
That came too lag to ſee him buried. Shakeſpeare's R III.
I am a cripple in my limbs; but what decays are in my
mind, the reader muſt determine. Dryden's Fables, Pref.
Among the reſt there was a lame cripple from his birth,
whom Paul commanded to ſtand upright on his feet. Bentley,
See the blind beggar dance, the cripple ſing,
The ſot a hero, lunatick a king. Pºpe's Eſſay on Man.
To CR1'PPLE. v. a. [frem the noun..] To lame; to make
lame; to deprive of the uſe of limbs.
- Knots upon his gouty joints appear,
And chalk is in his crippled fingers found. Dryden's Perſ
Tettyx, the dancing-maſter, threw himſelf from the rock,
but was crippled in the fall. Addiſon.
Cr1'PPLENESS. m. ſ. [from critple..] Lameneſs; privation of
the limbs. Dić7.
CR1's 1s. m. ſ. [2;(2:..]
1. The point in which the diſeaſe kills, or changes to the
better.
Wiſe leeches will not vain receipts obtrude;
Deaf to complaints, they wait upon the ill,
'Till ſome ſafe criſis authorize their ſkill. Dryden.
2. The point of time at which any affair comes to the height.
This hour's the very criſis of your fate;
Your good or ill, your infamy or fame,
And all the colour of your life depends -
On this important now. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
The undertaking, which I am now laying down, was en-
tered upon in the very criſis of the late rebellion, when it was
the duty of every Briton to contribute his utmoſt aſſiſtance to
the government, in a manner ſuitable to his ſtation and abi-
lities. Addison's Freehºlder, N°. 55.
CRISP, adj. [criſpus, Latin.]
1. Curled.
Bulls are more criſp on the forehead than cows. Bacon.
The Ethiopian black, flat noſed, and criſp haired. Hale.
2. Indented; winding.
You nymphs, call’d Naiads, of the winding brooks,
With your ſedg’d crowns, and ever harmleſs looks,
Leave your criſp channels, and on this green land
Anſwer your ſummons, Juno does command. Shakespeare Temp.
3. Brittle; friable.
In froſty weather, muſick within doors ſoundeth better;
which may be by reaſon not of the diſpoſition of the air, but
of the wood or ſtring of the inſtrument, which is made more
criſp, and ſo more porous and hollow. Bacon's Natural Hiſt,
To CRISP. v. a. [criſpo, Latin J
1. To curl; to contračt into knots or curls.
Severn, affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling recds,
And hid his criſp'd head in the hollow bank. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Young I'd have him too,
Yet a man, with criſhed hair,
Caſt in thouſand ſnares and rings,
For love's fingers, and his rings. Ben. johnſon's Underwoods.
The haſty application of ſpirits of wine is not only
unfit for inflammations in general, but alſo criſps up the veſſels
of the dura mater and brain, and ſometimes produces a gan-
grene. - Sharp's Surgery.
2. To twiſt. -
Along the criſhed ſhades and bow’rs
Revels the ſpruce and jocund ſpring.
3. To indent; to run in and out.
From that ſaphine fount the criſpodbrooks,
Rolling on orient pearl and ſands of gold,
Ran nectar, viſiting each plant. Milton's Paradiſe Left, b. iv.
CRISPA’TION. n.ſ.. [from criſp..]
1. The act of curling. -
2. The ſtate of being curled.
Some differ in the hair and feathers, both in the quantity,
criſpation, and colours of them ; as he-lions are hirſute, and
Milton.
have great manes ; the ſhe's are ſmooth, like cats. Bacon.
CR1's PING-PIN. m. ſ. [from criſp..] A curling-iron.
The changeable ſuits of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the criſing-fins. Iſ, iii. 22.
CRISPI's UlcANT. adj. [criſpiſºlcans, Latin.J Waved, or un-
dulating; as lightning is repreſented. IDić7.
CR1'sPNEss. m. ſ. [from criſp..] Curledneſs.
CR1's PY. adj. [from criſp...] Curled.
So are thoſe criſpy ſnaky locks, oft known
To be the dowry of a ſecond head. Shakeſp. Merch, of Wen.
CRIte'Rios. {{ [x;ºrſº...] A mark by which anything is
judged of, with regard to its goodneſs or badneſs.
Mutual agreement and endearments was the badge of pri-
3
mitive believers; but we may be known by the contrary tri-
terion. Glanv. Scepſ c. 27.
We have here a ſure infallible criterion, by which every
man may diſcover and find out the gracious or ungracious
diſpoſition of his own heart. South's Sermons.
By what criterion do ye eat, d'ye think,
If this is priz'd for ſweetneſs, that for ſlink Pope's Hor.
CRITICK. n.ſ [ºrizº;..]
1. A man ſkilled in the art of judging of literature; a man able
to diſtinguiſh the faults and beauties of writing. -
This ſettles truer ideas in men's minds of ſeveral things,
whereof we read the names in ancient authors, than all the
large and laborious arguments of criticks. Locke.
Criticks I ſaw, that other names deface,
And fix their own with labour in their place. Pope.
Where an author has many beauties conſiſtent with virtue,
piety, and truth, let not little criticks exalt themſelves, and
ſhower down their ill-nature. //atts.
2. A cenſurer; a man apt to find fault.
. My chief deſign, next to ſeeing you, is to be a ſevere cri-
tick on you and your neighbour. Swift.
CRI'tick, adj. Critical; relating to criticiſm; relating to the
art of judging of literary performances.
Thence arts o'er al the northern world advance,
But critick learning flouriſh'd moſt in France, Pope.
CR1"tick. n ſ.
1. A critical examination ; critical remarks; animadverſions.
I ſhould be glad if I could perſuade him to continue his
good cffices, and write ſuch another critick on any thing of
mine. Dryden.
I ſhould as ſoon expe&amp;t to ſee a critique on the poeſy of a
ring, as on the inſcription of a medal. Addison on Medals.
2. Science of criticiſm. -
If ideas and words were diſtinétly weighed, and duly con-
ſidered, they would afford us another ſort of logick and critick
than what we have been hitherto acquainted with. Locke.
What is every year of a wiſe man's life, but a cenſure and
critique on the paſt 2 Pope.
Not that my quill to criticks was confin'd,
My verſe gave ampler leſſons to mankind. Pºpc.
To CRI/TIck. v. n. [from critick.] To play the critick; to
criticiſe.
They do but trace over the paths that have been beaten by
the antients; or comment, critick, and flouriſh upon
them. Temple,
CRI'TICAL. adj. [from critick.]
1. Exačt; nicely judicious; accurate; diligent.
It is ſubmitted to the judgment of more critical cars, to
direét and determine what is graceful and what is not, Holder.
Virgil was ſo critical in the rites of religion, that he would
never have brought in ſuch prayers as theſe, if they had not
been agreeable to the Roman cuſtoms. Stillingfleet.
2. Relating to criticiſm; as, he wrote a critical diſſertation on the
loſt play. . -
3. Captious; inclined to find fault,
What wouldſt thou write of me, if thou ſhouldſt praiſe
me?— -
—O, gentle lady, do not put me to't ; -
For I am nothing, if not critical. Shakeſpeare's Othelle.
4. [from criſis.] Compriſing the time at which a great event is
determined. -
The moon is ſuppoſed to be meaſured by ſevens, and the
critical or decretory days to be dependent on that number.
Brown's Walgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
Opportunity is in reſpect to time, in ſome ſenſe, as time is
in reſpect to eternity: it is the finall moment, the exact point,
the critical minute, on which every good work ſo much de-
pends. Sprat's Sermons.
The people cannot but reſent to ſee their apprehenſions of
the power of France, in ſo critical a junéture, wholly laid
aſide. Swift.
CRI'tic All Y. adv. [from critical.] In a critical manner; ex-
actly ; curiouſly.
Difficult it is to underſtand the purity of Engliſh, and
critically to diſcern good writers from bad, and a proper ſtile
from a corrupt one. Dryden.
Theſe ſhells which are digged up out of the earth, ſeveral
hundreds of which I now keep by me, have been nicely and
critically examined by very many learned men Woodward.
CRI'tic AlNess, n ſ. [from critical J Exactneſs; accuracy;
nicety.
To CRI'T1c1s E. v. n. [from critik.]
1. To play the critick; to judge; to write remarks upon any
performance of literature; to point out faults and beauties.
They who can criticiſe ſo weakly, as to imagine I have
done my worſt, may be convinced, at their own coſt, that I
can write ſeverely with more caſe than I can gently. Dryden.
Know well each ancient’s proper character, t
Without all this at once before your eyes,
Cavil you may, but never criticiſe. Pope's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
2. To animadvert upon as faulty.
Nor would I have his father look ſo narrowly into theſe ac-
Coulºis:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 165</div><p class="Text">C R O
C. R. O.
counts, as to take occaſion from thence to crºſº on his ex-
L océe.
pences. - - ... [..
~.a. [from critick.] To cenſure; to paſs
To CR 1" ſcist.
• *
uugment upon. - - - - -
J Nor ſhall'I look upon it as any breach of charity to criticiſe
the author, ſo long as I keep clear of the perſon. Addiſon.
SR 1'ricism. m. ſ. ſtrom criticſ.]
$º aS ſº firſt inſtituted by Ariſtotle, was meant a
ſtandard of judging well. - Dryden s Innocence, Prºf.
2. Remark; animadverſion; critical obſervations.
There is not a Greck or Latin critick who has not ſhewn,
even in the ſtile of his criticiſms, that he was a maſter of all
the eloquence and delicacy of his native tongue. Addiſ Spect.
To CROAK. v. n. [c]acczzan, Saxon; crocare, Italian ; croci-
tare, Latin.]
1. To make a hoarſe low noiſe, like a frog.
The ſubtle ſwallow flies about the brook, -
And querulous frogs in muddy pools do croak. May's Firgil.
So when Jove's block deſcc.nded from on high,
Loud thunder to its bottom ſhook the bog,
And the hoarſe nation creat'd. Pope's Dunciad, b. i. 1. 264.
Blood, ſtuff'd in skins, is Britiſh chriſtians food;
And France robs marſhes of the croaking brood. Gay.
2. To caw or cry as a raven or crow.
The raven himſelf not hoarſe,
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements. Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
The hoarſe raven, on the blaſted bough,
By crºaking from the left, preſag'd the coming blow. Dryd.
At the ſame time the walk of elms, with the croaking of the
ravcns, looks exceeding ſolemn and venerable. Addison Speciat.
3. It may be uſed in contempt for any diſagreeable or offenſive
in urinur.
Their underſtandings are but little inſtructed, when all their
whole time and pains is laid out to ſtill the croaking of their
own bellies. Locke.
CR oak. n.ſ. from the verb.] The cry or voice of a frog or
Iawcn.
The ſwallow skims the river's watry face,
The frogs renew the croaks of their loquacious race. Dryd.
Was that a raven's croak, or my ſon's voice
No matter which, I'll to the grave and hide me. Lee's Oed.
CR o'ceous. adj. [croceus, Latin.] Conſiſting of ſaffron; like
ſaffron. Dićf.
CRoC it Aºtion. m. ſ. [crecitatio, Latin.] The croaking of
frogs or ravens. Dić7.
CROCK, n.ſ. [Kruick, Dutch..] A cup ; any veſſel made of
earth.
CRocKERY. n.ſ. Earthen ware.
CRO'CODILE, n.ſ. [from tº ſaffron, and 3.xº, fearing.]
. An amphibious voracious animal, in ſhape reſembling a
lizard, and found in Egypt and the Indies. It is covered with
very hard ſcalcs, which cannot, without great difficulty, be
pierced ; except under the belly, where the skin is tender. It
has a wide throat, with ſeveral rows of teeth, ſharp and ſepa-
rated, which enter one another. Though its four legs are
very ſhort, it runs with great ſwiftneſs; but does not eaſily
turn itſelf. It is long lived, and is ſaid to grow continually
tº its death; but this is not probable. Some are fifteen or
“ghteen cubits long. Its fight is very piercing upon the
ground, but in the water it fees but dimly; and it is ſaid to
'pend the four winter months under water. When its bowels
* taken out, or it is wounded, it ſmells very agreeably.
Crocodiles lay their eggs, reſembling gooſe-eggs, ſometimes
amounting to fixty, on the ſand near the waterſide, covering
them with the ſand, that the heat of the ſun may contribute
to hatch them. The Ichneumon, or Indian rat, which is as
large as a ſame cat, is ſaid to break the crocodile's eggs when-
ever it finds them; and alſo, that it gets into the very belly of
this creature, while it is aſleep with its throat open, gnaws its
entrails, and kills it. Calmet.
Glo'ſter's ſhow
Bºguiles him; as the mournful crocodile,
With ſorrow, ſhares relenting paſſengers. Shakespeare Hºn. VI.
Cºdies were thought to be peculiar unto the Kile. Ezº.
çeſar will weep, the crºcodile will weep. Drydºn.
Enticing crocodies, whoſe tears are death;
Syrens, that murder with enchanting breath. Granville.
** is alſo a little animal, otherwiſe called flinx, very
*ch like the lizard, or ſmall crºcodia. It lives by land and
Water; has four ſhort ſmall legs, a very ſharp muzzle, and a
ſhort finall tail. It is pretty enough to look at, being covered
all over with little ſcales of the colour of ſilver, intermix with
brown, and of a gold colour upon the back. It always re-
Fº in Egypt near the Red Sea, in Ly-
Crocopills "F"...r.º. - Wrcºux.
... ‘’”SF adj. [crocºdiinu, Lat J. Like a crocodile. Diº.
Rocus. m. ſ.
The beſt place to plant the Spring arºus', is cloſe to a wall
or on the edge of boarded º round a garden, minol º
the colour of tho, º f : ..." garden, gºing
a 1-ºn tºgether. The ſeed muſt be
kept in the husk ºf ... - -
P in the husk tº ſcº, and a light rich ground ſhould be
choſen for them. They muſt not be placed too thick: they
may be increaſed alſo by off fits. A.'ºrtiºner's Haslandry.
Fair handed Spring unboſoms every grace, -
Throws out the ſnow-drop and the grºws firſt. Thºmſºn.
CROFT. n.ſ. ſcroft, Saxon.] A little cloſe joi..i.g. to a houſe,
that is uſed for corn or paſture.
This have I learn'd,
Tending my flocks hard by, i' th' hilly a ſis
That brow this bottom glade. Milton.
CRo15A'DE. Un. ſ. [croſſade, Fr. from croix, a croſs.] A holy
CRols.A'Do. ; war; a war carried on againſt infidels under the
banner of the croſs. -
See that he take the name of Urban, becauſe a pope of that
name did firſt inſtitute the croſſado; and, as with an holy
trumpet, did ſtir up the voyage for the Holy Land. Eaccº.
CRo'is s. m. ſ.
1. Pilgrims who carry a croſs.
2. sº who fight againſt infidels under the banner of the
CrOls.
CRoNE. m. ſ. ſcrone, Sax, according to Perºgan; Kronie, Dut.
according to Skinner.]
I. An old ew.c.
2. In contempt, an old woman.
Take up the baſſard,
Take’t up, I ſay; give’t to thy crone. Shakespeare JPinter's Tale.
The crone being in bed with him on the wedding night,
and finding his averſion, endeavours to win his affection by
reaſon. Dryden's Fables, Prºſace.
€Ro'NET. n.ſ. The hair which grows over the top of an
horſe's hoof. -
CR9'NY. m. ſ. [a cant word.] An old acquaintance; a compa-
nion of long ſtanding.
So when the Scots, your conſtant cronies,
Th' eſpouſers of your cauſe and monies. Hudibras, p. iii.
To oblige your crony Swiſt,
Bring our dame a new year's gift.
Strange, an aſtrologer ſhould die,
Without one wonder in the sky!
Not one of all his crony ſtars,
To pay their duty at his herſe?
CROOK. m.ſ.. [croc, French.J
1. Any crooked or bent inſtrument.
2. A ſheephook.
He left his crºok, he left his flocks,
And ward'ring through the lonely rocks,
He nouriſh'd endleſs woe.
3. Anything bent; a meander.
There fall thoſe ſaphire-colour'd brooks,
Which, conduit like, with curious cro Á,
Sweet iſlands make in that ſweet land.
To CRook. v. a. [crocher, French.]
1. To bend; to turn into a hook.
It is highly probable, that this diſeaſe proceeds from a re-
dundant acidity, becauſe vinegar will ſoften and crook tender
bones. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. To pervert from red?ude; to divert from the original end.
Whatſoever affairs paſs ſuch a man's hands, he cricket',
them to his own ends; which muſt needs be often eccentrick
to the ends of his maſter or ſtate. Bacon, Eſſay 24.
CRo'ok B Ack. m. ſ. [crook and back.] A term of reproach for
a man that has gibbous ſhoulders.
Ay, crookhack, here I ſtand to anſwer thee,
Or any he the proudeſt of thy fort. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
CRo'ok Back E D. adj. Having bent ſhoulders.
A dwarf as well may for a giant paſs,
As negroe for a ſwan; a crooklack'd laſs
Be call’d Europa. Dryder's javeral, Sat. 8.
There are millions of truths that a man is not, or may not
think himſelf, concerned to know ; as, whether our king
Richard III. was crooklacked or no. Lºcke.
Swift.
Swift.
Prior.
Sidney, b. ii.
CRoo'k E.D. adj. [crocher, French.]
i. Bent; not ſtrait; curve.
A bell or a cannon may be heard beyond a hill, which in-
tercepts the fight of the founding body; and ſounds are pro-
pagated as readily through crººked pipcs as through ſtraight
OneS. Newton's ('pt.
Mathematicians ſay of a ſtraight line, that it is as well an
index of its own rectitude as of the obliquity of a crooked
One. // .cdward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Winding; oblique; anſraëuous.
A man ſhall never want croofed paths to walk in, if he thicks
that he is in the right way, where-ever he has the footſteps of
others to follow. . . . Lºcke.
Among the crººked lanes, on every hedge,
The glow-worm lights his gem. . Tºomſºn's Summer.
3. Perverſe; untoward; without icótitude of mind; given to
obliquity of conduct.
They have corruptcd themſelves: they are a perverſe and
c: oºked generation. - Deutr. xxxii. 5.
Hence, heap of wrath; foul, indigeſted lump!
As crºed in thy manners as thy ſhape. Siakºff. Hºy VI.
We
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 166</div><p class="Text">C R O
C R O
We were not born crocked; we learned thoſe windings and
turnings of the ſerpent. South's Sermons.
CRoo'ke DLY. adv. [from crooked.]
1. Not in a ſtrait line.
2. Untowardly; not compliantly.
If we walk perverſely with God, he will walk crookedly
towards us. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
CRoo'ked Ness. n.ſ.. [from crooked.]
1. Deviation from ſtraitneſs; curvity; the ſtate of being in-
fle&amp;ted; inflection.
He that knoweth what is ſtraight, doth even thereby diſ-
cern what is crooked; becauſe the abſence of ſtraightneſs, in
bodies capable thereof, is crookedneſs. Hooker.
2. Deformity of a gibbous body,
When the heathens offered a ſacrifice to their falſe gods,
they would make a ſevere ſearch to ſee if there were any
crookedneſs or ſpot, any uncleanneſs or deformity, in their
ſacrifice. Taylor's If orthy Communicant.
CROP. n.ſ.. [crop, Saxon.] The craw of a bird; the firſt
ſtomach into which her meat deſcends.
In birds there is no maſtication or comminution of the
meat in the mouth; but in ſuch as are not carnivorous, it is
immediately ſwallowed into the crop or craw.
Ray on the Creation.
But flutt'ring there, they neſtle near the throne,
And lodge in habitations not their own, }
By their high crops and corny gizzards known. Dryden.
Cro'PFULL. adj. [crop and full.] Satiated; with a full belly.
He ſtretch'd out all the chimney's length,
Basks at the fire his hairy ſtrength;
And, crop-fall, out of door he flings,
'Ere the firſt cock his matin rings. Milton.
CR o'Psick. adj. [crop and ſick..] Sick with repletion; ſick
with exceſs and debauchery.
Strange odds ! where crop-ſºck drunkards muſt engage
A hungry foe, and arm'd with ſober rage. Tate's juv. Sat.
CROP. n.ſ. [croppa, Saxon.]
1. The higheſt part or end of anything; as the head of a tree,
the ear of corn.
2. The harveſt; the corn gathered off a field; the produćt of
the field.
And this of all my harveſt hope I have,
Nought reaped but a weedy crºp of care. Spenſer's Paſt.
Lab'ring the ſoil, and reaping plentedus crop,
Corn, wine, and oil. Aſilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
The fountain which from Helicon proceeds,
That ſacred ſtream, ſhould never water weeds,
Nor make the crop of thorns and thiſtles grow. Roſcommon.
Nothing is more prejudicial to your crop than mowing of it
too ſoon, becauſe the ſap is not fully come out of the root.
Mortimer's Huſbandry.
3. Anything cut off.
Guiltleſs of ſteel, and from the razor free,
It falls a plenteous crop reſerv'd for thee. Dryden's Fables.
To CROP. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cut off the ends of any thing; to mow ; to reap ; to
lop.
Crop'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms;
Of England's coat, one half is cut away. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
He, upon whoſe ſide
The feweſt roſes are crop'd from the tree,
Shall yield the other in the right opinion. Shakespeare Henry VI.
All the budding honours on thy creſt
T'll crop, to make a garland for my head. Shakespeare Henry IV.
I will crop off from the top of his young twigs a tender
one, and will plant it upon an high mountain and eminent.
Ezek. xvii. 22.
There are ſome tears of trees, which are combed from the
bºards of goats; for when the goats bite and crop them, eſpe-
cially in the mornings, the dew being on, the tear cometh
forth, and hangeth upon their beards. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
O Fruit divine !
Sweet of thyſelf, but much more ſweet thus crop'd. Milton.
Age, like ripe apples, on earth's boſom drops;
While force our youth, like fruits, untimely crops. Denham,
Death deſtroys
The parent's hopes, and crops the growing boys. Creech.
No more, my goats, ſhall I behold you climb
The ſteepy cliffs, or crop the flow'ry thyme! Dryd. Virgil.
To CR op. v. n. To yield harveſt. -
Royal wench !
She made great Caeſar lay his ſword to-bed;
He plough'd her, and ſhe cropt. Shakeſp. Anth. and Cleopatra.
Cro'PPER. m. ſ. [from crop.] A kind of pigeon with a large
crop. -
There are ſeveral kinds of trouts, as there be tame and
wild pigeons; and of tame there be croppers, carriers,
runts. Walton's Angler.
CR o's 1 E.R. m. ſ. [croiſer, Fr. from croix, a croſs.] The paſto-
ral ſtaff of a biſhop, which has a croſs upon it.
V yº prelates are great, there is alſo danger from them;
OL. I.
as it was in the times of Anſelmus and Thomas Becket, who,
with their croſſers, did almoſt try it with the king's ſword.
Bacon, Eſſay 20.
Grievances there were, I muſt confeſs, and ſome incon-
gruities in my civil government; wherein ſome ſay the croſier,
ſome ſay the diſtaff, was too buſy. Howel's England's Tars.
Her front erect with majeſty ſhe bore,
The croſſer wielded, and the mitre wore. Dryden.
CRo's LET. n. ſ. [croiſelet, French.]
1. A ſmall croſs.
Then Una ’gan to aſk, if aught he knew,
Or heard abroad, of that her champion true,
That in his armour bare a crºſſet red. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Here an unfiniſh'd di'mond croſſet lay,
To which ſoft lovers adoration pay. Gay's Fan.
2. It ſeems to be uſed in the following paſſage, by miſtake, for
corſelet. -
The croſſet ſome, and ſome the cuiſhes mould,
With ſilver plated, and with dućtile gold. Dryden's Án.
CROSS. m. ſ. [croix, Fr. croce, Ital. crux, Latin.]
1. One ſtrait body laid at right angles over another; the inſtru-
ment by which the Saviour of the world ſuffered death. -
They make a little croſs of a quill, longways of that part of
the quill which hath the pith, and croſsways of that piece of
the quill without pith. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 494.
You are firſt to conſider ſeriouſly the infinite love of your
Saviour, who offered himſelf for you as a ſacrifice upon the
croſs. Taylor's Guide to the Penitent.
2. The enſign of the Chriſtian religion.
Her holy faith and Chriſtian croſs oppos'd
Againſt the Saxon gods. Rowe.
3. A monument with a croſs upon it to excite devotion; ſuch
as were anciently ſet in market-places.
She doth ſtray about
By holy croſſes, where ſhe kneels and prays. Shakeſpeare.
4. A line drawn through another.
5. Anything that thwarts or obſtructs; misfortune; hindrance;
vexation; oppoſition; miſadventure; trial of patience.
Wiſhing unto me many croſſes and miſchances in my love,
whenſoever I ſhould love. Sidney, b. i.
Then let us teach our trial patience, -
Becauſe it is a cuſtomary croſs. Shakeſpeare.
Heaven prepares good men with croſſes; but no ill can hap-
pen to a good man. Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
A great eſtate hath great croſſes, and a mean fortune hath
but ſmall ones. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
6. Money ſo called, becauſe marked with a croſs.
He was ſaid to make ſoldiers ſpring up out of the very
earth to follow him, though he had not a croſs to pay them
ſalary. Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
Whereas we cannot much lament our loſs,
Who neither carry'd back nor brought one croſs. Dryden.
7. Croſs and Pile, a play with money; at which it is put to
chance whether the ſide, which bears a croſs, ſhall lie upward,
or the other. - -
Whacum had neither croſs nor pile;
His plunder was not worth the while. Hudibras, p. ii.
This I humbly conceive to be perfect boys play; croſs, I
win, and pile, you loſe; or, what's yours is mine, and what's
mine is my own. - Swift.
CRoss. adj. [from the ſubſtantive.]
1. Tranſverſe; falling a-thwart ſomething elſe.
Whatſoever penumbra ſhould be made in the circles by the
croſs refraction of the ſecond priſm, all that penumbra would
be conſpicuous in the right lines which touch thoſe circles.
Newton's Opticks.
The ſun, in that ſpace of time, by his annual contrary
motion eaſtward, will be advanced near a degree of the eclip-
tick, croſs to the motion of the equator. Holder on Time.
The ſhips muſt needs encounter, when they either advance
towards one another in direct lines, or meet in the interſection
of eroſ, ones. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Oblique; lateral.
Was this a face,
To ſtand againſt the deep dread bolted thunder
In the moſt terrible and nimble ſtroke
Of quick croſs lightning? Shakespeare's King Lear.
3. Adverſe; oppoſite.
Were both love's captives; but with fate ſo croſs,
One muſt be happy by the other's loſs. Dryden's Aurengzebe,
Croſs to our intereſts, curbing ſenſe and ſin;
Oppreſs'd without, and undermin'd within,
It thrives through pain. Dryden.
It runs croſs to the belief and apprehenſion of the reſt of
mankind; a difficulty, which a modeſt and good man is ſcarce
able to encounter. Atterbury's Sermons.
4. Perverſe; untractable. -
When, through the crºſs circumſtances of a man's temper
or condition, the enjoyment of a pleaſure would certainly
expoſe him to a greater inconvenience, then religion bids him
quit it. South's Sermons.
6 A 5. Peewiſh ;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 167</div><p class="Text">C R O
C R - O
- iſh: fretful; ill-humoured. - *- - - -
5- Fº º hº upon the rack afflić himſelf, becauſe he
ived a croſ; anſwer from his miſtreſs f Taylor.
hºsº and #: humours, and whatever elſe may
render the converſation of men grº'9" and uneaſy to One
another, muſt be º: Tillotſon, Sermon 5.
trary; contradictory. -
6. cº id brings ºffic ends of a long and various hypo-
theſis together; ſees how one part coheres with, and depends
upon another; and ſo clears off all the appearing contrarietie;
jcontradićtions, that ſeemed to lie crºſs and uncouth, and
to make the whole unintelligible. South's Sermons.
7. Contrary to wiſh; unfortunate.
we learn the great reaſonableneſs of not only a contented,
but alſo a thankful acquieſcence in any condition, and under
the croſºft and ſevereſt paſſages of providence. South's Sermons.
I cannot, without ſome regret, behold the crºſs and un-
lucky iſſue of my deſign; for by my diſlike of diº airl
engaged in one. anv.
8. ...
Évarchus made a croſ; marriage alſo with Dorilaus's ſiſter,
and ſhortly left her with child of the famous Pyrocles. Sidney.
They had long conference, not only upon commerce, but
upon croſ; marriages, to be had between the king's ſon and
the archduke's daughter; and again, between the archdukº's
ſon and the king's daughter. Bacon's Henry VII.
CRoss. prep.
I . *:::::: ſo as to interſect any thing.
They were advertiſed, that the enemy had, in the woods
before them, whereby they were to paſs, cut down great trees
croſs the ways, ſo that their º % poſſibly }.
Way. moles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
y Betwixt the midſt and theſe, the º
Two habitable ſeats of human kind;
And croſs their limits cut a ſloaping way,
Which the twelve ſigns in beauteous order ſway. Dryd. Wirg.
Croſ; his back, as in triumphant ſcorn,
The hope and pillar of the houſe was born.
2. Over; from ſide to ſide.
A fox was taking a walk one night croſ, a village. L’Eſtran.
To Cross. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To lay one body, or draw one line, a-thwart another.
This forc’d the ſtubborn'ſt, for the cauſe,
To croſs the cudgels to the laws;
That what by breaking them't had gain'd,
By their ſupport might be maintain'd. Hudibras, p. iii. c. 2.
The loxia, or croſs-bill, whoſe bill is thick and ſtrong,
with the tips crºſſing one another, with great readineſs breaks
open fir-cones, apples, and other fruit, to come at their ker-
nels; as if the craffing of the bill was deſigned for this
ſervice. Derham's Phyſicz-Theology.
I ſhall moſt carefully obſerve, not to croſs ... or dº.
§: copy of your papers for the future, and only to mark in
the margin. Pote.
A hunted hare treads back her mazes, and crºſs and .
founds her former track. //atts.
2. To ſign with the croſs.
3. To mark out; to cancel; as, to croſs an article.
4. To paſs over.
He conquered this proud Turk as far as the Helleſpont,
which he croſſed, and made a viſit to the Greek emperor at
Conſtantinople. Temple.
We found the hero, for whoſe only ſake
We ſought the dark abodes, and croſs'd the bitter lake. Dry.
5. To move laterally, obliquely, or a-thwart; not in oppoſi-
tion; not in the ſame line.
But he them ſpying, 'gan to turn aſide,
For fear, as ſeem’d, or for ſome feined loſs;
More greedy they of news, faſt towards him do croſs. Spºnſ.
6. #:sº . interpoſe obſtruction; to embarraſs; to ob-
ſuct; to hinder.
Still de I croſs this wretch, whatſo he taketh in hand. Hooker.
The king no longer could endure
Thus to be croſs'd in what he did intend. Daniel's Civ. Iſar.
He was ſo great an enemy to Digby and Colepeper, who
were only preſent in debates of the war with the officers, that
he croſſed all they propoſed. Clarendon, b. viii.
Bury'd in private, and ſo ſuddenly
It crºſs my deſign, which was t allow
The rites of funeral fitting his degree. Dayd. Span. Fryar.
Śwell'd with our late ſucceſſes on the foe,
Which France and Holland wanted pow'r to croſs,
We urge an unſeen fate.
The firm patriot there,
*.*.*. º tº: and fortune crºft. w
7. To counteract. generous labour was not loſt. Addison's Cato.
Then their wills claſh wi - - - -
*Ppetites croſs their : with their underſtandings, *;
O . to binder by authority; to countermand.
*ur is ſuffered to go on with any one courſe,
Dryd. Fables.
Dryden.
but upon the leaſt information he is either ſtopped and craffºd,
or other courſes appointed him from hence. Spenſer on Ireland.
It may make my caſe dangerous, to croſs this in the
ſmalleſt. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
9. To contradićt.
In all this there is not a ſyllable which any ways croſºth
us.. . Hooker, b. ii. ſect. 6.
It is certain, howſoever it croſs the received opinion, that
ſounds may be created without air. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
10. To debar; to preclude.
From his loins no hopeful branch ſhall ſpring,
To croſs me from the golden time I look for. Shakespeare . H. VI.
To Cross. v. n.
1. To lye a-thwart another thing.
2. To be inconſiſtent.
Men's actions do not always croſ, with reaſon. Sidney.
Cross-BAR-shot. n.ſ. A round ſhot, or great bullet, with
a bar of iron put through it. Harris.
To CRoss-examin E. v. a. [.. roſ, and examire.] To try the
faith of evidence by captious queſtions of the contrary party.
If we may but crºſs-examine and interrogate their actions
againſt their words, theſe will ſoon confeſs the invalidity of
their ſolemneſt confeſſions. Decay of Picty.
The judges ſhall, as they think fit, interrogate or croft-
examine the witneſſes. Specſator, Nº. 608.
CRo'ss staff. m. ſ. [ſrom croſs and ſtaff. J. An inſtrument
commonly called the foreſtaff, uſed by ſeamen to take the
meridian altitude of the ſun or ſtars. Harris.
A Cro'ss bit E. n.ſ. [croſs and biºel A deception; a cheat.
The fox, that truſted to his addreſs and manage, without
ſo much as dreaming of a crºſs-bite from ſo filly an animal,
fell himſelf into the pit that he had digged for another. L'Aſir.
To Cro'ssbit E. v. a. [from the noun.J. To contravene by
deception.
No rhetorick muſt be ſpent againſt croſs-liting a country
evidence, and frighting him out of his ſenſes. Colier.
That many knotty points there are,
Which all diſcuſs, but few can clear;
As nature ſlily had thought fit,
For ſome by-ends, to croſs-lite wit. Prior.
CRo'ssbow. n.ſ.. [croſ; and low.] A miſſive weapon formed
by placing a bow a-thwart a ſtock.
Gentlemen ſuffer their beaſts to run wild in their woods
and waſte ground, where they are hunted and killed with croſs-
bows and pieces, in the manner of deer. Carew's S. of Cornwal.
The maſter of the croſs-bows, lord Rambures. Shakespeare H. V.
CRo'ss Bowers. m. ſ. [from croſs-low.] A ſhooter with a
croſs-bow.
The French aſſiſted themſelves by land with the crºſłºwers
of Genoa againſt the Engliſh. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Cºo'ssG RAINE D. adj. [croſs and grain.]
1. Having the fibres tranſverſe or irregular.
If the ſtuff proves croſſgrained in any part of its length,
then you muſt turn your ſtuff to plane it, the contrary way,
ſo far as it runs crºſs-grained. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
2. Perverſe; troubleſome ; vexatious.
We find in ſullen writs,
And crºſs-grain'd works of modern wits,
The wonder of the ignorant. Hudibras, f. i. ecºt. I.
The ſpirit of contradiction, in a crºſs-grained woman, is
incurable. L’Eſtrange.
She was none of your crºſs-graired, termagant, ſcolding
jades, that one had as good be hanged as live in the houſe
with. Arbuthnº’s Hiſtºry of john Hull.
But wiſdom, peeviſh and crºſs-grain'4, -
Muſt be oppos'd, to be ſuſtain'd. P; ar.
CRo'ssly. adv. [from croſs.]
1. A-thwart; ſo as to interſect ſomething cºſe.
2. Oppoſitely; adverſely; in oppoſition to. . .
He that provides for this life, but takes no care for cternity,
is wife for a moment, but a fool for ever; and “is as un-
towardly, and crºſy to the reaſon of things, as ºn " ".
gined. Tillºtſºn's Sermonſ.
3. Unfortunately.
CRo'ss N Ess. n.ſ.. [from croſs
1. Tranſverſeneſs; interfection.
2. Perverſeneſs; peeviſhneſs.
The lighter ſort of malignity turneth but to a craſheſ, or
aptneſs to oppoſe; but the deeper ſort, to envy, or nº miſ-
chicf. Bacon, Eſſay 13.
I deny nothing, fit to be granted, out of croſſheſ, or hu-
mour. King Charles.
Who would have imagined, that the ſtiff croſſneſs of s
poor captive ſhould ever have had the power to make Haman's
ſeat ſo uneaſy to him : L’É/irange, Fal. 38.
They help us to forget the craſheſ of men and thing."
compoſe our cares and our paſſions, and lay our diſappoint-
ments aſleep. Collier of the Entertainment ºf Books.
Cro'ss Row. n.ſ.. [croſs and row.] Alphabet; ſo named be-
cauſe a croſs is placed at the beginning, to ſhew that the chd
of learning is piety. r
He
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 168</div><p class="Text">w -
C R O
C R O
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,
And from the croſsrow plucks the letter G;
And ſays a wizard told him, that by G
His iſſue difinherited ſhould be. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
CRo'sswin D. m. ſ. [croſs and wind.] Wind blowing from the
right or left. -
The leaſt unhappy perſons do, in ſo fickle and ſo tem-
peſtuous a ſea, as we all find this world, meet with many
more either croſſwinds or ſtormy guſts than proſperous gales.
Boy'e's Seraphick Love.
CRO'ssway. n.ſ.. [croſs and way.] A ſmall obſcure path inter-
ſecting the chief road.
Damn’d ſpirits all,
That in croſſways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone.
CRo'sswor T. m. ſ. [from croſs and wort.]
It hath ſoft leaves, like the ladies bedſtraw, from which it
differs in the number of leaves, that are produced at every
joint; which in this are only four, diſpoſed in form of a croſs.
The rough or hairy croſſwort is ſometimes uſed in medicine,
and is found wild on dry ſandy banks. Miller.
CRotch. n.ſ.. [croc, French..] A hook.
There is a tradition of a dilemma, that Moreton uſed to
raiſe the benevolence to higher rates; and ſome called it his
fork, and ſome his crotch. - Bacon's Henry VII.
CR o'rch ET. m. ſ. [crochet, French.] -
1. [In muſick.] One of the notes or charaćters of time, equal
to half a minim, and double a quaver. Chambers.
As a good harper, ſtricken far in years,
Into whoſe cunning hands the gout doth fall,
All his old crotchets in his brain he bears,
But on his harp plays ill, or not at all. Davies.
2. A ſupport; a piece of wood fitted into another to ſupport a
building.
A ſtately temple ſhoots within the ſkies,
The crotchets of their cot in columns riſe. Dryden.
3. [In printing.] Hooks in which words are included [thus.]
4. A perverſe conceit; an odd fancy.
All the devices and crotchets of new inventions, which crept
into her, tended either to twich or enlarge the ivy. Howel.
The horſe ſmelt him out, and preſently a crotchet came in
his head how he might countermine him. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 37.
Shakeſpeare.
To CRouch. v. n. [crochu, crooked, French.]
1. To ſtoop low ; to lye cloſe to the ground; as the lion crouches
to his maſter.
2. To fawn; to bend ſervilely; to ſtoop meanly.
Every one that is left in thine houſe, ſhall come and crouch
to him for a piece of ſilver and a morſel of bread. I Sa. ii. 36.
At his heels,
Leaſht in like hounds, ſhould famine, ſword and fire,
Crouch for employment. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
They fawn and crouch to men of parts, whom they cannot
ruin; quote them, when they are preſent; and, when they
are abſent, ſteal their jeſts. Dryden's Aurengzebe, Prºf.
Too well the vigour of that arm they know;
They lick the duſt, and crouch beneath their fatal foe. Dryd.
Your ſhameful ſtory ſhall record of me,
The men all crouch'd, and left a woman free. Dryd. In. Emp.
CROUP. m. ſ. [crouppe, French.]
1. The rump of a fowl.
2. The buttocks of a horſe.
CR oup A/D Es. n.ſ.. [from croup.] Are higher leaps than thoſe
of corvets, that keep the fore and hind quarters of the horſe
in an equal height, ſo that he truſſes his legs under his belly
without yerking, or ſhooting his ſhoes. Farrier's Dići.
CROW. m. ſ. ſcnape, Saxon.]
1. A large black bird that feeds upon the carcaſſes of beaſts.
The crows and choughs, that wing the midway air,
Shew ſcarce ſo groſs as beetles. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To crows he like impartial grace affords,
And choughs and daws, and ſuch republick birds. Dryden.
2. To pluck a CRow, is to be induſtrious or contentious about
that which is of no value.
If you diſpute, we muſt even pluck a crow about it.
L’Eſtrange, Fable 7.
Reſolve before we go,
That you and I muſt pull a crow. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. ii.
3. A piece of iron uſed as a lever; as the Latins called a hook
wººl fºg.
The crow is uſed as a lever to lift up the ends of great
heavy timber, when either a bauk or a rowler is to be laid
under it, and then they thruſt the claws between the ground
and the timber; and laying a bauk, or ſome ſuch ſtuff, behind
the crow, they draw the other end of the ſhank backwards,
and ſo raiſe the timber. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
Get me an iron crow, and bring it ſtraight
Unto my cell. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
Againſt the gate employ your crows of iron. Southern.
4. [From crow.] The voice of a cock, or the noiſe which he
makes in his gaiety.
CRO'w Foot. n.ſ.. [from crow and foot; in Latin, ranunculus.]
The flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves, which expand in
form of a roſe, having a many-leaved empalement: out of the
middle of the flower riſes the pointal, which becomes a fruit,
either round, cylindrical, or ſpiked; to the axis of which, as
a placenta, adhere many naked ſeeds. The ſpecies are fixteen,
of which eleven were brought originally from Turkey.
CRowfoor. m. ſ [from crow and fººt..] "A caltrop or piece of
iron with four points, two, three, or four inches long; ſo
that, whatever way it falls, one point is up. It is uſed in
war for incommoding the cavalry. Military Diar.
To Crow. preterit. I crew, or crowed; I have crowed. v. n.
ſcrapan, Saxon.] -
1. To make the noiſe which a cock makes in gaiety, or de-
fiance. -
But even then the morning cock crew loud. Shakeſp Ham.
Diogenes called an ill phyſician, cock. Why? faith he.
Diogenes anſwered, Becauſe when you crew, men uſe to
riſe. - Bacon, Apophth. 284.
That the lyon trembles at the crºwing of the cock, king
James, upon trial, found to be fabulous. Hakewill.
Within this homeſtead liv'd, without a peer
For crowing loud, the noble Chanticleer,
So hight her cock. Dryden's Fables.
2. To boaſt; to bully; to vapour; to bluſter; to ſwagger.
CROWD. m.ſ.. [cnuš, Saxon.]
1. A multitude confuſedly preſſed together.
2. A promiſcuous medly, without order or diſtinétion.
He could then compare the confuſion of a multitude to that
tumult he had obſerved in the lcarian ſea, daſhing and break-
ing among its crowd of iſlands. Eſſay on Homer.
3. The vulgar; the populace.
He went not with the crowd to ſee a ſhrine,
But fed us, by the way, with food divine. Dryden's Fables.
4. [from crwth, Welſh.] A fiddle.
His fiddle is your proper purchaſe,
Won in the ſervice of the churches;
And by your doom muſt be allow'd
To be, or be no more, a crowd.
To Crowd. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To fill with confuſed multitudes.
A mind which is ever crowding its memory with things
which it learns, may cramp the invention itſelf. J/atts.
2. To preſs cloſe together.
The time miſorder'd, doth in common ſenſe
Crowd us and cruſh us to this monſtrous form,
To hold our ſafety up. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
It ſeems probable, that the ſea doth ſtill grow narrower
from age to age, and ſinks more within its channel and the
bowels of the earth, according as it can make its way into
all thoſe ſubterraneous cavities, and crowd the air out of
them. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
As the mind itſelf is thought to take up no ſpace, ſo its
ačtions ſeem to require no time; but many of them ſeem to
be crowded into an inſtant. Locke.
Then let us fill
This little interval, this pauſe of life,
With all the virtues we can crowd into it. Addiſon's Cato.
3. To incumber by multitudes.
How ſhort is life Why will vain courtiers toil,
And crowd a vainer monarch for a ſmile * Granville.
4. To CRowd Sail. [A ſea phraſe.] To ſpread wide the ſails
upon the yards.
To CRowl). v. n.
1. To ſwarm ; to be numerous and confuſed.
They follow their undaunted king ;
Crowd through their gates; and in the fields of light,
The ſhocking ſquadrons meet in mortal fight. Dryd. Virgil.
2. To thruſt among a multitude.
A mighty man, had not ſome cunning ſin,
Amidſt ſo many virtues, crowded in. Cowley's Davideis.
CRo'wo ER. m. ſ. [from crowd..] A fiddler.
Chevy-chaſe ſung by a blind crowder. Sidney.
CRo'wkEEPER. m. ſ. [crow and keep.] A ſcarecrow. The
following paſſage is controverted.
That fellow handles his bow like a crewkeeper. Shakespeare.
CROWN. m. ſ. ſcouronne, Fr. Kroone, Dut. corona, Latin.)
1. The ornament of the head which denotes imperial and regal
dignity. -
If thou be a king, where is thy crown
—My crown is in my heart, not on my head:
My crown is call’d content; y
A crown it is that ſeldom kings enjoy. Shakeſp. Henry VL
Look down, you gods,
And on this couple drop a bleſſéd crown. Shakeſp. Tempºſſ.
I would the college of the cardinals
Would chuſe him pope, and carry him to Rome,
And ſet the triple crºwn upon his head Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Edward put to death a citizen,
Only for ſaying, he would make his ſon - -
Heir to the crown. Shakespeare's Richard IIL
2. A garland.
Reccive a crown for thy well-ordering of the feaſt.
Ecclus. xxxii. 2.
3. Reward ;
Hudibras, p. i. cant. 2.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 169</div><p class="Text">C R O
C R U
. Reward; honorary diſtinétion. .
They do it to obtain a corruptible crºw”,
ruptible. - - - |
Let merit crowns, and juſtice laure
Butlet me happy by your pity live.
. Regal power; royalty. - -
4. Fº ºfton § ºran in ſeveral countries, places it on
different heads. - Locke.
5. The top of the head.
but we an incor-
I Cor. ix. 25.
s give,
Dryden's Epiffles.
If i. is with pinch
to crown he’ll fill our ſkins with pinches;
!. º: ſtuff. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?.
while his head was working upon this thought, the toy
took him in the crºwn to ſend for the ſongſter. L'Eſtrange.
Behold if fortune, or a miſtreſs frowns,
Some plunge in buſineſs, others ſave their crºtung. Pope.
6. The top of any thing; as, of a mountain.
Upon the crown o' th' cliff, what thing was that
Which parted from you? Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Huge trunks of trees, fell'd from the ſteepy crown
Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down. Dryden's 4ºn.
7. Part of the hat that covers the head. -
I once opened a remarkable atheroma: it was about
as big as the crºwn of a man's hat, and lay underneath the
pećtoral muſcle. Sharp's Surg, ry.
** piece of money, anciently ſtamped with a crown; five
illings.
Truit not to your ſervants, who may miſlead you, or miſ-
inform you, by which they may perhaps gain a few crowni.
- Bacon's Advice to Williers.
But he that can eat beef, and feed on bread which is ſo
brown,
May ſatisfy his appetite, and owe no man a crown. Suckling.
An ounce of ſilver, whether in pence, groats, or crown-
pieces, ſlivers or ducatoons, or in bullion, is, and eternally
will be, of equal value to any other ounce of ſilver. Locke,
9. Honour ; ornament; decoration; excellence; dignity.
Much experience is the crown of old men. Ecclus. xxv. 6.
Therefore my brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for, my
joy and crown, ſtand faſt in the Lord. Philip, iv. 1.
Io. Completion; accompliſhment.
CrowN-IMPERIAL. m. ſ. ſcorona imperialis, Lat..] A plant.
The flowers conſiſt of ſix leaves, are bell-ſhaped, and hang
downwards: theſe are ranged, as it were, into a crown,
above which appears a great buſh of leaves. The pointal of
the flower becomes an oblong fruit, winged, and divided into
three cells, filled with flat ſeeds. It hath a coated root, fur-
niſhed with fibres at the bottom. Miller.
To Crown. v. a. [from the noun.] º
1. To inveſt with the crown or regal ornament:
Had you not come upon your cue, my lord,
William lord Haſtings had pronounc'd your part;
I mean your voice for crowning of the king. Shakespeare R. III.
Her who faireſt does appear,
Crºwn her queen of all the year. Dryden's Indian Emperor.
2. To cover, as with a crown.
Umbro, the prieſt, the proud Marrabians led,
And Peaceful olives crown'd his hoary head. Dryden's A.m.
3. To dignify; to adorn; to make illuſtãous.
Thou haſ made him a little lower than the angels, and haſt
crºwned him with glory and honour. Pſ, viii. 5.
She ſhall be, to the happineſs of England,
An aged princeſs; many days ſhall ſee her,
And yet no day without a deed to crown it. Shakeſ H.VIII.
4. To reward; to recompenſe.
Urge your ſucceſs; deſerve a laſting name,
She'll crºwn a grateful and a conſtant fiame,
5. To complete; to perfect.
º'. and crowning privilege, or rather property of
P, is conſtancy. South's Sermons.
6. To terminate; to finiſh.
All theſe a milk-white honeycomb ſurround,
C which in the midſt the Country banquet crown'd. Dryden.
$.” m. ſ. The fineſt ſort of window-glaſs.
********, *.ſ. A poſt, which, in ſome buildings, ſtands
upright in the middle, between two principal raſters.
CRø'wsscab. n.ſ. A ſtinking filthy ſcab, that breeds round
; ; corners of a horſe's hoof, and is a cancerous and
ul IOre. N__ ____ " - x - -
Crownwheel. "...ſ. The upper wheel of a wº s Dić7.
- - - - - next the
balance, which is driven by it.
CRowNworks. n.ſ. [In fortification.] Bulwarks advanced
towards the field to gain ſome hill or riſing ground Harris
RºwNET. m. ſ [from crown.] o o - -
I. |. with coronet.
* * the following paſſage it ſeems - - -
wº ...; finis º chief end; laſt
* º falſe ſºul of Egypt' this gay charm
Whoſe i. beck'd forth my wars, and call'd them home;
Like a ..". º crownet, my chief end;
Beguil'd me § . ath, at faſt and looſe,
the very heart of loſs. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleop.
- 4.
Roſcommon.
Croylstone. m. ſ. Cryſtallized cauk. In this the cryſtals
are ſmall. I/oodward's Fºſſ.
CRU'cial, adj. [crux crucis, Latin.] Tranſverſe; interſecting
one another.
Whoever has ſeen the pračtice of the crucial inciſion, muſt
be ſenſible of the falſe reaſoning uſed in its favour. Sharp.
To CRU'ciate. v. a. ſcrucio, Latin.] To torture; to tor-
ment; to excruciate.
CRU'cible. m. ſ. ſcrucibulum, low Latin.] A chymiſt's melt-
ing pot, made of earth; ſo called, becauſe they were formerly
marked with a croſs.
Take a quantity of good ſilver, and put it in a crucible or
melting cruſe, and ſet them on the fire, well covered round
about with coals. Pracham on Drawing.
CRUcI'F E Rous, adj. [crux and fero, Latin.] Bearing the
croſs. Diº.
CRU'cIFIER. n.ſ. [from crucify.] He that inflićts the puniſh-
ment of crucifixion.
Viſible judgments were executed on Chriſt's crucifiers.
Hammond on Fundamentals.
CRU'cifix. m. ſ. ſcrucifixus, Latin.] A repreſentation in pic-
ture or ſtatuary of our Lord's paſſion.
There ſtands at the upper end of it a large crucifix, very
much eſteemed. The figure of our Saviour repreſents him in
his laſt agonies of death. Addiſon on Italy.
CRuci F1'sion. m. ſ. [from crucifixus, Latin.] The pºſſ
ment of nailing to a croſs.
This earthquake, according to the opinion of many learned
men, happened at our Saviour's crucifixion. Addiſon on Italy.
CRU'cifor M. adj. [crux and forma, Latin.] Having the form
of a croſs. -
To CRUCIFY. v. a. [crucifigo, Latin J To put to death by
nailing the hands and feet to a croſs ſet upright.
They crucif, to themſelves the ſon of God afreſh, and put
him to an open ſhame. Hebr. vi. 6.
But to the croſs he nails thy enemies,
The law that is againſt thee, and the fins
Of all mankind, with him there crucify'd. Milt. Par. Lyl.
CR Uci'GE Rous. dj. [cruciger, Latin.] Bearing the croſs.
CRUD. m.ſ.. [commonly written curd. See CURd.] A concre-
tion of any liquid into hardneſs or ſtiffneſs; coagulation.
CRUDE. adj. [crudus, Latin.]
1. Raw ; not ſubdued by fire.
2. Not changed by any proceſs or preparation.
Common crude ſalt, barely diſſolved in common aqua frtis,
will give it power of working upon gold. Boyle on Fluidity.
Fermented liquors have quite different qualities from the
plant itſelf; for no fruit, taken crude, has the intoxicating qua-
lity of wine. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Harſh; unripe.
A juice ſo crude as cannot be ripened to the degree of nou-
riſhment. Pacon's Natural Hiſtºry, Nº. 632.
4. Unconco&amp;ted; not well digeſted in the ſtomach.
While the body, to be converted and altered, is too ſtrong
for the efficient that ſhould convert or alter it, whereby it re-
ſiſteth and holdeth faſt, in ſome degree, the firſt form or con-
ſiſtence, it is, all that while, crude and inconcoët, and the
proceſs is to be called crudity and inconcoction. Bac. Nat. Hył.
5. Not brought to perfection ; unfiniſhed; immature.
In a moment up they turned,
Wide the celeſłial ſoil; and ſaw beneath
Th' originals of nature, in their crude
Conception. A ſilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi. l. 5 i 1.
6. Having indigeſted notions.
Deep vers'd in books, and ſhallow in himſelf,
Crude, or intoxicate, colle&amp;ting toys. Miltºn's Paradiſe Reg.
7, Indigeſted; not fully concocted in the intellect.
Others, whom meer ambition fires, and dole
Of provinces abroad, which they have feign'd
To their crude hopes, and I as amply promis'd. B. Johnſºn.
What peradventure may ſeem full to me, may appear very
crude and maimed to a ſtranger. Digby on the Soul, Dedicat.
Abſurd expreſſions, crude abortive thoughts,
All the lewd legions of exploded faults. Rºſſommon.
CRU'DELY. adv. [from crude..] Unripely; without due pre-
paration.
Th' advice was true; but fear had ſeiz'd the moſt,
And all good counſel is on cowards loſt:
The queſtion crudely put, to ſhun delay,
'Twas carry’d by the major part to ſtay. Dryden,
CRU'DFNess. m. ſ. [from crude..] Unripeneſs; indigeſtion.
CRU'DITY. m. ſ [from crude..] Indigeſtion; inconcočtion.
They are very temperate, whereby they prevent indigeſtion
and crudities, and conſequently putreſcence of humours. Brown.
A diet of viſcid aliment creates flatulency and crudities in
the ſtomach. Arbuthnot.
2. Unripeneſs; want of maturity. w
To CRü'DL.E. v. a. [a word of uncertain etymology.] To
coagulate; to congeal.
I felt my crudled blood
Congeal with fear; my hair with horrour ſtood. Dryd. Æn.
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            End of Section 6.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809190#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Index" id="Index"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Index</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 170</div><p class="Text">º
C R U
The Gelons uſe it, when, for drink and food,
They mix their cruded milk with horſes blood. Dryd. Pirg,
CRU'DY. adj. [from crud J
1. Concreted; coagulated.
His cruel wounds with crudy blood congeal’d,
They binden up ſo wiſely as they may. Fairy Queen, b. 1.
2. [from crude. J Raw ; chill.
Sherris ſack aſcends into the brain; dries me there all the
fooliſh, dull, and crudy vapours which environ it. Shakeſpeare.
CRU'EL. adj. [cruel, French; crudelis, Latin.]
1. Pleaſed with hurting others; inhuman; hard-hearted; with-
out pity ; without compaſſion; ſavage 3 -barbarous; un-
relenting.
If wolves had at thy gate how!'d that ſtern tisme,
Thou ſhould'ſt have ſaid, Go, porter, turn the key;
All cruel’s elſe ſubſcrib'd. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
If thou art that cruel god, whoſe eyes
Delight in blood, and human ſacrifice. Dryden's Ind. Emp.
2. [Of things.] Bloody; miſchievous; deſtructive; cauſing
alſl. -
P Conſider mine enemies; for they are many, and they hate
me with cruel hatred. Pſ. xxv. 19.
We beheld one of the cruel/? fights between two knights,
that ever hath adorned the moſt martial ſtory. Sidney, b. ii.
CRU'ELLY. adv. [from cruel.] In a cruel manner; inhumanly;
barbarouſly.
He relies upon a broken reed, that not only baſely fails, but
alſo cruelly pierces the hand that reſts upon it.
Since you deny him entrance, he demands
His wife, whom cruelly you hold in bands. Dryd. Aurengz.
CRu'ELN Ess. m. ſ. [from cruel.] Inhumanity; cruelty.
But ſhe more cruel, and more ſavage wild,
Than either lion or the lioneſs,
Shames not to be with guiltleſs blood defil’d ;
She taketh glory in her rvelneſs. Speºſer, Sonnet 20.
CRU'ELTY. m. ſ. [cruaut, French..] Inhumanity; ſavageneſs;
barbarity.
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our daſtard nobles,
Have ſuffer'd me by the voice of ſlaves to be
Whoop'd out of Rome. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
There were great changes in the world by the revolutions
of empire, the cruelties of conquering, and the calamities of
enſlaved uations. Temple.
CRU'ENTATE. adj. [cruentatus, Latin.] Smeared with blood.
Atomical aporrheas paſs from the cruentate cloth or weapon
to the wound. Glanv. Scepſ. c. 24.
CRU'Et. m. ſ. [Åruicke, Dutch..] A vial for vinegar or oyl,
with a ſtopple.
Within thy reach I ſet the vinegar !
And fill'd the cruet with the acid tide,
While pepper-water worms thy bait ſupply'd.
Cruise. m. ſ. [Kruicke, Dutch..] A ſmall cup.
I have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a barrel, and
a little oil in a cruiſe. I Kings, xvii. 12.
The train prepare a cruiſe of curious mold,
A cruiſe of fragrance, form'd of burniſh'd gold. Pope's Odſ.
A CRUISE. m.ſ. i craſe, Fr. from the original cruiſers, who
bore the croſs, and plundered only infidels.] A voyage in
ſearch of plunder.
To CRUISE. v. n, [from the noun..] To rove over the ſea in
ſearch of opportunities to plunder ; to wander on the ſea
without any certain courſe.
CRU's ER. m.ſ.. [from cruiſe.] One that roves upon the ſea
in ſearch of plunder.
Amongſt the cruiſers it was complained, that their ſurgeons
were too active in amputating fraćtured members. 1/iſeman.
CRUM. N. m. / ſcruma, Saxon; kruyme, Dutch ; Krummel,
CRUMB. ; German.
1. The ſoft part of bread; not the cruſt.
Take of manchet about three ounces, the crumb only thin
cut; and let it be boiled in milk 'till it grow to a pulp. Bacon.
2. A ſmall particle or fragment of bread.
More familiar grown, the table crums
Attract his ſlender feet. Thomſºn's I/inter, 1.255.
To CRU'MBle. v. a. [from crumb.] To break into ſmall
pieces; to comminute.
Fleſh is but the glaſs which holds the duſt
That meaſures all our time, which alſo ſhall
Swift.
Be crumbled into duſt. Herbert,
He with his bare wand can unthread thy joints,
And crumble all thy ſinews. AMilton.
By frequent parcelling and ſubdividing of inheritances, in
proceſs of time they became ſo divided and crumbled, that
there were few perſons of able eſtates. Hale's Com. Law of Eng.
At the ſame time we were crumbled into various factions
and parties, all aiming at by-intereſts, without any ſincere
regard for the publick good. Atterbury’s Sermons.
The other bill leaves three hundred pounds a year to the
mother church; which three hundred pounds, by another act
paſſed ſome years ago, they can divide likewiſe, and crumble
2S !. * will and pleaſure will diſpoſe of them. Swift,
QL. -
South's Sermon,
To CRU'MBLE. v. m. To fall into ſmall pieces,
There is ſo hot a ſummer in my brain,
That all my bowels crumble up to duſt. Shakeſp. King joln.
Nor is the profit ſmall the peaſant makes,
Who ſmooths with harrow, or who pounds with rakes,
The crumbling clods. Dryden's Georg,
Ambition ſigh'd; ſhe found it vain to truſt
The faithleſs column, and the crumbling buſt. Pope's Epiſł.
If the ſtone is brittle, it will often crumble, and paſs in the
form of gravel. A luthnot on Diet.
What houſe, when its materials crumble,
Muſt not inevitably tumble : Swift.
For the little land that remains, proviſion is made by the
late act againſt popcry, that it will daily crumble away. Swift.
CRU'MENAi, n.ſ.. [from crumena, Latin.] A purſe.
The fat ox, that woon ligye in the ſtall,
Is now faſt ſtalled in her crumenal. Spenſer's Paſtora's.
CRU'MMY. adj. [from crum.] Soft. -
CRUMP. adj. ſcrump, Saxon; Krom, Dutch; Krumm, Germ.]
Crooked in the back.
When the workman took meaſure of him, he was crump
ſhouldered, and the right fide higher than the left. L’E/irange.
To CRU'MPLE. v. a. [from crump; or corrupted from rumple,
rompelen, Dutch..] To draw into wrinkles; to cruſh together
in complications.
Sir Roger alighted from his horſe, and expoſing his palm to
two or three that ſtood by him, they crumpled it into all ſhapes,
and diligently ſcanned every wrinkle that could be made. Addison
CRE'MPLING.. n.ſ. A ſmall degenerate apple.
#. tº. }v. n. To cry like a crane. Diff.
CRU'PPER. n.ſ.. [from croupe, Fr. the buttocks of the horſe.]
That part of the horſeman's furniture that reaches from the
ſaddle to the tail.
Clitophon had received ſuch a blow, that he had loſt the
reins of his horſe, with his head well nigh touching the crup-
per of the horſe. Sidney.
Where have you left the money that I gave you?
Oh–ſixpence, that I had a Wedneſday laſt,
To pay the ſaddler for my miſtreſs' crupper. Shakeſpeare.
Full oft the rivals met, and neither ſpar'd
His utmoſt force, and each forgot to ward:
The head of this was to the ſaddle bent,
The other backward to the crupper ſent. Dryden,
CRU'RAL. adj. [from crus cruris, Latin.] Belonging to the leg.
The ſharpneſs of the teeth, and the ſtrength of the crural
muſcles in lions and tygers, are the cauſe of the great and
babitual immorality of thoſe animals. Arbuthnot.
R Us A/DE.
$º: }n.ſ. See CRois ADE.
1. An expedition againſt the infidels.
2. A coin ſtamped with a croſs.
Believe me, I had rather have loſt my purſe
Full of cruſadees. Shakeſpeare's Othelio.
CRuse. See CRUISE.
CRU's Ft. n.ſ. A goldſmith's melting pot.
To CRUSH. v. a. ſecraſer, French.
1. To preſs between two oppoſite bodies; to ſqueeze.
You ſpeak him far.
I don't extend him, fir: within himſelf
Cruſh him together, rather than unfold
His meaſure fully. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
The aſs thruſt herſelf unto the wall, and cruſhed Balaam's
foot againſt the wall. A lim. xxii. 25.
- Bacchus that firſt, from out the purple grape,
Cruſh'd the ſweet poiſon of miſuſed wine. 41ſt. Par, Loſt.
I fought and fell like one, but death deceiv'd ine:
I wanted weight of feeble Moors upon me,
To cruſh my ſoul out. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
2. To preſs with violence.
When loud winds from diff'rent quarters ruſh,
Vaſt clouds encountring, one another cruſh.
3. To overwhelm; to beat down.
Put in their hands thy bruiſing irons of wrath,
That they may cruſh down, with a heavy fall, -
Th' uſurping helmets of our adverſaries' Shakespeare . Rich. III,
The ſad weight of ſuch ingratitude
Will cruſh me into earth, -
Vain is the force of man, and heav'n's as vain,
To cruſh the pillars which the pile ſuſtain. Dryden's &amp;n.
4. To ſubdue ; to depreſs; to diſpirit.
They uſe them to plague their enemies, or to oppreſs and crºft
ſome of their own too ſtubborn freeholders. Síºſer on Ireland.
Mine emulation -
Hath not that honour in't it had 5 for -
I thought to crºſh him in an equal force,
True ſword to ſword. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus,
This a ‘t
Shall bruiſe the head of Satan, cruſh his ſtrength,
Defeating fin and death, his two main arms. Milt, Pa. Loſt,
What can that man fear, who takes care to pleaſe a Being
that is ſo able to cruſh all his adverſaries: a Being that can
6 divor:
Philipſ,
JValler.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 171</div><p class="Text">C R Y
C R Y
ºvert any misfortune from befalling him, or turn ºy ſuch
º to his advantage 2 Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 of.
To causg. v. m. To be condenſed; to come in a cloſe body.
Poverty, cold wind, and cruſhing rain,
Beat keen and heavy on thy tender years. Thomſ. Autumn.
CRush. m. ſ. [from the verb...] A colliſion.
Thou ſhalt flouriſh in º: youth,
amidſt the war of elements,
#. of matter, and the cruſh of worlds. Addiſ Cato.
CRUST. n.ſ. ſc. uſia, Latin.] - -
1. Any ſhell, or external coat, by which any body 1s enveloped.
I have known the ſtatue of an emperor quite hid under a
cruff of droſs. Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
2. An incruſtation; colle&amp;tion of matter into a hard body.
Were the river a confuſion of never ſo many different bo-
dies, if they had been all actually diſſolved, they would at
leaſt have formed one continued cruſ?; as we ſee the ſcorium
of metals always gathers into a ſolid piece. . Addison ºn Italy.
The viſcuous cruſt ſtops the entry of the chyle into the
lačteals. Arbuthnot on Alimentſ.
3. The caſe of a pye made of meal, and baked. -
He was never ſuffered to go abroad, for fear of catching
cold; when he ſhould have been hunting down a buck, he
was by his mother's ſide learning how to ſeaſon it, or put it in
cruſt. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 462.
4. The outer hard part of bread.
Th’ impenetrable cruſ; thy teeth defies,
And petrify'd with age, ſecurely lies. Dryden's juv. Sat. v.
5. A waſte piece of bread.
Y’are liberal now; but when your turn is ſped,
You'll wiſh me choak'd with every cruſt of bread. Dryden,
Men will do tricks, like dogs, for cruſts. L’Eſtrange.
To CR Ust. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To envelop ; to cover with a hard caſe.
Why gave you me a monarch's ſoul,
And cruſhed it with baſe plebeian clay. Dryd. Span. Fryar.
Nor is it improbable but that, in proceſs of time, the whole
ſurface of it may be cruſted over, as the iſlands enlarge them-
ſelves, and the banks cloſe in upon them. Addiſon on Italy.
And now their legs, and breaſts, and bodies ſtood
Crufted with bark, and hard'ning into wood. Addison.
In ſome, who have run up to men without education, we
may obſerve many great qualities darkened and eclipſed; their
minds are cruſted over, like diamonds in the rock. Felton.
2. To foul with concretions.
If your maſter hath many muſty, or very foul and cruſhed
bottles, let thoſe be the firſt you truck at the next alehouſe.
Swift's Directions to the Butler.
To CRust. v. n. To gather or contract a cruſt; to gain a
hard covering.
I contented myſelf with a plaiſter upon the place that was
burnt, which criſted and healed in very few days. Temple.
CRUSTA's Eous. adj. [from crºſla, Lat. Shelly, with joints;
not teſtaceous ; not with one continued uninterrupted ſhell.
Lobſter is cruſtaceous, oyſter teſtaceous. -
It is true that there are ſome ſhells, ſuch as thoſe of lobſters,
crabs, and others of cruſt.ceous kinds that are very rarely
found at land. Woºdward's Natural Hiſtory.
CRusTA'geous NEss. n.ſ [from cruſaceous.] The quality of
having jointed ſhells.
§: adv. [from cruſ'; ), Peewiſhly; ſnappiſhly.
RustiNESS. m. ſ. [from ruſty.]
1. The quality of a cruſt.
2. Peeviſhneſs; moroſeneſs.
CRusty, adj. [from cruſt.]
1. Covered with a cruſt.
The egg itſelf deſerves our notice: its parts within, and its
crºſy coat without, are admirably well fitted for the buſineſs
of incubation. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
*...tº moroſe; ſnappiſh: a low word.
CRUTCH. n. ſ' ſcreccia, Ital, croce, Fr. crucke, Germ.] A
ſupport uſed by cripples.
Ah, thus king Henry throws away his crutch,
Before his legs be firm to bear his body. Shakeſp. Hen. VI,
Beauty doth varniſh age, as if new born,
And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy.
Hence, therefore, thou nice crutch:
A ſcaly gauntlet now, with joints of ſteel,
Muſt glove this hand. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
9, theſe new crutches let them learn towaik, Dryd. Geor.
This fair defect, this helpleſs aid call'd wife,
Shakeſpeare.
The bending cruth of a decrepit life. Dryden.
At beſt a crutch that liſts the weak alon &gt;
*"Pºrts the feeble, but retards the ſtrong. Smith.
, *he dumb ſhall fing, the lame his grº, forego,
hd leap exulting like the bounding roe. Pope's Mºffah.
To Crutcli. º. a.
a cripple.
I haſten Og and Doeg to rehearſe,
Tº fools that crutch thiſ fºr.
To CRY. v. n. [crier, French..] enſe on verſe.
* To ſpeak with vehémence and loudneſs.
[from crutch..] To ſupport on crutches as
Dryden.
Methought I heard a voice cry, ſleep no more!
Macbeth, doth murther ſleep the innocent ſleep! Shaşſp.
While his falling tears the ſtream ſupply'd,
Thus mourning to his mother goddeſs cyd. Dryden's Wirg.
2. To call importunately. f
I cried, by reaſon of mine affliction, unto the Lord, and he
heard me. jon. ii. 2.
3. To talk eagerly or inceſſantly ; to repºat continually.
They be idle ; therefore they cry, ſaying let us go. Ex. v. 8.
4. To proclaim ; to make publick.
Go and cry in the ears of Jeruſalem. jer. ii. 2.
The Egyptians ſhall help in vain, and to no purpoſe;
therefore have I tried, concerning this, their ſtrength is to fit
ſtill. º - Iſ, Xxx. 7.
5. To exclaim.
Yet let them look they glory not in miſchief,
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men;
For then, my guiltleſs blood muſt cry againſt them. Shakespeare
What's the matter,
That in the ſeveral places of the city
You cry againſt the noble ſenate. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanut.
If dreſſing, miſtreſſing, and compliment,
Take tºp thy day, the ſun himſelf will cry
Againſt thee. Herbert.
Lyſimachus having obtained the favour of ſeeing his ſhips
and machines, ſurpriſed at the contrivance, tried out that they
were built with more than human art. Arbuthnot on Coins.
6. To utter lamentations.
We came crying hither:
Thou know'ſt, the firſt time that we ſmell the air,
We wawle and cry. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Behold, my ſervants ſhall ſing for joy of heart; but ye
ſhall cry for ſorrow of heart, and ſhall howl for vexation of
ſpirit. 1ſ. lxv. 14.
When any great evil has been upon philoſophers, they cer-
tainly figh and groan as pitifully, and cry out as loud, as other
men. Tillºtſ,n, Sermºn v.
7. To ſquall, as an infant.
Should ſome god tell me, that ſhould I be born,
And cry again, his offer I ſhould ſcorn. Denham.
Thus, in a ſtarry night, fond children cry
For the rich ſpangles that adorn the ſky. J/aller.
He ſtruggles for breath, and cries for aid;
Then helpleſs in his mother's lap is laid. Dryden's Fables.
The child certainly knows that the wormſeed or muſtard-
ſeed it refuſes, is not the apple or ſugar it cries for. Locke.
8. To weep; to ſhed tears.
Her who ſtill weeps with ſpungy eyes,
And her who is dry cork, and never cries. Donne.
9. To utter an inarticulate voice, as an animal.
He giveth to the beaſt his food, and to the young ravens
which cry. Pſalm, cxlvii. 9.
The beaſts of the field cry alſo unto thee. joel, i. 20.
1c. To yelp, as a hound on a ſcent.
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord;
He cried upon it at the meereſt loſs;
Truſt me, I take him for the better dog. Shakespeare.
To CR Y. v. a. To proclaim publickly ſomething loſt or found,
in order to its recovery or reſtitution.
She ſeeks, ſhe fighs, but no where ſpics him:
Love is loſt, and thus ſhe cries him.
To CR Y dºwn. v. a.
1. To blame; to depreciate; to decry.
Bavius cries down an admirable treatiſe of philoſophy, and
ſays there's atheiſm in it. //atts's Improvement, p. i. e. 6.
Men of diſſolute lives cry down religion, becauſe they would
not be under the reſtraints of it. Tillotſon, Sermon ii.
2. To prohibit. -
By all means cry down that unworthy courſe of late times,
that they ſhould pay money. Bacºn's Advice to hilliers.
3. To overbear.
Craſaw.
I'll to the king,
And from a mouth of honour quite cry down
This Ipſwich fellow's inſolence. Shakespeare's Henry VIII.
To CRY our. v. n.
1. To exclaim; to ſcream; to clamour. -
They make the oppreſſed to cry; they cry out by reaſon of
the arm of the mighty. fab, xxxv. 5.
With that Suſanna cried with a loud voice, and the two
elders cried out againſt her. Suj. xxiv.
2. To complain loudly.
We are ready to cry out of an unequal management, and
to blame the Divine adminiſtration. Alterbury's Sermºns.
3. To blame; to cenſure: with of, againſ, upon.
Are theſe things then neceſlities?
Then let us meet them like neceſſities;
And that ſame word even now cries out on us. Shakespearerare.
Giddy cenſure
Will then cry out of Marcius: oh, if he -
Had borne the buſineſs. Shakespeare's Cºriokºut.
Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard. 72%, Xix. 7.
Cry
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 172</div><p class="Text">Cry out upºn the ſtars for doing
Ill offices, to croſs their wooing. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. r.
Epiphanius cries out upon it as rank idolatry, and deſtructive
to their ſouls who did it. Stillinºffret.
Tumult, ſedition and rebellion, are things that the followers
of that hypotheſis cry out againſ?. Locke.
I find every ſect, as far as reaſon will help them, make uſe
of it gladly; and where it fails them, they cry out it is matter
of faith, and above reaſon. Locke.
4. To declare loud.
5. To be in labour. -
What is ſhe crying out 2
So ſaid her woman; and that her ſuffrance made
Each pang a death. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
To CRY up. v. a.
1. To applaud; to exalt; to praiſe.
Inſtead of crying up all things which are brought from be-
yond ſea, let us advance the native commodities of our own
kingdom. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
The philoſopher deſervedly ſuſpected himſelf of vanity,
when cried up by the multitude. Glanville's Scepſ, c. 18.
The aſtrologer, if his predićtions come to paſs, is cried up
to the ſtars from whence he pretends to draw them. South.
They ſlight the ſtrongeſt arguments that can be brought for
religion, and cry up very weak ones againſt it. Hill tſon's Serm.
He may, out of intereſt, as well as convićtion, cry up that
for ſacred, which, if once trampled on and profaned, he him-
ſelf cannot be ſafe, nor ſecure. Locke.
Poets, like monarchs on an Eaſtern throne,
Confin'd by nothing but their will alone,
Here can cry up, and there as boldly blame,
And, as they pleaſe, give infamy or fame. Iſaſh.
Thoſe who are fond of continuing the war, cry up our con-
ſtant ſucceſs at a moſt prodigious rate. - Swift.
2. To raiſe the price by proclamation.
All the effect that I conceive was made by crying up the
pieces of eight, was to bring in much more of that ſpecies,
inſtead of others current here. Temple.
CRY. n.f. [cri, French.]
1. Lamentation; ſhriek; ſcream.
And all the firſt-born in the land of Egypt ſhall die, and
there ſhall be a great cry throughout all the land. Exºd. xi. 5.
2. Weeping; mourning.
3. Clamour; outcry.
Amazement ſeizes all; the general cry
Proclaims Laocoon juſtly doom'd to die. Dryden's Wirg. Æn.
Theſe narrow and ſelfiſh views have ſo great an influence in
this cry, that there are ſeveral of my fellow freeholders who
fancy the church in danger upon the riſing of bank-ſtock. Addison
4. Exclamation of triumph or wonder, or any other paſſion.
In popiſh countries ſome impoſtor crics out, a miracle! a
miracle 1 to confirm the deluded vulgar in their errours; and
ſo the cry goes round, without examining into the cheat. Swift.
5. Proclamation.
6. The hawkers proclamation of wares to be ſold in the ſtreet;
as, the cries of London.
7. Acclamation; popular favour.
The cry went once for thee,
And ſtill it might, and yet it may again.
8. Voice; utterance; manner of vocal expreſſion.
Sounds alſo, beſides the diſtinét cries of birds and beaſts,
are modified by diverſity of notes of different length, put to-
gether, which make that complex idea called tune. Locke.
9. Importunate call. - -
Pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer
for them. jer. vii. 13,
1c. Yelping of dogs.
He ſcorns the dog, reſolves to try
The combat next; but if their cry
Invades again his trembling ear,
. He ſtrait reſumes his wonted care.
I 1. Yell; inarticulate noiſe.
There ſhall be the noiſe of a cry from the fiſhgate, and an
howling from the ſecond, and a great craſhing from the hills.
Zeph. i. 10.
Shakespeare.
Waller.
12. A pack of dogs. *
About her middle round,
A cry of hell-hounds never ceaſing bark'd. Milt. Par. Lºft.
You common cry of curs, whoſe breath I hate
As reek o' th' rotten fens; whoſe loves I prize
As the dead carcaſſes of unburied men,
That do corrupt my air. Shakespeare's Cori lanus.
CRY'AL. m. ſ. The heron. Ainſworth.
CRY'E.R. See CRIER.
CRY'E.R. m. ſ. A kind of hawk called the falcon gentle, an
enemy to pigeons, and very ſwift. Ainſworth.
CRYPTICAL. }* [xpſia..] Hidden; ſecret; occult; pri-
CRYPTICK. wate; unknown; not divulged.
The ſtudents of nature, conſcious of her more cryptick
ways of working, reſolve many ſtrange effects into the near
efficiency of ſecond cauſes. Glanville's Apolºgy.
Speakers, whoſe chief buſineſs is to amuſe or delight, do
not confine themſelves to any natural order, but in a cryptical
or hidden method adapt every thing to their ends. . /*aits.
CRY'ptically. adv. [from cryp ical J Occultly ; ſecretly :
perhaps in the following example, the author might have
written critically. -
We take the word acid in a familiar ſenſe, without crypti-
cally diſtinguiſhing it from thoſe ſapors that are a-kin to
it. Boyle.
CRYPT o'GRAPHY, n ſ [x;''', and 7:422.)
1. The act of writing ſecret characters.
2. Secret characters; c, phers.
Cryptology. m.ſ. [...wºw and ºl ānigmatical lan-
uage. -
cºsial. n.ſ. [x;;zz»º..]
1. Cryſtal, are hard, pellucid, and naturally colourleſs bodies,
of regularly angular figures, compoſed of ſimple, not fila-
mentous plates, not flexile or claſtick, giving fire with ſteel,
not fermenting with acid menſtrua, and calcining in a ſtrong
fire. There are many various ſpecies of it produced in dif-
ferent parts of the globe. Hill on ſo ſis.
Iſland cry/ſal bears a red heat without loſing its tranſpa-
rency, and in a very intenſe heat calcines without fuſion :
ſteeped a day or two in water, it loſes its natural poliſh :
rubbed on cloth, it attracts ſtraws, like amber. Chambers.
Iſland cryſtal is a genuine ſpar, of an extremely pure, clear,
and fine texture, ſeldom either blenniſhed with flaws or ſpots,
or ſtained with any other colour. It is always an oblique
parallelopiped of ſix planes, and found from a quarter of an
inch to three inches in diameter. It is moderately heavy, but
very ſoft, and is eaſily ſerated with a pin. It very frcely cal-
cines into a pure, but opaque white. It is found in the iſland
of Iceland, and in many parts of Germany and France A
remarkable property of this body, which has much employed
the writers on opticks, is its double refraction; ſo that if it
be laid over a black line, drawn on paper, two lines appear
in the place of one, of the ſame colour and thickneſs, and
running parallel to one another at a ſmall diſtance. Hill.
Water, as it ſeems, turneth into cryial; as is ſeen in divers
caves, where the cryial hangs in ſilicidis. Facºn's Phyſ. Rem.
If crylal be a ſtone, it is not immediately concreted by the
efficacy of cold, but rather by a mineral ſpirit. Brown.
Cryſtal is certainly known, and diſlinguiſhed by the degree of
its diaphaneity and of its refraction, as alſo of its hardneſs,
which are ever the ſame. //codward's A4 ath. Foſſ.
3. Cryſtal is alſo uſed for a faditious body caſt in the glaſs-houſes,
called alſo cryſtal glaſs, which is carricq to a degree of per-
fečtion beyond the common glaſs; though it comes far ſhort
of the whiteneſs and vivacity of the natural cryſtal. Chambers.
4. Cryſtals [in chymiſtry] expreſs ſalts or other matters ſhot or
congealed in manner of crylal. Chaºters.
If the menſtruum be overcharged, within a ſhort time
the metals will ſhoot into certain cryſtals. Bacon.
CRY's TAL. adj.
1. Conſiſting of cryſtal.
Then, Jupiter, thou king of Gods, -
Thy cryſtal window ope, look out. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
2. Bright; clear; tranſparent ; lucid ; pellucid.
In groves we live, and lie on moſſy beds -
By cryſtal ſtreams, that murmur through the meads. Dryden.
CRY'St ALLINE. adj. [crytailinus, Latin.]
1. Conſiſting of cryſtal.
Mount eagle to my palace cryſaline. Shakeſp. Cym'eline.
We provided ourſelves with ſome ſmall receivers, blown of
cryſtal ine glaſs. B yie's Spring ºf the Air.
2. Bright; clear; pellucid; tranſparent.
The clarifying of water is an experiment tending to the
health ; beſides the pleaſure of the eye, when water is cry/al-
line. It is effected by caſting in and placing pebbles at the
head of the current, that the water may ſtrain through them.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry, Nº. 7.
He on the wings of cherub rode iublime
On the cryſtalline ſky, in ſaphir thron'd
Illuſtrious far and wide. A,ilton's Paradſe Left, b. vi.
CRY's TALLINE Humour, a. ſ. The ſecond humour of the eye,
that lies in mediately next to the aqueous behind the uvea,
oppoſite to the papilla, nearer to the forepart than the back-
part of the globe. It is the leaſt of the humours, but much
more ſolid than any of them. Its figure, which is convex on
both ſides, reſembles two unequal ſegments of ſpheres, of
which the moſt convex is on its backſide, which makes a ſmall
cavity in the glaſſy humour in which it lies. It is covercd
with a fine coat, called aranea.
The parts of the eye are made cºnvex, and eſpecially
the cryſtalline humour, which is of a lenticular figure, convex
on both ſides. Ray on the Creation.
CRYSTALLIzA'tion. m. ſ. [from cryſtallize.] Congelation into
cryſtals.
Such a combination of ſaline particles as reſembles the
form of a cryſtal, variouſly modified, according to the nature
and texture of the ſalts. The method is by diſſolving any
ſaline body in water, and filtering it, to evaporate, 'till a film
appear at the top, and then let it ſtand to ſhoot ; and this, it
3 does
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 173</div><p class="Text">C U B
C U C
does by that attraćtive force which is in all bodies, and parti-
cularly in ſalt, by reaſon of its ſolidity : whereby, when the
mºnium of fluid, in which ſuch particles flow, is ſated
enough or evaporated, ſo that the ſaline particles are within
each other's attractive powers, they draw one another more
than they are drawn by the fluid, then will they run into cry-
ſtals. Ánd this is peculiar to thoſe, that let them be ever ſo
much divided and reduced into minute particles, yet, when
they are formed into cryſtals, they each of them reaſſume
their proper ſhapes; ſo that one might as eaſily diveſt them of
their fairneſs, as of their figure. This being an immutable and
perpetual law, by knowing the figure of the cryſtals, we may
underſtand what the texture of the particles ought to be,
which can form thoſe cryſtals; and, on the other hand, by
knowing the texture of the particles, may be determined the
figure of the cryſtals. ..ºuincy.
2. The maſs formed by congelation or concretion.
All natural metallick and mineral cryſtallizations were ef-
feded by the water, which firſt brought the particles, whereof
cach conſiſts, out from amongſt the matter of the ſtrata.
//oodward's Natural Hiſtory, p, i.
To CRY's TALLIzE. v. a. [from crytal.] To cauſe to congeal
or concrete in cryſtals.
If you diſſolve copper in aqua fortis, or ſpirit of nitre, you
may, by cryſtallizing the ſolution, obtain a goodly blue.
Boyle's Scept. Chym.
To CRY'stallize. v. n. To coagulate; congeal; concrete;
or ſhoot into cryſtals.
Recent urine will likewiſe cryſtallize by inſpiſſation, and
afford a ſalt neither acid nor alkaline. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
CUB. m. ſ. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. The young of a beaſt; generally of a bear or fox.
I would outſtare the ſterneſt eyes that look,
Pluck the young ſucking cubs from the ſhe-bear. Shakeſpeare.
This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
The lion, and the belly pinched wolf,
Keep their fur dry. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
In the cagle's deſtroying one fox's cubs, there's power exe-
cuted with oppreſſion. L'Eſtrange, Fable 72.
2. The young of a whale, perhaps of any viviparous fiſh.
Two mighty whales, which ſwelling ſeas had toſt,
One as a mountain vaſt, and with her came
A cub, not much inferior to his dame. JValler.
3. In reproach or contempt, a young boy or girl.
O thou diſſembling cub / what wilt thou be,
When time hath ſow'd a grizzle on thy caſe?
Or will not elſe thy craft ſo quickly grow,
That thine own trip ſhall be thine overthrow ; Shakespeare care.
O moſt comical ſight! a country ſquire, with the equipage
of a wife and two daughters, came to Mr. Snipwel's ſhop laſt
night; but, ſuch two unlicked cubs / Congreve.
To Cº. B. v. a... [from the noun..] To bring forth: uſed of
beaſts, or of a woman in contempt.
Cub’d in a cabbin, on a mattreſs laid,
On a brown George with louſy ſwabbers fed;
Dead wine, that ſtinks of the Borrachio, ſup
From a foul jack, or greaſy mapple cup. Dryden's Perſ. Sat.
CUBA"Tios. m. ſ. [culatio, Lat..] The act of lying down. Dićt.
SUBA Tory, adj. [from cuſo, Lat..] Recumbent. Dić7.
CU'BATURE. m.ſ.. [from cube..] The finding exactly the ſolid
content of any propoſed body. Harris.
CUBE. m. ſ. [from zºº, a die J
* [In geometry.] A regular ſolid body, conſiſting of ſix ſquare
and equal faces or ſides, and the angles all right, and therefore
equal. Chambers.
* [In ºrithmetick.] See Cubick Number.
^" the maſter planets move about the ſun at ſeveral diſ.
****, as their common center, and with different velocities.
This common law being obſerved in all of them, that the
"uares of the times of the revolutions are proportional to the
cubes of their diſtances. Grew's Coſmolog. b. i. c. 2. ſ. 6.
ºf Rzot. }": The origin of a cubick number; or a
Cu'Rick Roºt, 5 number, by whoſe multiplication into itſelf,
and again into the produći, any given number is formed:
- thus two is the cube-root of eight. Chambers.
Cu'BFB. n.ſ. A ſmall dried fruit reſembling pepper, but ſome-
what longer, of a greyiſh-brown colour on the ſurface, and
*Pºſed of a corrugated or wrinkled external bark, covering
d ſingle and thin friable ſhell or capſule, containing a ſingle
ſeed of a roundiſh figure, blackiſh on the ſurface, and white
within, It has an aromatick, but not very ſtrong ſmell, and
º asrid and pungent to the taſte, but leſs ſo than pepper.
ºtels are brought into Europe from the iſland of Java; but
the plant, which produces them, is wholly unknown to us.
- hey * Warm and carminative; and the Indians ſteep them
" *** and eſteem them provocatives to venery. Fiill.
l Aromaticks, as cubebº, cinnamon, and nutmegs, are uſual-
W. Put into crude poor wines, to give them more oily
ſpirits. -
Cubic Al, Player on the Humours.
CU'Bick. łaj. [from cube.]
i. Having the form or Properties of a cube.
A cloſe veſſel, containing ten cubical feet of air, will not
ſuffer a wax-candle of an ounce to burn in it above an hour
before it be ſuffocated. I/ilkins's Math. Mag.
It is above a hundred to one, againſt any particular throw,
that you do not caſt any given ſet of faces with four cubical
dice; becauſe there are ſo many ſeveral combinations of the
ſix faces of four dice. Bentley's Sermons.
2. It is applied to numbers.
The number of four, multiplied into itſelf, produceth the
ſquare number of fixteen; and that again multiplied by four,
produceth the cubick number of fixty-four. If we ſhould ſup-
poſe a multitude aétually infinite, there muſt be infinite roots,
and ſquare and culick numbers; yet, of neceſſity, the root is
but the fourth part of the ſquare, and the ſixteenth part of the
cubick number.
The number of ten hath been as highly extolled, as con-
taining even, odd, long and plain, quadrate and cubical
numbers. Brown's ſugar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
Cubical N Esº, n. ſ [from cubical.] The ſtate or quality of
being cubical.
CUB1 cu LARY. adj. [culiculum, Latin J. Fitted for the poſture
of lying down.
Cuſtom, by degrees, changed their cºliculary beds into diſcu-
bitory, and introduced a faſhion to go from the baths unto
theſe. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. v. c. 6.
CU'EIFor M. adj. [from cule and form.] Of the ſhape of a
cube.
CUBIT. m. ſ. [from culitus, Latin ). A meaſure in uſe among
the ancients; which was originally the diſtance from the
elbow, bending inwards, to the extremity of the middle
finger. This meaſure is the fourth part of a well propor-
tioned man's ſtature. Some fix the Hebrew cºſit at twenty
inches and a half, Paris meaſure; and others at eighteen. Calm.
From the tip of the elbow to the end of the long finger, is
half a yard and a quarter of the flature, and makes a cubit;
the firſt meaſure we read of, the ark of Noah being framed
and meaſured by cubits. Holder on Time.
Meaſur’d by culit, length, and breadth, and height.
Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi.
The Jews uſed two ſorts of cubits; the ſacred, and the pro-
fane or common onc. Arbuthnot on 4 eaſures.
When on the goddeſs firſt I caſt my fight,
Scarce ſeem'd her ſtature of a cubit height. Pope.
Cu'BITAL. adj. [cubitalis, Latin.] Containing only the length
of a cubit.
The watchmen of Tyre might well be called pygmies, the
towers of that city being ſo high, that, unto men below, they
appeared in a cut ital ſtature. Brown's /ugar Errours, b. iv.
CU'ckINGstool. n.ſ. An engine invented for the puniſh-
ment of ſcolds and unquiet women, which, in ancient times,
was called tumbrel. Cowel.
Theſe mounted on a chair-curale,
Which moderns call a cucking:/?ool,
March proudly to the river's ſide. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 2.
CU'CKOLD. m. ſ. [cocu, Fr. from coukoo.] One that is mar-
ried to an adultreſs; one whoſe wife is falſe to his bed.
But for all the whole world; why, who would not make
her huſband a cuckold, to make him a monarch : I ſhould ven-
ture purgatory for’t. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
There have been,
Or I am much deceiv'd, cuckold; ere now ;
And many a man there is, ev’n at this preſent,
Now while I ſpeak this, holds his wife by th’ arm,
That little thinks ſhe has been ſluic’d in's abſence. Shakesp.
For though the law makes null th’ adulterer's deed
Of lands, to her the cuckold may ſucceed. Pryden's juvenal.
Ever fince the reign of king Charles II. the alderman is
made a cuckold, the deluded virgin is debauched, and adultery
and fornication are committed behind the ſcenes. Swift. .
To CU'ckold. v. a.
1. To corrupt a man's wife; to bring upon a man the reproach of
having an adulterous wife; to rob a man of his wife's fidelity.
If thou canít cuckold him, thou do it thyſelf a pleaſure, and
me a ſport. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
2. To wrong a huſband by unchaſtity.
But ſuffer not thy wife abroad to roam,
Nor ſtrut in ſtreets with amazonian pace;
For that's to cuckold thee before thy face. Dºyd juv. Sat. 6.
CU'ckcLDLY. adj. [from cuckold.] Having the qualitics of a
cuckold ; poor; mean ; cowardly; ſheaking. -
Poor cuckoldly knave, I know him not; yet I wrong him to
call him poor; they ſay, the jealous knave hath maſſes of
money. Shakeſpeare's Aferry Wives of // indſºr.
Cuckold MAKER. m.ſ. ſcuckold and make.J. One that makes
a practice of corrupting wives. -
If I ſpared any that had a head to hit, either young or old,
he or ſhe, cuckold or cuckolamaker, let me never hope to ſee
a chine again. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII:
One Hernando, cuckoldºaker of this city, contrived to ſteal
her away. Dryden's Sani/ Fryar.
CU'cko Loo M. m. ſ. [from cuckold.]
1. The act of adultery. Sh
Ç
Hale's Origin of Mankind.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 174</div><p class="Text">C U D º
C U F
C UCKoo-FLow ER.
She is thinking on nothing but her colonel, and conſpiring
cuckoldom againſt me. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
2. The ſtate of a cuckold.
It is a true ſaying, that the laſt man of the pariſh that
knows of his cuckoldom, is himſelf. Arbuthn. Hiſi. of j. Bull.
CU'CKOO. m. ſ. ſcºverw, Welſh; cocu, Fr. Kockock, Dutch.]
1. A bird which appears in the Spring; and is ſaid to ſuck the
eggs of other birds, and lay her own to be hatched in their
place; from which practice, it was uſual to alarm a huſband at
the approach of an adulterer by calling cuckoo, which, by miſ-
take, was in time applied to the huſband. This bird is re-
markable for the uniformity of his note, from which his name
in moſt tongues ſeems to have been formed.
Finding Mopſa, like a cuckoo by a nightingale, alone with
Pamela, 1 came in. Sidney.
The merry cuckoº, meſſenger of Spring,
His trumpet ſhrill hath thrice already ſounded. Spenſer.
The plainſong cuckoo gray,
Whoſe note full many a man doth mark,
And dares not anſwer, nay. Shakeſpeare.
Take heed, have open eye; for thieves do foot by night:
Take heed ere Summer comes, or cuckoo birds affright. Shakespeare
I deduce,
From the firſt note the hollow cuckoo fings,
The ſymphony of Spring; and touch a theme
Unknown to fame, the paſſion of the grove. Thomſ. Spring.
2. It is a name of contempt.
Why, what a raſcal art thou then, to praiſe him ſo for
running f -
—A horſeback, ye cuckoo; but a-foot, he will not budge
a foot. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Cuckoo-BU D. }* / The name of a flower.
When daizies pied, and violets blue,
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue,
Do paint the meadows much bedight.
~. Nettles, cuckoº-ſlowers,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our ſuſtaining corn. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Cuckoo-sp1ttle. n.ſ. -
Cuckoo-ſhittle, or woodſeare, is that ſpumous dew or exuda-
tion, or both, found upon plants, eſpecially about the joints
of lavender and roſemary; obſerveable with us about the lat-
ter end of May. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v. c. 8.
§:::::... }aff. [atulatº, hooded, Latin.]
1. Hooded; covered, as with a hood or cowl.
2. Having the reſemblance or ſhape of a hood.
They are differently cuculated, and capuched upon the head
and back. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v. c. 3.
Cuſcu Mber. m. ſ. [cucumis, Latin J The name of a plant,
and alſo of the fruit of that plant.
It hath a flower conſiſting of one ſingle leaf, bell-ſhaped,
and expanded toward the top, and cut into many ſegments;
of which ſome are male, or barren, having no embryo, but
only a large ſtyle in the middle, charged with the farina :
others are female, or fruitful, being faſtened to an embryo,
which is afterwards changed into a fleſhy fruit, for the moſt
part oblong and turbinated, which is divided into three or
four cells, incloſing many oblong ſeeds. The ſpecies are,
1. The common cucumber 2. The white cucumber. 3. The
long Turky cucumber. The firſt of theſe kirds is the moſt
common in the Engliſh gardens. The ſecond ſort, which is
by far the better fruit, as being leſs watery, and containing
ſweet ſeeds, is the moſt common kind cultivated in Holland.
The third ſort is propagated for the uncommon length of its
fruit, and alſo its having leſs water, and fewer ſeeds; but it is
not ſo fruitful as the common kind, nor will it come ſo early.
The common ſort is cultivated in three different ſeaſons; the
firſt of which is on hot-beds, under garden-frames, for early
fruit: the ſecond is under bell or hand glaſſes, for the middle
crop; and the third is in the common ground for a late crop,
or to pickle. - - Miller.
How cucumb.rs along the ſurface creep,
With crooked bodies and with bellies deep. Dryden's Virgil.
CU'cu MBER WILD. See WILD CUcu MBER.
CUCURBITA'CEOUS. adj. [from cucurbita, Latin, a gourd.]
Cucu hitoce is plants are thoſe which reſemble a gourd;
ſuch as the pumpion and melon Chambers.
CU'cu REIT E. m. ſ. [cucurbita, Latin.) A chymical veſſel,
commonly called a body, made of earth or glaſs, in the ſhape
of a gourd, and therefore called cucurbite. $2uincy.
I have, for curioſity's ſake, diſtilled quickſilver in a cucurbite,
fitted with a capacious glaſs-head. Boyle on Colours.
Let common yellow ſulphur be put into a cucurbite glaſs,
upon which pour the ſtrongeſt aqua fortis. Mortimer’s Husb.
CU}). n ſ ſcub, Saxon.] That food which is repoſited in the
firſt ſtomach in order to rumination, or to be chewed again.
Many times, when my maſter's cattle came hither to chew
their cud in this freſh place, I might ſee the young bull teſtify
his love. - Sidney,
Vol. I.
Shakeſpeare.
- You range the pathleſs wood,
While on a flow'ry bank he chews the cud. Dryden,
CU'DDEN. }*ſ [without etymology..] A clown; a ſtupid
CU'DDY. ruſtick; a low dolt: a low bad word.
The ſlavering cudden, propp'd upon his ſtaff,
Stood ready gaping with a grinning laugh. Dryden.
To Cu'DDL.E. v. n. [a low word, I believe, without etymo-
logy.] To lye cloſe; to ſquat.
Have you mark'd a partridge quake,
Viewing the tow'ring faulcon nigh:
She cuddles low behind the brake;
Nor would ſhe ſtay, nor dares ſhe fly. Prizr.
CUT) GEL. m. ſ. [kudſ, Dutch.]
I. * ſtick to ſtrike with, lighter than a club, ſhorter than a
pole. -
Vine twigs, while they are green, are brittle; yet the wood,
dried, is extreme tough; and was uſed by the captains of ar-
mies, amongſt the Romans, for their cudgels. Bacon’s N. Hiſt.
Do not provoke the rage of ſtones
And cudge's to thy hide and bones.
Tremble and vaniſh. Hudilras, p. i. cant. 2.
The aſs was quickly given to underſtand, with a good
cudgel, the difference betwixt the one playfellow and the
other. L'Eſtrange, Fab. 15.
His ſurly officer ne'er fail'd to crack
His knotty cudgel on his tougher back. Dryden's juvenal.
This, if well reflected on, would make people more wary
in the uſe of the rod and the cudgel. Locke.
The wiſe Cornelius was convinced, that theſe, being pole-
mical arts, could no more be learned alone than fencing or
cudgel-playing. Arbuthnot and Pope's Martinus Scriberus.
2. To croſs the CUDGELs, is to yield, from the practice of cudgel-
players to lay one over the other.
It is much better to give way than it would be to contend
at firſt, and then either to croſs the cudgels, or to be baffled in
the concluſion. L’Eſtrange.
To CU’DGEL. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To beat with a ſtick.
My lord, he ſpeaks moſt vilely of you, like a foul-mouth'd
man, as he is ; and ſaid he would cudgel you. Shakeſp. H. IV.
The aſs courting his maſter, juſt as the ſpaniel had done,
inſtead of being ſtroked and made much of, is only rated off
and cudgelled for all his courtſhip. South's Sermons.
Three duels he fought, thrice ventur'd his life;
Went home, and was cudgell'd again by his wife. Swift.
2. To beat in general.
Cudgel thy brains no more about it; for your dull aſs will
not mend his pace with beating. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
A good woman happened to paſs by as a company of young
fellows were cudgelling a wallnut-tree, and aſked them what
they did that for. L'E/irange.
CUDGEL-PRoof. adj. Able to reſiſt a ſtiek.
His doublet was of ſturdy buff,
And though not ſword, yet cudgel-proof. Hudibras, p. i.
CU'Dwe ED. n.ſ.. [from cud and weed.] A plant.
It hath downy leaves: the cup of the flower is ſcaly, neither
ſhining nor ſpecious : the flowers are cut in form of a ſtar. It
is cultivated for medicinal uſe. - AMiller.
CUE. m. ſ. [queue, a tail, French.]
1. The tail or end of any thing; as, the long curl of a wig.
2. The laſt words of a ſpeech which the player who is to an-
ſwer catches, and regards as intimation to begin.
Pyramus, you begin: when you have ſpoken your ſpeech,
enter into that brake; and ſo every one according to his
Cité. Shakespeare’s Midſummer Night's Dream.
3. A hint; an intimation; a ſhort direction.
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he ſhould weep for her? What would he do,
Had he the motive and the cue for paſſion
That I have He would drown the ſtage with tears. Shakeſp.
Let him know how many ſervants there are, of both ſexes,
who expect vails; and give them their cue to attend in two
lines, as he leaves the houſe. Swift.
4. The part which any man is to play in his turn.
- Hold your hands,
Both you of my inclining, and the reſt:
Were it my cue to fight, I ſhould have known it
Without a prompter. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Neither is Otto here a much more taking gentleman:
nothing appears in his cue to move pity, or any way make the
audience of his party. Rymer’s Tragedies ºf the laſt Age.
5. Humour; temper of mind: a low word.
CUERPO. m. ſ. [Spaniſh..] To be in cuerto, is to be without
the upper coat or cloke, ſo as to diſcover the true ſhape of
the cuerpo or body. -
Expos'd in cuerpo to their rage, -
Without my arms and equipage. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 3.
CUFF. n.ſ. [zuffa, a battle, zuffare, to fight, Italian.]
1. A blow with the fift; a box; a ſtroke. -
The prieſt let fall the book,
And as he ſtoop'd again to take it up,
6 C . The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 175</div><p class="Text">C U L
C U L
The mad-brain’d bridegroom took him ſuch a cºff,
That down fell prieſt and book, and book and prieſt. Shakespeare
There was, for a while, no money bid for argument,
t and the player went to cuffs in the queſtion.
unleſs the poe play Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
He gave her a cuff on the ear, and ſhe would prick him.
with her knitting-needle. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
Their own ſects, which now lie dormant, would be ſoon
at cuffs again with each other about power and prefer-
ment. . - Swift.
2. It is uſed of birds that fight with their talons.
To CuFF. v n. [from the noun..] To fight; to ſcuffle.
Clapping farces aéted by the court,
while the peers cuff, to make the rabble ſport. Dryd. Juv.
To CUFF. v. a.
1. To ſtrike with the fiſt.
I'll after him again, and beat him.
—Do, cuff him ſoundly; but never draw thy ſword. Shakespeare
Well, fir Joſeph, at your intreaty; but were not you, my
friend, abuſed and cuffed, and kicked Congreve's Old Batchelor.
2. To ſtrike with talons.
Thoſe lazy owls, who, perch'd near fortune's top,
Sit only watchful with their heavy wings
To cuff down new-fledg’d virtues, that would riſe
To nobler heights, and make the grove harmonious. Otway.
The daſtard crow, that to the wood made wing,
With her loud kaws her craven kind does bring,
Who, ſafe in numbers, cuff the noble bird. Dryden.
They with their quills did all the hurt they cou’d,
And cuff"d the tender chickens from their food. Dryden.
3. To ſtrike with wings. This ſeems improper.
Hov'ring about the coaſts they make their moan,
And cuff the cliffs with pinions not their own. Dryd. Æn.
CUFF. n.ſ.. [cºffe, French.) Part of the ſleeve.
He railed at fops; and, inſtead of the common faſhion, he
would viſit his miſtreſs in a morning-gown, band, ſhort cuff,
and a peaked beard. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
CU'INAGE. n.ſ. The making up of twine into ſuch forms, as
it is commonly framed into, for carriage to other places Cowel.
CU'IRASS. m. y [cuiraffe, Fr. from cuir, leather; coraccia, Ital.]
A breaſtplate.
The lance purſu'd the voice without delay,
And pierc'd his cuiraſ, with ſuch fury ſent,
And ſign'd his boſom with a purple dint. Dryden.
Cuira'ssie R. n.ſ.. [from cuiraſ...] A man at arms; a ſoldier
1I] armour.
The field all iron, caſt a gleaming brown,
Nor wanted clouds of foot, nor on each horn
Cuiraſiers, all in ſteel, for ſtanding fight. Milt. Parad. Reg.
The piółure of St. George, wherein he is deſcribed like a
tuiraſier, or horſeman completely armed, is rather a ſymbo-
lical image than any proper figure. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
º n.J. [cuiſe, French..] The armour that covers the
igns.
I ſaw young Harry, with his beaver on,
His cuiſhes on his thighs, gallantly arm’d,
Riſe from the ground like feather'd Mercury. Shakespeare Hen.IV.
The croſlet ſome, and ſome the cuiſhes mould,
With ſilver plated, and with dućtile gold. Dryden’s AFn.
. But what had our author to wound AEneas with at ſo cri-
tical a time? And how came the cuiſhes to be worſe tempered
than the reſt of his armour Dryden's Wirg. Æn. Dedicat.
ºpers. m. ſ. ſcolidei, Latin.] Monks in Scotland.
Su'ler AGE. "...ſ. The ſame plant with Arse-sm ARt. Ainſw.
Quºis ARY. adj. [culina, Latin.] Relating to the kitchen;
relating to the art of cookery.
reat weight may condenſe thoſe vapours and exhalations,
as ſoon as they ſhall at any time begin to aſcend from the ſun,
* them preſently fall back again into him, and by that
* increaſe his heat; much after the manner that, ſnour
earth, the air increaſes the heat of a culinary fire. Nº.
Tº thoſe, who, by reaſon of their northen expoſition, will
be ſtill forced to be at the expence of culinary fires, it will
reduce the price of their manufacture. Arbuthnot.
To CULL. * * ſºurillir, French..] To ſele&amp;from others ; to
pick out of many.
The beſt of every thing they had, being culled out for
themſelves, if there were in their flocks any poor diſeaſed
thing not worth the keeping, they thought it good enough for
the altar of God. *Hºº, i.v. ſect. 34
- Our engines ſhall be bent &gt; -
§º the brows of this reſiſting town:
§: for our chiefeſt men of diſcipline,
o cull º ſº of bett advantage. Shakeſp. King john.
Our thighs Al Ke the bee, culling from ev’ry flow'r, -
In thi * Packt with wax, our mouths with honey. Shakespeare
Culling º Sºvert will we make our ſtand,
“”8 the Principal of all the deer. Shakespeare Hen. VI. p. iii.
In tatter'd do remember an apothecary
atter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
});
Culling of ſimples. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and Juliet.
Then in a moment fortune ſhall cull forth,
Out of one ſide, her happy minion. Shakeſp. King john.
The choiceſt of the Britiſh, the Roman, Saxon, and Nor-
man laws, being culled, as it were, this grand charter was ex-
tracted. Howel's Parley of Beoſis.
When falſe flow'rs of rhetorick thou would'ſ cull,
Truſt nature, do not labour to be dull. Dryden.
From his herd he culls,
For ſlaughter, four the faireſt of his bulls. Dryd. Pirg, Geor.
When the current pieces of the ſame denomination are of
different weights, then the traders in money cull out the
heavier, and melt them down with profit. Locke,
With humble duty and officious haſte,
I'll cull the fartheſt mead for thy repaſt. Priºr.
The various off'rings of the world appear:
From each ſhe nicely culls with curious toil,
And decks the goddeſs with the glitt'ring ſpoil. Pope,
CU'LLER. m. ſ. [from cull.] One who picks or chooſes.
CU'LLION. n.ſ.. [coglione, a fool, Ital perhaps from ſºullion.
It ſeems to import meanneſs rather than folly..] A ſcoundrel;
a mean wretch.
Such a one as leaves a gentleman,
And makes a god of ſuch a cullion. Shakespeare Tam, of the Shrew.
Up to the breach, you dogs; avaunt, you cullions. Shakespeare
CU'LLIonly. adj. . [from cullion.] Having the qualities of a
cullion; mean ; baſe.
I'll make a ſop o' th' moonſhine of you: you whorſon, cul-
liony, barber-monger, draw. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
CU'LLUMBINE... n.ſ.. [more properly ſpelt Columbine, which
ſee..] . The flowers of this plant are beautifully variegated
with blue, purple, red, and white. Miller.
Her goodly boſom, like a ſtrawberry-bed;
Her neck, like to a bunch of cullumbines. Spºnſer's Sonnets.
CU'LLY. m. ſ. [coglione, Ital. a fool.] A man deceived or im-
poſed upon; as, by ſharpers or a ſtrumpet.
Why ſhould you, whoſe mother wits
Are furniſh'd with all perquiſits,
B' allow'd to put all tricks upon
Our cully ſex, and we uſe none * Hudibras, p. iii.
Yet the rich cullies may their boaſting ſpare:
They purchaſe but ſophiſticated ware. Dryden.
He takes it in mighty dudgeon, becauſe I won't let him
make me over by deed as his lawful cully. Arbuthnot.
To CU'LLY. v.a. [from the noun J. To befool; to cheat; to
trick; to deceive; to impoſe upon.
CULM1'FERous. adj. [culmus and fero, Latin.]
Culmiferous plants are ſuch as have a ſmooth jointed ſtalk,
and uſually hollow; and at each joint the ſtalk is wrapped
about with ſingle, narrow, long, ſharp-pointed leaves, and
their feeds are contained in chaffy huſks. &amp;aincy.
There are alſo ſeveral forts of graſſes, both of the Cyprus
and culmiferous kinds; ſome with broader, others with nar-
rower leaves. Woodward on Foſſils.
The propereſt food of the vegetable kingdom is taken from
the farinaceous or mealy ſeeds of ſome culmiferous plants; as
oats, barley, wheat, rice, rye, maize, panic, millet. Arbuthn.
To CULMINATE. v. n. [culmen, Latin.] To be vertical;
to be in the meridian.
Far and wide his eye commands:
For fight no obſtacle found here, or ſhade,
But all ſunſhine; as when his beams at noon ---
Culminate from th' equator. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. iii.
Culmination. n.ſ.. [from culminate.] The tranſit of a Pla-
net through the meridian.
CulpAbi'lity. n.ſ.. [from culpable.] Blameableneſs.
CU'LPABLE. adj. [culpabilis, Latin J
1. Criminal.
Proceed no ſtraiter 'gainſt our uncle Glo'ſter,
Than from true evidence of good eſteem, --
He be approv’d in practice culpable. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
2. Guilty.
Theſe being perhaps culpable of this crime, or favourers of
their friends. Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
3. Blameable; blameworthy. -
The wiſdom of God ſetteth before us in Scripture ſo many
admirable patterns of virtue, and nº one of them, without
ſomewhat noted wherein they were culpable, to the end that
to him alone it might always be acknowledged, Thou ºn art
holy, Thou only art juſt. Hooker's Preface.
All ſuch ignorance is voluntary, and therefore cul; able; for
as much as it was in every man's power to have prevented
it. South's Sermoni.
CU/LPAble Ness. m.ſ.. [from culpable J Blame; guilt.
Culpably. adv. [from culpable.] Blameably ; criminally.
If we perform this duty pitifully and culiably, it is not to
be expected we ſhould communicate holily. Taylor.
Culprit. n.ſ. [about this word there is great diſpute. It is
uſed by the judge at criminal trials, who, when the priſoner
declares himſelf not guilty, and puts himſelf upon his trial,
anſwers; Culprit, God ſend thee a good de îverance. It is likely
that it is a corruption of Qu'il parot, 4.ay it ſº aſſed” the
W1
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 176</div><p class="Text">C U M
C U N
º
wiſh of the judge being that the priſoner may be found inno-
cent.] A man arraigned before his judge.
The knight appear'd, and ſilence they proclaim;
Then firſt the culprit anſwer'd to his name;
And, after forms of law, was laſt requir’d
To name the thing that woman moſt deſir'd. Dryden.
An author is in the condition of a culprit; the publick are
his judges: by allowing too much, and condeſcending too far,
he may injure his own cauſe; and by pleading and aſſerting
too boldly, he may diſpleaſe the court. Prior's Pref. to Solomon.
Cw'LTER. n.ſ.. [cuſter, Latin.] The iron of the plow per-
pendicular to the ſheare. It is commonly written coulter.
Her fallow lees
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,
Doth root upon ; while that the culter ruſts,
That ſhould deracinate ſuch ſavagery. Shakeſpeare's Hen. V.
To CULTIVATE. v. a. [cultiver, French.]
1. To forward or improve the produćt of the earth, by manual
induſtry.
Thoſe excellent ſeeds implanted in your birth, will, if cul-
tivated, be moſt flouriſhing in produćtion; and, as the ſoil is
good, and no coſt nor care wanting to improve it, we muſt
entertain hopes of the richeſt harveſt. Felton on the Clafficks.
2. To improve; to meliorate.
Were we but leſs indulgent to our faults,
And patience had to cultivate our thoughts,
Our muſe would flouriſh. JWaller.
To make man mild and ſociable to man,
To cultivate the wild licentious ſavage
With wiſdom, diſcipline, and liberal arts,
Th’ embelliſhments of life.
Cult; v A'tion. n.ſ.. [from cultivate.]
1. The art or practice of improving ſoils, and forwarding or
meliorating vegetables. f
2. Improvement in general; promotion; melioration.
An innate light diſcovers the common notions of good and
evil, which, by cultivation and improvement, may be ad-
vanced to higher and brighter diſcoveries. South's Sermons.
A foundation of good ſenſe, and a cultivation of learning,
are required to give a ſeaſoning to retirement, and make us
taſte the bleſſing. Dryden.
CULTIVA’Tor. m. ſ. [from cultivate.] One who improves,
promotes, or meliorates; or endeavours to forward any ve-
getable product, or any thing elſe capable of improvement.
It has been lately complained of, by ſome cultivators of
Addiſon's Cato.
clover-graſs, that from a great quantity of the ſeed not any
graſs ſprings up. Boyle's Unſucceſsful Experiments.
CUTLTURE. m.ſ.. [cultura, Latin.]
1. The act of cultivation; the ačt of tilling the ground;
tillage.
Give us ſeed unto our heart, and culture to our underſtand-
ing, that there may come fruit of it. 2 Eſd viii. 6.
Theſe three laſt were ſlower than the ordinary wheat of
itſelf, and this culture did rather retard than advance. Bacon.
The plough was not invented 'till after the deluge; the
earth requiring little or no care or culture, but yielding its in-
creaſe freely, and without labour and toil. JWoºdward.
Where grows —Where grows it not? If vain our toil,
We ought to blame the culture, not the ſoil.
Fix'd to no ſpot is happineſs ſincere. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
They roſe as vigorous as the ſun;
Then to the culture of the willing glebe. Thomſon's Spring.
2. Art of improvement and melioration.
One might wear any paſſion out of a family by culture, as
ſkilful gardeners blot a colour out of a tulip that hurts its
beauty. Tatler, N°. 75.
To Cu'lt URE. v. a... [from the noun..] To cultivate; to ma-
nure; to till. It is uſed by Thomſon, but without authority.
Cu'Lv ER. m. ſ. ſculpne, Saxon.] A pigeon. An old word.
Had he ſo done, he had him ſnatch'd away,
More light than culver in the faulcon's fiſt. Fairy Queen.
Whence, borne on liquid wing,
The ſound culver ſhoots. Thomſon's Spring.
Cu'lver IN. m. ſ. [colouvrine, French..] A ſpecies of ordnance.
A whole cannon requires, for every charge, forty pounds
of powder, and a bullet of ſixty-four pounds; a culverin, ſix-
teen pounds of powder, and a bullet of nineteen pounds; a
demi-culverin, nine pounds of powder, and a bullet of twelve
pounds. Wilkins's Math. Magic.
Here a well-poliſh'd mall gives us the joy
To ſee our prince his matchleſs force employ:
No ſooner has he touch'd the flying ball,
But 'tis already more than half the mall;
And ſuch a fury from his arm’t has got,
As from a ſmoaking culverin 'twere ſhot. Waller.
Cu'lv ERKEY. m. ſ. A ſpecies of flower.
Looking down the meadows I could ſee a girl cropping
culverkeys and cowſlips, to make garlands. Walton's Angler.
To CUMBER. v. a. [kommeren, komberen, to diſturb, Dutch.]
1. To embarraſs; to entangle; to obſtruct.
Why aſks he, what avails him not in fight,
And would but cumber, and retard his flight,
º,
In which his only excellence is plac'dſ
You give him death, that intercept his haſte. Dryd. Fables,
Hardly his head the plunging pilot rears,
Clog’d with his cloaths, and cumber'd with his years. Dryd.
The learning and maſtery of a tongue, being uneaſy and
unpleaſant enough in itſelf, ſhould not be cumbered with any
other difficulties, as is done in this way of proceeding. Locke.
2. To croud or load with ſomething uſeleſs.
I come ſeeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it
down, why cumbereth it the ground Lu. xiii. 7.
Let it not cumber your better remembrance. Shakeſp. Timon.
The multiplying variety of arguments, eſpecially frivolous
ones, is not only loſt labour, but cumbers the memory to no
purpoſe. Docke.
3. To involve in difficulties and dangers; to diſtreſs.
Domeſtick fury, and fierce civil ſtrife,
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy. Shakeſpeare's jul. Caeſar.
4. To buſy; to diſtraćt with multiplicity of cares.
Martha was cumbered about much ſerving.
5. To be troubleſome in any place.
Doth the bramble cumber a garden It makes the better
hedge; where, if it chances to prick the owner, it will tear
the thief. Grew's Coſmol. b. iii. c. 2. ſect. 47.
CU'MBER. m. ſ. [komber, Dutch..] Wexation; embarraſſment;
obſtruction; hindrance; diſturbance; diſtreſs.
By the occaſion thereof I was brought to as great cumber
and danger, as lightly any might eſcape. Sidney, b. ii.
Thus fade thy helps, and thus thy cumbers ſpring. Spenſer.
The greateſt ſhips are leaſt ſerviceable, go very deep in
water, are of marvellous charge and fearful cumber. Raleigh.
CU'MBERsom E. adj. [from cumber.]
1. Troubleſome; vexatious. -
Thinking it too early, as long as they had any day, to
break off ſo pleaſing a company, with going to perform a
cumberſome obedience. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Burthenſome ; embarraſſing.
I was drawn in to write the firſt part by accident, and to
write the ſecond by ſome defects in the firſt : theſe are the cum-
berſºme perquiſites of authors. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Unweildy; unmanageable.
Very long tubes are cumberſome, and ſcarce to be readily
managed. Newton's Opt.
CU'MBERsom ELY. adj. [from cumberſome.] In a troubleſome
manner; in a manner that produces hindrance and vexation.
CU'MBERso MEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from cumberſome.] Encumbrance;
hindrance; obſtruction.
CU'MBRANCE. n.ſ.. [from cumber.] Burthen; hindrance; im-
pediment.
Extol not riches then, the toil of fools,
The wiſe man's cumbrance, if not ſnare; more apt
To ſlacken virtue, and abate her edge,
Than prompt her to do aught may merit praiſe. Milt. P. L:
CU'MBRous. adj. [from cumber.j
1. Troubleſome; vexatious; diſturbing,
A cloud of cumbrous gnats do him moleſt;
All ſtriving to infix their feeble ſtings,
That from their noyance he no where can reſt. Fairy Queen.
2. Oppreſſive; burthenſome.
Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong
Life much ! Bent rather, how I may be quit,
Faireſt and eaſieſt, of this cumbrous charge. Milt. Par. Lºſt.
Black was his count'nance in a little ſpace; -
For all the blood was gather'd in his face:
Help was at hand; they rear'd him from the ground,
And from his cumbrous arms his limbs unbound;
Luke, x. 4o.
Then lanc'd a vein. Dryden.
Poſſeſſion's load was grown ſo great,
He ſunk beneath the cumb’rous weight. Swift.
3. Jumbled; obſtructing each other.
Swift to their ſeveral quarters haſted then
The cumb’rous elements, earth, flood, air, fire. Milt. P. Lºft.
CU'MFREY. n.ſ. A medicinal plant.
CU'MIN. m. ſ. [cuminum, Latin.] A plant.
The root is annual, the leaves like thoſe of fenel: the ſeeds
ſmall, long, narrow, and crooked; two of which ſucceed
each other's flower, as in other umbelliferous plants. The
ſeeds of this plant are uſed in medicine, which are brought
from the iſland of Malta, where it is cultivated ; for it is too
tender for our climate. Miller.
Rank-ſmelling rue, and cumin, good for eyes. Spenſer.
To CU'MULATE. v. a. [cumulo, Latin.] To heap together.
A man that beholds the mighty ſhoals of ſhells, bedded and
cumulated heap upon heap, amongſt earth, will ſcarcely con-
ceive which way theſe could ever live. Woodward's Nat. Hiſt.
CUMULA'tion. n.ſ. The act of heaping together. Dićf.
CUNct A't Ion. m.). [cuné?atio, Latin J Delay; procraſtina-
tion; dilatorineſs.
It is moſt certain, that the Engliſh made not their beſt im-
provements of theſe fortunate events; and that º by
two miſerable errours, tunéiation in proſecuting, and haſte in
departure. Hayward.
The ſwifteſt animal, conjoined with a heavy body, implies
that
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 177</div><p class="Text">C U N
- C U P
:
:
that common moral, fºſſina lent: ; and that celerity ſhould
always be contempered with cunciation. Brown's Puig. Errours.
CUNCTATOR. m.ſ. [Latin.] One given to delay; a lingerer;
an idler; a ſluggard.
Others, being unwilling to diſcourage ſuch cuneiators, al-
ways keep them up in good hope, that, if they are not yet
called, they may yet, with the thief, be brought in at the laſt
hour. Hammond on Fundamentals.
To CUND. v. n. [from kºnnen, to know, Dutch..] To give no-
tice : a provincial or obſolete word. See ConDER.
They are directed by a balker or huer on the cliff, who,
diſcerning the courſe of the pilchard, cundeth, as they call it,
the maſter of each boat. Carew's Survey of Cºrnwal.
CUTNEAL. adj. [cuneus, Latin.] Relating to a wedge; having
the form of a wedge.
CUNEA'TED. adj. [cuneus, Latin.] Made in form of a wedge.
CU'NEIFor M. adj. [from cuneus and forma, Latin.] Having the
form of a wedge. - -
CUNEIFoRM-bones. n.ſ. The fourth, fifth, and fixth bones
of the foot; thus called from their wedge-like ſhape, being
large above and narrow below. Dićf.
CU'NNER. n.ſ. A kind of fiſh leſs than an oyſter, that ſticks
cloſe to the rocks. Ainſworth.
CU'NNING. adj. [from connan, Sax. Fonnen, Dut. to know..]
1. Skilful; knowing; well inſtructed; learned.
Schoolmaſters will I keep within my houſe,
Fit to inſtruct her youth.--To cunning men
I will be very kind; and liberal
To mine own children, in good bringing up. Shakeſpeare.
I do preſent you with a man of mine,
Cunning in muſick and the mathematicks,
To inſtruct her fully in thoſe ſciences. Shakeſpeare.
Wherein is he good, but to taſte ſack and drink it? Wherein
neat and cleanly, but to carve a capon and eat it Wherein
cunning, but in craft? Wherein crafty, but in villainy
Wherein villainous, but in all things Wherein worthy, but
in nothing. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Send me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and
in ſilver, and that can ſkill to cut and to grave. 2 Chron. ii. 7.
When Pedro does the lute command,
She guides the cunning artiſt's hand. Prior.
2. Peformed with ſkill; artful.
And over them Arachne high did lift
Her cunning web, and ſpread her ſubtile net,
Enwrapped in foul ſmoak, and clouds more black than jet.
Speºſer's Fairy Queen, b. ii, cant. 7. ſtan. 28.
And there beſide of marble ſtone was built
An altar, carv'd with cunning imagery;
On which true Chriſtians blood was often ſpilt,
And holy martyrs often done to die. Spenſer's Fairy Queen.
Once put out thy light,
Thou cunning'/' pattern of excelling nature,
I know not where is that Promethean heat
That can thy light relumine. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
3. Artfully deceitful; ſly; deſigning; trickiſh; full of fetches
and ſtratagems; ſubtle; crafty ; ſubdolous.
Men will leave truth and miſery to ſuch as love it; they are
reſolved to be cunning: let others run the hazard of being
fincere. South's Sermons.
4. Aćted with ſubtilty.
The more he proteſted, the more his father thought he diſ.
ſembled, accounting his integrity to be but a cunning face of
falſhood. Sidney, b. ii.
CU'NNING. m. ſ. [cunninze, Saxon.]
I. Artifice; deceit; ſlyneſs; ſleight; craft; ſubtilty; diſfimula-
tion ; fraudulent dexterity.
What if I be not ſo much the poet, as even that miſerable
ſubjećt of his cunning, whereof you ſpeak. Sidney.
We take cunning for a finiſter or crooked wiſdom; and
certainly there is great difference between a cunning man and
a wiſe man, not only in point of honeſty, but in point of
ability. Bacon, Eſſay 23.
Theſe ſmall wares and petty points of cunning are infinité,
and it were a good deed to make a liſt of them; for nothing
doth more hurt than that cunning men paſs for wiſe. Bacon.
2. Art; ſkill; knowledge.
CU'NNINGLY. adv. [from cunning.] Artfully; ſlyly; ſub-
tily; by fraudulent contrivance; craftily.
Amongſt other crimes of this nature, there was diligent
enquiry made of ſuch as had raiſed and diſperſed a bruit and
rumour, a little before the field fought, that the rebels had the
day, and that the king's army was overthrown, and the king
fled; whereby it was ſuppoſed, that many ſuccours were cun.
ningly put off and kept back. Bacon's Henry VII.
I muſt meet my danger, and deſtroy him firſt;
But cunningly and cloſely. Denham's Sophy.
When ſtock is high, they come between,
Making by ſecond-hand their offers;
Then cunningly retire unſeen,
With each a million in his coffers. Swift.
CU'NNING MAN. n ſ. ſcunning and man.] A man who pretends
to tell fortunes, or teach how to recover ſtolen goods.
2
He ſent him for a ſtrong detachment
Of beadle, conſtable, and watchmen,
Tº attack the cunningman, for plunder
Committed falſly on his lumber. Hudibras, p. iii. cant 1.
CU'NNINGN Ess. m. ſ. [from cunning.] Deceitfulneſs; ſlyneſs.
CUP. m. ſ. ſcup, Sax. £ºp, Dut. coupe, French.]
1. A ſmall veſſel to drink in. -
Thou ſhalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand, aſter the
former manner when thou waſt his butler. Genºſis, xi. 13.
Ye heav'nly pow'rs, that guard
The Britiſh iſles, ſuch dire events remove
Far from fair Albion; nor let civil broils
Ferment from ſocial cuts. Philips.
2. The liquor contained in the cup; the draught.
Which when the vile enchantereſs perceiv'd,
How that my lord from her I would reprieve,
With cup thus charm’d, imparting ſhe deceiv'd Fairy Queen.
All friends ſhall taſte
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
The cups of their deſervings. Shakeſpeare's King Icar.
Wil't pleaſe your lordſhip, drink a cup of ſack. Shakeſp.
They that never had the uſe
Of the grape's ſurpriſing juice,
To the firſt delicious cup
All their reaſon render up. J/aller.
The beſt, the deareſt favºrite of the ſky,
Muſt taſte that cup; for man is born to die. Pºpe's Odſ.
3. Social entertainment; merry bout, [in the plural.]
Then ſhall our names,
Familiar in their mouth as houſhold words,
Be in their flowing cups freſhly remember'd. Shakeſ H. V.
Let us ſuppoſe that I were reaſoning, as one friend with
another, by the fireſide, or in our cups, without care, without
any great affection to either party. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
t was near a miracle to ſee an old man ſilent, ſince talking
is the diſeaſe of age; but amongſt cups, makes fully a wonder.
Ben. Johnſºn's Diſcoveries.
Marrying, or proſtituting, as befel
Rape or adultery, where paſſing fair
Allur'd them: thence from cups, to civil broils | Milton.
Amidſt his cups with fainting ſhiv'ring ſeiz'd,
His limbs disjointed, and all o'er diſeas'd,
His hand refuſes to ſuſtain the bowl. Dryden's Perſus.
4. Any thing hollow like a cup; as, the huſk of an acorn, the
bell of a flower.
A pyrites of the ſame colour and ſhape, placed in the cavity
of another of an hemiſpherick figure, in much the ſame man-
ner as an acorn in its cup. J/oodward on Fºſſils.
5. CUP and Can. Familiar companions. The can is the large
veſſel, out of which the cup is filled, and to which it is a con-
ſtant aſſociate.
You boaſting tell us where you din'd,
And how his lordſhip was ſo kind;
Swear he's a moſt facetious man;
That you and he are cup and can :
You travel with a heavy load,
And quite miſtake preferment's road. Swift.
To CUP. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſupply with cups: this ſenſe is obſolete.
Plumpy Bacchus, with pink eyne,
In thy vats our cares be drown'd :
With thy grapes our hairs be crown'd
Cup us, ’till the world go round. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
2. To fix a glaſs-bell or cucurbite upon the ſkin, to draw the
blood in ſcarification.
The clotted blood lies heavy on his heart,
Corrupts, and there remains in ſpite of art:
Nor breathing veins, nor cup; ing will prevail;
All outward remedies and inward fail. J}ryden's Fables.
You have quartered all the foul language upon me, that
could be raked out of the air of Billingſgate, without know-
ing who I am ; or whether I deſerve to be cupped and ſcarified
at this rate. . - Spe&amp;#ator, Nº. 595.
Bliſtering, cupping, and bleeding are ſeldom of uſe but to
the idle and intemperate. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 195.
Him the damn'd doćtors and his friends immur’d ;
They bled, they cupp'd, they purg'd; in ſhort they cur'd. Pope.
CUPBE'AR E R. n ſ.
1. An officer of the king's houſhold.
There is conveyed to Mr Villiers an intimation of the
king's pleaſure to wait and to be ſworn his ſervant, and ſhort-
ly after his cupbearer at large; and the Summer following he
was admitted in ordinary. //otton.
2. An attendant to give wine at a ſeaſt.
This vine was ſaid to be given to Troº, the father of Priam,
by Jupiter, as a recompence for his carrying away his ſon
Ganymede to be his cupbearer. Notes on the Cal ſy.
CU'Peo A Rd. m. ſ. ſcup and bord, a caſe or receptacle, Saxon 3
A caſe with ſhelves, in which victuals or earthen ware is
placed.
Some trees are beſt for planchers, as deal; ſome for tables,
cupboards, and deſks, as wain it. Bacon'; 'Natural Hºſºy.
Codrus<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 178</div><p class="Text">C U R
C U R
Codrus had but one bed; ſo ſhort to boot,
That his ſhort wife's ſhort legs hung dangling out:
His cupboard's head ſix earthen pitchers grac'd,
Beneath them was his truſty tankard plac'd. Dryden's juv.
Yet their wine and their vićtuals theſe curmudgeon-
lubbards, -
Lock up from my ſight, in cellars and cupboards. Swift.
To CU'PBoARD. v. a. [from the noun..] To treaſure in a cup-
board; to hoard up.
The belly did remain
I' th' midſt o' th' body, idle and unaćtive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labour with the reſt. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
CUP'IDITY.. n.ſ.. [cupiditas, Latin.] Concupiſcence ; unlaw-
ful or unreaſonable longing. -
CU'POL.A. m.ſ. [Italian.] A dome; the hemiſpherical ſummit
of a building.
Nature ſeems to have deſigned the head as the cupola to the
moſt glorious of her works; and when we load it with ſuper-
numerary ornaments, we deſtroy the ſymetry of the human
figure. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 28.
CU'PPF L. See Coppel.
There be other bodies fixed, which have little or no ſpirit;
ſo as there is nothing to fly out, as we ſee in the ſtuff whereof
cuppels are made, which they put into furnaces, upon which
fire worketh not. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 799.
CU'PPER... n.f. [from cup.] One who applies cupping-glaſſes;
a ſcarifier.
CUPPING-Glass. n.ſ.. [from cup and glaſs.] A glaſs uſed by
ſcarifiers to draw out the blood by rarefying the air.
A bubo, in this caſe, ought to be drawn outward by
cupping-glaſſes, and brought to ſuppuration. Wiſeman's Surgery.
CU'PREous. adj. [cupreus, Latin.] Coppery; conſiſting of
copper.
Having, by the intervention of a little ſal armoniack,
made copper inflammable, I took ſome ſmall grains, and put
them under the wiek of a burning candle, whereby they were
with the melted tallow ſo kindled, that the green, not blue,
flame of the cupreous body did burn for a good while. Boyle.
CUR. n.ſ. [Korre, Dutch. See CURTAl..]
1. A worthleſs degenerate dog.
How does your fallow greyhound, ſir?—
'Tis a good dog.—
—A cur, fir.
-Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog. Shakeſpeare.
Here's an old drudging cur turned off to ſhift for himſelf,
for want of the very teeth and heels that he had loſt in his
maſter's ſervice. L’Eſtrange, Fable 25.
A cur may bear.
The name of tiger, lion, or whate'er
Denotes the nobleſt or the faireſt beaſt. Dryden's juvenal,
2. A term of reproach for a man. -
What would you have, ye curs,
That like not peace nor war? Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
This knight had occaſion to inquire the way to St. Anne's-
lane; upon which the perſon, whom he ſpoke to, called him
a young popiſh cur, and aſked him, who made Anne a
ſaint. - Addiſon's Spe:lator, Nº. 125.
CU'RABLE, adj. [from cure.] That admits a remedy; that
may be healed.
A conſumption of the lungs, at the beginning, herein dif-
fers from all other curable diſeaſes, that it is not to be worn
away by change of diet, or a chearful ſpirit. Harvey on Conſump.
A deſperate wound muſt ſkilful hands employ,
But thine is curable by Philip's boy. Dryden's juvenal's Sat.
CU'RABLENEss. n. ſ. [from curable.] Poſſibility to be healed.
Cu'RAcy. m. ſ. [from curate.] Employment of a curate, diſ-
tinét from a benefice; employment which a hired clergyman
holds under the beneficiary.
They get into orders as ſoon as they can, and, if they be
very fortunate, arrive in time to a curacy here in town. Swift.
CU'RATE., n.ſ.. [curator, Latin.] A clergyman hired to per-
form the duties of another.
He ſpar'd no pains; for curate he had none;
Nor durſt he truſt another with his care. Dryden's Fables.
2. A pariſh prieſt. -
I thought the Engliſh of curate had been an eccleſiaſtical
hireling. No ſuch matter; the proper import of the word
ſignifies one who has the cure of ſouls. Collier on Pride.
CU'RATESHIP. n.ſ.. [from curate.] The ſame with curacy.
CU'RAtive. adj. [from cure.] Relating to the cure of diſ-
eaſes; not preſervative.
The therapeutick or curative phyſick, we term that which
reſtores the patient unto ſanity. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b iv.
There may be taken proper uſeful indications, both preſer-
vative and curative, from the qualities of the air. Arbuthnot.
CURA'7OR. n.ſ. [Latin.] One that has the care and ſuper-
intendence of any thing.
The curators of Bedlam aſſure us, that ſome lunaticks are
perſons of honour. Swift.
CURB. n.ſ.. [courber, to bend, French.]
I. § º is an iron chain, made faſt to the upper part of the
OL. I.
w
branches of the bridie, in a hole called the eye, and running
cver the beard of the horſe. Farrier’s Dict.
The ox hath his bow, the horſe his curh, and the faulcon
his bells; ſo man hath his deſire. Shakespeare As you like it.
So four fierce courſers, ſtarting to the race,
Scow'r through the plain, and lengthen ev'ry pace;
Nor reins, nor curbs, nor threat'ning cries they fear. Dryd.
2. Reſtraint; inhibition; oppoſition; hindrance.
The Roman ſtate, whoſe courſe will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thouſand curbs
Of more ſtrong links aſunder, than can ever
Appear in your impediment. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
We remain
In ſtrićteſt bondage, though thus far remov’d,
Under th’ inevitable curb, reſerv'd
His captive multitude. Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. ii. 1. 322.
By theſe men, religion, that ſhould be
The curb, is made the ſpur to tyranny. Denham's Sºphy.
Even they who think us under no other tie to the true in-
tereſt of our country, will allow this to be an effectual curb
upon us. Atterbury's Sermons.
3. A curb is a hard and callous tumour, which runs along
the inſide of a horſe's hoof; that is, on that part of the hoof
that is oppoſite to the leg of the lame ſide. Farrier's Dić.
To CURB. v. a. [from the noun.]
I. To ; or reſtrain a horſe with a curb. -
art wield their arms, part curb the foaming ſteed. Milt.
2. To reſtrain; to inhibit; to check; to confine; to hold back.
Were not the laws planted amongſt them at the firſt, and
had they not governours to curb and keep them ſtill in awe and
obedience 2 Spenſer on Ireland.
Then thou, the mother of ſo ſweet a child,
Her falſe imagin'd loſs ceaſe to lament, - º
And wiſely learn to curb thy ſorrows wild. Milton.
If ſenſe and learning are ſuch unſociable imperious things,
he ought to keep down the growth of his reaſon, and curb his
intellectuals. Collier on Pride.
At this ſhe curb’d a groan, that elſe had come 3
And pauſing, view'd the preſent in the tomb ;
Then to the heart ador'd devoutly glew'd
Her lips, and raiſing it, her ſpeech renew'd. Dryd. Fables.
*Till force returns, his ardour we reſtrain,
And curb his warlike wiſh to croſs the main.
Knowing when a muſe ſhould be indulged
In her full flight, and when ſhe ſhould be curbed. Roſcommon-
Some poor cottage on the mountain's brow,
Where pinching want muſt curb thy warm deſires,
Dryden.
And houſhold cares ſuppreſs thy genial fires. Prior.
Nature to all things fix’d the limits fit,
And wiſely curb’d proud man's pretending wit. Pope.
2. Sometimes with from ; ſometimes with of
Yet you are curb’d from that enlargement by -
The conſequence of the crown. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
CURD. n.ſ. [See CRUDLE.] The coagulation of milk; the
concretion of the thicker parts of any liquor.
Milk of itſelf is ſuch a compound of cream, curds, and
whey, as it is eaſily turned and diſſolved. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtºry.
This night, at leaſt, with me forget your care;
Cheſnuts and curd, and cream ſhall be your fare. Dryden.
Let Sporus tremble.—What! that thing of ſilk!
Sporus, that mere white curd of aſs’s milk? Pope.
To Curd. v. a. [from the noun..] To turn to curds; to cauſe
to coagulate.
Maiden, does it curd thy blood,
To ſay I am thy mother Shakeſp. All's well that ends well:
To Cu'RDLE. v. m. [from curd.] To coagulate; to ſhoot to-
gether; to concrete. - -
Powder of mint, and powder of red roſes, keep the milk
ſomewhat from turning or curdling in the ſtomach. Bacon.
- Some to the houſe,
The fold, and dairy, hungry bend their flight,
Sip round the pail, or taſte the curdling cheeſe. Thom. Sun.
To CU'RDLE. v. a. To cauſe to coagulate; to force into con-
cretions.
His changed powers at firſt themſelves not felt, -
*Till curdled cold his courage 'gan t’ affail. Fairy Qween, b. i.
Mixed with the fixth part of a ſpoonful of milk, it burnt
to the ſpace of one hundred pulſes, and the milk was ºrdº:
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 366.
My ſoul is all the ſame,
Unmov’d with fear, and mov’d with martial fame 3
But my chill blood is curdled in my veins, x - ºr-. •
And ſéarce the ſhadow of a man remains. Dryden's Wirgil.
Ev’n now I fall a victim to thy wrongs;
Ev’n now a fatal draught works out my ſoul;
Ev’n now it curdles in my ſhrinking veins
The lazy blood, and freezes at my heart. ... Smith.
There is in the ſpirit of wine ſome acidity, by which
brandy curdles milk. Floyer.
Cu'rdy, adj. [from curd J Coagulated; concreted; full of
curds; curdled.
6 D It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 179</div><p class="Text">*
C U R
-- r ing into a
- om a vegetable emulſion, by cºagulating in
..º.º. acids. g Arbuthnot on Mliments.
CURE. m. ſ. ſcura, Latin J
1. Remedy; “...i.edu: we have made,
will give her º hº little cure. tent
f England, how may we ºn * , tr:
#:* lady ? - - Shakeſpeare's King john.
Cold, hunger, priſon*, ills without a cure, * - -
All theft he muſt, and guiltleſs oft, endure; Dryden's Fables.
Now we're ador'd, and the next hour diſpleaſe; -
At firſt your cure, and after your diſeaſe. - Granville.
Horace adviſes the Romans to ſeek a ſeat in ſome remote
part, by way of a cure for the corruption of their manners. Sw.
2. Aćt of healing. ---
I do cures to-day, and to-morrow. Lu, xiii. 32.
. The benefice or employment of a curate or clergyman. .
If his cure lies among the lawyers, let nothing be ſaid againſt
entangling property, ſpinning out cauſes, ſqueezing clients,
and making the laws a greater grievance than thoſe who break
them. Collier.
To CuRE. v. a. [curº, Latin.] - -
1. To heal; to reſtore to health; to remedy; to recover: with
of before the diſeaſe. Uſed of patients or diſeaſes,
The bones, in ſharp colds, wax brittle; and therefore all
contuſions of bones, in hard weather, are more difficult to
ºtre. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 688.
Here the poor Lover, that has long endur'd
Some proud nymph's ſcorn, of his fond paſſion's cur'd. Waller.
I never knew any man cured of inattention. Swift.
Hear what from love unpractis'd hearts endure,
From love, the ſole diſeaſe thou canſt not cure. Pope.
2. To prepare in any manner, ſo as to be preſerved from cor-
ruption.
The beef would be ſo ill choſen, or ſo ill cured, as to ſtink
many times before it came ſo far as Holland. Temple.
Cu'Reifss. adj. [cure and leſs.] Without cure ; without
remedy.
Bootleſs are plaints, and cureleſ are my wounds;
No way to fly, nor ſtrength to hold out flight. Shakespeare H. VI.
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
To curelſ ruin. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
If, ſaid he,
Your grief alone is hard captivity,
For love of heav'n, with patience undergo
A curelſ, ill, ſince fate will have it ſo. . Dryden's Fables.
CU'RER. m.ſ.. [from cure.] A healer; a phyſician.
He is a curer of ſouls, and you a curer of bodies: if you
ſhould fight, you go againſt the hair of your profeſſions. Shakespeare
The indexterity and worſe ſucceſs of the moſt famous of
our conſumption curers, do evidently demonſtrate their dim-
neſs in beholding its cauſes. Harvey on Conſumptions.
CU'RFEw. m. ſ. [couvre feu, French.] An evening-peal, by
which the conqueror willed, that every man ſhould rake up
his fire, and put out his light; ſo that in many places at this
day, where a bell is cuſtomarily rung towards bed time, it is
ſaid to ring curfew. Cowel.
You whoſe paſtime
Is to make midnight muſhrooms, that rejoice
To hear the ſolemn curfw. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Oft on a plat of riſing ground,
I hear the far off curfew ſound,
Over ſome wide-water'd ſhoar,
Swinging ſlow with fullen roar. Milton.
2. A cover for a fire; a fireplate.
But now for pans, pots, curfews, counters and the like,
the beauty will not be ſo much reſpected, ſo as the compound
ſtuff is like to paſs. Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
CURIA lity. m. ſ. [from curialis, Latin.] The privileges,
Prerºgatives, or perhaps retinue of a court.
The court and curiality. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
CURio'sity. m. ſ. [from curiºus.]
1. Inquiſitiveneſs; inclination to enquiry.
2. Nicety; delicacy.
When thou waſt in thy gilt, and thy perfume, they mockt
thee for too much curioſity; in thy rags thou knoweſt none,
but art deſpiſed for the contrary. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
3. Accuracy; exactneſs.
Qualities are ſo weighed, that curioſity in neither can make
choice of either's moiety. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Qur eyes and ſenſes, however armed or aſſiſted, are too
groſs to diſcern the curiºſity of the workmanſhip of nature.
4. An act of curioſity; nice experiment. Ray on the Creation.
a' º º º a culioſity, to ſet a tree upon
through the wº º : and, at a little height, to draw it
ceiving that . • and ſpread it upon the ſouth-fide; con-
the j. º ; root and lower part of the ſtock ſhould enjoy
comfort º ti. .."º. º upper . º fruit, the
5. An object of cuiſity, #. Ilot. acon's Nat. Hiſtory.
3
C U R
We took a ramble together to ſee the curioſities of this great
town. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 47.
CURIOUS. adj. [curioſus, Latin.]
1. Inquiſitive; deſirous of information; addićted to enquiry.
Be not curious in unneceſſary matters; for more things are
ſhewn unto thee than men underſtand. Ecclus. iii. 23.
Even then to them the ſpirit of lyes ſuggeſts,
That they were blind, becauſe they ſaw not ill;
And breath'd into their uncorrupted breaſts
A curious wiſh, which did corrupt their will. Davies.
2. Attentive to ; diligent about: ſometimes with after.
It is pity a gentleman ſo very curious after things that were
elegant and beautiful, ſhould not have been as curious as to
their origin, their uſes, and their natural hiſtory. Woodward.
3. Sometimes with of
Then thus a ſenior of the place replies,
Well read, and curious of antiquities.
4. Accurate; careful not to miſtake.
'Till Arrianiſm had made it a matter of great ſharpneſs and
ſubtlety of wit to be a ſound believing Chriſtian, men were
not curious what ſyllables or particles of ſpeech they uſed. Hook.
5. Difficult to pleaſe; ſolicitous of perfection; not negligent;
full of care.
A temperate perſon is not curious of fancies and deliciouſ-
neſs; he thinks not much, and ſpeaks not often of meat and
drink. Taylour.
6. F.Xact; nice; ſubtle.
Both theſe ſenſes embrace their objećts at greater diſtance,
with more variety, and with a more curious diſcrimation, than
the other ſenſe. - Holder.
7. Artful; not neglectful; not fortuitous.
A vaile obſcur'd the ſunſhine of her eyes,
The roſe within herſelf her ſweetneſs cloſed;
Each ornament about her ſeemly lies,
By curious chance, or careleſs art, compoſed. Fairfax, b. ii.
8. Elegant; neat; laboured; finiſhed.
Underſtanding to deviſe curious works, to work in gold. Ex.
9. Rigid ; ſevere; rigorous.
For curious I cannot be with you,
Signior Baptiſta, of whom I hear ſo well.
CU'Riously. adv. [from curious.]
1. Inquiſitively; attentively; ſtudiouſly.
At firſt I thought there had been no light refle&amp;ted from
the water in that place; but obſerving it more curiouſly, I ſaw
within it ſeveral ſmaller round ſpots, which appeared much
blacker and darker than the reſt. Aewton’s Cpt.
2. Elegantly; neatly.
Nor is it the having of wheels and ſprings, though never
ſo curiouſly wrought, and artificially ſet, but the winding of
them up, that muſt give motion to the watch. South's Sermons.
3. Artfully; exactly.
4. Captiouſly.
CURL. m. ſ [from the verb.]
1. A ringlet of hair. .
She appareled herſelf like a page, cutting off her hair,
leaving nothing but the ſhort curl to cover that noble head. Sid.
Juſt as in act he ſtood, in clouds enſhrin'd,
Her hand ſhe faſten’d on his hair behind;
Then backward by his yellow curls ſhe drew
To him, and him alone confeſs d in view. Dryden's Fables.
2. Undulation; wave; ſinuoſity; flexure.
Thus it happens, if the glaſs of the priſms be free from
veins, and their ſides be accurately plain and well poliſhed,
without thoſe numberleſs waves or curls, which uſually ariſe
from the ſand holes, a little ſmoothed in poliſhing with putty.
Newton's Opt. Prop. ii. Th. 2.
To CURL. v. a. [krollen, Dut. cyrran, Sax. krille, Dan.]
1. To turn the hair in ringlets.
What haſt thou been —
—A ſerving man, proud in heart and mind, that curled my
hair, wore gloves in my cap, ſerved the luſt of my miſtreſs's
heart, and did the act of darkneſs with her. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
2. To writhe; to twiſt.
3. To dreſs with curls.
If ſhe firſt meet the curled Antony, t
He'll make demand of her kiſs. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
- Up the trees
Climbing, ſat thicker than the ſnaky locks
That curl’d Megaera. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. l. 569.
4. To raiſe in waves, undulations, or ſinuoſities.
The viſitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
Curling their monſtrous heads Shakespeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Seas would be pools, without the bruſhing air
To curl the waves, Dryden's Faller.
To CU R L. v. n.
1. To ſhrink into ringlets.
Thoſe ſlender aerial bodies are ſeparated and ſtretched out,
which otherwiſe, by reaſon of their flexibleneſs and weight,
would flag or curl. Bºyle's Spring of the Air.
2. To riſe in undulations.
To every nobler portion of the town,
Dryden’s Fables.
Shakeſpeare,
\
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 180</div><p class="Text">C U R
C U R
*
The curling billows roul their reſtleſs tide;
In parties now they ſtraggle up and down, -
As armies, unoppos'd, for prey divide. - Dryden.
While curling ſmoaks from village tops are ſecn. Pope.
3. To twiſt itſelf. -
Then round her ſlender waiſt he curl’d,
And ſtamp'd an image of himſelf, a ſov’reign of the world.
Dryden's Fables.
CU'RLEw, n.ſ. ſcourſieu, French.]. - - º
1. A kind of water-fowl, with a large beak of a grey colour,
with red and black ſpots. -
2. A bird larger than a partridge, with longer legs. It runs very
ſwiftly, and frequents the cornfields in Spain, in sº; and
ſometimes in France. fretoux'.
, CURMUDGEON. m. ſ. [It is a vitious manner of pro-
nouncing carur mechant, Fr. an unknown correſpondent.] An
awaritious churliſh fellow; a miſer; a niggard ; a churl; a
griper. -
- And when he has it in his claws,
He'll not be hide-bound to the cauſe;
Nor ſhalt thou find him a curmudgeon,
If thou diſpatch it without grudging. Hudibras, p. iii. c. 2.
Both their wine and their victuals theſe curmudgeon
lubbards -
Lock up from my ſight, in cellars and cupboards. Swift.
A man's way of living is commended, becauſe he will
give any rate for it; and a man will give any rate rather than
paſs for a poor wretch, or a penurious curmudgeon. Locke.
CU'RMUDGEoN LY. adj. [from curmudgeon.] Avaricious; co-
vetous ; churliſh; niggardly. . . . . * * * *
In a country where he that killed a hog invited the neigh-
bourhood, a cirmudgeonly fellow adviſed with his companions
how he might ſave the charge. L'Eſtrange.
CU'RRANT. n.ſ. ** si * =
1. The tree hath no prickles; the leaves are large: the flower
conſiſts of five leaves, placed in form of a roſe: the ovary,
which ariſes from the center of the flower-cup, becomes a
globular fruit, produced in bunches. * *
2. A ſmall dried grape, properly written corinth.
They butter'd turrants on fat veal beſtow'd,
And rumps of beef with virgin honey flew'd;
Inſipid taſte, old friend, to them who Paris know,
Where rocombole, ſhallot, and the rank garlick grow. King.
CU'RRENcy. n.ſ.. [from current.]
'I. Circulation; power of paſſing from hand to hand.
The currency of thoſe half-pence would, in the univerſal
opinion of our people, be utterly deſtructive to this king-
dom. - Swift.
- - - - -
2. General reception.
3. Fluency; readineſs of utterance; eaſineſs of pronunciation.
‘A. Continuance; conſtant flow; uninterrupted courſe.
The currency of time to eſtabliſh a cuſtom, ought to be
with a continuando from the beginning to the end of the term
preſcribed. Ayliff's Parergon.
5. General eſteem; the rate at which any thing is vulgarly
valued. - - - " - * * *
He that thinketh Spain to be ſome great over-match for this
eſtate, aſſiſted as it is, and, may be, is no good mintman, but
takes greatneſs of kingdoms according to their bulk and
currency, and not after intrinſick value. Lacon'sſ/ar with Spain.
6. The papers ſtamped in the Engliſh colonies by authority, and
aſling for money.
CURRENT, adj. [currens, Latin.] . .
-1. Circulatory; paſſing from hand to hand.
Shekels of filver, current money with the merchant. Gen.
*
That there was current money in Abraham's time is paſt .
doubt, though it is not ſure that it was ſtampt; for he is ſaid
to be rich in cattle, in ſilver, and in gold. Arbuthnot.
2. Generally received; uncontradićted; authoritative.
Many ſtrange bruits are received for current. Sidney.
Becauſe ſuch as openly reprove ſuppoſed diſorders of ſtate,
are taken for principal friends to the common benefit of all,
under this fair and plauſible colour, whatſoever they utter
paſſeth for good and current. Hooker, b. i.
I have collected the facts, with all poſſible impartiality, from
the current hiſtories of thoſe times. Swift.
3. Common; general.
They have been trained up from their infancy in one ſet
of notions, without ever hearing or knowing what other opi-
nions are current among mankind. Wats's Improvement.
About three months ago we had a current report of the
king of France's death. - Addison's Speciator.
4. Popular; ſuch as is eſtabliſhed by vulgar eſtimation.
We are alſo to conſider the difference between worth and
merit, ſtrićtly taken; that is, a man's intrinſick; this, his
current value; which is leſs or more, as men have occaſion for
him. - Grew's Cºſmol. b. ii. c. 7. ſect. 34.
5. Faſhionable; popular. - -
Oft leaving what is natural and fit,
The current folly proves our ready wit;
And authors think their reputation ſafe,
Which lives as long as fools are pleas'd to laugh. Pope.
6. Paſſible; ſuch as may be allowed or admitted.
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canſt make
No excuſe current, but to hang thyſelf. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
7. What is now paſſing; what is at préſent in its courſe; as, the
current year. • .
CU'RRENT. n.ſ.
I. A running ſtream, . -
The current, that with gentle murmur glides,
Thou know'ſt, being ſtopp'd, impatiently doth rage;
But his fair courſe is not hindered:
He makes ſweet muſick with th' enamel'd ſtones. Shakeſp.
Theſe inequalities will vaniſh in one place, and preſently
appear in another, and ſeem perfeótly to move like waves,
ſucceeding and deſtroying one another; ſave that their motion
oftentimes ſeems to be quickeſt, as if in that vaſt ſea they
were carried on '. a current, or at leaſt by a tide. Boyle.
Heav'n her Eridanus no more ſhall boaſt,
Whoſe fame in thine, like leſſer currents loſt;
Thy nobler ſtreams ſhall viſit Jove's abodes,
To ſhine among the ſtars, and bathe the gods. Denham.
Not fabled Po more ſwells the poet's lays,
While through the ſky his ſhining current ſtrays. Pºpe.
2. [In navigation.] Currents are certain progreſſive motions of
the water of the ſea in ſeveral places, either quite down to the
bottom, or to a certain determinate depth; by which a ſhip
may happen to be carried more ſwiftly or retarded in her
courſe, according to the direction of the current, with or
againſt the way of the ſhip. Harris.
CU'RRENTLY. adj. [from current.]
1. In a conſtant motion.
2. Without oppoſition. -
The very cauſe which maketh the ſimple and ignorant to
think they even ſee how the word of God runneth currently
on your ſide, is, that their minds are foreſtalled, and their
conceits perverted beforehand. Hooker, Preface.
3. Popularly; faſhionably ; generally.
4. Without ceaſing.
CU'RRENTNess. n.ſ.. [from current.]
1. Circulation.
2. General reception.
3. Eaſineſs of pronunciation.
When ſubſtantialneſs combineth with delightfulneſs, and
currentnºſ, with ſtayedneſs, how can the language ſound other
than moſt full of ſweetneſs Camden's Remains.
Cu'RRIER. m.ſ. ſcoriarius, Latin.] One who dreſſes and pares
leather for thoſe who make ſhoes, or other things.
A currier bought a bearſkin of a huntſman, and laid him
down ready money for it. . . L’Eſtrange.
Warn’d by frequent ills, the way they found
To lodge their loathſome carrion under ground ;
For uſeleſs to the currier were their hides,
Nor could their tainted fleſh with ocean tides -
Be free’d from filth. Dryden's Pirg, Geor. b. iii. 1. 833.
CU'RRish. adj. [from cur.] Having the qualities of a dege-
nerate dog; brutal; ſour; quarrelſome ; malignant; churliſh;
uncivil; untračtable; impracticable.
Sweet ſpeaking oft a curriſh heart reclaims. Sidney, b. ii.
No care of juſtice, nor no rule of reaſon,
No temperance, nor no regard of ſeaſon,
Did thenceforth ever enter in his mind,
But cruelty, the ſign of curriſh kind. . . Hubberd's Tale.
In faſhions wayward, and in love unkind;
For Cupid deigns not wound a curriſh mind. Fairfax, b. iv.
I would ſhe were in heaven, ſo ſhe could
Entreat ſome pow'r to change this curriſh Jew. Shaºffeare.
She ſays your dog was a cur; and tells you, curriſh thanks
is good enough for ſuch a preſent. Shakespeare Two Gent, of Werona.
To CURRY. v. a. ſcorium, leather, Latin.]
1. To dreſs leather, by beating and rubbing it.
2. To beat; to drub; to threſh ; to chaſtiſe.
A deep deſign in't to divide
The well affected that confide;
By ſetting brother againſt brother, -
To claw and curry one another. Hudibras, p. i. cant I.
I may expect her to take care of her family, and furry her
hide in caſe of refuſal. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 211.
3. To rub a horſe with a ſcratching inſtrument, ſo as to ſmooth
his coat, and promote his fleſh.
Frićtions make the parts more fleſhy and full; as we ſee
both in men, and in the currying of horſes: the cauſe is, for
that they draw a greater quantity of ſpirits and blood to the
parts. ' Bacon.
4. To ſcratch in kindneſs; to rub down with flattery; to tickle.
If I had a ſuit to maſter Shallow, I would humour his men;
if to his men, I would curry with maſter Shallow. Shakeſp.
5. To Ce RRY Favour. To become a favourite by petty offi-
ciouſneſs, ſlight kindneſſes, or flattery.
He judged them ſtill over-abjectly to fawn upon the hea-
thens, and to curry favour with infidels. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 7.
This humour ſucceeded ſo with the puppy, that an aſs
would go the ſame way to work to curry favour for him-
ſelf. L’Eſtrange.
Cu'RRY cox, s.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 181</div><p class="Text">C U R
C U R
--
Ut'RRycomb. n.ſ.. [from curry and comb.] An iron inſtru-
ment uſed for currying horſes.
He has a clearer idea from a little print than from a long
definition; and ſo he would have ºf ſtrigil and //trum, if,
inſtead of a currycomb and cymbal, he could ſee ſtamped in
the margin ſmall pićtures of theſe inſtruments. Locke.
To CURSE. v. a. [currian, Saxon ]
1. To wiſh evil to ; to exccrate; to devote.
Curſe me this people; for they are too mighty for me. Num.
After Solyman had looked upon the dead body, and bitterly
curſed the ſame, he cauſed a great weight to be tied unto it,
ind ſo caſt unto the ſea.
What, yet again the third time haſt thou cuſt me:
This imprecation was for Laius' death,
And thou haſt wiſhed me like him. Dryd, and Lee's Oedipus.
2. To miſchief; to afflićt; to torment.
On impious realms and barb'rous kings impoſe
Thy plagues, and curſe 'em with ſuch ſons as thoſe. Pope.
To CURse. v. n. To imprecate; to deny or affirm with im-
precation of divine vengeance.
The filver about which thou curſed?, and ſpeakeſt of alſo in
my ears, behold the ſilver is with me. jud. xvi. 2.
CURs E. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Maledićtion; wiſh of evil to another.
Neither have Iſuffered my mouth to fin, by wiſhing a curſe
to his ſoul. job, xxxi. 3c.
I never went from your lordſhip but with a longing to re-
turn, or without a hearty curſe to him who invented ceremo-
nies, and put me on the neceſſity of withdrawing. Dryden.
2. Affliction; torment; vexation.
Curſe on the ſtripling! how he apes his fire!
Ambitiouſly ſententious ! Addison's Cato.
CU'Rsf D. participial adj. [from curſe.]
1. Under a curſe; hateful; deteſtable; abominable; wicked.
Merciful pow'rs
Reſtrain in me the curſed thoughts that nature
Gives way to in repoſe. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. Unholy; unſanétified; blaſted by a curſe.
Come lady, while heav'n lends us grace,
Let us fly this curſed place,
Left the ſorcerer us entice
With ſome other new device;
Not a waſte or needleſs ſound,
...”Till we come to holier ground. Milton.
3. Vexatious; troubleſome.
This curſed quarrel be no more renew’d;.
Be, as becomes a wife, obedient ſtill;
Though griev’d, yet ſubječt to her huſband's will. Dryden.
One day, I think, in Paradiſe he liv'd;
Deſtin'd the next his journey to purſue,
Where wounding thorns and curſed thiſtles grew. Prior.
Cu’rsedly. adv. [from curſed.] Miſerably; ſhamefully: a
low cant word.
Satisfaction and reſtitution lies ſo curſºdy hard on the giz-
zards of our publicans. L’Eſtrange.
Sure this is a nation that is curſºdy afraid of being over-run
with too much politeneſs, and cannot regain one great genius
but at the expence of another. Pope.
CU'RSEDNess. n.ſ.. [from curſed.] The ſtate of being under a
curſe.
CU'R's HIP. m. ſ. [from cur.] Dogſhip; meanneſs; ſcoundrel-
II).
How durſt he, I ſay, oppoſe thy curſhip,
'Gainſt arms, authority, and worſhip. Hudibras, p. i.
CU'RSITOR. m. ſ. [Latin J. An officer or clerk belonging to
the Chancery, that makes out original writs. They are called
clerks of courſe, in the oath of the clerks of Chancery. Of
theſe there are twenty-four in number, which have certain
ſhires allotted to each of them, into which they make out
fuch original writs as are required. They are a corporation
among themſelves. Cowel.
Then is the recognition and value, ſigned with the hand-
writing of that juſtice, carried by the curſitor in Chancery for
that ſhire where thoſe lands do ſie, and by him is a writ of
covenant thereupon drawn, and ingroſſed in parchment. Bacon.
Cu’rsor ARY. adj. [from curſus, Latin.] Curſory; haſty;
careleſs. A word, I believe, only found in the following
line.
I have but with a curſºrary eye
O'erglanc'd the articles. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
CU'ssor Ily, adv. [from curſºry..] Haſtily; without care;
without ſolicitous attention.
This power, and no other, Luther diſowns, as any one that
views the place but curſorily muſt needs ſee. Atterbury.
SyºsoriNEss. n.ſ.. [from ºurſºry..] Slight attention.
CURSORY. adi, [from curſºrius, Latin.j Haſty; quick; in-
attentive; careleſs.
The firſt, upon a curſory and ſuperficial view, appeared
like the head of another man. Addiſon.
CURST. adj. Froward; peeviſh; malignant; miſchievous;
malicious; ſnarling
Mr. Maſon, after his manner, was very merry with both
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
parties, pleaſantly playing both with the ſhrewd touches of
many curſ boys, and with the ſmall diſcretion of many lewd
ſchoolmaſters. Aftham's Schoolmaſter.
I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
Let her not hurt me: I was never curſ ;
I have no gift at all in ſhrewiſhneſs:
I am a right maid, for my cowardice;
Let her not ſtrike me. Shakespeare A ſidimmer Night's Dream.
I'll go ſee if the bear be gone from the gentleman, and
how much he hath eaten: they are never curſ but when they
are hungry. Shakespeare's hinter’s Tale.
Her only fault, and that is fault enough,
Is, that ſhe is intolerably curſi,
And ſhrewd and forward, ſo beyond all meaſure,
That, were my ſtate far worſer than it is, -
I would not wed her for a mine of gold. Shakeſpeare.
Go, write in a martial hand; be curſ and brief. It is no
matter how witty, ſo it be eloquent, and full of invention. Shakespeare
When I diſſuaded him from his intent,
And found him pight to do it with curſ; ſpeech,
I threaten’d to diſcover him.
And though his mind
Be ne'er ſo cutſ, his tongue is kind , Craſhaw.
Cu’rst NFss. n.ſ.. [from cuſt.] Peewiſhneſs; frowardneſs;
malignity.
Then, noble partners,
Touch you the ſow'reſt points with ſweeteſt terms,
Nor curſinºſ, grow to the matter. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopat.
Her mouth ſhe writh'd, her forehead taught to frown,
Her eyes to ſparkle fires to love unknown;
Her ſallow cheeks her envious mind did ſhew,
And ev'ry feature ſpoke aloud the curſingſ of a ſhrew. Dryd.
CURT. adj. [from curtus, Latin.] Short.
To CU'RTAIL. v. a. [curto, Latin. It was anciently written
curtal, which perhaps is more proper; but dogs that had their
tails cut, being called curtal dogs, the word was vulgarly con-
ceived to mean originally to cut the tail, and was in time writ-
ten according to that notion.]
1. To cut off; to cut ſhort; to ſhorten.
I, that am curtail'd of all fair proportion,
Deform’d, unfiniſh'd, ſent before my time
Into this breathing world. Shakespeare’s Richard III.
Then why ſhould we ourſelves abridge,
And curtail our own privilege Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 2.
Scribblers ſend us over their traſh in proſe and verſe, with
abominable curtailings and quaint moderniſms. Swift.
This general employ, and expence of their time, would as
aſſuredly curtail and retrench the ordinary means of know-
ledge and erudition, as it would ſhorten the opportunities of
vice. A codward.
Perhaps this humour of ſpeaking no more than we muſt,
has ſo miſerably curtailed ſome of our words; and, in familiar
writings and converſations, they often loſe all but their firſt
ſyllables. Addison's Speciator, N°. 135.
2. It has of before the thing cut off.
The count aſſured the court, that Faët his antagoniſt had
taken a wrong name, having curtailed it ºf three letters; for
that his name was not Faël, but Faction. Addiſon.
CU'RTAIL Dog. m. ſ. A dog whoſe tail is cut off, and who is
therefore hindered in courſing. Perhaps this word may be the
original of cur. -
I, amazed, ran from her as a witch; and I think, if my
breaſt had not been made of faith, and my heart of ſteel, ſhe
had transformed me to a curtail dog, and made me turn i' th’
wheel. Shakeſpeare's Comedy of Erraurs.
CU'RTAIN. n.ſ. ſcortina, Latin.]
1. A cloath contračted or expanded at plcaſure, to admit or ex-
clude the light; to conceal or diſcover any thing; to ſhade a
bed; to darken a room.
Their curtains ought to be kept open, ſo as to renew the
21ſ. Arbuthnot on Diet.
So through white curtains ſhot a tim’rous ray,
And op'd thoſe eyes that muſt eclipſe the day. Pope.
Thy hand, great dulneſs let's the curtain fall,
And univerſal darkneſs buries all. Pope's Dunciad, b. iii.
2. To draw the CURTAIN. To cloſe it ſo as to ſhut out the
light, or conceal the objećt.
I muſt draw a curtain before the work for a while, and
keep your patience a little in ſuſpence, ’till materials are pre-
pared. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Once more I write to you, and this once will be the laſt:
the curtain will ſoon be drawn between my friend and me,
and nothing left but to wiſh you a long good night. Pope.
3. To open it ſo as to diſcern the object.
Had I forgot thee ? Oh, come in, AEmilia:
Soft, by and by ; let me the curtains draw.
Where art thou? What's the matter with thee now? Shalºſ.
So ſoon as the all-cheering ſun
Should in the fartheſt Eaſt begin to draw
The ſhady curtain from Aurora's bed. Shakespeare . Ram, and jul.
Peace, the lovers are aſleep :
They,
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 182</div><p class="Text">C U S
They, ſweet turtles folded lie
In the laſt knot that love could tie :
Let them ſleep, let them ſleep on,
*Till this ſtormy night be gone;
And th’ eternal morrow dawn,
Then the curtain will be drawn,
And they waken with that light,
Whoſe day ſhall never ſleep in night. Craſhaw.
4. [In fortification.] That part of the wall or rampart that lies
between two baſtions. Military Dićt.
The governour, not diſcouraged, ſuddenly of timber and
boards raiſed up a curtain twelve foot high, at the back of
his ſoldiers. Knollº’s Hiſtory of the Turks.
CURTAIN-LEct URE. m.ſ.. [from curtain and lecture.] A re-
proof given by a wife to her huſband in bed.
What endleſs brawls by wives are bred
The curtain-le&amp;ſure makes a mournful bed. Dryden's juven.
She ought to exert the authority of the curtain-letture, and,
if ſhe finds him of a rebellious diſpoſition, to tame him. Addison
To CU'RTAIN. v. a. [from the noun..] To incloſe or accom-
modate with curtains.
Now o'er one half the world -
Nature ſeems dead, and wicked dreams abuſe
The curtain'd ſleep. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The wand'ring prince and Dido,
When with a happy ſtorm they were ſurpriz'd,
And curtain'd with a counſel-keeping cave.
But in her temple's laſt receſs inclos'd,
On dulneſs' lap th’ anointed head repos'd :
Him cloſe ſhe curtain’d round with vapours blue,
And ſoft beſprinkled with cimmerian dew. Pope's Dunciad.
Cu'RTATE Diſtance. n.ſ. [In aſtronomy.] The diſtance of a
planet's place from the ſun, reduced to the ecleptick.
CURTA'tion. n.ſ.. [from curto, to ſhorten, Latin.] . The in-
terval between a planet's diſtance from the ſun and the curtate
diſtance. Chambers.
CU'RTEL Asse.
CU'RTELAx.
CU'RT sy. See Cou RTE sy.
CU'R v ATED. adj. [curvatus, Latin.] Bent.
CURVATION. m. ſ. [curvo, Latin.] The aët of bending or
crooking.
Cu'RVATURE. n.ſ.. [from curve.] Crookedneſs; inflexion;
manner of bending.
It is bent after the manner of the catenarian curve, by
which it obtains that curvature that is ſafeſt for the included
Shakeſpeare.
} See CUTLAss.
marrow. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Flaccid it was beyond the aëtivity of the muſcle, and
curvature of the officles, to give it a due tenſion. PHolder.
Curve, adj. [curvus, Latin.] Crooked; bent; inflected; not
fºreight.
Unleſs an intrinſick principle of gravity or attraction, may
make it deſcribe a curve line about the attracting body. Bentley.
CURve. n.ſ. Anything bent; a flexure or crookedneſs of any
particular form.
And as you lead it round, in artful curve,
With eye intentive mark the ſpringing game. Thomſon.
To CURVE. v. a. [curvo, Latin.] To bend; to crook; to
infle&amp;t.
And the tongue is drawn back and curved. Holder on Speech.
To CU'RVET. v. n. [corvettare, Italian.]
1. To leap; to bound.
Cry, holla! to thy tongue, I pr’ythee: it curvets unſea-
ſonably. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Himſelf he on an earwig ſet,
Yet ſcarce he on his back could get,
So oft and high he did curvet,
'Ere he himſelf could ſettle. Drayton's Nymphid.
Seiz'd with unwonted pain, ſurpriz'd with fright,
The wounded fleed curvets; and, rais'd upright,
Lights on his feet before: his hoofs behind
Spring up in air aloft, and laſh the wind. Dryden's AFneis.
2. To friſk ; to be licentious. -
CU'Rver. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A leap ; a bound.
2. A frolick; a prank.
CURv11.1'NEAR. adj. ſcurvus and linea, Lat I
1. Conſiſting of a crooked line.
The impulſe continually draws the celeſtial body from its
rečtilinear motion, and forces it into a curvilinear orbit; ſo
that it muſt be repeated every minute of time. Cheyne.
2. Compoſed of crooked lines.
CU'R v It Y. n.f. [from curve J Crookedneſs.
The joined ends of that bone and the incus receding, make
a more acute angle at that joynt, and give a greater curvity to
the poſture of the officles. Holder's Elements of Speech.
CU'SHION. m. ſ. [Kºſºn, Dutch; couffin, French.]
1. A pillow for the ſeat; a ſoft pad placed upon a chair.
Call Claudius, and ſome other of my men;
I'll have them ſleep on cuſhions in my tent. Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
If you are learn'd,
Be not as common fools; if you are not,
Vol. I.
Let them have cuſhions by you. Shałºffeare's Coriolanus.
But e're they ſat, officious Baucis lays
Two cuſhions ſtuff'd with ſtraw, the ſeat to raiſe;
Coarſe, but the beſt ſhe had. Dryden's Fables.
An Eaſtern king put a judge to death for an iniquitous ſen-
tence; and ordered his hide to be ſtuffed into a cuſhion, and
placed upon the tribunal, for the ſon to fit on. Swift.
CU'shioned. adj. [from cuſhion.] Seated on a cuſhion; ſup-
ported by cuſhions. -
Many, who are cuſhioned upon throncs, would have re-
mained in obſcurity. Diſſertation on Parties.
CUSP. m. ſ. [cuſis, inj A term uſed to expreſs the points
or horns of the moon, or other luminary. Harris.
CU's PATE D. }*. [from cuſpis, Latin.] When the leaves
CU'spidATE d. of a flower end in a point. &amp;incy.
CU'st ARD. m. ſ. [cuſſiard, Welſh.] A kind of ſweetmeat
made by boiling eggs with milk and ſugar, 'till the whole
thickens into a maſs. It is a food much uſed in city feaſts.
He cram'd them ’till their guts did ake,
With cawdle, cuffard, and plumb cake. Hudibras, cant. ii.
Now mayºrs and ſhrieves all huſh'd and ſatiate lay;
Yet eat, in dreams, the cuſtard of the day. Pope's Dunciad.
CU'stody. m. ſ. [cuſtodia, Latin.]
1. Impriſonment; reſtraint of liberty.
The council remonſtranced unto queen Elizabeth the con-
ſpiracies againſt her life, and therefore they adviſed her, that
ſhe ſhould go leſs abroad weakly attended, as ſhe uſed; but the
queen anſwered, ſhe had rather be dead than put in cuſtody.
Bacon's Apophthegms,
For us enſlav'd, is cuſtody ſevere,
And ſtripes, and arbitrary puniſhment -
Inflićted Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. ii. l. 335.
2. Care; guardianſhip; charge.
Under the cuſtody and charge of the ſons of Merari, ſhall
be the boards of the tabernacle. Nun. iii. 36.
We being ſtrangers here, how dar'ſt thou truſt
So great a charge from thine own cuſtody. Shakeſpeare.
An offence it were, raſhly to depart out of the city com-
mitted to their cuſtody. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
There is generally but one coin ſtampt upon the occaſion,
which is made a preſent to the perſon who is celebrated on it:
- % this means the whole fame is in his own cuſtody. Addiſon.
3.
efence; preſervation; ſecurity.
There was prepared a fleet of thirty ſhips for the cuſtody of
the narrow ſeas. Bacon's War with Spain.
CUSTOM. n.ſ. [couſtume, French.]
1. Habit; habitual pračtice.
Blood and deſtruction ſhall be ſo in uſe,
That mothers ſhall but ſmile, when they behold
Their infants quarter'd by the hands of war;
All pity choak'd with cuſtom of fell deeds. Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
Cuſtom, a greater power than nature, ſeldom fails to
make them worſhip. - Locke.
2. Faſhion; common way of ačting.
3. Eſtabliſhed manner.
According to the cuſtom of the prieſt's office, his lot was to
burn incenſe when he went into the temple of the Lord. Luk, i.
And the prieſts cuſtom with the people was, that when an
man offered ſacrifice, the prieſt's ſervants came, while the ãº.
was in, with a fleſh-hook of three teeth in his hands. I Sa. ii.
4. Pračtiſe of buying of certain perſons.
You ſay he is aſſiduous in his calling, and is he not grown
rich by it? Let him have your cuſtom, but not your votes. Addison
5. Application from buyers; as, this trader has good cuſtom.
6. [In law.] A law or right, not written, which, being eſta-
bliſhed by long uſe, and the conſent of our anceſtors, has been,
and is, daily pračtiſed. We cannot ſay that this or that is a
cuſtom, except we can juſtify that it hath continued ſo one
hundred years; yet, becauſe that is hard to prove, it is enough
for the proof of a cuſtom, if two or more can depoſe that they
heard their fathers ſay, that it was a cuſtom all their time; and
that their fathers heard their fathers alſo ſay, that it was like-
wiſe a cuſtom in their time. If it is to be proved by record,
the continuance of a hundred years will ſerve. Cuſtom is
either general or particular: general, that which is current
through England; particular is that which belongs to this or
that county; as gavelkind to Kent, or this or that lordſhip,
city, or town. Cuffom differs from preſcription; for cuſtom is
common to more, and preſcription is particular to this or
that man: preſcription may be for a far ſhorter time than
cuſtom. Cowel.
7. Tribute; tax paid for goods imported, or exported.
The reſidue of theſe ordinary finances be caſual or uncer-
tain, as be the eſcheats and forfeitures, the cuſtoms, butlerzge,
and impoſts. Bacon.
Thoſe commodities may be diſperſed, after having paid the
cuſtoms, in England. Temple.
Cuſions to ſteal is ſuch a trivial thing,
That 'tis their charter to defraud their king. Drydºn.
Strabo tells you, that Britain bore heavy taxes, eſpecially
the cuſtoms on the importation of the Gallick trade. A 'uthnot.
6 F. - CU's roMHQ USz.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 183</div><p class="Text">C U T
.
Cu'stolitious E. n.ſ. The houſe where the taxes upon goods
imported or exported are collected.
Some cuſtomhouſe officers, birds of paſſage, and oppreſſive
thrifty ſquires, are the only thriving people amongſt us Swift.
CU's rosſ Aple. a j. [from cuſton.] Common ; habitual ;
frequent.
CU's ſonſ ABLEN Ess. n.ſ [from cuſtomable.]
1. Frequency; habit.
2. Conformity to cuſtom.
CU's Tom A BLY. adv. [from cuſtomable.] According to cuſtom.
Kingdoms have cuſtomably been carried away by right of
ſucceſſion, according to proximity of blood. Hayward.
CU's ToMARILY. adv. [from cuſtomary.J Habitually; com-
monly.
To call God to witneſs truth, or a lye perhaps, or to ap-
peal to him on every trivial occaſion, in common diſcourſe,
cuſtomarily without any conſideration of what we ſay, is one
of the higheſt indignities and affronts that can be offered him.
Ray on the Creation.
CU'stom ARINEss. n.ſ.. [from cuſtomary J Frequency; com-
monneſs; frequent occurrence.
A vice, which, for its guilt, may juſtify the ſharpeſt, and
for its cuſtomarineſ; the frequenteſt invečtives, which can be
made againſt it. - Government ºf the Tongue, ſect. 3.
CU's to MARY. adj. [from cuſtom.]
1. Conformable to eſtabliſhed cuſtom ; according to preſcription.
Pray you now, if it may ſtand with the tune of your voices,
that I may be conſul: I have here the cuſtomary gown. Shakespeare
Several ingenious perſons, whoſe aſſiſtance might be con-
ducive to the advance of real and uſeful knowledge, lay under
the prejudices of education and cuſtomary belief. Glanv. Scepſ.
2. Habitual.
We ſhould carefully avoid the profane and irreverent uſe
of God's name, by curſing, or ct/lomary ſwearing, and take
heed of the neglect or contempt of his worſhip, or any thing
belonging to it. Tilotſon, Sermon 5.
3. Uſual; wonted.
Ev’n now I met him
With cuſomary compliment, when he,
Wafting his eyes to th’ contrary, and falling
A lip of much contempt, ſpeeds from me. Shakeſpeare.
CU's to MED. adj. [from cuſtom.] Uſual; common; that to
which we are accuſtomed.
No nat'ral exhalation in the ſky,
No common wind, no cuſtomed event,
But they will pluck away its nat'ral cauſe,
And call them meteors, prodigies, and ſigns. Shakespeare K. john.
CU's ToMER. n.ſ.. [from cuſtºm.] One who frequents any place
of ſale for the ſake of purchaſing.
One would think it Overdone's houſe; for here be many
old cuſtomers. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
A wealthy poet takes more pains to hire
A flatt’ring audience, than poor tradeſmen do
To perſuade cuſtomers to buy their goods. Roſcommon.
Don't you hear how lord Strut has beſpoke his liveries at
Lewis Baboon's ſhop Don't you ſee how that old fox ſteals
away your cuſtomers, and turns you out of your buſineſs every
day. Arbuthnot.
Thoſe papers are grown a neceſſary part in coffeehouſe
furniture, and may be read by cuſtomers of all ranks for curio-
ſity or amuſement. Swift's Prºject for the Advancem. of Religion.
I ſhewed you a piece of black and white ſtuff, juſt ſent from
the dyer, which you were pleaſed to approve of, and be my
cuſtomer for. Swift.
2. A common women. This ſenſe is now obſolete.
I marry her l—What, a cuſtomer? Pr'ythee, bear ſome cha-
rity to my wit; do not think it ſo unwholſome. Shakespeare Othello.
CU's rREL. m. ſ.
I. A buckler-bearer.
2. A veſſel for holding wine. Ainſworth.
To CUT. pret, cut; part, paſſ cut. [probably from the French
couteau, a knife.] º
1. To penetrate with an edged inſtrument; to divide any con-
tinuity by a ſharp edge.
Ah, cut my lace aſunder,
That my great heart may have ſome ſcope to beat,
Or elſe I ſwoon with this dead killing news. Shakespeare R. III.
And when two hearts were join’d by mutual love,
The ſword of juſtice cuts upon the knot,
And ſevers 'em for ever. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Some I have cut away with ſciſſars. J/ſeman's Surgery.
2. To hew.
Thy ſervants can ſkill to cut timber in Lebanon. 2 Chro. ii.
3. To carve; to make by ſculpture.
Why ſhould a man, whoſe blood is warm within,
Sit like his grandfire cut in alabaſter Shakeſpeare.
The triumphal is, indeed, defaced by time; but the plan
of it is neatly cut upon the wall of a neighbouring building.
Addison's Remarks on Italy.
*
4. To form anything by cutting.
And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into
Wires. Ex. xxxix. 3.
Before the whiſtling winds the veſſels fly,
With rapid ſwiftneſs cut the liquid way,
And reach Gereſtus at the point of day. Pope's O&amp;ſj, b. iii.
5. To pierce with any uneaſy ſenſation.
The man was cut to the heart with theſe conſolations. Mºſſ.
6. To divide packs of cards. w
Supine they in their heav'n remain,
Excmpt from paſion and from pain;
And frankly leave us, human elves,
To cut and ſhuffle for ourſelves. Prior.
We ſure in vain the cards condemn, º
Ourſelves both cut and ſhuffled them. Priºr.
Take a freſh pack, nor is it worth our grieving
Who cuts or ſhuffles with our dirty leaving. Granville.
7. To interſect; to croſs; as, one line cuts another at right
angles.
8. ‘f a CUT down. To fell; to hew down.
All the timber whereof was cut down in the mountains of
Cilicia. Knolley's Hiſtory of the Turks.
9. To Cut down. To excel; to overpower.
So great is his natural eloquence, that he cuts down the fineſt
orator, and deſtroys the beſt contrived argument, as ſoon as
ever he gets himſelf to be heard. Aidſon's Count Tariff.
10. To CUT off. To ſeparate from the other arts by cutting.
And they caught him, and cut ºff his thui...ºs. Jºa. i. 6.
11. To CUT ºff. To deſiroy; to extirpate; to put to death
untimely.
All Spain was firſt conquered by the Romans, and filled
with colonies from them, which were ſtill increaſed, an the
native Spaniards ſtill cut ºff. Spey r on Ireland.
By whoſe fell working I was firſt advanc'd,
And by whoſe pow'r I well might lodge a fear
To be again diſplac'd; which to avoid,
I cut them ºff. Shakespeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Were I king,
I ſhould cut off the nobles for their lands. Shakespeare Macleth.
This great commander was ſuddenly cut off by a fatal ſtroke,
given him with a ſmall contemptible inſtrument. JHowel.
Irenaeus was likewiſe cut off by martyrdom. Addiſon.
Ill-fated prince Too negligent of life
Cut off in the freſh, ripening prime of manhood,
Even in the pride of life. Philips's Diſtry? Mºther.
12. To Cut off. To reſcind.
Fetch the will hither, and we ſhall determine
How to cut ºff ſome charge in legacies, Shakſ, jul. Caſ
He that cuts off twenty years of life,
Cuts ºff ſo many years of fearing death. Shakeſp. Jul. Carſ.
Preſume not on thy God, whoe'er he be:
Thee he regards not, owns not, hath cut off
Quite from his people. Milton's Agon. l. 1156.
The propoſal of a recompence from men, cuts ºff the hopes
of future rewards. - Smalridge.
13. To Cut off. To intercept; to hinder from union or
return.
The king of this iſland, a wiſe man and a great warrior,
handled the matter ſo, as he cut ºff their land forces from their
ſhips. Bacon.
His party was ſo much inferior to the enemy, that it would
infallibly be cut off. Clar endon, b. viii.
14. To CUT off. To put an end to; to obviate.
To cut off contentions, commiſſioners were appointed to
make certain the limits. Hayward.
To cut off all further mediation and interpoſition, the king
conjured him to give over all thoughts of excuſe. Clarendon.
It may compoſe our unnatural feuds, and cut ºff frequent
occaſions of brutal rage and intemperance. Addison Freehºlder.
15. To Cut ºff. To take away; to withold.
We are concerned to cut off all occaſion from thoſe who
ſeek occaſion, that they may have whereof to accuſe us. Rogers.
16. To Cut off. To preclude. -
Every one who lives in the pračtice of any voluntary fin,
aćtually cuts himſelf ºff from the benefits and profeſſion of
Chriſtianity. - Addison.
This only objećt of my real care,
Cut off from hope, abandon'd to deſpair,
In ſome few poſting fatal hours is hurl’d
From wealth, from pow'r, from love, and from the world. Pr.
Why ſhould thoſe who wait at altars be cut off from par-
taking in the general benefits of law, Cr of nature. Swift.
17. To CUT off. To interrupt; to ſilence. w
It is no grace to a judge to ſhew quickneſs of conceit in
cutting off evidence or counſel too ſhort. Bacºn, Eſſy 57.
18. To Cut off. To apoſtrophiſe; to abbreviate.
No vowel can be cut ºff before another, when we cannot
ſink the pronunciation of it. Dryden's Dºdicat. &amp;n.
19. To CUT out. To ſhape; to form.
By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cºt out
The purity of his. Shake care's ſ?'inter’s Tale.
I, for my part, do not like images cut out in juniper, or
other garden ſtuff: they be for children. lacon, Aſhy 7.
There is a large table at Montmorancy cut out of the thick-
neſs of a vine-ſtock. Te”, le.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

3 The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 184</div><p class="Text">C U T
C U T.
The antiquaries being but indifferent taylors, they wrangle
prodigiouſly about the cutting out the toga. Arbuthnot on Coins.
They have a large forreſt cut out into walks, extremely thick
and gloomy. - - Addison.
2c. To CUT out. To ſcheme; to contrive. -
Having a moſt pernicious fire kindled within the very
bowels of his own foreſt, he had work enough cut him out to
extinguiſh it. - - Howel.
Every man had cut out a place for himſelf in his own
thoughts: I could reckon up in our army two or three lord-
treaſurers. Addison.
21. To CUT out. To adapt. -
You know I am not cut out for writing a treatiſe, nor have
a genius to pen anything exactly. Rymer.
22. To CUT ot. To debar.
I am cut out from any thing but common acknowledgments,
or common diſcourſe. Pope.
23. 70 Cut out. To excel; to outdo.
24. To CUT ſhort. To hinder from proceeding by ſudden in-
terruption.
Thus much he ſpoke, and more he would have ſaid,
But the ſtern heroe turn’d aſide his head,
And cut him ſhort.
Achilles cut him ſhort; and thus replied,
My worth allow'd in words, is in effect deny'd. Dryden.
Dryden's Aneis.
25. To Cut ſhort. To abridge; as, the ſoldiers were cut ſhort
of their pay.
26. To CUT up. To divide an animal into convenient pieces.
The boar's intemperance, and the note upon him after-
wards, on the cutting him up, that he had no brains in his
head, may be moralized into a ſenſual man. L’Eſlrange.
27. To Cut up. To eradicate.
Who cut up mallows by the buſhes, and juniper-roots for
their meat. jºb, xxx. 4.
This doctrine cuts up all government by the roots. Locke.
To CUT. v. m. - -
1. To make its way by dividing obſtruštions.
When the teeth are ready to cut, the upper part is rubbed
with hard ſubſtances, which infants, by a natural inſtinét,
affect. Arbuthnot.
2. To perform the operation of lithotomy.
He ſaved the lives of thouſands by his manner of cutting
for the ſtone. Pope.
3. To interfere; as, a horſe that cuts.
CUT. part, adj. Prepared for uſe: a metaphor from hewn timber.
Sets of phraſes, cut and dry, -
Evermore thy tongue ſupply. Swift.
CUT. n. ſ. [from the noun.]
1. The action of a ſharp or edged inſtrument; the blow of an
ax or ſword.
z. The impreſſion or ſeparation of continuity, made by an edge
or ſharp inſtrument; diſtinguiſhed from that made by perfo-
ration with a pointed inſtrument.
3. A wound made by cutting.
Sharp weapons, according to the force, cut into the bone
many ways, which cuts are called ſedes, and are reckoned
among the fračtures. Wiſeman's Surgery.
4. A channel made by art. -
This great cut or ditch Seſoſtris the rich king of Egypt,
and long after him Ptolomeus Philadelphus, purpoſed to have
made a great deal wider and deeper, and thereby to have let
in the Red Sea into the Mediterranean, for the readier tranſ-
portation of the Indian merchandiſe to Cairo and Alexandria.
- Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
5. A part cut off from the reſt.
Suppoſe a board to be ten foot long, and one broad, one cut
is reckoned ſo many foot. Aſortimer's Husbandry.
6. A ſmall particle; a ſhred.
It hath a number of ſhort cuts or ſhreddings, which may
be better called wiſhes than prayers. Hooker, b. v. ſect. 27.
. A lot cut off a ſtick.
My lady Zelmane and my daughter Mopſa may draw cuts,
and the ſhorteſt cut ſpeak firſt. Sidney, b. ii.
A man may as reaſonably draw cuts for his tenets, and re-
gulate his perſuaſion by the caſt of a die. Locke.
8. A near paſſage, by which ſome angle is cut off.
The ignorant took heart to enter upon this great calling,
and inſtead of their cutting their way to it through the know-
ledge of the tongues, the fathers and councils, they have
taken another and a ſhorter cut. South's Sermons.
There is a ſhorter cut, an eaſier paſſage. Decay of Piety.
The evidence of my ſenſe is ſimple and immediate, and
therefore I have but a ſhorter cut thereby to the ailent to
the truth of the things ſo evidenced. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
But the gentleman would needs ſee me part of my way,
and carry me a ſhort cut through his own ground, which ſaved
me half a mile's riding Swift's Examiner, Nº. 20.
9. A pićture cut or carved upon a ſtamp of wood or copper,
and impreſſed from it.
In this form, according to his deſcription, he is ſet forth in
the prints or cuts of martyrs by Cevallerius. Brown.
Madam Dacier, from ſome old cuts of Terence, fancies
7
that the larva or perſona of the Roman actors was not only 2
vizard for the face, but had falſe hair to it. Addiſon on Italy.
Io. The ſtamp on which a picture is carved.
i 1. The aët or practice of dividing a pack of cards.
How can the muſe her aid impart,
Unſkill'd in all the terms of art
Or in harmonious numbers put -
The deal, the ſhuffle, and the cut. . . Swift,
12. Faſhion; form; ſhape; manner of cutting into ſhape.
Their cloths are after ſuch a pagan cut too,
That, ſure, they've worn out Chriſtendom. Shakespeare H. VIII.
His tawny beard was th' equal grace
Both of his wiſdom and his face;
In cut and dye ſo like a tile, -
A ſudden view it would beguile. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
They were ſo familiarly acquainted with him as to know
the very cut of his beard. Still ngſ. Def of Diſc. on Rom. Id.l.
Children love breeches, not for their cut or eaſe, but be-
cauſe the having them is a mark or ſtep towards manhood. Locke.
A third deſires you to obſerve well the toga on ſuch a re-
verſe, and aſks you whether you can in conſcience believe the
ſleeve of it to be of the true Roman cut. Addiſon.
Sometimes an old fellow ſhall wear this or that ſort of cut
in his cloaths with great integrity. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 264.
Wilt thou buy there ſome high heads of the neweſt cut for
my daughter. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
13. It ſeems anciently to have ſignified a fool or cully. -
Send her money, knight: if thou haſt her not in the end,
call me cut. . . Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
*::::: and long tail. A proverbial expreſſion for men of all
In CIS. -
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
Ay, that I will, come cut and long tail, under the degree of a
ſquire. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of //indſor.
- A quintin he,
In honour of this bridaltee,
Hath challeng’d either wide countee:
Come cut and long tail; for there be -
Six batchelors as bold as he. Ben. johnſºn's Underwoºd.
CU'TANEous. adj. [from cutis, Latin. J Relating to the ſkin.
This ſerous, nutritious maſs is more readily circulated into
the cutaneous or remoteſt parts of the body. Floyer on Humours.
Some ſorts of cutaneous eruptions are occaſioned by feeding
much on acid unripe fruits and farinaceous ſubſtances. Arbuthn.
CU'ticle. m. ſ. [cuticula, Latin.]
1. The firſt and outermoſt covering of the body, commonly
called the ſcarf-ſkin. This is that ſoft ſkin which riſes in a
bliſter upon any burning, or the application of a bliſtering-
plaiſter. It ſticks cloſe to the ſurface of the true ſkin, to
which it is alſo tied by the veſſels which nouriſh it, though
they are ſo ſmall as not to be ſeen. When the ſcarf-ſkin is
examined with a microſcope, it appears to be made up of
ſeveral lays of exceeding ſmall ſcales, which cover one
another more or leſs, according to the different thickneſs of
the ſcarf-ſkin in the ſeveral parts of the body. $2Mincy.
In each of the very fingers there are bones and griſtles, and
ligaments and membranes, and muſcles and tendons, and
nerves and arteries, and veins and ſkin, and cuticle and
nail. Bentley's Sermons.
2. A thin ſkin formed on the ſurface of any liquor.
When any ſaline liquor is evaporated to cuticle, and let
cool, the ſalt concretes in regular figures ; which argues that
the particles of the ſalt, before they concreted, floated in the
liquor at equal diſtances in rank and file. , Newton's Opt.
CUT I'cula R. adj. [from cutis, Latin.] Belonging to the ſkin.
CUTH, ſignifies knowledge or ſkill. So Cuthwin is a knowing
conqueror; Cuthred a knowing counſellor; Cuthbert, famous
for ſkill. Much of the ſame nature are Sophocles and So-
phianus. Gib. Camden.
CU'tlAss. m. ſ. [coutelas, French. This word is written ſome-
times cutlace, ſometimes cuttleax: in Shakeſpeare, curtleaxes
and in Pope, cutlaſh J A broad cutting ſword: the word is
much in uſe among the ſeamen.
Were’t not better
That I did ſuit me all points like a man :
A gallant curtleax upon my thigh, - - -
A boar-ſpear in my hand. Shakespeare's As you like it.
To the lodgments of his herd he run,
Where the fat porkets ſlept beneath the ſun;
Of two his cutlaſh launch'd the ſpouting blood, -
Theſe quarter'd, fing'd, and fix’d on forks of wood. Pºpe.
CU'TLER. m. ſ. [coutelier, French..] One who makes or ſells
knives.
A paultry ring
That ſhe did give, whoſe poeſy was
For all the world like cutler's poetry
Upon a knife; love me, and leave me not. , Shakeſpeare.
In a bye cutler's ſhop on Tower-hill he bought a tenpenny
knife: ſo cheap was the inſtrument of this great attempt. Wºott.
He choſe no other inſtrument than an ordinary knife, which
he bought of a common criter. Clarºndºn.
CUTPURs E. m. ſ. [cut and purſe.] One who ſteals ty the
method
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 185</div><p class="Text">C Y G
method of cutting purſes: a common pračtice when men wore
their purſes at their girdles, as was once the cuſtom. A thief;
a robber. -
To have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is
neceſſary for a cutpurſe. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
A vice of kings,
A cutpurſe of the empire and the rule,
That from a ſhelf the precious diadem ſtole,
And put it in his pocket. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Was there no felony, no bawd,
Cutpurſe, nor burglary abroad? Hudibras, p. i. cant. 2.
If we could imagine a whole nation to be cutpurſes and
robbers, would there then be kept that ſquare dealing and
equity in ſuch a monſtrous den of thieves. Bentley's Sermons.
CU'ttER. m. ſ. [from cut.]
1. An agent or inſtrument that cuts anything.
2. A nimble boat that cuts the water.
3. The teeth that cut the meat.
The molares, or grinders are behind, neareſt the center of
motion, becauſe there is a greater ſtrength or force required to
chew the meat than to bite a piece; and the cutters before,
that they may be ready to cut off a morſel from any ſolid
food, to be tranſmitted to the grinders. Ray on the Creation.
4. An officer in the Exchequer that provides wood for the tal-
lies, and cuts the ſum paid upon them ; and then caſts the
ſame into the court to be written upon. Cowel.
Cut-throAt. m. ſ. [cut and throat J A rufian; a murderer;
a butcher of men; an aſſaſſin.
Will you then ſuffer theſe robbers, cut-throats, baſe people,
gathered out of all the corners of Chriſtendom, to waſte your
countries, ſpeil your cities, murder your people, and trouble
all your ſeas? - Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Perhaps the cut-throat may rather take his copy from the
Pariſian maſſacre, one of the horrideſt inſtances of barbarous
inhumanity that ever was known. South's Sermons.
The ruffian robbers by no juſtice aw'd,
And unpaid cut-throat ſoldiers are abroad; -
Thoſe venal ſouls, who, harden'd in each ill,
To ſave complaints and proſecution, kill. Dryden’s juvenal.
CUT-TR Roat, adj. Cruel; inhuman; barbarous.
If to take above fifty in the hundred be extremity, this in
truth can be none other than cut-throat and abominable
dealing. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
CU'TTING. m. ſ. [from cut.] A piece cut off; a chop.
The burning of the cuttings of vines, and caſting them upon
land, doth much good. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 667.
Many are propagated above ground by ſlips or cuttings. Ray.
CUTTLE. a. ſ. A fiſh, which, when he is purſued by a fiſh
of prey, throws out a black liquor, by which he darkens the
water and eſcapes.
It is ſomewhat ſtrange, that the blood of all birds and
beaſts, and fiſhes, ſhould be of a red colour, and only the
blood of the cuttle ſhould be as black as ink. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
He that uſes many words for the explaining any ſubječt,
doth, like the cuttle fiſh, hide himſelf for the moſt part in his
own ink. Ray on the Creation.
Cu'rt le. n.ſ.. [from cuttle..] A foul mouthed fellow; a fel-
low who blackens the character of others. Hanmer.
Away, you cutpurſe raſcal; you filthy bung, away; by
this wine I'll thruſt my knife in your mouldy chaps, if you
play the ſaucy cuttle with me. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
CY'cLE. m. ſ. [ºyclus, Latin; x9xxe.]
1. A circle.
2. A round of time; a ſpace in which the ſame revolutions
begin again; a periodical ſpace of time.
We do more commonly uſe theſe words, ſo as to ſtile a
leſler ſpace a cycle, and a greater by the name of period; and
you may not improperly call the beginning of a large period
the epocha thereof. Holder on Time.
3. A method, or account of a method continued 'till the ſame
courſe begins again.
We thought we ſhould not attempt an unacceptable work,
if here we endeavoured to preſent our gardeners with a com-
plete cycle of what is requiſite to be done throughout every
month of the year. Evelyn's Kalendar.
4. Imaginary orbs; a circle in the heavens.
How build, unbuild, contrive
To ſave appearances; how gird the ſphere
With centrick and excentrick, ſcrib!'d o'er
... Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb! Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. viii.
CYCi.O.D. m.ſ. (from zvºjº, of evºxº, and 33, ſhape.]
A geometrical curve, of which the geneſis may be conceived
by imagining a nail in the circumference of a wheel: the line
which the nail deſcribes in the air, while the wheel revolves
in a right line, is the cycloid.
Cyclo'ſ pal, adj. Iſroń cycloid.]. Relating to a cycloid; as
the cycloidal ſpace, is the ſpace contained between the cycloid
and its ſubſtance. Chambers.
CycloP: Di'A. m. ſ. ſºvº », and #23.a.] A circle of know-
ledge; a courſe of the ſciences.
Cy GSE’ſ. m. ſ. [from yenus, Latin.] A young fºwan.
fam the cygnet to this pale faint ſwan,
Who chaunts adoleful hymn to his own death. Shakespeare K.jºhn.
So doth the ſwan her downy cygnets ſave, -
Keeping them prisºners underneath her wings. Shakespeare H. VI.
Cygnets, from grey, turn white. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Young cygnets are good meat, if fatted with oats; but fed
with weeds, they taſte fiſhy. Mortimer's Huſſandry,
CY'LINDER. n. ſ. [xº~..] A body having two flat ſurfaces
and one circular.
The quantity of water which every revolution does carry,
according to any inclination of the cylinder, may be eaſily
found. //i/kins.
The ſquare will make you ready for all manner of com-
partments, baſes, pediſtals, plots, and buildings; your cylin-
der for vaulted turrets, and round buildings. Peacham.
CYLi'ND RIca L. W. adj. [from cylinder.] Partaking of the na-
CYLI'NDR1ck. } ture of a cylinder; having the form of a
cylinder.
Minera ferri ſtalaćtitia, when ſeveral of the cylindrick ſtriae
are contiguous, and grow together into one ſheaf, is called
bruſhiron ore. //codward's Natural Hiſtory, p. iv.
Obſtructions muſt be moſt incident to ſuch parts of the
body where the circulation and the elaſtick fibres are both
ſmalleſt, and thoſe are glands, which are the extremities of
arteries formed into cylindrical canals. Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
CYMA'R. n ſ. [properly written ſmar.] A ſlight covering; a
ſcarf.
Her comely limbs compoſed with decent care,
Her body ſhaded with a ſlight cymar; }
Her boſom to the view was only bare. Dryden.
C2/MATIUM. m. ſ. [Lat. from zvaario, a little wave..] A
member of architecture, whereof one half is convex, and the
other concave. There are two ſorts, of which one is hollow
below, as the other is above. Harris.
In a cornice the gola, or cymatium of the corona, the
coping, the modillions, or dentelli, make a noble ſhow by
their graceful proječtions. Speºtator, N°. 415.
CY'MBA l. n.ſ.. [cymbalum, Latin.] A muſical inſtrument.
The trumpets, ſackbuts, pſalteries and fifes,
Tabors and cymbals, and the ſhouting Romans,
Make the ſun dance. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
If mirth ſhould fail, I'll buſy her with cares,
Silence her clamorous voice with louder wars;
Trumpets and drums ſhall fright her from the throne,
As ſounding cymbals aid the lab’ring moon. Dryd. Aurengz.
CyNA'Nth RoPY. n.ſ. [xva, evº, and a Scºre..] A ſpecies of
madneſs in which men have the qualities of dogs.
CYNE GE'Ticks. n.ſ. [xvii, ſixz.] The art of hunting; the
art of training and hunting with dogs.
CY'NICAL. }*. [xvnxº..] Having the qualities of a dog;
CY'Nick. curriſh; brutal; ſnarling; ſatirical.
He doth believe that ſome new fangled wit (it is his cynical
phraſe) will ſome time or other find out his art. Wilkins.
CY'Nick. m. ſ. [xºnzº...] A philoſopher of the ſnarling or cur-
riſh ſort; a follower of Diogenes; a rude man; a ſnarler;
a miſanthrope.
How vilely doth this cynick rhime 2–
Get you hence, firrah; ſaucy fellow, hence. Shakeſpeare.
CY'Nc sur E. n.ſ.. [from xv. 3 ovea.] The ſtar near the North-
pole, by which ſailors ſteer.
Towers and battlements it ſees
Boſom'd high in tufted trees,
Where perhaps ſome beauty lies,
The cynoſure of neighbouring eyes. Milton.
CY'on. See C1 on.
Gather cyon, for graffs before the buds ſprout. Evelyn.
CYPREss-TREE. [cypreſſus, Latin.]
Its leaves are ſquamoſe and flat: the male flowers, which
are likewiſe ſquamoſe, grow at remote diſtances from the fruit
on the ſame tree. The fruit is of a ſpherical form, and is
compoſed of many woody tubercles, in which are contained
hard angular ſeeds. Miller.
The cypreſs is a tall ſtrait tree, produced with great diffi-
culty. Its fruit is of no uſe: its leaves are bitter, and the
very ſmell and ſhade of it are dangerous. Hence the Romans
looked upon it to be a fatal tree, and made uſe of it at fune-
rals, and in mournful ceremonies. The wood of the cypreſ:-
tree is always green, very heavy, of a good ſmell, and never
either rots or is worm eaten. It is diſtinguiſhed into male
and female: the branches of the male are, as it were, hori-
zontal; and thoſe of the female are upright, which is there-
fore generally uſed for paliſades of gardens, and to make py-
ramids. The fruit is round, of an olive colour, and as large
as nuts when they are ripe, and it grows in ſeparate places.
The Latins call it conus, becauſe of its figure. This fruit is
compoſed of a kind of ſcales, in the clefts of which are hidden
little ſeeds, flat and angular. This tree is common on mount
Libanus, Calmet.
In ivory coffers I have ſtufft my crowns;
In Cypreſs cheſts my arras counterpanes, Shakespeare.
I
Hc
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 186</div><p class="Text">C Y S
C Z A
He taketh the cypreſ; and the oak, which he ſtrengtheneth
for himſelf among the trees of the foreſt. Iſ xliv. 14.
Poplars and alders ever quivering play’d,
And nodding cypreſs form'd a fragrant ſhade. Pope's Odyſſ.
2. Being anciently uſed in funerals, it is the emblem of
mourning.
Poiſon be their drink,
Their ſweeteſt ſhade a grove of cypreſ; trees. Shakespeare Hen. VI,
CY'PRUs. m. ſ. [I ſuppoſe from the place where it was made;
or corruptly from cypreſs, as being uſed in mourning..] A
thin tranſparent black ſtuff.
Lawn as white as driven ſnow, -
Cyprus black as e'er was crow. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
To one of your receiving,
Enough is ſhewn: a cyprus, not a boſom, ,
Hides my poor heart | Shakeſpeare.
CYST. n. / [ xºris. J A bag containing ſome morbid
CY'STIS. } Inatter. -
Vol. I.
In taking it out the cyſis broke, and ſhewed itſelf by its
matter to be a meliceris. Wiſeman'. Surgery.
There may be a conſumption, with a purulent ſpitting,
when the vomica is contained in a cyſt or bag; upon the
breaking of which the patient is commonly ſuffocated.
Arbuthnot on Diet.
* Cystick. adj..[from cyſt, a bag..] Contained in a bag.
The bile is of two ſorts; the cylick, or that contained in
the gall-bladder, which is a ſort of .. for the gall;
or the hepatick, or what flows immediately from the liver.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Cysto'Tomy. n.ſ. [xºrk and rºw.] The aët or pračtice of
opening incyſted tumours, or cutting the bag in which any
morbid matter is contained.
CZAR. "#. [A Sclavonian word, written more properly
tzar.] The title of the emperour of Ruſſia.
Czari'NA. n.ſ.. [from ºxar.] The empreſs of Ruſſia.
6 F D.
