<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A D
Has two ſounds, one from the Greek T, and the
Latin, which is called that of the hard G, becauſe
it is formed by a preſſure ſomewhat hard of the
forepart of the tongue againſt the upper gum. This
ſound G retains before a, o, u, l, r ; as, gate, go, gull.
The other ſound, called that of the ſoft G, reſembles that of
j, and is commonly, though not always, found before e, i ;
as, gem, gibbet. Before n, at the end of a word, g is com-
monly melted away; as in the French, from which theſe words
are commonly derived : thus, for benign, malign, condign, we
pronounce benine, maline, condine. It is often ſilent in the
middle of words before h; as, might. The Saxon L, 3, ſeems
to have had generally the ſound of y conſonant; whence gate
is by ruſticks ſtill pronounced yate. -
GA'BARDIN E. n.ſ. [gavardina, Italian. J A coarſe frock;
any mean dreſs.
My beſt way is to creep under his gabardine; there is no
other ſhelter hereabout. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
You call me miſbeliever, cut-throat dog,
And ſpit upon my Jewiſh gabardine. Shakespeare Mr. of Venice.
The knight did ſtraight ſubmit,
And laid his weapons at her feet:
Next he diſrob'd his gabardine,
And with it did himſelf reſign. Hudibras, b. i.
To GA'BBLE. v. n. [gabbare, Italian ; gabberen, Dutch.]
1. To make an inarticulate noiſe. -
When thou could'ſt not, ſavage,
Shew thine own meaning, but would'ſt gabble like
A thing moſt brutiſh, I endow'd thy purpoſes
With words that made them known. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Flocks of fowl, that when the tempeſts roar,
With their hoarſe gabbling ſeek the filent ſhoar. Dryd. Æn.
2. To prate loudly without meaning.
* Have you no wit, manners, nor honeſty, but to gabble like
tinkers at this time of night? Do ye make an alehouſe of
my lady's houſe? Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Which made ſome think, when he did gabble,
Th’ had heard three labourers of Babel. Hudibras, p. i.
Such a rout, and ſuch a rabble,
Run to hear Jack Pudding gabble. Swift.
GA'bble. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
I. Inarticulate noiſe like that of brute animals.
Not to know what we ſpeak one to another, ſo we ſeem to
know, is to know ſtraight our purpoſe: chough's language,
gabble enough, and good enough. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
2. Loud talk without meaning.
Forthwith a hideous gabble riſes loud
Among the builders; each to other calls,
Not underſtood. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
GA'BBLER. m. ſ. [from gabble. J A prater; a chattering
fellow. - -
GA'BEL. m. ſ. [gabelle, French ; gabello, Italian; zapel, Saxon,
a tribute.] An exciſe; a tax. . -
The gabels of Naples are very high on oil, wine, and to-
bacco. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
GABION. n.ſ. [French, J A wicker baſket which is filled
with earth to make a fortification or intrenchment.
His battery was defended all along with gabions, and caſks
filled with ſand. Knolles's Hiſtory % the Turks.
GA’ele... n.ſ...[gaval, Welſh; gable, French.] The ſloping
roof of a building. -
Take care that all your brick-work be covered with the
tiling, according to the new way of building, without gable
ends, which are very heavy, and very apt to let the water
into the brick-work. - Mortimer's Husbandry.
GAD. n.ſ. [3ab, Saxon; gaddur, Iſlandick, a club.]
1. A wedge or ingot of ſteel.
Flemiſh ſteel is brought down the Rhine to Dort, and other
parts of Holland and Flanders, ſome in bars, and ſome in gadº;
and therefore called Flemiſh ſteel, and ſometimes gad ſteel.
Moxon's AMech. Exer.
2. It ſeems to be uſed by Shakeſpeare for a ſtile or graver,
[from 3ab, Saxon, a goad.]
I will go get a leaf of braſs,
And with a gad of ſteel will write theſe words. Shakeſpeare.
To GAD. v. n. [Derived by Skinner from gadfly; by junius
from gadaw, Welſh, to forſake.] To ramble about without
any ſettled purpoſe; to rove looſely and idly.
How now, my headſtrong, where have you been gadding 2
—Where I have learnt me to repent. Shakespeare Rom, and jul.
Give the water no paſſage, neither a wicked woman liberty
to gad abroad. - Eccleſ, xxv, 25.
The leſſer devils aroſe with ghaſtly rore,
And thronged forth about the world to gad;
Each land they fill'd, river, ſtream and ſhore. Fairfax, b. iv.
Envy is a gadding paſſion, and walketh the ſtreets, and doth
not keep home. - Bacon, Eſſay 9.
Gad not abroad at ev'ry queſt and call
Of an untrained hope or paſſion;
To court each place or fortune that doth fall,
Is wantonneſs in contemplation. Herbert,
Thee, ſhepherd, thee the woods and deſart caves,
With wild thyme and the gadding vine o'ergrown,
And all their echo's moan. AMilton.
A fierce loud buzzing breeze; their ſtings draw blood,
And drive the cattle gadding through the wood. Dryd. Wirg.
She wreaks her anger on her rival's head;
With furies frights her from her native home, -
And drives her gadding, round the world to roam. Dryden,
Gull 'em with freedom,
And you ſhall ſee 'em toſs their tails, and gad
As if the breeze had ſtung them. Dryd, and Lee's Oedipur.
There's an ox loſt, and this coxcomb runs a gadding after
wild fowl. L’É/irange.
No wonder their thoughts ſhould be perpetually ſhifting
from what diſguſts them, and ſeek better entertainment in
more pleaſing obječts, after which they will unavoidably be
gadding. Lotke.
GA'DDER. m. ſ. [from gad.] A rambler; one that runs much
abroad without buſineſs.
A drunken woman, and a gadder abroad, cauſeth great an-
ger, and ſhe will not cover her own ſhame. Eccluſ, xxvi. 8.
GA'DDINGLY. adv. [from gad.] In a rambling, roving man-
ner. -
GA'dfly. n.ſ. [gad and fly; but by Skinner, who makes it
the original of gad, goadfly. Suppoſed to be originally from
goad, in Saxon gab, and fly.] A fly that when he ſtings the
cattle makes them gad or run madly about; the breeſe.
The fly called the gadfly breedeth of ſomewhat that ſwim-
eth upon the top of the water, and is moſt about ponds. Bac.
Light fly his ſlumbers, if perchance a flight
Of angry gadflies faſten on the herd. Thomſon's Summer.
GAFF. n ſ. A harpoon or large hook. Ainſworth.
GA'FFE R. n.ſ. [3epene, companion, Saxon. J A word of
reſpect now obſolete, or applied only in contempt to a mean
perſon.
For gaffer Treadwell told us by the bye,
Exceſſive ſorrow is exceeding dry.
GA'FF LEs. n.ſ. [zapelucar, ſpears, Saxon.]
1. Artificial ſpurs put upon cocks when they are ſet to fight.
2. A ſteel contrivance to bend croſs-bows. Ainſworth.
To GAG. v. n. [from gaghel, Dutch, the palate, Minſhew.] To
ſtop the mouth with ſomething that may allow to breathe, but
hinder to ſpeak.
He's out of his guard already : unleſs you laugh and mini-
ſter occaſion to him, he is gagg'd. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
There foam’d rebellious logick, gagg’d and bound. Pope.
GAG. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Something put into the mouth to
hinder ſpeech or eating.
Some, when the kids their dams too deeply drain,
With gags and muzzles their ſoft mouths reſtrain. Dryden.
Your woman would have run up ſtairs before me; but I
have ſecured her below with a gag in her chaps. Dryden.
GAG e. n.ſ. [gage, French.] A pledge; a pawn; a caution;
anything given in ſecurity.
1o A Whq
Gay's Paſtorals.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
-
t
|
Who, when the ſhamed ſhield of ſlain Sansfoy
He ſpy'd, with that ſame fairy champion's page,
He to him leapt; and that ſame envious gage, -
Of vićtor's glory, from him ſnatcht away. Fairy Queen.
There I throw my gage
Diſclaiming here the kindred of a king,
And lay aſide my high blood's royalty. Shakespeare . Richard II.
There is my gage, the manual ſeal of death,
That marks thee out for hell. Shakeſp. Richard II.
They from their mothers breaſts poor orphans rend,
Nor without gages to the needy lend. Sandys's Paraphraſe.
I am made the cautionary pledge,
The gage and hoſtage of your keeping it. Southern's Oroonok.
But ſince it was decreed, auſpicious king,
In Britain's right that thou ſhould'ſt wed the main,
Heav'n, as a gage, would caſt ſome previous thing,
And therefore doom'd that Lawſon ſhould be ſlain. Dryden.
In any truth, that gets not poſſeſſion of our minds, by ſelf-
evidence or demonſtration, the arguments, that gain it aſſent,
are the vouchers and gage of its probability. Locke.
To GA.G.E. v. a. [gager, French.]
1. To wager; to depone as a wager; to impawn; to give as a
caution, pledge, or ſecurity.
Againſt the which, a moiety competent
Was gaged by our king. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Drawing near the ſhore, he ſound the Turkiſh merchants
making merry upon the main : unto theſe merchants, he gave
due ſalutations, gaging his faith for their ſafety, and they like-
wiſe to him. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
2. To meaſure; to take the contents of any veſſel of liquids
particularly. More properly gauge. See GAUGE.
We ſhall ſee your bearing.
—Nay, but I bar to-night: you ſhall not gage me
By what we do to-night. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
To GA'Gole. v. n. [gagen, gagelen, Dutch J To make noiſe
like a gooſe. -
Birds prune their feathers, geeſe gaggle, and crows ſeem to
call upon rain; which is but the comfort they receive in the
relenting of the air. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°, 823.
May fat geeſe gaggle with melodious voice,
And ne'er want gooſeberries or apple-ſauce. King.
GAI’ET Y. See GAYETY.
GAILY. adv. [from gay.]
1. Airily; cheerfully.
2. Splendidly; pompouſly; with great ſhow.
- The ladies gaily dreſs'd, the Mall adorn
With curious dyes, and paint the ſunny morn. Gay's Trivia.
Like ſome fair flow'r that early Spring ſupplies,
That gaily blooms, but ev'n in blooming dies. Pope.
GAIN. n.J. [gain, French.]
1. Profit; advantage.
But what things were gain to me, thoſe I counted loſs for
Chriſt. - Phil. iii. 7.
Beſides the purpoſe it were now, to teach how vićtory ſhould
be uſed, or the gains thereof communicated to the general
Content. Raleigh's Eſſays.
It is in praiſe of men as in gettings and gains ; for light
gains make heavy purſes; for light gains come thick, whereas
great come but now and then. Bacon, Eſſay 53.
This muſt be made by ſome governor upon his own private
account, who has a great ſtock that he is content to turn that
way, and is invited by the gains. Temple.
2. Intereſt; lucrative views.
That ſir, which ſerves for gain,
And follows but for form,
Will pack, when it begins to rain,
And leave thee in the ſtorm. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. Unlawful advantage.
Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I ſent unto
you? 2 Cor. xii. 17.
4. Overplus in a comparative computation; anything oppoſed
to loſs.
To GAIN. v. a. [gagner, French.]
1. To obtain as profit or advantage.
Thou haſt taken uſury and increaſe, and thou haſt greedily
gained of thy neighbours by extortions. Ezek. xxii. 12.
2. To have the overplus in comparative computation.
If you have two veſſels to fill, and you empty one to fill the
other, you gain nothing by that. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
. To obtain; to procure.
If ſuch a tradition were endeavoured to be ſet on foot, it is
not eaſy to imagine how it ſhould at firſt gain entertainment;
but much more difficult to conceive how ever it ſhould come
to be univerſally propagated. Tillotſon's Sermons.
4. To obtain increaſe of anything allotted.
I know that ye would gain the time, becauſe ye ſee the king
is gone from me. - Dan. ii. 8.
5. To obtain whatever good or bad.
Ye ſhould not have looſed from Crete, and have gained this
harm and loſs. 487, xxvii. 21.
6. To win,
G A I
They who were ſent to the other paſs, after a ſhort reſiſt-
ance, gained it. Clarendon, b.viii.
Fat fees from the defended Umbrian draws,
And only gains the wealthy client's cauſe. Dryd. Perſ. Sat.
O love! for Sylvia let me gain the prize,
And make my tongue vićtorious as her eyes. Pope's String.
7. To draw into any intereſt or party. . - &lt;&gt;
Come, with preſents, laden from the port,
To gratify the queen and gain the court. Drya. Jºrg. Ez.
If Pyrrhus muſt be wrought to pity, o
No woman does it better than yourſelf.
If you gain him, I ſhall comply of courſe.
. To reach; to attain.
The Weſt glimmers with ſome ſtreaks of day:
Now ſpurs the lated traveller apace,
To gain the timely inn. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Death was the poſt, which I almoſt did gain:
Shall I once more be toſt into the main J/aller.
We came to the roots of the mountain, and had a ver
troubleſome march to gain the top of it. Addison on Italy.
Thus ſav'd from death, they gain the Pheſtan ſhores,
With ſhatter'd veſſels and diſabled oars. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iii.
9. To GAIN over. To draw to another party or intereſt.
The court of Hanover ſhould have endeavoured to gain over
thoſe who were repreſented as their enemies. Swift.
To GAIN. v. n.
1. To encroach; to come forward by degrees.
When watchful herons leave their wat'ry fland,
And mounting upward with erected flight,
Gain on the ſkies, and ſoar above the fight. Dryd. Pirg, Geo.
On the land while here the ocean gains, -
In other parts it leaves wide ſandy plains. Pºpe on Criticiſm.
2. To get ground; to prevail againſt.
The Engliſh have not only gained upon the Venetians in
the Levant, but have their cloth in Venice itſelf. Addison.
3. To obtain influence with.
My good behaviour had gained ſo far on the emperor, that
I began to conceive hopes of liberty. Gulliver’s Travels.
To GAIN. v. n. To grow rich; to have advantage; to be ad-
vanced in intereſt or happineſs.
GAIN. adj. [An old word now out of uſe.] Handy; ready;
dexterous.
GA'INER. m. ſ. [from gain.] One who receives profit or ad-
vantage.
The client, beſides retaining a good conſcience, is always
againer, and by no means can be at any loſs, as ſeeing, if the
compoſition be overhard, he may relieve himſelf by recourſe
to his oath. Bacon's Off. of Alienation.
If what I get in empire
Iloſe in fame, I think myſelf no gainer. Denham's Sophy:
He that loſes anything, and gets wiſdom by it, is a gainer
by the loſs. L’Eſtrange, Fable 59.
By extending a well regulated trade, we are as great gainers
by the commodities of many other countries as thoſe of our
own nation. Addiſon's Freeholder.
GAI'NFul. adj. [gain and full.]
1. Advantageous; profitable.
He will dazzle his eyes, and bait him in with the luſcious
propoſal of ſome gainful purchaſe, ſome rich match, or advan-
tageous projećt. South-
2. Lucrative; produćtive of money.
Nor knows he merchants gainful care. Dryden's Horace.
Maro's muſe,
Thrice ſacred muſe!"commodious precepts gives,
Inſtructive to the ſwains, not wholly bent
On what is gainful: ſometimes ſhe diverts
From ſolid counſels. Phillips.
Gºvel». adv. [from gainſul. J Profitably; advantage-
ouily.
GA'INFULNess. n.ſ.. [from gainful J. Profit; advantage.
GAI'NGiving n. ſ. ['gainſ and give.] The ſame as miſ-
giving ; a giving againſt: as gainſaying, which is ſtill in uſe,
is ſaying againſt, or contradićting. Hanmer.
It is but foolery; but it is ſuch a kind of gaingiving as
would, perhaps, trouble a woman. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
A. Philºs.
8
GA'INLEss. adj. [from gain.] Unprofitable; producing no
advantage.
GAI'NL EssNess. n.ſ.. [from gainleſ...] Unprofitableneſs; want
of advantage.
The parallel holds too in the gain/ºffſ; as well as labori-
ouſneſs of the work: thoſe wretched creatures, buried in earth
and darkneſs, were never the richer for all the ore they
digged; no more is the inſatiable miſer. Decay of Piety.
GATNLY. adv. [from gain.J. Handily ; readily; dexterouſly.
To GAINSAY. v. a. [gainſt and ſay.]
I. To contradićt; to oppoſe; to controvert with ; to diſpute
againſt.
Speeches which gainſay one another, muſt of neceſſity be
applied both unto one and the ſame ſubject. Hºſer, i.v.
Too facile then, thou didſt not much gainſ.y;
Nay, didſt permit, approve, and fair diſmiſs. Aſilºn’s P. L.
2. To deny any thing.
I never
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A L
G A L
J
I never heard yet
That any of thoſe bolder vices wanted
Leſs impudence to gainſay what they did,
Than to perform it firſt. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
GA'INSAYER. m. ſ. [from gainſay..] Opponent; adverſary.
| Such as may ſatisfy gainſayers, when ſuddenly, and beſides
expectation, they require the ſame at our hands. Hooker, b. v.
We are, for this cauſe, challenged as manifeſt gainſayers
of Scripture, even in that which we read for Scripture unto
the people. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 19.
It was full matter of convićtion to all gainſayers. Hammond.
*GAINST. prep. [for againſ;..] See AGAINST.
Tremble, ye nations ! who, ſecure before,
Laugh'd at thoſe arms, that 'gainſ ourſelves we bore. Dryd.
To GAINSTAND. v. a. [gainſ and ſland.] To withſtand; to
oppoſe; to reſiſt. -
Love proved himſelf valiant, that durſt with the ſword of
reverent duty gainſ and the force of ſo many enraged de-
ſires. - Sidney, b. ii.
GA'IRISH. adj. [xeannian, to dreſs fine, Saxon.]
1. Gaudy; ſhowy; ſplendid; fine. -
I call'd thee then poor ſhadow, painted queen,
The preſentation of but what I was ;
A mother, only mock'd with two fair babes;
A dream of what thou waſt, a gairiſh flag,
To be the aim of every dangerous ſhot. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
There in cloſe covert by ſome brook,
Where no profaner eye may look,
Hide me from day's gairiſh eye. Milton.
2. Extravagantly gay; flighty.
Fame and glory tranſports a man out of himſelf: it makes
the mind looſe and gairiſh, ſcatters the ſpirits, and leaves a
kind of diſſolution upon all the faculties. South's Sermons.
GA'IRISHN Ess. n.ſ.. [from gairiſh.J
1. Finery; flaunting gaudineſs.
2. Flighty or extravagant joy.
Let your hope be without vanity, or gariſhneſs of ſpirit, but
ſober, grave and ſilent. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
GAIT. n.ſ.. [gat, Dutch.]
1. A way: as, gang your gait.
Good youth, addreſs thy gait unto her ;
Be not denied acceſs, ſtand at her door.
2. March; walk.
Nought regarding, they kept on their gait,
And all her vain allurements did forſake. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Thou art ſo lean and meagre waxen late,
That ſcarce thy legs uphold thy feeble gait. Hubb, Tale.
3. The manner and air of walking.
Great Juno comes; I know her by her gait. Shakeſpeare.
He had in his perſon, in his aſpect, the appearance of a
great man, which he preſerved in his gait and motion. Claren.
A third, who, by his gait
And fierce demeanour, ſeems the prince of hell. Milton.
Leviathans
Wallowing, unwieldy, enormous in their gait. Milton.
I deſcrib'd his way,
Bent all on ſpeed, and mark'd his airy gait. Milt. Pa. Loff.
GALA’G E. n.ſ. A ſhepherd's clog.
My heart-blood is well nigh fronne, I feel;
And my galage grown faſt to my heel. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
GALA/NGAL. m. ſ. [galange, French. J . A medicinal root,
of which there are two ſpecies. The leſſer galangal is in
pieces, about an inch or two long, of the thickneſs of a man's
little finger; a browniſh red colour, extremely hot and pun-
gent. The larger galangal is in pieces, about two inches or
more in length, and an inch in thickneſs: its colour is brown,
with a faint caſt of red in it: it has a diſagreeable, but much
leſs acrid and pungent taſte than the ſmaller ſort. They are
both brought from the Eaſt-Indies; the ſmall kind from China,
and the larger from the iſland of Java, wherewith the people,
while it is freſh, by way of ſpice, ſeaſon their diſhes. The
ſmall ſort is uſed with us in medicine as a ſtomachick, and is
an ingredient in almoſt all bitter infuſions and mixtures. Hill.
GALA’zY. m. ſ. [7,22232 ; galaxie, Fr. J The milky way; a
ſtream of light in the ſky.
A broad and ample road, whoſe duſt is gold,
And pavement ſtars, as ſtars to thee appear, -
Seen in the galaxy. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vii.
A brown, for which heaven would diſband
The galaxy, and ſtars be tann'd. Cleaveland.
Men doubt, becauſe they ſtand ſo thick i' th' ſky,
If thoſe be ſtars that paint the galaxy. Cºwley.
We dare not undertake to ſhew what advantage is brought
to us by thoſe innumerable ſtars in the galaxy. Bentley's Serm.
GAL BANU.M. m. ſ.
We meet with gabanum ſometimes in looſe granules, called
drops or tears, which is the pureſt, and ſometimes in large
maiſes. It is ſoft, like wax, and dućtile between the fingers;
of a yellowiſh or reddiſh colour: its ſmell is ſtrong and diſ-
agreeable; its taſte acrid, nauſeous and bitteriſh. It is of a
middle nature between a gum and a reſin, being inflammable
Shakeſpeare.
I
as a reſin, and ſoluble in water as a gum, and will not diſſolve
in oil as pure refins do. It is the produce of an umbelliferous
plant, whoſe ſtalks are about an inch thick, and five or fix fect
high: its leaves are like the common aniſe, of a ſtrong ſmell,
and acrid taſte; but the flowers, and eſpecially the ſeeds, much
more ſo. The whole plant abounds with a viſcous milky
juice, which it yields when wounded, and which ſoon con-
cretes into ſubſtance called gallanum. The plant is frequent
in Perſia, and in many parts of Africa. Its medicinal virtues
are conſiderable in aſthmas, coughs, and hyſterick com-
plaints. Hill's AZateria Medica.
I yielded indeed a pleaſant odour, like the beſt myrrh; as
galbanum. Eccluſ, xxiv. 15.
GALE, n.ſ. [gahling, haſty, ſudden, German.] A wind not
tempeſtuous, yet ſtronger than a breeze.
What happy gale
Blows you to Padua here, from old Verona: Shakeſpeare.
Winds
Of gentleſt gale Arabian odours fann'd
From their ſoft wings, and Flora's earlieſt ſmells. Milton.
Freſh gales and gentle air. Milton.
Umbria's green retreats,
Where weſtern gales eternally reſide. Addison.
GA'LEAs. n.ſ. [galeaſe, French.j A heavy low-built veſſel,
with both ſails and oars. It carries three maſts, but they can-
not be lowered, as in a galley. It has thirty-two ſeats for
rowers, and ſix or ſeven ſlaves to each. They carry three
tire of guns at the head, and at the ſtern there are two tire
of guns. - Dić.
The Venetians pretend they could ſet out, in caſe of great
neceſſity, thirty men of war, a hundred gallies, and ten ga-
leaſes. Addison's Remark, on Italy.
GA(if ATED. adj. [galeatus, Latin.]
1. Covered as with a helmet.
A galeated eſchinus copped, and in ſhape ſomewhat more
conick than any of the foregoing. //o3dward on Fºſſils.
2. [In botany.] Such plants as bear a flower reſembling an hel-
met, as the monkſhood.
GALER1'culate. adj. [from galruſ, Latin.] Covered as
with a hat. -
GA/Liot. n.ſ. [galiotte, French.] A little galley or ſort of
brigantine, built very ſlight and fit for chaſe. It carries but
one maſt, and two or three pattereroes. It can both fail and
row, and has ſixteen or twenty ſeats for the rowers, with one
man to each oar. - Dić?.
Barbaroſſa ſent before him Dragut and Corſetus, two .
notable pyrates, with thirty gallots, who, landing their men,
were valiantly encountered by Sarmentus, and forced again to
their gallots. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
GALL. m. ſ. [3eala, Saxon; galle, Dutch.] -
1. The bile; an animal juice remarkable for its ſuppoſed bitter
neſs.
Come to my woman's breaſt, -
And take my milk for gall, you murth’ring miniſters! Shakespeare
A honey tongue, a heart of gall,
Is fancy's ſpring, but ſorrow's fall.
It drew from my heart all love,
And added to the gall. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
This poſition informs us of a vulgar errour, terming the
gall bitter, as their proverb more peremptorily implies, It's as
bitter as gall; whereas there's nothing guſtable ſweeter; and
what is moſt unctuous muſt needs partake of a ſweet ſavour.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
Gall is the greateſt reſolvent of curdled milk: Boerhaave
has given at a time one drop of the gall of an cel with
ſucceſs. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. The part which contains the bile.
The married couple, as a teſtimony of future concord, did
caſt the gall of the ſacrifice behind the altar. Brown's Wu. Err.
3. Anything extremely bitter.
Thither write, my queen,
And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you ſend, -
Though ink be made of gall. Shakespeare's Cymbeline.
Poiſon be their drink
Gall, worſe than gall, the daintieſt meat they taſte! Shakespeare
She ſtill inſults, and you muſt ſtill adore ;
Grant that the honey's much, the gall is more. Dryd, juv.
4. Rancour; malignity.
They did great hurt unto his title, and have left a perpetual
gall in the mind of the people. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
5. A ſlight hurt by fretting off the ſkin. [From the verb.]
This is the fataleſt wound of the tongue, carries leaſt ſmart,
but infinitely more of danger; and is as much ſuperior to the
former, as a gangrene is to a gall or ſcratch: this may be fore
and vexing, but that ſtupifying and deadening.
Government ºf the Tºngue, ſ. 8.
Shakeſpeare.
6. Anger; bitterneſs of mind.
Suppoſe your hero were a lover,
Though he before had gall and rage;
He grows diſpirited and low,
He hates the fight, and ſhuns the blow. Prior,
7. [From<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A L
-
.
!
7. [From galla.] -
Galls or galnuts are a kind of preternatural and accidental tu-
mours, produced on various trees; but thoſe of the oak only are
uſed in medicine. We have two kinds, the Oriental and the Eu-
ropean gall; ; the Oriental are brought from Aleppo, of the
bigneſs of a large nutmeg, with tubercles on their ſurface, of
a very firm and ſolid texture, and a diſagreeable, acerb, and
aſtringent taſte. The European galls are of the ſame ſize,
with perfectly ſmooth ſurfaces: they are light, often ſpongy,
and cavernous within, and always of a lax texture. They have
a leſs auſtere taſte, and are of much leſs value than the firſt
ſort, both in manufactures and medicine. The general hiſ-
tory of galls is this: an inſect of the fly kind, for the ſafety
of her young, wounds the branches of the trees, and in the
hole depoſites her egg: the lacerated veſſels of the tree diſ-
charging their contents, form a tumour or woody caſe about
the hole, where the egg is thus defended from all injuries.
This tumour alſo ſerves for the food of the tender maggot,
produced from the egg of the fly, which, as ſoon as it is per-
fečt, and in its winged ſtate, gnaws its way out, as appears
from the hole found in the gall; and where no hole is ſeen on
its ſurface, the maggot, or its remains, are ſure to be found
within, on breaking it. It has been obſerved, that the oak
does not produce galls in cold countries: but this obſervation
{hould be confined to the medicinal galls; for all thoſe excreſ.
cencies which we find on this tree in our own woods, and
call oak-apples, oak-grapes, and oak-cones, are true and ge-
nuine galls, though leſs firm in their texture. The true rea-
ſon of the hard ones not being produced with us, ſeems to be
that we want the peculiar ſpecies of inſect to which they owe
their origin, which is a fly of the ichneumon kind, only found
in hot countries. The ſpecies of fly that occaſions, by its
punétures, the ſoft galls of France and Italy, is different both
from the Syrian one and from ours, though ſtill of the ich-
neumon kind; and we find the ſeveral kinds, which occaſion
the different galls in our own kingdom, produce different
kinds, and thoſe of different degrees of hardneſs, on the ſame
tree. Galls are uſed in making ink, and in dying and dreſſ-
ing leather, and many other manufactures. In medicine they
are very aſtringent, and good under proper management. Hill.
Beſides the acorns, the oak beareth galls, oak-apples, and
oak-nuts. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 635.
Malpighi, in his treatiſe of galls, under which name he
comprehends all preternatural and morboſe excreſcences, de-
monſtrates that all ſuch excreſcences, where any inſects are
found, are excited by ſome venenoſe liquor, which, together
with their eggs, ſuch inſe&amp;ts ſhed. Ray on the Creation.
The Aleppo galls, wherewith we make ink, are no other
than caſes of inſects, which are bred in them. Derham.
To GALL. v. a. [galer, French.]
1. To hurt by fretting the ſkin.
I'll touch my point
With this contagion, that, if I gall him ſlightly,
It may be death. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
His yoke is eaſy, when by us embrac'd ;
But loads and galls, if on our necks 'tis caſt. Denham.
A carrier, when he would think of a remedy for his galled
horſe, begins with caſting his eye upon all things. Locke.
On the monarch's ſpeech Achilles broke,
And furious thus, and interrupting ſpoke,
Tyrant, I well deſerv'd thy galling chain.
2. To impair; to wear away.
He doth objećt, I am too great of birth;
And that my ſtate being gall'd with my expence,
I ſeek to heal it only by his wealth. Shakeſpeare.
If it ſhould fall down in a continual ſtream like a river, it
would gall the ground, waſh away plants by the roots, and
overthrow houſes. Ray on the Creation.
3. To teaze; to fret; to vex.
In honour of that ačtion, and to gall their minds who did
not ſo much commend it, he wrote his book. Hooker, b. ii.
What they ſeem contented with, even for that very cauſe
we reject; and there is nothing but it pleaſeth us the better,
if we eſpy that it galleth them. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 9.
When I ſhew juſtice,
I pity thoſe I do not know ;
Which a diſmiſs'd offence would after gall.
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners: 'tis my breeding,
That gives me this bold ſhew of courteſy. Shakeſp. Othello.
All ſtudies here I ſolemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke. Shakesp H. IV.
No man commits any fin but his conſcience ſmites him,
and his guilty mind is frequently galled with the remembrance
of it. Tillotſon's Sermons.
5. To harraſs; to miſchicf.
The Helots had gotten new heart, and with divers ſorts of
ſhot from corners of ſtreets and houſe-windows galled
them. - - Sidney.
Light demilances from afar they throw,
Faſten’d with leathern thongs, to gall the foc. Dryd, Æn.
Pope's Iliad.
Shakeſpeare.
In our wars againſt the French of old, we uſed to ga'l them
i. our long bows, at a greater diſtance than they could ſhoot
their arrows. Addiſon on the S ſº
To GAL L. v. n. To fret. J e State of the War.
º: ſeen you gecking and galling at this gentleman twice
Or thrice. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
GALLANT. adj. [gaſant, French, from º, fine dº.
Spaniſh.]
1. Gay ; well dreſſed; ſhowy ; ſplendid; magnificent.
A place of broad rivers, wherein ſhall go no gally with
oars, neither ſhall gallant ſhips paſs thereby. If xxxiii. 21.
The gay, the wife, the gallant, and the grave,
Subdu'd alike, all but one paſſion have. J/aller.
2. Brave ; high ſpirited; daring; magnanimous.
Scorn, that any ſhould kill his uncle, made him ſeek his
revenge in manner gallant enough. Sidney, b. ii.
But, fare thee well, thou art a galant youth. Shakeſpeare.
A galant man, whoſe thoughts fly at the higheſt game, re-
quires no further inſight into them than to ſatisfy himſelf by
what way they may be performed. Digby on the Soul, Dedicaſ,
3. Fine; noble; ſpecious.
There are no tricks in plain and ſimple faith;
But hollow men, like horſes hot at hand, -
Make gallant ſhew and promiſe of their mettle. Shakeſp.
He diſcourſed, how gallant and how brave a thing it would
be for his highneſs to make a journey into Spain, and to fetch
home his miſtreſs. Clarendºn.
4. Inclined to courtſhip.
When firſt the ſoul of love is ſent abroad,
The gay troops begin
In gallant thought to plume their painted wings. Thomſºn.
GALLANT. n.ſ.. [from the adjective.]
1. A gay, ſprightly, airy, ſplendid man.
The new proclamation.
—What is't for *
-The reformation of our travell'd gallants,
That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and taylors. Shakespeare
The gallants and luſty youths of Naples came and offered
themſelves unto Vaſtius. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The gallants, to protećt the lady's right,
Their fauchions brandiſh'd at the griſly ſpright. Dryden.
Gallants, look to't, you ſay there are no ſprights;
But I'll come dance about your beds at nights. Dryden.
2. A whoremaſter, who careſſes women to debauch them.
9ne, worn to pieces with age, ſhews himſelf a young
gallant. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſºr.
The next carried a handſome young fellow upon her back:
ſhe had left the good man at home, and brought away her
gallant. Addiſon's Spečiator.
3. A wooer; one who courts a woman for marriage. In the
. latter ſenſes it has commonly the accent on the laſt ſyl-
a Dle. -
Gaº LANTLY. adv. [from galant.]
1. Gayly; ſplendidly.
2. Bravely; nobly ; generouſly. -
. You have not dealt ſo gallantly with us as we did with you
in a parallel caſe: laſt year a paper was brought here from
England, which we ordered to be burnt by the common
hangman. Swift.
GALLANTRY. m. ſ. [galanterie, French.]
1. Splendour of appearance; ſhow; magnificence; glittering
grandeur; oſtentatious finery.
Make the ſea ſhine with gallantry, and all
The Engliſh youth flock to their admiral. Waller.
2. Bravery ; nobleneſs; generoſity.
The eminence of your condition, and the gallantry of your
principles, will invite gentlemen to the uſeful and enobling
ſtudy of nature. Glanv. Scepſ. Preface.
3. A number of gallants.
Hector, Deiphobus, and all the gallantry of Troy, I would
have arm'd to-day. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
4. Courtſhip; refined addreſs to women.
The martial Moors, in gallantry refin'd,
Invent new arts to make their charmers kind.
5. Vicious love; lewdneſs; debauchery.
It looks like a ſort of compounding between virtue and
vice, as if a woman were allowed to be vicious, provided ſhe
be not a profligate; as if there were a certain point where
gallantry ends, and infamy begins. Swift.
Ga'LLE Ass. m. ſ. [galeas, French..] A large galley; a veſſel
of war driven with oars.
My father hath no leſs
Than three great argoſies, beſides two galleaſes, -
And twelve tight gallies. Shakeſp. ſaming of the Shrew.
The number of veſſels were one hundred and thirty,
whereof galleaſes and galleons ſeventy-two, goodly ſhips, like
floating towers. Bacon's I/ar with Spain.
GAL LE'on. m.ſ. [galion, French..] A large ſhip with four or
ſometimes five decks, now in uſe only among the Spaniards.
I aſſured them that I would ſtay for them at Trinidado, and
that no force ſhould drive me thence, except I were ſunk or
ſet on fire by the Spaniſh galleons. Raleigh's Apolo y.
The
Granville.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A L
The number of veſſels were one hundred and thirty,
whereof galleaſes and galleons ſeventy-two, goodly ſhips, like
floating towers or caſtles. Bacon's War with Spain.
GA'LLERY. n.ſ. [galerie, French, derived by Du Cange from
galeria, low Latin, a fine room.] - -
1. A kind of walk along the floor of a houſe, into which the
doors of the apartments open; in general, any building of
which the length much exceeds the breadth.
In moſt part there had been framed by art ſuch pleaſant
arbors, that, one anſwering another, they became a gallery
aloft from tree to tree, almoſt round about, which be-
low gave a perfect ſhadow. Sidney, b. i.
High lifted up were many loſty towers,
And goodly galleries fair overlaid. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Your gallery
Have we paſs'd through, not without much content. Shakeſp
The row of return on the banquet ſide, let it be all ſtately
gallerie, in which galleries let there be three cupola's. Bacon.
A private gallery'twixt th' apartments led,
Not to the foe yet known. Denham.
Nor is the ſhape of our cathedral proper for our preaching
auditories, but rather the figure of an amphitheatre, with
galleries gradually overlooking each other; for into this condi-
tion the pariſh-churches of London are driving apace, as ap-
pears by the many galleries every day built in them. Graunt.
There are covered galleries that lead from the palace to five
different churches. Addiſon on Italy.
2. The ſeats in the playhouſe above the pit, in which the meaner
people fit.
While all its throats the gallery extends,
And all the thunder of the pit aſcends. Pope's Ep. of Horace.
GA'll ety le. n ſ. I ſuppoſe this word has the ſame import
with gallipot.
Make a compound body of glaſs and galletyle; that is, to
have the colour milky like a chalcedon, being a ſtuff between
a porcellane and a glaſs. Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
GA'ſ LEY. n.ſ. [galea, Italian ; galere, French; derived, as
ſome think, from galea, a helmet pićtured anciently on the
prow ; as others from 72xsºrns, the ſwordfiſh; as others
from galleon, expreſſing in Syriac men expoſed to the ſea.
From galley come gal caſ, galeon, galliot.]
1. A veſſel driven with oars, much in uſe in the Mediterranean,
but found unable to endure the agitation of the main ocean.
Great Neptune grieved underneath the load
Of ſhips, hulks, gallies, barks and brigandines. Fairfax.
In the ages following, navigation did every where greatly
decay, and eſpecially far voyages; the rather by the uſe of
gallies, and ſuch veſſels as could hardly brook the ocean.
Bacon's New Atlant's.
Jaſon ranged the coaſts of Aſia the Leſs in an open boat, or
kind of galley. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
On oozy ground his gallies moor;
Their heads are turn'd to ſea, their ſterns to ſhore. Dryden.
2. It is proverbially conſidered as a place of toilſome miſery, be-
cauſe criminals are condemned to row in them.
The moſt voluptuous perſon, were he tied to follow his
hawks and his hounds, his dice and his courtſhips every day,
would find it the greateſt torment that could befal him: he
would fly to the mines and the gallies for his recreation, and
to the ſpade and the mattock for a diverſion from the miſery of
a continual uninterrupted pleaſure. South's Sermons.
GA'LLEY-slave. m. ſ. [galley and ſave..] A man condemned
for ſome crime to row in the gallies.
As if one chain were not ſufficient to load poor man, but
he muſt be clogged with innumerable chains: this is juſt ſuch
another freedom as the Turkiſh galley-ſlaves do enjoy. Bramh.
Hardened galley-ſlaves deſpiſe manumiſſion. Decay of Piety.
The ſurges gently daſh againſt the ſhore,
Flocks quit the plains, and galley-ſaves their oar. Garth.
GA'LLIARD. m. ſ. [gaillard, French; imagined to be derived
from the Gauliſh ard, genius, and gay.]
1. A gay, briſk, lively man; a fine fellow.
Selden is a calliard by himſelf. Cleaveland.
2. An active, nimble, ſpritely dance. It is in both ſenſes now
obſolete.
I did think by the excellent conſtitution of thy leg, it was
form'd under the ſtar of a galliard. Shakeſp. ſwelfth Night.
There's nought in France
That can be with a nimble galliard won :
You cannot revel into dukedoms there. Shakeſp. Henry V.
If there be any that would take up all the time, let him
find means to take them off, and bring others on ; as muſi-
cians uſe to do with thoſe that dance too long galliards. Bacon.
The tripla’s and changing of times have an agreement with
the changes of motion; as when galliard time and meaſure
time are in the medley of one dance. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
GALLIARDISE. m. ſ. [French, J Merriment; exuberant
a let W.
§ Aºny nativity my aſcendant was the watry ſign of Scor-
pius: I was born in the planetary hour of Saturn, and I think
I have a piece of that leaden planet in me: I am no way fa-
*
cetious, nor diſpoſed for the mirth and alliardſ of com-
pany. . Brown's Rel. Med.
GA'llicism. n.ſ. [galliciſme, French, from gallicus, Latin.]
A mode of ſpeech peculiar to the French language: ſuch as,
he figured in controvery; he he d this conduct; he held the
ſame language that another had held before: with many other
expreſſions to be found in the pages of Bolinbroke.
In Engliſh I would have Galliciſms avoided, that we may
keep to our own language, and not follow the French mode
in our ſpeech. Felton on the Claſſicks.
GA'llic AsKINs. n. ſ. [ Calgae Gallo-Poſconum. Skinner. J
Large open hoſe.
My galligaſkins, that have long withſtood
The Winter's fury, and encroaching froſts,
By time ſubdu'd, what will not time ſubdue,
An horrid chaſm diſcloſe. - Phillips.
GALLIMATIA, n.ſ. [gaſinathias, French..] Nonſenſe; talk
without meaning.
GALLIMAu'FRY. m. ſ. [galimafreſ, French.]
1. A hoch-poch, or haſh of ſeveral forts of broken meat; a
medley. Hanmer.
They have made of our Engliſh tongue a gallimaufry, or
hodge-podge of all other ſpeeches. Spenſar.
2. Any inconſiſtent or ridiculous medley.
They have a dance, which the wenches ſay is a gallimaufry
of gambols, becauſe they are not in't. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
The painter who, under pretence of diverting the eyes,
would fill his pićture with ſuch varieties as alter the truth of
hiſtory, would make a ridiculous piece of painting, and a
mere gallimaufry of his work. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
3. It is uſed by Shakespeare ludicrouſly of a woman.
Sir John affects thy wife.
—Why, ſir, my wife is not young.
—He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor;
He loves thy gallimaufry, friend. Shakeſpeare.
GA'lliot. n ſ. [galiotte, French.) A ſmall ſwiſt galley.
Barbaroſia departing out of Helleſpontus with cighty gallics,
and certain galliots, ſhaped his courſe towards Italy. Anclies.
GA'ſ LIPot. n.ſ. [gleye, Dutch, ſhining earth. Sinner. The
true derivation is from gala, Spaniſh, finery. Ga a, or gally-
pot, is a fine painted pot.] A pot painted and glazed, com-
monly uſed for medicincs.
Plato ſaid his maſter Socrates was like the apothecary’s gaſ-
lipots, that had on the outſides apcs, owls, and ſatyrs; but
within, precious drugs. Bacon, Apop!th. 227.
Here phials in nice diſcipline are ſet;
There gallipots are rang'd in alphabet Garth's Diſpenſatory.
Alexandrinus thought it unſafe to truſt the real ſecret of his
phial and gallipot to any man. Spe:ator, N°. 426.
Thou that do'ſt AEſculapius deride,
And o'er his gallpots in triumph ride. Fenton.
GA'llo N. n.ſ. [gelo, low Latin.] A liquid meaſure of four
u2ttS.
Q Beat them into powder, and boil them in a gallon of wine,
in a veſſel cloſe ſtopped. Hiſtman's Surgery.
GAllo'on. m. ſ. [galen, French.] A kind of cloſe lace, made
of gold or ſilver, or of ſilk alone.
To GA'LLOP. v. m. [ga oper, French. Derived by all the
etymologiſts, after Budaeus, from xxxvá’s w; but perhaps it
comes from gaut, all, and loopen, to run, Dutch; that is, to
go on full ſpeed.]
1. To move forward by leaps, ſo that all the feet are off the
ground at once.
I did hear
The galloping of horſe: who was’t came by ? Shakespeare Macb.
- His ſteeds will be reſtrain'd,
But gallop lively down the weſtern hill. Donne.
In ſuch a ſhape grim Saturn did reſtrain
His heav'nly limbs, and flow’d with ſuch a mane,
When half ſurpriz'd, and fearing to be ſeen,
The leacher gallºp'd from his jealous queen. Dryden's Wirgil.
2. To ride at the pace which is performed by leaps.
Seeing ſuch ſtreams of blood as threatned a drowning life,
we galloped toward them to part them. Sidney, b. ii.
They 'gan eſpy
An armed knight towards them gallºp faſt,
That ſeem'd from ſome feared foe to fly. Fairy Queen, h. i.
He who fair and ſoftly goes ſteadily forward, in a courſe
that points right, will ſooner be at his journey's end than he
that runs after every one he meets, though he gallop all day
full ſpeed. Locke.
3. To move very faſt.
The golden ſun ſalutes the morn,
And, having gilt the ocean with his beams,
Gallops the zodiack in his gift'ring coach. Shakespeare Tt. Ædr.
Whom doth time gallop withal
—With a thief to the gallows. Shakeſp. As you like it.
He that rides poſt through a country may, from the tran-
fient view, tell how in general therparts lie: ſuch ſuperficial
ideas he may colle&amp;t in galloping over it. Ilocke.
GA'llop. m. ſ. [from the verb.] The motion of a horſe when
I O i.e.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A M
G A M
º
-
-
he runs at full ſpeed; in which, making a kind of a leap for-
wards, he lifts both his forelegs very near at the ſame time;
and while theſe are in the air, and juſt upon the point of
touching the ground, he lifts both his hindlegs almoſt at
Once. Farrier's Dić7.
GA'lloper. m. ſ. [from gallop.]
1. A horſe that gallops.
Mules bred in cold countries are much better to ride than
horſes for their walk and trot; but they are commonly rough
gallopers, though ſome of them are very fleet. Mortim. Husb.
2. A man that rides faſt, or makes great haſte.
GA'llowAY. m. ſ. A horſe not more than fourteen hands
high, much uſed in the North; probably as coming originally
from Galloway, a ſhire in Scotland.
To GA’llow. v. a. ſagaelpan, to fright, Saxon.] To terrify;
to fright.
The wrathful ſkies
Gallow the very wand'rers of the dark,
And make them keep their caves. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
GA'llowglasses. n.ſ.. .
1. It is worn then likewiſe of footmen under their ſhirts of mail,
the which footmen call gallowglaſſes: the which name doth
diſcover them alſo to be ancient Engliſh; for gallogla ſignifies
an Engliſh ſervitor or yeoman. And he being ſo armed in a
long ſhirt of mail, down to the calf of his leg, with a long
broad ax in his hand, was then pedes gravis armaturae; and
was inſtead of the footman that now weareth a corſlet, before
the corſlet was uſed, or almoſt invented. Spenſer on Ireland.
2. [ Hanmer, otherwiſe than Spenſer.] Soldiers among the wild
Iriſh, who ſerve on horſeback,
- A puiſſant and mighty pow'r
Of gallºwglaſſes and ſtout kernes,
Is marching hitherward in proud array, Shakespeare Henry VI.
GA'llow. Ün. ſ. [It is uſed by ſome in the ſingular; but by
GA'llows. } more only in the plural, or ſometimes has another
F. gallowſ's. Gaga, Gothick; zeal;a, Saxon; galge,
utch; which ſome derive from gabalus, furca, Latin; others
from Tº high; others from gallu, Welſh, power: but it is
probably derived like gallow, to fright, from agalpan, the
gallows being the great objećt of legal terrour.]
1. A beam laid over two poſts, on which malefactors are hanged.
This monſter ſat like a hangman upon a pair of gallows:
in his right hand he was painted holding a crown of laurel, in
his left hand a purſe of money. Sidney, b. ii.
I would we were all of one mind, and one mind good; O,
there were deſolation of gaolers and gallowſes. Shakeſp. Cymbel.
I propheſied, if a gallows were on land,
This fellow could not drown. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
- A little before dinner he took the major aſide, and whiſ-
pcred him in the ear, that execution muſt that day be done in
the town, and therefore required him that a pair of gallows
fhould be erected. Hayward.
A produćtion that naturally groweth under gallowſes, and
places of execution. Brown's Wulgar En rours, b. ii.
A poor fellow, going to the gallows, may be allowed to feel
the ſmart of waſps while he is upon Tyburn road. Swift.
. 2. A wretch that deſerves the gallows.
Cupid hath been five thouſand years a boy.
—Ay, and a ſhrewd unhappy gallºws too. Shakeſpeare.
GA'llowsFREE. adj. [gallºws and free..] Exempt by deſtiny
from being hanged. -
Let him be gallow free by my conſent,
- And nothing ſuffer, ſince he nothing meant. Dryden.
GA'llow TRE E. m. ſ. [gallows and tree J . The tree of ter-
rour; the tree of execution.
He hung their conquer'd arms, for more defame,
On gallowtrees, in honour of his deareſt dame. Fai. Queen.
A Scot, when from the gallowtree got looſe,
Drops into Styx, and turns a ſoland gooſe. Cleaveland.
GAMBA'DE. !" ſ. [gamba, Italian, a leg.] Spatterdaſhes;
GAMBA'Do. 5 boots worn upon the legs above the ſhoe.
The pettifogger ambles to her in his gambadoes once a week.
Dennis's Letters.
GA'MBLER. m. ſ. [A cant word, I ſuppoſe, for game or gameſ?er.]
A knave whoſe pračtice it is to invite the unwary to game.
and cheat them.
GA'MBo G F. n.ſ.
Gamboge is a concreted vegetable juice, partly of a gummy,
partly of a refinous nature. It is heavy, of a bright yellow
colour, and ſcarce any ſmell. It is brought from America;
and from many parts of the Eaſt Indies, particularly from
Cambaja, or Cambogia, whence it has its name. Gamboge
was not known in Europe ’till 1603, and ſoon after got into
uſe as a purgative medicine; but the roughneſs of its opera-
tion rendering it leſs eſteemed as ſuch, it got into uſe in paint-
ing, where it yet retains its credit, Hill.
To GAMBOL. v. n. [gambiller, French.]
1. To dance; to ſkip; to friſk; to jump for joy; to play merry
frolicks.
Bears, tigers, ounces, pards,
Gamla!"a before them. AMilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv.
5
-
after game, and ſees it is not deſtrºyed.
The king of elfs, and little fairy queen;
Gambold on heaths, and danc'd on ev'ry green. Drydew.
The monſters of the flood -
Gambol around him in the wat'ry way,
And heavy whales in aukward meaſures play. Pope.
2. To leap; to ſtart.
'Tis not madneſs
That I have utter'd; bring me to the teſt,
And I the matter will record, which madneſs
Would gambol from. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
GA'M Bol. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſkip; a hop; a leap for joy.
A gentleman had got a favourite ſpaniel, that would be ſtill
toying and leaping upon him, and playing a thouſand pretty
gambols. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
Bacchus through the conquer'd Indies rode,
And beaſts in gambol friſk'd before their honeſt god. Dryden.
2. A frolick; a wild prank.
For who did ever play his gambo's,
With ſuch inſufferable rambles? Hudibras, p. iii, cant. 2.
GA'MBREL. m. ſ. [from gamba, gambarella, Italian.] The leg
of a horſe.
What can be more admirable than for the principles of the
fibres of a tendon to be ſo mixed as to make it a ſoft body,
and yet to have the ſtrength of iron as appears by the weight
which the tendon, lying on a horſe's gambrel, doth then com-
mand, when he rears up with a man upon his back. Grew.
GAME. m. ſ. [gaman, a jeſt, Iſlandick.]
1. Sport of any kind.
We have had paſtimes here, and pleaſing game. Shakespeare.
. Jeſt, oppoſed to earneſt or ſeriouſneſs.
Then on her head they ſet a garland green,
And crowned her 'twixt earneſt and 'twixt game. Fai. Qy.
. Inſolent merriment; ſportive inſult.
Do they not ſeek occaſion of new quarrels,
On my refuſal, to diſtreſs me more;
Or make a game of my calamitics.
. A ſingle match at play.
. Advantage in play.
Mutual vouchers for our fame we ſtand,
And play the game into each other's hand. Dryden.
. Scheme purſued; meaſures planned.
This ſeems to be the preſent game of that crown, and that
they will begin no other’till they ſee an end of this. Temple.
7. Field ſports: as, the chaſe, falconry.
If about this hour he make his way,
Under the colour of his uſual game,
He ſhall here find his friends with horſe and men,
To ſet him free from his captivity. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
What arms to uſe, or nets to frame
2
3
Milton's Agoniſies.
:
Wild beaſts to combat, or to tame, }
With all the myſtries of that game. J/aller.
Some ſportſmen, that were abroad upon game, ſpied a com-
pany of buſtards and cranes. L’Eſirange.
8. Animals purſued in the field; animals appropriated to legal
ſportſmen.
Hunting, and men, not beaſts, ſhall be his game,
With war, and hoſtile ſnare, ſuch as refuſe
Subjection to his empire tyrannous. Milton's Parad. Loft.
There is ſuch a variety of game ſpringing up before me,
that I am diſtraćted in my choice, and know not which to
follow. Dryden's Fable, Preface.
A bloodhound will follow the tract of the perſon he pur-
ſucs, and all hounds the particular game they have in chace.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Go, with thy Cynthia hurl the pointed ſpear
At the rough bear, or chace the flying deer;
I and my Chloe take a nobler aim,
At human hearts we fling, nor ever miſs the game. Prior.
Proud Nimrod firſt the bloody chace began,
A mighty hunter, and his prey was man:
Our haughty Norman boaſts that barb'rous name,
And makes his trembling ſlaves the royal game. Po; c.
9. Solemn conteſts exhibited as ſpectacles to the people.
The games are done, and Caeſar is returning. Shakeſpeare.
Milo, when ent’ring the Olympick game,
With a huge ox upon his ſhoulders came. Denham.
To GAME. v. n. [xaman, Saxon.]
1. To play at any ſport.
2. T9 play wantonly and extravagantly for money.
Gaming leaves no ſatisfaction behind it: it no way profits
either body or mind. Locke.
GA'MEcock. n.ſ. [game and cock.] Cocks bred to fight.
They managed the diſpute as fiercely as two gamecocks in the
pit. Locke.
GAME-EGG, n.ſ. [game and egg.] Eggs from which fighting
cocks are bred.
Thus boys hatch game-ggs under birds of prey,
To make the fowl more furious for the fray. Garth.
GA'MEKEEPER, n.ſ. [game and Rep.] A perſon who locks
GA'MEsoME.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A N
G A O
GA'MEsoME. adj. [from game.] Frolickſome; gay; ſportive;
playful; ſportful. - -
Geron, though old, yet gameſme, kept one end with
Coſma. Sidney.
I am not gameſame; I do lack ſome part
Of that quick ſpirit that is in Antony. Shakespeare jul. Caeſar.
The gameſome wind among her treſſes play,
And curleth up thoſe growing riches ſhort. Fairfax, b. iv.
Belial, in like gameſome mood. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
This gameſome humour of children ſhould rather be encou-
raged, to keep up their ſpirits and improve their ſtrength and
health, than curbed or reſtrained. Locke.
GA'MEsome Ness. n. ſ. [from gameſome.] Sportiveneſs; mer-
riment.
GA'Meso MELY. adv. [from gameſome.] Merrily.
GA'MEst ER. n.ſ.. [from game.]
1. One who is vitiouſly addićted to play.
Keep a gameſter from the dice, and a good ſtudent from his
book, and it is wonderful. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſºr.
A gameſter, the greater maſter he is in his art, the worſe
man he is. Bacon.
Gameſters for whole patrimonies play;
The ſteward brings the deeds, which muſt convey
The whole eſtate. Dryden's juvenal, Sat.1.
Could we look into the mind of a common gameſter, we
ſhould ſee it full of nothing but trumps and mattadores: her
ſlumbers are haunted with kings, queens and knaves. Addiſon.
All the ſuperfluous whims relate,
That fill a female gameſter's pate;
What agony of ſoul ſhe feels --
To ſee a knave's inverted heels. . .
2. One who is engaged at play.
When lenity and cruelty play for kingdoms, -
The gentler gameſler is the ſooneſt winner. Shakespeare Hen. V.
. A man may think, if he will, that two eyes ſee no more
than one; or that a gameſter ſeeth always more than a looker-
on: but, when all is done, the help of good counſel is that
which ſetteth buſineſs ſtrait. Bacon, Eſſay 28.
3. A merry frolickſome perſon.
- You're a merry gameſter,
My lord Sands.
4: A proſtitute. -
She's impudent, my lord,
And was a common gameſter to the camp. Shakeſpeare.
GA'MMER... n.ſ. [Of uncertain etymology; perhaps from grand
mere, and therefore uſed commonly to old women.] The
compellation of a woman correſponding to gaffer.
GA'MMon. m. ſ. [gambone, Italian.] -
1. The buttock of an hog ſalted and dried; the lower end of
the flitch.
Aſk for what price thy venal tongue was ſold:
A ruſty gammon of ſome ſev'n years old. Dryden's juv. Sat.
Gammons, that give a reliſh to the taſte,
And potted fowl, and fiſh, come in ſo faſt,
That ere the firſt is out, the ſecond ſtinks. Dryden's Perſ:
2. A kind of play with dice.
The quick dice,
In thunder leaping from the box, awake
The ſounding gammon. Thomſon's Autumn.
GA'MUT. n.f. [gama, Italian, J The ſcale of muſical notes.
Madam, before you touch the inſtrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I muſt begin with rudiments of art,
Swift.
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
To teach you gamut in a briefer ſort. Shakeſpeare.
When by the gamut ſome muſicians make
A perfect ſong, others will undertake,
By the ſame gamut chang'd, to equal it:
Things ſimply good can never be unfit. Donne.
Long has a race of heroes fill'd the ſtage,
That rant by note, and through the gamut rage;
In ſongs and airs expreſs their martial fire,
Combat in trills, and in a feuge expire. Addiſon.
'GAN, for began, from 'gin for begin.
The noble knight 'gan feel
His vital force to faint. Spenſer.
To GANch. v. a. [ganciare, from gancia, a hook, Italian;
ganche, French..] To drop from a high place upon hooks
by way of puniſhment: a practice in Turkey, to which Smith
alludes in his Pocockius.
Cohors catenis qua pia ſtridulis
Gemunt onuſti, vel ſude trans ſinum
Lučtantur acti, pendulive
Sanguineis luétantur in unaes. Muſe Angl.
GA'NDER. m. ſ. [3anona, Saxon.] The male of the gooſe.
As deep drinketh the gooſe as the gander. Camden's Rem.
One gander will ſerve five geeſe. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
To GANG. v. n. [gangen, Dutch; 3angan, Saxon; gang, Scot-
tiſh.] To go ; to walk: an old word not now uſed, except
ludicrouſly. -
But let them gang alone,
As they have brewed, ſo let them bear blame.
Spenser.
Your flaunting beaus gang with their breaſis open. Arbuthn.
GANG. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A number herding together; a
troop; a company; a tribe; a herd. It is ſeldom uſed but in
contempt or abhorrence.
Oh, you panderly raſcals' there's a knot, a gang, a pack,
a conſpiracy againſt me. Shakeſp Merry ſºv, , of Iłindſor.
As a gang of thieves were robbing a houſe, a maſtiff fell
a barking. L'A/irange, Fable 21.
Admitted in among the gang, -
He acts and talks as they befriend him. Prior.
GANGHON. [French J A kind of flower. Ainſwºrth.
GA'NGlion. n.ſ. [yaſyatov.] A tumour in the tendinous
and nervous parts, proceeding from a fall of ſtroke. It reſiſts,
if ſtirred; if preſſed upon the fide, is not diverted, nor can
be turned round. Harris.
Boneſetters uſually repreſent every bone diſlocated, though
poſſibly it be but a ganglion, or other crude tumour or preter-
natural protuberance of ſome part of a joint. J/ſeman.
GA'NGRENE, n.ſ. [gangrene, Fr. gangraena, Lat.]. A mor-
tification; a ſtoppage of circulation followed by pâtrefaction.
This experiment may be transferred unto the cure of gan-
grenes, either coming of themſelves, or induced by too much
applying of opiates. Bacon's Naturat Hiſtory.
She ſaves the lover, as we gangrenes ſtay,
By cutting hope, like a lopt limb, away. Waler.
A diſcolouring in the part was ſuppoſed an approach of a
gangrene. Wiſeman's Surgery.
If the ſubſtance of the ſoul is feſtered with theſe paſſions,
the gangrene is gone too far to be ever cured: the inflamma-
tion will rage to all eternity. Addison's Speciator.
To GA'NGRENE. v. a. [gangrener, French, from the noun.]
To corrupt to mortification.
In cold countries, when men's noſes and ears are mortified,
and, as it were, gangrened with cold, if they come to a fire
they rot off preſently; for that the few ſpirits, that remain in
thoſe parts, are ſuddenly drawn forth, and ſo putrefaction is
made complete. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Gangren'd members muſt be lop'd away,
Before the nobler parts are tainted to decay. Pryden.
To GA'NGRENE. v. n. To become mortified.
My griefs not only pain me
As a ling’ring diſeaſe;
But finding no redreſs, ferment and rage,
Nor leſs than wounds immedicable
Rankle and feſter, and gangrene -
To black mortification. Milton's Agoniſies.
As phlegmons are ſubjećt to mortification, ſo alſo in fat
bodies they are apt to gangrene after opening, if that fat be
not ſpeedily digeſted out. //iſeman's Surgery.
GA'NGRE Nous. adj. [from gangrene.] Mortified; producing
or betokening mortification.
The blood, turning acrimonious, corrodes the veſſels, pro-
ducing harmorrhages, puſtules red, lead-coloured, black and
gangrenous. Arbuthnot on Alimehts.
GA'NGw Ay. n.ſ. In a ſhip, the ſeveral ways or paſhages from
one part of it to the other. *. Dić7.
GA'NG week. m. ſ. [gang and week.] Rogation week, when
proceſſions are made to luſtrate the bounds of pariſhes. Dief.
GA'N TELope. \ n.ſ. [gantlet is only corrupted from gantelope,
GA'NTLET. } gant, all, and loopen, to run, Dutch J A mi-
litary puniſhment, in which the criminal running between the
ranks receives a laſh from each man.
But would'ſt thou, friend, who haſt two legs alone,
Would'ſt thou to run the gamlet theſe expoſe,
To a whole company of hob-nail'd ſhoes Dryden's juv.
Young gentlemen are driven with a whip, to run the gantlet
through the ſeveral claſſes. Locke.
GA'NzA. n.ſ. [ganſa, Spaniſh, a gooſe. J. A kind of wild
gooſe, by a flock of which a virtuoſo was fabled to be carried
to the lunar world.
They are but idle drearns and fancies,
And ſavour ſtrongly of the ganza's. Hudibras, p. ii.
GAOL. n.ſ [geol, Welſh; geole, French..] A priſon; a place
of confinement. It is always pronounced and too often writ-
ten jail, and ſometimes .
Then am I the priſoner, and his bed my gaol. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Have I been ever free, and muſt my houſe
Be my retentive enemy, my gaol;" . . Shakespeare's Timon.
. If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the gaoli,
and let out the priſoners. Shakeſpeare's Hºy; p. ii.
GA'oldeliver Y. m. ſ. [gaol and deliver.] The judicial
proceſs, which by condemnation or acquittal of perſons con-
fined evacuates the priſon. -
Then doth th'aſpiring ſoul the body leave,
Which we call death; but were it known to all,
What life our ſouls do by this death receive,
Men would it birth or gaoldelivery call. Davies.
Theſe make a general gºaldelivery of ſouls, not for puniſh-
Inent. - South-
Gaoler. n.ſ.. [from gaol.] Keeper of a priſon; he to whoſe
care the priſoners are committed. - Thi
13
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A P
G A R
This is a gentle provoſt; ſeldom, when
The ſteeled gaoler is the friend of men. Shakespeare Meaſ for Meoſ,
I know not how or why my ſurly goaler,
Hard as his irons, and inſolent as pow'r
When put in vulgar hands, Cleanthes,
Put off the brute. Dryden's Clemenes.
From the polite part of mankind ſhe had been baniſhed and
immured, 'till the death of her gaoler Tctler, N°. 53.
GAP. m. ſ. [from gape.]
1. An opening in a broken fence.
t Behold the deſpair,
By cuſtom and covetous pates,
By gaps and opening of gates. Tºſºr's Huſſandy.
With terrours and with furies to the bounds
And cryſtal wall of heav'n; which, opening wide,
Roll'd inward, and a ſpacious gap diſclos'd
Into the waſteful deep. AMiltºn's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vi.
Buſhes are moſt laſting of any for dead hedges, or to mend
gaps. Mrti, er's Huftandry.
I ſought for a man, ſays God, that ſhould make up the
hedge, and ſtand in the gap before me, for the land that I
ſhould not deſtroy it. Rºgers, Sermon 18.
2. A breach.
The loſs of that ſtrong city concerned the Chriſtian com-
monweal: manifold and lamentable miſeries afterwards en-
ſued by the opening of that gap, not unto the kingdom of
Hungary only, but to all that ſide of Chriſtendom. Knolles.
3. Any paſſage.
He’s made maſter
O' th' rolls and the king's ſecretary: further
Stands in the gap, and treads for more preferment. Shakeſp.
So ſtands the Thracian herdſman with his ſpear
Full in the gap, and hopes the hunted bear,
And hears him ruſtling in the wood. Dryden.
4. An avenue; an open way.
The former kings of England paſſed into them a great part
of their prerogatives; which though then it was well intended,
and perhaps well deſerved, yet now ſuch a gap of miſchief lies
open thereby, that I could wiſh it were well ſtopt. Spenſer.
5. A hole; a deficiency.
If you violently proceed againſt him, miſtaking his purpoſe,
it would make a great gap in your honour. Shakespeare King Lear.
Nor is it any botch or gap at all in the works of nature.
More's Antidote againſ! Atheiſm.
6. Any interſtice; a vacuity.
Each one demand, and anſwer to his part
Perform'd in this wide gap of time, ſince firſt
We were diſſever'd. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
That I might ſleep out this great gap of time my An-
tony is away. Shakeſpeare's Ant. and Cleopatra.
To make 'twixt words and lines huge gaps,
Wide as meridians in maps. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 3.
One can revive a languiſhing converſation by a ſudden ſur-
priſing ſentence; another is more dexterous in ſeconding; a
third can fill the gap with laughing. Swift's Genteel Converſat,
7. An opening of the mouth in ſpeech during the pronunciation
of two ſucceſſive vowels.
The hiatus, or gap between two words, is cauſed by two
vowels opening on each other. Pope.
8. Ta /?p a GAP, is to eſcape by ſome mean ſhift: alluding to
hedges mended with dead buſhes, ’till the quickſets will grow.
His policy conſiſts in ſetting traps,
In finding ways and means, and ſlopping gaps. Swift.
GA'p-Tooth Ed. adj. [gap and tooth.] Having interſtices be-
tween the teeth.
The reeve, miller, and cook, are diſtinguiſhed from each
other, as much as the mincing lady prioreſs and the broad-
... ſpeaking gap-toothed wife of Bath. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
To GAPE. v. n. [seapan, Saxon.]
1. To open the mouth wide; to yawn.
Some men there are love not a gaping pig;
Some, that are mad, if they behold a cat. Shakeſpeare.
Gaping or yawning, and ſtretching, do paſs from man to
man; for that that cauſeth gaping and ſtretching is when the
ſpirits are a little heavy by any vapour. Arbuthnot.
She ſtretches, gapes, unglues her eyes, -
And aſks if it be time to riſe. Swift.
2. To open the mouth for food, as a young bird.
As callow birds, -
Whoſe mother's kill'd in ſeeking of the prey,
Cry in their neſt, and think her long away;
And at each leaf that ſtirs, each blaſt of wind,
Gape for the food which they muſt never find. Dryden.
As in a drought the thirſty creatures cry,
And gape upon the gather'd clouds for rain,
Then firſt the martlet meets it in the ſky,
And with wet wings joys all the feather'd train. Dryden.
3. To deſire earneſtly; to crave. With for.
To her grim death appears in all her ſhapes; -
The hungry grave for her due tribute gapes. Denham,
To thy fortune be not thou a ſlave;
For what haſt thou to fear beyond the grave?
And thou, who gap'ſ fºr my eſtate, draw near;
For I would whiſper ſomewhat in thy ear. Dryden's Pºrſ:
4. With after. - ..
What ſhall we ſay of thoſe who ſpend their days in gaping
after court-favour and preferments : L’Eſtrange.
5. With at. -
Many have gaped at the church revenues; but, before they
could ſwallow them, have had their mouths ſtopped in the
church-yard. - South's Sermons.
6. To open in fiſſures or holes.
If it aſſume my noble father's perſon,
I'll ſpeak to it, though hell itſelf ſhould gape
And bid me hold my peace. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet,
May that ground gape, and ſwallow me alive,
Where I ſhall kneel to him that ſlew my father. Shakespeare H. VI.
The great horſe-muſſel, with the fine ſhell, doth gape and
ſhut as the oyſters do. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The reception of one is as different from the admiſſion of
the other, as when the earth falls open under the inciſions of
the plough, and when it gapes and greedily opens itſelf to drink
in the dew of heaven, or the refreſhments of a ſhower. South.
The mouth of a little artery and nerve gapes into the cavity
of theſe veſicles. Cheyne's Phil. Princ,
7. To open with a breach.
The planks, their pitchy coverings waſh'd away,
Now yield, and now a yawning breach diſplay:
The roaring waters, with a hoſtile tide,
Ruſh through the ruins of her gaping ſide. Dryden.
That all theſe actions can be performed by aliment, as well
as medicines, is plain ; by obſerving the effects of different
ſubſtances upon the fluids and ſolids, when the veſſels are open
and gape by a wound. Arbuthnot.
8. To open; to have an hiatus.
There is not, to the beſt of my remembrance, one vowel
gaping on another for want of a caeſura in this whole poem.
Dryden's Án. Dedication.
9. To make a noiſe with open throat.
And, if my muſe can through paſt ages ſee,
That noiſy, nauſeous, gafing fool is he. Roſcºmmon:
10. To ſtare with hope or expectation.
Others will gape t'anticipate
The cabinet deſigns of fate;
Apply to wizards, to foreſee
What ſhall, and what ſhall never be.
11. To ſtare with wonder.
Parts of different ſpecies jumbled together, according to the
mad imagination of the dawber; and the end of all this to
cauſe laughter: a very monſter in a Bartholomew fair, for the
mob to gape at. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Where elevated o'er the gaping croud,
Claſp'd in the board the perjur’d head is tow'd,
Betimes retreat. Gay's Tºivia.
12. To ſtare irreverently.
They have gaped upon me with their mouth. jºb xvi. I c.
GA'PER. m. ſ. [from gape.]
1. One who opens his mouth.
2. One who ſtares fooliſhly.
3. One who longs or craves.
The golden ſhower of the diſſolved abbey-lands rained well
near into every gaper's mouth. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
GAR, in Saxon, ſignifies a weapon: ſo Eadgar is a happy
weapon; Ethelgar, a noble weapon. Gibſon's Camden.
To GAR. v. a. [giera, Iſlandick.] To cauſe; to make. It
is ſtill in uſe in Scotland.
Tell me, good Hobbinol, what gar; thee greet 2
What hath ſome wolf thy tender lambs ytorn?
Or is thy bagpipe broke, that ſounds ſo ſweet?
Or art thou of thy loved loſs forlorne. Spenſer's Paſtoral.
GARB. m. ſ. [garbe, French.]
1. Dreſs; cloaths; habit.
Thus Belial, with words cloath'd in reaſon's garb,
Counſel'd ignoble eaſe, and peaceful ſloth.
Hudibras, p. ii.
Milton's Paradiº I off.
He puts himſelf into the garb and habit of a profeſſor of
phyſick, and ſets up. L'Eſtrange, Fable 37.
2. Faſhion of dreſs.
Horace's wit, and Virgil's ſtate,
He did not ſteal, but emulate;
And when he would like them appear,
Their garb, but not their cloaths, did wear. Denham.
3. Exteriour appearance. -
This is ſome fellow,
Who, having been prais'd for bluntneſs, doth affe&amp;t
A ſaucy roughneſs, and conſtrains the garb
Quite from his nature. Shakespeare's King Lear.
GA/R BAGE. n.ſ. [garbear, Spaniſh. This etymology is very
doubtful.]
1. The bowels; the offal; that part of the inwards which is
ſeparated and thrown away.
The cloyed will,
That ſatiate, yet unſatisfy'd deſire, that tub
Both
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A R
G A R
Both fill'd and running, ravening firſt the lamb, ,
Longs after for the garbage Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline,
Luſt, though to a radiant angel link'd,
Will ſate itſelf in a celeſtial bed,
And prey on garbage.
A flam more ſenſeleſs than the rog’ry
Cf old Aruſpicy and aug'ry,
That out of garbages of cattle
Preſag'd th' events of truce or battle. Hudibras, p. ii.
Who, without averſion, ever look'd -
On holy garbage, though by Homer cook'd : Roſcommon.
When you receive condign puniſhment, you run to your
confeſſor, that parcel of guts and garbage. Dryd. Span. Fryar.
GAR bel. n. ſ. A plank next the keel of a ſhip. Bailey.
Ga’R BIDG e. n.ſ. Corrupted for garbage.
All ſhavings of horns, hoofs of cattle, blood, and garbidge
is good manure for land. - Mortimer's Husbandry.
GA/R b is H. n.ſ. Corrupted from garbage.
In Newfou dland they improve their ground with the gar-
biſh of fiſh. Mo, timer's Husbandry.
To GARBLE. v. a. [garbellare, Italian.] To ſift; to pait;
to ſeparate the good from the bad.
But you who fathers and traditions take,
And garble ſome, and ſome you quite forſake. Dryden.
Had our author ſet down this command without garbling,
as God gave it, and joined mother to father, it had made
directly againſt him. Locke.
The underſtanding works to collate, combine, and garble
the images and ideas, the imagination and memory preſent to
it. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
GARBLER. n.ſ.. [from garble.] He who ſeparates one part
from another.
A farther ſecret in this clauſe may beſt be diſcovered by the
projećtors, or at leaſt the garblers of it. Swift's Examiner.
GA'RBoil. n.ſ. [garbouille, French; garbuglio, Italian.] Diſ-
order; tumult; uproar. Hanmer.
Look here, and at thy ſovereign leiſure read
What garboil; ſhe awak'd. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
GARD. n ſ. [garde, French J Wardſhip; care; cuſtody.
GARDEN. n.ſ. [gardd, Welſh; jardin, French; giardino,
Italian.]
1. A piece of ground incloſed, and cultivated with extraordi-
nary care, planted with herbs or fruits for food, or laid out
for pleaſure.
Thy promiſes are like Adonis' gardens,
Which one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next. Shaſeſ.
My lord of Ely, when I was laſt in Holbourn,
I ſaw good ſtrawberries in your garden there. Shakeſp R. III.
In the royal ordering of gardens, there ought to be gardens
for all the months in the year. Bacon's Eſſays.
In every garden ſhould be provided flowers, fruit, ſhade and
Water. Temple.
2. A place particularly fruitful or delightful.
I am arriv'd from fruitful Lombardy,
The pleaſant garden of great Italy. Shakespeare Tam. of the Shrew.
3. GARDEN is often uſed in compoſition for hortenſis, or be-
longing to a garden.
GARDEN-MoULD. m. ſ. Mould fit for a garden.
They delight moſt in rich black garden-mould, that is deep
and light, and mixed rather with ſand than clay. Morimer.
GARD EN-Till AGE. m. ſ. Tillage uſed in cultivating gar-
dens.
Peas and beans are what belong to garden tillage as well as
that of the field. Martimer's Husbandry.
GARDEN-w ARE. m. ſ. The produce of gardens.
A clay bottom is a much more pernicious ſoil for trees and
garden-ware than gravel. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
To GA'RDEN. v. n. [from the noun..] To cultivate a garden;
to lay out gardens
At firſt, in Rome's poor age,
When both her kings and conſuls held the plough,
Or garden'd well. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
When ages grow to civility and elegancy, men come to
build ſtately, ſooner than to garden finely; as if gardening
were the greater perfection Bacon, Eſſay 47.
GA'RDEN ER. m. ſ. [from garden.] He that attends or culti-
vates gardens.
Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are
gardeners; ſo that, if we will plant nettles, or ſow lettuce,
the power lies in our will. Shakeſpeare's Othel'o.
Gardeners tread down any looſe ground, after they have
ſown onions or turnips. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The gardener may lop religion as he pleaſe. Howel.
The life and felicity of an excellent gardener is preferable
to all other diverſions. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Then let the learned gard’ner mark with care
The kinds of ſtocks, and what thoſe kinds will bear. Dryd.
GARDENING. m. ſ. [from garden.] The act of cultivating or
planning gardens.
My compoſitions in gardening are after the Pindarick man-
ner, and run into the beautiful wildneſs of nature, without
Shakeſpeare's Hamlet. -
affecting the nicer elegancies of art. Speciatºr, N°. 477.
GAR E. n.ſ. Coarſe wool growing on the legs of ſheep. Dić.
GA'RG A R is M. n ſ. [ Yzºyzººs ; gargariſme, French. J A
liquid form of medicine to waſh the mouth with. Suincy.
Apophlegmatiſms and gargariſms draw the rheum down
the palate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To GAR GAR.'Ze. v. a. [yzęyatſº; gargariſer, French. I
To waſh the mouth with medicated liquors.
Vinegar, put to the noſtrils, or gargarized, doth eaſe the
hiccough ; for that it is aſtringent, and inhibiteth the motion
of the ſpirit. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
This being relaxed, may make a ſhaking of the larynx;
as when we gargarize. Holder's Elements of Speech.
GA'Ro ET. n.ſ. A diſtemper in cattle. -
The garget appears in the head, maw, or in the hinder
parts. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To GA'RGLE. v. a. [gargouiller, French; gargogliare, Ital.
gurgel, German, the throat.]
1. To waſh the throat with ſome liquor not ſuffered imme-
diately to deſcend.
Garge twice or thrice with ſharp oxycrate. Harvey.
The exciſiºn made, the bleeding will ſoon be ſtopt by gar-
gºing with oxycrate. JWiſeman's Surgery.
They comb, and then they order ev'ry hair;
Next garge well their throats. Dryden's Perſ. Sat.
2. To warble; to play in the throat. An improper uſe.
Thoſe which only warble long,
And gargle in their throats a ſong. Waller.
So chaim'd you were, you ceas'd a while to doat
On nonſenſe gargl'd in an eunuch's throat. Fenton.
GA'Rol E. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A liquor with which the
throat is waſhed.
His throat was waſhed with one of the gargles ſet down in
the method of cure. //ſeman's Surgery.
GA'RG Lion. m. ſ. An exſudation of nervous juice from a
bruiſe, or the like, which indurates into a hard immoveable
turnour. Quincy.
GA/R&amp;ol. n.ſ. A diſtemper in hogs.
The ſigns of the gargol in hogs are, hanging down of the
head, moiſt eyes, ſtaggering, and loſs of appetite. Mortimer.
GA'RLAND. m. ſ. [garlande, guirland, French..] A wreath of
branches or flowers. -
Strephon, with leavy twigs of laurel-tree,
A garland made, on temples for to wear;
For he then choſen was the dignity
Of village-lord that Whitſuntide to bear. Sidney.
With every minute you do change a mind,
And call him noble, that was now your hate,
Him vile, that was your garland. Shakeſpeare.
A reeling world will never ſtand upright,
*Till Richard wear the garland of the realm.
—How ! wear the garland! do'ſt thou mean the crown?
—Ay, my good lord. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
Then party-colour'd flow'rs of white and red
She wove, to make a garland for her head. Dryden's Fables.
Vanquiſh again; though ſhe be gone,
Whoſe garland crown'd the vićtor's hair,
And reign; though ſhe has left the throne,
Who made thy glory worth thy care. Prior.
Her gods and godlike heroes riſe to view,
And all her faded garland, bloom anew. Pope. .
GARLICK. m. ſ. [3an, Saxon, a lance, and leek, the leek that
ſhoots up in blades. Skinner.]
It has a bulbous root, conſiſting of many ſmall tubercles
included in its coats: the leaves are plain: the flowers conſiſt
of ſix leaves, formed into a corymbus on the top of the ſtalk;
and are ſucceeded by ſubrotund fruit, divided into three cells,
which contain roundiſh ſeeds. Miler.
Garlick is of an extremely ſtrong, and to moſt people a diſ-
agreeable ſmell, and of an acrid and pungent taſte. It is an
extremely active and penetrating medicine, as may be proved
by applying plaiſters of garlick to the ſoles of the feet, which
will in a very little time give a ſtrong ſmell to the breath.
Iſſues will ſmell ſtrongly of garlick three or four hours after a
perſon has eaten it; and given to fowls, it communicates its
taſte ſtrongly to their fleſh, and in ſome degree to their eggs.
Bruiſed, and laid on any tender part of the ſkin, it corrodes it,
and raiſes bliſters. Some are very fond of it in food; and a
little of it is not only agreeable this way, but aſſiſts digeſtion,
and ſtrengthens the ſtomach. Hill.
Garlick has, of all our plants, the greateſt ſtrength, affords
moſt nouriſhment, and ſupplies moſt ſpirits to thoſe who eat
little fleſh. - Temple.
'Tis mortal ſin an onion to devour;
Each clove of garick is a ſacred pow'r :
Religious nations ſure, and bleſt abodes,
Where ev'ry orchard is o'er-run with gods. Tate's juven.
GA/R LIck Pear-tree. n ſ.
It hath an anomalous flower, conſiſting of four petals or
leaves, which ſtand erect, the lower part being occupied by a
number of chives; the pointal, which is fixed on a long foot-
1o C -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A R
G A R
i
italk, riſes from the centre of the empalement, and afterward
becomes a globular fleſhy fruit; in the centre of which are
included many ſeeds, which are ſhaped almoſt like kidneys.
This tree is pretty common in Jamaica, and ſeveral other
places in the warmer parts of America, where it uſually riſes
to the height of thirty or forty feet, and ſpreads into many
branches. When the flowers fall off the pointal, it becomes
a round fruit about the ſize of a tennis ball, which, when
ripe, has a rough browniſh rind, and a mealy ſweet pulp,
fomewhat like ſome of the European pears; but has a ſtrong
ſcent of garlick. Miller.
GAR1.1ck //ild. m. ſ.
The charaćiers are: it agrees in every reſpe&amp;t with the gar-
lick; but hath, for the moſt part, a ſweet ſcent; and the
flowers are produced in an unbel. Miller.
GARLIcKEATER. m. ſ. [garlick and eat..] A mean fellow.
You've made good work,
You and your apron men, that ſtood ſo much
Upon the voice of occupation, and
The breath of garlickaters. Shakeſpeare's Cori lanus.
GA'F MENT. n. ſ. [guarniment, old French..] Any thing by
which the body is covered; cloaths; dreſs.
Hence, rotten thing, or I ſhall ſhake thy bones
Out of thy garments. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Haſt any of thy late maſter's garments in thy poſſ flion 2
Shakeſpeare's Cymbel me.
Our leaf, once fallen, ſpringeth no more; neither doth the
fun or ſummer adorn us again with the garments of new leaves
and flowers. Raleigh's Hiſory of the World.
Three worthy perſons from his ſide it tore,
And dy'd his garment with their ſcatter d gore. Iſ a 'ler.
The peacock, in all his pride, does not diſplay half the
colours that appear in the garments of a Britiſh lady, when
ſhe is dreſſed. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 265.
GA(RNER. m. ſ. [gremier, French..] A place in which threſhed
grain is ſtored up.
Earth's increaſe, and foyſon plenty,
Barns and garners never empty. Shakeſpeare's Tempg/?.
For ſundry foes the rural realm ſurround;
The fieldmouſe builds her garner under ground:
For gather'd grain the blind laborious mole,
In winding mazes, works her hidden hole. Dryd. Wir. Geo.
To GA/RNER. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtore as in garners.
There, where I have garner'd up my heart,
Where either I muſt live, or bear no life. Shakespeare Othello.
GA'RNET. n. ſ. [garnato, Italian; granatus, low Latin, from its
reſemblance in colour to the grain of the pomegranate.]
The garnet is a gem of a middle degree of hardneſs, be-
tween the ſaphire and the common cryſtal. It is found of
various ſizes . Its ſurfaces are not ſo ſmooth or polite as thoſe
of a ruby, and its colour is ever of a ſtrong red, with a plain
admixture of blueiſh: its degree of colour is very different,
and it always wants much of the brightneſs of the ruby. Hill.
The garnet ſeems to be a ſpecies of the carbuncle of the
ancients: the Bohemian is red, with a ſlight caſt of a flame-
colour; and the Syrian is red, with a ſlight caſt of purple.
Woodward's Met. Pºſſils.
To GA'RNISH. v. a. [garnir, French.]
1. To decorate with ornamental appendages.
There were hills which garniſhed their proud heights with
ſtately trees. Sidney.
All within with flowers was garniſhed,
That, when mild Zephyrus amongſt them blew,
Did breathe out bounteous ſmells, and painted colours ſhew.
Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 5.
With taper light
To ſeek the beauteous eye of heav'n to garniſh,
Is waſteful and ridiculous exceſs. Shakeſp. King john.
Paradiſe was a terreſtrial garden, garniſ, ed with fruits, de-
lighting both the eye and taſte.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the IWºrld.
All the ſtreets between the Bridge-foot and palace of Paul's,
where the king then lay, were garniſhed with the citizens,
ſtanding in their liveries. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. To embelliſh a diſh with ſomething laid round it.
With what expence and art, how richly dreſt
Garniſh'd with 'ſparagus, himſelf a feaſt ! Dryd, juven. Sat.
No man lards ſalt pork with orange peel,
Or garniſhes his lamb with ſpitchcok'd eel. King's Cookery.
3. To fit with fetters.
GA/RNIs H. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Ornament; decoration; embelliſhment.
So are you, ſweet,
Ev’n in the lovely garniſh of a boy. Shakespeare Merch. of Penice.
Matter and figure they produce;
For garniſh this, and that for uſe;
They ſeek to feed and pleaſe their gueſts. Prior.
2. Things ſtrewed round a diſh. -
3. [In gaols...] Fetters.
4. Penſiuncala carceraria ; an acknowledgment in money when
firſt a priſoner goes into a gaol. Ainſworth.
GA'RNISHMENT. n.ſ.. [from garniſh..] Ornament; embelliſh-
ment.
The church of Sanéta Guiſtiniana in Padoua is a ſound piece
of good art, where the materials being but ordinary ſtone,
without any garniſhment of ſculpture, do raviſh the beholders.
iſ otton’s Archite ºf ure.
GA'RNITURE. m. ſ. [from garniſh.] Furniture; ornament.
They conclude, if they fall ſhort in the garniture of their
knecs, that they are inferior in the furniture of their heads.
- - Government ºf the 7ongue.
Plain ſenſe, which pleas'd your ſires an age ago,
Is loſt, without the garniture of ſhow. Granville.
As nature has poured out her charms upon the female part
of our ſpecies, ſo they are very aſſiduous in beſtowing upon
themſelves the fineſt garnitures of art. Addiſon's Speciator.
GA'Rous, adj. from garum. 1 Reſembling pickle made of
fiſh.
In a civet-cat a different aid offenſive odour proceeds, part-
ly from its food, that being eſpecially fiſh; whereof this
humour may be a a cus excretion, and olidous ſeparation.
fºrcºvn's ſugar Errours, b. iii. c. 4.
GARRAs. "...ſ. (Fºrſe. It imports the ſame as gelding. The
word is fiſi retained in Scotland.] A ſmall horſe; a hobby.
A : gºard horſe wºn when brought into the North of Eng-
land takes the name of galloway.
When he comes forth he will make their cows and garrans
to walk, if he dºth no other harm to their perſons. Spenser.
Every man would be forced to provide Winter-fodder for
his team, whereas common garrans ſhift upon graſs the year
round; and this would force men to the encloſing of grounds,
ſo that the race of garrans would decreaſe. Temple.
GARRET. m. ſ. ſ. arite, the tower of a citadel, French..]
1. A room on the higheſt floor of the houſe.
The mob, commiſſion'd by the government,
Are ſeldom to an empty garret ſent. Dryden's juver. Sat.
John Bull ſkipped from room to room; ran up ſtairs and
down ſtairs, from the kitchen to the garret. Arbuthn. J. Lull.
On earth the god of wealth was made -
Sole patron of the building trade;
Leaving the arts the ſº acious air,
With licence to build caſtles there:
And 'tis conceiv'd their old pretence,
To lodge in garrets, comes from thence. Swift.
2. Rotten wood.
The colour of the ſhining part of rotten wood, by day-
light, is in ſome pieces white, and in ſome pieces inclining
to red, which they call the white and red garret. Bacon.
GARRE TE'E.R. m.ſ.. [from garret. J. An inhabitant of a
arret. -
GARRISON. n.ſ [garniſºn, French.J
I. Soldiers placed in a fortified town or caſtle to defend it.
How oft he ſaid to me,
Thou art no ſºldier fit for Cupid's garriſon.
2. Fortified place ſtored with ſoldiers.
Whom the old Roman wall ſo ill confin'd,
With a new chain of garriſon; you bind. Hºler.
3. The ſtate of being placed in a fortification for its defence.
Some of them that are laid in garriſon will do no great hurt
to the enemies. Spenser ºn Ireland.
To GA RR isos. v. a. [ from the verb. J. To ſecure by for-
treſſes.
Sidney, b. i.
Others thoſe forces join,
Which garriſºn the conqueſts near the Rhine. Dryd, jazcz.
GARRU'LITY... n.ſ. [ garrulitas, Latin.]
1. Loquacity; incontinence of tongue; inability to keep a
fecret.
Let me here
Expiate, if poſſible, my crime,
Shameful garriºſity. Milton's Agonjes.
2. The quality of talking too much ; talkativeneſs.
Some vices of ſpeech muſt carefully be avoided: firſt of all,
loquacity organ ruity. Ray on the Creation.
GA'RR Ulous. adj. [garrulus, Latin.] Prattling; talkative.
Old age looks out,
And garrulous recounts the feats of youth. Thomſºn.
GA'RTH.R. m. ſ. [gardus, Welſh; jartier, French, from gar,
Welſh, the binding of the knee.] -
1. A ſtring or ribband by which the ſtocking is held upon the
leg.
"Let their heads be ſleckly comb'd, their blue coats bruſh'd,
and their garters of an indifferent knit. Shakespeare 7am. of the Shrew.
When we reſt in our cloaths we looſen our garters, and
other ligatures, to give the ſpirits free paſſage. Ray.
Handſome parters at your knees. Swift.
There lay three garters, half a pair of gloves,
And all the trophies of his former loves. Pºpe.
2. The mark of the order of the garter, the higheſt order of
Engliſh knighthood. w
Now by my george, my garter.
—The george, profan'd, hath loſt his holy honour;
The garter, blemiſh'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue. Shakespeare. R. III.
You
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A S
G A T
:
º
You owe your Ormond nothing but a ſon,
To fill in future times his father's place,
And wear the garter of his mother's race.
3. The principal king at arms.
To GA/RT ER. v. a. [from the noun..] To bind with a garter.
He, being in love, could not ſee to garter his hoſe. Shakespeare
A perſon was wounded in the leg, below the gartering
place. I/iſeman's Surgery.
GARTH. n.ſ. ſas if girth, from gird..] The bulk of the body
meaſured by the girdle.
GAs. n.ſ. [A word invented by the chymiſts. J It is uſed
by Van Helmont, and ſeems deſigned to ſignify, in general, a
ſpirit not capable of being coagulated: but he uſes it looſely
in many ſenſes, and very unintelligibly and inconſiſtently. Har.
GASCONADE. n.ſ. [French, from Gaſton, a nation eminent
for boaſting..] A boaſt; a bravado.
Was it a gaſonade to pleaſe me, that you ſaid your fortune
was increaſed to one hundred a year ſince I left you ? Swift.
To GAscon A'DE. v. n. [from the noun..] To boaſt; to brag;
to bluſter.
To GASH. v. a [from hacher, to cut, French. Skinner.] To
cut deep ſo as to make a gaping wound; to cut with a blunt
inſtrument ſo as to make the wound wide.
Where the Engliſhmen at arms had been defeated, many
of their horſes were found grievouſly gaſhed or gored to
death. Hayward.
Wit is a keen inſtrument, and every one can cut and goſh
with it; but to carve a beautiful image requires great art.
‘ſ illotſon, Sermon 2.
Dryden.
See me gaſh'd with knives,
Or ſear'd with burning ſteel. Rºwe's Royal Convert.
Streaming with blood, all over gaſh'd with wounds,
He reel'd, he groan'd, and at the altar fell. A. Phillips.
Gas H. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A deep and wide wound.
He glancing on his helmet, made a large
And open gaſh therein; were not his targe,
That broke the violence of his intent,
The weary ſoul from thence it would diſcharge. Fai. Queen.
A perilous gaſh, a very limb lopt off. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Hamilton drove Newton almoſt to the end of the liſts; but
Newton on a ſudden gave him ſuch a gaſh on the leg, that
therewith he fell to the ground. Hayward.
But th' ethereal ſubſtance clos'd,
Not long diviſible; and from the gaſh
A ſtream of neétarous humour iſſuing flow'd. Milt. P. Lºft.
2. The mark of a wound. I know not if this be proper.
I was fond of back-ſword and cudgel play, and I now bear
in my body many a black and blue gaſh and ſcar. Arbuthnot.
GA'skins. n.ſ. [ from Gaſcoigne. See GALLIGAsKINs. J
Wide hoſe ; wide breeches. An old ludicrous word.
If one point break, the other will hold;
Or, if both break, your gaſkins fall. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
To GAsp. v. n. [from gape, Skinner; from giſpe, Daniſh, to
ſob, junius.]
1. To open the mouth wide to catch breath.
The fick for air before the portal gaff. Dryd. Virg. Geo.
They rais'd a feeble cry with trembling notes;
But the weak voice deceiv'd their gaſping throats. Dryden.
The gaſping head flies off; a purple flood
Flows from the trunk. - Dryden's Aºn.
The ladies gaſp'd, and ſcarcely could reſpire;
The breath they drew no longer air, but fire. Dryden.
A ſcantling of wit lay gaſping for life, and groaning be-
neath a heap of rubbiſh. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Pale and faint,
He gaſps for breath; and, as his life flows from him,
Demands to ſee his friends. Addiſon's Cato.
2. To emit breath by opening the mouth convulſively.
I lay me down to gaſp my lateſt breath;
The wolves will get a breakfaſt by my death. Dryden.
He ſtaggers round, his eyeballs roll in death,
And with ſhort ſobs he gaſps away his breath. Dryden's Án.
. To long for. This ſenſe is, I think, not proper, as nature
never expreſſes deſire by gaſping.
The Caſtilian and his wife had the comfort to be under the
ſame maſter, who, ſeeing how dearly they loved one another,
and goſped after their liberty, demanded a moſt exorbitant
price for their ranſom. Speciator, Nº. 198.
GAsp. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] -
1. The aët of opening the mouth to catch breath.
2. The ſhort catch of breath in the laſt agonies.
His fortunes all lie ſpeechleſs, and his name
Is at laſt gaſp. Shakeſpeare’s Cymbelin.
Ah, Warwick, Montague hath breath'd his laſt;
And to the lateſt gaſp cry’d out for Warwick. Shakespeare H. VI.
If in the dreadful hour of death,
If at the lateſt gaſp of breath,
When the cold damp bedevs your brow,
You hope for mercy, ſhew it now. Addiſh's Roſamond.
Life's buſineſs at one gaſp be o’er. Popr.
To GAst. v. a. [from 5arz, Saxon. See AGH ast.] To
3
make aghaſt; to fright; to ſhock; to terrify; to fear; to
affray.
When he ſaw my beſt alarmed ſpirits,
Bold in the quarrel's right, rous’d to th’ encounter,
Or whether gaſted by the noiſe I made,
Full ſuddenly he fled. Shakeſpeare’s King Lear.
GA's r Rick. adj. [from yarré.] Belonging to the belly.
Gast Roº APHY. n.ſ. [ yarºe and º In ſtrićtneſs of
etymology, ſignifies no more than ſewing up any wound of
the belly; yet in common acceptation it implies, that the
wound of the belly is complicated with another of the in-
teſtine. Sharp's Surgery.
GASTRo"roºty. m. ſ. [72% and rírop.a.] The act of
cutting open the belly.
GAT. The preterite of get.
Moſes gat him up into the mount.
GATE. r. ſ. [reat, Saxon.]
1. The door of a city, a caſtle, palace, or large building.
Open the gate of mercy, gracious God!
My ſoul flies through theſe wounds to ſeek thee. Shakespeare
Gates of monarchs -
Arc arch'd ſo high, that giants may jet through,
And keep their impious turbands on, without
Good-morrow to the ſun. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
2. A frame of timber upon hinges to give a paſſage into incloſed
grounds.
Ex. xxiv. 18.
Know'ſt thou the way to Dover?
Both ſtile and gate, horſeway and footpath. Shakeſp.
3. An avenue; an opening.
Auria had done nothing but wiſely and politickly, in ſetting
the Venetians together by the ears with the Turks, and open-
ing a gate for a long war. Knolley's Hiſtory of the Turks.
GA’t Eve IN. n.ſ. The vena porta.
Being a king that loved wealth, he could not endure to have
trade ſick, nor any obſtrućtion to continue in the gatevein
which diſperſeth that blood. Bacon's Henry VII.
GA TEwAY. n.ſ. [gate and way.] A way through gates of
incloſed grounds.
Gateways between incloſures are ſo miry, that they cannot
cart between one field and another. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
To GATHER. v. a. [...abenan, Saxon.]
1. To collečt; to bring into one place; to get in harveſt.
I gathered me ſilver and gold. Eccluſ. ii. 8.
Gather ſtones—and they took ſtones and made an heap. Gen.
The ſeventh year we ſhall not ſow, nor gather in our in-
creaſe. Dev. xxv. 29.
2. To pick up; to glean; to pluck. -
His opinions
Have ſatisfied the king for his divorce, º,
Gather'd from all the famous colleges. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Caſt up the highway, gather out the ſtones. Iſ lxii. Io.
I will ſpend this preface upon thoſe from whom I have
gathered my knowledge; for I am but a gatherer. J/otton.
To pay the creditor, that lent him his rent, he muſt gather
up money by degrees, as the ſale of his commodities ſhall
bring it in. Lºcke.
3. To crop.
What have I done?
To ſee my youth, my beauty, and my love
No ſooner gain'd, but ſlighted and betray'd;
And like a roſe juſt gather'd from the ſtalk,
But only ſmelt, and cheaply thrown aſide,
To wither on the ground ! Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
4. To aſſemble.
They have gathered themſelves together againſt me... job.
Come ye heathen, and gather yourſelves together. jeel iii.
He led us through three fair ſtreets; and all the way we
went there were gathered ſome people on both ſides, ſtanding
in a row. Bacon's New Atlantis.
5. To heap up ; to accumulate.
He that by uſury and unjuſt gain increaſeth his ſubſtance,
ſhall gather it for him that will pity the poor. Prov. xxviii. 8.
6. To ſelect and take.
Save us, O Lord, and gather us from among the heathen,
to give thanks unto thy holy name. Pſ. cwi. 47.
7. To ſweep together.
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a net that was caſt
into the ſea, and cathered of every kind. Mat. xiii. 47.
8. To collect charitable contributions.
9. To bring into one bºdy of intereſt.
I will gather others to him, beſides thoſe that are gathered
unto him. Iſ lvi. 8.
1c. To draw together from a ſtate of diffuſion; to compreſs ;
to contract.
Immortal Tully ſhone,
The Roman roſtra deck'd the conſul's throne;
Gath'ring his flowing robe he ſeem'd to ſtand,
In ad to ſpeak, and graceful ſtretch'd his hand. Pope.
11. To gain.
He gathers ground upon her in the chace;
Now breathes upon her hair with nearer pace. Dryden.
12. To pucker needlework.
4. I 3- To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G. A U
G. A U
:
13. To colle&amp;t logically; to know by inference.
That which, out of the law either of reaſon or of God,
men probably gathering to be expedient, they make it law.
Hooker, b. i. ſ. 3.
The reaſon that I gather he is mad,
Is a mad tale he told to-day at dinner,
Of his own door being ſhut againſt his entrance. Shakeſp.
After he had ſeen the viſion, we endeavoured to get into
Macedonia, aſſuredly gathering that the Lord had called us.
Acts xvi. Io.
Return’d
By night, and liſtening where the hapleſs pair
Sat in their ſad diſcourſe, and various plaint,
Thence gather'd his own doom. Milton's Paradiſe Loſ!, b. x.
Madamoiſelle de Scudery, who is as old as Sibyl, is at this
time tranſlating Chaucer into modern French: from which I
gather, that he has formerly been tranſlated into the old Pro-
vençal. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
We may eaſily gather from this paſſage what notion the
ancients had concerning a future ſtate. Notes on the Odyſſey.
14. To GATHER Breath. [A proverbial expreſſion.] To have
reſpite frºm any calamity.
The luckleſs lucky maid
A long time with that ſavage people ſtaid,
To a her bre th, in many niſeries. Spenſer.
To GA'THE R. v. n.
I. To be condenſed ; to thicken.
If ere night the ga hºring clouds we fear,
A ſong will help the beating ſtorm to bear. Dryden's Paſ?.
When gath'ring clouds o'erſhadow all the ſkies,
And ſhoot quick lightnings, weigh, my boys! he cries. Dry.
When the rival winds their quarrel try,
South, Eaſt and Weſt, on airy courſers born,
The whirlwind gathers, and the woods are torn. Dryden.
Think on the ſtorm that cathers o'er your head,
And threatens every hour to burſt upon it. Addison's Cato.
2. To grow larger by the accretion of ſimilar matter.
Their ſnow-ball did not gather as it went; for the people
came in to them. Bacon's Henry VIII.
3. To aſſemble.
There be three things that mine heart feareth; the ſlander .
of a city, the gather, ng together of an unruly multitude, and
a falſe accuſation. Eccluſ, xxvi. 5.
4. To generate pus or matter.
Aſk one, who by repeated reſtraints hath ſubdued his na-
tural rage, how he likes the change, and he will tell you 'tis
no leſs happy than the eaſe of a broken impoſthume after the
painful gathering and filling of it. Decay of Piety.
GA't H.E.R. n.ſ. [from the verb.] Pucker; cloth drawn toge-
ther in wrinkles.
Give laws for pantaloons,
The length of breeches, and the gathers,
Part cannons, perriwigs and feathers. Hudibras, p. i.
GA'THE RER. n / [from gather.]
I. One that gathers; one that colle&amp;ts; a colleółor.
I will ſpend this preface about thoſe from whom I have ga-
thered my knowledge; for I am but a gatherer and diſpoſer of .
other mens ſtuff. Wotton's Prºface to Elem. of Architecture.
2. One that gets in a crop of any kind.
I was a herdman and a gatherer of ſycamore-fruit. Amos vii.
Nor in that land
Do poiſonous herbs decive the gatherer's hand. May's Wing.
GA'THERING. m. ſ. [from gather.] Collection of charitable
contributions. -
Let every one lay by him in ſtore, that there be no gather-
ings when I come. 1 Cor. xvi. 2.
GATTEN-TRE E. See CoRNE LIAN-cHERRY, of which it is
a ſpecies.
GAUDE m. ſ. [The etymology of this word is uncertain :
Stinner imagines it may come from gaude, French, a yellow
flower, yellow being the moſt gaudy colour. junius, accord-
ing to his cuſtom, talks of 372,6; ; and Mr. Lye finds caude,
in Douglaſs, to ſignify deceit or fraud, from gwawdio, Welſh,
to cheat. It ſeems to me moſt eaſily deducible from gaudium,
Latin, joy; the cauſe of joy; a token of joy: thence aptly
applied to any thing that gives or expreſſes pleaſure. In Scot-
land this word is ſtill retained, both as a ſhowy bawble, and
the perſon fooled. It is alſo retained in Scotland to denote a
yellow flower.] An ornament; a fine thing; any thing worn
as a ſign of joy.
He ſtole th’ impreſſion of her fantaſy,
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gaudes, conceits,
Knacks, trifles, noſegays, ſweetmeats. Shakeſpeare.
The ſun is in the heav'n, and the proud day,
Attended with the pleaſures of the world,
Is all too wanton, and too full of gaudes,
To give me audience. Shakespeare's King Lear.
My love to Hermia
Is melted as the ſnow; ſeems to me now
As the remembrance of an idle gaud,
Which in my childhood I did doat upon. Shakeſpeare.
Some bound for Guiney, golden ſand to find,
Bore all the gaudes the ſimple natives wear;
Some for the pride of Turkiſh courts deſign'd,
For folded turbants fineſt holland lear. Dryd Ann. Mirah.
To GAUDF. v. a. [gaudeo, Latin J To exult; to rejoice at
any thing.
Go to a goſſip's feaſt, and gaude with me,
After ſo long grief ſuch nativity. Shakeſpeare.
GA'Up ER Y. n.J. [from gaude..] Finery; oſtentatious luxury
of dreſs.
The triumph was not pageants and gºudery, but one of the
wiſeſt and nooleſt inſtitutions that ever was. Eacon's Eſſays.
Age, which is but one remove from death, and ſhould
have nothing about us but what looks like a decent preparation
for it, ſcarce ever appears, of late, but in the high mode, the
flaunting garb, and utmoſt gaudery of youth, with cloaths as
ridiculouſly, and as much in the faſhion, as the perſon that
wears them is uſually grown out of it. South's Sermons.
A plain ſuit, ſince we can make but one,
Is better than to be by tarniſh’d gaud'ry known. Dryden.
GA'Udi ly, adv. [from gaudy J Showily.
GAU'1'1N Ess. n.ſ [from gaudy..] Showineſs; tinſel appearance.
GA'UDY. adj. [from gaº de J Showy, ſplendid; pompous;
oſtentatiouſly fine.
Coſtly thy habit as thy purſe can buy,
But not expreſt in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
For the apparel oft proclaims the man. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Fancies fond with gaudy ſhapes poſieſs, -
As thick and numberleſs
As the gay motes that people the ſun-beams. M; 'ton.
A man who walks directly to his journey's end, will arrive
thither much ſooner than him who wanders aſide to gaze at
every thing, or to gather every gaudy flower. //atts.
A goldfinch there I ſaw, with gaudy pride
Of painted plumes, that hopp'd from ſide to ſide. Dr den.
The Bavarian duke his brigades leads,
Gallant in arms, and gaudy to behold. Philips.
GA'UDY. m. ſ. [gaudium, Latin.] A feaſt; a feſtival; a day
of plenty.
He may ſurely be content with a faſt to-day, that is ſure of
a gaudy to-morrow. Cheyne.
GAve. The preterite of give.
Thou can'ſt not every day give me thy heart;
If thou can't give it, then thou never gav/t it:
Lovers riddles are, that though thy heart depart,
It ſtays at home, and thou with loſing ſav'ſt it. Donne.
GA’ve l. n. ſ. A provincial word for ground.
Let it lie upon the ground or gavel eight or ten days. Mort.
GA'vel KIND. n.ſ. [In law.] A cuſtom whereby the lands of
the father are equally divided at his death amongſt all his ſons,
or the land of the brother equally divided among the brothers,
if he have no iſſue of his own. This cuſtom is of force in
divers places of England, but eſpecially in Kent. Cºwel.
Among other W clſh cuſtoms he aboliſhed that of gavelkind,
whereby the heirs female were utterly excluded, and the
baſtards did inherit as well as the legitimate, which is the
very Iriſh gavel ind. Davies on Ireland.
To GAUGE. v. a. ſ gauge, jauge, a meaſuring rod, French. It
is pronounced gage.j -
1. To meaſure with reſpect to the contents of a veſſel.
2. To meaſure with regard to any proportion.
The vanes nicely gau ed on each ſide, broad on one ſide,
and narrow on the other, both which miniſter to the pro-
greſſive motion of the bird. Ierham's Phyſics-7 holºg.
There is nothing more perfočtly admirable in itſelf than that
artful manner in Homer's battles of taking meaſure or gaging
his heroes by each other, and thereby elevating the charaćier
of one perſon by the oppoſition of it to ſome other he is made
to excel. Pºpe's Affa, ºn Homer's Lattl s.
GAUG F. n.ſ. (from the verb...] A meaſure; a ſtandard.
This plate muſt be a sage to file your worm and groove to
equal breadth by. - 44-3-on’s Mech. Exer.
If money were to be hired, as land is, or to be had from
the owner himſelf, it might then be had at the market rate,
which would be a conſtant gauge of your trade and wealth. Loc.
Timothy propoſed to his miſtreſs, that ſhe ſhould entertain
no ſervant that was above four foot ſeven inches high; and for
that purpoſe had prepared a gage, by which they were to be
meaſured. - Arbuthnot's Hiſtory ſ john Bull.
GAU’, F.R. n.ſ.. [from gauge.] One whoſe buſineſs is to mea-
ſure veſſe's or quantities. -
Thoſe earls and dukes have, from the beginning, been pri-
vileged with royal juriſdiction ; and, to this end, appointed
their ſpecial officers, as ſheriff, admiral, gauger, and eſcheator.
- Carew's Survey of Cºrnwal.
GAUNT. adj. [As if gewart, from ze; anian, to leſien, Saxon.]
Thin; ſlender; lean; meagre.
Oh, how that name befits my compoſition!
Old Gaunt, indeed, and gaunt in being old :
Within me grief hath kept a tedious faſt;
And who abſtains from meat that is not gaunt *<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
F
O
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G A Z
G F. A
For fleeping England long time have I watch'd;
Watching breeds leanneſs, leanneſs is all gaunt :
The pleaſure that ſome fathers feed upon,
Is my ſtrićt faſt; I mean my childrens looks;
And therein faſting, thou haſt made me gaunt: `
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
Whoſe hollow womb inherits nought but bones. Shakespeare. R. II.
Two maſtiffs, gaunt and grim, her flight purſu’d,
And oft their faſten’d fangs in blood embru'd. Dryd. Falles.
GA'UNTLY. adv. [from gaunt..] Leanly; ſlenderly; mea-
erly.
Gºrºr. n. ſ. [gantelet, French..] An iron glove uſed for
defence, and thrown down in challenges. It is ſometimes
in poetry uſed for the ceſius, or boxing glove.
A ſcaly gauntlet now, with joints of ſteel,
Muſt glove this hand. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
Feel but the difference, ſoft and rough;
This a gauntlet, that a muff.
Some ſhall in ſwiftneſs for the goal contend,
And others try the twanging bow to bend;
The ſtrong with iron gauntlets arm'd ſhall ſtand,
Oppos'd in combat, on the yellow ſand. Dryd. Virg. Æn.
Who naked wreſtled beſt, beſmear'd with oil;
Or who with gaumlets gave or took the foil. Dryd. Fables.
The funeral of ſome valiant knight
May give this thing its proper light:
View his two gauntlets; theſe declare
That both his hands were us’d to war. Prior.
So to repel the Vandals of the ſtage,
Our vet’ran bard reſumes his tragick rage;
He throws the gauntlet Otway us’d to wield,
And calls for Engliſhmen to judge the field.
GA'vot. m. ſ. [gavotte, French.] A kind of dance.
The diſpoſition in a fiddle to play tunes in preludes, ſara-
bands, jigs and gavots, are real qualities in the inſtrument.
Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scriblerus.
GAUze. n.ſ. A kind of thin tranſparent ſilk.
Silken cloaths were uſed by the ladies; and it ſeems they
were thin, like gauze. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Brocadoes and damaſks, and tabbies and gauzer,
Are lately brought over. Swift.
GAwk. n.ſ. [3eac, Saxon.]
1. A cuckow.
2. A fooliſh fellow. In both ſenſes it is retained in Scotland.
GAwN. m. ſ. [corrupted for gallon.] A ſmall tub, or lading
veſſel.
GA'wNTREE. n.ſ. [Scottiſh. J A wooden frame on which
beer-caſks are ſet when tunned.
GAY. adj. [gay, French.]
1. Airy; chearful; merry; frolick.
Smooth flow the waves, the zephyrs gently play;
Belinda ſmil'd, and all the world was gay. Pope.
Ev’n rival wits did Voiture's fate deplore,
And the gay mourn'd, who never mourn'd before. Pope.
2. Fine; ſhowy.
A virgin that loves to go gay. Bar. vi. 9.
GAY. m. ſ. [from the adjective..] An ornament; an embel-
liſhment.
Moroſe and untračtable ſpirits look upon precepts in em-
blem, as they do upon gays and pictures, the fooleries of ſo
many old wives tales. L’Eſtrange.
GA' | ET Y. n ſ. [gayeté, French, from gay.]
1. Chearfulneſs; airineſs; merriment.
2. Aćts of juvenile pleaſure.
And from thoſe gayeties our youth requires
Cleaveland.
Southern.
To exerciſe their minds, our age retires. Denham.
3. Finery; ſhow.
Our gayety and our gilt are all beſmirch'd,
With rainy marching in the painful field. Shakeſp. H. V.
GA'Y LY. adv. Merrily; chearfully; ſhowily.
GA'YN Ess. n.ſ.. [from gay.] Gayety; finery. Not much in
uſe.
To GAZE. v. n. [2).3 sq.3.x, or rather zerean, to ſee, Sax.]
To look intently and earneſtly; to look with eagerneſs.
What ſee'ſt thou there King Henry's diadem,
Inchas'd with all the honours of the world:
If ſo, gaze on. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
From ſome ſhe caſt her modeſt eyes below;
At ſome her gazing glances roving flew. Fairfax, b. iv.
Gaze not on a maid, that thou fall not by thoſe things that
are precious in her. Eccluſ, ix. 5.
A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind. Shakeſpeare.
Strait toward heav'n my wond'ring eyes I turn'd,
And gaz'd a while the ample ſky. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
GAze. n. ſ. [from the verb J
1, Intent regard; look of eagerneſs or wonder; fixed look.
Peing light'ned with her beauty's beam,
And thereby fill'd with happy influence,
And lifted up above the worldis gaze,
To ſing with angels her immortal praiſe. Spenser.
Do but note a wild and wanton herd,
If any air of muſick touch their ears,
You ſhall perceive them make a mutual ſtand,
Their ſavage eyes turn'd to a modeſt gaze,
By the ſweet power of muſick. Shakeſp. March. of Penice.
Not a month
'Fore your queen dy'd, ſhe was more worth ſuch gazes
Than what you look on now. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale,
With ſecret gaze, -
Or open admiration, him behold,
On whom the great Creator hath beſtow'd
Worlds. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. iii.
Pindar is a dark writer, wants connexion as to our under-
ſtanding, ſoars out of fight, and leaves his readers at a
gaze. - Dryden's Preface to Ovid.
After having ſtood at gaze before this gate, he diſcovered
an inſcription. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 27.
2. The obječt gazed on.
I muſt die
Betray'd, captiv'd, and both my eyes put out;
Made of my enemies the ſcorn and gaze;
To grind in brazen fetters, under taſk,
With my heav'n-gifted ſtrength. Milton's Agoniſłes.
GA'ze R. m. ſ. [from gaze.] He that gazes; one that looks
intently with eagerneſs or admiration.
In her cheeks the vermil red did ſhew,
Like roſes in a bed of lilies ſhed;
The which ambroſial odours from them threw,
And gazers ſenſe with double pleaſure fed. Fairy Queen.
I'll ſlay more gazers than the baſiliſk. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
'Come, baſiliſk,
And kill the innocent gazer with thy fight. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Bright as the ſun, her eyes the gazers ſtrike;
And, like the ſun, they ſhine on all alike. Pope.
His learned ideas give him a tranſcendent delight; and yet,
at the ſame time, diſcover the blemiſhes which the common
gazer never obſerved. Watts's Logick.
GA'ze FUL. adſ...[gaze and full.] Looking intently.
The brightneſs of her beauty clear, -
The raviſht hearts of gazeful men might rear -
To admiration of that heavenly light. Spenser on Beauty.
GA'ze Hou ND. m.ſ: [gaze and hound; canis agaſaeus, Skinner.]
A hound that purſues not by the ſcent, but by the eye.
See'ſt thou the gazehound / how with glance ſevere
From the cloſe herd he marks the deſtin’d deer Tickell.
GAZETTE. n.ſ. [gazetta is a Venetian halfpenny, the price
of a newspaper, of which the firſt was publiſhed at Venice.]
A paper of news; a paper of publick intelligence. It is ac-
cented indifferently on the firſt or laſt ſyllable.
And ſometimes when the loſs is ſmall,
And danger great, they challenge all;
Print new additions to their feats,
And emendations in gazettes. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 3.
An Engliſh gentleman, without geography, cannot well
underſtand a gazette. Locke.
One cannot hear a name mentioned in it that does not
bring to mind a piece of a gazette. Addison's Guardian.
All, all but truth, falls dead-born from the preſs;
Like the laſt gazette, or the laſt addreſs. Pope.
GAzette‘E.R. m.ſ.. [from gazette J .
1. A writer of news.
2. It was lately a term of the utmoſt infamy, being uſually ap-
plied to wretches who were hired to vindicate the court.
Satire is no more : I feel it die:
No gazetteer more innocent than I. Pope.
GA'zingstock. n.ſ. [gaze and ſºck.] A perſon gazed at
with ſcorn or abhorrence.
Theſe things are offences to us, by making us gazing/?ocks
to others, and objećts of their ſcorn and deriſion. Ray.
GAZO'N. m.ſ [French.] In fortification, pieces of freſh earth
covered with graſs, cut in form of a wedge, about a foot long
and half a foot thick, to line parapets and the traſverſes
of galleries. - PHarris.
GEAR. n.ſ. ſ ºrian, to cloath; 3eapne, furniture, Saxon.]
1. Furniture; accoutrements; dreſs; habit; ornaments.
Array thyſelf in her moſt gorgeous gear. Fairy Queen.
When he found her bound, ſtript from her gear,
And vile to menters ready ſaw in place,
He broke through. Fairfax, b. ii. ſtan. 27.
When once her eye -
Hath met the virtue of this magick duſt,
I ſhall appear ſome harmleſs villager,
Whom thrift keeps up about his country gear. Milton.
I fancy every body obſerves me as I walk the ſtreet, and
long to be in Iny old plain gear again. Addiſon's Guardian.
To ſee ſome radiant nymph appear
In all her glitt'ring birthday gear,
You think ſome goddeſs from the ſky
Deſcended, ready cut and dry. Swift.
2. The traces by which horſes or oxen draw.
Apollo's ſpite Pallas diſcern'd, and flew to Tydeus' ſon;
His ſcourge reacht, and his horſe made freſh; then took
her angry run
At king Eumelus, brake his gears. Chapman's Iliads.
1o D The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G E L
G E N
The frauds he learn'd in his fanaticky”
Made him uneaſy in his lawful gears. Dryden.
3. sº...": a woman, ſhe is a good wench for this
Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
#. Scotland.] Goods or riche: ; * he has gear enough.
ãº. adj. (A word which I find only in Spenser.] Won-
dań. to Leeches ſeemed ſtrange and geaſºn. Hulberd's Tak.
Gear. n.ſ.. [corrupted from jett] The hole through which
the metal runs into the mold. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
Geck. n.ſ. [zeac, a cuckow ; geck, German, a fool ; gawk,
Scottiſh] Å bubble eaſily impoſed upon... Hanner;
why did you ſuffer Jachimo to taint his noble heart and
brain with needleſs jealouſy, and to become the geº and ſcorn
o' th' other's villany Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
why have you ſuffer'd me to be impriſon'd,
And made the moſt notorious geek and gull -
That eer invention plaid on 2 Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
To Geck. v. a. [from the noun..] To cheat; to trick.
Gee. A term uſed by waggoners to their horſes when they
would have them go faſter.
Geese. The plural of gooſe.
Geºlable. adj [from gela, Latin.] What may be congealed
or concreted into a gelly.
GE'LATINE. adj. [gelatus, Latin.J. Formed into a gelly;
§:::::::...} viſcous; ſtiff and coheſive.
That pellucid gelatinous ſubſtance is an excrement caſt off
from the ſhoals of fiſh that inhabit the main. Wºodward.
You ſhall always ſee their eggs laid carefully up in that
ſpermatick gelatine matter, in which they are repoſited. Derh.
To GELD. v. a. preter, gelded or gelt; part, paſſ gºlded or get.
[gelten, German.] -
1. To caſtrate; to deprive of the power of generation.
Gºld bull-calf and ram lamb as ſoon as they fall. Tuſſºr.
Lord Say hath gelded the commonwealth, and made it
an eunuch. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
2. To deprive of any eſſential part.
He bears his courſe, and runs me up
With like advantage on the other ſide,
Gelding th' oppos'd continent as much
As on the other fide it takes from you. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
3. To deprive of anything immodeſt, or liable to objećtion.
They were diligent enough to make ſure work, and to geld
it ſo clearly in ſome places that they took away the very man-
hood of it. Dryden's Preface to Cleomenes.
GE'lder. n.ſ.. [from geld.] One that performs the act of
caſtration.
Geld later with gelders, as many one do,
And look of a dozen to geld away two. Tuff. Husband y.
No ſow gelder did blow his horn
To geld a cat, but cry’d reform. Hudibrai, f.i. cant. 2.
GE'lde R-Rose. n.ſ. [l ſuppoſe brought from Guelderland.]
The leaves are like thoſe of the maple-tree: the flowers
conſiſt of one leaf, which expands in a circular roſe form,
and is divided at the top into five parts: theſe are collected in
form of an umbel, the largeſt of which grow on the outſide,
and are barren; but thoſe in the middle are fruitful, producing
red berries, in each of which is contained one flat heart-
ſhaped ſeed.
The ſpecies are three. If the ſoil be moiſt, this plant
affords a very agreeable proſpect, both in the ſeaſon when it
is in flower, and alſo in the Autumn, when the fruit is ripe,
which generally grows in large cluſters, and is of a beautiful
colour. Miller.
The gelder-rºſe is increaſed by ſuckers and cuttings. Mort.
GE'LDING. m. ſ. [from geld.] Any animal caſtrated, particu-
larly an horſe.
Though naturally there be more males of horſes, bulls or
rams than females; yet artificially, that is, by making geld-
ings, oxen and weathers, there are fewer. Graunt.
The lord lieutenant may chuſe out one of the beſt horſes,
and two of the beſt geldings; for which ſhall be paid one hun-
dred pounds for the horſe, and fifty pounds a-piece for the
geldings. Temple.
GE'LID. adj. [gelidus, Latin.] Extremely cold.
From the deep ooze and gelid cavern rous'd,
They flounce. Thomſon's Spring.
GEli'D1t Y. m. ſ. [from gelid.]. Extreme cold. , Die?.
GE'LIDNEss. m. ſ. [from gelid.] Extreme cold. Dić7.
GE'LLY. n.ſ. (gelatus, Latin, J. Any viſcous body; viſci-
dity; glue ; gluey ſubſtance.
My beſt blood turn
To an infected gelly. Shakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale.
The tapers of the gods, -
The ſun and moon, became like waxen globes,
The ſhooting ſtars end all in purple gellies,
And chaos is at hand. Dryden and Lee's Oedipus.
The white of an egg will coagulate by a moderate heat,
and the hardeſt of animal ſolids are reſolvable again into
gellies. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Gel T. n.ſ. [from geld.]. A caſtrated animal; gelding.
The ſpayed gelt, they eſteem the moſt profitable Whiting
GE lt. n ſ [corrupted for the ſake of rhyme from gilt.] Tin-
ſel; gilt ſurface.
I won her with a girdle of gelt,
Emboſt with bugle about the belt. Stenſºr's P ſ
GE Lt. The participle paſſive of geld. 'fenſer's Pofforal,
Let the others be gelt for oxen. AMºrtimer's Huſband,
GEM. m. ſ. [gemma, Latin.] tr; Huſbandy.
1. A jewel; a precious ſtone of whatever kind.
Love his fancy drew;
And ſo to take the gem Urania ſought.
I ſaw his bleeding rings,
Their precious gems new loſt, became his guide,
Led him, begg'd for him, ſav'd him from deſpair. Shaiſ,
It will ſeem a hard matter to ſhadow a gem, or well point:
diamond, that hath many ſides, and to give the luſtre where
it ought. Peacham ºn Drawing.
Stones of ſmall worth may lie unſeen by day; •
But night itſelf does the rich gem betray.’ “ Cowly.
The baſis of all gems is, when pure, wholly diaphanous
and either cryſtal or an adamantine matter; but we find in.
diaphaneity of this matter changed, by means of a fine metal.
lick matter. Wºodward,
2. The firſt bud.
From the joints of thy prolifick ſtem
A ſwelling knot is raiſed, call'd a gem;
Sidney.
Embolden'd out they come,
And ſwell the gems, and burſt the narrow room. Dryden.
The orchard loves to wave
With Winter winds, before the gems exert
Their feeble heads. Philipſ,
To GEM. v. a. [gemma, Latin.] To adorn, as with jewels of
buds.
T; *. v. m. [gemma, Latin. J. To put forth the firſt
u(1S.
Laſt roſe, in dance, the ſtately trees, and ſpread
Their branches; hung with copious fruit; or gemm'd
Their bloſſoms. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
GEME'LLIPA Rous. adj. [gemelli and tario, Latin.] Bearing
twins. Die?,
To GE'MINATE. v. a. [gemino, Latin.] To double. Diii.
GEMINATION. m. ſ. [from geminate J Repetition; redupli-
cation.
Be not afraid of them that kill the body: fear him, which,
after he hath killed, hath power to caſt into hell; yea, I ſay
unto you, a gemination, which the preſent controverſy ſhews
not to have been cauſeleſs, fear him. Bºyle.
GE'M IN Y. n.ſ. [gemini, Latin.] Twins; a pair; a brace; a
couple.
I have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for
you, and your couch-fellow, Nim ; or elſe you had looked
through the grate, like a geminy of baboons. Shakeſpeare,
A geminy of aſſes ſplit, would make juſt four of you. Congr.
GE'M INous, ad;. [geminus, Latin.] Double.
Chriſtians have baptized theſe geminous births, and double
connaſcencies, with ſeveral names, as conce wing in them a
diſtinction of ſouls. Brown's Walgar Errour, b. iii.
GE'MMAR Y. adj. [from gem.) Pertaining to gems or jewels.
The principle and gemmary affection is its tranſlucency; as
for irradiancy, which is found in many gems, it is not diſco-
verable in this. Brown's Wugar Erreurs, b. i. º. 2.
GE'MMEous. adj. [gemmeus, Latin j
1. Tending to gems. »
Sometimes we find them in the geminºus matter itſelf.”
2. Reſembling gems. -
G. M.Mo'sity. n.ſ. [ from gem. j. The quality of being *
jewel. Dić7.
GE'Mote, n.ſ. The court of the hundred. Obſolete.
GE'NDER. n.ſ. [genus, Latin; gendre, French.)
I. A kind ; a ſort. -
Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are
gardeners; ſo that if we will ſupply it with one gººr of
herbs, or diſtraćt it with many, the power and corrigible au-
thority of this lies in our will. Shakeſpeare'. Othell.
The other motive,
Why to a publick court I might not go,
Is the great love the general gender bear me. Shakespeare Hamlet.
2. A ſex. -
3. [In grammar.] A denomination given to nouns, from their
being joined with an adjective in this or that termination: Clark.
Cubitus, ſometimes cubitum in the neutral gender, ſignifies
the lower part of the arm on which we lean. Arbuthnot.
Ulyſſes ſpeaks of Nauſicaa, yet immediately changes the
words into the maſculine gender. Note: on the Odyſºſ:
To GE'NDER. v. a. [engendrer, French.]
1. To beget.
2. To produce; to cauſe. -
Fooliſh and unlearned queſtions avoid, knowing that. they
do gender ſtrife. 2 Tim. ii. #.
o
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G E N
G E N
*
*
|}
To GE'NDER. v. n. To copulate; to breed.
A ciſtern for foul toads
To gender in. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Thou ſhalt not let thy cattle gender with a diverſe kind.
Lev. xix. 19.
GENE ALO'GICAL. adj. [from genealogy.] Pertaining to deſcents
. families; pertaining to the hiſtory of the ſucceſſions of
Ouſes.
GF NEA'Logist. m. ſ. [yºvszaoyá, ; genealogifte, French.] He
who traces deſcents.
GENEA'LOGY.. n.ſ. [yºvsz and x8762.] Hiſtory of the
ſucceſſion of families; enumeration of deſcent in order of
ſucceſſion; a pedigree.
The ancients ranged chaos into ſeveral regions; and in that
order ſucceſſively riſing one from another, as if it was a pedi-
gree or genealogy. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
GE'NERABLE. adj. [from genero, Latin.] That may be pro-
duced or begotten.
GENERAL. adj. [general, French; generalis, Latin.]
1. Comprehending many ſpecies or individuals; not ſpecial;
not particular.
To conclude from particulars to generals is a falſe way of
arguing. Notes to Pope's Odſey.
2. Lax in ſignification; not reſtrained to any ſpecial or particu-
lar import.
Where the author ſpeaks more ſtrićtly and particularly on
any theme, it will explain the more looſe and general ex-
preſſions. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
3. Not reſtrained by narrow or diſtinétive limitations.
A general idea is an idea in the mind, conſidered there as
ſeparated from time and place, and ſo capable to repreſent
any particular being that is conformable to it. Locke.
4. Relating to a whole claſs or body of men, or a whole kind
of any being.
They, becauſe ſome have been admitted without trial,
make that fault general which is particular. Whitgifte.
5. Publick; compriſing the whole. -
Nor would we deign him burial of his men,
*Till he diſburs'd, at Saint Colmeſkill iſle,
Ten thouſand dollars to our gen'ral uſe. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Nor fail'd they to expreſs how much they prais'd,
That for the general ſafety he deſpis'd
His own. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
6. Not directed to any ſingle objećt.
If the ſame thing be peculiarly evil, that general averſion
will be turned into a particular hatred againſt it. Spratt.
7. Extenſive, though not univerſal.
8. Common; uſual.
I’ve been bold,
For that I knew it the moſt general way. Shakeſp. Timon.
9. General is appended to ſeveral offices: as, Attorney General,
Solicitor General, Vicar General.
Ge'NERAL. m. ſ.
1. The whole; the totality; the main, without inſiſting on
particulars.
That which makes an ačtion fit to be commanded or for-
bidden, can be nothing elſe, in general, but its tendency to
promote or hinder the attainment of ſome end. No ris.
In particulars our knowledge begins, and ſo ſpreads itſelf
by degrees to generals. Lºcke.
I have conſidered Milton's Paradiſe loſt in the fable, the
charaćters, the ſentiments, and the language; and have ſhewn
that he excels, in general, under each of theſe heads. Addiſon.
2. The publick; the intereſt of the whole. Not in uſe.
Neither my place, nor aught I heard of buſineſs,
Hath raiſed me from my bed; nor doth the general
Take hold on me; for my particular grief -
Ingluts and ſwallows other ſorrows. Shakespeare's Othello.
3. The vulgar. Not in uſe.
The play, I remember, pleaſed not the million; 'twas ca-
viare to the general: but it was, as I received it, and others,
whoſe judgment in ſuch matters cried in the top of mine, an
excellent play. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
4. [General, Fr.] One that has the command over an army.
A general is one that hath power to command an army. Lºc.
The generals on the enemy's ſide are inferior to ſeveral that
once commanded the French armies. Addiſon on the J/ar.
The war's whole art each private ſoldier knows,
And with agen'ral's love of conqueſt glows. Addiſon.
GENERALI'ss IMo. m. ſ. [generaliſime, French, from general.]
The ſupreme commander. It is often rather a title of honour
than office.
Commiſſion of generaliſimo was likewiſe given to the
prince. Clarendon, b. viii.
Pompey had deſerved the name of great; and Alexander, of
the ſame cognomination, was generaliſimo of Greece. Brown.
GENERALITY.. n.ſ. [generalité, French, from general.]
1. The ſtate of being general; the quality of including ſpecies
or particulars.
Becauſe the curioſity of man's wit doth with peril wade
farther in the ſearch of things than were convenient, the ſame
is thereby reſtrained unto ſuch generalities as, every where of.
fering themſelves, are apparent to men of the weakeſt con-
ceit. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 6.
Theſe certificates do only in the generality mention the par-
ties contumacies and diſobedience. Ayliffe's Pa, ergon.
2. The main body; the bulk; the common maſs.
There is a great neceſſity, though not apparent, as not
extending to the generality, but reſting upon private heads.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
By his own principles he excludes from ſalvation the gene-
raity of his own church; that is, all that do not believe upon
his grounds. Till tſn, Sermon I.
The generality of the Engliſh have ſuch a favourable opi-
nion of treaſon, nothing can cure them. Addiſon's Freeholder.
They publiſh their ill-natured diſcoveries with a ſecret pride,
and applaud themſelves for the ſingularity of their judgment,
which has found a flaw in what the generality of mankind ad-
mires. - Addiſon's Spediator.
Such treatment has its effect among the generality of thoſe
whoſe hands it falls into. Addiſon's Spediator.
The wiſeſt were diſtraćted with doubts, while the generality
wandered without any ruler. Rogers, Sermon 3.
GE'N E E ALLY. adv. [from general.]
1. In general; without ſpecification or exception.
I am not a woman to be touch'd with ſo many giddy fancies
as he hath generally taxed their whole ſex withal. Shakeſpeare.
Generally we would not have thoſe that read this work of
Sylva Sylvarum, account it ſtrange that we have ſet down par-
ticulars untried. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Extenſively, though not univerſally.
3. Commonly ; frequently.
4. In the main ; without minute detail; in the whole taken to-
gether.
Generally ſpeaking, they live very quietly. Addison Guardian.
Generally ſpeaking, they have been gaining ever ſince, though
with frequent interruptions. Swift.
GE(NER ALN Ess. n.ſ.. [from general.] Wide extent, though
ſhort of univerſality; frequency; commonneſs.
They had with a general conſent, rather ſpringing by the
generalneſs of the cauſe than of any artificial practice, ſet
themſelves in arms. Sidney.
GE'NERALTY. m. ſ. [from general.] The whole; the to-
tality.
The municipal laws of this kingdom are of a vaſt extent,
and include in their generalty all thoſe ſeveral laws which are
allowed as the rule of juſtice and judicial proceedings. Hale.
GE'NER ANT. n.ſ. [generans, Latin.] The begetting or pro-
dućtive power.
Some believe that the ſoul is made by God, ſome by angels,
and ſome by the generant: whether it be immediately created
or traduced hath been the great ball of contention to the later
ages. Glanv Sceſſ c. 4:
In ſuch pretended generations the generant or active prin-
ciple is ſuppoſed to be the ſun, which, being an inanimate
body, cannot act otherwiſe than by his heat. Ray on the Creat.
To GE/NERATE. v.a. [genero, Latin.]
1. To beget; to propagate.
Thoſe creatures which being wild generate ſeldom, being
tame, generate often. Bacon's Natural Hiſlory.
2. To cauſe ; to produce.
God created the great whales, and each
Soul living, each that crept, which plenteouſ
The waters generated by their kinds. Milton's Praiſ. Loſt.
Or find ſome other way to generate
Mankind. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x. l. 894.
Sounds are generated where there is no air at all. Bacon.
Whatever generates a quantity of good chyle, muſt like-
wiſe generate milk. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
GENERATIon, n. ſ [generation, French, from generate.]
. 1. The aët of begetting or producing.
Seals make excellent impreſſions; and ſo it may be thought
of ſounds in their firſt generation: but then the dilation of
them, without any new ſealing, ſhews they cannot be im-
preſſions. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
He longer will delay, to hear thee tell
His generation, and the riſing birth
Of nature from the unapparent deep. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
If we deduce the ſeveral races of mankind in the ſeveral
parts of the world from generation, we maſt imagine the firſt
numbers of them, who in any place agree upon any civil con-
ſtitutions, to aſſemble as ſo many heads of families whom they
repreſent. Temple.
2. A family; a race.
Y’are a dog.
Thy mother's of my generation: what's ſhe, if I be a
dog Shakeſpeare's Timon ºf Athens.
3. Progeny; offspring.
The barb'rous Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation meſſes,
To gorge his appetite, ſhall to my boſom
Be as well neighbour'd. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
4. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G E N
G E N
4. A fingle ſucceſſion; one gradation in the ſcale of genealogical
deſcent.
This generation ſhall not paſs 'till all theſe things be ful-
filled. Mat. xxiv. 34.
In the fourth generation they ſhall come hither again. Gen.
A marvellous number were excited to the conqueſt of Pa-
leſtine, which with fingular virtue they performed, and held
that kingdom ſome few generations. Raleigh's Eſſays.
5. An age.
By ſome of the ancients a generation was fixed at an hun-
dred years; by others at an hundred and ten ; by others at
thirty-three, thirty, thirty-five, and twenty: but it is re-
marked, that the continuance of generations is ſo much longer
as they come nearer to the more ancient times. Calmet.
Every where throughout all generations and ages of the
Chriſtian world, no church ever perceived the word of God
to be againſt it. Hooker.
GE's ERAtive. adj. [generatif, French, from genero, Latin.]
1. Having the power of propagation.
He gave to all, that have life, a power generative, thereby
to continue their ſpecies and kinds. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
In grains and kernels the greateſt part is but the nutriment
of that generative particle, ſo diſproportionable unto it. Brown.
2. Prolifick; having the power of produćtion; fruitful.
If there hath been ſuch a gradual diminution of the gene-
rative faculty upon the earth, why was there not the like
decay in the produćtion of vegetables? Bentley's Sermons.
GENERA'toR. n.ſ.. [from genero, Latin.] The power which
begets, cauſes, or produces.
Imagination aſſimilates the idea of the generator into the
reality in the thing engendered. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
GENERICAL. adj. [generique, French, from genuſ, Latin.]
GENE'RICK. } That which comprehends the genus, or
diſtinguiſhes from another genus, but does not diſtinguiſh the
ſpecies.
The word conſumption being applicable to a proper, and
improper to a true and baſtard comſumption, requires a gene-
rical deſcription quadrate to both. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Though wine differs from other liquids, in that it is the
juice of a certain fruit; yet this is but a general or generiek
difference; for it does not diſtinguiſh wine from cyder or
perry: the ſpecifick difference of wine, therefore, is its preſ-
ſure from the grape. // atts's Logick.
GENE'R1cAlly. adv. [from generick.] With regard to the
genus, though not the ſpecies.
Theſe have all the eſſential charaćters of ſea-ſhells, and
ſhew that they are of the very ſame ſpecifick gravity with
thoſe to which they are ſo generically allied. //codward.
GENERo's IT Y. m. ſ. [generoſité, French; generoſtas, Latin.]
The quality of being generous; magnanimity; liberality.
Can he be better principled in the grounds of true virtue
and generºſity than his young tutor is? Locke on Education.
It would not have been your generoſity, to have paſſed
by ſuch a fault as this. Locke.
GENEROUS. adj. [generoſus, Latin; genereux, French.]
1. Not of mean birth; of good extraction.
2. Noble of mind; magnanimous; open of heart.
His gen” ous ſpouſe, Theano, heav'nly fair,
Nurs'd the young ſtranger.
3. Liberal; munificent.
4. Strong; vigorous.
Having in a digeſtive furnace drawn off the ardent ſpirit
from ſome good ſack, the phlegm, even in this generous wine,
was copious. Boyle.
GE'NERously. adv. [from generous.]
1. Not meanly with regard to birth.
2. Magnanimouſly; nobly.
When all the gods our ruin have foretold,
Yet generouſly he does his arms withold.
3. Liberally ; munificently.
GEN’ERousNess. n.ſ.. [from generous.] The quality of being
generous. -
Is it poſſible to conceive that the overflowing generouſneſ of
the Divine Nature would create immortal beings with mean
or envious principles: Collier on Kindneſs.
GENESIS. n.ſ. [y:vert; ; geneſ, French.] Generation; the
firſt book of º which treats of the produćtion of the world.
GENET. n.ſ. [French. The word originally ſignified a horſe-
man, and perhaps a gentleman or knight.] A ſmall ſized
well proportioned Spaniſh horſe.
You'll have your nephews neigh to you; you'll have
courſers for couſins, and genets for germanes. Shakespeare Othello.
It is no more likely that frogs ſhould be engendered in the
clouds than Spaniſh genets be begotten by the wind. Ray.
He ſhews his ſtatue too, where, plac'd on high,
The genet underneath him ſeems to fly. Dryd, juven. Sat.
GEN ETHL (Aca L. adj. [7twº Saſzz©. J Pertaining to nati-
vities as calculated by aſtronomers; ſhewing the configura-
tions of the ſtars at any birth.
The night immediately before he was ſlighting the art of
thoſe fooliſh aſtrologers, and geneth'iacal ephemeriſts, that uſe
to pry into the horoſcope of nativities. Howel's Pocal Forſt.
GENET Hlí'Acks. m. ſ. [from 7:37.*..] The ſcience of cal-
4
Pope.
Dryd. Ind. Emp.
culating nativities, or predićting the future events of life from
the ſtars predominant at the birth.
GENETHLIA'tic K. m. ſ. [yev; 3xn. J
tivities.
The truth of aſtrological predićions is not to be referred
to the conſtellations: the genethliatiºs conjecture by the diſ.
poſition, temper, and complexion of the perſon. Drummond.
GENE'v A. m. ſ. [A corruption of genevre, French, a juniper-
berry.]
We uſed to keep a diſtilled ſpirituous water of juniper in
the ſhops ; but the making of it became the buſineſs of the
diſtiller, who ſold it under the name of geneva. At preſent
only a better kind is diſtilled from the juniper-berry: what is
commonly fold is made with no better an ingredient than oil
of turpentine, put into the ſtill, with a little common ſalt,
and the coarſeſt ſpirit they have, which is drawn off much
below proof ſtrength, and is conſequently a liquor that ore
would wonder any people could accuſtom themſelves to drink
with pleaſure. - Hill's Mat. Medica.
GE/NIAL. adj. [genialis, Latin.]
1. That which contributes to propagation.
Higher of the genial bed by far,
And with myſterious reverence I deem. Milt. Parad. Loſt.
Creator Venus, genial pow'r of love,
The bliſs of men below and gods above Drydn's Fables.
2. That gives chearfulneſs or ſupports life.
North other light of life continue long,
But yields to double darkneſs nigh at hand;
So much I feel my genial ſpirits droop. Milton's Agonſics.
3. Natural; native.
It chiefly proceedeth from natural incapacity, and genial in-
diſpoſition. Brown's Wugar Errours, b. i.
GE'N1All Y. adv. [from genial.]
1. By genius; naturally.
Some men are genially diſpoſed to ſome opinions, and natu-
rally as averſe to others. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 15.
2. Gayly; chearfully.
GENICULATED. adj.
jointed.
A piece of ſome geniculated plant, ſeeming to be part of a
ſugar-cane. I/cºdward on Fºſſil.
GENicul A^T Ion. m. ſ. [geniculatiº, Latin. I Knottineſs; the
quality in plants of having knots or joints.
GENIO. m. ſ. [genio, Italian ; genius, Latin.] A man of a par-
ticular turn of mind.
Some genio's are not capable of pure affečtion; and a man
is born with talents for it as much as for poetry, or any other
ſcience. Tatler, Nº. 53.
GE'NITALs. n.ſ. [genitalis, Lat.] Parts belonging to generatiºn. .
Ham is conceived to be Jupiter, who was the youngeſt ſon,
who is ſaid to have cut off the genital of his father. Erºwn.
G:NITING n.ſ.. [A corruption of janeton, French, ſignifying
jane or janet, having been ſo called in honour of ſome lady
of that name; and the Scottiſh dialect calls them janet apples,
which is the ſame with janet.n: otherwiſe ſuppoſed to be cor-
rupted from junctiº.] An early apple gathered in June.
In July come early pears and plumbs in fruit, gºitings and
codlins. Bacon, Eſſay 47.
GE'Nitive. adj. . [genitivus, Latin.] In grammar, the name
of a caſe, which, among other relations, ſignifies one begot-
ten, as, the father of a ſºn ; or one begetting, as ſon of a father.
GE/NIUS. n.ſ. [Latin ; genie, French.]
1. The protecting or ruling power of men, places, or things.
There is none but he
Whoſe being I do fear: and, under him, .
My genius is rebuk'd; as it is ſaid
Antony's was by Caeſar. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The genius and the mortal inſtruments
Are then in council; and the ſtate of man,
Like to a little kingdom, ſuffers then. Shakſ. jul. Cºſ. r.
And as I awake, ſweet muſick breathe,
Sent by ſome ſpirit to mortals good,
Or th’ unſeen genius of the wood. Miſtan.
And the tame demon that ſhould guard my throne,
He who calculates na-
[geniculatus, Latin. J Knotted;
Shrinks at a genius greater than his own. Dryden.
To your glad genius ſacrifice this day;
Let common meats reſpectfully give way. Dryden.
2. A man endowed with ſuperiour faculties.
There is no little writer of Pindarick who is not mentioned
as a prodigious genius. Addison.
3. Mental power or faculties.
The ſtate and order does proclaim
The genius of that royal dame. J/aller.
4 Diſpoſition of nature by which any one is qualified for ſome
peculiar cmployment.
A happy genius is the gift of nature. Dryden's Defreſnoy.
Your majeſty's ſagacity, and happy genius for natural hiſ-
tory, is a better preparation for enquiries of this kind than all
the dead learning of the ſchools. Burnet's Theory, Preface.
One ſcience only will one genius fit;
So vaſt is art, ſo narrow human wit. Pope on Criticiſm.
The Romans, though they had no great genius for trade,
yet were not entirely neglectful of it. 4 bathnot on Coins.
5. Nature;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G E N
G E N
it.
5. Nature; diſpoſition.
Studious to pleaſe the genius of the times,
With periods, points and tropes he ſlurs his crimes. Dryd.
Another genius and diſpoſition improper for philoſophical
contemplations is not ſo much from the narrowneſs of their
ſpirit and underſtanding, as becauſe they will not take time
to extend them. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, Preface.
He tames the genius of the ſtubborn plain. Pope.
GENT. adj. [gent, old French J Elegant ſoft; gentle; polite.
A word now diſuſed.
Veſpaſian, with great ſpoil and rage,
Forewaſted all: ’till Genuiſa gent
Perſuaded him to ceaſe. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 10,
She that was noble. wiſe, as fair and gent,
Caſt how ſhe might their harmleſs lives preſerve.
GENTE'EL. adj. [gentil, French.]
1. Polite; elegant in behaviour; civil.
He had a genteeler manner of binding the chains of this
kingdom than moſt of his predeceſſors. Swift to Gay.
Their poets have no notion of genteel comedy, and fall into
the moſt filthy double meanings when they have a mind to
make their audience merry. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
2. Graceful in mien.
GENTE's LLY. adv. [from genteel J
1. Elegantly ; politely.
Thoſe that would be genteelly learned, need not purchaſe it
at the dear rate of being atheiſts. Glanv Scepſ. Preface.
After a long fatigue of eating and drinking, and babbling,
he concludes the great work of dining genteelly, South.
2. Gracefully; handſomely.
GENT E'ELNEss. n. ſ. [from genteel,]
1. Elegance; gracefulneſs; politeneſs.
He had a genius full of genteelneſs and ſpirit, having nothing
that was ungraceful in his poſtures and dreſſes. Dryd. Dufreſn.
2. Qualities befitting a man of rank.
GE'Nti AN. n.ſ. [gentiane, French ; gentiana, Latin.] Felwort
or baldmony. -
The leaves grow by pairs oppoſite to each other: the flower
conſiſts of one leaf, ſhaped like a cup, being cut into four,
five, or more ſegments: it is ſucceeded by a membranous oval
ſhaped fruit, ending in a ſharp point, opening lengthwiſe into
two parts, and containing many flat roundiſh ſeeds, bordered
with a leafy rim. Miller.
The root of the gentian is large and long, of a tolerably
firm texture, and remarkably tough : it has a faintiſh and
ſomewhat diſagreeable ſmell, and an extremely bitter taſte. It
is brought cheap from Germany. Hill's Mat. Medica.
Fairfax.
If it be fiſtulous, and the orifice ſmall, dilate it with gentian
r0OtS. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Gent 1ANE'll A. n.ſ. A kind of blue colour.
GE/NTILE. n.ſ. [gentilis, Latin.]
1. One of an uncovenanted nation; one who knows not the
true God.
Tribulation and anguiſh upon every ſoul that doeth evil, of
the Jew firſt, and alſo of the gentile. Rom. ii. 2.
Gentiles or infidels, in thoſe ačtions, upon both the ſpiritual
and temporal good, have been in one purſuit conjoined. Bacon.
2. A perſon of rank. Obſolete.
Fine Baſil deſireth it may be her lot
To grow, as a gilliflower, trim in a pot ;
That ladies and gentiles, for whom ye do ſerve,
May help him as needeth, poor life to preſerve. Tuffār.
GENTILESSE. n.ſ. [French. J. Complaiſance; civility.
She with her wedding-cloaths undreſſes
Her compla ſance and gentileſſes. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 1.
GE'NT1 lism. n.ſ. [gentiliſme, French, from gentile.] Hea-
theniſm; paganiſm.
If invocation of ſaints had been introduced in the apoſto-
lical times, it would have looked like the introducing of gen-
tiliſm again. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
GENTILI'tious. adj. [gentilitius, Latin.] -
1. Endemial; peculiar to a nation.
That an unſavory odour is gentilitiouſ, or national unto the
Jews, reaſon or ſenſe will not induce. Brown's Wu'gar Err.
2. Hereditary; entailed on a family.
The common cauſe of this diſtemper is a particular and
perhaps a gentilitious diſpoſition of body. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
GENTI'lin Y. n.ſ. [gentilité, French, from gentil, French; gen-
tilis, Latin.]
1. Good extraćtion; dignity of birth.
2. Elegance of behaviour; gracefulneſs of mien; nicety of taſte.
3. Gentry; the claſs of perſons well born.
Gavelkind muſt needs, in the end, make a poor gentility.
- Davies on Ireland.
4. Paganiſm ; heatheniſm.
When people began to eſpy the falſhood of oracles, where-
upon all gentility was built, their hearts were utterly averted
from it. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 2.
GE/NTLE, adj. [gentilis, Latin.]
1. Well born; well deſcended; ancient, though not noble.
They entering and killing all of the gentle and rich faction,
for honeſty ſake broke open all priſons. Sidney.
Theſe are the ſtudies wherein our noble and gent's youth
ought to beſtow their time A/ilton on Education.
Of gentle blood, part ſhed in honour's cauſes
Each parent ſprung. Pope.
2. Soft; bland; mild; tame; meek; peaceable. . . .
I am one of thoſe gentle ones that will uſe the devil himſelf
with curteſy. Shakespeare's Twelfth Night.
Her voice was ever ſoft,
Gentle and low; an excellent thing in woman, Shake?eare.
As gentle, and as jocund, as to jeſt, -
Go I to fight. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
A virtuous and a good man, reverend in converſation, and
genile in condition. z AM.ac. xv. 12.
The gentleſ heart on earth is prov’d unkind. Fairfax.
"Your change was wiſe; for, had ſhe been deny'd,
A ſwift revenge had follow'd from her pride:
You from my gentle nature had no fears;
All my revenge is only in my tears. Dryden's Ind. Emp.
He had ſuch agentle method of reproving their faults, that
they were not ſo much afraid as aſhamed to repeat them. Atter.
3. Soothing; pacifick.
And though this ſenſe firſt gentle muſick found,
Her proper objećt is the ſpeech of men. Davieſ,
GE'Ntle. n.ſ.
1. A gentleman; a man of birth. Now out of uſe.
Gentles, do not reprehend;
If you pardon, we will mend. Shakeſpeare.
Where is my lovely bride? -
How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown. Shakespeare
2. A particular kind of worm.
He will in the three hot months bite at a flagworm, or at a
green gentle. - //alton's Angler.
To GE'Ntle. v. a. To make gentle; to raiſe from the vulgar.
Obſolete. -
He to-day that ſheds his blood with me,
Shall be my brother; be he never ſo vile,
This day ſhall gentle his condition. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
GE'NTLEFolk. n.ſ. [gentle and folk.] Perſons diſtinguiſhed
by their birth from the vulgar.
The queen's kindred are made gentleſºk, Shakespeare Rich. III.
º: will not care for the remainder cf a bottle of
wine; therefore always ſet a freſh one before them after
dinner. - Swift's Dire:iions to the Butler.
GE/NTLEMAN. n.ſ.. [gentilhomme, French; gentilhuomo, Ital.
that is, homa gentilis, a man of anceſtry. All other deri-
vations ſeem to be whimſical J
1. A man of birth; a man of extraćtion, though not noble.
A civil war was within the bowels of that ſtate, between
the gentlemen and the peaſants. Sidney.
I freely told you, all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins; I was a gentleman. Shakespeare Merth. ºf Venice.
He hither came a private gentleman,
But young and brave, and of a family
Ancient and noble.
You ſay a long deſcended race
Makes gentlemen, and that your high degree
Is much diſparag'd to be match'd with me. Dryden.
2. A man raiſed above the vulgar by his charaćter or poſt.
Inquire me out ſome mean-born gentleman,
Whom I will marry ſtrait to Clarence' daughter.
3. A term of complaiſance.
The ſame gentlemen who have fixed this piece of morality on
the three naked ſiſters dancing hand in hand, would have
found out as good a one had there been four of them ſitting
at a diſtance, and covered from head to foot. Addiſon.
4. The ſervant that waits about the perſon of a man of rank.
Sir Thomas More, the Sunday after he gave up his chan-
cellorſhip, came to his wife's pew, and uſed the uſual words
of his gentleman uſher, Madam, my lord is gone. Camden.
Let be call’d before us
That gentleman of Buckingham's in perſon. Shakespeare H. VIII.
5. It is uſed of any man however high.
The earl of Hereford was reputed then
In England the moſt valiant gentleman. Shakespeare Henry IV.
The king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar. Shakeſp.
GENTLE MAN11'ke. }*. [gentleman and like..] . Becoming a-
Otway's Orphan.
*...*
Shakeſp.
GE'NTLE MANLY. man of birth.
He holdeth himſelf a gentleman, and ſcorneth to work,
which, he ſaith, is the life of a peaſant or churl; but enureth
himſelf to his weapon, and to the gentlemanly trade of ſteal-
ing. Stenſer on Ireland.
Pyramus is a ſweet-fac'd man; a proper man as one ſhall
ſee in a Summer's day; a moſt lovely genilemanlike man. Shakesp
. You have train'd me up like a peaſant, hiding from me all
gentlemanlike qualities. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
A gentlemán uſes the words of gallantry, and gentlemanlike
very often in his petition. Speciator, N°. 629.
Two clergymen ſtood candidates for a freeſchool, where a
gentleman, who happened to have underſtanding, procured
the place for him who was the better ſcholar and more gentle-
manly perſon of the two. Swift.
GE'NTLENEss. n.ſ.. [from gentle.]
Io E 1. Dignity
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G E N
l
:
s
1. Dignity of birth; goodneſs of extrađtion.
2. Softneſs of manners; ſweetneſs of diſpoſition; meckneſs;
tenderneſs.
My lord Sebaſtian,
The truth, you ſpeak, doth lack ſome gentlenºſ, Shakespeare.
Still ſhe retains
Her maiden gentleneſs, and oft at eve
Viſits the herds. Milt n.
The perpetual gentleneſ, and inherent goodneſs of the Or-
mond family. Drydºn's Fables, Dedication.
Changes are brought about ſilently and inſenſibly, with all
imaginable benignity and gent eneſ. Woodward's Nat. Hiſt.
Maſters muſt correct their ſervants with gentleneſs, pru-
dence, and mercy. Rogers.
Women ought not to think gentleneſ of heart deſpicable in
a man. Clariſſa.
3. Kindneſs; benevolence. Obſolete.
The gentleneſ of all the gods go with thee. Shakeſpeare.
GE'Ntleship. n.ſ.. [from gentle..] Carriage of a gentleman.
Obſolete.
Some in France, which will needs be gentlemen, have more
gentleſhip in their hat than in their head. Aſham's Schoolmaſter.
GE'Ntlewoman. n.ſ. [gentle and woman. See GENTLE-
MAN.]
1. A woman of birth above the vulgar; a woman well de-
ſcended.
The gentlewomen of Rome did not ſuffer their infants to be
ſo longſwathed as poorer people. Abbot's Dºſir. of the ſhorld.
Doth this ſir Protheus
Often reſort unto this gentlewoman * Shakeſpeare.
Gentlewomen may do themſelves much good by kneeling
upon a cuſhion, and weeding. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. A woman who waits about the perſon of one of high rank.
The late queen's gentlewoman, a knight's daughter,
To be her miſtreſs’ miſtreſs Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Her gentlewomen, like the nereids,
So many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes,
And made their bends adorings. Shakespeare. Ant, and Cleºpat.
3. A word of civility or irony. -
Now, gentlewoman, you are confeſſing your enormities; I
know it by that hypocritical down-caſt look. Dryden.
GE'NTLY. adv. [from gentle.]
1. Softly; meekly; tenderly; inoffenſively; kindly.
y miſtreſs gently chides the fault I made. Dryden.
The miſchiefs that come by inadvertency, or ignorance,
are but very gently to be taken notice of. Locke.
2. Softly ; without violence.
Fortune's blows,
When moſt ſtruck home, being gently warded, craves
A noble cunning. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanur.
In the ſame iſland a ſort of great bat, as men lie aſleep
with their legs naked, will ſuck their blood at a wound ſo
gently made as not to awake them. Grew's Muſæum.
GENTRY. n.ſ. [gentlery, gentry, from gentle.]
1. Birth; condition.
You are certainly a gentleman,
Clerk-like experienc'd, which no leſs adorns
Our gentry than our parents' noble name,
In whoſe ſucceſs we are gentle. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
2. Claſs of people above the vulgar; thoſe between the vulgar
and the nobility. -
They ſlaughtered many of the gentry, for whom no ſex or
age could be accepted for excuſe. Sidny.
Let ſtates, that aim at greatneſs, take heed how their nobi-
lity and gentry multiply too faſt. Bacon's Ornam. Ration.
How chearfully the hawkers cry
A ſatire, and the gentry buy. Swift.
2. A term of civility real or ironical.
The many-colour'd gentry there above, -
By turns are rul’d by tumult and by love. Prior.
3. Civility; complaiſance. Obſolete.
Shew us ſo much gentry and good-will,
As to extend your time with us a-while. Shakespeare Hamlet.
GE'Nuflection. n.ſ. [genuflexion, French; genu and feeto,
Latin.] The aët of bending the knee; adoration expreſſed
by bending the knee.
Here they make uſe of all the rites of adoration, genufcc-
tions, wax-candles, incenſe, oblations, prayers only excepted.
Stillingfleet's Defence of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
GENUINE. adj. [genuinus, Latin.] Not ſpurious; not coun-
terfeit; real; natural; true.
Experiments were at one time tried with genuine materials,
and at another time with ſophiſticated ones. Boyle.
The belief and remembrance, and love and fear of God,
have ſo great influence to make men religious, that where any
of theſe is, the reſt, together with the true and genuine effects
of them, are ſuppoſed to be. Tillotſºn's Servions.
A ſudden darkneſs covers all;
True genuine night: night added to the groves:
The fogs are blown full in the face of heaven. Dryd. Oedip.
GENU'1N ELY. adv. [from genuine.] Without adulteration;
without foreign admixtures ; naturally,
2.
There is another agent able to analize compound bodies
leſs violently, more genuincy, and more univerſally than the
fire. Boyle.
GENU'IN EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from genuine.] Freedom from any thing
counterfeit ; freedom from adultcration; purity ; natural
ſtate.
It is not eſſential to the genuineneſ of colours to be
durable. Boyle.
GE'NUS. n.ſ. [Latin. In ſcience, a claſs of being, compre-
hending under it many ſpecies: as quadruped is a genus com-
prehending under it almoſt all terreſtrial beaſts.
A general idea is called by the ſchools genus, and it is one
common nature agreeing to ſeveral other common natures:
ſo animal is a genus, becauſe it agrees to horſe, lion, whale,
and butterfly. }%atts's Lºgick.
If minerals are not convertible into another ſpecies, though
of the ſame genus, much leſs can they be ſurmiſed reducible
into a ſpecies of another genus. Aarvey on Conſumptiºns.
GE'oc ENTRIck. adj. [77 and x&amp;tpov; geocentrique, French.]
Applied to a planet or orb having the earth for its centre, or
the ſame centre with the earth. Harris.
GE'ODAESIA. m. ſ. [ytºzaſz; geodºſe, French.] That part
of geometry which contains the doctrine or art of meaſuring
ſurfaces, and finding the contents of all plane figures. Harris.
GE'oD AET1cal. adj. [from geodaſa.] Relating to the art of
meaſuring ſurfaces; comprehending or ſhowing the art of
meaſuring land.
GEOGRAPHER... n.ſ. [77 and yºw; geºgraphe, French.]
One who deſcribes the earth according to the poſition of its
different parts.
A greater part of the earth hath ever been peopled than
hath been known or deſcribed by geographers. Brown.
The bay of Naples is called the Crater by the old geogra-
phers, Addiſon.
From ſea to ſea, from realm to realm I rove,
And grow a meer geographer by love. Tickell,
GEOGRA’PHIcAL. adj. [geographique, French, from geogra-
phy. J Relating to geography; belonging to geography.
GeoGRA'PHIcALLY. adv. [from geographical.] In a geogra-
phical manner; according to the rules of geography.
Minerva lets Ulyſſes into the knowledge of his country:
ſhe geºgraphically deſcribes it to him. Broome on the Odyffry.
GEo'GRAPHY, n.ſ. [77, and yozºo; geographie,Fr.] Gragrafly in
a ſtrićt ſenſe, ſignifies the knowledge of the circles of the earthly
globe, and the ſituation of the various parts of the earth. When
it is taken in a little larger ſenſe, it includes the knowledge of
the ſeas alſo ; and in the largeſt ſenſe of all, it extends to the
various cuſtoms, habits, and governments of nations. I/atts.
Olympus is extolled by the Greeks as attaining unto heaven;
but geography makes ſlight account hereof, when they diſcourſe
of Andes or Teneriff. Brown's Wugar Err aurs, b. vi.
According to ancient fables the Argonauts ſailed up the
Danube, and from thence paſſed into the Adriatick, carrying
their ſhips upon their ſhoulders: a mark of great ignorance
in geography. Arbuthnot an Cains.
Geo/logy. m. ſ. [yº, and x67&amp; J The doćtrine of the earth;
the knowledge of the ſtate and nature of the earth.
GE'oMAN cf R. m. ſ. ſyn and ºvzig.] A fortuneteller; a
caſter of figures; a cheat who pretends to foretell futurity by
other means than the aſtrologer.
Fortunetellers, jugglers, geomancers, and the incantatory
impoſtors, though commonly men of inferior rank, daily
delude the vulgar. Brown's Vulgar Erraurs, b. i.
GEOMANCY. m. ſ. [77, and 9.2V712; geomance, French. I
The act of caſting figures; the act of foretelling by figures
what ſhall happen.
According to ſome perſons there are four kinds of divina-
tion; hydromancy, pyromancy, aeromancy, and geomancy.
Ayliff's Parergon.
GeoMA'NT1ck. adj. [from geomancy..] Pertaining to the ačt
of caſting figures. -
Two geomantick figures were diſplay'd
Above his head, a warrior and a maid;
One when direét, and one when retrograde. Dryden. }
GE'oMETER. n.ſ. [7twºrpn; ; geometre, French.] One ſkilled
in geometry; a geometrician. -
He became one of the chief geometers of his age. IPatti.
GE'oM ETR AL. adj. [geometral, French, from geometry.] Per-
taining to geometry. Dićf.
GF'oMETRICAL. Nadj. [yºgāpix's; geometrique, French, from
GE'om ETR1ck. } geometry.]
1. Pertaining to geometry.
A geºmetrical ſcheme is let in by the eyes, but the demon-
ſtration is diſcerned by reaſon. More's Antid againſt Atheiſm.
This mathematical diſcipline, by the help of geometrical
principles, doth teach to contrive ſeveral weights and powers
unto motion or reſt. //ilkins's Math. Magick.
2. Preſcribed or laid down by geometry.
Muſt men take the meaſure of God juſt by the ſame geome-
trical proportions that he did, that gather'd the height and big-
neſs of Hercules by his foot? Stilingfieet.
Does
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">&amp;
i.
h.
ſº:
Does not this wiſe philoſopher aſſert,
That the vaſt orb, which caſts ſo fair his beams,
Is ſuch, or not much bigger than he ſeems ?
That the dimenſions of his glorious face
Two geometrick feet do ſcarce ſurpaſs Blackmore's Creation,
3. Diſpoſed according to geometry.
Geometrick jaſper ſeemeth of affinity with the lapis ſanguinalis
deſcribed by Boetius; but it is certainly one ſort of lapis cru-
ciformis. Grew's Muſeum.
GeoME'TR1cAlly, adv. [from geomerical.] According to the
laws of geometry.
'Tis poſſible geometrically to contrive ſuch an artificial mo-
tion as ſhall be of greater ſwiftneſs than the revolutions of the
heavens. //ilkins's Math. Magick.
All the bones, muſcles, and veſiels of the body are con-
trived moſt geºmetrically, according to the ſtrićteſt rules of
mechanicks. Ray on the Creation.
GEOMETR (c1A N. m. ſ. [yewºrpn;..] One ſkilled in geometry;
a geometer.
Although there be a certain truth therein, geometricians
would not receive ſatisfaction without demonſtration thereof.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
How eaſily does an expert geometrician, with one glance of
his eye, take in a complicated diagram, made up of many
lines and circles' //atts's Imprºvement of the Miºd.
To Geo'METRize. v. n. [ysºpia. J . To act according to
the laws of geometry.
We obtained good flore of cryſtals, whoſe figures were
differing enough, though prettily ſhaped, as if nature had at
once affected variety in their figuration, and yet confined her-
ſeff to geometrize. Boyle.
GE'OMETRY, n.ſ [yºpºpſz; geºmetrie, French..] Origi-
- nally ſignifies the art of meaſuring the earth, or any diſtances
or dimenſions on or within it: but it is now uſed for the
ſcience of quantity, extenſion, or magnitude abſtraćtedly
conſidered, without any regard to matter.
Geomeº y very probably had its firſt riſe in Egypt, where the
Nile atºnially overflowing the country, and covering it with
mud, obliged men to diſtinguiſh their lands one from another,
by the conſideration of their figure; and after which, 'tis pro-
bable, to be able alſo to meaſure the quantity of it, and to
know how to plot it, and lay it out again in its juſt dimen-
ſions, figure and proportion: after which, it is likely, a far-
ther contemplation of thoſe draughts and figures helped them
to diſcover many excellent and wonderful properties belonging
to them ; which ſpeculations were continually improving, and
are ſtill to this day. Geometry is uſually divided into ſpecula-
tive and practical; the former of which contemplates and
treats of the propertics of continued quantity abſtraćtedly;
and the latter applies theſe ſpeculations and theorems to uſe
and pračtice, and to the benefit and advantage of man-
kind. - - Harris.
In the muſcles alone there ſeems to be more geometry than in
all the artificial engines in the world. Ray on the Creation.
Him alſo for my cenſor I diſdain,
Who thinks all ſcience, as all virtue, vain;
Who counts geometry and numbers toys,
And with his foot the ſacred duſt deſtroys. Dryd. Perſ. Sat.
GE opo'Nica L. adj. [7% and révô"; geºpomºgue, French.j Re-
lating to agriculture; relating to the cultivation of the ground.
Such expreſiions are frequent in authors geºponical, or ſuch
as have treated de re ruffica. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi.
GEoPo'Nicks. n.ſ. [ 57 and révô'.] The ſcience of culti-
vating the ground; the doćtrine of agriculture.
GEORGF. m. ſ. [Georgius, Latin.] -
1. A figure of St. George on horſeback worn by the knights of
the garter.
Look on my George, I am a gentleman;
Rate me at what thou wilt Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
2. A brown loaf. Of this ſenſe I know not the original.
Cubb'd in a cabbin, on a mattreſs laid, -
On a brown george, with louſy ſwobbers, fed. Dryd. Perſ.
GEO'RGICK. m. ſ. [ytºpºv; georgiques, Fr.] Some part of
the ſcience of huſbandry put into a pleaſing dreſs, and ſet off
with all the beauties and embelliſhments of poetry. Addison.
GEORGIck, adj. Relating to the doćtrine of agriculture.
Here I peruſe the Mantuan's geºrgik ſtrains,
And learn the labours of Italian ſwains. Gay's Rural Sports.
GE o'ric K. adj. [from 7”. J Belonging to the earth; ter-
reſtrial. Dić.
GE'RENT. adj. [gerens, Latin.] Carrying; bearing. Dići.
GE'RF Alcos. n.ſ. A bird of prey, in ſize between a vulture
and a hawk, and of the greateſt ſtrength next to the
eagle. - Bailey.
GE'RMAN. m. ſ. [germain, French; germanus, Lat.] Brother;
one approaching to a brother in proximity of blood: thus the
children of brothers or ſiſters are called couſins german.
They knew it was their couſin german, the famous Am-
phialus. - Sidney, b. ii.
And to him ſaid, go now, proud miſcreant,
Thyſelf thy meſſage do to german dear. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Theſe Germans did ſubdue all Germany,
Of whom it hight; but in the end their fire, -
With foul repulſe, from France was forced to retire. F. Q.
Wert thou a bear, thou wouldſt be kill'd by the horſe;
wert thou a horſe, thou wouldſt be ſeiz'd by the leopard;
wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to the lion, and the
ſpots of thy kindred were juries on thy life. Shakeſp. Timon.
You'll have your nephews neigh to you; you'll have courſers
for couſins, and genets for germans. Shakeſp. Othello.
GE'RMAN. adj [germanus, Latin.] Related.
Not he alone ſhall ſuffer what wit can make heavy, and
vengeance bitter; but thoſe that are german to him, though
removed fifty times, ſhall come under the hangman. Shakeſp.
GE'RMANDER. n ſ. [germandrce, French.]
It has ſmall thick leaves, which are laciniated ſomewhat
like thoſe of the oak: the flowers, which are produced at the
wings of the leaves, are labiated: the flamina or threads ſup-
ply the place of the creſt, or upper lip: the beard or lower lip
of the flower is divided into five parts: the middle ſegment,
which is largeſt, is hollow like a ſpoon, and ſometimes divided
into two parts: the cup ef the flower is fiſtulous. AMiller.
GE'RM.E. n.ſ. lgermen, Latin.] A ſprout or ſhoot; that part
which grows and ſpreads.
Whether it be not made out of the germe, or treadle of the
egg, doth ſeem of leſſer doubt. Brown's / ugar Errours.
Gº”. n. ſ. [germen, Latin.] A ſhooting or ſprouting
eed.
Though palaces and pyramids do ſlope
Their heads to their foundations; though the treaſure
Of nature's germins tumble all together,
Even 'till deſtruction ſicken; anſwer me
To what I aſk you. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Thou all-ſhaking thunder,
Strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world;
Crack nature's mould, all germins ſpill at once
That make ungrateful man. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To GERMINATÉ ºn. [germino, Latin.] To ſprout; to
ſhoot; to bud; to put forth. -
This action is furthered by the chalcites, which hath within
a ſpirit that will put forth and germinate, as we ſee in chymical
trials. Bacon's Natural Hi/iory.
The feeds of all kinds of vegetables being planted near the
ſurface of the earth, in a convenient ſoil, amongſt matter
proper for the formation of vegetables, would germinate, grow
up, and repleniſh the face of the earth. Woºdward’s Na. Hiſł.
GERºti NA"Tſon. n ſ [germination, French, from germinate.]
The act of ſprouting or ſhooting; growth.
For acceleration of germination, we refer it over unto the
place, where we ſhall handle the ſubject of plants generally.
Bacon's Natural Hiſłory.
The duke of Buckingham had another kind of germination;
and ſurely, had he been a plant, he would have been reckoned
among the ſpoute naſcentes. //ºtton.
There is but little ſimilitude between a terreous humidity
and plantal germinations. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 25.
Suppoſe the earth ſhould be carried to the great diſtance of
Saturn; there the whole globe would be one frigid zone;
there would be no life, no germination. Bentley's Sermons.
GE'R UND. m. ſ. [gerundium, Latin.] In the Latin grammar, a
kind of verbal noun, which governs caſes like a verb.
GEST. m. ſ. [geſtum, Latin.]
1. A deed; an action; an atchievement.
Who fair them quites, as him beſeemed beſt,
And goodly can diſcourſe of many a noble geſ?. Fai. Qu.
2. Show; repreſentation. -
Gºffs ſhould be interlarded after the Perſian manner, by
ages, young and old.
3. The roll or journal of the ſeveral days, and ſtages prefixed,
in the progreſſes of our kings, many of them being ſtill ex-
tant in the herald's office. [From giſle, or gite, Fr.] Hanmer.
- I'll give you my commiſfion,
To let him there a month, behind the geſt,
Prefix’d for’s parting. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
He diſtinčily ſets down the gºff; and progreſs thereof; and
are conceits of eminent uſe, to ſolve magnetical phenomenas.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 2.
Gest A't Ion. m. ſ. [geſtatio, Latin.] The act of bearing the
young in the womb.
Ariſtotle affirmeth the birth of the infant, or time of its
geſtation, extendeth ſometimes unto the eleventh month; but
Hippocrates avers that it exceedeth not the tenth. Brown.
Why in viviparous animals, in the time of gºſlation, ſhould
the nouriſhment be carried to the embryo in the womb, which
at other times goeth not that way ? Ray on the Creation.
To GESTI'CULATE. v. n. [geſticulor, Latin; gifficuler, Fr.]
To play antick tricks; to ſhew poſtures. Dić7.
GEstic ULA'tion. n.ſ. [gºfficulatio, Latin; geſticulation, Fr.
from geſticulate.] Antick tricks; various poſtures.
Ge'sture. n.ſ. [gero, gºſium, Latin; geſte, French.]
1. Action or poſture expreſſive of ſentiment.
Ah, my fiſter, if you had hcard his words, or ſeen his
gº?ures,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G F. T
G. E. T
5
|
.º
.
i
ge/ures, when he made me know what and to whom his
love was, you would have matched in yourſelf, thoſe two
rarely matched together, pity and delight. Sidney, b. ii.
When we make profeſſion of our faith, we ſtand; when
we acknowledge our fins, or ſeek unto God for favour, we
fall down; becauſe the ge?ure of conſtancy becometh us beſt
in the one, in the other the behaviour of humility. Hao'er.
To the dumbneſs of the geſture
One might interpret. Shakeſpeare's Timon of Athens.
2. Movement of the body.
Grace was in all her ſteps, heav'n in her eye, -
In ev'ry gºſure dignity and love! Milton'ſ Paradiſ? Lºº.
Every one will agree in this, that we ought either to ſay
aſide all kinds of geſture, or at leaſt to make uſe of ſuch only
as are graceful and expreſſive. Addiſon's Sečiator, Nº. 408.
To GE's fur E. v. a. [from the noun..] To accompany with
aćtion or poſture.
Our attire diſgraceth it; it is not orderly read, nor gºſured
as beſeemeth. - Hooker, b. v.
Undertaking ſo to geſture and muffle up himſelf in his hood,
as the duke's manner was, that none ſhould diſcern him.
I/otton's Liſt of the Duke of Buckingham.
To GET. v. a. pret. I got, anciently gat; part. paſſ got, or
gotten. [3etan, gettan, Saxon.]
1. To procure; to obtain. - *
Thine be the coffet, well haſt thou it got. Spenſer's Poſt.
Of that which was our father's hath he gotten all this
glory. Gen. xxxi. 1.
We gat our bread with the peril of our lives. Sam. v. 9.
The pains of hell gat hold upon me. Pſ. cxvi. 3.
David gat him a name when he returned from ſmiting of
the Syrians. 2 Sa. viii. 1 3.
Moſt of theſe things might be more exactly tried by the
Torricellian experiments, if we could get tubes ſo accurately
blown that the cavity were perfectly cylindrical. Boyle.
Such a conſcience, as has not been wanting to itſelf, in en-
deavouring to get the utmoſt and cleareſt information about
the will of God, that its power, advantages, and opportunities
could afford it, is that great internal judge, whoſe abſolution
is a rational and ſure ground of confidence. South's Sermans.
He inſenſibly got a facility, without perceiving how ; and that
is attributed wholly to nature, which was much more the effect
of uſe and pračtice. Locke.
He who attempts to get another man into his abſolute power,
does thereby put himſelf into a ſtate of war with him. . Lºcke.
The man who lives upon alms, gets him his ſet of admirers,
and delights in ſuperiority. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 219.
Sphinx was a monſter that would eat
Whatever ſtranger ſhe could gºt,
Unleſs his ready wit diſclos'd,
The ſubtle riddle ſhe propos'd. Addiſon's Iſ'hig Examiner.
This practice is to be uſed at firſt, in order to get a fixed
habit of attention, and in ſome caſes only. - J/atts.
The word get is variouſly uſed: we ſay to get money, to get
in, to get off, to get ready, to get a ſtomach, and to get a
cold. J/atts's Lºgick.
2. To force; to ſeize.
Such loſels and ſcatterlings cannot eaſily, by any conſtable,
or other ordinary officer, be gotten, when they are challenged
for any ſuch fact. S; enſer on Ireland.
The king ſeeing this, ſtarting from where he ſat,
Out from his trembling hand his weapon gat. Daniel.
All things, but one, you can reſtore;
The heart you get returns no more. JValler.
3. To win.
Henry the fixth hath loſt
All that which Henry the fifth had gotten. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
He gat his people great honour, and he made battles, pro-
tecting the hoſt with his ſword. 1 4/ac. iii. 3.
To get the day of them of his own nation, would be a moſt
unhappy day for him. 2 Mac. v. 6.
Auria held that courſe to have drawn the gallies within his
great ſhips, who thundering amongſt them with their great
ordnance, might have opened a way unto his gallies to have
gotten a vićtory. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
4. To have poſſeſſion of ; to hold.
Then forcing thee, by fire he made thce bright;
Nay, thou haſt got the face of man. Herbert.
5. To beget upon a female. -
Theſe boys are boys of ice; they'll none of her: ſure they
are baſtards to the Engliſh, the French never got them. Shakespeare
Women with ſtudy'd arts they vex:
Ye gods deſtroy that impious ſex;
And if there muſt be ſome t' invoke
Your pow’rs, and make your altars ſmoke,
Come down yourſelves, and, in their place,
Get a more juſt and nobler race. Iłaller.
Children they got on their female captives. - Locke.
If you'll take 'em as their fathers got 'em, ſo and well; if
not, you muſt ſtay 'till they get a better generation. Dryden.
Has no man, but who has kill'd
A father, right to get a child Prior.
Let ev'ry married man, that's grave and wiſe,
Take a tartuff of known ability,
Who ſhall ſo ſettle laſting reformation;
Firſt get a ſon, then give him education. Dorſet.
The god of day, deſcending from above,
Mixt with the day, and got the queen of love. Granville.
6. To gain as profit.
Though creditors will loſe one fifth of their principal and
uſe, and landlords one fifth of their income, yet the debtors
and tenants will not get it. Locke.
7. To gain as ſuperiority or advantage.
If they get ground and 'vantage of the king,
Then join you with them like a rib of ſteel. Shakespeare H. IV.
8. To earn; to gain by labour.
Nature and neceſſity taught them to make certain veſſels of
a tree, which they got down, not with cutting, but with fire.
Aliot's Deſcription of the I/orld.
Having no mines, nor any other way of getting or kceping
of riches but by trade, ſo much of our trade as is loſt, ſo
much of our riches muſt neceſſarily go with it. Locke.
If it be ſo much pains to count the money I would ſpend,
what labour did it coſt my anceſtors to get it? Lºcke.
9. To receive as a price or reward.
Any tax laid on foreign commodities in England raiſes their
price, and makes the importer get more for them; but a tax
laid on your homemade commodities leſſens their price. Locke.
1c. To learn.
Git by heart the more common and uſeful words out of
ſome judicious vocabulary. J/atts.
11. To procure to be.
I ſhall ſhew how we may get it thus informed, and after-
wards preſerve and keep it to. South's Sermons.
12. To put into any ſtate.
Take no repulſe, whatever ſhe doth ſay;
For, get you gone, ſhe doth not mean away. Shakespeare.
About a fortnight before your ewes bring forth their young,
they may be pretty well kept, to get them a little into heart.
- Mortimer's Husbandry.
Helim, who was taken up in embalming the bodies, viſited
the place very frequently: his greateſt perplexity was how to
get the lovers out of it, the gates being watched. Guardian.
13. To prevail on ; to induce.
Though the king could not get him to engage in a life of
buſineſs, he made him however his chief companion. Speciat.
14. To draw; to book. -
With much communication will he tempt thee, and ſmiling
upon thee get out thy ſecrets. Eccluſ. xiii. 1 1.
By the marriage of his grandſon Ferdinand he got into his
family the kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary. Add ſon.
After having got out of you every thing you can ſpare, I
ſcorn to treſpaſs. ºuardian, N°. 167.
15. To betake; to remove. -
Get you to bed on th’ inſtant; I will be return'd forthwith.
Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Ariſe, get thee out from this land. Gen. xxxi. 13.
Get thee out, and depart hence. Luke xiii. 31.
Left they join alſo unto our enemies, and fight againſt us,
and ſo get them up out of the land. Ex. i. Io.
Get ye up in peace unto your father. Gen. xliv. 17.
Thus perplexed, he with all ſpeed got himſelf with his fol-
lowers to the ſtrong town of Mega, in hope to ſhrowd him-
ſelf. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
16. To remove by force or art.
By the good direction of Auria ſhe was quickly got off the
land again, and entered with the reſt. Knoles's Hiſtory.
The roving fumes of quickſilver, in evaporating, would
oftentimes faſten upon the gold in ſuch plenty, as would put
him to much trouble to get them off from his rings. Boyle.
When mercury is got by the help of the fire out of a metal,
or cther mineral body, we may ſuppoſe this quickſilver to have
been a perfect body of its own kind. Boyle.
They are offended to ſee them wilful, and wou'd be glad to
get out thoſe weeds which their own hands have planted, and
which now have taken too deep root to be eaſily extirpated.
Locke on Education.
17. To put.
Get on thy boots; we'll ride all night. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
18. To GET ºff. To ſell or diſpoſe of by ſome expedient.
Wood, to get his halfpence off, offered an hundred pounds
in his coin for ſeventy in ſilver. Swift.
To GET. v. n.
1. To arrive at any ſtate or poſture by degrees with ſome kind
of labour, effort, or difficulty.
Phalantus was entrapped, and ſaw round about him, but
could not get out. Sidney.
You knew he walk'd o'er perils, on an edge
More likely to fall in than to get o'er. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Away, get thee down. Ex. xix. 24.
If
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G F W
If it diſpleaſe thee, I will get me back again. Num, xxii.
The ſtranger ſhall get up above thee very high, and thou
ſhalt come down very low. Deuter. xxviii. 43.
The fox bragged what a number of ſhifts and devices he
had to get from the hounds, and the cat ſaid he had but one,
which was to climb a tree. - Bacon.
Thoſe that are very cold, and eſpecially in their feet, can-
not get to ſleep. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
I utterly condemn the pračice of the later times, that ſome
who are pricked for ſheriffs, and were fit, ſhould get out of
the bill. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Being entered unto the Mahometan religion, he got away
unto the Chriſtians, and hardly eſcaped from the battle.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
He would be at their backs before they could get out of
Armenia. Knolles's Hiſtºry of the Turks.
She plays with his rage, and gets above his anger. Denham.
The latitant air had got away in bubbles. Boyle.
There are few bodies whoſe minute parts ſtick ſo cloſe to-
gether, but that it is poſſible to meet with ſome other body
whoſe ſmall parts may get between, and ſo disjoin them. Bºyle.
There was but an inſenſible diminution of the liquor upon
the receſs of whatever it was that got through the cork. Boyle.
Although the univerſe, and every part thereof, are objećts
full of excellency, yet the multiplicity thereof is ſo various,
that the underſtanding falls under a kind of deſpondency of
getting through ſo great a taſk. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
If there ſhould be any leak at the bottom of the veſſel, yet
very little water would get in, becauſe no air could get out.
JWilkins's Math. Magick.
O heav'n, in what a lab’rinth am I led !
I could get out, but ſhe detains the thread
So have I ſeen ſome fearful hare maintain
A courſe, ’till tir’d before the dog ſhe lay;
Who, ſtretch'd behind her, pants upon the plain,
Paſt pow'r to kill, as ſhe to get away. Dryden's Ann. Mirab.
The more oily and light part of this maſs would get above
the other, and ſwim upon it. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Having got through the foregoing paſſage, let us go on to
his next argument. Locke.
The removing of the pains we feel is the getting out of
miſery, and conſequently the firſt thing to be done, in order
to happineſs, abſent good. Locke.
If, having got into the ſenſe of the epiſtles, we will but
compare what he ſays, in the places where he treats of the
ſame ſubjećt, we can hardly be miſtaken in his ſenſe. Lo Åe.
I got up as faſt as poſſible, girt on my rapier, and ſnatched
up my hat, when my landlady came up to me. Tatler.
Bucephalus would let nobody get upon him but Alexander
the Great. Addiſon on Italy.
Impriſon'd fires, in the cloſe dungeons pent,
Roar to get looſe, and ſtruggle for a vent;
Eating their way, and undermining all,
*Till with a mighty burſt whole mountains fall.
When Alma now, in diff'rent ages,
Has finiſh'd her aſcending ſtages,
Into the head at length ſhe gets,
And there in publick grandeur ſits,
To judge of things. Prior.
I reſolved to break through all meaſures to get away. Swift.
Happy are they who meet with civil people that will com-
ply with their ignorance, and help them to get out of it. Locke.
2. l'o fall; to come by accident.
- Two or three men of the town are got among them. Tatler.
3. To find the way.
When an egg is made hard by boiling, ſince there is nothing
that appears to get in at the ſhell, unleſs ſome colorifick atoms,
and ſome little particles of the water it is boiled in, it is not
eaſy to diſcover from whence elſe this change of conſiſtency
proceeds than from a change made in the texture of the
parts. Boyle.
He raves; his words are looſe
As heaps of ſand, and ſcattering wide from ſenſe:
You ſee he knows not me, his natural father;
But aiming to poſſeſs th' uſurping queen,
So high he's mounted in his airy hopes,
That now the wind is got into his head,
And turns his brains to frenzy. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
A child runs to overtake and get up to the top of his ſha-
dow, which ſtill advances at the ſame rate that he does. Locke.
Should dreſſing, feaſting, and balls once get among the
Cantons, their military roughneſs would be quickly loſt. Addison
The fluids which ſurround bodies, upon the ſurface of the
globe, g. t in between the ſurfaces of bodies when they are at
any diſtance. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
4. To mºve ; to remove.
Get home with thy fewel made ready to ſet;
The ſooner, the eaſier carriage to get. Tuſſºr.
Many of the gallies rode it out at ſea, where they were by
ſhot out of the city enforced to get them farther off. Knoller.
Riſe up and get you forth from amongſt my people. Ex. xii.
Dryden.
Addiſon.
-
5. To have recourſe to. -
The Turks made great haſte through the midſt of the towri
ditch, to get up into the bulwark to help their fellows Knolle.
Lying is ſo cheap a cover for any miſcarriage, and ſo much
in faſhion, that a child can ſcarce be kept from getting into
it. - Lºcke.
6. To go; to repair.
They ran to their weapons, and furiouſly aſſailed the Turks,
now fearing no ſuch matter, and were not as yet all got inte
the caſtle. Kroles's Hiſtory ºf the Turf.,
A knot of ladies, got together by themſelves, is a very ſchool
of impertinence. Swift.
7. To put one's ſelf in any ſtate. -
To-morrow get you early on your way. judg. xix 9.
They might get over the river Avon at Stratford, and get
between the king and Worceſter. Clarenacº.
We can neither find ſource nor iſſue for ſuch an exceflive
maſs of waters, neither where to have them; nor, if we had
them, how to get quit of them. Burnet'. Theory of the Earth.
Without his aſſiſtance we can no more get quit of our
afflićtion, than but by his permiſſion we ſhould have fallen
into it. //ake's Preparation for Death.
There is a ſort of men who pretend to diveſt themſelves of
partiality on both ſides, and to get above that imperſe&amp;t idea
of their ſubject which little writers fall into. Pope on Homer.
As the obtaining the love of valuable men is the happieſt
end of this life, ſo the next felicity is to get rid of fools and
ſcoundrels. Pºpe to Swift.
8. To become by any act what one was not before.
The laughing ſot, like all unthinking men,
Bathes and gets drunk; then bathes and drinks again. Dryd.
9. To be a gainer; to receive advantage.
Like jewels to advantage ſet,
Her beauty by the ſhade does get.
10. To GET off. To eſcape.
The gallies, by the benefit of the ſhores and ſhallows, got
off. Bacon's I/ar with Spain.
Whate'er thou do'ſ, deliver not thy ſword; -
With that thou may'ſt get off, tho' odds oppoſe thee. Dryd.
11. To GET over. To conquer; to ſuppreſs; to paſs without
being ſtopped in thinking or acting.
'Tis very pleaſant, on this occaſion, to hear the lady pro-
poſe her doubts, and to ſee the pains he is at to get over them.
Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 4: 5.
I cannot get over the prejudice of taking ſome little offence
at the clergy, for perpetually reading their ſermons. Swift.
To remove this difficulty, the earl of Peterborough was diſ-
patched to Vienna, and got over ſome part of thoſe diſputes,
to the ſatisfaction of the duke of Savoy. Swift.
12. To Get up. To riſe from repoſe.
Sheep will get up betimes in the morning to feed againſt
rain. Bacon's Natural Hiſ ry.
13. To Get up. . To riſe from a ſeat.
Get you up from about the tabernacle of Koran, Dathan,
and Aboriam. Numb. xvi.
GE'tt ER. n.ſ.. [from get.]
1. One who procures or obtains.
2. One who begets on a female.
Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy, null'd, deaf, ſleepy, in-
ſenſible; a getter of more baſtard-children than war's a de-
ſtroyer of men. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
GE'TTING. m. ſ. [from get.]
1. Aćt of getting; acquiſition.
Wiſdom is the principal thing, therefore get wiſdom; and
with all thy getting get underſtanding. Prov. iv. 7.
2. Gain; profit.
Who hath a ſtate to repair may not deſpiſe ſmall things;
and it is leſs diſhonourable to abridge a petty charge than to
ſtoop to petty gettings. Bacon, Eſſay 29.
The meaner families, are obliged to return to the ſteward
a ſmall monthly ſhare of their gettings, to be a portion for the
child. Gulliver's Travels.
GE'wo aw. n.ſ. [ xezar, Saxon; joyau, French.] A ſhowy
trifle; a toy; a bauble ; a ſplendid plaything.
That metal they exchanged for the meaneſt trifles and gew-
gaws which the others could bring. Ablot's Deſºr. of the Iłorld.
Prefer that which providence has pronounced to be the ſtaff
of life, before a glittering gewgaw that has no other value
than what vanity has ſet upon it. L’Eſtrange, Fable i.
As children, when they throw one toy away,
Straight a more fooliſh gewgaw comes in play.
A heavy gewgaw, call'd a crown, that ſpread
About his temples, drown'd his narrow head,
And would have cruſh'd it. Dryden's juvenal, Sat.1c.
Some looſe the bands
Of ancient friendſhip, cancel nature's laws
For pageantry and tawdry geºgawi. Phillips.
The firſt images were fans, ſilks, ribbands, laces, and many
other gewgaws, which lay ſo thick that the whole heart was
nothing elſe but a toyſhop. Addſon's Guard.
J/a", r.
Dryden.
*.
I o F “ GE'w GA w.
* -, - .
** * *
a
-
** ,
-----
ºrff, a
- Jºi,”
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G I B
º
GE'we Aw. adi. Splendidly trifling; ſhowy without value.
Let him that would learn the happineſs of religion, ſee the
poor gewgaw happineſs of Feliciano. Law's Serious Call.
GHA's TFUL. adj. [3arc and Fulle, Saxon.] Dreary; diſmal;
melancholy; fit for walking ſpirits.
Here will I dwell apart,
In ghaſtful grave, ’till my laſt ſleep
Do cloſe mine eyes:
Help me, ye baneful birds, whoſe ſhrieking ſound
Is ſign of dreary death. Spenſe's Paſłorals.
GHA's TLINEss. n.ſ.. [from ghaſly.]
1. Horrour of countenance; reſemblance of a ghoſt; paleneſs.
GHA'STLY. adj. [3art, or ghoſt, and like.]
1. Like a ghoſt; having horrour in the countenance; pale;
dreadful; diſmal. -
Why looks your grace ſo heavily to-day ?
—O, łł. paſt a miſerable night;
So full of ugly ſights, of ghoſtly dreams,
So full of diſmal terrour was the time. Shakeſp. Rich III.
Envy quickly diſcovered in court Solyman's changed coun-
tenance upon the great baſſa, and began now to ſhew her
ghoſtly face. Knolley's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Death
Grinn'd horrible a ghaſtly ſmile, to hear
His famine ſhould be fill’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
Thoſe departed friends, whom at our laſt ſeparation we ſaw
disfigured by all the ghaſtly horrours of death, we ſhall then
ſee aſſiſting about the majeſtick throne of Chriſt, with their
once vile bodies transfigured into the likeneſs of his glorious
body, mingling their glad acclamations with the hallelujahs
of thrones, principalities and powers. Boyle.
This poor man's deſolate wife,
Expects ſome happy day;
This ghaſily thing, the comfort of her life. Flatman.
He came, but with ſuch alter'd looks,
So wild, ſo ghaſily, as if ſome ghoſt had met him,
All pale and ſpeechleſs. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
I did not for theſe ghoſtly viſions ſend;
Their ſudden coming does ſome ill portend. Dryd. Ind. Em.
I who make the triumph of to-day,
May of to-morrow's pomp one part appear,
Ghaſſly with wounds, and lifeleſs on the bier!
2. Horrible; ſhocking; dreadful.
To be leſs than gods
Diſdain'd; but meaner thoughts learn'd in their flight,
Mangled with ghaſily wounds through plate and mail. Milt.
GHA'st Niss. n.ſ.. [from 3are, Saxon.] Ghaſtlineſs; horrour
of look.
Prior.
Look you pale, miſtreſs
Do you perceive the ghaſineſ of the eye? Shakeſp. Othello,
GHE'RKIN. m. ſ. [from gurcke, German, a cucumber. J A
pickled cucumber. Skinner.
To GHEss. v. n. [See To Guess. Ghºſ is by criticks con-
ſidered as the true orthography, but gueſ, has univerſally pre-
vailed.] To conjećture.
GHOST. n.ſ. [3ajºz, Saxon.]
1. The ſoul of man.
Vex not his ghºſt : O, let him paſs! He hates him,
That would upon the rack of this rough world
Stretch him out longer. Shakeſpeare's King Lecr.
Often did I ſtrive
To yield the ghoſt ; but ſtill the envious flood
Kept in my ſoul. Shakespeare R. III.
Man, when once cut down, when his pale ghoſt
Fleets into air, is for ever loſt. Sandys's Paraphraſe.
2. A ſpirit appearing after death.
The mighty ghoſts of our great Harrys roſe,
And armed Edwards look'd with anxious eyes,
To ſee this fleet among unequal foes,
By which fate promis'd them their Charles ſhould riſe. Dryd.
3. To give up the Ghost. To die; to yield up the ſpirit into
the hands of God.
- Their ſhadows ſeem -
A canopy moſt fatal, under which
Our army lies ready to give up the ghoff. Shakespeare. jul. Caſ
4. The third perſon in the adorable Trinity, called the Holy
Ghoſt.
To GHost. v. m., [from the noun..] To yield up the ghoſt; to
die. Not in uſe.
Euryalus taking leave of Lucretia, precipitated her into ſuch
a love-fit, that within a few hours ſhe ghoſted; which courſe
Euryalus was like to have ſteered, upon the news. Sidney.
To GHost. v. a. To haunt with apparitions of departed
men. Obſolete. - -
Julius Caeſar,
Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghoſted,
There ſaw you labouring for him. Shakespeare Ant, and Cºat.
GHo's TLINEss. n.ſ.. [from ghºſty.] Spiritual tendency; qua-
lity of having reference chiefly to the ſoul.
GHo's TLY. adi, [from ghoſl.]
1. Spiritual; relating to the ſoul; not carnal; not ſecular.
Our common neceſſitics, and the lack which we all have,
I
as well of ghºſtly as of earthly favours, is in each kind ſo eaſily
known, but the gifts of God, according to theſe degrees and
times, which he in his ſecret wiſdom feeth meet, are ſo
diverſly beſtowed, that it ſeldom appeareth what ali receive,
what all ſtand in need of, it ſeldom lieth hid. Hoºker, b. v.
The graces of the ſpirit are much more precious than
worldly benefits, and our ghºy cwi's of greater importance
than any harm which the body feeleth. Hocker, b. v. / 35.
To deny me the ghºſtly comfort of my chaplains, ſºm, a
greater barbarity than is ever uſed by Chriſtians. Aing Charlet.
2. Having a character from religion; ſpiritual. -
Hence will I to my ghºſtly friar's cloſe cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell. Shakespeare Ra. and jºi.
The ghoſłly father now bath done his ſhrift. Siakeſp. H.V.I.
GI/LA.I.N.A., n.ſ.. [Italian.] Earth of a bright goºd colour,
found in the kingdom of Naples, very fine, and much valued
by painters. lºcodward's Met. Fºſſ.
G1.A'MBEux. n.ſ. [jambes, French, J Legs, or armour fºr
legs; greaves.
The mortal ſteel diſpiteouſly entail'd, -
Deep in their fleſh, quite through the iron walls,
That a large purple ſtream adown their gianbeux falls. F. 3.
GPANT, n.ſ. [geant, French ; gigas, Latin.] A man of fix:
above the ordinary rate of men; a man unnaturally large. It
is obſervable, that the idea of a giant is always aſſociated
with pride, brutality, and wickedneſs.
Now does he feel his axle
Hang looſe about him, like a giant's robe
Upon a dwarfiſh thief. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Gates of monarchs
Are arch'd ſo high that giants may jet through,
And keep their impious turbands on, without
Good-morrow to the ſun. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Woman's gentle brain
Could not drop forth ſuch giant rude invention;
Such Ethiop words. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Fierce faces threat'ning wars, -
Giants of mighty bone, and bold empriſe! Mill. Pa. Left.
Thoſe giants, thoſe mighty men, and men of renown, far
exceeded the proportion, nature, and ſtrength of thoſe giants
remembered by Moſes of his own time. Ralgº, Hiſtory.
The giant brothers, in their camp, have found
I was not forc'd with eaſe to quit my ground. Dryden's AEm.
By weary ſteps and ſlow
The groping giant with a trunk of pine
Explor’d his way. Addison.
Neptune, by pray’r repentant, rarely won,
Afflićts the chief tº avenge his giant ſon,
Great Polypheme, of more than mortal might. Pope.
G.'ANTEss...nºſ. [from giant..] A ſhe-giant; a woman of un-
natural bulk and height.
I had rather be a gianteſ, and lie under mount Pelion. Shah.
Were this ſubject to the cedar, ſhe would be able to
make head againſt that huge gianteſs. Howel.
91'ANTLIKE, adj...[from giant and like..] Gigantick; vaſt;
GI’ANTLY. ; bulky. -
Single courage, has often, without romance, overcome
giantly difficulties. Decay of Piety.
Notwithſtanding all their talk of reaſon and #.
which they are deplorably ſtrangers to, and thoſe unanſwer.
able doubts and difficulties, which, over their cups, they pre-
tend to have againſt Chriſtianity; perſuade but the covetous
man not to deify his money, the proud man not to adore him-
ſelf, and I dare undertake that all their giantite objections
againſt the Chriſtian religion ſhall preſently vaniſh and quit
the field. South's Sermons.
G1'ANtship. m. ſ. [from giant.] Quality or character of a
giant. -
His giantſhip is gone ſomewhat creſt-fall'n,
Stalking with leſs unconſcionable ſtrides,
And lower looks.
Giebe. n.ſ. Any old worn-out animal.
For who that's but a queen, fair, ſober, wiſe,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gible,
Such dear concernings hide? Shakespeare's Hamlet.
To G1'EEER. v. n. [frºm jabber.] To ſpeak inarticulately.
- The ſheeted dead
Did ſqueak and gibber in the Roman ſtreets. Shakespeare Hazel.
G1'BBER is H. m. ſ. [Derived by Skinner from galer, French, to
cheat ; by others conjectured to be formed by corruption from
jabber. But as it was anciently written gebriſh, it is probably
derived from the chymical cant, and originally implied the
jargon of Geler, and his tribe..] Cant; the private language
of rogues and gipſics; words without meaning. -
Some, if they happen to hear an old word, albeit very na-
tural and ſignificant, cry out ſtraitway, that we fpeak no Eng-
liſh, but gibberiſh. Spenſer.
Some of both ſexes writing down a number of letters, juſt
as it came into their heads; upon reading this gilberiſh, that
which the men had wrote ſounded like High Dutch, and the
other by the women like Italian. - Swift.
Milton's A-onſer.
Hanmer.
GI'E2 ET
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G I B
G I D
G1'BBET, n.ſ. [gibet, French.] * * *
1. A gallows; the poſt on which malefactors are hanged; or on
which their carcaſes are expoſed. . .
When was there ever curſed atheiſt brought
Unto the gibbet, but he did adore
That bleſſed pow'r which he had ſet at nought Davies.
You ſcandal to the ſtock of verſe, a race
Able to bring the gibbet in diſgrace. Cleaveland.
Haman ſuffered death himſelf upon the very gibbet that he
had provided for another. L’Eſirange.
Papers of univerſal approbation, lay ſuch principles to the
whole body of the Tories, as, if they were true, our next
buſineſs ſhould be to erect gibbets in every pariſh, and hang
them out of the way. Swift.
2. Any traverſe beams. º
To GI'Beet. v. n. [from the noun )
1. To hang or expoſe on a gibbet. -
I’ll gibbet up his name. Oldham.
2. To hang on any thing going traverſe: as the beam of a
ibbet.
£ He ſhall come off and on ſwifter than he that gibbets on
the brewer's bucket. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
GI’BBIER. n.ſ. [French. J Game; wild fowl.
Theſe impoſts are laid on all butcher's meat, while, at the
ſame time, the fowl and gibbier are tax free. Addiſon on Italy.
Gibbo's 1TY. m. ſ. [gibboſité, Fr. from gibbous.] Convexity;
prominence; protuberance. -
When two ſhips, ſailing contrary ways, loſe the fight one
of another, what ſhould take away the fight of ſhips from
... each other, but the gibboſity of the interjacent water? Ray.
GI’BBOUS. adj. [gibbus, Latin ; gibbeux, Fr.]
1. Convex; protuberant; ſwelling into inequalities.
The bones will riſe, and make a gibbous member. Wiſeman.
A pointed flinty rock, all bare and black,
Grew gibbous from behind the mountain's back. Dryden.
The ſea, by this acceſs and receſs, ſhuffling the empty
ſhells, wears them away, reducing thoſe that are concave and
gibbous to a flat. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Crookbacked.
I ſhall demand how the camels of Baćtria came to have
two bunches in their back, whereas the camels of Arabia, in
all relations, have but one? How oxen, in ſome countries,
began and continue gibbous, or hunch-backed ” Brown.
GI’BBousNess. n.ſ.. [from gibbous.] Convexity; prominence.
To make the convexity of the earth diſcernible, ſuppoſe a
man lifted in the air, that he may have a ſpacious horizon;
but then, becauſe of the diſtance, the convexity and gibbouſ-
neſ would vaniſh away, and he would only ſee a great circular
,' flat. -- * . Bentley's Sermons.
G1'BcAt. n.ſ. [gib and eat..] An old worn-out cat.
I am as melancholy as a gibcat, or a lugg’d bear. Shakeſp.
To GIBE. v. n. [gaber, old French, to ſneer, to ridicule. }
To ſneer; to join cenſoriouſneſs with contempt. -
They ſeem to imagine that we have ere&amp;ted of late a frame
of ſome new religion, the furniture whereof we ſhould not
have borrowed from our enemies, leſt they ſhould afterwards
laugh and gibe at our party. ''', , Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 9.
When he ſaw her toy, and gibe, and geer,
And paſs the bounds of modeſt merry-make,
Her dalliance he deſpis'd. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant, 6.
Why that's the way to choke a gibing ſpirit,
Whoſe influence is begot of that looſe grace
Which ſhallow laughing hearers give to fools. Shakeſpeare.
Thus with talents well endu'd
To be ſcurrilous and rude,
When you pertly raiſe your ſnout, -
Flcer and gibe, and laugh and flout. Swift.
To G1 BE. v. a. To reproach by contemptuous hints; to
flout; to ſcoff; to ridicule; to treat with ſcorn; to ſneer; to
taunt.
When rioting in Alexandria: you
Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
Did gibe my miſſive out of audience. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleop.
Draw the beaſts as I deſcribe them, -
From their features, while I gibe them. Swift.
G1 BE. m. ſ. ſſrom the verb.] Sneer; hint of contempt by word
or look; feoff; ačt or expreſſion of ſcorn; taunt.
Mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable ſcorns
That dwell in ev'ry region of his face. Shakeſp. Othello.
The rich have ſtill a gibe in ſtore,
And will be monſtrous witty on the poor. , Dryden's juven.
If they would hate from the bottom of their hearts, their
averſion would be too ſtrong for little gibes every moment.
. . . . Spectator, Nº. 300.
But the dean, if this ſecret ſhou’d come to his ears,
Will never have done with his gibes and his jeers. Swift.
Gºber. m. ſ. [from gibe.] A ſneerer; one who turns others
to ridicule by contemptuous hints; a ſcoffer; a taunter.
You are well underſtood to be a more perfect giber of the
table, than a neceſſary bencher of the capitol. Shakespeare Cor.
Come, Sempronia, leave him; . . .
He is a giber, and our preſent buſineſs * - - - -
. . . If of more ſerious conſequence. Ben. johnſºn's Catiling.
Gi’BINGLY. adv. [from gile.] Scornfully; contemptuouſly.
His preſent portance, - -
Gilingly and ungravely he did faſhion *r
After th’ inveterate hate he bears to you. Shakespeare Coriºlants. w
Gi’BLETs. n.ſ. [ According to Mieſhew from g. bhet, goiſet:
according to junius more probably from gitier, game, Fr.]
The parts of a gooſe which are cut off before it is roaſted.
'Tis holyday; provide me better cheer: . . . .
'Tis holyday; and ſhall be round the year:
Shall I my houſhold gods and genius cheat,
To make him rich who grudges me my meat
That he may loll at eaſe; and pamper'd high, :
When I am laid, may feed on giulei pie? Dryden's Perſ.
G1'DDILY. adv. [from giddy.] -
1. With the head ſeeming to turn round. -- ---
2. Inconſtantly; unſteadily. - - - . . . "
. . . . . To roam.
Giddily, and be every where but at home, .
Such freedom doth a baniſhment become. Donne.
3. Careleſly; heedleſly; negligently. . . . . . .
The parts that fortune hath beſtow'd upon her,
Tell her, I hold as giddily as fortune. Shać. Twelfth Night:
G1'DDINEss. n.ſ.. [from giddy.] . . . . . * . . .
1. The ſtate of being giddy or vertiginous; the ſenſation which
we have when everything ſeems to turn round.
Megrims and giddineſ are rather when we riſe after long
ſitting, than while we fit. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Inconſtancy; unſteadineſs; mutability; changeableneſs.
There be that delight in giddineſ, and count it a bondage
to fix a belief. - - - Bacon, Eſſay i.
3. Quick rotation; inability to keep its place. . . . . . "
The indignation of heaven rolling and turning us, ’till
at length ſuch a giddineſ ſeized upon government, that it
fell into the very dregs of ſe&amp;taries. South's Sermons.
4. Frolick; wantonneſs of life. -
Thou, like a contrite penitent,
Charitably warn’d of thy ſins, do'ſt repent
Theſe vanities and giadineſſes. - Donne.
GI'DDY. adj. [3,813, Saxon. I know not whether this
word may not come from gad, to wander, to be in motion,
gad, gid, giddy.]
1. Vertiginous; having in the head a whirl, or ſenſation of cir-
cular motion, ſuch as happens by diſeaſe or drunkenneſs.
Them rev'ling thus the Tentyrites invade, -
By giddy heads and ſtagg'ring legs betray’d. Tate's juvenal.
2. Rotatory; whirling; running round with celerity. --
As Ixion fix'd, the wretch ſhall feel -
The giddy motion of the whirling mill. Pope.
3. Inconſtant; mutable; unſteady; changeful. *
Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,
More longing, wavering, ſooner loſt and won,
Than womens are. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
It may be gnats and flies have their imagination more mu-
table and giddy, as ſmall birds likewiſe have. Bacon’s N. Hiſt.
Thanks to giddy chance, which never bears
That mortal bliſs ſhould laſt for length of years,
She caſt us headlong from our high eſtate,
And here in hope of thy return we wait. Dryden's Falles.
The giddy vulgar, as their fancies guide,
With noiſe ſay nothing, and in parts divide. Dryden's 42n.
You are as giddy and volatile as ever, the reverſe of Pope,
who hath always loved a domeſtick life. Swift to Gay.
4. That which cauſes giddineſs. -
The frequent errors of the pathleſs wood,
The giddy precipice, and the dang'rous flood. Prior.
The ſylphs through myſtick mazes guide their way,
Through all the giddy circle they purſue. Pope.
5. Heedleſs; thoughtleſs; uncautious; wild.
Too many giddy fooliſh hours are gone,
And in fantaſtick meaſures danc'd away. Rowe's ja. Shore.
How inexcuſable are thoſe giddy creatures, who, in the ſame
hour, leap from a parent's window to a huſband's bcd. Clarija.
6. Tottering; unfixed.
As we pac'd along
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloſter ſtumbled. Shakeſpeare's Rich. III.
7. Intoxicated; elated to thoughtleſneſs; overcome by any over-
powering inticement.
Art thou not giddy with the faſhion too, that thou haſt
ſhifted out of thy tale into telling me of the faſhion? Shakºp.
Like one of two contending in a prize,
That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes;
Hearing applauſe and univerſal ſhout,
Giddy in ſpirit, gazing ſtill in doubt,
Whether thoſe peals of praiſe be his or no. Shakeſpeare.
G1'DDY BRAINED. adj. [giddy and brain.] Careleſs; thought-
leſs. -
Turn
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G I G
G I L
Turn him out again, you unneceſſary, uſeleſs, giddybrain'd
aſs! Otway's Venice Preſerved.
G1'ddyhead En. adj. [giddy and head.] Without thought or
caution; without ſteadineſs or conſtancy.
And ſooner may a gulling weather ſpy,
By drawing forth heav'n's ſcheme deſcry
What faſhion'd hats or ruffs, or ſuits, next year,
Our giddyheaded antick youth will wear. Donne.
That men are ſo miſaffected, melancholy, giddyheaded,
hear the teſtimony of Solomon. Burton on Melancholy.
G1'DDY PAce D. adj. [giddy and pace..] Moving without regu-
larity.
'Mor than light airs, and recoligéted terms,
Of theſe moſt briſk and giddypaced times. Shakeſpeare.
GI’ER-EAGLE. m. ſ. [Sometimes it is written jer-eagle..] An
eagle of a particular kind.
Theſe fowls ſhall not be eaten, the ſwan and
and the gier-eagle. -
GIFT. n.ſ.. [from give.] -
1. A thing given or beſtowed; ſomething conferred without
price.
They preſented unto him gifts, gold, and frankincenſe and
myrrh. Mat. ii. 1 1.
Recall your gift, for I your pow'r confeſs;
But firſt take back my life, a gift that's leſs. Dryd. Aureng.
2. The aët of giving. -
No man has any antecedent right or claim to that which
comes to him by free gift. South's Sermons.
3. Oblation; offering.
Many nations ſhall come with gifts in their hands, even
gifts to the king of heaven: Tab. xiii. 1 1.
4. A bribe.
Thou ſhalt not wreſt judgment, thou ſhalt not reſpećt per-
ſons, neither take a gift; for a gift doth blind the eyes of the
wiſe.
5. Power ; faculty.
- And if the boy have not a woman's gift,
To rain a ſhower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for ſuch a ſhift. Shakeſpeare.
He who has the gift of ridicule, finds fault with anything
that gives him an opportunity of exerting his beloved talent.
Addiſon's Sprélator, N°. 291.
the pelican,
Lev. xi. 18.
G1'FTED. adj. [from gift.]
1. Given; beſtowed.
Made of my enemies the ſcorn and gaze,
To grind in brazen fetters, under taſk,
With my heav'n gifted ſtrength. Milton's Agoniſłes.
2. Endowed with extraordinary powers. It is commonly uſed
ironically.
Two of their gifted brotherhood, Hacket and Coppinger,
got up into a peaſe-cart, and harangued the people to diſpoſe
them to an inſurrection. Dryd. Rel. Laici, Preface.
There is no talent ſo pernicious as eloquence, to thoſe who
have it not under command: women, who are ſo liberally
gifted by nature in this particular, ought to ſtudy the rules of
female oratory. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°, 23.
G. G. n.ſ. [Etymology uncertain.]
1. Anything that is whirled round in play.]
Playthings, as tops, gigs, battledores, ſhould be procured
them. - - Locke.
2. [Gigia, Iſlandick.] A fiddle. Now out of uſe.
Gi GANTick, adj. [gigantes, Latin.] Suitable to a giant;
big; bulky; enormous ; likewiſe wicked; atrocious.
Others from the wall defend
With dart and jav'lin, ſtones, and ſulphurous fire;
On each hand ſlaughter and gigantick deeds! Milt, Pa. Loſſ.
I dread him not, nor all his giant-brood,
Though fame divulg'd him father of five ſons,
All of gigantick ſize, Goliah chief. Milton's Agoniſłes.
The ſon of Hercules he juſtly ſeems,
By his broad ſhoulders and gigantick limbs. Dryden’s AFn.
The Cyclopean race in arms aroſe;
A lawleſs nation of gigantick foes. Pope's Odyſſey, b. vi.
To Gi"GGLE. v. n. [gichgelen, Dutch. ) To laugh idly; to
titter; to grin with merry levity. It is retained in Scotland.
G1'GGLER. m. ſ. [ from giggle. J A laugher; a titterer; one
idly and fooliſhly merry.
A ſad wiſe valour is the brave complexion,
That leads the van, and ſwallows up the cities:
The giggler is a milk-maid, whom infection,
Or the fir’d beacon, frighteth from his ditties. Herbert.
We ſhew our preſent, joking, giggling race;
True joy conſiſts in gravity and grace. Garrick's Epilogue.
Gºol. ET. n.ſ. [3eazl, Saxon ; geyſ, Dutch; gillet, Scottiſh, is
itill retained.] A wanton; a laſcivious girl. Now out of uſe.
Young Talbot was not born
To be the pillage of a gigſet wench. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
The fam'd Caſlibelan was once at point,
Qh giglet fortune to maſter Caeſar's ſword. Shakespeare Cymbel.
Away with thoſe giglets too, and with the other confederate
Gompanion. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for A ſeaſure.
Deuter. xvi. 19.
GIGOT. n.ſ. [French..] The hip joint. *- *
To GILD. v. a. pret. gilded, or gift. [ællban. Saxon.j
1. To waſh over with gold; to cover with foliated gold.
- The room was large and wide,
As it ſome gilt or ſolemn temple were: -
Many great golden piliars did uprear
The maſly roof, and riches huge ſuſtain. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Gilded wood may worms infold. Shakespeare Aſercº. ºf Penice.
To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
To throw a perfume on the violet. Shakeſpeare.'. K. jo'n.
And the gilded car of day
His glowing axle doth allay
In the ſteep Atlantick ſtream.
Purchaſing riches with our time and care,
We loſe our freedom in a gilded ſhare.
When Britain, looking with a juſt diſdain
Upon this gilded majeſty of Spain,
And knowing well that empire muſt decline,
Milton,
Roſcommºn.
Whoſe chief ſupport and finews are of coin. J/alier.
Her joy in gilded chariots, when alive ;
And love of ombre after death ſurvive. Pope.
2. To cover with any yellow matter.
Thou did'ſt drink
The ſtale of horſes and the gilded puddle,
Which beaſts would cough at. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
3. To adorn with luſtre.
No more the riſing ſun ſhall gild the morn,
Nor ev'ning Cynthia fill her ſilver horn. Pope's Mºffah.
4. To brighten; to illuminate.
The lightſome paſſion of joy was not that trivial, vaniſh-
ing, ſuperficial thing, that only gilds the apprehenſion and
plays upon the ſurface of the ſoul. South.
5. To recommend by adventitious ornaments.
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
I'll gild it with the happieſt terms I have. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Yet, oh! th’ imperfect piece moves more delight;
'Tis gilded o'er with youth, to catch the fight. Dryd. Auren.
G1'LDER. n.ſ.. [from gild.]
1. One who lays gold on the ſurface of any other body.
Gilders uſe to have a piece of gold in their mouth, to draw
the ſpirits of the quickſilver. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
We have here a gilder, with his anvil and hammer.
- Notes on the Odyſſey.
2. A coin, from one ſhilling and ſixpence, to two ſhillings. Phil.
I am bound
- To Perſia, and want gilders for my voyage. Shakeſpeare.
Gi'LDING. m. ſ. [from gild.] Gold laid on any ſurface by way
of ornament.
Silvering will ſully and canker more than gilding, which,
if it might be corrected with a little mixture of gold, there is
profit. - Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
The church of the Annunciation, all but one corner of it,
is covered with ſtatues, gilding, and paint. Addiſon on Italy.
Could laureate Dryden Pimp and Fry'r engage,
And I not ſtrip the gilding off a knave,
Unplac'd, unpenſion'd, no man's heir or ſlave Pope's Hor:
Gill. n.ſ.. [agulla, Spaniſh; gula, Latin.]
1. The apertures at each fide of a fiſh's head.
The leviathan,
Stretch'd like a promontory, ſleeps or ſwims,
And ſeems a moving land; and at his gills
Draws in, and at his trunk ſpouts out a ſea. Milt, P. Loft.
Fiſhes perform their reſpiration under water by the gills.
Ray on the Creation.
He hath, on the bottom of his ſides, two gill-fins; not be-
hind the gills, as in moſt fiſhes, but for a good part before
them. J/alion.
*Till they, of farther paſſage quite bereſt,
Were in the maſh with gills entang!'d left. King's Fiſherman.
2. The flaps that hang below the beak of a fowl.
The turkeycock hath great and ſwelling gills, and the hen
hath leſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
3. The fleſh under the chin.
In many there is no paleneſs at all; but, contrariwiſe, red-
neſs about the cheeks and gills, which is by the ſending forth
of ſpirits in an appetite to revenge. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Like the long bag of fleſh hanging down from the gills of
the people in Piedmont. Swift.
4. [Gilla, barbarous Latin.] A meaſure of liquids containing
the fourth part of a pint.
Every bottle muſt be rinced with wine: ſome, out of miſ-
ſtaken thrift, will rince a dozen with the ſame : change the
wine at every ſecond bottle : a gill may be enough. Swift.
5. [From gillian, the old Engliſh way of writing julian, or
juliana.] The appellation of a woman in ludicrous lan-
guage.
I can, for I will,
Here at Burley o' th' Hill,
Give you all your fill,
Each Jack with his Gill. Ben. Johnſon's Gyſſes.
6. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G I N
G. I. P
6. The name of a plant; ground-ivy.
7. Malt liquor medicated with ground-ivy.
GI’ll House. n. ſ. [gill and houſe. J A houſe where gill is
ſold.
Thee ſhall each alehouſe, thee each gillhouſe mourn,
And anſw'ring ginſhops ſourer fighs return. Pope.
Gil'LYFlow ER. m. ſ. [Either corrupted from july flºwer, or
from giroſlée, French.] -
Gillyfiewers, or rather julyffowers, ſo called from the month
they blow in, are of a very great variety; but they may be
reduced to theſe ſorts; red and white, purple and white,
ſcarlet and white, the various kinds of which are too many.
to enumerate. Mortimer's Husbandry.
In July come gillyflowers of all varieties. Bacon, Eſſay 47.
Fair is the gillyflow'r of gardens ſweet,
Fair is the marygold, for pottage meet. . . Gay's Paſtorals,
GILT. n.ſ.. [from gild.]. Golden ſhow; gold laid on the ſur-
face of any matter. Now obſolete.
Our gayneſs and our gilt are all beſmirch'd,
With rainy marching in the painful field. Shakespeare Hen. V.
When thou waſt in thy gilt, and thy perfume, they mockt
thee for too much curioſity: in thy rags thou know'ſt none,
but art deſpis'd for the contrary. hakeſ Timon of Athens.
The double gilt of this opportunity you let time waſh off.
Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
GILT. The participle of GILD, which ſee.
Where the gilt chariot never mark'd its way. Pope.
G1'LTHEAD. m. ſ. [gilt and head..] A ſeafiſh. Dićf.
GILT-TAIL. n.ſ [gilt and tail, J A worm ſo called from
his yellow tail. . . . -
GIM. adj. [An old word.] Neat; ſpruce; well dreſſed.
G1'McRAck. n.ſ. [Suppoſed by Skinner to be ludicrouſly formed
from gin, derived from engine.] A ſlight or trivial mecha-
niſm. -
For though theſe gimcracks were away,
However, more reduc’d and plain,
The watch would ſtill a watch remain;
But if the horal orbit ceaſes, -
The whole ſtands ſtill, or breaks to pieces. Prior.
What's, the meaning of all theſe trangrams and gim-
cracks 2 What, in the name of wonder, are you going
about, jumping over my maſter's hedges, and running your
lines croſs his grounds Arbuthnot's Hiſt, of j. Bull.
Gi'MLET: n.ſ. [gibelet, guimbelet, French. 1. A borer with a
ſcrew at its point.
The gimlet hath a worm at the end of its bit. Moxon.
G1'MMAL n.ſ. [Suppoſed by Skinner and Ainſworth to be derived
from gimelius, Latin, and to be uſed only of ſomething conſiſt-
ing of correſpondent parts, or double. It ſeems rather to begra-
dually corrupted from geometry or geometrical.] Some little
quaint devices or pieces of machinery. Planmer.
I think by ſome odd gimmal, or device
Their arms are ſet like clocks, ſtill to ſtrike on,
Elſe they could not hold out ſo as they do. Shakeſp Hen.VI.
G1(MMER. m.ſ. [See G1MMAL.] Movement; machinery.
The holding together of the parts of matter has ſo con-
founded me, that I have been prone to conclude with myſelf,
that the gimmers of the world hold together not ſo much by
geometry as ſome natural magick. More's Divine Dialogues.
GIMP. n.ſ. [See GIM. Gimp, in old Engliſh, is neat, ſpruce.]
A kind of ſilk twiſt or lace. -
GIN. n.ſ.. [from engine.]
1. A trap; a ſnare.
As the day begins,
With twenty gins we will the ſmall birds take,
And paſtime make. Sidney, b. i.
Which two, through treaſon and deceitful gin,
Hath ſlain ſir Mordant. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
So ſtuives the woodcock with the gin ;
So doth the cony ſtruggle in the net. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Be it by gins, by ſnares, by ſubtilty. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
If thoſe, who have but ſenſe, can ſhun
The engines that have them annoy’d;
Little for me had reaſon done,
If I could not thy gins avoid.
- I know thy trains,
Though dearly to my coſt, thy gins and toils;
No more on me have pow'r, their force is null’d. Milton.
He made a planetary gin, -
Which rats would run their own heads in,
And come on purpoſe to be taken,
Without th' expence of cheeſe and bacon. Hudibras, p. ii.
Keep from flaying ſcourge thy ſkin,
And ankle free from iron gin. Hudibrar, p. i. cant. 2.
2. Any thing moved with ſcrews, as an engine of torture.
Typhaeus' joints were ſtretched on a gin. Fairy Queen.
3. A pump worked by rotatory ſails. - --
A bituminous plate, alternately yellow and black, formed
by water driveling on the outſide of the gin pump of Moſtyn
coalpits. - - I/oodward on Foſſils.
4. [Contraded from GENEva, which ſee.] The ſpirit drawn
by diſtillation from juniper berrics,
Ben. Johnſºn's Foreſ.
This calls the church to deprecate our ſin,
And hurls the thunder of our laws on gin. Pope, Dial. r.
Thee ſhall each alehouſe, thee each gillhouſe mourn,
And anſw'ring gin ſhops ſourer ſighs return. Pope's Duniad.
GI'NGER. n.ſ. [2inziber, Latin; gingero, Italian.]
The flower confiſts of five leaves, which are ſhaped ſome-
what like thoſe of the iris: theſe are produced in an head or
club, each coming out of a ſeparate leafy ſcale. The ovar
afterwards becomes a triangular fruit, having three cells whic
contain their ſeeds. - - - - - Miller.
The root of ginger is of the tuberous kind, knotty, crooked
and, irregular ; of a hot, acrid, and pungent §, though
aromatick, and of a very agreeable ſmell. The Indians at
both the young ſhoots of the leaves and the roots themſelves,
cut ſmall in their ſallads, and make an excellent ſweetmeat
of them, Ginger is an excellent carminative and ſto-
machick. * * * * * * - - - Hill's Mat. Medica.
Qr wafting ginger round the ſtreets to go,
And viſit alehouſe where ye firſt did grow. Pope's Dunciad.
Gi'NGER BRE AD. m. ſ. [ginger and bread..] A kind of fari-
naceous ſweetmeat made of dough, like that of bread or biſ-
cuit, ſweetened with treacle, and flavoured with ginger and
ſome other aromatick ſeeds. It is ſometimes gilt.
An' I had but one penny in the world, thou ſhould'ſ have
it to buy gingerbread. Shakeſpeare's Love's Lalour Loſt;
Her curräns there and gooſeberries were ſpread, “ . .
With the enticing gold of gingerbread. King's Cookery.
'Tis a loſs you are not here, to partake of three weeks
froſt, and eat gingerbread in a booth by a fire upon the
Thames. . . ... " " " ' ". . . . . . Swift.
Gºx. adv. [I know not whence derived.] Cautiouſly,
Ill CC - - - - - - - - -- - - '-- - - - -
y What is't that you
Took up ſo gingerly?" Shakeſpeare's Two Gent, of Perona.
G1'NGERNess. n.ſ. Niceneſs; tenderneſs. * * * * * Diet.
GI'NGIVAL. adj. [gingiva, Latin.] Belonging to the gums.
Whilſt the Italians ſtrive to cut a thread in their pronun-
ciation between D and T, ſo to ſweeten it, they make the
occluſe appulſe, eſpecially the gingival, ſofter than we do,
giving a little of perviouſneſs. Holder's Elements of Speech.
To GIN’GLE. v. n. " ' " ' - - - - - - - - ^\
1. To utter a ſharp clattering noiſe; to utter a ſharp noiſe in
quick ſucceſſion. " " ' " " " ' " ' ' ' ' ' ' '
The foot grows black that was with dirt embrown'd,
And in thy pocket gingling halfpence ſound. Gay, Trivia.
Once, we confeſs, beneath the patriot's cloak,
º the crack'd bag the dropping guinea ſpoke,
nd gingling down the backſtairs, told the crew, -
Old Cato is as great a rogue as you. . . Pºpe's Epiffles.
2. To make an affeded ſound in periods or cadence. ”
To GI's cle. v. a. To ſhake ſo that a ſharp ſhrill clattering
noiſe ſhould be made. - - - - - - - - ". . . . . . . . "
er infant grandame's whiſtle next it grew;
The bells ſhe gingled, and the whiſtle blew.
G1'NGLE, n.ſ. (from the verb.] : " : * *
1. A ſhrill reſounding noiſe.
2. Affectation in the ſound of periods.
G1'NGLYMoID. adj. .[2,7avpC, and #362.] Reſembling a
ginglymus ; approaching to a ginglymus. ' -
The malleus lies along, fixed to the tympanum, and on the
other end is joined to the incus by a double or ginglymoid
joint. - Holder's Elements ºf Speech.
G1'NGLY MUs. n.ſ. [ginglime, French..] A mutual indenting
of two bones into each other's cavity, of which the elbow is
an inſtance. - J/iſeman.
Gi'NNET. m. ſ. [ yºGP. J A nag; a mule; a degenerated
breed. Hence, according to ſome, but, I believe, erroneouſly,
a Spaniſh gennet, improperly written for ginnet.
G1'NSENG. m. ſ. [I ſuppoſe Chinºſe..] A root brought lately
into Europe. It never grows to any great ſize, and is of a
browniſh colour on the outſide, and ſomewhat yellowiſh
within; and ſo pure and fine, that it ſeems almoſt tranſparent.
It is of a very agreeable and aromatick ſmell, though not very
ftrong. Its taſte is acrid and aromatick, and has ſomewhat
bitter in it. We have it from China; and there is of it
in the ſame latitudes in America. The Chineſe value this
root ſo highly, that it ſells with them for three times its weight
in ſilver. The Aſiaticks in general think the ginſeng almoſt
an univerſal medicine. The virtues moſt generally believed
to be in it are thoſe of a reſtorative, and a cordial.
The European phyſicians eſteem it a good medicine in con-
vulſions, vertigoes, and all nervous complaints; and recom-
mend it as one of the beſt reſtoratives known. Płill.
To GIP. v. a. To take out the . of herrings. Bailey.
GIPSY. m. ſ. [Corrupted from Egyptian; for when they firſt
appeared in Europe they declared, and perhaps truly, that they
were driven from Egypt by the Turks. They are now min-
gled with all nations.]
1. A vagabond who pretends to foretell futurity, commonly by
palmeſtry or phyſiognomy.
The butler, though he is ſure to loſe a knife, a fork, or a
ſpoon every time his fortune is told him, ſhuts himſelf up :
I Q - - - the
Pºpe.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G I R.
G H S
|
º
the pantry with an old gipſ for above half an hour. Addison.
A frantick gipſey now, the houſe he haunts, -
And in wild phraſes ſpeaks diſſembled wants. Prior.
I, near yon ſtile, three ſallow gypſies met;
Upon my hand they caſt a poring look,
Bid me beware, and thrice their heads they ſhook. Gay.
In this ſtill labyrinth around her lie
Spells, philters, globes, and ſpheres of palmiſtry;
A ſigil in this hand the gitſ, bears,
In th' other a prophetick ſieve and ſheers. Garth's Diſpenſat.
2. A reproachful name for a dark complexion.
Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen-wench ; Dido a
dowdy; Cleopatra a gipſy ; Helen and Hero hildings and
harlots. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
3. A name of ſlight reproach to a woman.
The widow play'd the gypſy, and ſo did her confidant too,
in pretending to believe her. L’Eſtrange.
A ſlave I am to Clara's eyes:
The gipſy knows her pow'r, and flies. Prior.
GIR'Asole. n.ſ. [giraſol, French.]
* I. The herb turnſol.
2. The opal ſtone.
To GIRD. v. a. pret. girded, or girt. [ærban, Saxon.]
1. To bind round. -
They ſprinkled earth upon their heads, and girded their
loins with ſackcloth. 24.ac. x. 25.
2. To put on ſo as to ſurround or bind.
Cords of the bigneſs of packthread were faſtened to ban-
dages, which the workmen had girt round my neck. Gilliver.
3. To faſten by binding. -
He girt his warlike harneſs about him. 1 Mac. iii. 3.
My bow and thunder, my almighty arms
Gird on, and ſword upon thy puiſiant thigh. Milt. P. Loff.
No, let us riſe at once, gird on our ſwords,
And, at the head of our remaining troops,
Attack the foe:
The combatant too late the field declines,
When now the ſword is girded to his loins. Prizr.
4. To inveſt.
Stoop then, and ſet your knee againſt my foot;
And in reguerdon of that duty done,
I gird thee with the valiant ſword of York. Shakeſp. H. VI.
The ſon appear'd,
Gºrt with omnipotence. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vii.
5. To dreſs; to habit; to clothe.
Addison's Cato.
I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee with -
ſilk. Ezek. xvi. Io.
Tyſiphone there keeps the ward,
Girt in her ſanguine gown, by night and day,
Obſervant of the ſouls that paſs the downward way. Dryd.
6. To cover round as a garment. -
Theſe, with what ſkill they had, together ſow'd,
To gird their waiſt: vain covering, if to hide -
Their guilt, and dreaded ſhame! Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
7. To reproach ; to gibe. -
Being mov’d, he will not ſpare to gird the gods. Shakespeare ,
8. To furniſh; to equip.
So to the coaſt of Jordan he direéts -
His eaſy ſteps, girded with ſhaky wiles. Paradſe Regain'd.
9. To incloſe; to incircle.
That Nyſcian iſle,
Girt with the river Triton, where old Cham
Hid Amalthca, and her florid ſon
Young Bacchus, from his ſtepdame Rhea's eye. Milt, P. L.
To GIRD. v. m. To break a ſcornful jeſt; to gibe; to ſneer.
Men of all ſorts take a pride to gird at me: the brain of
this fooliſh compounded clay, man, is not able to invent any
thing that tends to laughter more than I invent, or is invented
on me: I am not only witty in myſelf, but the cauſe that wit
is in other men. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
GIRD. m.ſ.. [from the verb ] A twitch; a pang: from the
ſenſation cauſed by a bandage or girdle drawn hard ſuddenly.
This word is now ſcljom uſed.
Sweet king! the biſhop hath a kindly gird:
For ſhame, my lord of Wincheſter, relent. Shakespeare H. VI.
They give ſatisfaction to his mind, and his conſcience by
this means is freed from many fearful girds and twinges which
the atheiſt feels. Tillotſon, Sermon 2.
He has the glory of his conſcience, when he doth
well, to ſet againſt the checks and girds of it when he doth
amiſs. Goodman's I/inter Evening Con.
G1'RDER. m. ſ. [from gird..] In architecture, the largeſt piece
of timber in a floor. Its end is uſually faſtened into the
ſummers, or breaſt ſummers, and the joiſts are framed in at
one arm to the girders. Harris.
The girders are alſo to be of the ſame ſcantling the ſum-
mers and ground-plates are of, though the back girder need
not be ſo ſtrong as the front girder. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
Theſe mighty girders which the fabrick bind,
Theſe ribs robuſt and vaſt in order join'd. Blackm. Creation.
GIRDLE. m. ſ. ſºrbel. Saxon. J
1. Any thing drawn round the waiſt, and ticd or buckled.
There will I make thee beds of roſes,
With a thouſand fragrant poſes;
A cap of flowers, and a girdle,
Embroider'd all with leaves of myrtle. Shakespeare,
Many conceive there is ſomewhat amiſ, until they put on
their girdle. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v. c. 21.
On him his mantle, girde, ſword and bow,
On him his heart and ſoul he did beſtow. Cºwley.
2. Encloſure; circumference.
Suppoſe within the girdle of theſe walls
Are now confin'd two mighty monarchies. Shakespeare Hen. V.
3. The equator; the torrid zone.
Great breezes in great circles, ſuch as are under the girdle
of the world, do refrigerate. Bacon.
To GI'RDLE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To gird; to bind as with a girdle.
Lay the gentle babes, girdling one another
Within their innocent alabaſter arms. Shakeſp Rich. III.
2. To incloſe; to ſhut in ; to environ.
Thoſe ſleeping ſtones,
That as a waiſt do girdle you about,
By this time from their fixed beds of lime
Had been diſhabited. Shakeſpeare's King jºn.
Let me look back upon thee, O thou wall,
That girdleſt in thoſe wolves | Shakeſpeare's Timon.
G.'RDLEBELT, n.ſ. [girdle and belt.] The belt that incircles
the waiſt.
Nor did his eyes leſs longingly behold
The girdlebet, with nails of burniſh'd gold. Dryden's Żn.
G1'RDLER... n.ſ.. [from girdle.] A maker of girdles..
GIRE. m. ſ. [gyrus, Latin.] A circle deſcribed by any thing
in motion. See GY RE.
GIRL!. n.ſ. [About the etymology of this word there is much
queſtion: Mericcaſaubon, as is hiscuſtom, derives it from zéºn,
of the ſame ſignification; Minſhew from garru'a, Latin, a
Prattler, or girella, Italian, a weathercock; junius thinks
that it comes from herlodes, Welſh, from which, ſays he,
harlot is very eaſily deduced. Skinner imagines that the Saxons,
who uſed ceorl' for a man, might likewiſe have ceonla for a
woman, though no ſuch word is now found. Dr. Hickes
derives it moſt probably from the Iſlandick Karlinna, a wo-
man.] A young woman, or female child.
In thoſe unfledg’d days was my wife a girl. Shakeſpeare.
And let it not diſpleaſe thee, good Bianca;
For I will love thee ne'er the leſs, my girl. Shakeſpeare.
A weather-beaten lover, but once known,
Is ſport for every girl to practiſe on. Lonne.
Tragedy ſhould bluſh as much to ſtoop
To the low mimick follies of a farce,
As a grave matron would to dance with girls. Roſcommon.
A boy, like thee, would make a kingly line;
But oh, a girl, like her, muſt be divine ! Dryden:
G1'RLISH. adj. [from girl..] Suiting a girl; youthful.
In her girliſh age ſhe kept ſheep on the moor. Carew.
G1'RLISHLY. adv. [from girliſh.] In a girliſh manner.
To GIRN. v. n. Seems to be a corruption of grin. It is ſtill
uſed in Scotland, and is applied to a crabbed, captious, or pee-
viſh perſon.
G1'RRock. m. ſ. A kind of fiſh. Diff.
GIRT. part, paſſ. [from To gird.]
To GIRT. v. a. [from gird..] To gird; to encompaſs; to
encircle. Not proper.
In the dread ocean, undulating wide
Beneath the radiant line, that girts the globe,
The circling Typhon whirl’d from point to point. Thomſºn.
GIRT. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
º * by which the ſaddle or burthen is fixed upon the
Orie.
Here lies old Hobſon, death hath broke his girt;
And here, alas ! hath laid him in the dirt. Milton.
2. A circular bandage.
The moſt common way of bandage is by that of the girt,
which girt hath a bolſter in the middle, and the ends are
tacked firmly together. Wiſeman's Surgery.
GIRTH. n.ſ.. [from gird. J
1. The band by which the ſaddle is fixed upon the horſe.
Or the ſaddle turn'd round, or the girths brake;
For low on the ground, woe for his ſake,
The law is found. Ben. johnſon's Underwood.
Nor Pegaſus could bear the load,
Along the high celeſtial road;
The ſteed oppreſs'd, would break his girth,
To raiſe the lumber from the earth. Swift.
Mordanto gallops on alone;
The roads are with his foll'wers ſtrown; }
This breaks a girth, and that a bone. Swift.
2. The compaſs meaſured by the girdle, or encloſing bandage.
He's a luſty jolly fellow that lives well, at leaſt three yards
in the girth. Addiſon's Freeholder.
To GIRTH. v. a. To bind with a girth.
To GISE Ground. v. a. Is when the owner of it does not feed
it with his own ſtock, but takes in other cattle to graze. Bai ey.
G1'slf.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G I V
G I V
G1'sle. Among the Engliſh Saxons, ſignifies a pledge: thus,
Fredgiſle is a pledge of peace; Giſebert an illuſtrious pledge,
like the Greek Homerus. Gilſon's Camden.
GitH. m. ſ. An herb called Guiney pepper.
To GIVE v. a. preter. gave ; part, paſt. given. [xpan, Saxon.]
1. To beſtow; to confer without any price or reward.
This opinion abated the fear of death in them which were
ſo reſolved, and gave them courage to all adventures. Hooker.
Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out. Mat. xxv.
Give us alſo ſacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may ſa-
crifice unto the Lord. Ex. x. 25.
I had a maſter that gave me all I could aſk, but thought fit
to take one thing from me again. Temple.
Conſtant at church and change; his gains were ſure,
His givings rare, ſave farthings to the poor. Pope's Epiſtles.
2. To tranſmit from himſelf to another by hand, ſpeech, or
writing; to deliver; to impart; to communicate.
The woman whom thou gaveſ to be with me, ſhe gave me
of the tree, and I did eat. Gen. iii. 12.
They were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage. Mat. xxiv. 38.
Thoſe bills were printed not only every week, but alſo a
general account of the whole year was given in upon the
Thurſday before Chriſtmas. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
We ſhall give an account of theſe phenomena. Burmet.
Ariſtotle adviſes not poets to put things evidently falſe and
impoſſible into their poems, nor gives them licence to run out
into wildneſs. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey,
3. To put into one's poſſeſſion; to conſign.
Nature gives us many children and friends, to take them
away; but takes none away to give them us again. Temple.
Give me, ſays Archimedes, where to ſtand firm, and I will
remove the earth. Temple.
If the agreement of men firſt gave a ſceptre into any one's
hands, or put a crown on his head, that almoſt muſt direct its
conveyance. Locke.
4. To pay as price or reward, or in exchange.
All that a man hath will he give for his life. job ii. 4.
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
And how unwillingly I left the ring,
You would abate the ſtrength of your diſpleaſure. Shakeſp.
He would give his nuts for a piece of metal, and exchange
his ſheep for ſhells, or wool for a ſparkling pebble. Locke.
5. To yield; not to withold.
Philip, Alexander's father, gave ſentence againſt a priſoner
what time he was drowſy, and ſeemed to give ſmall attention.
The priſoner, after ſentence was pronounced, ſaid, I appeal:
the king, ſomewhat ſtirred, ſaid, To whom do you appeal
The priſoner anſwered, From Philip, when he gave no ear, to
Philip, when he ſhall give ear. Bacon's Apophthegms.
Conſtantia accuſed herſelf for having ſo tamely given an ear
to the propoſal. Addiſon's Stediator.
3. To quit; to yield as due.
Give place, thou ſtranger, to an honourable man. Eccluſ.
. To confer; to impart. º
I will bleſs her, and give thee a ſon alſo of her. Gen. xvii.
Nothing can give that to another which it hath not itſelf.
Bramh, againſt Hobbs.
What beauties I loſe in ſome places, I give to others which
had them not originally. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
8. To expoſe.
All clad in ſkins of beaſts the jav'lin bear;
Give to the wanton winds their flowing hair.
9. To grant; to allow.
'Tis given me once again to behold my friend. Rowe.
He has not given Luther fairer play. Atterbury,
1c. To yield; not to deny.
I gave his wife propoſal way;
Nay, urg'd him to go on; the ſhallow fraud
Will ruin him. Rowe's Ambitious Stepmother.
11. To yield without reſiſtance.
12. To permit; to commiſſion.
Prepare
The due libation and the ſolemn pray'r;
Then give thy friend to ſhed the ſacred wine. Pope's Odyſ.
13. To enable; to allow.
God himſelf requireth the lifting up of pure hands in
prayers ; and hath given the world to underſtand,.. that the
wicked, although they cry, ſhall not be heard. Hocker.
Give me to know
How this foul rout began, who ſet it on. Shakespeare Othello.
So ſome weak ſhoot, which elſe would poorly riſe,
Jove's tree adopts, and lifts into the ſkies;
Through the new pulpil foſt'ring juices flow,
Thruſt forth the gems, and give the flow’rs to blow. Tickel.
14. To pay.
The applauſe and approbation, moſt reverend for thy ſtretcht-
out life, I give to both your ſpeeches. Shakespeare Trail, and Crºſſida.
15. To utter; to vent; to pronounce, -
Dryd. Æn.
So you muſt be the firſt that gives this ſentence,
And he that ſuffers. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Aſcoſite,
The Rhodians ſeeing their enemies turn their backs, gave
a great ſhout in deriſion of them. Knºlles's Hy; of the 7trº.
Let the firſt honeſt diſcoverer give the word about, that
Wood's halfpence have been offered, and caution the poor
people not to receive them. Swift.
16. To exhibit; to expreſs.
This inſtance gives the impoſſibility of an eternal exiſtence
in anything eſſentially alterable or corruptible. Hale.
17. To exhibit as the product of a calculation.
... The number of men being divided by the number of ſhips,
gives four hundred and twenty-four men a-piece. Arbuthnot.
18. To do any act of which the conſequence reaches others.
As we deſire to give no offence ourſelves, ſo neither ſhall
we take any at the difference of judgment in others. Burnet,
19. To exhibit; to ſend forth as odours from any body.
In oranges the ripping of their rind giveth out their ſmell
more. Bacon.
20. To addićt; to apply.
The Helots, of the other ſide, ſhutting their gates, gave
themſelves to bury their dead, to cure their wounds, and reſt
their wearied bodies. Sidney.
After men began to grow to number, the firſt thing we read
they gave themſelves into, was the tilling of the earth and the
feeding of cattle. Hooker, b. i.
Groves and hill-altars were dangerous, in regard of the
ſecret acceſs which people ſuperſtitiouſly given might have
always thereunto with eaſe. Hacker, b. v. ſ. 17.
The duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given,
To dream on evil, or to work my downfal. Shakespeare . H. VI.
Fear him not, Caeſar, he's not dangerous:
He is a noble Roman, and well given. Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
His name is Falſtaff: if that man ſhould be lewdly given,
he deceives me; for, Harry, I ſee virtue in his looks. S/ Shakeſp.
Huniades, the ſcourge of the Turks, was dead long before;
ſo was alſo Mathias: after whom ſucceeded others, given all
to *. and eaſe. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
hough he was given to pleaſure, yet he was likewiſe de-
firous of glory. Bacon's Henry VII.
He that giveth his mind to the law of the moſt High, will
ſeek out the wiſdom of all the ancients. Eccluſ xxxix. 1.
He is much given to contemplation, and the viewing of this
theatre of the world. More's Antidote againſt Ætheiſm.
They who gave themſelves to warlike action and enter-
priſes, went immediately to the palace of Odin. Temple.
Men are given to this licentious humour of ſcoffing at per-
ſonal blemiſhes and defečts. L'E/irange.
Beſides, he is too much given to horſeplay in his raillery;
and comes to battle, like a dictator from the plough. Dryden.
I have ſome buſineſs of importance with her; but her huſ-
band is ſo horribly given to be jealous. Dryd. Spaniſh Fryar.
What can I refuſe to a man ſo charitably given P Dryden.
21. To reſign; to yield up.
Finding ourſelves in the midſt of the greateſt wilderneſs of
waters, without vićtual, we gave ourſelves for loſt men, and
prepared for death. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Who ſay, I care not, thoſe I give for loſt;
And to inſtruct them, will not quit the coſt. Herbert.
Virtue giv'n for loſt,
Depreſt and overthrown, as ſeem'd ;
Like that ſelf-begott'n bird
In the Arabian woods emboſt,
That no ſecond knows, nor third,
And lay erewhile a holocauſt, -
From out her aſhy womb now teem'd. Milton's Agoniſies.
Since no deep within her gulph can hold
Immortal vigour, though oppreſs'd and fall'n,
I give not heaven for loſt. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ii.
For a man to give his name to Chriſtianity in thoſe days,
was to liſt himſelf a martyr. South.
Ours gives himſelf for gone; you've watch'd your time,
He fights this day unarm’d, without his rhyme. Dryden.
The parents, after a long ſearch for the body, gave him for
drowned in one of the canals. Addiſon's Speciator.
As the hinder feet of the horſe ſtuck to the mountain, while
the body reared up in the air, the poet with great difficulty
kept himſelf from ſliding off his back, in ſo much that the
people gave him for gone. Addiſon's Guardian.
22. To conclude; to ſuppoſe.
Whence came you here, O friend, and whither bound 2
All gave you loſt on far Cyclopean ground. Garth's Ovid.
23. To Give away. To alienate from one's ſelf; to make
over to another; to transfer.
The more he got, the more he ſhewed that he gave away
to his new miſtreſs, when he betrayed his promiſes to the
former. - Sidney, b. ii.
If you ſhall marry,
You give away this hand, and that is mine;
You give away heav'n's vows, and thoſe are mine;
You give away myſelf, which is known mine. Shakeſpeare.
Honeſt
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G I V
G I V
Honeſt company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away myſelf
To this moſt patient, ſweet, and virtuous wife. Shakeſpeare:
Iknow not how they ſold themſelves; but thou, like a kind
fellow, gav/; thyſelf away gratis, , and I thank thee for
thee. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Love gives away all things, that ſo he may advance the in-
tereſt of the beloved perſon. Taylºr's Rule of living holy.
But we who give our native rights away,
And our enſlav'd poſterity betray,
Are now reduc’d to began alms, and go
On holidays to ſee a puppet-ſhow. Dryden's juvenal's Sat.
Alas, ſaid I, man was made in vain! How is he given
away to miſery and mortality Addiſon's Spetiator, Nº. 159.
Theodoſius arrived at a religious houſe in the city, where
Conſtantia reſided, and made himſelf one of the order, with
a private vow never to inquire after Conſtantia, whom he
looked upon as given away to his rival, upon the day on which
their marriage was to have been ſolemnized. Addiſon's Spečiat.
Whatſoever we employ in charitable uſes, during our lives,
is given away from ourſelves: what we bequeath at our death,
is given from others only, as our neareſt relations. Atterbury.
24. To Give back. To return; to reſtore.
*Till their vices perhaps give back all thoſe advantages which
their vićtories procured. Atterbury's Sermons.
25. To Give forth. To publiſh; to tell.
Soon after it was given forth, and believed by many, that
the king was dead. Hayward.
26. To Give the hand. To yield pre-eminence, as being ſub-
ordinate or inferior.
Leſſons being free from ſome inconveniences, whereunto
ſermons are more ſubječt, they may in this reſpect no leſs
take than in others they muſt give the hand, which betokeneth
pre-eminence. Hocker.
27. To Give over. To leave; to quit; to ceaſe.
Let novelty therefore in this give over endleſs contradićtions,
and let ancient cuſtoms prevail. Hooker.
It may be done rather than that be given over. Hooker.
Never give her o'er;
For ſcorn at firſt makes after love the more. Shakeſpeare.
If Deſdemona will return me my jewels, I will give over
my ſuit, and repent my unlawful ſolicitation. Shakespeare Othells.
Abdemelech, as one weary of the world, gave over all, and
betook himſelf to a ſolitary life, and became monk. Knolles.
All the ſoldiers, from the higheſt to the loweſt, had ſolemnly
ſworn to defend the city, and not to give it over unto the .
IIlan, Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Sleep hath forſook and giv'n me o'er
To death's benuming opium, as my only cure. Milton.
Thoſe troops, which were levied, have given over the pro-
ſecution of the war. Clarendon, b. viii.
But worſt of all to give her over,
*Till ſhe's as deſperate to recover. Hudibras, p. iii. cant, 3.
'Tis not amiſs, e'er y' are giv'n o'er,
To try one deſp'rate med'cine more;
And where your caſe can be no worſe,
The deſp'rateſt is the wiſeſt courſe. Hudihras, p. ii.
A woman had a hen that laid every day an egg: ſhe fancied
that upon a larger allowance this hen might lay twice a day;
but the hen grew fat, and gave quite over laying. L’Eſtrange.
Many have given over their purſuits after fame, either from
the diſappointments they have met, or from their experience
of the little pleaſure which attends it. Addſºn's Speciator.
28. To Give over. To addićt; to attach to.
Zelmane, govern and direét me; for I am wholly given over
unto thee. Sidney, b. ii.
When the Babylonians had given themſelves over to all man-
ner of vice, it was time for the Lord, who had ſet up that
empire, to pull it down. Grew's Coſmol. b. iii. c. 3.
I uſed one thing ill, or gave myſelf ſo much over to it as to
neglect what I owed either to him or the reſt of the world.
Temple's Miſcellanies.
29. To Give over. To conclude loſt.
Since it is lawful to practiſe upon them that are forſaken
and given over, I will adventure to preſcribe to you. Suckling.
The abbeſs, finding that the phyſicians had given her over,
told her that Theodoſius was juſt gone before her, and had
fent her his benedićtion. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 164.
Her condition was now quite deſperate, all regular phyſi-
cians, and her neareſt relations, having given her over. Arbuth.
Yet this falſe comfort never gives him o'er,
That, whilſt he creeps, his vigorous thoughts can ſoar. Pope.
Not one foretells I ſhall recover;
But all agree to give me over.
20. To Giy E over. To abandon.
The duty of uniformity throughout all churches, in all man-
ner of indifferent ceremonies, will be very hard, and there-
forc beſt to give it over. - Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 13.
The cauſe, for which we fought and ſwore
So boldly, ſhall we now give o'er P Hudibras, p. i. cant, 2.
31. To Give out. To proclaim; to publiſh; to utter.
Swift.
The fathers give it out for a rule, that whatſoever Chriſt is
ſaid in Scripture to have received, the ſame we ought to ap-
ply only to the manhood of Chriſt. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 54.
It is given out, that, ſleeping in my orchard,
A ſerpent ſtung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
Is, by a forged proceſs of my death,
Rankly abuſed. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
One that gives out himſelf prince Florizeſ,
Son of Polixenes, with his princeſs. Shakespeare Iſinter's Tak.
It hath been given out, by an hypocritical thief, who was
the firſt maſter of my ſhip, that I carried with me out of
England twenty-two thouſand of twenty-two ſhillings per
piece. Raleigh's Apology.
He gave out general ſummons for the aſſembly of his council
for the wars. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The night was diſtinguiſhed by the orders which he gav.
out to his army, that they ſhould forbear all inſulting of their
enemies. Addiſon's Freehºlder, No. 49.
32. W. Give out. To ſhow in falſe appearance.
His givings out were of an infinite diſtance
From his true meant deſign. Shakespeare Meaſ for Meaſure.
She that, ſo young, could give out ſuch a ſeeming,
To ſeal her father's eyes up cloſe as oak. Shakeſp. Othello.
33. To Give up. To reſign; to quit; to yield.
The people, weary of the miſerics of war, would give him
ap, if they ſaw him ſhrink. Sidney, b. ii.
He has betray'd your buſineſs, and given up
For certain drops of ſalt your city Rome, Shakespeare Coriolanur.
The ſun, breaking out with his cheerful beams, revived
many, before ready to give up the ghoſt for cold, and gave
comfort to them all. Knolei's Hiſtory of the Turks.
He found the lord Hopton in trouble for the loſs of the re-
giment of foot at Alton, and with the unexpected aſſurance of
the giving up of Arundel-caſtle. Clarendon, b. viii.
Let us give ourſelves wholly up to Chriſt in heart and deſire.
Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Such an expectation will never come to paſs; therefore I'll
e'en give it up, and go and fret myſelf. Collier againſ. Deſpair.
I can give up to the hiſtorians of your country the names of
ſo many generals and heroes which crowd their annals. Dryd.
He declares himſelf to be now ſatisfied to the contrary, in
which he has given up the cauſe. Dryden.
The leagues made between ſeveral ſtates, diſowning all
claim to the land in the other's poſſeſſion, have, by common
conſent, given up their pretences to their natural right. Locke.
If they give them up to their reaſons, then they with them
£ive up all truth and farther enquiry, and think there is no
ſuch thing as certainty. Lºcke.
We ſhould ſee him give up again to the wild common of
nature, whatever was more than would ſupply the convenien-
cies of life. Locke.
Juba's ſurrender, ſince his father's death,
Would give up Africk into Caeſar's hands,
And make him lord of half the burning zone. Addiſ Cato.
Learn to be honeſt men, give up your leaders,
And pardon ſhall deſcend on all the reſt. Addison's Cato.
A popiſh prieſt threatened to excommunicate a Northum-
berland ſquire, if he did not give up to him the church
lands. Addison's Freeholder.
He ſaw the celeſtial deities a&amp;ing in a confederacy againſt
him, and immediately gave up a cauſe which was excluded
from all poſſibility of ſucceſs. Addiſon's Freeholder.
An old gentleman, who had been engaged in an argument
with the emperor, upon his friend's telling him he wondered
he would give up the queſtion when he had the better, I am
never aſhamed, ſays he, to be confuted by one who is maſter
of fifty legions. Addison's Spectator, N°. 239.
He may be brought to give up the cleareſt evidence. Atterb.
The conſtant health and longevity of men muſt be given up
alſo, as a groundleſs conceit. Bentley's Sermons.
Have the phyſicians giv'n up all their hopes?
Cannot they add a few days to a monarch? Rowe.
Theſe people were obliged to demand peace, and give up
to the Romans all their poſſeſſions in Sicily. Arbuthnot.
Every one who will not aſk for the condućt of God in the
ſtudy of religion, has juſt reaſon to fear he ſhall be left of
God, and given up a prey to a thouſand prejudices, that he
ſhall be conſigned over to the follies of his own heart. J/atts.
Give yourſelf up to ſome hours of leiſure. J/atts.
34. To Give up. To abandon. -
If any be given up to believe lyes, ſome muſt be firſt given
up to tell them. Stillingfeet's Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
Our minds naturally give themſelves up to every diverſion
which they are much accuſtomed to; and we always find that
play, when followed with affiduity, engroſſes the whole
WOIIlan. Addison's Guardian, N°. 12c.
Give up your fond paternal pride,
Nor argue on the weaker ſide. Swift.
A good poet no ſooner communicates his works, but it is
imagined he is a vain young creature given tºp to the ambition
of fame. 2 - Pope.
I *I'll<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G I V
G L A
§
*
&amp;
I am obliged at this time to give up my whole application
to Homer. - - Poſe.
Perſons who, through misfortunes, chuſe not to dreſs,
ſhould not, however, give up neatneſs. Clariffa.
35, 7% G1 v E up. To deliver.
And Joab gave up the ſum of the number of the people to
the king. 2 Sa. xxiv. 9.
His accounts were confuſed, and he could not then give
them up. - Swift on the Diſſent. in Athens and Rome.
To G1 v E. v. m.
1. To ruſh; to fall on ; to give the aſſault. A phraſe mercly
French, and not worthy of adoption.
Your orders come too late, the fight's begun;
The enemy gives on with fury led. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
Hannibal gave upon the Romans. Hooke's Ram. Hi/?.
2. To relent; to grow moiſt; to melt or ſoften ; to thaw.
- Some things are harder when they come from the fire, and
afterwards give again, and grow ſoft; as the cruſt of bread,
biſket, ſweetmeats, and ſalt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Only a ſweet and virtuous ſoul,
Like ſeaſon'd timber, never gives;
But though the whole world turn to coal,
Then chiefly lives. Herbert.
Unleſs it is kept in a hot houſe, it will ſo give again, that
it will be little better than raw malt. Mortimer.
Before you carry your large cocks in, open them once, and
ſpread them: hay is apt to give in the cock. Alſºrtimer.
3. To move. A French phraſe. -
Up and down he traverſes his ground,
Then nimbly ſhifts a thruſt, then lends a wound;
Now back he gives, then ruſhes on amain. Daniel’s C. J/ar.
4. To Give in. To go back; to give way.
The charge was given with ſo well governed fury, that the
left corner of the Scots battalion was enforced to give in. Hayw.
5. To Give in to. [A French phraſe.] To adopt; to embrace.
This is a geography particular to the medalliſts: the poets,
however, have ſometimes given in to it, and furniſh us with
very good lights for the explication of it. Addiſon on Medals.
This conſideration may induce a tranſlator to give in to thoſe
general phraſes, which have attained a veneration in our lan-
guage from being uſed in the Old Teſtament. Pope.
The whole body of the people are either ſtupidly negligent,
or elſe giving in with all their might to thoſe very practices
that are working their deſtruction. - Swift.
6. To Give off. To ceaſe; to forbear. -
The puniſhment would be kept from being too much, if
we gave off as ſoon as we perceived that it reached the mind.
Locke on Education.
7. To Give over. To ceaſe; to ačt no more.
If they will ſpeak to the purpoſe, they muſt give over, and
ſtand upon ſuch particulars only as they can ſhew we have
either added or abrogated, otherwiſe than we ought, in the
matter of church polity. Hooker, b. iii.
Neither hath Chriſt, thro’ union of both natures, incurred
the damage of either; left, by being born a man, we ſhould
think he hath given over to be God, or that becauſe he con-
tinued God, therefore he cannot be man alſo. Hooker, b. v.
Give not o'er ſo: to him again; intreat him,
Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown; -
You are too cold. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
The ſtate of human actions is ſo variable, that to try things
oft, and never to give over, doth wonders. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Demetrius, king of Macedon, had a petition offered him
divers times by an old woman, and ſtill anſwered he had no
leiſure ; whereupon the woman ſaid aloud, Why then give
over to be king. - Bacon's Apophthegms.
So Satan, whom repulſe upon repulſe
Met ever, and to ſhameful ſilence brought,
Yct gives not o'er, though deſperate of ſucceſs. Milton.
Shall we kindle all this flame
Only to put it out again
And muſt we now give o'er,
And only cnd where we begun ?
In vain this miſchief we have done,
If we can do no more. Denham.
It would be well for all authors, if they kncw when to give
over, and to deſiſt from any farther purſuits after fame. Addison
He coined again, and was forced to give over for the ſame
reaſon. Swift.
8. To Give out. To publiſh; to proclaim.
Simon bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that him-
ſelf was ſome great one. ..? is viii. 9.
Julius Caeſar laid aſleep Pompey's preparations, by a fame
that he cunningly gave out how Caeſar's own ſoldiers loved
him not. Bacon, Eſſay 6c.
Your ill-wiſhers will give out you are now going to quit
your ſchool. Swift.
9. To Give out. To ceaſe; to yield. -
- We are the earth; and they,
Like moles within us, heave and caſt about:
And 'till they foot and clutch their prey;
They never cool, much leſs give out. Herbe, t.
Madam, I always believ'd you ſo flout,
That for twenty denials you would not give zºº. Sr. º.
Io. To Give way. To yield; not to reſiſt; to make room for.
Private reſpects, with him, gave way to the common
good. . Carew's Survy of Cornwal.
Perpetual puſhing and aſſurance put a difficulty out of coun-
tenance, and make a ſeeming impoſſibility give way. Collier.
Scarce, had he ſpoken when the cloud gave way;
The miſts flew upward, and diſſolv’d in day. Dryd. Æn.
His golden helm gives way with ſtony blows,
Batter'd and flat, and beaten to his brows. Dryden's ºn.
G1 v ER. m. ſ. [from give..] One that gives; donor; beſtower;
diſtributer ; granter.
Well we may afford
Our givers their own gifts. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. v.
By thee how fairly is the giver now
Repaid But gratitude in thee is loſt - -
Long ſince. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd, b. iv.
I have not liv'd ſince firſt I heard the news;
The gift the guilty giver doth accuſe. Dryden's Aurengzºle.
Both gifts deſtructive to the givers prove;
Alike both lovers fall by thoſe they love. Pope.
GrºzzARD. m. ſ. [gºſier, French ; gigeria, Latin. It is ſome-
times called gizzern.]
1. The ſtrong muſculous ſtomach of a fowl.
Fowls have two ventricles, and pick up ſtones to convey
them into their ſecond ventricle, the gizzerne. More.
In birds there is no maſtication in the mouth; but in ſuch
as are not carnivorous, it is immediately ſwallowed into the
crop, a kind of anteſtomach, where it is moiſtened by ſome
proper juice from the glandules diſtilling in there, and thence
transferred into the gizzard, or muſculous ſtomach. Ray.
Flutt'ring there they neſtle near the throne,
And lodge in habitations not their own ; {
By their high crops and corny gizzards known. Dryden.
2. It is proverbially uſed for apprehenſion or conception of mind:
as, he frets his gizzard, he harraſſes his imagination.
But that which does them greateſt harm,
Their ſpiritual gizzards are too warm;
Which puts the overheated ſots
In fevers ſtill. • Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 1 1.
Satisfaction and reſtitution lie ſo curſedly hard upon the
gizzards of our publicans, that the blood in their veins is not
half ſo dear to them as the treaſure they have in their cof-
fers. L’Eſhrange.
GLA'BRITY. m. ſ. [from glaber, Latin.] Smoothneſs; bald-
neſs. Dićf.
GLA'cIAL. adj. [glacial, French; glacialis, Latin.] [cy; made
of ice; frozen.
To GLACIATE. v. n. [glacies, Latin; glacer, French. J. To
turn into ice.
GLAcIA'tion. n.ſ. [from glaciate.] The aët of turning into
ice; ice formed. -
Ice is plain upon the ſurface of water, but round in hail,
which is alſo a glaciation, and figured in its guttulous deſcent
from the air. Brown's Julgar Errours, b. ii. c. 1.
GLACIS. m. ſ. [ French. J In fortification, a ſloping
bank. It is more eſpecially taken for that which rangeth
from the parapet of the covered way to the level on the ſide
of the field. Harris.
GLAD. adj. [...lab, Saxon ; glad, Daniſh.]
1. Cheerful; gay; in a ſtate of hilarity.
He will be glad in his heart. Ex. iv. 14.
They bleſſed the king, and went unto their tents joyful and
glad of heart. 1 King; viii. 00.
2. Wearing a gay appearance; fertile; bright; ſhowy.
The wilderneſs and the ſolitary place ſhall be glad for them,
and the deſert ſhall rejoice and bloſſom as the roſe. Jſ. xxxv.
3. Pleaſed; elevated with joy. It has generally ºf, ſometime;
at or with before the cauſe of gladneſs: perhaps ºf is moſt
proper, when the cauſe of joy is ſomething gained or poſieſſed;
and at or with, when it is ſome accident befallen himſelf or
another.
I am glad to ſee your worſhip. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
He hath an uncle in Meſſina will be very much gºd ºf
it. Shakesprarº's Much Ado abºut Nothing.
He that is glad at calamities ſhall not be unpuniſhed. Prº.
If he be my encmy, let him triumph ; if he be my friend,
he will be glad of my repentance. Dryden's Fables, Prºf.
The gaping wound guſh'd out a crimſºn flood;
The Trojan, glad with ſight of hoſtile blood,
His fauchion drew. Dryden's ºn.
I would be glad to learn from thoſe who pronounce that
the human ſoul always thinks, how they know it. Lºckr.
4. Pleaſing; exhilarating. -
Her converſation
More glad to me than to a rººfer money is.
5. Expreſſing gladneſs.
Hark! a glad voice the lonely deſcri cheers:
Prepare the way, a God, a God appears' Pºp.'s iſ ſah.
To GLA D. v. a. (froin the ºijective.) To make gºad; to
chccr; to exhilafate.
1 C. H. He
Sidney, b, i.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G L A
G L A
He ſaw rich nećar-thaws releaſe the rigºur
Of th’ icy North; from froſt-bound Atlas' hands
His adamantine fetters fall: green Vigo"
Gladding the Scythian rocks, and Lybian ſands. Crºſhaw.
It glads me
To ſee ſo many virtues thus united,
To reſtore juſtice and dethrone oppreſſion. Otway.
Each drinks the juice that glads the heart of man. Pºpe.
If juſtice Philips' coſtive head
Some frigid rhymes diſburſes,
They ſhall like Perſian tales be read,
And glad both babes and nurſes. Swift.
To Gla'DDEN. v. a. [from glad..] To cheer; to delight; to
make glad : to exhilarate.
Oh, he was all made up of love and charms!
Delight of every eye! When he appear'd,
A ſecret pleaſure gladden’d all that ſaw him. Addison's Cato.
A kind of vital heat in the ſoul cheers and gladden; her,
when ſhe does not attend to it. Addison's Spectator.
GLA'DD ER. m. ſ. [from glad..] One that makes glad; one that
gladdens; one that exhilarates.
Thou gladder of the mount of Cytheron,
Have pity, goddeſs. Dryden.
GLAD e. n.ſ. [from glopan, to be hot, or to ſhine; whence
the Daniſh glod, and the obſolete Engliſh g eed, a red hot
coal.] A lawn or opening in a wood. Lucus. It is taken
for an avenue through a wood, whether open or ſhaded, and
has therefore epithets of oppoſite meaning.
So flam'd his eyen with rage and rancorous ire;
Put far within, as in a hollow glade,
Thoſe glaring lamps were ſet, that made a dreadful ſhade.
Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 11.
Lo where they ſpy'd, how in a gloomy glade
The lion ſleeping lay in ſecret ſhade. Hubberd's Tale.
O might I here
In ſolitude live ſavage, in ſome glade
Obſcur'd, where higheſt woods, impenetrable
To ſtar or ſun-light, ſpread their umbrage broad,
And brown as evening. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
When any, favour'd of high Jove,
Chances to paſs through this adventurous glade,
Swift as a ſparkle of a glancing ſtar
1 ſhoot from heav'n to give him ſafe convoy. Milton.
For noonday's heat are cloſer arbours made,
And for freſh ev'ning air the op'ner glade. Dryd Innocence.
There, intº ſpers'd in lawns and opening glades,
Thin trees ariſe that ſhun each other's ſhades. Pope.
lºv thc heroes armed ſhades,
Glittºring through the gloomy glades;
By the youths that dy'd for love,
Wand'ring in the myrtle grove,
Reſtore, reſtore Eurydice to life
Oh, take the huſband, or reſtore the wife Pope's St. Cecil.
G1.A'DEN. ( a. ſ. [from gladius, Latin, a ſword.] Swordgraſs: a
GLA'De R. { general name of plants that riſe with a broad
blade like ſedge. junius.
GLADFULNEss. n.ſ. [glad and fulneſs.]... Joy; gladneſs.
And there him reſts in riotous ſuffiſance
Of all his gladfulneſs, and kingly joyance. Stenſºr.
GLAD1A(Tor, n / [Latin; gladiateur, Fr.] A ſwordplayer;
a prizefighter.
Then whilſt his foe each gladiatºr foils,
The atheiſt, looking on, enjoys the ſpoils.
Beſides, in gratitude for ſuch high matters,
Know I have vow'd two hundred gladiators. Dryden', Porſ.
Denham.
GLA'DLY. adv. [from glad.] Joyfully ; with gayety; with
merriment; with triumph; with exultation.
For his particular, I'll receive him gladly;
But not one follower. Sašºſpeare's King Lear.
You ºre going to ſet us right; and 'tis an advanta e every
body will gºad; ſee you chgroſs the glory of Blount to Pope.
Glapºss "../ [from glaſ J Cheerfulneſs; joy; exultation.
By ſuch degrees the ſpreading gladeſ; grew
In every heart, which tear had frºze before:
The ſtanding ſtreets with ſo much joy they view,
That with leſs grief the periſh'd they deplore. Dry 'en.
G1.A'psom E. adj. [from glad.]
1. Pleaſed; gay; delighted.
- The higheſt angels to and fro deſcend,
Frºm higheſt heaven in gladſome company. Fairy Queen.
The gºadſºme ghoſts in circling troops attend,
And with unweary'd eyes behold their friend:
belight to hover near. Dryden's AEm. b. iv.
2. Cauſing joy; having an appearance of gayety.
Each morn they wak'd me with a ſprightly lay;
G o: opening heav'n they ſung and gladſome day. Prior.
**** adv. [from gladſ,me.] With gayety and de-
Gººses. n: ſ [from gladſome.] Gayety; ſhowineſs;
eight.
GłA18E. n.ſ. ſalar, Saxon, amber; glar, Daniſh, glaſs; glaire,
French glarea, Latin.]
1. The white of an egg. -
Take the glaire of cºgs, and ſtrain it as ſhort as water
Peacham on Drawn.
2. A kind of halbert. Dick
To GLAIR E. v. a. ſ.g'airer, French; from the noun.] i.
ſmear with the white of an egg. This word is ſtill uſed ,
the bookbinders. y
GLANCE. m. ſ. [glaniz, German, glitter J
1. A ſudden ſhoot of light or ſplendour.
His of 'ring ſoon propitious fire from heav'n
Conſum'd with nimble glance, and grateful ſteam:
The other's not; for his was not ſincere. Milt. Parad, Li
2. A ſtroke or dart of the beam of fight. 2. '
The aſpects which procure love are not gazings, but
ſudden glances and dartings of the eye. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory
There are of thoſe ſort of beauties which laſt but for.
moment; ſome particularity of a violent paſſion, ſome grace-
ful action, a ſmile, a giance of an eye, a diſdainful look, and
a look of gravity. - - - Dryden's Dufrºſty.
3. A ſnatch of fight; a quick view.
The ample mind takes a ſurvey of ſeveral objećls with one
glance. Watt's Improvement of the Aſini.
To Gla Nce. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To ſhoot a ſudden ray of ſplendour.
He double blows about him fiercely laid,
That glancing fire out of the iron play'd,
As ſparkles from the anvil uſe,
When heavy hammers on the wedge are ſway'J. F.i. $ºueen,
When through the gloom the glancing lightnings fly,
Heavy the rattling thunders roll on high.
2. To fly off in an oblique dire&amp;tion.
He has a little gall'd me, I confeſs;
But as the jeſt did glance away from me,
' ' is ten to one it maim'd you two outright. Shakespeareearſ.
3. To ſtrike in an oblique direction.
Pois'd in air, the jav'lin ſent,
Through Paris' ſhield the forceful weapon went,
His corſlet pierces, and his garment rends,
And gancing downwards near his flank deſcends. Pºp!,
4. To view with a quick caſt of the eye; to play the eye.
O' th' ſudden up they riſe and dance,
Then it again, and figh and glance;
Then dance again, and kiſs. Sucklºg.
Mighty dulneſs crown'd,
Sha'i take through Grub-ſtreet her triumphant round;
And her Parnaſius glancing o'er at once,
Behold a hundred ſons, and each a dunce. Pope's Dunciad.
The cooing dove
Flies thick in am,'rous chace, and wanton rolls
The giancing eye, and turns the changeful ſcene. Thºmſn.
5. To cenſure by oblique hints.
How can'ſt thou thus, for ſhame, Titania,
Glance at my credit with Hippolita,
Knowing I know thy love to Theſeus Shakespeare.
Some men glance and dart at others, by juſtifying themſelves
by negatives; as to ſay, this I do not. Bacon, Eſſay 23.
I have never glanced upon the late deſigned proceſſion of his
holineſs and his attendants, notwithſtanding it might have
afforded matter to many ludicrous ſpeculations. Addiſ Spºff.
It was obječied againſt him that he had written verſes,
wherein he glanced at a certain reverend doctor, famous ſor
dulneſs. Swift.
To GIANce. v. a. To move nimbly; to ſhoot obliquely.
Glancing an eye of pity on his loſſes,
Enough to preſs a royal merchant down. Shakespeare Mr. of Ven.
GLA'NciNgly. adv. [from glance..] In an oblique broken
manner; tranſiently. -
Sir Richard Hawkins hath done ſomething in this kind, but
brokenly and glancingly, intending chic fly a diſcourſe o his
own voyage. Hºrwill on Providence.
GLAND. m. ſ. [glans, Latin ; gland, French.]
All the glands of a human body are reduced to two fºrts,
viz. conglobate and conglomerate. A conglobate gland is a
little ſmooth body, wrapt up in a fine ſkin, by which it is
ſeparated from all the other parts, only admitting an art ſy
and nerve to paſs in, and giving way to a vein and excretº
canal to come out: of this fort are the gland, in the brain, tº
labial glands, and teſtes. A conglomerate gland is compoſed
of many little conglobate glands, all tied together, and wrapt
1&amp;wt.
up in the common tunicle or membrane. 3uinº).
I obſerved the abſceſs to have begun deep in the body of the
gland. IPſeman's Sargº).
The gland, which o'er the body ſpread,
Fine complicated clues of nervous thread,
Involv’d and twiſted with th' arterial dući, .
The rapid motion of the blood obſtruct. Ficciº. Crººtiv"
Gla'N of Rs. n.ſ.. [from gland.] In a horſe, is the running
corrupt matter from the noſe, which differs in colour accord-
ing to the degree of the malignity, being white, yello's gº
OT blac k. - t I’ar, itr', Diº.
II;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G L A
G L A
His horſe is poſtſt with the glanders, and like to moſe in
the chine. Shakeſpeare's 7 aming of the Shrew.
GLAN di F E Rous, adj. [glans and fero, Latin j Bearing maſt;
bearing acorns, or fruit like acorns.
The beech is of two ſorts, and numbered amongſt the
glandiſerºus trees. Alſo, timer's Husbandry.
GLANDULE. m. ſ. [glandu'a, Latin ; glandue, Fr.] A ſmall
gland ſerving to the ſecretion of humours.
Nature hath provided ſeveral glundues to ſeparate this juice
from the blood, and no leſs than four pair of channels to con-
vey it into the mouth, which are called duºus ſaivales. Ray.
GLANDulo’sity. n.ſ. [from glandulous...] A coll.ction of
glands.
In the upper parts of worms are found certain white and
oval glanduloſities. Brown's ſugar Errours, b. iii.
GLA'N DUlous. adj [glanduloſus, Latin; glanduleux, Fr. from
glandule.) Pertaining to the glands; ſubſiſting in the glands;
having the nature of glands.
There are no teſticles, or parts official unto generation, but
glandulous ſubſtances, that hold the nature of emunctories.
- Brown's Pulgar Erreurs, b. iii, c. 17.
Such conſtitutions muſt be ſubječt to glandulus tumours
and ruptures of the lymphatick, and all the diſcaſes thereon
dependant. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To GLARE. v. n. [glaeren, Dutch.]
1. To fline ſo as to dazzle the eyes. -
After great light, if you come ſuddenly into the dark, or,
contrariwiſe, out of the dark into a giaring light, the eye is
dazzled for a time, and the fight confuſed. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſł.
His glaring eyes with anger's venom ſwell,
And like the brand of foul Ale&amp;o flame. Fairſax, h. ii.
He is every where above conceits of epigrammatick wit,
and groſs hyperboles: he maintains majeſty in the midſt of
plainneſs; he ſhines, but glares not; and is ſtately without
ambition. Dryden.
The court of Cacus ſtands reveal’d to ſight;
The cavern glares with new admitted light. Dryden's AEn.
Alas, thy dazzled eye -
Beholds this man in a falſe glaring light,
Which conqueſt and ſucceſs have thrown upon him. Addſ.
2. To look with fierce piercing eyes.
Avaunt, and quit my fight! let the earth hide thee!
Thou haſt no ſpeculation in thoſe eyes,
Which thou do'ſt glare with. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Look, how pale he glares /
His form and cauſe conjoin'd, preaching to ſtones,
Would make them capable. Shakespeare's Hamlet.
Now friends no more, nor walking hand in hand;
But when they met they made a ſurly ſtand,
And glar'd, like angry lions, as they paſs'd,
And wiſh'd that ev'ry look might be their laſt. Dryd. Fables.
3. To ſhine oſtentatiouſly, or with too much laboured luſtre.
The moſt glaring and notorious paſſages are none of the
fineſt, or moſt correčt. Felton on the Clafficks.
To Gla R.E. v. a. To ſhoot ſuch ſplendour as the eye cannot
bear.
One ſpirit in them rul’d, and cwery eye
Gar'd lightning, and ſhot forth pernicious fire
Among th' accurſ, that wither'd all their ſtrength. Milton.
Gla RE. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Overpowering luſtre; ſplendour, ſuch as dazzles the eye.
The ſiame of burniſh'd ſteel that caſt a glare
From far, and ſeem'd to thaw the freezing air. Dryd. Fab.
I have grieved to ſee a perſon of quality gliding by me in
her chair at two o'clock in the morning, and looking like a
ſpectre amidſt a glare of flambeaux. Addiſon's Guaraian.
Here in a grotto, ſhelter'd cloſe from air,
And ſcreen'd in ſhades from day's deteſted glare,
She ſighs for ever. Pope's Rock of the Lock.
2. A fierce piercing look.
About them round,
A lion now he ſtalks with fiery glare. Milt. Parad. Loft.
Gla'REous. adj. [g'aireux, Fr. glareoſus, Latin, from glai. e.]
Conſiſting of viſcous tranſparent matter, like the white of an
egg.
Gl'A'RING, adj. Applied to any thing very ſhocking: as, a
glaring crime.
GLASS. n.ſ. [ xler, Saxon; glas, Dutch, as Pezon imagines
from glis, Britiſh, green. In Erſe it is called Ālānn, and this
primarily ſignifies clean or clear, being ſo denominated from
its tranſparency. -
1. An artificial ſubſtance made by fuſing fixed ſalts and flint or
ſand together, with a vehement fire.
The word glaſ, cometh from the Belgick and High Dutch:
gloſ, from the verb gianſºn, which ſignifies amongſt them to
{hine; or perhaps from glacies in the Latin, which is ice,
whoſe colour it reſembles. Peacham on Drawing.
Gloſ, is thought ſo compact and firm a body that it is
indeſtruštible by art or nature, and is alſo of ſo cloſe a tex-
ture that the ſubtleſt chymical ſpirits cannot pervade it. Boyle.
Show'rs of granadoes rain, by ſudden burſt
Diſploding murd’rous bowels, fragments of ſºccl
And ſtones, and glaſs ai.d nitrous grain aduſ'. Pºli; i.
2. A glaſs veſic of any kind.
I'll ſee no more;
And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glaſ;
Which ſhews me many more. Shakeſpeare' ºrbet'.
3. A looking-glaſs; a mirrour. r
He was the mark and glaſ, copy and book,
That faſhion'd others. Shakespeare care's Henry IV. p. ii.
He ſpreads his ſubtile nets from fight, -
With twinkling glaſſes, to betray
The larks that in the meſhes light. Dryden's Horace.
4. An Hour Glass. A glaſs uſed in meaſuring time by the
flux of ſand. -
Were my wife's liver
Infected as her life, ſhe would not live
The running of one glaſ. Shakespeare J/?nzer’s Ta'e,
5. A cup of glaſs uſed to drink in.
To this laſt coſtly treaty,
That ſwallow'd ſo much treaſure, and like a glºſs
Did break i' th' rinſing. Shakeſpeare's Heºry VIII.
- When thy heart
Dilates with fervent joys, and eager ſoul
Prompts to purſue the ſparkling glaſ, beſure
'Tis time to ſhun it. Philips.
6. The quantity of wine uſually contained in a gaſs ; a
draught.
While a man thinks one glaſ more will not make him
drunk, that one glaſs hath diſabled him from well diſcerning
his preſent condition. Taylºr's Rule of living hºly.
The firſt glaſs may paſs for health, the ſecond for good-
humour, the third for our friends; but the fourth is for our
enemies. Temple.
7. A perſpective glaſs.
Like thoſe who have ſurveyed the moon by glaſſes, I can
only tell of a new and ſhining world above us; but not relate
the riches and glories of the place. Dryden.
GLAss. adj. Vitreous ; made of glaſs.
Get thee gaſs eyes; .
And, like a ſcurvy politician, ſeem .
To ſee the things thou doſt not. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Glaſ, bottles are more fit for this ſecond fining than thoſe
of wood. Martimer’s Husbandry.
To GLAss. v. a.
1. To ſee as in a glaſs; to repreſent as in a glaſs or mirrour.
Methinks I am partaker of thy paſſion,
And in thy caſe doglºſs mine own debility. Siney, b. ii.
2. To caſe in glaſs.
Methought all his ſenſes were lockt in his eye,
As jewels in cryſtal for ſome prince to buy ;
Who tend'ring their own worth, frcin whence they were
glaſ, t,
Did point ** buy them, along as you paſt. Shakespeare
3. To cover with glaſs 3 to glaze. . .
I have obſerved little grains of ſilver to lie hid in the ſmall
cavities, perhaps glaſſed over by a vitrifying heat, in crucibles
wherein ſilver has been long kept in fuſion. Boyle.
GLA'ssfu RNAcF. n.ſ. [gaſ; and furnace. J A furnace in
which glaſs is made by liquefaction.
If our dreamer pleaſes to try whether the glowing heat of a
glaſſurnace be barely a wandering imagination in a drowſy
man's fancy, by putting his hand into it, he may perhaps be
awakened into a certainty that it is ſomething more than bare
imagination. Locke.
Gla’sgAzing. adj. [glaſ, and gazing ) Finical; often con-
templating himſelf in a mirrour.
A whorſon, glaſgazing, ſuperſerviceable, finical rogue.
- Shake peare's King Lear.
Gla'ssGRINDER. m. ſ. [glaſ, and grinder.] One whoſe trade
is to poliſh and grind glaſs.
The glaſſ rinders complain of the trouble they meet
with. - Bºyº.
GLA'sshouse. n.ſ. [glaſ, and houſe..] A houſe where glaſs is
manufactured.
I remember to have met with an old Roman Moſaic,
compoſed of little pieces of clay half vitrified, and prepared
at the glaſ houſes. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
Gla'ss As. n.ſ. [glaſ, and man.] One who ſells glaſs.
The profit of glaſſes conſiſts only in a ſmall preſent made
by the g affilian. . . . Sºft.
GLA'ssmºral. n.ſ. [glºſ, and metal.] Glaſs in fuſion.
Let proof be made of the incorporating of copper or braſs
with glaſſin, tal. - Bacº, Phyſ. Rem.
G. A.'sswork. n.ſ. [gaſ, and wºrk.] Manufactory of glaſs.
The cryſtalline Venice glaſs is a mixture, in equal portions,
of flone, brought from Pavia, and the aſhes of a weed called
kali, gathered in a deſert between Alexandria and Roſetta ;
and is by the Egyptians uſed firſt for fuel, and then they cruſh
the aſhes into lumps like a ſtone, and ſo ſell them to the Ye-
netians for their glaſſiv.r.º. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
GLA’ssw of T.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G L E
G L E
GLA'sswor T. n.ſ. [ ſalicornia, or ſaltwort.]
It hath an apetalous flower, wanting the empalement; for
the ſtamina, or chives, and the embryoes grow on the extreme
part of the leaves: theſe embryoes afterward become pods or
iladders, which for the moſt part contain one feed. The
ſpecies are two. Theſe plants grow on the ſea-coaſts in
many parts of Europe, and upon the ſhores in ſeveral places
of England which are waſhed every tide with the ſalt water.
The inhabitants, near the ſea-coaſt where theſe plants grow,
cut them up toward the latter end of Summer, when they are
fully grown; and, after having dried them in the ſun, they
burn them for their aſhes, which are uſed in making of glaſs
and ſoap. Theſe herbs are by the country people called kelp,
and are promiſcuouſly gathered for uſe. From the aſhes of
theſe plants is extracted the ſalt called ſalkali, or alkali, much
uſed by the chymiſts. Miller.
For the fine glaſs we uſe the pureſt of the fineſt ſand, and the
aſhes of chali or glaſſicort; and for the coarſer or green ſort,
the aſhes of brake or other plants. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
GLA'ss Y. adj. [from glaſs.]
1. Made of glaſs; vitreous.
In the valley near mount Carmel in Judea there is a ſand,
which, of all others, hath moſt affinity with glaſs; inſomuch
as other minerals laid in it turn to a glaſſ, ſubſtance. Pacon.
2. Reſembling glaſs, as in ſmoothneſs or luſtre, or brittleneſs.
Man proud man
Dreſt in a little brief authority,
Moſt ignorant of what he's moſt aſſur'd :
His glaſſ, eſſence, like an angry ape,
Plays ſuch fantaſtick tricks before high heav'n,
As makes the angels weep. Shakeſp. Meaſ, for Meaſure.
There is a willow grows aſlant a brook,
That ſhews his hoary leaves in the glaſſ; ſtream. Shakespeare Ham.
The magnet attracteth the ſhining or glaſſy powder brought
from the Indies, uſually cmployed in writing-duſt. Brown.
Whoſe womb produc’d the glaſſ, ice Who bred
The hoary froſts that fall on Winter's head Sandys.
A hundred ſweep,
With ſtretching oars, the glaſſ; deep.
GLA'ston BURY Thorn, n.ſ. A ſpecies of MEDLAR, whichſee.
This ſpecies of thorn produces ſome bunches of flowers in
Winter, and flowers again in the Spring, and in no other
reſpect differs from the common hawthorn. Miller.
Glauco'M.A. m. ſ. [7Azúzºg &amp; ; glaucome, French.] A fault
in the eye, which changes the cryſtalline humour into a
greyiſh colour, without detriment of fight, and therein differs
from what is commonly underſtood by ſuffuſion. &amp;uincy.
The glaucoma is no other diſeaſe than the cataraćt. Sharp.
Glav E. m. ſ. [glaive, French; glaiſ, a hook, Welſh. Glaive
is Erſe for a broad ſword..] A broad ſword; a falchion.
Two hundred Greeks came next in fight well try’d,
Not ſurely arm'd in ſteel or iron ſtrong,
But each a glave had pendant by his ſide. Fairfax, b, i.
When zeal, with aged clubs and glaveſ,
Gave chace to rockets and white ſtaves. Hudibras, p. iii.
To Glav ER. v. n. [glave, Welſh, flattery; &amp;lpan, Saxon, to
flatter. It is ſtill retained in Scotland.] To flatter; to
wheedle. A low word.
Kingdoms have their diſtempers, intermiſſions, and pa-
roxyſms, as well as natural bodies; and a glavering council is
as dangerous on the one hand as a wheedling prieſt, or a flat-
tering phyſician is on the other. L’Eſlrange's Fables.
To GLAze. v. a. [To glaſs, only accidentally varied.]
1. To furniſh with windows of glaſs.
Let there be two delicate cabinets daintily paved, richly
hanged, and glazed with cryſtalline glaſs. Bacon's Eſſays.
2. To cover with glaſs, as potters do their earthen ware; [from
the French glai.e., argilla.]
3. To overlay with ſomething ſhining and pellucid.
Sorrow's eye, glaz'd with blinding tears,
Divides one thing entire to many objects. Shakeſp. R. II.
The reaſon of one man operates on that of another in all
true oratory; wherein though with other ornaments he may
glaze and brandiſh the weapons, yet is it ſound reaſon that
carries the ſtroke home. Grew's Caſin. Sac. b. ii. c. 6.
White, with other ſtrong colours, with which we paint
that which we intend to glaze, are the life, the ſpirit, and the
luſtre of it. J)ryden's Diſreſnºy.
G1.A’zi E.R. m. ſ. [corrupted from glaſer, or glaſſer, of glaſs.]
One whoſe trade is to make glaſs windows. Other manu-
facturers of glaſs are otherwiſe named.
Into rabbets the ſeveral panes of glaſſwork are ſet, and
faſtened by the glazier. Al/ºxon's Mech. Exer.
The dext'rous glazier ſtrong returns the bound,
And gingling ſaſhes on the penthouſe ſound. Gay's Trivia.
GLE AD. m. ſ. A buzzard hawk; a kite. It retains that name
in Scotland.
GLEAM. m. ſ. [ 5elioma, Saxon. J Sudden ſhoot of light;
Juſtre; brightneſs.
Then was the fair Dodonian tree far ſeen
Upon ſeven hills to ſpread his gladſome gleam ;
And conquerors bedecked with his green,
Along the banks of the Auſonian ſtream. Spenser.
Pryden's Án. -
At laſt a gleam
Of dawning light turn'd thitherward in haſte
His travell'd ſteps. A ſilton's Paradiſe Lºſſ, b, iii.
As I bent down to look juſt oppoſite,
A ſhape within the wat'ry gleam appear'd,
Bending to look on me. Milton's Paradſ: Loſº, b. iv.
Mine is a gleam of bliſs, too hot to laſt;
Wat'ry it ſhines, and will be ſoon o'ercaſt. Dryd, Aurengz.
We ken them from afar; the ſetting ſun
Plays on their ſhining arms and burniſh'd helmets,
And covers all the field with grams of fire. Addison's Cats.
In the clear azure gleam the flocks are ſeen,
And floating foreſts paint the waves with green. Pºpe,
Nought was ſeen, and nought was heard,
Around the dreary coaſt, -
But dreadful gleams,
Tires that glow,
Shrieks of woe.
To GLE AM. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. To ſhine with ſudden coruſcation.
Obſervant of approaching day,
The meek-ey'd morn appears, mother of dews,
At firſt faint gleaming in the dappled Eaſt. Thomſ. Summer.
Ye gleamings of departed peace
Shine out your laſt.
2. To ſhine.
On each hand the guſhing waters play,
And down the rough caſcade white daſhing fall,
Or gleam in lengthen'd viſta's through the trees. Thomſºn,
GLE'AMY. adj. [from gleam.] Flaſhing; darting ſudden coruſ-
cations of light.
In brazen arms, that caſt a gleamy ray,
Swift through the town the warriour bends his way. Pope.
To GLEAN. v. a. [glaner, French, as Skinner thinks, from
granum.] -
1. To gather what the gatherers of the harveſt leave behind.
She came and gleamed in the field after the reapers. Ruthii,
Cheap conqueſt for his following friends remain'd;
He reap'd the field, and they but only glean'd. Dryden.
She went, by hard neceſſity compell’d, -
To glean Palaemon's fields.
2. To gather any thing thinly ſcattered,
Gather
So much as from occaſions you may glean,
If aught, to us unknown, afflićts him thus. Shakespeare Hamlet,
That goodneſs
Of gleaning all the land's wealth into onc,
Into your own hands, card'nal, by extortion. Shakespeare H.VIII.
They gleaned of them in the highways five thouſand men.
judg. xx. 45-
But Argive chiefs, and Agamemnon's train,
When his refulgent arms flaſh'd through the ſhady plain,
Fled from his well-known face with wonted fear;
As when his thund'ring ſword and pointed ſpear
Drove headlong to their ſhips, and glean'd the routed rear,
Dryden's Aºn. b. vi.
In the knowledge of bodies we muſt be content to glean
what we can from particular experiments; ſince we cannot,
from a diſcovery of their real effences, graſp at a time whole
ſheaves, and in bundles comprehend the nature and properties
of whole ſpecies together. Locke.
G.F.A.N. m.ſ.. [from the verb.] Colle&amp;tion made laboriouſly
by ſlow degrees.
Plains, meads, and orchards all the day he plies;
The gleans of yellow thyme diſtend his thighs:
He ſpoils the ſaffron. Dryden's Wiig. Geºrg. b. iv.
GLE AN ER. m. ſ. [from glean.]
1. One who gathers after the reapers.
For ſtill the world prevail'd, and its dread laugh,
Which ſcarce the firm philoſopher can ſcorn,
Should his heart own a gleaner in the ficki. Thorſ. Autºmn,
2. One who gathers any thing ſlowly and laboriouſly.
An ordinary coffee-houſe gºamer of the city is an arrant
ſtateſman, and as much ſuperior to him, as a nian converſant
about the court is to a ſhopkeeper. Locke,
G1, E'ANING. m.ſ. (from glean.] The act of gleaning, or thing
gleaned. -
There ſhall be as the ſhaking of an olive tree, and as the
gleaning of grapes when the vintage is done. Bil.c.
The orphan and widow are members of the ſame common
family, and have a right to be ſupported out of the incomes
of it, as the poor Jews had to gather the gleanings of the rich
man's harveſt. Atterbury's Sermºr.
GLEBE. m. ſ. [glºba, Latin.]
1. Turf; ſoil; ground.
Fertile of corn the glebe, of oil and wine,
With herds the paſtures throng'd, with flocks the hills, Ali,
Mark well the flow'ring almonds in the wood;
If od’rous blooms the bearing branches load,
The glebe will anſwer to the ſylvan reign,
Great heats will follow, and large crops of grain. Dryden,
Pope's St. Cecilia,
Thomſon's Spring.
Thºmſºn's Autumn,
Sleeping
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G I, I
~ *
G L I
º,
Sleeping vegetables lic,
*Till the glad ſummons of a genial ray -
Unbinds the glºbe, and calls them out to day. Gaº th:
2. The land poſleſſed as part of the revenue of an eccleſiaſtical
benefice.
The ordinary living or revenue of a parſonage is of three
ſorts: the one in land, commonly called the glºbe; another in
tythe, which is a ſet part of our goods rendered to God; the
third, in other offerings beſtowed upon God and his church
by the people. Stelman.
A treſpaſs done on a parſon's glebe land, which is a freehold,
cannot be tried in a ſpiritual court. Ayl jº's Parrgon.
Many pariſhcs have not an inch of glebe. Swift.
Gle'Rous. adj. [from glebe.] Turfy. Dićt.
GLE'BY. adi. [from glºbe | Turfy; perhaps in the following
paſſage fat or fruitful, if it has indeed any meaning.
Pernicious flatt'ry! thy malignant ſeeds
In an ill hour, and by a fatal hand
Sadly diffus'd o'er virtue's gleby land,
With riſing pride amidſt the corn appear,
And choke the hopes and harveſt of the year. Prior.
GLED E. m. ſ. [3,hoaºlibe, Saxon.] A kite,
Yc ſhall not eat the glede, the kite, and the vulture. Deutr.
GLEE n.ſ. ſºlºe, Saxon 1 Joy ; merriment; gayety. It
anciently fignified muſick played at feaſts. It is not now uſed,
except in ludicrous writing, or with ſome mixture of irony
and contempt.
She marcheth home, and by her takes the knight,
Whom all the people follow with great glee. Fairy Queen.
Many wayfarers make themſelves glee, by putting the in-
habitants in mind of their privilege; who again foreſlow not
to baigne them with perfume. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwal.
And his ſportive limbs,
This way and that convolv’d, in friſkful glee
Their frolicks play. Thºmſºn's Spring.
Is Blouzelinda dead? Farewel my gleef
No happineſs is now reſerv'd for me. Gay's Paſtorals.
Gleep. n.ſ. . [from 3!opan, Saxon, to glow.] A hot glow-
ing coal. A provincial and obſolete word.
Gle'EFUL. adj. [glee and full.] Gay; merry; cheerful.
My lovely Aaron, wherefore look'ſt thou ſad,
When everything doth make a gleeful boaſt? Shakeſpeare.
GLEEK. n.ſ. [3]ixxe, Saxon.] Muſick; or muſician.
What will you give us? No money, but the gle! : I
will give you the minſtrel. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
To GLEEK. v. a. [3].3man, in Saxon, is a mimick or a droll.]
1. To ſneer; to gibe; to droll upon.
I can gleek upon occaſion. Shakeſp. Midſ. Night's Dream:
I have ſeen you gleeking or galling at this gentleman twice
or thrice. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
2. In Scotland it is ſtill retained, and ſignifies to fool or ſpend
time idly, with ſomething of mimickry or drollery.
To GLEEN. v. m. To ſhine with heat or poliſh. I know not
the original notion of this word: it may be of the ſame race
with glow or with glºam.
Thoſe who labour
The ſweaty forge, who edge the crooked ſcythe,
Bend ſtubborn ſteel, and harden gleening armour,
Acknowledge Vulcan's aid. Prior.
GLEET. m. ſ. [It is written by Skinner glitt, and derived from
aliban, Saxon, to run ſoftly..] A ſanious ooze; a thin ichor
running from a fore.
There then lay a hard dry eſchar, without either matter or
gleet. . łłºſeman's Surgery.
To Gle ET. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To drip or ooze with a thin ſanious liquor.
His thumb being inflamed and ſwelled, I made an inciſion
into it to the bone: this not only bled, but glected a few
drops. //ſeman's Surgery.
2. To run ſlowly.
Vapours may be raiſed by the ſun in ſuch quantities as are
ſufficient to make clouds, which are carried up and down the
atmoſphere, 'till they hit againſt the ſides of the more moun-
tainous places of the globe, and by this concuſſion are con-
denſed, and ſo gleet down the rocky caverns of theſe moun-
tains, whoſe inner parts, being hollow and ſtony, afford them
a baſon. - Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
GLEETY. a.º. [from gleet.], Ichory; thinly ſanious.
If the fleſh loſe its ruddineſs, and the matter change to be
thin and gleety, you may ſuſpect it corrupting. Jºſeman.
GLEN. m. ſ. ſºkºnn, Erſe. J A valley; a dale; a depreſſion
between two hills. -
From me his madding mind is ſtart,
And wooes the widow's daughter of the glen. Spenser.
Glºw. m. ſ. [gluten, Latin.] A viſcous cement made by diſ-
folving the ſkins of animals in boiling water, and drying the
gelly. See GLUE.
GLIB. adj. [from Asſº. Skinner J -
1. Smooth; ſlippery; ſo formed as to be eaſily moved.
Liquid bodies have nothing to ſuſtain their parts, nor any
thing to cement them: the parts being glio and continually in
motion, fall off from cae another, which way ſoºver gravity
inclines them. Bºrner's ºery ºf the Earth.
Habakkuk brought him a ſmooth ſtrong rope, compactly
twiſted together, with a nooſe that flipt as glit as a birdcatcher's
gin, Airbuthnot.
2. Smooth; voluble.
I want that glib and oily art
To ſpeak and purpoſe not, fince what 1 well intend,
I’ll do.'t before I ſpeak. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
There was never ſo much glib nonſenſe put together in well
ſounding Engliſh. Docke:
Now Curl his ſhop from rubbiſh drains;
Three genuine tomes of Swift's remains:
And then, to make them paſs the gibber,
Revis’d by Tibbald, Moore, and Cibber. Swift.
Be ſure he's a fine ſpoken man;
Do but hear on the clergy how glib his tongue ran. Swift.
GLIB.. n.ſ.
They have another cuſtom from the Scythians, the wearing
of mantles and long glibi; which is a thick curled buſh of
hair hanging down over their eyes, and monſtrouſly diſguiſing
them. Spenſer on Ireland.
To GL1B. v. a. [from the adjećtive.] To caſtrate.
I'll geld them all: fourteen they ſhall not ſee,
To bring falſe generations; they are coheirs,
And I had rather glib myſelf than they
Should not produce fair iſſue. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale,
GLI'ELY. adv. [from glib.] Smoothly; volubly.
Many who would ſtartle at an oath, whoſe ſtomachs as well
as conſciences recoil at an obſcenity, do yet ſlide glibly into a
detračtion. Government of the Tongue,
GLI'BNEss. n.ſ.. [from glib.] Smoothneſs; ſlipperineſs.
A poliſh'd ice-like glibneſ; doth enfold
The rock. Chapman's Odyſſey:
The tongue is the moſt ready for motion of any member,
needs not ſo much as the flexure of a joint, and by acceſs of
humours acquires a glibneſs too, the more to facilitate its
moving. Gºvernment of the Tºngue.
To GLIDE. v. n. [3]iban, Saxon; glijden, Dutch. J
1. To flow gently and ſilently.
By Eaſt, among the duſty vallies, glide
The ſilver ſtreams of Jordan's cryſtal flood. Fairfax, b. iii.
Broke by the jutting land on either ſide,
“In double ſtreams the briny waters glide. Dryden's Aen.
Juſt before the confines of the wood,
The gliding Lethe leads her ſilent flood. Dryden's dºn,
Where ſtray the Muſes, in what lawn or grove?
In thoſe fair fields where ſacred Iſis glides,
Or elſe where Cam his winding vales divides. Pope,
2. To paſs gently and without tumult. -
Ye gliding ghoſts, permit me to relate
The myſtick wonders of your ſilent ſtate. Dryden's Zn,
3. To move ſwiftly and ſmoothly along.
If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day ? Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Shoals of fiſh, with fins and ſhining ſcales,
Glide under the green wave. Milton.
He trembl’d every limb, and felt a ſmart
As if cold ſteel had glided through his heart. Dryd. Fables.
All things are beheld as in a haſty motion, where the
objećts only glide before the eye and diſappear. Dryden.
Glide... n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Japſe; ačt or manner of paſſing
ſmoothly. -
*
About his neck
A green and gilded ſnake had wreath'd itſelf,
Who, with her head nimble in threats, approach'd
The opening of his mouth; but ſuddenly
Seeing Orlando it unlink'd itſelf,
And with indented glides did ſlip away
Into a buſh. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
GL1'DER. m. ſ [from glide..] One that glides.
The glaunce into my heart did glide;
Hey ho the glider;
Therewith my ſoul was ſharply gride,
Such wounds ſoon waxen wider. Spenser’s Paſtoral.
Glike. n.ſ. [3]13, Saxon. See GLEEK.] A ſneer; a ſcoff;
a flout. Not now in uſe.
Now where's the baſtard's braves, and Charles his glikes 2
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. i.
To GLIMMER. v. n. [glimmer, Daniſh, to ſhine; glimmen,
Dutch, to glow.] -
1. To ſhine faintly.
The Weſt yet glimmers with ſome ſtreaks of day, Shakeſp
The truth appears ſo naked on my ſide, -
That any purblind eye may find it out.
—And on my ſide it is ſo well apparel'd,
So clear, ſo ſhining, and ſo evident,
That it will glimmer through a blind man's eye. Shakeſpears.
Oft in glimmering bowers and glades
He met her. - - Milton.
1o I See'ſt
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G L I
G L O
Sce'ſ thou yon' dreary plain, forlorn and wild,
The ſeat of deſolation, void of light,
Save what the gimmering of theſe livid flames
Caſts pale and dreadful ? Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b, i.
- The ſacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of heav'n
Shoots far into the boſom of dim night
A glimmering dawn. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
Through theſe ſad ſhades this chaos in my ſoul,
Some ſeeds of light at length began to roll;
The riſing motion of an infant ray
Shot glimm'ring through the cloud, and promis'd day. Prior.
Oft by the winds, extinét the ſignal les;
Or ſmother'd in the glimm'ring ſocket dies. Gay's Trivia.
When roſy morning glimmer'd o'er the dales,
He drove to paſture all the lufty males. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To be perceived imperfectly ; to appear faintly.
On the way the baggage poſt-boy, who had been at court,
got a glimmerig who they were. J/otton.
The Pagan prieſthood was always in the druids;
and there was a perceivable glimmering of the Jewiſh rites in
it, though much corrupted. Swift.
Gl,’MMER. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Faint ſplendour; weak light.
2. A kind of foſſil.
The leſſer maſſes that are lodged in ſparry and ſtony bodies,
diſperſedly, from their ſhining and glimmering, were an in-
ducement to the writers of foſſils to give thoſe bodies the
name of mica and glimmer. Woodward on Fºſſils.
Stones which are compoſed of plates, that are generally plain
and parallel, and that are flexible and elaſtick: talc, catſilver,
or glimmer, of which there are three ſorts, the yellow or
golden, the white or ſilvery, and the black. Woodward.
Climpse. n. ſ. [glimmen, Dutch, to glow.]
1. A weak faint light.
Such vaſt room in nature,
Only to ſhine, yet ſcarce to contribute
Each orb a glimpſe of light, convey'd ſo far
Down to this habitable, which returns -
Light back to them. Milt. Par. Loft.
Thouſands of things, which now either wholly eſcape our
apprehenſions, or, which our ſhortfighted reaſon having got
ſome faint glimpſe of, we, in the dark, grope after. Locke,
2. A quick flaſhing light.
Light as the lightning glimpſe they ran Milton's P. Lºft.
My thoughtleſs youth was wing'd with vain deſires;
My manhood, long miſled by wand'ring fires,
Follow'd falſe lights; and when their glimpſe was gone,
My pride ſtruck out new ſpangles of her own. Dryden.
3. Tranſitory luſtre.
If I, celeſtial fire, in aught
Have ſerv'd thy will, or gratified thy thought,
'Oie glimpſe of glory to my iſſue give;
Grac'd for the little time he has to live. Dryd. Fables.
4. Short fleeting enjoyment. - -
If, while this weary'd fleſh draws fleeting breath,
Not ſatisfy'd with life, afraid of death,
If hap’ly be thy will that I ſhould know
Glimpſe of delight, or pauſe from anxious woe;
From now, from inſtant now, great fire, diſpel
The clouds that preſs my ſoul. Prior.
5. A ſhort tranſitory view.
O friends ! I hear the tread of nimble feet
Haſting this way, and now by glimpſº diſcern
Ithuriel, and Zephon, through the ſhade. Milt. Par. Loft.
Some he puniſheth exemplarily in this world, that we might
from thence have a taſte or glimpſe of his preſent juſtice.
Hakewill on Providence.
A man, uſed to ſuch ſort of refle&amp;tions, ſees as much at one
glimpſe as would require a long diſcourſe to lay before another,
and make out in one entire and gradual dedućtion. Locke.
What ſhould I do' while here I was enchain'd,
No glimpſe of godlike liberty remain'd. Dryden's Virgil.
{}. The exhibition of a faint reſemblance.
There is no man hath a virtue that he has not a glimpſe of.
Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Creſſida.
To GLI's TEN. v. n. [glittan, German.] To ſhine; to ſparkle
with light.
The bleating kind
Eye the bleak heaven, and next the gliſtening earth,
With looks of dumb deſpair. Thomſon's Winter.
The ladies eyes gliſtened with pleaſure. Richardſºn's Pamela.
To GLI'st ER. v. n. [glittun, German; gliſleren, Dutch..] To
ſhine; to be bright.
The wars flame moſt in Summer, and the helmets glifter
brighteſt in the faireſt ſunſhine. Spenſer on Ireland.
How he gli/iers
Through my dark ruſtſ And how his piety
Does my deeds make the blacker! Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
'Tis better to be lowly born,
And range with humble livers in content,
Than to be perk'd up in a gliſhering grief,
And wear a golden ſorrow. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
The golden ſun
Gallops the zodiack in his gift'rig coach. Shakeſpeares
All that glºſers is not gold. Shakesp. 4'erch, ºf Penice.
You were more the eye and talk
Of the court to day, than all -
Elſe that giffer'd in Whitehall. Pen. Johnſ. Underwood.
When the ſun ſhone upon the ſhields of gold and braſs,
the mountains giſtered therewith, and ſhined like lamps of
fire. I 44ae. vi. 39.
Gºſler'd in one ſnake, and into fraud
Led Eve, our credulous mother, to the tree
Of prohibition. 4.iltºn's Paradiſ? I off, b. ix.
It conſiſted not of rubics, yet the ſmall picces of it were
of a pleaſant rediſh colour, and gifte, ed prettily. Boyle.
GLI's ER. m. ſ. [Properly written yier, from zºº. J See
Clyst ER. -
Now enters Buſh with new ſtate airs,
His lordſhip's premier miniſter;
And who, in all profound affairs,
Is held as needful as his gliſler. Swift.
Choler is the natural gliſler, or one excretion whereby na-
ture excludeth another; which, deſcending daily unto the
bowels, extimulates thoſe parts, and excites them unto ex-
pulſion. frown's Pºlgar Errours, b. iii. c. 2.
To Gli tter. v. n. [2]rtinian, Saxon J
1. To ſhine; to exhibit luſtre; to gleam.
Steel gloſſes are more reſplendent than the like plates of
braſs, and ſo is the glittering of a blade. Bacon's Ply. Rem.
Before the battle joins, from afar -
The field yet glitters with the pomp of war. Drder', Pīrg.
Scarce had'ſ thou time t'unſheath thy conqu'ring blade;
It did but glitter, and the rebels fled. Granvi is.
2. To be ſpecious; to be ſtriking.
... Let them on the one hand ſet the moſt gºttering tempta-
tions to diſcord, and on the other the diſmal effects of it.
Decay of Piety.
GLITTER. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Luſtre; bright ſhow;
ſplendour.
- Clad
With what permiſſive glory ſince his fall
Was left him, or falſe glitter. Milton's Parad'ſ Ioff, b. x.
A man has reaſon not to flouriſh too much upon the gliter
of his fortune, for fear there ſhould be too much alloy in it.
Collier on Pride.
Glutter AND. Shining; ſparkling. A participle uſed by
Chaucer and the old Engliſh poets. This participial termina-
tion is ſtill retained in Scotland.
Gliºtt ERINGLY, adv. [from glitter.] With ſhining luſtre.
To Glo AR. v. a. [gloeren, Dutch. J
1. To ſquint; to look aſkew. Skinner.
2. In Scotland, to ſtare: as, what a gloarand quean.
To Glo AT. v. n. [This word I conceive to be ignorantly
written for glar.] To caſt ſide glances as a timorous lover.
Teach every grace to ſmile in your behalf,
And her deluding eyes to glºat for you. Rºwe's ja. Shore.
Glo'BARD. m. ſ [from glºw.] A glow-worm.
GLOBATED. adj. [from globe..] Formed in ſhape of a globe;
ſpherical; ſpheroidical.
GLOBE. n.ſ. [globe, French; globus, Latin.]
1. A ſphere; a bail; a round body; a body of which every
part of the ſurface is at the ſame diſtance from the centre.
2. The terraqueous ball. ... •
The youth, whoſe fortune the vaſt globe obey'd,
Finding his royal enemy betray'd,
Wept at his fall. Stepney.
Where God declares his intention to give this dominion, it
is plain he meant that he would make a ſpecies of creatures
that ſhould have dominion over the other ſpecies of this ter-
reſtrial globe. - - Lºcke.
3. A ſphere in which the various regions of the earth are geo-
graphically depićted, or in which the conſtellations are laid
down according to their placcs in the ſky.
The aſtrologer who ſpells the ſtars,
Miſtakes his glle, and in her brighter eye
Interprets heaven's phyſiognomy. . Cleave.and.
Theſe are the ſtars,
But raiſe thy thought from ſenſe, nor think to find
Such figures there as are in globes deſign'd. Creech.
4. A body of ſoldiers drawn into a circle.
Him round
A globe of fiery ſeraphim inclos'd,
With bright imblazoning, and horrent arms. Milton.
GLoB E Amaranth, or everlaſting f ºver. m. ſ. ſamaranthoides,
The flowers are ſmall, and cut into four ſegments, which
are colle&amp;led into ſquamoſe heads: from each of theſe ſcales
is produced a ſingle flower: the ovary in the bottom of the
flower becomes a roundiſh crocked feed, contained in a thin
pellicule or ſkin. 41iller.
GLO BE Daiſy, n.ſ. A kind of flower,
Glone
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">- G L O
º
Glob F Fiſh. m. ſ. A kind of orbicular fiſh.
GloBE Ranunculus. n. ſ. ſhelleboro-ranunciºus.] -
It hath fingle circumſcribed leaves, like the ranunculus: the
cup of the flower conſiſts of five ſmall leaves of the ſame
colour with the flower. A4iller.
GloBE 7 hiſi.e. n.ſ.
It hath the whole appearance of a thiſtle: the leaves are
produced alternately: the florets conſiſt of one leaf, which is
divided into five ſegments, and is hollow, and each ſingle
floret has a ſcaly cup : the flowers are collected into a ſpheri-
cal head, which has the common cup or covering. Miller.
GLOBO'SE. adj. [globſºs, Latin.] Spherical; round.
Regions, to which
All thy dominion, Adam, is no more
Than what this garden is to all the earth,
And all the ſea; from one entire globºſe
Stretch'd into longitude. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. v.
Then form'd the moon
Globoſe, and ev'ry magnitude of ſtars. . Milton's Par. Lºft.
Globo'sity. n.ſ. [from glºboſe..] Sphericity; ſphericalneſs.
Why the ſame eclipſe of the ſun, which is ſeen to them that
live more eaſterly, when the ſun is elevated ſix degrees above
the horizon, ſhould be ſeen to them that live one degree more
weſterly, where the ſun is but five degrees above the horizon,
and ſo lower and lower proportionably, 'till at laſt it appear
not at all: no account can be given, but the gloºdſity of the
earth. Ray on the Creation.
Glo'Bous. adj. [glºboſus, Latin. When the accent is intended
to be on the laſt ſyllable, the word ſhould be written globoſe,
when on the firſt globous : I have transferred hither a paſſage
of Milton, in which this rule has been neglected.] Spheri-
cal; round.
Wide over all the plain, and wider far
Than all this glºboſe earth in plain outſpread,
Such are the courts of God! Milton.
The brazen inſtruments of death diſcharge
Horrible flames, and turbid ſtreaming clouds;
Large globous irons fly, of dreadful hiſs,
Singeing the air. Phillips.
Glo'BULAR adj. [globulus, Latin.] In form of a ſmall ſphere;
round; ſpherical.
The figure of the atoms of all viſible fluids ſeemeth to be
globular, there being no other figure ſo well fitted to the
making of fluidity. Grew's Coſmol. Sacr. b. i. e. 2.
GLO'BULARIA. n.ſ. (Lat. globulaire, Fr.] A floſculous flower,
conſiſting of many florets, which are divided into ſeveral ſeg-
ments, and have one lip. Miller.
GLO'BULE, n.ſ. [globule, Fr. glºbulus, Lat J. Such a ſmall par-
ticle of matter as is of a globular or ſpherical figure, as the red
particles of the blood, which ſwim in a tranſparent ſerum, and
are eaſily diſcovered by the microſcope. Theſe will attract
one another when they come within a due diſtance, and unite
like the ſpheres of quickſilver. Quincy.
The hailſtones have opaque globules of ſnow in their centre,
to intercept the light within the halo. Newton's Opt.
Blood conſiſts of red globules, ſwimming in a thin liquor
called ſerum : the red globules are elaſtick, and will break:
the veſſels which admit the ſmaller globule, cannot admit the
greater without a diſeaſe. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Glo'bulous. adj. [from globule.] In form of a ſmall ſphere;
round.
The whiteneſs of ſuch globulous particles proceeds from the
air included in the froth. Boyle.
To Glo'MERATE. v. a. [glomero, Latin.] To gather into a
ball or ſphere.
Glom ERATIon. n.ſ. [glomeratio, Latin. 1
1. The ačt of forming into a ball or ſphere.
2. A body formed into a ball.
The rainbow conſiſteth of a glomeration of ſmall drops,
which cannot poſſibly fall but from the air that is very low.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 832.
Glo'MERous, adj. [glomeroſus, Latin.] Gathered into a ball
or ſphere.
GLOOM. n.ſ. [3]omanz, Saxon, twilight.]
1. Imperfeót darkneſs; diſmalneſs; obſcurity; defe&amp;t of light.
Glowing embers through the room,
Teach light to counterfeit a gloom. Milton,
This the ſeat,
That we muſt . for heav'n? This mournful gloom,
For that celeſtial light? Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
The ſtill night, not now, as ere men fell,
Wholſome, and cool, and mild; but with black air
Accompany'd; with damps, and dreadful gloom. Milton.
Now warm in love, now with'ring in thy bloom,
Loſt in a convent's ſolitary gloom. Pope.
2. Cloudineſs of aſpect; heavineſs of mind; ſullenneſs.
To Gloo M. v. n. [from the noun.] -
I. ºins obſcurely, as the twilight. This ſenſe is not now
in ule.
His gliſt'ring armour made
A little glooming light much like a ſhade. Fairy Queen,
*
Scarcely had Phoebus in the glooming Eaſt
Yet harneſſed his fiery footcd team. Speºſer,
2. To be cloudy; to be dark.
3. To be melancholy; to be ſullen,
G Loo'MILY. adv. [from gº any J
1. Obſcurely ; dimly ; without perfeół light; diſmally,
2. Sullenly ; with cloudy aſpect; with dark intentions; not
cheerfully. -
See, he comes: how gloomily he looks! Dryden,
Gloomiy retir’d
The villain ſpider lives. -
GLoo'M INEss. n.ſ. [from gloºmy J
I. Want of light; obſcurity; imperſcćt light; diſmalneſs.
2. Want of cheerfulneſs; cloudineſs of look; heavineſs of
mind; melancholy. -
Neglect ſpreads glºomineſ; upon their humour, and makes
them grow ſullen and unconverſable. Clier of the Spleen.
The gloomineſs in which ſometimes the minds of the beſt
men are involved, very often ſtands in need of ſuch little in-
citements to mirth and laughter as are apt to diſperſe melan-
choly. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 1; 9.
GLoo'MY. adj. [from gloom.]
1. Obſcure; imperfectly illuminated; almoſt dark; diſmal for
want of light.
Theſe were from without
The growing miſeries, which Adam ſaw
Already in part, though hid in gloomiſt ſhade,
To ſorrow abandon'd. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x.
Deep in a cavern dwells the drowſy god,
Whoſe gloomy manſion nor the riſing ſun,
Nor ſetting viſits, nor the lightſome noon. Dryden's Fables,
The ſurface of the earth is clearer or gloomier, juſt as the
ſun is bright or more overcaſt. Pope's Letters,
2. Dark of complexion.
That fair field
Of Enna, where Proſerpine gathering flow’rs,
Herſelf a fairer flow'r, by glºomy Dis -
Was gather'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b, iv.
§ Sullen; melancholy; cloudy of look; heavy of heart.
Lo'RIED. adj. [from glory.] Illuſtrious; honourable; deco-
rated with glory; dignified with honours.
Old reſpect,
As I ſuppoſe, toward your once glory'd friend,
My ſon now captive, hither hath inform'd
Your younger feet, while mine caſt back with age, ..
Came lagging after. Milton's Agoniſłet.
Glorification. n.ſ. [glorification, Fr. from glorify. ] The
aćt of giving glory. -
At opening your eyes, enter upon the day with thankſ-
giving for the preſervation of you the laſt night, with the glo-
rification of God for the works of the creation. Taylor.
To GLORIFY. v. a. [glorifier, French; glorifico, Latin.]
I. To procure honour or praiſe to one. -
Two ſuch ſilver currents, when they join,
Do glorify the banks that bound them in. Shakeſp. K. john.
Juſtice is their virtue: that alone
Makes them fit ſure, and glorifies the throne. Daniel.
2. To pay honour or praiſe in worſhip.
God is glorified when ſuch his excellency, above all things,
is with due admiration acknowledged. Hocker, b. v.
This form and manner of glorifying God was not at that
time firſt begun; but received long before, and alleged at that
time as an argument for the truth. Hooker, b. v. f. 42.
Good fellow, tell us here the circumſtance,
That we for thee may gloriſ; the Lord, Shakespeare. Henry VI.
All nations ſhall glorify thy name. Pſ. lxxxvi. 9,
This is the perfection of every thing, to attain its true and
proper end; and the end of all theſe gifts and endowments,
Thomſºn's Summer.
which God hath given us, is to glorify the giver. Tillotſºn,
3. To praiſe; to honour; to extol.
Whomſoever they find to be moſt licentious of life, deſpe-
rate in all parts of diſobedience and rebellious diſpoſition, him
they ſet up and glorify. Spenser on Ireland,
No chymiſt yet the elixir got,
But glorifies his pregnant pot,
If by the way to him befall -
Some odoriferous thing, or medicinal. Donne.
4. To exalt to glory or dignity, - *- :- - - - - - - -
If God be glorified in him, God ſhall alſo glorify him in him-
ſelf, and ſhall ſtraightway glorify him... jo xiii. 32.
Whom he juſtified, them he alſo glºrified. Rom. viii. 30.
The ſoul, being immortal, will, at ſome time or other,
reſume its body again in a glorified manner. Ayliff's Parrson.
GLORIOUS, adj. [glorioſus, Latin; glºrieux, French.]
1. Boaſtful; proud; haughty; oſtentatious.
Glorious followers, who make themſelves as trumpets of
the commendation of thoſe they follow, taint buſineſs for
want of ſecrecy. Bacon.
They that are glorious muſt needs be factious; for all bra-
very ſtands upon compariſons. Bacon, Eſſay 55.
2: Noble; illuſtrious; excellent, Let<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G L O
G L O
|
flat them know that thou art ſlord, the only God: and
glºrious over the whole world. - Dan. iii. 22.
Impartial juſtice holds her equal ſcales,
*Till ſtronger virtue does the weight incline;
If over thee thy glorious foe prevails, -
He now defends the cauſe that once was thine. Prior.
Let us remember we are Cato's friends,
And act like men who claim that glorious title. Addison's Catº.
Glo'Riously. adv. [from glorious. J Nobly; ſplendidly; il-
luſtriouſly. -
They inſpire with thoſe celeſtial flames, which ſhine ſo glo-
riouſly in their works. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Great wits ſometimes may gloriouſly offend,
And riſe to faults true criticks dare not mend. Pope.
Glo'RY. n.f [gloire, French; gloria, Latin. Among the old
poets it was uſed ſometimes as one ſyllable, glºre J
1. Praiſe paid in adoration.
Glory to God in the higheſt. Luke ii. 14.
2. The felicity of heaven prepared for thoſe that pleaſe God.
Thou ſhalt guide me with thy counſel, and afterwards re-
ceive me to thy glory. Pſal lxxiii. 24.
Then enter into glory, and reſume
His ſeat at God's right hand, exalted high
Above all names in heav'n. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
3. Honour; praiſe; fame; renown ; celebrity. -
Think it no glory to ſwell in tyranny. Sidney.
Glory is like a circle in the water,
Which never ceaſeth to enlarge itſelf,
"Till by broad ſpreading it diſperſe to nought. Shakespeare H. VI.
And with that word and warning ſoon was dight,
Each ſoldier longing for near coming glory. Fairfax, b. i.
Can we imagine that either the ambition of princes, or in-
tereſt, or gain in private perſons, or curioſity and the deſire of
knowledge, or the glory of diſcoveries, could ever move them
in that endleſs time to try their fortunes upon the ſea. Burnet.
4. Splendour; magnificence.
Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of
theſe. Matt. vi. 29.
Treated ſo ill, chas'd from your throne,
Returning, you adorn the town;
And with a brave revenge do ſhow
Their glory went and came with you. Waller.
Ariſtotle ſays, that ſhould a man under ground converſe
with works of art, and be afterwards brought up into the open
day, and ſee the ſeveral glories of the heaven and earth, he
would pronounce them the works of God. Addiſon's Spectator,
5. Luſtre; brightneſs.
Now ſleeping flocks on their ſoft fleeces lie;
The moon, ſerene in glory, mounts the ſky. Pope's Winter.
From opening ſkies may ſtreaming glories ſhine,
And ſaints embrace thee with a love like mine. Pope.
6. A circle of rays which ſurrounds the heads of ſaints in
pićture.
It is not a converting but a crowning grace; ſuch an one
as irradiates, and puts a circle of glory about the head of him
upon whom it deſcends. South's Sermons.
A ſmile plays with a ſurpriſing agreeableneſs in the eye,
breaks out with the brighteſt diſtinétion, and ſits like a glory
upon the countenance. Collier of the Aſpect.
7. Pride; boaſtfulneſs; arrogance.
By the vain glory of men they entered into the world, and
therefore ſhall they come ſhortly to an end. Wiſd. xiv. 14.
8. Generous pride.
The ſucceſs of thoſe wars was too notable to be unknown
to your cars, to which all worthy fame hath glory to come
unt O. Sidney, b. ii.
To grºx. v. m. [glorior, Latin.] To boaſt in ; to be proud
Oſ.
With like judgment glorying when he had happened to do
a thing well, as when he had performed ſome notable miſ-
chief. Sidney, b. ii.
They were wont, in the pride of their own proceedings, to
glory, that whereas ſuther did but blow away the roof, and
Zuinglius batter but the walls of popiſh ſuperſtition, the laſt
and hardeſt work of all remained, which was to raze up the
very ground and foundation of popery. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
Let them look they glory not in miſchief,
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men;
For then my guiltleſs blood muſt cry againſt them. Shakeſp.
Your glºrying is not good. I Cor. v. 6.
Thou haſt ſeen mount Atlas,
While ſtorms and tempeſts thunder on its brow,
And oceans break their billows at its feet,
It ſtands unmov’d, and glories in its height. Addison Cato.
This title is what I moſt glory in, and what moſt effectually
calls to my mind the happineſs of that government under which
I live. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 1.
If others may glory in their birth, why may not we, whoſe
parents were called by God to attend on him at his altar? /tter.
No one is out of the reach of misfortune; no one there-
fore ſhould glory in his proſperity. Clariſſa.
To GLos F. v. a. To flatter; to cologue. Hanmer, Šee
Tº Gloze, 3
Gſ.OSS. m. ſ. [ 57.4-72; gloſe, French. 3
I. A ſcholium; a comment.
They never hear ſentence, which mentioneth the word or
ſcripture, but forthwith their gºſſes upon it are the word
preached, the ſcripture explained, or delivered unto us in
ſermons. Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 22.
If then all ſouls, both good and bad, do teach,
With gen'ral voice, that ſouls can never die;
'Tis not man's flatt’ring gloſs, but nature's ſpeech,
Which, like God's oracles, can never lie. Davies.
Some mutter at certain paſſages therein, by putting ill gºſe;
upon the text, and taking with the left hand what I offer with
the right. (owel.
All this, without a g’ſ or comment,
He could unriddle in a moment. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
In many places he has perverted my meaning by his gloſſes,
and interpreted my words into blaſphemy and bawdry, of
which they were not guilty. 1973 den’s F.bles, Prºſace.
They give the ſcandal, and the wiſe diſcern;
Their gloſſe, teach an age too apt to learn. Dryden.
Explaining the text in ſhort gloſſes, was Accurſius's
method. - Paker’s Rºffe&amp;ſiºns on Learning.
Indentures, cov’nants, articles they draw,
Large as the fields themſelves, and larger far
Than civil codes with all their glºſſes are. Pope.
2. An interpretation artfully ſpecious; a ſpecious repreſentation.
Poor painters oft with filly poets join,
To fill the world with ſtrange but vain conceit;
One brings the ſtuff, the other flamps the coin,
Which breeds nought elſe but glºſſes of deceit. Sidney, b. ii.
It is no part of my ſecret meaning to draw you hereby into
hatred, or to ſet upon the face of this cauſe any fairer gloſs
than the naked truth doth afford. Hooker, Preface.
He ſeems with forged quaint conceit
To ſet a gloſs upon his bad intent. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
The common glºſs
Of theologians. Milton.
3. Superficial luſtre. -
His iron coat, all over grown with ruſt,
Was underneath enveloped with gold,
Whoſe gliſtering gly, dark'ned with filthy duſt. Fa. ºn.
You are a ſe&amp;tary,
That's the plain truth: your painted glºſ diſcovers,
To men that underſtand you, words and weakneſs. Shał4.
Golden opinions from all ſorts of people,
Which would be worn now in their neweſt gloff. Shakesp.
The doubt will be whether it will poliſh ſo well; for ſteel
gloſſes are more reſplendent than the like plates of braſs, and
ſo is the glittering of a blade. Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
Weeds that the wind did toſs
The virgins wore: the youths, woven coats, that caſt a
faint dim gºſ,
Like that of oil. Chapman's Iliad, b. xviii.
It was the colour of devotion, giving a luſtre to reverence,
and a gloſs to humility. - South’s Sermºns.
Groves, fields, and meadows, are at any ſeaſon pleaſant to
look upon ; but never ſo much as in the opening of the Spring,
when they are all new and freſh, with their firſt gloſs upon
them. Addison's Spediator, Nº. 412.
To Gloss. v. m. [gloſer, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To comment.
Thou detain'ſt Briſeis in thy bands,
By prieſtly glºſing on the gods commands. Dryd. Fałks.
2. To make ſly remarks. -
Her equals firſt obſerv'd her growing zeal, -
And laughing gloſs'd, that Abra ſerv’d ſo well. Prior.
To Gloss. v. a.
1. To explain by comment.
No woman ſhall ſucceed in Salique land;
Which Salique land the French unjuſtly glºſs
To be the realm of France. Sha ºff care’s Henry V.
In parchment then, large as the fields, he draws
Aſſurances, big as gigſ’d civil laws. Donne.
2. To palliate by ſpecious expoſition or repreſentation.
Is this the paradiſe, in deſcription whereof ſo much g’offng
and deceiving eloquence hath been ſpent? Hooker's Sermons.
Do I not reaſon wholly on your condućt:
You have the art to glſ, the fouleft cauſe. Phillips's Briton.
3. To embelliſh with ſuperficial luſtre.
But thou, who lately of the common ſtrain
Wert one of us, if ſtill thou do'ſ retain
The ſame ill habits, the ſame follies too,
Gloſ'd over only with a ſaint like ſhow,
Then I reſume the freedom which i gave,
Still thou art bound to vice, and ſtill a ſlave. Dryden's Perſ.
Glo'ss ARY m. ſ. [gloſſarium, Latin; glºſſaire, French..] A
dićtionary of obſcure or antiquated words. . . -
According to Varro, the moſt learned of the Romans,
when delubrim was applied to a place, it ſignified ſuch a one,
in quo dei ſimulachrum dedicatum ºff; and alſo in the old gloſ-
ſaries. Stillingfleet.
I could
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G L O
G L O
s
º
+
I could add another word to the gloſſary. - Baker.
Glossa"roR. m.ſ. [gliſſateur, French, from gloſs.] A writer of
gloſſes; a commentator. -
The reaſon why the aſſertion of a ſingle judge does not
prove the exiſtence of judicial ačts, is becauſe his office is to
pronounce judgment, and not to become an evidence: but
why may not the ſame be ſaid of two judges?...Therefore, in
this reſpect, the gloſſator's opinion muſt be falſe. Ayliffe.
Glo'sser. n.ſ. [gloſſarius, Latin.]
1. A ſcholiaſt; a commentator.
2. A poliſher. - * ,
Glo'ssiness. n.ſ. [from gloſſy.] Smooth poliſh; ſuperficial
luſtre.
Thoſe grains were as like little cubes as if they had been
made by a ſkilful jeweller, and their ſurfaces had a ſmooth-
neſs and gloſineſ, much ſurpaſſing whatever I had obſerved in
marine or common ſalt. - Boyle.
Glo'ssographer. n.ſ. [yawrro, and Yezºw.] A ſcholiaſt;
a commentator.
Glo'ssoqraphy. n.ſ. [yxérra and 7.62%.] The writing
of commentaries.
Glo'ssy. adj. [from gloſſ.] Shining; ſmoothly poliſhed.
There came towards us a perſon of place: he had on him
a gown with wide ſleeves, of a kind of water-camblet, of an
excellent azure colour, far more gloſſy than ours. Bacon.
The reſt entire -
Shone with a gloſſy ſcurf. Milton.
His ſurcoat was a bearſkin on his back;
His hair hung long behind, and gloſſy raven black. Dryden.
Myſelf will ſearch our planted grounds at home,
For downy peaches and the gloſſy plum. Dryden's Virgil.
GLOVE. n.ſ.. [xlope, Saxon, from klaffue, Daniſh, to divide.]
Cover of the hands.
Like an uproar in a town,
Before them every thing went down;
They flew about like chaff i' th' wind;
For haſte ſome left their maſks behind, }
Some could not ſtay their gloves to find. Drayton.
White gloves were on his hands, and on his head
. A wreath of laurel. Dryden.
To Glove. v. a. [from the noun. J. To cover as with a
glove.
My limbs,
Weaken'd with grief, being now enrag'd with grief,
Are thrice themſelves: hence therefore, thou nice crutch;
A ſcaly gauntlet now, with joints of ſteel,
Muſt glove this hand. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
The next he preys on is her palm,
That alm'ner of tranſpiring balm;
So ſoft, 'tis air but once remov’d ;
Tender as 'twere a jelly glov’d. Cleaveland.
Glover. n.ſ.. [from glºve..] One whoſe trade is to make
or ſell gloves.
Does he not wear a great round beard like a glover's paring
£nife 2 - Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſor.
To Glout. v. n. [A low word of which I find no etymology.]
To pout; to look ſullen. It is ſtill uſed in Scotland.
She lurks in midſt of all her den, and ſtreaks
From out a ghaſtly whirlpool all her necks,
Where, gºwting round her rock, to fiſh ſhe falls. Chapman.
Glouting with ſullen ſpight, the fury ſhook
Her clotted locks, and blaſted with each look. Garth.
To GLOW. v. n. [3]opan, Saxon; gloeyen, Dutch.]
1. To be heated ſo as to ſhine without flame.
But fithence filence leſſeneth not my fire,
But told it flames, and hidden it does glow,
I will reveal what ye ſo much deſire. Fairy Queen, b. i.
His goodly eyes,
That o'er the files and muſters of the war
Have glow'd like plated Mars, now bend, now turn
Their office upon a tawny front. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpat.
Runigund, wife to the emperor Henry II. to ſhow her in-
nocency, did take ſeven glowing irons, one after another, in
her bare hands, and had thereby no harm. Hakewill.
Not all parts like, but all alike inform'd
With radiant light, as glowing iron with fire. Milt. Par. L.
2. To burn with vehement heat.
Nor would you find it eaſy to compoſe
The mettled ſteeds, when from their noſtrils flows
The ſcorching fire that in their entrails glows. Addison Gvid.
How op'ning heav'ns their happy regions ſhow,
And yawning gulphs with flaming vengeance glow. Smith.
Fires that glow,
Shrieks of woe. Pope.
3. To feel heat of body.
Did not his temples glow
In the ſame ſultry winds and ſcorching heats . Addison Cato.
The cord ſlides ſwiftly through his glowing hands. Gay.
4. To exhibit a ſtrong bright colour.
With ſmile that glow'd
Celeſtial roſy red, love's proper hue. • Milton,
Clad in a gown that glows with Tyrian rays. Dryden,
A malicious joy, º -
Whoſe red and fiery beams caſt through your viſage
A glowing pleaſure. Dryden and Lee's Oedipus.
From the mingled ſtrength of ſhade and light, .
A new creation riſes to my fight;
Such heav'nly figures from his pencil flow,
So warm with life his blended colours glºw,
Amidſt the ſoft variety I'm loſt. Addison.
Like th' ethereal glow'd the green expanſe. Savage.
- Fair ideas flow, -
Strike in the ſketch, or in the pićture glºw. Pote.
.Not the fair fruit that on yon branches glºws,
With that ripe red th’ autumnal ſun beſtows,
Can move the god. Pope.
. . Each pleaſing Blount ſhall endleſs ſmiles beſtow,
And fair Belinda's bluſh for ever glow. - Pope.
Here clearer ſtars glºw round the frozen pole. Pope.
. From her naked limbs of glowing white,
. In folds looſe floating, fell the fainter lawn. Thomſºn.
5. To feel paſſion of mind, or activity of fancy.
You ſtrive in vain
To hide your thoughts from him, who knew too well
The inward glowings of a heart in love; Addiſon's Catz.
Forc’d compliments and formal bows
Will ſhew thee juſt above neglect;
The fire with which thy lover glowſ,
Will ſettle into cold reſpect. Prior.
Did Shadrach's zeal my glowing breaſt inſpire
To weary tortures, and rejoice in fire. Prizr.
Let the gay conſcience of a life well ſpent
Calm ev’ry thought, inſpirit ev'ry grace,
Glow in thy heart, and ſmile upon thy face. Pope.
With furies ſurrounded,
Deſpairing, confounded,
He trembles, he glows,
Amidſt Rhodope's ſnows. Poſe;
So periſh all, whoſe breaſts ne'er learn'd toglow
For others good, or melt at others woe. Pºpe:
- To praiſe is always hard,
When real virtue fires the glowing bard. Lewiſ.
6. To rage or burn as a paſſion. -
A fire which every windy paſſion blows;
With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows. Dryden:
- When crept into aged veins,
Love ſlowly burns, and long remains;
It glows, and with a ſullen heat, -
Like fire in logs, it warms us long. Shadwell.
To Glow. v. a. To make hot ſo as to ſhine. Not in uſe.
On each ſide her . .
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like ſmiling Cupids,
With divers colour'd fans, whoſe wind did ſeem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool. Shakespeare.
Glow. n. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Shining heat. -
2. Vehemence of paſſion.
3. Brightneſs or vividneſs of colour.
The pale complexion of true love,
And the red glow of ſcorn and proud diſdain. Shakeſpeare.
A waving glow his bloomy beds diſplay,
Bluſhing in bright diverſities of day. Pope, Epiſtle iv.
Glo'w wor M. n.ſ. [glºw and worm.] A ſmall creeping inſect
with a luminous tail. - -
The honey bags ſteal from the humble bees,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs, -
And light them at the fiery glowworm's eyes. Shakeſpeare.
The glowworm ſhews the mattin to be near,
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
A great light drowneth a ſmaller that it cannot be ſeen; as
the ſun that of a glowworm. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The man, who firſt upon the ground
A glowworm ſpy'd, ſuppoſing he had found
A moving diamond, a breathing ſtone;
For life it had, and like thoſe jewels ſhone:
He held it dear, 'till by the ſpringing day
Inform’d, he threw the worthleſs worm away. //a,'er.
To Gloze. v. n. [3]eran, Saxon. J
1. To flatter; to wheedle; to inſinuate; to fawn.
Man will hearken to his glozing lies, .
And eaſily tranſgreſs. Miltºn's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii.
So glaz'd the tempter, and his proem tun'd:
Into the heart of Eve his words made way. Milt. Par. Loſt.
A falſe glozing paraſite would call his foolhardineſs valour,
and then he may go on boldly, becauſe blindly, and by miſ-
taking himſelf for a lion, come to periſh like an aſs. South.
Now for a gºozing ſpeech, -
Fair proteſtations, ſpecious marks of friendſhip. Phillips.
2. To comment. This ſhould be glºſs. -
Which Salique land the French unjuſtly gloze
To be the realm of France. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
1o K s GLozE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G L U
G L U
|
|
|
Gloze. n.ſ. (from the verb.]
1. Flattery; inſinuation.
Now to plain dealing; lay theſe glazes by. Shakespeare.
2, Specious ſhow; gloſs. -
Precious couches full oft are ſhaked with a fever;
If then a bodily evil in a bodily gºoze be not hidden,
Shall ſuch morning dews be an eaſe to the heat of a love's
fire 2 Sidney, b. i.
GLUE. n.ſ. [glu, Fr. gluten, Lat. glud, Welſh.] A viſcous bºdy
commonly made by boiling the ſkins of animals to a gelly;
any viſcous or tenacious matter by which bodies are held one
to another; a cement.
Water, and all liquors, do haſtily receive dry and more
terreſtrial bodies proportionable; and dry bodies, on the other
ſide, drink in waters and liquors: ſo that, as it was well ſaid
by one of the ancients of earthly and watery ſubſtances, one
is a glue to another. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To build the earth did chance materials chuſe, -
And through the parts cementing glue diffuſe. Blackmore.
The cleareſt, drieſt, and moſt tranſparent glue is the beſt.
Moxon's Mech. Exer.
The flowers of grains, mixed with water, will make a ſort
of glue. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To Glue. v. a. [from the noun.]
J. To join with a viſcous cement.
I fear thy overthrow
More than my body's parting with my ſoul:
My love and fear glu'd many friends to thee, Shakespeare H.VI.
Whoſo teacheth a fool is as one that glueth a potſherd to-
gether. Eccluſ. xxii. 7.
The cuſtom of crowning the Holy Virgin is ſo much in
vogue among the Italians, that one often ſees in their churches
a little tinſel crown, or a circle of ſtars, glued to the canvas
over the head of the figure. Addiſon on Italy.
Moſt wounds, if kept clean, and from the air, the fleſh
will glue together with its own native balm. Derham.
2. To hold together.
The parts of all homogeneal hard bodies, which fully touch
one another, ſtick together very ſtrongly ; and for explaining
how this may be, ſome have invented hooked atoms, which is
begging the queſtion; and others tell us their bodies are glued
together by reſt, that is, by an occult quality, or rather by
nothing. Newton's Opt.
3. To join ; to unite ; to inviſcate.
Thoſe waſps in a honeypot are ſo many ſenſual men, that
are plunged in their luſts and pleaſures; and when they are
once glued to them, 'tis a very hard matter to work themſelves
Out. L’Eſtrange, Fable 126.
Intemperance, ſenſuality, and fleſhly luſts, do debaſe mens
minds and clog their ſpirits; ſink us down into ſenſe, and
glue us to thoſe low and inferior things. Tillotſon's Sermons.
She curb’d a groan, that elſe had come;
And pauſing, view'd the preſent in the tomb:
Then to the heart ador'd devoutly glu'd
Her lips, and, raiſing it, her ſpeech renew'd. Dryden.
I hear thee, view thee, gaze o'er all thy charms,
And round thy phantom glue my claſping arms. Pope.
Glu's BoILE R. m. ſ. [glue and boil.] One whoſe trade is to
make glue. -
Glu'ER. n.ſ.. [from glue.) One who cements with glue.
Glu M. adj. [A low cant word formed by corrupting gloom.]
Sullen; ſtubbornly grave.
Some, when they hear a ſtory, lookglum, and cry, Well,
what then Guardian.
To GLUT. v. a. [engloutir, French; glutio, Lat. to ſwallow ;
Yaſo.]
1. To ſwallow ; to devour.
* I ill cram’d and gorg'd, nigh burſt
With ſuck'd and glutted offal. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. x.
2. To cloy ; to fill beyond ſufficiency; to ſate; to diſguſt.
The ambaſſador, making his oration, did ſo magnify the
king and queen, as was enough to glut the hearers. Bacon.
Love breaks friendſhip, whoſe delights
Feed, but not glut our appetites. Denham.
What way remove
His ſettled hate, and reconcile his love,
That he may look propitious on our toils,
And hungry graves no more be glutted with our ſpoils. Dry.
No more, my friend;
Here let our glutted exccution end. Dryden's AEn.
I found
The fickle ear ſoon glutted with the ſound,
Condemn’d eternal changes to purſue,
Tir'd with the laſt, and eager of the new. Prior.
3. To feaſt or delight even to ſatiety.
With death's carcaſe glut the grave. Milton.
His faithful heart, a bloody ſacrifice,
Torn from his breaſt, to glut the tyrant's eyes. . Dryden.
A ſylvan ſcene, which, riſing by degrees,
Leads up the eye below, nor gluts the fight
With one full proſpect; but invites by many,
To view at laſt the whole. Dryden's State of Innocence.
4. To overfill; to load.
He attributes, the ill ſucceſs of either party to their gluttig
the market, and retailing too much of a bad commodity at
on Ce. Arbuthnot's Art of Polite Lying.
5. To ſaturate. -
The menſtrum, being already glutted, could not act power-
fully enough to diſſolve it. Løk.
Glut. m. ſ. [from the verb.] -
1. That which is gorged or ſwallowed.
Diſgorging foul
Their deviliſh glut, chain'd thunderbolts, and hail
Of iron globes. Milton's Paradſe Loft, b. vi.
2. Plenty even to loathing and ſatiety.
So death
Shall be deceiv'd his glut; and with us two
Be forc'd to ſatisfy his rav'nous maw. Milton's Par. Left.
Let him but ſet the one in balance againſt the other, and he
ſhall find himſelf miſerable, even in the very glut of his
delights. L’Eſtrange, Fable 1.
A glut of ſtudy and retirement in the firſt part of my life,
caſt me into this; and this will throw me again into ſtudy
and retirement. Pope to Swift.
3. More than enough ; overmuch.
If you pour a glut of water upon a bottle, it receives little
of it. Ben. Johnſon's Diſcoveries.
4. Anything that fills up a paſſage.
The water ſome ſuppoſe to paſs continually from the
bottom of the ſea to the heads of ſprings and rivers, through
certain ſubterranean conduits or channels, until they were by
ſome glut, ſtop, or other means, arreſted in their paſſage.
Wºodward's Natural Hiſtory.
GLUTINOU.S. adj. [glutinex, French, from gluten, Latin.]
Gluey; viſcous; tenacious.
The cauſe of all vivification is a gentle and proportionable
heat, working upon a glutinous and yielding ſubſtance; for the
heat doth bring forth ſpirit in that ſubſtance, and the ſubſtance
being glutinous, produceth two effects: the one, that the ſpirit
is detained, and cannot break forth; the other, that the mat-
ter, being gentle and yielding, is driven forwards by the motion
of the ſpirits, after ſome ſwelling, into ſhape and members.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 9oo.
Next this marble venom'd ſeat, -
Smear'd with gums of glutinous heat. Milton.
Nouriſhment too viſcid and glutinous to be ſubdued by the
vital force. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Glu'rinousness. n.ſ.. [from glutinous.] Viſcoſity; tena-
City.
#hele is a refiſtance in fluids, which may ariſe from their
elaſticity, glutinouſneſs, and the frićtion of their parts. Cheyne.
Gº,jº. n-ſ: [glouton, French, from glutio, Latin, to ſwal-
OW.
1. One who indulges himſelf too much in eating.
The Chineſe eat horſefleſh at this day, and ſome glutions
have uſed to have catsfleſh baked. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Through Macer's gullet ſhe runs down,
When the vile glutton dines alone;
And, void of modeſty and thought,
She follows Bibo's endleſs draught. Prior.
2. One eager of any thing to exceſs.
The reſt bring home in ſtate the happy pair
To that laſt ſcene of bliſs, and leave them there;
All thoſe free joys inſatiably to prove,
With which rich beauty feaſts the glutton love. Cowley.
Gluttons in murder, wanton to deſtroy,
Their fatal arts ſo impiouſly employ. Granville.
To Gluttonise. v. n. [from glution.] To play the glutton;
to be luxurious.
GLUT to Nous, adj. [ from glutton. J Given to exceſſive
feeding; delighted overmuch with food.
When they would ſmile and fawn upon his debts,
And take down th’intereſt in theirglutt'nous maws. Shakespeare.
The exceeding luxuriouſneſs of this gluttonous age, wherein
we preſs nature with overweighty burdens, and finding her
ſtrength defective, we take the work out of her hands, and
commit it to the artificial help of ſtrpng waters. . Raleigh,
Thou well obſerve -
The rule of not too much, by temperance taught
In what thou eat'ſt and drink'ſt; ſeeking from thence
Due nouriſhment, no gluttonous delight. Milton's Par. Loft.
Gluttonously. adv. [from gluttonous J. With the voracity
of a glutton.
Glu'tton Y. n.ſ.. . [glutonnie, Fr. from glutton.] Exceſs of
eating; luxury of the table.
Their ſumptuous gluttonies and gorgeous feaſts,
On citron tables or Atlantick ſtone. Milton's Parad. Reg.
Well may they fear ſome miſerable end,
Whom gluttony and want at once attend. Dryden's juven.
The inhabitants of cold moiſt countries are generally more
fat than thoſe of warm and dry; but the moſt common cauſe
is too great a quantity of food, and too ſmall a quantity of
motion; in plain Engliſh, gluttony and lazineſs. Arbuthnot.
GLU'Y. adj. [from glue.]
2. Viſcous; tenacious; glutinous.
It<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G N O
.
*
º
:
It is called balſamick mixture, becauſe it is a gluy ſpumous
matter. Harvey on Conſumptions.
With gluy wax ſome new foundations lay
Of virgin combs. Dryden's Ann. Mirab.
Whatever is the compoſition of the vapour, let it have but
one quality of being very gluy or viſcous, and it will mecha-
nically ſolve all the phaenomena of the grotto. Addiſon.
GLYN. n.ſ.. [Iriſh; gleann, glyn, plur. Erſe ; glenn, Scottiſh.]
A hollow between two mountains.
Though he could not beat out the Iriſh, yet he did ſhut
them up within thoſe narrow corners and glyns under the
mountains foot. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
To GNAR. Q. v. n. [2nymnan, Saxon; #norren, Dutch..] To
To GNA R L. § growl; to murmur; to ſnarl.
When he 'gan to rear his briſtles ſtrong,
And felly gnar, until day's enemy
Did him appeaſe. Fairy Queen, b, i. cant. 1.
Thus is the ſhepherd beaten from thy ſide,
And wolves are gnarling who ſhall gnaw thee firſt. Shakeſp.
Gnarling ſorrow hath leſs power to bite
The man that mocks at it, and ſets it light. Shakeſp. R. II.
The gnarring porter durſt not whine for doubt;
Still were the furies while their ſovereign ſpoke. Fairfax.
GNA'RLED. adj. [gnar, nar, or nurr, is in Staffordſhire a hard
knot of wood which boys drive with ſticks.] Knotty.
Merciful heav'n'
Thou rather with thy ſharp and ſulph’rous bolt
Split'ſt the unwedgeable and gnarled oak,
Than the ſoft myrtle. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
To GNAsH. v. a. [Anaſchen, Dutch..] To ſtrike together; to
claſh.
The ſeer, who could not yet his wrath aſſwage,
Rowl'd his green eyes, that ſparkl'd with his rage,
And gnaſh'd his teeth. Dryden's Wirg. Georg.
To GN Ash. v. n.
1. To grind or collide the teeth.
He ſhall gnaſh with his teeth, and melt away. Pſ. cxii. 10.
There ſhall be weeping and gnaſhing of teeth. Mat. viii.
2. To rage even to colliſion of the teeth; to fume; to growl.
His great iron teeth he ſtill did grind,
And grimly gnaſh, threatning revenge in vain. Fai. Queen.
They gnaſhed upon me with their teeth. Pſ, xxxv. 16.
They him laid
Gnaſhing for anguiſh, and deſpite and ſhame,
To find himſelf not matchleſs, Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
With boiling rage Atrides burn'd,
And foam betwixt his gnaſhing grinders churn'd. Dryden.
GNAT. n.ſ. [xnaec, Saxon.]
1. A ſmall winged ſtinging inſe&amp;t.
Her whip of cricket's bone, the laſh of film;
Her waggoner, a ſmall grey-coated gnat. Shakespeare. Rom, andju.
2. Anything proverbially ſmall.
Ye blind guides, which ſtrain at a gnat, and ſwallow a
camel. Mat. xxiii. 24.
GNATFLower. m. ſ. [gnat and flower.] A flower otherwiſe
called the beeflower.
GNA’TsN APPER. m. ſ. [gnat and ſnap.] A bird ſo called, be-
cauſe he lives by catching gnats.
They deny that any bird is to be eaten whole, but only the
gnatſnapper. Hakewill on Providence.
To GN Aw. v. a. [xnagan, Saxon; knaghen, Dutch.]
1. To eat by degrees; to devour by ſlow corroſion.
To you ſuch ſcabb'd harſh fruit is giv'n, as raw
Young ſoldiers at their exerciſings gnaw. Dryden's juvenal:
2. To bite in agony or rage.
Alas, why gnaw you ſo your nether lip
Some bloody paſſion ſhakes your very frame. Shakespeare Othello.
They gnawed their tongues for pain. Rev. xvi. Io.
He comely fell, and dying gnaw'd the ground. Dryden.
3. To wear away by biting.
Gnawing with my teeth my bonds aſunder,
I gain'd my freedom. Shakeſp. Comedy of Errours.
Like rotten fruit I fall, worn like a cloth
Gnawn into rags by the devouring moth. Sandys.
A lion, hampered in a net, called to a mouſe to help him
out of the ſnare: the mouſe gnawed the threads to pieces, and
ſet the lion at liberty. D'Eſtrange.
4. To fret; to waſte; to corrode.
5. To pick with the teeth.
His bones clean pick'd ; his very bones they gnaw. Dryd.
To GNA w. v. n. To exerciſe the teeth.
I might well, like the ſpaniel, gnaw upon the chain that ties
him; but I ſhould ſooner mar my teeth than procure li-
berty. Sidney.
See the hell of having a falſe woman: my bed ſhall be
abuſed, my coffers ranſacked, my reputation gnawn at. Shakespeare
I thought I ſaw a thouſand fearful wrecks,
A thouſand men that fiſhes gnaw’d upon. Shakeſp. R. III.
GNA'w ER, n.ſ.. [from gnaw.] One that gnaws.
GNo'Mon. n.ſ. [yvágºy J The hand or pin of a dial. . .
The gnomon of every dial is ſuppoſed to repreſent the axis
of the world, and therefore the two ends or extremities there-
of muſt direéily anſwer to the North and South pole. Harriſ.
There were from great antiquity ſun-dials, by the ſhadow
of a ſtyle or gnomon, denoting the hours of the day. Brown.
Gno'Monicks. m. ſ. [7 wwwowº.] A ſcience which makes a
part of the mathematicks: it teaches to find the juſt propor-
tion of ſhadows for the conſtruction of all kinds of ſun and
moon dials, and for knowing what o'clock it is by means
thereof; as alſo of a gnomon or ſtile, that throws off the
ſhadow for this purpoſe. Trevoux.
To GO. v. n. pret. I went; I have gone. [gan, Saxon. This
was probably changed to gone, or gang, then contračted to go.]
1. To walk; to move ſtep by ſtep.
You know that love
Will creep in ſervice where it cannot go. Shakeſpeare.
After ſome months thoſe muſcles become callous; and,
having yielded to the extenſion, the patient makes ſhift to go
upon it, though lamely. Jºſeman's Surgery.
2. To move; not ſtand ſtill. -
Riſe, let us be going.
3. To walk ſolemnly.
If there be cauſe for the church to go forth in ſolemn pro-
ceſſion, his whole family have ſuch buſineſs come upon them
that no one can be ſpared. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 41.
4. To walk leiſurely, not run.
And muſt I go to him
—Thou muſt run to him; for thou haſt ſtaid ſo long, that
going will ſcarce ſerve the turn. Shakeſpeare.
5. To travel; to journey a-foot.
I will only go through on my feet. Num. xx. 19.
And whoſoever ſhall compel thee to go a mile, go with him
twain. 44at. v. 41.
From them I go,
This uncouth errand ſole. Milton.
6. To proceed; to make a progreſs.
Thus others we with defamation wound,
While they ſtab us; and ſo the jeſt goes round. Dryden.
7. To remove from place to place.
I am in blood
Stept in ſo far, that, ſhould I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o'er. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
8. To depart from a place; to move from a place; the oppoſite
of to come. -
I hope it be not gone, to tell my lord
That I kiſs aught but him. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
At once, good-night:
Stand not upon the order of your going,
But go at once. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Ye ſhall not go forth hence. Gen. xlii. 15.
And when ſhe had ſo ſaid ſhe went her way. jo. xi. 28.
I will let you go, that ye may ſacrifice; only you ſhall not
go very far away. Ex. viii. 28.
Colcheſter oyſters are put into pits, where the ſeagoeth and
cometh. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Mat xxvi. 46.
A young tall ſquire
Did from the camp at firſt before him go. Cowley’s Davideis.
Then I concur to let him go for Greece, -
And wiſh our Egypt fairly rid of him. Dryden's Cleomenes.
Go firſt the maſter of thy herds to find,
True to his charge, a loyal ſwain and kind. Pope's Odyſſey.
9. To move or paſs in any manner, or to any end.
Though the vicar be bad, or the parſon be evil,
Go not for thy tything thyſelf to the devil. Tuff. Husbandry.
She may go to bed when ſhe liſt; all is as ſhe will. Shakeſp.
You did wiſh that I would make her turn;
Sir, ſhe can turn and turn, and yet go on. Shakespeare Othello.
I am glad to ſee your lordſhip abroad: I heard ſay your
lordſhip was ſick: I hope your lordſhip goes abroad by ad-
vice. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Go to, let us go down, and there confound their lan-
guage. Gen. xi. 7.
Let my Lord go amongſt us. Ex. xxxiv. 9.
The mourners go about the ſtreets. Eccl. xii. 5.
The ſun ſhall go down over the prophets, and the day ſhall
be dark over them. AMac. iii. 6.
Put every man his ſword by his ſide, and go in and out
from gate to gate throughout the camp. Ex. xxxii. 27.
The ſun, which once did ſhine alone,
Hung down his head, and wiſh'd for night,
When he beheld twelve ſuns for one
Going about the world, and giving light.
This ſeen, the reſt at awful diſtance ſtood,
As if they had been there as ſervants ſet,
To ſtay, or to go on, as he thought good,
And not purſue, but wait on his retreat. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
Not turning them going, 'till you have given them all the
ſatisfaction they are capable of, and ſo leading them by your
anſwers into farther queſtions. Locke.
Hiſtory only acquaints us that his fleet went up the Elbe,
he having carried his arms as far as the banks of that river.
- Arbuthnot on Cºins.
The laſt advice I give you relates to your behaviºur when
n you
Herbert.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">|
G O
you are going to be hanged, which, either for robbing your
imaſter, for houſebreaking, or going upon the º: may
very probably be your lot. Swift's Directions to the Footman.
Thoſe who come for gold will go off with pewter and
braſs, rather than return § Swift.
. To paſs in company with others.
IO T. ſhalt † º: adorned with thy tabrets, and ſhalt go
forth in the dances of them that make merry, jer. xxxi. 4.
whatever remains in ſtory of Atlas, or his kingdom of old,
is ſo obſcured with age or fables, that it may go along with
thoſe of the Atlantick iſlands. Temple.
11. To proceed in any courſe of life good or bad. . . .
He goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and
walketh with wicked men. job xxxiv. 8.
And the Levites that are gone away far from me, when
Iſrael went aſtray, which went aſtray away from me after their
idols, they ſhall even bear their iniquity. Ezek. xliv, Io.
12. To proceed in mental operations.
If I had unwarily too far engaged myſelf for the preſent
publiſhing it, truely I ſhould have kept it by me till I had
once again gone over it. Digby on the Soul, Dedication,
Thus I have gone through the ſpeculative confideration of
the Divine Providence. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
I hope, by going over all theſe particulars, you may receive
ſome tolerable ſatisfaction about this great ſubjećt. South.
If we go over the laws of Chriſtianity, we ſhall find that,
excepting a very few particulars, they enjoin the very ſame
things, only they have made our duty more clear and certain.
Tillotſºn, Sermon 6.
In their primary qualities we can go but a very little
way. Locke.
I go over ſome parts of this argument again, and enlarge a
little more upon them. Locke.
They are not able all their life-time to reckon, or regularly
go over any moderate ſeries of numbers. Locke.
13. To take any road.
I will go along by the highway; I will neither turn to the
right hand, nor to the left. Deutr. ii. 27.
Who ſhall bemoan thee? Or who ſhall go aſide to aſk how
thou doeſt ? jer. xv. 5.
His horſes go about
Almoſt a mile. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I have endeavoured to eſcape into the eaſe and freedom of
a private ſcene, where a man may go his own way and his
own pace. Temple.
14. To march in a hoſtile or warlike manner.
You were advis'd his fleſh was capable
Of wounds and ſcars, and that his forward ſpirit
Would lift where moſt trade of danger rang'd;
Yet did you ſay go forth. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
We be not able to go up againſt the people; for they are
ſtronger than we. Numb. xiii. 31.
Let us go down after the Philiſtines by night, and ſpoil
them until the morning light. i Sa. xiv. 36.
Thou art able to go againſt this Philiſtine to fight with
him. i Sa. xvii. 33.
The remnant of Jacob ſhall be among the Gentiles as a lion
among the beaſts of the foreſt; who, if he go through, both
treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.
Mic. v. 8.
15. To change ſtate or opinion for better or worſe.
We will not hearken to the king's words to go from our
religion. 1 Mac. ii. 22.
The regard of the publick ſtate, in ſo great a danger, made
all thoſe goodly things, which went ſo to wreck, to be lightly
accounted of, in compariſon of their lives and liberty. Knolles.
They become ſecretly diſcontent, and look upon men and
matters with an evil eye; and are beſt pleaſed when things go
backward, which is the worſt property of a ſervant of a prince
or ſtate. Bacon, Eſſay 37.
All goes to ruin, they themſelves contrive
To rob the honey, and ſubvert the hive. Dryd. Virg. Georg.
Landed men, as well as others, by their providence and
good huſbandry, accommodating their expences to their in-
come, keep themſelves from going backwards in the
world. Docke.
Cato, we all go into your opinion. Addiſon's Cato.
16. To apply one's ſelf.
Seeing himſelf confronted by ſo many, like a reſolute ora-
tor, he went not to denial, but to juſtify his cruel falſe-
hood. Sidney.
Becauſe this atheiſt goes mechanically to work, he will not
offer to affirm that all the parts of the embryon could, accord-
ing to his explication, be formed at a time. Bentley's Sermons.
17. To have recourſe to.
Dare any of you, having a matter againſt another, go to
law before the unjuſt, and not before the ſaints? I Cor. vi. 1.
18. To be about to do.
So extraordinary an example, in ſo degenerate an age, de-
ſerves for the rarity, and, I was going to ſay, for the incredibi-
G O
lity of it, the atteſtation of all that knew him, and confidered
his worth. Le, e.
19. To ſhift ; to paſs life not quite well.
Every goldſmith, eager to engroſs to himſelf as much as he
could, was content to pay high for it, rather than go with-
Out. I.e. e.
Cloaths they muſt have; but if they ſpeak for this ſtuff, or
that colour, they ſhould be ſure to go without it. 1.2, #:.
20. To decline; to tend towards death or ruin.
He is far gone, and, truly, in my youth,
I ſuffer'd much extremity for love,’"
Very near this.
21. To be in party or deſign.
They with the vanquiſh'd prince and party go,
And leave their temples empty to the foe. Dryden
22. To eſcape. -
, Timotheus himſelf fell into the hands of Doſtheus and
Sofipater, whom he beſought with much craft to let him g?
with his life. 2.44ac. xii. 24.
23. To tend to any ačt.
There be ſome women, Silvius, had they mark'd him
º º º I did, would have gone near
o fall in love with him. Shakeſø. As ke it.
24. To be uttered. ºff. As you like it
His diſciples perſonally appeared among them, and aſcer-
tained the report which had gone abroad concerning a life ſo
full of miracles. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
25. To be talked of; to be known.
It has the greateſt town in the iſland that goes under the
name of Ano-Caprea, and is in ſeveral places covered with a
very fruitful ſoil. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
26. To paſs; to be received.
Becauſe a fellow of my acquaintance ſet forth her praiſes in
yerſe, I will only repeat them, and ſpare my own tongue, ſince
Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
ſhe goes for a woman. Sidney.
And the man went among men for an old man in the days
of Saul. 1 Sa. xvii. 12.
A kind imagination makes a bold man have vigour and en-
terPrize in his air and motion: it ſtamps value upon his face,
and tells the people he is to go for ſo much. Collier.
Clipping ſhould be finally ſtopped, and the money which
remains ſhould go according to its true value. Locke.
27. To move by mechaniſm.
This pope is decrepid, and the bell goeth for him: take or-
der that, when he is dead, there be choſen a pope of freſh
years. Bacon's Holy War.
Clocks will go as they are ſet; but man,
Irregular man's never conſtant, never certain. Otway.
'Tis with our judgments as our watches, none
Go juſt alike, yet each believes his own. Pope's Eſ on Crit.
28. To be in motion from whatever cauſe.
The weyward ſiſters, hand in hand,
Poſters of the ſea and land,
Thus do go about, about. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Clipt and waſhed money goes about, when the entire and
weighty lies hoarded up. Waller.
29. To move in any direétion.
Dočtor, he is a curer of ſouls, and you a curer of bodies:
if you ſhould fight, you go againſt the hair of your pro-
feſſions. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of I/indſºr.
Thou truſteſt upon the ſtaff of this bruiſed reed, even upon
Egypt; on which, if a man lean, it will go into his hand and
pierce it. 2 Kings xviii. 21.
Shall the ſhadow go forward ten degrees, or go back ten
degrees: 2 Kings xx. 9-
30. To flow; to paſs; to have a courſe.
The god I am, whoſe yellow water flows
Around theſe fields, and fattens as it goes,
Tyber my name.
31. To have any tendency.
Athenians, know
Againſt right reaſon all your counſels go;
This is not fair, nor profitable that,
Nor t'other queſtion proper for debate. Dryden's Perſ:
32. To be in a ſtate of compačt or partnerſhip.
As a lion was beſtriding an ox that he had newly plucked
down, a robber paſſing by cried out to him, half ſhares:
you ſhould go your ſnip, ſays the lion, if you were not ſo for-
ward to be your own carver. L'Eſtrange.
There was a hunting match agreed upon betwixt a lion,
an aſs, and a fox, and they were to go equal ſhares in the
booty. L’Eſtrange.
33. To be regulated by any method; to proceed upon principles.
Where the multitude beareth ſway, laws that ſhall tend to
the preſervation of that ſtate muſt make common ſmaller offices
to go by lot, for fear of ſtrife and diviſions likely to ariſe. Hook.
We are to go by another meaſure. Sprat's Sermons.
The principles I there went on, I ſee no reaſon to alter. Loc.
The reaſons that they wºnt upon were very ſpecious and
probable. Bently's Sermons.
Dryden's Án.
34. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G O
G O
ſ
34. To be pregnant.
- Great bellied women,
That had not half a week to go. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
The fruit ſhe goes with,
I pray that it good time and life may find. Shakeſp H. VIII.
Of living creatures ſome are a longer time in the womb,
and ſome ſhorter: women go commonly nine months, the
cow and the eve about ſix months. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Some do go with their young the ſixth part of a year,
or two over or under, that is, about ſix or nine weeks;
and the whelps of theſe ſee not 'till twelve days. Brown.
And now with ſecond hopes ſhe goes,
And calls Lucina to her throws. Milton.
35. To paſs; not to remain.
She began to afflićt him, and his ſtrength went from
him. judg. xvi. 19.
When our merchants have brought them, if our commo-
dities will not be enough, our money muſt go to pay for
them. Locke.
36. To paſs; not to be retained.
Then he lets me go,
And, with his head over his ſhoulder turn'd,
He ſeem'd to find his way without his eyes. Shakespeare Hamlet.
Let go the hand of that arch heretick. Shakeſp K. john.
37. To be expended.
Scholars are cloſe and frugal of their words, and not will-
ing to let any go for ornament, if they will not ſerve for uſe.
- Felton on the Claſſicks.
38. To be in order of time or place.
We muſt enquire farther what is the connexion of that ſen-
tence with thoſe that go before it, and thoſe which follow
it. Watts's Logick.
39. To reach or be extended to any degree. ,
Can another man perceive that I am conſcious of anything,
when I perceive it not myſelf? No man's knowledge here can
go beyond his experience. Locke.
40. To extend to conſequences. -
It is not one maſter that either directs or takes notice of
theſe: it goes a great way barely to permit them. L'E/ºrange.
41. To reach by effects. -
Conſidering the cheapneſs, ſo much money might go far-
ther than a ſum ten times greater could do now. Wilkins.
42. To extend in meaning.
His amorous expreſſions go no further than virtue may
allow. Dryden's Ovid, Preface.
43. To ſpread; to be diſperſed; to reach farther.
Whoſe fleſh, torn off by lumps, the rav'nous foe
In morſels cut, to make it farther go. Tate's juven. Sat.
44. To have influence; to be of weight.
I had another reaſon to decline it, that ever uſes to go far
with me upon all new inventions or experiments; which is,
that the beſt trial of them is by time, and obſerving whether
they live or no. Temple.
'Tis a rule that goes a great way in the government of a
fober man's life, not to put any thing to hazard that may be
ſecured by induſtry, confideration, or circumſpection. L’Éſºr.
Whatever appears againſt their prevailing vice goes for
nothing, being either not applied, or paſſing for libel and
ſlander. Swift.
45. To be rated one with another; to be conſidered with regard
to greater or leſs worth.
I think, as the world goes, he was a good ſort of man
enough. Arbuthnot.
46. To contribute; to conduce; to concur.
The medicines which go to the ointments are ſo ſtrong,
that, if they were uſed inwards, they would kill thoſe that
uſe them. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
More parts of the greater wheels go to the making one part
df their lines. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 8.
º
There goes a great many qualifications to the compleating
this relation: there is no ſmall ſhare of honour and conſcience
and ſufficiency required. Collier of Friendſhip.
I had ſome thoughts of giving the ſex their revenge, by
laying together the many vicious charaćters that prevail in the
male world, and ſhewing the different ingredients that go to
the making up of ſuch different humours and conſtitutions.
Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 21 1.
Something better and greater than high birth and quality
muſt go toward acquiring thoſe demonſtrations of publick
eſteem and love. Swift to Pope.
47. To fall out, or terminate; to ſucceed. -
Your ſtrong poſſeſſion much more than your right,
Or elſe it muſt go wrong with you and me. Shakespeare K. john.
Howe'er the buſineſs goes, you have made fault
I' th' boldneſs of your ſpeech. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
I will ſend to thy father, and they ſhall declare unto him
how things go with thee. Tob. x. 8.
In many armies, if the matter ſhould be tried by duel be-
tween two champions, the vićtory ſhould go on the one ſide;
and yet, if it be tried by the groſs, it would go on the other
ſide. Bacºn’s Collečiion ºf Good and Evil,
It has been the conſtant obſervation of all, that if a miniſter
had a cauſe depending in the court, it was ten to one but it
went againſt him. South's Sermons.
At the time of the prince's landing, the father, eaſily fore-
ſeeing how things would go, went over, like many others, to
the prince. Swift.
Whether the cauſe goes for me of againſt me, you muſt pay
me the reward. Watts's Logick.
48. To be in any ſtate. This ſenſe is imperſonal.
It ſhall go ill with him that is left in his tabernacle. job xx.
He called his name Beriah, becauſe it went evil with his
houſe. 1 Chr. vii. 23.
49. To proceed in train or conſequence.
How goes the night, boy
—The moon is down: I have not heard the clock;
And ſhe goes down at twelve.
I take’t 'tis later, ſir. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I had hope,
When violence was ceas'd, and war on earth,
All would have then gone well. Milton.
Duration in itſelf is to be conſidered as gºing on in one
conſtant, equal, uniform courſe. Locke.
50. To Go abºut. To attempt; to endeavour; to ſet one's
ſelf to any buſineſs.
O dear father,
It is thy buſineſs that I go about. Shakeſpeare's King Lear,
I loſt him; but ſo found, as well I ſaw
He could not loſe himſelf, but went about
His father's buſineſs. Paradiſe Regain'd, b. ii.
Which anſwer exceedingly united the vulgar minds to
them, who concurred only with them as they ſaw them like
to prevail in what they went about. Clarendon.
Some men, from a falſe perſuaſion that they cannot reform
their lives, break off their ill cuſtoms, and root out their old
vicious habits, never ſo much as attempt, endeavour, or go
about it. South’s Sermons.
Either my book is plainly enough written to be rightly un-
derſtood by thoſe who peruſe it with attention and indiffe-
rency, or elſe I have writ mine ſo obſcurely that it is in vain
to go about to mend it. Locke.
They never go about, as in former times, to hide or palliate
their vices; but expoſe them freely to view. Swift.
51. To Go aſide. To err; to deviate from the right.
If any man's wife go aſide, and commit a treſpaſs againſt
him. Numb. v. 12.
52. To Go between. To interpoſe; to moderate between two.
I did go between them, as I ſaid; but more than that, he
loved her; for, indeed, he was mad for her. Shakeſpeare.
53. To Go by. To paſs away unnoticed.
Do not you come your tardy ſon to chide,
That laps'd in time and paſſion, lets go by
Th’ important ading of your dread command? Shakespeare Hamlet.
So much the more our carver's excellent,
Which lets go by ſome ſixteen years, and makes her
As ſhe liv'd now. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
What's that to us? The time goes by; away. Shakeſpeare.
54. To Go by. To find or get in the concluſion.
In argument with men a woman ever
Goes by the worſe, whatever be her cauſe. Milt. Agoniſter.
He's ſure to go by the worſt that contends with an adverſary
that is too mighty for him. L'Eſtrange.
55. To Go by. To obſerve as a rule.
'Tis not to be ſuppoſed, that by ſearching one can poſitively
judge of the ſize and form of a ſtone; and indeed the fre-
quency of the fits, and violence of the ſymptoms, are a better
rule to go by. Sharp's Surgery.
56. To Go down. To be ſwallowed; to be received, not re-
jećted.
Nothing ſo ridiculous, nothing ſo impoſſible, but it goes
down whole with him for truth and earneſt. L’Eſtrange.
Folly will not eaſily go dºwn in its own natural form with
diſcerning judges. Dryden's Aurengzebe, Pºſ.
If he be hungry, bread will go down. ocke.
Miniſters are ſo wiſe to leave their proceedings to be ac-
counted for by reaſoners at a diſtance, who often mould them
into the ſyſtems that do not only go down very well in the
coffeehouſe, but are ſupplies for pamphlets in the preſent
age. Swift on the preſent State of Affairs.
57. To Go in and out. To do the buſineſs of life.
The Lord ſhall preſerve thy going out and thy coming in. Pſ.
58. To Go in and out. To be at .
He ſhall go in and out, and find paſture. john x. 9.
59. To Go off. To die; to go out of life; to deceaſe.
I would the friends we miſs were ſafe arriv'd :
Some muſt go off; and yet, by theſe I ſee,
So great a day as this is cheaply bought. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
In this manner he went off, not like a man that departed out
of life, but one that returned to his abode. Tatler, N°. 86:
60. To Go off. To depart from a poſt.
The leaders having charge from you to ſtand,
Will not go off until they hear you ſpeak. Shakeſp. H. V.
12 ſ. 61. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G O
G O A .
.
61. To Go on. To make attack.
Bold Cethegus,
Whoſe valour I have turn'd into his poiſon,
And prais'd ſo to daring, as he would ---
Go on upon the gods. Ben. Johnſºn's Catiline.
62. To Go on. To proceed.
He found it a great war to keep that peace, but was fain to
go on in his ſtory. Sidney, b. ii.
He that deſires only that the work of God and religion ſhall
go on, is pleaſed with it, whoever is the inſtrument. Taylor.
I have eſcaped many threats of ill fits by theſe motions: if
they go on, the only poltice I have dealt with is wool from the
belly of a fat ſheep. Temple.
To look upon the ſoul as going on from ſtrength to ſtrength,
to conſider that ſhe is to ſhine for ever with new acceſſions of
glory, and brighten to all eternity, is agreeable. Addiſ, Speci.
Go on chearfully in the glorious courſe you have under-
taken. Addison's Speciator, N°. 164.
Copious bleeding is the moſt effectual remedy in the begin-
ning of the diſeaſe; but when the expectoration gºes on ſuc-
ceſsfully, not ſo proper, becauſe it ſometimes ſuppreſſeth
it. Arbuthnot on Diet.
I have already handled ſome abuſes during the late manage-
ment, and in convenient time ſhall go on with the reſt. Swift.
When we had found that deſign impračticable, we ſhould
not have gone on in ſo expenſive a management of it. Swift.
Many clergymen write in ſo diminutive a manner, with
ſuch frequent blots and interlineations, that they are hardly
able to go on without perpetual heſitations, or extraordinary
explctives. Swift.
I wiſh you health to go on with that noble work. Berkley.
63. To Go over. To revolt; to betake himſelf to another
art V.
p Hue change of religion, men of ordinary underſtandings
don't ſo much conſider the principles as the practice of thoſe
to whom they go ºver. Addiſon on Italy.
Power, which, according to the old maxim, was uſed to
follow, is now gone over to money. Swift.
64. Tº Go out. To go upon any expedition.
You need not have pricked me: there are other men fitter
to go out than I. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
65. To Go out. To be extinguiſhed.
Think'ſt thou the fiery fever will go out,
With titles blown from adulation ? Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Spirit of wine burned 'till it go out of itſelf, will burn no
more. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The care of a ſtate, or an army, ought to be as conſtant
as the chymiſt's fire, to make any great produćtion; and if
it goes out for an hour, perhaps the whole operation fails. Temp.
The morning, as miſtaken, turns about;
And all her early fires again go out. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
Let the acquaintance be decently buried, and the flame ra-
ther go out than be ſmothered. Collier of Friendſhip.
My blood runs cold, my heart forgets to heave,
And life itſelf goes out at thy diſpleaſure. Addison's Cato.
And at her felt approach and ſecret might,
Art after art gºes out, and all is night. Pope's Dunciad, b. iii.
66. To Go through. To perform throughly 5 to execute.
Finding Pyrocles every way able to go through with that
kind of life, he was as deſirous for his ſake as for his own to
enter into it. Sidney, b. ii.
If you can as well go through with the ſtatute laws of that
land, I will think you have not loſt all your time there. Spenſer.
Kings ought not to ſuffer their council to go through with
the reſolution and direction, as if it depended on them, but
take the matter back into their own hands. Bacon, Eſſay 21.
He much feared the earl of Antrim had not ſteadineſs of
mind enough to go through with ſuch an undertaking. Clarend.
The amazing difficulty and greatneſs of his account will
rather terrify than inform him, and keep him from ſetting
heartily about ſuch a taſk, as he deſpairs ever to go through
with it. South's Sermons.
The powers in Germany are borrowing money, in order
to go through their part of the expence. Addiſon on the War.
67. To Go through. To ſuffer; to undergo.
I tell thee that it is abſolutely neceſſary for the common
good that thou ſhouldſt go through this operation. Arbuthnot.
68. The ſenſes of this word are very indiſtinct: its general no-
tion is motion or progreſſion.
Go To... interječi. Come, come, take the right courſe. A
ſcornful exhortation.
Go to then, O thou far renowned ſon
Of great Apollo; ſhew thy famous might
In medicine. Fairy Queen, b. is cant. 5. ſtan. 43.
Go to, go to, thou art a fooliſh fellow ;
Let me be clear of thee. Shakeſpeare’s Twelfth Night.
My favour is not bought with words like theſe:
Go tº ; you'll teach your tongue another tale. Rowe.
Go-BY. n.ſ. Deluſion; artifice; circumvention; over-reach.
Except an apprentice is inſtructed how to adulterate and
varniſh, and give you the go-ly upon occaſion, his maſter may
be charged with neglect. Cºllier on Pride.
Go-cART. n. ſ. [go and cart.] A machine in which children
are incloſed to teach them to walk, and which they puſh for-
ward without danger of falling.
Young children, who are try’d in
Go-carts, to keep their ſteps from ſliding,
When members knit, and legs grow ſtronger,
Make uſe of ſuch machine no longer. Prior.
Go AD. m. ſ. [3ao, Saxon.] A pointed inſtrument with which
oxen are driven forward.
Oft in his harden'd hand a goad he bears. Pope.
To Go AD. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To prick or drive with a goad.
2. To incite; to ſtimulate; to inſtigate; to drive forward.
Moſt dangerous
Is that temptation, that doth goad us on
To ſin in loving virtue. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Goaded with moſt ſharp occaſions,
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The uſe of your own virtues. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
Of all that breathes the various progeny,
Stung with delight, is goaded on by thee. Dryden's Lucret.
GoAL. m. ſ. [gaule, French, a long pole ſet up to mark the
bounds of the race.]
I. The landmark ſet up to bound a race; the point marked out
to which racers run.
As at the Olympian games, or Pythian fields,
Part curb their fiery ſteeds, or ſhun the goal
With rapid wheels. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
And the ſlope ſun his upward beam
Shoots againſt the duſky pole,
Pacing toward the other goal. Milton.
2. The ſtarting poſt.
Haſt thou beheld, when from the goal they ſtart,
The youthful charioteers with heaving heart
Ruſh to the race Dryden's Wirg. Georg.
3. The final purpoſe; the end to which a deſign tends.
Our poet has always the goal in his eye, which dire&amp;s him
in his race: ſome beautiful deſign, which he firſt eſtabliſhes,
and then contrives the means, which will naturally condućt
him to his end. Dryden's Ovid, Preface.
Each individual ſeeks a ſev'ral goal;
But heav'n's great view is one, and that the whole. Pope.
So man, who here ſeems principal alone,
Perhaps acts ſecond to ſome ſphere unknown;
Touches ſome wheel, or verges to ſome goal;
'Tis but a part we ſee, and not a whole.
Pope's Eſſay on Man.
4. It is ſometimes improperly written for gaol, or jail.
GoAR. m. ſ. [goror, Welſh.] Any edging ſewed upon cloath
to ſtrengthen it. Skinner.
GOAT. n.ſ.. [sar, Saxon and Scottiſh.] A ruminant animal
that ſeems a middle ſpecies between deer and ſheep.
Gall of gºat, and ſlips of yew. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
You may draw naked boys riding and playing with their
paper-mills or bubble-ſhells upon goats, eagles, or dolphins.
Peacham on Drawing.
The little bear that rock'd the mighty Jove,
The ſwan whoſe borrow'd ſhape conceal’d his love,
Are grac'd with light; the nurſing goat's repaid
With heaven, and duty rais'd the pious maid. Creech.
Go'ATBEARD. m. ſ. [goat and beard.]
It is a plant with a ſemifloſculous flower, conſiſting of many
half florets: theſe with the embryoes are included in one
common many leaved flower-cup, not ſcaly, but the ſegments
are ſtretched out above the florets: the embryoes afterward
become oblong ſeeds incloſed in coats, and have a thick down
like a beard adhering to them. Miller.
GoA"Ts BREAD. The ſame with Go ATs BEARD, which ſee.
GoA^TCHAFER. m. ſ. An inſect; a kind of beetle. , Bailey.
GoA the R.D. m.ſ. [3;az and hjrb, Saxon, a feeder or tender.]
One whoſe employment is to tend goats.
Is not thilk ſame gatherd proud,
That fits on yonder bank,
Whoſe ſtraying herd themſelf doth ſhrowd
Among the buſhes rank? Spenſer’s Paſtorals.
They firſt gave the goatherd good contentinent, and the
marquis and his ſervant chaſed the kid about the ſtack. J/otton.
GoA'TMARJoRAM. m. ſ. The ſame with GoATs B E ARD,
which ſee.
GoA'T's MILK. m. ſ. [g cat and milk J
After the fever and ſuch like accidents are diminiſhed,
aſles and goat/milk may be neceſſary. //iſeman's Surgery.
Go A^T MILKE R. m. ſ. [goat and milker.] A kind of owl ſo
called from ſucking goats. Bailey.
GoAT's Kue. n.ſ. [gaſ ga.]
It hath a perennial root: the leaves grow by pairs, faſtened
to a mid-rib, terminating in an odd lobe: the flower is of the
papilionaceous kind, conſiſting of a ſtandard, the wings, and
the keel; the pointal becomes a long taper pod, which is filled
with oblong kidney-ſhaped ſeeds. This plant is propagated
for Inedicinal uſe. Miller.
6 Goat';
*-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G O B
G O D
Goat's rue is a native of Italy, and ſome parts of Spain,
where it has the reputation of being a great alexipharmick
and ſudorifick: the Italians eat it raw and boiled, and make a
kind of tea of it; but with us it is of no eſteem. Hill.
Go Aºtsk IN. n.ſ. [goat and skin.]
They wandered about in ſheepskins and goatskins, being
deſtitute, afflicted, and tormented. Hebr. ii. 37.
Then fill'd two gºatskins, with her hands divine;
With water one, and one with fable wine. Pope's Odyſſey.
GoA s-t HoRN. m. ſ [goat and thorn.]
It hath a papilinaceous flower, out of which empalement
ariſes the pointal, which afterwards becomes a bicapſular pod
filled with kidney-ſhaped ſeeds: the leaves grow by pairs on a
middle rib, which always end in a thorn. Tournefort ſays
the gum adragant, or dragon, is produced in Crete. Miller.
Go A'tis H. adj. [from goat.] Reſembling a goat in any qua-
lities: as, rankneſs; luſt. -
An admirable evaſion of a whoremaſter, man, to lay his
goitiſh diſpoſition on the change of a ſtar. Shakespeare King Lear.
The laſt is notorious for its coatiſh ſmell, and tufts not un-
like the beard of that lecherous animal. More againſt Ætheiſm.
Gob n.ſ. [gobe, French. J A ſmall quantity. A low word.
Do'ft think I have ſo little wit as to part with ſuch a gob of
money L’E/irange.
GO's BET. n.ſ. [ cohe, French.] A mouthful; as much as
can be ſwallowed at once.
Therewith ſhe ſpew'd out of her filthy maw
A flood of poiſon, horrible and black,
Full of great lumps of fiſh and gobbets raw. Fairy Queen.
By deviliſh policy art thou grown great,
And, like ambitious ylla, overgorg'd
With goºbets of thy mother's bleeding heart. Shakeſp H. VI.
The cooks, ſlicing it into little gobbets, prick it on a prog
of iron, and hang it in a furnace. Sandys's Travels.
The giant, gorg'd with fleſh, and wine, and blood,
Lay ſtretcht at length, and ſnoring in his den,
Belching raw got bets from his maw, o'ercharg'd
With purple wine and cruddl’d gore confus’d. Addiſon.
To Go' BBET. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſwallow at a mouth-
ful. A low word.
Down comes a kite powdering upon them, and gobbets up
both together. L'E/irange, Fable 4.
To GO/BBLE. v. a. [gober, to ſwallow, old French..] To
ſwallow haſtily with tumult and noiſe.
The ſheep were ſo keen upon the acorns, that they gobbled
up now and then a piece of the coat along with them. L'E/?.
Of laſt year's corn in barn great ſtore;
Fat turkeys gobbling at the door. Prior.
The time too precious now to waſte, -
And ſupper gobbled up in haſte,
Again afreſh to cards they run. Swift.
Go"BELE R. n. ſ [from gobble.] One that devours in haſte ; a
gormand; a greedy eater. -
Göset we E N m. ſ. [go and hetween. ) One that tranſacts
buſineſs by running between two parties.
Even as you came in to me, her aſſiſtant, or go-between,
parted from me: I ſay H ſhall be with her between ten and
eleven. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſor.
Go BLET. m. ſ. [gohelet, French..] A bowl, or cup, that holds
a large dratight. -
My figur'd goblets for a diſh of wood. Sºakeſ. Rich. II.
We love not loaded boards, and goblets crown'd ;
But free from ſurfeits our repoſe is found. Denham.
Crown high the goblets with a chearful draught ;
Enjoy the preſent hour, adjourn the future thought. Dryden.
Go's.I.N. m. ſ. [French; gohelina, which Spenſer has once re-
tained, writing it in three ſyllables. This word ſome derive
from the Gibellines, a faction in Italy; ſo that elfe and goblin
is Guelph and Gibeline, becauſe the children of either party
were terrified by their nurſes with the name of the other: but
it appears that ef is Welſh, and much older than thoſe fac-
tions. Eil. Usion are phantoms of the night, and the Germans
likewiſe have long had ſpirits among them named Golold,
from which gobe in might be derived.]
1. An evil ſpirit ; a walking ſpirit; a frightful phantom.
Angels and miniſters of grace defend us!
Be thou a ſpirit of health, or goblin damn'd,
Bring with thee airs from heav'n, or blaſts from hell ? Shakespeare
To whom the gobli (, full of wrath, reply'd,
Art thou that traytor angel ? Milton's aradiſe Lo 1, b. ii.
Always, whilſt he is young be ſure to preſerve his tender
mind from all impreſſions and notions of ſpirits and goblins,
or any fearful apprehenſions in the dark. Locke.
2. A fairy ; an elf.
His ſon was Elfinel, who overcame
The wicked gobbclines in bloody field;
But Elfant was of moſt renowned fame,
Who of all cryſtal did Panthea build. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Go, charge my goblins that they grind their joints
With dry convulſions; ſhorten up their finews
With aged cramps. Shakeſpeare's Tempºff.
Mean time the village rouzes up the fire,
While well atteſted, and as well believ'd,
Heard ſolemn goes the goblin ſtory round. Thomſon's Winter.
GOD. m. ſ. [3ob, Saxon, which likewiſe ſignifies good. The
ſame word paſſes in both ſenſes with only accidental variations
through all the Teutonick dialects.] -
1. The Supreme Being
God is a ſpirit, and they that worſhip him muſt worſhip him
in ſpirit and in truth. John iv. 24.
God above
Deal between thee and me: for ever now -
I put myſelf to thy direction. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
. The Supreme Being, whom we call God, is neceſſary, ſelf-
exiſtent, eternal, immenſe, omnipotent, omniſcient, and beſt
being ; and therefore alſo a being who is and ought to be
eſteemed moſt ſacred or holy. Grew's Coſmol. Sacr. b. i.
2. A falſe god; an idol.
He that ſacrificeth unto any god, ſave unto the Lord only,
he ſhall be utterly deſtroyed. Exod. xxii. 20.
As flies to wanton boys are we to the gods,
They kill us for their ſport. Shakeſpeare's King Lear:
Strong god of arms, whoſe iron ſceptre ſways -
The freezing North, and Hyperborean ſeas,
And Scythian colds, and Thracia's Winter coaſt,
Where ſtand thy ſteeds, and thou art honour'd moſt. Dryd.
3. Any perſon or thing deified or too much honoured.
Whoſe end is deſtruction, whoſe god is their belly. Phil. iii.
I am not Licio,
Nor a muſician as I ſeem to be;
But one that ſcorns to live in this diſguiſe,
For ſuch a one as leaves a gentleman,
And makes a god of ſuch a cullion. Shakeſpeare.
To God. v. a. [from the noun..] To deify; to exalt to divine
honours. -
This laſt old man;
Lov'd me above the meaſure of a father;
Nay, godded me, indeed. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Go'd child. n.ſ. [god and child J . A term of ſpiritual rela-
tion; one for whom one became ſponſor at baptiſm, and pro-
miſed to ſee educated as a Chriſtian.
Go'd DAUGHTER. n.ſ. [god and daughter.] A girl for whom
one became ſponſor in baptiſm. A term of ſpiritual relation.
Go' DD Ess. n.ſ.. [from god..] A female divinity.
Hear, nature, hear; dear goddeſs, hear a father! Shakespeare
A woman I forſwore; but I will prove, -
Thou being a goddeſ, I forſwore not thee:
My vow was earthy, thou a heav'nly love.
I long have waited in the temple nigh,
Built to the gracious goddeſs Clemency;
But rev'rence thou the pow'r, Dryden's Fables.
From his ſeat the goddeſ, born aroſe,
And thus undaunted ſpoke.
When the daughter of Jupiter preſented herſelf among a
crowd of goddeſſ: , ſhe was diſtinguiſhed by her graceful ſta-
ture and ſuperior beauty. Addiſon's Freeho der, N°. 21.
Modeſty with-held the goddeſs' train. Pope's Odyſſey.
Go'DD Ess-like. ad). [gºddeſs and like..] Reſembling a god-
deſs. -
Then female voices from the ſhore I heard;
A maid anidſt them goddeſs-like appear'd. Pope's Odyſſey.
Goºd FATHER... n.ſ. [god and father.] The ſponſor at the
font.
He had a ſon by her, and the king did him the honour as to
ſtand g dfather to his child. Bacon's Henry VII.
Confirmation, a profitable uſage of the church, tranſcribed
from the apoſtles, conſiſts in the child's undertaking in his
own name the baptiſmal vow; and, that he may more ſolemn-
ly enter this obligation, bringing ſome godfather with him,
not now, as in baptiſm, as his procurator. Hammond.
Go'DHE AD. n.ſ.. [from god.]
1. Godſhip; deity; divinity; divine nature.
Be content; -
Your low-laid ſon our godhead will uplift. Shakespeare. Cymbel.
At the holy mount
Of heav'n's high-ſeated top, th’ imperial throne
Of godhead, fix’d for ever firm and ſure, -
The filial pow'r arriv'd. A ſilton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. vii.
So may thy godhead be confeſt, - -
So the returning year be bleſt. - Prior.
2. A deity in perſon; a god or goddeſs.
Were your godhead; to borrow of men, men would forſake
the gods. Shakeſpeare.’s Iman of Ai ens.
Adoring firſt the genits of the place,
The nymphs and native godhead; yet unknown. Dryd, £n.
Go'dless adj [from god.] Without ſenſe of duty to God ;
atheiſtical; wicked; irreligious; inpious.
Of theſe two ſorts of men, both godleſs, the one has utterly
no knowledge of God, and the other ſtudies how to perſuade
themſelves that there is no ſuch thing to be known. Hooker.
That godleſs crew
Rebellious. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vi. l. Fº
OT
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden's Fables.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G O G
G O L
For faults not his, for guilt and crimes
Of godleſ, men, and of rebellious times,
Him his ungrateful country ſent,
Their beſt Camillus, into baniſhment. Dryden.
Goºdlike. adj. [god and like..] Divine; reſembling a divi-
nity; ſupremely excellent;
Thus Adam his illuſtrious gueſt beſought, ..
And thus the godlike angel anſwer'd mild. Milt. Par. Lºft.
Muſing and much revolving in his breaſt,
How beſt the mighty work he might begin
Of ſaviour to mankind, and which way firſt . -
Publiſh his godlike office now mature. Paradiſ, Rºgail'd,
That prince ſhall be ſo wiſe and godlike, as, by eſtabliſhed
laws of liberty, to ſecure protection and encouragement to the
honeſt induſtry of mankind. - - - Locke.
Godling. n.ſ.. [from god J A little divinity; a diminutive
od.
g Thy puny godlings of inferior race,
Whoſe humble ſtatues are content with braſs. Dryd, juven.
Go'DLINEss. n. ſ. [from godly.]
1. Piety to God. - -
2. General obſervation of all the duties preſcribed by religion.
Virtue and godlineſ of life are required at the hands of the
miniſter of God. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 2.
Goºdly. adj. [from god.]
1. Pious towards God. -
Grant that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and
ſober life. Common Prayer.
2. Good; righteous; religious. - -
Help, Lord, for the godly man ceaſeth, for the faithful fail
among the children of men. Pſ. xii. 1.
Go'dly adv. Piouſly; righteouſly. - - -
The apoſtle St. Paul teacheth, that every one which will
live godly in Chriſt Jeſus muſt ſuffer perſecution. Hooker, b. Y.
Goºdly HEAD. m.ſ. [from godly. ] Goodneſs; righteouſneſs.
An old word.
For this, and many more ſuch outrage,
I crave your godlyhead to affwage
The rancorous rigour of his might. Spenſer.
Go'dMother. n.ſ [god and mother] . A woman who has be-
come ſponſor in baptiſm. A term of ſpiritual relation.
Goºdship. n.ſ.. [from god..] The rank or character of a god;
deity; divinity.
Diſcourſing largely on this theme, -
O'er hills and dales their godſhips came. Prior.
Go'dson. n.ſ.. [god and ſon.] One for whom one has been
ſponſor at the font. -
What, did my father's godſon ſeek your life 2
He whom my father named your Edgar Shakeſp K. Lear.
Goºdward. adj. To Godward is toward God. So we read,
Hac Arethuſa tenus, for had enus Arethuſa.
And ſuch truſt have we through Chriſt to Godward. 2 Cor.
Goºdwit. m. ſ. [zob, good, and pra, an animal.] A bird of
particular delicacy.
Nor ortelans nor godwits crown his board. Cowley.
Go'DYELD. adv. [corrupted from God ſhield or protect.] A
Go'DYIELD. } term of thanks. Now not uſed.
Herein I teach you,
How you ſhould bid godyeld us for your pains,
And thank us for your trouble. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Goel. adj. [xolen, Saxon.] Yellow. An old word.
In March at the furtheſt, dry ſeaſon or wet,
Hop-roots ſo well choſen let ſkilful go ſet;
The goeler and younger, the better I love ;
Well gutted and pared, the better they prove. Tuſ Hub.
Go'ER. m. ſ. [from go.]
1. One that goes; a runner.
I would they were in Africk both together,
Myſelf by with a needle, that I might prick -
The goer back. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Such a man
Might be a copy to theſe younger times;
Which, follow’d well, would now demonſtrate them
But goers backward. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
Nothing could hurt either of us ſo much as the intervening
officious impertinence of thoſe goers between us, who in Eng-
land pretend to intimacies with you, and in Ireland to inti-
macies with me. Pope to Swift.
2. A walker; one that has a gait or manner of walking good
or bad.
The earl was ſo far from being a good dancer, that he was
no graceful goer. J/attan.
To Go"GGLE. v. n. To look aſquint.
Inflam'd all over with diſgrace,
To be ſcen by her in ſuch a place,
Which made him hang his head, and ſcoul,
And wink and goggle like an owl. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. I.
Nor fighs, nor groans, nor goggling eyes did want. Dryd.
Bo'GGLE-EYE D. adj. [rce; egen, Saxon.] Squint-eyed; not
looking ſtrait.
They are deformed, unnatural, or lame; and very unſeemly
-
to look upon, except to men that be gºggle-eyed them-
ſelves. Afthan's Schoolinaſter.
Go'1N G. m. ſ. [from going.]
1. The act of walking.
When nobles are their taylors tutors,
No hereticks burnt, but wenches ſuitors,
Then comes the time, who lives to ſee’t,
That going ſhall be us'd with feet.
2. Pregnancy.
The time of death has a far greater latitude than that of our
birth; moſt women coming, according to their reckoning,
within the compaſs of a fortnight; that is, the twentieth part
of their going. Grew's Coſmol. Sacr. b. iii. c. 3.
3. Departure.
Thy going is not lonely; with thee goes
Thy huſband; him to follow thou art bound. Milt, P. Loft.
Gola. m. ſ. The ſame with CYMATIUM, which ſee.
a cornice the gola, or cymatium of the corona, the
coping, the modillions or dentelli, make a noble ſhow. Speef.
GOLD. n.ſ. [3olb, Saxon; golud, riches, Welſh. It is
called gold in our Engliſh tongue either of geel, as Sca-
liger ſays, which is in Dutch to ſhine; or of another Dutch
word, which is gelten, and ſignifies in Latin valere, in Engliſh
to be of price or value: hence cometh their ordinary word
gelt, for money. Peacham on Drawing.]
1. Gold is the heavieſt, the moſt denſe, the moſt ſimple, the
moſt dućtile, and moſt fixed of all bodies; not to be injured
either by air or fire, and ſeeming incorruptible. It is ſoluble
by means of ſea-ſalt; but is injured by no other ſalt, and is
moſt eaſily of all metals amalgamated with filver. Gold is
frequently found native, and very rarely in a ſtate of ore. It
never conſtitutes a peculiar ore, but is found moſt frequently
among ore of ſilver. Native gold is ſeldom found pure, but
has almoſt conſtantly ſilver with it, and very frequently cop-
per. Gold duſt, or native gold, in ſmall maſſes, is mixed
among the ſand of rivers in many parts of the world. It is
found, in the greateſt abundance, bedded in maſſes of hard
ſtone, often at the depth of a hundred and fifty fathoms in the
mines of Peru. Pure gold is ſo fixed, that Boerhaave informs
us of an ounce of it ſet in the eye of a glaſs furnace for two
months, without loſing a ſingle grain. Hill on Foſſils.
Gold hath theſe natures: greatneſs of weight, cloſeneſs of
parts, fixation, pliantneſs or ſoftneſs, immunity from ruſt,
and the colour or tinéture of yellow. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Ah! Buckingham, now do I ply the touch,
To try if thou be current gold indeed. Shakespeare Rich. III.
We commonly take ſhape and colour for ſo preſumptive
ideas of ſeveral ſpecies, that, in a good pićture, we readily
ſay this is gold, and that a ſilver goblet, only by the different
figures and colours repreſented to the eye by the pencil. Lºcke.
The gold fraught veſſel, which mad tempeſts beat,
He ſees now vainly make to his retreat. Dryd. Tyran. Love.
Money.
For me, the gold of France did not ſeduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive
The ſooner to effect what I intended. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Thou, that ſo ſtoutly haſt reſiſted me,
Give me thy gold, if thou haſt any gold;
For I have bought it with an hundred blows. Shakespeare H. VI.
If I want gold, ſteal but a beggar's dog,
And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold. Shakeſpeare.
3. It is uſed for any thing pleaſing or valuable. So among the
ancients xévan 24'603rtn; and animamq; moreſque aureos educit
in aſtra. Horace.
The king's a bawcock, and a heart of gold,
A lad of life, an imp of fame. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Gold of Pleaſure. n. ſ. [myagrum,
It hath a flower of four leaves, placed in form of a croſs,
out of whoſe cup ariſes the pointal, which becomes a turbi-
nated fruit, having one cell, in which is included an oblong
ſeed, and two empty cells at the point. Miller.
Go'ld BEATER. m. ſ. [gold and beat..] One whoſe occupation
is to beat or foliate gold ſo as to gild other matter.
Our gold eaters, though, for their own profit ſake, they are
wont to uſe the fineſt coined gold they can get, yet they ſcru-
ple not to employ coined gold; and that the mint-maſters
are wont to alloy with copper or ſilver, to make the coin more
ſtiff, and leſs ſubject to be waſted by attrition. Boyle.
This gilder was a goldbeater. Pope.
Go'LDBEATER’s Skin, n.ſ. The inteſtinum redum of an ox,
which goldbeaters lay between the leaves of their metal while
they beat it, whereby the membrane is reduced thin, and
made fit to apply to cuts or ſmall freſh wounds, as is now the
common pračtice. Sºuincy.
When your gilliflowers blow, if they break the pod, open
it with a penknife or lancet at each diviſion, as low as the
flower has burſt it, and bind it about with a narrow ſlip of
goldbeater’s skin, which moiſten with your tongue, and it will
ſtick together. AMortimer's Husbandry.
Gold Bou ND. adj. [gold and bºund.) Encompaſſed with gold.
Thy air,
Thou other goldbound brow, is like the firſt. Shakespeare Aſad.
~ Goºlers.
Shakespeare King Lear.
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">3.
G O O
G O L
&amp;
Go'LDEN. adj. [from gold.]
1. Made of gold; conſiſting of gold.
O would to God that the incluſive verge
Of golden metal, that muſt round my brow,
Were red-hot ſteel to ſear me to the brain. Shakespeare R. III.
Nine royal knights in equal rank ſucceed,
Each warrior mounted on a fiery ſteed,
In golden armour glorious to behold;
The rivets of their arms were nail'd with gold. Dryden.
2. Shining; bright; ſplendid; reſplendent.
So ſweet a kiſs the golden ſun gives not
To thoſe freſh morning drops upon the roſe;
Nor ſhines the ſilver moon one half ſo bright
Through the tranſparent boſom of the deep. Shakeſpeare.
'Tis better to be lowly born,
And range with humble livers in content,
Than to be perk'd up in a gliſtering grief,
And wear a golden ſorrow. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Heaven's golden winged herald late he ſaw
To a poor Galilean virgin ſent.
To her hard yoke you muſt hereafter bow,
Howe'er ſhe ſhines all golden to you now. Dryden.
And ſee the guardian angels of the good,
Reclining ſoft on many a golden cloud. Rowe's Royal Conv.
3. Yellow; of the colour of gold.
Golden ruſſeting hath a gold coloured coat under a ruffet
hair, and its fleſh of a yellow colour. Martimer.
4. Excellent; valuable.
I have bought
Golden opinions from all ſort of people,
Which would be worn now in their neweſt gloſs,
Not caſt aſide ſo ſoon. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth:
That verſe which they commonly call golden, has two ſub-
ſtantives and two adječtives, with a verb betwixt them to
keep the peace. Dryden.
Thence ariſes that golden rule of dealing with others as we
would have others deal with us. Watts's Logick.
5. Happy; reſembling the age of gold.
They ſay many young gentlemen flock to him every day,
and fleet the time careleſly, as they did in the golden world.
Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Go'LDEN Saxifrage. n.ſ. [ chryſplenium,
It hath a perennial fibroſe root: the flowercup is divided
into four parts: the flower has no viſible petals, but eight
Ítamina, or threads, which ſurround the ovary: the pointal
becomes a membraneous veſſel, which is forked and bivalve,
incloſing many ſmall ſeeds. It grows wild upon marſhy ſoil,
and in ſhady woods. Miller.
Go'LDENLY. adv. [from golden.] Delightfully; ſplendidly.
My brother Jaques he keeps at ſchool, and report ſpeaks
goldenly of his profit. Shakeſpeare's A you like it.
Go'LDFINCH. m. ſ. [zolbpinc, Saxon.] A ſinging bird, ſo
named from his golden colour. This is called in Staffordſhire
a proud taylor.
Of ſinging birds they have linnets, goldfinches, ruddocks,
Canary-birds, blackbirds, thruſhes, and divers others. Carew.
A goldfinch there I ſaw, with gaudy pride
Of painted plumes, that hopp'd from fide to fide. Dryden.
Go'LDFINDER. n.ſ. [gold and find.] One who finds gold. A
term ludicrouſly applied to thoſe that empty jakes.
His empty paunch that he might fill,
He ſuck'd his vittels through a quill;
Untouch'd it paſs'd between his grinders,
Craſhaw.
Or’t had been happy for goldfinders. Swift.
Go'LDHAMMER. n.ſ. A kind of bird. Dić7.
Go'LDING. m. ſ. A ſort of apple. Dić7.
Go'LDNEY. n.ſ. A ſort of fiſh, otherwiſe called GILTHEAD,
which ſee. Dić7.
Go'LDPLEASURE. m.ſ. An herb. Dić7.
Go'Lpsize. n.ſ. A glue of a golden colour; glue uſed by
gilders.
The gum of ivy is good to put into your goldſize, and other
colours. Peacham on Drawing.
Goldsmit H. n.ſ. [xolb and rmit, Saxon.]
1. One who manufactures gold.
Neither chain nor goldſmith came to me. Shakeſpeare.
2. A banker; one who keeps money for others in his hands.
The goldſmith or ſcrivener, who takes all your fortune to
diſpoſe of, when he has beforehand reſolved to break the fol-
lowing day, does ſurely deſerve the gallows. Swift.
Go'1. Dylocks. n.ſ.. [coma aurea, Latin.] .
It hath a fibroſe perennial root: its numerous leaves are pro-
duced alternately on every ſide the branches: the flowers are
yellow, and produced either ſingly or in an umbel upon the
tops of the branches. Miller.
GoLL. m. ſ. [corrupted, as Skinner thinks, from pal or pol,
whence realban, to handle or manage.] Hands; paws;
claws. Uſed in contempt, and obſolete.
They ſet hands, and Mopſa put to her golden golls among
them; and blind fortune, that ſaw not the colour of them,
gave her the preheminence. Sidney, b. ii.
I
Go ME. m. ſ. The black and dily greaſe of a cart-whorl.
Bailºr.
GO'MPHOSIS. m. ſ. A particular form of articulation. y
Gomphyſis is the connexion of a tooth to its ſocket. JP'ſ".
GQ'NDOLA. n.ſ. [gondole, French.] A boat much uſed in
Venice; a ſmall boat.
He ſaw did ſwim
Along the ſhore, as ſwift as glance of eye,
A little gondelay, bedecked trim t -
With boughs and arbours woven cunningly. Fairy Queen.
In a gondºla were ſeen together Lorenzo and his amorous
Jeffica. Shakespeare 44erchant of Venice.
As with gondola's and men, his
Good excellence the duke of Venice
Sails out, and gives the gulph a ring. Prior.
Gondoli'er. n.ſ.. [from gondola.] A boatman; one that rows
a gondola. -
Your fair daughter,
Tranſported with no worſe nor better guard,
But with a knave of hire, a goºd:lier,
To the groſs claſps of a laſcivious Moor. Shakſ. Othello.
Gone, part.preter. [from go. See Tº GO.] As,
I need not qualify theſe remarks with a ſuppoſition that I
have gone upon through the whole courſe of my papers. Addison
1. Advanced; forward in progreſs.
I have known ſheep cured of the rot, when they have not
been far gone with it, only by being put into broomlands. Mort.
The obſervator is much the briſker of the two, and, I
think, farther gone of late in lyes and impudence than his
Preſbyterian brother. Swift.
2. Ruined; undone.
He muſt know 'tis none of your daughter, nor my ſiſter;
* gone elſe. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
3 I'll tell the ſtory of my life,
And the particular accidents gone by, ,
Since I came to this iſle. Shakeſpeare's Tºmºff.
4. Loſt; departed.
When her maſters ſaw that the hope of their gains was
gone, they caught Paul and Silas. Acts xvi. 19: .
Speech is confined to the living, and imparted to only thoſe
that are in preſence, and is tranſient and gone. Holder.
5. Dead; departed from life.
I mourn Adonis dead and gone. Oldham.
A dog, that has his noſe held in the vapour, loſes all ſigns
of life; but carried into the air, or thrown into a lake, reco-
vers, if not quite gone. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Go'NFAlon. Un. ſ. [gonfanon, French; gunfana, Iſlandick,
Go'NFA NoN. § from gunn, a battle, and fani, a flag. Mr. Lye.
An enſign; a ſtandard.
Ten thouſand thouſand enſigns high advanc'd,
Standards and gonfalons, 'twixt van and rear,
Stream in the air. Milton's Parad. Loft, b. v.
GonoRRHoe’A. m. ſ. [76vGP and fiew.] A morbid running of
venereal hurts. -
Rauty mummy or ſtone mummy grows on the tops of high
rocks: they powder and boil it in milk, and then give it to
ſtop gonorrhaeas. Woodward on Foſſils.
GOOD. adj. comp. better, ſuperl. bºſſ. [30b, Saxon; goed,
Dutch.]
1. Having ſuch phyſical qualities as are expe&amp;ted or deſired.
God ſaw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
very good. Gen. i. 31.
Take ye good heed unto yourſelves. Deutr. ii. 4.
A univerſe of death which God by curſe
Created evil; for evil only good. Milt. Paradiſe Loſt.
Reſolv’d
From an ill cauſe to draw a good effe&amp;t. Dryden's Fables.
Notwithſtanding this criticiſm the verſes were good. Speciat.
A man is no more to be praiſed upon this account, than
becauſe he has a regular pulſe and a good digeſtion. Addiſon.
We may as well pretend to obtain the good which we want
without God's aſſiſtance, as to know what is good for us with-
out his direction. Smalridge's Sermons.
Ah! ne'er ſo dire a thirſt of glory boaſt,
Nor in the critick let the man be loſt
Good nature and good ſenſe muſt ever join ;
To err is human, to forgive, divine. Pope's Eſ on Critic.
2. Proper; fit; convenient.
It is not good that the man ſhould be alone. Gen. ii. 18.
We thought it good to be left at Athens alone. 1 Theſ, iii. 1.
Amongſt a man's peers a man ſhall be ſure of familiarity,
and therefore it is good a little to keep ſtate: amongſt a man's
inferiors one ſhall be ſure of reverence, and therefore it is gºod
a little to be familiar. Bacon, Eſſay 53.
Let us, if you think good, give Martius leave to proceed in
his diſcourſe. Bacon's hºly iſ ar.
He concluded, that it was a good time to comply with the
importunity of the gentlemen of Suſſex. Clarendon, b, viii.
3. Uncorrupted ; undamaged.
10 M He
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G O O
G O O
He alſo bartered away plumbs, that would have rotted in a
week, for nuts, that would laſt god for his eating a whole
year. Locke.
4. Wholſome ; ſalubrious.
A man firſt builds a country ſeat,
Then finds the walls not good to eat. Prior.
5. Medicinal; ſalutary.
The water of Nilus is ſweeter than other waters in taſte,
and it is excellent goºd for the ſtone and hypochondriack me-
lancholy. Bac.n's Natural Hiſtºry, Nº. 767.
6. Pleaſant to the taſte.
Eat thou honey, becauſe it is gººd; and the honeycomb,
which is ſweet. Prov. xxiv. 13.
Of herbs and plants ſome are good to eat raw; as lettuce,
endive, and purſlane. Lacon's Natural Hiſtory.
7. Complete; full. -
The Proteſtant ſubječts of the abbey make up a goºd third
of its people. Addison on Italy.
8. Uſeful; valuable.
All quality, that is good for anything, is originally founded
upon merit. Collier of Envy.
We diſcipline betimes thoſe other creatures we would make
uſeful and good for ſomewhat. Locke.
9. Sound; not falſe; not fallacious.
He is reſolved now to ſhew how flight the propoſitions were
which Luther let go for good. Atterbury.
10. Legal; valid; rightly claimed or held.
According to military cuſtom the place was good, and the
lieutenant of the colonel's company might well pretend to the
next vacant captainſhip in the ſame regiment. JWotton.
1 1. Confirmed; atteſted; valid.
Ha! am I ſure ſhe's wrong'd Perhaps 'tis malice'
Slave, make it clear, make good your accuſation. Smith.
12. Having the qualities deſired to a conſiderable degree; ſuffi-
cient; not too little.
The king had likewiſe provided a good fleet, and had cauſed
a body of three thouſand foot to be embarked on thoſe
fhips. Clarendon, b. ii.
13. With as preceding. It has a kind of negative or inverted
ſenſe; as good as, no better than.
Therefore ſprang there even of one, and him as good as
dead, ſo many as the ſtars of the ſky in multitude. Heb. xi.
14. No worſe.
He ſharply reproved them as men of no courage, which,
being many times as good as in poſſeſſion of the victory, had
moſt cowardly turned their backs upon their enemies. Knoles.
The maſter, I am ſure, will be as goºd as his word, for his
own buſineſs. L'Eſtrange, Fable 52.
15. Well qualified; not deficient. -
If they had held their royaltiés by that title, either there
muſt have been but one ſovereign over them all, or elſe every
father of a family had been as good a prince, and had as good
a claim to royalty as theſe. Lºcke.
16. Skilful; ready; dexterous.
Flatter him it may, I confeſs; as thoſe are generally good
at flattering who are goºd for nothing elſe. South's Sermons.
I make my way where e'er I ſee my foe;
But you, my lord, are good at a retreat. Dryd. Span. Fryar.
17. Happy; proſperous.
Behold how gºod and how pleaſant it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity. Pſ. cxxxiii. 1.
Many good morrows to my noble lord
—Good morrow, Cateſby, you are early ſtirring. Shaft. R. III.
Good e'en, neighbours; -
Goºd e'en to you all, good e'en to you all. Shakespeare Coriºlan.
At once good night:
Stand not upon the order of your going,
But go at once. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
At my window bid good morrow. - Milton.
Good morrow, Portius! Let us once embrace. Addiſon.
18. Honourable.
Silence, the knave's repute, the whore's good name,
The only honour of the wiſhing dame, Pope.
10. Cheerful; gay. Joined with any words expreſſing temper
of mind. -
That when they are certified of our mind, they may be of
good comfort, and ever go cheerfully about their own affairs.
- - 2 Mac. xi. 26.
Quietneſs of mind improves into cheerfulneſs, enough to
make me juſt ſo gººd humourcd as to wiſh that world well.
- Pope to Swift.
2°. Conſiderable; not ſmall though not very great. -
A goºd while ago God made choice that the Gentiles by
my mouth ſhould hear the word. A:is xv. 7.
It ſeemeth the plant, having a great ſtalk and top, doth prey
*pon the graſs a gºod way about, by drawing the juice of the
carº from it. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
Mirtle and ponigranate, if they be planted, though a goºd
ipage one from the other, will meet. Peacham on Drawing.
We Hay ſuppoſe a great many degrees of littleneſs and
!ghtneſs in theſe earthy particles, ſo as Inany of them might
float in the air a gºod while, like exhalations before they fell
down. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
They held a good ſhare of civil and military employments
during the whole time of the uſurpation. Swift.
2:... Elegant; decent; delicate. With breeding.
If the critick has publiſhed nothing but rules and obſerva-
tions in criticiſm, I then conſider whether there be a pro-
priety and elegance in his thoughts and words, clearneſs and
delicacy in his remarks, wit and good breeding in his rail-
lery. Addison's Guardian.
Mankind have been forced to invent a kind of artificial
humanity, which is what we expreſs by the word good breed-
ing. Addison's Speãator.
Thoſe among them, who return into their ſeveral countries,
are ſure to be followed and imitated as the greateſt patterns
of wit and good breeding. Swift.
22. Real; ſerious ; earneſt. -
Love not in gºod earneſt, nor no farther in ſport neither,
than with ſafety of a pure bluſh thou may’ſ in honour come
off again. Shakeſpeare's As yºu like it.
23. Rich ; of credit; able to fulfil engagements.
Antonio is a good man: my meaning, in ſaying that he is a
good man, is to have you underſtand me that he is ſuffi-
cient. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Wenice.
24. Having moral qualities, ſuch as are wiſhed; virtuous.
For a good man ſome would even dare to die. Rem. v. 7.
The woman hath wrought a good work upon me. Mait.
Grant the bad what happineſs they would, * .
One they muſt want, which is to paſs for good. Pºpe.
25. Kind; ſoft; benevolent.
Matters being ſo turned in her, that where at firſt liking
her manners did breed good will, now good will became the
chief cauſe of liking her manners. Sidney, b. ii.
Glory to God in the higheſt, and on earth peace and gºd
will towards men. Lu. ii. 14.
Without go.d nature man is but a better kind of vermin.
Bacºn's Ornam. Rati.n.
Here we are lov’d, and there we love;
Good nature now and paſſion ſtrive
Which of the two ſhould be above, -
And laws unto the other give. Suckling.
'Tis no wonder if that which affords ſo little glory to God,
hath no more good will for men. Decay of Piety.
When you ſhall ſee him, ſir, to die for pity,
*Twere ſuch a thing, 'twould ſo deceive the world,
'Twould make the people think you were good natur'd. Denh.
To teach him betimes to love and be good natured to others,
is to lay early the true foundation of an honeſt man. Locke.
Good ſenſe and gºod nature are never ſeparated, though the
ignorant world has thought otherwiſe. Dryd, juven. Dedicat.
Affability, mildneſs, tenderneſs, and a word which I would
fain bring back to its original ſignification of virtue, I mean
good nature, are of daily uſe. Dryden.
This doćtrine of God's good will towards men, this com-
mand of mens proportionable good will to one another, is not
this the very body and ſubſtance, this the very ſpirit and life
of our Saviour's whole inſtitution ? Spratt's Sermons.
It was his greateſt pleaſure to ſpread his healing wings over
every place, and to make every one ſenſible of his good will to
mankind. . Calamy's Sermons.
How could you chide the young goºd natur'd prince,
And drive him from you with ſo ſtern an air. Addison Caic.
26. Favourable; loving. -
But the men were very good unto us, and we were not
hurt. I Sa. xxv. 15.
Truly God is gººd to Iſrael, even to ſuch as are of a clean
heart. Pſ. lxxiii. 1.
You have good remembrance of us always, deſiring greatly
to ſee us, as we alſo to ſee you. 1 Theff, iii. 6.
This idea, thus made, and laid up for a pattern, muſt ne-
ceſſarily be adequate, being referred to nothing elſe but itſelf,
nor made by any other original but the good liking and will of
him that firſt made this combination. Locke.
27. Companionable ; ſociable; merry. Often uſed ironically.
It was well known, that Sir Roger had been a good fellow
in his youth. Aſcham's Schoºlmaſter.
Though he did not draw the good fellows to him by drink-
ing, yet he eat well. Clarendºn, b. viii.
Not being permitted to drink without eating, will prevent
the cuſtom of having the cup often at his noſe; a dangerous
beginning and preparation to gºod fellowſhip. Lºcke.
28. It is ſometimes uſed as an epithet of ſlight contempt, im-
plying a kind of negative virtue or bare freedom from ill.
My good man, as far from jealouſy as I am from giving him
cauſe. Shakespeare's Merry Wives of //indſor.
She had left the good man at home, and brought away her
gallant. Addiſon's Spediator.
29. In a ludicrous ſenſe.
As for all other good women that love to do but little work,
how handſome it is to louſe themſelves in the ſunſhine, they
that have been but a while in Ireland can well witneſs. Spºſer.
*** *
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G O O
G O O
s
º
s
30. Hearty; earneſt; not dubious.
He, that ſaw the time fit for the delivery he intended, called
unto us to follow him, which we both, bound by oath and
willing by good will, obeyed. Sidney, b. ii.
The good will of the nation to the preſent war has been
ſince but too much experienced by the ſucceſſes that have at-
tended it. - Temple.
Good will, ſhe ſaid, my want of ſtrength ſupplies;
And diligence ſhall give what age denies. Dryden's Falles.
31. In Good time. Not too faſt.
In good time, replies another, you have heard them diſpute
againſt a vacuum in the ſchools. Collier on Human Reaſon.
32. In Good ſooth. Really; ſeriouſly.
What, muſt I hold a candle to my ſhames 2
They in themſelves, goºd ſºoth, are too too light. Shakeſp.
33. Good [To make.] To keep; to maintain; not to give up ;
not to abandon.
There died upon the place all the chieftains, all making goºd
the fight without any ground given. Bacon's Henry VII.
He forced them to retire in ſpite of their dragoons, which
were placed there to make good their retreat. Clarendºn.
Since we claim a proper intereſt above others in the pre-
eminent rights of the houſhold of faith, then, no doubt, to
make good that claim, we are proportionably obliged above
others to conform to the proper manners and virtues that
belong to and become this houſhold, and diſtinguiſh it from
all others. Spratt's Sermons.
He without fear a dangerous war purſues;
As honour made him firſt the danger chuſe,
So ſtill he makes it gºod on virtue's ſcore. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
34. Good [To make.] To perform ; to confirm.
I farther will maintain
Upon his bad life to make all this good.
While ſhe ſo far extends her grace,
She makes but good the promiſe of her face. Waller.
Theſe propoſitions I ſhall endeavour to make good. Smalridge.
35. Good [7 o make.] To ſupply.
Every diſtinct being has ſomewhat peculiar to itſelf, to
make good in one circumſtance what it wants in another. L'Eſt.
Good. n.ſ. -
1. That which phyſically contributes to happineſs; benefit; ad-
vantage; the contrary to evil.
I fear the emperor means no goºd to us. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
Let me play the lion too: I will roar, that I will do any
man's heart good to hear me. Shakespeare Midſum. Night's Dream.
He wav'd indifferently 'twixt them, doing neither good nor
Shakeſp. Rich. II.
harm. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Nature in man's heart her laws doth pen, -
Preſcribing truth to wit, and good to will. Davies.
This caution will have alſo this good in it, that it will put
them upon conſidering, and teach them the neceſſity of exa-
mining more than they do. - Locke.
Good is what is apt to cauſe or increaſe pleaſure, or diminiſh
pain in us; or elſe to procure or preſerve us the poſſeſſion of
any other good, or abſence of any evil. Locke.
Refuſe to leave thy deſtin’d charge too ſoon,
And for the church's good defer thy own. Prior.
Works may have more wit than does them good,
As bodies periſh through exceſs of blood. Pope's Eff, on Crit.
A thirſt after truth, and a deſire of good, are principles
which ſtill act with a great and univerſal force. Rogers.
2. Proſperity; advancement.
If he had employ'd
Thoſe excellent gifts of fortune and of nature
Unto the good, not ruin of the ſtate. Ben. johnſ Catiline.
3. Earneſt; not jeſt.
The good woman never died after this, ’till ſhe came to die
for good and all. L’Eſtrange.
4. Moral qualities, ſuch as are deſirable; virtue; righteouſneſs;
let V.
p Bºſt from evil, and do good.
Empty of all good, wherein conſiſts
Woman's domeſtick honour, and chief praiſe. Milt. P. L.
By good, I queſtion not but good, morally ſo called, bonum
hangſluin ought, chiefly at leaſt, to be underſtood; and that
the good of profit or pleaſure the bonum utile, or jucundum,
hardly come into any account here. South.
Nor holds this earth a more deſerving knight
For virtue, valour, and for noble blood,
Truth, honour, all that is compriz'd in good. Dryden.
5. Good placed after had, with as, ſeems a ſubſtantive; but the
expreſſion is, I think, vitious; and good is rather an adječtive
elliptically uſed, or it may be conſidered as adverbial. See
Good adv.
The pilot muſt intend ſome port before he ſteers his courſe,
or he had as good leave his veſſel to the direétion of the winds,
and the government of the waves. South's Sermons.
Without good nature and gratitude, men had as good live in
a wilderneſs as in a ſociety. L'Eſtrange.
GooD. adv.
1. Well; not ill; not amiſs.
2, ..?. Goop. No Worſe.
Pſ, xxxiv. 14.
Was I to have never parted from thy ſide,
A good have grown there ſtill a lifeleſs rib. Miſion.
Says the cuckow to the hawk, Had you not as good have
been eating worms now as pigeons f L'Eſtrange.
GooD. interjection. Well! right! It is ſometimes uſed
ironically. -
Good! my complexion do'ſt thou think, though I am ca-
pariſon'd like a man, I have a doublet and hoſe in my diſpo-
ſition ? . Shakespeare's As you like it.
Goºd condition ED. adj. Without ill qualities or ſymptoms.
Uſed both of things and perſons, but not elegantly.
No ſurgeon, at this time, dilates an abſceſs of any kind by
injections, when the pus is good-conditioned. Sharp's Surgery.
Good-Now. interječiion.
1. In good time; a la bonne heure. A gentle exclamation of in-
treaty. It is now a low word.
Good-now ſit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this ſame watch Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
2. A ſoft exclamation of wonder. -
Good-new, good-now, how your devotions jump with mine !
Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Go'oDLINEss. n.ſ.. [from goody..] Beauty; grace; elegance.
She ſung this ſong with a voice no leſs beautiful to his ears,
than her goodlineſs was full of harmony to his eyes. Sidney.
The ſtatelineſs of houſes, the goodlingſ of trees, when we
behold them, delighteth the eye. Hooker, b. i.
Goodly. adj. [from good.]
1. Beautiful; graceful; fine; ſplendid. Now little in uſe.
A prince of a goody aſpect, and the more goody by a grave
majeſty, wherewith his mind did deck his outward graces. Sidn.
A goodly city is this Antium. Sºakeſp. Coriolanus.
- Patience and ſorrow ſtrove
Which ſhould expreſs her goodlieſt : you have ſeen
Sunſhine and rain at once. Her ſmiles and tears
Were like a wetter May. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Here from gracious England have I offer
Of goodly thouſands. - Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
- But he's ſomething ſtain’d -
With grief, that's beauty's canker, thou might'ſt call him
A goodly perſon. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Rebekah took goodly raiment of her clieſt ſon Eſau, and
put them upon Jacob. Gen. xxvii. 15.
There was not among the children of Iſrael a goodier per-
ſon than he. . I Sa. ix. 2.
He had not, according to his promiſe to them in time of
his diſtreſs, made them any recompence for their goodly houſes
and olive gardens, deſtroyed in the country by Roſcetes in the
former wars. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The goodlieſ; man of men ſince born
His ſons, the faireſt of her daughters Eve. Milton.
Of the fourth Edward was his noble ſong;
Fierce, goodly, valiant, beautiful and young, Waller:
Not long ſince walking in the field,
My nurſe and I, we there beheld
A goodly fruit, which, tempting me;
I would have pluck'd. - JWaller.
How full of ornament is all I view
In all its parts and ſeems as beautiful as new :
O goodly order'd work O power divine !
Of thee I am, and what I am is thine ! Dryden's Innocence.
His eldeſt born, a goody youth to view,
Excell'd the reſt in ſhape and outward ſhew;
Fair, tall, his limbs with due proportion join'd,
But of a heavy, dull, degen'rate mind. Dryden's Fable!.
2. Bulky; ſwelling; affectedly turgid.
Round as a globe, and liquor'd every chink,
Goody and great he ſails behind his link. Dryden.
3. Happy; deſireable ; gay.
England was a peaceable kingdom, and but lately inured to
the mild and goody government of the Confeſſor. Stenſºr.
We have many goody days to ſee. Shakespeare Richard III.
Goo'DLY. adv. Excellently. Obſolete.
There Alma, like a virgin queen moſt bright,
Doth flouriſh in all beauty excellent ;
And to her gueſts doth bounteous banquet dight,
Atempered goodly well for health and for delight. F. Queen.
Goodly Hood. n.f. [from goody..] Grace; goodneſs. Ob-
ſolete.
But mote thy goodlyhood forgive it me,
To meet which of the gods I ſhall thee name. Fai, Queen.
Goo'DMAN. m. ſ. [good and man.]
1. A ſlight appellation of civility: generally ironical.
Help ho! murther' murther º
—How now, what's the matter? part. -
—With you, goodman boy, if you pleaſe: come, I'll fleſh
ye. - Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
2. A ruſtick term of compliment ; gaffer. .
Are you my wife, and will not call me huſband?. My men
ſhould call me lord: I am your goodman, Shakeſpeare.
Nay, hear your goodman delver. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
But ſee the ſun-beams bright to labour warn, …
And gild the thatch of gºodnan Hodge's barn. Gay's Paff.
4. Qid
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G O R
G O R
!
Old goodnan Dobſon of the green, -
Remembers he the trees has ſeen. Swift.
Goodness. n.ſ. [from good.] Deſirable qualitics either moral
or phyſicial; kindneſs; favour. -
If for anything he loved greatneſs, it was becauſe therein
he might exerciſe his goodneſs. Sidney, b. ii.
There is in all things an appetite or deſire, whereby they
incline to ſomething which they may be ; all which perfections
are contained under the general name of goodneſs. Hooker.
All goodneſs
Is poiſon to thy ſtomach.
—Yes, that goodneſs
Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one,
Into your own hands, cardinal, by extortion:
The goodneſs of your intercepted packets
You writ to the pope againſt the king; your goodneſs,
Since you provoke me, ſhall be moſt notorious. Sh, H.VIII.
There's no goodneſs in thy face. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleºpatra.
The goodneſs of everything is meaſured by its end and uſe,
and that's the beſt thing which ſerves the beſt end and pur-
ſe. Tillotſon, Sermon 1.
All ſeverally made him very particular relations of the
ſtrength of the Scots army, the excellent diſcipline that was
obſerved in it, and the goodneſs of the men. Clarendon, b. ii.
No body can ſay that tobacco of the ſame goodneſs is riſen
in reſpect of itſelf: one pound of the ſame goodneſs will never
exchange for a pound and a quarter of the ſame goodneſs. Locke.
Goods. n.ſ.. [from good.]
1. Moveables in a houſe.
That a writ be ſu'd againſt you,
To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
Caſtles, and whatſoever. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
2. Wares; freight; merchandiſe.
Her majeſty, when the goºds of our Engliſh merchants were
attached by the duke of Alva, arreſted likewiſe the goods of the
Low Dutch here in England. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Sallee, that ſcorn’d all pow'r and laws of men,
Good; with their owners hurrying to their den. Waller.
Goody. n.ſ. [corrupted from good wife.] A low term of civi-
lity uſed to mean perſons.
Soft, goody ſheep, then ſaid the fox, not ſo;
Unto the king ſo raſh ye may not go. Hubberd’s Tale.
Swarm'd on a rotten ſtick the bees I ſpy'd,
Which erſt I ſaw when goody Dobſon dy’d. Gay's Paſtorals.
Plain goody would no longer down;
'Twas madam in her grogram gown. Swift.
GOOSE. m. ſ. plural geeſe. [zor, Saxon; goes, Dutch; gave,
Erſe, ſing gewey, plural.]
1. A large waterfowl proverbially noted, I know not why, for
fooliſhneſs.
Thou cream-faced lown,
Where got'ſt thou that gooſe look? Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Since I plucktgeeſe, play'd truant, and whipt top, I knew
not what 'twas to be beaten 'till lately. Shakeſpeare.
Smile you my ſpeeches, as I were a fool?
Gooſe, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
I'd drive ye cackling home to Comelot. Shakeſp King Lear.
Birds moſt eaſy to be drawn are waterfowl; as the gooſe
and ſwan. Peacham on Drawing.
Nor watchful dogs, nor the more wakeful geeſe,
Diſturb with nightly noiſe the ſacred peace. Dryd. Fables.
2. A taylor's ſmoothing iron.
Come in, taylor: here you may roaſt your gooſe. Shakeſp.
Go'ose BERRY. m. ſ. [gooſe and berry, becauſe eaten with young
geeſe as ſauce.]
The leaves are laciniated or jagged: the whole plant is ſet
with prickles: the fruit grows diſperſedly upon the tree, having
for the moſt part but one fruit upon a footſtalk, which is of an
oval or globular figure, containing many ſmall ſeeds, ſur-
rounded by a pulpy ſubſtance. The ſpecies are, 1. The com-
mon gooſeberry. 2. The large manured gooſeberry. 3. The
red hairy gooſeberry. 4. The large white Dutch gooſeberry.
5. The large amber gooſeberry. 6. The large green gooſe-
berry. 7. The large red gooſeberry. 8. The yellow-leaved
gooſeberry. 9. The ſtriped-leaved gooſeberry. Miller.
Auguſt has upon his arm a baſket of all manner of ripe
fruits; as pears, plums, apples, gooſeberries. Peacham.
Upon a gooſeberry buſh a ſnail I found;
For always ſnails near ſweeteſt fruit abound, Gay's Poff.
Go'ose Foot. m. ſ. ſchenopodium, J Wild orach.
The ſeeds are ſingle and globoſe in ſome ſpecies; but in
others they are compreſſed: the cup of the flower is quinquefid:
the leaves grow alternately upon the ſtalks between the
feeds. 44iller.
Go'os E G R Ass. m. ſ. Clivers; an herb. See CLIVERs.
Gooſegraſs, or wild tanſy, is a weed that ſtrong clays are
very ſubject to. A/or timer’s Hushandry.
GORBELLY. m. ſ. [from zon, dung, and belly, according to
Skinner and junius. It may perhaps come from gor, Welſh,
beyond, too much; or, as ſeems to me more likely, may be
contračićd from gormand, or gormand's tely, the belly of a
glutton.] A big paunch; a ſwelling belly. A term of re-
proach for a fat man.
Go'RBELLIED. adj. [from gorley.] Fat; bigbellied; having
ſwelling paunches.
Hang ye, garbellied knaves, are you undone? No, ye fat
chuffs, I would your ſtore were here. Shakespeare. Henry IV. p. i.
GoRD. m. ſ. An inſtrument of gaming, as appears from Bau-
mont and Fletcher. - //arburton.
Thy dry bones can reach at nothing now, but ford, and
ninepins. Beaumont and Fletcher.
Let vultures gripe thy guts; for gord, and Fulham holds.
Shakeſpeare's Merry I/ives of Iłindſºr.
GORE., n.ſ. [3One, Saxon; gºr, Welſh, ſanious matter.]
1. Blood.
A griefly wound,
From which forth guſh'd a ſtream of gore blood thick,
That all her goodly garment ſtain’d around,
And into a deep ſanguine dy'd the graſſy ground. F. Queen.
Another's crimes the youth unhappy bore,
Glutting his father's eyes with guiltleſs gore. Dryden's Zn.
2. Blood clotted or congealed.
The bloody fačt
Will be aveng'd ; though here thou ſee him die,
Rolling in duſt and gore. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xi.
His horrid beard and knotted treſſes ſtood
Stiff with his gore, and all his wounds ran blood. Denham.
To GoR.E. v. a. [zebenlan, Saxon.]
1. To ſtab; to pierce.
Oh, let no noble eye profane a tear
For me, if I be gor'd with Mowbray's ſpear. Shakespeare R. II.
No weaker lion's by a ſtronger ſlain;
Nor from his larger tuſks the foreſt boar
Commiſſion takes his brother ſwine to gore. Tate's juven.
For arms his men long pikes and jav'lins bore,
And poles with pointed ſteel their foes in battle gore. Dryd.
2. To pierce with a horn.
Some toſs'd, ſome gor'd, ſome trampling down he kill’d.
Dryden's Preface to the Conqueſt of Granada.
He idly butting, feigns
His rival gor'd in every knotty trunk. Thomſon's Spring.
GORGE. n.ſ. [gorge, French.]
1. The throat; the ſwallow.
There were birds alſo made ſo finely, that they did not only
Jeceive the fight with their figures, but the hearing with their
ſongs, which the watry inſtruments did make their gorge
deliver. Sidney.
...And now how abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge
riſes at it. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Her delicate tenderneſs will find itſelf abuſed, begin to
heave the gorge, diſreliſh and abhor the Moor. Shakespeare Othello.
2. That which is gorged or ſwallowed.
And all the way, moſt like a brutiſh beaſt,
He ſpewed up his gorge, that all did him deteſt. Fa. K’ueen.
To GoRGE. v. u. [gorger, French.] s
1. To fill up to the throat; to glut; to ſatiate.
Thou deteſtable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorg'd with the deareſt morſel of the earth. Shakespeare Ro andjul.
Being with his preſence glutted, gorg'd, and full. Shakespeare
He that makes his generation meſſes,
To gorge his appetite. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Gorge with my blood thy barbarous appetite. Dryden.
I muſt therefore deſire, that they will not gorge him either
with nonſenſe or obſcenity. Addiſon's Guardian.
Nor would his ſlaughter'd army now have lain
On Africk's ſands, disfigur'd with their wounds,
To gorge the wolves and vultures of Numidia. Addison Cato.
The giant, gorg’d with fleſh, and wine, and blocd,
Lay ſtretcht at length, and ſnoring in his den. Addison.
2. To ſwallow: as, the fiſh has gorged the hook.
GO'RGEOUS. adj. [gorgias, old French. Skinner.] Fine;
ſplendid ; glittering in various colours; ſhowy ; magnificent.
O, that deceit ſhould dwell
In ſuch a gorgeºus palace! Shakespeare Rºmeo andjuliet.
As full of ſpirit as the month of May,
And gorgeous as the ſun at Midſummer. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
He bad them look upon themſelves and upon their enemies,
themſelves dreadful, their enemies gorgeous and brave. Hayw.
The gorgeous Eaſt, with richeſt hand,
Pours on her kings barbaric, pearl and gold. Milton.
With gorgeous wings, the marks of ſov’reign ſway,
The two contending princes make their way. Dryd. Wirgi'.
Go'RGEously. adv. [from gorgeous. J Splendidly; magnifi-
cently; finely.
The duke, one ſolemn day, gorgeouſy clad in a ſuit all over
ſpread with diamonds, loſt one of them of good value. Jºotton.
Go/RG Fous NESS. m. ſ. [from gorgeous.] Splendour; magni-
ficence; ſhow.
Go'RG ET. m. ſ. [from gorge.] The piece of armour that de-
fends the throat.
He with a palſy fumbling on his gorget,
Shakes in and out the rivet. Shakeſp Troilus and Crºſſda.
- He
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G O S
G O V -
He did oſtentimes ſpend the night in the church alone pray-
ing, his headpiece, gorget, and gauntlets lying by him.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
See how his gorget peers above his gown,
To tell the people in what danger he was. Ben. johnſ Cat.
About his neck a threefold gorget,
As rough as trebled leathern target. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 2.
Go'rcon. n.ſ. [7.08%.] . A monſter with ſnaky hairs, of
which the fight turned beholders to ſtone; anything ugly or
horrid.
Gorgons and hydras, and chimera's dire. Milton.
Why did'ſt thou not encounter man for man,
And try the virtue of that gorgon face
To ſtare me into ſtature. Dryden.
GO'RMAND. m. ſ. [gourmand, French..] A greedy eater ; a
ravenous luxurious feeder.
To Go'R MAND1zE. v. m. [from gormand.] To eat greedily;
to feed ravenouſly.
Go'RMAND1zeR. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]. A voracious eater.
Gorse. n.ſ. [3omr, Saxon.] Furz; a thick prickly ſhrub that
bears yellow flowers in Winter.
Go'RY. adj. [from gore.]
1. Covered with congealed blood.
When two boars with rankling malice met,
Their gory fides the freſh wounds fiercely fret. Spenſer.
Why do'ſt thou ſhake thy gory locks at me?
Thou can'ſt not ſay I did it. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
2. Bloody; murtherous; fatal. Not in uſe.
The obligation of our blood forbids
A gory emulation 'twixt us twain. Shakespeare. Troil, and Crºſſida.
Go's Hawk. m. ſ. [30r, gooſe, and papoc, a hawk.] A hawk
of a large kind.
Such dread his awful viſage on them caſt;
So ſeem poor doves at goſhawks ſight aghaſt. Fairfax, b. iii.
Go'slin G. n.ſ.. [from goºſe.]
1. A young gooſe; a gooſe not yet full grown.
Why do you go nodding and waggling ſo like a fool, as if
you were hipſhot? ſays the gooſe to her goſſing. L'Eſtrange.
Nature hath inſtructed even a brood of gºſlings to ſtick toge-
ther, while the kite is hovering over their heads. Swift.
2. A cat's tail on nut-trees and pines.
GO'SPEL. m. ſ. [xober rpel, or God's or good tidings; iv.27-
7&amp;low; ſoftkel, ſkeal ſuach, happy tidings, Erſe.]
1. God’s word; the holy book of the Chriſtian revelation.
Thus may the goſpel to the riſing ſun
Be ſpread, and flouriſh where it firſt begun. JValler.
How is a good Chriſtian animated and cheered by a ſtedfaſt
belief of the promiſes of the goſpel/ Bentley's Sermons.
2. Divinity; theology. -
To Go'spel. v. n. [from the noun..] To fill with ſentiments
of religion. This word in Shakeſpeare, in whom alone I have
found it, is uſed, though ſo venerable in itſelf, with ſome de-
ree of irony: I ſuppoſe from the goſpellers, who had long
en held in contempt.
Are you ſo goſpell’d
To pray for this good man, and for his iſſue,
Whoſe heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave? Shakeſp.
Go'speller. 'ſ [from goſpel.] A name of the followers of
JWickliſ, who firſt attempted a reformation from popery, given
them by the Papiſts in reproach, from their profeſſing to follow
and preach only the goſpel.
Theſe goſpellers have had their golden days,
Have troden down our holy Roman faith. Rowe's j. Shore.
Go'ss AMER. m. ſ. [goſſipium, low Latin. J. The down of
plants; the long white cobwebs which fly in the air in calm
ſunny weather, eſpecially about the time of Autumn. Hanmer.
A lover may beſtride the goſſamour,
That idles in the wanton Summer air,
And yet not fall, ſo light is vanity. Shakespeare Rom. and juliet.
Had'ſt thou been aught but goſſamere, feathers, air,
So many fathom down precipitating,
Thou'd'ſt ſhiver'd like an egg.
Four nimble gnats the horſes were,
Their harneſſes of goſſamere. Drayton's Nymphid.
The filmy goſſamer now flits no more,
Nor halcyons baſk on the ſhort ſunny ſhore. Dryd. Virgil.
GO'SSIP., n.ſ.. .[from 3ob and ryb, relation, affinity, Saxon.]
1. One who anſwers for the child in baptiſm.
Go to a goſſip's feaſt and gaude with me,
After ſo long grief ſuch nativity:
—With all my heart, I'll goſfip at this feaſt. Shakeſpeare.
At the chriſtening of George duke of Clarence, who was
born in the caſtle of Dublin, he made both the earl of Kil-
dare and the earl of Ormond his goſps. Davies on Ireland.
2. A tippling companion.
And ſometimes lurk I in a goſſip's bowl,
In very likeneſs of a roaſted crab,
And when ſhe drinks againſt her lips I bob. Shakeſpeare:
3. One who runs about tattling like women at a lying-in.
To do the office of a neighbour,
And be a gºſſip at his labour. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 1.
'Tis ſung in ev'ry ſtreet,
The common chat of gºſps when they meet,
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Dryden.
To Go'ssip. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To chat; to prate; to be merry.
Go to a goſſip's feaſt and gaude with me.
—With all my heart, I'll goſſip at this feaſt. Shakespeare.
His mother was a votreſs of my order,
And, in the ſpiced Indian air by night,
Full often hath ſhe goſſipt by my ſide. Shakeſpeare.
The market and exchange muſt be left to their own ways of
talking; and gºſſippings not be robbed of their ancient pri-
vilege. Locke,
2. To be a pot-companion.
Nor met with fortune, other than at feaſts,
Full warm of blood, of mirth, of gºſſipping. Shakespeare K. john.
Go'ssip Red. n.ſ. [goſſipry, from goſp.) -
Gºffpred or compaternity, by the canon law, is a ſpiritual
affinity; and the juror, that was goſſip to either of the par-
ties, might, in former times, have been challenged as not in-
different. IDavies on Ireland.
Go'st ING.. n.ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
GoT. pret. [from the verb get.]
Titus Lartius writes, they fought together; but Aufidius
got off. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
If you have ſtrength Achilles' arms to bear,
Though foul Therfites got thee, thou ſhalt be
Lov’d and eſteem'd. Dryden's juvenal.
Theſe regions and this realm my wars have got;
This mournful empire is the loſer's lot. Dryd. Innocence.
When they began to reaſon about the means how the ſea
gºt thither, and away back again, there they were preſently in
the dark. - JWoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Got. part, paſſ of get. -
Solyman commended them for their valour in their evil
haps, in a plot ſo well by them laid, more than he did the
vićtory of others got by good fortune, not grounded upon any
good reaſon. Knalles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Let him boaſt
His knowledge of good loſt, and evil got. Milt. Par. Loft.
A gentle perſuaſion in reaſoning, when the firſt point of
ſubmiſſion to your will is got, will moſt times do. Locke.
If he behaves himſelf ſo when he depends on us for his daily
bread, can any man ſay what he will do when he is got above
the world 2 Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
Thou wert from AEtna's burning entrails torn,
Got by fierce whirlwinds, and in thunder born. Pope:
Go"tte N. part, paſſ of get. -
Wiſdom cannot be gotten for gold. job. xxviii. 15.
Few of them, when they are gotten into an office, apply
their thoughts to the execution of it. Temple.
Goud. m.ſ. Woad : a plant. Dić7.
Gove. n.f. A mow. Tuffer.
To Gove. v. n. To mow; to put in a gove, goff, or mow.'
An old word.
Load ſafe, carry home, follow time being fair,
Gove juſt in the barn, it is out of deſpair. Iuſ. Husbandry,
To GOVERN. v. a. [gouverner, French; guberno, Latin.]
1. To rule as a chief magiſtrate.
This inconvenience is more hard to be redreſſed in the go-
vernor than the governed; as a malady in a vital part is more
incurable than in an external. Spenſer on Ireland.
Slaves to our paſſions we become, and then
It grows impoſſible to govern men. JValler.
2. To regulate; to influence; to direct.
The welfare of that is the chief point, which he is to carry
always in his eye, and by which he is to govern all his coun-
ſels, deſigns, and ačtions. Alterbury's Sermons.
3. To manage; to reſtrain.
Go after her, ſhe's deſperate; govern her. Shakespeare K. Lear.
4. [In grammar.] To have force with regard to ſyntax: as, amo
governs the accuſative caſe.
5. To pilot; to regulate the motions of a ſhip.
To Gover N. v. n. To keep ſuperiority; to behave with
haughtineſs.
By that rule,
Your wicked atoms may be working now
To give bad counſel, that you ſtill may govern. Dryden.
Gover NABLE. adj. [from govern.] Submiſſive to authority;
ſubjećt to rule; obedient; manageable.
The flexibleneſs of the former part of a man's age, not yet
grown up to be headſtrong, makes it more governable and
ſafe. Locke.
Governance. n. ſ. [ from govern. J
1. Government; rule; management.
Jonathan took the governance upon him at that time, and
roſe up inſtead of his brother Judas. I 44ac, ix. 31.
2. Control, as that of a guardian.
Me he knew not, neither his own ill,
*Till through wiſe handling, and fair governance,
I him recured to a better will. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
What! ſhall king Henry be a pupil ſtill,
Under the ſurly Glo'ſter's governance? Shakespeare Hen. VI.
3. Behaviour; manners. Obſolete.
io N. Go'y ERNAN rR.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G O W
Goºf RNANT Z. m.ſ. I governante, French.] A lady who has
the care of young girls of quality. The more uſual and pro-
per word is gºverneſs.
Gö've RNrºs. n.ſ. [governereſ, old French, from gºvern.]
1. A female inveſted with authority.
The moon, the governeſs of floods,
Palc in her anger, waſhes all the air,
‘I hat rheumatick diſeaſes do abound. Shakeſpeare.
2. A tutoreſ ; a woman that has the care of young ladies.
He preſented himſelf unto her, falling dºwn upon both his
1:accs, and holding up his hands, as the old governeſs of Da-
nae is painted, when ſhe ſuddenly ſaw the golden ſhower. Sidn.
His three younger children were taken from the governeſs
in whoſe hands he put them. Clarendon, b. viii.
3. A tutoreſs; an inſtruštreſs; a direétreſs.
Great afflićtion that ſevere governeſs of the life of man
brings upon thoſe ſouls ſhe ſeizes on. More againſt Atheiſm.
Gover NMENT. n.ſ. [gouvernment, French.]
1. Form of a community with reſpect to the diſpoſition of the
ſupreme authority.
There ſeem to be but two general kinds of government in
the world: the one exerciſed according to the arbitrary com-
mands and will of ſome ſingle perſon ; and the other accord-
ing to certain orders or laws introduced by agreement or
cuſtom, and not to be changed without the conſent of
many. Temple.
2. An eſtabliſhment of legal authority.
There they ſhall found
Their government, and their great ſenate chuſo
Through the twelve tribes, to rule by laws ordain'd. Milton.
While he ſurvives, in concord and content
The commons live, by no diviſions rent;
But the great monarch's death diſlolves the government. Dryd.
Every one knows, who has conſidered the nature of go-
vernment, that there muſt be in each particular form of it an
abſolute unlimited power. Addiſon.
Where any one perſon or body of men ſeize into their
hands the power in the laſt reſort, there is properly no longer
a government, but what Ariſtotle and his followers call the
abuſe or corruption of one. Swift.
3. Adminiſtration of publick affairs.
Safety and equal government are things
Which ſubječts make as happy as their kings. JWaller.
4. Regularity of behaviour.
You needs muſt learn, lord, to amend this fault;
Though ſometimes it ſhews greatneſs, courage, blood,
Yet oftentimes it doth preſent harſh rage,
Lefečt of manners, want of government,
Pride, haughtineſs, opinion and diſdain. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
'Tis government that makes them ſeem divine;
The want thereof makes thee abominable. Shakeſp H. VI.
5. Manageableneſs; compliance; obſequiouſneſs.
Thy eyes windows fall,
Like death, when he ſhuts up the day of life;
Teach part depriv'd of ſupple government,
Shall ſtiff and ſtark, and cold appear, like death. Shakeſp.
6. Management of the limbs or body. Obſolete.
Their god
Shot many a dart at me with fierce intent;
But I them warded all with wary government. Fairy Queen.
7. [In grammar.] Influence with regard to conſtruction.
Gover Nour. m. ſ. [gouverneur, French.]
1. One who has the ſupreme direétion.
It muſt be confeſled, that of Chriſt, working as a creator
and a governour of the world by providence, all are par-
takers. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 56.
They beget in us a great idea and veneration of the mighty
author and governour of ſuch ſtupendious bodies, and excite
and elevate our minds to his adoration and praiſe. Bentley.
2. One who is inveſted with ſupreme authority in a ſtate.
For the kingdom is the Lord's, and he is the governour
among the nations. Pſ. xxii. 28.
The magiſtrate cannot urge obedience upon ſuch potent
grounds as the miniſter, if ſo diſpoſed, can urge diſobedience:
as, for inſtance, if my governour ſhould command me to do a
thing, or I muſt die, or forfeit my eſtate; and the miniſter
ſteps in and tells me, that I offend God, and ruin my ſoul, if
I obey that command, 'tis eaſy to ſee a greater force in this
perſuaſion. - South's Sermons.
3. One who rules any place with delegated and temporary
authority.
To you, lord governour,
Remains the cenſure of this helliſh villain. Shakespeare Othells.
4. A tutor; one who has care of a young man.
To Eltam will I, where the young king is,
Being ordain’d his ſpecial governour;
And for his ſafety there I'll beſt deviſe. Shakespeare Henry VI.
The great work of a governour is to faſhion the carriage,
and form the mind; to ſettle in his pupil good habits, and the
principles of virtue and wifdom. Locke.
5. Pilot; regulator; manager.
Behbd alſo the ſhips, which though they be ſo great, and
are driven of fierce winds, yet they are turned about with a
very ſmall helm, whitherſoever the governour liſteth. ja. iii. 4.
GOUGE, n.ſ.. [French. J. A chiſſel having a round edge, for
the cutting ſuch wood as is to be rounded or hollowed. Åſºn.
Gºjkº E. m. ſ. [from golje, French, a camp trull.] The
French diſeaſe. Hamner,
Gou Rd. m. ſ. [gouhorde, French.]
1. It hath a flower conſiſting of one leaf, of the expanded
bell-ſhape, for the moſt part ſo deeply cut that it ſeems to con-
fift of five diſtinét leaves: this, like the cucumber, has male
and female flowers on the ſame plant. The fruit of ſome
ſpecies are long, of others round, or bottle-ſhaped, and is
commonly divided into fix cells, in which are contained many
flat oblong ſeeds. Miller.
But I will haſte, and from each bough and brake,
Each plant, and juicieſt gourd, will pluck ſuch choice
To entertain our angel-gueſt. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b.v.
Gourd ſeeds are uſed in medicine; and they abound ſo much
in oil, that a ſweet and pleaſant one may be drawn from them
by expreſſion: they are of the number of the four greater cold
ſeeds, and are uſed in emulſions. Bill's Mat. Med.
2. A bottle [from gourt, old French. Skinner.]
The large fruit ſo called is often ſcooped hollow, for the
purpoſe of containing and carrying wine, and other liquors:
from thence any leathern bottle grew to be called by the ſame
name, and ſo the word is uſed by Chaucer. Hanmer.
Gov'RD1Ness. n.ſ. [from gourd.] A ſwelling in a horſe's leg
after a journey. Farrier's Diä.
Gou'RNET. n.ſ. A fiſh. Ainſworth.
GOUT. n.ſ. Igoutte, French.]
1. The arthritis; a periodical diſeaſe attended with great pain.
The gout is a diſeaſe which may affect any membranous part,
but commonly thoſe which are at the greateſt diſtance from the
heart or the brain, where the motion of the fluids is the ſlow-
eſt, the reſiſtance, frićtion, and ſtrićture of the ſolid parts
the greateſt, and the ſenſation of pain, by the dilaceration of
the nervous fibres, extreme. Arbuthnot on Diſt.
One that's ſick o' th' gout, had rather
Groan ſo in perplexity than be cur'd
By th’ ſure phyſician death. Shakeſpeare's Cymbalist,
This very rev'rend lecher, quite worn out
With rheumatiſms, and crippled with his gout,
Forgets what he in youthful times has done,
And ſwinges his own vices in his ſon. Dryden's juvenal.
2. A drop, [goutte, French; gutta, Latin.] Gut for drºp is ſtill
uſed in Scotland by phyſicians.
ſee thee ſtill,
And on the blade o' th' dudgeon gouts of blood,
Which was not ſo before. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
GOUT. n.ſ. [French..] A taſte. An affected cant word.
The method which he has publiſhed will make theſe cata-
logues exceeding uſeful, and ſerve for a direction to any one
that has a goût for the like ſtudies. hºodward on Fºſſil.
Goutwort. n.ſ. Igout and wort.] An herb. Ainſworth,
Go’ut Y. adj. [from gout.]
1. Afflićted or diſeaſed with the gout.
There dies not above one of a thouſand of the gout, al-
though I believe that more die gouty. Graunt's Bill of Mortal.
Knots upon his gouty joints appear,
And chalk is in his crippled fingers found. Dryd. Perſ: Sat.
Moſt commonly a gouty conſtitution is attended with great
acuteneſs of parts, the nervous fibres, both in the brain and
the other extremities, being delicate. Arbuthnot on Dist.
2. Relating to the gout. :
GOWN. m. ſ. [gonna, Italian; gwn, Welſh and Erſe.]
1. A long upper garment.
They make garments either ſhort, as cloaks, or, as gown!,
long to the ground. Abbot's Deſcription of the World.
If ever I ſaid a looſebodied gown, ſew me up in the ſkirts
of it, and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread;
I ſaid a gown. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
In length of train deſcends her ſweeping gown,
And by her graceful walk the queen of love is known. Dry.
2. A woman's upper garment.
I deſpiſe your new gown, till I ſee you dreſſed in it. Pope.
3. The long habit of a man dedicated to ačts of peace, as divi-
nity, medicine, law.
The benefices themſelves are ſo mean in Iriſh counties, that
they will not yield any competent maintenance for any honeſt
miniſter, ſcarcely to buy him a gown. Spenſer on Ireland.
Girt in his Gabin gown the hero ſat. Dryden's Aºn.
4. The dreſs of peace.
He Mars depos'd, and arms to gowns made yield;
Succeſsful councils did him ſoon approve
As fit for cloſe intrigues as open field. Dryden.
Go'w NED. adj. [from gown.] Dreſſed in a gown.
A noble crew about them waited #
Of ſage and ſober peers, all gravely gown'd. Fairy Queen;
In velvet white as ſnow the troop was gown'd,
The ſeams with ſparkling emeralds ſet around. Drydºn.
Gown MAN. n. ſ. [gown and man.] A man devoted to the
aćts of peace; one whoſe proper habit is a gown. L
et
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R A
i.
&amp;
s
º
º
º,
º
il.
Let him with pedants
Pore out his life amongſt the lazy gownmen. Rowe.
Thus will that whole bench, in an age or two, be com-
poſed of mean, fawning gownmen, dependants upon the
court for a morſel of bread. Swift.
To GRA'BBL.E. v. n. [probably corrupted from grapple.] To
grope; to feel eagerly with the hands.
My blood chills about my heart at the thought of theſe
rogues, with their bloody hands grabbling in my guts, and
pulling out my very entrails. Arbuthnot's Hiſt, of john Bull.
To GRA’BBLR. v. a. To lie proſtrate on the ground. Ainſw.
GRACE. m. ſ. [grace, French; gratia, Latin; graace, Erſe.]
1. Favour; kindneſs.
If the higheſt love in no baſe perſon may aſpire to grace,
then may I hope your beauty will not be without pity. Sidney.
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God! Shakeſp.
Such as were popular,
And well deſerving, were advanc'd by grace. Daniel.
Is this the reward and thanks I am to have for thoſe many
aćts of grace I have lately paſſed ? King Charles,
Yet thoſe remov’d,
Such grace ſhall one juſt man find in his ſight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind. Milt. Par. Lºft.
Noble pity held
His hand a while, and to their choice gave ſpace
Which they would prove, his valour or his grace. Waller.
Or each, or all, may win a lady's grace;
Then either of you knights may well deſerve
A princeſs born. Dryden's Fables.
None of us, who now your grace implore,
But held the rank of ſovereign queen before. Dryden.
With profer'd ſervice I repaid the fair,
That of her grace ſhe gave her maid to know
The ſecret meaning of this moral ſhow. Dryden.
2. Favourable influence of God on the human mind.
Prevenient grace deſcending had remov’d
The ſtony from their hearts, and made new fleſh
Regenerate grow inſtead. Milton.
The grace of God, that paſſeth underſtanding, keep your
hearts and minds. Common Prayer,
3. Virtue; effect of God's influence.
How Van wants grace, who never wanted wit. Pope.
4. Pardon.
- Bow and ſue for grace
With ſuppliant knee. Milton.
15. Favour conferred.
I ſhould therefore eſteem it great favour and grace,
Would you be ſo kind as to go in my place. Prior.
6. Privilege.
But to return and view the chearful ſkies,
To few great Jupiter imparts this grace. Dryden.
7. A goddeſs, by the heathens ſuppoſed to beſtow beauty,
This forehead, where your verſe has ſaid
The loves delighted and the graces play’d. Prior,
8. Behaviour, conſidered as decent or unbecoming.
Have I reaſon or good grace in what I do. Temple,
They would have ill grace in denying it. Bolingbroke.
9. Adventitious or artificial beauty; pleaſing appearance.
Her purple habit ſits with ſuch a grace
On her ſmooth ſhoulders, and ſo ſuits her face. Dryd. Æn.
To write and ſpeak correctly gives a grace, and gains a
favourable attention to what one has to ſay. Locke.
lo. Natural excellence.
It doth grieve me, that things of principal excellency
ſhould be thus bitten at by men whom God hath endued with
graces, both of wit and learning, for better purpoſes. Hooker.
To ſome kind of men,
Their graces ſerve them but as enemies. Shakespeare As you like it.
In his own grace he doth exalt himſelf
More than in your advancement. Shakespeare King Lear.
The charming Lauſus, full of youthful fire,
To Turnus only ſecond in the grace
Of manly mien, and features of the face. Dryden's Aen.
11. Embelliſhment; recommendation; beauty.
Set all things in their own peculiar place,
And know that order is the greateſt grace. Dryden.
The flow'r which laſts for little ſpace,
A ſhort liv'd good, and an uncertain grace. Dryden.
12. Single beauty.
I paſs their form and every charming grace. Dryden.
13. Ornament; flower; higheſt perfection.
By their hands this grace of kings muſt die,
lf hell and treaſon hold their promiſes. Shakespeare Henry V.
14, Virtue; goodneſs. -
Where juſtice grows, there grows the greater grace,
The which doth quench the brand of helliſh ſmart. Fa. Qu.
The king-becoming graces,
As juſtice, verity, temp'rance, ſtableneſs,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
I have no reliſh of them, Shakespearetarº's Macbeth,
The graces of his religion prepare him for the moſt uſeful
diſcharge of every relation of life. Fogers.
15. Virtue phyſical.
O, mickle is the pow'rful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, ſtones, and their true qualities. Shakeſpeare.
16. The title of a duke; formerly of the king, meaning the
ſame as your goodneſs, or your clemency.
Here come I from our princely general,
To know your griefs; to tell you from his grace,
That he will give you audience. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
High and mighty king, your grace, and thoſe your nobles
here preſent, may be pleaſed to bow your ears. Bacon's H. VII,
17. A ſhort prayer ſaid before and after meat.
Your ſoldiers uſe him as the grace'fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end. Shakespeare Coriolan.
While grace is ſaying after meat, do you and your brethren
take the chairs from behind the company. Swift.
Then chearful healths, your miſtreſs ſhall have place;
And what's more rare, a poet ſhall ſay grace. Pope's Horace.
Grace-cup. n.ſ. [grace and cup.] The cup or health drank
after grace. -
* - The grace-cup ſerv'd, the cloth away,
Jove thought it time to ſhew his play. Prior,
To GR Ace. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To adorn; to dignify; to embelliſh; to recommend; to de-
COrate.
This they ſtudy, this they practiſe, this they grace with a
wanton ſuperfluity of wit. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 2.
I do not think a braver gentleman,
More daring, or more bold is now alive,
To grace this latter age with noble deeds. Shakespeare Hen. IV:
Little of this great world can I ſpeak,
And therefore little ſhall I grace my cauſe,
In ſpeaking for myſelf. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
There is due from the judge to the advocate ſome commen-
dation and gracing, where cauſes are well handled. Bacon.
Rich crowns were on their royal ſcutcheons plac'd,
With ſaphires, diamonds, and with rubies grac'd. Dryden,
By both his parents of deſcent divine;
Great Jove and Phoebus grac'd his noble line. Pope's Statius.
Though triumphs were to generals only due,
Crowns were reſerv'd to grace the ſoldiers too. Pope.
2. To dignify or raiſe by an act of favour.
- He writes
How happily he lives, how well belov’d,
And daily graced by the emperor. Shakespeare Two Gent. of Verona.
- Diſpoſe all honours of the ſword and gun, -
Grace with a nod, and ruin with a frown. Dryden's juven.
3. To favour. y
When the gueſts withdrew,
Their courteous hoſt ſaluting all the crew,
Regardleſs paſs'd her o'er, nor grac'd with kind adieu. Dryd.
GRA'ced, adj. [from grace.]
1. Beautiful; graceful.
He ſaw this gentleman, one of the propereſt and beſt graced
men that ever I ſaw, being of a middle age and a mean ſta-
ture. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Virtuous; regular; chaſte.
Epicuriſm and luſt
Make it more like a tavern or a brothel,
Than a grac'd palace. Shakeſp. King Lear:
Gra'ceful. adj. [from grace.] Beautiful with dignity.
Amid' the troops, and like the leading god,
Hº o'er the reſt in arms the graceful Turnus rode. Dryden:
atchleſs his pen, vićtorious was his lance;
Bold in the liſts, and graceful in the dance. Pope.
Yet graceful eaſe, and ſweetneſs void of pride,
Might hide her faults, if belles had faults to hide. Pope.
GRA’cefully. adv. [from graceful..] Elegantly; with pleaſing
dignitv.
g Firough nature and through art ſhe rang'd,
And gracefully her ſubjećt chang'd. Swift.
Walking is the mode or manner of man, or of a beaſt;
but walking gracefully implies a manner or mode ſuper-added
to that ačtion. Watts's Logick.
GRA'cefulness. n.ſ.. [from graceful..] Elegance of manner;
dignity with beauty. -
His neck, his hands, his ſhoulders, and his breaſt,
Did next in gracefulneſ, and beauty ſtand,
To breathing figures. Dryden's Ovid.
He executed with ſo much gracefulneſ; and beauty, that he
alone got money and reputation. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
There is a ſecret gracefulneſs of youth which accompanies
his writings, though the ſtaidneſs and ſobriety of age be want-
ing. Dryden's Ovid, Preface.
If hearers are amaz'd from whence
Proceeds that fund of wit and ſenſe,
Which, though her modeſty would ſhroud,
Breaks like the ſun behind a cloud;
While gracefulneſ; its art conceals,
And yet through ev'ry motion gºals. Swift,
GRA'cºlkss,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">:
ſ
GRA'cz Less. adj. [from grace.] Without grace; wicked;
hopeleſly corrupt; abandoned.
This graceleſs man, for furtherance of his guile,
Did court the handmaid of my lady dear. Fairy Queen.
Whoſe hap ſhall be to have her,
Will not ſo gracelſ, be, to be ingrate. Shakeſpeare.
In all manner of graceleſs and hopeleſs chara&amp;ers, ſome are
loſt for want of advice, and others for want of heed. L’Eſtr.
Furniſh'd for offence, he croſs'd the way
Betwixt the graceleſ, villain and his prey. Dryden.
Graces. m. ſ. Good graces for favour is ſeldom uſed in the
ſingular.
Demand deliv'ry of her heart,
Her goods and chattels, and good graces,
And perſon up to his embraces. Hudibras, p. iii.
GRA’cil E. adj. [gracilis, Latin.] Slender; ſmall. Dić7.
GRA'cile NT. n.ſ. [gracilentus, Latin.] Lean. Dić7.
GRaci'LITY.. n.ſ. [gracilitas, Latin. J Slenderneſs; ſmal-
neſs. Dić7.
GRACIOUS. adj. [gracieux, French.]
1. Merciful; benevolent. -
Common ſenſe and reaſon could not but tell them, that the
good and gracious God could not be pleaſed, nor conſequently
worſhipped, with anything barbarous or cruel. South's Serm.
To be good and gracious, and a lover of knowledge, are
two of the moſt amiable things. Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
2. Favourable ; kind.
And the Lord was gracious unto them, and had compaſſion
on them. 2 King: xiii. 23.
From now reveal
A gracious beam of light; from now inſpire
My tongue to ſing, my hand to touch the lyre. Prior.
3. Acceptable; favoured.
Dočtrine is much more profitable and gracious by example
than by rule. - Spenſer.
He made us gracious before the kings of Perſia, ſo that they
gave us food. 1 Eſdr. viii. 80.
Goring, who was now general of the horſe, was no more
gracious to prince Rupert than Wilmot had been. Clarendon.
4. Virtuous; good.
Kings are no leſs unhappy, their iſſue not being gracious,
than they are in loſing them when they have approved their
virtues. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
5. Excellent.
The grievous abuſe which hath been of counſels, ſhould
rather cauſe men to ſtudy how ſo gracious a thing may again
be reduced to that firſt perfection. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 10.
6. Graceful; becoming.
Our womens names are more gracious than their Rutilia,
that is, red head. Camden.
GRA'cious LY. adv. [from graciour.]
1. Kindly; with kind condeſcenſion.
His teſtimony he graciouſly confirmed, that it was the beſt
of all my tragedies. Dryden.
+He heard my vows, and graciouſly decreed
My grounds to be reſtor'd, my former flocks to feed. Dryd.
If her majeſty would but graciouſly be pleaſed to think a
hardſhip of this nature worthy her royal conſideration. Swift.
2. In a pleaſing manner.
GRA'cious Ness. n.ſ.. [from gracious.]
1. Kind condeſcenſion.
The graciouſneſs and temper of this anſwer made no im-
preſſion on them. Clarendon.
2. Pleaſing manner.
GRADA'tion. n.ſ. I gradation, French; gradus, Latin.]
1. Regular progreſs from one degree to another.
The deſire of more and more riſes by a natural gradation to
‘moſt, and after that to all. L’Eſtrange.
2. Regular advance ſtep by ſtep.
From thence,
By cold gradation, and well balanc'd form,
We ſhall proceed with Angelo. Shakeſp. Meaſ fºr Meaſ.
The pſalmiſt very elegantly expreſſeth to us the ſeveral gra-
dations by which men at laſt come to this horrid degree of
impiety. Tillotſon, Sermon 2.
3. Order; arrangement.
'Tis the curſe of ſervice;
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
Not, as of old, gradation, where each ſecond
Stood heir to th’ firſt. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
4. Regular proceſs of argument.
Certain it is, by a direét gradation of conſequences from
this principle of merit, that the obligation to gratitude flows
from, and is enjoined by, the firſt dićtates of nature. South:
GRADA"ror Y. n.ſ. [gradus, Latin.] Steps from the cloiſters
into the church. Ainſworth.
GRA'DIENT. adj. [gradiens, Latin.] Walking; moving by
ſteps.
Amongſt thoſe gradient automata, that iron ſpider is eſpe-
cially remarkable, which, being but of an ordinary bigneſs, did
creep up and down as if it had been alive. //ilkins.
GRA'DUAL, adj. [graduel, French..] Proceeding by degrees;
advancing ſtep by ſtep; from one ſtage to another,
- Nobler birth -
Of creatures animate with gradual life,
Of growth, ſenſe, reaſon, all ſumm'd up in man. A ſºn.
Men ſtill ſuppoſe a gradual natural progreſs of things; as
that, from great, things and perſons ſhould grow greater, 'till
at length, by many ſteps and aſcents, they come to be at
greateſt. South.
Gra'DUAL. m. ſ [gradus, Latin.] An order of ſteps.
- Before the gradual proſtrate they ador'd,
The pavement kiſs'd, and thus the ſaint implor’d. Dryden
GRADUA'LITY. n: ſ [from gradual.] Regular progreſſion. e
This ſome aſcribe unto the mixture of the elements, others
to the graduality of opacity and light. Brown's Wule. Errº,
GRa'Dually. adv. [from gradual.] By degrees; in regular
progreſſion. -&gt;
When the moon paſſes over the fixed ſtars, and eclipſes
them, your light vaniſhes; not gradually, like that of the
planets, but all at once. Newton's Opt.
The Author of our being weans us gradually from ºur
fondneſs of life the nearer we approach towards the end of
it. Swift.
Human creatures are able to bear air of much greater den-
ſity in diving, and of much leſs upon the tops of mountains,
provided the changes be made gradually. Zrinº.
To GRADUATE. v. a. [graduer, French; gradus, Latin.]
1. To dignify with a degree in the univerſity.
John Tregonwel, graduated a doćtor and dubbed a knight,
did his prince good ſervice. Carew's Survey of Crº.
Concerning columns and their adjuncts, archite&amp;ts make
ſuch a noiſe as if the terms of architraves, frizes, and cornices
were enough to graduate a maſter of this art. Wotton's Architra,
2. To mark with degrees.
The places were marked where the ſpirits ſtood at the ſº-
vereſt cold and greateſt heat, and according to theſe obſerva-
tions he graduates his thermometers. Derham's Phyſicº-Theolºgy
3. To raiſe to a higher place in the ſcale of metals: a chimi.
term.
The tinéture was capable to tranſmute or graduate
ſilver as equalled in †. that gold. gr *:
4. To heighten; to improve.
Not only vitriol is a cauſe of blackneſs, but the ſalts of na-
tural bodies; and dyers advance and graduate their colours
with ſalts. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 12.
GRA’DuATE, n.ſ. [graduſ, French, from gradus, Latin.j A
man dignified with an academical degree.
Of graduates I diſlike the learned rout,
And chuſe a female doćtor for the gout. Branſion:
GRADUA'tion. m. ſ. [graduation, French, from grada.j
1. Regular progreſſion by ſucceſſion of degrees.
The graduation of the parts of the univerſe is likewiſe ne-
ceſſary to the perfection of the whole. Grew's Coſmol. Sacra.
Of greater repugnancy unto reaſon is that which he deli-
vers concerning its graduation, that heated in fire, and often
extinguiſhed in oyſ of mars or iron, the loadſtone acquires
an ability to extract a nail faſtened in a wall. Brown's Wu. Err.
2. The act of conferring academical degrees. -
GRAFF. n.ſ. [See GRAve.] A ditch; a moat.
Though the fortifications were not regular, yet the walls
were good, and the graff broad and deep. Carendon, b. viii.
GRAFF. }": [grºffe, French.] A ſmall branch inſerted into
Graft. the ſtock of another tree, and nouriſhed by its ſap,
but bearing its own fruit; a young cyon.
God gave unto man all kind of ſeeds and graff; of life; as
the vegetative life of plants, the ſenſual of beaſt, the rational
of man, and the intelle&amp;tual of angels. Raleigh.
It is likely, that as in fruit-trees the graft maketh a greater
fruit, ſo in trees that bear no fruit it will make the greater
leaves. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 475.
'Tis uſual now an inmate graff to ſee
With inſolence invade a foreign tree: . Dryd, Virg. Georg.
If you cover the top with clay and horſe-dung, in the ſame
manner as you do a graft, it will help to heel the ſooner. Mort.
Now the cleft rind inſerted graff; receives,
And yields an offspring more than nature gives. Pope.
To GRAFF. w F h
To GRAFT. W. "“” [greffer, French.]
1. To inſert a cyon or branch of one tree into the ſtock of another.
His growth is but a wild and fruitleſs plant;
I'll cut his barren branches to the ſtock,
And graft you on to bear. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
With his pruning hook disjoin
Unbearing branches from their head,
And graft more happy in their ſtead. Dryden,
2. To propagate by inſertion or inoculation.
In March is good graffing the ſkilful do know,
So long as the wind in the Eaſt do not blow:
From moon being changed, 'till paſt be the prime,
For graffing and cropping is very good time. Tuffer's Hub.
To have fruit in greater plenty the way is to graft, not
only upon young ſtocks, but upon divers boughs of an old
tree; for they will bear great numbers of fruit: whereas, if
you graft but upon one ſtock, the tree can bear but few, Bacon.
Now
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R A
G R A
Now let me graff my pears, and prune the vine. Dryden,
3. To inſert into a place or body to which it did not originally
belong.
. they alſo, if they bide not ſtill in unbelief, ſhall be
graffed in ; for God is able to graff them in again. Rom. xi. 23.
Theſe are th' Italian names which fate will join
With ours, and graff upon the Trojan line. Dryden's Żn.
4. To fill with an adſcititious branch.
We've ſome old crab-trees here at home, that will not
Be grafted to your reliſh. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus:
The noble iſle doth want her proper limbs;
Her royal ſtock graft with ignoble plants, Shakeſp. R. III,
5. To join one thing ſo as to receive ſupport from another.
This reſolution againſt any peace with Spain is a new inci-
dent grafted upon the original quarrel, by the intrigues of a
faction among us. Swift,
May one kind grave unite each hapleſs name,
And graft my love immortal on thy fame. Pope.
GRA'fter. n.ſ.. [from graff or graft.] One who propagates
fruit by grafting.
I am informed, by the trials of more than one of the moſt
ſkilful and experienced grafters of theſe parts, that a man ſhall
ſeldom fail of having cherries borne by his graft the ſame year
in which the inſition is made. Evelyn,
GRAIL. n.ſ. [ from grile, French. J Small particles of any
kind.
Hereof this gentle knight unweeting was,
And, lying down upon the ſandy grails,
Drank of the ſtream as clear as cryſtal glaſs. Fairy Queen.
GRAIN. n.ſ. [graine, French; granum, Latin ; grano, Italian,
has all the following ſignifications.]
1. A ſingle ſeed of corn.
Look into the ſeeds of time,
And ſay which grain will grow, and which will not. Shakespeare
His reaſons are as two grains of wheat hid in two buſhels
of chaff. Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice.
Let them pronounce the ſteep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, flaying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Many of the ears, being fix inches long, had ſixty grains
in them, and none leſs than forty. Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. Corn.
As it ebbs, the ſeedſman
Upon the ſlime and ooze ſcatters his grain,
And ſhortly comes to harveſt. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra,
Pales no longer ſwell'd the teeming grain,
Nor Phoebus fed his oxen on the plain. Dryden's Paſtorals.
*Tis a rich ſoil, Igrant you; but oftner covered with weeds
than grain. Collier on Fame.
3. The ſeed of any fruit.
4. Any minute particle; any fingle body. .
Thou exiſt'ſt on many thouſand grains
That iſſue out of duſt. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Meaſure,
By intelligence
And proofs as clear as founts in July, when
We ſee each grain of gravel. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
5. The ſmalleſt weight, of which in phyſick twenty make a
ſcruple, and in Troy weight twenty-four make a peny weight;
a grain ſo named becauſe it is ſuppoſed of equal weight with
a grain of corn.
They began at a known body, a barley-corn, the weight
whereof is therefore called a grain; which ariſeth, being mul-
tiplied, to ſcruples, drachms, ounces and pounds. Holder.
The trial being made betwixt lead and lead, weighing
ſeverally ſeven drachms, in the air; the balance in the water
weigheth only four drachms and forty-one grains, and abateth
of the weight in the air two drachms and nineteen grains:
the balance kept the ſame depth in the water as aboveſaid.
Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
His brain Vſ.
Outweigh’d his rage but half a grain.
6. Anything proverbially ſmall. -
For the whole world before thee is as a little grain of the
balance. Wiſd. xi. 22.
The ungrateful perſon lives to himſelf, and ſubſiſts by the
good nature of others, of which he himſelf has not the leaſt
grain. South's Sermons.
7. GRAIN of Allowance. Something indulged or remitted;
ſomething above or under the exact weight.
Hudibras, p. i.
He, whoſe very beſt actions muſt be ſeen with grains of al- *
Iowance, cannot be too mild, moderate, and forgiving Addison
I would always give ſome grains of allowance to the ſacred
ſcience of theology. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
8. The direétion of the fibres of wood, or other fibrous matter.
Knots, by the conflux of meeting ſap,
Infe&amp;t the ſound pine, and divert his grain
Tortive and errant from his courſe of growth. Shakeſp.
9. The body of the wood.
The beech, the ſwimming alder, and the plane,
Hard box, and linden of a ſofter grain. Dryden,
10. The body conſidered with reſpect to the form or dire&amp;ion
of the conſtituent particles.
The tooth of a ſea-horſe, in the midſt of the ſolider parts,
contains a curdled grain which is not to be found in ivory.
- Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii, c. 23.
Stones of a conſtitution ſo compact, and a grain ſo fine,
that they bear a fine poliſh. Woodward,
1 1. Died or ſtained ſubſtance.
How the red roſes fluſh up in her cheeks,
And the pure ſnow with goodly vermil ſtain,
Like crimſon dy'd in grain. Spenſer's Prothalam,
Over his lucid arms
A military veſt of purple flow'd,
Livelier than melibaean, or the grain
Of ſarra, worn by kings and heroes old. Millon's P. Lºft.
Come, penſive nun, devout and pure,
All in a robe of darkeſt grain,
Flowing with majeſtick train. Milion.
The third, his feet
Shadow'd from either heel with feather'd mail,
Sky-tinétur'd grain / Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. v.
12. Temper; diſpoſition; inclination; humour.
Your minds, preoccupied with what
You rather muſt do than what you ſhould do,
Made you againſt the grain to voice him conſul. Shakeſp.
Quoth Hudibras, it is in vain,
I ſee, to argue gainſt the grain. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 2,
Old clients, weary'd out with fruitleſs care,
Diſmiſs their hopes of eating, and deſpair;
Though much againſt the grain, forc'd to retire,
Buy roots for ſupper, and provide a fire. Dryden's juvenal.
13. The heart; the bottom.
The one being tractable and mild, the other ſtiff and im-
patient of a ſuperior, they lived but in cunning concord, as
brothers glued together, but not united in grain. Hayward.
14. The form of the ſurface with regard to roughneſs and
ſmoothneſs.
The ſmaller the particles of thoſe ſubſtances are, the ſmaller
will be the ſcratches by which they continually fret and wear
away the glaſs until it be poliſhed; but be they never ſo ſmall,
they can wear away the glaſs no otherwiſe than by grating and
ſcratching it, and breaking the protuberances; and therefore
poliſh it no otherwiſe than by bringing its roughneſs to a very
fine grain, ſo that the ſcratches and frettings of the ſurface
become too ſmall to be viſible. Newton's Opt.
GRA’INED. adj. [from grain.] Rough; made leſs ſmooth.
Though now this grained face of mine be hid
In ſap conſuming Winter's drizzled ſnow,
Yet hath my night of life ſome memory. Shakeſpeare.
GRAINs. n.ſ.. [without a ſingular.] The huſks of malt ex-
hauſted in brewing.
Give them grains their fill.
Huſks, draff, to drink and ſwill.
GRA'IN.Y. adj. [from grain.]
I. Full of corn.
2. Full of grains or kernels. -
GRame'Rcy. interj. [contračted from grant me mercy.] An
obſolete expreſſion of ſurpriſe.
Gramercy, fir, ſaid he ; but mote Iweet
What ſtrange adventure do ye now purſue? Fairy Queen.
Gramercy, lovely Lucius, what's the news?... Shakeſp
GRAMI'Neous. adj. Igramineus, Latin. J. Graſſy. Grami-
neous plants are ſuch as have a long leaf without a footſtalk.
GRAMini’vorous. adj. [gramen and voro, Latin: l Graſs-
eating; living upon graſs. -
The ancients were verſed chiefly in the diſſection of brutes,
among which the graminivorous kind have a party-coloured
choroides. Sharp's Surgery.
GRAMMAR. n.ſ. [grammaire, French; grammatica, Latin;
yeappealizº.] -
f. #. ſcience of ſpeaking correàly; the art which teaches the
relations of words to each other. -
we make a countryman dumb, whom we will not allow
to ſpeak but by the rules of grammar. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Men, ſpeaking language according to the grammar rules of
that language, do yet ſpeak º of things. Locke.
2. Propriety or juſtneſs of ſpeech; ſpeech according togrammar.
Varium &amp; mutabile ſemper femina, is the ſharpeſt ſatire that
ever was made on woman; for the adjectives are neuter, and
animal muſt be underſtood to make them grammar. Dryden.
3. The book that treats of the various relations of words to one
another.
Grammar Schoºl. n.ſ.. A ſchool in which the learned lan-
guages are grammatically taught.
Thou haſt moſt traitorouſly corrupted the youth of the
realm in erecting a grammar ſchool. Shakeſpeare's Hen. VI.
The ordinary way of learning Latin in a grammar ſchool I
cannot encourage. - Locke.
GRAMMA’RIAN. n.ſ. [grammairien, French, from grammar.]
One who teaches grammar; a philologer. , -
10 O. - ‘Many
Ben. johnſ. New Inn.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R A
*
*
Many diſputes the ambiguous nature of letters hath created
among the grammarians. Holder's Elements ºf Speech.
They who have called him the torture of grammarians,
might alſo have called him the plague of tranſlators. Dryden.
GRAMMA’ric AL. adj. [grammatica, Fr. grammaticus, Latin.]
1. Belonging to grammar.
The beauty of virtue ſtill being ſet before their eyes, and
that taught them with far more duigent care than frammatical
rules. Sidne, b. ii.
I ſhall take the number of conſonants, not from the gram-
matical alphabets of any language, but from the diverſity of
ſounds framed by ſingle articulations with appuiſe. Holder.
2. Taught by grammar.
They ſeldom know more than the grammatical conſtrućtion,
unleſs born with a poetical genius. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
GRAMMA'tically, adv. [from grammatical] According to
the rules or ſcience of grammar.
When a ſentence is diſtinguiſhed into the nouns, the verbs,
pronouns, adverbs, and other particles of ſp. ech which com-
poſe it, then it is ſaid to be analyſed grammatically. 11 atts.
As grammar teacheth us to ſpeak properly, ſo it is the part
of rhetorick to inſtruct how to do it elegantly, by adding
beauty to that language that before was naked and gramma-
tically true. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
GRAMMATICA’STER. m.ſ. [Latin.] A mean verbal pedant;
a low grammarian.
I have not vexed their language with the doubts, the re-
marks, and eternal triflings of the French grammaticaſters.
Rymer's Tragedies ºf the laſt Age.
GRA'Mple. n.ſ. A crab-fiſh. Ainſworth.
GRA'Mpus. n.ſ. A large fiſh of the cetaceous kind.
GRA’NARY. m. ſ. [granarium, Latin. J A ſtorehouſe for
threſhed corn.
Ants, by their labour and induſtry, contrive the matter ſo,
that corn will keep as dry in their neſts as in our granaries.
Addiſon's Guardian, N°. 156.
The naked nations cloath,
And be th' exhauſtleſs granary of a world. Thomſon's Spring.
GRA'NATE. m. ſ. [from granum, Latin.] A kind of marble ſo
called, becauſe it is marked with ſmall variegations like
rains. Otherwiſe GRANITE.
GRAND. adj. [grand, French; grandis, Latin.]
I. Great; illuſtrious; high in power.
God had planted, that is, made to grow the trees of life
and knowledge, plants only proper and becoming the paradiſe
and garden of ſo grand a Lord. Raleigh's Hiſł. of the Wºrld.
2. Great; ſplendid; magnificent.
- A voice has flown
To re-enflame a grand deſign. Yºung.
3. Noble; ſublime; lofty; conceived or expreſſed with great
dignity.
4; It is uſed to ſignify aſcent or deſcent of conſanguinity.
GRA'NDAM. n.J. [grand and dam or dame.]
I. Grandmother; my father's or mother's mother.
I meeting him, will tell him that my lady
Was fairer than his grandam, and as chaſte
As may be in the world. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
A woman's ſtory, at a Winter's fire,
Authoris'd by her grandam. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
We have our forefathers and great grandames all before us,
as they were in Chaucer's days. Dryden's Fables, Prºf.
Thy tygreſs heart belies thy angel face:
Too well thou ſhew'ſt thy pedigree from ſtone;
Thy grandame's was the firſt by Pyrrha thrown. Dryden.
2. An old withered woman.
The women
Cry’d, one and all, the ſuppliant ſhould have right,
And to the grandame hag adjudg'd the knight. Dryden.
GRA'Ndchild. n ſ. [grani and child.] The ſon or daughter
of my ſon or daughter; one in the ſecond degree of deſcent.
Auguſtus Cæſar, out of indignation againſt his daughters
and Agrippa his grandchild, would ſay that they were not his
ſeed, but impoſthumes broken from him. Bacºn's Apophthegms.
Theſe hymns may work on future wits, and ſo
May great grandchildren of thy praiſes grow. Donne.
He hoped his majeſty did believe, that he would never make
the leaſt ſcruple to obey the grandchild of king James. Carend.
Fair daughter, and thou ſon and grandchild both Milton.
He 'ſcaping with his gods and reliques fled,
And tow'rds the ſhore his little grandchild led. Denham.
GRA'NDAUGHTER. m.ſ. [grand and daughter.] The daughter
of a ſon or daughter. -
GRANDEF: n.ſ. [grand, French; grandis, Latin.] A man of
great rank, power, or dignity.
They had ſome ſharper and ſome milder differences, which
might eaſily happen in ſuch an interview of grandees, both
vehement on the parts which they ſwayed. J/otton.
When a prince or grandee manifeſts a liking to ſuch a thing,
men generally ſet about to make themſelves confiderable for
ſuch things. South's Sermons.
Some parts of the Spaniſh monarchy arc rather for orna-
ment than ſtrength: they furniſh out viceroyalties for the
grandees, and poſts of honour for the noble families. Addison.
GRANDE'vit Y. m. ſ. [from grandavus, Latin.] Great age;
length of life. Dić7.
GRAND E'vous, adj. [grandavus, Latin. J Long lived; of
great age. - IDicf.
GRANDEUR. n. / [French. J
1. State; ſplendour of appearance; magnificence.
As a magiſtrate or great officer, he locks himſelf from all
approaches by the multiplied formalities of attendance, by the
diſtance of ceremony and grandeur. S.uth's Sermons.
2. Elevation of ſentiment or language.
GRANDF Ather. m. ſ. [grand and father] . The father of my
father or mother; the next above my father in the ſcale of
aſcent.
One was ſaying that his great grandfather, and grandfather,
and father died at ſea: ſaid another, that heard him, an’ I were
as you, I would never come at ſea. Why, ſaith he, where
did your great grandfather, and grandfather, and father die
He anſwered, where but in their beds He anſwered, an' I
were as you, I would never come in bed. Bacon's Apophth.
Our grandchildren will ſee a few rags hung up in Weſtmin-
ſterhall, which coſt an hundred millions, whereof they are
paying the arrears, and boaſt that their grandfathers were rich
and great. Swift.
GRANDI'Fick. adj. [grandis and facio, Latin. J Making
great. Dićf.
GRANDINous, adj. [grand, Latin.] Full of hail; conſiſting
of hail. Dić7.
GRA'Ndity. m. ſ. [from grandis, Latin.] Greatneſs; gran-
deur; magnificence. An old word.
Our poets excel in grandity and gravity, ſmoothneſs and
property, in quickneſs and briefneſs. Camden's Remains.
GRA'NDMother. n.ſ. [grand and mother.] The father's or
mother's mother.
Thy grandmºther Lois, and thy mother Eunice. 1 Tim. i. 5.
GRA'NDSIRE. m. ſ. [grand and ſire.]
1. Grandfather.
Think'ſt thou, that I will leave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandſire and my father ſat? Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Thy grandſire, and his brother, to whom ſame -
Gave, from two conquer'd parts o' th' world, their name.
Denham.
The wreaths his grandſire knew to reap
By active toil and military ſweat. Prior.
2. Any anceſtor, poetically.
Why ſhould a man, whoſe blood is warm within,
Sit like his grandſire cut in alabaſter: Shakespeare March. ºf Fam.
Above the portal, carv'd in cedar wood,
Plac'd in their ranks, their godlike grandſires ſtood. Dryden.
So mimick ancient wits at beſt,
As apes our grandſires in their doublets dreſt. Pope.
GRA'N Bson. m.ſ. [grand and ſon.] The ſon of a ſon or
daughter.
Almighty Jove augment your wealthy ſtore,
Give much to you, and to his grandſons more. Dryden.
Grandfathers in private families are not much obſerved to
have great influence on their grandſons, and, I believe, they
have much leſs among princes. Swift.
GRANGE. m. ſ. [grange, French.] A farm: generally a farm
with a houſe at a diſtance from neighbours.
One, when he had got the inheritance of an unlucky old
grange, would needs ſell it; and, to draw buyers, proclaimed
the virtues of it: nothing ever thrived on it, ſaith he; the
trees were all blaſted, the ſwine died of the meaſles, the cattle
of the murrain, and the ſheep of the rot; nothing was ever
reared there, not a duckling or a gooſe. Ben. johnſon's Diſcov.
At the moated grange reſides this dejećted Mariana. Shakespeare
The looſe unletter'd hinds,
When for their teeming flocks and granges full
In wanton dance they praiſe the bounteous Pan. Milton.
If the church was of their own foundation, they might
chuſe, the incumbent being once dead, whether they would
put any other therein; unleſs, perhaps, the ſaid church had
people belonging to it; for then they muſt ſtill maintain a
curate: and of this ſort were their granges and priories. Ayliffe.
GRA'N1T e. n.ſ. [granit, Fr. from granum, Lat, becauſe confiſt-
ing as it were of grains, or ſmall diſtinét particles.] . A ſtone
compoſed of ſeparate and very large concretions, rudely com-
paćted together; of great hardneſs, giving fire with ſteel; not
fermenting with acids, and imperfectly calcinable in a great
fire. The hard white granite with black ſpots, commonly
called moor-ſtone, forms a very firm, and though rude, yet
beautifully variegated maſs. It is found in immenſe ſtrata in
Ireland, but not uſed there. In Cornwal and the adjacent
counties it is found on the ſurface of the earth in prodigious
maſſes, and brought in great quantities to London, where it
is uſed for the ſteps of publick buildings. Hard red granite,
variegated with black and white, now called oriental granite,
is valuable for its extreme hardneſs and beauty, and capable
of a moſt elegant poliſh. It is common in Egypt and Arabia,
and
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R A
G R A
:
...t.
º:
º
ºr
"t,
hº
and is alſo found in the Weſt of England little inferiour. The
vulgar opinion of their being caſt out of various fragments of
marble, becauſe they appear compoſed of particles or granules
of different colours, is eaſily confuted by an accurate inſpec-
tion of the ſtructure and formation of thoſe granules, the leaſt
and meaneſt of which no human art could ever compoſe, nor
fire leave in the ſtate in which we ſee them. A third ſort of
ranite has a beautiful variegation of colours, red, white,
black and yellow, and capable of an elegant poliſh: it is lit-
tle inferiour in beauty to the oriental granite, and there are im-
menſe ſtrata of it in Minorca. Detached nodules of it, two
or three foot in circumference, are alſo frequent on the ſhores
of Guernſey, from whence it is brought as ballaſt, and uſed
in paving our ſtreets. Hill on Fºſſils.
Alabaſter, marble of divers colours, both ſimple and mixed,
the opulites, porphyry, and the granite. JWoodward.
There are ſtill great pillars of granite, and other fragments
of this ancient temple. Addiſon on Italy.
GRANI'vorous. adj. [granum and voro, Lat..] Eating grain;
living upon grain.
Granivºrous birds, as a crane, upon the firſt peck of their
bills, can diſtinguiſh the qualities of hard bodies, which the
ſenſe of men diſcerns not without maſtication. Brown.
Panick affords a ſoft demulcent nouriſhment, both for gra-
mivorous birds and mankind. A, buthnºt on Aliments.
GRANNAM. n ſ. [for grandam.] Grandmother. Only uſed
in burleſque works. -
Oft my kind grannam told me, Tim, take warning. Gay.
To GRAN I. v. a. [from garantir, French, junius and Skin-
ner; perhaps, as Minſhew thinks, from grat...ito, or rather
from gratia or gratificor.]
1. To admit that which is not yet proved; to allow ; to yield;
to concede.
They gather out of Scripture general rules to be followed
in making laws; and ſo, in effect, they plainly grant, that we
ourſelves may lawfully make laws for the church. Hooker.
Grant that the fates have firm’d, by their decree,
The Trojan race to reign in Italy. Dryden's AEn. b. vii.
Suppoſe, which yet I grant not, thy deſire
A moment elder than my rival fire,
Can chance of ſeeing § thy title prove 2 Dryden.
If he be one indifferent as to the preſent rebellion, they
may take it for granted his complaint is the rage of a diſap-
pointed man. Addſon's Freeholder.
2. To beſtow ſomething which cannot be claimed of right.
The God of Iſrael grant thee thy petition that thou haſt
aſked of him. 1 Sa. xvii.
Then hath God alſo to the Gentiles granted repentance unto
life. Acis xiii. 18.
Did'ſt thou not kill this king?
I grant ye.
—Do'ſt grant me, hedgehog? Then God grant me too,
Thou may'ſt be damned for that wicked deed. Shakespeare R. III.
He heard, and granted half his prayer;
The reſt the winds diſpers'd. Pope.
GRANT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] -
1. The aët of granting or beſtowing.
2. The thing granted; a gift; a boon.
Courtiers juſtle for a grant,
And when they break their friendſhip plead their want. Dry.
3. [In law.] A gift in writing of ſuch a thing as cannot aptly
be paſſed or conveyed by word only; as rent, reverſions, ſer-
vices, advowſons in groſs, common in groſs, tithes, &amp;c. or
made by ſuch perſons as cannot give but by deed, as the king,
and all bodies politick; which differences be often in ſpeech
negle&amp;ted, and then is taken generally for every gift whatſo-
ever, made of anything by any perſon; and he that granteth
it is named the grantor, and he to whom it is made the
grantee. A thing is ſaid to be in grant which cannot be af.
ſigned without deed. Cowel.
All the whole land is the queen's, unleſs there be ſome
grant of any part thereof, to be ſhewed from her majeſty.
- Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
4. Conceſſion; admiſſion of ſomething in diſpute.
But of this ſo large a grant, we are content not to take
advantage. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 11.
This grant deſtroys all you have urg'd before. Dryden.
Gº”. adj. [from grant. J That which may be
granted.
The office of the biſhop's chancellor was grantable for
life. Ayliff's Parergon.
GRANTE e. n.ſ.. [from grant.] He to whom any grant is
made.
To ſmooth the way for popery in Mary's time, the granteer
were confirmed by the pope in the poſſeſſion of the abby-
lands. Swift.
GRANTOR. m. ſ. [from grant..] He by whom a grant is made.
A duplex querela ſhall not be granted under pain of ſuſpen-
fion of the granter from the execution of his office. A liff.
Gº ANULARY, adj. [from granule.] Small and compačtº re-
ſembling a ſmall grain or ſeed.
Small-coal, with ſulphur and nitre, proportionably mixed,
tempered, and formed into gº anuary bodies, do make up that
powder which is in uſe for guns. Brown's /u/gar Errours.
To GRANULATE. v. n. [granuler, Fr. from granum, Latin.]
To be formed into ſmall grains. -
The juice of grapes, inſpiñated by heat, granulates into
ſugar. - Spratt,
To GRA’NULATE. v a.
1. To break into ſmall maſſes or granules.
2. To raiſe into ſmall aſperities.
I have obſerved, in many birds, the gullet, before its en-
trance into the gizzard, to be much dilated, and thick ſet, or
as it were granulated with a multitude of glandules, each
whereof was provided with its excretory veſſel. Ray.
GRANULATION. n.ſ. [granulation, French, from granulate.]
1. The act of pouring melted metal into cold water, ſo as it
may granulate or congeal into ſmall grains: it is generally
done through a colander, or a birchen broom. Gunpowder
and ſome ſalts are likewiſe ſaid to be granulated, from their
reſemblance to grain or ſeed. &amp;inºy.
2. The aët of ſhooting or breaking in ſmall maſſes.
Tents in wounds, by reſiſting the growth of the little gra-
nulations of the fleſh, in proceſs of time harden them, and in
that manner produce a fiſtula. Sharp's Surgery.
GRA'NULE. m. ſ. [from granum, Latin.] A ſmall compact
particle.
With an excellent microſcope, where the naked eye did ſee
but a green powder, the aſſiſted eye could diſcern particular
granules, ſome blue, and ſome yellow. Boyle on Colours.
GRA'Nulous, adj. [from granule.] Full of little grains.
GRAPE. n.ſ. [grappe, French; Ārappe, Dutch..] The fruit
of the vine, growing in cluſters; the fruit from which wine
is expreſſed.
And thou ſhalt not glean thy vineyard, neither ſhalt thou
gather every grape of thy vineyard; thou ſhalt leave them for
the poor and ſtranger. Lev. xix. Io.
Turn back thine hand, as the grape gatherers into the
baſkets.
tr. W1, O.
Anacreon, for thy ſake j 9
I of the grape no mention make;
Eremy Anacreon by thee fell,
Curſed plant I lov'd thee well. Cowley.
Here are the vines in early flow'r diſcry'd,
Here grapes diſcolour'd on the ſunny fide. Pope's Odyſſey.
GRAPE Hyacinth, or GRAPE Flower. See Musk.
GRA'PEstone. n.ſ. [grape and /lone..] The ſtone or ſeed con-
tained in the grape.
When obedient nature knows his will,
A fly, a grapeſtone, or a hair can kill. Prior.
GRAPHICAL adj. [764b2.]. Well delineated.
Write with a needle, or bodkin, or knife, or the like, when
the fruit or trees are young; for as they grow, ſo the letters
will grow more large and graphical. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
GRA'phic ALLY. adv. [from graphical.] In a pićtureſque man-
ner; with good deſcription or delineation.
The hyena odorata, or civet cat, is delivered and graphically
deſcribed by Caſtellus. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii.
GRA'PN.E.L. n.ſ. [grapin, French.]
1. A ſmall anchor belonging to a little veſſel.
2. A grappling iron with which in fight one ſhip faſtens on
another.
To GRAPPLE. v. n. [grabbelen, Dutch; Krappeln, German.]
1. To contend by ſeizing each other, as wreſtlers. -
They muſt be alſo practiſed in all the locks and gripes of
wreſtling, as need may often be in fight to tugg or grapple, and
to cloſe. - Milton.
Living virtue, all atchievements paſt, -
Meets envy, ſtill to grapple with at laſt. WWaller:
Does he think that he can grapple with divine vengeance,
and endure the everlaſting burnings? South's Sermons.
Antaeus here and ſtern Alcides ſtrive,
And both the grappling ſtatues ſeem to live. Addison.
2. To conteſt in cloſe fight.
I’ll in my ſtandard bear the arms of York,
Tograpple with the houſe of Lancaſter. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Sometimes, from fighting ſquadrons of each fleet,
Two grappling Ætna's on the ocean meet,
And Engliſh fires with Belgian flames contend. Dryden.
To GRA'PPLE. v. a. - -
1. To faſten; to fix; to join indiſſolubly. Now obſolete.
Grapple your minds to ſternage of the navy, , ,
And leave your England as dead midnight ſtill. Shakespeare H. V.
I will put that buſineſs in your boſoms,
Whoſe execution takes your enemy off,
Grapples you to the heart and love of us. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
2. To ſeize; to lay faſt hold of. -
GRAPPLE. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Conteſt hand to hand, in which the combatants ſeize each
other; the wreſtlers hold.
As when earth's ſon, Antaeus, ſtroye
With Jove's Alcides, and, oft foil'd, ſtill roſe
Freſh
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R A
Freſh from his fall, and fiercer grapple join'd, -
Throttled at length in th' air, expir'd and fell. Mikon.
Or did his genius -
Know mine the ſtronger demon, fear'd the grapple,
And, looking round him, found this nook of fate, -
To ſkulk behind my ſword. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
2. Cloſe fight. . . -
In the grapple I boarded them; on the inſtant they got clear
of our ſhip, ſo I alone became their priſoner. Shakeſp, Hamlet.
3. Iron inſtrument by which one ſhip faſtens on another.
But Cymon ſoon his crooked grapples caſt,
Which with tenacious hold his foes embrac'd. Dryden.
GRA’ppleMENT. n.ſ.. [from grapple..] Cloſe fight; hoſtile
embrace.
They catching hold of him, as down he lent,
Him backward overthrew, and down him ſtay'd
With their rude hands and griefly grapplement. Fairy Queen.
GRA’s Hopper. n.ſ. [graſ, and hop.] A ſmall inſect that hops
in the Summer graſs. The cicada of the Latins, or cicala of
the Italians, is often by the poets tranſlated graſhopper, but
improperly.
Her waggon ſpokes made of long ſpinners legs,
The cover of the wings of graſhoppers. Shakespeare Ro, and jul.
Graſhºppers eat up the green of whole countries. . . Bacon.
Where ſilver lakes, with verdant ſhadows crown'd,
Diſperſe a grateful chilneſs all around;
The graſhopper avoids the untainted air,
Nor in the midſt of Summer ventures there. Addiſon.
The women were of ſuch an enormous ſtature, that we
appeared as graſhºppers before them. Addiſon's Spectator.
GRA’s 1 ER. See GRAzIER.
To GRASP. v. a. [graſpare, Italian.]
1. To hold in the hand; to gripe.
O fool that I am, that thought I could graſp water and bind
the wind. Sidney, b. ii.
In his right hand
Graſping ten thouſand thunders, which he ſent
Before him, ſuch as in their ſouls infix’d
Plagues. Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. vi.
Kings, by graſping more than they could hold,
Firſt made their ſubječts, by oppreſſion, bold. Denham.
Doom, as they pleaſe, my empire not to ſtand,
I'll graſp my ſceptre with my dying hand. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
2. To ſeize; to catch at.
This graſping of the militia of the kingdom into their own
hands, was deſired the Summer before. Clarendon.
To GRAsp. v. n.
1. To catch; to endeavour to ſeize; to try at.
So endleſs and exorbitant are the deſires of men, that they
will graſp at all, and can form no ſcheme of perfect happineſs
with leſs. Swift.
2. To ſtruggle; to ſtrive; to grapple. Not now in uſe.
See, his face is black and full of blood;
His hands abroad diſplay'd, as one that graſpt
And tugg’d for life. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
3. To gripe; to encroach.
Like a miſer 'midſt his ſtore,
Who graſps and graſps’till he can hold no more. Dryden.
GRAsp. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
I. The gripe or ſeizure of the hand.
Nor wanted in his graſp - -
What ſeem'd both ſpear and ſhield. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
This hand and ſword have been acquainted well;
It ſhould have come before into my graſp,
To kill the raviſher. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
The left arm is a little defaced, though one may ſee it held
ſomething in its graſp formerly. Addiſon on Italy.
2. Poſſeſſion; hold.
I would not be the villain that thou think'ſt
For the whole ſpace that's in the tyrant's graſp,
And the rich Eaſt to boot. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
3. Power of ſeizing.
Within the direful graſp
Of ſavage hunger, or of ſavage heat. Milton.
They looked upon it as their own, and had it even within
their graſp. - Clarendºn, b. viii.
GRA’sper. n.ſ.. [from graſp.] One that graſps, ſeizes, or
catches at.
GRASS. m. ſ. [xnaer, Saxon.] The common herbage of the
field on which cattle feed; an herb with long narrow leaves.
Ye are grown fat as the heifer at graſs, and bellow as
bulls. jer. l. 11.
The trade of beef for foreign exportation was prejudiced,
and almoſt ſunk; for the fleſh being young, and only graſs
fed, was thin, light and moiſt, and not of a ſubſtance to
endure the ſalt, or be preſerved by it, for long voyages,
or a ſlow conſumption. Temple.
You'll be no more your former you;
But for a blooming nymph will paſs,
Juſt fifteen, coming Summer's graſs. Swift.
GRAss of Parnaſſis, nº ſ. [parnaſia, Latin.]
It hath a roſe-ſhaped flower of five large leaves, and five
ſmall at the bottom fring, d, of a greeniſh colour, and planted
orbicularly : out of the flower-cup ariſes the pointal, which
turns to an oval membranaceous fruit, having but one cell
filled with ſeeds. This plant grows wild in moſt meadows,
particularly in the North. . It is called parnaſia from mount
Parnaſius, where it was ſuppoſed to grow; and becauſe the
cattle feed on it, it obtained the name of graſs, though the
plant has no reſemblance to the graſs kind. A.iller.
To GRAss. v. n. [from the noun..] To breed graſs; to become
paſture.
Land arable, driven, or worn to the proof,
With oats ye may ſow it, the ſooner to graſ,
More ſoon to be paſture, to bring it to paſs. Tuff. Husband.
Grass-plot. n.ſ. [graſs and plat..] A ſmall level covered
with ſhort graſs.
Here on this graſs-plot, in this very place,
Come and ſport. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?.
The part of your garden next your houſe ſhould be a par-
terre for flowers, or graſs-plots bordered with flowers. Temple.
They are much valued by our modern planters, to adorn
their walks and graſs-plots. Mortimer’s Husbandy.
GF Ass-poly. A ſpecies of Willow-wort, which ſee.
GRA'ssiness. n.ſ.. [from graſſ).] The ſtate of abounding in
raſs.
GRa'ssy, adj. [from graft.] Covered with graſs; abounding
with graſs.
Ne did he leave the mountains bare unſeen,
Nor the rank graſſy fens delights untry'd. Spenſer.
Rais'd of graſſy turf
Their table was, and moſſy ſeats had round. Milt. P. Loff.
The moſt in fields, like herded beaſts, lie down,
To dews obnoxious, on the graſſ; floor. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
GRATE. n.ſ.. [crates, Latin.]
1. A partition made with bars placed near to one another, or
croſſing each other: ſuch as are in cloyſters or priſons.
I have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for
you, and your couch-fellow, Nim; or elſe you had look'd
through the grates, like a geminy of baboons. Shakeſpeare.
Out at a little grate his eyes he caſt
Upon thoſe bord'ring hills, and open plain. Daniel’s C. JW.
A fan has on it a nunnery of lively black-eyed veſtals,
who are endeavouring to creep out at the grates. Addison.
2. The range of bars within which fires are made.
My dear is of opinion that an old faſhioned grate conſumes
coals, but gives no heat. Spectator, Nº. 30.
To GRATE. v. a. [gratter, French.]
1. To rub or wear anything by the attrition of a rough body.
Thereat the fiend his gnaſhing teeth did grate. Fai. 24.
Blind oblivion ſwallow'd cities up, -
And mighty ſtates chara&amp;terleſs are grated
To duſty nothing. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Creſſida.
If the particles of the putty were not made to ſtick faſt in
the pitch, they would, by rolling up and down, grate and fret
the objećt metal, and fill it full of little holes. Newton's Opt.
2. To offend by anything harſh or vexatious.
Thereat enraged, ſoon he 'gan upſtart,
Grinding his teeth and grating his great heart. Hubb. Tale.
They have been partial in the goſpel, culled and choſen out
thoſe ſofter and more gentle dićtates which ſhould leſs grate
and diſturb them. Decay of Piety.
Juſt reſentment and hard uſage coin'd
Th' unwilling word; and, grating as it is,
Take it, for it is thy due. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
This habit of writing and diſcourſing, wherein I unfortu-
nately differ from almoſt the whole kingdom, and am apt to
grate the ears of more than I could wiſh, was acquired during
my apprenticeſhip in London. Swift.
3. To form a ſound by colliſion of aſperities or hard bodies.
The grating ſhock of wrathful iron arms. Shakespeare R. II.
On a ſudden open fly,
With impetuous recoil and jarring ſound,
Th’ infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harſh thunder, that the loweſt bottom ſhook
Of Erebus. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
To GRATE. v. n. -
1. To rub hard ſo as to injure or offend; to offend, as by op-
preſſion or importunity. -
Wherein have you been galled by the king?
What peer hath been ſuborn'd to grate on you,
That you ſhould ſeal this lawleſs bloody book
Of forg'd rebellion with a ſeal divine? Shakespeare Henry IV.
I have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for
you, or elſe you had looked through the grates. Shakeſpeare.
Paradoxing is of great uſe; but the faculty muſt be ſo ten-
derly managed as not to grate upon the truth and reaſon of
things. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
This grated harder upon, and raiſed greater tumults and
boilings in the hearts of men, than the ſeeming unreaſonable-
neſs of former articles. South's Sermons.
I never
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R A
º:
º
tº:
*i-
*
I never heard him make the leaſt complaint, in a caſe that
would have grated ſorely on ſome men's patience, and have
filled their lives with diſcontent. Locke.
2. To make a harſh noiſe, as that of a rough body drawn over
another. -
We are not ſo nice as to caſt away a ſharp knife, becauſe
the edge of it may ſometimes grate. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 36.
GRATEFUL. adj. [gratus, Latin.]
1. Having a due ſenſe of benefits; willing to acknowledge and
to repay benefits.
A grateful mind
By owing owes not, but ſtill pays. Milton.
Years of ſervice paſt,
From grateful ſouls exact reward at laſt. Dryden's Fables.
2. Pleaſing; acceptable; delightful; delicious.
Whatſoever is ingrate at firſt, is made grateful by cuſtom;
but whatſoever is too pleaſing at firſt, groweth quickly to
ſatiate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Now golden fruits on loaded branches ſhine,
And grateful cluſters ſwell with floods of wine. Pope.
GRA’refully, adv. [from grateful.]
1. With willingneſs to acknowledge and repay benefits; with
due ſenſe of obligation.
He, as new wak'd, thus gratefully reply'd, Milton,
Enough remains for houſhold charge beſide,
His wife and tender children to ſuſtain,
And gratefully to feed his dumb deſerving train. Dryd. Virg.
In Cyprus long by men and gods obey'd,
The loyers toil ſhe gratefully repaid. Granville.
2. In a pleaſing manner.
Study detains the mind by the perpetual occurrence of ſome-
thing new, which may gratefully ſtrike the imagination. Watts,
GRATEFULNess. n.ſ.. [from grateful.]
1. Gratitude; duty to benefactors. Now obſolete.
A Laconian knight, having ſometime ſerved him with more
gratefulneſs than good courage defended him. Sidney.
Bleſſings beforehand, ties of gratefulneſs,
The ſound of glory ringing in our ears. Herbert.
2. Quality of being acceptable; pleaſantneſs.
GRA't E.R. m. ſ [gratoir, Fr. from grate.] A kind of coarſe file
with which ſoft bodies are rubbed to powder,
GRATIFICATION. m. ſ. [gratificatio, Latin.]
1. The aët of pleaſing.
They are incapable of any deſign above the preſent grati-
fication of their palates. South's Sermons.
2. Pleaſure; delight.
How hardly is his will brought to change all its deſires and
averſions, and to renounce thoſe gratifications in which he has
been long uſed to place his happineſs Roger's Sermons.
3. Reward; recompence. A low word.
To GRATIFY. v. a. [gratificor, Latin.]
1. To indulge; to pleaſe by compliance.
You ſteer between the country and the court,
Nor gratiff, whate'er the great deſire,
Nor grudging give what publick needs require. Dryden.
2. To delight; to pleaſe.
But pride ſtood ready to prevent the blow;
For who would die to gratify a foe 2 Dryden's Fables.
The captive generals to his car are ty'd;
The joyful citizens tumultuous tide {
Echoing his glory, gratify his pride. Prior.
A palled appetite is humorous, and muſt be gratified with
auces rather than food. Tatler, N°. 54.
At once they gratify their ſcent and taſte,
While frequent cups prolong the rich repaſt. Pope.
A thouſand little impertinencies are very gratifying to cu-
rioſity, though not improving to the underſtanding. Addiſon.
3. To requite with a gratification: as, I'll gratify you for this
trouble.
GRATINGLY. adv. [from grate.] Harſhly; offenſively.
GRATIS. adv. [Latin. J For nothing; without a recom-
ence.
P The people cry you mock'd them; and, of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repin'd. Shakeſp.
They ſold themſelves; but thou, like a kind fellow, gav'ſt
thyſelf away gratis, and I thank thee for thee. Shakeſpeare.
Kindred are no welcome clients, where relation gives them
a title to have advice gratis. L’Eſtrange.
I ſcorned to take my degree at Utrecht or Leyden, though
offered it grati, by thoſe univerſities. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
GRA’t ITUDE. m. ſ. [gratitudo, low Latin. J .
1. Duty to benefactors.
Forbid
That our renowned Rome, whoſe gratitude
Tow'rds her deſerving children is enroll'd,
Should now eat up her own ' Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
2. Deſire to return benefits.
The debt immenſe of endleſs gratitude. Milton.
Gratitude is properly a virtue, diſpoſing the mind to an in-
ward ſenſe and an outward acknowledgment of a benefit re-
ceived, together with a readineſs to return the ſame, or the
like. 2 South's Sermons.
GRATU’ITOUS. adj. [gratuituſ, Latin; gratuit, Fr.]
1. Voluntary; granted without claim or merit.
We miſtake the gratuitous bleſſings of heaven for the fruits
of our own induſtry. L'Aſtrange.
2. Aſſerted without proof.
The ſecond motive they had to introduce this gratuitous
declination of atoms, the ſame poet gives us. Ray.
GRATU’ſ Tously. adv. [from gratiitou..]
1. Without claim or merit.
2. Without proof.
I would know whence came this obliquity of direction,
which they gratuitouſly tack to matter: this is to aſcribe will
and choice to theſe particles. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
GRATu'ity. n.ſ. [gratuitº, Fr. from gratuitous.] A preſent or
acknowledgment; a free gift.
They might have pretended to comply with Ulyſſes, and
diſmiſſed him with a ſmall gratuity. Ivotes ºn the O lºſſy.
He uſed every year to preſent us with his almanack, upon
the ſcore of ſome little gratuity we gave him. Swift.
To GRA'TULATE. v. a. [gratulor, Latin J
1. To congratulate; to ſalute with declarations of joy.
To gratify the good Andronicus,
And gratulate his ſafe return to Rome,
The people will accept whom he admires. Shakeſp. Tit. Andr.
Whither away ſo faſt?
No farther than the Tower,
To gratulate the gentle princes there. Shakespeare. Rich. III.
Since nature could behold ſo dire a crime,
Igratulate at leaſt my native clime,
That ſuch a land, which ſuch a monſter bore,
So far is diſtant from our Thracian ſhore. Dryden's Fables.
2. To declare joy for.
Yet give thy jealous ſubječts leave to doubt,
Who this thy 'ſcape from rumour gratulate,
No leſs than if from peril; and devout,
Do beg thy care unto thy after ſtate. Pen. johnſ. Epigrams.
GRATULATION. m. ſ. [from gratulatio, Latin.] Salutations
made by expreſſing joy; expreſſion of joy.
They are the firſt gratulations wherewith our Lord and Sa-
viour was joyfully received at his entrance into the world, by
ſuch as in their hearts, arms, and bowels embraced him. Hook.
The earth -
Gave ſigns of gratulation, and each hill. A ſiſt. Par. Loſt.
Your enjoyments, according to the ſtandard of a Chriſtian
deſire, are ſo compleat that they require no addition: I flail
turn my wiſhes into gratulations, and, congratulating their ful-
neſs, only wiſh their continuance. South.
GRA’t Ulator Y. adj. [from gratulate.] Congratulatory, ex-
preſfing congratulation.
GRAve, a final ſyllable in the names of places, is from the
Saxon &amp;naep, a grove or cave. Gibſºn's Camden.
GRAVE. n.ſ. [3raer, Saxon.] The place in the ground in
which the dead are repoſited.
Now it is the time of night,
That the graves, all gaping wide,
Every one lets forth his ſpright,
In the church-way paths to glide. Shakeſpeare.
Thou wilt not leave me in the loathſome grave. AMilton.
To walk upon the graves of our dead maſters,
Is our own ſecurity. Denham's Sophy.
A flood of waters would overwhelm all thoſe fragments
which the earth broke into, and bury in one common grave
all mankind, and all the inhabitants of the earth. Burnet.
GRA’ve-cloaths. n.ſ. [grave and cloaths.] The dreſs of the
dead.
But of ſuch ſubtle ſubſtance and unſound,
That like a ghoſt he ſeem’d, whoſe grave-coaths were un-
bound. Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. xi.
And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot
with grave-cloaths. jo. xi. 44.
GRA've-stone. n.ſ. [grave and ſtone..] The ſtone that is laid
over the grave; the monumental ſtone.
Timon, preſently prepare thy grave;
Lye where the light foam of the ſea may beat
Thy grave-ſtone daily. Shakeſpeare's Timon of Athens.
To GRAVE. v. a. preter. graved; part. paſſ graven. [graver,
French; Yéºpo.] - - -
1. To inſculp; to carve a figure or inſcription in any hard ſub-
ſtance. -
Cornice with boſſy ſculptures graven. Milton.
Such later vows, oaths, or leagues can never blot out thoſe
former gravings or chara&amp;ters, which by juſt and lawful oaths
were made upon their ſouls. - King Charles.
Thy ſum of duty let two words contain;
O! may they graven in thy heart remain, -
Be humble and be juſt. Prior.
2. To carve or form.
What profiteth the graven image, that the maker thereºf
hath graven it f - Heb. ii. 18.
3. To copy paintings upon wood or metal, in order to be im-
reſſed on paper.
P on F . P The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R A
G R A
The gravers can and ought to imitate the bodies of the
colours by the degrees of the lights and ſhadows: 'tis impoſ-
fible to give much ſtrength to what they grave, after the works
of the ſchools, without imitating in ſome ſort the colour of
the objećts. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
4. [From grave.] To entomb. Not in uſe.
- There's more gold :
Do you damn others, and let this damn you :
And ditches grave you all! Shakeſpeare's Timon of Athens.
5. To clean, caulk, and ſheath a ſhip. Ainſworth.
To GRAve. v. n. To write or delineate on hard ſubſtances.
Thou ſhalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon
it. Ex. xxviii. 36.
GR Ave. adj. [grave, French; gravis, Latin.]
1. Solemn; ſerious; ſober; not gay; not light or trifling.
To th’ more mature,
A glaſs that featur'd them; and to the grave, -
A child that guided dotards. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
- We ſhould have elſe deſir'd
Your good advice, which ſtill hath been both grave
And proſperous, in this day's council. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
That grave awfulneſs, as in your beſt breed of maſtives, or
elegancy and prettineſs, as in your leſſer dogs, are modes of
beauty. More's Antidote againſ: Atheiſm.
Even the grave and ſerious charaćiers are diſtinguiſhed by
their ſeveral ſorts of gravity. Dryden's Fable, Preface.
Youth on ſilent wings is flown;
Graver years come rolling on.
To laugh, were want of goodneſs and of grace; -
And to be grave, exceeds all pow'r of face. Pope's Epiffleſ.
Folly-painting humour, grave himſelf, -
Calls laughter forth. Thomſon's Winter.
2. Of weight; not futile; credible. Little uſed.
The Roman ſtate was of all others the moſt celebrated for their
virtue, as the graveſ of their own writers, and of ſtrangers,
do bear them witneſs. Grºw's Coſmoſ. Sac. b. iii. c. 3.
. Not ſhowy ; not tawdry: as, a grave ſuit of cloaths.
4. Not ſharp of ſound; not acute.
Accent, in the Greek names and uſage, ſeems to have re-
garded the tone of the voice; the acute accent raiſing the
voice, in ſome certain ſyllables, to a higher, i. e. more acute
pitch or tone, and the grave depreſſing it lower, and both
having ſome emphaſis, i. e. more vigorous pronunciation.
Holder's Elements of Spºrch.
SGRAVEL. n.ſ. [gravier, French; gravcel, Dutch; gravel,
Armorick.]
1. Hard ſand; ſand conſiſting of very ſmall pebbleſtones.
Gravel conſiſts of flints of all the uſual ſizes and colours, of
the ſeveral ſorts of pebbles; ſometimes with a few pyritae,
and other mineral bodies, confuſedly intermixed, and com-
mon ſand. ſ! codward's Met. Fºſſ.
His armour, all gilt, was ſo well handled, that it ſhewed
like a glittering ſand and gravel, interlaced with ſilver ri-
VerS. Sidney.
Priºr.
3
By intelligence,
And proofs as clear as founts in July, when
We ſee each grain of gravel. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Providence permitted not the ſtrength of the earth to ſpend
itſelf in baſe gravel and pebbles, inſtead of quarries of ſtones.
More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
So deep, and yet ſo clear, we might behold
The gravel bottom, and that bottom gold. Dryd, n.
The upper garden at Kenſington was at firſt nothing but a
gravel pit. Speciator, N°. 477.
Gravel walks are beſt for fruit-trees. Mortimer’s Husbandy.
2. [Gravelle, French..] Sandy matter concreted in the kidneys.
If the ſtone is brittle it will often crumble, and paſs in the
form of gravel: if the ſtone is too big to paſs, the beſt method
is to come to a ſort of a compoſition or truce with it. Arbuthn.
To GRA’vel. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To pave or cover with gravel.
Moſs groweth upon alleys, eſpecially ſuch as lie cold, and
upon the North, as in divers terraſſes; and again, if they be
much trodden, or if they were at the firſt gravelled.
2. To ſtick in the ſand.
William the Conqueror, when he invaded this iſland,
chanced at his arrival to be gravelled; and one of his feet
fluck ſo faſt in the ſand, that he fell to the ground. Camden.
3. To puzzle; to ſtop; to put to a ſtand; to embarraſs.
I would kiſs before I ſpoke.
—Nay, you were better ſpeak firſt, and when you were gra-
vel'd for lack of matter you might take occaſion to kiſs. Shakespeare
The diſeaſe itſelf will gravel him to judge of it; nor can
there be any predićtion made of it, it is ſo ſharp. Howel.
What work do our imaginations make with eternity and
• immenſity And how are we gravelled by their cutting
dilemma's 2 Glanv. Scepſ c. 13.
Mat, who was here a little gravell'd,
Toit up his noſe, and would have cavill’d. Prizr.
4. [In horſemanſhip.] To hurt the foot with gravel confined
by the ſhoe.
GRAVELFss, adj. [from grave..] Without a tomb; unburied.
Bacon.
By degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the diſcandying of this pelletted ſtorm,
Lie graveleſ. Shakeſpeare's Antony and Chºctra.
GRA’v ELLY. adj. [graveleux, French, from gravel.] I wil of
gravel; abounding with gravel; conſiſting of gravel.
There are ſome natural ſpring-waters that will inlapidate
wood; ſo that you ſhall ſee one piece of wood, whereof the
part above the water ſhall continue wood, and the part under
the water ſhall be turned into a gravely ſtone. Bacº's N. Hiſ'.
If you live in a conſumptive air, make choice of the more
open, high, dry, and gravely part of it. Harvey on Conſumpt.
GRA’v ELY. adv. [from grave.]
1. Solemnly ; ſeriouſly; ſoberly; without lightneſs or mirth.
Thou ſtand'ſt
Gravely in doubt when to hold them wiſe. 27 ton.
A girl longs to tell her confidant that ſhe hopes to be mar-
ried in a little time, and aſks her very gravely what ſhe would
have her to do. - Speciator. Nº. 475.
Wiſdom's above ſuſpe&amp;ting wiles;
The queen of learning gravely ſmiles. - Swift.
A formal ſtory was very gravely carried to his excellency,
by ſome zealous members. Swift.
2. Without gaudineſs or ſhow. .
GRA’ve Ness. n.ſ. . [from grave..] Scriouſneſs; ſolemnity and
ſobriety of behaviour.
You no leſs becomes
The light and careleſs livery that it wears,
Than ſettled age his ſables, and his weeds -
Importing health and graveneſs. Shakespeare's Hamlet.
But yet beware of counſels when too full;
. Number makes long diſputes and graveneſ dull. Denºam.
GRA'veoLENT. adj. [gave-lº, Lat.] Strong ſcented. Dicſ.
GRA'v ER. m. ſ. [graveur, French, from grave.]
1. One whoſe buſineſs is to inſcribe or carve upon hard ſub-
ſtances; one who copies pičiures upon wood or metal to be
impreſſed on paper.
If he makes a deſign to be graved, he is to remember that
the gravr, diſpoſe not their colours as the painters do; and
that, by conſequence, he muſt take occaſion to find the reaſon
of his deſign in the natural ſhadows of the figures, which he
has diſpoſed to cauſe the effect. Dryden's Difreſhoy.
2. The ſtile or tool uſed in graving.
With all the care where with I tried upon it the known
ways of ſoftening gravers, I could not ſoften this.
The toilſome hours in diff'rent labour ſlide, -
Some work the file, and ſome the graver guide. Gay's Fan.
GRA V1'DITY. m. ſ. [gravidº, Latin.J Pregnancy; ſtate of
being with child.
Women, obſtructed, have not always the forementioned
ſymptoms: in thoſe the ſigns of gravidity and obſtructions are
hard to be diſlinguiſhed in the beginning. Arbuthnot on Diet.
GRAVING. m. ſ. [from gratc.] Carved work.
Skilful to work in gold; alſo to grave any manner of
graving, and to find out every device which ſhall be put to
him. 2 Chro. ii. 14.
To GRAVITATE. v. n. [from gravis, Latin.] To tend to
the center of attraction.
Thoſe who have nature's ſteps with care purſu'd,
That matter is with ačtive force endu'd,
That all its parts magnetick pow'r exert,
And to each other gravitate, aſſert. Blackmore's Creatiºn.
That ſubtle matter muſt be of the ſame ſubſtance with all
other matter, and as much as is comprehended within a parti-
cular body muſt graviate jointly with that body. Bentley.
GRAVITA'TION. m.J. [from gravitate.] Act of tending to the
Centre.
The moſt conſiderable phenomenon belonging to terreſtrial
bodies is the general action of graviation, whereby all known
bodies, in the vicinity of the earth, do tend and preſs towards
its centre. Lentey's Sermons.
When the looſe mountain trembles from on high,
Shall gravitatiºn ceaſe, if you go by ? Pºpe's Eff, on Aſan.
GRA’v ITY. m. ſ. [gravitas, Latin ; gravité, French J
1. Weight; heavineſs; tendency to the centre.
That quality by which all heavy bodies tend towards the
centre of the earth, accelerating their motion the nearer they
approach towards it, true philoſophy has ſhown to be unſolve-
able by any hypotheſis, and reſolved it into the immediate will
of the Creator. Of all bodies, conſidered within the confines
of any fluid, there is a twofold gravity, true and abſolute,
and apparent, vulgar or comparative: abſolute gravity is the
whole force by which any body tends downwards; but the
relative or vulgar is the exceſs of gravity in one body above
the ſpecifick gravity of the fluid, whereby it tends downwards
more than the ambient fluid doth. &amp;aincy.
Bodies do ſwim or fink in different liquors, according to the
tenacity or gravity of thoſe liquors which are to ſupport
them. Brown's l'u'ar E. rotºrs, b. vii. c. 15.
Though this increaſe of denſity may at great diſtances be
exceeding ſlow, yet if the elaſtick tone of this medium be
exceeding great, it may ſuffice to impel bodies from the denſer
Parts
Lºyle.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R E
g
:
.
º
parts of the medium towards the rarer, with all that power
which we call gravity. Newton's Opt.
2: Atrociouſneſs; weight of guilt. -
No man could ever have thought this reaſonable, that had
intended thereby only to puniſh the injury committed, accord-
ing to the gravity of the fact. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 10.
3. Seriouſneſs; ſolemnity. -
There is not a white hair on your face but ſhould have his
effect of gravity. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Our youths and wildneſs ſhall no whit appear,
But all be buried in his gravity. Shakespeare's jul. Caeſar.
For the advocates and council that plead, patience and gra-
vity of hearing is an eſſential part of juſtice. Bacon, Eſſay 57.
Great Cato there, for gravity renown'd. Dryden's Aºn.
The emperors often jeſted on their rivals or predeceſſors,
but their mints ſtill maintained their gravity. Addiſon.
GRA’vy. n.ſ. The ſerous juice that runs from fleſh not much
dried by the fire. - - . .
They uſually boil and roaſt their meat until it falls almoſt
off from the bones; but we love it half raw, with the blood
trickling down from it, delicately terming it the gravy, which
in truth looks more like an ichorous or raw bloody matter.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
There may be a ſtronger broth made of vegetables than of
any gravy ſoup. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
GRAY. adi. [ºnae;, Saxon; grau, Daniſh; graau, Dutch..]
1. White with a mixture of black.
They left me then, when the gray headed even,
Like a ſad votariſt in palmer's weed, -
Roſe from the hindmoſt wheels of Phoebus' wain. Milton.
Theſe gray and dun colours may be alſo produced by mix-
ing whites and blacks, and by conſequence differ from perfeót
whites, not in ſpecies of colours, but only in degree of lumi-
nouſneſs. . - - Newton's Opt.
2. White or hoary with old age.
Living creatures generally do change their hair with age,
turning to be gray; as is ſeen in men, though ſome earlier and
ſome later; in horſes, that are dappled and turn white; in old
ſquirrels that turn griſly, and many others. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Thou haſt neither forſaken me now I am become gray
headed, nor ſuffered me to forſake thee in the late days of
temptation.
- Anon -
Gray headed men and grave, with warriors mix’d,
Aſſemble. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi.
The reſtoration of gray hairs to juvenility, and renewing
the exhauſted marrow, may be effected. Glanv. Stepſ.
Gray headed infant! and in vain grown old!
Art thou to learn that in another's gold -
Lie charms reſiſtleſs? Drydºn's juvenal, Sat. 13.
We moſt of us are grown gray headed in our dear maſter's
ſervice. Addison's Spectator, Nº. 517.
Her gray hair’d ſynods damning books unread,
nd Bacon trembling for his brazen head. Pope's Dunciad.
3. Dark like the opening or cloſe of day; of the colour of aſhes.
Our women's names are more gracious than their Caeſilia,
that is, gray eyed. Camden’s Remain.
The gray ey'd morn ſmiles on the frowning night,
Chequ'ring the eaſtern clouds with ſtreaks of light. Shakeſp.
I’ll ſay yon gray is not the morning's eye;
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow. Shakespeare R. and jul.
Soon as the gray ey'd morning ſtreaks the ſkies,
And in the doubtful day the woodcock flies. Gay's Trivia.
GRAY. m. ſ. A badger. Ainſwºrth.
GRA'Y BEARD. n.ſ. [gray and beard.] An old man, in con-
tempt.
Youngling, thou can'ſt not love ſo dear as I.
—Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.
Have I in conqueſt ſtretcht mine arm ſo far,
To be afraid to tell graybeards the truth? Shakespeare Jul. Caeſ.
GRA’Y Hou N'D. See GREY Hou ND.
GRA'YLING. m. ſ. The umber, a fiſh.
The grayling lives in ſuch rivers as the trout does, and is
uſually taken with the ſame baits, and after the ſame manner:
he is of a fine ſhape, his fleſh white, and his teeth, thoſe little
ones that he has, are in his throat. He is not ſo general a fiſh
as the trout, nor ſo good to eat. JWalton's Angler.
GRA'YNEss. m. ſ. [from gray.] The quality of being gray.
To'GRAzE. v. n. [from graſs.]
1. To eat graſs; to feed on graſs.
The greateſt of my pride is to ſee my eves graze, and my
lambs ſuck. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Graze where you will, you ſhall not houſe with me. Shakespeare
Leaving in the fields his grazing cows,
He ſought himſelf ſome hoſpitable houſe. Dryden's Fables.
The more ignoble throng
Attend their ſtately ſteps, and ſlowly graze along. Dryden.
2. To ſupply graſs.
Phyſicians adviſe their patients to remove into airs which
are plain champaigns, but grazing, and not overgrown with
heath. Bacon.
Shakeſpeare.
Walton's Life of Biſhop Sanderſon.
The ſewers muſt be kept ſo as the water may not ſtay too
long in the Spring; for then the ground continueth the wet,
whereby it will never graze to purpoſe that year. fºacon.
A third ſort of grazing ground is that near the ſea, which
is commonly very rich land. Mºrtimer’s Husbandry.
3. To move on devouring. - • . -
. As every ſtate lay next to the other that was oppreſſed, ſo
the fire perpetually grazed. Bacon on the J/ar with Spain.
4. [From raſer, French.J. To touch lightly.
Mark then a bounding valour in our Engliſh,
That being dead, like to the bullets grazing,
Breaks out into a ſecond courſe of miſchief, º -
... Killing in relapſe of mortality. Shakespeare Henry V.
To GRAzE. v. a. -
1. To tend grazing cattle; to ſet cattle to feed on graſs.
. Jacob graz'd his uncle Laban's ſheep. Shakespeare.
O happy man, ſaith he, that, lo! I ſee
Grazing his cattle in thoſe pleaſant fields, * * *
If he but know his good Daniel's Civil War.
... The chief beheld their chariots from afar;
Their ſteeds around, - -
Free ſrom their harneſs, graze the flow'ry ground. Dryden.
Grounds graze well the next year after plowing. Mortimer.
Some graze their laid 'till Chriſtmas, and ſome longer. A ſort.
He hath a houſe and barn in repair, and a field or two to
graze his cows, with a garden and orchard. Swift.
2. To ſeed upon. - -
, I was at firſt as other beaſts, that graze
The trodden herb, of abject thoughts and low. Milto".
. This Neptune gave him, when he gave to keep
His ſcaly flocks that graze the wat'ry deep. Dryden's Pirgil.
The lambs with wolves ſhall graze the verdant mead. Pope.
GRA'zi E.R. n.ſ.. [from graze.]
All graziers prefer their cattle from meaner paſtures to bet-
ter. - Eacon.
Gentle peace, which filleſt the huſbandman's barns, the
grazier's folds, and the tradeſman's ſhop. 1-owel.
His confuſion increaſed when he ſound the alderman's father
to be a grazier. Speciator, N. 6 12.
Of agriculture, the deſolation made in the country by en-
groſſing graziers, and the great yearly importation of corn
from England, are lamentable inſtances under what diſcou-
ragement it lies. - Swift.
GREASE. n.ſ. [graiſe, French.]
1. The ſoft part of the fat; the oily or uncluous part of ani-
mals. -
Greaſ, that's ſweaten
From the murth’rer's gibbet, throw -
Into the flame. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
To take out a ſpot of greaſe they uſe a coal upon brown
paper. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Thou hop'ſt, with ſacrifice of oxen ſlain,
To compaſs wealth, and bribe the god of gain
To give thee flocks and herds, with large increaſe ;
Fool' to expect them from a bullock's greaſe. Dryd. Yuv.
A girdle, foul with greaſe, binds his obſcene attire. Dryd.
2. [In horſemanſhip.] A ſwelling and gourdineſs of the legs,
which generally happens to a horſe after his journey.
To GREASE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſmear or anoint with greaſe.
2. To bribe; to corrupt with preſents.
Envy not the ſtore
Of the greas'd advocate that grinds the poor. Dryá. Perſ.
GRE'As INEss. n.ſ.. [from greaſe.] Oilineſs; fatneſs.
Upon the moſt of theſe ſtones, after they arc cut, there
appears always, as it were, a kind of greaſinºſ, or unétuo-
ſity. Rºyle.
GRE/ASY. adj. [from greaſe.]
1. Oily ; fat; unétuous.
The fragments, ſcraps, the bits and greaſy reliques
Of her o'er-eaten faith. Shakespeare.
2. Smeared with greaſe.
Even the lewd rabble
Govern'd their roaring throats, and grumbled pity:
I could have huggid the greaſ, rogues; they pleas'd me Cº.
Buy ſheep, and ſee that they be big-boned, and have a ſºft,
greaſy, well curled cloſe wool. Mortimer's Husbandry.
3. Fat of body; bulky. In reproach.
Let's conſult together againſt this greaſ, knight. Shakespeare care.
GREAT. adj. [[.ºneat, Saxon; groot, Dutch..]
1. Large in bulk or number.
Judas one of the twelve came, and with a great multitude
with ſwords and ſtaves, from the chief prieſts and elders of the
people. Mat. xxvi. 47.
All theſe cities were fenced with high walls, gates and bars,
beſides unwalled towns a great many. Deutr. iii. v.
The idea of ſo much is poſitive and clear: the idea of
greater is alſo clear, but it is but a comparative idea. Locke.
2. Having any quality in a high degree.
There were they in great feat. Pſ xiv. 5.
This is a great paradox, Tººtſºn:
5 3. Conſiderable
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R E
s
3. Conſiderable in extent or duration. -
Thou haſt ſpoken of thy ſervants houſe for a great while to
come. 2 Sa. vii. 19.
4. Important; weighty.
Many
Have broke their backs with laying manors on them,
For this great journey. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
And though this be a great truth, if it be impartially con-
ſidered, yet it is alſo a great paradox to men of corrupt minds
and vitious practices. Tillotſon, Sermon 6.
5. Chief; principal. -
Hear the king's pleaſure, cardinal, who commands you
To render up the great ſeal preſently. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
6. Of high rank; of large power.
Such men as he be never at heart's eaſe,
Whilſt they behold a greater than themſelves. Shakespeare. jul. Caſ.
Of all the great, how few
Are juſt to heaven, and to their promiſe true! Pºpe's Odyſ.
Misfortune made the throne her ſeat,
And none could be unhappy but the great. Rowe.
Deſpiſe the farce of ſtate,
The ſober follies of the wiſe and great. Pope.
7. Illuſtrious; eminent.
O Lord, thou art great, and thy name is great in might.
jer. x. 6.
8. Grand of aſpect; of elevated mien.
Such Dido was; with ſuch becoming ſtate,
Amidſt the crowd, ſhe walks ſerenely great. Dryd. Wirgil.
9. Noble; magnanimous.
In her every thing was goodly and ſtately; yet ſo, that it
might ſeem that great mindedneſs was but the ancient-bearer
to the humbleneſs. Sidney.
Io. Swelling; proud.
Solyman perceived that Vienna was not to be won with
words, nor the defendants to be diſcouraged with great looks;
wherefore he begun to batter the walls. Knolles.
1 1. Familiar; much acquainted. A low word.
Thoſe that would not cenſure, or ſpeak ill of a man imme-
diately, will talk more boldly of thoſe that are great with
them, and thereby wound their honour. Bacon, Eſſay 49.
12. Pregnant; teeming. - -
Their bellies great
With ſwelling vanity, bring forth deceit.
This fly, for moſt he ſtings in heat of day,
From cattle great with young keep thou away. May's Pirg,
13. It is added in every ſtep of aſcending or deſcending conſan-
guinity: as great grandſon is the ſon of my grandſon.
I dare not yet affirm for the antiquity of our language, that
our great-great-great grandfires tongue came out of Perſia.
Camden's Remains.
What we call great-great grandfather they called fortha-
fader. Camden's Remainder.
Their holiday-cloaths go from father to ſon, and are ſeldom
worn out 'till the ſecond or third generation; ſo that 'tis com-
mon enough to ſee a countryman in the doublet and breeches
of his great grandfather. Addiſon.
14. Hard; difficult; grievous. A proverbial expreſſion.
It is no great matter to live lovingly with good natured and
meek perſons. Taylºr's Devotion.
GREAT. n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive.]
1. The whole; the groſs; the whole in a lump.
To let out thy harveſt by great or by day,
Let this by experience lead thee the way:
By great will deceive thee with ling ring it out,
By day will diſpatch. Tuffer's Husbandry for Auguſt.
It were behoveful, for the ſtrength of the navy, that no
ſhips ſhould be builded by the great ; for by daily experience
they are found to be weak and imperfeót. Raleigh's Eſſays.
He did at length ſo many ſlain forget,
And loſt the tale, and took them by the great. Dryden.
Carpenters, for uniformity, generally make them ſo, unleſs
they build an houſe by the great, and are agreed for the ſum
of money. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
I ſet aſide one day in a week for lovers, and interpret by the
great for any gentlewoman who is turned of ſixty. Addiſon.
GRE'ATBELLIED. adj. [great and belly..] Pregnant ; teeming.
Greatbellied women,
That had not half a week to go, like rams
In the old time of war, would ſhake the preſs,
And make 'em reel from before 'em. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
A greatbellied woman, walking through the city in the day-
time, had her child ſtruck out of her womb, and carried half
a furlong from her. l/ilkins's Math. Magick.
To GRE'ATEN. v.a. [from great.] To aggrandize; to en-
large; to magnify. A word little uſed.
After they ſought to greaten themſelves in Italy itſelf, uſing
ſtrangers for the commanders of their armies, the Turks by
degrees beat them out of all their goodly countries. Raleigh.
GREATHEA'RTED. adj. [great and heart.] High ſpirited;
undeječted.
The earl, as greathearted as he, declared that he neither
cared for his friendſhip, nor feared his hatred. Clarend n.
Sandyſ.
GRE'At ly, adj. [from great.]
1. In a great degree.
Thy ſorrow I will greatl, multiply.
2. Nobly; illuſtriouſly.
Yet London, empreſs of the northern cline,
By an high fate thou greatly didſt expire. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
3. Magnanimoufly; generouſly; bravely.
Where are theſe bold intrepid ſons of war,
That greatly turn their backs upon the foe,
And to their general ſend a brave defiance? Addison's Catz.
GRE’ATN Ess. n.ſ.. [from great.]
1. Largeneſs of quantity or number.
2. Comparative quantity.
We can have no poſitive idea of any ſpace or duration,
which is not made up of and commenſurate to repeated num-
bers of feet or yards, or days or years, and whereby we
judge of the greatneſs of theſe ſort of quantities. Loºe.
All abſent good does not, according to the greatneſ; it has,
or is acknowledged to have, cauſe pain equal to that greatneſs,
as all pain cauſes deſire equal to itſelf; becauſe the abſence of
good is not always a pain, as the preſence of pain is. Locke.
3. High degree of any quality.
Zeal, in duties, ſhould be proportioned to the greatneſ of
the reward, and the certainty. Rogers, Sermon 13.
4. High place ; dignity; power; influence; empire.
- Farewel, a long farewel to all my greatneſs. Shakeſpeare.
So many
As will to greatneſ, dedicate themſelves. Staſºff. Macleth.
I beg your greatneſs not to give the law
In other realms; but beaten, to withdraw. Dryden's AFn.
Approaching greatneſs met him with her charms
Of pow'r and future ſtate;
He ſhook her from his arms. Dryden.
Themiſtocles raiſed the Athenians to their greatneſ, at ſea,
which he thought to be the true and conſtant intereſt of that
commonwealth. Swift.
5. Swelling pride; affected ſtate.
My lord would have you know, that it is not of pride or
Milton,
greatneſs that he cometh not aboard your ſhips. Lacºn.
6. Merit; magnanimity; nobleneſs of mind.
Greatneſs of mind and nobleneſs their ſeat
Build in her lovelieft. - A4i, toº.
7. Grandeur; ſtate; magnificence.
Greatneſs with Timon dwells in ſuch a draught,
As brings all Brobdignag before your thought. Pope.
GREAve. m. ſ. [ 5naer, Saxon.] A grove. Speºſer.
GREAves, n.ſ.. [from grives, French..] Armour for the legs;
a ſort of boots. It wants the ſingular number.
He had greaves of braſs upon his legs. 1 Sa. xvii. 6.
A ſhield make for him, and a helm, fair greaves, and curets
ſuch
As may renown thy workmanſhip, and honour him as much.
Chapman's I iads, b xviii.
GRE'cis M. m. ſ. [gnacciſinus, Latin.] An idiom of the Greek
language.
GREE. n.ſ. [gré, French, probably from gratia.] Good will;
favour; good graces.
And falling her before on lowly knee,
To her makes preſent of his ſervice ſeen,
Which ſhe accepts with thanks and goodly gree. Fa 3veen.
GREEce. n.ſ.. [corrupted from degrees.j A flight of ſleps:
Ev'ry greece of fortune
Is ſmother'd by that below. Shakeſpeare.
After the proceſſion, the king himſelf remaining ſeated in
the quire, the lord archbiſhop, upon the greece of the quire,
made a long oration. Eacon's Henry VII.
GRE'EDILY. adj. [from greedy..] Eagerly; ravenouſly; vora-
ciouſly; with keen appetite or deſire. -
Greedily ſhe engorg'd without reſtraint. A ſiſt. Par. Lºft.
He ſwallow'd it as greedily
As parched earth drinks rain. Denham's Sºphy.
Ev’n deadly plants, and herbs of pois'nous juice,
Wild hunger ſeeks; and to prolong our breath,
We greedily devour our certain death. Dryd. Indian Emp.
GR E'ED IN Ess. n. ſ. [from greedy..] Ravenouſneſs; voracity;
hunger; eagerneſs of appetite or deſire.
Fox in ſtealth, wolf in greedineſs. Shakeſp King Lear.
Thither with all greedings of affe&amp;lion are they gone, and
there they intend to ſup. Shakeſpeare's 11 inter's Tale.
If thou wert the wolf, thy greedineſ would afflićt thee.
Shakeſpeare's 7 irºn ºf Athens.
I with the ſame greedineſ, did ſºck, -
As water when I thirſt, to ſwallow Greek. Denham.
GREEDY. adj. [3rbiš, Sax. graadig, Dan. gretſg, Dutch..]
1. Ravenous; voracious; hungry.
As a lion that is greedy of his prey. Pſ. xvii. 12.
Be not unſatiable in any dainty thing, nor too greedy upon
meats. Eccluſ. xxxvii. 29.
He made the greedy ravens to be Elias's caterers, and bring
him food. King Charles.
2. Eager;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R E
G R E
º
º
º
2. Eager; vehemently deſirous. It is now commonly taken in
an ill ſenſe.
Greedy to know, as is the mind of man,
Their cauſe of death, ſwift to the fire ſhe ran. Fairfax.
The ways of every one that is greedy of gain. Prov.
Stern look'd the fichd, as fruſtrate of his will,
Not half ſuffic'd, and greed, yet to kill. Dryden.
While the reaper fills his greedy hands,
And binds the golden ſheaves in brittle bands. Dryd. Wirg.
GREEN. ad [grin, German; green, Dutch..]
1. Having a colour formed commonly by compounding blue and
yellow; of the colour of the leaves of trees or herbs. The
green colour is ſaid to be moſt favourable to the fight.
The general colour of plants is green, which is a colour that
no flower is of: there is a greeniſh primroſe, but it is pale,
and ſcarce a green. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Groves for ever green. Pope.
2. Pale; fickly : from whence we call the maid's diſeaſe the
green ſickneſs, or chloroſis. Like it is Sappho's XX wºotiºn rätz;.
Was the hope drunk
Wherein you dreſt yourſelf? Hath it ſlept fince?
And wakes it now to look ſo green and pale
At what it did ſo freely : Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
There's never any of theſe demure boys come to any proof:
they fall into a kind of male green ſickneſs. Shakespeare Henry IV.
*Till the green ſickneſs and love's force betray'd
To death's remorſcleſs arms th’ unhappy maid. Garth.
3. Flouriſhing; freſh; undecayed : from trees in Spring.
4. New ; freſh : as, a green wound.
The door is open, ſir; there lies your way:
You may be jogging while your boots are green. Shakeſp.
Griefs are green ;
And all thy friends, which thou muſt make thy friends,
Have but their ſtings and teeth newly ta'en out. Shakesp, H. IV.
In a vault,
Where bloody Tybait, yet but green in earth, º
Lics feitering in his blood. Shakeſpeare. Romeo and juliet.
A man that ſtudieth revenge keeps his own wounds greer,
which otherwiſe would heal and do well. Bacºn, Eſſay 4.
5. Not dry. -
If a ſpark of error have thus far prevailed, falling even
where the wood was green, and fartheſt off from any inclina-
tion unto furious attempts; muſt not the peril thereof be
greater in men, whoſe minds are of themſelves as dry fewel,
apt beforehand unto tumults Hooker, Dedication.
Of fragility the cauſe is an impotency to be extended, and
therefore ſtone is more fragil than metal, and ſo dry wood is
more fragil than green. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
If you but conſider a piece of green wood burning in a
chimney, you will readily diſcern, in the diſbanded parts of it,
the four elements. Boyſe.
The green do often heat the ripe, and the ripe, ſo heated,
give fire to the green. A/ortiºner's Husbandry.
6. Not roaſted; half rºw.
Under this head we may rank thoſe words which ſignify
different ideas, by a ſort of an unaccountable far-fetched ana-
logy, or diſtant reſemblance, that fancy has introduced be-
tween one thing and another; as when we ſay the meat is
green, when it is half roaſted. iſ atts's Logick.
7. Unripe; immature; young; becauſe fruits are green before
they are ripe.
My fallad days,
When I was green in judgment, cold in blood' Shakespeare.
O charming youth, in the firſt op'ning page;
So many graces in ſo green an age. Dryden,
You'll find a difference
Between the promiſe of his greener days,
And theſe he maſters now. Shakespeare. Henry V.
If you would fat green geeſe, ſhut them up when they are
about a month old. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Stubble geeſe at Michaelmas are ſeen -
Upon the ſpit, next May produces green. King's Coºkery.
GREEN. m. ſ.
1. The green colour; green colour of different ſhades.
Her mother hath intended,
That, quaint in green, ſhe ſhall be looſe enrob’d. Shakespeare
But with your preſence cheer'd, they ceaſe to mourn;
And walks wear freſher green at your return. Dryden.
Cinnabar, illuminated by this beam, appears of the ſame
red colour as in daylight; and if at the lens you intercept the
green making and blue making rays, its redneſs will become
more full and lively. Newton's Opt.
. Let us but conſider the two colours of yellow and blue: if
they are mingled together in any conſiderable proportion, they
make a green. Watts's Lºgicé.
2. A graſſy plain.
For this down-trodden equity, we tread
In warlike march theſe greems before your town. Shakeſp.
O'er the ſmooth enamell'd creen,
Where no print of ſtep hath been,
Follow me as I fing. - Milton.
The young AFmilia, fairer to be ſeen -
Than the fair lilly on the flow'ry green. Dryden's Fable.
3. Leaves; branches; wreaths. '
With greens and flow'rs recruit their empty hives,
And ſeek freſh forage to ſuſtain their lives. Dryden's Wirg.
Ev'ry brow with chearful green is crown'd ;
The feaſts are doubled, and the bowls go round. Dryden.
The fragrant greens I ſeek, my brows to bind. Dryden.
To G8 REN. v.a. [from the noun.J. To make green. A low
word. -
Great Spring before
Green’d all the year; and fruits and bloſſoms bluſh'd
In ſocial ſweetneſs on the ſelf-ſame bough. Tºonſ. Spring.
GREEN B Room. n. f. [ cytiſo geniſła, Latin. )
It hath papilioliaceous flowers, which are ſucceeded by com-
preſſed pods, in which are contained many kidney ſhaped
feeds: the branches of the trees are flexible, and have ſome-
times ſingle, and other times three leaves joined together. This
ſhrub grows wild upon barren dry heaths. Miller. .
GRE's Ncloth. n.ſ. A board or court of juſtice held in the
counting-houſe of the king's houſhold, for the taking cogni-
Zance of all matters of government and juſtice within the
king's court-royal ; and for correcting all the ſervants that
ſhall offend. Dić.
For the greencloth law, take it in the largeſt ſenſe, I have no
opinion of it. Bacon’s Advice to Williers.
GREENEYED. adj. [green and eye.] Having eyes coloured
with green.
Doubtful thoughts, and raſh-embrac'd deſpair,
And ſhudd'ring fear, and greeney’d jealouſy. Shakeſpeare.
GREENFINcH. n.). A kind of bird.
The chaffinch, greenfinch, dormouſe, and other ſmall birds,
are injurious to ſome fruits. Mortimer's Husbandry.
GREE'NF1s H. n.ſ. A kind of fiſh. Ainſworth.
GREENGAGF. m. ſ. A ſpecies of Plum", which ſee.
GRE'ENHouse. m. ſ. [green and houſe. J A houſe in which
tender plants are ſheltered from the weather.
If the ſeaſon prove exceeding piercing, which you may
know by the freezing of a moiſtened cloth ſet in your green-
houſe, kindle ſome charcoal, Eveyn'. Kalendar.
Sometimes our road led us into ſeveral hollow apartments
among the rocks and mountains, that look like ſo many na-
tural greenhorſes, as being always ſhaded with a great variety
of trees and ſhrubs that never loſe their verdure. Addison,
A kitchen garden is a more pleaſant fight than the fineſt
orangery or artificial greenhouſe. Speciator, Nº. 477.
GRE ENISH. adj. [from green.] Somewhat green; tending to
green. -
With goodly greeniſh locks, all looſe, unty'd,
As each had been a bride. Spenſer’s Prothalam.
Of this order the green of all vegetables ſeems to be, partly
by reaſon of the intenſeneſs of their colours, and partiy be-
cauſe, when they wither, ſome of them turn to a greeniſh
yellow. Newton's Opt.
GREENLY. adj. [from green.]
I. With a greeniſh colour.
2. Newly ; freſhly.
3. Immaturely.
4. Wanly; tımidly.
Kate, I cannot look greenly, nor gaſp out my eloquence;
nor have I cunning in proteſtation. Shakespeare's Henry V,
GREEN N Ess. m. / (from green J -
1. The quality of being green; viridity; viridneſs. -
About it grew ſuch fort of trees, as either excellency of
fruit, ſtatelineſs of growth, continual greenneſ, or poetical
fancies have made at any time famous. Sidney, b. i.
In a meadow, though the meer graſs and greenneſs delights,
yet the variety of flowers doth heighten and beautify. B. Jºhnſ.
My reaſon, which diſcourſes on what it finds in my phan-
taſy, can conſider greenneſs by itſelf, or mellowneſs, or ſweet-
neſs, or coldneſs, ſingly and alone by itſelf. Digby on Bodies:
2. Immaturity; unripeneſs.
This prince, while yet the errors in his nature were ex-
cuſed by the greemneſs of his youth, which took all the fault
upon itſelf, loved a private man's wife. Sidney, b. ii.
3. Freſhneſs; vigour. -
Take the picture of a man in the greenneſ; and vivacity of
his youth, and in the latter date and declenſion of his droop-
ing years, and you will ſcarce know it to belong to the ſame
perſon South's Sermons,
4. Newneſs. -
GREEN sickNess. n ſ. [ green and ſºngſ...] The diſeaſe of
maids, ſo called from the paleneſs which it produces.
Sour erućtations, and a craving appetite, eſpecially of ter-
reſtrial and abſorbent ſubſtances, are the caſe of girls in the
greemſ; Kneſs. Arbuthnot.
GRE/EN sw A R D. }'ſ [green and ſward: of the ſame original
GREEN sworp. 5 with ſwath. }. The turf on which graſs
grows. - - -
This is the prettieſt low-born laſs that ever
Ran on the greenſwºrd. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
10 Q. - After
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R. E.
GRE'ETING. m. ſ. [ from greet. )
After break their faſt
On greenſword ground, a cool and grateful taſte. Dryden.
In ſhallów ſoils all is gravel within a few inches; and
ſometimes in low ground a thin greenſward, and ſloughy un-
derneath; which laſt turns all into bog. Swift.
GREEN with D. n.ſ.. [green and weed J Dyers weed.
GREENwoop. n.ſ. [green and wood.] A wood conſidered as
it appears in the Spring or Summer. It is ſometimes uſed as
one word. -
Among wild herbs under the greenwood ſhade. Fairfax.
It happen'd on a Summer's holiday,
That to the greenwood ſhade he took his way;
For Cymon ſhunn'd the church.
Dryden's Cymon and Iphigenia.
To GREET. v. a. [gratºr, Latin; 3) etan, Saxon.]
1. To addreſs at meeting.
I think if men, which in theſe places live,
Durſt look in themſelves, and themſelves retrieve,
They would like ſtraggers greet themſelves. Domine.
I would gladly go,
To greet my Pallas with ſuch news below. Dryden's &amp;n.
2. To addreſs in whatever manner.
My noble partner
You greet with preſent grace, and great predićtion ;
To me you ſpeak not. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
And mark my greeting well; for what I ſpeak,
My body ſhall make good. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
3. To ſalute in kindneſs or reſpect.
My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.
—God bleſs your grace with health and happy days. Shakespeare
Now the herald lark
Left his ground neſt, high tow'ring to deſcry
The morn's approach, and greet her with his ſong. Milton.
Once had the early matrons run
To greet her of a lovely ſon. Milton.
The ſea's our own; and now all nations greet,
With bending ſails, each veſſel of our fleet. Waller.
Thus pale they meet, their eyes with fury burn:
None greets; for none the greeting will return;
But in dumb ſurlineſs, each arm'd with care,
His foe profeſt, as brother of the war. Dryden's Fables:
4. To congratulate. -
His lady, ſeeing all that channel from far,
Approacht in haſte to greet his vićtorie. Fairy Queen, b, i.
5. To pay compliments at a diſtance.
The king's a-bed,
And ſent great largeſs to your officers;
This diamond he greets your wife withal,
By the name of moſt kind hoſteſs. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
6. To meet, as thoſe do who go to pay congratulations. Not
much in uſe.
Your haſte
Is now urg'd on you.
We will greet the time. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Such was that face on which I dwelt with joy,
Ere Greece aſſembled ſtem'd the tides to Troy;
But parting then for that deteſted ſhore,
Our eyes, unhappy! never greeted more.
To GRE e.t. v. m. To meet and ſalute.
There greet in ſilence, as the dead are wont,
And ſleep in peace.
GREE'TER. n.ſ.. [from the verb. J He who greets.
Salutation at meeting, or
Pope's Odyſſey.
Shakeſp.
compliments at a diſtance.
I from him
Give you all greetings, that a king, as friend,
Can Č. his brother. Shakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale.
GREEze. n.ſ. [Otherwiſe written greece. See GRE EcE, or
º or GRIce, from degrees.] A flight of ſteps; a
ep.
In purity of manhood ſtand upright,
And ſay, this man's a flatterer: if one be,
So are they all; for every greeze of fortune
Is ſmooth'd by that below: the learned pate,
Ducks to the golden fool. Shakeſpeare's Timºn of Athens.
GRE'GAL. adj. [grex, gregis, Lat J Belonging to a flock. Dić.
GREGA'Rio Us, adj. [gregarius, Latin. J Going in flocks or
herds, like ſheep or partridges.
No birds of prey are gregarious. Ray on the Creation.
GRE'MIAL. adj. [gremium, Lat.] Pertaining to the lap. Dić.
GRENA'DE. n.ſ. f from pomum granatum, Latin. J A lit-
tle hollow globe or ball of iron, or other metal, about
two inches and a half in diameter, which, being filled
with fine powder, is ſet on fire by means of a ſmall fuſee
faſtened to the touch-hole: as ſoon as it is kindled, the caſe
flies into many ſhatters, much to the damage of all that ſtand
near. Theſe granades ſerve to fire cloſe and narrow paſſages,
and are often thrown with the hand among the ſoldiers to diſ-
order their ranks, more eſpecially in thoſe poſts where they
ſtand thickeſt; as in trenches, redoubts, and lodgments. Harr.
GRENA DiE.R. n.ſ. [grenadier, Fr. from grenade. J A tall foot-
ſoldier, of whom there is one company in every regimeat:
ſush men being employed to throw grenades.
Peace allays the #º fear
Of wearing cap of grenadier.
GRENA'Do. n.ſ. See GRENADE.
Yet to expreſs a Scot, to play that prize,
Not all thoſe mouth grenados can ſuffice. Cleaveland.
You may as well try to quench a flaming grenado with a
ſhell of fair water, as hope to ſucceed. Watts.
GREuT. n.ſ. A kind of foſfile body.
A ſort of tin-ore, with its greut; that is, a congeries of
cryſtals, or ſparks of ſpar, of the bigneſs of bayſalt, and of a
brown ſhining colour immerſed therein. Grew's Muſeum.
GREw. The preterite of grow.
The pleaſing taſk he fails not to renew ;
Soft and more ſoft at ev'ry touch it grew. Dryden's Fables.
GRRY. adj. [gris, French. More properly written gray.] See
GRAY.
Gay's Paſtorals.
This ancient ruffian, ſir, whoſe life I ſpar'd at ſuit of his " '
grey beard. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Our green youth copies what grey ſinners ačt,
When venerable age commends the fact. Dryden.
GRE'YHou N'D. n.f. [anizpunb, Saxon.] A tall fleet dog that
chaſes in fight.
Firſt may a truſty greyhound transform himſelf into a
tyger. Sidney, b, i.
So on the downs we ſee, near Wilton fair,
A haſt'ned hare from greedy greyhounds go. Sidney.
Th’ impatient greyhound, ſlipt from far,
Bounds o'er the glebe to catch the fearful hare. Dryden.
GRIce. n.ſ.
1. A little pig. Gouldman.
2. A ſtep or greeze.
- No, not a grice;
This a ſtep to love. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
To GRIDE. v. n. [gridare, Italian.] To cut; to make way
by cutting. A word elegant, but not in uſe.
His poignant ſpear he thruſt with puiſſant ſway,
At proud Cymochles, whiles his ſhield was wide,
That through his thigh the mortal ſteel did gride. F. Queen.
So fore
The griding ſword, with diſcontinuous wound,
Paſs'd through him! Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi.
GR1'DELIN. adj. A colour mixed of white and red.
The ladies dreſs'd in rich ſymars were ſeen,
Of Florence ſatten, flower'd with white and green,
And for a ſhade betwixt the bloomy gridelin. Dryden's Fab.
GR1'DIRoN. m. ſ. [grind, Iſlandick, a grate and iron..] A port-
able grate on which meat is laid to be broiled upon the fire.
He had added two bars to the gridiron. Speciator, Nº. 570.
Gº fl. ſ. [from grieve ; griff, Welſh, probably from the
ngliſh.
I. j trouble for ſomething paſt.
I will inſtruct my ſorrows to be proud;
For grief is proud, and makes his owner ſtout. Shakeſpeare.
Wringing of the hands, knocking the breaſt, or wiſhing
one's ſelf unborn, are but the ceremonies of ſorrow, the
pomp and oſtentation of an effeminate grief, which ſpeak not
ſo much the greatneſs of the miſery as the ſmallneſs of the
mind. South's Sermons.
The mother was ſo afflićted at the loſs of a fine boy, who
was her only ſon, that ſhe died for grief of it. Addiſon's Speci.
2. Grievance; harm. [Grief, French.]
Be factious for redreſs of all theſe grief,
And I will ſet this foot of mine as far
As who goes fartheſt.
The king hath ſent to know
The nature of your grief, and whereupon
You conjure from the breaſt of civil peace
Such bold hoſtility? Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
3. Pain; difeaſe. -
GR1'Eva N.cf. m. ſ. [from grief]
1. A ſtate of uneaſineſs. Out of uſe.
2. The cauſe of uneaſineſs. Uſed of ſuch cauſes as are the
effects of human condućt.
What remedy can be found againſt grievances, but to bring
religion into countenance, and encourage thoſe who, from the
hope of future reward, and dread of future puniſhment, will
be moved to juſtice and integrity Swift.
To GRIEVE. v. a. [grever, French ; griever, Flemiſh; gra-
vis, Latin.] To afflićt; to hurt.
For he doth not afflićt willingly, nor grieve the children of
men. Lu iii. 33.
Forty years long was I grieved with this generaticn. Pſal.
It repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth,
and it grieved him at his heart. Gen. vi. 6.
Griev'd at the thought, he vow'd his whole endeavour
Should be to cloſe thoſe breaches. Rºwe's Ambitious Stºpni.
To GR1Eve. v. m. To be in pain for ſomething paſt; to
mourn; to ſorrow, as for the death of friends.
Do not you grieve at this ; I ſhall be ſent for in private to
him: look you, he muſt ſeem thus to the world. Shakespeare *.
4. With
Shakeſpeare.
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">**
G R I
G R I
º
With equal mind what happens let us bear;
Nor joy nor grieve too much for things beyond our care.
Dryden's Fables.
GRIE'viNGLY. adv. [from grieve..] In ſorrow; ſorrowfully.
Grievingly, I think,
The peace between the French and us not values
The coſt that did conclude it. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
GRIE’VOUS. adj. [gravis, Latin; or from 7% grieve..]
I. Afflićtive; painful; hard to be born. -
To the fleſh, as the apoſtle himſelf granteth, all afflićtion
is naturally grievous. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 48.
Correction is grievous unto him that forſaketh the way, and
he that hateth reproof ſhall die. Prov. xv. 1 o.
2. Such as cauſes ſorrow.
To own a great but grievous truth, though they may
quicken and ſharpen the invention, they corrupt the temper.
Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
3- º great degree of uneaſineſs.
He durſt not diſobey, but ſent grievous complaints to the
parliament of the uſage he was forced to ſubmit to. Clarendon.
4. Atrocious; heavy.
It was a grievous fault,
And grievouſly hath Caeſar anſwer'd it. Shakespeare jul. Caeſar.
5. Sometimes uſed adverbially in low language. -
He cannot come, my lord ; he's grievous ſick. Shakeſp.
GRIE’vously. adv. [from grievous.]
1. Painfully; with pain.
Wide was the wound, and a large lukewarm flood,
Red as the roſe, thence guſhed grievouſly. Fairy Queen.
2. With diſcontent; with ill will.
Grittus, perceiving how grievouſly the matter was taken,
with the danger he was in, began to doubt. Knolles.
3. Calamitouſly; miſerably.
I ſee how a number of ſouls are, for want of right infor-
mation in this point, oftentimes grievouſly vexed. Hooker, b. v.
4. Vexatiouſly; to a great degree of uneaſineſs.
Houſes built in plains are apt to be grievouſly annoyed with
mire and dirt. Ray on the Creation.
GR1E"vousNess. n.ſ. [from grievous.] Sorrow; pain; cala-
mity.
#5 fled from the ſwords, from the drawn ſword and from
the bent bow, and from the grievouſneſs of war. Iſ xxi. 15:
GR1'FFIN. ln. ſ. [This ſhould rather be written gryſon, or gry-
GR1'FFon. } phon, gryps, yº; but it is generally written
griffin.] A fabled animal, ſaid to be generated between the lion
and eagle, and to have the head and paws of the lion, and
the wings of the eagle.
Of all bearing among theſe winged creatures, the griffin is
the moſt ancient. Peacham on Blazoning.
Ariſteus, a poet of Proconeſus, affirmed, that near the one-
eyed nations griffins defended the mines of gold. Brown.
GRIG. n.J. [kricke, Bavarian, a little duck.]
1. It ſeems originally to have ſignified any thing below the
natural ſize.
2. A ſmall eel.
3. f º creature. [Suppoſed from Greek; graculus fºſſivus,
atln.
Hard is her heart as flint or ſtone,
She laughs to ſee me pale;
And merry as a grig is grown,
And briſk as bottle-ale. Swift.
To GRILL. v. n. [grille, a grate, French. J. To broil on a
grate or gridiron.
GR1'LL AD E. m. ſ. [from grill. J. Any thing broiled on the
gridiron.
To GR1'LLY. v. a. [from grill. J. This word ſignifies, as it
ſeems, to harraſs; to hurt: as we now ſay, to roaſt a man,
for to teaze him.
For while we wrangle here and jar,
W’ are grillied all at Temple-bar.
GRIM. adj. [3]umma, Saxon.]
! • iºns a countenance of terrour; horrible; hideous; fright-
ful.
Hudibras, p. iii.
The innocent prey in haſte he does forſake,
Which quit from death, yet quakes in every Hmb,
With change of fear to ſee the lion look ſo grim. F. Queen.
Thou haſt a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in't. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Their dear cauſes
Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
Excite the mortified man. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
What if the breath that kindled thoſe grim fires,
Awak'd, ſhould blow them into ſevenfold rage Milton.
Expert to turn the ſway
Of battle, open when and where to cloſe
The ridges of grim war. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi.
He that dares to die,
May laugh at the grim face of law and ſcorn,
The cruel wrinkle of a tyrant brow. Denham's Sophy.
Their ſwarthy hoſts would darken all our plains,
Doubling the native horrour of the war,
And making death mere grim. Addiſon's Cato.
2. Ugly; ill-looking.
Grim viſag’d war hath ſmooth'd his wrinkl’d front. Shakespeare
Venus was like her mother; for her father is but grim. Shaft.
GR1'MAce. n.ſ. [French, from grim. J
1. A diſtortion of the countenance from habit, affectation, or
inſolence.
He had not ſpar'd to ſhew his piques,
Againſt th’ haranguer's politicks,
With ſmart remarks of leering faces,
And annotations of grimaces / Hudibras, p. iii.
The favourable opinion and good word of men comes ofteh-
times at a very eaſy rate; and by a few demure looks and af-
fečted whims, ſet off with ſome odd devotional poſtures and
grimaces, and ſuch other little arts of diffinulation, cunning
men will do wonders, South's Sermons.
The buffoon ape, with grimates and gambols, carried it
from the whole field. L'E/trange, Fable 1 16.
The French nation is addićted to grimacº. Speciator.
2. Air of affectation.
Vice in a vizard, to avoid grimace, -
Allows all freedom, but to ſee the face. Granville.
GRIMA'lkis. n.ſ. [griſ, French, grey, and malkin, or little
Moll.]
1. Grey little woman; the name of an old cat.
So, poets ſing,
Grimalkin, to domeſtick vermin ſworn
An everlaſting foe, with watchful eye
Lies nightly brooding o'er a chinky gap,
Protending her fell claws, to thoughtleſs mice -
Sure ruin. Phillipt.
GRIME. n.ſ.. [from grim.]. Dirt deeply inſinuated; fullying
blackneſs not eaſilv cleanſed.
Swart, like my i. but her face nothing ſo clean kept;
for why? ſhe ſweats: a man may go over ſhoes in the grime
of it. Shakeſpeare's Comedy of Errours.
Collow is the word by which they denote black grime of
burnt coals or wood. lºodward on Foſſils.
To GRIME. v. a. [from the noun.] To dirt; to fully deeply.
My face I'll grime with filth,
Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots. Shakeſpeare.
GR1'MLY. adv. [from grim.]
1. Horribly; hideouſly; terribly.
We've landed in ill time: the ſkies look grimly,
And threaten preſent bluſters, Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
So Pluto, ſeiz'd of Proſerpine, convey’d
To hell's tremendous gloom th’ affrighted maid;
There grimly ſmil'd, pleas'd with the beauteous prize,"
Nor envy'd Jove his ſunſhine and his ſkies. Addiſon's Cato.
2. Sourly; ſullenly.
The augurs
Say they know not; they cannot tell; look grimy,
And dare not ſpeak their knowledge. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleop.
GR1'MNEss. n.ſ. [ from grim. J Horror; frightfulneſs of
viſage.
To GRIN. v. n. [ xrennian, Saxon; grinnen, grinden, Dutch,
undoubtedly of the ſame origin with 7% grind, as we now ſay
to grind the teeth; grincer, French.] -
1. To ſet the teeth together and withdraw the lips.
Small curs are not regarded when they grin ;
But great men tremble when the lion roars. Shakeſp. H. VI.
Death, death oh, amiable, lovely death !
Come grin on me, and I will think thou ſmil'ſt. Shakeſp.
What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
For one to truſt his hand between his teeth,
When he might ſpurn him with his foot away ? Shakeſp.
It was no unpleaſant entertainment to me to ſee the various
methods with which they have attacked me; ſome with pite-
ous moans and outcries, others grinning, and only ſhewing
their teeth. Stilingfieet.
A lion's hide he wears;
About his ſhoulders hangs the ſhaggy ſkin;
The teeth and gaping jaws ſeverely grin. Dryden's Án.
They neither could defend, nor can purſue;
But grinn'd their teeth, and caſt a helpleſs view. Dryden.
Madneſs, we fancy, gave an ill-tim'd birth
To grinning laughter and to frantick mirth, Prior:
2. To fix the teeth as in anguiſh.
I like not ſuch grinning honour as fir Walter hath: give me
life, which if I can ſave, ſo; if not, honour comes unlook'd
for, and there's an end. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. i.
GRIN. m.ſ.. [from the verb.] The aët of cloſing the teeth
and ſhewing them.
He laughs at him : in's face too.
—O you miſtake him; 'twas an humble grin,
The fawning joy of courtiers and of dogs. Dryden.
The muſcles were ſo drawn together on each ſide of his
face, that he ſhewed twenty teeth at a grin. Addiſon's Stedjat.
Deiſts are effectually beaten in all their combats at the wea-
pons of men, that is, reaſon and argument; and they would
now attack our religion with the talents of a vile animal, that
is, grin and grimace. J/atti's Improvement of the Mind.
GRIN. m. ſ. [3nyn, xynene, Saxon.] A ſnare; a trap. Lik
like
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R I
G R I
-
Like a birde that haſteth to his gryn,
Not knowinge the perile. Chaucer.
The grin ſhall take him by the heel, and the robber ſhall
prevail againſt him. job xviii. 9.
To GRINI). v. a. preter. I ground; part, paſſ ground. [3run-
ban, 3e3runben, ground, Saxon.] . . . . -
1. To reduce any thing to powder by frićtion; to comminute by
attrition.
And whoſoever ſhall fall on this ſtone, ſhall be broken ; but
on whomſoever it ſhall fall, it will grind him to powder. Mat.
He that will have a cake out of the wheat, muſt needs tarry
the grinding. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
What relation or affinity is there between a minute body
and cogitation, any more than the greateſt ? Is a ſmall drop of
rain any wiſer than the ocean: Or do we grindinanimate corn
into living and rational meal?
2. To ſharpen or ſmooth by rubbing on ſomething hard.
Meeting with time, ſlack thing, ſaid I,
Thy ſithe is dull; whet it, for ſhame:
No marvel, ſir, he did reply,
If it at length deſerve ſome blame;
But where one man would have me grind it,
Twenty for one too ſharp do find it. Herbert.
Againſt a ſtump his tuſk the monſter grinds,
And in the ſharpen'd edge new vigour finds. Dryd. Fables.
That the ſtomach in animals grinds the ſubſtances which it
receives, is evident from the diffectic n of animals, which have
ſwallowed metals, which have been found poliſhed on the ſide
next the ſtomach. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. To rub one againſt another.
So up he let him riſe; who with grim look,
And count'nance ſtern, upſtanding, 'gan to grind
His grated teeth for great diſdain. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Harſh ſounds, as of a ſaw when it is ſharpened, and grind-
ing of one ſtone againſt another, make a ſhivering or horror
in the body, and ſet the teeth on edge. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſtory.
4. To harraſs; to oppreſs.
Some merchants and tradeſmen, under colour of furniſhing
the colony with neceſſaries, may not grind them ſo as ſhall
always keep them in poverty. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Another way the Spaniards have taken to grind the Neapo-
litans, and yet to take off the odium from themſelves. Addison
To GRIN D. v. n. To perform the act of grinding; to move
a mill. -
Fetter'd they ſend thce
Into the common priſon, there to grind
... Among the ſlaves and aſſes.
2. To be moved as in the act of grinding.
Shrinking ſinews ſtart,
And ſmeary foam works o'er my grinding jaws. Rowe.
GR1'NDER. m. ſ. [from grind.]
1. One that grinds; one that works in a mill.
2. The inſtrument of grinding.
His heart a ſolid rock, to fear unknown,
And harder than the grinder's nether ſtone. Sandys.
Now exhort
Thy hinds to exerciſe the pointed ſteel
On the hard rock, and give a wheely form
To the expected grinder. Philips.
3. [Inno-cobar.] The back teeth; the double teeth.
The teeth are in men of three kinds: ſharp, as the fore-
teeth; broad, as the back-teeth, which we call the molar-
teeth, or grinders; and pointed tecth, or canine, which are
between both. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory. .
He the raging lioneſs confounds,
The roaring lion with his javelin wounds;
Scatters their whelps, their grinders breaks; ſo they
With the old hunter ſtarve for want of prey. Sands.
The jaw-teeth or grinders, in Latin molares, are made flat
and broad a-top, and withal ſomewhat uneven and rugged,
that, by their knobs and little cavities, they may the better
retain, grind and commix the aliments. Kay on the Creation.
Nature is at a great deal of labour to tranſmute vegetable
into animal ſubſtances; therefore herb-eating animals, which
don't ruminate, have ſtrong grinders, and chew much. Arbuth.
4. The teeth, in irony or contempt.
One, who at fight of ſupper, open'd wide
His jaws before, and whetted grinders try’d. Dryd. Juven.
Both he brought;
He mouth'd them, and betwixt his grinders caught Dryden.
GR1'NDLEston E. Q m. ſ. [ from gº ind and ſtone j. The ſtone
GR1'ND STON E. ; on which edged inſtruments are ſharpened.
Such a light and metall'd dance
Saw you never yet in France;
And by the lead-men, for the nonce,
That turn round like grindleſtones,
Which they dig out fro’ the dells,
For their bairns bread, wives and ſells. Ben. johnſºn.
Literature is the grindſtone to ſharpen the coulters, and to
whet their natural faculties. Hammond on Fundamentals.
Smiths that make hinges brighten them, yet ſeldom file
Milton's Agoniſłes.
Bentley's Sermons. .
them; but grind them on a grind?” 'till bright. Mºxon.
GR1'NN.E.R. n.f. [from grº f Hé that grins.
The frightful it grinner
Be the winner. Adiſºn’s Sºciater, No. 170.
GR1'NNisgly, adv, [from grin.] With a grinning laugh.
GRIP. m. ſ. A ſmall ditch. Ainſworth.
To GRIP.E. v. a. ſ.greſpan, Gothick; ºpan, Saxon; ºriten
Dutch; gripp, sº Jº pain, ; £7 JPenix
1. To hold with the fingers cloſed; to graſp; to preſs with the
fingers. -
He that ſpeaks doth gripe the hearer's wriſt,
Whilſt he that hears makes fearful ačtion
With wrinkl’d brows. Sºgºffeare's King 7.ht.
He ſeiz'd the ſhining bough with griping hold,
And rent away with caſe the ling'ring gold. Dryden's Fr.
2. [Griffer, French..] To catch cagºrly; to ſeize.
A wond’rous way it for this lady wrought,
From lion's claws to pluck the grified prey. Fairy Queen.
You took occaſion to be quickly woo'd
To grife the gen'ral ſway into your hands. Shakespeare Hºn.IV.
3. To cloſe; to clutch.
Unlucky Welſted thy unfeeling maſter,
The more thou tickleſt, gripes his hand the faſter. Pope.
4. To pinch; to preſs; to ſqueeze. * .
- And firſt the dame came ruſhing through the wood;
And next the famiſh’d hounds that ſought their food, }
And grip'd her flanks, and oſt eſſay’d their jaws in blood
Dryden's Fubles.
To GRIP.E. v. n. To pinch the belly; to give the colick.
Thus full of counſel to the den ſhe went,
Grip'd all the way, and longing for a vent. Dryden.
Many people would, with reaſon, prefer the griping of an
hungry belly to thoſe diſhes which are a feaſt to others. Locke.
Manna, by the bulk, figure, texture and motion of its
parts, has a power to produce the ſenſations of ſickneſs, and
ſometimes of acute pains or gripings in us. Lºcke.
GRIPE. m. ſ. [from the verb.j . . .
1. Graſp ; hold; ſeizure of the hand or paw.
Therefore ſtill on high
He over him did hold his cruel claws, -
Threatning with greedy gripe to do him dy. Fairy Queen.
They put a barren ſceptre in my grip,
Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand. Shakespeare Macb.
Should I - º
Slaver with lips, as common as the ſtairs -
That mount the Capitol; join gripes with hands -
Made hardy with hourly fälſhood as with labour. Shałºń.
He gave me his hand,
And, with a feeble gripe, ſays, dear, my lord,
Command my ſervice. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
I fell; and with my weight the helm conſtrain'd,
Was drawn along, which yet my gripe retain'd. Dryd Zn.
2. Squeeze; preſſure.
Fir'd with this thought, at once he ſtrain'd the breaſt;
'Tis true, the harden'd breaſt reſiſts the gripe,
And the cold lips return a kiſs unripe. Dryden's Falles.
3. Oppreſſion; cruſhing power. -
I take my cauſe
Out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it
To a moſt noble judge, the king my maſter. Shakespeare H. VIII.
4. Affliction ; pinching diſtreſs.
Adam, at the news
Heart-ſtruck with chilling gripe of ſorrow ſtood,
That all his ſenſes bound ! Milt n’s Paradiſ. Loft, b. xi.
Can'ſt thou bear cold and hunger ? Can theſe limbs,
Fram'd for the tender offices of love,
Endure the bitter gripes of ſmarting poverty Otway.
5. [In the plural.] Belly-ach; colick. -
In the jaundice the choler is wanting; and the iélerical
have a great ſourneſs and gripes, with windineſs. Floyer.
GR 'PER. m.ſ. [ from grize. J Oppreſſor; uſurer; extor-
tion cr.
Others pretend zeal, and yet are profeſſed uſurers, griters,
monſters of men, and harpies. Burton on Melanchºly.
GR1'PINGLY. adv. [from griping.] With pain in the guts.
Clyſters help, left the medicine ſtop in the guts, and work
gripingly. Pacon's Natural Hiſtory.
GR1'PLE. n.ſ. A greedy ſnatcher; a griping miſer. Spenſer.
GR1's AMBER. m. ſ. Uſed by A. ilion for ambergriſe.
Beaſts of chaſe, or fowl of game,
In paſtry built, or from the ſpit, or boil'd,
Griſam!er ſteam'd. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd, b. ii.
GRISE. n.ſ. [Sce GR EEZE, as it ſhould be written..] A ſtep,
or ſcale of ſteps.
Let me ſpeak like ourſelf; and lay a ſentence,
Which, as a griſ; or ſtep, may help theſe lovers
Into your favour. Shakeſpeare's Ofhello.
GR1's KIN. m.ſ. [grigin, roaſt meat, Iriſh.] The vertebrae of
a hog broiled.
GR1's LY. adj. [zrurlu, Saxon.] Dreadſul, horrible; hidcous;
frightful; terrible.
6
His
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R I
. G R O
º
º
-
*
:
º
f
His griſly locks, long growen and unbound,
Diſordered hung about his ſhoulders round. Fairy Queen.
Where I was wont to ſeek the honey bee,
The griſly toadſtool grown there might I ſee. Spenser.
My griſly countenance made others fly;
None durit come near, for fear of ſudden death. Shakespeare H.VI.
Back ſtep'd thoſe two fair angels, half amaz'd
So ſudden to behold the griſly king;
Yet thus, unmov’d with fear, accoſt him ſoon. Milt, P. L.
For that damn'd magician, let him be girt
With all the griſly legions that troop
Under the ſooty flag of Acheron. - Milton.
The beauteous form of fight -
Is chang'd, and war appears a griſly fight. Dryden's Fables.
In viſion thou ſhalt ſee his griſly face,
The king of terrors, raging in thy race. Dryd. Innocence.
Thus the griſly ſpectre ſpoke again. Dryden's Fables.
Cloſe by each other laid, they preſs'd the ground,
Their manly boſoms pierc'd with many agriſly wound.
Dryden's Fables.
- So ruſhes on his foe the griſly bear. Addison.
GR1st. m. ſ. [3rurº, Saxon. J
1. Corn to be ground. -
Get grift to the mill to have plenty in ſtore,
Leſt miller lack water. Tuſcr's Husbandry.
A mighty trade this luſty miller drove;
Much grº/ from Cambridge to his lot did fall,
And all the corn they us’d at Scholars-hall. Miller of Trºmp.
2. Supply; proviſion. -
Matter, as wiſe logicians ſay,
Cannot without a form ſubſiſt ; ,
And form, ſay I, as well as they,
Muſt fail, if matter brings no griſt. Swift.
3. GR1st to 44il, is profit ; gain. -
The computation of degrees, in all matrimonial cauſes, is
wont to be made according to the rules of that law, becauſe
it brings ºr/l to the mill. Ayliffe's Parergon.
GRISTLE. n.f. [gurzle, Saxon.] A cartilage; a part of
the body next in hardneſs to a bone.
No living creatures, that have ſhells very hard, as oyſters,
, crabs, lobſters, and eſpecially the tortoiſe, have no bones
within them, but only little griſłłe. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Left the aſperity or hardneſs of theſe cartilages ſhould hurt
the ceſophagus or gullet, which is tender and of a ſkinny ſub-
ftance, or hinder the ſwallowing of our incat, therefore theſe
annulary griſtles are not made round, or intire circles; but
where the gullet touches the windpipe, there, to fill up the
circle, is only a ſoft membrane, which may eaſily give way to
, the dilatation of the gullet. Ray on the Creation.
GR1'stLY. adj. [from griſle..] Cartilaginous; made of griſtle,
At laſt they ſpit out pieces of their lungs; it may be ſmall
griftly bits, that are eaten off from the lung-pipes. Harvey.
She has made the back-bone of ſeveral vertebrae, as being
more fit to bend, more tough, and leſs in danger of breaking,
than if they were all one intire bone without theſe griftly
junétures. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
Fins are made of griſly ſpokes, or rays connected by
membranes; ſo that they may be contračted or extended like
womens fans. - Ray on the Creation.
They have a louder and ſtronger note than other birds of
the ſame bigneſs, which have only a griſily windpipe. Grew.
Each pipe, diſtinguiſh’d by its griftly rings,
To cheriſh life aerial paſture brings. Blackmore's Creation.
GRIT. n.ſ. [ xnycza, ºneoc, Saxon.]
1. The coarſe part of meal.
2. Oats huſked, or coarſely ground.
3. Sand; rough hard particles. - -
Sileſian bole, crackling a little betwixt the teeth, yet with-
-out the leaſt particle of grit, feels as ſmooth as Caſtile ſoap.
Grew's Muſæum.
The ſturdy pear-tree here
Will riſe luxuriant, and with tougheſt root
Pierce the obſtructing grit and reſtive marle. Phillips.
4. Grits are foſſils found in minute maſſes, forming together a
kind of powder; the ſeveral particles of which are of no de-
terminate ſhape, but ſeem the rudely broken fragments of
larger maſſes; not to be diſſolved or diſunited by water, but
retaining their figure, and not cohering into a maſs. They
are opake, and in many ſpecies fermenting with acids, and
often fouled with heterogene matters. One ſort is a fine, dull
looking, grey grit, which, if wetted with ſalt-water into
mortar or paſte, dries almoſt immediately, and coaleſces into
a hard ſtony maſs, ſuch as is not eaſily afterwards diſunited by
water. This is the pulvis puteolanus of the ancients, mixed
among their cements uſed in buildings ſunk into the ſea; and
in France and Italy an ingredient in their harder plaiſters, un-
der the name of pozzolane. It is common on the ſides of
hills in Italy. Another ſpecies, which is a coarſe, beautifully
green, dull grit, is the chryſocolla of the ancients, which they
uſed in ſoldering gold, long ſuppoſed a loſt foſſil. It ſerves
the purpoſe of ſoldering metals better than borax, and may be
had for carriage from the ſhores of New England. The
ferrugineous black glittering gº it, is the black ſhining ſand em.
ployed to throw over writing, found on the ſhords of Italy.
What is commonly uſed in London is from Genoa. The
coarſe, glittering, browniſh black is nearly of the ſame nature,
but inferior, in all reſpects. Hill on Fºſſils.
GR1'triNEss. n.ſ. [from gritty..] Sandineſs; the quality of
abounding in grit. - -
In fullers-earth he could find no find by the microſcope, nor
any grittineſs. º 41.1 tºner's Husbandry.
Gº. adj. [from grit..] Full of hard particles; conſiſting
of grit.
I could not diſcern the unevenneſs of the ſurface of the
powder, nor the little ſhadows let fall from the grºtty particles
thereof. t - Newton's Opt.
GRIZE LIN. adj. [More properly grid-lin. See GRIDELIN.j
The Burgundy, which is a grize in or pale red, of all others,
is ſureſt to ripen in our climate. Temple.
GRIZZLE. n.ſ.. [from gris, gray; griſtille, French..] A mix-
ture of white and black; gray.
O thou diſſembling cub what wilt thou be, -
When time hath ſow'd a grizzle on thy face? Shafeffeare,
GR1'zzI.E.D. adi, [from grizzle.] Interſperſed with gray.
To the boy Caeſar, ſend this grizzled head. Shakespeare,
His beard was grizzled: no.
—It was as I have ſeen it in his life.
His hair juſt grizzled,
As in a green old age. Drydºn and Leº's Oedipus,
Thoſe grizzled locks, which nature did provide
In plentedus growth, their aſſes cars to hide. Dryd. Yuven.
GR1'zzly. adj. [from gr’s, gray, French Somewhat gray.
Living creatures generally do charge their hair with age,
turning to be gray and white; as is ſeen in men, though ſome
earlier, ſome later; in horſes that are dappled, and turn white;
... and in old ſquirrels, that turn grizzly. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
To GROAN. v. n. Izanan, Saxon; groºm, Dutch.J. To
breathe with a hoarſe noiſe, as in pain or agony.
Many an heir
Of theſe fair edifices, for my wars,
Have I heard groan and drop. Shakeſpare's Coriolanus.
Men groan from out of the city, and the ſoul of the
wounded crieth oùt. job. xxiv. 12.
Repenting and groaning for anguiſh of ſpirit. J/ſl. v. 3,
So ſhall the world go on,
To good malignant, to bad men benign,
... Under her own weight groaning. Mikon's Paradiſ, Loft.
Nothing can ſo peculiarly gratify the noble diſpoſitions of
humanity, as for one man to ſee another ſo much himſelf as
to figh his griefs and groan his pains. South,
On the blazing pile his parent lay,
Or a lov’d brother groan'd his life away.
GRoAN. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Breath expired with noiſe and difficulty.
Alas poor country, - -
Where fighs and groans, and ſhrieks that rend the air,
Are made, not mark'd' Shakeſpeare's A Macbeth,
I led to ſlaughter, and to ſlaughter leave;
And ev’n from hence their dying groans receive. Dryden.
2. Any hoarſe dead ſound. -
Such ſheets of fire, ſuch burſts of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
Remember to have heard. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
GRO'ANFUL. adj. [groan and full.] Sad; agonizing.
Adown he keſt it with ſo puiſlant wreſt,
That back again it did aloft rebound, -
And gave againſt his mother earth a graaful ſound. F. &amp;#,
GROAT. n.ſ. (groot, Dutch ; graſſo, Italian.]
1. A piece valued at four pence.
2. A proverbial name for a ſmall ſum.
My mother was wont
To call them woollen vaſſals, things created
To buy and ſell with gº oats. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanut.
I dare lay a great,
A tertian ague is at leaſt your lot. Dryden's Falles.
Imagine a perſon of quality prevailed on to marry a wo-
man much his inferior, and without a great to her for-
tune. Swift.
3. GroAts. Oats that have the hulls taken off. Ainſwºrth.
GRO'CER. n.ſ. [This ſhould be written grºſſer, from grºſ, a
large quantity; a grocer originally being one who dealt by
wholeſale; or from grºſis, a fig, which their preſent ſtate
ſeems to favour.] -
• A grocer is a man who buys and ſells tea, ſugar and plumbs
and ſpices for gain. - //atts's Logick.
But ſtill the offspring of your brain ſhall prove
The grocer's care, and brave the rage of Jove, Garth.
Gro'cERY. m. ſ. [from grocer.] Grocers ware, ſuch as tea ;
ſugar; raiſins; ſpice.
His troops, being now in a country where they were not
expected, met with many cart-loads of wine, grocery, and
tobacco. - Clarendon, b. yji.
Jo R GRo'o E RAM.
Shakespeare. Hamilt.
Pope's Odyſſey.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R O
G R O
GRoger AM. ) m.ſ. [gros grain, French: graſſ granuſ, low
GRb'GRAM. ; Latin. Ainſworth.] ... Stuff woven with large
GRO'GRAN. woof and a rough pile.
Certes they're neatly cloth'd : I of this mind am, L. -
Your only wearing is your grogeram. Donne.
Natolia affords great ſtore of chamelots and grºgrams. Sandys.
Some men will ſay this habit of John's was neither of
camel's ſkin nor any coarſe texture of its hair, but rather ſome
finer weave of camelot, grogram, or the like. Brown's Wul. Err.
The natural ſweetneſs and innocence of her behaviour
ſhot me through and through, and did more execution upon
me in grogram than the greateſt beauty in town had ever done
in brocade. Addiſon's Spectator.
Plain goody would no longer down;
'Twas madam in her grgram gown. Swift.
GR or N. m. ſ. [Of uncertain derivation. J. The part next the
thigh.
&amp; The fatal dart arrives,
And through the border of his buckler drives; -
Paſs'd through and pierc'd his grain; the deadly wound
Caſt from his chariot, roll'd him on the ground. Dr. den.
Gro'Mwell. n.ſ. [ lithoſpermum, Latin.] Gromill or gray-
mill. A plant.
The cup of the flower conſiſts of one leaf, cut into five
long narrow ſegments: the flower, which is, for the moſt part,
ſmall, conſiſts of one leaf, is funnel-ſhaped, and open at the
top: the pointal is incompaſſed by four embryo's, which be-
come ſo many roundiſh hard poliſhed ſeeds. Miller.
G Room. n.ſ. [grom, Dutch..]
i. A boy; a waiter; a ſervant.
Then called ſhe a groom, that forth him led
Into a goodly lodge. Fairy Queen, b, i.
From Egypt's king ambaſſadours they come;
Them many a ſquire attends, and many a groom. Fairfax.
. Think then, my ſoul! that death is but a groºm
Which brings a taper to the outward room. Donne.
In the time of Edward VI. lived Sternhold, whom king
Henry his father, a little before, had made groom of his cham-
ber, for turning of certain of David's pſalms into verſe.
- Peacham on Poetry.
i. Would'ſt thou be touch'd
By the preſuming hands of ſaucy grooms? Dryd. Don Sebaſ.
Amid’ the fold he rages, nor the ſheep -
Their ſhepherds, nor the grooms their bulls can keep. Dryd.
2. A young man.
I preſume for to intreat this groom,
And ſilly maid, from danger to redeem. Fairfax, b. ii.
3. A man newly married.
. By this the brides are wak'd, their grooms are dreſs'd ;
All Rhodes is ſummon'd to the nuptial feaſt. Dryden.
GRoove. m. ſ. [from grave.]
1. A deep cavern, or hollow in mines.
He might, to avoid idleneſs, work in a groove or mine-pit
thereabouts, which at that time was little eſteemed. Boyle.
2. A channel or hollow cut with a tool.
The ſcrew-plate is a kind of ſteel well tempered, with
ſeveral holes in it, each leſs than other; and in thoſe holes are
threads grooved inwards, into which grooves fit the reſpective
taps that belong to them. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
To GRoove. v.a. [from the noun..] To cut hollow.
The plates of iron faſtened at the bottom of the box pre-
ſerved the balance while it fell, and every joint of it was well
grºoved. - Gulliver's Travels.
To GROPE. v. n. I grapan, Saxon.] To feel where one can-
not ſee.
My ſea-gown ſcarf about me, in the dark
Grop'd I, to find out them. Shakeſpeare's Ham'et.
Wegrºpe for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we
had no eyes. Iſ lix. 10.
They meet with darkneſs in the cleareſt light;
And grope at noon, as if involv’d with night. Sandys.
A boy was groping for ecls, and laid his hand upon a
ſnake. L'Eſtrange, Fable 131.
This, no doubt, is better for men than that they ſhould in
the dark grºpe after knowledge; as St. Paul tells us all nations
did after God. - Locke.
He heard us in our courſe, -
And with his out-ſtretch'd arms around him grip'd. Addison.
O truth divine ! enlighten’d by thy ray,
J grope and gueſs no more, but ſee my way. Arbuthnot.
To GR ope, v. a. To ſearch by feeling in the dark; to feel
without being able to ſee.
How vigilant to grope mens thoughts, and to pick out ſome-
what whereof they might complain. Hayward.
. They have left our endeavours to grote them out by twi-
light, and by darkneſs almoſt to diſcover that, whoſe exiſtence
is evidenced by light. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
But Strephon, cautious, never meant
The bottom of the pan to grope. Swift.
GRo'PER. m.ſ.. [from grope.] One that ſearches in the dark.
GRQSS, ad. (gro, French; graſh, Italian; traffin, Latin.j
1. Thick; bulky.
The crows and choughs, that wing the midway air,
Shew ſcarce ſo groſs as beetles. Shakeſp. King Lear.
There are two groſ; volumes concerning the power of
popes. Laker on Learning.
2. Shameful; unſeemly.
He ripely conſidered how groſs a thing it were for men of
his quality, wiſe and grave men, to live with ſuch a multi-
tude, and to be tenants at will under them. Hooker, Preface.
They can ſay that in doctrine, in diſcipline, in prayers, and
in ſacraments, the church of Rome hath very foul and groſ;
corruptions. Hooker, b. iv.
So far hath the natural underſtanding, even of fundry whole
nations, been darkened, that they have not diſcerned, no, not
groſs iniquity to be ſin. - Hooker, b, i.
3. Intellectually coalſe; palpable; impure; unrefined.
To all ſenſe ’tis grºſ;
You love my ſon: invention is aſham’d,
Againſt the proclamation of thy paſſion,
To ſay thou do'ſt not. Shakespeare All’s well that ends well.
Examples sº as earth exhort me. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
ike grºſs terms, n
The prince will in the perfectneſs of time
Caſt off his followers. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
, Belial came laſt, than whom a ſpirit more lewd
Fell not from heaven, or more groſs to love
Vice for itſelf. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. i.
Is not religion ſo perfeółly good in itſelf, above all, in its
Author, that, without the graſºft ſenſuality, we cannot but
admire it. Spratt's Sermoni.
It is a groſs miſtake of ſome men, to think that cur wants
only and imperfections do naturally induce us to be bene-
ficent. Smaridge's Sermonſ.
4. Inclegant; diſproportionate in bulk.
The ſun's oppreſſive ray the roſeat bloom
Of beauty blaſting, gives the gloomy hue,
And feature grºſ. Thomſºn's Summer.
5. Thick; not refined; not pure.
It is manifeſt, that when the eye ſtandeth in the finer me-
dium, and the objećt is in the groſſºr, things ſhew greater;
but contrariwiſe, when the eye is placed in the griffer me-
dium, and the objećt in the finer. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Of elements,
The groſſºr feeds the purer; earth the ſea,
Earth and the ſea feed air. A4ilton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. v.
Light fumes are merry, groſſer fumes are ſad;
Both are the reaſonable ſoul run mad. Dryden's Faber.
Or ſuck the miſts in groſſer air below,
Or dip their pinions in the painted bow. Pope.
6. Stupid; dull. - -
If ſhe doth then the ſubtile ſenſe excel,
How groſs are they that drown her in the blood? Davieſ.
And in clear dream and ſolemn viſion, -
Tell her of things that no groſ; ear can hear. Miltºn.
Some men give more light and knowledge by the bare ſtating
of the queſtion with perſpicuity and juſtneſs, than others by
talking of it in groſs confuſion for whole hours together.//atti.
7. Coarſe; rough; oppoſite to delicate.
Fine and delicate ſculptures are helped with nearneſs, and
grºſ with diſtance. J/otton's Architetºure.
8. Thick; fat; bulky.
GRoss. n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive.]
1. The main body; the main force.
The Belgians hop'd, that with diſorder'd haſte
The deep-cut keels upon the ſands might run;
Or, if with caution leiſurely were paſt,
Their numerous groſs might charge us one by one. Dryden.
Several caſuiſts are of opinion, that, in a battle, you ſhould
diſcharge upon the groſs of the enemy, without levelling your
piece at any particular perſon. Addiſon's Freeholder.
The groſs of the people can have no other proſpect in
changes and revolutions than of publick bleſfings. Addiſon.
2. The bulk; the whole not divided into its ſeveral parts.
Certain general inducements are uſed to make ſaleable your
cauſe in groſs. Hooker, Preface.
There was an opinion in groſs, that the ſoul was im-
mortal. Abbot's Deſcription of the J/orld.
Remember, ſon,
You are a general: other wars require you;
For ſee the Saxon grºſ; begins to move. Dryden’s K. Arthur.
Notwithſtanding the decay and loſs of ſundry trades and
manufactures, yet, in the grºſ, we ſhip off now one third
part more of the manufactures, as alſo lead and tin, than we
did twenty years paſt. Child's Diſcourſe on Trade.
3. Not individual, but a body together. -
He hath ribbons of all the colours i' th' rainbow; they
come to him by the groſ. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
I cannot inſtantly raiſe up the groſs
Of full three thouſand ducats. Shakespeare Merchant of Penice.
You ſee the united deſign of many perſons to make up one
figure: after they have ſeparated themſelves in many petty
diviſions, they rejoin ong by one into a grºſs. 1)ryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
4. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R O
º
.
:
A. The chief part; the main maſs. -
Comets, out of queſtion, have likewiſe power and effect
over the grºſ; and maſs of things. Bacon, Eſſay 24.
. The articulate ſounds are more confuſed, though the groſs
of the ſound be greater. Bacon's Natural Hijiory.
5. The number of twelve dozen, [Groſſe, French J
It is made up only of that fimple idea of an unite repeated;
and repetitions of this kind, joined together, make thoſe diſ-
tinét ſimple modes of a dozen, a groſs, and a million. Locke,
GRo'ssly. adv. [from groſs.j
1. Bulkily; in bulky parts; coarſely: as, this matter is groſsly,
pulverized. . . .
2. Without ſubtilty; without art; without delicacy; without
refinement; coarſely; palpably.
Such kind of ceremonies as have been ſo groſsly and ſhame-
fully abuſed in the church of Rome, where they remain, are
ſcandalous. Hoºker, b. iv. f. 12.
Treaſon and murder ever kept together, ,
As two yoke devils ſworn to others purpoſe;
Working ſo grºſsly in a natural cauſe,
That admiration did not whoop at them. Shakespeare. Hen. V.
And thine eyes
See it ſo groſsly ſhown in thy behaviour,
That in their kind they ſpeak it. Shakeſpeare.
What! are we cuckolds ere we have deſerv’d it?
—Speak not ſo groſsly. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
What I have ſaid has been forced from me, by ſeeing a
noble ſort of poetry ſo happily reſtored by one man, and ſo
groſsly copied by almoſt all the reſt. Dryden.
If at any time I ſpeak of light and rays as coloured, or
endued with colours, I would be underſtood to ſpeak not phi-
loſophically and properly, but grºſsly, and according to ſuch
conceptions as vulgar people, in ſeeing all theſe experiments,
would be apt to frame. Newton's Opt.
While it is ſo difficult to learn the ſprings and motives of
ſome facts, it is no wonder they ſhould be ſo groſsly miſrepre-
... ſented to the publick by curious inquiſitive heads. Swift.
GRO'ssNess. n.ſ. [ from groſs. J
1. Coarſeneſs; not ſubtilty; thickneſs; greatneſs of parts.
The purpoſe is perſpicuous even as ſubſtance,
Whoſe groſſneſs little characters ſum up. Shakeſpeare.
And I will purge that mortal groſſneſ; ſo, -
That thou ſhalt like an airy ſpirit go. Shakeſpeare.
. . The cauſe of the epilepſy from the ſtomach is the groſſneſs
bf the vapours which riſe and enter into the cells of the brain.
* , , Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 966.
Then all this earthy groſſneſs quit;
Attir'd with ſtars we ſhall for ever ſit,
Triumphing over death. - - Miłon.
So this being the firſt colour which vapours begin to refle&amp;t,
it ought to be the colour of the fineſt and moſt tranſparent
ſkies, in which vapours are not arrived to that groſſneſs requi-
fite to refle&amp;t other colours. - Newton's Opt.
For envy'd wit, like Sol eclips'd, was known
Th' oppoſing body's groſſneſ, not its own. Pope.
2. Inelegant fatneſs; unwieldy corpulence.
Wiſe men, that be over-fat and fleſhy, go to ſojourn abroad
at the temperate diet of ſome ſober man; and ſo, by little
and little, eat away the groſſneſ; that is in them. Aſtham.
3. Want of refinement; want of delicacy; intelle&amp;tual coarſe-
neſs.
I was three or four times in the thought they were not fai-
rics; and yet the guiltineſs of my mind drove the groſſneſs of
the foppery into a received belief that they were fairies. Shakespeare
Whatever beauties it may want, 'tis free at leaſt from the
groſſneſs of thoſe faults I mentioned. Dryden.
What a groſſneſs is there in the mind of that man, who
thinks to reach a lady's heart by wounding her ears Clariſſa.
Grot. m. ſ. [grotte, French; grotta, Italian.] A cave; a ca-
vern for coolneſs and pleaſure. .
In the remoteſt wood and lonely grot,
Certain to meet that worſt of evils, thought. Prior.
Awful ſee the Egerian grot. Pope.
GROTE'sque, adj. [groteſue, French; grotteſº, Italian. J
Diſtorted of figure; unnatural; wildly formed.
The champaign head
Qf a ſteep wilderneſs, whoſe hairy fides
With thicket overgrown, groteſque and wild,
Acceſs deny'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv.
There is yet a lower ſort of poetry and painting, which is
out of nature; for a farce is that in poetry which grotoſue is
in a pićture: the perſons and actions of a farce are all unna-
tural, and the manners falſe, that is, inconſiſting with the
characters of mankind: groteſque painting is the juſt reſem-
blance of this. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
An hideous figure of their foes they drew,
Nor lines, nor looks, nor ſhades, nor colours true,
And this groteſque deſign expos'd to publick view. Dryden.
Palladian walls, Venetian doors,
Groteſco roofs, and ſtucco floors. Pope's Sat. of Hºrace.
GRO'tto, n.ſ. [grotte, French; grotta, Italian.] A cavern or
4. Region; territory.
cave made for coolneſs. It is not uſed properly of a dark hor:
rid cavern.
Their careleſs chiefs to the cool grotto's run,
The bow'rs of kings, to ſhade them from the ſun. Dryden.
This was found at the entry of the grºtto in the Peak.”
J/oodward on Foſſils.
Grove. n.ſ [from gravel A walk covered by trees meeting
above.
I look'd toward 'Birnan, and anon methought
The wood began to move:
Within this three mile may you ſee it coming;
I ſay, a moving grove. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Fortunate fields, and groves, and flow'ry vales;
Thrice happy iſles | Milton;
She left the flow'ry field, and waving grave. Blackmºre.
Baniſh’d from courts and love,
Abandon'd truth ſeeks ſhelter in the grove. Granville;
Can fierce paſſions vex his breaſt;
While every gale is peace, and every grove *
Is melody ? Thomſon's Spring.
To GRo'v El. v. n. [ gruft, Iſlandick, flat on the face. It may
perhaps come by gradual corruption from ground fel]
1. To lie prone; to creep low on the ground.
The ſteel-head paſſage wrought,
And through his ſhoulder pierc'd ; wherewith to ground
He groveling fell, all gored in his guſhing wound. Fa. Qu.
What ſee'ſt thou there? king Henry's diadem, -
Inchas'd with all the honours of the world !
If ſo, gaze on, and grovel on thy face, - -
Until thy head be circled with the ſame. Shakespeare Hºn. IV.
Now they lie
Groveling and proſtrate on yon lake of fire. Mih. Par. Loſt.
Upon thy belly groveling thou ſhalt go. Milt. Par. Lºft.
Let us then conclude that all painters ought to require this
part of excellence: not to do it, is to want courage, and not
dare to ſhew themſelves: 'tis to creep and grovel on the
ground. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. To be mean ; to be without dignity or elevation.
I muſt diſclaim whate'er he can expreſs; -
His groveling ſenſe will ſhow my paſion leſs Dryden.
Several thoughts may be natural which are low and gro-
veling. Addiſon's Spediator.
GROUND. m. ſ [3runs, Saxon; growd, Daniſh.]
1. The earth, conſidered as ſolid, or as low.
Iſrael ſhall go on dry ground through the ſea. Ex. xiv. 15;
From the other hill .
To their fix’d ſtation, all in bright array,
The cherubim deſcended, on the ground w .
Gliding meteorous. Mill. Par. Left,
2. The earth as diſtinguiſhed from air of water.
I have made man and beaſt upon the ground, jer. xxvii. 5,
There was dew upon all the ground. judg. vi. 40.
It light on him as dew falleth on the ground. 2 Sa. xvii. 12;
Too late young Turnus the deluſion found;
Far on the ſea, ſtill making from the ground. Dryden's £n.
3. Land; country.
The water breaks its bounds; - -
And overflows the level grounds, Hudibras.
With theſe came they, who from the bord'ring flood
Of old Euphrates to the brook that parts
Egypt from Syrian ground, had general names
Of Baalim and Aſhtaroth. AZilton's Paradiſ? Loft, b, i.
5. Farm; eſtate; poſſeſſion.
Uneaſy ſtill within theſe narrow bounds, º
Thy next deſign is on thy neighbours ground; :
His crop invites, to full perfection grown;
Thy own ſeems thin, becauſe it is thy own. Dryd, juveh.
6. The floor or level of the place.
Wherefore ſhould I ſmite thee to the ground? 2 Sa. ii. 22.
Dagon was fallen on his face to the ground. i Sa. v. 4.
A multitude ſit on the ground. Ma. xv. 35.
7. Dregs; lees; feces; that which ſettles at the bottom of
liquors.
Set by them cyder, verjuice, ſour drink, of grounds. Mort.
Some inſiſt upon having had particular ſucceſs in º
gangrenes, from the uſe of the ground of ſtrong beer, mixe
up with bread or oatmeal. Sharp's Surgery.
8. The firſt ſtratum of paint upon which the figures are after-
wards painted.
We ſee the linner to begin with a rude draught, and the
painter to lay his grounds with ſhadows and darkſome colours.
Hakewill on Providence.
When ſolid bodies, ſenſible to the feeling and dark, are
placed on light and tranſparent grounds, as, for example, the
heavens, the clouds and waters, and every other thing which
is in motion, and void of different objects; they ought to be
more rough, and more diſtinguiſhable, than that with which
they are encompaſſed. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
9. The fundamental ſubſtance; that by which the additional or
accidental parts are ſupported.
Indeed
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R O
*. G R O
Indeed it was but juſt that the fineſt lines in nature ſhould
be drawn upon the moſt durable ground. - Pope.
10. The plain ſong; the tune on which deſcants are raiſed.
Get a prayer-book in your hand,
And ſtand between two churchmen, good my lord;
For on that ground I'll build a holy deſcant. Shakespeare R. III.
11. Firſt hint; firſt traces of an invention; that which gives
occaſion to the reſt. - -
Though jealouſy of ſtate th' invention found,
Yet love refin'd upon the former ground;
That way the tyrant had reſerv'd to fly, -
Purſuing hate, now ſerv'd to bring two lovers nigh. Dryden.
12. The firſt principles of knowledge.
The concords will eaſily be known, if the fore ground; be
thoroughly beaten in. Preface to Accidence.
Here ſtateſmen, or of them they which can read,
May of their occupation find the grounds. Donne.
After evening repaſts, ’till bed-time, their thoughts will be
beſt taken up in the eaſy grounds of religion, and the ſtory of
ſcripture. Milton on Education.
13. The fundamental cauſe; the true reaſon; original principle.
He deſired the fleward to tell him particularly the ground and
event of this accident. Sidney.
Making happineſs the ground of his unhappineſs, and good
news the argument of his ſorrow. Sidney, h. ii.
The uſe and benefit of good laws all that live under them
may enjoy with delight and comfort, albeit the ground; and
firſt original cauſes from whence they have ſprung be un-
known. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 1.
Thou could'ſt not have diſcern'd
Fraud in the ſerpent, ſpeaking as he ſpake,
No ground of enmity between us known. Mi’t. Par. Loft.
Nor did either of them ever think fit to make any parti-
cular relation of the grounds of their proceedings, or the
cauſes of their miſadventures. Clarendon, h. viii.
Sound judgment is the grºund of writing well. Roſcomm.
Love once given from her, and plac'd in you,
Would leave no ground I ever would be true. Dryden.
If it be natural, ought we not to conclude that there is
ſome ground and reaſon for theſe fears, and that nature hath
not planted them in us to no purpoſe. Tillotſon.
Upon that prince's death, although the grounds of our quar-
rel with France had received no manner of addition, yet this
lord thought fit to alter his ſentiments. Swift.
The miraculous increaſe of the profeſſors of Chriſtianity
was without any viſible grounds and cauſes, and contrary to all
human probability and appearance. Atterbury's Sermons.
14. The field or place of action.
Here was thy end decreed, when theſe men roſe;
And ev'n with theirs this act thy death did bring,
Or haſten’d at the leaſt upon this ground. Daniel's C. Iſar.
13. The ſpace occupied by an army as they fight, advance, or
retire.
At length the left wing of the Arcadians began to loſe
ground. Sidney.
Heartleſs they fought, and quitted ſoon their ground,
While our's with eaſy vićtory were crown'd. Dryd. Aureng.
He has loſt ground at the latter end of the day, by purſuing
his point too far, like the prince of Conde at the battle of
Senepa. Dryden's Fables, Prºſace.
16. The intervening ſpace between the flyer and purſuer.
Ev’ning miſt,
Ris'n from a river, o'er the mariſh glides,
And gathers ground faſt at the labourer's heels,
Homeward returning. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xii.
uperiors think it a detraćtion from their merit to ſee ano-
ther get ground upon them, and overtake them in the purſuits
of glory. Addiſon's Speciatºr.
Even whilſt we ſpeak our conqueror comeson,
And gathers ground upon us every moment. Addison.
17. The fire in which one is with reſpect to opponents or com-
petitors.
. . Had'ſt thou ſway’d as kings ſhould do,
Giving no ground unto the houſe of York,
They never then had ſprung. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
If they get ground and 'vantage of the king,
Then join you with them like a rib of ſteel,
To make them ſtronger. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
He will ſtand his ground againſt all the attacks that cań be
male upon his probity. Atterbury's Sermons.
Whatever ground we may have gotten upon our enemies,
** gotten none upon our vices, the wºrſt enemies of the
two; but are even ſubdued and led captive by the one, while
we triumph ſo gloriouſly over the others. Atterbury's Sermons.
18. State of progreſs or receſſion.
! I have known ſo many great examples of this cure, and
leard of its being ſo familiar in Auſtria, that I wonder it has
gained no more ground in other places. Temple.
The ſquirrel is perpetually turning the wheel in her cage:
*.*.*. and vºie herſelf with her continual mo-
5. gets no ground. 1,122.7
19. The foiſ to ſet : thing off. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
5
Like bright metal on a fullen ground,
My reformation glittering o'er my fault,
Shall ſhºw more goodly, and attract more eyes,
Than that which hath no foil to ſet it off.
To GRou ND. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſix on the ground.
Wherever ſhe had grºunded her foot, neither gods nor men
could force her to retire. Rambler
2. To found as upon cauſe or principle. -
Wiſdom groundeth her laws upon an infallible rule of COm-
pariſon. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 8.
It may ſerve us to ground conjećtures more approaching to
the truth than we have hitherto met with. Bºy'.
If your own actions on your will you grºund,
Mine ſhall hereaſter know no other bound. Dryd, Aurangz.
Some eminent ſpirit, having ſignalized his valour, i.
comes to have influence on the people, to grow their leader
in warlike expeditions; and this is grounded upon the princi-
ples of nature and common reaſon, which, where prudence
and courage are required, rather incite us to fly to a ſingle
perſon than a multitude. Swift.
3. To ſettle in firſt principles or rudiments of knowledge.
Being rooted and grounded in love. Iph. iii. 17.
GRound. The preterite and part, paſſ of grind. -
He took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the
fire, and ground it to powder. Ex. xxxii. 20.
How dull and rugged, ere’tis ground
And poliſh'd, looks a diamond? Hudibra, p. iii.
Grou ND is much uſed in compoſition for that which is next
the ground, or near the ground.
Grous p-Ash, n.ſ. A ſaplin of aſh taken from the ground;
not a branch cut from a tree. *
A lance of tough groundaſh the Trojan threw,
Rough in the rind, and knotted as it grew. Dryden's En.
Some cut the young aſhes off about an inch above the
ground, which cauſes them to make very large ſtraight ſhoots,
which they call groundaſ). Alſortiºner's Husbandry.
Gºo'UND-BAIt. n.ſ. [from ground and lait..] A bait made ºf
barley or malt boiled; which, being thrown into the
Place where you deſign to angle, ſinks to the bottom, and
draws the fiſh to it.
Take the depth of the place where you mean aſter to caſt
your groundlait, and to fiſh. J/ alton's Angler.
Gro UND-Floor. n.ſ. [ground and floor.] The lower ſtory of
a houſe.
GRo'UND-Ivy. m. ſ. [hedra terrſtris, Latin.] Althoof, or
tunhoof.
The ſhoots trail upon the ground, and emit roots from
almoſt every joint, which faſten themſelves into the earth:
the leaves are roundiſh, thick, rough, and crenated on the
edges: the helmet of the flower is roundiſh, bifid, and re-
flexed: the beard or lower lip is trifid, or cut into three ſeg-
ments; the middle ſegment is broad and bifid, and the flowers
are produced at the joints of the ſhoots. The ſpecies are, firſt,
common groundivy, or gill-go-by-ground; and ſecond, leſſer
groundivy. Miller.
Alehoof or groundivy is, in my opinion, of the moſt ex-
cellent uſe and virtue of any plants among us. Temple.
GRo'UND-oak. m. ſ. [grºund and oak..] -
If the planting of oaks were more in uſe for underwoods,
it would ſpoil the coopers trade for the making of hoops,
either of haſel or aſh; becauſe one hoop made of the yºung
ſhoots of a groundoaſ, would outlaſt ſix of the beſt aſh. 44".
GRound-PINE. m. ſ. [chamafitys, Latin.] -
The leaves are narrow and trifid; the flower |aliated: the
place of the creſt of the flower is ſupplied with little teeth :
the lower lip is divided into three parts, the middle ſegment
being ſplit again into two parts. The flowers rarely grº" " .
whorles, but one or two are produced at the wings of the
leaves. Miller. -
The whole plant has a very ſingular ſmell, reſembling that
of reſin; whence its name groundpine. It grows on dry an
barren hills, and in ſome places on the ditch-banks by road-
ſides. It is highly extolled, by the generality of medical wri-
ters, as an aperient, cephalick, and us medicine; but it
&gt; , Cephalick, and nervo *
is however little uſed at preſent. Hill's Mat. Mºd.
GROUND-PLATE. n.ſ. [ In archite&amp;ure. J The outcº
pieces of timber lying on or near the ground, and famed into
one another with mortiſes and tenſions. In theſe alſº “
mortiſes made to receive the tennons of the joiſts, the º:
and girders; and ſometimes the trimmers for the ſlºcals
and chimney way, and the binding joiſt. Harriſ.
º In the orthographical ſchemes there ſhould be a true º:
tion, if it be a timber-building, of the ſeveral ſizes of i.
ground; lates, breaſt-ſummers, and beams. Ažortinier” Husb.
GRo'UND-plot. n.ſ.
1. The ground on which any building is placed. d
Wretched Gynecia, where can'ſt thou find any finallgºº -
plot for hope to dwell upon Sidney.
2. The ichnography of a building. - - - - -
GRound-RENT. n.ſ. Rent paid for the privilege of building
on another man's ground.
A foot
Skałºńeart.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R O
G R O
!
º
º
.
:
º
A foot in front, and thirty-three five ſevenths deep, would
bring in a ground-rent of five pounds. Arbuthnot on Coins.
GRou N'D-Roo M. m. ſ. A room on the level with the ground.
I beſeeched him hereafter to meditate in a ground-roºm; for
that otherwiſe it would be impoſſible for an artiſt of any other
kind to live near him. Tatler, N°. 88.
GRO'UN DE DLY. adv. [from grounded.] Upon firm principles.
He hath given the firſt hint of ſpeaking groundedly, and to
the purpoſe, upon this ſubject. Glanville.
G Ro'UNDLEss. n.ſ.. [from ground..] Void of reaſon; without
ground.
But when vain doubt and groundleſs fear -
Do that dear fooliſh boſom tear. Prior.
We have great reaſon to look upon the high pretenſions
which the Roman church makes to miracles as groundleſs, and
to reject her vain and fabulous accounts of them. Atterbury.
* The party who diſtinguiſh themſelves by their zeal for the
preſent eſtabliſhment, ſhould be careful to diſcover ſuch a re-
verence for religion, as may ſhew how groundleſs that reproach
is which is caſt upon them, of being averſe to our national
worſhip. Freeholder, Nº. 129.
GRo'UNDLEssly. adv. [from groundleſs. J Without reaſon;
without cauſe; without juſt reaſon.
Divers perſons have produced the like by ſpirit of vitriol,
or juice of lemons; but have groundleſsly aſcribed the effect to
ſome peculiar quality of thoſe two liquors. Boyle on Colours.
GR o'UNDLess Ness. n.ſ. [ from groundleſs. J Want of juſt
reaſon.
He durſt not cite the words either of my book or ſermons,
left the reader ſhould have diſcovered the notorious falſhood
and groundleſſneſs of his calumny. Tillotſon, Sermon I.
G Ro'UNDLING. m. ſ. [ from ground.] A fiſh which keeps at
the bottom of the water: hence one of the low vulgar. Hanm.
It offends me to the ſoul, to hear a robuſteous perriwig-
pated fellow tear a paſſion to tatters, to very rags, to ſplit the
ears of the groundlings. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
GR o'UND ly, adv. [from ground..] Upon principles; ſolidly;
not ſuperficially.
A man, groundly learned already, may take much profit
himſelf, in uſing by epitome to draw other mens works, for
his own memory ſake, into ſhorter room. Aſcham's Schoolm.
GRo'UNDSE l. n.ſ. [3munb and rile, the baſis, Sax. perhaps
from ſella, Latin.] The timber or raiſed pavement next the
round.
The window-frame hath every one of its lights rabbetted on
its outſide about half an inch into the frame; and all theſe
rabbets, but that on the groundſel, are grooved ſquare; but the
rabbets on the groundſel is levelled downwards, that rain or
ſnow may the freelier fall off. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
GRO'UNDs el. n.ſ. [ſenecio, Latin.] -
It hath a floſculous flower, conſiſting of many florets, di-
vided into ſeveral ſegments fitting on the embryo, contained
in an empalement conſiſting of one leaf, and divided into
many parts, afterwards becoming of a conical figure: the em-
bryo afterward becomes a ſeed, furniſhed with down; at
which time the empalement is reflexed, to make way for the
ſeeds to eſcape. Miller.
GR o'UND work. m. ſ. [ground and work.]
1. The ground; the firſt ſtratum ; the firſt part of the whole;
that to which the reſt is additional.
A way there is in heav'n's expanded plain,
Which, when the ſkies are clear, is ſeen below,
And mortals by the name of milky know;
The groundwork is of ſtars.
The main ſkill and groundwork will be to temper them ſuch
lečtures and explanations, upon every opportunity, as may
lead and draw them in willing obedience. - Milton.
3. Firſt principle; original reaſon.
The groundwork thereof is nevertheleſs true and certain,
however they through ignorance diſguiſe the ſame, or through
vanity. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
The morals is the firſt buſineſs of the poet, as being the
groundwork of his inſtrućtion. Dryden.
GRoup. m. ſ. [grouppe, French; groppo, Italian.] A croud; a
cluſter; a huddle; a number thronged together.
In a pićture, beſides the principal figures which compoſe it,
and are placed in the midſt of it, there are leſs groups or knots
of figures diſpoſed at proper diſtances, which are parts of the
piece, and ſeem to carry on the ſame deſign in a more inferior
in anner. Dryden’s Dufreſnoy.
I cannot doubt but the poet had here in view the pićture of
Zetus, in the famous group of figures which repreſents the
two brothers binding Dirce to the horns of a mad bull. Addison
You ſhould try your graving tools
On this odious group of fools. Swift.
To GR oup. v. a. [groupper, French. J. To put into a croud;
To huddle together.
The difficulty lies in drawing and diſpoſing, or, as the pain-
ters term it, in grouping ſuch a multitude of different obječts,
preſerving ſtill the juſtice and conformity of ſtyle and colour-
ing, Prior,
Dryden's Fables.
2. The firſt part of an undertaking; the fundamentals. -
GROUSE. m. ſ. A kind of fowl; a heathcock.
The 'ſquires in ſcorn will fly the houſe -
For better game, and look for grouſe. Swift.
GROUT. m. ſ. Iznut, Saxon. In Scotland they call it groats.]
1. Coarſe meal; pollard.
King Hardicnute, 'midſt Danes and Saxons ſtout,
Carous'd in nut-brown ale, and din'd on grout:
Which diſh its priſtine honour ſtill retains, -
...And when each prince is crown'd in ſplendour reigns. King.
2. That which purges off.
Sweet honey ſome condenſe, ſome purge the grout;
The reſt, in cells apart, the liquid nectar ſhout. Dryden.
3. A kind of wild apple. [Agriomelum, Latin J
To GROW. v. m. preter. grew; part, paſſ, grown. [3ropan,
Saxon; groeyen, Dutch.]
1. To vegetate; to have vegetable motion; to increaſe by vege-
tation. -
... It is not the growing of fruit that nouriſheth man; but
it is thy word which preſerveth them. JWiſd. xvi. 26.
He cauſeth the graſs to grow for the cattle, and herb for the
ſervice of man. Pſ, civ. 14.
2. To be produced by vegetation. -
Ye ſhall eat this year ſuch things as grow of themſelves.
- 2 Kings xix. 20.
In this country groweth abundance of that wood, which
ſince is brought into Europe to die red colours. Abbot.
A bag, that groweth in the fields, at the firſt is hard like a
tennis-ball, and white; and after groweth of a muſhroom-
colour, and full of light duſt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
But ſay, where grows the tree ? from hence how far
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
In colder regions men compoſe -
Poiſon with art; but here it grows. Waller.
Thoſe tow’rs of oak o'er fertile plains might go,
And viſit mountains where they once did grow. //aller.
3. To ſhoot in any particular form.
Children, like tender oſiers, take the bow;
And as they firſt are faſhion'd, always grºw. Dryden's juv.
4. To increaſe in ſtature.
I long with all my heart to ſee the prince;
I hope he is much grown ſince laſt 1 ſaw him. Shakeſp R. III.
The poor man had nothing, ſave one little ew-lamb, which
he had bought and reared up; and it grew up together with
him and with his children. 2 Sa. xii. 3.
Thine own things, and ſuch as are grown up with thee,
can'ſt thou not know. 2 Eſdr. iv. Io.
5. To come to manhood from infancy.
Now the prince groweth up faſt to be a man, and is of a
ſweet and excellent diſpoſition. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
The main thing to be confidered, in every action of a
child, is how it will become him when he is bigger, and whi-
ther it will lead him when he is grºwn up. Locke.
We are brought into the world children, ignorant and im-
potent; and we grow up in vanity and folly. JWake.
6. To iſſue, as plants from a ſoil, or as branches from the main
trunk.
They will ſeem not ſtuck into him, but growing out of
him. Dryden’s AEn. Dedication.
7. To increaſe in bulk; to become greater, or more numerous.
Bones, after full growth, continue at a ſtay; as for nails,
they grow continually. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Then their numbers ſwell,
And grow upon us. Denham.
Diviſions grow upon us, by neglečt of pračtick duties: as
every age degenerated from primitive piety, they advanced in
nice enquiries. Decay of Piety.
8. To improve; to make progreſs.
Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Saviour Jeſus Chriſt. 2 Pet. iii. 18.
As he grew forward in years he was trained up to learning,
under one Pronapides, who taught the Pelaſgick letter invented
by Linus. Pºpe's Eſſay on Homer.
9. To advance to any ſtate.
Nature, as it grows again towards earth,
Is faſhion'd for the journey dull and heavy. Shakeſpeare.
They doubted whereunto this would grow. Ać's v. 24.
The king, by this time, was grown to ſuch an height of re-
putation for cunning and policy, that every accident and event
that went well was laid and imputed to his forefight. Bacon.
But when to ripen'd manhood he ſhall grow,
The greedy ſailor ſhall the ſeas forego. Dryden's Virgil.
Verſe, or the other harmony of proſe, I have ſo long ſtu-
died and practiſed, that they are grown into a habit, and be-
come familiar to me. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
Io. To come by degrees; to reach any ſtate gradually. .
After they grew to reſt upon number, rather competent than
vaſt, they grew to advantages of place, cunning diverſions,
and the like; and they grew more ſkilful in the ordering of
their battles. º Bacon's Eſſays.
The treſpaſſes of people are grown up to heaven, and their
fins are got beyond all reſtraints of law and authority. Rogers.
1 1. To come forward; to gather ground.
1 o S Some
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R O
G R U
Some ſeeing the end of their government nigh, and trou-
blous practice growing up, which may work trouble to the
next governour, will not attempt redreſs. Spenſer on Ireland.
It was now the beginning of O&amp;tober, and Winter began to
grow faſt on : great rain, with terrible thunder and lightning,
and mighty tempeſts, then fell abundantly. Knolles.
12. To be changed from one ſtate to another; to become either
better or worſe; to turn.
A good man's fortune may grow out at heels. Shakeſp.
Hence, hence, and to ſome barbarous climate fly,
Which only brutes in human form does yield,
And man grows wild in nature's common field. Dryden.
The nymph grew pale, and in a mortal fright,
Spent with the labour of ſo long a flight. Dryden.
Patient of command
In time he grew; and growing us’d to hand,
He waited at his maſter's board for food. Dryden's AFn.
We may trade and be buſy, and grow poor by it, unleſs we
regulate our expences. Locke.
You will grow a thing contemptible, unleſs you can ſupply
the loſs of beauty with more durable qualities. Swift.
Delos, by being reckoned a ſacred place, grew to be a free
port, where nations warring traded, as in a neutral country.
A buthnot on Coins.
13. To proceed as from a cauſe.
What will grow out of ſuch errours, as maſked under the
cloak of divine authority, impoſſible it is that ever the wit of
man ſhould imagine, ’till time have brought forth the fruits of
them. - PHooker.
Shall we ſet light by that cuſtom of reading, from whence
ſo precious a benefit hath grown P Hooker, b. v.
Take heed now that ye fail not to do this: why ſhould da-
mage grow to the hurt of the king. Ez. iv. 22.
Scipio Nafica feared leſt, if the dread of that enemy were
taken away, the Romans wou'd grow either to idleneſs or
civil diſſention. Abbo'.
The want of trade in Ireland procecds from the want of
people; and this is not grown from any ill qualities of the cli-
mate or air, but chiefly from ſo many wars. Temple.
14. To accrue; to be forthcoming.
Ev’n juſt the ſum that I do owe to you,
Is growing to me by Antipholis. Shakeſp. Com. of Errours.
15. To adhere; to ſtick together.
Honour and policy, like unſever'd friends,
I' th' war do grow together. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
The frog's mouth grows up, and he continues ſo for at
leaſt ſix months without eating. JWalton's Angler.
In burnings and ſcaldings the fingers would many times
grow together: the chin would grow to the breaſt, and the
arms to the ſides, were they not hindered. Wiſeman's Surgery.
16. To ſwell: a ſea term.
Mariners are uſed to the tumbling and rolling of ſhips from
ſide to ſide, when the ſea is never ſo little grown. Raleigh.
GRo'w ER. m. ſ. [from grow J An increaſer.
It will grow to a great bigneſs, being the quickeſt grower of
any kind of elm. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To GRowl. v. n. [grollen, Flemiſh.]
1. To ſnarl or murmur like an angry cur.
They roam amid' the fury of their heart,
And growl their horrid loves. Thomſºn's Spring.
Dogs in this country are of the ſize of common maſtiffs,
and by nature never bark, but growl when they are pro-
voked. Ellis's Voyage.
2. To murmur ; to grumble.
Othello, neighbours—how he would roar about a fooliſh
handkerchief! and then he would growl ſo manfully. Gay.
GRow N. The participle paſſive of grow.
1. Advanced in growth.
2. Covered or filled by the growth of any thing.
I went by the field of the ſlothful, and by the vineyard of
the man void of underſtanding; and lo, it was all grown over
with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof. Prov.
3. Arrived at full growth or ſtature.
I ſaw lately a pair of China ſhoes, which I was told were
for a grown woman, that would ſcarce have been big enough
for one of our little girls. Locke.
GRow TH. m. ſ. [from growth. J
1. Vegetation; vegetable life; increaſe of vegetation.
Deep in the palace, of long growth there ſtood
A laurel's trunk, a venerable wood. Dryden's 4 m. b. vii.
Thoſe trees that have the ſloweſt growth, are, for that rea-
ſon, of the longeſt continuance. Atterbury's Sermone.
2. Produćt; thing produced.
Forbidding every bleak unkindly fog
To touch the proſperous growth of this tall wood. Milton.
Our little world, the image of the great,
Of her own growth hath all that nature craves,
And all that's rare, as tribute from the waves. //aller.
The trade of a country ariſes from the native growths of
the ſoil or ſeas. Temple.
I had thought, for the honour of our nation, that this ſtory
was of Engliſh growth, and Chaucer's own. Dryden.
3. Increaſe in number, bulk, or frequency.
What I have tried, or thought, or heard upon this ſubjećt,
may go a great way in preventing the growth of this diſeaſe,
where it is but new. Temple.
4. Increaſe of ſtature; advance to maturity.
They ſay my ſon of York
Has almoſt overta'en him in his growth. Shakespeare Rich. III.
The ſtag, now conſcious of his fatal growth,
To ſome dark covert his retreat had made. Denham.
Though an animal arrives at its full growth at a certain age,
perhaps it never comes to its full bulk 'till the laſt period of
life. Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
5. Improvement; advancement.
It grieved David's religious mind to conſider the growth of his
own eſtate and dignity, the affairs of religion continuing ſtill
in the former manner. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 2.
GRow THE AD. Un. ſ. [ from grºſ, or great head; capito,
GRow TNol. } Latin.]
1. A kind of fiſh.
2. An idle lazy fellow.
Though ſleeping one hour refreſheth his ſong,
Yet truſt not Hob growthead for ſleeping too long. Tºſºr.
To GRUB. v. a. [graban, preter. grāb, to dig, Gothick.] To
dig up ; to deſtroy by digging; to root out of the ground; to
eradicate by throwing up out of the ſoil.
A fooliſh heir cauſed all the buſhes and hedges about his
vineyard to be grubbed up. L’Eſtrange.
Foreſt land,
From whence the ſurly ploughman grubs the wood. Dryden.
The grubbing up of woods and trees may be very needful,
upon the account of their unthriftineſs. Mortimer's Husband.
As for the thick woods, which nºt only Virgil but Homer
mentions, they are moſt of them grulled up, ſince the pro-
montory has been cultivated and inhabited. Addison an Italy.
GRU B. n.ſ. [from grubbing, or mining.]
1. A ſmall worm that eats holes in bodies.
There is a difference between a grub and a butterfly, and
yet your butterfly was a grub. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
New creatures riſe, -
A moving maſs at firſt, and ſhort of thighs;
*Till ſhooting out with legs, and imp'd with wings,
The grubs proceed to bees with pointed ſtings. Dryden.
Sometimes they are eaten with grubs. Mortimer's Huſband.
The grub,
Oft unobſerv'd, invades the vital core;
Pernicious tenant ' and her ſecret cave
Enlarges hourly, preying on the pulp
Ceaſeleſs. Phillips.
2. A ſhort thick man; a dwarf. In contempt.
John Romane, a ſhort clowniſh grub, would bear the whole
carcaſe of an ox, yet never tugged with him. Carew.
To GRU BBle. v. n. [.grubelen, German, from grub. J. To
feel in the dark.
Thou haſt a colour;
Now let me rowl and grubble thee:
Blind men ſay white feels ſmooth, and black feels rough:
Thou haſt a rugged ſkin; I do not like thee. Dryden.
Ainſworth.
. GRU'Estreet; n.ſ. Originally the name of a ſtreet in Moor-
fields in London, much inhabited by writers of ſmall hiſto-
ries, dićtionaries, and temporary poems; whence any mean
produćtion is called grubſtreet.
X2; ISzzº .# 3:3A2, wiſ' 3xytz rixf2
'Arrariº; 1:ow #32; lºwogai.
The firſt part, though calculated only for the meridian of
grubſlreet, was yet taken notice of by the better ſort. Arbuthn.
I’d ſooner ballads write, and grubſtreet lays. Gay.
To GRUDGE. v. a. [from gruger, according to Skinner, which
in French is to grind or eat. In this ſenſe we ſay of one who
reſents any thing ſecretly, he chews it. Grwgnach, in Welſh,
is to murmur ; to grumble. Grunigh, in Scotland, denotes a
grumbling moroſe countenance.]
1. To envy; to ſee any advantage of another with diſcontent.
What means this baniſhing me from your counſels? Do you
love your ſorrow ſo well, as to grudge me part of it Sidney.
'Tis not in thee
To grudge my pleaſures, to cut off my train. Shakespeare K. Lear.
He ſtruggles into birth, and cries for aid;
Then helpleſs in his mother's lap is laid:
He creeps, he walks; and, iſſuing into man,
Grudges their life from whence his own began. Dryden.
Theſe clamours with diſdain he hcard,
Much grudg’d the praiſe, but more the rob’d reward. Dryd.
Do not, as ſome men, run upon the tilt, and taſte of the
ſediments of a grudging uncommunicative diſpoſition. Spectat.
Let us conſider the ample proviſion of waters, thoſe inex-
hauſted treaſures of the ocean; and though ſome have grudged
the great ſhare that it takes of the ſurface of the earth, yet
we ſhall propoſe this too, as a conſpicuous mark and character
of the wiſdom of God. Bentley’s Sermons.
I have often heard the Preſbyterians ſay they did not grudge
us our employments. Swift.
2. To give or take unwillingly.
Let
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G R U
G U A
it,
5 |
C.
º
º
!
Let me at leaſt a funeral marriage crave,
{ Nor grudge my cold embraces in the grave. Dryd, Aurengz,
You ſteer betwixt the country and the court,
Nor gratify whate'er the great deſire,
Nor grudging give what publick needs require. Dryd. Fab.
They have grudged thoſe contributions, which have ſet our
country at the head of all the governments of Europe. Addiſon.
To GRUDGE. v. n.
1. To murmur ; to repine.
They knew the force of that dreadful curſe, whereunto
idolatry maketh ſubject; nor is there cauſe why the guilty ſuſ-
taining the ſame ſhould grudge or complain of injuſtice. Hook.
2. To be unwilling; to be reluctant.
Many times they go with as great grudging to ſerve in his
majeſty's ſhips, as if it were to be ſlaves in the gallies. Raleigh.
3. To be envious.
Grudge not one againſt another, brethren, leſt ye be con-
demned. - ja. v. 9.
4. To wiſh in ſecret. A low word.
E’en in the moſt ſincere advice he gave,
He had a grudging ſtill to be a knave. Dryden's Medal.
5. To give or have any uneaſy remains. I know not whether
the word in this ſenſe be not rather grugeons, or remains ;
grugeons being the part of corn that remains after the fine
meal has paſſed the ſieve. -
My Dolabella,
Haſt thou not ſtill ſome grudgings of thy ſever ? Dryden.
GR U Dº E. m.ſ. [ from the verb. J
1. Old quarrel; inveterate malevolence; ſullen malice.
Many countries about her were full of wars, which, for old
grudges to Corinth, were thought ſtill would conclude
there. Sidney, b. ii.
Two houſholds, both alike in dignity,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. Shakeſpeare.
Let me go in to ſee the generals:
There is ſome grudge between 'em ; ’tis not meet
They be alone. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
Deep-feſter'd hate ;
A grudge in both, time out of mind, begun,
And mutually bequeath'd from fire to ſon. Tate's juvenal.
2. Anger; ill-will.
The god of wit, to ſhew his grudge,
Clapt aſs's ears upon the judge. Swift.
3. Unwillingneſs to benefit.
4. Envy ; odium; invidious cenſure.
Thoſe to whom you have
With grudge preferr'd me. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
4. Remorſe of conſcience. Ainſworth.
5. Some little commotlon, or forerunner of a diſeaſe. Ainſw.
GRU'DGINGLY. adj. [from grudge.] Unwillingly; malignant-
ly; reluétantly.
Like harpies they could ſcent a plenteous board;
Then to be ſure they never fail'd their lord:
The reſt was form, and bare attendance paid ;
They drank and eat, and grudgingly obey'd. Dryden.
GRU E L. m. ſ. [gruau, gruelle, French.J Food made by boil-
ing oatmeal in water; any kind of mixture made by boiling
ingredients in water. º
Finger of birth-ſtrang!'d babe,
Ditch-deliver'd by a drab ;
Make the gruel thick and ſlab.
Was ever Tartar fierce or cruel
Upon the ſtrength of water gruel P Prior.
Gruel made of grain, broths, malt-drink not much hopped,
poſſet-drinks, and in general whatever relaxeth, Arbuthnot.
GRUFF. adj. [grºff, Dutch | Sour of aſpect; harſh of man-
iners.
Around the fiend, in hideous order, ſat
Foul bawling infamy and bold debate,
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Gruff diſcontent, through ignorance miſled. Garth.
The appellation of honour was ſuch an one the gruff, ſuch
an one the ſtocky. Addison.
GRU'FFLY. adv. [from gruff..] Harſhly ; ruggedly; roughly.
The form of Mars #. on a §: . y gnly
All ſheath'd in arms, and gruffy look'd the god. Dryden.
GRU'FFN Ess. m. ſ. [from gruff..] Ruggedneſs of mien ; harſh-
neſs of look or voice.
GR v M. a.d. [contračted from grumble.] Sour; ſurly; ſevere.
A low word.
Nic looked four and grum, and would not open his mouth.
Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
To GRU'MBLE. v. n. [grammelen, grammen, Dutch.]
1. To murmur with diſcontent.
A bridegroom,
A grumbling groom, and that the girl ſhall find. Shakeſp.
'ſ hou grumbleſ? and raileſt every hour on Achilles, and thou
art as full of envy at his greatneſs as Cerberus is at Proſerpina's
beauty. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Creſſida.
Th’ accurſt Philiſtian ſtands on th' other ſide,
Grumbling aloud, and ſmiles 'twixt rage and pride. Cowley.
Suitors, all but one, will depart grumbling, becauſe they
miſs of what they think their due. South's Sermons.
Providence has allotted man a competency: all beyond it
is ſuperfluous; and there will be grumbling without end, if
we reckon that we want this, becauſe we have it not. L'Eſtr.
L'Avare, not uſing half his ſtore,
Still grumbles that he has no more. Prior.
2. To growl; to gnarl.
The lion, though he ſees the toils are ſet,
Yet, pinch'd with raging hunger, ſcours away;
Hunts in the face of danger all the day;
At night, with ſullen pleaſure, grumbles o'er his prey. Dryd.
3. To make a hoarſe rattle.
Thou grumbling thunder join thy voice. Mtteux.
Like a ſtorm
That gathers black upon the frowning ſky,
And grumbles in the wind. Rowe's Royal Convert.
Vapours foul
Daſh on the mountains brow, and ſhake the woods
That grumbling wave below. Thomſon's Winter.
GRU'MBLER. m. ſ. [from grumble.] One that grumbles; a
murmurer; a diſcontented man.
. . . The half-pence are good half-pence, and I will ſtand by it:
if I made them of ſilver, it would be the ſame thing to the
grumbler. Swift.
GRUM BLING. m. ſ. [from grumble. J A murmuring through
diſcontent; a grudge.
I have ſerv’d
Without or grudge or grumblings. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
GRUME. n.ſ. fgrumeau, French ; grumus, jº A &amp;
viſcid conſiſtence of a fluid : as the white of an egg, or clotted
like cold blood. &amp;ºinty.
GRU'MLY. adv. [from grum.] Sulienly; moroſely.
GRU'MMEL. m. ſ. [ lithopermum, Lat J. An herb. Ainſworth.
GRU'MoUs. adj. [from grume.] Thick; clotted.
The blood, when let, was black, grumous, the red part
without a due conſiſtence, the ſerum ſaline, and of a yel-
lowiſh green. Arbuthnot on Diet.
GRU'MousNEss. n.ſ.. [from grumous.] Thickneſs of a coagu-
lated liquor.
The cauſe may be referred either to the coagulation of the
ſerum, or grumouſneſs of the blood. Wiſeman's Surgery.
GRU'N'sel. n.ſ. [More uſually ground/il, unleſs Milton intended
to preſerve the Saxon gunb.) The groundſil; the lower part
of the building. -
Next came one
Who mourn'd in earneſt, when the captive ark
Maim'd his brute image, head and hands lopp'd off
In his own temple, on the grunſel edge,
Where he fell flat, and ſham'd his worſhippers. Milton.
To GRUNT. v. m. [grunnio, Latin.] To murmur like
To GRUNTLE. } a hog.
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar and burn,
Like horſe, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn. Shakeſp.
Lament, ye ſwine ! in gruntings ſpend your grief;
For you, like me, have loſt your ſole relief. , Gay's Paſſ.
Thy brinded boars may ſlumber undiſmay’d,
Or grunt ſecure beneath the cheſnut ſhade. Tickel.
The ſcolding quean to louder notes doth riſe,
To her full pipes the grunting hog replies;
The grunting hogs alarm the neighbours round. Swift.
GRUNT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The noiſe of a hog.
Ran cow and calf, and family of hogs,
In panick horrour of purſuing dogs ;
With many a deadly grunt and doleful ſqueak,
Poor ſwine, as if their .. hearts would break. Dryden.
From hence were heard
The grunts of briſtled boars, and groans of bears,
And herds of howling wolves. Dryden's Án.
GRU’NT ER. m. ſ. [from grunt.]
1. He that grunts. -
2. A kind of fiſh. [xévºis.] Ainſworth.
GRU’NTLING. m. ſ. É. grunt.] A young hog.
To GRUTch. v. n. [corrupted for the ſake of rhyme from
grudge.] To envy; to repine; to be diſcontented.
The poor at the encloſure doth grutch,
Becauſe of abuſes that fall,
Leſt ſome men ſhould have but too much,
And ſome again nothing at all. Tuſſer's Huſbandry.
But what we're born for we muſt bear,
Our frail condition it is ſuch,
That what to all may happen here,
If't chance to me, I muſt not grutch. . Ben. Johnſºn.
GRUTch. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Malice ; ill-will.
In it he melted leaden bullets,
To ſhoot at foes, and ſometimes pullets;
To whom he bore ſo fell a grutch,
He ne'er gave quarter t” any ſuch. Hudibras, p. i.
GRY. n.ſ. [76].] Anything of little value: as, the paring of
the nails. Dić?.
GuAIA(cu M. n.ſ. [See LIGNUM-vitre.]
Guaiacum is attenuant and aperient, and promotes diſ-
charges by ſweat and urine. It is an excellent medicine in
many chronick caſes, and was once famous for curing the
2 venereal
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
G U E
G U A
i
venereal diſeaſe, which it ſtill does ſingly in warmer climates,
but with us we find it inſufficient. We have a reſin of it, im-
properly called gum guaiacum, given in the ſame caſes with
the famous balſamum polycreſtum is made of it. Hill.
Guar ANTE'E. n.ſ. [guarant, French..] A power who un-
dertakes to ſee ſtipulations performed. -
God, the great guarantee for the peace of mankind, where
laws cannot ſecure it, may think it the concern of his provi-
.dence. South’s Sermons.
A prince diſtinguiſhed by being a patron of Proteſtants, and
guarantee of the Weſtphalian treaty. Addiſon on the War.
To Gu A'RANTY. v. a. [garantir, French. J. To undertake
to ſecure the performance of any articles.
To GUARD. v. a. [garder, French, from our word ward, the
w being changed by the French into g; as Galles for Waleſ.]
1. To watch by way of defence and ſecurity.
2. To protećt ; to defend.
. Naked the graces guarded you from all &gt;
Dangers abroad, and now your thunder ſhall. JValler.
Your pow'r you never uſe, but for defence,
To guard your own or others innocence. Dryden.
Fix'd on defence, the Trojans are not ſlow
To guard their ſhore from an expected foe. Dryden.
The port of Genoa is very ill guarded againſt the ſtorms.
- Addiſon on Italy.
3. To preſerve by caution. -
One would take care to guard one's ſelf againſt this parti-
- cular imperfection, becauſe it is that which our nature very
ſtrongly inclines us to. Addison's Spectator.
4. To provide againſt obječtions.
Homer has guarded every circumſtance with as much cau-
tion as if he had been aware of the obječtion. Notes on Odyſſey.
5. To adorn with liſts, laces, or ornamental borders.
Give him a liver
More guarded than his fellows. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
See a fellow
In a long motley, guarded with yellow. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
To GUARD. v. n. To be in a ſtate of caution or defence.
There are other nice caſes, in which a man muſt guard, if
he intends to keep fair with the world, and turn the penny.
Collier on Pºpularity.
To guard againſt ſuch miſtakes, it is neceſſary to acquaint
ourſelves a little with words. Watts's Logick.
GUARD. n.ſ. [garde, French; ward, Teutonick.]
1. A man, or body of men, whoſe buſineſs is to watch by way
of defence or prevention.
The gward bare them, and brought them back into the
guard-chamber. 1 Kings xiv. 28.
Up into heav'n, from paradiſe, in haſte -
Th’ angelick guards aſcended, mute, and ſad,
For man. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
With liſted hands, and gazing eyes,
His guards behold him ſoaring through the ſkies. Dryden.
Others are cooped in cloſe by the ſtrićt guards of thoſe
whoſe intereſt it is to keep them ignorant. Locke.
He muſt be truſted to his own condućt, ſince there cannot
always be a guard upon him, except what you put into his
own mind by good principles. Locke.
They, uſurping arbitrary power, had their guards and ſpies,
after the practice of tyrants. Swift.
2. A ſtate of caution; a ſtate of vigilance.
The great alteration which he made in the ſtate eccleſiaſti-
cal, cauſed him to ſtand upon his guard at home. Davies.
Temerity puts a man off his guard. L’E/irange.
It is wiſdom to keep ourſelves upon a guard. L’É/irange.
Now he ſtood colle&amp;ted and prepar'd;
For malice and revenge had put him on his guard. Dryden.
Men are always upon their guard againſt an appearance of
deſign. Smalridge's Sermons.
3. Limitation; anticipation of objećtion; caution of expreſſion.
They have expreſſed themſelves with as few guards and
reſtričtions as J. Atterbury.
4. An ornamental hem, lace, or border. - - -
5. Part of the hilt of a ſword.
GUA’RDAGF. n.f. [from guard.] State of wardſhip.
A maid ſo tender, fair and happy,
Run from her guardage to the ſooty boſom
Of ſuch a thing as thou. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
GU'ARDER. m.ſ. One who guards. dinſworth.
GUA'RD I AN. m. ſ. [gardien, French, from guard. }
1. One that has the care of an orphan; one who is to ſupply the
want of parents.
I am ſorry for her, as I have juſt cauſe, being her uncle and
her guardian. Shakeſp. Much Ado about Nothing,
When perjur’d guardians, proud with impious gains,
Choak up the ſtreets, too narrow for their trains! Dryden.
Hocus, with two other of the guardians, thought it their
duty to take care of the intereſt of the three girls. Arbuthnot.
2. One to whom the care and preſervation of any thing is com-
mitted. -
I gave you all,
Made you my guardians, my depoſitaries;
But kept a reſervation to be follow'd
With ſuch a number. - . Shakſ. King Lear,
3. A repoſitory or ſtorehouſe. Not uſed.
Where is Duncan's body ? *
——Carried to Colineſkill,
The ſacred ſtorehouſe of his predeceſſors, *
And guardian of their bones, Shakeſp. Macbeth.
GUARDIAN of the Spiritualties. He to whom the ſpiritual
juriſdiction of any dioceſe is committed, during the vacancy of
the ſee. He may be either guardian in law, or jure magiftra-
tus, as the archbiſhop is of any dioceſe within his province;
or guardian by delegation, as he whom the archbiſhop or
vicar-general doth for the time depute. Cowel.
GUA'RDIAN. adj. Performing the office of a kind protećtor
or ſuperintendant. -
My charming patroneſs protects me unſeen, like my guar-
dian angel ; and ſhuns my gratitude like a fairy, who is boun-
tiful by ſtealth, and conceals the giver, when ſhe beſtows the
gift. Dryden's Dedication to Cleomenes.
Thus ſhall mankind his guardian care engage, -
The promis'd father of the future age. Pope's Mºſiah.
Mean while Minerva, in her guardian care,
Shoots from the ſtarry vaults through fields of air. Pºpe.
GUA'RDIANSHIP. m. ſ. [ from guardian. J The office of a
guardian.
The curate ſtretched his patent for the cure of ſouls, to a
kind of tutelary guardia ſhip over goods and chattels. L'E/ir.
Theſeus is the firſt who eſtabliſhed the popular ſtate in
Athens, aſſigning to himſelf the guardianſhip of the laws, and
chief commands in war. Swift.
GUA'RDLess. adj. [from guard.] Without defence.
So on the guardleſ; herd, their keeper ſlain,
Ruſhes a tyger in the Lybian plain. Waller.
A rich land, guardleſs and undefended, muſt needs have
been a double incitement. South's Sermons.
GUA'RDSHIP. m.ſ.. [from guard.]
1. Care; protećtion. -
How bleſs'd am I, by ſuch a man led !
Under whoſe wiſe and careful guardſhip
I now deſpiſe fatigue and hardſhip. Swift.
2. [Guard and ſhip.] A king's ſhip to guard the coaſt.
GUA'IAvA.
GUA'v A. }nſ.
The flowers confiſt of five leaves, produced in a circular
order, having many ſtamina or threads ſurrounding the ovary:
the ovary is of a long tubulous figure, which becomes a fleſhy
fruit, crowned on the top, and containing many ſmall hard
ſeeds. The fruit, ſays Sir Hans Sloane, is extremely delici-
ous and wholſome. They have only this inconvenience, that,
being very aſtringent, they ſtop up the belly, if taken in great
quantities. Miller.
Guber NA'tion. N. ſ. [gubernatio, Lat.] Government; ſu-
perintendency; ſuperiour direction.
Perhaps there is little or nothing in the government of the
kingdoms of nature and grace, but what is tranſačted by the
man Jeſus, inhabited by the divine power and wiſdom, and
employed as a medium or conſcious inſtrument of this exten-
five gubernation. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
GU'DG EoN. n.ſ. [goujon, French.]
1. A ſmall fiſh found in brooks and rivers, eaſily caught, and
therefore made a proverbial name for a man eaſily cheated.
'Tis true, no turbets dignify my boards;
But gudgeºns, flounders, what my Thames affords. Pºpe.
This he did to draw you in, like ſo many gudge.as, to ſwal-
low his falſe arguments. Swift.
2. Something to be caught to a man's own diſadvantage; a bait;
an allurement: gudgeons being commonly uſed as baits for
pike.
But fiſh not with this melancholy bait,
For this fool's gudgeon, this opinion. Shakespeare Merth. of Wºm.
GUE/R Don. m. ſ. [guerdon, gardon, French.] A reward; a
recompenſe. A word now no longer in uſe.
He hearken'd, and did ſtay from further harms,
To gain ſo goodly guerdon as ſhe ſpake. Fairy Queen, i. i.
But to the virgin comes, who all this while
Amazed ſtands herſelf ſo mock'd to ſee,
By him who has the guerdon of his guile,
For ſo misfeigning her true knight to be. Fairy Queen, h i.
He ſhall, by thy revenging hand, at once receive the juſt
guerdon of all his former villanies. - Inc.'...
Fame is the ſpur that the clear ſpirit doth raiſe
To ſcorn delights, and live laborious days;
But the fair guerdon when we hope to find,
And think to burſt out into ſudden blaze,
Comes the blind fury with th' abhorred ſheers,
And ſlits the thin-ſpun life. Aſiºr.
To GUESS. v. a. [ghiſen, Dutch.]
1. To conjećture; to judge without any certain principles of
judgment.
Incapable and ſhallow innocents'
You cannot gueſs who caus'd your father's death. Shakespeare.
Let not your ears deſpiſe my tongue for ever,
Which ſhall poſſeſs them with the heavieſt ſound
4. That
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G U I
-
G U I
That ever yet they heard.
—Hum ! I gueſ; at it. Shakespeare Macbeth.
He that, by reaſon of his ſwift motions, can inform him-
ſelf of all places and preparations, ſhould he not very often
gueſs rightly of things to come, where God pleaſeth not to
give impediment? Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
There iſſue ſwarming bands
Of ambuſh'd men, whom, by their arms and dreſs,
To be Taxcallan enemies I gueſ. Dryd. Indian Emperor.
The ſame author ventures to gueſ at the particular fate
which would attend the Roman government. Swift.
Nor can imagination gueſ,
How that ungrateful charming maid -
My pureſt paſſion has betray'd. Swift.
2. To conjećture rightly.
One may gueſ; by Plato's writings, that his meaning, as to
the inferiour deities, was, that they who would have them
might, and they who would not, might let them alone; but
that himſelf had a right opinion concerning the true God.
- - Stillin feet's Defence of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
To Guess. v. a. To hit upon by accident; to determine
rightly of any thing without certain direction of the judg-
inent.
If Xerxes was able to call every common ſoldier by his
name in his army, it may be gueſſed he got not this wonder-
ful ability by learning his leſions by heart Locke.
Guess. n.ſ. [from the verb..] Conjecture; judgment without
any poſitive or certain grounds.
The enemy's in view; draw up your powers:
Hard is the gueſ of their true ſtrength and forces. Shakeſp.
A poet muſt confeſs
His art's like phyſick, but a happy gueſ. Dryden.
It is a wrong way of proceeding to venture a greater good
for a leſs, upon uncertain gueſs, before a due examina-
tion. s Locke.
We may make ſome gueſ at the diſtinčtion of things, into
thoſe that are according to, above, and contrary to rea-
ſon. - - Locke.
This problem yet, this offspring of a gueſ,
Let us for once a child of truth confeſs. Priºr.
GUE'ss ER. n.ſ. [ from gueſ.] Conjećturer; one who judges
without certain knowledge.
It is the opinion of divers good gueſſers, that the laſt fit
will not be more violent than advantageous. Pope.
If fortune ſhould pleaſe but to take ſuch a crochet,
To thee I apply, great Smedley's ſucceſſor,
To give thee lawn-ſleeves, a mitre and rochet, -
Whom would'ſt thou reſemble I leave thee a gueſſºr. Swift.
Gue'ssiNGLY. adv. [from gueſſing.] Conječturally; uncer-
tainly. º
'what confed'racy have you with the traytors
Late footed in the kingdom
I have a letter gueſſingly ſet down,
Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
And not from one oppos'd. Shakespeare King Lear.
GUEST. m. ſ. [zert, zinc, Saxon; gweſi, Welſh.]
1. One entertained in the bouſe of another.
They all murmured, ſaying, that he was gone to be gueſ?
with a man that is a ſinner. Lu. xix. 7.
Methinks a father
Is, at the nuptial of his ſon, a gue
That beſt becomes the table.
Tell my royal gueſt
I add to his commands my own requeſt.
2. A ſtranger; one who comes newly to reſide.
O deſarts, deſarts how fit a gueſ; am I for you, ſince my
heart can people you with wild ravenous beaſts, which in you
are wanting, Sidney.
Thoſe happieſt ſmiles
That play'd on her ripe lip, ſeem’d not to know
What gueſts were in her cyes; which parted thence
As pearls from diamonds dropt. Shakeſpeare.
GUE's Tch AMBER. m. ſ. [gueſt and chamber.] Chamber of
entertainment. --
Where is the gueſ?chamber, where I ſhall eat the paſſover
with my diſciples? Mar. xiv. 14.
To GUGGL E. v. n. [gorgoliare, Italian.] To ſound as water
running with intermiſſions out of a narrow mouthed veſſel.
GUI'DAGE. m. ſ. [ from guide. J The reward given to a
uide. - Ainſworth.
GUI’DANCE. m. ſ. [from guide..] Direction; government.
As to thoſe who lived under the guidance of reaſon alone,
without the aſſiſtance of ſupernatural light, it is highly
probable that miracles, or a meſſage from the dead, would
perſuade them. Atterbury's Sermons.
Particular application muſt be left to Chriſtian prudence,
under the guidance of God's holy ſpirit, who knows our neceſ-
Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
Dryden's ACn.
ſity before we aſk, and our ignorance in aſking. Rogers.
A prince ought not to be under the guidance or influence of
either fačtion, becauſe he declines from his office of preſiding
over the whole to be the head of a party. Swift.
To GUIDE. v. a. [guider, French.]
I. To direct in a way.
When the ſpirit of truth is come, he will guide you into
all truth. jo. xvi. 13.
The new light ſerved to guide them to their neighbours
coſters. Decay of Piety.
Whoſoever has a faithful friend to guide him in the dark
paſſages of life, may carry his eyes in another man's head,
and yet ſee never the worſe. South's Sermons.
2. To govern by counſel; to inſtruct.
Pſ Xxxi. 3.
For thy name's ſake lead me and guide me.
3. To regulate; to ſuperintend.
Women neglect that which St. Paul aſſigns them as their
proper buſineſs, the guiding of the houſe. Decay of Piety.
GUIDE. m. ſ. [guide, French, from the verb.] -
1. One who directs another in his way. -
Judas was guide to them that took Jeſus. Aéis i. 16.
Thou gaveft them a burning pillar of fire, to be a guide of
the unknown journey. JWiſd. xviii. 3.
Can knowledge have no bound, but muſt advance
So far to make us wiſh for ignorance?
And rather in the dark to grope our way,
Than led by a falſe guide to err by day : Denham.
2. One who directs another in his conduct.
While yet but young his father dy'd,
And left him to an happy guide. Waller.
3. Direétor; regulator. -
Who the guide of nature, but only the God of nature?
In him we live, move and are. Thoſe things which nature is
ſaid to do, are by divine art performed, uſing nature as an
inſtrument; nor is there any ſuch art or knowledge divine in
nature herſelf working, but in the guide of nature's work.
Płooker, b. i. ſ. 3:
Some truths are not by reaſon to be tried,
But we have ſure experience for our guide. Dryden's Fables.
GUI'D El Ess. adj. [from guide..] Without a guide; without a
governour or ſuperintendant.
Th’ ambitious Swede, like reſtleſs billows toſt,
Though in his life he blood and ruin breath'd,
To his now guideleſs kingdom peace bequeath’d. Dryden.
There fierce winds o'er duſky valleys blow,
Whoſe every puff bears empty ſhades away,
Which guidelſ in thoſe dark dominions ſtray. Dryden.
GUI'DER. n.ſ.. [from guide.] Director; regulator; guide.
Our guider come! to the Roman camp condućt us. Shakespeare
That perſon, that being provoked by exceſſive pain, thruſt
his dagger into his body, and thereby, inſtead of reaching his
vitals, opened an impoſthume, the unknown cauſe of all his
pain, and ſo ſtabbed himſelf into perfect health and eaſe,
ſurely had great reaſon to acknowledge chance for his chirur-
geon, and providence for the guider of his hand. South.
GUI DON, n.ſ. [French, J A ſtandardbearer; a ſtandard.
Obſolete.
GUILD. m. ſ. [zilbrelp, Saxon, a fellowſhip, a corporation. I
A ſociety; a corporation; a fraternity or company, com-
bined together by orders and laws made among themſelves by
their prince's licence. Hence the common word gild or guild-
hall proceeds, being a fraternity or commonalty of men ga-
thered into one combination, ſupporting their common charge
by mutual contribution. Cowel.
Towards three or four o'clock
Look for the news that the guild hall affords. Shakespeare R. III.
In woollen cloth it appears, by thoſe ancient guild; that were
ſettled in England for this manufacture, that this kingdom
greatly flouriſhed in that art. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
As when the long-ear'd milky mothers wait
At ſome ſick miſer's triple-bolted gate,
For their defrauded abſent foals they make
A moan ſo loud, that all the guild awake. Pope's Dunciad.
GUILE. m.ſ. [guille, gille, old French, the ſame with wile. I
Deceitful cunning; inſidious artifice; miſchievous ſubtilty.
With fawning words he courted her awhile,
And looking lovely, and oft ſighing ſore,
Her conſtant heart did court with divers guile;
But words and looks, and ſighs ſhe did abhor. Fairy Qāſeen.
When I have moſt need to employ a friend,
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
Be he to me! This do I beg of heav'n,
When I am cold in zeal to you or yours. Shakespeare Rich. III.
We may, with more ſucceſsful hope, reſolve
To wage by force or guile eternal war. Mit. Parad. Lºff.
Northou his malice and falſe guile contemn:
Subtile he needs muſt be who could ſeduce
Angels. 4.iilton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ix.
Gui'Le Ful, adj. [guile and full.]
1. Wily; inſidious; miſchievouſly artful.
The way not to be inveigled by them that are ſo guilful
through ſkill, is throughly to be inſtructed in that which
maketh ſkilful againſt guile. Hºoker, b. iii. ſ. 8.
Without expence at all,
By guilful fair words, peace may be obtain'd. Shakespeare H. VI.
i o T He
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">:
He ſaw his guilful ačt
By Eve, though all unweeting, ſeconded - -
Upon her huſband. Milton's Paradºſ. Loft, b. x.
The guileful phantom now forſook the ſhrowd,
And flew ſublime, and vaniſh'd in a cloud. Dryden's Żn.
2. Treacherous; ſecretly miſchievous.
I train'd thy brethren to that guileful hole,
Where the dead corps of Baffianus lay. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
GUI’le fully. adv. [from guilful. J Infidiouſly ; treache-
rouſly. -
ºfo whom the tempter guilefully reply'd. Milton's P. Loſt.
Gui'l Ef Uln Ess. m. ſ. [ from guileſul. J Secret treachery;
tricking cunning.
GUI’leless. adi, [from guile.] Without deceit ; without in-
ſidiouſneſs; ſimply honeſt. -
Gui'LER. m. ſ. [from guile. See BEGUILE.] One that be-
trays into danger by inſidious practices. -
But he was wary wiſe in all his way,
And well perceived his deceitful ſleight;
Ne ſuffered luſt his ſafety to betray;
So goodly did beguile the guiler of the prey. Fairy Queen.
GUILT. n ſ. [3]lt, Saxon, originally ſignified the fine or
mulét paid for an offence, and afterward the offence itſelf.]
1. The ſtate of a man juſtly charged with a crime; the contrary
to innocence.
It was neither guilt of crime, nor reaſon of ſtate, that
could quench the envy that was upon the king for this exe-
cution. Bacon's Henry VII.
When theſe two are taken away, the poſſibility of guilt,
and the poſſibility of innocence, what reſtraint can the belief
of the creed lay upon any man : Hammond on Fundamentals.
2. A crime; an offence.
Cloſe pent up guilts
Rive your concealing continents, and aſk
Theſe dreadful ſummoners grace. Shakespeare King Lear.
Gui'ltily. adv. [from guilty.] Without innocence; with-
out clearneſs of conſcience.
Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,
And in a bloody battle end thy days:
Think on lord Haſtings, and deſpair and die. Shakespeare R. III.
Gui'LTINEss. n.ſ.. [from guilty.]. The ſtate of being guilty;
wickedneſs; conſciouſneſs of crime.
He thought his flight rather to proceed of a fearful guiltingſ;
than of an humble faithfulneſs. Sidney, b. ii.
The laſt was I that felt thy tyranny:
O, in the battle think on Buckingham,
And die in terrour of thy ...}. Shakeſp. Richard III.
I ſhould be guiltier than my guiltineſ. Shakeſpeare.
GUI'LTLEss, adj. [from guilt. J Innocent; free from crime.
I am in this commanded to deliver
The noble duke of Clarence to your hands:
I will not reaſon what is meant hereby,
Becauſe I will be guiltleſ of the meaning. Shakeſp. R. III.
Many worthy and chaſte dames thus,
All guiltleſs, meet reproach. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Then ſhall the man be guiltleſ from iniquity, and this wo-
man ſhall bear her iniquity. Num, v. 31.
Thou, who do'ſt all thou wiſheſt at thy will,
And never willeſt aught but what is right,
Preſerve this guiltleſ, blood they ſeek to ſpill;
Thine be my kingdom. Fairfax.
Guiltleſ of greatneſs, thus he always pray'd,
Nor knew nor wiſh’d he, that thoſe vows he made :
On his own head ſhould be at laſt repaid. Dryden.
Thou know'ſt how guiltleſ, firſt I met thy flame,
- When love approach'd me under friendſhip's name. Pope.
Gºx. adv. [from guiltleſ...] Without guilt; inno-
cently. t
GUI'LTLEssNEss. n.ſ.. [from guiltleſ...] Innocence; freedom
from crime.
A good number, truſting to their number more than to
their value, and valuing money higher than equity, felt that
guiltleſſneſs is not always with eaſe oppreſſed. Sidney, b. ii.
I would not have had any hand in his death, of whoſe guilt-
liſheſ; I was better aſſured than any man living could
€. King Charles.
GUI'LTY. adj. [3:lzig, Saxon, one condemned to pay a fine
for an offence.]
1. Juſtly chargeable with a crime; not innocent.
Is there not a ballad of the king and the beggar?
—The world was guilty of ſuch a ballad ſome three ages
ſince. Shakespeare's Love's Labour Lºft.
Mark'd you not
How that the guilty kindred of the queen -
Look'd pale, when they did hear of Clarence' death Shakespeare
We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we
ſaw the anguiſh of his ſoul when he beſought us, and we
would not hear. Gen. xlii. 21.
With mortal hatred I purſu'd his life,
Nor he, nor you, were guilty of the ſtrife;
Nor I, but as I lov’d; yet all combin'd,
Your beauty and my impotence of mind. Pryder,
- Farewel the ſtones -
And threſhold, guilty of my midnight moans. Drydºz.
There is no man, that is knowingly wicked, but is guity
to himſelf; and there is no man, that carries guilt about him;
but he receives a ſting into his ſoul. Tillotſ,n's Sermons.
2. Wicked; corrupt. *
All the tumult of a guilty world, -
Toft by ungenerous paſſion, finks away. Thomſºn's Spring.
GUINEA, n.ſ...[from Guinea, a country in Africa abounding
with gold.] A gold coin valued at one and twenty ſhillings.
By the word gold I muſt be underſtood to deſign a particular
piece of matter; that is, the laſt guinea that was coined. Locke.
GUINE/ADR opp ER. m. ſ. [guinea and drop.] One who cheats
by dropping guineas.
Who now the guineadropper's bait regards,
Trick'd by the ſharper's dice, or juggler's cards. Gay.
GUI'N EAHEN. m. ſ. A ſmall Indian hen.
GUINE'APEPPER. m. ſ. [capſeum, Latin.]
The charaćters are: the flowers conſiſt of one leaf, and are
expanded like thoſe of nightſhade: the fruit is ſoft, fleſhy and
membraneous, divided into two or more cells, in which are
contained many flat kidney-ſhaped ſeeds. Miller.
GUI'NEAPIG. n.ſ. A ſmall animal with a pig's ſnout.
Guise. n.ſ. [The ſame with wiſe; guiſe, French; pira, Saxon,
the p or w being changed as is common into g.]
1. Manner; mien; habit; caſt of behaviour.
His own fire, and maſter of his guiſe,
Did often tremble at his horrid view. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Thus women know, and thus they uſe the guiſe,
Tº enchant the valiant and beguile the wiſe. Fairfax, b.iv.
Lo you! here ſhe comes: this is her very guiſe; and, upon
my life, faſt aſleep: obſerve her, ſtand cloſe. Shakeſp. Maibath.
They ſtand a horrid front
Of dreadful length, and dazzling arms, in guiſe
Of warriors old, with order'd ſpear and ſhield,
Awaiting what command their mighty chief
Had to impoſe. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b, i.
By their guiſe
Juſt men they ſeem, and all their ſtudy bent
To worſhip God a-right. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
Back, ſhepherds, back;
Here be without duck or nod,
Other trippings to be trod,
Of lighter toes and ſuch court guiſe,
As Mercury did firſt deviſe. Milton.
Their external ſhapes are notoriouſly accommodated to that
law or guiſe of life that nature has deſigned them. Mºre.
2. Pračtice; cuſtom; property.
This would not be ſlept;
Old guiſe muſt be kept. Ben. johnſºn.
The ſwain reply'd, it never was our guiſe
To ſlight the poor, or aught humane deſpiſe. Pope.
3. External appearance; dreſs.
When I was very young, nothing was ſo much talked of
as rickets among children, and conſumptions among young
people: after theſe the ſpleen came in play, and then the
ſcurvy, which was the general complaint, and both were
thought to appear in many various guiſes. Temple.
The Hugonots were engaged in a civil war, by the ſpecious
pretences of ſome, who, under the guiſe of religion, ſacrificed
ſo many thouſands to their own ambition. Swift.
GUITA'R. n.ſ. [ghitara, Italian; guiterre, French..] A ſtringed
inſtrument of muſick.
Sallads and eggs, and lighter fare,
Tune the Italian ſpark's guitar. Prior."
GULCH. n. ſ. [ from gulo, Latin. J A little glutton.
GU'LCHIN. W. Skinner.
GULEs. adj. [perhaps from geule, the throat.] Red : a bar-
barous term of heraldry.
Follow thy drum;
With man's blood paint the ground: gules, gules;
Religious canons, civil laws are cruel;
Then what ſhould war be 2 Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
He whoſe ſable arms,
Black as his purpoſe, did the knight reſemble,
When he laid couched in the ominous horſe,
Hath now his dread and black complexion ſmear'd
With heraldry more diſmal; head to foot,
Now he is total gules. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
GULF. n.ſ. [golfo, Italian. J
1, A bay; an opening into land.
Piſaurius, the Venetian admiral, knowing himſelf unable
to encounter with the Turks great fleet at ſea, withdrew him-
ſelf farther off from the iſland Corfu, into the gulf of the
Adriatick. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
2. An abyſs; an unmeaſurable depth.
Thence turning back, in ſilence ſoft they ſtole,
And brought the heavy corſe with eaſy pace
To yawning gulf of deep Avernus' hole;
By that ſame hole, an entrance dark and baſe,
With ſmoak and ſulphur hiding all the place,
Deſcends to hell, Pairy Queen, $. i. eant. s.
I know
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G U L
's
º
º
* * I know thou’d'ſt rather
Folkw thine enemy in a fiery gulf,
Than flatter him in a bower. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
This is the gulf through which Virgil's Alečto ſhoots her-
ſelf into hell: the fall of waters, the woods that encompaſs it,
are all in the deſcription. Addiſon on Italy.
The ſea could not be much narrower than it is, without a
great loſs to the world; and muſt we now have an ocean of
mere flats and ſhallows, to the utter ruin of navigation, for
fear our heads ſhould turn giddy at the imagination of gaping
abyſſes and unſathomable guſſ; º' Bently.
3. A whirlpool; a ſucking eddy.
England his approaches makes as fierce
As waters to the ſucking of a gulf.
4. Anything inſatiable.
Scull of dragon, tooth of wolf,
Witches mummy; maw and gulf
Of the ravening ſalt ſea ſhark;
Root of hemlock, digg'd i' th' dark. Shakesp. Macbeth.
GU'LF Y. adj. [from gºlf.] Full of gulfs or whirlpools; vor-
ticoſus. -
Rivers ariſe; whether thou be the ſon
Of utmoſt Tweed, or Ooſe, or guffy Dun. Milton.
At their native realms the Greeks arriv'd,
All who the war of ten long years ſurviv'd,
And 'ſcap'd the perils of the gulf, main.
High o'er a gulfy ſea the Pharian iſle
Fronts the deep roar of diſemboguing Nile. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
To GULL. v. a. [guiller, to cheat, old French..] To trick;
to cheat; to defraud; to deceive.
If I do not gull him into a nay word, and make him a com-
mon recreation, do not think I have wit enough to lie ſtraight
in my bed. Shakeſpeare’s Twelfth Night.
Yet love theſe ſorc'ries did remove, and move
Thee to gull thine own mother for my love. Donne.
He would have gull'd him with a trick, -
But Mart was too too politick. Hudibras, p. ii.
They are not to be gulled twice with the ſame trick, L'Eſir.
The Roman people were groſly gulled twice or thrice over,
and as often enſlaved in one century, and under the ſame pre-
tence of reformation. Dryden's 4ºn. Dedication.
By their deſigning leaders taught,
The vulgar, gull'd into rebellion, arm'd ; Dryden.
For this advantage age from youth has won,
As not to be out-ridden, though out-run;
By fortune he was now to Venus trin'd,
And with ſtern Mars in Capricorn was join'd:
Of him diſpoſing in his own abode,
He ſooth'd the goddeſs, while he gull'd the god. Dryden.
GULL. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A ſea-bird. -
2. A cheat; a fraud; a trick. -
I ſhould think this a gull, but that the white-bearded fellow
ſpeaks it. Shakeſpeare's Much Ado about Nothing.
Either they have theſe excellencies they are praiſed for, or
they have not; if they have not, 'tis an apparent cheat and
gull. Government of the Tongue.
3. A ſtupid animal; one eaſily cheated.
Being fed by us you us’d us ſo,
As that ungentle gull, the cuckow bird,
Uſeth the ſparrow. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. i.
Why have you ſuffer'd me to be impriſon'd,
Kept in a dark houſe, viſited by the prieſt,
And made the moſt notorious geck and gull
That e'er invention plaid on. Shakespeare. Twelfth Night.
That paltry ſtory is untrue,
And forg'd to cheat ſuch gulls as you. Hudibras, p. ii.
GU'LLCAT cher. m. ſ. [gull and catch..] A cheat; a man of
trick; one who catches filly people.
Here comes my noble gullcatcher. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
GU'LLER. m. ſ. [from gull.] A cheat; an impoſtor.
GU'LLERY. m. ſ. [from gull.] Cheat; impoſture. Ainſworth.
GU'LLET. n.ſ. [goulet, French; gula, Latin.] The throat;
the paſſage through which the food paſſes; the meat-pipe;
the Ceſophagus.
It might be his doom
One day to ſing
With gullet in ſtring. JDenham.
Many have the gullet or feeding channel which have no
lungs or windpipe; as fiſhes which have gills, whereby the
heart is refrigerated; for ſuch thereof as have lungs and re-
ſpiration are not without wizzon, as whales and cetaceous
animals. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 8,
Nature has various tender muſcles plac'd,
By which the artful gullet is embrac'd. Blackmore's Creation.
The liquor in the ſtomach is a compound of that which is
ſeparated from its inward coat, the ſpittle which is ſwallowed,
and the liquor which diſtils from the gullet. Arbuthnot.
To GU'LLY. v. n. [corrupted from gurgle.] To run with
noiſe.
GU'LLY Hoi. F. m. ſ. [from gully and hole.] The hole where the
gutters cmpty themſelves in the ſubterraneous ſewer,
Shakeſp. Henry V.
Pope's Odyſſey.
Gulo'sit Y. n.ſ. [gulºſis, Latin.] Greedineſs; gluttony;
voracity. ,
They are very temperate, ſeldom offending in ebriety, or
exceſs of drink; nor erring in gulpſity, or ſuperfluity of mcats.
- Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 10,
To Gulp. v.a. [golfen, Dutch. J. To ſwallow eagerly; to
ſuck down without intermiſſion.
He looſens the fiſh, gulps it down, and ſo ſoon as ever the
morſel was gone wipes his mouth. L’Eſtrange.
I thirſty ſtand,
And ſee the double flaggon charge their hand;
See them puff off the froth, and gulp amain,
While with dry tongue I lick my lips in vain. Gay.
Gulp. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] As much as can be ſwallowed
at On Ce.
In deep ſuſpirations we take more large gulphs of air to
cool our heart, overcharged with love and ſorrow. More.
As oft as he can catch a gulp of air, -
And peep above the ſeas, he names the fair. Dryden's Fables.
GUM. n.ſ. [gummi, Latin J
1. A vegetable ſubſtance differing from a reſin, in being more
viſcid and leſs friable, and generally diſſolving in aqueous men-
ſtruums; whereas reſins, being more ſulphurous, require a
ſpirituous diſſolvent. &amp;#incy.
One whoſe eyes,
Albeit unuſed to the melting mood,
Drop tears as faſt as the Arabian trees
Their medicinal gum. Shakeſpeare's Othells.
... He ripens ſpices, fruit, and precious gum,
Which from remoteſt regions hither come. Waller.
Her maiden train,
Who bore the veſts that holy rites require,
Incenſe, and od’rous gums, and cover'd fire. Dryd. Fables.
2. [Homa, Saxon; gumme, Dutch..] The fleſhy covering that
inveſts and contains the teeth.
From the babe that milks me
I'd pluck my nipple from his boneleſs gums. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Untwiſts a wire, and from her gums
A ſet of teeth completely comes. Swift.
To GUM. v. a. [from the noun..] To cloſe with gum; to
ſmear with gum. -
The eyelids are apt to be gummed together with a viſcous
humour. - Wiſeman's Surgery.
To prevent the gumming of the eyelids cut a piece of ſponge,
and lay it wet upon the eye. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Gu'MMINess. m. ſ. [ from gummy. J The ſtate of being gum-
my; accumulation of gum.
The tendons are involved with a great gummineſ; and col-
lečtion of matter. Wiſeman's Surgery.
GUMMo'sity. n.ſ.. [from gummaus. J The nature of gum ;
gummineſs.
Sugar and honey make windy liquors, and the elaſtick fer-
menting particles are detained by their innate gummoſity. Floyer.
Gu'M Mous. adj. [from gum.] Of the nature of gum.
Obſervations concerning Engliſh amber, and relations about
the amber of Pruſſia, prove that amber is not a gummous or
reſinous ſubſtance drawn out of trees by the ſun's heat, but a
natural foſſil. JWoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Gu'MMY. adj. [from gum.]
1. Conſiſting of gum ; of the nature of gum.
From the utmoſt end of the head branches there iſſueth out
a gummy juice, which hangeth downward like a cord. Raleigh.
Nor all the gummy ſtores Arabia yields. Dryden's Virgil.
How each ariſing alder now appears,
And o'er the Po diſtils her gummy tears. Dryden's Silenus.
2. Produćtive of gum.
Late the clouds
Juſtling, or puſh'd with winds, rude in their ſhock,
Tine the ſlant lightning; whoſe thwart flame driv'n down,
Kindles the gummy bark of fir and pine. Milton's Par. Lºft.
3. Overgrown with gum.
The yawning youth, ſcarce half awake, eſſays
His lazy limbs and dozy head to raiſe ;
Then rubs his gummy eyes, and ſcrubs his pate. Dryden.
GUN. m. ſ. [Of this word there is no ſatisfactory etymology.
Mr. Lye obſerves that gun in Iceland ſignifies battle; but when
guns came into uſe we had no commerce with Iceland.] The
general name for firearms; the inſtrument from which ſhot is
diſcharged by fire.
Theſe dread curſes, like the ſun 'gainſt glaſs,
Or like an overcharged gun, recoil
And turn upon thyſelf. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
The emperor, ſmiling, ſaid that never emperor was yet ſlain
with a gun. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The bullet flying, makes the gun recoil. Cleaveland.
In vain the dart or glitt'ring ſword we ſhun,
Condemn'd to periſh by the ſlaught'ring gun. Granville.
GU'NNEL. m. ſ. [corrupted for gunwale. , See GUNw Ale.]
Gu'NNER. n.f. [from gun. J Cannonier; he whoſe employ-
ment is to manage the artillery in a ſhip.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G U S
G U T
*-
The nimble gunner
With lynſtock now the deviliſh cannon touches, r
And down goes all before him. Shakespeare's Henry V.
They flew the principal gunners, and carried away their ar.
tillery. - Hayward.
Gu'NNERY. m. ſ. [from gunner.] The ſcience of artillery;
the art of managing cannon. -
Gu'NPowd ER. n.ſ. [gun and powder.] The powder put into
guns to be fired. It conſiſts of about twenty parts of nitre,
three parts of ſulphur, and three of charcoal. The propor-
tions are not exactly kept.
Gunpowder conſiſteth of three ingredients, ſaltpetre, ſmall-
coal, and brimſtone. Brown's Vulgar Erroups, b. ii.
Burning by gunpowder frequently happens at ſea. Wiſeman.
GU'N's Hot. m. ſ. [gun and ſhot..] The reach or range of a
gun; the ſpace to which a ſhot can be thrown.
Thoſe who are come over to the royal party are ſuppoſed to
be out of gunſhºt. Dryden.
Gu'N's Hor. adj. Made by the ſhot of a gun.
The greater ſymptoms I have tranſlated to gunſhot wounds.
It iſeman's Surgery.
GU'ss: Iriſ. n.ſ. [gun and ſmith..] A man whoſe trade is to
make guns. -
It is of particular eſteem with the gunſmiths for ſtocks. Mart.
Gu'Nstick. m.ſ. [gun and /lick.] The rammer; or ſtick
with which the charge is driven. -
Gu'Nstock. n.ſ. [gun and ſºck.] The wood to which the
barrel of the gun is fixed. -
The timber is uſeful for bows, pullies, ſcrews, mills, and
guyſocks. A ſortimer’s Huſhandry:
GU'Nstos E. m.ſ. [gun and ſºme.] The ſhot of cannon. They
uſed formerly to ſhoot ſtones from artillery.
Tell the pleaſant prince, this mock of his
Hath turn'd his ball to gunſiones, and his ſoul
Shall ſtand fore charged for the waſteful vengeance
That ſhall fly with them. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
GU'Nw Ale, or GUNNEL of a Ship. That piece of timber
which reaches on either ſide of the ſhip from the half-deck to
the forecaſtle, being the uppermoſt bend which finiſheth the
upper works of the hull in that part, and wherein they put
the ſtanchions which ſupport the waſte trees; and this is
called the gunwale, whether there be guns in the ſhip or no;
and the lower part of any port, where any ordnance are, is
alſo termed the gunwale. Harris.
GURG E. m. ſ. [gurges, Latin.] Whirlpool; gulf.
Marching from Eden he ſhall find
The plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge - -
Boils out from under ground. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xii.
Gu'RGION. m. ſ. The coarſer part of the meal, fifted from the
bran.
To Gu'RGle. v. n. [gorgogliare, Italian.] To fall or guſh
with noiſe, as water from a bottle.
Then when a fountain's gurgling waters play,
They ruſh to land, and end in feaſts the day. Pope.
gº. }*ſ [gournal, French.] A kind of ſea-fiſh.
If I be not aſham'd of my ſoldiers I am a ſowc'd gurnet :
I have miſus’d the king's preſs damnably. Shakespeare Henry IV.
To Gusii. v. m. [goſleen, Dutch..]
1. To flow or ruſh out with violence; not to ſpring in a ſmall
{tream, but in a large body.
A ſea of blood guſh'd from the gaping wound,
That her gay garments ſtain'd with filthy gore. Fai. Queen.
The covering of this abyſs was broken aſunder, and the
water guſhed out that made the deluge. Burnet.
Inceſſant ſtreams of thin magnetick rays
Guſh from their fountains with impetuous force,
In either pole, then take an adverſe courſe. . Blackmore.
On either hand the guſhing waters play,
And down the rough caſcade white-daſhing fall. Thomſon.
2. To emit in a copious effluxion.
The gaping wound guſh'd out a crimſon flood. Dryden.
Line after line my guſhing eyes o'erflow, -
. Led through a ſad variety of woe. Poſt.
Gus H. n.ſ. [ from the verb. ) An emiſſion of liquor in a
large quantity at once; the liquor ſo emitted.
If a lung-vein be burſted, generally at the firſt cough a
great guſh of blood is coughed up. Harvey on Conſumpt.
GU’sse T. m. ſ. [gouſt, French. J Any thing ſewed on to
cloath, in order to ſtrengthen it.
GUST. n.ſ. [gouſ?, French ; gy?us, Latin.]
1. Senſe of taſting.
Deſtroy all creatures for thy ſport or guſt,
Yet cry, if man's unhappy, God's unjuſt. Pope.
2. Height of perception ; height of ſenſual enjoyment.
They fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with guſ, inſtead of fruit
Chew'd bitter aſhes, which th' offended taſte
With ſpattering noiſe reječted. Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. x.
Where love is duty on the female ſide,
Cn theirs incer ſenſual gift, and ſought with ſurly pride.
Dryden's Falls,
*
My fight, and ſmell, and hearing were employ'd,
And all three ſenſes in full gift enjoy’d. Dryden', Fuller,
3. Love; liking.
To kill, I grant, is fin's extremeſt guſt;
But, in defence, by mercy 'tis made juſt. Shakeſp. Timon.
Old age ſhall do the work of taking away both the guſt and
comfort of them. L'E/ºrange, Fable 38.
We have loſt, in a great meaſure, the guſt and reliſh of
true happineſs. - Tillotſon's Sermoni.
4. Turn of fancy; intelle&amp;ual taſte.
The principal part of painting is to find what nature has
made moſt proper to this art, and a choice of it may be made
according to the guſt and manner of the ancients. Dryden,
5. [From guſler, Iſlandick.] A ſudden violent blaſt of wind.
Some troops purſue the bloody-minded queen,
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
As doth a ſail, fill'd with a fretting guſ,
Command an argoſie to ſtem the waves. Shakespeare. Hen. VI,
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
To wag their high tops, and to make a noiſe,
When they are fretted with the guſt, of heav'n. Shakespeare
Preſently come forth ſwarms and volleys of libels, which
are the guſts of liberty of ſpeech reſtrained. Bacon's H. VII.
As when fierce northern blaſts from th' Alps deſcend,
From his firm roots with ſtruggling gifts to rend
An aged ſturdy oak, the rattling ſound
Grows loud. Denham.
Part ſtay for paſſage, ’till a guſt of wind
Ships o'er their forces in a ſhining ſheet. Dryd. Ann. Mirak.
Pardon a weak diſtemper'd ſoul, that ſwells
With ſudden guffs, and finks as ſoon in calms,
The ſport of paſſions. Addiſon's Cats.
6. It is written in Spenſer vitiouſly for juſts, ſports.
Full jolly knight he ſeem’d, and fair did fit,
As one for knightly guſt; and fierce encounters fit. Fa. &amp;#.
GU's TABLE, n.ſ. [guſło, Latin.]
1. To be taſted.
This poſition informs us of a vulgar errour, terming the
gall bitter; whereas there is nothing guſtable ſweeter. Harvey.
2. Pleaſant to the taſte.
A guſtable thing, ſeen or ſmelt, excites the appetite, and
affects the glands and parts of the mouth. Derham.
Gusta‘Tion, n. ſ. [guſſo, Latin.] The act of taſting.
In it the gullet and conveying parts are only feated,
which partake of the nerves of guſlation, or appertaining unto
ſapor. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vii.
GU's TFUL. adj. [guſt and full.] Taſteful; well-taſted.
What he defaults from ſome dry inſipid fin, is but to make
up for ſome other more guſtful. Decay ºf Piety.
GUSTO. m. ſ. [Italian.]
1. The reliſh of any thing; the power by which any thing ex-
cites ſenſations in the palate.
Pleaſant guſſos gratify the appetite of the luxurious. Derh,
2. Intellectual taſte; liking. r
In reading what I have written, let them bring no particu-
lar guſło along with them. Dr. d.m.
GU'sty. adj. [from guſt.] Stormy; tempeſtuous.
Once upon a raw and guſly day,
The troubled Tyber chafing with his ſhores. Sº, jal. Crſ.
Or whirl'd tempeſtuous by the guſly wind. Thºmſºn.
GUT. m.ſ. [ {utteln, German. I
1. The long pipe reaching with many convolutions from the
ſtomach to the vent.
This lord wears his wit in his belly, and his guts in his
head. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
Reveng'd I will be, as ſure as his guts are made of pud-
dings. Shakeſpeare's Merry /#ives of I/indſºr.
A viol ſhould have a lay of wire-ſtrings below, cloſe to the
belly, and then the ſtrings of guts mounted upon a bridge,
that by this means the upper ſtrings ſtricken ſhould make the
lower reſound. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The inteſtines or guts may be inflamed by any acrid or
poiſonous ſubſtance taken inwardly. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. The ſtomach; the receptacle of food: proverbially.
And cramm'd them ’till their guts did ake,
With cawdle, cuſtard, and plum-cake. Hudilras, p. ii.
With falſe weights their ſervants guts they cheat,
And pinch their own to cover the deceit. Dryden', juvenal.
3. Gluttony; love of gormandiſing.
Apicius, thou did'ſt on thy guts beſtow
Full ninety millions; yet, when this was ſpent,
Ten millions ſtill remain'd to thee; which thou,
Fearing to ſuffer thirſt and famiſhment,
In poiſon'd potion drank'ſt. Hakewill on Providence.
To Gut. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To eviſcerate; to draw ; to exenterate.
The fiſhermen ſave the moſt part of their fiſh : ſome are
gutted, ſplitted, powdered and dried. Carew's Sur. of Cornwal.
2. To plunder of contents.
In Nero's arbitrary time,
When virtue was a guilt, and wealth a crime,
A troop
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">G Y B
G Y V
*
*
A troop of cut-throat guards were ſent to ſeize
The rich men's goods, and gut their palaces. Dryd, juven.
Tom Brown, of facetious memory, after having gutted a
proper name of its vowels, uſed it in his works as free as he
pleaſed. Spectator, N. s.67.
GU'TTATED. adj. [from gutta, Latin, a drop.] Beſprinkle
with drops; bedropped. Dić?.
GU’tt E.R. n.ſ.. [from guttur, a throat, Latin. J A paſſage for
water.
Theſe gutter tiles are in length ten inches and a half. Moxon.
Rocks riſe one above another, and have deep gutters worn
in the ſides of them by torrents of rain. Add ſon on Italy.
To GU'TTER. v. a. [from the noun.] To cut in ſmall hol-
lows.
Tempeſts themſelves, high ſeas, and howling winds,
The gutter'd rocks, and congregated ſands,
Traitors enſteep'd to clog the guiltleſs keel,
As having ſenſe of beauty, do omit
Their mortal natures, letting ſafe go by
The divine Deſdemona. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
My cheeks are gutter'd with my fretting tears. Sandys.
Firſt in a place, by nature cloſe, they build
A narrow flooring, gutter'd, wall'd, and til'd. Dryden.
The gutter'd rocks, and mazy-running clefts. Thomſon.
To Gu'ttle. v. n. [from gut..] To feed luxuriouſly; to
gormandiſe. A low word.
His jolly brother, oppoſite in ſenſe,
Laughs at his thrift; and, laviſh of expence,
Quaffs, crams, and guttles in his own defence.
To Gu'ttle. v. a. [from gut.] To ſwallow.
The fool ſpit in his porridge, to try if they'd hiſs: they
did not hiſs, and ſo he guttled them up, and ſcalded his
chops. L'Eſtrange.
Gu'ttleR. n.ſ.. [from guttle.] A greedy eater.
GU’tt Ulous. adj [from guttula, Latin...] In the form of a
ſmall drop. -
Ice is plain upon the ſurface of the water, but round in hail,
which is alſo a glaciation, and figured in its guttulous deſcent
from the air. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii.
GUTTURAL. adj. [gutturalis, Latin.] Pronounced in the
throat; belonging to the throat.
The Hebrews have aſſigned which letters are labial, which
dental, and which guttural. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
In attempting to pronounce the naſals, and ſome of the
vowels ſpiritally, the throat is brought to labour, and makes
Dryden.
that which we call a guttural pronunciation. Holder.
Gu'ttu RALNess. n.ſ.. [from guttural.] The quality of being
guttural. IDićf.
GU’t wort. n ſ. [gut and wort.] An herb.
Guy. n.ſ.. [from guide..] A rope uſed to lift anything into the
ip. Skinner:
To Gu'zzle. v. n. [from gut, or guſt, to guttle, or guſºle.] To
gormandiſe; to feed immoderately; to ſwallow any liquor
greedily.
Well ſeaſon'd bowls the goſſip's ſpirits raiſe,
Who while ſhe guzzles chats the doćtor's praiſe. Roſcommon.
They fell to lapping and guzzling, 'till they burſt them-
ſelves. L'Eſtrange.
No more her care ſhall fill the hollow tray,
To fat the guzzling hogs with floods of whey. Gay.
To Gu'zzle. v. a. To ſwallow with immoderate guſt.
The Pylian king
Was longeſt liv'd of any two-legg'd thing,
Still guzzling muſt of wine. Dryd juvenal.
Gu'zzler. n.ſ.. [from guzzle.] A gormandiſer; an immode-
rate eater or drinker. -
Gybe. n. ſ. [See Gibe..] A ſneer; a taunt; a ſarcaſm.
Ready in gybe, quick anſwer'd, ſaucy, and as quarrellous
as the weazel. Shakespeare's Cynib line.
To Gº, B E. v. n. To ſneer; to taunt.
The vulgar yield an open ear,
And common courtiers love to g; he and fleer. Hidi, T., e.
GyMNA‘stically, adv. [from gynºw/lick J Athletically;
fitly for ſtrong exerciſe.
Such as with agility and vigour have not the uſe of either,
who are not gymnºſtically compoſed, nor actively uſe thoſe
parts. Brown's Pugar Erroir; b. iv. c. 5.
GYMNA/STICK. ad. [792.92; º; ; gymnaſtique, French.]
Pertaining to athletick exerciſes; conſiſting of leaping, wreſt:
ling, running, throwing the dart, or quoit.
I he Cretans wiſely forbid their ſervants symnaſticſ; as well.
as arms; and yet your modern footmen exerciſe themſelves
daily, whilſt their enervated lords are ſoftly lolling in their
chariots. Arbuthnot and Pºpe's Mart. Scriberus.
Gy'MNick, adi, [Yvºyº; ; gymn que, French..] Such as prac-
tiſe the athletick or gymnaſtick exerciſes. -
Have they not ſword-players, and ev'ry ſort -
Of gymnick artiſts, wreſtlers, riders, runners. Milton.
GYMNosfe'RMous. adj. [yūz; GP and a wifuz.] Having the
ſeeds naked. -
GY'Necock As AY. n.ſ. [Yvvºixox{2+ix; gynecocratie, French.]
Petticoat government; female power.
Gºos. m. ſ. [gyro, Latin.] The act of turning anything
about.
This effluvium attenuateth and impelleth the neighbour air,
which, returning home, in a gyration carrieth with it the ob.
vious bodies into the electrick. Brown's Wagar Errours.
If a burning coal be nimbly moved round in a circle with
gyrations, continually repeated, the whole circle will appear
like fire; the reaſon of which is, that the ſenſation of the coal
in the ſeveral places of that circle remains impreſſed on the
ſenſorium, until the coal return again to the ſame place. Newt.
GY RE. m.ſ. [gyrus, Latin.] A circle deſcribed by any thing
going in an orbit.
Ne thenceforth his approved ſkill to ward,
Or ſtrike, or hurlen round in warlike gyre,
Remember'd he; ne car'd for his ſafe guard,
But rudely rag'd. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 5.
Does the wild haggard tow'r into the ſky,
And to the South by thy direction fly?
Or eagle in her gyres the clouds embrace Sandys.
He faſhion'd thoſe harmonious orbs, that roll
In reſtleſs gyres about the Artick pole. Sandys.
Quick and more quick he ſpins in giddy gyreſ,
Then falls, and in much foam his ſoul expires. Dryden.
Gyves. n.ſ. [gevyn, Welſh.J. Fetters; chaias for the legs.
The villains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they had
gyves on. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
And knowing this, ſhould Iyet ſtay,
Like ſuch as blow away their lives,
And never will redeem a day,
Enamour'd of their golden gyves? Ben. Johnſºn's Foreſt.
The poor priſoners, ready to take the occaſion offered,
boldly ſtarting up, break off their chains and gyves. Knºlles.
Do'ſt thou already ſingle me? I thought
Gyves and the mill had tam'd thee. Milton's Agoniſłes.
But Telamon ruſh'd in, and hap'd to meet
A riſing root, that held his faſten’d feet;
So down he fell, whom ſprawling on the ground,
His brother from the wooden gyves unbound. Dryd. Fables.
To Gyve. v. a. [from the noun...] To fetter; to ſhackle; to
enchain; to enſnare.
With as little a web as this, will I enſnare as great a fly as
Caffio. Ay, ſmile upon her, do. I will gyve thee in thine
own courtſhip. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Io U H.
