<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T.
T A B
A conſonant, which, at the beginning and end
of words, has always th; ſame ſound nearly
approaching to the d5 but before an i, when
followed by a vowel, has the ſound of an ob-
9 ſcure - as, nation, ſalvation, except whenſ
precedes tº as, Chriſtian, queſtion.
TA’BBY. n. ſ: [tabi, tabino, Italian; tabis, French.] A kind
of waved ſilk.
-- Brocades, and tabies, and gauſes. Swift.
TA'BBY. adj. Brinded; brindled ; varied with different co-
lours. -
A tabby cat ſat in the chimney-corner. Addiſon.
On her tabby rival's face,
She deep will mark her new diſgrace. Prior.
TABEFA’ction. n.ſ.. [tabefacio, Latin.] The aët of waſting
aWaw.
To Tºrry. v. n. [tabefacio, Latin.] To waſte; to be ex-
tenuated by diſeaſe. In the following example it is impro-
perly a verb active.
Meat eaten in greater quantity than is convenient taleſet
, the body. Harvey on Conſumptions.
TA'BARD. lºn. ſ. ſtaberda, low Latin; tabard, Fr.j Á long
TA’BERD. } gown; a herald's coat.
TA'BERDER... n.ſ.. [from taberd..] One who wears a long
gown. -
TA’BERNAcle. n.ſ. ſtabernacle, Fr. tabernaculum, Lat.]
I. A temporary habitation; a caſual dwelling. -
They ſudden rear'd
Coeleſtial tabernacles, where they ſlept
Tann'd with cool winds. Milton's Par. Loft, b. v.
2. A ſacred place; a place of worſhip.
The greateſt conqueror did not only compoſe his divine
odes, but ſet them to muſick: his works, though conſecrated
to the tabernacle, became the national entertainment, as well
as the devotion of his people. Addiſon's Speč. Nº. 405.
To TA/BERNAcLE. v. n. [from the noun..] To enſhrine; to
houſe. -
The word was made fleſh, and tabernacled amongſt us,
and we beheld his glory. John i. 14.
TA’BID. adj. [tabide, Étalia, Lat.] Waſted by diſeaſe;
conſumptive.
In tabid perſons milk is the beſt reſtorative, being chyle
already preparcd. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
TA’BIDNESS. n.ſ.. [from tabid.] Conſumptiveneſs; ſtate of be-
ing waſted by diſeaſe.
TA'BLATURE. m. ſ. [from table.j Painting on walls or ceilings.
TA’BLE. m. ſ. ſtable, Fr. tabula, Latin.]
1. Any flat or level ſurface.
Upon the caſtle hill there is a bagnio paved with fair tables
of marble. Sandys.
2. A horizontal ſurface raiſed above the ground, uſed for meals
and other purpoſes.
We may again -
Give to our tables meat, ſleep to our nights. Shakeſpeare.
Help to ſearch my houſe; if I find not what I ſeek, let
me for ever be your table ſport. Shakeſpeare.
Children at a table never aſked for any thing, but content-
edly took what was given them. Locke on Education.
This ſhuts them out from all table converſation, and the
moſt agreeable intercourſes. Addiſon's Speciator.
Nor hath the fruit in it any core or kernel; and differing
from other apples, yet is a good table fruit. Mortimer.
The nymph the table ſpread,
Ambroſial cates, with nećtar, roſy red. Pope.
3. The perſons ſitting at table, or partaking of entertainment.
Give me ſome wine, fill full,
I drink to th’ general joy of the whole table. Shakeſpeare.
4. The fare or entertainment itſelf: as, he Æeep; a good table.
5. A tablet; a ſurface on which any thing is written or en-
raved.
£ He was the writer of them in the tables of their hearts.
Hººker, b. iii.
'Twas pretty, though a plague, -
T A B
To ſee him every hour; to fit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
In our hearts table. Shakeſpeare.
All theſe true notes of immortality
In our heart's table we ſhall written find. Davies.
I prepar'd to pay in verſes rude
A moſt deteſted act of gratitude:
Ev’n this had been your elegy which now
Is offer'd for your health, the table of my vow. Dryden,
There are books extant which the atheiſt muſt allow ºf as
proper evidence; even the mighty volumes of viſible nature,
and the everlaſting tables of right reaſon; wherein if they do
not wilfully ſhut their eyes, they may read their own folly
written by the finger of God in a much plainer and more
terrible ſentence, than Belſhazzar's was by the hand upon
the wall. Bentley's Sermons.
Among the Romans, the judge or praetor granted admini-
ſtration, not only according to the tables of the teſtament,
but even contrary to thoſe tables. Ayliffe's Parergon.
By the twelve tables, only thoſe were called into ſucceſſion
of their parents that were in the parent's power. Ayliffe.
6. [Tableau, Fr.] A pićture, or anything that exhibits a view
of any thing.
I never lov'd myſelf,
Till now, infixed, I beheld myſelf
Drawn in the flatt'ring table of her eye. Shakeſpeare.
His Jalyſus or Bacchus he ſo eſteemed, that he had rather
loſe all his father's images than that table. Peacham.
Saint Anthony has a table that hangs up to him from a
poor peaſant, who fancied the ſaint had ſaved his neck. Addison
7. An index; a collection of heads ; a catalogue; a ſyllabus.
It might ſeem impertinent to have added a table to a book
of ſo ſmall a volume, and which ſeems to be itſelf but a ta-
ble: but it may prové advantagious at once to learn the whole
culture of any plant. Evelyn's Kalender.
Their learning reaches no farther than the tables of con-
tents. Watts.
8. A ſynopſis ; many particulars brought into one view.
have no images of anceſtors,
Wanting an ear, or noſe; no forged tables
Of long deſcents, to boaſt falſe honours from. B. Johnſºn.
9. The palm of the hand.
Miſtreſs of a fairer table
Hath not hiſtory nor fable. Benj. johnſºn.
10. Draughts; ſmall pieces of wood ſhifted on ſquares.
Monſieur the nice,
When he plays at tables, chides the dice. Shakeſpeare.
We are in the world like men playing at tables; the chance
is not in our power, but to play it, is ; and when it is fallen
we muſt manage it as we can. Taylor.
11. To turn the TABLEs. To change the condition or fortune
of two contending parties: a metaphor taken from the viciſ-
ſitude of fortune at gaming tables. -
They that are honeſt would be arrant knaves if the tables
were turned. I’Eſtrange.
If it be thus, the talles would be turned upon ine; but I
ſhould only fail in my vain attempt. Dryden.
To Table. v. m. [from the noun...] To board; to live at the
table of another. -
He loſt his kingdom, was driven from the ſociety of men
to table with the beaſts, and to graze with oxen. South.
You will have no notion of delicacies if you table with
them; they are all for rank and foul feeding, Felton.
To TABLE. v. a. To make into a catalogue; to ſet down.
• I could have looked on him without admiration, though
the catalogue of his endowments had been tabled by his ſide,
and I to peruſe him by items. Shakeſpeare's Cºeline.
TA'ble BEER. m. ſ. ſtable and beer.] Beer uſed at victuals ;
ter. -
tº. m. ſ. ſtable and book.] A book on which any
thing is graved ºr written without ink.
-&gt; What might you think,
, If I had play'd the deſk or table-book.
Shakespeare Hamlet.
26 A -
Nature<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A C
T A C
- le-hook firſt, and then pourtrays
Nº. tab More's Antidote ...}}}.
º . your the-book whatſoever you judge worthy. Dry.
Nature's fair ºl. . . º
I all o'er with old and empty rules,
Šiºn. of the ſchools. Swift's Miſcel.
TA".Iºrg. n.ſ. ſtable and ſloth.] Linen ſpread on a table;
I will end with Odo holding maſter doctor's mule, and
Anne with her tableclºth. Camden’s Remains.
TA'ble MAN. m. ſ. A man at draughts.
In clericals the keys are lined, and in colleges they uſe to
line the tablemen. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
TA'bleR. m. ſ. [from table.] One who boards. - Ainſ.
TA'blet Alk. n.ſ.. [table and talk..] Converſation at meals
or entertainments ; table diſcourſe.
Let me praiſe you while I have a ſtomach.
—No, let it ſerve for tabletalk. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
His fate makes tabletalk, divulg'd with ſcorn,
And he a jeſt into his grave is born. Dryden's juvenal.
He improves by the tabletal, and repeats in the kitchen
what he learns in the parlour. Guardian, Nº. 165.
No fair adverſary would urge looſe table-talk in controverſy,
and build ſerious inferences upon what was ſpoken but in
jeſt. Atterbury.
TA’blet. n.ſ.. [from table.]
1. A ſmall level ſurface.
2. A medicine in a ſquare form.
It hath been anciently in uſe to wear tablets of arſenick,
or preſervatives, againſt the plague; as they draw the venom
to them from the ſpirits. Bacon.
3. A ſurface written on or painted.
It was by the authority of Alexander, that through all
Greece the young gentlemen learned, before all other things,
to deſign upon tablets of boxen wood. Dryden.
The pillar'd marble, and the tablet braſs,
Mould'ring, drop the vićtor's praiſe. Prior.
TA'BOUR. m. ſ. [tabourin, tabour, old French.] A ſmall
drum; a drum beaten with one ſtick to accompany a pipe.
If you did but hear the pedlar at door, you would never
dance again after a tabour and pipe. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
The ſhepherd knows not thunder from a tabour,
More than I know the ſound of Marcius' tongue
From every meaner man. sº. Coriolanus.
Morrice-dancers danced a maid marian, and a tabour and
pipe. Temple.
ToTA'Rour. v. n. [taborer, old French, from the noun..] To
ſtrike lightly and frequently.
And her maids ſhall lead her as with the voice of doves,
tabouring upon their breaſts." Nah. ii. 7.
TA'BourER. m. ſ. [from tabour.] One who beats the tabour.
Would I could ſee this tabourer. Shakeſpeare.
TA'bour ET. m. ſ. [from tabour.] A ſmall drum or tabour.
They ſhall depart the manor before him with trumpets,
tabourets, and other minſtrelſey. Speciat. Nº. 607.
TA"BOURINE. n.ſ. [French.j A tabour; a ſmall drum.
Trumpeters,
With brazen din blaſt you the city's ear,
Make mingle with our rattling tabourines,
That heav'n and earth may ſtrike their ſounds together,
Applauding our approach. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
TA'BRERE. m. ſ. Tabourer. Obſolete.
I ſaw a ſhole of ſhepherds outgo,
Before them yode a luſty tabrere,
That to the merry hornpipe plaid,
Whereto they danced.
TA/BRET. m. ſ. A tabour.
Wherefore didſt thou ſteal away, that I might have ſent
thee away with mirth and with tabret. Gen. xxxi. 27.
TA(BUL.A.R. n.ſ.. [tabularis, Lat.]
1. Set down in the form of tables or ſynopſes.
2. Formed in ſquares; made into laminae.
All the nodules that conſiſt of one uniform ſubſtance were
formed from a point, as the cruſted ones, nay, and moſt of
the ſpotted ones, and indeed all whatever, except thoſe that
are tabular and plated. JWoodward on Foſſils.
To TABULATE. v. a. [tabula, Lat.] To reduce to tablé, or
ſynopſes.
TA'Rºlated. adj. [tabula, Lat.] Having a flat ſurface.
Many of the beſt diamonds are pointed with fix angles,
and ſome tabulated or plain, and ſquare. Grew's Muſeum.
TA'she. n.ſ.. [from tack.] Anything taken hold of; a catch;
a loop; a button.
.Make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together
with the taches. Exod. xxv. 6.
Taſchygraph Y. m. ſ. [rzzº; and yºpw.] The art or prac-
tice of quick writing.
Spenſer's Paſtorals.
TA(cit. n-ſ: [tacite, Fr. tacitus, Latin.] Silent; implied;
not expreſſed by words.
As there are formal and written leagues reſpective to cer-
*in enemies, ſo is there a natural and tacit confederation
*"ongſt all men, againſt the common enemy of human ſo-
Ciety, pirates. Bacon's holy War.
In elective governments there is a tacit covenant, that the
king of their own making ſhall make his makers princes.
- L'Eſtrange.
Captiouſneſs not only produces miſbecoming expreſſions
and carriage, but is a tacit reproach of ſome incivility. Locke.
TA'citly. adv. [from tacit..] Silently; without oral expreſ-
ſion.
While they are expoſing another's weakneſſes, they are
tacitly aiming at their own commendations. Addiſon.
Indulgence to the vices of men can never be tacitly implied,
ſince they are plainly forbidden in ſcripture. Rogerſ'; 'Serm.
TAcItu'RNITY.. n.ſ.. [taciturnité, French; taciturnitas, Lat.]
Habitual ſilence.
The ſecreteſt of natures
Have not more gift in taciturnity. Shakeſpeare.
Some women have ſome taciturnity,
Some nunneries ſome grains of chaſtity. Donne.
Too great loquacity, and too great taciturnity by fits. Arb,
To TAck. v. a. [tacher. Breton.]
1. To faſten to anything.
Of what ſupreme almighty pow'r
Is thy great arm, which ſpans the Eaſt and Weſt,
And tacks the centre to the ſphere. Herbert.
True freedom you have well defin'd:
But living as you liſt, and to your mind,
And looſely tack'd, all muſt be left behind. Dryden.
The ſymmetry of cloaths fancy appropriates to the wearer,
tacking them to the body as if they belonged to it. Grew.
Frame with ſticks driven into the ground, ſo as to be co-
vered with the hair-cloth, or a blanket tacked about the edges.
Mortimer's Huſbandry.
If a corner of a hanging wants a nail to faſten it, tack it
up. Swift.
2. To join; to unite; to ſtitch together.
There's but a ſhirt and an half in all my company; and
the half ſhirt is two napkins tack'd together, and thrown over
the ſhoulders like a herald's coat without ſleeves. Shakespeare.
I tack'd two plays together for the pleaſure of variety.
Dryden.
They ſerve every turn that ſhall be demanded, in hopes of
getting ſome commendam tacked to their ſees, to the great
diſcouragement of the inferior clergy. Swift.
To TAck. v. n. [probably from tackle.] To turn a ſhip.
This verſeriam they conſtrue to be the compaſs, which is
better interpreted the rope that turns the ſhip; as we ſay,
makes it tack about. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii.
Seeing Holland fall into cloſer meaſures with us and Swe-
den, upon the triple alliance, they have tacked ſome points
nearer France. Temple.
On either ſide they nimbly tack,
Both ſtrive to intercept and guide the wind. Dryden.
They give me ſigns -
To tack about, and ſteer another way. Addiſon.
TAck. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſmall nail.
2. The aët of turning ſhips at ſea.
At each tack our little fleet grows leſs, -
And, like maim'd fowl, ſwim lagging on the main. Dryd.
3. To hold TAck. To laſt; to hold out. Tack is ſtill re-
tained in Scotland, and denotes hold or perſevering coheſion.
Martilmas beefe doth bear good tacke,
When countrey folke do dainties lacke. Tuſir.
If this twig be made of wood
That will hold tack, I'll make the fur
Fly 'bout the ears of that old cur.
TA'ckle. n.ſ.. [tacel, Welſh, an arrow.]
I. An arrow.
The takil ſmote and in it went.
2. Weapons; inſtruments of action.
She to her tackle fell,
And on the knight let fall a peal
Of blows ſo fierce, and preſs'd ſo home, - -
That he retir’d. Hudibras, p. 1.
Being at work without catching anything, he reſºlº .
take up his tackle and be gone. L’Eſtrange ; Fablei.
3. [Taeckel, a rope, Dutch..] The ropes of a ſhip.
After at ſea a tall ſhip did appear,
Made all of Heben and white ivory,
The ſails of gold, of ſilk the tackle were,
Mild was the wind, calm ſeem'd the ſea to be. Spºnſºr.
At the helm
A ſeeming mermaid ſteers; the ſilken tackles
Swell with the touches of thoſe flower-ſoft hands
That yarely frame the office. Shakeſpeare.
Thou haſt a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in't ; though thy tackle's torn, , .
Thou ſhew'ſt a noble veſſel. Shakeſp. Coriolanuſ.
A ſtately ſhip
With all her bravery on, and tackle trim,
Sails fill’d, and ſtreamers waving,
Courted by all the winds that hold them play. Mº.
Hudibra, p. i.
Chaucer,
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A I
TA I
Ere yet the tempeſt roars
Stand to your tackle, mates, and ſtretch your oars. Dryden.
If he drew the figure of a ſhip, there was not a rope
among the tackle that eſcaped him. Addiſon's Spectator.
TA'cKLED. adj. [from tackle..] Made of ropes tacked together.
My man ſhall
Bring thee cords, made like a tackled ſtair,
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Muſt be my convoy in the ſecret night.
TA'ckLING. m. ſ. [from tackle.]
1. Furniture of the maſt.
They wondered at their ſhips and their tacklings. Abbot.
Tackling, as ſails and cordage, muſt be foreſeen, and laid
up in ſtore. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Red ſheets of lightning o'er the ſeas are ſpread,
Our tackling yield, and wrecks at laſt ſucceed. Garth.
2. Inſtruments of ačtion: as, fiſhing tackling, kitchen tackling.
I will furniſh him with a rod, if you will furniſh him with
the reſt of the tackling, and make him a fiſher. //alton.
TA’ctic AL. }*. [rzzlizès, rºrro; tačique, Fr.] Relating
TA’ctick. to the art of ranging a battle.
TAc"ticks. n.ſ. [rzàix.] The art of ranging men in the
field of battle.
When Tully had read the tačicks, he was thinking on the
bar, which was his field of battle. Dryden.
TA’ct ILE. adj. [tactile, Fr. tačiilis, tačium, Lat.] Suſceptible
of touch.
We have iron, ſounds, light, figuration, tačfile qualities;
ſome of a more active, ſome of a more paſſive nature. Hale.
TAct I'lity. n.ſ.. [from tactile.] Perceptibility by the touch.
TA’ction. n.ſ. [taction, Fr. tačfio, Lat..] The act of touching.
TA'DPole. m. ſ. [zab, toad, and pola, a young one, Saxon.]
A young ſhapeleſs frog or toad, conſiſting only of a body
and a tail; a porwiggle.
I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point. Shakeſpeare.
Poor Tom eats the toad and the tadpole. Shakeſpeare.
The reſult is not a perfect frog but a tadpole, without any
feet, and having a long tail to ſwim with. Ray.
A black and round ſubſtance began to dilate, and after
awhile the head, the eyes, the tail to be diſcernable, and at
laſt become what the ancients called gyrinus, we a porwigle
or tadpole. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii.
TA’en, the poetical contraćtion of taken.
TA'FFETA. n.ſ. ſtaffetas, Fr. taffetar, Spaniſh..] A thin ſilk.
All hail, the richeſt beauties on the earth !
—Beauties no richer than rich taffata.
Never will I truſt to ſpeeches penn'd;
Taffata phraſes, ſilken terms preciſe, .
Three pil’d hyperboles. Shakeſp. Love's Labour loſt.
Some think that a conſiderable diverſity of colours argues
an equal diverſity of nature, but I am not of their mind for
not to mention the changeable taffety, whoſe colours the phi-
loſophers call not real, but apparent. Boyle on Colours.
Tag. n.ſ.. [tag, Iſlandiſh, the point of a lance.]
1. A point of metal put to the end of a ſtring.
2. Anything paltry and mean. - - -
If tag and rag be admitted, learned and unlearned, it is
the fault of ſome, not of the law. Whitgift.
Will you hence
Before the tag return, whoſe rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
The tag-rag people did not clap him and hiſs him. Shakespeare
He invited tag, rag, and bob-tail, to the wedding. L’E/hr.
Ta'otAil. n.ſ. ſtag and tail.] A worm which has the tail of
another colour.
They feed on tag worms and lugges. ... Carew.
There are other worms; as the marſh and tagtail. J/alton.
To TAG. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To fit any thing with an end ; as, to tag a lace.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
2. To append one thing to another:
His courteous hoſt
Tags every ſentence with ſome fawning word,
Such as my king, my prince, at leaſt my lord, Dryden.
'Tis tagg'd with rhyme, like Berecynthian Atys,
The mid-part chimes with art, which never flat is. Dryd.
3. The word is here improperly uſed.
Compell'd by you to tag in rhimes -
The common ſlanders of the times. Swift.
4. To join : this is properly to tack.
Réſiſtance, and the ſucceſſion of the houſe of Hanover,
the whig writers perpetually tag together. Swift's 44/tel.
TAIL. m. ſ. ſcat,l, Saxon.] -
1. That which terminates the animal behind ; the continua-
tion of the vertebrae of the back hanging looſe behind.
Oft have I ſeen a hot o'er-weening cur,
Run back and bite, becauſe he was with-held,
Who, having ſuffer'd with the bear's fell paw,
Hath clapt his tail betwixt his legs and cry’d. Shakeſpeare.
This ſees the cub, and does himſelf oppoſe,
And men and boats his active tail confounds. JWaller.
The lion will not kick, but will ſtrike ſuch a ſtroke with
his tail, that will break the back of his encounterer. 44%re.
Rouz'd by the laſh of his own ſtubborn tail,
Our lion now will foreign foes affail. Dryden,
The tail fin is half a foot high, but underneath level with
the tail. Grew.
2. The lower part.
The Lord ſhall make thee the head, and not the tail; and
thou ſhalt be above, and not beneath.
3. Anything hanging long; a cat-kin.
Duretus writes a great praiſe of the diſtilled water of thoſe
tail that hang upon willow trees. Harvey on Conſumptions.
4. The hinder part of any thing.
With the helm they turn and ſteer the tail. Butler.
5. To turn Tail. To fly; to run away.
Would ſhe turn tail to the heron, and fly quite out another
way ; but all was to return in a higher pitch. Sidney.
To TAIL. v. m. To pull by the tail.
The conquering foe they ſoon affail'd,
Firſt Trulla ſtav'd and Cerdon tail'd, Hudibras, b. i.
TA'iled. adj. [from tail.] Furniſhed with a tail.
Snouted and tailed like a boar, footed like a goat. Grew,
TA'ILLAGE. m. ſ. [tailler, French.]
Taillage originally ſignifies a piece cut out of the whole;
and, metaphorically, a ſhare of a man's ſubſtance paid by
way of tribute. In law, it ſignifies a roll or tax. Cowel.
TAILLE. m.ſ.
Taille, the fee which is oppoſite to fee-ſimple, becauſe it is
ſo minced or pared, that it is not in his free power to be diſ-
poſed of who owns it; but is, by the firſt giver, cut or di-
vided from all other, and tied to the iſſue of the donee.
This limitation, or taille, is either general or ſpecial. Taille
general is that whereby lands or tenements are limited to a
man, and to the heirs of his body begotten; and the reaſon
of this term is, becauſe how many ſoever women the tenant,
holding by this title, ſhall take to his wives, one after an-
other, in lawful matrimony, his iſſue by them all have a poſ-
ſibility to inherit one after the other. Taile ſpecial is that
whereby lands or tenements be limited unto a man and his
wife, and the heirs of their two bodies begotten. Cowel.
TAI'loR. m. ſ. [tailleur, from tailler, French, to cut.] One
whoſe buſineſs is to make cloaths.
I'll entertain a ſcore or two of tailors,
To ſtudy faſhions to adorn my body. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Here's an Engliſh tailor come for ſtealing out of a French
hoſe : come tailor, you may roaſt your gooſe. Shakeſpeare.
The knight came to the tailor's to take meaſure of his
gown. Camden.
The world is come now to that paſs, that the tailor and
ſhoemaker may cut out what religion they pleaſe. Howel.
They value themſelves for this outſide faſhionableneſs of
the tailor's making. Locke on Education.
It was prettily ſaid by Seneca, that friendſhip ſhould not
be unript, but unſtitcht, though ſomewhat in the phraſe of a
Deut. xxviii. 13.
tailor. Collier.
In Covent-Garden did a tailor dwell, -
That ſure a place deſerv'd in his own hell. King.
To TAINT. v. a. [teindre, French.]
1. To imbue or impregnate with anything.
The ſpaniel ſtruck
Stiff by the tainted gale, with open noſe
Draws full upon the latent prey.
2. To ſtain; to ſully. -
We come not by the way of accuſation
To taint that honour every good tongue bleſſes. Shakespeare .
Sirens taint
The minds of all men, whom they can acquaint
With their attractions. Chapman's Odyſſey, b. xii.
They the truth
With ſuperſtitions and traditions taint. Milton.
Thoſe pure immortal elements
Ejećt him tainted now, and purge him off -
As a diſtemper. Milton.
3. To infect. - *- - -
Nothing taints ſound lungs ſooner than inſpiring the breath
of conſumptive lungs. Harvey on Conſumptionſ.
Salts in fumes contract the veſicles, and perhaps the *-
ed air may affect the lungs by its heat. Arbuthnot on Air.
with wholeſome herbage mixt, the direful bane
Of vegetable venom taints the plain. Pope.
. To corrupt. -
4. ‘Ā rºad you found it tainted or fly-blown. Swift.
The yellow tinging plague
Internal viſion taints. f int
ontračtion of attaint.
# *..." º n. To be infected ; B. be touched.
Till Birnam wood remove to Dunlinaº
I cannot taint with fear. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
TAINT. n.ſ.. [teinte, Fr. from the verb.] -
1. A tinéture; a ſtain.
inſect. -
2. Aº is found in the Summer a ſider called a tain', of a
red colour, and ſo little that ten of the largeſt will hardly
- - », ºr . iii.
outweigh a grain. Brown’, Pulgar Errouri, * As
Thomſºn.
Thomſºn's Spring.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A K
As killing as the canker to the roſe,
Or raint worm to the weaning herds that graze.
3. Iº. that breeds his ſon at home, can keep him better
from the taint of ſervants than abroad. Locke on Education.
But is no rank, no ſtation, no degree,
From this º, º of ſorrow free.
- - emlin. -
4. A ſpot ; a ſoil; a Her offence
Muſt be of ſuch unnatural degree,
That monſters it; or your forevouch'd affe&amp;tion
Fall’n into taint. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Milton.
Prior.
*-
Now I
Unſpeak mine own detraction; here abjure
The taints and blames I laid upon myſelf. Shakeſpeare.
My hellhounds ſhall lick up the draft and filth,
Which man's polluting ſin with taint hath ſhed
On what was pure. - -
TA/INT less, adj. [from taint..] Free from infečtion.
No humours groſs, or frowzy ſteams, -
Could from her taintleſs body flow. Swift's Miſcel.
TA'INTURE. m. ſ. [tinctura, Lat. teinture, French.] Taint;
tinge; defilement.
See here the tainture of thy neſt,
And look thyſelf be faultleſs. Shakeſpeare.
To TAKE. v. a. preterite took, part. paſſ taken, ſometimes
took ; taka, Iſlandiſh; ey tek, I take; ey took, I took.]
1. To receive what is offered.
Then took I the cup at the Lord's hand, and made all the
nations to drink. er. xxv. 17.
Milton.
They refuſe to take the cup at thine hand to drink. jer.
Be thou advis'd, thy black deſign forſake;
Death, or this counſel, from Lucippus take. JValler.
- An honeſt man may take a knave's advice,
But idiots only may be cozen'd twice. Dryden.
Madam, were I as you, I'd take her counſel. Philips.
Diſtreſs'd myſelf, like you, confin'd I live,
And therefore can compaſſion take and give. Dryden.
2. To ſeize what is not given.
In fetters one the barking porter ty'd,
And took him trembling from his ſovereign's ſide. Dryden.
3. To receive.
No man ſhall take the nether or upper milſtone to pledge.
Deut. xxiv. 6.
4. To receive with good or ill will.
For, what we know muſt be,
Why ſhould we, in our peeviſh oppoſition,
Take it to heart. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
I will frown as they paſs by, and let them take it as they
liſt. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
La you! if you ſpeak ill of the devil, how he take; it at
heart. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Damaſco, without any more ado, yielded unto the Turks;
which the baſſa took in ſo good part, that he would not ſuffer
his ſoldiers to enter it. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
The king being in a rage, took it grievouſly that he was
mocked. 2 Mac. vii. 39.
The queen hearing of a declination of monarchy, too; it
ſo ill as ſhe would never after hear of the other's ſuit. Bacon.
A following hath ever been a thing civil, and well taken in
monarchies, ſo it be without too much popularity. Bacon.
The diminution of the power of the nobility they took
very heavily. Clarendon.
I hope you will not expečt from me things demonſtrated
with certainty; but will take it well that I ſhould offer at a
new thing. Graunt.
If I have been a little pilfering, I take it bitterly of thee to
tell me of it. Dryden.
The ſole advice I could give him in conſcience, would be
that which he would take ill, and not follow. Swift.
5. To lay hold on ; to catch by ſurprize or artifice.
Who will believe a man that hath no houſe, and lodgeth
wherefoever the night taketh him : Eccluſ. xxxvi. 26.
They ſilenced thoſe who oppoſed them, by traducing them
abroad, or taking advantage againſt them in the houſe. Clar.
Men in their looſe unguarded hours they take,
Not that themſelves are wiſe, but others weak.
6. To ſnatch ; to ſeize.
I am contented to dwell on the Divine Providence, and
Pope.
* up any occaſion to lead me to its contemplation. Hale.
7. To make priſoner.
£ppoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him, and diſgrace him for it. Shakespeare
King Lear hath loſt, he and his daughter ta'en. Shakespeare
..This man was taken of the Jews, and ſhould have been
killed. - Aéïs xxii. 27.
They entering with wonderful celerity on every ſide, ſlew
and took three hundred Janizaries. Knolles.
8. To $ºptivate with pleaſure; to delight; to engage.
More than hiſtory can pattern, though devis'd
And Play'd totaše ſpectators. Shakeſpeare.
- 2
I long
To hear the ſtory of your life, which muſt
Take the ear ſtrangely. Shakeſpeare's Tºmpºſ,
Let her not take thee with her eyelids. Prov. vi. 3.
Yet notwithſtanding, taken by Perkin's amiable behaviour
he entertained him as became the perſon of Richard duke º
York. Bacon's Henry VII.
Their ſong was partial, but the harmony
Suſpended hell, and took with raviſhment
The thronging audience. Milton.
If I renounce virtue, though naked, then I do it yet more
when ſhe is thus beautified on purpoſe to allure the eye, and
take the heart. Decay ºf Piety.
This beauty ſhines through ſome mens ačtions, ſets off ºf
that they do, and takes all they come near. Locke.
Cleombrotus was ſo taken with this prop.&lt;t, that he ºld
no patience. //aše.
9. To ſurprize; to catch.
Wiſe men are overborn when taken at a diſadvantage.
Collier ºf Confidence.
Io. To entrap; to catch in a ſhare.
Take us the foxes, that ſpoil the vines. 2 Cant. xv.
11. To underſtand in any particular ſenſe or manner.
The words are more properly taken for the air or ather
than the heavens. Raleigh.
You take me right, Eupolis; for there is no poſſibility of
an holy war. Bacon's holy Iſar,
I take it, andiron braſs, called white braſs, hath ſome
mixture of tin to help the luſtre. Bacon.
Why, now you take me; theſe are rites
That grace love's days, and crown his nights:
Theſe are the motions I would ſee. Benj. jºhnſºn.
Give them one ſimple idea, and ſee that they take it right,
and perfectly comprehend it. Lºcke.
Charity taken in its largeſt extent, is nothing elſe but the
ſincere love of God and our neighbour. J/aše.
12. To exact.
Take no uſury of him or increaſe. Lev. xxv. 36.
13. To get; to have ; to appropriate.
And the king of Sodom ſaid unto Abram, give me the
perſons, and take the goods to thyſelf. Gen. xiv. 21.
14. To uſe; to employ. -
This man always takes time, and ponders things maturely
before he paſſes his judgment. h/aiti.
15. To blaſt; to infect.
Strike her young bones,
You taking airs with lameneſs.
16. To judge in favour of.
The niceſt eye could no diſtinétion make
Where lay the advantage, or what ſide to take.
17. To admit anything bad from without.
I ought to have a care
To keep my wounds from taking air.
18. To get; to procure.
Striking ſtones they took fire out of them.
19. To turn to ; to practiſe. -
If any of the family be diſtreſſed, order is taken for their
relief: if any be ſubject to vice, or take ill courſes, they are
reproved. Bacon's New Atlantiš.
20. To cloſe in with ; to comply with.
Old as I am, I take thee at thy word,
And will to-morrow thank thee with my ſword. Drydºn.
She to her country's uſe reſign'd your ſword, -
And you, kind lover, took her at her word. Dryden.
I take thee at thy word. Rowe's Ambitious Stepmother.
Where any one thought is ſuch, that we have power to
take it up or lay it by, there we are at liberty. Lock.
21. To form; to fix. *
Reſolutions taken upon full debate,
with equal reſolution. -
22. To catch in the hand; to ſeize.
He put forth a hand, and took me by a lock of my head.
Ezek. viii. 3.
Drydºn.
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden,
Hudibras, p. iii.
2 Mac. x. 3.
were ſeldom proſecuted
Clarendon.
I took not arms till urg’d by ſelf defence.
23. To admit; to ſuffer.
Yet thy moiſt clay is pliant to command;
Now take the mould ; now bend thy mind to feel
The firſt ſharp motions of the forming wheel.
To perform any action. - -
Perädventure we ſhall prevail againſt him, and take our *
venge on him. er. xx. 18.
Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark, and took hºld of º
for the oxen ſhook it. - 2 Sam. . -
Taking my leave of them, I went into Macedonia. 29."
Before I proceed, I would be glad to take ſome breath.
Bacon's holy War.
His wind he never took whilſt the cup was at his nº
but juſtly obſerved the rule of drinking with ºne breath.
ZiaKewill on Providence.
Then call’d his brothers,
And her to whom his nuptial vows were bound;
Dryden.
24.
A long
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A K
º
-
..
A long figh he drew,
And his voice failing, took his laſt adieu.
The Sabine Clauſus came,
And from afar, at Dryops took his aim.
Her lovers names in order to run o'er,
Dryden's Fab.
Dryden's Aºn.
The girl took breath full thirty times and more. Dryden.
Heighten’d revenge he ſhould have took ;
He ſhould have burnt his tutor's book. Prior.
The huſband's affairs made it neceſſary for him to take a
voyage to Naples. Addiſon's Speciator.
I took a walk in Lincoln's Inn Garden. Tatler.
The Carthaginian took his ſeat, and Pompey entered with
great . in his own perſon. Tatler.
I am poſſeſſed of power and credit, can gratify my favou-
rites, and take vengeance on my enemies. Swift.
25. To receive into the mind.
When they ſaw the boldneſs of Peter and John, they took
knowledge of them that they had been with Jeſus. Aćis iv.
It appeared in his face, that he took great contentment in
this our queſtion. Bacon.
Dočtor Moore, in his Ethicks, reckons this particular in-
clination, to take a prejudice againſt a man for his looks,
among the ſmaller vices in morality, and names it a proſo-
polepiia. Addiſon's Spect. N°.86.
A ſtudent ſhould never ſatisfy himſelf with bare attendance
on lectures, unleſs he clearly takes up the ſenſe. //atts.
26. To go into.
When news were brought that the French king beſieged
Conſtance, he poſted to the ſea-coaſt to take ſhip. Camden.
Tygers and lions are not apt to take the water. Hale.
27. To go along; to follow; to perſue.
The joyful ſhort-liv'd news ſoon ſpread around,
Took the ſame train.
Obſerving ſtill the motions of their flight,
What courſe they took, what happy ſigns they ſhew. Dry.
28. To ſwallow ; to receive.
Conſider the inſatisfaction of ſeveral bodies, and of their
appetite to take in others. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Turkeys take down ſtones, having found in the gizzard of
one no leſs than ſeven hundred. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
29. To ſwallow as a medicine.
Tell an ignoramus in place to his face that he has a wit
above all the world, and as fulſome a doſe as you give him
he ſhall readily take it down, and admit the commendation,
though he cannot believe the thing. South.
Upon this aſſurance he took phyſick. Locke.
The glutinous mucilage that is on the outſides of the ſeeds
waſhed off cauſes them to take. Mortimer's Huſb.
30. To chooſe one of more.
Take to thee from among the cherubim
Thy choice of flaming warriors. Milton.
Either but one man, or all men are kings: take which you
pleaſe it diſſolves the bonds of government. Locke.
31. To copy. -
Our phaenix queen was pourtray'd too ſo bright,
Beauty alone cou’d beauty take ſo right.
32. To convey ; to carry; to tranſport.
Carry fir John Falſtaff to the fleet,
Take all his company along with him. Shakeſp, Henry IV.
He ſat him down in a ſtreet; for no man took them into
his houſe to lodging. judges xix. 15.
33. To faſten on ; to ſeize.
Whereſoever he taketh him he teareth him; and he foam-
Dryden.
Dryden.
eth. Mark ix. 18.
No temptation hath taken you, but ſuch as is common to
man. I Cor. x. 13.
When the froſt and rain have taken them they grow dan-
gercus. Temple.
At firſt they warm, then ſcorch, and then they take,
Now with long necks from fide to ſide they feed;
At length grown ſtrong their mother-ſize forſake,
And a new colony of flames ſucceed. Dryden.
No beaſt will eat ſour graſs till the froſt hath taken it. Mort:
In burning of ſtubble, take care to plow the land up round
the field, that the fire may not take the hedges. Mortimer.
34. Not to refuſe; to accept.
Take no ſatisfaction for the life of a murderer, he ſhall be
ſurely put to death. Num. xxxv. 31.
Thou tak'ſ thy mother's word too far, ſaid he,
And haſ uſurp'd thy boaſted pedigree. Dryden.
He that ſhould denſand of him how begetting a child gives
the father abſolute power over him, will find him anſwer
nothing: we are to take his word for this. Locke.
Who will not receive clipped money whilſt he ſees the
great receipt of the exchequer admits it, and the bank and
goldſmiths will take it of him. - Locke.
35. To adopt.
I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a
God. Exod. vi. 7.
36. To change with reſpect to place.
When he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them
to the hoſt. Luke x. 35.
T A K
- He put his hand into his boſom ; and when he too; it out,
it was leprous. Exod. iv. 6.
. If you ſlit the artery, thruſt a pipe into it, and caſt a ſtrait
ligature upon that part containing the pipe,
not beat below the ligature;
will beat immediately.
Lovers flung themſelves from the top of the
the ſea, where the
37. To ſeparate.
A multitude, how great ſocver, brings not a man any
nearer to the end of the inexhauſtible ſtock of number, where
ſtill there remains as much to be added as if none were taken
the artery will
yet do but take it off, and it
• Ray,
- - - precipice into
y were ſometimes taken up alive. Addiſon.
Out. Locke.
The living fabrick now in pieces take, Jºaº
Of every part due obſervation make;
All which ſuch art diſcovers. Blackmore.
38. To admit.
Let not a widow be taken into the number under three-
ſcore.
1 Tim. v. 9.
Though ſo much of heav'n appears in my make,
The fouleſt impreſſions I eaſily take. Swift.
39. To perſue; to go in.
He alone,
To find where Adam ſhelter'd, took his way. Milton.
To the port ſhe takes her way, -
And ſtands upon the margin of the ſea. Dryden,
Give me leave to ſeize my deſtin'd prey,
And let eternal juſtice take the way. Dryden,
It was her fortune once to take her way
Along the ſandy margin of the ſea. Dryden.
40. To receive any temper or diſpoſition of mind.
- They ſhall not take ſhame. Mic. ii. 6.
Thou haſt ſcourged me, and haſt taken pity on me. Tob.
They take delight in approaching to God. Iſa. lviii. 2.
Take a good heart, O Jeruſalem. Bar. iv. 30.
Men die in deſire of ſome things which they take to heart.
Bacon.
Few are ſo wicked as to take delight
In crimes unprofitable. Dryden.
Children, if kept out of ill company, will take a pride to
behave themſelves prettily, perceiving themſelves eſteemed.
Locke on Education.
41. To endure; to bear.
I can be as quiet as any body with thoſe that are quarrel-
ſome, and be as troubleſome as another when I meet with
thoſe that will take it. D'Eſtrange.
Won't you then take a jeſt? Spectator, N°. 422.
He met with ſuch a reception as thoſe only deſerve who
are content to take it. Swift's Miſcel.
42. To draw; to derive. -
The firm belief of a future judgment, is the moſt ſorcible
motive to a good life; becauſe taken from this conſideration
of the moſt laſting happineſs and miſery. Tillotſon,
43. To leap ; to jump over.
That hand which had the ſtrength, ev’n at your door,
To cudgel you, and make you take the hatch. Shakeſp.
44. To aſſume.
Fit you to the cuſtom,
And take t'ye as your predeceſſors have, -
Your honour with your form. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I take liberty to ſay, that theſe propoſitions are ſo far from
having an univerſal aſſent, that to a great part of mankind
they are not known. Locke.
45. To allow; to admit. -
Take not any term, howſoever authorized by the language
of the ſchools, to ſtand for anything till you have an idea of
1t. Locke.
Chemiſts take, in our preſent controverſy, ſomething fºr
granted which they ought to prove. Boyle.
46. To receive with fondneſs.
I lov'd you ſtill, and took your weak excuſes,
Took you into my boſom.
47. To carry out for uſe. y -
He commanded them that they ſhould take nothing for
their journey, ſave a ſtaff. Mar. vi. 8.
48. To ſuppoſe; to receive in thought; to entertain in opinion-
This I take it
Is the main motive of our preparations. Shakeſpeare.
The ſpirits that are in all tangible bodies are ſcarce known.
Sometimes they take them for vacuum, whereas they are
the moſt active of bodies. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
T. fºr tº himſelf to have deſerved as much as any
man, in contributing more, and appearing ſooner, }. º:
firſt approach towards rebellion. ? Still it i Claren i.
Is a man unfortunate in marriage. Still it is becauſe he
was deceived ; and ſo tºº that for virtue and affection which
was nothing but vice in a diſguiſe. *.
Our depraved appetites cauſe us often to take that for
true imitation of nature which has no reſemblance of it.
Dryden.
Dryden.
So ſoft his treſſes, fill'd with trickling Pearl,
You'd doubt his ſex, and take him for a girl. Tate.
26 B Time
= -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A K
J
Time is taken for ſo much of infinite duration, as is mea-
ſured out by the gºat bodies of the univerſe. Locke.
They who would advance in knowledge, ſhould lay gown
this as a fundamental rule, not tº tºe words for things. Locke.
Few will take a propoſition which amounts to no me.” than
this, that God is pleaſed with the doing of what he himſelf
...mmands for an innate moral principle, ſince it *::: º
ittle. 4 octº.
"...m. tories will take you for a whig, ſome whigs will take
ou for a tory. - Pope.
As I take it, the two principal branches of preaching are,
to tell the people what is their duty, and then to coºyºnº
them that it is ſo. Swift.
49. To direét. - -
Where injur'd Niſus takes his airy courſe,
Hence trembling Scylla flies and ſhuns his foe. Dryden.
so. To ſeparate for one's ſelf from any quantity; to remove
for one's ſelf from any place. -
I will take of them for prieſts. Iſº. lxvi. 21.
Hath God aſſayed to take a nation from the midſt of an-
other. Dut. ly. 34-
I might have taken her to me to wife. Gen. xii. 19.
Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took
im. Gen. v. 24.
The Lord took of the ſpirit that was upon him, and gave
it unto the ſeventy elders.
Four heifers from his female ſtore he took.
51. Not to leave ; not to omit.
The diſcourſe here is about ideas, which he ſays are real
things, and we ſee in God: in taking this along with me, to
make it prove any thing to his purpoſe, the argument muſt
ſtand thus. Locke.
Young gentlemen ought not only to take along with them
a clear idea of the antiquities on medals and figures, but
likewiſe to exerciſe their arithmetick in reducing the ſums of
money to thoſe of their own country. Arbuthnot on Coins.
52. To receive payments.
- Never a wife leads a better life than ſhe does; do what
ſhe will, take all, pay all. Shakeſpeare.
53. To obtain by menſuration.
The knight coming to the taylor's to take meaſure of his
gown, perceiveth the like gown cloth lying there. Camden.
With a two foot rule in his hand meaſuring my walls, he
took the dimenſions of the room. Swift.
54. To withdraw.
Honeycomb, on the verge of threeſcore, took me aſide,
and aſked me whether I would adviſe him to marry Speciat.
5 ; º ſeize with a tranſitory impulſe ; to affect ſo as not to
alſ.
Tiberius, noted for his niggardly temper, only gave his
attendants their diet; but once he was taken with a fit of
generoſity, and divided them into three claſſes. Arbuthnot.
56. To compriſe; to comprehend.
- We always take the account of a future ſtate into our
ſchemes about the concerns of this world. Atterbury.
Had thoſe who would perſuade us that there are innate
principles, not taken them together in groſs, but confidered
1eparately the parts, they would not have been ſo forward to
believe they were innate. Locke.
57. To have recourſe to. -
A ſparrow tºok a buſh juſt as an eagle made a ſtoop at an
Dryden.
- haſ: L’E/irange.
The cat preſently takes a tree, and ſees the poor fox torn
to pieces. L’Eſtrange.
58. To produce; or ſuffer to be produced.
No purpoſes whatſoever which are meant for the good of
that land will proſper, or take good effect. Spenſer.
59. To catch in the mind.
Theſe do beſt who take material hints to be judged by hiſ-
tory. Locke.
60. To hire; to rent.
If three ladies, like a luckleſs play,
Takes the whole houſe upon the poet's day. Pope.
61. To engage in ; to be active in.
Queſtion your royal thoughts, make the caſe yours;
Bc now the father, and propoſe a ſon;
Behold yourſelf ſo by a ſon diſdain'd;
And then imagine me taking your part,
And in your pow'r ſo ſilencing your ſon. Shakespeare Henry IV.
62. To ſuffer; to ſupport.
r In ſtreams, my boy, and rivers take thy chance,
There ſwims, ſaid he, thy whole inheritance. Addiſon.
Now take your turn ; and, as a brother ſhou'd,
. Attend your brother to the Stygian flood. Dryden's AFn.
03. To admit in copulation.
Five hundred aſles yearly took the horſe,
Producing mules of greater ſpeed and force.
94. To catch eagerly.
Drances tºok the word; who grudg’d, long ſince,
- T he riſing glories of the Daunian prince. Dryden.
°5. To uſe as an oath or cxpreſſion.
- !" that not take the name of the Lord in vain. Exod.
*6. To ſeize as a diſeaſe, ``
Sandyr.
They that come abroad after theſe ſhowers are commonly
taken with ſickneſs. Bacon
I am taken on the ſudden with a ſwimming in my head. -
67. To TAKE away. To deprive of. Dryden.
If any take away from the book of this prophecy, God
ſhall take away his part out of the book of life. Rev. xx. 19
The bill for taking away the votes of biſhops was callejº,
bill for taking away all temporal juriſdićtion. Clarendon.
Many diſperſed objects breed confuſion, and take away
from the picture that grave majeſty which gives beauty to the
piece. D
You ſhould be hunted like a beaſt of prey, ryden.
By your own law I take your life away.
The fun'ral pomp which to your kings you pay,
Is all I want, and all you take away. Dryden's AFn.
One who gives another any thing, has not always a right
to take it away again. -
Not foes nor fortune takes this pow'r away,
And is my Abelard leſs kind than they. Pºpe.
68. To TAKE away. To ſet aſide; to remove.
If we take away all conſciouſneſs of pleaſure and pain, it
will be hard to know wherein to place perſonal identity.
Locłe.
69. To TAKE care. To be careful; to be ſolicitous for; to
ſuperintend.
Thou ſhalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn.
Doth God take care for oxen I Cor. ix. 9.
70. To TAKE care. To be cautious; to be vigilant.
71. To TAKE courſe. To have recourſe to meaſures.
They meant to take a courſe to deal with particulars by re.
concilements, and cared not for any head. Bacon.
The violence of ſtorming is the courſe which God is forced
to take for the deſtroying, but cannot, without changing the
courſe of nature, for the converting of ſinners. Hammond.
72. To TAKE dºwn. To cruſh; to reduce; to ſuppreſs.
Do you think he is now ſo dangerous an enemy as he is
counted, or that it is ſo hard to take him down as ſome ſup-
poſe Spenſºr on Ireland.
Take down their mettle, keep them lean and bare. Dryd.
Lacqueys were never ſo ſaucy and pragmatical as now, and
he ſhould be glad to ſee them taken down. Addison.
73. To Take down. To ſwallow; to take by the mouth.
We cannot take down the lives of living creatures, which
ſome of the Paracelſians ſay, if they could be taken down,
would make us immortal: the next for ſubtilty of operation,
to take bodies putrefied, ſuch as may be eaſily taken. Bacon.
74. To Take from. To derogate; to detract.
It takes not from you, that you were born with principles
of generoſity; but it adds to you that you have cultivated
nature. Dryden.
75. To Take from. To deprive of.
Converſation will add to their knowledge, but be too apt
to take from their virtue. Locke,
Gentle gods take my breath from me. Shakeſpeare.
I will ſmite thee, and take thine head from thee. I Sam.
76. To TAKE heed. To be cautious; to beware. -
Take heed of a miſchievous man. Ecºluſ xi, 33.
Take heed leſt paſſion -
Sway thy judgment to do ought. Milton.
Children to ſerve their parents int’reſt live,
Take heed what doom againſt yourſelf you give.
77. To TAKE heed to. To attend.
Nothing ſweeter than to take heed unto the commandmen"
of the Lord. Eccluſ. xxiii. 27.
78. To TAKE in. To compriſe; to comprehend. . . .
Theſe heads are ſufficient for the explication of this whº
matter; taking in ſome additional diſcourſes, which ſº
the work more even. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
This love of our country takes in our families, iends,
and acquaintance. Addison.
The diſuſe of the tucker has enlarged the neck of a ".
woman, that at preſent it takes in almoſt half the body. Addison
Of theſe matters no ſatisfactory account can be given by
any mechanical hypotheſis, without taking in the ſuperiº,
dence of the great Creator. Derham's Phyſico-Theºl.
79. To TAKE in. To admit.
An opinion brought into his head by courſe, becauſe he
heard himſelf called a father, rather than any kindneſs that
he found in his own heart, made him take us in. Sidney.
A great veſſel full being drawn into bottles, and then the
liquor put again into the veſſel, will not fill the veſſel again
ſo full as it was, but that it may take in more. Bacon.
Porter was taken in not only as a bed-chamber ſervant, but
as an uſeful inſtrument for his ſkill in the Spaniſh. ſhºttº".
Let fortune empty her whole quiver on me,
I have a ſoul, that, like an ample ſhield,
Can take in all; and verge enough for more. Dryder.
The fight and touch take in from the ſame object º
ideas. - 2. Fr'.
There is the ſaine irregularity in my plantations: I ta”
in none that do not naturally rejoice in the ſoil. Speciator.
8c. It
Dryden,
Loºe.
Dryden,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A K
-----
º
º
---º
-º
80. To TAKE in. To win. - -
He ſent Aſan-aga with the Janizaries, and pieces of great
ordnance, to take in the other cities of Tunis. Knolles.
Should a great beauty reſolve to take me in with the artil-
łery of her eyes, it would be as vain as for a thief to ſet
upon a new robbed paſſenger. Suckling.
Open places are eaſily taken in, and towns not ſtrongly
fortified make but a weak reſiſtance. Felton on the Claſſiº.
81. To TAKE in. To receive.
We went before, and ſailed unto Aſſos, there intending
to take in Paul. Aéïs xx. 13.
That which men take in by education is next to that which
is natural. Tillotſon's Sermions.
As no acid is in an animal body but muſt be taken in by
the mouth, ſo if it is not ſubdued it may get into the blood.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
82. Tº Take in. To receive mentally.
Though a created underſtanding can never take in the ful-
neſs of the divine excellencies, yet ſo much as it can receive
is of greater value than any other object. Hale.
The idea of extenſion joins itſelf ſo inſeparably with all
viſible qualities, that it ſuffers to ſee no one without taking in
impreſſions of extenſion too. Locke.
It is not in the power of the moſt enlarged underſtanding
to frame one new ſimple idea in the mind, not taken in by
the ways afore-mentioned. Locke.
A man can never have taken in his full meaſure of know-
ledge before he is lurried off the ſtage. Addiſon's Speci.
Let him take in the inſtructions you give him in a wa
ſuited to his natural inclination. JWatts.
Some bright genius can take in a long train of propoſitions.
- Watts.
83. To TAKE oath. To ſwear.
The king of Babylon is come to Jeruſalem, and hath
taken of the king's ſeed, and of him taken an oath. Ezek.
We tale all oath of ſecrecy, for the concealing of thoſe in-
ventions which we think fit to keep ſecret. Bacon.
84. To Take off. To invalidate; to deſtroy; to remove. . .
You muſt forſake this room and go with us;
Your power and your command is taken off,
And Caſſio rules in Cyprus. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
The cruel miniſters
Took off her life. Shakeſpeare.
If the heads of the tribes can be taken off, and the miſled
multitude return to their obedience, ſuch an extent of mercy
is honourable. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Sena loſeth its windineſs by deco&amp;ting; and ſubtile or win-
dy ſpirits are taken off by incenſion or evaporation. Bacon.
To ſtop ſchiſms, take off the principal authors by winning
and advancing them, rather than enrage them by violence. Bac.
What taketh off the objection is, that in judging ſcandal we
are to look to the cauſe whence it cometh. Biſhop Sanderſon.
The promiſes, the terrors, or the authority of the com-
mander, muſt be the topick whence that argument is drawn;
and all force of theſe is taken off by this doćtrine. Hammond.
It will not be unwelcome to theſe worthies, who endea-
vour the advancement of learning, as being likely to find a
clear progreſſion when ſo many untruths are taken off. Brown.
This takes not off the force of our former evidence. Still.
If the mark, by hindering its exportation, makes it leſs va-
luable, the melting pot can eaſily take it off. Locke.
A man's underſtanding failing him, would take off that
preſumption moſt men have of themſelves. Locke.
It ſhews virtue in the faireſt light, and takes off from the
deformity of vice. Addiſon.
When we would take off from the reputation of an action,
we aſcribe it to vain glory. Addiſon.
This takes off from the elegance of our tongue, but ex-
preſſes our ideas in the readieſt manner. - Addiſon.
The juſtices decreed, to take off a halfpeny in a quart from
the price of ale. Swift's Miſcel.
How many lives have been loſt in hot blood, and how
many likely to be taken off in cold. Blount to Pope.
Favourable names are put upon ill ideas, to take off the
odium. - //atts.
85. To Take off. To with-hold; to withdraw. -
He perceiving that we were willing to ſay ſomewhat, in
great courteſy took us off, aud condeſcended to aſk us queſ-
tions. Bacon.
Your preſent diſłemper is not ſo troubleſome, as to take
you off from all ſatisfaction. Wake.
There is nothing more reſty and ungovernable than our
thoughts: they will not be directed what obječts to purſue,
nor be taken off from thoſe they have once fixed on ; but run
away with a man in purſuit of thoſe ideas they have in view,
let him do what he can. Locke.
Keep foreign ideas from taking off our minds from its pre-
ſent purſuit. Locke.
86. To TAKE off. To ſwallow.
Were the pleaſure of drinking accompanied, the moment
a man takes ºff his glaſs, with that ſick ſtomach which, in
ſome men, follows not many hours after, nobody would ever
let wine touch his lips.
87. T., TAKE ºff. To purchaſe.
Cºrn, in Plenty, the labourer will have at his own rate,
elſe he'll not *; it ºff the farmer's hands for wages. Locke.
The Spaniards having no commodities that we will ai.
off, above the value of one hundrej thouſand pounds per an-
munis, cannot pay us. * - - Locłe.
There is a projećt on foot for tranſporting our beſt wheaten
ſtraw to Dunſtable, and obliging us to take off yearly ſo ma-
ny ton of ſtraw hats. Swift's Miſcel.
88. 72 TAKE off. To copy. -
Addiſon.
Take off all their models in wood.
89. To TAKE off. To find place for.
The multiplying of nobility brings a ſtate to neceſſity;
and, in like manner, when more are bred ſcholars t &gt;
ferments can take off.
90. To TAKE off. To remove.
When Moſes went in, he took the vaiſ off until he came
Out. Exod. xxxiv. 34.
If any would reign and take up all the time, let him #.
them off and bring others on. Bacon.
He has taken you off, by a peculiar inſtance of his mercy,
from the vanities and temptations of the world. JWake.
91. Tº TAKE order with. To check; to take courſe with.
Though he would have turned his teeth upon Spain, yet
he was taken order with before it came to that.
92. To Take out. To remove from within any place.
Griefs are green;
And all thy friends which thou muſt make thy friends
Have but their ſtings and teeth newly ta'en out. Shakeſp.
93. To Take part. To ſhare. -
Take part in rejoicing for the vićtory over the Turks. Pope:
94. To Take place. To prevail; to have effect.
Where arms take place, all other pleas are vain; ,
Love taught me force, and force ſhall love maintain. Dry.
The debt a man owes his father takes place, and gives the
father a right to inherit. Locke.
95. To Take up. To borrow upon credit or intereſt.
The ſmooth pates now wear nothing but high ſhoes; and
if a man is through with them in honeſt taking up, they ſtand
upon ſecurity. Shakeſpeare.
We take up corn for them, that we may eat and live. Neh.
When Winter ſhuts the ſeas, ſhe to the merchant goes,
Rich cryſtals of the rock ſhe takes up there,
Huge agat vaſes, and old china ware. Dryden's juvenal.
I have anticipated already, and taken up from Boccace be-
fore I come to him. Dryden's Fables.
Men, for want of due payment, are forced to take up the
neceſſaries of life at almoſt double value. Swift.
96. To be ready for; to engage with.
His diviſions
Are, one power againſt the French,
And one againſt Glendower; perforce, a third
Muſt take up us. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
97. To TAKE up. To apply to the uſe of.
We took up arms not to revenge ourſelves,
But free the commonwealth. - Addiſon.
98. To TAke up. To begin.
They ſhall take up a lamentation for me. Ezek. xxv. 17.
Princes friendſhip, which they take up upon the accounts
of judgment and merit, they moſt times lay down out of hu-
III Our. South's Serm.
99. To TAKE up. To faſten with a ligature paſſed under.
A large veſſel opened by inciſion muſt be taken up before
Zocke:
han pre-
Bacon's Effºys.
Bacon.
you proceed. Sharp.
1oo. To TAKE up. To engroſs; to engage.
Take my eſteem,
If from my heart you aſk, or hope for more, -
I grieve the place is taken up before. Dryden.
I intended to have left the ſtage, to which my genius ne-
ver much inclined me, for a work which would have taken
up my life in the performance. Dryden's juvenal.
Over-much anxiety in worldly things takes up the mind,
hardly admitting ſo much as a thought of heaven. Duppa.
To underſtand fully his particular calling in the common-
wealth, and religion, which is his calling, as he is a man,
takes up his whole time. - Locke.
Every one knows that mines alone furniſh theſe: but
withal, countries ſtored with mines are poor; the digging
and refining of theſe metals taking up the labour, and waſt-
- * ... 1 Locke.
ing the number of the people.
we were ſo confident of ſucceſs, that moſt of my fellow-
ſoldiers were taken up with the ſame imaginations. Addison.
The following letter is from an artiſt, now taken jº.
this invention. iſon.
There is ſo much time taken up in the ceremony, that be-
t their ſubject the dialogue is half ended.
fore they enter on J Addiſon on ancient Medals,
The affairs of religion and war took up Conſtantine ſo
at he had not time to think of trade. Arbuthnot,
much, that he ha When<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A K
T A K
aſ of twelve books is taken up in theſe,
a.º.º. by what methods our author could
prevent being tedious. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
... r. Taki up. To have final recourſe to: -
1 O Arnobius aſſerts, that men of the fineſt parts and learning,
rhetoricians, lawyers, phyſicians, deſpiſing the ſentimºntº
they had been once fond of, took up their reſt in the Chriſtian
religion. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
1oz. ºf Take up. To ſeize 3 to catch; to arreſt.
Though the ſheriff have this authority to take up all ſuch
ſtragglers, and impriſon them ; yet ſhall he not work that
terror in their hearts that a marſhal will, whom they know
to have power of life and death. Spenſer.
I was taken up for laying them down. Shakeſpeare.
You have taken up,
Under the counterfeited zeal of God, -
The ſubjećts of his ſubſtitute, and here upſwarm d them.
Shakeſpeare.
103. To Take up. To admit. - -
The ancients took up experiments upon credit; and did
build great matters upon them. Bacon's Nat. Hſ!.
104. Tº Take up. To anſwer by reproving; to reprimand.
One of his relations took him up roundly, for ſtooping ſo
much below the dignity of his profeſſion. L’Eſtrange.
105. To TAKE up. To begin where the former left off.
The plot is purely fiction; for I take it up where the hiſ-
tory has laid it down. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
Soon as the evening ſhades prevail,
The moon takes up the wond’rous tale,
And nightly to the liſt'ning earth
Repeats the ſtory of her birth.
106. To TAKE up. To lift.
Take up theſe cloaths here quickly:
Where’s the cewlſtaff Shakeſpeare.
The leaſt things are taken up by the thumb and forefinger;
when we would take up a greater quantity, we would uſe the
Addiſon's Spect.
thumb and all the fingers. Ray.
Milo took up a calf daily on his ſhoulders, and at laſt ar-
rived at firmneſs to bear the bull. Watts.
107. To TAKE up. To occupy. -
The people by ſuch thick throngs ſwarmed to the place,
that the chambers which opened towards the ſcaffold were
taken up. . Hayward.
All vicious enormous praćtices are regularly conſequent,
where the other hath taken up the lodging. Hammond.
Committees, for the convenience of the common-council
who took up the Guild-hall, ſat in Grocer's-hall. Clarendon.
When my concernment takes up no more room than my-
ſelf, then ſo long as I know where to breathe, I know alſo
where to be happy. South's Sermons.
Theſe things being compared, notwithſtanding the room
that mountains take up on the dry land, there would be at
leaſt eight oceans required. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
When theſe waters were annihilated, ſo much other mat-
ter muſt be created to take up their places. Burnet.
Princes were ſo taken up with wars, that few could write
or read beſides thoſe of the long robes. Temple.
The buildings about took up the whole ſpace. Arbuthnot.
108. To TAKE up. To accommodate; to adjuſt.
I have his horſe to take up the quarrel. Shakeſpeare.
The greateſt empires have had their riſe from the pretence
of taking up quarrels, or keeping the peace. L'Eſtrange.
109. To TAKE up. To compriſe.
I prefer in our countryman the noble poem of Palemon
and Arcite, which is perhaps not much inferior to the Ilias,
only it takes up ſeven years. Dryden's Fables.
1 Io. To TAKE up. To adopt; to aſſume.
God's decrees of ſalvation and damnation have been taken
up by ſome of the Romiſh and Reformed churches, affixing
them to mens particular entities, abſolutely conſidered. Hamm.
The command in war is given to the ſtrongeſt, or
to the braveſt; and in peace taken up and exerciſed by the
boldeſt, Temple.
Aſſurance is properly that confidence which a man take; up
of the pardon of his fins, upon ſuch grounds as the ſcripture
lays down. South's Sermons.
The French and we ſtill change, but here's the curſe,
They change for better, and we change for worſe.
They take up our old trade of conquering,
And we are taking their's to dance and ſing. Dryden.
He that will obſerve the concluſions men tºe up, muſt be
ſatisfied they are not all rational. Locke.
Qelibacy, in the church of Rome, was commonly forced,
and taken uſ, under a bold vow. Atterbury.
Lewis Baboon had taken up the trade of clothier, without
ſerving his time. Arbuthnot's Hiſł. of john Bull.
Every man takes up thoſe intereſts in which his humour en-
gages him. Pope.
If thoſe proceedings were obſerved, morality and religion
would "on become faſhionable court virtues, and be taken
* * * only methods to get or keep employments. Swift.
1 11. To Taek up. To colle&amp;; to exact a tax.
This great baſſa was born in a poor country village, and in
his childhood taken from his Chriſtian parents, by ſuch as
take up the tribute children. Knolles's Hſi. of the Turi.
112. To TAKE upon. To appropriate to ; to aſſume; to j.
mit to be imputed to.
If I had no more wit than he, to take a fault apon me that
he did, he had been hang'd for't. Shakeſpeare.
He took not on him the nature of angels, but the ſeed of
Abraham. Heb. ii. 16.
For confederates, I will not take upon me the knowledge
how the princes of Europe, at this day, ſtand affeded to:
wards Spain. acon's War with Spain.
Would I could your ſuff'rings bear;
Or once again could ſome new way invent,
To take upon myſelf your puniſhment. Dryden.
She loves me, ev'n to ſuffer for my ſake;
And on herſelf would my refuſal take. Dryden,
113. Tº TAKE upon. To aſſume; to claim authority.
Theſe dangerous, unſafe lunes i' th' king ! beſhrew
them,
He muſt be told on’t, and he ſhall; the office
Becomes a woman beſt: I’ll take’t upon me. Shakeſheart.
Look that you take upon you as you ſhould. Shaft re.
This every tranſlator taketh upon himſelf to do. Filton,
To TAke. v. n.
1. To dire&amp; the courſe; to have a tendency to.
The inclination to goodneſs, if it iſſue not towards men,
it will take unto other things. Bacon.
The king began to be troubled with the gout; but the de-
fluxion taking alſo into his breaſt, waſted his lungs. Bacon.
All men being alarmed with it, and in dreadful ſuſpence
of the event, ſome took towards the park. Dryden.
To ſhun thy lawleſs luſt the dying bride,
Unwary, took along the river's ſide. Dryden,
2. To pleaſe; to gain reception.
An apple of Sodom, though it may entertain the eye with
a florid white and red, yet fills the hand with ſtench and foul-
neſs: fair in look and rotten at heart, as the gayett and moſt
taking things are. South's Sermonſ.
Words and thoughts, which cannot be changed but for
the worſe, muſt of neceſſity eſcape the tranſient view upon
the theatre; and yet without theſe a play may take. Dryden.
Each wit may praiſe it for his own dear ſake, ..
And hint he writ it, if the thing ſhou'd tale. . Addison.
The work may be well performed, but will never tale, if
it is not ſet off with proper ſcenes. Adſº's Fritheliº.
May the man grow wittier and wiſer by finding that this
ſtuff will not take nor pleaſe; and ſince by a little ſmattering
in learning, and great conceit of himſelf, he has loſt his re-
ligion, may he find it again by harder ſtudy and an hºmºlºr
mind. Bently.
3. To have the intended or natural effect. .
In impreſſions from mind to mind, the impreſſion taketh,
but is overcome by the mind paſſive before it work any mº"
nifeſt effect. , Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 90i.
The clods, expos'd to Winter winds, will bake,
For putrid earth will beſt in vineyards take. Dryden,
4. To catch; to fix. -
When flame taketh and openeth, it giveth a noiſe. Bacon.
5. Tº Take after. To learn of; to reſemble; to imita”.
Beaſts, that converſe
With man, take after him, as hogs - -
Get pigs all th’ 3. and bitches dogs. Hudibrº P. "
we cannot but think that he has taken after a gºod Pº
tern. Atterbury,
6. To TAKE in. To incloſe. |
Upon the ſea-coaſt are parcels of land that would º,
for the taking in. Mºrtimer's º .
7. To Take in. To leſſen; to contract: as, he took in his
ails. -
sºr. in. To cheat; to gull: as, the cunning *
were taken in. A low vulgar phraſe.
9. To TAKE in hand. To undertake. - ſ-
Till there were a perfect reformation, nothing woul"P".
per that they took in hand. Clarendon, b. Vill:
1o. To TAKE in with. To reſort to. - hat
Men once placed take in with the contrary faction.” tha
by which they enter. Bacon'ſ Ejoyi.
II. To Take notice. To obſerve. ... "
12. 7, Take notice. To ſhew by any act that obſervatio" "
made. bili-
Some laws reſtrained the extravagant power of the nº
ty, the diminution whereof they took very heavily, tº
at that time they took little notice of it. Clarendum.
13. To TAKE on. To be violently affeóted.
Your huſband is in his old tunes again; he ſo takes on .
der with me huſband, that any madneſs I ever yet behe
ſeemed but tameneſs to this diſtemper. Shakeſ rare.
In horſes, the ſmell of a dead horſe maketh theº fly
away, and take on as if they were mad. Bacon's Nº. #-
14. I*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A K
T A L
14. Tº TAKE on. To grieve ; to pine.
How will my mother, for a father's death,
Take on with me, and ne'er be ſatisfy'd : Shakeſp.
15. To TAKE to. To apply to ; to be fond of.
Have him underſtand it as a play of older people, and he
will, take to it of himſelf. Locke.
Miſs Betſey won't take to her book. Swift.
The heirs to titles and large eſtates could never take to their
books, yet are well enough qualified to ſign a receipt for half
a year's rent. Swift's Miſcel.
Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman
in travail. Pſal. xlviii. 6.
They ſent forth ſpies, which ſhould feign themſelves juſt
men, that they might take hold of his words. Luke xx. 20.
16. To TAKE to. To betake to ; to have recourſe.
If I had taken to the church, I ſhould have had more ſenſe
than to have turned myſelf out of my benefice by writing
libels. Dryden.
The callow ſtorks with lizzard and with ſnake
Are fed, and ſoon as eler to wing they take,
At fight thoſe animals for food purſue. Dryden.
Men of learning who take to buſineſs, diſcharge it gene-
rally with greater honeſty than men of the world. Addison.
17. To TAKE up. To ſtop.
The mind of man being naturally timorous of truth, and
yet averſe to that diligent ſearch neceſſary to its diſcovery, it
muſt needs take up ſhort of what is really ſo. Glanville.
This grated harder upon the hearts of men, than the
ſtrangeneſs of all the former articles that took up chiefly in
ſpeculation. South.
Sinners at laſt take up, and ſettle in a contempt of all re-
ligion, which is called ſitting in the ſeat of the ſcornful.
Tillotſon's Sermons.
18. To TAKE up. To reform.
This rational thought wrought ſo effectually, that it made
him take up, and from that time prove a good huſband. Locke.
19. To TAKE up with. To be contented with.
The aſs takes up with that for his ſatisfaction, which he
reckoned upon before for his misfortune. L’Eſtrange.
The law and goſpel call aloud for ačtive obedience, and
ſuch a piety as takes not up with idle inclinations, but ſhows
itſelf in ſolid inſtances of practice. South.
I could as eaſily take up with that ſenſeleſs aſſertion of the
Stoicks, that virtues and vices are real bodies and diſtinét ani-
mals, as with this of the atheiſt, that they can all be derived
from the power of mere bodies. Bentley.
A poor gentleman ought not to be curate of a pariſh, ex-
cept he be cunninger than the devil. It will be difficult to
remedy this, becauſe whoever had half his cunning would
never take up with a vicarage of ten pounds. Swift.
In affairs which may have an extenſive influence on our
future happineſs, we ſhould not take up with probabilities.
//atts's Logick.
20. To TAKE up with. To lodge; to dwell.
Who would not rather take up with the wolf in the
woods, than make ſuch a clutter in the world L'Eſtrange.
Are dogs ſuch deſirable company to take up with &amp; South.
His name and credit ſhall you undertake,
And in my houſe you ſhall be friendly lodg'd :
In 1643, the parliament took upon them to call an aſſembly
of divines, to ſettle ſome church controverſies, of which
many were unfit to judge. Sanderſon.
I take not on me here as a phyſician :
Nor do I, as an enemy to peace,
Troop in the throngs of military men :
But rather
To purge th' obſtructions, which begins to ſtop
Our very veins of life. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
21. To TAKE with. To pleaſe.
Our gracious maſter is a precedent to his own ſubjets, and
ſeaſonable memento's may be uſeful; and being diſcretely
uſed, cannot but take well with him. Bacon.
TA/KEN, the participle paſſ of take.
Thou art taken in thy miſchief, becauſe thou art bloody.
2 Sam. xvi. 8.
He who letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way.
2 Theſ, ii. 7.
It concerns all who think it worth while to be in earneſt
with their immortal ſouls, not to abuſe themſelves with a
falſe confidence: a thing ſo eaſily taken up, and ſo hardly
laid down. South's Sermons.
Scaliger, comparing the two great orators, ſays, that no-
thing can be taken from Demoſthenes, nor added to Tully.
Denham.
Though he that is full of them thinks it rather an eaſe
than oppreſſion to ſpeak them out, yet his auditors are per-
haps as much taken up with themſelves. Gov. of the Tongue.
The objećt of deſire once ta'en away,
'Tis then not love, but pity which we pay. Dryden.
TAKER. m. ſ. [from take.] He that takes.
He will hang upon him like a diſeaſe,
He is ſooner caught than the peſtilence,
And the taker runs preſently mad. Shakespeare.
The dear ſale beyond the ſeas encreaſed the numée, of
*a*rī, and the takers jarring and brawling one with another
and forecloſing the fiſhes, taking their kind within harb.
decreaſed the number of the taken. Cºrº.
The far diſtance of this county from the court hath her.
tofore afforded it a ſuperſedeas from takers and ſurveyors.
- Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Berry coffee and the leaf tobacco, of which the Turks are
great takers, condenſe the ſpirits, and make them ſtrong.
- Bacon.
Few like the Fabii or the Scipio's are,
Takers of cities, conquerors in war. Denham.
He to betray us did himſelf betray,
At once the taker, and at once the prey. Denham.
Seize on the king, and him your priſoner make,
While I, in kind revenge, my taker take. Dryden.
Rich cullies may their boaſting ſpare,
They purchaſe but ſophiſticated ware:
'Tis prodigality that buys deceit,
Where both the giver and the taker cheat. Dryden.
TA'KING. m. ſ. [from take.] Seizure; diſtreſs.
What a taking was he in, when your huſband aſked who
was in the baſket. Shakeſpeare.
She ſaw in what a taking,
The knight was by his furious quaking. Butler.
TALE. n.ſ. ſcale, from tellan, to tell, Saxon.]
1. A narrative; a ſtory. . Commonly a ſlight or petty account
of ſome trifling or fabulous incident; as, a tale of a tub.
This ſtory prepared their minds for the reception of any
tales relating to other countries. JWatts.
2. Oral relation.
My conſcience hath a thouſand ſeveral tongues,
And ev'ry tongue brings in a ſev'ral tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain.
Life is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of ſound and fury, -
Signifying nothing. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Hermia, for aught I could read,
Could ever hear by tale or hiſtory,
The courſe of true love never did run ſmooth. Shakeſp.
We ſpend our years as a tale that is told. Pſal. xc. 9.
3. [Talan, to count, Saxon.] Number reckoned.
Number may ſerve your purpoſe with the ignorant, who
meaſure by tale and not by weight. Hooker.
For ev'ry bloom his trees in Spring afford,
An autumn apple was by tale reſtor'd. Dryden's Virgil.
Both number twice a day the milky dams,
And once ſhe takes the tale of all the lambs. Dryden.
The herald for the laſt proclaims
A ſilence, while they anſwer'd to their names,
To ſhun the fraud of muſters falſe;
The tale was juſt. Dryden's Knight's 7ale.
Reaſons of things are rather to be taken by weight than
tale. Collier on Claths.
4. Reckoning; numeral account.
In packing, they keep a juſt tale of the number that every
hogſhead containeth. Carew.
Money bling the common ſcale
Of things by meaſure, weight and tale;
In all th º of church and ſtate,
'Tis both the balance and the weight. Bºtler.
Then twelve returned upon the principal pannel, or the
tales, are ſworn to try the ſame according to their evidence.
Shakeſpeare.
Hale.
. Information; diſcloſure of any thing ſecret.
From hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot; -
And thereby hangs a tale. - Shakespeare.
Birds live in the air frceſt, and are apteſt by their voice to
tell tales what they find, and by their flight to expreſs the
fame. - Bacon.
TALEBE'ARING.. n.ſ.. [tale and bear.] The ačt of informing;
officious or malignant intelligence. - - -
The ſaid Timothy was extremely officious about their miſ-
treſs's perſon, endeavouring, by flattery and talebºring, to
ſet her againſt the reſt of the ſervants, - Arºot.
TALE BEARER. n.ſ. [tale and bear.] One who gives officious
or malignant intelligence. - - - - - - -
The liberty of a common table is a tacit invitation tº. al
intruders; as buffoons, ſpies, tºº, ſº L'E/ºr.
In great families, ſome one falſe, paulty talelearer, by
carrying ſtories from one to another, ſhall inflame the mº,
and diſſompoſe the quiet of the whole family. Sciºth.
TALENT. m. ſ. ſtalentum, Lat.J.
A talent ſignified º much .. ºº º
ſº- ng to the different ages an ‘I ICS.
value differing according c Arbuthnot.
Five talents in his debt,
His means moſt ſhort, his creditors moſt ſtraight. Sººſ".
26 C Two<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A L
T A L
- -
- inods caſt in antick mould, --
wº: : talents of the fineſt gold. º:
2. Faculty; power; gº of nature. A metaphor borrowe
fom the talents mentioned in the holy writ. - -
Many who knew the treaſurer's talent in removing preju;
dice, and reconciling himſelf to wavering affections, believed
the joſs of the duke was unſeaſonable. - Clarendon.
He is chiefly to be conſidered in his three different talents,
as a critick, ſatyriſt, and writer of odes. Dryden.
'Tis not my talent to conceal my thoughts,
Or carry ſmiles and ſunſhine in my face, -
when diſcontent ſits heavy at my heart. . . Addiſon's Cato.
They are out of their element, and logick is none of their
talent. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
Perſons who poſſeſs the true talent of raillery are like
comets; they are ſeldom ſeen, and all at once admired. and
feared. Female Quixote.
3. Quality; nature. An improper and miſtaken uſe.
Though the nation generally, was without any ill talent to
the church in doćtrine or diſcipline, yet they were not with-
out a jealouſy that popery was not enough diſcountenanced.
Clarendon.
It is the talent of human nature to run from one extreme
to another. Swift.
Ta'lis MAN. m. ſ. [I know not whence derived: Têtraw,
Skinner.] A magical chara&amp;ter.
If the phyſicians would forbid us to pronounce gout, rheu-
matiſm, and ſtone, would that ſerve like ſo many taliſmans
to deſtroy the diſeaſes. Swift.
Of taliſmans and ſigils knew the power,
And careful watch'd the planetary hour. Pope.
TAlis Ma‘Nick. adj. [from taliſman.j Magical.
The figure of a heart bleeding upon an altar, or held in
the hand of a Cupid, has always been looked upon as taliſ-
manick in dreſſes of this nature. Addiſon's Spect.
To TALK. v. n. [taelen, Dutch.]
1. To ſpeak in converſation; to ſpeak fluently and familiarly;
not in ſet ſpeeches; to converſe.
I will buy with you, ſell with you, talk with you; but I
will not eat with you. - Shakespeare.
Now is this vice's dagger become a ſquire, and talks as
familiarly of John of Gaunt as if he had been ſworn brother
to him; and he never ſaw him but once. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
The princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their
mouth. job xxix. 9.
The children of thy people ſtill talk againſt thee. Ezek.
If I talk much, they ſhall lay their hands upon their mouth.
Wiſd. viii. 12.
Here free from court-compliances he walks,
And with himſelf, his beſt adviſer, talks. //aller.
As God remembers that we are but fleſh, unable to bear
the nearer approaches of divinity, and ſo talks with us as once
with Moſes through a cloud; ſo he forgets not that he breath-
ed into us breath of life, a vital active ſpirit. Decay of Piety.
Mention the king of Spain, he talks very notably; but if
you go out of the Gazette you drop him. Addiſon.
2. To prattle ; to ſpeak impertinently.
Hypocrites auſterely talk
Of purity. Milton.
My heedleſs tongue has talk'd away this life. Rowe.
3. To give account.
The cryſtalline ſphere, whoſe balance weighs
The trepidation talk'd. Milton.
The natural hiſtories of Switzerland talk much of the fall
of theſe rocks, and the great damage done. Addiſon.
We will conſider whether Adam had any ſuch heir as our
author talks of. Locke.
4. To ſpeak; to reaſon; to confer.
Let me talk with thee of thy judments. jer. xii. 1.
Will ye ſpeak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for
him * job xiii. 7.
It is difficult taſk to talk to the purpoſe, and to put life and
perſpicuity into our diſcourſes. Collier on Pride.
Talking over the things which you have read with your
: companions fixes them upon the mind. JWatts.
TALK.. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
I. Oral converſation; fluent and familiar ſpeech.
We do remember; but our argument
Is all too heavy to admit much talk. Shakeſpeare.
Perceiving his ſoldiers diſmayed, he forbad them to have
any talk with the enemy. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
How can he get wiſdom that driveth oxen, is occupied in
their labours, and whoſe talk is of bullocks : Eccluſ. xxxviii.
This ought to weigh with thoſe whoſe reading is deſigned
for much talk and little knowledge. Locke.
In various talk th’ inſtructive hours they paſt,
Who gave the ball, or paid the viſit laſt. Pope.
2. Report; rumour.
hear a talk up and down of raiſing our money, as a means
to retain our wealth, and keep our money from being carried
away. Locke.
3. Subjećt of diſcourſe.
What delight to be by ſuch extoll’d,
ğ live upon their tongues and be their talk,
f whom to be deſpis'd were no ſmall praiſe -
TALK. m. ſ. [tale, Fr.] p Miltºn.
Stones compoſed of plates are generally parallel, and flexi-
ble and elaſtick: as, talk, cat-ſilver or glimmer, of which
there are three ſorts, the yellow or golden, the white or fil.
very, and the black. //oodward's Fºſſil;
Venetian talk kept in a heat of a glaſs furnace; after alſº.
remaining body, though brittle and diſcoloured, had not loſt
much of its bulk, and ſeemed nearer of kin to talk than mere
earth. - Boyle.
Ta'ik A Tive., adj. [from talk..] Full of prate; loquacious.
If I have held you overlong, lay hardly the fault upon my
old age, which in its diſpoſition is talkative. Sidney.
This may prove an inſtructive leſſon to the diſaffected, not
to build any hopes on the talkative zealots of their party.
Addison.
I am aſhamed I cannot make a quicker progreſs in the
French, where everybody is ſo courteous and taliative. Ali,
The coxcomb bird ſo talkative and grave,
That from his cage cries cuckold, whore, and knave 5
Though many a paſſenger he rightly call,
You hold him no philoſopher at all. Pope.
TALKATIVENEss. n.ſ.. [from talkative..] Loquacity; gari.
lity; fulneſs of prate.
We call this talkativeneſ; a feminine vice; but he that ſhall
appropriate loquacity to women, may perhaps ſometimes
need to light Diogenes's candle to ſeek a man. Gov. Tongue.
Learned women have loſt all credit by their impertinent
talkativeneſs and conceit. Swift.
TA'LKE.R. m. ſ. [from talk.]
1. One who talks.
Let me give for inſtance ſome of thoſe writers or talker,
who deal much in the words nature or fate. Watts.
2. A loquacious perſon; a pratler.
Keep me company but two years,
Thou ſhalt not know the ſound of thine own tongue.
—Farewel, I'll grow a talker for this jeer. Shakeſpeare.
If it were deſirable to have a child a more briſk talker,
ways might be found to make him ſo; but a wiſe father had
rather his ſon ſhould be uſeful when a man, than pretty com-
pany. Locke on Education.
3. A boaſter; a bragging fellow.
The greateſt talkers in the days of peace, have been the
moſt puſillanimous in the day of temptation. Taylor.
TA'LKY. adj. [from talk..] Conſiſting of talk; reſembling talk.
The talky flakes in the ſtrata were all formed before the
ſubſidence, along with the ſand. JWoodward on Foſſils.
TALL. adj. [tál, Welſh.]
1. High in ſtature. -.
Bring word, how tall ſhe is. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
Two of nobler ſhape, -
Ereğt and tall. Milton,
2. High; lofty.
Winds ruſh'd abroad
From the four hinges of the world, and fell
On the vext wilderneſs, whoſe tall/?pines,
Though rooted deep as high, and ſturdieſt oaks -
Bow'd their ſtiff necks. Milton's Par. Reg. b. iv.
May they encreaſe as faſt, and ſpread their boughs,
As the high fame of their great owner grows:
May he live long enough to ſee them all
Dark ſhadows caſt, and as his palace tall!
Methinks I ſee the love that ſhall be made, 11
The lovers walking in that am’rous ſhade. JWiller,
3. Sturdy; luſty.
I'll ſwear thou art a tall fºllow of thy hands, and that thou
wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no tall fellow of thy
hands, and that thou wilt be drunk; but I would thou wº
be a tall fellow of thy hands. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale,
TA'll AGE. m. ſ. [taillage, French..] Impoſt; exciſe. ...
The people of Spain were better affected unto Philip than
to Ferdinando, becauſe he had impoſed upon them º
taxes and tallages. Bºon's Henry VII.
TA'llow. n.ſ.. [tage, Daniſh.] The greaſe or fat of an ani"
mal; ſuet.
She's the kitchen wench and all greaſe; and I know *
what uſe to put her to, but to make a lamp of her, and run
from her by her own light. I warrant her rags, and the tak
/ow in them, will burn a Lapland winter. Shakespeare  care.
In Cuba and Hiſpaniola are killed divers thouſands, whº
the Spaniards only take the tallow or the hide. - Abbot.
Snuff the candles cloſe to the allºw, which will ſº
them run. Swift.
To TA’llow. v. a. [from the noun..] To greaſe; to ſm”
with tallow.
TA'llowch ANDLER. m. ſ. ſtallow and chandelier, Fr.] Ong
who makes candles of tallow, not of wax.
Naſtincſ.
6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A M
º
º
ſ
;
º
º
º
º
º
Naſtineſs, , and ſeveral naſty trades, as tallºwchandler,
butchers, and neglect of cleanſing of gutters, are great oc-
caſions of a plague. Harvey on the Plague.
TA'll Y. m. ſ. [from tailler, to cut, Fr.]
1. A ſtick notched or cut in conformity to another ſtick, and
uſed to keep accounts by. -
So right his judgment was cut fit,
And made a tally to his wit. Hudibras, p. iii.
The only talents in eſteem at preſent are thoſe of Ex-
change-Alley; one tally is worth a grove of bays. Garth.
Have you not ſeen a baker's maid
Between two equal panniers ſway’d
Her tallies uſeleſs lie and idle,
If plac'd exactly in the middle. Prior.
From his rug the ſkew'r he takes,
And on the ſtick ten equal notches makes;
With juſt reſentment flings it on the ground,
There take my tally of ten thouſand pound. Swift.
2. Anything made to ſuit another.
So ſuited in their minds and perſons,
That they were fram'd the tallies for each other:
If any alien love had interpos'd,
It muſt have been an eye-fore to beholders. Dryden.
To TALLY. v. a. [from the noun..] To fit; to ſuit; to cut
out for anything.
Nor fiſher either had, nor brother;
They ſeem'd juſt tally’d for each other. Prior.
They are not ſo well tallied to the preſent junčture. Pope.
To TA(LLY. v. n. To be fitted; to conform; to be ſuitable.
I found pieces of tiles that exactly tallied with the chan-
nel. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
TA(LMUD. l. n. ſ. The book containing the Jewiſh tradi-
THA(LMUD. tions, the rabbinical conſtitutions and expli-
cations of the law.
TA'LNess. n.ſ.. [from tall.] Height of ſtature; procerity.
An hideous giant, horrible and high,
That with his talneſs ſeem'd to threat the ſky. Fairy Qu.
The eyes behold ſo many naked bodies, as for talneſs of
ſtature could hardly be equalled in any country. Hayward.
TA'LoN. m. ſ. [talen, French..] The claw of a bird of prey.
It may be tried, whether birds may not be made to have
greater or longer talons. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Upward the noble bird dire&amp;ts his wing,
And tow'ring round his maſter's earth-born foes,
Swift he colle&amp;ts his fatal ſtock of ire,
Lifts his fierce talon high, and darts the forked fire. Prior.
TA'MARIND tree. n.ſ.. [tamarindus, Lat.]
The flower of the tamarind tree conſiſts of ſeveral leaves,
which are ſo placed as to reſemble a papilionaceous one in
fome meaſure ; but theſe expand circularly, from whoſe
many leaved flower-cup riſes the pointal, which afterward
becomes a flat pod, containing many flat angular ſeeds ſur-
rounded with an acid blackiſh pulp. AMiller.
Lenitives are caſſia, tamarinds, manna. Jºſeman's Surgery.
Lay me reclin'd
Beneath the ſpreading tamarind that ſhakes,
Fan'd by the breeze its ſever-cooling fruit.
TA'MAR1sk. m. ſ. ſtamariſce, Lat.]
The flowers of the tamariſk are roſaceous, conſiſting of
ſeveral leaves, which are placed orbicularly ; from whoſe
flower-cup riſes the pointel, which afterward becomes a pod,
ſomewhat like thoſe of the ſallow, which opens into two
parts, and contains ſeveral downy ſeeds. Miller.
Tamariſk is a tree that grows tall, and its wood is medi-
cinal. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
TA'MBARINE. m. ſ. ſtambourin, Fr.] A tabor; a ſmall drum.
Calliope with muſes moe,
Soon as thy oaten pipe began to ſound,
Their ivory lutes and tambar ne; forego. Spenſer's Paſº.
TAME. adj. [rame, Saxon; taem, Dutch; tam, Daniſh.]
1. Not wild; domeſtick.
. Thales the Mileſian ſaid, That of all wild beaſts a tyrant
is the worſt, and of all tame beaſts a flatterer. Addiſon.
2. Cruſhed; ſubdued; depreſſed ; deječted; ſpiritleſs ; heart-
leſs.
Thomſon.
If you ſhould need a pin,
You could not with more tame a tongue deſire it. Shakeſp.
And now their pride and mettle is aſleep,
Their courage with hard labour tame and dull. Shakeſp.
A moſt poor man made tame to fortune's blows,
Who by the art of known and feeling ſorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Shake p. King Lear.
Praiſe him each ſavage furious beaſt,
That on his ſtores do daily feaſt;
And you tame ſlaves of the laborious plough,
Your weary knees to your Creator bow. Roſcommon.
3. Spiritleſs; unanimated: as, a tame poem. A low phraſe.
To TAM E. v. n. [gatamgan, Gothick; cemean, Saxon; tam-
men, Dutch.]
1. To reduce from wildneſs; to reclaim ; to make gentle.
Thoſe that tame wild horſes,
Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle;
But flºp their mouths with ſtubborn bits. Shaºcarc
2. To ſubdue ; to cruſh ; to depreſs; to conquer. -
If the heavens do not their viſible ſpirits
Send quickly down to tame the offences,
Humanity muſt perforce Prey on itſelf. Shakespeare . King Lear.
They cannot tame
Or overcome their riches not by making
#. . º letting in of reas
tre, and then there forcing them - -
A puling cuckold, ... º again. B. Johnſºn,
The lees and dregs of a flat tº piece. Shakeſpeare
A face unconquer'd, by their clime made bold -
The Caledonians arm'd with want and j &gt;
r Have been kept for you to tame.
TAMRABLE, adj. [from tame.j suſceptive of taming.
anzas are ſuppoſed to be great fowls, of a ſtrong flight.
and eaſily tameable; divers of which may be ſo brought up a;
tº join together in carrying the weight of a man. iń.
TA'Mely. adj. [from tame.j Not wildly; meanly; ſpiritleſy.
True obedience, of this madneſs cur'd,
Stoop tamely to the foot of majeſty. Shakespeare Henry IV.
What courage tamely could to death conſent,
//aller.
And not by ſtriking firſt the blow prevent. Dryden,
Once a champion of renown,
So tamely can you bear the raviſh'd crown? Dryden.
Has he given way ?
Did he look tamely on and let them paſs Addiſon.
Can you love and reverence your prelate, whom you tamely
ſuffer to be abuſed. Swift.
TA'MeNess. n.ſ.. [from tame.]
1. The quality of being tame; not wildneſs.
2. Want of ſpirits; timidity. . .
Such a condućt muſt appear rather like tameneſ than beau-
ty, and expoſe his authority to inſults. Rogers,
Ta’MER. n.ſ.. [from tame.] Consueror; ſubduer.
He, great tamer of all human art,
Dulneſs! whoſe good old cauſe I yet defend. Pope.
TAMIN.Y. m. ſ. A woollen ſtuff.
TAMKIN. m.ſ. The ſtopple of the mouth of a great gun.
To TAMPER. v. a. [of uncertain derivation, derived by Skin-
ner from tempero, Latin.
I. To be buſy with phyſick.
'Tis in vain
To tamper with your crazy brain,
Without trepanning of your ſkull -
As often as the moon's at full. Hudibras, p. ii.
He tried waſhes to bring him to a better complexion" but
there was no good to be done; the very tampering caſt him.
into a diſeaſe. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
2. To meddle; to have to do without fitneſs or neceſſity.
That key of knowledge, which ſhould give us entrance
into the receſſes of religion, is by ſo much tamperin and
wrenching made uſeleſs. Decay of Piety.
'Tis dang'rous tampering with a muſe,
The profits ſmall, and you have much to loſe:
For though true wit adorns your birth or place,
Degenerate lines degrade the attainted race. Roſcommon.
Earl Waltheof being overtaken with wine, engaged in a
conſpiracy; but repenting next morning, repaired to the king,
and diſcovered the whole matter: notwithſtanding which he
was beheaded upon the defeat of the conſpiracy, for having
but thus far tampered in it. Addiſon's Freeholder.
3. To deal; to practiſe with.
Others tamper'd
For Fleetwood, Deſborough, and Lambert.
To TAN. v. a. ſtannen, Dutch ; tannen, French.]
1. To impregnate or imbue with bark.
A human ſkull covered with the ſkin, having been buried
in ſome limy ſoil, was tanned or turned into a kind of lea-
ther. Grew's Mſ.
Black cattle produce tallow, hides, and beef; but the
greateſt part of the hides are exported raw for want of bark
to tan them. - Swift•
They ſell us their bark at a good price for tanning our hides
into leather. Swift's Aſſeſ.
2. To imbrown by the ſun.
His face all tann'd with ſcorching ſunny ray,
As he had travell'd many a Summer's day -
Through boiling ſands of Araby and Inu. Fa. Qū. b. i.
Like ſun parch'd quarters on the city gates,
Such is thy ann'd ſkin's lamentable ſtate. Donne.
A brown for which heaven would diſband
The galaxy, and ſtars be tann'd.
NE for taken, ta'en. - -
TA #. trºpices tane from th' Eaſt and Weſtern ſhore,
And both thoſe nations twice triumphed o'er. 44ay's Pirg,
TANG. n.ſ. ſtanghe, Dutch, acrid.]
1. A ſtrong taſte; a taſte left in the mouth. - *-
Sin taken into the ſoul, is like a liquor poured into a veſ-
ſel ; ſo much of it as it fills it alſo ſeaſons: ſo that º
- the
Hudibras.
Cleaveland.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A N
f the liquor ſhould be poured out again, yet ſtill it
the body o South's Sermons.
es that tang behind it. -
º i. firing that the ſoul ſhould never once recal over any
of its pure native thoughts, before it borrowed any thing
p iy; never bring into the waking man's view any
from the body; vo the caſk, and derive their
other ideas but what have a tang of the caſk, and derive thei
original from that union. Locke.
Jiſh; taſte. A low word. - - - - - -
2. Rºº. was not the leaſt tang of religion, which is indeed
the worſt affectation in any thing he ſaid or did. Atterbury.
3. Something that leaves a ſting or pain behind it.
She had a tongue with a tang,
Would cry to a ſailor, go hang. Shakeſp. Tempg/?.
4. Sound; tone: this is miſtaken for tone or twang. . . . .
There is a pretty affectation in the Allemain, which gives
their ſpeech a different tang from ours. Holder.
To TANG. v. n. [This is, I think, miſtaken for twang.] To
ring with. -
Be oppoſite with a kinſman, ſurly with thy ſervants; let
thy tongue tang arguments of ſtate; put thyſelf into the trick
of ſingularity. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
TA's cºst. m. ſ. ſtangent, Fr. tangens, Lat.] -
Tangent, in trigonometry, is a right line perpendicularly
raiſed on the extremity of a radius, and which touches a
circle ſo as not to cut it; but yet interfects another line with-
out the circle called a ſecant that is drawn from the centre,
and which cuts the arc to which it is a tangent. Trevoux.
Nothing in this hypotheſis can retain the planets in their
orbs, but they would immediately deſert them and the neigh-
'bourhood of the ſun, and vaniſh away in tangents to their
ſeveral circles into the mundane ſpace. Bentley's Serm.
TANGIE1'lity. m. ſ. [from tangible.] The quality of being
perceived by the touch.
TANGIBLE, adj. [from tango, Lat..] Perceptible by the touch.
Tangible bodies have no pleaſure in the conſort of air, but
cndeavour to ſubačt it into a more denſe body. Bacon.
By the touch, the tangible qualities of bodies are diſcern-
ed, as hard, ſoft, ſmooth. Locke.
To TA’NGLE. v. a. [See entangle.]
1. To implicate; to knit together.
2. To enſnare; to entrap.
She means to tangle mine eyes too.
'Tis not your inky brows, your black ſilk hair,
Your bugle eye-balls, nor your cheek of cream.
I do, quoth he, perceive
My king is tang!'d in affection to
A creature of the queen's, lady Anne Bullen. Shakeſpeare.
You muſt lay lime to tangle her deſires
By wailful ſonnets, whoſe compoſed rhimes
Shall be full fraught with ſerviceable vows.
If thou retire, the dauphin, well appointed,
Stands with the ſnares of war to tangle thee.
Now ly'ft vićtorious
Among thy ſlain ſelf-kill'd,
Not willingly, but tangl"d in the fold
Of dire neceſſity.
Skill'd to retire, and in retiring draw
Hearts after them, tang'd in amorous nets.
With ſubtile cobweb cheats,
They're catch'd in knotted law-like nets;
In which when once they are entangl'd,
The more they ſtir, the more they're tangld.
3. To embroil; to embarraſs.
When my ſimple weakneſs ſtrays,
Tangled in forbidden ways:
He, my ſhepherd is my guide,
He's before me, on my ſide.
To TANGLE. v. n. To be entangled.
Shrubs and tangling buſhes had perplex'd
All path of man or beaſt.
TA'NGLE. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A knot of things mingled in
one another.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſp.
Milton's Agoniſłes.
Milton.
Hudibras.
Craſhaw.
He leading ſwiftly rowl'd
In tangles, and made intricate ſeem ſtrait,
To miſchief ſwift. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ix.
Sport with Amaryllis in the ſhade,
Or with the tangles of Neaera's hair.
TANIST. m. ſ. [an Iriſh word; an taaniſher, Erſe.]
Preſently after the death of any of their captains, they
aſſemble themſelves to chuſe another in his ſtead, and nomi-
nate commonly the next brother, and then next to him do
they chuſe next of the blood to be taniſł, who ſhall next ſuc-
ceed him in the ſaid captainry. Spenſer on Ireland.
TA's 1st RY. n.ſ.. [from taniſh.]
The Iriſh hold their lands by taniſłry, which is no more
than * Perſonal eſtate for his life-time that is taniſt, by reaſon
he is admitted thereunto by election. Spenſer on Ireland.
If the Iriſh be not permitted to purchaſe eſtates of free-
holds, which might deſcend to their children, muſt they not
*ue their cuſtom of tenſiry 2 which makes all their
Polleſſions uncertain. Davies on Ireland.
Milton.
By the Iriſh cuſtom of taniſłry, the chieftains of eve
country, and the chief of every ſept, had no long ry
- - - - - - - - - - • onger eſtate
than for life in their chieferies; and when their ºni,
were dead, their ſons, or next heirs, did not ſucceed i.
but their taniſłą, who were elective, and purchaſed their de:
tions by ſtrong hand. Pavies on Ireland
Taff º ſtanque, Fr.] A large ciſtern or baſon. -
andle your pruning-knife with dexterity; go tie
your buſineſs : you have coſt me much, . muſt sº
here's plentiful proviſion, raſcal; fallading in the garden and
water in the tank; and in holy days, the licking of a platter
of rice when you deſerve it. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian
TA’NKARd. m. ſ. ſtanquaerd, French; tankaerd, Dutch; ta.
caird, Iriſh..] A large veſſel with a cover, for ſtrong din;
Hath his tankard touch'd your brain? c -
Sure they're fall'n aſleep again. Benj. johnſºn.
Marius was the firſt who drank out of a ſilver tankard
after the manner of Bacchus. Arbuthnot on cºin.
f wºn any calls for ale, fill the largeſt tankard cup top
ull. Swift.
TA'NNER. m. ſ. [from tan.] One whoſe trade is to tan iſ:
Tanners uſe that lime which is newly drawn out of the
kiln, and not ſlacked with water or air. Mºxon.
TA'N's Y. n.ſ. ſtanacetum, Lat.]
The taſy hath a floſculous flower, conſiſting of many flo-
rets, divided into ſeveral ſegments ſitting on the embrio, and
contained in a ſquamous and hemiſpherical empalement; the
embrio afterward becomes a ſeed not at all downy; to theſe
notes muſt be added thick flowers into a gathered head.
Miller.
TA'NTALISM. m. ſ. [from tantalize.] A puniſhment like that
of Tantalus.
A lively repreſentation of a perſon lying under the torments
of ſuch a tantaliſm, or platonick hell. Addiſon's Speciat.
To Ta'NTA Liz E. v. a. ſtrom Tantalus, whoſe puniſhment
was to ſtarve among fruits and water which he could not
touch..] To torment by the ſhew of pleaſures which cannot
be reached.
Thy vain deſires, at ſtrife -
Within themſelves, have tantaliz'd thy life. Dryden.
The maid once ſped was not ſuffered to tantalize the male
part of the commonwealth. Addiſon.
TANTIvy. adv. from the note of a hunting horn, ſo expreſ.
ſed in articulate ſounds; from tantá vi, ſays Skinner.] To
ride tantivy is to ride with great ſpeed.
TA/NTLING.. n.ſ.. [from Tantalus.] One ſeized with hopes of
pleaſure unattainable.
Hard life,
To be ſtill hot Summer's tantlings, and
The ſhrinking ſlaves of Winter.
TANIZMOUNT. n. / [French.] Equivalent.
If one third of our coin were gone, and ſo men had equally
one third leſs money than they have, it muſt be tantamount;
and what I 'cape of one third leſs, another muſt **
Jºkt'.
Shakespeare  care.
To TAP. v. a. ſtatpen, Dutch; tapper, French.]
1. To touch lightly; to ſtrike gently.
2. [Tapfen, Ditch..] To pierce a veſſel; to broach a veſſd.
It is uſed likewiſe of the liquor.
That blood, already like the pelican,
Haſt thou tapt out, and drunkenly carouzed. Shakſtart.
He has been tapping his liquors, while I have been ſpilling
my blood. Addiſon,
Wait with patience till the tumour becomes troubleſome,
and then tap it with a lancet. Sharp's Surgery.
TAP. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A gentle blow. d ſo part
This is the right fencing grace, tap for tap, and to P
fair. - g grace, tap †. Henry IV.
Each ſhakes her fan with a ſmile, then gives, he right-
hand woman a tap upon the ſhoulder. Addison's Spect.
As at hot cockles once F laid me down,
And felt the weighty hand of many a clown, • - l
Buxoma gave a gentle tap. Gay's Poſkral.
2. A pipe at which the liquor of a veſſel is let out. - - -
A gentleman was inclined to the knight of Gº.
diſtemper, upon hearing the noiſe of a tap running. Der º
Taproot. n.ſ. [tºp and ract.] The principal ſtem of *
IOOt. -
Some put under the trees raiſed of ſeed, about four inches
below the place where they ſow their ſeeds, a ſmall Fº O
tile to ſtop the running down of the taproot, which occº É.
it to branch when it comes to the tile. Martimer's Huſ".
TAPE. m. ſ. ſºappan, Saxon.) A narrow fillet or band.
Will you buy any tape, or lace for your cap, -
My º, º, º, : ? Shakeſpeare.
This pouch that's ty'd with tape G
I'll wager, that the prize ſhall be my due. a).
On once a flock bed, but repair'd with fraw,
With tape ty'd curtains never meant to draw.
Pope.
TA'PER,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A R
|
º:
º
TA'PER. m. ſ. ſcapen, Saxon.] A wax candle; a light.
Get me a taper in my ſtudy, Lucius:
When it is lighted come and call me. Shakeſpeare.
My daughter and little ſon we'll dreſs
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands. Shakeſpeare.
If any ſnatch the pure taper from my hand, and hold it to
the devil, he will only burn his own fingers, but ſhall not
rob me of the reward of my good intention. Taylor.
There the fair light,
Like hero's taper in the window plac'd,
Such fate from the malignant air did find,
As that expoſed to the boiſt'rous wind. Waller.
To ſee this fleet
Heav'n, as if there wanted lights above,
For tapers made two glaring comets riſe. Dryden.
TA'PER, adj. [from the form of a taper.] Regularly narrowed
from the bottom to the top; pyramidal; conical.
Her taper fingers, and her panting breaſt,
He praiſes. Dryden.
From the beaver the otter differs in his teeth, which are
canine ; and in his tail, which is feline, or a long taper.
Grew's Muſæum.
To TA'PER. v. n. To grow ſmaller.
The back is made tapering in form of a pillar, the lower
vertebres being the broadeſt and largeſt; the ſuperior leſſer
and leſſer, for the greater ſtability of the trunk. Ray.
Such be the dog,
With tap'ring tail, that nimbly cuts the wind. Tickell.
TA'PESTRY. m.ſ. ſtapeſlerie, tapiſerie, tapis, Fr. tapetum, Lat.]
Cloth woven in regular figures.
In the deſk
That's covered o'er with Turkiſh tapeſ?ry,
There is a purſe of ducats. Shakeſpeare.
The caſements are with golden tiſſue ſpread,
And horſes hoofs, for earth, on ſilken tap/iry tread. Dryd.
One room is hung with tapeſtry, in which are wrought
the figures of the great perſons of the family. Addiſon.
TA'PET. n.ſ.. [tapetia, Lat.] Worked or figured ſtuff.
To their work they fit, and each doth chuſe
What ſtory ſhe will for her tapet take. Spenſºr.
TA'pstER. m. ſ. [from tap.] One whoſe buſineſs is to draw
beer in an alehouſe.
The oath of a lover is no ſtronger than the word of a tap-
fier; they are both the confirmers of falſe reckonings. Shakespeare
Though you change your place, you need not change
your trade: I'll be your tapſler ſtill. Shakeſpeare.
The world is come now to that paſs, that the vintner and
tapſier may broach what religion they pleaſe; and the apothe-
cary may mingle her as he pleaſes. Howel.
Though the painting grows decay’d,
The houſe will never loſe its trade;
Nay, though the treacherous tapſler Thomas
Hangs a new angel two doors from us,
In hopes that ſtrangers may miſtake it. Swift.
TAR. m. ſ. [cane, Saxon; tarre, Dutch ; tiere, Daniſh.] Li-
quid pitch; the turpentine of the pine or fir drained out by
fire. -
Then, foaming tar, their bridles they would champ,
And trampling the fine element would fiercely ramp. Spenſ.
A man will not loſe a hog for a halfpennyworth of tar.
Camden's Remains.
Some ſtir the melted tar. Thomſon's Summer.
TAR. m. ſ. [from tar uſed in ſhips.] A ſailor; a ſeaman in
contempt. -
In ſenates bold, and fierce in war,
A land commander, and a tar.
To TAR. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſmear over with tar.
2. To teaze; to provoke. [ropºrra.]
There has been much to do on both ſides; and the na-
tion holds it no ſin to tarre them on to controverſy. Shakeſp.
Two curs ſhall tame each other; pride alone
Muſt tar the maſtiffs on, as 'twere the bone. Shakeſpeare.
TARANTULA. m. ſ. [Italian; tarentule, French..] An inſect
whoſe bite is only cured by muſick.
This word, lover, did no leſs pierce poor Pyrocles than
the right tune of muſick toucheth him that is ſick of the ta-
rantula.
Swift's Miſcel.
Sidney.
He that uſes the word tarantula, without having any idea
of what it ſtands for, means nothing at all by it. Locke.
TAR DATION. n.ſ. ſtardo, Latin.] The act of hindering or
delaying.
TARDIGRA dous. adj. ſtardigradus, Lat.] Moving ſlowly.
It is but a ſlow and tard gradous animal, preying upon ad-
vantage, and otherways may be eſcaped. Brown.
TARDILY. adv. [from tardy. Slowly; ſluggiſhly.
t He was indeed the glaſs,
Wherein the noble youth did dreſs themſelves;
Speaking thick, which nature made his blemiſh,
Hecame the accents of the valiant:
For thoſe that could ſpeak flow and tardiſy,
Would turn their own perfection to abuſe, -
To ſeem like him. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii,
/ - - • , a
T^*prºx. m. ſ. ſtarditas from tardus, Latin ; tardiveté, Fr.]
Slowneſs; want of velocity. -
Suppoſe there ma
of light,
y be ſome obſervable tardity in the motion
and then aſk how we ſhould arrive to perceive it?
elocity
Digby on the Soul.
ſluggiſhneſs; un-
9" explication includes time in the notions of v
and tardity.
TA'RPINEss. n.ſ...[from tardy..] Slowneſs;
willingneſs to action or motion.
A tardineſs in nature,
Yº often leaves the hiſtory unſpoke,
hat it intends to do. Shakespeare Kinz
TARDY. adj. ſtardus, Lat, tardſ, Fr.] ºff. King Lear.
1. Slow ; not ſwift.
Nor ſhould their age by years be told,
Whoſe ſouls, more ſwift than motion, climb,
And check the tardy flight of time. Sandy's Paraph.
2. Sluggiſh; unwilling to action or motion.
Behold that navy which a while before
Provok'd the tardy Engliſh cloſe to fight;
Now draw their beaten veſſels cloſe to ſhore,
As larks lie dar'd to ſhun the hobbies flight. Dryden,
When certain to o'ercome, inclin'd to ſave,
Tardy to vengeance, and with mercy brave. Prior.
3. Dilatory; late; tedious.
You ſhall have letters from me to my ſon
In your behalf, to meet you on the way;
Be not ta'en tardy by unwiſe delay. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Death he as oft accus’d
Of tardy execution, ſince denounc'd
The day of his offence. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. x.
The tardy plants in our cold orchards plac'd,
Reſerve their fruit for the next age's taſte:
There a ſmall grain in ſome few months will be
A firm, a lofty and a ſpacious tree. JValler.
Tardy of aid, unſeal thy heavy eyes,
Awake, and with the dawning day ariſe. Dryden.
You may freely cenſure him for being tardy in his pay-
ments. Arbuthnot.
4. Unwary. A low word.
Yield, ſcoundrel baſe, quoth ſhe, or die,
Thy life is mine, and liberty:
But if thou think'ſt I took thee tardy,
And dar'ſt preſume to be ſo hardy,
To try thy fortune o'er a-freſh,
I'll wave my title to thy fleſh. .
5. Criminal; offending. A low word. -
If they take them tardy, they endeavour to humble them
by way of reprizal : thoſe ſlips and miſmanagements are
uſually ridiculed. Collier on Pride.
To TA’RDY. v. a. ſtarder, Fr. from the adjective.] To de-
lay ; to hinder.
Hudibra, p. i.
I choſe
Camillo for the miniſter, to poiſon -
My friend Polixenes ; which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied .
My ſwift command. Shaft. Winter's Tale.
TARE. m. ſ. [from teeren, Dutch, to conſume. Skinner.] A
weed that grows among corn.
Through hatred of tares the corn in the field of God is
plucked up. Hooker, b. v.
The liberal contributions ſuch teachers met with ſerved to
invite more labourers, where their ſeed time was their har-
veſt, and by ſowing tares they reaped gold. , Decay of Piety.
My country neighbours begin not to think of being in ge-
neral, which is being abſtracted from all its inferior ſpecies,
before they come to think of the fly in their ſheep, or the
tares in their corn. - Locke.
TARE. n.ſ. [French.] A mercantile word denoting the weight
of any thing containing a commodity; alſo the allowance
made for it.
TARE, preterite of tear.
The women beat their breaſis, their checks they tarº.
Dryden.
TARGE. T. n.ſ. ſtanza, Saxon ; targe, Italian ; targe, French ;
#...} tarian, Welſh, which ſeems the original of the
reſt; an aargett, Erſe.) A kind of buckle; or ſhield born on
the left arm. It ſeems to be commonly uſed for a defenſive
weapon leſs in circumference than a ſhield.
Giancing on his helmet made a large
And open gaſh therein, were not his targe
That broke the violence. . .
I took all their
joints in my target.
Seven I ſº will I bear
Upon my target three fair ſhining ſuns. Shakeſp. Hºn. VI.
The arms ſhe uſeth moſt is the target to ſhroud herſelf un-
der, and fence away the blow. Howel's England's Tears.
Thoſe leaves **
They gather'd, broad as Amazonian targe. Mºlton.
26 D The
Fa. Qi.
Shakespeare Henry IV.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T. A. R.
T. A S
-
The Greeks the gates approach'd, their target: caſt
Over their heads, ſome ſcaling ladders plac'd Derham.
inſt the walls.
T wº. n. ſ. [E] ºn] A paraphraſe on the pentateuch
in the Chaldee language. - -
tº n.ſ. [perhaps a Spaniſh word; tarif, Fr.] A car-
tel of commerce. -
This branch of our trade was regulated by a tariff, or de-
claration of the duties of import and export. Addison.
TARN. n.ſ.. [tiorn, Iſlandick.] A bog; a fen; a marſh; a
pool; a quagmire. - -
Tö TA/RNish. v. a. ſternir, French..] To fully; to ſoil; to
make not bright. - -
Let him pray for reſolution, that he may diſcover nothing
that may diſcredit the cauſe, tarniſh the glory, and weaken
the example of the ſuffering: Collier.
Low waves the rooted foreſt, vex'd, and ſheds
What of its tarniſh’d honours yet remain. Thomſon.
To TA/RN1sh. v. n. To loſe brightneſs.
If a fine object ſhould tarniſh by having a great many ſee
it, or the muſick ſhould run moſtly into one man's ears,
theſe ſatisfactions would be made incloſure. Collier of Envy.
TARPA'wling. n.ſ. [from tar.]
1. Hempen cloath ſmeered with tar.
Some the gall'd ropes with dauby marling bind,
Or ſearcloth maſts with ſtrong tarpawling coats. Dryden.
2. A ſailor in contempt.
Was anything wanting to the extravagance of this age,
but the making a living tarpawlin and a ſwabber the hero of
a tragedy. Dennis.
TA'RRAGoN. m. ſ. A plant called herb-dragon.
TA'RRIAN ce. n.ſ. [from tarry..] Stay; delay; perhaps ſojourn.
Diſpatch me hence:
Come, anſwer not; but do it preſently,
I am impatient of my tarriance. Shakeſpeare.
TA'RRIER. m. ſ. [This ſhould be written terrier, from terre,
French, the earth.]
1. A ſort of ſmall dog, that hunts the fox or otter out of his hole.
The fox is earthed; but I ſhall ſend my two tarriers in
after him. Dryden.
2. One that tarries or ſtays.
To Ta’RRY. v. n. [targir, French.]
1. To ſtay; to continue in a place.
Tarry I here, I but attend on death;
But fly I hence, I fly away from life.
2. To delay; to be long in coming.
Thou art my deliverer, make no tarrying, O God. Pſal.
Who hath woe and redneſs of eyes? they that tarry long
at the wine. Prov. xxiii. 30.
Tarry ye here for us until we come again. Exod. xxiv. 14.
I yet am tender, young, and full of fear,
And dare not die, but fain would tarry here.
To TA’RRY. v. a. To wait for.
I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry dinner. Shakespeare
TA'RSEL. m. ſ. A kind of hawk.
Hiſt! Romeo, hiſt O for a falkner's voice;
To lure this tarſel gentle back again. Shakeſpeare.
A falc'ner Henry is, when Emma hawks;
With her of tarſals and of lures he talks. Prior.
TA'Rsus. m. ſ. [In anatomy; tarſe, Fr.] The ſpace betwixt
the lower end of the ſocil bones of the leg, and the beginning of
the five long bones that are jointed with, and bear up, the toes:
it compriſes ſeven bones and the three offa cuneiformia. Diff.
An obſcure motion, where the conjunction is called ſynan-
throſis; as, in joining the tarſus to the metatarſus. h jeman,
TARt. adj. [zeanz, Saxon; tıertig, Dutch.]
1. Sour; acid; acidulated; ſharp of taſte.
2. Sharp; keen; ſevere.
Why ſo tart a favour
To trumpet ſuch good tidings Shakeſpeare.
When his humours grew tart, as being now in the lees of
favour, they brake forth into certain ſudden exceſſes. Iſotton.
TART. n.ſ. ſtarte, French; tarta, Italian; taart, Daniſh;
A ſmall pie of fruit.
Figures, with divers coloured earths, under the windows
of the houſe on that ſide near which the garden ſtands, be
but toys; you may ſee as good fights in tarts. Bacon's Eſſays.
TARTANE. m. ſ. ſtartana, Italian; tartane, Fr.] A veſſel
much uſed in the Mediterranean, with one maſt and a three-
cornered ſail.
. I ſet out from Marſeilles to Genoa in a tartane, and ar-
rived late at a ſmall French port called Caſis. Addiſon.
TARTAR. m. ſ. ſtartarus, Lati
1. Hell. A word uſed by the old poets, now obſolete.
With this the damned ghoſts he governeth,
And ſuries rules, and tartare tempereth. - Spenſer.
He's in tartar limbo worſe than hell;
A devil in an everlaſting garment hath him,
One whoſe hard heart is button'd up with ſteel. Shakespeare.
2. |...] ... is what ſticks to wine caſks, like a hard
whence it co white ºf red, as the colour of the wine from
mes: the white is preferable, as containing leſs
.. of earthy parts : the beſt comes from Germany, and is
* *tar of the rheniſh wine, &amp;tincy.
Shakeſpeare,
Dryden.
The fermented juice of grapes is Pºrtly turned into liquid
drops or lees, and partly into that cruſt or dry feculency that
is commonly called tartar; and this tartar may by the fire
be divided into five differing ſubſtances, four of which ...
not acid, and the other not ſo manifeſtly acid as the tartar
itſelf. Boyle.
TARTA’RE AN. adj. ſtartarus, Lat..] Helliſh.
His throne mix'd with tartarean ſulphur. Milton
TARTAREous. n.ſ.. [from tartar.] -
1. Conſiſting of tartar.
In fruits, the tartareous parts of the ſap are thrown upon
the fibres deſigned for the ſtone, and the oily upon the fººd
within it. Grew's Coſmol.
2. Helliſh.
The ſpirit of God downward purg'd
The black tartareous cold infernal dregs,
Adverſe to life. Milton.
To TA'Rta Rize. v. a. [from tartar.] To impregnate with
tartar.
TA'Rt Aroºs. adj. [from tartar.] Containing tartar; confiſt-
ing of tartar.
TA/RTLY. adv. [from tart.]
1. Sharply; fourly; with acidity.
2. Sharply; with poignancy; with ſeverity.
Seneca, an ingenious and ſententious writer, was by Ca-
ligula called arena ſine cake, ſand without lime. Walker.
3. With ſourneſs of aſpect.
How tartly that gentleman looks
—He is of a very melancholy diſpoſition.
TA'RTNess. n. ſ. [from tart.]
1. Sharpneſs; ſourneſs; acidity.
Of theſe ſweets put in three gallons, more or leſs, into an
hogſhead, as the tartneſs of your cyder requires. Mortimer.
2. Sourneſs of temper; poignancy of language.
They cannot be too ſweet for the king's tartnſ. Shaiſ,
TAsk. n.ſ. (taſche, French; taſſa, Italian.]
1. Something to be done impoſed by another.
Relieves me from my taſk of ſervile toil
Daily in the common priſon elſe enjoin'd me. Milion.
2. Employment; buſineſs.
His mental powers were equal to greater taſks. Alterbury.
No happier taſk theſe faded eyes purſue,
To read and weep is all they now can do. Pope.
3. To Take to taſk. To reprove ; to reprimand.
A holy man took a ſoldier to taſk upon the ſubjećt of his
profeſſion. L'Eſtrange.
He diſcovered ſome remains of his nature when he met
with a foot-ball, for which Sir Roger took him to taſk. Addison
To Task. v. a. ſtaſiu, Welſh, or from the noun..] To bur-
then with ſomething to be done.
He depos'd the king,
Soon after that depriv'd him of his life,
And, in the neck of that, taff'd the whole ſtate. Shałºff.
Forth he goes,
Like to a harveſtman, that's taſk'd to mow, -
Or all, or loſe his hire. Shakespeare . Coriolanuſ.
Some things of weight,
That taſk our thoughts, concerning us and France. Shº.
I have drunk but one cup to-night, and that was craftily
qualified too; and behold what innovation it makes here.
am unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not taſk my weak-
neſs with any more. Shakeſp. Othell.
Divert thy thoughts at home, -
Shakeſpeare,
There taſk thy maids, and exerciſe the loom. Dryden.
TA's KER. n. ſ. ſtaff and maſter.] One who impoſes
TA's KMAst ER. ; taſks.
All is, if I have grace to uſe it ſo, 1.
As ever in my great taſkmaſter's eye. Milan.
The ſervice of fin is perfect ſlavery; and he who will pay
obedience to the commands of it, ſhall find it an unº.
able taſkmaſter, and an unmeaſurable exactor. South.
Hear, ye ſullen powers below ; L
Hear, ye taſkers of the dead. Dryden and º
TA'ssel. n.ſ.. [taſſé, French : taffellus, low Latin.] An orna
mental bunch of ſilk, or glittering ſubſtances.
Then took the ſquire an horn of bugle ſmall,
Which hung adown his ſide in twiſted gold, - b.
And taſſels gay. Fairy Queen, .
Their heads are tricked with taſſels and flowers. Sandyj.
TA'ss El. {n.ſ. An herb. Ainſ.
TA’z EL. - -
TA'sselled. adj. [from taffel.] Adorned with taſſels.
Early ere the odorous breath of morn
Awakes the ſlumb'ring leaves, or taffºld horn lion
Shakes the high thicket, haſte I all about. *::
TA'sses. n.ſ. Armour for the thighs. ...4%
TA'st ABLE. adj. That may be taſted; favoury; º,
Their diſtilled oils are fluid, volatile and teſtable.
To TAst E. v. a. [taſter, to try, ...]
1. To perceive and diſtinguiſh by the palate. - ii.
The ruler of the feaſt taſted the water made Wine. gº 11
2. To try by the mouth; to eat at leaſt in a ſmall *%.
Bold deed to taſie it under ban to touch. : T.
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A S
º
ºts
*:::
* .
* …
l: ſº
**
º
3. To eſſay firſt.
Roſcetes was ſeldom permitted to eat any other meat but
ſuch as the prince before taſted of. Knolles.
Thou and I marching before our troops
May to/le fate to them, mow them out a paſſage. Dryden.
4. To feel; to have perception of.
He ſhould taſte death for every man.
To TASTE. v. n.
1. To try by the mouth to eat.
Of this tree we may not taſe nor touch. Milton.
2. To have a ſmack; to produce on the palate a particular ſen-
ſation.
When the mouth is out of taſte, it maketh things taffe
bitter and loathſome, but never ſweet. Bacon's Nai. Hi/l.
When kine feed upon wild garlick, their milk taſeth of
Heb. ii. 9.
it.
Bacon.
If your butter taffes of braſs, it is your maſter's fault, who
will not allow a filver ſaucepan. Swift.
3. To diſtinguiſh intellectually.
Scholars when good ſenſe deſcribing,
Call it taſting and imbibing. Swift.
4. To reliſh intellectually; to approve.
Thou, Adam, wilt taſte no pleaſure. Milton.
5. To be tinétured, or receive ſome quality or charaćter.
Ev'ry idle, nice, and wanton reaſon
Shall, to the king, taſk of this action.
6. To try the reliſh of any thing.
The body's life with meats and air is fed,
Therefore the ſoul doth uſe the taſting pow'r
In veins, which through the tongue and palate ſpread,
Diſtinguiſh ev'ry reliſh ſweet and ſour. Davies.
7. To have perception of.
Cowards die many times before their deaths;
The valiant never taſie of death but once. Shakeſpeare.
The taſting of death touched the righteous alſo, and there
was a deſtruction of the multitude in the wilderneſs. Jºd.
8. To take enjoyment.
What hither brought us not hope here to taſie
Shakeſpeare.
Of pleaſure. Milton.
Of nature's bounty men forbore to taffe,
And the beſt portion of the earth lay waſte. Waller.
9. To enjoy ſparingly.
This fiery game your active youth maintain'd,
Not yet by years extinguiſh'd, though reſtrain'd;
You ſeaſon ſtill with ſports your ſerious hours,
For age but taſies of pleaſures, youth devours.
TAste. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The act of taſting; guſtation.
Beſt of fruits, whoſe taſte gave elocution. Milton.
2. The ſenſe by which the reliſh of any thing on the palate is
perceived.
Bees delight more in one flower than another, and there-
fore have taſie. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?.
D ryden.
Delicacies of taſte, ſight, ſmell. Milton.
The tardy plants in our cold orchards plac'd,
Reſerve their fruit for the next age's ta/le. JWaller.
3.1 ſibility; perception.
I have almoſt forgot the taſle of fears:
The time has been, my ſenſes would have cool’d
To hear a night ſhriek. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Muſick in the cloſe,
As the laſt taſte of ſweets is ſweeteſt laſt. Shakeſp. R. II.
4. That ſenſation which all things taken into the mouth give
particularly to the tongue, the papillae of which are the prin-
cipal inſtruments hereof. 34tincy.
Manna was like coriander ſeed, white; and the taſte of it
was like wafers made with honey. Exod. xvi. 31.
Though there be a great variety of toſſes, yet, as in ſmells,
they have only ſome few general names. Locke.
5. Intellectual reliſh or diſcernment. -
Seeing they pretend no quarrel at other pſalms which are
in like manner appointed to be daily read, why do theſe ſo
much offend and diſpleaſe their taſtes ? Płooker.
Sion's ſongs to all true taſies excelling,
Where God is prais'd aright. Milton.
I have no taſte - -
Of popular applauſe. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
As he had no taſte of true glory, we ſee him equipped like
an Hercules, with a club and a lion's ſkin. Addiſon.
This metaphor would not have been ſo general, had there
not been a conformity between the mental taſie and that ſen-
ſitive taſte which gives us a reliſh of every flavour. Addiſon.
Your way of life, in my to/le, will be the beſt. Pope.
I ſee how ill a taſte for wit and ſenſe prevails in the world.
Swift.
Pleaſure reſults from a ſenſe to diſcern, and a taſte to |.
affeółed with beauty. Seed's Sermons.
6. An eſſay; a trial; an experiment. Not in uſe.
I hope, for my brother's juſtification, he wrote as an eſſay
or taſie of my virtue. Shakespeare,
7. A ſmall portion given as a ſpecimen.
They thought it not ſafe fo reſolve, till they had a taffe of
the people's inclination. 7 Bacon's Henry VII.
Beſides the prayers mentioned, I ſhall give only a taſte df
º: few recommended to devout Perſons in the manuals and
Ces. - / Stillin -
TA'sted. adj. [from taffe.] Having a particular reſh. gfleet
Coleworts proſper exceedingly, and are better to/fed, if
watered with ſalt water, Bacon's Nat. Hå, No. 26%
TA'ster. n.ſ. ſtaſieur, Fr. from to/fe.] -
I. One who takes the firſt eſſay of food.
Fair hope our earlier heav'n by thee
Young time is taſter to eternity. Craſhaw.
Says the fly, Are not all places open to me? Am not I
the tºffer to princes in all their entertainments. L’E/irange.
Thy tutor be thy toffer, ere thou eat, -&gt;
There's poiſon in thy drink, and in thy meat. Dryden.
2. A dram cup. Ainſ.
TA'stEFUL. adj. ſtaffe and full.j High reliſhed; favoury.
Not taſteful herbs that in theſe gardens riſe,
Which the kind ſoil with milky ſap ſupplies,
Can move.
TA's teless. adj. [from taſe.]
I. Having no power of perceiving taſte.
2. jºins no reliſh or power of ſtimulating the palate ; in-
ipid.
By depurating chemical oils, and reducing them to an ele-
mentary ſimplicity, they could never be made to/lºſs. Boyle.
3. Having no power of giving pleaſure; inſipid.
The underſtanding cannot, by its natural light, diſcover
ſpiritual truths; and the corruption of our will and affections
renders them taſteleſ; and inſipid to us. Rogers's Serm.
4. Having no intellectual guſt.
If by his manner of writing he is heavy and ta/eleſs, I
throw aſide his criticiſms. Addiſon's Spect.
TA's TELEssNess. n.ſ. [from taſtelſ.]
1. Inſipidity; want of reliſh.
2. Want of perception of taſte.
3. Want of intellectual reliſh. -
To TATTER. v. a. [zoza'nan, Saxon.] To tear; to rend; to
make ragged. Tattered is perhaps more properly an adjective,
Through tatter'd cloaths ſmall vices do appear,
Robes and furr'd gowns hide all. Shakeſp. King Lear,
An apothecary late I noted -
In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of ſimples. Shakespeare Rome and juliet.
Where wav'd the tatter'd enſigns of Ragfair,
A }. ruin hangs. Pope.
n the land of liberty little tyrants rag’d,
Tore from cold wintry limbs the tatter'd weed. Thomſon.
TATTER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A rag; a fluttering rag.
This fable holds from him that ſits upon the throne, to
the poor devil that has ſcarce a tatter. L’Eſtrange.
TAtter DEMA'lion. m. ſ. ſtatter and I know not what..] A
ragged fellow. --
As a poor fellow was trudging along in a bitter cold morn-
ing with never a rag, a ſpark that was warm clad called to
this tatterdemalion, how he could endure this weather f
L'Eſtrange.
To TA’ttle. v. m. ſtateren, Dutch..] To prate; to talk idly;
to uſe many words with little meaning.
He ſtands on terms cf honourable mind,
Ne will be carried with every common wind
Of court's inconſtant mutability,
Ne after every tattling fable fly. Hubberd's Tale.
The one is too like an image, and ſays nothing; and the
other too like my lady's eldeſt ſon, evermore tattling. Shał.
Excuſe it by the tattling quality of age, which is always
narrative. Dryden.
The world is forward enough to tattle of them. . . Locº.
Their language is extremely proper to tattle in ; it is made
up of ſo much repetition and compliment. . Addison.
TA’ttle. n.ſ. [from the verb..] Prate ; idle chat; trifling
talk.
Pope.
They aſked her, how ſhe lik'd the play
Then told the tattle of the day.
Such tattle often entertains -
My lord and me. Swift.
A young academick ſhall dwell upon trade and politicks in
a dićtatorial ſtile, while at the ſame time Pºlº w: ſkilled
in thoſe different ſubjects hear the impºrtinº; tattle with a
juſt contempt. ſtattº Inprºvement of the Mind,
TA'ttleR. n.ſ.. [from tattle..] An idle talker ; a prater. . .
Going from houſe to hºuſe, tailers, buſy bodies, which
are the canker and ruſt of idleneß, * idleneſs is the ruſt of
time, are reproved by the apoſtle. F ſtrik *.
TAtto'o. n.ſ. [perhaps from tºotez tour, Fr. to ſtrike..] I he
beat of drum by which ſoldiers * warned to their quarters.
All thoſe whoſe hearts are looſe and low, Priºr
- but the tatto. ºr tº r.
Twº tº: Fr. taberna, Latin.] A houſe where
wine is ſold, and drinkers are entertained.
Enquire at º, º: º: tºº. there;
r there they ſay he daily doth frequent, ,- r- -
wº iii. looſe &amp;mºn. Shakeſp. Aiº,.
Swift's Miſel.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T A W.
T E A
º
You ſhall be called to no more payments; fear no mºre
tº bills, which are often the ſadneſs of parting, as the
procuring of mirth. - Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
To reform the vices of this town, all taverns and alehouſes
ſhould be obliged to diſmiſs their company by twelve at night,
and no woman ſuffered to enter any tavern or alſehouſe. Sw.
TA/V ERNER.. n. ſ. [from tavern man or keep; taberna-
TA’V E R N KEEPER. ; rius, Latin; tavernier, French..] One
TA(VERNMAN. " who keeps a tavern.
After local names, the moſt in number have been derived
"from occupations; as tailor, archer, taverner. Camden.
TAucht, preterite and part, paſſive of teach. -
All thy children ſhall be taught of the Lord. Iſa. liv.13.
How haſt thou ſatisfy'd me, taught to live. Milton.
To TAunt. v. a. ſtanſer, Fr. Skinner. Tanden, Dutch, to
ſhew teeth. Minſhew.] - --
1. To reproach; to inſult; to revile; to ridicule; to treat
with inſolence and contumelies.
When I had at my pleaſure taunted her,
She in mild terms begg'd my patience. Shakeſpeare.
The bitterneſs and ſtings of taunting jealouſy,
Vexatious days, and jarring joyleſs nights,
Have driv'n him forth. owe's jane Shore.
2. To exprobrate; to mention with upbraiding.
Rail thou in Fulvia's phraſe, and taunt my faults
With ſuch full licence. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
TAUNT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Inſult; ſcoff; reproach ; ridi-
cule.
With ſcoffs and ſcorns, and contumelious taunts,
In open market-place produc’d they me,
To be a publick ſpectacle. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
He would avoid ſuch bitter taunts,
As in the time of death he gave our father. Shakeſpeare.
Julian thought it more effectual to perſecute the Chriſtians
by taunts and ironies, than by tortures. Gov. of the Tongue.
He by vile hands to common uſe debas'd,
Shall ſend them flowing round his drunken feaſt,
With ſacrilegious taunt, and impious jeſt. Prior.
TA'UNTER. m. ſ. [from taunt.] One who taunts, reproaches,
or inſults.
TA'untingly. adv. [from taunting.] With inſult; ſcoffingly;
with contumely and exprobration.
It tauntingly replied
To th’ diſcontented members, th’ mutinous parts,
That envied his receipt. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The wanton goddeſs view'd the warlike maid
From head to foot, and tauntingly ſhe ſaid. Prior.
TAURico'RNous, adj. [taurus and cornu, Latin.] Having
horns like a bull.
Their deſcriptions muſt be relative, or the tauricornous
pićture of the one the ſame with the other. Brown.
TAUTologic AL. adj. [tautologique, Fr. from tautology..] Re-
peating the ſame thing. -
TAUTO'LoGIST. n.ſ.. [from tautology.] One who repeats te-
diouſly.
TAUTO'LOGY. m. ſ. [rzúloxoyſz; tautologie, Fr. rajro
and A&amp;G'.] Repetition of the ſame words, or of the ſame
ſenſe in different words.
All ſcience is not tautology; the laſt ages have ſhewn us,
what antiquity never ſaw, in a dream. Glanville's Scepſ.
Saint Andre's feet ne'er kept more equal time,
Not ev'n the feet of thy own Pſyche's rhime;
Though they in numbers as in ſenſe excel,
So juſt, ſo like tautology, they fell. Dryden.
Every paper addreſſed to our beautiful incendiaries, hath
been filled with different conſiderations, that enemies may
not accuſe me of tautology. Addiſon's Freeholder.
To TAw. v. a. [touwen, Dutch ; raplan, Saxon.] To dreſs
white leather commonly called alum leather, in contradiſtinc-
tion from tan leather, that which is dreſſed with bark.
TAw. n.ſ. A marble to play with.
Trembling I've ſeen thee
Mix with children as they play'd at taw;
Nor fear the marbles as they bounding flew,
Marbles to them, but rolling rocks to you. Swift.
TAWDRINEss. n.ſ. [from tawdry.] Tinſel finery; finery too
oſtentatious.
A clumſy beau makes his ungracefulneſs appear the more
ungraceful by his tawdrineſ of dreſs. Clariſſa.
TA'w DRY. adj. [from Stawdrey, Saint Awdrey, or Saint Ethel-
dred, as the things bought at Saint Etheldred's fair. Hen-
/haw, Skinner.] Meanly ſhewy ; ſplendid without coſt; fine
without grace; ſhewy without elegance. It is uſed both of
things and of perſons wearing them.
Bºnd your fillets faſt,
And gird in your waſte,
For more fineneſs, with a tawdrie lace. Spenſºr's Paſº.
* has a kind of coxcomb upon his crown, and a few
dry feathers. L'E/irange.
914 Romulus and father Mars look down,
Your bºrdinan Plimitive, your homely clown,
Is turn’d a beau in a looſ. tawdry gown. Dryden's juv.
He rails from morning to night at eſſenced fops and tawdry
courtiers. Addiſon's Spect. Nº. 128
Her eyes were wan and eager, her dreſs thin and tawj.
her mien genteel and childiſh. Addison's Spº.
TA’wer. n.ſ.. [from taw.] A dreſſer of white leather.
TA(wny, adj, ſtané, tanné, Fr.] Yellow, like things tanned
This child of fancy that armado hight, -
For interim to our ſtudies ſhall relate,
In high born words, the worth of many a knight
From tawny Spain, loſt in the world's debate. Shakeſpeare
Eurus his body muſt be drawn the colour of theº.
Moor, upon his head a red ſun. #.
The tawny lion pawing to get free. Milton.
Whilſt they make the river Senaga to bound the Moors
ſo that on the ſouth ſide they are black, on the other only
tawny, they ſeem not to derive it from the ſun. Brown.
Where's the worth that ſets this people up
Above your own Numidia's tawny ſons Addiſon's Cato.
Tax. m. ſ. [táſg, Welſh; taxe, French; taxe, Dutch.]
1. An impoſt; a tribute impoſed; an exciſe: a tallage.
He ſays Horace, being the ſon of a tax gatherer or collec-
tor, ſmells everywhere of the meanneſs of his birth, Dryden.
With wars and taxes others waſte their own,
And houſes burn, and houſhold gods deface,
To drink in bowls which glittering gems enchaſe. Dryden.
The tax upon tillage was two ſhillings in the pound in ara-
ble land, and four in plantations: this tax was often levied
in kind upon corn, and called decumae or tithes, Arbuthnot.
2. [Taxo, Lat. J Charge ; cenſure.
He could not without grief of heart, and without ſome tax
upon himſelf and his miniſters for the not executing the laws,
look upon the bold licence of ſome pamphlets. Clarendºn.
To Tax. v. a. [taxer, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To load with impoſts.
Jehoiakim gave the ſilver and gold to Pharaoh, but he taxed
the land to give the money. 2 Kings xxiii. 35.
2. [Taxo, Lat.] To charge ; to cenſure; to accuſe. It has
or with before the fault imputed, and is uſed both of perſons
and things.
How many hath he killed I promiſed to eat all of his
killing. Nicce, you tax ſignior Benedick too much; but
he'll be meet with you. Shakeſpeare.
I am not juſtly to be taxed with any preſumption for med-
dling with matters wherein I have no dealing. Raleigh.
Tax not divine diſpoſal, wiſeſt men
Have err'd, and by bad women been deceiv'd. Milton.
They cannot tax others omiſſions towards them without a
tacit reproach of their own. Decay of Piety.
He taxed not Homer nor Virgil for intereſting their gods
in the wars of Troy and Italy; neither would he have taxed
Milton for his choice of a ſupernatural argument. Dryden.
Mens virtues I have commended as freely as I have taxed
their crimes. Dryden.
He call'd him back aloud, and tax’d his fear;
And ſure enough he heard, but durſt not hear. Dryden.
Like ſome rich and mighty murderer,
Too great for priſon which he breaks with gold,
Who freſher for new miſchief does appear,
And dares the world to tax him with the old. Dryden.
If this be chance, it is extraordinary; and I dare not call
it more, for fear of being taxed with ſuperſtition. Dryden.
If he taxes both of long delay,
My guilt is leſs, who ſooner came away. Dryden.
This ſalutation cannot be taxed with flattery, ſince it was
direéted to a prince, of whom it had been happy for Rome if
he had never been born, or if he had never died. Addison.
TA(xA ble. adj. [from tax.] That may be taxed.
Taxation. n.ſ.. [taxation, Fr. taxatio, Lat. from tax.]
1. The aët of loading with taxes; impoſt; tax. -
The ſubječts could taſte no ſweeter fruits of having a king
than grievous taxations to ſome vain purpoſes; laws made ºr
ther to find faults than to prevent faults. Sidney, b. ii.
I bring no overture of war, no taxation of homage i.rºy
words are as full of peace as matter. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
He daily ſuch taxations did exact, -
As were againſt the order of the ſtate. Daniel.
Various news I heard,
Of old miſmanagements, taxations new ;
All neither wholly falſe, nor wholly true. Pope.
2. Accuſation; ſcandal. -
My father's love is enough to honour; ſpeak no more of
him, you'll be whipt for taxation one of theſe days. Shakeſ?.
TA'xER. n. ſ. [from tax.] He who taxes. -
Theſe rumours begot ſcandal againſt the king, taxing him.
for a great taxer of his people. Bacon's Henry VII.
TEA. m. ſ. [a word, I ſuppoſe, Chineſe; the, Fr.] A Chineſe
plant, of which the infuſion has lately been much drunk in
Europe. -
The muſes friend, tea, does our fancy aid,
Repreſs thoſe vapours which the head invade. Waller.
One
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º,
T E A
T E A
º
º: s'
ſº,
§§
º
Luº
º,
* º
*s
1: ...
º
º:
:
9ne has a deſign of keeping an open tea table. Addison.
I have filled a tea pot, and received a diſh of it. Addison.
He ſwept down a dozen tea diſhes. Speciator.
Nor will you encourage the common tea table talk. Spect.
Green leaves of tea contain a narcotick juice, which exudes
by roaſting: this is performed with great care before it is ex-
poſed to ſale. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Here living tea pot ſtands; one arm held out,’
One bent; the handle this, and that the ſpout. Pope.
The miſtreſs of the tea ſhop may give half an ounce. Sw.
The fear of being thought pedants hath taken many young
divines off from their ſeverer ſtudies, which they have exchang-
ed for plays, in order to qualify them for tea tables. Swift.
When you ſweep, never ſtay to pick up tea ſpoons. Swift.
To TEACH. v. 4. preter, and part, paſſ taught, ſometimes
teached, which is now obſolete. [carcan, Sax.]
1. To inſtrućt; to inform.
The Lord will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in
his paths. Iſa. ii. 3.
Teach us by what means to ſhun
Th’ inclement ſeaſons. Milton.
2. To deliver any doćtrine or art, or words to be learned.
Moſes wrote this ſong, and taught it. Deut. xxxi. 22.
In vain they worſhip me, teaching for doćtrines the com-
mandments of men. Mat. xv. 9.
They teach all nations what of him they learn'd. Milton.
3. To ſhow ; to exhibit ſo as to impreſs upon the mind.
He is a good divine that follows his own inſtructions; I
can eaſier teach twenty what were good to be done, than to
be one of the twenty to follow my own teaching. Shakeſp.
If ſome men teach wicked things, it muſt be that others
ſhould practiſe them. South's Sermons.
4. To tell; to give intelligence.
Huſwives are teached, inſtead of a clocke,
How winter night paſſeth by crowing of cocke. Tuſſºr.
To TE AcH. v. n. To perform the office of an inſtructor.
I have labour'd,
And with no little ſtudy, that my teaching,
And the ſtrong courſe of my authority,
Might go one way. Shakeſpeare.
I am too ſudden bold
To teach; a teacher ill beſeemeth me. Shakeſpeare.
The heads judge for reward, the prieſts teach for hire, and
the prophets divine for money. Mic. iii. 11.
TE'AchABLE. adj. [from teach..] Docile; ſuſceptive of inſtruc-
tion. t
We ought to bring our minds free, unbiaſed, and teach-
able to learn our religion from the word of God. Watts.
TE'AcHABLEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from teachable.] Docility; willing-
neſs to learn; capacity to learn.
TE'AcHER. m. ſ. [from teach.]
1. One who teaches; an inſtructor; preceptor.
Nature is no ſufficient teacher what we ſhould do that may
attain unto life everlaſting. Hºoker, b. ii.
I went into the temple, there to hear -
The teachers of our law, and to propoſe
What might improve my knowledge or their own. Milton.
Theſe were notions born with us; ſuch as we were taught
without the help of a teacher. South's Sermons.
Imperious with a teacher's air,
Boaſtful he claims a right to wiſdom's chair. Blackmore.
2. One who without regular ordination aſſumes the miniſtry.
Diſſenting teachers are under no incapacity of accepting
civil and military employments. - Swift.
3. A preacher; one who is to deliver doctrine to the people.
For the choice of a governor more ſufficient, the teachers
in all the churches aſſembled themſelves. Raleigh.
Wolves ſhall ſucceed for teachers. Mlton.
He may teach his dioceſe who ceaſes to be able to preach
to it; for he may do it by appointing teachers, and by a
vigilant exacting from them the inſtruction of their flocks.
South.
TEAD or tede. m. ſ. ſtarda, Lat.] A torch; a flambeau. Not
in uſe.
A buſhy tead a groom did light, - -
And ſacred lamp in ſecret chamber hide. Fairy 2acen.
Hymen is awake,
And long ſince ready from his maſk to move,
With his bright tºad that flames with many a flake.
Spenſer's Epithalamium.
TEAGUE. m. ſ. A name of contempt uſed for an Iriſhman.
TEAL. m. ſ. ſteelingh, Dutch..] A wildfowl.
Some ſerve for food to us, and ſome but to feed themſelves;
amongſt the firſt fort we reckon the dip-chick, coots, teal,
wigeon. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
TEAM. m. ſ. ſtemo, the team of a carriage, Latin ; tyme,
* Saxon, a yoke.]
1. A number of horſes or oxen drawing at once the ſame car-
riage. -
Thee a ploughman all unweeting found,
As he his toilſome team that way did guide,
And brought thee up in ploughman's ſtate to bido. F. Qw.
We fairies that do run
By the triple Hecate's team,
From the preſence of the ſun,
Following darkneſs like a dream,
Now are frolick. Shakeſp. 44idſummer Night's Dream.
Making ſuch difference betwixt wake and ſleep
As is the diff'rence betwixt day and night, 2
The hour before the heav'nly harneſs'd team
Begins his golden progreſs in the Eaſt. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
I am in love; but a team of horſe ſhall not pluck
t th
me, nor who 'tis I love. pluck that from
* After the declining ſun
Had chang'd the ſhadows, and their taſk was done,
Home with their weary team they took their way. Roſcom
He heav'd with more than human force to move ""
A weighty ſtone, the labour of a team. Dryden
In ſtiff clays they may plow one acre of wheat with .
team of horſe. Martimer's Huſº.
2. Any number paſſing in a line.
Like a long team of ſnowy ſwans on high,
Which clap their wings, and cleave the liquid ſky. Dryden.
TFAR. m. ſ. ſea in this word is Pronounced ee; tean, Saxon;
taare, Daniſh.] &gt;
1. The water which violent paſſion forces from the eyes.
She comes; and I’ll prepare
My tear ſtain'd eyes to ſee her miſeries. Shakeſpeare.
The pretty vaulting ſea refus’d to drown me,
Knowing, that thou would'ſ have me drown'd on ſhore
With tears as ſalt as ſea, through thy unkindneſs. Shakespeare
Cromwell, I did not think to ſhed a tear
In all my miſeries; but thou haſt forc'd me.
Lets dry our eyes. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Tears are the effects of compreſſion of the moiſture of the
brain upon dilation of the ſpirits. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
She ſilently a gentle tear let fall. Milton.
2. Any moiſture trickling in drops.
Let Araby extol her happy coaſt,
Her fragrant flow’rs, her trees with precious tears,
Her ſecond harveſts. - Dryden.
TEAR. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A rent; a fiſſure.
To TEAR. pret. tore, anciently tare, part paſſ. torn; [raenan,
Saxon; tara, Swediſh.]
1. To pull in pieces; to lacerate; to rend ; to ſeparate by vio-
lent pulling.
Shakeſpeare.
Come ſeeling night,
And with thy bloody and inviſible hand
Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
Which keeps me pale. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The one went out from me; and I ſaid, Surely he is torn
in pieces, and I ſaw him not ſince. Gen. xliv. 28.
John tore off lord Strutt's ſervants cloaths: now and then
they came home naked. Arbuthnot's Hiſ of john Bull.
Ambaſſadors ſent to Carthage were like to be torn to pieces
by the populace. Arbuthnot.
2. To laniate; to wound with any ſharp point drawn along.
Old with duſt deform'd their hoary hair,
The women beat their breaſts, their checks they tare. Shakespeare
Neither ſhall men tear themſelves for them in mourning to
comfort them for the dead. jer. xvi. 7.
3. To break by violence.
In the midſt a tearing groan did break
The name of Antony. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
As ſtorms the ſkies, and torrents tear the ground,
Thus rag'd the prince, and ſcatter'd death around. Dryden.
Bluſh rather, that you are a ſlave to paſſion,
Which, like a whirlwind, tears up all your virtues,
And gives you not the leiſure to conſider. A. Philips.
4. To divide violently; to ſhatter. -
Is it not as much reaſon to ſay, that God deſtroys fatherly
authority, when he ſuffers one in poſſeſſion of it to have his
government torn in pieces, and ſhared by his ſubjects. Locke.
5. To pull with violence; to drive violently. . .
He roar'd, he beat his breaſt, he tore his hair. Dryden.
From harden'd oak, or from a rock's cold womb,
At leaſt thou art from ſome fierce tygreſs come;
Or on rough ſeas from their foundation torn,
Got by the winds, and in a tempeſt born. Dryden.
6. To take away by ſudden violence.
Solyman
Rhodes and Buda from the Chriſtians tore. Jº'aller.
The hand of fate
Has torm thee from me, and I muſt forget thee. Addiſon.
To TEAR. v. n. [tieren, Dutch..] To fume; to rave; to rant
turbulently. - - -
All men tranſported into outrages for ſmall trivial matters,
fall under the inuendo of this bull, that ran tearing mad for
the pinching of a mouſe. L’Eſtrange's Fabler.
Tr'ARER. m.ſ. [from to tear.]. He who rends or tears.
TE’AR FALLING. adj. [tear and fall.] Tender; ſhedding tears.
I am in
So far in blood, that fin will pluck on ſin,
Tearſalling pity dwells not in this eye. Shakeſ rare.
26 E TE'ARFUL.
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E D
T E E
** A p. d;. ſtar and full.] Weeping; full of tears.
TEARful. &amp;. [. Is’t .. that º fearful lad
eave the helm, and, like a fearful lad,
; eyes add water to the ſea Shakeſpeare.
This clears the cloudy front of wrinkled care,
And drie, the tearful ſluices of deſpair : -
Charm'd with that virtuous draught th' exalted mind
All ſenſe of woe delivers to the wind. Pope's Odyſſey.
On Celadon her eye
Fell tearful, wetting her diſorder'd check. Thomſon.
To TEASE. v. a. [caeran, Saxon.]
1. To comb or unravel wool or flax.
2. To ſcratch cloth in order to level the nap. -
3. To torment with importunity; to vex with aſſiduous imper-
tinence.
Not by the force of carnal reaſon,
But indefatigable teaſing. - Butler.
My friends always teaſe me about him, becauſe he has no
eſtate. Speciator, N°. 475.
After having been preſent in publick debates, he was teaſed
by his mother to inform her of what had paſſed. Addiſon.
we ſyſtem-makers can ſuſtain , .
The theſis, which you grant was plain ;
And with remarks and comments teaſe ye, -
In caſe the thing before was eaſy. Prior.
TE'Asel. n.ſ. [raerl, Saxon; dipſacus, Lat.] A plant.
The flower of the teaſel hath no proper calyx, but leaves
repreſenting the perianthium encompaſſing the bottom of the
head : the little flowers which are produced ſingly from be-
tween the ſcales, are collected into an head ſomewhat like a
bee-hive; theſe are ſucceeded by longiſh four-cornered ſeeds:
the ſpecies are three : one is called carduus fullonum, and is
of figular uſe in raiſing the knap upon woollen cloth. Miller.
TE'aser. n.ſ. [from teaſe..] Any thing that torments by in-
ceſſant importunity.
A fly buzzing at his ear, makes him deaf to the beſt ad-
vice. If you would have him come to himſelf, you muſt
take off his little teaſer, which holds his reaſon at bay. Collier.
TEAT. m. ſ. ſteth, Welſh ; trº, Saxon; tette, Dutch ; teton,
French.j The dug of a beaſt; anciently the pap of a wo-
Iºlan.
Even at thy teat thou hadſt thy tyranny. , Shakeſpeare.
Snows cauſe a fruitful year, watering the earth better than
rain; for the earth ſucks it as out of the teat. Bacon.
When we perceive that bats have teats, we infer, that they
ſuckle their younglings with milk. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
It more pleas'd my ſenſe
Than ſmell of ſweeteſt fennel, or the teats
Of ewe or goat dropping with milk at even. Milton.
Infants ſleep, and are ſeldom awake but when hunger calls
for the teat. Locke.
The goat, how bright amidſt her fellow ſtars,
Kind Amalthea, reach'd her teat diſtent
With milk, thy early food. Prior.
TE'cHILY. adv. [from techy..] Peeviſhly ; fretfully; frowardly.
TechINEss. n.ſ. [from techy..] Peeviſhneſs; fretfulneſs.
TE'cHNICAL. adj. [Tszyuz's ; technique, Fr..] Belonging to
arts; not in common or popular uſe.
In technical words, or terms of art, they refrain not from
calling the ſame ſubſtance ſometimes the ſulphur, and ſome-
times the mercury of a body. Locke.
TECHY, adj. Peeviſh ; fretful; irritable; eaſily made an-
gry; froward. -
I cannot come to Creſid but by Pandar,
And he is as techy to be woo'd to wooe,
As ſhe is ſtubborn-chaſte againſt all ſute. Shakeſpeare.
When it did taſte the wormwood on the nipple, and felt
it bitter, pretty fool, to ſee it techy, and fall out with the
dug. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
TÉcto'NICK. adj. [rºſſoviz';..] Pertaining to building. Bailey,
To TE D. v. a... [teaban, Saxon, to prepare.] To lay graſs
newly mown in rows.
The ſmell of grain, or tedded graſs or kine,
Or dairy, each rural ſight, each rural ſound. Milton.
Hay-makers following the mowers, and caſting it abroad,
they call tedding. Mortimer's Huſh.
Prudent his fall'n heaps
Colle&amp;ting, cheriſh'd with the tepid wreaths
Of tedded graſs, and the ſun's mellowing beams,
Rivall'd with artful heats. Philips.
TE'DDER or tether. m. ſ. ſtudder, Dut. tindt, a rope, Iſlandick.]
1. A rope with which a horſe is tied in the field that he may
not paſture too wide. Teigher, Erſe.
2. Any thing by which one is reſtrained.
We lived joyfully, going abroad within our tedder. Bacon.
We ſhall have them againſt the wall; we know the length
of their tedder, they cannot run far from us. Child.
TE DEU.M. n.ſ. An hymn of the church, ſo called from
the two firſt words of the Latin.
- The choir,
With all the choiceſt muſick of the kingdom,
Together ſung te deum. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Te deum was ſung at Saint Paul's after the victory. Bacon.
TE'DIOUs, adj. [tedieux, Fr. taedium, Latin.]
1. Weariſome by continuance; troubleſome; irkſome,
That I be not further tedious unto thee, hear us of thv
clemency a few words.
The one intenſe, the other ſtill remiſs,
Cannot well ſuit with either, but ſoon prove
4.75 xxiv. 4.
Tedious alike. Miltºn
Pity only on freſh obječts ſtays, vºt.
But with the tedious fight of woes decays. Drydºn
./ tº ºt-
2. Weariſome by prolixity.
They unto whom we ſhall ſeem tedious are in nowife in.
jured by us, becauſe it is in their own hands to ſpare that
labour which they are not willing to endure. Hooker, b. i
3. Slow. Ainſ.
Chief maſtery to diſſect
With long and tedious havock fabled knights. Milton
TE'Diously. adv. [from tedious.] In ſuch a manner as .
weary.
TE'Dious Ness. n.ſ. [from tedious.]
1. Weariſomeneſs by continuance.
2. Weariſomeneſs by prolixity.
In vain we labour to perſuade them, that any thing can
take away the tediouſneſs of prayer, except it be brought to
the ſame meaſure and form which themſelves affign. Hair.
3. Prolixity; length.
Since brevity's the ſoul of wit,
And tediouſneſs the limbs and outward flouriſhes,
I will be brief. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
4. Uneaſineſs; tireſomeneſs; quality of wearying.
In thoſe very actions whereby we are eſpecially perſeded
in this life we are not able to perſiſt; forced we are with very
wearineſs, and that often, to interrupt them ; which tediouſ-
neſ; cannot fall into thoſe operations that are in the ſtate of
bliſs when our union with God is compleat. Hooker, b, i.
More than kiſſes, letters mingle ſouls,
For thus friends abſent ſpeak: this eaſe controuls
The tediouſneſs of my life. Donne.
She diſtaſtes them all within a while;
And in the ſweeteſt finds a tediouſneſs. Davies.
To TEEM. v. n. [team, Saxon, offspring.]
1. To bring young.
If ſhe muſt teem,
Create her child of ſpleen, that it may live,
And be a thwart diſnatur'd torment to her. Shakeſpeare.
2. To be pregnant; to engender young.
Have we more ſons? or are we like to have
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time,
And wilt thou pluck my fair ſon from mine age Shakespeare .
When the riſing Spring adorns the mead,
Teeming buds and cheerful greens appear. Dryden.
There are fundamental truths the baſis upon which a great
many others reſt: theſe are teeming truths, rich in ſtore, with
which they furniſh the mind, and, like the lights of heaven,
give light and evidence to other things. Locke.
3. To be full; to be charged as a breeding animal.
We live in a nation where there is ſcarce a ſingle head that
does not teem with politicks. Addiſon.
To TEEM. v. a.
1. To bring forth; to produce.
What's the neweſt grief?
Each minute trems a new one.
Common mother, thou
Whoſe womb unmeaſurable, and infinite breaſt,
Teems and feeds all. Shakeſp. Timon ºf Athens.
The earth obey'd; and ſtrait
Op'ning her fertile womb, teem'd at a birth --
Innumerous living creatures. Milton's Par. Lºft, h. W11.
The deluge wrought ſuch a change, that the earth did."
then teem forth its increaſe, as formerly, of its own acº”
but required culture. fºodward's Nat. H/.
2. To pour A low word, imagined by Skinner to come frºm
tommºn, Daniſh, to draw out ; to pour. The Scots retain *
as, tecm that water out; hence Swift took this word.
Teen out the remainder of the ale into the tankard, and
fill the glaſs with ſmall beer. Swift's Directions tº the Butler.
TE'EMFUL. adj. [teampul, Saxon.]
2. Pregnant; prolifick. -
2. #. p Aſ.
TE'EMER. n.ſ.. [from teem.] One that brings young.
TEEM less. Aj. [from teem.] Unfruitful; not prolifick.
Such wars, ſuch waſte, ſuch fiery tracks of dearth, r
Their zeal has left, and ſuch a team.ſºſs earth. Drydºk.
TEEN. m. ſ. [cinan, Saxon, to kindle ; tenen, Flemiſh, to tº ;
zeonan, Saxon, injuries.] Sorrow ; grief.
Arrived there
That barehead knight, for dread and doleful teen
Would fain have fied, ne durſt approachen near. Pa. º.
Fry not in heartleſs grief and doieful teen. Spenſer.
My heart bleeds t
To think o' th' teene that I have turn'd you to. Shaft.
Eighty odd years of ſorrow have I ſeen, k
And each hour's joy wreck'd with a week of teen. sº
Shakespeare . Macbeth.
£u.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">* T E L
He
lº
…
To TEEN. v. a. [from znan, to kindle, Saxon.] To excite;
to provoke to do a thing. Spenſer.
Teens. n.ſ [from teen for ten..] The years reckoned by the
termination teen ; as, thirteen, fourteen.
Our author would excuſe theſe youthful ſcenes,
Begotten at his entrance, in his teens;
Some childiſh fancies may approve the toy,
Some like the muſe the more for being a boy. Granville.
TEETH, the plural of tooth.
Who can open the doors of his face his teeth are terrible
round about. job xii. I4.
To Teeth. v. n. [from the noun..] To breed teeth; to be at
the time of dentition.
When the ſymptoms of tecthing appear, the gums ought
to be relaxed by ſoftening ointment. Arbuthnot on Diet.
TE'GUMENT. n.ſ. ſtegumentum, Latin.] Cover; the outward
part. This word is ſeldom uſed but in anatomy of phyſicks,
Clip and trim thoſe tender ſtrings in the faſhion of beard,
or other hairy teguments. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii.
Proceed by ſection, dividing the ſkin, and ſeparating the
teguments. Jºſeman's Surgery.
In the nutmeg another tegument is the mace between the
green pericarpium and the hard ſhell. Ray on the Creation.
To TEH-H E. v. n. [a cant word made from the ſound.] To
laugh with a loud and more inſolent kind of cachinnation;
to titter.
They laugh’d and teh-he'd with deriſion,
To ſee them take your depoſition. Hudibras, p. iii.
TEIl tree. n.f. [tilia, Latin.] The ſame with linden or lime
tree : which ſee.
A teiltree and an oak have their ſubſtance in them when
they caſt their leaves. Iſa. vi. 13.
TEINT. n.ſ.. [teinte, French..] Colour; touch of the pencil.
Glazed colours have a vivacity which can never be imita-
ted by the moſt brilliant colours, becauſe the different teints
are ſimply laid on, each in its place, one after another. Dryd.
Tel ARY. adj. [tela, a web, Lat.] Spinning webs.
The pictures of telary ſpiders, and their poſition in the
web, is commonly made lateral, and regarding the horizon;
although we ſhall commonly find it downward, and their
heads reſpecting the center. Brown's Pulgar Err. b. v.
TE'LESCOPE. m. ſ. [teleſcope, Fr. réxG, and axozºa.] A
long glaſs by which diſtant objećts are viewed.
The teleſiope diſcovers to us diſtant wonders in the hea-
vens, and ſhews the milky way, and the bright cloudy ſpots,
in a very dark ſky, to be a colle&amp;tion of little ſtars. JWatts.
TELEsco'P1cAL. adj. [from teleſcope.] Belonging to a tele-
ſcope; ſeeing at a diſtance.
To Tell. v. a. preterite and part, paſſ told, [tellan, Saxon;
taelen, tellen, Dutch ; talen, Daniſh.J
1. To utter; to expreſs; to ſpeak.
I will not eat till I have told mine errand. Gen. xxiv. 33.
Thy meſſage which might elſe in telling wound,
And in performing end us. Milton.
2. To relate ; to rehearſe; to ſpeak.
I will declare what wiſe men have told from their fathers,
and have not hid. job xv. 18.
When Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the in-
terpretation, he worſhipped. judg. vii. 13.
He longer will delay to hear thce tell -
His generation. Milton.
You muſt know; but break, O break my heart,
Before I tell my fatal ſtory out,
Th'uſurper of my throne is my wife' Dryden.
The reſt are vaniſh'd, none repaſs'd the gate,
And not a man appears to tell their fate. Pope's Odyſſey.
3. To teach ; to inform.
He gently aſk'd where all the people be,
which in that ſtately building wont to dwell,
Who anſwer'd him full ſoft, he could not tell. Fa. Qu.
I told him of myſelf; which was as much
As to have aſk'd him pardon. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
Tell me now, what lady is the ſame,
To whom you ſwore a ſecret pilgrimage,
That you to day promis'd to tell me of: Shakespeare.
The fourth part of a ſhekel of ſilver will I give to the man
of God to tell us our way. 1 Sam. ix. 8.
Saint Paul telleth us, we muſt needs be ſubject not only
for fear, but alſo for conſcience ſake. Biſhºp Sanderſon.
Tell me how may I know him, how adore. Milton.
4. To diſcover ; to betray.
They will tell it to the inhabitants.
5. To count; to number.
Here lies the learned Savile's heir,
So early wiſe, and laſting fair;
That none, except her years they told,
Thought her a child, or thought her old. J/aller.
Numerous ſails the fearful only tell;
Courage from hearts, and not from numbers grows. Dryd.
A child can tell twenty before he has any idea of infinite.
Locke.
Num. xiv. 14.
She doubts if two and two make four,
Though ſhe has told them ten times o'er. Prior.
6. To make excuſes. A low word.
Tuſh, never tell me, I take it much unkindly,
That thou, Iago, who haſt had my purſe,
As if the ſtrings were thine, ſhould'ſt know of this. Shakespeare
To Tell. v. n.
I. To give an account; to make report.
I will compaſs thine altar, O Lord, that I may publiſh
with the voice of thankſgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous
works. Pſal. xxvi. 7.
Ye that live and move, fair creatures tell,
Tell, if ye ſaw, how came I thus, how here Milton.
2. Tº TELL on. To inform of. A doubtful phraſe.
- David ſaved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tid-
ings to Gath, ſaying, leſt they ſhould tell on us, ſaying
did David. 1 Sam. xxvii. 11.
TE'lltale. n.ſ. ſtell and tal.] One who gives malicious in.
formation; one who carries officious intelligence.
You ſpeak to Caſca, and to ſuch a man
That is no flearing telltale. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
What ſhall theſe papers lie like telltales here Shakeſp.
Let not the heav'ns hear theſe telltale women
Rail on the Lord's anointed. Shakeſpeare.
'Tis done; report diſplays her telltale wings,
g, ſo
And to each ear the news and tidings brings. Fairfax.
And to the telltale ſun deſcry
Our conceal’d ſolemnity. Milton.
Eurydice and he are priſoners here,
But will not long be ſo: this telltale ghoſt
Perhaps will clear them both.
A telltale out of ſchool
Is of all wits the greateſt fool. Swift.
TE'LLER. n.ſ. [from tell.]
1. One who tells or relates.
2. One who numbers; a numberer.
3. A teller is an officer of the exchequer, of which there are
four in number: their buſineſs is to receive all monies due to
the king, and give the clerk of the pell a bill to charge him
therewith : they alſo pay all perſons any money payable to
them by the king, by warrant from the auditor of the re-
ceipt: they alſo make books of receipts and payments, which
they deliver the lord treaſurer. Cowel.
TEMERA'Rious. adj. [temeraire, Fr. temerarius, Lat.]
1. Raſh; heady.
Reſolution without forefight is but a temerarious folly; and
the conſequences of things are the firſt point to be taken into
conſideration. L'Eſtrange.
2. Careleſs; heedleſs.
Should he find upon one ſingle ſheet of parchment, an
oration written full of profound ſenſe, adorned with elegant
phraſe, the wit of man could not perſuade him that this was
done by the temerarious daſhes of an unguided pen. Ray.
TEME'Rity. m. ſ. [temeritas, Latin..] Raſhneſs; unreaſonable
contempt of danger.
The figures are bold even to temerity. Cowly.
To Te’MPER. v. a. [tempero, Lat., temperer, Fr.]
1. To mix ſo as that one part qualifies the other.
I ſhall temper ſo
Juſtice with mercy, as may illuſtrate moſt
Them fully ſatisfy'd, and Thee appeaſe. Milton.
2. To compound; to form by mixture.
If you could find out but a man.
To bear a poiſon, I would temper it;
That Romeo ſhould upon receipt thereof
Soon ſleep in quiet. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
3. To mingle: -
Prepare the fixth part of an ephah and the third part of an
hin of oil, to temper with the fine flour. Ezek. xlvi. 14.
The good old knight, with a mixture of the father and
maſter of the family, tempered the inquiries after his own. af-
fairs with kind queſtions relating to themſelves. Addiſon.
4. To beat together to a proper confiftefise
Th'uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms,
And temper clay with blood of Engliſhmen. Shakeſpears.
The potter tempering ſoft earth, faſhioneth every veſſel
with much labour. - J//d. xv. 7.
5. To accommodate; to modify. - a -
Thy ſuſtenance ſerving tº the appetite of the eater, tem-
pered itſelf to every man's Jºking. J/ſd. xvi. 21.
Theſe ſoft fires with kindly heat
Of various influence foment and warm, • r
* Temper or nouriſh: Milton.
6. To ſºften, to molliſy; to aſſuage; to footh; to cºln.
Solon, in his laws to the Athenians, laboured to tem:
per their warlike courage. with ſweet delights of learning and
fiences: ſo that as much as the one excelled in arms, the
other exceeded in knowledge. Spenſer on Ireland.
with this ſhe wonts to temper angry Jove,
when all the gods he threats with thund'ring dart. Spenſ,
Now will I to that old Andronicus,
And temper him with all the art I have.
Woman Nature made thee
To temper man: we had been brutc. without yºu. Otway.
7. To
Dryden and Lee.
Shakeſpeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E M
T E M
r degree of hardneſs.
7. To form metals to a pº .
Of Michael from the armoury of God
Was given him temper’d ſo, that neither kecn -
Nor ſolid might reſiſt that edge. - - - Milton.
In the tempering of ſteel, by holding it but a minute or
two longer or leſſer in the other competent heat, gives it very
differing tempers as to brittleneſs or toughneſs. Boyle.
Repeated peals they hear,
And, in a heav'n ſerene, refulgent arms appear;
Red'ning the ſkies, and glitt'ring all around,
The temper'd metals claſh, and yield a ſilver ſound. Dryd.
8. To govern. . A latiniſm.
with which the damned ghoſts he governeth,
And ſuries rules, and Tartare tempereth. Hubberd". Tak.
TE'MPER. n.ſ.. [from the verb..] .
1. Due mixture of contrary qualities. - - -
Nothing better proveth the excellency of this ſoil and tem-
er than the abundant growing of the palm trees. Raleigh.
Health itſelf is but a kind of temper, gotten and preſerved
by a convenient mixture of contrarieties. Arbuthnot.
2. Middle courſe; mean or medium.
If the eſtates of ſome biſhops were exorbitant before the
reformation, the preſent clergy's wiſhes reach no further than
that ſome reaſonable temper had been uſed inſtead of #
them ſo quick. Swift's Miſcel.
3. Conſtitution of body. -
This body would be increaſed daily, being ſupplied from
above and below, and having done growing, it would be-
come more dry by degrees, and of a temper of greater conſiſ-
tency and firmneſs. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. Diſpoſition of mind.
Remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard, and judg’d,
Without wrath or reviling. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
This will keep their thoughts eaſy and free, the only tem-
per wherein the mind is capable of receiving new informa-
tions. Locke on Education.
5. Conſtitutional frame of mind.
The brain may deviſe laws for the blood, but a hot temper
leaps o'er a cold decree. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Our hearts,
Of brothers temper, do receive you in
With all kind love. Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar.
6. Calmneſs of mind; moderation.
Reſtore yourſelves unto your tempers, fathers,
And without perturbation hear me ſpeak. Benj. Johnſºn.
Teach me, like thee, in various nature wiſe,
To fall with dignity, with temper riſe. Pope.
7. State to which metals are reduced, particularly as to hard-
neſs.
Here draw I
A ſword, whoſe temper I intend to ſtain
With the beſt blood that I can meet withal. Shakeſp.
Ithuriel with his ſpear
Touch'd lightly; for no falſhood can endure
Touch of coeleſtial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeneſs: up he ſtarts,
Diſcover'd, and ſurpriz'd. Milton's Par. Loft, b. iv.
Theſe needles ſhould have a due temper; for if they are
too ſoft, the force exerted to carry them through the fleſh
will bend them; if they are too brittle they ſnap. Sharp.
TE'MPER AMENT. n.ſ.. [temperamentum, Lat. temperament, Fr.]
1. Conſtitution ; ſtate with reſpect to the predominance of any
quality.
Bodies are denominated hot and cold in proportion to the
preſent temperament of that part of our body to which they
are applied. Locke.
2. Medium; due mixture of oppoſites.
The common law has waſted and wrought out thoſe diſ-
tempers, and reduced the kingdom to its juſt ſtate and tem-
perament. Hale.
TEMPERAM E/NTAL. adj. [from temperament.] Conſtitutional.
That temperamental dignotions, and conjecture of preva-
lent humours, that may be collected from ſpots in our nails,
we concede. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Intellectual repreſentations are received with as unequal a
fate upon a bare temperamental reliſh or diſguſt. Glanville.
TEMPER ANCE. m. ſ. [temperanta, Lat.]
1. Moderation; oppoſed to gluttony and drunkenneſs.
Well obſerve
The rule of not too much; by temperance taught
In what thou eat'ſ and drink'ſt; ſeeking from thence
Due nouriſhment, no gluttonous delight. Milton.
Temperance, that virtue without pride, and fortune without
º, gives indolence of body and tranquillity of mind;
the bºlt guardian of youth and ſupport of old age. ' Temple.
Make temperance thy companion; ſo ſhall health
Sit on thy brow. Dodſley's Agriculture.
2. Patience; calmneſs; ſedateneſs; moderation of paſſion.
His ſenſeleſs ſpeech and doted ignorance,
When as the noble prince had marked well ;
He calm'd his wrath with goodly temperance, Fa. Qu.
What, are you chaf'd : -
Aſk God for temp'rance, that's th’ appliance only
TE: which your diſeaſe requires. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
E’MPERATE. adj. [temperatus, Lat.]
1. Not exceſſive ; moderate in degree of any quality.
Uſe a temperate heat, for they are ever temperate heats that
digeſt and mature; wherein we mean temperate, accordin :
the nature of the ſubject; for that may be temperate to .
and liquors which will not work at all upon metals. B. º
His ſleep *Whi,
Was airy, light, from pure digeſtion bred,
And temp'rate vapours bland. Milton
2. Moderate in meat and drink. wº-
I adviſed him to be temperate in eating and drinking. Jºſer
3. Free from ardent paſſion. -
So hot a ſpeed with ſuch advice diſpos'd;
Such temp'rate order in ſo fierce a courſe
Doth want example. Shakeſpeare
She's not froward, but modeſt as the dove: Jr.-- - -
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn. Shakeſpeare
From temperate inactivity we are unready to put in ….
tion the ſuggeſtions of reaſon. Brºwn's Pulgar Erreur,
Tr'MPERATELY. adv. [from temperate.] o -
1. Moderately; not exceſſively.
By winds that temperately blow,
The bark ſhould paſs ſecure and ſlow. Addison.
2. Calmly , without violence of paſſion.
emp'rately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redreſs.
3. Without gluttony or luxury.
God eſteems it a part of his ſervice if we eat or drink;
ſo it be temperately, and as may beſt preſerve health. Taylor.
TE'MPERATEN Ess. n.ſ. [from temperate.]
1. Freedom from exceſſes; mediocrity.
2. Calmneſs; coolneſs of mind.
Langley's mild temperateneſs,
Did tend unto a calmer quietneſs. Daniel's Civil War.
TE/MPERATURE. m. ſ. [temperatura, tempero, Latin; tºwpera-
ture, French.]
1. Conſtitution of nature; degree of any qualitics.
It lieth in the ſame climate, and is of no other temperature
than Guinea. Abbot's Deſcription of the World.
Birds that change countries at certain ſeaſons, if they come
Shakeſpeare.
earlier, ſhew the temperature of weather. Bacon.
Memory depends upon the conſiſtence and the temperature
of the brain. - Watts.
2. Mcdiocrity; due balance of contrarieties.
As the world's ſun doth effects beget
Diff'rent, in divers places ev'ry day;
Here Autumn's temperature, there Summer's heat,
Here flow'ry Spring-tide, and there Winter gray. Davieſ.
If, inſtead of this variation of heat, we ſuppoſe an equa-
lity, or conſtant temperature of it before the deluge, the caſe
would be much altered. //oodward's Nat. Hiſt.
3. Moderation; freedom from predominant paſſion.
In that proud port which her ſo goodly graceth,
Moſt goodly temperature you may deſcry. Spenſºr.
TE'MPERED. adj. [from temper.] Diſpoſed with regard to the
paſſions.
When was my lord ſo much ungently tempered, , ,
To ſtop his ears againſt admoniſhment Shakeſ eart,
TEMPEST. n.ſ. [tempºſe, Fr. tempeſias, Lat.]
1. The utmoſt violence of the wind; the names by which the
wind is called according to the gradual encreaſe of its force
ſeems to be, a breeze; a gale; a guſt ; a ſtorm ; a tempeſt.
I have ſeen tempeſis, when the ſcolding winds
Have riv'd the knotty oaks. Shakespeare. julius Ceſar.
Some have been driven by tempºſſ to the ſouth. Abbot.
What at firſt was call'd a guit, the ſame
Hath now a ſtorm's, anon a tempºſi's name. Donne.
We, caught in a fiery tenºſt, ſhall be hurl’d
Each on his rock transfix’d.
With clouds and ſtorms
Around thee thrown, ten eſ; o'er tempºſſ roll'd, º
Thou humbleſt nature with thy northern blaſt. Thºmſºn,
2. Any tumult; commotion; perturbation.
The tempeſt in my mind
Doth from my ſenſes take all feeling elſe, --
Save what beats there. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To Tempest. v. a. [from the noun..] To diſturb as by *
tempeſt.
Miſiºn.
Part huge of bulk,
Wallowing unweildy, enormous in their gait,
Tempc/f the ocean.
Leviathan, in dreadful ſport,
Tempeſt the looſen’d brine. Tºmºſº.
Tempest-BEATEN. v. a. ſtampſ and beat..] Shattered with
ſtorms.
In the calm harbour of her gentle breaſt,
My temptſ beaten ſoul may ſafely reſt. Drydºn's Aurºng.
Tempfst-ºst, ºff, ſºft and tº/.] Driven about "!
ſtorms,
Though
Milton.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E M
Though his bark cannot be loſt,
Yet it ſhall be tempeſt-toff. Shakespeare. Macbeth,
TEMPEst1'vity. n.ſ.. [tempeſtivus, Lat.] Seaſonableneſs.
Since their diſperſion the conſtitutions of countries admit
not ſuch tempeſtivity of harveſt. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
TEMPE'stuous. adj. [tempeſtueux, Fr. from tempeſ?..] Stormy:
turbulent.
Tempeſtuous fortune hath ſpent all her ſpight,
And thrilling ſorrow thrown his utmoſt dart.
Fairy Qu,
Which of them riſing with the ſun or falling
Should prove tempeſtuous. Milton.
Her looks grow black as a tempeſtuous wind,
Some raging thoughts are rowling in her mind. Dryden.
Pompey, when diſſuaded from embarking becauſe the wea-
ther was tempeſtuous, replied, My voyage is neceſſary, my
life is not ſo. Collier on the Palue of Life.
TE/MPLAR. m. ſ. [from the Temple, an houſe near the Thames,
anciently belonging to the knights templars, originally from
the temple of Jeruſalem.] A ſtudent in the law.
Wits and templars ev'ry ſentence raiſe,
And wonder with a fooliſh face of praiſe.
TE/MPLE. m. ſ. [temple, Fr. templum, Lat.]
1. A place appropriated to acts of religion.
The honour'd gods
Throng our large temples with the ſhews of peace. Shakespeare
Here we have no temple but the wood, no aſſembly but
hornbeaſts. Shakeſpeare's A you like it,
Moſt ſacrilegious murther hath broke ope
The lord's anointed temple, and ſtole thence
The life o' th' building. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
This gueſt of Summer,
The temple haunting martlet. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. [Tempora, Latin.] The upper part of the ſides of the head
where the pulſe is felt.
Her ſunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece. Shakeſpeare.
We may apply intercipients of maſtich upon the temples ;
frontals alſo may be applied. Wiſeman's Surgery.
To procure ſleep, he uſes the ſcratching of the temples and
cars; that even mollifies wild beaſts. Arbuthnot.
The weapon enter'd cloſe above his ear,
Cold through his temples glides the whizzing ſpear. Pope.
TE'MPLET. m. ſ. A piece of timber in a building.
When you lay any timber on brick-work, as lintedls over
windows, or templets under girders, lay them in locm. 440xon.
TE'MpoR AL. adj. [temporal, Fr. temporalis, low Latin. J
1. Meaſured by time; not eternal.
As there they ſuſtain temporal life, ſo here they would learn
to make proviſion for eternal. Hooker.
2. Secular; not eccleſiaſtical. -
This ſceptre ſhews the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and majeſty,
Wherein doth ſit the dread of kings. Shakeſpeare.
All the temporal lands, which men devout
By teſtament have given to the church,
Would they ſtrip from us. Shakeſp. Henry V.
All temporal power hath been wreſted from the clergy, and
much of their eccleſiaſtick. Swift.
3. Not ſpiritual. -
Call not every temporal end a defiling of the intention, but
only when it contradicts the ends of God, or when it is prin-
cipally intended: for ſometimes a temporal end is part of our
duty; and ſuch are all the actions of our calling. Taylor.
Öur petitions to God with regard to temporals, muſt be
that medium of convenience proportioned to the ſeveral con-
ditions of life. Rogers's Serm.
4. [Temporal, Fr.) Placed at the temples, or upper part of the
head.
Copious bleeding, by opening the tempºral arteries, arc the
moſt effectual remedies for a phrenſy. Arbuthnot ºn Alinents.
TEMroRA'lity. n.ſ. [temporalité, Fr. from tempºral.] Se-
TE'M Por ALS. ; cular poſſeſſions; not eccleſiaſtick rights;
Such revenues, lands, and tenements, as biſhops have had
annexed to their ſees by the kings and others from time to
time, as they are barons and lords of the parliament. Cowel.
The reſidie of theſe ordinary finances is caſual, as the
temporalitics of vacant biſhopricks, the profits that grow by
the tenures of lands. Bacon.
TeºpoRally. adv. [from temporal.] With reſpect to this
life.
Sinners who are in ſuch a temporally happy condition, owe
it not to their fins, but wholly to their luck. South.
TE/M Por ALTY. m. ſ. [from temporal.]
1. The laity; ſecular people.
Pope's Epiſt.
The pope ſucked out ineſtimable ſums of money, to the
intolerable grievance of clergy and temporalty. Abbot.
2. Secular polleſſions.
The king yielded up the point, reſerving the ceremony of
homage from the biſhops, in reſpect of the temporalities, to
himſelf. Ayliffe.
TEMPORA'NEous. adj. [temporis, Lat.] Temporary. Dić.
TE'MP'or AR IN Ess. [from temporary..] The ſtate of being tem-
porary 3 not perpetuity.
T E M
Tºw. ºff. [tempus, Lat..] Laſting only for a limited
lme.
h Theſe tºrºy truces were ſoon made and ſoon broken;
º a ſtraiter amity. - Bacon's Henry VII.
e republick threatened with danger, appointed a tºm-
porary. dictator, who, when the danger was over, retired
T.º. the community. 'Ain.
O 1 E. MPORIZE. v. m. ſtem borºſ. a re/71",
I. º § to iº riſer, Fr tempus, Lat.]
upid hath not ſpent * - - - - •:
quake i. this i.” all his quiver in Venice, thou wilt
—I look for an earthquake too then.
—Well, you will temporize with the hours.
The earl of Lincoln deceived of the country’
in which caſe he would have temporized, reſolvéd
king battle.
2. To comply with the times or occaſions.
They might their grievance inwardly complain,
But outwardly they needs muſt temporize. Daniel.
3. To comply : this is improper.
The dauphin is too wilful oppoſite,
And will not temporize with my entreaties:
He flatly ſays, he'll not lay down his arms. Shakespeare.
TEMPOR1'zir. m.ſ.. [temporiſeur, Fr. from temporize.j" One
that complies with times or occaſions; a trimmer.
I pronounce thee a hovering temporizer, that
Canſt with thine eyes at once ſee good and evil,
Inclining to them both. Shakſ. J/inter's Tale.
TFMse BREAD. }*/ [temſen, Dutch ; tamiſer, Fr. tame-
TEMS ED BREAD. ſare, Italian, to fift ; tens, Dutch ; ta-
mis, French ; tamiſo, Italian, a ſieve..] Bread made of flower
better ſifted than common.
To TEMPT. v. a. [tento, Lat. tenter, Fr.]
1. To follicit to ill; to incite by preſenting ſome pleaſure or
advantage to the mind; to entice.
'Tis not the king that ſends you to the Tower:
*..." Gray tempts him to this harſh extremity, Shać.
ou ever gentle gods, take my breath from me;
Let not my worſer ſpirit tempt me again
To die before you pleaſe. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Come together, that Satan tempt you not. I Cor. vii. 5.
He that hath not .# ſubdued himſelf, is quickly tempt-
ed and overcome in ſmall things. Biſhop Taylor.
Fix'd on the fruit ſhe gaz'd, which to behold
Might tempt alone. Milton.
The devil can but tempt and deceive ; and if he cannot
deſtroy ſo, his power is at an end. South.
O wretched maid "
Whoſe roving fancy would reſolve the ſame
With him, who next ſhould tempt her eaſy fame. Prior.
2. To provoke.
I'm much too vent’rous
In tempting of your patience.
With-hold
Your talons from the wretched and the bold;
Tempt not the brave and needy to deſpair:
For, though your violence ſhou'd leave 'em bare -
Of gold and ſilver, ſwords and darts remain. Dryden.
3. It is ſometimes uſed without any notion of evil; to ſolicit;
to draw.
Shakeſpeare.
s concourſe,
to give the
Bacon's Henry VII,
Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Still his ſtrength conceal’d
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall. Milton.
The rowing crew,
To tempt a fare, clothe all their tilts in blue. Gay.
4. To try; to attempt. .
This from the vulgar branches muſt be torn,
And to fair Proſerpine the preſent born,
Ere leave be giv'n to tempt the nether ſkies.
TEMPTATION. m. ſ. ſtentation, Fr. from tempt.]
1. The act of tempting; follicitation to ill; enticement. . .
All temptation to tranſgreſs repel. Alſº.
2. The ſtate of being tempted.
when by human weakneſs, and the arts of the tempter,
you are led into temptations, prayer is the thread to bring
you out of this labyrinth. - ... Duppa.
3. That which is offered to the mind as a motive to ill.
Set a deep glaſs of rheniſh wine on the contrary caſket;
for if the devil be within, and that temptation without, he
will chooſe it. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
Dare to be great without a guilty crºwn ;
View it, and ſay the bright temptation down .
'Tis baſe to ſeize on all. ... Dryden's Aurengzeſe.
TEMPTABL. adj. [from tempt..] Liable to temptation ; ob-
noxious to bad influence.
If the parliament were as temptable as any other aſſembly,
the managers muſt fail for want of tools to work with. Swift.
TEMPTER. m. ſ. [from tempt.] -
1. One who ſolicits to ill; an enticer. - -
Theſe women are ſhrewd tempter: with their tongues.
Shakespeare's Hºlry VI.
Is this her fault or mine :
The tempter or the tempted, who fins moſt
Not ſhe'; nor doth ſhe tempt. Shakespeare 4.e3ſ fºr A ſeaſure.
26 F Thoſe
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E N
—a"
Thoſe who are bent to do wickedly,
to urge them on. . .
tempters £ My work is done :
She's now the tempter to * his heart. Dryden.
- licitor to evil.
2. Tºi; our own frailties, and the watchfulneſs
of the tempter, diſcourage *. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Foretold what would come to paſs,
When firſt this tempter croſs'd the gulf from hell. Milton.
To this high mountain's top the tenſter brought ---
Our Saviour. Miltºn's Par. Rºg. b. 111.
Teºulency. n.ſ.. [temulentia, Lat.] Inebriation; intoxica-
ion by liquor.
Tº. adj. [temulenius, Lat..] Inebriated; intoxicated
as with ſtrong liquors. -
TEN. adj. [eyn, Saxon; tien, Dutch..] The decimal number;
twice five ; the number by which we multiply numbers into
new denominations.
Thou ſhalt have more
Than two tens to a ſcore. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Ten hath been extolled as containing even, odd, long, and
plain, quadrate and cubical numbers; and Ariſtotle obſerved,
that Barbarians as well as Greeks uſed a numeration unto
will never want
Tillotſon.
ten. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv.
With twice ten ſail I croſs'd the Phrygian ſea,
Scarce ſeven within your harbour meet. Dryden.
There's a proud modeſty in merit,
Averſe from begging; and reſolv'd to pay
Ten times the gift it aſks. Dryden's Cleomenes.
From the ſoft lyre,
Sweet flute, and ten ſtring'd inſtrument, require
Sounds of delight. Prior.
Although Engliſh is too little cultivated, yet the faults are
nine in ten owing to affectation. Swift's Miſcel.
... TEN Abi.e. adj. [tenable, French.] Such as may be maintain-
ed againſt oppoſition; ſuch as may be held againſt attacks.
The town was ſtrong of itſelf, and wanted no induſtry to
ſortify and make it tenable. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
Sir William Ogle ſeized upon the caſtle, and put it into a
tenable condition. Clarendon.
Infidelity has been driven out of all its outworks: the
atheiſt has not found his poſt tenable, and is therefore retired
into deiſm. Addison's Spect. Nº. 186.
TENA’cious. adj. [tenax, Lat.]
1. Graſping hard; inclined to hold faſt ; not willing to let go,
with of before the thing held.
A reſolute tenacious adherence to well choſen principles,
makes the face of a governor ſhine in the eyes of thoſe that
ſee his ačtions. South.
Griping, and ſtill tenacious of thy hold,
Wou'd'ſt thou the Grecian chiefs, though largely ſoul’d,
Shou'd give the priſes they had gain'd. Dryden.
You reign abſolute over the hearts of a ſtubborn and free-
born people, tenacious to madneſs of their liberty. Dryden.
True love's a miſer; ſo tenacious grown,
He weighs to the leaſt grain of what's his own. Dryden.
Men are tenacious of the opinions that firſt poſſeſs them.
Locke.
He is tenacious of his own property, and ready to invade
that of others. A buthnot.
2. Retentive.
The memory in ſome is very tenacious ; but yet there ſeems
to be a conſtant decay of all our ideas, even of thoſe which
are ſtruck deepeſt, and in minds the moſt retentive. Locke.
3. [Tenace, French..] Having parts diſpoſed to adhere to each
other; coheſive.
Three equal round veſſels filled, the one with water, the
other with oil, the third with molten pitch, and the liquors
ſtirred alike to give them a vortical motion; the pitch by its
tenacity will loſe its motion quickly, the oil being leſs tena-
ciºus will keep it longer, and the water being leſs tenacious
will keep it longeſt, but yet will loſe it in a ſhort time. Newt.
4. Niggardly; cloſe-fifted; meanly parcimonious. Ainſ.
TENA'ciously, adv. [from tenacious...] With diſpoſition to
hold faſt.
Some things our juvenile reaſons tenaciouſly adhere to,
which yet our maturer judgments diſallow of. Glanville.
TENA’ciousNess. n.ſ. [ from tenacious. J Unwillingneſs to
quit, reſign, or let go.
TENA'city. m. ſ. [tºnacitas, tenacité, Fr. tenax, Latin.] Viſ-
coſity; glutinouſneſs; adheſion of one part to another.
If many contiguous vortices of molten pitch were each of
them as large as thoſe which ſome ſuppoſe to revolve about
the ſun and fixed ſtars, yet theſe and all their parts would,
by their tenacity and ſtiffneſs, communicate their motion to
on another till they all reſted among themſelves. Newton.
Šubſtances, whoſe tenacity exceed; the powers of digeſtion,
will neither paſs, nor be converted into aiment. Arbuthnot.
* ****Y. m. ſ. ſtenanche, old French ; tenentia, law Latin;
- ºut. Temporary poſſeſſion of what belongs to an-
This duke becomes *: of favour by deſcent, though
the condition of that eſtate be commonly no more tha
tenancy at will. n a
TENANT. n.ſ. ſtenant, French.] Iſºtton.
1. One that holds of another; one that on certain Condit
has temporary poſſeſſion and uſe of that which is in .
the property of another: correlative to landlord.
I have been your tenant,
And your father's tenant, theſe fourſcore years. Sºft
Such is the mould that the bleſt tenant feeds p.
On precious fruits, and pays his rent in weeds. Iſºlar
Jupiter had a farm long for want of a tenant. L'E/iran .
His cheerful tenants bleſs their yearly toil, §r.
ions
ality
. Yet to their lord owe more than to the ſoil. Pºpe
The tenants of a manor fall into the ſentiments of tº
lord. - Watts.
The father is a tyrant over ſlaves and beggars, whom he
calls his tenants. Swift
2. One who reſides in any place. º:
The bear, rough tenant of theſe ſhades. Thomſºn.
To TENANT. v. a. Ifrom the noun..] To hold on certain
conditions. -
Sir Roger's eſtate is tenanted by perſons who have ſerved
him or his anceſtors. Addiſon's Spe.7. N. 107.
TENANTABLE. adj. [from tenant..] Such as may be held by
a tenant. -
The ruins that time, ſickneſs, or melancholy ſhall bring,
muſt be made up at your coſt; for that thing a huſband is
but tenant for life in what he holds, and is bound to leave
the place tenantable to the next that ſhall take it. Suckling.
That the ſoul may not be too much incommoded in her
houſe of clay, ſuch neceſſaries are ſecured to the body as may
keep it in tenantable repair. Decay of Piety.
TE'N ANTLEss. adj. [from tenant..] Unoccupied; unpoſſeſſed.
O thou, that doſt inhabit in my breaſt,
Leave not the manſion ſo long tenantly; ;
Leſt growing ruinous the building fall,
And leave no memory of what it was. Shakespeare.
TE'N ANT-saw. m. ſ. [corrupted, I ſuppoſe, from tenon ſaw.]
See TENoN.
TENch. m. ſ. [zince, Saxon; tinca, Lat.] A pond fiſh.
Having ſtored a very great pond with carps, tench, and
other pond fiſh, and only put in two ſmall pikes, this pair of
tyrants in ſeven years devoured the whole. ale.
To TEND. v. a. [contracted from attend.]
1. To watch; to guard; to accompany as an aſſiſtant or de-
fender.
Nymphs of Mulla which, with careful heed,
The filver ſcaly trouts did tend full well. Spenſer's Epithal.
Go thou to Richard, and good angels tend thee. Shuk.
Him lord pronounc'd; and O ! indignity
Subjećted to his ſervice angel wings,
And flaming miniſters to watch and tend
Their earthy charge. - Milton.
He led a rural life, and had command
O'er all the ſhepherds, who about thoſe vales -
Tended their numerous flocks. Dryden and Lee's Oedipuſ.
There is a pleaſure in that ſimplicity, in beholding princes
tending their flocks. Pºpe.
Our humbler province is to tend the fair;
To ſave the powder from too rude a gale,
Nor let th' impriſon'd eſſences exhale. Pºpe.
Cicly had won his heart;
Cic'ly, the weſtern laſs, that tends the kee. Gay.
2. To attend ; to accompany.
Deſpair
Tended the ſick, buſieſt from couch to couch. Milton.
Thoſe with whom I now converſe, -
Without a tear will tend my herſe. Swift.
3. To be attentive to. - il
Unſuck'd of lamb or kid that tend their play. Milion.
To TEND. v. n. [tendo, Lat.]
1. To move towards a certain point or place. -
They had a view of the princeſs at a maſk, havin
heard two gentlemen tending towards that fight.
To theſe abodes our fleet Apollo ſends:
Here Dardanus was born, and hither tendi. P.
2. [Tendre, French..] To be directed to any end or purpoſe;
to aim at.
or Over-
o
If/ation.
Admiration ſeiz'd -
All heav'n, what this might mean and whithe et
Factions gain their power by pretending common ſafe }.
and tending towards it in the directeſt courſe. º &amp;
The laws of our religion tend to the univerſal happine”
mankind. Tilſºn's Sermºni.
3. To contribute. - - -
Many times that which we aſk would, if it ſhould be
to our deſtruct
granted, be worſe for us, and perhaps tend
tion; and then God by denying the particular mattº of our
prayers, doth grant the genéral matter of them. Hammond.
4. "[From attend..] To wait; to expect. Out of uſe.
The bark is ready, and the wind at help ; y l
Th' aſſociates tend. Shakespeare's *#.
r tend. Mil.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E N.
!,
s
:
º
".
5. To attend ; to wait as dependants or ſervants,
She deſerves a lord,
That twenty ſuch rude boys might tend upon,
And call her hourly miſtreſs. Shakeſpeare.
Give him tending,
He brings great news. Shakeſpeare.
Was he not companion with the riotous knights,
That tend upon my father. Shakeſp. King Lear.
6. To attend as ſomething inſeparable.
Threefold vengeance tend upon your ſteps Shakespeare
TE'N DANCE. n.ſ.. [from tend.]
1. Attendance; ſtate of expectation.
Unhappy wight born to diſaſtrous end,
That doth his life in ſo long tendance ſpend. Hubberd.
2. Perſon; attendant. Out of uſe.
His lobbies fill with tendance,
Rain ſacrificial whiſprings in his ear. Shakeſpeare.
3. Attendance; act of waiting.
She purpos'd,
By watching, weeping, tendance, to
O'ercome you with her ſhew.
4. Care; act of tending.
Nature does require
Her times of preſervation, which, perforce,
I her frail ſon, amongſt my brethren mortal,
Muſt give my tendance to. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
They at her coming ſprung, -
And touch'd by her fair tendance gladlier grew.
* -- +
º }*/ [from tend.]
1. Direction or courſe towards any place or object.
It is not much buſineſs that diſtraćts any man; but the
want of purity, conſtancy, and tendency towards God. Taylor.
Writings of this kind, if condućted with candour, have
a more particular tendency to the good of their country than
any other compoſitions. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 40.
e may acquaint ourſelves with the powers and proper-
ties, the tendencies and inclinations, of body and ſpirit. JWatts.
All of them are innocent, and moſt of them had a moral
tendency, to ſoften the virulence of parties, or laugh out of
countenance ſome vice or folly. Swift.
2. Direction or courſe toward any inference or reſult; drift.
Theſe opinions are of ſo little moment, that, like motes
in the fun, their tendencies are little noticed. Locke.
TENDER. adj. [tendre, French.]
1. Soft; eaſily impreſſed or injured.
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
AMilton.
The earth brought forth the tender graſs. Milton.
From each tender ſtalk ſhe gathers. 44ilton.
2. Senſible; eaſily pained; ſoon fore.
Unneath may ſhe endure the flinty ſtreet,
To tread them with her tender feeling feet. Shakeſpeare.
Leah was tender eyed, but Rachael was well-favoured.
Gen. xxix. 17.
Our bodies are not naturally more tender than our faces;
but by being leſs expoſed to the air, they become leſs able to
endure it. L’Eſtrange.
The face when we are born is no leſs tender than any other
part of the body: it is uſe alone hardens it, and makes it
more able to endure the cold. Locke on Education.
. Effeminate; emaſculate; delicate.
When Cyrus had overcome the Lydians, that were a
warlike nation, and deviſed to bring them to a more peace-
able life, inſtead of their ſhort warlike coat he clothed them
in long garments like women, and inſtead of their warlike
muſick appointed to them certain laſcivious lays, by which
their minds were ſo mollified and abated, that they forgot
their former fierceneſs, and became moſt tender and effemi-
ilate. Spenſºr on Ireland.
4. Exciting kind concern.
I love Valentine;
His life's as tender to me as my ſoul.
5. Compaſſionate; anxious for another's good.
The tender kindneſs of the church it well beſeemeth to
help the weaker ſort, although ſome few of the perfecter and
ſtronger be for a time diſpleaſed. Hooker, b. v.
This not miſtruſt but tender love injoins. Milton.
Be tender hearted and compaſſionate towards thoſe in want,
Shakeſpeare.
and ready to relieve them. Tillotſon's Sermons.
6. Suſceptible of ſoft paſſions.
Your tears a heart of flint
Might tender make, yet nought
Herein they will prevail. Spenſer.
7. Amorous; laſcivious.
What mad lover ever dy'd,
To gain a ſoft and gentie bride 2
Or for a lady tender hearted,
In purling ſtreams or hemp departed
8. Expreſſive of the ſofter paſſions.
9. Careful not to hurt, with of.
The civil authority ſhould be tender of the honour of God
and religion. Tillotſon's Sermons,
Hudibras, p. iii.
T E N
. As I have been tender of every particular Perſon's reputa-
tion, ſo I have taken care not to give offence. Addison
Io. Gentle; mild ; unwilling to pain. ----
Thy tender hefted nature ſhall not give
Thee o'er to harſhneſs; her eyes are fierce, but thine
Do comfort and not burn. Shakeſp. King Lear.
You, that are thus ſo tender o'er his follies,
Will never do him good. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale
II. Apt to give pain. - -
In things that are tender and unpleaſing, break the ice by
ſome whoſe words are ºf leſs weight, and reſerve the more
weighty voice to come in as by chance. Bacon.
12. Young; weak: as, tender age.
ſ W. yet he was but tender bodied, a mother ſhould not
CII ninn. - Shakespeare’ -
To TENDER. v. a. [tendre, French.] Jºcare's Coriolanus.
1. To offer; to exhibit; to propoſe to acceptance.
Some of the chiefeſt laity profeſſed with greater ſtomach
their judgments, that ſuch a diſcipline was little better than
popiſh tyranny, diſguiſed and tendered unto them. Hooker.
crave no more than what your highneſs offer'd;
Nor will you tender leſs. Shakeſp. King Lear.
All conditions, all minds, tender down
Their ſervice to lord Timon.
Owe not all creatures by juſt right to thee
Duty and ſervice, not to ſtay till bid, -
But tender all their pow'r? Milton's Par. Regain'd.
2. To hold; to eſteem. -
Tender yourſelf more dearly;
Or, not to crack the wind of the poor phraſe,
Wringing it thus, you'll tender me a fool. Shakeſpeare.
3. ſºn the adjective.] To regard with kindneſs. Not in
u1C.
I thank you, madam, that you tender her:
Poor gentlewoman, my maſter wrongs her much. Shakespeare
TE'NDER. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Offer; propoſal to acceptance.
Then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To anſwer I’ll not wed. Shakespeare. Romeo and juliet.
Think yourſelf a baby;
That you have ta'en his tenders for true pay,
Which are not ſterling. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
The earl accepted the tenders of my ſervice. Dryden.
To declare the calling of the Gentiles by a free, unlimited
tender of the goſpel to all. South's Sermons.
Our tenders of duty every now and then miſcarry. Addiſon.
2. [From the adjective..] Regard; kind concern.
Thou haſt ſhew'd thou mak’ſt ſome tender of my life,
In this fair reſcue thou haſt brought to me. Shakeſpeare.
TE'NDER-HEARTED. adj. [tender and heart. J Of a ſoft com-
paſſionate diſpoſition.
TÉ'NDERLING. m. ſ. [from tender.]
I. The firſt horns of a deer.
2. A fondling; one who is made ſoft by too much kindneſs.
TE'NDERLY. adv. [from tender.] In a tender manner; mildly;
gently; ſoftly ; kindly; without harſhneſs.
Tenderly apply to her
Shakeſpeare.
Some remedies for life. Shakeſpeare.
She embrac'd him, and for joy
Tenderly wept. Milton.
They are the moſt perfeót pieces of Ovid, and the ſtyle
tenderly paſſionate and courtly. Prof. to Ovid.
Marcus with bluſhes owns he loves,
And Brutus tenderly reproves. Pope.
Te’NDERNEss. n.ſ.. [tendrºſe, Fr. from tender.]
1. The ſtate of being tender; ſuſceptibility of impreſſions.
Pied cattle are ſpotted in their tongues, the tendernſ of
the part receiving more eaſily alterations than other parts of
the fleſh. Bacon.
The difference of the muſcular fleſh depends upon the
hardneſs, tenderneſs, moiſture, or drineſs of the fibres. Arbuth.
2. State of being eaſily hurt; ſoreneſs. -
A quickneſs and tenderneſs of ſight could not endure bright
ſun-ſhine. Locke.
Any zealous for his country, muſt conquer that tendernſ;
and délicacy which may make him afraid of being ſpoken ill
of. - Addison.
There are examples of wounded perſons, that have roared
for anguiſh at the diſcharge of ordnance, though at a great
diſtance; what inſupportable torture then ſhould we be under
upon a like concuſſion in the air, when all the whole body
would have the tenderneſs of a wound. Bentley's Sermºny.
3. Suſceptibility of the ſofter paſſions.
Weep no more, left I give cauſe
To be ſuſpected of more tenderneſs
Than doth become a man.
Well we know '. tenderneſ of *
tle, kind, effeminate remorie
#: j." Shakespeare. Richard III.
Shakeſpeare.
With
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E N
T E N
with what a graceful º: . º:
And breathes the ſofteſt, the ſincereſt vows
. Kind attention;, anxiety for the good of another.
Having no children, ſhe did with ſingular care and tender-
neſ intend the education of Philip and Margaret. Bacon.
5. scrupulouſneſs; cautiºn. ...,
My conſcience firſt receiv d a tenderneſs, *
Scruple, and prick, on certain ſpeeches utter'd
By th' biſhop of Bayon. Shakespeare . Henry VIII.
Sºme are unworthily cenſured for keeping their own, whom
tenderneſs how to get honeſtly teacheth to ſpend diſcreetly:
whereas ſuch need no great thriftineſs in preſerving their own
who aſſume more liberty in exacting from others. Pºtten:
True tenderneſs of conſcience is nothing elſe but an awful
and exact ſenſe of the rule which ſhould direct it; and while
it ſteers by this compaſs, and is ſenſible of every declination
from it, ſo long it is properly tender. South.
6. Cautious care.
There being implanted in every man's nature a great ten-
derneſs of reputation, to be careleſs of it is looked on as a
mark of a degenerous mind. Government of the Tongue.
7. Soft pathos of expreſſion. - - - -
TE'NdINous. adj. [tendineux, Fr. tendini, Latin.] Sinewy 5
containing tendons; conſiſting of tendons.
Nervous and tendinous parts have worſe ſymptoms, and are
harder of cure than fleſhy ones. - Jºſeman.
Trºndon. n.ſ. [tendo, Latin.] A finew; a ligature by which
the joints are moved. -
A ſtruma in her inſtep lay very hard and big amongſt the
tendons. Jºſeman's Surgery.
The entrails theſe embrace in ſpiral ſtrings,
Thoſe claſp th’ arterial tubes in tender rings;
The tendons ſome compacted cloſe produce,
And ſome thin fibres for the ſkin diffuſe. Blackmore.
TE'Ndrill n.ſ.. [tendrillon, French..] The claſp of a vine, or
other climbing plant.
In wanton ringlets wav'd,
As the vine curls her tend il, ; which imply'd
Subjection. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. iv.
So may thy tender bloſſoms fear no blite;
Nor goats with venom'd teeth thy tendril, bite. Dryden.
The tendrils or claſpers of plants are given only to ſuch as
have weak ſtalks, and cannot raiſe up or ſupport themſelves.
Ray on the Creation.
TENE'BRicose. adj. [tenebricoſus, tenebroſus, Latin.] Dark;
TE'NEBRous. } gloomy.
TENEbro'sity. m. ſ. ſtenebrae, Lat.] Darkneſs; gloom.
TE'NEMENT. n.ſ. ſtenement, Fr. tenementum, law Latin.] Any
thing held by a tenant.
What reaſonable man will not think that the tenement ſhall
be made much better, if the tenant may be drawn to build
himſelf ſome handſome habitation thereon, to ditch and in-
cloſe his ground Spenſer on Ireland.
'Tis policy for father and ſon to take different ſides;
For then lands and tenements commit no treaſon. Dryden.
Who has informed us, that a rational ſoul can inhabit no
Addiſon.
tenement, unleſs it has juſt ſuch a ſort of frontiſpiece. Locke.
Treat on, treat on, is her eternal note,
And lands and tenements glide down her throat. Pope.
TE'NENT, n.ſ. See TENET.
TENERITY. m. ſ. [teneritas, tener, Lat.] Tenderneſs. Ainſ.
TENE's Mus. n.ſ.
The ſtone ſhutting up the orifice of the bladder, is attend-
ed with a teneſmus, or needing to go to ſtool. Arbuthnot.
TE'NET. m. ſ. [from tenet, Latin, he holds. It is ſometimes
written tenent, or they hold.] Poſition; principle; opinion.
That all animals of the land are in their kind in the ſea,
although received as a principle, is a tenet very queſtionable.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii.
while, in church matters, profit ſhall be the touch-ſtone
for faith and manners, we are not to wonder if no gainful
tenet be depoſited. Decay ºf Piety.
This favours of ſomething ranker than ſocinianiſm, even
the tenents of the fifth monarchy, and of ſovereignty founded
only upon ſaintſhip. South's Sermons.
They wonder men ſhould have miſtook
The tenets of their maſter's book. Prior.
TENNIS. m.ſ. [this play is ſuppoſed by Skinner to be ſo named
from the word tenez, take it, hold it, or there it goes, uſed
by the French when they drive the ball.] A play at which a
ball is driven with a racket.
The barber's man hath been ſeen with him, and the old
ornament of his cheek hath already ſtuffed tennis balls. Shakespeare
There was he gaming, there o’ertook in's rowſe,
There falling out at tennis. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
A prince, by a hard deſtiny, became a tennis ball long to
the blind goddeſs. Howel's Pºcal Foreſt.
- It can be no more diſgrace to a great lord to draw a fair
Piºre, than to play at tennis with his page. Peacham.
The inſide of the uvea is blacked like the walls of a tennis
court, that the rays falling upon the retina may not, by be.
ing rebounded thence upon the uvea, be returned .
for ſuch a repercuſſion would make the fight more º:
fuſed. More's Antidote againſ? Atheiſm
We conceive not a tennis ball to think, and conſequeñº,
not to have any volition, or preference of motion toºſ.
We have no exedra for the philoſophers adjoining é º:
tennis court, but there are alehouſes. Arbuthnot and Pop,
To TENNIS. v. a. [from the noun..] To drive as a ball. pe.
Thoſe four gariſons iſſuing forth upon the enemy, will ſo
drive him from one ſide to another, and tennis him amon
them, that he ſhall find no where ſafe to keep his feet in, i.
hide himſelf. Spenſer on I, *
TE'NON. m. ſ. [French..] The end of a timber cut to be fit.
ted into another timber.
Such variety of parts, ſolid with hollow; ſome with cavi.
ties as mortiſes to receive, others with tenons to fit them. Ray.
The tenant-ſaw being thin, hath a back to keep it from
bending. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſe.
TE'Nou R. m. ſ. ſtenor, Lat. teneur, Fr.]
1. Continuity of ſtate; conſtant mode; manner of continuity;
general currency. &gt;
We might perceive his words interrupted continually with
fighs, and the tenor of his ſpeech not knit together to one
conſtant end, but diſſolved in itſelf, as the vehemency of the
inward paſſion prevailed.
When the world firſt out of chaos ſprang,
So finil'd the days, and ſo the tenor ran
Of their felicity: a ſpring was there,
An everlaſting ſpring, the jolly year
Led round in his great circle, no winds breath
As now did ſmell of Winter or of death. Craſhaw,
Still I ſee the tenor of man’s woe
Hold on the ſame, from woman to begin. Miltºn.
Does not the whole tenor of the divine law poſitively re-
Sidney,
quire humility and meekneſs to all men. Sprat.
Inſpire my numbers,
Till I my long laborious work complete,
And add perpetual tenor to my rhimes,
Deduc’d from nature's birth to Caeſar's times. Dryden.
This ſucceſs would look like chance if it were not perpe-
tual, and always of the ſame tenor. Dryden,
Can it be poiſon 1 poiſon's of one tenor,
Or hot, or cold. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
There is ſo great an uniformity amongſt them, that the
whole tenor of thoſe bodies thus preſerved clearly points forth
the month of May. IWoodward's Nat. Hiſt.
In ſuch lays as neither ebb nor flow,
Correctly cold, and regularly low,
That ſhunning faults, one quict tenor keep,
We cannot blame indeed—but we may ſleep.
2. Senſe contained ; general courſe or drift.
Has not the divine Apollo ſaid,
Is’t not the tenor of his oracle,
That king Leontes ſhall not have an heir,
Till his loſt child be found Shakespeare IWinter's Talk,
By the ſtern brow and waſpiſh ačtion,
Which ſhe did uſe as ſhe was writing of it, -- -
It bears an angry tenor. Shakºp. A you like it.
Bid me tear the bond.
—When it is paid according to the tenor. Shakhart.
Reading it muſt be repeated again and again with a cloſe
attention to the tenor of the diſcourſe, and a perfect neglect
of the diviſions into chapters and verſes. Lock.
3. A found in muſick.
The treble cutteth the air too ſharp to make the ſound
equal ; and therefore a mean or tenor is the ſweeteſt part.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. N. 173.
TEN's E. adj. [tenſils, Lat..] Stretched; ſtiff; not lax. . -
For the free paſſage of the found into the car, it is ºl".
ſite that the tympanum be tenſe, and hard ſtretched, other-
wiſe the laxneſs of the membrane will certainly dead an
damp the found. Holder.
TENSE. m. ſ. [tem's, Fr. tem: us, Lat.] - -
[In grammar.] Tenſe, in ſtrict ſpeaking, is only a wº.
of the verb to ſignify time. Clar ſ
As forefight, when it is natural, anſwers to memory, ſo
when methodical it anſwers to reminiſcence, and */
called forecaſt; all of them expreſſed in the tenſe.gº."
verbs. Memory faith, I did ſee; reminiſcence, I had ſeen;
forefight, I ſhalſ ſce; forecaſt, I ſhall have ſeen. . . Grew.
Ladies, without knowing what tenſes and participles .
ſpeak as properly and as correctly as gentlemen. #
He ſhould have the Latin words given him in their fi f
caſe and tenſe, and ſhould never be left to ſeek them himſel
from a dićtionary. JWattſ.
TE'N's EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from tenſ...] Contraćtion; tenſion: the
contrary to laxity.
Pope,
Should
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E N
º
%
§
*
s
-
* * *
-
Should the pain and tenſeneſ of the part continue, the
operation muſt take place. Sharp's Surgery.
TE'NSIBLE, adj. ſtenſus, Lat..] Capable of being extended.
Gold is the cloſeſt, and therefore the heavieſt, of metals,
and is likewiſe the moſt flexible and tenſible. Bacon,
TE'nsile. adj. [tenſilis, Lat..] Capable of extenſion.
All bodies dućtile and tenſile, as metals, that will be drawn
into wires, have in them the appetite of not diſcontinuing.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. No. 845.
TE'Nsion. n.ſ.. [temſon, Fr. tenſus, Lat.] The act of ſtretch-
ing; not laxation; the ſtate of being ſtretched; not laxity.
It can have nothing of vocal ſound, voice being raiſed b
ſtiff tenſiºn of the larynx; and on the contrary, this ſound by
a relaxed poſture of the muſcles thereof. Holder.
Still are the ſubtle ſtrings in tenſion found,
Like thoſe of lutes, to juſt proportion wound,
Which of the air's vibration is the force. Blackmore.
TE'ssive adj. [tenſis, Lat.] Giving a ſenſation of ſtiffneſs or
contračtion. :
From choler is a hot burning pain; a beating pain from
the pulſe of the artery; a tenſive pain from diſtention of the
parts by the fulneſs of humours. Floyer on Humours.
TE/NSURE. m. ſ. [tenſus, Lat.] The aët of ſtretching, or ſtate
of being ſtretched; the contrary to laxation or laxity.
This motion upon preſſure, and the reciprocal thereof,
motion upon teºſure, we call motion of liberty, which is,
when any body being forced to a preternatural extent, reſtor-
eth itſelf to the natural. Bacon.
TENT. n. ſ. [tente, French; tentorium, Lat.]
1. A ſoldier's moveable lodging-place, commonly made of can-
vas extended upon poles.
The Turks, the more to terrify Corfu, taking a hill not
far from it, covered the ſame with tents. Knolles.
Becauſe of the ſame craft he wrought with them; for by
occupation they were tent makers. Acts xviii. 23.
2. Any temporary habitation; a pavilion.
He ſaw a ſpacious plain, whereon
Were tents of various hue: by ſome were herds
Of cattle grazing. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
To Chaſſis' pleaſing plains he took his way,
There pitch'd his tents, and there reſolv’d to ſtay. Dryden.
3. [Tente, French..] A roll of lint put into a ſore.
Modeſt doubt is call’d
The beacon of the wiſe; the tent that ſearches
To th’ bottom of the worſt. Shakespeare. Troil, and Creſſida.
A declining orifice keep open by a ſmall tent dipt in ſome
medicaments, and after digeſtion withdraw the tent and heal
it. Jºſeman's Surgery.
4. [Pino tinto, Spaniſh..] A ſpecies of wine deeply red, chiefly
from Gallicia in Spain.
To TENT. v. n. [from the noun..] To lodge as in a tent; to
tabernacle.
The ſmiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and ſchoolboy's tears take up
The glaſies of my ſight. Shakeſpeare.
To TENT. v. a. To ſearch as with a medical tent.
I'll tent him to the quick; if he but blench,
I know my courſe. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
I have ſome wounds upon me, and they ſmart.
—Well might they feſter 'gainſt ingratitude,
And tent themſelves with death. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Some ſurgeons, poſſibly againſt their own judgments, keep
wounds tented, often to the ruin of their patient. Jºſeman.
TENTATION. m. ſ. [tentation, French; tentatio, Lat.] Trial;
temptation.
The firſt deluſion ſatan put upon Eve, and his whole ten-
ration, when he ſaid ye ſhall not die, was in his equivocation,
you ſhall not incur preſent death. Brown's Pºlar Erreur.
TÉ'NTATIVE. adj. [tentative, effort, Fr. tento, Latin.] Try-
ing; eſſaying. -
Te’NTED. adj. [from tent.] Covered with tents.
Theſe arms of mine till now have us'd
Their deareſt ačtion in the tented field. Shakespeare Othello.
The foe deceiv'd, he paſs'd the tented plain,
In Troy to mingle with the hoſtile train. Pope's Odyſſey.
TE'N TER. n.ſ. [tendo, tentus, Lat.]
1. A hook on which things are ſtretched. -
2. To be on the TENTERs. To be on the ſtretch; to be in
difficulties; to be in ſuſpenſe.
In all my paſt adventures,
I ne'er was ſet ſo on the tenters;
Or taken tardy with dilemma, - --
That ev'ry way I turn does hem me. Hudibras, p. ii.
To TENTER. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtretch by hooks.
A blown bladder preſſed riſeth again, and when leather or
cloth is tentered, it ſpringeth back. Bacon's N. Hiſt. Nº. 12.
To TE/NTER. v. n. To admit; extenſion.
Woollen cloth will tenter, linen ſcarcely. Bacon.
TENTH. adj. Iteopa, Saxon.] Firſt after the ninth; ordinal of
en. -
t It may be thought the leſs ſtrange if others cannot do as
much at the tenth or twentieth trial, as we did after much-
practice. Boyle.
T E P
TENTH. m. ſ. [from the adječtive.]
1. The tenth part.
Of all the horſes,
The treaſure in the field atchiev'd, and city,
We render you the tenth. Sºft. Criolinus,
By decimation and a tithed death,
If thy revenges hunger for that food
which * lºaths, take thou the deſlin'd tº. Shakespeare
To purchaſe but the tent of all their ſtore,
would make the mighty Perſian monarch poor. Dryden.
Suppoſe half an ounce"offii. now worth a buſhel of
wheat; but ſhould there be next year a ſcarcity, five ounces
9f ſilver would purchaſe but one biſhºl. ſo that money would
be then nine tenths leſs worth in reſpect of food. Lºcke.
2. Tithe.
With cheerful heart
The tenth of thy increaſe beſtow, and own
Heav'n's bountéous goodneſs, that will ſure repay
Thy grateful duty. Philips.
3. Tenths are that yearly portion or tribute which all livings
eccleſiaſtical yield to the king. The biſhop of Rome prº-
tended right to this revenue by example of the high prieſt of
the Jews, who had tenths from the Levites, till by Henry the
eighth they were annexed perpetually to the crown. Cowel,
TENTHLY. adv. [from tenth.] In the tenth place.
TENTI'GINous, adj. [tentigins, Lat..] Stiff; ſtretched.
TENTwort. m. ſ. A plant. Ainſ.
TENUIFolious. adj. ſtenuis and fºlium, Lat.] Having thin
leaves.
TENu'ity. n.ſ. [tenuité, French; tenuitas, from tenuis, Lat.]
Thinneſs; exility; ſmallneſs; minuteneſs; not groſſneſs.
Firs and pines mount of themſelves in height without ſide
boughs; partly heat, and partly tenuity of juice, ſending the
ſap upwards. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł. Nº. 33.
The tenuity and contempt of clergymen will ſºon let tº
ſee what a poor carcaſs they are, when parted from the in-
fluence of that ſupremacy. King Charles.
Conſider the divers figurings of the brain; the firings or
filaments thereof; their difference in tenuity, or aptneſs for
motion. - Glanville's Sceſ.
Aliment circulating through an animal body, is reduced
to an almoſt imperceptible tenuity, before it can ſerve animal
urpoſes. A luthnot.
p A. the height of four thouſand miles the aether is of that
wonderful tenuity, that if a ſmall ſphere of common air, of
an inch diameter, ſhould be expanded to the thinneſs of that
aether, it would more than take up the orb of Saturn, which
is many million times bigger than the earth. Bentley.
TE'Nuous. adj. [tenuis, Lat..] I hin; ſmall; minute.
Another way of their attraction is by a tenuous emanation,
or continued effluvium, which after ſome diſtance retracteth
unto itſelf. Brown's Pulgar Err. b. ii.
TENURE. m. ſ. ſteneo, Lat. tenure, Fr. tenura, law Latin.]
Tenu e is the manner whereby tenements are holden of
their lords. In Scotland are four tenures; the firſt is pura
eleemoſina, which is proper to ſpiritual men, paying nothing
for it, but devota animarum ſuffragia; the ſecond they call
feu, which holds of the king, church, barons, or others,
paying a certain duty called feudi firma; the third is a hold-
ing in blanch by payment of a penny, roſe, pair of gilt
ſpurs, or ſome ſuch thing, if aſked ; the fourth is by ſervice
of ward and relief, where the heir being minor is in the cuſ-
tody of his lord, together with his lands, &amp;c, and land
holden in this fourth manner is called feudum de hauberk or
haubert, feudum militare or loricatum. Tenure in groſs is
the tenure in capite ; for the crown is called a feignory in
groſs, becauſe a corporation of and by itſelf. Coweſ.
The ſervice follows the tenure of lands; and the lands were
given away by the kings of England to thoſe lords. Senſºr.
The uncertainty of tenure, by which all worldly things are
held, miniſters very unpleaſant meditation. Raleigh.
Man muſt be known, his ſtrength, his ſtate,
And by that tenure he holds all of fate; Dryden.
TEPEFA'cºſ Ion. m. ſ. [tºpefacio, Latin.] I he act of warming
to a ſmall degree. -
TE'PID. adj. ſtepidus, Latin.J Lukewarm ; warm in a ſmall
degree.
§ The tepid caves, and ſens, and ſhores, -
Their brood as numerous hatch. Milton.
He with his tepid rays the roſe renews,
And licks the dropping leaves, and dries the dews. JDryden.
Such things as relax the ſkin are likewiſe ſudorifick; as
Warm water, frićtion, and tepid vapours. A. buthnot.
TEP1'DITY. m. ſ. [from tepid.] Lukewarmneſs. Ainſ.
TE'poR. n.ſ. ſtºpºr, Lat. Lukewarmneſs; gentle heat.
The ſmall pox, mortal during ſuch a ſeaſon, grew more
favourable by the tº or and moiſture in April. &amp;lºt.
TERAtology. m. ſ. [rif &amp;G’ and Xiya...] Bombaſt, affecta-
tion of falſe ſublimity. - - Egilº.
TER ce. n.ſ.. [tierce, Fr. friens, Latin.] A veſſel containing
forty-two gallons of wine ; the third part of a butt or *i.
26 G - TERE-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E R
T E R
inthine, Fr. terebinthum, Lat.]
- 's This Are. adj. [*** - -
TEREEI/NT mixed with
TERE BI'N THIN E. Conſiſting of turpentine;
turpentine.
Salt ſerum may be ev
as tops of pine in all our ale.
To Tºep Are. v. a. ſter.”
te; to pierce. - * - - - - - - --"
ra &amp;º the threefold effeót of Jupiter's triſulk, to burn,
diſcuſs, and terebrate. Brown's J/ulgar Err. h. ii.
Earth-worms are completely adapted to their way of life,
for tercºrating the earth, and creeping. Derham.
Tºrsº Arios. n.ſ. [from terebrate.] The act of boring or
piercing. -
Tarºration of trees makes them proſper better ; and alſo
it maketh the fruit ſweeter and better. Bacon.
Trace MINous. adj. [tergeminus, Lat..] Threefold.
TER Giversation. n.ſ. [tergun and veſ?, Lat.]
1. Shift; ſubterfuge; evaſion.
writing is to be preferred before verbal
acuated by urine, by terebinthinates;
Floyer.
Latin.] To bore; to perfo-
conferences, as
being freer from paſións and tergiverſations. Bºp Bramhall.
2. Change; fickleneſs.
The colonel, after all his tergºverſations, loſt his life in the
king's ſervice. Clarendºn.
TER M. m. ſ. [terminus, Latin.]
1. Limit; boundary.
Corruption is a reciprocal to generation ; and they two are
as nature's two terms or boundaries, and the guides to life
and death. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?. Nº. 328.
2. [Tºrºne, Fr.] The word by which a thing is expreſſed. A
word of art.
To apply notions philoſophical to plebeian terms, or to
ſay, where the notions cannot fitly be reconciled, that there
wanteth a term or nomenclature for it, be but ſhifts of igno-
Ian Ce. Bacon.
Thoſe parts of nature into which the chaos was divided,
they ſignified by dark and obſcure names, which we have ex-
preſſed in their plain and proper terms. Burnet.
In painting, the greateit beauties cannot always be expreſ-
ſcd for want of terms. Dryden.
Had the Roman tongue continued vulgar, it would have
been neceſſary, from the many terms of art required in trade
and in war, to have made great additions to it. Swiſt.
3. Words; language.
Would curies kill, as doth the mandrakes groan,
I would invent as bitter ſearching terms,
As curſt, as harſh, as horrible to hear.
God to ſatan firſt his doom apply'd,
Though in myſterious terms.
4. Condition ; ſtipulation.
Well, on my terms thou wilt not be my heir 2 Dryden.
Enjoy thy love, ſince ſuch is thy deſire,
Live though unhappy, live on any terms. Drydºn.
Did religion beſtow heaven without any terms or conditions,
indifferently upon all, there would be no infidel. Bentley.
We flattered ourſelves with reducing France to our own
terms by the want of money, but have been ſtill diſappointed
by the great ſums imported from America. Addiſon.
5. [Termine, old French..] Time for which any thing laſts; a
limited time.
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
I am thy father's ſpirit,
Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night. Shakeſpeare.
Why ſhould Rome fall a moment ere her time :
No ; let us draw her tº ºn of freedom out
In its full length, and ſpin it to the laſt. Addiſon.
6. (In law.] The time in which the tribunals, or places of
judgment, are open to all that liſt to complain of wrong,
or to ſeck their right by courſe of law or action; the reſt
of the year is called vacation. Of theſe term; there are
four in every year, during which matters of juſtice are diſ-
patched : one is called Hillary term, which begins the twenty-
third of January, or, if that be Sunday, the next day fol-
lowing, and ends the twenty-firſt of February; another is
called Eaſter term, which begins eighteen days after Eaſter,
and ends the Monday next after Aſcenſion-day; the third is
Trinity term, beginning the Friday next aſtēr Trinity Sun-
day, and ending the Wedneſday-ſortnight after; the ſouth
is Michaelmas term, beginning the ſixth of November, or, if
that be Sunday, the next day after, and ending the twenty-
eighth of November. Jº Cowel.
The term ſuiters may ſpeed their buſineſ, : for the end of
theſe ſeſſions delivereth them ſpace enough to overtake the
beginning of the terms. t Carew.
Too long vacation haſten’d on his term. 4.ilton.
-
with one another. A ſale.
What are theſe to thoſe vaſt heaps of crimes
Which terms prolong. Dryden.
To TERM. v. a. [from the noun..] To name; to call.
- Men term what is beyond the limits of the univerſe ima-
TÉ. ſpace, as if no body exiſted in it. Locke.
********, *.ſ.. [from term gait..] Turbulence; tımul-
- -&gt; 2
tuouſncſ. -
-
Thoſe men employed as juſtices daily in term time conſult
. By a violent termagáncy of temper, ſhe may never ſuffer
him to have a moment's peace. - Barãer
TER MAGANT. adj. [tyr and magan, Saxon, emineni,
powerful.]
1. Tumultuous; turbulent.
'Twas time to counterfeit, or that hot termagant Scot had
paid me ſcot and lot too. Shaky?. Henry IV. p. i
2. Quarrelſome ; ſcolding; furious. - --
The eldeſt was a terrºgant, imperious, Prodigal, profli-
gate wench. Arbuthnº's Hiſt, of jºhn Buſ.
TE's MAGANT. m. ſ. A ſcold; a brawling turbulent woman.
It appears in Shakeſpeare to have been anciently uſed of
Ill CIl.
- I could have ſuch a fellow whipt for o'erdoing termagant;
It outherod s Herod. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
For zeal's a dreadful termagant,
That teaches ſaints to tear and rant. Hudibrar, p. iii.
She threw his periwig into the fire: well, ſaid he, thou
art a brave termagant.
The ſprites of fiery termagants in flame
Mount up, and take a ſalamander's name. Pope.
TE’R MER. m. ſ. [from term.] One who travels up to the term.
Nor have my title leaf on poſts or walls,
Or in cleft ſticks, advanced to make calls
For termers, or ſome clerk-like ſerving man. B. johnſºn.
TERMINABLE. adj. [from terminate.] Limitable; that admits
of bounds. -
To TE's MINATE. v. a. [termino, Lat, terminer, Fr.]
1. To bound; to limit.
Bodies that are ſolid, ſeparable, terminated and moveable,
have all ſorts of figures. Locke.
2. To put an end to ; as, to terminate any difference.
To TERMINATE. v. n. To be limited; to end; to have an
end; to attain its end. -
That God was the maker of this viſible world was evi-
dent from the very order of cauſes; the greateſt argument by
which natural reaſon evinces a God: it being neceſſary in
ſuch a chain of cauſes to aſcend to, and terminate in, ſome
firſt ; which ſhould be the original of motion, and the cauſe
of all other things, but itſelf be cauſed by none. South.
The wiſdom of this world, its deſigns and efficacy, temi-
nate on this ſide heaven. South's Sermons.
Ere I the rapture of my wiſh renew, * -
I tell you then, it terminutes in you. Dryden's Aurengzzle.
TERMINATION. m. ſ. [from terminate.]
1. The act of limiting or bounding.
2. Bound ; limit.
Its earthly and ſalinous parts are ſo cxačtly reſolved, that
its body is left imporous, and not diſcreted by atomical ter-,
minations. Brown's ºugar Erzur, b. ii.
3. End; concluſion. -
4. [In grammar; terminati, Latin; terminajºn, Fr.] End of
words as varied by their ſignifications.
Thoſe rude heaps of words and terminations of an un-
known tongue, would have never been ſo happily learnt by
heart without folne ſmoothing artifice. IWatts.
5. Word; term. Not in uſe.
She ſpeaks poniards, and every word ſlabs; if her breath
were as terrible as her terminations, there were no living near
her, ſhe would infect to the North ſtar. Shakeſpeare.
TER Mi'N THUs. n.ſ. [+º, whº’.] A tumour. - - -
Wºrminthus is of a blackiſh colour; it breaks, and within
a day the puſtule comes away in a ſlough I?’ſºnan.
TE’Rail Ess. adj. [from tem.j Unlimited ; boundleſs. . .
Theſe betraying lights look not up towards termleſ; joys,
nor down towards endleſs ſorrows. Raleigh.
TE'RMLY. adv. [from tem.] Term by term ; every tºrm.
The fees or allowances that are termly given to theſe de-
puties I pretermit. Bagn.
The Clerks are partly rewarded by that means allº: be-
ſides that termly fee which they are allowed. Baº.
TE NARY. adj. [ternaire, Fr. terrarius, Lat..] Proceeding by
threes; conſiſting of three.
TE(RN A R Y. Un. ſ. [terna ius, Lat. terniz, Lat.] The num-
TE’R NION. ; ber three.
Theſe nineteen conſºn nts flood in ſuch confuſed º
ſome in ternaries, ſome in pairs, and ſome ſingle. Hilder.
TE'RR AcF. m. ſ. [terrace, French; te: raccia, Italian.) A ſmall
mount of earth covered with graſs.
He made her gardens not only within the palac
--
t-
upon te rafts raiſed with earth over the arched roofs,
Tatler, Nº. 54.
eS, but
planted
with all ſorts of fruits. Temple.
Fear broke my ſlumbers, I no longer ſtay,
But mount the terrace, thence the town ſurvey. Dryden.
To TE(RRAcE. v. a. [from the noun.] -
The reception of light into the body of the building muſt
now be ſupplied, by terracing any ſtory which is in danger o
darkneſs. Jøtton's Architecture.
Clermont's terrac'd height and Eſher's groves. Thomſon.
TERRA'QUEous, caj. [terra and aqua, Latin.] Compoſed 9
land and water.
The
- 6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E. R.
The terraqueous globe is, to this day, nearly in the ſame
condition that the univerſal deluge left it. Woodward.
TERRE'N E. adj. [...? Lat. Earthly; terreſtrial.
They think that the ſame rules of decency which ſerve for
things done unto te reme powers, ſhould univerſally decide
what is fit in the ſervice of God.
Our terreme moon is now eclips'd,
And it portends alone the fall of Antony. Shakeſpeare.
God ſet before him a mortal and immortal life, a nature
coeleſtial and terrene; but God gave man to himſelf. Raleigh.
Over many a tract
Of heav'n they march'd, and many a province wide,
Tenfold the length of this terrene. Milton's Par. Loft.
TE(RRE-BLUE. m. ſ. [terre and lieu, Fr.] A ſort of earth.
Terre-blue is a light, looſe, friable kind of lapis armenus.
Žºodward's Math. Fºſſils.
TE’RRE-WERTE. m. ſ. [French..] A fort of earth. º
Terre-verte owes its colour to a ſlight admixture of copper.
Woodward's Meth. Fºſſils.
Terre-verte, or green earth, is light; it is a mean betwixt
yellow ochre and ultramarine. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
TE'RREous. adj. [terreus, Lat.] Earthy; conſiſting of earth.
There is but little ſimilitude betwixt a terreous humidity
and plantal germinations. Glanville's Scep.
According to the temper of the terreous parts at the bot-
tom, variouſly begin intumeſcencies. Brown's Vulgar Err.
TER RE's TRIAL. adj. ſter, º/fris, Lat.]
1. Earthly; not coeleſtial. -
Far paſſing th' height of men terrºrial,
Like an huge giant of the Titan race. Spenſer.
Terrºrial heav'n danc'd round by other heav'ns
That ſhine, yet bear their bright officious lamps,
Light above light. AM:lizn.
Thou brought'ſt Briareus with his hundred hands,
So call'd in heav'n ; but mortal men below
By his terreſtrial name Ægeon know.
2. Conſiſting of earth; terreous. Improper.
I did not confine theſe obſervations to land or terrºſhial
parts of the globe, but extended them to the fluids. Hººdw.
To TERRE's TRIFY. v. a. ſter, ſº is and facio, Latin.] To re-
duce to the ſtate of earth.
Though we ſhºuld affirm, that heaven were but earth ce-
leſtified, and earth but heaven terrºff, ified; or, that each
part above had an influence on its divided affinity below ;
yet to ſingle out theſe relations is a work to be effected by
revelation. Brown's Pulgar Er, curs, b. iv.
TeRRE's TRIous. adj. [terrºff is, Lat. terrºſère, Fr.] Ter-
reous ; earthy ; conſiſting of earth.
This variation proceedeth from terreſ?, ious eminences of
earth reſpecting the necdle. Brown.
TE(RR1ble. adj. [terrible, Fr. from terribilis, Lat.]
1. Dreadful; formidable; cauſing fear.
Was this a face to be expos'd
In the moſt terrible and nimble ſtroke
Of quick, croſs lightning.
Fit love for gods
IHooker, b. v.
Dryden.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Not terrible, though terrour be in love. Milton.
Thy native Latium was thy darling care,
Prudent in peace, and terrible in war. Prior.
2. Great ſo as to offend : a colloquial hyperbole.
Being indiſpos'd by the terrille coldneſs of the ſeaſon, he
repoſed himſelf till the weather ſhould mend. Clarendon.
I began to be in a ter, it!e fear of him, and to look upon
myſelf as a dead man. Tillºtſon.
TE fºr IBLE Ness. m. ſ. [from terrible.] Formidableneſs; the
quality of being terrible : dreadfulneſs. -
Having quite loſt the way of nobleneſs, he ſtrove to climb
to the height of terribleneſs. Sidney, h. ii.
Their terribleneſs is owing to the violent contuſion and la-
ceration of the parts. Sharp's Surgery.
Te'RRIBLY. m. ſ. [from terrible.]
1. Dreadfully; formidably ; ſo as to raiſe fear.
The poliſh'd ſteel gleams terribly from far,
And every moment nearer flows the war.
2. Violently ; very much. - -
The poor mºn ſqualled terrilly. Galliver’s Travels.
TE(RRIER. n.ſ. [terrier, Fr. from terra, earth.]
1. A dog that follows his game under-ground. - -
The fox is earth'd, but I ſhall ſend my two terrier; in
after him. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
2. [Terrier, Fr.] A ſurvey or regiſter of lands.
King James's canons require that the biſhops procure a
terrier to be taken of ſuch lands. Ayliffe.
3. [From terebro, Lat..] A winble; auger or borer. Ainſ.
TERRI'Fick. adj. Iterºftii, Latin.) Dreadful; cauſing ter-
IOur.
The ſerpent, ſubtleſ, beaſt of all the field,
Of huge extent ſometimes, with brazen eyes -
And hairy mane terrift. A filtºn's Par. Lºſº, b. vii.
The Britiſh navy through ocean vaſt
Shall wave her double croſs, t' extremeſt climes
Terrifick. Philipi.
Dryden.
T E S
To TE'RRIFY. v. a. [terror and hi. Latin.] To fight; to
ſhock with fear; to make afraid.
Thou ſcareſt me with dreams, and terrify? me through
viſions. - jºb vii. 14.
Simon ſlandered Onias, as if he had terrified Héliodorus.
- 2 A ſac. iv. 1.
In nothing terrifted by your adverſaries. Phil. i. 28.
Neither doth it beſeem this moſt wealthy ſtate to be ferri-
fied from that which is right with any charges of war. Knoles.
The amazing difficulty of his account will rather terriſy
than inform him, and keep him from ſetting heartily about
ſuch a taſk as he deſpairs ever to go through with. South.
Meteors for various purpoſes to form;
- The breeze to cheer, to terrify the ſtorm. Blackmore.
TE(RRITORY. m. ſ. [territorium, law Latin ; territoire, Fr.]
Land; country; dominion; diſtrićt. 2
Linger not in my territories longer than ſwifteſt expedition
will give thee time to leave our royal court.
They erected a houſe within their own territo,
between their fort and the town.
He ſaw wide territory ſpread - -
Before him, towns, and rural works between. Aſtºn.
Ne'er did the Turk invade our territory,
But fame and terror doubl’d ſtill their files. Denham.
Arts and ſciences took their riſe, and flouriſhed only in
thoſe ſmall territories where the people were free. Swift.
Shakeſpeare.
y, half way
Haywa, d.
TER rou R. m. ſ. [terror, Lat. terreur, Fr.]
I. Fear communicated.
Amaze and terrour ſeiz'd the rebel hoſt. Miltºn.
- The thunder when to roll
With terreur through the dark acrial kill. AZilton.
2. Fear received.
It is the cowiſh terroir of his ſpirit
That dares not undertake. Shakeſp. K ng Lear.
They ſhot thorough both the walls of the town and the
bulwark alſo, to the great terrºur of the defendants. Knºlles.
They with conſcious terrcars vex me round. A ſiſtan.
O fight -
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel. Milton.
The pleaſures and terrours of the main. Blackmore.
3. The cauſe of fear. -
Lords of the ſtreet, and terrours of the way. Anonym.
Thoſe enormous terrours of the Nile. Prior.
So ſpake the griefly terrour. AZilton.
TERSE. adj. [ters, Fr. terſus, Lat.]
1. Smooth.
Many ſtones precious and vulgar, although terſ and ſmooth,
have not this power attractive. Brown's Pulgar Err.
2. Cleanly written; neat; elegant without pompouſneſs.
To raw numbers and unfiniſh’d verſe,
Sweet ſound is added now to make it teſe. Dryden.
Theſe accompliſhments in the pulpit appear by a quaint,
terſe, florid ſtyle, rounded into periods without propriety or
meaning. Swift's Aſſºcł.
TE’RT AN. m. ſ. [tertiana, Lat.] Is an ague intermitting but
one day, ſo that there are two fits in three days. -
Tertians of a long continuance do moſt menace this ſymp-
tonn. Harvey on Cºſumptions.
To TE'RTIATE. v. a. [terrio, tºrtiuſ, Lat.] To do any thing
the third time.
Tesse'll ATED. adj. [tºſºla, Lat.] Variegated by ſquares.
Van Helmont produced a ſtone very different from the tºſ-
ſºlated pyrites. //ºodward on Faſili.
Test. n.f. [tºff, Fr. tºa, Italian.]
1. The cupeſ by which refiners try their metals.
2. Trial; examination: as by the cupel.
All thy vexations
were but my trials of thy love, and thou
Haſt ſtrangely ſtood the ty?. Shºjear.” Tºmº.
Let there be ſome more tº made of my metal,
Before ſo noble and ſo great a figure ... *
Be ſtampt upon it. Siakºff. M. º. fºr Mººre.
They who thought worſt of the Scots, did not think these
would be no fruit or diſcovery from that tºff. Clar: nººn.
What uſe of oaths, of promiſe, or of tºº, - *
Where men regard no God but intereſt. J/aer.
Thy virtue, prince, has ſtoºd the iſ of fortune
Like šureſt gold, that, tortur'd in the fulº .
Com's out more bright, and brings forth all its weight. . .".
-
3. Means of trial.
whom ſhould my muſe then fly to, but the lºſt . ."
Of kings for grace; of poets for my tºº. B. Johnſºn.
To be read herſelf ſhe need not * : &gt;
Each tºff, and every light, her muſe will bear. Dryºn.
4. That with which anything tº compared in order to prove
its genuinencfs. -
its g Unenring Nature, ſtill dividely bright,
Ongº, unchang'd and univerºlight,
Life, force, and beauty, mºſt to all ºpat,
At once the ſource, and end, and tº of art. . . . . Pº.
5. Diſcriminative<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T E S
T E T
- a" wºr:
iſcriminative charaćteriſtick. -
5. pººl penal laws no ſons of yours admit,
Our teſt ºl." tribe from benefit.
: diſtinction.
6. Judº. * excel, when few can make a tºff,
Betwixt indiff'rent writing and the beſt ?
7. It ſeems to ſignify any veſſel that holds fire.
- Your noble race
we baniſh not, but they forſake the place:
|. Our doors are open : True, but ere they come,
You toſs your 'cenſing tºff, and fume the roºm.
Test Aſceous. adj. [tºſłaccus, Lat. tºº, Fr.]
1. Conſiſting of ſhells; compoſed of ſhells.
2. Having continous; not jointed ſhells; oppoſed to cruſtaceous,
Tºftaceous, with naturaliſts, is a term given only to ſuch
fiſh whoſe ſtrong and thick ſhells are entire, and of a piece ;
becauſe thoſe which are joined, as the lobſters, are cruſta-
ceous: but in medicine all preparations of ſhells, and ſub-
ſtances of the like kind, are thus called. Sºuincy.
several ſhells were found upon the ſhores, of the cruſta-
ceous and teſtaceous kind. Iłoodward's Nat. Hiſ?.
The mineral particles in theſe ſhells is plainly to be diſtin-
guiſhed from the tyiaceous ones, or the texture and ſubſtance
of the ſhell. I?’oodward's Nat. Hiſt,
TESTAMENT. n.ſ.. [tºftament. Fr. tºſtamentum, Lat.]
1. A will; any writing directing the diſpoſal of the poſſeſſions
of a man deceaſed.
He bringeth arguments from the love which always the
teſtator bore him, imagining that theſe, or the like proofs,
will convićt a teſtament to have that in it which other men
can nowhere by reading find. Hooker, b. iii.
All the temporal lands, which men devout
By teſtament have given to the church,
Would they ſtrip from us. Shakespeare. Henry V.
He ordained by his laſt tº/iament, that his AEneis ſhould be
burnt. Dryden.
2. The name of each of the volumes of the holy ſcripture.
Test AME'NTARY. adj. [tºffamentaire, French; teſtamentarius,
Lat..] Given by will; contained in wills.
How many teſtamentary charities have been defeated by the
negligence or fraud of executors by the ſuppreſſion of a
Dryden.
Pryden.
Dryden.
will the ſubornation of witneſſes, or the corrupt ſentence
of a judge 2 Atterbury's Sermons.
TE's TATE. adj. [teſtatus, Lat.] Having made a will.
By the canon law, the biſhop had the lawful diſtribution
of the goods of perſons dying teſtate and inteſtate. Ayliffe.
Test A'ToR. n.ſ.. [tºſlator, Lat. teſtateur, French..] One who
leaves a will.
He bringeth arguments from the love or good-will which
always the teſtator bore him. Hooker, b. iii.
The ſame is the caſe of a teſtator giving a legacy by kind-
neſs, or by promiſe and common right. Taylor.
TESTATRIX. m. ſ. [Latin.] A woman who leaves a will.
TE's TED. adj. [from tº/f.] Tried by a teſt.
Not with fond ſhekels of the teſted gold. Shakeſpeare.
TE'stER. n.ſ.. [tºffe, French, a head; this coin probably be-
ing diſtinguiſhed by the head ſtamped upon it..]
1. A ſixpence.
Come manage me your caliver: hold, there is a tºffer for
thee. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
A crown goes for ſixty pence, a ſhilling for twelve pence,
and a teſter for ſixpence. Locke.
Thoſe who bore bulwarks on their backs,
And guarded nations from attacks,
Now practiſe ev'ry pliant geſture,
Op'ning their trunk for ev'ry tºffer.
Young man your days can ne'er be long,
In flow'r of age you periſh for a ſong;
Plums and direétors, Shylock and his wife,
- Will club their teſters now to take thy life.
2. The cover of a bed.
TE's ricle. n.ſ. [tºfficulus, Lat.] Stone.
That a bever, to eſcape the hunter, bites off his teſicles
or ſtones, is a tenent very antient. Brown's Pulg. Err.
The more certain ſign from the pains reaching to the
groins and teſticles. Jºſeman's Surgery.
TESTIFICA’rios. n.ſ.. [tºffficatio, Lat. from tyliſy..] The
aćt of witneſfing.
. When together we have all received thoſe heavenly myſte-
ries wherein Chriſt imparteth himſelf unto us, and giveth
viſible teſtification of our bleſſed communion with him, we
ſhould, in hatred of all hereſies, fačtions, and ſchiſms, de-
clare openly ourſelves united. Hooker, b. v.
In Places ſolemnly dedicated for that purpoſe, is a more
T. ſervice and teſtification of our homage to God. South.
ºros. n.J. [from te/lificor, Latin.] One who wit-
TE's T1F1E R. h: ſ [from teſtify.] One who teſtifies
To TESTIFY. v."n. [tºſºftcor, Lat..] To witneſs; to prove;
to give evidence.
Jeſus necded not that an ſh -
- - ould teſ?ify of man; for he
knew what was in man. y effify john ii. 25.
wift's Miſcel.
Pope.
One witneſs ſhall not tº/liff againſt any, to cauſe him to
die. - Num. Xxxv. 30
d º º ſhall teſtiff for us, that you put us tº
eath wrongful IV. I --
c ¥h. event was dire, 44ac, ii. 47.
As this place teſtifies. Milton's Par. Loft, H. i
To TE's TIFY. v. a. To witneſs; to give evidence of iny
oint.
We ſpeak that we do know, and tºſſify that we have ſeen:
and ye receive not our witneſs. john iii. i.
TE's TILY. adv. [from tº/ly.] Fretfully; peeviſhly; moroſely.
TESTIMo'NIAL. n.ſ.. [teſtimonial, Fr. teſtimonium, Lat.]’A
writing produced by any one as an evidence for himſelf.
Hoſpitable people entertain all the idle vagrant reports, and
ſend them out with paſſports and teſtimonial, and will have
them paſs for legitimate. Government of the Tongue.
It is poſſible to have ſuch teſtimonial of divine authority as
may be ſufficient to convince the more reaſonable part of
mankind, and pray what is wanting in the teſtimonies of
Jeſus Chriſt? Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
A clerk does not exhibit to the biſhop letters miſfive or tº-
ſ?imonial, teſtifying his good behaviour. Ayliff.
TESTIMONY. m. ſ. [tºſłimonium, Latin.]
1. Evidence given ; proof.
The proof of every thing muſt be by the teſtimony of ſuch
as the parties produce. Spenſer.
If I bring you ſufficient tº/?imony, my ten thouſand ducats
are mine. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
I could not anſwer it to the world, if I gave not your
lordſhip my teſtimony of being the beſt huſband. Dryden.
I muſt bear this teſtimony to Otway's memory, that the
paſſions are truly touched in his Venice Preſerved. Dryden.
2. Publick evidences.
By his preſcript a ſanétuary is fram’d,
An ark and in the ark his teſtimony;
The records of his covenant. Milton,
3. Open atteſtation; profeſſion.
Thou for the teſtimony of truth haſ born
Univerſal reproach. Milton,
To TE'st IM on Y. v. a. To witneſs. A word not uſed.
Let him be but teſtimonied in his own bringings forth, and
he ſhall appear a ſcholar, a ſtateſman, and a ſoldier. Shakespeare
TE's riNess. n.ſ. [from te/ºy..] Moroſeneſs.
Tºftineſ is a diſpoſition or aptneſs to be angry.
Test U'DINATED. adj. [teſłudo, Lat.] Roofed; arched.
Test UD1'NEous. adj. [teſłudo, Lat..] Reſembling the ſhell of
a tortoiſe.
TESTY. adj. [tºſłie, Fr. tºurdo, Italian.] Fretful; peeviſh;
apt to be angry. -
Lead theſe teſy rivals ſo aſtray,
As one come not within another's way. Shakeſpeare,
Muſt I ſtand and crouch under your teſy humour? Shakespeare
King Pyrrhus cur'd his ſplenetick
And teſy courtiers with a kick.
Averſe or teffy in nothing they deſire.
In all thy humours, whether grave or mellow,
Thou'rt ſuch a touchy, tº/fy, pleaſing fellow ;
Haſt ſo much wit, and mirth, and ſpleen about thee,
There is no living with thee, nor without thee. Tatler.
TE’tchy. adj. Froward; peeviſh: a corruption of tºy or
touchy.
A grievous burthen was thy birth to me,
Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy. Shakespeare Rich. III.
A filly ſchool-boy, coming to ſay my leſſon to the world,
that peeviſh and tetchy maſter. Graunt.
TETE A TETE. m. ſ. [French..] Cheek by jowl.
Long before the ſquire and dame
Are téte a tête.
Deluded mortals, whom the great
Chuſe for companions téte à tête ;
Who at their dinners, en famille,
Get leave to ſit whene'er you will. Swift's Miſel.
TE'THER... n.ſ. [See Teddeſ...] A ſtring by which horſes are
held from paſturing too wide.
Hamlet is young,
And with a larger tether he may walk
Locke.
Hudibras, p. ii.
Locke.
Prior.
Than may be given you. Shakespeare.
Fame and cenſure with a tether, -
By fate are always link'd together. Swift's Miſcel.
Imagination has no limits ; but where it is confined, wº
find the ſhortneſs of our tether. Swift.
To TETHER. v. a. [from the noun..] To tie up.
TETRA/G on AL. adj. [Tilfºyzvº.j Four ſquare. -
From the beginning of the diſeaſe, reckoning on untº the
ſeventh day, the moon will be in a tetragonal or quadrate
aſpect, that is, four ſigns removed from that wherein the
diſeaſe began ; in the fourteenth day it will be an oppoſite
aſpect, and at the end of the third ſeptenary tetragonal again.
Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv.
TETRAPE’t Alous. adj. [rérraps; and wirzz ov.] Are ſuch
flowers as conſiſt of four leaves round the ſtyle: plants having
a tetrapetalous flower conſtitute a diſtinct kind. M.
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H A
All the tetrapetalous ſiliquoſe plants are alkaleſcent. 4, buth.
TETRARch. n. ſ. [tetrarcha, Lat, tetrarque, Fr. räf &amp;#x2:..]
A Roman governor of the fourth part of a province.
All the earth,
Her kings and tetrarchs, are their tributaries:
People and nations pay them hourly ſtipends. B. Jºhnſºn.
TETRA's chate. n.ſ. [ tºpºxia. J A Roman govern-
Te’TRARch Y. ; ment.
TETRA'stick. h. ſ. [rflººrizos.] An epigram or ſtanza of
four verſes.
The tetraſtick obliged Spenſer to extend his ſenſe to the
length of four lines, which would have been more cloſely
confined in the couplet. Pope.
TE'TR1cAL. }* [tetricus, Latin; tetrique, Fr.] Froward;
TE'TR1co U.S. perverſe; ſour.
In this the tetrical baſſa finding him to excel, gave him as
a rare gift to Solyman. Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
TETTER. n.ſ. [recen, Saxon.] A ſcab; a ſcurf; a ringworm.
A moſt inſtant tetter bark'd about
Moſt lazar like, with vile and loathſome cruſt,
All my ſmooth body. - Shakeſp. Hamlet.
A ſcabby tetter on their pelts will ſtick. Dryden.
Tew. n.ſ.. [towe, a hempen rope, Dutch.]
1. Materials for anything. Skinner.
2. An iron chain. Ainſ.
To Tew. v. a. ſtaplan, Saxon.] To work; to beat ſo as to
ſoften.
TE'w El. n.ſ.. [tuyau or tuyal, French.]
In the back of the forge, againſt the fire-place, is fixed a
thick iron plate, and a taper pipe in it above five inches long,
called a tewel, or tewel iron, which comes through the back
of the forge; into this tewel is placed the bellows. Moxon.
To TE'wt Aw. v. a. [formed from tew by reduplication.] To
beat; to break.
The method and way of watering, pilling, breaking, and
fewtawing, of hemp and flax, is a particular buſineſs. Mort.
Text. m. ſ. [texte, Fr. textus, Lat.]
1. That on which a comment is written.
We expect your next
Shou'd be no comment but a text,
To tell how modern beaſts are vext.
2. A ſentence of ſcripture.
JWaller. ;
- In religion
What errour but ſome ſober brow
Will bleſs it, and approve it with a text. Shakeſpeare.
His mind he ſhould fortify with ſome few texts, which are
home and appoſite to his caſe. South's Sermons.
TE'xtILE. adj. [textilis, Latin.] Woven; capable of being
Woven.
The placing of the tangible parts in length or tranverſe,
as in the warp and woof of textiles. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
The materials of them were not from any herb, as other
textiles, but from a ſtone called amiantus. JWilkins.
TextMAN. n.ſ.. [text and man.] A man ready in quotation
of texts.
Mens daily occaſions require the doing of a thouſand
things, which it would puzzle the beſt textman readily to
bethink himſelf of a ſentence in the Bible, clear enough to
ſatisfy a ſcrupulous conſcience of the lawfulneſs of Sanderſon.
TE'xTRINE. adj. [textrina, Lat.] Relating to weaving.
It is a wonderful artifice how newly hatched maggots, not
the parent animal, becauſe ſhe emits no web, nor hath any
textrine art, can convolve the ſtubborn leaf, and bind it with
the thread it weaves from its body. Derham.
Text UARY. adj. [from text.]
1. Contained in the text. -
. He extends the excluſion unto twenty days, which in the
textuary ſenſe is fully accompliſhed in one. Brown.
2. Serving as a text; authoritative.
I ſee no ground why his reaſon ſhould be textuary to ours,
or that God intended him an univerſal headſhip. Glanville.
Textuarist. Un. ſ. [textuaire, Fr. from text.] One ready in
TE"&gt; TU ARY. ; the text of ſcripture ; a divine well verſed
in ſcripture.
TE'xture. n.ſ.. [textus, Lat.]
1. The act of weaving.
Skins, although a natural habit unto all before the inven-
tion of texture, was ſomething more unto Adam. Brown.
2. A web; a thing woven.
Others, far in the graſſy dale,
Their humble texture weave. Thomſºn's Spring.
3. Manner of weaving with reſpect either to form or matter.
Under ſtate of richeſt texture ſpread. Milton.
A veil of richeſt texture wrought ſhe wears. Pope.
4. Diſpoſition of the parts of bodies; combination of parts.
Spirits not in their liquid texture mortal wound
Receive, no more than can third air. Milton.
While the particles continue entire, they may compoſe bo-
dies of the ſame nature and texture now, with water and
earth compoſed of entire particles in the beginning. Newton.
THAN. adv. [ćanne, Saxon.] A particle placed in compariſon
after the comparative adverb.
T H A
Were we not better to fail once with virtue;
Than draw a wretched and diſhonour’d breath. B. Jºſh.
More true delight in that ſmall ground,
º in º all the earth was found.
never met with a more unhappy in nºnre ºf a Hºrs
than in the buſineſs of that ..º.º. º:
I . lov’d . more than plunder. º:
Ove you for nothing ... c. . . . . . . .”s’ “
T. for à the ſons of º than for the juſt º:
HANE. m. ſ. ['Seºn, Saxon. - f Hanaº. Tº
haps º: 3. baron. J. An old title of honour, per-
By Sinel's death I know I'm thane of nºs.
But how of Cawdor? the thane of gº Sha ºff.
To THANK. v. a. [ćancian, Saxon; dancken Dutch : º:
ken, German.] » 3 1//d/,
1. To return acknowledgments for any favour or kindneſs.
The forlorn ſoldier, that ſo nobly fought, -
He would have well become this place, and grac'd
The thankings of a king: Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
For your ſtubborn anſwer
The king ſhall know it, and, no doubt, thank you. Shaft.
We thank God always for you. 2 Thºſ. i. 3.
He was ſo true a father of his country,
To thank me for defending ev'n his foes, -
Becauſe they were his ſubjects. Dryán'; Spaniſh Fryar.
2. It is uſed often in a contrary or ironical ſenſe.
Ill fare our anceſtor impure;
Danii.
For this we may thank Adam. - Milton.
Weigh the danger with the doubtful bliſs,
And thank yourſelf, if ought ſhould fall amiſs. Dryden.
That Portugal hath yet no more than a ſuſpenſion of arms;
they may thank themſelves, becauſe they came ſo late into
the treaty ; and, that they came ſo late, they may thank the
whigs, whoſe falſe repreſentations they believed. Swift.
THANk. }*ſ [Sancar, Saxon; dancke, Dutch..] Acknow-
THANks. ledgment paid for favour or kindneſs; expreſſion
of gratitude. Thanks is commonly uſed of verbal acknow-
ledgment, gratitude of real repayment. It is ſeldom uſed in
the ſingular.
The pooreſt ſervice is repaid with thanks. Shakeſpeare.
Happy be Theſeus, our renowned duke.
-Thanks, good Egeus, what's the news Shakeſpeare.
The fool ſaith, I have no thank for all my good deed; and
they that eat my bread ſpeak evil of me. Eccluſ xx. 16.
He took bread, and gave thanks to God in preſence bf
them all. Acts xxvii. 35.
Thanks be to God, which giveth us the vićtory. I Cor. xv.
Some embrace ſuits which never mean to deal effectually
in them ; but they will win a thank, or take a reward. Bacon.
For this to th’ infinitely good we owe
Immortal thanks. Milton.
THA'NKFul, adj. [Sancrul, Saxon.] Full of gratitude; ready
to acknowledge good received.
Bc thankful unto him, and bleſs his name. Pſal. c. 4.
In favour, to uſe men with much difference is godd; for
it maketh the perſons preferred more thanyul, and the reſt
more officious. Bacon's Eſſays.
Live, thou great encourager of arts;
Live ever in our thankful hearts. Dryden.
THA'NKFULLY. adv. [from thankful..] With lively and grate-
ful ſenſe of good received.
Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. Shakespeare
If you have liv'd, take thankfully the paſt;
Make, as you can, the ſweet remembrance laſt. Dryden.
Out of gold how to draw as many diſtinct ſubſtances as I
can ſeparate from vitriol, I ſhall very thankfully learn. Boyle.
THA'NKFULNess. n.ſ.. [from thankful.] Gratitude; lively
ſenſe or ready acknowledgment of good received.
He ſcarcely would give me thanks for what I had done,
for fear that thankfulneſs might have an introduction of re-
ward. Sidney, b. ii.
Will you give me this maid your daughter?
—As freely, ſon, as God did give her me.
—Sweet prince, you learn me noble thankfulneſs. Shakeſ?.
The celebration of theſe holy myſteries being ended, re-
tire with all thankfulneſs of heart for having been admitted to
that heavenly feaſt. - » Taylor.
Thankfulneſ; and ſubmiſſion make us happy. L’Eſtrange.
THA'Nkless. adj. [from thank.]
1. Unthankful; ungrateful; making no acknowledgment.
Leaſt ſo great good, as he for her had wrought,
Should die unknown, and buried be in thankleſs thought.
Fairy Queen, b. i.
May he feel
How ſharper than a ſerpent's tooth it is,
To have º thankleſ child. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Bleſt in thy genius, in thy love too bleſt |
One grateful woman to, thy fame ſupply'd,
what a whole thankleſ land to his deny'd. Pope.
- t deſerving, or not likely, to gain thanks.
2 Nº. contracting º extending the lines and ſenſe of others,
26<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H A
T H E
if the firſt authors might ſpeak for themſelves,
a thanklſ; office.
would appear
J/otton.
wage ſtill their wars,
And bring home on thy breaſ more thanºl'ſ ſcars. Craſhaw.
Tu Aºlessness. m. ſ. [frºm thanklºſs...] Ingratitude; I ailure
to acknowledge good received. -
Not tº have written then, ſeems little leſs
Than worſt of civil vices, thanºliſheſ. - Dºme.
Traskoff ERING.. n.f. [thank and ºffering.] Offering paid
in acknowledgment of mercy. - -
Althouſand thank-ºffrings are due to that providence which
has delivered our nation from theſe abſurd iniquities. I/atts,
THANksgiving. m. ſ. [thanks and give..] Celebration of
ercy.
n º ſacred hymns Chriſtianity hath peculiar to itſelf, the
other being ſongs too of praiſe and than//giving, wherewith as
we ſerve God ſo the Jews likewiſe. Hooker, b. v.
tude; meritorious. - - -
Of old there were ſongs of praiſe and tharºgiving unto
God. Neh. xii. 46.
We ſhould acknowledge our obligations to God for the
many favours we receive, by continual praiſes and than'ſ-
givings. - Tillotſon's Sermons.
THA'Nº worthy, adj. [thank and worthy..] Deſerving grati-
This is thankworthy, if a man endure grief. I Pet. ii. 19.
If love be compell'd, and cannot chuſe,
How can it grateful, or thank-worthy prove Davies.
THARM. m. ſ. ſocarm, Saxon; darm, Dutch, the gut.] In-
teſtines twiſted for ſeveral uſes.
THAT, pronoun. [thata, Gothick; Saer, Saxon; dat, Dutch.]
1. Not this, but the othcr.
He wins me by that means I told you.
Octavia, not only that,
That were excuſeable, that and thouſands more
Of ſemblable import, but he hath wag'd
New wars againſt Pompey.
2. Which ; relating to an antecedent thing.
You'll rue the time
That clogs me with this anſwer.
Nothing they but duſt can ſhow,
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Or bones that haſten to be ſo. Cowley.
3. Who; relating to an antecedent perſon. -
Saints that taught and led the way to heav'n. Tickel.
4. It ſometimes ſerves to ſave the repetition of a word or words
foregoing.
I'll know your buſineſs, that I will. Shakesp. Henry IV.
They ſaid, what is that to us ſee thou to that. Matth.
Ye defraud, and that your brethren. I Cor. vi. 8.
Yet for all that, when they be in the land of their ene-
mies I will not caſt them away. Lev. xxvi. 44.
They weep as if they meant
That way at leaſt proud Nabas to prevent. Cowley.
This runick ſubject will occur upon that of poetry. Temple.
What is inviting in this ſort of poetry proceeds not ſo
much from the idea of a country life itſelf, as from that of
its tranquillity. Pope.
5. Oppoſed to this as the other to one.
- This is not fair; nor profitable that ;
Nor t'other queſtion proper for debate. Dryden's Perſus.
In this ſcale gold, in tother fame does lie,
The weight of that mounts this ſo high. Cowley.
6. When this and that relate to foregoing words, this is referred
like hit or cery to the latter, and that like ille or cela to the
former.
7. Such as. -
By religion is meant a living up to thoſe principles, that is,
to act conformably to our beſt reaſon, and to live as becomes
thoſe who believe a God and a future ſtate. Tillotſon.
8. That which ; what. -
- Sir, I think the meat wants that I have.
Baſting. Shakeſp. Comedy of Errours.
9. The thing.
The Nazarite hath vowed, beſides that that his hand ſhall
get. Num. vi. 21.
He made that art which was a rage. Cowley.
10. The thing which then was.
Secure proud Nabas ſlept,
And dreamt, vain man, of that day's barb'rous ſport. Cºwley.
II. By way of eminence.
This is that Jonathan, the joy and grace,
That Jonathan in whom does mixt remain
All that fond mothers wiſh.
Hence love himſelf, that tyrant of my days.
12. In T HAT. As being.
Things are preached not in that they are taught, but in
that they are publiſhed. Hooker, b. v.
THAT. cºnjunction.
I. Becauſe. -
- t is not that I love you leſs
Than when before your feet I lay:
But to prevent the ſad increaſe
Of hopeleſs love, I keep away.
Cowley.
Cowley.
J/aller.
Forgive me that I thus your patience wrong, Cºwly.
2. Noting a conſequence. -
That he ſhould dare to do me this diſgrace,
Is fool or coward writ upon my face : Dryden.
The cuſtom and familiarity of theſe tongues do ſometim.
ſo far influence the expreſſions in theſe epiſtles, that one may
obſerve the force of the Hebrew conjugations. Locke.
3. Noting indication. -
We anſwered, that we held it ſo agreeable, as we both
forgot dangers paſt and fears to come, that we thought an
hour ſpent with him was worth years of our former ife.
Bacon's New Atlantis,
4. Noting a final end.
Treat it kindly, that it may
Wiſh at leaſt with us to ſtay. Cowly.
THATch. m. ſ. ſºace, Saxon, ſtraw, Skinner, from Sac, a
roºf, in Iſlandick thak. Mr. Lyr.) Straw laid upon the top
of a houſe to keep out the weather.
Hard by a ſtye, beneath a roof of thatch
Dwelt Obloquy, who in her early days
Baſkets of fiſh at Billingſgate did watch,
Cod, whiting, oyſter, mackrel, ſprat, or plaiſe. Swift,
A plough-boy, who has never ſeen anything but thatch-
ed houſes, naturally imagines that thatch belongs to the very
nature of a houſe. JWatts.
Then came roſy Health from her cottage of thatch. Smart.
To THATch. v. a. [Saccian, Saxon.] To cover as with ſtraw.
Make falſe hair, and thatch
Your poor thin roofs with burthens of the dead. Shałºff.
Moſs groweth chiefly upon ridges of houſes tiled or that:h-
ed. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 537.
Then Rome was poor, and there you might behold
The palace thatch'd with ſtraw. Dryden.
Sonnets or elegies to Chloris
Might raiſe a houſe above two ſtories:
A lyrick ode would ſlate, a catch
Would tile, an epigram would thatch. Swift.
On the cottage thatch'd, or lordly roof
Keen faſtening. Thºmſºn.
THA’tch ER. m. ſ. [from thatah..] One whoſe trade is to cover
houſes with ſtraw.
You merit new employments daily;
Our thatcher, ditcher, gard’ner, baily. Swift.
Aſh is univerſal timber; it ſerves the ſoldier, ſeaman, car-
penter, thatcher, and huſbandman. Mortimer.
To THAw. v. n. [ćapan, Saxon; degen, Dutch.]
1. To grow liquid after congelation; to melt.
When thy melted maid
His letter at thy pillow hath laid:
If thou begin'ſt to thaw for this,
May my name ſtep in. . Donne.
It on firm land
7%aws not but gathers heap, and ruin ſeems
Of ancient pile; all elſe deep ſnow and ice. Miltºn.
Having let that ice thaw of itſelf, and frozen the liquor a
ſecond time, we could not diſcern any thing. Boyle,
2. To remit the cold which had cauſed froſt.
To THAw. v. a. To melt what was congealed.
Bring the the faireſt creature northward born,
Where Phoebus' fire ſcarce thaw, the ificles. Shakºſºrt.
Think not that Caeſar bears ſuch rebel blood,
That will be thaw'd from the true quality -
With that which melteth fools. Shaftºff. julius Caſºr.
My love is thaw'd,
Which, like a waxen image 'gainſt a fire,
Bears no impreſſion of the thing it was.
Burniſh’d ſteel, that caſt a glare -
From far, and ſeem'd to thaw the freezing air.
She can unlock --
The claſping charm, and thaw the numbing ſpell. Milº.
Her icy heart is thaw'd. Ganilº
THAw. n.ſ.' [from the verb.] Liqueſadion of anything *
gealed; warmth ſuch as liquifies congelation.
I was the prince's jeſter, and duller than a great thaw.
Shakeſp. Much ado about nothing.
A man of my kidney, that am as ſubject to heat as but-
Shakespeare.
Dryden.
ter; a man of continual diſſolution and thaw. Shakeſpeare.
Hardens his ſtubborn heart, but ſtill as ice l
More harden’d after thaw. Milton.
That cold country where diſcourſe doth freeze in the air
all Winter, and may be heard in the next Summer, 9. at i.
great thaw. Iſilkins's Math. Magic”
when ſharp froſts had long conſtrain'd the earth,
A kindly thaw unlocks it with cold rain,
Firſt the tender blade peeps. Dryden.
THE, article. [de, Dutch.j
1. The article noting a particular thing.
Yout ſon has paid a ſoldier's debt;
He only liv'd but till he was a man,
The which no ſooner had his proweſs confirm’d,
In the unſhrinking ſtation where he fought,
But like a man he dy’d. Shakeſpeare's *:
Ç
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H E
tº
*
º
He put him in mind of the long pretence he had to be
groom of the bed chamber, for the which he could not chuſe
but ſay, that he had the queen's promiſe. Clarendon, b. viii.
Unhappy ſlave, and pupil to a bell,
Unhappy till the laſt, the kind releaſing knell.
I'll march the muſes Hannibal.
The fair example of the heav'nly lark,
Thy fellow poet, Cowley, mark;
Above the ſtars let thy bold muſick ſound,
Thy humble neſt build on the ground.
The fruit
Of that forbidden tree, whoſe mortal taſte
Brought death into the world.
Night ſhades the groves, and all in ſilence lie,
All but the mournful philomel and I.
2. Before a vowel e is commonly cut off in verſe.
Who had th' eſpecial engines been to rear
His fortunes up unto the ſtate they were.
Th'adorning thee with ſo much art
Is but a barb’rous ſkill,
'Tis like the pois'ning of a dart,
Too apt before to kill.
3. Sometimes he is cut off.
In this ſcale worth, in tother gold does lie. Cowley.
4. In the following paſſage the is uſed according to the French
idiom.
As all the confiderable governments among the Alps are
commonwealths, ſo it is a conſtitution the moſt adapted of
any to the poverty of theſe countries. Addiſon on Italy.
THEATRAL. adj. [theatral, Fr. theatralis, Lat..] Belonging to
a theatre.
THEATRE. n.ſ.. [theatre, Fr. theatrum, Lat.]
1. A place in which ſhews are exhibited ; a playhouſe.
This wiſe and univerſal theatre,
Preſents more woful pageants than the ſcene
Wherein we play. Shakespeare. As you like it.
When the boats came within ſixty yards of the pillar, they
found themſelves all bound, yet ſo as they might go about,
ſo as they all ſtood as in a theatre beholding this light. Bacon.
2. A place riſing by ſteps like a theatre.
Shade above ſhade, a woody theatre
Cowley.
Cowley.
Cowley.
Milton.
Pope.
Daniel.
Cowley.
Of ſtatelieſt view. Milton.
In the midſt of this fair valley ſtood
A native theatre, which riſing ſlow,
By juſt degrees o'erlook'd the ground below. Dryden.
THEA’ſ Rick. Nadj. [theatrum, Latin.] Scenick; ſuiting a
THEATRICAL. ; theatre; pertaining to a theatre.
Theatrical forms ſtickle hard for the prize of religion: a
diſtorted countenance is made the mark of an upright heart.
Decay of Piety.
Load ſome vain church with old theatrick ſtate,
Turn arcs of triumph to a garden gate. Pope.
THEATR1cally. adv. [from theatrical.] In a manner ſuiting
the ſtage.
Dauntleſs her look, her geſture proud,
Her voice theatrically loud. .
Thee, the oblique ſingular of thou.
Poet and ſaint, to thee alone were giv'n
The two moſt ſacred names of carth and heav'n. Cowley.
THE Fr. n.ſ. from theif.]
1. The aët of ſtealing.
Theft is an unlawful felonious taking away of another
man's goods againſt the owner's knowledge or will. Cowel.
His thefts were too open, his filching was like an unſkilful
finger, he kept not time. Shakeſp. Merry //ives of J/indſor.
Their nurſe Euriphile,
Whom for the thºſ: I wedded, ſtole theſe children. Shakespeare
2. The thing ſtolen. - -
If the theſt be certainly found in his hand alive, whether
ox, aſs, or ſheep, he ſhall reſtore double. Exod. xxii. 4.
THEIR. m. ſ. ſecona, of them, Saxon.] Of them: the pro-
noun poſſeſſive, from they.
The round world ſhould have ſhook
Lions into civil ſtreets, and citizens into their dens. Shakespeare
For the Italians, Dante had begun to file their language in
verſe before Boccace, who likewiſe received no little help
from his maſter Petrarch; but the reformation of their proſe
was wholly owing to Boccace. Dryden.
2. Theirs is uſed when anything comes between the poſſeſſive
and ſubſtantive.
Prayer we always have in our powcr to beſtow, and they
never in theirs to refuſe. Hooker, b. v.
They gave the ſame names to their own idols which the
Swift's Miſcel.
Egyptians did to theirs. Raleigh.
The penalty to thy tranſgreſſion due,
And due to theirs which out of thine will grow. Milton.
Nothing but the name of zeal appears,
*Twixt our beſt actions and the worſt of theirs. Denham.
Vain are our neighbours hopes, and vain their cares,
The fault is more their languages than their's. Roſcommon.
Which eſtabliſhed law of theirs ſeems too ſtrict at firſt,
becauſe it excludes all ſecret intrigucs. Dryden.
And reading wiſh, like theirs, our fate and fame. Pope.
T H E
THEM, the oblique of they.
The materials of tºº were not from any herb.
THE ME. m. ſ. [theºr, Fr. from &amp;#42.]
1. A ſubject on which one ſpeaks or wites.
Every object of our idea is called a theme, whether it be a
being or not being. - Watts.
Two truths are told,
As happy prologues to the ſwelling aa
f the imperial theme. Shakespeare’s Macbeth.
When a ſoldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off. - Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
O! could I flow like thee, and make thy ſtream
My great example, as it is my themes
Though deep, yet clear; though gentle, yet not dull;
Strong without rage, without o'erflowing full.
Whatever near Eurota's happy ſtream,
With laurels crown'd, had been Apollo's theme. Roſcommon.
Though Tyber's ſtreams immortal Rome behold,
Though foaming Hermus ſwells with tides of gold,
From heav'n itſelf though ſeven-fold Nilus flows,
And harveſts on a hundred realms beſtows;
Theſe now no more ſhall be the muſe's themes,
Loſt in my fame, as in the ſea their ſtreams.
2. A ſhort 'º. written by boys on any topick,
3. The original word whence others are derived.
Let ſcholars daily reduce the words to their original or
theme, to the firſt caſe of nouns, or firſt tenſe of verbs. Aſ atts.
THEMs; Lves. n. ſ. [See THEY and SELF.]
1. Theſe very perſons.
. . Whatſoever evil befalleth in that, themſelves have made
themſelves worthy to ſuffer it. Hocker, b. v.
2. The oblique caſe of they and ſºlves.
They open to themſelves at length the way. M ſton.
Waken children out of ſleep with a low call, and give them
kind uſage till they come perfectly to themſelves. Locke.
THEN. adv. [than, Gothick; ban, Saxon; dan, Dutch..]
I. At that time.
The then biſhop of London, Dr. Laud, attended on his
majeſty throughout that whole journey. Clarendon.
Thee, then a boy, with my arms I laid. Dryden.
2. Afterwards; immediately afterwards; ſoon afterwards.
If an herb be cut off from the roots in Winter, and then
the earth be trodden down hard, the roots will become very
big in Summer. Bacon's Nat. Hºſt. Nº. 437.
3. In that caſe; in conſequence.
Had not men been fated to be blind,
Then had our lances pierc'd the treach’rous wood. Dryden.
Had fate ſo pleas'd I had been eldeſt born,
Wilkins.
Denham.
Pºe.
And then without a crime the crown had worn. Dryden.
If all this be ſo, then man has a natural freedom. Locke.
4. Therefore ; for this reaſon.
If then his providence
Out of our evil ſeek to bring forth good. Milton.
Now then be all thy weighty cares away,
Thy jealouſies and fears, and, while you may, {
To peace and ſoft repoſe give all the day. Dryden.
5. At another time: as now and then, at one time and other.
, Now ſhaves with level wing the deep, then ſoars. 41ilton.
One while the maſter is not aware of what is done, and
then in other caſes it may fall out to be his own act. L'E/ºr.
6. That time: it has here the effect of a noun.
Till then who knew
The force of thoſe dire arms ? Milton.
THEN ce. n.ſ. [contracted, according to Minſhew, from there
hence.]
1. From that place.
Faſt by the oracle of God; I thence
Invoke thy aid. Milton.
Surat he took, and thence preventing fame,
By quick and painful marches thither came. Dryden,
2. From that time.
There ſhall be no more thence an infant of days. Iſa. lxv.
3. For that reaſon.
Not to ſit idle with ſo great a gift - -
Uſeleſs, and thence ridiculous about him. Milton's Agoniſ.
4. From thence is a barbarous expreſſion, thence implying the
ſame.
From thence; from him, whoſe daughter
His tears proclaim'd his parting with her; thence
We have croſs'd. Shakeſpeare.
There plant eyes, all muſt from thence
Purge and diſperſe.
THE'Nce Fort H. adv. [thence and forth.]
1. From that time. - - -
Thenceforth this land was tributary made
’ ambitious Rome. - Senſºr.
º: placed in Leinſter, and have land given them
to live upon, in ſuch ſort as ſhall become good ſubjects, to
labour thenceforth for their living. Spenſer on Ireland.
Wrath ſhall be no more - *
Thencefºrth, but in thy preſence joy entire. Mºon.
2. From thenceſorth is a barbarous corruption crept into later
books.
Milton,
Aveſt<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">++ + + -
T H E
T H E
Avert r
holy eyes, reſolving frºm thencefºrth -- .
º lº. them to their own polluted ways. Milton.
Men grow acquainted with theſe ſelf-evident truths upon
their being propoſed; but whoſoever does ſo, finds in him-
ſelf that he then begins to know a propoſition which he
knew not before, and which from thenºforth he never j.
- 0C/º.
tionS. -
T ºjero/Rwarp. adv. [thence and fºrward.] Oil from that
e.
Tºcracy. n.ſ. [theocratic, Fr. Sº and xfºlio.] Go-
vernment immediately ſuperintended by God. - - - -
The charaders of the reign of Chriſt are chiefly juſtice,
peace, and divine preſence or conduct, which is called the-
ocracy. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
The ocRA'tic AL. adj. [theocratique, Fr. from theocracy..] Re-
lating to a government adminiſtered by God.
The covernment is neither human nor angelical, but pe—
culiarly Theocratical. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Tºronólite. n.ſ. A mathematical inſtrument for taking
heights and diſtances. - a -
Tºgosy. n.ſ. [theºgonie, Fr. Sºoyovſz.] The generation
of the gods. - - Bailey.
Theolo'G1AN. m. ſ. [theolºgien, Fr. theologus, Latin.] A di-
vine; a profeſſor of divinity. - -
Some theolºgians defile places erected only for religion by
defending oppreſſions: Hayward.
They to their viands fell: nor ſeemingly
The angel, nor in miſt, the common gloſs
Of theolºgians, but with keen diſpatch
Of real hunger. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. v.
Theological. adj. [theolºgique, Fr. theologia, Lat.] Relating
to the ſcience of divinity.
Although ſome pens have only ſymbolized the ſame from
the myſtery of its colours, yet are there other affections
might admit of theolºgical alluſions. Brown.
They generally are extracts of theolºgical and moral ſen-
tences, drawn from eccleſiaſtical and other authors. Swift.
Theologically. adv. [from theological.] According to the
principles of theology.
Theologist. A n.ſ.. [theologus, Lat..] A divine; one ſtudious
Theo'Log UE. } in the ſcience of divinity.
The cardinals of Rome, which are theologues, friars, and
ſchoolmen, call all temporal buſineſs, of wars, embaſſages,
ſhirtcry, which is under-ſheriffries. Bacon's Eſſays.
A theologue more by need than genial bent;
Int’reſt in all his ačtions was diſcern'd. Dryden.
It is no more an order, according to popiſh theologiſts, than
the prima tonſura, they allowing only ſeven eccleſiaſtical
theolºgiſis. Ayliffe's Parergon.
THEOLOGY. m. ſ. [theologic, Fr. Stoxoyſz.] Divinity.
The whole drift of the ſcripture of God, what is it but
only to teach theology? Theolºgy, what is it but the ſcience of
things divine Hooker, b. iii.
She was moſt dear to the king in regard of her knowledge
in languages, in theology, and in philoſophy. Hayward.
The oldeſt writers of theology were of this mind. Tillotſon.
THE'oMAchist. n.ſ. He who fights againſt the gods. Bailey.
THE'om Achy. m. ſ. [3:GP and a 2x2.] The fight againſt the
gods by the giants. Bailey.
THEO'Rio. n.ſ.. [tiorba, Italian ; turbe, Fr.] A large lute
for playing a thorough baſs, uſed by the Italians. Bailey.
He wanted nothing but a ſong,
And a well tun'd theorbo hung
Upon a bough, to eaſe the pain
His tugg'd ears ſuffer'd, with a ſtrain. Putler.
THE OREM. n.ſ. [theºreme, Fr. Sºngz.] A poſition laid
down as an acknowledged truth.
Having found this the head theorem of all their diſcourſes,
who plead for the change of eccleſiaſtical government in
Fngland, we hold it neceſſary that the proofs thereof be
weighed. Hooker, b. ii.
The chief points of morality are no leſs demonſtrable than
mathematicks ; nor is the ſubtilty greater in moral theorems
than in mathematical. More's divine Dialogues.
Many obſervations go to the making up of one theorem,
which, like oaks fit for durable buildings, muſt be of many
years growth. Graunt.
Here are three thcorers, that from thence we may draw
ſome concluſions. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
THE or FMA"Tical. -
adj. [from theorem.] Compriſed in the-
H E or EMA'Tick. ſiſting in th
TH FUR FM ick. Orens ; COn 11 ing 1In the OrcDInS.
'i becrenick truth, or that which lies in the conceptions we
have of things, is negative or poſitive. Grew.
THE or Eric Ai. [theoretique, F rench; ) Speculative;
Theof E^T, cK. 7 from Stºpwrix};..] depending
Theo Rica. d4j. [thcorique, Fr. from on theory
THE O'Rick. Stepſ...] or ſpecu-
lation ; terminating in theory or ſpeculation; not practical.
-- - When he ſpeaks,
The air, a charter'd libertine, is ſtill;
And the mute wonder lurketh in mens ears,
To ſteal his ſweet and honic d ſentences :
So that the aët and pračtick part of life
Muſt be the miſtreſs to this theºrique. Shaºffcºrt,
The theorical part of the inquiry being interwoven wi
the hiſtorical conjectures, the philoſophy of colours will be
promoted by indiſputable experiments. Foyle on Colour;
For theoretical learning and ſciences there is nothing y:
complete. * Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
THEO'Rick. n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive..] A ſpeculatiſt; one who
knows only ſpeculation, not practice.
The bookiſh theorick,
Wherein the toged conſuls can propoſe
As maſterly as he meer prattle, without pračice,
Is all his ſoldierſhip. Shakeſpeare's Othell.
Theore’tic ALLY. d; } [from theoretic{..} \ Speculative-
THEo'Rica LLY. } * \ [from theorick.] }
practically.
The' orst. n.ſ.. [from theory..] A ſpeculatiſt; one given to
ſpeculation. to
The greateſt theoriſ’s have given the preference to ſuch a
form of government as that which obtains in this kingdom.
Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 5.I.
THEORY.. n.ſ.. [theorie, Fr. Stºpſz.] Speculation; not prac-
tice; ſcheme; plan or ſyſtem yet ſubſiſting only in the mind.
If they had been themſelves to execute their own theory in
this church, they would have ſeen being nearer at hand.
Hºcker, b. v.
In making gold, the means hitherto propounded to '#3
it are in the practice full of errour, and in the theory full of
unfound imagination. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 326.
Pračtice alone divides the world into virtuous and vicious;
but as to the theory and ſpeculation of virtue and vice, man-
kind are much the ſame. South's Sermohs.
THERAPE'Utick. adj. [3:527:1.x3:..] Curative; teaching or
endeavouring the cure of diſeaſes.
Therapeutick or curative phyſick reſtoreth the patient into
ſanity, and taketh away diſeaſes aétually affecting. Brown.
The practice and therapeutick is diſtributed into the conſer-
vative, preſervative, and curative. Harvey.
Medicine is juſtly diſtributed into prophylaétick, or the art
of preſerving health; and therapeutick, or the art of reſtoring
it. //atts.
There. adv. [thar, Gothick; Saen, Saxon; dair, Dutch!;
der, Daniſh.]
1. In that place.
If they come to ſojourn at my houſe,
I'll not be there. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Exil'd by thee from earth to deepeſt hell,
In brazen bonds ſhall barb'rous diſcord dwell;
Gigantick pride, pale terror, gloomy care,
And mad ambition ſhall attend her there. Pºpe.
2. It is oppoſed to here.
To ſee thee fight, to ſee thee traverſe, to ſee thee here, to
ſee thee there. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Iſindſor.
Could their reliſhes be as different there as they are herº,
yet the manna in heaven will ſuit every palate. Lºgº.
Darkneſs there might well ſeem twilight here. Mill".
3. An exclamation directing ſomething at a diſtance.
Your fury hardens me.
A guard there; ſeize her. Dryden's Aurenſzºº.
4. It is uſed at the beginning of a ſentence with the appearance
of a nominative caſe, but ſerves only to throw the nomina-
tive behind the verb: as, a man came, or there came “”
It adds however ſome emphaſis, which, like many other
idioms in every language, muſt be learned by cuſtom, and
can hardly be explained. It cannot always be omitted with-
out harſhneſs: as, in old times there was a great king.
For reformation of errour there were that thought it.” pºt
of Chriſtian charity to inſtruct them. . . Hº:
There cannot in nature be a ſtrength ſo great, as “” make
the leaſt moveable to paſs in an inſtant, or all togethe,
through the leaſt place. Digby on the Sºul.
#. have been that have delivered themſelves ſº º'
ills by their good fortune or virtue. Suckling.
In human actions there are no degrees deſcribe, but a la-
titude is indulged. Biſhop Halº:
wherever there is ſenſe or perception, there ſome id: ls
aćtually produced. ºkt'.
5. In compoſition it means that : as thereby, by that. .
THE’REAbout. adv. [there and about, thereabout *
THE’RE A BouTS. ; fore leſs proper.]
1. Near that place. - - d
One ſpeech I lov’d ; 'twas Æneas's tale to Dido : º
thereabout of it eſpecially, where he ſpeaks of Priam";".
ter. Shateff. Hamiº.
2. Nearly ; near that number, quantity, or ſtate. -
ãº the twelfth of ſº }. thirty-ſixth of king
Edward the third, containing one hundred and fifty years of
thereabouts, there was a continual bordering war. P.
Find a houſe to lodge a hundred and fifty perſons, wº
4:ltºn.
twenty or thereabout may be attendants. Aft
2 Some
there-
ly; not
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H E
T H E
º
-
---
º
º:
--
Some three months ſince, or thereabout,
She found rhe out. Suckling.
Water is thirteen times rarer, and its reſiſtance leſs than
that of quickſilver thereabouts, as I have found by experi-
ments with pendulums. Newton's Opticks.
3. Concerning that matter.
As they were much perplexed thereabout, two men ſtood
by. Luke xxiv. 4.
THERE A/F TER. adv. [there and after.] According to that;
accordingly.
When you can draw the head indifferent well, proportion
the body thereafter. Peacham.
If food were now before thee ſet,
Wou'dſt thou not eat? thereafter as I like
The giver. Milton.
THERE A'T. adj. [there and at..]
1. At that; on that account.
Every errour is a ſtain to the beauty of nature; for which
cauſe it bluſheth thereat, but glorieth in the contrary. Hooker.
2. At that place.
Wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to
deſtruction, and many go in thereat. Mat. vii. 13.
THEREBY’. adv. [there and by..] By that; by means of that ;
in conſequence of that.
Some parts of our liturgy conſiſt in the reading of the
word of God, and the proclaiming of his law, that the people
may thereby learn what their duties are towards him. Hooker.
Therewith at laſt he forc'd him to untie
One of his graſping feet, him to defend therely. Fa. $24.
Being come to the height, they were thereby brought to an
abſolute neceſity. Davies on Ireland.
Dare to be true; nothing can need a lie,
A fault, which needs it moſt, grows two thereby. Herbert.
If the paper be placed beyond the focus, and then the red
colour at the lens be alternately intercepted and let paſs, the
violet on the paper will not ſuffer any change thereby. Newton.
THE’RE For E. adv. [there and fore.]
1. For that ; for this ; for this reaſon; in conſequence.
This is the lateſt parley we will admit;
Therefore to our beſt mercy give yourſelves.
Falſtaff is dead,
And we muſt yern therefºre. Shakeſp. Henry.V.
Therefore ſhall a man leave father and mother and cleave
to his wife. Gen. ii. 24.
The herd that ſeeks after ſenſual pleaſure is ſoft and un-
manly; and therefºre I compoſe myſelf to meet a ſtorm. Lucas.
He bluſhes; therefore he is guilty. Speciator.
The wreſtlers ſprinkled duſt on their bodies to give better
hold: the glory therefore was greater to conquer without
powder. //g/?’s Pindar.
2. In return for this; in recompence for this or for that.
We have forſaken all and followed thee, what ſhall we
have therefºre ? Mat. xix. 27.
THERE FRO'M. adv. [there and from..] From that ; from this.
Beye therefore very couragious to do all that is written in
the law, that ye turn not afide therefrom, to the right hand
or to the left. joſ. xxiii. 6.
The leaves that ſpring therefrom grow white. Mortimer.
THE REI'N. adv. [there and in..] In that; in this.
Therein our letters do not well agree. Shakeſpeare.
The matter is of that nature, that I find myſelf unable to
ſerve you therein as you deſire. Bacon.
- All the earth
To thee, and to thy race, I give: as lords -
Poſſeſs it, and all things that therein live. Milton.
After having well examined them, we ſhall therein find
many charms. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
THER £1NT'o. adv. [there and into.] Into that.
flet not them that are in the countries enter thereinto. Luke.
Though we ſhall have occaſion to ſpeak of this, we will
now make ſome entrance thereinto. Bacon.
THER Foº F. adv. [there and ºf..] Of that ; of this.
Conſidering how the caſe doth ſtand with this preſent age,
full of tongue and weak of brain, behold we yield to the
flream thereof. Hooker, b. i.
'Tis vain to think that laſting which muſt end;
And when 'tis paſt, not any part remains
3 hereºf, but the reward which virtue gains. Denham.
I ſhall begin with Greece, where my obſervations ſhall be
confined to Athens, though ſeveral inſtances might be brought
from other ſtates thereof. Swift.
THE REoN. adv. [there and on..] On that.
You ſhall bereave yourſelf
Of my gºod purpoſes, and put your children
To that deſtruction which I'll guard them from,
If thereon you rely. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Peter called to mind the word that Jeſus ſaid; and when
he thought thereon he wept. Mark xiv. 72.
Its foundation is laid thereon. Woodward.
THE’REout. adv. [there and out..] Out of that.
Thereout a ſtrange beaſt with ſeven heads aroſe,
That towns and caſtles under her breaſt did cour. Spenſºr.
Shakeſpeare.
THERETo’.
THEREuNTo’. }ad. [there and to, or antz.] To that.
Is it in regard then of ſermons on -
- - . . . " y, that apprehending
the goſpel of Chriſt we yield thereinto our unfeigned aſſent
as to a thing infallibly true. Hooker, b. v.
This ſort of baſe people doth not for the moſt part rebel of
themſelves, having no heart thereunto, but are by force drawn
by the grand rebels into their action. Spen er on Ireland.
Next thereunto did grow a goodly tree. Fairy Queen.
That whereby we reaſon, live and be
Within ourſelves we ſtrangers are tº Davies.
A larger form of ſpeech were ſafer than that which punc-
tually prefixeth a conſtant day theretz. Brown
What might his force have done, being broºght º,
When that already gave ſo much to do? Daniel
That it is the appointment of God, might be argument
enough to perſuade us thereunto. Tillotſon's Sºrmºn,
THEREuPo'N. adv. [there and upon.] -
1. Upon that ; in conſequence of that.
Grace having not in one thing ſhewed itſelf, nor for ſome
few days, but in ſuch ſort ſo long continued, our manifold
fins ſtriving to the contrary, what can we leſs thereupon con-
clude, than that God would at leaſt-wiſe, by tract of time
teach the world, that the thing which he § cannot but
be of him. Płocker, b. iv.
He hopes to find you forward
And thereupon he ſends you this good news. Shakeſpeara.
Let that one article rank with the reſt;
And thereupon give me your daughter. Shakespeare. Henry V.
Though grants of extraordinary liberties madé by a king
to his ſubjects do no more diminiſh his greatneſs than when
one torch lighteth another, yet many times inconveniencies
do ariſe thereupon. Davies on Ireland.
Children are chid for having failed in good manners, and
have thereupon reproofs and precepts heaped upon them. Locke.
Solon finding the people engaged in two violent factions,
of the poor and the rich, and in great confuſion thereupon,
made due proviſions for ſettling the balance of power. Swift.
2. Immediately.
THEREU'NDER. adv. [there and under.] Under that.
Thoſe which come nearer unto reaſon, find paradiſe under
the equinoëtial line, judging that thereunder might be found
moſt pleaſure and the greateſt fertility. Raleigh.
THERE witH. adv. [there and with.]
I. With that.
Germany had ſtricken off that which appeared corrupt in
the doctrine of the church of Rome, but ſeemed in diſcipline
ſtill to retain therewith very great conformity. Hooker, b. iv.
All things without, which round about we ſee,
We ſeek to know, and have therewith to do. Davies.
Therewith at laſt he forc’d him to untie
One of his graſping feet, him to defend thereby. Spenſer.
2. Immediately.
THERE witHA/L. adv. [there and withal.]
I. Over and above.
Therewithal the execrable ačt
On their late murther'd king they aggravate. Daniel.
2. At the ſame time.
Well, give her that ring, and give therewithal
That letter. Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Werona.
3. With that.
His hideous tail then hurled he about,
And therewithal enwrapt the nimble thighs
Of his froth-foamy ſteed. Spenſºr.
THER1'AcAL. adj. [$npºx2 ; from theriaca, Lat.] Medici-
nal; phyſical.
The virtuous bezoar is taken from the beaſt that feedeth
upon the mountains, where there are theriacal herbs. Bacon.
THERMO'METER. m. ſ. [thermometre, Fr. 3 spp. 3; and ºft-
rpov.] An inſtrument for meaſuring the heat of the air, or
of any matter.
The greateſt heat is about two in the afternoon, when the
ſun is paſt the meridian, as is evident from the thermºmeter,
or obſervations of the weather-glaſs. - Brown.
The RMoMETRic AL. adj. [from thermometer.] Relating to the
meaſure of heat. - -
His heat raiſes the liquor in the thermometrical tubes. Cheyne.
THE/RMoscope. m. ſ. [thermºſcope, Fr. 3:44.35 and ºxo~:2:1
An inſtrument by which the degrees of heat are diſcovered;
a thermometer. *
By the trial of the thermoſope, fiſhes have more heat than
the élement which they ſwim in. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
These, pronoun, the plural of tº:
. Oppoſed to thoſe. -
I Pº. We tºº, barbarians plant and ſow
On thºſe, on theſe our happy fields beſtow - Dryden.
2. Theſe relates to the perſons or things laſt mentioned; and
thoſe to the firſt. -
More rain falls in June and July than in December and
January; but it makes a much greater ſhew upon the earth
in theſe months than in thoſe, becauſe it lies lºnger upon it.
Wºodward"; Nat. Hiſł. p. iv.
26 I THE's is,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H I
T H I
Thesis. n.ſ.. [thºſ, Fr. *::) A poſition; ſomething laid
down; affirmatively ºr negatively.
The truth of what you here lay down,
By ſome example ſhould be ſhewn.
An honeſt, but a ſimple pair, -
May ſerve to make this theſis clear. a Prior.
THE's Mothere. n.ſ.. [thºſmothete, Fr. Stºp.o.3%rn: ; Strøs
and rſ3 nº.] A lawgiver. -
THºurgy. n.ſ. [Stepyiz.] The power of doing ſupernatural
things by lawful º: * prayer to God. Bailey.
HEW. m. ſ. [Seap, Saxon.
'º, cuſtoms; habit of life; form of beha-
viour.
Home report theſe happy news,
For well yee worthy been for worth and gentle the wes., .
Fairy &amp; teen, b. i.
From mother's pap I taken was unfit,
And ſtreight deliver'd to a fairy knight, - -
To be upbrought in gentle thewes and martial might. . .
Fairy Queen, b. i.
2. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems to ſignify brawn, or bulk, from the
Saxon seop, the thigh, or ſome ſuch meaning.
Nature creſcent does not grow alone
In the ws and bulk; but, as this temple waxes,
The inward ſervice of the mind and ſoul
Grows wide withal. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
| Will you tell me, maſter Shallow, how to chuſe a man
Care I for the limbs, the the wes, the ſtature, bulk and big
ſemblance of a man give me the ſpirit, maſter Shallow.
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
THE'w ED. adj. [from thew.] Educated; habituated; accuſ-
tomed.
But he was wiſe and wary of her will,
And ever held his hand upon his heart;
Yet would not ſeem ſo rude, and thewed in ill, --
As to deſpiſe ſo courteous ſeeming part. Fairy Qu. b. ii.
THEY. n.ſ. in the oblique caſe them, the plural of he or ſhe.
[81, Saxon.] -
1. The men; the women; the perſons.
They are in a moſt warlike preparation.
Why do you keep alone :
Of ſorrieſt fancies your companions making,
Uſing thoſe thoughts, which ſhould indeed have died
With them they think on. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The Spaniard
Muſt now confeſs, if they have any goodneſs,
The trial juſt and noble.
They eat on beds of ſilk and gold,
At ivory tables, or wood ſold
Dearer than it.
Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Shakeſpeare.
Benj. johnſon's Cataline.
They know
To joy the friend and grapple with the foe.
2. Thoſe men; thoſe women: oppoſed to ſome others.
Only they,
That come to hear a merry play,
Will be deceiv'd.
'Tis remarkable, that they
Prior.
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Talk moſt who have the leaſt to ſay. Prior.
3. It is uſed indefinitely; as the French on dit.
There, as they ſay, perpetual night is found
In filence brooding on th’ unhappy ground. Dryden.
THI’BLE, n.ſ. A ſlice; a ſcummer; a ſpatula. Aimſ.
THICK. aff, ſºcce, Saxon; dick, Dutch; dyck, Daniſh;
thickur, Iſlandick.]
I. Not thin.
2. Denſe; not rare; groſs; craſs.
God cauſed the wind to blow, to dry up the abundant
ſlime of the earth, make the land more firm, and cleanſe the
air of thick vapours and unwholeſome miſts. Raleigh.
To warm milk pour ſpirit of nitre; the milk preſently
after will become thicker than it was. Arbuthnot on Alimentſ.
3. Not clear; not tranſparent ; muddy; feculent.
Why haſt thou loſt the freſh blood in thy checks,
And given my treaſures and my rights of thee,
To thick ey’d muſing and curs'd melancholy Shakespeare.
A fermentation makes all the wine in the veſſel thick or
foul ; but when that is paſt, it grows clear of itſelf. Temple.
Encumber'd in the mud, their oars divide
With heavy ſtroaks the thick unwieldy tide.
4. Great in circumference; not ſlender.
My little finger ſhall be thicker than his loins. I Kings xii.
Thou art waxen fat; thou art grown thick, covered with
fatneſs. - Deut. xxxii. 15.
5. Frequent; in quick ſucceſſion; with little intermiſſion.
"hey charged the defendants with their ſmail ſhot and
Tuſky arrows as thick as hail. - Knolles.
Favours came thick upon him, liker main ſhowers than
ſprinkling drops or dews, for the jS. George's day he
Wa; knighted, made gentleman of the king's bed-chamber,
and an annual penſion given him.
Addiſon.
This bei //otton.
about * **ś 9"ce a week, came too thick and too often
- Spelman.
His pills as thick as handgranado's flew,
And where they fell as certainly they ſlew.
6. Cloſe ; not i. by much º 3. Rºſcommon.
It brought them to a hollow cave,
Amid the thickeſt woods. Fairy Qu. b. i
The people were gathered thick together. Luke xi. . .
Not thicker billows beat the Libyan main, 9.
Nor thicker harveſts on rich Hermús riſe,
Than ſtand theſe troops. Dryden's Án.
He fought ſecure of fortune as of fame;
Still by new maps the iſland might be ſhewn :
Conqueſts he ſtrew’d where'er he came,
Thick as the galaxy with ſtars is ſown. Dryden.
Objećts of pain or pleaſure do not lie thick enough toge-
ther in life to keep the ſoul in conſtant action. Addiſon,
7. Not eaſily pervious; ſet with things cloſe to each other.
He through a little window caſt his fight,
Though thick of bars that gave a ſcanty light. Dryd
The ſpeedy horſe § ryden.
Watch each entrance of the winding wood,
Black was the foreſt, thick with beech it ſtood. Dryden,
Next the proud palace of Salerno ſtood
A mount of rough aſcent, and thick with wood. Dryden."
Bring it near ſome thick-headed tree. Mortimer.
8. Coarſe; not thin.
It taſteth a little of the wax, which in a pomegranate, or
ſome ſuch thick-coated fruit, it would not. Bacon.
Thick-leaved weeds amongſt the graſs will need more dry-
ing than ordinary graſs. Martimer's Huſbandy.
9. Without proper intervals of articulation.
Speaking thick, which nature made his blemiſh,
Became the accents of the valiant,
To ſeem like him.
THICK. m. ſ. [from the adjećtive.]
I. The thickeſt part or time when any thing is thickeſt.
Achimetes having with a mine ſuddenly blown up a great
part of the wall of the Spaniſh ſtation, in the thick of the
Shaleſ. Henry IV.
duſt and ſmoak preſently entered his men. Knolles.
2. THIck and thin. Whatever is in the way.
Through perils both of wind and limb,
Through thick and thin ſhe followed him. Hudibras.
When firſt the down appears upon his chin,
For a ſmall ſum to ſwear through thick and thin. Dryden:
THIck, adv. [It is not always eaſy to diſtinguiſh the adverb
from the adjective.]
1. Frequently; faſt.
'Tis ſome diſaſter,
Or elſe he would not ſend ſo thick. Denham's Sophy.
I hear the trampling of thick beating feet;
This way they move. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
2. Cloſely.
The neighb'ring plain with arms is cover'd o'er;
The vale an iron harveſt ſeems to yield,
Of thick ſprung lances in a waving field. Dryden:
A little plat of ground thick ſown, is better than a great
field which lies fallow. Norris's Miſcel.
3. To a great depth.
If you apply it thick ſpread, it will eat to the bone, Wiſm.
Cato has piercing eyes, and will diſcern
Our frauds, unleſs they're cover'd thick with art. Addison.
4. THIck and threefºld. In quick ſucceſſion; in great numbers.
They came thick and threefºld for a time, till one.º.
rienced ſtager diſcovered the plot. D'Eſtrange's Fai.
To TH1'cKEN. v. a. [from thick.]
1. To make thick.
2. To make cloſe; to fill up interſtices. . . . ."
Waters evaporated and mounted up into the air, thiºn
and cool it. Iłoodward's Nat. Hiſ'.
3. To condenſe; to concrete. d
The white of an egg gradually diſſolves by heat, exº".
ing a little the heat of a human body; a greater degree o
heat will thicken it into a white, dark-coloured, dry, Yi*
maſs. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
4. To ſtrengthen ; to confirm.
'Tis a ſhrewd doubt, though it be º: a dream;
And this may help to thicken other proofs,
That do *†: thinly. Shakespeare . Othell.
5. To make frequent.
6. To make cloſe or numerous.
To TH1'ck EN. v. n.
1. To grow thick.
2. To grow denſe or muddy.
Thy luſtre thickens
When he ſhines by. Shakespeare . Ant, and Cleºpat”
3. To concrete; to be conſolidated.
Water ſtopt gives birth
To graſs and plants, and thickens into earth. Prior.
4. To grow cloſe or numerous.
The preſs of people thickens to the court, d
Th’ impatient crowd devouring the report. Dryden.
He ſaw the crowd thickening, and deſired to know. how
many there were. #.
4. 5.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º:
º
5. To grow quick. -
The combat thickens, like the ſtorm that flies
From weſtward when the ſhow'ry kids ariſe,
Or patt’ring hail comes pouring on the main,
When Jupiter deſcends in harden'd rain. Addison.
THI’cket. n.ſ. ſocceru, Saxon.] A cloſe knot or tuft of THIEf-catcher.
trees ; a cloſe wood or copſe.
I drew you hither,
Into the chiefeſt thicket of the park. Shakeſpeare.
Within a thicket I repos'd; and found
Let fall from heav'n a ſleep interminate. Chapman.
Chus, or any of his, could not in haſte creep through
thoſe deſart regions, which the length of one hundred and
thirty years after the flood had fortified with thickets, and
Permitted every buſh and briar, reed and tree, to join them-
iclves into one main body and foreſt. Raleigh,
How oftºn, from the ſteep
9f echoing hill, or thicket, have we heard
Coeleſtial voices, to the midnight air,
Sole, or reſponſive, each to other's note,
Singing their great Creator Milton.
* My brothers ſtept to the next thicket ſide
To bring me berries. Milton.
Now Leda's twins
Their trembling lances brandiſh'd at the fee 5
Nor had they miſs'd, but he to thi:;al, fled,
Conceal’d from aiming ſpears, not pervious to the ſteed.
Dryden.
I've known young Juba riſe before the ſun,
To beat the thicket where the tyger ſlept,
Or ſeek the lion in his dreadfuſ haunts. Addiſon's Cato.
TH1'ckly, adv. [from thick.] Deeply; to a great quantity.
Mending cracked receivers, having thickly overlaid them
with diachylon, we could not perceive leaks. Boyle.
THICKNEss. n.ſ.. [from thick.]
1. The ſtate of being thick; denſity.
2. Quantity of matter interpoſed; ſpace taken up by matter
interpoſed.
In the darkened room, againſt the hole at which the light
entered, I could eaſily ſee through the whole thickneſs of my
hand the motions of a body placed beyond it. Boyle.
3. Quantity laid on quantity to ſome conſiderable depth.
Poll a tree, and cover it ſome thickneſs with clay on the
top, and ſee what it will put forth. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
4. Conſiſtence ; groſſneſs; not rareneſs; ſpiſſitude.
Nitre mingled with water to the thickneſs of honey, and
anointed on the bud after the vine is cut, it will ſprout
forth. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 444.
Diſeaſes imagined to come from the thickneſs of blood,
Some often from the contrary cauſe. Arbuthnoi on Aliment.
5. Imperviouſneſs; cloſeneſs.
The banks of the river and the thickneſs of the ſhades drew
into them all the birds of the country. Addiſon.
6. Want of ſharpneſs; want of quickneſs.
A perſon found in himſelf, being at ſome times ſubjećt to
a thickneſs of hearing, the like effect. Holder.
What you write is printed in large letters; otherwiſe bel
tween the weakneſs of my eyes and thickneſs of hearing, I
ſhould loſe the greateſt pleaſure. Swift.
TH1'ck-sculled, adj. Dull; ſtupid.
Pleas'd to hear their thick-ſºul’d judges cry,
Well mov’d oh finely ſaid Dryden.
This downright fighting fool, this thick-ſºull'd hero,
This blunt unthinking inſtrument of death,
With plain dull virtue has outgone my wit. Dryden.
TH1'cKSET. adj. [thick and ſet.] Cloſe planted.
His eye-balls glare with fire, ſuffus'd with blood,
His neck ſhoots up a thickſet thorny wood;
His briſtled back a trench impal'd appears, -
And ſtands erected, like a field of ſpears. Dryden.
The world is ſo thic ſet with the numerous produćtions of
the creatures, that beſides the apparent beauty of things view-
ed by all, there are thoſe ſecret graces in every part of na-
ture, which ſome few alone have the ſkill to diſcern. Grew.
TH1'ckskin. n.ſ. [thick and ſkin..] A coarſe groſs man; a
numſkul.
The ſhallow'ſt thic ſºn of that barren ſort,
Who Pyramus preſented in their ſport,
Forſook his ſcene and enter'd in a brake. Shakeſpeare.
THIEF. n.ſ.. [thiubs, Gothick; self, Saxon; dieſ, Dutch.
It was anciently written thieoſ, and ſo appeareth to have been
of two ſyllables; thie was wont to be taken for thrift, ſo
that thie of is he that takes ºf or from a man his thie, that is,
his thrift or means whereby he thrives.]
1. One who takes what belongs to another: the thief ſteals by
ſecrecy, and the robber by violence; but theſe ſenſés are con-
founded.
Take heed, have open eye ; for thieves do foot by night.
Shakeſpeare.
This he ſaid becauſe he was a thicſ, and had the bag. john.
Can you think I owe a thief my life,
Becauſe he took it not by lawleſs force
Am I obliged by that t'affſ his rapines,
And to maintain his murders 2 Bryden
2. An excreſcence in the ſnuff of a candle. yaen.
!hºir burning lamps the nº enſuing ſhow
Th' oil ſparkles, thiº. about the ſnuff i. grow. May,
[thief and catch..] ) One whoſe bº-
º {-ſ} [thief and lead.] ; fineſs is to de-
thi d take. -
and bring them to juniº ºf and take.j tect thieves,
A wolf paſſed by
to execution.
My ey'nings all I would with ſhar ers ſi
, And make the thief-catcher my i. º
To Thieve. v. n. [from thief.] To ſteal
THIEVERY. n.ſ. [from thieve.]
I. The practice of ſtealing.
Ne how to ſcape great puniſhment and ſhame,
For their falſe treaſon and vii. thievery. Spenſºr.
Maſter, be one of them; 'tis an honourable kind of
thievery. - - - - Shakeſpears.
Do villainy, do, ſince you profeſs to do.'t,
Like workmen; I'll example you with thievery. Shakeſp.
He makes it a help unto thievery; for thieves having a de-
ſign upon a houſe, make a fire at the four corners thereof,
and caſt therein the fragments of loadſtone, which raiſeth
fume. Brown's Pulg. Errours, b. ii.
Amongſt the Spartans, thievery was a practice morally good
and honeſt. South.
2. That which is ſtolen.
Injurious time now, with a robber's haſte,
Crams his rich *iev'ry up he knows not how. Shake?:
TH1'Évish. adj. [from thief J
1. Given to ſtealing; practiſing theft.
What, would'ſt thou have me go and beg my food
Or with a baſe and boiſt'rous ſwoºd enforce
A thieviſ’ living on the common road. Shakeſpeare.
O thieviſh ni ght,
Why ſhould'ſt thou, but for ſome fjorious end,
In thy dark lanthorn thus cloſe up the ſtars,
That nature hung in heav'n, and filrd their lamps
With everlaſting oil, to give due light
To the miſled and lonely traveller? Milton.
The thirviſº God ſuſpected him, and took
The hind aſide, and thus in whiſpers ſpoke;
Diſcover nôt the theft. Addiſon.
2. Secret; ſly.
Four and twenty times the pilot's glaſs
Hath told the thieviſh minutes how they paſs. Shakeſp.
TH1’E Vishly adv. [from thieviſh.] Like a thief.
They lay not to live by their worke,
Tuſcr's Huſø.
as the thief-leaders were dragging a fox
L'Aſirange.
&gt;
Bramſton,
5 to practiſe theft.
But thieviſhly loiter and lurke.
TH1'EYish Ness. n.ſ. [from thieviſh..] Diſpoſition to ſteal;
habit of ſtealing.
THIGH. m. ſ. [Seop, Saxon; thico, Iſlandick; die, Dutch.]
The thigh includes all between the buttocks and the knee.
The thigh bone is the longeſt of all the bones in the body:
its fibres are cloſe and hard: it has a cavity in its middle: it
is a little convex and round on its foreſide, but a little hol-
low, with a long and ſmall ridge on its backſide. Quincy.
He touched the hollow of his thigh, and it was out ºf
joint. Gen. xxxii. 25.
The fleſh diſſolved, and left the thigh bone bare. Wiſeman.
THILK. pronoun. [Pilc, Saxon.] That ſame. Obſoleté,
I love thiſ laſs: alas, why do I love
She deigns not my good will, but doth reprove,
And of my rural muſick holdeth ſcorn. Spenſºr's Paſº.
THILL. m. ſ. ſoille, Saxon, a piece of timber cut..] . The
ſhafts of a waggon; the arms of wood between which the
laſt horſe is placed. -
More eaſily a waggon may be drawn in rough ways if the
fore wheels were as high as the hinder wheels, and if the
thills were fixed under the axis. Mortimer's Huſø.
THILL-Horse. Un. ſ. [thill and horſ...] The laſt horſe; the
THI'LLER. ; horſe that goes between the Shakespeare
Whoſe bridle and ſaddle, whitlether and nal,
With collars and harneiſs for thiſler and al. T. era.
What a beard haſ thou got?, thou haſt got more hair on
thy chin, than Dobbin my thiſ horſe has on his tail. Shakespeare
THI’MBLE. n.ſ. [This is ſuppoſed by Minſhew to be corrupted
from thumb bell.] A metal cover by which women ſecure their
fingers from the needle when they few.
C Your ladies and pale viſag'd maids,
Like Amazons, come tripping after drums;
Their thimbles into armed gantlets change, -
Their needles to lances. Shakeſp. King john.
Examine Venus and the Moon, - -
Who ſtole a thimble or a ſpoon. Hudibras, p. i.
Veins that run perpendicular to the horizon, have valves
ſticking to their fides like ſo many thimbles; which, when
the blood preſſes back, ſtop its paſſage, but are compreſſed
by the forward motion of the blood. Cheyne.
THYME.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H I
T H I
THIME. m. ſ. [thyme, Lat: thym, Fr.] A fragrant herb from
which the bees are ſuppoſed to draw honey. This ſhould be
- thyme, which ſee.
wº. and bees alluring thyme. Spenſer.
THIN. adj. [Sinn, Saxon; thunnur, Iſlandick; dunn, Dutch.]
1. Not thick.
Beat gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires. Exod.
2. Rare ; not denſe.
The hope of the ungodly is like thin froth, that is blown
away with the wind. I//d. v. 14.
In the day when the air is more thin, the ſound pierceth
better; but when the air is more thick, as in the night, the
ſound ſpendeth and ſpreadeth abroad leſs. Bacon.
Underſtand the ſame
Of fiſh within their wat'ry reſidence;
Not hither ſummon'd, ſince they cannot change
Milton.
Their element, to draw the thinner air.
The waters of Boriſthenes are ſo thin and ight, that they
e top of the ſtream of the river Hypanis,
More.
To warm new milk pour any alkali, the liquor will re-
main at reſt, though it appear ſomewhat thinner. Arbuthnot.
3. Not cloſe ; ſeparate by large ſpaces.
He pleas'd the thin and baſhful audience
Of our well-meaning, frugal anceſtors.
Thou art weak, and full of art is he ;
Elſe how could he that hoſt ſeduce to ſin,
ſwim upon th
Roſcommon.
Whoſe fall has left the heav'nly nation thin Ż Dryden.
Northward, beyond the mountains we will go,
Where rocks lie cover'd with eternal ſnow,
Thin herbage in the plains, and fruitleſs fields,
The ſand no gold, the mine no ſilver yields. Dryden.
Thin on the tow’rs they ſtand; and ev'n thoſe few,
A feeble, fainting, and deječted crew. Dryden.
Already Caeſar
Has ravag'd more than half the globe; and ſees
Mankind grown thin by his deſtructive ſword. Addiſon.
4. Not cloſely compačted or accumulated.
Seven thin ears blaſted with the eaſt wind ſprung up. Gen.
Remove the ſwelling epithets, thick laid
As varniſh on a harlot's cheek; the reſt
Thin ſown with ought of profit or delight.
Thin leaved arbute hazle-graffs receives,
And planes huge apples bear that bore but leaves. Dryden.
5. Exile; ſmall.
I hear the groans of ghoſts;
Thin, hollow ſounds, and lamentable ſcreams.
6. Not coarſe; not groſs in ſubſtance.
7. Not abounding.
Spain is thin ſown of people, by reaſon of the ſterility of
the ſoil and the natives being exhauſted in ſuch vaſt territo-
ries as they poſſeſs. Bacon.
Ferrara is very large, but extremely thin of people. Addiſon.
8. Not fat; not bulky; lean ; ſlim ; ſlender.
A ſlim thin gutted fox made a hard ſhift to wriggle his
body into a hen-rooſt, and when he had ſtuffed his guts well,
the hole was too little to get out again. L'E/irange.
THIN. adv. Not thickly.
Fame is the ſpur, that the clear ſpirit doth raiſe,
That laſt infirmity of noble mind,
To ſcorn delights, and live laborious days;
But the fair guerdon when we hope to find,
And think to burſt out into ſudden blaze,
Comes the blind fury with th' abhorred ſheers,
And ſlits the thin ſpun life. Milton.
A country, gentlewoman, if it be like to rain, goes not
abroad thin clad. Locke.
To THIN. v. a. [from the adjećtive.]
1. To make thin or rare; not to thicken.
The ſerum of the blood is neither acid nor alkaline: oil of
vitriol thickens, and oil of tartar thins it a little. Arbuthnot.
2. To make leſs cloſe or numerous.
The bill againſt root and branch never paſſed till both
houſes were ſufficiently thinned and overawed. King Charles.
Tº unload the branches, or the leaves to thin
That ſuck the vital moiſture of the vine. Dryden.
'Tis Caeſar's ſword has made Rome's ſenate little,
Milton.
Dryden.
And thinn'd its ranks. Addiſon's Cato,
3. To attenuate.
The vapours by the ſolar heat
Thinn'd and exhal'd riſe to their airy ſeat. Blackmore.
TH1'NLY. adv. [from thin..] Not thickly ; not cloſely ; not
denſely; not numerouſly. 2
bi ** commonly opinioned, that the earth was thinly inha-
ited before the flood. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi.
º Pronoun...[thein, Gothick; Sin, Saxon; dijn, Dutch..]
i. or relating to thee; the pronoun poſſeſſive of thou.
}. ed for thy When the ſubſtantive is divided from it: as
this *. Houſe; thine is this houſe; this houſe is thine.
Hº: º, '. France; let her be thine, for we
s aughter. Shakeſp. King Lear.
2
THINK. n.ſ. (Sing, Saxon; ding, Dutch.]
1. Whatever is ; not a perſon. A general word.
Do not you chide ; I have a thing for you.
You have a thing for me !
It is a common thing—
—Ha ?
——To have a fooliſh wife. Shakeſp. Othell,
The great maſter he found buſy in packing up his thiſ,
againſt his departure. Knolles's Hiff. of the Turi.
The remnant of the meat-offering is a thing moſt holy.
Lev. ii. 2.
Says the maſter, you devour the ſame things that §
would have eaten, mice and all. L'E/irange.
A thing by neither man or woman priz'd,
And ſcarcely known enough to be deſpis'd. Dryden.
I ſhould bluſh to own ſo rude a thing,
As it is to ſhun the brother of my king. Dryden.
Wicked men, who underſtand any thing of wiſdom, may
ſee the imprudence of worldly and irreligious courſes. Tillºft.
2. It is uſed in contempt.
I have a thing in proſe, begun above twenty-eight years
ago, and almoſt finiſhed: it will make a four ſhilling vo-
lume. - Swift.
3. It is uſed of perſons in contempt, or ſometimes with pity.
See, ſons, what things you are how quickly nature
Falls to revolt, when gold becomes her object?
For this the fooliſh over-careful fathers
Have broke their ſleeps with thought, their brains with
Care. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Never any thing was ſo unbred as that odious man. Congr.
The poor thing fighed, and with a bleſfing expreſſed with
the utmoſt vehemence turned from me. Addiſon.
I'll be this abjećt thing no more.
Love give me back my heart again. Granville.
4. It is uſed by Shakeſpeare once in a ſenſe of honour.
I lov'd the maid I married; never man
Sigh’d truer breath: but that I ſee thee here,
Thou noble thing / more dances my wrapt heart. Shakespeare
To THINK. v. n. preter. thought. [thankgan, Gothick;
§encean, Saxon; dencken, Dutch.]
1. To have ideas; to compare terms or things; to reaſon; to
cogitate ; to perform any mental operation.
Thinking, in the propriety of the Engliſh tongue, ſignifies
that ſort of operation of the mind about its ideas, wherein
the mind is active; where it, with ſome degree of voluntary
attention, conſiders any thing. Locke.
What am I? or from whence for that I am
I know, becauſe I think; but whence I came,
Or how this frame of mine began to be,
What other being can diſcloſe to me? Dryden.
Thoſe who perceive dully, or retain ideas in their minds
ill, will have little matter to think on. Locke.
It is an opinion that the ſoul always thinks, and that it has
the actual perception of ideas in itſelf conſtantly, and that
aćtual thinking is as inſeparable from the ſoul, as actual ex-
tenſion is from the body. Locke.
Theſe are not matters to be ſlightly and ſuperficially thought
upon. Tilſºn's Sermºni.
His experience of a good prince muſt give great ſatisfac-
tion to every thinking man. Addison's Freeholder.
2. To judge; to conclude; to determine. -
Let them marry to whom they think beſt; only to their
father's tribe ſhall they marry. Num. xxxvi.6.
I fear we ſhall not find
This long deſired king ſuch as was thought.
3. To intend. -
Thou thoughtſ to help me, and ſuch thanks! gº ...
As one near death to thoſe that wiſh him live. Shaºff”
. To imagine; to fancy. -
4. Something ſince i. coming forth is thought of, which
Imports the kingdom ſo much fear and dangº ,
That his return was moſt requir'd Shaº/P. King Lear.
, Edmund, I think, is gone,
In pity of his miſery, to diſpatch
His nighted life.
We may not be
earth; for the face of natu
and obſerve ſuch a thing.
Thoſe who love to live in gardens,
contriving a winter garden.
5. To muſe; to meditate. .
You pine, you languiſh, love to be alone,
Daniel.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
ſtartled at the breaking of the exterio.
re hath provoked men to think of
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
have never thought of
Speciator, Nº. 477.
Thing much, ſpeak little, and in ſpeaking figh. Dryden,
6. To recollect; to obſerve.
We are come to have the warrant.
Shake p.
—Well thought upon; I have it here about me. o all that
Think upon me, my God, for good, according % IQ-
I have done. d Neh. V. I9
. To judge; to conclude. - ided
7 #'. general acquaintance be among ladies, rº.
they have no ill reputation, you think you are ſafe. Still
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H I
T H I
n
º
º
s
ºº
-
*--
--
tº:
ne.
* ,
---
º
º
º
Still the work was not complete,
When Venus thought on a deceit. Swift's Miſsl.
The opinions of others whom we know and think well of
are no ground of aſſent. Locke.
8. To conſider; to doubt.
Any one may think with himſelf, how then can any
thing live in Mercury and Saturn. Bentley's Sermons.
To THINK. v. a.
1. To imagine; to image in the mind; to conceive.
Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,
And as my patron thought on in my prayer.
Charity thinketh no evil.
2. To believe; to eſteem.
Me thought I ſaw the grave where Laura lay. Sidney.
Me thinketh the running of the foremoſt is like that of
Shałºffeare.
I Cor. xiii. 5.
Ahimaaz. 2 Sam. xviii. 27.
Nor think ſuperfluous others aid. Milton.
3. To THINK much. To grudge.
He thought not much to clothe his enemies. Milton.
If we conſider our infinite obligations to God, we have no
reaſon to think much to ſacrifice to him our deareſt intereſts
in this world. Tillotſon's Sermons.
4. To THINK ſcorn. To diſdain.
He thought ſcorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone. Eſh. iii.
THINKFR. n.ſ. [from think.] One who thinks in a certain
manner.
No body is made any thing by hearing of rules, or laying
them up in his memory; practice muſt ſettle the habit: you
may as well hope to make a good muſician by a lecture in
the art of muſick, as a coherent thinker, or ſtričt reaſoner,
by a ſet of rules. Locke.
If a man had an ill-favoured noſe, deep thinkers would im-
pute the cauſe to the prejudice of his education. Swift.
TH1'NKING. m. ſ. [from think.] Imagination; cogitation ;
judgment.
He put it by once; but, to my thinking, he would fain
have had it. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
If we did think,
His contemplations were above the earth,
And fix’d on ſpiritual objećts, he ſhould ſtill
' Dwell in his muſings; but I am afraid
His thinkings are below the moon, nor worth
His ſerious conſidering. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
I heard a bird ſo ſing,
Whoſe muſick, to my thinking, pleas'd the king. Shakeſp.
I was a man, to my thinking, very likely to get a rich wi-
dow. Addiſon's Guard. Nº. 97.
TH1'NLY. m. ſ. [from thin.]
1. Not thickly.
2. Not cloſely; not numerouſly.
It is opinioned, that the earth was thinly inhabited before
the flood. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Our walls are thinly mann'd; our beſt men ſlain:
The reſt, an heartleſs number, ſpent with watching. Dryd.
TH1'NNess. n.ſ. [from thin.]
'1. The contrary to thickneſs; exility; tenuity.
Tickling is moſt in the ſoles, arm-holes and ſides, be-
cauſe of the thinneſ of the ſkin. Bacon.
No breach, but an expanſion,
Like gold to airy thinneſs beat. Donne.
Tranſparent ſubſtances, as glaſs, water, air, &amp;c. when
made very thin by being blown into bubbles, or otherwiſe
formed into plates, do exhibit various colours according to
their various thinneſs, although at a greater thickneſs they
appear very clear and colourleſs. Newton's Opticks.
Such depend upon a ſtrong projećtile motion of the blood,
and too great thinneſs and delicacy of the veſicls. A buthnot.
2. Paucity ; ſcarcity.
The buzzard
Invites the feather'd Nimrods of his race,
To hide the thinneſs of their flock from fight,
And all together make a ſeeming goodly flight. Dryden.
In country villages pope Leo the ſeventh indulged a
practice through the thinnſ of the inhabitants, which opencil
a way for pluralities. Ayliffe's Parergon.
3. Rareneſs; not ſpiffitude.
Thoſe pleaſures that ſpring from honour the mind can nau-
ſeate, and quickly feel the thinneſs of a popular breath. South.
THIRD. adj. [&amp;mièëa, Saxon.] The firſt after the ſecond ;
the ordinal of three.
This is the third time: I hope good luck lies in odd num-
be rs. Shakeſpeare.
THIRD. m. ſ. [from the adječtive.]
1. The third part.
To thce and thine hereditary ever,
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom. Shakeſp.
Men of their broken debtors take a third,
A ſixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again. Shakeſpeare.
The proteſtant ſubjects of the abbey make up a third of
its people. - Addison.
No ſenterce can ſtand that is not confirmed by two third;
of the council. Addison
Such clamours are like the feigned quarrels of combined
cheats, to delude ſome third perſon. Decay of Piet
2. The ſixtieth part of a ſecond. y-
Divide the natural day into twenty-four equal parts, an
hour into fixty minutes, a minute into fixty ſeconds, a ſecond
into ſixty thirds. Holder -
r - t 7 T -
Tº ºvoi. n. ſ. [third and borºugh..] An º:
abić.
TH1'RDIY. adv, [from third..] In the third place.
Firſt, metals are more durable than plants; ſecondly, they
are more ſolid; thirdly, they are wholly ſubterrany. bº.
To THIRL. v. 4. [ºnlian, Sax.] To pierce; to perforate. Ainſ.
THIRST. m. ſ. [Synre, Saxon; dºjº, Dutch.j -
I. The pain ſuffered for want of drink; want of drink.
But fearleſs they perſue, nor can the flood
Quench their dire thirſ'; alas ! they thirſt for blood. Denh.
Thus accurs'd,
In midſt of water I complain of thirſ. Dryden.
Thiſ and hunger denote the ſtate of ſpittle and liquor of
the ſtomach. Thiſ is the ſign of an acrimony commonly
alkaleſcent or muriatick. A buthnot on Aliments.
2. Eagerneſs; vehement deſire.
Not hope of praiſe, nor thirſ of worldly good,
Enticed us to follow this emprize. Fairfax, b. ii.
Thou haſt allay'd the thiſ! I had of knowledge. Aſſiºn.
Say is't thy bounty, or thy thiſ? of praiſe. Granville.
This is an active and ardent thiſ? after happineſs, or after
a full, beatifying object. Cheyne.
3. Draught.
The rapid current, through veins
Of porous earth with kindly thirſt up drawn,
Roſe a freſh fountain. Milton.
To THIRST. v. n. [Symran, Saxon; der/len, Dutch.]
1. To feel want of drink; to be thirſty or athirſt.
They ſhall not hunger nor thirſt. Iſa. xlix. 10.
The people thiſled there for water. Exod. xvii. 3.
They as they thir/ied ſcoop the brimming ſtream. Milt.
2. To have a vehement deſire for any thing.
They knew how the ungodly were tormented, thir/ling in
another manner than the juſt. J//d. xi. 9.
My ſoul thir/ieth for the living God. Pſal. xlii. 2.
Till a man hungers and thir/ls after righteouſneſs, till he
feels an uneaſineſs in the want of it, his will will not be de-
termined to any action in purſuit of this confeſſed, greater
ood. Locke.
g But furious thirſting thus for gore,
The ſons of men ſhall ne'er approach thy ſhore. Pope.
To THIRST. v. a. To want to drink.
Untam'd and fierce the tyger ſtill remains:
For the kind gifts of water and of food,
He ſeeks his keeper's fleſh, and thirſ's his blood. Prior.
THI’rst INEss. n.ſ. [from thirſt.] The ſtate of being thirſty.
Next they will want a ſucking and ſoaking thir/lineſs, or a
fiery appetite to drink in the lime. //otton.
TH1'Rst Y. adj. [Sunrz13, Saxon.]
1. Suffering want of drink; pained for want of drink.
Thy brother's blood the thirſty earth hath drank,
Broach'd with the ſteely point of Clifford's lance. Shakeſp.
Give me a little water to drink, for I am thir/ly. judg. iv.
Unworthy was thy fate,
To fall beneath a baſe aſſaſſin's ſtab,
Whom all the thirſty inſtruments of death
Had in the field of battle ſought in vain. Rowe.
2. Poſſeſſed with any vehement deſire: as, blood thirſty.
THIRTE'EN. adj. [Speozine, Saxon.] Ten and three. -
Speaking at the one end, I heard it return the voice thir-
teen times. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł. Nº. 249.
THIRTEENTH. adj. [from thirteen; ºneoteoba, Saxon.] The
third after the tenth. -
The thirteenth part difference bringeth the buſineſs, but to
ſuch a paſs, that every woman may have an huſband. Graunt.
THIRT1st H. adj. [from thirty; ºnrºtegoëa, Saxon.] The
tenth thrice told ; the ordinal of thirty. - -
Henry ſhall eſpouſe the lady Margaret ere the thirtieth of
May next enſuing. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
A thirtieth part of the ſun's revolution. Hale.
More will wonder at ſo ſhort an age,
To find a blank beyond the thirtieth page. Dryden.
Thirty. adj. [Spitziá, Saxon.] Thrice ten.
I have ſlept fifteen years.
—Ay, . the time ſeems thirty unto me. Shałºffeare.
The Claudian aqueduct ran thirty-eight miles. Addison.
This pronoun. [Sir, Saxon:! . -
1. That which is preſent ; what is now mentioned.
Bardolph and Nim had more valour. than this, yet they
were both hang'd : and ſo would this be, if he durit ſteal. Shakespeare
Come a little nearer this ways. - Shakeſpeare.
Within this three mile may you ſee it coming ;
I ſay a moving grovº. Shałºś. Macbeth.
26 K Muſt<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H O
T H O
Muſt I endure all this - Shakespeare Julius Caſar.
7... ſhall comfort us concerning our toil. Gen. V;29.
This is not the place for a large reduction. Hale.
There is a very great inequality among men as to their in-
ternal endowments, and their external conditions, in this
life. Calamy's Sermons.
ext future. -
2. T. the Lord be angry, and I will ſpeak yet but this
once: peradventure ten ſhall be found there. Gen. xviii. 32.
3. This is uſed for this time.
By this the veſſel half her courſe had run.
4. The laſt paſt. -
I have not wept this forty years ; but now
My mother comes afreſh into my eyes.
5. It is often oppoſed to that.
As when two winds with rival force contend,
This way and that, the wavºring ſails they bend,
while freezing Boreas and black Eurus blow,
Now here, now there, the reeling veſſel throw. Pope.
According as the ſmall parts of matter are connected to-
gether after this or that determinate manner, a body of this
or that denomination is produced. Boyle.
Do we not often hear of this or that young heir 2 are not
his riches and his lewdneſſes talkt of together f South's Serm.
This way and that the impatient captives tend,
And preſſing for releaſe the mountains rend. - Dryden.
6. When this and that reſpect a former ſentence, this relates to
the latter, that to the former member.
Their judgment in this we may not, and in that we need
º not, follow. Hooker.
7. Sometimes it is oppoſed to the other. -
Conſider the arguments which the author had to write
Dryden.
Dryden.
this, or to deſign the other, before you arraign him. Dryden.
With endleſs pain this man perſues
What, if he gain'd, he could not uſe:
And t'other fondly hopes to ſee
What never was, nor e'er ſhall be. Prior.
TH1's TL.E. n.ſ. ſhirtel, Saxon ; dieſel, Dutch ; carduus, Lat.] *
A prickly weed growing in corn fields.
The leaves of the thiſtle grow alternately on the branches,
and are prickly; and the heads are, for the moſt part, ſqua-
moſe and prickly. AMiller.
Hateful docks, rough thiſtles, keckfies, burs. Shakeſp.
Get you ſome carduus benedićtus, and lay it to your
heart.—There thou prick'ſt her with a thiſtle. Shakeſp.
Thorns alſo and thiſles it ſhall bring thee forth. Milion.
Tough thiſłles choak'd the fields, and kill'd the corn,
And an unthrifty crop of weeds was born. Dryden.
Rie graſs will kill thiſłles. Mortimer's Huſø.
TH1's TLE, golden. m. ſ. A plant.
The golden thiſtle hath the appearance of a thiſtle : the
flower conſiſts of many half florets, which reſt on the em-
brios; each of theſe are ſeparated by a thin leaf, and on the
top of each embrio is faſtened a little leaf. . Miller.
TH1's TLY. adj. [from thiſtle..] Overgrown with thiſtles.
Wide o'er the thiſłly lawn as ſwells the breeze,
A whitening ſhower of vegetable down
Amuſive floats. Thomſon's Summer.
TH1'THER. adv. [bºer, Saxon.]
1. To that place: it is oppoſed to hither.
We're coming thither. Shakeſpeare.
When, like a bridegroom from the Eaſt, the ſun
Sets forth ; he thither, whence he came, doth run. Denham.
There Phoenix and Ulyſſes watch the prey;
And thither all the wealth of Troy convey.
2. To that end ; to that point.
TH1'THERT.o. adv. [thither and to...] To that end ; ſo far.
THITHERWARD. adv. [thither and ward.] Towards that
place.
Ne would he ſuffer ſleep once thitherward
Approach, albe his drowſy den were next. Fairy Qu.
Madam, he's gone to ſerve the duke of Florence:
We met him thitherward, for thence we came. Shakeſp.
By quick inſtinctive motion, up I ſprung,
As thitherward endeavouring. Miltºn's Par. Lºft, b. viii.
The fooliſh beaſts went to the lion's den, leaving very
goodly footſteps of their journey thitherward, but not the
like of their return. L'Eſtrange.
A tuft of daiſies on a flow'ry la
They ſaw, and thitherward they bent their way. Dryden.
THQ: adv. [Sonne, Saxon.]
1. Then. Spenſer.
2. Tºo' contracted for though.
To THole. v. n. To wait awhile. Ainſ.
THoNG. * / [Franá, Pnong, Saxon.] A ſtrap, or ſtring of
leather.
Dryden.
- The Tuſcan king
Laid by the lance and took him to the ſling;
Thrice whirl'd the thong about his head, and threw
The heated lead half melted as it flew. Dryden's An.
The ancient ceſtus only conſiſted of ſo many large thongs
about the * without any lead at the end. Addiſon.
The ſmiths and armourers on palfreys ride,
And nails for looſen'd ſpears, and thongs for ſhield, pro-
vide. Dryden's Knight's jai.
THoRA'cick, adj. [from thorax.] Belonging to the breaſ.”
The chyle grows grey in the thoracic duº. Arnia
THo'RAL. adj. Ifrom thorus, Lat.] Relating to the bed."
The puniſhment of adultery, according to the Roman
law; was ſometimes made by a thoral ſeparation. Ayliff.
THORN. m. ſ. [thaurns, Gothick; Ponn, Saxon; dº.
Dutch.] &gt;
I. A prickly tree of ſeveral kinds.
Thorns and thiſtles ſhall it bring forth.
2. A prickle growing on the thorn buſh.
The moſt upright is ſharper than a thorn hedge. Mr. vii
Flowers of all hue, and without thorn the roſe. Aſia.
3. Anything troubleſome.
The guilt of empire; all its thorns and cares
Be only mine. Southern's Spartan Dame
Tho'RNApple. n.ſ. A plant. -
The thornapple is of two ſorts; the greater, which riſes
up with a ſtrong round ſtalk, and the leſſer differs from .
other in the ſmallneſs of the leaves.
THo'RNBAck. n.ſ. A ſea-fiſh.
The thornback when dried taſtes of ſal ammoniac. Arbuth.
THO'RNBUT. n. ſ. A ſort of ſea-fiſh, Ainſ, which he diffin-
guiſhes from thornback. A birt or turbót.
Tho'RN.Y. adj. [from thorn.]
1. Full of thorns; ſpiny; rough ; prickly.
Not winding ivy, nor the glorious bay;
Gen. iii. 18.
Martimer.
He wore, ſweet head, a thorny diadem. Randºlph.
The boar's eye-balls glare with fire,
His neck ſhoots up a thickſet thorny wood;
His briſtled back a trench impal'd appears. Dryden.
The wiſer madmen did for virtue toil
A thorny, or at beſt a barren ſoil. Drydºn.
They on the bleaky top
Of rugged hills, the thorny bramble crop. Dryden.
2. Pricking; vexatious.
No diſlike againſt the perſon
Of our good queen, but the ſharp thorny points
Of my alleged reaſons drive this forward. Shakespeare.
3. Difficult; perplexing.
By how many thorny and hard ways they are come there-
unto, by how many civil broils. Spenſer on Ireland.
THO'Rough. prepoſ. [the word through extended into two ſyl-
lables.] -
1. By way of making paſſage or penetration.
2. By means of.
Mark Antony will follow
Thorough the hazards of this untrod ſtate,
With all true faith. Shakespeare julius Caſar.
THo'Roug H. adj. [The adjective is always written through,
the prepoſition commonly through.]
1. Complete; full; perfect. -
The Iriſh horſeboys, in the thorough reformation of that
realm, ſhould be cut off. Sººn ar.
He did not deſire a thorough engagement till he had time to
reform ſome whom he reſolved never more to truſt. Clarendul.
A thorough tranſlator muſt be a thorough poet. Dryden.
A thorough practice of ſubjecting ourſelves to the wants of
others, would extinguiſh in us pride. Swift.
2. Paſſing through. -
Let all three ſides be a double houſe, without thorºugh
lights on the ſides. Bacon.
Thoroug HFAR F. n.ſ.. [thorough and fare.] A paſſage through;
a paſſage without any ſtop or let.
Th’ Hyrcanian deſerts are as thoroughſares now
For princes to come view fair Portia. Shakespºrt.
His body is a paſāble carcaſe if he be not hurt; tº ".
thoroughfare for ſteel, if it be not hurt. - shakeſpeare.
Hell, and this world, one realm, one continent b. x
Of eaſy thoroughfare. Milton's Par: * - :
The ungrateful perſon is a monſter, which is all * º:
and belly; a kind of thoroughfare, or common º, or 71ſ.
good things of the world to paſs into. South's armſ
The courts are fill'd with a tumultuous din
Of crouds, or iſſuing forth, or ent'ring in:
A thoroughfare of news; where ſome deviſe. .. Drydºn.
Things never heard; ſome mingle truth with lies. º
THo'Roud HLY. adv. [from thorough...] Completely; fully. t
Look into this buſineſs thoroughly. Salºº
We can never be grieved for their miſeries who are i.
roughly wicked, and have thereby juſtly called their º
on themſelves. Dryden', Dufrºſº.
One would think that every member of the commº.
who embraces with vehemence the principles of º:
ty, had thoroughly ſifted and examined them. }} * i
They had forgotten their ſolemn vows as thºrºg sy 7/1975-
they had never made them. Atterlºº rin-
Thorough sped. adj. [thorough and ſhed.] Finiſhed in P
ciples; thoroughpaced. Our
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H O
."
º
Our thoroughſhed republick of whigs, which contains the
bulk of all hopers, pretenders, and profeſſors, are moſt highly
uſeful to princes. Swift.
THoRoy GHPA cep. adj. [thorough and pace.] Perfeół in what
is undertaken; complete; thoroughſped. Generally in a
bad ſenſe. -
When it was propoſed to repeal the teſt clauſe, the ableſt
of thoſe who were reckoned the moſt ſtanch and thoroughpaced
whigs fell off at the firſt mention of it. Swift.
THoRough sti'ch. adv. [thorough and /litch..] Completely;
fully. A low word.
Perſeverance alone can carry us thorough/?itch. L'EArange,
THoRP. n.ſ.
7%arp, throp, thrºp, tre?, trop, are all from the Saxon
Forp, which ſignifies a village. Gibſon's Camden.
THose. pron. the plural of that.
Make all our trumpets ſpeak, give them all breath,
Thoſe clam’rous harbingers of blood and death. Shakeſp.
The fibres of this muſcle act as thoſe of others. Chºir.
Sure there are poets which did never dream
Upon Parnaſſus, nor did taſte the ſtream
Of Helicon, we therefore may ſuppoſe
Thoſe made not poets, but the poets thoſ. Denham.
THou. m. ſ. [pu, Saxon; du, Dutch ; in the oblique caſes ſin-
gular thee, Fe, Saxon; in the plural ye, 3e, Saxon; in the
oblique caſes plural you, eop, Saxon.]
1. The ſecond pronoun perſonal.
Is this a dagger which I ſee before me,
The handle tow'rd my hand Come let me clutch thee.
I have thee not, and yet I ſee thee ſtill.
Art thou not, fatal viſion, ſenſible
To feeling as to fight.
I am as like to call thee ſo again,
To ſpit on thee again, to ſpurn thee too,
If thou wilt lend this money lend it not
As to thy friend. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Thou, if there be a thou in this baſe town,
Who dares with angry Eupolis to frown;
Who at enormous villany turns pale,
And ſteers againſt it with a full-blown ſail. Dryden.
2. It is uſed only in very familiar or very ſolemn language.
When we ſpeak to equals or ſuperiors we ſay you; but in ſo-
lemn language, and in addreſſes of worſhip, we ſay thou.
To Thou. v. a. [from thou.] To treat with familiarity.
Taunt him with the licence of ink; if thou thou’ſ him
ſome thrice, it ſhall not be amiſs. Shakeſpeare.
THou GH. conjundžion. [heap, Saxon; thauh, Gothick.]
1. Notwithſtanding that ; although.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
. Not that I ſo affirm, though ſo it ſeem. Milton.
The ſound of love makes your ſoft heart afraid,
And guard itſelf, though but a child invade. //aller.
I can deſire to perceive thoſe things that God has prepared
for thoſe that love him, though they be ſuch as eye hath not
ſeen, ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of man to
conceive. Locke.
Though the name of abſtraćted ideas is attributed to uni-
verſal ideas, yet this abſtraćtion is not great. Watts's Logick.
2.7. Thouë. As if, like a #.
In the vine were three branches; and it was as though it
budded. Gen. xl. Io.
3. It is uſed in the end of a ſentence in familiar language:
however; yet.
You ſhall not quit Cydaria for me:
'Tis dangerous though to treat me in this ſort,
And to refuſe my offers, though in ſport. Dryden.
A good cauſe wou'd do well though ;
It gives my ſword an edge. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
THou GHT, the preterite and part, paſſ of think.
I told him what I thought. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Are my friends embark'd
Can any thing be thought of for their ſervice
Whilſt I yet live, let me not live in vain. Addison.
No other tax could have been thought of, upon which ſo
much money would have been immediately advanced. Addison
Thought. m. ſ. [from the preterite of to think.]
. . The operation of the mind; the act of thinking.
2. Idea ; image formed in the mind.
Sulph’rous and thought executing fires
Singe my white head. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
For our inſtrućtion to impart
Things above earthly thought. Milton.
3. Sentiment; fancy; imagery.
Thought, if tranſlated truly, cannot be loſt in another lan-
guage; but the words that convey it to our apprehenſion,
which are the image and ornament of that thought, may be
ſo ill-choſen as to make it appear unhandſome. Dryden.
One may often find as much thought on the reverſe of a
medal as in a canto of Spenſer. . Addiſon on ancient Medals.
Thoughts come crouding in ſo faſt upon me, that my only
difficulty is to chooſe or to rejećt. Dryden.
The thoughts of a ſoul that periſh in thinking. Locke,
4. Reflection; particular conſideration.
- - Why do you keep alone?
Qf ſorrieſt fancies your companions making,
Uſing thoſe thoughts which ſhould indeed have died
With them they think on. Shakeſp. Macbeth,
5. Conception; preconceived notion.
. . . Things to their thought
So unimaginable as hate in heaven. Milton.
6. Opinion; judgment.
He that is ready to ſlip, is as a 1 deſpiſed i h
of him that is at ... P2 a lamp deſpiſed in º:
º
They communicated their thoughts on this º to each
other; and therefore their reaſons are little different. Dryden.
Thus Bethel ſpoke, who always ſpeaks his thought
And always thinks the very thing he ought. Pºpe.
7. Meditation; ſerious conſideration. c
Pride, of all others the moſt dangerous fault,
Proceeds from want of ſenſe or want of thought. Roſcommon.
Nor was godhead from her thought. Milton.
8. Deſign; purpoſe.
The thoughts I think towards you are thoughts of peace,
and not evil. jer. xxix, 11.
9. Silent contemplation.
Who is ſo groſs -
That cannot ſee this palpable device
Yet who ſo bold, but ſays, he ſees it not ?
Bad is the world; and all will come to nought,
When ſuch ill dealings muſt be ſeen in thought. Shakeſp.
Io. Sollicitude; care; concern.
f'. Let us return, left he leave caring for the aſſes and take
thought for us. I Sam. ix. 5.
Hawis was put in trouble, and died with thought and an-
guiſh before his buſineſs came to an end. Bacon's Henry VII.
Adam took no thought, eating his fill. Milton.
II. Expectation.
The main deſcry
Stands on the hourly thought.
12. A ſmall degree; a ſmall quantity.
His face was a thought longer than the exačt ſymmetrians
would allow. Sidney.
If our own be but equal, the law of common indulgence
alloweth us to think them at the leaſt half a thought the bet-
ter, becauſe they are our own. Hooker, b. iv.
A needle pierced through a globe of cork, cut away by
degrees, will ſwim under water, yet not ſink unto the bot-
tom: if the cork be a thought too light to ſink under the fur-
face, the water may be attenuated with ſpirits of wine. Br.
My giddineſs ſeized me, and though I now totter, yet I
think I am a thought better. Swift.
THo'UGHTFUL. adj. [thought and full.]
1. Contemplative; full of reflection; full of meditation.
On theſe he mus'd within his thoughtful mind, -
And then reſolv’d what Faunus had divin'd. Dryden.
2. Attentive; careful.
Thoughtful of thy gain, I all the live-long day
Conſume in meditation deep. Phillips.
3. Promoting meditation; favourable to muſing.
Unſpotted long with human blood:
War, horrid war, your thoughtful walks invades,
And ſteel now glitters in the muſcs ſhades. Pope.
4. Anxious; follicitous.
In awful pomp, and melancholy ſtate,
See ſettled reaſon on the judgment-ſeat;
Around her croud diſtruſt, and doubt and fear, -
And thoughtful forefight, and tormenting care. Prior.
Thoughtfully. adv. [from thoughtful..] With thought or
conſideration ; with ſollicitude.
THo'UGHT FULNEss. n.ſ. Ifrom thoughtful.]
1. Deep meditation.
2. Anxiety; ſollicitude.
THo'UGHT less. adj. [from thought.]
1. Airy; gay; diſſipated.
2. Negligent; careleſs. - -
It is ſomething peculiarly ſhocking to ſee gray hair...with-
out remorſe for the paſt, and thoughtleſ; of the future. Rogers.
3. Stupid; dull.
His goodly fabrick fills the eye, .
And ſeems deſign'd for thoughtlºſ, majeſty: , .
Thoughtlift as monarch oaks that ſhade the plain, -
And ſpread in ſolemn ſtate ſupinely reign. Dryden:
Thouhtiessly. adv. [from thought.] Without thought;
careleſly; ſtupidly. -
In reſtleſs hurries thoughtleſsly they live, .
At ſubſtance oft unmov’d, for ſhadows grieve. Garth.
THoºgºriessness. n.ſ. [from thought'ſ...] Want of thought;
ce of thought. -
rº. *. [thought and ſick.] Uneaſy with reflec-
tion.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Heav'n's face doth glow
with triſtful viſage; and, as 'gainſt the doom,
Is thoughtſiek at the aët. Shakespeare Hamlet.
Thousand. adj. or n.ſ. [purene, Saxon; duyſend, Dutch.]
1. The number of ten hundred. About<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H R
T H R
-
About three thºſ” -
for remote voyages was greater than at this day.
- ber. ,
, Proverbially, a great num". - -
2 So . and thouſand, thouſand times more fair
ſeem’d, when ſhe preſented was to fight.
sº. at a thouſand doors they knock'd,
Bacon.
Fa. Qº.
Not one of all the thouſand but was lock'd. Dryden.
Search the herald's roll,
Where thou ſhalt find thy famous pedigree, n
Drawn from the root of ſome old Tuſcan tree,
And thou, a thºuſand off, a fool of long degree. Dryden.
Though he regulates himſelf by juſtice, he finds a thouſand
occaſions for generoſity and compaſſion. Aldſºn's Sped.
How many thouſand pronounce boldly on the affairs of the
publick, whom God nor men never qualificq for ſuch judg-
ment. J/atts.
THous ANDTH. adj. [from thouſand.] The hundredth ten
times told ; the ordinal of a thouſand.
He that will divide a minute into a thouſand parts, and
break but a part of a º part in the affairs of love, it
may be ſaid of him, that Cupid hath clapt him o' th' ſhoulder,
but I’ll warrant him heart whole. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Such is the poet's lot: what luckier fate
Does on the works of grave hiſtorians wait:
More time they ſpend, in greater toils engage,
Their volumes ſwell beyond the thouſandth page. Dryden.
The French hugonots are many thouſand witneſſes to the
contrary; and I wiſh they deſerved the thouſandth part of the
good treatment they have received. Swift's Miſeſ.
THowl. n.ſ. A piece of timber by which oars are kept in
their places when a rowing. - Airſ
THR ALL. m. ſ. []nael, Saxon.]
1. A ſlave; one who is in the power of another.
No thralls like them that inward bondage have. Sidney.
But fith ſhe will the conqueſt challenge need,
Let her accept me as her faithful thrall.
Look gracious on thy proſtrate thrall.
The two delinquents
Shakeſpeare.
That were the ſlaves of drink, and thralls of ſleep. Shakespeare
I know I'm one of nature's little kings;
Yet to the leaſt and vileft things am thrall. Davies.
That we may ſo ſuffice his vengeful ire,
Or do him mightier ſervice, as his thralls
By right of war, whate'er his buſineſs be. Milton.
2. Bondage; ſtate of ſlavery or confinement.
And laid about him, till his noſe
From thrall of ring and cord broke looſe. Hudibrat, p. i.
To THR All. v. a. Spenſer. [from the noun..] To enſlave;
to bring into the power of another.
Let me be a ſlave t'atchieve the maid,
Whoſe ſudden fight hath thrall'd my wounded eye. Shakespeare
Stateſmen purge vice with vice, and may corrode
The bad with bad, a ſpider with a toad.
For ſo ill thralls not them, but they tame ill,
And make her do much good againſt her will. Donne.
The author of nature is not thralled to the laws of na-
ture. Drummond.
THRA'ldoM. m. ſ. [from thrall.] Slavery; ſervitude.
How far am I inferior to thee in the ſtate of the mind
and yet know I that all the heavens cannot bring me to ſuch
thraldom. Sidney, b. i.
He ſwore with ſobs,
That he would labour my delivery.
—Why, ſo he doth, when he delivers you
From this earth's thraldºn to the joys of heav'n. Shakespeare
This country, in a great part deſolate, groaneth under the
Turkiſh thraldºm. Sandys.
He ſhall rule, and ſhe in thraldºm live. Dryden.
They tell us we are all born ſlaves; life and thraldom we
entered into together, and can never be quit of the one till
we part with the other. Locke.
THRA'PPLE. m. ſ. The windpipe of any animal. They ſtill
retain it in the Scottiſh dialect. -
To THRASH. v. a. [Samrcan, Saxon; deſchen, Dutch.]
I. To beat corn to free it from the chaff. This is written va.
ºriouſly thraſh or threſh, but thraſh is agreeable to etymology.
Firſt thraſh the corn, then after burn the ſtraw. Shakespeare.
Gideon threſhed wheat to hide it. judg. viii. 11.
Here be oxen for burnt ſacrifice, and threſhing inſtruments
for wood. 2 Sam. xxiv. 22.
In the ſun your golden grain diſplay,
And thraſh it out, and winnow it by day. Dryden.
This is to preſerve the ends of the bones from an inca-
leſsency, which they being hard bodies would contračt from
* 'wift motion; ſuch as that of running or threſhing. Ray.
yº. of your clover well dried in the ſun, after the firſt
º/hing, get what ſeed you can. 4/ortimer.
2. To beat; to drub.
- n *ſtury valiant aſ thou art here but to thraſh Tro-
}. and thou art bought and ſold among thoſe of any wit
ike a Barbarian ſlave. Shakeſp. Troil, and Crºſſda.
Spenſer.
4 years ago, navigation of the world To THRASH. v. n... To labour; to drudge.
I rather wou'd be Mevius, threſh for rhimes
Like his, the ſcorn and ſcandal of the times,
Than that Philippick fatally divine,
Which is inſcrib'd the ſecond, ſhould be mine. Dryden
THRA's HER... m. ſ... [from thraſh..] One who thraſhes corn."
Our ſoldiers, like a lazy thraſher with a flail,
Fell gently down, as if they ſtruck their friends. Shakeſ,
Not barely the plowman's pains, the reaper's and thrº
toil, and the baker's ſweat, is to be counted into the bread
we eat: the labour of thoſe employed about the utenſils muſt
all be charged. Locłe.
THRA’s HING-Floor. m. ſ. An area on which corn is beaten.
In vain the hinds the threſhing-flºor prepare,
And exerciſe their flails in empty air. Dryden.
Delve of convenient depth your threſhing-flºor
With temper'd clay, then fill and face it o’er. Dryden.
THR Aso's IcAL. adj. [from Thraſ, a boaſter in old comedy.]
Boaſtful; bragging.
His humour is lofty; his diſcourſe peremptory, his general
behaviour vain, ridiculous, and thraſonical. Shakespeare.
There never was any thing ſo ſudden but the fight of two
rams, and Caeſar's thrºſºnical brag of, I came, ſaw, and
overcam.c. Shakeſp. As you like it.
THRA v E. m. ſ. [Sjar, Saxon.]
1. A herd; a drove. Out of uſe.
2. The number of two dozen.
THREAD. m. ſ. [praeb, Saxon; draed, Dutch.]
I. A ſmall line; a ſmall twiſt.
Let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut
With edge of penny cord and vile reproach. Shakeſpeare.
Though the ſlender thread of dyed filk looked on ſingle
ſeem devoid of redneſs, yet when numbers of theſe thread;
are brought together, their colour becomes notorious. Byk.
He who ſat at a table but with a ſword hanging over his
head by one ſingle thread or hair, ſurely had enough to check
his appetite. South's Sermons.
The art of pleaſing is the ſkill of cutting to a thread, be-
twixt flattery and ill-manners. L'Eſtrange.
2. Anything continued in a courſe; uniform tenor.
The eagerneſs and trembling of the fancy doth not always
regularly follow the ſame even thread of diſcourſe, but ſtrikes
upon ſome other thing that hath relation to it. Burnet.
The gout being a diſeaſe of the nervous parts, makes it
ſo hard to cure; diſeaſes are ſo as they are more remote in
the thread of the motion of the fluids. Arbuthnot.
THRE/ADBARE. adj. [thread and bare.]
1. Deprived of the nap; wore to the naked threads.
Threadbare coat, and cobbled ſhoes he ware. Fa; 24.
The clothier means to dreſs the commonwealth, and ſet a
new nap upon it: ſo he had need; for 'tis threadlart. Shakespeare
Will any freedom here from you be borne,
Whoſe cloaths are threadlare, and whoſe cloaks are torm:
Dryden's juvenal.
He walk'd the ſtreets, and wore a threadbare cloak; .
He din’d and ſupp'd at charge of other folk. Swift.
2. Worn out; trite.
A hungry lean-fac'd villain,
A mere anatomy, a mountebank,
A threadbar juggler, and a fortune-teller, , , Shaft",
Many writers of moral diſcourſes run into ſtale topicks º
threadláre quotations, not handling their ſubject ful'."
cloſely. - Swift.
If he underſtood trade, he would not have mentioned .
threadbare and exploded project. Child on Trade.
To THREAD. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To paſs through with a thread. f
The largeſt crooked needle, with a ligature of the ſize o
that I have threaded it with in taking up the permaisk *
ſels. Sharp's Surg").
2. To paſs through ; to pierce through.
fhus out of lº threading dark-ey'd night. Shakespeare
Being preſt to th' war, -
Ev’n when the nave of the ſtate was touch'd, , , lanuſ
They would not thread the gates. Shaiſ). Criºla".
THRE’AºEN. adj. [from threadj Made of thread.
Behold the threaden ſails,
Borne with th' inviſible and creeping wind, - Shakespeare
Draw the huge bottoms through the furrow d ſea. º
To THREAP. v. a. A country word denoting to * ".
or contend. iation 9
THREAT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Menace; denu"
ill. Shakespeare .
There is no terror, Caſſius, in your threat;
The emperor perceiving that his threats were l
ed, regarded little to threaten any more.
- Do not believe - Milton.
Thoſe rigid threats of death: ye ſhall not die. . . ſºon
To THREAT. v. a. ſtreasian, Saxon : threat is 18
To THRE’ATEN. ; uſed but in poetry.]
2
ittle regar'.
Hayward.
1. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H R
*
º
, “…
* …
º
•º
tº
ºis
-
--
1. To menace; to denounce evil.
Death to be wiſh'd
Though threaten'd, which no worſe than this can bring.
Milton,
2. To menace; to terrify, or attempt to terrify, by denouncing
evil.
What threat you me with telling of the king?
Tell him and ſpare not.
ſpeak henceforth to no man in this name.
The void profound
Wide gaping, and with utter loſs of being
Threatens him. Milton.
AEneas their aſſault undaunted did abide,
And thus to Lauſus, loud with friendly threat'ning cry’d.
Dryden's %
This day black omens threat the brighteſt fair,
That e'er deſerv'd a watchful ſpirit's care. Pope.
3. To menace by ačtion.
Void of fear,
He threaten'd with his long protended ſpear. Dryden.
The noiſe increaſes as the billows roar,
When rowling from afar they threat the ſhore. Dryden.
THR'EAten ER. n.ſ.. [from threaten..] Menacer; one that
threatens.
Be ſtirring as the time; be fire with fire;
Threaten the threatener, and outface the brow
Of bragging horrour. Shakeſp. King john.
The fruit, it gives you life
To knowledge by the threat'ner * Milton's Par. Loft.
THRE'AtENINGLY. adv. [from threaten..] With menace; in
a threatening manner.
The honour that thus flames in your fair eyes,
Before I ſpeak, too threat'ningly replies. Shakeſpeare.
THR'EATFUL. adj. [threat and full.] Full of threats; mina-
clous.
Like as a warlike brigandine applide
To fight, lays forth her threatful pikes afore, -
The engines which in them ſad death do hide. Spenſºr.
THREE. adj. ſprue, Saxon; dry, Dutch; tri, Welſh and
Erſe; tres, Lat.] Two and one.
Prove this a proſp'rous day, the three-nook'd world
Shall bear the olive freely. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
If you ſpeak three words, it will three times report you the
whole three words. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 249.
Great Atreus ſons, Tydides fixt above,
With three-ag'd Neſtor. Creech's Manilius.
Jove hurls the three-fork'd thunder from above. *:::
Theſe three and three with oſier bands we ty'd.
Down to theſe worlds I trod the diſmal way,
And dragg'd the three-mouth'd dog to upper day. Pope.
A ſtrait needle, ſuch as glovers uſe, with a three-edged
point, uſeful in ſewing up dead bodies. Sharp,
2. Proverbially a ſmall number.
Away, thou three-inch'd fool; I am no beaſt. Shakeſp.
A baſe, proud, ſhallow, beggarly, three-ſuited, filthy,
worſted ſtocking knave. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Threefold... adj. [jneopealb, Saxon. J Thrice repeated ;
conſiſting of three.
A º cord is not eaſily broken. Eccluſ. iv. 12.
By a threefold juſtice the world hath been governed from
the beginning: by a juſtice natural, by which the parents and
elders of families governed their children, in which the obe-
dience was called natural piety: again, by a juſtice divine,
drawn from the laws of God; and the obedience was called
conſcience: and laſtly, by a juſtice civil, begotten by both the
former; and the obedience to this we call duty. Raleigh.
A threefold off'ring to his altar bring,
A bull, a ram, a boar. Pope's Odyſſey.
THRE'Epence. n.ſ.. [three and pence..] A ſmall filver coin va-
lued at thrice a penny. - -
A threepence bow’d would hire me,
Old as I am to queen it. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Laying a cauſtick, I made an eſcar the compaſs of a three-
pence, and gave vent to the matter. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Thre/epenN.Y. adj. [triobolaris, Lat.] Vulgar; mean.
THRE’EPILE. n.ſ.. [three and pile.] An old name for good
velvet.
I, in my time, wore threepile, but am out of ſervice. Shakespeare
irgil.
t’.
THREE P1’lāD. adj. Set with a thick pile; in another place
it ſeems to mean piled one on another.
Thou art good velvet; thou'rt a threepil'd piece: I had as
lief be Engliſh kerſey, as be pil'd as thou art. Shakeſpeare.
Threepil'd hyberboles; ſpruce affectation. Shakeſpeare.
THREEsco'RE. adj. [three and ſcore.] Thrice twenty; ſixty.
Threeſcore and ten I can remember well. $ºr.
Their lives before the flood were abbreviated after, and
contračted unto hundreds and threeſcores. Brown.
By chace our long-liv'd fathers earn'd their food;
Toil ſtrung the nerves, and purify'd the blood:
But we their ſons, a pamper'd race of men,
Are dwindl’d down to threeſcore years and ten. Dryden.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
That it ſpread no further, ſtraitly threaten them that they
Acts iv. 18.
T H R
THRENo'oy. *ſ [ºnºſz.] A ſong of lamentation.
***'Sher. n.ſ. properly thraſer.
Here too the thro/her brandiſhing his flail,
Beſpeaks a maſter. c
Thke'shing. See to Thrash.
The careful ploughman doubting ſtands,
Leſt on the threſhing floor his ſheaves prove chaff. Milton
Gideon was taken from thrºſhing, as well as Cincinnań.
from the plough, to command armies. Locke on Education.
THRE’shold. n /.. [&amp;nercºal -
- - - rcpalb, Saxon.] Th
under the door; entrance; gate. i. e ground or ſtep
h;air ...}} forth in honourable wiſe,
tº at the thrº/hold met ſhe well did enterprize. --
A Mº . that ſtumble at the hº ize. Spenſer:
re well foretold that danger lurks within.
Not better Shakeſpeare.
Than ſtill at hell's dark threſhold tº have ſat watch,
Unnam'd, undreaded, and thy ſelf half ſtarv'd Milton
Before the ſtarry threſhold of Jove's court -
My manſion is, where thoſe immortal ſhapes
9f bright aereal ſpirits live inſpher'd
In regions mild, of calm and ſerene air. Milton.
There ſought the queen's apartment, flood before
The peaceful threſhold, and beſieg'd the door. Dryden.
THREw, preterite of throw.
A broken rock the force of Pyrrhus threw :
Full on his ankle fell the pond’rous ſtone, -
Burſt the ſtrong nerves, and craſh'd the ſolid bone. Pope.
THRIce. adv. [from three.]
I. Three times.
Thrice he aſſay’d it from his foot to draw,
And thrice in vain to draw it did affay,
It booted nought to think, to rob him of his prey. Spenſer.
Thrice within this hour
I ſaw him down; thrice up again and fighting. Shakespeare
2. A word of amplification.
Thrice noble lord, let me"entreat of you
To pardon me. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
Thrice, and four times happy thoſe
That under Ilian walls before their parents dy’d. Dryden.
To THRID. v. a. [this is corrupted from thread; in French
enfilºr.] To ſlide through a narrow paſſage.
Some thrid the mazy ringlets of her hair,
Some hang upon the pendents of her ear. Pºpe.
THRIFT. n.ſ.. [from thrive.]
1. Profit; gain; riches gotten; ſtate of proſpering.
He came out with all his clowns, horſt upon ſuch cart
jades, and ſo furniſhed, as I thought with myſelf if that
were thrift, I wiſht none of my friends or ſubjects ever to
thrive. Sidney, b. ii.
You ſome permit
To ſecond ills with ills, each worſe than other,
And make them dreaded to the doer's thrift. Shakeſpeare.
Had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind preſages me ſuch thrift,
That I ſhould be fortunate. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Should the poor be flatter'd
No ; let the candied tongue lick abſurd pomp,
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee,
Where thrift may follow fawning. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. Parſimony; frugality; good huſbandry.
The reſt unable to ſerve any longer, or willing to fall to
thrift, prove very good huſbands. Spenſer on Ireland.
Out of the preſent ſparing and untimely thrift, there grow
many future inconveniences and continual charge in repairing
and re-edifying ſuch imperfect ſlight-built veſſels. Raleigh.
Thus heaven, though all-ſufficient, ſhows a thrift
In his oeconomy, and bounds his gift, Dryden.
3. A plant.
The thrift is a plant with a flower gathered into an almoſt
ſpherical head, furniſhed with a common ſcaly empalement:
this head is compoſed of ſeveral clove-gilliflower flowers,
conſiſting of ſeveral leaves in a proper empalement, ſhaped
like a funnel; in like manner the pointal riſes out of the
ſame empalement, and afterwards turns to an oblong ſeed,
wrapt up in the empalement, as in an huſk. Miller.
THRI'FTILY. adv. [from thrifty.] Frugally; parſimoniouſly.
Cromartie after fourſcore went to his country-houſe to live
thriftily, and ſave up money to ſpend at London. Swift.
THRI'FTINFss. n.ſ.. [from º Frugality; huſbandry.
If any other place you have,
which º: .. #. but thriftingſ to ſave., Hubbard.
Some are cenſured for keeping their own, whom tender-
neſs how to get honeſtly teachelh to ſpend diſcreetly; whereas
ſuch need no great thriftingſ in preſerving their own, who
aſſume more liberty in exašting from others. Wºtton.
THRI'fºrless. adj. [from thrift.] º: extravagant.
They in idle pomp and wanton play
cº had #. and º hours,
And thrown *m; i. into theſe heavy ſtowers. *;
26 - e
Dodſley.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H R
T H R
end mine honour with his ſºme, -
, ºr their ſcraping fathers gold. Shakespeare.
THRI'Fry. adj. [from thrift.]. -
. ... ſpiring; not prºfuſe; " laviſh.
Though ſome men do, as do they would,
Let thrifty do, as do they ſhould. Tºſºr.
Nature never lends -
The ſmalleſt ſcruple of her excellenge,
But like a thrifty goddeſs ſhe determines
Herſelf the glory of a creditor,
Thanks and uſe. - Shakespeare.
Left he ſhould neglect his ſtudies
Like a young heir, the thrifty goddeſs,
For fear young maſter ſhould be ſpoil'd, -
Swift.
would uſe him like a younger child. -
I am glad he has ſo much youth and vigour left, of which
he hath not becn thrifty; but wonder he has no more diſcre-
tion. Swift.
2. Well-huſbanded.
I have five hundred crowns,
The thrifty hire I ſav'd under your father. Shakespeare.
To Thrill. v. a. ſhynllan. Saxon; drilla, Swediſh. To
pierce : to bore; to penetrate ; to drill.
The cruel word her tender heart ſo thrill'd,
That ſudden cold did run through every vein,
And ſtormy horrour all her ſenſes fill’d -
With dying fit, that down ſhe fºll for pain. Fairy Q4.
He pierced through his chaffed cheſt
with thrilling point of deadly iron brand, -
And lanc'd his lordly heart. Fairy Q. b. i.
A ſervant that he bred, thrill'd with remorſe, -
Oppos'd againſt the act; bending his ſword
To his great maſter. Syakſpeare's King Lear.
Nature, that heard ſuch found,
Beneath the hollow round
Of Cynthia's ſeat, the airy region thrilling,
Now was almoſt won, w
To think her part was done. Milton.
To THRILL. v. n.
1. To have the quality of piercing.
The knight his thrillant ſpear again aſſay’d,
In his braſs-plated body to emboſs. Fairy Q. b. i.
With that, one of his thrillant darts he threw,
Headed with ire and vengeable deſpite. Fairy Q. b. ii.
2. To pierce or wound the ear with a ſharp ſound.
The piteous maiden, careful, comfortleſs,
Does throw out thrilling ſhricks, and ſhrieking crics.
Fairy &amp;een, b. i.
3. To feel a ſharp tingling ſenſation.
To ſeek ſweet ſafety out,
- - - - º
In vaults and priſons; and to thrill and ſhake,
Ev’n at the crying of our nation's crow, -
Thinking his voice an armed Engliſhman. Shakeſpeare.
Art thou not horribly afraid : Doth not thy blood thrill at
it * Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
4. To paſs with a tingling ſenſation.
A faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
That almoſt freezes up the heat of life.
A ſudden horror chill * .
Ran through each nerve, and thrill'd in ev'ry vein. Addison.
To THRIVE. v. n. pret. throve. and ſometimes leſs properly
thrived, part. thriven. [Of this word there is found no ſatiſ-
factory etymology: in the northern dialect they uſe throdden,
to make grow; perhaps throve was the original word, from
throa, Iſlandick, to encreaſe.] To proſper; to grow rich ; to
advance in any thing deſired. -
He came forth with his clowns horſt on poor cart-jades,
and ſo furniſhed, that if this be thrift, I wiſh my ſubjećts.
never thrive. - Sidney.
The better thou thriveſ?, the gladder am I. Tuffer.
If lord Percy thrive not, ere the king -
Diſmiſs his power, he means to viſit us. Shakeſpeare.
It grew amongſt buſhes, where commonly plants do not
thrive. - -- Bacon's Nat. Hył. Nº. 62o.
They by vices thrive,
Sail on ſmooth ſeas, and at their port arrive. . . Sandys.
O ſon why fit we here, each other viewing"
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives
In other worlds, and happier ſeat provides
For us, his offspring dear? Milton's Par. Lºft, b. x.
... Thoſe who have reſolved upon the thriving ſort of piety,
ſeldom embark all their hopes in one bottom. Decay of Piety.
- A careful ſhepherd not only turns his flock into a common
paſture, but with particular advertence obſerves the thriving
of ºvery one. Decay of Piety.
Growth is of the very nature of ſome things: to be and
Tº thrive is all one with them; and they know no middle
ſeaſon between their ſpring and their fall. South's Serm.
Experienc'd age in deep deſpair was loſt,
Tº ſee the rebel thrive, the loyal croſt. Dryden.
* * *riving man turns his land into money to make
the greater advantage, - Locke.
Shakeſpeare.
2. The main road of any place.
The thriven calves in meads their food forſake,
And render their ſweet ſouls before the plenteous rack.
Dryden's Pirgil.
A little hope but I have none.
On air the poor camelions thrive, -
Deny'd ev'n that my love can live. Granvill.
Such a care hath always been taken of the city charities.
that they have thriven and proſpered gradually from their in.
fancy, down to this very day. Alterbury's Sermons.
In the fat age of pleaſure, wealth and eaſe,
Sprung the rank weed, and thriv'd with large increaſe.
- Pº, º Eſſay ºn Criticiſm.
Diligence and humility is the way to thrive in the rich.
of the underſtanding, as well as in gold. ſº atts'; Logic{
THRI've R. m. ſ. [from thrive..] One that proſpers; one that
grows rich. - -
He had ſo well improved that little flock his father left, as
he was like to prove a thiver in the end. Hayward.
THRI'vis G.I.Y. adv. [from thriving.] In a proſperous way.
THRo’. contračted by barbarians from through. -
What thanks can wretched fugitives return,
Who ſcatter'd thro’ the world in exile mourn, Dryden.
THR oat. m. ſ. ſºrore, Snoza, Saxon.] . .
1. The forepart of the neck; the paſſages of nutriment and
breath. - -
The gold, I give thee, will I melt and pour
Down thy ill-uttering throat. Shakeſpeare.
Wherefore could I not pronounce, amen? -
I had moſt need of bleſſing, and amen
Stuck in my throat. Shakeſpeare's Macbeath.
Her honour, and her courage try’d,
Calm and intrepid in the very throat -
Of ſulphurous war, on Teniers dreadful field. Thomſºn,
3. To cut the TH Roat. To murder; to kill by violence.
Theſe bred up amongſt the Engliſhmen, when they be-
come kern, are made more fit to cut their throats. Spºnſºr.
A trumpeter that was made priſoner, when the ſoldiers
were about to cut his throat, ſays, why ſhould you kill a man
that kills nobody ? L'Eſtrange.
THR o'ATPIPE. n.f. [throat and pipe.] The weaſon; the wind-
pipe.
Thro'ATwo RT. m. ſ. [throat and wort.] A plant.
The throatwort hath a funnel-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of
one leaf, and cut into ſeveral parts at the top, whoſe empale-
rhent becomes a membranaceous fruit, often triangular, and
divided into three cells, full of ſmall ſeeds. Miller.
To THRob. v. n. [from Sopºćsſ, Minſhew and junius; form-
cd in imitation of the ſound, Skinner; perhaps contracted
from throw up.]
1. To heave; to beat; to riſe as the breaſt with ſorrow or
diſtreſs. -
Here may his head live on my throbbing breaſt. Shake?.
My heart throbs to know one thing:
Shall Banquo's iſſue ever reign Shakespeare Madith.
'Twas the claſh of ſwords: my troubled heart
Is ſo caſt down, and ſunk amidſt its ſorrows, -
It throbs with fear, and akes at every found. Aidſºn.
How that warm'd me ! How my throbbing heart
Leapt to the image of my father's joy,
When you ſhould ſtrain me in your folding arms.
2. To beat; to palpitate.
In the depending orifice there was a throbbing of the art:-
rial blood, as in an aneuriſm, the blood being choked in
by the contuſed fleſh. Iſºſºman's surgºſ.
TH's ob. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Heave; beat; ſtroke 9. pal-
pitation.
She figh’d from bottom of her wounded breaſt,
And after many bitter throbs did throw, 6)
With lips full pale, and fault'ring tongue oppreſt. Fa. Kº
Thou talk'ſt like one who never felt. -
Th’ impatient throbs and longings of a ſoul, , ...,
That pants and reaches after diſtant good. Aidſºn's Catº.
THRoe. m. ſ. [from Snoplan, to fifter, Saxon.]
1. The pain of travail; the anguiſh of bringing c
likewiſe written throw: d
Lucina lent not me her bed, :
But took me in my throes. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
My womb pregnant, and now exceſſive grow” Miltºn
Prodigious motion felt and rueful threes. . . Autº:
Not knowing 'twas my labour, I complain
Of ſudden ſhootings, and of grinding pains, win
My throes come thicker and my cries increas'd. - Dry -- i
Reflect on that day, when earth ſhall be again in º
with her ſons, and at one fruitful throe bring forth all .
generations of learned and unlearned, noble and igno
duſt. - Rºgers'; Sermº"
2. Any extreme agony; the final and mortal ſtruggle.
- O man! have mind of that moſt bitter thrº - . . al
For as the tree does fall ſo lies it ever low. Fairy &amp;
To eaſe them of their griefs,
Their fears of hoſtile ſtrokes, their aches, loſſes, Their
Smith,
hildren: it is
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H R
º
---
--&gt;
º
Their pangs of love, with other incident throes,
That nature's fragile veſſel doth ſuſtain
In life's uncertain voyage, I will do
Some kindneſs to them. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
To THRoe. v. a. [from the noun..] To put in agonies.
The ſetting of thine eye and cheek proclaim a birth,
Which throes thee much to yield. Shakeſp. Tem, ºft.
THRoNE. m.ſ. [thronus, Lat. Spovº.] -
1. A royal ſeat; the ſeat of a king.
Boundleſs intemperance hath been
Th’ untimely emptying of the happy throne,
And full of many kings. Shakespeare . Macbeth.
Th’ eternal father from his throne beheld
Their multitude. Milton.
Stonehenge once thought a temple, you have found
A throne where kings were crown'd. Dryden.
2. The ſeat of a biſhop.
In thoſe times the biſhops preached on the ſteps of the
altar ſtanding, having not as yet aſſumed the ſtate of a throne.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
To THRONE. v. a. [from the noun..] To enthrone; to ſet on
a royal ſeat.
They have, as who have not, whom their great ſtars
Thron’d and ſet high Shakeſpeare.
True image of the father, whether thron’d
In the boſom of bliſs and light of light,
Conceiving or remote from heav'n, enſhrin'd
In fleſhiy tabernacle and human form. A Milton.
C prince O chief of many throned powers. Mikon.
Tºron d in glaſs and nam'd it Caroline. Pope.
THRONG. m.ſ.. [Pianº, Saxon, from pringan, to prºſ...] A
croud ; a multitude preſſing againſt each other.
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives:
We are enow yet living in the field,
To ſmother up the Engliſh in our throngs.
- A throng
Of thick ſhort ſobs in thund'ring volleys float,
And roul themſelves, over her lubrick throat
Shakeſpeare.
In panting murmurs. Craſhaw.
This book, the image of his mind,
Will make his name not hard to find.
I wiſh the throng of great and good
Made it leſs eas"ly underſtood. J7aller.
With ſtudious thought obſerv'd th’ illuſtrious throng,
In nature's order as they paſs'd along;
Their names, their fates. Dryden's An.
To THRONG. v. n. from the noun..] To croud; to come in
tumultuous multitudes. -
I have ſeen -
The dumb men throng to ſee him, and the blind
To hear him ſpeak. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
His mother could not longer bear the agitations of ſo many
paſſions as throng’d upon her, but fell upon his neck, crying
out, my ſon. - - Tatler, Nº. 55.
To TH Ros G. v. a. To oppreſs or incommode with crouds or
tumults. -
I'll ſay, thou haſ gold :
Thou wilt be throng'd too ſhortly. -
The multitude throng thee and preſs thee.
All acceſs was throng'd, the gates
Thick ſwarm'd. Milton.
THRo's TL E. n.ſ. [proj-cle, Saxon.] The thruſh; a ſmall
ſinging bird. -
The thrº/?!e with his note ſo true,
The wren with little quill. Shakeſpeare.
The black-bird and thrº/?el with their melodious voices bid
welcome to the cheerful ſpring. //alton's Angler.
TH Roºrt I.E. m. ſ. [from throat.] The windpipe. -
At the upper extreme it hath no larinx or throttle to qua-
lify the ſound. Brºwn's /ulgar Errours.
To THROTTLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To choak; to ſuf-
focate; to kill by ſtopping the breath. -
I have ſeen then ſhiver and look pale,
Make periods in the midſt of ſentences,
Thrºttle their practis'd accents in their fears, -
And, in concluſion, dumbly have broke off. Shakeſpeare.
As when Antaeus in Iraſia ſtrove
With Jove's Alcides, and oft foil'd ſtill roſe,
Receiving from his mother earth new ſtrength,
Freſh from his fall and fiercer grapple join'd,
Throttled at length in th' air, expir'd and fell.
His throat half thrott'd with corrupted phlegm,
And breathing through his jaws a belching ſteam. Dryden.
The throttling quinſey 'tis my flar appoints,
And rheumatiſm I ſend to rack the joints.
Thrºttle thyſelf with an ell of ſtrong tape,
For thou haſt not a groat to attone for a rapC. Swift.
THRow E, the preterite of thrive. -
England never throve ſo well, nor was there cver brought
into England ſo great an increaſe of wealth ſince. Locke.
TH Roug H. prºp. [juſh, Saxon ; d.or, Dutch ; durch, Ger-
man.] - -
Shakeſpeare.
Lºſe viii. 45.
Milton.
Dryden.
T H R
1. From end to end of
He hath been ſo ſucceſſul with common heads
- - s that h
hath led their belief through all the works of nature. ...
A ſimplicity ſhines through all he writes.
- " ... - - Dryden.
Fame of th'aſſerted ſea through Europe blown, ./
Made France and Spain ambitious of his love. Dryden.
2. Noting paſſage.
.*.* the gate of iv'ry he diſmiſºd
His valiant offspring.
I he ſame thing happened when I removed the priſm out
of the ſun's light, and lºoking through it upon the hole ſhin.
ing by the light of the clouds beyond it. *** *
3. By tranſiniſłion. y l Newton.
7%rough theſe
plauſe.
Material things are preſented only through their
they have a real influx on theſe,
material things is conveyed int
theſe ſenſes.
4. By means of.
The ſtrong through pleaſure ſooneſt falls, the weak through
ſmart. Pairy Queen, b. ii.
Something you may deſerve of him through me. Shakespeare
By much ſlothfulneſs the building decayeth, and thrºugh
idleneſs of the hands the houſe droppeth through. Excluſ. K.
You will not make this a general rule to debar ſuch floº,
preaching the goſpel, as have through infirmity fallen. Iºhitºft.
Dryden's Zn,
hands this ſcience has paſſed with great ap-
Temple.
ſenſes;
and all real knowledge of
o the underſtanding thrºugh
Cheyne's Phil. Principles.
~
Some through ambition, or through thiiſt of gold,
Have ſlain their brothers, and their country ſold. Dryden.
To him, to him 'tis giv'n
Paſſion, and care, and anguiſh to deſtroy:
Through him ſoft peace and plenitude of joy
Perpetual o'er the world redeem'd ſhall flow. Prior.
TH Rou GH. adv.
1. Frome one end or ſide to the other.
You'd be ſo lean, that blaſts of January
Would blow you thrºugh and through. Shakespeare.
Inquire how metal may be tinged through and through, and
with what, and into what colours ? Bacon.
Pointed ſatire runs him through and through. Oldham.
To underſtand the mind of him that writ, is to read the
whole letter through, from one end to the other. Locke.
2. To the end of anything.
Every man brings ſuch a degree of this light into the
world with him, that though it cannot bring him to heaven,
yet it will carry him ſo far, that if he follows it faithfully he
ſhall meet with another light, which ſhall carry him quite
through. South's Sermons.
THROUGHBRED. adj. [through and bred, commonly thorough-
bred.] Completely educated; completely taught.
A through-bred ſoldier weighs all preſent circumſtances and
all poſſible contingents. Grew's Cºſmol.
THROUGHLi'GHTED. adj. [through and light.] Lighted on both
ſides. - -
That the beſt pieces be placed where are the feweſt lights;
therefore not only rooms windowed on both ends, called
th. oughlighted, but with two or more windows on the ſame
ſide are enemies to this art.
THROUGHLY. adv. [from through. . It is commonly written
thoroughly, as coming from thorough.]
I. cº fully; entirely , wholly.
The fight ſo throughly him diſmay’d, -
That nought but death before his eyes he ſaw. Spenſºr.
Rice muſt be throughly boiled in reſpect of its hardneſs. Bac.
No leſs wiſdom than what made the world can throughly
underſtand ſo vaſt a deſign. Tillºtſon.
2. Without reſerve; ſincerely. -
Though it be ſomewhat ſingular for men truly and throughly
to live up to the principles of their religion, yet ſingularity in
this is a ſingular commendation. Tillºtſºn's Sermons.
THROUGH out. prep. [through and cut.] Quite through 5 in
every part of.
Thus it fareth even clean throughout the whole controverſy
about that diſcipline which is ſo earneſtly urged. Hazºr.
There followed after the defeat an avoiding of all Spaniſh
forces throughout Ireland. Bacon.
O for a clap of º: loud ſ
As to be heard throughout the univerſe, -
To tell the world . fact, and to applaud it. B. Johnſºn.
Impartially inquire how we have behaved ourſelves through-
out the courſe of this long war. Atterbury's Sermons.
THRoug HouT. adv. Everywhere; in every part. '
Subdue it, and throughout dominion hold
Over fiſh of the ſea and fowl of the air. Milton.
- His youth and age . .
Aſ of a piece throughout, and all divine: Dryden,
Through pa’ced. adj. [through and pace..] Perfect; complete.
He is very dextrous in puzzling others, if they be not
t"roughpaced ſpeculators in thoſe great theories. More.
To Tir w. preter. threw, part. paſſ. thrown. v. a. [Snapan,
Saxon.]
*
1. To
//otton's Architréſure. .<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H R
T H R
1. To fling; to caſt; to ſend to a diſtant place by any prºjec-
tile force.
prºjanes threw down upon the Turks fire and ſcalding oil.
Knolles's Hºff. of the Turks.
- d ſhall be thrown to thee over the wall. 2 Sam. XX.
tºº. ſtones at him and caſt duſt. 2 Sam. xvi. I 3.
A poor widow threw in two mites, which make a far-
thing. Mark xii. 42.
~ He fell
From heav'n, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove --
Sheer o'er the cryſtal battlements. Milton.
Calumniate ſtoutly; for though we wipe away with never
ſo much care the dirt thrown at us, there will be left ſºme
fulliage behind. - Decay of Piety.
Arioſto, in his voyage of Aſtolpho to the moon, has a fine
allegory of two ſwans, who, when time had thrown the
writings of many poets into the river of oblivion, were ever
in a readineſs to ſecure the beſt, and bear them aloft into the
temple of immortality. - Dryden.
When Ajax ſtrives ſome rock's vaſt weight to throw,
The line too labours, and the words move ſlow. Pope.
The air-pump, barometer, and quadrant, were thrown
º out to thoſe buſy ſpirits, as tubs and barrels are to a whale,
- that he may let the ſhip ſail on while he diverts himſelf with
º thoſe innocent amuſements. Addison's Speci.
2. To toſs; to put with any violence or tumult. It always
compriſes the idea of haſte, force or negligence.
To threats the ſtubborn ſinner oft is hard,
Wrap'd in his crimes againſt the ſtorm prepar'd :
But when the milder beams of mercy play,
He melts, and throws his cumb’rous cloak away. Dryden.
The only means for bringing France to our conditions, is
to throw in multitudes upon them, and overpower them with
numbers. Addiſon's State of the War.
Labour caſts the humours into their proper channels, throws
off redundancies, and helps nature. Addiſon's Spee?.
Make room for merit, by throwing down the worthleſs and
depraved part of mankind from thoſe conſpicuous ſtations to
which they have been advanced. . . Addison's Speci. Nº. 126.
The iſland Inarime contains, within the compaſs of eighteen
miles, a wonderful variety of hills, vales, rocks, fruitful
plains, and barren mountains, all thrown together in a moſt
romantick confuſion. Berkley to Pope.
3. To lay careleſly, or in haſte.
His majeſty departed to his chamber, and threw himſelf
upon his bed, lamenting with much paſſion, and abundance
of tears, the loſs of an excellent ſervant. Clarendon.
At th' approach of night,
On the firſt friendly bank he throws him down,
Or reſts his head upon a rock till morn. Addiſon's Cato.
4. To venture at dice.
Learn more than thou troweſt,
Set leſs than thou throwſ?.
5. To caſt; to ſtrip off.
There the ſnake throws the enamell'd ſkin,
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in. Shakeſpeare.
6. To emit in any manner.
To arms; for I have thrown
A brave defiance in king Henry's teeth. Shakespeare Henry IV.
One of the Greek orator's antagoniſts reading over the
oration that procured his baniſhment, and ſeeing his friends
admire it, aſked them, if they were ſo much affected by the
bare reading, how much more they would have been alarm-
ed if they had heard him actually throwing out ſuch a ſtorm
of eloquence. Addiſon.
There is no need to throw words of contempt on ſuch a
practice ; the very deſcription of it carries reproof. If atts.
7. To ſpread in haſte.
O'er his fair limbs a flow'ry veſt he threw,
And iſſu'd like a god to mortal view. Pope's Odyſſey.
8. To overturn in wreſtling.
If the finner ſhall not only wreſtle with this angel, but
throw him too, and win ſo complete a vićtory over his con-
ſcience, that all theſe conſiderations ſhall be able to ſtrike no
terrour into his mind, he is too ſtrong for grace. South.
9. To drive; to ſend by force.
Myſelf diſtreſt, an exile and unknown,
Debarr'd from Europe, and from Aſia thrown,
In Libyan deſarts wander thus alone. Dryden’s AEn.
. When ſeamen are thrown upon any unknown coaſt in Ame-
rica, they never venture upon the fruit of any tree, unleſs
they obſerve it marked with the pecking of birds. Addiſon.
Poor youth how canſt thou throw him from thee
Jaucia, thou know'ſt not half the love he bears thee. Addison
19. To make to act at a diſtance.
Throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we maketh aerial blue
An indiſtinct regard.
II. To repoſe. §
In time of temptati -
- Ptation be not buſy to diſpute, but rely upon
the concluſion, and throw your ſelf upon God, and 3.
not with him but in prayer. Taylor's holy living.
Shakeſp. Othello.
12. To change by any kind of violence.
A new title, or an unſuſpected ſucceſs, throws us out of
ourſelves, and in a manner deſtroys our identity. Addison.
To throw his language more out of proſe, Homer affa,
the compound epithets. Pºpe
13. To turn. [tornare, Lat.] Aft
14. To THRow away. To loſe; to ſpend in vain. -
He warms 'em to avoid the courts and camps,
Where dilatory fortune plays the jilt
With the brave, noble, honeſt, gallant man,
To throw herſelf away on fools and knaves.
In vain on ſtudy time away we throw,
When we forbear to act the things we know. Denham
A man had better throw away his care upon anything eft
Otway,
than upon a garden on wet or moiſt ground. Temple
Had we but laſting youth and time to ſpare, -
Some might be thrown away on fame and war. Dryden
He figh'd, breath'd ſhort, and wou'd have ſpoke,
But was too fierce to throw away the time. Dryden
The next in place and puniſhment are they -
Who prodigally throw their ſouls away;
Fools who, repining at their wretched ſtate,
And loathing anxious life, ſuborn'd their fate. Dryden.
In poetry the expreſſion beautifies the deſign; if it be wi.
cious or unpleaſing, the coſt of colouring is thrown away
upon it. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The well-meaning man ſhould rather confider what op-
portunities he has of doing good to his country, than thrºw
away his time in deciding the rights of princes. Addison.
She threw away her money upon roaring bullies, that went
about the ſtrects. Arbuthnot's Hiſł. of john Bull,
15. Tº THRow away. To reject.
He that will throw away a good book becauſe it is not
gilded, is more curious to pleaſe his eye than underſtanding.
Taylor.
16. To THRow ly. To rejećt; to lay aſide as of no ſº
It can but ſhew
Like one of Juno's diſguiſes; and,
When things ſucceed, be thrown by, or let fall. B. jºhſ.
He that begins to have any doubt of his tenets, received
without examination, ought, in reference to that queſtion,
to throw wholly by all his former notions. Locke.
17. To THRow down. To ſubvert; to overturn.
Muſt one raſh word, th’ infirmity of age,
Throw down the merit of my better years:
This the reward of a whole life of ſervice Addiſon.
18. To Throw off. To expel.
The ſalts and oils in the animal body, as ſoon as they pu-
trefy, are thrown off, or produce mortal diſtempers. Arbuth.
19. To THRow off. To reject; to renounce: as, to throw of
an acquaintance.
'Twou'd be better
Cou'd you provoke him to give you th’ occaſion,
And then to throw him off. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Can there be any reaſon why the houſhold of God alone
ſhould throw off all that orderly dependence and duty, by
which all other houſes are beſt governed Sprat.
20. To THRow out. To exert; to bring forth into act.
She throws out thrilling ſhrieks and ſhrieking cries. Spenſ.
The gods in bounty work up ſtorms about us,
That give mankind occaſion to exert -
Their hidden ſtrength, and throw out into practice
Virtues which ſhun the day Addison,
21. To Throw out. To diſtance; to leave behind.
When e'er did Juba, or did Portius, ſhow
A virtue that has caſt me at a diſtance, -
And thrown me out in the purſuits of honour? Addison.
22. To THRow out. To eječt; to expel.
The other two whom they had thrown out they were con-
tent ſhould enjoy their exile. Swift.
23. Tº THRow out. To reječt; to exclude: &amp;
The oddneſs of the propoſition taught others to reflect a
little ; and the bill was thrown out. Swift.
24. To THRow up. To reſign angrily.
Bad games are thrown up too ſoon,
Until they're never to be won.
Experienced gameſters throw
know the game is in the enemy's
Hudibras, p. iii.
up their cards when they
hand, without unneceſſay
:---- t----1-------~ : Addiſon's Freeholder.
vexation in playing it out. -
Life we # nºt part with fooliſhly: it muſt not be #.
ap in a pet, nor ſacrificed to a quº. bri
25. To Throw up. To emit; tº eject; to bring up;
Judge of the cauſe by the ſubſtances the patient *::::
To THRow. v. n.
1. To perform the aët of caſting.
2. To caſt dice. -
3. To THRow about. To caſt about; to try expedients.
Now unto deſpair I'gin to grow, -
And mean for better wind abºut tº *. Hubbard
Throw. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] -
I. A caſt; the act of caſting or throwing: He
2.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H U
!-
º
:
He heav'd a ſtone, and riſing to the throw
He ſent it in a whirlwind at the foe;
A tow'r aſſaulted by ſo rude a ſtroke,
With all its lofty battlements had ſhook. Addiſon.
2. A caſt of dice; the manner in which the dice fall when they
are caſt. - - - -
If Hercules and Lichas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand: - -
So is Alcides beaten by his page. Shakeſpeare.
, If they err finally, it is like a man's miſſing his caſt when
he throws dice for his life; his being, his happineſs, and all,
is involved in the errour of one throw. South's Sermons.
Suppoſe any particular order of the alphabet to be aſſign-
ed, and the twenty-four letters caſt at a venture, ſo as to
fall in a line; it is many million of millions odds to one
againſt any ſingle throw, that the aſſigned order will not be
caſt. - Bentley's Sermons.
3. The ſpace to which any thing is thrown.
I have ever narrified my friends,
Like to a bowl upon a ſubtle ground
I’ve tumbled paſt the 1brow; and in his praiſe
Have, almoſt, ſtamp'd the leaſing. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The Sirenum Scopuli are two or three ſharp rocks that
ſtand about a ſtone's throw from the ſouth ſide of the iſland.
- Addiſon.
4. Stroke; blow.
So fierce he laid about him, and dealt blows
On either ſide, that neither mail could hold,
Ne ſhield defend the thunder of his throws.
5. Effort; violent ſally.
Your youth admires
The throws and ſwellings of a Roman ſoul ; - -
Cato's bold flights, the extravagance of virtue. Addiſon.
6. The agony of childbirth: in this ſenſe it is written throe.
. See THRoe. -
The moſt pregnant wit in the world never brings forth
any thing great without ſome pain and travail, pangs and
throws before the delivery. South's Sermons.
But when the mother's throws begin to come, - - -
The creature, pent within the narrow room,
Fa. 311een.
Breaks his blind priſon. Dryden.
- Say, my friendſhip wants him
To help me bring to light a manly birth;
Which to the wind'ring world I ſhall diſcloſe ; -
Or if he fail me, periſh in my throws. Dryden,
THRow ER. n.ſ.. [from throw.] One that throws.
Antigonus,
Since fate, againſt thy better diſpoſition,
Hath made thy perſon for the thrower out
Of my poor babe ; ,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia, , , ... -
There weep, or leave it crying. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
THRUM. m. ſ. ſihraum, Iſlandick, the end of anything...]
1. The ends of weavers threads.
2. Any coarſe yarn.
There's her thrum hat, and her muffler too. Shakespeare.
O fates, come, come,
Cut thread and thrum,
Quail, cruſh, conclude and quell. Shakeſpears.
All moſs hath here and there little ſtalks, beſides the low
thrum. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 537.
Wou'd our thrum-cap'd anceſtors find fault
For want of ſugar tongs, or ſpoons for ſalt.
To THRUM. v. a. To grate ; to play coarſly.
Blunderbuſſes planted in every loop-hole, go off conſtant-
ly at the ſqueaking of a fiddle and the thrumming of a guit-
tar. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
THRUSH. n.ſ. ſh;urc, Saxon.]
1. A ſmall ſinging bird.
Of ſinging birds they have linnets, goldfinches, black-
birds and thruſhes. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Pain, and a fine thruſh, have been ſeverally endeavouring
to call off my attention; but both in vain. Poſe.
2. [From thrift: as we ſay, a puſh; a breaking out..] By this
name are called ſmall, round, ſuperficial ulcerations, which
appear firſt in the mouth; but as they proceed from the ob.
ſtruction of the emiffarics of the ſaliva, by the lentor and
viſcoſity of the humour, they may affect every part of the
alimentary dućt except the thick guts: they are juſt the ſame
in the inward parts as ſcabs in the ſkin, and fall off from the
inſide of the bowels like a cruſt: the nearer they approach
to a white colour the leſs dangerous. Arbuthnot on Diet.
To THRUST. v. a. [triºſito, Lat.] -
1. To puſh any thing into matter, or between cloſe bodies.
Thruſt in thy ſickle and reap. Rev. xiv. 15.
2. To puſh ; to remove with violence; to drive. It is uſed of
perſons or things.
They ſhould not only not be thruſ; out, but alſo have
eſtates and grants of their lands new made to them. Spenſer.
When the king comes, offer him no violence,
Unleſs he ſeek to thriy; you out by force. Shakeſpeare.
King.
Lock up my doors; and when you hear the drum, -
Clamber not you up to the caſements then,
Nor thruſt your head into the publick ſtreets. Shakeſpeare.
When the aſs ſaw the angel, ſhe thruſt herſelf unto the
wall, and cruſht Balaam's foot. Num. xxii. 22.
On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that
I may thruſ' out all your right eyes. I Sam. xi. 2.
*.caught him by the feet; but Gehazi came near to
thruſt her away. - 2 Kings iv. 27.
Thou ſhalt ſtone him that he die; becauſe he hath fºught
to thruſ; thee away from the Lord. Deut. xiii. Io.
The prince ſhall not take of the people's inheritancé, by
oppreſſion to thruſ; them out. Iſa. xlvi. 18.
Thou Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, ſhalt be
thruſt down to hell. Luke x. 15.
The ſons of Belial ſhall be as thorns thruſt away. 2 Sam.
Rich, then lord chancellor, a man of quick and lively de-
livery of ſpeech, but as of mean birth ſo prone to thruſt for-
wards the ruin of great perſons, in this manner ſpake. Hayw.
The
In hate of kings ſhall caſt *. the frame,
And thruff out Collatine that bore their name. Dryden.
To juſtify his threat, he thruſis aſide
The croud of centaurs; and redeems the bride. Dryden.
3. To ſtab. -
Phineas thrift both of them through.
4. To compreſs. -
. He thruſt the fleece together, and wringed the dew out of
it. judg. vi. 38.
5. To impel; to urge.
We make guilty of our diſaſters, the ſun, the moon, and
ſtars, as if we were villains on neceſſity, and all that we are
evil in, by a divine thruſting on. Shakeſp. King Lear.
6. To obtrude; to intrude.
Who's there, I ſay How dare you thruſt yourſelves
Into my private meditations : Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
- I go to meet
The noble Brutus, thruſting this report -
Into his ears. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
Should he not do as rationally, who, upon this aſſurance,
took phyſick from any one who had taken on himſelf the
name of phyſician, or thruſt himſelf into that employment.
- Lo-Ke.
Num. xxv. 8.
To THRust. v. n. * .
1. To make a hoſtile puſh ; to attack with a pointed weapon.
2. To ſqueeze in ; to put himſelf into any place by violence.
I’ll be a Spartan while I live on earth;
But when in heav'n, ll ſtand next Hercules,
And thruſt between my father and the god. Dryden.
3. To intrude. *
Not all, -
Who like intruders thruſt into their ſervice,
Participate their ſacred influence. Rowe.
4. To puſh forwards; to come violently; to throng; to preſs.
Young, old, thruſt there,
In mighty concourſe. … Chapman's Odyſſey.
The miſèrable men which ſhrunk from the work were
again beaten forward, and preſently ſlain, and freſh men ſtill
thruſt on. - - t Knolle;’s Hiſ of the Turks.
THRust. m. ſ [from the verb.]
1. Hoſtile attack with any pointed weapon. . . . -
Zelmane hearkening to no more, began with ſuch witty
fury to purſue him with blows and thruſts, that nature and
virtue commanded him to look to his ſafety. Sidney.
That thruſt had been mine enemy indeed, - -
But that my coat is better than thou know'ſt. Shakeſpeare.
Polites Pyrrhus, with his lance, purſues,
And often reaches, and his thruſts renews.
2. Aſſault; attack. - - - - - - -
There is one thruſt at your pure, pretended mechaniſm.
- - More's Divine Dialogues.
THRU'stER. n. ſ. [from thruſt.] He that thruſts.
THRustle. n.ſ. [from thruſh. Thruſh; throſtle.
No thruſile; ſhrill the bramble buſh forſake; - -
No chirping lark the welkin ſheen invoke: . Gay.
To THRY FA'llow. v. a. [ihrice andfºllºw.] To give the third
plowing in ſummer. - -
Tryfºllºw betime for deſtroying of weed, -
Left tººls and docke fal a blooming and ſeed. . Tuffer.
THUMB. n.f. [Suma, Saxon.] The ſhort ſtrong finger an-
ſwering to the other four. .
Here I have a pilot's thumb, - -
wreck'd as homeward he did come. . Shakespeare . Macleſ.
when he is dead you will wear him in thumb rings, as the
Turks did Scanderbeg. Dryden.
Every man in Turkey is of ſome trade: Sultan Achmet
was a maker of ivory ring” which the Turks wear upon their
jump, when they ſhoot their arrows. . . - Broome.
It is divided into four fingers bending forwards, and one
oppoſite bending backwards called the thumb, to join with
tºm ſeverally or united, whereby it is fitted to lay hold of
bjećts. Ray on the Creation.
oD) 26 M
Dryden.
THUM B-
nu-illulº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H U
T H U
THU’MB-BAND. n. ſ. [thumb and band.] A twiſt of any ma-
terials made thick as a man's thumb.
Tie thumb-band; of hay round them.
To THUMB. v. n. To handle aukwardly. -
Tºurºstal. n.ſ.. [thumb and ſtall.] A thimble.
Tºr. n.ſ.. [thombo, Italian.] A hard heavy dead dull blow
with ſomething blunt.
And blund'ring ſtill with ſmarting rump,
He gave the knight's ſteed ſuch a thump - -
As made him reel. Hudibras, p. i.
Before, behind, the blows are dealt; around
Their hollow fides the rattling thumps reſound. Prydºn.
Their thumps and bruiſes might turn to account, if they
could beat each other into good manners. Addiſon.
The watchman gave ſo great a thump at my door, haſ
awaked at the knock. Tatler.
To THUMP. v. a. To beat with dull heavy blows.
Thoſe baſtard Britons whom our fathers
Have in their land beaten, bobb'd, and thump'd. Shakeſp.
To Thump. v. n. To fall or ſtrike with a dull heavy blow.
A ſtone
Levell'd ſo right, it thump'd upon
His manly paunch, with ſuch a force - -
As almoſt beat him off his horſe. Hudibras, p. i.
A watchman at midnight thumps with his pole. ... Swift.
Thu'MPER. n.ſ.. [from thump.] The perſon or thing that
thumps.
THUNDER. n.f. [Sunben, Sunon, Saxon; dunder, Swe-
diſh; donder, Dutch ; tonnere, Fr.]
Thunder is a moſt bright flame riſing on a ſudden, mov-
ing with great violence, and with a very rapid velocity,
through the air, according to any determination, upwards
from the earth, horizontally, obliquely, downwards, in a
right line, or in ſeveral right lines, as it were in ſerpentine
tracts, joined at various angles, and commonly ending with
a loud noiſe or rattling. Muſchenbroek.
2. In popular and poetick language thunder is commonly the
noiſe, and lightning the flaſh; though thunder is ſometimes
taken for both.
I do not bid the thunder bearer ſhoot,
Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove. Shakeſpeare.
No more, thou thunder maſter, ſhew
Thy ſpite on mortal flies.
The revenging gods
'Gainſt parricides all the thunder bend.
The thunder
Wing'd with red light'ning and impetuous rage,
Perhaps hath ſpent his ſhafts, and ceaſes now
To bellow through the vaſt and boundleſs deep. Milton.
3. Any loud noiſe or tumultuous violence.
So fierce he laid about him, and dealt blows
On either ſide, that neither mail could hold
Ne ſhield defend the thunder of his throws. Spenſer.
Here will we face this ſtorm of inſolence,
Nor fear the noiſy thunder; let it roll,
Then burſt, and ſpend at once its idle rage. Rowe.
To THU'NDER. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To make thunder.
His nature is too noble for the world:
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,
Nor Jove for’s power to thunder. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. To make a loud or terrible noiſe. -
So ſoon as ſome few notable examples had thundered a duty
into the ſubjects hearts, he ſoon ſhewed no baſeneſs of ſuſpi-
cion. - Sidney, b. ii.
His dreadful name late through all Spain did thunder,
And Hercules' two pillars ſtanding near,
Mortimer.
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Shakeſpeare:
Did make to quake and fear. Spenſer.
His dreadful voice no more
Would thunder in my ears. Milton.
Like a black ſheet the whelming billow ſpread,
Burſt o'er the float, and thunder'd on his head. Pope.
To Thu'NDER. v. a.
I. To emit with noiſe and terrour.
Oracles ſevere,
Were daily thunder'd in our general's ear,
That by his daughter's blood we muſt appeaſe
Diana's kindled wrath.
2. To publiſh any denunciation or threat.
An archdeacon, as being a prelate, may thunder out an
Dryden.
eccleſiaſtical cenſure. Ayliffe.
THUNDER Bolt. n, ſ, [thunder and bolt, as it ſignifies an ar-
row.
* Lightning; the arrows of heaven.
* had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who ſhould
º - Shakeſpeare.
ſev et the lightning of this thunderbolt, which hath been ſo
°Were a puniſhment to one, be a terrour to all. K. Charles.
As if " My heart does beat,
*... were forging thunderbolts for Jove.
Th sº ** omit the Gracchi, who declare
c º: * Worth, thoſe thunderbolts of war Dryden,
Denham.
The moſt remarkable piece in Antonine's pillar, is Jupiter
Pluvius ſending down rain on the fainting army of Marcº Au-
relius, and thunderbolts on his enemies; which is the greateſt
confirmation of the ſtory of the Chriſtian legion. Addiſon
2. Fulmination; denunciation properly eccleſiaſtical. -
He ſeverely threatens ſuch with the thunderbilt of excom.
munication. Hakewill on Provident,
Thu'NDER clap. m. ſ. [thunder and clap.] Exploſion of thuſ:
der.
The kindly bird that bears Jove's thunderclap,
One day did ſcorn the ſimple ſcarabee, 1.
Proud of his higheſt ſervice, and good hap,
That made all other fowls his thralls to be. Spºnſºr
When ſome dreadful thunderclap is nigh, -
The winged fire ſhoots ſwiftly through the ſky;
Strikes and conſumes ere ſcarce it does appear,
And, by the ſudden ill, prevents the fear. Drydın.
When ſuddenly the thunderclap was heard,
It took us unprepar'd, and out of guard. Drydın.
THU'NDERER. m. ſ. [from thunder.] The power that thun,
ders.
How dare you, ghoſts,
Accuſe the thunderer, whoſe bolt you know,
Sky-planted, batters all rebelling coaſts
Had the old Greeks diſcover'd your abode,
Crete had’nt been the cradle of their god;
On that ſmall iſland they had look'd with ſcorn,
And in Great Britain thought the thunderer born. Wallar,
When the bold Typheus
Forc’d great Jove from his own heav'n to fly,
The leſſer gods that ſhar'd his proſp’rous ſtate,
All ſuffer'd in the exil'd thunderer's fate. Dryden,
THU'NDERous. adj. [from thunder.j Producing thunder.
Look in and ſee each bliſsful deity,
How he before the thunderous throne doth lie. Milton,
THU'ND FR show ER. m. ſ. [thunder and ſhower.] A rain ac-
companied with thunder.
The conceit is long in delivering, and at laſt it comes like
a thunderſhower, full of ſulphur and darkneſs, with a terrible
crack. Stillingfeet.
In thunderſhowers the winds and clouds are oftentimes con-
trary to one another, eſpecially if hail falls, the ſultry wea-
ther below directing the wind one way, and the cold above
the clouds another. Derham's Phyſic-Theol.
THUNDER stone. n.ſ.. [thunder and ſtone..] A ſtone fabulouſly
ſuppoſed to be emitted by thunder; thunderbolt,
Fear no more the light'ning flaſh, -
North’ all-dreaded thunderſtone. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To THU'NDERst Rike. v. a. [thander and ſtrike.] To blaſt or
hurt with lightning.
I remained as a man thunderſtricken, not daring, may not
able, to behold that power. Sidney.
The overthrown he rais'd, and as a herd
Of goats, or tim’rous flock, together throng'd,
Drove them before him thunder/iruck. Miltºn.
With the voice divine -
Nigh thunderſtruck, th’ exalted man, to whom
Such high atteſt was giv'n, a while ſurvey'd -
With wonder. Milton's Par. Rºg, b, i.
'Tis ſaid that thunderſtruck Enceladus -
Lies ſtretch'd ſupine. - Addiſon.
THURI'FERous. adj. [thurifer, Lat.] Bearing frankincenſ; f
THURIFIcA'tion. n.ſ.. [thuri, and facio, Latin.] The ačt 0
fuming with incenſe; the act of burning incenſe. -
The ſeveral acts of worſhip which were required to be
performed to images are proceſſions, genuflection: thrift.
tions, deoſculations, and oblations. Stillingfleet.
THURSDAY. n. ſ. [thorſgday, Daniſh; from thor. Thor wº
the ſon of Odin, yet in ſome of the northern Part: º:
ſhipped the ſupreme deity under his name, º:
power over all things, even the inferior deities, to him.
lingfleet.] The fifth day of the week.
THUS. adv. [Sur, Saxon.]
1. In this manner; in this wife.
It cannot be that they who ſpeak thuſ,
Shakeſtart.
ſhould thus judge.
Hooker, b. V.
The knight him calling, aſked who hºw”
Who liſting up his head, . thus. Fa. Qº.
I return'd with ſimilar proof enoug"&gt; -
With tokens thus, and thus: . Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To be thus is nothing;
But to be ſafely thus.
I have finned againſt
done.
That the principle that ſets
thing elſe but the modification o
is falſe. ief
Beware, I warn thee yet, to tell thy griefs
In terms becoming majeſty to hear :
I warn thee thus, becauſe I know thy.” Sebaſtian.
Is inſolent. Dryden's Don **u.
Shakeſpeare's *:::
d thus and thus have
the Lord, and thus joſ. vii. 23.
on work theſe organs, “..".
thus poſited,
f matter thus or }. Hale.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T H Y
t:
**
--
º
º:
º
º
º
º:
Thus in the triumphs of ſoft peace I reign. Dryden,
All were attentive to the godlike man,
When from his lofty couch he thus began. Dryden's AFn.
2. To this degree; to this quantity.
A counſellor of ſtate in Spain ſaid to his maſter, I will tell
your majeſty thus much for your comfort, your majeſty hath
but two enemies; whereof the one is all the world, and the
other your own miniſters. Bacon.
He ſaid thus far extend, thus far thy bounds. Milton.
Thus much concerning the firſt earth, and its produćtion
and form. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
No man reaſonably pretends to know thus much, but he
muſt pretend to know all things. Tillotſon's Sermons.
This you muſt do to inherit life; and if you have come
up thus far, firmly perſevere in it. J/ake.
To THwack. v.a. [Saccian, Saxon.] To ſtrike with ſome-
thing blunt and heavy; to threſh; to bang; to belabour.
He ſhall not ſtay;
We'll thwack him hence with diſtaffs. Shakeſpeare.
Nick fell fowl upon John Bull, to ſnatch the cudgel he had
in his hand, that he might thwack Lewis with it. Arbuthnot.
Theſe long fellows, as fightly as they are, ſhould find
their jackets well thwack'd. Arbuthnot.
ThwAck. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A heavy hard blow.
But Talgol firſt with a hard thwack
Twice bruis'd his head, and twice his back. Hudibras.
They place ſeveral pots of rice, with cudgels in the neigh-
bourhood of each pot; the monkeys deſcend from the trees,
take up the arms, and belabour one another with a ſtorm of
thwacks. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 50.
THw ARt. adj. [Spyn, Saxon; dwars, Dutch.]
1. Tranſverſe; croſs to ſomething elſe.
This elſe to ſeveral ſpheres thou muſt aſcribe,
Mov'd contrary with thwart obliquities.
2. Perverſe; inconvenient; miſchievous.
To THw ART. v. a.
1. To croſs; to lie or come croſs any thing.
Swift as a ſhooting ſtar
In Autumn thwarts the night. Milton's Par. Loft, b. iv.
Yon ſtream of light, a thouſand ways
Upward and downward thwarting and convolv’d. Thomſon.
2. To croſs; to oppoſe; to traverſe; to contravene.
Some ſixteen months and longer might have ſtaid,
If crooked fortune had not thwarted me. Shakeſpeare.
Leſler had been
The thwartings of your diſpoſitions, if
You had not ſhew'd how you were diſpos'd
Ere they lack'd power to croſs you. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The underſtanding and will never diſagreed; for the pro-
poſals of the one never thwarted the inclinations of the other.
South's Sermons.
The rays both good and bad, of equal pow'r,
Each thwarting other made a mingled hour.
In vain did I the godlike youth deplore,
The more I begg'd, they thwarted me the more. Addiſon.
Neptune aton'd, his wrath ſhall now refrain,
Or thwart the ſynod of the gods in vain. Pope's Odyſſey.
To THw ARt. v. n. To be oppoſite.
It is eaſy to be imagined what reception any propoſition
ſhall find, that ſhall at all thwart with theſe internal ora-
cles. Locke.
THwa'RTINGLY. adv. [from thwarting.] Oppoſitely; with
oppoſition.
THY. pronoun. [Sin, Saxon.] Of thee; belonging to thee;
relating to thee.
Whatever God did ſay,
Milton,
Dryden.
Is all thy clear and ſmooth uninterrupted way. Cowley.
Th’ example of the heav'nly lark,
Thy fellow poet Cowley mark. - Cowley.
Theſe are thy works, parent of good. Milton.
Thyse'lf. pronoun reciprocal, [thy and ſelf.] -
1. It is commonly uſed in the oblique caſes, or following the
verb.
Come high or low,
Thyſelf and office deftly ſhow. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
It muſt and ſhall be ſo; content thyſelf. Shakeſpeare.
2. In poetical or ſolemn language it is ſometimes uſed in the
nominative.
Theſe goods thyſelf can on thyſelf beſtow.
THY INE wood, n.ſ. A precious wood.
The merchandize of gold and all thyine wood are departed
from thee. Rev. xviii. 12.
THYME. m. ſ. [thym, Fr. thymus, Lat.] A plant.
The thyme hath a labiated flower, conſiſting of one leaf,
whoſe upper-lip is erect, and generally ſplit in two, and the
under-lip is divided into three parts; out of the flower-cup
ariſes the pointal, accompanied by four embrios, which after-
ward become ſo many ſeeds, incloſed in a huſk, which be-
fore was the flower-cup ; to theſe marks muſt be added hard
ligneous ſtalks, and the flowers gathered into heads. Miller.
Dryden.
T I C
No more, my goats, ſhall I behold you climb
tº." ſteepy cliffs, or crop the flow'ry tº me. Dryden.
n.ſ.. [tiare, Fr. ti -
TIA'RA. } {#ſ. r. tiara, Lat.] A dreſs for the head;
His back was turn'd, but not his brightneſs hid;
Qf beaming funny rays a golden tiar
Circled his head. Milton's Par. Loft, b. iii.
This royal robe, and this tiara wore
9|d Priam, and this golden ſcepter bore
In full aſſemblies. Dryden's An
A tiar wreath'd her head with many a ſold -
Her waſte was circled with a zone of gold. 3.
Fairer ſhe ſeem’d, diſtinguiſh'd from the reſt, Pope.
And better mien diſclos'd, as better dreſt:
A bright tiara round her forehead ty'd,
To juſter bounds confin'd its riſing pride. Prior.
To Tice. v. a. [from entice.] To draw; to allure.
Lovely enchanting language, ſugar-cane,
Honey of roſes, whither wilt thou flie?
Hath ſome fond lover tic'd thee to thy bane
And wilt thou leave the church, and love a ſtie Herbert,
Tick. m. ſ. [This word ſeems contracted from ticket, a tally
on which debts are ſcored.]
I. Score; truſt.
If thou haſt the heart to try’t,
I'll lend thee back thyſelf awhile,
And once more for that carcaſe vile
Fight upon tick. Hudibras, p. i.
When the money is got into hands that have bought all
that they have need of, whoever needs any thing elſe muſt
go on tick, or barter for it. Locke:
You would ſee him in the kitchen weighing the beef and
butter, paying ready money, that the maids might not run a
tick at the market. Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of john Bull,
2. [Tique, Fr. teke, Dutch..] The louſe of dogs or ſheep.
Would the fountain of your mind were clear again, that I
might water an aſs at it! I had rather be a tick in a ſheep,
than ſuch a valiant ignorance. Shakespeare. Troil, and Creſſida.
3. The caſe which holds the feathers of a bed.
To Tick. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To run on ſcore.
2. To truſt; to ſcore.
The money went to the lawyers; council wont tick. Arb.
Tr'ckeN. l n.ſ. The ſame with tick. A ſort of ſtrong
TI'ckING. } linen for bedding. Bailey.
TI'cket. n.ſ. [etiquet, Fr.] A token of any right or debt
upon the delivery of which admiſſion is granted, or a claim
acknowledged.
There ſhould be a paymaſter appointed, of ſpecial truſt,
which ſhould pay every man according to his captain's ticket,
and the account of the clerk of his band. Spenſer.
In a lottery with one prize, a ſingle ticket is only enriched,
and the reſt are all blanks. Collier on Envy.
Let fops or fortune fly which way they will,
Diſdains all loſs of tickets or codille. Pope.
To TI'ckle. v. a. [titillo, Lat.]
1. To affect with a prurient ſenſation by ſlight touches.
Diſſembling courteſy How fine this tyrant -
Can tickle where ſhe wounds. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
The mind is moved in great vehemency only by tickling
ſome parts of the body. - ... Bacon.
There is a ſweetneſs in good verſe, which tickles even
while it hurts; and no man can be heartily angry with him
who pleaſes him againſt his will. - Dryden.
It is a good thing to laugh at any rate; and if a ſtraw can
tickle a man, it is an inſtrument of happineſs. Dryden.
. To pleaſe by ſlight gratifications. -
2 iº. %. of all manners of ſtile could beſt conceive
of golden eloquence, being withal tickled by Muſidorus's
praiſes, had his brain ſo turned, that he became ſlave to that
which he that ſued to be his ſervant offered to give him. Sidney.
Expectation tickling ſkittiſh ſpirits
Sets all on hazard.
Such a nature he ſhad
Tickled with good ſucceſs, diſdains the ſhadow -
Which it º on at noon. Shakeſp. Coriolanuſ.
I cannot rule my ſpleen ;
Shakeſpeare,
My ſcorn rebels, and tickles me within. &gt; Dryden.
unce at the beſt; in ſtreets but ſcarce allow'd
To tickle, on thy ſtraw, the ſtupid crowd. Dryden.
Adjºrd, the habitual thirſt after his cups, drives to th;
a.º.º. he has in his view the loſs of health, and
perhaps of the joys of another life, the leaſt of which 1S ſuch
a good as he confeſſes is far greater than the tickling of his
palate with a glaſs of Wºº, ...,n. Lotke.
T. Tickle. … n. To feel titillation;
He with ſecret joy therefore
id tickle inwardly in every vein, y
º i. º iº, fraught with all treaſon's ſtore,
Wis filrd with hope, his purpoſe to obtain. r:
I -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T I ID
T I E
** - of whence to deduce the ſenſe of this
1. E. : #...""... ; unſtable; eaſily overthrown.
wººl. the laſi O Neal began to ſtand upon ſome tickle
terms, this fellow, called baron of Dunganon, was ſet up
in ºrd him. Spenſºr on Ireland.
to bea - lders, that a milk-
Thy head flands, ſo tickle on thy ſhoulders, tha -
maid, if ſhe be in love, may figh it off. Shakeſpeare.
The ſtate of Normandy
Stands on a ticºle point, now they are gone. Shakeſpeare.
Ticklish, adj. [from tickle.]
1. Senſible to titillation; eaſily tickled. * * -
The palm of the hand, though it hath as thin a ſkin as
the other parts, yet is not tickliſh, becauſe it is accuſtomed
to be touched. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 766.
2. Tottering; uncertain ; unfixed.
Ireland was a tickliſh and unſettled ſtate, more eaſy to re-
ceive diſtempers and mutations than England was: Bacon.
Did it ſtand upon ſo tickliſh and tottering a foundation as
ſome mens fancy hath placed it, it would be no.wonder
ſhould it frequently vary. J/oodward's Nat. Hiſt. p. i.
3. Difficult; nice.
How ſhall our author hope a gentle fate,
Who dares moſt impudently not tranſlate ;
It had been civil in theſe tickliſh times, -
To fetch his fools and knaves from foreign climes. Swift.
Ticklish Ness. n.ſ.. [from tickliſh.] The ſtate of being tick-
liſh.
TI'cktack. n.ſ.. [tričiac, Fr.] A game at tables. Bailey.
TID. adj. [zybsen, Saxon.] Tender; ſoft; nice.
#. }}. }v. a. [from tid.] To uſe tenderly; to fondle.
TIDE. m. ſ. [ryo, Saxon; tijd, Dutch and Iſlandick.]
1. Time ; ſeaſon ; while.
There they alight in hope themſelves to hide
From the fierce heat, and reſt their weary limbs a tide.
Fairy Queen, b. i.
They two forth paſſing,
Received thoſe two fair brides, their love's delight,
Which, at the appointed tide,
Each one did make his bride. Spenſer.
What hath this day deſerv’d,
That it in golden letter ſhould be ſet,
Among the high tides in the kalendar. Shakeſp. K. john.
At New-year's tide following the king choſe him maſter of
the horſe. JWotton.
2. Alternate ebb and flow of the ſea.
That motion of the water called tides is a riſing and falling
of the ſea: the cauſe of this is the attraction of the Moon,
whereby the part of the water in the great ocean which is
neareſt the Moon, being moſt ſtrongly attracted, is raiſed
higher than the reſt; and the part oppoſite to it being leaſt
attrasted, is alſo higher than the reſt; and theſe two oppo-
ſite riſes of the ſurface of the water in the great ocean fol-
lowing the motion of the Moon from Eaſt to Weſt, and
ſtriking againſt the large coaſts of the continents, from thence
rebounds back again, and ſo makes floods and ebbs in nar-
row ſeas and rivers. Locke.
3. Fiºd.
As in the tides of people once up there want not ſtirring
winds to make them more rough, ſo this people did light
upon two ringleaders. . Bacon's Henry VII.
4. Stream; courſe.
Thou art the ruins of the nobleſt man,
That ever lived in the tide of times.
The rapid currents drive
Towards the retreating ſea their furious tide. Milton.
But let not all the gold which Tagus hides,
And pays the ſea in tributary tides,
Be bribe ſufficient to corrupt thy breaſt,
Shakeſpeare.
Or violate with dreams thy peaceful reſt. Dryden.
Continual tide
Flows from th’ exhilarating fount. Philips.
To TIDE. v. a. [from the noun...] To drive with the ſtream.
Their images, the relicks of the wreck,
Torn from the naked poop, are tided back
By the wild waves, and rudely thrown aſhore. Dryden.
To Tipp. v. m. To pour a flood; to be agitated by the tide.
When, from his dint, the foe ſtill backward ſhrunk,
Wading within the Ouſe, he dealt his blows,
And ſent them, rolling, to the tiding Humber. Philips.
T'PEGA, B. m. ſ. ſtide and gate.]. A gate through which the
tide paſſes into a baſon. Bailey.
(PEs MAN. n.ſ.. [tide and man.] A tidewaiter or cuſtom-
hóuſe officer, who watches on board of merchant ſhips till
the duty of goods be paid and the ſhips unloaded. Bailey.
'PFWAITE R. n. ſ. [tide and wait...] An officer who watches
the landing of goods at the cuſtomhouſe.
lº. will be in the hands of Engliſhmen; nothing
T1. or Iriſhmen but vicarages and tidewaiters places. Swift.
*Y. "4v.. [from tidy..] Neatly; readily.
- f - -
T1'DIN Ess. * / [from tidy..] Neatneſs; readineſs.
Ti’DINGs. n.ſ. [ziban, Saxon, to happen, to batide; tidends,
Iſlandick.] News ; an account of ſomething that has hap-
ened.
When her eyes ſhe on the dwarf had ſet,
And ſaw the ſigns that deadly tidings ſpake,
She fell to ground for ſorrowful regret. Fairy Q. b. ,
I ſhall make my maſter glad with theſe tidings. Shalºp.
- They win
Great numbers of each nation to receive,
With joy, the tidings brought from heav'n. Milton,
Portius, thy looks ſpeak ſomewhat of importance:
What tidings doſt thou bring methinks I ſee
Unuſual gladneſs ſparkling in thy eyes. Addison.
The meſſenger of theſe glad tidings, by whom this cove.
nant of mercy was propoſed and ratified, was the eternal ſon
of his boſom. 1&amp;ogers's Sermons,
TPDY. adj. [tidt, Iſlandick.]
1. Seaſonable.
If weather be faire and tidie, thy grain
Make ſpeedilie carriage, for feare of a raine. Tiſſºr,
2. Neat; ready.
Whenever by yon barley-Inow I paſs,
Before my eyes will trip the tidy laſs. Gay's Paſt.
3. It ſeems to be here put by miſtake for untidy.
Thou whorſon tidy Bartholomew boar pig, when wilt thou
leave fighting. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
To E. v. a. [~ian, zizan, Saxon.]
1. To bind; to aſten with a knot.
Tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home from
them. I Sam. vi. 7.
Thouſands of men and women, tied together in chains,
were, by the cruel Turks, enforced to run as faſt as their
horſes. Knolles's Hji, of the Turks.
2. To knit; to complicate.
We do not tie this knot with an intention to puzzle the
argument; but the harder it is tied, we ſhall feel the pleaſure
more ſenſibly when we come to looſe it. Burnet.
3. To hold; to faſten.
In bond of virtuous love together tied,
Together ſerv'd they, and together died. Fairfax.
The intermediate ideas tie the extremes fo firmly together,
and the probability is ſo clear, that aſſent neceſſarily follows
it. Locke.
Certain theorems reſolve propoſitions which depend on
them, and are as firmly made out from thence, as if the
mind went afreſh over every link of the whole chain that
ties them to firſt ſelf-evident principles. Locke.
4. To hinder; to obſtruct.
Death that hath ta'n her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me ſpeak, Shakespeare .
Melantius ſtay,
You have my promiſe, and my haſty word
Reſtrains my tongue, but ties not up my ſword. Walkr.
Honour and good-nature may tie up his hands; but as
theſe would be very much ſtrengthened by reaſon and prº-
ciple, ſo without them they are only inſtincts. Addison.
5. To oblige; to conſtrain; to reſtrain; to confine.
Although they profeſs they agree with us touching a Pº
ſcript form of prayer to be uſed in the church, they have de-
clared that it ſhalſ not be preſcribed as a thing where intº
they will tie their miniſters. Hooker, b. V.
It is the cowiſh terrour of his ſpirit,
That dares not undertake; he'll not feel wrongs.
Which tie him to an anſwer. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Cannot God make any of the appropriate acts of worſhip
to become due only to himſelf? cannot he tie us to perform
them to him. - Stillingfleet.
They tie themſelves ſo ſtrićtly to unity of place, º:
never ſee in any of their plays a ſcene change in the middle
of an act. Dryden.
Not tied to rules of policy, you find -
Revenge leſs ſweet than a ſºng mind. Pº
No one ſeems leſs tied up to a form of words. is. at
The mind ſhould, by ſeveral rules, be tied down to º
firſt, uneaſy taſk; uſe will give it facility. - Locke.
They have no uneaſy expectations of what is tº COInex
but are ever tied down to the preſent moment. 4.
A healthy man ought not to tie himſelf up to ſtrict º º
nor to abſtain from any ſort of food in common uſe. Aºuth.
6. It may be obſerved of tie, that it has often the º:
and down joined to it, which are, for the moſt part, “ .
more than emphatical.
TIE. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Knot; faſtening.
2. Bond; obligation. -
The rebels that had ſhaken off the great yoke of obe-
dience, had likewiſe caſt away the leſſer tie of reſpect. Bacon.
No foreſt, cave, or ſavage den,
Holds more pernicious beafts than men;
Vows, oaths, and contracts, they deviſe,
And tell us they are ſacred ties. If aller.
'Tis
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T I L
—-a-rºmºsa-
'Tis not the coarſer tie of human law
That binds their peace, but harmony itſelf -
Attuning all their paſſions into love. Thomſon's Spring.
Tº: n. ſ. [tiere, tieire, old Fr. tuyer, Dutch..] A row; a
Ian K.
Fornovius, in his choler, diſcharged a tier of great ord-
hance amongſt the thickeſt of them. Knolles.
Tierce; n.ſ.. [tiers, tiercier, Fr.] A veſſel holding the third
part of a pipe.
Go now deny his tierce. Benj. johnſon.
Wit, like tierce claret, when't begins to pall,
Neglected lies, and 's of no uſe at all;
But in its full perfeótion of decay
Turns vinegar, and comes again in play. Dorſet,
Tr'ercet. n.ſ.. [from tiers, Fr.] A triplet; three lines.
TIFF. n.ſ. (A low word, I ſuppoſe without etymology.]
1. Liquor; drink.
I, whom griping penury ſurrounds,
And hunger, ſure attendant upon want,
With ſcanty offals, and ſmall acid tiff,
Wretched repaſt ! my meagre corps ſuſtain.
2. A fit of peeviſhneſs or ſullenneſs; a pet.
To Tiff. v. n. To be in a pet; to quarrel. A low word.
Tiffany. n.ſ. ſtiffer, to dreſs up, old Fr. Skinner.] Very
thin ſilk.
The ſmoak of ſulphur will not black a paper, and is com-
Phillips.
monly uſed by women to whiten tiffanies. Brown.
TiGE. n.ſ.. [in archite&amp;ture.] The ſhaft of a column from the
aſtragal to the capital. Bailey.
Ti(GER. m. ſ. [tigre, Fr. tigris, Latin.] A fierce beaſt of the
ºleonine kind.
When the blaſt of war blows in your ear,
Then imitate the aëtion of the tiger:
Stiffen the finews, ſummon up the blood. Shakeſp. H. V.
Approach thou like the rugged Ruſſian bear,
The arm'd rhinoceros, or Hyrcanian tiger;
Take any ſhape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
This tiger-footed rage, when it ſhall find
The harm of unſkain'd ſwiftneſs will, too late,
Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Tigris, in the medals of Trajan, is drawn like an old
man, and by his ſide a tiger. Peacham on Drawing.
Has the ſteer,
At whoſe ſtrong cheſt the deadly tiger hangs,
E’er plow'd for him. Thomſon's Spring.
TIGHT. adj. [dicht, Dutch.]
J. Tenſe; cloſe ; not looſe.
If the centre holes be not very deep, and the pikes fill
them not very tight, the ſtrength of the ſtring will alter the
centre holes. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſe.
I do not like this running knot, it holds too tight; I may
be ſtifled all of a ſudden. Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of j. Bull.
Every joint was well grooved; and the door did not move
on hinges, but up and down like a ſaſh, which kept my cloſet
ſo tight that very little water came in. Gulliver's Travels.
2. Free from fluttering rags; leſs than neat.
A tight maid ere he for wine can aſk,
Gueſſes his meaning and unoils the flaſk. Dryden's juv.
The girl was a tight clever wench as any. Arbuthnot.
O Thomas, I'll make a loving wife;
I'll ſpin and card, and keep our children tight. Gay.
Dreſt her again genteel and neat,
And rather tight than great. Swift.
To TI'GHTEN. v. a. [from tight.] To ſtraiten; to make cloſe.
TI'GHTER. n.ſ.. [from tighten..] A ribband or ſtring by which
women ſtraiten their cloaths.
TI'GHTLY. adv. [from tight.]
1. Cloſely; not looſely.
2. Neatly; not idly.
- Hold, firrah, bear you theſe letters tightly;
Sail, like my pinnace, to theſe golden ſhores. Shakeſpeare.
Handle your pruning-knife with dexterity: tightly, I ſay,
go tightly to your buſineſs; you have coſt me much. Dryden.
T'ghi Ness. n.ſ. (from tight.] Cloſeneſs; not looſeneſs.
The bones are inflexible, which ariſes from the greatneſs
of the number of corpuſcles that compoſe them, and the
firmneſs and tightneſs of their union. JWoodward on Fºſſils.
Ti'GREss. n.ſ. [from tiger.] The female of the tiger.
It is reported of the tigrift, that ſeveral ſpots riſe in her
ſkin when ſhe is angry. Addison's Spect. Nº. 81.
Tik F. m. ſ. [tik, Swediſh; teke, Dutch; tique, Fr.]
1. The louſe of dogs or ſheep. See Tick.
Lice and ties are bred by the ſweat cloſe kept, and ſome-
what arefied by the hair. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 696.
2. It is in Shakeſpeare the name of a dog, in which ſenſe it is
uſed in Scotland. [from tijk, Runick, a little dog.]
Avaunt, you curs
Hound or ſpaniel, brache or hym,
Or bobtail tiſe, or trundle tail. Shakespeare K. Lear.
TILE, n.ſ. [x13'e, Saxon; tºgel, Dutch; tulle, Fr. tºgola,
-
T I IL -
*iºn.] Thin plates of baked clay uſed to cover houſes.
The roof is all tile, or lead, or ſtone. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt,
Earth ºurned into brick ſerveth for building as ſtone doth;
and the like of tile. Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
In at the window he climbs, or o'er the tiles. Milton.
Worſe than all the clatt'ring tiles, and worſe
Than thouſand padders was the poet's curſe. Dryden.
Tile pins made of oak or fir they drive into holes made
in the plain tiles, to hang them upon their lathing. Moxon.
To Tile. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. To cover with tiles.
Moſs groweth chiefly upon ridges of houſes tiled or thatch-
ed, Baco » Nat. Hi/?. -&gt;
Sonnets or elegies to Chloris nº Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 537.
Might raiſe a houſe above two ſtories;
A lyrick ode wou'd ſlate; a catch
Wou'd tile, an epigram wou'd thatch.
2. To cover as tiles,
+ The rafters of my body, bone,
Being ſtill with you, the muſcle, finew and vein,
Which tile this houſe, will come again. Donne.
T1'Le R. m. J. [tuiller, Fr. from tile.] One whoſe trade is to
cover houſes with tiles.
A Flemiſh tiler, falling from the top of a houſe upon a
Spaniard, killed him; the next of the blood proſecuted his
death; and when he was offered pecuniary recompence, no-
thing would ſerve him but lex talionis: whereupon the judge
ſaid to him, he ſhould go up to the top of the houſe, and
then fall down upon the tiler. Bacon's Apophth.
TI'll NG. n.ſ.. [from tile.] The roof covered with tiles.
They went upon the houſe-top, and let him down through
the tiling with his couch before Jeſus. Luke v. 19.
Till. n.ſ. A money box.
They break up counters, doors and tills,
And leave the empty cheſts in view. Swift.
Till. prep. [zil, Saxon.] To the time of.
Unhappy ſlave, and pupil to a bell,
Swift's Miſel.
Unhappy till the laſt, the kind releaſing knell. Cowly.
Till now. To the preſent time.
Pleaſure not known till now. Milton.
TILL then. To that time.
The earth till then was deſert. Milton,
TILL. conjunction.
1. To the time. -
Wood and rocks had ears
To rapture, till the ſavage clamour drown'd
Both harp and voice. - Milton.
The unity of place we neither find in Ariſtotle, Horace,
or any who have written of it, till in our age the French
poets firſt made it a precept of the ſtage. Dryden.
2. To the degree that.
Meditate ſo long till you make ſome ačt of prayer to God,
or glorification of him. Taylor.
§. ſpread thy reign till Iſis elders reel. Pope.
To Till. v. a. [cylian, Saxon; tenlen, Dutch..] To culti-
vate; to huſband: commonly uſed of the huſbandry of the
plow.
This paradiſe I give thee, count it thine,
To till, and keep, and of the fruit to eat. Milton.
Send him from the garden forth, to till
The ground whence he was taken. . . Milton's Par. Loft.
TI'LLABLE. adj. [from till.] Arable; fit for the plow.
The tillable fields are ſo hilly, that the oxen can hardly
take ſure footing. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Tillage. n.ſ.. [from till.] Huſbandry; the ačt or practice of
plowing or culture. -
Tillage will enable the kingdom for corn for the natives,
and to ſpare for exportation. Bacon.
A ſweaty reaper from his tillage brought -
Firſt-fruits, the green ear, and the yellow ſheaf. Milton.
Incite them to improve the tillage of their country, to re-
cover the bad ſoil, and to remedy the waſte. Milton.
Bid the laborious hind,
Whoſe harden'd hands did long in tillage toil, -
Neglect the promis'd harveſt of the ſoil. Dryden.
That there was tillage Moſes intimates; but whether be-
flowed on all, or only upon ſome parts of that carº, as alſº
what ſort of tillage that was, is not expreſſed. J/oodward.
TI'LLER. m. ſ. [from till.]
1. Huſbandman; ploughman. -
- They bring iſ ſea ſand partly after their nearneſs to the
places, and partly by the good huſbandry of the tiller. Carew.
Abel was a keeper of ſheep, but Cain was a tiller of the
ground. - - - Gen. º 2.
The worm that gnaws the ripening fruit, ſad gueſt
Canker or locuſt hurtful to infeſt . &gt;
The blade; while huſks elude the tiller's care, -
And eminence of want diſtinguiſhes the year. Prizr.
- ill; a ſmall drawer.
- 2. A "... her cabinet, and thou ſhalt find
Fach tiller there with love epiſtles lin'd.
-
Dryden's jº.
Ti’l M AN.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T I L
T I M
- º -
* - - - - ..y. ) adj. [A word uſed formerly when anything
'º. } ſaid was rejected as trifling or impertinent.
I'LLY ? am not I of her blood tilly-
ſanguinious
Am not I conſangu" Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
dy. -
º, fir John, never tell me; your ancient ſwaggerer
comes not in my door. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
TriMAN. m.ſ. ſtill and man.] One who tills; an huſband-
"Good ſhepherd, good tilman, good Jack and good Gil,
Makes huſband and huſwiſe their coffers to fil. Tiſſºr.
TILT. n.ſ. [rylb, Saxon.]
1. A tent; any covering over head.
The roof of linnen
Intended for a ſhelter'
But the rain made an aſs
Of tilt and canvas,
And the ſnow which you know is a melter.
2. The cover of a boat.
It is a ſmall veſſel, like in proportion to a Graveſend tilt-
boat. Sandys.
The rowing crew,
To tempt a fare, clothe all their tilts in blue. Gay.
3. A military game at which the combatants run againſt each
other with lances on horſeback.
His ſtudy is his tilt-yard, and his loves
Are brazen images of canonized ſaints. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
He talks as familiarly of John of Gaunt, as if he had
been ſworn brother to him; and he never ſaw him but once
in the tilt-yard, and then he broke his head. Shakespeare H. IV.
Images repreſenting the forms of Hercules, Apollo, and
Diana, he placed in the tilt-yard at Conſtantinople. Knolles.
The ſpouſals of Hippolite the queen,
Denham.
What tilts and tourneys at the feaſt were ſeen. Dryden.
In tilts and tournaments the valiant ſtrove,
By glorious deeds to purchaſe Emma's love. Prior.
4. A thruſt.
His majeſty ſeldom diſmiſſed the foreigner till he had en-
tertained him with the ſlaughter of two or three of his liege
ſubjects, whom he very dextrouſly put to death with the tilt
of his lance. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 10.
To Tilt. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover like a tilt of a boat.
2. To carry as in tilts or tournaments.
Ajax interpos'd
His ſevenfold ſhield, and ſcreen'd Laertes' ſon,
When the inſulting Trojans urg'd him fore
With tilted ſpears. Philips.
3. To point as in tilts.
Now horrid ſlaughter reigns,
Sons againſt fathers tilt the fatal lance,
Careleſs of duty, and their native grounds
Diſtain with kindred blood. Philips.
4. [Tillen, Dutch..] To turn up ſo as to run out.
To TILT. v. m.
1. To run in tilts.
To deſcribe races and games, -
Or tilting furniture, emblazon'd ſhields. Milton.
2. To fight with rapiers.
Friends all but even now; and then, but now—
Swords out and tilting one at other's breafts,
In oppoſition bloody. Shakeſp. Othello.
Scow'ring the watch grows out of faſhion wit:
Now we ſet up for tilting in the pit,
Where 'tis agreed by builies, chicken-hearted,
To fright the ladies firſt, and then be parted. Dryden.
It is not yet the faſhion for women of quality to tilt. Collier.
Satire's my weapon, but I'm too diſcreet
To run a muck, and tilt at all I mect ;
I only wear it in a land of Hectors. Pope,
3. To ruſh as in combat.
Some ſay the ſpirits tilt ſo violently, that they make holes
where they ſtrike. Collier.
4. To play unſteadily.
The floating veſſel ſwam
Uplifted ; and ſecure with beaked prow
Rode tilting o'er the waves. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. xi.
The fleet ſwift tilting o'er the ſurges flew,
Pope's Odyſſey.
Till Grecian cliffs appeard.
5. To fall on one ſide.
As the trunk of the body is kept from tilting forward by
the muſcles of the back, ſo from falling backward by thoſe
ºf the belly. - Grew's Coſmol. b. i.
Titº FR.M.'ſ [from tilt.] One who tilts; one who fights.
A puiſny tilter, that ſpurs his horſe on one ſide, breaks his
ſtaff like a noble gooſe. Shakeſp. As you like it.
He us’d the only antique philters,
Deriv'd from old heroick tº. Hudibras, p. iii.
If war you chuſe, and blood muſt needs be ſpilt here,
Let me afore to match your tilter. Granville.
Tiltii. n.ſ. [from till.] Huſbandry; culture.
Bouin, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
No uſe of metal, corn, or wine, or oil. Shakºp. Tempºff.
Her plenteous womb
Expreſſeth its full tilth and huſbandry,
TILTH. adj. [from till J Arable; tilled.
He beheld a field,
º arable and tilth ; whereon were ſheaves
New reap'd. Milton's Par. Lo -
TI(MBER. {{ ſtymbrian, Saxon, to build.] ºff, b. xi,
1. Wood fit for building.
I learn'd of lighter timber cotes to frame,
Such as might ſave my ſheep and me from ſhame. Spenſºr.
For the body of the ſhips no nation doth equal England
for the oaken timber wherewith to build them; but there
muſt be a great providence uſed, that our ſhip timber be not
unneceſſarily waſted. Bacon's Advice to Willieri,
The ſtraw was laid below,
Of chips and ſere wood was the ſecond row;
The third of greens, and timber newly fell’d. - Dryden.
There are hardly any countries that are deſtitute of timir
of their own growth, J/ºodward.
... Upon theſe walls they plant quick and timber trees, which
thrive exceedingly. 44%rtine's Huſbandy,
Who ſet the twigs, ſhall he remember, -
That is in haſte to ſell the timber 2
And what ſhall of thy woods remain,
Shakeſpeare.
Except the box that threw the main? Prior,
2. The main trunk of a tree.
We take -
From every tree, lop, bark, and part o' th' timber,
And though we leave it with a root thus hackt,
The air will drink the ſap. Shakſtart,
3. The main beams of a fabrick.
4. Materials ironically.
Such diſpoſitions are the very errors of human nature, and
yet they are the fitteſt timber to make politicks of, like to
knee timber, that is good for ſhips to be toſſed, but not for
houſes that ſhall ſtand firm. Bacon.
To TIMBER. v. n. [from the noun..] To light on a tree. A
cant word.
The one took up in a thicket of bruſh-wood, and the other
timbered upon a tree hard by. L'E/irange's Fables.
To TI(MBER. v. a. To furniſh with beams or timber.
TIM BERED. adj. [from timber 3 timbré, Fr.] Built; formed;
contrived.
He left the ſucceſſion to his ſecond ſon; not becauſe he
, thought him the beſt timbered to ſupport it. //otton.
Many heads that undertake learning were never ſquared
nor timbered for it. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i.
TI'M BER sow. m. ſ. A worm in wood.
Divers creatures, though they be ſomewhat loathſome to
take, are of this kind; as earth worms, timberſ wº, ſhalls.
- Bacon's Nat. Hiſt, Nº. 692,
TI'MBREL. m. ſ. [timbre, Fr. tympanum, Latin.] A kind of
muſical inſtrument played by pulſation.
The damſels they delight,
When they their timbrels ſmite, -
And thereinto dance and carrol ſweet. Speſº's Bººk
In their hands ſweet timbrel, all upheld on hight. Fa. K.
Praiſe with timbrels, organs, flutes;
Praiſe with violins and lutes. Sandys's Paraph
For her through Egypt's fruitful clime renown'd, -
Let weeping Nilus hear the timbrel ſound. Pºpe s Statiuſ.
TIME. m. ſ. ſtima, Saxon; tym, Erſe.]
I. The meaſure of duration. -
This conſideration of duration, as ſet out by certain Pº
riods, and marked by certain meaſures or epochas, is that
which moſt properly we call time. Locke.
Time is like a faſhionable hoſt,
That ſlightly ſhakes his parting gueſt by th' hand,
But with his arms out-ſtretch'd, as he would fly,
Graſps the incomer. Shakeſp. Troilus ànd Criſill.
Come what come may,
Time and the hour runs Hºle rougheſt day. Shakespeare .
Nor will poliſhed amber, although it ſend forth.* groſs ex-
halement, be found a long time defective upon the *.*.
ſcale. Brown's Pulgar Errºº b. ii.
Time, which conſiſteth of parts, can be no pºrt of º:
duration, or of eternity; for then there would be in nit
time paſt to day, which to morrow will be more than infinite.
- - - - - - ... • ther.
Time is therefore one thing, and infinite duration is anº”.
Grew's Cºſmºl. b. i.
2. Space of time. - - - - d that he
Daniel deſired that he would give him time, aſ " ". 16
would ſhew him the interpretation. D"...
He for the time remain'd ſtupidly good. Swift
No time is allowed for digreſſions. wjt.
3. Interval. nti-
Pomanders, and knots of powders, you may have i. at
nually in your hand; whereas perfumes you can take o u
times. Bacºn's Nat. H/. Nº. 929.
. Seaſon ; proper time. - -
4. To º, tº: there is a ſeaſon, and a time to ***'. pur
- . ! - iii. I.
poſe. 8 Ecciº/ They
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T I M
T I M
º,
---
--ami---- - -
They were cut down out of time, whoſe foundation was
overflown with a flood. job xxii. 16.
He found nothing but leaves on it; for the time of figs was
not yet. Mar. xi. 13.
Knowing the time, that it is high time to awake out of
ſleep. Rom, xiii. 1 1,
- Short were her marriage joys; for in the prime
Of youth her lord expir’d before his time. Dryden.
I hope I come in time, if not to make,
At leaſt, to ſave your fortune and your honour:
Take heed you ſteer your veſſel right. Dryden.
The time will come when we ſhall be forced to bring our
evil ways to remembrance, and then conſideration will do us
little good. Calamy's Sermons.
5. A conſiderable ſpace of duration; continuance; proceſs of
tline.
Fight under him, there's plunder to be had ;
A captain is a very gainful trade:
And when in ſervice your beſt days are ſpent, -
In time you may command a regiment. Dryden's juvenal.
In time the mind reflects on its own operations about the
ideas got by ſenſation, and thereby ſtores itſelf with a new
ſet of ideas, ideas of reflection. Locke.
One imagines, that the terreſtrial matter which is ſhower-
ed down along with rain enlarges the bulk of the earth, and
that it will in time bury all things under-ground. Iſoodward.
I have reſolved to take time, and, in ſpite of all misfor-
tunes, to write you, at intervals, a long letter. Swift.
6. Age ; particular part of time.
When that company died, what time the fire devoured two
hundred and fifty men. Num. xxvi. Io.
They ſhall be given into his hand until a time and times.
Dan, vii. 25.
If we ſhould impute the heat of the ſeaſon unto the co-
operation of any fiars with the ſun, it ſeems more favourable
for our times to aſcribe the ſame unto the conſtellation of
leo. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv.
The way to pleaſe being to imitate nature, the poets and
the painters, in ancient times, and in the beſt ages, have ſtu-
died her. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
7. Paſt time.
I was the man in th’ moon when time was.
8. Early time.
Stanley at Boſworth field, though he came time enough to
ſave his life, yet he ſtaid long enough to endanger it. Bacon.
If they acknowledge repentance and a more ſtrict obe-
dience to be one time or other neceſſary, they imagine it is
time cnough yet to ſet about theſe duties. Rogers.
9. Time conſidered as affording opportunity.
The earl loſt no time, but marched day and night. Clarend.
He continued his delights till all the enemies horſe were
paſſed through his quarters; nor did then purſue then in any
time. Clarendon, b. viii.
Time is loſt, which never will renew,
While we too far the pleaſing path purſue,
Surveying nature.
10. Particular quality of the preſent.
Comets, importing change of times and ſtates,
Brandiſh your cryſtal treſſes in the ſky. Shakeſpeare.
All the prophets in their age, the times
Of great Meſſiah fing. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
If any reply, that the times and manners of men will not
bear ſuch a practice, that is an anſwer from the mouth of a
profeſſed time-ſerver. South's Sermons.
11. Particular time.
- Give order, that no ſort of perſon
Have, any time, recourſe unto the princes. Shakeſpeare.
The worſt on me muſt light, when time ſhall be. Milt.
A time will come when my maturer muſe,
In Caeſar's wars a nobler theme ſhall chuſe. Dryden.
Theſe reſervoirs of ſnow they cut, diſtributing them to ſe-
veral ſhops, that from time to time ſupply Naples. Addison.
12. Hour of childbirth.
She intended to ſtay till delivered; for ſhe was within one
month of her time. Clarendon.
The firſt time I ſaw a lady dreſſed in one of theſe petti-
coats, I blamed her for walking abroad when ſhe was ſo near
her time; but ſoon I found all the modiſh part of the ſex as
far gone as herſelf. Addison's Speef. Nº. 127.
13. Repetition of anything, or mention with reference to re-
petition. -
Four times he croſs'd the car of night. Milton.
Every ſingle particle would have a ſphere of void ſpace
around it many hundred thouſand million million times bigger
than the dimenſions of that particle. Bentley.
Lord Oxford I have now the third time mentioned in this
letter expects you. - Swift.
14. Muſical meaſure. - -
Muſick do I hear !
Ha, ha! keep time. How four ſweet muſick is
When time is broke and no proportion kept. Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden's Virgil.
You by the help of tune and time
Can make that ſong which was but time.
On their exalted wings
To the coeleſtial orbs they climb,
And with th' harmonious ſpheres keep time.
Heroes who o'ercome, or die, -
Have their hearts hung extremely high;
The ſtrings of which in battle's hº
ſº their very corſlets beat;
cºp time with their own trumpet's -
And yield them moſt exceſſive º,
To TIME. v. a. [from the noun.
1. To adapt to the time; to bring or do at a proper time
There is no greater wiſdom than well to", -
J.P.allºr-
Denham,
Prior.
ime the begin-
nings and onſets of things. |Bacºn's Nat. Hiſ
º he timing of things is a main point in the diſpatch of all
analſ;... . L'Eſtrange.
This 'tis to have a virtue out of ſeaſon.
Mercy is good, but kings miſtake its timing. Dryden.
A man's convićtion ſhould be ſtrong, and ſo well timed,
that worldly advantages may ſeem to have no ſhare in it...i.
2. To regulate as to time. -
To the ſame purpoſe old Epopeus ſpoke,
Who overlook'd the oars, and tim'd the ſtroke. Addison.
3. To meaſure harmonically. -
He was a thing of blood, whoſe every motion
Was tim'd with dying cries. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Ti’MEFU L. adj. [time and full.] Seaſonable; timely; early.
If this arch-politician find in his pupils any remorſe, any
feeling of God's future judgments, he perſuades them that
God hath ſo great need of mens ſouls, that he will accept
them at any time, and upon any condition; interrupting, by
his vigilant endeavours, all offer of timeful return towards
God. Raleigh's Hyl, of the I/orld, b, i.
TI'Meless. adj. [from time.]
1. Unſeaſonable; done at an improper time.
Nor fits it to prolong the heav'nly feaſt .
Timeleſs, indecent, but retire to reſt. Pope's Odyſſy.
2. Untimely; immature; done before the proper time.
A pack of ſorrows, which would preſs you down,
If unprevented, to your timelſ, grave. Shakeſpeare.
Noble Gloſter's death,
Who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd
The bloody office of his timeleſs end. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
TIMELY. adj. [from time.] Seaſonable; ſufficiently early.
The Weſt glimmers with ſome ſtreaks of day,
Now ſpurs the lated traveller apace
To gain the timely inn.
Shakeſp. Macbeth,
Happy were I in my timely death;
Could all my travels warrant me they live. Shakeſpeare,
Leſt heat ſhould hinder us, his timely care
Hath unbeſought provided. Milton.
I'll to my charge,
And ſhow my duty by my timely care. Dryden.
TI’MELY. adv. [from time.] Early ; ſoon.
The beds i' th' Eaſt are ſoft, and thanks to you,
That call'd me timelier than my purpoſe hither. Shakeſp.
Sent to forewarn
Us timely of what elſe might be our loſs. Milton.
Timely advis'd, the coming evil ſhun ;
Better not do the deed, than weep it done. Prior.
TI(MEPLEAs ER. m. ſ. [time and pleaſe.] One who complies
with prevailing notions whatever they be.
Scandal, the ſuppliants for the people, call them
Timepleaſers, flatterers, foes to nobleneſs. Shakeſpeare.
TI’MEs ER v ING. adj. [time and ſerve.] Meanly complying with
preſent power. - -
If ſuch by trimming and timeſerving, which are but two
words for the ſame thing, abandon the church of England;
this will produce confuſion. South's Sermons.
TI(MID. adj. [timide, Fr. timidus, Lat.] Fearful; timorous;
wanting courage; wanting boldneſs. .
Poor is the triumph o'er the timid hare. Thomſºn.
TIMI'dity. n.ſ. [timidité, Fr. timiditas, Latin ; from timid.]
Fearfulneſs; timorouſneſs; habitual cowardice. -
The hare figured puſillanimity and timidity frºm its tem-
per. . Brown's Żulgar Errours.
Ti’MoRous, adj. [timor, Latin.J Fearful : full of fear and
cruple. - -
ſ Fººd heads will ever doubt it, and timer; belief,
will never dare to try it. Brown's Wulgar Err; 5. ii.
The infant flames, whilſt yet they were conceal’d
In tim’rous doubts, with pity I beheld;
With eaſy ſmiles diſpell'd the ſilent fear, -
That durſt not tell me what I dy'd to heaſ: ... Prior.
Tr'Morously, adv. [from timorous.] I carfully 3 with much
fear. we would have had you heard
The traitor ſpeak, and tim'rº/ confeſs
#. º the purpoſe of his treaſons. Shakeſheart.
Though<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T IN
T I N
had ideas enough to diſtinguiſh gold from a
hey -
Though they I from wood, yet they but timorouſly ventured
d meta - -
º: which ſhould pretend to ſignify º, º
0ckè.
ſº - - -
e *. daſard ſouls be timorºuſly wiſe:
But tell them, Pyrrhus knows not how to form - rp-
Far-fancy'd ills, and dangers out of fight. A. Phillips.
T1'MoRousness. m. ſ. [from timorous.] Fearfulneſs.
The clergy, through the timorouſneſ of many among them,
were refuſed to be heard by their council. Swift.
Tr'Mous. adj. [from time.] Early; timely; not innate.
By a wiſe and timºus inquiſition, the peccant humours and
humouriſts muſt be diſcovered, purged, or cut off. Bacon.
TIN. n.ſ.. [tem, Dutch.] -
1. One of the primitive metals called by the chemiſts ju-
iter.
p Quickſilver, lead, iron, and tin, have opacity or black-
neſs. Peacham on Blazoning.
Tin ore ſometimes holds about one-ſixth of tin. //codward.
2. Thin plates of iron covered with tin.
To Trn. v. a. [from the noun..] To cover with tin.
To keep the earth from getting into the veſſel, he employ.
ed a plate of iron tinned over and perforated. Boyle.
The cover may be tinned over only by nailing of ſingle tin
plates over it. Martimer's Huſbandry.
New tinning a ſaucepan is chargeable. Swift.
TI'NcAl. n. ſ. A mineral.
The tintal of the Perſians ſeems to be the chryſocolla of
the ancients, and what our borax is made of. //codward.
To TINct. v. a. ſtinčius, Lat. teint, Fr.]
1. To ſtain; to colour; to ſpot; to die.
Some bodies have a more departible nature than others in
colouration; for a ſmall quantity of ſaffron will tinct more
than a very great quantity of wine. Bacon.
Some were tináed blue, ſome red, others yellow. Brown.
I diſtilled ſome of the tinéled liquor, and all that came
over was as limpid as rock water. Boyle.
Thoſe who have preſerved an innocence, would not ſuffer
the whiter parts of their ſoul to be diſcoloured or tinčied by
the refle&amp;tion of one ſin. Decay of Piety.
2. To imbue with a taſte.
We have artificial wells made in imitation of the natural,
as tinčied upon vitriol, ſulphur, and ſteel. Bacon.
Tinct. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Colour; ſtain; ſpot.
- That great med'cine hath
With his tinči gilded thee. Shakeſpeare.
Of evening tiné:
The purple ſtreaming amethyſt is thine. Thomſon.
The firſt ſcent of a veſſel laſts, and the tinů the wool firſt
appears of. Benj. johnſon.
T1'NcTURE. m. ſ. [teinture, Fr. tinčura from tinčius, Lat.]
1. Colour or taſte ſuperadded by ſomething.
The fight muſt be ſweetly deceived by an inſenſible paſ-
ſage from bright colours to dimmer, which Italian artizans
call the middle tinétures. Wotton's Architecture.
Hence the morning planet gilds her horn,
By tinčiure or reflection they augment
Their ſmall peculiar. Milton.
'Tis the fate of princes that no knowledge
Come pure to them, but paſſing through the eyes
And ears of other men, it takes a tincture
From every channel. Denham.
That beloved thing engroſſes him, and, like a coloured
glaſs before his eyes, caſts its own colour and tincture upon
all the images of things. South.
To begin the practice of an art with a light tincture of the
rules, is to expoſe ourſelves to the ſcorn of thoſe who are
judges. Dryden.
Malignant tempers, whatever kind of life they are en-
gaged in, will diſcover their natural tinéſure of mind. Addison
Few in the next generation who will not write and read,
and have an early tinčiure of religion. Addiſon.
Sire of her joy and ſource of her delight;
Q wing'd with pleaſure take thy happy flight,
And give each future morn a tinčiure of thy white. Prior.
All manners take a tinčiure from our own,
Qr come diſcolour'd through our paſſions ſhown. Pope.
Have a care left ſome darling ſcience ſo far prevail over
your mind, as to give a ſovereign tincture to all your other
ſtudies, and diſcolour all your ideas. //atts.
2. Extract of ſome drug made in ſpirits; an infuſion.
In tinčiures drawn from vegetables, the ſuperfluous ſpirit of
wine diſtilled off leaves the extract of the vegetable. Boyle.
To Tincture. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To imbue or impregnate with ſome colour or taſte.
The bright ſun compačts the precious ſtone,
Imparting radiant luſtré like his own :
He tinctures rubies with their roſy hue,
And on the ſaphire ſpreads a heavenly blue. Blackmore.
A little black paint will tincture and ſpoil twenty gay co-
lours. Matts.
2. To imbue the mind.
Early were our minds tinčiured with a diſtinguiſhi
of good and evil; early were the ſeeds of a º: º
holy fear of offending, ſown in our hearts. Žº
To TIND. v. a. [tendgan, Gothick; tenban, Saxon.] †.
T}. to ſet on fire. - O
I'NDER. m. ſ. ſcynore, zenbne, Saxon.] Anythin -
inflammable placed to catch fire. J Anything eminently
G Strike on the tinder ho!
jive me a taper. Shakeſp.
To theſe ſhameleſs paſtimes were their ºº::
thereby adding, as it were, fire to tinder. Hairwi.
Where ſparks and fire do meet with tinder, -
Thoſe ſparks more fire will ſtill engender. Suckling
Whoever our trading with England would hinder, "“”
To inflame both the nations do plainly conſpire;
Becauſe Iriſh linen will ſoon turn to tinder,
And wool it is greaſy, and quickly takes fire. Swift.
Tºpºx. n. ſ. [tinder and box.] The box for holding tin-
Cr.
That worthy patriot, once the bellows,
And tinderbox of all his fellows. Hudibras, p. iii.
He might even as well have employed his time in catching
moles, making lanterns and tinderboxes. Atterbury's Sermon.
TINE. n. ſ. [tinne, Iſlandick.]
1. The tooth of a harrow ; the ſpike of a fork.
In the ſouthern parts of England they deſtroy moles by
traps that fall on them, and ſtrike ſharp fines or teeth through
them. AMortimer's Huſbandry.
2. Trouble; diſtreſs.
The root whereof, and tragical effect,
Vouchſafe, O thou the mournful'ſt muſe of nine,
That wont'ſ the tragick ſtage for to direct,
In funeral complaints and wailful tine. Spenſer's Muipotmo.
To TINE. v. a. [zynan, Saxon.]
1. To kindle; to light; to ſet on fire.
Strifeful Atin in their ſtubborn mind
Coals of contention and hot vengeance tin'd. Fa. Qu.
The clouds
Juſtling or puſh'd with winds, rude in their ſhock,
Tine the ſlant light'ning; whoſe thwart flame driv'n down,
Kindles the gummy bark of fir. Milton.
The prieſt with holy hands was ſeen to tine
The cloven wood, and pour the ruddy wine. Dryden.
2. [zinan, Saxon, to ſhut..] To ſhut.
To TINE. v. n.
1. To rage; to ſmart. Spenſer.
2. To fight.
Eden ſtain'd with blood of many aband
Of Scots and Engliſh both, that timed on his ſtrand. Spenſ.
To TING.E. v. a. [tingo, Lat..] To impregnate or imbue with
a colour or taſte.
Sir Roger is ſomething of an humouriſt; and his virtues as
well as imperfections are tinged by a certain extravagance,
which makes them particularly his. Addison's Spei.
A red powder mixed with a little blue, or a blue with 3.
little red, doth not preſently loſe its colour; but a white pow-
der mixed with any colour is preſently tinged with that ºr
lour, and is equally capable of being tinged with any colour
whatever. Newton's Opticº.
If the eye be tinged with any colour, as in the jaundice,
ſo as to tinge pićtures in the bottom of the eye with that *
lour, all objects appear tinged with the ſame colour. Nº"
Still lays ſome uſeful bile aſide,
To tinge the chyle's inſipid tide;
Elſe we ſhould want both gibe and ſatire, -
And all be burſt with pure good-nature. Piº.
The infuſions of rhubarb and ſaffrontinge the uring "
a high yellow. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
TI'NGENT. adj. [tingens, Lat.] Having the power tº "gº.
This wood, by the tinéture it afforded, appeared to have
its coloured part genuine; but as for the white Patº it ap-
pears much leſs enriched with the tingent property. Boyle.
Ti’NGLAss. n.ſ.. [tin and glaſs.] Biſmuth. -
To T1'N Gle. v. n. [tingelen, Dutch.] in the ears.
1. To feel a ſound, or the continuance of a ſound,
This is perhaps rather tinkle. ody is
when our ear ſingleth, we uſually ſay that ſomeº º
talking of us; which is an ancient conceit. Brºwn.
2. To feel a ſharp quick pain with a ſenſation of motº"
The pale boy ſenator yet tingling ſtands.
3. To feel either pain or pleaſure with a ſenſatiº
The ſenſe of this word is not very well aſcertained. Tickell
They ſuck pollution through their tingling vºiº. ...
In a palſy, ſometimes the ſenſation or feeling * ; ºf
tally aboliſhed, or dull with a ſenſe of tingling. 4.
To Tink. v. n. [tinnio, Latin; tıncian, Welſh J To "*
ſharp ſhrill noiſe.
Ti’NK ER. n.ſ.. [from tink, becauſe their way of
their trade is to beat a kettle, or becauſe in thei
make a tinkling noiſe.] A mender of old braſs. and
Am not I old Sly's ſon, by education a cardmaker, are.
now by preſent profeſſion a tinker, Shakeſpeare

</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T I P
T I R.
ºf:
º:
---
---
º
*
My copper medals by the pound
May be with learned juſtice weigh'd :
To turn the balance, Otho's head
May be thrown in ; and for the mettle
The coin may mend a tinker's kettle. Prior.
To T1'NKLE. v. n. [tinter, Fr. tinnio, Latin.]
1. To make a ſharp quick noiſe; to clink.
The daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with
ſtretched out necks, making a tinkling with their fect. Iſa.
His feeble hand a javelin threw,
Which flutt’ring, ſeem'd to loiter as it flew :
Juſt, and but barely, to the mark it held,
And faintly tinkl"d on the brazen ſhield.
The ſprightly horſe
Moves to the muſick of his tinkling bells. Dodſley's Agr.
2. It ſeems to have been improperly uſed by Pope. -
The wand'ring fireams that ſhine between the hills,
Dryden's Án.
The grots that echo to the tinkling rills. Pope.
3. To bºar a low quick noiſe.
With deeper brown the grove was overſpread,
• A ſudden horrour ſeiz'd his giddy head, }
And his ears tinkled, and the colour fled. Dryden.
TINMAN. m. ſ. ſtin and man.] A manufacturer of tin, or iron
tinned over.
Didſt thou never pop -
Thy head into a tinman's ſhop. Prior.
Ti(NPENNY. m. ſ. A certain cuſtomary duty anciently paid to
the tithingmen. Bailey.
TI'Nwok M. m. ſ. An inſe&amp;t. Bailey.
T1'NN ER. m. ſ. [from tin; tın, Saxon.] One who works in
the tin mines.
The Corniſh men, many of them could for a need live
under-ground, that were tinners. Bacon's Henry VII.
T1'Nsel. n.ſ. [etincelle, Fr.]
1. A kind of ſhining cloth.
A tinſel wail her amber locks did ſhrowd,
That ſtrove to cover what it could not hide. Fairfax.
Its but a night-gown in reſpect of your's; cloth of gold
and cuts, underborne with a bluiſh tinſel. Shakeſpeare.
By Thetis' tinſel ſlipper'd feet,
And the ſongs of ſirens ſweet. Milton.
2. Anything ſhining with falſe luſtre; any thing ſhewy and of
little value.
For favours cheap and common who would ſtrive;
Yet ſcatter'd here and there I ſome behold,
Who can diſcern the tinſel from the gold 2 Dryden.
If the man will too curiouſly examine the ſuperficial timſel
good, he undeceives himſelf to his own coſt. Norris.
No glittering timſel of May fair, -
Could with this rod of Sid compare. Swift.
Ye tinſel inſects, whom a court maintains,
That counts your beauties only by your ſtains,
Spin all your cobwebs o'er the eyes of day,
The muſe's wing ſhall bruſh you all away. ... Pope.
To TI'ssel. v. a. [from the noun.] To decorate with cheap
ornaments; to adorn with luſtre that has no value. .
Hence you phantaſtick poſtillers in ſong,
My text defeats your art, 'tis nature's tongue,
Scorns all her tin oil'd metaphors of pelf,
Illuſtrated by nothing but herſelf.
She, tinſell'd o'er in robes of varying hues,
With ſelf-applauſe her wild creation views,
Sees momentary monſters riſe and fall,
And with her own foo!'s colours gilds them all. Pope.
TiNT. n.ſ.. [teinte, Fr. tinta, Ital.] A dye; a colour.
Whether thy hand ſtrike out ſome free deſign,
Where life awakes, and dawns at ev'ry line;
Or blend in beauteous tint the colour'd maſs,
And from the canvas call the mimick face. Pope.
T1'NY. adj. [tint, tynd, Daniſh..] Little ; ſmall ; puny. A
burleſque word. D d little tiny kickſh
Some pigeons, Davy, and any pretty little tiny kickſhaws.
Some pigeons, Davy, rºº
Cleaveland.
When that I was a little tiny boy, -
A fooliſh thing was but a toy. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
But ah! I fear thy little fancy roves,
On little females and on little loves s
Thy pigmy children, and thy tiny ſpouſe, -
The baby playthings that adorn thy houſe. - Swift.
Tip. m. ſ. ſºft, ºften, Dutch..] Top 5 end; point; extre-
In tW.
y The tip no jewel needs to wear, - --
The tip is jewel of the ear. - Sidney, b. ii.
They touch the beard with the tip of their tongue, and
wet it. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 494.
Thrice upon thy fingers tip,
Thrice upon thy rubic d lip. Milton.
All the pleaſure dwells upon the tip of his tongue. South.
She has fifty private amours, which nobody yet knows any
thing of but herſelf, and thirty clandeſtine marriages that
have not been touched by the tip of the tongue. Addison.
'no longer look upon lord Plauſible as rid;
- - - s ridiculous, for ad-
*ing a lady's fine tip of an ear and prett 5
o Tip. J.A. [from the noun.] pretty elbow. Pope.
* To top; to end; to cover on the end.
Stood - In his hand a reed
Qºd waving, tipp'd with fire. Milton'
With truncheon titp'd with iron head ilton's Par. Left.
The warriour to the liſts he iºd. &gt;
º: would the old king ſmile
°º you weigh the paws, when tipp'd wi
And throw the ſhaggy ſpoils about º #.*.
Quarto's, oëtavo's ſhape the left. pyre - ** wris
And laſt a little Ajax tip; the ſpire. * Pºpe, Dunciad
Behold the place, where if a poet 1/??ttºº.
Shin'd in deſcription, he might ſhow it;
Tell how the moon-beam trembling falls
And tips with ſilver all the walls. Pº, H.
- Tipt with jet, a.
Fair ermines ſpotleſs as the ſhows they preſs.
2. To ſtrike ſlightly; to tap.
She writes love letters to the youth in grace,
Nay, tip; the wink before the cáckold's âce. Dryden
The pert jackanapes tipped me the wink, and put out his
tongue at his grandfather. Tatler, No. 86
A third rogue tips me by the elbow. - suffi.
Their judgment was, upon the whole, -
That lady is the dulleſt ſoul;
Then tipt their forehead in a jeer,
As who ſhould ſay, ſhe wants it here.
When I ſaw the keeper frown,
Tipping him with half a crown,
Now, ſaid I, we are alone,
Name your heroes one by one. Swift.
TI'PPET. n.ſ.. [capper, Sax.j Something worn about the nećk.
His turban was white, with a ſmall red croſs on the top :
he had alſo a tippet of fine linnen. Bacon,
To T1'PPLE. v. n. [tºpel, a dug, old Teutonick.] To drink
luxuriouſly; to waſte life over the cup.
Let us grant it is not amiſs to fit,
And keep the turn of tippling with a ſlave,
To reel the ſtreets at noon. Shakeſp. Alt. and Clºpatra.
To T1'PPLE. v. a. To drink in luxury or exceſs.
While his canting drone-pipe ſcan’d
The myſtick figures of her hand,
He tipples palmeſtry, and dines
Hudibras, £. i.
Thomſºn.
Swift.
On all her fortune-telling lines. Cleaveland.
To a ſhort meal he makes a tedious grace,
Before the barley-pudding comes in place;
Then bids fall on ; himſelf for ſaving charges
A peel'd ſlic'd onion eats, and tipples verjuice. Dryden.
If a ſlumber haply does invade
My weary limbs, my fancy's ſtill awake,
Thoughtful of drink, and eager in a dream,
Tipples imaginary pots of ale. Philips.
TI'PPI.E., n.ſ. [from the verb.] Drink; liquor.
While the tipple was paid for, all went merrily on. L'Eſir.
Ti(PPLED. adj. [from tipple.] Tipſy; drunk.
Merry, we ſail from the Eaſt,
Half tippled at a rainbow feaſt. Dryden.
TI'PPLE.R. n.ſ.. [from tipple..] A ſottiſh drunkard; an idle
drunken fellow.
TI'Pst AFF. n.ſ. ſtip and ſtaff.]
1. An officer with a ſtaff tipped with metal.
2. The ſtaff itſelf ſo tipt. -
One had in his hand a tipſtaff of a yellow cane, tºpped at
both ends with blue. Bacon.
One had in his hand a tipſtaff of a yellow cane, tipped at
both ends with blue. Bacon.
T1'psy. adj. [from tipple..] Drunk; overpowered with exceſs
of drink.
The riot of the tipſy bacchanals,
Tearing the Thracian finger in their rage.
Welcome joy and feaſt,
Midnight ſhout and revelry,
Tipſy dance and jollity. Milton.
TI'ptoe. n.ſ. (tip and toe.] The end of the toe.
Where the fond ape himſelf uprearing !";
Upon his tiptoes ſtalketh ſtately by. Spenſ. Hubberd's Tale.
He that outlives this day and comes ſafe home,
Will ſtand a tiptoe when this day is nam’d,
And rouze him at the name of Criſpian. Shakeſpeare.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Shakeſpeare.
Stands tiptoe on the miſty mountains tops. Shakeſpeare.
Religion ſtands on tiptoe in our land,
Ready to paſs to the American ſtrand. Herbert.
Ten ruddy wildings in the wood I found,
And ſtood on tiptoes from the ground. Dryden.
TIR E. n.ſ.. [tuyr, Dutch.]
1. Rank; row. -
Your loweſt tire of ordnance muſt lie four foot clear above
water, when all loading is in, or elſe thoſe your beſt pieces
26 O will<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">*
T I S
T I T
crown weathcr that makes
- ſca, in an - * --
will be of ſmall uſe at ſca, in any &amp; Raleigh's Eſſayſ.
illows to riſe. -
the º rank'd of ſeraphim another row,
to diſplode their ſecond tire - -
º: l A filton's Par. Lºſº, h. vi.
In all thoſe wars there were few triremes, moſt of them
being of one tire of oars of fifty banks. Arbuthnot.
2 ſcorrupted from tiar or tiara, or attire.] A head-dreſs.
- On her head ſhe wore a tire of gold,
Adorn'd with gems and ouches. Fairy Queen.
Here is her pićture: let me ſee :
If I had ſuch a tire, this face of mine
Were full as lovely as is this of hers. Shakespeare.
The judge of torments, and the king of tears,
Now fills a burniſh'd throne of quenchleſs fire,
And for his old fair robes of light he wears
A gloomy mantle of dark flame, the tire
That crowns his hated head on high, appears. Crºſław.
When the fury took her ſtand on high,
A hiſs from all the ſnaky tire went round. Pope.
3. Furniture; apparatus.
Saint George's worth
Enkindles like deſire of high exploits: *
Immediate ſieges, and the tire of war ... "
Rowl in thy eager mind. Philips.
when they firſt peep forth of the ground, they ſhew their
whole tire of leaves, then flowers, next ſecds. Hºodward.
To TIRE. v. a. [tinian, Saxon.] -
1. To fatigue; to make weary; to harraſs; to wear out with
labour or tediouſneſs.
Tir'd with toil, all hopes of ſafety paſt,
From pray'rs to wiſhes he deſcends at laſt. Dryden.
For this a hundred voices I deſire,
To tell thee what a hundred tongues wou'd tire ;
Yet never could be worthily expreſt,
How deeply thou art ſeated in my breaſt. Dryden's Perſus.
2. It has often out added to intend the ſignification.
Often a few that are ſtiff do tire out a greater number
that are more moderate. Bacon's Eſſays.
A lonely way
The cheerleſs Albion wander'd half a day;
Tir'd out, at length a ſpreading ſtream he 'ſpy'd. Tickell.
3. [From attire or tire, from tiara.] To dreſs the head.
Jezebel painted her face and tired her head. 2 Kings ix. 30.
To TIR.E. v. n. [zeonian, Saxon.] To fail with wearineſs.
TI'RED NEss. n.ſ.. [from tired.] State of being tired; weari-
neſs. -
It is not through the tiredneſs of the age of the earth, but
through our own negligence that it hath not ſatisfied us boun-
tifully. Hakewill on Providence.
TI'REsoME. adj. [from tire.] Weariſome ; fatiguing; te-
dious.
Since the inculcating precept upon precept will prove tire-
ſºme to the reader, the poet muſt ſometimes relieve the ſub-
jećt with a pleaſant and pertinent digreſſion. Addiſon.
Nothing is ſo tirºſome as the works of thoſe criticks who
write in a dogmatick way, without language, genius, or
imagination. Addiſon's Spect. Nº. 253.
Ti’REsom ENESS. n. ſ. [from tireſºme.] Act or quality of be-
ing tireſome.
T1'REwoMAN. m. ſ. [tire and woman.] A woman whoſe buſi-
neſs is to make dreſſes for the head.
Why ſhould they not value themſelves for this outſide
faſhionableneſs of the tirewoman's making, when their parents
have ſo early inſtructed them to do ſo. Locke on Education.
T1'RINGHouse. }*{ [tire and houſe, or room..] The room in
TI'RING Room. which players dreſs for the ſtage.
This green plot ſhall be our ſtage, this hawthorn brake
our tiringhouſe. Shakeſpeare.
Man's life's a tragedy; his mother's womb,
From which he enters, is the tiringroom;
This ſpacious earth the theatre, and the ſtage
That country which he lives in ; paſions, rage,
Folly, and vice, are actors. J/otton.
TI'Rwit. m. ſ. A bird. Ainſworth.
'TIs, contračted for it is.
'Tis deſtiny unſhunable. Shakeſpeare.
Tºck. h. / [corrupted from phthiſ:{..] Conſumption; mor-
bid waſte.
Tºsical. adj. [for phthiſical.] Conſumptive.
TI'ssu E. m. ſ. ſtiffie, Fr. tiran, to weave, Norman Saxon.]
Cloth interwoven with gold or filver. -
In their glittering iſſues emblaz'd
Holy memorials, acts of zeal and love,
Recorded eminent. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. v.
A robe of tiſſue, ſtiff with golden wire;
An upper veſt, once Helen's rich attire ;
From Argos by the fam'd adultreſs brought,
With golden flow’rs and winding foliage wrought. Dryden.
a- *.. - ----- -
To Tissue. v. a. [from the noun.] To interweave; to va-
riegate.
The chariot was covered with cloth of gold tiſſued upon
blue. Bacºn's New hº
They have been always frank of their bleſſings to count.
nance any great aćtion ; and then, according as it ſº
Proſper, to tiffe upon it ſome pretence or other. J/ctiºn
Mercy will ſit between, whº -
º in coeleſtial ſheen,
ith radiant feet the tiſſued clouds down fleer º,
TIT. n.ſ. iteering. Milºn.
I. A ſmall horſe: generally in contempt.
No floring of paſture with baggagely tit,
With ragged, with aged, and evil at hit. Tº ſºr
Thou might'ſt have ta'en example -
From what thou read'ſt in ſtory;
Being as worthy to ſit
On an ambling tit,
As thy predeceſſor Dory. - Denham
2. A woman: in contempt. -
yº does this envious tit, but away to her father with a
tale. L'E
A willing tit that will venture her corps with you. É.
Short pains for thee, for me a ſon and heiſ.
Girls coſt as many throes in bringing forth;
Beſide, when born, the tits are little worth. Dryden.
3. A titmouſe or tomtit. A bird. -
TIT BIT. m. ſ. [properly tidbit; tid, tender, and bit..] Nice
bit; nice food.
John pampered eſquire South with titlits till he grew wan-
ton. Arbuthnot.
TI'THEABLE. adj. [from tithe..] Subject to the payment of
tithes; that of which tithes may be taken.
The popiſh prieſt ſhall, on taking the oath of allegiance
to his majeſty, be entitled to a tenth part or tithe of all
things titleable in Ireland belonging to the papiſts, within
their reſpective pariſhes. Swift.
TITHE. m. ſ. [reoča, Saxon, tenth.]
1. The tenth part; the part aſſigned to the maintenance of the
miniſtry.
Many have made witty investives againſt uſury: they ſay,
that it is pity the devil ſhould have God's part, which is the
tithe. Bacon,
Sometimes comes ſhe with a tithe pig's tail,
Tickling the parſon as he lies aſleep,
Then dreams he of another benefice.
2. The tenth part of any thing.
I have ſearched man by man, boy by boy; the tithe of a
hair was never loſt in my houſe before. Shakeſpeare.
Since the firſt ſword was drawn about this queſtion,
Ev'ry tithe ſoul 'mongſt many thouſand diſmes
Hath been as dear as Helen. Shakeſp. Trail, and Crºſſida.
3. Small part; ſmall portion.
Offenſive wars for religion are ſeldom to be approved, un-
leſs they have ſome mixture of civil tithes. º Bacon.
To Titfie. v. a. [zeoSian, Saxon.] To tax; to pay the
tenth part.
. When I come to the tithing of them, I will tithe them one
with another, and will make an Iriſhman the tithingman.
Spenſºr on Ireland.
Shakeſpeare.
By decimation and a tithed death,
If thy revenges hunger for that food
which nature loaths, take thou the deſtin'd tenth. Shaº
When thou haſt made an end of tithing all the tithes of
thine increaſe, the third year, the year of tithing, give unto
the Levite, ſtranger, fatherleſs and widow. Deut. xxvi. 14.
To TITHE. v. n. To pay tithe. -
For lambe, pig, and calf, and for other the like,
Tithe ſo as thy cattle the lord do not ſtrike. . Taſer,
TI'THER. m. ſ. [from tithe..] One who gathers tithes;
T1'THYMAL. n.ſ.. [tithymalle, French; tithymallu, Lat..] An
herb. Ainſ.
TI'rhing. m. ſ. [tithinga, law Latin, from tithe..] ... …
1. Tithing is the number or company of ten men wit" their
families knit together in a ſociety, all of them being *
to the king for the peaceable and good behaviour of º O
their ſociety: of theſe companies there was one chief perſºn,
who, from his office, was called (toothingman) diº
but now he is nothing but a conſtable. - - - tº:
Poor Tom, who is whipt from tithing to tithing, and ſtoc
puniſhed and impriſoned. Shakespeare . King Lº"
2. Tithe ; tenth part due to the prieſt. il
Though vicar be bad, or the parſon evil, Tºſºr,
Go not for thy tithing thyſelf to the devil.
T1'THING MAN. m. ſ. [tithing and man.] A petty Pea
an under-conſtable.
His hundred is not at his command further than h -
ſervice; and alſo every tithingman may control him. Spe'ſ"
To TI(TILLATE. v. m. [titillo, Lat..] To tickle.
Juſt where the breath of life his noſtrils drew,
A charge of ſnuff the wily virgin threw ;
The gnomes direct to ev'ry atom juſt,
The pungent grains of titillating duſt.
ce officer;
- *
is prince S
Pºpe.
TITILLATION:
2.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T I T
..
-
*-
:-
--&gt;
-&gt;
T-a-mºme, º-
Titillation. *ſ [titillation, French 3 titilatio, Lat. from
titillate.]
1. The aët of tickling.
Tickling cauſeth laughter: the cauſe may be the emiſſion
of the ſpirits, and ſo of the breath, by a flight from titiſh-
tion. Bacon.
2. The ſtate of being tickled.
In ſweets the acid particles ſeem ſo attenuated in the oil as
only to produce a ſmall and grateful titillation. Arbuthnot.
3. Any ſlight or petty pleaſure.
The delights which reſult from theſe nobler entertainments
ºur cool thoughts need not be aſhamed of, and which are
dogged by no ſuch ſad ſequels as are the Products of thoſe
titiations, that reach no higher than the ſenſes. Glanville.
Ti’ſ LARK. m. ſ. A bird.
The ſmaller birds do the like in their ſeaſons; as the
leverock, titlark, and linnet. - //alton.
Tººle, n.ſ.. [titelle, old Fr. titaha, Lat.]
I. A general head compriſing particulars.
Three draw the ºxperiments of the former four into titles
and tables for the better drawing of obſervations; theſe we
call compilers. Bacon.
Amºng the many preferences that the laws of England
have above others, I ſhall ſingle out two particular titles,
which give a handſome ſpecimen of their excellencies above
other laws in other parts or titles of the ſame. . Hale.
2. An appellation of honour.
To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
His manſion, and his titles, in a place
From whence himſelf does fly?
Man over men
He made not lord: ſuch title to himſelf
Reſerving. Milton.
3. A name; an appellation. •
My name's Macbeth.
-The devil himſelf could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Ill worthy I ſuch title ſhould belong
To me tranſgreſſor. Milton.
4. The firſt page of a book, telling its name and generally its
ſubject ; an inſcription.
This man's brow, like to a titl, leaf,
Foretels the nature of a tragick volume. Shakeſheare.
Our adverſaries encourage a writer who cannot furniſh out
ſo much as a title page with propriety. Swift.
5. A claim of right. -
Let the title of a man's fight be called in queſtion; are
we not bold to rely and build upon the judgment of ſuch as
are famous for their ſkill in the laws? Hooker.
Is a man impoveriſhed by purchaſe? it is becauſe he paid
his money for a lye, and took a bad title for a good. South.
'Tis our duty
Such monuments, as we can build, to raiſe;
lºſt all the world prevent what we ſhould do,
• And claim a title in him by their praiſe. Dryden.
To revenge their common injuries, though you had an
undoubted title by your birth, you had a greater by your
courage. Dryden.
Sonti would have kept his title to Orange. Addison.
O the diſcretion of a girl ſhe will be a ſlave to any thing
that has not a title to make her one. Southern.
To Ti"TL.E. v. a. [from the noun.] To entitle; to name 5 to
call.
Shakespeare . Macbeth.
To theſe, that ſober race of men, whoſe lives
Religious, titled them the ſons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame,
Ignobly 44/ton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
Ti TLE LEss. adj. [from title.] Wanting a name or appella-
tion. Not in uſe.
He was a kind of nothing, titleleſ,
Till he had forg'd himſelf a name 6th' fire
Of burning Rome. Shakeſp. Coriolanur.
Tr'TLEPAGE. n.ſ.. [title and page.] The page containing the
title of a book.
We ſhould have been pleaſed to have ſeen Our Own names
at the bottom of the titlepage. Dryden.
Ti"r Mouse, or tit. "...ſ.. [tiſt, Dutch, a chick or ſmall bird;
#ngier, Iſlandick, a little bird: ; ſignifies little in the
Teutonick dialects.] A ſmall ſpecies of birds.
The nightingale is ſovereign of ſong,
Before him fits the titmouſe ſilent be,
And I unfit to thruſt iſ ſkilful throng,
Should Colin make judge of my fooleric. Spenſºr.
The titmouſe and the pecker. hungry brood,
And Progne with her boſom ſtain’d in blood. Dryden.
To T1"tt ER. v. m. [formed, I ſuppoſe, from the ſound..] To
laugh with reſtraint; to laugh without much noiſe.
In flow'd at once a gay embroider'd race,
And titt'ring puſh'd the pedants off the place.
Ti"TTER. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A reſtrained laugh.
2. I know not what it ſignifies in Tºſºr.
Dunciad.
T O
From wheat gºandrake out the time,
eare be not forth, it will riſe again fi
* */ [I ſuppoſe from tit.] A ſmall
ºr or tine,
ne. 7 ºffer,
particle; a point;
T1'TTL
a dot.
ºn the particular which concerned the church, the Scot,
Would never depart from a tittle. carnº, b. viii
&gt; Angels themſelve. diſdainin &gt; *. W. iii.
T’approach thy temple, give thee in Command
T * to . ſmalleſt titt, thou fhalt ſaw
O thy adorers. Paradiſ. Recai, . i.
They thought God and themſelves ºf ...º *
faſt a Covenant, that although they never performed their
Pºrt, God was yet bound . make good every tittle of his.
South's Sermons.
and underſtands
TOOm. Swi/?.
Ned Faſhion hath been bred about court,
** a tittle all the punélios ºf a drawing-
ITTLE TATTLE. */.l.A word formed from tattle by a ludi-
crous reduplication.j III. talk; prattle; empty gabble.
As the foe drew nea;
With love, and joy, and life and dear,
Our don, who knew this tittlefattle,
Jid, ſure as trumpet, call to battle.
For every idle titiºn, that went about, Jack was ſuſpect.
cd for the author. Arbuthnot's H/. of 7. Bull.
To TrºttleTATTLE. v., [from tattle.] To praté idly.
You are full in your tittletatilings of Cupid : here is Cupid,
, and there is Cupid'. I wiſ tell you now what a good old wo—
man told me. Sidney, b. ii.
TITUPA'tion. n: ſ ſtitulo, Lat.] The ad of ſtumbling.
TITULAR. *... [titulaire, Fr. from titulus, Lat.] Nominal,
having or conferring only the title.
They would deliver HP.he kingdom to the king of Eng-
land to ſhadow their rebellion, and to be tiſſ. and painted
head of thoſe arms. Bacon's Henry VII.
Thrones, virtues, powers,
If theſe magnifick titles yet remain,
Not merely titular. - Milton.
Both Valerius and Auſtin were titular biſhops, Ayliffs.
Titula'Rity. n.ſ.. [from #!”.] The ſtate of being jiā.
Julius, Auguſtus, and Tiberius, with great humility re-
ceived the name of imperator; but their ſucceſſors retain the
ſame even in its titularity. Brown's /u/gar Errours.
Ti'TULARY. adj. ſtitulaire, Fr. from titulus, Lat.]
1. Conſiſting in a title.
The malecontents of his kingdom have not been baſe nor
titulary impoſtors, but of an higher nature. Bacon, H. VII.
2. Relating to a title.
William the Conqueror, howſoever he uſed the-power of a
$onqueror to reward his Normans, yet mixed it with a titu-
lary pretence, grounded upon the confeſſor's will. Bacon.
TITULARY. m.ſ.. [from the *j.] One that has a title or right.
The perſons deputed for the celebration of theſe maſſes
were neither titularies nor Perpetual curates, but perſonsen.
tirely condućtitious. Ayliffe's Parergon.
TI'vy. adj. [A word expreſſing ſpeed, from tantivy, the note
of a hunting horn.]
In a bright moon-ſhine while winds whiſtle loud,
Tºy, titly, tivy, we mount and we fly,
All rocking in a downy white cloud:
And left our leap from the ſky ſhould prove too far,
We ſlide on the back of a new-falling ſtar. Dryden,
To, adv, ſco, Saxon; te, Dutch.]
I. A particle coming between two verbs, and noting the ſecond
as the objećt of the firſt.
The delay of our hopes teaches us to mortify our deſires.
*
Prior.
Smallridge.
2. It notes the intention.
Ambitious fool! with horny hoofs to paſs
O'er hollow arches of refounding braſs,
To rival thunder. Dryden's AFn.
She rais'd a war
In Italy, to call me back. Dryden's All fºr Love.
Urg'd by deſpair, again I go to try .
The fate of arms, reſºlvd in fight to die. Dryden.
I have done my utmoſt to lead my life ſo pleaſantly as to
forget all misfortunes. - - Pope.
3. After an adjećtive it notes .
We ready are to try our fortunes --
To the laſt man. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. ii.
The lawleſs ſword his childrens blood ſhall ſhed,
Increaſt for ſlaughter, born to beg their bread. Sandys.
- ing futurity. - -
4. Nº. and bones that can be conſcious of their
own hardneſs and redneſs; and we are ſtill to ſeek for ſome-
thing elſe in our frame that receives thoſe impreſſions. Bently.
5 } To and again.
- d fro.
Tºftid: and looſeth ſouls condemn'd to woe, , .
And ſends the devils on errands to and fro. Fairfax, b. ii.
The ſpirits perverſe
With eaſy intercourſe paſs to and fro, : 1
To tempt or puniſh mortals, *::::
ſº
}Backward and forward.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">i--
T O
Dreſ, it not till the ſeventh day,
to and fro.
Maſſes of marble,
the neighbouring roc
...i to the form of pebbles.
The winds in diſtant regions blow, -
Moving the world of waters to and frº. Addison.
To. prepoſition.
I. Nº. motion towards: oppoſed to from.
with that ſhe to him afreſh, and ſurely would have put
out his eyes. Sidney, b. ii.
and then move the joint
Wiſeman's Surgery.
originally beat off from the ſtrata of
ks, Iolled to and again till they were
ſPoodward on Foſſils.
Tybalt fled;
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
And to't they go like light'ning. - Shakeſpeare.
Give not over ſo; to him again, intreat him,
Kneel down before him. Shakeſp. Meaſ, for Meaſure.
She's coming; to her coz. - Shakeſpeare.
I'll to him again in the name of Brook; he ll tell me all
his purpoſe. Shakeſp. Merry I/ives of Iłindſor.
I’il to the woods among the happier brutes:
Come, let's away.
2. Noting accord or adaptation.
Thus they with ſacred thought
Mov'd on in ſilence to ſoft pipes. Milton's Par. Lº/?, b. i.
3. Noting addreſs or compellation: -
Tº you, my noble lord of Weſtmorland.
—I pledge your grace. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Here's to you all, gentlemen, and let him that's good-na-
tur'd in his drink pledge me. Denham's Sophy.
Now, to you, Raymond: can you gueſs no reaſon
Why I repoſe ſuch confidence in you? Dryden.
4. Noting attention or application.
Turn out, you rogue how like a beaſt you lic:
Go buckle to the law. Dryden's juvenal.
Sir Roger's kindneſs extends to their childrens children.
Smith.
Addison.
5. Noting addition or accumulation.
Wiſdom he has, and to his wiſdom courage;
Temper to that, and unto all ſucceſs. Denham's Sophy.
6. Noting a ſtate or place whither any one goes.
Take you ſome company and away to horſe. Shakeſ?.
He ſent his coachman's grandchild to prentice. Addiſon.
7. Noting oppoſition.
No foe unpuniſh’d in the fighting field,
Shall dare thee foot to foot with ſword and ſhield. Dryden.
8. Noting amount.
There were to the number of three hundred horſe, and as
many thouſand foot Engliſh. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
9. Noting proportion; noting amount.
Enoch whoſe days were, though many in reſpe&amp;t of ours,
yet ſcarce as three to nine in compariſon of theirs with whom
he lived. Hooker, b. iv.
With theſe bars againſt me,
And yet to win her—all the world to nothing. Shakeſp.
Twenty to one offend more in writing too much than too
little; even as twenty to one fall into ſickneſs rather by over-
much fulneſs than by any lack. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
The burial muſt be by the ſmallneſs of the proportion as
fifty to one; or it muſt be holpen by ſomewhat which may
fix the ſilver never to be reſtored when it is incorporated.
Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
With a funnel filling bottles; to their capacity they will
all be full. Benj. johnſon.
Phyſicians have two women patients to one man. Graant.
When an ambaſſador is diſpatched to any foreign ſtate, he
ſhall be allowed to the value of a ſhilling a day. Addison.
Among the ancients the weight of oil was to that of wine
as nine to ten. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Suppoſing them to have an equal ſhare, the odds will be
three to one on their ſide. Swift.
10. Noting poſſeſſion or appropriation.
Still a greater difficulty upon tranſlators riſes from the pe-
culiaritics every language hath to itſelf. Felton.
II. Noting perception.
The flow'r itſelf is glorious to behold,
Sharp to the taſte.
12. Noting the ſubjećt of an affirmation.
I truſt, I may not truſt thee; for thy word
Is but the vain breath of a common man:
Believe me, I do not believe thee, man ;
I have a king's oath to the contrary. Shakeſp. King john.
12. In compariſon of.
All that they did was piety to this. Benj. johnſºn.
. Theſe is no fool to the finner, who every moment ventures
his ſoul. Tillotſºn.
13. As far as.
Some Americans, otherwiſe of quick parts, could not count
tº one thouſand, nor had any diſtinét idea of it, though they
coºld reckon very well to twenty. Locke.
Coffee exhales in roaſting to the abatement of near one-
fourth of its weight. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
14. Noting intention.
Dryden's Virgil.
25. To day, to night, to mºrrow, are uſed, not very Pºp
T O
This the conſul ſees, yet this man lives |
Partakes the publick cares; and with his eve
Marks and points out cach man of us to ſlaughter. B jih
15. After an adjective it notes the object. - * / vºw.
Draw thy ſword in right.
I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,
And in that quarrel uſe it to the death.
Fate and the dooming gods are deaf to tears
wº were attentive to the godlike man,
hen from his lofty couch he thus began. -
16. Noting obligation. y began Dryden.
Almanzor is taxed with changing fides, and what tie ha
he on him to the contrary: he is not born their ſubject, º
Sha Reſearc.
• Dryden.
he is injured by them to a very high degree rydºn.
17. Reſpecting.
He's walk'd the way of nature;
And to our purpoſes he lives no more. Shakeſ are
fºurt.
The effects of ſuch a diviſion are pernicious to the Étº
gree, not only with regard to thoſe advantages which they
give the common enemy, but to thoſe private evils which
they produce in every particular. Addison's Spect. Nº. 12;
18. Noting conſequence. &gt; *
Fačtions carried too high are much to the prejudice of the
authority of princes. Bacon
Under how hard a fate are women born, -
Priz'd to their ruin, or expos'd to ſcorn JWallr,
Thus, to their fame, when finiſh’d was the fight,
The vićtors from their lofty ſteeds alight. o Dryden.
Oh frail eſtate of human things,
Now to our coſt your emptineſs we know. Dryden.
A Britiſh king obliges himſelf by oath to execute juſtice in
mercy, and not to exerciſe either to the total excluſion of
the other. Addison.
It muſt be confeſſed to the reproach of human nature, that
this is but too juſt a pićture of itſelf. Broome's Odſey.
19. Towards. -
She ſtretch'd her arms to heav'n. Dryden.
20. Noting preſence.
She ſtill beareth him an invincible hatred, and revileth him
to his face. Swift.
21. Noting effect.
He was wounded tranſverſe the temporal muſcle, and
bleeding almoſt to death. ///eman.
By the diſorder in the retreat great numbers were crowded
to death. - Clarendon.
Ingenious to their ruin, ev'ry age
Improves the act and inſtruments of rage. l/aller.
To prevent the aſperſion of the Roman majeſty, the of-
fender was whipt to death. Dryden.
The abuſe reigns chiefly in the country, as I found to my
vexation when I was laſt there in a viſit I made to a neigh-
bour. Swift.
I read my ruin in ev'ry cringing bow and fawningſmile.
Why with malignant elogies encreaſe
The peoples fears, and praiſe me to my ruin Smith.
22. After a verb to notes the obječt.
Give me ſome wine; fill full.
I drink to th’ general joy of the whole table,
And to our dear friend Banquo. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
Had the methods of education been directed to their right
end, this ſo neceſſary could not have been neglected. Lº:
Many of them have expoſed to the world the private miſ-
fortunes of families. Pºpe.
23. Noting the degree.
This weather-glaſs was ſo placed in the cavity of a final
receiver, that only the ſlender part of the pipe, to the height
of four inches, remained expoſed to the open air. ºk.
Tell her thy brother languiſhes to death. Addiſon.
A crow though hatched under a hen, and who nºve: has
ſeen any of the works of its kind, makes its neſt the ſame,
to the laying of a ſtick with all the neſts of that ſpecies.
Addison.
If he employs his abilities to the beſt advantage, th: ".
will come when the ſupreme governour of the world hall
proclaim his worth before men and angels. Alºj” Sprº.
24. Before day, to notes the preſent day; before mºr”. the
day next coming; before night, cither the preſent night, or
night next coming.
Banquo, thy ſoul's flight, -
If it find heav'n muſt find it out to night. Shaiºſpºrt.
To day they chas'd the boar. Otiº:
This ought rather to be called a full purpoſe of commº";
ſin to day, than a reſolution of leaving it to marrºw. º
perly,
as ſubſtantives in the nominative and other caſes.
To morrow, and to morrow, and to morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day :
And all our yeſterdays have lighted fools * ... ."
The way to duſky death. Shaº. Milº.
The father of Solomon's houſe will have private conſº".
- - ***.
with one of you the next day after to marrºw. *.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O B
Tº day is ours, why do we fear :
Tº day is ours, we have it here;
Let's baniſh bus'neſs, baniſh ſorrow,
To the gods belongs to morrow. Cowley.
To morrow will deliver all her charms
Into my arms, and make her mine for ever. . Dryden.
For what to morrow ſhall diſcloſe,
May ſpoil what you to night propoſe:
England may change, or Cloe ſtray;
Love and life are for to day. Prior.
TºAD. m. ſ. ſ.abe, Saxon.] An animal reſembling a frog;
but the frog leaps, the toad crawls: the toad is accounted
venomous, I believe truly.
From th’ extreameft upward of thy head,
To the deſcent and duſt below thy foot,
A moſt toad-ſpotted traitor.
I had rather be a toad,
And live upon the vapour of a dungeon,
Than keep a corner in the thing I love
For others uſe. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
In the great plague there were ſeen, in divers ditches about
London, many toads that had tails three inches long, whereas
toads uſually have no tails. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
In hollow caverns vermin make abode, -
The hilling ſerpent, and the ſwelling toad. Dryden.
To'ADFISH. n.ſ. A kind of ſea-fiſh.
To'ADF LAX. m. ſ. A plant.
Tø'Apston E. m. ſ. ſtoad and /lone..] A concretion ſuppoſed to
be found in the head of a toad.
The tºadſtone preſumed to be found in the head of that
animal, is not a thing impoſſible. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
To'Absºrool. n.ſ. ſtead and ſtool.] A plant like a muſhroom.
The griſly todºſłool grown there mought I ſee,
Shakeſp. K. Lear.
And loathing paddocks lording on the ſame. Spenſer.
Another imperfect plant like a muſhroom, but ſometimes
as broad as a hat, called toad/fool, is not eſculent. Bacon.
To Toast. v. a. [torreo, to/ium, Lat.]
1. To dry or heat at the fire.
Put up thy ſword betime,
Or I'll ſo maul you and your toaſting iron. Shakeſpeare.
His breath ſtinks with eating toaſted cheeſe. Shakeſpeare.
The earth whereof the graſs is ſoon parched with the ſun,
and too/led, is commonly forced earth. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
To allure mice I find no other magick, than to draw out
a piece of toaſted cheeſe. Brown.
2. To name when a health is drunk. To toaſt is uſed com-
monly when women are named.
Several popiſh gentlemen toaſted many loyal healths. Addison
We'll try the empire you ſo long have boaſted;
And if we are not prais'd, we'll not be toaſted. Prior.
To Ast. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Bread dried before the fire.
You are both as rheumatick as two dry toaſts; you cannot
one bear with another's confirmities. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Every third day take a ſmall toaſt of manchet, dipped in
oil of ſweet almonds new drawn, and ſprinkled with loaf
ſugar. Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
2. Bread dried and put into liquor.
Where's then the ſaucy boat
Co-rival’d greatneſs or to harbour fled,
Or made a too/* for Neptune? Shakeſp. Troil, and Crºſſida.
Some ſquire, perhaps, you take delight to rack;
Whoſe game is whiſk, whoſe treat a toaſt in ſack. Pope.
3. A celebrated woman whoſe health is often drunk.
I ſhall likewiſe mark out every toaſt, the club in which
ſhe was elected, and the number of votes that were on her
ſide. Addiſon's Guard. Nº. 107.
Say, why are beauties prais'd and honour'd moſt,
The wiſe man's paſſion, and the vain man's tooſ; º'
Why deck'd with all that land and ſea afford,
Why angels call’d, and angel-like ador'd : Pope.
To'AstER. m. ſ. [from toaſt.] He who toaſts.
We ſimple toaſters take delight
To ſee our women's teeth look white;
And ev'ry ſaucy ill-bred fellow -
Sncers at a mouth profoundly yellow. Prior.
TOBACCO. n.ſ. [from Tobaco or Tobago in America.]
The flower of the tobacco conſiſts of one leaf, is funnel-
ſhaped, and divided at the top into five deep ſegments, which
expand like a ſtar; the ovary becomes an oblong roundiſh
membranaceous fruit, which is divided into two cells by an
intermediate partition, and is filled with ſmall roundiſh
ſeeds. Miller.
It is a planet now I ſee;
And, if I err not, by his proper --
Figure, that's like a tobacco-ſtopper. Hudibras, p. ii.
Bread or tobacco may be neglected; but reaſon at firſt re-
commends their trial, and cuſtom makes them pleaſant. Locke.
Salts are to be drained out of the clay by water, before it
be fit for the making tobacco-pipes or bricks. JWoodward.
ToB'Accon IST. n.ſ.. [from tobacco.] A preparer and vender of
tobacco.
Top. m. ſ. [totte haar, a lock of hair, German, Skinner. I
believe rightly.]
T O I
I. A buſh; a thick ſhrub.
Within the ivic lod,
There ſhrouded was the little god;
I heard a buſy buſtling. - Spenſºr's Pyloral.
2. A certain weight of wool, twenty eight pounds.
Every eleven weather tºd, every tod yields a pound and
odd ſhillings. Shakeſpeare's Jºinter's Tale.
Toe. m. ſ. ſta, Sºon teen, Dutch..] file divided extremi.
ties of the feet; the fingers of the feet.
Come all you ſpirits,
And fill me from the Crown to th’
Of direct cruelty.
Sport that wrinkled care derides,
And laughter holding both his ides;
Come and trip it as you go,
On the light fantaſtick toº.
toe, topful
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
- Milton.
Laſt to enjoy her ſenſe of feeling, 41 tit.27t
A thouſand little nerves ſhe ſends
Quite to our toes, and fingers ends. Prior.
Toro'R.E. adv. [coronan, Saxon.] Before. Obſolete.
It is an epilogue to make plain
Some ºbſcure precedence that hath tofºre been ſain. Shakespeare
So ſhall they depart the manor with the corn and the baº,
tºfore him that hath won it. Spediator, Nº. 607.
Toft. m. ſ. ſºftum, law Latin.] A place where a meſſuage
has ſtood. Cowel and Ainſ.
To'GED. adj. [togatus, Lat.] Gowned; dreſſed in gowns.
The bookiſh theorick,
Wherein the toged conſuls can propoſe
As maſterly as he j meer prattle, without pračice,
Is all his ſoldierſhip. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Together. adv. [toget'ere, Saxon.] -
I. In company.
We turn'd o'er many books together. Shakeſpeare.
Both together went into the wood. Milton.
2. Not apart; not in ſeparation.
That king joined humanity and policy tºgether. Bacon.
3. In the ſame place.
She lodgeth heat and cold, and moiſt and dry,
And life and death, and peace and war together. Davies.
4. In the ſame time.
While he and I live together, I ſhall not be thought the
worſt poet. Dryden.
5. Without intermiſſion. -
The Portugueſe expected his return for almoſt an age toge-
fher after the battle. Dryden,
They had a great debate concerning the puniſhment of
one of their admirals, which laſted a month together. Addison.
6. In concert. -
The ſubjećt is his confederacy with Henry the eighth, and
the wars they made together upon France. Addiſon on Italy.
7. In continuity. -
- Some tree's broad leaves together ſew’d,
And girded on our loins, may cover round. Milton,
8. Together with. In union with ; in a ſtate of mixture
with.
Take the bad together with the good. Dryden's juvenal.
To ToI.L. v. n. [cilian, Saxon; tuylen, Dutch..] To labour;
perhaps originally, to labour in tillage.
This Percy was the man neareſt my ſoul;
Who, like a brother, toil"d in my affairs,
And laid his love and life under my foot.
Others ill-fated are condemn'd to toil
Their tedious life, and mourn their purpoſe blaſted
Shakeſpeare.
With fruitleſs act. Prior.
He views the main that ever toils below. Thomſon.
To ToI.L. v. a.
1. To labour; to work at.
Tail'd out my uncouth paſſage, forc'd to ride -
Th’untračtable abyſs. Milton,
2. To weary; to overlabour.
Then, toil'd with works of war, retir’d himſelf.
To Italy. Shakespeare's Richard II.
Toil. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Labour; fatigue. - - -
They live to their great, both toil and grief, where the
blaſphemies of Arians are renewed. Hazker, b. v.
Not to irkſome toil, but to delight º
He made us. Milton.
2. [Tºile, toiles, Fr. tela, Latin.] Any net or ſhare woven or
meſhed. -
She looks like ſleep,
e would catch another Antony -
ſº º ſtrong toil of grace. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
He had ſo placed his horſemen and footmen in the woods,
that he ſhut up the Chriſtians as it were in a tail. - Knolles.
All great ſpirits -
Bear great and ſudden change with ſuch impatience
As a Numidian lion, when firſt caught,
Endures the toil that holds him. Denham's Sophy.
A fly falls into the toil of a ſpider. - L'E/irange.
Fantaſtick honour, thou haſt fram'd a toil
Thyſelf, to make thy love thy virtues ſpoil. Dryden.
26 P To'ILET.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O M
T O L
- dreſſing table.
ºiler. m. ſ. ſtoilette, Fr.] A c -
To(IL The #: from the exchange returns in peace,
- - Pope.
And the long labours of the toilet ceaſe
m tail.] Laborious ; weary. -
Twº : ſº 07/le, }: with thee were ſweet. Milton.
While here we dwell, -
What can be toilſome in theſe pleaſant walks Milton.
Abſent or dead, ſtill let a friend be dear,
A figh the abſent claims, the dead a tear;
Recil thoſe nights that clos'd thy toilſome days,
Sihearthy Parnelin his living lays. . Pope.
ToºlsomeNess. n.ſ.. [from tailſome.] Weariſomeneſs; labo-
riouſneſs. -
Token. n.ſ.. [tains, Gothick; cacn, Saxon; trycken, Dutch.]
1. A ſign. -
Shew me a token for good, that they which hate me may
ſee it. Pſal. lxxxvi. 17.
2. A mark.
whereſoever you ſee ingratitude, you may as infallibly
conclude, that there is a growing ſtock of ill-nature in that
breaſt, as you may know that man to have the plague upon
whom you ſee the tokens. South's Sermons.
3. A memorial of friendſhip; an evidence of remembrance.
Here is a letter from queen Hecuba,
A token from her daughter, my fair love. Shakeſpeare.
- Whence came this 2
This is ſome token from a newer friend. Shakeſpeare.
Pigwiggen gladly would commend
Some token to queen Mab to ſend,
Were worthy of her wearing. Drayton's Nymphid.
To TokEN. v. a. [from the noun..] To make known. Not
in uſe.
What in time proceeds,
May token to the future our paſt deeds. Shakeſpeare.
Told. pret. and part. paſſ of tell. Mentioned; related.
The aëts of God to human ears
Cannot, without proceſs of ſpeech, be told. Milton.
To Tole. v. a. [This ſeems to be ſome barbarous provincial
word. ) To train; to draw by degrees.
Whatever you obſerve him to be more frighted at than he
ſhould, tole him on to by inſenſible degrees, till at laſt he
maſters the difficulty. r - Locke.
To'LERABLE. adj. [tolerable, Fr. tolerabilis, Lat.]
1. Supportable; that may be endured or ſupported.
Yourſelves, who have ſought them, ye ſo excuſe, as that
ye would have men to think ye judge them not allowable,
but tolerable only, and to be borne with, for the furtherance
of your purpoſes, till the corrupt eſtate of the church may
be better reformed. Hooker.
It ſhall be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of judgment
than for that city. Mat. x. 15.
Cold and heat ſcarce tolerable. Milton.
There is nothing of difficulty in the external performance,
but what hypocriſy can make tºlerable to itſelf. Tillotſon.
2. Not excellent; not contemptible; paſſable.
The reader may be aſſured of a tolerable tranſlation. Dryd.
Princes have it in their power to keep a majority on their
ſide by any tolerable adminiſtration, till provoked by conti-
nual oppreſſions. Swift.
To'LERABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from tolerable.] The ſtate of being
tolerable.
To'LERABLY. adv. [from tolerable.]
I. Supportably; in a manner that may be endured.
2. Paſſably; neither well nor ill; moderately well.
Sometimes are found in theſe laxer ſtrata bodies that are
ſtill tolerably firm. Hºodward's Nat. Hiſt. p. iii.
The perſon to whom this head belonged laughed frequent-
ly, and on particular occaſions had acquitted himſelf tolerably
at a ball. Addiſon's Speci. Nº. 275.
Toºk ANce. n.ſ. ſtºlerantia, Lat. tolerance, Fr.) Power of
enduring; act of enduring.
Diogenes one froſty morning came into the market-place
'ſhaking, to ſhew his toleranº; many of the people came
abºut him, pitying him: Plato paſſing by, and knowing he
did it to be ſeen, ſaid, if you pity him indeed, let him alone
IO himſelf. Bacon's Apophth.
There wants nothing but confideration of our own eternal
weal, a tolerance or endurance of being made happy here,
and bleſſed eternally. Hammond's Fundamentals.
To To'LERATE. v. a. ſtolero, Lat. tolerer, Fr.] To allow ſo
as not to hinder; to ſuffer.
Inaſmuch as they did reſolve to remove only ſuch things
of that kind as the church might beſt ſpare, retaining the re-
ſidue ; their whole counſel is, in this point, utterly con-
demned, as having either proceeded from the blindneſs of
thoſe times, or from negligence, or from deſire of honour
and glory, or from an erroneous opinion that ſuch things
might be tolerated for a while. Hooker, b. iv.
We ſhall tolerate flying horſes, harpies, and ſatyrs; for
theſe ** Poetical fancies, whoſe ſhaded moralities requite
their ſubſtantial falſities. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. v.
Men ſhould not tolerate themſelves o
ne minute in
known ſin. any
Crying ſhould not be tolerated in children. ecay y;
We are fully convinced that we ſhall always tolerate them
but not that they will tolerate us. Swift.
Toler A"tion. m. ſ. [tolero, Latin.] Allowance given to that
which is not approved.
I ſhall not ſpeak againſt the indulgence and toleration grant-
ed to theſe men. South's Sermon:
TQLL. m. ſ. [This word ſeems derived from tall, Lal.".
Şıxon; ºl, Dutch; tºll, Daniſh; tall, Welſh; tai, F.
An exciſe of goods; a ſeizure of ſome part for permiſſi -
the reſt.
Toll, in law, has two ſignifications: firſt, a liberty to bu
and ſell within the precincts of a manor, which ſeems ..
import as much as a fair or market; ſecondly, a tribute or
cuſtom paid for paſſage. Cowel.
Empſon and Dudley the people eſteemed as his horſ.
leaches, bold men, that took toll of their maſter's griſt. Bar.
The ſame Pruſias joined with the Rhodians againſt th:
Byzantines, and ſtopped them from levying the toll upon
their trade into the Euxine. Arbuthnot.
To Toll. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To pay toll or tallage.
I will buy me a ſon-in-law in a fair, and toll for him: for
this I'll none of him. Shakeſp. All's well that and wall.
Where, when, by whom, and what y' were ſold for,
And in the open market toll'd for Hudibras, p. ii.
2. To take toll or tallage.
The meale the more yeeldeth, if ſervant be true,
And miller that tolleth takes none but his due. Tiſſºr.
3. [I know not whence derived.] To ſound as a ſingle beſi.
The firſt bringer of unwelcome news
Hath but a loſing office; and his tongue
Sounds ever after as a ſullen bell,
Remember'd tolling a departed friend, Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Our going to church at the tolling of a bell, only tells us
the time when we ought to go to worſhip God. Stillingfied.
Toll, toll,
Gentle bell, for the ſoul
on of
Of the pure ones." Denham.
You love to hear of ſome prodigious tale,
The bell that toll'd alone, or Iriſh whale. Dryden.
They give their bodies due repoſe at night:
When hollow murmurs of their ev'ning bells
Diſmiſs the ſleepy ſwains, and toll them to their cells. Dry.
All the bells tolled in different notes. Pope.
With horns and trumpets now to madneſs ſwell,
Now ſink in ſorrows with a tolling bell. Pope's Dunciad.
The maid aſks who the bell toll'd for Swift.
To Toll. v. a. [toll, Lat.]
1. To ring a bell. -
When any one dies, then by tolling or ringing of a bell
the ſame is known to the ſearchers. Graunt.
2. To take away; to vacate; to annul. A term only uſed in
the civil law: in this ſenſe the o is ſhort, in the former long.
An appeal from ſentence of excommunication does º:
ſuſpend it, but then devolves it to a ſuperior judge, and tºll,
the preſumption in favour of a ſentence. Ayliffe.
3. To take away. Obſolete. -
The adventitious moiſture which hangeth looſe in a body,
betrayeth and tolleth forth the innate and radical moilº
along with it. - Bacon's Nat. Hiſł. Nº. 395.
Tollbooth. n.ſ.. [toll and booth.] A priſon: Aimſ,
To Tollbooth. v. a. To impriſon in a tollbooth.
To theſe what did he give why a hen, . b
That they might tollbooth Oxford men. Biſhºp º:f
TollcathéRER. n.ſ. [toll and gather.] The officer *
takes toll. Diſ?
To'lsey. n.ſ. The ſame with tolbooth. ul t
Tollutation. n.ſ.. [toluto, Latin.] The act of P* *
ambling.
#. move per latera, that is, two legs of ºn; ſide º:
ther, which is tolutation or ambling. Brown" Vulgar Err.
Authors have not writ Butler
Whether tolutation or ſuccuſation. º º
TOMB. n.ſ.. [tombe, tombeau, Fr. tumba, low Lat] . n
nument in which the dead are encloſed. bel
Methinks, I ſee thee, now thou art below,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb. sºft.
Time is drawn upon tombs an old man bald, wº; .
a ſithe and an hour-glaſs. Peacham on Draw"&amp;"
Poor heart ſhe ſlumbers in her filent tomb,
Let her poſſeſs in peace that narrow room. Dryden.
The ſecret wound with which I bleed
Shall lie wrapt up, ev’n in my herſe,
But on my tomb-ſtone thou ſhalt read Prior,
My anſwer to thy dubious verſe. b
To Tomb. v. a. [from the noun..] To bury; to en"
Souls of boys were there, May,
And youths, that tomb'd before their parents º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O N
T O O
" .
, ºr
º
To'MBless. adj. [from tomb.] Wanting a tomb; wanting a
ſepulchral monument.
Lay theſe bones in an unworthy urn,
Tombleſs, with no remembrance over them. Shakeſpeare.
To'MBox. m. ſ. [Tom a diminutive of Thomas, and boy..] A
mean fellow ; ſometimes a wild coarſe girl.
- A lad
Faſten’d to an empery, to i. partner'd
With tomboys, hir'd with that ſelf-exhibition
Which your own coffers yield ! Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
TOME. m. ſ. [Fr. Tow8;..]
1. One volume of many.
2. A book.
All thoſe venerable books of ſcripture, all thoſe ſacred
tones and volumes of holy writ, are with ſuch abſolute per-
fection framed. Hooker.
ToMTI'T. n.ſ. [See T1't Mouse..] A titmouſe; a ſmall bird.
You would fancy him a giant when you looked upon him,
and a tomtit when you ſhut your eyes. Speciator.
Ton... n.ſ.. [tonne, Fr. See TUN.j A meaſure or weight.
Spain was very weak at home, or very ſlow to move,
when they ſuffered a ſmall fleet of Engliſh to fire, ſink, and
carry away, ten thouſand ton of their great ſhipping. Bacon.
ToN. UIn the names of places, are derived from the Saxon
TUN. : run, a hedge or wall, and this ſeems to be from bun,
a hill, the towns being anciently built on hills for the ſake of
defence and protection in times of war. Giº on's Camden.
ToNE. m. ſ. [ton, Fr. tonus, Lat.]
1. Note; ſound.
Sounds called tones are ever equal. Bacon's Nat. Hiſ.
The ſtrength of a voice or ſound makes a difference in the
loudneſs or ſoftneſs, but not in the tone. Bacon's Nat. Hſi.
In their motions harmony divine
So ſmooths her charming tones, that God's own ear
Liſtens delighted. Milton's Par. Loft, b. v.
2. Accent; ſound of the voice.
Palamon replies,
Fager his tone, and ardent were his eyes. Dryden.
3. A whine; a mournful cry.
Made children, with your tones, to run for't
As bad as bloody-bones, or Lunsford. Hudibras, p. iii.
4. A particular or affected ſound in ſpeaking.
5. Elaſticity; power of extenſion and contraćtion.
Drinking too great quantities of this decoction may weaken
the tone of the ſtomach. Arbuthnot.
To NG. m. ſ. [See Tongs.] The catch of a buckle. This
word is uſually written tongue, but, as its office is to hold, it
has probably the ſame original with tongs, and ſhould there-
fore have the ſame orthography.
Their hilts were burniſh'd gold, and handle ſtrong
Of mother pearl, and buckled with a golden tong. Fa. Q.
ToNGs. m. ſ. ſtanx, Saxon ; tang, Dutch..] An inſtrument
by which hold is taken of any thing: as of coals in the fire.
Another did the dying brands repair
With iron tongs, and ſprinkled oft the ſame
With liquid waves. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
They turn the glowing maſs with crooked tongs;
The fiery work proceeds. Dryden’s AEn.
Get a pair of tongs like a ſmith's tongs, ſtronger and tooth-
ed. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
ToNGUE. m. ſ. [zung, Saxon; tonghe, Dutch..]
1. The inſtrument of ſpeech in human beings.
My conſcience hath a thouſand ſeveral tongue,
And ev'ry tongue brings in a ſev'ral tale,
And ev'ry tale condemns me for a villain. *::::::
Who with the tongue of angels can relate. łlton.
The terror of thy power or potent tongue. Milton.
They are tongue-valiant, and as bold as Hercules where
there's no danger. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
My ears ſtill ring with noiſe, I'm vext to death,
Tongue kill'd, and have not yet recover'd breath. Dryden.
Tongue-valiant hero, vaunter of thy might,
In threats the foremoſt; but the lag in fight. Dryden.
There have been female Pythagoreans, notwithſtanding
that philoſophy conſiſted in keeping a ſecret, and the diſciple
was to hold her tongue five years together. Addiſon's Guard.
I ſhould make but a poor pretence to true learning, if I
had not clear ideas under the words my tongue could pro-
in Ounce. I/atts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i.
2. The organ by which animals lick.
Hiſs for hiſs returned with forked tongue -
To forked tongue. Milton.
3. Speech; fluency of words. -
Tongue-doughty giant, how doſt thou prove : , Milton.
Much tongue and much judgment ſeldom go together; for
talking and thinking are too quite differing faculties. L'Eſir.
Parrots, imitating human tongue,
And ſinging-birds in ſilver cages hung. Dryden.
Firſt in the council-hall to ſteer the ſtate,
And ever foremoſt in a tongue debate. Dryden's Aºn.
Though they have thoſe ſounds ready at their tongue's end,
yet there are no determined ideas. Locke.
4. Speech, as well or ill uſed.
Gºne thy hand; I am ſorry I beat thee: but, while
thou liv'ſt, keep a good tongue in thy head. Shakeſheare.
On evil days though fallen and evil tongues. Milton.
5. ^{º
* Lord ſhall bring a nation agai
thou ſhalt not º on againſt *:::::::::gue
With wond’rous gifts endu'd, • 49.
To ſpeak all tongue; and do all miracle. Milton.
An acquaintance with the various tongues is nothing but a
relief againſt the miſchiefs which the building of Babel in-
troduced.
6. Specch as oppoſed to thoughts. //atts.
Let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed
and in truth. - I john iii. 18
7. A nation diſtinguiſhed by their language. A ſcriptural tem.
The Lord ſhall deſtroy the tongu of the Egyptian ſea Iſ. -
- S S. • 1/g.
8. A ſmall point: as, the tongue of a balance
9. To hold the Tongue. To be filent.
'Tis ſeldom ſeen that ſenators ſo young -
Know when to ſpeak, and when to hold heir tongue. Dryd.
Whilſt I live I muſt not hold my tongue,
And languiſh out old age in his diſpleaſure. Addison.
To Tongue. v. a. [from the noun..] To chide; to ſcold.
But that her tender ſhame
}. not proclaim againſt her maiden loſs, -
ow might ſhe tongue me. Shakeſp. Meaſ fºr Maſºre.
To Tong UF. v. n. †: talk; to prate. 'ſp ºſ. f. º/
'Tis ſtill a dream ; or elſe ſuch ſtuff, as madmen
Tongue, and brain not. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To'NGUED. adj. [from tongue.] Having a tongue.
Tongu'd like the night-crow. Donne.
To(NGUELEss. adj. [from tongue.]
I. Wanting a tongue; ſpeechleſs.
What tonguel'ſ blocks, would they not ſpeak? Shakespeare.
Our grave,
Like Turkiſh mute, ſhall have a tongueleſ, mouth. Shakespeare
That blood, like ſacrificing Abel's, cries,
Even from the tonguelſ, caverns of the earth,
To me, for juſtice. Shakeſp. Richard II.
2. Unnamed ; not ſpoken of.
One good deed, dying tongueleſ,
Slaughters a thouſand waiting upon that. Shakeſpeare.
To'Ngu EPA.D. m. ſ. [tongue and pad..] A great talker.
She who was a celebrated wit at London is, in that dull
part of the world, called a tonguepad. Tatler.
ToNGUETI'ED. adj. [tongue and tie..] Having an impediment
of ſpeech.
Love, and tonguety'd ſimplicity,
In leaſt ſpeak moſt to my capacity. Shakeſpeare.
They who have ſhort tongues, or are tonguetied, are apt
to fall ſhort of the appulſe of the tongue to the teeth, and
oftner place it on the gums, and ſay tand d inſtead of th and
dh ; as moder for mother. Holder's Elements of Speech.
He ſpar'd the bluſhes of the tonguety'd dame. Tickel.
To'Nick.
To'NicAL.
1. Being extended; being elaſtick. -
Station is no reſt, but one kind of motion, relating unto
that which phyſicians, from Galen, do name extenſive or
tonical. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii.
2. Relating to tones or ſounds.
To'NNAGE. m.ſ.. [from ton.] A cuſtom or impoſt due for mer-
chandiſe brought or carried in tons from or to other nations,
}ad. [tonique, Fr. reſºw.]
after a certain rate in every ton. Cowel.
Tonnage and poundage upon merchandizes were collected,
refuſed to be ſettled by ačt of parliament. Clarendon.
To'NSIL, n.ſ.. [ton/ille, Fr. tonſillae, Lat.]
Tomſils or almonds are two round glands placed on the ſides
of the baſis of the tongue, under the common membrane of
the fauces, with which they are covered; each of them hath
a large oval ſinus, which opens into the fauces, and in it
there are a great number of leſſer ones, which diſcharge
themſelves, through the great finus, of a mucous and ſlippery
matter, into the fauces, larynx, and deſophagus, for the
moiſtening and lubricating theſe parts. §any.
To'Nsure. n.ſ.. [tonſure, Fr. tonſura, Lat.] The act of clip-
ping the hair; the ſtate of being ſhorn.
The veſtals, after having received the tonſure, ſuffered
their hair to come again, being here full grown, and gather-
ed under the veil. Addiſon.
Too. adv. [zo, Saxon.] -
1. Over and above; overmuch ; more than enough. It is uſed
to augment the ſignification of an adjective or adverb to a
vicious degree. - -
Groundleſs prejudices and weakneſſes of conſcience, in-
ſtead of tenderneſs, miſlead too many others, too many,
iſ: d men. Sprat's Sermons.
*::::::::: to build a doćtrine of ſo mighty conſequence
upon ſo obſcure a place of ſcripture. Locke.
Theſe ridiculous ſtorics abide with us too long, and too far
influence the weaker part of mankind. ":
t 2. t<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O O
T O O
to encreaſe its emphaſis ' but *.
- - - ays ſeems harſh, and is therefore aid aſide.
º to, too ſolid fleſh would melt. Shakeſpeare.
- sºmetimes it would be full, and then
Ohiº, too ſoon decreaſe again;
Eclips'd ſometimes, that 'twou'd ſo fall,
There wou'd appear no hope at all.
3. Likewiſe; alſo. - - -
See what a ſcourge is laid upon your hate ;
And I, for winking at your diſcords tºº, -
Have ſoft a brace of kinſmen. Shakeſp. Romeº and juliet,
Let on my cup no wars be found,
Left thoſe incite to quarrels too,
which wine itſelf enough can do. Oldham.
The arriving to ſuch a diſpoſition of mind as ſhall make a
man take pleaſure in other mens fins, is evident from the text
and from experience too. South's Sermons.
It is better than letting our trade fall for want of current
pledges, and better too than borrowing money of our neigh-
bours. Locke.
2. It is ſometimes doubled
Suckling.
Let thoſe eyes that view
The daring crime, behold the vengeance tº?. Pope.
Took, the preterite, and ſometimes the participle paſſive of
take.
Thy ſoldiers
All levied in my name, have in my name s
Took their diſcharge. Shakeſp. King Lear.
He is God in his friendſhip as well as in his nature, and
therefore we finful creatures are not toºk upon advantages,
nor conſumed in our provocations. South's Sermons.
Suddenly the thunder-clap -
Tºok us unprepar’d. Dryden.
The ſame device encloſed the aſhes of men or boys, maids
or matrons; for when the thought took, though at firſt it re-
ceived its riſe from ſuch a particular occaſion, the ignorance
of the ſculptors applied it promiſcuouſly. Addison.
This took up ſome of his hours every day. Spectator.
The riders would leap them over iny hand; and one of
the emperor's hunſtmen, upon a large courſer, took my foot,
ſhoe and all. - Swift.
Leaving Polybus, I toºk my way
To Cyrrha's temple.
Tool. n.ſ. [zol, zool, Saxon.]
1. Any inſtrument of manual operation.
In mulberries the ſap is towards the bark only, into which
if you cut a little it will come forth; but if you piece it
deeper with a tool it will be dry. Bacon.
Arm'd with ſuch gard’ning tools as art, yet rude,
Guiltleſs of fire had form'd. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
The ancients had ſome ſecret to harden the edges of their
Pope's Statius.
tools. - Addiſon.
2. A hireling; a wretch who ads at the command of another.
He’d chooſe -
To talk with wits in dirty ſhoes;
And ſcorn the tools with ſtars and garters,
So often ſeen carefling Chartres. Swift.
To Toot. v. n. [Of this word, in this ſenſe, I know not the
derivation: perhaps coran, Saxon, contracted from copetan,
to know or examine.] To pry; to peep 5 to ſearch narrowly
and ſlily. It is ſtill uſed in the provinces, otherwiſe obſolete.
I caſt to go a ſhooting,
Long wand'ring up and down the land,
With bow and bolts on either hand,
For birds and buſhes tooting. Spenſºr's Pºſt.
Tooth. n.ſ. plural teeth. [toº, Saxon; tand, Dutch.]
The teeth are the hardeſt and ſmootheſt bones of the body;
they are formed in the cavities of the jaws, and about the
ſeventh or eighth month after birth they begin to pierce the
edge of the jaw, tear the perioſteum and gums, which being
very ſenſible create a violent pain: the dentes inciſvi, or fore
teeth of the upper jaw, appear firſt, and then thoſe of the
lower jaw, becauſe they are the thinneſt and the ſharpeſt;
after them come out the canini or eye teeth, and laſt of all
the molares or grinders, becauſe they are thickeſt and blunteſt:
about the ſeventh year of age they are thruſt out by new
teeth which then begin to ſprout, and if theſe teeth be loſt
they never grow again; but ſome have been obſerved to ſhed
their teeth twice: about the one-and-twentieth year the two
laſt of the molares ſpring up, and they are called dentes ſa-
pientiac. &amp;tiny.
Avaunt, you curs
Be thy mouth or black or white, -
Tooth that poiſons if it bite. Shakespeare . King Lear.
Deſert deſerves with chara&amp;ers of braſs
A forted reſidence againſt the tooth of time, -
And razure of oblivion. Shakeſpeare.
The teeth alone among the bones continue to grow in
length during a man's whole life, as appears by the unſightly
length of one toºth when its oppoſite happens to be pulled
Out, - - Ray on the Creation.
9
2
. Taſte; palate.
Theſe are not diſhes for thy dainty tooth;
What, haſt thou got an ulcer in thy mouth?
Why ſtand'ſt thou picking :
3. A tine, prong, or blade, of any multifid inſtrument
The prieſts ſervant came while the fleſh was in ſeethi
with a fleſh hook of three teeth. I Sam, i. tng,
I made an inſtrument in faſhion of a comb wº º
being in number fixteen, were about an inº and an º
broad, and the intervals of the teeth about two inches º
Newtºn' º:
4. The prominent part of wheels, by which they tº:
sº parts of other bodies. pon
he edge whereon the teeth are is always made thi
than the back, becauſe the back follows º e º:
In clocks, though the ſcrews and teeth be never ſo ſmood,
Drydºn,
yet if they be not oiled will hardly move, though you c.
them with never ſo much weight; but apply a little oil the
whirl about very ſwiftly with the tenth part of the force. .
5. Too TH and nail. With one's utmoſt violence; with ãº
means of attack or defence. y
A lion and bear were at toºth and nail which ſhould car
off a fawn. - L'E/ºrange's F.
6. Tº the TEETH. In open oppoſition. * - * * *
It warms the very ſickneſs in my heart,
That I ſhall live and tell him to his teeth,
Thus did deſt thou. Sašºffeare's Hºml?
The ačtion lies 4. -
In his true nature, and we ourſelves compell’d,
Ev’n to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. Sha'ſ care.
The way to our horſes lies back again by the houſe, and
then we ſhall meet ’em full in the teeth. Drydºn.
7. To caſt in the TEETH. To inſult by open exprobration.
. A wiſe body's part it were not to put out his fire, becauſe
his fond and fooliſh neighbour, from whom he borrowed
wherewith to kindle it, might coſt him therewith in the teeth,
ſaying, were it not for me thou wouldſt freeze, and not be
able to heat thyſelf. Hoºker, b. iv.
8. In ſite of the teeth. Notwithſtanding threats expreſſed by
ſhewing teeth; notwithſtanding any power of injury or de-
fence. -
The guiltineſs of my mind drove the groſſneſs of the fop-
pery into a received belief, in deſpight ºf the teeth of all rhime
and reaſon, that they were fairies. Shakeſpeare.
The only way is not to grumble at the lot they muſt bear
in ſite of their teeth. L'E/ºrange.
To Too'ſ H. v. a. [from tooth.]
1. To furniſh with teeth; to indent. -
Then ſaws were tooth'd, and ſounding axes made. Dryd.
The point hooked down like that of an eagle; and both
the edges toothed, as in the Indian crow. Grew's Muſicum.
Get a pair of tongs like a ſmith's tongs, ſtrºnger and
toothed at the end. Mºrtimer's Huſbandy.
2. To lock in each other.
It is common to tooth in the ſtretching courſe two inchº
with the ſtretcher only. Mºxon's Mech. Exerciſe.
Tooth Aſch. n.ſ.. [tooth and ach.J. Pain in the teeth.
There never yet was the philoſopher
That could endure the toothach patiently,
However at their eaſe they talk'd like gods. Sºft”.
He that ſleeps feels not the toothach. Shakespeare . Cynºdiº.
I have the toothach.
—What, figh for the toothach /
Which is but an humour or a worm. Shakespeare.
One was grown deſperate with the toºthach. Temple.
Tooth DRAw ER. n.ſ.. [tooth and draw.] One whoſe buſineſs
is to extraćt painful teeth.
Nature with Scots, as tootharawers, hath deal;
• Who uſe to ſtring their teeth upon their belt. Cºlini.
When the teeth are to be diſlocated, a toothfratº “”
ſulted. Iſºſºman', Sargº.
Tooth ED. adj. [from tooth.] Having teeth.
Toothless, adj. [from tooth.] Wanting teeth;
teeth. -
Deep-dinted wrinkles on her cheek ſhe draws,
Sunk are her eyes, and toothlºſs are her jaws.
They are fed with fleſh minced ſmall, having not only a
ſharp head and ſhout, but a narrow and tº *.
TO'o'THP1ck. m. ſ. [tooth and pick.] An inſtrument by
To'ot HPICKER. } §hiº, the teeth are cleanſed from *
thing ſticking between them. - Aſia
I will fetch you a toothpicker from the fartheſt inch of hi º
Shakespeare. Much ad alº tº:
He and his toothpick at my worſhip's meſs. Shakeſpeare.
Preſerve my woods, whereof, if this courſe hold, º:
will hardly be found in ſome places enough tº make a tººl
deprived of
Dryden,
pick. Howel's England"y ſº
Lentiſek excels; if toothpicks of the lentiſck be wº
of a quill then make a toothpick. iº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O P
2.
Lentiſe is a beautiful ever-green, and makes the beſt tooth-
pickers. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Toºthsome. adj. [from toath..] Palatable ; pleaſing to the
taſte.
Some are good to be eaten while young, but nothing tooth-
Jºme as they grow old. Carew.
To'oth someNess. n. ſ. [from toothſome.] Pleaſantneſs to the
taſte.
To'othwort. m. ſ. [dentaria, Lat.] A plant.
The toothwort hath a fleſhy root, which is ſcaly, and cut
in, as it were, with teeth: the flower conſiſts of four leaves,
placed in form of a croſs; this is ſucceeded by a long pod,
divided into two cells by an intermediate partition, and when
ripe twiſted up like a ſcrew, and diſcharges the ſeeds with
violence. - Miller.
Top. m. ſ. ſtopp, Welſh; top, Saxon; top, Dutch and Da-
niſh; topper, a creſt, Iſlandick.]
1. The higheſt part of any thing.
I ſhould not ſee the ſandy hour-glaſs run,
But I ſhould think of ſhallows and of flats,
And ſee my wealthy Andrew dock'd in ſand,
Vailing her high top lower than her ribs. Shakeſpeare,
He wears upon his baby brow the round
And top of ſovereignty. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Here Sodom's tow’rs raiſe their proud tops on high,
The tow’rs as well as men outbrave the ſky. Cowley.
Thou nor on the tºp of old Olympus dwell'ſt. Milton.
That government which takes in the conſent of the greateſt
number of the people, may juſtly be ſaid to have the broadeſt
bottom ; and if it terminate in the authority of one ſingle
perſon, it may be ſaid to have the narroweſt top, and ſo
makes the firmeſt pyramid. Temple.
Syſiphus no ſooner carries his ſtone up to the top of the
hill but it tumbles to the bottom. Addiſon.
So up the ſteepy hill with pain
The weighty ſtone is rowl'd in vain;
Which having touch'd the top recoils,
And leaves the labourer to renew his toils. Granville.
Marine bodies are found upon hills, and at the bottom
only ſuch as have fallen down from their tops. Woodward.
2. The ſurface; the ſuperficies.
Plants that draw much nouriſhment from the earth hurt
all things that grow by them, eſpecially ſuch trees as ſpread
their roots near the top of the ground. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Shallow brooks that flow'd ſo clear,
The bottom did the top appear.
3. The higheſt place. -
He that will not ſet himſelf proudly at the top of all things,
but will conſider the immenſity of this fabrick, may think,
that in other manſions there may be other and different intel-
ligent beings. - Locke.
What muſt he expect,when he ſeeks for preferment, but
univerſal oppoſition, when he is mounting the ladder, and
every hand ready to turn him off when he is at the top * Sw.
4. The higheſt perſon.
How would you be,
If he, which is the top of judgment, ſhould -
But judge you as you are : Shakeſp. Meaſ for Maſure.
5. The utmoſt degree.
Zeal being the top and perfeótion of ſo many religious af-
fečtions, the cauſes of it muſt be moſt eminent. Sprat.
If you attain the top of your deſires in fame, all thoſe who
envy you will do you harm ; and of thoſe who admire you
few will do you good. Pope.
The top of my ambition is to contribute to that work. Pope.
6. The higheſt rank.
Take a boy from the top of a grammar ſchool, and one of
the ſame age bred in his father's family, and bring them into
good company together, and then ſce which of the two will
have the more manly carriage. Locke on Education.
7. The crown of the head.
All the ſtor'd vengeance of heaven fall
On her ingrateful top / Shakeſp. King Lear.
Arm'd, ſay you ?
Arm'd, my lord.
Dryden.
From top to toe Shakeſpeare.
- - 'Tis a per’lous boy, -
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable;
He's all the mother’s from the top to toe. Shakeſpeare.
8. The hair on the crown of the head; the forelock.
Let's take the inſtant by the forward top ;
For we are old, and on our quick'ſt decrees
Th’ inaudible and noiſeleſs foot of time
Steals, ere we can effect them.
9. The head of a plant.
The buds made our food are called heads or tops; as cab-
bage heads. J/atts's Logick.
1c. [Tºp, Daniſh.] An inverted conoid which children ſet to
turn on the point, continuing its motion with a whip.
Since I pluckt geeſe, play'd truant, and whipt top, I knew
not what it was to be beaten till lately. Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
T O P
For as whipp'd tops, and bandied balls,
The learned hold, are animals;
So horſes they affirm to be
Mere engines made by geometry. Hudibras, p. i.
As young ſtriplings whip the top for ſport
On the ſmooth pavement of an empty court,
The wooden engine flies and whirl. about,
Admir'd with clamours of the beardleſs rout. Dryden.
Still humming on their drowſy courſe they keep,
And laſh'd ſo long, like tops, are laſh'd aſleep. Pope.
...A tºp may be uſed with propriety in a ſimilitude by a Vir-
gil, when the ſun may be diſhonoured by a Maevius. Broome,
II. Top is ſometimes uſed as an adjective to expreſs lying on
the top, or being at the top.
The top ſtones laid in clay are kept together.
To Top. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To riſe aloft; to be eminent.
Thoſe long ridges of lofty and topping mountains which
run Eaſt and Weſt, ſtop the evagation of the vapours to the
North and South in hot countries. Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
Some of the letters diſtinguiſh themſelves from the reſt,
and top it over their fellows; theſe are to be conſidered as
letters and as cyphers. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
2. To predominate.
The thoughts of the mind are uninterruptedly employed
by the determinations of the will, influenced by that foſſing
uneaſineſs while it laſts.
Mortimer.
Locke.
3. To do his beſt.
But write thy beſt and top, and in each line
Sir Formal's oratory will be thine. Dryden.
To Top. v. a.
I. To cover on the top; to tip; to defend or decorate with
ſomething extrinſick on the upper part.
The glorious temple rear'd
Her pile, far .# appearing like a mount
Of alabaſter, topp'd with golden ſpires. Milton's Par. Rºg.
To him the faireſt nymphs do ſhow
Like moving mountains topt with ſnow. //aller.
There are other churches in the town, and two or three
palaces, which are of a more modern make, and built with
a good fancy; I was ſhown the little notre dame; that is
handſomely deſigned, and topp'd with a cupola. Addiſon.
Top the bank with the bottom of the ditch. Mortimer.
2. To riſe above. -
A gourd planted cloſe by a large pine, climbing by the
boughs twined about them, till it topped and covered the tree.
L'Eſtrange,
3. To outgo; to ſurpaſs.
He's poor in no one fault, but ſtor'd with all.
——Eſpecially, in pride.
——And topping all others in boaſting. Shakeſpeare.
So far he topp'd my thought,
That I in forgery of ſhapes and tricks
Come ſhort of what he did. Shakeſpeare,
I am, cries the envious, of the ſame nature with the reſt:
why then ſhould ſuch a man top me? where there is equality
of kind, there ſhould be no diſtinction of privilege. Collier.
4. To crop. - -
Tºp your roſe trees a little with your knife near a leaf
bud. Evelyn's Kalendar.
5. To riſe to the top of. -
If ought obſtruct thy courſe, yet ſtand not ſtill,
But wind about till thou haſt topp'd the hill. Denham.
6. To perform eminently: as, he tops his part. This word, in
this ſenſe, is ſeldom uſed but on light or ludicrous occaſions.
Topful. adj. [top and full.] Full to the top; full to the
brim.
Fill me, from the crown to the toe, topful
Of direct cruelty. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
'Tis wonderful
What may be wrought out of their diſcontent; , ,
Now that their ſouls are topful of offence: Shakespeare eare.
Till a confiderable part of the air was drawn 9; of the
receiver, the tube continued topful of water *.* firſt. Boyle.
One was ingenious in his thoughts and bright. in his lan-
guage; but ſo toºſul of himſelf; that he let it ſpill on all the
company. Ipat's Improvement ºf the Mind; p. º
Fill the largeſt tankard-cup topfull. Swift.
TopcA'll ANT. n.ſ.. [tºp and gallant.] -
1. The higheſt #. lied to anything elevated:
- applied to -
2. It A. . 3. . ...'. Honeyſuck; sºlº top
and topgallants. - Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. N #.
I dare appeal to the conſciences of totgallant ſparks. L'E/ r:
Topheavy adj. [tºp and heavy.] Having the upper part too
wº º: º too heavy nor too light; but of the
two extremes a houſe tºº “ the worſt. Wºtton's Arch.
Topheavy drones, º º: looking down,
ver-ballaſted within the crown, . . . . -
*ś betwixt their lips ſome myſtick thing. Poº.
26 Q.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O P
T O R
-
As to fluff gales topheavy pines bow low
Their heads, and lift them as they ceaſe to blow. Pope.
Topknot. m. ſ. ſtop and Knot..] A knot worn by women on
, the top of the head. - - -
This arrogance amounts to the pride of an aſ in his trap-
pings; when 'tis but his maſter's taking away his tºpknot to
make an aſs of him again. L’Eſtrange.
TopMAN. n.ſ.. [top and man.] The ſawer at the top.
The pit-ſaw enters the one end of the ſtuff, the topman at
the top, and the pitman under him, the topman obſerving to
guide the ſaw exactly in the line. Moxon's Mºh, Exerciſe.
TopMost. n.ſ. [An irregular ſuperlative formed from top.]
Uppermoſt ; higheſt.
A ſwarm of bees,
Unknown from whence they took their airy flight,
Upon the tºpmoſt branch in clouds alight, Dryden's 4ºn.
From ſteep to ſteep the troops advanc'd with pain,
In hopes at laſt the topmºſt cliff to gain;
"But ſtill by new aſcents the mountain grew,
And a freſh toil preſented to their view. Addiſon.
Men pil'd on men with ačtive leaps ariſe,
And build the breathing fabrick to the ſkies;
A ſprightly youth above the topmoſt row, -
Points the tall pyramid, and crowns the ſhow. . . Addison.
Topp Roſud. adj. ſtºp and proud.] Proud in the higheſt de-
ſcc.
§ This top-proud fellow,
By intelligence I do know
To be corrupt and treaſonous. Shakeſpeare.
TopsA'il. n.ſ.. [top and ſail.] The higheſt ſail.
Contarenus meeting with the Turk's gallies, which would
not vail their topſails, fiercely aſſailed them. Knolles.
Strike, ſtrike the topſail; let the main-ſheet fly,
And furl your ſails. Dryden's Fables.
TOPARCH. n.ſ. [rérô and 2px?..] The principal man in
a place.
They are not to be conceived potent monarchs, but to-
parchs, or kings of narrow territories. Brown's Vulgar Err.
Tºny. m.ſ.. [from toparch..] Command in a ſmall di-
ſtričt.
To'PA z. m.ſ.. [topaſe, Fr. topazius, low Lat..] A yellow gem.
The golden ſtone is the yellow topaz. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Can blazing carbuncles with her compare :
The tophas ſent from ſcorched Meroe
Or pearls preſented by the Indian ſea? Sandys's Paraph.
With light's own ſmile the yellow topaz burns. Thomſon.
To TOPE. v. n. [topff, German, an earthen pot; toppen,
Dutch, to be mad. Skinner prefers the latter etymology;
toper, Fr.] To drink hard ; to drink to exceſs.
If you tope in form and treat,
'Tis the ſour ſauce to the ſweet meat, }
The fine you pay for being great. Dryden.
To'PER. n.ſ.. [from tope.] A drunkard.
ToPHA'ceous. adj. [from tophus, Lat.] Gritty; ſtony.
Acids, mixed with them precipitate a tophaceous chalky
... matter, but not a cheeſy ſubſtance. Arbuthnot.
ToPHET. m. ſ. [..T.En Heb. a drum.] Hell; a ſcriptural name.
The pleaſant valley of Hinnom, tophet thence
And black Gehenna called, the type of hell. Milton.
Fire and darkneſs are here mingled with all other ingre-
dients that make that tophet prepared of old. Burnet.
Topical. adj. [from 137C).]
1. Relating to ſome general head.
2. Local ; confined to ſome particular place.
An argument from authority is but a weaker kind of
Proof; it being but a topical probation, and an inartificial ar-
gument, depending on naked affeveration. Brown.
Evidences of fact can be no more than topical and pro-
bable. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
3. Applied medicinally to a particular part.
A woman, with ſome unuſual hemorrhage, is only to be
cured by topical remedies. Arbuthnot.
Topically adv. [from tºpical.] With application to ſome
particular part.
This topically applied becomes a phaenigmus, or rubifying
medicine, and is of ſuch fiery parts, that they have of them-
ſelves conceived fire and burnt a houſe. Brown's Wulgar Err.
TOPICK. m. ſ. [topique, Fr. Tórð’.]
1. A gºneral head; ſomething to which other things are re-
ferred. -
Let them argue over all the topicks of divine goodneſs and
human weakneſs, and whatſoever other pretences ſinking fin-
ºrs catch, at to ſave themſelves by, yet how trifling muſt be
their plea ! South's Sermons.
I might dilate on the difficulties, the temper of the people,
the Power, arts, and intereſt of the contrary party; but
*% are invidious topicks, too green in remembrance. Dryd.
‘I he principal branches of preaching are; to tell the people
what is their duty, and then convince them that it is ſo : the
tºpicks for both are brought from ſcripture and reaſon. Swift.
º º and ſciences have ſome general ſubjects, called
* * *9mmon places; becauſe laiddle tertas are bor-
rowed, and arguments derived from them for thi -
their various propoſitions. "...;
2. Things as are externally applied to any particular part agić.
In the cure of ſtrumae, the topicks ought to be diſcuin.
J/? -
To'Pless. adj. [from top.] Having no top. iſeman's Surgery.
He ſent abroad his voice,
Which Pallas far off echo'd ; who did betwixt them hoiſ
Shrill tumult to a topleſs height. Chapman's }.
TopographER. m. ſ. [Tºrº and yºzºa.] One who wº.
deſcriptions of particular places. es
Topo GRAPHY. m. ſ. ſtopographie, Fr. róró, and %2%
Deſcription of particular places, 52%.]
That philoſophy gives the exacteſt topography of the extra-
mundane ſpaces. Glanville's Sºp.
The topography of Sulmo in the Latin makes but an alik.
ward figure in the verſion. Cromwell
Tºº adj. [from top.] Fine ; noble; gallant. Ajº,
The topping fellow I take to be the anceſtor of the fine fl-
OW.
Toppingly, adj. [from topping.] Fine; gay; gallant; #.
An obſolete word. c y.
Theſe toppingle gheſts be in number but ten,
As welcome to dairie as beares among men. Tuſſºr,
Tº Topple. v. m. [from top.] To fall forward; to tumble
OWn.
Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down ;
Though caſtles topple on their warders heads. Shakeſpeare.
The wiſeſt aunt telling the ſaddeſt tale,
Sometime for three-foot ſtool miſtaketh me;
Then ſlip I from her quite, down topples ſhe. Shalºftware.
Torsytu'Ryx. adv. [This Skinner fancies to tºp in turf.]
With the bottom upward.
All ſuddenly was turned topſ turvy, the noble lord eſtſoons
was blamed, the wretched people pitied, and new counſels
plotted. Spenſer on Ireland.
If we without his help can make a head
To puſh againſt the kingdom; with his help
We ſhall o'erturn it topſyturvy down. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
God told man what was good, but the devil ſurnamed it
evil, and thereby turned the world topſy-turvy, and brought
a new chaos upon the whole creation. South's Sermons.
Man is but a topſyturvy creature; his head where his heels
ſhould be, grovelling on the earth. Swift.
Tor. m. ſ. [xon, Saxon.] . -
I. A tower; a turret.
2. A high pointed rock or hill, whence tor in the initial ſyllable
of ſome local names.
Torch. n.ſ.. [torche, French; torcia, Italian ; intertitium, low
Latin.] A wax light generally ſuppoſed to be bigger than 4
candle. -
Baſilius knew, by the waſting of the torches, that the
night alſo was far waſted. Sidity,
Here lies the duſky torch of Mortimer,
Choak'd with ambition of the meaner ſort. Shuºft”
They light the nuptial torch, and bid invoke
Hymen.
Never was known a night of ſuch diſtrašion;
Noiſe ſo confus'd and dreadful: torches gliding
Like meteors, by each other in the ſtreets. Dylt.
I'm weary of my part ;
My torch is out; and the world ſtands before me
Like a black deſart at th' approach of night: Dryden
Torchbearer. n.ſ.. [torch and bear.] One whoſe office is to
carry a torch. - - ith
He did in a genteel manner chaſtiſe their negº ;
making them, for that night, the torchbearers: Sidney, º
To'Rchlight. n.ſ.. [torch and light.] Light kindled to ſupply
the want of the ſun. lmoſt
When the emperor Charles had claſped Germa" # º
in his fiſt, he was forced to go from Iſburg, anº.” º
maſk, by torchlight, to quit every foot he had gº" tº ſº.
If thou like a child didſt fear before,
Being in the dark, where thou didſt nothing ſee ; it;
Now I have brought thec torchlight fear no mº Dawiti,
To'RcHER. m. ſ. [from torch..] One that gives light.
Ere the horſes of the ſun ſhall bring keſbºaré.
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring. sºft
ToRE. preterite, and ſometimes participle paſſive of tear.
Upon his head an old Scotch cap he wore, Spºnſºr
With a plume feather all to pieces tore. sº.
Tore. v. a. [Of this word I cannot gueſs the meaning: -
Proportion according to rowen or tºre upon th; #. -
the more tore the leſs hay will do. Mºtimer's Hºfta")"
To Tor ME(NT. n.ſ. [tourmenter, F r.]
1. To put to pain; to harraſs with anguiſh; t
No ſleep cloſe up that deadly eye of thine, .
Unleſs it be while ſome tormenting dream
Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.
I am glad to be conſtrain'd to utter whº cline.
Torments me to conceal. Sºakeſ. Cº. Aſt
Milton,
o excruciate.
Shºpart.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O R
--
---.
.
-
Art thou come to torment us before the time *
2. To teaze; to vex with importunity.
3. To put into great agitation, ſtormente, Fr. a great ſtorm.]
They ſoaring on main wing
Tormented all the air. Milton.
TO'RMENT. m. ſ. [tourment, French.]
1. Anything that gives pain.
They brought unto him all ſick people that were taken
with divers diſeaſes and torments, and he healed them. Mat.
2. Pain; miſery; anguiſh.
2. Penal anguiſh; torture.
- No priſoners there, inforc'd by torments, cry;
But fearleſs by their old tormentors lie. Sandys's Paraph.
Not ſharp revenge, not hell itſelf can find
A fiercer torment than a guilty mind,
Which day and night doth dreadfully accuſe,
Condemns the wretch, and ſtill the charge renews. Dryd.
ToRME'Ntor. n.ſ.. [from torment.]
1. One who torments ; one who gives pain.
He called to me for ſuccour, deſiring me at leaſt to kill
him, to deliver him from thoſe tormentors. Sidney, b. ii.
Let his tormenter conſcience find him out. Milton.
The commandments of God being conformable to the
dićtates of right reaſon, man's judgment condemns him when
he violates any of them; and ſo the finner becomes his own
formentor. South's Sermons.
2. One who inflićts penal tortures.
No priſoners there, enforc’d by torments, cry,
But fearleſs by their old tormentors lie. Sandys on job.
Hadſt thou full pow'r to kill,
Or meaſure out his torments by thy will;
Yet, what could'ſt thou, tormentor, hope to gain,
Thy loſs continues unrepaid by pain. Dryden's juv.
The ancient martyrs paſſed through ſuch new inventions
and varieties of pain as tired their tormentors. Addiſon.
To'RMENTIL. n.ſ.. [tormentille, Fr. tormentilla, Lat.] Sept-
foil. A plant.
The root has been uſed for tanning of leather, and account-
ed the beſt aſtringent in the whole vegetable kingdom. Miller.
Refreſh the ſpirits externally by ſome epithemata of balm,
bugloſs, with the powder of the roots of tormentil, Wiſeman.
Torn, part. paſſ. of tear.
Ye ſhall not eat any fleſh that is torn of beaſts. Exod. xxii.
TornA'Do. n.ſ.. [tornado, Spaniſh.] A hurricane ; a whirl-
wind.
Nimble coruſcations ſtrike the eye,
And bold tornado's bluſter in the ſky. Garth.
TORPE'DO. n.ſ. (Lat..] A fiſh which while alive, if touched
even with a long ſtick, benumbs the hand that ſo touches it,
but when dead is eaten ſafely,
To'RPEN.T. adj. [torpeus, Latin.] Benumbed; ſtruck motion-
leſs; not active; incapable of motion.
A comprehenſive expedient to aſſiſt the frail and torpent
memory through ſo multifarious an employment. Evelyn.
To'RPID. adj. ſtorpidus, Latin.] Numbed; motionleſs; ſlug-
giſh; not active.
Without heat all things would be torpid and without mo-
tion. Ray on the Creation.
The ſun awakes the torpid ſap. Thomſon's Spring.
To'RPIDNEss. n.ſ.. [from torpid.] The ſtate of being torpid.
Though the object about which it is exerciſed be poor,
little, and low, yet a man hath this advantage by the exer-
ciſe of this faculty about it, that it keeps it from reſt and
torpidneſs, it enlargeth and habituates it for a due improve-
ment even about nobler obječts. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To'Rp1tude. n.ſ.. [from torpid.] State of being motionleſs ;
numbneſs; ſluggiſhneſs.
Some, in their moſt perfect ſtate, ſubſiſt in a kind of tor-
pitude or ſleeping ſtate. Derham.
TC'RPOR. m.ſ. [Latin.] Dulneſs; numbneſs; inability to
move ; dulneſs of ſenſation.
Motion diſcuſſes the torpor of ſolid bodies, which, beſide
their motion of gravity, have in them a natural appetite not
to move at all. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 763.
ToRREFA’ction. m. ſ. [torrefaction, Fr. torrefacio, Latin.]
The act of drying by the fire.
When torréfied ſulphur makes bodies black, why does tor-
rºſačiian make ſulphur itſelf black. Boyle on Colours.
If it have not a ſufficient inſolation it looketh pale; if it
be funned too long it ſuffereth torrefaction. Brown.
To io'RRE FY. v. a. [terrifier, Fr. torrefacio, Lat.] To dry
by the fire.
In the ſulphur of bodies torrified conſiſt the principles of
inflammability. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
The Africans are more peculiarly ſcorched and torreſted
from the ſun by addition of dryneſs from the ſoil. Brown.
Divers learned men aſſign, for the cauſe of blackneſs, the
footy ſteam of aduſt, or torrefied ſulphur. Boyle on Colours.
Torrefied ſulphur makes bodies black; I deſire to know
why torrefaction makes ſulphur itſelf black Boyle.
Another cliſter is compoſed of two heminae of white wine,
Mat. viii.
T O R
half a hemina of honey, Ægyptian nitre torreñº a qua-
drant. Arbuthnot on Cºins.
To'RRENT. m. ſ. [torrent, Fr. torrens, Lat.]
1. A ſudden ſtream raiſed by ſummer ſhowers.
The near in blood, . .
Forſake me like the torrent of a flood.
Will no kind flood, no friendly rain;
Diſguiſe the marſhal's plain diſgrace;
No torrents ſwell the low Mohayne,
The world will ſay he durſt not paſs.
2. A violent and rapid ſtream; tumultuous Current.
Not far from Caucaſus are certain ſteep falling torrents;
which waſh down many grains of gold, as in many other
parts of the world ; and the people there inhabiting uſe to
ſet many fleeces of wool in theſe deſcents of waters, in which
the grains of gold remain, and the water paſſeth through;
which Strabo witneſſeth to be true. Raleigh.
The memory of thoſe who, out of duty and conſcience,
oppoſed that torrent which did overwhelm them, ſhould not
loſe the recompence due to their virtue. Clarendon.
_When ſhrivell'd herbs on with'ring ſtems decay,
The wary ploughman, on the mountain's brow,
Undams his wat'ry ſtores, huge torrents flow,
Temp'ring the thirſty fever of the field. Dryden's Georg.
Eraſmus, that great injur'd name,
Stemm'd the wild torrent of a barb'rous age. . Pope.
To'RRENT. adj. [torrens, Lat..] Rolling in a rapid ſtream.
Fierce Phlegeton,
Whoſe waves of torrent fire inflame with rage. Milton.
To'RRID. adj. [torride, Fr. torridus, Lat.]
1. Parched; dried with heat. -
Galen's commentators mention a twofold dryneſs; the one
concomitated with a heat, which they call a torrid tabes;
the other with a coldneſs, when the parts are conſumed
through extinétion of their native heat. Harvey on Conſump.
2. Burning; violently hot.
This with torrid heat,
And vapours as the Libyan air aduſt, -
Began to parch that temperate clime. Milton's Par, Loſt:
3. It is particularly applied to the regions or zone between the
tropicks.
Sandy, 077 joi.
Prior.
Columbus firſt
Found a temp'rate in a torrid zone;
The fev'riſh air fann'd by a cooling breeze.
Thoſe who amidſt the torrid regions live,
May they not gales unknown to us receive
See daily ſhow’rs rejoice the thirſty earth, -
... And bleſs the flow'ry buds ſucceeding birth. Prior.
Torsel. n.ſ. [torſ, Fr.] Anything in a twiſted form.
When you lay any timber on brickwork, as torſels for
mantle trees to lie on, or lintols over windows, lay them in
* loam. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſes.
Torsion. n.ſ.. [torſo, Lat.] The ačt of turning or twiſting.
Tort. n. ſ. {.. Fr. tortum, low Latin.] Miſchief; injury;
calamity. Obſolete.
Then gan triumphant trumpets ſound on high,
That ſent to heaven the echoed report
Of their new joy, and happy vićtory
Againſt him that had been long oppreſt with tºrt,
And faſt impriſoned in ſieged fort. Fa. Qu, b. i.
He dreadleſs bad them come to court,
For no wild beaſts ſhould do them any tort. Spenſer.
Your diſobedience and ill managing
Of ačtions, loſt for want of due ſupport,
Refer I juſtly to a further ſpring, - - -
Spring of ſedition, ſtrife, oppreſſion, tort. Fairfax, &amp; i.
To'R'file. n.ſ.. [tortilis, Lat.] Twiſted; wreathed. -
To'RTIon. n.ſ.. [from tortus, Latin.] Torulent; pain. Not
Dryden.
in uſe. -
All purgers have a raw ſpirit or wind, which is the prin-
cipal cauſe of tortion in the ſtomach and belly. Bacon.
Toºtious. adj. [from tort.] Injurious; doing wrong. Spenſ.
Tortive. adj. [from tortus, Lat.] Twiſted; wreathed.
Knots by the conflux of meeting ſap,
Infect the ſound pine, and divert his grain
7%rº, and errant from his courſe of growth. Shakesp
To'Rtoise. m. ſ. [tortue, French. -
1. An animal covered with a hard ſhell; there are tortoiſes
both of land and water. iſe h
In his needy ſhop a tortoiſe hung,
An alligator #. - Shakeſpeare.
A living tortoiſe being turned upon its back, not being able
to make uſe of its paws for the returning of itſelf, becauſe
they could only bend towards the belly, it could help itſelf
only by its neck and head; ſometimes one ſite, ſometimes
another, by puſhing againſt the ground, to rock itſelf as in a
cradle, to find out whºſe the inequality of the ground might
permit it to roll its ſhell. - Ray on the C eation.
2. A form into which the ancient ſoldiers uſed to throw their
troops, by bending down and holding their bucklers above
their heads ſo that no darts could hut them. Their
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O S
T O T
_a_-_
ir targets in a tortoiſe caſt, the foes »
sº to the |. roſe. Dryden's Aen.
Tortuosity. m. ſ. [from tortuºus.] Wreath; flexure.
Theſ: the midwife contriveth unto a knot cloſe unto the
body of the inſult, from whence enſueth that tortuoſity, or
complicated nodoſity, called the navel. Brown's Vulgar Err.
Tººrºous. adj. [tortueux, Fr. from tortuºſus, tortus, Lat.]
1. Twiſted; wreathed; winding. -
So vary'd he, and of his tortuous train -
Curl’d many a wanton wreath. Milton.
Aqueous vapours, like a dry wind, paſs through ſo long
and fortuous a pipe of lead. - Boyle.
2. Miſchievous. [Thus I explain it, on ſuppoſition that it is
derived from tort, wrong; but it may mean crooked: as we
ſay, crooked ways for bad practices, crooked being regularly
enough oppoſite to right. This in ſome copies is tortious,
and therefore from tort.]
Ne ought he car'd whom he endamaged
By tortuous wrong, or whom bereav'd of right. Fa. Qu.
Torture. n.ſ.. [torture, Fr. tortura, Lat.] -- - -
1. Torments judicially inflićted; pain by which guilt is puniſh-
ed, or confeſſion extorted.
Hecate
Then led me trembling through thoſe dire abodes,
And taught the tortures of th’ avenging gods. Dryden.
2. Pain; anguiſh ; pang.
Better be with the dead,
Than on the torture of the mind to lie
In reſtleſs extaſy. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Ghaſtly ſpaſm or racking torture. Milton.
To To(RTURE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To puniſh with tortures.
Hipparchus my enfranchis'd bondman,
He may at pleaſure whip, or hang, or tarture. Shakeſpeare.
The ſcouge inexorable and the torturing hour. Milton.
2. To vex; to excruciate; to torment.
Still muſt I cheriſh the dear, ſad remembrance
At once to torture, and to pleaſe my ſoul. Addiſon's Cato.
3. To keep on the ſtretch.
The bow tortureth the ſtring continually, and thereby
holdeth it in a continual trepidation. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
To'RTURER. m.ſ.. [from torture.] He who tortures; tormenter.
I play the torturer by ſmall and ſmall,
To lengthen out the worſt that muſt be ſpoken, Shakeſp.
When king Edward the ſecond was amongſt his torturers,
the more to diſgrace his face, they ſhaved him, and waſhed
him with cold water; the king ſaid, well, yet I will have
warm water, and ſo ſhed abundance of tears. Bacon's Apopk.
Turning our tortures into horrid arms
Againſt the torturer. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ii.
To'Rvity. m. ſ. [torvitas, Lat.] Sourneſs; ſeverity of coun-
-
tenance. -
To'Rvous. adj. [torvus, Lat..] Sour of aſpect; ſtern; ſevere
of countenance.
That torvous four look produced by anger, and that gay
and pleaſing countenance accompanying love. Derham.
T'or Y. n.ſ. [A cant term, derived, i'i. from an Iriſh
word ſignifying a ſavage.] One who adheres to the antient
conſtitution of the ſtate, and the apoſtolical hierarchy of the
church of England, oppoſed to a whig.
The knight is more a tory in the country than the town,
becauſe it more advances his intereſt. Addiſon.
To confound his hated coin, all parties and religions join
whigs, to, ies. Swift.
To º v. n. [Of the ſame original with teize.] To comb
WOOI.
To Toss. v. a. [taſen, Dutch; taſer, French, to accumu-
late ; Minſhew. Osºrzi, to dance; Meric Caſaubon. Toſen,
German, to make a noiſe; Skinner: perhaps from to us, a
word uſed by thoſe who would have any thing thrown to
them.]
1. To throw with the hand, as a ball at play.
With this ſhe ſeem'd to play, and as in ſport,
Tºſ'd to her love in preſence of the court. Dryden.
A ſhepherd diverted himſelf with toſſing up eggs and catch-
ing them again. Addiſon.
2. To throw with violence.
Back do I tºſs theſe treaſons to thy head. Shakeſpeare.
Vulcano's diſcharge forth with the fire not only metallick
and mineral matter but huge ſtones, toſſing them up to a very
great height in the air. //oodward's Nat. Hi/?. p. iv.
3. To lift with a ſudden and violent motion.
Behold how they toſs their torches on high,
How they point to the Perſian abodes.
I call'd to ſtop him, but in vain:
He tº his arm loſt, and dly told me
He would not ſtay. &gt; proudly told me,
So talk too idle buzzing things:
Tºſs up their head sº sº. 2 . .
To agri eads, and ſtretch their wings.
4. #. to put into violent motion.
**g of treaſures by a lying tongue is a vanity toſſ-d
to and fro. Prov. xxi. 6.
Dryden -
Addiſon's Cato.
Prior.
Things will have their firſt or ſecond agitation; if th
be not tºſſed upon the arguments of counſel, they will be
toſſed upon the waves of fortune, and be full of inconſtancy
doing and undoing. Bacon's Eff.
Cowls, hoods, and habits, with their wearers tºft J.--
And flutter'd into rags. Åhlºn
I have made ſeveral voyages upon the ſea, often been ºffi
in ſtorms. Addiſon's Speci. No. 489
5. To make reſtleſs; to diſquiet. -
She did love the knight of the red croſs,
For whoſe dear ſake ſo many troubles her did tºft. F. &amp;
Calm region once, -
And full of peace, now to/l and turbulent.
6. To keep in play; to tumble over.
That ſcholar ſhould come to a better knowledge in the
Latin tongue than moſt do, that ſpend four years in tºſſing all
the rules of grammar in common ſchools. Žiar.
To Toss. v. n.
1. To fling; to winch; to be in violent commotion.
Dire was the toſſing / deep the groans ! deſpair
Tended the ſick, buſieſt from couch to couch. Miltºn.
Galen tells us of a woman patient of his whom he found
very weak in bed, continually toſſing and tumbling from one
Miltºn.
ſide to another, and totally deprived of her reſt. Harvey.
To toſ, and fling, and to be reſtleſs, only frets and enrages
our pain. Tilliºn.
And thou, my fire, not deſtin’d by thy birth,
To turn to duſt and mix with common earth,
How wilt thou toſ, and rave, and long to die,
And quit thy claim to immortality. Addison's Ovid.
2. To be toſſed.
Your mind is toſſing on the ſea,
There where your argoſies -
Do overpeer the petty traffickers. Shakeheart.
3. To Toss up. To throw a coin into the air, and wager on
what ſide it ſhall fall.
I'd try if any pleaſure could be found,
In toſſing up for twenty thouſand pound.
Toss. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The aët of toſfing.
The diſcus that is to be ſeen in the hand of the celebrated
Caſtor at Don Livio's is perfectly round; nor has it any
thing like a ſling faſtened to it, to add force to the toft. Addison
2. An affected manner of raiſing the head.
His various modes from various fathers follow ;
One taught the toſs, and one the new French wallow:
His ſword-knot this, his cravat that deſign'd. Dryden.
There is hardly a polite ſentence in the following dialogues
which doth not require ſome ſuitable toſs of the head. Swift.
To'ssel. n. ſ. See TAssel. -
Tie at each lower corner a handful of hops with a piece
of packthread to make a toſſel, by which you may convº-
niently lift the bag when full. Morimer's Huſbandry.
To'ssex. m. ſ. [from toſ...] One who throws; one who fling"
and writhes.
To'sspot. n.ſ.. [toſ and pot.] A toper and drunkard.
Tost. preterite and part, paſſ of toſ.
Brampſºn.
In a troubled ſea of paſſion to/?. - Milton,
To"TAL. adj. [totus, Lat. total, Fr.]
1. Whole; complete; full.
They ſet and riſe;
Leſt total darkneſs ſhould by night regain --
Miltºn,
Her old poſſeſſion, and extinguiſh life.
If all the pains that, for thy Britain's ſake,
My paſt has took, or future life may take,
Begrateful to my queen; permit my pray'r, !.
And with this gift reward my total care. Prior.
2. Whole; not divided.
Either to undergo
Myſelf the total crime; or to accuſe -1, --&gt; Lº
My other-ſelf, the partner of my life. Miltºn'. Par. *
ToTA'í1ty. n.ſ.. [totalité, Fr.] Complete ſum; whole quan
tity.
Tºrry. adv. [from total.] Wholly; fully; º,
The ſound interpreters expound this image of God, ; the
tural reaſon; which, if it be totally or moſtly dº hºr
right of government doth ceaſe. Bacon's hºly º
Charity doth not end with this world, but goes *: an
us into the next, where it will be perfeóted; but fait ſight
hope ſhall then totally fail; the one being changed * º
the other into enjoyment. Atterbury's Sermº"
T'o'THER, contračted for the other. ſhake
To Totte R. v. n. [tateren, to ſtagger, Dutch..] To ſhake
ſo as to threaten a fall.
What news, in this our tott'ring º
—It is a reeling world indeed, my lord; -
And I believe will never ſtand #. - º
As a bowing wall ſhall ye be, and as a tattºriº fence.
The foes already have poſſeſs'd the wall, Dryden.
Troy nods from high, and tatters to her fall. ry
To'ſ TERY.
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O U
T O U
To'TTERY. }* [from totter.] Shaking; unſteady; dizzy.
To(TTY. Neither of thoſe words is uſed.
Siker thy head very tottie is,
So on thy corbe ſhoulder it leans amiſe. . . Stenſºr's Prſ.
To Touch. v. a. [toucher, Fr. tartſen, Dutch.]
1. To reach with anything, ſo as that there be no ſpace be-
tween the thing reached and the thing brought to it.
He ſo light was at legerdemain,
That what he touch'd came not to light again. Spenſer.
Ye ſhall not eat nor touch it leſt ye die. Gen. iii. 3.
He brake the withs as a thread of tow is broken when it
toucheth the fire. judg. xvi. 9.
2. To come to ; to attain.
He that is begotten of God keepeth himſelf, and that
wicked one toucheth him not. 1 John v. 18.
Their impious folly dar'd to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day;
The god vindićtive doom'd them never more,
Ah men unbleſs'd to touch that natal ſhore. Pope's Oºſ.
3. To try as gold with a ſtone.
When I have ſuit,
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It ſhall be full of poize and difficulty,
And fearful to be granted.
4. To affect; to relate to.
In ancient times was publickly read firſt the ſcripture, as,
namely, ſomething out of the books of the prophets of God;
ſome things out of the apoſtles writings; and, laſtly, out of
the holy evangeliſts ſome things which touched the perſon of
our lord Jeſus Chriſt. Hooker, b. v.
The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;
Betwixt ourſelves let us decide it then. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
What of ſweet
Hath touch'd my ſenſe, flat ſeems to this. Milton.
5. To move; to ſtrike mentally; to melt.
I was ſenſibly touched with that kind impreſſion. Congreve.
The tender ſire was touch'd with what he ſaid,
And flung the blaze of glories ſrom his head,
And bid the youth advance. Addison's Ovid.
6. To delineate or mark out.
Nature affords at leaſt a glimm'ring light:
The lines, though touch'd but faintly, are drawn right.
Pope.
Shakeſpeare's Othello.
7. To cenſure; to animadvert upon.
Dočtor Parker, in his ſermon before them, touched them
for their living ſo near, that they went near to touch him for
his life. Hayward.
8. To infect; to ſeize ſlightly.
Peſtilent diſeaſes are bred in the Summer; otherwiſe thoſe
touched are in moſt danger in the Winter. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
9. To bite; to wear; to have an effect on.
Its face muſt be very flat and ſmooth, and ſo hard, that a
file will not touch it, as ſmiths ſay, when a file will not eat,
or race it. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſe.
Io. To ſtrike a muſical inſtrument. - -
They touch'd their golden harps, and prais'd. Milton.
One dip the pencil, and one touch the lyre. Pope.
11. To influence by impulſe; to impel forcibly.
No decree of mine,
To touch with lighteſt moment of impulſe -
His free will. | Milton.
. To treat of perfunètorily.
12. T This thy i. . words touch'd only. , Milton.
13. Tº Touch up. To repair, or improve by ſlight ſtrokes,
or little emendations.
What he ſaw was only her natural countenance touched up
with the uſual improvements of an aged coquette. Addiſon.
To Touch. v. n. - - -
1. To be in a ſtate of junétion ſo that no ſpace is between
them. ſt ke effect
o faſten on ; to take effect on.
2. º: waters pierce metals, and will touch upon gold that
will not touch upon ſilver. - Bacon.
3. To Touch at. To come to without ſtay.
The next day we touched at Sidon.
Oh fail not to touch at Peru ;
Aéis Xxvii. 3.
with gold there our veſſel we'll ſtore. Cowley.
Civil law and hiſtory are ſtudies which a gentleman ſhould
not barely touch at, but conſtantly dwell upon; Locke.
A fiſhmonger lately touched at Hammerſmith. Speciator.
4. To Touch on. To mention ſlightly. -
The ſhewing by what ſteps knowledge comes into our
minds, it may ſuffice to have only touched on. - Locke.
It is an uſe no-body has dwelt upon; if the antiquaries
have touched upon it they immediately quitted it. Addiſon. .
5. To Touch on or upon. To go for a very ſhort time.
He touched upon the Moluccoes. Abbot's Deſ of the World.
Which monſters, left the Trojan's pious hoſt
Should bear, or touch upon th’ inchanted coaſt,
Propitious Neptune ſteer'd their courſe by night. Dryden.
I made a little voyage round the lake, and touched on the .
ſeveral towns that lie on its coaſts. Addiſon on Italy.
6. Tº Touch an or upon. To mention ſlightly.
It is impoſſible to make obſervations in art or ſcience which
have not been touched upon by others. Addiſon's Spediator.
Touch. n. ſ. [from the noun.]
* Reach of any thing ſo that there is no ſpace between the
things reaching and reached. -
2. The ſenſe of feeling.
- O dear ſon Edgar,
Might I but live to ſee thee in my touch
I'd ſay, I had eyes again. 2
The ſpirit of wine, or chemical oils, which are ſo hot in
operation, are to the firſt touch cold. Bacon's Nat. Hi/.
By touch the firſt pure qualities we learn,
Which quicken all things, hot, cold, moiſt and dry;
By touch, hard, ſoft, rough, ſmooth, we do diſºn;
By touch, ſweet pleaſure, and ſharp pain we try. Davies.
The ſpiders touch how exquiſitely fine !
Feels at each thread, and lives along the line. Pope.
The fifth ſenſe is touch, a ſenſe over the whole body. Loºke.
3. The act of touching.
. The touch of the cold water made a pretty kind of ſhrug-
ging come over her body, like the twinkling of the first
among the fixed ſtars. Sidney, b. ii.
The time was once when thou unurg'd wou'd'ſt vow,
That never touch was welcome to thy hand ... •
Unleſs I touch'd.
- Shakeſpeare.
With one virtuous touch
Th'archchemick ſun produces precious things. Milton. .
4. Examination as by a ſtone.
To-morrow, good fir Michell, is a day
Wherein the fortune of ten thouſand men
Muſt bide the touch. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Ah Buckingham, now do I ply the touch,
Tº try if thou be current gold indeed. Shakeſpeare.
Albeit ſome of theſe articles were merely deviſed, yet the
duke being of baſe gold, and fearing the touch, ſubſcribed
that he did acknowledge his offences. Hayward.
5. Teſt; that by which anything is examined.
The law-makers rather reſpected their own benefit than
equity, the true touch of all laws. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
6. Proof; tried qualities.
Come my ſweet wife, my deareſt mother, and
My friends of neble touch / when I am forth,
Bid me farewel, and ſmile. Shakeſpeare.
7. [7%uche, Fr. Single act of a pencil upon the picture.
Artificial ſtrife -
Lives in thoſe touches, livelier than life. Shakeſpeare.
It will be the more difficult for him to conceive when he
has only a relation given him, without the nice touches which
make the graces of the picture. Dryden.
Never give the leaſt touch with your pencil, till you have
well examined your deſign. Dryden.
8. Feature; lineament.
Thus Roſalind of many parts
By heav'nly ſynod was devis’d;
Of many faces, eyes and hearts,
To have the touches deareſt priz'd. Shakespeare. A you like it.
A ſon was copy'd from his voice ſo much,
The very ſame in ev'ry little touch. Dryden,
9. Aćt of the hand upon a muſical inſtrument.
Here let the ſounds of muſick
Creep in our ears; ſoft ſtilneſs and the night
Become the touches of ſweet harmony. Shakeſpeare.
Io. Power of exciting the affe&amp;tions.
Not alone
The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches,
Do ſtrongly ſpeak t'us. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
Nor wanted power to mitigate and ſwage,
With ſolemn touches, troubled thoughts. Milton.
11. Something of paſſion or affection.
He which without our nature could not on earth ſuffer for
the world, doth now alſo, by means thereof, both make inter-
rceſſion to God for ſinners, and exerciſe dominion over all men,
with a true, natural, and a ſenſible touch of mercy. Hooker.
He loves us not :
He wants the natural touch. Shakeſpeare.
12. Particular relation; ſenſible relation. - -
Speech of touch towards others ſhould be ſparingly uſed ;
for diſcourſe ought to be as a field, without coming home to
any man. Bacon's Eſſays.
13. [Touche, Fr.] A ſtroke. - -
Our kings no ſooner fall out, * . º, º: .
r; one meets ſometimes W.
...: &gt; Addiſon on ancient Medals.
Another ſmart touch of the author we meet with in the
fifth page, where, without any preparation, he breaks out
all on a ſudden into a vein of poetry. Addiſon.
Though its error may be ſuch,
As Knags and Burgeſs cannot hit
It yet may feel the nicer touch - -
Of Wicherley's or Congreve's wit. Prior.
26 R He
Shakeſp. King Lear:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T O U w
T O W,
He gave the little wealth he had
To build a houſe for º º mad;
ew by one ſatyrick touch, -
§. i. º º much. Swift.
imadverſion; cenſure.
f4. º: bare any touch of conſcience with greater regret.
King Charles.
Soon mov’d with touch of blame, thus Eve, -
what words have paſs'd thy lips, Adam, ſevere. Milton.
15. Exact performance of agreement.
Tºuch kept is commended, yet credit to keepe
Is pay and diſpatch him, yer ever ye ſleepe. Tuſſºr.
Qūoth Hudibras, thou offer'ſt much, -
But art not able to keep touch. Hudibras, p. i.
I keep touch both with my promiſe to Philopolis, and with
my own uſual frugality in theſe kind of collations. More.
He was not to expect that ſo perfidious a creature ſhould
keep touch with him. L’E/irange.
16. A ſmall quantity intermingled. -
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
That cannot brook the accent of reproof. Shakeſpeare.
This coming ſtill nearer to an aſpiration, a touch of it
may perhaps be an ingredient in the rough guttural pronun-
ciation of the Welſh and Iriſh. Holders Elements of Speech.
17. A hint; flight notice given.
The king your maſter knows their diſpoſition very well ;
a ſmall touch will put him in mind of them. Bacon.
18. A cant word for a ſlight eſſay.
Print my preface in ſuch a form as, in the bookſellers
phraſe, will make a ſixpenny tºuch. Swift.
Touch ABLE. adj. [from touch..] Tangible ; that may be
touched.
Touch-Hole. n.ſ.. [touch and hole.] The hole through which
the fire is conveyed to the powder in the gun.
In a piece of ordnance, if you ſpeak in the touch-hole, and
another lay his ear to the mouth of the piece, the ſound is
far better heard than in the open air. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Touchi's Ess. n.f. [from touching.] Peeviſhneſs; iraſcibility.
My friends reſented it as a motion not guided with ſuch
diſcretion as the touchineſs of thoſe times required. K. Charles.
Touch ING. prep. [This word is originally a participle of
touch..] With reſpect, regard, or relation to.
Touching things which belong to diſcipline, the church
hath authority to make canons and decrees, even as we read
in the apoſtles times it did. Hooker, b. iii.
Touching our perſon, ſeek we no revenge;
But we our kingdom's ſafety muſt ſo tender,
Whoſe ruin you three ſought, that to her laws
We do deliver you. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
The heavens and the earth remained in the ſame ſtate in
which they were created, as touching their ſubſtance, though
there was afterwards added multiplicity of perfection in re-
ſpect of beauty.
Touching the debt, he took himſelf to be acquitted thereof.
- Hayward.
Socrates choſe rather to die than renounce or conceal his
judgment touching the unity of the Godhead. South.
To'Uchi NG. adj. [from touch..] Pathetick; affecting; moving.
Touch INGLY. adv. [from touch..] With feeling emotion; in
a pathetick manner.
This laſt fable ſhows how touchingly the poet argues in
love affairs. Garth.
TouchMENot. n.ſ. An herb. Ainſ.
Touchston E. m. ſ. [tºuch and ſtone; pierre de touche, Fr.]
1. Stone by which metals are examined.
Chilon would ſay, that gold was tried with the touchſione,
and men with gold. Bacon's Apophth.
If he intends to deal clearly, why does he make the tºuch-
ſtone faulty, and the ſtandard uncertain. Collier.
2. Any teſt or criterion.
Is not this their rule of ſuch ſufficiency, that we ſhould uſe
it as a touch/?ome to try the orders of the church Hooker.
The work, the touchſtone of the nature, is ;
And by their operations things are known. Davies.
Money ſerves for the touchſtone of common honeſty. L'E/l.
Time is the ſureſt judge of truth: I am not vain enough
to think I have left no faults in this, which that touchine
will not diſcover. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Touchwoop. m. ſ. ſtouch and wood.] Rotten wood uſed to
catch the fire ſtruck from the flint.
A race of reſolute ſtout trees they are, ſo abounding with
metal and heat, that they quickly take fire, and become
touchwood. Howel's Pocal Forg/?.
To make white powder, the powder of rotten willows is
beſt, ſpunk, or touchwood prepared might make it ruſſet. Br.
Touchy... adj. [from touch.j 'Peewiſh; irritable, iraſſible 3.
apt to take fire. A low word.
You are upon a touchy point, and therefore treat ſo nice a
ſubject with proportionable caution. Collier on Pride.
You are ſo tºy, and take things ſo hotly, I am ſure there
muſt be ſome miſtake in this, Arbuthnot, Hiſt. of j. Bull.
Raleigh's Hiſł. of the J/orld.
TOUGH. adj. [zoh, Saxon.]
I. Yielding without fracture; not brittle.
Of bodies ſome are fragile, and ſome are tough
fragile. o
2. Stiff; not eaſily flexible.
The bow he drew,
And almoſt join'd the horns of the tough eugh.
3 and not
Bacon'; Mat. Hiſt -
Fate with nature's law would ſtrive, Dryden,
To ſhew plain-dealing once an age may thrive;
And when ſo tºugh a frame ſhe could not beni.
Exceeded her commiſſion to befriend. &gt; Dryden
3. Not eaſily injured or broken.
O fides you are too tought
Will you yet hold
A body made of braſs the crone demands
For her lov’d nurſing, ſtrung with nerves of wire
Tºugh to the laſt, and with no toil to tire. 'Dr.
4. Viſcous; clammy; ropy. y”,
To To'UGHEN. v. n. [from tough..] To grow tough.
Hops off the kiln lay three weeks to cool, give and
toughen, elſe they will break to powder. Mortimer's Huſh
To UGHN Ess. n.ſ.. [from tough.] -
1. Not brittleneſs; flexibility.
To make an induration with toughneſ, and leſ, faciliº,
decočt bodies in water for three : § they º:
into which the water will not enter. Bacºn's Nat. H}
A well-temper'd ſword is bent at will, -
But keeps the native toughneſs of the ſteel. Dryden
2. Viſcoſity; tenacity; clammineſs; glutinouſneſs. -
In the firſt ſtage the viſcoſity or toughneſs of the fluids ſhould
be taken off by diluents. Ælutinºt on Diet.
3. Firmneſs againſt injury.
I confeſs me knit to thy deſerving with cables of perdur-
able taughneſs. Shaºff. Othell.
TOUPE'T. m. ſ. [Fr.] A curl; an artificial lock of hair,
Remember ſecond-hand toupees and repaircd ruffles. Swift.
TOUR. n.ſ.. [tour, French.]
1. Ramble; roving journey.
I made the tour of all the king's palaces. Addison.
Were it permitted, he'd make the tour of the whole ſyſtem
of the ſun. Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Sºrih.
2. Turn ; revolution. In both theſe ſenſes it is rather French
than Engliſh.
Firſt Ptolemy his ſcheme coeleſtial wrought,
And of machines a wild proviſion brought;
Orbs centrick and eccentrick he prepares,
Cycles and epicycles, ſolid ſpheres
In order plac'd, and with bright globes inlaid,
To ſolve the tours by heavenly bodies made. Blackmore,
Sha}ºffeare.
3. In Milton it is probably tow’r; ſoar; elevation.
The bird of Jove ſtoop'd from his airy tour,
Two birds of gayeſt plume before him drove. Milton's
To’URNAMENT.
TU/URNEY.
1. Tilt ; juſt; military ſport; mock encounter,
They might under the pretence
Of tilts and tournaments,
Provide them horſe and armour for defence. Daniil,
For juſts, tourneys, and barriers, the glories of them are
the chariots, wherein challengers make their entry. Bacon.
Whence came all thoſe juſts, tiltings, and tºurnalirº."
much in uſe in theſe parts. - Temple's Mjºl,
He liv'd with all the pomp he cou’d deviſe, ;
ryden,
$n. ſ. [tournamenium, low Lat.]
At tilts and tournaments obtain'd the prize,
But found no favour in his lady's eyes.
The ſpouſals of Hippolita the queen,
What tilts and tourneys at the feaſt were ſeen, Dryden.
2. Milton uſes it ſimply for encounter; ſhock of battle.
With cruel tºurnament the ſquadrons join!
Where cattle paſtur'd late, now ſcatter'd lies l,
With carcaſſes, and arms, th’ inſanguin'd field. Aſian,
To Tourney. v. n. [from the noun..] To tilt in the liſts.
An elfin born of noble ſtate, b. ii
Well could he tourney, and in liſts debate. F. Qu. º:
TOURNISUET. n.ſ. [French..] A bandage uſed in **
tions, ſtraitened or relaxed by the turn of a handle. , f
If the orifice does not readily appear, looſen the tº:
and the effuſion of blood will direct you to it. - i. º
To Touse. v. a. [probably of the ſame original wit tº:
teize, toſ...] To pull; to tear; to haul; to drag : W*
touſer or towzer, the name of a maſtiff.
As a bear whom angry curs have touz'd,
Having off ſhak'd them and eſcap'd their hands,
Becomes more fell, and all that him withſtands
Treads down and overthrows.
Take him hence; to th’ rack with him: we
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpoſe. Shakesp
To towze ſuch things as flutter Swift.
To honeſt Bounce is bread and butter. bed
Tow. n.ſ. fºop, Saxon.j Flax or hemp beaten and *
into a filamentous ſubſtance. Tºw
Sºnſºr.
'll tºwze you
ſpeare.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">-- - *** * *
-
T O W,
Žºw twiſted round the handle of an inſtrument makes it
eaſier to be held. Sharp.
o Tow. v. a. ſceon, reohan, Saxon, to lead 3 toghen, old
Dutch..] To draw by a rope, Particularly through the water.
Thou knew'ſt too well
My heart was to thy rudder ty’d by th’ ſtring,
And thou ſhould'ſt tow me after. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
The ſeamen tºwed, and I ſhoved, till we arrived. Swift.
+: { prep ſcopano, Saxon.]
1. In a dire&amp;tion to.
He ſet his face toward the wilderneſs.
The currents drive,
Tow’rds the retreating ſea, their furious tide.
2. Near to: as, the danger now comes toward him.
3. With reſpect to ; touching; regarding.
We brought them to as great peace between themſelves,
as love towards us for having made the Peace. Sidney, b. ii.
Repent you not,
As that the fin hath brought you to this ſhame,
Which ſorrow's always tºwº, ourſelves, not heav'n 2
Shakeſp. Meaſure for Aſeaſure.
His heart relented toward, her. Milton.
By our law, no good is to be left undone toward, all, not
the good of the tongue, the hand, the heart. Sºuth', Sermons.
4. With tendency to.
This was the firſt alarm England received toward, any
trouble, after it had enjoyed for ſo many years the moſt un-
interrupted proſperity. Clarendon, b. ii.
5. Nearly; little leſs than.
I am toward; nine years older ſince I left you. Swift.
TowARD. lady. [It is doubtful whether in this uſe the word
Tow A'RDs. } be adverb or adjective.] Near; at hand ; in a
ſtate of preparation.
What might be toward that this ſweaty haſte
Doth make the night joint labourer with the day. Shakeſp.
Tow A'RD. adj. Ready to do or learn; not froward.
TowARDLINEss. n.ſ.. [from tºwardy..] Docility; compli-
ance; readineſs to do or to learn.
The beauty and tºwardlingſ of theſe children moved her
brethren to envy. Raleigh's Hºff. of the I/2/.
Toºw ARDLY. adj. [from *ard.] Ready to do or learn; dol
cile; compliant with duty.
Some young towardly ioblemen or gentlemen were uſuall
ſent as aſſiſtants or attendants. Bacon's Advice to ſillierſ.
Toºw ARDN Ess. n.ſ.. [from toward.] Docility. -
Parents will not throw away the towardneſ of a child,
and the expence of education upon a profeſſion, the labour of
which is encreaſed, and the rewards are vaniſhed. South.
To'w EL. m. ſ. [touaille, French; touaglio, Italian.] A cloath
on which the hands are wiped.
His arm muſt be kept up with a napkin or towel. Jºſeman.
Th’ attendants water for their hands ſupply,
And having waſh'd, with ſilken towel, dry. Dryden's Æn.
To'w ER. m. ſ. [xon, Saxon; tour, Fr. torre, Italian; turris,
Latin.
1. A # building; a building raiſed above the main edifice.
Let us build us a city and a tower, whoſe top may reach
unto heaven. 'en. xi. 4.
2. A fortreſs ; a citadel.
3. A high head-dreſs.
Lay trains of amorous intrigues
In towers, and curls, and perriwigs.
4. High flight; elevation.
Mum. xxiv. 1.
Milton.
Hudibras, p. iii.
To Tow ER. v. n. To ſoar; to fly or riſe high.
On th' other ſide an high rock towred ſºil. Spenſer.
No marvel
My lord protećtor's hawks do tower ſo well. Shakeſp.
Circular baſe of riſing folds that tower'd -
Fold above fold a ſurging maze. - Milton.
Tow'ring his height, and ample was his breaſt. Dryden.
The crooked plough, the ſhare, the tow'ring height
Of waggons, and the cart's unweildy weight;
Theſe all muſt be prepar’d. Dryden's Georg.
All thoſe ſublime thoughts which tower above the clouds,
and reach as high as heaven itſelf, take their riſe, not one Jot
beyond thoſe ideas which ſenſe of reflection have offer. for
the contemplation of the mind. Locke.
Tow ER-Musta R D. m. ſ. [turritis, Lat.] A plant.
The flower of the tower-muſard conſiſts of fºur leaves,
expanding in form of a croſs, out of whoſe empalement riſes
the pointal, which afterward becomes a long, ſmooth pod,
growing for the moſt part upright, and opening into two
parts, in each of which are many ſmooth ſeeds. AMiller.
ToweRED. adj. [from *er.] Adorned or defended by towers.
Might ſhe the wiſe Latona be,
Or the tow’red Cybele. Milton's Arcades.
ToweRY. adj. [from tower.] Adorned or guarded with towers.
Here naked rocks, and empty waſtes were ſeen,
There tow'ry cities and the foreſts green.
Riſe, crown'd with lights, imperial Salem riſe I
Exalt thy tow'ry head, and liſt thy eyes | Pope's M//,
9
Pope.
T O Y
With his **) grandeur ſwell their ſtate 7%
r - 3/m/ox.
º * / [cun, Saxon; ”, Dutch; from tinan, 3.
Zzº.
* Any walled collection of houſes.
he let them down by a cord; for her houſe was upon the
town wall. --
2. Any collection of houſes larger than a village. Jºſ. ii. I 5.
Speak the ſpeech trippingly on the tongue: but if you
y of our Players do, I had a lieve the tºwn
mouth it, as man
Shakespeare. Hamlet.
crier had ſpoke the line.
II - r - - - -
ito whatſoever city or town ye **ter, enquire who 111 it is
Worthy, and there abide?
Before him towns and rural w
My friend this infilt fees,
And flies from town to woods. Broome
3. In England, *Yºumber of houſes to which belongs a re.
gºlar market, and which is not a city or ſee of a bi
4. The court end of London. y iſhop.
A virgin whom her mother's care
at. X. I I.
orks between. 44ilton.
rags from the town to wholeſome coun air.
5. The people who live in th: capital. try Pope.
He all at once let down,
Stuns with his giddy larum half the town. Pope.
6. It is uſed by the inhabitants of I
- - - - “y town or city: as we
ſay, a new Jºy is come to town.
There is ſomé new dreſs or new diverſion juſt come to
tºwn. º
Townclerk. n. /.. [town and *] An officer whoma
the publick buſineſ of a place.
The townclerk appeaſed the people. 4:7: xix. 35.
Town House. n: ſ [town and */.] The hall where publick
buſineſs is tranſiae.
A. tºwnhouſe built at one end will front the church that
ſtands at the other. Addiſon on Italy.
Township. n.ſ.. [town and ſhip.] The corporation of a town;
the diſtrićt belonging to a town. -
I am but a poor Petitioner of our whole townſhip. Shakespeare .
They had built houſes, planted gardens, erected townſhips,
and made proviſion for their poſterity. Raleigh.
Towns MAN. */.. [town and man.] -
I. An inhabitant of a place.
Here come the ºften on proceſſion,
Before your highneſs to Preſent the man. Shakespeare.
In the time of king Henry the fixth, in a fight bätween
the earls of Ormond and Deſmond, almoſt all the town men
of Kilkenny were ſlain. Davies on Ireland.
They marched to Newcaſtle, which being defended only
by the townſmen, was given up to them. Clarendon, b. viii.
I left him at the gate firm to your intereſt,
Tº admit the townſmen at their firſt appearance.
2. One of the ſame town. -
Tow NTAlk. n: ſ [town and *..] Common prattle of a
lace.
p If you tell the ſecret, in twelve hours it ſhall be fowntaſk.
4'A/irange.
To'Xical, adj. [toxicum, Lat..] Poiſonous; containing poiſon.
Tº "...ſº ſtºn, toogſºn, to dreſs with many ornaments,
Dutch..]
I. A petty commodity; a trifle; a thing of no value.
Might I make acceptable into hº that toy which I had
found, following an acquaintance of mine at the plough. Sidh.
They exchange for knives, glaſſes and ſuch toys, great
abundance of gold and pearſ. Abbot.
Becauſe of old
Thou thyſelf doatd'ſt on womankind, admiring
Their ſhape, their colour, and attractive grace:
None are, thou think'ſt, but taken with figh toys. Milton.
O virtue virtue what art thou become,
That men ſhould leave thee for that tºy a woman. Dryden.
2. A plaything; a bauble.
To dally thus with death is no fit foy,
Go find ſome other play-fellows, mine own ſweet boy.
Fairy ºucºn, b, i.
What a profuſion of wealth laid out in coaches, trappings,
Law.
nages
Dryden.
tables, cabinets, and the like precious toys. Addison.
In Delia's hand this toy is fatal found,
Nor could that fabled dart more ſurely wound. Pºpe,
3. Matter of no importance.
'Tis a cockle or a walnut ſhell,
A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap. Shaftºffeare.
. Folly; trifling practice; filly opinion.
4. #. dº ſo long experience of all ages hath con-
firmed and made profitable, let us not Preſume to condemn
as follies and toys, becauſe we ſometime know not the cauſe
and reaſon of them. - Hooker, i. iv.
5. Play; ſport; amorous dalliance.
Ye ſons of Venus, play your ſports at will;
For greedy pleaſure, careleſs of yºur toys, -
#. * upon her paradiſe of Joys. Spenſºr's Epiſſal,
So ſaid he, and forbore not glance or tºy -
Of amorous intent, A ſilton.
6. Odd
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
T R A
6. Odd ſtory; filly #:
never may believe
Theſe antick fables, nor theſe fairy toys.
: ~l, . ur; odd fancy. - -
7. *;...". hath always received this conſtrućtion, be
now diſguiſed with a toy of novelty. - Hooker, b. v.
The very place puts toys of deſperation,
without more motive, into ‘....
hat looks ſo many fathoms to the ſea,
Å. hears it roar º Shakeſp. Hamlet.
To Toy. v. n. [from the noun..] To trifle; to dally amour-
ouſly; to play. - - -
Toyish. adj. [from toy..] Trifling; wanton.
Toyish Ness. n.ſ.. [from toyiſh.] Nugacity; wantonneſs.
Your ſociety will diſcredit that toyiſhneſs of wanton fancy,
that plays tricks with words, and frolicks with the caprice:
of frothy imagination. Glanville's Scepſ.
Toyshop. n.). [toy and ſhop.] A ſhop where playthings and
little nice manufactures are ſold. -
Fans, filks, ribbands, laces, and gewgaws, lay ſo thick
together, that the heart was nothing elſe but a toyſhop. Addison
With varying vanities from every part,
They ſhift the moving toyſhop of their heart. Pºpe.
To Tozº. v. a. [See Towse and TEASE.] To pull by vio-
lence or impetuoſity.
Think'ſ thou, for that I infinuate, or toze from thee thy
Shakeſpeare.
buſineſs, I am therefore no courtier. Shakeſpeare.
TRAcE. m. ſ. [trace, Fr. traccia, Italian.]
1. Mark left by anything paſſing; footſteps.
Theſe as a line their long dimenſion drew,
Milton.
Streaking the ground with ſinuous trace.
2. Remain; appearance of what has been.
The people of theſe countries are reported to have lived
like the beaſts among them, without any traces of orders,
laws, or religion. Temple.
There are not the leaſt traces of it to be met, the greateſt
part of the ornaments being taken from Trajan's arch, and
ſet up to the conqueror. Addison on Italy.
The ſhady empire ſhall retain no trace
Of war, or blood, but in the Sylvan chace. Pope.
3. [From tiraſer, French; tiraſſes, traces.] Harneſs for beaſts
of draught.
Her waggon ſpokes made of long ſpinner's legs;
The cover, of the wings of graſhoppers ;
The traces, of the ſmalleſt ſpider's web. Shakeſpeare.
The labour'd ox -
In his looſe traces from the furrow came. Milton.
While lab’ring oxen, ſpent with toil and heat,
In their looſe traces from the field retreat. Pope.
Twelve young mules,
New to the plough, unpractis'd in the trace. Pope's Odyſ.
To TRAce. v. a. [tracer, Fr. tracciare, Italian.]
1. To follow by the footſteps, or remaining marks.
I feel thy power to trace the ways
Of higheſt agents. Milton.
You may trace the deluge quite round the globe in profane
hiſtory; and every one of theſe people have a tale to tell
concerning the reſtauration. Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
They do but trace over the paths beaten by the ancients,
or comment, critick, or flouriſh upon them. Temple.
To this haſte of the mind a not due tracing of the argu-
ments to their true foundation is owing. Locke.
2. To follow with exactneſs.
That ſervile path thou nobly doſt decline,
Of tracing word by word, and line by line.
3. To mark out.
He allows the ſoul power to trace images on the brain, and
perceive them. Locke.
His pen can trace out a true quotation. Swift.
4. To walk over.
Denham.
Men as they trace,
Both feet and face one way are wont to lead.
We do trace this alley up and down.
TRA'ceR. m. ſ. [from trace.] One that traces.
Ambaſſadors ſhould not be held the tracers of a plot of
Fa. Qu.
Shakeſpeare.
ſuch malice. Howel.
TRACK. m. ſ. [trac, old French; traccia, Italian.]
I. Mark left upon the way by the foot or otherwiſe.
Following the track of Satan. Milton.
The hoſtile ſpear yet ſticking in his wound,
With tracks of blood inſcrib'd the duſty ground. Dryden.
Conſider the exterior frame of the globe, if we may find
any tracks or footſteps of wiſdom in its conſtitution. Bentley.
2. A road ; a beaten path.
With track oblique fidelong he works his way. Milton.
Behold Torquatus the ſame track perſue,
And next, the two devoted Decii view. Dryden’s AFn.
To TRAck. v.a. [from the noun..] To follow by the foot-
ſteps or marks left in the way.
às ſhepherd's cur that in dark evening's ſhade
Hath tracked forth ſome ſavage beaſt's treade. Fa. 94aeen.
Hung by the neck and hair, and dragg'd around, }
He was not only a profeſſed imitator of Horace, but a
learned plagiary in all the others; you track him everywhere
in their ſnow. Dryden.
TRA'ckless, adj. [from track..] Untrodden; marked with no
footſteps.
Loſt in trackleſ, fields of ſhining day,
Unable to diſcern the way,
Which Naſſau's virtue only cou’d explore. Prior,
TRACT. n.ſ. tradius, Lat.]
1. Any kind of extended ſubſtance.
2. A region; a quantity of land.
Only there are ſome tracts which, by high mountains, are
barred from air and freſh wind. Raleigh.
Heav'n hides nothing from thy view, o
Nor the deep tract of hell. Milton.
Monte Circeio, by Homer called inſula AEca, is a very
high mountain joined to the main land by a narrow trail of
earth. Addiſin.
3. Continuity; any thing protračted, or drawn out to length.
The myrtle flouriſheth ſtill ; and wonderful it is that for
ſo long a tract of time ſhe ſhould ſtill continue freſh. Hºwel.
Your bodies may at laſt turn all to ſpirit,
Improv’d by tract of time, and wing'd aſcend
Ethereal as we. Miltºn.
As in tract of ſpeech a dubious word is eaſily known by
the coherence with the reſt, and a dubious letter by the whole
word; ſo may a deaf perſon, having competent knowledge
of language, by an acute ſagacity by ſome more evident
word diſcerned by his eye, know the ſenſe. Hºlder.
4. Courſe; manner of proceſs ; unleſs it means, in this place,
rather, diſcourſe; explanation.
The tract of every thing
Would, by a good diſcourſer, loſe ſome life
Which action's ſelf was tongue to. Shakºp. Henry VIII.
5. It ſeems to be uſed by Shakeſpeare for track.
The weary ſun hath made a golden ſet,
And, by the bright tract of his fiery car,
Gives ſignal of a goodly day to-morrow.
6. [Tračiatus, Lat.] A treatiſe; a ſmall book.
The church clergy at that time writ the beſt collection of
tracts againſt popery that ever appeared. Swift.
TRA’ctable. adj. [tractabilis, Lat. traitable, Fr.]
1. Manageable; docile; compliant; obſequious; practicable;
governable.
For moderation of thoſe affections growing from the very
natural bitterneſs and gall of adverſity, the ſcripture much
alledgeth contrary fruit, which afflićtion likewiſe hath, when-
ſoever it falleth on them that are traciable, the grace of God's
holy ſpirit concurring therewith. Hooker, b. v.
Noble Ajax, you are as ſtrong, as valiant, as wiſe, no
leſs noble, much more gentle, and altogether more traciable.
Shakeſp. Troila: and Crºſſida.
Traffable obedience is a ſlave
To each incenſed will. Shakeſp. Henry VII.
If thou doſt find him trađable to us,
Encourage him, and tell him all cur reaſons;
If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,
, icy, cold, * Shakespeare. Rich. III.
Be thou ſo too.
As thoſe who are bent to do wickedly will never want
tempters to urge them on in an evil courſe; ſo thoſe who
yield themſelves traciable to good motions, will find the ſpirit
of God more ready to encourage them. Tillotson's Sºrmºnſ.
If a ſtrićt hand be kept over children from the beginſ"&amp;"
they will in that age be trađable, and quietly ſubmit.”".
Lºcke on Educatiºn.
2. Palpable; ſuch as may be handled. - - d
The other meaſures are of continued quantity viſible, an
for the moſt part trađable; whereas time is always tranſient,
neither to be ſeen nor felt. Hºlder on Time.
TRAct.AbleNEss. n.ſ.. [from traciable.] The ſtate of being
tractable; compliance; obſequiouſneſs. ild
It will be objected, that whatſoever I fanſy of dº.
tradableneſ, yet many will never apply: - º:
TRActatº. m. ſ. [tradiatus, Latin.j A treatiſe; * *
ſmall book. ion of au-
Though philoſophical tradiates make enumeratio". *
thors, yet are their reaſons uſually introduced. º:
We need no other evidence than Glanville's trºº" º
TRAction. n.ſ.. [from tractus, Lat.] The ačt of drawing?
the ſtate of being drawn.
The malleus being fixed to an extenſible mem ---
lows the traction of the muſcle, and is drawn inward; to
bring the terms of that line nearer in proportion 2S "...
curved, and ſo gives a tenſion to the tympanum. H. ſº
TRActile. n ſ. [tradius, Lat..] Capable to be draw” Out
extended in length; dućtile. - wh;
The conſiſtences of bodies are very divers; fragile, toº
flexible, inflexible; tractile, or to be drawn forth." length,
intractile. Bacºn's Nat. Hiſ'. Nº. ;:
Tractility. adj. [from tradiil..] The quality of bºº"
tile. Silveſ,
brane, fol:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
º
Silver, whoſe dućtility and *rºfility are much inferiour to
thoſe of gold, was drawn out to ſo fender a wire, that a
- fingle grain amounted to twenty-ſeven feet.
TRADE. n. /, ſtratia, Italian.j
I. Traffick; commerce; exchange of goods for other goods,
or for money.
Whoſoever commands the ſea, commands the trade ; who-
ſoever commands the trade of the world, commands the
riches of the world, and Sonſequently the world itſelf. R.
Trade increaſes in one place and decays in another. Temple.
2. Occupation ; particular employment whether manual or
mercantile, diſtinguiſhed from the liberal art. learned pro-
feſions.
*Pºint to every one that is not able to live of his
freehold a certain trade of life ; the which trade he ſhall be
bound to follow. Speºſer on Ireland.
How dizzy! half way down
Hangs one that gathérs ſamphire, dreadful trade. Shakeſp.
I'll mountebank their loves, and come home beloyd
Of all the trades in Rome. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Fear and piety, -
Inſtruction, manners, myſteries, and trades,
Decline to your Sonfounding contraries.
The rude Equicolae
Hunting their ſport, and Plund'ring was their trade. Dryd.
Fight under him; therº's plunder to be had ;
A captain is a very gainful trade. Dryden's juv.
The whole diviſion that to Mars pertains,
All trades of death, that deal in ſteel for gains. Dryden.
The emperor Pertinax applied himſelf in his youth to a
gainful trade; his father, judging him fit for a better em-
ployment, had a mind to turn his education another way;
the ſon was obſtinate in Purſuing ſo profitable a trade, a ſort
of merchandiſe of wood. 4rbuthnot on Coins.
3. Inſtruments of any occupation.
The ſhepherd bears
His houſe and houſhold gods, his trade of war,
His bow and quiver, and his truſty cur. Dryden's Wirgil.
4. Any employment not manual; habitual exerciſe.
Call ſome of young years to train them up in that trade;
and ſo fit them for weighty affairs. Bacon.
To TRADE. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To traffick; to deal; to hold COrnmerce.
He commanded theſe ſervants to be called, to know how
much every man had gained by trading. Luke xix. 15.
Delos, a ſacred place, grew a free port, where nations
warring with one another reſorted with their goods, and
traded. Z, buthnot on Coins.
Maximinus traded with the Goths in the product of his
Derham.
Shakeſpeare,
eſtate in Thracia. Arbuthnot.
2. To act merely for money. -
Saucy and overbold how did you dare
To trade and traffick with Macbeth,
In riddles and affairs of death Shakſ? Macbeth.
3. Having a trading wind.
They on the trading flood ply tow'rd the pole. Milton.
To TRADE. v. a. To ſell or exchange in commerce.
They were thy merchants: they traded the perſons of
men and veſſels of braſs in thy market. Ezek. xxvii. 13.
TRADE-WIND. m. ſ. [trade and wind.] The monſoon; the
periodical wind between the tropicks.
Thus to the eaſtern wealth through ſtorms we go,
But now, the Cape once doubled, fear no more ;
A conſtant trade-wind will ſecurely blow,
And gently lay us on the ſpicey ſhore. Dryden.
His were the projects of perpetuum mobiles, and of in-
creaſing the trade-wind by vaſt plantations of reeds. Zºº.
Comfortable is the trade-wind to the cquatorial parts, with-
out which life would be both ſhort and grievous. Cheyne,
TRADED. adj. [from trade.] Verſed; practiſed.
Truſt not thoſe cunning waters of his eyes ;
For villainy is not without ſuch a rheum:
And he long traded in it makes it ſeem
Like rivers of remorſe and innocence.
Eyes and ears,
Two traded pilots 'twixt the dangerous ſhores
Of will and judgment. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſila,
TRADER. m. ſ. ſirom trade.] -
1. One engaged in merchandiſe or commerce. -
Pilgrims are going to Canterbury with rich offerings, and
traders riding to London with fat purſes. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Now the vićtory's won,
We return to our laſes like fortunate traders,
Triumphant with ſpoils. Dryden.
Many traders will neceſſitate merchants to trade for leſs
prºfit, and conſequently be more frugal. Child on Trade.
That day traders ſum up the accounts of the week. Swift.
2. One long uſed in the methods of money getting ; a practi-
tloner.
TRADEsfolk. m. ſ. [trade and ſº.] People employed in
trades.
By his advice vićtuallers and trad ſºlº would ſoon get all
the money of the kingdom into their hands. Swift.
Shakeſpeare.
TR ***MAN, n.ſ. [trad, and man.] A ſhopkeeper. A mer.
chant is called a trader, but not a tradeſman; and it ſeems
jºined in ºakſpeare from a man j labours with his
3 flûs.
I live by the awl, I meddle with no tradeſmen's matters.
... . They rather had beheld Shakeſpeare:
Diſſentious "ºbº peſtring ſtreets, than ſee
ºr tradeſmen ſinging in their ſhops, and going
About their functions. Shakeſp. Coriºus,
Order * trade thither and thence ſo as ſome few merº,
and tºadſmen, under colour of furniſhing the colony with ne–
ceſſaries, may not grind them.
Tradeſmen might conjecture what doi
have in their reſpective dealings. Graunt
M. Jordain would not be thought a tradeſman, but order.
ed fome ſilk to be meaſured out to his partner's friend, : now
I give up my ſhop. Priºr
From a plain tradeſman with a ſhop, he is now grown s
Very rich country gentleman. Arbuth. Hà. ºf J. Bull.
Domeſticks in a gentleman's family have moré Opportunities
of improving their minds, than the ordinary tradjien. Swift.
Boaſtful and rough, your firſt ſon is a ſquiré;
The next a #4%ian, meek and much a jiā. Pºpe's Ep.
TR ºut. *}. [trade and full.] Commercial ; buſy in traf-
CK.
Ye tradful merchants that with weary toil
Do ſeek moſt precious things to make your gain,
And both the Indies of their treaſure ſpoil,
What needeth you to ſeek ſo far in vain. Spenſºr.
TRADI'tion. n: / [tradition, Fr. traditio, Lat.]
I. The act or practiſe of delivering accounts frºm mouth to
mouth without written memoria;; communication from age
to age.
To learn it we have *adition; namely, that ſo we be-
lieve, becauſe both we from our predeceſſors, and they from
theirs, have ſo received. Hooker, b. iii.
2. Any thing delivered orally from age to age.
They the truth
With ſuperſtitions and tradition, taint,
Left only in thoſe written records pure.
Our old ſolemnities
From no blind zeal, or fond tradition riſe s
Put ſav'd from death, our Argives yearly pay
... Theſe grateful honours to the God’of day. Pope's Statius.
TRADITIONAL. adj. [from tradition.]
1. Delivered by tradition; deſcending by oral communication;
tranſmitted by the foregoing to the following age.
Whence may we have the infallible tºnal ſenſe of
ſcripture, if not from the heads of their church; Tillºtſºn.
If there be any difference in natural parts, it ſhould ſeem
the advantage lies on the ſide of children bºrn from wealthy
Parents, the ſame traditional ſloth and luxury which render
their body weak, perhaps refining their ſpirits. Swift.
2. Obſervant of traditions, or idle ſites. Not uſed, nor proper.
God forbid
We ſhould infringe the holy privilege
Of ſanctuary
-—You are too ſenſeleſs obſtinate, my lord; ' .
Too ceremonious and traditional. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
TRADITIONALLY. adv. [from traditional.]
I. By tranſmiſſion from age to age.
There is another channel wherein this doğrine is traj-
tionally derived from Saint John, namely, from the clergy of
Aſia. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. From tradition without evidence of written memorials.
It croſſeth the proverb, and Rome might well be built in
a day, if that were true which is traditionally related .
Strabo, that the great cities Anchiale and Tarſūs were buſt
by Sardanapalus both in one day. Brown's Pulgar Err.
TRADI'TIONARY. adj. [from tradition.] Delivered by tradi-
tion.
Suppoſe the ſame traditionary ſtrain
Of rigid manners in the houſe remain,
Inveterate truth, an old plain Sabine's heart. Dryden.
Oral tradition is more uncertain, eſpecially if we may take
that to be the traditionary ſenſe of texts of ſcripture. Tillot on.
The fame of our Saviour, which in ſo few years had gone
through the whole earth, was confirmed and perpetuated by
ſuch records as would preſerve the traditiºnary account of him
to after-ages. Alliſon on the Chiftian Religion.
TRA'DITIVE, adj. [traditive, Fr. from trado, Latin.] Tranſ-
mitted or tranſmiſſible from . to ".
uppoſe we on things traditive divide,
ai i. appeal to ſcripture to decide. Dryd. H. and Pant.
To TRADU'cE. v. a. [traduco, Lat. t. aduire, Fr.]
1. To cenſure; to condemn; to repreſent as blameable; to
iate : to decry.
sº iº that Satan hath, who knoweth his
kingdom to be no one way more ſhaken than by the publick
devout prayers of God's church, is by traducing the form and
manner of them, to bring them into contempt, and ſo ſlack
* !
sº
the force of all mens devotion towards them. Aſoo’er. b. v.
26 S - Thoſe
Milton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
Ti" R. A
.
Thoſe particular ceremonies which they pretend to be ſo
ſcandalous, we ſhall mºtº thoroughly ſiſt, when other things
alſo tradiced in the publick duties of the church are, toge-
ther with theſe, to be touched. Hooker, b. iv.
whilſt calumny has ſuch potent abetters, we are not to
wonder at its growth : as long as men are malicious and de-
ſigning they will be traducing. - - - Gov. of the langue.
*From that preface he took his hint; though he had the
baſeneſs not to acknowledge his benefactor, but inſtead of it
to traduce me in libel. Dryden's Fab.
2. To propagate; to encreaſe by deriving one from another.
None are ſo groſs as to contend for this,
That ſouls from bodies may traduced be ;
Between whoſe natures no proportion is,
When root and branch in nature itill agree.
From theſe only the race of perfect animals were Pºpº-
gated and traduced over the earth. Hale.
Some believe the ſoul is made by God, ſome by angels,
and ſome by the generant; whether it be immediately creat-
ed or tradućed hath been the great ball of contentiº, tº the
latter ages. Glanville's Scepſ.
TRAbu'diment. n.ſ. [from traduce.] Cenſure; obloquy.
Rome muſt know
The value of her own : 'twere a concealment -
Worſe than a theft, no leſs than a traducement,
To hide your doings. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
TRAbu'cER. n.ſ.. [from traduce.] A falſe cenſurer; a calum-
Davies.
Illator.
TRADU’ciple. adj. [from traduce.] Such as may be derived.
Though oral tradition might be a competent diſcoverer of
the original of a kingdom, yet ſuch a tradition were incom-
petent without written monuments to derive to us the origi-
nal laws, becauſe they are of a complex nature, and there-
fore not orally traducible to ſo great a diſtance of ages. Hale.
TRADU’ction. n.ſ. [from traduce.]
1. Derivation from one of the ſame kind; propagation.
The patrons of traduction accuſe their adverſaries of aſ-
fronting the attributes of God; and the aſſerters of creation
impeach them of violence to the nature of things. Glanville.
If by tradućtion came thy mind,
Our wonder is the leſs to find
A ſoul ſo charming from a ſtock ſo good ;
Thy father was transfus'd into thy blood.
2. Tradition; tranſmiſſion from one to another.
Touching traditional communication and tradušion of
truths connatural and engraven, I do not doubt but many of
them have had the help of that derivation. Hale.
3. Conveyance.
Since America is divided on every ſide by conſiderable ſeas,
and no paſſage known by land, the traduction of brutes could
only be by ſhipping: though this was a method uſed for the
traduction of uſeful cattle from hence thither, yet it is not
credible that bears and lions ſhould have ſo much care uſed
for their tranſportation. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
4. Tranſition.
The reports and fugues have an agreement with the figures
in rhetorick of repetition and traduction. Bacon.
TRA/F Fick. m. ſ. [trafique, Fr. traffco, Italian.]
1. Commerce; merchandiſing; large trade; exchange of com-
modities.
Traffick's thy god. Shakeſp. Timon ºf Athens.
My father
A merchant of great traffik through the world. Shakeſp.
As the firſt of theſe was, for his great wiſdom, ſtiled the
Engliſh Solomon, he followed the example of that wiſe king
in nothing more than by advancing the traffº of his people.
Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 41.
2. Commodities; ſubječt of traffick. -
You'll ſee a draggled damſel
From Billingſgate her fiſhy traffic; bear. Gay.
To TRA'FFICK. v. n. [trafiquer, Fr. traffare, Italian.]
1. To practiſe commerce; to merchandiſe; to exchange com-
modities.
They firſt plant for corn and cattle, and aſier enlarge them-
ſelves for things to traffick withal. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
2. To trade meanly or mercenarily.
Saucy and overbold how did you dare
To trade and traffic; with Macbeth,
In riddles and affairs of death Shakeſ?. Macbeth.
How haſt thou dar'd to think ſo vilely of me,
That I would condeſcend to thy mean arts,
Dryden.
T And traffick with thee for a prince's ruin Rowe.
** Fick ER. m. ſ. ſtafjueur, Fr. from traff:..] Trader;
merchant.
Your Argoſics with portly ſail,
Jºke ſigniors and rich burghers on the flood,
º ºverpeer the petty traffixers
In ººº - - Shakespeare Aſerchant of P. nice.
tº ſº.
TRA/GAcANTH. m. ſ. [tº - º tradic lin º ºds. Zld.
- ººtha, La.) A ſort of gum to
which this name has been given, becauſe it proceet, from
the inciſion of the root or trunk of a plant ſo called. Tº...
TRAGEDIAN. m. ſ. [from tragedy; tragadas, Lat.j " * .
1. A writer of tragedy.
Many of the poets themſelves had much nobler coff
ceptions of the Deity, than to imagine him to have in,
thing corporeal; as in theſe verſes out of the ancient .."
dian. - Stilling fit.
2. An actor of tragedy. o/*****
I can counterfeit the deep tragedian ;
Speak, and look back, and pry on ev'ry ſide,
Tremble and ſtart at wagging of a ſtraw,
Intending deep ſuſpicion. Shakespeare . Rih. III
To well-lung’d tragedian's rage * -114
They recommend their labours of the ſtage. Dryden
TRAGEDY. n.ſ. [tragédie, Fr. tragedia, Lat.] ryden.
1. A dramatick repreſentation of a ſerious action.
Thouſands more, that yet ſuſpect no peril,
Will now conclude their plotted tragedy. Shakeſpears,
All our tragedies are of kings and princes; but you never
ſee a poor man have a part unleſs it be as a chorus, or to fill
up the ſcenes, to dance, or to be derided. Taylºr's hºl, lºſſ.
Imitate the ſiſter of painting, tragedy; which employs i.
whole forces of her art in the main action. Dryden.
An anthem to their god Dionyſus, whilſt the goat floºd.
his altar to be ſacrificed, was called the goat-ſong or tro-
gedy. Rymer's Tragedies of the loſt Æt.
There to her heart ſad tragedy addreſt º
The dagger, wont to pierce the tyrant's breaſt. Pºe.
2. Any mournful or dreadful event.
I ſhall laugh at this,
That they, who brought me in my maſter's hate,
I live to look upon their tragedy. Shakespeare Rih. III.
I look upon this now done in England as another ad of
the ſame tragedy which was latcly begun in Scotland. K. Cº.
Fº {e}. [tragicus, Lat. tragique, Fr.]
1. Relating to tragedy.
The root whereof and tragical effect,
Vouchſafe, O thou the mournfull'ſt muſe of nine,
That wont'ſt the tragick ſtage for to direct,
In funeral complaints and wailful tine
Reveal to me. Spºnſºr's Mºmii,
Thy Clarence he is dead that ſtabb'd my Edward;
And the beholders of this tragick play,
Th’ adulterer Haſtings, Rivers, Vaughan, Gray,
Untimely ſmother'd in their duſky graves. Shaft, R. III.
2. Mournful; calamitous; ſorrowful; dreadful.
A dire induction I am witneſs to ;
And will to France, hoping the conſequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
The gaudy, blabbing, and remorſeful day,
Is crept into the boſom of the ſea:
And now loud howling wolves arouſe the jades,
That drag the tragick melancholy night. Shałºff. Hºn. WI.
Why look you ſtill ſo ſtern and tragical? Shaftart:
So tragical and merited a fate
Shall ſwallow thoſe who God and juſtice hate. §§.
Shaiſ care.
I now muſt change thoſe notes to tragick. Miltºn.
The tale of this ſong is a pretty tragical ſtory; and pleaſes
becauſe it is a copy of nature. Addison.
Bid them dreſs their bloody altars Rºw:
4:08.
With every circumſtance of tragick pomp.
TRA/G 1cALLY. adv. [from tragical.]
1. In a tragical manner; in a manner befitting tragedy.
Juvenal's genius was ſharp and eager; and as his ".
cations were great, he has revenged them tragically. Dryden.
2. Mournfully; ſorrowfully; calamitouſly:
TRA/GICALNEss. n.ſ. [from tragical. M
mitouſneſs. f
Like bold Phaºtons we deſpiſe all benefits of the ſº .
light, unleſs we may guide his chariot; and we morº º
fable as well in the tragicalngſ of the event * * the f
lence of the undertaking. º i.
TRAG ico'MEDY. n.ſ. [tragicomedie, Fr. from trºgº º
medy. A drama compounded of merry and ſerious º i.
On the world's ſtage, when our applauſe grows hig",
For acting here life's tragi-comeº,
The lookers-on will ſay we act not well, Denham.
Unleſs the laſt the former ſcenes excº’. - hi h is
The faults of that drama are in the kind of it, ".
tragi-comedy; but it was given to the people. Engliſh ſº
We have often had tragi-comedies upº the Eng º dy an
will, i.e., iſ nºt ſort of compoſition **** %.
comedy are in diſtinct ſcenes.
TRA Gico'McAL. adj. [tragicomiº
1. Relating to tragi-comedy. ... • * "-
The whole at of the * farce º in º:
ing the ſeveral kinds of the drama, ſo that º lº all it.
diſtinguiſhed. gº tºº
2. Coniding of a mixture of mirth with ſorrow, TRAGI-
. . ca'a-
ournfulneſs; ca.
Fr. tragical and cºmicall
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
T R A
!.
º
º
º
|
º
ſ
!
TRAgico'sſically, a.k. [from tragicomical.] In a tragicomi- 2. To draw by artifice or ſtratagem
- º -
cal manner.
Laws my Pindarick parents matter'd not,
So I was tragicomically got. - Bramp/lon.
To TRAJE/ct. v. a. [traſºlus, Latin.] To caſt through, to
throw.
The diſputes of thoſe aſſuming confidents, that think ſo
highly of their attainments, are like the controverſy of thoſe
in Plato's den, who having never ſeen but the ſhadow of an
horſe traječied, eagerly contended, whether its neighing pro-
ceeded from its appearing mane or tail. Glanville's Scepſ.
If there are different kinds of aether, they have a different
degree of rarity; by which it becomes ſo fit a medium for
traječing the light of all coeleſtial bodies. Grew's Coſm. b. i.
If the ſun's light be trajected through three or more croſs
priſms ſucceſſively, thoſe rays which in the firſt priſm are re-
fraćted more than others, are in all the following priſins re-
fracted more than others in the ſame proportion." Newtºn.
TRAJE'cT. m. ſ. [trajet, Fr. traječius, Latin.] A ferry; a
paſſage for a water-carriage.
What notes and garments he doth give thee,
Bring to the trajeć, to the common ferry,
Which trades to Venice. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
TRAJE'cTION. n.ſ.. [trajeći, Lat.]
1. The act of darting through.
Later aſtronomers have obſerved the free motion of ſºch
comets as have, by a trajećtion through the aether, wandered
through the coeleſtial or interſtellar part of the univerſe. Boyſ.
2. Emiſſion.
The traječians of ſuch an object more ſharply pierce the
martyred ſoul of John, than afterwards did the nails the cru-
cified body of Peter. Brown's Wulgar Err. b. vii.
To TRAIL. v. a. [trailler, Fr.]
1. To hunt by the track.
2. To draw along the ground.
Bºat thou the drum, that it ſpeak mournfully:
Trail your ſteel pikes. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Faintly he ſtaggered through the hiſing throng,
And hung his head, and trail'd his legs along. Dryden.
3. To draw after in a long floating or waving body.
What boots the regal circle on his head,
That long behind he trails his pompous robe,
And, of all monarchs, only graſps the globe Pope.
4. [Treglen, Dutch..] To draw; to drag.
Becauſe they ſhall not trail me through their ſtreets
Like a wild beaſt, I am content to go, Milton's A. onſes.
Thrice happy poet, who may trail
Thy houſe about thee like a ſnail;
Or harneſs'd to a nag, at eaſe
Take journies in it like a chaiſe;
Or in a boat, whene'er thou wilt,
Canſt make it ſerve thee for a tilt. Swift.
To TRAIL. v. n. To be drawn out in length.
When his brother ſaw the red blood trail
Adown ſo faſt, and all his armour ſteepe,
For very felneſs loud he 'gan to weep. Fairy Qu. b. ii.
Since the flames purſu'd the trailing ſmoke,
He knew his boon was granted. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
From o'er the roof the blaze began to move,
And trailing vaniſh’d in th’ Idean grove.
It ſwept a path in heav'n, and ſhone a guide,
Then in a ſteaming ſtench of ſulphur dy’d. Dryden's Zn.
TRAIL. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Scent left on the ground by the animal perſued; track ſol-
lowed by the hunter.
See but the iſſue of my jealouſy: if I cry out thus upon
no trail, never truſt me when I open again. Shakeſpeare.
- How chearfully on the falſe trail they cry!
Oh, this is counter, you falſe Daniſh dogs. Shakeſpeare.
I do think, or elſe this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy ſo ſure
As I have us’d to do, that I have found
The very cauſe of Hamlet's lunacy. Shakespeare Hamlet.
2. Any thing drawn to length.
From thence the fuming trail began to ſpread,
And lambent glories danc'd about her head. Dryden's An.
When light'ning ſhoots in glitt'ring trails along:
It ſhines, ’tis true, and gilds the gloomy night;
But when it ſtrikes, ’tis fatal. Rowe's Royal Convert.
3. Any thing drawn behind in long undulations.
And round about her work ſhe did empale
With a fair border wrought of fundry flow’rs,
Enwoven with an ivy winding trail, ºpenſºr's Muipotmos.
A ſudden ſtar it ſhot through liquid air,
And drew behind a radiant trail of hair. Pope,
To TRAIN. v. a. [trainer, Fr.]
1. To draw along.
In hollow cube he train'd.
His deviliſh enginry. Miltow.
2. To draw ; to entice ; to invite.
If but twelve French
Were there in arms, they would be as a call
To train ten thouſand Engliſh to their ſide. Shakespeare.
3. To draw from ad to aćt by p
4. To educate; to bring up: cº,
5. To breed, or form to any thing.
For that cauſe I train'd thee to my houſe. Shakespearecare,
Oh train me not, ſweet mermaid, with thy note?
To drown me in thy ſiſter's flood of tears.
Sing, Syren, to thyſelf, and I will doat:
Spread o'er the ſilver waves thy golden hair,
And as a bed I'll take thcc, and there lie. Shaky?eare.
Crſuaſion or promiſe.
We did train him On, p
And his corruption being taenºom UIS,
...We as the ſpring of all ſhall Pºy for all. Shaº. H. IV.
- nly with up.
I can ſpeak Engliſh,
For I was train’d up in the Engliſh court.
A moſt rare ſpeaker,
To nature none more bound ; his training ſuch
That he may furniſh and inſtruct great teachers. Shakeſ,
A place for exerciſe and training up of youth in the faſhion
of the heathem. 244ac, iv. 9.
Qill ſome of young years to train them up in that trade
and ſo fit them for weighty affairs. Bºº.
Spiits train a up in leaſt and ſong. AMilton.
The firſt Chriſtians were by great hardſhips trained up for
glºry. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Shakeſpeare.
Abram armed his trained ſervants born in his houſe, and
purſued. Gen. xiv. 14.
The warrior horſe here bred he's taught to train. Dryd.
- The young ſoldier is to be trained on to the warfare of
life; wherein care is to be taken that more things be not re-
Preſented as dangerous than really are ſo. Locke.
TRAIN. m. ſ. [train, Fr.]
I. Artifice; ſtratagem of enticement.
2.
3.
He caſt by treaty and by trains
Her to perſuade. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Their general did with due care provide,
To ſave his men from ambuſh and from train. Fairfax.
- This inov'd the king,
To lay to draw him in by any train. Danic"; Civil ſtar.
Swol'n with pride into the ſhare I fell
Of fair fallacious looks, venereal trains, -
Soft'ned with pleaſure and voluptuous life. Milton's Agºn:
Now to my charms
And to my wily trains f I ſhall cre long
Be well ſtock'd with as fair a herd as graz'd
About my mother Circe. Milton.
The practice begins of crafty men upon the ſimple and
fº. theſe eaſily follow and are caught, while the others
ay trains and purſue a game. Temple.
The tail of a bird.
Contračting their body, and being forced to draw in their
fore parts to eſtabliſh the hinder in the elevation of the train,
if the fore parts do part and incline to the ground, the hin-
der grow too weak, and ſuffer the train to fall. Brown.
The bird guideth her body with her train, and the ſhip is
ſteered with the rudder. Hakewill.
Th’ other, whoſe gay train
Adorns him colour’d with the florid hue
Of rainbows and ſtarry eyes. Milton.
Rivers now ſtream and draw their humid train. Milton.
The train ſteers their flights, and turns their bodies like
the rudder of a ſhip; as the kite, by a light turning of his
train, moves his body which way he pleaſes. Ray.
The part of a gown that falls behind upon the ground.
A thouſand pounds a year, for pure reſpect
That promiſes more thouſands: honour's train
Is longer than his fore ſkirts. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
Coſtly followers are not to be liked, left while a man
makes his train longer he makes his wings ſhorter. Bacºn.
. A ſeries; a conſecution.
Diſtinct gradual growth in knowledge carries its own light
with it, in every ſtep of its progreſſion, in an eaſy and or-
derly train. Locke.
If we refle&amp;t on what is obſervable in ourſelves, we ſhall
find our ideas always paſſing in train, one going and another
coming, without intermiſſion. • Locke.
They laboured in vain ſo far to reach the apoſtle's mean-
ing, all along in the train of what he ſaid. Locke.
Some truths reſult from any ideas, as ſoon as the mind
puts them into propoſitions; other truths require a train of
ideas placed in order, a due comparing of them, and 'i.
tions made with attention. 0.8%.
What would'ſt thou have me do? conſider well -
The train of ills our love would draw behind it. Alºiſºn.
- 1. -
‘I he author of your beings can by a giance of the eye, or
a word ſpeaking, enlighten your mind, and conduct you to a
- -
train of happy ſentinents. //aits,
. Proceſs; method; ſtate of procedure.
If things were once in this train, if virtue were eſtabliſh-
ed as neceſſary to reputation, and vice not only loaded with
infamy, but made the infallible ruin of all mens pretenſions,
our duty would take root in our nature. Swift.
6. A retinue ;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">'T R A
T R A
inn., a number of followers or attendants.
6. A º: are men of choice and rareſt parts,
That in the moſt exact regard ſupport
The worſhips of their names. - Shakespeare.
Our fire walks forth, without more º
any'd than with his own complete
#. Milton's Par. Lºſº, b. v.
Thou ſhould'ſt be ſeen d
A goddeſs among gods, ador'd, and ſerv'd.
fº numberleſs, thy daily train. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Faireſt of ſtars, laſt in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn. Milton's Par. Lºſ’.
He comes not with a train to move our fear. Dryden.
The king's daughter, with a lovely train -
Of fellow nymphs, was ſporting on the plain. . Addison.
He would put a check to the fury of war, that a flop
might be put to thoſe fins which are of its train. Smalridge.
7. An orderly company; a proceſſion. -
Who the knights in green, and what the train
Of ladies dreſs'd with daiſies on the plain :
8. The line of powder reaching to the mine.
Since firſt they fail'd in their deſigns,
To take in heav'n by ſpringing mines;
And with unanſwerable barrels
Of gun-powder, diſpute their quarrels;
Now take a courſe more practicable, ---
By rºying trains to fire the rabble. Hudibras, p. iii.
Shall'he that gives fire to the train pretend to waſh his
hands of the hurt that's done by the playing of the mine!
L'E/irange's Fables.
9. TRAIN of artillery. Cannons accompanying an army.
With an army abundantly ſupplied with a train of artillery,
and all other proviſions neceſſary, the king advanced towards
Scotland. Clarendon, b. ii.
TRAINBA'NDs. m. ſ. [train and band: I ſuppoſe for trained
band.] The militia; the part of a community trained to mar-
tial exerciſe.
He directed the trainbands of Weſtminſter and Middleſex,
which conſiſted of the moſt ſubſtantial houſholders, to at-
Dryden.
tend. Clarendon.
Give commiſſion
To ſome bold man, whoſe loyalty you truſt,
And let him raiſe the trainbands of the city. Dryden.
A council of war was called, wherein we agreed to re-
treat: but before we could give the word, the trainbands,
taking advantage of our delay, fled firſt. Addison's Freeholder.
TRAINo'IL. n.ſ.. [train and oil.] Oil drawn by coction from
the fat of the whale.
TRA'IN.Y. adj. [from train..] Belonging to train oil. A bad word.
Here ſteams aſcend,
Where the huge hogſheads ſweat with trainy oil. Gay.
To TRAIPse. v. a... [A low word, I believe, without any ety-
mology.] To walk in a careleſs or ſluttiſh manner.
Two ſlip-ſhod muſes traipſe along,
In lofty madneſs, meditating ſong. Pope.
TRAIT. n.ſ.. [trait, Fr.] A ſtroke; a touch. Scarce Engliſh.
By this ſingle trait Homer marks an eſſential difference be-
tween the Iliad and Odyſſey; that in the former the people
periſhed by the folly of their kings; in this by their own
folly. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
TRAITOR. m. ſ. [traitre, Fr. traditor, Lat.] One who be-
ing truſted betrays.
The law laid that grievous puniſhment upon traitors, to
forfeit all their lands to the prince, that men might be terri-
fied from committing treaſons. Spenſer on Ireland.
If you flatter him, you are a great traitor to him. Bacon.
I'll put him thus far into the plot, that he ſhould be ſe-
cured as a traitor; but when I am out of reach, he ſhall be
releaſed. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
There is no difference, in point of morality, whether a
man calls me traitor in one word, or ſays I am one hired to
betray my religion and ſell my country. Swift.
TRAITORLY., adj. [from traitºr.] Treacherous; perfidious.
Theſe traitory raſcals miſeries are to be finil'd at, their
offences being ſo capital. Shakespeare . Jºinter's Tale.
TBA'ſ okous, adj. [from traitor.] Treacherous; perfidious;
faithleſs.
What news with him, that trait’rous wight?
- Pontinius knows not you,
While you ſtand out upon theſe t'aito ous terms. B. Jºhnſ.
The traitorous or treacherous, who have miſled others, he
would have ſeverely puniſhed, and the neutrals noted. Bacon.
More of his majeſty's friends have loſt their lives in this
rebellion than of his traiterºus ſubjects. Addiſon's Freeholder.
TRA'itoRously, adv. [from traito ous...] In a manner ſuiting
traitors; perfidiouſly; treacherouſly.
Good duke Humphry traiteroiſſy is murther'd
By Suffolk. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Thou bitter ſweet! whom I had laid
Next me, me trait. ºy haſt betray'd ;
And unſuſpected half inviſibly
At once fied into him, and ſtay'd with me.
Daniel.
Donne.
They had traitoro'ſ endeavoured to ſubvert the funda-
mental laws, deprive the king of his regal power, and to
place on his ſubjects a tyrannical power. Clarenam
TRA'it Ress. n.J. [from traitor.] A woman who betrays -
I, what I am, by what I was, o'ercome: -
Traitreſs, reſtore my beauty and my charms,
Nor ſteal my conqueſt with my proper arms.
Nor did my traitreſs wife theſe eye-lids cloſe,
Nor decently in death my limbs compoſe. Pope's Odºſy.
By the dire fury of a trait, ſº wife, ey.
Ends the ſad evening of a ſtormy life. Pºpº'; Olſ.
TRALATI'tious. adi, ſf. anſla * - -- ºſey.
. adj. [from tranſlatus, Lat.] Metaphoricaſ;
not literal. &gt;
TRALATI"riously. adv. [from tralatitious.] Metaphorically,
not literally ; not according to the firſt intention of i.
word.
Language properly is that of the tongue directed to the ear
by ſpeaking; written language is tralatitiouſly ſo called, be-
cauſe it is made to repreſent to the eye the ſame words which
are pronounced. Holder's Elements ºf Speech.
To TRALINEATE. v. n. [trans and line.] To deviate from
any direction.
If you tº alineate from your father's mind,
What are you elſe but of a baſtard kind?
IDo, as your progenitors have done,
And by their virtues prove yourſelf their ſon.
TRA/MM El. n.ſ.. [tramail, Fr. trama, tragula, Lat.]
1. A net in which birds or fiſh are caught.
The trammel differeth not much from the ſhape of the
bunt, and ſerveth to ſuch uſe as the wear and haking. Carew.
2. Any kind of net.
Her golden locks ſhe roundly did upty
In braided trammels, that no looſer hairs
Did out of order ſtray about her daihty ears. Faiyº.
3. A kind of ſhackles in which horſes are taught to pace.
I may go ſhuffingly at firſt, for I was never before walked
in trammel; ; yet I ſhall drudge at conſtancy, till I have worn
off the hitching in my pace. Dryden's Saniſh Fryar.
To TRAMMEL. v. a. [from the noun..] To catch; to inter-
cept.
Dryden.
Dryden,
If th’ aſſaſſination
Could trammel up the conſequence, and catch
With its ſurceaſe ſucceſs. Shakespeare. Machºth.
To TRAMPLE. v. a. [tampe, Daniſh.] To tread under foot
with pride, contempt, or elevation.
Caſt not your pearls before ſwine, left they trample them
under their feet. Mat vii. 6.
My ſtrength ſhall trample thee as mire. Miltºn.
To TRA/MPLE. v. n.
1. To tread in contempt. -
Diogenes trampled on Plato's pride with greater of his
OWn. Government ºf the Tºngue.
Your country's gods I ſcorn,
And tramºle on their ignominious altars. Rowe,
2. To tread quick and loudly. -
I hear his thund'ring voice reſound,
And trampling feet that ſhake the ſolid ground. Dryden,
TRA/MPLE.R. m. J. [from trample..] One that tramples. . .
TRAN A Tion. m.ſ.. [trano, Latin.) The act of ſwimming
over. 3. -
TRANCE. n.ſ.. [tranſ, Fr. ranfitus, Lat. . It might.”
fore be written tranſ...] An extaſy; a ſtate in which the ſoul
is rapt into viſions of future or diſtant things; a tempo")
abſence of the ſoul from the body. |
Gynecia had been in ſuch a trance of muſing: that Zºl.
mane was fighting with the lion before ſhe knew of any lion's
coming. Sidney, b, i.
Rapt with joy reſembling heavenly madneſs, '; Sºnnet
My ſoul was raviſht quite as in a trance. Spºſºrº º
Abſtraćt as in a trance methought I ſaw. Milton.
Sudden he ſtarts, cº-
Shook from his tender trance. Thºmſºn's *1ng.
TRA'Nced. adj. [from trance..] Lying in a trançº; “”
His grief grew puiſſant, and the ſtrings of life
Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets º,
And there I left him tranc'd, Shaft. º º:
TRA's GRAM. m. ſ. [A cant word.] An odd intº “
trived thing. - cks?
What's the meaning of all theſe trangrams and . s
what are you going about, jumping over my maſter i.
and running your lines croſs his grounds : Arbuth
TRA/NNEL. m. ſ. A ſharp pin.
With a º trannel *..., or a large nail gº."
a ſharp point, they mark the brick. Mixºn's º º
TRAN quil. adj. [tranquiſe, Fr. 1 anquillus, Latin.) Quicº
peaceful; undiſturbed.
I had been happy
So I had nothing known. Oh now, for ever e
Farewel the tranqui; mind farewel content! sº
TRANQUI'LLITY. m. ſ. [tranquilitas, Latin , tºº. ...;
Quiet; peace of mind; peace of condi;ion; freedom
perturbation. 8 Leave
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
–Eamºs
- -
Leave off,
To let a weary wretch from her due reſt, -
And trouble dying ſouls tranquility. Fairy Qu. b. ii.
You can ſcarce imagine any hero paſſing from one ſtage of
life to another with ſo much tranquility, ſo eaſy a tranſition,
and ſo laudable a behaviour. Pope.
To TRANSA'ct. v. a. [tranſačius, Lat.]
1. To manage; to negotiate; to condućt a treaty or affairs.
2. To perform; to do ; to carry on.
It cannot be expected they ſhould mention particulars which
were tranſacted amongſt ſome few of the diſciples only, as
the transfiguration and the agony. Addiſon.
TRANSA'ction. m. ſ. [tranſaction, Fr. from tranſaſ.] Négo-
tiation; dealing between man and man; management; af-
fairs; things managed.
It is not the purpoſe of this diſcourſe to ſet down the par-
ticular tranſačions of this treaty. Clarendon, b. viii.
RANSANIMATION. m. ſ. [trans and anima.] Conveyance of
the ſoul from one body to another.
If the tranſanimation of Pythagoras were true, that the
ſouls of men tranſmigrating into ſpecies anſwering their for-
mer natures, ſome men cannot eſcape that very brood whoſe
fire Satan entered. Brown's Vulgar }. b. vii,
To TRANscE'ND. v. a. [tranſcendo, Latin.]
1. To paſs; to overpaſs.
It is a dangerous opinion to ſuch popes, as ſhall tranſcend
their limits and become tyrannical. Bacon.
To judge herſelf, ſhe muſt herſelf tranſcend,
As greater circles comprehend the leſs. Davies,
2. To ſurpaſs; to outgo; to exceed; to excel.
This glorious piece tranſcends what he could think;
So much his blood is nobler than his ink. JValler,
Theſe are they
Deſerve their greatneſs and unenvy'd ſtand,
Since what they ačt tranſcends what they command. Denh.
High though her wit, yet humble was her mind,
As if ſhe cou’d not, or ſhe wou'd not find, }
How much her worth tranſcended all her kind. Dryden.
. To ſurmount; to riſe above.
Make diſquiſition whether theſe unuſual lights be meteoro-
logical impreſſions not tranſcending the upper region, or whe-
ther to be ranked among celeſtial bodies. Howel.
To TRANscE'ND. v. n. To climb. Not in uſe.
To conclude, becauſe things do not eaſily fink, they do
not drown at all, the fallacy is a frequent addition in human
expreſſions, which often give diſtinct accounts of proximity,
and tranſcend from one unto another. Brown,
NSCE/NDENCE. *
º:...}nſ [from tranſºnal
1. Excellence; unuſual excellence; ſupereminence.
2. Exaggeration; elevation beyond truth.
It is true greatneſs to have in one the frailty of a man, and
the ſecurity of a God: this would have done better in poeſy,
where tranſcendencies are more allowed. Bacon's Eſſays.
TRANscE'N DENT. adj. [tranſcendens, Lat. tranſcendant, Fr.]
Excellent; ſupremely excellent; paſſing others.
Thou, whoſe ſtrong hand, with ſo tranſcendent worth,
Holds high the rein of fair Parthenope. Craſhaw.
There is, in a lawgiver, a habitual and ultimate intention
of a more excellent and tranſcendent nature. Biſhop Sanderſon.
If thou beeſt he—But O ! how fal’n, how chang'd
From him who in the happy realms of light,
Cloath'd with tranſcendent brightneſs, didſt outſhine
Myriads, though bright. Milton.
Oh charming princeſs Oh tranſcendent maid! A. Phillips.
The right our Creator has to our obedience is of ſo high
and tranſcendent a nature, that it can ſuffer no competition;
his commands muſt have the firſt and governing influence on
all our actions. Rogers's Sermons,
TRANscENDENTAL. adj. [tranſcendentalis, low Lat.]
1. General ; pervading many particulars.
2. Supereminent; paſſing others. -
Though the Deity perceiveth not pleaſure nor pain, as we
do; yet he muſt have a perfect and tranſcendental perception
of theſe, and of all other things. Grew's Coſmol. b. ii.
TRAN sce'NDENTLY. adv. [from tranſcendent.] Excellently ;
fupereminently.
The law of Chriſtianity is eminently and tranſcendently
called the word of truth. South's Sermons.
To TRA'NscoLATE. v. a. [trans and colo, Latin.] To ſtrain
through a ſieve or colander. -
The lungs are, unleſs pervious like a ſpunge, unfit to im-
bibe and tranſcolate the air. Harvey,
To TRANscRI'BE. v. a. [tranſcribo, Lat. tranſcrire, Fr.] To
copy; to write from an exemplar.
He was the original of all thoſe inventions from which
others did but tranſcribe copies. Clarendon.
The moſt rigid exactors of mere outward purity do but
tranſcribe the folly of him who pumps very laboriouſly in a
ſhip, yet neglects to ſtop the leak. Becay of Piety.
If we imitate their repentance as we tra
we ſhall be received with the ſame mer
RANscR1'BER. m. ſ. [from tranſcribe.]
writes from a copy.
A coin is in no danger of h
copiers and tranſcriber.
TRA'sscript. n.ſ. [tranſcript, Fr.
°9P.; anything written from an original,
The Grecian learning was but a traftºpſ of the Chaldean
and Egyptian ; and the Roman of the Grecian. Glanville
The decalogue of Moſes was but a tranſcript, not an oi.
"ſcribe their faults,
cy. Rogers.
A copier; one who
aving its charaćters altered b
- Addiſon,
tranſcriptum, Latin.]. A
ginal. South's Sermons
Dićtate, Q mighty Judge what thou haſt ſeen t” ºn
Of cities and of courts, of books and men,
And deign to let thy ſervant hold the pen.
Through ages thus I may preſume to live,
And from the tranſcript of thy proſe receive
What my own ſhort-liv'd verſe can never give. Prior,
TRANscR1'PTIon. n. /... [tranſcription, Fr. from tranſcriptus
Lat] The act of copying. J 2
. The ancients were but men; the practice of tranſcription
in our days was no monſter in their's : plagiary had not its
nativity with printing, but began in times when thefts were
difficult. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i.
- The corruptions that have crept into it by many tranſcrip-
tions was the cauſe of ſo great difference. Brerewood.
TRANscriptively. adv. [from tranſcript..] In manner of a
copy.
Not a few tranſcriptively ſubſcribing their names to other
mens endeavours, tranſcribe all they have written.
To TRANscu'R. v. n. [tranſcurro,
and fro.
By fixing the mind on one objećt, it doth not ſpatiate and
tranſcur. Bacon.
TRANscu'Rsion. n.ſ.. [from tranſurſus, Lat.] Ramble, paſ-
ſage through ; paſſage beyond certain limits; extraordinary
deviation.
In a great whale, the ſenſe and the affects of any one part
of the body inſtantly make a tranſcuſſion throughout the
whole. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
I have briefly run over tranſcurſions, as if my pen had been
poſting with them. //otton's Life of Buckingham.
His philoſophy gives them tranſcurſions beyond the vortex
we breathe in, and leads them through others which are only
known in an hypotheſis. Glanville's Scep.
I am to make often tranſcurſions into the neighbouring
foreſts as I paſs along. Howel.
If man were out of the world, who were then left to view
the face of heaven, to wonder at the tranſcurſion of comets.
Mºe's Antidºte againſt Atheiſm.
TRANSE. m. ſ. [tranſe, Fr. See TRANce.] A temporary ab-
ſence of the ſoul; an ecſtaſy.
Abſtraćt as in a tranſe, methought I ſaw,
Though ſleeping, where I lay, and ſaw the ſhape
Still glorious before whom awake I ſtood. Milton.
TRANSELEMENTA'tion. n.ſ.. [trans and element.] Change of
one element into another.
Rain we allow ; but if they ſuppoſe any other tranſºlemen.
tation, it neither agrees with Moſes's philoſophy, nor Saint
Peter's. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
TRANSE'x1ON. m. ſ. [trans and ſexus, Lat.] Change from one
ſex to another.
It much impeacheth the iterated tranſexion of hares, if that
be true which ſome phyſicians affirm, that tranſmutation of
ſexes was only ſo in opinion, and that thoſe transfeminated
perſons were really men at firſt. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
To TRANSFER. v. a. [transferer, Fr. tranſe, o, Lat.]
1. To convey, or make over, from one to another.
He that tranfers the laws of the Lacedemonians to the
people of Athens, ſhould find a great abſurdity and inconve-
nience. Spenſer's State of I, eland.
Was't not enough you took my crown away,
But cruelly you muſt my love betray : -
I was well pleas'd to have transferr'd my right,
And better chang'd your claim of lawleſs might. Dryden,
The king,
Who from himſelf all envy would remove,
Left both to be determin'd by the laws,
And to the Grecian chiefs tº anye, r'd the cauſe. Drydºn.
This was one perverſe effect of their fitting at eaſe under
their vines and fig-trees, that they forget from whence that
eaſe came, and tranſferred all the honour of it upon them-
ſelves. Atterbury's Sermons,
Your ſacred aid religious monarchs own,
when firſt they merit, then aſcend the throne:
But tyrants dread you, lºſt your juſt decree
Tranſfºr the power and ſet the people free. Prior,
By reading we learn not only the aëtions and the ſenti-
ments of diſtant nations, but transfer to ourſelves the know-
ledge and improvements of the moſt learned men. iſ atts.
Brown.
Lat..] To run or rove to
26 T 2. To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
T R A
- remove; to tranſport. - - - -
2 Tº: ... was much moved with this unexpe&amp;ted accident,
...as ſtirred in ſuch a place where he could not with
hº his own perſon to ſuppreſs it. Bacon's H. VII.
He thirty rowling years,the crown ſhall wear,
Then from Lavinium ſhall the ſeat transfer.
TRAN Figur Aºtion, n. ſ. [tranſguration, Fr.]
. Change of form. - -
i in kinds where the diſcrimination of ſexes is obſcure, theſe
transformations are more common, and in ſome without
commixture; as in caterpillars or ſilkworms, wherein there
is a viſible and triple transfiguration. Brown's W.ulgar Errours.
. The miraculous change of our bleſſed Saviour's appearance
on the mount. - -
It cannot be expected that other authors ſhould mention Par-
ticulars which were tranſacted amongſt ſome of the diſciples.;
ſuch as the transfiguration and the agony in the garden. Addison
Did Raphael's pencil never chuſe to fall 2
Say, are his works transfiguration all? Blackmore.
To TRANSFIGURE. v. a. [tranſgurer, French; trans and
figura, Lat.] To transform 3 to change with reſpect to out-
ward appearance. -
j.º tanfºured before them, and his face did, ſhine
as the ſun, and his raiment was white as the light. Matth.
I am the more zealous to tranſgure your love into devo-
tion, becauſe I have obſerved your paſſion to have been ex-
Dryden.
tremely impatient of confinement. Boyle.
The nuptial #. his out age ſtrait attends,
The dow'r deſir'd is his transfigur'd friends :
The incantation backward ſhe repeats,
Inverts her rod, and what ſhe did defeats. Garth.
To TRANSF1'x. v. a. [transfixus, Lat.] To pierce through.
Amongſt theſe mighty men were women mix'd :
The bold Semiramis, whoſe ſides transfix'd
With ſon's own blade, her foul reproaches ſpoke. Fa. Qu.
With linked thunderbolts
Transfix us to the bottom of this gulph. Milton's P. Lºft.
Diana's dart
In an unhappy chace transfix'd her heart. Dryden's Homer.
Nor good Éiºn envy'd him the prize,
Though he transfix'd the pigeon in the ſkies.
Till fate ſhall with a ſingle dart
Transfix the pair it cannot part. Fenton.
To TRAN's Fo'RM. v. a. [transformer, Fr. trans and forma,
Latin.] To metamorphoſe ; to change with regard to exter-
nal form.
She demanded of him, whether the goddeſs of thoſe woods
had ſuch a power to transform every-body. Sidney, b, i.
Love is blind, and lovers cannot ſee
The pretty follies that themſelves commit;
For if they could, Cupid himſelf would bluſh
To ſee me thus transformed to a boy.
As is the fable of the lady fair,
Which for her luſt was turn’d into a cow;
When thirſty to a ſtream ſhe did repair,
And ſaw herſelf transform'd ſhe wift not how.
To TRAN's Fo'R.M. v. m. To be metamorphoſed.
His hair transforms to down, his fingers meet
In ſkinny films and ſhape his oary feet. Addiſon.
TRANSFORMATION. n.ſ.. [from transform.] Change of ſhape;
aćt of changing the form; ſtate of being changed with re-
gard to form.
Something you have heard
Of Hamlet's transformation; ſo I call it,
Since not th' exterior, nor the inward man,
Reſembles that it was. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
wººt could'ſt thou be, that were not ſubječt to a
eart -
And what a beaſt art thou already, and ſeeſt not thy loſs
in transformation / Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
The menſuration of all manner of curves, and their mu-
tual transformation, are not worth the labour of thoſe who
deſign either of the three learned profeſſions. J/atts.
TRANSFRETA"tion. n.ſ.. [trans and fretum, Latin, J Paſſage
over the ſea.
Since the laſt transfretation of king Richard the ſecond,
the crown of England never ſent over numbers of men ſuf-
ficient to defend the ſmall territory. IDavies on Ireland.
To TRANSFU's E. v. a. [transfuſus, Lat.] To pour out of one
into another.
Between men and beaſts there is no poſſibility of ſocial
communion ; becauſe the well-ſpring of that communion is
a natural delight which man hath to tranfuſe from himſelf
intº others, and to receive from others into himſelf, eſpe-
cially thoſe things wherein the excellency of this kind doth
moſt conſiſt. Hooker, b. i.
Tranſfus'd on thee his ample ſpirit reſts. Milton.
When did his muſe from Fletcher ſcenes purloin,
As thou whoſe Eth'ridge doſt transfuſe to thine
But ſo tranſas'd, as oil and waters flow,
His always floats above, thine ſinks below.
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
Davies.
Dryden.
Where the juices are in a morbid {tate, if one could ſ
poſe all the unſound juices taken away and ſound juices up-
mediately transfuſed, the ſound juices would grow morbid *.
TRANSFU'sion. m. ſ. [transfuſion, Fr. transfuſus, Lat J tº
aćt# pouring out of one into another. - e
he crooked part of the pipe was placed i
prevent the loſs of the º: that º ſº iº.
transfuſion from the veſſel into the pipe. Bo .
Poeſy is of ſo ſubtile a ſpirit, that in the pouring *:
one language into another it will all evaporate; and if a Inew
ſpirit be not added in the tranſuſon, there will remain not.
but a caput mortuum. D.
Something muſt be loſt in all tranſfuſion, that is, in º
tranſlations, but the ſenſe will remain. 'D. den
What noiſe have we had about tranſplantation of º:
T and transfuſion of blood. Baker's Refteåions on º:
º RE'ss. v. a. [tranſgreſſer, French; tranſgreſſus,
1. To paſs over; to paſs beyond.
Long ſtood the noble youth oppreſs'd with awe
And ſtupid at the wond’rous things he ſaw, »
Surpaſſing common faith, tranſgreſſing nature's law. Dr.
2. To violate; to break. j4.
Let no man doubt but that every thing is well done, be-
cauſe the world is ruled by ſo good a guide as tranſgreſſeth
not his own law, than which nothing can be more abſolute
perfect, and juſt. Hºr, i.
This ſorrow we muſt repeat as often as we irº, the
divine commandments. J/ake's Preparation for Death.
To TRANSGRE'ss. v. n. To offend by violating a law.
I would not marry her, though ſhe were endowed with all
Adam had left him before he tranſgreſſed. Shakeſpeare.
Achan tranſgreſſ'd in the thing accurſed. 1 Chron. ii. 7.
He upbraideth us with our offending the law, and obječ-
eth to our infamy the tranſgreſſings of our education. //ſl.
TRANSGRE'ssion; n.ſ.. [tranſgreſſion, Fr. from tranſgeſ.j
1. Violation of a law ; breach of a command.
Shall I abuſe this conſecrated gift
Of ſtrength, again returning with my hair
After my great tranſgreſſion ; ſo requite
Favour renew'd, and add a greater ſin. Miltºn.
All accuſation ſtill is founded upon ſome law; for where
there is no law, there can be no tranſgreſſion; and where
there can be no tranſgreſſion, there ought to be no accuſa-
tion. South's Sermons.
2. Offence; crime; fault.
What's his fault
—The flat tranſgreſſion of a ſchool-boy, who, being over-
joy'd with finding a bird's neſt, ſhews it his companion, and
he ſteals it.
—Wilt thou make a truſt a tranſgreſſion * The trangreſſion
is in the ſtealer. Shakeſp. Much ad aleut nothing.
Teach us, ſweet madam, for our rude tranſgreſſion
Some fair excuſe. Shakeſp. Love's Labour lºſt.
TRANGRE'ssive. adj. [from tranſgreſs.] Faulty; culpable;
apt to break laws.
Though permitted unto his proper principles, Adam per;
haps would have finned without the ſuggeſtion of Satan, and
from the trangreſſive infirmities of himſelf might have erred
alone, as well as the angels before him. Brown.
TRANGRE'ssor. m. ſ. [tranſg, ºffeur, French, from tranſºrſ.]
Lawbreaker; violator of command ; offender. -
He intended the diſcipline of the church ſhould be applied
to the greateſt and moſt ſplendid tranſgreſſors, as well as,”
the puniſhment of meaner offenders. Clarendºn.
I go to judge
On earth theſe thy tranſgreſſºrs; but thou know'ſt
Whoever judg’d, the worſt on me muſt light
When time ſhall be. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. X.
Ill-worthy I, ſuch title ſhould belong
To me tranſgreſſºr / who for thee ordain'd -
A help, became thy ſnare. Milton's Par. Lºff, * *
TRANSIENT. adj. [tranſiens, Lat.] Soon paſt; ſoon Fºº
fing; ſhort; momentary; not laſting; not durable.
How ſoon hath thy prediction, ſeer bleſt'
Meaſur'd this tranſient world, the race of time,
Till time ſtand fix’d.
He that rides poſt through a country, may, from th;
Miltºn.
rº-
ſent view, tell how in general the parts lie. Lock.
Love hitherto a tranſºnt gueſt, -
Ne'er held poſſeſſion in his breaſt. Swift.
What is looſe love a tranſient guſt,
A vapour fed from wild deſire. Pºpe.
TRA'N's IENTLY. adv. [from t anſient.] In paſſage; with 3
ſhort paſſage; not extenſively.
I touch here but tranſiently, without any ſtrićt method, on
ſome few of thoſe many rules of imitating nature which Art-
ſtotle drew from Homer. Dryde".
TRA'NSIENTNEss. º [from tranſient.] Shortneſs of com"
nuance; ſpeedy paſſage.
I:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
.
It were to be wiſhed that all words of this ſort, as they
reſemble the wind in fury and impetuouſneſs, ſo they might
do alſo in tranſientneſs and ſudden expiration. Dec. of Piety.
TRANSI'll Encé. n: / [from tranſilio, Lat.] Leap from thing
R ANSI/LIEN cy. ; to thing.
By unadviſed */ºoney leaping from the effed to its re-
noteſt cauſe, we obſerve not the Sonnection of more imme-
diate cauſalities. Glanville's Scep.
TRANSiT. n.ſ. [tranſitus, Latin.] In aſtronomy, the paſſing
of any planet juſt by or under any fixt ſtar; or of the In OOn
in particular, covering or moving cloſe by any other pla-
net. Harris.
TRANsition. n.ſ. [tranſitio, Latin.]
1. Removal; paſſage.
Heat and cold have a virtual ”ſition without communi-
cation of ſubſtance, but moiſture not. Bacon's Nat. Hi/.
As for the mutation of ſexes, and tranſition into one an-
other, we cannot deny it in ºares, it being obſervable in
unan. Brown's W.ulgar Brrours, b. iii.
I have given ſome intimations of the changes which hap-
pen in the interior Parts of the earth, I mean the tranſitions
and removes of metals and minerals there. //oodward.
2. Change.
The ſpots are of the ſame colour throughout, there bein
an immediate tranſition from white to black, and not declin-
ing gradually, and mixing as they approach. J/oodward.
You can ſcarce imagine any hero Paſſing from one ſtage
of life to another with ſo eaſy a tranſition, and ſo laudable a
behaviour. Pope.
As once inclos'd in woman's beauteous mould ;
Thence, by a ſoft tranſition we repair,
From earthly vehicles to theſe of ºil. Pope.
3. [Tranſition, Fr.] aſlage in writing or converſation from
one ſubject to another.
- Then with tranſition ſweet new ſpeech reſumes. Milton.
Covetouſneſs was none of his faults, but deſcribed as a
veil over the true meaning of the poet, which was to ſaty-
rize his prodigality and Voluptuouſneſs, to which he make a
tranſition. Dryden.
TRANsitive, adj. [tranſitivus, Lat.]
i. Having the power of paſſing.
One cauſe of cold is the contad of cold bodies; for cold
is active and tranſitive into bodies adjacent, as well as heat.
Bacon's Nat. Hºſ. No, 7o.
2. [In grammar.]
A verb tranſitive is that which ſignifies an ačtion, con-
ceived as having an effect upon ſome object; as ſerio terram,
I ſtrike the earth. Clarke's Latin Grammar.
TRANSItoRILY. adv. [from tranſitory.] With ſpeedy eva.
neſcence ; with ſhort continuancé.
TRANSI toRINEss. n.ſ. [from tranſitºry..] Speedy evaneſcence.
TRA’NSITORY.. n. ſ: [tranſitoire, Fr. tranſitorius, from tran-
ſea, Latin.] Continuing but a ſhort time; ſpeedily vaniſh-
ing.
If we love things have ſought; age is a thing
Which we are fifty years in compaſſing:
If tranſitory things, which ſoon decay,
Age muſt be lovelieſt at the lateſt day. Donne.
Religion prefers thoſe pleaſures which flow from the pre-
ſence of God evermore, infinitely before the tranſitory plea-
ſures of this world. Tillotſon's Sermons.
To TRANSEATE. v. n. [tranſlatus, Lat.]
I. To tranſport; to remove.
Since our father is tranſlated unto the gods, our will is
that they that are in our realm live quietly. , 2 Mac. xi. 23.
By faith Enoch was tranſlated that he ºld not ſee death.
- Pieb. xi. 5.
Thoſe argent fields -
Tranſlated ſaints or middle ſpirits hold. Milton.
Of the ſame ſoil their nurſery prepare
With that of their plantation, left the tree
Tranſlated ſhould not with the ſoil agree. Dryden.
The gods their ſhapes to winter birds tranſlate,
But both obnoxious to their former fate. Dryden.
Tº go to heaven is to be tranſlated to that kingdom you
have longed for ; to enjoy the glories of eternity. //ake.
* It is particularly uſed of the removal of a biſhop from one
ſee to another.
*iſher, biſhop of Rocheſter, when the king would have
tranſated him from that poor biſhoprick to a better, he re-
fuſed, ſaying, he would not forſake his poor little old wife,
with whom he had ſo long lived. Camden's Remains.
3. To transfer from one to another; to convey.
I will tranſlate the kingdom from the houſe of Saul, and
ſet up the throne of David. 2 Sam. iii. Io.
Becauſe of ºnrighteous dealings the kingdom is tranſlated
from one people to another. Eccluſ x. 8.
Lucian affirms the ſouls of uſurers, after their death, to
be metempſychoſed, or tranſlated into the bodies of aſſes,
there to remain for poor men to take their pennyworths out
of their bones and ſides with the cudgel and ſpur. Peacham.
As there are apoplexies from invetrate gouts, the regimen
- -
T R A
ºut be to tranſlate the "orbifick matter upon the extremi-
Arbuthnoi.
ties of the body. -
Perverſe mankind ! whoſe wills, created free,
Charge all their Woes on abſolute decree; *
All to the dooming gods their guilt tranſlate,
And follies are miſcall'd the crimes of fate.
4. To change.
9ne do I perſonate of Timon's frame,
Whom fortune with her iv'ry hand waſ: to her
hoſe preſent §ºe to preſent ſlaves and ſervants
77 anſlates his fivals. Shakeſp. Timon ºf Athen;
Happy is your grace, -
º can tranſlate the ſtubbºrnn's of fortune -
º *}o quiet and ſo ſweet a ſtyle. Shakeſø. * -, -
5. [. Tranſlater, old Fr.] To imº in .. ſº i.
change into another language retaining the ſenſe, &gt; * &gt;
I can conſtrue the aćtion of her familiar ſtile, and the
hardeſt voice of her behaviour, to be engliſhed right, is, I
an Si John Falſtaffs.” “ 3 is 2
–He hath ſtudied her well, and tranſlated her out of ho-
neſty into Engliſh. Shakeſp. 4/erry //; ves of I/indſºr.
or word for word too faithfully tranſlate. A/common.
Read this ere you tranſlate one bit
Of books of high renown. Swift.
Were it meant that in deſpite
Qf art and nature ſuch diji clods ſhould write,
Bavius and Maevius had been ſav'd by fate
For Settle and for Shadwi, tranſlate. Daše.
6. To explain. A low colloquial uſe. - -
There's matter in theſ. ſighs, theſe profound heaves
You Inuſt tranſlate; is fit". underſtand them. Shakespeare
TRANslation. ... J. [tranſlatio, Lat. tranſlation, Fr.]
1. Removal; act of removing.
His diſeaſe was an aſthma; the cauſe a metaſtaſis or tranſ-
*tion of humours from his joints to his lungs. Harvey.
Žia'ſations of morbifick matter ariſe in acute diſłempers.
Arbuthnot.
2. The removal of a biſhop to another ſee.
Pº.
If part of the People be ſomewhat in the election, you
Sannot make them nulls or Cyphers in the privation or tº:
/ation. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
The king, the next time the biſhop of London came to
him, entertained him with this compellation, my lord's grace
of Canterbury, you are *Y welcome ; and gave order for
all the neceſſary forms for the tranſlation. Clarendon.
3. The act of turning into another language; interpretation.
A book of his travels hath been honoured with tranſlation
into many languages. Brºwn's Wulgar Errours, b, i.
Nor ought a genius leſs than his that writ,
Attempt tranſlation ; for tranſplanted wit,
All the defects ef air and ſoil doth ſhare,
And colder brains like colder clima. 3Ie.
4. Something made by tranſlation; verſion.
Of both tranſlations, the better i acknowledge that which
cometh nearer to the very letter of the very original verity.
- Aooker, b. v.
T.ANslator. n.ſ. ſtra/oteur, old Fr. from tranſlate.] One
that turns any thing into another language.
A new and nobler way thou doit perſue,
To make tranſlations and tranſlators too. Denham.
No tranſlation our own Country ever yet produced, hath
“”. Pºo that of the Old and New Teſtament, and I 3 In
Perſiaded, that the tranſlators of the Bible wer. maſters of
an Engliſh ſtile much fitter for that work than any we ſee in
our preſent writings, the which is owing to the ſimplicity
that runs through the whole. Swift.
TRANSLA’roRy, n. / [from tranſlate.] Transferring.
The tranſatory is a lie that transfers the merit of a man's
good action to another more deſerving. . . Arbuthnot.
TRANslocA'tion. */ [trans and locis, Latin.) Removal of
things reciprocally to each others places. -
here happened certain tranſlocations at the deluge, the
matter conſtituting animal and vegetable ſubſtances being diſ-
ſolved, and mineral matter ſubſtituted in its place, and thereby
like tranſlocation of metals in ſome ſprings. - Iſoodward.
TRANSLU'cency. n: ſ [from tranſlucent.J Diaphaneity; tran-
ſparency. -
Lumps of rock cryſtal heated red hot, then quenched in
fair water, exchanged their tranſlucency for whiteneſs, the ig-
nition and extinétion having cracked each lump into a muj-
titude of minute bodies. Boyle an Colours.
TRANSLU'CEN I’, adj. [trans and luºns or lucidus Lat.]
TRANSLU'CID. ; | ranſparent; diaphanous; clear;
ivin aſſage to the light. - -
*:::::: th. ſpirits º and wax eager; which is ſeen
Denham.
in the eyes, becauſe they are tranſlucid. • Bacon.
Wherever fountain or freſh current flow'd -
Againſt the eaſtern ray, tranſlucent, pure,
With touch aetherial of heav'n's fiery rod, .
Milton.
I drank. - - -
The golden ewer a maid obſequious brings, -
Repleniſh'd from the cool tranſlucent ſprings. Popº's Ody.
4. TRANs-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
T R A
- rºar; in. ſing on the
Ta A'N's MARINr. adj. [tranſfºrt"; Latin.] Lying
- dº of the ſea; found beyond ſea. -
º i. not tº drained this way, ſhe might have made
- ":-- - t tranſmarine neigh-
rſelf miſtreſs of Timaurania, her nex ſ &gt; s's
herſe Howel's Wocal Foreſ'.
bour.
To rºa'ssMew. v. a. ſtranſºn*, Lat. tranſmuer, French J
To tranſmute; to transform 5 to metamorphoſe ; to change.
Obſolete.
when him liſt the raſcal routs appall,
Men into ſtones therewith he could tranſmew,
And ſtones to duſt, and duſt to nought at all. Fa. 2ueen.
TRANsmic RANT, adj. [tranſmigrans, Lat..] Paſſing into an-
other country or ſtate. - -
Beſides an union in ſovereignty, or a conjunétion in paćts,
there are other implicit confederations, that of colonies or
tranſmigrants towards their mother nation: Bacºn's hº //ar.
To TRA'ssMigrate. v. m. [tranſmigro, Lat..] To paſs from
one place or country into another: -
This complexion is maintain’d by generation; ſo that
ſhangers contračt it not, and the natives which tranſmigrate
omit it not without commixture. Brown's Pulgar Erraurº.
If Pythagoras's tranſanimation were true, that the ſouls of
men tranſmigrating into ſpecies anſwering their former natures,
ſome men muſt live over many ſerpents. Brown's Wulg. Err.
Their ſouls may tranſmigrate into each other. Howel.
Regard
The port of Luna, ſays our learned bard;
Who, in a drunken dream, beheld his ſoul
The fifth within the tranſmigrating roll. Dryden.
TRANSMIGRA’tion. m. ſ. [tranſmigration, Fr. from tranſmi-
grate.] Paſſage from one place or ſtate into another.
The ſequel of the conjunction of natures in the perſon
of Chriſt is no aboliſhment of natural properties appertaining
to either ſubſtance, no tranſition or tranſmigration thereof out
of one ſubſtance into another. Hooker, b. v.
Seeing the earth of itſelf puts forth plants without ſeed,
plants may well have a tranſmigration of ſpecies. Bacon.
From the opinion of the metempſychoſis, or tranſmigra-
tion of the ſouls of men into the bodies of beaſts, moſt ſuit-
able unto their human condition, after his death, Orpheus
the muſician became a ſwan. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Eaſing their paſſage hence, for intercourſe
Of tranſmigration, as their lot ſhall lead. Milton,
'Twas taught by wiſe Pythagoras,
One ſoul might through more bodies paſs:
Seeing ſuch tranſmigration there,
She thought it not a fable here. Denham,
When thou wert form’d, heav'n did a man begin,
But the brute ſoul by chance was ſhuffled in :
In woods and wilds thy monarchy maintain,
Where valiant beaſts, by force and rapine, reign.
In life's next ſcene, if tranſmigration be,
Some bear or lion is reſerv'd for thee. Dryden's Aureng.
TRANSM1'ssion. m. ſ. [tranſmiſſion, Fr. tranſmiſſils, Latin.]
The act of ſending from one place to another, or from one
perſon to another. -
If there were any ſuch notable tranſmiſſion of a colony
hither out of Spain, the very chronicles of Spain would not
have omitted ſo memorable a thing. . Spenſer on Ireland.
Operations by tranſmiſſion of ſpirits is one of the higheſt
ſecrets in nature. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 236.
In the tranſmiſſion of the ſea-water into the pits, the water
riſeth ; but in the tranſmiſſion of the water through the veſſels
it falleth. Bacon.
Theſe move ſwiftly, but then they require a medium well
diſpoſed, and their tra’ſmiſſion is eaſily ſtopped. Bacon.
The uvea has a muſculous power, and can dilate and con-
tract that round hole in it called the pupil, for the better
moderating the tranſmiſſion of light. More.
Languages of countries are loſt by tranſmiſſion of colonies
of a different language. Halº's Origin of Mankind.
This enquiry will be of uſe, as a parallel diſcovery of the
tº anſmiſſion of the Engliſh laws into Scotland. Hale.
Their reflexion or tranſmiſſion depends on the conſtitution
of the air and water behind the glaſs, and not the ſtriking of
the rays upon the parts of the glaſs. ſewton's Opticks.
TRANSMI'ssive. adj. [from tranſmiſſis, Lat..] Tranſmitted;
derived from one to another.
And ſtill the fire inculcates to his ſon
Tºſniffive leſſons of the king's renown. Prizr.
- Itſelf a fun ; it with tranſmiſſive light
Enlivens worlds deny'd to human ſight. Prior.
Then grateful Greece with ſtreaming eyes would raiſe
Hiſtorick marbles to record his praiſe ;
His praiſe eternal on the faithful ſtone,
T Had with tº anſmiſſive honour grac'd his ſon. Pope.
o TRAN's M1 r. v. . [tranſmitta, Lat. tranſmettre, Fr.] To
ſend from one perſon or place to another. ~
Yºans of writing, former ages tranſmit the memorials
of #". times and things to poſterity. Hale.
º his friend in Spain to ſell his eſtate, and
- 7 money to him, Addison's Speci. Nº. 198.
Thus flouriſh'd love, and beauty reign'd in ſtate
Till the proud Spaniard gave this glory's date.”
Paſt is the gallantry, the ſame remains,
Tranſmitted ſafe in Dryden's lofty ſcenes. Granvil,
Shine forth, ye planets, with diſtinguiſh’d light; 4.
Again tranſmit your friendly beams to earth, S” - ?
As when Britannia joy'd for Anna's birth. Prior
TRANSM1'TTAL. m. ſ. [from tranſmit.] The ad of trait.
ting; tranſmiſſion.
Beſides the tranſmittal to England of two-thirds of the re-
venues of Ireland, they make our country a receptacle for
their ſupernumerary pretenders to offices. Swift
TRANs.MU'TABLE. adj. [tranſmuable, Fr. from tranſmiſj
Capable of change; poſſible to be changed into another na.
ture or ſubſtance.
It is no eaſy matter to demonſtrate that air is ſo much as
convertible into water; how tranſmutable it is unto fleſh may
be of deeper doubt. Brown's Wulg. Err. b. iii.
The fluids and ſolids of an animal body are eaſily tranſ-
mutable into one another. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
TRANSMu'tably, adv. [from tranſmute.] With capacity of
being changed into another ſubſtance or nature.
TRANsm UTA'Tion. m. ſ. [tranſmutation, Fr. tranſmutatio, from
tranſmuto, Latin.] Change into another nature or ſubſtance,
The great aim of alchemy is the tranſmutation of baſe me-
tals into gold.
Am not I old Sly's ſon, by birth a pedlar, by education a
cardmaker, by tranſmutation a bear herd. Shakeſpeare,
The tranſmutation of plants one into another, is inter mag-
malia nature, for the tranſmutation of ſpecies is, in the vulgar
philoſophy, pronounced impoſſible; but ſeeing there appear
ſome manifeſt inſtances of it, the opinion of impoſſibility is
to be reječted, and the means thereof to be found out. Bac.
The converſion into a body merely new, and which was
not before ; as ſilver to gold, or iron to copper, is better
called, for diſtinétion ſake, tranſmutation. Bacon.
The ſame land ſuffereth fundry tranſmutations of owners
within one term. Bacon's Office of Alienation.
The changing of bodies into light, and light into bodies,
is very conformable to the courſe of nature, which ſeems
delighted with tranſmutations. Water, which is a very fluid
taſteleſs ſalt, ſhe changes by heat into vapour, which is a
ſort of air, and by cold into ice, which is a hard, pellucid,
brittle, fuſible ſtone; and this ſtone returns into water by
heat, and water returns into vapour by cold. Newton.
The ſuppoſed change of worms into flies is no real tranſ-
mutation; but moſt of thoſe members, which at laſt be-
come viſible to the eye, are exiſtent at the beginning, arti-
ficially complicated together. Bentley's Sermons.
To TRANs Mū‘TE. v. n. [tranſmuto, Lat. tranſnier, French.]
To change from one nature or ſubſtance to another.
Suidas thinks, that by the golden fleece was meant a gol-
den book of parchment which is of ſheeps-ſkin, and there-
fore called golden, becauſe it was taught therein how ºther
metals might be tranſmuted. Raleigh,
That metals may be tranſmuted one into another I am not
ſatisfied of the fact. Ray on the Creation.
Patience ſov’reign o'er tranſmuted ill. Pan, of hu.”
TRANSMU'TER. m. ſ. [from tranſmute.] One that tranſmutº.
TRA'Nsom. m. ſ. [tranſenna, Lat.]
1. A thwart beam or lintel over a door.
2. [Among mathematicians.] The vane of an inſtrument called
a croſs ſtaff, being a piece of wood fixed acroſs with a lºº
ſocket upon which it ſlides. Bailey,
TRANSPA'RENcy. m. ſ. [tranſparence, Fr. from tranſaſºit.]
Clearneſs; diaphaneity; tranſlucence; power of tranſmitting
light.
A poet of another nation would not have dwelt ſo long
upon the clearneſs and tranſparency of the ſtream but in
Italy one ſeldom fees a river that is extremely bright and lim-
- - #ſº.
pid, moſt of them being muddy. #.
Another cauſe is the greater tranſparency of the sº
- rpt/I//&gt;
caſioned by the thinneſs and delicacy of their coats. -
TRANSPARENT, n.ſ.. [tranſparent, Fr. trans and sº
Latin.] Pervious to the light; clear; pellucid; diaphanous ;
tranſlucent ; not opaque. -
Nor ſhines the filver moon one half ſo bright,
Through the tranſparent boſom of the deep,
As doth thy face through tears of mine give
Thou ſhin'ſ in every tear that I do weep.
wait upon him with whom you ſpeak with yº" d tº at-
there be many wiſe men that have ſecret hº º:
Jparent countenances. Bacon'; Eſſays, Nº. 23.
Each thought was viſible that roll'd within, -
As through a cryſtal caſe the figur’d hours are ſcen;
And heav'n did this tranſparent veil provide,
light,
Shakeſpeare.
eye; for
den.
Becauſe ſhe had no guilty thought to hide. º
Her boſom appeared all of chryſtal, and ſo wº
tranſparent, that I ſaw every thought in her heart.
Tranſparent forms, too fine for mortal fight, Pºpe,
Their fluid bodies half-diſſolv’d in light. TRANspicuovº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
* Tranſport her purpoſes by word.
TRANspicuous. adj. [trans and ſpecio, Latin.] Tranſparent;
pervious to the fight.
What if that light,
Sent from her through the widé tranſpicuous air,
To the terreſtrial moon be as a ſtar. Milton,
Now thy wine's tranſpicuous, purg'd from all
Its earthy groſs, yet let it feed awhile
On the fat refuſe. Philips.
To TRANSP1’ER ce. v. m. [tranſferrer, Fr. trans and pierce.]
To penetrate ; to make way through; to permeate.
A mind, which through each part infus’d doth paſs,
Faſhions and works, and wholly doth tran pierce -
All this great body of the univerſe. Raleigh's H. of the ſº.
His forceful ſpear, which, hiſſing as it flew, .
Pierc'd through the yielding planks of jointed wood:
The ſides tranſpie, c'd return a rattling ſound,
And groans of Greeks inclos'd came iſſuing through the
wound. Dryden’s AEn.
TRANSPIRA"tion. n.ſ. [tranſpiration, Fr.] Emiſſion in va-
Our.
P That a bullet dipped in oil, by preventing the tranſpiration
of air, will carry farther, and pierce deeper, my experience
cannot diſcern. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii.
The tram piration of the obſtructed fluidis imagined to be
one of the ways that an inflammation is removed. Sharp.
To TRANSPIRE. v. a. [tranſpiro, Lat. tranſpirer, French.]
To emit in vapour.
To TRANSPI'RE. v. n. [tranſpirer, Fr.]
1. To be emitted by inſenſible vapour.
The nuts when freſh got are full of a ſoft pulpy matter,
which in time tranſpires, and paſſes through the ſhell.
J/oodward on Foſſils.
2. To eſcape from ſecreſy to notice: a ſenſe lately innovated
from France, without neceſſity.
To TRANsplace. v. a. [trans and place.] To remove; to
put into a new place.
It was tranſplaced from the left ſide of the Vatican unto a
more eminent place. Jºilkins's Math. Magick.
To TRANSPLANT. v. a. [trans and planto, Lat. tranſplan-
ter, Fr.]
1. To remove and plant in a new place.
The nobleſt fruits tranſplanted in our iſle,
With early hope and fragrant bloſſoms ſmile. Rºſcommon.
Salopian acres flouriſh with a growth,
Peculiar ſtil'd the Ottley; be thou firſt
This apple to tranſplant. Phillips.
If any tranſplant themſelves into plantations abroad, who
are ſchiſmaticks or outlaws, ſuch are not fit to lay the foun-
dation of a new colony. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
2. To remove.
Of light the greater part he took
Tranſplanted from her cloudy ſhrine, and plac'd
In the ſun’s orb. Milton.
He proſpered at the rate of his own wiſhes, being tranſ-
planted out of his cold barren dioceſe of Saint David's into a
warmer climate. Clarendon.
TRANSPLANTATION. n.ſ.. [tranſplantation, Fr.]
1. The act of tranſplanting or removing to another ſoil.
It is confeſſed, that love changed often doth nothing; nay,
it is nothing; for love where it is kept fixed to its firſt off.
ject, though it burn not, yet it warms and cheriſhes, ſo as it
needs no tranſplantation, or change of ſoil, to make it fruit-
ful. Suckling.
2. Conveyance from one to another.
What noiſe have we had for ſome years about tranſplanta-
tion of diſeaſes, and transfuſion of blood. Baker.
3. Removal of men from one country to another. - -
Moſt of kingdoms have throughly felt the calamities of
forcible tranſplantations, being either overwhelmed by new
colonies that fell upon them, or driven, as one wave is driven
by another to ſeek new ſeats, having loſt their own. Raleigh.
This appears a replication to what Menelaus had offered
concerning the tranſplantation of Ulyſſes to Sparta. Broome.
TRANSPLA'NTER. n. ſ. [from tranſplant.] One that tranſ-
plants.
To TRANSPO'Rt. v. a. [trans and porto, Latin; tranſporter,
French.]
1. To convey by carriage from place to place.
I came hither to tranſport the tidings. - Shakeſpeare.
Why ſhould ſhe write to Edmund'ſ might not you
Shakeſpeare.
Impoſe upon men the tranſportation of rivers from one end
of the world to the other, which, among other uſes, were
made to tranſport men. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the World.
A ſubterranean wind tranſports a hill
Torn from Pilorus. Milton.
In the diſturbances of a ſtate, the wiſe Pomponius tran-
ſºrted all the remaining wiſdom and virtue of his country
into the ſanctuary of peace and learning. Dryden.
2. To carry into baniſhment: as a felon.
We return aſter being t aſported, and are ten times greater
rogucs than before, Swift.
T R A
3. To ſentence as a felon to baniſhment.
4. To hurry by violence of paſſion.
You are tranſported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you ſlander
*-
The helms o' th' ſtate
- :----. Shakespeare :
They laugh as if traº?orted with ſome fit Shakespeare
9. paſſion. Miſion
ſhew him Once tran ted b ; : - - -
paſſion. ºffºrted by the violence of a ſudden
If il - - Dryden.
**!!y,not immediately concerned Contribute more than
the principal Party, he ought to have his ſhare in what is
Sonquered; or if his romantick diſpoſition tranſport him ſo
far as to expect little **othing, they ſhould mise it up in
dignity. ‘ºn ºr
5. To put into ecſtaſy; to raviſh with pleaſure. Swift.
Here tranſported I hºhold, tranſported touch. Milton.
Thoſe on whom Chriſt beſtowed miraculous Cures were ſo
º with them, that their gratitude ſupplanted their
Obedience. Decay of Pi
TRANspor T. n. / [tranſport, Fr. from the verb.] y ºf Piety.
I. Tranſportation; carriage; conveyance.
The Romans neglected their maritime affairs; for they
ſtipulated with the Carthaginians to furniſh them with ſhips
for tranſport and war. Arbuthnot on Coil.
2. A veſſel of carriage; Particularly a veſſel in which ſoldiers
are conveyed.
Nor dares his tranſport veſſel croſs the waves,
With ſuch whoſe bones are not compos'd in graves. Dryd.
Some ſpoke of the men of war only, and others added
the tranſports. Arbuthnot on Coins.
3. Rapture; ecſtaſy.
A truly pious mind receives a temporal bleſfing with gra-
titude, a ſpiritual one with ecſtaſy and tranſport. Sºuth, sºm.
TRANspo'RTANce. n: ſ [from tranſport.) Conveyance; car-
riage; removal.
O, be thou my Charon,
And give me ſwift tranſportance to thoſe fields,"
Where I may wallow in the lilly beds
Propos'd for the deſerverſ Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
**Nsportation. n. / [from tranſpºt.j
1. Removal; conveyancé; carriage.
Sir Francis Cottington and Mr. Endymion Porter had been
ſent before to provide a veſſel for their tranſportation.
Wotton's Life of Buckingham.
Some were not ſo ſolicitous to provide againſt the plague,
as to know whether we had it from the malignity of our own
air, or by tranſportation. Dryden.
2. Baniſhment for felony.
3. Ecſtatick violence of paſſion.
All pleaſures that affect the body muſt needs weary, be-
cauſe they tranſport, and all tranſportation is a violence; and
no violence can be laſting but determines upon the falling of
the ſpirits. South.
TRANsporter. m. ſ. [from tranſport.] One that tranſports.
The pilchard merchant may reap a ſpeedy benefit by diſ.
patching, ſaving, and ſelling to the tranſporters. 8.
TRANsposal. n.ſ.. [from tranſpoſe.] Thé ačt of putting things
in each other's place. - Swift.
To TRANSPOSE. v. a. [tranſpoſer, French; tranſpºſtum,
Latin.
1. To #. each in the place of other.
The letters of Elizabetha regina tranſpoſed ſignify, O Eng-
land's ſovereign, thou haſt made us happy. Camden's Rem.
7"anſfºſe the propoſitions, making the medius terminus
the predicate of the firſt and the ſubječt of the ſecond, i.i.
2. To put out of place.
That which you are my thoughts cannot tranſpoſe;
Angels are bright ſtill, though the brighteſt fell. Shakeſp.
TRANsposition. m. ſ. [tranſpoſition, Fr. from tranſpoſe.]
1. The act of putting one thing in the place of another.
2. The ſtate of being put out of one place into another. -
The common centre of gravity in the terraqueous globe is
ſteady, and not liable to any accidental tranſpoſition, nor hath
it ever ſhifted its ſtation. Iłoodward's Nat. Hiſł. p. i.
To TRANssha'pe. v. a. [trans and ſhape.] To transform; to
bring into another ſhape.
f tell thee how ºffice prais'd thy wit: I ſaid thou hadſt
a fine wit; right, ſaid ſhe, a fine little one ; nay, ſaid I, he
hath the tongues; that I believe, ſaid ſhe for he ſwore a
thing to me on Monday night which he forſwore on Tueſday
morning; there's a double tongue: thus did ſhe tanſhape
thy particular virtues. Shakeſp. Much ado about nothing:
To TRANSUBSTANTIATE. v. a. [tranſubſtantier, Fr.]
To change to another ſubſtance. -
O ſelf traitor, I do bring
The ſpider love which tranſul/fantiates all,
And can convert manna to gall. . IDonne.
Nor ſeemingly, but with keen diſpatch
Of real hunger, and concočtive heat -
To tranſal/antiate; what redounds, tranſpires -
Through ſpirits with eaſe. - Milton.
26 U TRAN-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
T R A
i
- tranſubſtantiation, Fr.] A mi-
sursranri Arios: "...ſº I - - -
Tº operation believed in the Romiſh church, in which
the elements of the cºchariſt are ſuppoſed to be changed into
the real body and blood of CHRIST. l
How is a Romaniſt prepared eaſily to ſwallow, not only
all probability, but even the clear evidence of his
ºnſes, the doctrine of trawſuiſtantiation * Locke.
T.A.Nst pation. n.ſ.. [from tranſuda.] The ad of paſſing in
ſweat, or perſpirable vapour, through any integument.
The drops proceeded not from the tranſudation of the
liquors within the glaſs. Boyle.
T. FRANSUDE. v. n. [trans and ſudo, Latin.] To paſs
through in vapour.
Purulent fumes cannot be tranſmitted throughout the body
before the maturation of an apoſthem, nor after, unleſs the
humour break; becauſe they cannot tranſude through the bag
of an apoſthem. Harvey on Conſumptions.
TRAnsversal. adj. [tranſveſal, Fr. trans and verſali, Lat.]
Running croſſwiſe.
An aſcending line, dire&amp;t, as from ſon to father, or grand-
father, is not admitted by the law of England; or in the
as to the uncle or aunt, great-uncle or great-
againſt
tram, verſal line,
aunt. Hale.
TRANsve'Rs Ally. adv. [from tranſverſal.] In a croſs direct
tion.
There are divers ſubtile enquiries and demonſtrations con-
cerning the ſeveral proportions of ſwiftneſs and diſtance in an
arrow ſhot vertically, horizontally, or tranſverſally. Wilkins.
TRANSWE'RSE. adj. [tranſverſus, Latin.] Being in a croſs
direčtion.
His violent touch
Fled and purſu'd tranſveſe the reſonant fugue. Milton.
Part in ſtrait lines, part in tranſverſe are found,
One forms a crooked figure, one a round;
The entrails theſe embrace in ſpiral ſtrings,
Thoſe claſp th’ arterial tubes in tender rings. Blackmore.
What natural agent could impel them ſo ſtrongly with a
tranſverſe fide-blow againſt that tremendous weight and rapi-
dity, when whole worlds are a falling! Bentley’s Sermons.
*TRANsve'R's ELY. adv. [from tranſverſe.] In a croſs direc-
tlOn.
At Stonehenge the ſtones lie tranſverſely upon each other.
- Stillingfleet.
In all the fibres of an animal there is a contračtile power;
to the heart, have valves and trapdoors which open inward
ſo as to give way into the blood to run into the heart rds,
To TRAPE. v. a. [commonly written to traitſ. priº f
the ſame original with drab.j To run idly and fluttiſhly *
It is uſed only of women. -
TRAPEs. n.ſ. [I ſuppoſe from trape.] An idle flatternly woman
He found the fullen trapes
Poſſeſt with th' devil, worms, and claps. Hall ---
From door to door I’d ſooner whine and beg, raj, p. iii.
Than marry ſuch a trapes. Gay's I. hi dye call it
TRA'pstick. m. ſ. ſtrap and /lick.] A ſtick with which boys
drive a wooden ball.
A fooliſh ſwoop between a couple of thick bandy legs and
two long trapſticks that had no calfs. Spect.' Nº. 5,
TRAPE'ziuM. m. ſ. (Tparić ov; trapeſe, French.] A quadri-
lateral figure, whoſe four ſides are not equal, and non; cf.
ſides parallel. Dić
Two of the lateral trapezia are as broad. Jºãº.
TRAPEzo'ID. n.ſ. [7parigo, and sº trapeſ?ide, Fr.] An
irregular figure, whoſe four ſides are not parallel. Diä
TRAPPINGs. m. ſ. [This word Minſhew derives from drap,
French, cloath.]
1. Ornaments appendant to the ſaddle. -
Capariſons and ſteeds,
Baſes and tinſel trappings, gorgeous knights
At jouſt and tournament. Miltºn,
2. Ornaments; dreſs; embelliſhments; external, ſuperficial,
and trifling decoration.
Theſe indeed ſeem,
But I have that within which paſſeth ſhew;
Theſe but the tratpings and the ſuits of woe, Shakºftart,
He has fair words, rich trappings, and large promiſes; but
works only for his maſter. L'Érangº.
The points of honour poets may produce,
Trappings of life, for ornament, not uſe. Dryden,
Such pageantry be to the people ſhown;
There boaſt thy horſe's traºpings, and thy own. Dryder,
Draw him ſtrictly ſo,
That all who view the piece may know
He needs no trappings of fictitious fame, Dydın.
In ſhips decay’d no mariner confides,
Lur’d by the gilded ſtern and painted ſides;
Yet at a ball unthinking fools delight,
In the gay trappings of a birth-day night. Swift.
for if a fibre be cut tranſverſely, both the ends ſhrink and TRASH. m. ſ. [tros, Iſlandick; druſen, German.]
make the wound gape. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
TRANsu'Mption. n.ſ.. [trans and ſumo, Latin.] The act of
taking from one place to another.
TRAN'T ERs. n.ſ. Men who carry fiſh from the ſea-coaſts to
ſell in the inland countries. Bailey.
TRAP. m. ſ. ſcrappe, Saxon; trape, Fr. trappola, Italian.]
I. A ſnare ſet for thieves or vermin.
Die as thou ſhouldeſt, but do not die impatiently, and like
a fox catched in a trap. Taylor's holy living.
The trap ſprings and catches the ape by the fingers. L’Eſir.
2. An ambuſh ; a ſtratagem to betray or catch unawares.
And lurking cloſely, in await now lay,
How he might any in his trap betray. Spenſºr.
God and your majeſty
Protećt mine innocence, or I fall into
The trap is laid for me. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
They continually laid traps to enſnare him, and made fini-
ſter interpretations of all the good he did. Calamy.
He ſeems a trap for charity to lay,
And cons by night his leſſon for the day. Dryden.
3. A play at which a ball is driven with a ſtick.
Unruly boys learn to wrangle at trap, or rook at ſpan-far-
thing. Locke on Education.
He that of feeble nerves and joints complains,
From nine-pins, coits, and from trap-ball abſtains. King.
To TRAP. v. a. [znappan, Saxon.]
1. To enſnare ; to catch by a ſnare or ambuſh; to take by
ſtratagem.
My brain, more buſy than the lab'ring ſpider,
Weaves tedious ſnares to trap mine enemies. Shakeſp.
If you require my deeds, with ambuſh'd arms
I trapp'd the foe, or tir'd with falſe alarms. Dryden.
2. [Sce TRAPPING..] To adorn; to decorate.
The ſteed that bore him
Was trapp'd with poliſh'd ſteel, all ſhining bright,
And covered with th' atchievements of the knight. Spenſer.
To ſpoil the dead of weed is ſacrilege:
But leave theſe reliques of his living might
To deck his hearſe and trap his tomb black ſteed. Fa. Qu.
- º Lucius preſented to you four milk-white horſes trapt
T º, . º, n.ſ.. [t Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
ting º rap and door.] A door opening and ſhut-
he arteries which carry from the heart to the ſeveral
Parts have valves which open outward like trapdoors, and give .
the blood a free Paſſage; and the veins, which bring it back
1. Any thing worthleſs ; droſs; dregs.
Lay hands upon theſe traitors, and their traſh. Shakespeare .
Look what a wardrobe here is for thee!
—Let it alone, thou fool, it is but traſh. Shakeſpeare.
Who ſteals my purſe, ſteals traſh; 'tis ſomething, no-
thing;
*Twas mine, 'tis his ; and has been ſlave to thouſands.
But he that filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
And makes me poor indeed. Shakeſpeare': Othelh,
More than ten Hollenſhed's, or Hall's, or Stow's,
Of trivial houſhold traſh he knows; he knows
When the queen frown'd or ſmil’d. Dinº
The collectors only conſider, the greater fame a writº."
in poſſeſſion of, the more traſh he may bear to have tacked
to him. Swift.
Weak fooliſh man I will heav'n reward us there
With the ſame traſh mad mortals wiſh for here? Pºſt,
2. A worthleſs perſon.
I ſuſpećt this traſh *
To be a party in this injury. Shałºffeare'. Othº.
3. Matter improper for food, frequently eaten by girls in the
green ſickneſs. Garth
O that inſtead of traſ, thou’dſt taken ſteel. :
4. I believe that the original ſignification of tra!” the lopping
of trees, from the verb. ... -
To T R As H. v. a.
1. To lop ; to crop. -
Being once perſeded how to grant ſuits, h
How to deny them; whom t' advance: and whomTempſi.
To traſh for overtopping. Shakeſpeare's
2. To cruſh ; to humble.
Not ſuch as was fit to be impoſed on hard-hearted Jº
to encumber and traſh them, but ſuch as becomes &amp; in.
nuous people. ſº *::::: t
TRA's HY. adj. [from traſh.] Wºº. º that traſh
A judicious reader will diſcover in - ryden.
ſtuff, whoſe glittering deceived him in the action.
To TRA’v AIL. v. n. [travailler, Fr.]
1. To labour; to toil. - - - -- *
2. To be in labour; to ſuffer the pain; of diº, xxiii. 4.
I travail not, nor bring forth children. , h and paint
She being with child cried, travailing in birth, Rev. xii. ?
to be delivered. - wail, with the obli-
His heart is in continual labour; it "“” South', sº
Q
gation, and is in pangs till it be delivered.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R A
!.
º
---,
To TRA’v AIL. v. a. To harraſs; to tire.
As if all theſe troubles had not been ſufficient to travail
the realm, a great diviſion fell among the nobility. Hayward.
A gleam of light turn'd thitherward in haſte
His travell'd ſteps. Milton.
TRA'v Ail. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Labour; toil; fatigue.
As every thing of price, ſo this doth require travail. Hook.
Such impotent perſons as are unable for ſtrong travail, are
yet able to drive cattle to and fro to their paſture. Spenſºr.
2. Labour in childbirth.
In the time of her travail twins were in her. Gen. xxxviii.
To procure eaſy travails of women, the intention is to
bring down the child, but not too faſt. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Tr Ave, TRAve./L, or TRAvi's E. n.ſ. A wooden frame for
ſhoeing unruly horſes. Ainſworth.
To TRAVEL. v. n. [This word is generally ſuppoſed origi-
nally the ſame with travail, and to differ only as particular
from general : in ſome writers the word is written alike in
all its ſenſes; but it is more convenient to write travail for
labour, and travel for journey.]
1. To make journeys: it is uſed for ſea as well as land, though
ſometimes we diſtinguiſh it from voyage, a word appropriated
to the ſea.
In the foreſt ſhall ye lodge, O ye travelling companies of
Dedanim. Iſa. xxi. 13.
Raphael deign'd to travel with Tobias. Milton.
Fain wou'd I travel to ſome foreign ſhore,
So might I to myſelf myſelf reſtore. Dryden.
If others believed he was an Egyptian from his knowledge
of their rites, it proves at leaſt that he travelled there. Pope.
2. To paſs; to go; to move.
By th' clock 'tis day;
And yet dark night ſtrangles the travelling lamp. Shakeſp.
Time travels in divers paces, with divers perſons; I'll tell
you who time ambles withal, who time trots withal. Shakeſp.
Thus flying Eaſt and Weſt, and North and South,
News travell'd with increaſe from mouth to mouth. Pope.
3. To make journeys of curioſity.
Nothing tends ſo much to enlarge the mind as travelling,
that is, making a viſit to other towns, cities, or countries,
beſide thoſe in which we were born and educated. J/atts.
4. To labour; to toil. This ſhould be rather travail.
If we labour to maintain truth and reaſon, let not any
think that we travel about a matter not needful. Hooker.
I’ve watch'd and travell'd hard;
Some time I ſhall ſleep out; the reſt I’ll whiſtle. Shakeſp.
To TRA’v EL. v. a.
1. To paſs; to journey over.
Thither to arrive I travel thus profound. Milton.
2. To force to journey.
There are other privileges granted unto moſt of the cor-
porations, that they ſhall not be charged with garriſons, and
they ſhall not be travelled forth of their own franchiſes. Spenſ.
TRA’vel. n.ſ.. [travail, Fr. from the noun.]
1. Journey; act of paſſing from place to place.
Love had cut him ſhort,
Confin'd within the purlieus of his court.
Three miles he went, nor farther could retreat,
His travels ended at his country-ſeat. Dryden.
Mingled ſend into the dance
Moments fraught with all the treaſures,
Which thy eaſtern travel views. Prior.
2. Journey of curioſity or inſtruction.
Let him ſpend his time no more at home,
Which would be great impeachment to his age,
In having known no travel in his youth. Shakeſpeare.
Travel in the younger ſort is a part of education; in the
elder a part of experience. Bacon's Eſſays, Nº. 18.
A man not enlightened by travel or reflexion, grows as
fond of arbitrary power, to which he hath been uſed, as of
barren countries, in which he has been born and bred. Addison
3. Labour; toil. This ſhould be travail: as in Daniel.
He wars with a retiring enemy,
With much more travail than with vićtory. Daniel.
What think'ſt thou of our empire now, though earn'd
With travel difficult. Milton.
4. Labour in childbirth. This ſenſe belongs rather to travail.
Thy mother well deſerves that ſhort delight,
The nauſeous qualms of ten long months and travel to
requite. Dryden's Wirg.
4. TRAvels. Account of occurrences and obſervations of a
journey into foreign parts. -
A book of his travels hath been honoured with the tranſla-
tion of many languages. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Hiſtories engage the ſoul by ſenſible occurrences; as alſo
voyages, travels, and accounts of countries. J/atts.
TRA'v Elle R. n.ſ. [travailleur, Fr. from travel.]
1. One who goes a journey; a wayfarer.
The weary traveller wand'ring that wa
Therein did often quench his thirſty heat Fairy Qu. b. ii.
A little eaſe to theſe my torments give,
T R A
Before I go where all in filence mourn,
F º whoſe dark ſhores no traveller, return. Sandyr.
'S Was a common opinion amon - -
gods ſometimes aſſumed '. #. "...º.º. the
earth with trangers and travellers. 2 Bentley's S upon
2. o; who viſits foreign countries. ey 3 Sermons.
*arewel monſieur traveller; look you liſp and wear ſtrange
"hººl º of your &amp; country. º
eye, than he ãº: .. country knows more by the
vºir. yeth at home can by relation of the tra-
They are travellers newly arrived in *ſº New Atlantis.
rº therefore not miſlead them. ge * :
RAVELTAINTED. adj. [travel . - -
tigued with travel. #. [ and tainted.] Harraſſed; fa-
I have foundered nine ſcore and odd Poſts: and here, tra-
vºltainted as I am, have, in my pure and immaculate viour
taken Sir John Coleville. Shakeſp. Heny IV. p. i.
TRA"WERS. adv. [French..] Athwart; acroſs. Not uſed. -
He ſwears brave oaths, and breaks them brav
travers, athwart the heart of his lover. Shakeſpeare.
Traves SE. adv. [a travers, French..] Croſſwiſe; athwart.
Bring water from ſome hanging grounds, in long furrows 3
and from thoſe drawing it traverſe to ſpread. -
The ridges of the fallow field lay traveſe.
TRAVERSE. prºp. Through croſſwiſe.
He through the armed files
Darts his experienc'd eye, and ſoon traverſ,
The whole battalion views their order dué. Milton.
TRA’verse. adj. [tranveſus, Lat. trave ſe, Fr.] Lying acroſs;
lying athwart.
The Paths cut with traverſe, trenches much encumbered
the carriages until the pioneers levelled them. Hayward.
Oak being ſtrong in all poſitions, may be truſted in croſs
T. traveſe y: for Summers. JWotton's Architect.
RA(VERSE. m. ſ.
I. Anything laid or built croſs.
The Tirſan cometh with all his generation; and if there be
a mother from whom the whole lineage deſcended, there is a
traverſe placed in a loft where ſhe ſitteth. Bacon.
Some wind inſtruments are blown at a ſmall hole in the
ſide, which ſtraiteneth the breath at the firſt entrance; the
rather in reſpect of their traverſe and ſtops above the hole,
which performeth the fipple's part. Bacon.
2. Something that thwarts, croſſes, or obſtructs; croſs acci-
dent; thwarting obſtacle. This is a ſenſe rather French
than Engliſh.
A juſt and lively pićture of human nature in its actions,
paſſions, and traveſes of fortune. Dryden.
He ſees no defect in himſelf, but is ſatisfied that he ſhould
have carried on his deſigns well enough, had it not been for
unlucky traverſes not in his power. Locke.
To TRA’verse. v. a... [traverſer, Fr. It was anciently ac-
cented on the laſt ſyllable.]
1. To croſs; to lay athwart.
Myſelf, and ſuch
As ſlept within the ſhadow of your power,
Have wander'd with our traverſ' arms, and breath’d
Our ſufferance vainly, Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
The parts ſhould be often traverſed or croſſed by the flow-
ing of the folds which looſely encompaſs them, without fit-
ting too ſtraight. Dryden's Duf eſnoy.
2. To croſs by way of oppoſition; to thwart with obſtacles.
This treatiſe has, ſince the firſt conception thereof, been
often traverſed with other thoughts. //attox.
You ſave th' expence of long litigious laws,
Where ſuits are travers'd, and ſo little won,
That he who conquers is but laſt undone. Dryden.
John Bull thought himſelf now of age to look after his
own affairs; Frog reſolved to traverſe this new project, and
to make him uneaſy in his own family. A buthnot.
3. To oppoſe ſo as to annul. A law term.
Without a good ſkill in hiſtory, and a new geography to
underſtand him aright, one may loſe lº in tº º the
decree. Baker’s Refle&amp;ions on Lea ning.
4. To wander over ; to croſs. &amp;
He many a walk travers'd
Of ſtatelieſt covert, cedar, pine, or palm. Milton.
The lion ſmarting with the hunter's ſpear,
Though deeply wounded, no way yet diſmay’d ;
In ſullen fury trave ſes the plain,
To find the vent'rous foe. P, ior.
Believe me, prince, there's not an African
That traverſes our vaſt Numidian deſarts
In queſt of prey, and lives upon his bow,
But better practiſes theſe boaſted virtues. Addiſon's Cato.
What ſeas yout avers'd and what fields you fought! Pope.
5. To ſurvey; to examine thoroughly. - -
My purpoſe is to taleſe the nature, principles, and pro-
erties, of this deteſtable vice, ingratitude. South's Se: mans.
Tô TRA’verse. v. n. To uſe a poſture of oppoſition in
in Cling. -
fe º To
Bacon.
Hayward.
ely, quite<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R E
T R E
thce traveſ, to ſee thee here,
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of I/indſor.
ºft, Fr.) Dreſſed ſo as to be made ri-
To ſee thee fight, to ſee
to ſee thee there.
TRA’v Es T Y. adj. [tra:
diculous; burleſqued.
ºrick. dºl. [rpzvºllz.] Vulnerary.
Tºº, and iº the ulcer to incarn, and to do ſo I
sº
ient into a traumatick decoction. Wiſeman's Surgery.
nº [tray, Swediſh..] A ſhallow wooden veſſel in
which meat Ör fiſh is carried.
siſt it into a tray, or bole of wood. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
No more her care ſhall fill the hollow tray,
To fat the guzzling hogs with floods of whey, Gay.
TRA’y TRIP: n.ſ. A kind of play, I know not of what kind.
Shall I play my freedom at traytrip, and become thy bond
ſlave. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Tºacherous, adj. [from treachery.] Faithleſs; perfidious ;
guilty of deſerting or betraying. . -
He bad the lion to be remitted
Unto his ſeat, and thoſe ſame treacherous vile
Be puniſh'd for their preſumptuous guile. Hubberd's Tale:
Deſire in rapture gaz'd awhile, -
And ſaw the treach'rous goddeſs ſmile. Swift.
TRE'Acherously. adv. [from tº eacherous.] Faithleſsly; per-
fidiouſly; by treaſon; by ſtratagem.
Then 'gan Carauſius tyrannize anew,
And him Alećtus treacherouſly ſlew,
And took on him the robe of emperor.
Thou haſt ſlain
The flower of Europe for his chivalry,
Fairy Qu. b. ii.
And treacherouſly haſt thou vanquiſh'd him. . Shakeſpeare.
Let others freeze with angling reeds,
Or treacherouſly poor fiſh beſet,
With ſtrangling ſnare, or winding net. Donne.
I treated, truſted you, and thought you mine;
When, in requital of my beſt endeavours,
You treache, ouſly practis'd to undo me,
Seduc’d my only child, and ſtole her.
They bid him ſtrike, to appeaſe the ghoſt
Of his poor father treacherouſly loſt. Dryden's juvenal.
TRE’Ach EROUs N Ess. º [from treacherous.] The quality of
being treacherous ; perfidiouſneſs.
TREACHERY. n.ſ.. [tricherie, French..] Perfidy; breach of
faith.
TREA'chEToR. ln. ſ. [from tricher, tricheur, Fr.] A traitor;
TRE'AcHour. } one who betrays; one who violates his
faith or allegiance.
Good Claudius with him battle fought,
In which the king was by a treachetour
Diſguiſed ſlain. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Where may that treachour then be found,
Or by what means may I his footing tract. Fairy
TRE'Acle. m. ſ. [triacle, Fr. triackle, Dutch; theriaca,
1. A medicine made up of many ingredients.
The phyſician that has obſerved the medicinal virtues of
treacle, without knowing the nature of each of the ſixty odd
Otway.
tree??.
at.]
ingredients, may cure many patients with it. Boyle.
T. eacle water has much of an acid in it. Floyer.
2. Moloſſes; the ſpume of ſugar.
To TREAD. v. m. pret. tºod, part, paſſ. trodden. [trudan, Go-
thick; treban, Saxon; treden, Dutch..]
1. To ſet the foot.
He ne'er drinks,
But Timon's ſilver treads upon his lip. Shakeſpeare.
Thoſe which perfume the air moſt, being trodden upon
and cruſhed, are burnet, wild thyme, and water mint;
therefore ſet whole alleys of them, to have the pleaſure when
you walk or tread. Bacon's Eſſays.
Thoſe dropping gums
Aſk riddance, if we mean to tread with eaſe. Milton.
Where'er you tread the bluſhing flow’rs ſhall riſe. Pope.
2. To trample ; to ſet the feet in ſcorn or malice.
Thou
Muſt, as a foreign recreant, be led
With manacles along our ſtreet, or elſe
Triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin,
And bear the palm. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Thou ſhalt tread upon their high places. Deut. xxxiii. 29.
3. To walk with form or ſtate.
When he walks, he moves like an engine,
And the ground ſhrinks before his treading.
Ye that ſtately tread or lowly creep.
4. To copulate as birds.
When ſhepherds pipe on oaten ſtraws;
When turtles tread Shakeſpeare.
What diſtance between the treading or coupling, and the
laying of the egg Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
They bill, they tread, Alcyone compreſs'd,
Shakeſpeare.
ilton.
----- Seven days ſits brooding on her floating neſt. Dryden.
To TREAD. v. a. b
1. To walk on ; to feel under the foot.
Would I had never t od this Engliſh earth,
“” felt the flatterics that grow upon it! Shakeſpeare.
He dy'd obedient to ſevereſt law;
Forbid to tread the promis'd land he ſaw. P, .
2. To preſs under the foot. 1 lor,
Tread the ſnuff out on the floor to prevent ſinkin, c.,.
3. To beat; to track. prevent flinking. Swift.
Full of briars is this working world.
-They are but burs: if we walk not in the tradiºn aths
our very petticoats will catch them. Shakeſp. 4, you |. .
4. To walk on in a formal or ſtately manner. il.
Methought ſhe trod the ground with greater grace. D,
5. To cruſh under foot; to trample in contempt or hatred J.
º thy name will we tread them under that riſe
againſt us. -
£ Why was I rais’d the meteor of the wº.” xliv, 5.
Hung in the ſkies, and blazing as I travell'd,
Till all my fires were ſpent ; and then caſt downward
To be trad out by Caeſar Dryden's Allfor Love
6. To put in action by the feet. -
They tread their wine-preſſes and ſuffer thirſt. job xxiv
7. To love as the male bird the female. -
He feather'd her and trod her. Dryden's Fallſ
TREAD. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Footing; ſtep with the foot
If the ſtreets were pav'd with thine eyes, -
Her feet were much too dainty for ſuch tread. Shakeſpeare
The quaint mazes in the wanton green, -
For want of tread, are undiſtinguiſhable. Miltºn
High above the ground -
Their march was, and the paſſive air upbore
Their nimble tread. Milton,
The dancer on the rope, with doubtful tread,
Gets wherewithal to cloath and buy him bread. Drydºn,
How wert thou wont to walk with cautious tread,
A diſh of tea, like milk-pail, on thy head |
2. Way ; track; path.
Cromwell is the king's ſecretary: further,
Stands in the gap and tread for more preferment. Shalºft.
3. The cocks part in the egg.
TREADER. n.ſ.. [from tread.] He who treads. 4
The treaders ſhall tread out no wine in their preſſes.
TRE'Adle. n. ſ. [from tread.]
1. A part of an engine on which the feet act to put it in mo-
tlOn.
The farther the fore-end of the tradle reaches out beyond
the fore-ſide of the lathe, the greater will the ſweep of the
fore-end of the treadle be, and conſequently the more revo-
lutions is made at one tread. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſes.
2. The ſperm of the cock.
Whether it is not made out of the garm, or treadle of the
egg, ſeemeth of leſſer doubt. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
At each end of the egg is a treadle, formerly thought to
be the cock's ſperm. Derham.
TREASON. n.ſ.. [trahiſon, French.] An offence committed
againſt the dignity and majeſty of the commonwealth: it is
divided into high treaſon and petit treaſon. High treaſºn is
an offence againſt the ſecurity of the commonwealth, or of
the king's majeſty, whether by imagination, word, or deed;
as to compaſs or imagine treaſon, or the death of the prince,
or the queen conſort, or his ſon and heir-apparent; or to de-
flower the king's wife, or his eldeſt daughter unmarried,
or his eldeſt ſon's wife; or levy war againſt the king in his
realm, or to adhere to his enemies by aiding them; or to
counterfeit the king's great ſeal, privy ſeal, or money; or
knowingly to bring falſe money into this realm counterfeited
like the money of England, and to utter the ſame; or to
kill the king's chancellor, treaſurer, juſtice of the one bºth,
or of the other; juſtices in Eyre, juſtices of aſſize, juſticº
of oyer and terminer, when in their place and doing their
duty; or forging the king's ſeal manual, or privy ſignet; *
diminiſhing or impairing the current money: and, in ſuch
treaſon, a man forfeits his lands and goods to the king: and
it is called treaſon paramount. Petit treaſon is when a ſº."
kills his maſter, a wife her huſband; ſecular or religious kills
his prelate: this treaſon gives forfeiture to every lord within
his own fee : both treaſons are capital. Cowel.
Man diſobeying,
Diſloyal breaks his fealty, and fins
Againſt the high ſupremacy of heaven :
#. expiate *...}. ... left. Milton.
He made the ovérture of thy treaſons to us. Shaº!”
Athaliah cried, treaſon, treaſºn. 2 Kings xi. 14.
TRE'ason ABLE. Nad. [from treaſºn.] Having the na" Or
TRE'Asonous. } guilt of treaſon. Treaſonous is out of uſe.
Him by proofs as clear as founts in July IIII
I know to be corrupt and treaſonour. Shakespeare . Henry VIII.
Againſt the undivulg’d pretence I fight
Of ºnous malice." P Sºftware's Malth
Moſt mens heads had been intoxicated with imaginatº
of plots, and treaſonable practices. Clarendºn.
Were it a draught for June when ſhe banquets, l
I wou'd not taſte thy treaſonous offer. - Miltºn.
A credit to run ten millions in debt without parliamº"?
ſecurity is º, illegal, and perhaps º:
Swift,
Iſa,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
º
T R E
TREASURE. m. ſ. ſtrºſºr, Fr. theſaurus, Latin.] Wealth
hoarded ; riches accumulated.
An inventory, importing
The ſeveral parcels of his plate, his treaſure,
Rich ſtuffs. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
They built treaſure cities. Exod. i. 11.
He uſed his laws as well for colle&amp;ting of treaſure, as for
correóting of manners. Bacon.
Gold is treaſure as well as filver, becauſe not decaying,
and never ſinking much in value. Locke.
To TRE'Asur E. v. a. [from the noun..] To hoard; to repo-
fit; to lay up.
After thy hardneſs and impenitent heart thou treaſureſ up
unto thyſelf wrath againſt the day of wrath. Rom. ii. 5.
Pračtical principles are treaſured up in man's mind, that,
like the candle of the Lord in the heart of every man, diſ-
covers what he is to do, and what to avoid. South.
No, my remembrance treaſures honeſt thoughts,
And holds not things like thee; I ſcorn thy friendſhip.
Rowe.
Some thought it mounted to the lunar ſphere,
Since all things loſt on earth are treaſur'd there. Pope.
TRE'Asures. n.ſ.. [from treaſure; treſºrier, Fr.] One who
has care of money; one who has charge of treaſure.
This is my treaſurer, let him ſpeak
That I have reſerv'd nothing. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
Before the invention of laws, private affections in ſupreme
rulers made their own fancies both their treaſurers and hang-
men, weighing in this balance good and evil. Raleigh.
TRE'Asu RERSHIP. m. ſ. [from treaſurer.] Office or dignity of
treaſurer.
He preferred a baſe fellow, who was a ſuitor for the trea-
Jurerſhip, before the moſt worthy. Hakewill.
TRE'Asur EHouse. m. ſ. [t eaſure and houſe..] Place where
hoarded riches are kept.
Let there be any grief or diſeaſe incident to the ſoul of
men, for which there is not in this treaſurehouſe a preſent
comfortable remedy to be found. Hooker, b. v.
Thou ſilver treaſurehouſe,
Tell me once more, what title doſt thou bear 2 Shakeſp.
Gather together into your ſpirit, and its treaſurehouſe, the
memory, not only all the promiſes of God, but alſo the for-
mer ſenſes of the divine favours. Taylor's holy living.
TREASURY. m. ſ. [from tº eaſure; treſ rerie, Fr.] A place in
which riches are accumulated.
And make his chronicle as rich with prize,
As is the ouzy bottom of the ſea
With ſunken wreck and ſumleſs treaſuries.
Thy ſumptuous buildings
Have coſt a maſs of publick treaſury. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The treaſury of life, when life itſelf
Yields to the theft. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
He had a purpoſe to furniſh, a fair caſe in that univerſity
with choice collections from all parts, like that famous trea-
ſuy of knowledge at Oxford. JWotton,
The ſtate of the treaſury the king beſt knows. Temple.
Phyſicians, by treaſu ics of juſt obſervations, grow to ſkill
in the art of healing. JWatts.
To TREAT. v. a. [traiter, Fr. tradio, Lat.]
1. To negociate; to ſettle. *
To treat the peace, a hundred ſenators
Shakeſpeare.
Shall be commiſſioned. Dryden’s AFn.
2. [Traćio, Lat..] To diſcourſe on.
3. To uſe in any manner, good or bad.
He treated his priſoner with great harſhneſs. Spectator.
Since living virtue is with envy curs'd,
And the beſt men are treated like the worſt;
Do thou, juſt goddeſs, call our merits forth,
And give each deed th’ exact, intrinſick worth.
4. To handle; to manage; to carry on.
Pope.
Zeuxis and Polygnotus treated their ſubjećts in their pic- -
tures, as Homer did in his poetry. Dryden.
5. To entertain with expence.
To TREAT. v. n. [traiter, Fr. cnahzian, Saxon.]
1. To diſcourſe; to make diſcuſſions. -
Of love they treat till th’ev'ning ſtar appear'd. Milton.
Abſence, what the poets call death in love, has given oc-
caſion to beautiful complaints in thoſe authors who have treat-
ed of this paſſion in verſe. Addiſon's Spect.
2. To practiſe negotiation.
The king treated with them.
3. To come to terms of accommodation.
Inform us, will the emp'ror treat P
4. To make gratuitous entertainments.
TREAT. n. /. [from the verb.]
1. An entertainment given.
This is the ceremony of my fate;
A parting treat, and I'm to die in ſtate. Dryden.
He pretends a great concern for his country, and inſight
into matters : now ſuch profeſſions, when recommended by
a treat, diſpoſe an audience to hear reaſon. Collier.
2 Mac. xiii. 22.
Swift.
T R. E.
-
What tender maid but muſt a vićtim fall
°r one man's treat, but for another's ball?
2. Something given at an entertainment.
Pºy figs and grapes, and wrinkled dates were ſet,
Pope.
In caniſters tº enlarge the little treat
- - Dryden.
The King of gods revolving in his mind ryaen
Pycaon’s guilt and his inhumiñº. Dryden.
TRE'Atable. adj. [traitable, Fr.] Moderate; not violent.
A virtuous mind ſhould rather wiſh to depart this world
with a kind of treatable diſſolution, than be ſuddenly cut off
** moment, rather to be taken than ſnatched away. Hooker
The heats or the colds of ſeaſons are leſs tº catable than
with us. Temple.
r - -
Treatise. n.ſ. [tradiatus, Latin.] Diſcourſe; written jº
tate.
...The time has been my fell of hair
X. at a diſmal tº eatiſe rouze, and flir
s life were in’t. Sh
. Beſides the rules given in this treatiſe to make *::::
judgment of good pictures, there is required a long conver-
ſation with the beſt pieces. Dryden's Duf enoy.
TREATMENT. n. ſ. [traitment, French.] Uſage; manner of
uſing good or bad.
Scarce an humour or character which they have not uſed;
all comes waſted to us; and were they to entertain this age,
they could not now make ſuch plenteous treatment. D, yº.
Accept ſuch treatment as a ſwain affords. Pope.
TREATY. n. ſ. ſtraité, Fr.]
I. Negotiation; act of treating.
She began a treaty to procure;
And ſtabliſh terms betwixt both their requeſts. Fa. 99.
2. A compact of accommodation relating to publick affairs.
A peace was concluded, being rather a bargain than a
treaty. Bacon's Henry VII.
Echion
Let fall the guiltleſs weapon from his hand,
And with the veſt a peaceful treaty makes. Addiſon's Ovid.
3. For entreaty: ſupplication; petition; ſolicitation.
He caſt by treaty and by trains
Her to perſuade. Spenſer.
I muſt
To the young man ſend humble treaties, doge,
And palter in the ſhift of lowneſs. Shakeſpeare.
TRE’BLE, adj. [triple, Fr. triplus, triplex, Lat.]
1. Threefold; triple.
Some I ſee,
That twofold balls and treble ſceptres carry. Shakespeare.
Who can
His head's huge doors unlock, whoſe jaws with great
And dreadful teeth in treble ranks are ſet. Sandys.
All his malice ſerv'd but to bring forth
Infinite goodneſs, grace, and mercy ſhewn
On man by him ſeduc’d ; but on himſelf
Treble confuſion, wrath, and vengeance pour’d.
A lofty tow'r, and ſtrong on ev'ry fide
With treble walls.
The pious Trojan then his jav'lin ſent,
The ſhield gave way; through treble plates it went
Of ſolid braſs. Dryden's Aºn.
2. Sharp of ſound. A muſical term.
The ſharper or quicker percuſſion of air cauſeth the more
treble ſound, and the lower or heavier the more baſe ſound.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 179.
To TRE(ple. v. a. [from the adjective; triplico, Lat. tripler,
Fr.] To multiply by three ; to make thrice as much. -
She conceiv'd, and trebling the due time,
Brought forth this monſtrous maſs.
I would not be ambitious in my wiſh,
To wiſh myſelf much better; yet for you, .
I would be trebled twenty times myſelf, -
A thouſand times more fair. Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
Aquarius ſhines with feebler rays,
Four years he trebles, and doubles ſix ſcore days.
To TRE'ble. v. n. To become threefold.
Whoever annually runs out, as the debt doubles and trebles
upon him, ſo doth his inability to pay it. Swift.
TRE’ble. n.ſ. A ſharp ſound. - -
The treble cutteth the air ſo ſharp, as it returneth too ſwift
to make the ſound equal; and therefore a mean or tenor is
the ſweeteſt. - Bacon,
The lute ſtill trembles underneath thy nail :
At thy well-ſharpen'd thumb from ſhore to ſhore,
The trebles ſqueak for fear, the baſes roar. . . Pryden.
TRE'bleness. n.). [from treble.] The ſtate of being treble.
The juſt proportion of the air percuſſed towards the baſe-
neſs or treblineſ of tones, is a great ſecret in ſounds., Bacon.
TRE'sly. adv. Ifrom treble.] Thrice told ; in threefold num-
ber or quantity.
Milton.
Dryden's Aen.
Spenſºr.
Creech.
His jav'lin ſent, l -
The ſhield gave way; through treble plates it went -
Of i. .. of linnen trebly roll’d. Dryden's Aen.
26 X The
-
-º-, -
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T. R. E.
T R E.
eed being ſo neceſſary for the maintenance of the
ºf #. #, in ſome doubly and trebly defended. Ray.
TREE, ºf trie, Iſlandick; tee, Daniſh;]
1. A large vegetable riſing, with one woody ſtem, to a con-
e height.
ſº jºb, of our native growth in England, are
diſtinguiſhed by Ray, I. Such as have their flowers disjoint-
ed and remote from the fruit; and theſe are, 1. Nuciferous
ones; as, the walnut tree, the hazel-nut, tree, the beach,
the cheſnut, and the common oak. 2. Coniferous ones;
of this kind are the Scotch firs, male and female; the pine,
the common alder tree, and the birch tree. 3. Bacciferous ;
as, the juniper and yew trees. 4: Lanigerous ones; as, the
black, white, and trembling poplar, willows, and offers of
all kinds. 5. Such as bear their ſeeds, having an imperfect
flower, in leaſy membranes; as, the horſe-bean. 6. Such
as have their fruits and flowers contiguous; of theſe ſome are
pomiferous; as, apples and pears; and ſome bacciferous; º;
the ſorb or ſervice tree, the white or hawthorn, the wild
roſe, ſweet brier, currants, the great bilbery buſh, honey-
ſuckle, joy. Pruniferous ones, whoſe fruit is pretty large
and ſoft, with a ſtone in the middle; as, the black-thorn or
ſloe tree, the black and white bullace tree, the black cherry,
&amp;c. Bacciferous ones; as, the ſtrawberry tree in the
weſt of Ireland, miſletoe, water elder, the dwarf, a large
laurel, the viburnum or way-fairing tree, the dog-berry tree,
the ſea black thorn, the berry-bearing elder, the privet bar-
berry, common elder, the holy, the buckthorn, the berry-
bearing heath, the bramble, and ſpindle tree or prickwood.
Such as have their fruit dry when ripe; as, the bladder nut
tree, the box tree, the common elm and aſh, the maple, the
gaule or ſweet willow, common heath, broom, dyers wood,
furze or gorſe, the lime tree, &amp;c. Miller.
Sometime we ſee a cloud that's dragoniſh,
A forked mountain, or blue promontory
With trees upon't, that nod unto the world,
And mock our eyes with air. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Who can bid the tree unfix his earth-bound root. Shakespeare
It is pleaſant to look upon a tree in Summer covered with
green leaves, decked with bloſſoms, or laden with fruit, and
caſting a pleaſant ſhade: but to conſider how this ree ſprang
from a little ſeed, how nature ſhaped and fed it till it came
to this greatneſs, is a more rational pleaſure. Burmet.
Trees ſhoot up in one great ſtem, and at a good diſtance
from the earth, ſpread into branches: thus gooſeberries are
ſhrubs, and oaks are trees. Locke.
2. Any thing branched out.
Vain are their hopes who fancy to inherit,
By trees of pedigrees, or fame or merit:
Though plodding heralds through each branch may trace
Old captains and dićtators of their race. Dryden.
TREE ge' mander. m. ſ. A plant.
TREE of life. n.ſ. [lignum vitae, Latin.] An evergreen : the
wood is eſteemed by turners. Miller.
TREE primroſe. m. ſ. A plant.
TREEN. old plur. of tree.
Well run greenhood, got between
Under the ſand-bag he was ſeen;
Lowting low like a for'ſter green,
He knows his tackle and his treen. Benj. johnſon.
TREEN. adj. Wooden ; made of wood. Obſolete.
Sir Thomas Rookeſby, being controlled for firſt ſuffering
himſelf to be ſerved in treen cups, anſwered, theſe homely
cups pay truly for that they contain: I had rather drink out
of treen and pay gold and filver, than drink out of gold and
filver and make wooden payments. Camden.
TRE/Foil. n. ſ. ſtrifolium, Lat.] A plant.
The trefoil hath a papilionaceous flower, conſiſting of the
ſtandard, the wings and keel coming out of the empalement
together with the pointal covered with its fringed ſheath: it
becomes a capſule hidden in the empalement, and full of
ſeeds ſhaped like a kidney, adhering cloſe to the capſule when
ripe: ſome have flowers conſiſting of one leaf, and filled
with kidney-ſhaped ſeeds: to this muſt be added, that the
leaves grow by threes, ſeldom by four or fives, on a common
footſtalk. AMiller.
Hope, by the ancients, was drawn in the form of a ſweet
and beautiful child, ſtanding upon tiptoes, and a trefoil, or
three-leaved graſs in her hand. Peacham on Drawing.
$9me ſow trºfoil or rye-graſs with their clover. Mortime.
TREILLAGE. m. ſ. [French.]
Teillage is a contexture of pales to ſupport eſpalliers,
making a diſtinét incloſure of any part of a garden. Trevoux.
There are as many kinds of gardening as of poetry:
makers of flower-gardens are epigrammatiſts and ſonneteers,
. of bowers, grotto's, treillages, and caſcades, are
nance writers. Speciator, N°. -
TRELLIS, n.ſ. [French. l Is a awaii. of iron, wº,
or offer, the parts croſſing each other like a lattice. Trevoux.
To TRE/M ble. v. n. [trembler, Fr. tremo, Lat.]
* To ſhake as with fear or coli. trar - -
ſhudder. old; to ſhiver; to quake 5 to
My compaſſionate heart
Y. not permit my eyes once to behold
he thing, whereat it trembles by ſurmiſe.
God’s lº. Shakeſheart,
And power thou trembleſ; at. Shakeſpeare'
Shew your ſlaves how cholerick you #. e's Henry VI,
And make your bondmen tremble. Shakespeare Yal,
This judgment of the heavens that º Ž ..º.
Touches us not with pity. Shakeſp. King i.
They ſhall fear and tremble. - jer. xxxiii 7.
When he heard the king, he fell into ſuch a trembling *
he could hardly ſpeak. Clarendon
Frighted Turnus trembl’d as he ſpoke. Dryden's Æ.
He ſhook the ſacred honours of his head, -
With terror trembl’d heav'n's ſubſiding hill,
And from his ſhaken curls ambroſial dews diſtil. Dryden
Ye powers, revenge your violated altars, -
That they who with unhallow'd hands approach
May tremble. Rowe.
2. To quiver; to totter. -
Sinai's grey top ſhall tremble. Milton.
We cannot imagine a maſs of water to have ſtood upon
the middle of the earth like one great drop, or a trembling
jelly, and all the places about it dry. Burnet.
3. To quaver; to ſhake as a ſound.
Winds make a noiſe unequally, and ſometimes when ve-
hement tº emble at the height of their blaſt. Bacon.
TRE/MBLINGLY. adv. [from trembling.] So as to ſhake or
quiver.
Tremblingly ſhe ſtood,
And on the ſudden dropt. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
Say what the uſe, were finer opticks giv'n,
Or touch, if tremblingly alive all o'er,
To ſmart and agonize at every pore ? Pope.
TREME'Ndous. adj. [tremendus, Latin.] Dreadful; horrible ;
aſtoniſhingly terrible.
There ſtands an altar where the pricſt celebrates ſome
myſteries ſacred and tremendous. Tatler, Nº, 57.
In that portal ſhou'd the chief appear,
Each hand tremendous with a brazen ſpear. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
TRE'MoUR. m. ſ. [tremor, Lat.]
1. The ſtate of trembling.
He fell into an univerſal tremour of all his joints, that
when going his legs trembled under him. Harvey.
By its ſtyptick and ſtimulating quality it affects the nerves,
occaſioning tremours. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Quivering or vibratory motion.
Theſe ă. do not twinkle when viewed through teleſcopes
which have large apertures: for the rays of light which paſs
through divers parts of the aperture tremble each of them
apart, and by means of their various, and ſometimes con-
trary tremors fall at one and the ſame time upon different
points in the bottom of the eye. Newton,
TRE'Mulous. adj. [tremulus, fº
1. Trembling; fearful.
The tender tremulous chriſtian is eaſily diſtraćted and amazed
by them. Decay ºf Pitt).
2. Quivering; vibratory.
Breath vocalized, that is, vibrated or undulated, impreſſ:
a ſwift tremulous motion in the lips, tongue or palate, which
breath paſſing ſmooth does not. Holder.
As thus th' effulgence tremulous I drink,
The lambent lightnings ſhoot acroſs the ſky. Thºmſºn,
TRE'Mulousness. n.ſ.. [from tremulous.] The ſtate of 4*
vering.
TREN. n.ſ. A fiſh ſpear. Ainſ.
To TRENCH. v. a. [trancher, Fr.]
1. To cut.
Safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenched gaſhes on his head. Shakespeare.
This weak impreſs of love is as a figure
Trench'd in ice, which with an hour's heat
Diſſolves to water, and doth loſe his form. Shakespeare.
2. To cut or dig into pits or ditches.
Pioneers with ſpades and pickax arm’d, -
Forerun the royal camp to trench a field. Miltºn.
Trench the ground, and make it ready for the *::.
Firſt draw thy faulchion, and on ev'ry ſide
Trench the black earth a cubit long and wide. º:
The trenching plough or coulter is uſeful in paſture-ground,
to cut out the fides of trenches or drains. Martimer.
TRENcH. n.ſ.. [tranche, Fr.] -
1. A pit or ditch.
On that coaſt build, -
And with a trench encloſe the fruitful field. Dryde" º:
when you have got your water up to the higheſt partº
the land, make a ſmall trench to carry ſome of the water iſ,
keeping it always upon a level. Mortimer's Hº!”
2. Earth thrown up to defend ſoldiers in their approach * *
town, or to guard a camp. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R E
2
The citizens of Corioli have iſſued forth
And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle:
I ſaw our party to the trenches driven,
And then I came away. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
William carries on the trench,
Till both the town and caſtle yield.
TRE's chast. adj. [trenchant, Fr. Cutting; ſharp.
He fiercely took his trenchant blade in hand,-
With which he ſtruck ſo furious and ſo fell,
That nothing ſeem'd the puiſſance could withſtand. F. Q.
Againſt a vanquiſh'd foe, their ſwords
Were ſharp and trenchant, not their words.
TRE'Ncher, n, ſ [from trench; trenchoir, Fr.]
1. A piece of wood on which meat is cut at table.
No more
I'll ſcrape trencher, nor waſh diſh.
My eſtate deſerves an heir more rais'd,
Than one which holds a trencher. Shakespeare. Timon of Athens.
When we find our dogs, we ſet the diſh or trenchºr on the
ground. Mºe's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
Their homely fare diſpatch'd; the hungry band
Invade their trenchers next, and ſoon devour. Dryden.
* Many a child may have the idea of a ſquare trencher, or
round plate, before he has any idea of infinite. Locke.
2. The table.
Prior.
Hudibras.
Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
How often haſt thou,
Fed from my trencher, kneel'd down at the board,
When I have feaſted. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
3. Food; pleaſures of the table.
It could be no ordinary declenſion of nature that could
bring ſome men, after an ingenuous education, to place their
ſummum bonum upon their trenchers, and their utmoſt felicity
in wine. South's Sermons.
TRE'Ncher fly. n.ſ.. [trencher and fly.] One that haunts ta-
bles; a paraſite.
He found all people came to him promiſcuouſly, and he
tried which of them were friends, and which only trencher-
flies and ſpungers. L’Eſtrange.
TRE'Ncher MAN. n.ſ.. [trencher and man.] A feeder; an eater.
Palladius aſſured him, that he had already been more fed
to his liking than he could be by the ſkilfulleſt trenchermen of
Media. Sidney.
You had muſty vićtuals, and he hath holp to eat it: he's
a very valiant trencherman; he hath an excellent ſtomach.
Shakeſp. Much ado about nothing.
TRE'NcherMAte. n.ſ.. [trencher and mate.] A table compa-
nion; a paraſite.
Becauſe that judicious learning of the ancient ſages doth not
in this caſe ſerve the turn, theſe trenchermates frame to them-
ſelves a way more pleaſant; a new method they have of
turning things that are ſerious into mockery, an art of con-
tradićtion by way of ſcorn. Hooker, b. v.
To TREND. v. n. To tend; to lie in any particular direc-
tion. It ſeems a corruption of tend.
The ſcouts to ſeveral parts divide their way,
To learn the natives names, their towns explore
The coaſts and trendings of the crooked ſhore.
TRE'NTALs. n.ſ. [tº ente, Fr.]
Trental or trigintals were a number of maſſes, to the tale
of thirty, ſaid on the ſame account, according to a certain
order inſtituted by Saint Gregory. Ayliffe's Parergon.
TRE'Ndle. m. ſ. [ºnenbel, Saxon.] Any thing turned round.
Now improperly written trundle.
TREPA'N. n.ſ.. [trepan, Fr.]
1. An inſtrument by which chirurgeons cut out round pieces of
the ſkull.
2. A ſnare; a ſtratagem by which any one is enſnared. [Of
this ſignification Skinner affigns for the reaſon, that ſome
Engliſh ſhips in queen Elizabeth's reign being invited, with
great ſhew of friendſhip, into Trapani, a part of Sicily, were
there detained.]
But what a thoughtleſs animal is man,
How very ačtive in his own trepan. Roſcommon.
Can there be any thing of friendſhip in ſnares, hooks, and
trepans. South's Sermons.
During the commotion of the blood and ſpirits, in which
paſſion conſiſts, whatſoever is offered to the imagination in
favour of it, tends only to deceive the reaſon: it is indeed a
real trepan upon it, feeding it with colours and appearances
inſtead of arguments. South's Sermons.
To TREPA'N. v. a. [from the noun; trepaner, Fr.]
1. To perforate with the trepan.
A putrid matter flowed forth her noſtrils, of the ſame ſmell
with that in trepanning the bone. JWiſeman's Surgery.
Few recovered of thoſe that were trepanned. Arbuthnot.
2. To catch; to enſnare.
They trepann'd the ſtate, and fac’d it down
With plots and projects of our own. Hudibras, p. iii.
Thoſe are but trºpanned who are called to govern, being
inveſted with authority but bereaved of power, which is no-
thing elſe but to mock and betray them into a ſplendid and
magiſterial way of being ridiculous. South's Sermons.
5
Dryden.
T R E
Trephi'se. *ſ. A ſmall trepan; a ſmaller inſtrument of
perforation managed by one hand. -
ſhewed a trepan ańd trºphine, and gave them liberty to
try both upon a ſkull. Jºſeman's Surgery.
*::IPA"tion, n.ſ...[t epidatio, Lat.] c
I. The ſtate of trembling.
- The bow tortureth the ſtring continually, and holdeth it
in a continual trºpidation. Bacon's Nat. Hiſſ. Nº. 137.
All objects of the ſenſes which are very offenſive, diſe
the ſpirits to retire; upon which the parts, in ſome degree,
: º and ſo there is induced in them a tretidation
and horror. Bacon's Nat. H/l. Nº. 703.
Moving of th' earth brings harms and #. 793
Men reckon what it did and meant;
But trºpidation of the ſpheres,
Though greater far, is innocent.
- Donne.
!hey paſs the planets ſev'n, and paſs the fix’d,
And that cryſtalline ſphere whoſe balance weighs
The trºpidation talk'd, and that firſt-mov’d. Milton.
2. State of terrour.
Becauſe the whole kingdom ſtood in a zealous trepidation
9f the abſence of ſuch a prince, I have been the mºre de-
firous tº reſearch the ſeveral paſſages of the journey. Wotton.
His firſt action of note was in the battle of Lepanto ;
where the ſucceſs of that great day, in ſuch trepidation of the
ſtate, made every man meritorious. J/attan.
To TRE'sPAss. v. n. ſtreſpaſſer, Fr.]
I. To tranſgreſs; to offend.
If they ſhall confeſs their treſpaſs which they teſpaſſed
againſt me, I will remember my covenant. Leº. xxvi. 43.
They not only contradićt the general deſign and particular
expreſſes of the goſpel, but trºſpaſ, againſt all logick. Norris.
2. To enter unlawfully on another's ground.
Their morals and oeconomy,
Moſt perfectly they made agree:
Each virtue kept its proper bound,
Nor treſpaſs'd on the other's ground.
TRE’spass. n.ſ.. [t eſpas, Fr.]
I. Tranſgreſſion; offence.
Your purpos'd low correótion
Is ſuch, as baſeſ, and the meaneſt wretches
For pilfrings, and moſt common treſpaſs
Are puniſh'd with. Shakeſp. King Lear.
The tºſpaſ, money and fin money was the prieſts. 2 Kings.
Prior.
-
He ſhall bring his treſpaſs offering for his fin. Lev. v. 6.
Will God incenſe his ire
For ſuch a petty trºſpaſ ? Milton,
2. Unlawful entrance on another's ground.
TRE'spasser. m. ſ. [from t ſhaft.]
I. An offender; a tranſgreſſor.
2. One who enters unlawfully on another's ground.
If I come upon another's ground without his licence, or
the licence of the law, I am a treſpaſſer, for which the owner
may have an action of treſpaſs againſt me. //alton.
TRE'ssed. adj. [from treſ, French..] Knotted or curled.
Nor this nor that ſo much doth make me mourn,
But for the lad, whom long I lov’d ſo dear,
Now loves a laſs that all his love doth ſcorn,
He plunged in pain his treſſed locks doth tear. Spenſer.
TRE'sses. n.ſ. without a ſingular. [treſſe, Fr. treccia, Italian.]
A knot or curl of hair. -
Hung be the heav'ns with black, yield day to night !
Comets, importing change of times and ſtates,
Brandiſh your cryſtal treſſes in the ſky.
Her ſwelling breaſt
Naked, met his under the flowing gold
Of her looſe treſſes hid.
- Adam had wove w
Of choiceſt flow’rs a garland to adorn
Her treſſes, and her rural labours crown.
Fair treſſes man's imperial race enſnare,
And beauty draws us with a ſingle hair. ... Pope.
Then ceaſe, bright nymph 1 to mourn the raviſh'd hair,
Which adds new glory to the ſhining ſphere !
Not all the treſſes that fair hair can boaſt,
Shall draw ſuch envy as the lock you loſt. Pope.
TRE'stle. n. ſ. [treſſeau, Fr.]
1. The frame of a table. -
2. A moveable form by which any thing is ſupported. -
TRET. n.ſ. [Probably from tritis, Lat.] An allowance .
by merchants to retailers, which is four pounds in every hun-
dred weight, and four pounds for waſte or refuſe of a con-
modity. - - Bailey.
TRE"things. n.ſ. ſº low Latin, from trethu, Welſh,
to tax.] Taxes; impoſts. - -
tº: n. ſ. tºº, Saxon; trepied, Fr.] Any thing
that ſtands on three legs: as, a ſtool.
TREY. n.ſ.. [tres, Lat. tº Fr.] A three at cards.
White-handed miſtreſs, one ſweet word with thee.
——Honey, milk, and ſugar; there is three.
—Nay then, two try; ; metheglin, wort, and malinſey.
Shakeſp. Love's Labour lºſt.
TRI’ABLE.
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
Milton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R I
T R I
'Able. adj. [from try.] - -
*::::: to te º ; capable of trial. - -
' ' ... the more eaſy underſtanding of the experiments triable
by our engine, I infinuated that notion, by which all of them
will prove explicable. Boyle.
. Such as may be judicially examined. . . -
2 §§ One #. be admitted to a biſhop's chancellorſhip
without good knowledge in the civil and canon laws, ſince
divers cauſes triable in the ſpiritual court are of weight. Ayliffº.
TRI’AD. n. ſ. [trias, Lat. triade, Fr.] Three united.
TR1'al. n.J. [from try.]
1. Teſt; examination.
With trial fire touch me his finger end;
If he be chaſte the flame will back deſcend,
And turn him to no pain; but if he ſtart,
It is the fleſh of a corrupted heart.
2. Experience; ačt of examining by experience.
I leave him to your gracious acceptance, , .
Whoſe trial ſhall better publiſh his commendation. Shakespeare
Skilful gardeners make trial of the ſeeds by putting them
into water gently boiled; and if good, *:: will ſprout within
half an hour. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 520.
3. Experiment; experimental knowledge. -
Others had trial of cruel mockings and ſcourgings.
4. Judicial examination. - -
Trial is uſed in law for the examination of all cauſes, civil
or criminal, according to the laws of our realm : the trial is
the iſſue, which is tried upon the inditement, not the indite-
ment itſelf. Cowel.
Shakeſpeare.
Heb.
He hath reſiſted law,
And therefore law ſhall ſcorn him further trial
Than the ſeverity of publick power. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
5. Temptation; teſt of virtue.
Leſt our trial, when leaſt ſought,
May find us both perhaps far leſs prepar’d,
The willinger I go. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. ix.
No ſuch company as then thou ſaw'ſt
Intended thee; for trial only brought,
To ſee how thou could'ſt judge of fit and meet. Milton.
Every ſtation is expoſed to ſome trials, either temptations
that provoke our appetites, or diſquiet our fears. Rogers.
`8. State of being tried.
- Good ſhepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love
—It is to be all made of ſighs and tears;
It is to be made all of faith and ſervice,
All humbleneſs, all patience and impatience;
All purity, all trial, all obſervance. Shakeſp. As you like it.
TRIANGLE. n.ſ.. [triangle, Fr. triangulum, Lat..] A figure
of three angles.
The three angles of a triangle are equal to two right ones.
Locke.
TRIA’NGULAR. adj. [triangularis, Lat..] Having three angles.
The frame thereof ſeem'd partly circular,
And part triangular; O work divine !
Theſe two the firſt and laſt proportions are. Fairy Qu.
Though a round figure be moſt capacious for the honey,
and moſt convenient for the bee; yet did ſhe not chuſe that,
becauſe then there muſt have been triangular ſpaces left void.
Ray on the Creation.
TRIBE, n.ſ.. [tribu, Fr. tribus, Lat. from trev, b and v being
labials of promiſcuous uſe in the ancient Britiſh words; trev
from tir ºf, his lands, is ſuppoſed to be Celtick, and uſed be-
fore the Romans had anything to do with the Britiſh govern-
ment; to prove which Mr. Rowland offers many reaſons,
which he mentions by imagining that centuriae is derived from
trev, ſuppoſing it to be the ſame with our centrev, importing
a hundred trevs or tribes.]
1. A diſtinct body of the people as divided by family or for-
tune, or any other chara&amp;teriſtick.
I ha’ been writing all this night unto all the tribes
And centuries for their voices, to help Catiline
In his election. Benj. johnſon's Cataline.
If the heads of the tribes can be taken off, and the miſled
multitude will ſee their error, ſuch extent of mercy is ho-
nourable. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Who now ſhall rear you to the ſun, or rank
Your tribes, and water from th’ ambroſial fount. Milton.
Straggling mountaineers, for publick good,
To rank in tribes, and quit the ſavage wood,
Houſes to build. Tate.
I congratulate my country upon the increaſe of this happy
tribe of men, ſince, by the preſent parliament, the race of
freeholders is ſpreading into the remoteſt corners. Addiſon.
2. It is often uſed in contempt.
Folly and vice are eaſy to deſcribe,
The common ſubjects of our ſcribbling tribe. Roſcommon.
Trì'elet or TRIBo'ULET. n. ſ. A goldſmith's tool for mak-
ing rings. Ainſ.
Tribula’ſ los. n.ſ. [tribulation, Fr.] Perſecution; diſtreſs;
vexation; diſturbance of life.
Tribulation being preſent cauſeth ſorrow, and being immi-
nent breedeth fear. Hooker, b. v.
The juſt ſhall dwell,
And after all their tribulations long,
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds.
- Death becomes
His final remedy; and after life
Try'd in ſharp tibulation, and refin'd
By faith, and faithful works. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. xi.
Our church taught us to pray, that God would, not only
in all time of our tribulation, but in all time of our wealth
deliver us. Atterbuy’s sm.
TRIBU'NAL.. n.ſ.. [tribunal, Latin and French.]
1. The ſeat of a judge.
- I' th' market-place, on a tribunal ſilver'd,
Cleopatra and himſelf in chairs of gold
Were publickly enthſon'd. , Shakeſp. Ant, and Cºpatra.
He ſees the room
Where the whole nation does for juſtice come,
Under whoſe large roof flouriſhes the gown,
And judges grave on high tribunals frown. Waller.
Here the tribunal ſtood. Dryden's AFn.
There is a neceſſity of ſtanding at his tribunal, who is in.
finitely wiſe and juſt. Grew's Coſmol. b. iii.
2. A court of juſtice.
Summoning arch-angels to proclaim
Thy dread tribunal.
TRI'BUNE. m. ſ. [tribun, tribunus, Lat.]
1. An officer of Rome choſen by the people.
Theſe are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o' th' common mouth: I do deſpiſe them.
Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
2. The commander of a Roman legion.
TRIBUNI’tial. ) adj. [tribunitius, Lat.] Suiting a tribune;
TRIBUNI'rious. } relating to a tribune.
Let them not come in multitudes, or in a tribunitious man-
ner; for that is to clamour counſels, not to inform. Bacon,
Oh happy ages of our anceſtors,
Beneath the kings and tribunitial powers
One jail did all their criminals reſtrain. Dryden's juvenal.
TRI'but ARY. adj. [tributaire, Fr. tributarius, Lat.]
1. Paying tribute as an acknowledgement of ſubmiſſion to a
maſter.
Thenceforth this land was tributary made
Tº ambitious Rome, and did their rule obey,
Till Arthur all that reckoning did defray:
Yet oft the Briton kings againſt them ſtrongly ſway’d. .
Fairy Queen, b. ii.
The two great empires of the world I know;
And fince the earth none larger does afford,
Milton,
Milton,
This Charles is ſome poor t ibutary lord. Dryden.
Around his throne the ſea-born brothers flood,
That ſwell with tributary urns his flood. Pope.
2. Subječt; ſubordinate.
Theſe he, to grace his tributary gods,
By courſe commits to ſeveral government,
And gives them leave to wear their ſaphire crowns,
And wield their little tridents. Milton's Camuſ.
O'er Judah's king ten thouſand tyrants reign,
Legions of luſt, and various pow'rs of ill
Inſult the maſter's tributary will.
3. Paid in tribute.
Nor flatt'ry tunes theſe tributary lays. Cº.;
TRI'but ARY. n.ſ.. [from tribute.] One who pays a ſtate
ſum in acknowledgement of ſubjection. . d
All the people therein ſhall be tributaries unto thee, an
ſerve thee. Dºut. xx. If
The Iriſh lords did only promiſe to become triº."
king Henry the ſecond: and ſuch as only pay tribute, are
not properly ſubjećts but ſovereigns. P.
TRI'BUTE. m.ſ.. [tribut, Fr. tributum, Lat.) Payment ma"
in acknowledgement; ſubjećtion.
The }.} tribute of i. ſheep was fix hundred. Nº.
They that received tribute money ſaid, Doth nº" º,
ſter pay tribute 2 Mat. xvii. 2.
Milton.
Dryden.
Prior.
She receives
As tribute her warmth and light.
To acknowledge this was all he did exaët;
Small tribute, where the will to pay was act.
TRIcom A^Nes. n.ſ. A plant. -
A branch of ſome capillary plant, reſembling the common
ſº, only the pinnae are larger in a ãº,
One. Fr. cor-
TRIce. n.ſ.. [I believe this word comes from tra', ſtroke.
rupted by pronunciation.] A ſhort time; an inſtant; a they
If they get never ſo great ſpoil at any time, the º do
waſte in a trice, as naturally delighting in ſpoil, thoug
themſelves no good.
Juſt in the nick the cook knock'd thrice,
And all the waiters in a trice
His ſummons did obey:
Each ſerving man with diſh in hand,
March'd boldly up like our train'd band,
Preſented, and away. sº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R I
He could raiſe ſcruples dark and nice,
T R I
- Pove is an airy good, opini -
s nd after ſolve them in a trice. Hudibras, p. i. hat tricks and #. ºp Hºn. Dryden.
So when the war had rais'd a ſtorm, eople laviſh it profuſely in tricking up their chiº in
I've ſeen a ſnake in human form, ne cloaths, and yet ſtarve their minds. Locke
All ſtain'd with infamy and vice, 3. To perform by ſlight of hand, or with a light touch -
*lº, Peap from the dunghiſ in a triº. Sw; The colours and the ground prepare: g -
º ... It ſeems incredible at firſt, that all the blood in our bodies Dip in the rainbow, triº her off i, j.
ºr ſhould circulate in a trice, in a very few minutes; but it Chuſe a firm cloud before it fall. &gt; Pope
º would be more ſurpriſing if we knew the ſhort periods of the To TRick. v. m. T. live by fraud. pe.
º great circulation of water. Bentley's Sermons. Thus they jog on, ſtill *icking, never thrivin
Trichotomy. n.ſ. Diviſion into three parts. - And murd'ring plays, which they call revivin * D den
º Some diſturb the order of nature by dichotomies, trichoto- TRI'cker. * / [This is often written trigger º, kº not
mies, ſevens, twelves: let the ſubject with the deſign you which is right.] The catch which being pulled diſengages
º have in view determine the number of parts into Wii. you the cock of the gun, that it may give fire. gag
divide it. Watts. Pulling aſide the tricker we ºbſerved, that the force of the
º, TRIck. n.ſ.. [treck, Dutch.] ſpring of the lock was not ſenſibly abated by the abſence of
º, 1. A ſly fraud. - the air. Boyle.
i. Sir Thomas Moor ſaid, that a trick of law had no leſs As a gooſe
º Power than the wheel of fortune, to liſt men up, or caſt In death contračis his talos cloſe;
* them down. Raleigh. $2 did the knight, and with one law
--- A bantering droll took a journey to Delphos, to try if he The tricker of his piſtol draw. Hudibras, p. i.
, - could put a trick upon Apoſio. L'Eſtrange's Fables. TRI'cking. m. / [from trict.] Dreſs; ornament.
Such a one thinks to find ſome ſhelter in my friendſhip, Get us properties and tricking for our fairies. Shakeſpeare.
º and I betray him: he comes to me for counſel and I ſhew TRI'ckish. adj. [from trick.] Knaviſhly artful; fraudulently
him a trick. South.
He ſwore by Stix,
cunning; miſchievouſly ſubtle.
All he ſays is in a looſe, ſlippery, and trickiſh way of rea-
Whate'er ſhe wou'd deſire, to grant; ſoning. - Pope.
But wife Ardelia knew his tricks. Swift. To TRI'cki.e. v. n. [Of this word I find no etymology that
2. A dexterous artifice.
Gather the loweſt and leaving the top,
Sball teach thee a trick for to double thy crop. Yuſer.
And now, as oft in ſome diſtemper'd ſtate,
On one nice trick depends the gen'ral fate. Pope.
3. A vicious practice.
- Suſpicion ſhall be ſtuck full of eyes:
For treaſon is but truſted like a fox,
Who ne'er ſo tame, ſo cheriſh'd and lock'd up,
Will have a wild trick of his anceſtors. Shakeſpeare.
I entertain you with ſomewhat more worthy than the ſtale
ſeems well authoriſed or Probable.] To fall in drops; to riſi
in a ſlender ſtream. -
He, prick'd with pride,
Forth ſpurred faſt; adown his courſer's ſide
The red blood trickling, ſtain'd the way. Fa. Qy, b, i.
Faſt beſide there triºled ſoftly down
A gentle ſtream, whoſe murm'ring wave did play
Amongſt the pumy ſtones, and made a found
To lull him ſoft aſleep that by it lay. Fa. Qu. b. ii.
Some noiſes help ſleep; as, the blowing of the wind, and
trickling of water, as moving in the ſpirits a gentle atten-
exploded trick of fulſom panegyricks. Dryden. tions which ſtilleth the diſcuſſive motiºn. Bacon.
- Some friends to vice pretend, He wakened by the trickling of his blood. I/ſeman,
. That I the tricts of youth too roughly blame. Dryden. Beneath his ear the faſt'ned arrow flood,
4. A juggle; an antick; any thing done to cheat jocoſely, or And from the Wound appear'd the trickling blood. Dryden,
to divert. All at once his grief and rage appear'd,
º A rev'rend prelate ſtopp'd his coach and ſix, And floods of tears ran triºling down his beard. Dryden.
º To laugh a little at our Andrew's tricks. Prior. He lay ſtretch'd along, his eyes fixt upward,
7, 5. An unexpected effect. And ever and anon a ſilent tear -- -
So felleſt foes who broke their ſleep, Stole down, and trickled from his hoary beard. Dryden.
-: To take the one the other, by ſome chance, The emblems of honour wrought on the front in the brittle
º Some trick not worth an egg, ſhall grow dear friends. mäterials above-mentioned, tº ickled away under the firſt im-
.* º Shakeſp. Coriolanus. preſſions of the heat. Addiſon's Freeholder, No. 28.
- 6. A practice; a manner; a habit. Imbrown'd with native bronze, loſ Henly ſtands,
I ſpoke it but according to the trick: if you'll hang me Tuning his voice and balancing his hands: -
you may. Shakeſpeare. How fluent nonſenſe trickles from his tongue ! -
-- The trick of that voice I well remember. Shaftare. How ſweet the periods, neither ſaid nor ſung. Pope.
º, Behold, They empty heads conſole with empty ſound.
Although the print be little, the whole matter No more, alas ! the voice of fame they hear, --- " _ _1,
tº And copy of the father; eye, noſe, lip, The balm of dulneſs trickling in their ear. Pope's Dunciad:
The trick of 's frown, his forehead. Shakespeare Iłżnter’s Tale. - Subdu'd, - º
7. A number of cards laid regularly up in play: as, a trick of The froſt reſolves into a triºling thaw. . Thomſºn's Winter.
** cards. T. adj. [from trick.] Pretty. This is a word of en-
º TR1ck. v. a. [from the noun; tricker, Fr. earinent. - - - -
º Tº. cheat; to º on ; to defraud. J The fool hath planted in his memory
It is impoſſible that the whole world ſhould thus conſpire An army of good words; and I do know
º to cheat themſelves, to put a deluſion on mankind, and trick A many fools that ſtand in better place,
º themſelves into belief. Stephens's Sermons. Qarniſh'd like him, that for a triºſ word - !---
º 2. To dreſs; to decorate; to adorn; properly to knot. [trica, Defy the matter. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
º in low Latin, ſignifies a knot of hair; treccia, Italian: hence All this ſervice have I done fince T went. *
º trace. Matt. 1//lmonaſterienſ, ſays of Godiva of Coventry, —My trictſ, ſpirit ! Shakeſpeare's ºff.
º that ſhe rode tricas capitis &amp; crines diſſolvens.] TR Ico'RPoRAL. adj. [tricorpus, Lat.] Having three bodies d
ſº And trick them up in knotted curls anew. d Drayton. Tº: adj. [among hunters; tride, French. J softi; -
º ned the impoſture upon the king, and gave out, ready. - - - - - - , -
º ººº the true hº ; had º up a *. in the TRI'DENT, n.ſ.. [trident, Fr. tridens, Dat..] A three forked
º likeneſs of Edward Plantagenet. Bacon's Henry VII. ſceptre of Neptune. ~ ---~~1.1 -
Horridly trickt His nature is too noble for the world: haſ -
| With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, ſons, He would not flatter Neptune for his trident. Shakeſpeare.
ith blood of a 2 • *. 2 Shak Can'ſt thou with fiſgigs pierce him to the quick
º Bak’d and impaſted with the parching fires. akºff. n gigs p
This pillar is but a medley, or a maſs of all the precedent
ornaments, making a new kind by ſtealth; and though the
moſt richly tricked, yet the pooreſt in this, that he is a bor-
rower of all his beauty. Wotton's Architect.
Their heads are trickt with taſſels and flowers. Sandys.
Woful ſhepherds, weep no more,
For Lycidas, your ſorrow, is not dead:
Or in his ſkull thy barbed trident ſtick?
He lets them wear their ſaphire crowns, -
And wield their little tridents. h of Neptune’ *.
ral find ſtery in every tooth of Neptune's tºnſ.
Several find a myſtery y Addiſon on ancient Medals.
TRI'DENT, adj. Having three teeth. -
TRI'DING. : [zničinja, Saxon.] The third part of a coun-
Sandy: on jºb.
- Bailey.
-- Sunk, though he be, beneath the wat'ry floor; ty or ſhire. . . . . .
2. So ſing the Day-ſtar in the ocean bed, TRIDuan. adj. [from triduum, Lat.]
! And yet anon repairs his drooping head, I. Laſting three days. d.
And tricks his beams, and with new ſpangled ore, 2. Happening every third *L triennal, Fr.]
Flames in the forehead of the morning ſky. Milton. TRI º adj. [triennis, Lat. triennal, Fr.
A daw that had a mind to be ſparkiſh, tricked himſelf up I. Laſting three years. . . - s King Charlet.
with all the gay feathers he could muſter, L’Eſtrange's Fab. I paſſed the blº ginia parliaments. ing Ri ...;d<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R I
T R I
Richard the third, though he came in by blood, yet the
ſhort time of his triennial reign he was without any; and
proved ºne of my beſt lawgivers. Hºwe's England's Tears.
2. 'Happening every third year.
TRI'E.R. m. ſ. [from try.]
1. One who tries experimentally. -
The ingenious triers of the German experiment found,
that their glaſs veſſel was lighter when the air had been drawn
out than before by an ounce and very near a third. Boyle.
2. One who examines judicially.
Courts of juſtice are bound to take notice of ačts of par-
liament, and whether they are truly pleaded or not ; and
therefore they are the triers of them. Hale.
There ſhould be certain triers or examiners appointed by
the ſtate to inſpect the genius of every particular boy. Sped.
3. Teſt; one who brings to the teſt.
You were uſed
To ſay, extremity was the trier of ſpirits;
That common chances common men could bear. Shakeſ?.
To TRI'FAllow. v. a. ſtres, Latin, and realza, Saxon, 2
harrow.] To plow land the third time before ſowing, Bailey.
The beginning of Auguſt is the time of triſallowing, or
laſt plowing, before they ſow their wheat. Martimer.
TRI'Fid. adj. [among botaniſts.] Cut or divided into three
parts. Bailey.
TRIFI'stulary. adj. [tres and f/iula, Latin.] Having three
ides.
"ºn, of that ſpecies whoſe trififtulary bill or crany we
have beheld. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To TR1'FL E. v. n. [tryfrien, Dutch.]
1. To act or talk without weight or dignity; to act with levity;
to talk with folly. - -
When they ſaw that we ought to abrogate ſuch popiſh ce-
remonies as are unprofitable, or elſe might have other more
profitable in their ſtead, they trifle and they beat the air about
nothing which toucheth us, unleſs they mean that we ought
to abrogate all popiſh ceremonies. Hooker.
2. To mock; to Ph. the fool.
- o not believe,
That, from the ſenſe of all civility,
I thus would play and trifle with your reverence. Shakeſp.
3. To indulge light amuſement.
4. To be of no importance.
'Tis hard for every trifting debt of two ſhillings to be
driven to law. Spenſer.
To TRI'Fle. v. a. To make of no importance. Not in
uſe.
Threeſcore and ten I can remember well,
Within the volume of which time I’ve ſeen
Hours dreadful and things ſtrange; but this ſore night
Hath trified former knowings. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
TR1'FLE. n.ſ.. [from the noun...] A thing of no moment.
The inſtruments of darkneſs tell us truths;
Win us with honeſt trifles, to betray us
In deepeſt conſequence. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Old Chaucer doth of Topas tell,
Mad Rabelais of Pantagruel, ;
A later third of Dowſabell,
With ſuch poor trifles playing:
Others the like have labour'd at,
Some of this thing, and ſome of that, }
And many of they know not what,
But that they muſt be ſaying. Drayton's Nymphid.
. The infinitely greateſt confeſſed good is neglected, to ſa-
- tisfy the ſucceſſive uneaſineſs of our deſires purſuing trifles.
- Locke.
TRI'FEER. n.ſ. [trifelaar, Dutch..] One who ads with levity;
one that talks with folly.
A man cannot tell whether Apelles or Albert Durer
were the more trifieri, whereof the one would make a per-
ſonage by geometrical proportions, the other by taking the
beſt parts out of divers faces to make one excellent. Bacon. -
Shall I, who can enchant the boiſt’rous deep,
Bid Boreas halt, make hills and foreſts move,
Shall I be baffled by this trifier, love. Granville.
As much as ſyſtematical learning is decried by ſome vain
*śr of the age, it is the happieſt way to furniſh the mind
with knowledge. /Watts.
TRI'FLING. adj [from trifte.] Wanting worth; unimportant;
wanting weight.
To a ſoul ſupported with an aſſurance of the divine fa-
vour, the honours or afflićtions of this life will be equally
trifting and contemptible. Rogers's Sermons.
Triflingly. adv. [from trifting..] Without weight; with-
out dignity ; without importance.
Thoſe who are carried away with the ſpontaneous current
of their own thoughts, muſt never humour their minds in
being thus triftingly buſy. Locke.
TRI'For M. adj. [triformis, Lat.] Having a triple ſhape.
The moon her monthly round
Still ending, ſtill renewing through mid heav'n,
TRI'GLYPH. m. ſ. [In architecture. J A member of th:
With borrow'd light her countenance trifºrm
Hence fills, and empties, to enlighten th’ earth. Miltºn
TRI'Go ER. m. ſ. [derived by junius from trigue, Fr. from in-
tricare, Lat.]
1. A catch to hold the wheel on ſteep ground.
2. The catch that being pulled looſes the cock of the un
. The pulling the trigger of the gun with which th: murder
is committed, has no natural connection with thoſe ideas that
make up the complex one, murder. Lock
TRING 1'NTAls. n.ſ. [from triginta, Latin, thirty.]
Trentals or tringintals were a number of maſſes to th
of thirty, inſtituted by Saint Gregory, ;:
- - fri
of the Dorick order ſet directly over every pillar, and in .
tain ſpaces in the intercolumnations. Harri;
The Dorick order has now and then a ſober ganiſhment
of lion's heads in the cornice, and of triglyphs ind metopes
always in the frize. Wotton.
TRI'Gon. m. ſ. [trigone, Fr.] A triangle. A term in aft.
logy.
The ordinary height of a man ninety-ſix digits, the an-
cient Egyptians eſtimated to be equal to that myſtical cubit
among them ſtiled paſſus Ibidis, or the trigon that the Ibis
makes at every ſtep, conſiſting of three latera, each thiſ.
two digits. Hale's Origin ºf Mania.
TRI'Go NAL. adj. [from trigon.] Triangular; having three
corners.
A ſpar of a yellºw hue ſhot into numerous trigºnal pointed
ſhoots of various ſizes, found growing to one ſide of a per-
pendicular fiſſure of a ſtratum of free-ſtone in digging
be"'&gt;
Woodward on Fifth,
TRIGONOMETRY. m. ſ. [trigonometrie, Fr.]
Trigonometry is the art of meaſuring triangles, or of cal-
culating the ſides of any triangle ſought, and this is plain or
ſpherical. Harris,
On a diſcovery of Pythagoras all trigonometry, and conſe.
quently all navigation, is founded. Guardian,
TRIgonome"Trical. adj. [from trigonometry.] Pertaining to
trigonometry.
TRILA't ERA.L. adj. [trilateral, French; tre; and latus, Lat.]
Having three ſides.
TRIll. n.ſ.. [trillo, Italian.] Quaver; tremulouſneſs of mu-
ſick.
Long has a race of heroes fill'd the ſtage,
That rant by note, and through the gamut rage,
In ſongs and airs expreſs their martial fire
Combat in trills, and in a fugue expire. Addison,
To TRIll. v. a. [from the noun..] To utter quavering.
Through the ſoft ſilence of the liſtening night
The ſober-ſuited ſongſtreſs trill, her lay. Thomſºn.
To TRIll. v. n.
1. To trickle; to fall in drops or ſlender ſtreams.
Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonſtration
of grief?
I, ſhe took 'em ; read 'em in my preſence;
And now and then an ample tear trill'd down ...
Her delicate cheek. Shakeſp. King Lear.
2. To play in tremulous vibrations of ſound.
Am I call’d upon the grave debate,
To judge of trilling notes and tripping feet. . Dºlº,
TRI'llion. m. ſ. [A word invented by Locke : tilis, Fº
A million of millions of millions; a million twice multiplied
by a million. -
Triluºminar. adj. [triluminari, Latin.] Having ºf
TRILU'MINous. } lights. - Did.
TRIM. adj. [zernymmes, Saxon, completed] Nicº; ſmug;
dreſſed up. doth tak
Tone paine in cottage doth take, »
When .. trim bowers do make. Tºſºr's Hºſ.
A trim exploit, a manly enterprize,
To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes , , , ,
With your deriſion. Shakespeare Midſummer Nigh', Drº:
The Dorick order has, in compariſon of thoſe that i.
low, a more maſculine aſpect, and little trim" than .
Tuſcan that went before, ſave a ſober garniſhment " *
then of lions heads in the cornice, and of triglyphs * .
topes always in the frize. Iſºttºn's Arth
Doſt thou not bluſh to live ſo like a beat, , , , . f
So trim, ſo diſſolute, ſo looſely dreſt. Dryden's Peſuſ.
To TRIM. v. a. ſerumman, Saxon, to build.]
1. To fit out.
Malicious cenſurers ever,
As rav'nous fiſhes do a veſiel follow
That is new trimm'd.
2. To dreſs; to decorate.
Our youth got me to play the woman's part, tº ſºare,
And I was trim'd in Julia's gown. sº
Pennyroyal and orpin they uſe in the country to t",º:
houſes, binding it with a lath againſt a wall . . ntle-
Two arts attend architecture, like her principal ge
- - - - “a lº ºttºm.
women, to dreſs and t in her, picture and ſculp" º
Shaft. Henry VIII,
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R I
* The vićtim ox that was for altars preſt,
- Trimm'd with white ribbons and with garlands dreſt,
Sunk of himſelf. Dryden's Georg.
3. To ſhave ; to clip.
Mephiboſheth had neither dreſſed his feet, nor trimmed his
º beard. 2 Sam. xix. 24.
º Clip and trim thoſe tender ſtrings like a beard. Brown.
“3. The barber may trim religion as he pleaſes. Howel.
Trim off the ſmall ſuperfluous branches. Mortimer.
º - 4. To make neat; to adjuſt.
&lt;º I found her trimming up the diadem
º On her dead miſtreſs. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
º Go, firrah, to my cell, as you look
*: To have my pardon, trim it handſomely. Shakeſpeare.
Yet are the men more looſe than they !
** More kemb'd, and bath'd, and rubb'd, and trimm'd
º More ſleek, more ſoft, and ſlacker limb'd. Benj. johnſºn.
- To blaſt the living, gave the dead their due,
As And wreaths, herſelf had tainted, trimm'd anew. Tickell.
When workmen fit a piece into other work, they ſay they
trim in a piece. Mozon's Mech. Exerciſes.
Each muſe in Leo's golden days
Starts from her trance, and trim; her wither'd bays. Pope.
5. To balance a veſſel.
º Sir Roger put his coachman to trim the boat. Spectator.
~. 6. It has often up emphatical.
- He gave you all the duties of a man,
º Trimm'd up your praiſes with a princely tongue,
*- Spoke your deſervings like a chronicle. Shakeſpeare.
º To TRIM. v. n. To balance; to fluctuate between two par-
i ties.
If ſuch by trimming and time-ſerving, which are but two
words for the ſame thing, betray the church by nauſeating
her pious orders, this will produce confuſion. South's Serm.
For men to pretend that their will obeys that law, while
----- all beſides their will ſerves the faction ; what is this but a
... -- groſs, fulſome juggling with their duty, and a kind of trim-
ming it between God and the devil. South's Sermons.
He who heard what ev'ry fool cou’d ſay,
Wou'd never fix his thought, but trim his time away.
Dryden's Hind and Panther.
TRIM. n.ſ. Dreſs; geer; ornaments.
They come like ſacrifices in their trim,
And to the five-ey'd maid of ſmoaky war,
All hot, and bleeding, will we offer them.
º Forget
Your labourſome and dainty trims, wherein
You made great Juno angry. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
- The goodly London in her gallant trim,
-- The phoenix daughter of the vanquiſh’d old,
Shakeſpeare.
. . Like a rich bride does to the ocean ſwim,
And on her ſhadow rides in floating gold. Drydm.
: TR1/MLY. adv. [from trim.] Nicely ; neatly.
:.” Her yellow golden hair
Was trimly woven, and in treſſes wrought. Fairy Queen.
º The mother, if of the houſhold of our lady, will have her
.. ſon cunning and bold, in making him to live trimly. Aſcham.
-- 'TR1'MMER. n.ſ.. [from trim.] One who changes ſides to ba-
lance parties; a turncoat.
The ſame bat taken after by a weazel begged for mercy:
* no, ſays the weazle, no mercy to a mouſe: well, ſays tother,
- but you may ſee by my wings that I am a bird; and ſo the
º bat 'ſcaped in both by playing the trimmer. L'E/irange's Fab.
To confound his hated coin,
All parties and religions join,
Whigs, tories, trimmers.
, 2. A piece of wood inſerted.
- Before they pin up the frame of ground-plates, they muſt
fit in the ſummer and the girders, and all the joiſts and the
trimmers for the ſtair-caſe. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſe.
TR1'MMING.. n.ſ. [from trim.] Ornamental appendages to a
coat or gown.
Judgment without vivacity of imagination is too heavy,
and like a dreſs without fancy; and the laſt without the firſt
is too gay, and but all trimming. Garth's Prºf. to Ovid.
TR1'NAL. adj. [trinus, Lat.] Threefold.
Like many an angel's voice,
Singing before th' eternal majeſty,
In their trinal triplicity on high.
That far-beaming blaze of majeſty,
Wherewith he wont at heav'n's high council table
To fit the midſt of trinal unity,
He laid aſide. . AMilton.
TRINE. m. ſ. [trine, Fr. trinus, Latin.] An aſpect of planets
placed in three angles of a trigon, in which they are ſuppoſed
by aſtrologers to be eminently benign.
To th’ other five,
Their planetary motions, and aſpects,
º In ſextile, ſquare, and trine, and oppoſite,
º Of noxious efficacy. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
Swift.
Fa. Qu. b. i.
T R I
Now frequent trines the happier lights amon
And high-rais'd Jove from . º: º -
Thoſe weights took off that on his planet hung,
Will gloriouſly the new-laid works ſucceed. "Dryden.
From Aries right-ways draw a line, to end
In the ſame round, and let that line ſubtend
An equal triangle; now ſince the lines
Muſt three times touch the round, and meet three ſigns,
Where'er they meet in angles thoſe are trines. Creech.
To TRINE. ** [from the noun..] To put in a trine aſpect.
This advantage age from youth has won
As not to be outridden, though outrun; 2
.. *: now to Venus trin'd,
nd with ſtern Mars in Capricorn was join'd. Maez.
TRINITY. n.ſ. ſtrinitas, . trinité, #. The º:
henſible union of the three perſons in the Godhead.
Touching the picture of the trinity, I hold it blaſphemous
and utterly unlawful. Peacham.
In my whole eſſay there is not anything like an objection
againſt the trinity. Locke.
TRI'Nket. n.ſ. [This Skinner derives ſomewhat harſhly from
trinquet, Fr. trinchetto, Ital, a topſail. I rather imagine it
corrupted from tricket, ſome petty finery or decoration.]
1. Toys; ornaments of dreſs; ſuperfluities of decoration.
Beauty and uſe can ſo well agree together, that of all the
trinkets wherewith they are attired, there is not one but ſerves
to ſome neceſſary purpoſe. Sidney, b. ii.
We'll ſee your trinkets here forthcoming all. Shakeſp.
They throng who ſhould buy firſt, as if my trinkets had
been hallowed. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
Let her but have three wrinkles in her face,
Soon will you hear the ſawcy ſteward ſay,
Pack up with all your trinkets and away. Dryden's juv.
She was not hung about with toys and trinkets, tweezer-
caſes, pocket-glaſſes. Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of john Bull.
How Johnny wheedl’d, threat'n'd, fawn'd,
Till Phyllis all her trinkets pawn'd.
2. Things of no great value; tackle ; tools.
What huſbandlie huſbands except they be fooles,
But handſom have ſtorehouſe for trinkets and tooles. Tuff.
Go with all your ſervants and trinkets about you. L’Eſtr.
TRIo'BoLAR. adj. [triabolaris, Latin.] Vile ; mean; worth-
leſs.
Turn your libel into verſe, and then it may paſs current
amongſt the balladmongers for a triololar ballad. Cheynel.
To TRIP. v. a. [trºper, Fr. trippen, Dutch.]
1. To ſupplant; to throw by ſtriking the feet from the ground
by a ſudden motion.
Swift.
He conjunct
Tripp'd me behind.
Be you contented,
To have a ſon ſet your decrees at naught,
To trip the courſe of law, and blunt the ſword
That guards the peace and ſafety of your perſon. Shakespeare
2. To ſtrike the feet from under the body.
I tript up thy heels and beat thee. Shakeſpeare.
The words of Hobbes's defence trip up the heels of his
cauſe; I had once reſolved. To reſolve preſuppoſeth deli-
beration, but what deliberation can there be of that which
is inevitably determined by cauſes without ourſelves. Bramhall.
3. To catch; to detect. -
Theſe women
Can trip me, if I err ; who, with wet checks, -
Were preſent when ſhe finiſh'd. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To TRIP. v. n. -
1. To fall by loſing the hold of the feet. -
Virgil is ſo exact in every word, that none can be changed
but for a worſe: he pretends ſometimes to trip, but it is to
make you think him in danger when moſt ſecure. Pryden.
2. To fail; to err; to be deficient. -
Saint Jerome, who pardons not over-eaſily his adverſaries,
if any where they chance to trip, preſſeth him as thereby
making all ſorts of men God's enemies. Płooker, b. v.
Many having uſed their utmoſt diligence to ſecure a reten-
tion of the things committed to the memory, cannot, cº-
tainly know where it will trip and fail them. South.
Will ſhines in mixed company, making his real ignorance
appear a ſeeming one : our club has caught him tripping, at
which times they never ſpare him. Addiſon's Spºt. Nº. 1 oš.
Several writers of uncommon erudition would º my
- - aught me tripping in a matter of to great
º if they caug Pl %'." Speč7. Nº. 228.
: to titubate.
3- Tº: * idea of a man's drinking till his tongue
trips, yet not know that it is called drunkenneſs. Locke.
4. To run lightly.
Shakespeare.
In ſilence ſad,
Trip we after the night's ſhade. Shakeſt care.
The old ſaying is, the third Pays for all; the triplex, ſir,
is a good tripping meaſure. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
He
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R [.
ſ
He throws his arm, and with a long-drawn daſh
Blends all together ; then diſtinctly trip; . .
From this to that; then quick returning ſkips
And ſnatches this again, and pauſes there.
On old Lycaeus or Cyllene hoar,
Trip no more in twilight ranks,
fhough Erymanth your loſs deplore,
A better ſoil ſhall give you thanks.
She bounded by, and tripp'd ſo light,
Craſhaw.
Milton's Arcades.
They had not time to take a ſteady fight. Dryden.
To the garden walk ſhe took her way,
To ſport and trip along in cool of day. Dryden.
Stay, nymph, he cry’d, I follow not a foe ;
Thus from the lion trips the trembling doe. Dryden.
Well thou doſt to hide from common fight
Thy cloſe intrigues, too bad to bear the light:
Nor doubt I, but the ſilver-footed dame
Tripping from ſea on ſuch an errand came. Dryden.
He'll make a pretty figure in a triumph, -
And ſerve to trip before the vićtor's chariot. Addiſon.
The lower plaits of the drapery in antique figures in ſculp-
ture and painting, ſeem to have gathered the wind when the
perſon is in a poſture of tripping forward. Addiſon.
In Britain's iſles, as Heylin notes,
The ladies trip in petticoats. Prior.
They gave me inſtructions how to ſlide down and trip up
the ſteepeſt ſlopes. Pope. .
5. To take a ſhort voyage.
TRIP. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A ſtroke or catch by which the wreſtler ſupplants his anta-
oniſt.
g O thou diſſembling cub what wilt thou be,
When time hath ſow'd a grizzel on thy caſe ?
Or will not elſe thy craft ſo quickly grow,
That thine own trip ſhall be thine overthrow Shakeſp.
He ſtript for wreſtling, ſmears his limbs with oil,
And watches with a trip his foe to foil. Dryden's Georg.
It was a noble time when trips and Corniſh hugs could
make a man immortal. * on ancient Medals.
2. A ſtumble by which the foothold is loſt. "
3. A failure; a miſtake.
He ſaw his way, but in ſo ſwift a pace,
To chuſe the ground might be to loſe the race:
They then, who of each trip th’ advantage take,
Find but thoſe faults which they want wit to make. Dryd.
4. A ſhort voyage or journey.
I took a trip to London on the death of the queen. Pope.
TRI'PART1te. adj. [tripartite, Fr. tripartitus, Latin.] Di-
vided into three parts; having three correſpondent copies.
Our indentures tripartite are drawn. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
TRIPE. n.ſ.. [tripe, Fr. trippa, Italian and Spaniſh.]
1. The inteſtines; the guts.
How ſay you to a fat tripe finely broil'd :
—I like it well. Shakeſpeare.
In private draw your poultry, clean your tripe. King.
2. It is uſed in Iudicrous language for the human belly.
TIR'PEDAL. adj. [tres and pes, Lat.] Having three feet.
TRIPETAlous, adj. [tres and wirzaov.] Having a flower
conſiſting of three leaves.
TRI'PHTHoNG. m. ſ. [triphthongue, Fr. tres and p$oſy..] A
coalition of three vowels to form one ſound: as, eau; eye.
TR1'Plf... adj. [triple, Fr. triplex, triplus, Lat.]
1. Threefold; conſiſting of three conjoined.
See in him
The triple pillar of the world transform'd
Into a ſtrumpet’s ſtool. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
O night and ſhades,
How are ye join'd with hell in triple knot,
Againſt th' unarmed weakneſs of one virgin,
Alone and helpleſs | Milton.
Thrice happy pair ſo near ally’d
In royal blood and virtue too:
Now love has you together ty'd,
May none this triple knot undo. J/aller.
By thy triple ſhape as thou art ſeen
In heav'n, earth, hell, grant this. Dryden.
... Strong Alcides, after he had ſlain
The triple Geryon, drove from conquer'd Spain
His captive herds. Dryden's Aºn.
Out bounc'd the maſtiff of the triple head;
Away the hare with double ſwiftneſs fled. Swift.
2. Treble; three times repeated.
..We have taken this as a moderate meaſure betwixt the
higheſt and loweſt; but if we had taken only a triple pro-
Poition, it would have been ſufficient. Burnet.
If then the atheiſt can have no imagination of more ſenſes
than five, why doth he ſuppoſe that a body is capable of
more | If we had double or triple as many, there might ſtill
be the ſame ſuſpicion for a greater number without end.
Bentley's Sermons.
To TRI'PLE. v. a. [from the adječtive.] ey r
* To treble; to make thrice as much, or as many.
To what purpoſe ſhould words ſerve, when nature hath
more to declare than groans and ſtrong cries; more than
ſtreams of bloody ſweat; more than his doubled and tripled
prayers can expreſs. Hooker, i.v.
ſ' theſe halfpence ſhould gain admittance, in no long ſince
of time his limited quantity would be tripled u -
2. To make J. y pled upon us. Swift.
Time, ačtion, place, are ſo preſerv'd by thee,
That e'en Corneille might with envy ſee
Th' alliance of his tripled unity. - Dryden,
TRI'Plet. n.ſ.. [from triple.]
1. Three of a kind.
There ſit C–nts, D–ks, and Harriſon,
How they ſwagger from their garriſon;
Such a triplet could you tell
Where to find on this ſide hell. Swift,
2. Three verſes rhyming together: as, w
Waller was ſmooth, but Dryden taught to join
The varying verſe, the full reſounding line,
The long majeſtick march and energy divine. Pºpe.
Some wretched lines from this neglected hand
May find my Hero on the foreign ſtrand,
Warm with new fires, and pleas'd with new command.
- Prior.
I frequently make uſe of triºlet rhymes, becauſe the
bound the ſenſe, making the laſt verſe of the triplet a pin-
darick. Dryden's AFn.
TRI'plicate. adj. [from triplex, Lat.] Made thrice as much.
Triplicate ratio, in geometry, is the ratio of cubes to each
other; which ought to be diſtinguiſh'd from triple. Harris,
All the parts, in height, length, and breadth, bear a du-
plicate or triplicate proportion one to another. Grew.
Triplication. m. ſ. [from triplicate.] The aët of trebling
or adding three together.
Since the margin of the viſible horizon in the heavenly
globe is parallel with that in the earthly, accounted but one
hundred and twenty miles diameter; ſenſe muſt needs mea-
ſure the azimuths, or verticle circles, by trilization of the
ſame diameter of one hundred and twenty. Glanville's Scepſ.
TRIPL1(city. m.ſ.. [triplicité, Fr. from triplex, Lat..] Treble-
neſs; ſtate of being threefold.
Like many an angel's voice,
Singing before th' eternal majeſty,
In their trinal triplicity on high. Fairy Qu. l. i.
It was a dangerous triplicity to a monarchy, to have the
arms of a foreigner, the diſcontents of ſubjects, and the title
of a pretender to meet. Bacon's Henry VII.
Affect not duplicities nor triplicities, nor any certain num-
ber of parts in your diviſion of things. Watts's Logick.
TRI'PMADAM. m. ſ. An herb. -
Tripmadam is uſed in ſalads. Mºrtimer's Huſſ.
TR1'pod. n.ſ.. [tripus, Latin.] A ſeat with three feet, ſuch as
that from which the prieſteſs of Apollo delivered oracles.
Two tripods caſt in antick mould,
With two great talents of the fineſt gold. Dryden's Án.
TRI'poly. n.ſ.. [I ſuppoſe from the place whence it is brought]
A ſharp cutting ſand.
In poliſhing glaſs with ſand, putty, or tritely, it is not to
be imagined that thoſe ſubſtances can by grating and ſetting
the glaſs bring all its leaſt particles to an accurate poliſh. .
Newton's Opticº.
TRI'pos. n.ſ. A tripod. See TRipod.
Welcome all that lead or follow,
To the oracle of Apollo;
Here he ſpeaks out of his pottle, -
Or the tripos, his tower bottle. Benj. jºhnſºn.
Craz'd fool, who would'ſt be thought an oracle,
Come down from off the tripos, and ſpeak plain. Dryden.
TRI'PPER. n.ſ.. [from trip.] One who trips.
TRI''PPING. adj. [from trip.] Quick; nimble.
The clear fun of the freſh wave largely drew,
As after thirſt; which made their flowing ſhrink
From ſtanding lake, to tripping ebb ; that ſtole #
With ſoft foot tow’rds the deep. Miltºn's Par. L3'.
TRI''PP1 NG. m. ſ. [from trip.] Light dance.
Back, ſhepherds, back, enough your play,
Here be without duck or nod,
Other trippings to be trod, •r
Of lighter toes. Milton.
TRI'ptote. n.ſ.. [triptoton, Lat.] Clark.
Triptote is a noun uſed but in three caſes. ing
Tripu'pi ARY. adj. [tripºdium, Lat.] Performed by dancing
Claudius Pulcher underwent the like ſucceſs when º' con.
tinued the tripudiaºy augurations. Brown's Wººd" Era".
Tº IPU DIA’t 16N. m.ſ. [tripudium, Lat..] Aët ºf lºft
Trºppingly, adv. [from tipping.] With agility; wit"""
motion.
This ditty after me
Sing, and dance it trippingly. Sºft.
Speak the ſpeech trippingy on the tongue : but if yº
mouth it as many of our players do, I had as lieve th; º
crier had ſpoke my lines. Shakespeare . Hamlet.
TRI'REME.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R I
-
º
ºr
º
º
−wºmºsºs
=-
TRIRP'Me. n.ſ.. [triremis, Lat.] A galley with three benches
of oars on a ſide.
TRIsection. n.ſ.. [tres and ſºlio, Lat.] Diviſion into three
equal parts: the trife&amp;tion of an angle is one of the defide-
rata of geometry.
TRI'stful. adj. [triſtis, Lat.] Sad; melancholy; gloomy ;
ſorrowful. A bad word.
Heav'n's face doth glow
With triſtful viſage; and, as 'gainſt the doom,
I thought ſick at the aët. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
TRISU'lc. m. ſ. [triſulcus, Lat..] A thing of three points.
Conſider the threefold effect of Jupiter's %. to burn,
diſcuſs, and terebrate. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
TR1sylla'pical. adi, ſtrºſyllabe, Fr. from triſyllable.] Con-
ſiſting of three ſyllables.
TRISYLLABLE. n.ſ. ſtriſyllaba, Latin.] A word conſiſting
of three ſyllables.
TRITE, adj. [tritus, Latin.] Worn out; ſtale; common;
not new.
Theſe duties cannot but appear of infinite concern when
we refle&amp;t how uncertain our time is: this may be thought
ſo trite and obvious a reflection, that none can want to be
reminded of it. Rogers's Sermons.
She gives her tongue no moment's reſt, T.
In phraſes batter'd, ſtale, and trite,
Which modern ladies call polite. Swift.
TRI'TE Ness. m. ſ. [from trite.] Staleneſs; commonneſs.
TR1THE'IsM. n.ſ. [tritheiſme, Fr. Theſ; and Sièg.] The opi-
nion which holds three diſtinét gods.
TR1'tu RABLE. adj. [triturable, #. from triturate.] Poſſible
to be pounded or comminuted.
It is not only trituſ able and reducible to powder by contri-
tion, but will not ſubſiſt in a violent fire. Brown.
TR1TURA’tion. m. ſ. [trituration, Fr. trituro, Lat.] Re-
dućtion of any ſubſtances to powder upon a ſtone with a
muller, as colours are ground: it is alſo called levigation.
He affirmeth, that a pumice ſtone powdered is lighter
than one entire; that abatement can hardly be avoided in
trituration. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv.
TRI'vet. m. ſ. [See TREver.] Anything ſupported by three
feet.
The beſt at horſe-race he ordain’d a lady for his prize,
Generally praiſeful; fair and young, and ſkill'd in houſe-
wiferies,
Of all kind fitting; and withal a trivet, that enclos'd
Twenty-two meaſures. Chapman's Iliad.
- The trivet table of a foot was lame,
A blot which prudent Baucis overcame,
Who thruſts beneath the limping leg a ſherd. Dryden.
TRI'v1Al. n.ſ.. [trivial, Fr. trivialis, Lat.]
1. Vile; worthleſs; vulgar; ſuch as may be picked up in the
highway.
Be ſubjećts great, and worth a poet's voice,
For men of ſenſe deſpiſe a trivial choice. Roſcommon.
2. Light; trifling; unimportant; inconſiderable. This uſe is
more frequent, though leſs juſt.
This argues conſcience in your grace,
But the reſpects thereof are nice and trivial,
All circumſtances well conſidered. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
See yon mad fools, who, for ſome trivial right,
For love, or for miſtaken honour, fight. Dryden.
Were they only ſome ſlight and trivial indiſcretions, to
which the example of the world expoſed us, it might per-
haps not much concern our religion. Rogers's Serm.
In ev'ry work regard the writer's end;
And if the means be juſt, the condućt true,
Applauſe, in ſpite of trivial faults, is due. Pope.
The ancient poets are like many modern ladies: let an
aćtion be never ſo trivial in itſelf, they always make it ap-
pear of the utmoſt importance. Pope.
TRI'v1ALLY. adv. [from trivial.]
1. Commonly ; vulgarly.
Money is not the finews of war, as is tº ivially ſaid, where
the finews of mens arms, in effeminate people, fail. Bacon.
2. Lightly ; inconſiderably.
TRI'vial Ness. n.ſ.. [from trivial.]
1. Commonneſs; vulgarity.
2. Lightneſs; unimportance.
TRI'UMPH. n.ſ.. [triumphus, Lat. triomphe, Fr.]
1. Pomp with which a vićtory is publickly celebrated.
Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels
Unto a dunghil, which ſhall be thy grave;
And there cut off thy moſt ungracious head,
Which I will bear in triumph to the king. Shakeſpeare.
In ancient times the triumphs of the generals from vićtory,
and the great donatives upon diſbanding the armies, were
things able to enflame all mens courage. Bacon.
2. State of being vićtorious.
Sublime with expectation when to ſee
In triumph iſſuing forth their glorious chief. Milton.
Hercules, from Spain,
Arriv'd in triumph, from Geryon ſlain. Dryden's Án.
3. Vićtory; conqueſt.
Eros has
Packt cards with Caeſar, and falſe play'd my glory
Unto an enemy's triumph. Shakeſp. Ant. and Clopatra,
- Each order bright
Sung triumph, and him ſung vićtorious king. Milton.
Turn arcs of triumph to a garden-gate. &gt; Pope.
T. fools admire, or whining coxcombs toaſt,
e Vain Coquets the trifling tr;
4, Joy for ... g triumphs boaſt.
Great triumph and rejoicing was in heav'n. Milton.
# A conquering card now called trump. See TRUMP.
o TRIUMPH. v. n. [triumphe, Lat. triompher, Fr. This
word is always accented in proſe on the firſt ſyllable, but in
poetry ſometimes on the laſt.] &gt;
1. To celebrate a vićtory with pomp; to rejoice for vićtory.
The triumphing of the wicked is ſhort, and the joy of the
hypogrite is but for a moment. jºb xx. 5.
Your vićtory, alas, begets my fears;
Can you not then triumph without my tears. Dryden.
2. To obtain vićtory.
This great commander ſought many times to perſuade So-
lyman to forbear to uſe his forces any farther againſt the
Chriſtians, over whom he had ſufficiently triumphed, and
turn them upon the Perſians. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
Then all this earthy groſſneſs quit,
Attir'd with ſtars, we ſhall for ever ſit,
Lºgie.
Triumphing over death, and chance, and time. Milton.
There fix thy faith and triumph o'er the world;
For who can help, or who can ſave beſides Rowe.
While blooming youth and gay delight
Sit on thy roſey cheeks confeſt,
Thou haſt, my dear, undoubted right
To triumph o'er this deſtin’d breaſt. Prior.
3. To inſult upon an advantage gained.
How ill beſeeming is it in thy ſex
To triumph, like an Amazonian trull. Shakeſpeare.
Sorrow on all the pack of you,
That triumph thus upon my miſery. Shakeſpeare.
Our grand foe,
Who now triumphs, and in th' exceſs of joy
Sole reigning, holds the tyranny of heav'n. Miltoh.
TRIU'MPHAL. adj. [triomphal, Fr. triumphalis, Lat. from
triumph.] Uſed in celebrating vićtory.
He left only triumphal garments to the general. Bacon.
Ye ſo near heav'n's door,
Triumphal with triumphal act have met. Milton.
Steel could the works of mortal pride confound,
And hew triumphal arches to the ground. Pope.
Leſt we ſhould for honour take
The drunken quarrel of a rake;
Or think it ſeated in a ſcar,
Or a proud triumphal car. Swift.
TRIU'MPHAL. m. ſ. [triumphalia, Lat. triumphal ornaments.]
A token of vićtory. Not in uſe.
He to his crew that ſat conſulting brought"
Joyleſs triumphal of his hop'd ſucceſs.
Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd.
TRIU'MPHANT. adj. [triumphans, Lat, triumphant, Fr.]
1. Celebrating a vićtory.
Captives bound to a triumphant car. Shakeſpeare.
It was drawn as a triumphant chariot, which at the ſame
time both follows and triumphs. South's Sermons.
2. Rejoicing as for victory. c
Think you, but that I know our ſtate ſecure, -
I would be ſo triumphant as I am 7 Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Off with the traitor's head;
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
Succeſsful beyond hope, to lead ye forth -
Triumphant out of this infernal pit. Milton.
. Vićtorious; graced with conqueſt.
He ſpeedily through all the hierarchies -
Intends to paſs triumphant, and give laws. Milton.
Athena, war's triumphant maid, . •
The happy ſon will, as the father, aid. Pope's Odyſſey.
TRIU'MPHANTLY. adv. [from triumphant; -
I. In a triumphant manner in token of victory; joyfully as for
vićtory.
Waoy with little loſs doth play
Upon the dancing banners of the French;
whº are at hand triumphantly diſplay'd. . . Shakespeare ?ear.
Through armed ranks triumphantly ſhe driyº,
And with one glance commands ten thouſand lives. Gran,
2. Vićtoriouſly; with ſucceſs.
Thou máſi, as a foreign recreant, be led
with manacles along our ſtreet; or elſe
imºhantly tread on thy country's ruin, -
ſº. palm. y Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus,
with inſolent exultation.
3. A'. governing lye goes round the world, and has
almoſt baniſhed truth out of it; and ſo reigning triumphantly
26 Z - 111<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R O
T R O
, is the ſource of moſt of thoſe confuſions that
- South's Sermons.
the univerſe. -
tº: n. ſ. [from triumph.] One who triumphs.
- Theſe words become your lips, as they paſs through
in its ſtead
them, lik t triumph
And enter in our ears, like great triumpbeº.
In their applauding gates. Shakespeare. Timon of Athens.
Auguſt was dedicated to Auguſtus by the ſenate, becauſe
in the fame month he was the firſt time created conſul, and
thrice triumpher in Rome. Peacham on Drawing.
r n.ſ. (triumviratus or triumviri, Lat. trium-
TRIU *} virat, Fr.] A coalition or concurrence of
TRIUMVIRI. three men.
Lepidus of the triumvirate
Should be depos'd. Shakespeare. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
The triumviri, the three corner cap of ſociety. Shakeſpeare:
During that triumvirate of kings, Henry, the eighth of
England, Francis the firſt of France, and Charles the fifth
emperor of Germany, none of the three could win a palm
of ground but the other two would balance it. Bacon's Eſſays.
with theſe the Piercies them confederate,
And, as three heads conjoin in one intent,
And inſtituting a triumvirate, -
Do part the land in triple government. Daniel's Civil War.
From diſtant regions fortune ſends
An odd triumvirate of friends. Swift.
TRI'UNE. adj. ſtres and unus, Lat..] At once three and one.
we read in ſcripture of a triune Deity, of God made fleſh
in the womb of a virgin, and crucified by the Jews. Burnet.
To TRoAT. v. a. [with hunters.] To cry as a buck does at
rutting time. Dić”.
TRoſcAR. n.ſ. ſtrocar corrupted from trois quart, French.J
A chirurgical inſtrument.
The handle of the trocar is of wood, the canula of ſilver,
and the perforator of ſteel. Sharp's Surgery.
Troch A'ical. adj. [trochaique, Fr. trochaicus, Lat..] Conſiſt-
ing of trochees.
TRoch ANTERs. m. ſ. [rpoxaſ?pt;..] Two proceſſes of the
thigh bone, called rotator major and minor, in which the
tendons of many muſcles terminate. Die?.
TRO'CHEE. n.ſ.. [trochaus, Lat, trochée, Fr. rtox2:32.] A
foot uſed in Latin poetry, conſiſting of a long and ſhort ſyl-
lable.
TRochi'Licks. m. ſ. [reoxºtov, Thoxº, a wheel.] The
ſcience of rotatory motion. -
There ſucceeded new inventions and horologies, compoſed
by trochilicks, or the artifice of wheels, whereof ſome are
kept in motion by weight, others without. Brown.
It is requiſite that we rightly underſtand ſome principles in
trochilicks, or the art of wheel inſtruments; as chiefly the
relation betwixt the parts of a wheel and thoſe of a balance,
the ſeveral proportions in the ſemidiameter of a wheel being
anſwerable to the ſides of a balance. JWilkins's Daedalus.
*TRochi NGs. n.ſ. The branches on a deer's head. Ainſ.
Trochi'sch. . m. ſ. . [Téoxſaxº~ ; trochiſłue, Fr. trochiſcus,
Latin.] A kind of tablet or lozenge.
The trochiſks of vipers, ſo much magnified, and the fleſh
of ſnakes ſome ways condited and corrected. Bacon.
TRode, the preterite of tread.
They trade the grapes and made merry. judges ir. 27.
TRoDE. m. ſ. [from trode, pret. of tread..] Footing.
The trade is not ſo tickle. Spenſer.
They never ſet foot on that ſame trade,
But baulke their right way, and ſtrain abroad. Spenſer.
TRod.
TRo'DDEN.
Jeruſalem ſhall be trodden down of the Gentiles. Luke xxi.
Thou, infernal ſerpent, ſhalt not long
Rule in the clouds; like an autumnal ſtar,
Or light'ning, thou ſhalt fall from heav'n trod down
Under his feet. Milton's Par. Reg. b. iv.
Ev’n the rough rocks with tender myrtle bloom,
And trodden weeds ſend out a rich perfume. Addiſon.
TRo'glodyte. n.ſ. (TF27A03:13;..] One who inhabits caves
of the earth.
. Procure me a troglodyte footman, who can catch a roe at
his full ſpeed. Arbuth, and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
To TRoLL. v. a. ſtrollen, to roll, Dutch ; perhaps from
trochlea, Lat, a thing to turn round..] To move circularly;
to drive about.
With the phant'ſies of hey troll,
Troll about the bridal bowl,
And divide the broad-bread cake,
Round about the bride's ſtake. Benj. johnſon's Underwoods.
To TRoll. v. n.
1. To roll; to run round.
How pleaſant on the banks of Styx,
To troll it in a coach and fix. Swift.
2. To fiſh for a pike with a rod which has a pulley towards
the bºttom, which I ſuppoſe gives occaſion to the term.
. Nor drain I ponds the golden carp to take,
Nor trowle for pikes, diſpeoplers of the lake. Gay.
}participle paſſive of tread.
TRo'LLOP. m. f. [A low word, I know no
A ſlatternly, looſe woman.
TRo'i MYPAMEs. n.ſ. (Of this word I know not the
A fellow I have known to go about with trolmwº.
knew him once a ſervant of the prince. Shakesp #. *: I
- ſº inter's Tal
-TROOP. m. ſ. [troupe, Fr. troppa, I - J Iai:
- p ppa, Italian 3 troope, Dutch
trop, Swediſh; troppa, low Latin.] x Lutc
1. A company; a number of people colleded
That which ſhould tº old º,ogether.
As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends
I muſt not look to have. sº Macbeth
Saw you not a bleſſed troop • 4Macbeth,
Invite me to a banquet, whoſe bright faces
Caſt thouſand beams upon me like the ſun. Shake
As the mind, by putting together the repeated ::::
unity, makes the collective mode of any number, as a ſc Q
or a groſs; ſo by putting together ſeveral particular nº.
it makes collective ideas of ſubſtances, as a troºp, an army. La .
2. A body of ſoldiers. Y. Locke,
AEneas ſeeks his abſent foe,
And ſends his ſlaughter'd troops to ſhades below.
3. A ſmall body of ... p ow. Dryden,
To Troop. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To march in a body.
I do not, as an enemy to peace,
Troop in the throngs of military men,
But rather ſhew a while like fearful war. Shakºftarº
They anon fºr “
With hundreds, and with thouſands, trooping came,
Attended. Milton's Par. Lºft, b.
Armies at the call of trumpet -
Troop to their ſtandard. Milton's Par, Lºft, i.vii.
2. To march in haſte.
Yonder ſhines Aurora's harbinger,
At whoſe approach ghoſts, wand'ring here and there,
Troop home to churchyards. Shakºſecre.
The dry ſtreets flow'd with men, -
That troop’d up to the king's capacious court. Chapman,
3. To march in company.
I do inveſt you jointly with my power,
Preheminence, and all the large effects
That troop with majeſty. Shakeſp. King Lear.
TRo'oper, n.ſ.. [from troop.] A horſe ſoldier A trooper
fights only on horſeback; a dragoon marches on horſeback,
but fights either as a horſeman or footman.
Cuſtom makes us think well of anything: what can be
more indecent now than for any to wear boots but troopers
and travellers ? yet not many years ſince it was all the faſhion.
Grew.
TRope. n.ſ. [764–62; trope, Fr. trºpus, Lat.] A change of
a word from its original ſignification; as, the clouds fºrciel
rain for foreſhew. -
For rhetorick he could not ope
t whence derived.]
meaning.]
His mouth, but out there flew a trºpe. Hudibrar.
If this licence be included in a ſingle word, it admits of
tropes; if in a ſentence, of figures. Dryden,
TRo'PHIED. adj. [from trophy.] Adorned with trophies.
Some greedy minion, or imperious wife,
The trophy'd arches, ſtory'd halls invade. Pº.
Trophy. m. ſ. [tropeum, trºphaeum, Latin.] Somethingtºn
from an enemy, and ſhewn or treaſured up in proof of victory.
What trºphy then ſhall I moſt fit deviſe,
In which I may record the memory -
Of my love's conqueſt, peerleſs beauty's prize
Adorn'd with honour, love, and chaſtity? Spºnſºr:
To have borne
His bruiſed helmet and his bended ſword,
Beforé him through the city, he forbids;
Giving all trophy, ſignal, and oſtent, V
Quite from himſelf to God. Shałºff. Henry V.
There lie thy bones,
Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb. , Shakespeare.
Twice will I not review the º
-r- r b.
Till I have torn that trophy from thy back, Shakespeare.
And ſplit thy heart for wearing it. f the
In ancient times the trºphies erected upon the place o the
vićtory, the triumphs of the generals upon theiº" rere
great donatives upon the diſbanding of the "...º. º
things able to enflame all mens courage. Bacon'; Eſº
Around the poſts hung helmets, darts, and Pºº"
And captive chariots, axes, ſhields, and bars,
And broken beaks of ſhips, the trophies of their waſ "?"
The tomb with manly arms and trophies grace. b. xi
To ſhew poſterity Elpenor was. Popº'; Olſº, "..."
TRo'P1cAL. adj. [from trope.] -
1. Rhetorically changed from the original meaning. ... | ex-
A ſtrict and literal acceptation of a looſe and tº. urj
preſſion was a ſecond ground. Brown's Fºgar ſº
The words are tropical or figurative, and import º" º,
bole, which is a way of expreſſing things beyºn" what º
and naturally they are in themſelves. South's Serm
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R O
The foundation of all parables is, ſome analogy or ſimili-
tude between the tropical or alluſive part of the pārable, and
the thing intended by it. . South's Sermons.
2. [From tropic}.] Placed near the tropick; belonging to the
tropick.
The pine apple is one of the tropical fruits. Salmon.
TROPICK., n.ſ. [tropique, Fr. tropicus, Lat..] The line at
which the ſun turns back, of which the North has the tro-
pick of Cancer, and the South the tropick of Capricorn.
Under the tropic} is our language ſpoke,
And part of Flanders hath receiv'd our yoke. JWaller.
Since on ev'ry ſea, on ev'ry coaſt,
Your men have been diſtreſs'd, your navy toſt,
Sev'n times the ſun has either tropick view’d,
The Winter baniſh'd, and the Spring renew'd. Dryden.
TRopological. n. ſ. [tropologique, Fr. Tºrº and x:yº.]
Varied by tropes; changed from the original import of the
words.
Tropology. m. ſ. [rpºró” and A473°.] A rhetorical mode
of ſpeech including tropes, or a change of ſome word from
the original meaning. -
Not attaining the deuterology and ſecond intention of words,
they omit their ſuperconſequences, coherences, figures, or
tropologies, and are not perſuaded beyond their literalities.
Brown's Wulgar Errours.
TRo'ssERs. n.ſ.. [trouſes, Fr.] Breeches; hoſe. See Trouse.
You rode like a kern of Ireland; your French hoſe off,
and in your ſtrait traffers. Shakeſp. Henry V.
To TRot. v. m. [trotter, Fr. trotten, Dutch.]
1. To meve with a high jolting pace.
Poor Tom, that hath made him proud of heart, to ride
on a bay trotting horſe, over four inch'd bridges, to courſe
his own ſhadow for a traitor. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Whom doth time trot withal
—He trots hard with a young maid, between the contraćt
of her marriage and the day it is ſolemniz'd : if the interim
be but a ſevennight time's pace, is ſo hard that it ſeems
the length of ſeven years. Shakeſp. A you like it.
Take a gentle trotting horſe, and come up and ſee your
old friends. Dennis.
2. To walk faſt, in a ludicrous or contemptuous ſenſe.
TRot. m. ſ. [trot, Fr. from the verb.]
1. The jolting high pace of a horſe.
His honeſty is not
So looſe or eaſy, that a ruffling wind...
Can blow away, or glitt'ring look it blind:
Who rides his ſure and even trot,
While the world now rides by, now lags behind. Herbert.
Here lieth one who did moſt truly prove,
That he could never die while he could move;
So hung his deſtiny, never to rot -
While he might ſtill jog on and keep his trot. Milton.
The virtuoſo's ſaddle will amble when the world is upon
the hardeſt trot. Dryden.
2. An old woman. In contempt. I know not whence derived.
Give him gold enough, and marry him to an old trot with
ne'er a tooth in her head: why, nothing comes amiſs, ſo
money comes withal. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
How now bold-face, cries an old trot; firrah, we eat our
own hens, and what you eat you ſteal. L’Eſtrange.
TRoth. n.ſ.. [trouth, old Engliſh; ºneo's, Saxon.] Truth;
faith; fidelity. -
Saint Withold met the night-mare,
Bid her light and her troth plight. Shakeſpeare.
Stephen aſſails the realm, obtains the crown,
Such tumults raiſing as torment them both :
Th’ afflićted ſtate, divided in their troth
rtial faith, moſt miſerable grown,
#. the while. g Daniel's Civil War.
In troth, thou’rt able to inſtruct grey hairs, -
And teach the wily African deceit. Addiſon's Cato.
Tro'THless. adj. [from troth.] Faithleſs; treacherous, .
Thrall to the faithleſs waves and trothleſs ſky. Fairfax.
TRoºthplight. adj. [troth and plight.] Betrothed; affianced.
This, your ſon in law, -
Is trothplight to your daughter. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
To TROUBLE. v. a. [troubler, Fr.]
1. To diſturb; to perplex.
An hour before the worſhipp'd ſun
Pear'd through the golden window of the Eaſt,
A troubled mind drew me to walk abroad. Shakeſpeare.
But think not here to trouble holy reſt. - Milton,
Never trouble yourſelf about thoſe faults which age will
cure. Locke on Education.
2. To afflićt; to grieve. -
It would not trouble me to be ſlain for thee, but much it
torments me to be ſlain by thee. Sidney, b. ii.
They pertinaciouſly maintain that afflićtions are no real
evils, and therefore a wiſe man ought not to be troubled at
them. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Though it is in vain to be troubled for that which I cannot
chuſe, yet I cannot chuſe but be afflićted. Tillotſon's Sermons.
-
T R O
3. To diſtreſs; to make uneaſy.
Be not diſmay’d nor trºila at theſ. tidings. Milton.
He was fore troubled in mind, and much diſtreſſed. Liz.
4. To buſy; to engage overmuch.
Martha, thou art careful, and troubled about many things.
:.. Luke x. 41.
5. º occaſion of labour to. A word of civility or ſlight
I will not trouble "yºlf to prove that all terms are not de-
finable, from that Progreſs in infinitum which it will lead is
into.
6. To teize; to vex. Locke.
*T-- The boy ſo troubles me;
Tis paſt enduring. Shakeſpeare.
7. To diſorder; to put into agitation or commotion
A woman mov’d is like a fountain troubled :
ºlºing, thick, bereñof bºy.’ Sºfta,
An angel went down into the pool and troubled theºr.
whoſoever firſt after the troubling ſtepped in was made whºle.
ohn v. 4.
God looking forth will trouble all his hoſt. j Žiš.
Hear how ſhe the ear employs; -
Their office is the troubled air to take.
- Davies.
Seas are troubled when they do revoke
Their flowing waves into themſelves again. Davier.
It is not bare agitation, but the ſediment at the bottom
that troubles and defiles the water. South.
. The beſt law in our days is that which continues our
judges during their good behaviour, without leaving them to
the mercy of ſuch who might, by an undue influence, trouble
and pervert the courſe of juſtice. Addiſon's Guard. Nº. 99.
Thy force alone their fury can reſtrain,
And ſmooth the waves, or ſwell the troubid main. Dryden.
8. To mind with anxiety.
He had credit enough with his maſter to provide for his
own intereſt, and troubled not himſelf for that of others. Car.
9. [In low language.] To ſue for a debt.
Trouble. n.ſ. ſtrouble, French.]
1. Diſturbance; perplexity.
They all his hoſt derided, while they ſtood
A while in troºble. Milton,
2. Affliction; calamity.
Double, double, toil and trouble,
Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
3. Moleſtation; obſtrućtion; inconvenience.
Take to thee from among the cherubim
The choice of flaming warriours, leſt the fiend
Some new trouble raiſe. Milton.
4. Uneaſineſs; vexation.
I have dream'd
Of much offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irkſome night. Milton.
TRo'UBLE-state. n.ſ.. [trouble and ſtate.] Diſturber of a
community; publick makebate.
Thoſe fair baits theſe trouble-ſtates ſtill uſe,
Pretence of common good, the king's ill courſe,
Muſt be caſt forth. Daniel's Civil WWar.
TRo'UBLER. n.ſ.. [from trouble.] Diſturber; confounder.
Unhappy falls that hard neceſſity,
Quoth he, the troubler of my happy peace,
And vowed foe of my felicity.
Heav'ns hurl down their indignation
On thee, thou troubler of the poor world's peace l Shakespeare
The beſt temper of minds deſireth good name and true
honour; the lighter, popularity and applauſe; the more de-
praved, ſubjećtion and tyranny; as is ſeen in great conquerors
and troublers of the world, and more in arch-hereticks. Bac.
Spain,
Whoſe chief ſupport and finews are of coin,
Our nation's ſolid virtue did oppoſe
To the rich troublers of the world's repoſe. IWaller.
The ſword juſtly drawn by us can ſcarce ſafely be ſheath-
ed, till the power of the great troubler of our peace be pared,
as to be under no apprehenſions for the future. Atterbury.
TRo'UBLEsome. adj. [from trouble.] - A- -
1. Full of moleſtation; vexatious ; uneaſy; afflićtive.
Heav'n knows
By what bye-paths and indirečt crooked ways
I met this crown; and I myſelf know well
How troubleſome it ſat upon my head : .
To thee it ſhall deſcend with better quiet. Shakeſpeare.
He muſt be very wiſe that can forbear being. troubled at
things very troubleſome. - Tillotſºn's Sermons.
Though our paſſage through this world be rough and
troubleſome, yet the trouble will be but ſhort, and the reſt and
contentment at the end will be an ample recompence. Atterb.
2. Burdenſome; tireſome ; weariſome.
My mother will never be troubleſome to me. Pope.
f teizing buſineſs.
3. Fº could not make us accuſe her, though it made us
almoſt pine away for ſpight, to loſe any of our time, in ſo
troubleſome an idleneſs. sº
5 4. Slightly
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Fairy Qu. b. i.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R O
T R U
- io l ha aſſin - -
* 4. Slightly "ßad the putting off
Theſe troubleſºme diſguiſes which we wear. .
why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
Being ſo troubleſome a bedfellow, . Shalºp. Henry IV.
5. Unſeaſonably engaging; improperly importuning.
She of late is lightened of her womb, -
That her to ſee ſhould be but troubleſome. Fa. Qu. b. i.
6. Importunate; teizing
two or three troubleſome old murſes, never let me have
a quiet night's reſt with knocking me up. Arbuthnot.
Troublesomely, adv. [from troubleſome. J Vexatiouſly;
weariſomely; unſeaſonably; importunately.
Though men will not be ſo troubleſomely critical as to cor-
rečt others in the uſe of words; yet where truth is concern-
ed, it can be no fault to deſire their explication. Locke.
TRoublesome Ness. n.ſ.. [from troubleſome.]
1. Vexatiouſneſs; uneaſineſs.
The lord treaſurer, he complained of the troubleſomeneſs
of the place, for that the exchequer was ſo empty; the chan-
cellor anſwered, be of good cheer, for now you ſhall ſee the
bottom of your buſineſs at the firſt. Bacon.
2. Importunity; unſeaſonableneſs.
TRo'Ublous. adj. [from trouble.] Tumultuous; confuſed;
diſordered; put into commotion. An elegant word, but
diſuſed.
Milton.
He along would fly
Upon the ſtreaming rivers, ſport to find ;
And oft would dare tempt the troublous wind.
Soon as they this mock king did eſpy,
Their troublous ſtrife they ſtinted by and by.
No other noiſe, nor people's troublous cries,
As ſtill are wont t'annoy the walled town,
Might there be heard. Fairy Queen, b. i.
As a tall ſhip toſſed in troublous ſeas,
Whom raging winds threaten to make the prey
Of the rough rocks. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Then, maſters, look to ſee a troublous world. Shakeſp.
Only one ſupply
In four years troublous and expenſive reign. Daniel.
TRover. m. ſ. [trouver, French..] In the common law, is an
aćtion which a man hath againſt one that having found any
of his goods refuſeth to deliver them upon demand. Cowel.
TRough. n.f. [znoz, enoh, Saxon; troch, Dutch ; trou,
Daniſh; traug, Iſlandick; truego, Italian.] Anything hol-
lowed and open longitudinally on the upper ſide.
The bloody boar
That ſpoil'd your ſummer .. and fruitful vines,
Swills your warm blood like waſh, and makes his trough
In your embowel'd boſoms. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
They had no ſhips but big troughs, which they call ca-
1]OCS. Abbot's Deſcription of the World.
Where there is a good quick fall of rain water, lay a half
trough of ſtone, of a good length, three foot deep, with one
end upon the high ground, the other upon the low; cover
the trough with brakes a good thickneſs, and caſt ſand upon
the top of the brakes, the lower end of the trough will run
like a ſpring of water. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 29.
Some log, perhaps, upon the water ſwam,
An uſeleſs drift, which rudely cut within,
And hollow'd, firſt a floating trough became,
And croſs ſome riv'let paſſage did begin. Dryden.
The water diſſolves the particles of ſalt mixed in the ſtone,
and is conveyed by long troughs and canals from the mines to
Hall, where it is received in vaſt ciſterns and boiled off. Add,
To TRoul. v. n. [trollen, to roll, Dutch..] See TRoll.
1. To move volubly.
Bred only, and completed, to the taſte
Of luſtful appetence; to fing, to dance,
To dreſs, and troul the tongue, and roll the eye. Milton.
2. To utter volubly.
Let us be jocund. Will you troul the catch
You taught me while-ere. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
To Trou Ncº. v. a. [derived by Skinner from trone or tronſon,
French, a club.] To puniſh by an indićtment or informa.
tion.
More probable, and like to hold
Than hand, or ſeal, or breaking gold;
For which ſo many, that renouncid
Their plighted contracts have been trounc'd, Hudibras.
If you talk of peaching, I’ll peach firſt: I’ll trounce you
, for offering to corrupt my honeſty. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
TRouse. {*/ ſtrouſe, Fr. truſh, Erſe.] Breeches; hoſe.
TRous ERs. See TRoss ERs.
The leather quilted jack ſerves under his ſhirt of mail, and
to Sover his trouſe on horſeback. Spenſer on Ireland.
The unfightlineſs and pain in the leg may be helped by
**ºng a laced ſtocking; a laced trouſe will do as much for
the thigh. Jºſeman's Surgery.
T Rout. n. ſ. ſenuhr, Saxon; tročja, truta, trutta, Lat.]
1. A delicate ſpotted fiſh inhabiting brooks and quick ſtreams.
-- The pond will keep trout and ſalmon in their ſeaſonable
Pºight, but not in their reddiſh grain. . Carew.
Spenſer.
Hubb. Tale.
Truant adj. Idle; wandering from buſineſs; la');
To TRU ANT. v. n. [truander, to beg about a
Worſe than the anarchy at ſea,
Where fiſhes on each other prey;
Where ev'ry trout can make as high rants
O'er his inferi -
eriours as our tyrants. Swift,
2. A familiar phraſe for an honeſt, or perhaps for a filly i.
Here comes the trout that muſt be caught with tickling.
Shakeſpeare.
To TRow. v. n. [rneo Sian, Saxon; troe, Daniſh.] To think.
to imagine; to conceive. A word now diſuſed, and .
uſed in ancient writers but in familiar language. y
What handſomeneſs, trow you, can be obſerved in that
ſpeech, which is made one knows not to whom Siº.
Is there any reaſonable man, traw you, but will judge º
meeter that our ceremonies of Chriſtian religion ſhºulī b.
Popiſh than Turkiſh or Heatheniſh. Hooker, b. iv
Lend leſs than thou oweſt, -
Learn more than thou troweſt.
To-morrow next
Shakespeare , King Lear.
We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow. Shakeſpeare.
O rueful day 1 rueful indeed, I trow. Gay.
TRow: interjeel. [for 1 trow, or trow you..] An exclamation ºf
enquiry.
Well, if you be not turn'd Turk, there is no more ſailing
by the ſtar. -&gt;
—What means the fool, traw? Shakeſpeare.
TRo'wel. n.ſ. [truelle, Fr. trulla, Lat.]
A trowel is a tool to take up the mortar with, and ſpread
it on the bricks; with which alſo they cut the bricks to ſuch
lengths as they have occaſion, and alſo ſtop the joints. Mºon.
Fair princeſs, you have loſt much good ſport.
—Sport l of what colour *
—What colour, madam how ſhall I anſwer you?
—As wit and fortune will.
—Or as the deſtinies decree.
—Well ſaid, that was laid on with a trowel. Shalºftware.
This was dext'rous at his trowel,
That was bred to kill a cow well. Swift
TRoy-weight. Un. ſ. [from Troies, Fr.] A kind of wº
TRoy. }
by which gold and bread are weighed,
conſiſting of theſe denominations: a pound = 12 ounces;
ounce = 20 pennyweights; pennyweight = 24 grains.
The Engliſh phyſicians make uſe of troywright after the
following manner.
Grains
20 |Scruple
T65 –3 Drachm
Tºšo TT2:. 8 T | Ounce
576.0 | 288 96 12 |Pound.
The Romans left their ounce in Britain, now our averdu-
pois ounce, for our troy ounce we had elſewhere. Arbuthnºt.
TRu’ANT. n.ſ. ſtruand, Old Fr. treuwant, Dutch, avagabond.]
An idler; one who wanders idly about, neglecting his duty
or employment. To play the truant is, in ſchools, to ſtay
from ſchool without leave.
For my part I may ſpeak it to my ſhame,
I have a truant been to chivalry.
Though myſelf have been an idle truant,
Omitting the ſweet benefit of time, -
To cloath mine age with angel-like perfection;.
Yet hath Sir Protheus made fair advantage of his º:
- Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen ºf herº.
Providence would only initiate mankind into the know-
ledge of her treaſures, leaving the reſt to our induſtry, that
we might not live like idle loiterers and truanti. More.
Our ſhips are laden with the Trojan ſtore, '; Æ
And you like truants come too late aſhore. Dryden's º:
Shakeſpeare,
tering.
What keeps you from Wertemberg’
—A truant diſpoſition, good my lord.
He made a bluſhing cital of himſelf,
And chid his truant youth with ſuch a grace,
As if he maſter'd there a double ſpirit,
Shalºft. Hamlet.
Of teaching, and of learning inſtantly. Shakespeare tart.
Where thou ſeeſt a ſingle ſheep remain
In ſhades aloof, or couch’d upon the plain,
Or late to lag behind with truant pace, head. Drydºn.
- y
Revenge the crime, and take the traytor's -
t &gt; country, French;
truwanten, old German.] To idle at a diſtance from duty
to loiter; to be lazy. - bed
'Tis double wrong to truant with your bed, Shakºftart.
And let her read it in thy looks at board. truandiſ, in
TRU’ANtship. n.ſ.. [trualtº, Old Fr. from truant à of ſtudy
Chaucer is beggery.] Idleneſs; negligence ; negle
or buſineſs. - - c
The maſter ſhould not chide with him if the dº:
done his diligence, and uſed no truanº. ſ
I TRUB-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R U
&amp;
.*,
-
º
Tru'ptAil. n.ſ. A ſhort ſquat woman. Ainſworth.
Trubs. n. ſ. [tuber, Lat.) A ſort of herb. Ainſ.
Truce. n.ſ. [truga, low Lat. tregua, Italian ; traie, old Fr.]
I. A temporary peace; a ceſſation of hoſtilities.
Leagues and truces made between ſuperſtitious perſons,
and ſuch as ſerve God aright, Hooker, b. v.
They pray in vain to have ſin pardoned, which ſeek not
alſo to prevent fin by prayer, even every particularfin, by
prayer againſt all ſin, except men can name ſome tranſ.
greſſion wherewith we ought to have truce. Hooker.
All this utter'd
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bent,
Could not make truce with the unruly ſpleen
Of Tybalt, deaf to peace.
This token ſerveth for a flag of truce
Betwixt ourſelves, and all our followers. Shakeſpeare.
Men ſhall be lovers of their own ſelves, without natural
affection, truce breakers. 2 Tim. iii. 3.
Leaſt the truce with treaſon ſhould be mixt,
'Tis my concern to have the tree betwixt. Dryden.
Shadwel till death true dulneſs would maintain;
And in his father's right, and realm's defence,
Ne'er wou'd have peace with wit, nor truce with ſenſe. Dryd.
2. Ceſſation; intermiſſion; ſhort quiet.
There he may find
Truce to his reſtleſs thoughts, and entertain
The irkſome hours. Milton.
Trucid A'tion. m. ſ. [from trucido, Lat..] The aët of killing.
Shakeſpeare.
To TRUCK. v., n. [troquer, Fr. truccare, Italian; trocar, Spa- .
niſh; deduced by Salmaſius from Tºwysty, to get money..] To
traffick by exchange; to give one commodity for another.
To TRUck...w.. a. To give in exchange; to exchange.
The Indians truck gold for glaſſes.
Go, miſer go; for lucre ſell thy ſoul,
Truck wares for wares, and trudge from pole to pole;
That men may ſay, when thou art dead and gone,
See, what a vaſt eſtate he left his ſon. Dryden.
I ſee nothing left us, but to truck and barter our goods like
the wild Indians, with each other. Swift.
TRuck. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Exchange; traffick by exchange.
It is no leſs requiſite to maintain a truck in moral offices,
than in the common buſineſs of commerce. L’Eſtrange.
Love is covetous ; I muſt have all of you: heart for heart
is an equal truck. Dryden.
2. [reox's] Wooden wheels for carriage of cannon. Ainſ.
TRU'ckle BED, or trundlebed. m. ſ. [properly troclebed; from
trochlea, Latin, or TFox.35.] A bed that runs on wheels under
a higher bed.
There's his chamber, his houſe, his caſtle, his ſtanding
bed and trucklebed. Shakeſp. Merry I/ives of Windſor.
If he that is in battle ſlain,
Be in the bed of honour lain;
He that is beaten may be ſaid,
To lie in honour's trucklebed. Hudibras, p. i.
To TRU'ckle. v. n. [This word is, I believe, derived from
trucklebed, which is always under another bed.] To be in a
ſtate of ſubječtion or inferiority; to yield; to creep.
Shall our nation be in bondage thus
Unto a land that truckles under us. Cleaveland.
For which ſo many a legal cuckold
Has been run down in courts and truckl’d. PIudihras.
Men may be ſtiff and obſtinate upon a wrong ground, and
ply and truckle too upon as falſe a foundation. L’E/irange.
Religion itſelf is forced to truckle to worldly policy. Norris.
His zeal was not to laſh our crimes,
But diſcontent againſt the times :
For had we made him timely offers,
To raiſe his poſt or fill his coffers :
Perhaps he might have truckled down,
Like other brethren of his gown. Swift.
They were ſubducd and inſulted by Alexander's captains,
and continued under ſeveral revolutions, a ſmall truckling
ſtate, of no name till they fell under the Romans. Swift.
TRU'culence. n.ſ. [tructulentia, Lat.]
1. Savageneſs of manners.
2. Terribleneſs of aſpect.
Trucul. ENT. adj. It urulentus, Lat.]
I. Savage; barbarous. -
A barbarous Scythia where the ſavage and truculent inha-
bitants transfer themſelves from place to place in waggons, as
they can find paſture, and live upon milk, and fleſh roaſted
in the ſun at the pomels of their ſaddles. Ray.
2. Terrible of aſpect.
3. Deſtructive ; cruel.
Peſtilential ſeminaries, according to their groſſneſs or ſub-
tilty, cauſe more or leſs truculent plagues, ſome of ſuch ma-
lignity, that they enecate in two hours. Harvey on the Plague.
To TRUDGE. v. n. [truggiolare, Italian.] To travel laboriouſly;
to jog on ; to march heavily on.
No man is ſecure, but night-walking heralds,
That trudge between the king and miſtreſs Shore. Shakeſp.
L'Eſtrange. .
T R Uſ
No ſooner was he fit to trudge,
But both made ready to diſlodge. Hudibras, p. iii,
Away they trudged together, and about midnight got to
their journey's end. L'Eſtrange's Fables,
- Go, miſer go; for lucre ſell thy ſoul, -
Truck wares for wares, and trudge from pole to pole;
That men may ſay, when thou art dead and gone,
Sce, what a vaſt eſtate he left his ſon Dryden.
Once a poor rogue, 'tis true, I trod the ſtreet
And trudg’d to Rome upon my naked feet: &gt;
Gold is the greateſt god. Dryden's juvenal
wº. * º the º muſt leave the beaten track,
lch none but ſervile minds trudge conti - -
TRUE. adj. [eneopa, enupa, sº tinually in. Locke.
1. Not falſe; not erroneous; agreeing with fact, or with the
nature of things. &gt;
A º he choſe he falſeſt two,
ºd fitteſt for to forge true ſeeming lics. Fairy gº. J.;
Teeth hadſt thou ; thy head º thou ºft . b. i.
And, if the reſt be true which I have hear &gt; 3.
Thou cam'ſt into the world with thy legs forward. Shakespeare
A new commandment I write, which thing is true in him
and in you. - I john ii. 8.
What you ſaid had not been true,
If ſpoke by any elſe but you. Cowley.
2. Not falſe; agreeing with our own thoughts.
3. Pure from the crime of falſehood; veracious.
4. Genuine; not counterfeit.
The darkneſs is paſt, and the true light now ſhincth. 1%h.
Among unequals what ſociety
Can ſort? What harmony or true delight? Milton.
Religion, as it is the moſt valuable thing in the world, ſo
it gives the truſt value to them who promote the practice of
it by their example and authority. Atterbury.
5. Faithful; not perfidious; ſteady. -
My revenge is now at Milford, would I had wings to fol.
low it ! come and be true. Shakeſpeare's &amp;micine.
So young and ſountender *
So young my lord, and true.
—Let it be ſo; thy truth then be thy dower. Shakeſ,
Do not ſee -
My fair roſe wither; yet look up; behold,
That you in pity may diſſolve to dew,
And waſh him freſh again with true love tears. Shakespeare.
The firſt great work
Is, that yourſelf may to yourſelf be true.
- I'll rather die
Deſerted, than oblige thee with a fact
Pernicious to thy peace, chiefly aſſur'd
Remarkably ſo late of thy ſo true,
So faithful, love unequal’d. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
When this fire is kindled, both ſides inflame it: all re-
gard of merit is loſt in perſons employed, and theſe only
choſen that are true to the party. Temple.
Smil'd Venus, to behold her own true knight
Obtain the conqueſt, though he loſt the fight. Dryden.
True to the king her principles are found;
Oh that her pračtice were but half ſo ſound !
Stedfaſt in various turns of ſtate ſhe ſtood,
And ſeal’d her vow'd affection with her blood. Dryden.
The trueſº hearts for Voiture heav'd with fighs;
Roſtonmon.
Voiture was wept by all the brighteſt eyes. Pope.
True to his charge the bard preſerv'd her long
In honour's limits, ſuch the pow'r of ſong. Pope.
6. Honeſt ; not fraudulent.
The thieves have bound the true man: now could thou
and I rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it would be
argument for a week. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
If king Edward be as true and juſt,
As I am ſubtle, falſe, and treacherous,
This day ſhould Clarence cloſely be mew'd up. Shakeſp.
. Exačt; truly conformable to a rule.
If all thoſe great painters, who have left us ſuch fair plat-
forms, had rigorouſly obſerved it, they had made things more
regularly true, but withal very unpleaſing. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
He drew -
A circle regularly true. Prior.
Tickel's firſt book does not want its merit; but I was
diſappointed in my expectation of a tranſlation nicely true to
the original; whereas in thoſe parts where the greateſt exact-
neſs ſeems to be demanded, he has been the leaſt careful. Arb.
8. Rightful.
They ſeize the ſceptre;
Then ſoſe it to a ſtranger, that the true
Anointed King Meſſiah might be born -
Bar'd of his right. - - Milton.
Trueso'RN. m.ſ.. [true and born.J. Having a right by birth.
Where’er I wander, boaſt of this I can,
Though baniſh'd, yet a truebern Engliſhman. Shakeſpeare.
Let him that is a trueborn gentleman,
And ſtands upon the honour of his birth,
From off this briar pluck a white roſe with me. Shakeſ?.
27 A TRUEBRE(D,
7<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R U
T R U
- d bred.] Of a right breed.
TruebRE'D. adj. [true an ------- d er
to be as truebred cowards as CV
..º." I know ſubſtantial ºft.
call him he's a ſubſtantial truebred beat,
b º Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
ravely ſ: [true and heart.] Honeſt; faithful.
r
F HEARTED. *.
Twº have known no honeſter or truerhearted man: fare thee
well h P Shkaeſpeare.
º: ... m. ſ. An herb, called herba Paris.
łºf m. ſ. ſtrue, love, and knot..] . Lines
TRU elovERSKNoT. } drawn through each other with ma-
ny involutions, conſidered as the emblem of interwoven af-
fed tion.
I'll carve your name on barks of trees
with trueloveknots, and flouriſhes, --
That ſhall infuſe eternal ſpring. Hudibras, p. ii.
Tru'E Ness. n.ſ.. [from true.] Sincerity; faithfulneſs.
The even carriage between two factions proceedeth not
always of moderation, but of a trueneſs to a man's ſelf, with
end to make uſe of both. --- Bacon's Eſſays.
Truepe'NN.Y. m. ſ. [true and penny..] A familiar phraſe for an
honeſt fellow.
Say'ſ thou ſo? art thou there, truepenny?
Come on. Shakeſpeare.
Tru'ffle. n.ſ. (truffe, truff, French.J
In Italy, the uſual method for the finding of truffles, or
ſubterraneous muſhrooms, called by the Italians tartuſali, and
in Latin tubera terræ, is by tying a cord to the hind leg of a
pig, and driving him, obſerving where he begins to root. Ray.
TRUG. m. ſ. A hod for mortar. Ainſw.
Trull. n.ſ.. [trulla, Italian.]
1. A low whore; a vagrant ſtrumpet.
I'm ſure, I ſcar'd the dauphin and his trull. Shakeſpeare.
A trull who fits
By the town wall, and for her living knits. Dryden.
So Maevius, when he drain'd his ſkull,
To celebrate ſome ſuburb trull;
His ſimilies in order ſet,
And ev'ry crambo he cou’d get ;
Before he could his poem cloſe,
The lovely nymph had loſt her noſe. Swift.
2. It ſeems to have had firſt at leaſt a neutral ſenſe: a girl; a
laſs; a wench.
Among the reſt of all the route
A paſſing proper laſe,
A white-hair'd trull, of twenty years,
Or neere about there was:
In ſtature paſſing all the reſt,
A gallant girl for hewe;
To be compar'd with towniſh nymphs,
So fair ſhe was to viewe. Turbe ville.
TRU'LY. adv. [from true.]
1. According to truth; not falſely ; faithfully; honeſtly.
They thought they might do it, not only willingly, be-
cauſe they loved him; and truly, becauſe ſuch indeed was the
mind of the people; but ſafely, becauſe ſhe who ruled the
king was agreed thereto. Sidney, b. ii.
No untruth can avail the patron long; for things moſt
truly are moſt behoovefully ſpoken. Hooker.
Wiſdom alone is truly fair. Milton.
2. Really ; without fallacy.
3. Exačtly; juſtly.
Right reaſon is nothing elſe but the mind of man judging
of things truly, and as they are in themſelves. South.
4. Indeed.
I have not undertaken it out of any wanton pleaſure in
mine own pen; nor truly without often pondering with my-
ſelf beforehand what cenſures I might incur. J/otton.
TRUMP. n.ſ.. [trompe, Dutch, and old Fr. tromba, Italian.]
1. A trumpet; an inſtrument of warlike muſick.
Whilſt any trump did ſound, or drum ſtruck up,
His ſword did ne'er leave ſtriking in the field. Shakeſp.
Yet firſt to thoſe yohain’d in ſleep,
The wakeful trump of doom muſt thunder through the
deep. AMilton.
I heard
The neighing courſers and the ſoldiers cry,
And ſounding trumps that ſeem'd to tear the ſky. Dryden.
Beneath this tomb an infant lies,
To earth whoſe body lent,
Hereafter ſhall more glorious riſe,
But not more innocent.
When the archangel's trump ſhall blow,
And ſouls to bodies join,
What crowds ſhall wiſh their lives below
Had been as ſhort as thine. Jºſley.
2. [Qºţupted from triumph. Latimer, in a Chriſtmas ſermon,
exhibited a game at cards, and made the ace of hearts
triumph. Fox.] A winning card; a card that has particular
privileges in a game. -
, Him Baſto follow'd, but his fate more hard,
Gain'd but one trump and one plebeian card. Pope.
Now her heart with pleaſure jumps,
She ſcarce remembers what is trumps. Swift,
3. To put to or upon the TRUMPs. To put to the laſt expedié.
We are now put upon our laſt trump; the fox is earth.
but I ſhall ſend my two terriers in after him. Dni,
To TRUMP. v. a. [from the noun.] yden.
1. To win with a trump card.
2. To TRUMP up. [from tramper, Fr. to cheat..] To deviſe, to
forge. &gt;
Tºw. n. ſ. [tromperie, French, a cheat.]
1. Something fallaciouſly ſplendid; ſomething of leſs val
than it ſeems. value
The trumpery in my houſe bring hither,
For ſtate to catch theſe thieves. Shake -
2. Falſehood; empty talk. ºffeare's Tempºff.
Breaking into parts the ſtory of the creation, and deliver
ing it over in a myſtical ſenſe, wrapping it up mixed win
other their own trumpery, they have ſought to obſcure the
truth thereof. Raleigh's Hſ. of the IWºrld
3. Something of no value; trifles. -
Embrio's and idiots, eremits and friars,
White, black, and grey, with all their trumpery. Miltºn
Another cavity of the head was fluffed with billejº.
pricked dances, and other trumpery of the ſame nature.Anº.
TRU'MPET. m. ſ. [trompette, French and Dutch.] ----
1. An inſtrument of martial muſick ſounded by the breath.
What's the buſineſs 2
That ſuch a hideous trumpet calls to parley
The ſleepers of the houſe. Shakeſpear.
If any man of quality will maintain upon Edmund ºar of
Gloſter, that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the
third ſound of the trumpet. Shakeſp. King Lear.
He blew -
His trumpet, heard in Oreb ſince perhaps
When God deſcended, and perhaps once more
To ſound at gen'ral doom. Th' angelick blaſt
Filled all the regions. Milton.
The laſt loud trumpet's wond’rous ſound
Shall through the rending tombs rebound,
And wake the nations under ground. Rºſcommon.
Things of deep ſenſe we may in proſe unfold,
But they move more in lofty numbers told;
By the loud trumpet which our courage aids,
We learn that ſound, as well as ſenſe, perſuades. J/aller.
The trumpet's loud clangor
Excites us to arms,
With ſhrill notes of anger,
And mortal alarms. Dryden.
Every man is the maker of his own fortune, and muſt be
in ſome meaſure the trumpet of his fame. Tatler.
No more the drum
Provokes to arms, or trumpet's clangor ſhrill
Affrights the wives. Philipi.
Let the loud trumpet ſound,
Till the roofs all around, }
The ſhrill echoes rebound. Pºpe.
2. In military ſtile, a trumpeter.
He wiſely deſired, that a trumpet might be firſt ſent for a
paſs. Clarendon, b. viii.
Among our forefathers, the enemy, when there was a king
in the field, demanded by a trumpet in what part he reſided,
that they might avoid firing upon the royal pavilion. Addison.
3. One who celebrates; one who praiſes.
Glorious followers, who make themſelves as trumpets of
the commendation of thoſe they follow, taint buſineſs for
want of ſecrecy, and export honour from a man, and make
him a return in envy. Bacon.
That great političian was pleaſed to have the greateſ. Wit
of thoſe times in his intereſts, and to be the trumpet of his
praiſes. Dryden.
TRUMPET-Flower. n.ſ.. [bignonia, Lat.] It hath a tubulº
flower conſiſting of one leaf, which opens at top like twº
lips: theſe flowers are ſucceeded by pods, which are divided
into two cells, and contain ſeveral winged ſecds. *[.
To Trumper.º. a. ſºompeter, Fr. from the noun..] Tº
publiſh by ſound of trumpet; to proclaim.
That I did love the Moor to live with him,
My downright violence to form my fortunes
M. trump; to the world. Shakespeare Othell.
Why ſo tart a favour a.
To trumpet ſuch good tidings? Shakhar”.
They went with ſound of trumpet; for they did nothing
but publiſh and trumpet all the reproaches they could deviſe
againſt the Iriſh. Bacon's War with Stº
TRU'MPETER. m. ſ. [from trumpet.]
1. One who ſounds a trumpet.
Trumpeters,
With brazen din blaſt you the city's ear, :
Make mingle with our rattling tabourines. Shałeffºrt.
As they returned, a herald and trumpeter from the º,
overtook them. Hayward.
Their
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R U
-
--
º
Their men lie ſecurely intrench'd in a cloud,
And a trumpeter hornet to battle ſounds loud. Dryden.
An army of trumpeters would give as great a ſtrength as
this confederacy of tongue warriors, who, like thoſe military
muſicians, content themſelves with animating their friends to
battle. Addiſon's Freeholder, No. 28.
2. One who proclaims, publiſhes, or denounces.
Where there is an opinion to be created of virtue or great-
neſs, theſe men are good trumpeters. Bacon's Eſſays.
How came ſo many thouſands to fight, and die in the ſame
rebellion why were they deceived into it by thoſe ſpiritual
trumpeters, who followed them with continual alarms of dam-
nation if they did not venture life, fortune and all, in that
which thoſe impoſtors called the cauſe of God. South,
3. A fiſh. Ainſw.
TRUMPET-Tongued, adj. I trumpet and tongue. J Having
tongues vociferous as a trumpet.
This Duncan's virtues
Will plead, like angels, trumpet-tongu'd againſt
The deep damnation of his taking off. Shakespeare Macbeth.
To TRU'NcATE. v. a. [trunco, Lat.] To maim; to lop 5 to
cut ſhort.
TRUNCATION. n.ſ.. [from truncate.] The ad of lopping or
maiming.
Tru'Nch EoN. m. ſ. ſtrongon, French.]
1. A ſhort ſtaff; a club ; a cudgel.
With his t uncheon he ſo rudely ſtroke º
Cymocles twice, that twice him forc’d his foot revoke. F. &amp;.
Set limb to limb, and thou art far the leſſer;
Thy hand is but a finger to my fiſt ;
Thy leg is a ſtick compared with this truncheon. Shaieff.
The Engliſh ſlew divers of them with plummets of lead
tied to a truncheon or ſtaff by a cord. Hayward.
One with a broken truncheon deals his blows. Dryden.
2. A ſtaff of command.
The hand of Mars
Beckon'd with fiery truncheon my retire.
No ceremony that to great ones 'longs,
The marſhal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe,
Become them with one half ſo good a grace,
As mercy does. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
To TRU'Ncheon. v. a. [from the noun..] To beat with a
truncheon.
Captain, thou abominable cheater! If captains were of
my mind, they would truncheon you out of taking their names
upon you before you earn'd them. Shakeſpeare.
TRUNCHEoNee'R. m. ſ. [from truncheon.] One armed with a
truncheon.
Shakeſpeare.
I miſt the meteor once, and hit that woman, who cried
out, chibs when I might ſee from far ſome forty truncheoneers
draw to her ſuccour. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
To TRU'NDLE. v. n. [trondeler, Picard French; ºftenol, a
bowl, Saxon.] To roll; to bowl along.
In the four firſt it is heaved up by ſeveral ſpondees inter-
mixed with proper breathing places, and at laſt trundles down
in a continued line of daćtyls. Addiſon's Spect. Nº. 253.
TRU'NDLE. m. ſ. [ºnenol, Saxon.] Any round rolling thing.
TRU’NDLE-TAIL. m. ſ. Round tail.
Avaunt you curs
Hound or ſpaniel, brache or hym,
Or bobtail tike, or trundle-tail.
TRUNK. m. ſ. ſtruncus, Lat. tronc, Fr.]
1. The body of a tree.
He was
The ivy, which had hid my princely trunk,
And ſuckt my verdure out on't.
About the moſſy trunk I wound me ſoon ;
For high from ground the branches would require
Thy utmoſt reach. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
&amp;: 'twixt 'em all, the mantling vine
Does round their trunks her purple cluſters twine. Dryden.
Some of the largeſt trees have ſeeds no bigger than ſome
diminutive plants, and yet every ſeed is a perfect plant with
a trunk, branches, and leaves, incloſed in a ſhell. Bentley.
2. The body without the limbs of an animal.
The charm and venom which they drunk,
Their blood with ſecret filth infected hath, , , --
Being diffuſed through the ſenſeleſs trunk. Fairy Qu. b. ii.
Thou bring'ſt me happineſs and peace, ſon John;
But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown
From this bare, wither'd trunk. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
3. The main body of any thing.
The large trianks of the veins diſcharge the refluent blood
into the next adjacent trunk, and ſo on to the heart. Ray.
4. [Tronc, French..] A cheſt for cloaths; a ſmall cheſt com-
monly lined with paper.
Neither preſs, coffer, cheſt, trunk, well, vault, but he
hath an abſtraćt for the remembrance of ſuch places. Shakespeare
Some odd fantaſtick lord would fain
Carry in trunks, and all my drudgery do. Dryden.
Where a young man learned to dance, there happened to
fland an old trunk in the room, the idea of which had ſo
mixed itſelf with the turns of all his dances, that, though
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Shakeſpeare.
T R U
he could dance excellently well, yet it was only whilſt that
trunk was there; nor could he perform well in any other
place, unleſs that, or ſome ſuch other trunk, had its due no-
tition in the room. -
Locłe,
. Your poem ſunk, 9&amp;#e
And ſent in quires to linea ºnk:
§ ſtill you be diſpos'd to rhyme,
*o try your hand a ſecond time, Swiſ:
5. [Trompe, Fr.] The proboſcis of an elephant, or other a wift.
Leviathian that at his gills nimal.
Draws in, and at his truń. ſpouts out a ſea.
When elephant 'gainſt elephant did rear
His trunk, and caſtles juſtled in the air, -
My ſword thy way to vićtory had ſhown. Dryden
6. A long tube through which péllets of clay are blown ryden.
In rolls of parchment trunks, the mout; being laid to the
one end and the ear to the other, the ſound is heard much
farther than in the open air. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
In a ſhooting tº unk, the longer it is to a certain inſt
the ſwifter and more forcibly the air drives the pellet. R.
To TRUNK. v. a. ſtrunca, Lat.] To truncate; to main
lop. Obſolete.
Large ſtreams of blood out of the trunked ſtock
Forth guſhed, like water ſtreams from riven rºck. Fairy Q.
TRU'NKED. adj. [from trunk] Having a trunk. -
She is thick ſet with ſtrong and well trunked trees. Hºwl.
TRUNk-Hose. n.ſ.. [trunk and hoſe.J Large breeches formerly
Worn.
The ſhort trunk-hoſe ſhall ſhow thy foot and knee
Licentious, and to common eye-ſight free;
And with a bolder ſtride, and looſer air,
Milton. ,
3 to
Ming'd with men, a man thou muſt appear. Prior.
TRU'NNions. n ſ. [trognons, Fr.] The knobs or bunchings of
a gun, that bear it on the cheeks of a carriage. Bailey.
TRuſsion. n.ſ. [trudo, Lat.] The aâ of thruſting or puſhing.
By attraction we do not underſtand drawing, pumping,
fucking, which is really pulſion and truſion. Bentley.
TRUss. n.ſ. [trouſe, Fr.]
I. A bandage by which ruptures are reſtrained from lapſing.
Ahernia would ſucceed, and the patient be pit tº the
trouble of wearing a truſ. Jºſeman's Surgery.
2. Bundle; anything thruſt cloſe together.
All as a poor pedler he did wend,
Bearing a truſ of trifles at his back,
As belles and babies, and glaſſes in his packe. Spenſer.
The rebels firſt won the plain at the hill's foot by aſſault,
and then the even ground on the top, by carrying up great
truſſes of hay before them, to dead their ſhot. Carew.
An aſs was wiſhing for a mouthful of freſh graſs to knap
upon, in exchange for a heartleſs truſ of ſtraw. L'E/irang.
The fair one devoured a truſ of ſallet, and drunk a full
bottle to her ſhare. Addiſon's Speci. Nº. 4 IQ.
3. Trouſe ; breeches. Obſolete.
To Tºussºv. a. ſtrauſer, French.] To pack up cloſe together.
What in moſt Engliſh writers uſeth to be looſe and un-
right, in this author, is well grounded, finely framed, and
ſtrongly truſſed up together. Spenſer.
Some of them ſend the ſcriptures before, truſ up bag and
baggage, make themſelves in a readineſs, that they may fly
from city to city. Hooker, b. ii.
You might have truſſed him and all his apparel into an
eelſkin. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Trust. n.ſ.. [trauſſ, Runick.]
1. Confidence; reliance on another.
What a fool is honeſty and truſt, his ſworn brother, a
very ſimple gentleman. Shakeſpeare.
My misfortunes may be of uſe to credulous maids, never
to put too much truſt in deceitful men. Swift.
2. Charge received in confidence.
In my wretched caſe 'twill be more juſt
Not to have promis'd, than deceive your truſt. Dryden.
His truſt was with th' eternal to be deemed -
Equal in ſtrength. Milton,
3. Confident opinion of any event.
4. Credit given without examination. . -
Moſt takethings upon truſt, and miſemploy their aſſent by
lazily enſlaving their minds to the dićtates of others. Lºcke.
5. Credit without payment.
Ev’n ſuch is time, who takes on truſt
Our youth, our joys, our all we have,
And pays us but with age and duſt.
6. Something committed to one's faith.
They cannot ſee all with their own eyes; they muſt com-
mit many great truſts to their miniſters. Bacon.
Thou the ſooner
Temptation found'ſt, or over pºtent charms,
To violate the ſacred truſt of ſilence -
Depoſited within thee. . Milton's Agoniſes.
7. Depoſit; ſomething committed to charge, of which an ac-
count muſt be given.
Although the advantages one man poſſeſſeth more than
another, may be called his property with reſpect to other
men, yet with reſpect to God they are only a truff. ... Sºiſt.
5 8. Fidelity;
Raleigh.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T R U
T R U
..l-1. --&gt; - ſcd honeſty. -
8. *ś, †. my jughter unto thee of ſpecial truſ’;
wherefore do not entreather evil. - Tob. x. 12.
9. State of him to whom ſomething is entruſted. r-
I ſerve him truly, that will put me, in truſt. Shakespeare King Lear.
Being tranſplanted out of his cold barren dioceſe he Was
left in that great truff with the king. . . Clarendon.
Expect no more from ſervants than is juſt,
Reward them well if they obſerve their truſt. Denham.
To Trust. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To place confidence in ; to confide in.
I’d be torn in pieces ere I'd truſt a woman
With wind. Benj. janſºn.
2. To believe; to credit.
Give me your hand : truſt me you look well. . . Shakeſp.
3. To admit in confidence to the power over any thing.
When you lie down, with a ſhort prayer, commit yourſelf
into the hands of your faithful Creator; and when you have
done, truſt him with yourſelf as you muſt do when you are
dying. Taylor.
4. To commit with confidence. -
Give me good fame, ye pow'rs, and make me juſt,
This much the rogue to publick ears will truſt :
In private then :--When wilt thou, mighty Jove,
My wealthy uncle from this world remove : Dryden.
Whom with your pow'r and fortune, Sir, you tºº/,
Now to ſuſpećt is vain. Dryden.
5. To venture confidently.
Fool'd by thee to trºſ, thee from my ſide. Milton.
6. To ſell upon credit.
To TRU st. v. n.
1. To be confident of ſomething future.
I truſt to come unto you, and ſpeak face to face. 2 john.
From this grave, this duſt,
My God ſhall raiſe me up I truſt. Raleigh.
2. To have confidence; to rely; to depend without doubt.
The iſles ſhall wait upon me, and on mine arm ſhall they
truſt. Iſa. li. 5.
The Lord is a buckler to all that truſ? in him. 2 Sam. xxii.
Sin never ſhall hurt them more who rightly truſt
In this his ſatisfaction. Milton.
3. To be credulous; to be won to confidence.
Well you may fear too far
Safer than truſt too far. Shakeſpeare.
4. To expect.
The ſimplicity of the goat ſhews us what an honeſt man
is to truſt to that keeps a knave company. L’Eſtrange.
TRustEE'. m. ſ. [from truſt.]
1. One entruſted with any thing.
Having made choice of ſuch a confeſſor that you may truſ?
your ſoul with, ſincerely open your heart to him, and look
upon him only as he is a truſtee from God, commiſſioned by
him as his miniſterial deputy, to hear, judge, and abſolve
you. Taylor’s Guide to a Penitent.
2. One to whom ſomething is committed for the uſe and be-
hoof of another.
You are not the truſtees of the publick liberty: and if you
have not right to petition in a crowd, much leſs to intermed-
dle in the management of affairs. Dryden.
TRU's TER. m. ſ. [from tº uſ?..] One who truſts.
Nor ſhall you do mine ear that violence,
To make it tºuffer of your own report
Againſt yourſelf. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
TRU's TiNess. m. ſ. [from truſty.] Honeſty; fidelity; faithfulneſs.
If the good qualities which lie diſpérſed among other crea-
tures, innocence in a ſheep, truffineſs in a dog, are ſingly ſo
eommendable, how excellent is the mind, which ennobles
them into virtues. Grew's Cºſmol. b. ii.
TRU's TLESS. n.ſ.. [from truſ?..] Unfaithful; unconſtant; not
to be truſted. A word elegant, but out of uſe.
I beheld this fickle trigºl'ſ ſtate,
Of vain world's glory, flirting to and ſo. Spºnſer.
TRU'sty, adj. [from tº uſ?..]
I. Honeſt ; faithful; true; fit to be truſted.
This daſtard, at the battle of Poićtiers,
Before we met, or that a ſtroke was giveſ,
Like to a truly 'ſquire, did run away. Shakeſ esre.
This truſty ſervant
Shall paſs between us. - Shakeſp. King Lear.
He removeth away the ſpeech of the tº ºſy, and taketh
away the underſtanding of the aged. job xii. 26.
Guyomar his trºſy ſlave has ſent. Dryd. Indian Emperor.
º: º º which flow'd in to him, he bu-
eq under-groun the hands of his moſt tri/?y ſlaves.
2. Strong; ſtout; hº as will not fail. :/') ſlaves. Addison
When he ſaw no power might prevail,
His truſty ſword he called to his a -
- - - - is aid. Fairy 9.
º: ºng feeds are to the chariot ty'd, y X.
TRUTH. */y weapon fits on ev'ry ſide. Dryden's AFn.
n, ſ. [rneopºa, Saxon.j
1. The co -
"trary to falſehood 3 conformity of notions to things.
Truth is the ioni -
That men are pubeſcent at the year of twice ſeven is 2C-
counted a punctual truth.
º: words, impregn'd Brown.
With reaſon to her ſeeming and with truth. Milton
This clue leads them through the mizmaze of opinion.
and authors to truth and certainty. Locke
2. Conformity of words to thoughts. -
Shall truth fail to keep her word * Miltºn
And lend a lie the confidence of truth. Anºnym,
3. Purity from falſehood.
So young and ſo untender
So young, my lord, and true.
Let it be ſo, thy truth then be thy dower. Sai,
4. Fidelity; conſtancy. &amp;lp,
The thoughts of paſt pleaſure and truth,
The beſt of all bleſfings below. Sºn
5. Honeſty; virtue. If,
The money I tender for him in the court;
If this will not ſuffice, it muſt appear
That malice bears down truth. Shaftºffare
6. It is uſed ſometimes by way of conceſſion. Praſt,
She ſaid, truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs
which fall. Matth. xv. 27
7. Exactneſs; conformity to rule. /*
Ploughs to go true depend much upon the truth of the iron
work. Mortimer's Huſbandy.
8. Reality.
In truth, what ſhould any prayer, framed to the miniſter's
hand, require, but only ſo to be read as behoveth. Histºr
9. Of a TRUTH, or in TRUTH. In reality.
Of a truth, Lord, the kings of Aſſyria have deſtroyed the
nations. 2 King, Xix. 17.
TRUTINA'tion. m. ſ. ſtrutina, Lat.] The act of weighing ;
examination by the ſcale.
Men may miſtake if they diſtinguiſh not the ſenſe of levity
unto themſelves, and in regard of the ſcale or deciſion of trº.
tination. Brown's Pulgar Errour, b. iv.
To TRY. v. a. [trier, French.]
1. To examine; to make experiment of.
Some among you have beheld me fighting,
Come tºy upon yourſelves what you have ſeen me. Sha',
He cannot be a perfeót man,
Not being tried and tutor'd in the world. Shaftºffear,
Doth not the ear try words, and the mouth taſe meat?job.
2. To experience; to aſſay; to have knowledge or experienceof.
Thou know'ſt only good; but evil haſt not try’d Milt,
Some to far Oaxis ſhall be ſold,
Cr tºy the Libyan heat, or Scythian cold. Dryden,
With me the rocks of Scylla you have ty'd,
Th’ inhuman Cyclops, and his den defy'd;
What greater ills hereafter can you bear? Dryden.
3. To examine as a judge. -
4. To bring before a judicial tribunal.
5. To bring to a deciſion, with out emphatical. -
Nicanor hearing of their couragiouſneſs to fight for their
country, durſt not try the matter by the ſword, 2 M**
I'll try it out, and give no quarter. Dryden's Don Sºlºftian,
6. To act on as a teſt.
The fire ſev’n times tried this;
Sev’n times tried that judgment is,
Which did never chuſe amiſs.
7. To bring as to a teſt. -
The tying of your faith worketh patience. ?"3
They open to themſelves at length the way !
Up hither under long obedience try’d. Mltºn.
8. To eſſay; to attempt. º
Let us try advent'rous work. Milton,
9. To purify; to refine.
After life
Ty’d in ſharp tribulation and refin'd Miltºn.
By faith and faithful works. -
To TRY. v. n. To endeavour; to attempt.
TUB. m. ſ. ſtobbe, tubbe, Dutch.]
1. A large open veſſel of wood.
In the Eaſt Indies, if you
room where cloves are kept,
four hours. ick t
They fetch their precepts from the Cynic
Skilful coopers hoop their tub, Hudibraſ.
With Lydian and with Phrygian dubs. ſo called.
2. A ſtate of ſalivation. º: not well why ſo-call
Seaſon the ſlaves "A vouth
For tub, and baths, bring down tº º #7.
Tº ſh; tıfaſt, and the diet. Sºº ; º;
Tube. n.ſ.. [tube, Fr. tubus, Lat.] A pipe; a “P”
body. - - - ith their fiery tube:
There bellowing engines with thº. º
Diſpers'd athereal forms and dow" they fell.
Aſpot like which aſtrnomer ſaw. Miltºn.
Trhough his glaz'd optick tube yet º: of the earth,
This bears up part of it out ºf the ſu tables therº.
- - JOlning or ſeparati *- -
ſignificd agree or jiā. "Parating of ſigns, as the things
* agrec. Locke
the vegeta. -
the reſt through the tube, and vº of ... Hiſt, p. iii.
Oil, G ſ/codward's Nº.
Shakeſ eart. |
ſet a tub of water open "..."
it will be drawn dry in ".
... W. Aftſ. Nº. 78.
Bacon's Nat º Miltºn,
Rºſſºm.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T U R
-
--
-º-
r
Tu'BER CLF. m. ſ. ſtubercule, Fr. from tuberculum, Latin.] A
ſmall ſwelling or excreſcence on the body; a pimple.
A conſumption of the lungs, without an ulceration, arrives
through a ſchirroſity, or a crude tubercle. Harvey on Conſump.
TUBE'Rose. m. ſ. A flower.
The ſtalks of tuberoſe run up four foot high more or leſs, the
common way of planting them is in pots in March, in good
earth. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Eternal ſpring, with ſmiling verdure here,
Warms the mild air, and crowns the youthful year,
The tuberºſe ever breathes and violets blow. Garth's Diffenſ.
TU'BERo Us. adj. [tubereux, Fr. from tuber, Latin.] Having pro-
minent knots or excreſcences.
Parts of tuberous hæmatitae ſhew ſeveral varieties in the
cruſts, ſtriature, and conſtitution of the body. JWoodward.
Tu'bul.A.R. adj. [from tubus, Lat.] Reſembling a pipe or trunk;
conſiſting of a pipe ; long and hollow ; fiſtular.
He hath a tubular or pipe-like ſnout reſembling that of the
hippocampus, or horſe-fiſh. Grew's Mu'eum.
Tºº n. ſ. [tubulus, Latin.] A ſmall pipe, or fiſtular
Ody.
As the ludus Helmontii, and the other nodules have in
them ſea-ſhells that were incorporated with them during the
time of their formation at the deluge, ſo theſe ſtones had then
incorporated with them teſtaceous tubules, related to the fi-
phunculi or rather the vermiculi marini. Iſºodw, on Fºſſils.
TU’BU LATED. }* [from tubulus, Lat.] Fiſtular; longitu-
Tu'BU Lou s. dinally hollow.
The teeth are tubulated for the conveyance of the poiſon
into the wound they make ; but their hollowneſs doth not
reach to the top of the tooth. Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
Tuck. m. ſ. [tweca Welſh, a kniſe ; ºftoc, French ; Jłoccº,
Italian.]
1. A long narrow ſword.
If he by chance eſcape your venom'd tuck,
Our purpoſe may hold there. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Theſe being prim’d, with force he labour'd
To free's ſword from retentive ſcabbard;
And after many a painful pluck,
From ruſty durance he bail'd tuck.
2. A kind of net.
The tuck is narrower meaſhed, and therefore ſcarce lawful
with a long bunt in the midſt. Carew.
To TU cK. v. n. [from tº urken, German.] To preſs. Skinner.
1. To cruſh together ; to hinder from ſpreading.
She ticked up her veſtments, like a Spartan virgin, and
marched directly forwards to the utmoſt ſummit of the pro-
montory. Addiſon.
The ſex, at the ſame time they are letting down their
ſays, are tucking up their petticoats, which grow ſhorter and
ſhorter every day. Addiſon's Guardian.
The following age of females firſt tucked up their garments
to the elbows, and expoſed their arms to the air. Addison.
Dick adept tuck back thy hair,
And I will pour into thy ear. P, ior.
2. To incloſe, by tucking cloaths round.
Make his bed after different faſhions, that he may not feel
every little change, who is not to have his maid always to lay
all things in print and tuck him in warm. Locke an Education.
To TU cK. v. n. To contraćt. A bad word.
An ulcer diſcharging a naſty thin ichor, the edges tuck in,
and growing ſkinned and hard, give it the name of a callous
ulcer. Sha'p's Surgery.
Tu'ck ER. m. ſ. A ſmall piece of linen that ſhades the breaſt of
WOInnell.
A female ornament by ſome called a tucker, and by others
the neck-piece, being a ſlip of fine linen or muſlin, uſed to
run in a ſmall kind of ruffle round the uppermoſt verge of the
ſtays. Addiſon's Guardian.
Tº CKETson ANc F. m. ſ. A word apparently derived from the
French, but which I do not certainly underſtand; turquet is a
hat, and toguer is to ſtrike.
Let the trumpets found,
The turiſtſmance and the note to mount. Shakespeare Hºn. V.
TU'EL. m. /. I tuyeau, French..] The anus. - Skinner.
TU'Esday. n.ſ. [cueroaj, Saxon ; tuv, Saxon, is Mars.) The
third day of the week. - .
Tºx. n. J. [from tufted and taffety.] A villous kind
of ſilk.
His cloaths were ſtrange, tho’ coarſe, and black, tho’
bare :
Slceveleſs his jerkin was, and it had been
Velvet; but it was now, ſo much ground was ſeen,
Become tufftoffaty. - Donne.
TUF.T. m. ſ. ſtuffe, French.]
1. A number of threads or ribbands, flowery leaves, or any ſmall
bodies joined together.
Upon ſweet brier, a fine tuft or bruſh of moſs of divers
colours, you ſhall ever find full of white worms. Bacon.
It is notorious for its goatiſh ſmell, and tufts not unlike
the beard of that animal. 4ſore's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
A tuft of daiſics on a flow'ry lay. Dryden.
Hudibras, p. i.
T U G
Near a living ſtream their manſion place
Elg'd round with moſs and tiſts of matted graſs. Dryºn.
The male among birds often appears in a creſt, comb, a
*ſt of feathers, or a natural little plume, erected like a
Pinacle on the top of the head. Ajº. Speci Q
2. A cluſter; a plump. ſon's Spectator, N° 265.
Going a little aſide into the wood, where many times be-
fore ſhe delighted to walk, her eyes were ſaluted with a tuft
of trees ſo cloſe ſet together, as with the ſhade the moon gave
through it, it might breed a fearful kind of devotion to ſº
upon it. - Sidney.
My houſe is at the tuft of olives hard by. Shakespeare
With high woods the hills were crown'd : -
With tufts the valleys, and cach fountain fide &gt;
With borders long the rivers. Ahº', Par. Loff
In bow'r and field he fought, where any tuft -
Qſgrove, or garden-plot more pleaſant,
Their tendance, or plantation for delight. Milton's P. L.
Under a tuft of ſhade, that on a green
Stood whiſp'ring ſoft, by a freſh fountain ſide
They ſat them down. 4/ſton's Par. Loff, h, iv.
To Tu Fr. v. a. To adorn with a tuft ; a doubtful word, not
authoriſed by any competent writer.
Sit beneath the ſhade
Qf ſolemn oaks, that tuft the ſwelling mounts,
Thrown graceful round. Thomſºn.
Tu'FTED. adj. [from tuft.) Growing in tufts or cluſters. .
There does a ſable cloud
Turn forth her ſilver lining on the night,
And caſt a gleam over this tufted grove. Aſ ſºon.
Towers and battlements it ſees,
Boſom'd high in tufted trees,
Where perhaps ſome beauty lies
The cynoſure of neighbouring eyes. Milton.
"Midſt the deſert fruitful fields ariſe,
That crown'd with tufted trees and ſpringing corn,
Like verdant iſles the fable waſte adorn. Pope.
Tu'FTY, adj. [from tuft.] Adorned with tuſts. A word of no
authority. -
Let me ſtrip thee of thy tiſſy coat,
Spread thy ambroſial ſtores.
To TUG. v. a. ſtizan, reogan, Saxon.]
I. To pull with ſtrength long continued in the utmoſt exertion;
Thomſºn's Summer.
to draw.
No more tug one another thus, nor moil yourſelves;
receive
Priſe equal; conqueſts crown ye both: the liſts to others
leave. Chapman's Iliads.
Theſe two maſſy pillars
With horrible confuſion to and fro
He tugg’d, he ſhook, till down they came, and drew
Upon the heads of all that ſat beneath,
The whole roof after them, with burſt of thunder. Milton.
Take pains the genuine meaning to explore,
There ſweat, there ſtrain, tug the laborious oar. Rºſº.
2. To pull; to pluck.
Prieſt, beware thy beard;
I mean to tug it, and to cuff you ſoundly. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
There leaving him to his repoſe
Secured from the purſuit of foes,
And wanting nothing but a ſong,
And a well tun'd theorbo hung
Upon a bough, to eaſe the pain
His tugg’d ears ſuffer'd, with a ſtrain.
To TUG. v. m.
1. To pull; to draw.
The meaner ſort will tug luſtily at one oar. Sandwr.
Lead your thoughts to the galleys, there thoſe wretched
captives are chained to the oars they tug at. Boyls.
There is ſuch tugging and pulling this way and that way.
AMºre's Antid:tº againſ? A:hº ºn.
Thus galley-ſlaves tug willing at their oar, !
Hudibras, p. i.
Content to work in proſpect of the ſhore;
But would not work at all, if not conſtrained before. Dryd.
We have been tugging a great while againſt the ſtream, an
have almoſt weathered our point; a ſtretch or two more will
do the work; but if inſtead of that we ſlacken our arms, an
drop our oars, we ſhall be hurried back to the place from
whence we ſet out. Aïiſon on the State ºf Iſar.
2. To labour; to contend ; to ſtruggle.
Caſt your good courſels
Upon his paſſion; let myſelf and fortune . ...
Tug for the time to corne. Shake?, Hºinter, T.J.
His face is black and full of blood,
His hands abroad diſplay'd, as one that graſpt
And tugg'd for life. Shaº, Hen. VI, p. ii.
They long wreſtled and ſtrenuouſly tugg'd for their liberty
with a no leſs magnanimous than conſtant pertinacy. How.
Go now with ſome daring drug,
Bait thy diſeaſe, and while they tug,
Thou to maintain the cruel ſtrife,
Spend the dear treaſure of thy life. Craſhaw.
27 B TUG.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T U M
T U M
Tuc. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Pull performed with the utmoſt
effort. Downward by the feet he drew
embling daſtard: at the tug he falls,
º º º along, rent from the ſmoking walls. Dryd.
Tugger. n.ſ.. [from tug.] One that tugs or pulls hard.
Tuition. n.ſ. ſtuitio from tucor, Lat.] Guardianſhip ; ſu-
erintendent care ; care of a guardian or tutor.
A folly for a man of wiſdom, to put himſelf under, the
tuition of a beaſt. - Sidney, b. ii.
They forcibly endeavour to caſt the churches, under my
care and tution, into the moulds they have faſhioned to their
deſigns. King Charles.
If government depends upon religion, this ſhews the peſti-
lential deſign of thoſe that attempt to disjoin the civil and ec-
cleſiaſtical intereſts, ſetting the latter wholly out of the tuition
of the former. South's Sermons.
When ſo much true life is put into them, freely talk with
them about what moſt delights them, that they may perceive
that thoſe under whoſe tuition they are, are not enemies to
their ſatisfaction. Locke.
TULIP. m. ſ. [tulipe, Fr. tulipa, Lat.] A flower.
It hath a lilly flower, compoſed of ſix leaves, ſhaped ſome-
what like a pitcher; the pointal riſing in the middle of the
flower is ſurrounded with ſtamina, and afterwards becomes
an oblong fruit, which opens into three parts, and is divided
into three cells, full of plain ſeeds, reſting upon one another
in a double row. To theſe may be added a coated root, with
fibres on the lower part. The properties of a good tulip, ac-
cording to the characteriſticks of the beſt floriſts of the pre-
ſent age, are, I. It ſhould have a tall ſtem. 2. The flower
ſhould conſiſt of ſix leaves, three within, and three without,
the former being larger than the latter. 3. Their bottom
ſhould be proportioned to their top ; their upper part ſhould
be rounded off, and not terminate in a point.
when opened ſhould neither turn inward nor bend outward,
but rather ſtand erect; the flower ſhould be of a middling
fize, neither over large nor too ſmall. 5. The ſtripes ſhould
be ſmall and regular, ariſing quite from the bottom of the
flower. The chives ſhould not be yellow, but of a brown
colour. They are generally divided into three claſſes, viz.
praecoces, or early flowers ; media's, or middling flowers; and
ſerotines, or late flowers. The early blowing tulips are not
near ſo fair, nor riſe half ſo high as the late ones, but are
chiefly valued for appearing ſo early in the ſpring. Their
roots ſhould be taken up and ſpread upon mats in a ſhady
place to dry ; after which they ſhould be cleared from their
filth, and put up in a dry place until the ſeaſon for planting.
A/iller. -
The tulip opens with the riſing, and ſhuts with the ſetting
ſun. Hakewill.
Why tulips of one colour produce ſome of another, and
running thro' all, ſtill eſcape a blue. Brown's /ugar Errours.
TU/LIPTREE. A tree.
To TUMBLE. v. n. [tomber, Fr. tommelen, Dutch ; tombo-
lare, Italian.]
1. To fall ; to come ſuddenly to the ground.
Though the treaſure
Of nature's germins tumble all together,
Anſwer me.
2. To fall in great quantities tumultuouſly.
When riches come by the courſe of inheritance and teſta-
Shakeſpeare.
ments, they come tumbling upon a man. Bacon.
To ſtand or walk, to riſe or tumble,
As matter and as motion jumble. Prior.
Siſyphus liſts his ſtone up the hill; which carried to the
top, it immediately tumbles to the bottom. Addiſon's Speciator.
3. To roll about.
I ſaw at the bottom of one tree a gentleman bound with
many garters hand and foot, ſo as well he might tumble and
toſs. Sidney, b. ii.
Glo'ſter ſtumbled, and in falling ſtruck me
Into the tumbling billows of the main. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
4. To play tricks by various librations of the body.
Reform our ſenſe, and teach the men t’obey;
They'll leave their tumbling, if you lead the way. Rowe.
To TU/M BI. E., v. a.
1. To turn over; to throw about by way of examination.
When it came to the ears of Maximilian, and tumbling it
ºver and over in his thoughts, that he ſhould at one blow be
defeated of the marriage of his daughter and his own, he loſt
all patience. Bacon’s Henry VII.
A man by tumbling his thoughts, and forming them into ex-
Preſſions, gives theii, a new fermentation, which works them
into a finer body. - Collier on Pride.
They tumbled all their little quivers o'er,
To chuſe propitious Shakespeare Prior.
°. Tº throw by chance or violence.
The mind often ſets itſelf on work in ſearch of ſome hid-
den ideas; though ſometimes they are rouzed and tumbled out
of their dark cells into open day-light by ſome turbulent
paſſions. Locke's I/orks.
4. The leaves
3. To throw down.
Wilt thou ſtill be hammering treachery,
To tumble down thy huſband and thyſelf,'
From top of honour to diſgrace's feet? Shakeſ,
King Lycurgus, while he fought in vain, bakºffrare.
His friend to free, was tumbled on the plain. Drydºn
If a greater force than his holds him faſt, or tumbles him
down, he is no longer free. Lºck
TU'MBle. n. ſ. [from the verb.] A fall. -
A country-fellow got an unlucky tumble from a tree. why
ſays a paſſenger, I could have taught you a way to climb º
never hurt yourſelf with a fall. L'Éi.
TU'MBLER. m. ſ. [from tumble.] One who ſhews poſtures i.
various contortions of body, or feats of activity.
What ſtrange agility and activeneſs do common tumbler;
and dancers on the rope attain to by continual exerciſe;
//ilkins’ Math. Mariº.
Nic. bounced up with a ſpring equal to that of the mini
tumblers or rope-dancers. - A builmºt,
Never by tumbler thro’ the hoops was ſhown,
Such ſkill in paſſing all, and touching none. P; e.
TU'MBREL. m. ſ. [tomlereau, Freuch..] A dungcart. +
Twiſallow once ended, get tumbrel and man,
And compaſs that fallow as ſoon as ye can. Tuff. Hºff,
My corps is in a tumbrillaid, among
The filth and ordure, and inclos'd with dung;
That cart arreſt, and raiſe a common cry,
For ſacred hunger of my gold I die. Drdºn.
What ſhall I do with this beaſtly tumbril? go Hedown aſſi
ſleep, you ſot. Cºngrºve.
To convince the preſent little race how unequal all their
meaſures were to an antediluvian, in reſpect of the inſe&amp;s which
now appear for men, he ſometimes rode in an open luxºril.
Tatler.
TUM FA'ction. m. ſ. ſtumefºlio, Latin.] Swelling.
The common ſigns and effects of weak fibres, are paleneſ,
a weak pulſe, tunefuſions in the whole body. Arbuthnºt,
To TVM EFY. v. a. [tumºfacio, Lat..] To ſwell; to make to
ſwell.
I applied three ſnall cauſticks triangular about the twº fid
joint. J/jcman's Yugºy,
A fleſhy excreſcence, exceeding hard and tumºrſ, ſup-
poſed to demand extirpation. Sharp's Surgery.
Tu'MID. ad. [tumidus, Lat.]
I. Swelling; puffed up.
2. Protuberant; raiſed above the level.
So high as heav'd the tumid hills, ſo low
Down funk a hollow bottom broad and deep,
Capacious bed of waters.
3. Pompous; boaſtful; puffy; falſely ſublime. - -
Though ſuch expreſſions may ſeem tumid and aſpiring; yet
cannot I ſcruple to uſe ſeeming hyperboles in mentioning º:
ties, which make the higheſt hyperboles but ſeemingones. Lºk.
TU(MOUR. n.ſ.. [tumºr, Latin.]
1. A morbid ſwelling. - -
Tumour is a diſeaſe, in which the parts recede fºn their
natural ſtate by an undue encreaſe of their bigneſs. Hºſº".
Having diffected this ſwelling vice, and ſeen what it is that
feeds the tumour, if the diſeaſe be founded in pride, the abating
that is the moſt natural remedy. Govern. of the Tºngº.
2. Affected pomp ; falſe magnificence; puffy grandeur; ſwell-
ing mien; unſubſtantial greatneſs. - * -
His ſtile was rich of phraſe, but ſeldom in bold mºtº
and ſo far from the tumour, that it rather wants a º
tion. º:
It is not the power of tumour and bold looks up?" º: pal-
fions of the multitude. L'Ejiraºgº.
Tu(Morous. adj. [from tumour.]
I. Swelling; protuberant. d above
Who ever ſaw any cypreſs or pine, ſmall blow an }. º
and tumorous in the middle, unleſs ſome º º //0 ton.
2. Faſtuous; vainly pompous; falſely magnificen: -
According to # ſubject, theſe ſtiles vary; fºr that wº
is high and lofty, declaring excellent matter, º, hn.
and tumorous, ſpeaking of petty and inferior thiº. “ #3 à.
His limbs were rather ſturdy than dainty, ſublim" jº
moſt tumorous in his looks and geſtures. "ith *.
To TUMP, among gardeners, to fence trees about . This
To Tu'MULATE. v. m. [tumulo, Latin.] To ſwell. !!!
ſeems to be the ſenſe here, but I ſuſpect the word to be wro º
Urinous ſpirits, or volatile alkalies, are ſuch ...
acid, that as ſoon as they are put together, they tºº." † Oſ
grow hot, and continue to fight till they have dº.
mortified each other. . . ;11 Hº.
Tu'Mulose. adj. [tumulºſis, Lat.] Full of hills. hiº.
TUMULo's ITY... n.f. [tumulus, Lat.] Hillineſs. i-J
TU’MULT. n.ſ. [tumute, Fr. tumultus, Latin.j
1. A promiſcuous commotion in a multitude.
A tumult is improved into a rebellion,
overturned by it.
With ireful taunts each other they oppoſe,
Till in loud tumult all the Greeks arole.
(Jſºn.
and a gº"t
1. Eſhang.
p
gºf.
*
*
2, .
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T U N
--
2. A multitude put into wild commotion.
3. A ſtir; an irregular violence; a wild commotion.
What ſtir is this what tumults in the heav'ns
Whence cometh this alarum and this noiſe Shakeſpeare.
Tumult and confuſion all embroil'd. Milton.
This piece of poetry, what can be nobler than the idea it
gives us of the ſupreme Being thus raiſing a tumult among the
elements, and recovering them out of their confuſion, thus
troubling and becalming nature. Addison's Spectator.
TUMU'LTUARILY. adv. [from tumultuary.] In a tumultuary
manner.
Tu Mu'i TUARINEss. m. ſ. [from tumultuary..] Turbulence;
inclination or diſpoſition to tumults or commotions.
The tumultuarineſs of the people, or the factiouſneſs of
preſbyters, gave occaſion to invent new models. K. Charles.
Tu Mu'i.T.u.A.R.Y. adj. [tumultuaire, Fr. from tumuli.]
1. Diſorderly ; promiſcuous; confuſed.
Perkin had learned, that people under command uſed to
conſult, and after to march in order, and rebels contrariwiſe;
and obſerving their orderly, and not tumultuary arming,
doubted the worſt. Bacon’s Henry VII.
My followers were at that time no way proportionable to
hazard a tumultuary conflict. K. Charles.
Is it likely, that the divided atoms ſhould keep the ſame
ranks in ſuch a variety of tumultuary agitations in that liquid
medium. Glanv. Scep.
2. Reſtleſs ; put into irregular commotion.
Men who live without religion, live always in a tumultiary
and reſtleſs ſtate. Atterbury's Sermons.
To TUMU'LTUATE. v. n. [tumultuor, Lat.] To make a tumult.
TUMULTUATION. m. ſ. [from tumuliuate.] Irregular and con-
fuſed agitation.
That in the ſound the contiguous air receives many ſtrokes
from the particles of the liquor, ſeems probable by the ſudden
and eager tumultuation of its parts. Boyle's l/orks.
TUM U LT U'ous. adj. [from tº mult; tumultiteux, Fr.]
1. Put into violent commotion; irregularly and confuſedly
agitated.
The ſtrong rebuff of ſome tumultuous cloud
Hurry'd him aloft.
His dire attempt; which nigh the birth
Now rowling, boils in his tumultuous breaſt,
And like a deviliſh cngine back recoils
Upon himſelf. Milton's Parad. Loft.
The vital blood, that had forſook my heart,
Returns again in ſuch tumultuous tides,
It quite o'ercomes me.
2. Violently carried on by diſorderly multitudes.
Many civil broils, and tumultuous rebellions, they fairly
overcame, by reaſon of the continual preſence of their King,
whoſe only perſon oftentimes contains the unruly people from
a thouſand evil occaſions. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
3. Turbulent; violent. -
Nought reſts for me in this tumultuous ſtrife,
But to make open proclamation. Shakeſpeare.
Furiouſly running in upon him with tumultuous ſpeech, he
violently raught from his head his rich cap of ſables. Knolles.
4. Full of tumults.
The winds began to ſpeak louder, and as in a tumultuous
kingdom, to think themſelves fitteſt inſtruments of command-
ment. Sidney, b. ii.
Tu Mu’ltuously. adv. [from tumultuous.] By act of the
multitude; with confuſion and violence.
It was done by edićt, not tumuliuo'ſly; the ſword was not
put into the people's hand. Bacon's Holy WWar.
TUN. m. ſ. ſtunne, Sax, tonne, Dut. tonne, tonneau, Fr.]
1. A large caſk.
Milton.
Addison's Cato.
As when a ſpark
Lights on a heap of powder, laid
Fit for the tun, ſome magazine to ſtore
Againſt a rumour'd war.
2. A pipe; the meaſure of two hogſheads.
3. Any large quantity proverbially.
I have ever follow'd thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breaſt. Shakeſp.
4. A drunkard. In burleſque.
Here's a tun of midnight-work to come,
Og from a treaſon-tavern rolling home.
5. The weight of two thouſand pounds. -
6. A cubick ſpace in a ſhip, ſuppoſed to contain a tun. -
7. Dryden has uſed it for a perimetrical meaſure, I believe with-
out precedent or propriety.
A fun about was every pillar there;
A poliſh'd mirrour ſhone not half ſo clear. Dryden.
To TU N. v. a. [from the noun..] To put into caſks ; to
barrel.
If in the muſt, or wort, while it worketh, before it be tunned,
the burrage ſtay a time, and be often changed with freſh, it
will make a ſovereign drink for melancholy. Bacon.
The ſame fermented juice degenerating into vinegar, yields
an acid and corroding ſpirit. The ſame juice tunned up, arms
itſelf with tartar. Boyle's //orks.
9
JMilton.
Dryden.
T U N
Tu'NABLE, adj. [from tune.] Harmonious; muſical,
A cry more tunable -
Was never hall'd to, nor cheer'd with horn. Shakeſp.
Hard are the ways of truth, and rough to walk,
Smooth on the tongue diſcouſs'd, pleaſing to th’ear,
And tunable as ſylvan pipe or ſong. O Alſilion.
All tunable founds, whereof human voice is one, are made
by a regular vibration of the ſonorous body, and undulation
of the air, proportionable to the acuteneſ, or gravity of the
º ! lines in Virgi Holder:
everal lines in Virgil are not altogether tunable to a mo-
dºn ear. Garth's Pref. to Ovid.
TU’NABLENEss. n. ſ. [from tunable.] Harmony; Melodiouſ-
neſs.
Tu'NABLY. adv. [from tunable.] Harmoniouſly; melodiouſly.
TUNE, n.ſ.. [toon, Dut. ton, Swed, tune, ità, i.f. y
- &gt; - 2. ... tone, Fr. to-
mus, Lat.] -
1. Tune is a diverſity of notes put together. Locke:
Came he to ſing a raven's note,
Whoſe diſmal tune bereft my vital pow'rs. Shakeſp.
Tunes and airs have in themſelves ſome affinity with the af-
fections; as merry tunes, doleful tunes, ſolemn tunes, tunes
inclining mens minds to pity, warlike tunes; ſo that tunes
have a prediſpoſition to the motion of the ſpirits. Bacon.
Keep unſteddy nature to her law,
And the low world in meaſur'd motion draw
After the heav'nly tune, which none can hear
Of human mould with groſs unpurged ear. Milton.
That ſweet ſong you ſung one ſtarry night,
The tune I ſtill retain, but not the words. Dryden.
The diſpoſition in the fiddle to play tunes. Arb. &amp; Pope.
2. Sound; note.
Such a noiſe aroſe
As the ſhrouds make at ſea in a ſtiff tempeſt,
As loud, and to as many tunes. Shakeſpeare.
3. Harmony ; order; concert of parts.
A continual parliament I thought would but keep the com-
monweal in tune, by preſerving laws in their due execution
and vigour. K. Charles.
4. State of giving the due ſounds, as the fiddle is in tune, or out
of tune.
5. Proper ſtate for uſe or application; right diſpoſition; fit
temper; proper humour.
A child will learn three times as much when he is in tune,
as he will with double the time and pains, when he goes auk-
wardly, or is dragged unwillingly to it. Locke.
6. State of anything with reſpect to order.
Diſtreſſed Lear, in his better tune, remembers what we are
come about. Shakeſpeare.
To TUNE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To put into ſuch a ſtate, as that the proper ſounds may be
produced.
Their golden harps they took,
Harps ever tun'd, that glitter'd by their fide.
Tune your harps,
Ye angels, to that ſound; and thou, my heart,
Make room to entertain thy flowing joy.
2. To fing harmoniouſly.
Fountains, and ye that warble as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praiſe.
Rouze up, ye Thebans; tune your Io Paeans;
Your king returns, the Argians are o'ercome. Dryden.
Leave ſuch to tune their own dull rhymes, and know
What's roundly ſmooth, and languiſhingly ſlow. Pope.
To TUNE. v. n.
I. To form one ſound to another.
The winds were huſh'd, no leaf ſo ſmall
At all was ſeen to ſtir;
Whilſt tuning to the waters fall, -
The ſmall birds ſang to her. Drayt. Q. of Cynthia.
All ſounds on fret or ſtop • *
Temper'd ſoft tunings, intermix'd with voice. Milton.
2. To utter with the voice inarticulate harmony. .
Tu'NEFul. adj. [tune and full.] Muſical; harmonious.
I ſaw a pleaſant grove. - - - - -
With chant of tuneful birds reſounding love. Milton.
Earth ſmiles with flow'rs renewing, laughs the ſky,
And birds to lays of love their tuneful notes apply. Dryd.
For thy own glory ſing our ſov’reign's praiſe,
God of verſes º º º
|] thy tuneful ſons adorn -
ſº º ... with william's name. Prior.
p.d. themſelves muſt fall, like thoſe they ſung,
Deaf the prais'd ear, and mute the tuneful tongue. Pope.
Tu'NE less. adj. [from tune.] Unharmonious ; unmuſical.
When iſ hand my tuneles harp I take,
Milton.
Dryden.
Milton.
Then do I more augment my foes deſpight. Spenſºr.
Swallow, what doſt thou
with thy tune'ſ ſerenadº Cowley.
'sºn. f. [from tune.) One who tunes.
TU *#. º ſuch antick, liſping, affected phantaſies, theſe
----- Shakeſtrare
r; of accents. gº:-
new tune TU NICK.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T U R
T U R
|
TUNICK. m. ſ. ſtunique, Fr. tunica, Lat.]
1. Part of the Roman dreſs. - -
The timick, of the Romans, which anſwer to our waiſt-
º coats, were without ornaments, and with very ſhort ſleeves.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. Covering; integument ; tunicle.
Lohocks and ſyrups abate and demulce the hoarſeneſs of a
º, cough, by mollifying the ruggedneſs of the intern tunit of
the gullet. Harvey on Conſ
Their fruit is locked up all winter in their gems, and well
fenced with neat and cloſe tunicks. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
The dropſy of the tunica vaginalis is owing to a preterna-
tural diſcharge of that water continually ſeparating on the
internal ſurface of the tunick. Sharp.
Tu'Nicle. n.ſ.. [from tunick..] Cover; integument. -
The humours and tunicles are purely tranſparent, to let in
the light and colour unfoiled. Ray.
One fingle grain of wheat, barley, or rye, ſhall contain
four or five diſtinct plants under one common tunicle ; a very
convincing argument of the providence of God. Bently.
Tu'NNAGE. n.ſ. [from tun.]
1. Content of a veſſel meaſured by the tun.
The conſideration of the riches of the ancients leads to
that of their trade, and to enquire into the bulk and tunnage
of their ſhipping. Arbuthnot.
2, Tax laid on a tun; as to levy tunnage and poundage.
Tu'NN FL. m. ſ. -
1. The ſhaft of a chimney; the paſſage for the ſmoke.
It was a vault ybuilt for great diſpence,
With many ranges rear'd along the wall,
And one great chimney, whoſe long tunnel thence
The ſmoak forth threw. Fairy Queen.
The water being ratified, and by rarification reſolved into
wind, will force up the ſmoke, which otherwiſe might linger
in the tunnel, and oftentimes reverſe. J/ºtton's Arch.
2. A funnel; a pipe by which liquor is poured into veſſels.
For the help of the hearing, make an inſtrument like a
tunnel, the narrow part of the bigneſs of the hole of the ear,
and the broader end much larger. Bacon.
3. A net wide at the mouth, and ending in a point, and ſo re-
ſembling a funnel or tunnel.
To Tu'N N E L. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To form like a tunnel.
The Phalaenae tribe inhabit the tunnelled, convolved leaves.
Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
- - -
2. To catch in a net.
3. This word is uſed by Derham for to make net-work; to re-
ticulate.
Some birds not only weave the fibrous parts of vegetables,
and curiouſly tunnel them into neſts, but artificially ſuſpend
them on the twigs of trees. Derham.
Tu'N N Y. m. ſ. [tonnen, Ital, thymus, Lat.] A ſea-fiſh.
Some fiſh are boiled and preſerved freſh in vinegar, as tonny
and turbot. Carew.
Tº P. n. ſ. [I know not of what original.] A ram. This word
is yet uſed in Staffordſhire, and in other provinces.
To TUP. v. n. To but like a ram.
TURBAN. {{ [A Turkiſh word..] The cover worn by
*T*... r. 1 -
º the Turks on their heads.
Gates of monarchs
- Arch'd are ſo high, that giants may jet through,
And keep their impious turbands on, without
Good morrow to the ſun. Shakeſpeare.
His hat was in the form of a turban, not ſo huge as the
Turkiſh turbans. Bacon.
From utmoſt Indian iſle, Taprobane,
Duſk faces with white ſilken tu lants wreath’d. Milton.
I ſee the Turk nodding with his turbant. Howel.
| Some for the pride of Turkiſh courts deſign'd,
For folded turbants fineſt Holland bear. Dryden.
TU'RBANED. adj. [from turban.] Wearing a turban. -
A turban'd Turk
That beat a Venetian, and traduc’d the ſtate,
I took by the throat. Shakeſpeare.
Tuſk BAR Y. n.ſ. Iturbaria, low Lat, from turf.] The right of
Jigging turf. Skinner.
TURBID. adj. [tºrhiius, Latin.] Thick; muddy; not clear.
Though lees make the liquid turbid, yet they refine the
ſpirits. Bacon.
The brazen inſtruments of death diſcharge
Horrible flames, and turbid ſtreaming clouds
Of ſmoke ſulphureous, intermix'd with theſe
Large globotis irons fly. Philips.
The ordinary ſprings, which were before clear, freſh, and
limpid, become thick and turbid, as long as the earthquake
laſts. //oodw. Nat. Hiſt.
ºbsess. n: ſ [from turbid.] Muddineſs; thickneſs.
ſu'RB's Art D. dj. Itarbinatus, Latin.]
1. Twiſted ; ſpiral.
• 1st mechaniſm here produce a ſpiral and turbinated motion
of the whole moved body without an external director. Bentley.
2. Among botaniſts plants are called turbinated, as ſome
of them reſemble, or are of a conical figure. }.
Tºº n. ſ. [from turbinated.] The art of ſpinning
TU'RBITH. m. ſ. ſturpethus, Latin.] Yellow precipitate
I ſent him twelve grains of turbith mineral, and red -
off with a bitter draught. I repeated the turbiº, º in h It
days; and the ulcers ſhell'd ſoon-off. Wiſeman's Sur º
Tu'R Bot. m. ſ. ſturbot, French and Dutch..] A delicate #.
Some fiſh are preſerved freſh in vinegar, as turbot Car -
Of fiſhes you ſhall find in arms the whale, the finº, º:
turbot. Peach
Nor oyſters of the Lucrine lake JDuh.
My ſober appetite would wiſh,
Nor tu, bot. Dryden
TU'R BULEN.cf.
+j } n. ſ. ſturbulence, Fr. turbulentia, Latin.]
I. Tumult; confuſion.
I have dream'd
Of bloody turbulence; and this whole night
Hath nothing been but forms of ſlaughter.
Oft-times noxious where they light
On man, beaſt, plant, waſteful and turbulent,
Like turbulencies in the affairs of men,
Over whoſe heads they roar, and ſeem to point:
They oft foreſignify and threaten ill.
I come to calm thy turbulence of mind,
If reaſon will reſume her ſov’reign ſway.
2. Tumultuouſneſs; liableneſs to confuſion.
You think this turbulence of blood,
From ſtagnating preſerves the flood,
Which thus fermenting by degrees,
Exalts the ſpirits, ſinks the lees.
TU'RBULENT. ad. [turbulentus, Lat.]
I. Raiſing agitation ; producing commotion.
From the clear milky juice allaying
Thirſt, and refreſh'd; nor envy'd them the grape,
Whoſe heads that turbuleut liquor fills with fumes. Åſſiºn,
2. Expoſed to commotion ; liable to agitation.
Calm region once,
And full of peace; now toſt, and turbulent /
3. Tumultuous; violent.
What wondrous ſort of death has heav'n deſign'd
Shukſare,
Miltºn,
Dryden,
Swift,
Miltºn,
For ſo untam’d, ſo turbulent a mind? Dryden.
Nor need we tell what anxious cards attend
The tubulent mirth of wine, nor all the kinds
Of maladies that lead to death's grim cave,
Wrought by intemperance. Drydºn.
Men of ambitious and turbulent ſpirits, that were diffitisfied
with privacy, were allowed to engage in matters of ſtate. Bºtſ.
TuRBu’lently. adv. [from turbulent.] Tumultuouſly; vio-
lently.
Tºw. n. ſ. [turiſmus, low Latin.] The religion of the
Turks. ---
Methinks I am at Mecca, and hear a piece of tº
preached to me by one of Mahomet's prieſts. Dr. Min.
He is condemned immediately, as preferring lºſiſ. "
Chriſtianity. Afterbury.
Tu'Rcois. n.ſ.. [turcois, Dutch..] A precious ſtone.
TURD. m. ſ. ſtunb, Saxon.] Excrement. -
TURF. n.ſ. ſºng, Saxon; torſ, Dutch; torf, Swediſh.) A
clod covered with graſs; a part of the ſurface of the ground.
- Where was this lane : 1 * : *
Cloſe by the battle, ditch'd, and wall'd with tºf. Shºp.
Turf and peats are cheap fuels, and laſt long. Ba.ºn.
Could that divide you from near uſhering guides?
They left me weary on a graſſy turf.
Then living turf; upon his body lay.
Each place ſome monument of thce ſhould bear; d
I with green turf; would grateful altars raiſe. Dryden,
Their bucklers ring around,
- - tes the ſolid ground.
Their trampling turns the turf, and ſhakes jº Æn.
lated a turf of
dhim that all
Miltºn.
Dryde".
The ambaſſador every morning religiouſly ſº
earth dug out of his own native ſoil, to remin Addison
the day he was to think of his country. ady".
His flock daily crops
Their verdant dinner from the moſſy turf, Philipſ.
Sufficient.
Yet ſhall thy grave with riſing flow'rs be dreſt,
And the green turf lie lightly on thy breaſt. . ſ Pºpe.
To Turf. v. a. [from the noun..] To cover with º her
Aſortime.
The face of the bank next the ſea is turfed. inºr Wit
Tu'R FINEss. n. ſ. [from turf.] The ſtate of abounding W*
turfs.
Tu'RFY. adj. [from turf.] Full of turfs. - Til-
Tu'RGENT. adj. [turgens, Lat.] Swelling; protuberant; tu
mid. r
t is neceſſary not only to
Where humours are turgent, it is, Gºv. Iºn.
purge them, but alſo to ſtrengthen the infeſted parts. Gº".
The cluſters clear, Thºmſºn.
White ra',• living dew.
White o'er the turgent film the * TURGE's EN~5.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T U R
T U R
TURGE'scence. -
TURGE'scENcy. }n. ſ. [turgeſtens, Lat.]
I. The act of ſwelling; the ſtate of being ſwollen.
The inſtant turgiſtence is not to be äken off, but by me-
dicines of higher natures. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Tu'RGIP. adj. [turgidus, Lat.]
1. Swelling; bloated ; filling more room than before.
A bladder, moderately fill'd with air, and ſtrongly tied,
held near the fire grew turgid and hard; and brought nearer,
ſuddenly broke with a vehement noiſe. Boyle.
The ſpirits embroil'd with the malignity, and drowned in
the blood turgid and tumified by the fibril fermentation, are
by phlebotomy relieved. Barvey on Conſumptions.
Diſburthen thou thy ſapleſs woºd
Qf its rich progeny; the turgid fruit
Abounds with mellow liquor." Philips.
Thoſe channels turgid with th' obſtruaed tide
Stretch their ſmall holes and make their meſhes wide. Bla.
2. Pompous; tumid; faſtuous; vainly magnificent.
Some have a violent and turgid manner of talking and
thinking; whatſoever they judge of is with a tincture of this
vanity. //atts's Logick.
TURGI'dity. m. ſ. [from turgid.] State of being ſwollen.
The fore-runners of an apoplexy are dulneſs, ſlowneſs of
ſpeech, vertigos, weakneſs, wateryneſs, and turgidity of the
eyes. * Arbuthnot on Diet.
Tu'RKEY. m. ſ. ſºallina turcica, Lat.] A large domeſtick fowl
brought from Turkey.
Here he comes ſwelling like a turkey-cock. Shakespeare.
The turkey-cock hath ſwelling gills, the hen leſs. Bač.
So ſpecids the wily fox,
Who lately filch'd the turkey's callow care. Gay.
Tu'kkois. n.f. [turguoiſe, French, from turkey.] A blue ſtone
numbered among the meaner precious ſtones, now diſcovered
to be a bone impregnated with cupreous particles.
Thoſe bony bodies found among copper-ores are tinged
with green or blue : the turcois ſtone, as it is commonly ſtiled
by lapidaries, is part of a bone ſo tinged. Woodward.
TU'RKscAP. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſ.
Tukki. m. ſ. [turne, Lat.] A troop. Not in uſe.
Legions and cohorts, turms of horſe and wings. Milton.
TuRMBRick.". ſ. ſturmerica, Lat.] An Indian foot which
makes a yellow die.
Tu'RMoil. n.ſ. [derived by Skinner from tremouille, French,
a mil-hopper, more probably derived from moil, to labour.]
Trouble; diſturbance; harraffing uneaſineſs ; tumultuous mo:
leſtation. Little in uſe.
He ſeeks, with torment and turmoil,
To force me live and will not let me die. Spenſer.
There I'll reſt, as after much turmoil
A bleſſed ſoul doth in elyſium. Shakeſpeare.
Blinded greatneſs ever in turmoil,
Still ſeeking happy life, makes life a toil. Daniel.
Happy when I, from this turmoil ſet free,
That peaceful and divine aſſemby ſee. Denham.
To TuRMoil. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To harraſs with commotion. Out of uſe.
That is not fault of will in thoſe godly fathers, but the
troublous occaſions wherewith that wretched realm hath con-
tinually been turmoiled. Spenſer.
It is her fatal misfortune above all othercountries, to be mi-
ferably toſſed and turmoiled with theſeſtorms of afflićion. Spenſ.
Haughty Juno, who with endleſs broil,
‘Did earth, and heav'n and Jove himſelf turmoil,
At length aton'd, her friendly pow'r ſhall join. Dryden.
2. To weary ; to keep in unquietneſs.
Having newly left thoſe grammatic ſhallows, where they
{tuck unreaſonably to learn a few words, on the ſudden are
tranſported to be toſt and turmoil'd with their unballaſted
wits in fathomleſs aud unquiet deeps of controverſy. Milton.
To TURN. v. a. [zunnan, Sax. tourner, Fr. from torno, Lat.]
4. To put into a circular or vertiginous motion; to move
round; to revolve.
She would have made Hercules tarn the ſpit; yea and
have cleft his club to make the fire too. Shakeſp.
He turn'd me about with his finger and thumb, as one
would ſet up a top. - Shakeſpeare.
Here's a knocking, indeed: if a man were porter of hell-
gate he ſhould have old turning the key. Shakeſp.
They in numbers that compute -
Days, months and years, towards his all-chearing lamp
Żurn ſwift their various motions, or are turn'd
By his magnetic beam. Milton's Par. Lºft.
2. To put the upperſide downwards; to ſhift with regard to the
ſides.
When the he has laid her eggs ſo that ſhe can cover them,
what care does ſhe take in turning them frequently, that all
parts may partake of the vital warmth Addiſon.
3. To change with reſpect to poſition.
Expert
When to advance, or ſtand, or turn the ſway
Of battle. Milton,
He bid his angels turn aſcanſ, the oles. . -
4. T; change the ſtate of the ballance. poles. Mihih,
% Weigh equally, a feather witurn the ſcale. Shake
If I ſurvive, ſhall Troy the leſs prevail, akeſ?,
A ſingle ſoul's too light to turn the ſcale.
s. T. j. " " " the ſcale. Dryden,
He called me ſot;
And told me I had tº the wrong ſide out. Shakespeare .
- The vaſt abyſs -
Up from the bottom ºf by furious winds. Milton.
6. º: change as to the poſture of the body, or direction of the
His gentle dumb expreſſion turn’d at length
The eye of Eve to mark his pia. -
- play Milton.
The rage of thirſt and hunger now ſuppreſt
The monarch turns him to his royal gueſt. 'Pºp's Odyſ.
7. To form on a lathe by moving round. [torno, Lat.] -
As the placing one foot of a Pair of compaſſes on a plane,
and moving about the other foot, deſcribes a circle with the
moving point; ſo any ſubſtance, pitched ſteddy on two points,
* on an axis, and moved about, alſo deſcribes a circle con-
centric to the axis: and an edge-tool ſet ſteddy to that part
of the outſide of the ſubſtance, will in a circumvolution of
that ſubſtance, cut off all the Parts that lie farther off the axis,
and make the outſide alſo concentric to the axis. This is the
whole ſurn of turning. Moxon's Mech. Exer,
The whole lathe is made ſtrong, becauſe the matter it
turns being metal, is heavier than wood, and with forceable
coming about, would, if the lathe were iſ ht, make it tremble,
and ſo ſpoil the work. 440xon's Mech. Exer,
8. To form ; to ſhape.
His whole perſon is finely turned, and ſpeaks him a man
of quality. Tatler, N° 75,
What nervous arms he boaſts, how firm his tread,
His limbs how turn'd, how broad his ſhoulders ſpread | Pºpe.
9. To transform, to metamorphoſe ; to tranſmute.
My throat of war be turn'd
To the virgin's voice that babies lulls aſleep. Shakeſp.
This mock of his
Hath turn'd his balls to gunſtones. Shakespeare Hen. V.
Żurn the council of Ahitophel into fooliſhneſs.” . . XV.
Impatience turns an ague into a fever, a fever tº the plague,
fear into deſpair, anger into rage, loſs into madneſs, and ſorrow,
to amazement. Taylor's Rule of living Hoy.
Qgoodneſs! that ſhall evil turn to good. 44ilton.
Of ſooty coal th’ empirick alchemiſt
Can turn, or holds it poſſible to turn
Mettals of droflieſt ore to perfect gold. Milton.
Io. To make of another colour.
The choler of a hog turned ſyrup of violets green. Floyer,
II. To change; to alter.
Diſdain not me although I be not fair:
Doth beauty keep which never ſun can burn,
Nor ſtorms do turn. Sidney.
Some dear friend dead; elſe nothing in the world
Could turn ſo much the conſtitution
Of any conſtant man. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
12. To make a reverſe of fortune.
Fortune confounds the wiſe,
And when they leaſt expect it, turns the dice. Dryden.
13. To tranſlate. w
The bard whom pilfer'd paſtorals renown;
Who turns a Perſian tale for half a crown,
Juſt writes to make his barrenneſs appear. Pope.
14. To change to another opinion, or party, worſe or better;
to convert; to pervert.
15. To change with regard to inclination or temper.
Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me. Pſ, xxv.
16. To alter from one effect or purpoſe to another.
That unreadineſs which they find in us, they turn it to the
ſoothing up themſelves in that accurſed fancy. Hooter.
When a ſtorm of ſad miſchance beats upon our ſpirits, turn
it into advantage, to ſerve religion or prudence. Taylor.
God will make theſe evils the occaſion of a greater good,
by turning them to advantage in this world, or increaſe of
our happineſs in the next. Tillotſon.
. To betake. -
17 Sheep, and great cattle, it ſeems indifferent which of theſe
two were moſt turned to. Temple,
18. To transfer. -
Theſe came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of
Saul to him. I Chron. xii. 23.
Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourſelves molten
gods. Lev. xix. 4.
- Il. ---
I9. º of Demetrius, ſon to Philip II. of Mace-
don, turned upon the father, who died of repentance. Bacon.
. T ke to nauſeate.
2O º beaſtly line quite turns my ſtomach. Pope.
. To make giddy. - -
2 I *...*.i. in giddy iº. Pope
ir heads to imitate the ſun. 49e.
And turn their heads 27 C 22. To
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T U R
T U R
|
bels on my pariſhioners.
22. To infatuate ; to make mad.
My aking head can ſcarce ſupport the pain,
This curſed love will ſurely turn my brain : -
Feel how it ſhoots. - - * Theocrit,
XI. f ſhe raves; her brain, I fear, is turn'd. Rowe.
To direct to, or from any point.
23. The ſun
was bid turn reins from th' equinoëtial road. Milton.
A man, though he turns his eyes towards an object, yet
he may chuſe whether he will curiouſly ſurvey it. Locke.
Unſeſ, he turns his thoughts that way, he will no more have
clear and diſtinét ideas of the operations of his mind, than he
will have of a clock, who will not turn his eyes to it.
Locke.
They turn away their eyes from a beautiful proſpect. Addison
24. To direct to a certain purpoſe or propenſion.
My thoughts are turn'd on peace.
Already have our quarrels fill'd the world -
With widows and with orphans. Addison's Cato.
This turns the buſieſt ſpirits from the old notions of honour
and liberty to the thoughts of traffick. Addiſow.
His natural magnanimity turn’d all his thoughts upon ſome-
thing more valuable than he had in view. Addison.
He turn'd his parts rather to books and converſation, than
to politicks. Prior.
He is ſtill to ſpring from one of a poetical diſpoſition, from
whom he might inherit a ſoul turn'd to poetry. Pope.
25. To double in.
Thus a wiſe taylor is not pinching,
But turns at ev'ry ſeam an inch in. Swift.
26. To revolve; to agitate in the mind.
Turn theſe ideas about in your mind, and take a view of
them on all ſides. J/atts.
27. To drive from a perpendicular edge; to blunt.
Quick wits are more quick to enter ſpeedily, than able to
pierce far; like ſharp tools whoſe edges be very ſoon turn'd.
Aſcham.
28. To drive by violence; to expel.
Rather turn this day out of the week;
This day of ſhame. Shakeſpeare.
They turn'd weak people and children unable for ſervice,
out of the city. Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
He now was grown deform'd and poor,
And fit to be turn'd out of door. Hudibras, p. iii.
If I had taken to the church, I ſhould have had more ſenſe
than to have turn'd myſelf out of my benefice by writing li-
Dryden's Preface to Fables.
'Twould be hard to imagine that God would turn him out
of paradiſe, to till the ground, and at the ſame time advance
him to a throne. - Locke.
A great man in a peaſant's houſe, finding his wife hand-
ſome, tu n'd the good man out of his dwelling. Addison.
29. To apply.
They all the ſacred myſteries of heaven
To their own vile advantages ſhall turn. Milton.
When the paſſage is open, land will be turned moſt to
great cattle ; when ſhut, to ſheep. Temple.
32. To reverſe; to repeal.
God will turn thy captivity, and have compaſſion upon
thee. -- Deut. xxx.
31. To keep paſſing in a courſe of exchange or traffick.
Theſe are certain commodities, and yield the readieſt money
of any that are turn'd in this kingdom, as they never fail of
a price abroad. Temple.
A man muſt guard, if he intends to keep fair with the
world, and turn the penny. Collier of Popularity.
32. To adapt the mind.
. However improper he might have been for ſtudies of a
higher nature, he was perfectly well turn'd for trade. Addiſon.
33. To put towards another.
I will ſend my fear before thee, and make all thine enemies
turn their backs unto thee. Exod. xxiii. 27.
34. To retort; to throw back.
Luther's conſcience, by his inſtigations, turns theſe very
reaſonings upon him. Alterbury.
35. To Türs away. To diſmiſs from ſervice; to diſcard.
She did nothing but turn up and down, as ſhe had hoped
to turn aſgay the fancy that maſter'd her, and hid her face as if
ſhe could have hidden herſelf from her own fancies. Sidney.
Yet you will be hanged for being ſo long abſent, or be
tirn'd away. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
. . She turn'd away one ſervant for putting too much oil in
her ſallad. Arbuthnot.
3%. 7” TuRN back. To return to the hand from which it WaS
- received. .
We turn not back the filks upon the merchant,
When we have ſpoil'd them. Shakespeare. Troilus and Creſſida.
37. To TURN off. To diſmiſs contemptuouſly.
Having brought our treaſure
Then take we down his load, and turn him off,
like to the empty aſs, to ſhake his cars. Shakeſpeare.
- --
-
The murmurer is turn'd off, to the company of thoſe dole-
ful creatures that inhabit the ruins of Babylon. Gºv. of Tong.
. He turn'd ºff his former wife to make room for this º:
riage. - -
38. Tº TuRN off. To give over; to reſign. Addiſon.
The moſt adverſe chances are like the ploughing and
breaking the ground, in order to a more plentiful hiveſ
And yet we are not ſo wholly turned off to that reverſion s
to have no ſupplies for the preſent; for beſides the comº of
ſo certain an expectation in another life, we have promiſes
alſo for this. Decay of Piety,
39. Tº TURN off. To defleå.
The inſtitution of ſports was intended by all governments
to turn off the thoughts of the people from buſying themſelves
in matters of ſtate. - Addison's Freeholder.
40. To TURN over. To transfer.
Excuſing himſelf and turning over the fault to fortunes
then let it be your ill fortune too. Sin.
41. To TURN to. To have recourſe to a book.
He that has once acquired a prudential habit, doth not, in
his buſineſs, turn to theſe rules. Grew.
Helvicus's tables may be turn'd to on all occaſions. Lock.
42. Tº be TURNED ºf . To advance to an age beyond. An
odd ungrammatical phraſe.
Narciſſus now his fixteerth year began,
Juſt turned ºf boy, and on the verge of man. Ovid', Ma.
When turned of forty they determined to retire to the
country. Addison.
Irus, though now turned ºf fifty, has not appeared in the
world ſince five and twenty. Addison.
43. To TURN over. To refer.
After he had ſaluted Solyman, and was abaut to declare the
cauſe of his coming, he was turn'd over to the Baffa's. Knolles.
'Tis well the debt no payment does demand,
You turn me over to another hand. Dryden's Aurengzh.
44. 7%TURN over. To examine one leaf of a book after an-
other.
Some conceive they have no more to do than to turn over
a concordance. Swift's Miſcellanies.
45. To TURN over. To throw off the ladder.
Criminals condemned to ſuffer
Are blinded firſt, and then turn'd over. Butler.
To TURN. v. m.
1. To move round; to have a circular or vertiginous motion.
Such a light and mettl’d dance
Saw you never;
And by lead-men for the nonce,
That turn round like grindleſtones. Ben, jihnſºn.
The gate on golden hinges turning. Miltºn.
The cauſe of the imagination that things turn round, is,
for that the ſpirits themſelves turn, being compreſſed by the
vapour of the wine; for every liquid body, upon compreſſion,
turneth, as we ſee in water; and it is all one to the fight,
whether the viſual ſpirits move, or the object moveth; or the
medium moveth. And we ſee that long turning ſound breed.
eth the ſame imagination. Bacºn's Nat. Hºff.
2. To ſhew regard or anger, by direéting the look towards any
thing. -
Pompey turned upon him and bad him be quiet, Bacon,
The underſtanding turns inwards on itſelf, and reflects on
its own operations. Lºck.
Turn, mighty monarch, turn, this way: Dryde
Do not refuſe to hear. ryath.
3. To move the body round. • ? alſº
Nature wrought ſo, that ſeeing me ſhe turnº. Milton.
- - - edy pace
He ſaid, and turning ſhort with ſpeedy pate, Dryden.
Caſts back a ſcornful glance and quits the place.
4. To move from its place. - by rea-
The ancle-bone is apt to turn out on either flºº #. in
ſon of relaxation of the tendons upon the leaſt walk"&amp; ſm.
. To change poſture.
5 If one : ten thouſand dice, ſhould throw five º
ſiſes once or twice, we might ſay he did it b.
if, with almoſt an infinite number he ſhould, ". §
throw the ſame ſiſes, we ſhould certainly conclude he §. ".
art, or that theſe dice could turn upon no other ſide. Uht)
6. To have a tendency or dire&amp;tion. - an who
There is not a more melancholy objećt than * º: ºn.
has his head turned with religious enthuſiaſm. -
His cares all turn upon Aſtyanax, A. Philipi.
Whom he has lodg’d within the citadel.
. To move the face to another quarter. ings
The night ſeems doubled with the fear ſhe brings.
The morning, as miſtaken, turns about, , , Murºngzik.
And all her early fires again go out. Dryden's Aurº
8. To depart from the way; to deviate. Gen. xix. *
My lords turn in, into your ſervant's houſe. an. battle,
Virgil, ſuppoſe in deſcribing the fury of his herº." ".
when endeavouring to raiſe our concernment tº º with
pitch, turns ſhort on the ſudden into ſome ſimilitude, rydºſ.
diverts attention from the main ſubject. y
7
9. Tg
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T U R
9. To alter; to be changed; to be transformed.
Your bodies may at laſt turn all to ſpirit.
A ſtorm of ſad miſchance will turn into ſomething that is
good, if we liſt to make it ſo. Taylor.
This ſuſpicion turned to jealouſy, and jealouſy to rage;
then ſhe diſdains and threatens, and again is humble. Dryd.
Socrates meeting Alcibiades going to his devotions, and
obſerving his eyes fixed with great ſeriouſneſs, tells him that
he had reaſon to be thoughtful, ſince a man might bring
down evils by his prayers, and the things which the gods
fend him at his requeſt might turn to his deſtruction. Addiſon.
For this I ſuffer'd Phoebus' ſteeds to ſtray,
And the mad ruler to miſguide the day,
When the wide earth to heaps of aſhes turn'd,
Milton.
- Nothing but the open air will do me good, I'll take a turn
in your garden. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
Upon a bridge ſomewhat broader than the ſpace a man
takes up in walking, laid over a precipice, deſire ſome emi-
nºt philoſopher to take a turn or two upon it. Collier.
- - -
4. Change; viciſſitude; alteration.
An admirable facility muſick hath to expreſ, and repreſent
to the mind, more inwardly than any other ſenſible mean,
the very ſtanding, riſing, and falling; the very ſteps and
inflections every way; the turns and varieties of all paſſions
whereunto the mind is ſubject. Hoaxer.
Oh, world, thy flippery turns ! friends now faſt ſworn
On a diffenſion of a doit, break out - &gt;
To bittereſt enmity. Shakeſpeare.
---
And heav'n itſelf the wand'ring chariot burn'd. - Pope. The ſtate of chriſtendom might by this have a turn. Bacon.
Rather than let a good fire be wanting, enliven it with the The King with great nobleneſs and bounty, which virtues
butter that happens to turn to oil. Swift. had their turns in his nature, reſtored Edward Stafford. Bacºn.
Io. To become by a change.
Cygnets from grey turn white; hawks from brown turn
more white. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Oil of vitriol and petroleum, a drachm of each, will turn
This turn hath made amends ! thou haſt fulfill’d
Thy words, Creator bounteous. Milton.
This turn's too quick to be without deſign;
I'll ſound the bottom of 't ere I believe. Dryden.
into a mouldy ſubſtance. Boyle. Too well the turns of mortal chance I know,
They turn viragos too; the wreſtler's toil And hate relentleſs of my heavenly foe. Pope's Odyſſ.
They try. Dryden’s juvenal. An Engliſh gentleman ſhould be well verſed in the hiſtory
In this diſeaſe, the gall will turn of a blackiſh colour, and of England, that he may obſerve the ſeveral turns of ſtate,
the blood verge towards a pitchy conſiſtence. Arbuthnot. and how produced. Locke.
11. To change ſides. 5. Manner of proceeding; change from the original intention or
I turn'd, and try’d each corner of my bed, firſt appearance. -
To find if ſleep were there, but ſleep was loſt. Dryden. The Athenians were offered liberty, but the wiſe turn they
As a man in a fever turns often, although without any hope thought to give the matter, was a ſacrifice of the author. Swift.
of eaſe, ſo men in the extremeſt miſery fly to the firſt ap- 6. Chance; hap.
pearance of relief, though never ſo vain. Swift's Intellig. Every one has a fair turn to be as great as he pleaſes. Col.
12. To change the mind, condućt, or determination. 7. Occaſion; incidental opportunity.
Turn from thy fierce wrath. - Exod. xxxii. 12. An old dog, falling from his ſpeed, was loaden at every turn
Turn at my reproof: behold I will pour out my ſpirit. Prov. with blows and reproaches. L'E/irange.
He'll relent and turn from his diſpleaſure. Milton. 8. Time at which any thing is to be had or done.
13. To change to acid. Uſed of milk. - Myſelf would be glad to take ſome breath, and deſire that
Has friendſhip ſuch a faint and milky heart, ſome of you would take your turn to ſpeak. - Bacon.
It turns in leſs than two nights Shakespeare. Timºn of Athens. His turn will come to laugh at you again. Denham.
The ſpiteful ſtars have ſhed their venom down,
And now the peaceful planets take their turn. Dryden.
Though they held the power of the civil ſword unlawful,
whilſt they were to be governed by it, yet they eſteemed it
very lawful when it came to their turn to govern. Alterb.
A ſaline conſtitution of the fluids is acid, alkaline, or mu-
riatic : of theſe in their turns. Arbuthnot.
The nymph will have her turn to be - - --
The tutor, and the pupil, he. Swift.
9. Aćtions of kindneſs or malice.
- Lend this virgin aid,
Thanks are half loſt when good turns are delay’d. Fairfax.
- Aſſes milk turneth not ſo eaſily as cows. Bacon.
14. To be brought eventually. -
- Let their vanity be flattered with things that will do them
good; and let their pride ſet them on work on ſomething
which may turn to their advantage. Locke on Education.
Chriſtianity directs our actions ſo, as every thing, we do
may turn to account at the great day. Addiſon's Speef.
For want of due improvement, theſe uſeful inventions have
not turned to any great account. Baker's Rºſicci, ºn Learning.
15. To depend on, as the chief point.
When a man once perceives how far ideas agree or diſ-
agree, he will be able to judge of what other people ſay. - - - - - - - - - -
The queſtion turns upon this point ; when the preſbyterians Some malicious natures place their delight in doing ill
fhall have got their ſhare of employments, whether they tº 7:3. - - L'Eſtrange's Fab, b. 103.
ought not, by their own principles, to uſe the utmoſt of their Shrewd turns ſtrike deeper than ill words. South.
power to reduce the whole kingdom to an uniformity. Swift. Io. Reigning inclination.
Conditions of peace certainly turn upon events of war. Sw. This is not to be accompliſhed but by introducing religion
The firſt platform of the poem, which reduces into one
to be the turn and faſhion of the age. Swift.
important action all the particulars upon which it turns. Pºpe. 11. A ſtºp of the ladder at the gallows.
16. To grow giddy. . They, by their ſkill in palmiſtry,
I'll look no more, Will quickly read his deſtiny;
Leſt my brain turn, and the deficient fight - - And make him glad to read his leſſon,
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Topple down headlong. Or take a turn for it at the ſeſſion. Butler.
17. To have an unexpected conſequence or tendency. 12. Convenience. -
Diogenes’ diſh did never ſerve his maſter for more turns,
notwithſtanding that he made it his diſh, cup, cap, meaſure,
and water-pot, than a mantle doth an Iriſhman. Spenſer.
They never found occaſion for their tourn, -
But almoſt ſtarv'd did much lament and mourn. Hubberd.
His going I could frame to ſerve my turn ;
save him from danger, do him love and honour. Sº?.
My daughter Catharine is not for your turn. Shakeſpeare.
To perform this murder was elect ; -
A baſe companion, few or none could miſs, ..
who firſt did ſerve their turn, and now ſerves his. . Pan.
They tried their old friends of the city, who bad ſerved
their ºn, ſo often, and ſet them to get a petition. Cºrº.
This philoſophy may paſs with the moſt ſenſual, while
they pretend to be reaſonable; but whenever they have a
mińd to be otherwiſe, to drink or to ſlººp, will ſerve the
&gt; Temple's Miſcellanies.
If we repent ſeriouſly, ſubmit contentedly and ſerve him
faithfully, afflictions ſhall turn to our advantage. //akc.
18. To TURN away. To deviate from a proper courſe.
The turning away of the ſimple ſhall ſlay him. Prov.
In ſome ſprings of water if you put wood, it will turn
into the nature of ſtone. Bacon.
19. To return ; to recoil.
His foul cſtcem
Sticks no diſhonour on our front, but tu, iſ
Foul on himſelf.
26. To be directed to, or from any point.
Forthwith from dance to ſweet repaſt they turn. Miltºn.
21. Tº TURN off. To divert one's courſe. -
The peaceful banks which profound ſilence keep,
The little boat ſecurely paſſes by
But where with noiſe the waters creep, -
Turn off with care, for treacherous rocks are near. Norris. "#, f ſt; ſhape; manner
RN. m. ſ. ſ f rb. I 2. e form ; caſt 5 ; Inanie. , Trnol:
Tº: 4 d *. º 3 Our young men take up. º ‘. d up. º .
2. Meander ; winding way. herein his thoughts are improper to his
without knowing whº is thoughts }
Fear miſled the youngeſt from his way; - ſubječt, or his expreſſions unworthy of his thoughts, or the
But Niſus hit the turns. Dryden.
turn of both is unharmonious. . . . hich d Dryden.
After a turbulent and noiſy courſe among the rocks, the Seldom any thing raiſes wonder in me,which does not give
Teverne falls into the valley, and after many turns and
kes my heart the better. Addiſon.
my thought a turn that ma •. - ilv
windings glides peaceably into the Tiber. Addiſon. Femaič virtues are of a domeſtick tº: The family is the
3. A walk too and fro.
proper province for private women to ſhine in. Addiſon.
My good and gracious lord of Canterbury:
Án agreeable tºn appears in her ſentinents upon the moſt
Come, you and I muſt walk a turn together. Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
ordinary affairs of life. *
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T U R
T U T.
- Wºº —
--
- not conſiſt ſo much in advancing things new, as
.*º known an agreeable turn. Addiſon's Spect.
#efore I made this remark, I wondered to ſee the Roman
poets, in their deſcription of a beautiful man, ſo often men-
tion the turn of his neck and arms. - Addiſon.
A youngman of a ſprightly turn in converſation, had an in-
ordinate deſire of appearing faſhionable. Speciator.
Books give the ſame turn to our thoughts and reaſoning,
that good company does to our converſation. Swift's Miſ.
The very turn of voice, the good pronunciation, and the
alluring manner which ſome teachers have attained, will, en-
gage the attention. JWatts.
14. The manner of adjuſting the words of a ſentence.
The turn of words, in which Ovid exeells all poets, are
ſometimes a fault or ſometimes a beauty, as they are uſed
properly or improperly. Dryden.
The three firſt ſtanzas are rendered word for word with
the original, not only with the ſame elegance, but the ſame
ſhort turn of expreſſion peculiar to the ſapphick ode. Addiſon.
The firſt coin being made of braſs gave the denomination
to money among the Romans, and the whole turn of their
expreſſions is derived from it. Arbuthnot.
15. By TuRNs. One after another.
They feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes; extremes by change more fierce. Milt.
The challenge to Dametas #. belong,
Menalcas ſhall ſuſtain his under-ſong;
Each in his turn your tuneful numbers bring;
By turns the tuneful muſes love to fing. Dryden's Virg.
By turns put on the ſuppliant, and the lord;
Threaten'd this moment, and the next implor’d. Prior.
TU'RNBENcH. m. ſ. [turn and bench..] A term of turners.
Small work in metal is turn'd in an iron lathe called a
turnbench, which they ſcrew in a vice, and having fitted their
work upon a ſmall iron axle, with a drill barrel, fitted upon a
ſquare ſhank, at the end of the axis, next the left-hand, they
with a drill-bow, and drill-ſtring, carry it about. Moxon.
Tu'RN.coat. n.ſ.. [turn and coat.] One who forſakes his party
or principles; a renegade;
Courteſy itſelf muſt turn to diſdain, if you come in her
preſence—Then is courteſy a turncoat. Shakeſp.
Tu'RNER. n. ſ. [from turn..] One whoſe trade is to turn in a
lathe.
Nor box, nor limes without their uſe are made, ,
Smooth-grain’d and proper for the turner's trade. Dryden.
Some turners, to ſhew their dexterity in turning, turn long
and ſlender pieces of ivory, as ſmall as an hay-ſtalk. Moxon.
Tu'RNING. v. a. [from turn..] Flexure; winding; meander.
Iran with headlong haſte
Thro' paths and turnings often trod by day. Milton.
Tu'RNING Ness. n.ſ.. [from turning.] Qūality of turning; ter-
giverſation; ſubterfuge.
So nature formed him, to all turningnſ of ſleights; that
though no man had leſs goodneſs, no man could better find
the places whence arguments might grow of goodneſs. Sidn.
Tu'RNIP. n.ſ. A white eſculent root. -
The flower conſiſts of four leaves, which are placed in form
of a croſs ; out of the flower cup riſes the pointal, which af-
terward turns to a pod, divided into two cells by an interme-
diate partition, to which the valves adhere on both ſides, and
are full of roundiſh ſeeds: a carneous and tuberoſe root. Mil.
November is drawn with bunches of parſnips and turnips in
his right-hand. Peacham on Drawing.
The goddeſs roſe amid the inmoſt round,
With wither'd turnip-tops her temples crown'd.
Turnips hide their ſwelling heads below.
Gay.
TURNPI'KE... m. ſ. . [turn and pike, or pique.] -
Gay's Paſ?
I. A croſs of two bars armed with pikes at the end, and turn-
ing on a pin, fixed to hinder horſes from entering.
2. Any gate by which the way is obſtructed.
The gates are ſhut, and the turnpikes locked. Arbuthnot.
Tu'RNsick, adj. [turn and ſick.] Vértiginous; giddy.
If a man ſee another turn ſwiftly and long; or if he look
upon wheels that turn, himſelf waxeth turnſick. Bacon.
TuRNso’i, n.ſ. [Heliotrºpium, Lat..] A plant.
The flower confiſts of one leaf ſhaped like a funnel, having
its centre wrinkled and folded, and its brim cut into ten ſeg-
ments alternately unequal: theſe flowers are colleaed into a
long reflected ſpike, reſembling a ſcorpion's tail; each flower
is ſucceeded by four naked gibboſe ſeeds. Miller.
Tuºnsert. * / [turn and ſpit.] He that anciently turned a
ſpit, inſtead of which jacks are now generally uſed.
I give you joy of the report
That he's to have a place at court;
Yes, and a place he will grow rich in,
r A turnſpit in the royal kitchen.
Tu'RNstlie. n.f. [turn and ſtile.] A turnpike.
A turnſ?ile is more certain
Than, in events of war, dame Fortune.
Twirling turnſiles interrupt the way,
T .The thwarting paſſenger ſhall force them roºd.
* U RPentine. n.ſ. [turp.
*
Swift's Miſcel.
Hudibras.
- Gay.
"tina, Italian; terebinthina, Lat.JThe
gum exuded by the pine, the juniper, and other trees of that
kind.
As the turpentine tree I ſtretched out my branches. Eccl
Vertgreaſe grinded with turpentine, put into a pot jº -
you uſe it warm it. eacham on B.
Tu'Rquoise. n.ſ. See Turkois. g.
One ſhew'd me a ring, he had of your daughter for a
monkey—Out upon her it was my turquoiſ, Thi it when
I was a bachelor. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice
Tu'RPITUDE. m. ſ. [turpitude, Fr. turpitude, from turfi, Lati
Eſſential deformity of words, thoughts of adions: i. ..]
vileneſs; badneſs. ; inherent
How would'ſt thou have paid
My better ſervice, when my turpitude
Thou thus doſt crown with gold. Shakeſpeare
Decency imports a certain meaſure of one thing to anºther,
the preſervation of which is properly that rule by which.
thing ought to act ; and conſequently the violation of it im-
plies a turpitude or indecency. South's Sermon
Tur R.E.T. n.ſ. ſturris, Lat.] A ſmall eminence raiſed alj
the reſt of the building; a little tower.
Diſcourſe I pry thee, on this turret's top. Shai
All things well ordered, he withdrew with ſpeed
Up to a turret high, two ports between,
That ſo he might be near at every need,
And overlook the lands and furrows green.
Make Windſor hills in lofty numbers riſe,
And liſt her turret, nearer to the ſkies. Pºpe. Windſ. Fr.
Tu'RReted. adj. [from turret.] Formed like a tower; riſing
like a tower.
Take a turreted lamp of tin, in the form of a ſquare; the
height of the turret being thrice as much as the length of the
lower part, whereupon the lamp ſtandeth. Bacon'; Nat. Hiſ.
TU’RTLE. }". ſ: [runtle, Saxon; tortorelle, French ;
TU'RTLEDove. tortarella, Italian; turtar, Latin.]
1. A ſpecies of dove.
When ſhepherds pipe on oaten ſtraws,
And merry larks are ploughmens clocks:
When turtles tread. Shakespeare Love's Lab. Loft.
We'll teach him to know turtles from jays. Shakespeare
Take me an heifer and a turtle dove. Gen. xv. 9.
Galen propos'd the blood of turtles dropt warm from their
wings. //jcman.
2. It is uſed among ſailors and gluttons for a tortoiſe.
Tush. interj. [Of this word I can find no credible etymology.]
An expreſſion of contempt.
Tuſh, ſay they, how ſhould God perceive it: is there
knowledge in the moſt high Pſalm bºxiii.
Sir Thomas Moor found fault with his lady's continual
chiding, ſaying; the conſideration of the time, for it was
ſent, É.i. reſtrain her. Tuſh, tuſh, my lord, ſaid ſhe, loºk,
here is one ſtep to heaven-ward, ſhewing him a fiar's girdle.
I fear me, quoth Sir Thomas, this one ſtep will not bring
you up a ſtep higher. Camden's Remaini,
Tuſh never tell me, I take it much unkindly
That thou, Iago, who haſt had my purſe, - .
As if the ſtrings were thine, ſhould know of this. Shai.
Tusk. m. ſ. [x;xar, Saxon; tºſken, old Friſick.] The lºng
teeth of a pugnacious animal; the fang; the holding tooth.
Some creatures have over-long, or out-growing teeth,
called fangs, or tusks; as boars and pikes. y Bacon.
The boar depended upon his tusks. L'Eſtrange.
As two boars,
With riſing briſtles, and with frothy jaws,
Their adverſe breaſts with tusks oblique they wound. Dryd.
A monſtrous boar
ºffeare,
Fairfax,
Whetting his tusks, and churning hideous foam. Smith.
TU'skED. - - -
+. łaj. [from tusk..] furniſhed with tuſks.
Into the naked woods he goes, Dryden.
And ſeeks the tusky boar to tear. : the
Of thoſe §§'s no one was horned and tuikd *: ‘etw
ſuperfluous blººd not ſufficing to feed both. º .
Tu'suck. n.ſ. [diminitive of tazz.] A tuft of gaſ." . of
The firſt is remarkable for the ſeveral tuſſuck, or *:;:
thorns, wherewith it is armed round. - zrºw.
Tut. interſ. [This ſeems to be the ſame with tuſh.]
A particle noting contempt. - cl
Tut, tut 1 grace me no grace, nor uncle me no un
Tut, tut f here's a mannerly forbearance.
Tuta NAG. m. ſ. - -
Tutanage ſ the Chineſe name for ſpelter, which :
roneouſly apply to the metal of which *". 2.
that are brought over with the tea from China. | and and
coarſe pewter made with the lead carried from P} dward.
tin got in the kingdom of Quintang. 6.dian-
TU'TEL AGE. n.ſ.. [tutelle, º: Fr. tutela, Lat.] G"
ſhip ; ſtate of being under guardian. -
- # one in the i. ; lands die, and leavei. º:
ſucceed to him, his tutelage belongeth to the kit'É. ſ1: natuſ:
He accoupled the ambaſſage with an article "...
- - - his
of a requeſt, that the French king might, acco"; *:::
e. Shakespeare
Shakespeare .
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T W A
T W E
tº
--
º
--&gt;
".
.
* -
º
right of ſeigniory or tutelage; diſpoſe of the marriage of the
young ducheſs of Britany. Bacon.
UTELAR. adj. [tutela, Lat.] Having the charge or guar-
TU’t El ARY. { dianſhip of any perſon or thing; protecting;
defenſive ; guardian.
According to the traditions of the magicians the tutelary
ſpirits, will not remove at common appellations, but at the
proper names of things, whereunto they are protectors. Brown.
Temperance, that virtue without pride, and fortune without
- envy, that gives indolence of body, with an equality of mind;
the beſt guardian of youth and ſupport of of age : the pre-
cept of reaſon, as well as religion, and phyſician of the ſoul
as well as the body; the tutelar goddeſs of health, and uni-
verſal medicine of life. Temple.
Theſe tutelar genii who preſided over the ſeveral people
committed to their charge, were watchful over them. Dryd.
But you, O Grecian chiefs, reward my care,
Sure I may plead a little to your grace:
Enter'd the town; I then unbarr'd the gates,
When I remov’d the tutelary fates. Dryden.
Ye tutelar gods who guard this royal fabric. Rowe.
TuTor. m. / [tutor, Lat. İuteur, Fr.] One who has the care
of anºther's learning and morals; a teacher or inſtructor.
When I am as I have been,
Approach me, and thou ſhalt be as thou waſ,
The tutor and the feeder of my riots ;
Till then I baniſh thee on pain of death. Shakeſp.
Ah tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes. Shakeſp.
When nobles are the tailors tutors ;
No hereticks burnt but wenches ſuiters. Butler.
A Primitive Chriſtian, that coming to a friend to teach him
a pſalm, began, I ſaid I will look to my ways, that I offend
not with my tongue; upon which he ſtop'd his tutor, ſaying,
this is enough if I learn it. Government of the Tougue.
º His body thus adorn'd, he next deſign'd
With lib'ral arts to cultivate his mind:
He ſought a tutor of his own accord,
And ſtudy'd leſſons he before abhorrºd. Dryden.
No ſcience is ſo ſpeedily learned by the nobleſ: genius with-
Out a tutor. //atts.
To TutoR. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To inſtruct; to teach; to document.
This boy is foreſt born,
And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments
Of many deſperate ſtudies by his uncle.
He cannot be a perfeót man,
Not being tried and tutor'd in the world. Shakespeare
The cock has his ſpurs, and he ſtrikes his feet inwärd
with ſingular ſtrength and order; yet he does not this by any
ſyllogiſtical method, but is merely tutored by inſtinét. Hale.
2. To treat with ſuperiority or ſeverity.
I hardly yet have learn'd
T'inſinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my knee :
Give ſorrow leave a while to tutor me
To this ſubmiſſion. Shakespeare Rich. II.
I take a review of my little boys mounted upon hobby-
horſes, and of little girls tutoring their babies. Addiſon.
Tu'roRAGE. m. ſ. [from tutor.] The authority or ſolemnity of
a tutor.
Children care not for the company of their parents or
tutors, and men will care leſs for theirs, who would make
them children by uſurping a tutorage. Govern. of the Tongue.
Tu’roREss. n.ſ.. [from tutor.] Direétreſs; inſtructreſs; go-
verneſs.
Fidelia ſhall be your tutoreſ. Mºore's Foundling.
Tutty. m. ſ. ſtutia, low Lat. tuthie, Fr.] A ſublimate of zinc
or calamine collected in the furnace. Ainſw.
TU’TsAN, or parkleaves. n.ſ.. [androſaemum, Lat..] A plant.
Tuz. m. ſ. [I know not whether it is not a word merely of
cant..] A lock or tuft of hair.
With odorous oil thy head and hair are ſleek;
And then thou kemp'ſt the tuzzes on thy cheek;
Of theſe thy barbers take a coſtly care. Dryden.
Twain, adj. [ipšen, bagpa, both twain, Saxon.] Two. An
old word, not now uſed but ludicrouſly.
'Tis not the tryal of a woman's war,
The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,
Can arbitrate this cauſe betwixt us twain.
Such ſmiling rogues as theſe, -
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords in twain, - -
Too intricate tº unlooſe. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Of my condition take no Care ;
It fits not; thou and I long ſince are twain. Milton.
When old winter ſplit the rocks in twain;
He ſtrip'd the bears-foot of its leafy growth. Dryden.
The trembling widow, and her daughters twain,
This woeful cackling cry with horror heard. Dryden.
To TWANG. v. n. [A word formed from the ſound.j To
ſound with a quick ſharp noiſe. . .
A thouſand twanging inſtrum e its
Will hum about mine ears. Shakespeare , Tempeſt.
Shake?.
Shakeſp.
º
His quiver o'er his ſhoulders Phoebus threw,
His bow twang'd, and his arrows rattled as they flew. Dºyd.
With her thund'ring voice ſhe menacid high;
And every accent *g'd with ſmarting ſorrow. Dryden.
The twanging bows -
Send ſhowers ºf that, that on their barbed points
Alternate ruin bear. Philips
Sounds the tough horn and twang; the quiv'ring ſtring.
Pope.
To Twang. v. a. To make to ſound ſharply. ope
A ſwaggering accent tharply twang'd off, gives manhood
approbation. Shakespeare Twel -
TwANG. m. ſ. [from the verb.] ºak. Twelfth Night.
I. A ſharp quick ſound.
- They by the ſound and twang of noſe,
If all be ſound within, diſcloſe. Butler's Hudibrar.
So ſwells each wind-pipe; aſs intones to aſs, -
Harmonic twang of leather, horn and braſs.
2. An affected modulation of the vºice.
If he be but a perſon in Vogue with the multitude, he can
make popular, rambling, incoherent ſtuff, ſeaſoned with twang
and tautology, paſs for high rhetorick. South's Sermons.
He has ſuch a titang in his diſcourſe, and ungraceful wa
9f ſpeaking thro' his noſe, that one an hardly underſtand
him. - - - Arbuthnot.
TwANG. interj. A word making a quick ačtion, accompanied
. a ſharp found. Little uſed, and little deſerving to be
uſed.
Pope.
There's one, the beſt in all my quiver,
Žºvang! thro' his very heart and fºr.
Twa’NGLIs G. adj. [from twang.J.Contemptibly noiſy.
She did call me raſcal, fidler,
And twangling jack, with twenty ſuch vile terms. Shakespeare
T; TWANK. v. n. [Corrupted from twang.] To make to
ound.
A freeman of London has the Privilege of diſturbing a whole
Prior.
ſtreet with twanking of a braſs kettle. Addiſon.
'Twas. Contracted from it was.
If he aſks who bid thee, ſay 'twas I. Dryd.
To TWATTLE. v. n. [ſchwatzen, German.] To prate; to
gabble ; to chatter.
... It is nºt for every twattling goſſip to undertake. L'Eſtrange.
TwAY. For Tw AiN.
Gyon's angry blade ſo fierce did play
On th' other's helmet, which as Titaſ, ſhone,
That quit it clove his plumed creſt in tway. Fairy 2.
TwA'YBLADE. m. ſ. [Ophris, Lat..] It hath a polypetalous
flower, conſiſting of ſix diſſimilar leaves, of which the five
ºpper ones are ſo diſpoſed, as to repreſent in ſome meaſure dil
helmet, the under one being headed and ſhaped like a maj
The empalement becomes a fruit, perforated with three
windows, to which adhere valves, Pregnant with very ſmall
ſeeds like duſt. Miller.
To TWEAG. A v.a. [It is written tweag by Skinner, but ºf
To Twe Ak. } by other writers; twäcken, German.] To
pinch : to ſqueeze betwixt the fingers.
Who calls me villain, breaks my pate acroſs,
Tweaks me by the noſe. Shakespeare
To rouſe him from lethargick dump,
He tweak’d his noſe. Butler.
Look in their face, they tweak'd your noſe. Swift. .
Twe AGUE. N. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Perplexity; ludicrous
Twe A K. } diſtreſs. A low word.
This put the old fellow in a rare tweague. Arbuthnot.
To TWEETL.E. v. a. [I know not whence deriv'd.] To handle
lightly. It ſeems in the following paſſage miſprinted for
wheedle. -
A fidler brought in with him a body of luſty young fellows,
whom he had tweedled into the ſervice. Addiſon.
Tweez ERs. m. ſ. ſetup, French..] Nippers, or ſmall pincers,
to pluck off hairs.
There hero's wits are kept in pond’rous vaſes,
And beaus in ſnuff-boxes and tweezer caſes. Pope.
Tw ELF TH. adj. xpelpca, Saxon.] Second after the tenth; the
ordinal of twelve.
He found Eliſha plowing with twelve yoke of oxen, and
he with the twelfth. I Kings. xix. 9.
Suppoſing, according to the ſtandard, five ſhillings were
to weigh an ounce, wanting about ſixteen grains, whereof
one twelfth were copper, and eleven twelfths ſilver, it is plain
here the quantity of ſilver gives the value. - Locke.
Twelfth ride. m. ſ. The twelfth day after Chriſtmas.
Plough-munday, next after that twelfthtide, . . .
Bids out with the plough. | Tuff. Hasb.
Twelve. adj. [xpelp, Sax.] Two and ten ; twice ſix. -
Thou haſt beat me out twelve ſeveral times. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Had we no quarrel elſe to Rome, but that
Thou art thence baniſh'd, we would muſter all,
Froin twelve to twenty, Shakespeare
27 D What<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">- T W I
T W I
- Tº wº
an talk'd with you yeſternight -
cºlº º tº: . and one. Slakeſpeare.
On his left hand twelve reverend owls did fly:
So Romulus, 'tis ſung, by Tyber's brook,
Preſage of ſway from twice ſix vultures, took. Dryden.
Twelv FMost H. n. fº and month.] A year, as con-
- twelve months.
firi #. laugh at this a twelvemonth hence. y Shakeſp.
This year or twelvemonth, by reaſon that the moon's months
are ſhorter than thoſe of the ſun, is about eleven days ſhorter
than the ſun's year. - - Holder.
Taking the ſhoots of the paſt ſpring and pegging them
down in very rich earth perfectly conſumed, watering them
upon all occaſions, by this time twelvementh they will be
ready to remove. Evelyn.
In the ſpace of about a twelvemonth I have run out of a
whole thouſand pound upon her. Addiſon.
Not twice a twelvemonth you appear in print. Pope.
Twe’lve PEN ce. m. ſ. [twelve and pence.]. A ſhilling. ----
Twelve penny. adj. [twelve and penny..] Sold for a ſhilling.
I would wiſh no other revenge, from this rhyming judge
of the twelvepenny gallery. - Dryd.
Twe'lvescoſ. E. n.J. [twelve and ſcore.]Twelve times twenty ;
two hundred and forty.
Twelveſ ore virago's of the Spartan race. Dryden.
Twe’NTIETH. adj. [rpenteogota, Saxon.] Twice tenth ; or-
dinal of twenty.
This year,
The twentieth from the firing the capitol,
As fatal too to Rome, by all predićtions. , Ben. Johnſon.
The quantity of the fifteenth ſhould be turned to a twentieth.
Bacon.
Why was not I the twentieth by deſcent
From a long reſtive race of droning kings Dryden.
This crown now muſt be raiſed, and coined one twentieth
lighter; which is nothing but changing the denomination,
calling that a crown, now, which yeſterday was but a part,
viz. nineteen twentieths. ocke.
Tw ENTY. adj. [xpenziz, Saxon.]
I. Twice ten.
At leaſt nineteen-in twenty of theſe perplexing words might
be changed into eaſy ones. Swift.
2. A proverbial or indefinite number.
Maximilian, upon twenty reſpc&amp;ts, could not have been the
n1211. Bacon's Henry VII.
Twi'BIL. m. ſ. ſtwy for two and bill, bipennis, Lat..] A halbert.
Ainſ.
Twice. adv. [episº, Saxon; twees, Dutch.]
1. Two times.
Upon his creſt he ſtruck him ſo,
That twice he reeled, ready twice to fall. Fairy Q.
He twice eſſay’d to caſt his ſon in gold ;
Twice from his hands he drop'd the forming mould. Dryd.
2. Doubly.
A little ſum you mourn, while moſt have met
With twice the loſs, and by as vile a cheat. Dryden.
3. It is often uſed in compoſition.
Life is tedious as a twice told tale,
Vexing the dull ear of a drowſy man. Shakeſp.
Twice-born Bacchus burſt the thund’rer's thigh,
And all the gods that wander thro’ the ſky. Creech.
Extol the ſtrength of a twice-conquer'd race. Dryden.
And what ſo tedious as a twice-told tale. Pope.
To Twipi E. v. a... [This is commonly written tweedle.] To
touch lightly. A low word.
With my fingers upon the ſtupe, I preſſed cloſe upon it,
and twidled it in, firſt one ſide, then the other. Jºſeman.
TWIG. m. ſ. cyré, 2p133a, Saxon; twyg, Dutch..] A ſmall
ſhoot of a branch ; a ſwitch tough and long.
The Britons had boats made of willow twigs, covered on
the outſide with hides, and ſo had the Venetians. Raleigh.
They choſe the fig-tree, ſuch as ſpread her arms,
Branching ſo broad and long, that in the ground
The bended twigs take root.
Can'ſt thou with a weak angle ſtrike the whale,
His huge jaw with a twig or bulruſh bore ? Sandys.
. If they cut the twigs at evening, a plentiful and pleaſant
Juice comes out. More.
The tender twig ſhoots upwards to the ſkies. Dryden.
- From parent bough ... "
A cyon meetly ſever: after force
A way into the crabſtocks cloſe wrought grain
By wedges, and within the living wound
Incloſe the foſter twig, around which ſpread
Milton.
The binding clay. Philips.
Twºgºs. adj.. [from twig.] Made of twigs.
!!! beat the knave with a twiggen bottle. Shakeſp.
The ſides and rim ſewed together after the manner of
twiggen work. Grew.
Twiggy. adj. [from twig.] Full of twigs.
| Willºr. º. f. tweeiſt, Dutch ; zyeoncleohz, Saxon.]
The dubious or faint light before ſunriſe,
obſcure light; uncertain view.
Her twilights were more clear than our mid-day
h Suſpicions amongſt thoughts, are like {"º.
they ever fly by twilight. Certainly t tº ulius,
º: y by &amp; y they are to be wº
A faint weak love of virtue, and of good,
Reflects from her on them, which underſtood
Her worth ; and though ſhe have ſhut in all day
The twilight of her memory doth ſtay.
He that ſaw hell in's melancholy dream,
And in the twilight of his phancy's theme
Scar'd from his fins, repented in a fright,
Had he view'd Scotland, had turn'd proſelyte.
Ambroſial night, with clouds exhal’d
From that high mount of God, whence light and ſhads
Spring both, the face of brighteſt heav'n had chang'd
To grateful twilight. Milton's P. Lºft
When the ſun was down w/1 -
They juſt arriv'd by twilight at a town. Drydºn
In the greateſt part of our concernment he has afforded º
only the twilight of probability, ſuitable to our flate of...
crity. - Lºck.
Twi'light. adj.
1. Not clearly or brightly illuminated; obſcure; deepl -
wº. ſun º to fling ply ſhaded
His flaring beams, me goddeſs bring
To arched walks of twilight groves.
O'er the twilight groves, and duſky caves,
Long-ſounding iſles, and intermingled graves,
Black melancholy fits, and round her throws
A death-like ſilence, and a dead repoſe.
2. Seen by twilight.
On old Lycaeus or Cyllene hoar
Trip no more in twilight ranks.
Twin. m. ſ. [rpinn, Saxon; tweelingen, Dutch.]
I. Children born at a birth. It is therefore ſeldom uſed in the
ſingular ; though ſometimes it is uſed for one of twins.
In this myſtery of ill opinions, here's the twin brother of
thy letter; but let thine inherit firſt, for mine never ſhall. Shakespeare
In beſtowing
He was moſt princely : ever witneſs for him
Thoſe twins of learning Ipſwich and Oxford. Shakespeare
If that moment of the time of birth be of ſuch moment,
whence proceedeth the great difference of the conſtitutions of
twins, which, tho’ together born, have ſtrange and contrary
fortunes. Drummond.
and after ſunſet;
Bacºn.
Dºmnº,
r
Cleveland.
Miliºn.
Pºſt,
Miltºn.
The divided dam
Runs to the ſummons of her hungry lamb; -
But when the twin cries halves, ſhe quits the firſt. Cleveland.
They came twins from the womb, and ſtill they live
As if they would go twins too to the grave. Otway.
Fair Leda's twins, in time to ſtars decreed,
One fought on foot, one curb’d the fiery ſteed. Drydºn.
Had there been the ſame likeneſs in all men, as ſometimes
in twins, it would have given occaſion to confuſion. Grew,
2. Gemini, the ſign of the zodiack.
This, when the ſun retires,
Firſt ſhines, and ſpreads black night with feeble fires,
Then parts the twins and crab. - Creath,
When now no more, th' alternate twins are fir’d. r
Short is the doubtful empire of the night. Thºmſºn,
To Twin. v. n. [from the noun.]
I. To be born at the ſame birth.
He that is approv’d in this offence, -
Though he had twinn'd with me both at a birth, lſ
Shall loſe me. Shaft.0thiº.
2. To bring two at once. - Tºſºr
Ewes yearly by twinning rich maſters do make. uſer.
3. To be paired ; to be ſuited.
Hath nature given them eyes,
Which can diſtinguiſh 'twixt
The fiery orbs above and the twinned ſtones
Upon the humbl’d beach.
O how inſcrutable his equity Sandº,
Twins with his power. bi d •.
Twinbo'RN. adj. [twin and born.] Born at theſ.”
Our fins lay on the King; he muſt bear all. Shah'ſ
O hard condition and twiniern with greatneſſ. Jakº/P.
To Twin E. v. a. [zpınan, Saxon; twynan, Dutch.] body of
I. To twiſt or complicate ſo as to unite, or form one bod)
ſubſtance out of two or more. ºned linem
Thou ſhalt make an hanging of blue, and fine twine. .. .
wrought with needlework. Exºd. xxvi. 3
2. I know not whether this is from twine or twin.
By original lapſe, true liberty
Is loſt, which always with right reaſon dwells,
Shak ºff -
Twin'd, and from her hath no dividual being: Miltºn,
3. To unite itſelf. -
Lumps of ſugar loſe themſelves, and tº Craſhatt.
Their ſubtile eſſence with the ſoul of wine. rº/ To
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T W I
.
To Twine. v. n. -
1. To convolve itſelf; to wrap itſelf cloſely about.
Let wreaths of triumph now my temples twine,
The victor cry'd, the glorious prize is mine ! Pope.
2. To unite by interpoſition of parts.
Friends now faſt ſworn, who twine in love
Unſeparable, ſhall, within this hour,
On a diffenſion of a doit, break out
To bittereſt enmity.
3. To wind; to make flexures.
As rivers, though they bend and twine,
Still to the ſea their courſe incline.
Or as philoſophers who find
Some fav'rite ſyſtem to their mind,
In ev'ry point to make it fit,
Will force all nature to ſubmit. Swift.
The deer ruſtles thro’ the twining brake. Thomſon.
Twine. n.ſ...[from the verb.]
1. A twiſted thread.
Not any damſel, which her vaunteth moſt
In ſkilful knitting of ſoft filken twine. - Spenſer.
A pointed ſword hung threat'ning o'er his head,
Suſtain'd but by a ſlender twine of thread. Dryden.
2. Twiſt; convolution.
Nor all the gods beſide
Longer dare abide,
Not Typhon huge ending in ſhaky twine. Milton.
Welcome joy and feaſt,
Braid your locks with roſy twine,
Dropping odours, dropping wine. Milton.
3. Embrace; ačt of convolving itſelf round.
Everlaſting hate
The vine to ivy bears, but with am’rous twine
Claſps the tall elm. Philips.
To Twing E. v. a. [twingen, German; twinge, Daniſh.]
1. To torment with ſudden and ſhort pain. -
The gnat charg'd into the noſtrils of the lion, and there
twing'd him till he made him tear himſelf, and ſo maſter'd
him. L’Eſtrange.
2. To pinch; to tweak.
When a man is paſt his ſenſe,
There's no way to reduce him thence,
But twinging him by th’ ears and noſe,
Shakeſpeare.
Or laying on of heavy blows. Hudibras.
Twinge. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Short ſudden ſharp pain.
• The wickedneſs of this old villain ſtartles me, and gives me
a twinge for my own ſin, though far ſhort of his. Dryd.
2. A tweak; a pinch.
How can you fawn upon a maſter that gives you ſo many
blows and twinges by the ears. L’Eſtrange.
Twink. m. ſ. [See Twinkle.] The motion of an eye;
a moment. Not in uſe.
She hung about my neck, and kiſs on kiſs
She vied ſo faſt, proteſting oath on oath,
That in a twink ſhe won me to her love.
To Twi'NKLE, v. n. [Epinclian, Saxon.]
1. To ſparkle; to flaſh irregularly; to ſhine with intermitted
light 5 to ſhine faintly; to quiver. -
At firſt I did adore a twinkling ſtar,
Shakeſpeare.
But now I worſhip a celeſtial ſun. Shakeſpeare.
As plays the ſun upon the glaſſey ſtreams,
Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
So ſeems this gorgeous beauty. Shakeſpeare.
Some their forked tails ſtretch forth on high,
And tear the twinkling ſtars from trembling ſky. Fairfax.
God compriſes all the goods we value in the creatures, as
the ſun doth the light that twinkles in the ſtars. Boyle.
The ſtar of love,
That twinkles you to fair Almeyda's bed. Dryden.
Think you your new French proſelytes are come
To ſtarve abroad, becauſe they ſtarv'd at home,
Your benefices twinkl’d from afar. Dryden.
So weak your charms, that like a winter's night,
Twinkling with ſtars, they freeze me while they light. Dryd.
Theſe ſtars do not twinkle when viewed through teleſcopes
which have large apertures: for the rays of light which paſs
through divers parts of the aperture, tremble each of them
apart; and by means of their various, and ſometimes contrary
tremors, fall at one and the ſame time upon different points
“ in the bottom of the eye. Newton.
2. To open and ſhut the eye by turns.
The owl fell a moping and twinkling. L’Eſtrange.
3. To play irregularly.
His eyes will twinkle, and his tongue will roll,
As tho’ he beck’ned, and call’d back his ſoul, Donne.
Fº } n. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A ſparkling intermitting light; a motion of the eye.
T W I
Suddenly, with twinkle of her eye,
The damſel broke his miſintended dart.
Spenºr.
I come, I come ; the leaſt twinkle had brought me pen
to thee.
Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
2. A ſhort ſpace, ſuch as is taken up by a mºn of the 4. º
sº can thy wants at will ſupply,
It º:º:. º all things for º meet,
- - 'ling of an eye. 'airy 9teen.
Theſe falſe beauties of the ſtage * no more tº:
a rainbow; when the actor gilds them no longer with hi
reflection, they vaniſh in a twinkling. 3. Dryd .
The action, paſſion, and manners of ſo man £;
a pićture, are to be diſcerned in the twinkling y . eye, if
º could travel over ſo many different º,all at
TWIN.ING. m. f. [diminutive of twin.] A twin iſ...".
limº; two brought at a birth. &gt;
winlings increaſe bring. Tuſſºr'
Twi'NNER. m.ſ.. [from twin.j A breeder of º s Huſº.
Ewes yeerely by twinning rich maiſters do make,
The lambe of ſuch twinner, for breeders go take. Tuffer.
To Twirl. v. a. [from whirl..] Tö turn round ; to move by
a quick rotation.
Wºol and raw filk by moiſture incorporate with other
thread; eſpecially if there be a little wreathing, as appeareth
by the twiſting and twirling about of ſpindles. Bacon.
Dextrous damſels twirl the ſprinkling mop. Gay.
See ruddy maids,
Some taught with dextrous hand to twirl the wheel. Dodſ.
Twirl. n.ſ. Ifrom the verb.]
1. Rotation; circular motion.
2. Twiſt; convolution.
The twirl on this is different from that of the others; this
being an heteroſtropha, the twirl: turning from the right-
hand to the left. Iſºodward on Fºſſils.
To TWIST. v. a. ſ.3expiran, Saxon; twiſt.n, Dutch.]
I. To form by complication; to form by convolution.
Do but deſpair,
And if thou want'ſt a cord, the ſmalleſt thread
That ever ſpider twiſted from her womb,
Will ſtrangle thce. Shakeſheare.
To reprove diſcontent, the ancients feigned, that in hell
ſtood a man twiſting a rope of hay; and ſtill he twiſted on,
ſuffering an aſs to eat up all that was finiſhed. Taylor.
Would Clotho waſh her hands in milk,
And twiſt our thread with gold and ſilk;
Would ſhe in friendſhip, peace, and plenty,
Spin out our years to four times twenty,
And ſhould we both in this condition,
Have conquer'd love, and worſe ambition,
Elſe theſe two paſſions by the way,
May chance to ſhew us ſcurvy play. Prior.
The taſk were harder to ſecure my own
Againſt the pow'r of thoſe already known ;
For well you twiſt the ſecret chains that bind
With gentle force the captivated mind.
2. To contort; to writhe. -
Either double it into a pyramidical, or twiſt it into a ſer-
pentine form. Pope.
3. To wreath; to wind; to encircle by ſomething round
about.
There are pillars of ſmoke twiſted about with wreaths of
flame. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. To form; to weave.
If thou doſt love fair Hero, cheriſh it,
And thou ſhalt have her : was’t not to this end
That thou began'ſt to twiſt ſo fine a ſtory Shakeſpeare.
5. To unite by intertexture of parts.
All that know how prodigal
Of thy great ſoul thou art, longing to twiſ'
Bays with that joy, which ſo early kiſt
Thy youthful temples, with what horror we
Think on the blind events of war. //aller.
6. To unite ; to inſinuate. -
When avarice twiſts itſelf, not only with the praštice of
men, but the doćtrines of the church; when eccleſiaſticks
diſpute for money, the miſchief ſeems fatal. Decay of Piety.
To Twist. v. n. To be contorted; to be convolved.
In an ileus, commonly called the twiſting of the guts, is a
circumvolution or inſertion of one part of the gut within the
other. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Deep in her breaſt he plung'd the ſhining ſword:
Th’Ináchians view the ſlain with vaſt ſurprize,
Her twiſting volumes, and her rolling eyes. Pope.
Twist. n.f. [from the verb.] . - - - -
1. Any thing made by convolution, or winding two bodies
together. -
Lyttleton.
Minerva nurs'd him - -
within a twiſt of twining offers laid. Addison.
2. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T W I
T Y. M.
a cord. -
ſtring about the work, hazards its break-
againſt one another.
Maxon's Mech. Exer.
2. A fingle ſtring ºf
Winding a thin -
ing by the fretting of the ſeveral twiſts
3. A cord; a ſtring. - 21- -
Through theſe labyrinths, not my grov'ling wit,
But thy filk twiſt, let down from heav'n to me,
Did both conduct and teach me, how by it
To climb to thee. Herbert.
About his chin the twiſt
He ty'd, and ſoon the ſtrang!'d ſoul diſmiſs'd. Dryden.
4. Contortion ; writhe.
Not the leaſt turn or twiſ in the fibres of any one animal,
which does not render them more proper for that particular
animal's way of life than any other caſt or texture. Addiſon.
5. The manner of twiſting. -
Jack ſhrunk at firſt fight of it; he found fault with the
length, the thickneſs, and the twiſt. Arbuthnot.
Twister. m. ſ. [from twiſt.] One who twiſts; a ropemaker.
To this word I have annexed ſome remarkable lines, which
explain twiſt in all its ſenſes.
When a twiſter a-twiſting will twiſt him a twiſt,
For the twiſting of his twiſt, he three twines doth intwiſt;
But if one of the twines of the twiſt do untwiſt,
The twine that untwiſteth untwiſteth the twiſt.
Untwirling the twine that untwiſteth between,
He twirls with his twiſler, the two in a twine;
Then twice having twiſted the twines of the twine,
He twitcheth the twine he had twined in twain.
The twain that in twining before in the twine,
As twins were intwiſted, he now doth untwine,
*Twixt the twain intertwiſting a twine more between,
He, twirling his twiſter, makes a twiſt of the twine. //allis.
To Twit. v. a. ſetpizan, Saxon.] To ſneer ; to flout; to
reproach.
When approaching the ſtormy ſtowers,
We mought with our ſhoulders bear off the ſharp ſhowers,
And ſooth to ſaine, nought ſeemeth fike ſtrife,
That ſhepherds ſo twiten each other's life. Spenſer.
When I proteſt true loyally to her,
She twits me with my falſhood to my friend. Shakeſpeare.
AEſop minds men of their crºors without twitting them for
what's amiſs. L’E/ºrange.
This theſe ſcoffers twitted the Chriſtians with. Tillotſon.
Galen bled his patients, till by fainting they could bear no
longer; for which he was twitted in his own time. Baker.
To TWITCH. v. a. ſ. Piccian, Saxon.] To vellicate; to
pluck with a quick motion ; to ſnatch; to pluck with a haſty
In Otion.
He roſe, and twitch'd his mantle blue,
To-morrow to freſh woods, and paſtures new. Milton.
Twitch'd by the ſleeve he mouths it more and more.
Dryden's juvenal.
With a furious leap
She ſprung from bed, diſturbed in her mind,
And fear'd at ev'ry ſtep a twitching ſpright behind. Dryd.
Thrice they twitch'd the diamond in her ear. Pope.
Twitch. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A quick pull; a ſudden vellication.
But Hudibras give him a twitch,
As quick as light'ning in the breech. Hudibras.
The lion gave one hearty twitch, and got his feet out
of the trap, but left his claws behind. L’Eſtrange.
2. A painful contračtion of the fibres.
Other confed’rate pairs
Contračt the fibres, and the twitch produce,
Which gently puſhes on the grateful food
To the wide ſtomach, by its hollow road.
Mighty phyſical their fear is,
For ſoon as noiſe of combat near is,
Their heart deſcending to their breeches,
Muſt give their ſtomachs cruel twitches. Prior.
A fit of the ſtone is the cure, from the inflammation and
pain occaſioning convulſive twitches. - Sharp.
Twi'Tch GRASS. m. ſ. A plant.
Twitch-graſs is a weed that keeps ſome land looſe, hollow,
and draws away the virtue of the ground. Mortimer.
To Twi'TTER. v. n.
1. To make a ſharp tremulous intermitted noiſe.
This muſt be done,
Swallows twitter on the chimney-tops. Dryden.
They twitter chearful, till the vernal months
Invite them back. Thomſºn.
2. To be ſuddenly moved with any inclination. A low word.
A widow which had a twittering toward a ſecond huſband,
tººk a goſſipping companion to manage the jobb. L’Eſtr.
Twº ER. i. ſ. Any motion or diſorder of paſſion; ſuch as
a violent fit of laughing, or fit of fretting.
The ancient errant knights
Won all their ladies hearts in fights
And cut whole giants into fitters, &gt;
Po put them into amorous twitters.
Blackmore,
Hudibras.
The moon was in a heavy twitter
4. t that her
fitted her. &gt; clºth,..
Twittletwa'rtle. n. ſ. [A ludicro : ºrange.
- - ** - I - us reduplicati
twattle.] Tattle ; gabble. A vile word. Plication of
Inſipid twittletwatles, frothy jeſts, and jingling witticiſm
s:
inure us to a miſunderſtanding of things. L’Eſtr
*Twixt. A contraction of betwixt. range.
Twilight * . . . * * * ..-
ght, ſhºrt arbiter 'twixt day and night, Milton,
Two. adj. . [twai, Gothick; zyu, Saxon.]
1. One and one.
Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch;
Between two dogs, which hath the deeper motº. '
Between two blades, which bears the better tem &amp; -
Between two horſes, which doth bear him beſt º &gt;
Between two girls, which hath the merrieſt eye.
I have ſome ſhallow ſpirit of judgment. Saif
- - - Yeare
Three words it will three times report, and then #. -
latter for ſome times. Bacon's Nat #.
Fifteen chambers were to lodge us two and two jº
tº--ºvi.
They lay Bacm,
By two and two acroſs the common way. -
2. It is uſed in compoſition. y Dryden,
Next to the raven's age, the Pylian king
Was longeſt liv'd of any two-legg'd thing. Dryden
A rational animal better deſcribed man's eſſence, than .
two-legged animal, with broad nails, and without feather.
L &gt;
The two-ſhap'd Erićthonius had his birth ocke's Hºrii,
Without a mother, from the teeming earth. Addison
Her regiſter was a two-leaved book of record, one º
containing the names of her living, and the other of her dº-
ceaſed members. - Aliff.
Tºoro. adj. [two and edge.] Having an edge on either
10.C.
Clariffa drew, with tempting grace,
A twoedg’d weapon from her ſhining caſe.
Two/Fold. adj. [two and fold.] Double.
Our prayer againſt ſudden death importeth a twofºld defire,
that death when it cometh may give us ſome convenient re-
ſpite, or if that be denied us of God, yet we may have wiſ.
dom to provide always before hand. Hooker.
Through mirkſom air her ready way ſhe makes,
Her twofold team, of which two black as pitch,
And two were brown, yet each to each unlike,
Did ſoftly ſwim away. Fairy Queen,
O thou ! the earthly author of my blood, -
Whoſe youthful ſpirit in me regenerate,
Doth now with twofºld vigour lift me up,
To reach at vićtory above my head,
Pºpe.
Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers,
And with thy bleſfings ſteel my lance's point. Shake?.
Our twofold ſeas waſh either ſide. Dryden.
Time and place taken for diſtinguiſhable portions of ſpace
and duration, have each of them a twofold acceptation. Lºck,
Ewes, that erſt brought forth but ſingle lambs, -
Now dropp'd their twofold burdens. Priºr,
Holineſs may be taken in a twofºld ſenſe; for that external
holineſs, which belongs to perſons or things, offered to God;
or for thoſe internal graces which ſanctify our natures. Atterb,
. Two/Fol D. adv. Doubly.
A proſelyte you make twofold more the child of hell than
yourſelves. Matth. xxiii. 15.
Two'HANDED. adj. [two and hand.J Large; bulky; enor-
mous of magnitude.
With huge twohanded ſway,
Brandiſh'd cloft, the horrid edge came down,
Wide waſting. Milton's Par, Lºft.
If little, then ſhe's life and ſoul all o'er ;
An Amazon, the large twohanded whore. . Drydºn.
Two/PENce. n.ſ. A ſmall coin, valued at twice Pº
You all ſhew like gilt twopences to me. Shakespeare.
To TY E. v. a To bind. See TIE. ... ."
TYE. m. ſ. See TIE. A knot; a bond or obligation.
Lay your -
Command upon me; to the which my duties
Are with a moſt indiſſoluble tye
For ever knit.
I have no tye upon you to be true,
But that which looſen'd your's, my love to yo"
Honour's a ſacred tye, the law of kings,
The noble mind's diſtinguiſhing perfection,
That aids and ſtrengthens virtue where it meet”
And imitates her actions where ſhe is not.
It ought not to be ſported with ;
Lend me aid, I now conjure thee, lend,
By the ſoft tye and ſacred name of friend.
TY'GER. n.ſ. See TIGER.
TYMBAL. n.ſ.. [tymbal, French..] A kind o
Yet gracious charity indulgent gueſt
Were not thy pow'r exerted in my breaſt;
Shakſtart.
Drydºn.
her,
Aidſ. Catº.
Pºſt,
f kettle-drum"
Thoſe<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T Y. P
º
º
:
My ſpeeches would ſend up unheeded pray'r:
The ſcorn of life would be but wild deſpair:
A tymbal's ſound were better than my voice,
My faith were form, my eloquence were noiſe. Prior.
Tyke. m. ſ. [See TIKE..] Tyke in Scottiſh ſtill denotes a
dog, or one as contemptible and vile as a dog, and from
thence perhaps comes teague.
Baſe tyke, call'ſt thou me hoſt now,
By this hand, I ſwear I ſcorn the term. Shakeſpeare.
TYMPANITES. m. ſ. [rvaravirns, from rug.ravº, to
ſound like a drum.]. That particular ſort of dropſy that ſwells
the belly up like a drum, and is often cured by tapping.
TYMPANUM, n.ſ. A drum; a part of the ear, ſo called
from its reſemblance to a drum.
The three little bones in meatu auditorio, by firming the
tympanum, are a great help to the hearing. JWiſeman.
TY'MPANY. m. ſ. [from tympanum, Lat..] A kind of obſtructed
flatulence that ſwells the body like a drum.
Hope, the chriſtian grace, muſt be proportioned and at-
temperate to the promiſe ; if it exceed that temper and pro-
portion, it becomes a tumour and tympany of hope. Hamm.
He does not ſhew us Rome great ſuddenly,
As if the empire were a tympany,
But gives it natural growth, tells how and why
The little body grew ſo large and high. Suckling.
Others that affect
A lofty ſtile, ſwell to a tympany. Roſcommon.
Pride is no more than an unnatural tympany, that riſes in a
bubble, and ſpends itſelf in a blaſt L’E/irange.
Nor let thy mountain-belly make pretence
Of likeneſs; thine's a tympany of ſenſe.
A tun of man in thy large bulk is writ,
But ſure thou'rt but a kilderkin of wit. Dryden.
The air is ſo rarified in this kind of dropſical tumour as
makes it hard and tight like a drum, and from thence it is
called a tympany. A buthnot.
TYNY. adj. Small.
He that has a little tymy wit,
Muſt make content with his fortunes fit.
TYPE. n.ſ.. [type, Fr. typus, Lat. riſwo;..]
1. Emblem; mark of ſomething.
Clean renouncing
The faith they have in tennis, and tall ſtockings,
Short bolſter'd breeches, and thoſe types of travel,
And underſtanding again the honeſt men. - Shakeſpears.
Thy emblem, gracious queen, the Britiſh roſe,
Shakeſpeare.
Type of ſweet rule, and gentle majeſty. - Prior.
2. That by which ſomething future is prefigured.
Informing them by types
And ſhadows of that deſtin’d ſeed to bruiſe
The ſerpent, by what means he ſhall atchieve
Mankind’s deliverance. Milton.
The Apoſtle ſhews the Chriſtian religion to be in truth
and ſubſtance what the Jewiſh was only in type and ſhadow.
Tillotſon's Sermons.
3. A ſtamp; a mark not in uſe.
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Yet not ſo wealthy as an Engliſh yeoman. Shakeſpeare.
What good is cover'd with the face of heav'n
To be diſcovered, that can do me good
—Th'advancement of your children, gentle lady,
—Up to ſome ſcaffold, there to loſe their heads;
—No, to the dignity and height of fortune,
The high imperial type of this earth's glory. Shakeſpeare.
4. A printing letter.
TYPick. n. ſ. [typijue, Fr typicus, Lat.] Emblematical ;
TYP1cAL. } figurative of ſomething elſe.
The Levitical prieſthood was only typical of the chriſtian ;
which is ſo much more holy and honourable than that, as
the inſtitution of Chriſt is more excellent than that of Mo-
ſes. Atterbury.
Hence that many courſers ran,
Hand-in-hand, a goodly train, {
To bleſs the great Eliza's reign;
And in the typic glory ſhow -
What fuller bliſs Maria ſhall beſtow. Prior.
TYP1 cally. adv. [from typical.] In a typical manner. .
This excellent communicativeneſs of the divine nature is
typically repreſented, and myſteriouſly exemplified by the Por-
phyrian ſcale of being. Norris.
Tºº lNess. n.f. [from typical J The ſtate of being ty-
1Ca!.
Tºr. PIFY. v a. [from type.] To figure; to ſhew in em-
blem.
The reſurreótion of Chriſt hath the power of a pattern to
us, and is ſo typified in baptiſm, as an engagement to riſe to
newneſs of life. Hammond.
Our Saviour was typified indeed by the goat that was ſlain;
at the effuſion of whoſe blood, not only the hard hearts of
his enemies relented, but the ſtony rocks and vall of the
temple were ſhattered. Brown's Wulg. Errours.
TYPo'graphER. ad. [ru'ro; and yea: A pri
TyrogRA'phical. adj. [from ;: printer.
1. Emblematical; figurative.
# Belonging to the printer's art.
*PoçRA'PHICALLY. adv. [from typographical.
I. Emblematically; iſ: ypographical.]
2. After the manner of printers.
TYPO GRAPHY, "...ſ.. [typographie, Fr. typographia, Lat. J
I. Emblematical, figurative, or hieroglyphical repreſentation.
Thoſe diminutive and pamphlet treatiſes daily publiſhed
amongſt us, are pieces containing rather typography than ve-
rity. rown's Pulgar Err
- - - - ?? attry.
2. The art of printing. 3.
TYRANNess. n.ſ.. [from tyrant.] A ſhe tyrant.
They were by law of that proud tyranneſs,
Provok'd with wrath and envy's falſe ſurmiſè.
The tyranneſ doth joy to ſee
The huge maſſacres which her eyes do make. Spen or.
TYRA'NNICAL. } *ſ, [tyrannus, Latin ; tyrannique, French;
Fairy Qu.
TYRA'NNick. rvézºviko’s...] Suiting a tyrant; ačting like
* tyrant } cruel; deſpotick; imperious.
- Charge him home that affects
Tyrannic power. - Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
You have contriv'd to take
From Rome all ſeaſon'd office, and to wind -
Yourſelf into a power tyrannical. Shakeſpeare.
Domitian had been tyrannical; and in his time many
noble houſes were overthrown by falſe accuſations. Bacon.
Our ſects a more tyrannick power aſſume,
And would for ſcorpions change the rods of Rome. Rºſ.
Subdue and quell, o'er all the earth,
Brute violence, and proud tyrannick pow'r. Milton,
If the ſpirit of a ſubject be rebellious, in a prince it will be
tyrannical and intolerable. Taylor.
She hath recourſe
To tears and prayers, again ſhe feels the ſmart
Of a freſh wound from the tyrannick dart.
And by the nobles, by his commons curſt,
Th' oppreſſor rul'd tyrannick where he durſt;
Stretch'd o'er the poor and church his iron rod,
And treats alike his vaſſals and his God. Pope.
TYRANNIcALLY. adv. [from tyrannical.] In manner of a
tyrant. -
TYRANNIcide. n. ſ. [tyrannus and cardo, Latin.] The act of
killing a tyrant.
To Ty's ANNise. v. n. [tyraniſer, Fr. from tyrant.] To play
the tyrant; to act with rigour and imperiouſneſs.
While we truſt in the mercy of God thro' Chriſt Jeſus, fear
will not be able to tyrannſe over us. Hooker.
Then gan Carauſius tyranniſe anew,
And gainſt the Romans bent their proper power,
And ſo Alećtus treacherouſly ſlew,
And took on him the robe of Emperor.
I made thee miſerable,
What time I threw the people's ſuffrages
On him, that thus doth tyranniſe o'er me.
A crew, whom like ambition joins
With him, or under him to tyrannie. Milton.
Beauty had crown'd you, and you muſt have been
The whole world's miſtreſs, other than a queen;
All had been rivals, and you might have ſpar'd,
Or kill'd and tyrannis'd without a guard. J/aller.
He does violence to his own faculties, tyranniſes over his
own mind, and uſurps the prerogative that belongs to truth
alone, which is to command aſlent by its own authority.
Lo ke's Works.
Ty'RANNous. adj. [from tyrant..] Tyrannical; deſpotick ;
arbitrary; ſevere; cruel; imperious. Not in uſe.
It is ſtrange to ſee the unmanlike cruelty of mankind, who,
not content with their tyrannous ambition, to have brought the
others virtuous patience under them, think their maſterhood
nothing without doing injury to them. - Sidney.
Lately grown into a loathing and deteſtation of the unjuſt
and tyrannous rule of Harold an uſurper. Spenſer.
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father,
And, like the tyrannous breathing of the north,
Shakes all our buds from blowing.
Subjection to his empire tyranous.
"Tis excellent
To have a giant's ſtrength; but it is tyrannnous
To uſe it like a giant.
Fear you his tyrannous paſſion more, alas !
Than the queen's life. ... Shakeſpeare.
After the death of this tyrannous and ambitious king, theſe
writings came abroad - * Temp t’.
TYRANNY. m. ſ. [tranni, Latin; rvºzºis ; tyrannie, Fr.]
1. Abſolute monarchy imperiouſly adminiſtered.
Our grand foe, -
who now triumphs, and, in th' exceſs of joy,
Sole reigning holds the tyranny of heav'n.
Denham.
Fairy Queen.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
AMilton.
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
27 E — 28 Z The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">T Y. R.
T Y. R
The cities fell often under tyrannies, which ſpring natu-
rally out of popular governments. Temple.
2. Unreſiſted and cruel power.
Boundleſs intemperance
In nature is a tyranny ; it hath been
Th'untimely emptying of the happy throne,
And fall of many kings. Shakeſpeare.
3. Cruel government; rigorous command.
Bleed, bleed, poor country
Great tyranny lay thou thy baſis ſure,
For goodneſs dares not check thee. Shakeſpeare.
Suſpicions diſpoſe kings to tyranny, and huſbands to jea-
louſy. Bacon.
God in judgment juſt,
Subjećts him from without to violent lords;
Who oft as undeſervedly inthral
His outward freedom ; tıranny muſt be. Milton.
4. Severity; rigour; inclemency.
The tyranny o’ the open night's too rough
For nature to endure. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
TYRANT. m. ſ. [rtſpaw® ; tyrannus, Latin. Rowland
contends that this word, with the correſpondent Greek and
Latin, is derived from tir, Welch and Erſe, land, and rhan-
mer, Welch, to ſhare, 4.d. tirhanner, a ſharer, or divider of
and among his vaſſals.]
1. An abſolute monarch governing imperiouſly.
2. A cruel deſpotick and ſevere maſter; an oppreſſor.
Love to a yielding heart is a king, but to a reſiſting is a
tyrant. --- - Sidney, b, i.
I would not be the villain that thou think'ſt,
For the whole ſpace that's in the tyrant's graſp,
And the rich eaſt to boot. Shakeſpeare's Machath
Diſſembling courteſy! how fine this tyrant -
Can tickle where ſhe wounds ! Shakeſ, Cymb
The houſe of woe, and dungeon of our tyrant. %.
Conſider thoſe grand agents and lieutenants of the devil b.
whom he ſcourges and plagues the world under him, to :
tyrant; ; and was there ever any tyrant who was not alſo fiſ.
and perfidious ! South's Sermons,
Thou meant'ſt to kill a tyrant, not a king. Dryd
When tyrant cuſtom had not ſhackl’d º, yaen.
But free to follow nature was the mode. Thomſºn,
Tyr F. n. ſ. [Properly tire.] See TIR.E.
I have ſeen her beſet and bedecked all over with emeralds
and pearls, ranged in rows about the tyre of her head.
Hakewill on Providence.
Tyro. m. ſ. [Properly tiro, as in the Latin.] One yet not
maſter of his art; one in his rudiments.
There ſtands a ſtructure on a riſing hill,
Where tyro's take their freedom out to kill. Garth', Diff.
