&amp; 7 V_l<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A C
Is a labial conſonant, formed by a ſlight compreſſion of
the anterior part of the lips; as, pull, pelt. It is con-
founded by the Germans and Welſh with b : it has an
uniform ſound: it is ſometimes mute before t; as, ac-
compt, receipt; but the mute p is in modern orthogra-
phy commonly omitted.
Pa'bulAR. adj. [pabulun, Lat.] Affording aliment or pro-
vender.
Pabulation, n.ſ. [pabulum, Lat.] The aâ of feeding or
procuring provender.
PA'bulous. adj. [pabulum, Lat.] Alimental ; affording ali-
Inent.
We doubt the air is the pabulous ſupply of fire, much leſs
that flame is properly air kindled. Brown's Vulgar Err.
PACE. n.ſ. [pas, French.]
I. Step; ſingle movement in walking.
Behind her death,
Cloſe following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale horſe. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x.
2. Gait; manner of walk.
He himſelf went but a kind of languiſhing pace, with his
eyes ſometimes caſt up to heaven, as though his fancies
ſtrove to mount higher. Sidney.
He ſaw Menalcas come with heavy pace;
Wet were his eyes, and chearleſs was his face. Addison.
3. Degree of celerity. To keep pace, is not to be left behind.
To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to-day,
To the laſt ſyllable of recorded time;
And all our yeſterdays have lighted fools
The way to duſky death.
Bring me word
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
I may ſpur on my journey. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
His teachers were fain to reſtrain his forwardneſs; that his
brothers, under the ſame training, might hold pace with him.
//otton's Buckingham.
The beggar ſings ev'n when he ſees the place,
Beſet with thieves, and never mends his pace. Dryden.
Juſt as much
He mended pace upon the touch. Hudibras, p. i.
Marcia could anſwer thee in ſighs, keep pace
With all thy woes, and count out tear for tear. Addiſon.
Hudibras applied his ſpur to one fide of his horſe, as not
doubting but the other would keep pace with it. Addiſon.
4. Step; gradation of buſineſs. A galliciſm. - -
The firſt pace neceſſary for his majeſty to make, is to fall
into confidence with Spain. Temple.
5. A meaſure of five feet. The quantity ſuppoſed to be meal
ſured by the foot from the place where it is taken up to that
where it is ſet down.
Meaſuring land by walking over it, they ſtyled a double
ſtep; i. e. the ſpace from the elevation of one foot, to the
ſame foot ſet down again, mediated by a ſtep of the other
foot; a pace equal to five foot; a thouſand of which paces
made a mile. Holder on Time.
The violence of tempeſts never moves the ſea above fix
paces deep. //ilkin's Math. Magic.
6. A particular movement which horſes are taught, though ſome
have it naturally, made by lifting the legs on the ſame ſide
together. - -
They rode, but authors having not
Petermin'd whether pate or trot;
That's to ſay, whether tollutation,
As they do term it, or ſuccuſation.
To Pace. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To move on ſlowly.
He ſoft arrived on the graſſie plain,
And fairly paced forth with eaſy pain. Hubberd.
U. ... As we pac'd alon
pon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought, that Gloſter ſtumbl’d. Shakeſp. R. III.
I beheld
Criſpinus, both in birth and manners vile,
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Hudibras.
P A C
Pacing in pomp with cloak of Tyrian dye,
Chang'd oft a day. Dryden's juvenal.
The moon roſe in the cleareſt ſky I ever ſaw, by whoſe
ſolemn light I paced on ſlowly without interruption. Pope.
The nymph, obedient to divine command,
To ſeek Ulyſſes, pac'd along the ſand. Pope.
2. To move.
Remember well, with ſpeed ſo pace,
To ſpeak of Perdita. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
3. [Uſed of horſes.] To move by raiſing the legs on the ſame
fide together.
To PAce. v. a.
1. To meaſure by ſteps. -
Where is the horſe that doth untread again
His tedious meaſures with th' unbated fire,
That he did pace them firſt. Shakeſp. Merch. of Wen.
2. To direct to go. -
If you can, pace your wiſdom ... .
In that good path that I would wiſh it go,
And you ſhall have your boſom on this wretch. Shakeſp.
PA'ced, adj. [from pace..] Having a particular gait,
Revenge is ſure, though ſometimes ſlowly par d;
Awake, awake, or ſleeping ſleep thy laſt. Dryden.
PA'cer. n.ſ.. [from pace..] He that paces. -
Pacification. n. J. ſpacification, Fr. from pariff.]
1. The act of making peace. - * -
He ſent forthwith to the French king his chaplain, chufing
him becauſe he was a churchman, as beſt ſorting with an
ambaſſy of pacification. Bacon's Hºn. VII.
David, by an happy and ſeaſonable pacification, was took
off from ačting that bloody tragedy. South.
2. The act of appeaſing or pacifying.
A world was to be ſaved by a pacification of wrath, through
the dignity of that ſacrifice which ſhould be offered. Hooker.
PAcIFICA/Tor. m. ſ. [pacificateur,Fr. from paciſy.) Peace-maker.
He ſet and kept on foot a continual treaty of peace ; be-
ſides he had in confideration the bearing the bleſſed perſon of
a pacificator. Bacon's Henry VII.
PA'cificatory. adj. [from pacificator.] Tending to make
peace. -
PAcI'Fick. adj. [pacifique, Fr. pacificus, Lat.] Peace-making;
mild ; gentle; appeaſing.
God now in his gracious pacifick manner comes to treat
with then. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Returning, in his bill -
An olive leaf he brings, pacift ſign Milton.
PACIFIER. m. ſ. [from pacify.] One who pacifies:
To PACIFY. v. a. ſpacifier, Fr. pacifto, Lat.] To appeaſe;
to ſtill reſentment; to quiet an angry perſon; to compoſe any
deſire. -
While the dog hunted in the river, he had withdrawn to
pacify with ſleep his over-watched eyes. Sidney, b. ii.
Menelaus promiſed Ptolemy money, if he would pacify
the king. 2 Maº. iv. 4.
The moſt high is not pacified for fin by the multitude of
ſacrifices. ccius xxxiv. I 9.
Although in his journey he heard news of the Victory, yet
he went on as far as York, to pacify and ſettle thoſe Countries.
- - - - - - Bacon's Henry VII.
O villain to have wit at will upon all other occaſions
and not one diverting ſyllable now at a pinch to pacify our
miſtreſs. * F/?.....
Nor William's pow'r, nor Mary's charms L'Eſi, 4/96.
Could or repel, or pacify his arms.
PACK. m. ſ. ſpack, Dutch.j
I. A.lºgº bundle of any thing tied up for carr;
Tºmiºſidº...","...". ſ
like cloth of Arras, opened". . ."...º. was
imagery appears in figures; wº ...ſoad, whereby the
&gt; S 111 thoughts they lie but
as in packs.
Had ſly Ulyſſes at the ſack Bacon, Aſſays 28.
Cleaveland.
Prior.
Of Troy, brought thee his dlar'
Qur knight did bear no ..d º
Of his own buttocks on hi. back.
4. Hudibras, P. i.
2. A burden 5<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A C
- P A D
2. A burden ; a load.
I rather choſe
To croſs my friend in his intended drift,
Than, by concealing it, heap on your head - -
A pack of ſorrows. Shakeſp. March. of Wen.
But when they took notice how ſtupid a beaſt it was, they
loaded it with packs and burdens, and ſet boys upon the
back of it. D'Eſtrange.
. A due number of cards.
3 Women to cards may be compar'd, we play
A round or two, when us'd we throw away,
Take a freſh pack. Granville.
It is wonderful to ſee perſons of ſenſe paſſing away a dozen
hours together in ſhuffling and dividing a pack of cards. Addison
. A number of hounds hunting together.
Two ghoſts join their packs to hunt her o'er the plain. Dryd.
The fury fires the pack; they ſnuff, they vent,
And feed their hungry noſtrils with the ſcent.
The ſavage ſoul of game is up at once,
The pack full-opening various. Thomſon's Summer.
5. A number of people confederated in any bad deſign or
raćtice.
p You panderly raſcals there's a knot, a gang, a pack, a
conſpiracy, againſt me. Shakeſp. Mer. //, of I/ind.
Never ſuch a pack of knaves and villains, as they who
now governed in the parliament. Clarendon.
Bickerſtaff is more a man of honour, than to be an
accomplice with a pack of raſcals that walk the ſtreets on
nights. - Swift.
6. Any great number, as to quantity and preſſure: as a pack
or world of troubles. Ainſworth.
To Pack. v. a. ſpacken, Dutch.]
1. To bind up for carriage.
A poor merchant driven on unknown land,
That had by chance pack'd up his choiceſt treaſure
Dryden.
In one dear caſket, and ſav'd only that. Otway.
Reſolv'd for ſea, the ſlaves thy baggage pack, º
Each ſaddled with his burden on his back. Dryden.
What we looked upon as brains, were an heap of ſtrange
materials, packed up with wonderful art in the ſkull.
Addiſon.
2. To ſend in a hurry. -
He cannot live, I hope, and muſt not die, *
Till George be pack'd with poſt horſe up to heav'n. Shakeſp.
3. To ſort the cards ſo as that the game ſhall be iniquitouſly ſe-
cured. It is applied to any iniquitous procurement of colluſion.
Enos has
Packt cards with Caeſar, and falſe play'd. Shakeſp.
There be that can pack cards and yet cannot play well; ſo
there are ſome that are good in canvaſſes and factions, that
are otherwiſe weak men. Bacon's Eſſays, N°. 23.
The judge ſhall jobb, the biſhop bite the town,
And mighty dukes pack cards for half a crown.
4. To unite picked perſons in ſome bad deſign.
When they have pack'd a parliament,
Will once more try th’ expedient:
Who can already muſter friends,
To ſerve for members to our ends. Hudibras.
Brutes, called men, in full cry pack'd by the court or
country, run down in the houſe of commons, a deſerted
Pope.
horned beaſt of the court. JWychery.
So many greater fools than they,
Will pack a crowded audience the third day. Southern.
The expected council was dwindling into a conventicle;
a pack'd aſſembly of Italian biſhops, not a free convention of
fathers from all quarters. Atterbury.
o PAck. v. n.
1. To tie up goods.
The marigold, whoſe courtier's face
Ecchoes the ſun, and doth unlace
Her at his riſe, at his full ſtop
Packs and ſhuts up her gaudy ſhop.
2. To § bff in a hurry; to remove in haſte.
ew farmer thinketh each hour a day,
Until the old farmer be packing away. Tuff. Huſø.
Rogues, hence, avaunt'
Seek ſhelter, pack. Shakeſp. M. Iſ of Iłżnd.
The wind no ſooner came good, but away pack the gallies
with all the haſte they could. Carew.
A thief kindled his torch at Jupiter's altar, and then robbed
the temple: as he was packing away with his ſacrilegious
burden, a voice purſued him. L’Eſtrange.
If they had been an hundred more, they had been all ſent
packing with the ſame anſwer. Stillingfect.
Pack hence, and from the cover'd benches riſe,
This is no place for you.
Poor Stella muſt pack off to town, -
(on purling ſtreams and fountains bubblin
To Liffy's ſtinking tide at Dublin. Swift.
3. To concert bad meaſures ; to confederate in ill ; to practiſe
unlawful confederacy or colluſion,
Cleaveland.
Dryden,
go
That this ſo profitable a merchandize, riſeth not to a
proportionable enhauncement with other leſs beneficial com-
modities, they impute partly to the eaſtern buyers packing,
partly to the owners not venting the ſame. Carew.
º Go pack with him. Shakeſp. Titus Audronicus.
PA'ckçLoATH. m. ſ. ſpack and cleath..] A cloath in which
goods are tied up.
PA’cKER. m. ſ. [from pack.] One who binds up bales for
Carri age.
PA'cket. n.ſ. ſpacquet, French.] A ſmall pack; a mail of
letters.
In the dark
Grop'd I to find out them,
Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew.
There paſſed continually packets and diſpatches between
the two kings. Bacon's Henry VII,
Upon your late command
To guard the paſſages, and ſearch all packets,
This to the prince was intercepted. Denham.
People will wonder how the news could come, eſpecially
if the wind be fair when the packet goes over. Swift.
To PA(cket. v. a. [from the noun..] To bind up in parcels.
My reſolution is to ſend you all your letters, well ſealed
and packeted. Swift.
PA'ck Horse. m. ſ. ſpack and horſe.] A horſe of burden; a
horſe employed in carrying goods.
Ere you were queen, ay, or your huſband king,
I was a packhorſe in his great affairs. Shakeſp.
It is not to be expe&amp;ted that a man, who drudges on in a
laborious trade, ſhould be more knowing in the variety of
things done in the world, than a packhorſ who is driven con-
ſtantly forwards and backwards to market, ſhould be ſkilled
in the geography of the country. Locke.
PA'cks Addle. n.ſ. ſpack and ſaddle.] A ſaddle on which
burdens are laid.
Your beards deſerve not ſo honourable a grave as to ſtuff
a butcher's cuſhion, or to be entombed in an aſſes packſaddle.
Shakeſpeare's Cortolanus.
That brave prancing courſer, hath been ſo broken and
brought low by her, that he will patiently take the bit and
bear a packſaddle or panniers. Howel's Wocal Forg/?.
The bunch on a camel's back may be inſtead of a packſaddle
to receive the burthen. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
PA'ckthread. m. ſ. ſpack and thread..] Strong thread uſed
in tying up parcels.
About his ſhelves
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roſes
Were thinly ſcatter'd. Shakeſp. Rom. and juliet.
Girding of the body of the tree about with packthread,
reſtraineth the ſap. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſł. N°. 419.
I can compare ſuch produćtions to nothing but rich pieces
of patchwork, ſewed together with packthread. Felton.
His horſe is vicious, for which reaſon I tie him cloſe to
his manger with a packthread. Addiſon's Speciator.
The cable was about as thick as packthread. Swift.
PA'ckw Ax. n.ſ.
Several parts peculiar to brutes, are wanting in man ; as the
ſtrong aponeuroſes on the ſides of the neck, called packwax.
Ray on the Creation.
PAct. n.ſ. [paſt, Fr. pačium, Latin.] A contract; a bar-
gain; a covenant.
The queen, contrary to her pač; and agreement concern-
ing the marriage of her daughter, delivered her daughters out
of ſanétuary unto king Richard. Bacon.
PA’ction. n.ſ. [paciion, Fr. pačfio, Latin.] A bargain ; a
covenant.
The French king ſent for Matthew earl of Levenox, en-
couraging him to remove the earl of Arraine from the re-
gency of Scotland, and reverſe ſuch pačions as he had made.
Hayward.
There never could be any room for contračts or paiº,
between the ſupreme being and his intelligent creatures. Cheyne.
PAct 1'tious. m. ſ. [pacio, Lat.] Settled by covenant.
PAD. n.ſ. [from paab, Sax. whence likewiſe path, or PaaS.]
1. The road ; a foot path.
We have ſeen this to be the diſcipline of the ſtate, as
well as of the pad. L’E/irange.
The ſquire of the pad and the knight of the poſt,
Find their pains no more battlk'd, and their hopes no more
croft. Prior.
2. An eaſy paced horſe.
Let § walk a foot with his pad in his hand; but let not
them be accounted no poets who motiºt and ſhew their horſe-
manſhip. Dryden's Ded. to juvenaſ.
A grey pad is kept in the ſtable with great care, out of
regard to his paſt ſervices. - Addison.
I would have ſet you on an eaſier ſad, and relieved ths wan-
dering knight with a night's lodging. Pope's Letters,
3. A robber that infeſts the roads on foot. -
4. A low ſoft ſaddle : properly a ſaddle or bolſter ſtuffed with
ſtraw. [Pajado, Spaniſh, of pºja, ſtraw- -
19 A Tremellius
Shakeſp.
&amp; 7" v_ ]<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
9
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A G
P A I
Tremellius was called ſcropha or ſow, becauſe he hid his
neighbour's ſow under a pad, and commanded his wife to lie
thereon ; he ſware that he had no ſow but the great ſow that
lay there, pointing to the pad and the ſow his wife. Camden.
We ſhall not need to ſay what lack
Of leather was upon his back;
For that was hidden under pad.
To PAD. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To travel gently.
2. To rob on foot.
3. To beat a way ſmooth and level.
PA'D.A.R. m. ſ. Grouts; coarſe flower.
In the bolting and fifting of near fourteen years of ſuch
power and favour, all that came out could not be expected
to be pure and fine meal, but muſt have amongſt it padar and
bran in this lower age of human fragility. //otton.
PA'DDER. m. ſ. [from pad.] A robber; a foot highwayman.
Spurr'd as jockies uſe, to break,
Or padders to ſecure a neck. Hud. p. iii. cant. I.
Worſe than all the clatt'ring tiles, and worſe
Than thouſand padders, is the poet's curſe;
Rogues that in dog days cannot rhime forbear;
But without mercy read, to make you hear. Dryden.
If he advanced himſelf by a voluntary engaging in unjuſt
quarrels, he has no better pretence to honour than what a
reſolute and ſucceſsful padder may challenge. Collier.
To PA’ddle. v. n. [patouiller, Fr.]
1. To row ; to beat water as with oars.
As the men were paddling for their lives.
JHudibras, p. i.
L’Eſtrange.
Paddling ducks the ſtanding lake defire. Gay. .
2. To play in the water.
The brain has a very unpromiſing aſpect for thinking: it
looks like an odd ſort of bog for fancy to paddle in. Cºllier.
A wolf lapping at the head of a fountain, ſpyed a lamb
paddling a good way off. L’Eſtrange,
3. To finger.
Paddling palms, and pinching fingers,
And making practis'd ſmiles,
As in a looking-glaſs. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
PA'pdl.e. n.ſ. [pattil, Welſh.]
I. An oar, particularly that which is uſed by a ſingle rower in
a boat.
2. Anything broad like the end of an oar.
ave a paddle upon thy weapon. Deut. xxiii. 13.
PA'DDLER. m. ſ. [from paddle.] One who paddles. Ainſ.
PA'DDock. n.ſ. [paba, Saxon; padde, Dutch..] A great frog
or toad.
Where I was wont to ſeek the honey bee,
Working her former rooms in waxen frame;
The griſly toad ſtool grown there mought I ſee,
And loathing paddocks lording on the ſame. Spenſºr.
The paddock, or frog paddock, breeds on the land, is
bony and big, eſpecially the ſhe. //alton.
The water ſnake whom fiſh and paddocks fed,
With ſtaring ſcales lies poiſon'd. Dryden.
PA'DDock. n.ſ.. [corrupted from parrack..] A ſmall incloſure
for deer.
PADELI'oN. n. ſ. ſpas de lion, Fr. pe; leonis, Lat.] An herb. Ain.
PA'DLOCK. n.), [padde, Dutch..] A lock hung on a ſtaple
to hold on a link.
Let all her ways be unconfin'd;
And clap your padlock on her mind. Prior.
To PA'pločK. v. a. [from the noun..] To faſten with a
padlock. -
Some illiterate people have padlock'd all thoſe pens that were
to celebrate their heroes, by ſilencing grub-ſtreet. j. Bull.
PA'Dow PIPE. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
P+(AN. m. ſ. [from the ſongs ſung at feſtivals to Apollo, be-
gining Jo param.] A ſong of triumph.
Q may, I live to hail the glorious day,
And ſing loud paan, thro' the crouded way. Roſcomm.
See from each clime the learn'd their incenſe bring :
Hear, in all tongues conſei:ing paan, ring. Pope.
PAGAN. m. ſ. [paganirc, Saxon; paganus, Latin ; from pa-
gus, a village; the villages continuing heathen after the cities
were chriſtian.] A Heathen ; one not a Chriſtian.
PA'GAN. adj. Heatheniſh.
Their cloaths are after ſuch a pagan cut too,
That ſure they have worn out Chriſtendom. Shakespeare
The ſecret ceremonies I conceal,
§ncouth, perhaps unlawful, to reveal ;
But ſuch they were as Pagan uſe requir’d. Dryden.
PA'GAN is M. n. ſ. [paganiſm, Fr. from pagan.] Heatheniſm.
The name of popery is more oft. than very paganiſºn
amongſt divers of the more ſimple ſort. Hooker, b. iv.
cº labarum, in a ſtate of paganiſm you have on a coin
PAGE *: It ſtands between two other enſigns. Addison
• *ſ. [page, French.]
I. One ſide of the leaf of a book.
vi If a º °ould have opened one of the pages of the di-
ne counſel, and ſeen the event of Joſeph’s being ſold to the
merchants, he might have dried up the young man's tears.
Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
Thy name to Phoebus and the muſes known
Shall in the front of ev'ry page be ſhown. &gt; Dryde
A printer divides a book into ſheets, the ſheets into ! Wr.
the pages into lines, and the lines into letters. à.
2. [page, Fr.] A young boy attending on a great perſon J.
The fair goddeſs Fortune, -
Fºll deep in love with thee, and her great charms
Miſguide thy oppoſers ſwords ! -
Proſperity be º page /
ages following him,
Even at the heels in golden multitudes. Shakespeare.
He had two pages of honour, on either hand one. #.
Where is this mankind now who lives to age
Skałºż. Coriolanus.
Fit to be made Methuſalem his page. Donne.
This day thou ſhalt my rural pages ſee,
For I have dreſs'd them both to wait on thee. Dryden.
Philip of Macedon had a page attending in his chamber, to
tell him every morning, Remember, O king, that thou art
mortal. J/ake's Prep. fºr Death.
To PAGE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To mark the pages of a book.
2. To attend as a page.
Will theſe moſs'd trees
That have out-liv'd the eagle, page thy heels
And ſkip when thou point'ſt out? Shakeſp.
PA'GEANT. n.ſ. [Of this word the etymologiſts give no ſa-
tisfactory account. It may perhaps be payen geant, a pagan
giant, a repreſentation of triumph uſed at return from holy
wars; as we have yet the Saracen's head.]
1. A ſtatue in a ſhow.
2. Any ſhow ; a ſpectacle of entertainment.
When all our pageants of delight were plaid,
Our youth got me to play the woman's part,
And I was trim’d in madam Julia's gown.
I'll play my part in fortune's pageant.
This wide and univerſal theatre,
Preſents more woful pageants than the ſcene - - -
Wherein we play. Shałºff. A yºu like it.
The poets contrived the following pageant or machine for
the pope's entertainment; a huge floating mountain that was
ſplit in the top in imitation of Parnaſſus. . Addison.
PA'GEANT. adj. Showy; pompous; oſtentatious; ſuperficial.
Were ſhe ambitious, ſhe'd diſdain to own
The pageant pomp of ſuch a ſervile throne. . . . . Dryden.
To PAGEANT. J. a. [from the noun..] To exhibit in ſhow ;
to repreſent.
With ridiculous and aukward ačtion,
Which, ſlanderer, he imitation calls, -
He pageants us. Shakeſp. Troil, and Crºſſida.
PA'GEANTRY. n.ſ.. [from pageant.] Pomp; ſhow. . .
All theſe inconveniences are conſequent to this dogmatizing,
ſuppoſing men in the right; but if they be in the wrong:
what a ridiculous pageantry is it to ſee ſuch a philoſophical
gravity ſet man out a ſoleciſm. Governm. of the Tongue.
Such pageantry be to the people ſhown ;
There boaſt thy horſe's trappings and thy own. Dryden.
PA'GINAL.. n.ſ. [pagina, Latin.] Conſiſting of pages. .
An expreſſion proper into the paginal books of our times,
but not ſo agreeable unto volumes or rolling books, in uſe
among the Jews. Brown's Wular Errours.
PA'God. m. ſ. [probably na Indian word.]
1. An Indian idol.
They worſhip idols called pagod, after ſuch a terrible re-
preſentation as we make of devils. Stillingfeet.
2. The temple of the idol. -
See thronging millions to the pagºd run
Shakespeare.
Shakeſp.
And offer country, parent, wife, or ſon. Pope.
PAID. adj, the preterite and participle paſſive of pay.
This puniſhment purſues the unhappy maid,
And thus the purple hair is dearly paid. Dryden.
PAI'GLEs. m. ſ. Flowers; alſo called cowſlips. Dići.
PAI l. n. ſ. [paila, Spaniſh..] A wooden veſſel in which milk
or water is commonly carried.
In the country when their wool is new ſhorn, they ſet
fail of water by in the ſame room, to increaſe the weight.
- Bacon's Nat. Hj. Nº. 78,
New milk that all the winter never fails, w
And all the ſummer overflows the pail. Drydºn.
Pººl. m. ſ. [pail and full.] The quantity that a paiſ will
O) (1.
Yond ſame cloud cannot chuſe but fall by failful, ºak.
PAILMA'il. n.ſ. [This is commonly written peſſmely:
I know which of the too is right.] W.; .." do
f A ſtroke with a pailmail bººtle upon a bowl, makes i. H
IOIn 11. …
- - Póły on the Souſ
PAIN. m. ſ. [peine, Fr. pin, Sax. 34) ºn the Soz/.
1. Puniſhment dº. 2 Pººna, Lat.]
There, the princeſſes determining
- * - - to bathe the
thought it was ſo priviledged a pºe, upon pain ..".
as no body durſt preſume to come thither. Sidney, i. i.
oº: tain of death no perſon being ſo bold y; b. 11.
dating hardy, as to touch the liſt. sº. Rich. III
Interpoſe,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A I
Interpoſe, on pain of my diſpleaſure, - -
Betwixt your ſwords. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
None ſhall preſume to fly under pain, of death, with
wings of any other man's making. Addiſon's Guardian.
2. Penalty; puniſhment. -
Becauſe Euſebius hath yet ſaid nothing, we will by way
of mulét or pain, lay it upon him. Bacon.
3. Senſation of uneaſineſs. -
As the pains of the touch are greater than the offences of
the other ſenſes; ſo likewiſe are the pleaſures. Bacon.
Pain is perfect miſery, the worſt
Of evils; and exceſſive, overturns
All patience. Ikon's Par. Loft, b. vi.
He would believe, but yet is ſtill in pain,
Preſſes the pulſe, and feels the leaping vein.
4. [In the plural.] Labour; work; toil.
Many have taken the pains to go out of Europe to reſide
as friars in America. Abbot's Deſcrip. of the World.
One laboureth and taketh pains, and maketh haſte, and is
ſo much the more behind. - Ecclus xi. 11.
The pains they had taken, was very great. Clarend.
If philoſophy be uncertain, the former will conclude it
vain; and the latter may be in danger of pronouncing the
ſame on their pains, who ſeek it, if after all their labour they
Dryden.
muſt reap the wind, mere opinion and conjecture. Glanv.
She needs no weary ſteps aſcend,
All ſeems before her feet to bend ;
And here, as ſhe was born ſhe lies,
High without taking pain, to riſe. //aller.
The deaf perſon muſt be diſcreetly treated, and by plea-
fant uſage wrought upon, to take ſome pains at it, watching
your ſeaſons and taking great care, that he may not hate his
taſk, but do it chearfully. Holder.
If health be ſuch a bleſfing, it may be worth the pains to
diſcover the regions where it grows, and the ſprings that
feed it. Temple.
They called him a thouſand fools for his pains. , L’Eſtran.
Some natures the more pains a man takes to reclaim them,
the worſe they are: L’Eſtrange, Fab. 242.
Her nimble feet refuſe
Their wonted ſpeed, and ſhe took pains to loſe. Dryden.
The fame with pains we gain, but loſe with eaſe,
Sure ſome to vex, but never all to pleaſe. Pope.
A reaſonable clergyman, if he will be at the pains, can
make the moſt ignorant man comprehend what is his duty,
and convince him that he ought to perform it. Swift.
5. Labour; talk. The fingular, is, in this ſenſe, obſolete.
He ſoft arrived on the graſſy plain,
And fairly paced forth with eaſy pain. Hubberd.
Tone paine in a cottage doth take, -
When tother trim bowers do make. Tuffer's Huſø.
When of the dew, which th' eye and ear do take,
From flow’rs abroad and bring into the brain,
She doth within both wax and honey make :
This work is hers, this is her proper pain.
When a lion ſhakes his dreadful mane,
And angry grows, if he that firſt took pain
To tame his youth, approach the haughty beaſt,
He bends to him, but frights away the reſt.
6. Uneaſineſs of mind.
It bid her feel
No future pain for me; but inſtant wed
A lover more proportion'd to her bed.
7. The throws of child-birth.
She bowed herſelf and travailed; for her pains came upon
her. I Sam. iv. 19.
To PAIN. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To afflićt; to torment; to make uneaſy.
I am pained at my very heart, becauſe thou haſt heard,
O my ſoul, the ſound of the trumpet. jer. iv. 19.
She drops a doubtful word that pains his mind,
And leaves a rankling jealouſy behind.
Exceſs of cold as well as heat, pains us, becauſe it is
equally deſtructive to that temper which is neceſſary to the
preſervation of life. Locke.
Pleaſure aroſe in thoſe very parts of his leg, that juſt be-
fore had been ſo much pained by the fetter. Addiſon.
2. With the reciprocal pronoun..] To labour.
Though the lord of the liberty do pain himſelf to yield
equal juſtice unto all, yet can there not but great abuſes
lurk in ſo abſolute a privilege. Spenſer on Ireland.
. He pained himſelf to raiſe his note. Dryden,
PA'INFUL. adj. [pain and full.]
1. Full of pain; miſerable; beſet with afflićtion.
_ Is there yet no other way, beſides
Theſe painful paſſages, how we may come
To death. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. xi.
2. Giving pain; afflićtive.
Evils have been more painful to us in the proſped, than
by their actual preſſure. Addison's Speciator.
I am ſick of this bad world !
The day light and the ſun grow painful to me,
6
Davies.
JPaller.
Prior.
Addison,
Dryden. .
Long abſtinence may be painful to acid conſtitutions, by
the uneaſy ſenſation it creates in the ſtomach. Arbuthnot.
3. Difficult; requiring labour.
. . The painful ſervice, -
The extreme dangers, and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankleſs country, are requited
But with that ſurname. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
When I thought to know this, it was too É%; for me.
Pſalm Ixxiii. 16.
Surat he took, and thence preventing fame,
By quick and painful marches hither came.
&gt; Dryden.
Ev’n I, tho' ſlow to touch the painful ſtring,
Awake from ſlumber, and attempt to fing. Smith.
4. Induſtrious ; laborious. - c
To dreſs the vines new labour is requir’d,
Nor muſt the painful huſbandman be tir’d. Dryden.
Great abilities when employed as God directs, do but
make the owners of them greater and more painful ſervants
to their neighbours : however, they are real bleſfings when
in the hands of good men. Swift.
AINFU'LLY. adv. [from painful.]
1. With great pain or afflićtion.
2. Laboriouſly; diligently.
Such as fit in eaſe at home, raiſe a benefit out of their
hunger and thirſt, that ſerve their prince and country pain-
fully abroad. - - Raleigh's Eſſays.
Robin red-breaſt painfully
P Did cover them with leaves.
AINFU'LNESs. m. ſ. ſfrom painful.
I. Afflićtion; º: .# iful.]
With diamond in window-glaſs ſhe graved,
Erona die, and end this ugly ; Sidney.
No cuſtom can make the painfulneſs of a debauch eaſy,
or pleaſing to a man; ſince nothing can be pleaſant that is
unnatural. South's Sermons.
2. Induſtry; laboriouſneſs.
Painfulneſs, by feeble means ſhall be able to gain that
which in the plenty of more forcible inſtruments, is through
ſloth and negligence loſt. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
PAI'NIM. n.ſ. (payen, French.] Pagan ; infidel.
The croſs hath been a very ancient bearing, even before
the birth of our Saviour, among the Painims themſelves.
- ... Peacham on Blazoning.
Such dire atchievements ſings the bard that tells
Of palfrey'd dames, bold knights, and magic ſpells;
Where whole brigades one champion's arms o'erthrow,
Children in the Wood.
Slay Painims vile that force the fair. Tickel.
Pá1'NIM. adj. Pagan; infidel.
Champions bold, ...
Defy'd the beſt of Painim chivalry, , .
To mortal cembat, or carriere with lance. Milton.
The Solymean ſultan he o'erthrew,
His moony troops returning bravely ſmear'd
With Painim blood effus’d. Philips.
PAI'NLess. adj. [from pain..] Without pain; without trouble.
The deaths thou ſhow'ſt are forc'd ;
Is there no ſmooth deſcent no painleſs way
Of kindly mixing with our native clay Dryden:
PAINst AſkER. m. ſ. [pains and take..] Labourer; laborious
perſon. -
O Thomas, Thomas, hazard not thy life,
I'll prove a true painſtaker day and night; -
I’ll ſpin and card, and keep our children tight. Gay.
PAINst A/KING. adj. [pains and take.] Laborious; induſtrious,
To PAINT. v. a. ſpeindre, French.]
1. To repreſent by delineation and colours.
Live to be the ſhew and gaze o'th’ time,
We'll have thee as our rarer monſters are,
Painted upon a pole. Shakespeare. Mºleth.
2. To cover with colours repreſentative of ſomething.
Who fears a ſentence or an old man's ſaw,
Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.
3. To repreſent by colours, appearances, or images. -
Till we from an author's words paint his very thoughts in
our minds, we do not underſtand him. Locke,
4. To deſcribe; to repreſent.
The lady is diſloyal. —
— Diſloyal — - - • * *
— The word is too good to paint out her wickedneſs, S^3.
5. To colour; to diverſify.
| Such is his will that paints
The earth with colours freſh,
The darkeſt ſkies with ſtore
Of ſtarry lights,
6. To deck with artificial colours. . . . .
Hath not old cuſtom made this life more ſweet
Than that of painted pomp are not theſe woods
More free from peril than the court? Shakeſ?.
Jezebeel painted her face and tired her head. 2 King ix. 32.
To PAINT. v. n. To lay colours on the face.
Such a fin to paint, Pop'.
Shakespeare.
Spºnſºr.
PAINT.
*
==
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A L
P A L
PAINT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] hing:
1. Colours repreſentative of any thing.
Poets are limners
t ideas in the mind, -
word are the paint by which their thoughts are º,
And nature is their object to be drawn. - Granvi *.
The church of the annunciation looks beautiful in the in-
ſide, all but one corner of it being covered with º:
gilding, and pºint. - Addison an Italy.
Her charms in breathing paint engage,
Her modeſt cheek ſhall warm a future age. Pope.
2. Colours laid on the face. - Alic
Together lay her pray’r book and her pºint. ...
PAI'NTER. m. ſ. [peintre, Fr. from paint.] One who profeſſes
the art of repreſenting objects by colours: - did
In the placing let ſome care be taken how the painter di
ſtand in the working. Iſºttºn's Ashtº:
Beauty is only that which makes all things as they are º
their proper and perfect nature; which the beſt *}. -
ways 'chuſe by contemplating the forms of each. Dryden.
PA1'NTING. m.ſ.. [from paint. J - - -
1. The art of repreſenting objects by delineation and colours.
If painting be acknowledged for an art, it follows that no
arts are without their precepts. - - Dryden.
'Tis in life as 'tis in painting, -
Much may be right, yet much be wanting. Prizr.
2. Pićlure; the painted reſemblance. -
This is the very painting of your fear;
This is the air-drawn dagger which you ſaid,
Led you to Duncan. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Painting is welcome;
The painting is almoſt the natural man:
For ſince diſhonour trafficks with man's nature,
He is but outſide : pencil'd figures are
Ev’n ſuch as they give out. Shakespeare . Timon of Athens.
3. Colours laid on.
If any ſuch be here
That love this painting, wherein you ſee me ſmear'd,
Let him expreſs his diſpoſition, Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
PAI'NTURE. m. ſ. [peinture, French..] The art of painting.
A French word.
To the next realm ſhe ſtretch'd her ſway,
For painture near adjoining lay,
A plenteous province. Dryden.
The ſhow'ry arch
With liſted colours gay, or, azure, gules,
Delights and puzzles the beholders eye,
That views the watry brede with thouſand ſhews
Of painture vary’d. Philips.
PAIR... n.ſ. [paire, Fr. par, Latin.]
1. Two things ſuiting one another, as a pair of gloves.
2. A man and wife.
O when meet now,
Such pairs in love and mutual honour join'd? Milton.
Baucis and Philemon there
Had liv'd long marry'd and a happy pair;
Now old in love. Dryden.
3. Two of a ſort; a couple; a brace.
All his lovely looks, his pleaſing fires,
All his ſweet motions, all his taking ſmiles,
To copy ou
He does into one pair of eyes convey. Suckling.
The many pairs of nerves branching themſelves to all the
parts of the body, are wonderful to behold. Ray.
To PAIR. v. n. [from the noun.]
I. To be joined in pairs; to couple.
Our dance, I pray;
Your hand, my Perdita; ſo turtles pair. Shakeſp.
2. To ſuit; to fit as a counterpart.
Had our prince ſeen the hour, he had pair’d
Well with this lord; there was not a full month
Between their births. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
- - Ethelinda |
My heart was made to fit and pair with thine,
Simple and plain, and fraught with artleſs tenderneſs. Rowe.
To PAIR. v. a.
1. To join in couples.
Minds are ſo hardly match'd, that ev'n the firſt,
Tho' pair’d by heav'n, in Paradiſe were cursd. Dryden,
2. To inite as correſpondent or oppoſite.
Turtles and doves with diffring hues unite,
PA't gloſſy jet is pair'd with ſhining white. Pope.
E. m. ſ: [balais, Fr. palatium, Lat..] A royal houſe;
an houſe “minently ſplendid.
You f
§: ...] º ſpread, orgot,
***, the city to the palace gates.
T*::::: and º do i. Š
º, º: to their foundations. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
And .. f; †. yard is fill'd with floating tides,
F. i. bear the former to the ſides. Dryden.
* tailes, and villas riſe, Anon.
Shakeſpeare.
The ſuns bright palace on high columns rais'd,
With burning gold and flaming jewels blaz'd. Aidº.
And gardens ſmile around. Thomſºn's Summer.
The old man early roſe, walk'd forth and ſate
On poliſh'd ſtone before his palace gate. Pºpe.
PALA’cious. adj. [from palace..] Royal ; noble; magnificent.
London encreaſes daily, turning of great palacious houſes
into ſmall tenements. Graunt’s Bill; of Mºrt.
PALA(NQUIN. m. ſ. Is a kind of covered carriage uſed in the
eaſtern countries that is ſupported on the ſhoulders of ſlaves,
and wherein perſons of diſtinction are carried.
PA'LATABLE. adj. [from palate.] Guſtful ; pleaſing to the
taſte.
There is nothing ſo difficult as the art of making advice
agreeable. How many devices have been made uſe of to
render this bitter potion palatable. Addison.
They by th’ alluring odour drawn in haſte,
Fly to the dulcet cates, and crowding ſip
Their palatable bane. Philips.
PA'LATE. m. ſ. [palatum, Latin.]
1. The inſtrument of taſte.
Let their beds
Be made as ſoft as yours, and let their palates
Be ſeaſon'd with ſuch viands. Shakeſp. Merch. of J’ºn.
Theſe ivory feet were carved into the ſhape of lions;
without theſe their greateſt dainties could not reliſh to their
palates. Hakewill on Providence.
Light and colours come in only by the eyes; all kind of
founds only by the ears; the ſeveral taſtes and ſmells by the
noſe and palate. Locke.
By nerves about our palate plac'd,
She likewiſe judges of the taſte:
Elſe, diſmal thought ! our warlike men
Might drink thick port for fine champagne. Prior.
The vulgar boil, the learned roaſt an egg;
Hard taſk to hit the palate of ſuch gueſts. Pºpe.
2. Mental reliſh; intellectual taſte. -
It may be the palate of the ſoul is indiſpoſed by liſtleſſneſs
or ſorrow. Taylor.
The men of nice palates could not reliſh Ariſtotle, as dreſt
up by the ſchoolmen. Baker on Learning.
PA'LA Tick. adj. [from palate.] Belonging to the palate; a
roof of the mouth.
The three labials, P. B. M. are parallel to the three gin-
gival T. D. N. and to the three palatic K. G. L. PHºlder.
PALATINE. m. ſ. [palatin, Fr. from palatinus of palatium, Lat.]
One inveſted with regal rights and prerogatives.
Many of thoſe lords, to whom our kings had granted thoſe
petty kingdoms, did exerciſe jura regalia, inſomuch as there
were no leſs than eight counties palatines in Ireland at one
time. Davies on Ireland.
Theſe abſolute palatines made barons and knights, did ex-
erciſe high juſtice in all points within their territories. Davies.
PA'LATINE. adj. Poſſeſſing reyal privileges.
PALE. adj. [pale, Fr. pallidus, Lat.]
1. Not ruddy; not freſh of colour; wan; white of look.
Look I ſo pale, lord Dorſet, as the reſt ?
Ay, my good Lord ; and no man in the preſence;
But his red colour hath forſook his checks. Shakespeare.
Was the hope drunk
Wherein you dreſt yourſelf; hath it ſlept fince
And wakes it now to look ſo green and pale. Shaft.
Tell pale-hearted fear, it lies;
And ſleep in ſpite of thunder. Shakespeare Macbeth.
2. Not high coloured; approaching to colourleſs tranſparency-
When the urine turns pale, the patient is in danger. Arbuth.
3. Not bright; not ſhining; faint of luſtre; dim.
The night, methinks, is but the day-light ſick, -
It looks a little paler. Shaft. Mºrch ºf Pºniº.
To PAL.E. v. a. [from the adjective.] To make Pale.
The glowworm ſhews the matin to be near, -
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire. Shakeſp. Haml.t.
To teach it good and ill, diſgrace or fame, -
Pale it with rage, or redden it with ſhame. Prior.
PALE. m. ſ. ſpalus, Latin.]
1. Narrow piece of wood joined above and below to a rail,
- : grounds.
to §: . rail, I’ll peck you o'er the pales clſe. Shakespeare
As their example ſtill prevails, -
She tempts the ſtream, or leaps the pales. Priºr.
Deer creep through when a pale tumbles down. Mortimer.
2. Any incloſure. - -
A ceremony, which was then judged very convenient for
the whole church even by the whole, thoſe few excepted,
which brake out of the common pale. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 13.
Let my due feet never fail
To walk the ſtudious cloiſter's pale, -
And love the high embowed roof. Al Milton.
He hath propoſed a ſtanding revelation, ſo well confirmed
by miracles, that it ſhould be needleſs to recur to them for
the conviction of any man born within the baſe of chriſtianity.
Atterbury's Sermons.
Confine<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A L
P A L
Confine the thoughts to exerciſe the breath;
And keep them in the pale of words till death.
3. Any diſtrict or territory. - -
There is no part but the bare Engliſh pale, in which the
Iriſh have not the greateſt footing. Spenſer.
The lords juſtices put arms into the hands of divers noble-
men of that religion, within the pale. Clarendon,
The pale is the third and middle part of the ſcutcheon,
being derived from the chief to the baſe, or nether part of the
ſcutcheon, with two lines. Peacham.
To PALE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To incloſe with pales. -
The diameter of the hill of twenty foot, may be paled in
with twenty deals of a foot broad. Mart. Huſb.
2. To incloſe; to encompaſs.
Whate'er the ocean pales, or ſky inclips,
Is thine. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopat.
The Engliſh beach
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys.
Will you pale your head in Henry's glory,
And rob his temples of the diadem,
Now in his life 2 Shakeſp. Henry IV.
PA'lery Ed. adj. [pale and eye.] Having eyes dimmed.
No nightly trance, or breathed ſpell,
Inſpires the paleey'd prieſt from the prophetic cell. Milton.
Shrines, where their vigils paleey'd virgins keep,
And pitying ſaints, whoſe ſtatues learn to weep. Pope.
PALEFA'ced. adj. [pale and face..] Having the face wan.
- Why have they dar'd to march
So many miles upon her peaceful boſom,
Frighting her palefac’d villages with war.
Let palfac’d fear keep with the mean born man,
And find no harbour in a royal heart. Shakeſp.
PA'LELY. adv. [from pale.J Wanly; not freſhly ; not ruddily.
PA'LENEss. n.ſ.. [from pale.]
1. Wanneſs; want of colour; want of freſhneſs; ſickly white-
neſs of look. -
Her blood durſt not yet come to her face, to take away
the name of paleneſ from her moſt pure whiteneſs. Sidney.
The blood the virgin's cheek forſook,
A livid palentſ; ſpreads o'er all her look.
2. Want of colour; want of luſtre.
The paleneſs of this flow'r
Bewray'd the faintneſs of my maſter's heart.
PA'LENDAR. m. ſ. A kind of coaſting veſſel.
Solyman ſent over light horſemen in greatpalendars, which
running all along the ſea coaſt, carried the people and
the cattle. Knolles's Hiff. of the Turks.
PALFous. n.ſ. [palea, Latin.] Huſky; chaffy.
This attraction have we tried in ſtraws and paleous bodies.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
PA'LETte. n. ſ. [palette, French..] A light board on which
a painter holds his colours when he paints.
Let the ground of the pićture be of ſuch a mixture, as
there may be ſomething in it of every colour that compoſes
Dunciad.
4.
Shakespeare
Shakeſp.
Po. Ra. Lock.
Shakeſp.
your work, as it were the contents of your palette. Dryden.
Ere yet thy pencil tries her nicer toils,
Or on thy palette lie the blended oils,
Thy careleſs chalk has half atchiev'd thy art,
And her juſt image makes Cleora ſtart. Tickell.
When ſage Minerva roſe,
From her ſweet lips ſmooth elocution flows,
Her ſkilful hand an iv'ry pallette grac'd,
Where ſhining colours were in order plac'd. Gay.
PALFREY. m. ſ. [palfroy, French..] A ſmall horſe fit for la-
tº: it is always diſtinguiſhed in the old books from a war
orſe.
Her wanton palfrey all was overſpread
With tinſel trappings, woven like a wave. Fa. Queen.
The damſel is mounted on a white palfrey, as an emblem
of her innocence. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 99.
The ſmiths and armorers on palfreys ride, ryden.
PALFREYED. adj. [from palfrey.] Riding on a palfrey.
Such dire atchivements ſings the bard that tells,
Of palfrey'd dames, bold knights, and magick ſpells;
Where whole brigades one champion's arms o'erthrow,
And cleave a giant at a random blow. Tickell.
PALIFIcArios. m. ſ. ſpalus, Latin.] The aët or practice
of making ground firm with piles.
I have ſaid nothing of palification or piling of the ground-
Plot commanded by Vitruvius, when we build upon a moiſt
ſºil. Wotton.
PA'LINDRome. n. ſ. [Tzawºeopatz, rºw and pop, w.] A
word or ſentence which is . ſame read backward or for-
Wards; as, madam; or this ſentence, Subi dura a rudibus.
PA'LINo
D.E. -
PA'linody ; m. ſ. [72Aww32.] A recantation.
I, of thy excellence, have oft been told;
But now my raviſht eyes thy face behold:
Who therefore in this weeping palinod
Abhor myſelf, that have diſpleas'd my God,
In duſt and aſhes mourn. Sandys's Paraph. on job,
PALISADE. */ ſpaſſade, Fr. paliſad, Span. from paluſ,
PALISADO. } it'ſ É ſet §§ of intº :
The Trojans round the place a rampire caſt,
And paliſades about the trenches plac'd, Dryden.
The wood is uſeful for palliſades for fortifications, being
very hard and durable. Martimer's Huſbandry.
The city is ſurrounded with a ſtrong wall, and that wall
guarded with paliſades. Broom’s Notes on the Odyſſey.
Tº PALISA'DE. v. a. [from the noun.J. To incloſe with pá-
liſades.
PA'LISH, adj. [from pale.] Somewhat pale.
Spirit of nitre makes with copper a palſh blue; ſpirit of
urine a deep blue. Arbuthnot on Air.
PALL. n.ſ. [pallium, Latin.]
I. A cloak or mantle of ſtate.
With princely pace,
As fair Aurora in her purple pall,
Out of the Eaſt the dawning day doth call;
So forth ſhe comes.
Let gorgeous tragedy
In ſcepter'd pall come ſweeping by.
2. The mantle of an archbiſhop.
An archbiſhop ought to be conſecrated and anointed, and
Milton.
after conſecration he ſhall have the pall ſent him. Ayliffe.
3. The covering thrown over the dead. -
The right ſide of the pall old Egeus kept, -
And on the left the royal Theſeus wept. Dryden.
To PALL. v. a. [from the noun..] To cloak; to inveſt.
Come thick night
And pall thee in the dunneſt ſmoak of hell,
That my keen knife ſee not the wound it makes. Shakeſp.
To PALL. v. n. [Of this word the etymologiſts give no rea-
ſonable account: perhaps it is only a corruption of pale, and
was applied originally to colours..] To grow vapid ; to be-
come inſipid.
Empty one bottle into another ſwiftly, left the drink pall. Bac.
Beauty ſoon grows familiar to the lover,
Fades in the eye, and pall; upon the ſenſe.
To PALL. v. a.
1. To make inſipid or vapid.
Reaſon and reflection, repreſenting perpetually to the mind
the meanneſs of all ſenſual gratifications, blunt the edge of
his keeneſt deſires, and pall all his enjoyments. Atterbury.
Wit, like wine, from happier climates brought,
Daſh'd by theſe rogues, turns Engliſh common draught,
They pall Moliere's and Lopez’ ſprightly ſtrain. Swift.
2. To impair ſpritelineſs; to diſpirit.
- A miracle
Their joy with unexpected ſorrow pall'd,
Ungrateful man,
Baſe, barbarous man, the more we raiſe our love
The more we pall, and cool, and kill his ardour. Dryden.
3. To weaken; to impair. -
For this,
I'll never follow thy pall'd fortunes more.
4. To cloy. -
Palled appetite is humorous, and muſt be gratified with
ſauces rather than food. Tatler, N°. 54.
PA’llet. n.ſ. Fpaillet, in Chaucer, which was probably the
French word from paille, ſtraw, and ſecondarily, a bed.]
I. A ſmall bed; a mean bed.
Why rather, ſleep, lieſt thou in ſmoaky cribs,
Upon uneaſy pallets ſtretching thee,
And huſht with buzzing night flies to thy ſlumber;
Than in the perfum’d chambers of the great,
Under the canopies of coſtly ſtate,
And lull'd with ſounds of ſweeteſt melody ? Shakeſp.
His ſecretary was laid in a pallet near him for ventilation of
his thoughts. J7%tton's Buckingham.
If your ſtray attendance be yet lodg’d,
Or ſhroud within theſe limits, I ſhall know
Ere morrow wake, or the low-rooſted lark -
From her thatch’t pallet rouſe. Milton.
2. [palette, French..] A ſmall meaſure, formerly uſed by
chirurgeons.
A ſurgeon drew from a patient in four days, twenty-ſeven
pallets, every pallet containing three ounces. ... Hºº'.
PALLMA'Ll. n.ſ. [pila and malleus, Lat. pale maille, French]
A play in which the ball is ſtruck with a mallet through an
iron ring.
PA'lliament. n.ſ. ſpallium, Lat..] A dreſs; a robe.
The people of Rome,
Send thee by me their tribune,
This º of white and ſpotleſs hue. . . Shakeſp.
PA'LLIARDISE. m. ſ. [pailliardſº, Fr.] Fornication; whor-
ing. Obſolete.
Addiſon.
Dryden.
Shakeſp.
To FALLIATE. v. a. ſpallio, Lat. from pallium, a cloak ;
pallier, French.]
1. To cover with excuſe. - - -
They never hide or palliate their vices, but cxpoſe them
freely to view. Swift's Advan. of Religion;
19 B 2. To
Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 4.
&amp; 7"V
a<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A L
P A L
. To extenuate; to ſoften by favourable repreſentations.
2 Tº: . is to ... palliate, and indulge. Dryden.
3. To cure imperfectly or temporarily, not radically ; to eaſe,
u re.
Pºios. m. / [palliation, Fr. from palliate.].
1. Extonnation; alleviation ; favourable repreſentation. .
I ſaw clearly through all the pious diſguiſes and ſoft pallia-
tions of ſome men. King Charles.
Such bitter invečtives againſt other mens faults, and indul-
gence or palliation of their own, ſº their tº: }. their
fileen. 'overnment of the Tongue.
2. lºa or temporary, not radical cure; mitigation, not
Cure.
If the juſt cure of a diſeaſe be full of peril, let the phy-
fician reſort to palliation. Bacon's Nat. Hy!.
PA LLIATIVE. adj. ſpalliatiſ, Fr. from palliate.]
1. Extenuating; favourably repreſentative. -
2. Mitigating, not removing; temporarily or partially, not ra-
dically curative.
Conſumption pulmonary º º º tº than
a falliative cure, and is generally incurable when here tary.
- Aráuthnot on 12ict.
PA'LLIATIVE. m. ſ. [from palliate.] Something mitigating ;
ſomething alleviating.
It were more ſafe to truſt to the general averſion of our
people againſt this coin, than apply thoſe palliatives which
weak, perfidious, or abject politicians adminiſter. Swift.
PA'llid. adj. ſpallidus, Latin.j Pale; not high-coloured ;
not bright: pallid is ſeldom uſed of the face.
Of every ſort, which in that meadow grew,
They gather'd ſome ; the violet pallid blue. Spenſºr.
When from the pallid ſky the ſun deſcends. Thomſon.
PALM. m. ſ. [palma, Latin; palmier, Fr.]
1. A tree of great variety of ſpecies; of which the branches
were worn in token of vićtory.
The Pºtree hath a ſingle imbranched ſtalk; the leaves
are diſpoſed in a circular form on the top, which, when they
withºr or fall off, are ſucceeded by new ones out of the
middle of thoſe which remain ; among which ſheaths or
plain twigs break forth, opening from the bottom to the top,
very full of flowers and cluſters of embryos. There are
twenty-one ſpecies of this tree, of which the moſt remark-
able are, the greater palm or date-tree. The dwarf palm
grows in Spain, Portugal, and Italy, from whence the
leaves are ſent hither and made into flag-brooms. The oil
palm is a native of Guinea and Cape Verd iſland, but has
been tranſplanted to Jamaica and Barbadoes, it grows as
high as the main maſt of a ſhip. Miller.
Get the ſtart of the majeſtick world,
And bear the palm alone. Shakespeare. jul. Caſar.
Go forth into the mount and fetch palm-branches.
Neh. viii. 15.
Nothing better proveth the excellency of this ſoil, than
the abundant growing of the palm-trees without labour of
man: , This tree alone giveth into man whatſoever hi. life
beggeth at nature's hand. Raleigh.
Above others who carry away the palm for excellence, is
Maurice Landgrave of Heſs. Peacham of Muſik.
Fruits of palm-tree, pleaſanteſt to thirſt
And hunger both. Milton's Par. I ºft.
Thou youngeſt virgin, daughter of the ſkies,
Whoſe palms new pluck'd from Paradiſe,
With ſpreading branches more ſublimely riſe. Dryden.
2. Victory; triumph. [palme, Fr.]
Namur ſubdu'd is England's palm alone;
...The reſt beſieg'd ; but we conſtrain'd the town. Dryden.
3. The hand ſpread out; the inner part of the hand. [palma, Lat.]
By this virgin palm now kiſſing thine,
I will be thine. - - Shakeſpeare.
Drinks of extreme thin parts fretting, put upon the back
of your hand, will, with a little ſtay, paſs through to the
Pºlº, and yet taſte mild to the mouth. Bacon.
Seeking my ſucceſs in love to know,
I try’d th’ infallible prophetick way,
^ºpy-leaf upon my palm toia. Dryden.
4. A hand, or meaſure Öf length, compriſing three inches,
[palme, Fr.]
The length of a foot is a ſixth part of the ſtature; a ſpan
* eighth of it; a palm or hand's breadth one twenty-fourth;
* thumb's breadth or inch one ſeventy-ſecond; a fºrefinger.
bºth one ninety-fixth. filler on fin.
Henry VIII. of England, Francis I. of France, and Charles
2- º, were ſo Provident, as ſcarce a palm of ground
. ** gotten by ºther, but that the other two would ſet
the balance of Europe upright again. Bacon.
... ºd intº iſºloſ,
ich inſtantly a Palm expanded ſhows. Denham.
[from the noun.
he palm of the hand, as jugglers.
! play amongſt gameſters. Dryden.
rick that loſt the game. Prior.
2. To impoſe by fraud.
If not by ſcriptures, how can we be ſure,
Reply'd the panther, what traditions pure ? -
For you may palm upon us new for old. Dryden.
Miſſ White has made the country ring with ſeveral ima-
ginary exploits palmed upon her. Addison's Speciator.
3. To handle. - -
Frank carves very ill, yet will palm all the meat. Prior.
4. To ſtroak with the hand. - Ainſworth.
PALMER. n.ſ.. [from palm..] A pilgrim : they who returned
from the holy land carried branches of palm.
My ſceptre, for a palmer's walking ſtaff. Shakespeare
Behold yon iſle, by palmers, pilgrims trod,
Men bearded, bald, cowl'd, uncowl'd, ſhod, unſhod. Pºpe.
PA'I, MFR. n.ſ. A crown encircling a deer's head.
PA'LMER worm. n.ſ. [palmer and *..] A worm covered
with hair, ſuppoſed to be ſo called becauſe he wandels OVer
all plants.
A fleſh fly, and one of thoſe hairy worms that reſemble
caterpillars and are called palmerwººs, being conveyed into
one of our ſmall receiver, the bee and the fly ſay with
their bellies upward, and the worm ſeemed ſuddenly ſtruck
dead. Bºyle.
PALM E/Tro. n.ſ. A ſpecies of the palm-tree: It grows
in the Weſt-Indies to be a very large tree; with the leaves
the inhabitants thatch their houſ. Theſe leaves, b--
fore they are expanded, are cut and brought into England to
make womens plaited hats; and the bºries of this trces
were formerly much uſed for buttons.
Broad o'er my head the verdant cedars Wavc,
And high palmettos lift their graceful ſhade. Thomſºn.
PALM1'FERöus. adj. [palma and/ºr”. Lat J Bearing.jºs. 15.
PALMIPEDE. adj. [palma and .., Lat...] Webfooted; having
the toes joined by a membrane.
It is deſcribed like fiſſipedes, whereas it is a fahmipede or
fin-footed like ſwans. Brown's ſºlºr Err. h. v.
Water-fowl which are palmipede, are whole footed, have
very long necks, and yet but ſhort legs, as ſwans. Rºy.
PALM1st ER. n. J. [from Paºla.J One who deals in pil-
miſtry. Dicf.
PA'ſ Mistry. n.ſ. ſpalºa, Latin.] -
1. The cheat of foretelling fortune by the lines of the palm.
We ſhall not query what truth there is in palmiſtry, or divi-
nation, from thoſe lines of our hands of high denomination.
Brºwn's /ugar Errours, b. v.
Here while his canting drone-pipe ſcand,
The myſtick figures of her hand,
He tipples paniſłry, and dines
On all her fortune-telling lines. Cleaveland.
With the fond maids in palmi/?ry he deals;
They tell the ſecret firſt which he reveals. Prior.
2. 4d/ºr uſes it for the action of the hand.
Going to relieve a common beggar, he found his pocket
was Picked; that being a kind of palmiſtry at which this ver-
min are very dextrous. Addison's Speciator.
PALMY. adj. [from palm.] Bearing palms.
In the moſt high and famy ſtate of Rome,
A little cre the mightieſ: Julius fell,
The graves flood tenantlöß. Shaft. Hamlet.
She paſs'd the region which Panchea join'd,
And flying, left the palmy plains behind. Dryden.
PALPABI'lity. n.ſ.. [from papable.] Quality of being per-
ceivable to the touch.
He firſt found out palpability of colours; and by the de-
licacy of his touch, could diſlinguiſh the different vibrations
of the heterogeneous rays of light. Aſart. Scriberius.
PALPABLE. m. ſ. [palpable, Fr. paper, Latin.]
I. Perceptible by the touch. -
Art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a º *
I ſee thee yet in form as palpable,
As this which now I º: p Shakespeare . Macbeth.
Darkneſs muſt overſhadow all his bounds,
Palpable darkneſs and blot out three days. Milton.
2. Groſs; coarſe; eaſily detected. -
That groſſer kind of heatheniſh idolatry, whereby they
worſhipped the very works of their own hands, was an ab-
ſurdity to reaſon ſo palpable, that the prophet David, com-
paring idols and idolaters together, maketh almoſt no odds
between them. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 8.
They grant we err not in palpable manner, we are not
openly and notoriouſly impious. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 27.
He muſt not think to ſhelter himſelf from ſo palpºle in
abſurdity, by this impertinent diſtinétion. Tillotſºn.
Having no ſurer guide, it was no wonder that they fell into
groſs and palpable miſtakes.
3. Plain ; eaſily perceptible.
That they all have ſo teſtified, I ſee not how we ſhould
Poſſibly wiſh a proof more palpable, than this manifeſtly re-
ceived and every where continued cuſtom of reading them
publickly. Hooker, b. v. /.22.
//oodward's Nai. H/ory. .<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
Since
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A N
-
Since there is ſo much diffimilitude between cauſe and
effect in the more palpable phaenomena, we can expect no leſs
between them and their inviſible efficients. Glanville.
Palpa’b, E Ness. m. ſ. [from palpable.] Quality of being pal- .
pable ; plainneſs; groſſneſs.
PA 1 PAbiy, adv. [from palpable.]
1. In ſuch a manner as to be perceived by the touch.
2. Groſsly ; plainly.
Clodius was acquitted by a corrupt jury, that had palpably
taken ſhares of money, before they gave up their verdict,
they prayed of the ſenate a guard, that they might do their
conſciences juſtice. - Bacon.
PALFA’rios. m. ſ. [palpatio, palpor, Lat..] The aët of feeling.
To PALPITATE. v. a. ſpalpito, Latin; palpiter, Fr.] To
beat as the heart; to flutter; to go pit a pat.
Palpit Arion. m. ſ. [fa'pitation, Fr. from palpitate.] Beating
or panting; that alteration in the pulſe of the heart, upon frights
or any other cauſes, which makes it felt : for a natural
uniform pulſe goes on without diſtinction.
The heart ſtrikes five hundred ſort of pulſes in an hour;
and hunted into ſuch continual palpitations, through anxiety
and diſtraction, that fain would it break. Harvey.
I knew the good company too well to feel any palpitations
at their approach. Tatler, Nº. 86.
Anxiety and palpitations of the heart, are a ſign of weak
fibres. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Her boſom heaves
with palpitations wild. Thomſºn's Spring.
PA'iscº A&amp;E, n. ſ. [pal/graff, German.] A count or earl
who has the overſeeing of a prince's palace. Dić?.
PA'isical. adj. [from palſy..] Afflicted with the palſy ; para-
lytick.
Pºp. adj. [from palſ,..] Diſeaſed with a palſy.
- Pall'd, thy blazed youth
Becomes aſſuaged, and doth beg the alms
Of paſſed eld. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Though ſhe breaths in a few pious peaceful ſouls, like a
paſſed perſon, ſhe ſcarce moves a limb. Decay of Piety.
Let not old age long ſtretch his paſſy'd hand,
Thoſe who give late are importun'd each day. Gay.
PALSY. m. ſ. ſparalyſis, Lat. thence paralyſy, paraſy, palaſy,
paff.] A privation of motion, or ſenſe of feeling, or both;
proceeding from ſome cauſe below the cerebellum, joined
with a coldneſs, ſoftneſs, flaccidity, and at laſt waſting of
the parts. If this privation be in all the parts below the
head, except the thorax and heart, it is called a paraplegia;
if in one ſide only, a hemiplegia; if in ſome parts only of
one ſide, a paralyſis. There is a three fold diviſion of a
paſſy; the firſt is a privation of motion, ſenſation remaining:
Secondly, a privation of ſenſation, motion remaining. And
laſtly, a privation of both together. &amp;uincy.
The palſy, and not fear, provokes me. Shakeſp.
A paſſy may as well ſhake an oak, as ſhake the delight of
conſcience. º South's Sermons.
To PALTER. v. n. [from paltron, Skinner.] To ſhift; to
dodge; to play tricks. -
---&gt; play I muſt
To the young man ſend humble treaties,
And palter in the ſhift of lowneſs.
Be theſe juggling fiends no more believ'd,
That palter with us in a double ſenſe;
That keep the word of promiſe to our ear,
And break it to our hope. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Romans, that have ſpoke the word,
Shakespeare. jul. Caſar.
Shakeſpeare.
And will not palter 8
To PALTER. v. a. To ſquander: as, he palters his fortune.
Ainſworth.
PALTERER. m. ſ. [from palter.] An unſincere dealer; a ſhifter.
PA'LTRINEss. m. ſ. [from paltry.] The ſtate of being paltry.
PA'LTRY. adj. [poltron, French; a ſcoundrel; paltrocca, a low
whore, Italian.] Sorry ; worthleſs ; deſpicable ; contemp-
tible ; mean.
Then turn your forces from this paltry ſiege,
And ſtir them up againſt a mightier taſk. Shakeſp.
A very diſhoneſt paltry boy, as appears in leaving his
friend here in neceſſity, and denying him. Shakeſp.
Whoſe compoſt is paltry and carried too late,
Such huſbandry uſeth that many do hate. Tºſſ. Huſø.
For knights are bound to feel no blows,
From paltry and unequal foes. Hudibras. p. iii.
It is an ill habit to ſquander away our wiſhes upon paltry
fooleries. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 140.
When ſuch paltry ſlaves preſume
To mix in treaſon, if the plot ſucceeds,
They're thrown neglected by ; but if it fails, -
They're ſure to die like dogs. Addison's Cato.
PA'ly, adj. [from pale.] Pale. Uſed only in poetry.
. ...Fain would I go to chaſe his paly lips,
With twenty thouſand kiſſes.
From camp to camp,
Fire anſwers fire, and through their pay flames
Each battle ſees the others umber'd face.
Shakeſp.
PAM. n. / [probably from palm,
To PA(MPER. v. a. ſpambera, e, Italian.] To
Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
The roſes in thy lips and cheeks ſhall fäde
To pay aſhes. Shakespeare Romeo and juiet.
A dim gleam the pay lanthorn throws -
O'er the mid pavement. Gay.
- vićtory ; as trump from
triumph.] The knave of clubs. ry ; p
Ev’n mighty Pºm that kings and queens o'erthrew,
And mow’d down armies in the fights of lu. Pope.
lut; to fill
with food ; to ſaginate ; to feed luxuriouſly. glut ; *
It was even as two phyſicians ſhould take one ſick body in
hand, of which the former would miniſter all things meet to
purge and keep under the body, the other to pamper and
ſtrengthen it ſuddenly again ; whereof what is tº be looked
for but a moſt dangerous relapſe
- wº - Spenſer.
You are more intemperate in your blood
Than Venus, or thoſe pampered animals -
That rage in ſavage ſenſuality. Sha'eſp.
They are contented as well with mean food, as thoſe that
with the rarities of the earth do pamper their voracities. Sandys.
Praiſe ſwelled thee to a proportion ready to burſt, it
brought thee to feed upon the air, and to ſtarve thy ſoul,
only to pamper thy imagination. South's Sermons.
With food
Diſtend his chine and pamper him for ſport. Dryden.
His lordſhip lolls within at eaſe,
Pamp'ring his paunch with foreign rarities. Dryden.
To pamper'd inſolence devoted fall,
Prime of the flock and choiceſt of the ſtall. Pºpe.
PA'MPHLET. m. ſ. ſpar un fict, Fr. Whence this word is
written anciently, and by Caxton paunſet.] A ſmall book,
properly a book ſold unbound, and only ſtitched. -
Com'ſt thou with deep premeditated lines,
With written pamphlets ſtudiouſly deviš'd : Shakeſp.
I put forth a ſlight pamphlet about the elements of architec-
ture. //otton.
He could not, without ſome tax upon himſelf and his
miniſters for the not executing the laws, look upon the bold
licence of ſome in printing pamphlets. Clarendon.
As when ſome writer in a publick cauſe,
His pen, to ſave a ſinking nation draws,
While all is calm, his arguments prevail,
*Till pow'r diſcharging all her ſtormy bags,
Flutters the feeble pamphlet into rags. Swift.
To PA'MPHLET. v. n. [from the noun..] To write ſmall books.
I put pen to paper, and ſomething I have done, though in
a poor pamphleting way. Howe's Pre-eminence of Parliament.
PAMPHLETEE/R. m. ſ. [from pamphlet.] A ſcribbler of ſmall
books. -
The ſquibs are thoſe who in the common phraſe are called
libellers, lampooners, and pamphleteers. Tatler.
With great injuſtice I have been pelted by pamphleteers. Swift.
To PAN. v. a. An old word denoting to cloſe or join together.
Ainſworth.
PAN. m. ſ. ſponne, Saxon.] - - -
1. A veſſel broad and ſhallow, in which proviſions are dreſſed
or kept. -
This were but to leap out of the pan into the fire. Spenſer.
The pliant braſs is laid -
On anvils, and of heads and limbs are made,
Pans, cans.
Dryden.
2. The part of the lock of the gun that holds the powder.
Our attempts to fire the gun-powder in the pan of the piſtol,
ſucceeded not. Boyle.
3. Anything hollow ; as, the brain pan.
PANAce’A. m. ſ. ſpanacée, Fr. Tzvºzsiz, from 72, &amp;zo;..] An
univerſal medicine.
PANAce’A. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
PANCAKE. m. ſ. ſpan and cake.] Thin pudding baked in the
frying-pan. -
A certain knight ſwore by his honour they were good?"-
cakes, and ſwore by his honour the muſtard was naught. Shaº.
The flour makes a very good pancake, mixed with a ſittle
wheat flour. Mºrtimer's Huſandry.
PANA'Do. n.ſ. [from panis, thread..] Food made by boiling
bread in water.
Their diet ought to be very ſparing; gruels, panadºs, and
chicken broth. //iſeman's Surgery.
PAN cRA'tical. adj. [rz, and xp:13;..] Excelling in all the
gymnaſtick exerciſes.
He was the moſt pancratical man of Greece, and, as Galen
reporteth, able to perfiſt erect upon an oily plank, and not
to be removed by the force of three mº: Brºwn.
PAN cREAs. n. ſ." [+3, and zpix.] The pancrºar or ſweet
bread, is a gland of the conglomerate ſort, ſituated be-
tween the bottom of the ſtomach and the vertebrae of the
loins: it lies acroſs the abdomen, reaching from the liver to
the ſpleen, and is ſtrongly tied to the peritonaeum, from
which it receives its common membranes. It weighs com-
monly four or five ounces. It is about ſix fingers breadth
long, two broad, and one thick. Its ſubſtance is a little
ſoft and ſupple. - *::::<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A N
P A N
* 'rick.aff. [from pancreas.] Contained in the pancreas.
º .. º ãº, the food moiſtened with
the ſaliva is firſt chewed, then ſwallowed into the ſtomach,
and ſo evacuated into the inteſtines, where being mixed with
the choſer and pancreatick juice, it is further ſubtilized, and
eaſily finds its way in at the ſtreight orifices of the lacteous
veins. Ray on the Creation.
The bile is ſo acrid, that nature has furniſhed the pancrea-
tie jutce to temper its bitterneſs. Arbuthnot.
PA's cy. Un, ſ. [corrupted, I ſuppoſe, from panacy, panacea.]
PA'ssy. ; A flower: a kind of violet.
The daughters of the flood have ſearch'd the mead
For violets pale, and cropp'd the poppy's head :
Pancies to pleaſe the fight, and caſia ſweet to ſmell. Dryd.
The real effence of gold is as impoſſible for us to know,
as for a blind man to tell in what flower the colour of a
paſſy is, or is not to be found, whilſt he has no idea of the
Locke.
colour of a parſy.
PANDEct. n.ſ. ſtandºa, Latin.] -
1. A treatiſe that comprehends the whole of any ſcience.
It were to be wiſhed, that the commons would form a
panded of their power and privileges, to be confirmed by the
entire legiſlative sº Swift.
2. The digeſt of the civil law. - -
PAN de'Mick, adj. [rz, and 37.2:..] Incident to a whole
people. - -
Thoſe inſtances bring a conſumption, under the notion of
a pandemick or endemick, or rather º "... Eng-
land. arvey on Conſumptiºns.
PANDER. m. ſ. [This word is derived from Pandarus, the pimp
in the ſtory of Troilus and Crºſſida; it was therefore originally
written pandar, till its etymology was forgotten..] A pimp. ;
a male bawd; a procurer.
Let him with his cap in hand,
Like a baſe pander, hold the chamber door
Whilſt by a ſlave
His faireſt daughter is contaminated. Shakespeare Hon. V.
If thou fear to ſtrike, and to make me certain it is done,
thou art the pander to her diſhonour, and º to me diſ-
loyal. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
'i. ever you prove falſe to one another, ſince f have taken
ſuch pains to bring you together, let all pitiful goers-between
be call'd panders after my name. Shalºp. Trail and Crºft da.
Camillo was his help in this, his pander,
There is a plot againſt my life. Shakeſp. //int. Tale.
The ſons of happy Punks, the pander's hºir,
Are privileged
To clap the firſt, and rule the theatre.
Thou hak confeſs'd thyſelf the conſcious pandar
Of that pretended paſſion;
A ſingle witneſs infamouſly known,
^º two perſons of unqueſtion'd ſame:
y obedient honeſty was made
The pander to thy luſt and black ambition. Rowe.
To PANDER. v. a. [from the noun..] To pimp 5 to be ſub-
ſervient to luſt or paſſion.
Proclaim no ſhame,
When the compulſive ardour gives the charge,
Since firſt itſelf as actively doth burn,
/ And reaſon panders will. - - Shakespeare . Hamlet.
PANDERLY. adj. [from pander.] Pimping; pimplike.
Oh you panderly raſcals there's a conſpiracy againſt me:
Shakeſp. Merry Iłże, of 1/indſºr.
PANdiculation. n. ſ. ſtandiculans, Lat...] The reſtleſsneſs,
ſtretching, and uncafineſs that uſually accompany the cold
fits of an intermitting fever.
Windy ſpirits, for want of a due volatilization, produce
in the nerves a pandiculation, or oſcitation, or ſtupor, or
cramp in the muſcles. Floyer on the Hºmº,
PANE. m. ſ. ſpaneau, French.] e
I. A ſquare of glaſs. -
The letters appear'd reverſe thro' the pane,
But in Stella's bright eyes they were plac'd right again. Sw.
The face of Eleanor owes more tº that fingle pane than
to all the glaſſes ſhe ever conſulted. Pºpº Letters.
2. A piece mixed in Variegated works with other pieces.
Him all repute
For his device in handſoming a ſuit,
. judge of lace, pink, panºs, print, and plait,
PANº. *º to}* the beſt conceit. Donne.
• 77. /. anegyri. wº -
*Y; an encomiaſtick ſº que, Fr. way"Yvéſ;..] An
ain º §ºn. met at the ſepulchres of thoſe who were
**rathon, and there made panegyricks upon them.
Dryden.
Dryden.
That which i Stillingfleet.
to your lºſſ. a ſatyr to other men muſt be a *;
she conti - - -
may be ..". the exerciſes of theſe eminent virtues, he
.**it men that our age has bred; and
leave materials f -
ſome future É." * Panegyrick, not unworthy the º:
7°107".
PANEgy/R1st. n.ſ. [from panegyrick panºgyrºe, Fr.] One
that writes praiſe; encomiaft. -
Add theſe few lines out of a far more ancient panegyriſt in
the time of Conſtantine the great. Camden.
PA'NEL. m. ſ. [ panellum, law Latin ; pancau, French. J
1. A ſquare, or piece of any matter inſerted between other
bodies. -
The chariot was all of cedar, ſave that the fore end had
panels of ſapphires, ſet in borders of gold. Bacon.
Maximilian, his whole hiſtory is digeſted into twenty-four
ſquare panels of ſculpture in bas relief. Addison's Italy.
This fellow will join you together as they join wainſcot;
then one of you will prove a ſhrunk panel, and, like green
timber, warp. Shakespeare's 4 you lize it.
A bungler thus, who ſcarce the naiſ can hit,
With driving wrong will make the panel ſplit. Swift.
He gave the panel to the maid. . Prior.
2. [Panel, panellum, Lat. of the French, panne, id eſt, pelli; or
panean, a piece or pane in Engliſh..] A ſchedule or roll,
containing the names of ſuch jurors, as the ſheriff provides
to paſs upon a trial. And empannelling a jury, is nothing
but the entering them into the ſheriff's roll of bºok. Cowel.
Then twelve of ſuch as are indifferent, and are returned
upon the principal panel, or the tales, are ſworn to try the
ſame, according to evidence. Iille's Hi/i. ºf England.
PANG. m. ſ. [cither from pain, or bang, Dutch, uneaſy.]
Extreme pain; ſudden paroxiſm of torment.
Say, that ſome lady
Hath for your love as great a panº of heart,
As you have for Olivia. Shakespeare's ſwº'ºh Night.
See how the pangs of death do inake him grin S.K.
- Suff’rance made
Almoſt each pang a death. Shºp. H. n. VIII.
Earth trembl’d from her entrails, as again
In pang; ; and nature gave a ſecond groan. ..] liſt. Par. Lºft.
Juno pitying her diſaſtrous fate,
Seuds Iris down, her pangs to initigate.
My ſon advance
Still in new impudence, new ignorance.
Succeſs let others teach, learn thou from me
Pangs without birth, and fruitleſs induſtry.
I will give way
To all the pang; and fury of deſpair.
I ſaw the hoary traitor
Grin in the pang of death, aſid bite the ground. Addison.
Ah! come not, write not, think not once of me,
Nor ſhare one pang of all I felt for thee. Pope.
To PANG. v. a. [from the noun..] To torment cruelly.
If fortune divorce
It from the bearer; 'tis a ſuffrance panging,
Denham.
Drydºn.
Alºn.
As ſoul and bodies parting. Shakeſp.
I grieve myſelf
To think, when thou ſhalt be diſedg’d by her,
Whom now thou tirºſt on, how thy memory -
Will then be pang'd by me. Shakeſpeare.
PA'Nick. adj. [from pan, groundleſs fears being ſuppoſed to be
ſent by Pan.] Violent without cauſe.
The ſudden ſtir and panical fear, when chantecleer was
carried away by reynard. Camden’s Remains.
Which many reſpect to be but a panick terror, and men
do fear, they juſtly know not what. Brown's Pulgar Errors.
I left the city in a panic fright;
Lions they are in council, lambs in fight. Dryden.
PANNADE. m. ſ. The curvet of a horſe. Ainſwoºth.
PANNEL. m. ſ. ſpanneel, Dutch; paneau, French.] A kind of
ruſtick ſaddle.
A pannel and wanty, pack-ſaddle and ped,
With line to fetch litter, and halters for hed. Tiſſºr.
His ſtrutting ribs on both ſides ſhow'd,
Like furrows he himſelf had plow'd ;
For underneath the ſkirt of pannel,
*Twixt every two there was a channel.
PA'NNEL. n.ſ. The ſtomach of a hawk.
PA'NN1cLE.
PA'NN1ck. } n, ſ. A plant. - - - A- -
The pannicle is a plant of the millet kind, differing from
that, by the diſpoſition of the flowers and ſeeds, which, of
this, grow in a cloſe thick ſpike : It is ſowed in ſeveral parts
of Europe, in the fields, as corn for the ſuſtenance of the in-
habitants; it is frequently uſed in particular places of Ger-
many to make bread. Miller.
September is drawn with a chearful countenance; in his
left hand a handful of millet, oats, and pannicle. Peacham.
Panick affords a ſoft demulent nouriſhment. Arbuth.
PANNI'ER. m. ſ. ſpanier, French..] A baſket; a wicker veſicl,
in which fruit, or other things, are carried on a horſe.
The worthleſs brute
Turns a mill, or drags a loaded life,
Beneath two panniers, and a baker's wife. Dryden.
We have reſolved to take away their whole club in a pair
of panniers, and impriſon them in a cupboard. *;
Hudibras.
Ainſworth.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A P
P A P
bread well.
PANo'PI.Y. m. ſ. [Tºyor’ſz.] Complete armour.
In arms they ſtood -
Of golden tanopy, refulgent hoſt
Soon banded. Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft.
We had need to take the chriſtian panoply, to put on the
whole armour of God. Ray on the Creation.
To PANT. v. n. [panteler, old French.]
1. To palpitate; to beat as the heart in ſudden terror, or after
hard labour. - -
Yet might her piteous heart be ſeen to pant and quake.
Fairy Queen.
Below the bottom of the great abyſs,
There where one centre reconciles all things,
The world's profound heart pants. Craſhaw.
If I am to loſe by fight the ſoft pantings, which I have al-
ways felt, when I heard your voice, pull out theſe eyes before
they lead me to be ungrateful. Tatler.
2. To have the breaſt heaving, as for want of breath.
Pluto pants for breath from out his cell,
And opens wide the grinning jaws of hell. Dryden.
3. To play with intermiſſion.
The whiſp'ring breeze
Pants on the leaves, and dies upon the trees. Pope.
4. To long; to wiſh ſº -
They pant after the duſt of the earth, on the head of the
poor. - - - Amos i. 7.
Who pants for glory, finds but ſhort repoſe,
A breath revives him, and a breath o'erthrows. Pope.
PANT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Palpitation; motion of the heart.
º: attire and all,
Through proof of harneſs, to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing. Shakespeare.
PA'Nºt Aloon. n.ſ. [pantalon, French.] A man's garment
anciently worn, in which the breeches and ſtockings were
all of a piece. Hanmer.
The fixth age ſhifts
Into the lean and ſlipper'd pantaloon,
With ſpectacles on noſe, and pouch on ſide. Shakespeare
The French we conquer'd once,
Now give us laws for pantaloons, - -
The length of breeches and the gathers. Hudºras.
PANTEss. n.ſ. The difficulty of breathing in a hawk. Ainſ.
PANTHE'on. n.ſ. [rzyTS slow.] A temple of all the gods.
PANTHER. m. ſ. [72.3%, panthera, Lat. panthere, Fr.] A
ſpotted wild beaſt; a lynx; a pard.
An it leaſe your majeſty,
To hunt the panther and the hart with me,
With horn and hound. Shakeſpeare.
Pan, or the univerſal, is painted with a goat's face, about
his ſhoulders a panther's ſkin. Peacham.
The panther's ſpeckled hide,
Flow'd o'er his armour with an eaſy pride. Pope.
PANTILE. m. ſ. A gutter tile.
PANTINGLY. adv. [from panting.] With palpitation.
She heav'd the name of father
Pantingly forth, as if it preſt her heart. Shakeſpeare.
PANTHER. m. ſ. ſpanetier, French.] The officer in a great
family, who keeps the bread. Hanmer.
When my old wife liv'd,
She was both pantler, butler, cook. Shakeſpeare.
He would have made a good pantler, he would have chipped
Shakeſpear's Henry IV.
º ºn. ſ. [pantoiſe, French; pantoſula, Italian.j A
Ipper.
Melpomene has on her feet, her high cothurn or tragick
fantaſies of red velvet and gold, beſet with pearls. Peacham.
PANTOMIMF. n.ſ. [rz; and tºo; ; pantºnine, Fr.]
1. One who has the power of univerſal minickry; one who
expreſſes his meaning by mute ačtion; a buffoon.
Not that I think thoſe pantomimes,
Who vary action with the times,
Are leſs ingenious in their art,
Than thoſe who duly act one part. Hudibras.
2. A ſcene; a tale exhibited only in geſture and dumb-ſhew.
He put off the repreſentation of pantomimes till late hours,
on market-days. Arbuthnot.
Exulting folly hail'd the joyful day,
And pantomime and ſong confirm'd her ſway. Anon.
PANToN. n.ſ. A ſhoe contrived to recover a narrow and
hoof-bound heel. Farrier’s Dié.
ANTRY. m. ſ. ſpan terie, Fr. panarimm, Lat.] The room in
which proviſions are repoſited.
The Italian artizans diſtribute the kitchin, pantry, bake-
houſe under ground. Iſºtton's Żºliº.
What work would they make in the fantry and the larder.
L’Eſtrage.
. He ſhuts himſelf up in the pantry with an old gipſy, once
P In a º Addison's Speci.
^*...”. J. [Papa, Italian; pºpe, Dutch; papilla, Latin.
1. The ſº the dug ...tº » papilla’, J
Some were ſo from their ſource endu'd,
By great dame nature, from whoſe fruitful pap,
Their well-heads ſpring. Fairy Q'een.
Out ſword, and wound
The pop of Pyramus.
Ay, that left pap, where heart doth hop; -
Thus die I. Shakeſpear's Midſummer Night's Dream.
An infant making to the paps would preſs, -
And meets inſtead of milk, a falling tear. Dryden.
In weaning young creatures, the beſt way is never to let
them ſuck the pºps. - Ray on the Creation.
That Timothy Trim, and Jack were the ſame perſon,
was proved particularly by a mole under the left pop. Arbuth.
2. Food made for infants, with bread boiled in water.
Sleep then a little, pop content is making. Sidney.
The noble foul by age grows luſtier;
We muſt not ſtarve, nor hope to pamper her
With woman's milk and pap unto the end. Donne.
Let the powder, after it has done boiling, be well beaten up
with fair water to the conſiſtence of thin pap. Boyle.
3. The pulp of fruit. - Ainſ.
PA/PA. m. ſ. [Tz772; ; papa, Lat.] A fond name for father,
uſed in many languages.
Where there are little maſters and miſſes in a houſe, bribe
them, that they may not tell tales to papa and mamma. Swift.
PAPA’cy. m. ſ. [pdfat, papauté, Fr. from papa, the pope.]
popedom; office and dignity of biſhops of Rome.
Now there is aſcended to the papacy a perſonage, that though
he loves the chair of the papay well, yet he loveth the car-
pet above the chair. Bacon.
PA(PAL: adj. [papal, French.] Popiſh ; belonging to the pope;
annexed to the biſhoprick of Rome.
The pope releaſed Philip from the oath, by which he
was bound to maintain the privileges of the Netherlands; this
papal indulgence hath been the cauſe of ſo many hundred
thouſands ſlain. Raleigh.
PA'PAw, n. ſ. ſpapaya, low Lat. papaya, papayer, Fr.]
The papaw hath a ſimple ſtalk; the flowers are male and
female in different plants: the male flowers, which are bar-
ren, are tubulous, conſiſting of one leaf, and expand in form
of a ſtar : the female flowers conſiſt of ſeveral leaves, which
expand in form of a roſe, out of whoſe flower-cup riſes the
pointal, which afterwards becomes fleſhy fruit, ſhaped like a
cucumber or melon. Miller.
The fair papaw,
Now but a ſeed, preventing nature's law,
In half the circle of the hafty year,
Projects a ſhade, and lovely fruits does wear. JWaller.
PAPA viºus. adi, [papavereus, from papaver, Lat. a poppy.]
Reſembling poppies.
Mandrakes afford a papaverous and unpleaſant odour, whe-
ther in the leaf or apple. Brown's Vulgar Errors.
PA'PER. n.ſ. ſpapier, French; papyrus, Latin.]
1. Subſtance on which men write and print; made by macerating
linen rags in water, and then ſpreading them in thin ſheets.
I have ſeen her unlock her cloſet, take forth paper. Shakespeare.
2. Piece of paper.
'Tis as impoſſible to draw regular chara&amp;ters on a trembling
mind, as on a ſhaking paper. Locke on Education.
3. Single ſheet printed, or written. It is uſed particularly of eſſays
or journals, or any thing printed on a ſheet. [Feuille volante.]
What ſee you in thoſe papers, that you loſe
So much complexion ? look ye how they change |
Their checks are paper. Shakespeare  ear’s Hon. V.
Nothing is of more credit or requeſt, than a petulant paper,
or ſcoffing verſes. Ben Johnſon.
They brought a paper to me to be ſign'd. Dryden.
Do the prints and papers lie Swift.
PA'PER. adj. Any thing ſlight or thin.
There is but a thin paper wall between great diſcoveries
and a perfect ignorance of them. Burnet.
To PAPER. v. a. [from the noun.]. To regiſter.
He makes up the file
Of all the gentry: and his own letter
Muſt fetch in him he papers. Shakeſ car's Hºn. VIII.
PA'PERMAKER. m. ſ. ſpaper and make..] One who makes paper.
PA'PERMILL. m. ſ. ſpaper and mill.] A mill in which rags are
ground for paper. -
Thou haſt cauſed printing to be uſed; and contrary to the
king, and his dignity, thou haſt built a paper-mill. Shakeſp.
PAPE sces T. adj. Containing pap; inclinable to Pap.
Demulcent, and of eaſy digeſtion, moiſtening and reſol-
vent of the bile, are vegetable ſopes; as honey, and the
juices of ripe fruits, ſome of the cooling, lacieſcent, pºp ſcent
plants; as cichory and lettuce. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
PAPILIO. m. ſ. [Lat. papillon, Fr.] A butterfly ; a moth of
various colours. - --- -
Conjecture cannot eſtimate all the kinds of papilios, natives
of this iſland, to fall ſhort of three hu, dred. Ray.
PAPILios A(cEous. adj. [from papilio, Latin.]
The flowers of ſome plants are called papilionaceºus by bo-
taniſts, which repreſent ſomething of the figure of a butterfly,
with its wings diſplayed : and here the petala, or flower leaves,
are always of a diform figure: they are four in number, but
joined together at the extremitics; one of theſe is uſually
jarger than the reſt, and is erected in the middle of the flower.
- 19 C - and<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R
P A R
and by ſome called vexillum : the plants, that have this flower,
are of the leguminous kind; as peaſe, vetches, &amp;c. Quincy.
Papillary. adj. [from papilla.] Having emulgent veſſels,
PA'Pillous. ; or reſemblances of paps.
Malpighi concludes, becauſe the outward cover of the
tongue is perforated, under which lie papillary parts, that in
theſe the taſte lieth. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
The papillous inward coat of the inteſtines is extremely
ſenſible. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
PAPIST. n ſ. ſpapſe, Fr. papiſła, Latin.] One that adheses
to the communion of the pope and church of Rome. .
The principal clergymen had frequent conferences with the
prince, to perſuade him to change his religion, and become
a papiſt. - Clarendon.
Papi'sſical. adj. [from papiſi.J. Popiſh; adherent to Pºpºly.
There are ſome papſtical practitioners among you. J/hitg.
Papistry. n.ſ.. [from papſ...] Popery; the doctrine of the
Romiſh church.
Papiſtry, as a ſtanding pool, cover
England.
ed and overflowed all
Aftham's Shcoolmaſter.
Ågreat number of pariſhes in England conſiſt of.” and
- sº - ‘ſtry. Whitgifte.
ignorant men, drowned in pºp:/º - &amp;
PAirpoºs, adj. ſpappaſus, low Latin.J. Having that ſoft light
down, growing out of the ſeeds of ſome plants ; ſuch as
thiſtles, dandelyon, hawk-weeds, which buoys them up
ſo in the air, that they can be blown any where about with
tº wind; and, therefore, this diſtinguiſhes one kind of plants,
which is called pappoſa, or pappoſi flores. - &amp;uincy.
Another thing argumentative of providence is, that pappous
plumage growing upon the tops of ſome ſeeds, whereby
they are wafted with the wind, and by that means diſſemi-
nated far and wide. Ray on the Cneation.
Dandelion, and moſt of the pappous kind, have long nu-
merous feathers, by which they are wafted every way, Derh.
PA'ppy, adj. [from pap.]. Soft; ſucculent ; eaſily divided.
Theſe were converted into fens, where the ground, being
fpungy, ſucked up the water, and the looſen'd earth ſwell'd
into a ſoft and pappy ſubſtance. Burnet.
Its tender and pappy fleſh cannot, at once, be fitted to be
nouriſhed by ſolid diet. Ray on the Creation.
PAR. m. ſ. [Latin.] State of equality; equivalence; equal
value. This word is not elegantly uſed, except as a term of
traffick.
To eſtimate the par, it is neceſſary to know how much
filver is in the coins of the two countries, by which you
charge the bill of exchange. Locke.
My friend is the ſecond after the treaſurer; the reſt of the
great officers are much upon a par. Gulliver's Travels.
PARA'Ble. adj. [parabilis, Latin.J Eaſily procured. Not in
uſe.
They were not well wiſhers unto parable phyſic, or remedies
eaſily acquired, who derived medicines from the phoenix.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
PARABLE. n.ſ.. [Tzézéox?; parabole, Fr.] A fimilitude;
a relation under which ſomething elſe is figured.
Balaam took up his parable, and ſaid. Numbers, xxiii. 7.
He ſpake many things in parables. Matt. xiii. 3.
What is thy fulſome parable to me?
My body is from all diſeaſes free. Dryden.
PARABOL.A. n.ſ. [Latin.]
The parabola is a conick ſection, ariſing from a cone's being
cut by a plane parallel to one of its ſides, or parallel to a
plane that touches one ſide of the cone. Harris.
Had the velocities of the ſeveral planets been greater or leſs
than they are now, at the ſame diſtances from the ſun, they
would not have revolved in concentrick circles as they do, but
have moved in hyperbola's or parabola's, or in ellipſes, very
excentrick. Bentley's Sermons.
PARAbo'lical. - - -
PARAbo'Lick. } adj. [parabolique, Fr. from parable.]
1. Expreſſed by parable or ſimilitude.
Such from the text deſcry the parabolical expoſition of
Cajetan. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
The whole ſcheme of theſe words is figurative, as being a
parabolical deſcription of God's vouchſafing to the world the
invaluable bleſfing of the goſpel, by the ſimilitude of a king.
- South's Sermons.
2. Having the nature or form of a parabola. [from parabola.]
The pellucid coat of the eye doth not lie in the ſame ſuper-
ficies with the white of the eye, but riſeth up a hillock above
**onvexity, and is of an hyperbolical or parabolical figure.
The inci - - &amp;ay on the Creation.
he incident ray will deſcribe, in the refracting medium,
x the parabolick curve. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
PA **olicAlly, adv. [from parabolical.]
I. º of º: or ſimilitude.
.*** words, notwithſtandin 'abolically i -
mit no literal iniºn. 1ng tºº, ad
i. In the form of a parabola. gar tryours.
*...*.*.* / 1* algebra, the diviſion of the terms
of an equation, by d kn W Q tity that is invo ved OI mul
- -- - OWn Ulal - - -
tiplied In the firſt term. lilti 1S 1 l IDić
!C/ .
PARA boloid. n. ſ. [rzºzº and fººl. A Paraboliform
curve in geometry, whoſe ordinates are ſuppoſed to be in
ſuptriplicate, ſubquadruplicate, &amp;c. ratio of their reſpective
abſciſie: There is another ſpecies 3 for if you ſuppoſe the
parameter, multiplied into the ſquare of the abſciſſa, to be
equal to the cube of the ordinate ; then the curve is called a
ſemicubical paraboloid. * º Harris.
PARAcENTE's Is. n. ſ. [rz:2xiſzzº, ºrzºzzºtia, to pierce.
paracentºſe, Fr.] That operation, whereby any of the ven-
ters are perforated to let out any matter; as tapping in a
tympany. - - r . . &amp;inºy.
Pakače'NTR1cAl. Nadi, [T2:2 and xivrºv.] Deviating from
PARAce"NTRICK. } circularity. - - -
Since the planets move in the elliptick orbits, in one of
whoſe foci the ſun is, and, by a radius from the ſun, deſcribe
equal areas in equal times, we muſt find out a law for the
paracentrical motion, that may make the orbits elliptic. Cheyne.
PARADE. n.ſ. [parade, Fr.]
1. Shew; oftentation.
He is not led forth as to a review, but as to a battle; nor
adorned for parade, but execution. Granville.
The rites perform’d, the parſon paid,
In ſtate returned the grand parade. Swift.
Be rich ; but of your wealth make no parade,
At leaſt, before your maſter's debts are paid. Swift.
2. Military order.
The cherubim ſtood arm'd
To their night-watches in warlike parade. Milton.
3. Place where troops draw up to do duty and mount guard.
4. Guard; poſture of defence.
Accuſtom him to make judgment of men by their inſide,
which often ſhews itſelf in little things, when they are not
in parade, and upon their guard. Locke on Education.
PARADIGM. n.ſ. [rzºzºwyaz.]. Example.
PARADISI Acal. adj. [from paradſ?..] Suiting paradiſe; making
paradiſe.
The antients expreſs the ſituation of paradiſiacal earth in re-
ference to the ſea. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Such a mediocrity of heat would be ſo far from exalting the
earth to a more happy and paradſiacal ſtate, that it would
turn it to a barren wilderneſs. Woodw. Nat. Hiſł.
The ſummer is a kind of heaven, when we wander in a
paradiſiacal ſcene, among groves and gardens; but, at this
ſeaſon, we are like our poor firſt parents, turned out of that
agreeable, though ſolitary life, and forced to look about for
more people to help to bear our labours, to get into warmer
houſes, and hive together in cities. Pope.
PARADISE., n.ſ. [rzºzºgo; ; paradiſe, Fr.]
1. The bliſsful regions, in which the firſt pair was placed.
Longer in that paradiſe to dwell,
The law I gave to nature him forbids. Milton.
2. Any place of felicity.
What fool is not ſo wiſe,
To loſe an oath to win a paradiſe. Shakeſpeare.
Confideration, like an angel, came,
And whipt th' offending Adam out of him; .
Leaving his body as a paradiſe,
T” invelope and contain celeſtial ſpirits. Shakeſpeare.
If ye ſhould lead her into a fool's paradiſe,
It were very groſs behaviour. Shakeſp. Romeo andjuliet.
Why, nature, bower the ſpirit of a fiend
In mortal paradiſe of ſuch ſweet fleſh. Shakeſpeare.
The earth
Shall all be paradiſe, far happier place, -
Than this of Eden, and far happier days. Milton.
PARADOX. m. ſ. ſparadoxe, Fr. ratzjogos.] A tenet con-
trary to received opinion; an aſſertion contrary to appearance;
a poſition in appearance abſurd. -
A gloſſe there is to colour that paradºx, and make it appear
in ſhew not to be altogether unreaſonable. Hooker.
You undergo too ſtrict a paradºx, .
Striving to make an ugly deed look fair. Shakeſp.
In their love of God, men can never be too affectionate:
it is as true, though it may ſeem a paradºx, that in their
hatred of fin, men may be ſometimes too paſſionate. Sprat.
Paradoxic AL. adj. [from paradox.]
1. Having the nature of a paradox. . . -
what hath been every where opinioned by all men, is more
than paradoxical to diſpute. . Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Strange it is, how the curioſity of men, that have been
aćtive in the inſtruction of beaſts, among thoſe many para-
dºxical and unheard-of imitations, ſhould not attempt to
make one ſpeak. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
• Theſe will ſeem ſtrange and paradoxical to one that takes
a proſpect of the world. - Norris.
2. Inclined to new tenets, or notions contrary to received
opinions.
PARADo'x1cALLY. adv. [from paradox.] In a paradoxical
manner; in a manner contrary to received opinions.
If their vanity of appearing fingular puts them upon ad-
vancing paradoxes, and proving them as paradºxically, they
are uſually laught at. Collier on Prise.
PARADoxI-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R
-
P A R
PAR adoxic AlNess. m. ſ. [from paradox.] State of being
paradoxical.
PARADoxology, n.ſ.. [from paradox.] The uſe of paradoxes.
Perpend the difficulty, which obſcurity, or unavoidable
paradoxolºgy, muſt put upon the attempter. Brown.
PARAgoge. . n. ſ. [rzºzºwº , paragogº, Fr.] A figure
whereby a letter or ſylſable is added at the end of a word,
without adding any thing to the ſenſe of it. Dićf.
PARAgon. n.ſ. [paragon, from parage, equality, old French;
paragone, Italian.] -
1. A model; a pattern; ſomething ſupremely excellent.
An angel ! or, if not,
An earthly paragon. Shakeſpeare.
Tunis was never grac'd before with ſuch a paragon to
their queen. Shakeſp. Tempºſł.
2. Companion; fellow. -
Álone he rode without his paragon. Spenſer.
To PARAGoN. v. a. [parangonner, French.]
1. To compare. - -
The picture of Pamela, in little form, he wore in a tablet,
purpoſing to paragon the little one with Arteſia's length,
hot doubting but even, in that little quantity, the excellency
of that would ſhine through the weakneſs of the other. Sidney.
I will give thee bloody teeth,
If thou with Caeſar paragon again
My man of men.
Proud ſeat
Of Lucifer, ſo by alluſion call’d
Of that bright ſtar to Satan paragon'd. Milt. Par. Loft.
2. To equal.
Shakeſpeare.
He hath atchiev’d a maid
That paragons deſcription and wild fame;
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens. Shakeſp.
We will wear our mortal ſtate with her,
Catharine our queen, before the primeſt creature
That's paragon'd i' th' world. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
PARAGRAPH. n.ſ. [paragraphe, Fr. ratz7624”.] A di-
ſtinét part of a diſcourſe.
Of his laſt paragraph, I have tranſcribed the moſt impor-
tant parts. Swift.
PARAGRA'phically. adv. [from paragraph..] By paragraphs;
with diſtinét breaks or diviſions.
PARALLA'cticAL. Nadj. [from parallax.] Pertaining to a
PARALLA'ctick. } parallax.
PARALLAX. n.ſ. [rzeźx2.É...]. The diſtance between the
true and apparent place of the ſun, or any ſtar viewed from
the ſurface of the earth.
By what ſtrange parallax or optick ſkill
Of viſion multiply'd Milton's Paradiſe Regained.
Light moves from the ſun to us in about ſeven or eight
minutes time, which diſtance is about 70,000,ooo Engliſh
miles, ſuppoſing the horizontal parallax of the ſun to be about
twelve ſeconds. Newton's Optics.
PARALLEL adj. [rotºxxºxo; ; parallele, Fr.]
1. Extended in the ſame direétion, and preſerving always the
ſame diſtance.
Diſtorting the order and theory of cauſes perpendicular to
their effects, he draws them aſide unto things whereto they
run parallel, and their proper motions would never meet to-
gether. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2. Having the ſame tendency.
When honour runs parallel with the laws of God and our
country, it cannot be too much cheriſhed; but when the
dićtates of honour are contrary to thoſe of religion and equity,
they are the great depravations of human nature. Addison.
3. Continuing the reſemblance through many particulars; equal;
like.
The foundation principle of peripateticiſm is exactly pa-
rallel to an acknowledged nothing. Glanville.
I ſhall obſerve ſomething parallel to the wooing and wed-
ding ſuit in the behaviour of perſons of figure. Addiſon.
&amp;º: the words and phraſes in one place of an author,
with the ſame in other places of the ſame author, which are
generally called parallel places. JWatts.
PARAllel. n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive.]
1. Lines continuing their courſe, and ſtill remaining at the ſame
diſtance from each other.
Who made the ſpider parallels deſign, -
Sure as De Moivre, without rule or line? Pope.
2. Lines on the globe marking the latitude.
3. Direction conformable to that of another line.
Diſſentions, like ſmall ſtreams, are firſt begun,
Scarce ſeen they riſe but gather as they run;
So lines, that from their parallel decline,
More they proceed, the more they ſtill disjoin. Garth.
4. Reſemblance; conformity continued through many particu-
lars; likeneſs.
Such a reſemblance of all parts,
Life, death, age, fortune, nature, arts;
She lights her torch at theirs to tell,
And ſhew the world this parallel. Denham.
Twixt earthly females and the moon,
All parallel exactly run. Swift's Miſcel.
5. Compariſon made.
The parallel holds in the gainleſneſs, as well as laboriouſ-
neſs of the work. Decay of Piety.
A reader cannot be more rationally entertained, than by
Cºmparing and drawing a parallel between his own private
character, and that of other perſons. Addiſon.
6. Any thing reſembling another.
Thou ungrateful brute, if thou wouldſ, find thy parallel, ge
to hell, which is both the region and the emblem of ingrati-
tude. . . . . . - South's Sermons.
For works like theſe, let deathleſs journals tell,
None but thyſelf can be thy parallel.
To PA’RALLEL. v.a. [from the noun.]
1. To place, ſo as always to keep the ſame direction with
another line.
The Azores having a middle ſituation between theſe conti-
nents and that vaſt tract of America, the needle ſeemeth
equally diſtraćted by both, and diverting unto neither, doth
parallel and place itſelf upon the true meridian. Brown.
2. To keep in the ſame direction; to level.
º His life is parallel'd -
Ev’n with the ſtroke and line of his great juſtice. Shakeſp.
3. To correſpond to. -
That he ſtretched out the north over the empty places,
ſeems to parallel the expreſſion of David, he ſtretched out the
earth upon the waters. Burnet.
4. To be equal to ; to reſemble through many particulars. -
In the fire, the deſtruction was ſo ſwift, ſudden, vaſt and
miſerable, as nothing can parallel in ſtory. Dryden.
5. To compare. - - -
I parallel'd more than once, our idea of ſuſtance, with the
Indian philoſopher's he-knew-not-what, which ſupported the
tortoiſe. Locke.
PARALLE'lism.. n.ſ. [parallelſne, Fr. from parallel.] State
of being parallel.
The paralleliſm and due proportionated inclination of the
axis of the earth. More's Divine Dialogues:
Speaking of the paralleliſm of the axis of the earth, I de-
mand, whether it be better to have the axis of the earth
ſteady and perpetually parallel to itſelf, or to have it careleſsly
tumble this way and that way. Ray on the Creation.
PARALLELOGRAM. m. ſ. [rzeżaxnao; and yeagua;
parallelograme, Fr.] In geometry, a right lined quadrilate-
ral figure, whoſe oppoſite ſides are parallel and equal. Harris.
The experiment we made in a loadſtone of a parallelelograms
or long figure, wherein only inverting the extremes, as it
came out of the fire, we altered the poles. Brown,
We may have a clear idea of the area of a parallogram,
without knowing what relation it bears to the area of a tri-
angle. JWatts's Logick.
PARAllelogra'Mical... adj. [from parallelogram.] Having
the properties of a parallelogram.
PARALLELo'PIPED. m. ſ. . [from parallelopipede, Fr.] A ſolid
figure contained under fix parallelograms, the oppoſites of
which are equal and parallel; or it is a priſm, whoſe baſe is
a parallelogram : it is always triple to a pyramid of the ſame
baſe and height. - - - Harris.
Two priſms alike in ſhape I tied ſo, that their axes and
oppoſite fides being parallel, they compoſed a parallelopiped.
- Newton's Optics.
Cryſtals that hold lead are yellowiſh, and of a cubic or
parallelopiped figure. JWoodward.
PAR Alo Gis M. m. ſ. [rzézaćyiguo; ; paralogiſme, Fr.] A
falſe argument.
That becauſe they have not a bladder of gall, like thoſe we
obſerve in others, they have no gall at all, is a paralogiſm not
admittible, a fallacy that dwells not in a cloud, and needs not
the ſun to ſcatter it. . Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Modern writers, making the drachma leſs than the dena-
rius, others equal, have been deceived by a double paralogiſm,
in ſtanding too nicely upou the bare words of the ancients,
without examining the things. Arbuthnot.
If a ſyllogiſm agree with the rules given for the conſtruction
Pope.
of it, it is called a true argument: if it diſagree with theſe
rules, it is a paralogiſm, or falſe argument. J/atts.
PARALogy, n. ſ. Falſe reaſoning. - -
That Methuſelah was the longeſt liver of all the poſterity of
Adam, we quietly believe; but that he muſt needs be ſo, is
perhaps below paralogy to deny. Brown,
PARAL1 SIS. [rzézava is ; paralyſe, Fr.] A palſy. -
PARALY'tical. Uddj. [from paralyſis; paralytique, Fr.] Pal.
PARALY"Tick. } £d ; inclined to palſy. . -
Nought ſhall it profit, that the charming fair,
Angelic, foſteſt work of heav'n, draws near
To the cold ſhakingparalytick hand, -
Senſeleſs of beauty. - Prior.
If a nerve be cut, or ſtreightly bound, that goes to any
muſcle, that muſcle ſhall immediately loſe its motion; which
is the caſe of paralyticé. . . Dºrham.
The difficulties of breathing and ſwallowing, without any
tumour after long diſeaſes, proceed commonly from a reſolu-
tion or paralytical diſpoſition of the parts. Arbuthnot.
PARAMETER.
.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R
P A R
* Šium of a parabola, is a third
TER. m. ſ. The latus ree -
PARA ME ſ ła and any ordinate ; ſo that the
ional to the abſciſ -
§º º is always equal to the rectangle under
the parameter and abſciſſa; but, in the ellipſis and hyperbola,
it has a different pº J Harris.
(UNT. adj. [her and motint.
º ; fift. the higheſt juriſdićtion; as lord para-
mount, the chief of the ſeigniory. -
Leagues within the ſtate are ever pernicious to monarchies;
for they raiſe an obligation, paramount to obligation of ove-
reignty, and make the king, tanquam unus ex nobis. Bacon.
The dogmatiſt's opinioned aſſurance is paramount tº argº-
ment, - Glanville.
If all power be derived from Adam, by divine inſtitution, this
is a right antecedent and paramºunt to all government; and
therefore the poſitive laws of men cannot determine that
which is itſelf the foundation of all law. Locke.
Mankind, ſeeing the apoſtles poſſeſſed of a power plainly
paramount to the powers of all the known, beings, whether
angels or daemons, could not queſtion their being inſpired by
God. Iſºſt on the Reſurreółion.
2. Eminent; of the higheſt order. - -
John a Chamber was hanged upon a gibbet raiſed a ſtage
higher in the midſt of a ſquare gallows, as a traitor fara.
mºunt; and a number of his chief accomplices were hanged
upon the lower ſtory round him. Bacon.
PA'RAMount. m. ſ. The chief.
In order came the grand infernal peers,
"Midſt came their mighty paramount.
PA'R A MoUR. m. ſ. [far and amour, Fr.]
I. A lover or woer. -
Upon the floor
A lovely bevy of fair ladies ſat,
Courted of many a jolly paramour,
The which them did in modeſtwiſe amate,
Milton's P. L.
And each one ſought his lady to aggrate. Fa. Queen.
No ſeaſon then for her -
To wanton with the ſun her luſty paramour. Milt.
2. A miſtreſs. It is obſolete in both ſenſes, though not inele-
gant or unmuſical.
Shall I believe
That unſubſtantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monſter keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour. Shakeſpeare.
PAR ANYM pH. n.ſ. [. 72:2 and wºº; paranymphe, Fr.]
1. A brideman; one who leads the bride to her marriage.
The Timnian bride
Had not ſo ſoon prefer'd
Thy paranymth, worthleſs to thee compar'd,
Succeſſor in thy bed. Miltºn's 4ºzniſłes.
2. One who countenances or ſupports another.
Sin hath got a paranymph and a ſolicitor, a warrant and an
advocate. Taylor's Hºrthy Communicant.
PARA'PEGM. n.ſ. [Tzºzºyuz, Tzºzºwº.] A brazen
table fixed to a pillar, on which laws and proclamations were
anciently engraved; alſo a table ſet up publickly, containing
an account of the riſing and ſetting of the ſtars, eclipſes of
the ſun and moon, the ſeaſons of the year, &amp;c. whence
aſtrologers give this name to the tables, on which they draw
figures according to their art. Philips.
Our forefathers, obſerving the courſe of the ſun, and mark-
ing certain mutations to happen in his progreſs through the
zodiac, ſet them down in their parapegms, or aſtronomical
CanonS. Brown's Pulgar E. rours.
PA(RARET. m. ſ. [parapet, Fr. farapetto, Italian.] A wall
breaſt high.
There was a wall or parapet of teeth ſet in our mouth to
reſtrain the petulancy of our words. Ben {...} on.
PARAPHIMo'sis. m. ſ. [wºzºſº wris ; faraphimoſe, Fr.] A
diſeaſe when the praeputium cannot be drawn over the glans.
PARAPHERNALIA, n.ſ. [Lat. paraphernaux, Fr.] Goods
in the wife's diſpoſal.
PARAPHRASE, n.ſ. [72;&amp;#627; ; paraphraſe, Fr.] A looſe
interpretation; an explanation in many words.
All the laws of nations were but a faraphraſe upon this
fanding rečtitude of nature, that was ready to enlarge itſelf
into ſuitable determinations, upon all emergent objects and
occaſions. South's Sermons.
In paraphraſe, or tranſlation with latitude, the author's
words are not ſo ſtrictly followed as his ſenſe, and that too
ºffed, but not altered: ſuch is Mr. waiie's tranſlation
of Virgi's fourth AEneid. Dryden.
ºr. v. a. [paraphraſer, Fr. T26%362&amp;.] To
pºet with laxity of expreſſion; to tranſlate looſely.
...' * * put to conſtrue and paraphrae our own words, to
º º ignorange and malice of our adver.
What needs ºft s Def of Diſ. on Romiſh Idolatry.
C were at wº t ºrge On what we mean,
Where tranſlati * wanton; he's obſcene. Dryden.
But it is into ''''''.impracticable, they may paraphraſe.—
*able, that under a ret f thr
pretence of paraphraſing
7
f
and tranſlating, a way ſhould be ſuffered of treating authors
to a manifeſt diſadvantage. Fºlton on the Claſſic/s.
PARAPHRAST. n. ſ. [paraphraſe, Fr. 726.2% zº;..] A lax
interpreter; one who explains in many words.
The fitteſt for publick audience are ſuch, as following a
middle courſe between the rigor of literal tranſlators and the
liberty of paraphraſ's, do, with great ſhortneſs and plaineſs,
deliver the meaning. Hooker.
The chaldean paraphraſ' renders Gerah by Meath. Arbuth.
PARAPHRA'stical. Najd. [from paraphraſe..] Lax in inter-
PARAPHRA's TIC. } pretation; not literal ; not verbal.
PARAPHREN1'Tis. n.ſ. [+232 and ºviri: ; paraphrenºſe, Fr.]
Paraphrenitis is an inflammation of the diaphragm. The
ſymptoms are a violent fever, a moſt exquiſite pain in-
creaſed upon inſpiration, by which it is diſtinguiſhed from a
pleuriſy, in which the greateſt pain is in expiration. Arbuth.
PAR As ANG. m. ſ. [paraſanga, low Latin.] A Perſian meaſure
of length.
Since the mind is not able to frame an idea of any ſpace
without parts, inſtead thereof it makes uſe of the common
meaſures, which, by familiar uſe, in each country, have
imprinted themſelves on the memory; as inches and feet, or
cubits and paraſangs. Locée.
PARASITE. n.ſ. [paraſite, Fr. paraſºta, Latin.] One that
frequents rich tables, and earns his welcome by flattery.
He is a flatterer,
A paraſite, a keeper back of death,
Who gently would diſſolve the bands of life,
Which falſe hopes linger.
Moſt ſmiling, ſmooth, deteſted parºſtes,
Courteous deſtroyers, affable wolves, ineck bears,
You fools of fortune. Shakeſpeare.
Come, you paraſite, anſwer me
Dire&amp;tly to this queſtion. Shakeſpeare.
Diogenes, when mice came about him, as he was eating,
ſaid, I ice, that even Diogenes nouriſheth paraſies. Bacon.
Thou, with trembling fear,
Or like a fawning paraſite, obeyed;
Shakeſpeare.
Then to thyſelf aſcrib'ſt the truth foretold. Miltºn.
The people ſweat not for their king's delight,
Tº enrich a pimp, or raiſe a paraſite. Dryden.
PARAsiſtical. adj. . [paraſtique, Fr. from paroſte.J Flat-
PARASITIck. ; tering; wheedling.
The biſhop received ſmall thanks for his paraſtick preſen-
tation. - Hakewill on Providence.
Some paraſitick preachers have dared to call thoſe martyrs,
who died fighting againſt me. King Charles.
PAR Asol. n.ſ. A ſmall ſort of canopy or umbrello carried
over the head, to ſhelter from rain and the heat of the ſun.
Dić7.
PARASYNA'xis. n. ſ. In the civil law, a conventicle or un-
lawful meeting. Dićf.
To PAR Boil. v. a. ſparbouiller, French..] To half boil;
to boil in part.
Parboil two large capons upon a ſoft fire, by the ſpace of
an hour, till, in effect, all the blood be gone. Bacon.
From the ſea into the ſhip we turn,
Like parbeil'd wretches, on the coals to burn. Donne.
Like the ſcum, ſtarved men did draw,
From parboi"d ſhoes and boots. Donne.
To PARBREAK. v. n. [brecker, Ditch..] To vomit.
PAR BREAK, n.f. [from the verb.] Vomit.
Her filthy parbreak all the place defiled has. Fa: Queen.
PARCEL. m.ſ. parcelle, French; particula, Latin.]
I. A ſmall bundle.
2. A part of the whole taken ſeparately.
Women, Silvius, had they mark'd him
In parcels, as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him. Shaftºffeare.
I drew from her a prayer of earneſt heart,
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate;
Whereof by parcels ſhe had ſomething heard, y
But not diſtinctively. - Shakeſ car's Othell.
An inventory º
The ſeveral farcels of his plate, his treaſure,
Rich ſtuffs lſº OrnamentS ; houſhold. Shakeſpeare.
I have known penſions given to particular perſons, any one
of which, if divided into ſmaller parcels, and diſtributed to
thoſe, who diſtinguiſh themſelves by wit or learning, would
anſwer the end. Swift.
The ſame experiments ſucceed on two parcel of the white
of an egg, only it grows ſomewhat thicker upon mixing with
an acid. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. A quantity or maſs. - -
What can be rationally conceived in ſo tranſparent a ſub-
- ſtance as water for the production of theſe colours, beſides
the various ſizes of its fluid and globular parceli. Newton.
4. A number of perſons, in contempt.
This youthful parcel
Of noble batchelors ſtand at my beſtowing. Shakeſ?.
5. Any<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R
P A R
- number or quantity in contempt. -
5 Aº came i. tº: that, unleſs they could, by
a pared of fair words and pretences, engage them into a con-
federacy, there was no good to be done. L’Eſtrange.
To PA/Rce l. v. a. {from the noun.]
1. To divide into portions. -
If they allot and parcel out ſeveral perſedions to ſeveral
deities, do they not, by this, aſſert contradićtions, making
deity only to ſuch a meaſure perfect; whereas a deity implies
perfection beyond all meaſure. South's Sermons.
Thoſe ghoſtly kings would parcel out my pow'r,
And all the fatneſs of my land devour. Dryden.
2. To make up into a maſs.
What a wounding ſhame,
That mine own ſervant ſhould
Parcel the ſum of my diſgraces by -
Addition of his envy." Shakeſp;
PA'RCENER. m. ſ. [In common law.] When one dies poſſeſſed
of an eſtate, and having iſſue only daughters, or his ſiſters be
his heirs; ſo that the lands deſcend to thoſe daughters or ſiſters:
s theſe are called parceners, and are but as one heir. Dići.
PARcE/NERY. m. ſ. [from parſonier, Fr.] A holding or occupy-
ing of land by more perſons pro indiviſo, or by joint tenants,
otherwiſe called coparceners: for if they refuſe to divide their
common inheritance, and chuſe rather to hold it jointly, they
are ſaid to hold in parcinarie. Cowel.
To PARch. v. a. [from Tsézziew, ſays Junius; from percoquo,
ſays Skinner; neither of them ſeem ſatisfied with their con-
jećture: perhaps from peruſus, burnt, to peruſ, to parch ;
perhaps from parchment, the effect of fire upon parchment
being almoſt proverbial.] To burn ſlightly and ſuperficially;
to ſcorch ; to dry up.
Hath thy fiery heart ſo parcht thine entrails,
That not a tear can fall Shakeſp.
Did he ſo often lodge in open field
In winter's cold, and ſummer's parching heat,
To conquer France Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
Torrid heat,
And vapours as the Libyan air aduſt,
Began to parch that temperate clime. Milton's Par. Loſt.
I’m ſtupify'd with ſorrow, paſt relief
Of tears; parch’d up and wither'd with my grief. Dryden.
Without this circular motion of our earth, one hemiſphere.
would be condemned to perpetual cold and darkneſs, the other
continually roaſted and parched by the ſun beams. Ray.
The Syrian ſtar
With his ſultry breath infects the ſky;
The ground below is parch'd, the heav'ns above us fry.
Dryden's Horace,
Full fifty years
I have endur'd the biting winter's blaſt,
And the ſeverer heats of parching ſummer. Rowe.
He is like a man diſtreſſed with thirſt in the parched places
of the wilderneſs, he ſearches every pit, but finds no water.
- Rogers's Sermons.
To PAR ch. v. n. To be ſcorched.
We were better parch in Africk ſun,
Than in the pride and ſalt ſcorn of his eyes. Shakeſpeare.
If to prevent the acroſpiring, it be thrown thin, many
corns will dry and parch into barley. Mo, t. Huſh.
PA/R chMENT. n.ſ. [ parchemin, French ; pergamena, Latin.]
Skins dreſſed for the writer. Among traders, the ſkins of
ſheep are called parchment, thoſe of calves vellum.
ls not this a lamentable thing, that the ſkin of an innocent
lamb ſhould be made parchment; that parchment, being ſcrib-
bied o'er, ſhould undo a man Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
In the coffin, that had the books, they were found as freſh
as if newly written, being written in parchment, and covered
with watch candles of wax. Bacon.
Like flying ſhades before the clouds we ſhew,
We ſhrink like parchment in conſuming flame. Dryden.
PARCHMENT-MAKER. m. ſ. [parchment and maker.] He who
dreſſes parchment.
PAR d. n. ſ. ſtardus, pardalis, Latin.] The leopard ;
PA'RDALE. ; in poetry, any of the ſpotted beaſts.
The pardale ſwift, and the tyger cruel. Fa. Q'een.
As fox to lambs, as wolf to heifer's calf;
As pa d to the hind, or ſtep-dame to her ſon. Shakeſpeare.
Ten brace of greyhounds, ſnowy fair,
And tall as ſtags, ran looſe, and cours'd around his chair,
A match for pard, in flight, in grappling for the bear. Dryden.
To PA'RDON. v. a. ſpardonnel, French.]
1. To excuſe an offender.
When I beheld you in Cilicia,
An enemy to Rome, I pa don'd you. Dryden.
2. To forgive a crime.
3. To remit a penalty.
That thou may’ſ ſee the diff'rence of our ſpirit,
I ſardon thee thy ife before thou aſk it. Shakeſpeare.
4. Pardºn me, is a word of civil denial, or ſlight apology.
Sir, padºn me, it is a letter from my brother. Shakeſp.
**Box. . / Ifa ºn, Fr. from the verb.j
* ! orgi, ca: of an offender,
2. Fºlgiveneſ of a crime; indulgence.
He that pleaſeth great men, ſhall get pardon for iniquity,
- t Eccluſ, xx. 27.
A flight pamphlet, about the elements of architecture, hath
been entertained with ſome pardon among my friends. Jºotton.
3. Remifion of penalty. -
4. Forgiveneſs received.
A man may be ſafe as to his condition, but, in the mean
time, dark and doubtful as to his apprehenſions, ſecure in his
fºrdan, but miſerable in the ignorance of it; and ſo paſſing
all his days in the diſconſolate, uneaſy viciſłitudes of hop;
and fears, at length go out of the world, not knowing whi-
ther he goes. South's Sermons.
5. Warrant of forgiveneſs, or exemption from puniſhment.
The battle done, and they within our power,
Shall never ſee his pardon. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
PA'RD9Nable. adj. [pardonable, Fr. from pardonjºveniai,
excuſable.
That which we do being evil, is notwithſtanding by ſo
much more pardºnable, by how much the exigences of ſo
doing, or the difficulty of doing otherwiſe is greater, unleſs
this neceſſity or difficulty have originally riſen from our-
ſelves. JHooker.
A blind man fitting in the chimney corner is pardonable
enough, but ſitting at the helm, he is intolerable. South.
What Engliſh readers, unacquainted with Greek or Latin,
will believe me, when we confeſs we derive all that is par-
donable in us from ancient fountains Dryden.
PA'RD9NABLENess. n.ſ.. [from pardonable.] Venialneſs; ſuſ-
ceptibility of pardon. -
Saint John's word is, all ſin is tranſgreſſion of the law;
Saint Paul's, the wages of fin is death: put theſe two toge-
ther, and this conceit of the natural pardonableneſs of fin va-
niſhes away. Hall.
PA'RDoNABLY. adv. [from pardonable.] Venially; excuſably.
I may judge when I write more or leſs pardonably. Dryden.
PA'RDoNER. m.ſ.. [from pardon.]
1. One who forgives another. -
This is his pardon, purchas'd by ſuch ſin,
For which the pardoner himſelf is in. Shakeſp.
2. Fellows that carried about the pope's indulgencies, and ſold
them to ſuch as would buy them, againſt whom Luther in-
cenſed the people of Germany. Cowel.
To PARE. v. a. [This word is reaſonably deduced by Skinner
from the French phraſe, parer les ongles, to dreſs the horſes
hoofs when they are ſhaved by the farrier : thus we firſt ſaid,
pare your nails; and from thence transfered the word to ge-
neral uſe.] To cut off extremities or the ſurface; to cut
away by little and little ; to diminiſh.
The creed of Athanaſius, and that ſacred hymn of glory,
than which nothing doth ſound more heavenly in the ears of
faithful men, are now reckoned as ſuperfluities, which we
muſt in any caſe pare away, leſt we cloy God with too
much ſervice. Hooker.
I have not alone
Imploy'd you where high profits might come home;
But par'd my preſent havings to beſtow -
My bounties upon you. Shakespeare. Hen. VIII.
I am a man, whom fortune hath cruelly ſcratch'd.
—"Tis too late to pare her nails now. Shakespeare
The lion, mov’d with pity, did endure
To have his princely paws all par'd away. Shakeſp.
The king began to pare a little the privilege of clergy, or-
daining that clerks convićt, ſhould be burned in the hand.
- Bacon's Hen. VII.
Pick out of tales the mirth, but not the fin.
He pares his apple, that will cleanly feed. Herbert.
Whoever will partake of God's ſecrets, muſt firſt look
into his own, he muſt pare off whatſoever is amiſs, and not
without holineſs approach to the holieſt of all holies. Tayºr.
All the mountains were pared off the earth, and the fur- .
face of it lay even, or in an equal convexity every where
with the ſurface of the ſea. Burnet.
The moſt poetical parts, which are deſcription and images,
were to be pared away, when the body was ſwollen into too
large a bulk for the repreſentation of the ſtage. Dryden.
The ſword, as it was juſtly drawn by us, ſo can it ſarcº
ſafely be ſheathed, 'till the power of the great troubler of
our peace be ſo far parcd and reduced, as that we, may be
under no apprehenſions. - Atterbury.
'Twere well if ſhe would pare her nails: Pºpe.
PAR eco'Rick. adj. [rzewyotº?..] Having the Power in ºne-
dicine to comfort, mollify and aſſuage. Dic?.
PARE/NCHYMA. n.ſ. [rzºzºz.] A ſpongy or porous
ſubſtance; in phyſick, a part through which the blood is
ſtrained for its better fermentation and perfection. - Die?.
PAR EN, hy'MAT ous. adj. [from parenchyma.] Relating to
PA R F NC HYMO U.S. ; the parenchyma 5 ſpongy.
Ten thouſand ſecos of the plant, hart's-tongue, hardly
make the bulk of a pepper-corn. Now the covers and true
body of each ſeed, the parenchymatous and ligneous parts of
both moderately multiplica, afford an hundred thouſand mil-
lions of formed atoms in the ſpace of a pepper corn. Grew.
19 D Thoſe
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R
P A R
ts, former! reckoned parenchymateus, are now
ºf: º of jºy ſmall threads. Cheyne.
Paºis. n.ſ. [rzºzººl Perſuaſion. Die?,
PARENT. n.ſ. ſparent, Fr. Paren', Latin.] A father or
mº. virtues are to honour true religion as their parent,
and all well-ordered commonweales to love her as º,
chiefeſt ſtay. Hooker.
As a publick parent of the ſtate,
My juſtice, and thy crime, requires thy fate. Pryden.
Ín vain on the diſſembl’d mother's tongue
Had cunning art, and ſly perſuaſion hung;
And real care in vain and native love -
In the true parent's panting breaſt had ſtrove: P. 107°. .
PARENTAGF. n.ſ. ſparentage, Fr. from parent.] Extraction ;
birth; condition with . to the rank of parefits.
A gentleman of noble parentage, r
Of }. demeafns, youthfūl and nobly allied. Shakeſp.
Though men eſteem thee low of parentº,
Thy father is th eternal king. Milton's Par. Reg.
To his levee go,
And from himſelf your parentage may know. Dryden.
We find him not only boaſting of his parentage, as an
Iſraelite at large, but particularizing his deſcent from Ben-
jamin. Alterbury's Sermons.
PARE's Tal. adj. (from parent.] Becoming parents; Pertain-
ing to parents. -
it o'erthrows the careful courſe and parental proviſion of
nature, whereby the young ones newly excluded, are ſuſtain-
ed by the dam. Brown's ſugar Errours.
Theſe cºgs hatched by the warmth of the ſun into little
worms, feed without any need of parental care: Der/ m.
Young ladies, on whom parental controul ſits heavily,
give a man of intrigue room to think, that they waſ to be
parents. - Cºiffa.
PAREN ration. n.ſ. (from parento, Latin.] Something done
or ſaid in honour of the dead.
PARENTHESIS. m. ſ. ſparentheſe, Fr. 72°2, ty and +3rº...]
A ſentence ſo included in another ſentence, as that it may
be taken out, without injuring the ſenſe of that which in-
cloſes it: being commonly marked thus, ().
In vain is my perſon excepted by a far entheſis of words,
when ſo many hands are armed againſt me with ſwords.
King Charles.
In his Indian relations, are contained ſtrange and incredible
accounts ; he is ſeldom mentioned, without a derogatory
parenthºſis, in any author. Brown's ſugar Errours.
Thou ſhalt be ſeen,
Tho' with ſome ſhort parentheſis between,
High on the throne of wit. Dryden.
Don't ſuffer every occaſional thought to carry you away
into a long parenthºſis, and thus ſtretch out your diſcourſe,
and divert you fiom the point in hand. JP atts's Logick.
Pa REN THE'ſ icº L. adj. [from parenthſ, J Pertaining to a
parentheſis.
PA'RER. n.ſ. [from pare.] An inſtrument to cut away the
ſurface. -
A hone and a parer, like ſole of a boot,
To pare away grade, and to raiſe up the root. Tºſºr.
PARERGY. m. ſ. […: 2 and #7 ov.] Something unimportant;
ſomething done by the by.
The ſcripture being ſerious, and commonly omitting ſuch
parergies, it will be unreaſonable to condemn all laughter.
- Brown's Wulgar Errours.
PARGET. m. ſ. Plaſter laid upon roofs of rooms.
Gold was the parget, and the cieling bright
Did ſhine all ſcaly with great plates of gold ;
The floor with jaſp and emerald was dight. Spenſºr.
Of Engliſh tale, the coarſer ſort is called plaſter or parget;
the finer, ſpaad. //oodward.
To PA's GET. v. a. [from the noun.] To plaſter; to cover
with plaſter.
There are not more arts of diſguiſing our corporeal ble-
miſhes than our moral; and yet, while we thus paint and
farget our own deformities, we cannot allow any the leaſt
imperfection of another's to remain undetected.
* Gºvernment of the Tongue.
FARGETER. m. ſ. [from parge.] A plaſterer.
PARHºlios. m. ſ. 7282 and #xicº. A mock ſun.
To neglect that ſupreme reſplendency, that ſhines in God,
* thoſe dim repreſentations of it, that we ſo doºr on in th:
****, is as abſurd, as it were for a Perſian to offer his
P º º :#"; inſtead of adoring the ſun. Boyle.
or wāli, j [from paries, Latin.] Conſtituting the ſides
The lower part of the parietal and upper part of the tem-
poºl bones were fraćtured. Sharp's Surgery.
AR1 ETARY. n.ſ. [tarietaire, Fr. taries, Lat.] An herb. Ainſ.
PA/RING.. n. - --- - - -
º ...ſ.º. *..] That which is pared off any
Virginity breeds mit
- es; much lik -
itſelf to the very parin &gt; e a cheeſe; and conſumes
- Shakeſpeare.
2.
To his gueſt, tho’ no way ſpating,
He eat himſelf the rind and paring. Pºp.
In May, after rain, pare off the ſurface of the earth, and
with the parings raiſe your hills high, and enlarge their
breadth. 41.rtimer’s Huſſandry.
PA/F Is. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſ.
PARISH, n.ſ. [parochia, low Lat, paroiſ, Fr. of the Greek
wzéoºkſz, i. e. accolarum conventus, accolatus, ſacra vicinia.]
The particular charge of a ſecular prieſt. Every church is ei-
ther cathedral, conventual, or parochial : cathedral is that,
where there is a biſhop ſeated, ſo called a cathedra: conven-
tual conſiſts of regular clerks, profeſſing ſome order of reli-
gion, or of a dean and chapter, or other college of ſpiritual
men: parochial is that which is inſtituted for ſaying divine ſer-
vice, and adminiſtring the holy ſacraments to the people, dwel-
ling within a certain compaſs of ground near unto it. Our
realm was firſt divided into pariſhes by Honorius, archbiſhop
of Canterbury, in the year of our Lord 636. Cowel.
Dametas came piping and dancing, the merrieſt man in a
pariſh. Sidney:
The tythes, his pariſh freely paid, he took ;
But never ſu'd, or curs'd with bell or book. Dryden.
PA'Rºsh. adj.
1. Belon ing to the pariſh; having the care of the pariſh.
A tariſh prieſt was of the pilgrim train,
An awful, reverend and religious man. Dryden.
Not pariſh clerk, who calls the pſalms ſo clear. Gay.
The office of the church is performed by the pariſh prieſt,
at the time of his interment. Ayliff.
A man, after his natural death, was not capable of the leaſt
pariſh office. A buthnot and Pope's A1art. Scrib.
Maintained by the pariſh.
The ghoſt and the pariſh girl are entire new charašters. Gay.
PAR.'s Hio N.E.R. m. ſ. [parºiſien, Fr. from pariſh.] One that
belongs to the pariſh.
I praiſe the Lord for you, and ſo may my pariſhinºrs ; for
their ſons are well tutor’d by you. Shakeſpeare.
Hail biſhop Valentine, whoſe day this is,
All the air is thy dioceſe;
And all the chirping choriſters
And other birds are thy pariſhioners. Donne.
In the greater out pariſhes, many of the pariſhioners, thro'
neglect, do periſh. Grant.
I have depoſited thirty marks, to be diſtributed among the
poor pariſhioners. Addison's Speciatºr.
PA'RIT cr. n. f. [for apparitor.] A beadle; a ſummoner of
the courts of civil law.
You ſhall be ſummon'd by an hoſt of paritours; you ſhall
be ſentenced in the ſpiritual court. Dryden.
PA'RITY. m. ſ. ſparité, Fr. paritas, Lat...] Equality; reſemblance.
We may here juſtly tax the diſhoneſty and ſhamefulneſs of
the mouths, who have upbraided us with the opinion of a
certain ſtoical parity of fins. Hall.
That Chriſt or his apoſtles ever commanded to ſet up ſuch
a party of preſbyters, and in ſuch a way as thoſe Scots endea-
vour, I think is not very diſputable. K. Charles.
Survey the total ſet of animals, and we may, in their legs
or organs of progreſſion, obſerve an equality of length and
parity of numeration; that is, not any to have an odd leg, or
the movers of one ſide not exactly anſwered by the other.
- Brown's Walgar E roºrs.
Thoſe accidental occurrences, which excited Socrates to
the diſcovery of ſuch an invention, might fall in with that
man that is of a perfect parity with Socrates. Hale.
Their agreement, in eſſential characters, makes rather
an identity than a parity. Glanville.
Women could not live in that parity and equality of expence
with their huſbands, as now they do. ... Grant.
By an exact parity of reaſon, we may argue, if a man has
no ſenſe of thoſe kindneſſes that paſs upon him, from ºne like
himſelf, whom he ſees and knows, how much leſs ſhall his
heart be affected with the grateful ſenſe of his favours, whom
he converſes with only by imperfect ſpeculations, by the diſ-
courſes of reaſon, or the diſcoveries of faith Sºuth's Sermon.
By parity of reaſon, we muſt expect a peace ſº much worſe
about two years hence. Swift's Miſcellanies.
PARK. n.ſ. ſpearruc, Sax, parº, Fr.] A piece of ground in-
cloſed and ſtored with wild beaſts of chaſe, which a man may
have by preſcription or the king's grant. Manwood, in his
foreſt-ſaw, defines it thus: a park is a place for privilege for
wild beaſts of venery, and alſo for other wild beaſts that
are beaſts of the foreſt and of the chaſe: and thoſe wild
beaſts are to have a firm peace and protection there, ſo that
no man may hurt or chaſe them within the park, without li-
cenſe of the owner: a park is of another nature, than either
a chaſe or a warren ; for a park muſt be incloſed, and may
not lie open ; if it does, it is a good cauſe of ſeizure into the
king's hands: and the owner cannot have action againſt ſuch
as hunt in his park, if it lies open. Cowel.
We have parks and incloſures of all ſorts of beaſts and
birds, which we uſe not only for view or rareneſs, but like-
wiſe for diffections and trials. Bacon.
9 To PARK.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R.
P A R
f
To PARK. v. a. [from the noun..] To incloſe as in a park.
How are we park'd, and bounded in a pale :
A little herd of England's tim’rous deer,
Maz'd with a yelping kennel of French curs. Shakespeare
PARKER. n.ſ. (from park.] . A park-keeper. Ainſworth.
parkle Aves. n.ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
PAR le. n.ſ.. [from parler, French.] Converſation; talk;
oral treaty; oral diſcuſſion of any thing.
Of all the gentlemen,
That every day with parle encounter me,
In thy opinion, which is worthieſt love?
Our trumpet call'd you to this general park.
The biſhop, by a parle, is, with a ſhow
Of combination, cunningly betray'd. Daniel.
why meet we thus, like wrangling advocates,
To urge the juſtice of our cauſe with words?
I hate this parle; 'tis tame: if we muſt meet,
Give me my arms. . . Rowe's Ambitious Step-mother.
To PAZRLEY. v. n. [from parler, French..] To treat by word
of mouth; to talk; to diſcuſs any thing orally. It is much
uſed in war for a mecting of enemies to talk.
A Turk deſired the captain to ſend ſome, with whom they
might more conveniently parley. Knolles's Hiff. of the Turks.
He parly with her a while, as imagining ſhe would adviſe
him to proceed. Broome."
PA'Riley, n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Oral treaty; talk; confe-
rence; diſcuſſion by word of mouth. -
Seck rather by parley to recover them, than by the ſword. Sid.
Well, by my will, we ſhall admit no parley :
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſp.
A rotten caſe abides no handling. Shakeſpeare.
In ſuch a parly ſhould I anſwer thee. Shakeſp.
Summon a parley, we will talk with him. Shakeſp.
Let us reſolve never to have any parley with our luſts, but
to make ſome conſiderable progreſs in our repentance. Calamy.
No gentle means could be eſſay’d;
‘Twas beyond parly when the ſiege was laid. Dryden.
Force never yet a generous heart did gain;
We yield on parley, but are ſtorm'd in vain. Dryden.
Yet when ſome better fated youth
Shall with his am’rous parley move thee,
Reflect one moment on his truth,
Who, dying thus, perſiſts to love thee. - Prior.
PARLIAMENT. n.ſ. [ parliamentum, low Latin; parlement,
French..] In England, is the aſſembly of the king and three
eſtates of the realm ; namely, the lords ſpiritual, the lords
temporal, and commons, for the debating of matters touch-
ing the commonwealth, eſpecially the making and correcting
of laws; which aſſembly or court is, of all others, the high-
eſt, and of greateſt authority. Cowel.
The king is fled to London,
To call a preſent court of parl ament. Shakeſpeare.
Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
To make a ſhambles of the parliament houſe. Shakeſpeare.
The true uſe of parliaments is very excellent ; and be often
called, and continued as long as is neceſſary. Bacon.
I thought the right way of parliaments the moſt ſafe for
my crown, as beſt pleaſing to my people. King Charles.
Theſe are mob readers: if Virgil and Martial ſtood for
parliament-men, we know who would carry it. Dryden.
PARLIAM E/NTARY. adj. [from parliament.] Enačted by par-
liament; ſuiting the parliament; pertaining to parliament.
To the three firſt titles of the two houſes, or lines, and
conqueſt, were added two more; the authoritics parliamentary
and papal. Bacon.
Many things,' that obtain as common law, had their ori-
ginal by parliamentary acts or conſtitutions, made in writings
by the king, lords, and commons. Hale.
Credit to run ten millions in debt, without parliamentary
ſecurity, I think to be dangerous and illegal. Swift.
PA/R Lou R. m. ſ. ſtarlºir, French ; parlatorio, Italian.]
1. A room in monaſteries, where the religious meet and converſe.
2. A room in houſes on the firſt floor, clegantly furniſhed for
reception or entertainment.
Can we judge it a thing ſeemly for a man to go about the
building of an houſe to the God of heaven, with no other
appearance than if his end were to rear up a kitchen or a
parlour for his own uſe : Iłooker.
Back again fair Alma led them right,
And ſoon into a goodly parlour brought. Fairy Queen.
It would be infinitely more ſhameful, in the dreſs of the
kitchen, to receive the entertainments of the parlour. South.
Roof and ſides were like a parlour made,
A ſoft receſs, and a cool ſummer ſhade. Dryden.
PA'RLOUS. adj. [This might ſeem to come from parler, Fr.
to ſpeak; but junius derives it, I think, rightly, from peri-
!ºus, in which ſenſe it anſwers to the Latin imprºvus.] Keen;
ſprightly ; waggiſh.
Midas durſt communicate
To none but to his wife his ears of ſtate;
One muſt be truſted, and he thought her fit,
As paſſing prudent, and a parlous wit. Dryden.
Paºloissess. n.ſ. [from parlou.J Quiskneſs; keenneſs of
temper. *
FARMA citry. m. ſ. Corruptedly for ſherma ceti. Ainſw.
PA's SFL. m.ſ. [The diminutive of petrºlla.] A punk; a ſlut.
Obſolete. Skinner.
PAR o'cHAL. adj. [parochialis, from parochia, low Latin.]
Belonging to a pariſh.
The married ſtate of parochial paſtors hath given them the
º of º ..". exact and univerſal pattern of
º!y lºg, to the people committed to their charge. Atterb.
PA'RODY. n.ſ. [parojic, Fr. 72°23'2.] A kind of writing,
in which the words of an author or his thoughts are taken,
and by a ſlight change adapted to ſome new purpoſe.
The imitations of the ancients are added together with
ſome of the parodies and alluſions to the moſt excellent of the
moderns. Pope's Dunciad.
To PA'Rody. v. a. [ parodier, Fr. from parody..] To copy by
way of parody.
I have tranſlated, or rather parodied, a poem of Horace,
in which I introduce you adviſing me. Pope.
PARo'NYMous. adj, ſixtºwo;..] Reſembling another word.
Shew your critical learning in the etymology of terms, the
ſynonimous and the paronymºus or kindred names. ///atts.
PA'Rol E. m. ſ. [parole, French.] Word given as an aſſurance;
promiſe given by a priſoner not to go away.
Love's votaries enthral each other's ſoul,
*Till both of them live but upon parole. Cleaveland.
Be very tender of your honour, and not fall in love; be-
cauſe I have a ſcruple whether you can keep your parole, if
you become a priſoner to the ladies. Swift.
PA RonoMA's IA. m.ſ. [rzgºwogarſz.] A rhetorical figure, in
which, by the change of a letter or ſyllable, ſeveral things
are alluded to. It is called, in Latin, agnominatio. Die?.
PA'Roquet. n.ſ. [parroquet, or per oguet, French..] A ſmall
ſpecies of parrot.
The great, red and blue, are parrots; the middlemoſt,
called popinjays; and the leſler, parroquets: in all above
twenty ſorts. Grew.
I would not give my paroquet
For all the doves that ever flew. Prior.
PARoNY'cHIA. n.ſ. ſ rzºvzz; paronychie, Fr. J. A pre-
ternatural ſwelling or fore under the root of the nail in one's
finger; a felon; a whitlow. Dićf.
PA'Rot (D. adj. [parotide, Fr. Twº.1%, T252 and Żrz.] Sali-
vary: ſo named becauſe near the ears.
Beaſts and birds, having one common uſe of ſpittle, are
furniſhed with the parotid glands, which help to º the
mouth with it. rew.
PA'Rotus. n.ſ. [rzº".] A tumour in the glandules behind
and about the ears, generally called the emunétories of the
brain; though, indeed, they are the external fountains of
the ſaliva of the mouth. - Wiſeman.
PA'Roxysm. n.ſ. [Tzºugač; ; paroxyſme, French..] A fit;
periodical exacerbation of a diſeaſe. -
I fancied to myſelf a kind of eaſe, in the change of the
paroxyſm. Dryden.
Amorous girls, through the fury of an hyſterick paroxyſm,
are caſt into a trance for an hour. Harvey.
The greater diſtance of time there is between the paroxyſmi,
the fever is leſs daugerous, but more obſtinate. Arbuthnot.
PA'RRicide. n.ſ. [parricide, French 3 par ricida, Latin.]
I. One who deſtroys his father.
I told him the revenging gods.
'Gainſt parricides did all the thunder bend;
Spoke with how manifold and ſtrong a bond
The child was bound to th' father. -
2. One who deſtroys or invades any to whom he owes particu-
lar reverence ; as his country or patron.
3. [Parricide, Fr. parricidium, Lat..] The murder of a father;
murder of one to whom reverence is due.
Although he were a prince in military virtue approved, and
likewiſe a good law-maker; yet his cruelties and particides
weighed down his virtues. Bacon.
Morat was always bloody, now he's baſe ;
And has ſo far in uſurpation gone,
He will by parricide ſecure the throne. Drydºn.
PARR1c1/DIAL. Nadj. [from parricida, Latin.]. Relating to
PARR1c1'Dio Us, ; particide; committing particide. -
He is now paid in his own way, the parricidious animal,
and puniſhment of murtherers is upon him. Brown.
PA'RRoT. n.ſ. [perroquet, French.) A particoloured bird of
the ſpecies of the hooked bill, remarkable for the exact ini-
tation of the human voice. -
Some will ever nicle peep through their eyes,
And laugh like parrots at a bag-piper. Shakeſpeare.
who taught the parrot human notes to try *
‘Twas witty want, fierce hunger to appeaſe. Dryden.
The great, red, and blue, ſº of theſe, the middle-
moſt are called popinjays; and the leſler, Parroquets: in all
above twenty ſouts. Grew.
To PARRY. v. n. [parer, French.] To put by thruſts; to fence:
A man of courage, who cannot fence, and will put all
upon one thruſt, and not ſtand parrying, has the odds againſt
a moderate fencer. Locke.
- I could
Shakespeare.
&gt;.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R
P A R
i
—-
I could
By dist of logick ſtrike the mºtº .
With learned ſkill, nºw puſh, now parry,
From Darii to Bocardo vary.
To F. º. a. ſtrom Paris Hºt
into the clements or parts of ſpeech.
in grammar ſchools. - - -
ill i. in conſtruc the letter into Engliſh, and parſ; it over
perfectly. Mºham's º
J. f.holars reduce the words to their original, to the fir
caſe of nouns, or firſt tenſe of verbs, and give an account of
their formations and changes, their ſyntax and dependencies,
which is called parſing. Iſaats's Improv. of the Mind.
Panjºo's rous. aff. [from paſmºny.] Covetous; frugal;
ſparing. It is ſometimes of a good, ſometimes of a bad ſenſe.
A prodigal king is nearer a tyrant, than a parſimºnieks;
for fire at home draweth not his contemplations abroad, but
want ſupplieth itſelf of what is next. - Bacon.
Extraordinary funds for one campaign mºy ſpare us the ex:
pence of many years, whereas a long paſmonious war will
drain us of more men and money. Addiſon.
Paſmoniºus age and rigid wiſdom. . - Rowe.
Passrºo’iously. adv. [from paſmºniºuſ.] Covetouſly;
ally ; ſparingly.
ſº iº * parſmoniºſ, becauſe they only ſpent
their own treaſure for the good of their poſterity; whereas
we ſquandered away the treaſures of our poſterity. - Swift.
Parsºo'Niousness. n. / [from parſimoniºuſ.] A diſpoſition
to ſpare and ſave. - - -
PARSIMONY. n.ſ. ſparſimonia, Latin.] Frugality; cove-
touſneſs; niggardlineſs; ſaving temper.
The ways to enrich are many: parſimony is one of the
beſt, and yet is not innocent; for it withholdeth men from
works of liberality. Bacon.
Theſe people, by their extreme parſimony, ſoon grow into
wealth from the ſmalleſt beginnings. Swift.
PA'Rsley. m. ſ. [ perſºl, Fr. apium, Lat. perſi, Welſh.] The
leaves are divided into wings, growing upon a branched rib,
and for the moſt part cut into ſmall ſegments: the petals of
the flowers are whole and equal, each flower being ſucceeded
by two gibbous channelled ſeeds. A/iller.
A wench married in the afternoon, as ſhe went to the gar-
den for parſley to ſtuff a rabbit. Shakeſpeare.
Green beds of parſley near the river grow. Dryden.
Sempronia dug Titus out of the parſley-bed, as they uſe to
tell children, and thereby became his mother. Locke.
PA'RSNEP. m. ſ. [paſtinaca, Latin.] A plant with roſe and
umbellated flowers, conſiſting of many petals or leaves placed
orbicularly, and reſting on the empalement, which turns to
a fruit compoſed of two ſeeds, which are oval, and generally
caſting off their cover; to which you may add, that the leaves
are winged and large. Miller.
November is drawn in a garment of changeable green,
and black bunches of parſnºps and turneps in his right hand.
Peacham on Blazoning.
PA'RSON. m. ſ. [Derived cither from perſºna, becauſe the
parſºn omnium perſºnan in eccleſia ſuſtinct; or from paro-
cheamus, the pariſh prieſt. J
1. The prieſt of a pariſh ; one that has a parochial charge or
cure of ſouls.
Abbot was preferred by king James to the biſhoprick of Co-
wentry and Litchfield, before he had been parſon, vicar, or
Prior.
in..] To reſolve a ſentence
It is a word only uſed
curate of any pariſh church. Clarendon.
2. A clergyman.
Sometimes comes ſhe with a tithe pig's tail,
Tickling the parſon as he lies aſleep;
Then dreams he of another benefice. Shakeſp.
3. It is applied to the teachers of the preſbyterians.
PA'Rºsa GE. m. ſ. I from parſºn. j. The benefice of a
pariſh.
I have given him the parſºnage of the pariſh.
PART. n. ſ. ſpars, Latin.]
1. Something leſs than the whole;
from a larger quantity.
Helen's checks, but not her heart,
Atalanta's better part. Shake?.
The people ſtood at the nether part of the mount.
- Exodus xix. 17.
This law wanted not parts of prudent and deep forefight;
for it took away occaſion to pry into the king's title. Bacon.
The citizens were for the moſt part ſlain or taken. Knolles.
Henry had divided
The perſon of himſelf into four parts. Daniel.
but .. conclude that to happen often, which happeneth
that º 3 that never, which happeneth but ſeldom; and
º happeneth for the moſt part. Brown.
had º As a ſoldier, which were eminent, he
the politial º, º being a very sº
When your judgment i.i. grow ſtronger, it will be ne.
ceſſary to examiné, part b - -
º - y Part, thoſe works which ha
gºven reputation to the maſºn." ' W B.
Addison.
a portion ; a quantity taken
Of heavenly part, and part of earthly blood;
A mortal woman mixing with a god. Drydºn.
Our ideas of extenſion and number, do they not contain a
ſecret relation of the parts 2 Lºcke.
2. Member. -
He fully poſſeſſed the revelation he had received from God:
all the parts were formed, in his mind, into one harmonious
body. Lºcke.
3. That which, in diviſion, falls to each.
Go not without thy wife, but let me bear
My part of danger, with an equal ſhare. Dryden.
Had I been won, I had deſerv'd your blame;
But ſure my part was nothing but the ſhame. Dryder.
4. Share; concern.
Foraſmuch as the children are partakers of fleſh and blood,
he alſo took part of the ſame. Hebrews ii. 14.
Sheba ſaid, we have no part in David, neither have we in-
heritance in the ſon of Jeſſe. 2 Samuel xx. 1.
The ungodly made a covenant with death, becauſe they
are worthy to take part with it. ///dom i. 16.
Agamemnon provokes Apollo, whom he was willing to
appeaſe afterwards at the coſt of Achilles, who had no part
in his fault. Pope.
5. Side; party.
Michael Caſio,
When I have ſpoken of you diſpraiſingly,
Hath ta'en your part. Shakeſpeare.
And that he might on many props repoſe,
He ſtrengths his own, and who his part did take. Daniel.
Let not thy divine heart
Forethink me any ill;
Deſtiny may take thy part,
And may thy fears fulfill. Donne,
Some other pow'r
Might have aſpir'd, and me, tho' mean,
Drawn to his part. Milton.
Call up their eyes, and fix them on your example; that ſo
natural ambition might take part with reaſon and their intereſt
to encourage imitation. Glanville.
A brand preſerv'd to warm ſome prince's heart,
And make whole kingdoms take her brother's part. If aller.
The arm thus waits upon the heart,
So quick to take the bully's part;
That one, tho' warm, decides more ſlow,
Than t’ other executes the blow.
6. Something relating or belonging.
For Zelmane's part, ſhe would have been glad of the fall,
which made her bear the ſweet burden of Philoclea, but that
ſhe feared ſhe might receive ſome hurt. Sidney.
For my part, I would entertain the legend of my love
with quiet hours. sºft. Henry IV.
For your part, it not appears to me,
That you ſhould have an inch of any ground
To build a grief upon. Shake?. Henry IV.
For my part, I have no ſervile end in my labour, which
may reſtrain or embaſe the feedom of my poor judgment. .
//otton.
For my part, I think there is nothing ſo ſecret that ſhall
not be brought to light, within the compaſs of the world.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Prior.
7. Particular office or charader.
The pneumatical part, which is in all tangible bodies, and
hath ſome affinity with the air, performeth the parts of the
air: as, when you knock upon an empty barrel, the ſound
is, in part, created by the air on the outſide, and, in part,
by the air in the inſide. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Accuſe not nature, ſhe hath done her part ; -
Do thou but thine. Milton's Paradº e Lºſ’.
8. Character appropriated in a play.
That part
was aptly fitted, and naturally performed. Shakespeare.
Have you the lion's part written ? give it me, for an ſlow
of ſtudy. Shakespeare, Midſummer Night's Dream.
God is the maſter of the ſcénes: we muſt not chuſe which
part we ſhall act; it concerns us only to be careful, that we
do it well. Taylor's holy Living.
eſs ; duty.
9. º them i. ſo furniſhed and inſtructed for the military
part, as they may defend themſelves. Bacon.
10. Action; conduct.
Find him, my lord,
And chide him hither ſtraight: this part of his
Conjoins with my diſeaſe.
11. Relation reciprocal. -
Inquire not whether the ſacraments confer grace by their
own excellency, becauſe they, who affirm they do, require ſo
much duty on our parts, as they alſo do, who attribute the
effect to our moral diſpoſition. Tºlº
The ſcripture tells us the terms of this covenant on Gºd's
part and our's ; namely, that he will be our Gºd, and we ſhall
be his people. Tillotſon's Sº man.
Shakeſpeare.
7<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">**
º,
º,
º,
:)
º:
#,
P A R
It might be deem’d, on our hiſtorian's part,
Or too much negligence, or want of art,
If he forgot the vaſt magnificence
Of royal Theſeus, Dryden,
12. In good part 3 in ill part; as well done; as ill done.
God accepteth it in good part, at the hands of faithful
men. Hooker.
13. [In the plural.] Qualities; powers ; faculties; or accom-
liſhments.
Who is courteous, noble, liberal, but he that hath
the example before his eyes of Amphialus; where are all he-
roical parts, but in Amphialus Sidney.
Such licentious parts tend, for the moſt part, to the hurt
of the Engliſh, or maintenance of their own lewd liberty.
Spenſer on Ireland.
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man,
Which honour does acknowledge. Shakeſp.
Solomon was a prince adorned with ſuch parts of mind,
and exalted by ſuch a concurrence of all proſperous events to
make him magnificent. South's Sermons.
The Indian princes diſcover fine parts and excellent endow-
ments, without improvement. Felton on the Claſſicks.
14. [In the plural.] Quarters; regions; diſtricts.
Although no man was, in our parts, ſpoken of, but he,
for his manhood; yet, as though therein he excelled himſelf,
he was called the courteous Amphialus. Sidney.
When he had gone over thoſe parts, he came into Greece.
Acts xx. 2.
All parts reſound with tumults, plaints, and fears,
And griefly death, in ſundry ſhapes, appears. Dryden,
PART. adv. Partly ; in ſome meaſure.
For the fair kindneſs you have ſhew'd me,
And part being prompted, by your preſent trouble,
I'll lend you ſomething. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
To PART. v. a.
1. To divide; to ſhare; to diſtribute.
All that believed, ſold their goods, and parted them to all
men, as every man had need. Act; ii. 45.
Jove himſelf no leſs content wou'd be
To part his throne, and ſhare his heav'n with thee. Pope.
2. To ſeparate; to diſunite.
A chariot of fire parted them both aſunder, and Elijah
went up into heaven. 2 Kings ii. II.
Nought but death ſhall part thee and me. Ruth i. 17.
All the world,
As 'twere the bus'neſs of mankind to part us,
Is arm'd againſt my love, Dryden.
3. To break into pieces.
Part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon.
4. To keep aſunder.
In the narrow ſeas, that part
The French and Engliſh, there miſcarried
A veſſel of our country. Shakeſp.
5. To ſeparate combatants.
Who ſaid
King John did fly, an hour or two before
The ſtumbling night did part our weary powers. Shakeſp.
Jove did both hoſts ſurvey,
And, when he pleas'd to thunder, part the fray. Waller.
6. To ſecern.
The liver minds his own affair,
And parts and ſtrains the vital juices. Prior.
To PART. v. m.
1. To be ſeparated.
Powerful hands will not part
Eaſily from poſſeſſion won with arms.
'Twas for him much eaſier to ſubdue
Thoſe foes he fought with, than to part from you. Dryd.
2. To quit each other.
He wrung Baſſanio's hand, and ſo they parted. Shakeſp.
This was the deſign of a people, that were at liberty to
part aſunder, but deſired to keep in one body. Locke.
What! part, for ever part P. unkind Iſmena;
Oh! can you think, that death is half ſo dreadful,
As it would be to live without thee. Smith.
If it pleaſes God to reſtore me to my health, I ſhall make
a third journey; if not, we muſt part, as all human creatures
have parted. Swift.
3. To take farewel.
Leviticus ii. 6.
Milt. Par. Rºg.
Ere I could
Give him that parting kiſs, which I had ſet
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father. Shakepſ.
Nuptial bow'r by me adorn'd, from thee
How ſhall I part, and whither wander. Milton.
Upon his removal, they parted from him with tears in their
eyes. Swift.
4. To have ſhare.
As his part is, that goeth down to the battle, ſo ſhall his
part be, that tarrieth by the ſtuff; they ſhall part alike.
Iſaiah xxx, 24.
5 [Partir, Fr.] To go away; to ſet out.
–
- - —- - -
- - -
6. To PART with.
P A R
So parted they ; the angel up to heaven
From the thick ſhade, and Adam to his bow'r. Aſhen.
&gt; Thy father
Pºbrac'd me, parting for the Etrurian land. Dryden.
To quit; to reſign; to loſe ; to be ſeparated
from.
For her ſake, I do rearu her boy :
And for her ſake, I will º part º him. Shakespeare .
An affectionate wiſe, when in fear of parting with her be-
loved huſband, heartily deſired of God'his fire or ſociety,
upon any conditions that were not finful. Taylor
Celia, for thy ſake, I part yuor.
With all that grew ſo near my heart;
And that I may ſucceſsful prove,
Transform myſelf to what you love. Iłaller
Thou marble hew'ſt, ere long to part with breath, -
And houſes rear'ſt, unmindful of thy death. Sandys.
Pixiviate ſalts, though, by piercing the bodies of vege-
tables, they diſpoſe them to part readily with their tin&amp;ture;
3. ſome tinétures they do not only draw out, but likewiſe
ºf . - Boyle.
The ideas of hunger and warmth are ſome of the firſt that
children have, and which they ſcarce ever part with. Locke.
What a deſpicable figure muſt mock-patriots make, who
venture to be hang'd for the ruin of thoſe civil rights, which
their anceſtors, rather than part with, choſe to be cut to
pieces in the field of battle? Addison's Freeholder.
The good things of this world ſo delightin, as remember,
that we are to part with them, to exchange them for more
durable enjoyments. Atterbury's Sermons.
As for riches and power, our Saviour plainly determines,
that the beſt way to make them bleſfings, is to part with
them. Swift's Miſcellanies.
PARTA ble. adj. [from part.] Diviſible; ſuch as may be
parted. -
His hot love was partable among three other of his mi-
ſtreſſes. Camden’s Remains.
PARTAGE. m. ſ. [partage, Fr.] Diviſion; ačt of ſharing or
parting. A word merely French.
Men have agreed to a diſproportionate and unequal poſſeſ-
ſion of the earth, having found out a way, how a man may
fairly poſſeſs more land, than he himſelf can uſe the produćt
of, by receiving, in exchange, for the overplus, gold and
ſilver: this partage of things, in an equality of private poſ-
ſeſſions, men have made pračticable out of the bounds of ſo-
ciety, without compact, only by putting a value on gold and
ſilver, and tacitely agreeing in the uſe of money. Locke.
To PA(RTAkE. v. m. Preterite, I partook : participle paſſive,
p ple p
partaken. ſpart and take..]
1. To have ſhare of anything; to take ſhare with.
Partake and uſe my kingdom as your own,
And ſhall be yours while ; command the crown. Dryden.
How far brutes partake in this faculty, is not eaſy to deter-
mine. Locke.
2. To participate; to have ſomething of the property, nature,
claim, or right.
The attorney of the dutchy of Lancaſter partakes partly of
a judge, and partly of an attorney-general. Bacon.
3. To be admitted to ; not to be excluded.
You may partake of anything we ſay : -
We ſpeak no treaſon. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
4. Sometimes with in before the thing partaken of
I took occaſion to conječture, how far brutes partook with
men, in any of the intelle&amp;tual faculties. Locke.
Truth and falſhood have no other trial, but reaſon and
* proof, which they made uſe of to make themſelves knowing,
and ſo muſt others too, that will partake in their knowledge.
Locke.
5. To combine; to enter into ſome deſign. An unuſual ſenſe.
As it prevents factions and partakings, ſo it keeps the rule
and adminiſtration of the laws uniform. Hale.
To PARTA’KE. v. a.
1. To ſhare; to have partin.
By and by, thy boſom ſhall partake
The ſecrets of my heart. Shakespeare
At ſeaſon fit, -
Let her with thee partake, what thou haſt heard. Milton.
My royal father lives,
Let ev'ry one partake the general joy. Dryden.
2. To admit to part; to extend participation. Obºlº”
My friend, hight Philemon, I did partake
Of all my love, and all my privity, -
Who greatly joyous ſeemed for my fake. Fa. Queen.
Your exultation partake to every one. Shakeſp.
PARTA'KER. n.ſ.. [from partaše.] - -
1. A partner in £º. ; a ſharer of any thing; an aſſociate
with. -
"hey whom earneſt lets hinder from being partakers of
the whole, have yet, through length of divine ſervice, op-
portunity for acceſs unto ſome reaſonable part thereof. Hooker:
19 E Didſt
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R
P A R
Didſt thou
Make us partaºrſ of a little gain ;
That now our loſs might be º: º º Shakeſp.
in ſuch ſhe muſt return at ſetting light, -
With ſuc Prior.
- artaker, witneſs of their night.
ſº jºinies were partakers of his kindneſs, and
he ſtill continued to entreat them to accept of life from him,
with tears of compaſſion, bewailed their infidelity.
Calamy’s Sermons.
2. Sometimes with in before the thing partaken.
Wiſh me partaker in thy happineſs,
When thou do'ſt meet good hap. Shakeſp.
If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood ºf the prophets.
Matthew xxiii. 39.
and,
3. Accomplice; aſſociate. -
Thou conſentedt, and haſ been partaker with adulteers:
Pſalm l. 18.
He took upon him the perſon of the duke of ork, and
Bacon.
drew with him complices and partaºri.
PARTER. m. ſ. [from part.) One that parts or ſeparates.
The chief parter of the fray was night, which, with her
black arms, pulled their malicious fights one from the other.
Sidney.
PARTERRE. m. ſ. ſparterre, Fr.] A level diviſion of ground,
that, for the ſº faces the ſouth and beſt front of an
houſe, and is generally furniſhed with greens, flowers, &amp;c.
Miller.
There are as many kinds of gardening, as of poetry; your
makers of parterres and flower gardens are epigramatiſts and
ſonneteers. Spectator, N° 477.
The vaſt parterres a thouſand hands ſhall make ;
Loſ Cobham comes, and floats them with a lake.
PA'RTIAL, adj. [partial, French.]
1. Inclined antecedently to favour one party in a cauſe, or one
ſide of the queſtion more than the other. - - -
Ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the
law. 44al. ii. 9.
2. Inclined to favour without reaſon. -
Self-love will make men partial to themſelves and friends,
and ill nature, paſſion, and revenge will carry them too far in
puniſhing others; and hence, God hath appointed govern-
Pope.
ments to reſtrain the partiality and violence of men. Locke.
Authors are partial to their wit, 'tis true,
But are not criticks to their judgment too. Pope.
In theſe, one may be fincerer to a reaſonable friend, than
to a fond and partial parent. Pope.
3. Affecting only one part; ſubſiſting only in a part; not ge-
neral; not univerſal; not total.
If we compare theſe partial diſſolutions of the earth with
an univerſal diſſolution, we may as eaſily conceive an uni-
verſal deluge from an univerſal diſſolution, as a partial deluge
from a partial. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
That which weakens religion, will at length deſtroy it;
for the weakening of a thing is only a partial deſtruction of
it. South's Sermons.
All diſcord, harmony, not underſtood;
All partial evil, univerſal good. Pope.
PARTIALity. n. ſ. ſpartialité, Fr. from partial.] Unequal
ſtate of the judgment and favour of one above the other, with-
out juſt reaſon. - -
Then would the Iriſh party cry out partiality, and com-
plain he is not uſed as a ſubject, he is not ſuffered to have the
free benefit of the law. Spenſer on Ireland,
Partiality is properly the underſtanding's judging according
to the inclination of the will and affections, and not according
to the exact truth of things, or the merits of the cauſe. South.
As there is a partiality to opinions, which is apt to miſlead
the underſtanding; ſo there is alſo a partiality to ſtudies,
which is prejudicial to knowledge. Locke.
To PARTIALiz E. v. a. ſtartialjºr, Fr. from partial.] To
make partial. A word, perhaps, peculiar to Shakeſpeare, and
not unworthy of general uſe.
Such neighbour-nearneſs to our ſacred blood
Shºuld nothing privilege him, nor partialize
Th'unſtooping firmneſs of my upright ſoul.
PARTIALLY. adv, [from partial.] -&gt;
1. With unjuſt favour or diſlike.
2. In part; not totally.
. That ſtole into a total verity, which was but partially true
in its covert ſenſe. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
T he meſſage he brought, opened a clear proſpect of eternal
ºvation, which had been but obſcurely and partially figured
P in the ſhadows of the law. w Rogers’s Sºmºn.
º 111 Y. m. ſ. [from partible.] Diviſibility; ſeparabi-
PA *:::::: adj. [from part.] Diviſible; ſeparable.
that ºº º moulds partille, glued or cemented together,
T he * . them, when you take out the fruit. Bacon.
and, in .*}” in one circumſtance, is more weighty,
•," another, is more partible. Digby on the Soil.
PART1cipAB --
- *E. adj. [from - - -
or part. ken, j. [ Participate.] Such as may be ſhared
Shakespeare.
Plato, by his ideas, means only the divine eſſence with
this connotation, as it is variouſly imitable or participable by
created beings. Norris's Miſcellanieſ.
PART1'cIPANT. adj. [participant, Fr. from participate.] Shar-
ing; having ſhare or part. -
During the parliament, he publiſhed his proclamation, of.
fering pardon to all ſuch as had taken arms, or been partici-
pant of any attempts againſt him ; ſo as they ſubmitted them-
ſelves. Bacon.
The prince ſaw he ſhould conſer with one participant of
more than monkiſh ſpeculations. //atton.
If any part of my body be ſo mortified, as it becomes like
a rotten branch of a tree, it putrefies, and is not participant
of influence derived from my ſoul, becauſe it is now no longer
in it to quicken it. - - Hale.
To PARTicipate. v. n. (participo, Lat, participer, Fr.]
1. To partake; to have ſhare.
Th' other inſtruments
Did ſee, and hear, deviſe, inſtruct, walk, feel;
And mutually participate. Shakeſp.
2. With of.
An aged citizen brought forth all his proviſions, and ſaid,
that as he did communicate unto them his ſtore, ſo would he
participate of their wants. Hayward.
3. With in.
His delivery, and thy joy thereon,
In both which we, as next, participate. Milton.
4. To have part of more things than one.
Few creatures participate of the nature of plants and metals
both. Bacon.
God, when heav'n and earth he did create,
Form'd man, who ſhould of both participate. Denham.
Thoſe bodies, which are under a light, which is extended
and diſtributed equally through all, ſhould participate of each
others colours. Dryden.
5. To have part of ſomething common with another.
The ſpecies of audibles ſeem to participate more with local
motion, like percuſſions made upon the air. Bacon.
To PART1'cIPATE. v. a. To partake; to receive part of; to
ſhare.
As Chriſt's incarnation and paſſion can be available to no
man's good, which is not made partaker of Chriſt, neither
can we participate him without his preſence. Hooker.
The French ſeldom atchieved any honourable acts without
Scottiſh hands, who therefore are to participate the glory with
them. Camden's Remains.
Fellowſhip,
Such as I ſeek, fit to participate
All rational delight; wherein the brute
Cannot be human conſort. Mill. Par. Loft.
PARTICIPA’tion. n.ſ. [participation, Fr. from participate.]
1. The ſtate of ſharing ſomething in common.
Civil ſociety doth more content the nature of man, than
any private kind of ſolitary living; becauſe, in ſociety, this
good of mutual participation is ſo much larger. Hooker.
Their ſpirits are ſo married in conjunction, with the par-
ticipation of ſociety, that they flock together in conſent, like
ſo many wild geeſe. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
A joint coronation of himſelf and his queen might give any
countenance of participation of title. Bacon.
2. The aët or ſtate of partaking or having part of ſomething.
All things ſeek the higheſt, and covet more or leſs the par-
ticipation of God himſelf. Hooker.
Thoſe deities are ſo by participation, and ſubordinate to the
ſupreme. Stillingfleet.
What an honour, that God ſhould admit us into ſuch a
bleſſed participation of himſelf f Atterbury.
Convince them, that brutes have the leaſt participation of
thought, and they retract. Bently's Sermons.
Your genius ſhould mount above that miſt, in which 1tS
participation and neighbourhood with earth long involved it.
Pope.
3. Diſtribution; diviſion into ſhares. - -
It ſufficethnot, that the country hath wherewith to ſuſtain
even more than to live upon it, if means be wanting whereby
to drive convenient participation of the general ſtore into a
great number of well-deſervers. - Raleigh.
PART1cipial. adj. [participialis, Lat.] Having the nature of
a participle. - -
PART1c1 Pi All Y. adv. [from participle.] In the ſenſe or man-
ner of a participle. - - -
PARTICIPLE. n.ſ. [participium, Lat.]
1. A word partaking at once the qualities of a noun and verb.
A participle as is a particular fort of adjective, formed
from a verb, and together with its ſignification of action,
paſſion, or ſome other manner of exiſtence, ſignifyingthe time
thereof. Clarke's Latin Grammar.
2. Anything that participates of different things.
The participles or confiners between plants and living crea-
tures, are ſuch as are fixed, though they have a motion in
their parts: ſuch as, oyſters and cockles. Bacon.
PARTICLE. m. ſ. ſtarticule, Fr. particula, Lat.]
1. Any ſmall portion of a greater ſubſtance.
I There
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R
,
:
From any of the other unreaſonable demands, the houſes
had not given their commiſioners authority in the leaſt
particle to recede. - Clarendon.
There is not one grain in the univerſe, either too much or
too little, nothing to be added, nothing to be ſpared ; nor ſo
much as any one particle of it, that mankind may not be either
the better or the worſe for, according as 'tis applied. L’Eſtr.
- With particles of heav'nly fire,
The God of nature did his ſoul inſpire. Dryden.
Curious wits,
With rapture, with aſtoniſhment refle&amp;t,
On the ſmall ſize of atoms, which unite
To make the ſmalleſt particle of light. Blackmore.
It is not impoſſible, but that microſcopes may, at length,
be improved to the diſcovery of the particles of bodies, on
which their colours depend. Newton's Opticks.
Bleſt with more particles of heav'nly flame. Granville.
2. A word unvaried by inflexion.
*Till Arianiſm had made it a matter of great ſharpneſs and
ſubtility of wit to be a ſound believing chriſtian, men were
not curious what ſyllables or particle of ſpeech they uſed.
Hooker, b. v.
The Latin varies the ſignification of verbs and nouns, not
as the modern languages, by particles prefixed, but by chang-
ing the laſt ſyllables. Locke on Education.
Particles are the words, whereby the mind ſignifies what
connection it gives to the ſeveral affirmations and negations,
that it unites in one continued reaſoning or narration. Locke.
In the Hebrew tongue, there is a particle, conſiſting but of
one fingle letter, of which there are reckoned up above fifty
ſeveral ſignifications. Locke.
PART.’cular. adj. [particulier, French.]
1. Relating to ſingle perſons; not general.
He, as well with general orations, as particular dealing
with men of moſt credit, made them ſee how neceſſary it
was. Sidney.
As well for particular application to ſpecial occaſions, as
alſo in other manifold reſpects, infinite treaſures of wiſdom
are abundantly to be found in the holy ſcripture. Hooker.
2. Individual; one diſtinét from others.
Whereſoever one plant draweth ſuch a particular juice out
of the earth, as it qualifieth the earth, ſo as that juice, which
remaineth, is fit for the other plant; there the neighbourhood
doth good. Bacon.
This is true of a&amp;tions conſidered in their general nature or
kind, but not conſidered in their particular individual in-
ſtances. South's Sermons.
Artiſts, who propoſe only the imitation of ſuch a particular
perſon, without elečtion of ideas, have often been reproached
for that omiſſion. Dryden.
3. Noting properties or things peculiar.
Of this prince there is little particular memory; only that
he was very ſtudious and learned. Bacon.
4. Attentive to things ſingle and diſtinét.
I have been particular in examining the reaſon of chil-
dren's inheriting the property of their fathers, becauſe it will
give us farther light in the inheritance of power. Locke.
5. Single; not general.
Rather performing his general commandment, which had
ever been, to embrace virtue, than any new particular, ſprung
out of paſſion, and contrary to the former. Sidney.
6. Odd ; having ſomething that eminently diſtinguiſhes him
from others. This is commonly uſed in a ſenſe of contempt.
PART1'cula R. n.ſ.
1. A fingle inſtance; a ſingle point.
I muſt reſerve ſome particulars, which it is not lawful for
me to reveal. Bacon.
Thoſe notions are univerſal, and what is univerſal muſt
needs proceed from ſome univerſal conſtant principle; the
ſame in all particulars, which can be nothing elſe but human
Inature. South's Sermons.
Having the idea of an elephant or an angle in my mind,
the firſt and natural enquiry is, whether ſuch a thing does
exiſt and this knowledge is only of particulars. Locke.
And if we will take them, as they were directed, in parti-
cular to her, or in her, as their repreſentative, to all other wo-
men, they will, at moſt, concern the female ſex only, and
import no more but that ſubjection, they ſhould ordinarily be
in, to their huſbands. Locke.
The maſter could hardly fit on his horſe for laughing, all
the while he was giving me the particulars of this ſtory. Addison
Veſpaſian he reſembled in many particulars. Swift.
2. Individual; private perſon.
It is the greateſt intereſt of particulars, to advance the good
of the community. L’Eſtrange.
3. Private intereſt. -
... Our wiſdom muſt be ſuch, as doth not propoſe to itſelf tº
tº our own farticular, the partial and immoderate deſire
whereof poiſoneth wherefoever it taketh place; but the ſcope
*nd mark, which we are to aim at, is the publick and com-
mon good. Hooker.
They apply their minds even with hearty aftection and zeal,
at the leaſt, unto thoſe branches of publick prayer, wherein
their own particular is moved. 11.2%er, b. 5:
His general lov’d him
In a moſt dear particular. Shakeſp.
4. Private character'; ſingle ſelf; ſtate of an individual.
For his particular, I'll receive him gladly;
But not one follower. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear.
5. A minute detail of things ſingly enumerated.
The reader has a particular of the books, wherein this law
was written. Ayliffe's Parergon.
6. Diſtinét not general recital. tyliff. &amp;
- Invention is called a muſe, authors aſcribe to each of them,
in particular, the ſciences which they have invented. Dryden.
Pasticularity. m. ſ. [particularité, Fr. from particular.]
1. Diſtinét notice or enumeration; not general aſſertion.
So did the boldneſs of their affirmation accompany the
greatneſs of what they did affirm, even deſcending tº particu-
!arities, what kingdoms he ſhould overcome."
2. Singleneſs; individuality.
Knowledge imprinted in the minds of all men, whereby
both general principles for directing of human actions are com-
prehended, and concluſions derived from them, upon which
concluſions groweth, in particularity, the choice of good and
evil. Hoºker, b. ii.
3. Petty account; private incident.
To ſee the titles that were moſt agreeable to ſuch an em-
peror, the flatteries that he lay moſt open to, with the like
particularities only to be met with on medals, are certainly
not a little pleaſing. Addiſon.
4. Something belonging to ſingle perſons.
Let the general trumpet blow his blaſt,
Particularities and petty ſounds
To ceaſe. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
5. Something peculiar.
I ſaw an old heathen altar, with this particularity, that it
was hollowed like a diſh at one end; but not the end on
which the ſacrifice was laid. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
He applied himſelf to the coquette's heart; there occurred
many particularities in this diſſection. Addiſon.
o PART1'cularize., v. a...[particulariſer, Fr. from particu-
dar.] To mention diſtinétly; to detail; to ſhew minutely.
The leanneſs that afflicts us, is an inventory to particularize
their abundance. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
He not only boaſts of his parentage as an Iſraelite, but par-
ticularizes his deſcent from Benjamin. Atterbury's Sermons.
PART1'cular LY. v. a. [from particular.]
1. Diſtinétly; ſingly; not univerſally.
Providence, that univerſally caſts its eye over all the crea-
tion, is yet pleaſed more particularly to faſten it upon ſome.
South's Sermons,
Sidney.
.2. In an extraordinary degree.
This exact propriety of Virgil, I particularly regarded as a
great part of his charaćter. Dryden.
With the flower and the leaf I was ſo particularly pleaſed,
both for the invention and the moral, that I commend it to
the reader. Dryden.
To PARticulate. v. a. [from particular.] To make men-
tion ſingly. Obſolete.
I may not particulate of Alexander Hales, the irrefra-
gable doćtor. Camden's Remains.
PARTIs AN. n.ſ. [pertiſan, French.]
1. A kind of pike or halberd.
Let us
Find out the prettieſt dazied plot we can,
And make him with our pikes and partiſans
A grave. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Shall I ſtrike at it with my partiſan. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. [From parti, French..] An adherent to a faction.
Some of theſe partiſans concluded, the government had
hired men to be bound and pinnioned. Addiſon.
I would be glad any partiſan would help me to a tolerable
reaſon, that, becauſe Clodius and Curio agree with me in a
few fingular notions, I muſt blindly follow them in all. Swift.
3. The commander of a party. -
4. A commander's leading ſtaff. Ainſworth.
PART1"rio N. m. ſ. [partition, Fr. tartitio, Latin.]
1. The act of dividing; a ſtate of being divided.
We grew together,
Like to a double cherry, ſeeming parted, *
But yet an union in partition. Shakeſp.
2. Diviſion; ſeparation ; diſtinction. . . -
We have, in this reſpect, our churches divided by certain
partition, although not ſo many in number as theirs. Hooker.
Can we not
'tion make with ſpectacles ſo precious
#: . and foul º Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
We ſhall be winnow'd with ſo rough a wind,
That ev’n our corn ſhall ſeem as light as chaff,
And good from bad find no partitiºn. Shaft.
The day, month and year, meaſured by them, are uſed as
ſtandard meaſures, as likely others arbitrarily deduced from
them by partitiºn or collection, Holder on Time.
3. Part
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A R
º
To PARTI'tion. v. a.
P A R
2. Part divided from the reſt; ſeparate part.
- . . . . . . . he reſt
Lodg’d in a ſmall parºt"; } and t
Ordain’d * uſes to his Lord beſt known: Milton.
fifth different parts are ſeparated.
4. º, ..., that God, without reſpect, doth teach
us to erect between us and them a partition wall of difference,
in ſuch things indifferent as have hitherto been diſputed of
Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 6.
Make partitions of wood in a hogſhead, with holes in
them, and mark the difference of their ſound from that of an
hogſhead without ſuch partitions. Bacon.
Partition firm and ſure,
The waters underneath from thoſe above -
Dividing. Miltºn's Paradiſe Lºſ’.
fncloſures our factions have made in the church, becom"
- ll t ke other -
a great par futlozz Wa O ep th S Out of It y ºf
A I f - - - - l ſi l f
Addiſon.
opera.
The partition
where one ſin has entere
between good and evil is broken down; and
d, legions will force their way.
Rºgers's Sermonſ.
5. Part where ſeparation is made.
The mound was newly made, no fight could Paſs
Betwixt the nice partitions of the graſs,
The well-united ſods ſo cloſely lay. ... Dryden.
To divide into diſtinét parts.
Theſe fides are uniform without, though ſeverally partitioned
within. Bacon.
PARTIET. n.ſ. A name given to a hen; the original ſignifi-
cation being a ruff or band, or covering for the neck.
Hanmer.
Thou dotard, thou art woman tir’d; unrooſted
By thy dame partlet here. - Shakeſp.
Tir'd with pinn'd ruffs, and fans, and partlet ſtrips. Hall.
Dame partlet was the ſovereign of his heart ;
He feather'd her. Dryden's Fables.
PA'Rtly. adv. [from part.] In ſome meaſure; in ſome de-
gree; in part.
That part, which, ſince the coming of Chriſt, partly hath
enº, and partly ſhall hereafter embrace the chriſtian re-
ligion, we term, as by a more proper name, the church of
Chriſt. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
The inhabitants of Naples have been always very noto-
rious for leading a life of lazineſs and pleaſure, which I take
to ariſe out of the wonderful plenty of their country, that
does not make labour ſo neceſſary to them, and partly out of
the temper of their climate, that relaxes the fibres of their
bodies, and diſpoſes the people to ſuch an idle indolent hu-
In Our. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
PA'RTNER. m. ſ. [from part.]
I. Partaker; ſharer; one who has part in anything; aſſociate.
My noble partner,
You greet with preſent grace,
That he ſeems rapt withal.
Noble partners
Touch you the ſowreſt points with ſweeteſt terms. Shakeſp.
Thoſe of the race of Sem were no partners in the unbe-
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
lieving work of the tower. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
To undergo
Myſelf the total crime; or to accuſe
My other ſelf, the partner of my life. Milton.
Sapor, king of Perſia, had an heaven of glaſs, which,
proudly fitting in his eſtate, he trod upon, calling himſelf
brother to the fun and moon, and partner with the ſtars.
Peacham of Geometry.
The ſoul continues in her ačtion, till her ſº is .
qualified to bear her company. Adãºn.
2. One who dances with another.
Lead in your ladies every one; ſweet partner,
* I muſt not yet forſake you. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
To PARTNER. v. a. [from the noun..] Tº join ; to aſſociate
with a partner.
~ A lady who
So fair, and faſten’d to an empery,
Would make the great'ſ king double: to be partner'd
With tomboys, hir'd with ſelf-exhibition,
, Which your own coffers yield. Shakeſp.
PARTNERSHIP. m. ſ. [from partner.]
* Joint intereſt or property.
- He does poſſeſſion keep,
...And is too wiſe to hazard partnerſhip. Dryden
2. The union º or more in the ſame trade. -
***Ceſſary rule in alliances, partnerſhips and all man-
ner of civil dealings, to have a ſtrict regard &amp; the diſpoſition
ºf thoſe we have jo withal. L’Eſtrange.
PA'Rtook P -
• I’reterite of
PA'RTRIDGE. partake.
A bird of g "...ſ. [perdrix, Fr. pertris, Welſh; perdix, Lat.]
anne.
he king i
a partrid g is come out to ſeek a flea, as when one doth hunt
- $* in the mountains, - i Sam, xxvi, 29
party P
PAR ru'RIFN.T. adj. [parturiens, Lat.] About to bring forth, -
PARTUR1'tion. m. ſ. [from parturio, Latin.] The ſtate of
being about to bring forth.
Conformation of parts is required, not only unto the pre-
vious conditions of birth, but alſo unto the parturition or very
birth. Brown's Pulgar Errourſ.
PA'Rºry. n.ſ. [partić, French..]
1. A number of perſons confederated by ſimiliarity of deſigns
or opinions in oppoſition to others; a faction.
when any of theſe combatants ſtrips his terms of ambi-
guity, I ſhall think him a champion for truth, and not the
iſlave of vain glory or a party. Locke.
This account of party patches will appear improbable to
thoſe, who live at a diſtance from the faſhionable world. Addison
Party writers are ſo ſenſible of the ſecret virtue of an in-
nuendo, that they never mention the q—n at length. Speciat.
This party rage in women only ſerves to aggravate animo-
ſities that reign among them. Addison Spect. Nº 81.
As he never leads the converſation into the violence and
rage of party diſputes, I liſtened to him with pleaſure. Tatler.
Diviſion between thoſe of the ſame party, expoſes them to
their enemies. Pope.
The moſt violent party men are ſuch, as, in the condućt of
their lives, have diſcovered leaſt ſenſe of religion or mora-
'3. Swift.
ne of two litigants.
When you are hearing a matter between party and party,
if pinched with the cholick, you make faces like mummers,
and diſmiſs the controverſy more entangled by your hearing:
all the peace you make in their cauſe, is calling both parties
knaves. Shakeſp.
The cauſe of both parties ſhall come before the judges.
Exodus xxii. 9.
If a biſhop be a party to a ſuit, and excommunicates his
adverſary; ſuch excommunication ſhall not bar his adver-
ſary from his action. Ayliffe's Parergon.
3. One concerned in any affair.
The child was priſoner to the womb, and is
Free’d and erfranchis'd; not a party to
The anger of the king, nor guilty of
The treſpaſs of the queen. Shakespeare.
I do ſuſpect this traſh
To be a party in this injury. Shakeſp.
4. Side; perſons engaged againſt each other.
Our Foes compell'd by need, have peace embrac'd:
The peace, both parties want, is like to laſt. Dryden.
5. Cauſe; ſide.
A:gle came in, to make their party good. Dryden.
6. A ſelect aſſembly.
Let me extol a cat, on oyſters fed,
I'll have a party at the Bedford-head. Pope.
If the clergy would a little ſtudy the arts of converſation,
they might be welcome at every party, where there was the
leaſt regard for politeneſs or good ſenſe. Swift.
7. Particular perſon; a perſon diſtinct from, or oppoſed to,
another.
As ſhe paced on, ſhe was ſtopped with a number of trees,
ſo thickly placed together, that ſhe was afraid ſhe ſhould,
with ruſhing through, ſtop the ſpeech of the lamentable party,
which ſhe was ſo deſirous to underſtand. Sidney.
The miniſter of juſtice may, for publick example, vir-
tuouſly will the execution of that party, whoſe pardon another,
for conſanguinity's fake, as virtuouſly may deſire. Hooker.
If the jury found, that the party ſlain was of Engliſh r3CC2
it had been adjudged felony. Bavies on Ireland.
How ſhall this be compaſt? canſt thou bring me to the
Shakeſpear's Tempeſt.
The ſmoke received into the noſtrils, cauſes the party to
lie as if he were drunk. Abbot's Deſcript. of the //orld.
The imagination of the party to be cured, is not needful to
concur; for it may be done without the knowledge of the
party wounded. Bacon's Natural Hyłory.
He that confeſſes his fin, and prays for Pardo", hath pu-
niſhed his fault: and then there is nothing left to be done by
the offended party, but to return to charity. Taylor.
Though there is a real difference between ºn and
another, yet the party, who has the advantage, uſually mag-
nifies the inequality. Collier on Pride.
8. A detachment of ſoldiers: as, he commanded that party ſent
thither.
Party-colourED. adj. [party and coloured.] Having diverſity
f colours.
Of COIO The fulſome ewes,
Then conceiving, did, in yearſing time, -
Fall party-colour'd lambs. Shakeſp. Merch. of Wenice.
The leopard was valuing himſelf upon the luſtre of his
party-coloured ſkin. L’Eſtrange.
From one father both,
Both girt with gold, and clad in party-colour'd cloth. Dryd.
Conſtrain’d him in a bird, and made him fly
With parly-colºur'd plumes a chattering pie. Dryden.
I looked<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">I looked with as much pleaſure upon the little fºrty-colºured 4. To vaniſh; to be loſt,
aſſembly, as upon a bed of tulips. Addiſon's Spect. Truſt not too much to that enchanting face;
Nor is it hard to beautify each month ---- Beauty's a charm, but ſoon the charm will paſs. Dryden,
With files of party-colour'd fruits. Phillips. 5. To be ſpent; to go away.
Four knaves in garb ſuccinét, a truſty band, The time, when the thing exiſted, is the idea of that
And party-coloured troops, a ſhining train, ſpace of duration, which paffed between ſome fixed period
Draw forth to combat on the velvet plain. Pope. and the being of that thing.
PARTy-Ju'ry. m. ſ. [in law.] A jury in ſome trials half fo-
reigners and half natives. -
PA'Rºry-MAN. n.ſ. [party and man.] A fačtious perſon; an
abettor of a party.
Party-wall. n.ſ. [party and wall.] Wall that ſeparates one
houſe from the next. -
'Tis an ill cuſtom among bricklayers to work up a whole
flory of the party-walls, before they work up the fronts.
Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
PAR/IS. n.ſ. [Fr.] A church or church porch : applied to the
mootings or law-diſputes among young ſtudents in the inns of
courts, and alſo to that diſputation at Oxford, called diſpu-
tatio in parvis. - - Bailey.
Parvitude. m. ſ. . [from parvus, Latin.] Littleneſs; mi-
nuteneſs.
The little ones of parvitude cannot reach to the ſame
floor with them. - Glanville.
PA/Rv1TY. m. ſ. [from parvus, Lat..] Littleneſs; minute-
neſs. -
What are theſe for fineneſs and parvity, to thoſe minute
animalcula diſcovered in pepper-water. Ray.
PAS. n.ſ. [French.] Precedence; right of going foremoſt.
In her poor circumſtances, ſhe ſtill preſerv'd the mien of a
gentlewoman; when ſhe came into any full aſſembly, ſhe
would not yield the pas to the beſt of them. Arbuthnot.
PA'sch Al. adj. [paſtal, French ; paſchalis, Latin.]
1. Relating to the paſſover.
2. Relating to Eaſter,
Pash. n.ſ. [paz, Spaniſh.]. A kiſs. Hammer.
Thou want'ſt a rough paſh, and the ſhoots that I have,
To be full like me. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
To PAsh. v. a. [perſen, Dutch..] To ſtrike 5 to cruſh.
With my armed fiſt
I'll paſh him o'er the face.
Thy cunning engines have with labour rais'd
My heavy anger, like a mighty weight,
To fall and paſh thee dead.
Pasque-Flower. m.ſ. ſºlº Latin.] * - **
The flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves, which are placed in
a circular order, and expand in form of a roſe; out of the
middle of which riſes a pointal, beſet, for the moſt part,
with chives, which afterward becomes a fruit, in which the
ſeeds are gathered, as it were in a little head, each ending
in a ſmall hair: to which muſt be added ſome little leaves,
encompaſſing the pedicle below the flower; as the anemone,
from which the paſque-flower differs in the ſeed, ending in a
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
tail. AMiller.
PA's QUIL. m. ſ. [from paſıuino, a ſtatue at Rome, to
PA's QUIN. } which they affix any lampoon or paper of
PA'sq; INADE. ) ſatirical obſervation.j A lampoon.
He never valued any paſºuis that were dropped up and
down, to think them worthy of his revenge. Howel.
The paſquils, lampoons, and libels, we meet with now-a-
days, are a ſort of playing with the four and twenty letters,
without ſenſe, truth, or wit. Tatler, N° 92.
To Pass. v. n. [paſſer, French; paſſis, a ſtep, Latin.]
1. To go; to move from one place to another; to be pro-
greſſive.
Tell him his long trouble is paſſing . .
Out of this world. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
If I have found favour in thy fight, paſs not away from
thy ſervant. Geneſis.
While my glory paſſeth by, I will put thee in a cliſt of the
rock, and will cover thee, while I paſs by. Exodus xxxiii. 22.
Thus will I cut off him that paſſeth out, and him that
returneth. Ezekiel xxxv. 7
They took the fords of Jordan, and ſuffered not a man to
poſs over. udges iii. 28.
This heap and this pillar be witneſs, that I will not paſ;
over to thee, and that thou ſhall not paſs over it and this
pillar unto me for harm. Geneſs xxxi. 52.
An idea of motion not paſſing on, is not better than idea
of motion at reſt. Locke.
Heedleſs of thoſe cares, with anguiſh ſtung,
He felt their fleeces as they paſs'd along. Pope.
If the cauſe be viſible, we ſtop at the inſtrument, and ſel-
dom paſs on to him that direéted it. Jºake's Prep. for Death.
2. To go; to make way.
Her face, her bands were torn
With paſſing through the brakes. Dryden.
3. To make tranſition from one thing to another.
Others diſſatisfied with what they have, and not truſting to
hoſe innocent ways of getting more, fall to others, and paſ;
from juſt to unjuſt. Temple's Miſcellanies.
- Locke.
We ſee, that one who fixes his thoughts very intently on
one thing, ſo as to take but little notice of the ſucceſſion of
ideas that pºſ, in his mind, whilſt he is taken up with that
earneſt contemplation, lets ſlip out of his accounta good part
of that duration, and thinks that time ſhorter than it is. Lockr.
6. To be at an end; to be over.
Their officious haſte,
Who would before have born him to the ſky,
Like eager Romans, ere all rites were paſt,
Did let too ſoon the ſacred eagle fly.
7. To die; to paſs from the preſent life to another ſtate.
The pangs of death do make him grin ;
Diſturb him not, let him paſs peaceably.
8. To be changed by regular gradation.
Inflammations are tranſlated from other parts to the lungs;
a pleuriſy eaſily paſſeth into a peripneumony. Arbuthnot.
9. To go beyond bounds. Obſolete.
Why this paſſes, Mr. Ford —you are not to go looſe any
longer, you muſt be pinnioned. Shakeſp.
10. To be in any ſtate.
I will cauſe you to paſs under the rod, and I will bring you
into the bond of the covenant. Ezekiel xx. 37.
II. To be enaëted. -
Many of the nobility ſpoke in parliament againſt thoſe
things, which were moſt grateful to his majeſty, and which
ſtill paſſed, notwithſtanding their contradićtion. Clarendon.
either of theſe bills have yet paſſed the houſe of commons,
and ſome think they may be rejected. Swift.
This pernicious projećt, if paſſed into a law, would have
been of the worſt conſequence. Swift.
12. To be effe&amp;ted ; to exiſt. Unleſs this may be thought a
noun with the articles ſuppreſſed, and be explained thus: it
came to the paſs that. ,
I have heard it enquired, how it might be brought to paſ;
that the church ſhould every where have able preachers to in-
ſtruct the people. - Hooker, b. v. ſ. 3.
When the caſe required diſfimulation, if they uſed it, it
came to paſs that the former opinion of their good faith made
them almoſt inviſible. - Bacon's Eſſays.
13. To gain reception; to become current: as, this money
will not paſs. -
That trick, ſaid ſhe, will not paſ twice. Hudibrar.
Their excellencies will not paſs for ſuch in the opinion of
the learned, but only as things which have leſs of error in
them. * Dryden.
Falſe eloquence paſſeth only where true is not underſtood,
and no body will commend bad writers, that is acquainted
with good. Felton on the Claſſickr.
The groſſeſt ſuppoſitions paſ; upon them, that the wild Iriſh
were taken in toyls; but that, in ſome time, they would
grow tame. - - Swift.
14. To be pračtiſed artfully or ſucceſsfully.
This pračtice hath moſt ſhrewdly paſt upon thee;
But when we know the grounds and authors of it,
Thou ſhalt be both the plaintiff and the judge. Shakeſ?.
Though frauds may paſs upon men, they are as open as the
light to him that ſearches the heart. L’Eſtrange.
15. To be regarded as good or ill.
He rejected the authority of councils, and ſo do all the re-
formed ; ſo that this won't paſs for a fault in him, 'till 'tis
proved one in us. Atterbury,
16. To occur; to be tranſacted.
If we would judge of the nature of ſpirits, we muſt have
recourſe to our own conſciouſneſs of what paſſes within our
own mind. Watts's Logick.
17. To be done. -
Zeal may be let looſe in matters of direét duty, as in
prayers, provided that no indirect act paſs upon them to dº-
file them. . Taylor's Rule of Living Hºly.
18. To heed; to regard.
As for theſe ſilken-coated ſlaves, I poſs not;
It is to you, good people, that I ſpeak,
Dryden,
Shakeſp.
O'er whom, in time to come, I hope to reign. Shakespeare ?.
19. To determine finally; to judge capitally. ,
Though well we may not paſs upon his life,
Without the form of juſtice; yet our Powr ,"
Shall do a court’ſy to our wrath. Shakeſp.
20. To be ſupremely excellent. -
21. To thruſt; to make a puſh in fencing. º
To ſee thee fight, to ſee thee paſs thy punéto. Shakeſp.
Both advance
Againſt each other, and with ſword and lance * * *
They laſh, they foin, they pºſ, they ſtrive to borº,
Their corſlets.
19 F 22. To omit.
***
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A S
P A S 4,
--
-
22. To omit.
Full piteous ſeems young Alma's caſe,
As in a luckleſs gameſter's place,
She would not play, yet muſt not paſs.
23. To go through the alimentary dućt. -
Subſtances hard cannot be diſſolved, but they will pºſi;
..but ſuch, whoſe tenacity exceeds the powers of digeſtion,
will neither paſs, nor be converted into aliment. Arbuthnot.
24. To be in a tolerable ſtate. -
A middling ſort of man was left well enough to paſs by his
father, but could never think he had enough, ſo long as any
had more. L’Eſtrange.
25. To PAss away. To be loſt; to glide off.
Defining the ſoul to be a ſubſtance that always thinks, can
ſerve but to make many men ſuſpect, that they have no ſouls
at all, ſince they find a good part of their lives paſs away
without thinking. Locke.
26. Tº Pass away. To vaniſh.
To PAss. v. a.
1. To go beyond.
As it is advantageable to a phyſician to be called to the cure
of a declining diſeaſe; ſo it is for a commander to ſuppreſs
a ſedition, which has paſſed the height: for in both the
noxious humour doth firſt weaken, and afterwards waſte to
nothing. - Hayward.
2. To go through as, the horſe paſſed the river.
. To ſpend ; to live through."
were I not aſſured he was removed to advantage, I ſhould
Prior.
paſs my time extremely ill without him. Collier.
You know in what deluding joys we paſt
The night that was by heav'n decreed our laſt. Dryden.
We have examples of ſuch, as paſs moſt of their nights
without dreaming. Locke.
The people, free from cares, ſerene and gay,
Paſs all their mild untroubled hours away. Addiſon.
In the midſt of the ſervice, a lady, who had paſſed the
winter at London with her huſband, entered the congrega-
tion. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 129.
4. To impart to any thing the power of moving.
Dr. Thurſton thinks the principal uſe of inſpiration to be,
to move, or paſs the blood, from the right to the left ven-
tricle of the heart. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
5. To carry haſtily.
I had only time to paſs my eye over the medals, which are
in great number. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
6. To transfer to another proprietor.
He that will paſ; his land,
As I have mine, may ſet his hand
And heart unto this deed, when he hath read ;
And make the purchaſe ſpread.
7. To ſtrain; to percolate.
They ſpeak of ſevering wine from water, paſſing it through
ivy wood. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
8. To vent; to let out.
How many thouſands take upon them to paſ; their cenſures
on the perſonal actions of others, and pronounce boldly on
the affairs of the publick. J/atts.
They will commend the work in general, butpoſ, ſo many
ſly remarks upon it afterwards, as ſhall deſtroy all their cold
praiſes. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
9. To utter ceremoniouſly.
Many of the lords and ſome of the commons paſſed ſome
tompliments to the two lords. Clarendon.
10. To utter ſolemnly.
He paſt his promiſe, and was as good as his word.
L'E/ºrange.
Herbert.
11. To tranſmit.
Waller paſſed over five thouſand horſe and foot by New-
bridge. Clarendon, b. viii.
12. To put an end to.
This night
We'll paſs the buſineſs privately and well.
13. To ſurpaſs ; to excel.
She more ſweet than any bird on bough
Would ºſtentimes emongſt them bear apart,
...And ſtrive to paſs, as ſhe could well enough,
Their native muſic by her ſkilful art. Fairy Queen
Wh9m de'ſt thou paſs in beauty : Ezekiel xxxii. 16.
Martial, thou gav'ſt far nobſer epigrams • I9.
To thy Domitian, than I can my James;
º ". .# ſubject I paſs thee,
Yºu flattered'ſt thine, mine cannot fl y
The anceſtor and all his heirs, atter'd be. B. Johnſ.
hough they in numb &gt;
ãºmbs tº the flat of hewn,
I4. *: to neglect.
... Yºondly paſs our proffer'd offer
Tis ºf the rounder of your old fac’d walls
an hide you
-. Shakeſpeare's King Gohn.
Put *: erleap that cuſtom ; for I ... ing jo pp.
É.” “and naked, and entreat them;
Pleaſe
you that I may paſ; this doing. Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
Da vies -
&amp;:
Ipaſ the wars, that ſpotted linx's make -
With their fierce rivals. - Dryden.
I paſs their warlike pomp, their proud array. Dryden.
15. To tranſcend; to tranſgreſs. -
They did pºſs thoſe bounds, and did return ſince. that
time. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
16. To admit; to allow.
The money of every one that paſſeth the account, let the
prieſts take. 2 Kings xii. 4.
I'll paſ; them all upon account,
As if your nat'ral ſelf had don't.
17. To enact a law. -
How does that man know, but the decree may be already
paſſed againſt him, and his allowance of mercy ſpent. South.
Among the laws that paſs'd, it was decreed,
That conquer’d Thebes from bondage ſhould be freed.
Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Could the ſame parliament which addreſſed with ſo much
zeal and earneſtneſs againſt this evil, paſ; it into a law? Swift.
His majeſty's miniſters propoſed the good of the nation,
Hudibras.
when they adviſed the paſſing this patent. Swift.
18. To impoſe frandulently.
Th’ indulgent mother did her care employ,
And paſs'd it on her huſband for a boy. Dryden.
19. To practice artfully ; to make ſucceed. -
Time lays open frauds, and after that diſcovery there is
no paſſing the ſame trick upon the mice. L’Eſtrange.
20. To ſend from one place to another: as, paſs that beggar to
his own pariſh. -
21. To Pass away. To ſpend ; to waſte.
The father waketh for the daughter, leſt ſhe paſs away the
flower of her age. Eccluſ, xlii. 9.
22. To PAss by. To excuſe; to forgive. -
However God may paſs by ſingle ſinners in this world; yet
when a nation combines againſt him, the wicked ſhall not go
unpuniſhed. Tillotſon's Sermons.
23. To PAss by. To neglect; to diſregard.
How far ought this enterprize to wait upon theſe other
matters, to be mingled with them, or to paſs by them, and
give law to them, as inferior unto itſelf? Bacon.
It conduces much to our content, if we paſs by thoſe things
which happen to our trouble, and conſider that which is proſ-
perous; that, by the repreſentation of the better, the worſe
may be blotted out. Taylor's Holy Living.
Certain paſſages of ſcripture we cannot, without injury to
truth, paſs by here in ſilence. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
24. To Pass over. To omit; to let go unregarded.
Better to paſs him o'er, than to relate
The cauſe I have your mighty fire to hate. Dryden.
It does not belong to this place to have that point debated,
nor will it hinder our purſuit to paſs it over in ſilence. Watts.
The poet paſſes it over as haſtily as he can, as if he were
afraid of ſtaying in the cave. Dryden.
The queen aſked him, who he was ; but he paſſes over
this without any reply, and reſerves the greateſt part of his
ſtory to a time of more leiſure. Broome.
PAss. n. ſ. [from the verb.]
I. A narrow entrance; an avenue.
The ſhaight paſs was damm'd
With dead men. Shakeſpear's Cymbeline.
It would be eaſy to defend the paſſes into the whole coun-
try, that the king's army ſhould never be able to enter. Clar.
Truth is a ſtrong hold, fortified by God and nature, and
diligence is properly the underſtanding's laying ſiege to it; ſo
that it muſt be perpetually obſerving all the avenues and paſs
to it, and accordingly making its approaches. South.
2. Paſſage; road.
The Tyrians had no paſ to the Red Sea, but through the
territory of Solomon, and by his ſufferance. Raleigh.
Pity tempts the paſs;
But the tough metal of my heart reſiſts. Dryden.
. A permiſſion to go or come any where.
3 +. ſhall : all that "... in, and ſend them to
the lord deputy, with their ſafe conduct or paſs, to be at his
diſpoſition. Spenſer on Ireland.
We bid this be done,
when evil deeds have their permiſſive pºſ,
And not the puniſhment. Shakeſpeare.
Give quiet paſs - -
Through your dominions for this enterprize. Shakeſpeare.
A gentleman had a poſs to go beyond the ſeas. Claren.
If they ſhould ſend for a pºſs to France, the ceremony in
aſking and granting it would be liable to the ſame objećtions
of delay. - Clarendon.
4. An order by which vagrants or impotent perſons are ſent to
their place of abode.
5. Puſh; thruſt in fencing.
'Tis dangerous when the baſer nature comes
Between the paſs, and fell incenſed points
Of mighty oppoſites. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
The king hath laid, that in a dozen paſſes between you and
him, he ſhall not exceed you three hits. Shakeſpeare.
With
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A S
P A S
With ſeeming innocence the crowd beguil'd;
But inade the deſperate paſſes, when he ſmil’d.
6. State; condition.
To what a paſs are our minds brought, that, from the right
line of virtue, are wryed to theſe crooked ſhifts : Sidney.
After King Henry united the roſes, they laboured to re-
duce both Engliſh and Iriſh, which work, to what paſs and
perfection it was brought, in queen Elizabeth's reign, hath
been declared. Davies's State of Ireland.
I could ſee plate, hangings and paintings about my houſe
till you had the ordering of me, but I am now brought to
ſuch paſs, that I can ſee nothing at all. L’Eſtrange.
Matters have been brought to this paſs, that if one
among a man's ſons had any blemiſh, he laid him aſide for the
miniſtry, and ſuch an one was preſently approved. South.
PA'ssable. adj. [paſſible, Fr. from paſs.]
1. Poſſible to be paſſed or travelled through or over.
Antiochus departed in all haſte, weening in his pride to
make the land navigable, and the ſea paſſable by foot. 2 Mac.
2. Supportable ; tolerable; allowable.
His body is a paſſable carkaſs, if he be not hurt. It is a
thoroughfare for ſteel. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
They are crafty and of a paſſable reach of underſtanding.
Howel.
In counterfeits, it is with men as with falſe money; one
piece is more or leſs paſſable than another. L’Eſtrange.
Lay by Virgil, my verſion will appear a paſſable beauty
when the original muſe is abſent. Dryden.
White and red well mingled on the face, make what was
before but paſſable, appear beautiful. Dryden.
3. Capable of admiſſion or reception.
Theſe ſtage advocates are not only without truth, but
without colour: could they have made the ſlander paſſable,
we ſhould have heard farther. Collier.
4. Popular; well received. This is a ſenſe leſs uſual.
Where there is no eminent odds in ſufficiency, it is better
to take with the more paſſable, than with the more able. Bac.
A man of the one faction, which is moſt paſſable with the
other, commonly giveth beſt way. Bacon's Eſſays.
PASSADO. m. ſ. [Italian.] A puſh; a thruſt.
A duelliſt, a gentleman of the very firſt houſe; ah the
immortal paſſado. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
PA'ss AGE. n.ſ. [paſſage, French.]
1. Aćt of paſſing; travel; courſe; journey.
The ſtory of ſuch a paſſage was true, and Jaſon with the
reſt went indeed to rob Colchos, to which they might arrive
by boat. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the I/orld.
So ſhalt thou beſt prepar'd endure
Thy mortal paſſage when it comes. Milton.
Live like thoſe who look upon themſelves as being only on
their paſſage through this ſtate, but as belonging to that which
is to come. Atterbury's Sermons.
Though the paſſage be troubleſome, yet it is ſecure, and
ſhall in a little time bring us eaſe and peace at the laſt. Wake.
2. Road; way.
Human actions are ſo uncertain, as that ſeemeth the beſt
courſe, which hath moſt paſſages out of it. Bacon.
The land enterprize of Panama was grounded upon a falſe
account, that the paſſages towards it were no better fortified
D ryden -
than Drake had left them. Bacon.
Is there yet no other way beſides
Theſe painful paſſages, how we may come -
To death, and mix with our connatural duſt Milton.
Againſt which open'd from beneath
A paſſage down to th' earth, a paſſage wide. Milton.
When the paſſage is open, land will be turned moſt to great
cattle; when ſhut, to ſheep. Temple.
The Perſian army had advanced into the ſtraight paſſages
of Cilicia, by which means Alexander with his ſmall army
was able to fight and conquer them. South's Seromns.
The paſſage made by many a winding .
Reach'd e'en the room, in which the tyrant lay. Dryden.
He plies him with redoubled ſtrokes;
Wheels as he wheels; and with his pointed dart
Explores the neareſt paſſage to his heart. Dryden.
I wiſhed for the wings of an eagle, to fly away to thoſe
happy ſeats; but the genius told me there was no paſſage to
them, except through the gates of death. Addison.
I have often ſtopped all the paſſages to prevent the ants
going to their own neſt. Addiſon's Guardian, N° 157.
When the gravel is ſeparated from the kidney, oily ſub-
ſtances relax the paſſages. Arbuthnot on Diet.
3. Entrance or exit; liberty to paſs. -
What, are my doors oppos'd againſt my paſſage * Shakespeare
4. The ſtate of decay. Not in uſe.
Would ſome part of my young years
Might but redeem the paſſage of your age
5. Intellectual admittance; mental acceptance.
I would render this treatiſe intelligible to every rational man,
however little verſed in ſcholaſtick learning, among whom I
$xpect it will have a fairer paſſage than among thoſe deeply im-
bucd with other principles. Digby.
3
Shakeſp.
- - - - - - -
6. Occurrence; hap.
It is no act of common paſſage, but
A ſtrain of rareneſs.
7. Unſettled ſtate; a
the place of abode.
Moſt traders in Ireland are but factors; the cauſe muſt be
rather an ill opinion of ſecurity than of gain: the laſt intices
the Poorer traders, young beginners, orthoſe of paſſage; but
without the firſt, the rich will never ſettle in the country.
Temple's Miſcellanies.
In man the judgment ſhoots at flying : iſ.
A bird of paſſage 7 loſt as ſoon as found;
Now in the noon perhaps, now under ground.
8. Incident; tranſaction.
This buſineſs as it is a very high paſſage of ſtate, ſo it is
worthy of ſerious conſideration. Hayward.
Thou doſt in thy paſſages of life
Make me believe that thou art only mark'd -
For the hot vengeance of heav'n. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
9. Management : conduct. -
Upon conſideration of the condućt and paſſage of affairs
in former times, the ſtate of England ought to be cleared of
an imputation caſt upon it. Davies on Ireland.
Io. Part of a book; ſingle place in a writing. Endroit, Fr.
A critic who has no taſte nor learning, ſeldom ventures
to praiſe any paſſage in an author who has not been before re-
ceived by the publick. Addiſon's Spediator, N° 291.
As to the cantos, all the paſſages are as fabulous as the
viſion at the beginning. Pope.
PA'ssED. Preterite and participle of paſs.
Why ſayeſt thou my way is hid from the Lord, and my
judgment is paſſed over from my God Iſaiah xl. 27.
He affirmed, that no good law paſſed fince king William's
acceſſion, except the act for preſerving the game. Addiſon.
The deſcription of a life, paſſed away in vanity and among
the ſhadows of pomp, may be ſoon finely drawn in the ſame
place. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 210.
PA'ss ENGER. m. ſ. [paſſager, French.]
I. A traveller; one who is upon the road; a wayfarer.
All the way, the wanton damſel found
New mirth, her paſſenger to entertain.
What hollowing, and what ſtir is this 2
Theſe are my mates that make their wills their law,
Shakeſpeare:
ptneſs by condition or nature to change
Pope.
Fairy Queen.
Have ſome unhappy paſſenger in chaſe. Shakeſpeare.
The nodding horror of whoſe ſhady brows -
Threats the forlorn and wand'ring paſſenger. Milton.
Apelles, when he had finiſhed any work, expoſed it to the
ſight of all paſſengers, and concealed himſelf to hear the cen-
ſure of his faults. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. One who hires in any vehicle the liberty of travelling.
The diligent pilot in a dangerous tempeſt doth attend the
unſkilful words of a paſſenger. Sidney.
PAssenger falcon. m. ſ. A kind of migratory hawk. Ainſ.
P'Asser. n. ſ. [from paſs.] One who paſſes; one that is upon
the road.
Under you ride the home and foreign ſhipping in ſo near a
diſtance, that, without troubling the paſſer or borrowing
Stentor's voice, you may confer with any in the town. Carew.
Have we ſo ſoon forgot,
When, like a matron, butcher'd by her ſons,
And caſt beſide ſome common way a ſpectacle
Of horror and affright to paſſers by,
Our groaning country bled at every vein. Rowe.
PAssibi‘LITY.. n.ſ. ºft. Fr. from paſſible.] Quality of
receiving in preſſions from external agents.
The laſt doubt, touching the paſſibility of the matter of
the heavens, is drawn from the eclipſes of the ſun and
in OOil. Hakewill on Providence.
PA'ssible. adj. [paſſible, Fr. paſſibilis, Lat..] Suſceptive of im
preſſions from external agents.
Theodoret diſputeth with great earneſtneſs, that God can-
not be ſaid to ſuffer; but he thereby meaneth Chriſt's divine
nature againſt Apollinarius, which held even deity itſelf
paſſible. Hooker, b. v. 53.
PA'ssibleNEss. n. ſ [from paſſible.] Quality of receiving im-
preſſions from external agents. -
It drew after it the hereſy of the paſſibleneſ of the deity,
becauſe the deity of Č; was become, in their conceits,
the ſame naturé with the humanity that was paſſible.
Brerewood on Languages.
PAssiNG. participial adj. [from paſs.]
1. Supreme ; ſurpaſſing others; eminent.
No ſtrength of arms ſhall win this noble fort,
Or ſhake this puiſſant wall, ſuch paſſing might
Have ſpells and charms, if they be ſaid aright. Fairfax.
Sir Hudibras his paſſing worth, -
The manner how he fallied forth. Hudibras.
2. It is uſed adverbially to enforce the meaning of another word.
Exceeding.
“ºn is pºſing ſell and wroth. Shakeſpeare.
Many<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A S
P A S
**** |
Many in each region poſing fair
n ſky; more like to goddeſſes - - -
#. ãº. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
She was not only pºſſing fair,
But was withal diſcreet and debonair. Dryden.
while thus we ſtood as in a ſtound,
Full ſoon by bonfire and by bell,
we learnt our liege was paſſing well. . . Gay.
Passing bell. m. ſ. ſpaſing and bell.] The bell which rings
...the hour of departure, to obtain prayers for the paſſing ſoul:
it is often uſed for the bell, which rings immediately after
death.
Thoſe loving papers,
Thicken on you now, as pray'rs aſcend
To heaven in troops at a good man's paſſingbell. Donne.
A talk of tumult, and a breath -
Would ſerve him as his paſſingbell to death. Daniel.
Before the paſſingbell begun, -
The news through half the town has run. Swift.
PASSION. m. ſ. [pºſion, French ; paſſie, Latin.]
. Any effect cauſed by external agency.
I #. differences . .# ...} not mouldable, ſciſſible
and not ſciſſible, and many other paſſions of matter are ple-
beian notions, applied to the inſtruments men ordinarily
pračtiſe. - - Bacon.
A body at reſt affords us no idea of any aćtive power to
move, and when, ſet in motion, it is rather a paſſion than
an action in it. Locke.
2. Violent commotion of the mind.
All the other paſſions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts and raſh embrac'd deſpair. Shakeſp.
Thee every thing becomes, to chide, to laugh,
To weep: whoſe every paſſion fully ſtrives
To make itſelf in thee fair and admired. Shakeſpeare.
Vex'd I am
Of late, with paſſions of ſome difference. Shakeſpeare.
I am doubtful, leſt
You break into ſome merry paſſion,
And ſo offend him:
If you ſhould ſmile, he grows impatient. Shakeſp.
n loving thou do'ſt well, in pºſion not;
Wherein true love conſiſts not, Milton's Par. Loft.
Cruel his eye, but caſt
Signs of remorſe and paſºn, to behold
The fellows of his crime condemn'd
For ever now to have their lot in pain. Milton's Par. Loft,
Paſſion's too fierce to be in fetters bound,
And nature flies him like enchanted ground. Dryden.
All the art of rhetorick, beſides order and perſpicuity, only
moves the paſſions, and thereby miſleads the judgment. Locke.
3. Anger.
The word paſſion ſignifies the receiving any action in a
large philoſophical ſenſe; in a more limited philoſophical
ſenſe, it ſignifies any of the affections of human nature; as
love, fear, joy, ſorrow: but the common people confine it
only to anger. Watts.
4. Zeal; ardour.
Where ſtateſmen are ruled by faction and intereſt, they can
have no paſſion for the glory of their country, nor any con-
cern for the figure it will make. Addiſon on Å.
5. Love.
For your love,
You kill'd her father: you confeſs'd you drew
A mighty argument to prove jº. for the daughter.
- Dryden and Lee's Oedipus.
- He, to grate me more,
Publickly own'd his pajion for Ameſtris. Rowe.
Survey yourſelf, and then forgive your ſlave,
Think what a paſſion ſuch a form muſt have. Granvil.
6. Eargerneſs.
Abate a little of that violent paſſion for fine cloaths, ſo pre-
dominant in your ſex. Swift.
7. Emphatically. The laſt ſuffering of the redeemer of the
world.
He ſhewed himſelf alive after his paſſion, by many infallible
proofs. Aé?, i. 3.
To PA'ssion. v. n. [paſſionner, Fr. from the noun..] To be
ºnely agitated ; to expreſs great commotion"of mind,
Obſolete.
'Twas Ariadne paſſioning
For Theſeus' perjury and unju flight. Shakeſpeare.
^*.*Lºwer, n.ſ. [granadilla, Latin.]
th †: ºwer hath a double calyx, the firſt conſiſting of
. i. the other of five, which expand in form ºf a
º i. flowers conſiſt of five leaves each, and are of a ro-
with . 9m in the centre of the flower ariſes the pointal,
tender .. fringed at the bottom, but furniſhed with a
which are . à. the top, ºn which ſtand three clubs, under
ways iniº *na, with rough obtuſe apices, which al-
globular i. *...*. the embryo turns to an oval or
ulty º, and conſiſting of one cell, which is
full of ſeeds adhering to the ſides, and covered with a ſort of
hood or veil. Miller.
PA'ssion-week. m. ſ. The week immediately preceding
Eaſter, named in commemoration of our Saviour's crucifixion.
PA'ssion at E. adj. [paſſionné, French.]
1. Moved by paſſion; cauſing or expreſſing great commotion
of mind.
My whole endeavour is to reſolve the conſcience, and to
ſhew what, in this controverſy, the heart is to think, if it
will follow the light of found and ſincere judgment, without
either cloud of prejudice or miſt of paſſionate affection. Hooker.
Thucydides obſerves, that men are much more paſſionate for
injuſtice than for violence; becauſe the one coming as from
an equal ſeems rapine ; when the other proceeding from one
ſtronger is but the effect of neceſſity. Clarendon.
Good angels looked upon this ſhip of Noah's with a
paſſionate concern for its ſafety. Burnet.
Men, upon the near approach of death, have been rouzed
up into ſuch a lively ſenſe of their guilt, ſuch a paſſionate de-
gree of concern and remorſe, that, if ten thouſand ghoſts
had appeared to them, they ſcarce could have had a fuller
convićtion of their danger. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. Eaſily moved to anger.
Homer's Achilles is haughty and paſſionate, impatient of
any reſtraint by laws, and arrogant in arms. Prior.
To PA'sssionate. v. a. [from paſſion.] An old word. Obſolete.
1. To affect with paſſion.
Great pleaſure mix'd with pitiful regard,
That godly king and queen did paſſionate,
Whilſt they his pitiful adventures heard,
That oft they did lament his luckleſs ſtate. Fairy Queen.
2. To expreſs paſſionately.
Thy neice and I want hands,
And cannot paſſionate our tenfold grief
With folded arms. Shakeſpeare's Titus Andronicus.
PA'ssion ATELY. adv. [from paſſionate.]
1. With paſſion ; with defire, love or hatred; with great com-
motion of mind.
Whoever paſſionately covets any thing he has not, has loſt
his hold. L’Eſtrange.
If ſorrow expreſſes itſelf never ſo loudly and fº.
and diſcharge itſelf in never ſo many tears, yet it will no
more purge a man's heart, than the waſhing of his hands
can cleanſe the rotteneſs of his bones. South's Sermons.
I made Meleſinda, in oppoſition to Nourmahal, a woman
paſſionately loving of her huſband, patient of injuries and con-
tempt, and conſtant in her kindneſs. Dryden.
2. Angrily.
They lay the blame on the poor little ones, ſometimes
paſſionately enough, to divert it from themſelves. Locke.
Pa'ssion AT ENEss. n.ſ.. [from paſſionate.]
1. State of being ſubject to paſſion.
2. Vehemence of mind.
To love with ſome paſſionateneſ; the perſon you would
marry, is not only allowable but expedient. Boyle.
PASSIVE. adj. [paſſif, French; paſſivus, Latin.]
1. Receiving impreſſion from ſome external agent.
High above the ground
Their march was, and the paſse air upbore
Their nimble tread. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
The active informations of the intellect, filling the paſſive
reception of the will, like form cloſing with matter, grew
aćtuate into a third and diſtinct perfection of practice. Sºuth.
As the mind is wholly paſſive in the reception of all its
ſimple ideas, ſo it exerts ſeveral acts of its own, whereby,
out of its ſimple ideas, the other is formed. Locke;
The vis inertia is a paſſive principle by which bodies perſiſt
in their motion or reſt, receive motion in proportion to the
force impreſſing it, and reſiſt as much as they are reſiſted:
by this principle alone, there never could have been any mo-
tion in the world. Newton's Opticks.
2. Unreſiſting; not oppoſing:
Not thoſe alone, who paſſive own her laws, -
But who, weak rebels, more advance her cauſe. Punciad.
3. Suffering; not acting.
... [In grammar.
4. I Aš. ...}} is that which ſignifies paſſion or the effect of
aćtion: as, doceor, I am taught. ... Clarke's Lat. Gram.
Passively. adv. [from paſſive..] With a paſſive nature.
Though ſome are pºſſively inclin'd, , ,
The greater part degenerate from their kind. Dryden.
PA'ssive Ness. n.ſ. [from paſſive.]
1. Quality of receiving impreſſion from external agents.
2. Paſibility; power of ſuffering. - -
we ſhall loſe our paſſiveneſ with our being, and be as in-
capable of ſuffering as heaven can make us. Decay of Piety.
Passivity. n.ſ.. [from paſſive..] Paſſiveneſs. An innovated
word.
There being no mean between penetrability and impene-
trability, between paſſivity and activity, theſe being contrary
and oppoſite, the infinite rarefaction of the one quality, is
the poſition of its contrary. Cheyne's Philºſºphical Principles.
- PA'ssoy E.R.
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A S
P A S
Flº,
PA'ssover. m. ſ. ſpaſ, and over.]
1. A feaſt inſtituted among the Jews in memory of the time
when God, ſmiting the firſt-born of the Egyptians, paffed
over the habitations of the Hebrews,
The Jews paſſover was at hand, and Jeſus went up. jo. ii. 13.
The Lord's paſſover, commonly called Eaſter, was or-
dered by the common law to be celebrated every year on a
Sunday. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. The ſacrifice killed.
• Take a lamb, and kill the paſſºver. Exodus xii. 21.
PA'ssport. n. ſ. ſpaſſport, Fr. J. Permiſſion of egreſs.
Under that pretext, fain ſhe would have given a ſecret
affort to her affection. Sidney.
Giving his reaſon paſſport for to paſs
Whither it would, ſo it would let him die. Sidney.
Let him depart; his paſſport ſhall be made,
And crowns for convoy put into his purſe. Shakeſpeare.
Having uſed extreme caution in granting paſſports to Ire-
land, he conceived that paper not to have been delivered. Clar.
The goſpel has then only a free admiſſion into the aſſent
of the underſtanding, when it brings a paſſport from a rightly
diſpoſed will, as being the faculty, of dominion, that com-
mands all, that ſhuts out, and lets in, what objećts it
pleaſes. South's Sermons.
Admitted in the ſhining throng,
He ſhows the paſſport which he brought along;
His paſſport is his innocence and grace,
Well known to all the natives of the place. Dryden.
- At our meeting in another world;
For thou haſt drunk thy paſſport out of this. Dryden.
Past. participial adj. [from paſs.]
I. Not preſent; not to come.
Paſi, and to come, ſeem beſt; things preſent worſt. Shakespeare
For ſeveral months paſſ, papers have been written upon the
beſt publick principle, the love of our country. Swift.
This not alone has ſhone on ages paſt, -
But lights the preſent, and ſhall warm the laſt. Pope.
2. Spent ; gone through ; undergone.
- A life of glorious labours paſt. Pope.
Past. n.ſ. Elliptically uſed for paſt time.
The paſt is all by death poſſeſt,
And frugal fate that guards the reſt,
By giving bids us live to-day. Fenton.
PAST. prºpoſition.
1. Beyond in time. - - -
Sarah was delivered of a child, when ſhe was paſt age.
- - Hebrews xi. 1 1,
2. No longer capable of. -
Fe: vºt prayers he made, when he was eſteemed paſſ ſenſe,
and do ſpent his latt breath in committing his ſoul unto the
. Almighty. - - - Hayward.
3. Beyond; out of reach of. * * -
- We muſt not
Proſtitute our paſt cure malady - - :
To empiricks. Shakeſpear’s All's well that ends well.
- What's gone, and what's paſt help,
Should be paſt grief. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
Many men have not yet finned themſelves poſt all ſenſe or
feeling, but have ſome regrets; and when their ſpirits are at
any time diſturbed with the ſenſe of their guilt, they are for
a little time more watchful over their ways; but they are
ſoon diſheartened. Calamy's Sermons.
Love, when once paſt government, is conſequently paſt
ſhame. L’Eſtrange.
Her life ſhe might have had ; but the deſpair
Of ſaving his, had put it paſt her care, Dryden.
I’m ſtupify'd with ſorrow, paſt relief -
Of tears. Dryden.
That the bare receiving a ſum ſhould ſink a man into a
ſervile ſtate, is paſt my comprehenſion. Collier on Pride.
That he means paternal power, is paſt doubt from the in-
ference he makes. Locke.
4. Beyond; further than.
We will go by the king's high way, until we be poſt thy
borders. Numbers xxi. 22.
5. Above; more than. -
The northern Iriſh Scots have bows not paſt three quarters
of a yard long, with a ſtring of wreathed hemp and their
arrows not much above an ell. Spenſer on Ireland.
The ſame inundation was not deep, not paſt forty foot
from the ground. Bacon.
PASTE. n.ſ. [paſſe, French.]
1. Anything mixed up ſo as to be viſcous and tenacious : ſuch
as flour and water for bread or pies ; or various kinds of earth
mingled for the potter. -
Except you could bray Chriſtendom in a mortar, and
mould it into a new poſte, there is no poſſibility of an holy
War. Bacon's Hºly J/ar.
With particles of heav'nly fire
The God of nature did his ſoul inſpire;
Which wife Prometheus temper'd into poſſe,
And, mixt with living ſtreams, the godlike image caſt, Dryd.
–
When the gods moulded up the paſie of man, -
Some of their dough was left upon their hands. Dryden.
He has the whiteſt hand that ever you ſaw, and raiſes paſte
better than any woman. Addiſon's Speciator, N° 482.
2. Flour and water boiled together ſo as to make a cement.
3: Artificial mixture, in imitation of precious flones.
To PASTE. v. a. ſpaſter, Fr. from the noun..] To faſten
with paſte. -
By paſting the vowels and conſonants on the ſides of dice,
his eldeſt ſon played himſelf into ſpelling. - Locke.
... Young creatures have learned their letters and ſyllables, by
having them paſted upon little flat tablets. JWatts.
PA's reboard. n ſ. ſpaſte and board.] Maſſes made anciently
by paſting one paper on another: now made ſometimes by
macerating paper and caſting it in moulds, ſometimes by
pounding old cordage, and caſting it in forms.
Tintoret made chambers of board and paſteboard, propor-
tioned to his models, with doors and windows, through which
he diſtributed; on his figures, artificial lights. Dryden.
, I would not make myſelf merry even with a piece of paſſe-
board, that is inveſted with a publick character. Addiſon.
PA's TEBoARD. adj. Made of paſteboard. -
Put ſilkworms on whited brown paper into a paſteboard
box. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
PA'stel: n.ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
PA's TERN. m. ſ. [paſturon, French.] -
1. The knee of an horſe. - | -
I will not change my horſe with any that treads on four
poſterns. . - Shakeſpear’s Henry V.
The colt that for a ſtallion is deſign'd,
Upright he walks on paſterns firm and ſtraight,
His motions eaſy, prancing in his gait. Dryden,
Being heavy, he ſhould not tread ſtiff, but have a paſtern
made him, to break the force of his weight: by this his body
hangs on the hoof, as a coach doth by the leathers. Grew.
2. The legs of an human creature in contempt.
So ſtraight ſhe walk'd, and on her paſterns high :
If ſeeing her behind, he lik'd her pace, -
Now turning ſhort, he better lik'd her face. . Dryden,
PA's TIL. m. ſ. [poſtillus, Lat. paſtille, Fr.] A roll of paſte.
To draw with dry colours, make long paſſils, by grinding
red led with ſtrong wort, and ſo roll them up like pencils,
drying them in the ſun. Peacham on Drawing.
PA's TIME. n.ſ. [pdſ, and time.] Sport; amuſement ; diverſion.
It was more requiſite for Zelmane's hurt to reſt,' than
ſit up at thoſe paſtimes; but ſhe, that felt no wound but one;
earneſtly deſired to have the paſtorals. Sidney, b. i.
I'll be as patient as a gentle ſtream,
And make a poſime of each weary ſtep, .
*Till the laſt ſtep has brought me to my love. Shakespeare
- Paſtime paſſing excellent,
If huſbanded with modeſty. - Shakeſpeare,
- With theſe
Find paſſime, and bear rule; thy realm is large. , Milton.
A man, much addićted to luxury, recreation and paſſime,
ſhould never pretend to devote himſelf entirely to the ſciences,
unleſs his ſoul be ſo refined, that he can taſte theſe entertain-
ments eminently in his cloſet. - Watts.
PA's roR. m. ſ. [paſtor, Latin; paſſeur, old French.]
I. A ſhepherd. - . .
Receive this preſent by the muſes made,
The pipe on which the Aſcraean paſtor play’d. Dryden.
The paſtor ſhears their hoary beards,
And eaſes of their hair the loaden herds. Dryden.
2: A clergyman who has the care of a flock; one who has ſouls
to feed with ſound doctrine. - - -
The paſtor maketh ſuits of the people, and they with
one voice teſtify a general aſſent thereunto, or he joyfully
beginneth, and they with like alacrity follow, dividing be:
tween them the ſentences wherewith they ſtrive, which ſhall
much ſhew his own, and ſtir up others zeal to the glory of
God. - Hooker, b. v. ſ. 39.
The firſt branch of the great work belonging to a paſtor
of the church, was to teach. South's Sermons.
A breach in the general form of worſhip was reckoned too
unpopular to be attempted, neither was the expedient then
found out of maintaining ſeparate paſtors out of Privº
purſes. Swift.
PA's roRAL. adj. [poſioralis, Latin; paſtoral, French.] -
1. Rural; ruſtick; beſeeming ſhepherds; imitating ſhepherds.
In thoſe paſtoral paſtimes, a great many days were ſent to
follow their flying predeceſſors. Sidney.
2. Relating to the care of ſouls. -
Their lord and maſter taught concerning the paſtoral care
he had over his own flock. - Hººker, b. v. ſ. 19.
The biſhop of Saliſbury recommended the tenth ſatire of
Juvenal, in his poſioral letter, to the ſerious peruſal of the
divines of his dioceſe. - - Dryden.
PA's roRAL. m. ſ. A poem in which any action or pation is
repreſented by its effects upon a country life; or according to
the common practice in which ſpeakers take uron them the
character of ſhepherds; an idyl; a bucolick.
19 G Paſtoral<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A T
P A T
- imitation of the aëtion of a ſhepherd, the
a... ..". dramatick or narrative, or mixed
of both, the fable ſimple, the manners not too polite *.º
- wº beſt adors in the world, for tragedy, comedy, hi-
ſtory pa/foral. - Shakeſp. º
Théré ought to be the ſame difference between paſtorals
and elegies: as between the life of the country and the court;
the latter ſhould be ſmooth, clean, tender and paſſionate :
the thoughts may be bold, more gay, and more *jº
in pa/Poral. alſ/2.
pºſ: n. ſ. ſpaſiſerie, Fr. from paſſe.]
1. The act of making pies.
Let never freſh machines your pa/lry try,
Unleſs grandees or magiſtrates are by, --
Then you may put a dwarf into a pye. King.
2. Pies or baked paſte.
- Remember
The ſeed cake, the paſtries and the furmenty pot. Tiſz.
They call for dates and quinces in the pºſity. Shakeſp.
Beaſts of chaſe, or º º game,
affry built, or from the ſpit, or boil'd,
§º: ſteam'd. P A4ilton's Paradiſe Regain'd.
3. The place where paſtry is made. -
PA's TRY-cook. n. / [pºſtry and cook.] One whoſe trade is
to make and ſell things baked in paſte.
I wiſh you knew what my huſband has paid to the paſtry-
cooks and confectioners. Arbuthnot.
PA's rurable. adj. [from pºſture.] Fit for paſture.
PA's rur Age. n.ſ. [paſturage, French.]
1. The buſineſs of feeding cattle.
I wiſh there were ſome ordinances, that whoſoever keepeth
twenty kine, ſhould keep a plough going; for otherwiſe all
men would fall to paſturage, and none to huſbandry.
Spenſer on Ireland.
2. Lands grazed by cattle. -
France has a ſheep by her to ſhew, that the riches of the
cºuntry conſiſted chiefly in flocks and poſiurage. Addiſon.
3. The uſe of paſture.
Cattle fatted by good poſiurage, after violent motion, die
ſuddenly. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
PA's Tuke. m. ſ. ſpaſture, French.J
1. Food; the act of feeding.
Unto the conſervation is required a ſolid paſture, and a food
congenerous unto nature. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
2. Ground on which cattle feed.
A careleſs herd,
Full of the paſture, jumps along by him,
And never ſtays. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
When there was not room for their herds to fººd together,
they, by conſent, ſeparated and enlarged their poſiure where
it beſt liked them. Locke.
The new tribes look abroad
On nature's common, far as they can ſee
Or wing, their range and poſiur.
3. Human culture; education.
- From the firſt paſtures of our infant age,
To elder cares and man's ſeverer page
We laſh the pupil. Dryden.
o PA'sture. v. a. [from the houn..] To place in a paſture.
To Pasture. v. n. [from the noºn J To graze on the
ground. -
...The cattle in the fields and meadows green
Thºſe rare and ſolitary; theſe in floº,
Poſluring at once, and in broad herds upſprung. Milton.
PA sty. n. j. [pºſte, French.] A Pye of cruſt raiſed without
Thomſºn's Spring.
, - a diſh.
Of the paſte a coffin will I rear,
And make two paſić of your ſhameful heads: Shakeſp.
I will confeſs what I know ; if ye pinch me like a paſty, I
can ſay no more. Shakespeare
ºf you'd fight an alderman and mayor, shakeſpeare.
Within a paſ; lodge a living hare. King.
- A man of ſober life,
Not quite a madman, though a poſſy fell,
And much too wiſe to walkintº well. Pope.
^T, ºff. [from pas, Dutch, Skinner.] Fit, Convenient:
exactly ſuitable either as to time * Place. This is a low word.
and ſhould not be uſed but in burleſque writings.
Pat pat; and here's a marvellous convenient place for our
- rehearſal, - Shakeſpear's 44idſummer Night's prº.
Now I might do it ſº, now he is praying. Shakeſp.
hey never ſaw two things ſo pat,
In all ºſpects, as this and that. Hudibras, p. ii.
ſinglius dreamed of at - -
doctrine of the Fºſſ. ext, which he found Very pat to his
- Atterbury.
e e . "rely put to't at the end of a verſe, y
* he could find nowo; to come pat in. Swift.
A.T. a. ſ. -
- with the !º Fr. is a foot, and thence Pat may be a blow
- f. A light quick blow; a tap.
he leaſt noiſe * *ough to diſturb the operation of his
brain; the pat of a ſhuttle-cock, or the creaking of a jack
will do. Collier on human Reaſon.
2. Small lump of matter beat into ſhape with the hand.
To PAT. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtrike lightly ; to tap.
Children prove, whether they can rub upon the breaſt
with one hand, and pat upon the forehead with another, and
ſtraightways they pat with both. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Gay pats my ſhoulder, and you vaniſh quite. Pope,
PATAcHE. m. ſ. A ſmall ſhip. Ainſworth.
PATAcoon. "...ſ.. A Spaniſh coin worth four ſhillings and
eight pence Engliſh. Anſworth.
To PATch. v. n. [pudiaer, Daniſh; Pezzare, Italian.j
I. To cover with a piece ſewed on. -
They would think themſelves miſerable in a patched coat,
and yet their minds appear in a pie-bald livery of coarſe patches
and borrowed ſhreds. Locke.
2. To decorate the face with ſmall ſpots of black ſilk.
In the middle boxes, were ſeveral ladies who patched both
ſides of their faces. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº 81.
We begg'd her but to patch her face,
She never hit one proper place. Swift.
3. To mend clumſily; to mend ſo as that the original itrength
or beauty is loſt.
Anything mended, is but patch'd. Skałºff.
Phyſick can but mend our crazy ſtate,
Patch an old building, not a new create. Dryden.
Broken limbs, common prudence ſends us to the ſurgeons
to piece and patch up. L'Aſtrange.
4. To make up of ſhreds or different pieces. Someti. with
ap emphatical.
If we ſeek to judge of thoſe times, which the ſcriptures ſet
us dºwn without error, by the reigns of the Aſſyrian princes,
we ſhall but patch up the ſtory at adventure, and le.". in
confuſion. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the World.
His glorious end was a patch'd work of fate,
Ill ſorted with a ſoft effeminate life. Dryden.
There is that viſible ſymmetry in a human body, as gives
an intrinſick evidence, that it was not formed ſucceſſively and
patched up by piece-meal. Bentley's Sermon.
Enlarging an author's ſenſe, and building fancies of our
own upon his foundation, we may call Paraphraſing; but
more properly changing, adding, patching, Piccing. Felton.
PATCH. n.ſ. ſpezzº, Italian.]
I. A piece ſewed on to cover a hole.
Patches ſet upon a little breach,
Diſcredit more in hiding of the flaw,
Than did the flaw before it was ſo patch'd. Shakespeare .
If the ſhoe be ript, or patches put;
He's wounded! ſee the plaiſter on his foot. Dryden.
They ſuffer their minds to appear in a pie-bald livery of
cºarſe patches and borrowed ſhreds, ſuch as the common opi-
nion of thoſe they converſe with clothe them in. Locke.
2. A piece inſerted in maſaick or variegated work.
3. A ſmall ſpot of black filk put on the face.
How I providence 1 and yet a Scottiſh crew
Then madan nature wears black patches too. Cleaveland.
If to every common funeral, -
By your eyes martyr'd, ſuch grace were allow'd,
Yºur face wou'd wear not patches, but a cloud. Suckling.
They were patched º and caſt hoſtile glances
"Pon one another, and their patches were placed in different
ſituations as party-ſignals to diſtinguiſh friends from foes. Addison
This the morning omens ſeem'd to tell;
Thrice from my trembling hand the patch-box fell. Pope.
4. A ſmall particle; a parcel of land.
We go to gain a little patch of ground,
That hath in it no profit but the name. Shakespeare .
. A paltry fellow. Obſolete.
5. A p W. a py'd ninny's this thou ſcurvy patch / Shakeſp.
PA'Tcher. m. / [from patch..] One that patches; a botcher.
PA'tch ERY. n.J. [from patch..] Botchery; bungling work.
Forgery. A word not in uſe.
You hear him cogg, ſee him diſſemble, , , ,
Know his groſs patchery, love him, and feed him,
Yet remain aſſur'd that he's a made-up villain. Shakespeare .
PA'tchwork. n.ſ. ſpatch and work.] Work made by ſewing
ſmall pieces of different colours interchangeably together.
When my cloaths were finiſhed, they loºked like the
patchwork, only mine were all of a colour. Gulliver's Travel.
Whoever only reads to tranſcribe ſhining remarks, without
entering into the genius and ſpirit of the author, will be apt
to be miſled out of the regular way of thinking; and all the
produćt of all this will be found a manifeſt incoherent piece
of patchwork. . . - Swift.
Foreign her air, her robe's diſcordant pride -
In patchwork flut’ring. Dunciad.
PATF. n.ſ.. [This is derived by Skinner from tête, Fr.] The
head. Now commonly uſed in contempt or ridicule, but an-
tiently in ſerious language.
Senſeleſs man, that himſelf doth hate,
To love another;
Here take thy lover's token on thy pate. Fairy ń<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A T
:
Behold the deſpaire,
Py cuſtome and covetous pates,
By gaps and opening of gates. Tuffer.
He is a traitor, let him to the tower,
And crop away that factious pate of his. Shakeſp.
Steal by line and level is an excellent paſs of pate. Shakeſp.
e That ſly devil,
That broker that ſtill breaks the pate of faith,
That daily breakvow. Shakeſp.
I had broke thy pate,
And aſk'd thee mercy for’t. Shakesp.
* Who dares
Say this man is a flatterer. The learned pate
Ducks to the golden fool. Shakeſp.
Thank your gentler fate,
That, for a bruis'd or broken pate,
Has freed you from thoſe knobs that grow
Much harder on the married brow. Hudibras.
If only ſcorn attends, men for aſſerting the church's dig-
nity, many will rather chuſe to neglect their duty, than to
et a broken pate in the church's ſervice. South's Sermons.
If any young novice happens into the neighbourhood of
flatterers, preſently they are plying his full purſe and empty
pate with addreſſes ſuitable to his vanity. South.
P{Trp. adj. [from fate.] Having a pate. It is uſed only in
compoſition; as, long-pated or cunning; ſhallow-pated or
oliſh.
pºetion. n. ſ. [patºſačio, Latin.] Aét or ſtate of
opening. Ainſworth.
Paºren. n.ſ. [patina, Latin.] A plate. Not in uſe.
The floor of heav'n
Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold;
There's not the ſmalleſt orb which thou behold'ſt,
But in his motion like an angel ſings. Shakeſp.
PATENT. adj. [patens, Latin; patent, French.]
1. Open to the peruſal of all : as, letters patent.
2. Something appropriated by letters patent.
Madder is eſteemed a commodity that will turn to good
profit; ſo that, in king Charles the firſt's time, it was made
a patent commodity, Mortimer's Huſbandry.
PATENT. n.ſ. A writ conferring ſome excluſive right or pri-
vilege.
; you are ſo fond over her iniquity, give her patent to of—
fend; for if it touch not you, it comes near no body.
Shakeſpeare.
So will I grow, ſo live, ſo die,
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
Unto his lordſhip. Shakeſpeare's Midſum. Night's Dream.
We are cenſured as obſtinate, in not complying with a
royal patent. Swift.
PATENTEE. n.ſ.. [from patent.] One who has a patent.
If his tenant and patentee diſpoſe of his gift, without his
kingly conſent, the lands ſhall revert to the king. Bacon.
In the patent granted to lord Dartmouth, the ſecurities
obliged the patentee to receive his money back upon every
demand. Swift.
PATER-NOSTER, n.ſ. (Lat.] The Lord's prayer.
No penny no pater-noſfer. Camden's Remains.
PATE'RNAL. adj. [paternus, Lat. paternel, Fr.]
1. [Fatherly ; having the relation of a father; pertaining to a
father.
I diſclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity and property of blood,
And as a ſtranger to my heart and me
Hold thee. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Admonitions fraternal or paternal of his fellow chriſtians
or governors of the church. Hammond.
They ſpend their days in joy unblam'd; and dwell
Long time in peace, by families and tribes,
Under paternal rule. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
2. Hereditary; received in ſucceſſion from one's father.
Men plough with oxen of their own
Their ſmall paternal field of corn. Dryden.
He held his paternal eſtate from the bounty of the con-
queror. Dryden.
Retreat betimes
To thy paternal ſeat, the Sabine field,
Where the great Cato toil'd with his own hands. Addison.
Pate'RNITY.. n.ſ.. [from paternus, Lat. paternité, Fr.] Fa-
therſhip; the relation of a father.
The world, while it had ſcarcity of people, underwent no
other dominion than paternity and elderſhip. Raleigh,
A young heir, kept ſhort by his father, might be known
by his countenance; in this caſe, the paternity and filiation
leave very ſenſible impreſſions. Arbuthnot.
ATH. n.ſ. [paş, Saxon.] Way; road; track. In conver-
ſation it is uſed of a narrow way to be paſſed on foot; but in
ſolemn language means any paſſage.
For darkneſs, where is the place thereof; that thou ſhouldſt
know the paths to the houſe thereof. job xxxviii. 20.
On the glad earth the golden age renew,
And thy great father's paih to heav'n purſue, Dryden.
—-- - = *_ſ
The dewy path of meadows we will tread,
For crowns and chaplets. Dryden's Theocritus.
There is but one road by which to climb up, and they
have a very ſevere law againſt any that enters the town by
another path, leſt any new one ſhould be worn on the
mountain. * Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
####$!!. }: pathetique, Fr.] Affecting
the paſſions; paſſionate; moving.
- His page that handful of wit;
'Tis a moſt pathetical neat. Shakeſp.
How pathetiik is that expoſtulation of Job, when, for the
trial ºf his patience, he was made to look upon himſelf in
this deplorable condition. Speciator, N° 571.
Tully confidered the diſpoſitions of a ſincere and leſs mer-
curial nation, by dwelling on the pathetick part. Swift.
While thus pathetick to the prince he ſpoke,
From the brave youth the ſtreaming paſſion broke. Pope.
PATHETICALLY. adv. [from pathetical.] In ſuch a maaner
as may ſtrike the paſſions. y
Theſe reaſons, ſo pathetically urged and ſo admirably raiſed
by the proſopopoia of nature, ſpeaking to her children with
ſo much authority, deſerve the pains I have taken. Dryden.
Pathetical Ness. n.ſ.. [from pathetical.] Quality of being
pathetick; quality of moving the paſſion. -
PA'thless, adj.[from path.] Untrodden; not marked with paths.
Aſk thou the citizens of pathleſs woods ;
What cut the air with wings, what ſwim in floods. Sandys.
Like one that had been led aſtray
Through the heav'ns wide pathleſs way. Milton.
In fortune's empire blindly thus we go,
And wander after pathleſs deſtiny,
Whoſe dark reſorts ſince prudence cannot know ;
In vain it would provide. Dryden.
Through miſts obſcure, ſhe wings her tedious way,
Now wanders dazzl'd with too bright a day;
And from the ſummit of a pathleſs coaſt
. . Sees infinite, and in that fight is loſt. Prior.
PathognomoNick, adj. [rz$oyvapovixes, ra:30; and yivár-
xz.] Such ſigns of a diſeaſe as are inſeparable, deſigning the
eſſence or real nature of the diſeaſe; not ſymptomatick. Quincy.
He has the true pathognomonick fign of love, jealouſy; for
nobody will ſuffer his miſtreſs to be treated ſo. Arbuthnot.
Pathological. adj. [pathologique, Fr. from pathology.] Re-
lating to the tokens or diſcoverable effects of a diflemper.
PATHologist. n.ſ. [ºrg SGP and afyw.] One who treats of
pathology.
Fºogy. n. ſ. [rzºo; and Aéyw; #. Fr.]
That part of medicine which relates to the diſtemper, with
their differences, cauſes and effects incident to the human
body. Quincy:
Pathway. m. ſ. [path and way.] A road; ſtrićtly a narrow
way to be paſſed on foot,
Alas, that love, whoſe view is muffl'd ſtill,
Should without eyes ſee pathways to his ill. Shakeſp.
In the way of righteouſneſs is life, and in the pathway
thereof there is no death. Proverbs xii. 28.
When in the middle pathway baſks the ſnake;
O lead me, guard me from the ſultry hours. ay.
PATIBLE. adj. [from pation, Lat..] Sufferable; tolerable. Die?.
PATIBULARY. adj. [patibulaire, Fr. from patibulum, Latin.]
Belonging to the gallows. - Dić7.
PATIENCE. m. ſ. ſpatience, French ; patientia, Latin.]
1. The power of ſuffering ; indurance; the power of expect-
ing long without rage or diſcontent; the power of ſupporting
faults or injuries without revenge; long ſuffering.
The king becoming graces,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude;
I have no reliſh of them. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Neceſſary patience in ſeeking the Lord, is better than he
that leadeth his life without a guide. Eccluſ; xx. 32.
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Matthew.
Chriſtian fortitude and patience have their opportunity in
times of afflićtion and perſecution. Sprat's Sermons.
Frequent debauch to habitude prevails, -
Patience of toil and love of virtue fails. Prior.
2. Sufferance; permiſſion.
By their patience, be it ſpoken, the apoſtles preached, as
well when they wrote, as when they ſpake the goſpel. Hooker.
3. An herb. A ſpecies of dock. -
Patience, an herb, makes a good boiled ſallad. Mortimer.
PA'tient. adj. [patient, Fr. patiens, Latin.]
I. Having the quality of enduring. -
W. ...'. the ºn of grain, of which the
pureſt bread is made, is patient of heat and cold. Ray.
2. Calm under pain or affliction.
Be º: and I will ſtay. - Shakeſp. Henry V I.
Griev'd, but unmov’d, and patient of your ſtorm, .
I die. Dryden's Theocritus.
3. Not revengeful againſt injuries.
4. Not eaſily provoked. -
warn them that are unruly, ſupport the weak, be fatient
toward all men. 1 Theſſalºnians v. 14.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5. Not
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A T
P A T
not viciouſly eager of impetuous.
Too induſtrious º * great,
*T ºnt to expect the turns of fate,
}: º deform'd by civil fight.
PATIEN F. n.ſ. ſtatiº Fr.]
1. That which receives impreſſions from external agents. -
Malice is a paſſion ſo impetuous and precipitate, that it
often involves the agent and the fatient. Gov. of the Tongue.
To proper patient; he kind agents brings,
In various leagues binds diſagreeing things. Creech.
Action and paſſion are modes which belong to ſubſtances:
when a finith with a hammer ſtrikes a picce of iron, the
hammer and the ſmith are both agents or ſubjects of action ;
the one ſupreme, and the other ſubordinate: the iron is the
patient or the ſubject of paſſion, in a philoſophical ſenſe, be-
cauſe it receives the operation of the agent. Iłatts's Logick.
2. A perſon diſcaſed. It is commonly uſed of the relation be-
tween the ſick and the phyſician.
You deal with me like a phyſician, that ſeeing his patient
in a poſilent fever, ſhould chide inſtead of adminiſtring help,
and bid him be ſick no more. Sidney.
Through ignorance of the diſeaſe, through unreaſonable-
neſs of the time, inſtead of good he worketh hurt, and out
of one evil throweth the patient into many miſeries. Spenſer.
A phyſician uſes various methods for the recovery of ſick
perſons; and though all of them are diſagreeable, his patients
are never angry. Addiſon.
3. It is ſometimes, but rarely uſed abſolutely for a ſick perſon.
Nor will the raging fever's fire abate
With golden canopies or beds of ſtate;
But the poor patient will as ſoon be ſound
5. Not naſty;
Prior.
On the hard matreſs or the mother ground. Dryden.
To PATIENT. v. a. ſpatienter, Fr.] To compoſe one's ſelf;
to behave with patience. Obſolete.
Patient yourſelf, madam, and pardon me. Shakespeare .
PA’rif NTLY. adv. [from patient.]
1. Without rage under pain or affliction.
- Lament not, Eve, but patiently reſign
What juſtly thou haſt loſt. Milton's Paradſe Lºft.
- Ned is in the gout,
Lics rack'd with pain, and you without,
How patiently you hear him groan
How glad the caſe is not your own. Swift.
That which they grant, we gladly accept at their hands,
and wiſh that patiently they would examine how little cauſe
they have to deny that which as yet they grant not. Hooker.
Could men but once be perſuaded patiently to attend to the
dićtates of their own minds, religion would gain more pro-
ſelytes. - Calamy's Sermons.
2. Without vicious impetuoſity.
PATINE. m. ſ. ſpatina, Lat.] The cover of a chalice. Ainſ.
PATLY: adv... [from pat..] Commodiouſly; fitly.
PATRIARCH. n.ſ. [patriarche, Fr. patriarchi, Latin.]
1. One who governs by paternal right; the father and ruler of
a family.
So ſpake the patriarch of mankind; but Eve -
Perſiſted, yet ſubmiſs. Milton's Paradſ: Loſſ.
The monarch oak, the patriarch of the trees,
Shoots riſing up, and ſpreads by ſlow degrees,
Three centuries he grows, and three he ſtays
Supreme in ſtate; and in three more decays.
2: A biſhop ſuperior to archbiſhops.
The patriarch; for an hundred years had been of one houſe,
to, the prejudice of the church, and there yet remained oné
biſhop of the ſame kindred. Raleigh.
Where ſecular primates were heretofore given, the ecieſ
ſiaſtical laws have ordered fatriarch, and eccleſiaſtical primates
to be placed. Ayliffe's Parergon.
PATRIARCHAL. adj. [patriarchal, Fr. from patriarch.J
Dryden.
i. Belonging to patriarchs; ſuch as was poſſeſſed or cnoyed by
patriarchs.
Such drowſy ſedentary ſouls have they,
Who would to º years live on,
Fix'd to hereditary clay,
And know no climate but their own. Norris.
Nimrod enjoyed this patriarchal power; but he againſt right
enlarged his cinpire, by ſeizing violently on the rights of
other lords. Lºci,
2. Belonging to hierarchical patriarchs. -
Archbiſhops or metropolitans in France are immediately
ſubject to the pope's juriſdiction; and, in other places, they are
"mediately ſubject to the patriarchal fees. » }}.
- º | : º }* ſ: [Patriarchat, Fr. from patriarcſ.]. A
§3. b biſhoprick ſuperior to archbiſhopricks.
the º e terms the greater benefices; as that of
Aºi...” a flat. iº and archbiſhoprick. Ayliffe.
alabria º Jºn of a patriarch; patriarchate.
appeareth in the º 1. the patriarch of Conſtantinople, aS
of metropolitans i. of Leo Sophus, touching the precedence
-- ºgºng to that patriarchy. Brerewood.
PATRIci As - -
ºff. [patriciºn, F - -
- - I. -
rial; noble ; not ſºcian. 2 Patricia, Lat..] Senato-
I ſee -
Th’ inſulting tyrant prancing o'er the field,
His horſe's hoofs wet with patrician blood | Addison,
PATRI'c1AN. m. ſ. A nobleman.
Noble patricians, patrons of my right,
Defend the juſtice of my cauſe with arms. Shakeſp.
You'll find Gracchus, from patrician grown
A fencer and the ſcandal of the town. Dryden.
Your daughters are all married to wealthy patricians. Swift.
PATRIMo'NIAL. adj. [patrimonial, Fr. from patrimony.] Páſ-
ſeſſed by inheritance.
The expence of the duke of Ormond's own great patri-
monial eſtate, that came over at that time, is of no ſmall
conſideration in the ſtock of this kingdom. Temple.
Their patrimonial ſloth the Spaniards keep, -
And Philip firſt taught Philip how to ſleep. Dryden.
PATRIMONY. m. ſ. [patrimonium, Latin; patrimoine, Fr.]
An eſtate poſſeſſed by inheritance.
Incloſures they would not forbid, for that had been to forbid
the improvement of the patrimony of the kingdom. Baton:
So might the heir, whoſe father hath, in play,
Waſted a thouſand pounds of ancient rent,
By painful earning of one groat a day,
- Hope to reſtore the patrimony ſpent.
In me all
Poſterity ſtands curs'd fair patrimony
That I muſt leave ye, ſons.
For his redemption, all my patrimony
I am ready to forego and quit. Milton's Agoniſter.
Their ſhips like waſted patrimonies ſhew ;
Where the thin ſcatt'ring trees admit the light,
Davies.
Milton's Par. Lºft.
And ſhun each other's ſhadows as they grow. Dryden.
The ſhepherd laſt appears,
And with him all his patrimony bears;
His houſe and houſhold gods, his trade of war,
His bow and quiver, and his truſty cur. Dryden.
PATRIOT. n.ſ. One whoſe ruling paſſion is the love of
his country.
Patriots who for ſacred freedom ſtood. Tickel.
The firm patriot there,
Who made the welfare of mankind his care,
Shall know he conquer'd. Addiſon's Cato.
Here tears ſhall flow from a more gen’rous cauſe,
Such tears as patriots ſhed for dying laws. Pope.
PA't Riotism. n.ſ.. [from patriot..] Love of one's country;
zeal for one's country.
To PATRo'cin At E. v. a. ſpatrocinor, Latin; patrociner, old
French..] To patroniſe; to protećt; to defend. Dic?.
PATRol. n.ſ. [patrouille, patouille, old French.]
1. The act of going the rounds in a garriſon to obſerve that
orders are kept.
2. Thoſe that go the rounds.
O thou ! by whoſe almighty nod the ſcale
Of empire riſes, or alternate falls,
Send forth the ſaving virtues round the land
In bright patrol. Thomſon's Summer.
To PATRol. v. n. [patrouiller, Fr.] To go the rounds in a
camp or gariſon. -
Theſe out guards of the mind are ſent abroad
And ſtill patrolling beat the neighb'ring road,
Or to the parts remote obedient fly,
Keep poſts advanc'd, and on the frontier lie.
PATRON. n.ſ. [patron, Fr. patronus, Latin.]
1. One who countenances, ſupports or protects. Commonly a
wretch who ſupports with inſolence, and is paid with flattery.
Blackmore.
I'll plead for you, as for my patron. Shakeſp.
Ne'er let me paſs in filence Dorſet's name 3
Ne'er ceaſe to mention the continu'd debt, -
Prizr.
Which the great patron only would forget.
2. A guardian faint. -
Thou amongſt thoſe ſaints, whom thou do'ſt ſee,
Shall be a ſaint, and thine own nation's friend. -
And patron. Fairy Queen, b. i
St. Michael is mentioned as the patron of the Jews, and is
now taken by the Chriſtians, as the protector general of our
religion. - - Dryden.
3. Advocate; defender ; vindicator. -
we are no patrons of thoſe things; the beſt defence where-
of is ſpeedy redreſs and amendment. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 1.
whether the minds of men have naturally imprinted on
them the ideas of cxtenſion and number, I leave to thoſe who
are the patrons of innate principles. Locke.
4. One who has donation of eccleſiaſtical preferment.
PATRoN A.G.E. n.ſ. [from patron.]
1. Support; protection. ... .
Lady, moſt worthy of all duty, how falls it out, that you,
in whom all virtue ſhines, will take the patronage of fortune,
the only rebellious handmaid againſt virtue. Sidney.
Here's patronage, and here our art deſcries,
What breaks its bonds, what draws the cloſer ties,
Shows what rewards our ſervices may gain,
Creech.
And how too often we may court in vain.
O 2. Guardianſhip<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">#.
it,
iſ,
º,
all
º,
k-º'-
P A T
2, Guardianſhip of ſaints.
From certain paſſages of the poets, ſeveral ſhips made
choice of ſome god or other for their guardians, as among
the Roman Catholicks every veſſel is recommended to the
patronage of ſome particular ſaint. Addison.
."Donation of a benefice; right of conferring a benefice.
To PATRoN AGE. v. a. [from the noun..] To patroniſe; to
protećt. A bad word.
Dar'ſt thou maintain the former words thou ſpak'ſt
Yes, ſir, as well as you dare patronage
The envious barking of your ſaucy tongue. Shakeſp.
An out-law in a caſtle keeps,
And uſes it to patronage his theft. , Shakeſp.
PATRo’NAL. adj. [from patronus, Lat.] Protećting; ſupport-
ing; guarding; defending; doing the office of a patron:
The name of the city being diſcovered unto their enemies,
their penates and patronal gods might be called forth by
charms. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
PA'rgoNess. n.ſ.. [feminine of patron ; patrona, Lat.]
1. A female that defends, countenances or ſupports.
Of cloſe eſcapes the aged patroneſ,
Blacker than earſt, her ſable mantle ſpred,
When with two truſty maids in great diſtreſs, *
Both from mine uncle and my realm I fled. Fairfax.
All things ſhould be guided by her direétion, as the ſove-
reign patroneſ, and protećtreſs of the enterpriſe. Bacon.
Befriend me night, beſt patroneſ of grief,
Over the pole thy thickeſt mantle throw. Milton.
He petitioned his patroneſs, who gave him for anſwer, that
providence had affigned every bird its proportion. L’Eſtrange.
It was taken into the protection of my patroneſſes at court.
- Swift.
2. A female guardian ſaint. - -
To PATRoNise. v. a. [from patron.] To protećt; to ſup&gt;
port; to defend; to countenance.
Churchmen are to be had in due reſpe&amp;t for their work
ſake, and protećted from ſcorn; but if a clergyman be looſe
and ſcandalous, he muſt not be patroniſed nor winked at. Bac.
All tenderneſs of conſcience againſt good laws, is hypocriſy,
and patroniſed by none but men of deſign, who look upon it
as the fitteſt engine to get into power. South's Sermons.
I have been eſteemed and patroniſed by the grandfather,
the father and the ſon. Dryden.
PATRoNYMick. n.f. [Tortovywizjs, patronymique, Fr.] Name
expreſſing the name of the father or anceſtor: as, Tydides,
the ſon of Tydeus.
It ought to be rendered the ſon, Teółonides being a
patronymick. Broome.
Patten of a pillar. n.ſ. Its baſe. - Ainſworth.
PATTENMAKER. m. ſ. [patten and maker.] He that makes
pattens. -
P:. n. ſ. ſpatin, Fr.] A ſhoe of wood with an iron
ring, worn under the common ſhoe by women to keep them
from the dirt. - - - -
Their ſhoes and pattens are ſnouted and piked more than a
finger long, crooking upwards, which they call crackowes,
which were faſtened to the knees with chains of gold and
ſilver. Camden's Remains.
Good houſewives
Underneath th' umbrella's oily ſhed,
Safe through the wet on clinking pattens tread. Gay.
To PATTER. v. m. [from patte, Fr. the foot..] To make a
noiſe like the quick ſteps of many feet.
Patt'ring hail comes pouring on the main,
When Jupiter deſcends in harden'd rain. . Dryden.
The ſtealing ſhower is ſcarce to patter heard
By ſuch as wander through the foreſt walks. Thomſºn.
PA’rtº RN. m. ſ. [patron, Fr. patroon, Dutch.]
1. The original propoſed to imitation; the archetype; that
which is to be copied ; an exemplar.
As though your deſire were, that the churches of old ſhould
be patterns for us to follow, and even glaſſes wherein we
might ſee the practice of that which by you is gathered out of
ſcripture. º - Hooker.
I will be the pattern of all patience;
I will ſay nothing. "Shakeſp. King Lear.
A pattern to all princes living with her,
And all that ſhall ſucceed. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The example and pattern of the church of Rome. Claren.
Loſe not the honour you have early won,
But ſtand the blameleſs pattern of a ſon. Dryden.
Meaſure the excellency of a virtuous mind; not as it is
the copy, but the pattern of regal power. Grew.
...This pattern ſhould be our guide, in our preſent ſtate of
pilgrimage. Atterbury's Sermons.
Chriſtianity commands us to act after a nobler pattern,
than the virtues even of the moſt perfect men. Rogers.
, Take pattern by our ſiſter ſtar,
Delude at once and bleſs our fight; . .
When you are ſeen, be ſeen fromiſar,
And chiefly chuſe to ſhine by night. 'Swift.
P A U
2. A ſpecimen; a part ſhown as a ſample of the reſt.
... A gentleman ſends to my ſhop for a pattern of ſtuff; if he
like it, he compares the pattern with the whole piece, and
probably we bargain. Swift.
3. An inſtance; an example.
What God did command touching Canaan, the ſame con-
cerneth not us otherwiſe than only as a fearful pattern of his
juſt diſpleaſure againſt finful nations. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 17.
4: Anything cut out in paper to direct the cutting of cloth.
To PATTERN. v. a. ſpatronner, Fr. from the noun.]
I. To make in imitation of ſomething; to copy.
Ay, ſuch a place there is, where we did hunt,
Pattern'd by that the poet here deſcribes.
2. To ſerve as an example to be followed.
now much in uſe.
When I that cenſure him do ſo offend,
Let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
Shakespeare
Neither ſenſe is
And nothing come in partial. Shakeſ
PA'v AN. - - - - p.
PA’v IN. } n. ſ. A kind of light tripping dance. Ainſ.
PAU'ciloq9Y. m. ſ. ſpauciloquium, Lat..] Sparing and rare
ſpeech. Dić7.
Pauſcity. [paucitas, from paucus, Latin.]
I. Fewneſs; ſmallneſs of number. -
The multitude of pariſhes, and paucity of ſchools. Hooker.
In ſuch flender corpuſcles as thoſe of colour, may eaſily be
conceived a greater paucity of protuberant corpuſcles. Boyle.
Socrates well underſtood what he ſaid touching the rarity
and paucity of friends. L'Eſtrange.
2. Smallneſs of quantity,
This paucity of blood is agreeable to many other animals:
as, lizzards, frogs and other fiſhes. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To PAVE. v. a. [pavio, Lat, paver, Fr.]
1. To lay with brick or ſtone; to floor with ſtone.
Should ſhe kneel down,
Her brother's ghoſt his paved bed would break,
And take her hence in horrour. Shakeſp.
Let not the court be paved, for that ſtriketh up a greatheat
in ſummer, and much cold in winter. Bacon.
From this chymic flame
I ſee a city of more precious mold,
With ſilver pav'd, and all divine with gold. Drydºn.
The ſtreets are paved with brick or freeſtone. Addison.
2. To make a paſſage eaſy. -
It might open and pave a prepared way to his own title. Bäc.
PA’v EMENT. n.f. [pavimentum, Lat.] Stones or bricks laid
on the ground ; ſtone floor. . . . . . . . . . . .
The marble pavement cloſes, he is enter'd
Into his radiant roof. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
A broad and ample road, whoſe duſt is gold,
And pavement ſtars ſeen in the galaxy. Milton.
The long laborious pavement here he treads, -
That to proud Rome th’ admiring nations leads. Addison.
The foundation of Roman ways was made of rough ſtone
joined together with cement; upon this was laid another layer,
conſiſting of ſmall ſtones and cement, to plane the inequali-
ties of the lower ſtratum in which the ſtones of the upper
pavement were fixed: for there can be no very durable pave-
ment, but a double one. Arbuthnot on Coins.
*A f
#: }n. J. [from pave..] One who lays with ſtones.
For thee the ſturdy paver thumps the ground,
Whilſt ev'ry ſtroke his lab’ring lungs reſound. Gay.
PAvi'lion. n.ſ. [pavillon, French..] A tent; a temporary or
moveable houſe. - - . -
Flowers being under the trees, the trees were to them a
pavillion, and the flowers to the trees a moſaical floor. Sidney.
- She did lie -a -
In her pavilion, cloth of gold, of tiſſue. Shakespeare
He, only he, heaven's blew pavilion ſpreads,
And on the ocean's dancing billows treads. Sandy.
It was uſual for the enemy, when there was a king in the
field, to demand by a trumpetin what part of the camp he
reſided, that they might avoid firing upon the royal pavilion.
Addison's Freeholder, N° 23,
The glowing fury ſprings,
Once more invades the guilty dome, and ſhrouds
Its bright pavilions in a veil of clouds. Pope.
To PAVI'lion. v. a. [from the noun.]
-1. To furniſh with tents.
Jacob in Mahanaim ſaw
The field pavilion'd with his guardians bright. Milton,
2. To be ſheltered by a tent. -
With his batt'ning flocks the carefli ſwain
Abides pavilion'd on the graſſy plain. ... -
Pausch. n.ſ. [panſ, French; fanga, Spaniſh; fante*, Latin.]
The belly; the region of the guts. .. -
Demades, the orator, was talkative, and would cat hard ;
Antipater would ſay of him, that he was like a ſacrifice, that
nothing was left of it but the tongue and the faunch. Bacon,
10 FI Pleading
*s-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P A W
P A Y
|
To Paw. v. n. [from the noun..] To
ing Matho born abroad for air, • -
wº paunch fills his new-faſhion'd chair. Dryden.
- in the
To PA UNch. v. a. [from the noun..] To º or rip t
belly; to exenterate; º: º paunch ; to eviſcerate.
Batter his ſkull, or faunch him with a ſtake. Shakeſp.
Chiron attack'd Talthibitis with ſuch might,
One paſs had faunch'd the huge hydropick knight. Garth.
Pau’re R. n. ſ. [Latin.] A poor perſon; one who receives
alms.
Patise. n.ſ.. [falſe, Fr. pauſa, low Latin; wav2.]
1. A ſtop; a place or time of intermiſſion.
Neither could we ever come to any pauſe, whereon to reſt
our aſſurance this way. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 4.
Comes a fellow crying out for help,
And Caſſio following with determin'd ſword,
To execute upon him; this gentleman
Steps in to Caſio, and intreats his pauſe.
Some pauſe and reſpite only I require,
Till with my tears I ſhall have quench'd my fire. Denham.
The puniſhment muſt always be rigorouſly exacted, and
the blows by pauſes laid on till they reach the mind, and you
perceive the ſigns of a true ſorrow. Locke.
Whilſt thoſe exalted to primeval light,
Only perceive ſome little pauſe of joys
In thoſe great moments, when their god employs
Shakeſp.
Their miniſtry. Prior.
What pauſe from woe, what hopes of comfort bring -
The names of wiſe or great. Prior.
Our diſcourſe is not kept up in converſation, but falls into
more pauſes and intervals than in our neighbouring countries.
Addiſon's Speciator, N° 13 3.
2. Suſpenſe; doubt.
Like a man to double buſineſs bound,
I ſtand in pauſe where I ſhall firſt begin,
And both neglect. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
3. Break; paragraph ; apparent ſeparation of the parts of a
diſcourſe.
He writes with warmth, which uſually neglects method,
and thoſe partitions and pauſes which men, educated in the
ſchools, obſerve. Locke.
4. Place of ſuſpending the voice marked in writing.
5. A ſtop or intermiſſion in muſick.
To PAUSE. v. n.
1. To wait; to ſtop; not to proceed; to forbear for a time,
Tarry; pauſe a . or two,
Before you hazard: for in chu ing wrong
I loſe your company; therefore foibear a while. Shakeſp.
Give me leave to read philoſophy.
And, while I pauſe, ſerve in your harmony: Shakeſ?.
Pauſing a while, thus to herſelf ſhe mus’d. AMilton,
2. To deliberate.
Bear Worceſter to death, and Vernon too.
Other offenders we will pauſe upon. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Solyman pauſing a little upon the matter, the heat of his
fury being over, ſuffered himſelf to be intreated. Knoller.
3. To be intermitted.
What awe did the ſlow ſolemn knell inſpire,
The pealing organ, and the pauſing choir,
And the laſt words, that duſt to diſt convey'd Tickell.
PAusER. n.ſ. [from pai, *] He who pauſes; he who delibe.
rates.
The expedition of my violent love
Outruns the pauſer, reaſon. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
PAW. m. ſ. [patten, Welſh.]
I. The foot of a beaſt of prey.
One choſe his ground,
Whence ruſhing he might ſureſt ſeize them both
Grip'd in each paw. Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft.
The bee and ſerpent know their ſtings, and the bear the
uſe of his paws, 44ore's Antidote againſ Atheiſm.
If lions had been brought up to Painting, where you have
one lion under the feet of a man, you ſhould have had twen
men under the paw of a lion.
L’E/irange.
Each claims poſſeſſion, :/trang
Both their paws are faſtened on the prey. Dryden.
2. Hand. In contempt. -
Be civil to the wretch imploring,
And lay your paws upon him without roaring, Dryden.
draw the fore foot along
the ground. e tore foot along
The fiery courſer, when he hears from far,
The ſprightly trumpets and the ſhouts of war,
Picks up his ears, and trembling with delight
Shifts place, and Pºw', and hopes the promis'd fight.
Th’ i - - - * Dryden.
And mpatient courſer pants in every vein,
Hill **3, ſeems to beat the diſtant plain,
* Wales, and floods ºppear already croſs'd,
..º. a thouſand ſteps are loſt. Pope.
in my mini.” Pºwing with his hoof, ſtruck a jºi.
9 -- Swift,
To PAw. v. a.
1. To ſtrike with a draught of the fore foot.
His hot courſer paw'd th’ Hungarian plain,
And adverſe legions ſtood the ſhock in vain. 7.…",
2. To handle roughly.
3. To fawn ; to flatter. Ainſwºrth.
PAWN. m. ſ. ſpand, Dutch; pan, French.] Something given
to pledge as a ſecurity for money borrowed or promiſe maj.
Her oath for love, her honour's pawn. Shakeſp.
As for mortgaging and pawning, men will not take pawns
without uſe; or they will look for the forfeiture. Bacon.
He retains much of his primitive eſteem, that abroad his
very word will countervail the bond or pawn of another. Howel.
Here's the very heart, and ſoul, and life-blood of Go-
mez; pawns in abundance, ’till the next bribe helps their
huſbands to redeem them. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
2. The ſtate of being pledged.
Sweet wife, my honour is at pawn,
And, but my going, nothing can redeem it. Shakespeare .
Redeem from broking pawn the blemiſh'd crown,
Wipe off the duſt that hides our ſceptre's gilt. Shaft.
3. A common man at cheſs. Ainſworth.
PA'wed, adj. [from paw.]
I. Having paws.
2. Broad footed. Ainſworth.
To Pawn. . v.a. [from the noun.] To Pledge; to give in
Pledge. It is now ſeldom uſed but of Pledges given for
money.
I hold it cowardiſe
To reſt miſtruſtful, where a noble heart
Hath pawn'd an open hand in ſign of love. Shakespeare .
Let's lead him on with a fine baited delay, 'till he hath
Pºw"; his horſes. ... Shalºftcore, Merry ſlº, J. //indſor.
Pawn me to this your honour, ſhe is his. Shakeſp.
I dare pawn down my life for him, that he hath writ this
to feel my affection to your honour. Shakeſpeare.
Will you thus break your faith ?—
I pawn'd you none:
I promis'd you redreſs. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
I'll pawn the little blood which I have left,
To ſave the innocent. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tal.
If any thought annoys the gallant youth,
'Tis dear remembrance of that fatal glance,
For which he lately pawn'd his heart. Waller.
She who before had mortgag’d her eſtate,
And pawn'd the laſt remaining piece of plate. Dryden.
One part of the nation is pawned to the other, with hardly
3 poſſibility of being ever redeemed. Swift.
PA'ws brokeR., n. J. ſpawn and broker.] One who leńd.
money upon pledge.
The uſurers or money-changers were a ſort of a ſcanda-
lous employment at Rome; thoſe money-ſcriveners ſeem to
have been little better than our pawnbrokers. Arbuthnot.
To PAY. v. a. [paier, Fr. apagar, Spaniſh; parare, Lat.]
1. To diſcharge a debt.
You have done enough, and have perform'd
A ſaint-like ſorrow; and indeed paid down
More penitence, than done trepaſs. Shakeſp.
Your ſon has paid a ſoldier's debt;
He only liv'd but till he was a man. Shakeſp.
She does what ſhe will, ſay what ſhe will, take all, pay
all. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of I/injor.
The king and prince -
Then paid their off rings in a ſacred grove
To Hercules. Dryden.
An hundred talents of ſilver did the children of Ammon
pay. 2 Chronicle; xxvii. 5.
I have peace offerings with me ; this day have I paid my
WOWs. Proverbs vii. 14.
Have patience, and I will pay thee all. Matthew viii. 26.
The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again. Pſ. Xxxvii. 21.
2. To diſmiſs one to whom anything is due with his money.
3. To attone; to make amends by ſuffering; with for before the
cauſe of payment.
If this prove true, they’ll pay for't. , Shakespeare
Bold Prometheus, whoſe untam'd deſire
Rival'd the ſun with his own heav'nly fire,
Now doom'd the Scythian vulture's endleſs prey,
Severely pays for animating clay. Roſcommon.
Men of parts, who were to act according to the reſult of
their debates, and often pay for their miſtakes with their
heads, found thoſe ſcholaſtick forms of little uſe to diſcover
truth. - Locke.
4. To beat.
I follow'd me cloſe, and, with a thought, ſcwen of the
eleven I paid. Shakeſp, Henry IV.
- Forty things more, - -
For which, or pay me quickly, or I'll pay you. B. Johnſ.
5. To reward; to recompenſe.
She I love, or laughs at all my pain,
. Or knows her worth too well; and pay; me with diſdain.
Dryden's Knight's Tale.
6. To give<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. E. A
dº,
ºf
ºff.
iii.
| ty
%
6. To give the equivalent for any thing bought. ---
Riches are got by conſuming leſs of foreign commodities,
than what by commodities or labour is paid for. - Locłe.
PAY. m. ſ. [from the verb.J Wages; hire; money given in
return for ſervice.
Come on, brave ſoldiers, doubt not of the day;
And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay. . Shakespeare
The ſoldier is willing to be converted, for there is neither
pay nor plunder to be got. L’Eſtrange.
Money, inſtead of coming over for the pay of the army,
has been tranſmitted thither for the pay of thoſe forces called
from thence. - Temple.
Here only merit conſtant pay receives,
Is bleſt in what it takes, and what it gives. Pope.
PA'y Able. adj. [paiable, Fr. from pay.]
1. Due; to be paid. -
The marriage-money, the princeſs brought, was payable
ten days after the ſolemnization. Bacon's Henry VII.
The farmer rates or compounds the ſums of money payable
to her majeſty, for the alienation of lands, made without or
by licence. Bacon.
2. Such as there is power to pay. . - -
To repay by a return equivalent, is not in every one's
power; but thanks are a tribute payable by the pooreſt. South.
PAYDAY. n.ſ. [pay and day.] Day on which debts are to be
diſcharged or wages paid. - * . . .
Labourers pay away all their wages, and live upon truſt
till next payday. Locke.
PAYER. m.ſ. [paieur, Fr. from pay.] One that pays.
PA'y MastER. n.ſ. ifay and maſter.] One who is to pay;
one from whom wages or reward is received.
Howſoever they may bear ſail for a time, yet are they ſo
ſure paymaſters in the end, that few have held out their lives
ſafely. - - - Hayward.
If we deſire that God ſhould approve us, it is a ſign we do
his work, and expect him our paymg/ler. Taylor.
PA'YMENT. n.ſ.. [from pay.]
1. The aët of paying. -
2. The diſcharge of debt or promiſe.
Thy huſband commits his body
To painful labour both by ſea and land,
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks, and true obedience;
Too little payment for ſo great a debt. Shakespeare.
Perſons of eminent virtue, when advanced, are leſs envied,
for their fortune ſeemeth but due unto them ; and no man
envieth the payment of a debt. Bacon.
3. A reward.
Give her an hundred marks.
—An hundred marks by this light I'll ha'more.
An ordinary groom is for ſuch payment. Shakeſp.
The wages that fin bargains with the finner, are life, plea-
ſure and profit; but the wages it pays him with, are death,
torment and deſtruction: he that would underſtand the falſe-
hood and deceit of fin thoroughly, muſt compare its promiſes
and its payments together. South's Sermons.
4. Chaſtiſement; ſound beating. Ainſworth.
To PAYse. v. n. [Uſed by Spenſºr for poiſe.] To balance.
Ne was it iſland then, ne was it pays'd
Amid the ocean waves,
But was all deſolate. -
PA'Yser. n.ſ.. [for poiſer.] One that weighs.
To mange this coinage, porters bear the tin, poizers weigh
it, a ſteward, comptroller and receiver keep the account. Carew.
PEA. m. ſ. [piſum, Latin; pira, Saxon; pois, French.]
A pea hath a papilionaceous flower, and out of his empale-
ment riſes the pointal, which becomes a long pod full of
roundiſh ſeeds; the ſtalks are fiſtulous and weak, and ſeem
to perforate the leaves by which they are embraced; the other
leaves grow by pairs along the midrib, ending in a tendril.
1. The ſpecies are ſixteen: the greater garden pea, with
white flowers and fruit. 2. Hotſpur pea. 3. Dwarf pea.
4. French dwarf pea. 5. Pea with an eſculent huſk. 6.
Sickle pea. 7. Common white pea. 8. Green rouncival
pea. 9. Grey pea. Io. Maple rouncival pea. 11. Roſe
pea. 12. Spaniſh moretto pea. 13. Marrowfat or Dutch
admiral pea, 14. Union pea. 15. Sea pea. 16. Pig
pea. AMiller.
PEACE. m. ſ. [paix, French; tax, Latin.]
1. Reſpite from war.
The Dane and Swede rouz'd up to fierce alarms,
Bleſs the wiſe condućt of her pious arms;
Soon as her fleets appear, their terrours ceaſe,
And all the northern world lies huſh'd in peace.
No joys to him pacifick ſcepters yield,
War ſounds the trump, he ruſhes to the field,
Peace courts his hand, but ſpreads her charms in vain. Anon.
2. Quiet from ſuits or diſturbances. -
The king gave judgment againſt Warren, and commanded
that Sherborn ſhould hold his land in peace. Davies.
3. Reſt from any commotion.
4. Stilneſs from riots or tumults.
Keep peace upon your lives; he dies that ſtrikes again. Sha.
Fairy Queen.
Addison.
P. E. A
, All aſſembled here in arms againſt God's peace and the
king's; we charge you to repair to your dwelling places. Shakespeare
Shallow, you have yourſelf been a great fighter, though
now a man of peace. Shakeſp. Merry JPives of //indſor.
5. Reconciliation of differences. " .
Let him make peace with me.
6. A ſtate not hoſtile.
If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with:
me, let the enemy perſecute my foul.
Iſaiah xxvii. 5.
Pſalm vii. 4.
There be two falſe peaces or unities: the on: grounded
upon an implicit ignorance. Bacon.
7. Reſt; quiet; content; freedom from terrour; heavenly reſt.
Well, peace be with him that hath madeu -
–Peace be with us, leſt we be heavier Shakeſpeare.
Peace be unto thee, fear not, thou ſhalt not die. judg. vi. 23.
The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believ-
ing, that ye may abound in hope. Romans xv. 13.
Religion directs us rather to ſecure inward peace than out-
ward eaſe, to be more careful to avoid everlatting torment
than light afflićtions. Tillotſon's Sermons.
8. Silence; ſuppreſſion of the thoughts. -
'Twill out;—I peace / -
No, I will ſpeak as liberal as the air. Shakeſpeare.
In an examination, a freed ſervant, who had much
power with Claudius, very ſaucily had almoſt all the words;
and amongſt other things, he aſked in ſcorn one of the exa-
minates, who was a freed ſervant of Scribonianus; I pray,
Sir, if Scribonianus had been emperor, what would you have
done he anſwered, I would have ſtood behind his chair and
held my peace. - - Bacon.
She ſaid ; and held her peace: AEneas went
Sad from the cave. - Dryden.
PEACE. interjećtion. A word commanding ſilence.
Peace / fear, thou comeſt too late, when already the arm
is taken. - Sidney, b. ii.
Hark! peace /
It was the owl that ſhriek'd, the fatal bellman,
Which gives the ſtern'ſ good night. Shake?.
Peace, good reader do not weep; . . .
Peace, the lovers are aſleep;
They, ſweet turtles, folded lie,
In the laſt knot that love could tie.
Let them ſleep, let them ſleep on,
*Till this ſtormy night be gone;
And th’ eternal morrow dawn,
Then the curtains will be drawn,
And they waken with that light,
Whoſe day ſhall never ſleep in night.
But peace, I muſt not quarrel with the will
Of higheſt diſpenſation. AMilton's Agoniſer.
Silence, ye troubled waves, and, thou deep, peacef
Said then th' omnific word. Milton.
I prythee peace /
- Perhaps ſhe thinks they are too near of blood. Dryden.
Peace-offer ING. m. ſ. [peace and offer.] Among the Jews,
a ſacrifice or gift offered to God for attonement and recon-
ciliation for a crime or offence.
A ſacrifice of peace-offering offer without blemiſh. Lev. iii. 1,
PEA'ce ABLE. adj. [from peace.]
1. Free from war; free from tumult.
The moſt peaceable way for you, if you do take a thief, is
to let him ſhew himſelf, and ſteal out of your company. Shakespeare
The reformation of England was introduced in a peaceable
manner, by the ſupreme power in parliament. Swift.
2. Quiet; undiſturbed. -
The laws were firſt intended for the reformation of abuſes
and peaceable continuance of the ſubject. Speyer.
Lie, Philo, untouch'd on my peaceable ſhelf,
Nor take it amiſs, that ſo little I heed thee;
I've no envy to thee, and ſome love to myſelf,
Then why ſhould I anſwer; ſince firſt I muſt read thce. Pri.
3. Not violent; not bloody.
The Chaldaeans flattered both Caeſar and Pompey with
long lives and a happy and peaceable death; both which fell out
extremely contrary. - Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
4. Not quarrelſome ; not turbulent. . . .
Theſe men are peaceable, therefore let them dwell in the
land and trade. Geneſis xxxiv. 21.
PFA'ce AELENEss. n. ſ. [from peaceable.] Quietneſs; diſpo-
ſition to peace. - - - -
Plant in us all thoſe precious fruits of piety, juſtice, and
charity, and peaceableneſs, and bowels of mercy toward all .
others. . Hammond's Fundamentals.
PFA'ce ABLY. adv. [from peaceable.]
1. Without war; without tumult. .
To his crown, ſhe him reſtor'd, • *
In which he dy’d, made ripe for death by eld,
And after will'd it ſhould to her remain, -
Who praceably the ſame long time did weld. Fa. Qººn.
The balance of power was provided for, elſe Pſittatus
could never have governed ſo peaceably, without changing any
of Solon's laws. -- - Swiſ.
2. \\ ...ho…"
s heavy
Craſhaw.
__ 7W
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E. A
P E A
".
º
2. Without diſturbance;
of death do make him grin ;
Dº i. let him paſs peaceably. Shakeſp.
Peaceful. adj. [Peacº and full.]
iet : not in war. -
I. Qºţi. fouz'd the Tyrrhene realm with loud alarms,
And peaceful Italy involv’d in arms. Dryden.
ifick; mild.
2. Pºiº one diſarm'd, his anger all he loſt; -
And thus with peaceful words uprais'd her ſoon. Milton.
The peaceful power that governs love repairs,
To feaſt upon ſoft vows and ſilent pray'rs. Dryden.
3. Undiſturbed; ſtill ; ſecure. - -
Succeeding monarchs heard the ſubjects cries,
Nor ſaw diſpleas'd the peaceful cottage riſe. Pope.
PEA'cefully. adv. [from peaceful.]
1. Quietly; without diſturbance.
Our lov’d earth; where peacefully we ſlept,
And far from heav'n quiet poſſeſſion kept. Dryden.
2. Mildly; gently. - -
#,...}}..."../ [from peaceful.] Quiet; freedom from
diſturbance. -
PeaceMaker, n.ſ. [peace and maker.] One who reconciles
differences.
Peace, good queen;
And whet not on theſe too too furiºus peers,
For bleſſed are the peacemakers. Shakeſp.
Think us,
Thoſe we profeſs, peacemakers, friends and ſervants. Shakespeare
PeacePA'RTED. adj. [peace and parted.] Diſmiſled from the
world in peace.
We ſhould prophane the ſervice of the dead
To fing a requiem, and ſuch reſt to her
As to peaceparted ſouls. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
PEach. n.ſ. [peſche, Fr. malum perſicum, Lat.]
A peach hath long narrow leaves; the flower conſiſts of ſe-
veral leaves, which are placed in a circular order, and expand
in form of a roſe; the pointal, which riſes from the center
of the flower cup, becomes a roundiſh fleſhy fruit, having a
longitudinal furrow incloſing a rough rugged ſtone. Miller.
September is drawn with a chearful countenance : in his
left hand a handful of millet, withal carrying a cornucopia of
ripe peaches, pears and pomegranates. Peacham.
The ſunny wall,
Preſents the downy peach. Thºmſon's Autumn.
To Peach. v. n. [Corrupted from impeach..] To accuſe of
ſome crime.
If you talk of peaching, I’ll peach firſt, and ſee whoſe oath
will be believed; I'll trounce you. Dryden
Peach-colour Ed. adj. [peach and colour.] Of a colour like
a peach.
One Mr. Caper comes, at the ſuit of Mr. Threepile the
mercer, for ſome four ſuits of peach-coloured ſattin, which now
peaches him a beggar. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
PEA'chick. m. ſ. ſpea and chick.] The chicken of a peacock.
Does the ſniveling peachick think to make a cuckold of
me. Southern.
PEA'cock. m. ſ. [paya, Saxon, pavo, Lat.] Of this word the
etymology is not known : perhaps it is peak cock, from the
tuft of feathers on its head; the peak of women being an
ancient ornament: if it be not rather a corruption of beaucº,
Fr. from the more ſtriking luſtre of its ſpangled train..] A
fowl eminent for the beauty of his feathers, and particularly
of his tail.
Let frantick Talbot triumph for a while ;
And, like a peacock, ſweep along his tail. Shakeſp.
The birds that are hardeſt to be drawn, are the tame
birds; as cock, turky-cock and peacock. Peacham.
The peacock, not at thy command, aſſumes
His glorious train; nor eſtrich her rare plumes. Sandys.
The peacock's plumes thy tackle muſt not fail, -
Nor the dear purchaſe of the ſable's tail. Gay.
PEA'HEN. m. ſ. ſpea and hen; pava, Lat.] The female of the
peacock.
PEA... n.ſ. ſpeaç, Saxon; pique, pic, French.]
1. The top of a hill or eminence.
Thy fifter ſeek,
Or on Meander's bank or Latmus' peak, Prior.
2. Anything acuminated.
3. The riſing forepart of a head-dreſs.
To Peak. v. m. ſpequeno, Spaniſh, little, perhaps lean : but I
believe this word has ſome other derivation: we ſay a wi-
thered man has a ſharp face; Falſtaff dying, is ſaid to have
**/*as ſharp as a pen : from this obſervation, a ſickly man
is ſaid to peak or grow acuminated.
I. To look fickly.
Wºry ſºnnights, nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, peak and pine.
2. To make a mean figure ; to ſneak.
#. adºl and muddy mettled raſcal, peak,
ºke John a dreams, unpregnant of my cauſe, Shakespeare
° peaking cornuto her huſband, dwelling in a continúal
5
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
larum of jealouſy, comes me in the inſtant of our en-
Counter. Shakeſp.
PEAL. m. ſ. [Perhaps from pello, pellere tympana.]
1. A ſucceſſion of loud ſounds: as, of bells, thunder, can-
non, loud inſtruments.
They were ſaluted by the way, with a fair peal of artillery
from the tower. Hayward.
The breach of faith cannot be ſo highly expreſſed, as in
that it ſhall be the laſt peal to call the judgments of God upon
Incil. Bacon's Eſays.
Woods of oranges will ſmell into the ſea perhaps twenty
miles; but what is that, ſince a peal of ordnance will do as
much, which moveth in a ſmall compaſs : Bacon.
A peal ſhall rouſe their ſleep;
Then all thy ſaints aſſembled, thou ſhalt judge
Bad men and angels. Milt. Par. R*g.
I myſelf,
Wanquiſh'd with a peal of words, O weakneſs;
Gave up my fort of ſilence to a woman. Milton.
From the Moors camp the noiſe grows louder ſtill;
Peals of ſhouts that rend the heav'n's, Dryden.
Oh! for a peal of thunder that would make
Earth, ſea and air, and heaven and Cato tremble! Addison
2. It is once uſed by Shakeſpeare for a low dull noiſe, but improperly.
Ere to black Hecar's ſummons -
The ſhard-born beetle with his drowſy hums,
Hath rung night's yawning peaſ, there ſhall be done
A deed of dreadful note. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
To PEAL. v. m. [from the noun..] To play ſolemnly and loud.
Let the pealing organ blow,
To the full-voic’d quire below,
In ſervice high and anthems clear,
As may with ſweetneſs through mine ear,
Diſlolve me into extafies,
And bring all heav'n before my eyes. Milton.
The pealing organ, and the pauſing choir;
And the laſt words, that duſt to duſt convey'd. Tickell.
To PEAL. v. a. -
1. To aſſail with noiſe.
Nor was his ear leſs peal’d -
With noiſes loud and ruinous, than when Bellona ſtorms,
With all her batt’ring engines bent to raſe .
Some capital city. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
2. To ſtir with ſome agitation: as, to peal the pot, is when tt
boils to ſtir the liquor therein with a ladle. Aiºſ.
PEAR. m. ſ. ſpoire, French; pyrum, Latin.]
The flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves, placed in a circular
order, and expand in form of a roſe, whoſe flower cup be-
comes a fleſhy fruit, which is more produced toward the foot-
ſtalk than the apple, but is hollowed like a navel at the ex-
treme part ; the cells, in which the ſeeds are lodged, are ſe-
parated by ſoft membranes, and the ſeeds are oblong. The
ſpecies are eighty-four: 1. Little muſk pear, commonly
called the ſupreme. 2. The Chio pear, commonly called the
little baſtard muſk pear. 3. The haſting pear, commonly
called the green chiſel. 4. The red muſcadelle, it is alſo
called the faireſt. 5. The little muſcat. 6. The jargonelle.
7. The Windſor pear. 8. The orange muſk. 9. Great blanket.
Io. The little blanket pear. I 1. Long ſtalked blanket pear.
12. The ſkinleſs pear. 13. The muſk robin pear. 14. The
muſk drone pear. 15. The green orange pear. 16. Caſſo-
lette. 17. The Magdalene pear. 18. The great onion
pear. 19. The Auguſt muſcat. 20. The roſe pear. 21.
The perfumed pear. 22. The ſummer bon chrétien, or good
chriſtian. 23. Salviati. 24. Roſe water pear... 25. The
choaky pear. 26. The ruſſelet pear. 27. The prince's
pear. 28. The great mouth water pear. 29. Summer pur-
gamot. 30. The Autumn burgamot. 31. The Swiſs bur-
gamot. 32. The red butter pear. .. 33. The dean's pear.
34. The long green pear; it is called the Autumn month
water pear. 35. The white and grey monſieur John. 36.
The flowered muſcat. 37. The vine fear. 38. Rouſſeline
pear. 39. The knave's pear. .40. The green. ſugar pear.
41. The marquis's pear. 42. The burnt cat; it is alſo called
the virgin of Xantônee. 43. Le Beſidery; it is ſo called
rom Heri, which is a foreſt in Bretagne between Bennes and
Nantes, where this pear was found. 44. The craſane, or
burgamot craſane; it is alſo called the flat butter fear. 45.
Th: lanſac, or dauphin pear, 46. The dry martin. 47.
The villain of Anjou ; it is alſo called the tulip pear and the
great orange. 48. The large ſtalked fear. 49. The Ama-
dot pear. 50. Little lard pear. 51. The good Lewis pear.
52. The colmar pear; it is alſo called the manna pear and
the late burgamot. 53. The winter long green pear, or the
landry wilding. , 54. La virgoule, or la virgoleuſe. 55. Poire
d'Ambrette; this is ſo called from its muſky flavour, which
reſembles the ſmell of the ſweet ſultan flower, which is called
Ambrette in France. 56. The winter thorn pear. 57. The
St. Germain pear, or the unknown of la Fare; it being firſt
diſcovered upon the banks of a river called by that name in
the pariſh of St. Germain. , 58. The St. Auguſtine. 59.
The Spaniſh bon chrétien. 62. The pound pear. 61. The
- wilding<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. E. A
P E C
º
m
|
— -
wilding of Caſſoy, a foreſt in Brittany, where it was diſ-
covered. 62. The lord Martin pear. 63. The winter
citron pear ; it is alſo called the muſk orange pear in ſome
places. 64. The winter roſelet. , 65. The gate pear:
this was diſcovered in the province of Poićtou, where it was
much eſteemed. 66. Bergamotte Bugi ; it is alſo called the
Eaſter burgamot. 67. The winter bonchretien pear. 68.
Catillac or cadillac. 69. La paſtourelle. 70. The double
flowering pear. 71. St. Martial; it is alſo called the ange-
lic pear. 72: The wilding of Chaumontelle. 73. Carme-
lite, 74. The union pear. , 75. The aurate. , 76. The
fine preſent; it is alſo called St. Sampſon. 77. Le rouſſelet
de reims. 78. The ſummer thorn pear. 79. The egg pear;
ſo called from the figure of its fruit, which is ſhaped like an
egg. 80. The orange tulip pear. 81. La manſuette. 82.
The German muſcat. 83. The Holland burgamot. 84.
: The pear of Naples. Miller.
They would whip me with their fine wits, till I were as
creſt-faln as a dried pear. Shakeſpeare's Merch. of Penice.
Auguſt ſhall bear the form of a young man, of a choleric
aſpect, upon his arm a baſket of pears, plums and apples. Peac.
- The juicy pear
Lies in a ſoft profuſion ſcatter'd round. Thomſºn.
PEARL. n.ſ. [perle, Fr. perla, Spaniſh; ſuppoſed by Salmaſius,
to come from ſpherula, Latin.] .
Pearl, though eſteemed of the number of gems by our
jewellers, are but a diſtemper in the creature that produces
them: the fiſh in which pearls are moſt frequently found is
the Eaſt Indian berbes or pearl oyſter: others are found to pro-
duce pearl; ; as the common oyſter, the muſcle, and various
other kinds; but the Indian pearls are ſuperior to all: ſome
pearls have been known of the ſize of a pigeon's egg; as
they increaſe in fize, they are leſs frequent and inore valued:
the true ſhape of the pearl is a perfeót round; but ſome of a
confiderable ſize are of the ſhape of a pear, and ſerve for
ear-rings: their colour ought to be a pure, clear and brilliant
white, and they bring their natural poliſh with them, to
which art can never attain: it is reported, that pearl, natu-
rally of a yellowiſh caſt, never, alter, that this tinge never
grows deeper, and that the luſtre of the pearl never fades,
which is therefore juſtly preferred by the Orientals to ſuch as
are purely white : from the name unio given to the pearl,
ſome have been led to believe, that there was only one found
in each ſhell; this is indeed uſually the caſe in oyſters and
muſcles; but in the oriental pearl ſhell ſix or eight are
frequent, and ſometimes twenty or more. Hill.
A pearl-julep was made of a diſtilled milk. Wiſeman.
- Flow'rs purſled, blue and white,
Like ſaphire, pearl, in rich embroidery
Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee. Shakeſp.
Catalaćts pearl-coloured, and thoſe of the colour of bur-
niſhed iron, are eſteemed proper to endure the needle. Sharp.
PEARL. m. ſ. [albugo, Lat.]. A white ſpeck or film growing
on the eye. - - - Ainſworth.
PEARLED. adj. [from pearl.] Adorned or ſet with pearls.
The water nymphs
Held up their pearled wriſts, and took her in,
Bearing her ſtraight to aged Nereus’ hall. Milton.
PEARLEYED. adj. [pearl and eye.] Having a ſpeck in the eye.
PEARLGRAss.
PEA'RPLANT. }/ Plants.
PEARL wort.
PEA'RLY. adj. [from pearl.]
1. Abounding with pearls ; containing pearls.
Some in their pearly ſhells at eaſe, attend
Moiſt nutriment. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
Another was inveſted with a pearly ſhell, having the ſu-
Ainſworth.
tures finely diſplayed upon its ſurface. //oodward.
2. Reſembling pearls.
Which when ſhe heard, full pearly floods
I in her eyes might view. Drayton.
'Tis ſweet the bluſhing morn to view,
And plains adorn'd with pearly dew, Dryden.
For what the day devours, the nightly dew
Shall to the morn in pearly drops renew. Dryden.
PEARMAI'N. m. ſ. An apple.
Pearmain is an excellent and well known fruit. Mortimer.
PFA'RTREE, n.ſ. [pear and tree.] The tree that bears pears.
The peartree criticks will have to borrow his name of
wwe, fire. - - - Bacon.
PEA/SANT. m. ſ. [paiſant, Fr.] A hind; one whoſe buſineſs
is rural labour.
He holdeth himſelf a gentleman, and ſcorneth to work,
which, he faith, is the life of a peaſant or churl. Spenſer.
Our ſuperfluous kacqueys and our peaſants,
Who in unneceſſary action ſwarm
About our ſquares of battle. Shakeſp.
I had rather coin my heart, than wring
From the hard hands of peaſants their vile traſh. Shakeſp.
'Tis difficult for us,who are bred up with the ſame infirmities
about us with which we were born, to raiſe our thoughts and
imaginations to thoſe intellectual perfections that attended our
nature in the time of innocence, as it is for a peaſant bred up
PEBELESTONE.
in the ºbſcurities of a cottage, to fancy in his mind the un-
ſeen ſplendours of a court. South's Sermons.
he citizens would bring two thouſand men, with which
they could make head againſt twelve thouſand peaſants.
w Addiſon.
PEA'sANTRY. m. ſ. Peaſants; ruſticks ; country people.
How many then ſhould cover, that ſtand bire?
How much low peaſantry would then be gleaned
From the true ſeed of honour how much honour
Pickt from the chaff Shakespeare , Merch. of Venice.
The peaſantry in France under a much heavier preſſure of
want and poverty than the day-labourers of England of the
reformed religion, underſtood it much better than thoſe of a
higher condition among us. Locke.
PEA'scod. }". J. [pea, cod and ſhell.] The huſk that con-
PEA's Hell. § tains peas.
Thou art a ſheal’d peaſºod. Shakeſp. King Lear.
I ſaw a green caterpillar as big as a ſmall peaſºod. Walton.
As peaſºods once I pluck'd, I chanc'd to ſee
One that was cloſely fill'd with three times three.
I o'er the door the ſpell in ſecret laid. Gay.
PEASE. m. ſ. [Pea, when it is mentioned as a ſingle body,
makes peas; but when ſpoken of collectively, as food or a
ſpecies, it is called peaſe, anciently peaſon ; pira, Saxon; pois,
French ; piſo, Italian ; piſum, Latin.] Food of peaſe.
Sowe peaſon and beans in the wane of the moon;
Who ſoweth them ſooner, he ſoweth too ſoone. Tuſſer.
Peaſe, deprived of any aromatic parts, are mild and de-
mulcent; but, being full of aerial particles, are flatulent. Arb.
PEAT. n. ſ. A ſpecies of turf uſed for fire.
Turf and peat, and cowſheards are cheap fuels and laſt
long. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Carew, in his ſurvey of Cornwall, mentions nuts found
in peat-earth two miles #. of St. Michael's mount. Wºodw.
Pr:AT. n.ſ.. [from petit, Fr.] A little fondling; a darling; a
dear play thing. It is now commonly called pet.
A pretty peat it is beſt put finger in the eye,
An ſhe knew why. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
A citizen and his wife
Both riding on one horſe, upon the way
I overtook; the wench a pretty peat. Donne.
PE'BBLE. n. ſ. ſpaebolreana, Saxon.] A ſtone di-
} ſtinét from flints, being not in layers,
but in one homogeneous maſs, though ſometimes of many
colours. Popularly a ſmall ſtone.
Through the midſt of it ran a ſweet brook, which did
both hold the eye open with her azure ſtreams, and yet ſeek to
cloſe the eye with the purling noiſe it made upon the pebble-
Jiones it ran over. Sidney, b. i.
The biſhop and the duke of Glo'ſter's men,
Forbidden late to carry any weapon, . . .
Have fill'd their pockets full of pebbleſtones. Shakeſp.
Suddenly a file of boys deliver'd ſuch a ſhower of pebbles
looſe ſhot, that I was fain to draw mine honour in. Shakeſp.
You may ſee pebbles gathered together, and a cruſt of ce-
ment between them, as hard as the pebbles. Bacon.
Colle&amp;ting toys,
As children gath'ring pebbles on the ſhore. Milton.
Providence permitted not the ſtrength of the earth to ſpend
itſelf in baſe gravel and pebbles inſtead of quarries of ſtones.
More's Antidote againſ? Atheiſm.
Winds murmur'd through the leaves your long delay;
And fountains o'er the pebbles chid your ſtay. Dryden.
Another body, that hath only the reſemblance of an ordi-
nary pebble, ſhall yield a metallic and valuable matter. Woodw.
PEEBre-crystAL. m. ſ. -
The cryſtal, in form of nodules, is found lodged in the
earthy ſtrata left in a train by the water departing at the con-
cluſion of the deluge: this ſort, called by the lapidaries
pebble-cryſłal, is in ſhape irregular. Woodward.
PE’BBLED. adj. [from pebble.] Sprinkled or abounding with
pebbles.
- This bank fair ſpreading in a pebbled ſhore. Thomſºn.
PEBBLY. adj. [from pebble.] § of pebbles.
Strow'd bibulous above I ſee the ſands,
The pebbly gravel next. Thomſºn,
PeccAbi'lity. n.ſ.. [from peccable.] State of being ſubject
to ſin.
Where the common peccability of mankind is urged 9 in-
duce commiſeration towards the offenders; if this be of force
in fin, where the concurrence of the will renders the per-
ſon more inexcuſable, it will ſurely hold much more in bare
error which is purely º ... Decay of Piety.
PE'CCABLE. adj. [from pecco, Lat.] Incident to ſin.
Pecca pºllo. [Spaniſh; peccadille, French.] A petty fault;
a ſlight crime; a venial offence. -
H. means thoſe little vices, which we call follies and the
defects of the human underſtanding, or at moſt the peccadillº
of life, rather than the tragical vices to which men are hur-
ried by their unruly paſſions. Dryden.
'Tis low ebb with his accuſers, when ſuch peccadilos as
theſe are put in to ſwell the charge. Atterbury.
19 I PE'ccANC Y.
w v. 1
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E C
P. E. D
- r
... ?, Not Sommon to other thi
..] Bad quality.
Prº ...ſ..."... !, .. ºuin, be-
aft diſai took its original merely from the º
of the part, and not from the peccancy of the humours. 1ſt???.
PECCANT. adj. ſº Fr. peccans, Latin.]
C 11 ilfv : Cri II.111121.
1. Guilty; c From them I will not º
judgments, how with mankind I proceed ; -
º with peccant angels late they ſaw. Milton.
That ſuch a peccant creature ſhould diſapprove and repent
of every violation of the rules of juſt and honeſt, this right
reaſon could not but infer. South', Sermºns.
2. Ill diſpoſed; corrupt; bad; offenſive to the body; injur-
ious to health. It is chiefly uſed in medical writers.
With laxatives preſerve your body ſound,
And purge the pectant humours that abound. Dryden.
Such as have the bile peccant or deficient are relieved by
bitters, which are a ſort of ſubſidiary gall. Arbuthnot.
3. Wrong; bad; deficient; unformal. - - -
Nor is the party cited bound to appear, if the citation be
peccant in form or matter. Ayliff's Parergon.
Peck. n.ſ.. [from pocca, or perhaps from Fat, a veſſel. Skinner.
1. The fourth part of a buſhel.
Burn our veſſels, like a new -
Seal’d peck or buſhel, for being true. Hudibras.
To every hill of aſhes, ſome put a peck of unſacked lime,
which they cover with the aſhes till rain ſlacks the lime, and
then they ſpread them. Martimer's Huſhandry.
He drove about his turnips in a cart;
And from the ſame machine ſoldpecks of peaſe. King.
2. Proverbially. [In low language.] A great deal.
Her finger was ſo ſmall, the ring
Would not ſtay on which they did bring;
It was too wide a peck;
It look’d like the great collar juſt
About our young colt's neck.
To PECK. v. a. [becquer, French; picken, Dutch.]
1. To ſtrike with the beak as a bird.
2. To pick up food with the beak.
She was his only joy, and he her pride,
She, when he walk'd, went pecking by his fide. Dryden.
Can anything be more ſurpriſing, than to conſider Cicero
obſerving, with a religious attention, after what manner the
chickens pecked the grains of corn thrown them. Addiſon.
3. To ſtrike with any pointed inſtrument.
With a pick-ax of iron about ſixteen inches long, ſharpened
at the one end to peck, and flat headed at the other to drive
little iron wedges to cleave rocks. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
4. To ſtrike; to make blows.
Two contrary factions, both inveterate enemies of our
church, which they are perpetually pecking and ſtriking at
with the ſame malice. South's Sermons.
They will make head againſt a common enemy, whereas
mankind lie pecking at one another, till they are torn to
pieces. L’Eſtrange.
Suckling.
5. The following paſſage is perhaps more properly written to
peck, to throw.
,, . Get up o' th' rail, I'll peck you o'er the pales elſe. Shakeſp.
PE's KER, n. ſ. [from peck.]
1. One that pecks.
2. A kind of bird: as, the wood-pecker.
The titmouſe and the peckers hungry brood,
And º with her boſom ſtain'd in blood. Dryden.
Pºp. *j [corrupted from ſpeckled.] Spotted; varied with
pots.
Some are peckled, ſome greeniſh.
Pectºr's AL. m. ſ. [from petiºn, Lat. a comb.]
There are other fiſhes whoſe eyes regard the heavens, as
Plain, and cartilaginous fiſhes, as pedinal, or ſuch as have
their bones made laterally like a comb. Brown.
PE"ct INATED. ºff...[from pºten..] Put one within anotheraj.
ternately. This ſeems to be the meaning.
J/alton’s Angler.
To fit croſs leg'd or with our fingers pećinated, is ac-
counted bad. Brown's Pulgar Errour
z J.
Pectin Aºtion, n. ſ. The ſtate of being º
l º: º of Pºlination of the fingers was an hiero-
glyphic of impediment. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
**10*AL. adj. [from pećioralis, Latin.] Belonging to the
breaſt.
Being troubled with a
p and he was thereby relieve
. sº n: ſ ſpectorale, Lat. pºral, Fr.] A breaſt plate.
pº. * }*{ ſpeculatus, Latin; peculat, Fr..] Robbery
º Pº. of the publick; theft of publick money.
pictº. (Latin.] Robber of the publick.
* Appropia. ºil. ſpecidiaris, from peculium, fat. pecule, Fr.]
d º ..º. any one with excluſion of others.
is $º. .. s: William Temple, that the word humour
is peculiar to . º tongue; but not that the thing itſelf
in many's ... *gliſh, becauſe the contrary may be found
...Pºliſh, Italian and Fºn. productions. Swift.
ngs.
$ough, pectoral were preſcribed,
I
- J/ſeman.
The only ſacred hymns they are that chriſtianity hath pecu-
liar unto itſelf, the other being ſongs too of praiſe and of
thankſgiving, but ſongs wherewith as we ſerve God, ſo the
Jews likewiſe. Hooker, b. v. J. 39.
Space and duration being ideas that have ſomething very
abſtruſe and peculiar in their nature, the comparing them one
with another may be of uſe for their illuſtration. Locke.
3. Particular; ſingle. To join mºſt with peculiar, though found
in Dryden, is improper. -
One peculiar nation to ſelect
From all the reſt, of whom to be invok'd. Milton.
I neither fear, nor will provoke the war;
My fate is Juno's moſt peculiar care. Dryden.
Peculiar. n.
1. The property; the excluſive property.
By tincture or reflection, they augment
Their ſmall peculiar. Milt. Par. Left.
Revenge is ſo abſolutely the peculiar of heaven, that no
conſideration whatever can empower even the beſt men to
aſſume the execution of it. South's Sermons.
2. Something abſcinded from the ordinary juriſdiction.
Certain peculiars there are, ſome appertaining to the digni-
ties of the cathredral church at Exon. Carew.
Peculia's 1TY. n.ſ. [from peculiar..] Particularity; ſomething
found only in one.
If an author poſſeſſed any diſtinguiſhing marks of ſtyle or
peculiarity of thinking, there would remain in his leaſt ſucceſ:-
ful writings ſome few tokens whereby to diſcover him. Swift.
Peçu'll ARLY. adv. [from peculiar.]
1. Particularly ; ſingly.
That is peculiarly the effect of the ſun's variation. Iſºodw.
2. In a manner not common to others.
PECU'N1ARY. adj. ſpecuniarius, from pecunia, Lat. pecuniaire,Fr.]
1. Relating to money.
Their impoſtures delude not only unto pecuniary defrau-
dations, but the irreparable deceit of death. Brown.
2. Conſiſting of money.
Pain of infamy is a ſeverer puniſhment upon ingenuous na-
tures than a pecuniary mulét. Bacon.
The injured perſon might take a pecuniary mulá by way
of attonement. Broome.
PED. m. ſ.
I. A ſmall packſaddle. A ped is much ſhorter than a pannel,
and is raiſed before and behind, and ſerves for ſmall burdens. ,
A pannel and wanty, packſaddle and ped. Tiſſºr.
2. A baſket; a hamper.
A haſk is a wickerped, wherein they uſe to carry fiſh. Spenſ.
PEDAGoºgical. adj. [from pedagogue.] Suiting or belonging
to a ſchoolmaſter.
PEDAGOGUE. m. ſ. ſpedagogus, Lat. rai&amp;yºyº;, ºral; and
3rw.] One who teaches boys; a ſchoolmaſter; a pedant.
Few pedagogues but curſe the barren chair, --
Like him who hang'd himſelf for mere deſpair
And poverty. Dryden.
To PE'dagogue. v. a. [rzºzywyſo, from the noun..] To
teach with ſuperciliouſneſs. -
This may confine their younger ſtiles,
Whom Dryden pedagogues at Will's ;
But never cou’d be meant to tie -
Authentic wits, like you and I. Prior.
PE'DAGoGY. m. ſ. [wai3xycyſz.] The maſterſhip; diſcipline.
In time the reaſon of men ripening to ſuch a pitch, as to
be above the pedagºgy of Moſes's rodſ and the diſcipline of
types, God thought fit to diſplay the ſubſtance without the
adow. South's Sermons.
PE'DAL. adj. [pedalis, Lat.] Belonging to a foot. Dić.
PE'DALs. m. ſ. [pedalis, Lat. pedales, Fr.] The large pipes
of an orgān; ſo called becauſe played upon and ſtopt with
the foot. - - Diº.
PEDA'Neous. adj. [pedaneus, Lat.J. Going on foot. Die?.
PE'DANT. m. ſ. [pedant, French.]
1. A ſchoolmaſter.
Apedant that keeps a ſchooli' th' church. Shakeſp.
The boy who ſcarce has paid his entrance down
To his proud pedant, or declin’d a noun. Dryden.
2. A man vain of low knowledge; a man awkwardly oſtenta-
tious of his literature. - -
The pedant can hear nothing but in favour of the conceits
he is amorous of. Glanville.
The preface has ſo much of the pedant, and ſo little of the
converſation of men in it, that I ſhall paſs it over. Addison.
In learning let a nymph delight, -
The pedant gets a miſtreſs by’t. Swift.
Pr DA'N TIc. adj. [pedantºſue, Fr. from pedant..] Awk-
PEDA'N TIcAL. } wardly oſtentatious of learning.
Mr. Checke had eloquence in the Latin and Greek tongues;
but for other ſufficiencies pedantick enough. Hayward.
When we ſee any thing in an old ſatyriſt, that looks forced
and pedantick, we ought to conſider how it appeared in the
time the poet writ. Addiſon.
The obſcurity is brought over them by ignorance and age,
made yet more ºbſcure by their pedantical élucidators. Fºſtºn,
A ſpirit<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">i
A ſpirit of contradićtion is ſo pedantic and hateful, that a
man ſhould watch againſt every inſtance of it. Watts.
We now believe the Copernican ſyſtem; yet we ſhall ſtill
uſe the popular terms of ſun-riſe and ſun-ſet, and not intro-
duce a new pedantuck deſcription of them from the motion of
the earth. Bentley's Sermons.
PEDANT1cALLY. adv. [from pedantical.] With awkward
oſtentation of literature.
The earl of Roſcommon has excellently rendered it;
too faithfully is, indeed, pedantically; 'tis a faith like that,
which proceeds from ſuperſtition. Dryden.
PEDANTRY. m. ſ. [pedanterie, Fr.] Awkward oſtentation of
needleſs learning. -
'Tis a pračice that ſavours much of pedantry, a reſerve of
puerility we have not ſhaken off from ſchool. Brown.
Horace has enticed me into this pedantry of quotation. Cowl.
Make us believe it, if you can : it is in i. if I may
be allowed the pedantry of a quotation, non perſuadebis, etimaſ;
perſuaſeris. Addiſon's Freeholder.
From the univerſities the young nobility are ſent for fear of
contracting any airs of pedantry by a college education. Swift.
To Peddle. v. n. To be buſy about trifles. Ainſ. It is com-
monly written piddle ; as, what piddling work is here.
PEDERE'Ro. m. ſ. [pedrero, Spaniſh, from piedra, a ſtone with
which they charged it..] A ſmall cannon managed by a
ſwivel. It is frequently written paterero.
Pe'Dest Al. n. ſ. [pied/tal, Fr.] The lower member of a
pillar; the baſis of a ſtatue. -
The poet bawls
And ſhakes the ſtatues and the pede/fals. Dryden.
In the centre of it was a grim idol; the forepart of the
pedeſłal was curiouſly emboſſed with a triumph. Addiſon.
So ſtiff, ſo mute ſome ſtatue you would ſwear
Stept from its pedeſial to take the air. Pope.
PFDE'strious. adj. [pedeſiris, Latin.] Not winged ; going
on foot.
Men conceive they never lie down, and enjoy not the po-
ſition of reſt, ordained unto all pedeſirious animals. Brown.
PE'Dicle. n.ſ.. [from pedis, Lat. pedicule, Fr.] The footſtalk,
that by which a leaf or fruit is fixed to the tree.
The cauſe of the holding green, is the cloſe and compačt
ſubſtance of their leaves and pedicles. Bacon.
PEDI'cular, adj. ſpedicularis, Lat. pediculaire, Fr.] ... Having
the phthyriaſis or louſy diſtemper. Ainſworth.
PE'digree. m. ſ. [pere and degré, Skinner.] Genealogy; li-
neage; account of deſcent.
I am no herald to enquire of men's pedegrees, it ſufficeth
me if I know their virtues. Sidney.
You tell a pedigree
Of threeſcore and two years, a ſilly time. Shakeſpeare.
Alterations of firnames, which in former ages have been
very common, have obſcured the truth of our pedigrees, that
it will be no little hard labour to deduce many of them. Cam.
To the old heroes hence was giv'n
A pedigree which reach'd to heav'n. JValler.
The Jews preſerved the pedigrees of their ſeveral tribes,
with a more ſcrupulous exactneſs than any other nation. Atter.
PE'DIMENT. m. ſ. [pedis, Lat..] In architecture, an ornament
that crowns the ordonances, finiſhes the fronts of buildings,
and ſerves as a decoration over gates, windows and niches:
it is ordinarily of a triangular form, but ſometimes makes the
arch of a circle. Dić?.
PE'DLER. m. ſ. [a petty dealer; a contračtion produced by fre-
quent uſe..] One who travels the country with ſmall com-
modities.
All as a poor pedler he did wend,
Bearing a trufle of trifles at his backe;
As bells and babies and glaſſes in his packe. Spenſºr.
If you did but hear the pedler at the door, you would never
dance again after a tabor and pipe Shakeſpeare.
He is wit’s pedler, and retails his wares
At wakes and waſſals, meetings, markets, fairs. Shakeſp.
Had ſly Ulyſſes at the ſack
Of Troy brought thee his pedler's pack. Cleaveland.
A narrow education may beget among ſome of the clergy
in poſſeſſion ſuch contempt for all innovators, as merchants
have for pedlers. Swift.
Atlas was ſo exceeding ſtrong,
He bore the ſkies upon his back,
Juſt as a pedler does his pack. Swift.
PE'dleRY. adj. [from pedler...] Wares ſold by pedlers.
The ſufferings of thoſe of my rank are trifles in compari-
ſon of what all thoſe who travel with fiſh, poultry, pedlery
ware to ſell. - - Swift.
PE'opling. adj. Petty dealing; ſuch as pedlers have.
So ſlight a pleaſure I may part with, and find no miſs;
this peddling profit I may reſign, and 'twill be no breach in
my eſtate. Decay of Piety.
Pºpoba Prism. n.ſ. [rzºo; and 32.14.2.] Infant baptiſm.
Dić?.
PE'Dobaptist. n.ſ. [rz,30; and 32:1;;..] Onc that holds
or Practiſes infant baptiſm.
-
- . - *
To Peel. v. a. ſpeler, Fr. from peli,.]
1. To decorticate; to flay.
The ſkilful ſhepherd peel'd me certain wands,
And ſtuck them up before the fulſome ewes. Shºff.
2. [From piller, to rob.] To Blunder. According to analó
this ſhould be *i. P sº gy
Who once juſt and temp'rate conquer'd well,
But govern ill the nations under yoke,
Peeling their provinces, exhauſtēd all
But luſt and rapine. Milton's Paradiſe Regained.
Lord-like at eaſe, with arbitary pow'r,
To peel the chiefs, the people to devour;
Theſe, traitor, are thy talents. Dryden,
PEEL. m. ſ. [pellis, Latin; pelure, French..] The ſkin or thiri
rind of anything.
PEEL. m. ſ. ſpaelle, Fr.] A broad thin board with a long
handle, uſed by bakers to put their bread in and out of th: *
Owen. -
Peeler. n.ſ.. [from peel.]
1. One who ſtrips or flays.
2. A robber; a plunderer.
Yet otes with her ſucking a peeler is found,
Both ill to the maiſter and worſe to ſome ground. *
Tu e?",
As 'tis a peeler of land, ſow it upon lands that are rank.
Martimer's Huſbandry.
To PEEP. v. n. [This word has no etymology, except that of
Skinner, who derives it from opheſºn, Dutch, to lift up; and
of Caſaubon, who derives it from 3rriſºe, a ſpy; perhaps it
may come from pip, pipio, Latin, to cry as young birds :
when the chickens firſt broke the ſhell and cried, they were
ſaid to begin to pip or peºp; and the word that expreſſed the
aćt of crying, was by miſtake applied to the aët of appearing
that was at the ſame time: this is offered till ſomething better
may be found.]
1. To make the firſt appearance.
She her gay painted plumes diſordered,
Seeing at laſt herſelf from danger rid, -
Peeps forth and ſoon renews her native pride. Fa. Queen.
Your youth
And the true blood, which peeps forth fairly through it, .
Do plainly give you out an unſtain'd ſhepherd. Shakeſp.
England and France might through their amity,
Breed him ſome prejudice; for from this league,
Peep’d harms that menac'd him. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
I can ſee his pride -
Peep through each part of him. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The tim’rous maiden-bloſſoms on each bough
Peept forth from their firſt bluſhes; ſo that now
A thouſand ruddy hopes ſmil'd in each bud,
And flatter'd every greedy eye that ſtood. Craſhaw.
With words not hers, and more than human ſound,
She makes th’ obedient ghoſts peep trembling through the
ground. Roſcommon.
Earth, but not at once, her viſage rears, -
And peeps upon the ſeas from upper grounds. Dryden.
When flowers firſt peep'd, and trees did bloſſoms bear,
And winter had not yet deform'd th’ inverted year. Dryd.
Printing and letters had juſt peeped abroad in the world;
and the reſtorers of learning wrote very eagerly againſt one
another. Atterbury.
Though but the very white end of the ſprout peep out in
the outward part of the couch, break it open, you will find
the ſprout of a greater largeneſs. Mortimer's Huſbandry,
So pleas'd at firſt the tow'ring Alps we try,
And the firſt clouds and mountains ſeem the laſt;
But thoſe attain'd, we tremble to ſurvey
The growing labours of the lengthen'd way;
Th’ increaſing proſpect tires our wand'ring eyes,
Fair as the face of nature did appear, {
Hills peep o'er hills, and Alps on Alps ariſe. Pope.
Moſt ſouls but prep out once an age,
Dull ſullen pris’ners in the body's cage. Pope.
2. To look ſlily, cloſely or curiouſly; to look through any
crevice. -
Who is the ſame, which at my window preºs.
Sfeſſºr.
Come thick night !
That my keen knife ſee not the wound it makes;
Nor heav'n peep through the blanket of the dark, -
To cry hold. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Nature hath fram'd ſtrange fellows in her time ;
Some that will evermore prºp through their eyes,
And laugh like parrots, at a bag-piper. Shaft.
A fool will peep in at the door. - Axiºſ XXi. 23.
The trembling leaves through which he play'd,
Dappling the walk with light and ſhade,
Like lattice-windows give the ſpy
Room but to perp with half an eye. Cleaveland.
All doors are ſhut, no ſervant peºps abroad,
While others outward went on quick diſpatch. Dryden.
The
;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E E
P. E. G.
:
!
i
PEF. R Dom. n [f
- • *. J. from peer.
PEE’REss. ..? fºr.] Peerage.
The daring flames peptin, and ſaw from far
The awful beauties of the ſacred quire ;
But ſince it was prophan'd by civil war,
Heav'n thought it fit to have it purg'd by fire. Dryden.
From each tree
The feather'd people look down to peep on me. Dryden.
Thoſe remote and vaſt bodies were formed not merely to
be peept at through an optick glaſs. Bentley's Sermons.
O my muſe, juſt diſtance keep ;
Thou art a maid, and muſt not peep. Prior.
In vain his little children peeping out
Into the mingling ſtorm, demand their fire. Thomſºn.
PEEP. n.ſ.
1. Firſt appearance: as, at the peep and firſt break of day.
2. A ſly look.
Would not one think, the almanackmaker was crept out
of his grave to take t'other peep at the ſtars. Swift.
PEE/PER. n.ſ. Young chickens juſt breaking the ſhell.
Diſhes Ichuſe, though little, yet genteel;
Snails the firſt courſe, and peeper crown the meal. Brºſ.
Pee'PHole. n.ſ. ſpeep and hºle.J Hole through which
PEE'PINGHole. } one may look without being diſcovered.
By the peepholes in his creſt,
Is it not virtually confeſt, - -- .
That there his eyes took diſtant aim. Prior.
The fox ſpied him through a peepinghole he had ſound out
to ſee what news. L'Eſtrange.
PEER. n.ſ. [pair, French.]
1. Equal; one of the ſame rank. -
His peers upon this evidence
Have found him guilty of high treaſon. Shakº/p.
Amongſt a man's peers, a man ſhall be ſure of familiarity;
and therefore it is good a little to keep ſtate. Bacon.
Oh! what is man, great maker of mankind
That thou to him ſo great reſpect do'ſt bear !
That thou adorn'ſt him with ſo bright a mind,
Mak'ſt him a king, and ev’n an angel's peer. Davies.
2. One equal in excellence or endowments.
In ſong he never had his peer,
From ſweet Cecilia down to chanticleer. Dryden.
3. Companion: fellow.
He all his peers in beauty did ſurpaſs. Fairy Queen.
If you did move to-night,
In the dances, with what ſpight
Of your peers you were beheld,
That at every motion ſwell’d. Benj. johnſºn.
Who bear the bows were knights in Arthur's reign,
Twelve they, and twelve the peers of Charlemagne. Dryd.
4. A nobleman; of nobility we have five degrees, who are all
nevertheleſs called peers, becauſe their effential privileges are
the ſame. -
I ſee thee compaſt with thy kingdom's peers,
That ſpeak my ſalutation in their minds:
Hail king of Scotland
King Henry's peers and chief nobility
Deſtroy'd themſelves, and loſt the realm of France. Shakespeare
Bejuſt in all you ſay, and all you do ;
Whatever be your birth, you're ſure to be
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
A peer of the firſt magnitude to me. Dryden.
To PEER. v. n. [By contraction from appear.]
1. To come juſt in fight.
As the fun breaks through the darkeſt clouds,
So honour ferreth in the meaneſt habit. Shakeſp.
Yet a many of your horſemen peer,
And gallop o'er the field. Shakespeare's Henry V.
Ev’n through the hollow cyes of death -
I ſpy life peering - Shakeſp.
See how his gorget peers above his gown,
To tell the people in what danger he was. Ben. Johnſºn.
Hell itſelf will paſs away,
And leave her dolorous manſion to the peering day. Milt.
2. To look narrowly; to peep. o
Now for a clod-like hare in form they peer,
Now bolt and cudgel ſquirrels leap do move,
Now the ambitious lark with mirror clear
They catch, while he, fool to himſelf makes love. Sidn.
£eering in maps for ports, and Peers, and roads,
And every objećt that might make me fear
Misfortune to my venturºs. Shakºpſ. Merch, of Penice.
*AGF. n.ſ. ſºirie, Fr. iſom peer.]
I. The dignity of a peer.
ºffiéndſhips he to few confind 3 *
O fools of rank or mongrel breed,
ho ºn would paſs for Lords indeed 3.
'''''' titles give no right or power,
And peera e i it *
2. The body º: º her'd flower.
Swift.
Not only the Penal laws are in force againſt papiſts, and
their n - -
º º **temptible, but alſo the Peerage and com-
are excluded from parliament. Dryden
Ainſworth.
man ºfemale of p“r.] The lady of a Peer ; a wo-
Pee'vishiy. adv. [from perviſh.]
neither aſk nor hear the advice of any.
PEE'vish Ness. n.ſ. [from peeviſh.] Iraſcibility; querulouſ-
Stateſman and patriot ply alike the ſtocks;
Peereſ; and butler ſhare alike the box. - Pope.
Peerless. adj. [from peer.] lººk ; having no peer.
- 1nd, •
On pain of puniſhment, the world to weet,
We ſtand up peerleſs.
You,
So perfeót, and ſo peerleſs, are created -
Of every creature's beſt. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Her peerleſs feature, joined with her birth,
Approves her fit for none, but for a king.
Heſperus, that led
The ſtarry hoſt, rode brighteſt; till the moon,
Riſing in clouded majeſt, yat length,
Apparent queen, unveil'd her peerleſs light.
Such muſic worthieſt were to blaze
The peerleſ light of her immortal praiſe,
Whole luſtre leads us.
Her dreſs, her ſhape, her matchleſs grace,
Were all obſerv'd, as well as heav'nly face;
With ſuch a peerleſ majeſty ſhe ſtands,
As in that day ſhe took the crown. Dryden.
PEER+EssNess. n.ſ.. [from peerleſ...] Univerſal ſuperiority.
PEE"VISH, adj. [This word junius, with more reaſon than he
commonly diſcovers, ſuppoſes to be formed by corruption from
Perverſe; Skinner rather derives it from ſeeiſh, as we ſay
waſpiſh.] Petulant; waſpiſh; eaſily offended; irritable;
iraſcible; ſoon angry; perverſe; moroſe; querulous; full of
expreſſions of diſcontent; hard to pleaſe.
For what can breed more perviſh incongruities,
Than man to yield to female lamentations.
She is previſh, fullen, froward,
Proud, diſobedient, ſtubborn, lacking duty.
If thou haſt the metal of a king,
Being wrong'd as we are by this perviſh town,
Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
As we will ours, againſt theſe faucy walls. Shakeſp.
I will not preſume
To ſend ſuch peeviſh tokens to a king. Shakeſp.
Thoſe deſerve to be doubly laugh'd at, that are perviſ! and
angry for nothing to no purpoſe. L’Eſtrange.
Neither will it be ſatire or peeviſh invečtive to affirm, that
infidelity and vice are not much diminiſhed. Swift.
Angrily; querulouſly;
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
Milton.
Milton.
Sidney.
Shakeſp.
moroſely. -
He was ſo perviſhly opiniative and proud, that he would
Hayward.
neſs; fretfulneſs; perverſeneſs.
Some miſcarriages in government might eſcape through the
ferº/heſ of others, envying the publick ſhould be managed
without them. King Charles.
It will be an unpardonable, as well as childiſh peewiſhneſs,
if we undervalue the advantages of our knowledge, and neg-
lect to improve it. Locke.
You may find
Nothing but acid left behind:
From paſſion you may then be freed,
When peeviſhneſs and ſpleen ſucceed. Swift.
PEG. m. ſ. [pegghe, Teutonick.]
I. A piece of wood driven into a hole, which does the office of
an iron nail.
Solid bodies foreſhew rain; as boxes and pegs of wood,
when they draw and wind hard. Bacon.
The teeth are about thirty in each jaw; all of them clavi-
culares or peg teeth, not much unlike the tuſks of a maſtiff.
Grew's Muſæum.
If he pretends to be cholerick, we ſhall treat him like his
little friend Dicky, and hang him upon a peg till he comes to
himſelf. Addison's Guardian, N° 108.
The pegs and nails in a great building, though they are but
little valued in themſelves, are abſolutely neceſſary to keep the
whole frame together. Addison Spectator.
A finer petticoat can neither make you richer, more vir-
tuous or wiſe, than if it hung upon a peg. Swift.
2. The pins of an inſtruinent in which the ſtrings are ſtrained.
You are well tun’d now ; but I'll let down
The pegs that make this muſick. Shakeſp. Othello.
3. To take a PEG lower; to depreſs; to ſink: perhaps from re-
laxing the cords of muſical inſtruments.
jºr how in arms and politicks,
We ſtill have worſted all your holy tricks,
Trepann'd your party with intrigue,
And took your grandees down a peg. Hudibrar.
4. The nickname of Margaret,
To PEG. v. a. To fatten with a peg.
I will rend an oak,
And peg thee in his knotty entrails, ’till
T.# howl'd away twelve winters. Shakespeare . Tempºff.
Taking the ſhoots of the paſt ſpring, and pegging them
down in very rich earth, by that time twelvemonth they will
be º to rein OVC. Evelyn's *::::
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. E. L.
P E N
l
º,
ºt
Pelf. n. ſ. [In low Latin, pel/ra, not known whence derived;
peuffº. in Norman, is frippery.] Money : riches.
The thought of this doth paſs all worldly peſ. Sidney.
Hardy elf,
Thou dareſt view my direful countenance,
I read thee raſh and heedleſs of thyſelf,
To trouble my ſtill ſeat and heaps of precious pelf.
Fairy Queen.
Immortal gods, I crave no pelf;
I pray for no man but myſelf. Shakeſpeare.
He call'd his money in ;
But the prevailing love of pelſ
Soon ſplit him on the former ſhelf: -
He put it out again. Dryden's Horace.
To the poor if he refus'd his pelf,
He us’d them full as kindly as himſelf. Swift.
Pelican. n.ſ. [pelicanus, low Lat. pelliºn, Fr.] -
There are two ſorts of pelicans ; one lives upon the water
and feeds upon fiſh; the other keeps in deſerts, and feeds
upon ſerpents and other reptiles: the pelican has a peculiar
tºnderneſs for its young; it generally places its neſt upon a
craggy rock: the pelican is ſuppoſed to admit its young to
fuck blood from its breaſt. Calmet.
Should diſcarded fathers
Have this little mercy on their fleſh;
'Twas this fleſh begot thoſe pelican daughters. Shakeſp.
The pelican hath a beak broad and flat, like the ſlice of
apothecaries. Hakewill on Providence,
PELLET. n. ſ. [from pila, Lat. pelote, Fr.]
1. A little ball. - -
That which is ſold to the merchants, is made into little
pellets, and ſealed. - - Sandys.
I dreſſed with little pellets of lint. Wiſeman's Surgery.
2. A bullet; a ball. -
The force of gunpowder hath been aſcribed to rarefaction
of the earthy ſubſtance into flame, and ſo followeth a dilata-
tion; and therefore, leſt two bodies ſhould be in one place,
there muſt needs alſo follow an expulſion of the pellet or
blowing up of the mine: but theſe are ignorant ſpeculations;
for flame, if there were nothing elſe, will be ſuffocated with
any hard body, ſuch as a pellet is, or the barrel of a gun; ſo
as the hard body would kill the flame. Bacon.
A cube or pillet of yellow wax as much as half the ſpirit
of wine, burnt only eighty-ſeven pulſes. Baton.
How ſhall they reach us in the air with thoſe pellets they
can hardly roll upon the ground. L’Eſtrange.
In a ſhooting trunk, the longer it is to a certain limit, the
more forcibly the air paſſes and drives the pellet. Ray:
Pelleted. adj. [from pellet.]. Conſiſting of bullets.
- My brave Egyptians all,
By the diſcandying of this felleted ſtorm,
Lie graveleſs. -
PE'llicle. m. ſ. ſpellicula, Lat.]
1. A thin ſkin.
After the diſcharge of the fluid, the pellicle muſt be broke.
- Sharp's Surgery.
2. It is often uſed for the film which gathers upon liquors im-
pregnated with ſalts or other ſubſtances, and evaporated by
heat. ,
PE'llitory. m. ſ. [parietaria, Lat.] An herb.
The pellitory hath an apetalous flower, whoſe flower cup is
divided into four parts, which is ſometimes bell-ſhaped like a
funnel, with four ſtamina or threads ſurrounding the pointal,
which becomes for the moſt part an oblong ſeed, ſurrounded
by the flower cup 5 to which may be added, the flowers are
produced from the wings of the leaves. Miller.
PE’ll Mell. n.ſ. [peſe mºſle, Fr.] Confuſedly ; tumultuouſly;
one among another.
When we have daſh'd them to the ground,
Then defie each other; and pell mell -
Make work upon ourſelves. Shakeſpeare's King john.
Never yet did inſurrection want
Such moody beggars, ſtarving for a time
Shakeſp care.
Of pelimell havock and confuſion. Henry IV.
He knew when to fall on pellmell,
To fall back and retreat as well. Hudibras.
Pells. n. ſ. [pellis, Lat.] -
Clerk of the pells, an officer belonging to the exchequer,
who enters every teller's bill into a parchment roll called pelli:
acceptorum, the roll of receipts; and alſo makes another roll
called pellis exituum, a roll of the diſburſements. Bailey.
PELLU'CID. adj. [pellucidus, Lat.] Clear; tranſparent ;
not opake; not dark. -
The colours are owing to the intermixture of foreign matter
with the proper matter of the ſtone: this is the caſe of agates
and other coloured ſtones, the colours of ſeveral whereof may
be extraćted, and the bodies rendered as pellucid as cryſtal,
without ſenſibly damaging the texture. JWoodward.
If water be made warm in any pellucid veſſel emptied of
air, the water in the vacuum will bubble and boil as vehe-
mently as it would in the open air in a veſſel ſet upon the fire,
till it conceives a much greater heat. Newton's Opticks.
PELLu'cidity. }" ſ: [from pellucid.] Tranſparency; clear-
Pellº'cidNess. neſs; not opacity.
. The air is a clear and pellucid menſtruum, in which the
inſenſible particles of diſſolved matter float, without troubling
the pellucidity of the air; when on a ſudden by a precipitation
they gather into viſible miſty drops that maké clouds. Locke.
We conſider their pellucidneſ; and the vaſt quantity of light,
that paſſes through them without reflection. Kil
PELT. n.ſ.. [from pellis, Lat.] -
1. Skin; hide.
The camels hair is taken for the ſkin or pºl, with the hair
upon it. Brown's Vulgar E
A ſcabby tetter on their pells will ſt . ulgar Errours.
When the raw rain has pierc'd them to the quick. Dryd.
2. The quarry of a hawk all torn. quic ºff.
PELT-Mon GER. m. ſ. ſpellio, Lat. pelt and monger.] A dealer.
in raw hides.
To Pelt. v. a. [poltern, German, Skinner; contraded from
pellet, Mr. Lye.] It is generally uſed of ſomething thrown,
rather with teazing frequency than deſtrućtive violence.
1. To ſtrike with ſomething thrown.
Poor naked wretches wherefoe'er you are
That bide the pelting of this pitileſs ſtorm
How ſhall your houſeleſs heads and unfed ſides,
Your loop'd and window’d raggedneſs defend you. Shakespeare .
Do but ſtand upon the foaming ſhore,
The chiding billows ſeem to pelt the clouds. Shakeſp.
No zealous brother there would want a ſtone
To maulus cardinals, and pelt pope Joan. Dryden.
Obſcure perſons have inſulted men of great worth, and
pelted them from coverts with little obječtions. Atterbury.
The whole empire could hardly ſubdue me, and I might
eaſily with ſtones pelt the metropolis to pieces. Gulliver.
2. ‘To throw ; to caſt. -
My Phillis me with pelted apples plies,
Then tripping to the woods the wanton hies. Dryden.
PE'LTING. adj. This word in Shakeſpeare ſignifies, I know not
why, mean ; paltry; pitiful. -
Could great men thunder, Jove could ne'er be quiet;
For every pelting petty officer
Would uſe his heav’n for thunder.
, Shakeſpeare.
Fogs falling in the land,
Have every pelting river made ſo proud,
That they have everborn their continents. Shakeſp.
They from ſheepcotes and poor pelting villages -
Enforce their charity. Shakeſp.
A tenement or pelting farm. Shakeſp.
PELVIS. n.ſ. [Latin.] The lower part of the belly.
PEN. n.ſ. [penna, Latin.]
1. An inſtrument of writing. .
Never durſt poet touch a pen to write,
Until his ink were temper'd with love's ſighs. Shakeſp.
Eternal deities 1
Who write whatever time ſhall bring to paſs,
With pens of Adamant on plates of braſ. Dryden.
He takes the papers, lays them down again;
And, with unwilling fingers, tries the pen. Dryden.
I can, by deſigning the letters, tell what new idea it ſhall
exhibit the next moment, barely by drawing my pen over it,
which will neither appear, if my hands ſtand ſtill ; or though
I move my pen, if my eyes be ſhut. Locke.
2. Feather. -
The pegs that did his pinnions bind,
Were Hike main-yards with flying canvas lin'd.
- Fairy Queen.
3. Wing; though even here it may mean father.
Feather'd ſoon and fledg'd,
They ſumm'd their pens ; and ſoaring th' air ſublime,
With clang deſpis'd the ground. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
4. [From pennan, Saxon.] A ſmall incloſure; a coop,
My father ſtole two geeſe out of a pen. Shakeſp.
The cook was ordered to dreſs capons for ſupper, and take
the beſt in the pen. L’Eſtrange.
She in pens his flocks will fold. Dryden's Horace.
Ducks in thy ponds, and chickens in thy pens, -
And be thy turkeys num’rous as thy hens. King,
The gather'd flocks
Are in the wattled pen innumerous preſs'd,
Head above head. Thomſºn's Summer.
To Pen. v. a. ſpennan and pinban, Saxon.] -
1. To coop; to ſhut up; to incage; to impriſon in a narrow
place. -
Away with her, -
And pen her up. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
My heavy ſon
Private in his chamber pens himſelf. Shalºft.
The plaiſter alone would pen the humour already contained
in the part, and forbid new humour. Bacºn.
As when a prowling wolf,
whom hunger drives to ſeek new haunt for prey,
watching where ſhepherds ºn their flocks at eve
19 K In
--- &amp; Z v. 1
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E N
P E N
º
|
º
led cotes, amid the field ſecure -
łº, the ºn. with caſe into the fold, - Milton.
The glaſs, wherein it is penued up, hinders it to deliver
itſelf by an expanſion of its parts. - Boyle.
The prevention of miſchief is preſcribed by the Jewiſh
cuſtom ; they ſº up their daughters, and permit them to be
acquainted with none. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Ah! that your bus'neſs had been mine,
To pen the ſheep. Dryden.
2. [From the noun..] To write. It probably meant at firſt
only the manual exerciſe of the pen, or méchanical part of
writing ; but it has been long uſed with relation to the ſtile
or compoſition.
For prey theſe ſhepherds two he took,
Whoſe metal ſtiff he knew he could not bend
With hearſay pictures, or a window look, -
With one good dance or letter finely penn'd. Sidney,
I would be loth to caſt away my ſpeech; for, beſides that
it is excellently well penn'd, I have taken great pains to con
it. Shakeſpeare's ſweſh Night.
Read this challenge, mark but the fººning of it. Sha&amp;ſp.
A ſentence ſpoken by him in Engliſh, and penned out of
his mouth by four good fecretaries, for trial of our orthogra-
phy, was ſet down by them. Camden's Remains.
He frequented ſermons, and penned notes with his own
- hand. Hayward on Edward VI.
The digeſting my thoughts into order, and the ſetting them
down in writing was neceſſary; for without ſuch ſtrict exa-
mination, as the penning them affords, they would have been
disjointed and rowing ones. Digby on the Soul.
Almoſt condemn'd, he mov'd the judges thus:
Hear, but inſtead of me, my Oedipus;
The judges hearing with applauſe, at th' end
Freed him, and ſaid, no fool ſuch lines had penn'd. Denh.
Gentlemen ſhould extempore, or after a little meditation,
ſpeak to ſome ſubject without penning of anything. Locke.
Should I publiſh the praiſes that are ſo well penn'd, they
would do honour to the perſons who write them. Addiſon.
Twenty fools I never ſaw
Some with petitions fairly penn'd,
Deſiring I ſhould ſtand their friend. Swift,
PENAL. adj. [penal, Fr. from pana, Lat.]
1. Denouncing puniſhment; enacting puniſhment.
Gratitude plants ſuch generºſity in the heart of man, as
ſhall more effectually incline him to what is brave. be-
coming than the terror of any penal law. South.
2. Uſed for the purpoſes of puniſhment; vindiğive.
Adamantive chains and penal fire. 41ilton.
ſº#. }n. / [from penalité, old French.]
1. Puniſhment; cenſure; judicial inflićtion.
Many of the ancients denied the Antipodes, and ſome unto
the penality of contrary affirmations; but the experience of na-
Vºtiºns, can now aiert them beyond all dubitation. Brown.
Political power is a right of making laws with penalties of
death, and conſequently all leſs penalties, for preſerving pro-
Perty, and employing the forcé of the community in the exe-
cution of laws. Locke.
Beneath her footflool, ſcience groans in chains,
And wit dreads exile, penalties and pains. Dunciad.
2. Forfiture upon non-performance.
Lºnd this money, not as to thy friend,
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who, if he break, thou may'ſt with better face
Exact the penalty. Shakeſp. March. ºf Penice.
PENNANce, * / [penence, old French; for penitence..] In-
fliction either publick or Private, ſuffered as an txpreſſion of
rcpentance for ſin.
And bitter pennance, with an iron whip,
Was wont him once to diſciple every day. Fairy Queen
Mew her up, -
And make her bear the pennance of her tongue. Shakespeare
- No Penitentiary, though he had enjoined him never
ſo ſtraight pennance to expiate his firſt offence, would have
counſelled him to have given over the Purſuit of his right.
The ſcourge Bacon.
º and the torturing hour
'alls us to pennance. A4ilton's Parad;
A Lorain ſurgeon, who whipped the naked part : %
rod of nettles till all over blitered, perſuaded him ..
ºrm this pennance in a ſharp fit he had. }. 7.
ENCE. n. The plural of Pºly; formed from pennies -
“‘ºtraction uſual in the rapidity of colloquial ſpeech. &gt; Dy
ed **me ſervant found one of his fellow ſervants, which
p...” all hundred fence, and took him by the throat. Alſat.
I. A im. {{ ſpºilium, Latin.]
- "ºuth of hair which Pºinters dip in their colours.
Pencil, can ": one ſlight touch reſtºre
In 11es t -
For . Shanged face, that wept before, Dryden.
or thee d * goves greeſ, ivºřic. wear,
And mº, : lead the dancing hours, -
S ſea ºncil pai ºx y
6 * * paints the flows, Dryden,
A ſort of pićtures there is, wherein the colours, as laid by
the pencil on the table, mark out very odd figures. Locke.
The faithful pencil has deſign'd
Some bright idea of the matter's mind,
Where a new world leaps out at his command,
And ready nature waits upon his hand. Pope.
One dips the pencil, tº other ſtrings the lyre. Pope.
2. A black lead pen, with which cut to a Point they write with-
out ink.
Mark with a pen or pencil the moſt conſiderable things in
the books you deſire to remember. // atts.
3. Any inſtrument of writing without ink.
To PENCIL. v. n. [from the noun..] To paint.
Painting is almoſt the natural man;
For ſince diſhonour trafficks with man's nature,
He is but outſide: pencil'd figures are
Ev’n ſuch as they give out. Shakeſpeare's Timon ºf Athens,
PE's DANT. m. ſ. [pendant, French.j
I. A jewel hanging in the ear.
The ſpirits
Some thrid the mazy ringlets of her hair,
Some hang upon the pendents of her ear.
* Any thing hanging by way of ornament.
Unripe fruit, whoſe verdant ſtalks do cleave
Cloſe to the tree, which grieves no leſs to leave
The ſmiling pendant which adorns her io,
And until Autumn, on the bough ſhould grow.
3. A pendulum. Obolete.
To make the ſame pendant gº twice as faſt as it did, or
make every undulation of it in hºlf the time it did, make the
line, at which it hangs, double in geometrical proportion to
the line at which it hanged before. Digby ºn the Saul.
4. A ſmall flag in ſhips.
PENDENCE. m. ſ. [from P*. Lat.] Slopeneſs ; inclination.
The Italians give the cover a gºaceful pendence or ſlope-
neſs, dividing the whole breadth intº nine parts, whereof two
ſhall ſerve for the elevation of the higheſt top or ridge from
the loweſt. //otton's Architeclare,
Pºnésex. a. ſ. [from perio, Lat.) Suſpenſe; delay of
deciſion.
The judge ſhall pronounce in the Principal cauſe, nor can
the appellant allege pendency of ſuit. Ayliffe.
***Pºst ad; ſpenden, Latin; ſome write pendant, from
the French.j
1. Hanging.
Quaint in green ſhe ſhall be looſe enrob’d
Pope.
JWaller,
With ribbans pendent, flaring 'bout herhead. Shakespeare .
I ſometimes mournful verſe indite, and ſing
Qf deſperate lady near a Purling ſtream,
Or lover pºndent on a willow tree. Phillips.
2. Jutting over. . -
A pendent rock,
A forked mountain, or blue promonto
With trees upon't, that nod unto the world,
And mock our eyes with air. Shakespeare.
3. Supported above the ground.
They brought, by wond’rous art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendent rock
Over the vex'd abyſs. Aſilion's Paradiſ. Lºft.
PF'N BING... n.ſ. ſpendente lite.] Pepending; remaining yet
undecided.
* Perſºn pending ſuit with the dioceſan, ſhall be defended
in the poſſeſſion. Ay/ºffe.
Pendulo's 1TY. }": [from pendulous.] The ſtate of hang-
Ps NPulousNess. 3 ing; ſuſpenſion.
His ſlender legs he encreaſed by riding, that is, the humours
deſcended upon their Pendulºfty, having no ſupport or ſuppe-
daneous ſtability. Brown's /u/gar Errours.
PENDULOUS. adj. ſpendulus, Lat.] Hanging ; not ſup-
ported below. -
All the plagues, that in the pendulous air
Hang fated o'er men's faults, light on thy daughters. Shaf.
Bellerophon's horſe, fram'd of iron, and placed between
two loadſtones with wings expanded, hung pendulous in the
air. - Brown's Pulgar Errours.
The grinders are furniſhed with three roots, and in the
upper jaw often four, becauſe theſe are pendulºus. Roy.
PE'NDulu M. n. ſ. ſpendulus, Lat. pendule, Fr.] Any weight
hung ſo as that it may eaſily ſwing backwards and forwards,
of which the great law is, that its oſcillations are always
performed in equal time. .
Upon the bench I will ſo handle 'em,
That the vibration of this pendulum
Shall make all taylors yards of one
Unanimous opinion. Hudibrar.
PENETRABLE. adj. [penetrable, Fr. penetrabī, Latin.]
1. Such as may be pierced ; ſuch as may admit the entrance of
another body.
Let him try thy dart,
And pierce his only penetrable part. Dryden,
2. Suſceptive of moral or intellectual impreſſion.
I am not made of ſtone, -
But penetrable to your kind entreatics. Shakeſp.
Peace,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E N
i
Peace,
And let we wring your heart, for ſo I ſhall, -
If it be made of penetrable ſtuff. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
PENETRABI'LITY. m. ſ. [from penetrable.] Suſceptibility of
impreſſion from another body.
There being no mean between penetrability and impenetra-
bility, paſſivity and activity, they being contrary ; therefore .
the infinite rarefaction of the one quality is the poſition of its
contrary. Cheyne's Philoſophical Principles.
Pe’NETRAIL. n.ſ. [penetralia, Latin.] Interiour parts. Not
in uſe.
The heart reſiſts purulent fumes, into whoſe penetrails to
infinuate ſome time muſt be allowed. Harvey.
PENETRANCY. n.ſ.. [from penetrant..] Power of entering or
piercing.
The ſubtlitiy, activity and penetrancy of its effluvia no ob-
ſtacle can ſtop or repel, but they will make their way through
all bodies, Ray on the Creation.
PE'NETRANT. adj. [penetrant, Fr.] Having the power to
pierce or enter; ſharp; ſubtile.
If the operation of theſe ſalts be in convenient glaſſes pro-
moted by warmth, the aſcending ſteams may eaſily be caught
and reduced into a penetrant ſpirit. Boyle.
The food, mingled with ſome diſſolvent juices, is evacuated
into the inteſtines, where it is further ſubtilized and rendered
io fluid and penetrant, that the finer part finds its way in
at the ſtreight orifices of the lacteous veins. Ray.
To PENETRATE. v. a. penetro, Lat. penetrer, Fr.]
1. To pierce; to enter beyond the ſurface; to make way into
a body.
Māow is, of all other oily ſubſtances, the moſt penetra-
ting. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To affect the mind.
3. To reach the meaning.
'ío PENETRATE. v. n. To make way.
There ſhall we clearly ſee the uſes of theſe things, which
here were too ſubtile for us to penetrate. Ray.
If we reached no farther than metaphor, we rather fancy
than know, and are not yet penetrated into the inſide and
reality of the thing. Locke.
PENETRATION. n.ſ. [penetration, Fr. from penetrate.]
1. The act of entering into any body.
It warms
The univerſe, and to each inward part
With gentle penetration though unſeen
Shoots inviſible virtue even to the deep. Milton's Par. Loft.
2. Mental entrance into any thing abſtruſe.
A penetration into the abſtruſe difficulties and depths of mo-
dern algebra and fluxions, is not worth the labour of thoſe
who deſign either of the three learned profeſſions. Watts.
3. Acuteneſs; ſagacity.
The proudeſt admirer of his own parts might conſult with
others, though of inferior capacity and penetration. //atts.
PE's ETRATIVE. adj. [from penetrate.]
1. Piercing ; ſharp; ſubtile.
Let not air be too groſs, nor too penetrative, nor ſubjećt to
any foggy noiſomeneſs from fens. //otton.
2. Acute; ſagacious; diſcerning.
O thou, whoſe penetrative wiſdom found
The ſouth ſea rocks and ſhelves, where thouſands drown'd.
Swift's Miſcellanies.
3. Having the power to impreſs the mind.
Would'ft thou ſee
Thy maſter thus with pleacht arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face ſubdu'd
To penetrative ſhame. Shakeſpeare.
Pe’NETRATIven Ess. m. ſ. [from penetrative.] The quality of
being penetrative.
PE NGUIN. n.ſ.. [anſer magellanicus, Latin.]
1. A bird. This bird was found with this name, as is ſup-
poſed, by the firſt diſcoverers of America; and penguin ſigni-
iying in Welſh a white head, and the head of this fowl being
white, it has been inmagined, that America was peopled from
Wales; whence Hudibras: -
Britiſh Indians nam'd from penguins.
Grew gives another account of the name, deriving it from
pinguis, Lat. fat; but is, I believe, miſtaken.
The penguin is ſo called from his extraordinary fatneſs:
for though he be no higher than a large gooſe, yet he weighs
ſometimes fixteen pounds: his wings are extreme ſhort and
little, altogether unuſeful for flight, but by the help whereof
he ſwims very ſwiftly. Grew's Muſæum.
2. A fruit.
The penguin is very common in the Weſt Indies, where
the juice of its fruit is often put into punch, being of a ſharp
acid flavour: there is alſo a wine made of the juice of this
fruit, but it will not keep good long. Miller.
PENINSULA, n. ſ. [Lat. pene inſula; peninſule, Fr.] . A
piece of land almoſt ſurrounded by the ſea, but joined by a
narrow neck to the main.
Afide of Milbrooklieth the peninſula of Inſwork, on whoſe
neckland ſtandeth an ancient houſe. Carew.
P E N
Pºrto. adj. [from peninſula.] Almoſt ſurrounded
9. Water....,
PENITENCE. n.ſ. [penitence, Fr. paenitentia, Lat.] Repen-
*; ſorrow for crimes; contrition for fin, with amend-
ments of life or change of the affections.
Death is deferr'd, and penitence has room
To Initigate, if not reverſe the doom. Pryden.
May. penitence fly round thy mournful bed,
And wing thy lateſt Prayer to pitying heav'n. Irene.
PENITENT: adj. [penient, Fr. paenitens, Lat.] Repentant;
contrite for ſin; ſorrowful for paſt tranſgreſſions, and reſo-
lutely amending life. tº-
Much it joys me
To ſee you become ſo penitent. Shakespeare
- Give me Shakeſpeare.
The penitent inſtrument to pick that bolt. Shakeſpeare.
Nor in the land of their captivity
Humbled themſelves, or penitent beſought
The God of their forefathers. Milton's Par. Regain'd.
Provoking God to raiſe them enemies;
From whom as oft he ſaves them penitent. Milton.
The proud he tam’d, the penitent he cheer'd,
Norto rebuke the rich offender fear'd.
His preaching much, but more his practice wrought
. . A living ſermon of the truths he taught. Dryden.
PE'NITENT. n.ſ.
I. One ſorrowful for ſin. -
Concealed treaſures ſhall be brought into uſe by the in-
duſtry of converted penitents, whoſe carcaſes the impartial
laws ſhall dedicate to the worms of the earth. Bacon.
The repentance, which is formed by a grateful ſenſe of the
divine goodneſs towards him, is reſolved on while all the ap-
petites are in their ſtrength: the penitent conquers the tempta-
tions of fin in their full force. Rogers's Sermons.
2. One under cenſures of the church, but admitted to pennance.
The counterfeit Dionyſius deſcribes the practice of the
church, that the catechumens and penitents were admitted to
the leſſons and pſalms, and then excluded. Stillingfeet.
3. One under the direction of a confeſſor.
PENITE(NTIAL. adj. [from penitence..] Expreſfing penitence;
enjoined as pennance.
I have done pennance for contemning love,
Whoſe high imperious thoughts have puniſh'd me
With bitter faſts and penitential groans. Shakeſpeare.
Is it not ſtrange, that a rational man ſhould adore leeks
and garlick, and ſhed penitential tears at the ſmell of a deified
onion ? South's Sermons.
PENITE(NTIAL. m. ſ. [penitenciel, Fr. panitentiale, low Latin.]
A book dire&amp;ting the degrees of pennance.
The penitentials or book of pennance contained ſuch mat-
ters as related to the impoſing of pennance, and the reconci-
liation of the perſon that j pennance. Ayliffe.
PENIT ENTIARY. m. ſ. [penitencier, Fr. paenitentiarius, low
Latin.]
1. One who preſcribes the rules and meaſures of pennance.
Upon the loſs of Urbin, the duke's undoubted right, no
penitentiary, though he had enjoined him never ſo ſtraight pen-
nance to expiate his firſt offence, would have counſelled him
to have given over purſuit of his right, which he proſperouſly
re-obtained. Bacon.
The great penitentiary with his counſellors preſcribes the
meaſure of pennance. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. A penitent; one who does pennance.
A priſon reſtrained John Northampton's liberty, who, for
abuſing the ſame in his unruly mayoralty of London, was
condemned hither as a perpetual penitentiary. Carew.
To maintain a painful fight againſt the law of fin, is the
work of the penitentiary. Hammond.
3. The place where pennance is enjoined. Ainſworth.
PE'NIT ENTLY. adv. [from penitent.] With repentance ; with
ſorrow for fin; with contrition.
PENKNIFE. n.ſ. [pen and knife.] A knife uſed to cut pens.
Some ſchoolmen, fitter to guide penknives than ſwords, pre-
ciſely ſtand upon it. Bacon.
PENMAN. n.ſ. [pen and man.]
1. One who profeſſes the act of writing.
2. An author; a writer. - . . .”
The four evangeliſts, within fifty years after our Saviour s
death, conſigned to writing that hiſtory, which had been pub-
liſhed only by the apoſtles and diſciples: the further confide-
ration of theſe holy penmen will fall under another part of this
diſcourſe. Addiſon ozz the Chriſtian Religion.
The deſcriptions which the evangeliſts give; the " that both
our bleſſed Lord and the holy penmºn of his ſtory were deeply
affected. - Atterbury.
PE'NNAchED. adj. [pennachi, Fr.] Is only applied to flowers
when the ground of the natural colour of their leaves is ra-
diated and diverſified neatly without any confuſion.
Trevaux.
Carefully protea from violent rain your pennached ulips,
covering them with matraſies. Evelyn.
PE'NNANT.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E N
P E. N.
|
-
-
Pr's NaNT. n.ſ. ſpennon, Fr.]
1. A ſmall flag, enſign of colours.
2. A tackle for hoiſting thingº on. board.
prºp. adj. [pennatu, Latin J
. Winged.
!. }º, amongſt botaniſts, are thoſe leaves of plants as
row direétly one againſt another on the ſame rib or ſtalk; as
Ainſworth.
#. of aſh and walnut-tree. &amp;minºy.
PENNER. m.ſ.. [from pen.]
1. A writer.
2. A pencaſe. Ainſ. So it is called in Scotland.
Penni'less. adj. [from fenny..] Moneyleſs : poor; wanting
money.
Pe’NNoN. a. ſ. [pennon, Fr.] A ſmall flag or colour.
Her yellow locks criſped like golden wire,
About her ſhoulders weren looſely ſhed,
And when the wind amongſt them did inſpire,
They waved like a pennon wide diſpred. Fairy Queen.
Harry ſweeps through our land
with pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur. Shakeſp.
High on his pointed lance his pºinon bore,
His Cretan fight, the conquer'd Minotaur. Dryden.
PENNY. n.ſ. plural pence. [penić, Saxon.]
1. A ſmall cóin, of which twelve make a ſhilling: a penny is
the radical denomination from which Engliſh coinis numbered,
the copper halfpence and farthings being only nummorum fa-
muli, a ſubordinate ſpecies of coin. - -
She fighs and ſhakes her empty ſhoes in vain,
No filver penny to reward her pain. Dryden.
One frugal on his birth-day fears to dine,
Does at a penny's coſt in herbs repine. Dryden.
2. Proverbially. A ſmall ſum.
You ſhall hear
The legions, now in Gallia, ſooner landed
In our not fearing Britain, than have tidings
Of any penny tribute paid. Shakeſpear's Cymbeline.
We will not lend thee a penny. Shakeſpeare.
* Becauſe there is a latitude of gain in buying and ſelling,
take not the utmoſt penny that is lawful, for although it be
lawful, yet it is not ſafe. Taylor's Living Holy.
3. Money in general.
Pepper and Sabean incenſe take;
And with poſt-haſte thy running markets make ;
Be ſure to turn the penny. Dryden.
It may be a contrivance of ſome printer, who hath a mind
to make a penny. - Swift's Miſcellanics.
PENNY Royal, or puddin: graſ. n.ſ. [pulgium, Lat..] .
Pennyroyal hath a labiated flower conſiſting of one leaf,
whoſe upper lip or creſt is entire, but the lower lip or beard
is divided into three parts; out of the flower cup riſes the
pointal attended by four embryos, which afterwards become
ſo many ſeeds: to which may be added, that the flowers grow
in ſhort thick whorles. Miller.
PENNY weight. m. ſ. ſpenny and weight.] A weight contain-
ing twenty-four grainstroy weight.
The Sevil piece of Eight is 1 ; pennyweight in the pound
worſe than the Engliſh ſtandard, weighs fourteen pennyweight,
contains thirteen pennyweight, twenty-one grains and fifteen
mites, of which there are twenty in the grain of ſterling
filver, and is in value forty-three Engliſh pence and eleven
hundredths of a penny. Arbuthnot on Coins.
PENNY WISE. adj. [penny and wiſe.] One who ſaves ſmall
ſums at the hazard of larger; one who is a niggard on
improper occaſions. cº-
Be not pennywiſe; riches have wings and fly away of them-
ſelves. Bacon.
PENNY woº TH. m. ſ. ſpenny and worth.]
1. As much as is bought for a penny.
2. Any purchaſe ; any thing bought or ſold for money.
As for corn it is nothing natural, ſave only for barley and
oats, and ſome places for rye; and therefore the larger penny-
worths may be allowed to them. Spenſºr * Ireland.
Pirates may make cheap penn'worths of their pillage,
And purchaſe friends. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
You know I ſay nothing to him, for he hath neither
Latin, French nor Italian, and you may come into court
and ſwear that I have a poor pennywºrth of the Engliſh.
Shakeſpeare.
Lucian affirms, that the ſouls of uſurers after º
te º into the bodies of aſſes, and there remain cer.
tain days for poor men to take their pennyworth -
bones and fides by cudgel and ſpur. pennyworths º
Though in purchaſes of church lands men have uſuall th.
º Pennyworths, yet they have not always the beſt bar.
s: , , South's Sermons.
*iºneºuſ; bought; a purchaſe got for leſs
For fame he pray'd, but let the event declare
He had no mighty 'arin - y
4. A ſmall º y penn'vorth of his pray’r.
My friendſhip I diſtrib
and who diſpleaſe me .
8
Dryden.
in pennyworths to thoſe about me
Swift.
PENSILF. adj. ſpenſilis, Latin.]
1. Hanging; ſuſpended. -
There are two trepidations; the one manifeſt and local, as of
the bell when it is pegſile; the other, ſecret of the minute parts. .
This ethereal ſpace,
Yielding to earth and ſea the middle place,
Anxious I aſk you, how the penſile ball -
should never ſtrive to riſe, nor never fear to fall. Prior.
2. Supported above the ground. -
The marble brought, erects the ſpacious dome,
Or forms the pillars long-extended rows,
On which the planted grove and penſile garden grows. Prior.
PE'ssile Ness. n.ſ.. [from penſile.] The ſtate of hanging.
PENSION. m. ſ. ſpenſion, Fr.] An allowance made to any
one without an equivalent. In England It is generally under-
flood to mean pay given to a ſtate hireling for treaſon to his
country. -
. A charity beſtowed on the education of her young ſubjećts
has more merit than a thouſand penſions to thoſe of a higher.
fortune. Addison's Guardian, N° 105.
He has liv'd with the great without flattery, and been a
friend to men in power without penſiºns. Pope.
To PE Nsion. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſupport by an arbi-
trary allowance.
One might expect to ſee medals of France in the higheſt
perfection, when there is a ſociety penſioned and ſet apart
for the deſigning of them. Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
The hero William and the martyr Charles,
One knighted Blackmore, and one penſion'd Quarles. Pope.
PE'Nsion ARY. adj. [perſionnaire, French..] Maintained by
penſions.
Scorn his houſhold policies,
His filly plots and penſionary ſpies. Donne.
They were devoted by penſionary obligations to the olive.
Howel's Pocal Forſt.
PE'ssion eR. m. ſ. [from penſion.]
1. One who is ſupported by an allowance paid at the will of
another; a dependant.
Prices of things neceſſary for ſuſtentation, grew exceſſive
to the hurt of peſſioners, ſoldiers, and all hired ſervants. Camd.
Hovering dreams,
The fickle penſioners of Morpheus' train. Milton.
The rector is maintained by the perquiſites of the curate's
office, and therefore is a kind of penſioner to him. Collier.
2. A ſlave of ſtate hired by a ſtipend to obey his maſter.
In Britain's ſenate he a ſeat obtains,
And one more penſioner St. Stephen gains. Pope.
PENSIVE. adj. ſpenſif, French ; penſivo, Italian.]
1. Sorrowfully thoughtful; ſorrowful; mournfully ſerious; me-
lancholy.
Think it ſtill a good work, which they in their penſive care
for the well beſtowing of time account waſte. Hooker.
Are you at leiſure, holy father,
—My leiſure ſerves me, penſive daughter, now. Shakeſp.
Anxious cares the penſive nymph oppreſt,
And ſecret paſſions labour'd in her breaſt. Pope.
2. It is generally and properly uſed of perſons; but Prior has
applied it to things. -
We at the ſad approach of death ſhall know
The truth, which from theſe penſive numbers flow, }
That we purſue falſe joy, and ſuffer real woe. Prior.
PE'ssively. adv. [from peºve..] With melancholy; ſorrow-
fully; with gloomy ſeriouſneſs.
So fair a lady did I ſpy,
On herbs and flowers ſhe walked penſively
Mild, but yet love ſhe proudly did forſake. Spenſºr.
PE'ssives ess. n.ſ. [from penſive..] Melancholy; ſorrowful-
neſs; gloomy ſeriouſneſs.
Concerning the bleſſings of God, whether they tend unto
this life or the life to come, there is great cauſe why we
ſhould delight more in giving thanks than in making requeſts
for them, inaſmuch as the one hath penſiºnſ and fear, the
other always joy annexed. Hooker, b. v. f. 43.
Would'ſt thou unlock the door
To cold deſpairs and gnawing penſiveneſs,
PEN.T. part. paſſ of pen. Shut up.
part, pa d my lace aſunder,
That my pent heart may have ſome ſcope to beat. Shakespeare
The ſoft of Clarence have I pent up cloſe. Shakespeare eare.
Pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy • • *
Their mercy. Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
Their armour help'd their harm, cruſh'd in, and bruis'd
Herbert.
Into their ſubſtance pent. A ſiltan.
The ſoul pure fire, like ours, of equal force ;
But pent in fleſh, muſt iſſue by diſcourſe. Dryden.
Pent up in Utica he vainly forms * -
A poor epitome of Roman greatneſs. Addiſon's Cata.
PENTA&amp;Apsular, adj. [riſi and capſular..] Having five
cavities. - -
PENTAchorp. adj. [+º] and xogº.] An inſtrument with
five ſtrings. - -
PENTAE DRO U.S.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E P
P E N
º,
*
.
PENTAE'drous. adj. [ré's and ºx.] Having five ſides.
The pentaedrous columnar coralloid bodies are compoſed of
plates ſet lengthways, and paſſing from the ſurface to the
axis. JWoodward on Foſſils.
PENTAGON. n. f, ſpentagon, Fr. rá'ís and Yoviz.] A
figure with five angles.
I know of that famous piece at Capralora, caſt by Baroccio
into the form of a pentagon with a circle inſcribed. Wotton.
PENTAG on AL. adj. [from pentagon.] Quinquangular; having
five angles. - -
The body being cut tranſverſely, its ſurface appears like a
net made up of pentagonal maſhes, with a pentagonal ſtar in
each maſh. J/oodward on Foſſils.
PENTA'METER. m. ſ. ſpentametre, Fr. pentametrum, Lat.] A
Latin verſe of five feet.
Mr. Diſtich may poſſibly play ſome pentameters upon us,
but he ſhall be anſwered in Alexandrines. Addiſon.
PENTA NGULAR. adj. [wiſ’s and angular.] Five cornered.
His thick and bony ſcales ſtand in rows, ſo as to make
the fleſh almoſt pentangular. Grew.
PENTAPETAlous. adj. [ré's and petala, Lat.) Having five
etals.
Fºras. adj. ſpentaſpaſie, Fr. riſe and Crºw.] An
engine with five pullies. \ Dić7.
PENTA'stick. m. ſ. [rºſs and rixº~..] A compoſition con-
ſiſting of five verſes.
PENTAstyle. n. ſ. [rá's and ČrvXGP.] In archite&amp;ture, a
work in which are five rows of columns. Dić?.
PENTAteuch. n.ſ. (Täls and reºxo; ; pentateuque, Fr.] The
five books of Moſes. *
The author in the enſuing part of the pentateuch makes not
unfrequent mention of the angels. Bentley.
PE'N TECOST. n.ſ. [riſixcº pentacoſie, Fr.] A feaſt
among the Jews.
Pentecºſt ſignifies the fiftieth, becauſe this feaſt was cele-
brated the fiftieth day after the ſixteenth of Niſan, which was
the ſecond day of the feaſt of the paſſover: the Hebrews call
it the feaſt of weeks, becauſe it was kept ſeven weeks after the
paſſover: they then offered the firſt fruits of the wheat harveſt,
which then was completed: it was inſtituted to oblige the
Iſraelites to repair to the temple, there to acknowledge the
Lord's dominion, and alſo to render thanks to God for the
law he had given them from mount Sinai, on the fiftieth day
after their coming out of Egypt. Calmet.
'Tis ſince the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come pentecoſt as quickly as it will
Some five and twenty years. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
PENteco stal. adj. [from pentecoſt.j Belonging to Whitſun-
tide.
I have compoſed ſundry colle&amp;ts, made up out of the
church collects with ſome little variation; as the collects ad-
ventual, quadrageſimal, paſchal or pentecoſłal. Sanderſon.
PENTHouse. n. J. [pent, irom pente, Fr. and houſe..] A ſhed
hanging out aſlope from the main wall.
This is the penthouſe under which Lorenzo deſir'd us to
make a ſtand. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Wenice.
Sleep ſhall neither night nor day
Hang upon his penthouſe lid. Shakeſpeare.
The Turks lurking under their penthouſe, laboured with
mattocks to dig up the foundation of the wall. Knolles.
A blow was received by riding under a penthonſ. Iłiſeman.
Thoſe defenſive engines, made by the Romans into the
form of penthouſes to cover the affailants from the weapons of
the beſieged, would he preſently batter in pieces with ſtones
and blocks. JWilkins.
My penthouſe eye-brows and my ſhaggy beard
Offend your fight; but theſe are manly ſigns. Dryden.
The chill rain
Drops from ſome penthouſe on her wretched head.
Rowe.
PENTIce. m. ſ. [appentir, French ; pendice, Italian. It is
commonly ſuppoſed a corruption of penthouſe ; but perhaps
pentice is the true word..] A ſloping roof.
Climes that fear the falling and lying of much ſnow, ought
to provide more inclining pentices. /Wotton.
FNTILE. m. ſ. [f ent and tile. J A tile formed to cover the
ſloping part of the roof.
Pentiles are thirteen inches long, with a button to hang on
the laths; they are hollow and circular. Mºxon.
Pºst up, part, adj. pent, fºom pen and up..] Shut up.
Cloſe pent up guilts
Rive your concealing continents. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
PENU'L'i LMA. n. ſ. [Latin.] The laſt ſyllable but one.
*NUMBRA. m. ſ. [pene and umbra, Latin.] An imperfect
ſhadow.
The breadth of this image anſwered to the ſun's diameter,
*nd was about two inches and the cighth part of an inch,
including the penumbra. Newton.
*NU'Rious. adj. [from penuria, Latin.]
* Niggardly; ſparing; not liberal; ſordidly mean.
What more can our penurious reaſon grant
To the large whale or caſtled elephant, Prior.
2. Scant; not plentiful.
Some penurious ſpring by chance appear'd
Scanty of water.
PENU'RIously. adv.
tifully.
PENu'Riousness. n.ſ. [from penurious.] Niggardlineſs; par-
ſimony. -
If we confider the infinite induſtry and penuriouſneſs of that
people, it is no wonder that, notwithſtanding they furniſh as
great taxes as their neighbours, they make a better figure.
Addiſon on the State of the War.
PE'NURY. m. ſ. ſpenuria, Lat.] Poverty; indigence.
The penury of the eccleſiaſtical eſtate. - Hooker.
Who can perfectly declare
The wondrous cradle of thy infancy
When thy great mother Venus firſt thee bare,
Begot of plenty and of penury. Spenſer.
Sometimes am I king;
Then treaſon makes me wiſh myſelf a beggar;
And ſo I am : then cruſhing penury
Perſuades me, I was better when a king;
Then I am king'd again. Shakeſp. Richard III.
All innocent they were expoſed to hardſhip and penury,
which, without you, they could never have eſcaped. Sprat.
Let them not ſtill be obſtinately blind,
Still to divert the good deſign'd,
Or with malignant penury
To ſtarve the royal virtues of his mind.
May they not juſtly to our climes upbraid
Shortneſs of night, and penury of ſhade. Prior.
PE'on Y. m. ſ. [paronia, Latin.]
The peony hath a flower compoſed of ſeveral leaves, which
are placed orbicularly, and expand in form of a roſe, out of
whoſe empalement riſes the pointal, which afterwards be-
comes a fruit, in which ſeveral little horns bent downwards
are gathered, as it were, into a little head covered with down
opening lengthways, containing many globular ſeeds. Miller.
A phyſician had often tried the peony root unſeaſonably
gathered without ſucceſs; but having gathered it when the
decreaſing moon paſſes under Aries and tied the ſlit root about
the necks of his patients, he had freed more than one from
epileptical fits. Boyle.
PE'ople. n.ſ. ſpeuple, Fr. populus, Lat.]
1. A nation; theſe who compoſe a community.
Propheſy again before many peoples and nations and
tongues. Revelations x. II.
Ants are a people not ſtrong, yet they prepare their meat in
ſummer. Proverbs xxx. 25.
What is the city but the people *
True the people are the city.
2. The vulgar.
Addiſon.
[from penurious.] Sparingly; not plen-
Dryden.
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The knowing artiſt may
Judge better than the people, but a play
Made for delight,
If you approve it not, has no excuſe. Waller.
3. The commonalty; not the princes or nobles.
4. Perſons of a particular claſs.
If a man temper his ačtions to content every combination
of people, the muſick will be the fuller. Bacon.
A ſmall red flower in the ſtubble fields country people call
the wincopipe. Bacon.
5. Men, or perſons in general. In this ſenſe, the word people
is uſed indefinitely, like ou in French.
The frogs petitioning for a king, bids people have a care of
ſtruggling with heaven. L’Eſtrange.
People were tempted to lend by great premiums and large
intereſt. Swift's Miſcellanies.
Watery liquor will keep an animal from ſtarving by di-
luting the fluids; for people have lived twenty-four days upon
nothing but water. Arbuthnot on Alimentſ.
People in adverſity ſhould preſerve laudable cuſtoms. Clariſa.
To People. v. a. ſpeupler, French..] To ſtock with inha-
bitants. -
Suppoſe that Brute, or whoſoever elſe that firſt peopled this
iſland, had arrived upon Thames, and called the iſland after
his name Britannia. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
He would not be alone, who all things can;
But peopled Heav'n with angels, earth with man. Pryden.
Beauty a monarch is,
Which kingly power magnificently proves
By crouds of ſlaves, and peopled empire loves.
A peopl"d city made a deſert place:
Imperious death directs his ebon lance ; 3.
Peoples great Henry's tombs, and leads up Holben's dance.
Prior.
spasticks. m. ſ. ſriraſ, 2.] Medicines which] are good to
P help the fººd the ſtomach º º crudities. Dić7.
- . m. ſ. ſpiper, Lat, poivre, Fr.
PE º {{ #: kinds sº the black, the white, and
the long, which are three different fruits produced . three
diſtinct plants: black pepper is a dried fruit of the ſize of a
vetch and roundiſh, but rather of a deep brown than a black
19 L colour:
Dryden.
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. E. R.
P E. R.
with this we are ſupplied by the Dutch from their Eaſt
i. iº in Java, Malabar and Sumatra, and the plant
has the ſame heat and fiery taſte that we find in the pepper :
whitepepperis commonly factitious, and prepared from the black
by taking off the outer bark, but there is a rarer ſort, which
is a genuine fruit naturally white: long pepper is a fruit gº.
thered while unripe and dried, of an inch or an inch and half
in length, and of the thickneſs of a large gooſe quill: it
much reſembles the catkins of ſome of our trees, and conta"
ſeveral ſeeds fingly in ſmall membranaceous cells, and theſe
ſeeds are of an acrid, hot and bitteriſh taſte : the whole fruit
is of a browniſh grey colour and cylindrick in its fig". Hill.
Scatter o'er the blooms the pungent duſt
Of pepper, fatal to the froſty tribe.
To PeppER. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſprinkle with pepper.
2. To beat; to mangle with ſhot or blows. - -
I have peppered two of them; two I have paid, two rogues
in buckram ſuits. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Peppersox. n.ſ. [pºpper and box.] A box for holding pepper.
I will not take the leacher; he cannot creep into half-
penny purſe nor into a pepperbox. - Shakeſp.
Prºpºdorn. n.ſ. [pepper and corn.) Anything of inconfi-
derable value. -
Our performances, though dues, are like thoſe peppercorns
which feeholders pay their landlord to acknowledge that they
Thomſºn's Spring.
hold all from him. Boyle.
Folks from mud-wall'd tenement
Bring landlords peppercorn for rent. Prior.
Pepper MiNT. n.ſ. [pepper and mint.] Mint eminently hot.
Pepperwort. n.ſ. ſtepper and wort.] A plant.
Pepperwort hath a flower conſiſting of four leaves, which
are placed in form of a croſs, from whoſe cup ariſes the pi-
ſtillum, which afterward becomes a ſpear-ſhaped fruit, which
is divided in the middle by a partition into two cells, which
contain many oblong ſeeds. Miller.
Peptick. adj. [rºs.) What helps digeſtion. Ainſ.
Per Acute. n.ſ. [peracutus, Lat.] Very ſharp; very violent.
Malign, continual peracute fevers, after moſt dangerous at-
tacks, ſuddenly remit of the ardent heat. Harvey.
PER Adve'N'TURE. adv. [par adventure, Fr.]
1. Perhaps; may be ; by chance.
That wherein they might not be like unto either, was ſuch
peradwenture as had been no whit leſs unlawful. PHooker.
As you return, viſit my houſe; let our old acquaintance be
renew'd ; perativenture I will with you to court. Shakespeare
What peradventure may appear very full to me, may ap-
pear very crude and maimed to a ſtranger. Digby.
2. Doubt; queſtion. It is ſometimes uſed as a noun, but not
gracefully nor properly. -
Though men's perſons ought not to be hated, yet without
all peradventure their practices juſtly may. South.
To PERA GRATE. v. a. [peragro, Lat..] To wander over;
to ramble through. Disi.
PERAGRA'tion. n.ſ.. [from peragrate.] The act of paſſing
through any ſtate or ſpace.
A month of peragration is the time of the moon's revolu-
tion from any part of the zodiac unto the ſame again, and
this containeth but twenty-ſeven days and eight hours. Brown.
The moon has two accounts which are her months or
years of revolution; one her periodic month, or month of
fºragration, which chiefly reſpects her own proper motion or
place in the zodiack, by which ſhe like the ſun performs her
revolution round the zodiack from any one point to the ſame
again. Holder on Time.
To PERAMBULATE. v. a. ſperambulo, Lat.]
1. To walk through.
2. To ſurvey, bypaſſing through.
Perſons the lord deputy ſhould nominate to view and per-
ambulate Iriſh territories, and thereupon to divide and limit the
fame. Davies on Ireland.
Peº AMBULATION. m. ſ. [from perambulate.]
1. The act of paſſing through or wandering over.
The duke looked ſtill for the coming back of the Armada, -
even when they were wandering and making their perambula.
tion of the northern ſeas. Bacon.
2. A travelling ſurvey.
F rance is a ſquare of five hundred and fifty miles traverſe,
thronging with ſuch multitudes, that the general calcul, made
sº the laſt perambulatiºn exceeded eighteen millions. Hºwe,
***ASE, adv, ſpar and caſe.] Perchance; perhaps. Not uſed.
. A virtuous man will be virtuous in ſolitudine, and not only
. *atro, though percaſe it will be more ſtrong by glory and
Pº. * an heat which is doubled by reflexion. * fla.ºn.
w. 3. [perſant, Fr.] Piercing ; penetrating.
As eagl * quick and perceant was his ſpright
Prº. that can behold the ſun. Fairy Queen.
aft under per...ſºm perceive..] Perceptible; ſuch as
The body, though it 1] -
ceivable diſtă º really moves, yet not changing per-
**tance with ſome other bodies, as faſt as the ideas of
our own minds w;
the hands . ºw one another, ſeems to ſtand ".
Qu'Ate.
That which we perceive when we ſee figure, as perceivah.
by fight, is nothing but the termination of colour. Locke.
PER ceivably. adv. [from perceivable.] In ſuch a manner as
may be be obſerved or known.
To PERCEIVE. v. a. [percipio, Lat.]
1. To diſcover by ſome ſenſible effects.
Conſider,
When you above perceive me like a crow,
That it is place which leſiens and ſets off.
2. To know ; to obſerve.
Jeſus perceived in his ſpirit, that they ſo reaſoned within
themſelves. AZark ii. 8.
His ſons come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they
are brought low, but he perceiveth it not. job xiv. 21.
'Till we ourſelves ſee it with our own eyes, and perceive it
Shakeſ,
by our own underſtandings, we are ſtill in the dark. Locke.
How do they come to know that themſelves think, when
they themſelves do not perceive it. Locke.
3. To be affected by.
The upper regions of the air perceive the colle&amp;tion of the
matter of tempeſts before the air here below. Bacon.
PERceptibi'LITY.. n.ſ.. [from perceptible.]
1. The ſtate of being an object of the ſenſes or mind; the ſtate
of being perceptible.
2. Perception; the power of perceiving.
The illumination is not ſo bright and fulgent, as to obſcure
or extinguiſh all perceptibility of the reaſon. AMore.
PERCEPTIBLE. adj. [perceptible, Fr. perceptus. Lat..] Such
as may be known or obſerved.
No ſound is produced but with a perceptible blaſt of the air,
and with ſome reſiſtance of the air ſtrucken. Bacon.
When I think, remember or abſtract; theſe intrinſick ope-
rations of my mind are not perceptible by my fight, hearing,
taſte, ſmell or feeling. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
It perceives them immediately, as being immediately ob-
jećted to and perceptible to the ſenſe ; as I perceive the ſun by
my fight. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
In the anatomy of the mind, as in that of the body, more
good will accrue to mankind by attending to the large, open
and perceptible parts, than by ſtudying too much finer nerves.
Pope's Eſſay on Man.
Perce'PTIBLY. adv. [from perceptible.] In ſuch a manner as
may be perceived.
The woman decays perceptibly every week. Pope.
PERCE'ption. n.ſ. [perception, Fr. perceptiº, Lat.]
1. The power of perceiving; knowledge ; conſciouſneſs.
Matter hath no life nor perception, and is not conſcious of
its own exiſtence. Bentley's Sermons.
Perception is that ačt of the mind, or rather a paſſion or
impreſſion, whereby the mind becomes conſcious of any thing;
as when I feel hunger, thirſt, cold or heat. Watts.
2. The act of perceiving; obſervation.
3. Notion ; idea.
By the inventors, and their followers that would ſeem not
to come too ſhort of the perceptions of the leaders, they are
magnified. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
4. The ſtate of being affected by ſomething.
Great mountains have a perception of the diſpoſition of the
air to tempeſts ſooner than the vallies below; and therefore
they ſay in Wales, when certain hills have their night caps
on, they mean miſchief. Bacon.
This experiment diſcovereth perception in plants to move
towards that which ſhould comfort them, though at a di-
ſtance. • Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
PERCEPTIVE. adj. [perceptus, Lat.] Having the power of
perceiving.
There is a difficulty that pincheth: the ſoul is awake and
ſollicited by external motions, for ſome of them reach the
perceptive région in the moſt filent repoſe and obſcurity of
night: what is it then that prevents our ſenſations? Glanvil.
Whatever the leaſt real point of the eſſence of the percep-
tive part of the ſoul does perceive, eyºry, real point of the
perceptive muſt perceive at once. . 4%rº Divine Dialºgues.
Pérceptivity. n.ſ. [from perceptive.] The power of per-
ception or thinking. Locke.
PER&amp;H. n.ſ. [perca, Lat. perche, Fr.] - -
The perch is one of the fiſhes of prey, that, like the pike
and trout, carries his teeth in his mouth, he dare venture to
kill and deſtroy ſeveral other kinds of fiſh: he has a hooked
or hog back, which is armed with ſtiff briſtles, and all his
ſkin armed with thick hard ſcales, and hath two fins on his
back: he ſpawns but once a year, and is held very nutri-
tive. //alton's Angler.
Perch. n.ſ. [pertica, Lat. perche, Fr.]
1. A meaſure of five yards and a half; a pole.
2. [perche, Fr.] Something on which birds rooſt or fit.
For the narrow perch I cannot ride. Dryden.
To Perch. v. n. [percher, Fr. from the noun..] To fit or
rooſt as a bird.
He percheth on ſome branch thereby,
To weather him and his moiſt wings to dry. Speºſer.
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. E. R.
P E R
#:
ºr:
!
ſm,
sº
º,
mºſ:
º
ſº,
º,
ºf 13
Perpi Tion... n.ſ. [perditiº, Lat. perdition, Fr.]
The world is grown ſo bad,
That wrens make prey, where eagles dare not perch. Shakespeare
The morning muſes perch like birds, and ſing
Among his branches. Craſhaw.
Let owls keep cloſe within the tree, and not perch upon
the upper boughs. South's Sermons.
They wing'd their flight aloft, then ſtooping low,
Perch'd on the double tree, that bears the golden bough. Dry.
Glory like the trembling eagle ſtood
Perch’d on my beaver: in the Granic flood;
When fortune's ſelf my ſtandard trembling bore,
And the pale fates ſtood frighted on the ſhore. Lee.
Hoſts of birds that wing the liquid air,
Perch’d in the boughs, had nightly lodging there. Dryden.
To PERCH. v. a. To place on a perch.
It would be notoriouſly perceptible, if you could perch
yourſelf as a bird on the top of ſome high ſteeple, More.
As evening dragon came,
Aſſailant on the perched roots,
And neſts in order rang'd
Of ſome villatic fowl. Milton's Agoniſłes.
PERchA'Nce. adv. [per and chance.] Perhaps; peradventure.
How long within this wood intend you ſtay –
—Perchance till after Theſeus' wedding day, Shakeſp.
Finding him by nature little ſtudious, ſhe chuſe rather to
endue him with ornaments of youth ; as dancing and fenc-
ing, not without aim then perchance at a courtier's life. Wotton.
Only Smithfield ballad perchance to embalm the memory
of the other. L’Eſtrange.
PE'rchers. n. ſ. Paris candles uſed in England in ancient
times; alſo the larger ſort of wax candles, which were uſu-
ally ſet upon the altar. Bailey.
PERé1'PIENT. adj. [percipiens, Lat..] Perceiving; having the
power of perception.
No article of religion hath credibility enough for them ;
and yet theſe cautious and quickfighted gentlemen can wink
and ſwallow down this ſottiſh opinion about percipient atoms.
Bentley's Sermons.
Senſation and perception are not inherent in matter as ſuch;
for if it were ſo, every ſtock or ſtone would be a percipient
and rational creature. Bentley's Sermons.
Pe'RcIPIENT. n.ſ. One that has the power of perceiving.
The ſoul is the ſole percipient, which hath animadverſion
and ſenſe properly ſo called, and the body is only the re-
ceiver of corporeal impreſſions. Glanville's Scett.
Nothing in the extended percipient perceives the whole,
but only part. More's Divine Dialogues.
PERclose. m. ſ. [per and cloſe..] Concluſion ; laſt part.
By the percloſe of the ſame verſe, vagabond is underſtood
for ſuch an one as travelleth in fear of revengement, Raleigh.
To PERCOLATE. v. a. [percolo, Lat..] To ſtrain.
The evidences of fact are percolated through a vaſt period
of ages. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Percolation. m. ſ. [from percolate.] The act of ſtraining ;
purification or ſeparation by ſtraining. -
Experiments touching the ſtraining and paſſing of bodies
one through another, they call percolation. , Bacon.
Water paſſing through the veins of the earth is rendered
freſh and potable, which it cannot be by any percolations we
can make, but the ſaline particles will paſs through a tenfold
filtre. Ray on the Creation.
To PERCU'ss. v. a. ſpercuſſia, Lat.] To ſtrike.
Flame percuſſed by air giveth a noiſe; as in blowing of the
fire by bellows; and ſo likewiſe flame percuſſing the air
ſtrongly Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
PERcussion, n.ſ. [percuſſia, Lat. percuſſion, Fr.]
1. The act of ſtriking ; ſtroke.
With thy grim looks, and
The thunder-like percuſſion of thy ſounds,
Thou mad'ſt thine enemies ſhake. Shakeſpeare.
The percuſſion of the greater quantity of air is produced by
the greatneſs of the body percuſſing. Bacon.
Some note, that the times when the ſtroke or percuſſion of
an envious eye doth moſt hurt are, when the party envied is
bcheld in glory. Bacon's Eſſays.
The vibrations or tremors excited in the air by percuſſion,
continue a little time to move from the place of percuſſion in
concentric ſpheres to great diſtances. Newton's Opticks.
Marbles taught him percuſſion and the laws of motion, and
tops the centrifugal motion. Pope and Arbuthnot's Scriblerus.
2. Effect of ſound in the ear.
In double rhymes the percuſſion is ſtronger. Rymer.
Pºrcu tiest. m. ſ. [printiens, Latin.) Striking; having the
power to ſtrike. -
Inequality of ſounds is accidental, either from the roughneſs
or obliquity of the paſſage, or from the doubling of the
percutient. - Bacon.
1. Deſtruction; ruin; death.
Upon tidings now arrived, importing the meer perdition
of the Turkiſh fleet, every man puts himſelf in triumph.
2 Shakeſp.
We took ourſelves for free men, ſeeing there was no dan-
ger of our utter perdition, and lived moſt joyfully; going abroad,
and ſeeing what was to be ſeen. Bacon.
Quick let us part! Perdition's in thy preſence,
And horror dwells about thee Addiſon's Cato.
2. Loſs.
There's no ſoul loſt,
Nay not ſo much perdition as an hair
Betid to any creature in the veſſel
Thou ſaw'ſt ſink. Shakespeare
3. Eternal death. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
As life and death, mercy and wrath, are matters of
knowledge, all men's ſalvation and ſome men's endleg perdi-
tion are things ſo oppoſite, that whoever doth affirm the one,
muſt neceſſarily deny the other. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 49.
Men once fallen away from undoubted truth, do after wan-
der for ever more in vices unknown, and daily travel towards
their eternal perdition. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the IWorld.
PERDUE, adv. [This word, which among us is adverbially
taken, comes from the French perdue, or forlorn hope: as per-
due or advanced centinel..] Cloſe; in ambuſh.
Few minutes he had lain perdue,
To guard his deſp'rate avenue. Hudibras,
PE'RDulous. adj. [from perdo, Lat.] Loſt; thrown away.
There may be ſome wandering perdulous wiſhes of known
impoſſibilities; as a man who hath committed an offence, may
wiſh he had not committed it: but to chuſe efficaciouſly and
impoſſibly, is as impoſſible as an impoſſibility. Bramhall.
PERDu Rable. adj. [perdurable, Fr. perduro, Lat..] Laſt-
ing; long continued. A word not in uſe, nor accented ac-
cording to analogy.
Confeſs me knit to thy deſerving with
Cables of perdurable toughneſs. Shakeſp. Othello.
Operdurable ſhame; let's ſtab ourſelves. Shakeſp.
PERDURABLY. adv. [from perdurable.] Laſtingly.
Why would he for the momentary trick,
Be perdurably fin'd? Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
PERDURATION. m. ſ. [perduro, Lat..] Long continuance. Ainſ.
PERE GAL. adj. [French..] Equal. Obſolete.
Whilom thou waſt peregal to the beſt,
And wont to make the jolly ſhepherds glad ;
With piping and dancing, did paſs the reſt. Spenſer.
To PE’REGRINATE. v. n. [peregrinus, Lat..] To travel; to
live in foreign countries. Dić7.
PEREGRINATION. m. ſ. [from peregrinus, Lat.] Travel;
abode in foreign countries,
It was agreed between them, what account he ſhould give
of his peregrination abroad. Bacon's Henry VII.
That we do not contend to have the earth paſs for a para-
diſe, we reckon it only as the land of our peregrination, and
aſpire after a better country. Bentley's Sermons.
PE REGRINE. adj. [peregrin, old Fr. peregrinus, Lat.] Fo-
reign; not native ; not domeſtick. -
The received opinion, that putrefaction is cauſed by cold
or peregrine and preternatural heat, is but nugation. Bacon.
To PERE'MPT. v. a. [peremptus, Late] To kill; to cruſh.
A law term.
Nor is it any obječtion, that the cauſe of appeal is perempted
by the deſertion of an appeal; becauſe the office of the judge
continues after ſuch inſtance is perempted. Ayliffe.
PE’REMPTION. n.ſ. [peremptio, Lat. peremption, Fr.] Cruſh;
extinction. Law term.
This peremption of inſtance was introduced in favour of the
publick, left ſuits ſhould otherwiſe be rendered perpetual.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
PERE'MPToRILY. adv. [from peremptory..] Abſolutely ; poſi-
tively; ſo as to cut off all farther debate.
Norfolk denies them peremptorily. Daniel.
Not to ſpeak peremptorily or concluſively, touching the point
of poſſibility, till they have heard me deduce the means of
the execution. Bacon’s Holy War.
Some organs are ſo peremptorily neceſſary, that the extin-
guiſhment of the ſpirits doth ſpeedily follow, but yet, ſo as
there is an interim. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
In all conferences it was inſiſted peremptorily, that the king
muſt yield to what power was required. Clarendon.
Some talk of letters before the deluge ; but that is a matter
of mere conjecture, and nothing can be peremptorily deter-
mined either the one way or the other. Woodward.
Never judge peremptorily on firſt appearances. . Clariſſa.
PeremptóRINess. n.ſ. (from peremptory.J Poſitiveneſs; ab-
ſolute deciſion; dogmatiſm. - - - -
Peremptorineſs is of two ſorts; the one a magiſterialneſs in
matters of opinion; the other a poſitiveneſs in relating mat-
ters of fact. Government of the Tongue.
Self-conceit and peremptorinºſ; in a man's own opinion are
not commonly reputed vices. - Tillotſon's Sermons.
PEREMPTORY. adj. [peremptorius, low Lat. peremptoire,
Fr. from peremptus, killed.]. Dogmatical; abſolute ; ſuch
as deſtroys all further expoſtulation.
As touching the apoſtle, wherein he was ſo reſolute and
peremptory, our Lord Jeſus Chriſt made manifeſt unto him,
even<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E R
P E R
|
even by intuitive revelation, wherein there was no rºy
of errour. 00ker.
He may have fifty-ſix exceptions peremptory againſt the ju-
rors, of which he ſhall ſhew no cauſe. Spenſer.
To-morrow be in readineſs to go ;
Excuſe it not for I am peremptory. Shakeſpeare.
Not death himſelf
In mortal fury is half ſo peremptory, -
As we to § this city. Shakeſ car's King john.
Though the text and the doćtrine run peremptory and ab-
ſolute, whoſoever denies Chriſt, ſhall aſſuredly be denied by
him; yet ſtill there is a tacit condition, unleſs repentance
intervene. South's Sermons.
The more modeſt confeſs, that learning was to give us a
fuller diſcovery of our ignorance, and to keep us from being
peremptory and dogmatical in our determinations. Cºllier.
He would never talk in ſuch a peremptory and diſcou-
raging manner, were he not aſſured that he was able to
ſubdue the moſt powerful oppoſition againſt the doctring which
he taught. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
PERE'NNIAL. adj. ſperennis, Latin.]
1. Laſting through the year. - -
If th: †, º: preciſely the ſame in theſe perennial
fountains, the difficulty would be greater. Cheyne.
2. Perpetual ; unceaſing. - - -
The matter wherewith theſe perennial clouds are raiſed, is
the ſea that ſurrounds them. Harvey.
PERE'NNITY. m. ſ. [from perennitas, Lat.] Equality of laſting
through all ſeaſons; perpetuity.
That ſprings have their origin from the ſea, and not from
rains and vapours, I conclude from the perennity of divers
ſprings. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
PETF É&amp;T. adj. [perfäus, Lat, parfait, Fr.]
1. Complete; conſummate; finiſhed; neither defective nor re-
dundant.
We count thoſe things perfeº, which want nothing requi-
fite for the end, whereto they were inſtituted. Hooker.
2. Fully informed; fully ſkilful.
Within a ken our army lies;
Our men more perfeół in the uſe of arms,
Our armour all as ſtrong, our cauſe the beſt ;
Then reaſon wills our hearts ſhould be as good.
Fair dame ! I am not to you known,
Though in your ſtate of honour I am perſº. Shakeſpeare.
I do not take myſelf to be ſo perfºr in the privileges of Bo-
hemia, as to handle that part; and will not offer at that I
Shakeſp.
cannot maſter. Bacon.
3. Pure ; blameleſs; clear; immaculate. This is a ſenſe
º
y Parts, my title, and my perfºr ſoul
Shall manifeſt me rightly. Shakeſp. Othello.
Thou ſhalt be perſº with the Lord thy God. Deutr. xviii.
4. Safe; Out of danger.
Thou art perfºr then, our ſhip hath touch’d upon
The deſerts of Bohemia. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
Tº PE’RFEcT. v. a. [perfectus, from perficio, Latin; parſaire,
French.] -
1. To finiſh; to complete; to conſummate; to bring to its
due ſtate.
If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love
is perfected in us. I john iv. 12.
Beauty now muſt perfeół my renown;
With that I govern'd him that rules this iſle. //aller.
In ſubſtances reſt not in the ordinary complex idea com-
monly received, but enquire into the nature and properties of
the things themſelves, and thereby perſed our ideas of their
diſtinét ſpecies. Locke.
Endeavour not to ſettle too many habits at once, left by
variety you confound them, and ſo perfeół none. Locke.
What toil did honeſt Curio take
To get one medal wanting yet,
And perſº all his Roman’ſét? Prior.
2. To make ſkilful; to inſtruct fully.
Her cauſe and yours
I'll perfeół him withal, and he ſhall bring you
Before the duke. Shºffear's Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
PE's Ecter. [from perfe?..] One that makes perfect.
t º º: was altered; they offered not to Mercury, but
* Jupiter the perfeółer. Pope's Odyſſey.
PERFECTION. . [perfeółio, Lat. perfäion. # º//e}
1. The ſtate of tº &gt; perfeółion, Fr.]
in º ſeek a triple perſºčion; firſt a ſenſual, conſiſting
'ºff." things which Very life itſelf requireth, either as nº
le ãº ºppºnents 9 *s ornaments thereof; then an intel-
is ca º "thoſe things which none inderneath man
º wº laſtly, a ſpiritual and divine, conſiſting in thoſe
cannot her. º tend by ſupernatural º *
2ker, b. 1.
It is *judgment maim
- m’d and moſt i
That will confeſs perfection ſo i. ºperfeół,
Againſt all rules of nature,
* Virtue being united t
makes up the higheſt perſºn
Shakeſp. Othello.
° the heavenly grace of faith
- 44i/ºon on Education.
No human underſtanding being abſolutely ſecured from
miſtake by the perſºlion of its own nature, it follows that
no man can be infallible but by ſupernatural aſſiſtance. Tillotſ.
Many things impoſſible to thought,
Have been by need to full perfection brought. Dryden.
2. Something that concurs to produce ſupreme excellence.
What tongue can her perfections teil, -
In whoſe each part all pens may dwell ? Sidney.
You knot of mouth-friends ; ſmoke and lukewarm water
Is your perfection. - Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
An heroick poem requires, as its laſt perfection, the a CCOIn-
pliſhment of ſome extraordinary undertaking, which requires
more of the active virtue than the ſuffering. Dryden.
3. Attribute of God. -
If God be infinitely holy, juſt and good, he muſt take de-
light in thoſe creatures that reſemble him moſt in theſe per-
fee?ions. - Atterbury's Serºons.
To PERF 2"ction ATE. v. a. ſperfectionner, Fr. from perfection.]
To make perfect; to advance to perfection. This is a word
propoſed by Dryden, but not received nor worthy of reception.
Painters and ſculptors, chufing the moſt elegant natural
beauties, perfectionate the idea, and advance their art above
nature ºft in her individual productions; the utmoſt maſtery
of human performance. Dryden.
He has ſounded an academy for the progreſs and perfºjion-
ating of painting. - Dryden.
Perfective. adj. [from perfect.] Conducing to bring to
perfection.
Praiſe and adoration are actions perfective of our ſouls. Mr.
Eternal life ſhall not conſiſt in endleſs love; the other fa.
culties ſhall be employed in actions ſuitable to, and perfºive
of their natures. Ray on the Creation.
PERfectively, adv. [from perfective..] In ſuch a manner
as brings to perfection.
As virtue is feated fundamentally in the intelled, ſo per-
fºčively in the fancy; ſo that virtue is the force of reaſon in
the conduct of our actions and paſſions to a good end. Grºw.
PERFEctly. adv. [from perfº.]
1. In the higheſt degree of excellence.
2. Totally; completely.
Chawing little ſponges dipt in oil, when perfº, under
water, he could longer ſupport the want of reſpiration. Boyle.
Words recal to our thoughts thoſe ideas only which they
have been wont to be ſigns of, but cannot introduce any per-
ſºily new and unknown ſimple ideas. Locke.
3. Exactly; accurately.
We know bodies and their properties moſt perfectly. Locke.
PERF ectNess. n.ſ.. [from perfº.j
1. Completeneſs.
2. Goodneſs; virtue. A ſcriptural word.
S Put on charity, which is the bond of perſecineſ. Col. iii. 14.
. Skill.
3 Is this your perfäneſ 2 Shakespeare.
PERFIDIQU.S. adj. [perfidus, Lat. perfidº, Fr.] Treache-
rous; falſe to truſt; guilty of violated faith.
Tell me, perfidious, was it fit
To make my cream a perquiſite,
And ſteal to mend your wages. JWidow and Cat.
PERF1 piously, adv. [from perfidious.] Treacherouſly; by
breach of faith.
Perfidiouſly
He has betray'd your buſineſs, and given up
For certain drops of ſalt, your city Rome. Shakespeare.
They eat perfidiouſly their words. Hudibras.
Can he not deliver us poſſeſſion of ſuch places as would put
him in a worſe condition, whenever he ſhould perfidiouſly re-
new the war * Swift's 44ftellanies.
PERFI'dious N Ess. n. ſ. [from perfidious.] The quality of
being perfidious. - - -
Some things have a natural deformity in them; as perjury,
perfidiouſneſs and ingratitude. ſillotſºn's Sermons.
PERFI’DY. n.ſ. [perfidia, Lat. perfidie, Fr.] Treachery;
want of faith; breach of faith. - - -
PE RFLAble. adj. [from perfo, Lat.] Having the wind driven
through.
To PERFLATE. v. a. ſperflo, Lat.]. To blow through.
If Eaſtern winds did perfiºte our climates more frequently,
they would clarify and refreſh our air. Harvey.
The firſt conſideration in building of cities, is to make
them open, airy and well perflated. Arbuthnot on Air.
PER FLATION. m. ſ [from perfate.] The act of blowing
through. - - - -
Miners, by perſations with large bellows, give motion to
the air, which ventilates and cools the mines. Woodward.
To PERFORATE. v. a, [perforo, Lat..] To pierce with a
tool ; to bore.
Draw the bough of a low fruit tree newly budded without
twiſting, into an earthern pot perforate at the bottom, and
then cover the pot with earth, it will yield a very large
fruit. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A perforated bladder does not ſwell. Boyle.
The labour’d chyle pervades the pores,
In all the arterial perforated ſhores. Blackmore.
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">The aperture was limited by an opaque circle placed be-
tween the eye-glaſs and the eye, and perforated in the middle
with a little round hole for the rays to paſs through to the
eye. Newton's Opticks.
Worms perforate the guts. Arbuthnot on Diet.
PERFoRA'tion. n.ſ.. [from perforate.]
1. The act of piercing or boring.
The likelieſt way is the perforation of the body of the tree
in ſeveral places one above another, and the filling of the
holes. Bacon.
The induſtrious perforation of the tendons of the ſecond
joints of fingers and toes, and the drawing the tendons of the
third joints through them. More's Divine Dialogues.
2. Hole; place bored.
That the nipples ſhould be made ſpongy, and with ſuch
perforations as to admit paſſage to the milk, are arguments
of providence. Ray on the Creation.
PERFor A'ToR. m. ſ. [from perforate.] The inſtrument of
boring.
The patient placed in a sonvenient chair, dipping the tro-
car in oil, ſtab it ſuddenly through the teguments, and with-
drawing the perforator, leave the waters to empty by the
canula. Sharp's Surgery.
PERFo'Rce. adv. [per and force..] By violence; violently.
Guyon to him leaping, ſtaid
His hand, that trembled as one terrifyd ;
And though himſelf were at the fight diſmayd,
Yet him perforce reſtrain'd. Fairy Queen.
Jealous Oberon would have the child,
But ſhe perforce withholds the loved boy. Shakeſp.
She amaz'd, her cheeks
All trembling and ariſing, full of ſpots,
And pale with death at hand, perforce ſhe breaks
Into the inmoſt rooms. Peacham on Poetry.
To PERFORM. v. a. [performare, Italian.] To execute;
to do; to diſcharge; to atchieve an undertaking; to accom-
liſh.
P All three ſet among the foremoſt ranks of fame for great
minds to attempt, and great force to perform what they did
attempt. Sidney, b. ii.
Haſt thou, ſpirit,
Perfºrm'd to point the tempeſt that I bad thee? Shakespeare
What cannot you' and I perform upon
Th'unguarded Duncan Shakeſp. Macbeth.
I will cry unto God that performeth all things for
Inc. - Pſalms lyii. 2:
Let all things be perfºrmed after the law of God dili-
gently. 1 Eſdras viii. 21.
Thou, my love,
Perform his fun'rals with paternal care.
You perform her office in the ſphere,
Born of her blood, and make a new Platonick year. Dryd.
To PERFo'RM. v. n. To ſucceed in an attempt.
When a poet has performed admirably in ſeveral illuſtrious
places, we ſometimes alſo admire his very errors. JWatts.
Perfo'RMABLE. adj. [from perform.] Practicable; ſuch as
mº, done.
enforget the relations of hiſtory, affirming that elephants
have no joints, whereas their actions are not performable
without them. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
PERFo'RMAN.cf. m. ſ. [from perform.]
1. Completion of ſomething deſigned; execution of ſomething
promiſed. `
His promiſes were, as he then was, mighty;
But his performance, as he now is, nothing. Shakeſp.
Promiſing is the very air o' th' time; it opens the eyes of
expe&amp;tation: performance is ever the duller for his ačt, and
but in the plainer kind of people, the deed is quite out of
uſe. . Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
Perform the doing of it; that as there was a readineſs to
will, ſo there may be a performance. 2 Cor. viii. 1 I.
The only means to make him ſucceſsful in the performance
of theſe great works, was to be above contempt. South.
2. Compoſition; work.
In the good poems of other men, I can only be ſure, that
'tis the hand of a good maſter; but in your performances 'tis
ſcarcely poſſible for me to be deceived. Dryden.
Few of our comic performances give good examples. Clariſ.
3. Aćtion; ſomething done. -
In this ſlumbry agitation, beſides her walking and other
actual performances, what have you heard her ſay? Shakeſp.
PERFo'RMER. m. ſ. [from perform.]
1. One that performs anything.
The merit of ſervice is ſeldom attributed to the true and
exact performer. Shakeſp.
2. It is generally applied to one that makes a publick exhibition
of his ſkill.
To PERFR1 cate. v. n. [perfrico, Lat.] To rub over. Dià.
P:RFu Matory. adj. [from perfume.] That which perfumes.
PERFU/ME. m. ſ. [parfume, Fr.]
"...g odour of ſweetneſs uſed to give ſcents to other
1119.S.
&amp;
Dryden.
Pomanders and knots of powders for drying rheums are not
{o ſtrong as perfumes; you may have them continually in your
hand, whereas perfume’ you can take but at times. Bacon:
sº º groſs bodies that may be ſenſibly waſted,
rºom where a perfume is burned, but we ſmell it. Digby.
2. Sweet odour; fragrance.
No rich perfines refreſh the fruitful field,
Nor fragrant herbs their native incenſe yield. Popc.
To PERFU Me. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſcent; to impreg-
nate with ſweet ſcent.
Your papers
Let me have them very well perfin'd,
For ſhe is ſweeter than perfume itſelf
To whom they go. Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
Why rather, ſleep, lieſt thou in ſmoky cribs,
And huſht with buzzing night-flies to thy ſlumber,
Than in the perfum’d chambers of the great,
Under the canopies of coſtly ſtate, -
And lull'd with ſounds of ſweeteſt melody ?
Then will I raiſe aloft the milk-white roſe,
With whoſe ſweet ſmell the air ſhall be perſum'd. Shakeſp.
The diſtilled water of wild poppy, mingled at half with
roſe water, take with ſome mixture of a few cloves in a per-
fuming pan. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Smells adhere to hard bodies; as in perfuming of gloves,
which ſheweth-them corporeal. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
The pains ſhe takes are vainly meant,
To hide her amorous heart,
'Tis like perfuming an ill ſcent,
The ſmell's too ſtrong for art.
See ſpicy clouds from lowly Sharon riſe,
And Carmel's flow'ry top perfumes the ſkies Pope.
PERFU'MER. m. ſ. [from perfume.] One whoſe trade is to
ſell things made to gratify the ſcent.
A moſs the perfumers have out of apple trees, that hath
an excellent ſcent. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Firſt iſſued from perfumers ſhops
A croud of faſhionable fops. Swift.
PERFU'NctoRILY. adv. [perfunctorie, Lat.] Careleſly; neg-
ligently.
ºny caſting his eye perfunèſſorily upon it, and be-
lieving it had been drawn by mature advice, no ſooner received
it, than he delivered it to the lord-keeper. Clarendon.
Whereas all logic is reducible to the four principal opera-
tions of the mind, the two firſt of theſe have been handled
by Ariſtotle very perfundiorily ; of the fourth he has ſaid no-
thing at all. Baker's Reflection on Learning:
Per FUNctor Y. adj. [perfumé!orie, Lat.j Slight; careleſs ;
negligent.
A tranſient and perfund?ory examination of things leads
men into conſiderable miſtakes, which a more correct and ri-
gorous ſcrutiny would have detected. JWoodward.
To PERFU's E. v. a. [perfuſus, Lat J. To tinéture; to over-
ſpread. -
Theſe dregs immediately perfuſe the blood with melancholy,
and cauſe obſtructions. Harvey on Conſumptions.
PERHA'Ps. adv. [per and hap.] Peradventure ; it may be.
Perhaps the good old man that kiſs'd his ſon,
And left a bleſfing on his head,
His arms about him ſpread, -
Hopes yet to ſee him ere his glaſs be run. Flatman.
Somewhat excellent may be invented, perhaps more excel-
lent than the firſt deſign, though Virgil muſt be ſtill excepted,
when that perhaps takes place. Dryden.
His thoughts inſpir'd his tongue,
And all his ſoul receiv'd a real love.
Perhaps new graces darted from her eyes,
Perhaps ſoft pity charm'd his yielding ſoul,
Perhaps her love, perhaps her kingdom charm'd
Shakeſp.
Granville.
him.
Smith.
Pe'RIApt. m. ſ. [rs;1&amp;rro.] Amulet; charm worn as pre-
ſervatives againſt diſeaſes or miſchief. PHammer.
The regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly:
Now help, ye charming ſpells and periapts. Shaºffeare.
PERISARDIUM. m. ſ. [rigi and xzéºz; pericarde, Fr.]
The pericardium is a thin membrane of a conick figure
that reſembles a purſe, and contains the heart in its cavºy.
its baſis is pierced in five places, for the paſſage of the veſſels
which enter and come out of the heart: the uſe of the peri-
cardium is to contain a ſmall quantity of clear water, which
is ſeparated by ſmall glands in it, that the ſurface §. the
heart may not grow dry by its continual motion. 3uincy.
PERIcarpſum. a. ſ. ſpºricarpe, Fr.]. In botany, a pellicle or
thin membrane encompaſſing the fruit or grain of a plant, or
that part of a fruit that envelops the ſeed. -
Beſides this uſe of the pulp or perica”um for the guard of
the ſeed, it ſerves alſo for the ſuſtenance of animals. Ray.
Peºcºration. n.ſ. [from periditor, Lat, perichter, Fr.]
1. The ſtate of being in danger.
2. Trial ; experiment.
19 M Pºrtcranium.
ſo that we can put our noſe in no part of the
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E R
P. E. R.
Perick wºux. 7. ſ: [from re; and cranium ; periorate, Fºl
The periºranium is the membrane that covers the ſkull; it
is a very thin and nervo's membrane of an exquiſite ſenſe,
ſuch as covers immediately not only the cranium, but all the
bones of the body, except the teeth; for which reaſon It is
alſo called the perioſteum. - - Sºny.
Having divided the periºranium, I ſaw a fiſſure running the
whole length of the wound. Iſºſºman's Surgery.
PERI'culous. adj. [periculºſus, Lat.] Dangerous; jeopar-
dous ; hazardous. A word not in uſe.
As the moon every ſeventh day arriveth unto a contrary
ſign, ſo Saturn, which remaineth about as many years in one
ſign, and holdeth the ſame conſideration in years as the moon
in days, doth cauſe theſe periculous periods. Brown.
PERIER GY. m. ſ. [+º, and #7 ov.] Needleſs caution in an
operation; unneceſſary diligence. . . - -
PERIGEE. m. ſ. [rs; and 7: ; perigée, Fr.]. Is a point in
PERIGE'UM. { the heavens, wherein a planet is ſaid to be in
its neareſt diſtance poſſible from the earth. Harris.
By the proportion of its motion, it was at the creation,
at the beginning of Aries, and the perigeum ºf neareſt point
in Libra. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
PERIHE'LIUM. m. ſ. [ref] and *: ; perihelie, Fr.] Is that
point of a planet's orbit, wherein it is neareſt the ſun. Harris.
Sir Iſaac Newton has made it probable, that the comet,
which appeared in 1680, by approaching to the ſun in its
perihelium, acquired ſuch a degree of bºat, as to be 50000
years a cooling. Cheyne's Philºſºphical Principles.
PERIL. m. ſ. [peril, Fr. perikel, Dutch ; periculum, Lat.]
1. Danger; hazard; jeopardy.
Dear Pyrocles, be liberal unto me of thoſe things, which
have made you indeed precious to the world, and now doubt
not to tell of your perils. Sidney, b. ii.
- How many perils do infold -
The righteous man to make him daily fall. Fairy Queen.
In the act what perils ſhall we find,
If either place, or time, or other courſe,
Cauſe us to alter th' order now aſſign'd. Daniel.
The love and pious duty which you pay,
Have paſs'd the perils of ſo hard a way. Dryden.
Strong, healthy and young people are more in peril by
peſtilential fevers, than the weak and old. Arbuthnot.
2. Denunciation; danger denounced.
I told her,
On your diſpleaſure's peril,
She ſhould not viſit you. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale,
PERIlous. adj. [perileux, Fr. from peril.
1. Dangerous; hazardous; full of danger.
Alterations in the ſervice of God, for that they impair the
credit of religion, are therefore perilºus in common-weals,
which have no continuance longer than religion hath all re-
werence done unto it. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 2.
Her guard is chaſtity,
She that has that is clad in compleå ſteel,
And like a quiver'd nymph with arrows keen
May trace huge foreſts and unharbour'd heaths,
Infamous hills and ſandy perilous wilds. Milton.
Dictate propitious to my duteous ear,
What arts can captivate the changeful féer:
For perilous th’ affay, unheard the toil
Tº elude the preſcience of a God by guile. Pope.
Into the perilous flood
Bear fearleſs. Thomſºn.
2. It is uſed by way of emphaſis, or ludicrous exaggeration of
any thing bad. co
Thus was th’ accompliſh'd ſquire endu'd
With gifts and knowledge per’lºus ſhrewd. Hudibras.
3. Smart; witty. In this ſenſé it * I think, only applied to
children, and probably obtained its ſignification from the
notion, that children eminent for wit, do not live; a witty
boy was therefore a perilºus boy, or a boy in danger. It is
vulgarly parlous. e
'Tis a per’lºus boy,
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable;
He's all the mother's from the top to toe.
Fººtously. adv. [from perilous.] Dangerouſly.
PE RitousN Ess. n.ſ. [from Pºriºus...] Dangerouſneſs.
PERI METER. n: / [Tse, and Pºrgio 3 perimetre, Fr.] The
$ºſs ºr ſum of aſ the ſides which’i. any figure of
what kind ſoever, whether rectilinear or mixed.
.*) compreſſing the glaſſes ſtill more, the diameter of this
.* increaſe, and the breadth of j or perimeter
...” until another new colour emerged in the centre of
- Mewton's Opticks.
PERIOD. ... f -
I. A .*/ [period, Fr. ºrigſ…}o;..].
2. Time in whi * -
- ch any thi - -
in the ſame º "g is performed, ſo as to begin again
Tell theſe, that th
earth with i the º
*iºd; they cannºt ad
Shakeſp.
n is fixed in the Centre, that the
*."oll round the ſun in their ſeveral
" * ſyllable of this new doctrine.
J/ats,
3. A ſtated number of years; a round of time, at the end of
which the things compriſed within the calculation ſhall return
to the ſtate in which they were at beginning.
A cycle or period is an account of years that has a begin-
ning and end too, and then begins again as often as it ends.
Holder on Time.
We ſtile a leſſºr ſpace a cycle, and a greater by the name
of period; and you may not improperly call the beginning of
a large period the epocha thereof. 11:1.4er on Time.
4. The end or concluſion. - -
If my death might make this iſland happy,
And prove the period of their tyranny,
I would expend it with all willingneſs;
But mine is made the prologue to their play. Shakſ).
There is nothing ſo ſecret that ſhall not be brought to light
within the compaſs of our world; whatſoever concerns this
ſublunary world in the whole catent of its duration, from the
chaos to the laſt period. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
What anxious moments paſs between
The birth of plots and their laſt fatal periºd.
Oh! 'tis a dreadful interval of time.
5. The ſtate at which any thing terminates.
Beauty's empires, like to greater ſtates,
Have certain periºds ſet, and hidden fates. Sºlº.
Light-conſerving ſtones muſt be ſet in the ſun before they
retain light, and the light will appear greater or leſſºr, until
they come to their utinoſt period. 19 gly,
6. Length of duration.
Some experiment would be made how by art to make plants
more laſting than their ordinary period; as to make a ſtalk
of wheat laſt a whole year. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
7. A complete ſentence from one full ſtop to another.
Periods are beautiful, when they are not too long : for ſo
they have their ſtrength too as in a pike or javelin. 3, johnſ.
Is this the confidence you gave me,
Lean on it ſafely, not a periºd
Shall be unſaid for me. Milton.
Syllogiſm is made uſe of to diſcover a fallacy, cunningly
A.º 'ſºn -
wrapt up in a ſmooth period. Locke.
For the aſſiſtance of weak memories, the firſt words of
every period in every page may be written in diſtinét colours.
//atts's Improvement ºf the Mind.
From the tongue
Th’ unfiniſh'd period falls. Thomſºn's Spring.
To PE’Rio D. v. a. [from the noun..] To put an end to. A
bad word.
Your letter he deſires
To thoſe have ſhut him up, which failing to him,
Period; his comfort. Shakeſp. Timon ºf Athens.
; ºi. } adj. [periodique, Fr. from period.]
I. Circular; making a circuit; making a revolution.
Was the earth's periºdick motion always in the ſame plane
with that of the diurnal, we ſhould miſs of thoſe kindly in-
creaſes of day and night. Derham.
Four moons perpetually roll round the planet Jupiter, and
are carried along with him in his periodical circuit round the
ſun. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. Happening by revolution at ſome ſtated time. -
Aſtrological undertakers would raiſe men out of ſome ſlimy
foil, impregnated with the influence of the ſtars upon ſome
remarkable and periodical conjunctions. Bently.
3. Regular ; performing ſome action at ſtated times. -
The confuſion of mountains and hollows furniſhed me with
a probable reaſon for thoſe periodical fountains in Switzerland,
which flow only at ſuch particular hours of the day. Addison.
4. Relating to periods or revolutions. . . . . . -
It is implicitly denied by Ariſtotle in his politicks, in that
diſcourſe againſt Plato, who meaſured the viciſiitude and mu-
tation of ſtates by a periodical fatality of number. Brºwn.
PERIO'Dically. adv. [from periodical.] At ſtated periods.
The three tides ought to be underſtood of the ſpace of the
night and day, and then there will be a regular flux and re-
flux thrice in that time every eight hours periºdically.
Broome.
PER1'osteu M. m. ſ. [zig; and 3; sº, 3 periºr, Fr.]
All the bones are covered with a very ſenſible membrane,
called the perio/ſeum. Cheyne's Philºſºphical Principles.
PERI PHERY. n.ſ. [Tiº and bi:2 5 peripherie, Fr.] Circum-
ference. - -
Neither is this ſole vital faculty ſufficient to exterminate
noxious humours to the peri, hery or outward parts. Harvey.
To PER1'PHRASE. v. a. ſperiphraſer, Fr.] To expreſs one
word by many ; to expreſs by circumlocution. -
PERI'PHRAsis. m. ſ. [regºris ; periphraſe, Fr.]. Circum-
locution; uſe of many words to expreſs the ſenſe of one:
as, for death, we may ſay, the loſs of life. -
They make the gates of Thebes and the mouths of this
river a conſtant periphraſs for this number ſeven. Brown.
She contains all bliſs,
And makes the world but her periphraſs. Craveland.
They
4.
t
f<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E R
ºfº,
They ſhew their learning uſeleſly, and make a long peri-
phraſſ, on every word of the book they explain. //atts.
The periphraſes and circumlocutions, by which Homer cx-
preſſes the ſingle act of dying, have ſupplied ſucceeding poets
with all their manners of phraſing it. Pope
PERIPHRA'stic AL. adj. [from periphraſs.] Circumlocutory;
expreſſing the ſenſe of one word in many. - -
PERIPNEU'Mon Y. Un. ſ. [re: and rvivºv; peripneumonie,
PERIPNEU Mo'NiA. ; Fr.] An inflammation of the lungs.
Lungs oft imbibing phlegmatick and melancholick hu-
mours, are now and then deprehended ſchirrous, by diſſipa-
tion of the ſubtiler parts, and lapidification of the groſſer
that remain, or may be left indurated, through the groſs re-
liques of peripheumonia or inflammation of the lungs.
Harvey.
A peripneumony is the laſt fatal ſymptom of every diſeaſe ;
for no body dies without a ſtagnation of the blood in the
lungs, which is the total extinction of breath. Arbuthnot,
To PE R1s H. v. m. ſperir, Fr. pereo, Lat.]
1. To die; to be deſtroyed; to be loſt; to come to nothing.
I burn, I pine, I periſh,
If I atchieve not this young modeſt girl. Shakeſp.
If I have ſeen any periſh for want of cloathing, then let
mine arm fall from my ſhoulder-blade. job xxxi. 29.
He keepeth back his ſoul from the pit, and his life from
periſhing by the ſword. job xxxiii. 18.
They periſh quickly from off the good land. Deut. xi. 18.
I periſh with hunger. Luke xv. 17.
The ſick, when their caſe comes to be thought deſperate,
are carried out and laid on the earth to periſh without aſſiſtance
or pity. Locke.
Charaćters drawn on duſt, that the firſt breath of wind ef-
faces, are altogether as uſeful as the thoughts of a ſoul that
periſh in thinking Locke.
Expoſing their children, and leaving them in the fields to
periſh by want, has been the practice. Locke.
Still when the luſt of tyrant pow'r ſucceeds,
Some Athens periſhes, or ſome Tully bleeds. Pope.
In the Iliad, the anger of Achilles had cauſed the death of
ſo many Grecians; and in the Odyſſey, the ſubjects periſhed
through their own fault. Pope.
2. To be in a perpetual ſtate of decay.
Duration, and time which is a part of it, is the idea we
have of periſhing diſtance, of which no two parts exiſt to-
gether, but follow in ſucceſſion ; as expanſion is the idea of
laſting diſtance, all whoſe parts exiſt together. Locke.
3. To be loſt eternally.
Theſe, as natural brute beaſts made to be deſtroyed, ſpeak
evil of the things they underſtand not, and ſhall utterly
periſh. 2 Peter ii. 12.
O ſuffer me not to periſh in my fins, Lord careſt thou not
that I periſh, who wilt that all ſhould be ſaved, and that none
ſhould periſh. Moreton's Daily Exerciſe,
To PERISH. v. a. To deſtroy; to decay. Not in uſe.
- The ſplitting rocks cow’r'd in the ſinking ſands,
And would not daſh me with their ragged ſides;
Becauſe thy flinty heart, more hard than they,
Might in thy palace periſh Margaret. Shakespeare . Henry VI.
site, prepar'd in black, to mourn thy periſh'd lord.
Dryden.
He was ſo reſerved, that he would impart his ſecrets to no-
body; whereupon this cloſeneſs did a little periſh his under-
ſtandings. - Collier on Friendſhip.
Familiar now with grief your ears refrain,
And in the publick woe forget your own,
You weep not for a periſh'd lord alone. Pope.
PERISHABLE, adj. [from periſh..] Liable to periſh; ſubject to
decay; of ſhort duration.
We derogate from his eternal power to aſcribe to them
the ſame dominion over our immortal ſouls, which they have
over all bodily ſubſtances and periſhable natures. Raleigh.
To theſe purpoſes nothing can ſo much contribute as ine-
dals of undoubted authority not periſhable by time, nor con-
fined to any certain place. Addiſon.
It is princes greateſt preſent felicity to reign in their ſub-
jects hearts; but theſe are too periſhable to preſerve their me-
mories, which can only be done by the pens of faithful hi-
ſtorians. Swift.
Human nature could not ſuſtain the reflection of having
all its ſchemes and expectations to determine with this frail
and periſhable compoſition of fleſh and blood. Rogers.
Thrice has he ſeen the periſhable kind
Of men decay. Pope's Odyſſey.
PERISHABLE Ness. n.ſ. [from periſhable.] Liablencſs to be
deſtroyed; liableneſs to decay.
Suppoſe an iſland ſeparate from all commerce, but having
nothing becauſe of its commoneſs and periſhableneſ, fit to
"Pply, the place of money; what reaſon could any have
to enlarge his poſſeſſions beyond the uſe of his family.
- - Locke.
PERIsra'i rºck. adj. [Tºw; perſialtique, Fr.]
*rīſīaltick motion is that vermicular motion of the guts;
which is made by the contraction of the ſpiral fibres, whereby
thº.ºxcrements are preſſed downwards and voided. Quincy.
The fºr:/altick motion of the guts, and the cºntinºis.
preſſion of the fluids, will not ſuffer the leaſt matter to be
applied to one point the leaſt inſtant: Arbuthnot.
PERISTE’Rios. m. ſ. The herb very in. JDiº.
PERISTYLE. m. ſ. ſperiſtile, Fr.
The Villa G ! A circular range of pillars.
ordiana had a periſtyle of two hundred pillars.
z w Arbuthnot on Coins.
PE Rºystole. n.ſ. [+º, and Cºrox”.] The pauſe or inter-
val betwixt the two motions of the heart or pulſe; namely,
that of the ſyſtole or contraction of the heart, and that of
diaſtole or dilatation. D:/?.
PERITONE'UM. m. ſ. [reirãºzlow ; peritaine, Fr.] This lies
immediately under the muſcles of the lower belly, and is a
thin and ſoft membrane, which encloſes all the bowels
contained in the lower belly, covering all the inſide of its
cavity. Diet.
Wounds penetrating into the belly, are ſuch as reach no
farther inward than to the peritoneum. Jºſeman.
PERJURE. m. ſ. [perjurus, Lat..] A perjured or foſſwºrn
perſon. A word not in uſe.
Hide thee, thou bloody hand,
Thou perjure, thou ſimular of virtue, -
Thou art inceſtuous. Sha'eſh. King Lear.
To PERJURE. v. a. ſperjuro, Lat.] To forſwear; to
taint with perjury. It is uſed with the reciprocal pronoun.
Who ſhould be truſted now, when the right hand
Is perjur'd to the boſom. Shakeſp.
The law is not made for a rightcous man, but for the
lawleſs and diſobedient, for perjured perſons. ſºn. i. 16.
PE'RJu RER. m. ſ. [from perjure.] One that ſwears falſely.
The common oath of the Scythians was by the ſword and
fire; for that they accounted thoſe two ſpecial divine powers,
which ſhould work vengeance on the perjurers. Spenſer.
PER JURY. m. ſ. [perjurium, Lat.] Falſe oath.
My great father-in-law, renowned Warwick,
Cried aloud—What ſcourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford falſe Clarence,
And ſo he vaniſh’d. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Pe'Riwig. n.ſ. [perruque, Fr.] Adſcititious hair; hair not
natural, worn by way of ornament or concealment of bald-
neſs.
Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow ;
If that be all the difference in his love,
I'll get me ſuch a colour’d periwig. Shakeſp.
It offends me to hear a robuſteous periwig-pated fellow tear
a paſion to tatters, to ſplit the ears of the groundlings.
Shakeſpeare.
The ſun’s
Diſhevel’d beams and ſcatter'd fires
Serve but for ladies periwigs and tires
In lovers ſonnets. Donne.
Madam time, be ever bald,
I'll not thy periwig be call’d. Cleaveland.
For vailing of their viſages his highneſs and the marquis
bought each a periwig, ſomewhat to overſhadow their fore-
heads. J/otton.
They uſed falſe hair or periwigs. Arbuthnot on Coins.
From her own head Megara takes -
A feriwig of twiſted ſnakes,
Which in the niceſt faſhion curl’d,
Like toupets. Swift's Miſcellanies.
To PE'RIwig. v. a. [from the noun..] To dreſs in falſe hair,
Now when the winter's keener breath began
To cryſtallize the Baltick ocean,
To glaze the lakes, to bridle up the floods,
And periwig with ſnow the bald-pate woods.
Near the door an entrance gapes,
Crouded round with antick ſhapes,
Diſcord periwig'd with ſnakes,
See the dreadful ſtrides ſhe takes.
PE'RiwiNKLE. m. ſ.
1. A ſmall ſhell fiſh; a kind of fiſh ſnail. -
Thetis is repreſented by a lady of a browniſh complexion,
her hair diſheveled about her ſhoulders, upon her head a co-
ronet of periwinkle and eſcalop ſhells. Peacham.
2. A plant.
The periwinkle hath a flower cup, conſiſting of one leaf,
that is divided into five long narrow ſegments: the flower alſo
conſiſts of one leaf, which expands in form of a ſalver, and
is cut into five broad ſegments: the pointal, which ariſes from
the center of the flower cup, becomes a fruit compoſed of two
huſks or pods, which contain oblong, cylindrical, furrowed
ſeeds; to which may be added, that this plant ſhoots out
many long creeping branches that ſtrike out roots at their
joints. - A Miller.
There are in uſe, for the prevention of the cramp, bands
of green periwinkle tied about the calf of the leg. Bacon.
The common ſimples with us are comfry, bugle, ladies
mantle, and periwinkle. Jºſnan's Surgery.
Sylvº ºr.
Swift's Miſcellanies.
To PERK.
&amp; 7 V_l<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E R
P E R
To Prºk. v. n. (from pºº", Skinner.] To hold up the head
3. ected briſkneſs. -
with an aff i you think it a diſgrace,
ºrna, Edward's miſs thus perks it in your face,
I hat Edward's fleſh and blood,
To ſee a piece of failing
I.e. the modeſt matrons of the town
Cºme here in crouds, and ſtare the ſtrumpet down. Pºpe.
To P, sg. v. a. To dreſs; to prank;
'Tis better to be lowly born,
And range with humble livers in content,
than to be perk'd up in a gliſt'ring grief,
And wear a golden ſorrow. Shakespeare . Henry VIII.
PERK. adj. Pert; briſk; airy. Obſolete.
My ragged ronts -
wont in the wind, and wag their wriggle tails,
Park as a peacock, but nought avails. Spenſºr.
PE's lous. adj. [from perilºus.] Dangerous; full of hazard.
A perious paſſage lies, -
Where many maremaids haunt, making falſe melodies.
Spenſer's Fairy Queen.
Late he far'd
In Phaedria's fleet bark over the periºus ſhard. Fa. &amp;een.
Pe'RMAGY.. n.ſ. A little Turkiſh boot. Dići.
m. ſ. [from permanent.] . Duration; conſi-
PE/RMAN ENCE. - -
ſtency; continuance in the ſame ſtate ; laſt-
PE/RMAN ENCY.
ingneſs. - -- -
Salt, they ſay, is the baſis of ſolidity and permanency in
compound bodies, without which the other four elements
might be variouſly blended together, but would remain im-
compačted. Boyle.
Shall I diſpute whether there be any ſuch material being
that hath ſuch a permanence or fixedneſs in being. Hale.
From the permanency and immutability of nature hitherto,
they argued its permaneny and immutability for the future.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
| Such a punctum to our conceptions is almoſt cquivalent to
permanency and reſt. Bentley.
PERMANENT. adj. [permanent, Fr. permanens, Lat..] Du-
rable; not decaying; unchanged.
If the authority of the maker do prove unchangeableneſs
in the laws which God hath made, then muſt all laws which
he hath made be neceſſarily forever permanent, though they
be but of circumſtance only. Hooker. b. iii. ſ. 1d.
That eternal duration ſhould be at once, is utterly uncon-
ceivable, and that one permanent inſtant ſhould be commen-
ſurate or rather equal to all ſucceſſions of ages. More.
Pure and unchang'd, and needing no defence
From fins, as did my frailer innocence;
Their joy ſincere, and with no more ſorrow mixt,
Eternity ſtands permanent and fixt. Dryden.
PE'RMAN ENTLY. adv. [from permanent.] Durably; laſtingly.
It does, like a compact or conſiſtent body, deny to mingle
fermanently with the contiguous liquor. Boyle.
PERMANsion. n.ſ. [from permane?, Lat.] Continuance.
Although we allow that hares may exchange their ſex ſome-
times, yet not in that viciſſitude it is preſumed ; from female
unto male, and from male to female again, and ſo in a circle
without a permanſion in either. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
PERMEABLE, adj. [from permeo, Lat..] Such as may be
paſſed through.
The pores of a bladder are not eaſily permeable by air. Boyle.
To PERMEATE. v. a. [permeo, Lat..] To paſs through.
This heat evaporates and elevates the water of the abyſs,
pervading not only the fiſſures, but the very bodies of the
ſtrata, permeating the interſtices of the ſand or other matter
whereof they conſiſt. lººdward's Natural Hiſtory.
PE'RMEANT. adj. [permeans, Lat.] Paſſing through.
It entercth not the veins, but taketh leave of the permeant
parts at the mouths of the meſeraicks. Brown.
PERMEAtion. m. ſ. [from permeate.] The aa of paſſing
through. So
Pºir. adj. [from permiſceo, Lat.] Such as may be
5'---
Pººr, adj [permiſus, Lat..] What may be per-
PERMI'ssion. m. ſ. ſpermiſſion, Fr. Permiſus, Lat.] Allow-
ance; grant of liberty.
With thy permiſſion then, and thus forewarn'd,
The willinger I go. Milton
º, jº
- Fº: - TODation.
º: SSIVE. adj. [from permitte, jº On Dryden.
- r ºr liber ---- - -
lºgº, not favour; not hindering, though not
When evil We bid this be done,
A º eVl deeds have their permiſſive paſs,
". the puniſhment. Shakeſp. 44eaſure fºr Meaſure
Iº. , the only evil that walks -
i...Sº alone
y his permiſſive will, thrºugh heav'n and earth. Miltºn.
2. Granted"; ſuff, - -
&gt; ered wit -
voured. hout hindrance; not authoriſed or fa.
If this doth authoriſe uſu
3 "Y, which before was but permiſſive,
it is better to mitigate uſury by declaration, than to ſuffer it
to rage by connivance. Bacon's Eſſays.
Thus I embolden’d ſpake, and freedom us’d
Permiſſive, and acceptance found. A ſiſtan’, Par. Loſt.
Clad
With what permiſſive glory ſince his fall
Was left him, or falſe glitter. Milton's Par. Loft.
PERMI'ssively. adv. [from permiſſive..] By bare allowance;
without hindrance.
As to a war for the propagation of the chriſtian faith, I
would be glad to hear ſpoken concerning the lawfulneſs, not
only permiſſively, but whether it be not obligatory to chriſtian
princes to deſign it. Bacon's Hºly I/ar.
PERMI'stion. m. ſ. [permiſłus, Lat.] The act of mixing.
To PERMIT. v. a. [permitto, Lat. permettre, Fr.]
1. To allow without command.
What things God doth neither command nor forbid, the
ſame he permitteth with approbation either to be done or left
undone. Hooker, b. ii. J. 4.
2. To ſuffer, without authoriſing or approving.
3. To allow ; to ſuffer.
Women keep ſilence in the churches; for it is not per-
mitted unto them to ſpeak. 1 Corinthians xiv. 34.
Ye gliding ghoſts, permit me to relate
The myſtick wonders of your filent ſtate. Dryden.
Age oppreſſes us by the ſame degrees that it inſtructs us,
and permits not that our mortal members, which are frozen
with our years, ſhould retain the vigour of our youth. Dryden.
We ſhould not permit an allowed, poſſible, great and
weighty good to ſlip out of our thoughts, without leaving
any reliſh, any deſire of itſelf there. Locke.
After men have acquired as much as the laws permit them,
they have nothing to do but to take care of the publick. Swift.
4. To give up ; to reſign.
Nor love thy life, nor hate ; but what thou liv'ſt,
Live well; how long, how ſhort, permit to heav'n. AMilton.
If the courſe of truth be permitted unto itſelf, it cannot
eſcape many errours. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
To the gods permit the reſt. Dryden.
Whate’r can urge ambitious youth to fight,
She pompouſly diſplays before their fight;
Paws, empire, all permitted to the ſword. Dryden.
Let us not aggravate our ſorrows,
But to the gods permit th' event of things. Addison's Catz.
PERMIT. n.ſ. A written permiſſion from an officer for tranſ-
porting of goods from place to place, ſhowing the duty on
them to have been paid.
PERMitt Ance. n. ſ. [from permit.] Allowance; forbear-
ance of oppoſition; permiſſion. A bad word.
When this ſyſtem of air comes, by divine permittance, to
be corrupted by poiſonous acrimonious ſteams, what havock
is made in all living creatures Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
PERMI'xtion. m. ſ. [from permiſłus, Lat..] The act of ming-
ling; the ſtate of being mingled.
They fell into the oppoſite extremity of one nature in
Chriſt, the divine and human natures in Chriſt, in their con-
ceits, by permixtion and confuſion of ſubſtances, and of pro-
perties growing into one upon their adunation. Brerewood.
PERMUTATION. m. ſ. [permutation, Fr. permutatio, Lat.]
Exchange of one for another.
A permutation of number is frequent in languages. Bentley.
Gold and filver, by their rarity, are wonderfully fitted for
this uſe of permutation for all ſorts of commodities. Ray.
To PERMU'TE. v. a. [permuto, Lat. permuter, Fr.] To ex-
change.
PERMUTER. m. ſ. ſpermutant, Fr. from permute.] An ex-
changer ; he who permutes.
PERNI'CIOUS. adj. [perniciºſºs, Lat. pernicieux, Fr.]
1. Miſchievous in the higheſt degree ; deſtructive.
To remove all out of the church, whereat they ſhew them-
ſelves to be ſorrowful, would be, as we are perſuaded, hurt-
ful, if not perniciºus thereunto. Hooker, b. iv. f. Io.
I call you ſervile miniſters, . .
That have with two pernicious daughters join'd
Your high engender'd battles, gainſt a head. ...
So old and white as this. ' Shakeſp. King Lear.
Let this pernicious hour r
Stand ay accurſed in the kalendar! . . Shakeſp.
2. [Pernix, Latin.] Quick. An uſe which I have found only
in Miltºn, and which, as it produces an ambiguity, ought
not to be imitated.
Part incentive reed
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire. Milton.
PERNI'ciously. adv. [from pernicious.] Deſtruštively; miſ-
chievouſly; ruinouſly.
Some wilful wits wilfully againſt their own knowledge,
perniciouſly againſt their own conſcience, have openly taught.
Aftham's Schoolmaſter.
All the commons
Hate him perniciouſly, and wiſh him
Ten ... deep. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
PERNiciousness. m. ſ. [from pernicious. The quality of
being pernicious.
g P PERNI'city.
</p></div><p>
            End of Section.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809207#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section" id="Section"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. E. R.
PERNI'city. n. ſ. [from permix.], Swiftneſs; celerity.
Others armed with hard ſhells, others with prickles, the
reſt that have no ſuch armature endued with great ſwiftneſs
or pernicity. Ray on the Creation.
PERöRA'tion. m. ſ. [peroratio, Lat.] The concluſion of an
oration. -
What means this paſſionate diſcourſe ?
This peroratian with ſuch circumſtances
True woman to the laſt—my peroration
I come to ſpeak in ſpite of ſuffocation. Smart.
To Perpe'ND. v. a. [perpendo, Lat.] To weigh in the mind;
to conſider attentively.
Thus it remains and the remainder thus ;
Perpend. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Perpend, my princeſs, and give ear. Shakeſp.
Conſider the different conceits of men, and duly perpend
the imperſe&amp;tion of their diſcoveries. -
PERPENDER. n.ſ. [perpigne, Fr.] A coping ſtone.
PERPEN Dicle. m. ſ. [perpendicule, Fr. perpendiculum, Lat.]
Any thing hanging down by a ſtrait line. Dić7.
PERPENDICULAR. adj. [perpendiculaire, Fr. perpendicularis,
Latin.
1. cºil. any other line at right angles. Of two lines, if one
be perpendicular, the other is perpendicular too.
If in a line oblique their atoms rove, *
Or in a perpendicular they move;
If ſome advance not ſlower in their race,
And ſome more ſwift, how could they be entang!'d.
Shakeſp.
Brown.
Blackmore.
The angle of incidence, is that angle, which the line, de-
ſcribed by the incident ray, contains with the perpendicular to
the refle&amp;ting or refracting ſurface at the point of incidence.
Newton's Opticks.
2. Cutting the horizon at right angles.
Some define the perpendicular altitude of the higheſt moun-
tains to be four miles. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
PERPENDI'cular. n.ſ. A line croſſing the horizon at right
angles.
*gh the quantity of water thus riſing and falling be
nearly conſtant as to the whole, yet it varies in the ſeveral
parts of the globe; by reaſon that the vapours float in the
atmoſphere, and are not reſtored down again in a perpendi-
cular upon the ſame preciſe tract of land. Woodward.
PERPENDI'cularly. adv. [from perpendicular.]
1. In ſuch a manner as to cut another line at right angles.
2. In the direction of a ſtrait line up and down.
Ten maſts attacht make not the altitude reach,
Which thou haſt perpendicularly fall’n. Shakeſp.
Irons refrigerated North and South, not only acquire a di-
rečtive faculty, but if cooled upright and perpendicularly, they
will alſo obtain the ſame. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Shoot up an arrow perpendicularly from the earth, the ar-
row will return to your foot again. More.
All weights naturally move perpendicularly downward. Ray.
PERPENDIcula'RITY.. n.ſ.. [from perpendicular.] The ſtate
of being perpendicular.
The meeting of two lines is the primary eſſential mode or
difference of an angle; the perpendicularity of theſe lines is
the difference of a right angle. Watts's Logick.
PERPE NSION. n.ſ.. [from perpend.] Conſideration. Not in
uſe. -
Unto reaſonable perpenſions it hath no place in ſome
ſciences. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To PERPETRATE. v.a. [perpetro, Lat. perpeirer, Fr.]
1. To commit; to act. Always in an ill ſenſe.
Hear of ſuch a crime
As tragick poets, ſince the birth of time,
Ne'er feign'd a thronging audience to amaze;
But true and perpetrated in our days. * Tate's juvenal.
My tender infants or my careful fire, -
Theſe they returning will to death require,
Will perpetrate on them the firſt deſign,
And take the forfeit of their heads for mine. . . Dryden.
The foreſt, which in after-times,
Fierce Romulus, for perpetrated crimes,
A ſacred refuge made. Dryden.
2. It is uſed by Butler in a neutral ſenſe, in compliance with his
verſe, but not properly. -
Succeſs, the mark no mortal wit,
Or ſureſt hand can always hit;
For whatſoe'er we perpetrate,
We do but row, we're ſteer'd by fate.
Perpetration. n.ſ.. [from perpetrate.]
1. The act of committing a crime. -
A deſperate diſcontented aſſaſſinate would, after the perpe-
tration, have honeſted a meer private revenge. //otton.
A woman, who lends an ear to a ſeducer, may be º
Hudibras.
drawn into the perpetration of the moſt violent acts. Clar
2. A bad action.
The ſtrokes of divine vengeance, or of men's own con-
ſciences, always attend injurious perpetrations. King Charles.
ERPETUAL. adj. [perpetuel, Fr. perpetuus, Latin.]
1. Never ceaſing; eternal with reſpect to futurity.
iſſa.
Mine is a love, which muſt perpetual be,
If you can be ſo juſt as I am true.
- Dryden.
2. Continual ; uninterrupted; perennial. ry
Within thoſe banks rivers now -
Stream, and perpetual draw their humid train. Milton.
By the muſcular motion and
a great part of them is thrown
3. Perpetual ſcrew. A ſcrew wh
wheel, and continues its ačtio
out of the body. Arbuthnot.
ich acts againſt the teeth of a
n without end.
A perpet” ſcrew hath the motion of a wheel and the force
of a ſcrew, being both infinite. h'ilkin's Math. Magick.
Perpetually, adv. [from Perpetual.] Conſtantly; conti-
nually; inceſſantly.
This verſe is every where ſounding the very thing in your
ears; yet the numbers are perpetually varied, ſo that the ſame
ſounds are never repeated twice. Dryden.
In paſſing from them to great diſtances, doth it not grow
denſer and denſer perpetually; and thereby cauſe the ravity
of thoſe great bodies towards one another. Newton's 6pticº.
The bible and common prayer book in the vulgar tongue,
being perpetually read in churches, have proved a kind of
ſtandard for language, eſpecially to the common people. Swift,
To PERPETUATE. v. a. ſpirpetuer, Fr. perpetuº, Lat.]" .
1. To make perpetual; to preſerve from extinction; to eter-
nize.
Medals, that are at preſent only mere curioſities, may be
of uſe in the ordinary commerce of life, and at the ſame
time perpetuate the glories of her majeſty's reign. Addison.
Man cannot deviſe any other method ſo likely to preſerve
and perpetuate the knowledge and belief of a revelation, ſo
neceſſary to mankind. Forbes.
2. To continue without ceſſation or intermiſſion.
What is it, but a continued perpetuated voice from heaven,
reſounding for ever in our ears to give men no reſt in their
ſins, no quiet from Chriſt's importunity, 'till they awake
from their lethargick ſleep and ariſe from ſo mortiferous a ſtate,
and permit him to give them life. Hammond.
Perpetuaº to N. n.ſ. [from perpetuate.] The act of making
perpetual; inceſſant continuance.
Nouriſhing hair upon the moles of the face, is the per-
petuation of a very ancient cuſtom. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Perpetuity. m. ſ. [perpetuité, Fr. perpetuitas, Lat..] .
1. Duration to all futurity.
For men to alter thoſe laws, which God for *; hath
eſtabliſhed, were preſumption moſt intolerable. - ooker.
Yet am I better
Than one that's ſick o' th' gout, ſince he had rather
Groan ſo in perpetuity, than be cur'd - a “ . .
By the ſure phyſician, death. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
- Time as long again
Would be fill’d up with our thanks ; • *
And yet we ſhould, for perpetuity, -- I
Go hence in debt. - Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
Nothing wanted to his noble and heroical intentions, but
only to give perpetuity to that which was in his time ſo hap-
pily eſtabliſhed. Bacon.
2. Exemption from intermiſſion or ceſſation. -
A cycle or period begins again as often as it ends, and ſo
obtains a perpetuity. Holder.
3. Something of which there is no end. -
A meſs of pottage for a birth-right, a preſent repaſt for a
perpetuity. South's Sermons.
The ennobling property of the pleaſure, that accrues to a
man from religion, is, that he that has the property, may be
alſo ſure of the perpetuity. South's Sermons.
The laws of God as well as of the land
Abhor a perpetuity ſhould ſtand;
Eſtates have wings, and hang in fortune's power.
To PERPLEX. v. a. [perplexus, Latin.] -
1. To diſturb with doubtful notions; to entangle; to make
anxious; to teaze with ſuſpenſe or ambiguity; to diſtraćt ;
to embarraſs; to puzzle.
Being greatly perplexed in his mind, he determined to go
into Perſia. - 1 Mac. iii. 31.
Themſelves with doubts they day and night perplex. Denh.
He perplexes the minds of the fair ſex with nice ſpe-
culations of philoſophy, when he ſhould engage their
hearts. - - ryden.
We can diſtinguiſh no general truths, or at leaſt ſhall be
apt to perplex the mind. . Docke.
2. To make intricate; to involve; to complicate.
" - Their way -
Lies through the perplex'd paths of this drear wood. Milt.
We both are involv’d . . * /* --&gt;
In the ſame intricate perplext diſtreſ. Addiſon's Cata,
What was thought obſcure, perplexed, and too hard. for
our weak parts, will lie open to the underſtanding in a
fair view. Locks.
3. To plague; to torment; to vex: A ſenſe not proper.
Chloe's the wonder of her ſex,
'Tis well her heart is tender,
How might ſuch killing eyes perplex,
With virtue to defend her.
19 N
Pope.
Granville.
Ps RPLEX.
perpetual flux of the liquids,'
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E R
P E. R.
Perplex. adj. [perple"; " perplexus, Lat.] Intricate;
- lºsed is the word in uſe. -
difficult. *:::::.. the ſpirits for the motion of the body,
How the ſou - - - -
- al animal exigents, is perplex in the
º to the ſeveral a gents, §, Scºpt.
pºrary. adv. [from perplexed.] Intricately; with in-
volution.
Pejºxedness. n. ſ. [from perplexed.]
1. Embaraſſment ; anxiety.
2. Intricacy; involution ; difficulty. Paul’
Obſcurity and perplexedneſs have been caſt upon St. . s
Epiſtles from without. - - - - Docke,
Perple'xity... n.ſ. [perplexité, Fr.]
1. Anxiety; diſtraćtion of mind. - -
The fear of him ever fince hath put me into ſuch?"Pºiº),
as now you found me. - Sidney, b. ii.
Perpláxity not ſuffering them to be idle, they think and
do, as it were, in a phrenſy. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 3.
The royal .#. ; º: from far,
enſive plight and ſad perplexity,
iº. :::::::::::::: i. this doubtful war,
Came running faſt to greet his victory. Fairy Queen.
nglement; intricacy.
2. H. #. loºk for the ſayinth, for I cannot diſcern any,
unleſs in the perplexity of his own .."; Stillingfleet,
Perror Aºtion. n. ſ. [per and pote, Latin.] The act of
inking largely. -
rº. [perquiſitus, Lat..] Something gained by a
place or office over and above the ſettled wages.
Tell me, perfidious, was it fit
To make my cream a perquiſite,
And ſteal to mend your wages. JWidow and Cat.
To an honeſt mind, the beſt perquiſites of a place are the
advantages it gives a man of doing good. Addison.
To what your lawful perquiſites amount. Swift.
Perquisition. n.ſ. [perquiſitus, Lat.] An accurate enquiry;
a thorough ſearch. Ainſworth.
PE(RRY. m. ſ. ſpoire, Fr. from poire.] Cyder made of pears.
Perry is the next liquor in eſteem aſter cyder, in the or-
dering of which, let not your pears be over ripe before you
grind them; and with ſome ſorts of pears, the mixing of a
few crabs in the grinding is of great advantage, making perry
equal to the redſtreak cyder. AMortimer.
To PERSECUTE. v. a. ſperſecuter, Fr. perſecutus, Lat.]
1. To harraſs with penalties; to perſue with malignity. It is
generally uſed of penalties inflicted for opinions.
I perſecuted this way unto the death. Aéis Xxii. 4.
2. To perſue with repeated acts of * or enmity.
They might have fallen down, being perſecuted of ven-
geance, and ſcattered abroad. //ſdom xi. 20.
Relate,
For what offence the queen of heav'n began
To perſecute ſo brave, ſo juſt a man Dryden.
3. To importune much: as, he perſecutes me with daily ſolici-
tationS.
PERSEcu'tion, n. ſ. [perſecution, Fr. perſecutia, Lat. from
perſecute.]
1. The act or pračtice of perſecuting.
... The Jews raiſed perſecution againſt Paul and Barnabas,
and expelled them. Acis Xiii. 59.
- Heavy perſecution ſhall ariſe
On all, who in the worſhip perſevere
Of ſpirit and truth. Milton.
The deaths and ſufferings of the primitive chriſtians had a
great ſhare in the converſion of thoſe learned Pagans, who
lived in the ages of perſecution. Addiſon.
2. The ſtate of being perſecuted.
Our necks are under perſecution; we labour and have no
reſt. - Lam. v. 5.
Chriſtian fortitude and patience had their opportunity in
times of afflićtion and perſecution. Sprat's Sermons.
PERsecutor. n.ſ. [perſeciteur, Fr. from perſecute.] One who
harraſſes others with continued malignity.
What man can do againſt them, not afraid,
Though to the death; againſt ſuch cruelties
With inward conſolations recompens'd;
And oft ſupported ſo, as ſhall amaze
Their proudeſt perſecutors. Milton's Paradiſe Left.
Henry rejected the pope's ſupremacy, but retained ever
, corruption beſides, and became a cruel perſecutor. Swift.
***VB'RANCE. m. ſ. [perſeverance, Fr. perſeverantia, Lat.
This word was once improperly acceented on the ſecond ſyl-
lable.] Perſiſtence in any deſign or attempt ; ſteadineſs in
º conſtancy in progreſs. It is applied alike to good
... dnd ill.
* - The king becoming graces,
- Bounty, perſev’rance, mercy, lowlineſs ;
... I have no reliſh of them.
- Pºſeverance keeps honour bright:
To have done, is to hang quite out ; faſhion,
Like ruſty mail in monumental mockery. Shakeſpeare.
They hate repentance more than perſeverance in a fault.
Aing Charles.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Wait the ſeaſons of providence with patience and perºe-
rance in the duties of our calling, what difficulties foever we
may encounter. L'E/ºrange.
atience and perſeverance overcome the greateſt diſh-
culties. - Clariſſa.
And perſeverance with his batter'd ſhield. Brooke.
Perseve RANT. adj. [perſeverant, Fr. perſeverans, Lat.) Per-
ſiſting; conſtant. Ainſworth.
To Perseve'R.E. v. n. [perſevero, Lat. perſeverer, Fr. This
word was anciently accented leſs properly on the ſecond
ſyllable.] To perſiſt in an attempt; not to give over; not
to quit the deſign.
But my rude muſick, which was wont to pleaſe
Some dainty ears, cannot with any ſkill
The dreadful tempeſt of her wrath appeaſe,
Nor move the dolphin from her ſtubborn will ;
But in her pride ſhe doth perſevere ſtill. Spenſºr.
Thrice happy, if they know
Their happineſs, and perſºvere upright! Milton.
Thus beginning, thus we perſevere;
Our paſſions yet continue what they were. Dryden.
To perſevere in any evil courſe, makes you unhappy in
this life, and will certainly throw you into everlaſting tor-
ments in the next. Jºake's Preparation for Death.
PER seve'RINGLY. adv. [from perſevere.] With perſeverance.
To PERSIST. v. n. [perſºo, Lat: perſiſter, Fr.j To perſe-
vere; to continue firm ; not to give over.
Nothing can make a man happy, but that which ſhall laſt
as long as he laſts; for an immortal ſoul ſhall perſ? in being
not only when profit, pleaſure and honour, but when time
itſelf ſhall ceaſe. South's Sermons.
If they perſºft in pointing their batteries againſt particular
perſons, no laws of war forbid the making repriſals. Addison.
PERs1'stance. Un. ſ. [from perſºft. Perftence ſeems more
PERs1'stENcy. } proper.]
1. The ſtate of perſiſting; ſteadineſs; conſtancy; perſeverance
in good or bad.
The love of God better can conſiſt with the indeliberate
commiſſions of many fins, than with an allowed perſ/lance in
any one. Government ºf the Tongue.
2. Obſtimacy; obduracy; contumacy.
Thou think'ſt me as far in the devil's book, as thou and
Falſtaff, for obduracy and perſiſtency. Shakeſp.
Persi'stive. adj. [from perft.J Steady; not receding from
a purpoſe; perſevering.
The protractive tryals of great Jove,
To find perſ/live conſtancy in men. Shakespeare .
PERSON. n.ſ. [perſonne, Fr. perſona, Lat.]
1. Individual or particular man or woman.
A perſon is a thinking intelligent being, that has reaſon and
reflection, and can conſider itſelf as itſelf, the ſame thinking
thing, in different times and places. Locke.
2. Man or woman conſidered as oppoſed to things, or diſtinct
from them.
A zeal for perſons is far more eaſy to be perverted, than a
zeal for things. Sprat's Sermons.
To that we owe the ſafety of our perſons and the propriety
of our poſſeſſions. Atterbury's Sermons.
3. Human Being; conſidered with reſpect to mere corporal ex-
iſtence.
'Tis in her heart alone that you muſt reign;
You'll find her perſon difficult to gain. Dryden.
4. Man or woman conſidered as preſent, ačting or ſuffering.
If I am traduc’d by tongues which neither know
My faculties nor perſon;
'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
That virtue muſt go through. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The rebels maintained the fight for a ſmall time, and for
their perſons ſhewed no want of courage. Bacon. -
5. A general looſe term for a human being ; one ; a man.
Be a perſon's attainments ever ſo great, he ſhould always
remember, that he is God's creature. Clarift.
6. One's ſelf; not a repreſentative.
When I purpoſed to make a war by my lieutenant, I mad:
declaration thereof to you by my chancellor; but now that I
mean to make a war upon France in perſon, I will decla.e.t
to you myſelf. Bacon's Henry VII.
The king in perſon viſits all around,
Comforts the fick, congratulates the ſound,
And holds for thrice three days a royal feaſt. Dryden.
7. Exteriour appearance.
For her own perſon, -
It beggar'd all deſcription. Shake?.
8. Man or woman repreſented in a fiétitious dialogue:
All things are lawful unto me, faith the apoſtle, ſpeak-
ing, as it ſeemeth, in the perſon of the chriſtian gentile for
the maintenance of liberty in things indifferent. Hºr.
Theſe tables Cicero pronounced under the perſºn of Craſſus,
were of more uſe and authority than all the books of the
philoſophers. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
9. Character. a"
From his firſt appearance upon the ſtage, in his new fºº
of a ſycophant of jugler, inſtead of his torner “f” of *
Prince,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E R
P. E. R.
---T
prince, he was expoſed to the deriſion of the courtiers and
the common people, who flocked about him, that one might
know where the owl was, by the flight of birds. Bacon.
He hath put on the perſon not of a robber and a murtherer,
but of a traitor to the ſtate. Hayward.
10. Character of office.
I then did uſe the perſon of your father;
The image of his power lay then in me:
‘And in th’ adminiſtration of his law,
While I was buſy for the commonwealth,
Your highneſs pleaſed to forget my place. Shakespeare.
How different is the ſame man from himſelf, as he ſuſtains
the perſon of a magiſtrate and that of a friend. South.
11. [In grammar.] The quality of the noun that modifies the
verb. -
Dorus the more bluſhed at her ſmiling, and ſhe the more
ſmiled at his bluſhing; becauſe he had, with the remem-
brance of that plight he was in, forgot in ſpeaking of himſelf
the third perſon. Sidney.
If ſpeaking of himſelf in the firſt perſºn fingular has ſo va-
rious meanings, his uſe of the firſt perſon plural is with greater
latitude. Docke.
PE'Rsonable, adj, [from perſon.]
1. Handſome ; graceful ; of good appearance.
Were it true that her ſon Ninias had ſuch a ſtature, as that
Simiramis, who was very perſonable, could be taken for him ;
yet it is º that ſhe could have held the empire forty-
two years after by any ſuch ſubtilty. Raleigh.
2. [In Fº One that may maintain any plea in a judicial
Court. Ainſworth.
Perso'NAge. n. ſ. [perſonage, Fr.]
I. A conſiderable perſon ; man or woman of eminence.
It was a new fight fortune had prepared to thoſe woods, to
ſee theſe great perſonages thus run one after the other. Sidney.
It is not eaſy to reſearch the actions of eminent perſonages,
how much they have blemiſhed by the envy of others, and
what was corrupted by their own felicity. /Wotton,
2. Exteriour appearance; air; ſtature.
- She hath made compare
Between our ſtatures, ſhe hath urg’d his height;
And with her perſonage, her tall perſonage,
She hath prevail'd with him. Shakeſpeare.
The lord Sudley was fierce in courage, courtly in faſhion,
in perſºnage ſtately, in voice magnificent, but ſomewhat empty
of matter. Hayward.
3. Character aſſumed.
The great diverſion is maſking: the Venetians, naturally
#. love to give into the follies of ſuch ſeaſons, when
iſguiſed in a ài. tºw. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
4. Character repreſented.
Some perſons muſt be found out, already known by hiſto-
ry, whom we may make the actors and perſonages of this
fable. Broome's Wiew of Epic Poems.
Pe'Rsonal, adj. [perſonel, Fr. perſonalis, Lat.]
1. Belonging to men or women, not to things; not real.
Every man ſo termed by way of perſonal difference only.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 13.
2. Afte&amp;ting individuals or particular people; peculiar ; proper
to him or her; relating to one's private ačtions or character.
For my part,
I know no perſonal cauſe to ſpurn at him;
But for the general. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
It could not mean, that Cain as elder had a natural do-
minion over Abel, for the words are conditional; if thou
doeſt well, and ſo perſonal to Cain. Locke.
Publick reproofs of fin are general, though by this they
loſe a great deal of their effect; but in private converſations
the application may be more perſonal, and the proofs when ſo
directed come home. Rogers,
3. Preſent; not acting by repreſentative.
The favºrites that the abſent king
In deputation left,
When he was perſonal in the Iriſh war. Shakeſp.
4. Exteriour; corporal. -
This hero.ck conſtancy determined him to deſire in mar-
riage a princeſs, whoſe perſºnal charms were now become
the leaſt part of her character. Addiſon.
5. [In law.] Something moveable; ſomething appendant to
the perſon, as money; not real, as land. -
This fin of kind not perſonal
But real and hereditary was. Davies.
6. [In grammar.] A perſonal verb is that which has all the
regular modification of the three perſons; oppoſed to imper-
ſonal that has only the third.
* Rsonality. n. ſ. [from perſonal.] The exiſtence or indi-
viduality of any one. -
Perſon belongs only to intelligent agents, capable of a law,
and happineſs and miſery: this perſonality extends itſelf be-
yond preſent exiſtence to what is paſt, only by conſciouſneſs,
whereby it imputes to itſelf paſt actions, juſt upon the ſame
ground that it does the preſent. Locke,
J.
Personally, adv. [from perſºnal.]
1. In perſon; in preſence; not by repreſentative.
APProbation not only they give, who perſonally declare their
aſſent by voice, fign or act, but alſo when others do it in
their names, Hooker, b. i. ſ. 10.
I could not perſonally deliver to her
What you commanded me, but by her woman
I ſent your meſſage. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
There are many reaſons, why matters of ſuch a wonder-
ful nature ſhould not be taken notice of by thoſe Pagan wri-
ters, who lived before our Saviour's diſciples had perſonally
appeared among them. adiſon.
2. With reſpect to an individual; particularly.
She bore a mortal hatred to the houſe of Lancaſter, and
-tºº. to the king. Bacon's Henry VII.
ith regard to numerical exiſtence.
The converted man is perſºnally the ſame he was before,
and is neither born nor created a-new in a proper literal
ſenſe. Rogers's Sermons.
To Pe'Rsonate. v. a, [from perſona, Latin.]
1. To repreſent by a fićtitious or aſſumed charaćter, ſo as to
paſs for the perſon repreſented,
This lad was not to perſonate one, that had been long be-
fore taken out of his cradle, but a youth that had been
brought up in a court, where infinite eyes had been upon
him. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. To repreſent by ačtion or appearance; to act.
Herſelf a while ſhe lays aſide, and makes
Ready to perſonate a mortal part. Craſhaw.
3. To pretend hypocritically, with the reciprocal pronoun.
It has been the conſtant pračtice of the Jeſuits to ſend over
cmiſſaries, with inſtrućtions to perſonate themſelves members
of the ſeveral ſcºts amongſt us. a Swift.
4. To counterfeit ; to feign. Little in uſe.
Piety is oppoſed to that perſonated devotion, under which
any kind of impiety is diſguiſed. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Thus have I played with the dogmatiſt in a perſonated
ſcepticiſm. Glanvill's Scepſ.
3.
5. To reſemble.
The lofty cedar perſonates thee. Shakeſp. Cymbeline,
6. To make a repreſentative of, as in pićture. Out of uſe.
Whoſe eyes are on this ſovereign lady fixt,
One do I perſonate of Timon's frame,
Whom fortune with her iv'ry hand wafts to her. Shakespeare
7. To deſcribe. Out of uſe.
I am thinking, what I ſhall ſay; it muſt be a perſonating
of himſelf; a ſatyr againſt the ſoftneſs of proſperity. Shakeſp.
I will drop in his way ſome obſcure epiſtles -
Of love, wherein, by the colour of his beard, the
Shape of his leg, the manner of his gait, the . .
Expreſſure of his eye, forehead and complexion,
He ſhall find himſelf moſt feelingly perſonated. Shakeſpeare.
PersonA'tion. n.ſ.. [from perſonate.] Counterfeiting of an-
other perſon.
This being one of the ſtrangeſt examples of a perſonation
that ever was, it deſerveth to be diſcovered and related at
the full. Bacon's Henry VII.
PERsonific A'tion. n.ſ.. [from perſoniff.] Proſopopoeia; the
change of things to perſons: as,
Confuſion heard his voice. Milton.
To PE'Rson ºf Y. v. a. [from perſon.] To change from a thing
to a perſon. r
PE’Rspective. m. ſ. [perſpe?if, Fr. perſpicio, Lat.]
1. A glaſs through which things are viewed. -
If it tend to danger, they turn about the perſpeciive, and
fhew it ſo little, that he can ſcarce diſcern it. Denham.
It may import us in this calm, to hearken to the ſtorms
raiſing abroad; and by the beſt perſpectives, to diſcover from
what coaſt they break, . . . . . . . ' ' Temple,
You hold the glaſs, but turn the perſpective, -
And farther off the leſſen'd obječt drive. - Drydºn.
Faith for reaſon's glimmering light ſhall give , , , ,
Her immortal perſpeñive. " - Prior.
2. The ſcience by which things are ranged in pićture, according
to their appearance in their real ſituation. .
Medals have repreſented their buildings according to the
rules of perſpečfive. Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
3. View ; viſto. * .
Lofty trees, with ſacred ſhades, -
And perſpectives of pleaſant glades,
Where nymphs of brighteſt form appear. . . . Prydºn.
PE’Rspectivá. Adj. Relating to the ſcience of viſion; optick #
optical. . . . ‘. . . . . . . . .
***, *, *** ****
- i. of all lights and radiations; and out of things unco,
* 'loured and tranſparent, we can repreſent unto you all ſeveral
colours. - - . . . Bacºn,
PERSPICACIOUS, adj. [perſpirax, Lat.] Quickfighted ;
ſharp of fight.
It is as nice and tender in feeling, as it can be perſ?icacious
and quick in ſeeing. South's Sermons,
PERSP1c Acious N ESS,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E R
P. E. R.
ſ?icacious. uickneſs of
Perspicaciousness. n.ſ. [from * J Qu
ſight. - - - - - ſight.
a rſpiracité, Fr.] Quickneſs of fig
Prº % §: of 3. earth cannot be , ex-
cluded the ſecrecy of the mountains; nor can there any º
eſcape the perſpiracity of thoſe eyes, which were before light,
... in whéſe opticks there is no ºpacity. f :
Perspicience. "...ſ. [perſpiciens, Lat.] The aćt o º;
rºi. n.ſ. [perſpicillum, Lat.] A glaſs through which
things are viewed; an optick glaſs.
Let truth be
Ne'er ſo far diſtant, yet chronology,
Sharp-fighted as the eagle's eye, that can
Out'ſtare the broad-beam'd day's meridian,
Will have a perſpiciº to find her out,
And through the night of error and dark doubt,
Diſcern the dawn of truth's eternal ray,
As when the roſy morn buds into day: Craſhaw.
The perſpicil, as well as the needle, hath enlarged the ha-
bitable world. Glanvill's Scepſ.
Perspicu'ity. n.ſ. [perſpicuité, Fr. from perſ?iº.]
1. Clearneſs to the mindſ; eaſineſs to be underſtood ; freedom
from obſcurity or ambiguity.
The verſes containing piecepts, have not ſo much need of
ornament as of tº." Dryden.
Perſpicuity conſiſts in the uſing of proper terms for the
thoughts, which a man would have paſs from his own mind
into that of another's. Locke's Thoughts on Reading.
2. Tranſparency; tranſlucency; diaphantity. .
As for diaphaneity and perſpicuity it enjoyeth that moſt
eminently, as having its earthy and ſalinous parts ſo exactly
reſolved, that its body is left imporous. Brown.
PERSPICUOUS. adj. º Latin.] -
1. Tranſparent; clear; ſuch as may be ſeen through 5 diapha-
nous; tranſlucent; not opake.
As contrary cauſes produce the like effects, ſo even the
ſame proceed from black and white; for the clear and per-
ſpicuous body effeáeth white, and that white a black. Peacham.
2. Clear to the underſtanding; not obſcure ; not ambiguous.
• The purpoſe is perſpicuous even as ſubſtance,
Whoſe groſſneſs little characters ſum up. Shakeſp.
All this is ſo perſpicuous, ſo undeniable, that I need not
be over induſtrious in the proof of it. Sprat's Sermons.
PERspicuously. adv. [from perſpicuous.] Clearly ; not ob-
ſcurely. - º
#. caſe is no ſooner made than reſolved; if it be made
not enwrapped, but plainly and perſpicuouſly. Bacon.
Perspicuous Ness. n.ſ.. [from perſpicuous...] Clearneſs; free-
dom from obſcurity.
PERSPI'RABLE. adj. [from perſpire.]
1. Such as may be emitted by the cuticular pores.
That this attraction is performed by effiuviums, is plain
and granted by moſt ; for electricks will not commonly at-
tračt, unleſs they attract or become perſpirable. Brown.
In an animal under a courſe of hard labour, aliment too
vaporous or perſpirable will ſubjećt it to too ſtrong a perſpira-
‘ tion, debility and ſudden death. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Perſpiring; emitting perſpiration. Not proper. -
Hair cometh not upon the palms of the hands or ſoles of
the feet, which are parts more perſpirable: and children are
not hairy, for that their ſkins are moſt perſpirable. Bacon.
PERSPIRA'tion. n ſ. [from perſpire.J Excretion by the cuti-
cular pores.
Inſenſible perſpiration is the laſt and moſt perfeół action of
animal digeſtion. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Perspi'Rative. adj. [from perſpire.] Performing the act of
perſpiration. -
To PERSPIRE. v. n. [perſpiro, Lat.J.
1. To perform excretion by the cuticular pores
2. To be excreted by the }.
Water, milk, whey taken without much exerciſe, ſo as to
make them perſpire, relax the belly. Arbuthnot.
To PERSTRI'NGE. v. a. [perſhingo, Lat.] To graze upon;
to glance upon. - - Dić?.
rºaº. adj. [from perſuade.] Such as may be per-
Lladed. . . . . . -
To PERSUADE. v. a. ſperſuadeo, Lat. perſuader, Fr.]
1. To bring to any particular opinion.
Let every man be fully perſuaded in his own mind.
- . . . . Romans.
- We are perſuaded better things of you, and things that ac-
company ſalvation.” “º . . . . Hebrews vi. 9
-, }. ºver them that are perſuaded to ſalvation. 2 Eſdras vii.
... ." § man be ever ſo welſ perſuaded of the advantages of
! ..". till he hungers and thirſts after righteouſneſs, his
Jº not be determined to any action in purſuit of this
. . . “great good. - - Lock
Men ſhould ſeriouſly perſuade themſel h 0t/ºe,
here no abiding place, i. ſelves, that they have
heavenly i. e, but are ºnly, in their paſſage to the
. . . . * * ----- 4. %ake's Preparation fºr Death.
2. To influence by argument or expoſtulation. Perſuaſiºn
ſeems rather applicable to the paſſions, and argument to the
reaſon ; but this is not always obſerved.
Philoclea's beauty not only perſuaded, but ſo perſuaded as
all hearts muſt yield : Pamela's beauty uſed violence, and
ſuch as no heart could reſiſt. Sidney.
They that were with Simon, being led with covetouſneſs,
were perſuaded for money. 2 Mac. x. 20.
To fit croſs-leg'd, or with our fingers pećtinated, is ac-
counted bad, and friends will perſuade us from it. Brown.
I ſhould be glad, if I could perſuade him to write ſuch an-
other critick on any thing of mine ; for when he condemns
any of my poems, he makes the world have a better opinion
of them. Dryden.
. To inculcate by argument or expoſtulation.
To children, afraid of vain images, we perſuade confidence
by making them handle and look nearer ſuch things. Taylor.
4. To treat by perſuaſion. A mode of ſpeech not in uſe.
Twenty merchants have all perſuaded with him;
But none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeiture. Shakeſpeare.
Persuader. n.ſ. (from perſuade.] One who influences by
perſuaſion; an importunate adviſer.
The earl, ſpeaking in that imperious language wherein the
king had written, did not irritate the people, but make them
conceive by the haughtineſs of delivery of the king's errand,
that himſelf was the author or principal perſuader of that
counſel. Bacon's Henry VII.
He ſoon is mov’d
By ſuch perſuaders as are held upright. Daniel's Civil War.
Hunger and thirſt at once,
Pow'rful perſuaders / quicken'd at the ſcent
Of that alluring fruit, urg'd me ſo keen. Milton.
PERSUASIBLE. adj. [perſuaſibilis, Lat. perſuaſible, Fr. from
*:::::: Latin.] To be influenced by perſuaſion.
t makes us apprehend our own intereſt in that obedience,
makes us tractable and perſuaſible, contrary to that brutiſh
ſtubborneſs of the horſe and mule, which the Pſalmiſt re-
proaches. Government of the Tongue.
PERsua'sible Ness. m. ſ. [from perſuaſible.] The quality of
being flexible by perſuaſion.
PERsu A'sion. n. ſ. [perſuaſion, Fr. from perſuaſus, Lat.]
1. The aët of perſuading; the act of influencing by expoſtu-
lation; the act of gaining or attempting the paſſions.
If't prove thy fortune, Polydore, to conquer,
For thou haſt all the arts of fine perſuaſion,
Truſt me, and let me know thy love's ſucceſs.
2. The ſtate of being perſuaded ; opinion.
The moſt certain token of evident goodneſs is, if the ge-
neral perſuaſion of all men does ſo account it. Hooker,
You are a great deal abus'd in too bold a perſuaſion.
Shakeſpeare.
When we have no other certainty of being in the right,
but our own perſuaſions that we are ſo; this may often be but
making one error the gage for another. Gov. of the Tongue,
The obedicnt and the men of practice ſhall ride upon thoſe
clouds, and triumph over their preſent imperfections; till
- #. paſs into knowledge, and knowledge advance into
aſſurance, and all come at length to be compleated in the
beatifick viſion. South's Sermons.
PERsu Aſsive. adj. [ferſuaſiſ, Fr. from perſuade.] Having the
power of perſuading; having influence on the paſſions,
In prayer, we do not ſo much reſpect what precepts art de-
livereth, touching the method of perſuaſive utterance in the
preſence of great men, as what doth moſt avail to our own
edification in piety and godly zeal. Płocker.
Let Martius reſume his farther diſcourſe, as well for the
perſuaſive as for the conſult, touching the means that may
conduce unto the enterprize. Bacon,
Notwithſtanding the weight and fitneſs of the arguments
to perſuade, and the light of man's intelle&amp;t to meet this per-
ſud/ive evidence with a ſuitable aſſent, no aſſent, followed,
not were men thereby actually perſuaded. Sºut” ”.
Persuasively. adv. [from perſuaſive..] In ſuch a manner as
to perſuade.
Otway.
The ſerpent with me
Perſuaſively hath ſo prevail'd, that I
Have alſo taſted.
Many who live u
Milton.
pon their eſtates cannot ſo much as tell a
leſs ſpeak clearly and perſuaſively in any
...” eſs 1p Lº on Education.
Persºxsiveness. n.ſ. [from perſuaſive..] Influence on the
ſlions. -
pa Aſſºinion of the ſucceſsfulneſs of the work being as ne-
ceſſary to found a purpoſe of undertaking it, as either the all-
thority of commands, or the perſuaſiveneſs of promiſes, or
pungency of menaces can be. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Prºsogy. adj. [perſuaſarius, Lat. from perſuade.] Ha-
ving the power to perſuade. -
Neither is this perſuaſary. Brown.
PERT.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E R
P. E. R.
i
m
PERT adj. [pert, Welſh; pert, Dutch ; appert, French.]
1. Lively ; briſk; ſmart.
Åwake the pert and nimble ſpirit of mirth;
Turn melancholy forth to funerals. Shakeſp.
- On the tawny ſands and ſhelves,
Trip the pert fairies and the dapper elves. Milton.
2. Saucy; petulant; with bold and garrulous loquacity.
All ſervants might challenge the ſame liberty, and grow
pert upon their maſters; and when this ſaucineſs became uni-
verſal, what leſs miſchief could be expected than an old Scy-
thian rebellion : Collier on Pride.
A lady bids me in a very pert manner mind my own affairs,
and not pretend to meddle with their linnen. Addiſon.
Vaneſſa
Scarce liſt'ned to their idle chat,
Further than ſometimes by a frown,
When they grew pert, to pull them down. Swift.
To PERTAIN. v. n. [pertinez, Lat.] To belong; to relate.
As men hate thoſe that affect that honour by ambition,
which pertaineth not to them, ſo are they much more odious,
who through fear betray the glory which they have.
Hayward.
A cheveron or rafter of an houſe, a very honourable bear-
ing, is never ſeen in the coat of a king, becauſe it pertaineth
to a mechanical profeſſion. Peacham.
Perter ebRATION. m. ſ. [per and terebratio, Lat.] The adt
of boring through. Ainſworth.
PERTINA'cious. adj. [from pertinax.]
1. Obſtinate; ſtubborn; perverſely reſolute.
One of the diſſenters appeared to Dr. Sanderſon to be ſo
bold, ſo troubleſome and illogical in the diſpute, as forced
him to ſay, that he had never met with a man of more per-
inacious confidence and leſs abilities. Walton.
2. Reſolute ; conſtant; ſteady.
Diligence is a ſteady, conſtant and pertinacious ſtudy, that
naturally leads the ſoul into the knowledge of that, which at
firſt ſeemed locked up from it. South's Sermons.
PERTINA'ciously. adv. [from pertinacious.] Oſtinately ;
ſtubbornly.
They deny that freedom to me, which they pertinaciouſly
challenge to themſelves. King Charles.
Metals pertinaciouſly reſiſt all tranſmutation; and though
one would think they were turned into a different ſubſtance,
yet they do but as it were lurk under a vizard. Ray.
Others have ſought to eaſe themſelves of all the evil of
afflićtion by diſputing ſubtilly againſt it, and pertinaciouſly
maintaining, that afflićtions are no real evils, but only in
imagination. Tillotſon's Sermons.
PERTINA'cITY. n. ſ. [pertinacia, Lat. from pertina-
PERTINA'cious Ness. cious.]
1. Obſtinacy; ſtubbornneſs.
In this reply, was included a very groſs miſtake, and if
with pertinacity maintained, a capital errour. Brown.
2. Reſolution; conſtancy.
PERTINACY. n.ſ.. [from pertinax.]
1. Obſtinacy; ſtubbornneſs; perſiſtency.
Their pertinacy is ſuch, that when you drive them out of
one form, they aſſume another. Duppa.
It holds forth the pertinacy of ill fortune, in purſuing people
into their graves. L'Eſtrange.
2. Reſolution ; ſteadineſs; conſtancy.
St. Gorgonia prayed with paſſion and pertinacy, till ſhe
obtained relief. Taylor.
They with a pertinacy unmatch'd,
For new recruits of danger watch'd. - Hudibrar.
Pe'RTINENCE. Un. ſ. [from pertineo, Lat.]. Juſtneſs of rela-
PE’RTINENcy. } tion to the matter in hand; propriety to the
purpoſe; appoſiteneſs.
I have ſhewn the fitneſs and pertinency of the apoſtle's diſ-
courſe to the perſons he addreſſed to, whereby it appeareth
that he was no babbler, and did not talk at random. Bentley.
PERTINENT. adj. [pertinens, Lat. pertinent, Fr.]
1. Related to the matter in hand; juſt to the purpoſe; not uſe-
leſs to the end propoſed; appoſite; not foreign from the thing
intended.
My caution was more pertinent -
Than the rebuke you give it. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I ſet down, out of experience in buſineſs, and converſation
in books, what I thought pertinent to this buſineſs. Bacon.
Here I ſhall ſeem a little to digreſs, but you will % and
by find it pertinent. - - acow.
If he could find pertinent treatiſes of it in books, that would
reach all the particulars of a man's behaviour; his own ill-
faſhioned example would ſpoil all. Locke.
2. Relating; regarding ; concerning. In this ſenſe the word
now uſed is pertaining.
Men ſhall have juſt cauſe, when any thing pertinent unto
faith and religion is doubted of, the more willingly to incline
their minds towards that which the ſentence of ſo grave, wiſe
and learned in that faculty ſhall judge moſt ſound. Hooker.
Pºrtinently, adv. [from pertinent.] Appoſitely; to the
Purpoſe.
Be, modeſt and reſerved in the preſence of thy betters,
ſpeaking little, anſwering pertinently, not interpoſing without
leave or reaſon. Taylor's Rule of Liviug Holy.
PE *ºneNTNess, n. f. [from pertinent.]_Appoſiteneſs. Diä.
Perti'NGENT. adj. [pertingeni, Lat.] Reaching to; touch-
ing. - Dić7.
PERTEY. adv. [from pert.] -
1. Briſkly; ſmartly. -
I find no other difference betwixt the common town-wits
and the downright country fools, than that the fift al. ertly in
the wrºng, with a little more gaiety; and the laſt neith'ſ in
the º nor the wrong. Pope,
2. Saucily; petulantly.
Yonder walls, that pertly front your town,
Yond towers, whoſe wanton tops do buſs the clouds,
Muſt kiſs their own feet. Shakeſpeare.
When you pertly raiſe your ſnout,
Fleer, and gibe, and laugh, and flout;
This, among Hibernian aſſes, -
For ſheer wit, and humour paſſes. Swift.
Pe'RTNess. n.ſ.. [from pert.]
I. Briſk folly; ſaucineſs; petulance.
Dulneſs delighted ey'd the lively dunce,
Remembring #. herſelf was pertneſ; once. Dunciad.
2. .." livelineſs; ſpritelineſs without force, dignity or ſoli-
ity. - - -
There is in Shaftſbury's works a lively perineſ, and a pa-
rade of literature ; but it is hard that we ſhould be bound to
admire the reveries. Watts's Improvement of the wind.
Pertra'NSIF Nt. adj. [pertranſiens, Lat.] Paſſing over. Dić.
ſº tº gº, Iaº Pain;
To PERTU'RBATE. ‘U. 4. [perturbo, Latin.] -
1. To diſquiet; to diſturb; to deprive of tranquility.
Reſt, reſt, perturbed ſpirit. Shakeſp.
His waſting fleſh with anguiſh burns,
And his perturbed ſoul within him mourns. Sandys.
2. To diſorder; to confuſe; to put out of regularity.
They are content to ſuffer the penalties annexed, rather
than perturb the publick peace. King Charles.
The inſervient and brutal faculties controul'd the ſugge-
ſtions of truth ; pleaſure and profit overſwaying the inſtruc-
tions of honeſty, and ſenſuality perturbing the reaſonable
commands of virtue. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
The acceſſion or ſeceſſion of bodies from the earth's ſur-
face perturb not the equilibration of either hemiſphere. Brown.
PERTURBA’tion, n.ſ.. [perturbatio, Lat. perturbation, Fr.]
1. Diſquiet of mind; deprivation of tranquillity.
Love was not in their looks, either to God,
Nor to each other; but apparent guilt,
And ſhame, and perturbation, and deſpair. Milton.
The ſoul as it is more immediately and ſtrongly affected by
this part, ſo doth it manifeſt all its paſſions and perturbations
by it. Ray on the Creation.
2. Kieſheſ, of paſſions.
Natures, that have much heat, and great and violent de-
ſires and perturbations, are not ripe for action, till they have
paſſed the meridian of their years. Bacon's Eſſays.
3. Diſturbance; diſorder; confuſion ; commotion. -
. Although the long diſſentions of the two houſes had had
lucid intervals, yet they did ever hang over the kingdom, ready
to break forth into new perturbations and calamities. Bacon.
4. Cauſe of diſquiet.
O poliſh'd perturbation / golden care 1
That keep'ſt the ports of ſlumber open wide
To many a watchful night: ſleep with it now,
Yet not ſo ſound, and half ſo deeply ſweet,
As he, whoſe brow with homely biggen bound,
Sleeps out the watch of night. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
5. Commotion of paſſions. **-
Reſtore yourſelves unto your temper, fathers;
And, without perturbation, hear me ſpeak. Ben. Johnſºn.
PERTURBA'Tour. n.ſ. [perturbator, Lat. perturbvteur, Fr.]
Raiſer of commotions." -
PERTUsed. adj. [pertuſus, Lat.] Bored; punched ; pierced
with holes. -- - - - - - - Dić7.
PERTU'sion. n.ſ.. [from pertuſus, Latin.]
I. The act of piercing or punching. -
The manner of opening a vein in Hippocrates's time, was
by ſtabbing or pertuſion, as it is performed in horſes. Arbuth.
2. Hole made by punching or piercing. -
An empty pot without earth in it, may be put over * fruit
the better, if ſome few pertuſions be made in the Pot. Bacon.
To PERVA/DE. v. a. [pervado, Lat.]
1. To paſs through an aperture; to permeate.
The labour’d chyle pervades the pores
In all the arterial perforated ſhores. Blackmore.
Paper dipped in water or oil, the oculus mundi ſtone
ſteeped in water, linen-cloth oiled Or varniſhed, and many
other ſubſtances ſoaked in ſuch liquors as will intimately per-
Jade their little pores, become by that means more tranſpa-
rent than otherwiſe. -T = Newton's opticki.
19 O 2. To
—--&gt; - 1
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E. R.
P E S
aſ through the whole extenſion. -
2. T. . bereaved of motion, cannot of itſelf, ac-
quire it again, nor till it be ſtruck by ſome other body from
without, or be intrinſically moved by an immaterial ſelf-aētive
ſubſtance, that can penetrate and pervade it. Bentley.
What but God
Pervades, adjuſts and agitates the whole. Thomſon.
PERVA'sion. n.f. [from pervade.] The act of pervading ºf
affing through.
P If É. . made rather by the ingreſs and tranſcurſions of
the atoms of fire, than by the bare propagation of that mo-
tion, with which fire beats upon the outſide of the veſº, hº
contain the matter to be melted; both thoſe kinds of flui"),
aſcribed to ſaltpetre, will appear to be cauſed by the pervaſion
of a foreign body. Boyle.
PERVERSE. adj. [pervers, Fr. perverſus, Lat.]
1. Diſtorted from the right.
And nature breeds -
Milton.
Perverſe, all monſtrous, all prodigious thing;
2. Obſtinate in the wrong; ſtubborn ; untractable.
Then for the teſtimony of truth haſt born
Univerſal reproach ; far worſe to bear
Than violence; for this : º i. h ld
To ſtand approv’d in ſight of God, though Wºrld's
Judg'd jº. § - Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
To ſo perverſ, a ſex all grace is vain,
It gives them courage to offend again.
3. Petulant; vexatious.
Oh gentle Romeo,
If thou doſt love, pronounce it faithfully,
Or if you think I am too quickly won,
I'll frown and be perverſe, and ſay thee nay,
So thou wilt wooe: but elſe not for the world. Shaky?.
Perve'Rsely, adv. [from perverſe.] With intent to vex;
peeviſhly; vexatiouſly; ſpitefully; croſsly ; with petty ma-
lignity.
*. perverſely take up picques and diſpleaſures at others,
and then every opinion of the diſliked perſon muſt partake of
his fate. Decay of Piety.
Men that do not perverſely uſe their words, or on purpoſe
ſet themſelves to cavil, ſeldom miſtake the ſignification of
Dryden.
the names of ſimple ideas. Locke.
A patriot is a dangerous poſt,
When wanted by his country moſt,
Perverſely comes in evil times,
Where virtues are imputed crimes. Swift.
PERVERSE Ness. n.ſ. [from perverſe.]
1. Petulance; peeviſhneſs; ſpiteful croſſneſs.
A wholeſome tongue is a tree of life; perverſeneſ, therein
is a breach in the ſpirit. Proverbs xv. 4.
Virtue hath ſome perverſeneſs; for ſhe will
Neither believe her good, nor others ill.
He whom he wiſhes moſt, ſhall ſeldom gain
Through her perverſeneſs; but ſhall ſee her gain'd
By a far worſe. . Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
The perverſeneſ of my fate is ſuch,
That he's not mine, becauſe he's mine too much. Dryden.
When a friend in kindneſs tries
To ſhew you where your error lies,
Convićtion does but more incenſe;
Perverſeneſs is your whole defence, Swift.
2. Perverſion; corruption. Not in uſe.
Neither can this be meant of evil governours or tyrants;
for they are often eſtabliſhed as lawful potentates; but of
ſome perverſºnſ; and defection in the very nation itſelf.
- Bacon.
PERVE'Rsion. n.ſ. [perverſion, Fr. from perverſe.] The aët
of perverting; change to ſomething worſe.
Women to govern men, ſlaves freemen, are much in the
ſame degree; all being total violations and perverſions of the
laws of nature and nations. Bacon.
... He ſuppoſes that whole reverend body are ſo far from diſ-
liking popery, that the hopes of enjoying the abby lands
P would be an effectual incitement to their pºverſion. Swift.
ERVERSITY. m. ſ. [perverſité, Fr. - e-
neſs; croſſneſs. f [perverſité, Fr. from perverſe.J Perverſe
What ſtrange perverſity is this of man
When 'twas a crime to taſte th’ inlightning tree,
He could not then his hand refrain. o
To PERVERT. v. a. ſperverto, Lat. pervertir, Fr.]
1. To diſtort from the true end of purpoſe. - -
Inſtead of good they may work ill, and pervert juſtice to
extreme injuſtice. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
If * ſeeſ the oppreſſion of the poor, and viºlent per-
”g of juſtice in a province, marvel not. Eccluſ. v. 8.
Out of If then his providence
Our º: evil ſeek to bring forth good,
And º be to pervert that end,
- #. º 9 good ſtill to find means of evil. Milton.
reted * Perverted my meaning by his gloſſes; and inter-
ſº my word, into blaſphemy, of which they were not
guilty. Pryden.
Donne.
Norris,
4.
Porphyry has wrote a volume to explain this cave of the
nymphs with more piety than judgment; and another perſon
has perverted it into obſcenity; and both allegorically. Broome.
2. To corrupt; to turn from the right ; oppoſed to convert,
which is to turn from the wrong to the right.
The heinous and deſpiteful act
Of Satan, done in Paradiſe, and how
He in the ſerpent had perverted Eve,
Her huſband ſhe, to taſte the fatal fruit,
Was known in heav'n. Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft.
PER ve'RTER. m. ſ. [from pervert.]
1. One that changes anything from good to bad; a corrupter.
Where a child finds his own parents his perverters, he can-
not be ſo properly born, as damned into the world. South.
2. One who diſtorts any thing from the right purpoſe.
He that reads a prohibition in a divine law, had need be
well ſatisfied about the ſenſe he gives it, left he incur the
wrath of God, and be found a per verter of his law. Stillingſ.
Perve'RT1ble. adj. [from pervert.] That may be eaſil
erverted. Jº.
PERVICACIOUS. adj. [pervicax, Lat.J Spitefully obſtinate;
peeviſhly contumacious.
May private devotions be efficacious upon the mind of one
of the moſt pervicacious young creatures' Clariſſa.
PER vica'ciously. adv. [from pervicacious.] With ſpiteful
obſtinacy.
PER v IcA'cious Ness.
PER vicA'city.
PEP vicAcy.
PERVICU.S. adj. [pervius, Latin.]
1. Admitting paſſage; capable of being permeated.
The Egyptians uſed to ſay, that unknown darkneſs is the
firſt principle of the world; by darkneſs they mean God,
whoſe ſecrets are pervious to no eye. Taylor.
Leda's twins
Conſpicuous both, and both in act to throw
Their trembling lances brandiſh'd at the foe,
Nor had they miſs'd ; but he to thickets fled,
Conceal’d from aiming ſpears, not pervious to the ſteed.
Dryden.
Thoſe lodged in other earth, more lax and pervious, de-
cayed in tract of time, and rotted at length. Woodward.
2. Pervading; perm eating. This ſenſe is not proper.
What is this little, agile, pervious fire,
This flutt'ring motion which we call the mind? Prior.
PE'Rvious N Ess. n.ſ.. [from pervious.] Quality of admitting
a paſſage.
The perviouſneſ of our receiver to a body much more
ſubtile than air, proceeded partly from the looſer texture of
that glaſs the receiver was made of, and partly from the enor-
mous heat, which opened the pores of the glaſs. Boyle.
There will be found another difference beſides that of per-
viouſneſs. Holder's Elements of Speech.
PERU’k E. m. ſ. ſperuque, Fr.] A cap of falſe hair; a periwig
I put him on a linen cap, and his peruke over that.
Wiſeman.
To PERU'KE. v. a. [from the noun..] To dreſs in adſcititious
hair.
PERU'KEMAKER. m. ſ. [peruše and maker.] A maker of pe-
rukes; a wigmaker.
PERU's Al. [from peruſe.] The act of reading.
As pieces of miniature muſt be allowed a cloſer inſpection,
ſo this treatiſe requires application in the peruſal. Woodward.
If upon a new peruſal you think it is written in the yery
ſpirit of the ancients, it deſerves your care, and is capable of
being improved. Atterbury,
To PERU-SE. v. a. [per and uſe.]
1. To read. -
Peruſ; this writing here, and thou ſhalt know
The treaſon. Shakeſp. Richard II.
The petitions being thus prepared, do you *} ſet
apart an hour in a day to peruſe thoſe petitions. altºn,
Carefully obſerve, whether he taſtes the diſtinguiſhing per-
fe&amp;tions or the ſpecifick qualities of the author whom he
pe' uſes. Addiſon's Speciatºr, N° 409.
2. To obſerve; to examine, -
I hear the enemy;
Out ſome light horſemen, and periſe their wings. Shakespeare .
I've perus'd her well;
Beauty and honour in her are ſo mingled,
That they have caught the king.
Myſelf I then perus'd, and limb by limb -
Survey’d. AMilton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
Peru's ER. n.f. [from peruſ...] A reader; examiner.
The difficulties and heſitations of every one will be ac-
cording to the capacity of each peruſer, and as his penetra-
tion into nature is greater or leſs. //codward.
Pesa D. F. n.ſ.
Peſade is a motion a horſe makes in raiſing or lifting up his
forequarters, keeping his hind legs upon the ground without
ſtirring. Farrier's Diº,
n.ſ. [pervicacia, Lat. from pervicacious.]
Spiteful obſtinacy.
Shakespeare eare.
PEssak Y.
#:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P E S
|
it;
|
i
:
Pe'ssARY. n.f ſpeſſarie, Fr.] Is an oblong form of medicine,
made to thruſt up into the uterus upon ſome extraordinary
occaſions.
Of cantharides he preſcribes five in a peſſary, cutting off
their heads and feet, mixt with myrrh. Arbuthnot.
PEST. n.ſ. ſpefte, Fr. peſtis, Lat.j
1. Plague; peſtilence.
Let fierce Achilles
The god propitiate, and the peſº aſſuage. Pope.
2. Any thing miſchievous or deſtrućtive.
The peſt a virgin's face and boſom bears,
High on her crown a riſing ſnake appears, }
Guards her black front, and hiſſes in her hairs. Pope.
At her words the helliſh peſt
Forbore. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Of all virtues juſtice is the beſt;
Valour without it is a common peſt.
To PE'ster. v. a. ſpe/ter, Fr.]
1. To diſturb; to perplex; to haraſs; to turmoil.
Who then ſhall blame
His pºſter'd ſenſes to recoil and ſtart,
When all that is within him does condemn
Itſelf for being there. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He hath not fail'd to peſter us with meſſage,
Importing the ſurrender of thoſe lands. Shakeſpeare.
We are feſtered with mice and rats, and to this end the
cat is very ſerviceable. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
They did ſo much pºſter the church and groſsly delude the
people, that contradićtions themſelves aſſerted by Rabbies were
equally revered by them as the infallible will of God.
South's Sermons.
A multitude of ſcribblers daily peſter the world with their
inſufferable ſtuff. Dryden.
At home he was purſu'd with noiſe;
Abroad was pºſter'd by the boys. Swift.
2. To encumber.
J/aller.
Fitches and peaſe
For peſtring too much on a hovel they lay. Tuſſer.
Confin'd and peſter'd in this pinfold here,
Strive to keep up a frail and feveriſh being. Milton.
Pe'sterer. n.ſ.. [from peſter.] One that peſters or diſturbs.
Pe'sTeRous, adj. [from peſter.] Encumbering; cumberſome.
In the ſtatute againſt vagabonds note the diſlike the par-
liament had of goaling them, as that which was chargeable,
pºſterous, and of no open example. Bacon's Henry VII.
PE'sthouse. n.ſ...[from peſt and houſe..] An hoſpital for per-
ſons infected with the plague.
Pesti'Ferous. adj. [from peſtifer, Lat.]
1. Deſtrućtive; miſchievous.
Such is thy audacious wickedneſs,
Thy leud, pe/lifºrous and diſſentious pranks,
The very infants prattle of thy pride. Shakeſp.
You, that have diſcover'd ſecrets, and made ſuch pe/lift-
raus reports of men nobly held, muſt die. Shakeſp.
2. Peſtilential ; malignant; infectious.
It is eaſy to conceive how the ſteams of peſtiferous bodies
taint the air, while they are alive and hot. Arbuthnot.
PE's rilence. m. ſ. [pºſtilence, Fr. pºſilentia, Lat.] Plague;
peſt; contagious diſtemper.
The red pºſłilence ſtrike all trades in Rome,
And occupations periſh. Shakeſp.
When my eyes beheld Olivia firſt,
Mcthought ſhe purg'd the air of peſſilence. Shakeſp.
PE's ril. ENT. adj. [pe/tiltnt, Fr. pºſſilens, Lat.]
1. Producing plagues; malignant.
Great ringing of bells in populous cities diffipated pºſſilent
air, which may be from the concuſſion of the air, and not
from the ſound. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To thoſe people that dwell under or near the equator, a
perpetual ſpring would be a moſt pºſſilent and inſupportable
ſummer. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Miſchievous ; deſtructive.
There is nothing more contagious and pºſſilent than ſome
kinds of harmony; than ſome nothing more ſtrong and potent
unto good. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 38.
Hoary moulded bread the ſoldiers thruſting upon their
ſpears railed againſt king Ferdinand, who with ſuch corrupt
and pºſſilent bread would feed them. Knolles.
Which preſident, of pe/filent import,
Againſt thee, Henry, had been brought. Daniel.
The world abounds with pºſſilent books, written againſt
this doćtrine. Swift's Miſcellanies.
3. In ludicrous language, it is uſed to exaggerate the meaning
of another word.
One pºſſilent fine,
His beard no bigger though than thine,
Walked on before the reſt.
Pºſile Ntial. adj. [pºſſilencil, Fr. pºſilens, Lat.]
1. Partaking of the nature of peſtilence; producing peſtilence;
infectious; contagious.
Theſe with the air paſſing into the lungs, infect the maſs
of blood, and lay the foundation of pºſſilential fevers. Woodw.
Suckling.
-- - Fire involv’d
In pºſſilential vapours, ſtench and ſmoak.
2. Miſchievous; deſtrućtive; pernicious.
If government depends upon religion, then this ſhews the
pºſſilential deſign of thoſe that attempt to disjoin the civil and
eccleſiaſtical intereſts. South's Sermons.
º adv. [from pºſſilent.] Miſchievouſly; de-
Pestill Ation. m. ſ. [piſillum, Lat.] The aâ of pounding
or breaking in a mortar.
The beſt diamonds are comminuble, and ſo far from
breaking hammers, that they ſubmit unto pºſtillation, and re-
ſiſt not any ordinary peſtle. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
PE'stle. n.ſ. [piſillum, Lat.] An inſtrument with which
any thing is broken in a mortar.
What real alteration can the beating of the pºſtle make in
any body, but of the texture of it. Locke.
Upon our vegetable food the teeth and jaws act as the pºſil,
and mortar. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Pestle of Pork. n.ſ. A gammon of bacon. Ainſ.
PET. n.ſ.. [This word is of doubtful etymology; from deſpit,
Fr. or impetus, Lat., perhaps it may be derived ſome way
from petit, as it implies only a little fume or fret.]
1. A ſlight paſſion; a ſlight fit of anger. -
If all the world
Should in a pet of temperance feed on pulſe,
Drink the clear ſtream, and nothing wear but freeze,
Th’ all-giver would be unthankt, would be unprais'd.
AMilton.
If we cannot obtain every vain thing we aſk, our next bu-
fineſs is to take pet at the refuſal. L'Eſtrange.
Life, given for noble purpoſes, muſt not be thrown up in
Addiſon.
a pet, nor whined away in love. Collier.
They cauſe the proud their viſits to delay,
And ſend the godly in a pet to pray. Pope.
2. A lamb taken into the houſe, and brought up by hand. A
cade lamb. [Probably from petit, little.] Hanmer.
PETAL. m. ſ. [petalum, Latin. J
Petal is a term in botany, ſignifying thoſe fine coloured
leaves that compoſe the flowers of all plants: whence plants
are diſtinguiſhed into monopetalous, whoſe flower is one con-
tinued leaf; tripetalous, pentapetalous and polypetalous,
when they conſiſt of three, five or many leaves. &amp;Hinºy.
Pet A'lous. adj. [from petal.] Having petals.
#º. }n. / [petard, Fr. petardo, Italian.]
A petard is an engine of metal, almoſt in the ſhape of an
hat, about ſeven inches deep, and about five inches over at
the mouth : when charged with fine powder well beaten, it
is covered with a madrier or plank, bound down faſt with
ropes, running through handles, which are round the rim
near the mouth of it: this petard is applied to gates or bar-
riers of ſuch places as are deſigned to be ſurprized, to blow
them up: they are alſo uſed in countermines to breakthrough
into the enemies galleries.
'Tis the ſport to have the engineer
Hoiſt with his own petar.
Find all his having and his holding,
Reduc’d t' eternal noiſe and ſcolding;
The conjugal petard that tears
Down all portcullices of ears. Hudibras.
Pete'chi AL. adj. [from petéchiae, Lat..] Peſtilentially ſpotted.
In London are many fevers with buboes and carbuncles,
and many petechial or ſpotted fevers. Arbuthnot.
PE"Te R-wort. n.ſ. This plant differs from St. John's-wort,
only in having a pyramidal ſeed-veſſel, divided into five
cells. Miller.
PETIT. adj. [French..] Small ; inconſiderable.
By what ſmall petit hints does the mind recover a vaniſhing
notion South's Sermons.
PETITION. n.ſ. [petitio, Latin.] -
1. Requeſt; intreaty ; ſupplication; prayer. - -
We muſt propoſe unto all men certain petitions incident
Military Dić.
Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
and very material in cauſes of this nature. Płooker.
My next poor petition
Is, that his noble grace would have ſome pity
Upon my wretched women. Shakeſp.
Let my life be given at tition, and my people at my
requeſt. y II given at my pe &gt; y Eſther vii. 3.
Thou didſt chooſe this houſe to be called by thy name, and
to be a houſe of prayer and petition for thy people. 1 Mac. vii.
2. Single branch or article of a prayer. -
Then pray'd that ſhe might ſtill poſſeſs his heart,
And no pretending rival ſhare a Part 3,
This laſt petition heard of all her Prayº - - Dryden.
To Petition. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſolicite; to ſup-
plicate.
You have petition'd all the gods -
For my proſperity. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The mother petitioned her goddeſs to beſtow upon them the
greateſt gift that could be given. . Addiſon.
PETITIo'NARILY.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">|
P E T
P E. T.
º
º
- 'tionary. ay of begging
Periſtionarily. adv. [from petitiºnary.] By way gging
*:::: but petitionarily infer a dextrality in the heavens,
and we may as reaſonably conclude a right and left laterality
in the ark of Noah.
Petition ARY. m. ſ. [from petition.]
1. Supplicatory; coming with petitions.
Pardon thy petitionary countrymen. Shakeſp.
It is our baſe petitionary breath
That blows 'em to this greatneſs. Ben. Johnſºn.
. Containing petitions or requeſts. -
2 jº. tº only to ſuch as are in them-
ſelves impotent, and ſtand in need of relief from others. Hooker.
I return only yes or no to queſtionary and petitionary epiſtles
of half a yard long. Swift.
PETI'tion ER. m. ſ. Ifrom petition.] One who offers a pe-
tition. - - - -
When you have received the petitions, and it will pleaſe
the petitioners well to deliver them into your own hand, let
your ſecretary firſt read them, and draw lines under the ma-
terial parts. ... Bacon.
What pleaſure can it be to be encumbered with depen-
dences, thronged and ſurrounded with petitioners - South.
Their prayers are to the reproach of the petitioners, and
to the confuſion of vain deſires. - L'E/irange.
His woes broke out, and begg'd relief
With tears, the dumb petitioner of grief. Dryden.
The Roman matrons preſented a petition to the fathers;
this raiſed ſo much raillery upon the petitioners, that the
ladies never after offered to direct the lawgivers of their
country. - - Addiſon.
PET1 Tory. adj. [petitorius, Lat. petitoire, Fr.] Petitioning;
claiming the property of any thing. Ainſ.
PE, TRE. m. ſ. [from petra, a ſtone.] Nitre; ſaltpetre. Sée
NITRE.
Powder made of impure and greaſy petre, hath but a weak
emiſſion, and gives but a faint report. Brown.
The veſſel was firſt well nealed to prevent cracking, and
covered to prevent the falling in of any thing, that might
unſeaſonably kindle the petre. Boyle.
Nitre, while it is in its native ſtate, is called petre-ſalt,
when refined ſalt-petre. JWoodward.
PETRE scent. adj. [petrºſen, Lat.] Growing ſtone; be-
coming ſtone.
A cave, from whoſe arched roof there dropped down a
Petrºſent liquor, which oftentimes before it could fall to the
ground congealed. Boyle.
PET ºf Actſ N. m. ſ. [from petrift, Lat.]
"tº act of turning to ſtone; the ſtate of being turned to
One.
Its concretive ſpirit has the ſeeds of petriſaćtion and gorgon
within itſelf. Brown.
2. That which is made ſtone.
Look over the variety of beautiful ſhells, petriſations,
orcs, minerals, ſtones, and other natural curioſities. Cheyne.
PET 81'Factive. [from Petrºſariº, Lat.] Having the power
to form ſtone.
There are many to be found, which are but the lapi-
deſcenses and petrifactive mutation of bodie. Brown.
PETRificatios. i. ſ. IPetrification, Fr. from petriff.] A body
formed by changing other matter to ſton.
In theſe ſtrange pet ificatiºn, the hardening of the bodies
ſeems to be effected Principally, if not only, as in the indu-
ration of the fluid ſubſtances ºf an “gg into a chick, by al-
tering the diſpoſition of their parts. Boyle.
Pet RIFIck. Adj. [Petrificus, Lat.] Having the power to
change to ſtone.
- The aggregated ſoil
Death with his mace Petrifick, cold and dry,
As with a trident, ſmote. A filtºn's Parad'ſ Lºº.
To PETRIFY. v. a. ſpetrifier, Fr. Petra and fo, Lat.] To
change to ſtone. -
Schiſm is markt out by the apoſtle to the Hebrews, as a kind
of #. crime, which induces induration. Decay of Piety.
hough their ſouls be not yet, wholly petrified, y
Ct every
aćt of fin makes gradual approaches to it. Decay of Pictſ
A few reſemble petrified wood. ſºdiumſ.
"...he midſt of Euclid dip at once, * * * * * * * *
And petrify a genius to a dunce. Pope
o PETRIFY. v. n. To becom. ſtone. -
Like Niobe we marble grow,
And petrify with grief.
PetRol.
Petroleum. }n. J. [petrole, Fr.]
Petrol or Petroleum is a liquid bitu -
- - men, black, fl
...; of ſprings. Q 2 Dlack, }.”
NEL. m. ſ. - - !-----, “.
by a hº{ [Petrinal, Fr.] A piſtol; a ſmall gun uſed
And he with Petronel upheav’
- eav'd
Inſtead of ſhield the tº."
§§ºn recoil'd as well it might.”
PE"ttico AT */, peti
- - • * /. petaf and
man's dreſs, £ coat.J
Dryden.
Hudibras.
The lower part of a wo-
7
Brown. "
PETT coy. m. ſ. An herb. -
PETULANCE. Un. ſ. [petulance, Fr. petulantia, Lat.] Sauci-
PETULAN cy.
PETULANT. adi, [petulani, Lat. petulant, Fr.]
1. Saucy; perverſe.
What trade art thou, Fuble —a woman's taylor, ſir.—
Wilt thou make as many holes in an enemy's battle, as thou
haſt done in a woman's petticoat P Shakeſpeare.
Her feet beneath her petticoat,
Like little mice, ſtole in and out,
As if they fear'd the light. Suckling.
It is a great compliment to the ſex, that the virtues are
generally ſhewn in petticoats. Addiſon,
To fifty choſen ſylphs, of ſpecial note,
We truſt th’ important charge, the petticoat;
Oft have we known that ſevenfold fence to fail,
Though ſtiff with hoops, and arm'd with ris of whale.
Pope's Rape ºf the Lock.
Pettifo'gg E.R. n.ſ.. [corrupted from pettivoglier; Petit and
vºgº, Fr.] A petty ſmall-rate lawyer.
The worſt conditioned and leaſt cliented petivoguers get
under the ſweet bait of revenge, more plentiff Protecution ºf
actions. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwań.
Your pettifºggers damn their ſouls
To ſhare with knaves in cheating fools.
Conſider, my dear, how indecent it is to aban
ſhop and follow pettifºggers; there is hardly a plea between
two country eſquires about a barren acre, but you draw your-
ſelf in as bail, ſurety or ſolicitor. Arbuthnº, H% of J. Bull.
Phyſicians are apt to deſpiſe empiricks, lawyers, petti-
Jºggers, merchants and pedlars. - Swift.
Perri Ness. n.ſ. [from petty.] Smallneſs; littleneſs; incon.
ſiderableneſs; unimportance.
The loſſes we have borne, the ſubječas we
Have loſt, and the diſgrace we have digeſted ;
To anſwer which, his Pettineſ would bow under. Shakeſ,
PETrish. adj. [from pet.J Fretful; peewiſh.
Nor doth their childhood prove their innocence;
They're froward, pettiſh, and unus’d to ſmile. Creech.
PETTI's HNess. m. ſ. [from pettiſh.] Fretfulneſs; peeviſhneſs.
Like children, when we loſe"our favourite Plaything, we
throw away the reſt in a fit of pettiſhneſs. Collier.
PETT1'Toes. n.ſ. [petty and toe.]
1. The feet of a ſucking pig.
2. Feet in contempt.
My good clown grew ſo in love with the wenches ſong,
that he would not ſtir his Pettitoes, till he had both tune a.
words. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Taº,
ºſQ. [Italian.] The breaſt; figurative by privacy.
Pºy. adj. [petit, Fr.] Small; inconſiderable; inferiour;
1ttle.
Audibrar.
don your
When he had no power;
But was a petty ſervant to the ſtate,
He was your enemy. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
It is a common experience, that dogs know the dog-killer;
whº as in time of infection, ſome petty fellow is ſent out
to kill the dogs. Bacon's Nat. H/.
It importeth not much, ſome petty alteration or difference
it may make.
Bacon.
ill God incenſe his ire
For ſuch a petty treſpaſs. Milton.
From thence a thouſand leſſºr poets ſprung,
Like petty princes from the faii of Rom. enham.
They believe one only chief and great God, which hath
been from all eternity; who when he propoſed to make the
world, made firſt other gods of a principal order; and after,
the fun, moon and ſtars, as petty gods. Stillinfeet.
By all I have read of petty commonwealths, as well as the
gºat ones, it ſeems to me, that a free people do of them-
ſelves divide into three powers. Swift.
Bolonia water'd by the petty Rhine. Addiſon.
Can there an example Ée given, in the whole courſe of
this war, where we have treated the pettieſ? prince, with
whom we have had to deal, in ſo contemptuous a manner.
Swift's Miſcellanies.
Ainſworth.
neſs ; peeviſhneſs ; wantonneſs.
It was excellently ſaid of that philoſopher, that there was
a wall or parapet of teeth ſet in our mouth, to reſtrain the
petulancy of our words. - Ben.johnſºn.
Such was others petulancy, that they joyed to ſee their bet-
ters ſhamefully outraged and abuſed. King Charles.
Wiſe men knew that which looked like pride in ſome, and
like petulance in others, would, by experience in affairs and
converſation amongſt men, be in time wrought off. Clarendon.
However their numbers, as well as their inſolence and per-
verſeneſs increaſed, many inſtances of petulancy and ſcurrility
are to be ſeen in their pamphlets. Swift.
There appears in our age a pride and fetulancy in youth,
zealous to caſt off the ſentiments of their fathers and
teachers. Watts's Logick.
If the opponent ſees vićtory to incline to his ſide, let him
ſhew the force of his argument, without too importunate and
petulant demands of an anſwer. JWatts.
- 2. Wanton.
*
º
}
t;
l,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P H A
hou
art,
º!.
&amp;ſe
jin,
2. Wanton.
The tongue of a man is ſo petulant, and his thoughts ſo
variable, that one ſhould not lay too great ſtreſs upon any
preſent ſpeeches and opinions. Speciator, N° 439.
Peru'LANTLY. adv. [from petulant..] With petulance: with
ſaucy pertneſs. - - -
Pew. n.ſ. [puye, Dutch.J. A ſeat incloſed in a church.
When Sir Thomas More was lord chancellor, he did uſe,
at maſs, to fit in the chancel, and his lady in a pew. Bacon.
Should our ſex take it into their heads to wear trunk
breeches at church, a man and his wife would fill a whole
pew. Addiſon.
Pºwer. n.ſ. ſpiewit, Dutch.]
I. A water fowl.
We reckon the dip-chick, ſo named of his diving and
littleneſs, puffins, pewets, meawes. Carew.
2. The lapwing. Ainſ.
PE/WTER. m. ſ. ſpeauter, Dutch..] A compound of metals;
an artificial metal.
Coarſe pewter is made of fine tin and lead. Bacon.
The pewter, into which no water could enter, became
more white, and liker to ſilver, and leſs flexible. Bacon.
Pewter diſhes, with water in them, will not melt eaſily,
but without it they will ; nay, butter or oil, in themſelves
inflammable, yet, by their moiſture, will do the like. Bacon.
2. The plates and diſhes in a houſe.
The eye of the miſtreſs was wont to make her pewter
ſhine. Addiſon.
PEw'TERER. n.ſ.. [from pewter.] A ſmith who works in
pewter.
He ſhall charge you and diſcharge you with the motion of
a pewterer's hammer, • Shakeſpear's Henry IV.
We cauſed a ſkilful pewterer to cloſe the veſſel in our
preſence with ſoder exquiſitely. Boyle.
PHA. No Menon. m. ſ. This has ſometimes phenomena in the
plural. [ſp2iyousov.] An appearance in the works of nature.
The paper was black, and the colours intenſe and thick,
that the phaenomenon might be conſpicuous: Newton.
Theſe are curioſities of little or no moment to the under-
ſtanding the phanomenon of nature. Newton.
PHAGEDE’NA. m. ſ. [payáðzivo: ; from (paya, edo, to eat.]
An ulcer, where the ſharpneſs of the humours eats away the
fleſh. -
f
; :::::::: łaj. [phagedºnique, Fr.] Eating; corroding.
Phaged nick medicines, are thoſe which eat away fungous
or proud fleſh.
... A bubo, according to its malignancy, either proves eaſily
curable, or terminates in a phagedenous ulcer with jagged.
lips. Wiſeman's Surgery.
When they are very putrid and corroſive, which circum-
ſtances give them the name of foul phagedenick ulcers, ſome
ſpirits of wine ſhould be added to the fomentation. Sharp.
PHA'lanx... n.ſ., ſphalanx, Lat. phalange, Fr.] A troop of
men cloſely embodied.
Far otherwiſe th’ inviolable ſaints,
In cubic phalanx firm, advanc'd entire -
Invulnerable, impenetrably arm'd. Milton's Par. Loft.
Who bid the ſtork, Columbus-like explore
Heav'ns not his own, and worlds unknown before ?
Who calls the council, ſtates the certain day?
Who forms the phalanx, and who points the way Pope,
The Grecian phalanx, moveleſs as a tow'r,
On all ſides batter’d, yet reſiſts his pow'r. Pope.
PHANTA's M. }": [?&amp;laruz, paſzaſz ; phantaſme, phan-
PHANTA's MA. td/le, Fr.] Vain and airy appearance; ſome-
thing appearing only to imagination.
All the interim is -
Ilike a phantaſma or a hideous dream. Shakeſpeare.
This armado is a Spaniard that keeps here in court
Aphantaſm, a monarcho, and one that makes ſport
To the prince and his book-mates. Shakeſpeare.
They believe, and they believe amiſs, becauſe they be but
phantaſms or apparitions. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the IWorld.
If the great ones were in forwardneſs, the people were
in fury, entertaining this airy body or phantaſm with incredible
affection; partly out of their great devotion to the houſe of
York, partly out of proud humour. Bacon's Henry VII.
- Why
In this infernal vale firſt met, thou call’ſt
Me father, and that phanta'm call'ſt my ſon. Milton.
Aſſaying, by his deviliſh art, to reach
The organs of her fancy, and with them forge -
Illuſions, as he liſt, phantaſms and dreams. Milton.
Phanta'stical.
PHANTA'stick. : See FANTASTIcAL.
PHANTom. n.ſ. ſphantone, French.]
1. A ſpectre; an apparition.
If he cannot help believing, that ſuch things he ſaw and
heard, he may ſtill have room to believe that; what this airy
phantom ſaid is not abſolutely to be relied on. Atterbury.
A conſtant vapour o'er the palace flies;
Strange thantoms riſing as the miſts ariſe;
Dreadful as hermit's dreams in haunted ſhadas, -
Or bright, as viſions of expiring maids. Pºpe.
2. A fancied viſion.
Reſtleſs and im
- Patient to try every ſcheme and overture of
preſent happineſs,
he hunts a phantºn he can never overtake.
Roger's Sermons.
As Pallas will'd, along the ſable ſkies,
To calm the queen, the phantom ſiſter flies. Pope.
PHARISA'IcAL. adj. [from phari fe.]. Ritual ; externally reli-
iºus, from the ſect of the Phariſees, whoſe reliº -
#. almoſt wholly in ceremonies.” oie religion con
The cauſes of ſuperſtition are pleaſing and ſenſual rites,
exceſs of outward and phariſaical holineſſ, over-great reve-
rence of traditions, which cannot but load the chirch. Bacon.
Suffer us not to be deluded with phariſaical waſhings in-
ſtead of chriſtian reformings. King Charles.
PHARMAce'utical. }*. [?&amp;ºaxiſlizès, from ©26*2xsww.]
PHARMAce'utick. § Relating to the knowledge or art of
pharmacy, or preparation of medicines.
PHARMAco'Logist. n.ſ. ſpatuaxo, and xyz.] One who
writes upon drugs. -
The oſteocolla is recommended by the common pharma-
colºgiſts as an abſorbent and conglutinator of broken bones.
Jºaodward on Foſſils:
PHARMacology, n. ſ. [92.6%axov and Xiyw.] The know-
ledge of drugs and medicines.
PHARMAcopoei'A. m. ſ. [926%axov and rolío, ; pharmacopée,
Fr.]. A diſpenſatory; a book containing rules for the com:
poſition of medicines.
PHARMAco'Polist. n. ſ. [?&amp;#42xov and raxiw ; pharmace-
pole, Fr.] An apothecary; one who ſells medicines.
PHARMACY. m.ſ. [from paeºzzow, a medicine; pharmacie,
Fr.] The art or practice of preparing medicines; the trade
of an apothecary.
Each doſe the goddeſs weighs with watchful eye,
So nice her art in impious pharmacy. Garth.
PHA Ros. ln. ſ. [from pharos in Egypt.] A light-houſe; a
PHARE. } lantern from the ſhore to direct ſailors.
He augmented and repaired the port of Oſtia, built a
pharos or light-houſe. Arbuthnot on Coins.
PHARYNgo Tomy, n.ſ. [prºvyč and ríava.] The act of
making an inciſion into the wind-pipe, uſed when ſome tu-
mour in the throat hinders reſpirations
PHA'sels. n.ſ. [phaſeoli, Lat..] French beans. Ainſ.
PHA'sis. a. ſ. In the plural phaſes. [paris; phaſe, Fr.] Ap-
pearance exhibited by any body; as the changes of the moon.
All the hypotheſes yet contrived, were built upon too nar-
row an inſpection of the phaſes of the univerſe. Glanvill.
He o'er the ſeas ſhall love, or fame purſue;
And other months, another phaſis view;
Fixt to the rudder, he ſhall boldly ſteer,
And paſs thoſe rocks which Tiphysus’d to fear. Creech.
PHASM. m. ſ. [pºrºz.] Appearance; phantom; fancied ap-
parition.
Thence proceed many aereal fićtions and phaſins, and chy:
maeras created by the vanity of our own hearts or ſedućtion of
evil ſpirits, and not planted in them by God. Hammond.
PHE'AsANT. n.ſ.. [faiſan, Fr. phaſianus, from Phaſis, the river
of Cholchos.] A kind of wild cock.
The hardeſt to draw are tame birds; as the cock, peacock
and pheaſant. Peacham on Drawing.
Preach as I pleaſe, I doubt our curious men
Will chuſe a pheaſant ſtill before a hen. Pope.
PheeR. n. ſ. A companion. See Feer. . Spenſer.
To PHEEse. v. a. [perhaps to feaze.] To comb; to fleece;
to curry.
An he be proud with me, I'll pheeſe his pride. Shakeſp.
PHEN1'copter. n.ſ. [(powix&lt; GP ; phaenicopterus, Lat..] A
kind of bird, which is thus deſcribed by Martial:
Dat mihi penna rubens nomenſed lingua guloſis
Noſtra ſapit; quidſ, garrula lingua foretº -
He blended together the livers of guiltheads, the brains of
pheaſants and peacocks, tongues of phenicopters, and the melts
of lampres. Hairwill on Providence.
PHe'Nix. n.ſ.. [ſpólvº: ; phaenix, Lat..] The bird which is
ſuppoſed to exiſt fingle, and to riſe again from its own aſhes.
There is one tree, the phenix throne; one phenix
At this hour reigning there. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
To all the fowls he ſeems a phenix. Milton.
Having the idea of a phenix in my mind, the firſt enquiry
is, whether ſuch a thing does exiſt : Locke.
PHENG MENoN. m. ſ. [pañozºvoy; phenoment, Fr..it is therefore
often written phanomenon; but being naturaliſed, it has changed
the ae, which is not in the Engliſh language, to e.]
- earance : viſible quality. -
I *::::::::: .." arC ài. to make philoſophers, whoſe
buſineſs it is to deſcribe in comprehenſive theories, the pheno-
mena of the world and their cauſes. - Burnet,
The moſt conſiderable phenomenºn, belonging to terreſtrial
bodies, is gravitation: whereby all bodies in the vicinity of
the earth preſs towards its centre. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Anything that ſtrikes by any new appearance. f
19 P PH1'AL.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P H I
P H L
|-
PHIAL. m. ſ. ſphiala, Lat. pºlº, Fr.] A ſmall bottle.
Upon my ſecure hour thy uncle ſtole Shakeſ
With juice of curſed hebenon in a phial. ...” jº
He proves his º . º, lº. w: º:
- - Of glal's fille 1. -
full of water, and with globes of g Newton's Opticks.
Phila's thropy. n, ſ. [?ixão, and 3,360no;..] Love of man-
ind : good nature. -
kiº. tranſient temporary good nature is not that philan-
thropy, that love of mankind, which deſerves the §: of a
moral virtue. Addiſon's Speciator, N° 177.
Philippick adj. [from the invectives of Demoſthenes againſt
Philip of Macedon.] Any invečtive declamation.
Philo'LoGER. n. ſ. [???oyoº.] 9. whoſe chief ſtudy is
language ; a grammarian; a critick.
Philliºr, and critical diſcourſers, who look beyond the
ſhell and obvious exteriors of things, will not be angry with
our narrower explorations. -- Brown.
You expect, that I ſhould diſcourſe of this matter like a
naturaliſt, not a philologer. - - Boyle.
The beſt philºloger; ſay, that the original word does not
only ſignify domeſtick, as oppoſed to foreign, but alſo pri-
vate, as oppoſed to common. ... , Sprat's Sermons.
Philological. adj. [from philology.] Critical ; gramma-
tical. -
Studies, called philological, are hiſtory, language, grammar,
rhetorick, poeſy and criticiſm. - Watts.
He who pretends to the learned profeſſions, if he doth not
ariſe to be a critick himſelf in philological matters, ſhould fre-
quently converſe with dićtionaries, paraphraſts, commentators
or other criticks, which may relieve any difficulties. Watts.
PHILo'Logist... n.ſ.. [bºxéaoyos.] A critick ; a grammarian.
PHILO'LOGY. m. ſ. [pixoxoyſz; philologie, Fr.] Criticiſm;
grammatical learning.
Temper all diſcourſes of philology with interſperſions of
morality. - JWalker.
PH1'lom E.L. "iſ [from Philomela, changed into a bird.]
PhiloME'LA. } he nightingale.
Time drives the flocks from field to fold,
When rivers rage, and rocks grow cold,
And philomel becometh dumb. Shakeſp.
Hears the hawk, when philomela fings Pope.
Liſtening philomela deigns
To let them joy. Thomſºn:
PHI'lomot. adj. [corrupted from feuille morte, a dead leaf.]
- Coloured like a dead leaf.
One of them was blue, another yellow, and another phi-
*mºt, the fourth was of a pink colour, and the fifth of a pale
green. Addiſon's Spediator, N° 265.
Philosopheme. n.ſ.. [bºxerſpraz.j Principle of reaſon-
ing; theorem. An unuſual word.
You will learn how to addreſs yourſelf to children for their
benefit, and derive ſome uſeful philºſºphemes for your own
entertainment. Watts.
Philo'sopher, n. ſ. [philºſºphus, Lat. philoſºphe, Fr.] A
man..deep in knowledge, either moral of natºa.
Many ſound in belief have been alſo great philoſºphers.
Booker's Eccleſiaſtical Polity.
That ſtone ºſoft ty
Philºſºphers in vain ſo long have ſought. Milton.
Adam, in the ſtate of innocence, came into the world a
philoſopher, which ſufficiently appeared by his writing the na-
*9; things upon their names; he could view j in
themſelves, and read forms without the comment of their re-
ſpective properties. South's Sermons.
They all our fam'd philoſºpher, defie,
And would our faith by force of reaſon try. Dryden.
If the philºſºphers by fire had been ſº wary in their obſer-
Xàtions and ſincere in their reports, as thoſe, who call them-
ſºlves philºſºphers, ought to have been, our acquaintance with
the bodies here about us had been yet much greater. Locke.
Philosophers Jºne. n.ſ. A ſtone dreamed ºf by alchemiſts
which, by its touch, converts baſe metals into gold. &gt;
PHILoso'PHick. - - -
tº.{a}. Ifhºſphin, F. Ron philoſºphy.]
i. Belonging to Philoſophy; ſuitable to a Philoſopher; formed
by philoſophy.
Others in virtue plac'd felicity:
The ſtoic laſt in philoſophick pride
By him call'd virtue; and his virtuous man,
Wºº, perfect in himſelf, and aſ poſſeſſing. Milton.
T ºw.cºuld our chymick friends go on
* * the philºſºphiº ſtone. Prior.
en the ſafety of the publick is endangered
ance of - - - gered, the appear-
fººd indº.
2. Skilled in ºn. Addiſon's Freeholder.
'e have ãº.
miliar, i...ºl Pºiſons to make modern and fa-
C
Acquaintance º º cauſeleſs. Shakeſp.
buil * 's not a ſpeculative k
*. *º *aſonings aº his º: º
• - phi ºnal minds often buſy themſelves in,
without reaping from thence any advantage towards tegulating
their paſſions, but practical knowledge. Atterbury's Sermon.
3. Frugal; abſtemious.
This is what nature's wants may well ſuffice:
But ſince among mankind ſo few there are,
Who will conform to philoſophick fare,
I'll mingle ſomething of our times to pleaſe. Dryden,
Philosophically. adv, (from philºſºphical.] In a philoſo-
phical manner ; rationally ; wiſely. - -
The law of commonweales that cut off the right hand of
malefactors, if philºſºphically executed, is impartial; other.
wiſe the amputation not equally puniſheth all. Brown.
No man has ever treated the paſſion of love with ſo much
delicacy of thought and of expreſſion, or ſearched into the .
nature of it more philoſophically than Ovid. Dryden.
If natural laws were once ſettled, they are never to be re-
verſed; to violate and infringe them, is the ſame as what We
call miracle, and doth not found very philºſºphical, out of .
mouth of an atheiſt. entley's Sermons.
To Philosophize. v. a. [from philoſºphy.] To play the
philoſopher; to reaſon like a philoſopher; to moralize ; to
enquire into the cauſes of effe&amp;ts.
Qualities, that were occult to Ariſtotle, muſt be ſo to uS ;
and we muſt not philºſºphize beyond ſympathy and antipathy.
Glanvill's Scept.
The wax philoſophized upon the matter, and finding out at
laſt that it was burning, made the brick ſo hard, ºff itſelf
into the fire. L’Eſtrange.
Two doctors of the ſchools were philoſºphizing upon the -
advantages of mankind above all other creatures. L'E/trange.
Some of our philoſºphizing divines have too much exaſ.
the faculties of our ſouls, when they have maintained, that
by their force mankind has been able to find out God. Dryd.
PHILOSOPHY. n.ſ. [philoſºphie, Fr. philoſophia, Latin.]
1. Knowledge natural or moral.
I had never read, heard nor ſeen any thing, I had never
any taſte of philoſºphy nor inward feeling in myſelf, which for
a while I did not call to my ſuccour. Sidney.
Hang up philoſophy;
Unleſs philoſºphy can make a Juliet,
Diſplant a town, reverſe a prince's doom,
It helps not. Shakespeare .
The progreſs you have made in philoſºphy, hath enabí:
you to benefit yourſelf with what I have written. Digby.
2. Hypotheſis or ſyſtem upon which natural effeas are ...
plained.
We ſhall in vain interpret their words by the notions of
our philºſºphy, and the doćtrines in our ſchools. Locke.
3. Reaſoning; argumentation.
Of good and evil much they argu'd then -
Vain wiſdom all and falſe philºſºphy. Milton.
His deciſions are the judgment of his paſſions and not of
his reaſon, the philºſºphy of the finner and not of the man.
Rogers's Sermons.
4. The courſe of ſciences read in the ſchools.
Phi'ite R. m. ſ. [pºleoy; philtre, Fr.] Something to cauſe love.
The melting kiſs that ſips
The jellied philtre of her lips. Cleaveland.
This cup a cure for both our ills has brought,
You need not fear a philter in the draught. Dryden.
A philter that has neither drug nor enchantment in it, love
if you would raiſe love. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 38.
To PHI’lter. v. a. [from the noun..] To charm to love.
Let not thoſe that have repudiated the more inviting ſins,
ſhew themſelves philtred and bewitched by this. Gov. of Tong.
PHIz. m. ſ. [This word is formed by a ridiculous contračtion
from phyſiognomy, and ſhould therefore, if it be written at all,
be written phyz.] The face, in a ſenſe of contempt.
His air was too proud, and his features amiſs,
As if being a traitor had alter'd his phiz. Stepney;
PHLE Botomist. n. ſ. ſphlebotomiſle, Fr. from pxáp and
Téºva.] One that opens a vein; a bloodletter.
To PHLE BotoMize. v. a. [phlebotomiſer, Fr. from phlebotomy.]
To let blood. - -
The frail bodies of men muſt have an evacuation for their
humours, and be phlebotomized. a How. Tears.
PHLEBOTOMY. n.ſ. [pzigorouz, pafly, ſpxt{39, vena,
and ripava, ; phlebotomie, Fr.] Bloodletting; the act or prac-
tice of opening a vein for medical intentions,
Although in indiſpoſitions of the liver or ſpleen, conſidera-
tions are made in phlebotomy to their ſituation, yet, when the
heart is affected, it is thought as effectual to bleed on the
right as the left. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Pains for the ſpending of the ſpirits, come neareſt to the co-
pious and ſwift loſs of ſpirits by phlebotomy. Harvey.
PHLEGM. n.ſ. ſpx?pg , phlegm, Fr.] - -
1. The watry humour of the body, which, when it predomi-
nates, is ſuppoſed to produce ſluggiſhneſs or dulneſs.
Make the proper uſe of each extreme, .
And write with fury, but correct with phlegm. Roſcommon.
He who ſupreme in judgment, as in wit, -
Might boldly cenſure, as he boldly writ,
Yet judg’d with coolneſs, though he ſung with fire;
Our<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P H R
P H Y
.
Our critics take a contrary extreme, -
They judge with fury, but they write with phie'm. Pope.
Let melancholy rule ſupreme,
Choler preſide, or blood or phlegm. Swift.
2. Water. - -
A linen cloth, dipped in common ſpirit of wine, is not
burnt by the flame, becauſe the phlegm of the liquor defends
the cloth. Boyle.
PHLEGMAGogues. n.ſ. (£2.Éyuz and &amp;yo; phlegmagogue,
Fr.] A purge of the milder ſort, ſuppoſed to evacuate
phlegm and leave the other humours.
The pituitous temper of the ſtomachick ferment muſt be
corrected, and phlegmagogues muſt evacuate it. Floyer.
Pºlegmatick, adj. [ºxytºlizes; phlegmatique, Fr. from
phlegm.] - -
1. Abounding in phlegm.
A neat's foot,
I fear, is too phlegmatick a meat. Shakeſp.
The putrid vapours, though exciting a fever, do colliquate
the phlegmatick humours of the body. Harvey.
Chewing and ſmoaking of tobacco is only proper for phleg-
matick people. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Generating phlegm,
Negroes, tranſplanted into cold and phlegmatick habitations,
continue their hue in themſelves and generations. Brown.
3. Watry. - - - - -
• Spirit of wine is inflammable by means of its oily parts,
and being diſtilled often from ſalt of tartar, grows by every
diſtillation more and more aqueous and phlegmatick. Newton.
4. Dull; cold; frigid. -
As the inhabitants are of a heavy phlegmatick temper, if any
leading member has more fire than comes to his ſhare, it is
quickly tempered by the coldneſs of the reſt. Addiſon.
Who but a huſband ever could perſuade
His heart to leave the boſom of thy love,
For any phlegmatick deſign of ſtate. Southern.
Phlegmon. n.ſ.. [ſpxty-own.] An inflammation; a burn-
ing tumour.
Phlegmon or inflammation is the firſt degeneration from
good blood, and neareſt of kin to it. Wiſeman.
PHle GMonous. adj. [from phlegmon.] Inflammatory; burn-
IIlg.
§ is generated ſecondarly out of the dregs and remainder
of a phlegmonous or ordematick tumour. Harvey.
PHLEME. m. ſ. [from phlebotomus, Lat.]. A fleam, ſo it is
commonly written; an inſtrument which is placed on the
vein and driven into it with a blow ; particularly in bleeding
of horſes.
PhloGI'ston. m. ſ. [oxoyºs, from £2.Éyw.]
1. A chemical liquor extremely inflammable.
2. The inflammable part of any body.
Pho'Nicks. n. ſ. [from pown.] The doćtrine of ſounds.
Phonoca’MPtick. adj. [povº and xapawla.] Having the
power to inflect or turn the ſound, and by that to alter it.
The magnifying the ſound by the polyphoniſms or reper-
P cuffions of the rocks, and other phonocamptick objects. Derham.
HO SPHOR.
#... }n.ſ [phºſphorus, Lat]
1. The morning ſtar.
Why ſit we ſad when phoſphor ſhines ſo clear, Pope.
2. A chemical ſubſtance which, expoſed to the air, takes fire.
Of lambent flame you have whole ſheets in a handful of
phoſphor. - Addiſon.
iquid and ſolid phoſphorus ſhow their flames more con-
ſpicuouſly, when expoſed to the air. Cheyne.
PHRASE, n.ſ. [462aºs.]
1. An idiom ; a mode of ſpeech peculiar to a language.
2. An expreſſion; a mode of ſpeech.
Now mince the ſin,
And mollify damnation with a phraſe :
Say you conſented not to Sancho's death,
But barely not forbad it. Dryden.
To fear the Lord, and depart from evil, are phraſes which
the ſcripture uſeth to expreſs the ſum of religion. Tillotſon.
3. Stile; expreſſion. .
Thou ſpeak'ſt -
In better phraſe and matter than thou didſt. Shakeſp.
To PHRase. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtile ; to call; to
term. --
Theſe ſuns,
For ſo they phraſe them, by their heralds challenged
The noble ſpirits to arms. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
PHRASEology. n. ſ. [Péza is and 2.Éyw.]
I. Stile; dićtion.
The ſcholars of Ireland ſeem not to have the leaſt con-
ception of a ſtile, but run on in a flat phraſeology, often
mingled with barbarous terms. Swift's Miſcellanies.
2. A phraſe book. Ainſ.
Pºrts. n. ſ. [?givºrs.] Madneſs; inflammation of the
Taln.
It is allowed to prevent a phrenitis. JWiſeman's Surgery.
HRENE Tick. adj. [tesvilize; ; phrenitique, Fr.] Mad ;
PHRENTick. ; inflamed in the brain ; frantick.
- Phroneticis imagine they ſee that without, which their
imagination is affected with within. Harvey,
What ceſtrum, what phrenetic mood, - *
Makes you thus laviſh of your blood. , Hudibrar.
fi *. was little better than a common fold of phren-
tº and pedlams. JWoodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
PHRE NSY. n.ſ.. [from ©ésyſtis ; phreneſe, Fr. º §
cºntraction, phren/y.] Madneſs; frantiékneſs. This is toº,
often written frenzy. See FRENzy.
Many never think on God, but in extremity of fear, and
then perplexity not ſuffering them to be idle, they think and
do as it were in a phrenſ. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 3.
Demoniack phrenſ, mooping melancholy. Milton.
Would they only pleaſe themſelves in the deluſion, the
- phrenſ, were more innocent; but lunaticks will needs be
kings. - - * Decay of Piety.
hrenſ, or inflammation of the brain, profuſe hemorrhages
from the noſe reſolve, and copious bleeding in the temporal
arteries. . - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
º adj. [Sirixò; ; phyſique, Fr. from phthiſick.]
waiting. .
Collection of purulent matter in the capacity of the breaſt,
if not ſuddenly cured, doth undoubtedly impell the patient
into a phthiſical conſumption. Harvey on Conſumptions.
PHTHI'SICK. m. ſ. [2Sigis ; phyſie, Fr.] A conſumption.
. His diſeaſe was a phthiſick or aſthma oft incurring to an
orthopnea. Harvey on Conſumptions.
PHTH1'sis. n.ſ. [03% is...] A conſumption.
. If the lungs be wounded deep, though they eſcape the firſt
nine days, yet they terminate in a phthiſis or fiſtula. Wiſeman.
PHILA’cter Y. n. /. (puxaxingtov; phylaciere, Fr.] A bandage
on which was inſcribed ſome memorable ſentence.
The philačieries on their wriſts and foreheads were looked
on as ſpells, which would yield them impunity for their
diſobedience. - Hammond.
- Golden ſayings
On large phylačieries expreſſive writ, -
Were to the foreheads of the Rabbins ty'd. Prior.
PHY'sical. adj. [phyſique, Fr. from phyſick.j
1. Relating to nature or to natural philoſophy; not moral.
The phyſical notion of neceſſity, that without which the
work cannot poſſibly be done; it cannot be affirmed of all
the articles of the creed, that they are thus neceſſary. Hamm.
To reflect on thoſe innumerable ſecrets of nature and phy- .
ſcal philoſophy, which Homer wrought in his allegories, what
a new ſcene of wonder may this afford us ! Pope.
Charity in its origin is a phyſical and neceſſary conſequence
of the principle of re-union. "Cheyne's Philoſophical Principles.
2. Pertaining to the ſcience of healing.
3. Medicinal; helpful to health.
Is Brutus ſick and is it phyſical
To walk unbraced, and ſuck up the humours
Of the dank morning. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar,
. The blood, I drop, is rather phyſical
Than dangerous to me.
4. Reſembling phyſick.
PHY'sically, adv. [from phyſical.] According to nature; by
natural operation; in the way or ſenſe of natural philoſophy;
not morally.
Time meaſuring out their motion, informs us of the pe-
riods and terms of their duration, rather than effecteth of
phyſically produceth the ſame. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The outward act of worſhip may be conſidered phyſically
and abſtraćtly from any law, and ſo it depends upon the na-
ture of the intention, and morally, as good or evil: and ſo it
receives its denomination from the law. Stillingfleet.
Though the act of the will commanding, and the act of
any other faculty, executing that which is ſo commanded, be
phyſically and in the preciſe nature of things diſtinct, yet mo-
rally as they proced from one entire, free, moral agent, may
paſs for one and the ſame action. South's Sermons.
I do not ſay, that the nature of light conſiſts in ſmall round
globules, for I am not now treating phyſically of light or
colours. locke.
Physician. n.ſ. [phyſicien, Fr. from phyſick.] One who pro-
feſſes the art of healing.
- Truſt not the phyſician,
His antidotes are poiſon, and he ſlays
More than you rob. Shakespeare . Timon of Athens.
Some phyſicians are ſo conformable to the humour of the Pa-
tient, as they preſs not the true cure of the diſeaſe, and others
are ſo regular, as they reſpect not ſufficiently th: condition of
the patient. - Bacon's Eſſays.
His gratulatory verſe to king Henry, is not more witty than
the epigram upon the name of Nicolaus an ignorant phyſician,
who had been the death of thouſands. Pºtham ºf Poetry.
Taught by thy art divine, the ſage phyſician -
Eludes the urn; and chains, or exiles death. Prior.
PHYSICK. n.ſ.. [buzzº, which: originally ſignifying natural
philoſophy, has been transferred in many modern languages
to medicine.] The ſcience of healing.
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Were<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I C
P I A
- - frº- ld not the
it my buſineſs to underſtand phyſł, would no
º: º y conſult nature herſelf in the hiſtory of diſeaſes
and their cures, than eſpouſe the principles of the dogmatiſts,
- ke.
methodiſts or chymiſts. Loc
2. Medicines ; remedies.
- deſire health, phyſick only for health's ſake.
In itſelf we • ? 'i. b. v. ſ. 48.
jºſek or ever thou be ſick. Eccluſ xviii. 19.
#: the beſt phyſick for many melancholy diſeaſes.
- - Peacham.
He'ſcapes the beſt, who nature to repair -
Draws phyſick from the fields in draughts of vital air. Dryd.
[In common rºl A purge.
The people uſe phyſick to purge themſelves of humours:
Ahbºr's Deſcription of the World.
To Phy'sick: v. a. [from the noun..] To purge ; to treat
with phyſick; to cure.
The labour we delight in, phyſicks pain. Shakeſp.
It is a gallant child; one that indeed phyſick; the ſubject,
makes old hearts freſh. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
Give him allowance as the worthier man;
For that will phyſick the great myrmidon
Who broils in loud applauſe. Shakeſp.
In virtue and in health we love to be inſtructed, as well
as phyſicked with pleaſure. L’Eſtrange.
Physico'theology. n.ſ.. [from phyſico and theology.] Divi-
º, nity enforced or illuſtrated by natural philoſophy.
PHYSIo'GNoMER. ": phyſionomiſle, Fr. [from phyſiognomy.]
Physio'GNoMist. } ne who judges of the temper or future
fortune by the features of the face.
Digonius, when he ſhould have been put to death by the
Turk, a phyſiognomer wiſhed he might not die, becauſe he would
ſow much diſſention among the Chriſtians. Peacham.
Apelles made his pićtures ſo very like, that a phyſiognomiſt
and fortune-teller, foretold by looking on them the time of
their deaths, whom thoſe pićtures repreſented. Dryden.
Let the phyſiognomiſis examine his features. Arb. and Pope.
Physiogno'Mick. }*. [Övroyvºu ovºx'); ; from phyſiog-
PHYSIog No'Monick. 5 nomy..] Drawn from the contempla-
tion of the face; converſant in contemplation of the face.
PHYSIOGNQM.Y. m. ſ. [for phyſiognomony; purio/vapoyſ. ;
phyſonomie, Fr.]
1. The act of diſcovering the temper, and foreknowing the
fortune by the features of the face.
In all phyſiognomy, the lineaments of the body will diſcover
thoſe natural inclinations of the mind which diſfimulation will
conceal, or diſcipline will ſuppreſs. - Bacon's Nat. Hiſt,
2. The face; the caſt of the look.
The aſtrologer, who ſpells the ſtars,
Miſtakes his globes and in her brighter eye
Interprets heaven's phyſiognomy. Cleaveland.
They'll find i'th’ phyſiognomies
O' th' planets all men's deſtinies. Hudibras.
The end of portraits conſiſts in expreſſing the true temper
of thoſe perſons which it repreſents, and to make known their
phyſiognomy. - - - - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
- The diſtinguiſhing charaćters of the face, and the li-
neaments of the body, grow more plain and viſible with time
and age ; but the peculiar phyſiognomy of the mind is moſt
diſcernible in children. Locke.
PHYSIo'Logical. adj. [from phyſiology.] Relating to the doc-
trine of the natural conſtitution of things.
Some of them ſeem rather metaphyſical than phyſiological
In Ottons -
º: oyle.
PHY slo LoGisT. n.ſ.. [from phyſiology.) One verſed in º
fiology; a Writer of natural philoſophy. -
PHYSIOLOGY. "..f. [?vris and Aiyo; phyſiologie, Fr.] The
doºrine of the conſtitution of the works of nature.
* Phyſiºlºgy is of no accommodation to your de-
10 ns.
Philoſophers adapted their deſcripti -
- ption of the deity to th
vulgar, otherwiſe the conceptions of mankind e.' º .
D accounted for from their phyſiolºgy. Bentley's Sermons
l º m. ſ. º the ſame with fuſee..] See Fusee -
* Watches are made with four wheels, ſ -
p ſtrings and phyſics, and others none. &gt; *;
**Tºyokous, adj. [?!?, and voro, Lat. -
or any vegetable. [4 varº, Lat.] That eats graſs
Hairy animals with only two large f teeth • **
P ºrous, and called the iº. ge foreteeth, are *:
**To GRAPHY. m. ſ. [pſ, and %20w.] A deſcription of
plants.
PHY tology m. ſ. ſ * *
• *. J. [2013, and yea:02. The doćtri
pº botanical diſcourſe. 7.62% J oćtrine of
ACL - -
. In Ot .*/ Ltiºn, Lat.] An enormous crime. A word
To tear th
e
greater piacle .. that gave them ſuck, can there be a
and horrid thi gºt nature, can there be a more execrable
ng : Płowel's England's Tears.
PIA'cula R. * - -
}a}. [Piacularis, from piaculum, Lat.]
PIA'culous.
1. Expiatory; *ing the power to attone,
expiation.
Glanvill’s Scept.
It was piaculous unto the Romans to pare their nails upon
the nundinae, obſerved every ninth day. Brown.
3. Criminal; atrociouſly bad. -
While we think it ſo piaculous to go beyond the ancients,
we muſt neceſſarily come ſhort of genuine antiquity and
truth. Glanvill's Scept.
PIA-MATER. m. ſ. [Lat..] A thin and delicate membrane,
which lies under the dura mater, and covers immediately the
ſubſtance of the brain.
PIANET, n.ſ.
1. A bird ; the leſſer wood-pecker. Baily.
2. The magpie. This name is retained in Scotland.
PIA's TER. m. ſ. [piaſtra, Italian.] An Italian coin, about five
ſhillings ſterling in value. Die?.
PIAZZZ. n.ſ. [Italian.] A walk under a roof ſupported by
pillars.
He ſtood under the piazza. Arb. and Pope's Scriblerus.
Pica. m. ſ. Among printers, a particular ſize of their types or
letters. This dićtionary is in ſmall pica.
Picaro'on. n.ſ.. [from picare, Italian.] A robber; a plun-
derer. -
Corſica and Majorca in all wars have been the neſts of
pisaroons. Temple's Miſcellanies.
Piccace. n.ſ. ſpiragium, low Lat.] Money paid at fairs for
breaking ground for booths. Ainſ.
To Pick. v. a. [picken, Dutch.]
1. To cull; to chuſe; to ſelect; to glean; to gather here thé
there.
This fellow picks up wit as pigeons peas.
He hath pick'd out an att,
Under whoſe heavy ſenſe your brother's life
Falls into forfeit. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
Truſt me, ſweet,
Out of this filence yet I pick’d a welcome;
And in the modeſty of fearful duty
I read as much, as from the rattling tongue
Of ſaucy and audacious eloquence. Shakeſp.
Contempt putteth an edge upon anger more than the hurt
itſelf; and when men are ingenious in picking out circum-
ſtances of contempt, they do kindle their anger much. Bacon.
The want of many things fed him with hope, that he
ſhould out of theſe his enemies diſtreſſes pick ſome fit occa-
ſion of advantage. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
They muſt pick me out with ſhackles tir’d,
Shakeſp.
To make them ſport with blind activity. Milton.
What made thee pick and chuſe her out,
Tº employ their ſorceries about Hudibrar.
How many examples have we ſeen of men that have been
picked up and relieved out of ſtarving neceſſities, afterwards
conſpire againſt their patrons. L'Eſtrange.
If he would compound for half, it ſhould go hard but he'd
make a ſhift to pick it up. L’Eſtrange.
A painter would not be much commended, who ſhould
pick out this cavern from the whole AEneids; he had better
leave them in their obſcurity. Dryden.
Imitate the bees, who pick from every flower that which
they find moſt proper to make honey. Dryden.
He that is nouriſhed by the acorns he picked up under an
oak in the wood, has certainly appropriated them to himſelf.
Locke.
He aſked his friends about him, where they had picked up
ſuch a blockhead. Addiſon's Spediator, N° 167.
The will may pick and chuſe among theſe objects, but, it
cannot create any to work on. Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principleſ.
Deep through a miry lane fle pick'd her way,
Above her ankle roſe the chalky clay. - Gay.
Thus much he may be able to pick out, and willing to tran.
fer into his new hiſtory; but the reſt of your character will
probably be dropped, on account of the antiquated ſtile they
are delivered in. Swift.
Heav'n, when it ſtrives to poliſh all it can
Its laſt, beſt work, but forms a ſofter man,
Picks from each ſex, to make the fav'rite bleſt, Pope.
2. To take up ; to gather; to find induſtriouſly -
You owe me money, Sir John, and now you pick a qº-
rel to beguile me of it. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
It was believed, that Perkin's eſcape was not without. the
king's privity, who had him all the time of his flight in a
line; and that the king did this, to pick a quarrel to put him.
to death. - Bacon's Henry VII.
They are as peeviſh company to themſelves as to their
neighbours; for there's not one circumſtance in nature, but
they ſhall find matters to pick a quarrel at. L’Eſtrange.
Pick the very refuſe of thoſe harveſt fields. Thomſºn.
3. To ſeparate from any thing uſeleſs or noxious, by gleaning
out either part; to clean by picking away filth.
For private friends: his anſwer was,
He could not ſtay to pick them in a pile -
Of muſty chaff. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
It hath been noted by the ancients, that it is dangerous to
pick one's ears whilſt he yawneth; for that in yawning, the
minor parchment of the ear is extended by the drawing of
2. Such as requires
R
the breath. Bacon's Natural Hiſ#.
ie
.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I C
4.
He picks and culls his thoughts for converſation, by ſup-
preſſing ſome, and communicating others. Addiſon.
You are not to waſh your hands, till you have picked
your ſallad. - - Swift.
To clean, by gathering off gradually anything adhering.
Hope is a pleaſant premeditation of enjoyment; as when
a dog expects: till his maſter has done picking a bone. More.
... [Piquer, Fr.] To pierce; to ſtrike with a ſharp inſtrument.
Pick an apple with a pin full of holes not deep, and ſmear
it with ſpirits, to ſee if the virtual heat of the ſtrong waters
will not mature it. Bacon.
In the face, a ſmall wart or fiery puſtule, being healed by
ſcratching or picking with nails, will terminate corroſive.
J/ſeman's Surgery.
6. To ſtrike with bill or beak; to peck.
The eyethat mocketh at his father, the ravens of the valley
ſhall pick out. Proverbs xxx. 17.
7. [Picare, Italian.] To rob.
The other night I fell aſleep here, and had my pocket pickt ;
this houſe is turn'd bawdy-houſe, they pick pockets. Shakeſp.
They have a deſign upon your pocket, and the word con-
ſcience is uſed only as an inſtrument to pick it. South.
8. To open a lock by a pointed inſtrument.
Did you ever find
That any art could pick the lock, or power
Could force it open. Denham.
9. To Pick a hole in one's cºat. A proverbial expreſſion for
one finding fault with another.
To PICK. v. n.
1. To eat ſlowly and by ſmall morſels. -
Why ſtand'ſt thou picking P is thy palate ſore,
That bete and radiſhes will make thee roar. Dryden.
2. To do any thing nicely and leiſurely. -
He was too warm on picking work to dwell,
But faggoted his notions as they fell, }
And if they rhym'd and rattl’d, all was well. Dryden.
Pick. n.ſ. A ſharp-pointed iron tool.
What the miners call chert and whern, the ſtone-cutters
nicomia, is ſo hard, that the picks will not touch it; it will
not ſplit but irregularly. JWoodward on Foſſils.
Pi cKAPAck. adv. [from pack, by a reduplication very common
in our language.] In manner of a pack.
In a hurry ſhe whips up her darling under her arms, and
carries the other a pickapack upon her ſhoulders. L’Eſtr.
Pick Axe. m. ſ. ſtick and axe.] An axe not made to cut but
pierce; an axe with a ſharp point.
Their tools are a pickaxe of iron, ſeventeen inches long,
ſharpened at the one end to peck, and flat-headed at the other
to drive iron wedges. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
I'll hide my maſter from the flies, as deep
As theſe poor pickaxes can dig. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
As when bands
Of pioneers, with ſpade and pickaxe arm’d,
Forerun the royal camp, to trench a field. Milton.
PickBAck. adj. [corrupted perhaps from pickpack..] On the
back.
As our modern wits behold,
Mounted a pickback on the old, -
Much farther off. Hudibras.
Pi'cKED. adj. [pique, Fr.] Sharp; ſmart.
Let the ſtake be made picked at the top, that the jay may
not ſettle on it. Martimer's Huſbandry.
To Pickee R. v. a. ſpiccare, Italian.]
1. To pirate; to pillage; to rob.
2. To make a flying ſkirmiſh. Ainſworth.
No ſooner could a hint appear,
But up he ſtarted to pickeer,
And made the ſtouteſt yield to mercy,
When he engag'd in controverſy. Hudibras.
Picker. m. ſ. [from pick.]
1. One who picks or culls.
The pickers pick the hops into the hair-cloth. Mortimer.
2. A pickax; an inſtrument to pick with.
With an iron picker clear all the earth out of the hills.
AMortimer's Huſbandry.
Picke'REL. m. ſ. [from pike..] A ſmall pike.
Picker El-weed. m. ſ. [from pike..] A water plant, from
which pikes are fabled to be generated.
The luce or pike is the tyrant of the freſh waters; they
are bred, ſome by generation, and ſome not; as of a weed
called pickerel-weed, unleſs Goſner be miſtaken. Walton.
Pickle. n.ſ. ſpekel, Dutch.]
1. Any kind of ſalt liquor, in which fleſh or other ſubſtance is
preſerved.
Thou ſhalt be whipt with wire, and ſtew’d in brine,
Smarting in lingring pickle. Shakeſpeare.
Some fiſh are gutted, ſplit and kept in pickle; as whiting
and mackerel. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Heinſtructs his friends that dine with him in the beſt pickle
for a walnut. Addiſon's Speciator, N° 482.
A third ſort of antiſcorbuticks are called aſtringent ; as
**Pers, and moſt of the common pickles prepared with
vinegar. Arbuthnot on Aliments,
2. Thing kept in pickle. -
3. Condition; ſtate. A word of contempt and ridicule.
How cam'ſt thou in this pickle P Shakeſpeare.
A Phyſician undertakes a woman with fore eyes; his way
was to dawb 'em with ointments, and while ſhe was in that
pickle, carry off a ſpoon.
L’Eſtrange,
Poor Umbra, left in this abandon'd pickle, :/irang
Een fits him down. Swift's Mºſellanies.
Pi'ckle or Pight'. m.ſ. A ſmall parcel of land inclºſed with
a hedge, which in ſome countries is called a pingle. Phillips.
To Pickle. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To preſerve in pickle.
Autumnal cornels next in order ſerv’d, -
In lees of wine well picki'd and preſervá. Dryden.
They ſhall have all, rather than make a war,
The Straits, the Guiney-trade, the herrings too;
. . Nay, to keep friendſhip, they ſhall pickle you. Dryden.
2. To ſeaſon or imbue highly with anything bad: as, a pickled
rogue, or one conſummately villainous. -
Pr'ckleHERRING. m. ſ. [pickle and herring.] Ajack-pudding ;
a merry-andrew ; a zany; a buffoon.
Another branch of pretenders to this art, without horſe or
piršleherring, lie ſnug in a garret. Spediator, N° 572.
The pickleherring found the way to ſhake him, for upon
his whiſtling a country jig, this unlucky wag danced to it
with ſuch a variety of grimaces, that the countryman could
not forbear ſmiling, and loſt the prize. Addison Spect.
Picklock. n.ſ. [pick and lock.]
1. An inſtrument by which locks are opened without the key.
We take him to be a thief too, Sir ; for we have found
upon him, Sir, a ſtrange picklock. Shakeſpeare.
Scipio, having ſuch a picklock, would ſpend ſo many years
in battering the gates of Carthage. Brown.
It corrupts faith and juſtice, and is the very picklock that
opens the way into all cabinets. L’Eſtrange.
Thou raiſedſt thy voice to deſcribe the powerful Betty or
the artful picklock, or Vulcan ſweating at his forge, and ſtamp-
ing the queen's image on viler metals. Arbuthnot.
2. The perſon who picks locks.
Pickpocket. n.ſ. [pick and pocket.] A thief who ſteals,
PI'ckPURse. ; by putting his hand privately into the pocket
or purſe.
I think he is not a pickpurſe nor a horſeſtealer Shakeſ carr.
It is reaſonable, when Eſquire South is loſing his money
to ſharpers and pickpockets, I ſhould lay out the fruits of my
honeſt induſtry in a law ſuit. Arbuthnot's Hiff. of j. Buſ.
Pickpockets and highwaymen obſerve ſtrict juſtice among
themſelves. Bentley's Sermons.
His fellow pickpurſe, watching for a job,
Fancies his fingers in the cully's fob. Swift.
A pickpurſe at the bar or bench. Swift.
If a court or country's made a job,
Go drench a pickpocket, and join the mob. Pope.
PickToo"TH. n. ſ. [pick and tooth.] An inſtrument by which
the teeth are cleaned.
If a gentleman leaves a picktooth caſe on the table after
dinner, look upon it as part of your vails. Swift.
Pickth A'NK. m. ſ. [pick and thank.] An officious fellow,
who does what he is not deſired; a whiſpering paraſite.
With pleaſing tales his lord's vain ears he fed,
A flatterer, a pickthank, and a lyer. . Fairfax.
Many tales devis'd,
Oft the ear of greatneſs needs muſt hear,
By ſmiling pickthanks and baſe newſmongers. Shakeſp.
The buſineſs of a pickthank is the baſeſt of offices.
L’Eſtrange.
If he be great and powerful, ſpies and pickthanks generally
provoke him to perſecute and tyrannize over the innocent and
the iuſt. South's Sermons.
Pict. m. ſ. ſpičius, Lat..] A painted perſon.
Your neighbours would not look on you as men,
But think the nations all turn'd pić's again. Lee.
Picto'RIAL. adj. [from piéfor, Lat.] - Produced by a painter.
A word not adopted by other writers, but elegant and uſeful.
Sea horſes are but groteſco delineations, which fill up
empty ſpaces in maps, as many pictorial inventions, not any
phyſical ſhapes. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
PI'ctURE. m. ſ. [pictura, Latin.]
1. A reſemblance of perſons or things in colours.
Madam, if that your heart be ſo obdurate,
Vouchſafe me yet your picture for my love,
The pi-sure that is hanging in your chamber. Shakespeare "
Pićures and ſhapes are but ſecondary objects, and pleaſe
or diſpleaſe but in memory. Hºn. Natural Hjºry.
i)evouring what he ſaw ſº well deſign'd,
He with an empty picture fed his mind. - Dryden.
As ſoon as he begins to ſpell, as many piāures of animals
ſhould be got him as can be found with the printed names to
them. Locke.
2. The ſcience of painting.
19 Q. 3. The
=m-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I E
P I E
c works of painters. **
Tº: !. he ſaw any well-expreſſed image of
- - in piiure or ſculpture, would uſually weep. //ott.
"#,...; ſatisfy him, but having it under my hand,
that I had no deſign to ruin the company of picture-drawers'
I do hereby give it him. Stillingſleet.
cºmbiance or repreſentation.
4. Aº. this pičiure of thy ſoul to ſee :
- - Dryden.
'Tis ſo far good, as it reſembles thee. . _y
It º . the unity of any idea, that it be conſidered .
Ver
one repreſentation or picture, though made up of *: A.
many particulars. 4. Ka'.
To Picture. v. a. [from the noun.]
. To paint; to repreſent by painting: * -
I } have not ſeen him ſo pictur'd Shakespeare Cymbeline.
He who cauſed the ſpring to be pictured, “.."; rhyme
for an expoſition. crew's Survey of Cornwall.
It is nºt allowable, what is obſervable of Raphael Urban ;
-* - Magdalen is pictured before our Saviour. waſh-
sº *::: knces, ‘. will not conſiſt with the
ſtrict letter of the text. Brºwn'; Pulgar Erreurs.
Love is like the painter, who, being to draw the picture
of a friend having a blemiſh in one eye, would pºuſe only
the other ſide of his face. South's Sermons.
t.
2. To repreſen h theſe rueful ſpectacles of ſo many wretched
All filled wit -
cº ñº, that even I, that do but hear it from you,
and dopičiure it in my mind, do greatly pity it. Speºſer.
}.ond man, - r + --
See here thy piºur'd life. Thomſºn's JPinter.
To PIDDLE. v. n. [This word is obſeure in its º ;
sing, derives it from picciolo, Italian; or petit, Fr. little ;
Mr. Lye thinks the diminutive of the Welſh brºta, to eat;
perhaps it comes from peddle, for skinner gives for its primi-
tive ſignification, to deal in little things.] - -
1. To pick at table; to feed ſqueamiſhly, and without appetite.
From ſtomach ſharp, and hearty feeding,
To piddle like a lady breeding. Swift's Miſſellanies.
2. To trifle; to attend to ſmall parts rather than to the ".
1/1/.
Pippler. n.ſ.. [from piddle.) One that eats ſqueamiſhly, and
without appetite. - - -
PIE. n.ſ. [This word is derived by Skinner from kiczan, to build,
that is to build of paſte ; by junius derived by contraction
from paſſy; if paſties, doubled together without walls, were
the firſt pies, the derivation is eaſy from pie, a foot; as in
fome provinces, an apple paſty is ſtill called an apple foot.]
1. Any cruſt baked with ſomething in it.
No man's pie is freed
From his ambitious finger. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
Mincing of meat in pies ſaveth the grinding of the teeth,
and therefore more nouriſhing to them that have weak tecth.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
He is the very Withers of the city; they have bought more
editions of his works, than would ſerve to lay under all their
pies at a lord mayor's Chriſtmas. Dryden.
Chuſe your materials right;
From thence of courſe the figure will ariſe,
And elegance adorn the ſurface of your pies. King.
Eat beef or pic-cruſt, if you'd ſerious be. Ring.
2. [Pica, Lat.] A magpie ; a particoloured bird.
The pie will diſcharge thee for pulling the reſt. Tiſſºr.
The raven croak'd hoarſe on the chimney's top,
And chattering pies in diſmal diſcords ſung. Shakeſp.
Who taught the parrot human notes to try,
Qr with a voice endu'd the chatt’ringpie?
'Twas witty want. Dryden.
3. The old popiſh ſervice book, ſo called, as is ſuppoſed, from
the different colour of the text and rubrick.
4. Cock and pie was a ſlight expreſſion in Shakeſpeare's time, of
which I know not the meaning.
Mr. Slender, come ; we ſtay for you.-
– I'll eat nothing, I thank you, Sir.—
–By cock and pie, you ſhall not chuſe, Sir ; come,
COInc. Shakespeare Merry Wives of I/indſºr.
PIE BAL.D. adj. [from pie.] Of various colours; diverſified in
colour.
It was a particoloured dreſs,
Of patch'd and piebald languages. Hudibrar.
They would think themſelves miſerable in a patched coat,
*nd yet contentedly ſuffer their minds to appear abroad in a
fººd livery of coarſe patches and borrowed ſhreds. L.
They aré pleaſed to hear of a piebald horſe that is ſtrayed
** a field near Iſlington, as of a whole troop that has
been lºgged in any foreign adventure. Spediator, No 452.
cº * lº, and piebald, linſey-woolſey brothers,
PIECE. m. * ſome, and ſhirtleſs others. Pope.
I. A patch.
2. A part of a whole ; a fragment.
ſing it out piece by piece Ezekiel xxiv
- - - (xiv. 26.
in º tearing leſt Paul ſhould have bech pulled
* &gt; *w. * “mmanded to take him by force. ‘Aci.
Ainſworth.
Theſe leſſer rocks or great bulky ſtones, that lie ſcattered
in the ſea or upon the land, are they not manifeſt fragment,
and pieces of theſe greater maſſes. - Burnet.
A man that is in Rome can ſcarce ſee an objećt, that does
not call to mind a piece of a Latin poet or hiſtorian. Addiſon.
3. A part. -
It is accounted a piece of excellent knowledge, to know
the laws of the land. Tilºſºn.
4. A piéture.
If unnatural, the fineſt colours are but dawbing, and the
piece is a beautiful monſter at the beſt. Dryden.
Each heav'nly piece unweary'd we compare,
Match Raphael's grace with thy lov'd Guido's air. Pope.
5. A compoſition; performance.
He wrote ſeveral pieces, which he did not aſſume the ho-
nour of. Addiſon.
6. A fingle great gun.
A piece of ord'nance 'gainſt it I have plac'd, Shake?care.
Many of the ſhips have braſs pieces, whereas every piece at
leaſt requires four gunners to attend it. Raleigh's Hºys.
Pyrrhus, with continual battery of great pieces, did batter
the mount. Kncle's Hiſtory % the Turks.
7. A hand gun.
When he cometh to experience of ſervice abroad, or is
put to a piece or a pike, he maketh as worthy a ſoldier as any
nation he meeteth with. Spenſer.
The ball goes on in the direétion of the flick, or of the
body of the piece out of which it is ſhot. Cheyne.
8. A coin; a ſingle piece of money.
When once the poet's honour ceaſes,
From reaſon far his tranſports rove;
And Boileau, for eight hundred pieces,
Makes Louis take the wall of Jove. Prior.
9. In ridicule and contempt: as, a piece of a lawyer or ſmatterer.
1c. A-PIEcE. To each.
I demand, concerning all thoſe creatures that have eyes
and ears, whether they might not have had only one eye and
one ear a-piece. More's Antidote againſ, Atheiſm.
11. Of a Piece with. Like; of the ſame ſort; united; the
ſame with the reſt.
Truth and fiction are ſo aptly mix’d,
That all ſeems uniform and of a piece. Roſammon.
When Jupiter granted petitions, a cockle made requeſt,
that his houſe and his body might be all of a piece. L’Eſtr.
My own is of a piece with his, and were he living, they
are ſuch as he would have written. Dryden.
I appeal to my enemies, if I or any other man could have
invented one which had been more of a piece, and more de-
pending on the ſerious part of the deſign. Dryden.
Too juſtly vaniſh’d from an age like this;
Now ſhe is gone, the world is of a piece. Dryden.
Nothing but madneſs can pleaſe madmen, and a poet muſt
be ºf a piece with the ſpectators, to gain a reputation. Dryden.
To Piece. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To enlarge by the addition of a piece.
I ſpeak too long, but 'tis to piece the time,
To draw it out in length, Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
If aught within that little ſeeming ſubſtance,
Or all of it with our diſpleaſure picº’d,
And nothing more may fitly like your grace,
She is yours. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Plant it with women as well as men, that it may ſpread
into generations, and not be pieced from without. Bacon.
2. To join; to unite.
3. To Piece out. To encreaſe by addition.
He pieces out his wife's inclination; he gives her folly mo-
tion and advantage. Shakeſp. Merry Iłives of I/indſor.
Whether the picting out of an old man's life is worth the
pains, I cannot tell. - Temple.
To Piece. v. n. [from the noun..] To join; to coaleſce; to
be compacted.
Let him, that was the cauſe of this, have power
To take off ſo much grief from you, as he -
Will piece up in himſelf. Shakespeare
The cunning prieſt choſe Plantagenet to be the ſubject
his pupil ſhould perſonate; becauſe he was more in the pre-
ſent ſpeech of the people, and it pieced better and followed
more cloſe upon the bruit of Plantagenet's eſcape. Bacon.
Piercer. n.ſ.' [from piece..] One that pieces.
PIE cel Ess. %; [from piece..] Whole ; compact; not made
*Darate D16 CCS.
of "... poor types of God, round circles; ſo -
Religion's types the piece'ſ centers flow, }
And are in all the lines which all ways go. Donne.
PieceMEAl. adv. ſpice and mel; a word in Saxon of the ſame
import.] In pieces; in fragments.
Why did I not his carcaſs piecemeal tear,
And caſt it in the ſea.
I'll be torn piecemeal by a horſe, -
E’er I'll take you for better or worſe. * Hudibras.
Neither was the body then ſubject to diſtempers, to die by
piecemeal, and languiſh under coughs or conſumptions, §:
Denham.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">eſcº
tºt,
rºl,
ſlow
P I E
Stage editors printed from the common piecemeal written
parts in the playhouſe. Pope.
Piecemeal they win this acre firſt, then that;
Glean on and gather up the whole eſtate. Pope.
'PIECEMEAL. adj. Single; ſeparate ; divided.
Other blaſphemies level; ſome at one attribute, ſome at an-
other: but this by a more compendious impiety, ſhoots at his
very being, and as if it ſcorned theſe piecemeal guilts, ſets up
a ſingle monſter big enough to devour them all. Gov. of the Tong.
Pied. adj. [from pie ] Variegated ; particoloured.
They deſire to take ſuch as have their feathers of pied,
orient and various colours. Abbot's Deſcript. of the IWorld.
All the yeanlings, which were ſtreak'd and pied,
Should fall as Jacob's hire. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
Pied cattle are ſpotted in their tongues. Bacon.
The ſeat, the ſoft wool of the bee,
The cover, gallantly to ſee,
The wing of a fied butterfly,
I trow 'twas ſimple trimming. Drayton.
Meadows trim with daiſies pied,
Shallow brooks and rivers wide. Milton.
Pie'DNEss. n.ſ.. [from pied.] Variegation; diverſity of colour.
There is an art, which in their piedneſ, ſhares
With great creating nature. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
PIE'LED. adj. Perhaps for peeled, or bald; or piled, or having
ſhort hair.
Piel'd prieſt, doſt thou command me be ſhut out
I do. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
PI'Epowder court. n.ſ. [from pied, foot, and pouldre, duſty.]
A court held in fairs for redreſs of all diſorders committed
therein.
PIE.R. m. ſ. [tierre, Fr.] The columns on which the arch of
a bridge is raiſed.
Oak, cedar and cheſnut are the beſt builders, for piers
ſometimes vet, ſometimes dry, take elm. Bacon.
The Engliſh took the galley, and drew it to ſhore, and
uſed the ſtones to reinforce the pier. Hayward.
The bridge, conſiſting of four arches, is of the length of
ſix hundred and twenty-two Engliſh feet and an half: the
dimenſions of the arches are as follows, in Engliſh meaſure;
the height of the firſt arch one huridred and nine feet, the
diſtance between the piers ſeventy-two feet and an half; in
the ſecond arch, the diſtance of the piers is one hundred and
thirty feet; in the third, the diſtance is one hundred and nine
feet; in the fourth, the diſtance is one hundred and thirty-
eight feet. - Arbuthnot on Coins.
To PIERCE. v. a. [percer, Fr.]
1. To penetrate; to enter; to force.
Steed threatens ſteed in high and boaſtful neighs,
Piercing the night's dull ear. Shakeſp. Henry V.
The love of money is the root of all evil; which while
ſome coveted after, they have pierced themſelves through with
many ſorrows. 1 Tim. vi. Io.
With this fatal ſword, on which I dy'd,
I pierce her open'd back or tender ſide. Dryden.
The glorious temple ſhall ariſe,
And with new luſtre pierce the neighb'ring ſkies. Prior.
2. To touch the paſſions: to affect.
Did your letters pierce the queen;
She read them in my preſence,
And now and then an ample tear trill'd down. Shakeſp.
To Pierce. v. n.
1. To make way by force.
Her ſighs will make a batt'ry in his breaſt;
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart. Shakeſp.
There is that ſpeaketh like the piercings of a ſword; but
the tongue of the wiſe is health. Proverbs xii. 18.
Short arrows, called ſprights, without any other heads,
ſave wood ſharpened, were diſcharged out of muſkets, and
would pierce through the ſides of ſhips, where a bullet would
not pierce. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. To ſtrike; to move; to affect.
Say, ſhe be mute, and will not ſpeak a word;
Then I'll commend her volubility;
And ſay ſhe uttereth piercing eloquence. Shakeſp.
3. To enter; to dive.
She would not pierce further into his meaning, than him-
ſelf ſhould declare, ſo would ſhe interpret all his doings to be
accompliſhed in goodneſs. Sidney, b. ii.
All men knew Nathaniel to be an Iſraelite; but our Sa-
viour piercing deeper, giveth further teſtimony of him than
men could have done. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
4. To affect ſeverely.
They provide more piercing ſtatutes daily to chain up the
poor, Shakeſp.
Piercer. m. ſ. [from pierce.]
1. An inſtrument that bores or penetrates.
Cart, ladder and wimble, with perſer and pod. Tuſſºr.
2. The part with which inſects perforate bodies.
The hollow inſtrument, terebra, we may engliſh piercer,
wherewith many flies are provided, proceeding from the
womp, with which they perfor e the tegument of leaves,
and though the hollow of it inject their eggs into the holes
they have made. " R., on the Creation,
P I G
3. One who perforates.
£1ERcingly, adv. [from pierce..] Sharply.
Pie Rºing Ness. n.ſ.. [from piercing.] Power of piercing.
We contemplate the vaſt reach and compaſs of our undef-
ſtanding, the Prodigious quickneſs and piercingneſ of its
thought. - - Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
Pl'E.T.Y. m. ſ. ſpietas, Lat. pieté, Fr.]
1. Diſcharge of duty to Gód.
What piety, pity, fortitude did Æneas poſſeſs beyond his
companions Peacham on Poetry.
, 'Till future infancy, baptiz'd by thee,
Grow ripe in years, and old in piety. Prior.
There be who faith prefer and piety to God. AMilton.
2: Duty to parents or thoſe in ſuperiouſ rélation.
Pig. n.ſ.. [bigge, Dutch.]
I. A young ſow or boar.
Some men there are, love not a gaping pig,
Some that are mad, if they behold a cat.
- Alba, from the white ſow nam’d,
That for her thirty ſuckingpigs was fam'd. Dryden.
The fleſh-meats of an eaſy digeſtion, are pig, lamb, rab-
bit and chicken. Floyer on the Humours.
Shakeſpeare.
2. An oblong maſs of lead or unforged iron.
A nodding beam or pig of lead,
May hurt the very ableſt head. Pope, ,
To Pig. v. a. [from the noun..] To farrow; to bring pigs.
Pigeon. n.ſ. Ipigeon, Fr.] A fowl bred in cots or a ſmall
houſe : in ſome places called dovecote. -
This fellow picks up wit as pigeons peas. Shakeſp.
A turtle, dove and a young pigeon. Gen. xv. 9.
Perceiving that the pigeon had loſt a piece of her taff,
through the next opening of the rocks rowing with all their
might, they paſſed ſafe, only the end of their poop was
bruiſed. Raleigh.
Fix'd in the maſt, the feather'd weapon ſtands,
The fearful pigeon flutters in her bands. Dryden.
See the cupola of St. Paul's covered with both ſexes, like
the outſide of a pigeon-houſe. Addiſon's Guardian.
This building was deſign’d a model,
Or of a pigeon-houſe or oven,
To bake one loaf, or keep one dove in. Swift.
Pi'GeoN Foot. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
Pi'GeoNLivered, adj. ſpigeon and liver.] Mild; ſoft ;
gentle.
I am pigeonliver'd, and lack gall -
To make oppreſſion bitter. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
PI'GGIN. n.ſ. In the northern provinces, a ſmall veſſel.
Pight, old preter, and paſt, paſſ of pitch..] Pitched; placed;
fixed; determined. - *
An hideous rock is pight,
Of mighty Magnes ſtone, whoſe craggy clift,
Depending from on high, dreadful to fight, -
Over the waves his rugged arms doth lift. Spenſer.
The body big and mightily pight,
Thoroughly rooted and wondrous height,
Whilom had been the king of the field,
And mockle maſt to the huſband did yield. Spenſer.
Then brought ſhe me into this deſart vaſt,
And by my wretched lover's ſide me pight.
Stay yet, you vile abominable tents,
Thus proudly pight upon our Phrygian plains. Shakeſp.
When I diſſuaded him from his intent,
I found him pight to do it. Shakesp.
Pi'GMENT. n. / [pigmentum, Lat..] Paint; colour to be laid
on any body.
Conſider about the opacity of the corpuſcles of black pig-
ments, and the comparative diaphaneity of white bodies. Bºyle.
PI'GMY. m. ſ. ſpigmée, Fr. pigmaus, Lat..] A ſmall nation,
fabled to be devoured by the cranes; thence anything mean
or inconſiderable.
When cranes invade, his little ſword and ſhield
The pigmy takes. Dryden's juvenal.
The criticks of a more exalted taſte, may diſcover ſuch
beauties in the antient poetry, as may eſcape the comprehen-
fion of us pigmies of a more limited genius. Garth.
But that it wanted room, -
It might have been a pigmy's tomb. Swift.
PIGNora’tion. n.ſ. (pigmera, Lat.] The aët of pledging.
Pi GNUT. n.ſ. ſpig and nut.]. An earth nut.
I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts. Shakeſp.
PI'GsNEY. n. ſ ſpiga, Sax. a girl...] . A word of endearinent
to a girl. It is uſed by Butler for the eye of a woman, I be-
lieve, improperly.
Shine upon me but benignly - -
With that one, and that other pigſhey. Hudibrar:
Piawi doeon. n.ſ. This word is uſed by Drayton as the
name of a fairy, and is a kind of cant word for any thing
petty or ſmall. -
Where's the Stoick can his wrath appeaſe,
To ſee his country ſick of Pym's diſeaſe ;
By Scotch invaſion to be made a prey
To ſuch figwig-on myrmidons as they
Fa. Queen.
Cleaveland,
Z PIKE,
-
;
i
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I L
P I L
|
PIKE. n.ſ. ſpique, Fr. his ſnout being ſharp. Skinner and
I º:i. or pike is the tyrant of the freſh waters: they are
bred ſome by generation, and ſome not ; as namely of a
weed called pickerel-weed, unleſs Geſner be much miſtaken;
for he ſays, this weed and other glutinous matter, with the
help of the ſun's heat in ſome particular months, and in ſome
ords apted for it by nature, do become pikes : doubtleſ, di-
vers pikes are bred after this manner, or are brought into ſome
ponds ſome other ways, that is paſt man's finding out; Sir
Francis Bacon obſerves the pike to be the longeſt lived of any
freſh water fiſh, and yet he computes it to be not uſually
above forty years ; and others think it to be not above ten
ears: he is a ſolitary, melancholy and bold fiſh; he breeds
}. once a year, and his time of breeding or ſpawning is
uſually about the end of February, or ſomewhat later, in
March, as the weather proves colder or warmer; and his
manner of breeding is thus; a he and a ſhe fire will uſually
go together out of a river into ſome ditch or creek, and there
the ſpawner caſts her eggs, º the º: º: º her
ime ſhe is caſting her ſpawn, but touches her not.
all the ti * c pawn, J/alton's Angler.
In a pond into which were put ſeveral fiſh and two pike;
upon drawing it ſome years afterwards there were left no fiſh,
but the pikes grown to a prodigious ſize, having devoured the
other fiſh and their numerous ſpawn. Hale.
The rise the tyrant of the floods, - Pope.
2. [Pique, Fr.] A long lance uſed by the foot ſoldiers, to keep
off the horſe, to which bayonets have ſucceeded.
Beat you the drum that it ſpeak mournfully,
Trail your ſteel pikes. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Let us, revenge this with our pike, ere we become rakes;
for I ſpeak this in hunger for bread, not for revenge. Shakeſp.
He wanted pikes to ſet before his archers. Shakeſp.
They cloſed, and locked ſhoulder to ſhoulder, their
pikes they ſtrained in both hands and therewith their buckler
in the left, the one end of the pike againſt the right foot, the
other breaſt-high againſt the enemy. Hayward.
A lance he bore with iron piis;
Th’one half would thruſt, the other ſtrike.
3. A fork uſed in huſbandry.
A rake for to rake up the fitches that lie,
A pike to pike them up handſome to drie. Tºr.
4. Among turners, two iron ſprigs between, which any thing
to be turned is faſtened. -
Hard wood, prepared for the lathe with raſping, they pitch
between the pikes. Mºxon.
Pi'KEd. adj. [fiqué, Fr.] Sharp; accuminated; ending in a
point. In Shakeſpeare, it is uſed of a man with a pointed
beard.
Why then I ſuck my teeth, and catechiſe
My pixed man of countries. Shakeſp. King john.
PrºEMAN. m. ſ. ſpike and man.] A ſoldier inj with a
pike. -
Three great ſquadrons of pikemen were placed againſt the
enemy. Knºlley's Hiſtory ºf the Turks.
Pi KEsta FF. m. ſ. ſpike and ſtaff] The wooden frame of a
pike.
To me it is as plain as a fiłºſłaff, from what mixture it is,
that this daughter ſilently lowers, t'other ſteals a kind look.
Tatler, Nº. 75.
Pira'stER. m. ſ. ſpilo/re, Fr. pilºſºro, Italian.] A ſquare 65.
lumn ſometimes inſulated, but oftner ſet within a wall, and
only ſhewing a fourth or a fifth part of its thickneſs. Diº.
Pilº/lers muſt not be too till and ſlender, leſt they re-
ſemble pillars; nor too dwarfiſh and groſs, left they imitate
Hudibras.
the piles or piers of bridges. J/otton.
Bailt like a temple, where piloffers round - -
Were ſet. Milton.
The curtain riſes, and a new frontiſpiece is ſeen, joined
to the great piloffers each ſide of the ſtage. Dryden.
Clap four ſlices of pilaſter on't,
That laid with bits of ruſtic makes a front. Pope.
PitchER. m. ſ. [Warhºrº ºys we ſhould read pilºhe, which
ſignifies a cloke or coat of ſkins, meaning the ſcabbard: this
is $onfirmed by junius, who renders fity, a garment of ſkins.
pylece, Sax. pellice, Fr. felliccia, Italian; pellis, Lat.] &gt;
I. *::::: º ... any thing lined with fur.
ck your ſword out of his pilcher
2. A fiſh i. a herring. p by the cars.
PiLF. m. ſ. [pile, Fr. pyle, Dutch.]
* A ſtrong piece of wood driven into the ground to make firm
d º c -
* "Fidge the Turks before broke b -
certain piles, and taking away of the ... *.*.*
the r d * . -
* driving iº be hollow or weak, he ſtrengthens it by
Hammer.
Shakeſp.
- A%xon.
wºn º º: the church of Harlem is ſupported by
es; as the ouſes i -
2. A heap; an arº." Amſterdam dTC, Locke.
hat is the Wºy to lay the city fl
And bury all which y the city flat,
In heaps and ...? et diſtinctly ranges
- ruin. -
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated . Shakeſp.
To his own portion what expence by th’ honr
Seems to flow from him how i' th' name of thrift,
Does he rake this together. Shakeſp.
By the water paſſing through the ſtone to its perpendicular
intervals, was brought thither all the metallic matter Ilow
lodged therein, as well as that which lies only in an undi-
geſted and confuſed pile. - //oodward.
3. Anything heaped together to be burned.
I'll bear your logs the while ; pray give me it,
I'll carry't to the pile. Shºp. Tempº.
Woe to the bloody city, I will even make the pile for fire
reat. Ezekiel xxiv. 9.
In Alexander's time, the Indian philoſophers, whe.
of living, lay down upon their funeral pile without any viſible
Concern. Collier on the /alue ºf Life.
The wife, and counſellor or prieſt,
Prepare and light his fun'ral fire,
And cheerful on the pile expire. Prior.
4. An edifice; a building.
Th' aſcending file ſtood fix’d her ſately height. Mill.
Not to look back ſo far, to whom this iſle
Owes the firſt glory of ſobrave a pile. Denham.
The pile o'erlook'd the town, and drew the fight. Dryd.
Fancy brings the vaniſh'd piles to view,
And builds imaginary Rome anew. Pope's 44 ſellanies.
No longer ſhall förſaken Thames
Lament his old Whitehall in flames; -
A pile ſhall from its aſhes riſe;
Fit to invade or prop the ſkies. Swift's Miſellanieſ.
5. A hair. ſpilus, Lat.]
Yonder's my lord, with a patch of velvet on', face; his
left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a half, but his right
cheek is worn bare. Sºakeſp. All's well that end, well.
6. Hairy ſurface; nap.
Many other ſorts of ſtones are regularly figured; the ami-
anthus of parallel threads, as in the pile of velvet. Grew.
7. [Pium, Lat..] The head of an arrow.
His ſpear a bent,
The pile was of a horſe fly's tongue,
Whoſe ſharpneſs nought revers'd. Drayton's Nymph.
8. [Pile, Fr. pila, Italian-J One ſide of a coin; the reverſe
of croſs.
Other men have been, and are of the ſame opinion, a
man may more juſtifiably throw up croſs and pile for his
opinions, than take them up ſo. Locke.
9. In the plural, piles.] The haemorrhoids.
Wherever there is any uneaſineſs, ſolicit the humours to-
wards that part, to procure the piles, which ſeldom miſs to
relieve the head. Arbuthnot.
To Pil. E. v. a.
1. To heap; to coacervate.
The fabrick of his folly, whoſe foundation
Js piºd upon his faith, and will continue
The ſtanding of his body. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale,
Let them pull all about my ears,
Pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might downſtretch
Below the beam of fight, yet will I ſtill
Be thus. - Shakespeare
Againſt beleagur'd heav'n the giants move;
Hills fil'd on hills, on mountains mountains lie, -
To make their mad approaches to the ſky. Dryden.
Men piſd on men, with active leaps ariſe,
And build the breathing fabrick to the ſkies. Addison.
In all that heap of quotations which he has piled up,
nothing is aimed at. Atterbury.
All theſe together are the foundation of all thoſe heaps of
Comments, which are piled ſo high upon authors, that it is
difficult ſometimes to clear the text from the rubbiſh. Felton.
2. To fill with ſomething heaped. -
Attabaliba had a great houſe piled upon the fides with great
wedges of gold. Abbot's Deſcript. of the J/orld.
PILEATED. adj. [pileus, Lat..] In the form of a cover or hat.
A pileated echinus taken up with different ſhells of ſeveral
kinds, - - - //oodward on Fºſſils.
Pr'LER. m. ſ. [from pik.J He who accumulates. -
To Pi'l FER. v. a. ſpiller, Fr.] To ſteal; to gain by petty
robbery. -
#. not only ſteal from each other, but pilfer away all
things that they can from ſuch ſtrangers as do land. Abbot.
He would not pilfer the victory ; and the defeat was
eaſy. - Bacon's Eſſays.
Leaders, at an army's head,
Hemm'd round with glories, pilfer cloth or bread,
As meanly plunder, as they bravely fought. Pºpe.
To Pi LFER. v. n. To pračtiſe petty theft.
Your purpos'd low correction
Is ſuch as baſeſt and the meaneſt wretches,
For pilfrings and moſt common treſpaſſes, * *
Are puniſh'd with. Shakespeare . Åing Lear.
They of thoſe marches -
Shall be a wall ſufficient to defend
Our inland from the pilfering borderers, Shakespeare
I came<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I L
P I M
I came not here on ſuch a trivial toy,
As a ſtray'd eve, or to purſue the ſtealth
Of pilfering wolf. - Milton.
When theſe plagiaries come to be ſtript of their pilfered
ornaments, there's the daw of the fable. L’Eſtrange.
Ev'ry ſtring is told,
For fear ſome pilf’ring hand ſhould make too bold. Dryden.
PI'lfe Re R. m. ſ. [from pilfer.] One who ſteals petty things.
Haft thou ſuffered at any time by vagabonds and pilferers *
Promote thoſe charities which remove ſuch peſts of ſociety
into priſons and workhouſes. Atterbury's Sermons.
P'LF ERINGLY. adv. With petty larceny ; filchingly.
Pi LF ERY. m. ſ. [from pilfer.] Petty theft.
A wolf charges a fox with a piece of pifery; the fox de-
nies, and the ape tries the cauſe. L’Eſtrange.
Pilgrim. n.ſ. [pelgrim, Dutch ; pelerin, Fr. pelegrino, Italian;
peregrinus; Lat. A traveller; a wanderer; particularly one
who travels on a religious account.
Two pilgrims, which have wandered ſome miles together,
have a hearts-grief when they are near to part. Drummond.
Granting they could not tell Abraham's footſtep from an
ordinary pilgrim's ; yet they ſhould know ſome difference be-
tween the foot of a man and the face of Venus. Stillingfleet.
Like pilgrims to th’ appointed place we tend ;
The world's an inn, and death the journey's end. Dryden.
To Pi'lgrim. v. m. [from the noun..] To wander; to ramble.
The ambulo hath no certain home or diet, but pilgrims up
and down every where, feeding upon all ſorts of plants. Grew.
Pilo RIMAGE. m. ſ. ſpelerinage, Fr.]
1. A long journey; travel ; more uſually a journey on account
of devotion.
We are like two men
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage. Shakeſp.
In priſon thou haſt ſpent a pilgrimage,
And, like a hermit, overpaſt thy days. Shakeſp.
Moſt miſerable hour, that time ere ſaw -
In laſting labour of his pilgrimage. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
Painting is a long pilgrimage; if we do not actually begin
, the journey, and travel at a round rate, we ſhall never arrive
at the end of it. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. Shakeſpeare uſed it for time irkſomely ſpent, improperly.
PILL. m. ſ. ſpilula, Lat. pillule, French..] Medicine made into
a ſmall ball or maſs.
In the taking of a potion or pills, the head and the neck
Thake. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
When I was ſick, you gave me bitter pills. Shakeſpeare.
The oraculous doctor's myſtick bills,
Certain hard words made into pills. Craſhaw.
To Pill. v. a. ſpiller, Fr.]
1. To rob ; to plunder.
So did he good to none, to many ill; -
So did he all the kingdom rob and pill. Hubberd.
The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes,
And loſt their hearts. Shakeſp. Richard II.
Large-handed robbers your grave maſters are,
And pill by law. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
You wrangling pirates, that fall out
In ſharing that which you have pill'd from me. Shakeſp.
Suppoſe pilling and polling officers, as buſy upon the people,
as thoſe flies were upon the fox. L'Eſtrange.
He who pil"d his province 'ſcapes the kaws,
And keeps his money, though he loſt his cauſe.
2. For peel; to ſtrip off the bark.
Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and pilled white
ſtreaks in them. Geneſis xxx. 37.
To Pill. v. n. To be ſtript away; to come off in flakes or
ſcoriae. This ſhould be peel; which ſee.
The whiteneſs pilled away from his cyes.
PILLAGE. m. ſ. ſpillage, Fr.]
1. Plunder ; ſomething got by plundering or pilling.
- Others, like ſoldiers,
Make boot upon the ſummer's velvet buds;
Dryden.
Tab. xi. 13.
Which pillage they with merry march bring home. Slai.
2. The act of plundering. -
Thy ſons make pillage of her chaſtity. Shakeſp.
To Pi'LLAGE. v. a. [from the noun..] To plunder ; to ſpoil.
The conſul Mummius, after having beaten their army,
took, pillaged and burnt their city. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Fºl.A.G.E.R. m. ſ. [from pillage.] A plunderer; a ſpoiler.
PI'LLAR. m. ſ. [pilier, Fr. pilar, Spaniſh; filºſºro, Italian ;
piler, Welſh and Armorick.j
I. A column.
Pillars or columns, I could diſtinguiſh into ſimple and com-
pounded. //otton's Architecture.
The palace built by Picus vaſt and proud,
Supported by a hundred pillars ſtood. Dryden.
2. A ſupporter; a maintainer.
Give them leave to fly, that will not ſtay; -
And call them pillars that will ſtand to us. Shakeſp.
Note, and you ſhall ſee in him
The triple pillar of the world transform'd --
Into a ſtrumpet's ſtool. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
I charge you by the law,
Whereof you are a well deſerving pillar,
Proceed to judgment. Shakeſp. Mºrch. of Venice.
Pi'ila Red. adj. from pillar.]
1. Supported by columns. -
A pillar'd ſhade
High overarch'd, and echoing walks between. Milton.
- If this fail,
The pillar'd firmament is rottenneſs,
And earth's baſe built on ſtubble. Milton.
2. Having the form of a column. -
Th’infuriate hill ſhoots forth the pillar'd flame. Thomſ.
PI'llion... n.ſ. [from pillow.]
I. A ſoft ſaddle ſet behind a horſeman for a woman to fit on.
The houſe and pillion both were gone;
Phyllis, it ſeems, was fled with John.
2. A pad ; a pannel; a low ſaddle.
I thought that the manner had been Iriſh, as alſo the furni-
ture of his horſe, his ſhank pillion without ſtirrups. Spenſer.
3. The pad of the ſaddle that touches the horſe.
Pi'ilory. n.ſ. [pillori, Fr. pillorium, low Latin.] A frame
erected on a pillar, and made with holes and folding boards,
through which the heads and hands of criminals are put.
I have ſtood on the pillory for the geeſe he hath killed.
- Shakeſpeare.
As thick as eggs at Ward in pillory. Pope.
The jeers of a theatre, the pillory and the whipping-poſt
are very near a-kin, Matts's Improvement of the Mind.
To Pi'llor Y. v. a. ſpillorier, Fr. from the noun.j To puniſh
with the pillory. .
To be burnt in the hand or pillored, is a more laſting re-
a proach than to be ſcourged or confin'd. Gov. of the Tongue.
PILLOW., n. ſ. [pyle, Saxon; pulewe, Dutch..] A bag of
down or feathers laid under the head to ſleep on.
Pluck ſtout men's pillows from below their heads.
Shakeſpeare.
Swift.
One turf ſhall ſerve as pillow for us both,
One heart, one bed, two boſoms, and one troth. Shakeſp.
A merchant died that was very far in debt, his goods and
houſhold ſtuff were ſet forth to ſale ; a ſtranger would needs
buy a pillow there, ſaying, this pillow ſure is good to ſleep on,
ſince he could ſleep on it that owed ſo many debts. Bacon.
- Thy melted maid,
Corrupted by thy lover's gold, :
His letter at thy pillow laid. Donne.
Their feathers ſerve to ſtuff our beds and pillows, yielding
us ſoft and warm lodging. - Ray on the Creation.
To P1’llow. v. a. To reſt any thing on a pillow.
When the ſun in bed,
Curtain'd with cloudy red,
Pillows his chin upon an orient waves
The flocking ſhadows pale
Troop to th’infernal jail.
§:...}ºf The cover of a pillow:
When you put a clean pillowcaſe on your lady's pillow,
faſten it well with pins. - Swift.
Pilo'sity. n.ſ.. [from piloſus, Lat..] Hairineſs. . .
At the years of puberty, all effects of heat do then come
on, as piloſity, more roughneſs in the ſkin. Bacon.
PIT.OT. n.ſ. [pilote, Fr. piloot, Dutch..] He whoſe office is
to ſteer the ſhip. -
When her keel ploughs hell,
And deck knocks heaven; then to manage her,
Becomes the name and office of a pilot. Ben. Johnſon.
To death I with ſuch joy reſort,
As ſeamen from a tempeſt to their port;
Yet to that port ourſelves we muſt not force,
Milton.
Denham:
Before our pilot, nature, ſteers our courſe.
What port can ſuch a pilot find, -
Who in the night of fate muſt blindly ſteer? Dryden.
The Roman fleet, although built by ſhipwrights, and con-
dućted by pilots without experience, defeated that of the
Carthaginians. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To Pi'lot. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſteer ; to direct in
the courſe. -
Pi Lot AGE. m. ſ. ſpi’.”ge, French, from pilot.]
1. Pilot's ſkill; knowledge of coaſts. . -
We muſt for ever abandon the Indies, and -
knowledge and pilºtage of that part of the world. Kaº.
2. A pilot's hire. . Ainſ.
Pilser. n.ſ. The moth or fly that runs into a candle flame.
Ainſ.
loſe all Our
PIME'NTA. m. ſ. [piment, French.] A kind of ſpice. • .
Pimento, from its round figure, and the place whence it is
brought, has been called Jamaica pepper, and from its mixt
flavour of the ſeveral aromaticks, it has obtained the name of
all-ſpice : it is a fruit gathered before it is ripe, and dried for
medicinal and culinary uſe, of the ſize of a ſmall pea, with
a brown and rough ſurface, and it reſembles that of cloves
more than any other ſingle ſpice. Hill's Materia Medica.
iQ R - PIMP.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I N
P I N
twr. a. ſ. ſpinº, Fr. Skinner.] One who provides gratifica-
"...ſº É of jº * a pander.
I’m courted by a - - A- r n - A -
As principal pimp to the mighty king Harry. Addison.
Lords keep a pimp to bring a wench ;
Somen of wit are but a kind
Of panders to a vicious mind;.
who proper objects muſt provide ~ : -
To gratify their luſt of pride. . . - Swift.
To Pimp. v. a. [from the noun..] To provide gratifications
for the luſt of others; to pander ; to procure.
But he's poſſeſt with a thouſand imps, -
To work whoſe ends his madneſs pimps. Swift.
Yet bards like theſe aſpir'd to laſting praiſe,
And proudly hop'd to pimp in future days. Anonymous.
PI'MPERNel. n.ſ. ſpinpºnſila, Latin; £imprenelle, French.]
A plant. -
A }. flower of the pimpernel conſiſts of one leaf ſhaped like
a wheel and cut into ſeveral ſegments; the pointal, which
riſes out of the empalement, is fixed like a nail in the middle
of the flower, and afterwards becomes a roundiſh fruit, which,
when ripe, opens tranſverſely into two parts, one incumbent
on the other, incloſing many angular ſeeds, which adhere to
the placenta. Miller.
Pi'Mping. adj. [himple menſch, a weak man, Dutch..] Little;
petty: as, a pimping thing. Skinner.
Prºmpte. n.ſ. [pompette, Fr.] A ſmall red puſtule. -
If Roſalinda is unfortunate in her mole, Nigranilla is as
unhappy in a pimple. Addiſon's Spee?.
If e'er thy gnome could ſpoil a grace,
Or raiſe a pimple on a beauteous face. Pope.
PI'mpled, adj. [from pimple..] Having red puſtules; full of
pimples: as, his face is pimpled.
- PIN. n.ſ. ſeſſingle, Fr. ſpina, ſpinula, Lat. ſpilla, Italian; ra-
ther from pennum, low Latin. Iſidore.]
1. A ſhort wire with a ſharp point and round head, uſed by
women to faſten their cloaths.
I'll make thee eat iron like an oſtridge, and ſwallow my
ſword like a great pin, ere thou and I part. Shakeſp.
Whatever ſpirit, careleſs of his charge,
His poſt neglects, or leaves the fair at large,
Shall feel ſharp vengeance ſoon o’ertake his fins,
Be ſtopt in vials, or transfixt with pins. Pope.
2. Anything inconſiderable or of little value.
Soon after comes the cruel Saracen,
In woven mail all armed warily,
And ſternly looks at him, who not a pin
Does care for look of living creature's eye. Fairy Queen.
His fetch is to flatter to get what he can ;
His purpoſe once gotten, a pin for thee than. Tuſſºr.
Tut, a pin; this ſhall be anſwer'd. Shakeſpeare.
'Tis fooliſh to appeal to witneſs for proof, when 'tis not a
pin matter whether the fact be true or falſe. L’Eſtrange.
3. Anything driven to hold parts together; a peg; a bolt.
With pins of adamant
And chains, they made all faſt. Milton's Par. Loft.
4. Any ſlender thing fixed in another body.
Bedlam beggars with roaring voices,
Sticks in their numb’d and mortified bare arms,
ſºns, woºden pricks, nails, ſprigs of roſemary. , Shakeſp.
Theſe bullets ſhall reſt on the pins; and there muſt be other
pins to keep them. Wilkins.
5. That which locks the wheel to the axle; a linch pin.
6. The central part.
Romeo is dead, the very pin of his heart cleft with the
blind hautboy's butſhaft. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
7. The pegs by which muſicians intend or relax their ſtriñºs.
8. A note; a ſtrain. In low language. º
A fir tree, in a vain ſpiteful humour, was mightily upon
the pin of commending itſelf, and deſpiſing the bramble. L’É/l.
As the woman was upon the peeviñ pin, a poor bod
comes, while the froward fit was upon her, to beg. L'E/ir.
9. A horny induration of the membranes of the eye. Hanmer.
Skinner ſeems likewiſe to fay the ſame. I ſhould rather think
it an inflammation, which cauſes a pain like that of a pointed
body piercing the eye.
Wiſh all eyes
Blind with the pin and web.
ić. A º roller made of wood.
hey drew his brownbread face on pretty gins
And made him ſtalk upon two rolling ; gins, Corbet.
*I. A noxious humour in a hawk's foot. Ainſ.
To PIN. v. a. [from the noun.] -
I. To faſten with pins.
*". º or two more are added upon the chief offenders,
*Y* Paper pinn'd upon the breaſt. Pope.
Not Cynthia when h x . *
* - Čr IIlanteau &gt;
E’er felt ſuch rage. spinn'd awry,
2. To faſten; to make faſt.
Shakeſpeare.
Pope.
- Our gates,
*ºws baſinºxid nº
* - 's Pen of themſelves, Shakeſp. Macbeth.
. To join ; to fix.
She lifted the princeſs from the earth, and ſo locks her in
embracing, as if ſhe would pin her to her heart. Shakeſp.
If removing my conſideration from the impreſſion of the
cubes to the cubes themſelves, I ſhall pin this one notion upon
every one of them, and accordingly conceive it to be really
in them; it will fall out, that I allow exiſtence to other en-
tities, which never had any. Digby of Bodies.
I’ve learn'd how far I'm to believe
Your pinning oaths upon your ſleeve. Hudibras.
They help to cozen themſelves, by chufing to pin their
faith on ſuch expoſitors as explain the ſacred ſcripture, in fa-
vour of thoſe opinions that they beforehand have voted or-
thodox. Locke.
It cannot be imagined, that ſo able a man ſhould take ſo
much pains to pin ſo cloſely on his friend a ſtory which, if he
himſelf thought incredible, he could not but alſo think ridi-
culous. Locke.
4. [Pinban, Sax.] To ſhut up 3 to incloſe ; to confine: as,
in pinfold.
If all this be willingly granted by us, which are accuſed to
pin the word of God in ſo narrow room, let the cauſe of the
accuſed be referred to the accuſer's conſcience. Hooker.
Pi'NcAs E. m. ſ. ſpin and caſe.] A pincuſhion. Ainſ.
Pi Nc ERs. n.ſ. [pincette, Fr. J
1. An inſtrument by which nails are drawn, or any thing is
griped, which requires to be held hard.
As ſuperfluous fleſh did rot,
Amendment ready ſtill at hand did wait,
To pluck it out with pincers fiery hot,
That ſoon in him was left no one corrupt jot, Fa. Queen,
2. The claw of an animal.
Every ant brings a ſmall particle of that earth in her pin-
cers, and lays it by the hole. Addiſon's Guardian.
To PINch. v. a. ſpincer, Fr.]
1. To ſqueeze between the fingers, or with the teeth.
When the doćtor ſpies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand,
The maid hath given conſent to go with him. Shakespeare .
2. To hold hard with an inſtrument.
3. To ſqueeze the fleſh till it is pained or livid.
Thou ſhalt be pinch'd
As thick as honey-combs, each pinch more ſtinging
Than bees that made them. Shakeſpeare's Tempe?.
He would pinch the children in the dark ſo hard, that he
left the print in black and blue. Arbuthnot's Hiſt, of j. Bull.
4. To preſs between hard bodies.
5. To gall; to fret.
As they pinch one another by the diſpoſition, he cries out,
no inore. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
6. To gripe; to oppreſs; to ſtraiten.
Want of room upon the earth pinching a whole nation,
begets the remedileſs war, vexing only ſome number of par-
ticulars, it draws on the arbitrary. Raleigh's Eſſays.
She pinch'd her belly with her daughter's too,
To bring the year about with much ado. Dryden.
Nic. Frog would pinch his belly to ſave his pocket. Arb.
7. To diſtreſs ; to pain. -
Avoid the pinching cold and ſcorching heat. Milton.
Afford them ſhelter from the wintry winds.
As the ſharp year pinches. Thomſºn's Autumn.
8. To preſs; to drive to difficulties.
The beaver, when he finds himſelf hard pinch'd, bites 'em
off, and by leaving them to his purſuers, ſaves himſelf.
L’Eſtrange.
When the reſpondent is pinched with a ſtrong objection,
and is at a loſs for an anſwer, the moderator ſuggeſts ſome
anſwer to the objection of the opponent. . Hatti.
9. To try throughly ; to force out what is contained within.
This is the way to pinch the queſtion ; therefore, let what
will come of it, I will ſtand the teſt of your method. Collier.
To Pi Nch. v. n.
1. To act with force, ſo as to be felt; to bear hard upon; to
be puzzling,
Å difficity pinchºth, nor will it eaſily be reſolved. Glanvi
But ‘. hold the ſcal
Know'ſt with an equal hand to hold the ſcalº, . .
See'ſt where the jº pinch, and where they fail. Dryd.
; to be frugal. - - - - -
2. Tº: is that waxeth rich by his warineſs and pinching.
Eccluſ. xi. 18.
The poor that ſcarce have wherewithal to eat,
will pinch and make the finging boy a treat. Dryden.
The bounteous player outgave the pinching lord. Dryden.
Pinch. n.ſ. ſpingon, French, from the verb.]
1. A painful ſqueeze with the fingers.
If any ſtraggler from his rank be found,
A pinch muſt for the mortal fin compound. Dryden.
. A gripe; a pain given.
2. A g #: ãº: be a pinch in death
More ſharp than this is. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
3. Oppreſſion;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I N
P I N
º
}
º,
l,
it,
#4,
lſ,
ji,
3. Oppreſſion; diſtreſs inflićted.
Return to her: no, rather Ichuſe
To be a comrad with the wolf and owl, - -
Neceſſity's ſharp pinch. Shakespeare. King Lear.
A farmer was put to ſuch a pinch in a hard winter, that he
was forced to feed his family upon the main ſtock. L’Eſtr.
4. Difficulty; time of diſtreſs. -
A good ſure friend is a better help at a pinch, than all the
ſtratagems of a man's own wit. Bacon.
The devil helps his ſervants for a ſeaſon; but when they
come once to a pinch, he leaves 'em in the lurch. L’Eſtrange.
The commentators never fail him at a pinch, and muſt ex-
cuſe him. - Dryden.
They at a pinch can bribe a vote. Swift's Micellanies.
... ; n. ſ. ſpinch, fift, and penny..] A miſer. Ainſ
pºscushion. n.ſ. ſpin, and cuſhion.]. A ſmall bag ſtuffed
with bran or wool on which pins are ſtuck.
She would ruin me in ſilks, were not the quantity, that
goes to a large pincuſhion, ſufficient to make her a gown and
etticoat. Addiſon's Guardian, No 27 I.
Thou art a retailer of phraſes, and doſt deal in remnants of
remnants, like a maker of pincuſhions. Congreve.
Pi's Dust. n. ſ. ſpin and duff..] Small particles of metal made
by cutting pins. -
The little parts of pinduſ, when mingled with ſand, can-
not, by their mingling, make it lighter. Digby.
PINE. n.ſ. ſpinus, Lat. pin, French.]
The pine-tree hath amentaceous flowers or katkins, which
are produced, at remote diſtances from the fruit, on the ſame
tree'; the ſeeds are produced in ſquamous cones: to which
ſhould be added, that the leaves are longer than thoſe of a
fir-tree, and are produced by pairs out of each ſheath. Miller.
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
To wag their high tops, and to make a noiſe,
when they are fretted with the guſts of heaven. Shakeſp.
Thus droops this lofty pine, and hangs his ſprayes;
Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her younger days. Shakeſp.
Go forth unto the mount, and fetch pine-branches. Nehem.
To PIN.E. v. a. ſpiman, Sax. pijnen, Dutch.]
1. To languiſh; to wear away with any kind of miſery.
My hungry eyes through greedy covetiſe,
With no contentment can themſelves ſuffice;
But having, pine, and having not, complain. Spenſºr.
I burn, I pine, I periſh,
If I atchieve not this young modeſt #. Shakeſp.
Since my young lady's going into France, the fool hath
much pined away. Shakeſp. King Lear.
See, ſee the pining malady of France,
Behold the moſt unnat'ral wounds,
Which thou thyſelf haft giv'n her woful breaſt. Shakeſp.
Ye ſhall not mourn, but pine away for your iniquities.
Ezekiel xxiv. 23.
The wicked with anxiety of mind
Shall pine away; in fighs conſume their breath. Sandys,
To me who with eternal famine pine,
Alike is hell, or paradiſe, or heav'n. Milton's Par. Loſt.
Farewell the year, which threaten’d ſo
The faireſt light the world can ſhow ;
Welcome the new, whoſe ev'ry day,
Reſtoring what was ſnatch'd away
By pining ſickneſs from the fair,
That matchleſs beauty does repair. //aller.
This night ſhall fee the gaudy wreath decline,
The roſes wither, and the lilies pine. Tickell.
2. To languiſh with deſire.
We may again
Frce from our feaſts and banquets bloody knives,
Do faithful homage and receive free honours:
All which we pine for. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
We ſtood amaz'd to ſee your miſtreſs mourn,
Unknowing that ſhe pin'd for your return. Dryden.
Your new commander need not pine for action. Philips.
To PIN.E. v. a.
1. To wear out; to make to languiſh.
Part us; I towards the north,
Where ſhivering cold and ſickneſs pines the clime.
Shakespeare
Beroe pin'd with pain,
Her age and anguiſh from theſe rites detain. Dryden.
Thus tender Spencer liv'd, with mean repaſt
Content, depreſs'd with penury, and pin'd
In foreign realm : yet not debas'd his verſe. Philips.
2. To grieve for; to bemoan in filence.
Abaſh'd the devil ſtood,
Virtue in her ſhape how lovely, ſaw ; and pin'd
His loſs. Milton’s Paradiſe Loſt, b. iv.
Pi'NEAPPLE. n.ſ.
The pineapple hath a flower conſiſting of one leaf, divided
into three parts, and is funnel-ſhaped: the embryos are pro-
duced in the tubercles: theſe become a fleſhy fruit full of
juice: the ſeeds, which are lodged in the tubercles, are very
ſmall and almoſt kidney-ſhaped. Miller.
Try if any words can give the taſte of a pineapple, and
make one have the true idea of its reliſh. Locke.
If a child were kept where he never ſaw but black and
white, he would have no more ideas of ſcarlet, than he that
never taſted a pineapple, has of that particular reliſh. Locke.
PI NEAL. adj. ſpineale, Fr.] Reſembling a pineapple. An epi-
thet given by Des Cartes from the form, to the gland which
he imagined the ſeat of the ſoul.
Courtiers and ſpaniels exactly reſemble one another in the
pineal gland. . . . Arbuthnot and Pope.
Pi’NFEATHERED. adj. [pin and feather.] Not fledged ; having
the feathers yet only beginning to ſhoot.
We ſee ſome raw pinfather'd thing
Attempt to mount, and fights and heroes fing;
Who for falſe quantities was whipt at ſchool. Dryden.
PINFoED. m. ſ. ſpinban, Sax. to ſhut up, and ſold.] A place
in which beaſts are confined.
The Iriſh never come to thoſe raths but armed; which the
Engliſh nothing ſuſpecting, are taken at an advantage, like
ſheep in the pinfold. Spenſer on Ireland.
I care not for thee.—
—If I had thee in Lipſbury pinfold, I would make thee
care for me. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Confin’d and peſter'd in this Éſ. here,
Strive to keep up a frail and feveri
being. AMilton.
Oaths were not purpos'd more than law
To keep the good and juſt in awe,
But to confine the bad and ſinful,
Like moral cattle in a pinfold. Hudibras.
PI'NGLE. n.ſ. A ſmall cloſe; an incloſure. Ainſ.
Pr'NMoney, n. ſ. ſpin and money..] Money allowed to a wife
for her private expences without account.
The woman muſt find out ſomething elſe to mortgage,
when her pinmoney is gone. Addiſon's Guardian.
PINGUID. adj. [pinguis, Lat.] Fat; unétuous. Little uſed.
Some clays are more pinguid, and other more ſlippery;
yet all of them are very tenacious of water on the ſurface.
Mortimer's Huſbandry.
PI'NHole. m. ſ. ſpin and hole..] A ſmall hole, ſuch as is
made by the perforation of a pin.
The breaſt at firſt broke in a ſmall pinhole.
Pi'NIon. m. ſ. ſpignon, Fr.
1. The joint of the wing remoteſt from the body.
2. Shakeſpeare ſeems to uſe it for a feather or quill of the wing.
He is pluckt, when hither
JWiſeman.
He ſends ſo poor a pinion of his wing. Shakeſp.
3. wift
ow oft do they with golden pinions cleave
The flitting ſkies, like flying purſuivant. Fairy Queen.
The God, who mounts the winged winds,
Faſt to his feet the golden pinions binds,
That high through fields of air his flight ſuſtain. Pope.
Though fear ſhould lend him pinions like the wind,
Yet ſwifter fate will ſeize him from behind. Swift.
4. The tooth of a ſmaller wheel, anſwering to that of a larger.
5. Fetters for the hands. Ainſ.
To P1’NIon. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To bind the wings.
Whereas they have ſacrificed to themſelves, they become
themſelves ſacrifices to the inconſtancy of fortune, whoſe
wings they thought by their ſelf-wiſdom to have pinioned.
- Bacon's Eſſays, N° 24.
2. To confine by binding the wings.
3. To bind the arm to the body.
A ſecond ſpear ſent with equal force,
His right arm pierc'd, and holding on, bereſt
His uſe of both, and pinion'd down his left.
4. To confine by binding the elbows to the ſides.
Swarming at his back the country cry’d,
And ſeiz'd and pinion'd brought to court the knight.
Dryden.
Dryden.
5. To ſhackle; to bind.
Know, that I will not wait pinion'd at your maſter's court;
rather make my country's high pyramids my gibbet, and hang
me up in chains. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra,
You are not to go looſe any longer, you muſt be ºnion d.
Shakeſp. Merry //ives of Windſor.
O looſe this frame, this knot of man untie!
That my free ſoul may uſe her wing,
Which now is pinion'd with mortality,
As an entangled, hamper'd thing. Herbert.
In vain from chains and fetters free,
The great man boaſts of liberty; - -
He's pinion'd up by formal rules of ſtate. Norris.
6. To bind to. -
A heavy lord ſhall hang at ev'ry wit:
And whilé on fame's triumphant car they ride,
Some ſlave of mine be pinion'd to their ſide. Danciad.
P.N.K.
- * &gt; 1
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I O
P I P
i
Pist. n.ſ. ſpin-, Sax. pinte, Fr. pinta, low Lat. J
Pink. m. ſ. ſpince, Fr. from pink, Dutch, an eye; whence
tº a &gt; ord aillet. F. . . -
I. º lº. ſº of the gilliflower kind. - h
In May and June come pink, of all forts; eſpecially the
bluſh pink. - Bacon's Eſſays.
2. An eye; commonly a ſmall eye: as, pink-eyed.
- Come, thou monarch of the vine,
mpy Bacchus, with pink cyne, -
º ** our cares be drown'd. Shakespeare.
3. Any thing ſupremely excellent. I know not whether from
the flower or the eye, or a corruption of finace.
I am the very pink of courteſy. Shakeſp. Rom. and jul.
4. A colour uſed by painters. -
Pink is very ſuſceptible of the other colours by the mixture;
if you mix brown-red with it, you will make it a very earthy
colour. - Dryden's Dyrºney.
- 5. [Pinque, Fr.] A kind of heavy narrow-ſterned ſhip.
This pink is one of Cupid’s carriers;
Gº: ſhe is my prize. Sha'ſ ſp. Merry */ J/indſ.
6. A fiſh ; the minow. iſworth.
To PIN K. v. a. [from pink, Dutch, an eye.] To work in oy-
let holes; to pierce in ſmall holes. - - -
A haberdaſher's wife of ſmall wit rail'd upon me, till her
pinºd portinger fell off her head. Shºp. Henry VIII.
The ſea-hedgehog is encloſed in a round ſhell, handſomely
wrought and pink'd. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Happy the climate, where the beau
Wears the ſame ſuit for uſe and ſhow ;
And at a ſmall expence ?. wife, - -
If once well pink'd, is cloath'd for life. Priºr.
To PINK. v. n. Lpincken, Dutch ; from the noun..] To wink
with the eyes. - - - -
A hungry fox lay winking and pinking, as if he had fore
CVCS. L'E/?range's Falles.
Pi NMAKER. m. ſ. ſpin and make.] He who makes pins.
PIN's AcE. m. ſ. ſpinaſe, Fr. pinnacia, Italian; finaga, Span.]
A boat belonging to a ſhip of war. It ſeems formerly to
have ſignified rather a ſmall ſloop or bark attending a larger ſhip.
Whilſt our pinnace anchors in the downs, -
Here ſhall they make their ranſom bn the ſand. Shafe?.
For fear of the Turks great fleet, he came by night in a
ſmall pinnace to the Rhodes. Knolles's Hiſ of the Tºrº.
I ſent a pinnace or poſt of advice, to make a diſcovery of
the coaſt, before I adventured my greater ſhip. Spelman.
Thus to ballaſt love,
I ſaw I had love's pinnace overfraught. Donne.
I diſcharged a bark, taken by one of my pinnaces, coming
from cape Blanch. Raleig's Apolºgy.
A pinnace anchors in a craggy bay. 4ſilon.
Swift as a ſwallow ſweeps the liquid way,
The winged pinnace ſhot along the ſea.
“PºsNAcLF. n.ſ. ſpinnacle, Fr. pinna, Lat.]
1. A turret or elevation above the reſt of the building.
My letting ſome men go up to the pinnacle of the temple,
was a temptation to them to caſt me dºwn headlong. K. Char.
He who deſires only heaven, laughs at that enchantment,
which engages men to climb a tottering pinnacle, where the
ſtanding is uneaſy, and the fall deadly. Decay of Piety.
He took up ſhip-money where Noy left it, and, being a
jºgº, Carried it up to that pinnacle, from when he almoſt
Pope.
broke his neck. Clarendon.
Some metropolis
With gliſºring ſpires and pinnacle, adorn'd. Milton.
2. A high ſpiring point. º -
- The flipp'ry tops of human ſtate,
The gilded finnacles of fate. Cowley.
Pi'SNER. m. ſ. ſtrom pinna or pinion.]
1. The appet of a head which flies looſe.
He goodly countenance I've ſeen, -
Set off with kerchief ſtarch'd, and pinners clean. Gay.
An antiquary will ſcorn to mention 4 pinner or a night-raíl,
but will talk on the vitta. 4ddiſºn on Ancient Maº.
2. A pinmaker. Ainſworth.
ºr's Nock. m. ſ. The tom-tit. Ainſworth.
Half a
‘"art; in medicine, twelve ounces ; a liquid meaſure.
Well, you'll not believe me generous, till I crack half a
fint with you at my own charges. Dryden.
..º. n: / In aſtronomy, the fights of an aſtrolabe. Dž.
******: '... ſ. ſpicnier, from pion, obſolet. Fr. pion, accord-
"g to Scaliger, comes from Peo for pedito, a foot ſoldier, who
** ſºmerly employed in digging for the army. A pioneer
is in Dutch, ſhagenier, from ſpagº, a ſpade; whence junius
imagines that the French borrowed Pºgenier, which was after-
* i. {...] º ... tº is to level the
Well à. ld S5 º ink mines in military Operations.
A worthy. O jmo e, can'ſt work i'th ground ſo faſt :
y pioneer : Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Three try *** ~~! - - -
theſe we § ** **periments, ſuch as themſelves think good ;
pianº Or miners. Bacon.
is pioneers
Even the pat
Cºns - - -
6 Paths, and make the highways plain. Fairfax.
Of labouring pioneers
A multitude with ſpades and axes arm’d,
To lay hills plain, fell woods or vallies fill. Milton.
The Romans, after the death of Tiberius, ſent thither an
army of pioneers to demoliſh the buildings, and deface the
beauties of the iſland. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
PI(oNING. m. ſ. Works of pioneers. Spenſer.
P1 on Y. m. ſ. ſpaconia, Lat.] A large flower. See PeoNy.
PI'OUS. adj. [pius, Lat. pieux, Fr.]
1. Careful of the duties owed by created beings to God; godly;
religious ; ſuch as is due to ſacred things.
Pious awe that fear'd to have offended. Milton.
2. Careful of the duties of near relation.
As he is not called a juſt father, that educates his children
well, but pious ; ſo that prince, who defends and well rules
his people, is religious. Taylor's Rule ºf Living Holy.
Where was the martial brother's pious caré
Condemn'd perhaps ſome foreign ſhore to tread.
3. Practiſed under the appearance of religion.
I ſhall never gratify ſpightfulneſs with any finiſter thoughts
of all whom pious frauds have ſeduced. King Charles.
Pi'ously. adv. [from pious.] In a pious manner; religiouſly;
with regard; ſuch as is due to ſacred things.
The prime act and evidence of the Chriſtian hope is, to
ſet induſtriouſly and piouſly to the Performance of that coſidi.
tion, on which the promiſe is made. 11ammond.
See lion-hearted Richard, with his force -
Drawn from the North, to Jury's hallow'd plains ;
Pope.
Piouſly valiant. Philips.
This martial preſent piºuſly deſign'd,
The loyal city give their beſt-loºd king. Dryden.
Let freedom never periſh in your hands
But piºuſly tranſmit it to your children. Addison's Catz.
PiP. m. ſ. ſtippe, Dutch ; pºie, Fr. deduced by Skinner from
pituita ; but probably °ning from pipio or pipil, on account
of the complaining cry.]
I. A defluxion with which fowls are troubled; a horny pellicle
that grows on the tip of their tongues.
When murrain reigns in hogs or ſheep,
And chickens languiſh of the pip.
A ſpiteful vexatious gipſy died of the pip. L'A/irange.
2. A ſpot on the cards. Tknow not from what original, unleſs
from pie?, painting; in the country, the pictured or court
cards are called picts.
When our women fill their imaginations with pips and
counters, I cannot wonder at a new-born child, that was
marked with the five of clubs. Addison's Guardian.
To PIP. v. a. ſpipio, Lat.] To chirp or cry as a bird.
It is no unfrequent thing to hear the chick pip and cry in the
Hudibrar.
egg, before the ſhell be broken. Boyle.
PIPE. m. ſ. [pil, Welſh; Pipe, Saxon.] -
1. Any long hollow body; a tube.
The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
We powt upon the morning, are unapt
Tº give or to forgive; but when wºve fluff'd
º Theſe pipes, and theſe conveyances of blood
With wine and feeding, we have ſuppler ſouls. Shakespeare
The Part of the pipe, which was lowermoſt, will become
higher; ſo that water aſcends by deſcending. J/ilkins.
It has many ſprings breaking out of the ſides of the hills,
and vaſt quantities of wood to make pipes of. Addiſon.
An animal, the nearer it is to its original, the more pipes
it hath, and as it advanceth in age, ſtill fewer. Arbuthnot.
2. A tube of clay through which the fume of tobacco is drawn
into the mouth. -
Try the taking of fumes by pipes, as in tobacco and other
things, to dry and comfort. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
His ancient pipe in ſable dy'd,
And half unſmoak'd lay by his ſide. Swift.
My huſband's a ſot, -
With his pipe and his pot. Swift.
3. An inſtrument of hand muſick. - - - -
I have known, when there was no muſick with him but the
drum and the fire, and now had he rather hear the taber and
the pipe. Shakeſp.
The ſolemn pipe and dulcimer. . . A4ilton.
The ſhrill ſound of a ſmall rural pipe,
Was entertainment for the infant ſtage. Roſcommon.
There is no reaſon, why the ſound of a pipe ſhould leave
traces in their brains. - - - Locke.
4. The organs of voice and reſpiration; as, the wind-pipe.
The exerciſe of ſinging openeth the breaſt and pipes. Peac.
5. The key of the voice.
My throat of war be turn'd, -
Which quired with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch. Sºſº. Coriolanus.
6. An office of the exchequer.
That office of her majeſty's exchequer, we, by a metaphor,
call the pipe, becauſe the whole receipt is finally conveyed
into it by the means of divers final pºe; or quilis, as water
into a ciſtern. Bacºn.
- 7. [Peºp,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I Q.
P I S
7. [Peep, pº pipe, Fr.] A liquid meaſure containing twä
OgſheadS.
h ſ". I ſhall drink in pipe wine with Falſtaff; I'll make
him dance. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
To Pipe. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To play on the pipe. -
Merry Michael the Corniſh poet piped thus upon his oaten
pipe for merry England. Camden's Remains.
We have piped unto you, and you have not danced. Mat.
In ſinging, as in piping, you excel. Dryden.
Gaming goats, and fleecy flocks,
And lowing herds, and piping ſwains,
Come dancing to me. Swift,
2. To have a ſhrill ſound.
His big manly voice,
Turning again toward childiſh treble, pipes
And whiſtles in his ſound. Shakeſp. As Pou like it.
Pr'PER. n.ſ.. [from pipe.] One who plays on the pipe.
Piper; and trumpeters ſhall be heard no more in thee. Rev.
PI'PETREE. m. ſ. The lilac tree. -
Pi'PING. adj. [from pipe. This word is only uſed in low
language.]
1. Weak ; feeble; ſickly: from the weak voice of the ſick.
I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to paſs away the time,
Unleſs to ſpy my ſhadow in the ſun. Shakeſp.
2. Hot; boiling: from the ſound of anything that boils.
Pipkin. n.ſ. [diminutive of pipe, a ſº veſſel.] A ſmall
earthern boiler.
A pipkin there like Homer's tripod walks. Pope.
Some officer might give conſent
To a large cover'd pipkin in his tent. King.
Pi'PPIN. m. ſ. [puppynghe, Dutch. Skinner.] A ſharp apple.
Pippins take their name from the ſmall ſpots or pips that
uſually appear on the ſides of them : ſome are called ſtone
pippins from their obdurateneſs; ſome Kentiſh pippins, be-
cauſe they agree well with that ſoil; others French pippins,
having their original from France, which is the beſt bearer
of any of theſe pippin: ; the Holland pippin and the ruſſet
pippin, from its ruſſet hue; but ſuch as are diſtinguiſhed by
the names of grey and white pippins are of equal goodneſs:
they are generally a very pleaſant fruit and of good juice,
but ſlender bearers. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
You ſhall ſee mine orchard, where, in an arbour, we will
eat a laſt year's pippin of my own graffing. Shakeſp.
At ſupper entertain yourſelf with a pippin roaſted.
Harvey.
The ſtory of the pippin-woman, I look upon as fabulous.
- Addiſon's Spectator, N° 247.
His foaming tuſks let ſome large pippin grace,
Or midſt thoſe thund'ring ſpears an orange place. King.
This pippin ſhall another trial make;
See from the core two kernels brown I take. Gay.
Piſquant. adj. [piquant, French.]
1. Pricking; piercing ; ſtimulating.
There are vaſt mountains of a tranſparent rock extremely
ſolid, and as piquant to the tongue as ſalt. Addiſon on Italy.
2. Sharp; tart ; pungent; ſevere.
Some think their wits aſleep, except they dart out ſome-
what that is piquant, and to the quick: that is a vein that
would be bridled ; and men ought to find the difference be-
tween ſaltneſs and bitterneſs. Bacon's Eſſays.
Men make their railleries as piquant as they can to wound
the deeper. Government of the Tongue.
Pi'QUAN cy. m. ſ. [from piquant..] Sharpneſs; tartneſs.
Pi'QUANTLY. adv. [from piquant.] Sharply; tartly.
A ſmall miſtake may leave upon the mind the laſting me-
mory of having been piquantly, though wittily taunted. Locke.
PIQUE. m. ſ. [pique, French.]
1. An ill will; an offence taken; petty malevolence.
He had never any the leaſt pique, difference or jealouſ
with the king his father. Bacon’s Henry VIII.
Men take up piques and diſpleaſures at others, and then
every opinion of the diſliked perſon muſt partake of his
fate. Decay of Piety.
Out of a perſonal pique to thoſe in ſervice, he ſtands as a
looker-on, when the government is attacked. Addiſon.
2. A ſtrong paſſion. -
Though he have the pique, and long,
'Tis ſtill for ſomething in the wrong;
As women long, when they're with child,
For things extravagant and wild.
3. Point; nicety; punctilio.
Add long preſcription of eſtabliſh’d laws,
And pique of honour to maintain a cauſe,
And ſhame of change.
To Pique. v. a. ſpiquer, Fr.]
1. To touch with envy or virulency; to put into fret.
Piqu'd by Protogenes's fame,
From Co to Rhodes Apelles came
To ſee a rival and a friend,
Prepar'd to cenſure or commend. Prior.
Płudibras, p. iii.
Dryden.
nº lady was piqued by her indifference, and began to.
&amp;ntion going away. Female 9tuixote.
2. To offend ; É. *. Quixote
Why pique all mortals, that affect a name *
A fºol to pleaſure, yet a ſlave to fame Pope.
3. [With the reciprocal "...º. To value ; to fix reputa-
tion as on a point. [ſe piquer, rench.]
Children, having made it eaſy to part with what they
have may pique themſelves in being kind. Locke.
Men apply themſelves to two or three foreign, dead, and
which are called the learned, languages; and pique ºffive,
upon their ſkill in them. Locke on Education.
To Pique ER. See Pickeert.
Piºrek: m. ſ. A robber; a plunderer. Rather pickerer.
When the guardian profeſſed to engage in faction, the word
was given, that the guardian would ſoon be ſeconded by
ſome other piqueerers from the ſame camp. Swift.
PIQUE"T. m. ſ. ſpirquet, Fr.] A game at cards.
She commonly went up at ten,
Unleſs piquet was in the way. Prior.
Inſtead of entertaining themſelves at ombre or piquet, they
would wreſtle and pitch the bar. Spediator.
PI’Racy, "{ [rutaliſz ; piratica, Lat. piraterie, Fr. from
pirate.] The act or praćtice of robbing on the ſea.
Our gallants, in their freſh gale of fortune, began to ſkum
the ſeas with their piracies. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Now ſhall the ocean, as thy Thames, be free,
From both thoſe fates of ſtorms and piracy. Waller.
Fame ſwifter than your winged navy flies,
Sounding your name, and telling dreadful news
To all that piracy and rapine uſe. Waller.
His pretence for making war upon his neighbours was their
piracies ; though he pračtiſed the ſame trade. Arbuthnot.
PIRATE. n.ſ.. [we'gariſ; ; pirata, Lat. pirate, Fr.]
1. A ſea-robber.
Wrangling pirates that fall out
In ſharing that which you have pill'd from me. Shakeſp.
Pirates all nations are to proſecute, not ſo much in the
right of their own fears, as upon the band of human ſo-
ciety. Bacon.
Relate, if buſineſs or the thirſt of gain
Engage your journey o'er the pathleſs main,
Where ſavage pirates ſeek through ſeas unknown
The lives of others, vent’rous of their own. Pope.
2. Any robber; particularly a bookſeller who ſeizes the copies
of other men.
To Pi'RAt E. v. n. [from the noun..] To rob by ſea.
When they were a little got out of their former condition,
they robbed at land and pirated by ſea: Arbuthnot.
Nabis poſſeſſed himſelf of the coaſt near to Sparta, and
there pirated outrageouſly upon all the Peloponneſian trade.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
To P1’RATE. v. a. ſpirater, Fr.] To take by robbery.
They publickly advertiſed, they would pirate his º:
ope.
PIRA'tical. adj. ſpiraticus, Lat. from pirate.] Predatory ;
robbing; conſiſting in robbery.
Having gotten together ſhips and barks, fell to a kind of
piratical trade, robbing, ſpoiling and taking priſoners the
ſhips of all nations. Bacon's Henry VII.
The errors of the preſs were multiplied by piratical printers;
to not one of whom I ever gave any other encouragement,
than that of not proſecuting them. Pope.
PiscA’tion. n.ſ. [piſcatio, Lat.] The act or pračtice of
fiſhing.
ºre are extant four books of cynegeticks, or venation;
five of halieuticks, or piſcation, commented by Ritterhuſius.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Pr'scARY. m. ſ. A privilege of fiſhing. Dićf.
PI'scAtoRY. adj. [piſcatorius, Lat.] Relating to fiſhes.
On this monument is repreſented, in bas-relief, Neptune
among the ſatyrs, to ſhew that this poet was the inventor of
piſcatory eclogues. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Pisci’vorous, adj. [piſºis and voro..] Fiſheating; living on
In birds that are not carnivorous, the meat is ſwallowed
into the crop or into a kind of anteſtomach, obſerved in piſci-
vorous birds, where it is moiſtened and mollified by ſome
proper juice. Ray on the Creation.
Pish. interj. A contemptuous exclamation. This is ſometimes
ſpoken and written pſhaw. I know not their etymology, and
imagine them formed by chance.
There was never yet philoſopher .
That could endure the toothach Patiently :
However they have writ,
And made ſº at chance or ſufferance. Shakeſp.
She frowned and cried piſh, when I ſaid a thing that I
ſtole. Speñator, N° 268.
To Pish. v. n. [from the interjection.] To expreſs contempt.
He turn'd over your Homer, ſhook his head, and piſh'd at
every line of it. - Pope.
19 S - PI's MIRE,
=mm-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I T
P I T
Pºrt F. n.ſ. (myra, Sax. pſiniere, Dutch..] An ant; an
tºnnet. - -
His cloaths, as atoms might prevail, -
Might fit a piſmire or a whale. - - Prior.
Prejudicial to fruit are piſmires, caterpillars and mice. Mort.
To PISS. v. m. ſpºr, Fr. piſſºn, Dutch..] To make water.
I charge the fiftng conduit run nothing but claret. Shakespeare
One aſs piſs, the reſt piſs for company. L'E/irange.
Once poſſeſs'd of what with care you ſave,
The wanton boys would piſ; upon your grave. Dryden.
Piss. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Urine; animal water.
My ſpleen is at the little rogues, it would vex one more to
be knock'd on the head with a pºſs-pot than a thunder
bolt. Pºpe to Swift.
Piss ABED. m. ſ. A yellow flower growing in the graſs.
Ri'ssby R.N.T. adj. Stained with urine. ... - - - - -
Pista'chio. n.ſ. [p:/ºache, Fr. piſacchi, Italian ; pi/?achia,
Latin.
º p:/achi, is a dry fruit of an oblong figure, pointed at
both ends about half an inch in length, and a third of an inch
in thickneſs: it has a double ſhell, the exteriour one mem-
branaceous and thin, and the inner hard, tough and woody:
the kernel is of a green colour and a ſoft and unctuous ſub-
ſtance, much like the pulp of an almond, of a pleaſant taſte:
p:/?achios were known to the ancients, and the Arabians call
them pºſłuch and/º/luch, and we ſometimes fºich nuts. Hill.
P://achios, ſo they be good, and not muſty, joined with al-
monds, are an excellent nouriſher. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?.
PISTA. m. / [French..] The track or tread a horſeman makes
upon the ground he goes over.
PSTI'll Arios. m. ſ. ſpi/illum, Lat.] The act of pounding
In a mortar.
The beſt diamonds we have are comminuible, and ſo far
from breaking hammers, that they ſubmit unto piſillatiºn,
and reſiſt not an ordinary peſtle. Brown's /u/gar Errours.
Pistol. n. ſ. ſpiſtole, piſhlet, Fr.] A ſmall handgun.
Three watch the door with fiftol, that none ſhould iſſue
out. Shakeſpeare's Merry Jºves of Iłżnd/or.
The whole body of the horſe paſſed within pººl-ſhot of
the cottage. Claren lon, b. viii.
Quickſilver diſcharged from a pºol will hardly pierce
through a parchment. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
A woman had a tubercle in the great canthus of the eye, of
the bigneſs of a piſtol-bullet. //iſeman's Surgery.
To Pistol. v. a. ſºlºr, Fr.] To ſhoot with a piſtol.
Pi's role m / [p://zle, Fr.] A coin of many countries and
many degrees of value.
I ſhall diſburden him of many hundred piñºles, to make
him lighter for the journey. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Pisto'Lº T. m. ſ...[diminutive of fiſſol.J A little piſtol.
Thoſe unlickt bear-whelps, unil'd piſtolets
That, more than cannon-ſhot, avails or lets. Donne.
Piston. "...ſ. ſºn, Fr.] The movable part in ſeveralma.
chines; as in pumps and ſyringes, whereby the ſuction or at-
traction is cauſed ; am embolus.
PIT. n.ſ. ſpir, Saxon.]
I. A hole in the ground.
Get you gone,
And from the pit of Acheron -
Meet me i' th' morning. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Tumble me into ſome loathſome pit, - 4
Where never man's eye may behold my body. Shakespeare .
Qur enemies have beat us to the pit ;
It is more worthy to leap in ourſelves,
Than tarry 'till they puſh us. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
. Pit; upon the ſea-ſhore turn into freſh water, by percola-
tion of the ſalt through the ſand; but in ſome places of Africa,
the water in ſuch pits will become brackiſha. -
2. Abyſs; profundity. CKlih again. Bacon.
Into what pit thou ſeeſ:
From what height fillen. Milton.
3. The grave.
O Lord, think no ſcorn of me, leſ. I become like them
* go down into the pit. Pſalm xxviii. I
4. the jº on which cocks fight; whence the phraſe, to fly
Make him glad, at leaſt, to quit
His victory, and fly the pº qui
. They managed thé diſpute as fiercely,
in the pit.
5. The middle part of the theatre.
Hºt Cully, Cockwood, Fopli -
- y: pling charm the pit
And in their folly ſhew the . wit. pit,
Hudibrar.
as two game-cocks
Zºe on Education.
Dryden.
Nº. º: * us, and a kind hearty pit; ryden
- C W. { - -
6. [Pis, feis, .."i. CS, never fails of wit. Dryden.
r from peºfus, Lat.] Any hollow of the
9dy: as, the pit of the ſtomach; the arm £it.
... A dint made b the fing
- - Cr.
To º #. To fink in hollows.
"*"Say a ſpecies of dropſy, is characteriſed by the
mining a - - -
'º º of the ſkin, which gives way to the leaſt
» and remains Pitted for ſome time S/ rp
- Ozi) p.
PiTAPA+.
APA.T. m. ſ. [Probably from ** Paſ, or patte patte, Fr.]
1. A flutter; a palpitation.
A lion meets him, and the fox's heart went pilafat. L'Eºr.
2. A light quick ſtep.
Now I hear the pitäfat of a pretty foot through the dark
alley: no, 'tis the ſon of a mare that's broken looſe, and
munching upon the melons. Drydºn's Don Sebaſtian,
PITCH. m. ſ. [pic, Sax. pix, Lat..] The reſin of the pine ex-
tracted by fire and inſpiſſated.
They that touch pitch will be defiled. Prover!;.
Of air and water mixed together, and conſumed with fire,
is made a black colour; as in charcoal, oil, pitch and
links. - Peacham on Drawing.
A veſſel ſmear'd round with pitch. Mºſton.
2. [From picº, Fr. Skinner.] Any degree of elevation or
height.
Lovely concord and moſt ſacred peace
Doth nouriſh virtue, and faſt friendſhip breeds,
Weak ſhe makes ſtrong, and ſtrong things does increaſe,
Till it the pitch of higheſt praiſe exceeds.
How high a pitch his reſolution ſoars.
Arm thy heart, and fill thy thoughts
To mount aloft with thy imperial miſtreſs, -
And mount her pitch. Shakeſpeare's 77th's Ardrºn.….
Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch,
I have, perhaps, ſome ſhallow judgment. Shaft.
Down they fell,
Driv'n headlong from the pitch of heav'n, down
Into this deep. 44ilton's Par. Lºft, b. ii.
Cannons ſhoot the higher pitches,
The lower we let down their breeches. Hidilras.
Alcibiades was one of the beſt orators of his agº, not-
withſtanding he lived at a time when learning was at the
higheſt pitch. 44/on's Jºg Examinºr.
3. Higheſt riſe.
A beauty waining, and diſtreſſed widow,"
Seduc’d the pitch and height of all his thoughts
-
Fairy &amp;#een.
Shakeſp.
To baſe declenſion and loath'd bigamy. Shakespeare.
4. State with reſpect to lowneſs or height.
From this high pitch let us deſcend
A lower flight; and ſpeak of things at hand. A ſiſtan.
By how much from the top of wond’rous glory,
Strongeſt of mortal men,
To loweſt pitch of abject fortune thou art fall'n.
5. Size; ſtature.
That infernal monſter having caſt
His weary foe into the living well,
'Gan high advance his broad diſcoloured breaſt
Above his wonted pitch. Pairy &amp;gten.
Were the whole frame here,
It is of ſuch a ſpacious lofty pitch,
Aſia.
Your roof were not ſufficient to contain it. Shakeſp.
It turn'd itſelf to Ralpho's ſhape;
So like in perſon, garb and pitch,
'Twas hard tº interpret which was which. Hudibras.
6. Degree ; rate.
To overcome in battle, and ſubdue
Nations, and bring home ſpoils, with infinite
Manſlaughter, ſhall be held the higheſt pitch
Of human glory. 41ſton's Par. L3/?, b. xi.
Our reſident Tom
From Venice is comc,
And hath left the ſtateſman behind him,
Talks at the ſame pitch,
Is as wife, is as rich,
And juſt where you left him, you find him. Denham.
Princes that fear'd him, grieve; concern'd to ſee .* r *
No pitch of glory from the grave is free. //aller.
Evangelical innocence, ſuch as the goſpel accepts, though
mingled with ſeveral infirmities and defects, yet amounts to
ſuch a pitch of righteouſneſs, as we call ſincerity. . . South.
When the ſun's heat is thus far advanced, 'tis but juſt
come up to the pitch of another ſet of vegetables, and but
great enough to excite the terreſtial particles, which are more
ponderous. 4%advard's Natural Hiſtory.
Tô PITCH. v. a. [appicciare, Italian.]
. To fix ; to plant. -
I On Båi. plains the Greeks do pitch -
Their brave pavilions. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºftda.
Sharp ſtakes, pluckt out of hedges, y
They pitched in the ground. Shakespeare . Henry VI.
He counſelled him how to hunt his game,
What dart to caſt, what net, what toile to pitch. Fairfax.
David prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched for
it a tent. 1 Chron. xv.1.
Mahometes pitched his tents in a little meadow. Knollei.
When the vićtor
Had conquered Thebes, he pitched upon the plain -
His mighty camp. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
* To Chaſſis' pleaſing plains he took his way, -
There pitch'd his tents, and there reſolv'd to ſtay. Dryden.
The trenches firſt they paſs'd, then took their way
Where their proud foes in pitch'd pavilions lay. *
7 -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P I T
º,
2. To order regularly.
In ſetting down the form of common prayer, there was
no need to mention the learning of a fit, or the unfitneſs of
an ignorant miniſter, more than that he, which deſcribeth
the manner how to pitch a field, ſhould ſpeak of moderation
and ſobriety in diet. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 31.
One pitched battle would determine the fate of the Spaniſh
continent. Addiſon on the State of the J/ar.
3. To throw headlong; to caſt forward.
They'll not pitch me i' th' mire,
Unleſ; he bid 'em. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
They would wreſtle, and pitch the bar for a whole after-
noon. Spectator, N° 434.
. To ſmear with PITCH. [pico, Lat. from the noun.]
The ark pitch within and without. Geneſis vi. 14.
The Trojans mount their ſhips, born on the waves,
And the pitch'd veſſels glide with eaſy force. Dryden.
Some pitch the ends of the timber in the walls, to preſerve
them from the mortar. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſe.
I pitched over the convex very thinly, by dropping melted
pitch upon it, and warming it to keep the pitch ſoft, whilſt
I ground it with the concave copper wetted to make it ſpread
evenly all over the convex. Newton's Opticks.
5. To darken.
The air hath ſtarv'd the roſes in her cheeks,
And pitch'd the lily tincture of her face. Shakeſp.
Damon
Roſe early from his bed; but ſoon he found
The welkin pitch'd with ſullen cloud. Addiſon.
6. To pave. Ainſworth,
To P1 ch. v. n.
1. To light; to drop.
When the ſwarm is ſettled, take a branch of the tree
whereon they pitch, and wipe the hive clean. Mortimer.
2. To fall headlong.
The courſer o'er the pommel caſt the knight;
Forward he flew, and pitching on his head,
He quiver'd with his feet, and lay for dead. Dryden.
3. To fix choice.
We think 'tis no great matter which,
They're all alike, yet we ſhall pitch
On one that fits our purpoſe. Hudibras.
A free agent will pitch upon ſuch a part in his choice, with
knowledge certain. More's Divine Dialogues.
The ſubjećt I have pitched upon may ſeem improper. South.
I pitched upon this conſideration that parents owe their chil-
dren, not only material ſubſiſtence, but much more ſpiritual
contribution to their mind. Digby on the Soul.
The covetous man was a good while at a ſtand; but he
came however by degrees to pitch upon one thing after an-
other. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Pitch upon the beſt courſe of life, and cuſtom will render
it the moſt eaſy. Tillotſon's Sermons.
I tranſlated Chaucer, and amongſt the reſt pitched on the
wife of Bath's tale. Dryden's Fables.
4. To fix a tent or temporary habitation.
They pitched by Emmaus in the plain. I Mac. iii. 40.
Pitch ER. m. ſ. [picher, French.] n
1. An earthen veſſel; a water pot.
With ſuddain fear her pitcher down ſhe threw
And fled away. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Pitchers have ears, and I have many ſervants;
Beſides old Gremio is hearkening. Shakeſp.
Pyreicus was only famous for counterfeiting all baſe things;
as earthen pitchers and a ſcullery. Peacham on Drawing.
Hylas may drop his pitcher, none will cry,
Not if he drown himſelf. Dryden.
2. An inſtrument to pierce the ground in which any thing is to
be fixed.
To the hills poles muſt be ſet deep in the ground, with a
ſquare iron pitcher or crow. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Pitchfork. m. ſ. [pitch and fºrk.] A fork with which corn
is thrown upon the waggon.
An old lord in Leiceſterſhire amuſed himſelf with mending
pitchforks and ſpades for his tenants gratis. Swift.
Pitchi Ness. n.ſ. (from pitchy..] Blackneſs; darkneſs.
Pitch Y. adj. [from pitch.]
I. Smeared with pitch. -
The planks, their pitchy cov’rings waſh'd away,
Now yield; and now a yawning breach diſplay. Dryden.
2. Having the qualities of pitch.
Native petroleum, found floating upon ſome ſprings, is no
other than this very pitchy ſubſtance, drawn forth of the ſtrata
by the water. JWoodward on Foſſils.
3. Black; dark; diſmal.
Night is fled,
Whoſe fitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth. Shakeſp.
I will ſort a pitchy day for thce. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Pitchy and dark the night ſometimes appears,
Friend to our woe, and parent of our fears;
Our joy and wonder ſometimes ſhe excites,
With ſtars unnumber'd. P, ior.
Pi Tºi, n.ſ. ſpit and coal.] Foſſile coal.
. The beſt fuel is peat, the next charcoal made of pitcoal of
cinders. * Mortimer's Huſhandry.
Pr "MAN: "...ſ [fit and man.] He that in ſawing timber works
below in the pit.
With the pitſaw they enter the one end of the ſtuff, the
topman at the top, and the pitman under him: the topman
obſerving to guide the ſaw exactly, and the pitman drawing it
with all his ſtrength Perpendicularly down. Mºon.
Piºt-saw. m. ſ. ſpit and ſºw.] The large ſaw uſed by two
men, of whom one is in the pit.
. The Piſº is not only uſed by thoſe workmen that ſaw
timber and boards, but is alſo for ſmall matters uſed by
Joiners. . 440xon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
Pi Teous. adj. [from pity.] -
I. Sorrowful; mournful; exciting pity.
When they heard that piteous ſtrained voice,
In haſte forſook their rural merriment. Fairy Queen.
The moſt arch deed of piteous maſſacre,
That ever yet this land was guilty of Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Which when Deucalion with a piteous look
Beheld, he wept. Dryden.
2. Compaſſionate; tender.
If the ſeries of thy joys
Permit one thought leſs ...?to ariſe,
Piteous transfer it to the mournful ſwain. Prior.
She gave him, piteous of his caſe,
A ſhaggy tap'ſtry.
3. Wretched; paltry; pitiful.
- Piteous amends ! unleſs
Be meant our grand foe. - Milton's Par. Lºft.
Pi'TEously. adv. [from piteous.] In a piteous manner.
I muſt talk of murthers, rapes and maſſacres,
Ruthful to hear, yet piteouſly perform'd. Shakeſp.
Pi'teousNess. n. ſ. [from piteous.] Sorrowfulneſs; tenderneſs.
PITFALL. n.ſ. [pit and fall.] A pit dug and covered, into
which a paſſenger falls unexpectedly.
Poor birdſ thoud'ſt never fear the net nor lime,
The pitfall nor the gin. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Thieves dig concealed pitfalls in his way. Sandys.
Theſe hidden pitfalls were ſet thick at the entrance of the
bridge, ſo that throngs of people fell into them. Addiſon.
PITH. n.ſ. [pitte, Dutch..]
1. The marrow of the plant; the ſoft part in the midſt of the
wood. - -
If a cion, fit to be ſet in the ground, hath the pith finely
... taken forth, and not altogether, but ſome of it left, it will bear
a fruit with little or no core. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Her ſolid bones convert to ſolid wood,
To fith her marrow, and to ſap her blood. Dryden.
2. Marrow.
As doth the pith, which leſt our bodies ſlack,
Strings faſt the little bones of neck and back; -
So by the ſoul doth death ſtring heav'n and earth. Donne.
The vertebres are all perforated in the middle, with a large
hole for the ſpinal marrow or pith to paſs along. Fay.
3. Strength ; force.
Pith in Scotland is ſtill retained as denoting ſtrength, either
corporeal or intellectual: as, that defies all your pith.
Leave your England,
Guarded with grandſires, babies and old women,
Or paſs'd, or not arriv'd to pith and puiſſance. Shakeſp.
Since theſe arms of mine had ſeven years pith. Shakeſp.
4. Energy ; cogency; fulneſs of ſentiment; cloſeneſs and vi-
gour of thought and ſtile.
5. Weight; moment; principal part.
That's my pith of buſineſs
*Twixt you and your poor brother. Shakº.
Enterprizes of great pith and moment,
With this regard their currents turn awry,
Pºpe's Dunciad.
And loſe the name of action. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
6. The quinteſcence; the chief part.
The owner of a foul diſeaſe,
To keep it from divulging, lets it feed
Ev’n on the pith of life. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Pi'thily. adv. [from pithy..] With ſtrength; with cogency;
with force.
PI'THINEss. n.ſ. [from pithy.] Energy ſtrength. . . . . .
No leſs deſerveth his wittineſs in deviſing, his pihineſ, in
uttering, his complaint of love, ſo lovely. Spenſer.
PI'THLEss. adj. [from pith.]
1. Wanting pith. - - -
weak ſhoulders over-born with burthening grief
And pithleſs arms, like to a wither'd vine
That droſs his ſapleſs branches to the ground. Shakeſpeare.
2. Wanting energy; wanting force.
PI'THY. adj. [from pith.]
1. Conſiſting of pith. - - -
The pithy fibres brace and ſtitch together the ligneous in a
plant. Grew's Coſmol. b. i.
- The Herefordian plant that likes
Tº approach the quince, and th' alder's pithy ſtem. Philiº.
2. Strong;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">p 1 T
P L A
; forcible; energetick.
2. sº i. º pithy words, and counſel ſad,
Still ſtrove their ſudden rages to revoke :
laſt, ſuppreſſing fury mad
That at the laſt, ſuppreſſing fury mad, Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Th an abſtain. -
.# begin with rudiments of art,
ore pleaſant, pithy and effectual,
}: * #: by any. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
Many rare pithy ſaws concerning -
The worth of aſtrologic learning. Hudibra.
This pithy ſpeech prevail'd, and all agreed. Dryden.
In all theſe, Goodman Fact was very ſhort, but pithy;
for he was a plain home-ſpun man. . Addiſon.
Pi'TIABLE. adj. [pitoyable, Fr. from pity.] Deſerving pity.
The pitiable perſons relieved, are conſtantly under your
eye. Atterbury's Sermont.
Pi'TIFUL. adj. ſpity and full J
1. Melancholy; moving compaſſion.
Some, who have not deſerved judgment of death, have
been for their goods ſake caught up and carried ſtraight to
the bough; a thing indeed very pitiful and horrible. Spenſer.
A fight moſt pitiful in the meaneſt wretch, ...
Paſt ſpeaking of in a king. Shakeſp. King Lear,
Strangely viſited }.
All ſwoln and ulc’rous, pitiful to the eye;
The mere deſpair of ſurgery he cures. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Will he his pitiful complaints renew
For freedom with afflićted language ſue. Sandys.
The conveniency of this will appear, if we confider what
a pitiful condition we had been in. Ray on the Creation.
2. Tender; compaſſionate.
Would my heart were flint, like Edward's,
Or Edward's ſoft and pitiful, like mine. Shakeſp.
Be pitiful to my condemned ſons,
Whoſe ſouls are not corrupted. Shakeſp.
3. Paltry; contemptible; deſpicable.
That's villainous, and ſhews a moſt pitiful ambition in the
fool that uſes it. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
One, in a wild pamphlet, beſides other pitiful malignities,
would ſcarce allow him to be a gentleman. //otton.
The accuſations againſt him contained much frivolous mat-
ter or pitiful. Hayward.
This is the doom of fallen man, to exhauſt his time and
impair his health, and perhaps to ſpin out his days and him-
ſelf into one pitiful controverted concluſion. South.
Sin can pleaſe no longer, than for that pitiful ſpace of time
while it is committing; and ſurely the preſent pleaſure of a
ſinful act is a poor countervail for the bitterneſs which begins
where the action ends, and laſts for ever. South's Sermons.
If theſe pitiful ſhanks were anſwerable to this branching
head, I ſhould defy all my enemies. L’Eſtrange's Fable.
What entertainment can be raiſed from ſo pitiful a ma-
chine, where we ſee the ſucceſs of the battle from the be-
inning. Dryden's Dedication to juvenal.
Pitifully, adv. [from pitiful.]
1. Mournfully; in a manner that moves compaſſion.
He beat him moſt pitifully; nay,
He beat him moſt unpitifully. Shakeſp.
$ome of the philoſophers doubt whether there were any
ſuch thing as ſenſe of pain; and yet, when any great evil has
been upon them, they would figh and groan as pitifully as
other men. Tillotſon's Sermons.
2. Contemptibly; deſpicably.
. Thoſe men, who give themſelves airs of bravery on refle&amp;-
ing upon the laſt ſcenes of others, may behave the moſt piti-
fully in their own. Clariſſa.
PiTIFULNess. n. ſ. [from pitiful.]
I. Tenderneſs; mercy; compaſſion.
Bafilius giving the infinite terms of praiſes to Zelmane's
valour in conquering, and pitifulneſs in Pardoning, commanded
no more words to be made of it. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Deſpicableneſs; contemptibleneſs. 2 -
Plºtilesly, adv. [from pil. ºl. Without mercy.
£º m. ſ. Unmercifulneſs.
*T*Ess, adj. [from pity.) Wanting pit, . -
paſſion; # pity.] &amp; Pity ; wanting com-
Fair be ye ſure, but proud and pitileſ,
As is a ſtorm, that all things doth proſtrate,
Finding a tree alone all comfortleſs,
Beats on it ſtrongly, it to ruinate.
- S e
Hadſt thou in perſon ne'er offended me, 'penſer
Even for his ſake aminow pitileſ. Shakeſp
Hath mad My chance, I ſee, -
made ev'n pity, pitileſ; in thee. -
Upon my livid i. ğ. a kiſs, Fairfax.
*". Your kiſſes can reſtore my breath;
}*.*.* ºf more pitileſ than death. I)
Pi'TTANcé. n J. [pitance, Fr. pietantia, Italian.] ryden.
In a monaſtry.
Then at my lodgi
- - gin
- The worſt is *; that at ſo finds warning
You're like to have a thin and ſlender pittance. ... Shaieff.
The aſs ſaved a miſerable pittance for himſelf. L'E/ºrange.
I have a ſmall pittance left, with which I might retire. Arb.
Many of them loſe the greateſt part of the ſmall pittance
of learning they received at the univerſity. Swift's Miſcellanies.
Pituite. n.ſ. ſpituite, Fr. pituita, Lat..] Phlegm.
Serous defluxions and redundant pituite were the produćt of
the winter, which made women ſubject to abortions. Arb.
Piru'itous. adj. [pituitoſus, Lat. pituiteux, Fr.] Conſiſting
of phlegm. * . . . - - -
It is thus with women, only that abound with pituitous and
watery humours. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv.
The forerunners of an apoplexy are weakneſs, waterineſs
and turgidity of the eyes, pituitous vomiting and laborious
breathing. - - Arbuthnot on Diet.
PITY.. n.ſ. [pitie, Fr. pieta, Italian.]
1. Compaſſion; ſympathy with miſery; tenderneſs for pain or
uneaſineſs.
Thou haſt ſcourged and taken pity on me.
Wan and meagre let it look,
With a pity-moving ſhape. Waller.
An ant dropt into the water; a woodpigeon took pity of
her, and threw her a little bough. L’Eſtrange.
Leſt the poor ſhould ſeem to be wholly diſregarded by their
maker, he hath implanted in men a quick and tender ſenſe of
pity and compaſſion. Calamy's Sermons.
When Æneas is forced in his own defence to kill Lauſus,
the poet ſhows him compaſſionate; he has pity on his beauty
and youth, and is ioth to deſtroy ſuch a maſterpiece of na'.
- ture. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Tob. xi. 15.
The mournful train
With groans and hands upheld, to move his mind,
Befought his pity to their helpleſs kind. Dryden.
2. A ground of pity; a ſubject of pity or of grief.
That he is old, the more is the pity, his white hairs do
witneſs it. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Julius Cæſar writ a collection of apophthegms; it is pity
his book is loft. Bacon.
'Tis great pity we do not yet ſee the hiſtory of Chaſmir.
Temple.
See, where ſhe comes, with that high air and mien,
Which marks in bonds the greatneſs of a queen,
What pity 'tis.
What pity'tis you are not all divine.
Who would not be that youth what pity is it
That we can die but once to ſerve our country? Addison
3. It has in this ſenſe a plural. In low language.
Singleneſs of heart being a virtue ſo neceſſary, 'tis a thou-
ſand pities it ſhould be diſcountenanced. L’Eſtrange.
To Pi'ſ Y. v. a. [pitoyer, Fr.] To compaſſionate miſery; to
regard with tenderneſs on account of unhappineſs.
When I deſired their leave, that I might pity him, they
Dryden.
Dryden.
took from me the uſe of mine own houſe. Shakeſp.
He made them to be pitied of all. Pſalm cvi. 46.
You I could pity thus forlorn. Milton.
Compaſſionate my pains ! ſhe pities me !
To one that aſks the warm return of love,
Compaſſion's cruelty, 'tis ſcorn, 'tis death. Addison.
To PITY... v. n. To be compaſſionate.
I will not pity nor ſpare, nor have mercy, but deſtroy
them. - eremiah xiii. 14.
Pivor... n.ſ. [pivot, Fr.] A pin on which any thing turns.
When a man dances on the rope, the body is a weight
balanced on its feet, as upon two pivots. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Pix. n.ſ. ſpixis, Lat.] A little cheſt or box, in which the con-
ſecrated hoſt is kept in Roman catholick countries. Hammer.
He hath ſtolen a pix, and hanged muſt a' be. Shakeſp.
Pizzi.e. n.ſ. ſquaſi piſtle. Minſhaw.] . -
The pizzle in animals is official to urine and generation.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
PLACABLE. adj. [placabilis, Lat.] Willing or poſſible to
be appeaſed.
Since I ſought
By pray’r th’ offended deity tº appeaſe;
ethought I ſaw him placable and mild, - -
Bending his ear. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. xi.
Thoſe implanted anticipations are, that there is a god, that
he is placable, to be feared, honoured, loved, worſhipped
and obeyed. Hale's Qrigin of Mankind.
PlacAbi'lity. n.ſ.. [from placable.] Willingneſs to be
PLA'cABLENESS. } appeaſed ; poſſibility to be appeaſed.
The various methods of propitiation and atonement {hew
the general conſent of all nations in their opinion of the
mercy and placability of the divine nature. Anonymºus.
PlacA'RD. m. ſ. ſplakaert, Dutch ; placard, Fr.] An edict;
PlacA'RT. ; a declaration; a manifeſto. -
To PlacAt E. v. a. [place0, Lat..] To appeaſe; to reconcile.
This word is uſed in Scotland.
That the effect of an atonement and reconciliation was to
give all mankind a right to approach and rely on the prº-
tection and beneficence of a placated deity, is not deducible
from nature. Forber.
PLACE.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L A
- - - - -
PLACE. m. ſ. [place, Fr. piazza, Italian ; from platea, Lat.]
1. Particular portion of ſpace.
Search you out a place to pitch your tents.
We accept it always and in all places.
Here I could frcquent
With worſhip, place by place, where he vouchſaf’d
Preſence divine. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xi.
I will teach him the names of the moſt celebrated perſons,
who frequent that place. Addiſon's Guardian, N° 107.
2. Locality; ubiety; local relation.
Place is the relation of diſtance betwixt anything, and any
two or more points conſidered as keeping the ſame diſtance
one with another; and ſo as at reſt: it has ſometimes a more
confuſed ſenſe, and ſtands for that ſpace which any body
takes up. Locke.
. Local exiſtence. -
The earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found
no place for them. Revelations xx. 11.
Deut. i. 33.
Acts xxiv. 3.
, 4. Space in general.
All bodies are confin'd within ſome place;
But ſhe all place within herſelf confines. Davies.
5. Separate room.
In his brain
He hath ſtrange places cram'd with obſervation. Shakeſp.
6. A ſeat; reſidence ; manſion.
The Romans ſhall take away both our place and nation. jo.
Saul ſet him up a place, and is gone down to Gilgal. 1 Sam.
7. Paſſage in writing,
Hoſea faith of the Jews, they have reigned, but not by me;
which place proveth, that there are governments which God
doth not avow. Bacon's Holy War.
I could not paſs by this place, without giving this ſhort ex-
plication. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
8. Ordinal relation.
What ſcripture doth plainly deliver, to that the firſt place
both of credit and obedience is due. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 8.
Let the eye be ſatisfied in the firſt place, even againſt all
other reaſons, and let the compaſs be rather in your eyes than
in your hands. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
We ſhall extinguiſh this melancholy thought, of our being
overlooked by our maker, if we conſider, in the firſt place,
that he is omnipreſent; and, in the ſecond, that he is omni-
ſcient. - Spectator, N° 565.
9. Exiſtence; ſtate of being; validity; ſtate of actual opera-
tion.
I know him a notorious liar ;
Think him a great way fool, ſolely a coward;
Yet theſe fix’d evils ſit ſo fit in him,
That they take place, when virtue's ſteely bones
Look bleak in the cold wind. Shakespeare.
Theſe fair overtures, made by men well eſteemed for ho-
neſt dealing, could take no place. Hayward.
They are defects, not in the heart, but in the brain; for
they take place in the ſtouteſt natures. - Bacon.
With faults confeſs'd commiſſion'd her to go,
If pity yet had place, and reconcile her foe. Dryden.
Where arms take place, all other pleas are vain;
Love taught me force, and force ſhall love maintain.
Dryd 27.
To the joy of mankind, the unhappy omen took not
place. Dryden's Dedication to his Fables.
Somewhat may be invented, perhaps more excellent than
the firſt deſign ; though Virgil muſt be ſtill excepted, when
that perhaps takes not place. Dryden's Preface to Ovid.
Mixt government, partaking of the known forms received
in the ſchools, is by no means of Gothick invention, but
hath place in nature and reaſon. Swift.
It is ſtupidly fooliſh to venture our ſalvation upon an expe-
riment, which we have all the reaſon imaginable to think
God will not ſuffer to take place. Atterbury's Sermons.
10. Rank; order of priority.
The heavens themſ. Ives, the planets, and this center
Obſerve degree, priority and place. Shakeſp.
11. Precedence; priority. This ſenſe is commonly uſed in the
phraſe take place.
Do you think I'd walk in any plot,
Where Madam Sempronia ſhould take place of me,
And Fulvia come i' the rear. Benj. johnſon's Catiline.
There would be left no meaſures of credible and incredible,
if doubtful propoſitions take place before ſelf-evident. Locke.
As a Britiſh freeholder, I ſhould not ſcruple taking place
of a French marquis. Addiſon's Freeholder.
12. Office; publick character or employment. w
Do you your office, or give up your place,
And you ſhall well be ſpared. Shakeſp.
If I'm traduc’d by tongues that neither know
My faculties nor perſon;
Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake -
That virtue muſt go through. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The horſemen came to Lodronius, as unto the moſt valiant
captain, beſeeching him, inſtead of their treacherous gene-
ral, to take upon him the place. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
Is not the biſhop's bill deny'd,
And we ſtill threaten’d to be try'd :
You ſee the king embraces
Thoſe counſels he approv’d before ;
Nor doth he promiſe, which is more,
That we ſhall have their places. Denham,
Penſions in private were the ſenate's aim;
And Patriots for a place abandon'd fame. Garth.
Some magiſtrates are contented, that their places ſhould
adorn them ; and ſome ſtudy to adorn their places, and reflect
back the luſtre they receive from thence. . Atterbury.
13. Room ; way; ſpace for appearing or ačting given by ceſſion;
not oppoſition.
Avenge not yourſelves, but rather give place unto wrath.
- Romans xii. 19.
He took a ſtride, and to his fellows cry'd,
Give place, and mark the diff'rence if you can,
Between a woman warrior and a man. Dryden.
Vićtorious York did firſt, with fam'd ſucceſs,
To his known valour, make the Dutch give place. Dryd.
The ruſtick honours of the ſcythe and ſhare,
Give place to ſwords and plumes the pride of war. Dryd.
14. Ground ; room. -
Ye ſeek to kill me, becauſe my word hath no place in
you. jo. viii. 37.
There is no place of doubting, but that it was the very
ſame. Hammond's Fundamentals.
To Place. v. a. [placer, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To put in any place, rank or condition.
Place ſuch over them to be rulers. Ex. xviii. 21.
He placed forces in all the fenced cities. 2 Chro. xvii. 2.
Thoſe accuſations had been more reaſonable, if placed on
inferior perſons. - Dryáen's A trengz.
2. To fix; to ſettle; to eſtabliſh.
God or nature has not any where placed any ſuch juriſ-
dićtion in the firſt born. Locke.
3. To put out at intereſt.
'Twas his care
To place on good ſecurity his gold. Pope.
PLA'ce R. n.ſ.. [from place J One that places.
Sovereign lord of creatures all,
Thou placer of plants, both humble and tall. Spenſer.
PLACID. adj. [placidus, Latin.]
I. Gentle ; quiet; not turbulent.
It conduceth unto long life and to the more placid motion of
the ſpirits, that men's actions be free. Bacon."
2. Soft; kind; mild.
That placid aſpect and meek regard,
Rather than aggravate my evil ſtate, -
Would ſtand between me and thy father's ire. Milton.
PLA'cIDLY. adv. [from placid.] Mildly; gently.
If into a phial, filled with good ſpirit of nitre, you caſt a
piece of iron, the liquor, whoſe parts moved uniformly and
placidly before, by altering its motion, it begins to penetrate
and ſcatter abroad particles of the iron. Boyle.
The water eaſily inſinuates itſelf into, and placidly diſtends
the tubes and veſſels of vegetables. J/oodward.
PLA'cit. n.ſ. [placitum, Lat..] Decree; determination.
We ſpend time in defence of their placits, which might
have been employed upon the univerſal author. Glanvill.
PLACKET, or plaquet. n.ſ. A petticoat. -
You might have pinch'd a plaquet, it was ſenſeleſs. Shakespeare
The bone-ach is the curſe dependant on thoſe that war for
a plaquet. Skakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
PLA(GIARISM. n.ſ.. [from plagiary.] Theft; literary adop-
tion of the thoughts or works of another. -
With great impropriety, as well as plagiariſºn, they have
moſt injuriouſly been transferred into proverbial maxims. Swi.
PLA(GIARY. n.ſ. [from plagium, Lat.]
1. A thief in literature; one who ſteals the thoughts or writings
of another. -
The enſuing diſcourſe, leſt I chance to be traduced for a
plagiary by him who has played the thief, was one of thoſe
that, by a worthy hand, were ſtolen from me. South.
Without invention, a painter is but a copier, and a poet
but a plagiary of others; both are allowed ſometimes to copy
and tranſlate. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. The crime of literary theft. Not uſed. -
Plagiary had not its nativity with printing, but began when
the paucity of books ſcarce wanted that invention. Brown.
PLAGUE. m. ſ. [plaghe, Dutch ; plage, Teut. plaga, Latin ;
Tanyn ..] - - -
1. Peſtilence; a diſeaſe eminently contagious and deſtructive.
Thou art a bile, ]
A plague-fore or imboſs'd carbuncle
#; corrupted blood. Shakespeare . King Lear,
The general opinion is, that years hot and moiſt are moſt
peſtilent; yet many times there have been great plagues in
dry years. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Snakes, that uſe within thy houſe for ſhade,
Securely lurk, and, like a plague, invade ... .
Thy cattle with venom. May's Wirgil's Georgicks.
19 T A.!
~
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L A
P L A
All thoſe plagues, which earth and air had brooded,
Firſt on inferior creatures try'd their force,
And laſt they ſeized on man,
2. State of miſery.
I am ſet in my plag
fight.
3. Anything troubleſome or vexatious.
'Tis the time's plague, when madmen lead the blind. Sha.
I am not mad, too well I feel
The diff'rent plague of each calamity, Shakeſp. K. john.
Good or bad company is the greateſt bleſfing or greateſt
plague of life. L’Eſtrange.
Sometimes my plague, ſometimes my darling. Prior.
To PLAGUE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To infect with peſtilence.
2. To trouble ; to teaze; to vex; to harraſs; to torment; to
afflićt; to diſtreſs; to torture; to embarraſs; to excruciate ;
to make uneaſy; to diſturb.
If her nature be ſo,
That ſhe will plague the man that loves her moſt,
And take delight to encreaſe a wretch's woe,
Then all her nature's goodly gifts are loſt.
Say my requeſt's unjuſt,
| And ſpurn me back; but if it be not ſo,
Thou art not honeſt, and the gods will plague thee. Shakespeare
Thus were they plagu'd
And worn with famine. Milton.
People are ſtormed out of their reaſon, plagued into a com-
pliance, and forced to yield in their own defence. Collier.
When a Neapolitan cavalier has nothing elſe to do, he
gravely ſhuts himſelf up in his cloſet, and falls a tumbling
over his papers, to ſee if he can ſtart a law ſuit, and plague
any of his neighbours. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
PLA Guily. adv. [from plaguy..] Wexatiouſly ; horribly. A
low word.
This whiſpering bodes me no good; but he has me ſo pla-
guily under the laſh, I dare not interrupt him. Dryden.
You look’d ſcornful, and ſnift at the dean;
But he durſt not ſo much as once open his lips,
And the doćtor was flaguily down in the hips. Swift.
PLA'Guy. adj. [from plague.] Wexatious ; troubleſome. A
low word.
Lee and Dryden.
tle, and my heavineſs is ever in my
Pſalm xxxviii. 17.
Spenſer.
Of heats,
Add one more to the plaguy bill.
What perils do environ
The man that meddles with cold iron,
What plaguy miſchiefs and miſhaps
Do dog him ſtill with after-claps.
Plaice. n.ſ. [plate, Dutch..] A flat fiſh,
Of flat fiſh there are ſoles, flowkes, dabs and plaice. Carew.
| PLAID. m. ſ. A ſtriped or variegated cloth; an outer looſe
weed worn much by the highlanders in Scotland: there is a
particular kind worn too by the women; but both theſe
modes ſeem now nearly extirpated among them ; the one b
ačt of parliament, and the other by adopting the §
dreſſes of the ſex.
PLAIN. adj. [planus, Latin.]
1. Smooth; level; flat ; free from protuberances or excreſ-
cencies. In this ſenſe, eſpecially in philoſophical writings,
it is frequently written plane : as, a plane ſuperficies.
It was his policy to leave no hold behind him; but to
make all plain and waſte. Spenſer.
The South and South-Eaſt ſides are rocky and mountainous,
but plain in the midſt. Sandys's journey.
Thy vineyard muſt employ thy ſturdy ſteer
To turn the glebe ; beſides thy daily pain
To break the clods, and make the ſurface plain. Dryden.
Hilly countries afford the moſt entertaining proſpects,
though a man would chuſe to travel through a plain one. Addison
2. Void of ornament; ſimple.
A crown of ruddy gold inclos'd her brow,
Plain without pomp, and rich without a ſhow.
3. Altleſs; not ſubtle; not ſpecious; not learned; fimple.
In choice of inſtruments, it is better to chuſe men of a
plainer ſort, that are like to do that that is committed to them
and to report faithfully the ſucceſs, than thoſe that are gun.
ning to contrive ſomewhat to grace themſelves, and will help
the matter in report. Bacon's E
- - - - J alyj.
Of many plain, yet pious chriſtians, this cannot º:
firmed. - Hammond's Fundamentals.
The experiments alledged with ſo much confiden. and
º an author that writ like a plain man, and one whº,
r
. º was to tell truth, helped me to reſolve upon making
Temple.
My heart was made to fit and pair within, emple
§º tº: and fraught with artleſs tenderneſ,
°º beat an army in plain fight and open fi id
T. then at once, the charaćter to ſave, pen field. Felt.
4. Hjá.h hero turn a cr afty knave
ive me i. º fincere; not ſoft in language.
juſt cauſe of ſcandal be plain with You, that yourſelf give no
Donne.
Hudibras.
Dryden.
Rowe.
Pope.
Bacon,
5. Mere ; bare.
He that begull'd you in a plain accent, was a pºſin knave,
which, for my part, I will not be. Shakespeare ?. King Lear.
Some have at firſt for wits, then poets paſt,
Turn'd criticks next, and prov’d plain fools at laſt. Pºpe.
6. Evident; clear; diſcernible ; not obſcure.
They wondered there ſhould appear any difficulty in any
expreſſions, which to them ſeemcd very clear and plain. Clar.
Expreſs thyſelf in plain, not doubtful words,
That ground for quarrels or diſputes affords. Denham.
I can make the difference more plain, by giving you my
method of proceeding in my tranſlations ; I confidered the
genius and diſtinguiſhing character of my author. , Dryden.
'Tis plain in the hiſtory, that Eſau was never ſubject to
Jacob. - Locke.
That children have ſuch a right, is plain from the laws of
God; that men are convinced, that children have ſuch a
right, is evident from the law of the land. Locke.
It is plain, that theſe diſcourſes are calculated for none, but
the faſhionable part of womankind. Addison's Speciator.
To ſpeak one thing mix’d dialects they join;
Divide the ſimple, and the plain define. Prior.
7. Not varied by much art.
A plaining ſong plain-ſinging voice requires, -
For warbling notes from inward cheering flow. Sidney.
Plain. adv.
1. Not obſcurely.
2. Diſtinctly; articulately.
The ſtring of his tongue was looſed, and he ſpake plain.
Aſar. vii. 35.
3. Simply ; with rough ſincerity. -
Goodman Faët is allowed by every body to be a plain-
ſpoken perſon, and a man of very few words ; tropes and
figures are his averſion. Addi,on's Count Tariff.
PLAiN. n. ſ. [plaine, Fr.) Level ground ; open ; flat; often,
a field of battle.
In a plain in the land of Shinar they dwelt. Gen. xi. 2.
The Scots took the Engliſh for fooliſh birds fallen into
their net, forſook their hill, and marched into the plain di-
rectly towards them. Hayward.
They erected their caſtles and habitations in the plains and
open countries, where they found moſt fruitful lands, and
turned the Iriſh into the woods and mountains. Davies.
Pour forth Britannia's legions on the plain. Arbuthnot.
While here the ocean gains,
In other parts it leaves wide ſandy plains. Pope.
The impetuous courſer pants in ev'ry vein,
And pawing ſeems to beat the diſtant plain. Pope.
To PLAIN. v. a. [from the noun..] To level; to make even.
Upon one wing, the artillery was drawn, every piece ha-
ving his guard of pioners to plain the ways. Hayward.
To PLAIN. v. n. [plaindre, je plains, Fr.] To lament; to
wail.
Long ſince my voice is hoarſe, and throat is ſore,
With cries to ſkies, and curſes to the ground;
But more I plain, I feel my woes the more. Sidney.
A plaining ſong plain-ſinging voice requires
For warbling notes from inward cheering flow. Sidney.
The fox, that firſt this cauſe of grief did find,
*Gan firſt thus plain his caſe with words unkind. Hubberd.
The inceſlant weeping of my wife,
And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
Forc'd me to ſeek delays. Shakeſp.
He to himſelf thus plain'd. Milton.
PLAINDE A/LING. adj. [plain and deal.] Aéting without art.
Though I cannot be ſaid to be a flattering honeſt man; it
muſt not be denied, but I am a plaindealing villain. Shakespeare .
Bring a plaindealing innocence into a conſiſtency with ne-
ceſſary prudence. L’Eſtrange.
Pla'indéALING.. n.ſ. Management void of art.
I am no politician; and was ever thought to have too little
wit, and too much plaindealing for a ſtateſman. Denham.
It looks as fate with nature's law may ſtrive
To ſhew plaindealing once an age would thrive. Dryden.
PLA'INLY. adv. [from plain.]
1. Levelly; flatly.
2. Not ſubtilly; not ſpeciouſly.
3. Without ornament.
4. Without gloſs; ſincerely.
You write to me with the freedom of a friend, ſetting
down your thoughts as they occur, and dealing plainly with
me in the matter. Pope.
5. In earneſt; fairly. -
They charged the enemies horſe ſo gallantly, that they
gave ground; and at laſt plainly run to a ſafe place. Clarenå.
6. Evidently ; clearly ; not obſcurely.
St. Auguſtine acknowledgeth, that they are not only ſet
down, but alſo plainly ſet down in ſcripture; ſo that he which
heareth or readeth, may without difficulty underſtand. Hooker.
Coriolanus neither cares whether they love or hate him ;
and out of his careleſſneſs, let's them piań, ſººt. Shatſ.
By
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L A
P L A
!.
By that ſeed
is meant thy great deliverer, who ſhall bruiſe
The ſerpent's head; whereof to thee anon
Plainlier ſhall be reveal’d. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
We ſee plainly that we have the means, and that nothing
but the application of them is wanting. Addiſon.
Pla’in Ness. n.ſ. [from plain.]
1. Levelneſs; flatneſs.
2. Want of ornament; want of ſhow.
If ſome pride with want may be allowed,
We in our plainneſs may be juſtly proud,
Whate'er he's pleas'd to own, can need no ſhow. Dryden.
As ſhades moſt ſweetly recommend the light,
So modeſt plainneſs ſets off ſprightly wit.
Openneſs ; rough ſincerity. -
Well, ſaid Baſilius, I have not choſen Dametas for his
fighting nor for his diſcourſing, but for his plainnſ, and ho-
neſty, and therein I know he will not deceive me. Sidney.
Your plainneſs and your ſhortneſs pleaſe me well. Shakeſp.
Think'ſt thou, that duty ſhall have dread to ſpeak,
When pow'r to flatt'ry bows; to plainn'ſ honour
Is bound, when majeſty to folly falls. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Plainnſ, and freedom, an epiſtolary ſtile required. Wake.
4. Artleſsneſs; ſimplicity.
All laugh to find
Unthinking plainneſs ſo o'erſpreads thy mind,
That thou could'ſt ſeriouſly perſuade the crowd
To keep their oaths. Dryden's juvenal.
PLAINT. n.ſ. [plainte, French.]
1. Lamentation; complaint ; lament.
Then pour out plaint, and in one word ſay this ;
Helpleſs his plaint, who ſpoils himſelf of bliſs. Sidney.
Bootleſs are plaints, and cureleſs are my wounds. Shakespeare
From inward grief
His burſting paſſion into plaints thus pour’d.
2. Exprobration of injury.
There are three juſt grounds of war with Spain; one of
plaint, two upon defence. Bacon.
3. Expreſſion of ſorrow.
How many childrens plaints, and mother's cries
Where though I mourn my matchleſs loſs alone,
And none between my weakneſs judge and me;
Yet even theſe gentle walls allow my moan,
Whoſe doleful echoes to my plaints agree.
Liſtening where the hapleſs pair
Sat in their ſad diſcourſe, and various plaint,
Thence gather'd his own doom. Milton's Par. Loft.
For her relief,
Vext with the long expreſſions of my grief,
Receive theſe plaints. Waller.
Pla INTFUL. adj. [plaint and full.] Complaining; audibly
ſorrowful.
To what a ſea of miſeries my plaintful tongue doth lead
Inc. Sidney, b. ii.
Pla'INTIFF. n.ſ. [plaintif, Fr.] He that commences a ſuit in
law againſt another; oppoſed to the defendant.
The plaintiff proved the debt by three poſitive witneſſes,
and the defendant was caſt in coſts and damages. L'Eſtrange.
You and I ſhall talk in cold friendſhip at a bar before a
Pope.
3.
Milton.
Daniel.
Wotton.
judge, by way of plaintiff and defendant. Dryden.
In ſuch a cauſe the plaintiff will be hiſs'd,
My lord, the judges º and you're diſmiſs'd. Pope.
PLA'INTIFF. adj. [plaintif, Fr.] Complaining. A word not
in uſe.
His younger ſon on the polluted ground,
Firſt fruit of death, lies plaintiff of a wound
Giv'n by a brother's hand. - Prior.
Pla’intive. adj. [plaintif, Fr.] Complaining; lamenting;
expreſfive of ſorrow.
His careful mother heard the plaintive ſound,
Encompaſs'd with her ſea-green ſiſters round. Dryden.
The goddeſs heard,
Roſe like a morning miſt, and thus begun
To ſooth the ſorrows of her plaintive ſon. Dryden.
Can nature's voice
Plaintive be drown'd, or leſſen'd in the noiſe,
Though ſhouts as thunder loud afflićt the air. Prior.
Leviathans in plaintive thunders cry. Young.
Pla'1N work. n.ſ. [plain and work.] Needlework as diſtin-
guiſhed from embroidery; the common practice of ſewing
or making linen garments.
She went to plainwork, and to purling brooks. Pope.
PLAIT, n.ſ. [corrupted from plight or pyght, from to ply or ſold.]
A fold; a double.
Should the voice direétly ſtrike the brain,
It would aſtoniſh and confuſe it much ;
Therefore theſe plaits and folds the ſound reſtrain,
That it the organ may more gently touch. Davies.
Nor ſhall thy lower garments artful plait,
From thy fair ſide dependent to thy feet,
Arm their chaſte beauties with a modeſt pride,
And double ev'ry charm they ſeek to hide. Prior.
To PLAIT.
'Tis very difficult to trace out the figure of a veſt through
, all the plaits and foldings of the drapery. Addiſon.
tº a; [from the noun.]
I. To fold; to double.
The buſy ſylphs ſurround their darling care,
Some fold the ſleeve, while others plait the gown;
^º. Prais'd for labours not her own.
- ill ſhe on funday morn th k -
2. To weave; to braid. y y neckcloth plait.
Let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair.
1 Peter iii. 3.
Pope.
Gay,
What ſhe demands, inceſſant I'll prepare ;
I'll weave her garlands, and I'll plait her hair;
My buſy diligence ſhall deck her board,
For there at leaſt I may approach my lord. Prior,
3. To intangle; to involve.
Time ſhall unfold what plaited cunning hides,
ho covers faults at laſt with ſhame derides. Shakeſpeare.
PLAI ter. n.ſ. [from plait..] He that plaits.
PLAN. n.ſ. [plan, French.]
I. A ſcheme; a form; a model.
Remember, O my friends, the laws, the rights,
The generous plan of power delivered down
From age to age to your renown'd forefathers. Addison
2. A plot of any building or ichnography; form of any thing
laid down on paper.
Artiſts and plans reliev'd my ſolemn hours;
I founded palaces, and planted bow'rs. Prior.
To PLAN. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſcheme; to form in
deſign.
Vouchſafe the means of vengeance to debate,
And plan with all thy arts the ſcene of fate.
PLA(NARY. adj. Pertaining to a plane.
Pla'Nched. adj. [from planch.] Made of boards.
He hath a garden circummur'd with brick,
Whoſe Weſtern ſide is with a vineyard backt,
And to that vineyard is a planched gate,
That makes his opening with this bigger key. Shakeſp.
Pla'Ncher. n.ſ. [plancher, French.] A board; a plank.
Oak, cedar and cheſnut are the beſt builders; ſome are
beſt for planchers, as deal; ſome for tables, cupboards and
deſks, as walnuts. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
PLA'Nching. m. ſ. In carpentry, the laying the floors in a
building. Dićf.
PLANE. m. ſ. [planus, Latin. Plain is commonly uſed in popu-
lar language, and plane in geometry.]
1. A level ſurface.
Comets, as often as they are viſible to us, move in planes in-
clined to the plane of the ecliptick in all kinds of angles. Bent.
Proječijls would ever move on in the ſame right line, did.
not the air, their own gravity, or the ruggedneſs of the plane,
on which they move, ſtop their motion. Cheyne.
2. [Plane, Fr.] An inſtrument by which the ſurface of boards
is ſmoothed.
The iron is ſet to make an angle of forty-five degrees with
the ſole of the plane. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
To PlaNE. v. a. [planer, Fr. from the noun.]
I. To level; to ſmooth from inequalities.
The foundation of the Roman cauſeway was made of rough
ſtone, joined with a moſt firm cement; upon this was laid
another layer of ſmall ſtones and cement, to plane the inequa-
lities of rough ſtone, in which the ſtones of the upper pave-
ment were fixt. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. To ſmooth with a plane.
Theſe hard woods are more properly ſcraped than planed.
Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
PlaNE-TREE. n.ſ. [platanus, Lat. plane, platane, Fr.]
The plane-tree hath an amentaceous flower, conſiſting of
ſeveral ſlender ſtamina, which are all colle&amp;ted into ſpherical
little balls and are barren; but the embryos of the fruit,
which are produced on ſeparate parts of the ſame trees, are
turgid, and afterwards become large ſpherical balls, containing
many oblong ſeeds intermixed with down: it is generally ſup-
poſed, that the introdućtion of this tree into England, is
owing to the great lord chancellor Bacon. Miller.
The beech, the ſwimming alder and the plane. Dryd.
PLA(NET. n.ſ. [planeta, Lat. .xzºzº; planette, Fr.]
Planets are the erratick or wandering ſtars, and which are not
like the fixt ones always in the ſame poſition to one another:
we now number the earth among the primary planetº, becauſe
we know it moves round the ſun, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus and Mercury do, and that in a path or circle between
Mars and Venus: and the moon is accounted among the ſe-
condary planets or ſatellites of the Primary, ſince ſhe moves
round the earth: all the planets have, beſides their motion
round the ſun, which makes their year, alſo a motion round
their own axes, which makes their day; as the earth's re-
volving ſo makes our day and night: it is more than probable,
that the diameters of all the planets are longer than their axes:
we know 'tis ſo in our earth; and Flamſteed and Caſſini
found it to be ſo in Jupiter: Sir Iſaac Newton aſſerts our
earth's equatorial diameter to exceed the other about *.
Quºr
Pope.
Die?.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L A
P L A
four miles; and indeed elſe the motion of the carth would
make the ſea riſe ſo high at the equator, as to drown all the
parts thereabouts. Harris.
Barbarous villains ! hath this lovely face
Rul’d like a wand'ring planet over me,
And could it not inforce them to relent. Shakeſp.
And flanetſ, planet-ſtruck, real eclipſe
Then ſuffer'd. Milton's Paradºſ. Loft, b. x.
There are ſeven planets or errant ſtars in the lower ofbs of
heaven. Brown's ſugar Erraurs, b. iv.
PLANETARY. adj. [planetaire, Fr. from planet.]
1. Pertaining to the planets. - -
Their planetary motions and aſpects. Milton.
To marble and to braſs, ſuch features give,
Deſcribe the ſtars and planetary way, -
And trace the footſteps of eternal, day. Granvill.
2. Under the denomination of any particular planet.
Darkling they mourn their fate, whom Circe's power,
That watch'd the moon and planetary hour,
With words and wicked herbs, from human kind
Had alter’d. Dryden.
I was born in the planetary hour of Saturn, and, I think,
I have a picce of that leaden planet in me I am no way
facetious. Addiſon's Speciata , N° 487.
3. Produced by the planets.
Here's gold, go on ;
Be as a planetary plague, when Jove - -
Will o'er ſome high-vic'd city hang his poiſon
In the ſick air. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
We make guilty of our diſaſters the fun, the moon and
ſtars, as if we were villains by an enforced obedience of pla-
metary influence. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
4. Having the nature of a planet; erratick.
We behold bright planetary Jove,
Sublime in air through his wide province move ;
Four ſecond planets his dominion own,
And round him turn, as round the garth the moon. Blackm.
PLANE"rical. adj. (from flanet.] ...Pertaining to planets.
Add the two Egyptian days in every month, the interlunary
and plenilunary exemptions, the eclypſes of ſun and moon,
conjunctions and oppoſitions planetical. Brown.
PLANETs rRuck. adj. [planet and ſtrike..] Blaſted; ſidere
affiatuſ.
Wonder not much if thus amaz'd I look,
Since I ſaw you, I have been planet/truck; -
A beauty, and ſo rare, I did deſcry. Suckling.
PLANIFo'L16Us, adj. [planus and folium, Lat..] Flowers are
ſo called, when made up of plain leaves, ſet together in cir-
cular rows round the center, whoſe face is uſually uneven,
rough and jagged. Dići.
PLANIME TRICAL. adj. [from planimetry.) Pertaining to the
menſuration of plane ſurfaces.
PLANIMETRY. n.ſ. [planus, Lat, and wºrkio planimetric,
Fr.] The menſuration of plane ſurfaces. -
PLANIPE(TAlous. adj. [planus, Lat. and Târzxcy.] Flat-
leaved, as when the ſmall flowers are hollow only at the bot-
tom, but flat upwards, as in dandelion and ſuccory. Dići.
To PLAN is H. v. a. [from plane.] To poliſh ; to ſmooth. A
word uſed by manufacturers.
PLAN is PHERE. n.ſ. [planus, Lat. and ſphere.] A ſphere pro-
jected on a plane; a map of one or both hemiſpheres.
PLAN K. m. ſ. [planthe, Fr.] A thick ſtrong board.
They gazed on their ſhips, ſeeing them ſo great, and con-
fiſting of divers planks. Allot's Deſcript. of the J/ºrld.
The doors of plank were ; their cloſe exquiſite,
Kept with a double key. Chapman's Odyſſey.
The ſmoothed plank new rub'd with balm. AMilton.
Some Turkiſh bows are of that ſtrength, as to pierce a
plank of ſix inches. JWilkins.
Deep in their hulls our deadly bullets light,
And through the yielding planks a paſſage find. Dryden.
Be warn'd to ſhun the watry way,
For late I ſaw adrift disjointed planks,
And empty tombs erected on the banks. Dryden.
To PLANK. v. a. [from the noun..] To cover or lay with
planks.
If you do but flank the ground over, it will breed ſalt-
petre. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A ſteed of monſtrous height appeard; iſtory
The fides were plank'd with pine. Dryden.
*** ****AL. gº. [planus and conus.] Level on ong fide
“nd conical on others.
ºw, are flanºconical, whoſe ſuperficies is in part level
betwee
ween both ends. Grew's 4/uſa-um.
** Noco NV Ex
****, *ſ, [planus and convexus.] Fla
ſide and $9"vex on the other. J t on the one
t took tw i.e.: -
teen feet ..ºgºs, the one a planoconvex for a four-
... " the other a large double convex for
one of about fifty
- y feet. &gt; : .
lºst. ... ſ. [plant, Fr. planta, Latin.] Newton's Opticks.
I. A. -
% thing produció from ſeed; any we getable produćtion.
What comes under this denomination, Ray has diſtributed
under twenty-ſeven genders or kinds: 1. The imperfect plants,
which do either totally want both flower and feed, or elſe
ſeem to do ſo. 2. Plants producing either no flower at all,
or an imperfeót one, whoſe feed is ſo ſmall as not to be diſ-
cernible by the naked eye. 3. Thoſe whoſe ſeeds are not ſo
ſmall, as ſingly to be inviſible, but yet have an imperfect or
ſtaminous flower; i.e. ſuch a one, as is without the petala,
having only the ſtamina and the perianthium. 4. Such as
have a compound flower, and emit a kind of white juice or
milk when their ſtalks are cut off or their branches broken
off. , 5. Such as have a compound flower of a diſcous figure,
the ſeed pappous, or winged with downe, but emit no milk.
6. The herbae capitatae, or ſuch whoſe flower is compoſed of
many ſmall, long, fiſtulous or hollow flowers gathered round
together in a round button or head, which is uſually covered
with a ſquamous or ſcaly coat. 7. Such as have their leaves
entire and undivided into jags. 8. The corymbiferous plants,
which have a compound diſcous flower, but the ſeeds have no
downe adhering to them. 9. Plants with a perfect flower,
and having only one fingle ſeed belonging to each ſingle
flower. Io. Such as have rough, hairy or briſtly ſeeds. I 1.
The umbelliferous plants, which have a pentapetalous
flower, and belonging to each ſingle flower are two ſeeds,
lying naked and joining together; they are called umbellife-
rous, becauſe the plant, with its branches and flowers, hath
an head like a lady's umbrella : [1..] Such as have a broad flat
ſeed almoſt of the figure of a leaf, which are encompaſſed
round about with ſomething like leaves. [2.] Such as have
a longiſh ſeed, ſwelling out in the middle, and larger than
the former. [3.] Such as have a ſhorter ſeed. [4.] Such as
have a tuberoſe root. [5.] Such as have a wrinkled, channe-
lated or ſtriated ſeed. 12. The ſtellate plants, which are ſo
called, becauſe their leaves grow on their ſtalks at certain in-
tervals or diſtances in the form of a radiant ſtar: their flowers
are really monopetalous, divided into four ſegments, which
look like ſo many petala; and each flower is ſucceeded by
two ſeeds at the bottom of it. 13. The aſperifolia, or rough
leaved plants : they have their leaves placed alternately, or
in no certain order on their ſtalks; they have a monopetalous
flower cut or divided into five partitions, and after every
flower there ſucceed uſually four ſeeds. 14. The ſuffrutices,
or verticilate plants: their leaves grow by pairs on their ſtalks,
one leaf right againſt another; their leaf is monopetalous,
and uſually in form of an helmet. I 5. Such as have naked
ſeeds, more than four, ſucceeding their flowers, which there-
fore they call polyſpermae plantae ſemine nudo ; by naked
feeds, they mean ſuch as are not included in any ſeed pod.
16. Bacciferous plants, or ſuch as bear berries. 17. Multi-
ſiliquous, or corniculate plants, or ſuch as have, after each
flower, many diſtinct, long, ſlender, and many times crooked
caſes or ſiliquae, in which their ſeed is contained, and which,
when they are ripe, open themſelves and let the ſeeds drop
out. 18. Such as have a monopetalous flower, either uni-
form or difform, and after each flower a peculiar ſeed-caſe
containing the ſeed, and this often divided into many di-
ſtinct cells. 19. Such as have an uniform tetrapetalous
flower, but bear theſe ſeeds in oblong ſiliquous caſes. 20.
Vaſculiferous plants, with a tetrapetalous flower, but often
anomalous. 21. Leguminous plants, or ſuch as bear pulſe,
with a papilionaceous flower. 22. Vaſculiferous plants, with
a pentapetalous flower; theſe have, beſides the common ca-
lix, a peculiar caſe containing their ſeed, and their flower
conſiſting of five leaves. 23. Plants with a true bulbous
root, which conſiſts but of one round ball or head, out of
whoſe lower part go many fibres to keep it firm in the earth :
the plants of this kind come up but with one leaf; they have
no foot ſtalk, and are long and ſlender : the ſeed veſicls are
divided into three partitions: their flower is ſexapetalous.
24. Such as have their fruits approaching to a bulbous form :
theſe emit, at firſt coming up, but one leaf, and in leaves,
flowers and roots reſemble the true bulbous plant. 25. Cul-
miferous plants, with a grafly leaf, are ſuch as have a ſmooth
hollow-jointed ſtalk, with one ſharp-pointed leaf at each joint,
encompaſſing the ſtalk, and ſet out without any foot ſtalk: their
ſeed is contained within a chaffy huſk. 26. Plants with a
grafly leaf, but not culmiferous, with an imperfect or ſtami-
nous flower. 27. Plants whoſe place of growth is uncertain.
and various, chiefly water plants.
Butchers and villains,
How ſweet a plant have you untimely cropt. Shakeſp.
Between the vegetable and ſenſitive province there are plant-
animals and ſome kind of inſects ariſing from vegetables, that
ſeem to participate of both. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
The next ſpecies of life above the vegetablé, is that of
ſenſe; wherewith ſome of thoſe productions, which we call
plant-animals, are endowed. Grew's Coſmol.
It continues to be the ſame plant, as long as it partakes of
the ſame life, though that life be communicated to new par-
ticles of matter, vitally united to the living plant, in a like
continued organization, conformable to that ſort of plants. Locke.
7
Once
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L A
–
Once I was ſkill'd in ev'ry herb that grew,
And ev'ry plant that drinks the morning dew.
2. A ſapling.
A man haunts the foreſt, that abuſes our young plants with
carving Roſalind on their barks. Shakeſp. As You like it.
Take a plant of ſtubborn oak,
And labour him with many a ſtubborn ſtroke.
3. [Planta, Lat.] The ſole of the foot.
To Plant. v. a. ſplanto, Lat. planter, Fr.]
1. To put into the ground in order to grow; to ſet; to cultivate.
Plant not thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar of
the Lord. Deutr. xvi. 21.
2. To procreate ; to generate.
The honour'd gods the chairs of juſtice
Pope.
Dryden.
Ainſworth.
Supply with worthy men, plant love amongſt you. Shakespeare
It engenders choler, planteth anger;
And better 'twere, that both of us did faſt;
Than feed it with ſuch overroaſted fleſh. Shakeſp.
3. To place ; to fix.
The fool hath planted in his memory
An army of good words. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
In this hour,
I will adviſe you where to plant yourſelves. Shakeſp.
The mind through all her powers
Irradiate, there plant eyes. Milton.
When Turnus had aſſembled all his pow'rs,
His ſtandard planted on Laurentum's tow’rs;
Trembling with rage, the Latian youth prepare
To join th' allies. Dryden's AEneir.
4. To ſettle ; to eſtabliſh: as, to plant a colony.
If you plant where ſavages are, do not only entertain them
with trifles and jingles, but uſe them juſtly.
Create, and therein plant a generation. Milton.
To the planting of it in a nation, the ſoil may be mellowed
with the blood of the inhabitants; nay, the old extirpated,
and the new colonies planted. Decay of Piety.
5. To fill or adorn with ſomething planted: as, he planted the
garden or the country.
To build, to plant, whatever you intend,
In all let nature never be forgot. Pope.
6. To direct properly: as, to plant a cannon.
PLA(NTAGE. n.ſ. [plantago, Lat.] An herb.
Truth, tir'd with iteration, --
As true as ſteel, as plantage to the moon. Shakeſp.
PLA'NTAIN... n.ſ. [plantain, Fr. plantago, Lat.]
1. An herb. -
The toad, being overcharged with the poiſon of the ſpider,
as is ordinarily believ'd, has recourſe to the plantain leaf.
More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
The moſt common ſimples are mugwort, plantain and
horſetail. JWiſeman's Surgery.
2. A tree in the Weſt Indies, which bears an eſculent fruit.
I long my careleſs limbs to lay
Under the plantain's ſhade.
Pla'sta L. adj. [from plant.] Pertaining to plants.
There's but little ſimilitude betwixt a terreous humidity and
plantal germinations. - Glanvill’s Scepſ.
PLANTATION. n.ſ. [plantatio, from planto, Latin.]
1. The ačt or pračtice of planting.
2. The place planted.
As ſwine are to gardens and orderly plantations, ſo are tu-
mults to parliaments. King Charles.
Some peaſants
Of the ſame ſoil their nurſery prepare,
With that of their plantation ; left the tree
Iſailºr.
Tranſlated ſhould not with the ſoil agree. Dryden.
whoſe riſing foreſts, not for pride or ſhow,
But future buildings, future navies grow :
Let his plantations ſtretch from down to down,
Firſt ſhade a country, and then raiſe a town. Pope.
Virgil, with great modeſty in his looks, was ſeated by
Calliope in the midſt of a plantation of laurel. Addison.
3. A colony. -
Planting of countries is like planting of woods; the prin-
cipal thing, that hath been the deſtruction of moſt plantations,
hath been the baſe and haſty drawing of profit in the firſt
years; ſpeedy profit is not to be neglected, as far as may ſtand
with the good of the plantation. - Bacon's Eſſays.
4. Introdućtion; eſtabliſhment.
Epiſcopacy muſt be caſt out of this church, after poſſeſ-
ſon here, from the firſt plantation of chriſtianity in this
iſland. King Charles.
PLA(NTED. adj. [from plant.] This word ſeems in Shakeſpeare
to ſignify, ſettled; well grounded.
Our court is haunted
With a refined traveller of Spain;
A man in all the world's new faſhion planted,
That hath a mint of phraſes in his brain. Shakeſp.
Pla'NTER. m. ſ. [planteur, Fr. from plant.]
-1. One who ſows, ſets or cultivates; cultivator.
There ſtood Sabinus, planter of the vines,
And ſtudiouſly ſurveys his gen'rous wines, Bryden.
Bacon.
- What do thy vines avail,
Or olives, when the cruel battle nows
The planters, with their harveſt immature ?
That product only which our paſſions bear,
Eludes the planter's miſerable care, Priºr.
2. One who cultivates ground in the Weſt Indian colonies.
A planter in the Weſt Indies might muſter up, and lead
all his family out againſt the Indians, without the abſolute
dominion of a monarch, deſcending to him from Adam. Locke.
alº to º . tranſported,
One, an no planter courted. - a y ſº. -
3. One who #. or introduces: Swift's Miſcellanies.
Had theſe writings differed from the ſermons of the firſt
planters of chriſtianity in hiſtory or doćtrine, they would have
been rejećted by thoſe churches which they had formed. Addison
PLASH. n.ſ. [plaſche, Dutch; platz, Daniſh.j
I. A ſmall lake of water or puddle.
He leaves
A ſhallow plaſh to plunge him in the deep,
And with ſatiety ſeeks to quench his thirſt. Shakeſp.
Two frogs conſulted, in the time of drought, when many
plaſhes, that they had repaired to, were dry, what was to be
done. - Bacon.
I underſtand the aquatile or water frog, whereof in ditches
and ſtanding plaſhes we behold millions. Brown.
With filth the miſcreant lies bewray'd,
Fall’n in the plaſh his wickedneſs had laid. Pope.
2. [From the verb to plaſh..] Branch partly cut off and bound
to other branches. - -
In the plaſhing your quick, avoid laying of it too low and
too thick, which makes the ſap run all into the ſhoots, and
leaves the plaſhes without nouriſhment. Martimer.
To PLASH. v. a. [pleſſer, Fr.] To interweave branches.
Plant and plaſh quickſets. Evelyn.
PLA's HY. adj. [from plaſh.] Watry; filled with puddles.
Near ſtood a mill in low and plaſhy ground. Betterton.
PLAs.M. m. ſ. [T22*2.] A mould ; a matrix in which any
thing is caſt or formed. -
The ſhells ſerved as plaſms or moulds to this ſand, which,
when conſolidated, and afterwards freed from its inveſtient
ſhell, is of the ſame ſhape with the cavity of the ſhell.
J/oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
PLASTER. m. ſ. ſploſire. Fr. from razºº.]
1. Subſtance made of water and ſome abſorbent matter, ſuch
as chalk or lime well pulveriſed, with which walls are over-
laid or figures caſt.
In the ſame hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and
wrote upon the plaſier of the wall. Dan. v. 5.
In the worſt inn's worſt room, with mat half-hung,
The floors of plaſier, and the walls of dung. Pope.
Maps are hung up ſo high, to cover the naked plaſter or
wainſcot. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. [Emploſirum, Lat., in Engliſh, formerly emplaſter.] A glu-
tinous or adheſive ſalve.
Seeing the ſore is whole, why retain we the plaſier * Hook.
You rub the fore,
When you ſhould bring the plaſier.
Philip, !
Shakeſpeare.
It not only moves the needle in powder, but likewiſe, if
incorporated with plaſiers, as we have made trial. Brown.
Plaſters, that had any effect, muſt be by diſperfing or re-
pelling the humours. Temple's Miſcellanies.
To Pla'stER. v. a. ſplaſºrer, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To overlay as with plaſter.
Boils and plagues
Plaſter you o'er, that one infect another
Againſt the wind a mile. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The harlot's cheek beautied with plaſt’ring art. Shakeſp.
A heart ſettled upon a thought of underſtanding, is as a
fair plaſtering on the wall. Eccluſ. xxii. 17.
With a cement of flour, whites of eggs and ſtone pow;
dered, piſcina mirabilis is ſaid to have the walls plaſtered.
Bacon.
Plaſter the chinky hives with clay. Dryden.
The brain is grown more dry in its conſiſtence, and receives
not much more impreſſion, than if you wrote with.yºu;
finger on a plaſier'd wall. iſ att's Improvement of the 44thd.
2. To cover with a medicated plaſter.
PLA'sterer. m. ſ. ſpaſirier, Fr. from plaſter:)
1. One whoſe trade is to overlay walls with plaſter.
Thy father was a plaſterer,
And thou thyſelf a ſhearman.
2. One who forms figures in plaſter. - -
The plaſierer makes his figures by addition, and the carver
by ſubtraction. - Wºtton.
PLX's Tick, aft. [+xaºxo;..] Having the Power to give form.
Benign creator i º thy plaſtick hand Pri
- - In effect. 2'40/".
º thing ſtrange in the produćtion of the ſaid
formed metals, nor other plaſtick virtue concerned in ſhaping
them into thoſe figures, than merely the configuration of the
particles. 1%odward's Natural Hiſtory.
19 U
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
PLASTRON.
* --&gt;
* *
v ºn ... •<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L A
P L A
º
PL4STRON. m. ſ. [French.] A piece of leather ſtuffed,
which fencers uſe, when they teach their ſcholars, in order
to receive the puſhes made at them. Trevoux.
Againſt the poſt their wicker ſhields they cruſh,
Flouriſh the ſword, and at the plaſ, on puſh. Dryden.
To Plat, v, a [from plait..] To weave, to make by tex-
tuſe.
***n neſts of an Indian bird curiouſly interwoven and
platted together, Ray on the Creation.
I never found ſo much benefit from any expedient, as from
* ring, in which my miſtreſs's hair is plºtted in a kind of true
lovers knot. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 245.
PLAT. n.ſ.. [more properly plot; plot, Sax.] A ſmall piece
of ground.
Such pleaſure took the ſerpent to behold
This flow'ry plat, the ſweet receſs of Eve. Milton.
On a plat of riſing ground,
I hear the far-off curfeu found,
Over ſome wide-water'd ſhore,
Swinging ſlow with ſullen roar. AMilton.
It paſſes through banks of violets and plats of willow of its
own producing. Speciator.
PLATANE, n.ſ. ſplatane, Fr. platanus, Lat.] The plane tree.
The platane round,
The carver holm, the mapple ſeldom inward ſound. Spenſ.
I eſpy'd thee, fair and tall,
Under a platane. Milton.
Plate. m. ſ. [plate, Dutch ; plaque, Fr.]
1. A piece of metal beat out into breadth.
In his livery
Walk'd crowns and coronets, realms and iſlands were
As plates dropt from his pocket. Shakeſp.
Make a plate, and burniſh it as they do iron. Bacon.
A leaden bullet-ſhot from one of theſe guns, the ſpace of
twenty paces, will be beaten into a thin plate. Wilkins.
The centers of theſe wretches, who could derive no ſanc-
tity to them; yet in that they had been conſecrated by the
ſº. incenſe, were appointed to be beaten into" broad
plates, and faſtened upon the altar. South's Sermons.
Eternal deities'
Who rule the world with abſolute decrees,
And write whatever time ſhall bring to paſs
With pens of adamant on plates of braſs. Dryden,
2. Armour of plates.
With their force they pierc'd both plate and mail,
And made wide furrows in their fleſhes frail, Fa. Queen.
3. [Plata, Spaniſh.] Wrought filver.
They eat on beds of ſilk and gold,
And leaving plate,
Do drink in ſtone of higher rate. Benj. johnſºn's Cataline.
The Turks entered into the trenches ſo far, that they car-
ricd away the plate. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
They that but now for honour and for plate
Made the ſea bluſh with blood, reſign their hate. JPaller.
At your deſert bright pewter comes too late,
When your firſt courſe was all ſerv'd up in plate. King.
4. [Plat, Fr. Piatta, Italian.] A ſmall ſhallow veſſel of metal
on which meat is eaten.
Aſcanius this obſerv'd, and, ſmiling, ſaid,
See, we devour'the plates on which we fed. Dryden,
To Plate. v. 4. [from the noun.]
1. To cover with plates.
The doors are curiouſly cut through and plated. Sandyr.
M. Lepidus's houſe had a marble door-caſe ; afterwards
they had gilded ones, or rather plated with gold. Arbuthnot.
2. To arm with plates.
And the ſt Plate fin with gold,
"d the ſtrong lance of juſtice hurtleſ, breaks. -
Marſhal, aſk yonder knight in arms, Shakespeare
Why plated in habiliments of war; Shakeſ,
His goodly eyes, -
That o'er the files and muſters of the war
Have glow'd like plated Mars. » Shakeſ
The bold Aſcalonite p.
Éled from his lion ramp, old warriours turn’d
Their plated backs under his hecl. AMilt
3. To beat into laminae or plates. 1/147t.
If to fame alone thou doſt pretend,
The miſer will his empty palace lend,
§et wide his doors, adornºd with plated braſ, Dryde
If a thinned or plated body, of an uneventhickneſ, ; f
. all over of one uniform colour, ſhould be i.
ºads of the ſame thickneſs with the plate; into
why everyth - I ſee no reaſon
PLA'ſ EN. º ead ſhould not keep its colour. Newton.
/. Among printers; tı -
whereby the &amp; Pºntºrs, the flat part of the pſ.
Intyre P
PL A"r for M. 7t. preſſion is made.
1. The ſketch .# [plat, flat, Fr; and fºrm.]
nography. any thing horizontally delineated; the ich-
When the workmen be
don, eagles cony £ºn to lay the platfºrm at Chalce-
i. onveyed their lines to the ãº ſide ; i.
Sandys's Journey.
2. A place laid out after any model.
No artful wildneſs to perplex the ſcene;
Grove nods at grove, each alley has a brother,
And half the platfºrm juſt reflects the other. Pope.
3. A level place before a fortification.
Where was this 2
—Upon the platfºrm where we watch. Shakeſp.
4. A ſcheme ; a plan.
Their minds and affections were univerſally bent even
againſt all the orders and laws wherein this church is founded,
conformable to the platform of Geneva. Hooker.
I have made a platform of a princely garden by precept,
partly by drawing not a model, but ſome general lines
of it. Bacon's Eſſays.
They who take in the entire platform, and ſee the chain,
which runs through the whole, and can bear in mind the ob.
ſervations and proofs, will diſcern how theſe propoſitions
flow from them. J/oodward.
Pla'tick aſpeci. In aſtrology, is a ray caſt from one planet
to another, not exactly, but within the orbit of its own
light. - Bailey.
PLATO'on. n.ſ.. [a corruption of peloton, Fr.] A ſmall ſquare
body of muſketeers, drawn out of a batallion of foot, when
they form the hollow ſquare, to ſtrengthen the angles: the
grenadiers are generally thus poſted ; yet a party from any
other diviſion is called a platoon, when intending to far from
the main body. AMilitary Dić.
In comely wounds ſhall bleeding worthies ſtand,
Webb's firm platoon, and Lumly's faithful band. Tickell.
Platt E.R. m. / [from plate.] A large diſh, generally of
earth.
The ſervants waſh the platter, ſcour the platº,
Then blow the fire. Dryden's juvenal.
Satira is an adjective, to which lanx, a charger, or large
platter is underſtood. Pryden.
PLAu’Dut. Un. ſ. [A word derived from the Latin, plaudite,
PLAU'DITE. ; the demand of applauſe made by the player,
when he left the ſtage.] Applauſe.
True wiſdom muſt our actions ſo direct,
Not only the laſt plaudit to expect. Denham.
She would ſo ſhamefully fail in the laſt act, that inſtead of
a plaudite, ſhe would deſerve to be hiſſed off the ſtage. More.
Some men find more melody in diſcord than in the ange-
lick quires; yet even theſe can diſcern muſick in a conſort of
plaudites, eulogies given themſelves, Decay of Piety.
Plausibility. n.ſ.. [plauſibilité, Fr. from plauſible.] Spe-
ciouſneſs; ſuperficial appearance of right.
Two pamphlets, called the management of the war, are
written with ſome plauſibility, much artifice and direct falſe-
hoods. Swift.
The laſt excuſe for the ſlow ſteps made in diſarming the
adverſaries of the crown, was allowed indeed to have more
plauſibility, but leſs truth, than any of the former. Swift.
PLAUSIBLE, adj. [plauſible, Fr. plauſibilis, from plaud, Lat.]
Such as gains approbation; ſuperficially pleaſing or taking;
ſpecious ; popular; right in appearance.
Go you to Angelo, anſwer his requiring with a plauſible
obedience, agree with his demands to the point. Shakeſp.
Judges ought to be more reverend than plauſible, and more
adviſed than confident. Bacon.
They found out that plauſible and popular pretext of raiſing
an army to fetch in delinquents. King Charles.
Theſe were all plauſible and popular arguments, in which
they, who moſt deſired peace, would inſiſt upon many con-
deſcenſions. Clarendon.
No treachery ſo plauſible, as that which is covered with the
robe of a guide. L’Eſtrange.
The caſe is doubtful, and may be diſputed with plauſible
arguments on either ſide. - South.
PLAU’s IBLENEss. n.ſ.. [from plauſible.] Speciouſneſs ; ſhow
of right.
The plauſibleneſs of arminianiſm, and the congruity it hath
with the principles of corrupt nature. Sanderſºn.
The notion of man's free will, and the nature of ſin bears
along with it a commendable plainneſs and plauſibleneſ.
- 4%re.
PLAU's IBLY. adv. [from plauſible.]
1. With fair ſhow ; ſpeciouſly.
They could talk plauſibly about that they did not under-
ſtand, but their learning lay chiefly in flouriſh. Collier.
Thou can'ſt plauſibly diſpute,
Supreme of ſeers, of angel, man and brutc. Prior.
2. With applauſe. Not in uſe.
I hope they will plauſibly receive our attempts, or candidly
correct our miſconjectures. Brown's Pººr Errº.
PLAU'sive, adj. [from plauda, Lat.]
1. Applauding.
2. Plauſible. A word not in uſe.
His plauſive words
He ſcatter'd not in ears, but grafted them
To grow there and to bear. Shaºp.
To PLAY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L A
P L A
To PLAY. v. n. [ple;an, Saxon.]
1. To ſport; to frolick; to do ſomething not as a taſk, but for
3 pleaſure.
On ſmooth the ſeal and bended dolphins play. Milton.
2. To toy; to act with levity.
Thou with eternal wiſdom did'ſt converſe,
Wiſdom thy fiſter and with her didſt play. Milton.
3. To be diſmiſled from work.
I'll bring my young man to ſchool; look where his maſter
comes; 'tis a playing day I ſee. Shakeſp. Mr. JW of Windſ.
4. To trifle; to act wantonly and thoughtleſly.
Men are apt to play with their healths and their lives as
they do with their cloaths. Temple.
5. To do ſomething fanciful.
How every fool can play upon the word Shakeſp.
6. To pračtiſe ſarcaſtick merriment.
I would make uſe of it rather to play upon thoſe I deſpiſed,
than to trifle with thoſe I loved. Pope.
7. To mock; to pračtiſe illuſion.
I ſaw him dead; art thou alive,
Or is it fancy plays upon our eye-ſight. Shakeſpeare.
8. To game; to contend at ſome game.
Charles, I will play no more to-night;
My mind's not on't, you are too hard for me.
—Sir, I did never win of you before. Shakeſp.
When lenity and cruclty play for kingdoms,
The gentler gameſter is the ſooneſt winner. Shakeſp.
O perdurable ſhame !
Are theſe the wretches that we play’d at dice for. Shakeſp.
The low rated Engliſh play at dice. Shakeſp.
The clergyman played at whiſt and ſwobbers. Swift.
9. To do any thing trickiſh or deceitful.
His mother played falſe with a ſmith. Shakeſpeare.
Cawdor, Glamis, all
The wizzard women promis'd ; and, I fear, -
Thou play'd/ moſt fouily for't. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Life is not long cnough for a coquette to play all her
tricks in. Addison's Speciator, N° 89.
10. To touch a muſical inſtrument.
Ev'rything that heard him play,
Ev’n the billows of the ſea
Hung their heads, and then lay by,
In ſweet muſick is ſuch art,
Killing care, and grief of heart,
Fall aſleep, or hearing die. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Thou art as a very lovely ſong of one that hath a plea-
fant voice, and can play well on an inſtrument. Ezekiel.
Tully ſays, there conſiſteth in the practice of finging and
playing on inſtruments great knowledge, and the moſt ex-
cellent inſtruction, which reëtifies and orders our manners,
and allays the heat of anger. Peacham of Muſick.
Wherein doth our pračtice of ſinging and playing with in-
ſtrum e its in our cathédral churches differ from the practice
of David. Peacham of Muſick.
Clad like a country ſwain, he pip'd, he ſung,
And playing drove his '. troop along. Dryden.
Take thy harp and melt thy maid;
Play, my friend'ſ and charm the charmer. Glanvill.
He applied the pipe to his lips, and began to play upon it:
the found of it was exceeding ſweet. Addiſon's Speciator.
11. To operate ; to ačt. Uſed of any thing in motion.
John hath ſeiz'd Arthur, and it cannot be,
That whilſt warm life plays in that infant's veins,
The miſplac'd John ſhould entertain - -
One quiet breath of reſt. - Shakeſp. King john.
My wife cried out fire, and you brought out your buckets,
and called for engines to play againſt it. Dryden.
By conſtant laws, the food is concocted, the heart beats,
the blood circulates, the lungs play. Cheyne.
12. To wanton ; to move irregularly.
Citherea all in ſedges hid,
Which ſeem to move and wanton with her breath, ,
Ev’n as the waving ſedges play with wind. Shakeſp.
This with exhilarating vapour bland
About their ſpirits play'd, and inmoſt powers
Made err. Milton,
In the ſtreams that from the fountain play,
She waſh’d her face. Dryden.
The ſetting ſun
Plays on their ſhining arms and burniſh'd helmets, ,
And covers all the field with gleams of fire. Addison.
13. To perſonate a drama.
A lord will hear you play to-night;
But I am doubtful of your modeſties,
Leſt, over-eying of his odd behaviour,
Fot yet his honour never heard a play,
You break into ſome merry paſſion. Shakeſpeare:
Ev’n kings but play; and when their part is done,
Some other, worſe or better, mount the throne. Dryden.
14. To repreſent a character. -
Courts are theatres, where ſome men play ;
Princes, ſome ſlaves, and all end in one day. Donne,
6
- - ===== \ ^
15. To act in any certain character.
..Thus, we play the fool with the time, and the ſpirits of the
wiſe fit in the clouds and mockus. Shakeſp.
I did not think to ſhed a tear
In all my miſeries; but thou had fººd 'me, -
Out of thy honeſt truth to play the woman. Shakeſp.
She hath wrought folly to play the whore." Deut. xxii. #.
Be of good courage, and ſet us play the men for our
people. 2 Samuel x. 12.
Alphonſe, duke of Ferrara, delighted himſelf only in
turning and playing the ioiner. Peacham of %.
'Tis poſſible theſe Turks may play the villains. Dººm.
f º man has no pleaſure in proving that he has played the
tool. Collier of Friendſhip.
To Play. v. a. of Friendſhip
I. To put in action or motion: as, he played his cannon.
2. To uſe an inſtrument of muſick.
- He plays a tickling ſtraw within his noſe. Gay.
3. To act a mirthful character.
- Nature here -
Wanton'd as in her prime, and play’d at will
Her virgin fancies. Milton,
4. To exhibit dramatically.
Your honour's players hearing your amendment,
Are come to play a pleaſant comedy. Shakeſp.
5. To act ; to perform.
Doubt would fain have played his part in her mind, and
called in queſtion, how ſhe ſhould be aſſured that Zelmane
was not Pyrocles. Sidney, b. ii.
Play. n.ſ.
1. Aćtion not impoſed; not work; diſmiſſion from work:
2. Amuſement; ſport. -
My dearling and my joy;
For love of me leave off this dreadful play. Fa. gyeºn.
Two gentle fawns at play. Milton.
3. A drama; a comedy or tragedy, or any thing in which cha-
raēters are repreſented by dialogue and action.
Only they,
That come to hear a merry play, -
Will be deceiv'd. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
A play ought to be a juſt image of human nature, repre-
ſenting its humours and the changes of fortune to which it is
ſubjećt, for the delight and inſtruction of mankind. Dryden.
Viſits, plays and powder'd beaux. Swift.
4. Game; practice of gaming; conteſt at a game.
I will play no more, my mind's not on't ;
I did never win of you,
Nor ſhall not when my fancy's on my play. Shakeſp:
5. Pračtice in any conteſt. -
When they can make nothing elſe on’t, they find it the
beſt of their play to put it off with a jeſt. L’Eſtrange.
He was reſolved not to ſpeak diſtinétly, knowing his beſt
play to be in the dark, and that all his ſafety lay in the confu-
ſidin of his talk. Tillotſon.
In arguing the opponent uſes comprehenfive and equivocal
terms, to involve his adverſary in the doubtfulneſs of his ex-
preſſion, and therefore the anſwer on his ſide makes it his play
to diſtinguiſh as much as he can. Locke.
, Bull's friends adviſed to gentler methods with the young
lord; but John naturally lov’d rough play. Arbuthnot.
6. Aćtion; employment ; office.
The ſenſeleſs plea of right by providence
Can laſt no longer than the preſent ſway;
But juſtifies the next who comes in play. Dryden.
7. Pračtice; ačtion; manner of ačting. -
Determinining, as after I knew, in ſecret manner, not to
be far from the place where we appointed to meet, to prevent
any foul play that might be offered unto me. Sidney, b. ii.
8. Aćt of touching an inſtrument. -
9. Irregular and wanton motion.
Io. A ſtate of agitation or ventilation. -
Many have been ſav'd, and many may, -
Who never heard this queſtion brought in play. Dryden,
11. Room for motion.
The joints are let exactly into one another, that they have
no play between them, leſt they ſhake upwards or down-
wards. Mºxon's Michanical Exerciſe.
12. Liberty of a&amp;ting; ſwing. - - - -
Should a writer give the full play to his mirth, without re-
gard to decency, he might pleaſe readers ; but muſt be a very
ill man, if he could pleaſe himſelf. Addiſon's Frºholder.
Playbook. n.ſ. [play and boºk.] Book of dramatick com-
poſitions. • * &gt; . . .
Your's was a match of common good liking, without any
mixture of that ridiculous paſſion, which has no being but
in playbooks and romances. Swift.
PLAYDAY. n.ſ. [play and day.] Day exempt from taſks or
work.
I thought the life of every lady
Should be one continual playday; -
Balls and maſquerades and ſhows. Swift's Miſcellanies.
Pla'Y DEBT.
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L A
P L E.
Playperr. n, f [play and debt.] Debt contracted by gaming.
There are multitudes of leaſes upon ſingle lives, and play.
debts upon joint lives. - Arbuthnot.
She has ſeveral playdebts on her hand, which muſt be diſ.
charged very ſuddenly. Spectator, N° 295.
Player. n.ſ.. [from play.]
1. One who plays,
2. An idler; a lazy perſon.
- - You're pićtures out of doors,
Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,
Players in your houſewifery. Shakeſpeare's Otheilo.
3. Aćtor of dramatick º ſpeare
Like players plac'd to fill a filthy ſtage,
Where change of thoughts one fool to other ſhews,
5. One who touches a muſical inſtrument.
Command thy ſervants to ſeek out a man, who is a cun-
ning player on the harp. 1 Samuel xvi. 16.
6. A gameſter.
7. One who ačts in play in any certain manner.
The ſnake bit him faſt by the tongue, which therewith
began ſo to rankle and ſwell, that, by the time he had knocked
this foul player on the head, his mouth was ſcarce able to
contain it. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Pla'yfellow. m. ſ. [play and fellow.] Companion in amuſe-
ment. -
Inconſtant in his choice of his friends, or rather never hav-
ing a friend but playfellows, of whom, when he was weary,
he could no otherwiſe rid himſelf than by killing them. Sidn.
She ſeem’d ſtill back unto the land to look,
And her payfellows aid to call, and fear
The daſhing of the waves. . Spenſer.
Your precious ſelf had not then croſs'd the eyes
Of my young playfellow. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
Miſchance and ſorrow go along with you !
Heart's diſcontent and ſour afflićtion
Be playfellows to keep you company Shakeſp.
Sweet playfellow, pray thou for us,
- And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius. Shakeſp.
This was the play at which Nero ſtakedthree thouſand two
hundred and twenty-nine pounds three ſhillings and four
pence upon every caſt; where did he find playfellows 8
Arbuthnot on Coins.
PLAYFUL. adj. ſplay and full.] Sportive ; full of levity.
He is ſcandalized at youth for being lively, and at child-
hood for being playful, Addiſon's Spectator, N° 494.
Playg AMF. n.ſ. ſplay and game.] Play of children.
That liberty alone gives the true reliſh to their ordinary
playgames. Locke.
Pia's House. m. ſ. [play and houſe..] Houſe where dramatick
performances are repreſented.
Theſe are the youths that thunder at a playhouſe, and fight
for bitten apples. Shakeſp. Henry Viſi.
He hurries me from the playhouſe and ſcenes there, to the
bear-garden. . . Stillingfeet.
..I am a ſufficient theatre to myſelf of ridiculous actions
without expecting company either in a court or playhouſe. By.
Shakeſpear, whom you and ev'ry playhouſe bill º
Stile the divine. Pope's Epiſłſes of Horace.
PLAYPLEASURE. m. ſ. ſplay and pºſure.] Idle amuſement.
He taketh a kind of playpſeaſure in looking upon the for-
tunes of others. "Bºº, Eſſay;
#AY.9ME, aſ ſºlº and ſmº) wanton, i.fi.
º n.J. [from playſome.] Wantonneſs; levity.
ºiso. m. ſ. [play and thing.] Toy; thing to play
O Caſtalio ! thou haſt caught
My fooliſh heart; and like a tender child
That truſts his plaything to another hand &gt;
fear its harm, and fain would have it back.
A child knowshi Otway.
a little º º:* and by degrees the *g. ;
*** ſhould be hindered fro - OcA’z.
them, by giving tº fruit and playtº." making * º
Would fortune c º º: 0cre.
And give us pla . * Preſent rage,
4. Playthings for our age. Prior.
And all but jeſts, ſerve only ſorrow's rage. Sidney.
Certain pantomimi will repreſent the voices of players of
interludes ſo to life, as you would think they were thoſe players
themſelves. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A player, if left of his auditory and their applauſe, would
ſtraight be out of heart. Bacon.
Thine be the laurel then, ſupport the ſtage;
Which ſo declines, that ſhortly we may ſee
Players and plays reduc’d to ſecond infancy. Dryden.
His muſe had ſtarv'd, had not a piece unread,
And by a player bought, ſupply'd her bread. Dryden.
4. A mimick.
Thus ſaid the player god ; and adding art
Of voice and geſture, ſo perform'd his part,
She thought, ſo like her love the ſhade appears,
º That Ceyx ſpake the words. Dryden.
Allow him but the plaything of a pen,
He ne'er rebels or plots. Pope.
PLA'y wRight. m. ſ. ſplay and wright.] A maker of plays.
He ended much in the character he had liv'd in ; and Ho-
race's rule for a play may as well be applied to him as a play-
wright. Pope.
PLEA. m. ſ. [plaid, old French.]
1. The act or form of pleading.
2. Thing offered or demanded in pleading.
The magnificoes have all perſuaded with him;
But none can drive him from the envious plea -
Of forfeiture of juſtice and his bond. Shakespeare
3. Allegation.
They tow'rds the throne ſupreme,
Accountable, made haſte, to make appear
With righteous plea, their utmoſt vigilance. Milton.
4. An apology ; an excuſe.
The fiend, with neceſſity,
The tyrant's plea, excus'd his deviliſh deeds. A ſiltan.
Thou determin'ſt weakneſs for no plea. Milton.
When ſuch occaſions are,
No plea muſt ſerve; 'tis cruelty to ſpare. Denham.
Whoever argues in defence of abſolute power in a fingle
perſon, though he offers the old plauſible plea, that, it is his
opinion, which he cannot help, unleſs he be convinced, ought
to be treated as the common enemy of mankind. Swift.
To Ple Ach. v. a. ſplºſer, Fr.] To bend; to interweave.
A word not in uſe.
Would'ſt thou be window’d in great Rome, and ſee
Thy maſter thus, with pleacht arms, bending down
His corrigible neck. Shakeſpeare.
Steal into the pleached bower,
Where honey-ſuckles ripen'd by the ſun,
Forbid the ſun to enter.
To PLEAD. v. n. [plaider, Fr.]
1. To argue before a court of juſtice.
To his accuſations
He pleaded ſtill not guilty; and alleg'd
Many ſharp reaſons. Shakespeare Henry VIII,
O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man
pleadeth for his neighbour ! job. xvi. 21.
Of beauty ſing;
Let others govern or defend the ſtate,
Plead at the bar, or manage a debate. Granvil.
Lawyers and divines write down ſhort notes, in order to
preach or plead. //atti's Improvement ºf the Mind.
2. To ſpeak in an argumentative or perſuaſive way for or againſt;
to reaſon with another.
Shakeſp,
I am
Top'ead for that, which I would not obtain. Shakespeare .
Who is he that will plead with me; for now if I hold my
tongue, I ſhall give up the ghoſt. job. xiii. 19.
If nature plead not in a parent's heart,
Pity my tears, and pity her deſert. Dryden.
It muſt be no ordinary way of reaſoning, in a man that is
pleading for the natural power of kings, and againſt all com-
pačt, to bring for proof an example, where his own account
founds all the right upon compačt. Locke.
3. To be offered as a plea.
Since you can love, and yet your error ſee,
The ſame reſiſtleſs power may plead for me,
With no leſs ardour I my claim purſue;
I love, and cannot yield her even to you.
To Ple AD. v. a.
1. To defend; to diſcuſs.
Will you, we ſhew our title to the crown -
If not, our ſwords ſhall plead it in the field. Shakeſp.
2. To allege in pleading or argument.
Don Sebaſtian came forth to intreat, that they might part
with their arms like ſoldiers; it was told him, that they could
not juſtly plead law of nations, for that they were not lawful
enemies. Spenſºr on Ireland.
If they will plead againſt me my reproach, know that God
hath overthrown me. job xix. 5.
3. To offer as an excuſe.
I will neither plead my age nor ſickneſs, in excuſe of
faults. Dryden.
PLEADABLE. adj. [from plead.] Capable to be alleged in
lea.
p I ought to be diſcharged from this information, becauſe this
privilege is pleadable at law. Dryden.
PLEADER. n.ſ. [plaideur, Fr. from plead.]
1. One who argues in a court of juſtice.
The brief with weighty crimes was chargd,
On which the pleader much enlarg’d. Swift's Mºſel.
2. One who ſpeaks for or againſt.
If you
Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue
Might ſtop our countryman. Shakeſp. Čºriolanus.
So fair a pleader any cauſe may gain. Dryden.
Dryden.
- PLEADING,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L E
P L E
#,
5,
i.
*
º,
#,
PLEADING. m. ſ. [from plead..] Aét or form of pleading.
If the heavenly folk ſhould know
Theſe pleadings in the court below. Swift's Miſcel.
Ple A's ANCE. n.ſ. [plaiſance, Fr.] Gaiety; pleaſantry; mer-
riment.
The lovely pleaſance and the lofty pride
Cannot expreſſed be by any art. Spenſer.
Her words ſhe drowned with laughing vain,
And wanting grace in utt'ring of the ſame,
That turned all her pleaſance to a ſcoffing game. F. Queen.
Oh that men ſhould put an enemy into their mouths, to
ſteal away their brains ! that we ſhould with joy, pleaſance,
revel and applauſe transform ourſelves into beaſts. Shakeſp.
PLEASANT. adj. [plaiſant, French.]
1. Delightful; giving delight.
The gods are juſt, and of our pleaſant vices
Make inſtruments to ſcourge us. Shakeſp. King Lear.
What moſt he ſhould diſlike, ſeems pleaſant to him;
What like, offenſive. Shakeſp. King Lear.
How good and how pleaſant it is for brethren to dwell in
unity Pſalms.
Verdure clad
Her univerſal face with pleaſant green. Milton.
2. Gratcſul to the ſenſes. -
Sweeter thy diſcourſe is to my ear,
Than fruits of palm-tree pleaſanteſt to thirſt. Milton.
. Good humoured ; cheerful. -
In all thy humours, whether grave or mellow,
Thou'rt ſuch a touchy, teſty, pleaſant fellow. Addiſon.
4. Gay , lively ; merry.
Let neither the power nor quality of the great, or the wit
of the pleaſant prevail with us to flatter the vices, or applaud
the prophaneneſs of wicked men. Rogers's Sermons.
5. Trifling; adapted rather to mirth than uſe.
They, who would prove their idea of infinite to be poſi-
tive, ſeem to do it by a pleaſant argument, taken from the ne-
gation of an end, which being negative, the negation of it
is poſitive. - Locke.
Pleasantly, adv. [from pleaſant.]
1. In ſuch a manner as to give delight.
2. Gayly ; merrily; in good humour. -
King James was wont pleaſantly to ſay, that the duke of
Buckingham had given him a ſecretary, who could neither
write nor read. Clarendon.
3. Lightly; Iudicrouſly.
Euſtathius is of opinion, that Ulyſſes ſpeaks pleaſantly to
Elpenor. - - Broome.
PLEA sant N Ess. n. ſ. [from pleaſant.]
1. Delightfulneſs; ſtate of being pleaſant.
Doth not the pleaſantneſs of this place carry in itſelf ſuffi-
cient reward. Sidney.
2. Gaiety; checrfulneſs; merriment.
It was refreſhing, but compoſed, like the pleaſantneſs of
youth tempered with the gravity of age. South.
He would fain put on ſome pleaſantneſs, but was not able
to conceal his vexation. Tillotſon.
Plf A's ANTRY. m. ſ. [plaiſanterie, Fr.]
1. Gaiety ; merriment.
The harſhneſs of reaſoning is not a little ſoftened and
ſmoothed by the infuſions of mirth and pleaſantry. Addiſon.
Such kinds of pleaſantry are diſingenuous in criticiſm, the
greateſt maſters appear ſerious and inſtructive. Addiſon.
2. Sprightly ſaying; lively talk.
The grave abound in pleaſantries, the dull in repartees and
points of wit. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 487.
To Ple As E. v. a. [place0, Lat. plaire, Fr.]
1. To delight; to gratify ; to humour.
They pleaſe themſelves in the children of ſtrangers. Iſii. 6.
Whether it were a whiſtling wind, or a pleaſing fall of
water running violently. Jºſdom xvii. 18.
Thou can'ſt not be ſo pleas'd at liberty,
As I ſhall be to find thou dar'ſt be free. Dryden.
Leave ſuch to trifle with more grace and eaſe,
Whom folly pleaſes, and whoſe follies pleaſe. Pope.
2. To ſatisfy 3 to content.
Dočtor Pinch
Eſtabliſh him in his true ſenſe again,
And I will pleaſe you what you will demand. Shakeſp.
What next I bring ſhall pleaſe
Thy wiſh exactly to thy heart's deſire. Milton.
3. To obtain favour from ; to be pleaſed with, is to approve ;
to favour.
This is my beloved ſon, in whom I am well pleaſed. Mat.
I have ſeen thy face, and thou waſt pleaſed with me. Gen.
Fickle their ſtate whom God
Moſt favours: who can pleaſe him long Milton.
4. To be Pleased. To like. A word of ceremony.
Many of our moſt ſkilful painters were pleaſed to recom-
mend this author to me, as one who perfectly underſtood the
rules of painting. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
To Please. v. n.
I. To give pleaſure.
What pleaſing ſeem’d, for her now pleaſes more. Milton.
1ſoundſomething that was more plaine in them
ordinary . pleaſing em, º:
2. T; #. approbation.
eir wine-offerings ſhall n -
3. To like ; to chuſe. g ot be pleaſing unto him. Hºſta.
Spirits, freed from mortal laws, with eaſe
Aſſume what ſexes and what ſhapes they pleaſe. Pope.
4. To condeſcend; to comply. A word of ceremony.
Pleaſe you, lords,
In fight of both our battles we may meet. Shakeſp.
The firſt words that I learnt were, to expreſs my deſire,
that he would pleaſe to give me my liberty. Gulliver.
PLEA'ser. m. ſ. [from pleaſe.] One that courts favour.
PLEA singly adv. [from pleaſing.] In ſuch a manner as to
give delight.
Pleaſingly troubleſome thought and remembrance have been
to me ſince I left you. Suckling.
Thus to herſelf ſhe pleaſingly began. Milton.
The end of the artiſt is pleaſingly to deceive the eye. Dryd.
He gains all points, who pleaſingly confounds,
Surprizes, varies, and conceals the bounds. Pope.
*:singNess. n.ſ.. [from pleaſing.] Quality of giving de-
ight.
PLEA'seMAN. n.ſ. [pleaſe and man.] A pickthank; an off-
cious fellow.
Some carry tale, ſome pleaſeman, ſome ſlight zany,
That knows the trick to make my lady laugh,
Told our intents. Shakeſp. Love's Labour Loſſ.
PLEA'surable. adj. [from pleaſure.] Delightful; full of
pleaſure.
Planting of orchards is very profitable, as well as pleaſur-
able. Bacon.
It affords a pleaſurable habitation in every part, and that is
the line ecliptick. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
There are, that the compounded fluid drain
From different mixtures: ſo the blended ſtreams,
Each mutually correcting each, create
A pleaſurable medley. Philips.
Our ill-judging thought
Hardly enjoys the pleaſurable taſte. Prior.
PLEA.º. n. ſ. [plaiſir, French.]
1. Delight; gratification of the mind or ſenſes.
Pleaſure, in general, is the conſequent apprehenſion of
a ſuitable object, ſuitably applied to a rightly diſpoſed fa-
culty. South's Sermons. ,
A cauſe of men's taking pleaſure in the ſins of others, is,
that poor ſpiritedneſs that accompanies guilt. South's Sei mons.
In hollow caves ſweet echo quiet lies;
Her name with pleaſure once ſhe taught the ſhore,
Now Daphne's dead, and pleaſure is no more. Pope.
2. Looſe gratification.
Convey your pleaſures in a ſpacious plenty,
And wet ſeem cold. Shakeſp.
Behold yon dame does ſhake the head to hear of pleaſure's
name. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Not ſunk in carnal pleaſure. AMilton.
3. Approbation.
The Lord taketh pleaſure in them that fear him. Pſalms.
4. What the will dićtates.
Uſe your pleaſure ; if your love do not perſuade you to
come, let not my letter. Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
He will do his pleaſure on Babylon. If xlviii.
Choice; arbitrary will.
We aſcribe not only effects depending on the natural period
of time unto arbitrary calculations, and ſuch as vary at plea-
ſure, but confirm our tenets by the uncertain account of
others. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv.
Half their fleet offends
His open ſide, and high above him ſhews;
Upon the reſt at pleaſure he deſcends,
And doubly harm’d, he double harm beſtows. Dryden.
Raiſe tempeſts at your pleaſure. Dryden.
We can at pleaſure move ſeveral parts of our bodies. Locke-
All the land in their dominions being acquired by conqueſt,
was diſpoſed by them according to their pleaſure. Arbuthnºt.
To Pleasure. v. a. [from the noun..] To pleaſe; to gra-
tify. This word, though ſupported by good authority, is,
I think, inelegant.
Things, thus ſet in order,
Shall further thy harveſt, and pleaſtre thee beft. Tºr.
I count it one of my greateſt afflictions, that I cannot plea-
ſure ſuch an honourable gentleman. Shakeſpeare.
If what pleaſes him, ſhall pleaſure you,
Fight cloſer, or good faith you'll catch d blow. - Shakespeare
When the way of pleaſuring and diſpleaſuring lieth by the
favourite, it is impoſſible any ſhould be overgreat. Bacon.
Nothing is difficult to love ; it will make a man croſs his
own inclinations to pleaſure them whom he loves. Tillotſon.
PLEA'sukeful. adj. ſpleaſure and full.] Pleaſant; delightful.
Cbſolete.
This country, for the fruitfulneſs of the land and the con-
veniency of the ſea, hath been reputed a very commodious
and pleaſurful country. Abbot's Diſcript. of the ſºrld.
19 X PLE BE AN,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L E
P L E
º
Plebei’AN. n.ſ. [plebeien, Fr. plebeius, Lat.] One of the lower
people.
Let him
Hoiſt thee up to the ſhouting plebeians. Shakeſpeare.
You're plebeians, if they be ſenators. Shakeſpeare.
Upon the leaſt intervals of peace, the quarrels between
the nobles and the plebeians would revive. Swift.
PLEBE1’AN. adj.
1. Popular; conſiſting of mean perſons. -
As ſwine are to gardens, ſo are tumults to parliaments,
and plebeian concourſes to publick counſels. King Charles.
2. Belonging to the lower ranks.
He through the midſt unmark'd,
In ſhew plebeian angel militant
Of loweſt order. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
3. Vulgar; low ; common. -
o apply notions philoſophical to plebeian terms; or to ſay,
where the notions cannot fitly be reconciled, that there
wanteth a term or nomenclature for it, as the ancients uſed,
they be but ſhifts of ignorance. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
The differences of mouldable and not mouldable, ſciſible
and not ſciſſible are plebeian notions. - Bacon.
Diſhonour not the vengeance I deſign'd.
A queen! and own a baſe plebeian mind Dryden.
PLEDGE. m. ſ. ſpleige, Fr. piggio, Italian.]
I. Any thing put to pawn. -
2. A gage ; anything given by way of warrant or ſecurity; a
awn.
p Theſe men at the firſt were only pitied ; the great humility,
zeal and devotion, which appeared to be in them, was in all
men's opinion a pledge of their harmleſs meaning. Hooker.
If none appear to prove upon thy perſon
Thy heinous, manifeſt and many treaſons;
There is my pledge, I'll prove it on thy heart. Shakeſpeare.
That voice their livelieſt pledge
Qf hope in fears and dangers. Milton.
Money is neceſſary both for counters and for pledges, and
carrying with it even reckoning and ſecurity. . Lºcke.
. . Hymen ſhall be aton'd, ſhall join two hearts,
And Aribert ſhall be the pledge of peace. Rowe.
3. A ſirety; a bail; an hoſtage. -
What purpoſe could there be of treaſon, when the Guia-
, nians offered to leave pledges, ſix for one.
Good ſureties will we have for thy return,
And at thy pledges peril keep thy day. Dryden.
To Pledge. v. a. ſpleiger, Fr. Piggiarº, Italian.]
1. To put in pawn.
Aſleep and naked as an Indian lay,
An honeſt factor ſtole a gem away;
He pledg'd it to the knight; the knight had wit,
So kept the diamond. Pope.
2. To give as warrant or ſecurity:
3. To ſecure by a pledge.
- I accept her; -
. ...And here to pledge my vow, I give my hand. Shakespeare.
4. ...is to drink, by *ccepting the cup or health after
another.
Raleigh.
The fellow, that
Parts bread with him, and p'edges
The breath of him in a divided draught,
Is th' readieſt man to kill him. Shakespeare 7inon of Athens.
To you noble lord of Weſtmoreland.
I pledge your grace. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
That flexânimous orator began the king of Homébiº
health; he Preſently pledg'd it. Hºwe's Pocal Forg/?.
PLE ****, *ſ, ſplºgghe, Dutch..] A ſmaīmāſ, of lint.
1 applied a pledget of baſilicon. //iſeman's Surgery.
PLE'IAbs. }" ſº [Pleiades, Lat. *ſadis.] A northern coi.
PLE'IADEs. ; ſellation.
The pleiades before him danc'd,
Shedding ſweet influence. Milton
Then ſailors quarterd heav'n, and found a name -
For pleiadi, hyads and the northern ca. Dryden.
PLE'NARily. adv. [from plenary.] Fully; completely.
The cauſe is made a Plenary cauſe, and ought to be deter-
mined flºarily. Ayliffe's Parergon.
PLE NARY. adj. [from plenus, Lat.] Full; complete. -
I am far from denying that compliance on my part, for
plenary conſent it was not, to his deſtruction. King Č.
he cauſe is made a Plenary cauſe. Ayl; 3.
A treatiſe on a ſubject ſhould be Pºnary or full, ſo that ſo.
c y be anti §: P - -
t in * Ina W tln nothing which 1S pro CI omitted //atts
P LE NAR Y. m. /. - Deciſive procedure.
A bare inſtitution without induction does not make
le - - a
P”y againſt the king, where he has a title to preſent.
PLENARIN Ayliff:
ESS. m. ſ. y | --
* NILUNARY J. [from Plenary.] Fulneſ ; completeneſs.
adj. [from Pienilunium, Lat.] Relating to
gyptian days in every month, the in-
”*mptions, there would ariſe above
Brown's ſugar Errours.
terlunary and Pleniluna
an hundred mºre.
Ple(NIPOTEN ce. m. ſ. [from plenus and potentia, Lat.J Fulnes
of power. - -
PLE'Nipo TENT, adj. [plenipotent, Lat..] Inveſted with full
Wer.
My ſubſtitutes I ſend you, and create
Plenipotent on earth, of matchleſs might
Iſſuing from me. - Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
PLENI pote'N TIARY. m. ſ. ſplenipotentiaire, Fr.] A negotiator
inveſted with full power. -
They were only the plenipotentiary monks of the patriarchal
monks. Stilingfleet.
PLE'NIST. n. / [from plenus, Lat..] One that holds all ſpace
to be full of matter.
Thoſe ſpaces, which the vacuiſts would have empty, be-
cauſe devoid of air, the pleniſts do not prove repleniſhed with
ſubtle matter by any ſenſible effects. Boyle.
PLE's ſtude. n.ſ. ſplenitude, from Penus, Lat. plenitude, Fr.]
I. Fulneſs; the contrary to vacuity.
If there were every where an abſolute plenitude and denſity
without any pores between the particles of bodies, all bodies
of equal dimenſions would contain an equal quantity of mat-
ter, and conſequently be equally ponderous. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Repletion; animalfulneſs; plethory.
Relaxation from plenitude is cured by ſpare diet. Arbuth.
3. Exuberance; abundance.
The plenitude of the pope's power of diſpenſing was the
main queſtion. Bacon's Henry VII.
4. Completeneſs.
The plenitude of William's fame
Can no accumulated ſtores receive. Prior.
PLENTEous, adj. [from plenty.]
1. Copious ; exuberant; abundant.
Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt
Now plentecus theſe acts of hateful flrife. Milton.
Two plenteous fountains the whole proſpect crown'd;
This through the gardens leads its ſtreams around. Pºpe.
2. Fruitful; fertile. -
Take up the fifth part of the land in the ſeven plenteous
years. Geneſis xli. 34.
Lab'ring the ſoil and reaping plentecus crop. Milton.
PLE'NtEously, adv. [from plenteous.] Copiouſly; abun-
dantly; exuberantly.
Thy due from me is tears,
Which nature, love and filial tenderneſ,
Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteouſ'. Shakeſp.
God created the great whales and each
Soul living, each that crept, which plenteouſly
The waters generated. Milton's Par. Lºft, p. vii.
God proves us in this life, that he may the more plenteouſly
reward us in the next. Hake's Preparation fºr Death.
PLENTEousNess. n.ſ.. [from plenteouſ.] Abundance; fer-
tility.
%he ſeven years of plenteouſneſ; in Egypt were ended.
- Geneſs.
Prºstiful, adj. [plenty and full.] Copious; abundant; ex:
uberant; fruitful.
To Amalthca he gave a country, bending like a horn;
whence the tale of Amalthea's plentiful horn. Raleigh.
. He that is plentiful in expences, will hardly be preſerved
from decay. Bacon’s Eſſays.
If it be a long winter, it is commonly a more plentifid
year. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
When they had a plentiful harveſt, the farmer had hardly
any corn. - L’Eſtrange.
Alcibiades was a young man of noble birth, excellent edu-
cation and a plentiful fortune. - Swift.
PLE'N TIFULLY. adv. [from plentiful.] Copiouſly; abundantly.
They were not multiplied before, but they were at that
time plentifully encreaſed. - Brown's /uſgar Errours.
Bern is plentifully furniſhed with water, there being a great
multitude of fountains. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
PLENTIFULNEss. n. /.. [from plentiful.] The ſtate of being
plentiful; abundance; fertility:
PLENTY. m. ſ. [from plenus, full.]
1. Abundance ; ſuch a quantity as is more than enough.
Peace,
Dear nurſe of arts, plenties and joyful birth. Shakespeare
- What makes land, as well as other things, dear, is plenty
of buyers, and but few ſellers; and ſo plenty of ſellers and
few buyers makes land cheap. Locke.
2. Fruitfulneſs ; exuberance.
The teeming clouds
Deſcend in gladſome plenty o'er the world. Thomſºn.
3. It is uſed, I think, barbarouſly for plentiful.
To graſs with thy calves,
Where water is plenty. Tuſer's Huſbandry.
If reaſons were as plenty as black berries, I would give no
man a reaſon on compulſion. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
4. A ſtate in which enough is had and enjoyed. - -
Ye ſhall eat in plenty and be ſatisfied, and praiſe the
Lord, - joe. ii. 26.
5 PLE on ASM.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L I
P L O
,
Pleſon Asm.. n.ſ. ſpleanaſne, Fr. pleonaſmus, Lat.] A figure
of rhetorick, by which more words are uſed than are neceſſary.
Plesh. n.ſ. [A word uſed by Spenſer inſtead of plaſh, for the
convenience of rhyme..] . A puddle ; a boggy marſh.
Out of the wound the red blood flowed freſh,
That underneath his feet ſoon made a purple plaſh. Spenſºr.
PLE THORA. m. ſ. [from ranSwea.] The ſtate in which
the veſſels are fuller of humours than is agreeable to a na-
tural ſtate or health ; ariſes either from a diminution of ſome
natural evacuations, or from debauch and feeding higher or
more in quantity than the ordinary powers of the viſcera can
digeſt: evacuations and exerciſe are its remedies.
The diſeaſes of the fluids are a plethora, or too great abun-
dance of laudable juices. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
#. º }a}[from plethora.] Having a full habit.
The fluids, as they conſiſt of ſpirit, water, ſalts, oil and
terreſtrial parts, differ according to the redundance of the
whole or of any of theſe ; and therefore the plethorick are
phlegmatick, oily, ſaline, earthy or dry. Arbuthnot.
PLETHoRY. m. ſ. [plethore, Fr. from ranSéez.] Fulneſs of
habit.
In too great repletion, the elaſtick force of the tube throws
the fluid with too great a force, and ſubjects the animal to
the diſeaſes depending upon a plethory. Arbuthnot.
PLE'viN. m. ſ. ſpleuvine, Fr. plevina, law Lat.] In law, a
warrant or aſſurance. See Replievin. Dić7.
PLEURISY. n.ſ.. [º.svgºri; ; pleurºſe, Fr. pleuritis, Lat.]
Pleuriſy is an inflammation of the pleura, though it is
hardly diſtinguiſhable from an inflammation of any other part
of the breaſt, which are all from the ſame cauſe, a ſtagnated
blood ; and are to be remedied by evacuation, ſuppuration or
expectoration, or all together. Quincy.
URITICAL. - -
º łaj, [from pleuriſy.]
1. Diſeaſed with a pleuriſy.
The viſcous matter, which lies like leather upon the ex-
travaſated blood of pleuritick people, may be diſſolved by a
due degree of heat. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Denoting a pleuriſy.
His blood was pleuritical, it had neither colour nor con-
ſiſtence. - Wiſeman's Surgery.
PLIABLE, adj. ſpliable, from plier, Fr. to bend.]
1. Eaſy to be bent; flexible.
Though an act be never ſo ſinful, they will ſtrip it of its
guilt, and make the very law ſo pliable and bending, that it
thall be impoſſible to be broke. South's Sermons.
Whether the different motions of the animal ſpirits may
have any effect on the mould of the face, when the linea-
ments are pliable and tender, I ſhall leave to the curious. Addison
2. Flexible of diſpoſition; eaſy to be perſuaded.
Pll'AbleNEss. n.f. [from pliable.]
1. Flexibility; eaſineſs to be bent.
2. Flexibility of mind.
Compare the ingenuous pliab'eneſ to virtuous counſels in
youth, as it comes freſh out of the hands of nature, with the
confirmed obſtinacy in moſt ſorts of ſin, that is to be found
in an aged ſinner. -
PLI'ANCY. n.f. [from pliant.] Eaſineſs to be bent.
Had not exerciſe been neceſſary, nature would not have
given ſuch an activity to the limbs, and ſuch a pliancy to every
part, as produces thoſe compreſſions and extenſions neceſſary
for the preſervation of ſuch a ſyſtem. Addiſon's Spectator.
PLIANT. adj. [pliant, French.] -
1. Bending ; tough ; flexile; flexible; lithe ; limber.
An anatomiſt promiſed to diffect a woman's tongue, and
examine whether the fibres may not be made up of a finer
and more pliant thread. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 247.
2. Eaſy to take a form. -
Particles of heav'nly fire,
Or earth but new divided from the ſky,
And pliant ſtill retain'd th' etherial energy. Dryden.
As the wax melts that to the flame I hold,
Pliant and warm may ſtill her heart remain,
Soft to the print, but ne'er turn hard again. Granville.
3. Eaſily complying. -
In languages the tongue is more pliant to all ſounds, the
joints more ſupple to all feats of activity, in youth than after-
wards. - Bacon's Eſſays.
Thoſe, who bore bulwarks on their backs,
Now practiſe ev'ry pliant geſture,
Op'ning their trunk for ev'ry teſter. Swift's Miſcel.
4. Eaſily perſuaded. - -
The will was then dućtile and pliant to right reaſon, it
met the dićtates of a clarified underſtanding halfway. South.
Pll'ANTNess. n.ſ.. [from pliant.] Flexibility; toughneſs.
Greatneſs of weight, cloſeneſs of parts, fixation, pliant-
nºſ, or ſoftneſs. . . . Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Pircature. ln. ſ. ſplicatura, from plica, Lat.] Fold; double.
Plication. } Plication is uſed ſomewhere in Clariſſa.
Pll'ERs. n.ſ. (from ply..] An inſtrument by which any thing
is laid hold on to bend it.
*—
South’s Sermons.
Piers are of two ſorts, flat-noſed and round-noſed ; their
office is to hold and faſten upon a ſmall work, and to fit it in
its place; the round-noſed pliers are uſed for turning or boring
wire or ſmall plate into a circular form. Moxon.
I made a detention by a ſmall pair of plier. JWiſeman
To PLIGHT. v. a. º j pite ſeman.
1. To pledge ; to give as ſurety.
He plighted his right hand
Unto another love, and to anotherland. Fairy Queen.
Saint Withold
Met the night mare, and her name told,
Bid her alight, and her troth plight. Shakeſp. King Lear.
I again in Henry's royal name, -
Give thee her hand for ſign of plighted faith. Shakeſpeare.
Here my inviolable faith I plight,
Lo, thou be my defence, I, thy delight. Dryden.
New loves you ſeek,
New vows to plight, and plighted vows to break, Dryden.
I'll never mix my plighted hands with thine,
While ſuch a cloud of miſchiefs hangs about us. Addiſon.
2. To braid; to weave. [from plico, Lat, whence to ply or
bend, and plight, pleight or plait, a fold or flexure.]
Her head ſhe fondly would aguiſe
With gaudie girlonds, or freſh flowrets dight
About her neck, or rings of ruſhes plight. Fairy Queen.
I took it for a fairy viſion - -
Of ſome gay creatures of the element,
That in the colours of the rainbow live,
And play i' th' plighted clouds. * . Milton.
Plight. n.J. [This word Skinner imagines to be derived from
the Dutch, plicht, office or employment; but junius obſerves,
that plihr, Saxon, ſignifies diſtreſs or preſing danger; whence,
I º, plight was derived, it being generally uſed in a bad
enie. - -
1. Condition; ſtate.
When as the careful dwarf had told,
And made enſample of their mournful fight
Unto his maſter, he no longer would -
There dwell in peril of like painful plight. Fa. Queen;
I think myſelf in better plight for a lender than you are.
--- Shakeſpeare.
Beſeech your highneſs,
My women may be with me; for, you ſee,
My plight requires it. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
They in lowlieſt plight repentant ſtood
Praying. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. xi.
- Thou muſt not here
Lie in this miſerable loathſome flight. Milton:
" _ Moſt perfect hero tried in heavieſt plight
Of labours huge and hard. Milton.
2. Good caſe.
Who abuſeth his cattle and ſtarves them for meat,
By carting or plowing, his gaine is not great;
Where he that with labour can uſe them aright,
Hath gaine to his comfort, and cattel in plight.
3. Pledge ; gage. [from the verb..] .
That lord, whoſe hand muſt take my plight, ſhall carry
Half my love with him, half my care and duty. Shakeſp.
4. [From to plight.] A fold; a pucker ; a double ; a purſe;
a plait. -
P Yclad, for fear of ſcorching air,
All in a ſilken camus, lilly white,
Purfled upon with many a folded plight. . . Fairy Queen.
PLINTH. n.ſ.. [waiv$4;..] In architecture, is that ſquare
member which ſerves as a foundation to the baſe of a pillar;
Vitruvius calls the upper part or abacus of the Tuſcan pillar, a
plinth, becauſe it reſembles a ſquare tile: moreover, the ſame
denomination is ſometimes given to a thick wall, wherein
there are two or three bricks advanced in form of a plat-
band. - Harris.
To PLOD. v. n. [ploeghen, Dutch. Skinner.]
1. To toil; to moil ; to drudge; to travel.
A plodding diligence brings us ſooner to our journey's end,
than a fluttering way of advancing by ſtarts. L'E/trange.
He knows better than any man, what is not to be written :
and never hazards himſelf ſo far as to fall, but plods on de-
liberately, and, as a grave man ought, puts his ſtaff before
him. - Dryden's State of Innocence.
Th’ unletter'd chriſtian, who believes in groſs,
Plods on to heav'n, and ne'er is at a loſs.
2. To travel laboriouſly.
Rogues, plod º, o’ the hoof, ſeek ſhelter, pack. Sha.
If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day. -
Haſt thou not held my ſtirrup!
Bare-headed, plodded by my foot cloth mule,
And thought thee happy when I ſhook my head : Shakespeare .
Ambitious love hath ſo in me offended,
That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
With ſainted vow my faults to have amended.
Tw ere
Dryden.
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Shakeſ?.
3. To ſtudy
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L O
P L O
-
ſtudy cloſely and dully.
3. To §. %; priſons up
The nimble ſpirits in the arteries;
As motion and long-during action tires
The finewy vigour of the traveller.
He plods to turn his am’rous ſuit
T’a plea in law, and proſecute.
She reaſon'd without plodding long, --
Nor ever gave her judgment wrong. Swift's Miſcel.
Plo'DDER. m. ſ. [from plod.] A dull heavy laborious man.
Study is like the heav'ns glorious ſun,
That will not be deep ſearch'd with ſaucy looks;
What have continual plodders ever won,
Save baſe authority from other's books :
PLOT. n.ſ. ſplot, Saxon. See Plat.]
1. A ſmall extent of ground.
It was a choſen plot of fertile land,
Amongſt wide waves ſet like a little neſt,
As if it had by nature's cunning hand
Been choicely picked out from all the reſt.
Plant ye with alders or willowes a plot,
Where yeerely as needeth mopoles may be got.
Many unfrequented plot; there are,
Fitted by kind for rape and villainy. Shakeſpeare.
Were there but this ſingle plot to loſe,
This mould of Marcius, they to duſt would grind it,
slaiſ.
Hudibras, p. iii.
Shakeſp.
Fairy Queen.
Tuſſºr.
And throw't againſt the wind. Shakeſp.
When we mean to build,
We firſt ſurvey the plot, then draw the model,
And when we ſee the figure of the houſe,
Then we muſt rate the coſt of the erection. Shakeſp.
Weeds grow not in the wild uncultivated waſte, but in
garden plots under the negligent hand of a gardener. Locke.
2. A plantation laid out.
Some goddeſs inhabiteth this region, who is the ſoul of
this ſoil; for neither is any leſs than a goddeſs, worthy to be
ſhrined in ſuch a heap of pleaſures; nor any leſs than a god-
deſs could have made it ſo perfect a plot. Sidney.
3. A form; a ſcheme; a plan.
The law of England never was properly applied unto the
Iriſh nation, as by a purpoſed plot of government, but as they
could inſinuate and ſteal themſelves under the ſame by their
humble carriage. Spenſer on %.
4. [Imagined by Skinner to be derived from platform, but evi-
dently contracted from complat, Fr.] A conſpiracy ; a ſecret
deſign formed againſt another. -
I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him. Shakespeare.
Eaſy ſeems the thing to every one, -
That nought could croſs their plot, or them ſuppreſs. Dan.
5. An intrigue; an affair complicated, involved and embarraſſed 3.
the ſtory of a play, compriſing an artful involution of affairs,
unravelled at laſt by ſome unexpected means.
If the plot or intrigue muſt be natural, and ſuch as ſprings
from the ſubject, then the winding up of the plot muſt be a
probable conſequence of all that went before. Pope.
Nothing muſt be ſung between the acts,
But what ſome way conduces to the plot. Roſcommon.
Our author
Produc’d his play, and begg'd the knight's advice,
Made him obſerve the ſubject and the plot,
The manners, paſſions, unities, what not * Pope.
- They deny the plºt to be tragical, becauſe its cataſtrophe
is a wedding, which hath ever been accounted comical. Gay.
6. Stratagem; ſecret combination to any ill end.
Fruſtrate all our plots and wiles. Milton
7. Contrivance; deep reach of thought. -
Who ſays he was not
A man of much plot,
May repent that falſe accuſation;
Having plotted and pen'd
Six plays to attend
The farce of his negociation.
º º [from the noun.]
1. To form ſchemes of miſchief again
againſt thoſe in authority. gainſt another, commonly
- The ſubtle traitor
†. º Plºtted in the council houſe
9 murther me. Shakeſpeare's R;
The wicked plotteth againſt the juſt. *::::::::: º
He who envies now thy ſtate, - - - -
Who now is plotting how he may ſeduce
*:::from obedience. AMilton's Par. Left i.vi
º ". º round th’ incloſure prowl'd 3 vs. v. 1.
2. jº. . * plots not on the fold.
C CO - - -
prince did . º the marquis of a flying noiſe, that the
ſwer'd, th ** “cretly gone; to which the marquis an-
i.” hough love had made hi high quis an
...” Sountry, yet fear . is highneſs ſteal out of
Spain. Would never make him run out of
To Plot. v.a. Watton.
1. To plan; to contrive.
Denham.
Dryden.
With ſhame and ſorrow fill'd :
Shame for his folly; ſorrow out of time
For plotting an unprofitable crime;
2. To deſcribe according to ichnography. -
This treatiſe plateſ; down Cornwall, as it now ſtandeth,
for the particulars. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Plotter. m. ſ. [from plot.]
1. Conſpirator.
As for you, Colonel, we ſhall try who's the greater platter
of us two; I againſt the ſtate, or you againſt the petticoat.
Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Dryden.
2. Contriver. - - - -
An irreligious moor,
Shakeſp.
Chief archite&amp;t and plotter of theſe woes.
PlovER. m. ſ. [pluvier, Fr. pluvialis, Lat..] A lapwing. A
bird.
Of wild birds, Cornwall hath quail, rail, patridge, phea-
ſant and plover. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Scarce
The bittern knows his time: or from the ſhore,
The plovers when to ſcatter o'er the heath
And ſing. Thomſºn's Spring.
PLOUGH. n.ſ. [plox, Saxon; plog, Daniſh; plºgh, Dutch...]
1. The inſtrument with which the furrows are cut in the ground
to receive the ſeed.
Look how the purple flower, which the plough
Hath ſhorn in ſunder, languiſhing doth die. Peacham.
Some plough, differ in the length and ſhape of their beams 5
ſome in the ſhare, others in the coulter and handles. Afrt.
In ancient times the ſacred plough employ'd
The kings and awful fathers. Thomſºn.
2. A kind of plane. Ainſworth.
To Plough. v. n. To practiſe aration ; to turn up the ground
in order to ſow ſeed. -
Rebellion, inſolence, ſedition
We ourſelves have plough'd for, ſow'd and ſcatter'd,
By mingling them with us. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
D9th the ploughman plºugh all day to ſow iſ xxviii. 24.
They only give the land one ploughing, and ſow white
oats, and harrow them as they do black. A/artimer.
To Ploug H. v. a. . -
1. To turn up with the plough.
Let the Volſcians
Plºugh Rome and harrow Italy. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Shou'd any ſlave, ſo lewd, belong to you f -
No doubt you'd ſend the rogue, in fetters bound,
To work in bridewell, or to plough your ground. Dryden.
A man may plough, in ſtiff grounds the firſt time fallowed,
an acre a day. Mortimer.
You find it ploughed into ridges and ſurrows. Mortimer.
2. To bring to view by the plough.
Another of a duſky colour, near black; there are of theſe
frequently ploughed up in the fields of Weldon. Iſºodward.
3. To furrow ; to divide.
When the prince her fun'ral rites had paid,
He plough'd the Tyrrhene ſeas with ſails diſplay’d. Addison
With ſpeed we plough the watry way, -
My power ſhall guard thee. Pope's Odyſſy.
4. To tear; to furrow. -
Let
Patient O&amp;tavia plough thy viſage up
With her prepared nails. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
Plou'GHBox. n.ſ. [plough and boy..] A boy that follows the
plough ; a coarſe ignorant boy.
A ploughboy, that has never ſeen anything but thatched
houſes and his pariſh church, imagines that thatch belongs to
the very nature of a houſe. I/atts's Logicº.
Plou'GHER. m. ſ. [from plough..] One who ploughs or culti-
vates ground. - .
When the country ſhall be repleniſhed with corn, as it
will, if well followed; for the country people themſelves are
great ploughers and ſmall ſpenders of corn: then there ſhould
be good ſtore of magazines erected. Spenſer.
Plough LA'ND. n.ſ. [plough and land.]. A farm for corn.
Who hath a ploughland caſts all his ſeed-corn there,
And yet allows his ground more corn ſhould bear. Donne.
In this book are entered the names of the manors or in-
habited townſhips, the number of ploughland; that each con-
tains, and the number of the inhabitants. Hale.
Plou'GHMAN. n.ſ. [plough and man.]
1. One that attends or uſes the plough.
When ſhepherds pipe on oaten ſtraws,
And merry larks are ploaghmen's clocks,
The cuckow then on ev'ry tree. Shakeſpeare.
God provides the good things of the world, to ſerve the
neeeds of nature by the labours of the ploughman. Taylor.
The careful ploughman doubting ſtands. AMilton.
Your reign no leſs aſſures the ploughman's peace,
Than the warm ſun advances his increaſe. //aller.
The merchant gains by peace, and the ſoldiers by war, the
ſhepherd by wet ſeaſons, and the ploughmen by dry. Zeºple.
3 Who
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L U
P L U
Who can ceaſe t'admire
The ploughman conſul in his coarſe attire. Dryden.
One
My plºughman's is, t'other my ſhepherd's ſon. Dryden.
2. A groſs ignorant ruſtick.
Her hand ' to whoſe ſoft ſeizure
The cignet's down is harſh, and, ſpite of ſenſe,
Hard as the palm of ploughman. Shakeſp.
3. A ſtrong laborious man.
A weak ſtomach will turn rye bread into vinegar, and a
ploughman will digeſt it. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Plou'GH Mon DAY. m. ſ. The monday after twelfth-day.
Ploughmunday next after that the twelftide is paſt,
Bids out with the plough, the worſt huſband is laſt. Tuſſºr.
Ploughsh A'RE. m. ſ. ſplough and ſhare.] The part of the
plough that is perpendicular to the coulter.
As the earth was turned up, the ploughſhare lighted upon a
great ſtone; we pulled that up, and ſo found ſome pretty
things. *idney, b. ii.
The pretty innocent walks blindfold among burning plough-
ſhares without being ſcorched. Addiſon's Speciator.
To PLUCK. v. a. [ploccian, Sax. plocken, Dutch.]
1. To pull with nimbleneſs or force; to ſnatch; to pull; to
draw; to force on or off; to force up or down; to act upon
with violence. It is very generally and licentiouſly uſed, par-
ticularly by Shakeſpeare.
It ſeemed better unto that noble king to plant a peaceable
government among them, than by violent means to pluck them
under. Spenſer on Ireland.
You were crown'd before,
And that high royalty was ne'er pluck'd off. Shakeſp.
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees,
For now a time is come to mock at form. Shakeſp.
Can’ſ thou not
Pluck from the memory a rooted ſorrow,
And with ſome ſweet oblivious antidote
Cleanſe the ſtuff'd boſom. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
When yet he was but tender bodied, when youth with
comelineſs plucked all gaze his way. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
I gave my love a ring;
He would not pluck it from his finger, for the wealth
That the world maſters. Shakespeare Merch, of Venice.
If you do wrongfully ſeize Hereford's right,
You pluck a thouſand dangers on your head. Shakeſp.
Dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks. Shakeſp.
I will pluck them up by the roots out of my land. 2 Chron.
Pluck away his crop with his feathers. Lev. i. 16.
A time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is
planted. Eccluſ. iii. 2.
They pluck off their ſkin from off them. Mic. iii. 2.
Diſpatch 'em quick, but firſt pluck out their tongues,
Left with their dying breath they ſow ſedition. Addiſon.
Beneath this ſhade the weary peaſant lies,
Plucks the broad leaf, and bids the breezes riſe. Gay.
From the back
Of herds and flocks, a thouſand tugging bills
Pluck hair and wool. Thomſon's Spring.
2. To ſtrip of feathers.
Since I pluckt geeſe, I knew not what it was to be beaten.
Shakeſpeare.
I come to thee from plume pluck'd Richard. Shakeſp.
3. To pluck up a heart or ſpirit. A proverbial expreſſion for
taking up or reſuming of courage.
He willed them to puck up their hearts, and make all
things ready for a new aſſault, wherein he expected they ſhould
with couragious reſolution recompenſe their late cowardice.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Pluck. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] -
1. A pull; a draw ; a ſingle act of plucking.
Birds kept coming and going all the day long; but ſo few
at a time, that the man did not think them worth a pluck.
L’Eſtrange.
Were the ends of the bones dry, they could not, without
great difficulty, obey the plucks and attractions of the motory
muſcles. Ray on the Creation.
2. [Plughk, Erſe. I know not whether derived from the
Engliſh, rather than the Engliſh from the Erſe.] The heart,
liver and lights of an animal.
Plu'ck ER. n.ſ.. [from pluck.] One that plucks.
Thou ſetter up and plucker down of kings' Shakespeare
Pull it as ſoon as you ſee the ſeed begin to grow brown, at
which time let the pluckers tie it up in handfuls. Mortimer.
Plug. m. ſ. [plugg, Swediſh ; plugghe, Dutch..] A ſtopple;
anything driven hard into another body.
Shutting the valve with the plug, draw down the ſucker
to the bottom. Boyle.
The fighting with a man's own ſhadow, confiſts in the
brandiſhing of two ſticks graſped in each hand, and loaden
with plugs of lead at either end : this opens the cheſt. Addison
In bottling wine, fill your mouth full of corks, together
with a large plug of tobacco. Swift's Direct. to the Butler.
To Plug. v. a. ſon the noun..] To ſtop with a plug.
^ tent pºging up the orifice, would make the matter re-
cur to the part diſpoſed to receive it. Sharp's Surgery.
PLUM. n.ſ. [plum, plum-reop, Sax. blumme, Daniſh. A cu-
I.
2.
3.
º: Prevailed of writing plumb, but improperly.
. The flower conſiſts of five leaves, which are placed in a
circular order, and expand in
flower-cup riſes the Pointal, which afterwards becomes an
oval or globular fruit, having a ſoft fleſhy pulp, ſurrounding
an hard oblong ſtone, for the moſt part pointed; to which
ſhould be added, the footſtalks are long and ſlender, and have
but a ſingle fruit upon each : the ſpecies are; 1. The jean-
hâtive, or white primordian. 2. The early black damaſk,
Commonly called the Morocco plum. 3. The little black
damaſk plum. 4. The great damaſk violet of Tours. 5.
The Orleans plum. 6. The Fotheringham pum. 7. The
Perdrigon plum. 8. The violet Perdrigon pium. 9. The
white Perdfigon P'um. Io. The red imperial plum, ſome-
times called the red bonum magnum. I 1. The white im-
perial bonum magnum ; white Holland or Mogul pur. 12.
The Cheſton plum. 13. The apricot plum. 14. The maitre
claude. , 15. La roche-courbon, or diaper rouge; the red
diaper plum. 16. Queen Claudia. 17. Myrobalan plum.
18. The green gage plum. 19. The cloth of gold pum.
29. St. Catharine plan. 21. The royal plum. 22. "La mi-
rabelle. 23. The Brignole plum. 24. The empreſs. 25.
The monſieur plum: this is ſometimes called the Wentworth
plum, both reſembling the bonum magnum. 26. The cherry
plum.,,,27. The white pear plum. 28. The muſcle plum.
29. The St. Julian plum. 36. The black bullace-tree plum.
31. The white bullace-tree plum. 32. The black thorn or
ſloe-tree plum. Miller.
Philoſophers in vain enquired, whether the ſummum bonum
conſiſted in riches, bodily delights, virtue or contemplation :
they might as reaſonably have diſputed, whether the beſt re-
liſh were in apples, plums or nuts. Locke.
Raiſin; grape dried in the ſun.
I will dance, and eat pums at your wedding. Shakeſp.
[In the cant of the city..] The ſum of one hundred thou-
ſand pounds.
By the preſent edićt, many a man in France will ſwell into
a plum, who fell ſeveral thouſand pounds ſhort of it the day
before. Addiſon.
The miſer muſt make up his plum,
And dares not touch the hoarded ſum. Prior.
By fair dealing John had acquired ſome plums, which he
might have kept, had it not been for his law-ſuit. Arbuth.
Aſk you,
Why ſhe and Sapho raiſe that monſtrous ſum ?
Alas ! they fear a man will coſt a plum. Pope.
4. A kind of play, called how many plums for a penny. Airy:
PLU MAGE. m. ſ. [plumage, Fr.] Feathers; ſuit of feathers.
The plumage of birds exceeds the pilofity of beaſts. Bacon.
Say, will the falcon, ſtooping from above,
Smit with her varying pumage, ſpare the dove. Pope.
PLUMB. m. ſ. [plomb, Fr. plumbum, Lat..] A plummet; a leaden
weight let down at the end of a line.
If the plumb line hang juſt upon the perpendicular, when
the level is ſet flat down upon the work, the work is level.
Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
Plum B. adv. [from the noun..] Perpendicularly to the horizon.
If all theſe atoms ſhould deſcend plumb down with equal
velocity, being all perfectly ſolid and imporous, and the va-
cuum not reſiſting their motion, they would never the one
overtake the other. Ray on the Creation.
Is it not a ſad thing to fall thus plumb into the grave? well
one minute and dead the next. Collier.
To Plum B. v. a. . [from the noun.]
I.
To ſound ; to ſearch by a line with a weight at its end.
The moſt experienced ſeamen plumbed the depth of the
channel. Swift's Gulliver.
2. To regulate any work by the plummet.
PLUMBER. m. ſ. [plombier, Fr.] One who works upon lead.
Commonly written and pronounced plummer.
Plu MBERY. m. ſ. [from plumber.] Works of lead; the ma-
Plu'McAKE.. n.ſ. [plum and cake.]
nufactures of a plumber, Commonly ſpelt plummery.
ake made with raiſins.
He cramm'd them till their guts did ake
With caudle, cuſtard and plumcake. FIudibras.
PLUME. n.ſ. [plume, Fr. pluma, Lat.]
I.
2.
Feather of birds. -
Let frantick Talbot triumph for a while,
And, like a peacock, ſweep along his tail; .
We'll pull his plumes, and take away his train. Shakespeare.
Wings he wore of many a colour'd plume. Milton.
They appear made up of little bladders, like thoſe in the
plume or ſtalk of a quill. Grew's Muſeum.
Feather worn as an ornament.
Let every feeble rumour ſhake your hearts,
Your enemies with nodding of their plumes
Fan you into deſpair. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
19 Y Eaſtern
form of a roſe, from whoſe
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L U
—
-
-
-
-
Eaſtern travellers know that oftridges feathers are common,
and the ordinary plume of Janizaries. Brown.
The fearful º ſpread
ed to ſee a face with ſteel o'erſpread,
. high plume that nodded o'er his head. Dryden.
ide ; towering mien.
3. Piº. ... Lancaſter, I come to thee
From plume pluckt Richard, who with willing ſoul
Adopts thee heir. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
4. Token of honour; prize of conteſt. -
Ambitious to win from me ſome plume. Milton.
5. Plume is a term uſed by botaniſts for that part of the ſeed
of a plant, which in its growth becomes the trunk; it is in-
cloſed in two ſmall cavities, formed in the lobes for its recep,
tion, and is divided at its looſe end into divers pieces, all
cloſely bound together like a bunch of feathers, whºs It
has this name. &amp;ſincy.
To PLUME. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To pick and adjuſt feathers.
sº muſt º: kept in ſome encloſed pond, where they
may have room ºº º º plume themſelves. Mort.
. I tºlumer. Fr. O ſtrip of feath CIS.
2 [... ſº, 3S º fleſh, devour ſome part of the
feathers of the birds they gorge themſelves with, becauſe they
will not take the pains fully to plume them. Ray.
To ſtrip : to pill.
3. '#' "... to ſay, that the king cared not to plume
the nobility and people to ſcather himſelf. Lacon.
. To place as a plume.
4. #. iºd the ſky, and on his creſt -
Sat horror plum'd. Milton's Par. L3/?, b. iv.
5. To adorn with plumes. -
Farewel the plumed troops, and the big war,
That make ambition virtue. Shakeſp. Othello.
PLUMEA'LLUM. m. ſ. [alumen plumºſum, Lat..] A kind of
aſbeſtus.
Plumeallum, formed into the likeneſs of a wick, will ad-
miniſter to the flame, and yet not conſume. JWilkins.
PLUMI'GEROUS. adj. [pluma and gero, Lat..] Having feathers;
feathered. Die?.
PLU'MIPEDE. m. ſ. [pluma and pes, Lat..] A fowl that has
feathers on the foot. Dicf.
PLUMMFT. m. ſ. [from plumb.] -
1. A weight of lead hung at a ſtring, by which depths are
ſounded, and perpendicularity is diſcerned.
Deeper than did ever plummet ſound,
I'll drown my book.
- Fly envious time
Call on the lazy leaden-ſtepping hours,
Whoſe ſpeed is but the heavy plummet's pace. Milton.
2. Any weight.
God ſees the body of fleſh which you bear about you,
and the plummets which it hangs upon your ſoul, and there.
fore, when you cannot riſe high enough to him, he comes
down to you. Duppa's Rules for Devotion.
The heavineſs of theſe bodies, being always in the aſcend-
ing ſide of the wheel, muſt be counterpoiſéd by a plummet
faltened about the pulley on the axis: this plummet will de-
ſcend according as the ſand doth make the ſeveral parts of
the wheel lighter or heavier. //ilkins.
£iu Mo'sity. n.ſ. [from plumous...] The ſtate of having feathers.
Pig'Mºus, adj. [plumeux, Fr. plumoſus, Lat.J Feathery; re-
ſembling feathers.
This has a like flumous body in the middle, but finer.
//oodward on Foſſils.
PLUMP. adj. [Of this word the etymology is not known.
8%inner derives it from pommel, Fr. full likº a ripe apple ; it
might be more eaſily deduced from plum, which yet ſeems
very harſh. junius omits it...] Somewhat fat; not lean;
ſleek; full and ſmooth.
The heifer, that valued itſelf upon a ſmooth coat and a
flump habit of body, was taken up for a ſacrifice; but the
OX, that was deſpiſed for his raw bones, went on with his
work ſtill. L'Eſtrange.
Plump gentleman,
Get out as faſt as e'er you can;
Or ceaſe to puſh, or to exclaim,
Shakeſp. Tempeſ?.
You make the very croud you blame. Prior.
The famiſh’d cow -
Grows plump and round, and full of mettle. Swift.
PLUMP. n: / [from the adjective..] A knot; a tuft; a cluſter;
2 º: joined in one maſs.
"gland, Scotland, Ireland lie all i lump togeth
acceſſible but by ſea. &gt; n a plump toge º:
m *Wick having eſpied certain plumps of Scottiſh horſe-
ºn ranging the field, returned towards the arriere to pre-
Vent danger. Hayward
We reited under a plump of trees. Sandys.
Pread upon a lake, with upward eye -
A plump of fowl behold their foe on high
They cloſe their - ;
On whom the ...”ing troop, and all attend
*ś eagle will deſcend. Dryden.
To PLUMP. v. 7. * - -
to make i. [from the *jective.] To fatten ; to ſwell;
The particles of air expanding themſelves, plump out the
ſides of the bladder, and keep them turgid. Boyle.
I'm as lean as carrion ; but a wedding at our houſe will
plump me up with good chear. - - L'E/irange.
Let them lie for the dew and rain to plump them. Mºt.
To Plump. v. n. [from the adverb.]
2. [From the adjective.] To be ſwollen. Ainſworth.
1. To fall like a ſtone into the water. A word formed from the
ſound.
PLUMP. adv. [Probably corrupted from plumb, or perhaps
formed from the ſound of a ſtone falling on the water.]
With a ſudden fall. -
I would ſain now ſee 'em rowl'd
Down a hill, or from a bridge
Head-long caſt, to break their ridge;
Or to ſome river take 'em
Plump, and ſee if that would wake 'em. B. Jºhnſºn.
Fluttering his pennons vain plump down he drops. Af.
PLU'MPER. m. ſ. [from plump.] Something worn in them.
to ſwell out the cheeks.
She dextrouſly her plumpers draws,
That ſerve to fill her hollow jaws. Swift's Miſal.
PLUMPN Ess. n. / [from plump.] Fulneſs; diſpoſition towards
fulneſs.
Thoſe convex glaſſes ſupply the defect of plumpneſs in the
eye, and by encreaſing the refraction make the rays converge
ſooner, ſo as to convene at the bottom of the eye. Newtºn.
Plum Por R. D.G.E. n.ſ. [plum and Porridge..] Porridge with
lums.
P A rigid diſſenter, who dined at his houſe on Chriſtmas-
day, eat very plentifully of his plumporridge. Addison.
PLU MPUDDING.. n.ſ. [plum and Pudding..] Pudding made
with plums.
PLU'MPY. adj. Plump ; fat.
Come, thou monarch of the vine,
Plumpy Bacchus, with pink eyne,
In thy vats our cares be drown'd. Shakeſp.
Piº MX, adj. [from flame.] Feathered; covered with feathers.
Satan fell, and ſtraight a fiery globe -
Of angels on full ſail of wing flew nigh,
Who on their plumy vans receiv'd him ſºft
From his uneaſy ſtation, and upbore
As on a floating couch through the blithe air. Milton.
APPear'd his plumy creſt, beſmear'd with blood. Alliſon.
Sometimes they are like a quill, with the pluny part only
upon one ſide. Grew's Cºſmol. b. i.
To PLUNDER. v. a. [plunderen, Dutch..]
1. To pillage ; to rob in an hoſtile way.
Nebuchadnezzar plunders the temple of God, and we find
the fatal doom that afterwards befel him. South's Sermons.
Ships the fruits of their exaction brought,
Which made in peace a treaſure richer far,
Than what is plunder'd in the rage of war. Dryden.
2. To rob as a thief.
Their country's wealth our mightier miſers drain,
Or croſs, to plunder provinces, the main. Pope.
PLUNDER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Pillage; ſpoils gotten in war.
Let looſe the murmuring army on their maſters,
To pay themſelves with plinder. Otway.
PLUNDERER. m. ſ. [from plunder.]
1. Hoſtile pillager; ſpoiler.
2. A thief; a robber.
It was a famous ſaying of William Rufus, whoſoever ſpares
Perjured men, robbers, plunderers and traitors, deprives all
good men of their peace and quietneſs. Addiſon.
We cannot future violence o'ercome,
Nor give the miſerable province eaſe,
Since what one plund’rer left, the next will ſeize. Dryden.
To PLUNGE. v. 3. [plonger, Fr.]
1. To put ſuddenly under water, or under any thing ſuppoſed
liquid.
Plunge us in the flames. Milton.
Headlong from hence to plunge herſelf ſhe ſprings,
But ſhoots along ſupported on her wings. Dryden.
2. To put into any ſtate ſuddenly.
I mean to plunge the boy in pleaſing ſleep,
And raviſh’d in Idalian bow’rs to keep. Dryden.
3. To hurry into any diſtreſs.
O conſcience 1 into what abyſs of fears
And horrors haſt thou driv'n me out of which
I find no way; from deep to deeper plung’d. Milton.
Without a prudent determination in matters before us, we
ſhall be plunged into perpetual errors. //atts.
. To force in ſuddenly. This word, to what action ſoever it
be applied, commonly expreſſes either violence and ſuddenneſs
in the agent, or diſtreſs in the patient.
At this advanc'd, and ſudden as the word,
In proud Plexippus' boſom plung’d the ſword. Dryden.
Let them not be too haſty to plunge their enquiries at once
into the depths of knowledge. //atts.
To PLUNGE. v. n.
1. To ſink ſuddenly into water; to dive.
Accoutred as I was, I plunged in. Shakespeare. julius ºft,
8 IS
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P L Y
P O A
His courſer plung’d,
And threw him off; the waves whelm'd over him,
And helpleſs in his heavy arms he drown'd. Dryden.
When thou, thy ſhip o'erwhelm'd with waves, ſhalt be
Forc'd to plunge naked in the raging ſea. Dryden.
When tortoiſes have been a long time upon the water,
their ſhell being dried in the ſun, they are eaſily taken; by
reaſon they cannot plunge into the water nimbly enough. Ray.
2. To fall or ruſh into any hazard or diſtreſs.
He could find no other way to conceal his adultery, but to
plunge into the guilt of a murther. Tillotſon.
Bid me for honour plunge into a war
Then ſhalt thou ſee that Marcus is not ſlow. Addiſon.
Impotent of mind and uncontrould,
He plung'd into the gulph which heav'n foretold. Pope.
PLUNGE. m. ſ.
1. Act of putting or ſinking under water.
2. Difficulty ; ſtrait; diſtreſs.
She was weary of her life, ſince ſhe was brought to that
plunge; to conceal her huſband's murder, or accuſe her ſon.
Sidney, b. ii.
People, when put to a plunge, cry out to heaven for help,
without helping themſelves. L'A/irange.
Wilt thou behold me ſinking in my woes
And wilt thou not reach out a friendly arm,
To raiſe me from amidſt this plunge of ſorrows : Addison.
He muſt be a good man; a quality which Cicero and
Quinétilian are much at a plunge in aſſerting to the Greek
and Roman orators. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
Plu'NGEoN. m. ſ. [mergus, Lat..] A ſea bird. Ainſ.
Plu'NGER. m. ſ. [from plunge.] One that plunges; a diver.
Plu'NKET. n.ſ. A kind of blue colour. Ainſworth.
PLURAL. adj. [pluralis, Lat.]
1. Implying more than one.
Thou haſt no faith left now, unleſs thoud'ſt two ;
Better have none
Than plural faith, which is too much by one. Shakeſp.
2. [In grammar.]
The Greek and Hebrew have two variations, one to ſig-
nify the number two, and another to ſignify a number of more
than two ; under one variation the noun is ſaid to be of the
dual number, and under the other of the plural. Clarke.
Plu'RALIST. n.ſ. [pluraliſte, Fr. from plural.] One that
holds more eccleſiaſtical benefices than one with: cure of ſouls.
If the pluraliſts would do their beſt to ſuppreſs curates, their
number might be ſo retrenched, that they would not be in
the leaſt formidable. Collier on Pride,
PLURALITY. m. ſ. [pluralità, Fr.]
1. The ſtate of being or having a greater number.
It is not plurality of parts without majority of parts, that
maketh the total greater ; yet it ſeemeth to the eye a ſhorter
diſtance of way, if it be all dead and continued, than if it
have trees, whereby the eye may divide it. Bacon.
2. A number more than one.
Thoſe hereticks had introduced a plurality of gods, and ſo
made the profeſſion of the unity part of the ſymbolum, that
ſhould diſcriminate the orthodox from them. Hammond.
They could forego plurality of wives, though that be the
main impediment to the converſion of the Eaſt Indies. Bentl.
'Tis impoſſible to conceive how any language can want this
variation of the noun, where the nature of its ſignification is
ſuch as to admit of plurality. Clarke's Lat. Grammar.
3. More cures of ſouls than one.
4. The greater number; the majority.
Take the plurality of the world, and they are neither wiſe
nor good. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
PLURALLY. adv. [from plural.] In a ſenſe implying more
than one.
Plus H. n.ſ. ſpeluche, Fr.] A kind of villous or ſhaggy cloth;
ſhag.
The bottom of it was ſet againſt a lining of pluſh, and the
ſound was quite deaded, and but mere breath. Bacon.
The colour of pluſh or velvet will appear varied, if you
ſtroak part of it one way, and part of it another. Boyle.
I love to wear cloths that are fluſh,
Not prefacing old rags with pluſh.
Plu's HER... n.ſ. A ſea fiſh.
The pilchard is devoured by a bigger kind of fiſh called a
pluſher, ſomewhat like the dog-fiſh, who leapeth above wa-
ter, and therethrough bewrayeth them to the balker. Carew.
Pluvial. Madj. from pluvià, Latin.] Rainy 3 relating to
Plu'vious. } rain.
The fungous parcels about the wicks of candles only ſigni-
fieth a moiſt and pluvious air about them. Brºwn.
Piuvial. n.ſ. [fluvial, Fr.] A prieſt's cope. Ainſ.
To Ply. v. a. ſilien, to work at any thing, old Dutch. junius
and Skinner.]
i. To work on any thing cloſely and importunately.
- The ſavage raves, impatient of the wound,
The wound's great author cloſe at hand provokes
His rage, and plies him with redoubled ſtrokes. Dryden.
The hero from afar
Plies him with darts and ſtones; and diſtant war. Dryden.
Cleaveland.
2. To employ with diligence; to keep buſy; to ſet on work.
Her gentle wit ſhe plies --
To teach them truth. Fairy ºfteen.
Keep houſe, and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Viſit his Countrymen, and banquet them. Shakſº.
They their legs ply'd, not ſtaying
Until they reach'd the fatal champain. Hudibras.
He who exerts all the faculties of his ſoul, and plies a!!
means, and opportunities in the ſearch of truth, may reſt upon
the judgment of his conſcience ſo informed, as a warrantibie
guide. * - South's Sermons.
The weary Trojans ply their ſhatter'd oars
To neareſt land. Dryden's Wirgil.
I have plied my needle theſe fifty years, and by my gºod
will would never have it out of my hand. Spectator.
3. To practiſe diligently.
He ſternly bad him other buſineſs ply. Spenſºr.
Then commune how they beſt may ply -
Their growing work. Milton.
Their bloody taſk, unweary'd ſtill, they fly. J/aller.
4. To ſolicit importunately.
He plies her hard, and much rain wears the marble. Sha.
He plies the duke at morning and at night,
And doth impeach the freedom of the ſtate,
If they deny him juſtice. Shakeſp. Merch. of Wenice.
Whoſoever has any thing of David's piety will be perpe-
tually plying the throne of grace with ſuch like acknowledg-
ments: as, bleſſed be that providence, which delivered me
from ſuch a lewd company. South's Sermons.
To PLY. v. n.
1. To work, or offer ſervice.
He was forced to ply in the ſtreets as a porter for his live-
lihood. Addison's Speciator, N° 94.
2. To go in haſte. &gt; 9
Thither he plies undaunted. Milton.
3. To buſy one's ſelf.
A bird new-made about the banks ſhe plies,
Not far from ſhore, and ſhort excurſions tries. Dryden.
4. [Plier, Fr.] To bend.
The willow plied and gave way to the guſt, and ſtill reco-
vered itſelf again, but the oak was ſtubborn, and choſe ra-
ther to break than bend. L'A/trange.
PLY. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Bent; turn ; form; caſt; biaſs. -
The late learners cannot ſo well take the ply, except it be
in ſome minds that have not ſuffered themſelves to fix, but
have kept themſelves open and prepared to receive continual
amendment.
2. Plait ; fold.
The rugae or plies of the inward coat of the ſtomach de-
tain the aliment in the ſtomach. " Arbuthno: on Aliments.
PLYERs. n.ſ. See Pll ERs.
PNEUM ATIcAl.
PNEU MATICK. -
1. Moved by wind; relative to wind.
I fell upon the making of pneumatical trials, whereof I gave
an account in a book about the air. Bºyle.
}a}. [rvivºrºs, from Tysºz.]
That the air near the ſurface of the earth will expand itſelf,
when the preſſure of the incumbent atmoſphere is taken off,
may be ſeen in the experiments made by Boyle in his pneu-
matick engine. Locke's Elements of Natural Philºſophy.
The lemon uncorrupt with voyage long,
To vinous ſpirits added,
They with pneumatick engine ceaſeleſs draw. Philips.
2. Conſiſting of ſpirit or wind.
All ſolid bodies conſiſt of parts pneumatical and tangible;
the pneumatical ſubſtance being in ſome bodies the native ſpirit
of the body, and in ſome other, plain air that is gotten in.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The race of all things here is, to extenuate and turn things
to be more pneumatical and rare; and not to retrogade, from
pneumatical, to that which is denſe. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?.
PNEUMA"Ticks. n.ſ. [pneumatique, Fr. Tysºzz.
1. A branch of mechanicks, which conſiders the doćtrine
of the air, or laws according to which that fluid is condenſed,
rarified or gravitates. Harris.
2. In the ſchools, the doćtrine of ſpiritual ſubſtances, as God,
angels and the ſouls of men. Dici.
PNEUMAtology. m. ſ. [Tysºp, 270x972.] The doctrine of
ſpiritual exiſtence.
To POACH. v. a. [oetſ, pochez, Fr.]
1. To boil ſlightly. -
The yolks of eggs are ſo well prepared for nouriſhment,
that, ſo they be pºached or rare boiled, they need no other
preparation. Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry.
2. To begin without completing: from the practice of boiling
eggs ſlightly. Not in uſe.
Of iteſ times, they have rather pºached and offered at a
number of enterprizes, than maintained any conſtantly. Bacºn.
3. [Pocher, Fr. to pierce.] To ſtab; to pierce. -
The flowk, ſole and plaice follow the tide up into the
freſh rivers, where, at low water, the country people poach
them with an inſtrument ſomewhat like the ſalmon ſpear. Car.
4. [From
Bacon's Eſſays.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O E
P O F.
º
4. [From poche, a pocket.] To plunder by ſtealth.
§, ſhameleſs, ſo abandoned are their ways: r
They poach Parnaſſus, and lay claim for praiſe. Garth.
To Poach. v. n. [from poche, a bag, Fr.] -
1. To ſteal game ; tº carry off game privately in a bag.
In the ſchools
They poach for ſenſe, and hunt for idle rules. Oldham.
2. To be damp. A cant word. - -
Chalky and clay lands burn in hot weather, chap in ſum-
mer, and poach in winter. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
PoacáARD. n.ſ. A kind of water fowl. -
Poacher. n.ſ.. [from poach..]. One who ſteals game.
You old poachers have ſuch a way with you, that all at
once the buſineſs is done. Mºre's Fºundling.
PoA'chiness. n.ſ. . [from pºachy.] Marſhineſs; dampneſs.
A cant word.
The vallies becauſe of the poachinºſ; they keepforgraß. AMort.
PoAchy. adj. Damp; marſhy. A cant word. -
What uplands you deſign for mowing, ſhut º the begin-
ning of February 3, but marſh lands lay nºt up t! April, ex-
cept your marſhes be very poachy; Martimer's Huſbandry.
Pock. n.ſ.. [from pox.] A puſtule raiſed by the ſmallpox.
Pocker. n.ſ. [pocca, Saxon; pochet, Fr.] The ſmall bag
inſerted into cloaths.
Here's a letter
Found in the pocket of the ſlain, Roderigo. Shakeſp.
whilſt one hand exalts the blow,
And on the earth extends the foe;
Tº other would take it wond’rous ill, -
If in your pocket he lay ſtill. Prizr.
As he was ſeldom without medals in his pocket, he would
often ſhew us the ſame face on an old coin, that we ſaw in
the ſtatue. Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
To Pocker. v. a. ſpocheter, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To put in the pocket.
Bleſs'd paper-credit !
Gold, imp'd with this, can compaſs hardeſt things,
Can pocket ſtates, or fetch or carry kings. Pope.
2. Tº Pocket up. A proverbial form that denotes the doing
or taking any thing clandeſtinely. -
If thy pocket were enriched with any other injuries but
theſe, I am a villain; and yet you will ſtand to it, you will
not pocket up wrongs. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
He lays his claim
To half the profit, half the fame, }
And helps to pocket up the game. Prior.
Pocket Book. n.ſ. (pocket and book.] A paper book carricd
in the pocket for haſty notes.
Licinius let out the offals of his meat to intereſt, and
kept a regiſter of ſuch debtors in his pocketbook. Arbuthnot.
Note down the matters of doubt in ſome pocketbook, and
take the firſt opportunity to get them reſolved. J/atts.
Pocket GLAss. m. ſ. [pocket and gloſs.] Portable looking-
glaſs.
* Powders and pocketglaſ, and beans. Prior.
And vanity with pocketglaſs,
And impudence with front of braſs. Swift's Miſcel.
Pockhole. n.ſ. [pock and hole..] Pit or ſcar made by the
ſmallpox.
Are theſe but warts and pockholes in the face
O' th' earth : Donne.
PockINEss. n.ſ.. [from pocky.] The ſtate of being pocky.
Po'cKY. m. ſ. adj. [from pox.] Infected with the pox.
My father's love lies thus in my bones; I might have loved
all the pocky whores in Perſia, and have felt it leſs in my
bones. - Denham's Sophy.
Pocu'l ENT. adj. [toculum, Lat.] Fit for drink.
Some of theſe herbs, which are not eſculent, are notwith-
ſtanding poculent; as hops and broom. Bacon.
PoD. m. ſ. [bode, boede, Dutch, a little houſe. Skinner.] The
capſule of legumes; the caſe of ſeeds.
To raiſe tulips, ſave the ſeeds which are ripe, when the
the pods begin to open at the top, which cut off with the
ſtalks from the root, and keep the pods upright, that the ſeed
P do not fall º [ro? 3. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
oDA'GRICAL. adj. [Toºzygºs, roºyeº. from pod
"jºi. º§ Y;2 ; from podraga, Lat.]
From a magnetical activity muſt be made out, that a load-
ſtone, held in the hand of one that is podagrical, doth either
cure or give great eaſe in the gout. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
2. Gouty ; relating to the gout.
PopDER. n.ſ. (from pod.j A gatherer of peaſecods, beans and
other pulſe. Die?
p. n. ſ. a puddle ; a plaſh. Skinner. -
*M. m. ſ. ſpoema, Lat. roſnaz. - -
- º t. Troinºz.] The work of a poet ; a
. A poem is not alone any work, or compoſition of th
**ny or few verſes; but even one . verſe º:
º º perſea poem. Benj. johnſon.
of Frº º: paſſing through the preſence
kiſſing him, ſaid . muſt . a famous poet, faſt aſleep,
olden tº hº hºnour the mouth whence ſo many
§ }. r have proceeded. Peacham on Poetry.
° you the promis'd poem I will pay. Dryden.
Pºrsy. n.ſ. [pºſe, Fr. pºſſi, Lat. roºrº J
1. The art of writing poems. - - - - - -
A poem is the work of the poet; fºr y is his ſkill or craft
of making; the very fiction itſelf, the reaſon or form of the
work. Bºy. Johnſºn.
- How far have we
Prophan'd thy heav'nly gift of poeſy %
Made proſtitute and profligate the muſe,
whoſe harmony was firſt ordain'd above
For tongues of angels. - Dryden.
2. Poem ; metrical compoſition ; poetry.
Muſick and aſy uſe to quicken you. Shakespeare.
There is an hymii, for they have excellent fºſy; the ſub-
jećt is always the praiſes of Adam, Noah and Abraham,
concluding ever with a thankſgiving for the nativity of our
Saviour. Bacon's New Atlantas.
They apprehend a veritable hiſtory in an emblem or piece
of chriſtian poey. Brown's hugar Erſaurs.
3. A ſhort conceit engraved on a ring or other thing.
A paltry ring, whoſe pocſy was,
For all the world like cutler's pasſy
Upon a knife : love me, and leave me not. Shakespeare .
POET. n.ſ. [pºete, Fr. pºrta, Lat. Toºn';..] An inventir;
an author of hetion; a writer of poems; one who writes in
meaſure.
The poet's eye in a fine frenzy rowling,
Doth glance from heav'n to earth, from earth to heav'n ;
And, as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
Turns them to ſhape, and gives to ev'rything
A local habitation and a name. Shakeſp.
Our poet ape, who would be thought the chief,
His works become the frippery of wit,
From brocage he is grown to bold a thief,
While we the robb d deſpite, and pity it.
'Tis not vain or fabulous
What the ſage poet, taught by the heav'nly muſe
Story'd of old in high immortal verſe,
Of dire chimeras and enchanted iſles. A filton.
A poet is a maker, as the word ſignifies; and he who can-
not make, that is invent, hath his name for nothing. Dryden.
POETASTER. n.ſ. [Latin.] Avile petty poet.
Let no poetºer command or intreat
Another extempore verſes to make.
Begin not as th' old poetaſier did,
Troy's famous war, and Priam's fate I ſing. Roſcommon.
Horace hath expoſed thoſe trifling poetaſiers, that ſpend
themſelves in glaring deſcriptions, and ſewing here and there
ſome cloth of gold on their ſackcloth. Feltºn.
Poet Ess. n. ſ. [from pºet ; pica poetria, Lat..] A ſhe poet.
PoE'rical. Uadj. [Tomlixás; poetique, Fr. poeticus, Lat..] Ex-
PoE'Tick. ; prefied in poetry; pertaining to poetry; ſuitable
to poetry.
Would the gods had made you poetical.
—I do not know what poetical is.
B. johnſºn.
Benj. Jºhnſon.
—The trueſt poetry is moſt feigning. Shakespeare .
With courage guard, and beauty warm our age,
And lovers fill with like poetick rage. J/aller.
The moral of that pactical fiction, that the uppermoſt link
of all the ſeries of ſubordinate cauſes is faſtened to Jupiter's
chair, ſignifies that almighty God governs and directs ſubor-
dinate cauſes and effects. Hale.
Neither is it enough to give his author's ſenſe in good Eng-
liſh, in poetical expreſſions and in muſical numbers. Dryden.
The muſe ſaw it upward riſe,
Though mark'd by none but quick poetick eyes. Pope.
I alone can inſpire the pºetical crowd. Swift.
PoE'Tic ALLY. adv. [from poetical.] With the qualities of
poetry; by the fiction of poetry.
The criticks have concluded, that the manners of the he-
roes are poetically good, if of a piece. Dryden.
The many rocks, in the paſſage between Greece and the
bottom of Pontus, are poetically converted into thoſe fiery
bulls. Raleigh.
To Poetſ'z E. v. n. [poetiſºr, Fr. from port.] To write like a poet.
I verſify the truth, not poetize, , , Donne.
Virgil, ſpeaking of Turnus and his great ſtrength, thus
poetizes. Hakewill.
PóE TREss. n.ſ.. [from pºeirii, Lat, whence fortridas picas in
Perſius.] A ſhe poet, - -
Moſt peerleſs poetreſs, -
The true Pandora of all heavenly graces. Spenſºr.
Poetry. n.ſ. [rain reta from poet.] ... - -
1. Metrical compoſition; the art or practice of writing poems.
Strike the beſt invention dead,
Till baffled poetry hangs down the head. Cleavelard.
Although in poetry it be neceſſary that the unities of time,
place and action ſhould be explained, there is ſtill ſomething
that gives a greatneſs of mind to the reader, which few of
the criticks have conſidered. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 499.
2. Poems ; poctical pieces.
She taketh moſt delight
In muſick, inſtruments and poetry. Shakºp.
- 2. Poi'GNANCY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O I
P O I
Poi'6NANcy. n.ſ.. [from poignant.]
1. The power of ſtimulating the palate; ſharpneſs.
I ſat quietly down at my morſel, adding only a principle
of hatred to all ſucceeding meaſures by way of ſauce; and
one point of conduct in the dutcheſs's life added much poig-
nancy to it. Swift.
2. The power of irritation; aſperity. z
POIGNANT. adj. [poignant, Fr.]
1. Sharp; ſtimulating the palate.
No poignant ſauce ſhe knew, nor coſtly treat,
Her hunger gave a reliſh to her meat. Dryden.
The ſtudious man, whoſe will was never determined to
poignant ſauces and delicious wine, is, by hunger and thirſt,
determined to eating and drinking. Locke.
2. Severe; piercing; painful.
If God makes uſe of ſome poignant diſgrace to let out the
poiſonous vapour, is not the mercy greater than the ſeverity
of the cure ? South's Sermons.
Full three long hours his tender body did ſuſtain
Moſt exquiſite and poignant pain. Norris's Miſel.
. Irritating ; ſatirical ; keen.
FOINT. n. ſ. [poinci, point, French.]
1. The ſharp end of any inſtrument.
The thorny point
Of bare diſtreſs hath ta'en from me the ſhew
Of ſmooth fidelity. Shakeſp. As Yºu like it.
That bright beam, whoſe point now rais'd,
Bore him ſlope downward. Milton.
A pyramid reverſed may ſtand for a while upon its point,
if balanced by admirable ſkill. Temple's Miſcellanies.
Doubts if he wielded not a wooden ſpear
Without a point; he look'd, the point was there. Dryden.
2. A ſtring with a tag.
If your ſon have not the day,
For a ſilken point I'll give my baronry. Shakeſp.
He hath ribbands of all colours; points more than all the
lawyers can learnedly handle. Shakeſpeare.
I am reſolved on two points;
That if one break, the other will hold;
Or if both break, your gaſkins fall. Shakeſp.
King James was wont to ſay, that the duke of Buckingham
had given him a groom of his bed-chamber, who could not
truſs his points. Clarendon.
3. Headland ; promontory.
I don't ſee why Virgil has given the epithet of Alta to Pro-
chita, which is much lower than Iſchia, and all the points of
land that lie within its neighbourhood. Addiſon.
4. A ſting of an epigram ; a ſentence terminated with ſome
remarkable turn of words or thought.
He taxes Lucan, who crouded ſentences together, and was
too full of points. Dryden on Heroick Plays.
Studious to pleaſe the genius of the times,
With periods, points and tropes he ſlurs his crimes;
He robb’d not, but he borrow'd from the poor. Dryden.
Times corrupt, and nature ill inclin'd,
Produc’d the point that left a ſting behind. Pope.
5. An indiviſible part of ſpace.
We ſometimes ſpeak of ſpace, or do ſuppoſe a point in it
at ſuch a diſtance from any part of the univerſe. Locke.
6. An indiviſible part of time; a moment.
Then neither from eternity before,
Nor from the time, when time's firſt point begun,
Made he all ſouls. Davies.
7. A ſmall ſpace.
On one ſmall point of land,
Weary'd, uncertain and amaz'd, we ſtand. Prior.
8. Punétilio ; nicety.
Shalt thou diſpute
With God the points of liberty, who made
Thee what thou art. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. v.
9. . required of time or ſpace; critical moment; exact
place.
How oft, when men are at the point of death,
Have they been merry which their keepers call
A lightning before death. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
Eſau ſaid, behold I am at the point to die; and what profit
ſhall this birthright do Gen. xxv. 32.
Democritus, ſpent with age, and juſt at the point of death,
called for loaves of new bread, and with the ſteam under his
noſe, prolonged his life till a feaſt was paſt. Temple.
They follow nature in their deſires, carrying them no far-
ther than ſhe directs, and leaving off at the point, at which
exceſs would grow troubleſome. Atterbury's Sermons.
10. Degree; ſtate.
The higheſt point outward things can bring one unto, is
the contentment of the mind, with which no eſtate is miſer-
able. Sidney, b. i.
In a commonwealth, the wealth of the country is ſo equally
diſtributed, that moſt of the community are at their eaſe,
though few are placed in extraordinary points of ſplendor.
Addiſon on the State of the JP'ar.
11. Note of diſtinétion in writing; a ſtop.
12. A ſpot; a part of a ſurface divided by ſpots ; diviſion by
marks, into which any thing is diſtinguiſhed in a circle or
other plane: as, at tables the ace or fiſe point.
I3. One of the degrees into which the circumference of the
horizon, and the mariner's compaſs is divided.
Carve out dials point by point,
Thereby to ſee the minutes how they run. Shakeſp.
There aroſe ſtrong winds from the South, with a point
eaſt, which carried us up. Bacon's New Atlantis.
A. ſeaman, coming before the judges of the admiralty for
admittance into an office of a ſhip, was by one of the judges
much ſlighted; the judge telling him, ãº he believed he
could not ſay the points of his compaſs. Bacon.
Vapours fir’d ſhew the mariner
From what point of his compaſs to beware
Impetuous winds. Milton's Par. Loft, b. iv.
If you tempt her, the wind of fortune
May come about, and take another point,
And blaſt your glories.
At certain periods ſtars reſume their place,
From the ſame point of heav'n their courſe advance. Dryd.
14. Particular place to which any thing is directed.
Eaſt and Weſt are but reſpective and mutable points, ac-
cording unto different longitudes or diſtant parts of habita-
tion. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Let the part, which produces another part, be more ſtrong
than that which it produces ; and let the whole be ſeen by
Denham,
one point of fight. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The poet intended to ſet the charaćter of Arete in a fair
point of light. Broome.
15. Reſpect; regard.
A figure like your father,
Arm'd at all points exactly cap-a-pe,
Appears before them. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
A war upon the Turk is more worthy than upon any other
Gentiles, in point of religion and in point of honour. Bacon.
He had a moment's right in point of time;
Had I ſeen firſt, then his had been the crime. " Dryden.
With the hiſtory of Moſes, no book in the world in point
of antiquity can contend. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Men would often ſee, what a ſmall pittance of reaſon is mixed
with thoſe huffing opinions they are ſwelled with, with which
they are ſo armed at all points, and with which they ſo con-
fidently lay about them. Locke.
I have extraćted out of that pamphlet a few of thoſe no-
torious falſehoods, in point of fact and reaſoning. Swift.
16. An aim ; the act of aiming or ſtriking.
What a point your falcon made,
And what a pitch ſhe flew above the reſt. Shakeſp.
17. The particular thing required.
You gain your point, if your induſtrious art .
Can make unuſual words eaſy. Roſcommon:
There is no creature ſo contemptible, but, by reſolution,
may gain his point. L’Eſtrange.
18. Particular; inſtance; example.
I'll hear him his confeſſions juſtify,
And point by point the treaſons of his maſter
He ſhall again relate. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Thou ſhalt be as free
As mountain winds; but then exactly do
All points of my command. Shakeſp. Tempeſ?.
His majeſty ſhould make a peace, or turn the war di-
rećtly upon ſuch points, as may engage the nation in the ſup-
port of it. Temple.
He warn’d in dreams, his murder did foretel,
From point to point, as after it befel. Dryden.
This letter is, in every point, an admirable pattern of the
preſent polite way of writing. Swift.
19. A ſingle poſition; a ſingle aſſertion; a ſingle part of a
complicated queſtion; a ſingle part of any whole.
Another vows the ſame ;
A third tº a point more near the matter draws. Daniel.
Strange point and new
Dočtrine which would know whence learn'd. Milton.
Stanilaus endeavours to eſtabliſh the duodecuple proportion;
by comparing ſcripture together with Joſephus; but they will
hardly prove his point. Arbuthnot on Coins.
There is no point wherein I have ſo much laboured, as that
of improving and poliſhing all parts of converſation between
perſons of quality. - Swift.
The gloſs produceth inſtances that are neither pertinent,
nor prove the point. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
20. A note; a tune.
You, my lord archbiſhop,
Whoſe white inveſtments figure innocence,
Wherefore do you ſo ill tranſlate yourſelf
Into the harſh and boiſt'rous tongue of war?
Turning your tongue divine
To a ...} . and a point of war. Shakeſ?.
21. Pointblank; directly: as, an arrow is ſhot to the point-
blank or white mark. -
This boy will carry a letter twenty mile, as eaſy as a can-
non will ſhoot pointblank twelve ſcore. Shakeſp.
19 Z The
-msm-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O I
P o I
The other level paintblank at the inventing of cauſes and
Bacon.
*"..., it be the cannon ball,
That ſhot th'air pointbank upright,
Was born to º: . height,
t learn'd philoſophers maintain, --
*º: canne ‘. Hudibras, p. ii.
The faculties that were given us for the glory of our maſter,
are turned pointblank againſt the intention of them. L'E/ir.
Eſtius declares, that although all the ſchoolmen were for
Latria to be given to the croſs, yet that it is pointblank againſt
the definition of the council of Nice: - Stiltingſleet.
23. Point deviſe ; exact or exactly in the point of view. . .
Every thing about you ſhould demonſtrate a careleſs deſo-
lation; but you are rather pºint de wiſe in your accoutrements,
as loving yourſelf, than the loyer of another. Shakeſp.
I will baffle Sir Toby, I will waſh off groſs acquaintance,
I will be point deviſe the very man. - Shakeſp.
Men's behaviour ſhould be like their apparel, not too
ſtraight or point de wiſe, but free for exerciſe. at 0/1.
To Point. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſharpen; to forge or grind to a point,
The princes of Germany had but a dull fear of the great-
neſs of Spain; now that fear is ſharpened and pointed, by
the Spaniards late enterprizes upon the Palatinate. Bacon.
Part-new grind the blunted ax, and point the dart. Dryd.
What help will all my heav'nly friends afford,
When to my breaſt I liſt the pointed ſword. Dryden.
The two pinnae ſtand upon either ſide, like the wings in
the petaſus of a Mercury, but riſe much higher, and are
more pointed. Addiſon on Italy.
Some on pointed wood
Transfix'd the fragments, ſome prepar'd the food. Pope.
2. To direct towards an object, by way of forcing it on the
, Ilotl.ce.
Alas to make me
A fixed” figure, for the hand of ſcorn
To joint his ſlow unmeaning finger at. Shaky?. Othell.
Mount Hermon, younder ſea, each place behold
As I point. A ſilton.
3. To direct the eye or notice.
Whoſoever ſhould be guided through his battles by Mi-
nerva, and pointed to every ſcene of them, would ſee nothing
but ſubjects of ſurprize. Pope.
4. To ſhow as by directing the finger.
From the great ſea, you ſhall point out for you mount Hor.
Numb. xxxiv. 7.
It will become us, as rational creatures, to follow the £
rection of nature, where it ſeems to point us out the way. Locke.
I ſhall do juſtice to thoſe who have diſtinguiſhed them-
ſelves in * .point out their beauties. Addiſon.
s not the elder
. . By nature pointed out for preference? Rowe.
5: [Pºinter, Fr.] To direct towards a place: as, the cannon
were pointed againſt the fort. -
6: To diſtinguiſh by ſtops or points.
To Point. v. n.
1. To note with the finger; to force upon the notice, by di-
recting the finger towards it. With a commonly, ſometimes
to before the thing indigitated. &gt;
Now muſt the world point at poor Catharine,
And ſay, lo! there is mad Petºuchio's wife. Shakeſp.
Sometimes we uſe one finger only, as in pointing at any
thing. Ray on the Creation.
Who fortune's fault upon the poor can throw
Point at the tatter'd coat and ragged ſhoe. »
Rouſe up for ſhame! our brothers of Pharſalia
Point at their Wounds, and cry aloud to battle.
2. To diſtinguiſh words or ſentences by points
Fond the Jews are of their method of mining
3. To indicate as dogs do to ſportſmen. c. *
The ſubtle dog ſcow’rs with ſagacious noſe,
Now the warm ſcent aſſures the covey near,
4. 1. with caution, and he points with fear. Gay.
To point at what time the balance of power was mo
equally held between their lords and tº: in k'."
would Perhaps admit a controverſ ...”
P - ... y. - Swift.
*TED. 6d. or participle. [from point.]
* Sharp; having a a ſharp point or pic.
. ...Who now reads Cowley ; if he pleaſes, yet
His moral pleaſes, not his pointed wit; &gt; y Pote
A *** flinty rock, all bare and black ºpe.
2 ºw gibbous from behind. &gt;
º ; abounding in conceits.
The tº: º In a pointed manner. -
tºo pointed, for his *. wit was ſuch, that he often writ
of NTE DNess. n, ſ. [ ject. - Dryden.
* Sharpneſs; pij.
The viciouslä,
regular; when it .
...tain and pointedneſ;
Dryden.
Addiſon.
Forbes.
Dryden.
from pointed.]
eſs with aſperity. .
*nds to be high, full of rock, moun-
- - Benj. johnſon's Diſcovery.
"age is vaſt and gaping, ſwelling and ir-
2. Epigrammatical ſmartneſs. -
Like Horace, you only expoſe the follies of men; and in
this excel him, that you add pointedneſs of thought. Dryden.
Poi NTE l. n.ſ. Any thing on a point.
Theſe poiſes or pºinteſs are, for the moſt part, little balls,
ſet at the top of a ſlender ſtalk, which they can move every
way at pleaſure. - Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
Pot Nºt ER. m. ſ. [from point.] -
1. Any thing that points.
I ought to tell him what are the wheels, ſprings, pointer,
hammer and bell whereby a clock gives notice of the time.
//atts.
2. A dog that points out the game to ſportſmen.
The well taught pointer leads the way,
The ſcent grows warm ; he ſtops, he ſprings his prey. Gay.
Po1'NTING stock. m. ſ. [painting and /lock.J Something made
the object of ridicule.
I, his forlorn dutcheſs,
Was made a wonder and a pointing/to...?
To every idle raſcal follower. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
Poi'N T LEss. adj. [from point..] Blunt; not ſharp ; obtuſe.
Lay that pointleſs clergy-weapon by,
And to the laws, your ſword of juſtice, fly. Dryden.
PQISON. m. ſ. [poiſon, Fr.] That which deſtroys or injures
life by a ſmall quantity, and by means not obvious to the
ſenſes; venom.
The tongue is an unruly evil, full of deadly poiſon. ja.
Themſelves were firſt to do the ill,
E'er they thereof the knowledge could attain;
Like him that knew not poiſºn's power to kill,
Until, by taſting it, himſelf was ſlain. Davies.
One gives another a cup of poiſon, but at the ſame time
tells him it is a cordial, and ſo he drinks it off and dies. South.
To Poison. v. a. [from the noun J
1. To infect with poiſon.
Envy is a lawleſs enemy, againſt whom poiſoned arrows
may be uſed. Anonymous."
2. To attack, injure or kill by poiſon given.
He was ſo diſcouraged, that he poiſoned himſelf and died.
2 Mac. x. 13.
Drink with Walters, or with Chartres eat;
They'll never poiſon you, they’ll only cheat. Pope.
3. To corrupt; to taint.
The other meſſenger,
Whoſe welcome I perceiv'd, had poiſºn'd mine.
Haſt thou not
With thy falſe arts poiſºn'd his people's loyalty Rowe.
Poiſsos-tREE. n.ſ. [toxicº dendron.] A plant. The flower
conſiſts of five leaves, which are placed orbicularly, and ex-
pand in form of a roſe, out of whoſe flower cup riſes the
pointal, which afterwards becomes a roundiſh, dry, and for
the moſt part a furrowed fruit, in which is contained one
Shakespeare.
compreſſed ſeed. Miller.
Poiſsos E.R. m. ſ. [from poiſon.]
1. One who poiſons.
I muſt be the poiſoner
Of good Polixenes. Shakespeare
So many miſchiefs were in one combin’d ;
So much one ſingle poisºner coſt mankind. Dryden.
2. A corrupter.
Wretches who live upon other men's fins, the common
poiſoners of youth, getting their very bread by the damnation
of ſouls. South's Sermonſ.
Po1'sonous, adj. [from poiſºn.] Venomous; having the qua-
lities of poiſon.
- Thoſe cold ways,
That ſeem like prudent helps, are very poiſºnºuſ, .
Where the diſeaſe is violent. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Not firius ſhoots a fiercer flame,
When with his poisºnous breath he blaſts the ſky. Pyden.
A lake, that has no freſh water running into it, will, by
heat and its ſtagnation, turn into a ſtinking rotten piddle,
ſending forth nauſeous and poiſºnous ſteams. Cheyne.
Poisonously. adv. [from pºiſonous.] Venomouſly. . . .
Men more eaſily pardon ill things done, than ill things
ſaid; ſuch a peculiar rancour and venom do they leave be-
hind in men's minds, and ſo much more poiſonouſly and incu-
rably does the ſerpent bite with his tongue than his teeth.
South's Sermons.
PoisonousNess. n.ſ.. [from poiſonous.] The quality of being
poiſonous; venomouſneſs. . . -
Port Rel. n.ſ. [poićirel, poitrine, Fr. pettorale, Italian ; pećio-
rale, Lat.]
1. Armour for the breaſt of a horſe.
2. A graving tool.
Poize. n.ſ. [poids, French.]
1. Weight; force of any thing tending to the genter.
He fell, as an huge rockie clift,
Whoſe falſe foundation, waves have waſh'd away
With dreadful poize, is from the main land reſt. F. &amp; ten.
When I have ſuit,
It ſhall be full of poize and difficulty,
And fearful to be granted.
Skinner.
Ainſworth.
Shakespeare. Othells.
2. Balance ;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O L
P O L
º-----
2. Balance ; equipoize ; equilibrium.
To do’t at peril of your ſoul,
Were equal poize of fin and charity. Shakeſp.
Where an equal poize of hope and fear
Does arbitrate th' event, my nature is
That I incline to hope. Miltºn.
The particles that formed the earth, muſt convene from all
quarters towards the middle, which would make the whole
compound to reſt in a poize. Bentley's Sermons.
'Tis odd to ſee fluétuation in opinion ſo earneſtly charged
upon Luther, by ſuch as have lived half their days in a poize
between two churches. Atterbury.
3. A regulating power.
Men of an unbounded imagination often want the poize of
judgment. Dryden.
Tº Póize. v. a. ſpeſer, French.]
1. To balance; to hold or place in equiponderance.
How nice to couch how all her ſpeeches poized be:
A nymph thus turn'd, but mended in tranſlation.
As the ſands
Of Barca or Cyrene's torrid ſoil,
Levy'd to ſide with warring winds; and poize
Their lighter wings. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ii.
Nor yet was earth ſuſpended in the ſky,
Nor poiz'd did on her own foundation lie. Dryden.
Our nation with united int’reſt bleſt,
Not now content to poize, ſhall ſway the reſt. Dryden.
Where could they find another form'd ſo fit,
To poize with ſolid ſenſe a ſprightly wit! Dryden.
Th'all-perfect mind
That pºiz'd, impels and rules the ſteady whole. Thomſºn.
2. To be equiponderant to.
If the balance of our lives had not one ſcale of reaſon to
poize another of ſenſuality, the baſeneſs of our natures would
condu&amp; us to prepoſterous concluſions. Shakeſp. Othello.
3. To weigh. -
We poizing us in her defe&amp;tive ſcale
Shall weigh thee to the beam. Shakeſpeare.
He cannot fincerely conſider the ſtrength, poize the weight
and diſcern the evidence of the cleareſt argumentations, where
they would conclude againſt his deſires. South's Sermons.
4. To oppreſs with weight.
I'll ſtrive, with troubl’d thoughts, to take a nap,
Leſt leaden ſlumber poize me down to-morrow,
When I ſhould mount with wings of vićtory. Shakespeare.
POKE, n.ſ. ſpocca, Sax, poche, Fr.] A pocket ; a ſmall
Sidney.
º;
will not buy a pig in a poke.
She ſuddenly unties the poke,
Which out of it ſent ſuch a ſmoke,
As ready was them all to choke,
So grievous was the pother. Drayton's Nym “hid.
My correſpondent writes againſt maſter's gowns and foxe
ſleeves. Spectator, N° 619.
To Poke. v. a. ſpoka, Swediſh.] To feel in the dark; to
ſearch anything with a long inſtrument.
If theſe preſumed eyes be clipped off, they will make uſe
of their protruſions or horns, and poke out their way as
before. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
Po KER. m. ſ. [from poke.] The iron bar with which men ſtir
the fire.
Camden's Remains.
With poker fiery red
Crack the ſtones, and melt the lead. Swift.
If the poker be out of the way, ſtir the fire with the
tongs. Swift's Rules to Servants.
Poſla R. adj. [polaire, Fr. from pole.] Found near the pole;
lying near the pole ; iſſuing from the pole.
As when two polar winds, blowing adverſe
Upon the Cronian ſea, together drive
Mountains of ice. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
I doubt
If any ſuffer on the polar coaſt,
The rage of Arétos, and eternal froſt. Prior.
Pola'RITY.. n.ſ.. [from polar.] Tendency to the pole.
This polarity from refrigeration, upon extremity and defe&amp;t
of a loadſtone, might touch a needle any where. Brown.
Po'LARY. adj. [polaris, Lat.] Tending to the pole; having a
direction toward the poles.
Irons, heated red hot, and cooled in the meridian from
North to South, contračt a polary power. Brown.
POLE. m. ſ. [polus, Lat. pole, Fr.]
1. The extremity of the axis of the earth; either of the points
on which the world turns.
From the centre thrice to the utmoſt pole. Milton.
From pole to pole
The forky lightnings flaſh, the roaring thunders roll. Dry.
2. [Pole, Sax. pal, pau, Fr. pala, Italian and Spaniſh ; palus,
Lat.] A long ſtaff.
A long pole, ſtruck upon gravel in the bottom of the wa-
ter, maketh a ſound. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
If after ſome diſtinguiſh’d leap,
He drops his pole, and ſeems to ſlip ;
2
Straight gath'ring all his aai
He . ; his active ſtrength, Prizr.
He ordered to arm long poles with ſharp hooks, wherewith
they took hold of the tackling which held the mainyard to the
º they cut the tackling, and brought
C DQaid. -
3. A tall piece .# timber erected. 4rbuthnot on Cains.
Wither'd is the garland of the war,
The ſoldier's pole is fall'n. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleo
Live to be the ſhow and gaze o'th. time, - p.
We'll have thee as our rarer monſters are
Painted upon a pole, and underwrit,
Here may you ſee the tyrant.
4. A meaſure of length containing five yards and a half.
This ordinance of tithing them b
y the pole is not only fit
for the gentlemen, but alſo the noblemen. only
Shakeſp.
nſer.
Every pole ſquare of mud, twelve inches deep, *:::.
ſix pence a pole to fling out. 44%rtimer's Huſbandry.
5. An inſtrument of meaſuring.
A peer of the realm and a counſellor of ſtate are not to be
meaſured by the common yard, but by the pole of ſpecial
grace. Bacon.
To Pole. v. a. [from the noun..] To furniſh with poles.
Begin not to pole your hops. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Pole Axe. m. ſ. [pole and axe.] An axe fixed to a long pole.
To beat religion into the brains with a poleaxe, is to offer
vićtims of human blood. Howl's England's Tears.
One hung a poleaxe at his ſaddle bow,
And one a heavy mace to ſtun the foe. Dryden.
Polecat. m. ſ. [Pole or Poliſh cat, becauſe they abound in
Poland.] The fitchew; a ſtinking animal.
Polecatiº there are fairer things than polecats. Shakeſp.
Out of my door, you witch you hag, you polecat 1 out,
out, out; I'll conjure you. Shakeſp. Merry hºves of I/indſor.
She, at a pin in the wall, hung like a palecat in a warren,
to amuſe them. AL’Eſtrange.
How ſhould he, harmleſs youth,
Who kill'd but polecats, learn to murder men. Gay
Po'LEDA v IFs. m. ſ. A ſort of coarſe cloth. Ainſworth.
Pol E Mica L. adj. [roxtº:3;..] Controverſial; diſputative
Pol Ex1, cK. !/. ** 12:0s. ontrovertial ; diſputative.
I have had but little reſpite from theſe polemical exerciſes,
and, notwitt.ſtanding all the rage and malice of the adverſa-
ries of our church, I ſit down contented. Stillingſ?-et.
The nullity of this diſtinétion has been ſolidly ſhewn by
moſt of our polemicé writers of the pro-citant church. South.
The beſt method to be uſed with theſe polemical ladies, is
to ſhew them the ridiculous ſide of their cauſe. Addiſon.
Pole Mick. m. ſ. Diſputant; controvertiſt.
Each ſtaunch polemick ſtubborn as a rock,
Came whip and ſpur. Danciad, b. iv.
Pole"Moscope. r. ſ. [w 4xtu.3° and ſtoria.] In opticks, is
a kind of crooked or oblique perſpectiv. º. aſs, contrived for
ſeeing objects that do not lie directly befºre ite eye. Dić.
Po LESTAR. m. ſ. [pole and ſtar.]
1. A ſtar near the pole, by which navigators compute their nor-
thern latitude ; cynoſure; lodeſtar.
If a pilot at ſea cannot ſee the poleſłar, let him ſteer his
courſe by ſuch ſtars as beſt appear to him. King Charles.
I was ſailing in a vaſt ocean without other help than the
polyſiar of the ancients. Dryden,
2. Any guide or director.
Pole Y-MoUNTAIN. m. ſ. [polium, Lat.] A plant.
The poly-mountain hath a labiated flower, conſiſting of one
leaf, whoſe ſtamina ſupply the place of a creſt; the beard is
divided into five ſegments, as the germander; out of the flower
cup riſes the pointal, attended, as it were, by four embryos,
which afterward become ſo many ſeeds ſhut up in the flower
cup : the flowers are collected into an head upon the top of
the ſtalks and branches. Miller.
POLICE. m. ſ. [French..] The regulation and government
of a city or country, ſo far as regards the inhabitants.
PolicED. adj. [from police..] Regulated; formed into a regu-
lar courſe of adminiſtration. -
Where there is a kingdom altogether unable or indign to
govern, it is a juſt cauſe of war for another nation, that is
civil or policed, to ſubdue them. Bacon's Holy War.
Policy. m. ſ. [Toast six ; politia, Lat.] -
1. The art of government, chiefly with reſpect to foreign
powers.
2. Art; prudence; management of affairs ; ſtratagem. .
The policy of that purpoſe is made more, in the marriage,
than the love of the parties. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleºpatra.
If it be honour in your wars to ſeen
The ſame you are not, which for your beſt ends
You call your policy; how ist leſs or worſe,
But it ſhall hold companionſhip in Peace
With honour as in war. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
If ſhe be curſt, it is for policy,
For ſhe's not froward, but modeſt. Shakeſp.
The beſt rule of policy, is to prefer the doing of juſtice
before all enjoyments. King cº
e
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">=-
sº
P O L
º
- fineſs for a man's ſecular advantage.
funds. -
Tºlish. v. a. ſpolio, Lat. polir, Fr.]
1. To ſmooth; to brighten by attrition; to gloſs.
º
Pygmalion, with fatal art,
Poliſh'd the form that ſtung his heart.
2. To make elegant of manners.
Studious they appear
Of arts that poliſh life, inventors rare.
Bid ſoft ſcience poliſh Britain's heroes.
ceive a gloſs.
Po LISH. m. ſ. ſpoli, poliſhire, Fr. from the verb.]
I. Artificial gloſs; brightneſs given by attrition.
poliſh.
2. Elegance of manners. - - - -
What are theſe wond’rous civiliſing arts,
This Roman poliſh, and this ſmooth behaviour,
gives a gloſs.
the ſkill of the poliſher fetches out the colours.
POLITE. adj. [politus, Latin.]
1. Gloſſy ; ſmooth.
lucid medium, be reflected back, the fits of eaſy
cºnvex polite riſings like waves.
; 2. Elegant of manners.
A nymph of quality admires our knight,
He marries, bows at court, and grows polite.
genteely.
manners; gentility; good breeding.
courſe.
Political, adj. [rox1,x2.]
lick affairs.
book of proverbs, than from a thouſand Machiavel.
2. Cunning; ſkilful.
PoliticALLY. adv. [from political.]
I. With relation to Publick adminiſtration.
2. Artfully ; politickly.
crites, empiricks, law-jobbers and politica/fers
| . . / º:--
Polit 1'cIAN. n.ſ. [politicien, Fr.]
I. One verſed in the arts of government;
Get thee glaſs eyes,
And, like a ſcurvy politician, ſeen
To ſee things thou doſt not.
While emp'rick politicians uſe deceit,
Hide what they give, and cure but by a cheat,
You boldly ſhow that ſkill, which they pretend,
And work by means as noble as your end.
Soffee, which makes the fºlitician wiſe,
" "Pin vapours to th: baron's brain
2. A . "...ºns, the radiant lock to gain.
" of artifice ; one of deep contrivance.
nd ...ming pºlitician lords,
Å.” of bridal friend. and gueſts
PPºinted to awaiti. thirty ſpies. S------&gt;
5
The wiſdom of this world is ſometimes taken in ſcripture
for policy, and conſiſts in a certain dexterity of managing bu-
or policy, South's Sermºns.
3. [Poliga, Spaniſh.] A warrant for money in the publick
He ſetteth to finiſh his work, and poliſheth it perfeótly. Eccl.
To Polish. v. n. To anſwer to the act of poliſhing; to re-
It is reported by the ancients, that there was a kind of ſteel,
which would poliſh almoſt as white and bright as ſilver. Bacon.
Not to mention what a huge colümn of granite coſt in the
quarry, only conſider the great difficulty of hewing it into
any form, and of giving it the due turn, proportion and
Addison's Remarks on Italy.
Another priſm of clearer glaſs and better poliſh ſeemed free
from veins. Newton's Opticks.
That render man thus tractable and tame: Addison's Catc.
Polish Able. adj. [from poliſh.] Capable of being poliſhed.
º Po'LisHER. m. ſ. [from fº/”.] The perſon or inſtrument that
I conſider an human ſoul without education, like marble in
the quarry, which ſhews none of its inherent beauties, till
Some of them are diaphanous, ſhining and polite; others
not pºlite, but as if powder'd over with find irºn iſ. J7%zd:w.
If any ſort of rays, falling on the polite ſurface of an
which they have at the point of reflexion, ſhall ſtill continue
to return. Newton's Opticks.
The edges of the ſand holes, being worn away, theſe are
- left all over the glaſs a numberieſ; company of very little
Newton's Opticks.
Poliſtery. adi, [from pºli.j Wii, elegance of man
Poli'TENEss. n.ſ. [politºſe, Fr. from pºlite.] Elegance of
I have ſeen the dulleſt men aiming at wit, and others, with
as little pretenſions, affecting Pºlitenºſ in manners and diº
1. Relating to politicks; relating to the adminiſtration of pub-
More true political wiſdom may be learned from this fi
The Turks politically mingled certain Janizaries,
buſiers with their horſemen. Knolles's Hiſtºry of the ſº.
PoliticA's TER. n. ſ. A petty ignorant pretender to politicks:
There are quacks of all forts; as bullies, pedants, hypo-
- L'//ºrange.
; one ſkilled in politicks.
Shakespeare Ring Lear.
And,’t be any way, it muſt be with valour; for
hate: I had as lief be a Browniſt as a pºlitiºn. Sha
Although I may ſeem leſs a £ºlitician to men, yet I need no
ſecret diſtinctions nor evaſions beſ. God. Åing Charles.
And ſee through all things with his half-ſhut cycs,
P O L
If a man ſucceeds in any attempt, though undertook with
never ſo much raſhneſs, his ſucceſs ſhall vouch him a politi-
cian, and good luck ſhall paſs for deep contrivance; for give
any one fortune, and he ſhall be thought a wiſe man, South.
POLITICK. adj. [rox1,x2;..] - -
1. Political; civil. In this ſenſe political is almoſt always uſed,
except in the phraſe body politick. -
Virtuouſly and wiſely acknowledging, that he with his
people made all but one politick body, whereof himſelf was
the head ; even ſo cared for them as he would for his own
limbs. - - Sidney, b. ii.
No civil or politick conſtitutions have been more celebrated
than his by the beſt authors. Temple.
2. Prudent; verſed in affairs.
This land was famouſly enrich'd
With politick grave counſel; then the king
Had virtuous uncles. Shakespeare . Richard III.
3. Artful; cunning. In this ſenſe pºlitical is not uſed.
I have trod a meaſure; I have flatter'd a lady; I have been
politick with my friend, ſmooth with mine enemy. Shakeſp.
Authority followeth old men, and favour youth ; but for
the moral part, perhaps youth will have the Preheminence,
as age hath for the politick. Bacon.
No leſs alike the politick and wiſe,
All fly ſlow things, with circumſpective eyes;
Men in their looſe unguarded hours they take. Pope.
Politickly, adv. [from pºlitick.] Artfully; cunningly.
Thus have I pºliticſſy begun my reign,
And 'tis my hope to end ſucceſsfully. Shakeſp.
'Tis politickly done,
To ſend me packing with an hoſt of men. Shakeſp.
The dutcheſs hath been moſt Pºſiticºy employed in ſharp-
ening thoſe arms with which ſhe ſubdued you. Pope.
Po'll ficks. n.ſ. [politique, Fr. ****) The ſcience of
government; the art or practice of adminiſtring publick af.
fairs.
Be pleas'd your poſitiº, to ſpare,
!'m old enough, and can my ºf take care. Dryden.
It would be an ***ing reproach to politicſ, ſhould ſºft
men overturn an eſtabliſhment formed by the wiſeſt laws, and
ſupported by the ableſt heads. Addiſon.
Of crooked counſels and dark politicks. Pope.
Po'Litu RE. m. ſ. [politure, Fr.] The gloſs given by the aët
of poliſhing.
POLITY. W.ſ. [*] A form of government; civil
conſtitution.
Becauſe the ſubject, which this poſition concerneth, is a
form of church gºvernment or church polity, it behoveth us
to conſider the nature of the church, as is requiſite for men's
more clear and plain underſtanding, in what reſpect laws of
pºlity or government are neceſſary thereunto. Hooker.
The polity of ſome of our neighbours hath not thought it
beneath the publick care, to promote and reward the improve-
ººt of their own language. Locke on Education.
POLL. n.ſ. [.Polk, pol, Dutch, the top.]
1. The head.
Look if the withered elder hath not his poll claw'd like a
parrot. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
2. A catalogue or liſt of perſons; a regiſter of heads.
Have you a catalogue
Of all the voices that we have procur'd,
Set down by th’ poll. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The muſter file, rotten and ſound, amounts not to fifteen
thouſand poll. Shakeſpeare.
3. A fiſh called generally a chub. A chevin.
To Poll. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To lop the to of trees.
The oft cutting and polling of hedges conduces much to
their laſting. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
May thy woods of pºll'd yet ever wear.
A green, and, when ſhe liſt, a golden hair. Donne.
2. In this ſenſe is uſed polled ſheep.
Żºłęd ſheep, that is ſheep without horns, are reckoned the
beſt breeders, becauſe the ewes yean the polled lamb with the
leaſt danger. Martimer's Huſhandry.
3. To puff off hair from the head; to clip ſhort; to ſhear. -
Neither ſhall they ſhave, only poll their heads. Ezekiel.
. To mow ; to crop.
4. He'll go and Kºi. the porter of Rome gates by th’ ears:
he will mow down all before him, and leave his paſſage
poll’d. Shakeſp. Coriolania.
5. To plunder; to ſtrip; to pill. -
They will poll and ſpoil ſo outrageouſly, as the very enemy
cannot do much worſe. Spenſºr on Ireland.
Take and exact upon them the wild exactions, coignie, li-
very and forehon, by which they poll and utterly undo the
poor tenants. Spenſer on Ireland.
He told the people, that ſubſidies were not to be granted
nor levied for wars in Scotland; for that the law had pro-
vided another courſe by ſervice of eſcuage, much leſs when
war was made but a Pretence to foll and pill the people. Bacon.
Neither<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">º,
|-
º:
*
º
º,
i
1.
**
il
:
Keither can juſtice yield her fruit with ſweetneſs, amongſt
the briars and brambles of catching and polling clerks and
miniſters. Bacon.
4. To take a liſt or regiſter of perſons. º
5. To enter one's name in a liſt or regiſter.
Who ever brought to his rich daughter's bed,
The man that polled but twelve pence for his head Dryd,
6. To inſert into a number as a voter.
In ſolemn conclave fit, devoid of thought,
And poll for points of faith his truſty vote. Tickell.
Poll ARD. n. ſ. [from poll.]
1. A tree lopped.
Nothing procureth the laſting of trees ſo much as often
cutting; and we ſee all overgrown trees are pollard, or dot-
tards, and not trees at their full height. Bacon.
2. A clipped coin.
The ſame king called in certain counterfeit pieces coined by
the French, called pollards, crocars and roſaries. Camden.
3. The chub fiſh. Ainſworth.
Éolle N. m. ſ. A fine powder, commonly underſtood by the
word farina; as alſo a ſort of fine bran. Bailey.
PolleNGER. m. ſ. Bruſhwood. This ſeems to be the mean-
ing of this obſolete word.
Lop for thy fewel old pollenger grown, -
That hinder the corne or the graiſe to be mown. Tuſſºr.
Poller. n ſ, [from poll.]
1. Robber; pillager; plunderer.
The polier and exacter of fees juſtifies the reſemblance of
the courts of juſtice to the buſh, whereunto while the ſheep
flies for defence, he loſes part of the fleece. Bacon's Eſſays.
2. He who votes or polls.
Poll. Evil. n. ſ. [poll and evil.]
Pollevil is a large ſwelling, inflammation or impoſthume in
the horſe's poll or nape of the neck, juſt between the ears to-
wards the mane. Farrier's Dići.
To'llock. n.ſ. A kind of fiſh. . . .
The coaſt is plentifully ſtored with ſhellfiſh, ſea-hedgehogs,
ſcallops; and flat, as round, pilcherd, herring and pollock.
Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
To POLLUTE. v. a. [polluo, Lat. polluer, Fr.]
1. To make unclean, in a religious ſenſe; to defile.
Hot and peeviſh vows
Are polluted offerings, more abhorr'd
Than ſpotted livers in the ſacrifice. Shakeſp.
2. To taint with guilt.
She woos the gentle air,
To hide her guilty front with innocent ſnow,
And on her naked ſhame, -
Pollute with ſinful blame,
The ſaintly veil of maiden white to throw. Milton.
3. To corrupt by mixtures of ill.
Envy you my praiſe, and would deſtroy
With grief my pleaſures, and pollute my joy Dryden.
4. Milton uſes this word in an uncommon conſtruction.
Polluted from the end of his creation. Milton.
Pollu’re DNFss. n.ſ.. [from pollute.] Defilement; the ſtate
of being polluted.
Pollu’re R. n. ſ. [from pollute.] Defiler; corrupter.
Ev’n he, the king of men,
Fell at his threſhold, and the ſpoil of Troy
The foul folluters of his bed enjoy. Dryden's AEncis.
Pollution. n. ſ. [pollution, Fr. pollutio, Latin.]
1. The aët of defiling. *-
The contrary to conſecration is pollution, which happens in
churches by homicide, and burying an excommunicated per-
ſon in the church. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. The ſtate of being defiled ; defilement.
Their ſtrife pollution brings
Upon the temple. Milton's Par Loff, b. xii.
Poºr Ros. m. ſ. [police truncato, from the thumb cut off; it
being once a practice of cowards to cut off their thumbs, that
they might not be compelled to ſerve in war. Saumaiſe.
Menage derives it from the Italian poltro, a bed; as cowards
feign themſelves ſick a bed: others derive it from poletro or
poltro, a young unbroken horſe.] A coward ; a nidgit; a
ſcoundrel.
Patience is for poltrons. Shakeſp.
They that are bruis'd with wood or fiſts,
And think one beating may for once
Suffice, are cowards and poltrons. Hudibras, p. ii.
For who but a poltron poſſeſs'd with fear,
Such haughty inſolence can tamely bear. Dryden.
Poly. n.ſ. ſpolium, Lat..] An herb. Ainſworth.
Poly. ["rox.j A prefix often found in the compoſition of
words derived from the Greek, and intimating multitude: as,
pºlygon, a figure of many angles; polypus, an animal with
many feet.
olx|Acoustick. adj. [Toxº; and 2x42.] Any thing that
multiplies or magnifies ſounds. . Dić7.
PolyAnthos. n.ſ. [Toxº; and 3,362.] A plant.
Great varieties of polyanthos are annually produced, and its
flowers are ſo numerous on one ſtalk, and ſo beautifully
ſtriped, that they are not inferior to auriculas in beauty. Miller.
The daiſy, primroſe, violet darkly blue, - - -
And polyanthos of unnumber'd dyes. Thomſºn.
ºokyºpkićal. !ad. [from Tºvsö; GP ; polyedre, Fr.] Ha-
PolyE pRous. $ ving many ſides. '
, ſº Prºbeſant particles may be ſpherical, elliptical, cy-
lindrical, polyedrical, and ſome very irregular ; and accord-
lºg 9 the nature of theſe, and the ſituation of the lucid body;
the light muſt be variouſly effected. Boyle.
A tubercle of a pale brown ſpar, had the exterior ſurface
covered with ſmall polyedrous cryſtals, pellucid, with a caſt of
yellow. - //oodward.
Poly'GAMIST. n. J. [from pºlygamy..] One that holds the law-
fulneſs of more wives than one at a time.
POLY GAMY. m. ſ. [polygamie, Fr. troºvyzºſa..] Plurality
of wives.
Pºlygamy is the having more wives than one at once. Locł.
They allow no polygamy: they have ordained, that none
do intermarry or contract, until a month be paſt from their
firſt interview. Bacon:
Chriſtian religion, prohibiting polygamy, is more agreeable
to the law of nature, that is, the law of God, than maho-
netiſm that allows it; for one man, his having many wives
by law, ſignifies nothing, unleſs there were many women to
one man in nature alſo. Graunt.
Polyglot. adj. [roxvyxorrº”; polyglotte, Fr.] Having
many languages.
The polyglot or linguiſt is a learned man. Howel.
POTYGON. m. ſ. [folygone, Fr. rox); and yºvſz.] A figure
of many angles.
He began with a ſingle line; he joined two lines in an
angle, and he advanced to triangles and ſquares, polygons and
circles. Watts's Improvement ºf the Mind.
PolyGoNAL. adj. [from polygon.] Having many angles.
Po'LYGRAM. n. ſ. [road; and yºzºva.] A figure conſiſting
of a great number of lines. IDicſ.
Poly GRAPHY, n.ſ. [wº, and Yezº ; polygraphie, Fr.] The
art of writing in ſeveral unuſual manners or cyphers; as alſo
decyphering the ſame. Dić7.
PolylogY. n.ſ. [road; and 7.070;..] Talkativeneſs: Dić.
Poly'MATHY, n.ſ. [roxv, and gº, Sayw.] The knowledge
of many arts and ſciences; alſo an acquaintance with many
different ſubjects. Dić7.
Poly'PHoNIsM. m. ſ. [Toxo; and @ww..] Multiplicity of
ſound.
The paſſages relate to the diminiſhing the ſound of his
piſtol, by the rarity of the air at that great aſcent into the at-
moſphere, and the magnifying the ſound by the polyphoniſms
or repercuſſions of the rocks and caverns. Derham.
Polype"TAlous. adj. [Tox); and réraxov.] Having many
petals.
Polypody. m. ſ. ſpolypodium, Latin.] A plant.
Polypody is a capillary plant with oblong jagged leaves, ha-
ving a middle rib, which joins them to the ſtalks running
through each diviſion. AMiller.
Polypody is common on the banks of ditches where there are
ſtumps of old trees, on walls, and by the ſides of woods:
polypody is attenuant and diſſolvent. Hill's Materia Medica.
A kind of polypody groweth out of trees, though it windeth
In Ot. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Po'LYPous. adj. [from polypus.] Having the nature of a poly-
pus ; having many feet or roots,
If the veſſels drive back the blood with too great a force
upon the heart, it will produce polypous concretions in the ven-
tricles of the heart, eſpecially when its valves are apt to grow
rigid. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
POLYPUS. n.ſ. [roxſwe; ; polype, Fr.]
1. Polypus ſignifies any thing in general with many roots or
feet, as a ſwelling in the noſtrils; but it is likewiſe applied
to a tough concretion of grumous blood in the heart and ar-
teries. 9aincy.
The polypus of the noſe is ſaid to be an excreſcence of fleſh,
ſpreading its branches amongſt the laminae of the os eth-
moides, and through the whole cavity of one or both noſtrils.
* Sharp's Surgery.
The juices of all auſtere vegetables, which coagulate the
ſpittle, being mixed with the blood in the veins, form poly-
puſes in the heart. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. A ſea animal with many feet.
The polypus, from forth his cave
Torn with full force, reluctant beats the wave,
His ragged claws are ſtuck with ſtones. - Pºpe.
Po'Lyscope. m. ſ. [road; and (...oria.] A multip gºng
glaſs. - - IDiff.
Poly’spast. n.ſ. [polyſpoſe, Fr.] A machine confifting of
many pullies. Dié?.
Polyspºlous. adj. [rox); and Cºíº...]. Thoſe plants
are thus called, which have more than four ſeeds ſucceeding
each flower, and this without any certain order or number. Qu.
Polysyll. A bical. adj. [from polyſyllable.] Having many ſyl-
lables; pertaining to a polyſyllable.
Polyſyllabical echoes are ſuch as repeat many ſyllables or
words diſtinétly. Dić7.
20 A POLYSY'LLABLE.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O M
P O N
POLYSYLLABLE, n.ſ.. [Toxº; and ſº ; polyſyllabe,
d of many ſyllables.
Fºl sº Jºãº, to which ſyllable the emphaſis
- - nd in each ſyllable to which letter. Holder.
IS $... º tº: and makes a noiſe; it ſtalks
upon hard words, and rattles through polyſyllables. Addiſon.
Poly’syNdeton. n.ſ.. [roxv'ſvöslow.] A figure of rhethorick
by which the copulative is often repeated: as, I came, and
w and overcame.
p.º. n. ſ. [road; and 9:0; ; polytheiſme, Fr.] The
dočtrine of plurality of gods. - -
The firſt author of polytheiſm, Orpheus, did plainly aſſert
one ſupreme God. * Stillingfeet.
Polytheist. n. ſ. [rox); and 0:0: ; polythée, Fr.] One that
holds plurality of gods.
have falſely made the Turks, polythei/?s.
Some authors have fa ely Duncomb's Žºf Hughes.
Po'Mace. n. ſ. [pomaceum, Lat.] The droſs of *;
rºle. adj. [from pomum, Latin.] Conſiſting of apples.
Autumn paints - -
Auſonian hills with grapes, whilſt Engliſh plains ---
Bluſh with pomaceous harveſts breathing ſweets. , Philips.
Po'MADE. n. J. [pomade, Fr. pomado, Italian.] A fragrant
ointment.
Po'MANDER. m. ſ. ſpomme d’ambre, Fr.] A ſweet ball; a
perfumed ball or powder. -
I have ſold all my trumpery ; not a counterfeit ſtone, not
a ribbon, glaſs, pomander or browch to keep my Pack from
faſting. Shakeſp.
They have in phyſick uſe of pomander and knots of powders
for drying of rheums, comforting of the heart and provoking
of ſleep. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
POMATUM. n.ſ. [Latin.] An ointment.
I gave him a little pomatum to dreſs the ſcab. Jºſeman.
To Pome. v. n. [pommer, Fr.] To grow to a round head like
an apple. - Diet.
Pom Eci'TRoN. m. ſ. ſpome and citron.] A citron apple. Dicz.
PoMEGRANATE. n.ſ. ſpomum granatum, Lat.]
I. The tree.
The flower of the pomegranate conſiſts of many leaves
placed in a circular order, which expand in form of a roſe,
whoſe bell-ſhaped multifid flower cup afterward becomes a
globular fruit, having a thick, ſmooth, brittle rind, and is
divided into ſeveral cells, which contain oblong hardy ſeeds,
ſurrounded with a ſoft pulp. Miller.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly ſhe ſings on yon pomegranate tree. Shakeſp.
2. The fruit.
In times paſt they dyed ſcarlet with the ſeed of a pome-
granate. Peacham on Drawing.
Nor on its ſlender twigs
Low bending be the full pomegranate ſcorn'd. Thomſºn.
Po' MeRoy. A ſ - -
Po'MERoy Al. } n. ſ. ort of apple. Ainſworth.
Po'MIFERous. adj. [pomfºr, Lat.] A term applied to plants
which have the largeſt fruit, and are covered with thick hard
rind, by which they are diſtinguiſhed from the bacciferous,
which have only a thin ſkin over the fruit.
All pomiferous herbs, Pumpions, melons, gourds and cu-
cumbers, unable to ſupport themſelves, are either endued with
* fºculty of twining about others, or with claſpers and ten-
drils whereby they catch hold of them. Ray on the Creation.
Other fruits contain a great deal of cooling viſcid juice,
combined with a nitrous ſalt, ſuch are many of the low pomi-
ferºus kind, as cucumbers and Pompions. Arbuth. on Aliments.
Po'MMEL. * /, ſpomeau, Fr. pomo, Italian; appel van t’ſwaerd,
Dutch.]
I. A round ball or knob.
Like pommel round of marble clear,
Where azur’d veins well mixt appear. Sidney, b. ii.
Huram finiſhed the two Pillars and the pommel, and the
chapters which were on the top of the two pillars. 2 Chron.
2. The knob that balances the jade ºf the ſword.
. His chief enemy offered to deliveſ th: pommel of his ſword
in token of yielding. Sidney.
3. The protuberant part of the ſaddle before.
The ſtarting ſteed was ſeiz'd with ſudden fright,
T tº: bounding, o'er the pºmmel caſt the knight. Dryden.
.O º *MEL. v. a. [This word ſeems to come from pommeler,
to º To beat with any thing thick or bulky,
OMP. :*: º: # to bruiſe ; to punch.
I. Splendôur', º: atin.]
Take phyſick, pomp,
feel what wretches feel. Shakeſp.
e bright endour and oſtentation. -
All eyes O {{ aſcended jubilant. AMilton.
f your º po '**', and with the eyes the heart;
mp yºurſelf the greateſt part. Dryden.
* Such a num,
* and innocent multitude, cloathed in the
charity of their benefactors, was a more beautiful expreſſion
fjoy and thankſgiving, than could have been exhibited by
jº. powps of a Roman triumph. Addiſon's Guardian.
'MPHolyx. n.ſ. - -
Po “gº. is a white, light and very friable ſubſtance, found
in cruſts adhering to the domes of the furnaces and to the
covers of the large crucibles, in which braſs is made either
from a mixture of copper and lapis calaminaris, or of copper
and zink. Hill’; Aateria A/edica.
Po Mpion. m. ſ. ſpompon, Fr.] A pumkin. A ſort of large
fruit. Dić.
Po MPIRE. m.ſ. ſtorium and pyruſ: Lat.J.A ſort of pearmain. Ain.
POMPOUS. adj. [pompeux, Fr. J Splendid ; magnificent;
rand. -
g What flatt’ring ſcenes our wand'ring fancy wrought,
Rome's pompous glories riſing to our thought. Pope.
An inſcription in the ancient way, plain, £ompouſ, yet
modeſt, will be beſt. Atterbury to Pope.
Po'Mpously. adv. [from pompous.] Magnificently; ſplen-
didly. -
'white, can urge ambitious youth to fight,
She pompouſly diſplays before their fight. Dryden.
Po'Mpousness. m. ſ. [from pompous.] Magnificence; ſplen-
dour; ſhowineſs; oftentatiouſneſs.
The Engliſh and French raiſe their language with meta-
phors, or by the pompºſitſ of the whole phraſe wear off.
littleneſs that appears in the particular parts. Addiſon.
Pond. m. ſ. [ſuppoſed to be the ſame with pound; pinban, Sax.
to ſhut up.] A ſnall pool or lake of water; a biſon ; Water
not running or emitting any ſtream.
In the midſt of all the place was a fair pond, whoſe ſhak-
ing cryſtal was a perfect mirror to all the other beauties, ſo
that it bare ſhew of two gardens. Sidney.
Through bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pool.
There ſwallow'd up. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ix.
Had marine bodies been found in only one place, it might
have been ſuſpected, that the ſea was, what the Caſpian is, a
great pond or lake, confined to one part. Wºodward.
His building is a town,
His pond an ocean. Pope.
To Posp. v. a. To ponder. A corrupt obſolete word.
O my liege lord, the god of my life,
Pleaſeth you pond your ſuppliant's plaint. Spenſºr.
To Po NDER. v. a. ſpondero, Latin.] To weigh mentally; to
conſider; to attend.
Mary kept all theſe things, and ponder'd them in her
heart. Duke ii. 19.
Colours, popularities and circumſtances ſway the ordinary
judgment, not fully pondering the matter. Bacon.
This ponder, that all nations of the earth
Shall in his ſeed be bleſſed. AMilton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
Intent he ſeem’d, -
Pond'ring future things of wond’rous weight. Dryden.
To Po NDER. v. n. To think; to muſe. With on. This is
an improper uſe of the word. -
This tempeſt will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Whom, pond'ring thus on human miſeries,
When Venus ſaw, her heav'nly fire beſpoke. Dryden.
Po'NDERAL. adj. [from pondus, Lat] Eſtimated by weight;
diſtinguiſhed from numeral.
Thus did the money drachma in proceſs of time decreaſe;
but all the while we may ſuppoſe the ponderal drachma to
have continued the ſame, juſt as it has happened to us, as
well as our neighbours, whoſe ponderal libra remains as it
was, though the nummary hath much decreaſed. Arbuthnot.
Po'NDERABLE. adj. [from pondero, Lat..] Capable to be
weighed; menſurable by ſcales. -
The bite of an aſp will kill within an hour, yet the im-
preſſion is ſcarce viſible, and the poiſon communicated not
ponderable. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Ponde RATION. m. ſ. [from pondero, Latin.] The act of
eighing. -
W W j we perſpire, we abſorb the outward air, and the
quantity of perſpired matter, found by ponderation, is only
the difference between that and ‘ī alſ. Arbuthnot.
/ RER. m. ſ. [from ponder.] e who pongers. -
; *:::::/ ; /. ſº ponderous.] Weight; gravity;
*ē. will ſink in water, as carrying in its own bulk a
- it doth oc-
ter ponderºſity than the ſpace in any water it
sº p ºſity Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Gold is remarkable for its admirable ductility and ponde-
roſty, wherein it excels all other bodies. Ray.
PONDEROUS. adj. [ponderoſus, from pondus, Lat.]
y; weighty. -
I. # . In Ore #1. to make gold, which is the moſt ponde-
rous and materiate amongſt metals, of other metals leſs pon-
derous and materiate, than, via verſa, to make ſilver of lead or
quickſilver ; both which are more ponderous than ſilver. Bacon.
His pond’rous ſhield behind him caſt. AMilton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5 Upon
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O N
Upon laying a weight in one of the ſcales, inſcribed eter-
nity, though I threw in that of time, proſperity, afflićtion,
wealth and poverty, which ſeemed very ponderous, they were
not able to ſtir the oppoſite balance. - Addiſon.
Becauſe all the parts of an undiſtributed fluid are of equal
gravity, or gradually placed according to the difference of it,
any concretion, that can be ſuppoſed to be naturally made in
ſuch a fluid, muſt be all over of a ſimilar gravity, or have the
more ponderous parts nearer to its baſis. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Important; momentous.
If your more ponderous and ſettl’d projećt
May ſuffer alteration, I’ll point you
Where you ſhall have receiving ſhall become you. Shakeſp.
. Forcible; ſtrongly impulſive,
Imagination hath more force upon things living, than
things inanimate; and upon light and ſubtile motions, than
upon motions vehement or ponderous. Bacon.
Impatient of her load,
And lab’ring underneath the pond’rous god,
The more ſhe ſtrove to ſhake him from her breaſt,
With far ſuperior force he preſs'd. Dryden.
Preſs'd with the pond’rous blow,
Down ſinks the ſhip within th’ abyſs below. Dryden.
Po'NDERously. adv. [from ponderous.] With great weight.
Po'NDERousness. n.ſ.. [from ponderous.] Heavineſs; weight;
ravity.
}. oil and ſpirit place themſelves under or above one an-
other, according as their ponderouſneſ, makes them ſwim or
ſink. Boyle.
Po'Ndweep. m. ſ. A plant. Ainſworth.
Po'N ENT. adj. [ponente, Italian.] Weſtern.
Thwart of theſe, as fierce,
Forth ruſh the levant and the ponent winds
Eurus and Zephyr. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x:
Po'NiARD. m.ſ. [poignard, Fr. pugio, Lat..] A dagger; a ſhort
ſtabbing weapon.
She ſpeaks poniards, and every word ſtabs. Shakeſp.
Melpomene would be repreſented, in her right hand a naked
poniard. Peacham on Drawing.
Poniards hand to hand
Be baniſh'd from the field, that none ſhall dare
With ſhortned ſword to ſtab in cloſer war. Dryden.
To Po NIARD. v. a. [poignardier, French..] To ſtab with a
poniard.
Ponk. n.ſ. [Of this word I know not the original.] A noc-
turnal ſpirit ; a hag.
Ne let the ponk, nor other evil ſprights,
Ne let miſchievous witches. Spenſer.
Po'NTAG e. n.ſ. ſpons, pontis, bridge.] Duty paid for the re-
paration of bridges. -
In right of the church, they were formerly by the common
law diſcharged from pontage and murage. Ayliffe.
PoſNTIFF. n.ſ. ſpontife, Fr. pontifex, Latin.]
1. A prieſt; a high prieſt.
Livy relates, that there were found two coffins, whereof
the one contained the body of Numa, and the other, his
books of ceremonies, and the diſcipline of the pontiffs. Bacon.
2. The pope.
P. NTI'FICAL. adj., ſpontifical, Fr. pontificalis, Lat.]
1. Belonging to an high prieſt.
2. Popiſh.
It were not amiſ, to anſwer by a herald the next pontifical
attempt, rather ſending defiance than publiſhing anſwers. Ral.
The pontifical authority is as much ſuperior to the regal,
as the ſun is greater than the moon. Baker.
3. Splendid; magnificent.
- Thus did I keep my perſon freſh and new,
My preſence, like a robe pontifical,
Ne'er ſeen, but wonder'd at. Shakespeare Henry IV.
4. [From pons and facio..] Bridge-building. This ſenſe is, I
believe, peculiar to 44;lton, and perhaps was intended as an
equivocal ſatire on popery.
Now had they brought the work by wond’rous art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendent rock
Over the vex'd abyſs. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
Ponti'Fical n.ſ. ſpontificale, Lat.] A book containing rites
and ceremonies eccleſiaſtical.
What the Greek and Latin churches did, may be ſeen in
pontificals, containing the forms for conſecrations. South.
By the pontifical, no altar is to be conſecrated without re-
liqués. Stillingfleet.
Ponti'Fically. adv. [from pontifical.] In a pontifical
Inanner.
Pontificate. n.ſ. [pontificat, Fr. pontificatus, Lat..] Papacy;
popedom.
He turned hermit in the view of being advanced to the
pontificate. Addiſon.
Painting, ſculpture and archite&amp;ture may all recover them-
ſelves under the preſent pontificate, if the wars of Italy will
give them leave. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
° NTIFICE. m. ſ. ſpons and facio..] Bridgework; edifice of a
bridge. -
º
P O O
He, at the brink of Chaos, near the foot
f this new wond’rous pontifice, unhop'd
r Met his offspring dear. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
Po'N'rlevis. n.J. in horſemanſhip, is a diſorderly reſiſting
action of a horſe in diſobedience tº his rider, in which he
º º º º running, and riſes up ſo upon his hind-
egS, that he is in danger of comi iſ.”
POWłów. n. ſ. [French. ming over. Bailey.
- Ponton is a floating bridge or invention to paſs over water:
it is made of two great boats placed at ſome diſtance from
one another, both planked over, as is the interval between
them, with rails on their ſides: the whole ſo ſtrongly built
as to carry over horſe and cannon. Miliº, Dićf.
The black prince paſſed many a river without the help of
pontons. Speciator, N° 165.
*. n. ſ. [I know not the original of this word.j A ſmail
Orie.
Pool. n.ſ. [pul, Saxon; poel, Dutch..] A lake of ſtanding water.
Moſs, as it cometh of moiſture, ſo the water muſt but
ſlide, and not ſtand in a pool. -
Sea he had ſearch'd, and land,
From Eden over Pontus, and the pool
Maeotis. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
Love oft to virtuous ačts inflames the mind,
Awakes the ſleepy vigour of the ſoul,
Bacon.
And bruſhing o'er, adds vigour to the pool. Dryden.
The circling ſtreams, once thought the pools of blood,
From dark oblivion Harvey's name ſhall ſave. Dryden.
After the deluge, we ſuppoſe the vallies and lower grounds,
where the deſcent and derivation of the water was not ſo
eaſy, to have been full of lakes and pools. Burnet.
Poop. m. ſ. [pouppe, Fr. puppis, Lat.] The hindmoſt part of
the ſhip.
Some ſat upon the top of the poºp weeping and wailing,
till the ſea ſwallowed them. Sidney, b. ii.
The poop was beaten gold. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
Perceiving that the pigeon had only loſt a piece of her
tail through the next opening of the rocks, they paſſed ſafe,
only the end of their poop was bruiſed. Raleigh.
He was openly ſet upon the poop of the gally. Knolles.
With wind in poop, the veſſel ploughs the ſea,
And meaſures back with ſpeed her former way. Dryden.
POOR. adj. [pauvre, Fr. povre, Spaniſh.]
1. Not rich; indigent; neceſſitous ; oppreſſed with want.
Poor cuckoldly knave.—I wrong him to call him poor; .
they ſay he hath maſſes of money. Shakeſpeare.
Who builds a church to God, and not to fame,
Will never mark the marble with his name ;
Go ſearch it there, where to be born and die,
Of rich and poor makes all the hiſtory. Pope.
2. Trifling; narrow ; of little dignity, force or value.
A conſervatory of ſnow and ice uſed for delicacy to cool
wine, is a poor and contemptible uſe, in reſpect of other uſes
that may be made of it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
How poor are the imitations of nature in common courſe of
experiments, except they be led by great judgment. Bacon.
When he delights in ſin, as he obſerves it in other men,
he is wholly transformed from the creature God firſt made
him; nay, has conſumed thoſe poor remainders of good that
the ſin of Adam left him. South.
That I have wronged no man, will be a poor plea or apo-
logy at the laſt day; for it is not for rapin, that men are for-
mally impeached and finally condemned; but I was an hun-
gry, and ye gave me no meat. Calamy's Sermons.
3. Paltry; mean; contemptible. -
A poor number it was to conquer Ireland to the pope's
uſe. Bacon.
And if that wiſdom ſtill wiſe ends propound,
Why made he man, of other creatures, king;
When, if he periſh here, there is not found
In all the world ſo poor and vile a thing? Davier.
The marquis, making haſte to Scarborough, embarked in
a poor veſſel. Clar endon, b. viii.
We have ſeen how poor and contemptible a force has been
raiſed by thoſe who appeared openly. Addison Freeholder.
4. Unimportant. -
To be without power or diſtinétion, is not, in my pººr
opinion, a very amiable ſituation to a perſon of title. Swift.
5. Unhappy; uneaſy.
ext ſailors curſe the rain,
For which poor ſhepherds pray'd in vain. //allºr.
Vain privilege, poor woman have a tongue ;
Men can ſtand ſilent, and reſolve on wrong. Dryden.
6. Mean; depreſſed; low ; dejected. - - -
A ſº made Aºi. believe, that his genius, which
otherwiſe was brave, was, in the Preſence of Octavianus,
poor and cowardly. Bacon.
7. [A word of tenderneſs.] Dear. -
Poor, little, pretty, flutt’ring thing,
Muſt we no longer live together?.. -
And doſt thou prune thy trembling wing, -
To take thy flight thou know'ſt not whither ? Prior.
8. [A word
*—
:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O P
P O P -
i
ſ A uſ ight contempt..] Wretched.
8. tº: never . in: of the decrees and coun-
cils he had occaſion to uſe. * Refteå. on Learning.
- ; not fit for any purpoſe.
9. Nº. poor and .. brains for drinking: I could
wiſh courteſy would invent ſome other entertainment. Shakeſp.
10. The Poor. [collectively. ] Thoſe who are in the loweſt
rank of the community; thoſe who cannot ſubſiſt but by the
charity of others; but it is ſometimes uſed with laxity for any
not rich.
From a confin'd well manag'd ſtore, A-
You both employ and feed the poor. //aller.
Never any time ſince the reformation can ſhew ſo many
poor amongſt the widows and orphans of churchmen, as this
particular time. - Sprat's Sermons.
Has God caſt thy lot amongſt the poor of this world, by
denying thee the plenties of this life, or by taking them away?
this may be preventing mercy; for much miſchief riches do
to the ſons of men. South's Sermons.
The poor dare nothing tell but flatt’ring news. Dryden.
11. Barren ; dry : as, a poor ſoil.
12. Lean; ſtarved ; emaciated: as, a poor horſe. -
Where juice wanteth, the language is thin, flagging, poor,
ſtarved and ſcarce covering the bone. Benj. Johnſon.
13. Without ſpirit; flaccid.
Poo'RI.Y. adv. [from poor.]
1. Without wealth. -
Thoſe thieves ſpared his life, letting him go to learn to
live poorly. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Not proſperouſly; with little ſucceſs. - - - -
If you ſow one ground with the ſame kind of grain, it will
proſper but poorly. Bacon.
3. Mcanly; without ſpirit.
Your conſtancy
Hath left you unattended : be not loſt
So poorly in your thoughts. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Nor is their courage or their wealth ſo low,
- That from his wars they poorly would retire. Dryden.
4. Without dignity.
You meaner beauties of the night,
That poorly ſatisfy our eyes,
More by your number than your light,
You common people of the ſkies; -
What are you when the ſun ſhall riſe. Wotton.
Poor John. n.ſ. A ſort of fiſh. Ainſworth.
Poºr Ness. n.J. [from poor.]
1. Poverty; indigence; want.
If a prince ſhould complain of the poorneſ of his exche-
Suer, would he be angry with his merchants, if they brought
him a cargo of good bullion, Burnº, Theory of the Earth.
2. Meanneſs; lowneſs; want of dignity.
The Italian opera ſeldom finks intº a poorneſ of language,
but, amidſt all the meanneſs of the thoughts, has ſomething
-
beautiful and ſonorous in the expreſſion. Addiſon.
There is a kind of ſluggiſh reſignation, as well as poorneſs
*nd degeneracy of ſpirit, in a ſtate of ſlavery. Addiſon.
3. Sterility; barrenneſs.
The poornºſ of the herbs ſhews the poornſ of the earth,
eſpecially if in colour more dark. Bacon.
Enquire the differences of metals which contain other me-
tals, and how that agrees with the poornſ; or riches of the
metals in themſelves. Bacon.
Poo'Rsrikited. *dj ſpºor and ſpirit.] Mean; cowardly.
Mirvan' poor ſpirited wreſſitiou haſt deceiv'd me. Den.
Poo'Rspirit Epses. m. ſ. Meanneſs; cowardice.
A cauſe of men's taking pleaſure in the fins of others, is,
from that meanneſs and poolſpiritedneſs that accompanies
guilt. South's Sermons.
Pop. n.ſ. (Pºſna, Lat.] A ſmall ſmart quick ſound. It is
º º º found.
*** ſeveral ladies, who could not ive a pop lou
tº be heard at the farther end of the .*. º
“ſharge a fan, that it ſhalimák: * report like a pocket-
piſtol. Addiſon's Spectator, No 102.
To Pop. v. n. [from the noun..] To move or enter with a
quick, ſudden and unexpected motion.
Popt in b He that kill’d my king,
** in between th’ election and my ho CS. /
A boat was ſunk and all the folk ... ſaving ...;
Woman, that in her firſt *g up again, which moſt living
things accuſtom, eſpied the boat riſen likewiſe, and floating
. her, got hold of the boat, and ſat aſtride upon one of its
l i. - - Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
ſtartled at his popping upon me "nexpectedly. Addison.
Fº he ſcratched to fetch up thought,
Othertº: the ſprite ſo thin. Swift's Miſcellanies.
**isk of pºpping up and down every moment,
TOIn thei - - - -
To Pop. º º *the audience, like an idiº ſchool-boy. Swift.
* To put out or ºnly, ſlily or unexpectedly.
i. i. i. i** my brother's plea
Å; . if he can prove, he * m. Out
**om fair five hu. Pound a year. Shakeſp.
He popped a paper into his hand. - 4/.427.
A fellow, finding ſomewhat prick him, pºpt his finger upon
the place. - 1. Eſtrange Fai.
The commonwealth pºpped up its head for the third time
under Brutus and Caſſius, and then ſunk for ever. Dryaen.
Did'ſt thou never pop
Thy head into a tinman's ſhop : - Prior.
2. To ſhift.
If their curioſity leads them to aſk what they ſhould not
know, it is better to tell them plainly, that it is a thing that
belongs not to them to know, than to pop them off with a
falſhood. - 42-4e on Education.
POPE. m. ſ. ſpapa, Lat. Tarra;..]
1. The biſhop of Rome. .
I refuſe you for my judge ; and -
Appeal unto the pope to be judg’d by him. Sºakeſp.
He was organiſt in the pope's chapel at Rome. Pracham.
Chriſtianity has been more oppreſſed by thoſe that thus
fought for it, than thoſe that were in arms againſt it; upon
this ſcore, the pope has done her more harm than the
Turk. Decay ºf Piety.
2. A ſmall fiſh.
A pope, by ſome called a ruffe, is much like a pearch for
ſhape, but will not grow bigger than a gudgeon : he is an
excellent fiſh, of a pleaſant taſte, and ſpawns in April.
I/alton's Angler.
Po Pedom. [pope and dom.] Papacy; papal dignity. -
That world of wealth I've dawn together
For mine own ends; indeed, to gain the pºpedom. Shakeſp.
Po PERY. n.ſ. [from pope.] The religion of the church of
Rome.
Po, ery for corruptions in doğrine and diſcipline, I look
upon to be the moſt abſurd ſyſtem of chriſtianity. , Swift.
Po'Pºsey E. m. / [pope and ey..] The gland ſurrounded with
fat in the middle of the thigh : why ſo called I know not.
Po'PGUN. m. ſ. [pop and gun.j A gun with which children
play, that only makes a noiſe.
ife is not weak enough to be deſtroyed by this popgun
artillery of tea and coffee. Cheyne.
Por, NJAY. [papegay, Dutch ; papagayo, Spaniſh.]
1. A parrot.
Young tºpinjoys learn quickly to ſpeak. Aſcham.
The great red and blue parrot; there are of theſe greater,
the middlemoſt called popinjays, and the leſſer called perro-
quets. Grew's Muſæum.
2. A woodpecker. So it ſeems to be uſed here.
Terpſichore would be expreſſed, upon her head a coronet
of thoſe green feathers of the popinjay, in token of that vic-
tory which the muſes got of the daughters of Pierius, who
were turned into popinjoys or woodpeckers. Peacham.
3. A trifling fop. “
I, all ſmarting with my wounds, being gall’d
To be ſo peſter'd by a poºinjay,
Anſwer'd neglectingly, I know not what. Shakeſ?.
Po'Pish. adj. [from pope.) Taught by the pope; relating to
Popery ; peculiar to popery. -
In this ſenſe as they affirm, ſo we deny, that whatſoever is
pºpiſh we ought to abrogate. Hacker.
I know thou art religious,
With twenty pºpiſh tricks and ceremonies. Shakeſp.
Popishly. adv. [from pºpiſh..] With tendency to popery; in
a popiſh manner. -
She baffled the many attempts of her enemies, and entirely
broke the whole force of that party among her ſubjects, which
was popiſhly affected. - Addison's Freeholder.
A friend in Ireland, pºpiſhly ſpeaking, I believe conſtantly
well diſpoſed towards me. lus, Lat..] A Pope to Swift.
Po'PLA.R. m. ſ. [peuplier, Fr. popula, Lat. tree.
The º #. poplar . broad, and for the moſt part
angular : the male trees produce amentaceous flowers, which
have many little leaves and apices, but are barren : the female
trees produce membraneous pods, which open into two parts,
containing many ſeeds, which have a large quantity of down
adhering to them, and are collected into ſpikes. AMiller.
Po is drawn with the face of an ox, with a garland of
poplar upon his head. Peacham on Drawing.
All he deſcrib'd was preſent to their eyes, -
And as he rais'd his verſe, the poplars º to riſe. Roſe.
So falls a poplar, that in watry groun ºr
Rais'd high É head. Pope's Iliad.
Poppy. n.ſ. [popig, Sax, paftaver, Lat..] A plant.
The flower of the poppy, for the moſt part, conſiſts of four
leaves, placed orbicularly, and expanded in form of a roſe, out
of whoſe flower cup, conſiſting of two leaves, riſes the poin-
tal, which afterwards becomes a fruit or pod that is oval or
oblong, and adorned with a little head, under which, in ſome
ſpecies, is opened a ſeries of holes quite round into the cavity
of the fruit, which is defended lengthwiſe with various leaves
or plates, to which a great number of very ſmall ſeeds ad;
here : of theſe are eighteen ſpecies : ſome ſort is cultivated
for medicinal uſe ; and ſome ſuppoſe it to be the plant *::::
opium is produced. His
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O P
His temples laſt with poppies were o'erſpread,
That nodding ſeem'd to conſecrate his head. Dryden.
Dr. Liſter has been guilty of miſtake, in the reflections
he makes on what he calls the ſleeping Cupid with poppy in
his hands. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Populace. n.ſ. [populace, Fr. from populus, Lat.] The vul-
gar; the multitude.
Now ſwarms the populace, a countleſs throng,
Youth and hoar age tumultuous pour along. Pope.
The tribunes and people having ſubdued all competitors,
began the laſt game of a prevalent populace, to chuſe them-
ſelves a maſter. Swift.
Populacy. n.ſ. [populace, Fr.] The common people; the
multitude. - -
Under colours of piety ambitious policies march, not only
with ſecurity, but applauſe as to the populacy. King Charles.
When he thinks one monarch's luſt too mild a regiment, he
can let in the whole populacy of fin upon the ſoul. D. of Piety.
POPULAR. adj. [populaire, Fr. popularis, Lat.]
1. Vulgar; plebeian.
I was ſorry to hear with what partiality and popular heat
elections were carried in many places. King Charles.
The emmet join’d in her popular tribes
Of commonalty. Milton.
So the popular vote inclines. Milton.
2. Suitable to the common people.
Homilies are plain and popular inſtrućtions.
3. Beloved by the people; pleaſing to the people.
It might have been more fiftſ and plauſible to vulgar
ears, if this firſt diſcourſe had been ſpent in extolling the force
of laws. Hooker, b. i.
Hooker.
Such as were popular,
And well-deſerving, were advanc'd by grace. Daniel.
The old general was ſet aſide, and prince Rupert put into
the command, which was no popular change, Clarendon,
4. Studious of the favour of the people.
A popular man is, in truth, no better than a proſtitute to
common fame and to the people. Dryden.
- His virtues have undone his country;
Such popular humanity is treaſon. Addiſon's Cato.
5. Prevailing or raging among the populace: as, a popular di-
ſtemper.
Popula'RITY. m. ſ. [popularitas, Lat. popularité, Fr. from
popular.]
1. Graciouſneſs among the people; ſtate of being favoured by
the people.
The beſt temper of minds deſireth good name and true ho-
nour; the lighter, popularity and applauſe; the more de-
praved, ſubjection and tyranny. Bacon.
Your mind has been above the wretched affectation of
popularity. Dryden.
Admire we then,
Or popularity, or ſtars, or ſtrings,
The mob's applauſes, or the gifts of kings. Pope.
He could be at the head of no factions and caba's, nor at-
tended by a hired rabble, which his flatterers might repreſent
as popularity. ... * Swift.
2. Repreſentation ſuited to vulgar conception; what affects the
vulgar. -
The perſuader's labour is to make things appear good or
evil, which as it may be performed by ſolid reaſons, ſo it may
be repreſented alſo by colours, popularities and circumſtances,
which ſway the ordinary judgment. Bacon.
PopULARLY. adv. [from popular.]
1. In a popular manner ; ſo as to pleaſe the crowd.
The vićtor knight
Bareheaded, popularly low had bow’d,
And paid the ſalutations of the crowd. Dryden.
Influenc'd by the rabble's bloody will,
With thumbs bent back, they popularly kill. Dryden.
2. According to vulgar conception.
Nor can we excuſe the duty of our knowledge, if we only
beſtow thoſe commendatory conceits, which popularly ſet forth
the eminency thereof. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
To POPULATE. v. n. [from populus, people.] To breed people.
When there be great ſhoals of people, which go on to
populate, without foreſeeing means of life and ſuſtentation, it
is of neceſſity, that once in an age they diſcharge a portion
of their people upon other nations. Bacon's Eſſays.
Population. n.ſ.. [from populate.] The ſtate of a country
with reſpect to numbers of people.
The population of a kingdom, eſpecially if it be not mown
down by wars, does not exceed the ſtock of the kingdom,
which ſhould maintain them ; neither is the population to be
reckoned, only by number; for a ſmaller number, that ſpend
more and earn leſs, do wear out an eſtate ſooner than a
greater number, that live lower, and gather more. Bacon.
Populo'sity. n.ſ. [from populous.) Populouſneſs; multitude
of people.
How it conduceth unto populoſity, we ſhall make but little
doubt; there are two main cauſes of numeroſity in any ſpecies;
a frequent and multiparous way of breeding. Brown.
POPULOUS. ad; [populºſiº, Lat.] Full of people; nume-
rouſly inhabited.
A wilderneſs is pºpulous enough,
So Suffolk had thy heav'nly company.
Far the greater part have kept
Their ſtation; heav'n yet populous, retains
f Number ſufficient to poſſeſ; her realms. Mºon.
Populously. * [from populous.] With much people.
Populousness. * / [from pºpulous.] The ſtate of abound-
ing with people.
This will be allowed by any that confiders the vaſtneſs, the
opulence, the populouſneſs of this region, with the eaſe and
facility where with 'tis governed. Temple's Miſcellanies.
PokcelaiN. n.ſ. [porcelaine, Fr. ſaid to be derived from pour
cent annºë, becauſe it was believed by Europeans, that the
materials of porcelain was matured underground one hundred
years..] *
1. China; china ware; fine diſhes, of a middle nature between
earth and glaſs, and therefore ſemi-pellucid.
We have burials in ſeveral earths, where we put divers ce-
ments, as the Chineſe do their porcelain. Bacon.
We are not thoroughly reſolved concerning porcelain or
china diſhes ; that according to common belief, they are made
of earth, which lieth in preparation about a hundred years
under ground. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
The fine materials made it weak;
Skakeſp.
Porcelain, by being pure, is apt to break. Dryden.
Theſe look like the workmanſhip of heav'n :
This is the porcelain clay of human kind,
And therefore caſt into theſe noble molds. Dryden.
2. [Portulaca, Lat.] An herb. Ainſworth.
Porch. m. ſ. [porche, Fr. porticus, Lat.]
I. A roof ſupported by pillars before a door; an entrance.
Ehud went forth through the porch, and ſhut the doors of
the parlour. judges iii. 23.
Not infants in the porch of life were free,
The ſick, the old, that could but hope a day
Longer by nature's bounty, not let ſtay.
2. A portico; a covered walk.
All this done,
Repair to Pompey's porch, where you ſhall find us. Shakespeare.
Porcupin E. m. ſ. ſpore ſpi or epic, Fr. porcoſpino, Italian.]
The porcupine, when full grown, is as large as a moderate
pig : the quills, with which its whole body is covered, are
black on the ſhoulders, thighs, ſides and belly; on the back,
hips and loins they are variegated with white and pale brown:
the neck is ſhort and thick, the noſe blunt, the noſtrils ve
large in form of ſlits; the upper lip is ſlit or cleft as in the
hare, and it has whiſkers like a cat: the eyes are ſmall, and
the ears very like thoſe of the human ſpecies: the legs are
ſhort, and on the hinder feet are five toes, but only four upon
the fore feet, and its tail is four or five inches long, beſet
with ſpines in an annular ſeries round it : there is no other
difference between the porcupine of Malacca and that of Eu-
rope, but that the former grows to a larger ſize. Hill.
This ſtubborn Cade
Fought ſo long, till that his thighs with darts
Were almoſt like a ſharp-quill'd porcupine.
Long bearded comets ſtick
Like flaming porcupines to their left ſides,
As they would ſhoot their quills into their hearts. Dryden.
By the black prince of Monomotapa's fide were the glar-
ing cat-a-mountain and the quill-darting porcupine. Ar. and Po.
PORE. m. ſ. ſpore, Fr. roe GP.]
I. Spiracle of the ſkin; paſſage of perſpiration.
Witches, carrying in the air, and transforming themſelves
into other bodies, by ointments and anointing themſelves all
over, may juſtly move a man to think, that theſe fables are
the effects of imagination; for it is certain, that ointments
do all, if laid on any thing thick, by ſtopping of the pores,
ſhut in the vapours, and ſend them to the head extremely. Bac.
Why was the fight
To ſuch a tender ball as th’ eye confin'd?
So obvious and ſo eaſy to be quench'd,
And not, as feeling through all parts diffus'd, -
That ſhe might look at will through every pore. Milton.
2. Any narrow ſpiracle or paſſage.
Pores are ſmall interſtices between the particles of matter
which conſtitute every body, or between certain aggregates
or combinations of them. &amp;uincy.
From veins of vallies milk and nečiar broke,
And honey ſweating through the pores of oak. Dryden.
To Po RE. v. n. [TºGP is the opticº herº; but I imagine pore
to COne by corruption from ſome Engliſh word.] To look
with great intenſeneſs and care; to examine with great at-
tention. -
All delights are vain ; but that moſt vain,
Which with pain purchas'd, doth inherit pain;
As painfully to pore upon a boºk, -
To ſeek the light of truth, while truth the while
Doth falſely blind the eyeſight,
Benj. johnſºn.
Shakeſpeare.
Sha (eſp.
2c B A book<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O R
P O R
A book was writ, called Tetrachordon, -
The ſubject new : it walk'd the town a while, --
Numb'ring good intellects h'. ſeldom tº: On. º:
rows weary, with poring perpetually on the lam
º eye g y poring Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
"Let him with pedants hunt for praiſe in books,
Pore out his life amongſt the lazy gownmen,
Grow old and vainly proud in fancy'd knowledge. Rºwe.
With ſharpen'd fight pale antiquaries pore,
Th’ inſcription value, but the ruſt adore. Pºpe.
He hath been poring ſo long upon Fox's Martyrs, that he
imagines himſelf living in the reign of queen Mary. Swift.
The deſign is to avoid the imputation of pedantry, to ſhew
that they underſtand men and manners, and have nº
poring upon old unfaſhionable books. - } º
PóREEliš d. adj. [commonly ſpoken and written fº blind.]
Nearfighted; ſhortfighted. - - - - -
Por:blind men ſee beſt in the dimmer light, and likewiſe
have their fight ſtronger near at hand, than thoſe that are not
poreblind, and can read and write ſmaller letters; for that the
ſpirits viſual in thoſe that are foreblind are thinner and rarer
than in others, and therefore the greater light diſperſeth
them. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Poºr in ess. n.ſ.. [from for).] Fullneſs of pores.
I took off the dreſſings, and ſet the trepan above the frac-
tured bone, conſidering the porineſs of the bone below. It iſºm.
Por 1stick method, n.ſ. (Toºrºos.] In mathematicks, is that
which determines when, by what means, and how many diffe-
rent ways a problem may be ſolved. - Lic?.
PORK. m.ſ. ſtore, Fr. porºus, Lat.] Swines fleſh unſalted. .
You are no good member of the commonwealth ; for, in
converting Jews to chriſtians, you raiſe the price of park.
Shakeſpeare's Mer hant of Penice.
All fleſh full of nouriſhment, as beef and pork, increaſe the
matter of phlegm. Floyer on the Humours.
Po RKER. m. ſ. [fºom fork.] A hog ; a pig.
Strait to the lodgments of his herd he run,
Where the fat porkers ſlept beneath the ſun. Pºpe.
Po'RKEATER. m. / [pork and eater.] One who feeds on pork.
This making of chriſtians will raiſe the price of hogs; if
we grow all to be porkeaters, we ſhall not ſhortly have a raſher
on the coals for money. Shakesp. Merch. of Penice.
Po RKET. [from pork.] A young hog.
A prieſt appears
And off rings to the flaming altars bears; {
A porket, and a lamb that never ſuffer'd ſhears. Drydºn.
Po'RKLING. m. ſ. [from pork.] A young pig.
Ove
Will ſerve thee in winter, moreover than that,
To ſhut up thy porklings, thou meaneſt to fat. Taffºr.
Porosity. n.ſ.. [from porous.]. Quality of having pores.
This is a good experiment for the diſcloſure of the nature
of colours; which of them require a finer poroſity, and which
a groſſer. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Porous: adj. [poreux, Fr. from pore.] Having ſmall ſpiraclés
or paſſages.
The rapid current, which through veins
Of porous earth with kindly thirſt updrawn,
Roſe a freſh fountain, and with many a rill
Water'd the garden. AMilton's Par. Lºft, b. iv.
Qf light the greater part he took, and plac'd
In the ſun's orb, made porous to receive
And drink the liquid light; firm to retain
Her gather'd beams; great palace now of light. Milton.
Po'Rousness. n. ſ. [from porºus.] The quality of having
pores.
They will forcibly get into the foratifieſ of it, and paſs
between part and part, and ſeparate thé parts of that thing
one from another ; as a knife doth a ſolid ſubſtance, by hav-
ing its thinneſt parts preſſed into it. Digby on Bodies.
Po RPHYRE. }" f: [from Tºpſ;z ; porphyrites, Lat. porphyre,
Po'RPHYRY. S. Fr.] Marble of a particular kind, -
I like beſt the porphyry, white or green marble, with a
mullar or upper ſtone of the ſame. ‘...." on Drawing.
Conſider the red and white colours in porphyre; hinder ift
but from ſtriking on it, its colours vaniſh, and produce no
ſuch ideas in us; but upon the return of light, it produces
theſe appearances again. Locke.
Po'RPoise.
Po'RPUs. {n-ſ ſpore poiſºn, Fr.] The ſea-hog.
Amphibious animals link the terreſtrial and aquatick to-
gether; ſeals live at land and at ſea, and porpoiſes have the
Warm blood and entrails of a hog, Locke.
Parch'd with unextinguiſh'd thirſt,
Small beer I guzzle till I burſt;
And then I drag a bloated corpus
P Swell'd with a dropſy like a porpus. Swift.
º º “...[fºr accus, Lat. porrace, Fr. Greeniſh.
with º º: be wounded, he will be troubled
1ng. 2: • ºr
Po'RRET. n. / [porrum, Lat] A ſcallion. t iſeman's Surgery.
It is not an eaſy problem to reſolve why garlick, molys
2
and farrets have white roots, deep green leaves and black
ſeeds. * - Brown's /mlgar Errºrs,
Po'RR IDG E. n.ſ. (more properly forrage; porrata, low Latin,
from pºrrun, a leek.J Food made by boiling meat in
water; broth. º
I had as licf you ſhould fell me of a meſs of fºrriºr. Sº,
Po'RR IDG Epot. m. ſ. [foridge and pot.] The pot in which
meat is boiled for a family.
Po'RRING ER. m. ſ. [from porridge.]
1. A veſſel in which broth is eaten.
A ſmall wax candle put in a ſocket of braſs, then ſt up-
right in a porringer full of ſpirit of wine, then ſet both tie
candle and firit of wine on fire, and you ſhall ſee the flame
of the candle become four times bigger than otherwiſe, and
appear globular. Bacon's Nat. Hi/.
A phyſician undertakes a woman with fore “yes, who
dawbs 'em quite up with ointment, and, while ſhe was in
that pickle, carries off a porringer. L'E/ºrange.
The porringers, that in a row &lt;&gt;
Hung high, and made a glitt'ring ſhow,
Were now but leathern buckets rang'd. Swift.
2. It ſeems in Shakeſpeare's time to have been a word of con.
tempt for a headdreſs; of which perhaps the firſt of theſe
paſſages may ſhow the reaſon.
Here is the cap your worſhip did beſpeak.
—Why this was moulded on a porringer. Shakespeare.
A haberdaſher's wife of ſmall wit rail'd upon me, till her
pink'd porringer fell off her head. Shakespeare . Henry VIII.
Pork Eſcºrios. m. ſ. ſpºrrectio, Latin.] The act of reachin
forth.
Por T. n.ſ. ſport, Fr. fºrtus, Latin.]
1. A harbour ; a ſafe ſtation for ſhips.
Her ſmall gondelay her fort did make,
And that gay pair iſiuing on the ſhore,
Diſburden'd her. *
I ſhould be ſtill
Peering in maps for ports, and ways and roads. Shakespeare.
The earl of Newcaſtle ſeized upon that town; when thºre
was not one fort town in England, that avowed their obe-
dience to the king. Clarendºn, b. viii.
A weather beaten veſſel holds
Gladly the port. Miltºn.
2. [Porta, Lat. poºre, Sax. pºrte, Fr.] A gate.
Shew all thy praiſes within the ports of the daughter of
Sion. Pſalm ix. 14.
Deſcend, and open your uncharged ports. Shakesp.
He I accuſe,
The city forts by this hath entered. Shaft. Coriºlanus.
O poliſh'd perturbation golden care
That keep'ſt the ports of ſlumber open wide
To many a watchful night; ſleep with it now !
Yet not ſo ſound, and half ſo deeply ſweet,
As he, whoſe brow with homely biggen bound,
Snores out the watch of night. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
The mind of man hath two ports ; the one always fre-
quented by the entrance of manifold vanities; the other de-
ſolate and overgrown with graſs, by which enter our chari-
ºr
~
Fairy Queen, b. ii.
table thoughts and divine contemplations. Raleigh.
From their ivory port the cherubim
Forth iſſu’d. Milton.
3. The aperture in a ſhip, at which the gun is put out.
At Portſmouth the Mary Roſe, by a little ſway of the
ſhip in caiting about, her ports being within fixteen inches of
the water, was overſet and loſt. Raleigh.
The linſtocks touch, the pond’rous ball expires,
The vigºrous ſeaman every port hole plies,
And adds his heart to every gun he fires. Dryden.
4. [Porte, Fr.] Carriage ; air; mien ; manner; bearing;
external appearance ; demeanour.
In that proud port, which her ſo goodly graceth,
Whiles her fair face ſhe rears up to the ſky,
And to the ground her eyelids low embraceth,
Moſt goodly temperature ye may deſcry. Spenſºr.
Think you much to pay two thouſand crowns,
And bear the name and port of gentleman Shakesp.
See Godfrey there in purple clad and gold, -
His ſtately port and princely look behold. Fairfax.
Their port was more than human, as they ſtood;
I took it for a fairy viſion
Of ſome gay creatures of the element,
That in the colours of the rainbow live. / Miltºn.
A proud man is ſo far from making himſelf great by his
haughty.and contemptuous port, that he is uſually puniſhed
with neglect for it. Collier on Priaz.
Now lay the line, and meaſure all thy court,
By inward virtue, not external fort ;
And find whom juſtly to prefer above
The man on whom my judgment plac'd my love. Dryden.
Thy plumy creſt
Nods horrible, with noré terrific port - - -
Thou walk'it, and ſecm'ſ already in the fight. Phi f : .
To Po Ri".
!.
f
?:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O R
P O R.
To Poa r. v. a ſpºrto, Lat. pºrter, Fr.] To carry in form.
Th' angelick ſquadron bright
Turn'd fiery red, ſharpning in mooned horns
Their phalanx, and began to hem him round
With ported ſpears. Milton's Par. Lºſ", b. iv.
Po'RTABLE. adj. [fortabilis, Lat.]
1. Manageable by the hand.
2. Such as may be born along with one.
The pleaſure of the religious man is an eaſy and portable
pleaſure, ſuch an one as he carries about in his boſom, with-
out alarming the eye or envy of the world. South.
Such as is tranſported or carried from one place to another.
Moſt other portable commodities decay quickly in their uſe;
but money is by ſlower degrees removed from, or brought into
the free commerce of any country, than the greateſt part of
other merchandize. Locke.
4. Sufferable ; ſupportable.
How light and portable my pains ſeem now, -
When that which makes me bend, makes the king bow.
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
All theſe are *
With other graces weigh’d. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Po RTABLE N Ess. m. ſ. [from portable.] The quality of being
portable.
Po RTAGE. m. ſ. [portage, Fr.]
1. The price of carriage.
2. [From port.] Porthole.
Lend the eye a terrible aſpect;
Let it pry through the portage of the head,
Like the braſs cannon. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Po'RTAL. m. ſ. ſportail, Fr. po tella, Italian.] A gate ; the
arch under which the gate opens.
King Richard d9th appear,
As doth the bluſhing diſcontented ſun,
From out the fiery portal of the eaſt.
Though I ſhould run
To thoſe diſcloſing portals of the ſun;
And walk his way, until his horſes ſteep
Their fiery locks in the Iberian deep. Sandys.
He through heav'n
That open'd wide her blazing portals, led
To God's eternal houſe direct the way. Milton.
The ſick for air before the portal gaſp. Dryden.
The portal conſiſts of a compoſite order unknown to the
ancients. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
Po'RTANCE. m. ſ. [from porter, Fr.] Air ; mien ; port; de-
incan Our.
There ſtepped forth a goodly lady,
That ſeem'd to be a woman of great worth,
And by her ſtately portance born of heav'nly birth. F. Qu.
Your loves,
Thinking upon his ſervices, took from you
The apprehenſion of his preſent portance,
Which gibingly, ungravely, he did faſhion. Shakeſp.
PoRTA'ss. m.ſ. [ſometimes called portuis, and by Chaucer port-
hºſe..] A breviary ; a prayer book.
In his hand his porteſe ſtill he bare,
That much was worn, but therein little red;
For of devotion he had little care. Fairy Queen.
An old prieſt always read in his portaſ, mumpſimus domine
for ſumpſimus; whereof when he was admoniſhed, he ſaid that
he now had uſed mumpſimus thirty years, and would not leave
his old mumpſimus for their new ſumpſimus. Camden.
Portcu'llis. n. ſ. ſportecouliffe, Fr. quaſi porta clauſa.] A
Po'RTCLUs E. } ſort of machine like a harrow, hung over the
gates of a city, to be let down to keep out an enemy.
Over it a fair portcullis hong,
Which to the gate directly did incline,
With comely compaſs and compačture ſtrong,
Neither unſeemly ſhort, nor yet exceeding long. F. Qu.
The cannon againſt St. Stephen's gate executed ſo well,
that the portcullis and gate were broken, and entry opened
Shakeſp. Rich. II.
into the city. Hayward.
She the huge portcullis high up drew,
Which but herſelf, not all the Stygian pow'rs
Cou'd once have mov’d. Milton.
Pyrrhus comes, neither men nor walls
His force ſuſtain, the torn portcullis falls. Denham.
The upper eyelid claps down, and is as good a fence as a
portculli, againſt the importunity of the enemy. AMore.
The gates are opened, the portcullis drawn ;
And deluges of armies from the town
Cone pouring in. Dryden.
To Po RT cullis. v. a. [from the noun..] To bar; to ſhut
up.
Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,
Doubly portullis'd with my teeth and lips. Shakeſp.
o'RTFD. adj. [porter, Fr.] Borne in a certain or regular
order.
They hem him round with ported ſpears. A Milton.
To PORTEND. v. a. [portendº, Lat...] To foretoken; to
forcſhow as omens.
As many as remained, he earneſtly exhorteth to prevent
pºrtended calamities. . . Hºoker.
i oth this churiiſh ſuperſcription
*** ſome alteration in goºd will Shakeſp.
A moiſt and a cool ſummer portendeth a hard winter. Bacon.
True opener of mine eyes,
Much better ſeems this viſion, and more ho
Of peaceful days fortends, than thoſe two paſt. Milton.
True poets are the guardians of a ſtate,
And when they fail, portend approaching fate. Roſcommon.
The ruin of the ſtate in the deſtruction of the church, is
not only P** as its ſign, but alſo inferred from it as its
Ca uſe. South's Sermons.
Port E. Nsion. n.f. [from portend J The act of foretokening.
Although the red comets do carry the portenſions of Mars,
the brightly white ſhould be of the influence of Venus B.º.
PORTENT. m. ſ. ſportentum, Lat..] Omen of ill; prodigy
foretokening miſery.
O, what portents are theſe ?
Some heavy buſineſs hath my lord in hand,
And I muſt know it. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
- My loſs by dire portents the god foretold ;
Yon riven oak, the faireſt of the green. Dryden.
Poště Nºrous adj. ſportentºſas, Lat. from portent.] Mon-
ſtrous; prodigious; foretokening ill.
They are portentous things -
Unto the climate, that they point at. Shakeſp.
This portentous figure
Cºmes armed through our watch ſo like the king
That was. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Overlay
With this portentous bridge the dark abyſs. Milton.
No beaſt of more portentous ſize
In the Hercinian foreſt lies. Roſcommon.
Let us look upon them as ſo many prodigious exceptions
from our common nature, as ſo many portentous animals, like
the ſtrange unnatural productions of Africa. South.
Every unwonted meteor is portentous, and ſome divine
prognoſtick. Glanvil.
The petticoat will ſhrink at your firſt coming to town; at
leaſt a touch of your pen will make it contract itſelf, and by
that means oblige ſeveral who are terrified or aſtoniſhed at this
portentous novelty. Addiſon's Speciator, N° 127.
PORTER. n. ſ. ſportier, Fr. from porta, Lat. a gate.]
1. One that has the charge of the gate.
Porter, remember what I give in charge,
And, when you've ſo done, bring the keys to me. Shakeſp.
Arm all my houſhold preſently, and charge
The porter he let no man in till day. Benj. johnſºn.
Nic. Frog demanded to be his pºrter, and his fiſhmonger,
to keep the keys of his gates, and furniſh the kitchen. Arb.
2. One who waits at the door to receive meſſages.
A fav'rite porter with his maſter vie,
Be brib'd as often, and as often lie. Pope.
3. [Porteur, Fr. from porto, Lat. to carry..] One who carries
burthens for hire.
It is with kings ſometimes as with porters, whoſe packs
may joſtle one againſt the other, yet remain good friends
ſtill. Howel.
By porter, who can tell, whether I mean a man who bears
burthens, or a ſervant who waits at a gate JWatts.
Po'RTERAGE. n.ſ.. [from porter..] Money paid for carriage.
Po'RTEsse. m. ſ. A breviary. See Port Ass.
Po'RTGLAve. n.ſ. [porter and glaive, Fr. and Erſe.] A ſword
bearer. Ainſworth.
Po'RT G R A v E. }*{ ſporta, Lat. and grave, Teut. a keeper.]
Po'RT GREVE. The keeper of a gate. Obſolete.
Po's Tico. m. ſ. ſporticus, Lat. portico, Italian ; portique, Fr.]
A covered walk; a piazza.
The rich their wealth beſtow
On ſome expenſive airy portio;
Where ſafe from ſhowers they may be born in ſtate,
And free from tempeſts for fair weather wait. Dryden.
PORTION. n.ſ. [portion, Fr. portio, Latin.]
I. A part. - -
Theſe are parts of his ways, but how little a portion is
heard of him job xxvi. 14.
Like favour find the Iriſh, with like fate
Advanc'd to be a portion of our ſtate. J/aller.
In battles won, fortune a part did claim,
And ſoldiers have their portion in the fame. Jſ/aller.
Thoſe great portions or fragments fell into the abyſs ; ſome
in one poſture, and ſome in another. Burnet.
Pirithous no ſmall portion of the war
Preſs'd on, and ſhook his lance. . . Dryden.
2. A part aſſigned ; an allotment ; * dividend. -
Here their prisºn ordain’d and portion ſet. Miltºn.
Shou'd you no honey vow to taſte,
But what the maſter-bces have plac'd
In compaſs of their cells, how ſmall
A portiºn to your ſhare would fall? JWaller.
Of<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O R
P O S
!
- - l
; they ſeldom know more than the grammatica
..º. ‘... they º with a poetical Å.
- - - ortion amon - ...
wºº *º gº : to make a part of their portion
of hº they begin to deſire it. - Locke.
When he conſiders the manifold temptations of poverty
and riches, and how fatally it will affect his happineſs to be
overcome by them, he will pº . º in º
ortion of a moderate convenience.
God for the ſafer p Rogers.
One or two faults are eaſily to be remedied with a very
ſmall portion of abilities. - - Swift.
3. Part of an inheritance given to a child; a fortune.
Leave to thy children tumult, ſtrife and war,
Portions of toil, and legacies of care.
4. A wife's fortune.
To Po'RTIon. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To divide; to parcel. -
The gods who portion out
The lots of princes as of private men,
Have put a bar between his hopes and empire.
Argos the ſeat of ſovereign rule I choſe,
where my Ulyſſes and his race might reign,
And portion to his tribes the wide domain.
2. To endow with a fortune. -
Him portion'd maids, apprentic'd orphans bleſt,
The young who labour, and the old who reſt.
Portioner. n.ſ. (from portiºn.] One that divides.
Portliness. n.ſ.. [from portly..] Dignity of mien ; grandeur
of demeanour. - *- -
Such pride is praiſe, ſuch partlineſ is honour,
That boldneſs innocence bears in her eyes;
And her fair countenance like a goodly banner
Spreads in defiance of all enemies. Spenſºr.
When ſubſtantialneſs combineth with delightfulneſs, ful-
neſs with fineneſs, ſeemlineſs with portlineſs, and currantneſs
with ſtayedneſs, how can the language ſound other than moſt
full of ſweetneſs? Camden's Remains.
Po'RTLY. adj. [from port.]
1. Grand of mien.
Rudely thou wrong'ſt my dear heart's deſire,
In finding fault with her too portly pride.
Your Argoſies with portly ſail,
Like ſigniors and rich burghers on the flood,
Or as it were the pageants of the ſea,
Do overpeer the petty traffickers.
A partly prince, and goodly to the fight,
He ſeem'd a ſon of Anak for his height.
2. Bulky; ſwelling.
A goodly, portly man and a corpulent; of a chearful look,
a pleaſing eye, and a moſt noble carriage. Shakeſp.
Our houſe little deſerves
The ſcourge of greatneſs to be uſed on it;
And that ſame greatneſs too, which our own hands
Have help'd to make ſo portly. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Po'RTMAN. n.ſ. ſport and man.] An inhabitant or burgeſs,
as thoſe of the cinque ports. Dići.
PortMA'N Te Au. m. ſ. ſportemanteau. Fr.] A cheſt or bag in
which cloaths are carried.
I deſired him to carry one of my portmanteaus; but he
laughed, and bid another do it. - a - Spectator.
Po'Rtoise. n. ſ. In ſea language, a ſhip is ſaid to ride a por-
tºiſe, when ſhe rides with her yards ſtruck down to the
deck. Dić7.
Po RTRAIT. n: ſ [pourtrait, Fr.] A pićture drawn after the
life.
As this idea of perfeótion is of little uſe in portraits, or the
reſemblances of particular perſons, ſo neither is it in the cha-
raćters of comedy and tragedy, which are always to be drawn
with ſome ſpecks of frailty, ſuch as they have been deſcribed
in hiſtory. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The figure of his body was ſtrong, proportionable, beau-
tiful; and were his picture well drawn, it muſt deſerve the
Praiſe given to the portraits of Raphael. Prior.
To Po RTRAIt. v. 4. [portraire, Fr. from the noun..] To
draw; to portray. It is perhaps ill copied, and ſhould be
written in the following examples portray. -
In moſt exquiſite pictures, they blaze and portrait not only
the dainty lineaments or beauty, but alſo round about ſhadow
the rude thickets and craggy cliffs. Spenſer.
| Portrait in Arthur before he was king, the image of a
brave knight, perfected in the twelve private moral §.
penſer.
Po'RTRAITU RE. m. ſ. [portraiture, Fr. from portray.] Picture;
Painted reſemblance.
the image of my cauſe I ſee
º: of § * Shakeſp. Hamlet.
et ſome ſtrange myſterious dream,
Waye at his wº. in * ſtream
Of lively Portraiture diſplay'd,
Sºftly 9" my eye-lids laid.
Herein was alſo the Portraiture of a hart,
Priºr.
Rowe.
Pºpe.
Pope.
Spenſºr.
Shaiſp.
Dryden.
Milton.
Brown.
This is the portraiture of our earth, drawn without
flattery. Burmet's Theory ºf the Earth,
Her wry mouth'd portraiture
Diſplay'd the fates her confeſſors endure. Pope,
He délineates and gives us the portraiture of a perfect
orator. Baker’s Refteåions on Learning.
To PORTRAY. v. a. ſpourtraire, Fr.]
1. To paint ; to deſcribe by picture. -
The Earl of Warwick's ragged ſtaff is yet to be ſeen por-
trayed in many places of their church ſteeple. Carew.
Take a tilé, and ſo pºrtray upon it the city Jeruſalem. Ez.
Our Phenix quicen was portrayed too bright,
Beauty alone could beauty take ſo right. Dryden.
2. To adorn with pictures.
Shields
Various, with boaſtful argument portray'd. AMilton.
Po'RTRFss. n.ſ. (from porter J A female guardian of a gate.
Jamitrix.
The pºrtreſ of hell-gate reply'd. Milton's Par. Lºft.
The ſhoes put on, our faithful portreſ; -
Admits us in to ſtorm the ſortreſs ;
While like a cat with walnuts ſhod,
Stumbling at ev'ry ſtep ſhe trod. Swift's Mjøl.
Poºglºſ. A tadpole or young frog not yet fully ſhaped.
That black and round ſubſtance began to grow oval, after
a while the head, the eyes, the tail to be diſcernible, and at
laſt to become that which the ancients called gyrinus, we a
portvigle or tadpole. Brown's Wºlgar Errours.
Poky, ºff. [poreux, Fr. from pore.] Full of pores.
To the court arriv'd th’ admiring ſon
Beholds the vaulted roofs of pory ſtone. Dryden.
To POSE. v. a. (from pºſe, an old word ſignifying heavineſs
or ſtupefaction. zepoſe. Skinner.]
1. To puzzle; to gravel; to put to a ſtand or ſtop.
Learning was pos'd, philºſºphy was ſet,
Sophiſters taken in a fiſher's met. Herbert.
How God's eternal ſon ſhould be man's brother,
Pºſeth his proudeſt intellectual power. Craſhaw.
As an evidence of human infirmities, I ſhall give the fol-
lowing inſtances of our intellectual blindneſs, not that I de-
ſign to pºſ, them with thoſe common enigma's of magnetiſm.
Glanvill's Scºtſ.
Particularly in learning of languages, there is leaſt occaſiºn
for poſing of children. Locke on Education.
2. To appoſe; to interrogate.
She in the preſence of others pºſed him and fifted him,
thereby to try whether he were indeed the very duke of York
Or no. Bacon's Henry VII.
Po's ER. m. ſ. [from poſ...] One that aſketh queſtions to try
Capacities ; an examiner.
He that queſtioneth much, ſhall learn much ; but let his
queſtions not be troubleſome, for that is fit for a poſer. Bacon.
Posi TED. adj. [pºſtus, Lat. It has the appearance of a parti-
ciple preter, but it has no verb.] Placed ; ranged.
That the principle that ſets on work theſe organs is nothing
elſe but the modification of matter, or the natural motion
thereof thus, or thus pºſited or diſpoſed, is moſt apparently
falſe. - Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Position, n. ſ. [pºſition, Fr. pºſitio, Latin.]
I. State of being placed; ſituation.
Iron having ſtood long in a window, being thence taken,
and by the help of a cork balanced in water, where it may
have a free mobility, will bewray a kind of inquietude till it
attain the former pºſition. J/atton.
They are the happieſt regions for fruits, by the excellence
of ſoil, the poſition of mountains, and the frequency of
ſtreams. Temple.
Since no one ſees all, and we have different proſpects of
the ſame thing, according to our different poſition; to it, it is
not incongruous to try whether another may not have notions
that eſcaped him. Locke.
By varying the poſition of my eye, and moving it nearer to
or farther from the direct beam of the ſun's light, the colour
of the ſun's reflected light conſtantly varied upon the ſpeculum
as it did upon my eye. Newton's Opticks.
We have a different proſpect of the ſame thing, according
to the different poſition of our underſtandings toward it. Iſatº.
Place ourſelves in ſuch a pºſition toward the object, or place
the object in ſuch a poſition toward our eye, as may give us
the cleareſt repreſentation of it; for a different pºſition greatly
alters the appearance of bodies. //atts's Logică.
2. Principle laid down. - -
Of any offence or fin therein committed againſt God, with
what conſcience can ye accuſe us, when your own poſitions
are, that the things we obſerve ſhould every one of them be
dearer unto us than ten thouſand lives. Hooker.
Let not the proof of any poſitions depend on the poſitiºns
that follow, but always on thoſe which go before. //atts.
3. Advancement of any principle.
A fallacious illation is to conclude from the pºſition of the
antecedent unto the poſition of the conſequent, or the remo-
tion of the conſequent to the remotion of the anteceden. ...
4. [In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P os
P O S
4. [In grammar.] The ſtate of a vowel placed before two
conſonants, as pºmpºus; or a double conſonant, as āxle.
Position A L. adj. [from foſition.] Reſpecting poſition.
* The leaves of cataputia or ſpurge plucked upwards or
downwards, performing their operations by purge or vomit;
as old wives ſtill do preach, is a ſtrange conceit, aſcribing unto
lants poſitional operations. Brown's Wulgar krrours.
PÖSITIVE. adj. (pºſitivus, Lat. pºſtiſ, Fr.]
1. Not negative ; capable of being affirmed; real; abſolute.
The power or bloſſom is a poſitive good, although the re-
move of it, to give place to the fruit, be a comparative
ood. Bacon.
Hardneſs carries ſomewhat more of poſitive in it than in-
enetrability, which is negative; and is perhaps more a con-
jejuence of ſolidity, than ſolidity itſelf. - Locke.
Whatſoever doth or can exiſt, or be conſidered as one
thing, is pºſitive; and ſo not only ſimple ideas and ſubſtances,
but modes alſo are poſitive beings, though the parts, of which
they conſiſt, are very often relative one to another. Locke.
2. Abſolute; particular ; direct; not implied.
As for poſitive words, that he would not bear arms againſt
king Edward's ſon ; though the words ſeem calm, yet it was
a plain and direct over-ruling of the king's title. Bacon.
Ijogmatical ; ready to lay down notions with confidence;
ſtubborn in opinion.
I am ſometimes doubting, when I might be pºſitive, and
ſometimes confident out of ſeaſon. Rymer.
Some poſitive perſiſting fops we know,
That, if once wrong, will needs be always ſo;
But you, with pleaſure own your errors paſt,
And make each day a critick on the laſt. Pope.
4. Settled by arbitrary appointment.
In laws, that which is natural, bindeth univerſally, that
which is pºſitive, not ſo. Hooker.
Although no laws but pºſitive be mutable, yet all are not
rºutable which be pºſitive ; poſitive laws are either permanent
or cle changeable, according as the matter itſelf is, concern-
is, which they were made. Hooker.
c - ſº • •
Laws are but poſitive; love's pow'r we ſee,
Is nature's ſančtion, and her firſt decree. Dryden.
5. Having the power to enact any law.
Not to conſert to the enacting of ſuch a law, which has
no view beſides the general good, unleſs another law ſhall
at the ſame time paſs, with no other view but that of ad-
vancing the power of one party alone; what is this but to
claim a pºſitive voice, as well as a negative. Swift.
6. Certain; aſſured. - Ainſworth.
Positively. adv. [from poſitive.]
1. Abſolutely; by way of direét poſition.
Give me ſome breath, ſome little pauſe,
Before I pºſitively ſpeak in this. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
The good or evil, which is removed, may be eſteemed
good or evil comparatively, and not poſitively or ſimply. Bacon.
2. Not negatively.
It is impoſſible that any ſucceſſive duration ſhould be ac-
tually and poſitively infinite, or have infinite ſucceſſions already
gone and paſt. Bently’s Sermons.
3. Certainly ; without dubitation.
It was abſolutely certain, that this part was poſitively yours,
and could not poſſibly be written by any other. Dryden.
4. Peremptorily; in ſtrong terms.
I would aſk any man, that has but once read the bible,
whether the whole tenor of the divine law does not poſitively
require humility and meekneſs to all men. Sprat.
Po's rives Ess. n.ſ.. [from poſitive.]
i. Actualneſs; not mere negation.
The pºſitivenſ of fins of commiſſion lies both in the habi-
tude of the will and in the executed ačt too; whereas the po-
fitizenſ of fins of omiſſion is in the habitude of the will
only. - Norris.
2. Peremptorineſs; confidence.
This peremptorineſs is of two ſorts; the one a magiſterial-
neſs in matters of opinion and ſpeculation, the other a poſſ-
tiveneſs in relating matters of fact; in the one we impoſe
upon men's underſtandings, in the other on their faith.
Government of the Tongue.
Positi'vity. n.ſ. [from poſitive..] Peremptorineſs; confi-
dence. A low word.
Courage and poſitivity are never more neceſſary than on
ſuch an occaſion; but it is good to join ſome argument with
them of real and convincing force, and let it be ſtrongly pro-
nounced too. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
Po §ITURE. m. ſ. [poſtura, Lat..] The manner in which any
thing is placed.
Suppoſing the poſture of the party's hand who did throw
the dice, and ſuppoſing all other things, which did concur to
the produćtion of that caſt, to be the very ſame they were,
there is no doubt but in this caſe the caſt is neceſſary. Bramh.
PosNet. n. ſ. [from baſinet, Fr. Skinner.] A little baſon;
a porringer ; a ſkillet.
To Inake proof of the incorporation of filver and tin in
equal quantity, and alſo whether it yield no ſoilineſs more
than ſilver; and again whether it will endure the ordinary
fire, which belongeth to chaffing-diſhes, pºſnets and ſuch
other ſilver veſſels. Bacon,
POSSE. n ſ. [Latin.] An armed power; from poſſe comi-
tatuſ, the Power of the ſhires. A low word.
The poſſe comitatus, the power of the whole county, is
legally committed unto him. Bacon.
• As if the Pathºn that rules, were the ſheriff of the place,
and came with all the pºſſe, the underſtanding is ſeized. Locke.
To POSSESS. v. a. ſpºſºſis, Lat. poſſeder, Fr.]
1. To have as an owner; to be maſter of ; to enjoy or occupy
actually.
She will not let inſtrućtions enter
Where folly now poſſes 2 Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Record a gift,
Here in the court, of all he dies pºſſy;’d,
Unto his ſon. - Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
Sundry more gentlemen this little hundred pºſſ ºth and
poſſeſſioneth. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
2. To ſeize ; to obtain.
The Engliſh marched towards the river Eſke, intending to
paſſeſ; a hill called Under-Eſke. Hayward.
3. To give poſſeſſion or command of any thing; to make
maſter of. It has of before that which is poſieſſed; ſome-
times anciently with.
Is he yet pºſſ?,
How much you would
—Ay, ay, three thouſand ducats. Shakespeare .
This man, whom hand to hand I flew in fight,
May be poffſed with ſome ſtore of crowns. Shakeſp.
This pºſſes us of the moſt valuable bleſſing of human
life, friendſhip. Government of the Tongue.
Seem I to thee ſufficiently pºſſ'd
Of happineſs or not, who am alone
From all eternity? Milton's Par. Lºft, b. viii.
I hope to pºſſ, chymiſts and corpuſcularians of the ad-
vantages to each party, by confederacy between them. Boyle.
The intent of this fable is to poſſ; us of a juſt ſenſe of
the vanity of theſe craving appetites. L’Eſtrange.
Whole houſes, of their whole deſires pºſºft,
Are often ruin’d at their own requeſt. Dryden.
Of fortune's favour long pºſſ'd,
He was with one fair daughter only bleſs'd. Dryden.
We paſſed ourſelves of the kingdom of Naples, the dutchy
of Milan and the avenue of France in Italy. Addiſon.
Endowed with the greateſt perfections of nature, and
poſſed of all the advantages of external condition, Solomon
could not find happineſs. Prior.
4. To fill with ſomething fixed.
It is of unſpeakable advantage to poſtſ our minds with an
habitual good intention, and to aim all our thoughts, words
and actions at ſome laudable end. Addiſon.
Thoſe, under the great officers, know every little caſe that
is before the great man, and if they are pºſſed with honeſt
minds, will conſider poverty as a recommendation. Addison
5. To have power over, as an unclean ſpirit.
Beware what ſpirit rages in your breaſt;
For ten inſpir'd, ten thouſand are poſſeſ?. Roſcommon.
Inſpir'd within, and yet paſſeſs'd without. Cleaveland.
I think, that the man is paſſed. Swift.
6. To affect by inteſtine power.
He's poſſeſ? with greatneſs,
And ſpeaks not to himſelf, but with a pride
That quarrels at ſelf-breath. Shakespeare . Trail, and Creſ.
Let not your ears deſpiſe my tongue,
Which ſhall poſſ; them with the heavieſt ſound
That ever yet they heard. Shakeſp.
Poſºft with rumours full of idle dreams,
Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear. Shakespeare
What fury, O ſon, -
Poſſeſſes thee, to bend that mortal dart
Againſt thy father's head Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ii.
With the rage of all their race pºſºft,
Stung to the ſoul the brothers ſtart from reſt. Pope.
PossE'ssion. m. ſ. [poſſeſſion, Fr. poſſio, Lat.]
1. The ſtate of owning or having in one's own hands or power;
property. - -
He ſhall inherit her, and his generation ſhall hold her in
peſſion. Eccluſ, iv. 16.
In paſſion ſuch, not only of right, -
I call you. Milton.
2. The thing poſſeſſed. -
Do nothing to loſe the beſt paſſion of life, that of honour
and truth. - - Temple.
A man has no right over another's life, by his having a
property in land and paſſiſſiºns. Locke.
Tô Pössission. v. a. To inveſt with property. Obſolete.
Sundry more gentlemen this little hundred poſſeſſeth and
fºſſeſſioneth. Carew.
Possession ER. m. ſ. [from paſſion.] Maſter; one that has
the power or property of any thing.
They were people, whom having been of old frcemen and
pºſſ.ſioners, the Laccdemonians had conquered. Sidney.
20 C Po'ss Essive.
– um v_i<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O S
P O S
º, Lat.] Having poſſeſſion:
pjº. ºff, ſºire, Fr. from pºſt/?..] Having poſſeſſion.
This he detains from the ivy much againſt his will; for
he ſhould be the true pºſ/ºry.lord thereof. Hºwel.
Poºr'ssou R. m. ſ. [pajºr, Lat. pºſſ ſºur, Fr.] Owner ;
: Droprict Oſ.
maſter; prop Thou profoundeſt hell -
Receive thy new pºſſeſſºr. Milton.
A conſiderable difference lies between the honour of men
for natural and acquired excellencies and divine graces, that
thoſe having more of human nature in them, the honour doth
more directly redound to the foſſeſſor of them. Stilling fleet.
'Twas the intereſt of thoſe, who thirſted after the pºſſeſ.
º fions of the clergy, to repreſent the poſſeſſºrs in as vile colours
as they could. Atterbury's Sermons.
º f Po'sset. n.ſ. [pºſta, Lat.] Milk curdled with wine or any
acid.
We'll have a pºſt at the latter end of a ſeacoal fire. Shakespeare
In came the bridemaids with the pºſſet, -
- The bridegroom eat in ſpight. Suckling.
I allowed him medicated broths, fººt. ale and pearl
| julep. Jºſeman's Surgery.
A ſparing diet did her health aſſure;
Or fick, a pepper pºſſet was her cure. Dryden.
The cure of the ſtone conſiſts in vomiting with poſſet drink,
in which althea roots are boiled. Floyer on the Humours.
Increaſe the milk when it is diminiſhed by the too great uſe
of fleſh meats, by gruels and pºſſet drink. rbuthnot.
To Po'sset. v. a. [from the noun...] To turn; to curdle:
as milk with acids. Not uſed.
Swift as quickſilver it courſes through
The nat'ral gates and allies of the body;
Possessive. adj. [Pºſºft"
And, with a ſudden vigour, it doth poſſet
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholeſome blood. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Possibility. n.ſ. [pºſſiblilité, Fr.] The power of being in
any manner; the ſtate of being poſſible.
There is no let, but that as often as thoſe books are read,
and need ſo requireth, the ſtile of their differences may ex-
preſly be mentioned to bar even all poſſibility of error. Hooker.
Brother, ſpeak with poſſibilities,
And do not break into theſe woeful extremes. Shakeſp.
Conſider him antecedently to his creation, while he yet
lay in the barren womb of nothing, and only in the number
| of pºſſibilitieſ ; and conſequently could have nothing to re-
commend him to Chriſt's affection. South's Sermons.
- A bare pºſſibility, that a thing may be or not be, is no juſt
cauſe of doubting whether a thing be or not. Tillotſon.
According to the multifariouſneſs of this imitability, ſo are
the poſſibilities of being. Norris.
Example not only teaches us our duty, but convinces us of
the poſſibility of our imitation. Rogers's Sermons.
POSSIBLE, adj. [poſſible, Fr. pºſſibilis, Lat..] Having the
Power to be or to be done; not contrary to the nature of
things.
Admit all theſe impoſſibilities and great abſurdities to be
foſſible and convenient. JWhitgifte.
With men this is impoſſible, but with God all things are
poſſible. Mat. xix. 26.
All things are pºſſible to him that believeth. Mar. ix. 23.
Firm we ſubſiſt, but poſſible to ſwerve. Milton.
- . It will ſcarce ſeem poſſible, that God ſhould engrave prin-
ſ ciples in men's minds in words of uncertain ſignification. Locke.
Set a pleaſure tempting, and the hand of the Almighty vi-
fibly prepared to take vengeance, and tell whether it be poſſible
for people wantonly to offend againſt the law. Locke.
Po'ssibly, adv. [from poſſible.]
1. By any power really exiſting. -
Within the compaſs of which laws, we do not only com-
Prehend whatſoever may be eaſily known to belong to the
duty of all men, but even whatſoever may poſſibly be known
º to be of that quality Hooker, b. i. ſ. 8.
- Can we poſſibly his love deſert? Milton.
2. Perhaps; without abſurdity.
- */*} he might be found in the hands of the earl of Eſſex,
but he would be dead firſt. Clarendon, b. viii.
Arbitrary power tends to make a man a bad ſovereign, who
might pºſſibly have been a good one, had he been inveſted
With an authority circumſcrib'd by laws. Addiſon.
POST, n. f, ſpºſe, Fr. equis poſiti; curſor.]
1. A haſty nellenger; a courier who comes and goes at ſtated
** 3 commonly a letter carrier.
f In *ain places there be always freſh poſs,
arther which is brought unto them by the other.
- o!'. II. rake up, the poſt unſanétified
murth’rous lechers. Shakeſp. King Lear.
R º º, Julia would not deign my lines,
‘...."; them by ſuch a worthleſs pſ. Shakeſp.
of ..º. in the Way out-travels a footman, or a pºſt. Out
I ſend ºy. he ſa; Benj. johnſon's Diſcov.
fhould º: the fair copy of the poem on dulneſs, which I
Carc to hazard by the common poſt. Pope.
to carry that
Abbot.
2. Quick courſe or manner of travelling. This is the ſenſe in
which it is taken ; but the exprellion ſeems elliptical to ride
poſt, is to ride as a poſt, or to ride in the manner of a poſt ;
courir en poſe ; whence Shakeſpeare, to ride in poſt.
I brought my matter news of Juliet's death,
And then in pºſt he came from Mantua
To this ſame monument. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
Sent from Media poſt to Egypt. 41ilton.
He who rides pºſt through an unknown country, cannot
diſtinguiſh the ſituation of places. Dryden.
3. [Poſſe, Fr. from pºſitus, Lat.] Situation; ſeat.
The waters riſe every where upon the ſurface of the
earth; which new pºſt, when they had once ſeized on, they
would never quit. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. Military ſtation.
See before the gate what ſtalking ghoſt
Commands the guard, what ſentries keep the poſt. Dryd.
As I watch'd the gates,
Lodg'd on my poſt, a herald is arriv'd
From Caeſar's camp. -
Whatever ſpirit careleſs of his charge
His poſt neglects, or leaves the fair at large,
Shall feel ſharp vengeance. Pope.
Each of the Grecian captains he repreſents conquering a
ſingle Trojan, while Diomed encounters two at once ; and
when they are engaged, each in his diſtinct poſt, he only is
drawn fighting in every quarter. Pope.
5. Place ; employment; office.
Every man has his poſt aſſigned to him, and in that ſtation
he is well, if he can but think himſelf ſo. L’Eſtrange.
Falſe men are not to be taken into confidence, nor fearful
men into a poſt that requires reſolution. L’Eſtrange.
Without letters a man can never be qualified for any conſi-
derable poſt in the camp; for courage and corporal force, un-
leſs joined with conduct, the uſual effects of contemplation,
Addiſon's Cato,
is no more fit to command than a tempeſt. Collier.
While you, my lord, the rural ſhades admire,
And from Britannia's publick poſts retire,
Me into foreign realms my fate conveys. Addison.
Certain laws, by ſuff'rers thought unjuſt,
Deny'd all poſts of profit or of truſt. Pope.
Many thouſands there are, who determine the juſtice or
madneſs of national adminiſtrations, whom neither God nor
men ever qualified for ſuch a poſt of judgment. //atts.
6. [Poſtis, Lat..] A piece of timber ſet erect.
The blood they ſhall ſtrike on the two ſide pºſs and upper
poſt of the houſe. Ex. xii. 7-
Fir-trees, cypreſſes and cedars being, by a kind of natural
rigour, inflexible downwards, are thereby fitteſt for poſts or
pillars. J/otton's Architecture.
Poſt is equivocal ; it is a piece of timber, or a ſwift meſ-
ſenger. Watts's Logick.
To Post. v. n. [pºſter, Fr. from the noun..] To travel with
ſpeed.
I poſted day and night to meet you. Shakeſp.
Will you preſently take horſe with him,
And with all ſpeed poſt with him tow'rds the North Shakespeare
Poſt ſpeedily to my lord, your huſband,
Shew him this letter. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Moſt wicked ſpeed, to poſt
- With ſuch dexterity to inceſtuous ſheets. Shakeſp.
Then this, then that man's aid, they crave, implore;
Poſt here for help, ſeek there their followers. Daniel.
The Turkiſh meſſenger preſently took horſe, which was
there in readineſs for him, and pºſted towards Conſtantinople
with as much ſpeed as he could. - Knolles.
Themiſtocles made Xerxes poſt apace out of Greece, by
giving out that the Grecians had a purpoſe to break his bridge
of ſhips athwart the Helleſpont. Bacon's Eſſays:
Wer’t thou of the golden-winged hoſt,
Who having clad thyſelf in human weed,
To earth from thy prefixed ſeat did'ſt pº/?. Milton.
Thouſands at his bidding ſpeed, -
And poſt o'er land and ocean without reſt. Milton.
With ſongs and dance we celebrate the day;
At other times we reign by night alone,
And poſting through the ſkies purſue the moon. Dryden.
No wonder that paſtorals are fallen into diſeſteem; I ſee
the reader already uneaſy at this part of Virgil, counting the
pages, and pºſting to the Æncis. //a/h.
This only obječt of my real care,
In ſome few poſłing fatal hours is hurl’d
From wealth, from pow'r, from loye and from the world.
Prior.
To Post. v. a.
1. To fix opprobriouſly on poſts.
Many gentlemen, for their integrity in their votes, were,
by poſſing their names, expoſed to the popular calumny and
fury. King Charleſ.
On pain of being poſted to your ſorrow,
Fail not, at four, to meet me. Granville.
2. To place ;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O S
P O S
ſ
2. [Poſſer, Fr.]. To place; to ſtation; to fix.
The conſcious prieſt, who was ſuborn'd before,
Stood ready poſted at the poſtern door. Dryden.
He that proceeds upon other principles in his enquiry into
any ſciences, puts himſelf on that ſide, and poſts himſelf in a
party, which he will not quit till he be beaten out. Locke.
When a man is pºſed in the ſtation of a miniſter, he is
ſure, beſide the natural fatigue of it, to incur the envy of
ſome, and the diſpleaſure of others. Addiſon's Freeholder.
To regiſter methodically; to tranſcribe from one book into
another. A term common among merchants.
You have not poſted your books theſe ten years ; how
ſhould a man of buſineſs keep his affairs even at this rate
Arbuthnot.
4. To delay. Obſolete.
I have not ſtopt mine ears to their demands,
Nor poſed off their ſuits with ſlow delays;
Then why ſhould they love Edward more than me.
- Shakeſpeare.
Postage. n.ſ.. [from pºſt.] Money paid for conveyance of
a letter.
Fifty pounds for the poſtage of a letterſ to ſend by the
church, is the deareſt road in Chriſtendom. Dryden.
Postbox. m. ſ. [poſt and boy..] Courier ; boy that rides poſt.
This genius came thither in the ſhape of a poſtboy, and
cried out, that Mons was relieved. Tatler.
To Postdate. v. a. [poſt, after, Lat. and date.] To date
later than the real time.
Post diluvian. adj. [pºſt and diluvium, Lat.] Poſteriour to
the flood.
Take a view of the poſtdiluvian ſtate of this our globe,
how it hath ſtood for this laſt four thouſand years. Woodw.
Post diluvian. n.ſ. [poſt and diluvium, Lat..] One that
lived ſince the flood.
The antidiluvians lived a thouſand years; and as for the
age of the poſtdiluvians for ſome centuries, the annals of
Phoenicia, Egypt and China agree with the tenor of the ſa-
cred ſtory. Grew's Coſmol. b. iv.
Po'stER. m.ſ.. [from poſt.] A courier; one that travels haſtily.
Weird ſiſters hand in hand,
Poſters of the ſea and land,
Thus do go about. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
POSTERIOR. adj. [poſterior, Lat. poſterieur, Fr.]
I. Happening after ; placed after ; following. -
Where the anterior body giveth way, as faſt as the poſterior
cometh on, it maketh no noiſe, be the motion never ſo
great. Bacon.
No care was taken to have this matter remedied by the ex-
planatory articles, pºſterior to the report. Addiſon.
Heſiod was poſterior to Homer. Broome.
This orderly diſpoſition of things includes the ideas of
prior, poſterior and fimultaneous. Watts's Logick.
2. Backward.
And now had fame's poſterior trumpet blown,
And all the nations ſummon'd. Dunciad, b. iv.
PostE'Riors. n.ſ. [poſteriora, Lat.] The hinder parts.
To raiſe one hundred and ten thouſand pounds, is as vain
as that of Rabelais, to ſqueeze out wind from the poſteriors of
a dead aſs. Swift.
Poste'RiorITY. m. ſ. [poſteriorité, Fr. from poſterior.] The
ſtate of being after ; oppoſite to priority.
Although the condition of ſex and poſteriority of creation
might extenuate the error of a woman, yet it was unexcuſable
in the man. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
There muſt be a poſteriority in time of every compounded
body, to theſe more ſimple bodies out of which it is con-
ſtituted. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Poste'RITY. m. ſ. [poſterité, Fr. poſteritas, Lat.] Succeeding
generations; deſcendants : oppoſed to anceſtors.
It was ſaid,
It ſhould not ſtand in thy poſterity;
But that myſelf ſhould be the father
Of many kings. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Since arms avail not now that Henry's dead!
Poſierity await for wretched years. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Poſterity inform'd by thee might know. Milton.
Their names ſhall be tranſmitted to pºſterity, and ſpoken of
through all future ages. Smalridge's Sermons.
To th’ unhappy, that unjuſtly bleed,
Heav'n gives poſłerity tº avenge the deed. Pope.
Po's TERN. m. ſ. [poterne, Fr. poſterne, Dutch ; janua poſſica,
Lat..] A ſmall gate; a little door.
E’re dawning light
Diſcover'd had the world to heaven wide,
He by a privy poſtern took his flight,
That of no envious eyes he mote be ſpy'd. Fa. Queen.
Go on, good Eglamour,
Out at the poſtern by the abby wall. Shakeſpeare.
By broken bywayes did I inward paſs,
And in that window made a poſtern wide. Fairfax.
Theſe iſſued into the baſe court through a privy poſiern,
and ſharply viſited the aſſailants with halberds. Hayward.
Great Britain hath had by his majeſty a ſtrong addition ;
the pºſtern, by which we were ſo often entered and ſurpriſed,
is now made up. Raleigh's Eſſays.
The conſcious Prieſt, who was ſuborn'd before,
Stood ready Poſted at the poſtern door. Dryden.
If the nerves, which are the conduits to convey them from
without to the audience in the brain, befodiſºrdered, a not
to perform their functions, they have no p://ern to be ad-
mitted by, no other ways to bring themſelves into view. Locke.
A private poſtern opens to iny gardens
Through which the beauteous captive might remove. Rowe.
PostExistence. n, ſ, ſpo/? and exiſtence.] Future exiſtence.
As Simonides has expoſed the vicious part of women from
the doctrine of pre-exiſtence, ſome of the ancient philoſo-
phers have ſatyrized the vicious part of the human ſpecies
from a notion of the ſoul's poſſexiſtence. Addiſon's Spe:1.
Post HA'ckNEY. m. ſ. [poſt and hackney..] Hired poſthorſes.
Eſpying the French ambaſſador with the king's coach at-
tending him, made them balk the beaten road and teach poſt-
hackneys to leap hedges. I/otton
Postha ste, n.ſ. ſºft and hoſte.J Hafle like that of a cou!
rier.
This is
The ſource of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this pºſthaſte and romage in the land. Shakespeare .
The duke
Requires your haſte, poſthaſe appearance,
Ev’n on the inſtant. Shakeſp. Othello.
This man tells us, that the world waxes old, though not in
poſthaſe. Hakewill on Providence.
Post HoRSE. m. ſ. [pºſt and horſe.] A horſe ſtationed for the
uſe of couriers.
He lay under a tree, while his ſervants were getting freſh
poſthorſes for him. Sidney, b. ii.
He cannot live, I hope; and muſt not die,
Till George be pack'd with poſthorſe up to heav'n Shakeſp.
Xaycus was forthwith beſet on every ſide and taken priſo-
ner, and by pºſthorſes conveyed with all ſpeed to Conſtan-
tinople. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Post House. m. ſ. [poſt and houſe..] Poſt office; houſe where
letters are taken and diſpatched.
An officer at the pºſthouſe in London places every letter he
takes in, in the box belonging to the proper road. JWatts.
Po's THUMous. adj. [poſthumus, Lat. poſthume, Fr.] Done,
had, or publiſhed after one's death.
In our preſent miſerable and divided condition, how juſt
ſoever a man's pretenſions may be to a great or blameleſs re-
putation, he muſt, with regard to his poſthumous character,
content himſelf with ſuch a conſideration as induced the fa-
mous Sir Francis Bacon, after having bequeathed his ſoul to
God, and his body to the earth, to leave his fame to foreign
nations. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 35.
Po'stick. adj. [poſticus, Lat.] Backward.
The poſtick and backward poſition of the feminine parts in
quadrupeds can hardly admit the ſubſtitution of maſculine ge-
neration. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
PO'STIL. n.ſ. [poſtille, Fr. poſtilla, Lat.] Gloſs ; marginal
notes.
To Postil. v. a. [from the noun..] To gloſs; to illuſtrate
with marginal notes.
I have ſeen a book of account of Empſon's, that had the
king's hand almoſt to every leaf by way of ſigning, and was
in ſome places pºſtilled in the margin with the king's hand.
Bacon's Henry VII.
Post I'll ER. n.ſ.. [from poſſil.] One who gloſſes or illuſtrates
with marginal notes.
It hath been obſerved by many holy writers, commonly
delivered by poſtillers and commentators. Brown.
Hence you phantaſtick poſtillers in ſong,
My text defeats your art, ties nature's tongue. Cleaveland.
Post 1'lion. m. ſ. [poſtillon, French.]
1. One who guides the firſt pair of a ſet of ſix horſes in a coach.
A young batchelor of arts came to town recommended to
a chaplain's place; but none being vacant, modeſtly accepted
of that of a poſſilion. Tatler, N° 52.
2. One who guides a poſt chaiſe. -
Post limi'Nious. adj. [po/liminium, Lat.] Done or contrived
ſubſequently. - -
The reaſon why men are ſo ſhort and weak in governing,
is, becauſe moſt things fall out to them accidentally, and
come not into any compliance with their pre-conceiv d ends,
but are forced to comply ſubſequently, and to ſtrike in with
things as they fall out, by po/liminious after-applications of
them to their purpoſes. South's Sermons.
PostMA'st ER. m. ſ. ſpºº and maſter.] One who has charge
of publick conveyance of letters.
I came yonder at Eaton to marry Mrs. Anne Page ; and
'tis a poſtmaſter's boy. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of //indſor.
Without this letter, as he believes that happy revolution
had never been effected, he prays to be made poſtmaſter
general. Speciator, N° 629.
PostMASTER-
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O S
P O T
PostMA stER-GENERAL, n. / He who preſides over the
C - *
tter carriers. - -
poſts or le - - - - ring in the
PostMERI'diAN. a.º. [Pºmeridianuſ, Lat..] Being i
afternoon. - A - - - - - ... /*
Over haſty digeſtion is the inconvenience of po//meridian
ſleep Bacon's Nat. Hi/?.
Pºrrice. m. / [pº/? and ºffe.] Office where letters are
delivered to the poſt ; a poſthouſe. -
If you don't ſend to me now and then, the po/ºffice wild
think me of no conſequence; for I have no correſpondent
but you. Gay to Swift.
If you are ſent to the pº/ºffle with a letter, put it in care-
fully. - Swift.
To Post Po’NE. v. a. ſpºſipono, Lat. pº/pºſer, Fr.]
1. To put off; to delay. -
You wou'd poſtpone me to another reign,
Till when you are content to be unjuſt. Drydºn.
The moſt trifling amuſement is ſuffered to tºpºne the One
thing neceſſary. A:gers's Sermons.
2. To ſet in value below ſomething elſe.
All other conſiderations ſhould give way, and be poſtponed
to this. Zocºe on Education.
Po's Tscript. m. ſ. ſpeſ; and /criptum, Lat.] The Paragraph
added to the end of a letter. - - -
I think he prefers the publick good to his private opinion ;
and therefore is willing his propoſals ſhould with freedom be
examined : thus I underſtand his pºſt/cript. Locke.
One, when he wrote a letter, would put that which was
moſt material in the pº//cript. Bacon's Eſſays.
The following letter I ſhall give my reader at length, with-
out either preface or pºſſ rift. Addison's Speciator.
Your ſaying that fought to have writ a pºſ/ript to Gay's,
ºš His not content to write leſ, than a whole letter. Pope.
To POSTULATE. . . |Pºulº, Lat. poſtuler, Fr.] To
beg or aſſume without proof.
They moſt Powerfully magnify God, who, not from pº/?ulated
and precarious *nces, entréat a courteºus aſſent, but from
*Periments and undeniable effects. Brown.
Postulate. n. / [pºſtulatum, Lat.J Poſition ſuppoſed or
aſſumed without proof.
This we ſhall induce not from Pºſtulates and intreated
maxims, but from undeniable principles. Brown.
Some have caſt all their learning into the method of mathe-
maticians, under theorems, problems and pºſtulates. If atts.
Postulation. n. ſ: [Pºſtulatio, Lat. Pºſłulation, Fr. from
Pºſtulate.] The act of ſuppoſing without Proof; gratuitous
aſſumption.
A ſecond pºſtulation to elicit my aſſent, is the veracity of
him that reports it. *{ak's Origin of Maº,
Po'st ULA toky. adj. [from pºſtulate.]
1. Aſſuming without proof.
2. Aſſumed without proof.
Whoever ſhall peruſe the Phytognomy of Porta, and ſtrictly
obſerve how “gºtable realities are forced into animal repre-
ſentations, *Y. Perceive the ſemblance is but Pºſtulatory. Bro.
Po's TURE. m. / (fºurt, Fr. pºſtura, Latin.]
i. Place; ſituáticº.
Although theſe ſtudies are not ſo pleaſing as Contemplations
phyſical or mathematical, yet they recompenſe with the 6x-
“ellency of their uſe in ſºlation to man, and his nobleſt poſiure
and flation in this world, a ſtate of regulated ſociety. H.
According to the Pºſłure of our affairs in the laſt campaign,
this prince could have *d the balance on either fift. Addison
2. Voluntary collocation of the Parts of the body with reſpect
to each other,
He ſtarts,
Then lays his finger on his temple; ſtrait
$prings out into fift gait; then ſtops again,
His eyes againſt the *90m, in moſt ſtrange pº/?ures. S/a/.
Where there are affections of reverence, tº will be po-
Jº of reverence. South's Sermºns.
The pºſſure of a Poetick figure is the deſcription of his he
** in the performance of ſº, or ſuch an action. Dryden.
- In the meaneſt marble ſtatue, one fees the faces, £2/!u es,
** and dreſs of thoſe that lived ſo **ny ages before us. Addison
3. State; diſpoſition. S
. The lord Hopton left *Adel-caſtle, before he had put it
* the good pºur, he intended. Clarendon, b. viii.
*"; at the ſame point and Pºtre I was, when they forced
* tº leave Whitehill. Aing Charles.
In this #bject pººre have ye ſworn
*** the conqueror. Milton.
life º º £3% of his devout ſoul in all conditions of
...”.” “diſplayed with great ſimplicity. Atterbury.
9 * STURE. ..., [fr -
... ’.“: lºom the noun. To put in any par-
ticular Place °F diſpoſition. J p y p
%ured, as to move from back to belly
*987, Lºžūz º. Grew.
J. Cºatin.J Poſition aſſumed without
Calumnics often refuted
* * are the Az/?ºla, ible
"Pon which they proceed. • ??ºlatiºns of ſcriblers,
&gt; Uſ Jr. iirſt Principles. Addiſon,
Postur EMA's TER. n.ſ. [tºur, and mººr. One who teache:
or practiſes artificial contortions of the body.
When the ſtudents have accompliſhed themſelves in this
Part, they are to be delivered into the hands ºf . kind of pº-
ſuremaſter. Speciator, Nº 395.
Po's Y. m. /. [contracted from poſſ.]
I. A motto on a ring.
A. paltry ring,
That ſhe did give me, whoſe Pºſ, was,
Like cutler's poetry;
Love me and leave me not. Shakespeare . Aſ rº, ºf J. nice.
You have choſen a very ſhort text to “nlarge upon; I
ſhould as ſoon expect to ſee a critik on the poly of a ring, as
on the inſcription of a medal. - 4a/ºn.
2. A bunch of flowers. Of unknown derivation.
With ſtore of vermeil roſes, -
To deck their bridegroom's pºſſes. Spenſºr,
We make a difference between ſuffering thiſtles to grow
among us, and wearing them for pºſter. Swift.
Pot. n.ſ. ſpot, Fr. in liſh. ſenſes, and Dutch; pºtte, Hää.
dick.
I. A º in which meat is boiled on the fire,
Toad that under the cold ſtone
Swelter'd, venom fleeping got;
Boil thou firſt i'th chirmj pot. $ººp. Aſºlet.
Gigantick hinds, as ſoon as work was done,
2. their huge pots of boiling pulſe would run,
Fell to with eager joy. Dryden.
2. Veſſel to hold liquids.
The woman left her water fºot, and went her way. jºhn.
3. Veſſel made of earth.
Whenever potters meet with *y chalk or marl mixed with
their clay, though it will with the clay hold burning, yet
whenever any water comes near any ſuch pots after they are
burnt, both the chalk and mail will ſlack and ſpoil their
Ware. 4 ſortimer's Hºſandry.
4. A ſmall cup.
But that I think his father loves him not,
I'd have him poiſon'd with a pot of ale. Shaº?.
Suppoſe your eyes ſent equal rays, -
Upon two diſtant pots of ale,
Yot knowing which was mid or ſtale. Prior.
A ſoldier drinks his Pot, and then offers payment. Swift.
5. 73 go to Pot. To be deſtroyed or devoured. A low phraſe.
The ſheep went firſt to P*, the goats next, and afte: them
the oxen, and all little enough to keep life together. L’É/?.
John's ready money went into the lawyers pockets; then
John began to borrow money upon the bank ſtock, now and
then a farm went to pot. 4-butºnot's Hyº. ºf j. Buſ.
To Pot. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To preſerve ſeaſoned in pots.
Potted fowl and fiſh cóme in ſo faſt,
That ere the firſt is out, the ſecond ſtinks,
And mouldy mother gathers on the brinks. Dryden.
2. To incloſe in pots of earth.
Pet them in natural, not forced earth ; a layer of rich
mould beneath, and about this natural earth to nouriſh the
fibres, but not ſo as to touch the bulbs. Evelyn.
Acorns, maſt and other ſeeds may be kept well, by being
barrelled or potted up with moſt ſini. Al/artimer.
POTABLE. adj. [£ºtable, Fr. potabilis, Lat.] Such as may
be drank; drinkable.
Thou beſt of gold are worſt of gold,
Other leſs fine in carrat, is more Precious, -
Preſerving life in medicine potable. Sºare.
Pg 3 Pit upon the ſea ſhore, ſomewhat above the high
water mark, and ſink it as deep as the low water mark; and
as the tide cometh in, it will fill with water freſh and
pºtable. Bacon's Nat. H/?.
Rivers run potable gold. Aſſion's Par. Lºft.
The ſaid potable gold ſhould be endued with a capacity of
being agglutinated and aſſimilated to the innate heat. Harvey.
Where ſolar beams
Parch thirſty human veins, the damaſ'd meads
Unforc'd diſplay ten thouſand painted flow’rs ---
Uſeful in potables. - Pºps.
Po"TABLENEss. n. / [from potable.] Drinkableneſ.
Po'TAGER. n.ſ.. [from pottºge.] A porringer.
An Indian diſh or potager, made of the bark of a tree,
with the ſides and rim ſewed together after the manner of
twiggen-work. - - Grew's 4/uſaeum.
PotARGo. n.ſ. A Weſt Indian pickle. -
What lord of old would bid his cook prepare
Mangos, potargo, champignons, cavarre. King,
Po'TASH. n. / [potaſſé, Fr.]
*/?, in general, is an impure fixed alcaline ſalt, made
by burning from vegetables: we have five j of this ſalt
now in uſe ; 1. The German Pºtº/, made from burnt wood,
and commonly ſold under the name of pearlaſhes. 2. The
Spaniſh called barilia, made by burning a ſpecies of kali, a
Planſ which the Spaniards ſow in th: fields as we do corn.
3. The home-made */*, made from fern and other uſeleſ,
Plaints,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">º
plants, colle&amp;ted in large quantities and burnt. 4. The
Swediſh, and 5. Ruſſian kinds, with a volatile acid matter
combined with them ; but the Ruſſian is ſtronger than the
Swediſh, which is made of decayed wood only : potaſh is of
at uſe to the manufacturers of ſoap and glaſs, to bleachers
and to dyers; it is alſo an ingredient in ſome medicinal com-
poſitions, but the Ruſſian potaſh is greatly preferable to all the
other kinds. Hill's Materia Medica.
Cheſhire rock-ſalt, with a little nitre, allum and potaſh, is
the common flux uſed for the running of the plate-glaſs.
J/oodward on Foſſils.
Potation. m. ſ. ſpotatio, Lat.] Drinking bout ; draught.
Roderigo,
whom love hath turned almoſt the wrong ſide out
To Deſdemona, hath to night carouz'd
Potations pottle deep. Shakeſp. Othello.
If I had a thouſand ſons, the firſt human principle I would
teach them, ſhould be to forſwear thin potations, and to ad-
dićt themſelves to ſack. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Potato. m. ſ. [I ſuppoſe an American word.] An eſculent
root.
The red and white potatoes are the moſt common eſculent
roots now in uſe, and were originally brought from Virginia
into Europe. Miller.
On choiceſt melons and ſweet grapes they dine,
And with potatoes fat their wanton ſwine. //aller.
The families of farmers live in filth and haſtineſs upon
butter-milk and potatoes. Swift.
Leek to the Welch, to Dutchmen butter's dear,
Of Iriſh ſwains potatoe is the chear;
Oats for their feaſts the Scottiſh ſhepherds grind,
Sweet turnips are the food of Blouzelind;
- While ſhe loves turnips, butter I'll deſpiſe,
Nor leeks, nor oatmeal, nor potatoe prize. Gay.
Pot be LLIED. adj. ſpot and belly..] Having a ſwoln paunch.
Porbe'lly. m. ſ. ſpot and belly..] A ſwelling paunch.
He will find himſelf a forked ſhadling animal and a pot-
belly. Arbuthnot and Pope.
To Potch. v. a. ſpocher, Fr. to thruſt out the eyes as with
the thumb.]
1. To thruſt; to puſh.
Where
I thought to cruſh him in an equal force,
True ſword to ſword; I'll patch at him ſome way,
Or wrath or craft may get him. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. [Pocher, Fr.] To poach; to boil ſlightly.
In great wounds, it is neceſſary to obſerve a ſpare diet, as
panadoes or a potched egg ; this much availing to prevent in-
flammation. JWiſeman's Surgery.
Potcom PANION. m. ſ. A fellow drinker; a good fellow at
carouſals.
Po're Ncy. m. ſ. ſpotentia, Lat.]
1. Power; influence.
Now arriving
At place of potency and ſway o' th' ſtate,
If he ſhould ſtill malignantly remain
Faſt foe to the plebeians, your voices might
Be curſes to yourſelves. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I would I had your potency. Shakeſp.
Thou haſt ſought to make us break our vow,
To come betwixt our ſentence and our power,
Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
Our potency make good. Shakespeare.
By what name ſhall we call ſuch an one, as exceedeth God
in potency. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
2. Efficacy; ſtrength.
Uſe can maſter the devil, or throw him out
With wond’rous potency. $hakeſp. Hamlet.
POTENT. adj. [potens, Latin.]
I. Powerful; forcible; ſtrong; efficacious.
There is nothing more contagious than ſome kinds of har-
mony; than ſome nothing more ſtrong and potent unto
ood. - Hooker.
Why ſtand theſe royal fronts amazed thus
Cry havock, kings; back to the ſtained field,
You equal potents, fiery kindled ſpirits! Shakeſp.
I do believe,
Induc’d by potent circumſtances, that
You are mine enemy.
Here's another
More potent than the firſt. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
One would wonder how, from ſo differing premiſſes, they
ſhould infer the ſame concluſion, were it not that the conſpi-
ration of intereſt were too potent for the diverſity of judg-
inent. Decay of Piety.
When by command
Moſes once more his potent rod extends
Over the ſea; the ſea his rod obeys.
Verſes are the potent charms we uſe,
Heroick thoughts and virtue to infuſe. J/aller.
The magiſtrate cannot urge obedience upon ſuch potent
grounds, as the miniſter can urge diſobedience. South.
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Milton.
Hºw the effluvia ºf a magnet can be ſo rare and ſubtle, as
to paſs through a plate of glaſs without any reſiſtance or di-
minution of their force, and yet ſo potent as to turn a magne-
tick needle through the glaſs. Newton's Opticks.
The chemical RºParations are more vigorous and point in
their effects than the galenical. Baker.
Cyclop, ſince human fleſh has been thy feaſt
Now drain this goblet potent to digeſt. &gt; Pope:
2. Having great authority or dominion. as, potent monarchs. * -
º m. ſ. [potentat, Fr.] Monarch; prince; ſove-
This gentleman is come to me,
With commendations from great potentates.
Kings and mightieſt potentates muſt die.
Theſe defences are but compliments,
To dally with confining potentates. Daniel.
All obey'd the ſuperior voice
Of their great potentate; for great indeed
His name, and high was his #. in heav'n. Milton.
Exalting him not only above earthly princes and potentates,
but above the higheſt of the celeſtial hierarchy. Boyle,
Each potentate, as wary fear, or ſtrength,
9r emulation urg'd, his neighbour's bounds
Invades.
Poº's TIAL. adi.ſpotenciel, Fr. potentialis, Latin.]
1. Exiſting in poſſibility, not in act.
..This potential and imaginary materia prima cannot exiſt
without form. Raleigh's Hiſ of the I/orld.
2. Having the effect without the external actual property.
The rhagnifico is much belov’d,
And hath in his effect a voice potential,
As double as the duke's. Shakespeare. Othello.
Ice doth not only ſubmit unto actual heat, but indureth
not the potential calidity of many waters. Brown.
3. Efficacious ; powerful.
Thou muſt make a dullard of the world,
If they not thought the profits of my death
ere very pregnant and potential ſpurs
To make thee ſeek it. Shakeſp.
4. In grammar, potential is a mood denoting the poſſibility of
doing any action.
Potenti A'lity. m. ſ. [from potential.] Poſſibility; not ac-
tuality. -
ºn, repreſented to every man the taſte himſelf did like,
but it had in its own potentiality all thoſe taſtes and diſpo-
ſitions eminently. Taylor's JWorthy Communicant.
God is an eternal ſubſtance and act, without potentiality
and matter, the principle of motion, the cauſe of naure. Still.
The true notion of a ſoul's eternity is this, that the future
moments of its duration can never be all paſt and preſent;
but ſtill there will be a futurity and potentiality of more for
ever and ever. Bentley's Sermons.
Pote/NTIALLY. adv. [from potential.]
1. In power or poſſibility; not in act or poſitively.
This duration of human ſouls is only potentially infinite;
for their eternity conſiſts only in an endleſs capacity of conti-
nuance without ever ceaſing to be in a boundleſs futurity, that
can never be exhauſted, or all of it be paſt or preſent; but
their duration can never be poſitively and actually eternal,
becauſe it is moſt manifeſt, that no moment can ever be aſ-
ſigned, wherein it ſhall be true, that ſuch a ſoul hath then
actually ſuſtained an infinite duration. Bentley.
2. In efficacy; not in actuality.
They ſhould tell us, whether only that be taken out of
ſcripture which is actually and particularly there ſet down, or
elſe that alſo which the general principles and rules of ſcrip-
ture potentially contain. Hooker, b. iii.
Blackneſs is produced upon the blade of a knife that has
cut four apples, if the juice, though both actually and poten-
tially cold, be not quickly wiped off. Boyle on Colours.
Potently, adv. [from potent.] Powerfully; forcibly.
You're potently oppos'd ; and with a malice
Of as great ſize. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Metals are hardened by often heating and quenching; for
cold worketh moſt potently upon heat precedent. Bacon.
Oil of vitriol, though a potently acid menſtruum, will yet
precipitate many bodies mineral, and others diſſolved not only
in aquafortis, but in ſpirit of vinegar. Boyle.
Pote'Ntness. n. ſ. [from potent.j Powerfulneſs; might;
OWer.
pº. n. ſ. [by miſtake or corruption uſed for popgun..] A
gun which makes a ſmall ſmart noiſe.
An author, thus who pants for fame, .
Begins the world with fear and ſhane,
When firſt in print, you ſee him dread * * *
Each potgun levell'd at his head. Swift's Miſel.
Pot HA'NGER. m. ſ. ſpot and hanger.] Hook or branch on
which the pot is hung over the fire. - - -
Poºrhecary. n.ſ. [contračted by pronunciation and poetical
convenience from apothecary; from apotheca, Lat..] One who
compounds and ſells phyſick.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
Philips.
20 D Modern<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O T
P O U
-
ern 'pºthecaries, taught the art
sº to play the dočtor's part,
Bold in the practice of miſtaken rules,
pºſite, apply, and call their maſters fools. Pºpe.
Po'ºther. n.ſ. [This word is of double orthography and un-
certain º : it is ſometimes written podder, ſometimes
lººr, and is derived by junius from fºudre, thunder, F I.
by Skinner from peuteren or peteren, Dutch, to ſhake or dig :
and more probably by a ſecond thought from poudre, Fr. duſt.]
1. Buſtle; tumult; flutter.
Such a pother,
As if that whatſoever god, who leads him,
Were crept into his human pow'rs, -
And gave him graceful poſture. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Some hold the one, and ſome the other, -
But howſoe'er they make a pother. Hadibras.
What a pother has been here with Wood and his braſs,
Who would modeſtly make a few halfpennies paſs? Swift.
'Tis yet in vain to keep a pºther
About one vice, and fall into the other. Pope.
I always ſpeak well of thee,
Thou always ſpeak'ſt ill of me;
Yet after all our noiſe and pother, -
The world believes nor one nor t'other. - Guardian.
2. Suffocating cloud.
He ſuddenly unties the poke,
Which from it ſent out ſuch a ſmoke,
As ready was them all to choke,
So grievous was the pother. Drayton.
To Po The R. v.a. To make a bluſtering ineffectual effort.
He that loves reading and writing, yet finds certain ſeaſons
wherein thoſe things have no reliſh, only pothers and wearies
himſelf to no purpoſe. Locke.
Poſthere. n.ſ. ſpot and herb.] An herb fit for the pot.
Sir Triſtram telling us tobacco was a potherb, bid the drawer
bring in tother halfpint. Tatler, Nº 57.
Egypt baſer than the beaſts they worſhip;
Below their potherb gods that grow in gardens. Dryden.
Of alimentary leaves, the olera or potherbs afford an excel-
lent nouriſhment; amongſt thoſe are the cole or cabbage
kind. Arbuthnot.
Leaves eaten raw are termed ſallad; if boiled, they be-
come potherbs: and ſome of thoſe plants, which are potherbs
in one family, are ſallad in another. JWatts.
Poſthook. n.ſ. ſpot and hook.] Hooks to faſten pots or kettles
with; alſo ill formed or ſcrawling latters or charaćters.
Potion. m. ſ. ſpotion, Fr. potio, Lat..] A draught; com-
monly a phyſical draught.
à º in the taking of a potion or pills, the head and
neck Inake. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?.
The earl was by nature of ſo indifferent a taſte, that %
would ſtop in the midſt of any phyſical potion, and after he
had licked his lips, would drink off the reſt. J/atton.
Moſt do taſte through fond intemperate thirſt,
Soon as the potion works, their human countenance,
Th’ expreſs reſemblance of the gods, is chang'd
Into ſome brutiſh form of wolf or bear. Milton.
Po TLD. m. ſ. ſpot and lid.] The cover of a pot.
The columella is a fine, thin, light, bony tube; the bot-
tom of which ſpreads about, and gives it the reſemblance of
a wooden potlid in country houſes. Derham.
Poºsh Fºr D. m. ſ. ſpot and ſhard; from ſchaerde; properly pot-
ſhard.]. A fragment of a broken pot.
At this day at Gaza, they couch potſherds or veſſels of
earth in their walls to gather the wind from the top, and paſs
it in ſpouts into rooms. Bacon's Nat. Hiſi.
He on the aſhes fits, his fate deplores;
And with a potſherd ſcrapes the ſwelling forcs. Sandys.
Whence come broken potſherds tumbling down,
And leaky ware from garret windows thrown;
Well may they break our heads. Dryden.
PortAGE. m.ſ. ſp.tage, Fr. from pot.] Anything boiled or
decoèted for food. See Por RIDGE.
f Jacob ſod pottage, and Eſau came from the field faint. Gen.
Poºr#. m. ſ. [patier, Fr. from pot.] A maker of earthen
WClicls. -
My thoughts are whirled like a potter's wheel. Shakeſp.
Some preſs the plants with ſherds of potters clay. Dryd.
A potter will not have any chalk or marl mixed with
the clay; for though it will hold burning, yet whenever
. water comes near any ſuch pots, it will ſlack and ſpoil
the ware .. - Mortimer's Huſbandry.
He like the potter in a mould has caſt
he world’s great frame. Prior.
9TTERN-oRE. m. ſ. -
º which for its aptneſs to vitriſy, and ſerve the pot-
ore. * their earthen veſſels, the miners call t;
Po TTING. m. ſ. ſo Øyſe.
po*º { | É. where they are moſt potent in
3. Shakeſp. Othello.
Po TTLE n. ſ. [ſ
: **** *. J. Liſom pot. - - - -
pints. P*] Eiquid meaſure containing four
4.
pºt.] Drinking.
He drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk, ere the
next pottle can be filled. Shakeſp. Othello.
Roderigo hath to might carous'd
Potations pottle deep. Shakespeare ,
The oracle of Apollo
Here ſpeaks out of his pottle,
Or the Tripos his tower bottle. Benj. johnſºn:
Potva'li ANT. adj. [pot and valiant..] Heated with courage
by ſtrong drink. &amp;
Potu"LENT. adj. ſpotulentus, Lat.]
1. Pretty much in drink. - Dićf.
2. Fit to drink. -
Pouch. n.ſ. [poche, Fr.]
1. A ſmall bag; a pocket.
Teſter I'll have in pouch, when thou ſhalt lack. Shakeſp.
From a girdle about his waiſt, a bag or pouch divided into
two cells. Gulliver's Travels.
The ſpot of the veſſel, where the diſeaſe begins, gives way
to the force of the blood puſhing outwards, as to form a
pouch or cyſt. Sharp's Surgery.
2. Applied ludicrouſly to a big belly or paunch.
To Pouch. v. a.
1. To pocket.
In January huſband that poucheth the grotes,
Will break up his lay, or be ſowing of otes. Tuſſºr.
2. To ſwallow.
The common heron hath long legs for wading, a long
neck to reach prey, and a wide extenſive throat to pouch
it. Derham's Phyſico-Theºlºgy.
3. To pout; to hang down the lip. Ainſworth.
Pou'cHMouTHED. adj. [pouch and mouthed.] Blubberliped. Ainſ:
Pov ERTY. m. ſ. [pauvreté, Fr.]
1. Indigence ; neceſſity; want of riches.
My men are the pooreſt,
But poverty could never draw them from me. Shakeſp.
Such madneſs, as for fear of death to die,
Is to be poor for fear of poverty. Denham,
Theſe by their ſtrict examples taught,
How much more ſplendid virtue was than gold;
Yet ſcarce their ſwelling thirſt of fame could hide,
And boaſted poverty with too much pride. Prior.
There is ſuch a ſtate as abſolute pºverty, when a man is
deſtitute not only of the conveniencies, but the ſimple neceſ-
ſaries of life, being diſabled from acquiring them, and de-
pending entirely on charity. Rogers.
2. Meanneſs; defect.
There is in all excellencies in compoſitions a kind of po-
verty, or a caſualty or jeopardy. Bacon.
Pou'ld Avis. n. ſ. A ſort of ſail cloath. Ainſworth.
POULT. n.ſ. [poulet, Fr.] A young chicken.
One wou'd have all things little, hence has try’d
Turkey poults, freſh from th’ egg, in batter fry'd. King.
Pou'lt ER ER. m. ſ. [from poult..] One whoſe trade is to ſell
fowls ready for the cook.
If thou doſt it half ſo gravely, ſo majeſtically, hang me up
by the heels for a poulterer's hare. Shakeſp.
Several naſty trades, as butchers, poulterers and fiſh-
mongers, are great occaſions of plagues. Harvey.
Pou'ltice. n.ſ. [pulte, Fr. pultis, Lat..] A cataplaſm; a ſoft
mollifying application.
Poultice relaxeth the pores, and maketh the humour apt
to exhale. - Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
If your little finger be ſore, and you think a poultice made
of our vitals will give it eaſe, ſpeak, and it ſhall be done. Sw.
To Pou'lt Ice. v. a. [from the noun..] To apply a poultice
or cataplaſm.
Pou'ltive. n.ſ. [A word uſed by Temple..] A poultice.
Poultives allayed pains, but drew down the humours,
making the paſſages wider, and apter to receive them. Temple.
Pou'ltRY. n.ſ. ſpoulet, Fr. pullities, Lat..] Domeſtick fowls.
The cock knew the fox to be a common enemy of all
poultry. L’E/ºrange.
What louder cries, when Ilium was in flames,
Than for the cock the widow’d poultry made. Dryden.
Soldiers robbed a farmer of his poultry, and made him wait
at table, without giving him a morſel. wift:
POUNCE. n.ſ. ſponzone, Italian. Skinner.]
1. The claw or talon of a bird of prey.
As haggard hawk, preſuming to contend
With hardy fowl, about his able might,
His weary pounces, all in vain doth ſpend
To truſs the prey too heavy for his flight. Fa. Queen.
The new-diſſembl’d eagle, now endu'd
With beak and pounces Hercules purſu’d. Dryden.
'Twas a mean prey for a bird of his pounces. Atterbury.
2. The powder of gum ſandarach, ſo called becauſe it is thrown
upon paper through a perforated box.
To Pou Nce. v. a. ſponganare, Italian.]
1. To pierce; to perforate.
Barbarous people, that go naked, do not only paint, but
pounce and raiſe their ſkin, that the painting may not be taken
forth, and make it into works. Bacºn's Nat. Hiſt.
2. To pour
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P O U
P O W,
2. To pour or ſprinkle through ſmall perforations. .
It may be tried by incorporating copple-duſt, by pouncing
into the quickſilver. Bacon,
. To ſeize with the pounces or talons.
Pou'Nced. adj. [from pounce.] Furniſhed with claws or talons.
From a craggy cliff,
The royal eagle draws his vigorous young
Strong pounc'd, Thomſon's Spring.
Pou'Nc ET Box. m. ſ. [pounce and box.] A ſmall box perforated,
He was perfumed like a milliner,
And, 'twixt his finger and his thumb, he held
A pouncetbox, which ever and anon
He gave his noſe. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
POUND. n. ſ. ſponb, punb, Sax. from pondo, Lat.]
1. A certain weight, conſiſting in troy weight of twelve, in
averdupois of ſixteen ounces.
He that ſaid, that he had rather have a grain of fortune
than a pound of wiſdom, as to the things of this life, ſpoke
nothing but the voice of wiſdom. South's Sermons.
A pound doth conſiſt of ounces, drams, ſcruples. Wilkins.
Great Hannibal within the balance lay,
And tell how many pounds his aſhes weigh.
2. The ſum of twenty ſhillings.
That exchequer of medals in the cabinets of the great duke
of Tuſcany, is not worth ſo little as an hundred thouſand
pound. Peacham of Antiquities.
3. [From pinban, Sax.]. A pinfold; an incloſure; a priſon in
which beaſts are incloſed.
I hurry,
Not thinking it is levee-day,
And find his honour in a pound,
Hemm'd by a triple circle round. Swift's Miſcel.
To Pound. v. a. ſpunian, Sax. whence in many places they
uſe the word pun.]
I. To beat; to grind with a peſtle.
His mouth and noſtrils pour’d a purple flood,
And pounded teeth came ruſhing with his blood.
Would'ſt thou not rather chuſe a ſmall renown
To be the mayor of ſome poor paltry town,
To pound falſe weights and ſcanty meaſures break.
Dryden,
Tir'd with the ſearch, not finding what ſhe ſeeks,
With cruel blows ſhe pounds her blubber'd cheeks.
Dryden.
Shou'd their axle break, its overthrow }
Dryden.
Dryden,
Would cruſh, and pound to duſt the crowd below ;
Nor friends their friends, nor ſires their ſons could know.
Dryden's juvenal.
Opaque white powder of glaſs, ſeen through a microſcope,
exhibits fragments pellucid and colourleſs, as the whole ap-
peared to the naked eye before it was pounded. Bentley,
She deſcribes
How under ground the rude Riphean race
Mimick briſk cyder, with the brakes produćt wild
Sloes founded. Philips,
Liſted peſtles brandiſhed in the air,
Loud ſtroaks with pounding ſpice the fabrick rend,
And aromatick clouds in ſpires aſcend. Garth,
2. To ſhut up ; to impriſon, as in a pound.
We'll break our walls,
Rather than they ſhall pound us up. Shakeſp.
I ordered John to let out the good man's ſheep that were
pounded by night. Spectator, N° 243.
Pou'NDAGE. m. ſ. [from pound.]
1. A certain ſum dedućted from a pound ; a ſum paid by the
trader to the ſervant that pays the money, or to the perſon
who procures him cuſtomers.
In poundage and drawbacks I loſe half my rent.
2. Payment rated by the weight of the commodity.
Tonnage and poundage, and other duties upon merchan-
Swift.
dizes, were collečted by order of the board. Clarend.
Pou NDER. m. ſ. [from pound.]
1. The name of a heavy large pear.
Alcinous' orchard various apples bears,
Unlike are bergamots and pounder pears. Dryden.
2. Any perſon or thing denominated from a certain number of
pounds : as, a ten pounder; a gun that carries a bullet of ten
pounds weight; or in ludicrous language a man with ten pounds
a year; in like manner, a note or bill is called a twenty
pounder or ten pounder, from the ſum it bears.
None of theſe forty or fifty pounders may be ſuffered to
marry, under the penalty of deprivation. Swift.
3. A peſtle. Ainſworth.
Pou Peton. n. ſ. [poupée, Fr.] A puppet or little baby.
Pog'Picts. m. ſ. In cookery, a meſs of vićtuals made of veal
ſtakes and ſlices of bacon. Bailey.
To POUR. v. a. [ſuppoſed to be derived from the Welſh
bwrw, .
1. To let ſome liquid out of a veſſel, or into ſome place or
receptacle.
If they will not believe thoſe ſigns, take of the water of
the river, and pour it upon the dry land. Exodus iv. 9.
, ºr ºld, pºur out for the people, and there was na harm
in the pot. 2 Kings iv. 41.
He ſtretched out his hand to the cup, and poured of the
blood of * grape, he poured out at the foot ºf the altar a
ſweet ſmelling favour into the moſt high. Eccluſ. l. 15.
A Samaritan bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and
wine, and brought him to an inn. Luke x. 34
Yºur fury then boil'd upward to a ſome; -
But ſince this meſſage came, you ſink and ſettle
As if cold water had been pour’d upon you. &gt; Dryden.
2. To emit; to give vent to ; to ſend forth
- - to let out ; t
ſend in a continued courſe. - ; tº
Hie thee hither,
That I may pour my ſpirits in thine ear,
And chaſtiſe with the valour of my tongue
All that impedes thee from the golden round.
Londondoth pour out her citizens;
The mayor and all his brethren in beſt ſort,
With the plebeians ſwarming. Shakeſp. Henry V.
As thick as hail
Came poſt on poſt; and every one did bear
Thy praiſes in his kingdom's great defence,
And pour'd them down before him. Shakeſp. Macbeth,
The devotion of the heart is the tongue of the ſoul; actu-
ated and heated with love, it pours itſelf forth in ſupplications
and prayers. Duppa's Rules for Devotion.
If we had groats or ſixpences current by law, that wanted
one third of the ſilver by the ſtandard, who can imagine, that
our neighbours would not pour in quantities of ſuch money
Shakeſp.
upon us, to the great loſs of the kingdom. Locke.
Is it for thee the linnet pours his throat
Loves of his own and raptures ſwell the note. Pope.
To Pour. v. n.
I. To ſtream ; to flow.
2. To ruſh tumultuouſly.
If the rude throng pour on with furious pace,
And hap to break thee from a friend's embrace,
Stop ſhort. Gay.
All his fleecy flock
Before him march, and pour into the rock,
Not one or male or female ſtay’d behind. Pope.
A ghaſtly band of giants,
Pouring down the mountains, crowd the ſhore. Pope.
A gathering throng,
Youth and white age tumultuous pour along. Pope.
Pou'RER. n.ſ.. [from pour.] One that pours.
Pousse. n.ſ. The old word for peaſe. Spenſer.
But who ſhall judge the wager won or loſt?
That ſhall yonder heard groom and none other,
Which over the pouſe hitherward doth poſt, Spenſer.
Pout. n.ſ.
1. A kind of fiſh; a cod-fiſh.
2. A kind of bird.
Of wild birds, Cornwall hath quail, wood-dove, heath-
cock and pout. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
To Pout. v. n. [bouter, Fr.]
1. To look ſullen by thruſting out the lips.
Like a miſbehav'd and ſullen wench,
Thou pout'ſ upon thy fortune and thy love.
He had not din'd ;
The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold; and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive. Shakeſp. Coriolanur.
I would adviſe my gentle readers, as they conſult the good
of their faces, to forbear frowning upon loyaliſts, and pouting
at the government. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 8.
The nurſe remained pouting, nor would ſhe touch a bit du-
ring the whole dinner. Arbuthnot and Pope:
2. To gape; to hang prominent.
The ends of the wound muſt come over one another, with
a compreſs to preſs the lips equally down, which would other-
wiſe become crude, and pout out with great lips. Jºſeman.
Satyrus was made up betwixt man and goat, with a hu-
man head, hooked noſe and pouting lips. Dryden.
POWDER. n.ſ. [poudre, Fr.]
1. Duſt; any body comminuted. -
The calf which they had made, he burnt in the fire, and
ground it to powder. Ex. xxxii. 20.
2. Gunpowder. -
The ſeditious being furniſhed with artillery, powder and ſhot,
battered Biſhopſgate. Hayward.
As to the taking of a town, there were few conquerors
could ſignalize themſelves that way, before the invention of
Shakeſp.
powder and fortifications. Addiſon,
3. Sweet duſt for the hair. -
when th’ hair is ſweet through pride or luſt,
The powder doth forget the duſt. Herbert,
Our humbler province is to tend the fair,
To ſave the powder from too rude a gale, Pope.
To Powder. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To reduce to duſt; to comminute; to pound ſmall,
2. To ſprinkle<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">p O W
P O VV
–
3: Ability ; force; reach,
2, [Poudrer, Fr. } To º as with duſt.
der thy radiant hair,
wº wº ſuch aſhes thou would'ſt wear,
Thou who, to all which come to look upon,
Wert meant for Phoebus, would'ſt be Phaeton.
In the galaxy, that milky way
Which nightly, as a circling zone, thou ſee'ſt --
Powder'd with ſtars. A ſilton's Par. Lºft, b. vii.
The powder'd footman -
, Beneath his flapping hat ſecures his hair. Gay.
3. To ſalt; to ſprinkle with ſalt.
If you imbowel me to day, I'll give you leave to powder
me and eat me to-morrow. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Salting of oyſters, and powdering of meat, keepeth them
from putrefaction. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
- My hair I never powder, but my chief
Invention is to get me powder'd beef. . . Clºveland.
Inmoderate feeding upon pºwdered beef, pickled meats,
anchovy, and debauching with brandy do inflame and acuate
the blood. Harvey on Conſumption:.
To Powder. v. n. To come tumultuouſly and violently. A
low corrupt word. - • •
Whilſt two companions were diſputing it at ſword's point,
down comes a kite powdering upon them, and ; up
both. :/trange.
Powder Box, n.ſ. (powder and box.] A box in which pow-
der for the hair is kept.
There ſtands the toillette,
The patch, the powderbox, pulville, perfumes. Gay.
Pow DERHoRN. n.ſ. (powder and horn.] A horn caſe in which
powder is kept for guns.
You may ſtick your candle in a bottle or a pºwderhorn. Sw.
Powder Miil. n.ſ. [powder and mill.] The mill in which
the ingredients for gunpowder are ground and mingled.
Upon the blowing up of a powdermill, the windows of ad-
jacent houſes are bent and blown outwards, by the elaſtick
force of the air within exerting itſelf. , Arbuthnot.
Pºw DER-Room. n.ſ. [powder ind room..] The part of a ſhip
in which the gunpowder is kept.
The flame invades the pºwderrooms, and then
Their guns ſhoot bullets, and their veſſeſsmen. It al.,.
Powpºk-cliests. n.ſ. On board a ſhip, wooden triangular
cheſts filled with gunpowder, pebble-ſtones and ſuch like
* materials, ſet on fire when a ſhip is boarded by an enemy,
which ſoon makes all clear before them. Dicf.
°WPERING-Tu B. m. ſ. [powder and tub.] -
1. The veſſel in which meat is ſalted.
When we view thoſe large bodies of oxen, what can we
better conceit them to be, than ſo many living and walking
£ºriºg-tubs, and that they have animàm ſai. More.
2. The place in which an infected lecher is phyſicked to pre-
ſerve him from putrefaction. -
To the ſpital go,
*nd from the powd'ring tub ºf inſam
... Fetch forth the lazar kite Doll ºffs. Shakeſp.
Powpery, adj. ſpoudreux, Fr. from powder.] Duſty; friable.
h A brown powdery ſpar, which holds iron, is found amongſt
the iron ore. Woodward N-
PoweR. "... ſ. ſpouvoir, Fr.] on Foſſils.
1. Command; authority; dominion; influence.
If law, authority and pow'r deny not,
ſt will go hard with poor Anthonio. Shakespeare
w No man could ever have a iuſt pºwer over the life of anº-
ther, by right of property in land. Locke.
Pºwer is no bleſling in itſelf, but when it is employ'd to
protećt the innocent. Swift
2. Influence; prevalence upon. -
d º * had pºwer with him, to draw him forth to his
eat in. »
Dejeded! no, it never ſhall be ſaid, Bacon's Eſſays.
That fate had Pºwer upon a Spartan ſoul;
My mind on its own centre flâni, unmov’d
And ſtable, as the fabrick of the world.
Donne.
Dryden.
That which moveth God to work is goodneſs, and that
which ordereth his work is wiſdom, and that which perfecteth
- his work is power. - Hooker.
. I have ſuffer'd in your woe:
Nor ſhall be wanting ought within my pow'r,
For your relief in my refreſhing bow'r, Dryden.
You are ſtill living to enjoy the blefings of all the good
...” Performed, and many Prayers that your power of
f º *tions may be as extended as your will. Dry.
to º in the power of the moſt enlarged underſtanding,
the ... ." "Ple idea in the mind, not taken in by
i.Ways aforementioned. Locke.
mićiº * the power of want or ſlavery to make them
Though it be not Addiſon's Guardian.
tion; yet it is in " * Pºwer to make affliction no afflic-
ſteady view of i. pºwer to take off the edge of it, by a
tite. °le divine joys Prepared for us in another
4tterbury's Sermons,
7. Faculty of the mind.
4. Strength; motive force.
Obſerving in ourſelves, that we can at pleaſure move ſº.
veral parts of our bodies, which were at reſt; the effects
alſo that natural bodies are able to produce in one another;
occurring every moment to our ſenſes, we both theſe ways
get the idea of power. - Locke.
5. The moving force of an engine.
By underſtanding the true difference betwixt the weight
and the power, a man may add ſuch a fitting ſupplement to
the ſtrength of the power, that it ſhall move any conceivable
weight, though it ſhould never ſo much exceed that force,
which the power is naturally endowed with. Wilkins.
6. Animal ſtrength; natural ſtrength.
Care, not fear; or fear not for themſelves altered ſome-
thing the countenances of the two lovers: but ſo as any man
might perceive, was rather an aſſembling of powers than diſ-
mayedneſs of courage. Sidney, b. i.
#. died of great years, but of ſtrong health and powers.
Bacon's Henry VII.
If ever
You meet in ſome freſh cheek the power of fancy,
Then you ſhall know the wounds inviſible,
That love's keen arrows make. Shakeſp.
I was in the thought, they were not fairies, and yet the
guiltineſs of my mind, the ſudden ſurprize of my powers drove
the groſineſs of the foppery into a received belief Shakeſp.
In our little world, this ſoul of ours
Being only one, and to one body ty'd,
Doth uſe, on divers objects, divers powers;
And ſo are her effects diverſity'd. Davies.
Maintain the empire of the mind over the body, and keep
the appetites of the one in due ſubjection to the reaſoning
powers of the other. Atterbury's sermon:
The deſign of this ſcience is to reſcue our reaſoning powers.
from their unhappy ſlavery and darkneſs. //atts.
8. Government; right of governing. -
My labour
Honeſt and lawful, to deſerve my food
Of thoſe who have me in their civil pºwer. 4/ilton.
9. Sovereign ; potentate.
'Tis ſurpriſing to conſider with what heats theſe two £27Jers
have conteſted their title to the kingdom of Cyprus, that is in
the hands of the Turk. Addison's Kemarks on Italy.
Io. One inveſted with dominion. -
After the tribulation of thoſe days ſhall the ſun be dark-
ened, and the powers of the heavens ſhall be ſhaken. 4/at.
The fables turn'd ſome men to flow’rs,
And others did with brutiſh forms inveſt;
And did of others make celeſtial pow'r,
Like angels, which ſtill travel, yet ſtill reſt. Davies.
If there's a pow'r above us,
And that there is all nature cries aloud
Through all her works, he muſt delight in virtue. Addison
11. Divinity. - -
Merciful powers /
Reſtrain in me the curſed thoughts, that nature
Gives way to in repoſe. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
Caſt down thyſelf, and only ſtrive to raiſe
The glory of thy maker's ſacred name;
Uſe all thy pow'rs, that bleſſed pow'r to praiſe,
Which gives thee pow'r to be and uſe the ſame. Davier,
With indignation, thus he broke
His awful ſilence, and the pow'rs beſpoke. Dryden.
Tell me,
What are the gods the better for this gold 2
The wretch that offers from his wealthy ſtore
Theſe preſents, bribes the pow'r, to give him more. Dryd.
12. Hoſt; army; military force.
He, to work him the more miſchief, ſent over his brother
Edward with a power of Scots and Redſhanks into Ireland,
where they got footing. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Never ſuch a power,
For any foreign preparation,
Was levied in the body of a land. Shakeſp. K. john.
Young Octavius and Mark Antony -
Come down upon us with a mighty power,
Bending their expedition tow'rd Philippi. Shakeſp.
Who leads his power P
Under whoſe government come they along? Shakeſp.
My heart, dear Harry,
Threw many a northward look, to ſee his father
Bring up his pow'rs ; but he did long in vain. Shakespeare .
Gazellus, upon the coming of the baſſa, valiantly iſſued
forth with all his power, and gave him battle. Knolles.
13. A large quantity ; a great number. In low language: as,
a power of good things.
PoW ERABLE. adj. [from power.] Capable of performing any
thing.
That you may ſee how powerable time is in altering tongues,
I will ſet down the Lord's prayer as it was tranſlated in fundry
ages. Camden.
Powe'RFUL.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R A
Power FUL. adj. [power and ful.]
1. Inveſted with command or authority; potent.
2. Forcible; mighty.
We have ſuſtain'd one day in doubtful fight,
What heaven's lord hath powerfully? to ſend
Againſt us from about his throne. Milton's Par. Loft.
Henry II. endeavouring to eſtabliſh his grandfather's laws,
met with powerful oppoſition from archbiſhop Becket. Ayliffe.
. Efficacious. - - -
Foſwer FULLY. adv. [from powerful..] Potently ; mightily;
efficaciouſly ; forcibly. -
The ſun and other powerfully lucid bodies dazzle our
eyes. - - - Boyle.
By aſſuming a privilege belonging to riper years, to which
a child muſt not aſpire, you do but add new force to your
example, and recommend the action more powerfully. Locke.
Before the revelation of the goſpel, the wickedneſs and
impenitency of the heathen world was a much more excu-
ſable thing, becauſe they had but very obſcure apprehenſions
of thoſe things which urge men moſt *# to forſake
their ſins. illotſon's Sermons.
The grain-gold, upon all the golden coaſt of Guinea, is
diſplayed by the rains falling there with incredible force,
powerfully beating off the earth. J/oodward.
Pówekfulness. n.ſ.. [from powerful..] Power; efficacy;
ight.
*g. much he ſtands upon the powerfulneſs of chriſtian reli-
gion, that he makes it beyond all the rules of moral philo-
iophy, ſtrongly effectual to expel vice, and plant in men all
kind of virtue. Hakewill on Providence.
Power less. adj. [from power.] Weak; impotent.
I give you welcome with a pow'rlºſ hand,
But with a heart full of unſtained love. Shakeſp.
Pox, n.ſ. [properly pocks, which originally ſignified a ſmall
bag or puſtule; of the ſame original, perhaps, with powke or
pouch. We ſtill uſe pock, for a fingle puſtule; poccar,
Sax. pocken, Dutch.]
1. Puſtules; effloreſcencies; exanthematous eruptions.
2. The venereal diſeaſe. This is the ſenſe when it has no
epithet.
"ºugh brought to their ends by ſome other apparent diſ-
eaſe, yet the pox hath becn judged the foundation. Jºſeman.
Wilt thou ſtill ſparkle in the box,
Sill ogle in the ring
Can't thou forget thy age and pox. Dorſet.
Poy. n.ſ.. [appoyo, Spaniſh; appuy, poids, Fr.] A ropedancer's
ole.
T. Poze. v. a. To puzzle. See Pos E and Appose.
And ſay you ſo then I ſhall poze you quickly. Shakeſp.
Of human infirmities I ſhall give inſtances, not that I de-
ſign topoze them with thoſe common enigmas of magnetiſm,
fluxes and refluxes. Glanvill's Scºpſ.
PRA'cticable. adj. [prađicable, Fr.]
1. Performable ; feaſible ; capable to be pračtiſed.
This falls out for want of examining what is pračicable
and what not, and for want again of meaſuring our force and
capacity with our deſign. L'E/ºrange.
An heroick poem ſhould be more like a glaſs of nature, figu-
ring a more pračicable virtue to us, than was done by the
ancients. Dryden on Heroick Plays.
This is a pračicable degree of chriſtian magnanimity. Att.
Some phyſicians have thought, that if it were practicable to
keep the humours of the body in an exact balance of each
with its oppoſite, it might be immortal ; but this is impoſſible
in the practice. Swift.
2. Aſſailable; fit to be affailed.
PRA'cticableNEss. n.ſ.. [from pračicable.] Poſſibility to be
performed. -
PRAct IcABLY. adv. [from pračicable.] In ſuch a manner as
may be performed. - -
. The meaneſt capacity, when he ſees a rule fračicably ap-
plied before his eyes, can no longer be at a loſs how 'tis to be
performed. - Rogers.
PRAct IcAL. adj. [pračicus, Lat. pratique, Fr. from practice.]
Relating to action; not merely ſpeculative.
The image of God was no leſs reſplendent in man's pradii-
cal underſtanding; namely, that ſtorehouſe of the ſoul, in
which are treaſured up the rules of action and the feeds of
morality. South's Sermons.
Religion comprehends the knowledge of its principles, and
a ſuitable life and practice; the firſt, being ſpeculative, may
be called knowledge; and the latter, becauſe 'tis pračical,
wiſdom.
PRA’ctic All Y. adv. [from pradical.]
1. In ... to action.
2. By practice; in real fact.
I honour her, having practically found her among the better
ſort of trees. Howel's local Forg/?.
PRA’ericals ess. n.ſ. [from practical.] The quality of being
practical. -
PRACTICE. n.ſ. [+33* , pratique, Fr.]
1. The habit of doing anything.
Tillotſon's Sermons.
2. Uſe ; cuſtomary uſe.
Obſolete worás may be laudably revived, when they are
more ſounding, or more ſignificant than thoſe in practice. Dry.
Qf ſuch a practice when Ulyſſ. told :
Shall we, cries one, permit yiles told ;
This lewd romancer and his bant’rin
3. Dexterity acquired by habit.
I'll prove it on his body, if he dare,
Deſpite his nice fence and his active practice. Shakeſp.
4. Aétual performance, diſtinguiſhed from theory.
There are two functions of the ſoul, contemplation and
Pºić, according to that general diviſion of obječts, ſome
of which only entertain our ſpeculations, others alſo employ
our ačtions; ſo the underſtanding, with relation to theſe, is
divided into ſpeculative and practick, South.
5. Method or art of doing any thing.
6. Medical treatment of diſeaſes.
This diſeaſe is beyond my practice; yet I have known thoſe
which have walked in their ſleep, who have died holily in
their beds. - Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
7. Exerciſe of any profeſſion.
8. [Praet, Saxon, is cunning, ſlineſs, and thence prat, in Dou.
glaſ, is a trick or fraud; latter times forgetting the orginal of
words, applied to prajice the ſenſe of prat.] Wicked ſtrata.
gem ; bad artifice. A ſenſe not now in uſe.
He ſought to have that by praſtice, which he could not by
Prayer; and being allowed to viſit us, he uſed the opportu.
* of a fit time thus to deliver us. Sidney, b. ii.
artly with ſuſpicion of practice, the king was ſuddenly
turned. Sidney, b. ii.
It is the ſhameful work of Hubert's hand,
The practice and the purpoſe of the king,
Shall we thus permit
A blaſting and a ſcandalous breath to fall -
On him ſo near us? this needs muſt be practice; * :
g wit. Tale.
Shake?.
Who knew of your intent and coming hither Shakespeare
Wiſe ſtates prevent purpoſes -
Before they come to practice, and foul prašices
Before they grow to act. Penham's Sophy.
PRA'ctick. adj. [Tézáixº, pračictºr, Lat. pratique, Fr.]
I. Relating to action"; not merely theoretical.
When he ſpeaks,
The air, a charter'd libertine, is ſtill;
And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears,
To ſteal his ſweet and honied ſentences;
So that the aët and practick part of life
Muſt be the miſtreſs to this theorick. Shakeſp.
Whilſt they contend for ſpeculative truth, they, by mu-
tual calumnies, forfeit the practick. Gov. of the Tongue.
True piety without ceſſation toſt
By theories, the praiſick part is loſt.
2. In Spen'er it ſeems to ſignify, ſly; artful.
She uſed hath the practick pain
Of this falſe footman, cloaked with ſimpleneſs. F. Queen,
Thereto his ſubtile engines he doth bend,
His pračick wit, and his fair filed tongue,
With thouſand other ſleights. Fairy £acen,
To PRAYCTISE. v. a. [Texx'izö; ; pratiquer, Fr.]
1. To do habitually.
Incline not my heart to praºſe wicked works with men
that work iniquity. Pſalm cºli. 4.
2. To do ; not merely to profeſs: as, to praćtiſe law or phyſick.
3. To uſe in order to habit and dexterity.
To PRA’ct Is E. v. n.
1. To have a habit of ačting in any manner formed.
Will truth return unto them that practiſe in her. Eccluſ.
They ſhall praefiſe how to live ſecure. AZilton.
Oft have we wonder'd
How ſuch a ruling ſprit you cou’d reſtrain,
And practiſe firſt over yourſelf to reign. IPaler.
2. To tranſact; to negotiate ſecretly.
I've practis'd with him,
And found a means to let the vićtor know,
Penhnm.
That Syphax and Sempronius are his friends. Addiſon.
3. To try artifices.
- Others by guilty artifice and arts,
Of promis'd kindneſs practiſe on our hearts;
With expectation blow the paſſion up, -
Granvil.
She fans the fire without one gale of hope.
4. To uſe bad arts or ſtratagems.
If you . in Egypt
Did pračiſ on my ſtate, your being in Hºgy
#. tº; º - Shakespeare , Ant, and Cleop.
If thou do'ſ him any ſlight diſgrace, he will praiſe againſt
thee by poiſon. Shakeſpeare's A, 1%u Like it.
5. To uſe medical methods: - - - -
I never thought I ſhould try a new experiment, being little
inclined to praiſe upon others, and as little that others ſhould
practiſe upon me. Temple's Miſcel.
6. To exerciſe any profeſſion. ...
PRA'cris ANT. m. ſ. [from pračiſe.] An agent.
Here enter'd Pucelle and her practants. Shakeſp.
20 E. PRACTISER.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R A
P. R. A
w , n.ſ.. [from practiſe.] -
º: º: º any thing; one that does any thing ha-
| || "...in, in the principles of the politician, ſhew how
" ' - little efficacy they have to advance the practiſer of them to
the things they aſpire to. South's Sermons.
2. One who preſcribes medical treatment.
Sweet practiſer, thy phyſick I will try,
That miniſters thine own death if I die. Shakeſpeare.
I had reaſoned myſelf into an opinion, that the uſe of phy-
ficians, unleſs in ſome acute diſeaſe, was a great venture, and
that their greateſt pratītiſers practiſed leaſt upon *:::.
enºr -
Practitioner. n.ſ.. [from practice..] .
1. He who is engaged in the actual exerciſeof any art. -
The author exhorts all gentlemen practitioners to exerciſe
themſelves in the tranſlatory. Arbuthnot.
I do not know a more univerſal and unneceſſary miſtake
among the clergy, but eſpecially the younger practitioners. Sw.
2. One who uſes any ſly or dangerous arts. - -
There is ſome ºº:::::::" among you. Whitgifte.
- oes any thing habitually.
3. º: .. # an . thorough-paeed praślitioner
of theſe vices himſelf. - South's Sermons.
PRAECOGNITA. m. ſ. [Latin.] Things previouſly known in
order to underſtanding ſomething elſe; thus the ſtructure of
the human body is one of the precognita of phyſick.
Either all knowledge does not depend on certain pracognita
or general maxims, called principles, or elſe theſe are prin-
ciples. - Locke.
- PRAGMATICK. }*; [7:27'ºzzz ; pragmatique, Fr.]
PRAGMATICAL. J. Meddling; impertinently buſy; aſlu-
ming buſineſs without leave or invitation.
No ſham ſo groſs, but it will paſs upon a weak man that
is pragmatical and inquiſitive. L'E/irange.
Common eſtimation puts an ill charaćter upon pragmatick
meddling people. Government of the Tongue.
He underſtands no more of his own affairs, than a child ;
he has got a ſort of a pragmatical filly jade of a wife, that
pretends to take him out of my hands. Arbuthnot.
The fellow grew ſo pragmatical, that he took upon him the
government of my whole family. Arbuthnot.
Such a backwardneſs there was among good men to en-
gage with an uſurping people, and pragmatical ambitious
Orators. Swift.
They are pragmatical enough to ſtand on the watch tower,
but who aſſigned them the poſt ºft,
PRAGMA'tically. adv. [from pragmatical.] Meddlingſy;
impertinently.
PRAGMATIcALNess. n.ſ.. [from pragmatical.] The quality
of intermeddling without right or call.
PRAISE. m. ſ. [prijs, Dutch.j
I. Renown; commendation; fame; honour; celebrity.
w Beſt of fruits, whoſe taſte has taught
The tongue, not made for ſpeech, to ſpeak thy praiſ. Milt.
Lucan, content with praiſe, may lie at eaſe
In coſtly grotts and marble palaces;
But to poor Baſſus what avails a name,
To ſtarve on compliments and empty fame.
2. Glorification; tribute of gratitude; laud.
He hath put a new ſong in my mouth, even praiſe unto
our God. - Pſalm xl. 3.
To God glory and praiſ. Milton.
3. Ground or reaſon of praiſe.
Praiſeworthy ačtions are by thee embrac'd 3
And 'tis my praiſe to make thy praiſes laſt.
To PRAISE. v. a. [prijſen, Dutch..]
I. To commend; to applaud; to celebrate.
Will God incenſe his ire
For ſuch a petty treſpaſs, and not praiſe
Rather your dauntleſs virtue. Milton.
We praiſe not Hector, though his name we know
Is great in arms; 'tis hard to praiſe a foe. Dryden.
2. To glorify in worſhip.
The ſhepherds returned, glorifying and praiſing God for all
the things that they had heard and ſºn. uše ii. 20.
One generation ſhall praiſe thy works to another, and de-
clare thy mighty works. Pſalm cºlv. 4.
Their touch'd their golden harps, and hymning prais'd
God and his works. - Milton.
***E*UL. adj. [praiſe and fall.J Laudable; commend.
able. Not now in uſe.
9, whoſe high praiſe, and praiſful bliſs,
°odneſs the pen, heaven the paper is.
G He ordain’d a lady for his priſe,
º ºſul, fair and young, and ſkill'd in houſe-
- lferies. Chapman's Iliad.
*::::::ſºn Praiſe.] One who praiſes; in applauder;
*i. * praiſers of men ſhould remember, that if we
xcellencies, it is -
reaſon to think th ell
creatures, of whom we are, CIn “gº.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Sidney.
Forgive me, if my verſe but ſay you are
A Sidney: but in that extend as far
As loudeſt praiſers. B. Johnſºn's Epig.
Turn to God, who knows I think this true,
And uſeth oft, when ſuch a heart miſſays,
To make it good; for ſuch a praiſer prays.
PRAISEwo'RTHY, adj. [praiſe and worthy.] Commendable;
deſerving praiſe.
The Tritonian goddeſs having heard
Her blazed fame, which all the world had fill'd,
Came down to prove the truth, and due reward
For her praiſeworthy workmanſhip to yield.
Since men have left to do praiſeworthy things,
Moſt think all praiſes flatteries; but truth brings
That ſound, and that authority with her name,
As to be rais'd by her is only fame. Ben. johnſºn.
Firmus, who ſeized upon Egypt, was ſo far praiſeworthy
that he encouraged trade. Arbuthnot on C.
PRAME. n.ſ. A flat bottomed boat. - Bailey.
To PRANCE v. a. [pronken, Dutch, to ſet one's ſelf to ſhow.]
1. To ſpring and bound in high mettie.
Here's no fantaſtick maſk, nor dance,
But of our kids that friſk and prance;
Nor wars are ſeen,
Unleſs upon the green,
Two harmleſs lambs are butting one the other. J7%tton.
With mud fill’d high, the rumbling cart draws near,
Now rule thy prancing ſteeds, lac'd ºafiore. Gay.
Far be the ſpirit of the chace from them,
To ſpring the fence, to rein the prancing ſteed.
2. To ride gallantly and oftentatiouſly.
The horſes hoofs were broken by means of the prancings,
the prancings of their º OIlcs. tages v. 22.
ſee
Th’ inſulting tyrant, prancing o'er the field,
Strow'd with Rome's citizens, and drench'd in ſlaughter,
His horſes hoofs wet with patrician blood. 4./ajan,
3. Tº move in a warlike or ſhowy manner. -
We ſhould neither have meat to cat, nor manufacture to
cloatheus, unleſs we could prance about in coats of mail, or
eat braſs. Swift.
Spenſºr.
Thomſºn.
To PRANK. v. a. [pronken, Dutch..] To decorate; to dº.
or adjuſt to oſtentation.
Some prank their ruffs, and others timely dight
Their gay attire. *airy Queen.
In wine and meats ſhe flow'd above the bank,
And in exceſs exceeded her own might,
In ſumptuous tire ſhe joy'd herſelf to prank,
But of her love too laviſh. Fairy &amp;een.
Theſe are tribunes of the people,
The tongues o' th' common mouth: I deſpiſe them:
For they do prank them in authority
Againſt all noble ſufferance.
Your high ſelf,
The gracious mark o' th' land, you have obſcur'd
With a ſwain's wearing; and me, poor lowly maid,
Moſt goddeſs-like prank'd up. Shakeſp. Winter’s Tale.
'Tis that miracle, and queen of gems,
That nature pranks, her mind attracts my ſoul.
I had not unlock'd my lips
In this unhallowed air, but that this jugler
Would think to charm my judgment as mine eyes,
Obtruding falſe rules, prankt in reaſon's garb. Milton.
PRANK. m. ſ. A frolick; a wild flight; a ludicrous trick; a
wicked act.
Shakuſp.
Shakespeare .
Lay home to him;
Tell him, his pranks have been too broad to bear with. Sha.
Such is thy audacious wickedneſs,
Thy lewd, peſtif’rous and diſſentious prank; ;
The very infants prattle of thy pride. Shakespeare
They cauſed the table to be covered and meat ſet on, which
was no ſooner ſet down, than in came the harpies, and played
their accuſtomed pranks. Raleigh.
They put on their cloaths, and played all thoſe pranks you
have taken notice of. Addiſon's Guardian.
PRA’son. m. ſ. [Téza ov.] A leek: alſo a ſea weed as green as
a leek. Bailey.
To PRATE. v. n. [praten, Dutch.j To talk careleſly and with-
out weight; to chatter; to tattle ; to be loquacious; to prattle.
His knowledge or ſkill is in prating too much. ‘ſuffer.
Behold me, which owe
A moiety of the throne, here ſtanding
To prate and talk for life and honour, 'fore
Who pleaſe to hear. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tºle.
This ſtarved juſtice hath prated to me of the neſs of
his youth, and the feats he hath done about Turnbæ-ſtreet;
and every third word a lie. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
After Flammock and the blackſmith had, by joint and ſe-
veral pratings, found tokens of conſent in the multitude, they
offered themſelves to lead them. Bacon’s Henry VII.
Oh liſten with attentive fight
To what my prating eyes indite cº
at
Donne.
</p></div><p>
            End of Section.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809207#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section" id="Section"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R A
º,
-- - -
What nonſenſe would the fool thy maſter prate,
When thou, his knave, can'ſt talk at ſuch a rate. Dryden,
She firſt did wit’s prerogative remove,
And made a fool preſume to prate of love. Dryden.
This is the way of the world; the deaf will prate of diſ-
cords in muſick. JWatts.
TRATE. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Tattle ; flight talk; unmean-
ing loguacity.
ing º I i. to him; with his innocent prate,
He will awake my mercy which lies dead. Shakeſp.
Would her innocent prate could overcome me;
Oh what a conflićt do I feel. Denham's Sophy.
PRATER. m. ſ. [from prate.] An idle talker; a chatterer.
When expe&amp;tation rages in my blood,
Is this a time, thou prater; hence be gone. Southern.
PRATINGLY. adv. [from prate.] With tittle tattle; with
loquacity.
PRATTIQUE. n.ſ. [French ; prattica, Italian.] A licence
for the maſter of a ſhip to traffick in the ports of Italy upon
a certificate, that the place, from whence he came, is not
annoyed with any infectious diſeaſe. Bailey.
To PRATTLE. v. m. [diminutive of prate.] To talk lightly;
to chatter; to be trivially loquacious.
But I prattle
Something too wildly, and my father's precepts
I therein do forget. Shakeſpeare's Tempſ?.
What the great ones do, the leſs will prattle of. Shakespeare
A French woman teaches an Engliſh girl to ſpeak and read
French, by only prattling to her. . Locke.
There is not ſo much pleaſure to have a child prattle agree-
ably, as to reaſon well. Locke on Education.
His tongue, his prattling tongue, had chang'd him quite
To ſooty blackneſs, from the pureſt white. Ad. Ovid.
A little lively ruſtick, trained up in ignorance and preju-
dice, will prattle treaſon a whole evening. Addiſon.
I muſt prattle on,
And beg your pardon, yet this half hour. Prior.
Let cred’lous boys and prattling nurſes tell,
How if the feſtival of Paul be clear,
Plenty from libral horn ſhall ſtrow the year. Gay.
PRATTLE, n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Empty talk; trifling lo-
quacity.
In a theatre the eyes of men,
After a well-grac'd actor leaves the ſtage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious.
The bookiſh theorick,
Wherein the toged conſuls can propoſe
As maſterly as he , mere prattle, without praćtice,
Is all his ſoldierſhip. Shakeſp. Othello.
The inſignificant prattle and endleſs garrulity of the philo-
Shakeſp. Rich. II.
ſophy of the ſchools. Glanv.
PRATTLER. n.ſ. [from prattle.] A trifling talker; a chatterer.
Poor prattler 1 how thou talk'ſt Shakeſp.
Prattler, no more, I ſay;
My thoughts muſt work, but like a noiſeleſs ſphere,
#: peace muſt rock them all the day;
No room for prattlers there. Herbert.
PRA'vity. n.ſ. [pravitas, Lat..] Corruption; badneſs; ma-
lignity.
gnity Doubt not but that ſin
Will reign among them, as of thee begot;
And therefore was law given them, to evince
Their natural pravity. Milton's Par. Loſº, b. xii.
More people go to the gibbet for want of timely correction,
than upon any incurable pravity of nature. L'E/hrange.
I will ſhew how the pravity of the will could influence the
underſtanding to a diſbelief of Chriſtianity. South.
PRAwN. m. ſ. A ſmall cruſtaceous fiſh, like a ſhrimp, but
larger.
fia prawns, and borrowed a meſs of vinegar, Shakeſp.
To PRAY. v. n. [prier, Fr. pregare, Italian.]
1. To make petitions to heaven.
I will buy with you, ſell will you; but I will not cat with
you, drink with you, nor pray with you. Shakeſpeare.
Pray for this good man and his iſſue. Shakeſp.
Ne'er throughout the year to church thougo'ſt,
Except it be to pray againſt thy foes. Shakeſp.
I tell him, we ſhall ſtay here at the leaſt a month; and he
heartily prays, ſome occaſion may detain us longer. Shakeſp.
Is any fick? let him call for the elders of the church, and
let them pray over him. jam. v. 14.
Unſkilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him. Milton.
. He that prays, deſpairs not; but ſad is the condition of
him that cannot pray; happy are they that can, and do, and
love to do it. º Guide to Devotion.
Thou, Turnus, ſhalt attone it by thy fate,
And pray to heav'n for peace, but pray too late. Dryden.
He prais'd my courage, pray'd for my ſucceſs;
He was ſo true à father of his country,
To thank me for defending ev’n his foes, Dryden,
Should you pray to God for a recovery, how raſh would it
° tº accuſe, God of not hearing your prayers, becauſe you
found your diſeaſe ſtill to continu. Hake,
2. To entreat; to aſk ſubmiſſively.
You ſhall find
Agonqu'ror that will pray in aid for kindneſs,
Where he for grace is kneel'd to.
Shakespeare.
Pray that in towns and temples of renown, ºft
The name of great Anchiſes may be known. Dryden.
3. I PRAY ; that is, I pray you to left m, is a ſlightly ceremo-
nious form of introducing a queſtion. re
But I pray, in this mechanical formation, when the ſer-
ment was expanded to the extremities of the arteries, why
did it not break through the receptacle : Bentley's Sermons.
4. Sometimes only pray elliptically.
Barnard in ſpirit, ſenſe and truth abounds;
Pray then what wants he? fourſcore thouſand pounds. Pope.
To PRAY. v. a. -
1. To ſupplicate; to implore; to addreſs with ſubmiſſive pc-
titlonS.
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pity incline Miltons
2. To aſk for as a ſupplicant.
He that will have the benefit of this act, muſt pray a pro-
hibition before a ſentence in the eccleſiaſtical court. Aliff.
3. To entreat in ceremony or form.
Pray my collegue Antonius I may ſpeak with him;
And as you go, call on my brother Qintus,
And pray him with the tribunes to come to me, B. Johnſ.
PRA'YER. m. ſ. [priere, Fr.]
1. Petition to heaven.
They did ſay their prayers, and addreſs'd them
Again to ſleep. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
O remember, God
O hear her prayer for them as now for us. Shakeſp.
Were he as famous and as bold in war,
As he is fam'd for mildneſs, peace and prayer. Shakeſp.
My heart's deſire and prayer to God for Iſrael is, that they
might be ſaved. Romani X. I.
Sighs now breath'd
Inutterable, which the ſpirit of prayer
Inſpir'd. Milton.
No man can always have the ſame ſpiritual pleaſure in his
prayers ; for the greateſt ſaints have ſometimes ſuffered the
baniſhment of the heart, ſometimes are fervent, ſometimes
they feel a barrenneſs of devotion; for this ſpirit comes and
goes: Taylor's Guide to Devotion:
2. Entreaty; ſubmiſſive importunity.
Prayer among men is ſuppoſed a means to change the per-
ſon to whom we pray; but prayer to God doth not change
him, but fits us to receive the things prayed for. Stillingfleet.
PRAYER Book. n.ſ. [prayer and boºk.j #. of publick or
private devotions.
Get a prayerbook in your hand,
And ſtand between two churchinen ;
For on that ground I’ll build a holy deſcant. Shał ſp.
I know not the names or number of the family which now
reigns, farther than the prayerlook informs me. Swift.
PRE. ſprae, Lat..] A particle which, prefixed to words de-
rived from the Latin, marks priority of time or rank.
To PREACH. v. n. [pradico, Lat. preſcher, Fr.] To pro-
nounce a publick diſcourſe upon ſacred ſubjects.
From that time Jeſus began to preach.
Mat. iv. 17.
Prophets preach of thee at Jeruſalem.
Neh. vi. 7.
Divinity would not paſs the yard and loom, the forge or
anvil, nor preaching be taken in as an eaſier ſupplementary
trade, by thoſe that diſliked the pains of their own. D. of Pir.
As he was ſent by his father, ſo were the apoſtles commiſ-
ſionated by him to preach to the gentile world. D. of Piety.
The ſhape of our cathedral is not proper for our preaching
auditories, but rather the figure of an amphitheatre with
galleries. Graunt.
To PREAch. v. a.
1. To proclaim or publiſh in religious orations.
The Jews of Theſſalonica had knowledge, that the wºrd
of God was preached of Paul. Acłs.
2. To inculcate publickly; to teach with earneſtneſs.
There is not any thing publickly notific, but we my Pro-
perly ſay it is preached. * Hooker.
- He oft to them preach'd -
Converſion and repentance. - Milton.
Can they preach up equality of birth, -
And tell us how we all began from earth. Dryden.
Huge heaps of ſlain;
Among the reſt, the rich Galeſus lies. - -
A good old man while peace hº preach'd in vain,
Amidſt the madneſs of th' unruly train. Dºn.
PR each. n.ſ. [prºſche, Fr. from the verb.] A diſcourſe; a
•liori ation.
ºf... occaſioned the French ſpitefully to term re-
ligion in that fort exerciſed, a mere preach. Hooker.
4. PREA'chi, R.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P R E
f , a. ſ. [preſcheur, Fr. from prºach.]
*::::::: º publickly upon religious ſubjects. f th
The Lord gave the word; great was the company of the
reachers. * Pſalm lxviii. II.
you may hear the ſound of a preacher's voice, when you
cannot diſtinguiſh what he faith. Bacon.
Here lies a truly honeſt man,
One of thoſe few that in this town
Honour all preachers; hear their own. Craſhaw.
2. One who inculcates any thing with earneſtneſs and vehe-
mence.
No preacher is liſtened to but time, which gives us the
ſame train of thought, that elder people have tried in vain to
put into our heads before. Swift.
PREA'chMENT. n.ſ.. [from preach.J. A ſermon mentioned in
contempt ; a diſcourſe affectedly ſolemn:
was’t you, that revell'd in our parliament,
And made a preachment of your high deſcent. Shakeſp.
All this is but a preachment upon the text fe º
'E/?range.
PREAMBLE. m. ſ. ſpreamlule, Fr.] Something previous ;
introdućtion; preface.
How were it poſſible that the church ſhould any way elſe
with ſuch eaſe and certainty provide, that none of her chil-
dren may, as Adam, diſſemble that wretchedneſs, the penitent
confeſſion whereof is ſo neceſſary a preamble, }}...", to
Commoil prayer. ooker, b. V.
Truth . . this we do not violate, ſo neither is the ſame
gainſayed or croſſed, no not in thoſevery preambles placed be-
fore certain readings, wherein the ſteps of the Latin ſervice
book have been ſomewhat too nearly followed. Hooker.
Doors ſhut, viſits forbidden, and divers conteſtations with
the queen, all preambles of ruin, though now and then he did
wring out ſome petty contentments. J/otton.
This preamlie to that hiſtory was not improper for this
relation. Clarendon's Hiſt, of the Rebellion.
With preamble ſweet
Of charming ſymphony they introduce
Their ſacred ſong, and waken raptures high. Milton.
I will not detain you with a long preamble. Dryden.
PREA'MBULARY. }"; [from preamble.] Previous. Not in
PREAMBUlous. ! uſe.
He not only undermineth the baſe of religion, but de-
ſtroyeth the principle preambulous unto all belief, and puts
upon us the remoteſt error from truth. Brown.
PREAPPREHENSION. m. ſ. [pre and apprehend..] An opinion
formed before examination.
A conceit not to be made out by ordinary eyes, but ſuch
as regarding the clouds, behold them in ſhapes conformable
to preapprehenſions. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
PREASE. n. ſ. Preſs; crowd. Spenſer. See PREss.
A ſhip into the ſacred ſeas,
New-built, now launch we ; and from out our preaſe
Chuſe two and fifty youths. Chapman.
PREA's ING. part. adj. Crowding. Spenſºr.
PREBEND. m. ſ. [prabenda, low Latin; prebende, Fr.]
1. A ſtipend granted in cathedral churches.
His excellency gave the doctor a prebend in St. Patrick's ca-
thedral. - Swift's Miſcellanies.
2. º but improperly, a ſtipendiary of a cathedral; a
prebendary.
Deans and canons, or prebends of cathedral churches, in
their firſt inſtitution, were of great uſe, to be of counſel
with the biſhop. - Bacon.
Fºr ºf Iºwa, Lºſ A ſºlay of .
CC1, 31. º
To lords, to principals, to prebendaries. Hubberd
A º to . tº: Mr. Grattan, prebendary of s.
udeon's, my gold bottle-ſcrew. * . . . * **, * -
pº adj. [precarius, Lat. rº,£º.
#". becauſe depending on the will of another;
y courteſy; changeable or alienable at the pleaſure of
another. No word is more unſkilfully uſed than this with its
derivatives. It is uſed for uncertain in all its ſenſes ; but it
only º: . as dependent on others: thus there
are authors who mention the -: -
the weather, of a die. Precariouſneſs of an account, of
What ſubjects will precariºus kings regard,
A beggar ſpeaks too ſoftly to be heard. Dryden.
Thoſe who live under an arbitrary tyrannick power, have
no other law but the will of their prince, and conſe und
*Miivileges but what are precariºus. 2 º:
This little happineſs is ſo very precarious, that it wholl
epends on the will of others. Addiſon's !.
* who rejoices in the ſtrength and beauty of youth, ſhould
confider by how precarious a tenure he holds theſ
that a thºuſand accidents ma º e º s theſe advantages,
theſe glories in the duff y before the next dawn lay all
PRECA Riously...?". - Rogers's Sermons.
Fendence; dependent on precarious.] Uncertainly by de-
y; at the pleaſure of others.
Our ſcene precariouſly ſ
- ºiſy ſubſiſts too lon
on French tianſlation and Italian ſong g
~ *
Dare to have ſenſe yourſelves; aſſert the ſtage,
Be juſtly warm'd with your own native rage. Pope.
PREcA'Rious N Ess. m. ſ. [from precarious.] Uncertainty; de-
pendence on others. The following paſſage from a book,
otherwiſe elegantly written, affords an example of the impro-
priety mentioned at the word precarious.
Moſt conſumptive people die of the diſcharge they ſpit up,
which, with the precariouſneſs of the ſymptoms of an oppreſſed
diaphragm from a mere lodgement of extravaſated matter
render the operation but little adviſeable. Sharp's Sº.
PREcAU'tion. . m. ſ. precaution, Fr. [from praecautus, Lat.]
Preſervative caution ; preventive meaſures.
Unleſs our miniſters have ſtrong aſſurances of his falling in
with the grand alliance, or not oppoſing it, they cannot be too
circumſpect and ſpeedy in taking their precautions againſt an
contrary reſolution. Addiſon on the State of the 1/aſ.
To PR E cAU"rio N. v. a. [precautioner, Fr. from the noun.]
To warn beforehand.
By the diſgraces, diſeaſes and beggary of hopeful young
men brought to ruin, he may be precautioned. Zºº:
PREced AN Eous. adj. [This word is, I believe, miſtaken by
the author for praecidaneous ; praecidaneus, Lat. cut or ſlain
before. Nor is it uſed here in its proper ſenſe. J previous;
antecedent. &gt;
That priority of particles of ſimple matter, influx of the
heavens and preparation of matter might be antecedent and
precedaneous, not only in order, but in time, to their ordinary
productions. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
To PREcE'DE. v. a. [pracedo, Lat. preceder, Fr.J
1. To go before in order of time.
ow are we happy, ſtill in fear of harm ;
But harm precedes not fin. Milton.
Arius and Pelagius durſt provoke,
To what the centuries preceding ſpoke: Dryden.
The ruin of a ſtate is generally preceded by an univerſal de-
generacy of manners and contempt of religion. Swift.
2. To go before according to the adjuſtment of rank.
;::::::::::: {n. J. [from practed, Lat.]
1. The act or ſtate of going before ; priority.
2. Something going before ; ſomething paſt.
I do not like but yet ; it does allay
The good precedence. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleºp.
It is an epilogue or diſcourſe, to make plain
Some obſcure precedence that hath tofore been ſain. Shałęſp.
3. Adjuſtment of place. -
The conſtable and marſhal had cognizance, touching the
rights of place and precedence. 11ale.
4. The foremoſt place in ceremony.
None ſure will claim in hell
Precedence ; none, whoſe portion is finall
Of preſent pain, that with ambitious mind
Will covet more. - Milton's Par. Lo/?.
The royal olive accompanied him with all his court, and
always gave him the precedency. Howel.
That perſon hardly will be found,
With gracious form and equal virtue crown'd ;
Yet if another could precedence claim,
My fixt deſires could find no fairer aim. Dryden.
5. Superiority.
Books will furniſh him, and give him light and precedency
enough to go before a young follower. Locke.
Being diſtracted with different deſires, the next inquiry
will be, which of them has the precedency, in determining
the will, to the next action. Locke.
PREcE'DENT. adj. [precedent, Fr. praceden, Lat..] Former ;
going before.
Do it at once,
Or thy precedent ſervices are all -
But accidents unpurpos'd. Shakespeare . Ant, and Cleºp.
Our own precedent paſſions do inſtruct us.
What levity's in youth. Shakeſp. Timon ºf Atheni.
When you work by the imagination of another, it is ne-
ceſſary that he, by whom you work, have a precedent opinion
of you, that you can do ſtrange things. Bacon.
Hippocrates, in his prognoſticks, doth make good obſer-
vations of the diſeaſes that enſue upon the nature of the pre-
cedent four ſeaſons of the year. - Bacon.
The world, or any part thereof, could not be precedent to
the creation of man. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Truths, abſolutely neceſſary to ſalvation, are to clearly re-
vealed, that we cannot err in them, unleſs we be notoriouſly
wanting to ourſelves; herein the fault of the judgment is re-
ſolved into a precedent default in the will. South.
Precedest. h. / [The adjective has the accent on the ſecon"
ſyllable, the ſubſtantive on the firſt.] Anything that is a rule
or example to future times; anything done before of the
ſame kind. *
Examples for caſes can but direct as precedent; only. Hººr.
Eleven hours I’ve ſpent to write it over,
The precedent was full as long a doing. Shakeſpeare.
A reaſon
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. R. E.
P R E
–
A reaſon inighty, ſtrong and effectual,
A pattern, precedent and lively warrant
For me, moſt wretched, to perform the like. Shake?.
No pow'r in Venice
Can alter a decree eſtabliſhed:
*Twill be recorded for a precedent;
And many an errour, by the ſame example,
Will ruſh into the ſtate. Shakeſp. March. of Penice.
God, in the adminiſtration of his juſtice, is not tied
to precedents, and we cannot argue, that the providences of
God towards other nations ſhall be conformable to his deal-
ings with the people of Iſrael. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Such precedents are numberleſs ; we draw
Our right from cuſtom; cuſtom is a law. Granville.
PREcedently. adv. [from precedent, adj.] Beforehand.
PREce'NToR. n.ſ. [praecentors. Lat, precenteur, Fr.] He that
leads the choir.
Follow this precentor of ours, in bleſfing and magnifying
that God of all grace, and never yielding to thoſe enemies,
which he died to give us power to reſiſt and overcome. Hamm.
PRECEPT. n.ſ. [precepte, Fr. praeceptum, Lat..] A rule autho-
ritatively given; a mandate ; a commandment; a direction.
The cuſtom of leſſons furniſhes the very ſimpleſt and rudeſt
ſort with infallible axioms and precepts of ſacred truth, deli-
wered even in the very letter of the law of God. Hooker.
'Tis ſufficient, that painting be acknowledged for an art;
for it follows, that no arts are without their precepts. Dryden.
A precept or commandment conſiſts in, and has reſpect to,
ſome moral point of doćtrine, viz. ſuch as concerns our man-
ners, and our inward and outward good behaviour. Ayliffe.
Prece'PTIAL. adj. [from precept.] Conſiſting of precepts. "A
word not in uſe.
‘Men
Can counſel, and give comfort to that grief
Which they themſelves not feel; but taſting it,
Their counſel turns to paſſion, which before
Would give *... medicine to rage;
Fetter ſtrong madneſs in a ſilken thread,
Charm ach with air, and agony with words. Shakeſp.
Preceptive. adj. [preceptivus, Lat. from precept.] Containing
precepts; giving precepts.
The ritual, the preceptive, the prophetick and all other
parts of ſacred writ, were moſt ſedulouſly, moſt religiouſly
guarded by them. Government of the Tongue.
As the preceptive part enjoins the moſt exact virtue, ſo is it
moſt advantageouſly enforced by the promiſſory, which, in
reſpečt of the rewards, and the manner of propoſing them,
is adapted to the ſame end. Decay of Piety.
The leſſon given us here, is preceptive to us not to do any
thing but upon due conſideration. L’Eſtrange.
PreciproR n.ſ. [preceptor, Lat. precepteur, Fr.] A teacher;
a tutor.
Paſfionate chiding carries rough language with it, and the
names that parents and preceptors give children, they will
not be aſhamed to beſtow on others. - Docke.
It was to thee, great Stagyrite unknown,
And thy preceptor of divine renown. Blackmore.
PRF ce'ssion. n.ſ.. [from pracedo, praeceſus, Lat..] The aët of
going before.
Preci'Nct. n.ſ. [pracinéſus, Latin.] Outward limit; boundary.
The main body of the ſea being one, yet within divers
precinéis, hath divers names; ſo the catholick church is in
like ſort divided into a number of diſtinét ſocieties. Hooker.
Through all reſtraint broke looſe, he wings his way
Not far off heav'n, in the preciné’s of light,
Dire&amp;tly towards the new-created world. Milton.
PREcio'sity. n.ſ.. [from pretioſus, Lat.]
. Value ; preciouſneſs.
2. Any thing of high price.
The index or forefinger was too naked whereto to commit
their precioſities, and hath the tuition of the thumb ſcarce unto
the ſecond joint. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Barbarians ſeem to exceed them in the curioſity of their
application of theſe precioſities. More's Divine Dialogues.
PRECIOUS. adj. [precieux, Fr. pretioſus, Lat.]
1. Valuable; being of great worth.
Many things, which are moſt precious, are neglected only
becauſe the value of them lieth hid. Hooker.
I cannot but remember ſuch things were,
That were moſt precious to me. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Why in that rawneſs left you wife and children,
Thoſe precious motives, thoſe ſtrong knots of love,
Without leave taking Shakeſp. Macbeth.
I never ſaw
Such precious deeds in one that promis'd nought
But begg'ry and poor luck. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Theſe virtues are the hidden beauties of a ſoul, which
make it lovely and precious in his ſight, from whom no ſe-
crets are concealed. Addiſon's Spectator.
2. Coſtly ; of great price: as, a precious ſtone,
Let none admire
That riches grow in hell; that ſoil may beſt
Deſerve the precious bane. Milton.
3. Wolthieſ. An epithet of contempt or irony.
More of the ſame kind, concerning theſe precious ſaints
amongſt the Turks, may be ſeen in Pietro della valle. Locke.
PRE'ciously. adv. [from precious.]
I. Valuably ; to a great price.
2. Contemptibly. In irony.
PRE'ciousness. n.ſ.. [from Precious.] Valuableneſs; worth;
price.
ºfºſºft equalled the price of pearls. Wilkin;
PRECIPICE. m. ſ. [precipitium, Lat. #. Fr.] º:
long ſteep ; a fall perpendicular without gradual declivity.
You take a precipice for no leap of danger,
And woo your own deſtruction. Shakeſp. Henry VIII
Where the water daſheth more againſt the bottom there
it moveth more ſwiftly and more in precipice; for in the break.
ing of the waves there is ever a precipice.
Iere long that precipice muſt tread,
Whence none return, that leads unto the dead, Sandys.
No ſtupendous precipice denies
Bacon.
Acceſs, no horror turns away our eyes. Denham.
Swift down the precipice of time it goes,
And ſinks in minutes, which in ages roſe. Dryden.
His gen'rous mind the fair ideas drew
Of ſame and honour, which in dangers lay;
Where wealth, like fruit, on precipices grew,
Not to be gather'd but by birds of prey. Dryden.
Drink as much as you can get; becauſe a good coachman
never drives ſo well as when he is drunk; and then ſhew
your ſkill, by driving to an inch by a precipice. Swift.
Preci'PITANce. }" / [from precipitant..] Raſh haſte; head-
Preci'PITANcy. $ long hurry.
Thither they haſte with glad precipitance. Milton.
'Tis not likely that one of a thouſand ſuch precipitancier
ſhould be crowned with ſo unexpected an iſſue. Glanvill.
As the chymiſt, by catching at it too ſoon, loſt the philo-
ſophical elixir, ſo precipitany of our underſtanding is an occa-
ſion of error. Glanvill's Scepſ.
We apply preſent remedies according unto indications, re-
ſpecting rather the acuteneſs of diſeaſe and precipitancy of oc-
caſion, than the riſing or ſetting of ſtars. Brown.
Hurried on by the precipitancy of youth, I took this oppor-
tunity to ſend a letter to the ſecretary. Gulliver's Travels.
A raſhneſs, and precipitance of judgment, and haſtineſs to
believe ſomething on one ſide or the other, plunges us into
many errors. J%atts's Lºgick.
PRECI'Pitant. adj. [praecipitans, Lat.]
1. Falling or ruſhing headlong.
Without longer pauſe,
Downright into the world's firſt region throws
His flight precipitant. %. Par. Left, $. iii.
The birds heedleſs while they ſtrain
Their tuneful throats, the tow'ring heavy lead
O'ertakes their ſpeed; they leave their little lives
Above the clouds, precipitant to earth. Philips.
2. Haſty; urged with violent haſte.
Should he return, that troop ſo blithe and bold,
Precipitant in fear, would wing their flight,
And curſe their cumbrous pride's unwieldy weight. Pope.
3. Raſhly hurried.
The commotions in Ireland were ſo ſudden and ſo violent,
that it was hard to diſcern the riſe, or apply a remedy to that
precipitant rebellion. King Charles.
PRecipitantly, adv, [from precipitant.] In headlong haſte;
in a tumultuous hurry.
To PRECIPITATE. v. a. [precipito, Lat. precipiter, Fr. in
all the ſenſes.]
1. To throw headlong,
She had a king to her ſon in law, yet was, upon dark and
unknown reaſons, precipitated and baniſhed the world into a
nunnery, Bacon's Henry VII.
Ere vengeance
Precipitate thee with augmented pain. Milton.
They were wont, upon a ſuperſtition, to precipitate a man
from ſome high cliff into the ſea, tying about him with ſtrings
many great fowls. JWilkins.
The virgin from the ground
Upſtarting freſh, already clos'd the wound,
Precipitates her flight. - Dryden.
The goddeſs guides her ſon, and turns him from the light,
Herſelf involv’d in clouds, precipitates her flight. Dryden.
2. To haſten unexpectedly. - - -
Short, intermittent and ſwift recurrent pains do precipitate
patients into conſumptions. Harvey.
3. To hurry blindly or raſhly. . - - -
As for having them obnoxious to ruin, if they be of fear-
ful natures, it may do well ; but if they be ſtout and daring,
it may precipitate their deſigns, and prove dangerous.
Bacon.
Dear Erythraea, let not ſuch blind fury
Precipitate your thoughts, nor ſet them working,
Till time ſhall lend them better means,
Than loſt complaints. Denham's Sophy.
20 F 3. To throw
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P. R. E.
|
. To throw to the bottom. A term of chymiſtry oppoſed to
º: endures a vehement fire long without any change,
and after it has been divided by corroſive liquors into inviſible
parts, yet may preſently be precipitated, ſo as tº appear again
in its own form. Grew's Cynol.
To PRECIPITATE. v. n.
1. To fall headlong.
Had'ſt thou been aught but goſs'mer feathers,
So many fathom down precipitating,
Thoud'ſt ſhiver like an egg.
2. To fall to the bottom as a ſediment.
By ſtrong water every metal will precipitate. Bacon.
3. To haſten without juſt preparation. -
Neither did the rebels ſpoil the country, neither on the
other fide did their forces encreaſe, which might halten him
to precipitate and affail them. - Bacon.
PRECIPITATE. adj. [from the verb.]
- ly falling. -
I *::::::::: ñº, it was neceſſary this paradiſe ſhould be ſet
at ſuch a height, becauſe the four rivers, had they not fallen
ſo precipitate, could not have had ſufficient force to thruſt
themſelves under the great ocean. Aaleigh.
When the full ſtores their antient bounds diſdain,
Precipitate the furious torrent flows; -
In vain would ſpeed avoid, or ſtrength oppoſe. Prior.
2. Headlong ; haſty; raſhly haſty.
The archbiſhop, too precipitate in preſſing the reception of
that which he thought a reformation, paid dearly for it.
Clarendon.
Shakespeare . King Lear.
3. Haſty; violent.
Mr. Gay died of a mortification of the bowels; it was the
moſt precipitate caſe I ever knew, having cut him off in three
days. - Pope to Swift.
PRECIPITATE. m. ſ. A corroſive medicine made by precipi-
tating mercury. -
As the eſcar ſeparated, I rubb'd the ſuper-excreſcence of
fleſh with the vitriol-ſtone, or ſprinkled it with precipitate.
Jºſeman's Surgery.
PREc1'PITATELY. adv. [from precipitate.]
1. Headlong ; ſteeply down.
2. Haſtily; in blind hurry.
It may happen to thoſe who vent praiſe or cenſure too pre-
cipitately, as it did to an Engliſh poet, who celebrated a noble-
man for erecting Dryden's monument, upon a promiſe which
he forgot, till it was done by another. Swift.
Not ſo bold Arnall; with a weight of ſcull
Furious he ſinks, precipitately dull. Pope's Dunciad.
PRECIPITATION. m. ſ. [precipitation, Fr. from precipitate.]
1. The act of throwing headlong.
Let them pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down-ſtretch
Below the beam of fight, yet will I ſtill
- Be this to them. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. Violent motion downward.
That could never happen from any other cauſe than the
hurry, precipitation and rapid motion of the water, returning
at the end of the deluge, towards the ſea. //oodward.
3. Tumultuous hurry; blind haſte.
Here is none of the hurry and precipitation, none of the
bluſtering and violence, which muſt have attended thoſe ſup-
poſititious changes. Hoodward's Nat. Hiſł.
4. In chemiſtry, Subſidency: contrary to ſublimation.
- Separation is wrought by precipitation or ſublimation; that
1s, a calling of the Parts up or down, which is a kind of at-
traction. Bacon.
The precipitation of the vegetative matter, after the deluge,
and the burying it in the ſtrata underneath amongſt the ſand,
Wº to, refrºnch the luxury of the productions of the earth,
which had been ſo ungratefully abuſed by its former inha-
bitants. - Woodward's Nat. Hiſł.
PRECIPI tous. adj. [pracípites, Lat.] -
1. Headlong ; ſteep.
- *º together * º could not but be daſhed in
pieces uch a precipitous fall as they iſ w
2. Haſty "...? p y intended. K. Charles.
Though the attempts of ſome have been precipitous, and
their enquiries ſo audacious as to have loſt themſelves in at-
... humanity, yet have the enquiries of moſt de-
- itcte - *****
sºme time is, how *:::::::::::::::::
* many things to be done in their juſt ſeaſon, after once *
ground is in order. Evelyn's Kalend
3. Raſh ; heady. y it haltz?".
º fram'd for ill, he loos'd our triple hold,
PR Eğ. **, precipitous and boki.
tions. ' * * * having ſtrict and determinate limita-
Means more d
- - urable to preſe
livion and corruption Preſerve the laws of God from ob-
- rew in uſ. , , ; }; -e-iſ. A
tion from God i. uſe, not without £ºſ. direc-
- a Jiaº'er, b. i.
Dryden.
-
You'll not bear a letter for me; you ſtand upon your ho-
nour; why, thou unconfinable baſeneſs, it is as much as I can
do to keep the term of mine honour preciſe. Shakeſp.
The ſtate hath given you licence to ſtay on land ſix weeks,
and let it not trouble you if your occaſions aſk farther time;
for the law in this point is not preciſe. Bacºn.
Let us deſcend from this top
Of ſpeculation; for the hour preciſe
Exacts our parting. 41ilton's Par. Loft, b. xiii.
In human actions there are no degrees and preciſe natural
limits deſcribed, but a latitude is indulged. Taylºr.
The reaſonings muſt be preciſe, though the practice may
admit of great latitude. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
The preciſe difference between a compound and collective
idea is this, that a compound idea unites things of a different
kind, but a collective, things of the faine kind. If atti.
2. Formal; finical; ſolemnly and ſuperſtitiouſly exact.
The raillery of the wits in king Charles the Second's reign,
upon every thing which they called preciſe, was carried to ſo
great an extravagance, that it almoſt put all Chriſtianity out
of countenance. Addiſon.
PRECI's El Y. adv. [from preciſe.]
1. Exactly ; nicely; accurately.
Doth it follow, that all things in the church, from the
greateſt to the leaſt, are unholy, which the Lord hath not
himſelf preciſely inſtituted 2 Hooker, b. v.
When the Lord had once preciſily ſet down a form of exe-
cuting that wherein we are to ſerve him, the fault appeareth
greater to do that which we are not, than not to do that which
we are commanded. Hooker, b. ii.
He knows,
He cannot ſo preciſely weed this land,
As his miſdoubts preſent occaſion,
His foes are ſo enrooted with his friends. Shakespeare .
Where more of theſe orders than one ſhall be ſet in ſeveral
ſtories, there muſt be an exquiſite care to place the columns
preciſely one over another. J/otton's Architeciure.
In his tract my wary feet have ſtept,
His undeclined ways preciſely kept. Sandys.
The rule, to find the age of the moon, cannot ſhew pre-
ciftly an exact account of the moon, becauſe of the inequality
of the motions of the ſun and of the moon. Holder.
Meaſuring the diameter of the fifth dark circle, I found
it the fifth part of an inch preciſely. Newton's Opticks.
2. With ſuperſtitious formality; with too much ſcrupuloſity;
with troubleſome ceremony. -
PREcI's EN Ess. n.ſ. [from preciſe.] Exactneſs; rigid nicety.
I will diſtinguiſh the caſes; though give me leave, in the
handling of them, not to ſever them with too much preciſe-
meſs. Bacon.
When you have fixed proper hours for particular ſtudies,
keep to them, not with a ſuperititious prºjenſ, but with
ſome good degrees of a regular conſtancy. //atts.
PRECI's 1AN. n.ſ.. [from preciſe.]
1. One who limits or reſtrains.
Though love uſe reaſon for his preciſian, he admits him not
for his counſellor. Shakeſp. Merry J/ives of // indºr.
2. One who is ſuperſtitiouſly rigorous. -
A profane perſon calls a man of piety a preciſian. Watts.
PREci'sion, n.ſ. [preciſion, Fr.] Exact limitation.
He that thinks of being in general, thinks never of any
particular ſpecies of being; unleſs he can think of it with
and without preciſion at the ſame time. Lºcke.
I have left out the utmoſt preciſions of fračtions in theſe
computations as not neceſſary; theſe whole numbers ſhºwing
well enough the difference of the value of guineas. Locke.
I was unable to treat this part more in detail, without ſacri-
ficing perſpicuity to ornament, without wandering from the
preciſion or breaking the chain of reaſoning. . . . Pope.
Precisive. adj. [from preciſus, Lat..] Exactly limiting, by
cutting off all that is not abſolutely relative to the preſent
purpoſe. -
Preciſive abſtraaion is when we conſider thoſe things apart,
which cannot really exiſt apart; as when we conſider Inode, ,
without conſidering its ſubſtance or ſubject. //atts.
To preclude. v. ... [pracludo, Lat.J. To ſhutout or hinder
one anti Cipati Oil.
º much . obviate and preclude the objections of our
adverſaries, that we do not determine the final cauſe of the
ſyſtematical parts of the world, merely as they have reſpect
to the exigences or conveniences of life. Bentley.
If you once allow them ſuch an acceptation of chance, you
have precluded yourſelf from any more reaſoning againſt
them. Bentley's Sermonſ.
I fear there will be no way left to tell you, that I entirely
eſteem you; none but that which no bills can preclude, and
no king can prevent. ,- - Pope.
PRECO'CIOU.S. adj. [pracocis, Lat, precoſe, Fr.] Ripe before
the time. - - - -
Many precocious trees, and ſuch as have their ſpring in the
winter, may be found in moſt parts. Brown.
PREcocity.
f
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. R. E.
P R E
PREco'city. n.ſ.. [from precocious.] Ripeneſs before the time.
Some impute the cauſe of his fall to a precocity of ſpirit and
valour in him; and that therefore ſome infectious ſouthern air
did blaſt him. Howel's Pocal Forg/?.
To PREco Git Ate. v. a. ſpraecºgito, Lat..] To conſider or
ſcheme beforehand. -
Precognition, n.f ſpra, and cognitio, Lat..] Previous know-
ledge; antecedent examination.
Preconce I'T. n. ſ. [pra, and conceit.] An opinion previouſly
formed.
A thing in reaſon impoſſible, which notwithſtanding through
their misfaſhioned preconceit, appeared unto them no leſs cer-
tain than if nature had written it in the very foreheads of
all the creatures. Hooker.
To PREconce 1've. v. a. , ſpra, and conceive.] To form an
opinion beforehand; to imagine before...and.
In a dead plain the way ſeemeth the longer, becauſe the
eye hath preconceived it ſhorter than the truth; and the fruſ-
trations of that maketh it ſeem ſo. Bacon.
Fondneſs of preconceived opinions is not like to render your
reports ſuſpect, nor for want of ſagacity or care, defective.
Glanvill's Scepſ.
The reaſon why men are ſo weak in governing is, becauſe
moſt things fall out accidentally, and come not into any com-
pliance with their preconceived ends, but they are forced to
comply ſubſequently. South's Sermons.
BREconception. n.f ſprae and conception.] Opinion pre-
viouſly formed.
Cuſtom with moſt men prevails more than truth, according
to the notions and preconceptions, which it hath formed in
our minds, we ſhape the diſcourſe of reaſon itſelf. Hakewill.
PEEco'NTRAct. m. ſ. ſpra, and contrači. This was formerly
accented on the laſt ſyllable.] A contračt previous to another.
He is your huſband on a precontrači i
To bring you thus together, 'tis no fin. Shakeſp.
To PR econtract. v. a. [prae and contrači.] To contračt or
bargain beforehand.
Some are ſuch as a man cannot make his wife, though he
himſelf be unmarried, becauſe they are already precontračied
to ſome other; or elſe are in too near a degree of affinity or
conſanguinity. Ayliffe.
PREcu'RSE. m. ſ. [from praecurro, Lat.] Forerunning.
The like precurſe of fierce events,
As harbingers preceding ſtill the fates,
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and earth together demonſtrated. Shakeſpeare.
PREcu'Rsor. n. ſ. [pracurſor, Lat. precurſeur, Fr.] Fore-
runner; harbinger. -
Jove's lightnings, the precurſºrs
Of dreadful thunder claps, more momentary
Were not. Shakespeare Tempeſt.
This contagion might have been preſaged upon confidera-
tion of its precurſors, viz. a rude winter, and a cloſe, ſul-
phurous and fiery air. Harvey on the Plague.
Thomas Burnet played the precurſºr to the coming of Ho-
mer in his Homerides. Pope.
PREDA crous. adj. [from praeda, Lat.] Living by prey.
As thoſe are endowed with poiſon, becauſe they are preda-
ceous ; ſo theſe need it not, becauſe their food is near at hand,
and may be obtained without conteſt. Derham.
PRE DAL. adj. . [from praeda, Lat..] Robbing ; practiſing
plunder. This word is not countenanced from analogy.
Sarmatia, laid by predal rapine low,
Mourn'd the hard yoke, and ſought relief in vain. Sa. Boyſ.
PRE'DAT or Y. adj. [praedatorius, Lat. from praeda, Lat.]
1. Plundering; practiſing rapine.
The king called his parliament, where he exaggerated the
malice and the cruel predatory war made by Scotland. Bacon.
2. Hungry; preying ; rapacious ; ravenous.
The evils that come of exerciſe are, that it maketh the
ſpirits more hot and predatory. Bacon.
PREDfcEA's ED. adj. [prae and deceaſed.] Dead before.
Will you mock at an ancient tradition, began upon an ho-
nourable reſpect, and worn as a memorable trophy of prede-
ceaſed valour. Shakeſp. Henry V.
PREDEcE'ssoR. m. ſ. [predeceſſºur, Fr. prac and decedo, Lat.]
1. One that was in any ſtate or place before another. -
In theſe paſtoral paſtimes, a great many days were ſpent
to follow their flying predeceſſors. Sidney.
There is cauſe, why we ſhould be ſlow and unwilling to
change, without very urgent neceſſity, the ancient ordinances,
rites and long approved cuſtoms of our venerable predeceſſºrs.
Hooker.
If I ſeem partial to my predeceſſºr in the laurel, the friends
of antiquity are not few. Dryden.
The preſent pope, who is well acquainted with the ſecret
hiſtory, and the weakneſs of his predeceſſor, ſeems reſolved to
bring the project to its perfeółion. Addiſon.
The more beauteous Cloe ſat to thee, -
Good Howard, emulous of Apclies’ art;
But happy thou from Cupid's arrow free,
And flames that pierc'd thy predeceſſºr's heart. Prior.
2. Anceſtors.
PREDESTINA'RIAN. n.f. [ſ - - -
- • ?:, .J. [from predeſtinate. One that holds
the doćtrine of predeſtination. predſ J
Why does the predºſiinarian ſo adve
heaven, to ranſack the celeſtial archives, read God's hidden
decrees, when with leſs labour he may ſecure an authentick
tranſcript within himſelf. Decay of Piety.
Tº PRFP}STINATE. v.a. ſºred/liner, Fr...; deſtine,
Lat.] To appoint beforehand by irreverſible decree.
fa sºme gentleman or other ſhall ſcape a predeſtinate ſcratcht
Ce.
hać -
Whom he did foreknow, he alſo did Shakeſpeare
- - predºſſinate to be con-
formed to the image of his ſon. Romans viii. 29.
Having predeſtinated us unto the adoption of children't
Jeſus Chriſt to himſelf. adop C '. º .
To PREDE'st INATE. v. n. To hold predeſtination, i. ludi-
crous language.
His ruff creſt he rears,
And pricks up his predeſtinating ears. Dryden.
PREDESTINA"rios. n.ſ. [predºſtination, Fr. from predeſtimate.]
Fatal decree; pre-ordination.
Predeſtination we can difference no otherwiſe from provi-
dence and preſcience, than this, that preſcience only fore-
feeth, providence foreſeeth and careth for, and hath reſpect
to all creatures, and predºftination is only of men; and yet
not of all to men belonging, but of their ſalvation properly
in the common uſe of divines; or perdition, as ſome have
uſed it. Raleigh's Hſi, of the J/orld.
Nor can they juſtly accuſe
Their maker, or their making, or their fate;
As if predeſtination over-rul’d
Their will, diſpos'd by abſolute decree,
Or high fore-knowledge. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. iii.
PREDESTINA"roR. n.ſ.. [from predeſtinate.] One that holds
predeſtination or the prevalence of pre-eſtabliſhed neceſſity.
Me, mine example let the Stoicks uſe,
Their ſad and cruel doćtrine to maintain;
Let all predeſtinators me produce,
Who ſtruggle with eternal fate in vain. " Cowley.
T; ºpºrts. v. a. [prac and deſline.] To decree before-
alloi.
Ye careful angels, whom eternal fate
Ordains on earth and human acts to wait,
Who turn with ſecret pow'r this reſtleſs ball,
And bid predeſtin'd empires riſe and fall. Prior.
PREDETERMINATIon. n.ſ. [predetermination, Fr. prae and
determination.] Determination made beforehand. -
This predetermination of God's own will is ſo far from being
the determining of ours, that it is diſtinétly the contrary; for
ſuppoſing God to predetermine that I ſhall ačt freely; ’tis
certain from thence, that my will is free in reſpect of God,
and not predetermined. Hammond's Fundamentals.
To PREDETERMINE. v. a. [prae and determine.] To doom or
confine by previous decree.
We ſee in brutes certain ſenſible inſtinčts antecedent to their
imaginative faculty, whereby they are predetermined to the
convenience of the ſenſible life. Hale.
PRE DIAL. [praedium, Lat..] Conſiſting of farms.
By the civil law, their predial eſtates are liable to fiſcal
payments and taxes, as not being appropriated for the ſervice
of divine worſhip, but for profane uſes. Ayliffe.
PREDICABLE. adj. [predicable, Fr. praedicabilis, Lat.] Such as
may be affirmed of ſomething. -
PREDI'cABLE. m. ſ. [pradicabile, Lat.] A logical term, de-
noting one of the five things which can be affirmed of any
thing.
Theſe they call the five predicables; becauſe every thing
that is affirmed concerning any being, muſt be the genus, ſpe-
cies, difference, ſome property or accident. J/atts.
PRE'DICAMENT. n.ſ. [predicament, Fr. praedicamentum, Lat.]
1. A claſs or arrangement of beings or ſubſtances ranked ac-
cording to their natures: called alſo categorema or cate-
gory. Harris.
If there were nothing but bodies to be ranked by them in
the predicament of place, then that deſcription. would be al-
lowed by them as ſufficient. Digby on Bodies.
2. Claſs or kind deſcribed by any definitive marks.
The offender's life lies in the mercy.
Of the duke only, 'gainſt all other voice ;
nturouſly climb into
In which predicament I ſay thou ſtand'ſt. Shaº.
I ſhew the line and the predicament, .
Wherein you range under this ſubtle king. Shakespeare.
Predicameºstal. dj. [from predicament. Relating to pre-
dicaments. º
PRE'Dicast. n.ſ. [pradianſ, Lat.] One that affirms any
hing.
t
To PREDICATF. v. a. [predico, Lat..] To affirm any
thing of another thing. . . -
All propoſitions, wherein a part of the complex idea,
which any term ſtands for, is predicated of that term, are
only verbal ; v. g. to ſay that gold is a metal. Locke.
To PRE'DICATE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P R E
PRED1'ction. ſ [predidio, Lat. prediction,
y;
To PREſpie at E. v. n. To affirm or ſpeak.
a preſumption to think, that any thing in any
º can bear any perfeót reſemblance of the incoln.
prehenſible perfection of the divine nature, very being itſelf
dicating univocally touching him and any created
:reducating y %. Origin of Mankind.
5*
Prºpicate. n.ſ. [predicatum, Lat.] That which is affirmed
f the ſubjećt; as man is rational. -
O The ºn is that which is affirmed or denied of the
ſubjećt. J/atts's Logick.
Predication. n.ſ. [predicatio, Lat. from predicate.] Affir-
mation concerning anything.
Let us reaſon from them as well as we can ; they *...
about identical predications and influence. 0ck't'.
To PREDICT. v.a. [preditius, Lat. predire, Fr.] To fore-
tell; to foreſhow. :ſ, -ºk, “Fane -
He is always inveighing againſt ſuch unequal diſtributions;
nor does he ever ceaſe to predici publick ruins, till his private
are repaired. Government of the Tongue.
r. from pre-
declaration of ſomething future.
Theſe predictions
Are to the world in general, as to Caeſar. Shakeſp.
The predictions of cold and long winters, hot, and, dry
ſummers, are good to be known. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
How ſoon hath thy predićtion, ſeer bleſt
Meaſur'd this tranſient world the race of time, --
Till time ſtand fix’d. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
In Chriſt they all meet with an invincible evidence, as if
they were not preditions, but after-relations; and the penmen
of them not prophets but evangeliſts. South's Sermons.
He, who propheſy'd the beſt,
Approves the judgment to the reſt;
He'd rather chooſe, that I ſhould die,
Than his predićtion prove a lie.
dić.] Prophe
Swift's Miſcel.
PRED1 ctor. m. ſ. [from predić.] Foreteller.
Whether he has not been the cauſe of this poor man's
death, as well as the predićior, may be diſputed. Swift.
PREDIGE'stion. m. ſ. [prae and digº/lion.] Digeſtion too ſoon
performed.
Predige/lion, or haſty digeſtion, fills the body full of cru-
dities and ſeeds of diſeaſes. Bacon's Eſſays.
To PREDispo's E. v. a. [prae and diſpoſe.] To adapt previouſly
to any certain purpoſe.
Vegetable produćtions require heat of the ſun, to prediſpoſe
and excite the earth and the ſeeds. Burnet.
Unleſs nature be prediſpoſed to friendſhip by its own pro-
j. no arts of obligation ſhall be able to abate the ſecret
hatreds of ſome perſons towards others. South's Sermons.
PREDIsposition. m. ſ. [pra and diſpoſition.] Previous adapta-
tion to any certain purpoſe.
It was conceived to proceed from a malignity in the con-
ſtitution of the air, gathered by the prediſpoſitions of ſeaſons.
Bacon's Henry VII.
Tunes and airs have in themſelves ſome affinity with the
affections; ſo as it is no marvel if they alter the ſpirits, confi-
dering that tunes have a prediſpoſition to the motion of the
ſpirits. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
External accidents are often the occaſional cauſe of the
king's evil; but they ſuppoſe a prediſpoſition of the body.
JWiſeman's Surgery.
PRedo'MINANce. }*{ [pra and domina, Lat.] Prevalence;
PREDo'MINANcy.
fuperiority; aſcendency; ſuperior in-
fluence.
We make guilty of our diſaſters, the ſun, the moon and
the ſtars, as if we were knaves, thicves and treacherous by
fpherical predominance. * * Shakeſp. King Lear.
An inflammation conſiſts only of a ſanguineous affluxion, or
elſe is denominable from other humours, according to the
predominancy of melancholy, phlegm or choler. * Brown.
In human bodies, there is an inceſſant warfare amongſt the
humours for predºminancy. Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
.The true cauſe of the Phariſees diſbelief of Chriſt's dº.
time, was the predºminance of their covetouſneſs and ambi-
tion over their will. South's Sermons.
The ſeveral rays therefore in that white light do retain their
Colorific qualities, by which thoſe of any ſort, whenever they
bºome more copious than the reſt, do, by their j
and predominance, cauſe their Proper colour to appear.
Newton.
PREbo'MINANT. ad;... [predominant, Fr. prae and dominor.]
*: ſupreme in influence ; aſcendent.
affai *ºle were the condition of that church, the weighty
*** whereof ſhould be ordered by thoſe deliberations,
wº *h an humour as this were predominant. Hooker.
A º ſubornation is predºminant,
º “quity exil'd your highneſs’ land. Shakeſp.
wº. ... that will ſtrike
e ‘tis predom; - * ... • *
Thoſe i. ; and 'tis powerful. Shakespeare.
*weighed by divers things that made
• predominant in the king's mind.
Bacon.
againſt him, and wer
PREENGAGEMENT. n.ſ.. [from preengage.] Prece
Whether the ſun, predominant in heav'n, -
Riſe on the earth ; or earth riſe on the ſun. Milton,
I could ſhew you ſeveral pieces, where the beauties of this
kind are ſo predominant, that you could never be able to read
or underſtand them. Swift.
To PR Edo MINATE. v. n. [predominer, Fr. prae and dominor,
Lat.] To prevail; to be aſcendent; to be ſupreme in in-
fluence.
So much did love t' her executed lord
Predominate in this fair lady's heart. Daniel.
The gods formed womens ſouls out of theſe principles
which compoſe ſeveral kinds of animals; and their good or
bad diſpoſition ariſes, according as ſuch and ſuch principles
predominate in their conſtitutions. Addiſon:
The rays, reflected leaſt obliquely, may predominate over
the reſt, ſo much as to cauſe a heap of ſuch particles to ap-
pear very intenſely of their colour. Newton's Opticº.
Where judgment is at a loſs to determine the choice of a
lady who has ſeveral lovers, fancy may the more allowabl
predominate. Clariſſa.
To Pre'Elect. v. a. [pre and elect.] To chuſe by previous
decree.
PRE'EMIN ENce. m. ſ. [preeminence, Fr. pre and eminence.
It is ſometimes written, to avoid the junction of te, prºhe-
minence.
1. Superiority of excellence.
I plead for the preeminence of epick poetry. Dryden.
Let profit have the preeminence of honour in the end of
poetry; pleaſure, though but the ſecond in degree, is the
firſt in favour. Dryden.
The preeminence of chriſtianity to any other religious
ſcheme which preceded it, appears from this, that the moſt
eminent among the Pagan philoſophers diſclaimed many of
thoſe ſuperſtitious follies which are condemned by revealed
religion. Addison.
2. Precedence ; priority of place.
His lance brought him captives to the triumph of Arteſia's
beauty, ſuch, as though Arteſia be amongſt the faireſt, yet
in that company were to have the preeminence. Sidney.
He toucheth it as a ſpecial preeminence of Junias and An-
dronicus, that in chriſtianity they were his ancients.
Hooker.
I do inveſt you jointly with my power,
Preeminence, and all the large effects
That troop with majeſty. Shakeſp. King Lear.
The Engliſh deſired no preeminence, but offered equality
both in liberty and privilege, and in capacity of offices and
employments. Bayward.
Am I diſtinguiſh'd from you but by toils,
Superior toils, and heavier weight of cares ] ...
Painful preeminence. Addison's Cato.
3. Superiority of power or influence.
That which ſtandeth on record, hath preeminence above that
which paſſeth from hand to hand, and hath no pens but the
tongues, no book but the ears of men. Hoster.
Beyond the equator, the Southern point of the needle is
ſovereign, and the North ſubmits his preeminence. Brown.
PRE'EMIN ENT. adj. [preeminent, Fr. pre and eminent.] Excel-
lent above others.
Tell how came I here? by ſome great maker
In goodneſs and in pow'r preeminent. - Milton.
We claim a proper intereſt above others, in the frºminent
rights of the houſhold of faith. Sprat's Sermons.
PRE EMPTION. n.ſ. [preemptio, Lat.] The right of purcha-
ſing before another. - - r
Certain perſons, in the reigns of king Edward VI. and
queen Mary, ſought to make uſe of this preemption, but croſſed
in the proſecution, or defeated in their expectation, gave it
Over. - Carew.
To PREENGAGE. v. a. [pre and engage.] To engage by
precedent ties or contračts. -
The world has the unhappy advantage of preengaging our
paſſions, at a time when we have not reflection enough to
look beyond the inſtrument to the hand whoſe direction it
obeys. Rogers's Sermons.
To Cipſeus by his friends his ſuit he mov’d,
But he was preengag’d º former ties. Dryden.
Not only made an inſtrument ; d
But preengaged without my own conſent. aſ:
gation.
My preengagements to other themes were not unknow. "
thoſe for wholm I was to write. - *:
The opinions, ſuited to their º: º: Wi
ke way to their aſſent, in ſpite of accidental Prºgºść.
ºw * * * * Glanvill's Scºpſ.
Men are apt to think, that thoſe obediences they Pº) º
God ſhall, like a preengagement, diſannull all after cºnſº
made by guilt. ſº #.
As far as opportunity and former freengagement’." §'.
leave. PP y f Cºllier of Friendſhip.
2 *
PRER NING.
º
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P R E.
º
.
To PREEN. v. a. [priinen, Dutch, to dreſs or prank up..] To
trim the feathers of birds, to cnable them to glide more eaſily
through the air : for this uſe nature has furniſhed them with
two peculiar glands, which ſecrete an unctuous matter into a
perforated oil bag, out of which the bird, on occaſion, draws
it with its bill. Bailey.
To PREESTABLISH. v. a. ſprae and eſtabliſh.] To ſettle
beforehand. -
PREEst A'BLISHMENT. m. ſ. [from pregſ?abliſh.] Settlement
beforehand.
To PREEx1's T. v. a. [prac and exiſto, Lat..] To exiſt be-
forehand.
If thy preexiſting ſoul
Was form'd at firſt with myriads more,
It did through all the mighty poets roll. Dryden.
PREEx1's TENCE. m. ſ. [preexiſtence, Fr. from preexiſt.] Ex-
iſtence beforehand; exiſtence of the ſoul before its union with
the body.
Wiſdom declares her antiquity and preexiſtence to all the
works of this carth. },...; Theory of the Earth.
As Simonides has expoſed the vicious part of women, from
the doćtrine of preexiſtence; ſome of the ancient philoſophers
have ſatyrized the vicious part of the human ſpecies, from a
notion of the ſoul's poſtexiſtence. Addiſon.
PRE Exist ENT. adj. [preexiſtent, Fr. prae and exiſtent.] Ex-
iſtent beforehand ; preceding in exiſtence.
Artificial things could not be from eternity, becauſe they
ſuppoſe man, by whoſe art they were made, preexiſtent to
them; the workman muſt be before the work. Burnet.
Blind to former, as to future fate,
What mortal knows his preexiſtent ſtate Pope.
If this preexiſtent eternity is not compatible with a ſuc-
ceſſive duration, then ſome being, though infinitely above our
finite comprehenſions, muſt have had an identical, invariable
continuance from all eternity, which being is no other than
God. Bentley's Sermons.
PREFACE. m. ſ. [preface, Fr. prafatio, Lat..] Something
ſpoken introductory to the main deſign; introduction; ſome-
thing proemial.
This ſuperficial tale
Is but a preface to her worthy praiſe. Shakeſp.
Sir Thomas More betrayed his depth of judgment in
ſtate affairs in his Utopia, than which, in the opinion of
Budaeus in a preface before it, our age hath not ſeen a thing
more deep. Peacham of Poetry.
Heav'n's high beheſt no preface needs; -
Sufficient that thy pray'rs are heard, and death
Defeated of his ſeizure. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
To PREF AcE. v. n. [prefari, Lat.] To ſay ſomething intro-
dućtory. -
Bºº I enter upon the particular parts of her chara&amp;ter,
it is neceſſary to preface, that ſhe is the only child of a de-
crepid father. Speciator, NY 449.
To PREF Ace. v. a.
1. To introduce by ſomething proemial.
Thou art raſh,
And muſt be prefac’d into government. Southern.
2. To face; to cover. A ludicrous ſenſe.
I love to wear cloaths that are fluſh,
Not prefacing old rags with pluſh. Cleaveland.
PRE'FACE.R. n.ſ. [from preface.] The writer of a preface.
If there be not a tolerable line in all theſe ſix, the prefacer
gave me no occaſion to write better. Dryden.
PRE'FATor Y. adj. [from preface.] Introductory.
If this propoſition, whoſoever will be ſaved, be reſtrained
only to thoſe to whom it was intended, the chriſtians, then
the anathema reaches not the heathens, who had never heard
of Chriſt : after all, I am far from blaming even that prefa-
tory addition to the creed. Dryden.
PRE/FEct. n. ſ. [praftectus, Lat.] Governor; commander.
He is much
The better ſoldier, having been a tribune,
Prºf…?, lieutenant, praetor in the war. Benj. johnſºn.
It was the cuſtom in the Roman empire, for the projects
and vice-roys of diſtant provinces to tranſmit a relation of
every thing remarkable in their adminiſtration. Addiſon.
PREFEct URE. m. ſ. [prefecture, Fr. praftectura, Lat.] Com-
mand ; office of government. \ . -
To PREFER. v. a. [preferer, Fr. praft ro, Lat.]
I. To regard more than another.
With brotherly love, in honour preſer one another.
2. With above before the thing poſtponed.
If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth ; if I prefer not Jeruſalem above my chief
Joy. Pſalm czxxvii. 6.
3. With before.
He that cometh after me, is preferred befºre me; for he
was before me. jo. i. 15.
It may worthily ſeem unto you a moſt ſhameful thing, to
have prºft red an infamous peace befºre a moſt juſt war. Knolles.
O ſpirit, that doſt prefer
Before all temples th’ upright heart.
Ro.
Milton.
4. With to.
Would he rather leave this frantick ſcene,
And trees and beaſts prºfer to courts and men.
5. To advance ; to exalt', to raiſe.
By the recommendation of the earl of Dunbar, he was
prºfer'd to the biſhoprick of Coventry and Litchfield. Clarend.
He ſpake, and to her hand prefer'd the bowl. Pope.
6. To offer ſolemnly ; to propoſe publickly; to exhibit,
They flatly diſavouch
To yield him more obedience or ſupport;
And as tº a perjur’d duke of Lancaſter,
Their cartel of defiance they prºfºr.
I, when my ſoul began to faint,
My vows and prayers to thee prefer'd;
. The lord my paſſionate complaint,
Even from his holy temple, heard. Sandys.
Prefer a bill againſt all kings and parliaments ſince the
conqueſt; and if that won't do, challenge the crown and
the two houſes. Collier on Duelling.
Prior.
Daniel.
Take care,
Leſt thou prefer ſo raſh a pray'r;
Nor vainly hope the queen of love
Will e'er thy fav'rite's charms improva. Prior.
Every perſon within the church or commonwealth may
preſer an accuſation, that the delinquent may ſuffer condign
puniſhment. Ayliff's Parergon.
PREFERABLE, adj. [preferable, Fr. from prefer.j Eligible be-
ºthing elſe. With to commonly before the thing re-
uled,
The ſtronger ties we have to an unalterable purſuit of hap-
pineſs, which is greateſt good, the more are we free from
any neceſſary compliance with our deſire, ſet upon any par-
ticular, and then appearing preferable good, till we have duly
examined it. Locke.
Though it be incumbent on parents to provide for their
children, yet this debt to their children does not quite cancel
the ſcore due to their parents; but only is made by nature
preferable to it. Locke.
Almoſt every man in our nation is a politician, and hath a
ſcheme of his own, which he thinks prºferable to that of any
other. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Even in ſuch a ſtate as this, the pleaſures of virtue would
be ſuperior to thoſe of vice, and juſtly preferable. Atterb.
PRE'FERABLENEss. adj. [from preferable.] The ſtate of being
preferable.
PREFERABLY. adv. [from preferable.] In preference; in ſuch
a manner as to prefer one thing to another.
How came he to chuſe a comick preferably to the tragick
poets; or how comes he to chuſe Plautus preferably to Te-
rence. Dennis.
PREFERENce. n.ſ. [preference, Fr. from preſer.]
1. The act of prefering; eſtimation of one thing above an-
other; election of one rather than another.
It gives as much due to good works, as is conſiſtent with
the grace of the goſpel; it gives as much preference to divine
grace, as is conſiſtent with the precepts of the goſpel. Sprat.
Leave the criticks on either ſide, to contend about the pre-
ference due to this or that ſort of poetry. Dryden.
We find in ourſelves a power to begin or forbear ſeveral
aćtions of our minds and motions of our bodies, barely by a .
thought or preference of the mind, ordering the doing, or not
doing ſuch a particular action. Locke.
The ſeveral muſical inſtruments in the hands of the Apollo's,
Muſes and Fauns, might give light to the diſpute for preference
between the ancient and modern muſick. Addiſon.
A ſecret pleaſure touch’d Athena's ſoul -
To ſee the pref'rence due to ſacred age
Regarded. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. With to before the thing poſtponed.
This paſſes with his ſoft admirers, and gives him the pre-
ference to Virgil. Dryden.
It directs one, in preference to, or with neglect of the other,
and thereby either the continuation or change becomes vo-
luntary. Locke:
3. With above. -
I ſhall give an account of ſome of thoſe appropriate and
diſcriminating notices wherein the human body differs, and
hath preference above the moſt perfect brutal nature. Hale.
4. With before. -
Herein is evident the viſible diſcrimination between the hu-
man nature, and its preference before it. Hale.
5. With over. -
The knowledge of things alone gives.” value to our rea-
ſonings, and prºſerence to one man * knowledge over an-
other. Locke.
PREFERMENT. n.ſ. [from prºſºr.]
1. Advancement to a higher ſtation:
I'll move the king
To any ſhape of thy preferment, ſuch
As thou’lt deſire. - -
If you hear of that blind traito’,
Prefºrment falls cn him that cuts him off.
2O Princes
… 'a'
Shakeſp. Cymbeline. • .--
Shaº.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P R E
Princes muſt, by a vigoro” exerciſe of that law, make it
man's intereſt and honour ta cultivate religion and vir-
...’, rendering vice a diſgrace, and the certain ruin to pre-
» ~.
- Swift.
ferment or pretenſions. Swiſ
# honour or profit.
2. *... ſhould be placed upon fit men. L’Eſtrange.
: act of prefering. Not in uſe.
3. Pºiº jº', º preferment of the one unto the
motion before the other. Brown's /ugar Errours.
PREFERER. [from ##". One who prefers.
T. PREFIGURATE. v. a. [prae and figure, Lat.] To ſhew
by an antecedent repreſentation.
Prºfiguration. n.ſ. [from prºfgurate.] Antecedent re-
reſentation. -
The ſame providence that hath wrought the one, will
work the other; the former being pledges, as well as preſi-
gurations of the latter. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
The variety of propheſies and prºfigurations had their punc-
tual accompliſhment in the author of this inſtitution. Norris.
To PREFIGURE. v. a. ſprae and figuro, Lat.] To exhibit by
antecedent repreſentation.
what the Old Teſtament hath, the very ſame the New
containeth; but that which lieth there, as under a ſhadow,
is here brought forth into the open ſun; things there prefi-
gured, are here performed. Hooker.
Such piety, ſo chaſte uſe of God's day,
That what we turn to feaſt, ſhe turn'd to pray,
And did prefigure here in devout taſte,
The reſt of her high ſabbath, which ſhall laſt. Donne.
If ſhame ſuperadded to loſs, and both met together, as
the ſinners portion here, perfectly prefiguring the two ſaddeſt
ingredients in hell, deprivation of the bliſsful viſion, and con-
#. of face, cannot prove efficacious to the mortifying of
vice, the church doth give over the patient Hammond.
To Prefi'NE. v. a. [prefinir, Fr. prafinio, Lat..] To limit
beforehand.
He, in his immoderate deſires, prefined unto himſelf three
years, which the great monarchs of Rome could not perform
in ſo many hundreds. Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
To PREFI’X. v. a. ſpraft, o, Lat.]
1. To appoint beforehand.
At the prefix’d hour of her awaking,
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault. Shakespeare
A time prefix, and think of me at laſt ! Sandys.
Its inundation conſtantly increaſeth the ſeventh day of June;
wherein a larger form of ſpeech were ſafer, than that which
punctually prefixeth a conſtant day. Brown.
Booth's forward valour only ſerv'd to ſhow,
He durſt that duty pay we all did owe :
Th’ attempt was fair; but heav'ns prefixed hour
Not come.
2. To ſettle; to eſtabliſh.
Becauſe I would prefix ſome certain boundary between them,
the old ſtatutes end with king Edward II. the new or later
ſtatutes begin with king Edward III. Hale's Law of England.
Theſe boundaries of ſpecies are as men, and not as nature
makes them, if there are in nature any ſuch prefixed
bounds. Locke.
3. To put before another thing: as, he prefixed an advertiſement
to his book.
PREF13, n.ſ. [prefixum, Lat.] Some particle put before a
word, to vary its ſignification.
In the Hebrew language the noun has its prefixa and affixa,
the former to fignify ſome few relations, and the latter to de'
note the pronouns poſſeſſive and relative. Clarke.
It is a prºfix of augmentation to many words in that lan-
guage. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
PREF1Xion. m. ſ. [prefixion, Fr. from prefix.] The act of
prefixing. Dić7.
To PREFo'R.M. v. a. [pre and form.] To form beforehand.
- If you conſider the true cauſe,
why all theſe things change, from their ordinance
Their natures and prºformed faculties &gt;
To monſtrous quality; why you ſhai find
º º º: them inſtröments of fºr
into ſome monſtrous ſtate. - -
PRE'GNANCY. n.ſ.. [from pregnant.] Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
1. The ſtate of being with young.
The breaſt is encompaſſed with ribs, and the belly left free
for reſpiration 3 and in females, for that extraordinary exten:
ºn in the time of their pregnancy. Ray on the Creation
2. Fertility ; fruitfulneſs ; inventive power; acuteneſs. -
in º is made a tapſter, and hath his quick wit waſted
#. reckonings. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
found *. out of the pregnancy of his invention, hath
under the i. old way of inſinuating the groſſeſt reflections
PRE&amp;Nº of admonitions. Swift's Miſcel.
1. Teeming; §: | [prºgnant, Fr. pragmans, Lat.]
ceding.
Thou
ng on the vaſt abyſs,
t.
Dryden.
Dove-like ſat'ſt brood;
di
And mad'ſt it OO
His town pregnan
By Danae,
* * *me reports, was buil
- - t of ol
Prºgnant with amiº, ...” old
Milton.
Dryden,
Through cither ocean, fooliſh man'
That pregnant word ſent forth again,
Might to a world extend each atom there,
For every drop call forth a ſea, a heav'n for ev'ry ſtar. Pri.
2. Fruitful; fertile ; impregnating.
All theſe in their pregnant cauſes mixt: Milton.
Call the floods from high, to ruſh amain
With pregnant ſtreams, to ſwell the teeming grain. Dryden.
. Full of conſequence.
Theſe knew not the juſt motives, and pregnant grounds,
with which I thought myſelf furniſhed. King Charles.
An egregious and pregnant inſtance how far virtue ſurpaſſes
ingenuity. Iłoodward's Nat. Hſi.
O déteſtable, paſſive obedience did I ever imagine I
ſhould become thy votary in ſo pregnant an inſtance. Arl.
4. Evident; plain; clear; full. An obſolete ſenſe.
This granted, as it is a moſt pregnant and unforc’d poſition,
who ſtands ſo eminent in the degree of this fortune as Caño?
a knave very voluble. Sºakeſp. Othel's.
Were’t not that we ſtand up againſt them all,
'Twere pregnant, they ſhould ſquare between themſelves.
Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra.
5. Eaſy to produce any thing.
A moſt poor man made tame to fortune's blows,
Who by the art of known and feeling ſorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Shakespeare. King Lear.
6. Free; kind. Obſolete.
My matter hath no voice, but to your own moſt pregnant
and vouchſafed ear. Shakespeare.
PRE'GN ANTLY. adv. [from pregnant.]
1. Fruitfully.
2. Fully; plainly ; clearly.
A thouſand moral paintings I can ſhew,
That ſhall demonſtrate theſe quick blows of fortune
More pregnantly than words. Shakeſp. Timon ºf Athens.
The dignity of this office among the Jews is ſo pregnantly
ſet forth in holy writ, that it is unqueſtionable; kings and
prieſts are mentioned together. South's Sermons.
PREGUSTA'tion. m. ſ. [prae and guffo, Lat..] The act of
taſting before another.
To PREJU'DGE. v.a. [prejuger, Fr. prae and judico, Lat..] To
determine any queſtion beforehand ; generally to condemn
beforehand.
If he ſtood upon his own title of the houſe of Lancaſter,
he knew it was condemn’d in parliament, and prejudged in
the common opinion of the realm, and that it tended to the
diſinheriſon of the line of York. Bacon's Henry VII.
The child was ſtrong and able, though born in the eight
month, which the phyſicians do prejudge. Bacon.
The committee of council hath prejudged the whole caſe,
by calling the united ſenſe of both houſes of parliament an
univerſal clamour. Swift.
Some action ought to be entered, left a greater cauſe ſhould
be injured and prejudged thereby. Ayliff.
To PREJu'dicate. v. a. [prae and judico, Lat.] To de-
termine beforehand to diſadvantage.
Our deareſt friend
Prejudicates the buſineſs, and would ſeem
To have us make denial.
Are you, in favour of his perſon, bent
Thus to prejudicate the innocent : Sandy.
PREJu'dicatz. adj. [from the verb.]
1. Formed by prejudice; formed before examination.
This rule of caſting away all our former prejudicate opi-
nions, is not propoſed to any of us to be practiſed at once as
ſubjects or chriſtians, but merely as philoſophers. //attr.
2. Prejudiced ; prepoſſeſſed.
Their works will be embraced by moſt that underſtand
them, and their reaſons enforce belief from prºjudicate
readers. Brown's /ulgar Errours.
PREjudication. m. ſ. [from prejudicate.] The act of judg-
ing beforehand. - - - -
PREJUDICE. n.ſ. [prejudice, Fr. prºjudicinº, Lat.] -
1. Prºpoſſeſſion; judgment formed beforehand without exami-
nation. It is uſed for prepoſſeſſion in favour of anything or
againſt it. It is ſometimes uſed with to before that which the
prejudice is againſt, but not properly. -
The king himſelf frequently confidered more the perſon
who ſpoke, as he was in his prºjudice, than the counſel itſelf
that was given. - Clarendon, b. viii.
My comfort is, that their manifeſt prejudice to my cauſe
will render their judgment of leſs authority. Dryden.
There is an unaccountable prejudice to proječtors of all
kinds, for which reaſon, when I talk of practiſing to fly,
filly people think me an owl for my pains. . - Addiſon.
2. Miſèhief; detriment; hurt ; injury. This ſenſe is only ac-
cidental or conſequential; a bad thing being called a prejudº,
only becauſe prejudice is commonly a bad thing, and is not de-
rivéd from the original or etymology of the word; it wº
therefore better to uſe it leſs; perhaps prejudice ought ºf
to be applied to any miſchief, which does not imply ſome
partiality or prepoſſeſſion. In ſome of the following examples
its impropriety will be diſcovered. I have
Shakeſpeare.
:
p
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. R. E.
P. R. E.
f.
I have not ſpake one the leaſt word,
That might be prejudice of her preſent ſtate,
Or touch of her good perſon. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
England and France might, through their amity,
Breed him ſome prejudice; for from this league
Peep'd harms that menac'd him. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Factions carried too high and too violently, is a ſign of
weakneſs in princes, and much to the prejudice of their au-
thority and buſineſs. Bacon.
How plain this abuſe is, and what prejudice it does to the
underſtanding of the ſacred ſcriptures. Locke.
A prince of this character will inſtruct us by his example,
to fix the unſteadineſs of our politicks; or by his conduct
hinder it from doing us any prejudice. Addiſon.
To PRE JUDI'cE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To prepoſſeſs with unexamined opinions ; to fill with pre-
iudices.
J Half-pillars wanted their expected height,
And roofs imperfect prejudic'd the fight. Prior.
Suffer not any beloved ſtudy to prejudice your mind, ſo far
as to deſpiſe all other learning. JWatts.
No ſnares to captivate the mind he ſpreads,
Nor bribes your eyes to prejudice your heads.
2. To obſtruct or injure by prejudices previouſly raiſed.
Companies of learned men, be they never ſo great and re-
verend, are to yield unto reaſon; the weight whereof is no
whit prejudiced by the ſimplicity of his perſon, which doth
alledge it. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
Neither muſt his example, done without the book, preju-
dice that which is well appointed in the book. Whitgifte.
I am not to prejudice the cauſe of my fellow-poets, though
I abandon my own defence. Dryden.
3. To injure; to hurt; to diminiſh; to impair; to be detri-
mental to. This ſenſe, as in the noun, is often improperly
extended to meanings that have no relation to the original
ſenſe; who can read with patience of an ingredient that pre-
judices a medicine
The ſtrength of that law is ſuch, that no particular nation
can lawfully prejudice the ſame by any their ſeveral laws and
ordinances, more than a man by his private reſolutions, the
law of the whole commonwealth wherein he liveth. Hooker.
The Danube reſcu'd, and the empire ſav’d,
Say, is the majeſty of verſe retriev'd :
And would it prejudice thy ſofter vein,
To ſing the princes, Louis and Eugene Prior.
To this is added a vinous bitter, warmer in the compoſition
of its ingredients than the watry infuſion; and, as gentian
and lemon-peel make a bitter of ſo grateful a flavour, the
only care required in this compoſition was to chuſe ſuch an ad-
dition as might not prejudice it. London Diſpenſatory.
Anonym.
PREJudicial. adj. [prejudiciable, Fr. from prejudice.]
1. Obſtructive by means of oppoſite prepoſſeſſions.
2. Contrary; oppoſite.
What one ſyllable is there, in all this, prejudicial any way
to that which we hold Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 5.
3. Miſchievous ; hurtful ; injurious ; detrimental. This ſenſe
is improper. See PRE JUDice, noun and verb.
His going away the next morning with all his troops, was
moſt prejudicial and moſt ruinous to the king's affairs. Claren.
One of the young ladies reads, while the others are at
work ; ſo that the learning of the family is not at all preju-
dicial to its manufactures. Addiſon's Guardian.
A ſtate of great proſperity, as it expoſes us to various
temptations, ſo it is often prejudicial to us, in that it ſwells
the mind with undue thoughts. Atterbury's Sermons.
PREJUDiſcIALNEss. n.ſ.. [from prejudicial.] The ſtate of being
prejudicial; miſchievouſneſs.
PRE'LA cy. n.ſ.. [from prelate.]
1. The dignity or poſt of a prelate or eccleſiaſtick of the higheſt
order.
Prelacies may be termed the greater benefices; as that of
the pontificate, a patriarchſhip, an archbiſhoprick and biſhop-
rick. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. Epiſcopacy; the order of biſhops.
The preſbyter, puff’d up with ſpiritual pride,
Shall on the necks of the lewd nobles ride,
His brethren damn, the civil power defy,
And parcel out republick prelacy. Dryden.
How many are there, that call themſelves proteſtants, who
put prelaty and popery together as terms convertible. Swift.
3. Biſhops. Collectively.
Divers of the reverend prelacy, and other moſt judicious
men, have eſpecially beſtowed their pains about the matter of
juriſdiction. Hooker's Dedication.
PRELATE. m. ſ. ſprelat, Fr. praclatus, Lat.] An eccleſi-
aſtick of the higheſt order and dignity.
It beſeemed not the perſon of ſo grave a prelate, to be ei-
ther utterly without counſel, as the reſt were, or in a common
perplexity to ſhew himſelf alone ſecure. Hooker.
Hear him but reaſon in divinity,
And, all-admiring, with an inward wiſh
You would deſire the king were inade a prelate. Shakeſp.
–
*** ** – .
The Archbiſhop of Vienna, a reverend prelate, ſaid one
day to king Lewis XI. of France ; fir, your mortal enemy is
dead, what time duke Charles of Burgundy was ſlain. Bacon.
Yet Munſter's prelate ever be acºurſ,
In whom we ſeek the German faithin vain.
P --- - Dryden.
******** adj. [from prelate.] Relating to prelate or
prelacy. Die?,
PRELATION. m. ſ. [prelatus,
one above the other,
In caſe the father left only daughters,
ceeded as in co-patnerſhip, without an
of the eldeſt daughter to a double por
Preſlatur E. #": [prelatura, Lat. prelature, Fr.] The
PRELATURESHIP. S. ſtate or dignity of a prelate. Dić7.
PRELEction, n. ſ. [pracleºlio, Lát.] Reading; le&amp;ture;
diſcourſe.
He that is deſirous to proſecute theſe aſyſtata of infinitude,
let him reſort to the prelections of Faber. Hale.
PRELIBA'tion n.ſ. [from pralibo, Lat..] Taſte beforehand,
effuſion previous to taſting. -
The firm belief of this, in an innocent ſoul, is a high
prelibation of thoſe eternal joys. More's Divine Dialogues.
PRELI'M INARY. adj. [preliminaire, Fr. prae limine, Lat.] Pre-
vious ; introductory; proemial.
My maſter needed not the aſſiſtance of that preliminary poet
to prove his claim ; his own majeſtick mien diſcovers him to
be the king. Dryden.
Lat.] Preference; ſetting of
they equally ſuc-
y prelation or preference
tion. Halt.
PRELIMINARY. n.ſ. Something previous ; preparatory mea-
ſures.
The third conſiſts of the ceremonies of the oath on both
ſides, and the preliminaries to the combat. Notes on Iliad.
PRELUTE. n.ſ. [prelude, Frpreludium, Lat.]
I. Some ſhort flight of muſick played before a full concert.
2. Something introdućtory; ſomething that only ſhews what is
to follow.
To his infant arms oppoſe
His father's rebels and his brother's foes ;
Thoſe were the preludes of his fate,
That form'd his manhood, to ſubdue
The hydra of the many-headed hiſing crew. Dryden.
The laſt Georgick was a good prelude to the AEmeis, and
very well ſhewed what the poet could do in the deſcription of
what was really great. Addiſon.
One conceſſion to a man is but a prelude to another.
Clariſſa.
To PRELU'D E. v. a. [preluder, Fr. praeludo, Lat..] To ſerve
as an introdućtion; to be previous to.
Either ſongſter holding out their throats,
And folding up their wings, renew'd their notes,
As if all day, preluding to the fight,
They only had rehears'd, to fing by night. Dryden,
PRELUDious. adj. [from prelude..] Previous ; introductory.
That's but a preludious bliſs,
Two ſouls pickeering in a kiſs. Cleaveland.
PRELUDIUM. n.ſ. [Latin.] Prelude.
This Menelaus knows, expos'd to ſhare
With me the rough preludium of the war. Dryden.
PRELU'sive. adj. [from prelude..] Previous ; introductory;
procmial.
The clouds
Softly ſhaking on the dimpled pool
Preluſive drops, let all their moiſture flow. Thomſºn.
PREMATU/RE. adj. [prematuré, Fr. praematurus, Lat..] Ripe
too ſoon; formed before the time; too early ; too ſoon ſaid,
believed, or done; too haſty.
'Tis hard to imagine, what poſſible conſideration ſhould
perſuade him to repent, 'till he depoſited that premature per-
ſuaſion of his being in Chriſt. Hammond's Fundamentali.
PREMATU'RELY. adj. [from premature.] Too early ; too
ſoon ; with too haſty ripeneſs.
PREMATU'RENEss. }*ſ [from premature.] Too great haſte ;
PREMATU'RITY. unſeaſonable earlineſs. -
To PREMEDITATE. v. a. [praemeditor, Lat. premediter,
Fr.] To contrive or form beforehand; to conceive before-
hand.
Where I have come, great clerks have purpoſed
To greet me with premeditated welcomes. Shakeſp.
With words premeditated thus he ſaid. . . Dryden,
To PREME'ditate. v. n. To have formed in the mind by
previous meditation ; to think beforehand.
Of themſelves they were rude, and knew nºt ſo much as
how to premeditate; the ſpirit gave hºmº" and eloquent
utterance. Hooker's Ecleſiaſtical Polity.
PREMEDITA’rion, m. ſ. ſpraemeditatiº, Lat. premeditation, Fr.
from premeditate.] Act of meditating beforehand.
Arealith unlook'd-for iſſue of their bºdies
To take their rooms cre I can place myſelf.
A cold premeditation for my purpoſe Shakeſp.
Hope is a pleaſant premeditation of enjoyment, as when a
dog expects, till his maſter has done picking of the bone.
o Mare's Antidºte againſt Ætheſin.
y Verſe
__-_-----------
**
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P R E.
verſe is not the effect of ſudden thought; but this hinders
t ſudden thought may be repreſented in verſe, ſince
thoſe thoughts muſt be higher than nature can raiſe without
premeditatiºn. - - - Dryden an Dramatiº Poetry.
PRE's ices. n.ſ. ſprinitiºn Lat. premices, Fr.) Firſt fruits.
A charger, yearly filled with fruits, was offered to the
gods at their feſtivals, as the premiers or firſt gatherings. Dry.
PREA/IER, adj. [French..] Firſt; chief.
The Spaniard challengeth the premier place, in regard of
his dominions. Camden's Remains.
Thus families like realms, with equal fate,
Are ſunk by premier miniſters of ſtate.
To PREMI'se. v. a. [pracmiſſils, Lat.]
1. To explain previouſly; to lay down premiſes.
The apoſtle's diſcourſe here is an anſwer upon a ground
taken; he premiſeth, and then infers. Burnet.
I premiſe theſe particulars, that the reader may know I enter
upon it as a very ungrateful taſk. Addiſon.
2. To ſend before the time. Not in uſe.
O let the vile world .
And the premiſed flames of the laſt day
Knit .# ... together Shakespeare. Henry VI.
To PREME'RIT. v. a. ſpra-mereor, Lat.] To deſerve before.
They did not forgive Sir John Hotham, who had ſo much
premerited of them. - - - King Charles.
Premisrs. n.ſ. [pramiſa, Lat., premiſes, Fri
1. Propoſitions antecedently ſuppoſed or proved. -
They infer upon the premiſes, that as great difference as
commodiouſly may be, there ſhould be in all outward cere-
monies between the people of God, and them which are not
his people. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 7.
This is ſo regular an inference, that whilſt the premiſes ſtand
firm, it is impoſſible to ſhake the concluſion. Decay of Piety.
She ſtudy'd well the point, and found
Her foes concluſions were not found,
From premiſes erroneous brought,
And therefore the deduction's nought. Swift's Miſel.
2. In low language, houſes or lands, as, I was upon the pre-
miſſes.
PRE'Miss. n. ſ. [pra-miſſim, Lat.] Antecedent propoſition.
This word is rare in the ſingular.
They know the major or minor, which is implied, when
you pronounce the other premiſs and the concluſion. Hatts.
PREMIUM. m. ſ. ſpraemium, Lat.] Something given to invite
a loan or a bargain. .
No body cares to make loans upon a new proječt; whereas
men never fail to bring in their money upon a land-tax, when
the premium or intereſt allowed them is ſuited to the hazard
they run. Addison's Freeholder, N° 23.
People were tempted to lend, by great premiums and large
intereſt; and it concerned them to preſerve that government,
which they had truſted with their money. Swift's Aſſel.
To PREMONISH. va. [praenonco, Lat..] To warm or admo-
niſh beforehand.
PREMo'Nish MENT. n.ſ.. [from premoniſh.JPrevious information.
After theſe premoniſhments, I will come to the compartition
itſelf. //otton's Architecture.
PREMONITION. m. ſ. [from fremoniſh.] Previous notice; pre-
vious intelligence.
What friendly premonitions have been ſpent
On your forbearance, and their vain event. Chapman.
How great the force of ſuch an erroneous perſuaſion is, we
may collect from our Saviour's premonition to his diſciples,
when he tells them, that thoſe who killed them ſhould think
they did God ſervice. Decay of Piety.
PREM2N1 roRY. m. ſ. [from prae and mºnº, Lat..] Previouſly
adviſing.
Tº PREMio NSTRATE. v. a. [pre and monſtro, Lat.] To ſhow
beforehand.
PREMUNI RE. m.ſ. [Latin.]
I. A writ in the common law, whereby a penalty is incurrable,
as infringing ſome ſtatute.
Premunire is now grown a good word in our Engliſh laws,
by tract of time; and yet at firſt it was merely miſtaken for a
premonere. Bramhall againſt Hobbs.
Woolſey incurred a premunire, forfeited his honour, eſtate
and life, which he ended in great calamity. South.
2. The penalty ſo incurred.
3. A difficulty; a diſtreſs. A low ungrammatical word.
PREMU'N ºr 16s. * / [from premunio, Lat..] An anticipation
of objection.
9 PRExo'MINATE. v. a. [prºnomino, Lat..] To forename.
- He you would ſound,
Having ever ſeen, in the prenominate crimes,
Prº Yºu breathe of, guilty. - Shakeſ, Hamlet.
lege of bein *N. m. ſ. [prac and nomino, Lat.j The privi-
- 3. named firſt.
they . lº ſhould have the prºnºmination ; and
thoſe of the ſea *her derive their names, than nominate
- Brown's Wulgar Errours.
R ENo"tion. n J. [premot;
- - - emotion, Fr. - *-
knowledge; preſciºn.” Fr. prae and nºſco, Lat..] Fore
not, tha
Swi/?.
The hedgehog's preſenſion of winds is ſo exad, that it
ſtoppeth the north or ſouthern hole of its neſt, according unto
prºmotion of theſe winds enſuing. * * &gt; . . . . . . . . B, own.
PRENTICE. m. ſ. [contracted, by colloquial licence, from
apprentice..] One bound to a maſter, in order to inſtruction
in a trade.
My accuſer is my prentice, and when I did correct him for
his fault, he did vow upon his knees he would be even with
me. - Shakeſp. Henry VI.
PRE N ticeship. m. ſ. [from prentice.] The ſervitude of an
apprentice.
He ſerv'd a frenticeſhip, who ſets up ſhop,
Ward try’d on puppies, and the poor his drop. Pope.
PRENu'NcIATION. n. ſ. [prenuncio, Lat..] The act of telling
before. Die?.
PREoccupancy. m. ſ. [from preoccupate.] The act of taking
poſſeſſion before another.
To PREOCCUPATE. v. a. [preoccuper, Fr. preoccupa, Latj
1. To anticipate.
Honour aſpireth to death; grief flieth to it; and fear pre-
occupieth it. Bacon.
2. To prepoſſeſs; to fill with prejudices.
That the model be plain without colours, left the eye
preoccupate the judgment. //otton's Architecture.
PREoccupation. n.ſ. [preoccupation, Fr. from preoccupate.]
1. Anticipation.
2. Prepoſſeſſion.
3. Anticipation of objećtion.
As if, by way of proccupation, he ſhould have ſaid; well,
here you ſee your commiſſion, this is your duty, theſe are
your diſcouragements; never ſeek for evaſions from worldly
afflictions; this is your reward, if you perform it; this is your
doom, if you decline it. South's Sermons.
To PR Eoccupy. v. a. To prepoſſeſs; to occupy by antici-
pation or prejudices.
I think it more reſpectful to the reader to leave ſomething
to reflections, than preoccupy his judgment. Arbuthnot.
To PRE'ominate. v. a. ſpre and ominor, Lat.] To prog-
noſticate; to gather from omens any future event.
Becauſe many ravens were ſeen when Alexander entered
Babylon, they were thought to preominate his death. Brown.
PRE'opis ios. m. ſ. [pre and opinio, Lat..] Opinion antece-
dently formed ; prepoſſeſſion.
Diet holds no ſolid rule of ſelećtion; ſome, in indiſtinčt
voracity, eating almoſt any ; others, out cf a timorous pre-
opinion, refraining from very many things. Brown.
To PRE ORDAIN. v. a. [pra and ordain..] To ordain before-
hand.
Sin is the contrariety to the will of God, and if all things
be preordained by God, and ſo demonſtrated to be willed by
him, it remains there is no ſuch thing as fin. Hammond.
Few ſouls preordain’d by fate,
The race of gods have reach'd that envy'd ſtate. Roſcom.
PREo'RDIN AN ce. m. ſ. [prae and ordinance..] Antecedent de-
cree; firſt decree. Not in uſe.
Theſe lowly courteſies
Might ſtir the blood of ordinary men,
And turn preordinance and firſt decree
Into the law of children. Shakespeare. julius Cæſar.
PRECR DINA"rio N. m. ſ. [from preordain..] The act of preor-
daining.
PREPARA"rios. m. ſ. [preparatio, Lat. preparation, Fr. from
prepare.]
1. The act of preparing or previouſly fitting any thing to any
purpoſe.
Nothing hath proved more fatal to that due preparation for
another life, than our unhappy miſtake of the nature and end
of this. //afe's Preparation for Death.
2. Previous meaſures.
I will ſhew what preparations there were in nature for this
at diſſolution, and after what manner it came to Paſs.
great diſſolution, Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
3. Ceremonious introduction. h ſo little t tion, upon you
I make bold to preſs, with ſo little prºgraf.” "Ou.
—You're .." &gt; Shakeſp. Merry Jºves ºf //inſor.
4. The act of making or fitting by a regular proceſs;
In the preparations of cookery, the moſt volatile parts of
vegetables are deſtroyed. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
5. Any thing made by proceſs of operation. . -
I wiſh the chymiſts had been more ſparing, who magnify
their preparations, inveigle the curioſity of Rºy, and delude
the ſecurity of moſt. Brown P.ulgar Errours.
6. Accompliſhment; qualification. Out of uſe. -
Sir John, you are a gentleman of excellent breeding, au-
thentičk in your place and perſon, generally allowed for your
many warlike, courtlike and learned preparations. Shaky?.
PRE PARAtiv P. adj. [preparatiſ, Fr. from prepare.] Having
the power of preparing or qualifying, -
Would men have ſpent toilſome days and watchful nights
in the laborious queſt of knowledge preparatiº to this
work South's Sermons.
PRE PARATIVE.
6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
%
l
PRFPA's AT1 v E. m. ſ. ſpreparatiſ, Fr. from prepare.]
1. That which has the power of preparing or previouſly fitting.
They tell us the profit of reading is ſingular, in that it
ſerveth for a preparative unto ſermons. H22Aer.
My book of advancement of learning may be ſome repa-
rative or key for the better opening of the inſtauration. Bacon.
Reſolvedneſs in fin can, with no reaſon, be imagined a pre-
arative to remiſſion. Decay of Piety.
2. That which is done in order to ſomething elſe,
The miſeries, which have enſued, may be yet, through
thy mercy, preparatives to us of future bleſfings. K. Charles.
Such a temper is a contradićtion to repentance, as being
founded in the deſtruction of thoſe qualities, which are the
only diſpoſitions and pretaratives to it. South's Sermons.
What avails it to make all the neceſſary preparatives for
our voyage, if we do not actually begin the journey. Dryden.
PRFPARATIVELY. adv. [from preparative.J. Previouſly; by
way of preparation.
It is preparatively neceſſary to many uſeful things in this
life, as to make a man a good phyſician. Hale.
PREPA's AtoRY. adj. [preparatoire, Fr.]
1. Antecedently neceſſary.
The pračtice of all theſe is proper to our condition in this
world, and preparatory to our happineſs in the next. Tillotſºn.
2. Introductory; previous ; antecedent.
Preparatory, limited and formal interrogatories in writing
preclude this way of occaſional interrogatories. Hale.
Rains were but preparatory, the violence of the deluge de-
pended upon the diſruption of the great abyſs. Burnet.
To PREPARE. v. a. ſtraparo, Lat. preparer, Fr.]
1. To fit for anything; to adjuſt to any uſe; to make ready for
any purpoſe.
Patient Oétavia, plough thy viſage up
With her prepared nails. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
Confound the peace eſtabliſh'd, and prepare
Their ſouls to hatred, and their hands to war. Dryden.
Our ſouls, not yet prepard for upper light,
Till doomſday wander in the ſhades of night. Dryden.
The beams of light had been in vain diſplay'd,
Had not the eye been fit for viſion made;
In vain the author had the eye prepar’d
With ſo much ſkill, had not the light appear'd. Blackmore.
2. To qualify for any purpoſe.
Some preachers, being prepared only upon two or three
points of doćtrine, run the ſame round. Addiſon.
3. To make ready beforehand.
There he maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may pre-
pare a city for habitation. Pſalm cviii. 36.
Now prepare thee for another ſight. Milton.
He took the golden compaſſes, prefar'd
In God's eternal ſtore, to circumſcribe
This univerſe. Milton.
4. To form ; to make.
The woman fled into the wilderneſs, where ſhe hath a
place prepared of God to feed her. Rev. xii. 6.
He hath founded it upon the ſeas, and prepared it upon the
floods. Pſalm xxiv. 2.
5. To make by regular proceſs: as, he prepared a medicine.
To PR EPA R E. v. n.
1. To take previous meaſures.
Efficacy is a power of ſpeech, which repreſents to our
minds the lively ideas of things ſo truly, as if we ſaw them
with our eyes; as Lido preparing to kill herſelf. Peacham.
2. To make every thing ready; to put things in order.
Go in, firrah, bid them prepare for dinner. Shakeſp.
The long-ſuffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the ark was a preparing. I Peter iii. 2.
3. To make one's ſelf ready ; to put himſelf in a ſtate of ex-
pećtation. - -
PRE PARE. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Preparation; previous mea-
ſures. Not in uſe. -
In our behalf
Go levy men, and make pretare for war. Shakespeare.
PRE PARE DLY. adv. [from prepared.] By proper precedent
meaſures.
She preparedy may frame herſelf
To th’ way ſhe's forc'd to. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
PR EPA'RED Ness. n.ſ. (from prepare.] State or act of being
prepared : as, he's in a preparedneſs for his final exit.
PRE PARER. m. ſ. [from prepare.]
I. One that prepares; one that previouſly fits.
The biſhop of Ely, the fitteſt preparer of her mind to re-
ceive ſuch a doleful accident, came to viſit her. Wotton.
2. That which fits for any thing.
Codded grains are an improver of land, and preparer of it
for other crops. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
PREPE NSE. adj. [prºfenſus, Lat." Forethought ; precon-
PREPE'Nsed. ; ceived; contrived beforehand : as, malice pre-
penſe. -
To PR Epo's of R. v. a. [from preponderate.] To outweigh.
Though pillars by channelling be ſeemingly ingroſſed to
Our fight, yet they are truly weakned ; and therefore ought
not to be the more ſlender, but the more corpulent, unleſs
apparences prºforider truths. //otton’s Archite&amp;ure.
ºperance. }*ſ [from prºponderate.] The ſtate of
PRE Po sperancy. outweighing; ſuperiority of weight.
As to addition of ponderoſity in dead bodies, comparing
them unto blocks, this occaſiónal preponderancy is rather an
appearance than reality. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
The mind ſhould examine all the grounds of probability,
and, upon a due balancing the whole, rejećt or receive pro-
portionably to the preponderany of the greater grounds of
probability. Locke:
Little light boats were the ſhips which people uſed, to the
ſides whereof this fiſh remora faſtening, might make it ſwag, as
the leaſt preponderance on either fide will do, and ſo retarā'i's
courſe. Grew’s Muſicum.
To PREPO'NDERATE. v. a. [prepondero, Lat.]
1. To outweigh; to overpower by weight. -
An, inconſiderable weight, by diſtance from the centre of
the balance, will prºponderate greater magnitudes. G.;ſ.
The trivialleſt thing, when a paſſion is caſt into the ſcale
with it, preponderates ſubſtantial bleſſings. Gov. of the Tongue.
2. To overpower by ſtronger influence.
To PREpo'NDERATE. v. n.
I. To exceed in weight.
He that would make the lighter ſcale preponderate, will not
ſo ſoon do it, by adding increaſe of new weight to the emptier,
as if he took out of the heavier, what he adds to the lighter.
- - - Locke.
Unleſs the very mathematical center of gravity of every
ſyſtem be placed and fixed in the very mathematical center of
the attractive power of all the reſt, they cannot be evenly at-
tracted on all ſides, but muſt prºponderate ſome way or other.
Bentley's Sermons.
2. To exceed in influence or power analogous to weight.
In matters of probability, we cannot be ſure that we have
all particulars before us, and that there is no evidence be-
hind, which may outweigh all that at preſent ſeems to pre-
ponderate with us. Locke.
By putting every argument on one ſide and the other into
the balance, we muſt form a judgment which ſide prepon-
derates. J/atts.
PREPONDERATION. m. ſ. [from preponderate.] The act or
ſtate of outweighing anything.
In matters, which require preſent practice, we muſt con-
tent ourſelves with a mere preponderation of probable reaſons.
J/atts's Logick.
To PREpo'se. v. a. [prºpoſer, Fr. prapono, Lat.] To put
before. Dić7.
PREPosition. n.ſ. [prapºſition, Fr. prepoſitio, Lat.] In
grammar, a particle governing a caſe.
A prepoſition ſignifies ſome relation, which the thing ſigni-
fied by the word following it, has to ſomething going before in
the diſcourſe; as, Ceſar came to Rome. Clarke's Lat. Gram.
PREPo's Tor. m. ſ. [prapºſitor, Lat] A ſcholar appointed by
the maſter to overlook the reſt.
To PREPOSSESS. v. a. [pra and poſſ...] To fill with an
opinion unexamined; to prejudice.
She was prepaſſed with the ſcandal of ſalivating. Iſºſºm.
PREPossessios. n.ſ.. [from prºpoffſ.]
I. Preoccupation; firſt poſſeſſion.
God hath taken care to anticipate and prevent every man
to give piety the prepaſſion, before other competitors ſhould
be able to pretend to him ; and ſo to engage him in holineſs
firſt and then in bliſs. Hammond's Fundamentals.
2. Prejudice; preconceived opinion.
Had the poor vulgar rout only, who were held under the
prejudices and prepaſſeſſions of education, been abuſed into
ſuch idolatrous ſuperſtitions, it might have been pitied, but
not ſo much wondred at. South's Sermons.
With thought, from prepaſſion free, reflect
On ſolar rays, as they the fight reſpect.
PREPOSTEROUS. adj. [prajºſerus, Lat.]
1. Having that firſt which ought to be laſt; wrong; abſurd ;
perverted. -
Put a caſe of a land of Amazons, where the whole go-
vernment, publick and private, is in the hands of women:
is not ſuch a prºpoſerous government againſt the firſt order of
nature, for women to rule over men, and in itſelf void Bac.
Death from a father's hand, from whom I firſt
Receiv'd a being 'tis a prºpºſerous gift,
An act at which inverted nature ſtarts,
Blackmore.
And bluſhes to behold herſelf ſo cruel. Denham.
Such is the world's prepoſterous fate;
Amongſt all creatures, mortal hate
-- Denham.
Love, though immortal, doth create. - -
By this diſtribution of matter, continual proviſion is every
where made for the ſupply of bodies, quite contrary to the
prºpoſerous reaſonings of thoſe men, whº expected ſo different
a reſult. I/oodward's Nat Hi/.
The method I take may be cenſured as prepo/?erous, be-
cauſe I thus treat laſt of the antediluvian earth, which was
firſt in order of nature. J/ºodward’s Nat. Hiſł.
2. Applied to perſons: fooliſh ; abſurd.
Prepº/ferous aſs ! that never read ſo far
To know the cauſe why muſick was ordain'd. Shakeſp.
2 o H PRE Po's TE Rously.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P. R. E.
Perro's resously, adv. [from prºpºſ”.] In a wrong ſitua-
. . . . . . urdly.
tioi) ; *f; things do beſt pleaſe me,
That befal prºfºra/#, Shakeſt. Aſº'ſ Night's Dream.
Upon this ſuppoſition, one animal would have its lungs,
wheſe another hath its liver, and all the other members pre-
poſſerº/ſy placed 3. there could not be a like configuration of
parts in any two individuals. Bently's Sermons.
PREpo's rerouss Ess. n. ſ. (from prºpºſerous.) Abſurdity ;
wrong order or method.
PRE Por Ency. m. ſ. [prapotentia, Lat.] Superior power;
redominance.
If there were a determinate prºpotency in the right, and
ſuch as ariſeth from a conſtant root in nature, we might ex-
pect the ſame in other animals. Brown.
PREPU'cf. m. ſ. [prºprice, Fr. prafutiaº, Lat.] That which
covers the glans ; foreſkin.
The prºpice was much inflamed and ſwelled. If iſºman.
To PRE’REQUIRE. v. a. [prae and require.] To demand pre-
viouſly. - *- - - -
Some primary literal ſignification is prerequired to that other
of figurative. - - - Hammond.
PREREQUISITE. adj. [prae and requiſite.] Something previouſly
neceſſary. -
The conformation of parts is neceſſary, not only unto the
prerequiſite and previous conditions of birth, bºt alſo unto the
parturition. Brown's Jºuſsar Errours.
Before the exiſtence of compounded body, there muſt be a
pre-exiſtence of active principles, neceſſarily prerequiſite to
the mixing theſe particles of bodies. ult'.
PRF Roc Ativ F. n.ſ. [prerogative, Fr. praerogativa, low Lat.]
An excluſive or peculiar privilege.
, My daughters and the fair Parthenia might far better put
in their claim for that prerogative. Sidney.
Our prerogative
Cal's not your counſels, but our natural goodneſs
Imparts this. Shakeſp.
How could communities,
The primogeniture, and due of birth,
Prerogative of age, ſceptres, and crowns,
But by degree, ſtand in authentick place Shake?.
The great Caliph hath an old prerogative in the choice and
confirmation of the kings of Aſſyria. Knolles.
They are the beſt laws, by which the king hath the juſteſt
prerºgative, and the people the beſt liberty. Bacon.
Had any of theſe ſecond cauſes deſpoiled God of his pre-
rogative, or had God himſelf conſtrained the mind and will
of man to impious acts by any celeſtial inforcements? Raleigh.
They obtained another royal prerogative and power, to
make war and peace at their pleaſure. Lavies.
The houſe of commons to theſe their prerºgatives over the
lords, ſent an order to the lieutenant of the tower, that he
ſhould cauſe him to be executed that very day. Clarendon.
For freedom ſtill maintain’d alive,
Freedom an Engliſh ſubjects’ ſole prerºgative,
Accept our pious praiſe. Dryden.
All wiſh the dire prerogative to kill,
Ev’n they wou'd have the pow'r, who want the will.
Dryden.
It ſeems to be the prerogative of human underſtanding,
when it has diſtinguiſhed any ideas, ſo as to perceive them to
be different, to conſider in what circumſtances they are ca-
pable to be compared. Locke.
I will not confider only the prerogatives of man above other
animals, but the endowments which nature hath conferred on
his body in common with them. Ray on the Creation.
PRERo GATIVED, adj. [from prerºgative..] Having an exclu-
five privilege ; having prerogative.
'Tis the plague of great ones,
Pºrºgativ'd are they leſs than the baſe;
'Tis deſtiny unſhunable. Shakeſp.
PR Es. Prº, prºft, ſeem to be derived from the Saxon, preorº, a
pº it being uſual in after times to drop the letter o in like
caſes. Gibſon's Camden.
PRESA/GE. ºf [frºſse, Fr. preſgium, Lat.] ſº -
preſenſion of futurity. &gt;
Joy and ſhout preſage of victory. Milton.
Dreams have generally been conſidered by authors only as
revelations of what has already happened, or as preſages of
.*hat is to happen. . Žiºn.
9. RESA’s E. º. a. It reſºger, Fr. freſagio, Latin.]
* To forebode; to foreknow; to forctell; to propheſy.
Henry's late prºſaging propheſy
Did gld my heaſt with hope.
Foreſce: What pow'r of mind
Of i. preſaging from the depth
How º ge ſº or preſent, could have fear'd
As ſtood º force of gods, how ſuch -
Thi OOC! || e theſe, could ever know repulſe. Milton
his contagion might have been prºſaged upo ſid -
tion ºf its precurſors gea upon conſidera-
Wiſh’ freedºm I Harvey on Conſumptions.
I heav'n be inſi" fºſge you ſºon will find,
** be juſt, and iſ to virtue kind.
f
Shakespeare Henry VI.
Dryden.
2, Sometimes with of before the thing foretold.
That by certain ſigns we may frºſage
Of heats and rains, and wind's impetuous rage,
The ſov’reign of the heav'ns has ſet on high
The moon to mark the changes of the ſky. Dryden.
2. To foretoken ; to foreſhow.
If I may truſt the flattering ruth of ſleep,
My dreams preſage ſome joyful news at hand. Shakespeare
Dreams adviſe ſome great good prºſaging. 4/ilton.
That cloud, that hangs upon thy brow, preſages
A greater ſtorm than all the Turkiſh power
Can throw upon us. Denham's Sophy.
When others fell, this ſtanding did preſage
The crown ſhou'd triumph over poplar rage. J/aller.
PRESA/G EMENT. n. ſ. [from preſage.]
1. Forebodement ; preſenſion.
I have ſpent much enquiry, whether he had any ominous
preſagement before his end. J/otton.
2. Foretoken.
The falling of ſalt is an authentick prºſagement of ill luck
from whence nothwithſtanding nothing can be naturally
feared. Brown's Pulgar Errourſ.
PRESBYTER. n. ſ. [preſbyter, Lat. Tºtagſ ºf GP.]
1. A prieſt. &gt;
Preſbyters abſent through infirmity from their churches,
might be ſaid to preach by thoſe deputies who in their flead
did but read homilies. Hºcker, b. v. ſ. 20.
2. A preſbyterian.
And preſbyters have their jackpuddings too. Butler.
PRESBYTER AN. adj. [76-73. Figº..] Conſiſting of elders;
a term for a modern form of eccleſiaſtical government.
Chiefly was urged the abolition of epiſcopal, and the eſtab-
liſhing of preſbyterian government. King Charles.
PRES BYTE RAN. m. ſ. [from preſbyter.] An abettor of preſby-
tery or calviniſtical diſcipline.
One of the more rigid preſbyterians. Swift.
PRESPY TERY. m. ſ. [from preſbyter.] Body of elders, whether
prieſts or laymen.
Thoſe which ſtood for the prºſytery, thought their cauſe
had more ſympathy with the diſcipline of Scotland than the
hierarchy of England. - Bacon.
Flea-bitten ſynod, an aſſembly brew’d
Of clerks and elders ana, like the rude
Chaos of preſbyt'ry, where laymen guide
With the tame woolpack clergy by their ſide. Craveland.
PRE's cresce. m. ſ. [prºſcience, Fr. from prºcient.] Foreknow-
ledge ; knowledge of future things.
They tax our policy, and call it cowardice,
Foreſtall our preſcience, and eſteem no act
But that of hand. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
Preſcience or foreknowledge, conſidered in order and nature,
if we may ſpeak of God after the manner of men, goeth be-
fore providence; for God foreknew all things before he had
created them, or before they had being to be cared for; and
preſcience is no other than an infallible foreknowledge. Ral.
If certain prºſcience of uncertain events imply a contra-
dićtion, it ſeems it may be ſtruck out of the omniſciency of
God, and leave no blemiſh behind. More.
Of things of the moſt accidental and mutable nature, God's
prºſcience is certain. South.
Freedom was firſt beſtow'd on human race,
And preſcience only held the ſecond place. Dryden.
PRESCIENT. adj. [praftiens, Lat..] Foreknowing; pro-
phetick.
Henry, upon the deliberation concerning the marriage of
his eldeſt daughter into Scotland, had ſhewed himſelf ſenſible
and almoſt prºſcient of this event. Bacon.
Who taught the nations of the field and wood *
Prºſcient, the tides or tempeſts to withſtand. Pope.
PRE'scious. adj. [praſcius, Lat.] Having foreknowledge.
Thrice happy thou, dear partner of my bed,
Whoſe holy ſoul the ſtroke of fortune fled;
Preſcious of ills, and leaving me behind,
To drink the dregs of life. Dryden's Żncis.
To PR esci'N p. v. a. [preſcindo, Lat...] To cut off; to ab-
ſtract. -
A bare a&amp;t of obliquity does not only preſcind from, but
poſitively deny ſuch a ſpecial dependence. Norris.
Presci's dest adj. [preſcindens, Lat..] Abſtraćting.
we may, for one ſingle act, abſtract from a reward, which
nobody, who knows the preſcindent faculties of the ſoul, can
deny. Cheyne's Philoſophical Principles.
To PRESCRIBE. v. a. [praeſcribo, Lat.]
1. To ſet down authoritatively ; to order; to direct.
Doth the ſtrength of ſome negative arguments prove this
kind of negative argument ſtrong, by force whereof all things
are denied, which ſcripture affirmeth not, or all things, which
ſcripture preſcribeth not, condemned. Hooker.
To the blanc moon her office they preſcrib'd, 44 ſton.
There's joy, when to wild will you laws prºſcribe,
When you bid fortune carry back her bribe. Dryden.
When parents loves are order'd by a ſon,
Let ſtreams prºfoil, their fountains where to run. Pryden.
2. To direct<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P. R. E.
º
..
n
t
2. To direét medically. -
The end of ſatire is the amendment of vices by corre&amp;tion;
and he who writes honeſtly is no more an enemy to the of—
fender, than the phyſician to the patient, when he preſcribes
harſh remedies. Dryden.
The extremeſt ways they firſt ordain,
Preſcribing ſuch intolerable pain, ;
As none but Caeſar could ſuſtain. Dryden.
By a ſhort account of the preſſing obligations which lie on
the magiſtrate, I ſhall not ſo much preſcribe directions for the
future, as praiſe what is paſt. Atterbury.
Should any man argue, that a phyſician underſtands his
own art beſt; and therefore, although he ſhould preſcribe poiſon
to all his patients, he cannot be juſtly puniſhed, but is an-
ſwerable only to God. Swift.
To PREscRI'BE. v. n.
1. To influence by long cuſtom.
A reſerve of puerility we have not ſhaken off from ſchool,
where being ſeaſoned with minor ſentences, they preſcribe
upon our riper years, and never are worn out but with our
memories. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
2. To influence arbitrarily.
The aſſuming an authority of dićtating to others, and a
forwardneſs to preſcribe to their opinions, is a conſtant con-
comitant of this biaſs of our judgments. Locke.
3. [Preſcrire, Fr.] To form a cuſtom which has the force of law.
That obligation upon the lands did not preſcribe or come
into diſuſe, but by fifty conſecutive years of exemption. Arb.
4. To write medical directions and forms of medicine.
Modern 'pothecaries, taught the art
By doctor's bills to play the doćtor's part,
Bold in the practice of miſtaken rules,
Preſcribe, apply, and call their maſters fools. Pope.
PRE'script., adj. [preſcriptus, Lat...] Direéted; accurately
laid down in a precept.
Thoſe very laws ſo added, they themſelves do not judge
unlawful; as they plainly confeſs both in matter of prºſcript
attire, and of rites appertaining to burial. Hooker.
PRE'scRIPT. m. ſ. [praeſcriptum, Lat..] Direétion; precept;
model preſcribed.
By his preſcript, a ſanétuary is fram'd
Of cedar, overlaid with gold. Milton.
PREscription. n.ſ. [preſcription, Fr. praſcriptio, Lat. from
praeſcribo, Lat.]
1. Rules produced and authoriſed by long cuſtom; cuſtom con-
tinued till it has the force of law.
You tell a pedigree
Of threeſcore and two years, a ſilly time
To make preſcription for a kingdom's worth. Shakeſp.
Uſe ſuch as have prevailed before in things you have em-
ployed them ; for that breeds confidence, and they will ſtrive
to maintain their preſcription. Bacon's Eſſays.
It will be found a work of no ſmall difficulty, to diſpoſſeſs
a vice from that heart, where long poſſeſſion begins to plead
prºſcription. South's Sermons.
Our poet bade us hope this grace to find,
To whom by long preſcription you are kind. Dryden.
The Lucqueſe plead preſcription, for hunting in one of the
duke's foreſts, that lies upon their frontiers. Addiſon.
2. Medical receipt.
My father left me ſome prºſºriptions
Of rare and prov'd effects; ſuch as his reading
And manifeſt experience had collected
For general ſov’reignty. Shakeſp.
Approving of my obitinacy againſt all common preſcrip-
tions, he aſked me, whether I had never heard the Indian
way of curing the gout by moxa. Temple.
PRE’s E ANce. n.ſ. [prºſeance, Fr.] Priority of place in fitting.
The gheſts, though rude in their other faſhions, may, for
their diſcreet judgment in precedence and preſeance, read a
leſſon to our civileſt gentry. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
PRE's ENc E. m. ſ [preſence, Fr. preſentia, Lat.]
1. State of being preſent; contrary to abſence.
To-night we hold a ſolemn ſupper,
And I’ll requeſt your preſence. Shakeſp.
The preſence of a king engenders love -
Amongſt his ſubječts and his loyal friends,
As it diſanimates his enemies. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
2. Approach face to face to a great perſonage.
The ſhepherd Dorus anſwered with ſuch a trembling voice
and abaſhed countenance, and oftentimes ſo far from the
matter, that it was ſome ſport to the young ladies, thinking
it want of education, which made him ſo diſcountenanced
with unwonted preſence. Sidney, b. i.
Men that very preſence fear,
Which once they knew authority did bear ! Daniel.
3. State of being in the view of a ſuperior.
Thou know'ſt the law of arms is ſuch,
That, whoſo draws a ſword in th’ preſence 't's death. Sha.
I know not by what power I am made bold,
In ſuch a preſence here, to plead my thoughts. Shakeſp.
Wiſdom thy ſiſter, and with her did'ſt play
In preſence of th' Almighty. Milton.
Perhaps I have not ſo well conſulted the repute of my in-
telle&amp;tuals, in bringing their imperfections into ſuch diſcern-
ing preſences. Glanvill's Scepſ.
Since clinging cares and trains of inbred fears,
Not aw’d by arms, but in the preſence bold,
Without reſpect to purple or to gold. I}ryden.
4. A number aſſembled before a great perſon.
Look I ſo pale.
—Ay; and no man in the preſence,
But his red colour hath forſook his checks. Shakeſp
Odmar, of all this preſence does contain; -
Give her your wreath whom you eſteem mºſt fair. Dryden.
5. Pº alr; i." ; º
irtue is beſt in a body that is comely, and -
ther dignity of preſence, than beauty of ãº. that hº
A graceful preſence beſpeaks acceptance, gives a force to
language, and helps to convince by look and poſture. Collier.
How great his preſence, how erect his look,
How ev'ry grace, how all his virtuous mother
Shines in his face, and charms me from his eyes. Smith :
6. Room in which a prince ſhows himſelf to his court.
By them they paſs, all gazing on them round,
And to the preſence mount, whoſe glorious view
Their frail amazed ſenſes did confound. Fairy Queen:
An't pleaſe your grace, the two great cardinals
Wait in the preſence. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The lady Anne of Bretagne, paſſing through the preſence
in the court of France, and eſpying Chartier, a famous poet,
leaning upon his elbow faſt aſleep, openly kiſſing him, ſaid,
we muſt honour with our kiſs, the mouth from whence ſo
many ſweet verſes have proceeded. Peacham.
7. Readineſs at need ; quickneſs at expedients:
A good bodily ſtrength is a felicity of nature, but nothing
comparable to a large underſtanding and ready preſence of
mind. L'Eſtrange.
Errors, not to be recall’d, do find
Their beſt redreſs from preſence of the mind,
º
Courage our greateſt failings does ſupply. J/aller:
8. The perſon of a ſuperior.
To her the ſov’reign preſence thus reply'd. Milton.
PRESENce-chamber. n.ſ. [preſence and chamber or room.]
PRESENCE-Room. ; The room in which a great perſon
receives company. -
If theſe nerves, which are the conduits to convey them
from without to their audience in the brain, the mind's pre-
fence-room, are ſo diſordered, as not to perform their functions,
they have no poſtern to be admitted by. Locke,
Kneller, with ſilence and ſurpriſe,
We ſee Britannia's monarch riſe,
And aw’d by thy deluſive hand, -
As in the preſence-chamber ſtand. Addiſon.
PRESE'Nsion. n.ſ. [praeſenſio, Lat..] Perception beforehand.
The hedgehog's preſenſion of winds is exact. Brown.
PRESENT. adj. [preſent, Fr. praſºns, Lat.]
1. Not abſent; being face to face; being at hand.
But neither of theſe are any impediment, becauſe the re-
gent thereof is of an infinite immenſity more than commen-
ſurate to the extent of the world, and ſuch as is moſt inti-
mately preſent with all the beings of the world. Hale.
Be not often preſent at feaſts, not at all in diſſolute com-
pany; pleaſing objects ſteal away the heart. Taylor.
Much I have heard
Incredible to me, in this diſpleas'd,
That I was never preſent on the place
Of thoſe encounters.
2. Not paſt ; not future.
Thou future things can'ſt repreſent
As preſent. Milion.
The moments paſt, if thou art wiſe, retrieve
With pleaſant mem'ry of the bliſs they gave ;
The preſent hours in pleaſant mirth employ, -
And bribe the future with the hopes of joy. Prior.
The preſent age hath not been leſs inquiſitive than the
former ages were. If 3-dward's Nat. H/.
3. Ready at hand ; quick in emergencies.
If a man write little, he had need have a great memory =
if he confer little, he had need have a preſent wit, and if he
read little, he had need have much cunning. Bacon.
'Tis a high point of philoſophy and virtue for a man º be
ſo preſent to himſelf, as to be always provided againſ: all
accidents. - - L’Eſtrange,
4. Favourably attentive; not neglectful; Propitious.
Be preſent to her now, as then,
And let not proud and factious men
Againſt your wills oppoſe their mights. r
The golden goddeſs, preſent at the pray'r,
well knew he meant th’inanimated fair,
Milton's Agoniſter.
Benj. johnſºn.
• And gave the ſign of granting his deſire. Drydºn.
Nör could I hope in any place but there,
To find a god ſo preſent to my pray’r. Dryden.
. Unforgotten; not neglectiid. - - - -
5 }. mind keeps the ſeveral obječts all within ſight,
and preſent to the ſoul. - //att.
6. Not abſtracted; not abſent of mind; attentive.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P R. E.
T. PREsent. An elliptical expreſſion for the prºſent time ;
- ow exiſting.
the time n when he ſaw deſcend
The ſon of God to judge them, terrify’d
º He fled; not hoping to “ºpe. but ſhun
The preſent ; fearing guilty, what his wrath º
i Might ſuddenly inflict. Mºon.
. Mén that ſet their hearts only upon the preſent, without
! looking forward into the end of things are ſtruck at. L’E/?r.
Who, ſince their own ſhort underſtandings reach
- No further than the preſent, think ev'n the wife,
Speak what they think: and tell tales of themſelves. Rowe.
A. PRºsent. [a preſent, Fr.] At the preſent time; now ;
illiptically, for the preſent time. - - -
c %. º is at prºjent very ſenſible of the decay . their
trade. aſon.
PRE's ENT. n.ſ. [preſent, Fr., from the verb.], .
1. A gift; a donative; ſomething ceremoniouſly given.
c Plain Clarence
I will ſend thy ſoul to heav'n,
If heav'n will take the preſent at our hands. Shakespeare.
His dog to-morrow, by his maſter's command, he muſt
carry for a preſent to his lady. Shakeſp.
He ſent part of the rich ſpoil, with the admiral's enſign, as
a preſent unto Solyman. Knolles's H/. of the Turks.
Say heav'nly muſe, ſhall not thy ſacred vein
Afford a preſent to the infant God -
Haſt thou no verſe, no hymn, no ſolemn ſtrain,
To welcome him to this his new abode : Milton.
They that are to love inclin'd,
Sway’d by chance, not choice or art
To the firſt that's fair or kind,
Make a preſent of their heart. //aller.
Somewhat is ſure deſign'd by fraud or force; -
Truſt not their preſents, nor admit the horſe. Dryden.
2. A letter or mandate exhibited.
To PRESENT. v. a. [praſento, low Lat. preſenter, Fr. in all
the ſenſes.]
1. To place in the preſence of a ſuperior.
On to the ſacred hill
They led him high applauded, and preſent
Before the ſeat ſupreme. A4ilton's Par. Loft, b. vi.
2. To exhibit to view or notice.
He knows not what he ſays; and vain is it,
That we preſent us to him. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. To offer; to exhibit.
Thou therefore now adviſe,
Or hear what to my mind firſt thoughts preſent. Milton.
Now ev'ry leaf, and ev'ry moving breath
Preſents a foe, and ev'ry foe a death. Denham.
Lectorides's memory is ever ready to offer to his mind
ſomething out of other men's writings or converſations, and
is preſenting him with the thoughts of other perſons perpe-
tually. hºtts's Improvement of the A.ind.
4. To give formally and ceremoniouſly.
Folks in mudwall tenement,
Affording pepper-corn for rent,
Preſent a turkey or a hen
To thoſe might better ſpare them ten. Prior.
5. To put into the hands of another.
So ladies in romance aſſiſt their knight,
Preſent the ſpear, and arm him for the fight. Dryden.
6. To favour with gifts. To preſent, in the ſenſe of to give,
has ſeveral ſtructures: we ſay abſolutely, to preſent a man, to
give ſomething to him. This is leſs in uſe. The common
Phraſes are to preſent a gift to a man; or, to preſent the man
with a gift.
Thou ſpendeſt thy time in waiting upon ſuch a great one,
and thy eſtate in prºſenting him ; and, after all, haſ no other
reward, but ſometimes to be ſmiled upon, and always to be
ſmiled at. South's Sermons.
He now preſents, as ancient ladies do,
That courted long, at length are forc'd to woo. Dryden.
Octavia preſented the poet, for his admirable elegy on her
ſon Marcellus. Dryden.
Should I preſent thee with rare figurd plate,
O how thy riſing heart would throb and beat. Dryden.
7. To prefer to eccleſiaſtical benefices.
. That he put theſe biſhops in the places of the deceaſed by
his own authority, is notoriouſly falſe; for the duke of Saxony
always preſented. Atterbury.
. To offer openly.
He was appointed admiral, and preſented battle to the
French navy, which they refuſed. Hayward.
9. To introduce by ſomething exhibited to the view or notice.
Not in uſe.
Tell on, quoth ſhe, the woful traged
The whic * ~~1. - tragedy,
T Which theſe reliques ſad preſent unto. Spenſer.
"º lay before a court of judicature, as an obječt of en-
The grand ju ies were - -
ºf - pračiſed effectually with to preſent
the ſaid pamphlet, with all *guravating epithets. :
Be it known to all men by theſe preſents. Shakeſp.
PRESENTA's roºs, adj. [from praft maneus, Lat.] Ready;
quick ; immediate.
Some plagues partake of ſuch inalignity, that, like a prº-
ſentaneous poiſon, they enecate in two hours. Harvey.
PRESENTABLE. adj. [from preſent.] What may be preſented.
Incumbents of churches preſentable cannot, by tº ir ſole
ačt, grant their incumbencies to others; but 1114 y make
leaſes of the profits thereof. Ayºff", fºregºn.
PR Es ENTATION. m. ſ. [preſentation, Fr. from prºſent.]
1. The act of preſenting,
Prayers are ſometimes a prºſºntation of mere deſires, as a
mean of procuring deſired effects at the hand, of God. Hºoke,
2. The act of offering any one to an eccleſiaſtical benefice.
He made effectual proviſion for recovery of advowſons and
preſentations to churches. Hale.
What, ſhall the curate controul me? have not I the frca
2ntation ? Gay.
3. Exhibition.
Theſe preſentations of fighting on the flage, are neceſſary
to produce the effects of an heroick play. Drydºn.
4. This word is miſprinted for pre enſiºn.
Although in fundry animals, we deny not a kind of natural
meteorology, or innate preſentation both of wind and weather,
yet that proceeding from 10nſe, they cannot retain that ap-
prehenſion after death. Brºwn's Julgar Errouj.
PRESENTATIVE. adj. [from preſnt.] Such as that preſenta-
tions may be made of it.
Mrs. Gulſton poſſeſſed of the impropriate parſonage of Barº-
well, did procure from the king leave to annex the ſame to
the vicarage, and to make it prºſenſative, and gave them both
to St. John's College in Oxon. &amp; elºnań.
PRESENTEE. m. ſ. Ifrom prºſentſ, Fr.] One preſented to a
benefice.
Our laws make the ordinary a diſturber, if he does not
give inſtitution upon the fitneſs of a perſon preſented to him,
or at leaſt give notice to the patron of the diſability of his
preſentee. 4./cº Paregºn.
PR es; NTER. m. ſ. [from preſent.] One that pictents.
The thing was acceptable, but not the frºntºr. Lººr.
PRESENTIAL. adj. [from preſent J Suppoſing actual preſence.
By union, I do not underſtand that which is local or pre-
ſential, becauſe I conſider God as omnipreſent. Norris.
PRESENTIALITY.. n. J. [from prºſential.J State of being
preſent.
This eternal, indiviſible ačt of his exiſtence makes all
futures actually preſent to him ; and it is the preſentiality of
the object, which founds the unerring certainty of his know-
ledge. South's Sermons.
To PR SE'N TIATE. v. a. [from prºſent.] To make preſent.
The fancy may be ſo ſtrong, as to prºſentiate upon one
theatre, all that ever it took notice of in times paſt: the
power of fancy, in prºſentiating any one thing that is faſt,
being no leſs wonderful, than having that power, it ſhould
alſo acquire the perfection to preſentiate them all. Grew.
PRESENTIFICK. adj. [praſen, and facio, Latin.] Making
preſent. Not in uſe.
PRESENTIFICKLY. adv. [from prºſentifi...] In ſuch a manner
as to make preſent.
The whole evolution of times and ages, from everlaſting to
everlaſting, is collectedly and preſentifickly repreſented to God
at once, as if all things and actions were, at this very inſtant,
really preſent and exiſtent before him. 41…e.
PRESENTLY. adv. [from preſent.]
I. At preſent; at this time; now.
The towns and forts you preſently have, are ſtill left unto
you to be kept either with or without garriſons, ſo as you
alter not the laws of the country. Siaºy.
I hope we may preſume, that a rare thing it is not in the
church of God, even for that very word which is read to be
preſently their joy, and afterwards their ſtudy that hear it.
Hººker, b. v. ſ. 2.
To ſpeak of it as requireth, would require very long diſ-
courſe ; all I will preſently ſay is this. Hoºker, b. i. ſ. 12.
Covetous ambition, thinking all too little which pºſºnº,
it hath, ſuppoſeth itſelf to ſtand in necd of all which it hath
In Ot. Raleigh's Elºy.
2. Immediately; ſoon after.
Tell him, that no hiſtory can match his policies, and frº-
ſently the ſot ſhall meaſure himſelf by himſelf. Sºuth.
PRESENTMENT. n.ſ. [from prºſent.]
I. The act of preſenting.
When comes your book forth : -
- Upon the heels of my preſentment. - Shakespeare .
2. Any thing preſented or exhibited ; repreſentation.
Thus I hurl
My dazzling ſpells into the ſpungy air,
Of power to cheat the eye with blear illuſion,
And give it falſe preſentments, left the place
And my quaint habits breed aſtoniſhment. - Aſ ſtan.
3. In law, preſentment is a mere denunciation of the jurors ºpen-
ſelves or ſome other officer, as juſtice, conſtable, ſearcher, ſu:-
veyors, and, without any information, of an offence inquiſ:
able in the court to which it is preſented. º
1C
T
ſ
</p></div><p>
            End of Section.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809207#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section" id="Section"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P R E
- --~~~
The grand juries were praćtiſed effectually with, to preſent
the ſaid pamphlet with all aggravating epithets, and their pre-
ſentments publiſhed for ſeveral weeks in all the news-papers.
Swift to Pope.
PRE's ENTNEss. m. ſ. [from preſent.] Preſence of mind; quick-
neſs at emergencies.
Goring had a much better underſtanding, a much keener
courage, and preſentneſs of mind in danger. Clarendon.
PRESERVAT ion. n. ſ. [from preſerve.] The aët of preſerv-
ing; care to preſerve; act of keeping from deſtruction, de-
cay, or any ill.
Nature does require
Her times of preſervation, which, perforce,
I give my tendance to. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The eyes of the Lord are upon them that love him, he is
their mighty protećtion, a preſervation from ſtumbling, and
a help from falling. Eccluſ. xxxiv. 16.
Ev'ry ſeriſeleſs thing, by nature's light,
Doth preſervation ſeek, deſtruction ſhun. Davies.
Our allwiſe maker has put into man the uneaſineſs of hun-
er, thirſt, and other natural deſires, to determine their wills
for the preſervation of themſelves, and the continuation of
their ſpecies. - Locke.
PRESERVATIve. m. ſ. [preſervatiſ, Fr. from preſerve.] That
which has the power of preſerving; ſomething preventive;
ſomething that confers ſecurity.
If we think that the church needeth not thoſe ancient pre-
frvatives, which ages before us were glad to uſe, we de-
ceive ourſelves. Hooker.
It hath been anciently in uſe to wear tablets of arſenick,
as preſervatives againſt the plague; for that being poiſons
themſelves, they draw the venom to them from the ſpirits.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Were there truth herein, it were the beſt preſervative for
princes, and perſons exalted unto ſuch fears. Brown.
Bodies kept clean, which uſe preſervatives, are likely to
eſcape inſe&amp;tion. Harvey.
The moſt effectual preſervative of our virtue, is to avoid
the converſation of wicked men. Rogers.
Molly is an Egyptian plant, and was really made uſe of
as a prºmºtive againſt enchantment. Broome's Notes on Q&amp;ſ.
To PRESERVE. v. a. ſpraeſervo, low Latin; preſerver, Fr.]
1. To ſave; to defend from deſtruction or any evil; to keep.
The Lord ſhall deliver me from every evil work, and pre-
frve me unto his heavenly kingdom. 2 Tim. iv. 18.
God ſent me to preſerve you a poſterity, and ſave your
lives. - Gen. xlv. 7.
She ſhall lead me ſoberly in my doings, and preſerve me in
her power. J//dom ix. 11.
He did too frequently gratify their unjuſtifiable deſigns, a
guilt all men, who are obnoxious, are liable to, and can
hardly preſerve themſelves from. Clarendon.
We can pre erve unhurt our minds. Milton.
To be indifferent, which of two opinions is true, is the
right temper of the mind, that prºſerves it from being im-
poſed on, till it has done its beſt to find the truth. Locke.
Every petty prince in Germany muſt be intreated to pre-
ſerve the queen of Great Britain upon her throne. Swift.
2. To ſeaſon fruits and other vegetables with ſugar and in other
proper pickles : as, to preſerve plumbs, walnuts, and cucumbers.
PRESERVE. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Fruit preſerved whole in
ſugar.
º this is eaſily diſcerned in thoſe fruits, which are
brought in preſerves unto us. Brown.
The fruit with the huſk, when tender and young, makes
a good preſerve. Mortimer.
PRESE’R v ER. m. ſ. [from preſerve.]
1. One who preſerves; one who keeps from ruin or miſchief.
Sit, my preſerver, by thy patient's ſide. Shakeſp.
To be always thinking, perhaps, is the privilege of the
infinite author and preſerver of things, who never ſlumbers
nor ſleeps; but is not competent to any finite being. . Locke.
Andrew Doria has a ſtatue erected to him, with the glo-
rious title of deliverer of the commonwealth; and one of his
family another, that calls him its preſerver. Addison.
2. He who makes preſerves of fruit.
To PR E side. v. m. [from pra/ideo, Lat. preſider, Fr.] To
be ſet over; to have authority over.
Some o'er the publick magazines preſide,
And ſome are ſent new forage to provide. Dryden.
O'er the plans
Of thriving peace, thy thoughtful fires preſide. Thomſon.
PRE's DENcy. m. ſ. [preſidence, Fr. from preſident.] Superin-
tendence.
What account can be given of the growth of plants from
mechanical principles, moved without the preſidency and gui-
dance of ſome ſuperior agent. Ray on the Creation.
PRE's iDest. m. ſ. ſpraftdens, Lat. preſident, Fr.]
1. One placed with authority over others; one at the head of
others.
As the preſident of my kingdom, will I
Appear there for a man. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
The tutor fits in the chair as preſident or moderator, to ſee
that the rules of diſputation be obſerved. JWatts.
2. Governour; prefe&amp;t.
How might thoſe captive Iſraelites, under the overfight and
gºvernment of Aſſyrian preſidents, be able to leave the
places they were to inhabit. Breerewood on Languages.
3. A tutelary power.
This laſt complaint th’indulgent ears did pierce
Of juſt Apollo, preſident of º p JWaller.
PRE's DENTSHiP. m.ſ.. [from preſident.] The office and place
of preſident.
- When things came to trial of praaice, their paſtors learn-
ing would be at all times of force to overperſuade ſimple men,
who, knowing the time of their own preſidentſhip to be but
ſhort, would always ſtand in fear of their miniſters perpetual
authority. Hooker's Preface.
PRESI'DIAL. adj. [traßdium, Lat..] Relating to a garriſon.
To PRESS. v. a. [preſſer, Fr. preno, prºſus, Lat.]
1. To ſqueeze; to cruſh.
The grapes I preſſed into Pharaoh's cup. Gen. xl. 1 r.
Good meaſure preſſed down, ſhaken together, and running
over, ſhall men give into your boſom. Luke vi. 38.
From ſweet kernels prºs'd,
She tempers dulcet creams, Milton.
I put pledgets of lint preſſed out on the excoriation. Wiſem.
Their morning milk the peaſants preſs at night,
Their evening milk before the riſing light. I Dryden.
After preſſing out of the coleſeed for oil in Lincolnſhire,
they burn the cakes to heat their ovens. Mortimer.
2. To diſtreſs; to cruſh with calamities.
Once or twice ſhe heav'd the name of father
Pantingly forth, as if it preſ; her heart. Shakeſp.
3. To conſtrain; to compel; to urge by neceſſity.
The experience of his goodneſs in her own deliverance,
might cauſe her merciful diſpoſition to take ſo much the more
delight in ſaving others, whom the like neceſſity ſhould
preſs. PHooker.
The poſts that rode upon mules and camels, went out,
being haſtened and preſſed on by the king's commands. Eſther.
I was prºft by his majeſty's commands, to aſſiſt at the
treaty. Temple's Miſcel.
He gapes; and ſtraight
With hunger preſt, devours the pleaſing bait. Dryden.
He preſſed a letter upon me, within this hour, to deliver
to you. - Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
4. To drive by violence.
Come with words as medical as true,
Honeſt as either, to purge him of that humour
That preſſes him from ſleep. Shakeſp.
5. To affect ſtrongly.
Paul was preſſed in ſpirit, and teſtified to the Jews that
Jeſus was Chriſt. Aës xviii. 5.
Wickedneſs condemned by her own witneſs, and preſſed
with conſcience, forecaſteth grievous things. JWiſdom xvii. 11.
6. To enforce ; to inculcate with argument or importunity.
Be ſure to preſ; upon him every motive. Addison,
I am the more bold to preſ; it upon you, becauſe theſe ac-
compliſhments fit more handſomely on perſons of quality,
than any other. Felton on the Claſſicks.
Thoſe who negotiated, took care to make demands im-
poſſible to be complied with ; and therefore might ſecurely
preſ; every article, as if they were in earneſt. Swift.
7. To urge; to bear ſtrongly on. -
Chymiſts I may preſs with arguments, drawn from ſome of
the eminenteſt writers of their ſect. Boyle.
8. To compreſs; to hug, as in embracing. -
He preſs'd her matron lips
With kiſſes pure. Al Milton.
- She took her ſon, and preſs'd -
Th’ illuſtrious infant to her fragrant breaſt. Dryden.
His eaſy heart receiv'd the guilty flame, -
And from that time he preſ; her with his paſſion. Smith.
Leucothoe ſhook,
And preſs'd Palemon cloſer in her arms. Pºpe.
9. To act upon with weight.
The place thou preſſ on thy mother earth,
Is all thy empire now : now it contains thee. Dryden.
Io. To make earneſt. Preſt is here perhaps rather an adjective 5
preſſe, Fr. or from prºſe or empreſse, Fr. -
Let them be prºfti, and ready to give ſuccouns to their
confederates, as it ever was with the Romans; for if the
confederate had leagues defenſive with divers other ſtates, and
implored their aids, the Romans would ever be the formoſt.
º d thei £º Eſſays.
their country’s honour and their King $2
ofºº beaks #, whet their pointed ſtings. Dryd.
11. To fºrce into military ſervice. This is properly imprºft.
- Do but ſay to me what I ſhould do,
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am preſt into it... . • Shakeſp.
For every man that Bolingbroke hath preſ'd
To lift ſharp ſteel againſt our golden crown,
Heav'n for his Richard hath in ſtore -
A glorious angel. Shakespeare . Richard II.
From London by the king was I prºft forth. Shºſt.
20 I They
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P R E
nforced of very neceſſity.” preſ; the beſt and
º: . their men out of the Weſt countie,wº
- - alegn.
BS º: to raiſe new men for the recruit of the army
by preſſing, found oppoſition in many places. Clarendon.
y p ºf he peaceful peaſant to the wars is preſſ,
The fields lie fallow in inglorious reſt. Drydºn.
Muſt grandſon Filbert to the wars be tº. ff with º:
- C
&amp;ou were preſſed for the ſea ſervice, and got off wi §.
a-do.
"To PREss. v. n. - -
1. To act with compulſive violence; to urge ; to diſtreſs.
- - ll on
If there be fair proofs on the one ſide, and none at all
the .. and if §. moſt preſſing difficulties be on that ſide,
on which there are no proof, this is ſufficient to render one
- - dible, and the other altogether incredible.
opinion very credible, Tillotſºn's Sermons,
A great many uneaſineſſes always ſolliciting the will, it is
º that . greateſt and moſt preſſing ſhould determine
it to the next action. - Locke.
2. To go forward with violence to any obječt.
I make bold to prºſ;
With ſo little preparation.
—You're welcome. Shakeſp.
I preſ; toward the mark for the prize. - Phil. iii. 14.
The Turks gave a great ſhout, and preſſed in on all ſides,
to have entered the brºach. Knolles.
Thronging crowds preſs on you as you paſs,
And with their eager joy make triumph ſlow. Dryden.
Th’ inſulting vićtor preſſes on the more,
And treads the ſteps the vanquiſh'd trod before. Dryden.
She is always drawn in a poſture of walking, it being as
natural for Hope to preſs forward to her proper ºbjects, as for
Fear to fly from them. Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
Let us not therefore faint, or be weary in our journey,
much leſs turn back or fit down in deſpair ; but prºſ. chear-
fully forward to the high mark of our calling. Rºgers.
3. To make invaſion; to encroach.
On ſuperior powers
were we to preſs, inferior might on ours. Pºpe.
4. To croud; to throng.
For he had healed many, inſomuch that they preſſed upon
him for to touch him. Mar. iii. 1 o.
Counſel ſhe may ; and I will give thy ear
The knowledge firſt of what is fit to hear:
what I tranſact with others or alone,
Beware to learn; nor preſs too near the throne. Dryden.
5. To come unſeaſonably or importunately.
6. To urge with vehemence and importunity.
He reſid upon them greatly; and they turned in. Gen.
The leſs blood he drew, the more he took of treaſure ;
and, as ſome conſtrued it, he was the more ſparing in the one,
that he might be the more preſſing in the other. Bacon.
So thick the ſhiv'ring army ſtands,
And preſs for paſſage with extended hands. Dryden.
7. To act upon or influence.
when arguments preſs equally in matters indifferent, the
ſafeſt method is to give up ourſelves to neither. Addiſon.
8. To PREss upon. To invade; to puſh againſt.
Patroclus preſſes upon Hector too boldly, and by obliging
him to fight, diſcovers it was not the true Achilles. Pope.
PREss. n.ſ. [preſſoir, Fr. from the verb.]
1. The inſtrument by which any thing is cruſhed or ſqueezed.
The preſs is full, the fats overflow. joel iii. 13.
When one came to the preſs fats to draw out fifty veſſels
out of the preſs, there were but twenty. Hag. ii. 16.
The ſtomach and inteſtines are the preſs, and the lačteal
veſſels the ſtrainers, to ſeparate the pure emulſion from the
faeces. - Arbuthnot.
They kept their cloaths, when they were not worn, con-
ſtantly in a preſs, to give them a luſtre. Arbuthnot.
2. The inſtrument by which books are printed.
Theſe letters are of the ſecond edition; he will print them
out of doubt, for he cares not what he puts into the preſs,
when he would put us two in. Shakeſp.
3. Croud; tumult; throng.
Paul and Barnabas, when infidels admiring their virtues,
went about to ſacrifice unto them, rent their garments in token
of horror, and as frighted, ran crying through the preſs of
the people, O men wherefore do ye theſe things. Hºoker.
She held a great gold chain ylinked well,
Whoſe upper end to higheſt heaven was knit,
And lower part did reach to loweſt hell,
And all that preſs did round about her ſwell,
To Satchen hold of that long chain.
Who is it in the preſ; that calls on me?
I hear a tongue, ſhriller than all the muſick,
Cry, Caeſar. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
Death having prey’d upon the outward Parts,
Leaves them intenſible; his fiege is now
{\gainſt the mind ; the which he pricks and wounds
With many legions of ſtrange fantafies;
Fairy Queen.
which in their throng, and preſs to that laſt hold,
Confound themſelves. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Ambitious Turnus in the preſs appears,
And aggravating crimes augment their fears. Dryden.
A new expreſs all Agra does affright,
Darah and Aurengzebe are join'd in fight;
The preſs of people thickens to the court,
Th’ impatient croud .#. report. Dryden.
Through the preſs enrag’d Thaleſtris flies, -
And ſcatters deaths around from both her eyes. Pope.
4. A kind of wooden caſe or frame for cloaths and other uſes.
Creep into the kill hole.—Neither preſs, coffer, cheſt,
trunk; but he hath an abſtraćt for the remembrance of ſuch
places. Shałºff. Merry Wives of Windſor.
5. A commiſſion to force men into º ſervice. For impreſs.
If I be not aſhamed of my ſoldiers, I am a ſowc'd gurnet;
I have miſus’d the king's preſs damnably. Shakeſp.
Concerning the muſters and preſe; for ſufficient mariners to
ſerve in his majeſty's ſhips, either the care is very little, or
the bribery very great. Raleigh.
PRE'ssor D. n.ſ. [prºſ, and bed.] Bed ſo formed, as to be ſhut
up in a caſe.
PRE'sser. n.ſ.. [from prºſ...] One that preſſes or works at a preſs.
Of the ſtuffs I give the profits to dyers and prºſers, Swift.
PRE'sscANG. m. ſ. [preſs and gang.]. A crew that ſtrols about
the ſtreets to force men into naval ſervice.
PRE'ssingly. adv. [from preſſing..] With force; cloſely.
The one contracts his words, ſpeaking preſſingly and ſhort;
the other delights in long-breathed accents. Howel.
PRE'ssion. n.J. [from prºft.] The act of preſſing:
If light conſiſted only in prºftºn, propagated without adual
motion, it would not be able to agitate and heat the bodies,
which refract and reflect it: if it conſiſted in motion, propa-
gated to all diſtances in an inſtant, it would require an infinite
force every moment, in every ſhining particle, to generate
that motion: and iſ it conſiſted in prºfton or motion, propa-
gated either in an inſtant or in time, it would bend into the
ſhadow. Newton's Opticks.
PRE'ssit ANT. adj. Gravitating; heavy. A word not in uſe.
Neither the celeſtial matter of the vortices, nor the air,
nor water are preſſitant in their proper places. More.
PRE'ssMAN. n.ſ. preſs and man.]
1. One who forces another into ſervice; one who forces away-
One only path to all; by which the preſſmen came. Chº?:
2. One who makes the impreſſion of print by the preſs: di-
ſtinét from the compoſitor, who ranges the types.
PRE'ssmoney. n.ſ. [preſs and money..] Money given to a ſol-
dier when he is taken or forced into the ſervice.
Here Peaſcod, take my pouch, 'tis all I own,
'Tis my preſinoney.—Cañ this ſilver fail? Gay.
PRE'ssure. m. ſ. [from £3.
1. The aët of preſſing or cruſhing.
2. The ſtate of being preſſed or cruſhed.
3. Force ačting againſt anything; gravitation; preſſion. -
The inequality of the prajure of parts appeareth in this ;
that if you take a body of ſtone, and another of wood of the
ſame magnitude and ſhape, and throw them with equal force,
you cannot throw the wood ſo far as the ſtone. - Bacon.
Although the glaſſes were a little convex, Yº! this tranſpa-
rent ſpot was of a conſiderable breadth, which breadth ſeemed
principally to proceed from the yielding inwards of the parts
of the glaſſes, by reaſon of their mutual preſſure. Newtºn.
The blood flows through the veſſels by the exceſs of the
force of the heart above the incumbent prºſºrº, whº " fat
people is exceſſive. Arbuthnot.
4. Violence inflićted ; oppreſſion. -
A wiſe father ingenuouſly confeſſed, that thoſe, which per;
ſuaded preſſure of conſciences, were commonly intereſted
therein. Bacon's Eſſayſ.
5. Affliction; grievance; diſtreſs. -
Mine own and my people's preſures are gº”. and
peace would be very pleaſing: Ring Charles.
The genuine price of lands in England would be twº
years purchaſe, were it not for accidental preſſures under which
it labours. Child's Diſ-ourſ ºf Trade.
To this confideration he retreats, in the midſt of all his
preſſures, with comfort ; in this thought, notwithſtanding the
fad afflićtions with which he was overwhelmed, he mightily
exults. Atterbury's Sermon:
Excellent was the advice of Elephas to Jº...? the midſt
of his great troubles and preſſureſ, acquaint thyſelf nºw with
God, and be at peace. - Atterbury.
6. Impreſſion; ſtamp; character made by impreſſion.
From my memory
I'll wipe away all trivial fond recºrds,
All ſaws of books, all forms, all pr:/* paſt,
P That youth and º copy'd there. Shakespeare
REst. adj. ſpreſ? or prét, Fr. - -
1. Ready º º º, ſaid to have been the original
ſenſe of the word preſ' men ; men, not forced into the ſervice,
as now we underſtand it, but men, for * * ſum re-
ceived, prºſt or ready to march at command. Each
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P. R. E.
Each mind is preſſ, and open every ear,
To hear new tidings, though they no way joy us. Fairfax.
Grittus deſired nothing more than, at his firſt entrance, to
have confirmed the opinion of his authority in the minds of
the vulgar people, by the preſ; and ready attendance of the
Vayuod. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
2. Néat; tight. In both ſenſes the word is obſolete.
More wealth any where, to be breefe
More people, more handſome and preſ?
Where find ye Tuſſer's Huſbandry.
PREst. n.ſ. [preſt, Fr.] A loan.
He required of the city a preſt of fix thouſand marks; but,
after many parlees, he could obtain but two thouſand pounds.
- Bacon's Henry VII.
PREstigation. m. ſ. [prºſtigatio, Lat..] A deceiving; a jug-
gling; a playing legerdemain. Dić7.
rº. 71. y [prºſtigiae, Lat..] Illuſions; impoſtures;
juggling tricks. Dić7.
Presto. n.ſ. [preſto, Italian.] Quick; at once. A word
uſed by thoſe that ſhow legerdemain.
Preſio 1 begone ! 'tis here again ;
There's ev'ry piece as big as ten. Swift.
PREsu"MABLY. adv. [from preſume.] Without examination.
Authors preſumably writing by common places, wherein,
for many years, promiſcuouſly amaſſing all that make for their
ſubjećt, break forth at laſt into uſeleſs rhapſodies. Brown.
To PRESU'ME. v. n. [preſumer, Fr. praſumo, Lat.]
1. To ſuppoſe; to believe previouſly without examination.
O much deceiv'd, much failing, hapleſs Eve 1
Of thy preſum’d return event perverſe! Milton.
Experience ſupplants the uſe of conjećture in the point;
we do not only preſume it may be ſo, but ačtually find it is
ſo. Government ſ the Tongue.
2. To ſuppoſe; to affirm without immediate proof.
Although in the relation of Moſes there be very few perſons
mentioned, yet are there many more to be preſumed. Brown.
I preſume,
That as my hand has open'd bounty to you,
My heart dropp'd love; my pow'r rain’d honour more
On you, than any. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
3. To venture without poſitive leave.
There was a matter we were no leſs deſirous to know,
than fearful to aſk, left we might preſume too far. Bacon.
I to the heav'nly viſion thus preſum’d. Milton.
4. To form confident or arrogant opinions.
The life of Ovid being already written in our language, I
will not preſume ſo far upon myſelf, to think 1 can add any
thing to Mr. Sandys his undertaking. Dryden.
This man preſumes upon his parts, that they will not fail
him at time of need, and ſo thinks it ſuperfluous labour to
make any proviſion beforehand. Locke.
5. To make confident or arrogant attempts.
In this we fail to perform the thing, which God ſeeth
meet, convenient and good; in that we preſume to ſee what
is meet and convenient, better than God himſelf. Hooker.
God, to remove his ways from human ſenſe,
Plac'd heav'n from earth ſo far, that earthly ſight,
If it preſume, might err in things too high,
And no advantage gain. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. viii.
6. It has on or upon ſometimes before the thing ſuppoſed, or cau-
ſing preſumption.
He, that would not deceive himſelf, ought to build his hy-
potheſis on matter of fact, and not preſume on matter of fact,
becauſe of his hypotheſis. Locke.
Luther preſumes upon the gift of continency. Atterbury.
7. It has of ſometimes, but not properly,
Preſuming of his force, with ſparkling eyes,
Already he devours the promis'd prize. Dryden.
PREsu MER. n ſ. [from preſume.] One that preſuppoſes; an
arrogant perſon. -
Heavy with ſome high minds is an overweight of obliga-
tion ; otherwiſe great deſervers do grow intolerable pre-
ſumers. - J/otton.
PREsu Mption. n.ſ. ſpraſamptus, Lat, prºſºmption, Fr.]
1. Suppoſition previouſly formed.
Thou haſt ſhewed us how unſafe it is to offend thee, upon
preſumptions afterwards to pleaſe thee. King Charles.
Though men in general believed a future ſtate, yet they had
but confuſed preſumptions of the nature and condition of it. Rog.
2. Confidence grounded on any thing preſuppoſed.
A preſumption, upon this aid, was the principal motive for
the undertaking. Clarendon, b. viii.
Thoſe at home held their immoderate engroſſments of
power by no other tenure, than their own preſumption upon
the neceſſity of affairs. Swift's Miſcellanies.
3 tº argument ſtrong, but not demonſtrative; a ſtrong pro-
ability.
#. error and unſufficience of their arguments doth make
it, on the contrary ſide againſt them, a ſtrong preſumption,
that God hath not moved their hearts to think ſuch things, as
he hath not enabled them to prove. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 10.
4. Arrogance; confidence blind and adventurous ; preſump-
tuculneſs. -
Let my preſumption not provoke thy wrath;
For I am ſorry, that with reverence
I did not entertain thee as thou ar. Shakeſp.
It warns awarier carriage in the thing,
Left blind preſumption work their ruining. Daniel.
. I had the preſumption to dedicate tº you a very unfiniſhed
piece. Dryden.
5. Unreaſonable confidence of divine favour.
The awe of his majeſty will keep us from preſumption, and
the promiſes of his mercy from deſpair. Rogers.
PREsu"mptive. adj. [preſomptive, Fr. from preſume.]
1. Taken by previous ſuppoſition.
... We commonly take ſhape and colour for ſo prºfimptive
ideas of ſeveral ſpecies, that, in a good pićture, we readily
ſay this is a lion, and that a roſe. Locke.
2. Suppoſed; as, the preſumptive heir : oppoſed to the heir ap-
parent.
3. Confident; arrogant; preſumptuous.
There being two opinions repugnant to each other, it may
not be preſumptive or ſceptical to doubt of both. Brown.
Presu'Mptuous. adj. [preſumptueux, prºſomptueux, Fr.]
I. *g. confident; inſolent.
reſumptuous prieſt, this place commands my patience.
Shakeſp. Henry VI.
I follow him not
With any token of preſumptuous ſuit;
Nor would I have him, till I do deſerve him. Shakeſp.
The boldneſs of advocates prevail with judges; whereas
they ſhould imitate God, who repreſſeth the preſumptuous,
and giveth grace to the modeſt. Bacon's Eſſays.
Their minds ſomewhat rais'd
By falſe preſumptuous hope. Milton.
Some will not venture to look beyond received notions of
the age, nor have ſo preſumptuous a thought, as to be wiſer
than their neighbours. Locke.
2. Irreverent with reſpect to holy things.
Thus I preſumptuous : and the viſion bright, -
As with a ſmile more brighten'd, thus reply'd. Milton,
The pow'rs incens'd
Puniſh'd his preſumptuous pride,
That for his daring enterprize ſhe dy'd. Dryden.
Can'ſt thou love
Preſumptuous Crete, that boaſts the tomb of Jove. Pope.
PRESU'Mptuously. adv. [from preſumptuous.]
1. Arrogantly ; irreverently. *
Do you, who ſtudy nature's works, decide,
Whilſt I the dark myſterious cauſe admire;
Nor, into what the gods conceal, preſumptuouſly enquire.
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
2. With vain and groundleſs confidence in divine favour.
I entreat your prayers, that God will keep me from all
premature perſuaſion of my being in Chriſt, and not ſuffer
me to go on preſumptuouſly or deſperately in any courſe Hamm.
PREsu"Mptuousness. m. ſ... [from preſumptuous.] Quality of
being preſumptuous; confidence; irreverence.
PREsuppo's AL. m. ſ. [prae and ſuppoſal.] Suppoſal previouſly
formed.
All things neceſſary to be known that we may be ſaved,
but known with preſuppoſal of knowledge concerning certain
principles, whereof it receiveth us already perſuaded. Hooker.
To PRESUPPO'se. v. a. [preſuppoſer, Fr. prae and ſuppoſe.]
To ſuppoſe as previous.
In as much as righteous life preſuppoſeth life, in as much as
to live virtuouſly it is impoſſible except we live; therefore the
firſt impediment, which naturally we endeavour to remove,
is penury and want of things, without which we cannot
live. - Hooker, b. i. ſ. 10.
All kinds of knowlege have their certain bounds; each of
them preſuppoſeth many neceſſary things learned in other
ſciences, and known beforehand. Hooker, b. i.
PRESUPPosition. n.ſ. ſpre, uppoſition, Fr. prae and ſuppoſition.]
Suppoſition previouſly formed.
PRESURMI'se. m. ſ. [prae and ſurmiſe.] Surmiſe previouſly
formed.
It was your preſurmiſe,
That, in the dole of blows, your ſon might drop. Shakeſ?.
PRETE'Nce. m. ſ. [praetenſus, Lat.]
1. A falſe argument grounded upon fićtitious poſtulates.
This pretence againſt religion will not only be baffled, but
we ſhall gain a new argument to perſuade men over. Tillotſ.
2. The act of ſhowing or alleging what is not real.
With flying ſpeed and ſeeming great pretent.
Came running in a meſſenger. . Fairy Queen.
So ſtrong his appetite was to thoſe executions he had been
accuſtom'd to in Ireland, without any kind of commiſſion or
pretence of authority. . . Clarendon.
O worthy not of liberty alone, -
Too mean pretence, but honour. Miller.
Let not the Trojans, with a feign'd pretence
Of proffer'd peace, delude the Latian prince. Dryden.
I ſhould have dreſſed the whole with greater care ; but I
had little time, which I am ſure you know to be more than
pretence. Wake's Preparation fºr Death.
5 3. Aſſumption ;
~.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P. R. E.
3. Aſſumption; claim tº notice.
Deſpiſe not theſe few enſuing pages; for ºve ". y
thing of this prºtºtice more ingenuouſly imparted. velyn,
4. Claim true or falſe. - • 1
Spirits in our juſt pretences arm'd l
Fell with us. Milton.
Primogeniture cannot have any pretence to a right of ſolely
inheriting property or power. . - - - -
5. º uſes this word with more affinity to the original
in for ſomething threatened, or held out to terrify.
Lºft. conceived a moſt faint negle&amp;t of late, which I have
rather blamed as my own jealous curioſity, than as 4 Veſy
pretence and purpoſe of unkindneſs. Shakeſp.
In the great º : God I º and thence
Againſt the undivulg’d pretence I fight
ğ treas'nous . p Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He hath writ this to feel my affection for your honour, and
to no other pretence of danger.
To PRETEND. v. a. [pretendo, Lat., pretendre, Fr.] . .
1. To hold out; to ſtretch forward. This is mere Latinity,
and not uſed.
Lucagus, to laſh his horſes, bends
Prone to the wheels, and his left foot pretendi. Dryden.
2. To portend; to foreſhow. Not in uſe.
All theſe movements ſeemed to be pretended by moving of
the earth in Suſſex. Hayward.
3. To make any appearance of having; to allege falſely.
This let him know,
Leſt wilfully tranſgreſſing he pretend
Surpriſal. Milton.
What reaſon then can any man pretend againſt religion,
when it is ſo apparently for the benefit, not only of human
º but of every particular perſon. Tillotſºn.
4. To ſhow hypocritically.
'Tis their intereſt to guard themſelves from thoſe riotous
effects of pretended zeal, nor is it leſs their duty. D. of Piety.
5. To hold out as a deluſive appearance ; to exhibit as a cover
of ſomething hidden. This is rather Latin.
Warn all creatures from thee
Henceforth; left that too heav'nly form, pretended
To helliſh falſhood, ſnare them. Milton's Par. Loft.
6. To claim. In this ſenſe we rather ſay, pretend to.
Chiefs ſhall be grudg’d the part which they pretend. Dry.
Are they not rich what more can they pretend ? Pope.
To PRETEND. v. n.
1. To put in a claim truly or falſely. It is ſeldom uſed without
ſhade of cenſure.
What peace can be, where both to one pretend ?
But they more diligent, and we more ſtrong. Dryden.
. In thoſe countries that pretend to freedom, princes are ſub-
jećt to thoſe laws which their people have choſen. Swift.
2. To ſºme on ability to do any thing; to profeſs preſump-
tuouſly.
Of the ground of redneſs in this ſea are we not fully ſatis-
fied ; for there is another red ſea, whoſe name we pretend
not to make out from theſe principles. Brown.
PRETENDER. m. ſ. [from pretend.j One who lays claim to
any thing.
The prize was diſputed only till you were ſeen; now all
pretenders have withdrawn their claims. Dryden.
Whatever vićtories the ſeveral pretenders to the empire ob-
tained over one another, they are recorded on coins without
the leaſt refle&amp;tion. Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
The numerous pretenders to places would never have been
kept in order, if expectation had been cut off. Swift.
o juſt contempt ye vain pretenders fall,
The people's fable and the ſcorn of all. Pope.
Pretenders to philoſophy or good ſenſe grow fond of this
ſort of learning. - JWatts.
Fºx. adv. [from pretending.] Arrogantly; pre-
umptuouſly.
I have a particular reaſon to look a little pretendingly at
preſent. Collier on Pride,
PRETE'ssion. m. ſ. [pretenſo, Lat. pretention, Fr.] -
I, Claim true or falſe.
But if to unjuſt things thou doſt pretend,
Ere they begin, let thy pretenſiºns end. Denham.
Men indulge thoſe opinions and practices, that favour their
pretenſons. L’E/irange.
The commons demand that the conſulſhip ſhould lie in
Sºmmon to the pretenſions of any Roman. Swift.
2. Fictitious appearance. A Latin phraſe or ſenſe.
sº but an invention and pretenſion given out by the
janiards. Bacon.
Fºsº*ſº º A particle, which prefixed to
PRETERIM per n origina : ſignifies beſide.
P perfectl ...' *** adj. In grammar, denotes the tenſe not
; IT. adj. [preterit, Fr. practeritus, Lat.] Paſt.
f ºr TION. n.ſ. [preterition, Fr. from preterit..] The aët
9 going paſt; the ſtate of bei. paſt.
S
PRETERITN
**S. m. ſ. [from preſſeſſit - -
not preſence; not futurity. pre J State of being paſt;
Locke. -
Shakeſp. King Lear.
We cannot conceive a preteritneſs ſtill backwards in infl-
nitum, that never was preſent, as we can an endleſs futurity,
that never will be preſent; ſo that though one is potentiall
infinite, yet nevertheleſs the other is poſitively finite: and this
reaſoning doth not at all affect the eternal exiſtence of the
adorable divinity, in whoſe invariable nature there is no paſt
nor future. Bentley's Sermons.
PRETER LA'ps ED. adj. [practerlapſis, Lat.] Paſt and gone.
We look with a ſuperſtitious reverence upon the accounts
of preterlapſed ages. Glanvill's Scºpſ.
Never was there ſo much of either, in any preterlapſed age,
as in this. //alier.
PRETER LEGAL. adj. [preter and legal.] Not agreeable to
law.
I expe&amp;ted ſome evil cuſtoms preterlegal, and abuſes per-
ſonal, had been to be removed. King Charles.
PRETERMI'ssion. m. ſ. [pretermiſſion, Fr. practerinſio, Lat]
The aët of omitting.
To PRETERMIT. v. a. [practermitto, Lat..]. To paſs by.
The ſees, that are termly given to theſe deputies, for re-
compence of their pains, I do purpoſely pretermit; becauſe
they be not certain. Bacon.
PRETERNATURAL. adj. [practer and natural.] Different.
from what is natural; irregular.
We will enquire into the cauſe of this vile and preternatural
temper of mind, that ſhould make a man pleaſe himſelf with
that, which can no ways reach thoſe faculties, which nature
has made the proper ſeat of pleaſure. South's Sermons.
That form, which the earth is under at preſent, is preter-
natural, like a ſtatue made and broken again. Burnet.
PRETERNATURALLY. adv. [from preternatural.] In a man-
ner different from the common order of nature.
Simple air, preternaturally attenuated by heat, will make
itſelf room, and break and blow up all that which reſiſteth
it. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
PRETERNATURALNEss. n. ſ. [from preternatural.] Manner
different from the order of nature.
PRETER PERFEct. adj. [practeritum perfectum, Lat..] A gram-
matical term applied to the tenſe which denotes time abſolutely
aſt.
P The ſame natural averſion to loquacity has of late made a
conſiderable alteration in our language, by cloſing in one ſyl-
lable the termination of our preterperfect tenſe, as drown'd,
walk'd, for drowned, walked. Addison's Speciator.
PRETERPLUPERF Ect. adj. [practeritum pluſ/uam perfectum,
Lat.] The grammatical epithet for the tenſe denoting time
relatively paſt, or paſt before ſome other paſt time. -
PRETEx T. n.ſ. [practextus, Lat. pretexte, Fr.] Pretence;
falſe appearance; falſe allegation.
My pretext to ſtrike at him admits -
A good conſtruction. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Under this pretext, the means he ſought -
To ruin ſuch whoſe might did much exceed - -
His pow'r to wrong. Daniel's Civil War.
As chymiſts gold from braſs by fire would draw,
Pretexts are into treaſon forg'd by law. Denham.
I ſhall not ſay with how much, or how little pretext of ſea-
fon they managed thoſe diſputes. Decay of Piety.
They ſuck the blood of thoſe they depend upon, under a
pretext of ſervice and kindneſs. L'Eſtrange.
PRE tor. n.ſ. [practor, Lat. preteur, Fr.] The Roman judge.
It is now ſometimes taken for a mayor.
Good Cinna, take this paper; .
And look you lay it in the pretor's chair. Shakespeare.
Porphyrius, whom you Egypt's pretor made,
Is come from Alexandria to your aid. Dryden.
An advocate, pleading the cauſe of his client before one of
the pretors, could only produce a ſingle witneſs, ** point
where the law required two. Spectatºr, Nº. 555.
PRE toRIAN. adj. [pretorianus, Lat. pretorien, Fr.] Judicial ;
exerciſed by the pretor. -
The chancery had the pretorian power for equity; the ſtar-
chamber had the cenſorian power for offences. Bacon.
PRE'ttily. adv. [from pretty..] Neatly; elegantly; pleaſingly
without dignity or elevation.
How prettily the young ſwain ſeems to waſh... . .
The hand was fair before. Shakeſp. /Pinter's Tale.
One faith prettily; in the quenching of the flame of a pe-
ſtilent ague, nature is like people that come to quench the fire
of a houſe; ſo buſy, as one letteth another. Bº:
Children, kept out of ill company, take a pride to º:
Jºkt'.
themſelves prettily, after the faſhion of others. - -
PRETTIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from pretty..] Beauty without dignity ;
neat elegance without elevation. - -
There is goodlineſs in the bodies of animals, as in the ox,
greyhound and ſtag; or majeſty and ſtatelineſs, as in the lion,
horſe, eagle and cock; grave awfulneſs, as in nº."
elegancy and prettingſ, as in leſſer dogs and moſt ſort of º *
all which are ſeveral modes of beauty. Aſ tº
Thoſe drops of prettineſ, ſcatteringly ſprinkled amongſt the
creatures, were deſigned to defecate and exalt our º:
tions, not to inveigle or detain our paſſions. oyſt.
PRETTY.
.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P. R. E.
PRETTY. adj. [praet, finery, Sax, pretto, Italian ; prat, prat-
tigh, Dutch...]
1. Neat; elegant ; pleaſing without ſurpriſe or elevation.
Of theſe the idle Greeks have many pretty tales. Raleigh.
They found themſelves involved in a train of miſtakes, by
taking up ſome pretty hypotheſis in philoſophy. J/atts.
2. Beautiful without grandeur or dignity.
The pretty gentleman is the moſt complaiſant creature in
the world, and is always of my mind. Speciator.
3. It is uſed in a kind of diminutive contempt in poetry, and
in converſation: as, a pretty fellow indeed!
A pretty taſk; and ſo I told the fool,
Who needs muſt undertake to pleaſe by rule. Dryden.
He'll make a pretty figure in a triumph,
And ſerve to trip before the vićtor's chariot. Addiſon.
4. Not very ſmall. This is a very vulgar uſe. -
A knight of Wales, with ſhipping and ſome pretty com-
pany, did go to diſcover thoſe parts. . . . Abbot.
&amp; off the ſtalks of cucumbers, immediately after their
bearing, cloſe by the earth, and then caſt a pretty quantity of
earth upon the plant, and they will bear next year before the
ordinary time. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
I would have a mount of ſome pretty height, leaving the
wall of the encloſure breaſt high. Bacon's Eſſays.
Of this mixture we put a parcel into a crucible, and ſuffered
it for a pretty while to continue red hot. Boyle.
A weazle a pretty way off ſtood leering at him. L’E/?r.
PRETTY. adv. In ſome degree. This word is uſed before
adverbs or adječtives to intend their ſignification: it is leſs
than very.
The world begun to be pretty well ſtocked with people,
and human induſtry drained thoſe unhabitable places. Burnet.
J ſhall not enquire how far this lofty method may advance
the reputation of learning; but I am pretty ſure 'tis no
great addition to theirs who uſe it. Collier.
A little voyage round the lake took up five days, though
the wind was pretty fair for us all the while. Addiſon.
I have a fondneſs for a projećt, and a pretty tolerable genius
that way myſelf. Addiſon's Guardian, N° 107.
Theſe colours were faint and dilute, unleſs the light was
trajećted obliquely; for by that means they became pretty
vivid. Newton's Opticks.
. This writer every where inſinuates, and, in one place,
pretty plainly profeſſes himſelf a ſincere chriſtian. Alterbury.
The copper halfpence are coined by the publick, and every
piece worth pretty near the value of the copper. . . Swift.
The firſt attempts of this kind were pretty modeſh. Baker.
To PREVAIL. v. n. [prevaloir, Fr. pracualºre, Lat.]
1. To be in force; to have effect; to have power; to have in-
fluence.
This cuſtom makes the ſhort-ſighted bigots, and the wa-
rier ſcepticks, as far as it prevails. Locke.
2. To overcome; to gain the ſuperiority. With on or upon,
ſometimes over or againſ?.
They that were your enemies, are his,
And have prevail'd as much on him as you. Shakespeare
Nor is it hard for thee to preſerve me amidſt the unjuſt ha-
tred and jealouſneſs of too many, which thou haſt ſuffered to
prevail upon me. King Charles.
I told you then he ſhould prevail, and ſpeed
On his bad errand. - Milton.
The millenium prevailed long againſ? the truth upon the
ſtrength of authority. Decay of Piety.
While Malbro's cannon thus prevail; by land,
Britain's ſea-chiefs by Anna’s high command,
Reſiſtleſs o'er the Thuſcan billows ride. Blackmore.
Thus ſong could prevail
O'er death and o'er hell,
A conqueſt how hard and how glorious ;
Though fate had faſt bound her
With Styx nine times round her,
Yet muſick and love were victorious. - Pope.
This kingdom could never prevail againſt the united power
of England. Swift.
3. To gain influence; to operate effectually.
4. To perſuade or induce by entreaty. It has with, upon or on
before the perſon perſuaded.
//ith minds obdurate nothing prevaileth, as well they that
preach, as they that read unto ſuch, ſhall ſtill have cauſe to
complain with the prophets of old, who will give credit unto
our teaching Hooker, b. lſ 22.
He was prevailed with to reſtrain the earl of Briſtol upon
his firſt arrival. Clarendon.
The ſerpent with me
Perſuaſively have ſo prevail'd, that I -
Have alſo taſted. Milton.
They are more in danger to go out of the way, who are
marching under the conduct of a guide, that it is an hundred
to one will miſlead them, than he that has not yet taken a ſtep,
and is likelier to be prevailcº on to enquire after the right
way. Locke.
There are four ſorts of arºunents that men, in their rea-
ſonings with others, make uſe of to prevail on them. Locke.
The gods pra
He would reſume the é. º: the day,
Nor let the world be loſt in endleſs night ;
Prevail'd upon at laſt, again he took
The harneſs'd fleeds, that ſtill with horror ſhook. Addison
JP'ſ aſſurances of revolt, the queen was prevailed with
to fºnd her forces upon that expedition. Swift.
Prevail upon ſome judicious friend to be your conſtant
hearer, and allow him the utmoſt freedom. Swift.
Prevai'LING. adj. [from prevail.]
moſt influence. -
Probabilities, which croſs men's appetites and prevailing
ſº run the ſame fate : let never ſo much probability
ang on one ſide of a covetous man's reaſoning, and money
on the other, it is eaſy to foreſee which will outweigh. Locke.
Save the friendleſs infants from oppreſſion;
Saints ſhall aſſiſt thee with prevailing prayers,
Predominant; having
And warring angels combat on thy ſide. Rowe,
PREva I'lm ENT, n.ſ.. [from prevail.j Prevalence,
Meſſengers
Of ſtrong prevailment in unharden'd youth. Shakeſp.
PRE’v Alence. !" / [prevalence, Fr. prevalentia, low Lat.]
PRE'y Alency. $ Superiority; influence; predominance.
The duke better knew, what kind of arguments were of
prevalence with him. Clarendon.
Others finding that, in former times, many churchmen
were employed in the civil government, imputed their want-
ing of theſe ornaments their predeceſſors wore, to the power
and prevalency of the lawyers. Clarendon.
Animals, whoſe forelegs ſupply the uſe of arms, hold, if
not an equality in both, a prevalency oſt times in the other.
- Brown's Pulgar Errours,
Why, fair one, would you not rely
On reaſon's force with beauty's join'd;
Could I their prevalence deny,
I muſt at once be deaf and blind. Prior.
Leaſt of all does this precept imply, that we ſhould com-
ply with any thing that the prevalence of corrupt faſhion has
made reputable. Rogers's Sermons.
PRE'VALENT. adj. [praevalens, Lat.] Vićtorious; gaining ſu-
periority. -
Brennus told the Roman ambaſſadors, that prevalent arms
were as good as any title, and that valiant men might ac-
count to be their own as much as they could get. Raleigh.
On the foughten field,
Michael and his angels prevalent encamping. Milton.
The conduct of a peculiar providence made the inſtruments
of that great deſign prevalent and vićtorious, and all thoſe
mountains of oppoſition to become plains. South's Sermons.
2. Predominant; powerful.
Eve 1 eaſily may faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy, from heav'n deſcends;
But, that from us ought ſhould aſcend to heav'n,
So prevalent, as to concern the mind
Of God high-bleſt; or to incline his will ; t
Hard to belief maw ſeem. Milton's Par. Loft.
This was the .. received and prevalent opinion, when I
firſt brought my collection up to London. //oodward.
PRE'v ALENTLY. adv. [from prevalent.] Powerfully; forcibly.
The ev'ning-ſtar ſo falls into the main,
To riſe at morn more prevalently bright. Prior.
To PREVA RICATE. v. n. [praevaricor, Lat. prevariquer,
Fº To cavil; to quibble; to ſhuffle.
aws are either diſannulled or quite prevaricated through
change and alteration of times, yet they are good in them-
ſelves. Spenſer.
He prevaricates with his own underſtanding, and cannot
ſeriouſly conſider the ſtrength, and diſcern the evidence of ar-
gumentations againſt his deſires. South.
Whoever helped him to this citation, I deſire he will never
truſt him more; for I would think better of himſelf, than
that he would wilfully prevaricate. Stillingfleet.
PREva Rication. n.ſ. [pravaricatio, Lat, prevarication, Fr.
from prevaricate J Shuffle; cavil.
Several Romans, taken priſoners by Hannibal, were re-
leaſed upon obliging themſelves by an oath to return again to
his camp: among theſe was one, who, thinking to elude the
oath, went the ſame day back to the camp, on pretence of
having forgot ſomething; but this prevaricatiºn was ſo ſhock-
ing to the Roman ſenate, that they ordered him to be deli-
vered up to Hannibal. Addiſon's Freeholder.
PREva Rica’ tor. m. ſ. ſpravaricator, Lat. Prevaitate”, Fr.
from prevariate.] "A caviller ; a ſhuffle. -
PREve'Niest. adj. [praveniens, Lat.] Preceding; going before;
preventive.
From the mercy-ſeat above -
Prevenient grace deſcending, had remov’d
The flony from their hearts, and made new fleſh
Regenerate grow inſtead. Milton's Par. Lºft,
To PREVEN c. ... a. ſpravenia, Lat..] To hinder.
If thy indulgent care
Had not pre:en'd, among unbody'd ſhades - - -
I now had wander'd. Philips.
2 o K. To PREVE"NT.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R E
P R I
To PREVENT. v. a. [prºvenia, Lat, prevenir, Fr.]
1. To go before as a guide; to go before, making the way
eaſy. - - i-
Are we to forſake any true opinion, or to ſhun any requi
ſite action, only becauſe we have in the prºtice thereof been
prevented by idolaters. Hoºker, b. v. J. I 2.
prevent him with the bleſfings of goedneſs. Pſalm xxi 3.
Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy moſt gra-
cious favour. Common Prayer.
Let thy grace, O Lord, always prevent and follow us.
Common Prayer.
2. To go before ; to be before ; to anticipate. -
Mine eyes prevent the night-watches, that I might be oc-
cupied in thy words. Palm CXIX. 4.
The ſame officer told us, he came to conduct us, and that
he had prevented the hour, becauſe we might have the whole
day before us for our buſineſs. - Bacon.
Nothing engendred doth prevent his meat:
Flies have their tables ſpread, ere they appear;
Some creatures have in winter what to eat ;
Others do ſleep. Herbert's Temple of Sacred Poems.
Soon ſhalt thou find, if thou but arm their hands,
Their ready guilt preventing thy commands;
Coud'ſt thou ſome great proportion'd miſchicf frame,
They'd prove the father from whoſe loins they came. Pope.
. To preoccupy; to preengage ; to attempt firſt.
Thou haſt prevented us with offertures of love, even when
we were thine enemies. Aing Charles.
. To hinder ; to obviate; to obſtruct. This is now almoſt
the only ſenſe.
They prevented me in the day of my trouble ; but the
Lord was my upholder. Pſalm xviii. 18.
I do find it cowardly and vile,
For fear of what might fall, ſo to prevent
The time of life. Shakespeare. julius Cæſar.
This your ſincereſt care could not prevent,
Foretold ſo lately what would come to paſs. Milton.
Too great confidence in ſucceſs is the likelieſt to prevent
it; becauſe it hinders us from making the beſt uſe of the ad-
vantages which we enjoy. Atterbury.
To PREVENT. v. m. To come before the time. A latiniſm.
Strawberries watered with water, wherein hath been ſteeped
ſheep's dung, will prevent and come early. Bacon's Nat. Hºº.
PREv EºN TER. m. ſ. [from prevent.]
1. One that goes before.
The archduke was the affailant, and the preventer, and
had the fruit of his diligence and celerity. Bacºn.
2. One that hinders; an hinderer; an obſtrušter.
PREVENTION. m. ſ. [prevention, Fr. from preventum, Lat.]
1. The act of going before.
The greater the diſtance, the greater the prevention; as in
thunder, where the lightning precedeth the crack a good
ſpace. Bacon.
No odds appear'd *
In might or ſwift prevention. Miltºn.
2. Preoccupation; anticipation.
Atchievements, plots, orders, preventions,
Succeſs or loſs. Shakespeare .
3. Hinderance; obſtruction.
Half way he met
His daring foe, at this prevention more
Incens'd. - Miltºn.
Prevention of fin is one of the greateſt mercies God can
vouchſafe. South's Sermons.
4. Prejudice; prepoſſeſſion. A French expreſſion.
In reading what I have written, let them bring no parti-
cular guſto or any prevention of mind, and that whatſoever
judgment they make, it may be purely their own. Dryden.
PREve's ri 9NAL. adj. [from prevention.] Tending to pre-
VentlOn. Dić.
PREVENTIVE. adj. [from prevent.]
I. Tending to hinder.
Wars preventive upon juſt fears are true defenſives, as well
as upon actual invaſions. Bacon.
2. Preſervative; hindering ill. It has ºf before the thing pre-
vented.
h Phyſick is curative or preventive of diſeaſes; preventive is
that which, by purging noxious humours, preventeth ſickneſs.
P - Brown.
b º: a due degree of ſweat and perſpiration, is the
et preventive of the gout. A, ºut/not
R r * - -
. NTIVE. m. ſ. [from prevent.] A preſervative; that
Which prevents; an antidote.
R E V E (NT -
ºtiv FLY. adv. [from Preventive..] In ſuch a manner
**nds to prevention.
Such as fear
integrity of Å. to concede a monſtrofity, or mutilate the
S * Preventively conceive the creation of thir-
teen ribs. * --
PREVIOUS - -. Brown's Pulgar Errºrs.
fore ; º adj. [previus, Lat.] Anteccdent; going be-
By this trºom, irº......
the * ºn we may gather ſome hopes, that
Sound Ilot º . Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
*** mountain, previous to the ſtorm,
R *.. * --&gt;
olls o'er the muttering Earth. Thomſºn
PRE'viously. adv. [from previous.] Beforehand; antecedently.
Darting their ſtings, they previouſly declare
Deſign'd revenge, and ficree intent of war. Prior.
It cannot be reconciled with perfect ſincerity, as previouſly
ſuppoſing ſome neglect of better information. Fiddes.
PRE'vious N Ess. m. ſ. [from previvas...] Antecedence.
PREY. m. ſ. [praeda, Lat.]
1. Something to be devoured; ſomething to be ſeized; food gotten
by violence; ravine ; wealth gotten by violence ; plunder.
A garriſon ſupported itſelf, by the prey it took from the
neighbourhood of Ayleſbury. Clarendon, b. viii.
The whole included race his purpos'd prey. Milton.
She ſees herſelf the monſter's prey,
And feels her heart and intrails torn away. Dryden.
Pindar, that eagle, mounts the ſkies,
While virtue leads the noble way;
Too like a vulture Boileau flies,
Where ſordid int’reſt ſhews the prey. Prior.
2. Ravage; depredation.
Hog in ſloth, fox in ſtealth, lion in prey. Shakesp.
3. Animal of prey, is an animal that lives on other animals.
There are men of prey, as well as beaſts and birds of prey,
that live upon, and delight in blood. L'E/irange.
To PR EY. v. m. [predor, Lat.]
1. To feed by violence. With on before the obječt.
A lioneſs
Lay couching head on ground, with cat-like watch,
When that the ſleeping man ſhould ſtir : for 'tis
The royal diſpoſition of that beaſt
To prey on nothing that doth ſeem as dead. Shakespeare.
Put your torches out; -
The wolves have prey'd, and look the gentle day
Dapples the drowſy caſt. Shakeſp.
Jove venom firſt infus'd in ſerpents fell,
Taught wolves to prey, and ſtormy ſeas to ſwell, May.
Their impious folly dar'd to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day. Pope.
2. To plunder ; to rob.
They pray continually unto their ſaint the commonwealth,
or rather not pray to her, but prey on her; for they ride up
and down on her, and make her their boots. Shakeſp.
3. To corrode : to waſte.
Language is too faint to ſhow
His rage of love; it preys upon his life;
He pines, he ſickens, he deſpairs, he dies. Addison.
PRE'YER. n.ſ.. [from prey.] Robber; devourer; plunderer.
PRI APIs M. n.ſ. [priapſinus, Lat. piapiſme, Fr.] A preter-
natural tenſion.
Luſt cauſeth a flagrancy in the eyes and friapiſm. Bacon.
The perſon every night has a priapiſm in his ſleep. Flºyer.
PRICE. m. ſ. ſprix, Fr. praelium, Lat. J
1. Equivalent paid for any thing.
I will buy it of thee at a price; neither will I offer burnt-
offerings unto the Lord my God, of that which coſt me no-
thing. 2 Samuel xxiv. 24.
From that which hath its price in compoſition, if you take
away any thing, or any part do fail, all is diſgrace. Bacºn.
If fortune has a niggard been to thee,
Devote thyſelf to thrift, not luxury ;
And wiſely make that kind of food thy choice,
To which neceſſity confines thy price. Dryden.
2. Value ; cſtimation; ſuppoſed excellence. - -
We ſland in ſome jealouſy, left by thus overvaluing their
ſermons; they make the price and eſtimation of ſcripture,
otherwiſe notified, to fall. Hooker.
Sugar hath put down the uſe of honey, inaſmuch as wº
have loſt thoſe preparations of honey which the ancients had,
when it was more in price. Bacon.
3. Rate at which any thing is ſold. -
Suppoſing the quantity of wheat, in reſpect to its vent be
the ſame, that makes the change in the price of wheat. Locke.
4. Reward ; thing purchaſed at any rate.
Sometimes virtue ſtarves, while vice is fed ;
What then f is the reward of virtue bread :
That, vice may merit; 'tis the price of toil;
The knave deſerves it, when he tills the ſoil. Pºpe,
To PR1c E. v. a. To pay for. -
Some ſhall pay the price of others guilt ;
And he the man that made fans foy to fall. . .
Shall with his own blood price that he hath ſpilt. F. 34&amp;n.
To PRICK. v. a. [prician, Saxon.]
1. To pierce with a ſmall puncture.
Leave her to heav'n,
And to thoſe thorns that in her boſon lodge, }.4
To prick and ſting her. Shakespeare Hamlet.
There ſhall be no more a pricking brier unto the houſe of
Iſrael, nor any grieving thorn. Ezekiel XXVI 11. ź.
If ſhe preſidher finger, Jack laid the pin in the way. 44.
2. To form or erect with an acuminated point.
The poets make fame a monſter; they ſay, look hºw
many feathers ſhe hath, ſo many eyes ſhe hath underneath,
ſo many tongues, ſo many voices, ſhe priº,"P o may
C4IS. Bacon's Hºſey.
A hunted<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R I
},
–
- A hunted panther caſts about - -
Her glaring eyes, and prick, her liſt'ning ears to ſcout. Dry.
His rough creſt he rears,
And pricks up his predeſtinating ears.
The fiery courſer, when he hears from far
The ſprightly trumpets and the ſhouts of war,
Pricks up his ears. Dryden's Wirgil's Georg.
A greyhound bath pricked ears, but thoſe of a hound hang
down; for that the former hunts with his ears, the latter
Dryden.
only with his noſe. Grew.
The tuneful noiſe the ſprightly courſer hears,
Paws the green turf, and pricks his trembling ears. Gay.
Keep cloſe to ears, and thoſe let aſſes prick;
'Tis nothing–nothing; if they bite and kick. Pope.
. To fix by the point.
I cauſed the edges of two knives to be ground truly ſtrait,
and pricking their points into a board, ſo that their edges
might look towards one another, and meeting near their
points contain a rečtilinear angle, I faſtened their handles to-
gether with pitch, to make this angle invariable. Newton.
4. To hang on a point. -
The cooks ſlice it into little gobbets, prick it on a prong
of iron, and hang it in a furnace. Sandys.
5. To nominate by a puncture or mark.
Thoſe many then ſhall die, their names are pric{t.
Shakeſpeare:
Some who are pricked for ſheriffs, and are fit, ſet out of
the bill. Bacon.
6. To ſpur; to goad; to impel ; to incite.
When I call to mind your gracious favours,
My duty pricts me on to utter that,
Which elſe no worldly good ſhould draw from me. Shakeſp.
Well, 'tis no matter, honour pricks me on ; -
But how if honour prick me off, when
I come on. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
His high courage prick'd him forth to wed. Pope.
. To pain; to pierce with remorſe.
When they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts,
and ſaid, men and brethren what ſhall we do? A:is ii. 37.
8. To make acid.
They their late attacks decline,
And turn as eager as prick'd wine.
9. To mark a tune.
To PRick. v. n. [prijken, Dutch.]
1. To dreſs one's ſelf for ſhow.
2. To come upon the ſpur. This ſeems to be the ſenſe in
Speºſer.
After that Varlet's flight, it was not long,
Ere on the plain faſt pricking Guyon ſpied,
One in bright arms embattled full ſtrong. Fa. Queen.
A gentle knight was pricking on the plain,
Yclad in mighty arms of filver ſhield. Fa. Queen.
They had not ridden far, when they might ſee
One pricking towards them with haſty heat. Fa. 9;ſeen.
The Scottiſh horſemen began to hover much upon the
Engliſh army, and to come pricking about them, ſometimes
Hudibras, p. ii.
within length of their ſtaves. Hayward.
Before each van
Prick forth the airy knights. Miltºn.
In this king Arthur's reign,
A luſty knight was pricking o'er the plain. Dryden.
PR1cK. m. ſ. [pricca, Saxon.]
1. A ſharp ſlender inſtrument; any thing by which a punéture
is made.
The country gives me proof
Of bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
Strike in their numb’d and mortified bare arms
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, ſprigs of roſemary. Shakeſp.
It is hard for thee to kick againſt the pricks. Aéis ix. 5.
If the Engliſh would not in peace govern them by the law,
nor could in war root them out by the ſword, nauſt they not
be pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their fides. Davies.
If God would have had men live like wild beaſts, he would
have armed them with horns, tuſks, talons or pricks. Bramh.
2. A thorn in the mind; a teafing and tormenting thought; re-
morſe of conſcience.
My conſcience firſt receiv'd a tenderneſs,
Scruple, and prick, on certain ſpeeches utter'd -
By th’ biſhop of Bayon. Shakeſp. Henry VIII,
3. A ſpot or mark at which archers aim.
For long ſhooting, their ſhaft was a cloth yard, their pricks
twenty-four ſcore; for ſtrength, they would pierce any ordi-
nary armour. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
4. A point; a fixed place.
Now gins this goodly frame of temperance
Fairly to riſe, and her adorned head
To prick of higheſt praiſe forth to advance. Spenſºr.
Phaeton hath tumbled from his car,
And made an evening at the noon-tide prick. Shakeſp.
5. A puncture.
No aſps were diſcovered in the place of her death, only
two ſmall inſenſible pricks were found in her arm. Brown.
6. The print of a hare in the ground.
Pri'ck ER. m. ſ. [from pricſ.]
I. A ſharp-pointed inſtrument.
Pricker is vulgarly called an awl; yet, for joiner's uſe, it
hāth moſt commonly a ſquare blade. Aſ wºn; M. `--
2. A light horſeman: y a touare blade xon's Mechan. Exer.
They had horſemen, prickers as they are termed, fitter to
make excurſions and tò chace, than to ſuſtain any ſtrong
P charge. - - Hayward.
Rººker. ºſ. [from prick.] A buck in his ſecond year.
I've call'd the deer; the princeſs kid a pricket. Shakeſp.
The buck is called the firſt year a fawn, the ſecond year a
pricket. AManivozd ºf the Laws of the Forg/?.
*::::::: * / [from prick.J Small ſharp point, like that of
a drier.
The prickles of trees are a kind of excreſcence; the plants
that have prickles, are black and white, thoſe have it in the
bough ; the plants that have prickles in the leaf, are holly and
juniper; nettles alſo have a ſmall venomous prickle. jacon.
An herb growing in the water, called lincoſtis, is full of
prickles: this putteth forth another ſmall herb out of the leaf,
imputed to moiſture gathered between the prickles. Bacon.
A fox catching hold of a bramble to break his fall, the
prickles ran into his feet. L'E/irange.
The man who laugh’d but once to ſee an aſs
Mumbling to make the croſs-grain'd thiſtles paſs,
Might laugh again, to ſee a jury chaw
The prickles of unpalatable law. Dryden.
The flower's divine, where'er it grows,
Neglect the prickles, and aſſume the roſe. JWatts.
PRI'cklin Ess. m. ſ. [from prickly..] Fullneſs of ſharp points.
PR1'cklous E. m. ſ. [prick and loºſe J A word of contempt
for a taylor. A low word.
A taylor and his wife quarreling; the woman in contempt
called her huſband pricºlouſe. L'E/irange.
PRI'ckson G. m. ſ. [prick and ſºng..] Song ſet to muſick.
He fights as you ſing pricſongs, keeps time, diſtance and
proportion. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
PRI'ckly. adj. [from prick.] Full of ſharp points.
Artichoaks will be leſs prickly and more tender, if the ſeeds
have their tops grated off upon a ſtone. Bacon.
I no more -
Shall ſee you browzing, on the mountain's brow,
The prickly ſhrubs. Drydeni
How did the humbled ſwain deteſt
His prickly beard, and hairy breaſt ! Swift's Miſcel,
PRI'ckMADAM. m. ſ. A ſpecies of houſeleek, which ſee.
PRI'cKPUNCH. n.ſ. -
Prickpunch is a piece of tempered ſteel, with a round point
at one end, to prick a round mark in cold iron. Moxon.
PRI'ckwooD. m. ſ. A tree. Ainſworth.
PRIDE. n.ſ. [pric or pnyo, Saxon.]
1. Inordinate and unreaſonable ſelf-eſteem.
I can ſee his pride
Peep through each part of him.
- Pride hath no other glaſs
To ſhew itſelf, but pride ; for ſupple knees
Shakeſp. Henry VIII,
Feed arrogance, and are the proud man's fees. Shakespeare.
He his wonted pride ſoon recollects. A4ilton.
Vain aims, inordinate deſires
Blown up with high conceits engend'ring pride. , Milton.
2. Inſolence; rude treatment of others; inſolent exultation.
That witch
Hath wrought this helliſh miſchief unawares;
That hardly we eſcap'd the pride of France.
They undergo
This annual humbling certain number'd days,
To daſh their pride and joy for man ſeduc’d.
Wantonneſs and pride
Raiſe out of friendſhip, hoſtile deeds in peace,
3. Dignity of manner; loftineſs of air.
4. Generous elation of heart.
The honeſt pride of conſcious virtue.
5. Elevation ; dignity. º
A falcon, tow'ring in her pride of place,
Was by a mouſing owl hawkt at and kill’d.
6. Ornament ; ſhow ; decoration. -
Whoſe lofty trees, yelad with ſummer's triº,
Did ſpread ſo broad, that heavens light did hide.
Smalleſt lineaments exact, .
In all the liveries deck'd of ſummer's ºride.
Be his this ſword, - -
Whoſe ivory ſheath, inwrought with curious pride,
Adds graceful terror to the wearer's ſide.
Splendour; oftentation. -
In this array the war of either. ſide,
Through Athens paſs'd with military pride.
8. The flat of a female beaſt ſoliciting the male.
It is impoſſible you ſhould ſee this,
were they as ſalt as wolves in priº. Shakeſ?.
To PRIDE. v.a. [from the noun..] To make proud; to rate
himſelf high. It is only uſed with the reciprocal pronoun.
He could have made the moſt deformed beggar as rich, as
thoſe who moſt pride them, elves in their wealth. Go, of the ††
is
Shake?,
Miltºn.
Milfº/a
Smith,
Shakeſ?.
G)
F. Qi.
Milton,
Pº ée
7
Dryders
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">º—
P R I
is little impudent hardware-man turns into ridicule the
º sº of the whole kingdom, priding himſelf
as the cauſe of them. - Swift's Miſcel.
PRIE. m.ſ. I ſuppoſe an old name of privet. -
Lop popler and fallow, elme, maple and prie,
Wel ſaved from cattel, till ſummer to lie.
PRIEF for proof. Spenſer. -
PRI’ER. m.ſ.. [from pry.] One who enquires too narrowly.
PRIEST. n.ſ. ſpheore, Sax. preſire, Fr.]
1. One who officiates in ſacred offices.
I'll to the vicar,
Bring you the maid, you ſhall not lack a prieſ. Shakeſ?.
The high prieſt ſhall not uncover his head. Zev. xxi. 13.
Our practice of ſinging differs from the practice of David,
the prieſts and Levites. - - Peacham.
Theſe pray'rs I thy prieſ? before thee bring. Milton.
2. One of the ſecond order in the hierarchy, above a deacon,
below a biſhop.
No neighbours, but a few poor ſimple clowns,
Honeſt and true, with a well-meaning prieſ. . Rowe.
PRI'Estcraft. m. ſ. [prieſ and craft. J Religious frauds;
management of wicked prieſts to gain power.
Puzzle has half a dozen common-place topicks; though
the debate be about Doway, his diſcourſe runs upon bigotry
and prieſ?craft. - Speciator.
From prieſ?craft happily ſet free,
Lo ev'ry finiſh’d ſon returns to thee. Pope.
PRIE’st Ess. n.ſ.. [from prieſ?..] A woman who officiated in
heathen rites.
Then too, our mighty fire, thou ſtood'ſt diſarm’d,
When thy rapt ſoul the lovely prieſ'ſ charm’d, -
That Rome's high founder bore. Addison.
Theſe two, being the ſons of a lady who was prieſtſ to
uno, drew their mother's chariot to the temple. Speciator.
She as priſiſ, knows the rites,
Wherein the God of earth delights. Swift's Miſcel.
Th' inferior prieſtſ, at her altar's ſide,
Trembling, begins the ſacred rites of pride. Pope.
PRIE’sthood. n.ſ.. [from prieſ.]
1. The office and charaćter of a prieſt.
Jeroboam is reproved, becauſe he took the prieſthood from
the tribe of Levi. Jºhitgifte.
The prieſthood hath in all nations, and all religions, been
held highly venerable. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. The order of men ſet apart for holy offices.
Is your prieſthood grown ſo perémptory Shakeſp.
He pretends, that I have fallen foul on priº/hood. Dryden.
. The ſecond order of the hierarchy. Sce Pries r.
Riº's TLINEss; n.ſ. [from priſily.] The appearance or man-
ner of a prieſt. - -
PRIESTLY, adj. [from prieſ...] Becoming a prieſt; ſacerdotal;
belonging to a prieſt.
In the Jewiſh church, none that was blind or lame was
capable of the priſily office. South's Sermons.
How can inceſt ſuit with holineſs,
Or prieſtly orders with a princely ſtate Dryden.
PRIE’s TRIdden. adj. [prieſ and ridden.] Managed or go-
verned by prieſts.
Such a cant of high-church and perſecution, and being
prieſ ridden. Swift.
To PRIEve for prove. Senſºr.
Pric. n. ſ. [A cant word derived perhaps from prick, as he
Pricks up, he is pert; or from prickeared, an epithet of re-
proach beſtowed upon the Preſbyterian teachers.] A pert,
conceited, ſaucy, pragmatical, little fellow.
The little man concluded, with calling monſeur Meſnager
an inſignificant prig. Spectator, N9 482.
There have I ſeen ſome aétive prig,
To ſhew his parts, beſtride a twig.
;: m. ſ. A birt or turbot.
** 64. [by contraction from primitive. - iſe .
ja:; §. p e.] Formal; preciſe;
A ball of new dropt horſe's dung,
Mingling with apples in the throng,
§aid to the pippin, plump and prim,
See, brother, how we apples ſwim. Swift's Mićel.
To PRIM. v. a. [from the adjective.] To deck up preciſely; 6
to form to an affected nicety.
P&amp; IMA cy. n /... [primatic, primace, Fr. primatus, L
- - rs - in - - at. Th
chief eccleſiaſtical ſtation. y p &gt; l e
When he had now the primacy in his own hand, he thought
Swift's Mºſel.
Ainſwºrth. 5. Spring.
7. The firſt canonical hour.
P R I
Theſe confiderations ſo exactly ſuiting the parable of the
wedding-ſupper to this ſpiritual banquet of the goſpel, if it
does not primarily, and in its firſt deſign, intend it; yet cer-
tainly it may, with greater advantage of reſemblance, be ap-
plied to it, than to any other duty. South's Sermont.
Tºſºr. PRI MARINEss. n.ſ. [from primary..] The ſtate of being firſt
in act or intention.
That which is peculiar, muſt be taken from the primari-
nºſ. and ſecondarineſs of the perception.
PRIMARY. adj. [primarius, Lat.]
1. Firſt in intention.
The figurative notation of this word, and not the primary
or literal, belongs to this place. AHammond
2. Original; firſt. -
Before that beginning, there was neither primary matter to
be informed, nor form to inform, nor any being but the
eternal. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the //orld.
When the ruins both primary and ſecondary were ſettled
the waters of the abyſs began to ſettle too. Birº.
Theſe I call original or primary qualities of body, which
produce ſimple ideas in us, viz. ſolidity, extenſión, figure
and motion. 5
3. Firſt in dignity; chief; principal.
As the ſix primary planets revolve about him, ſo the ſe-
condary ones are moved about them in the ſame ſeſquialteral
... proportion of their periodical motions to their orbs. Bently.
PRIMATE. n.ſ. [primat, Fr. primas, Lat J The chief ecclé.
ſiaſtick.
When the power of the church was firſt eſtabliſhed the
archbiſhops of Canterbury and York had then no prºm:
nence one over the other; the former being primate over the
Southern, as the latter was over the Northerſ, Parts. Ayliff.
The late and preſent primate, and the lord archbiſhop of
Dublin hath left memorials of his bounty. Swift.
PRI'MATESHIP. n.ſ. [from primate.] The dignity or office
of a primate.
PRIME. m. ſ. [primus, Lat.
1. The firſt part of the day; the dawn; the morning.
His larum bell might loud and wide be heard *
When cauſe requir’d, but never out of time,
Early and late it rung at evening and at prime. Spenſºr.
Sure pledge of day, that crown'ſt the ſmiling morn
With thy bright circlet, praiſe him in thy ſphere
While day ariſes, that ſweet hour of prim.
2. The beginning ; the early days.
Quickly fundry arts mechanical were found out in the very
prime of the world. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 16.
Nature here wanton'd as in her prime. Milton.
3. The beſt part. -
Give no more to ev'ry gueſt,
Than he's able to digeſt,
Give him always of the prime,
And but little at a time. Swift.
4. The ſpring of life; the height of health, ſtrength or beauty.
Make haſte, ſweet love, whilſt it is prime,
For none can call again the paſſed time.
Will ſhe yet debate her eyes on me,
That cropt the golden prime of this ſweet prince,
And made her widow to a woful bed : Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Youth, beauty, wiſdom, courage, virtue, all
That happineſs and prime can happy call.
Likelieſt ſhe ſeem'd to Ceres in her prime.
No poet ever ſweetly ſung,
Unleſs he were, like Phoebus, young;
Nor ever nymph inſpir'd to rhyme, -
Unleſs, like Venus, in her prime. . - Swift.
Short were her marriage joys; for in the prime
orris.
Locke.
Milton:
Spenſer.
Shakeſp.
Milton.
Of youth, her lord expir’d before his time. Dryden,
Hope waits upon the flow'ry prime,
And ſummer, though it be leſs gay,
Yet is not look'd on as a time
Of declination or decay. - - JValler.
The poet and his theme in ſpite of time, -
Granville.
For ever young enjoys an endleſs prime.
. The height of perfection. -
The it. ... now appear in the . i. *:
- - and flouriſhing together at the
yº. e been all in prime, § //codward.
- Ainſworth.
he ſhould be to blame if he did not apply remedies. Clarºid. 8. The firſt part; the beginning: as, the prime ºf the moon.
..º. n. ſ. The freight of a ſhip. Ainſworth. P
RIME. adj. [primus, Lat.]
**MAL. adj. Ibrimus, Lat.] Firſt. A word not in uſe, but I. Early ; blooming.
"Cry Cornmodious for poetry.
It hath been taught us from the primal ſtate,
hat º which is, was wiſh'd, until he wer.
It h º *) offence is rank, it ſmells to heav'n,
* the primal, eldeſt cºrſ. upon't. Shakeſp.
PRI'MARily. adv. ſſ. - - - -
intention; in the fººd Originally; in the firſt
In fevers, where the hea
medicines unto the wriſts.
4.
rt primarily ſuffereth, we apply
Brown's Vulgar Errºrſ.
His ſtarry helm unbuckl’d, ſhew'd him prime 1
In º, where youth ended. Milton's Par, Lºft.
Shakeſp. 2. Principal; firſt rate.
- - ... • - for re-
Divers of prime quality, in ſeveral counties, weſºło
fuſing to pay the ſame, committed to priſon. Clarendon.
'Nor can I think, that God will ſo deſtroy Milton
We his prime creatures dignify’d ſo high. fº.
Humility and reſignation are our prime virtues.
3. Firſt 5
}
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R I
P R I
We ſmother'd
The moſt repleniſhed ſweet work of nature,
That from the prime creation e'er ſhe fram'd. Shakeſp.
Moſes being choſen by God to be the ruler of his people,
will not prove that prieſthood belonged to Adam's heir, or the
rime fathers. Locke.
. Excellent. It may, in this looſe ſenſe, perhaps admit,
though ſcarcely with propriety, a ſuperlative.
We are contented with
Catharine our queen, before the prim'ſ creature
That's paragon'd i' th' world. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
To PRIME. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To put in the firſt powder; to put powder in the pan of a
3. Firſt ; original.
Il.
s", piſtol of about a foot in length, we primed with well-
dried gunpowder. Boyle.
Prime all your firelocks, faſten well the ſtake. Gay.
His friendſhip was exactly tim’d,
He ſhot before your foes were prim'd. Swift's Miſcel.
2. [Primer, Fr. to begin..] To lay the firſt colours on in paint-
ing. A Galliciſm.
PRIMELY. adv. [from prime.]
1. Originally; primarily; in the firſt place; in the firſt inten-
tion.
Words ſignify not immediately and primely things them-
ſelves, but the conceptions of the mind about them. South
2. Excellently ; ſupremely well. A low ſenſe.
PRIMENEss. n.ſ.. [from prime.]
1. The ſtate of being firſt.
2. Excellence.
PRIMER. m. ſ.
1. An office of the bleſſed Virgin.
Another prayer to her is not only in the manual, but in
the primer or office of the bleſſed Virgin. Stillingfleet.
2. [Primarius, Lat.] . A ſmall prayer book in which children
are taught to read, ſo named from the Romiſh book of devo-
tions; an elementary book.
The Lord's prayer, the creed and ten commandments
he ſhould learn by heart, not by reading them himſelf in his
primer, but by ſomebody's repeating them before he can
read. Locke on Education.
PRIME’RO. m. ſ. [Spaniſh.] A game at cards.
I left him at prime, o
With the duke of Suffolk. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
PRIME'v AL. ladj. [primavus, Lat..] Original; ſuch as was
PRIME'vous. } at firſt.
Immortal dove,
Thou with almighty energy did'ſt move
On the wild waves, incumbent did'ſt diſplay
Thy genial wings, and hatch primeval day.
All the parts of this great fabrick change;
Quit their old ſtations and primeval frame,
And loſe their ſhape, their eſſence, and their name. Prior.
PRIMITIAL. adj. [frimitius, primitia, Lat..] Being of the firſt
produćtion. Ainſworth.
PRIMITIVE. adj. [primitiſ, Fr. primitivus, Lat.]
1. Ancient; original; eſtabliſhed from the beginning.
Their ſuperſtition pretends, they cannot do God greater
ſervice, than utterly to deſtroy the primitive apoſtolical go-
vernment of the church by biſhops. King Charles.
David reflects ſometimes upon the preſent form of the
world, and ſometimes upon the primitive form of it. Burmet.
The doćtrine of purgatory, by which they mean an eſtate
of temporary puniſhments after this life, was not known in
the primitive church, ror can be proved from ſcripture. Tillotſ.
2. Formal ; affectedly ſolemn; imitating the ſuppoſed gravity
of old times.
3. Original; primary; not derivative: as, in grammar, a pri-
mitive verb.
Our primitive great fire, to meet
His godlike gueſt, walks forth.
PRIM1Tively. adv. [from primitive.]
1. Originally; at firſt.
Solemnities and ceremonies, primitively enjoined, were af-
terward omitted, the occaſion ceaſing. Brown.
2. Primarily ; not derivatively.
3. According to the original rule; according to ancient practice.
The pureſt and moſt primitively reformed church in the
world was laid in the duſt. South's Sermons.
PRI'M ITIVEN Ess. n.ſ. (from primitive..] State of being ori-
ginal ; antiquity; conformity to antiquity.
PRIMNEss. n.ſ. [from prim.j Affected niceneſs or formality.
PRIMogº'NIAL. diff. [primigºnius, Lat. it ſhould therefore have
been written primigenial.] Firſtborn; original; primary ;
conſtituent; elemental.
The primogenial light at firſt was diffuſed over the face of
the unfaſhioned chaos. Glanvill's Scepſ.
It is not eaſy to diſcern, among many differing ſubſtances
obtained from the ſame matter, what primogenial and fi ple
bodies convened together compoſe it. Boyle.
The firſt or primºgenial earth, which roſe out of the chaos,
was not like the preſent earth. Barnet's Theory of the Earth.
Blackmore.
Milton.
PRIMogº'Nirur e. n. ſ ſprimogeniture, Fr. from primogenitut
Lat.] Seniority ; elderſhip ; ſtate of being }. g y
sº affordeth the priority of order unto
*The firi provotº: º infer his primogeniture. Brown.
- 3, by his ſeniority and primogeniture,
a. double portion of the guilt. Government of the Tongue.
P RIM&amp;R DIAL. adj. [primordial, Fr. primordium, Lat.] Ori-
ginal ; exiſting from the beginning. -
Salts may be either ºnſinuted or otherwiſe produced, and
ſo may not be primordial and immutable beings. Boyle.
Fº *ſ [from the adj.] Origin; firſt principle.
he primordial of the world are not mechanical, but ſper-
matical and vital. More's Divine Dialogues.
£º "ſ; i. PLUM, of which it is a ſpecies.
RIM O'RDIATE. adj. [from primordium, Lat. riginal ex-
iſting from the #. p &gt; Lat..] Original; ex
Not every thing chymiſts will call ſalt, ſulphur or ſpirit, that
needs always be a primardiate and ingenerable body. Boyle.
PRIMRose. n.ſ. [primula veris, Lat.) A plant.
The flower of the primroſe conſiſts of one leaf, the lower
Part of which is tubuloſe, but the upper part expands itſelf
flat in form of a ſalver, and is cut into ſeveral ſegments;
from the flower-cup, which is fiſtulous, ariſes the pointal,
which, when the flower is decayed, becomes an oblong fruit
or huſk, lying almoſt concealed in the flower-cup, and opens
at the top, in which are contained many roundiſh ſeeds
faſtened to the placenta. Miller.
Pale primroſs,
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Bright Phoebus in his ſtrength. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
I would look pale as primroſe. Shakeſp. Hºrry VI.
There followeth, for the latter part of January, primroſes,
anemonies, the early tulip. Bacon's Eſſays.
2. Primrºſe is uſed by Shakeſpeare for gay or flowery.
I had thought to have let in ſome of all profeſſions, that go
the primroſe way to the everlaſting bonefire. Shakeſp.
PRINCE. n.ſ. [prince, Fr. princeps, Lat.]
I. A fovereign; a chief ruler.
Coeleſtial whether among the thrones, or nam'd
Qf them the higheſt; for ſuch of ſhape may ſeem
Prince above princes. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
Forces come to be uſed by good princes, only upon neceſſity
of providing for their defence. Temple.
Eſau founded a diſtinct people and government, and was
himſelf a diſtinét prince over them. Locke.
The ſucceſſion of crowns, in ſeveral countries, places it
on different heads, and he comes, by ſucceſſion, to be a prince
in one place, who would be a ſubject in another. Locke.
Had we no hiſtories of the Roman emperors, but on their
money, we ſhould take them for moſt virtuous princes. Addiſon.
Our tottering ſtate ſtill diſtraćted ſtands,
While that prince threatens, and while this commands. Pope.
2. A ſovereign of rank next to kings.
3. Ruler of whatever ſex.
Queen Elizabeth, a prince admirable above her ſex for her
princely virtues. Camden.
God put it into the heart of one of our princes, towards
the cloſe of her reign, to give a check to that ſacrilege. Atter.
4. The ſon of a king; in England only the eldeſt ſon; the
kinſman of a ſovereign.
A prince of great courage and beauty, but foſtered up in
blood by his naughty father. Sidney, b. ii.
Heav'n forbid, that ſuch a ſcratch ſhould drive
The prince of Wales from ſuch a field as this. Shakespeare
5. The chief of any body of men.
To uſe the words of the prince of learning hereupon, only
in ſhallow and ſmall boats, they glide over the face of the
Virgilian ſea. Peacham on Poetry.
To PRINCE. v. n. To play the prince ; to take ſtate.
Nature prompts them,
In ſimple and low things, to prince it, much
Beyond the trick of others. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
PRINCE Dom. n.ſ.. [from prince.] The rank, eſtate or power
of the prince; ſovereignty.
Next Archigald, who, for his proud diſdain,
Depoſed was from princedom ſovereign. Fairy Queen.
Under thee, as head ſupreme
Thrones, princedoms, pow'rs, dominions, I reduce. Milton.
PRINCEL KE. adj. [prince and like..] Becoming a prince.
The wrongs he did me were nothing princelike. Shakeſ?.
PRINCE LINEss. n.ſ. [from princely..] The ſtate, manner or
dignity of a prince.
PRI Nc ELY. adj. [from prince.]
1. Having the appearance of one highborn.
n war, was never lion rag'd more fierce,
In peace, was never gentle lamb, more mild,
Than was that young and prince', gentleman.
2. Having the rank of princes. - - -
Meaning only to do honour to their prin.ey birth, they flew
among them all. Sidney, b. ii.
Be oppoſite all planets of good luck
To my proceeding; if with pure heart's love,
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter. Shakeſp.
20 L T he
Shakeſp.
:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R I
P R I
The prince, hierarch left his pow'rs to ſcize
Poſſeſſion of the garden. d Milton.
- ed her commands -
T! # lords and princely dames. JValler.
º So fied the dame, and o'er the ocean bore • , ºf
- Her princely burthen to the Gallick ſhore. Jſ aller.
3. Becoming a prince; royal ; grand 3. auguſt.
I, that but now refus'd moſt princely gifts,
: Am bound to beg of my lord general. Shakespeare
Princely counſel in his face yet ſhone. AMilton.
Born to command, your princely virtues ſlept //aller
'a, le?".
Like humble David's, while the flock he kept.
PRI's cely. adv. [from prince..] In a princelike manner. ,
PRINces-Feath ER. n. 7. The herb amaranth. Ainſ.
PRI'Ncess. n. ſ. [princeſſe, Fr.], . -
1. A ſovereign lady; a woman having ſºvereign command.
Aſk why God's anointed he revil'd ;
A king and princeſ dead. - Dryden.
Princeſ ador'd and lov’d, if verſe can give -
A deathleſs name, thine ſhall for ever live. Granvil.
Under ſo excellent a princeſ, as the preſent queen, wº ſup-
poſe a family ſtrictly regulated. Swift.
| 2. A ſovereign lady of rank, next to that of a queen. -
3. The daughter of a king. -
Here the bracelet of the trueſt princeſ, -
- That ever ſwore her faith. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
4. The wife of a prince: as, the princeſs of Wales.
PRINCIPAL. adj. [principal, Fr. principali, Lat.] .
1. Princely. A ſenſe found only in Spenſer. A Latiniſm.
Suſpicion of friend, nor fear of foe,
That hazarded his health, had he at all;
But walk’d at will, and wandred to and fro,
In the pride of his freedom principal. Spenſºr.
2. Chief; of the firſt rate; capital; eſſential; important; con-
ſiderable.
This later is ordered, partly and as touching principal
matters by none but precepts divine only; partly and as con-
cerning things of inferior regard by ordinances, as wełl hu-
man as divine. , Hooker, b. v. ſ. 4.
Can you remember any of the principal evils, that he laid
to the charge of women. Shakeſp. As You like it.
PRI'NCIPAL. n.ſ.. [from the adj.]
1. A head; a chief; not a ſecond.
Seconds in factions do many times, when the fastion ſub-
divideth, prove principali. Bacon.
2. One primarily or originally engaged; not an acceſſary or
auxiliary.
We were not principals, but auxiliarics in the war. Swift.
In judgment, ſome perſons are preſent as principals, and
others only as acceſſaries. Ayliffe's Parergom.
3. A capital ſum placed out at intereſt.
Thou wilt not only looſe the forfeiture,
But touch'd with human gentleneſs and love,
Forgive a moiety of the principal. Shakespeare.
Taxes muſt be continued, becauſe we have no other means
for paying off the principal. Swift's Miſcellanies.
4. The preſident or governour.
PRINcipA(lity. n: /, ſprincipaulté, Fr. J
1. Sovereignty; ſupreme power. -
Divine lady, who have wrought ſuch miracles in me, as to
make a prince none of the baſeſt, to think all principalities
bağ, in reſpect of the ſheephook. Sidney, b. ii.
Nothing was given to Henry, but the name of king; all
º
i
other abſolute power of principality he had. Spenſer.
2. A prince; one inveſted with ſovercignty.
Then ſpeak the truth by her ; if not divine,
Yet let her be a principality,
Sov’reign to all the creatures on the earth. Shakespeare
Niſroch of principalities the prime. Miltºn.
sº which gives title to a prince: as, the principa-
To the boy Caeſar ſend this grizled head,
And he will fill thy wiſhes to the brim
With principalities. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºp.
The little frincipality of Epire was invincible by the whole
pºwer of the Turks. Temple's Miſcellanies.
4. Superiority; predominance.
In the chief work of elements, water hath the principality
- and exceſs over earth. Digby on Bodies.
. If any myſtery be effective of ſpiritual bleſfings, then this
is much more, as having the prerogative and principality above
lº, º: ce. Taylºr's Jºrthy Communicant.
above dtºº. [from principal.] Chiefly ; above all;
1. º: of divine offices ſhall take upon him that
º ing for covetous or ambitious ends, or ſhall not de-
ºr. e glory of God principally, he polluteth his heart. Tayl.
its *...*. miſtake the nature of criticiſm, who think
The f º p incipally to find fault. Dryden.
tiae of j * of water ariſes principally from the vis iner-
as denſe º and by conſequence, if the heavens were
than water * ***, they would not have much leſs reſiſtance
- Newton's Opticks.
What I principally inſiſt on, is due exccution. Swift.
PRI'NcIPALNFss. m. ſ. [from principal.] The ſtate of being
principal or chief.
PRI'Ncipiation; n.ſ. (from principium, Lat..] Analyſis into
conſtituent or elemental parts. A word not received.
The ſeparating of any metal into its original or element
we will call principiation. Biº.
PRINCIPLE. m. ſ. [principium, Lat. principe, Fr.]
1. Element; conſtituent part; primordial ſubſtance.
Modern philoſophers ſuppoſe matter to be one ſimple prin-
citle, or ſolid extenſion diverſified by its various ſhapes. If atti.
2. Original cauſe. -
Some few, whoſe lamp ſhone brighter, have been led,
From cauſe to cauſe to nature's ſecret head,
And found that one firſt principle muſt be. Dryden.
For the performance of this, a vital or dire&amp;tive principle
ſeemeth to be aſſiſtant to the corporeal. Grew's Coſmol.
3. Being productive of other being ; operative cauſe.
The ſoul of man is an active principle, and will be em-
ployed one way or other. 7illotſon's Sermons.
4. Fundamental truth ; original poſtulate ; firſt poſition from
which others are deduced.
Touching the law of reaſon, there are in it ſome things
which ſtand as principles univerſally agreed upon; and out of
thoſe principles, which are in themſelves evident, the greateſt
moral duties we owe towards God or man, may, without
any great difficulty, be concluded. Hooker.
All of them may be called principles, when compared with
a thouſand other judgments, which we form under the regu-
lation of theſe primary propoſitions. J/atts's Logick.
5. Ground of action ; motive.
Farewel, young lords; theſe warlike principle;
Do not throw from you. Shakeſp.
As no principle of vanity led me firſt to write it, ſo much
leſs does any ſuch motive induce me now to publiſh it. Iſake.
There would be but ſmall improvements in the world,
were there not ſome common principle of action, working
equally with all men. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 255.
6. Tenet on which morality is founded.
I'll try
If yet I can ſubdue thoſe ſtubborn principles
Of faith, of honour. Addison's Catz.
A feather ſhooting from another's head,
Extracts his brain, and principle is fled. Pope.
To PRI Nciple. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To eſtabliſh or fix in any tenet; to impreſs with any tenet
good or ill.
Wiſeſt and beſt men full of beguil'd,
With goodneſs principl’d not to reject
The penitent, but ever to forgive,
Are drawn to wear out miſerable days. Milion.
It is the concern of his majeſty, and the peace of his go-
vernment, that the youth be principled with a thorough per-
ſuaſion of the juſtneſs of the old king's cauſe. South.
There are ſo many young perſons, upon the well and ill
principling of whom next under God, depends the happineſs
or miſery of this church and ſtate. South's Sermons.
Governors ſhould be well principled and good-natured. L'E/l.
Men have been principled with an opinion, that they muſt
not conſult reaſon in things of religion. Locke.
Let an enthuſiaſt be principled, that he or his teacher is in-
ſpired, and you in vain bring the evidence of clear reaſons
againſt his doctrine. Locke.
He ſeems a ſettled and principled philoſopher, thanking for-
tune for the tranquility he has by her averſion. Pºpe to Swift.
2. To eſtabliſh firmly in the mind.
The promiſcuous reading of the bible is far from being of
any advantage to children, either for the perfecting their read-
ing, or principling their religion. Locke.
PRI'N cock. Un. ſ. [from prink or prim cock; perhaps pre:ox or
PRI'N.cox. } pracaquum ingenium, Lat.] A coxcomb; a
conceited perſon ; a pert young rogue.
You are a ſaucy boy; - -
This trick may chance to ſcathe you I know what;
You muſt contrary me ! you are a princox, go. Shakeſ?.
To PRINk. v. n. [pränken, Dutch..] To prank; to deck for
ſhow. - -
Hold a good wager ſhe was every day longer prinking in
the glaſs than you was. Art of Hormºnting.
To PRINT. v. a. [imprimer, emº reint, Fr.]
1. To mark by preſſing any thing upon another.
On his fiery ſteed betimes he rode,
That ſcarcely prints the turf on which he trod.
2. To impreſs anything, ſo as to leave its form.
3. To form by impreſſion.
Your mother was moſt true to wedlock, prince,
For ſhe did print your royal father off, - - -
Conceiving you. Shakespeare Jºinter s Tale.
Ye ſhall not make any cuttings in your fleſh for the dead,
nor print any marks upon you. Lev. ix. 28.
Perhaps ſome footſteps printed in the clay,
Will to my love direct your wand'ring way.
t
Dryden -
R2ſ arm”.
15
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R I
P R I
ift.
much
Wait,
wººd,
*g
1:
Cº.
utiºn
tº nºt
-** - Z - Z
His royal bounty brought its own reward;
And in their minds ſo deep did print the ſenſe,
That if their ruins ſadly they regard,
'Tis but with fear. Dryden,
4. To impreſs words or make books, not by the pen, but the
reſs.
! Thou haſt cauſed printing to be uſed ; and, contrary to the
king, his crown and dignity, built a paper-mill. Shakeſp.
This nonſenſe got in by a miſtake of the ſtage editors, who
printed from the piecemeal written parts. Pope.
Is it probable, that a promiſcuous jumble of printing letter
ſhould often fall into a method, which ſhould ſtamp on paper
a coherent diſcourſe. Locke.
As ſoon as he begins to ſpell, pićtures of animals ſhould be
got him, with the printed names to them. Locke.
To PRINT. v. n. To publiſh a book.
From the moment he prints, he muſt expect to hear no
more truth. Pope,
PRINT. n.ſ. ſempreinte, Fr.]
1. Mark or form made by impreſſion.
Some more time
Muſt wear the print of his remembrance out. Shakeſp.
Abhorred ſlave,
Which any print of goodneſs wilt not take,
Being capable of all ill ! Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Attend the foot,
That leaves the print of blood where'er it walks. Shakeſp.
Up they toſt the ſand,
No wheel ſeen, nor wheels print was in the mould impreſt
Behind them. - Chapman's Iliads.
Our life ſo faſt away doth ſlide,
As doth an hungry eagle through the wind;
Or as a ſhip tranſported with the tide,
Which in their paſſage leave no print behind. Davies.
My life is but a wind,
Which paſſeth by, and leaves no print behind. Sandys.
O'er the ſmooth enamell'd green,
Where no print of ſtep hath been. Milton.
While the heav'n, by the ſun's team untrod, -
Hath took no print of the approaching light,
And all the ſpangled hoſt keep watch. Milton.
Before the lion's den appeared the footſteps of many that
had gone in, but no prints of any that ever came out. South.
Winds bear me to ſome barren iſland,
Where print of human feet was never ſeen. Dryden.
From hence Aſtrea took her flight, and here
The prints of her departing ſteps appear. Dryden.
If they be not ſometimes renewed by repeated exerciſe of
the ſenſes or reflection, the print wears out. - Locke.
2. That which being impreſſed leaves its form.
3. Pictures cut in wood or copper to be impreſſed on paper. It
is uſual to ſay wooden prints and copper plates.
4. Picture made by impreſſion.
From my breaſt I cannot tear
The paſſion, which from thence did grow;
Nor yet out of my fancy raſe -
The print of that ſuppoſed face. JWaller.
The prints, which we ſee of antiquities, may contribute to
form our genius, and to give us great ideas. Dryden.
Words ſtanding for things, ſhould be expreſſed by little
draughts and prints made of them. Locke.
5. The form, ſize, arrangement, or other qualities of the types
uſed in printing books.
To refreſh the former hint;
She read her maker in a fairer print. Drydºn.
6. The ſtate of being publiſhed by the printer.
I love a ballad in print, or a life. Shakeſp.
It is ſo rare to ſee
Ought that belongs to young nobility
In print, that we muſt praiſe. Suckling.
His natural antipathy to a man, who endeavours to ſignalize
his parts in the world, has hindered many perſons from mak-
ing their appearance in print. Addiſon.
I publiſhed ſome tables, which were out of print. Arbuth.
The rights of the chriſtian church are ſcornfully trampled
on in print. Atterbury.
7. Single ſheet printcd and ſold.
The prints, about three days after, were filled with the
ſame terms. - Addiſon.
The publick had ſaid before, that they were dull; and they
were at great pains to purchaſe room in the prints, to teſtify
under their hands the truth of it. - Pope.
Inform us, will the emperor treat,
Or do the priºts and papers lie : Pºpe.
8. Formal method.
Lay his head ſometimes higher, ſometimes lower, that he
may not feel every little change, who is not deſigned to have
his maid lay all things in print, and tuck him in warm. Locke.
PRI'N TER. m. ſ: [from print.J
I. One that prints books.
I find, at reading all over, to delive: to the printer, in that
which I ought to have done to comply with my deſign, I am
fallen very iliort, - Digby.
To buy books, only becauſe they were publiſhed by an
ºnent printer, is much as if a man ſhould buy cloaths that
did not fit him, only becauſe made by ſome famous taylor.
Y sº the frinter's boy below ;
e hawkers all your voices lift. Swift.
2. One that ſtains ić. wift
PRI'stless. * [ſion print..] That which leaves no im-
preſſion.
Ye elves,
And ye, that on the ſands with print'ſ foot
Do chaſe the ebbing Neptune. Shakeſp. Tºm’ ºff.
Whilſt from off the waters fleet, -
Thus I ſet my printleſ, feet
O'er the cowſlip's velvet head,
That bends not as I tread. - AMilton.
PRI'OR. ad. [prior, Lat.] Former; being before ſomething
elſe; antecedent; anterior. c
Whenever tempted to do or approve any thing contrary to
the duties we are enjoined, let us reflect that we have a riºr
and ſuperior obligation to the commands of Chriſt. Rºgers.
PRI'oR. n.ſ. [prieur, Fr.]
I. The head of a convent of monks, inferior in dignity to an
abbot.
Neither ſhe, nor any other, beſides the prior of the con-
vent, knew any thing of his name. Addiſon's Spectator.
2. Prior is ſuch a perſon, as, in ſome churches, preſides over
others in the ſame churches. Ayliffe's Parergon.
PRI'oREss. n.ſ. [from prior.] A lady ſuperior of a convent
of nuns.
When you have vow’d, you muſt not ſpeak with men,
But in the preſence of the prioreſ. Shakeſp.
The reeve, miller and cook are diſtinguiſhed from each
other, as much as the mincing lady prioreſ; and the broad
ſpeaking wife of Bath. Dryden.
PRIo'RITY.. n. ſ. [from prior, adj.]
1. The ſtate of being firſt ; precedence in time.
From ſon to ſon of the lady, as they ſhould be in priority
of birth. Hayward.
Men ſtill affirm, that it killeth at a diſtance, that it poi-
ſoneth by the eye, and by priority of viſion. Brown.
This obſervation may aſſiſt, in determining the diſpute con-
cerning the priority of Homer and Heſiod. Broome.
Though he oft renew'd the fight,
And almoſt got priority of fight, ;
He ne'er could overcone her quite. Swift. ).
2. Precedence in place.
Follow, Cominius; we muſt follow you,
Right worthy your priority. Shakeſ?.
PRI'QRSHIP. m. ſ. [from prior.] The ſtate or office of
prior.
PRI'oR Y. m. ſ. [from prior.]
1. A convent, in dignity below an abbey.
Our abbies and our priories ſhall pay
This expedition's charge. Shakespeare. King john.
2. Priories are the churches which are given to priors in titulum,
or by way of title. Ayliffº's Parergon.
PRI's AGE. n.ſ.. [from priſe.] -
Priſage, now called butlerage, is a cuſtom whereby the
prince challenges out of every bark loaden with wine, con-
taining leſs than forty tuns, two tuns of wine at his price.
Cowel.
PRISM. m. ſ. [priſºne, Fr. Teſtuz.]
A priſºn of glaſs is a glaſs bounded with two equal and pa-
rallel triangular ends, and three plain and well poliſhed ſides,
which meet in three parallel lines, running from the three
angles of one end, to the three angles of the other end.
Newton's Opticks.
Here, aweful Newton, the diſſolving clouds
Form fronting, on the fun, thy ſhowery priſm. Thomſºn.
PRISMA"rick, adj. [priſmatique, Fr. from priſºn.] Formed as
a priſm.
* the maſs of the earth was cubick, priſmaticº, or any
other angular figure, it would follow, that one, too vaſt a
part, would be drowned, and another be dry. Derham.
Falſe eloquence, like the priſmatick glaſs,
Its gaudy colours ſpreads on ev'ry place ;
The face of nature we no more ſurvey,
All glares alike, without diſtinction gay. Pºpe.
PRISMA rically. Adv. [from priſmatic...] In the form of a
Yriſm.
| Take notice of the pleaſing variety of colours exhibited by
the triangular glaſs, and demand what addition of decrement
of either ſalt, ſulphur or mercury befalls the glaſs, by being
priſmatically figured; and yet it is known, that without that
ihăpe, it would not afford thoſe colours is it does. Bºyle.
PRISM 01D. m. ſ. [7;7&amp;z and #33-.] A body approaching
to the form of a priſºn. - • -
PRISON. m. ſ. [priſºn, Fr.] A ſtrong hold in which perſºns
are confined ; a gaol.
He hath commiſſion
To hang Cordelia in the priſºn. Sº ſº, King I. ar.
I thought
Pope.
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R I
For thoſe rebellious here their prisºn ordain'd. 44*.
I thought our utmoſt good
was in one word of freedom underſtºod,
- aſ bleſſing came ; from priſºn free:
*::::::::: i. loſe the fight of Emily. Dryden.
inkind I can you, whom only I adore,
sºº to jº. the priſon door. Dryden.
The tyrant A.olus, - -
with pow'r imperial, curbs the ſtruggling winds,
d ſounding tempeſts in dark priſons binds. Dryden.
#. i. has his chains knocked off, and the priſon doors
ſet open to him, is preſently at liberty. Locke.
'son. v. a. [from the noun.] -
Tº: º 5 º ſhut up in holdſ; to reſtrain from liberty.
- captivate ; to enchain.
2. To Č. their potent herbs and baleful drugs,
They, as they ſung, would take the priſºn'a ſoul,
And lap it in Elyſium. Milton.
3. To confine. -
Univerſal plodding priſºns up
The nimble ſpirits in the arteries. Shakeſp.
Then did the king enlarge • rp-
The ſpleen he priſon'd. Chapman's Iliads.
PRI’sonbase. m. ſ. A kind of rural play, commonly called
priſonbars.
The ſpachies of the court play every friday at ciocho di
canni, which is no other than priſºnbaſe upon horſeback,
hiting one another with darts, as the others do with their
hands. Sandys's Travels.
PRI’soner. m. ſ. [priſºnnier, Fr.]
1. One who is confined in hold.
Ceſar's ill-erected tower,
To whoſe flint boſom my condemned lord -
Is doomed a priſoner. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
The moſt pernicious infection, next the plague, is the
ſmell of the jail, when priſoners have been long and cloſe,
and naſtily kept. Bacon.
He that is tied with one ſlender ſtring, ſuch as one reſolute
ſtruggle would break, he is priſoner only to his own ſloth, and
who will pity his thraldom. Decay of Piety.
A priſoner is troubled, that he cannot go whither he would;
and he that is at large is troubled, that he does not know
whither to go. L'Eſtrange.
2. A captive; one taken by the enemy.
So oft as homeward I from her depart,
I go like one that having loſt the field,
Is priſºner led away with heavy heart. Spenſºr.
There ſucceeded in abſolute victory for the Engliſh, the
taking of the Spaniſh general d'Ocampo priſºner, with the
loſs of few of the Engliſh. Bacon.
He yielded on my word,
And as my priºner, I reſtore his ſword. Dryden.
3. One under an arreſt.
Tribune, a guard to ſeize the empreſs ſtraight,
Secure her perſon prisºner to the ſtate. Dryden.
PRI’sos House. m. ſ. Gaol; hold in which one is confined.
, I am forbid to tell the ſecrets of my priſonhouſe. Shakeſp.
PRI sonMENT. n. ſ: [from priſon.] Confinement: empriſon-
ment; captivity.
May be he will not touch young Arthur's life,
But hold himſelf ſafe in his priſonment. Shakespeare
PRI's rise. adj. [priſinus, Lat. | Firſt; ancient; original.
Now their priſtine worth
The Britons recollect. Philips.
This light being trajećted only through the parallel ſuper-
ficies of the two priſms, if it ſuffered any change by the re-
fraction of one ſuperficies, it loſt that impreſſion by the con-
trary refračtion of the other ſuperficies, and ſo, being re-
ſtored to its priſtine conſtitution, became of the ſame nature
and condition as at firſt. Newton's Opticks.
PRI'THE E. A familiar corruption of pray thee, or I pray thee,
which ſome of the tragick writers have injudiciouſly uſed.
Well, what was that ſcream for, I prithee 2 L'E/ºrange.
Alas! why com’ſ thou at this dréadful moment,
To ſhock the peace of my departing ſoul ?
Away ! I prithee leave mé ! Fowe's jane Shore.
PRI'v Acy, n. J. [from private.]
1. State of being ſecret; ſecrecy.
2. Retirement; retreat
Clamours our privaje, uneaſy make,
Birds leave their neſis diſturb’d, and beaſts their haunts for-
ſake. - - Dryden.
3. [Privauté, Fr.] Privity; joint knowledge; great famili-
arity. Privacy in this ſenſe is improper. c
You ſee Frog is religiouſly true to his bargain, ſcorns to
compoſition without your privacy. Arbuthnot.
Ainſworth.
hearken to any
4. Taciturnity.
*Hºo "iſ [Spaniſh.] A ſecret friend.
tugal e * Bampion, an Engliſh lady, embarked for Por.
PRI. aſ at that time, With ſome privad, of her OWil. Bacon.
ATE, adj. [privatus, Lat.]
1. Not open; ſécré.
You ſhall go with me ;
I have ſome prival. “hooling for yºu loth, Shakeſp.
Fancy retires
Into her private cell, when nature reſts. Milton.
The harmleſs freedom, and the private friend. Anon.
2. Alone; not accompanied.
3. Being upon the ſame terms with the reſt of the community;
particular: oppoſed to publick.
When publick conſent of the whole hath eſtabliſhed any
thing, every man's judgment, being thereunto Compared,
were not private, howſoever his calling be to ſome kind of
publick charge ; ſo that of peace and quietneſs there is not
any way poſſible, unleſs the probable voice of every intire ſo-
ciety or body politic overrule all private of like nature in the
ſame body. Hooker's P
He ſues rºſace.
To let him breathe between the heav'ns and earth,
A private man in Athens. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
What infinite hearteaſe muſt kings neglea,
That private men enjoy and what have kings,
That private have not too, ſave ceremony Shakeſp.
Peter was but a private man, and not to be any way com-
pared with the dukes of his houſe. Peacham ºf Antiquities.
The firſt principles of chriſtian religion ſhould not be farced
with ſchool points and private tenets. Sanderſon.
Dare you,
A private man preſume to love a queen. Dryden.
4. Particular; not relating to the publick.
My end being private, I have not expreſſed my conceptions
in the language of the ſchools. Digby.
5. In PRIVATE. Secretly ; not publickly; not openly.
In private grieve, but with a careleſs ſcorn;
In publick ſeem to triumph, not to mourn. Granville.
PRI'v ATE. n.ſ. A ſecret meſſage.
His private with me of the dauphin's love,
Is much more general than theſe lines import. Shakeſ?.
PRI'vateer. n.ſ.. [from private.] A ſhip fitted out by pi-
vate men to plunder enemies.
He is at no charge for a fleet, further than providing pri-
vateers, wherewith his ſubjects carry on a pyratical war at
their own expence. Swift's Miſcellanies.
To PRI'v At EE R. v. a. [from the noun.] o fit out ſhips
againſt enemies, at the charge of private perſons.
PRIVATELY. adv. [from private.] Secretly; not openly.
There, this night,
We'll paſs the buſineſs privately and well. Shakespeare
And as he ſat upon the mount of Olives, the diſciples
came unto him privately. 41at. xxiv. 3-
PRI'vat'ENEss. m. ſ. [from private.]
1. The ſtate of a man in the ſame rank with the reſt of the
community.
2. Secrecy; privacy.
Ambaſſadors attending the court in great number, he did
content with courteſy, reward and privatenſ. Bacon.
3. Obſcurity ; retirement.
He drew him into the fatal circle from a reſolved private-
nºſ, where he bent his mind to a retired courſe. JP'otton.
PRIVATION. m. ſ. [privation, Fr. privatio, Lat.]
1. Removal or deſtruction of any thing or quality.
For, what is this contagious fin of kind,
But a privation of that grace within. Davieſ.
So bounded are our natural deſires,
That wanting all, and ſetting pain aſide,
With bare privation ſenſe is ſatisfy'd. Dryden.
After ſome account of good, evil will be known by conſe-
quence, as being only a privation or abſence of good. South.
A privation is the abſence of what does naturally belong
to the thing, or which ought to be preſent with it; as when
* man or horſe is deaf or dead, or a phyſician or divine un-
learned; theſe are privations. //atts's Logicé.
2. The act of the mind by which, in confidering a ſubject, we
ſeparate it from anything appendant.
3. The act of degrading from rank or office.
If part of the people or eſtate be ſomewhat in the
election, you cannot make them nulls or cyphers in the pri-
vation or tranſlation. º Bacon.
If the privation be good, it follows not the former condi-
tion was evil, but leſs good; for the flower or bloſſom is a
poſitive good, although the remove of it, to give place to the
fruit, be a comparative good. Bacon.
PRIVATIVE. adj. [privatiſ, Fr. privativus, Lat.]
I. Cauſing privation of any thing. -
2. Conſiſting in the abſence of ſomething; not poſitive. Pri-
vative is in things, what negative is in propoſitions.
The impreſſion from privative to active, as from filence to
noiſe, is a greater degree than from leſs noiſe to more. Bacon.
The yety privative bleſfings, the bleſfings of immunity,
ſafeguard, liberty and integrity, which we enjoy, deſerve the
thankſgiving of a whole life. Taylor.
PRIVA"Tive. n. ſ. That of which the eſſence is the abſence
of ſomething, as filence is only the abſence of ſound. -
Harmonical ſounds and diſcordant ſounds are both active
and poſitive, but blackneſs and darkneſs are indeed but priva-
tive, and therefore have little or no activity; ſomewhat they
do contriſtate, but very little. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
PRI v ATIVELY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R I
P R O
º,
#,
ſks
3.
the
PRI'v Atively. adv. [from privative..] By the abſence of
ſomething neceſſary to be preſent; negatively.
The duty of the new covenant is ſet down, firſt privatively,
not like that of Moſaical obſervances external, but poſitively,
laws given into the minds and hearts. Hammond.
PRI'v Ativ EN Ess. m. ſ. [from privative.] Notation of abſence
of ſomething that ſhould be preſent.
PRI'vet. n.ſ. The leaves grow by pairs oppoſite to each other;
the flower conſiſts of one leaf, is tubulous, and divided at the
top into five ſegments; the ovary in the center of the flower-
cup becomes a globular ſoft fruit full of juice, in which are
lodged four feeds. Miller.
PRI'vet. n.ſ. Evergreen. It is diſtinguiſhed from the phillyrea
by the leaves being placed alternately upon the branches,
whereas thoſe of the phillyrea are produced by pairs oppoſite
to each other: it hath three ſeeds incloſed in each berry,
whereas the phillyrea has but one. Miller.
PRI'vilege. n.ſ. [privilege, Fr. privilgium, Lat.] -
1. Peculiar advantage.
Here's my ſword,
Behold it is the privilege of mine honours,
My oath, and my profeſſion. Shakesp.
He went
Inviſible, yet ſtay’d, ſuch privilege
Hath omnipreſence. Milton.
He claims his privilege, and ſays 'tis fit,
Nothing ſhould be the judge of wit, but wit. Denham.
Smiles, not allow'd to beaſts, from reaſon move,
And are the privilege of human love. Dryden.
The privilege of birth-right was a double portion. Locke.
2. Immunity; publick right.
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens. Shakeſp.
A ſoul that can ſecurely death defy,
And counts it nature's privilege to die. Dryden.
To PRI'vilzGE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To inveſt with rights or immunities; to grant a privilege.
The great are privileg'd alone,
To puniſh all injuſtice but their own. Dryden.
He happier yet, who privileg'd by fate
To ſhorter labour, and a lighter weight,
Receiv'd but yeſterday the gift of breath,
Ordain'd to-morrow to return to death. Prior.
2. To exempt from cenſure or danger.
The court is rather deemed as a privileged place of un-
tridled licentiouſneſs, than as the abiding of him, who, as a
father, ſhould give a fatherly example. Sidney, b. ii.
He took this place for ſanctuary,
And it ſhall privilege him from your hands. Shakeſp.
This place
Doth privilege me, ſpeak what reaſon will. Daniel.
3. To exempt from paying tax or impoſt. -
Many things are by our laws privileged from tythes, which
by the canon law are chargeable. Hale.
PRI'vily. adv. [from privy.] Secretly; privately.
They have the profits of their lands by pretence of con-
veyances thereof unto their privy friends, who privily ſend
them the revenues. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
PRI'vity. n.ſ. [privauté, Fr. from privy.] -
1. Private communication.
I will unto you in privity diſcover the drift of my purpoſe;
I mean thereby to ſettle an eternal peace in that country, and
alſo to make it very profitable to her majeſty. Spenſer.
- 2. Conſciouſneſs; joint knowledge; private concurrence.
The authority of higher powers have force even in theſe
things which are done without their privity, and are of mean
reckoning. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 7.
Upon this French going out, took he upon him,
Without the privity o' th' king, t'appoint
Who ſhould attend him Skakeſp. Henry VIII.
All the doors were laid open for his departure, not without
the privity of the prince of Orange, concluding that the king-
dom might better be ſettled in his abſence. Swift.
3. [In the plural.] Secret parts. -
Few of them have anything to cover their privities. Abbot.
PRIVY. adj. [privé, Fr.]
1. Private; not publick; aſſigned to ſecret uſes.
The party, gainſt the which he doth contrive, -
Shall ſeize on half his goods ; the other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the ſtate. Shakeſp.
2. Secret; clandeſtine.
He took advantage of the night for ſuch privy attempts,
inſomuch that the bruit of his manlineſs was ſpread every
where. 2 44ac, viii. 7.
3. Secret; not ſhown.
The ſword of the great men that are ſlain entereth into
their privy chamber. Ezek. xxi. 14.
4. Admitted to ſecrets of ſtate.
The king has made him
One of the privy council. Shakespeare . Henry VIII.
One, having let his beard grow from the martyrdom of
king Charles I. till the reſtoration, deſired to be made a privy
counſellor. Speciator, Nº. 629.
5. Sºon to anything; admitted to participation of know-
c ge.
. . . . Sir Valentine
This night intends to flea away your daughter;
Myſelf am cne made privy to the plot. Shakeſp.
Many being privy to the fact,
How hard is it to keep it unbetray'd? Danie'.
He would rather loſe half of his kingdom,
- - than be triv
to ſuch a ſecret, which he Commanded me never privy
to mention.
Gulliver's Travels.
'ºr v. - -
PRI'vy. m. ſ. Place of retirement; neceſſary houſe.
Your fancy
Would ſtill the ſame ideas give ye,
As when you ſpy'd her on the priºr. -
PRIZE".'... ." privy Swift.
I. A reward gained by conteſt with competitors.
If ever he go alone, I'll never wreſtle for prize. Shakeſ,
I fought and conquer’d, yet have loſt the prize. Dº.
The raiſing ſuch ſilly competitions among the ignorant,
propoſing prizes for ſuch uſeleſs accompliſhments, and intº
ſing them with ſuch abſurd ideas of ſuperiority, has in it
ſomething immoral as well as ridiculous. Adiſºn.
2. A reward gained by any performance.
True poets empty fame and praiſe deſpiſe,
Fame is the trumpet, but your ſmile the prize. Dryden.
3. [Priſº, Fr.] Something taken by adventure; plunder.
The king of Scots ſhe did ſend to France,
To fill king Edward's fame with priſoner kings,
And make his chronicle as rich with prize, &gt;
As is the ouzy bottom of the ſea
With ſunken wreck. Shakespeare. Henry V.
He acquitted himſelf like a valiant, but not like an honeſt
man; for he converted the prizes to his own uſe. Arbuthnºt.
Then proſtrate falls, and begs with ardent eyes
Soon to obtain and long poſſeſs the prize:
The pow'rs gave ear. Pope.
To PRIZE. v. a. [from appraiſe; priſer, Fr. appreciare. Lat..]
I. To rate ; to value at a certain price.
Life I prize not a ſtraw ; but for mine honour
Which I would free. Shakespeare.
Caſt it unto the potter; a goodly price that I was prized at
of them. Zech. xi. 13.
2. To eſteem; to value highly.
I go to free us both of pain;
I priz'd your perſon, but your crown diſdain. Dryden.
Some the French writers, ſome our own deſpiſe;
The ancients only, or the moderns prize. Pope.
PRI'z ER. m. ſ. [priſeur, Fr. from prize.j He that values.
It holds its eſtimate and dignity,
As well wherein 'tis precious of itſelf,
As in the prizer. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
PRI'zEFIGHTER, n. ſ. [prize and fighter.] One that fights
publickly for a reward.
Martin and Crambe engaged like prizefighters. Arb. and P2.
In Fig the prizefighter by day delight. Bromſton.
PRO. [Latin.] . For ; in defence of; pro and con, for pro and
contra, for and againſt. Deſpicable cant.
Doctrinal points in controverſy had been agitated in the
pulpits, with more warmth than had uſed to be ; and thence
the animoſity increaſed in books pro and con. Clarendon.
Matthew met Richard, when
Of many knotty points they ſpoke,
And pro and con by turns they took. Prior.
PROBAB, LIT Y. m. ſ. [probabilitas, Lat. probabilité, Fr. from
probable.] Likelihood; appearance of truth; evidence ariſing
from the preponderation of argument: it is leſs than moral
certainty.
Probability is the appearance of the agreement or diſagree-
ment of two ideas, by the intervention of proofs, whoſe con-
nection is not conſtant; but appears for the moſt part to be
ſo. Locke.
As for probabilities, what thing was there ever ſet down ſo
agreeable with found reaſon, but ſome probable ſhew againſt
it might be made : Hºoker's Preface.
If a truth be certain, and thwart intereſt, it will quickly
fetch it down to but a probability; nay, if it does not carry
with it an impregnable evidence, it will go near to debaſe it to
a downright falſity. South's Sermons.
Though moral certainty be ſometimes taken for a high de-
gree of probability, which can only produce a doubtful aſſent;
yet it is alſo frequently uſed for a firm aſſent to thing upon
ſuch grounds, as are fit fully to ſatisfy a Prudent man.
Tilºtſon's Sermons.
For a perpetual motion, magnetical virtues are not without
ſome ſtrong probabilities of proving effectual. //i/{ins.
PRO BABLE. adj. [probable, Fr. probabilis, Lat..] Likely ,
having more evidence than the contrary; -
The publick approbation, given by the body of this whole
church unto thoſe things which are eſtabliſhed, doth make it
but probable that they are good, and therefore unto a neceſ.
ſary proof that they are not good it muſt give place. Hooker.
20 M That<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
That is accounted probable, which has better agº, º:
ducible for it, than Caº be brought againſt it. . attºry.
They aſſented to things, that were neither evident nor cº-
tain, but only probable; for they converſed, they *...*.
º upon a probable perſuaſion of the honeſty and truth o
thoſe whom they correſponded with: . - Sºuth. Sermons.
Probably. adu. [from probable.] Likely ; 1n likelihood. -
Diſtinguiſh betwixt what may poſibly, sº what will pro-
bally be done. L’Eſtrange's Fabies.
Óur conſtitution in church or ſtate could not probably have
been long preſerved, without ſuch methods. Swift.
PRO.B.A.T. n.ſ. [Latin.] The prºof of wills and teſtaments
of perſons deceaſed in the ſpiritual court, either in cominº
form by the oath of the executor, or with witneſſes. Die?.
PRößA^TION. n.ſ. [prºbatio, Lat. from Prº** Lat. proba-
tion, Fr.]
1. Proof; evidence; teſtimony.
Of the truth herein,
This preſent object made probation. Shałºń. Hºnlet.
He was lapt in a moſt curious mantle, which, for more
probation, I can produce. - Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
2. The act of proving by ratiocination or teſtimony.
When theſe principles, what is, is, and it is impoſſible for
the ſame thing to be, and not to be, are male uſe of in the
prelation of propoſitions, wherein are words ſtanding for
complex ideas, as man or horſe, there they make men receive
and retain falſehood for manifeſt truth. Locke.
3. [Probation, Fr.] Trial; examination. -
In the practical part of knowledge, much will be left to
experience and probation, whereunto indication cannot ſo
fully reach. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
4. Trial before entrance into monaſtick life; noviciate. -
I ſuffer many things as an author militant, whereof, in
your days of probation, you have been a ſharer. Pope to Swift.
Pºonation a fly. adj. [from probation.] Serving for trial.
Prop Arion ER. m. ſ. [from prolation.]
1. One who is upon trial.
Hear a mortal muſe thy praiſe rehearſe,
In no ignoble verſe;
But ſuch as thy own verſe did pračtiſe here,
When thy firſt fruits of poeſy were giv'n,
To make thyſelf a welcome inmate there ;
While yet a young probationer,
And candidate of heav'n. Dryden.
Build a thouſand churches, where theſe probationers may
read their wall lectures. Swift.
2. A novice.
This root of bitterneſs was but a probationer in the ſoil;
and though it ſet forth ſome offsets to preſerve its kind, yet
Satan was fain to cheriſh them. Decay of Piety.
ProBATIONERSHIP. m. ſ. [fom probationer.] State of being
a probationer; noviciate.
He has afforded us only the twilight of probability, ſuitable
to that ſtate of mediocrity and probationerſhip, he has been
pleaſed to place us in here, wherein to check our over-confi-
dence. Locke.
PRob AtoRy. adj. [from prolo, Lat.] Serving for trial.
Job's afflićtions were no vindicatory puniſhinents, but pro-
batory chaſtiſements to make trial of his graces. Bramhall.
PROBATUA1 EST. A Latin expreſſion added to the end of
a receipt, ſignifying it is tried or proved.
Vain the concern that you expreſs,
That uncall’d Alard will poſſeſs
Your houſe and coach both day and night,
And that Macbeth was haunted leſs
By Banquo's reſtleſs ſprite:
Lend him but fifty louis d'or,
And you ſhall never ſee him more ;
Take my advice probatum ºf 2
Why do the gods indulge our ſtore,
But to ſecure our reſt. Prior.
ProBE. m. ſ. [from probo, Lat.] A ſlender wire by which ſur-
geons ſearch the depth of wounds.
I made ſearch with a probe. I/ſeman's Surgery.
PRoBE-scissoRs. n.ſ. [probe and ſiſºr.] Sciſſors uſed to open
wounds, of which the blade thruſt into the orifice has a button
at the end.
The finus was ſnipt up with probe-ſciſſºrs. //7ſºnan.
To PROBE. v. a. [prolo, Lat..] To ſearch; to try by an in-
ſtrument.
Nothing can be more painful, than to probe and ſearch a
purulent old fore to the bottom. South’s Sermons.
He'd raiſe a bluſh, where ſecret vice he found;
And tickle, while he gently prob’d the wound. Dryden.
PRC'erry. nºſ. [prolité, Fr. prolitas, Lat..] Honeſty; ſince-
rity ; veracity.
The truth ºf our Lord's aſcenſion, might be deduced from
the pºlity of the apoſtles. Fiddº, Sºrmºns.
- º º we their celeſtial kind,
- §§e, truth, and probity of mind. Pope.
N
º * / [prºblems, Fr. 7:43×43.] A queſtion pro-
6
The problem is, whether a man conſtantly and ſtrongly be-
lieving, that ſuch a thing ſhall be, it doth help any thing to
the effecting of the thing. Bacon's Nat. H/l.
Although in general one underſtood colours, yet were it not
an eaſy problem to reſolve, why graſs is green Brown.
This problem let philoſophers reſolve,
What makes the globe from Weſt to Eaſt revolve. Bla.{m.
PRob LEMAT ſca L. adj. [from problem ; problematique, Fr.
Uncertain ; unſettled ; diſputed ; diſputable. -
I promited no better arguments than might be expected in
a point problematical. Boyle.
Diligent enquiries into remote and problematical guilt, leave
a gate wide open to the whole tribe of informers. Swift.
PRoblem A^rically. adv. [from problematical.] Uncertainly.
PRobo'scis. n.ſ. [probºſcis, Lat.] A ſnout ; the trunk of an
elephant; but it is uſed alſo for the ſame part in every crea-
ture, that bears any reſemblance thereunto.
The elephant wreath'd to make them ſport
His lithe probºſcis. Milton.
PRoca'cious adj. [procax, Lat.) Petulant; looſe. Dić.
PRoc AcITY. m. ſ. [from ‘...] Petulance. Dićt.
PRocata Rcrick adj. [762×zzºlº...] Forerunning; an-
tecedent. See PRoc ATARxis.
James IV. of Scotland, falling away in his fleſh, without
the precedence of any procatarétick cauſe, was ſuddenly cured
by decharming the witchcraft. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The phyſician enquires into the procatarctick cauſes. Harv.
PRoc At ARxis. n.ſ. [760x272.63.5.]
Protatarxis is the pre-exiſtent cauſe of a diſeaſe, which co-
operates with others that are ſubſequent, whether internal or
external; as anger or heat of climate, which bring ſuch an
ill diſpoſition of the juices, as occaſion a fever: the ill diſpo-
ſition being the immediate cauſe, and the bad air the proca-
tartick cauſe. &amp;Mincy.
PRoce’du RE. m. ſ. [procedure, Fr. from proceed.]
1. Manner of proceeding; management; condućt.
This is the true procedure of conſcience, always ſuppoſing
a law from God, before it lays obligation upon man. South.
2. Aćt of proceeding ; progreſs ; proceſs; operation.
Although the diſtinction of theſe ſeveral procedures of the
ſoul do not always appear diſtinct, eſpecially in ſudden actions,
yet in actions of weight, all theſe have their diſtinct order
and procedure. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
3. Produce ; thing produced.
No known ſubſtance, but earth and the procedures of earth,
as tile and ſtone, yieldeth any moſs or herby ſubſtance. Bacon.
To PROCEE'D. v. n. [procedo, Lat. procedar, Fr.]
1. To paſs from one thing or place to another.
Adam
Proceeded thus to aſk his heav'nly gueſt. Milton.
Then to the prelude of a war proceeds ;
His horns, yet fore, he tries againſt a tree. Dryden.
I ſhall proceed to more complex ideas. Locke.
2. To go forward; to tend to the end deſigned.
Temp'rately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redreſs. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Theſe things, when they proceed not, they go backward.
Benj. jºhnſon's Catiline.
3. To come forth from a place or from a ſender.
I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of
myſelf, but he ſent me. jo. viii. 42.
4. To go or march in ſtate.
He aſk'd a clear ſtage for his muſe to proceedin. Anon.
5. To iſſue; to ariſe; to be the effect of ; to be produced from.
A dagger of the mind, a falſe creation
Proceeding from the heat oppreſſed brain. Shakespeare . Macbeth.
From me what proceed -
But all corrupt, both mind and will both deprav'd. Milt.
All this proceeded not from any want of knowledge. Dryd.
6. To proſecute any deſign. - - -
Hé that proceed, upon other principles, in his enquiry”
any ſciences, poſts himſelf in a party. Locke.
Since huſbandry is of large extent, the poet ſingles, out
ſuch precepts to proceed on, as are capable of ornament. Addſ.
7. To be tranſacted; to be carried on.
He will, after his four faſhion tell you,
What hath proceeded worthy note to-day. Shakºſº,
8. To make progreſs; to advance.
Violence
Proceeded, and oppreſſion and ſword law
Through all the plain.
9. To carry on juridical proceſs.
Prºceed by proceſs, leſt parties break out,
And ſack great Rome with Romans. ...
Inſtead of a ſhip, to levy upon his county ſuch a ſum i.
money for his majeſty's uſe, with direétion in what ºne, e
ſhould proceed againſt ſuch as refuſed. º cº.
To judgment he proceeded on th’ accus’d. l Mi i.
10. To tranſact; to act; to carry on any affair methodically.
From them I will not hide
My judgments, how with mankind I proceed;
As how with peccant angels late they ſaw.
Milton.
Milton.
How
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
;
How ſeverely with themſelves proceed, -
The men who write ſuch verſe as who can read
Their own ſtričt judges, not a word they ſpare,
That wants or force, or light, or weight, or care. Pope.
11. To take effect; to have its courſe.
This rule only proceeds and takes place, when a perſon can-
not of common law condemn another by his ſentence. A liffe.
12. To be propagated; to come by generation.
From my loins thou ſhalt proceed. A4ilton.
13. To be produced by the original efficient cauſe.
O Adam, one Almighty is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return. Milton.
Proceed. m. ſ. [from the verb..] Produce : as, the proceeds
of an ºſlate. Clariffa. Not an imitable word, though much
uſed in law writings.
PRocee'De R. m. ſ. [from proceed.] One who goes forward ;
one who makes a progreſs.
He that ſeeketh vićtory over his nature, let him not ſet him-
ſelf too great nor too ſmall taſks; for the firſt will make him
dejected by often failing; and the ſecond will make him a
ſmall proceeder, though by often prevailings. Bacon.
PRocer'DING. m. ſ. [precede, Fr. from proceed.]
1. Progreſs from one thing to another; ſeries of condućt ;
tranſaction.
I'll acquaint our duteous citizens,
With all your juſt proceedings in this caſe. Shakeſp.
My dear love
To your proceedings bids me tell you this. Shakeſp.
The underſtanding brought to knowledge by degrees, and,
in ſuch a general proceeding, nothing is hard. Locke.
It is a very unuſual proceeding, and I would not have been
guilty of it for the world. Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of j. Bull
From the earlieſt ages of chriſtianity, there never was a
precedent of ſuch a proceeding. Swift.
2. Legal procedure; as, ſuch are the proceedings at law.
PRocellous. adj. [procelloſus, Lat..] Tempeſtuous. Dići.
Proception. n.ſ. Preoccupation; act of taking ſomething
ſooner than another. A word not in uſe.
Having ſo little power to offend others, that I have none to
preſerve what is mine own from their proception. King Charles,
Proce'RITY. m. ſ. [from procerus, Lat.] Talneſs ; height of
ſtature.
We ſhall make attempts to lengthen out the humane figure,
and reſtore it to its ancient procerity. Addiſon.
Process. n.ſ. [proces, Fr. proceſſus, Latin.]
1. Tendency; progreſſive courſe:
That there is ſomewhat higher than either of theſe two,
no other proof doth need, than the very proceſs of man's de-
fire, which being natural ſhould be fruſtrate, if there were
not ſome farther thing wherein it might reſt at the length
contented, which in the former it cannot do. Hooker.
2. Regular and gradual progreſs.
Commend me to your honourable wife ;
Tell her the proceſs of Antonio's end; -
Say how I lov’d you ; ſpeak me fair in death. Shakeſp.
They declared unto him the whole proceſs of that war, and
with what ſucceſs they had endured Knolles.
Immediate are the acts of God, more ſwift
Than time or motion ; but to human ears
Cannot without proceſs of ſpeech be told. Milton.
Saturnian Juno
Attends the fatal proceſs of the war. Dryden.
In the parable of the waſteful ſteward, we have a lively
image of the force and proceſs of this temptation.
3. Courſe ; continual flux or paſſage.
I have been your wife, in this obedience,
Upward of twenty years; if in the courſe
And proceſs of this time you can report,
And prove it too againſt mine honour aught,
Turn me away. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
This neither empire riſe,
By policy and long proceſs of time. Milton.
Many acts of parliament have, in long proceſs of time,
been loſt, and the things forgotten. Hale's Law of England.
4. Methodical management of anything.
Experiments, familiar to chymiſts, are unknown to the
learned, who never read chymical proceſes. Boyle.
An age they live releas'd -
From all the labour, proceſs, clamour, woe,
Rogers.
Which our ſad ſcenes of daily action know. Prior.
5. Courſe of law.
Proceed by proceſs,
Leſt parties, as he is belov'd, break out. Shakeſp.
All proceſſes eccleſiaſtical ſhould be made in the king's name,
as in writs at the common law. Hayward.
The patricians they choſe for their patrons, to anſwer for
their appearance, and defend them in any proceſs. Swift.
PROCESSION. m. ſ. [proceſſion, Fr. proceſſio, Lat..] A train
marching in ceremonious ſolemnity.
If there be cauſe for the church to go forth in ſolemn pro-
ceſſion, his whole family have ſuch buſineſs come upon them,
that no one can be ſpared. Płooker.
Him all his train
Follow'd in bright proceſſion. JMilton.
—---- ~
...Tº the prºceſſiºn of a funcral vow,
Which cruel laws to indian wives allow:
The prieſts, Potitius at their head,
ſº of beaſts involv'd, the long proceſſion led. Dryden.
When this yº “ongregation was formed into a regular pro-
cºſion to attend the ark of the covenant, the king marched at
the head of his people, with hymns and dances.” Addison.
It is to be hoped, that the perſons of wealth, who made
their prººftºn, through the members of thº. nº erº".
mºnaries, will contribute to their maintenance. Zidi 971.
The Ethiopians held an annual ſacrifice of twelve days to
the Gods ; all that time they carried their images in proceſ-
Jion, and placed them at their feſtivals." Broome.
To PRocession. v. n. [from the noun..] To go in proceſſion.
A low word.
PRocessional, adj. [from proceſſion.] Relating to proceſſion.
PRocession ARY. adj. [from prºceſſion.] Conſiſting in pro-
ceſſion. - c
Dryd. *177.
Rogations or litanies were then the very ſtrength and com-
fort of God's church; whereupon, in the year 506, it was
by the council of Aurelia decreed, that the whole church
ſhould beſtow yearly at the ſeaſt of pentecoſt, three days in
that proceſſionary ſervice. Hooker.
Pººchronism. n.ſ.. [reozºirº.] An error in chrono-
logy; a dating a thing befºre it happened. Dić.
ko cºp" NCE. m. ſ. [procidentia, Lat..] Falling down; de-
pendence below its natural place.
Płocinct. m. ſ. [procinius, Lat ) Complete preparation;
Preparation brought to the point of a&amp;tion.
When all the plain
Cover'd with thick imbattl’d ſquadrons bright,
Chariots, and flaming arms, and fiery ſteeds,
Reflecting blaze on blaze, firſt met his view,
War he perceiv'd, war in procinº. A4ilton.
To PROCLAIM. v. a. [proclamo, Lat. proclamer, Fr.]
1. To promulgate or denounce by a ſolemn or legal publication.
When thou comeſt nigh unto a city to fight againſt it, pro-
claim peace unto it. Deut. xx. Io.
I proclaim a liberty for you, faith the Lord, to the ſword
and to the peſtilence. jer. xxxiv. 17.
Heralds
With trumpet’s ſound, throughout the hoſt proclaim
A ſolemn council.
AM ſtºn.
While in another's name you peace declare,
Princeſs, you in your own proclaim a war. Dryden.
She to the palace led her gueſt, -
Then offer'd incenſe, and proclaim'd a feaſt. Dryden.
2. To tell openly.
Some profligate wretches, were the apprehenſions of pu-
niſhments, or Thane taken away, would as openly prºcłaim
their atheiſm, as their lives do. - Locke.
While the deathleſs muſe
Shall ſing the juſt, ſhall o'er their head diffuſe
Perfumes with laviſh hand, ſhe ſhall proclaim
Thy crines alone.
3. To outlaw by publick denunciation. -
I heard myſelf proclaimed. Shakespeare.
PRoclai'MER. n. ſ. [from proclaim..] One that publiſhes by
authority.
The great proclaimer, with a voice
More awful than the ſound of trumpet, cry'd
Repentance, and heaven's kingdom nigh at hand
To all baptiz'd. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd.
PRocla MA’rſon n. ſ. [proclamatio, Lat. proclamation, Fr.
from proclaim.]
1. Publication by authority,
2. A declaration of the king's will openly publiſhed among the
people. -
If the king ſent a proclamation for their repair to their
houſes, ſome nobleman publiſhed a proteſtation againſt thoſe
proclamations. Clarenazm.
PRoc Li viºr Y. m. ſ. [proclivitas, proclivis, Lat.]
1. Tendency; natural inclination ; propenſion ; pronenes,
The ſenſitive appetite may engender a proclivity to iłeal,
but not a neceſſity to ſteal. Bramhall againſt Hºbº.
2. Readineſs ; facility of attaining. ſa:
He had ſuch a dextrous proclivity, as his teachers were fain
to reſtrain his forwardneſs, that his brothers might keep pace
with him. If of 1977,
PRoclivous. adj. [proclivis, Lat..] Incided; *},y
nature. ----
PROCONSUL. m. ſ. [Latin.]. A Roman officer, who go-
verned a province with conſular authority.
Every child knoweth how dear the works of Homer were
to Alexander, Virgil to Auguſtus, Auſonº,” Graſian, who
made him proconſul, Chaucer to Richard II. and Gower to
Prior.
Henry IV. Peacham.
Pºinir. n.ſ. [from proceſſal.] The office of a pro-
conſul.
Top ROCRASTINATE. v. a. [pro-rºſtinor, Lat.] To de-
fer, to delay; to put off from day to day. :
Hopeleſs and helpleſs doth Ægeon wind, …'
But to procroſſinate his lifeleſs end. sºft.
et
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
º
let men ſeriouſly and attentively liſten to that voice within
d they will certainly need no other medium to con-
... either of the error or danger of thus tracºaſti-
* ºr pentance. ;1 I)ecay of Piety.
T. pºds a stiNATE. v. n., To be dilatory. hav
I procrg/linate more than I did twenty years ago, and have
ſeveral things to finiſh, which I put off to twenty yº
hence. - Swift to Pope.
PRoc R Ast INA'tion. m. ſ. ſprocroſſinatio, Lat. from procrg/ti-
nate.] Delay ; dilatorineſs. - - -
How deſperate the hazard of ſuch procraftinatiºn is, haſh
been convincingly demonſtrated by better pens. D. ºf ſº
ProcRASTINATök. m. ſ. [from procro/iinate.] A dilatory
perſon. -
Pro'cRE ANT. adj. [procreans, Lat.] Produćtive; pregnant.
The temple haunting martlet, does approve
By his lov d manſonr., that heaven's breath
Smells wooingly here : no jutting frieze,
But this bird
Hath made his pendant bed, and prºcreamt cradle. Shalºft.
To PRO'CREATE. v. a. [procreo, Lat. procreer, Fr.] To
generate ; to produce. - -
Flies cruſhed and corrupted, when incloſed in ſuch veſſels,
did never procreate a new fly. Bentley.
Since the earth retains her fruitful power,
To procreate plants the foreſt to reſtore ;
Say, why to nobler animals alone
Should ſhe be feeble, and unfruitful grown. 13|ackmore.
PRock EA'tion, n. ſ. [procreation, Fr. procreatio, Lat. from
precreate.] Generation ; produćtion.
The encloſed warmth, which the earth hath in itſelf,
ſtirred up by the heat of the fun, aſſiſteth nature in the ſpeedier
procreation of thoſe varieties, which the earth bringeth forth.
Raleigh's Hiſł. of the Iſ orid.
Neither her outſide form'd ſo fair, nor ought
In procreation common to all kinds. A ſilton's Par. Lºft.
Uncleanneſs is an unlawful gratification of the appetite of
procreation. South's Sermºns.
PRO'CREATIVE. adj. [from procreate.] Generative; produc-
tlve.
The ordinary period of the human procreative faculty in
males is ſixty-five, in females forty-five. Hale.
PRock EATIVEN Ess. n. / [from procreative..] Power of ge-
neration. ,
Theſe ſeem to have the accurſ privilege of propagating
and not expiring, and have reconciled the frocreativeneſs of
corporeal, with the duration of incorporeal ſubſtances.
Decay of Piety.
Fºocºſ A'Tor. m. ſ. [from procreate.] Generator; begºtter.
PROCTOR. m. ſ. [contracted from procurator, Lat.]
I. A manager of another man's affairs.
The moſt clamorous for this pretended reformation, are
cither athciſts, or elſe prºfors ſuborned by atheiſts. Hooker.
2. An attorney in the ſpiritual court.
I find him charging the inconveniencies in the payment
of tythes upon the clergy and proºrs. Swift.
3. The magiſtrate of the univerſity.
To PRo'c'ſ ok. v. a. [from the noun..] To manage. A cant
word. c
I cannot procłor mine own cauſe ſo well
..To make it clear. Shakeſp. /nt, and Cºop.
PRocroRSHIP. n.ſ. [from procłor.] Office or dignity of a
proctor. S
From a ſcholar he became a fellow, and the preſident of
the college, after he had received all the graces and degrees,
the procłorſhip and the doğtorſhip. Clarendon.
PRocu'MBENT. 44ff. [procumbens, Latin.] Lying down;
prone.
Procu'r ABLE, adj. [from Prºcure.] To be procured ; obtain-
able ; acquirabic. 2
Thºugh it be a far more common and procurable liquor
than the infuſion of lignum nephriticum, it may yet be ea-
fily ſubſtituted in its room, Boyle on Colours.
Pºsey. * / [from procure.] The management of any
ing,
PRocuRATION. m. ſ. [from Prºcºre.] The ačt of procuring.
Thoſe, who formerly were doubtful in this Illatter upon
ſtrict and repeated inſpection of theſe bodies, and pºliº,
of plain ſhells from this iſland, are now convinced, that theſe
are the remains of ſea-animals. Iºward, N. Hi/?.
Procurator. m. J. [procurateur, Fr. from procuro Íºj
Alanager; one who tranſacts affairs for another. &gt; -
"had in charge at my depart from France,
is procurator for your excellence,
° marry Princeſs Margret for your grace. Shake?.
They confirm and ſeal ~
taking with their deareſt blood,
en the !,º the commonweal. Daniel.
upon the ſick ſº...". king Antigonus impoſed a rate
Waters which wer. º d ſ came to Edepſum to drink the
Y ſprung, and were very healthful,
they inſtantly dº 3.
's ricd up. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy,
Their under
S procurato
Procurato'RIAL. ad. [from procurator.] Made by a proctor,
All procuratorial exceptions ought to be made before COn-
teſtation of ſuit, and not afterwards, as being dilatory ex-
ceptions, if a proctor was then made and conſtituted. 'yliffe.
Procu RATORY. adj. [from procurator.] Tending to procura-
t! On,
To PROCURE. v. a. procu, o, Lat. procurer, Fr.]
1. To manage; to tranſact for another.
2. To obtain ; to acquire.
They ſhall fear and tremble, for all the proſperity that I
procure unto it. jer. xxxiii. 9.
Happy though but ill,
If we procure not to ourſelves more woe. - Milton.
We no other pains endure,
Than thoſe that we ourselves procure. Dryden.
Then by thy toll, rocur'd, thou food ſhalt eat. D, yden.
3. To perſuade ; to prevail on.
Is it my lady mother?
What unaccuſtom d cauſe procures her hither: Shakespeare
- Whom nothing can procure,
When the wide world runs biaſs, from his will
To writhe his limbs, and ſhare, not mend the ill. Herbert.
4. To contrive; to forward.
Proceed, Sahnus, to trocure my fall,
And by the doom of death end woes and all. Shakeſp.
To P o'cus F. v. n. To bawd; to pimp. */
Our author calls colouring, lena ſororis, in plain Engliſh,
the bawd of her ſiſter, the deſign or drawing: ſhe cloaths,
ſhe dreſſes her up, ſhe paints her, ſhe makes her appear more
lovely than naturally ſhe is, ſhe procures for the deſign, and
makes lovers for her. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
With what impatience muſt the muſe behold,
The wife by her procuring huſband ſold. Dryden.
PRoce RFMENT. n.ſ. The act of procuring.
They mourn your ruin as their proper fate,
Curſing the empreſs; for they think it done
By her procurement. Dryden's Aurengz.
Proctºr ER. m. ſ. [rom *rocure.]
1. One that gains; obtainer.
Angling was after tedious ſtudy, a moderator of paſions,
and a procurer of contentedneſs. J/alton's Angler.
2. i.imp ; pandar. -
Strumpets in their youth, turn procurers in their age. South.
Procº'RFºº. n. /.. [from trocure.] A bawd.
I ſaw the moſt artful procureſ; in town, ſeducing a young
girl. Speciator.
PRODIGAL. adj. [prodigus, Lat, prodigue, Fr.] Profuſe;
waſteful : expenſive ; laviſh ; not frugal; not parcimonious.
Leaſt I ſhould ſeem over prodigal in the praiſe of my coun-
trymen, I will only preſent you with ſome few verſes. Camd.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace,
As nature was in making graces dear,
When ſhe did ſtarve the general world beſide,
And prodigally gave them all to you. Shakeſp.
My chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts,
Wherein my time, ſomething too prodiga',
Hath left me gaged. Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
Diogenes did beg more of a prodigal man than the reſt;
whereupon one ſaid, ſee your baſeneſs, that when you find
a liberal mind, you will take moſt of him ; no, ſaid Dioge-
nes, but I mean to beg of the reſt again. Bacon.
As a hero, whom his baſer foes
In troops ſurround; now theſe affails, now thoſe,
Though prodigal of life, diſdains to die
By common hands. Denham.
Here patriots live, who for their country's good,
In fighting fields were prodigal of blood. . . Dryden.
The prodigal of ſoul ruſh'd on the ſtroke
Of lifted weapons, and did wounds provoke. Dryden.
O ! beware, -
Great warrior, nor too prodigal of life,
Expoſe the Britiſh ſafety. - Philips.
Some people are prodigal of their blood, and others ſo ſpar-
ing, as if ſo much life and blood went together. Baker.
PRodio al. n.ſ. A waſter; a ſpendthrift. -
A beggar ſuddenly grown rich, becomes a prodigal; for to
is former obſcurity, he puts on riot and exceſs.
obſcure his for ty, he p Benj. johnſon's Diſcovery.
Thou
Ow'ſ all thy loſſes to the fates; but I,
Like waſteful prodigals, have caſt away
My happineſs. Denham's Sophy.
Let the waſteful prodigal be ſlain. Dryden.
PRODIGA'LITY. m. ſ. [prodigalité, Fr. from prodigal.] Extra-
vagance; profuſion; waſte; exceſſive liberality.
A ſweeter and lovelier gentleman,
Fram'd in the prodigality of nature,
The ſpacious world cannot again afford. Shakeſ?:
He that decries covetouſneſs, ſhould not be held an adver-
ſary to him that oppoſeth prodigality. Glanvil.
It<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
"Uſe
ind
º,
It is not always ſo obvious to diſtinguiſh between an ačt of
liberality and act of prodigality. South's Sermons.
The moſt ſevere cenſor cannot but be pleaſed with the p-a-
digality of his wit, though at the ſame time he could have
wiſh, d, that the mater of it had been a better manager. Dry.
Pro pig Al LY. adv. [from prodigal.] Profuſely ; waſtefully ;
extravagantly.
We are not yet ſo wretched in our fortunes,
Nor in our wills ſo loſt, as to abandon
A friendſhip prodigally, of that price -
As is the ſenate and the people of Rome. B. Johnſºn.
I cannot well be thought ſo prodigally thirſty of my ſubjects
blood, as to venture my own life. King Charles.
The next in place and puniſhment are they,
Who prodigally throw their ſouls away;
Fools, who repining at their wretched ſtate,
And loathing anxious life, ſuborn'd their fate.
Nature not bounteous now, but laviſh grows,
Our paths with flow’rs ſhe prodigally ſtrows. Dryden.
PRODIGIOUS, adj [prodigioſus, Lat. prodigieux, Fr.] Ama-
zing; aſtoniſhing; ſuch as may ſeem a prodigy; portentous;
enormous; monitrous; amazingly great.
If eer he have a child, abortive be it,
Prodigious and untimely brought to light. Shakespeare,
An emiſſion of immateriate virtues we are a little doubtful
to propound, it being to prodigious ; but that it is conſtantly
avouched by many. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
It is prodigious to have thunder in a clear ſky. Brown.
Then entring at the gate,
Conceal’d in clouds, prodigious to relate,
He mix’d, unmark'd, among the buſy throng. Dryden.
The Rhone enters the lake, and brings along with it a
prodigious quantity of water. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
It is a ſcandal to chriſtianity, that in towns, where there
is a prodigious increaſe in the number of houſes and inhabi-
tants, ſo little care ſhould be taken for churches. Swift.
Prodi'Giously. adv. [from prodigious.]
1. Amazingly; aſtoniſhingly ; portentouſly; enormouſly.
I do not mean abſolutely according to philoſophick exact-
... nels infinite, but only infinite or innumerable as to us, or their
number prodigiouſly great. Ray on the Creation.
2. It is ſometimes uſed as a familiar hyperbole.
I am prodigiouſly pleaſed with this joint volume. Pope.
Prodi Grous N Ess. m. ſ. [from prodigious.] Enormouſneſs;
portentouſneſs ; amazing qualities.
PRO D1GY. m. ſ. [prodige, Fr. prodigium, Lat.]
1. Any thing out of the ordinary proceſs of nature, from which
omens are drawn ; portent.
Be no more an exhal'd meteor,
A prodigy of fear, and a portent
Of broached miſchief, to the unborn times. Shakeſp.
The party oppoſite to our ſettlement, ſeem to be driven
out of all human methods, and are reduced to the poor com-
fort of prodigies and old womens fables. Addiſon.
2. Monſter.
Moſt of mankind, through their own ſluggiſhneſs, become
Dryden.
nature's prodigies, not her children. Benj. Johnſor,
3. Any thing aſtoniſhing for good or bad.
They would ſeem prodigies of learning. Spefator.
PRodi'ſ ſo ºn. ſ. Lºrºditio, Lat.) Treaſon; treachery. Ain.
PKC/D11 OR. m. ſ. [Latin.] A traytor. Not in uſe.
Piel'd prieſt, doſt thou command me be ſhut out
—I do, thou moſt uſurping proditor. Shakespeare.
PR opito Rious. adj. [from proditor, Lat.]
1. Trayterous; treacherous; perfidious.
Now proditorious wretch what haſt thou done,
To make this barb'rous baſe aſſaſſinate : Daniel.
2. Apt to make diſcoveries.
Solid and concluſive charaćters are emergent from the mind,
and ſtart out of children when themſelves leaſt think of it;
for nature is proditorious. J/ottom on Education.
To PRODU’CE. v. a. [produco, Lat, produire, Fr.]
I. To offer to the view or notice.
Produce your cauſe, faith the Lord; bring forth your ſtrong
reaſons. Iſa. xli. 21.
2. To exhibit to the publick.
Your parents did not produce you much into the world,
whereby you avoided many wrong ſteps. Swift.
3. To bring as an evidence.
It ſeems not meet, nor wholeſome to my place,
To be produc’d againſt the Moor. Shakeſp. Othello.
4. To bear; to bring forth, as a vegetable.
This ſoil fººd...as all forts of palm-trees. Sandys.
5. To cauſe ; to citect ; to generate; to beget.
Somewhat is prºduced of nothing; for lyes are ſufficient to
breed opinion, and opinion brings on ſubſtance. Bacºn.
They by imprudence mix’d
Produce prº digious births of body or mind. Milton.
Thou all this good of evil ſhalt produce. AMilton.
Clouds may rain, and rain produce
Fruits in her ſoften’d ſoil. Milton,
7
Obſerving in ourſelves, that we can at pleaſure move ſeve-
ral parts of our bºdies; the effects also, that natural bºdi's
are able to prºduce !" ºne another, occurins every mornint to
our ſenſes, we both theſe ways get the idea of power. Lººe.
Hinter light but from ſtriking on porphyre, an its colours
yºſh, it no longer produces any ſuch ideas; upon the return
of light, it prºtºes theſe appearances again. Locke.
I his wonder of the ſculptor's hand
Produc d; his at was at a ſtand. A lion.
PRO Duc E. m. / [from the verb. This noun, though accented
on the laſt ſyllable by Dryden, is g-nerally accented on the
former.] -
1. Product; that which any thing yields or brings.
You hoard not health for your own private uſe,
But on the publick ſpend the rich produce. Dryden.
2. Amount; profit; gain ; emergent ſum or quantity.
In Staffordſhire, after their lands are marled, they ſow it
with barley, allowing three buſhels to an acre. Its common
produce is thirty buſhels. Aºrtimer’s Hºffandry.
This tax has already been ſo often tried, that we know tºe
exact produce of it. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 26.
QPU CENT. n.ſ.. [from produce.] One that exhibits; one
that offers.
If an inſtrument be produced with a proteſtation in favour
of the producent, and the adverſe party does not contradict,
it ſhall be conſtrued to the advantage of the producent. A liff.
Fº cER. m. ſ. [from produce.] One that generates of pro-
uCe3.
By examining how I, that could contribute nothing to minc
own being, ſhould be here, I came to aſk the ſame queſtion
for my father, and ſo am led in a direct line to a firſt prºducer
that muſt be more than man. Stickling.
Whenever want of money, or want of deſire in the con-
fumer, make the price low, that immediately reaches the firſt
producer. Locke.
Produ'cIBLE. adj. [from produce.]
1. Such as may be exhibited.
That is accounted probable, which has better arguments
producible for it, than can be brought againſt it. South.
Many warm expreſſions of the fathers are producible in this
caſe. Decay of Piety.
2. Such as may be generated or made.
The ſalts producible, are the alcalis or fixt ſalts, which ſecn
to have an antipathy with acid ones. Boyle.
Producible N Ess. n. ſ. [from producible.] The ſtate of
being producible.
To confirm our doćtrine of the producibleneſ of ſalts, Hel-
mont aſſures us, that by Paracelſus's ſal circulatum ſolid bo-
dies, particularly ſtones, may be tranſmuted into actual ſalt
equiponderant. Bºyle,
Product. m. ſ. [produšius, Lat. prºduit, Fr J
1. Something produced, as fruits, grain, metals.
The landholder, having nothing but what the produ? of
his land will yield, muſt take the market-rate. Locke.
Our Britiſh products are of ſuch kinds and quantities, as
can turn the balance of trade to our advantage. 4.diſºn.
Range in the ſame quarter, the producis of the ſame ſeaſon.
Speciator.
See thy bright altars
Heap'd with the products of Sabaean ſprings. Pope.
2. Work ; compoſition.
Moſt of thoſe books, which have obtained great reputation
in the world, are the products of great and wiſe men. If atts.
3. Thing conſequential ; effect.
Theſe are the product -
Of thoſe ill-mated marriages. Milion's Par. Lºft.
PRoduct ILE. adj. [from produco, Lat..] Which may be pro-
duced.
PRO Duction. n.ſ. [produciion, Fr. from product.]
1. The act of producing.
A painter ſhould foreſee the harmony of the lights and
ſhadows, taking from each of them that which will mºſt cº-
duce to the production of a beautiful effect. Dryden.
2. The thing produced ; fruit; product.
The beſt of queens and beſt of herbs we owe
To that bold nation, which the way did ſhow
To the fair region, where the ſun does rite, r
Whoſe rich produ:ions we ſo juſtly prize. ſpºr.
What would become of the ſcrofulous coºfumptivº Prº-
dućlion, furniſhed by our men of wit and learning. Switz-
3. Compoſition. -
we have had our names prefixed at length, to whole Yº-
lumes of mean froducians. - sº
Productive, ad. [from predº.] Having the power to pro-
duce; fertile; generative; efficient.
In thee
Not in themſelves, all their known virtue appears ** *
Productive as in herb and plant. - A.T. ºn.
This is turning nobility unto a principle of virtue, and
making it productive of merit, as it is underſtoºd º, bºº
becm originally a reward of it. Sprator, N° 53.
20 N Jºe:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
my aid, my tuneful ſong inſpire,
Aºi. º productive fire. - Dryden.
If the productive ſat of the marl be ſpent, it is not capable
of being mended with new. - Mortimer.
Numbers of Scots are glad to exchange their barren hills
for our fruitful vales ſo productive of that grain. Swift.
Hymen's flames like ſtars unite,
And burn for ever one ; -
Chaſte as cold Cynthia's virgin light,
Productive as the ſun. Pope.
Plutarch, in his life of Theſeus, ſays, that that age was
productive of men of prodigious ſtature. Broome.
ProEM. m. ſ. [Técoiºio, ; proamium, Lat. proeme, old Fr.]
Preface; introduction. -
So gloz'd the tempter, and his procm tun'd. Milton.
Thus much may ſerve by way of proem, , , -
Proceed we therefore to our poem. Swift's Miſtel.
Juſtinian has, in the procm to the digeſts, only prefixed
the term of five years for ſtudying the laws. Ayliffe.
ProFANA'tion. m. ſ. [prºfanation, Fr. from profano, Lat.]
1. The aët of violating anything ſacred.
He knew how bold men are to take even from God him-
ſelf; how hardly that houſe would be kept from impious pro-
anation he knew. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 12.
What I am and what I would, are to your ears, divinity ;
to any others, profanation. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
'Twere profanation of our joys,
To tell the laity our love. Donne.
All profanation and invaſion of things ſacred, is an offence
againſt the eternal law of nature. South.
Others think I ought not to have tranſlated Chaucer: they
ſuppoſe a veneration due to his old language, and that it is little
leſs than profanation and ſacrilege to alter it. Dryden.
2. Irreverence to holy things or perſons.
Great men may jeſt with ſaints, ’tis wit in them;
But, in the leſs, foul tºº. Shakeſp.
PROFA'NE. adj. [prºfane, Fr. from proſanus, Lat.]
1. Irreverent to ſacred names or things.
Profane fellow !
Wert thou the ſon of Jupiter, and no more
But what thou art beſides, thou wert too baſe
To be his groom. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Theſe have cauſed the weak to ſtumble, and the profane to
blaſpheme, offending the one, and hardening the other. South.
2. Not ſacred; ſecular.
The univerſality of the deluge is atteſted by profane hiſtory;
for the fame of it is gone through the earth, and there are
records or traditions concerning it in all the parts of this and
the new-found world. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
3. Polluted; not pure.
Nothing is profane that ſerveth to holy things. Raleigh.
4. Not purified by holy rites.
Far hence be ſouls profane,
The Sibyl cry’d, and from the grove abſtain. Dryden,
To ProFA's E. v. a. ſprofano, Lat. profaner, Fr.]
1. To violate ; to pollute.
He then, that is not furniſh’d in this ſort,
Doth but uſurp the ſacred name of knight,
Profaning this moſt honourable order. Shakespeare.
Foretaſted fruit
Pºfan'd firſt by the ſerpent, by him firſt -
Made common and unhallow'd. Milton.
Pity the temple profaned of ungodly men. 2 Mac. viii. 2.
- ow far have we
Profan'd thy heav'nly gift of poeſy
Made proſtitute and profligate the muſe,
Debas'd. Dryden.
2. To put to wrong uſe.
- - - - I feel me much to blame.
So idly to profane the precious time. Shakeſp.
PROF ANELY. adv. [from profane..] With irreverence to ſacred
names or things.
I will hold my tongue no more, as touching their wicked-
neſs, which they profanely commit. 2 Eſdr. xv. 8.
Let none of things ſerious, much leſs of divine,
When belly and head's full, profancy diſpute, É. johnſ.
That proud ſcholar, intending to erect altars to Virgil,
ſpeaks of Homer too profanely. Broome's Notes on the Od/ºy.
Prof. A NER. m. ſ. (from profane.j Polluter; violater.
The argument which our Saviour uſeth againſt profaners of
* “mple, he taketh from the uſe whereuniºr was with ſo-
emnity conſecrated. Hooker. b. v. ſ. 12.
Rebellious ſubjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour ſtained ſteel. Shakeſp.
here are a lighter Iudicrous ſort of profaners, who uſe the
pºſ: to furniſh out their jeſts. Gov. of the Tongue.
facred *** * / [from profane..] Irreverence of what is
My great ºf. Apollo, pardon
.*.*.*.*ºnentſ, gainſt thy oracle Shakeſp.
You can baniſh frºm thence ſcurrility and profaneneſs, #:
*"rain the licentious inſolence of Poets and their actors. Dry,
I
Edićts againſt immorality and prºfanentſ, laws againſt
oaths and execrations, we trample upon. Attº.
Prof. Ection... m. ſ. [prºſectio, Lat..] Advance; progreſſion.
This, with prºfection of the horoſcope unto the ſeventh
houſe or oppoſite ſigns, every ſeventh year oppreſieth living
InatureS. - Brºwn's Pulgar Errow.
To PROFESS. v. a. ſtreſſºr, Fr. from prºſºft, Lat.]
1. To declare himſelf in ſtrong terms of any opinion or paſſion.
Would you have me ſpeak after my cuſtom,
As being a pºſſ. tyrant to their ſex. Shake?.
retending firſt ./
Wiſe to fly pain, prºfeſſing next the ſpy. Milton.
A ſervant to thy ſex, a ſlave to thee,
A foe proſºft to barren chaſtity. Dryden's Knight's Tal.
2. To make a ſhow of any ſentiments by loud declaration.
Love well your father;
To your profeſſing boſoms I commit him. Shakespeare .
3. To declare publickly one's ſkill in any art or ſcience, ſo as
to invite employment.
What, maſter, read you ? firſt reſolve me that.
—I read that I proftſ; the art of love. Shakespeare
Without eyes thou ſhalt want light; proftſ, not the know-
ledge therefore that thou haſt not. Ecclusiii. 25-
To Profe'ss. v. n.
1. To declare openly.
The day almoſt itſelf prºfeſs yours,
And little is to do. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
They profft, that they know God, but in works they
deny him. Tit. i. 16.
}} unto the Lord, that I am come unto the county,
which the Lord ſware unto our fathers. Deutr. xxvi. 3-
2. To declare friendſhip. Not in uſe.
As he does conceive,
He is diſhonour’d by a man, which ever
Profeſs'd to him ; why, his revenges muſt
In that be made more bitter. Shakeſp.
PROFE'ss EDLY. adv. [from prºfºſſid.]. According to open de-
claration made by himſelf.
I could not grant too much to men, that being profftly
my ſubjects, pretended religious ſtrictneſs. King Charles.
Virgil, whom he profeſſedly imitated, has ſurpaſſed him
among the Romans. Dryden's Dedication to juvenal.
England I travelled over, profeſſedly ſearching all places I
paſſed along. //oodward.
ProFE'ssion. m. ſ. [profſſion, Fr. from profſ.]
1. Calling ; vocation ; known employment.
I muſt tell you,
You tender more your perſon's honour, than
Your high profeſſion ſpiritual. Shafft. Henry VIII.
If we confound arts with the abuſe of them, we ſhall con-
demn all honeſt trades; for there are that deceive in all pro-
fiſſions, and bury in forgetfulneſs all knowledge. Raleigh.
Some of our profeſſion keep wounds tented. Wiſeman.
No other one race, not the ſons of any one other profeſ-
ſon, not perhaps altogether, are ſo much ſcattered amongſt
all profeſſions, as the ſons of clergymen. Sprat's Sermont.
This is a practice, in which multitudes, beſides thoſe of
the learned profeſſions, may be engaged. Watts.
2. Declaration. d h h -
A naked profeſſion may have credit, where no other evi-
dence can f ... y Glanvill's Scºpſ.
Moſt profligately falſe, with the ſtrongeſt prºffton; of fin-
cerity. - - Swift.
3. The act of declaring one's ſelf of any party or opinion.
For by oil in their lamps, and the firſt lighting of them,
which was common to them both, is meant that ſolemn prº-
fiſſion of faith and repentance, which all chriſtians make in
baptiſm. Tilbſon's Sermoni,
When chriſtianity came to be taken up, for the ſake of
thoſe civil encouragements which attended their prºffton, the
complaint was applicable to chriſtians. Swift.
PROFE'ssional. adj. [from proſºfton.] Relating to a partic”
calling or profeſſion. -
Profeſſional, as well as national, reflections are 9. be
avoided. Clarift.
PROFE'ssoR. m.ſ. [profºffur, Fr. from proftſ.]
1. One who declares himſelf of any opinion or party: d
When the holineſs of the profeſſºrs of religion is dºſe
you may doubt the ſpringing up of a new ſect. Bacon' ººº-
2. One who publickly practiſes or teaches an art. ified
Profeſſºr; in moſt £iences, are generally the worſt qualſº
to explain their meanings to thoſe who are not of their
tribes. Swift.
3. One who is viſibly religious.
Ordinary iº. º, who were prºfeſſºrs, that ſº
# concern for religion, ſeemed much converſant in St. º:
iftles. -
Pºur. n. ſ. [from prºfeſſºr.] The ſtation of office
of a publick teacher. º, being th
Dr. Prideaux ſucceeded him in the profeſſºrſhip, being' º
elected biſhop of Worceſter, Sanderſon ſucceeded him. º 1C
regius profeſſorſhip. Haltºn.
To PROFFER.
!
hº
*.
!.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
To PROFFER. v. a. [profºro, Lat. prºfºrer, Fr.]
1. To propoſe ; to offer.
To them that covet ſuch eye-glutting gain,
Proffer thy gifts, and fitter ſervants entertain. Fairy Queen.
None, among the choice and prime
Of thoſe heav'n-warring champions, could be found
So hardy as to proffer, or accept
Alone, the dreadful voyage. Milton’s Par. Lo/?.
Does Cato ſend this anſwer back to Caeſar,
For all his generous cares and proffer'd friendſhip. Addison
2. To attempt. Ainſworth.
ProFFER. n. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Offer made ; ſomething propoſed to acceptance.
Baſilius, content to take that, ſince he could have no more,
allowed her reaſons, and took her proffer thankfully. Sidney.
Proffers, not took, reap thanks for their reward. Shakeſp.
The king
Great proffers ſends of pardon and of grace,
If they would yield, and quietneſs embrace. Daniel.
He made a prºffer to lay down his commiſſion of command
in the army.
But theſe, nor all the proffers you can make,
Are worth the heifer which I ſet to ſtake. Dryden.
2. Eſſay; attempt.
It is done with time, and by little and little, and with
many eſſays and proffers. Bacon's Eſſays.
PRoFFERER. m. ſ. [from proffer.] He that offers.
Maids, in modeſty, ſay no, to that
Which they would have the proff'rer conſtrue ay. Shakeſp.
He who always refuſes, taxes the profferer with indiſcre-
tion, and declares his aſſiſtance needleſs. Collier.
PROFI'cIENCE. Un. ſ. [from proficio, Lat..] Profit; advance-
PROFI'cle Ncy. } ment in any thing; improvement gained.
It is applied to intelle&amp;tual acquiſition.
Perſons of riper years, who flocked into the church during
the three firſt centuries, were obliged to paſs through inſtruc-
tions, and give account of their proficiency. Addiſon.
Some reflecting with too much ſatisfaction on their own
prºficiencies, or preſuming on their election by God, perſuade
themſelves into a careleſs ſecurity. Rogers's Sermons.
PROFI'cient. n. ſ. [proficiens, Lat..] One who has made ad-
vances in any ſtudy or buſineſs.
I am ſo good a proficient in one quarter of an hour, that I
can drink with any tinker in his own language. Shakeſp.
I am diſpoſed to receive further light in this matter, from
thoſe whom it will be no diſparagement for much greater pro-
ficients than I to learn. Boyle.
Young deathlings were, by pračtice, made
Proficients in their father's trade. Swift's Miſel.
Clarendon.
Proficuous, adj. [proficuus, Lat..] Advantageous; uſeful.
It is very proficuous, to take a good large doſe. Harvey.
To future times
Proficuous, ſuch a race of men produce,
As in the cauſe of virtue firm, may fix
Her throne inviolate. Philips:
PROFI'l F. n.ſ. [profile, Fr.] The ſide face; half face.
The painter will not take that ſide of the face, which has
ſome notorious blemiſh in it; but either draw it in profile, or
elſe ſhadow the more imperfect ſide. Dryden.
Till the end of the third century, I have not ſeen a Roman
emperor drawn with a full face: they always appear in profile,
which gives us the view of a head very majeſtic. Addiſon.
PROFIT. n.ſ. [profit, Fr.]
I. Gain; pecuniary advantage.
Thou muſt know,
'Tis not my profit that does lead mine honour. Shakeſp.
He thinks it highly juſt, that all rewards of truſt, profit, or
dignity ſhould be given only to thoſe, whoſe principles direct
them to preſerve the conſtitution. Swift.
2. Advantage: acceſſion of good.
What profit is it for men now to live in heavineſs, and
after death to look for puniſhment 2 2 Eſdr. vii. 47.
Wiſdom that is hid, and treaſure that is hoarded up, what
prºfit is in them both Eccluſ. xx. 30.
Say not what profit is there of my ſervice; and what good
things ſhall I have hereafter. Eccluſ xi. 23.
The king did not love the barren wars with Scotland,
though he made his profit of the noiſe of them. Bacon.
3. Improvement; advancement ; proficiency.
To PRO FIT. v. a. [profiter, Fr.]
I. To benefit; to advantage.
Whereto might the ſtrength of their hands profit me, job.
Let it profit thee to have heard,
By terrible example, the reward
Of diſobedience.
2. To improve; to advance.
'Tis a great means of prºfting yourſelf, to copy diligently
excellent pieces and beautiful deſigns. Dryden.
To PR of it. v. n.
1. To gain advantage.
The Romans, though poſſeſſed of their ports, did not profit
much by trade. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Milton's Par. Lºft, b. vi.
2. To make improvement.
Meditate upon theſe things, give thyſelf wholly to them,
that thy prºfiting may appear to all. 1 Tim. iv. 15.
She has profited ſo well already by your counſel, that ſhe
can ſay her leſſon. Dryden's Spaniſh F.
3. To be of uſe or advantage. ryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Oft times nothing ºr fils mºre
Than ſelf-eſteem º ſ and R. t. Milton.
What profited thy thoughts, and toils, and cares,
In vigour more confirm’d, and riper years
PR9 FITABLE. adi, ſtrºfitable, Fr. from prºft.]
1. Gainful; lucrative.
A pound of man's fleſh, taken from a man,
Is not ſo eſtimable or profitable,
As fleſh of muttons, beefs, or goats. Shakeſp.
The planting of hop-yards, ſowing of wheat and rape-
ſeed, are found very profitable for the planters, in places apt
fºr them, and conſequently prºfitable for the kingdom. Bacon.
2. Uſeful; advantageous.
To wail friends loſt
Is not by much ſo wholeſome, profitable,
As to rejoice at friends but newly found. Shakespeare.
Then Judas, thinking indeed that they would be profitable
in many things, granted them peace. 2 Mac. xii.
What was ſo profitable to the empire, became fatal to the
emperor. - Arbuthnot on Cºins.
PROFITABLEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from prºfitable.]
I. Gainfulneſs.
2. Uſefulneſs ; advantageouſneſs.
We will now briefly take notice of the profitableneſ of
plants for phyſick and food. More's Antidote againſt Atheir.
What ſhall be the juſt portion of thoſe, whom neither the
condeſcenſion or kindneſs, nor wounds and ſufferings of the
ſon of God could perſuade, nor yet the excellency, eaſineſs
and profitableneſs of his commands invite Calamy’s Sermons.
PRO'FITABLY. adv. [from profitable.]
1. Gainfully.
2. Advantageouſly; uſefully. -
You have had many opportunities to ſettle this refle&amp;tion,
and have profitably employed them. J/ake.
PROFITLEss. adj. [from profit.] Void of gain or advantage.
We muſt not think the Turk is ſo unſkilful,
To leave that lateſt, which concerns him firſt;
Neglecting an attempt of eaſe and gain,
To wake and wage a danger profilºſs. Shakeſ?.
PROFLIGATE. adj. [proftigatus, Lat..] Abandoned; loſt
to virtue and decency; ſhameleſs.
Time ſenſibly all things impairs;
Our fathers have been worſe than theirs,
And we than ours; next age will ſee }
Prior.
A race more proftigate than we,
With all the pains we take, have ſkill enough to be. Roſe.
How far have we
Prophan'd thy heav'nly gift of poeſy
Made proſtitute and proftigate the muſe,
Debas'd to each obſcene and impious uſe,
Whoſe harmony was firſt ordain’d above
For tongues of angels, and for hymns of love. Dryden,
Though Phalaris his brazen bull were there,
And he wou'd dićtate what he'd have you ſwear,
Be not ſo proftigate, but rather chuſe - -
To guard your honour, and your life to loſe. Dryden.
Melancholy objects and ſubjects will, at times, impreſs
the moſt proftigate ſpirits. Clariſa.
PRO'Flig At E. m. ſ. An abandoned ſhameleſs wretch.
It is pleaſant to ſee a notorious prºftigate ſeized with a con-
cern for his religion, and converting his ſpleen into zeal. Addison
I have heard a proftigate offer much ſtronger arguments
againſt paying his debts, than ever he was known to do againſt
chriſtianity; becauſe he happened to be cloſer preſſed by the
bailiff than the parſon. Swift's A1 cellanies.
How could ſuch a proftigate as Antony, or a boy of
eighteen, like Octavius, ever dare to dream of giving the
law to ſuch an empire and people. - Swift.
To PROF LIGATE. v. a. [profigo, Lat.] To drive away. A
word borrowed from the Latin without alteration of the ſenſe,
but not uſed. - -
Lavatories, to waſh the temples, hands, wriſts, and ju-
gulars, do potently profligate and keep off the venom. Harv.
PROF LIGATELY. adº. (from prºfitate.] Shaºlely:
Moſt prºftigately falſe, with the ſtrongeſt prºſions of
ſincerity. - Swift J. 44/celanies.
Proſºlidates Ess. n. / [from prºl The quality of
ing profligate.
pº. m. / [from proftuent.] Progreſs; courſe.
In the proftuence or proceedings of their fortunes, there was
much difference between them. - - J/otton.
PROFLUENT. adj. [from prºfittent, Lat..] Flowing forward.
Teach all nations what of him they learn'd,
And his ſalvation; them who ſhall believe
Haptizing in the proftuent ſtream, the ſign *
of waſhing then from guilt of fin. - Mººn.
- PROFOUND.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
!.
P R O
;I of OUND. adj. ſ. rofºnd Fr. proftindus, Lat]
º º, É. below the ſurface; low with reſpect to
- !' . *-*
• or ing places.
the nº .. deep ſnow and ice,
ulf profound, as that Serbonian bog
flºº, and mount Caſius old.
He hath hither thruſt me down - -
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound. - Milton.
2. Intellectually deep; not obvious to the mind; not eaſily fa-
thomed by the "º " ". treatye.
wly ; humble ; ſubmiſs ; ſubmiſſive.
- *... words wilt thou uſe to move thy God to hear thee *
what humble geſtures: what troºnd reverºnº ? Du'pa.
4. Learned beyond the common reach; knowing to the bottom.
Not orators only with the people, but even the very pro-
fºund/, diſputers in all facultics, have hereby often, with the
beſt learned, prevailed moſt. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
. Deep in contrivance.
5 Pº. rººters are profºund to make ſlaughter, though I
have been a rebuker of them. Hoſea v. 2.
PROFo'UND. m. ſ.
1. The deep; the main; the ſea.
God, in the fathomleſs frºfound,
Hath all his choice commanders drown'd. Sandys.
Now I die abſent in the vaſt profound;
And me without myſelf the ſeas have drown'd. Dryden.
2. The abyſs.
If ſome other place th' ethereal king
Poſſeſſes lately, thither to arrive,
I travel this 'rofound. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ii.
To ProFoºts p. v. m. [from the noun..] To dive; to pene-
trate. A barbarous word.
we cannot profºund into the hidden things of nature, nor
ſee the firſt ſprings that ſet the reſt a-going. Glanvil.
PROFo'UNDLY. adj. [from pro ound.]
1. Deeply; with deep concern. -
Why figh you ſo profºundly Shakeſp.
The virgin ſtarted at her father's name,
And figh’d profºundly, conſcious of the ſhame. Dryden.
2. With great degrees of knowledge; with deep inſight.
Domenichino was profoundly ſkill'd in all the parts of paint-
ing, but wanting genius, he had leſs of nobleneſs. Dryden.
PRofo'U' DNEss. n.ſ.. [from profound.]
1. Depth of place.
2. Depth of knowledge.
- Their wits, which did every where elſe conquer hardneſs,
were with profºundneſs here over-matched. Hooker.
PROFUNDITY.. n. J. [from prºfºund..] Depth of place or
knowledge.
Milton.
The other turn'd
Round through the vaſt frºfundity obſcure. Milton.
PROFUSE. adj. [profuſiºs, Lat..] Laviſh ; too liberal; pro-
digal; overabounding; exuberant.
On a green ſhady bank, prºfuſe of flow’rs,
Penſive I ſat. ilton's Par. Loft, b. viii.
Oh liberty, thou goddeſs heav'nly bright,
Profuſe of bliſs, and pregnant with delight. Addison.
One long dead has a due proportion of praiſe; in which,
whilſt he lived, his friends were too profuſe, and his enemies
too ſparing. Addison,
PROFusely, adv. [from profuſº.]
1. Laviſhly ; prodigally.
2. With exuberance.
Then ſpring the living herbs prºfuſly wild. Thomſºn.
PROFU's ENEss. n.ſ. [from profuſe.j Laviſhneſs; prodigality.
One of a mean fortune manages his ſtore with extreme
parſimony; but, with fear of running into profujenſ, never
arrives to the magnificence of living. Dryden.
Prºfſºnſ of doing good, a ſoul unſatisfied with all it has
done, and an unextinguiſhed deſire of doing more. Dryden.
Hoſpitality ſometimes degenerates into profuſeneſs, and ends
in madneſs and folly. Atterbury's Sermons.
PRQFU'sſos. m. ſ. [profuſio, Lat. profuſion, Fr. from prºfuſe.]
I. Laviſhneſs; prodigality ; extravagance. -
...What meant thy pompous progreſs through the empire 2
- º vaſt pro uſion to the factious nobles. Rowe.
2. º ..". ſuperfluous effuſion.
e was deſtrous to avoid not only profuſion
effuſion of chriſtian blood. y profuſion, but º
The great profuſion and expence
Of his reveniles bred him much offence. Daniel
3. Aºundance; exuberant plenty. -
Trade is fitted to the nature of our country, as it abounds
with a great Prºfuſion of commodities of its own growth,
***Y convenient for other countries. Addiſon.
The ſai The raptur'd eye,
° idir profuſion, yellow A - -
W Aut
To Proc. v. º &gt; y umn ſpies. Thomſºn.
I. To rob ; to ſteal.
* *** meanly for proviſions. A low word.
She went out Prºgging for proviſions as before. L’E/?r.
PROG.. n. 1. If - -
O nephew your grief is but folly,
In town you may find better prog.
wift's Miſel.
Spouſe tuckt up doth in pattens trudge it,
With handkerchief of prog, like trull with budget;
And eat by turns plumcake and judge it. Congreve.
PRogen ERA Tion. m. ſ. [progenero, Lat..] The act of be-
getting; propagation.
PRoc E'NitoR. m. ſ. [progenitus, Lat.] A forefather; an an-
ceſtor in a direct line.
Although theſe things be already paſt away by her progenitors
former grants unto thoſe lords, yet I could find a way to re-
medy a great part thereof. Spenſer's tate of Ireland.
Like true ſubjects, ſons of your progenitors,
Go chearfully together. Shakespeare
All generations had hither come,
From all the ends of th' Earth, to celebrate
And reverence thee, their great progenitor. Milton.
Power by right of fatherhood is not poſſible in any one,
otherwiſe than as Adam's heir, or as progenitor over his own
deſcendants. Locke.
The principal actors in Milton's poem are not only our
progenitors, but repreſentatives. Addiſon.
PRO GEN.Y. m. ſ. [progenie, old Fr. progenies, Lat..] Offspring;
race; generation.
The ſons of God have God's own natural ſon as a ſecond
Adam from heaven, whoſe race and progeny they are by ſpi-
ritual and heavenly birth. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 56.
Not me begotten of a ſhepherd ſwain,
But iſſu'd from the progeny of kings. Shakespeare .
By promiſe he receives
Gift to his progeny of all that land. Milion.
The baſe degenerate iron of pring ends;
A golden progeny iron heav n deſcends. Dryden.
Thus ſhall we live in perfect bliſs, and ſee
Deathieſs ourſelves, our num’rous progeny. Dryden.
We are the more pleaſed to behold the throne ſurrounded
by a numerous progeny, when we conſider the virtues of thoſe
from whom they deſcend. Aaliſon's Freeholder.
PRoc Nostic ABLE. adj. [from prognºſticate.j Such as may be
foreknown or foretold.
The cauſes of this inundation cannot be regular, and
therefore their effects not frognoſticable like eclipſes. Brown.
To PRoc No'sticATE. v. a. [from prognºſtick.] To foretell;
to foreſhow. -
He had now outlived the day, which his tutor Sandford had
prognºſticated upon his nativity he would not outlive. Clarend.
Unſkill'd in ſchemes by planets to foreihow,
I neither will, nor can prognoſticate,
To the young gaping heir, his father's fate. Dryden,
PRoc NostićA Tios. n.ſ. [from prognoſticate.]
1. The act of foreknowing or foreſhowing.
If an oily palm be not a fruitful prognºſtication, I cannot
ſcratch mine ear. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleº, atra.
Raw as he is, and in the hotteſt day prognºſtication Pro-
claims, ſhall he be ſet againſt a brick-wall, the ſun looking
with a ſouthward eye upon him, where he is to behold him,
with flies blown to death. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
This theory of the earth begins to be a kind of prophecy
or prognoſtication of things to come, as it hath been hitherto
an hiſtory of things paſt. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
2. Foretoken.
He bid him farewell, arming himſelf in a black arm”
as a badge or prºgnºſtication of his mind. Sidney.
Prognos'ſ ca'ſ ok. n. J. [from prºgnºſticate.] Foreteller ;
foreknower. -
That aſtrologer, who made his almanack give a tolerable
account of the weather by a direct inverſion of the º
rognoſii to let his belief run quite counter to "Pº"
prognºſticators, . overnment of the Tºngue.
PROGNOSTICK. adj. [progn'ſ ſue, Fr. 7:07, wrºs.] Fore-
tokening diſeaſe or recovery; foreſhowing: *, * prognoſtick
ſign.
PR og No'stick. n.ſ.. [from the adj.] -
1. The ſkill of foretelling diſeaſes or the event of diſeaſes. .
Hippocrates's prognoſtick is generally true, that it is very
hard to reſolve a ſmall apoplexy.
2. A predićtion. faſt
Though vour progno/?icks run too faſt, -
#. º at laſt. Swift.
3. A token forerunning. - -
whatſºever yºu are or ſhall be, has been but anº..
noſtick from what you were. South.
Careful obſervers : Aſ
By ſure prognoſticks may foretell a ſhow'r, S. ſt.
PROGRESS. n.ſ. [progres, Fr. from progreſſus, Lat.]
1. Courſe; proceſſion , º f the ſt
I cannot, by the progreſs of the ttars, . . - r
Give gueſs how .# to day. Shâtep. julius Cººr.
The morn begins Milion
Her roſy prog eſs ſmiling. - - - za, Jºe
The Sylphs behold it kindling as it flies,
&gt; ue its ; through the ſkies. Pope.
And pleas'd purſue its progreſs through 2. Advancement;
Arbuthnot.
ci
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
l
X-
}:
4.
}-
§
h
ſ
2. Advancement; motion forward.
Through all thy veins ſhall run
A cold and drowzy humour, which ſhall ſeize
Each vital ſpirit; for no pulſe ſhall keep
His natºral progreſs, but ſurceaſe to beat. Shakeſp.
This motion worketh in round at firſt, which way to de-
liver itſelf; and then worketh in progreſs, where it findeth
the deliverance eaſieſt. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Out of Ethiopia beyond Egypt had been a ſtrange progreſ;
for ten hundred thouſand men. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the World.
Whoſoever underſtands the progreſs and revolutions of na-
ture, will ſee that neither the preſent form of the earth, nor
its firſt form, were permanent and immutable. Burnet.
It is impoſſible the mind ſhould ever be ſtopped in its pro-
grºſ; in this ſpace. Locke.
The bounds of all body we have no difficulty to arrive at ;
but when the mind is there, it finds nothing to hinder its
progreſs into the endleſs expanſion. Locke.
Perhaps I judge º there being ſeveral, in whoſe wri-
tings I have made very ittle progreſs. Swift's Miſcel.
3. Intelledual improvement; advancement in knowledge.
Solon the wiſe his progreſs never ceas'd,
But ſtill his learning with his days increas'd. Denham.
It is ſtrange, that men ſhould not have made more progreſ;
in the knowledge of theſe things. Burnet.
Several defects in the †ding hinder it in its progreſ;
to knowledge. Locke.
Others deſpond at the firſt difficulty, and conclude, that
making any progreſs in knowledge, farther than ſerves their
ordinary buſineſs, is above their capacities. Locke.
. Removal from one place to another.
From Egypt arts their progreſs made to Greece,
wrapt in the fable of the golden fleece. Denham.
5. A journey of ſtate; a circuit;
He gave order, that there ſhould be nothing in his journey
like unto a warlike march, but rather like unto the progreſs of
a king in full peace. Bacon.
O may I live to hail the day,
When the glad nation ſhall ſurvey
Their ſov’reign, through his wide command,
Paſſing in progreſs o'er the land. Addison.
To Pro'GREss. v. n. [progredior, Lat.] To move forward;
to paſs. Not uſed.
Let me wipe off this honourable dew,
That ſilverly doth progreſ; on thy cheeks. Shakeſp.
ProgRE'ssion. n. ſ. [progreſſion, Fr. progreſſio, Lat.]
1. Proceſs; regular and gradual advance.
The ſquares of the diameters of theſe rings, made by any
priſmatick colour, were in arithmetical progreſſion. Newton.
2. Motion forward.
Thoſe worthies, who endeavour the advancement of learn-
ing, are likely to find a clearer progreſſion, when ſo many
rubs are levelled. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
In philoſophical enquiries, the order of nature ſhould go-
vern, which in all progreſſion is to go from the place one is
then in, to that which lies next to it. Locke.
3. Courſe ; paſſage.
He hath fram’d a letter, which accidentally, or by the way
of progreſſion, hath miſcarried. Shakeſp.
Intellectual advance. -
For the ſaving the long progreſſion of the thoughts to firſt
principles, the mind ſhould provide ſeveral intermediate prin-
ciples. Locke.
ProgRE'ssion AL. adj. [from progreſſion.] Such as are in a
ſtate of encreaſe or advance.
They maintain their accompliſhed ends, and relapſe not
again unto their progreſſional imperfections. Brown.
PROGRE'ssive. adj. [progreſſ, Fr. from progreſs.] Going
forward; advancing.
Princes, if they uſe ambitious men, ſhould handle it ſo,
as they be ſtill prºgreſſive, and not retrograde. Bacon.
In progreſſive motion, the arms and legs move ſucceſſively;
but in natation, both together. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The progreſſive motion of this animal is made not by walk-
ing, but by leaping: Ray on the Creation.
Their courſe
Progreſſive, retrograde, or ſtanding ſtill. Milton.
Ere the progreſſive courſe of reſtleſs .#
Performs three thouſand times its annual ſtage,
May not our pow'r and learning be ſuppreſt,
And arts and empire learn to travel weſt ? Prior.
ProgRE'ssively. adv. [from progreſſive..] By gradual ſteps
or regular courſe.
The reaſon why they fall in that order, from the greateſt
epačts progreſſively to the leaſt, is, becauſe the greateſt epačts
denote a greater diſtance of the moon before the ſun, and
conſequently a nearer approach to her conjunction. Holder.
ProgRE'ssive Ness. n.ſ.. [from progreſſive.] The ſtate of ad-
Vancing.
To PROHIBIT. v. a. [prohibco, Lat. prohiber, Fr.]
1. To forbid; to interdićt by authority.
She would not let them know of his cloſe lying in that
prohibited place, becauſe they would be offended. Sidney.
aſ: jºid it did command them, are to us in
e goſpel prohibited. ... iv. f. I 1.
2. #. to hinder. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. º
3. Gates of burning adamant
Bar d over us, prohibit all egreſs. Milton.
£ºoHº'ºrºk. n.ſ...[ſtom prohiii.j Forbidder; interdà.
Prohibition... n.ſ. [prohibition, Fr. prohibitio, Lat. from pro-
hibit.) Forbiddance; interdićt; aa of forbidding.
Might there not be ſome other myſtery in this prohibition,
than they think of Hooker, b. iv /. 6
'Gainſt ſelf-ſlaughter &gt; * * * v- J - ve
F. is a prohibition ſo divine,
hat cravens my weak hand. Shakeſp. -
* beſtowed the liberal choice of all º; £º.
prohibition, to try his obedience. Raleigh's #h. ,
iº not think hard g ift. of the I/orld.
One eaſy prohibition, who enjo -
Free leave ſo large to all things elſe. Milton's Par. Loſt.
The law of God in the ten commandments conſiſts moſé
of prohibitions; thou ſhalt not do ſuch a thing. Tillotſon.
PRøHºrtory, adj. [from prohibit..] Implying prohibition;
forbidding.
A prohibition will lie on this ſtatute, notwithſtanding the
penalty annexed ; becauſe it has words prohibitory, as well as
a penalty annexed. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To PRQJECT. v. a. [projicio, projeńus, Lat.j
1. To throw out; to caſt forward.
Th' aſcending villas
Projeći long ſhadows o'er the cryſtal tide. Pope.
2. To exhibit a form, as of the image thrown on a mirrour.
Diffuſive of themſelves where e'er they paſs,
They make that warmth in others they expect;
Their valour works like bodies on a glaſs,
And does its image on their men project. Dryden:
If we had a plan ºf the naked lines of longitude and lati-
tude...projećied on the meridian, a learner might much more
ſpeedily advance himſelf in the knowledge of geography.
J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
3. [Projetter, Fr.] To ſcheme; to form in the mind; to con-
trive.
It ceaſes to be counſel, to compel men to aſſent to what-
ever tumultuary patrons ſhall projeći. King Charles.
What fit we then projećting peace and war * Milton.
What deſire, by which nature projects its own pleaſure or
preſervation, can be gratified by another man's perſonal pur-
ſuit of his own vice South's Sermons.
To Pro'JEct. v. n. To jut out; to ſhoot forward; to ſhoot
beyond ſomething next it.
Project. m. ſ. [projet, Fr. from the verb.] Scheme; de-
ſign; contrivance.
It is a diſcovering the longitude, and deſerves a much
higher name than that of a projeći. Addiſon's Guardian.
In the various projects of happineſs, deviſed by human rea-
ſon, there ſtill appeared inconſiſtencies not to be reconciled.
- Rogers's Sermons.
ProJE’ctile. n.ſ.. [from the adj.] A body put in motion.
Projećtils would for ever move on in the ſame right line, did
not the air, their own gravity, or the ruggedneſs of the plane
ſtop their motion. Cheyne's Philoſ. Principles.
PRojectile. adj. [proječfile, Fr.] Impelled forward.
Good blood, and a due proječfile motion or circulation are
neceſſary to convert the aliment into laudable juices. Arbuth.
Proje'ction. m. ſ. [from projeći.]
1. The ačt of ſhooting forwards.
If the eleētrick be held unto the light, many particles
thereof will be diſcharged from it, which motion is performed
by the breath of the effluvium iſſuing with agility; for as
the eleētrick cooleth, the projećtion of the atoms ceaſeth.
Brown.
2. [Projection, Fr.] Plan; delineation. See to PROJECT.
For the bulk of the learners of aſtronomy, that projection
of the ſtars is beſt, which includes in it all the ſtars in our
horizon, reaching to the 384 degree of the ſouthern lati-
tude. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
3. Scheme; plan of ačtion. -
A. [Projection, Fr.] . In chemiſtry, an operation; criſis of an
operation; moment of tranſmutation. - - - -
A little quantity of the medicine, in the prºjection; will
turn a ſea of the baſer metal into gold by multiplying. Bacºn.
ProJE/ctor. n.ſ.. [from projeći.]
1. One who forms ſchemes or deſigns.
The following comes from a proječar, a correſpondent as
diverting as a traveller; his ſubject having the ſame grace of
novelty to recommend it. - Addiſon.
Among all the projectors in this attempt; none have met
with ſo general a ſucceſs, as they who apply, themſelves to
ſoften the rigour of the precept. Rogers's Sermons.
2. One who forms wild impracticable ſchemes.
Chymiſts, and other projectors, propoſe to themſelves things
utterly impracticable. L’Eſtrange.
Aſtrologers that future fates foreſhew,
Projectors, quacks, and lawyers not a few, Pope.
20 O PRo-
-
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P. R. O
gº
n, f, [proječure, Fr. proječiura, Lat.] A jutting
ProjectURE.
Tºols ... a. [a corruption of prune.] To lop; to cut ;
C.
to trim ; to pruº -
I fit and proin my wings
After flight, and put new ſtings F. ‘Azhnſ,
To my Shakespeare - - Bºnj. }. ºfºn.
The cºuntry huſbandman will not give the proining knife to
a young plant, as not able to admit the ſcar. B. johnſon.
To Prola'r E. v. a. [prolatum, Lat.] To pronounce ; to
utter. - - -
The preſſures of war have ſomewhat cowed their ſpirits,
as may be gathered from the accent of their words, which
they prolate in a whining querulous tone, as if ſtill complin;
ing and creſt-fallen. Howel.
PrºA-re. adj. [prolatus, Lat..] . Oblate ; flat., .
As to the prolate ſpheroidical figure, though it be the ne-
ceſſary reſult of the carth's rotation about º own axe, yet it
is alſo very convenient for u. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Prola'rios. n.ſ. [prolatus, Laºl
1. Pronunciation; utterance. -
Farrot, having been uſed to be fed at the prºlation of £er-
tain words, may afterwards pronounce the ſame. - Ray.
2. Delay; act of deferring. . Ainſwºrth.
Proleſ&amp;om ENA. m. ſ. [7622.5% ºf 2 3 prolegomenes, Fr.] Pre-
vious diſcourſe; introductory obſervations.
PROLEPSIS. m. ſ. [rºxylas prolºpſe, Fr.] A form of
rhetorick, in which objections are anticipated. - -
This was contained in my prolēpſis or prevention ºf his
anſwer. Bramhall againſt Hobbs.
Proleptical. adj. [from prolēpſis.] Previous ; antecedent.
The prolºptical notions of religion cannot be ſo well de-
fended by the profeſſed ſervants of the altar; Glanvil.
Proleptically, adv. [from proleptical.] By way of antici-
pation. Clariſſa.
Prolet A'R1AN. adj. Mean; wretched; vile; vulgar.
Like ſpeculators ſhould foreſee,
From pharos of authority,
Portended miſchiefs farther than
Low proletarian tything-men. Hudibras, p. i.
Prolific ATION. n.ſ. [proles and facio, Lat.] Generation of
children.
Their fruits, proceeding from ſimpler roots, are not ſo di-
ſtinguiſhable as the offspring of ſenſible creatures, and proli-
fications deſcending from double origins. Brown.
PROLIFICK. Wadj. [prolifique, Fr. proles and facio..] Fruit-
PROLIFICAL. ; ful; generative; pregnant ; productive.
Main ocean flow'd ; not idle, but with warm
Prolifick humour ſoft'ning all her globe,
Fermented the great mother to conceive,
Satiate with genial moiſture. Milton's Par. Loft.
Every diſpute in religion grew prolifical, and in ventilating
one queſtion, many new ones were ſtarted. Decay of Piety.
His vital pow'r air, earth and ſeas ſupplies,
And breeds whate’cr is bred beneath the ſkies;
For every kind, by thy prolifick might,
Springs. - Dryden.
All dogs are of one ſpecies, they mingling together in ge-
neration, and the breed of ſuch mixtures being prºlift.K. Ray.
From the middle of the world,
The ſun's prolifick rays are hurl’d;
'Tis from that ſeat he darts thoſe beams,
Which quicken earth with genial flames. Prior.
Pººj Figally, adv. [from prolifică.J. Fruitfully; pregnantly.
PROLIX, adj. [prolixe, Fr. prolixus, Latin.]
1. Long ; tedious; not conciſe.
According to the caution we have been ſo prolix in giving,
if we aim at right underſtanding the true nature of it, we
muſt examine what apprehenſion mankind make of it. Digby.
Should I at large repeat - -
The bead-roll of her vicious tricks,
My poem would be too prolix. Prior.
2. Of long duration. This is a very rare ſenſe.
If the appellant appoints a term too prolix, the judge may
then aſſign a competent term. Ayliff's Parerºon.
Protºxigus adj. [from prolix.] Dilatory, tedious.* A
word of Shakeſpeare's coining.
Lay by all nicety and prolixious bluſhes. Shakeſp.
Prolixity. n. ſ. [prolixité, Fr. from prolix.] Tediouſneſs ;
tireſome length; want of brevity.
th: is true, without any ſlips of prolixity, or croſſing the plain
ghway of talk, that the good Anthonio hath loſt a ſhip.
Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
In ſome other paſſages, I may have, to ñº.
P unawares ſlipt into the contrary extreme. Boyle.
****Y., adv. [from prolix.) At great length ; tediouſly.
p r On theſe prolixly thankful ſhe enlarg’d. Dryán.
ºf [from prolix.] Tediouſneſs. .
of a .."4. (Latin.] The foreman ; the ſpeaker
- he convocation the queen prorogued, tho h
gued, ugh at the ex-
i. Dr. Atterbury's diſpleaſure, who was deſign'd their
- Swift.
|
PRolocutoRSHIP. m. ſ. [from prolocutor.] The office or
dignity of prolocutor.
PRologue. n. ſ. [766x07&amp; ; prºlºgue, Fr. prolºgus, Latin.]
1. Preface; introduction to any diſcourſe or performance.
Come, fit, and a ſong.
–Shall we clap into 't roundly, without hawking, or ſpit.
ting, or ſaying we are hoarſe, which are the only polºgue, to
a bad voice Shakºp. 4, ºu Like it.
In her face excuſe -
Came prologue, and apology too prompt. Milton.
2. Something ſpoken before the entrance of the aëtors of a play.
If my death might make this iſland happy,
And prove the period of their tyranny,
I would expend it with all willingneſs;
But mine is made the prologue to their play. Shakespeare
The peaking cornuto comes in the inſtant, after we iſ
ſpoke the prologue of our comedy. Shakeſp.
To PRologue. v. a. [from the noun..] To introduce with a
formal preface.
He his ſpecial nothing ever prologues. Shakespeare 
To PROLONG. v. a. [prºlonger, Fr. pro and langus, Lat.j -
1. To lengthen out ; to continue ; to draw out.
Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong
Life much. - Milton.
Th’ unhappy queen with talk prolºng'd the night. Dryd.
2. To put off to a diſtant time.
To-morrow in my judgment is too ſudden;
For I myſelf am not ſo well provided,
As elſe I would be were the day prolong’d. Shaiſº.
PRolon GA/Tios. m. ſ. [prolongation, Fr. from prºlong.]
1. The act of lengthening.
Nouriſhment in living creatures is for the prºlºngatiºn of
life. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
2. Delay to a longer time.
This ambaſſage concerned only the prolºngation of days for
payment of monies. Bacon's Henry VII.
Prolusion... n.ſ. [prolºſſo, Lat..] Entertainments; perfor-
mance of diverſion.
It is memorable, which Famianus Strada, in the firſt book
of his academical proluſions, relates of Suarez. Hakewill.
PROMIN ENT. adj. [prominens, Lat..] Standing out beyond
the near parts; protuberant; extant.
Whales are deſcribed with two prominent ſpouts on their
heads, whereas they have but one in the forehead terminating
over the windpipe. Brºwn's Pulgar Errours.
She has her eyes ſo prominent, and placed ſo that ſhe can
ſee better behind her than before her. More.
Two goodly bowls of maſſy ſilver,
With figures prominent and richly wrought. Dryden.
Some have their eyes ſtand ſo prominent as the hare, that
they can ſee as well behind as before them. Kay.
PROMIN EN ce. Un. ſ. [prominentia, Latin; from prominent.]
Pro MIN EN cy. } rotuberance; extant part.
It ſhows the noſe and eyebrows, with the prºminencies and
fallings in of the features. Addison on Ancient Medal.
PROMISCUOUS. adj. [promiſuus, Lat.] Mingled ; con-
fuſed ; undiſtinguiſhed.
Glory he requires, and glory he receives,
Promiſcuous from all nations. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Promiſcuous love by marriage was reſtrain'd. Roſcom.
In ruſh'd at once a rude promiſcuous crowd;
The guards, and then each other overbear,
And in a moment throng the theatre. Dryden.
No man, that conſiders the promiſcuous diſpenſations of
God's providence in this world, can think it unreaſonable tº
conclude, that after this life good men ſhall be rewarded, and
ſinners puniſhed. Tillotſºn's Senon.
The earth was formed out of that promiſcuºus maſs of ſand,
carth, ſhells, ſubſiding from the water. //oodward.
Clubs, diamonds, hearts, in wild diſorder ſeen,
With throngs promiſcuous ſtrow the level green. Pope.
A wild, where weeds and flow'rs promiſcuºus ſhoot *f;
ProMiscuously, adº. Ifrom promiſius.j With confuſed
mixture; indiſcriminately.
We beheld where once flood Ilium, called Troy promiſ.
cuouſly of Tros. Sandys's jºurney.
That generation, as the ſacred writer modeſtly expreſſes it,
married and gave in marriage without diſcretion or decency,
but promiſcuouſly, and with no better a guide tha, the lin-
pulſes of a brutal appetite. IZºodward.
Here might you ſee
Barons and peaſants on the embattled field,
In one huge heap, fromiſcuºuſly amatt.
Unaw’d by precepts human or divine, .
Like birds and beaſts promiſcuouſly they join. Pºpe.
PROMISE. n.ſ. [promiſum, Lat. promiſe, frº/” Fr.]
1. Declaration of ſome benefit to be confered.
I eat the air, promiſ cramm'd; you cannot ſeed caponsſo.
His promiſes were, as he then was, mighty;
But his performance, as he now is, nothing: Sºft.
O Lord, let thy promiſe unto David be eſtabliſhed. 1 Chron.
Behold, ſhe ſaid, perform'd in ey'ry part -
My promiſe made; and Vulcan's labour'd art. Pº
Philips.
Sha.
.
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
º:
ſº
ºn."
.
}: º,
Sººty
;:
Let any man confider, how many ſorrows he would have
eſcaped, had God called him to his reſt, and then ſay, whe-
ther the promiſe to deliver the juſt from the evils to come,
ought not to be made our daily prayer. Wake.
2. Performance of promiſe ; grant of the thing promiſed.
Now are they ready, looking for a promiſe from thce. Ais.
3. Hopes; expectation.
Your young prince Mamillius is a gentleman of the greateſt
promiſe. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
To Promise. v. a. [promettre, Fr. promitto, at.]
1. To make declaration of ſome benefit to be confered.
While they promiſe them liberty, they themſelves are the
ſervants of corruption. 2 Peter ii. 18.
I could not expect ſuch an effect as I found, which ſeldom
reaches to the degree that is promiſed by the preſcribers of any
remedies. Tºm, lº's 44ftel.
To Pro’MISE. v n. -
1. To aſſure one by a promiſe. -
Promiſing is the very air o' th' time; it opens the eyes of
expe&amp;tation : performance is ever the duller for his act. Shakespeare
I dare promiſe for this play, that in the roughneſs of the
numbers, which was ſo deſigned, you will ſee ſomewhat more
maſterly than any of my former tragedies. Dryden.
As he promiſed in the law, he will ſhortly have mercy, and
ather us together. 2 Mac. ii. 18.
All the pleaſure we can take, when we met theſe promiſing
ſparks, is in the diſappointment. Felton.
She brib'd my ſtay, with more than human charms;
Nay promis'd, vainly promis'd to beſtow
Immortal life.
2. It is uſed of aſſurance, even of ill.
Will not the ladies be afraid of the lion ?
—I fear it, I promiſe you. Shakespeare.
Pro'MisebREACH. m. ſ. [b, each and promiſe.] Violation of
promiſe. Not in uſe.
Criminal in double violation
Pope's Odyſſey.
Of ſacred chaſtity, and of promiſeb each. Shakeſp.
Pro'MisebREAKER. m. ſ. [promiſe and break.] Violator of
promiſes. - -
He's an hourly promiſebreaker, the owner of no one good
quality worthy your entertainment. Shakeſp.
PRó'Miser. m. ſ. [from prom ſe..] One who promiſes.
Who let this promiſer in did you, good Diligence
Give him his bribe again. Benj. johnſon.
Fear's a large promiſer; who ſubjećt live
To that baſe paſſion, know not what they give. Dryden.
Pro'MissoRY. adj. fromiſon is, Lat..] Containing profeſſion
of ſome benefit to be confered. -
As the preceptive part enjoins the moſt exact virtue, ſo is
it moſt advantageouſly enforced by the promiſºry, which is
moſt exquiſitely adapted to the ſame end. Decay of Piety.
The promiſtry lyes of great men are known by ſhouldering,
hugging, ſqueezing, ſmiling and bowing. Arbuthnot.
Pro MissoRiſix. adv. [from promiſºry..] By way of promiſe.
Nor was he obliged by oath to a ſtrićt obſervation of that
which promiſarily was unlawful. Brown.
PRo'Mont. . . n. ſ. [prom htoire, Fr. promontorium, Latin.
PRO'Mon To RY. ; Promont I have obſerved only in Suckling.]
A headland; a cape; high land jutting into the ſea.
The land did ſhoot out with a great promontory. Abbot.
I have dogs
Will climb the higheſt promontory top. Shakeſp.
Like one that ſtands upon a promontory,
And ſpies a far off ſhore where he would tread. Shakeſp.
A forked mountain, or blue promontory,
With trees upon't, nod unto the world,
And mock our eyes with air. Shakeſp. Aut. and Cleop.
The waving ſea can with each flood
Bath ſome high promont.
They, on their heads,
Main promontories flung, which in the air
Came ſhadowing, and oppreſs'd whole legions arm'd. Milt.
Every guſt of rugged winds, -
Suckling.
That blows from off each beaked promontory. . . Milton.
If you drink tea upon a promontory that cverhangs the ſea,
it is preferable to an aſſembly. Pºpe.
To PROMOTE. v. a. [promoved, promotus, Lat.]
-1. To forward; to advance. -
“Next to religion, let your care be to promote juſtice. Bacon.
Nothing lovelier can be found, -
Than good works in her huſband to promote. - Milton.
He that talks deceitfully for truth, muſt hurt it more by
his example, than he promotes it by his arguments. Atterb.
Frićtions of the extreme parts promote the flux of the juices
in the joints. A, buthnot,
2. [Promiizuwoir, Fr.] To elevate ; to exalt; to preſer. -
‘I will promote thee unto very great honour. Num. xxii. 17.
Shall I leave my fatneſs wherewith they honour God and
man, and go to be promoted over the trees.
Eid 1 ſoilicit thee
*From darkneſs to promote me. Milton.
ProMoºre R. m. ſ. [promoteur, Fr. from promote.]
1. Advancer; forwarder ; encourager. -
judges ix. 9.
Knowledge hath received little improvement from the en-
deavours of many pretending promoters. Glanvil.
Our Saviour makes this return, fit to be. engraven in the
hearts of all promoter of charity; verily, I ſay unto you,
inaſmuch as you have do it -
my brethren, ye have d * it unto one of the leaſt of theſe
one it unto me. Att -
2. intº ; makebate. An obſolete uſe. erbury
is “ies be promoters, ſometreſſ t ſpi T
Informers and promoterso reſ: : to pie. aſſer.
of his beſt ſubječts. PPreſs and ruin the *:::::::::
ProMotion. n.ſ. [promºtiºn, Fr from
* * *. promote.] Advance-
ment; encouragement; exalt
rank; preferm i." *tion to ſome new honour or
Many fair promotions
Are daily given to enoble thoſe,
That ſcarce, ſome two days ſince, were worth a noble. Sha
The high promotion of his grace of Canterbur - -
Who holds his ſtate at door 'mongſt purſuivants. 'slatº.
My riſing is thy fail,
And my promotion will be thy *aion. Milton,
Thou youngeſt virgin-daughter of the ſkies,
Made in the laſt promotion of the bleſt 3
Whoſe palms, new pluck'd from paradiſe,
In ſpreading branches more ſublimely riſe. Dryden.
To ProMove. v. a. [promoves, Lat. promouvoir, Fr.] To
forward; to advance; to promote. A word littisuſed.
Never yet was honeſt man,
That ever drove the trade of love:
It is impoſſible, nor can
... Integrity our ends promove.
PRQMPT. adj. [prompt, Fr. promptus, Lat J
1. Quick; ready; acute; eaſy.
The reception of light into the body of the building was
Suckling.
very prompt, both from without and from within. JP'ottom.
Very, diſcerning and prompt in giving orders, as occaſions
required. Clarendon.
Prompt eloquence
Flow'd from their lips, in proſe or numerous verſe. Milton.
To the ſtern ſančtion of th’ offended ſky,
My prompt obedience bows. Pope.
2. Quick; petulant.
I was too haſty to condemn unheard;
And you, perhaps, too prompt in your replies. Dryden.
3 Ready without heſitation; wanting no new motive.
Tell him, I'm prompt
To lay my crown at's feet, and there to kneel. Shakeſp.
The brazen age,
A warlike offspring, prompt to bloody rage. Dryden.
Still aroſe ſome rebel ſlave,
Prompter to ſink the ſtate, than he to ſave. Prior.
4. Ready; told down : as, prompt payment.
To PRCMPT. v. a. [prontare, Italian.]
1. To affift by private inſtrućtion; to help at a loſs.
Sitting in ſome place, where no man ſhall prompt him, let
the child tranſlate his leſſon. Aſcham.
You've put me now to ſuch a part, which never
I ſhall diſcharge to th’ life.
—Come, come, we'll prompt you. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
My voice ſhall ſound as you do prompt mine ear,
And I will ſtoop and humble my intents
To your well practis'd wiſe directions. Shakeſp.
None could hold the book ſo well to prompt and inſtruct
this ſtage play, as ſhe could. Bacon's Henry VII.
He needed not one to prompt him, becauſe he could ſay
the prayers by heart. Stillingfleet.
Every one ſome time or other dreams he is reading books,
in which caſe the invention prompts ſo readily, that the mind
is impoſed on. Addiſon.
Grace ſhines around her with ſereneſt beams,
And whiſp'ring angels prompt her golden dreams. Pope.
2. To incite; to inſtigate. -
The Volſcians ſtand
Ready, when time ſhall prompt them, to make road
Upon's again. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Speak not by th’ matter
Which your heart prompts you to, but with ſuch words
But rooted in your tongue. Shakespeare .
If they prompt us to anger, their deſign makes uſe of it to
a further end, that the mind, being thus diſquieted, may not
be eaſily compoſed to prayer. Duppa.
º: pompted them at length and found them arms. Milt.
Kind occaſion prompts their warm deſires. Pope.
3. To remind. -
The inconcealable imperfeótions of ourſelves will hourly
promºt us our corruption, and loudly tell us we are ſons of
earth. Prown's Vulgar Errours.
‘Pro’MPTE R. n.ſ.. [from prompt.] - t
I. One who º a publick ſpeaker, by ſuggeſting the word to
* - - hen he falters. -
him *. it my cue to fight, I ſhould have known it
Without a prompter. Shakeſp. Othello.
- In florid impotence he ſpeaks, -
And as the prompter breathes, the puppet ſqueaks. *:::
2. Art<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
:
º
º
oniſher; a reminder. -
2. Aºi. our duty without a teacher, and acquit our-
ght to do without a prompter. L’Eſtrange.
p:ºº zº. { [promptitude, Fr. from promptus, Lat.]
- - : quickneſs.
p.: *. [from prompt.] Readily; quickly ; expe-
diº. does his merchandiſe chearfully, promptly and rea-
dily, and the works of religion ſlowly, it is a ſign that his
heart is not right with God. Taylor.
Promptness. n.ſ.. [from prompt..] Readineſs , quickneſs ;
alacrity. -
Had not this ſtop been given him by that accidental ſick-
neſs, his great courage and promptneſs of mind, would have
carried him directly forward to the enemy, till he had met him
in the open plains of Perſia. South's Sermons.
Firm and rigid muſcles, ſtrong pulſe, aćtivity, and prompt-
neſ; in animal actions, are ſigns of ſtrong fibres. Arbuthnot.
Prompture. n.ſ.. [from prompt.]. Suggeſtion; motion given
by another; inſtigation. A word not uſed.
Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood ;
Yet hath he in him ſuch a mind of honour,
That had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, he'd wield them up. Shakespeare:
Promptu ARY. m. ſ. [promptuaire, Fr. promptuarium, Lat.) A
ſtorehouſe; a repoſitory; a magazine.
This ſtratum is ſtill expanded at top, ſerving as the ſemi-
nary or promptuary, that furniſheth, forth matter for the for-
mation of animal and vegetable bodies. JWoodward.
To PROMU'LGATE. v. a. [promulgo, Lat..] To publiſh;
to make known by open declaration.
Thoſe albeit I know he nothing ſo much hateth as to pro-
mulgate, yet I hope that this will occaſion him to put forth
divers other goodly works. Spenſer.
Thoſe, to whom he entruſted the promulgating of the
goſpel, had far different inſtructions. Decay of Piety.
It is certain laws, by virtue of any ſančtion they receive
from the promulgated will of the legiſlature, reach not a
ſtranger, if by the law of nature every man hath not a power
to puniſh offences againſt it. Locke.
PROMUL.GATIon. m. ſ. [promulgatio, Lat. from promulgate.]
, Publication; open exhibition.
The ſtream and current of this rule hath gone as far, it
hath continued as long as the very promulgation of the
goſpel. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
The very promulgation of the puniſhment will be part of
the puniſhment, and anticipate the execution. South.
PROMUL.GA Tor. m. ſ. [from promulgate.J. Publiſher; open
teacher.
How groundleſs a calumny this is, appears from the ſanc-
tity of the chriſtian religion, which excludes fraud and falſe-
hood; ſo alſo from the deſignments and aims of its firſt pre-
mulgators. Decay of Piety.
To PROMUT.G.E. v. a. [from promulgo, Lat..] To promul-
gate; to publiſh ; to teach openly.
The chief deſign of them is, to eſtabliſh the truth of a
new revelation in thoſe countries, where it is firſt promulged
and propagated. Atterbury.
PROMU'LGER. m. ſ. [rom promulge.] Publiſher; promulgator.
The promulgers of our religion, Jeſus Chriſt and his apºſtles,
raiſed men and women from the dead, not once only, but
often, Atterbury.
Pººsa"ror, n.ſ. In anatomy, a muſcle of the radius, of which
theº.ºre two, that help to turn the palm downwards. Diº.
PRONE. adj. [pronus, Latin.]
I. Bending downward; not erect.
There wanted yet a creature not prone,
And brute as other creatures, but indu'd
With ſanctity of reaſon, might erect
His ſtature, and upright with frontferene
Govern the reſt. Milton's Par. Loft, b. vii.
2. Hº with the face downwards: contrary to ſupine.
pon theſe three Poſitions in man, wherein the ſpine can
only be at right lines with the thigh, ariſe thoſe poſtures,
prone, ſupine and erect. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
3. Precipitous; headlong; going downwards.
Down thither prone in flight
§: and º the vaſt ethereal ſky
allS between WorldS. Milton'
4. Declivous; ſloping. on's Par. Loft, b. v.
Since the floods demand,
For their deſcent, a prºne and ſinking land:
Does not this due declivity declare
I º wife dire&amp;tor's providential care Blackmore.
5. In º t Propenſe; diſpoſed. It has commonly an ill ſenſe.
the cº...§: good, with the pleaſure ariſing from
One and priºr to º i. men for the moſt part ſlower to the
bylaw, can prevailſi.er, º that duty, preſcribed them
f Thoſe who are ready . d #.
lm in judgment and pro-
ºffion, are very pron, to deny him º; #. their ..
South's Sermons.
If we are prone to ſedition, and delight in change, there
is no cure more proper than trade, which ſupplies buſineſs to
the active, and wealth to the indigent. Addiſon.
Still prone to change, though ſtill the ſlaves of ſtate.
Pope.
Pro'NeNess. m. ſ. [from prone.]
1. The ſtate of bending downwards; not erectneſs.
If erectneſs be taken, as it is largely oppoſed unto proneneſ,
or the poſture of animals looking downwards, carrying their
venters, or oppoſite part to the ſpine, directly towards the
earth, it may admit of queſtion. Brown's }. Errours.
. The ſtate of lying with the face downwards; not ſupine-
neſs.
3. Deſcent; declivity. -
4. Inclination; propenſion; diſpoſition to ill.
The holy ſpirit ſaw that mankind is unto virtue hardly
drawn, and that righteouſneſs is the leſs accounted of, b
reaſon of the pronentſ of our affections to that which deſ.
lighteth. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 8.
The ſoul being firſt from nothing brought,
When God's grace fails her, doth to nothing fall;
And this declining pronentſ, unto nought,
Is ev'n that ſin that we are born withal. Davies.
He inſtituted this way of worſhip, becauſe of the carnality
of their hearts, and their pronemeſ of the people to idolatry.
Tillotſon's Sermons.
The pronene; of good men to commiſerate want, in what-
ſoever ſhape it appears. Atterbury's Sermons.
How great is the pronentſ of our nature, to comply with
this temptation. Rogers's Sermons.
ProNG. m. ſ. [pronghen, Dutch, to ſqueeze. Minſhew.] A
fork.
The cooks make no more ado, but ſlicing it into little
gobbets, prick it on a prong of iron, and hang it in a fur-
Ilace. Sandys’ journey.
Whacum his ſea-coal prong threw by,
And baſely turn'd his back to fly. Hudibrar.
Be mindful,
With iron teeth of rakes and prongs to move
The cruſted earth. Dryden's Wirg. Georg.
PR o'NITY.. n.ſ. [from prone..] Proneneſs. A word not uſed.
Of this mechanick promity, I do not ſee any good ten-
dency. More's Divine Dialogues.
Pronou'N. n.ſ. [pronom, Fr. pronomen, Lat.]
I, thou, he ; we, ye, they, are names given to perſons,
and uſed inſtead of their proper names, from whence they had
the name of pronouns, as though they were not nouns them-
ſelves, but uſed inſtead of nouns. Clarke's Lat. Gram.
To PRONOUNCE. v. a. [prononcer, Fr. pronuncio, Lat.]
1. To ſpeak; to utter. *
He pronounced all theſe words unto me with his mouth.
jer. xxxvi. 18.
2. To utter ſolemnly; to utter confidently.
She
So good a lady, that no tongue could ever
Pronounce diſhonour of her. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
I have pronounced the word, faith the Lord, jer. xxxiv. 5.
So was his will
Pronounc'd among the gods. Milton.
Sternly he pronounc'd the rigid interdićtion. Milton.
The pronouncing of ſentence of death is the office of infe-
rior magiſtrates. - Locke.
Abſalom pronounced a ſentence of death againſt his bro-
ther. Docke.
3. To form or articulate by the organs of ſpeech.
Language of man pronounc'd
By tongue of brute, and human ſenſe expreſs'd. ... Miltºn.
Though diverſity of tongues continue, this would render
the pronouncing them eaſier. Holder.
4. To utter rhetorically. -
To Pronou'nce. v. m. To ſpeak with confidence or autho-
rity.
'How confidently ſoever men pronounce of themſelves, and
believe that they are then moſt pious, when they are moſt
eager and unquiet; yet 'tis ſure this is far removed from the
true genius of religion. Decay of Piety.
Every fool may believe, and pronounce confidently; but
wife mén will, in matters of diſcourſe, conclude firmly, and
in matters of fact, act ſurely. South's Sermons.
Pronou'Ncer. m. ſ. [from pronounce.] One who pronounces.
The pronouncer thereof ſhall be condemned in expences.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
Pronunciation. m. ſ. [pronunciatio, from pronuncio, Lat.
pronunciation, Fr.] The aa or mode of utterance.
The deſign of ſpeaking being to communicate our thoughts
by ready, eaſy and graceful pronunciation, all kind of letters
have been ſearched out, that were ſerviceable for º, }.
oſe. older".
P It were eaſy to produce thouſands of his verſes, which ar;
lame for want of half a foot, ſometimes a whole one, and
which no pronunciation can make otherwiſe. Dryden.
$
PRoof,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">Proof. n.ſ.. [from prove.]
1. Evidence ; teſtimony; convincing token; convincing argu-
ment; means of conviction.
That they all have always ſo teſtified, I ſee not how we
ſhould poſſibly wiſh a proof more palpable than this. Hooker.
This has neither evidence of truth, nor proof ſufficient to
give it warrant. Hooker.
Though the manner of their trials ſhould be altered, yet
the proof of every thing muſt needs be by the teſtimony of
ſuch perſons as the parties ſhall produce. Spenſer.
That which I ſhall report will bear no credit,
Were not the proof ſo high. Shakeſp.
One ſoul in both, whereof good proof
This day affords. Milton.
This, vers'd in death, th’ infernal knight relates,
And then for proof fulfill'd their common fates. Dryden.
Thoſe intervening ideas, which ſerve to ſhew the agree-
ment of any two others, are called proofs. Locke,
2. Teſt; trial; experiment.
Retire or taſte thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born 1 not to contend with ſpirits of heav'n. Milton.
Sampſon,
This day to Dagon is a ſolemn feaſt,
Thy ſtrength they know ſurpaſſing human race,
And now ſome publick proof thereof require
To honour this great feaſt. Milton's Agoniſłes.
When the imagination hath contrived the frame of ſuch an
inſtrument, and conceives that the event muſt infallibly an-
ſwer its hopes, yet then does it ſtrangely deceive in the
proof. Wilkins's Math. Magick.
Gave, while he taught, and edify'd the more,
Becauſe he ſhew'd, by proof, 'twas eaſy to be poor. Dryd.
My paper gives a timorous writer an opportunity of putting
his abilities to the proof. Addiſon.
Here for ever muſt I ſtay,
Sad proof how well a lover can obey. Pope.
3. Firm temper; impenetrability; the ſtate of being wrought
and hardened, till the expected ſtrength is found by trial to
be attained.
Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers,
And with thy bleſfings ſteel my lance's point: Shakeſp.
To me the cries of fighting fields are charms,
Keen be my ſabre, and of proof my arms;
I aſk no other bleſfing of my ſtars. Dryden.
With arms of proof, both for myſelf and thee,
Chuſe thou the beſt. Dryden.
4. Armour hardened till it will abide a certain trial.
He Bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
Confronted him. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
5. In printing, the rough draught of a ſheet when firſt pulled.
Proof. adj. [This word, though uſed as an adjećtive, is only
elliptically put for of proºf..]
1. Impenetrable; able to reſiſt.
Now put your ſhields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than ſhields. Shakeſp.
Opportunity I here have had
To try thee, fift thee, and confeſs have found thee
Proof againſt all temptation, as a rock
Of adamant. Milton's Par. Regain'd.
He paſt expreſſion lov’d,
Proof to diſdain, and not to be remov’d. Dryden.
When the mind is throughly tinétured, the man will be
proof againſt all oppoſitions. Collier.
Guiltleſs of hate, and proof againſt deſire;
That all things weighs, and nothing can admire. Dryden.
When a capuchin, that was thought proof againſt bribes,
had undertaken to carry on the work, he died a little after.
Addiſon.
2. It has either to or againſ? before the power to be reſiſted.
Imagin'd wiſe,
Conſtant, mature, proof againſt all aſſaults. Milton,
Deep in the ſnowy Alps, a lump of ice
By froſt was harden'd to a mighty price;
Proof to the ſun it now ſecurely lies,
And the warm dog-ſtar's hotteſt rage defies. Addiſon.
The God of day,
To make him proof againſt the burning ray,
His temples with celeſtial ointment wet. Addison.
PRoo'fless. adj. [from proof..] Unproved ; wanting evidence.
Some were ſo manifeſtly weak and proofleſ, that he muſt
be a very courteous adverſary, that can grant them. Boyle.
To PRop. v.a. [proppen, Dutch.] -
1. To ſupport by ſomething placed under or againſt.
What we by day
Lop overgrown, or prop, or bind,
One night derides. Milton.
2. To ſupport by ſtanding under or againſt.
Like theſe earth unſupported keeps its place,
Though no fixt bottom props the weighty maſs. Creech.
Eternal ſnows the growing maſs ſupply,
Till the bright mountains prop th’ incumbent ſky;
As Atlas fix’d each hoary pile appears. Pope.
P R O
3. To ſuſtain; to ſupport.
The nearer I find myſelf verging to that period, which is
to be labour and ſorrow, the more I ſelf hoſ.
few ſupports that are left me. prop myſelf upon }:
PRop. n.ſ. [proppe, Dutch. - -
which #, #: teſt. J A ſupport; a ſtay ; that on
The boy was the very ſtaff of my age,
You take my houſe, when you do take the prop
That doth ſuſtain my houſe; you take my life
When you do take the means whereby I live. &gt; Shakeſp.
Some plants creep along the ground, or wind about other
trees or props, and cannot ſupport themſelves. Bacon.
That he might on many props repoſe,
He ſtrengths his own, and who his part did take, Daniel,
Again, if by the body's prop we ſtand, -
If on the body's life, her life depend,
As Meleager's on the fatal brand,
The body's good ſhe only would intend.
my very prop. Sha.
- Davies,
Faireſt unſupported flower
From her beſt prop ſo far. Milton.
The current of his vićt'ries found no ſtop,
Till Cromwell came, his party's chiefeſt prop. Waller.
‘Twas a confiderable time before the great fragments that
fell reſted in a firm poſture; for the props and ſtays, whereby
they leaned one upon another, often failed. Burnet.
The props return
Into thy houſe, that bore the burden’d vines. Dryden.
Pro'PAGable: adj. [from propagate.] Such as may be ſpread;
ſuch as may be continued by ſucceſſion.
Such creatures as are produced each by its peculiar ſeed,
conſtitute a diſtinct propagable ſort of creatures. Boyle.
To PROPAGATE. v. a. [propago, Latin.]
1. To continue or ſpread by generation or ſucceſſive produćtion.
All that I eat, or drink, or ſhall beget,
Is propagated curſe ! Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
Is it an elder brother's duty ſo -
To propagate his family and name ;
You would not have yours die and buried with you? Otway.
From hills and dales the cheerful cries rebound;
For echo hunts along, and propagates the ſound. Dryden,
2. To extend; to widen.
I have upon a high and pleaſant hill
Feign'd fortune to be thron'd : the baſe o' th' mount
Is rank'd with all deſerts, all kind of natures,
That labour on the boſom of this ſphere
To propagate their ſtates. Shakeſp. Timon of Atheni.
3. To carry on from place to place; to promote.
Some have thought the propagating of religion by arms not
only lawful, but meritorious. Decay of Piety.
Who are thoſe that truth muſt propagate,
Within the confines of my father's ſtate. Dryden,
Thoſe who ſeek truth only, and deſire to propagate nothing
elſe, freely expoſe their principles to the teſt. Locke.
Becauſe denſe bodies conſerve their heat a long time, and
the denſeſt bodies conſerve their heat the longeſt, the vibra-
tions of their parts are of a laſting nature; and therefore may
be propagated along ſolid fibres of uniform denſe matter to a
great diſtance, for conveying into the brain the impreſſions
made upon all the organs of ſenſe. Newton.
4. To encreaſe ; to promote:
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breaſt,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have them preſt
With more of thine. Shakeſp.
Sooth'd with his future fame,
And pleas'd to hear his propagated name. Pryden.
5. To generate.
Superſtitious notions, propagated in fancy, are hardly ever
totally eradicated. Clariſſa.
To PRo'PAGATE. v. n. To have offspring.
No need that thou
Should'ſt ropagate, already infinite, --
And through all numbers abſolute, though one. Mººn.
PropAGA'tion. n.ſ. [propagatio, Lat. propagation, Fr. from
propagate.] Continuance or diffuſion by generation or ſucceſ-
five production. -
Men have ſouls rather by creation than propagatiºn, Hooker:
There are other ſecondary ways of the rºpagatiº of it.
as lying in the ſame bed. ſºftman's Surgery.
There is not in all nature any ſpontaneous generation, but
all come by propagation, wherein chance hath not the leaſt
part. Ray on the Creation.
Old ſtakes of olive trees in plants revive;
But nobler vines by propagation thrive. Dryden,
PRopagator. n. / [from pro agate.] . .
1. One who continues by ſucceſſive production.
2. A ſpreader; a promoter. -
Socrates, the greateſt frºggatºr of morality, and a martyr
for the unity of the Godhead, was ſo famous for this falent,
that he gained the name of the Drole. Jaſon.
To PR ope’l. v. a. [propello, Lat.] To drive forward.
Avicen witneſſes the blood to be frothy that is propelled out
of a vein of the breaſt, Harvey.
20 P This
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
in ſome human creatures, may be wº
- *- - - - at is taken, ſo as not to be able
reſpect ** viſcidity of wh Žium on Aliments:
to #. overplus of motion would be too feeble and languid
to propel ſo vaſt and ponderous a body, with that prºdigious
velocity. Bentley's Sºrmºn:
To propF'ND. v. n. [propendeº, Lat. to hang forwards.]
To incline to any part; to be diſpoſed in favour of any thing.
My ſprightly brethren, I propend to you,
In reſolution to keep Helen ſtill. Shakeſp.
Prope'NDENcy. n ſ [from propend.] -
1. Inclination or tendency of deſire to anything. .
2. [From propende, Lat. to weigh.] Preconſideration ; atten-
tive deliberation; perpendency.
An aa above the animal actings, which are tranſient, and
admit not of that attention, and propendency of action: Hale.
Propºnse. adj. [propenſus, Lat.j Inclined; diſpoſed. It is
uſed both of good and bad. - -
women, propenſe and inclinable to holineſs, be otherwiſe
edified in good things, rather than carried away is ºivº.
This motion,
Hooker's Preface.
I have brought ſcandal
. In feeble hearts, propenſe enough before
Towaver, or fall off, and join with idols. Milton.
Paorension. A n. ſ. [propenſion, Fr. propenſio, Lat. from
{...} propenſe.]
1. Inclination; diſpoſition to any thing good or bad. -
Some miſcarriages might eſcape, rather through neceſſities
of ſtate, than any propenſity of myſelf to injuriouſneſs. K. Chºr.
So forcible are our propenſions to mutiny, that we equally
take occaſions from benefits or injuries. Gov. of the Tongue.
Let there be but propenſity, and bent of will to religion,
and there will be ſedulity and indefatigable induſtry. South.
It requires a critical nicety to find out the genius or the
propenſions of a child. L'Eſtrange.
he natural propenſion, and the inevitable occaſions of com-
plaint, accidents of fortune. Temple.
He aſſiſts us with a meaſure of grace, ſufficient to over-
balance the corrupt propenſity of the will. Rogers.
2. Tendency.
Bodies, that of themſelves have no propenſions to any de-
terminate place, do nevertheleſs move conſtantly and per-
petually one way. Digby.
This great attrition muſt produce a great propenſity to the
putreſcent alkaline condition of the fluids. Arbuthnot.
PROPER. adj. [profre, Fr. proprius, Latin.] -
1. Peculiar ; not belonging to more; not common.
As for the virtues that belong unto moral righteouſneſs and
honeſty of life, we do not mention them, becauſe they are
not proper unto chriſtian men as they are chriſtian, but do
concern them as they are men. Hooker.
Men of learning hold it for a ſlip in judgment, when offer
is made to demonſtrate that as proper to one thing, which
reaſon findeth common unto many. Hooker.
No ſenſe the precious joys conceives,
Which in her private contemplations be;
For then the raviſh'd ſpirit the ſenſes leaves,
Hath her own pow'rs, and proper ačtions free. Davies.
Of nought no creature ever formed ought,
For that is proper to th' Almighty's hand. Davies.
Dufreſnoy's rules, concerning the poſture of the figures,
are almoſt wholly proper to painting, and admit not any com-
pariſon with poetry. - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Outward obječts, that are extrinſecal to the mind, and its
own operations, proceeding from powers intrinſecal and proper
to itſelf, which become alſo objects of its contemplation, are
the original of all knowledge. Locke.
2. Noting an individual.
A prºper name may become common, when given to ſe-
veral beings of the ſame kind; as Caeſar. J/atts.
3. One's own. It is joined with any of the poſſeſſives: as, my
proper, their proper.
The bloody book of law
You ſhall yourſelf read in the bitter letter,
After your own ſenſe; yea, though our proper ſon
Stood in your action. Shakeſp. Othello.
- Court the age
With ſomewhat of your proper rage. J/aller.
If we might determine it, our prºper conceptions would
be all voted axioms. Glanvil's Scepſ.
Now learn the diff'rence at your proper coſt,
Betwixt true valour and an empty boaſt. Dryden
4. Natural; original. -
In our proper motion we aſcend
Up to our native ſeat. Milton.
5. "it s, accommodated; adapted; ſuitable; qualified.
In Athens all was pleaſure, mirth and play,
All prºper to the ſpring, and ſprightly May. Dryden.
e is the only Prºper perſon of all others for an Epic
Pºº", who, to his natural endowments of a large invention,
* †pe judgment, and a ſtrong - -
ledge of the iº arts. * memory, has joined º:
In debility, from great loſs of blood, wine and all aliment,
that is eaſily affimilated or turned into blood, are proper: for
blood is required to make blood. Arbuthnot,
6. Exačt; accurate ; juſt.
7. Not figurative.
Thoſe parts of nature, into which the chaos was divided,
they . by dark names, which we have expreſſed in
their plain and proper terms. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
8. It ſeems in Shakeſpeare to ſignify, mere ; pure.
See thyſelf, devil;
Proper deformity ſeems not in the fiend
So horrid as in woman.
9. [Propre, Fr.] Elegant; pretty.
Moſes was a proper child.
Io. Tall; luſty; handſome with bulk.
At laſt ſhe concluded with a ſigh, thou waſt the properaſ:
man in Italy. - Shakeſp.
A proper goodly fox was carrying to exccution. L'E/irange.
PR o'PERLY. adv. [from proper.]
1. Fitly; ſuitably.
2. In a ſtrict ſenſe.
What dies but what has life
And fin the body pro erly hath neither. Milton.
The miſeries of life are not properly owing to the unequal
diſtribution of things. Swift.
There is a ſenſe in which the works of every man, good
as well as bad, are properly his own. Rºgers.
PRo'PERN Ess. n.ſ.. [from proper.]
1. The quality of being proper.
2. Tallneſs.
PRo PERTY. m. ſ. [from proper.]
1. Peculiar quality.
What ſpecial property or quality is that, which being no
where found but in ſermons, maketh them effectual to ſave
ſouls 2 Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
A ſecondary eſſential mode, is any attribute of a thing,
which is not of primary confideration, and is called a
property. - //atti.
2. Quality; diſpoſition.
'Tis conviction, not force, that muſt induce aſſent; and
ſure the logick of a conquering ſword has no great property
that way; ſilence it may, but convince it cannot. D. of Pict.
It is the property of an old ſinner to find delight in reviewing
his own villanies in others. e South's Sermons.
3. Right of poſſeſſion.
Some have been deceived into an opinion, that the inheri-
tance of rule over men, and property in things, ſprung from
the ſame original, and were to deſcend by the ſame rules. Locke.
Property, whoſe original is from the right a man has to
uſe any of the inferior creatures, for ſubſiſtence and comfort,
is for the ſole advantage of the proprietor, ſo that he may
even deſtroy the thing that he has property in. Locke.
4. Poſſeſſion held in one's own right.
For numerous bleſſings yearly ſhow'r'd,
And property with plenty crown'd,
Accept our pious praiſe. Dryden.
5. The thing poſſeſſed. w
'Tis a thing impoſſible
I ſhould love thee but as a property. Shakespeare
No wonder ſuch men are true to a government, where Ji-
berty runs ſo high, where property is ſo well ſecured. Swift.
6. Nearneſs or right. I know not which is the ſenſe in the fol-
lowing lines.
Here I diſclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity, and property of blood,
And as a ſtranger to my heart and me,
Hold thee.
7. Something uſeful; an appendage.
I will draw a bill of properties, ſuch as our play Wººts.
Shakeſp. Midſummer's Night's Dream.
The purple garments raiſe the lawyer's fees,
Shałºff. King Lear.
Heb. xi. 2 3.
Sha'ſ. King Lear.
High pomp and ſtate are uſeful prope ties. . Dryden.
Greenfield was the name of the property man in that "“”
who furniſhed implements for the actors. Pºpe.
8. Property for propriety. Anything peculiarly adapted.
6. º {..., # sº and gravity, ſmoothneſs and
property, in quickneſs and briefneſs. Camden.
To PR ope'RTY. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To inveſt with qualities.
His rear'd arm 'd
Creſted the world; his voice was prºperty
As all the tuned ſpheres. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºp.
2. To ſeize or retain as ſomething owned, or in which “ has
a right; to appropriate; to hold. This word is not now
uſed in either meaning.
His large º d tend
Subdues and properties to his love and tendance
All ſorts of £º. Shakeſp. Timºn ºf Athens.
They have here propertied me, keep Inc in dº .
do all they can to face me out of my wits. Shakeſp.
I am too highborn to be propertied, . -
To be a ſecondary at controul. Shakespeare King fchn.
PR CPHASIS.
!
ſ
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
º,
º,
iſ:
&amp;
-Jº,
Proph Aſsis. m. ſ. [rečfºrts.] In medicine, a foreknowledge
of diſeaſes.
Prophe'cy... m. ſ. [Tºo?:1ſ2 ; prophetie, Fr.] A declaration
of ſomething to come; predićtion.
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams. Shakeſp.
Poets may boaſt
Their work ſhall with the world remain ;
Both bound together, live or die, -
The verſes and the prophecy. Waller.
Prophesier. m. ſ. [from propheſy.] One who propheſies.
To PRo'PHESY. v.a.
1. To predićt; to foretell; to prognoſticate.
Miſerable England,
I propheſy the fearful'ſt time to thee,
That ever wretched age hath look’d upon. Shakeſp.
I hate him, for he doth not propheſy good, but evil. 1 Kings.
The Lord ſent me to propheſy, againſt this houſe, all the
words that ye have heard. jer. xxvi. 12.
2. To foreſhow.
Methought thy very gait did propheſy
A royal nobleneſs.
To PRO/PHESY. v. n.
1. To utter predićtions.
Strange ſcreams of death,
And propheſying with accents terrible
Of dire combuſtion. Shakeſp.
Receiv'd by thee, I propheſy, my rhimes,
Mix'd with thy works, their life no bounds ſhall ſee. Tick.
2. To preach. A ſcriptural ſenſe.
Propheſy unto the wind, propheſy, ſon of man. Ezekiel.
The elders of the Jews builded, and proſpered through the
propheſying of Haggai. • Eſra vi. 14.
PROPHET. n.ſ. [prophete, Fr. recºrns.]
1. One who tells future events; a predićter ; a foreteller.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Ev'ry flower
Did as a prophet weep what it foreſaw,
In Hečtor's wrath. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
Jeſters oft prove prophets.
Oprophet of glad tidings finiſher
Of utmoſt hope I Milton.
He lov’d ſo faſt,
As if he fear'd each day wou'd be her laſt;
Too true a prophet to foreſee the fate,
That ſhould ſo ſoon divide their happy ſtate. Dryden.
God, when he makes the prophet, does not unmake the
Shakeſp. King Lear.
man. Locke.
2. One of the ſacred writers empowered by God to foretell fu-
turity.
His champions are the prophets and apoſtles. Shakeſp.
Pro'PHETEss. n.ſ. [propheteſſe, Fr. from prophet.] A woman
that foretells future events.
He ſhall ſplit thy very heart with ſorrow,
And ſay poor Margret was a propheteſ. Shakeſp.
That it is conſonant to the word of God, ſo in ſinging to
anſwer, the practice of Miriam the propheteſ, when ſhe an-
ſwered the men in her ſong, will approve. Peacham.
If my love but once were crown'd
Fair propheteſ, my grief would ceaſe. Prior.
É...}aff. [prºhain, Fr. from prºha.]
1. Foreſeeing or foretelling future events.
- Say, wh
Upon this blaſted heath you Hop our way,
With ſuch prophetick greeting. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The counſel of a wiſe and then prophetical friend was for-
gotten. J/otton.
Some perfumes procure prophetical dreams. Bacon.
*Till old experience do attain
To ſomething like prophetick ſtrain. Milton.
Some famous prophetick pićtures repreſent the fate of Eng-
land by a mole, a creature blind and buſy, ſmooth and de-
ceitful, continually working under ground, but now and then
to be diſcerned in the ſurface. Stillingfleet.
No arguments made a ſtronger impreſſion on theſe Pagan
converts, than the predićtions relating to our Saviour in thoſe
old prophetick writings depoſited among the hands of the greateſt
enemies to chriſtianity, and owned by them to have been ex-
tant many ages before his appearance. Addiſon.
2. It has of before the thing foretold.
The more I know, the more my fears augment,
And fears are oft prophetick of th' event. Dryden.
PRoPHETICALLY. adv. [from prophetical.] With knowledge
of futurity; in manner of a prophecy.
He is ſo prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling, that
he raves in ſaying nothing. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
This great ſucceſs among Jews and Gentiles, part of it
hiſtorically true at the compiling of theſe articles, and part
of it prophetically true then, and fuſilled afterward, was a moſt
effectual argument to give authority to this faith. Hammond.
She figh'd, and thus prophetically ſpoke. Dryden.
To PRo'PHET1ze. v. n. [prophetiſer, Fr. from prophet.] To
give predićtions,
- Nature elſe hath conference -
With profound ſleep, and ſo doth warning ſend
By prophetizing dreams. Daniel's Civil War.
ProPHYLA’ctick ad; -
: : “... [769?vazºs, from reopuxarro.
Preventive; preſervative. &amp; 2 £9% l
Medicine is diſtributed int -
ſerving health; and th into prºphylattick, or the art of pre-
°rapeutick, or the art of reſtoring
p. . Watts's Logick.
ºf NQUITY, n.ſ. [propinquitas, Lat.] -
I. Nº. ; proximity; neighbourhood.
ey draw the retina nearer to the cr ſtalline h
by their relaxation ſuffer it to return . its "...º.
according to the exigency of the object, in reſpect of diſtance
or propinquity. Ray on th -
2. Nearneſs of time. y e Creation,
Thereby was declared the propinquity of their de
- ---- ſolations
and that their tranquillity was of no longer duration, than
thoſe ſoon decaying fruits of ſummer. Brown.
3. Kindred; nearneſs of blood.
Here I diſclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity, and property of blood,
And as a ſtranger to my heart and me
Hold thee. Shakeſp. King Lear.
PRoPITIABLE. adj [from propitiate.]. Such as may be in-
duced to favour ; ſuch as may be made propitious.
To PROPI(TIATE. v. a. [prºpilio, Lat.] To induce to
favour; to gain; to conciliate; to make propitious.
You, her prieſt, declare
What off rings may prºpitiate the fair,
Rich orient pearl, bright ſtones that ne'er deca '2
Qr poliſh'd lines which longer laſt than they. //aller.
They believe the affairs of human life to be managed by
certain ſpirits under him, whom they endeavour to propitiate
by certain rites. Stillingfleet.
Wengeance ſhall purſue the inhuman coaſt,
*Till they propitiate thy offended ghoſt. Dryden.
Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage,
The God propitiate, and the peſt aſſuage. Pope.
PRoPITIATION. m. ſ. [propiciation, Fr. from propitiate.]
1. The act of making propitious.
2. The attonement; the offering by which propitiouſneſs is
obtained.
He is the propitiation for the fins of the whole world. I %.
RRoPITIA'Tor. n.ſ.. [from propitiate.] One that propitiates.
PROPI'TIAtoRY. adj. Iprºpiciaioire, Fr. from propitiat..] Ha-
ving the power to make propitious.
Is not this more than giving God thanks for their virtues,
when a propitiatory ſacrifice is offered for their honour Stilling.
Pºlov. adj. [propitius, Lat. propice, Fr.] Favourable;
In(1.
T’aſſuage the force of this new flame,
And make thee more propitious in my need,
I mean to fing the praiſes of thy name. Spenſer.
Let not my words offend thee,
My maker, be propitious while I ſpeak | Milton.
fº God! propitious pow'r to Troy, -
Swift to relieve, unwilling to deſtroy. Dryden.
Would but thy ſiſter Marcia be propitious
To thy friend’s vows.
Ere Phoebus roſe, he had implor’d
Propitious heav'n. Pope's Rape of the Lock.
PRoPI'tiously. adv. [from propitious.] Favourably; kindly.
So when a muſe propitiouſly invites,
Improve her favours, and indulge her flights. Roſtommon.
PROP1"tioUSN ESS. m. ſ. [from propitious.] Favourableneſs;
kindneſs.
All theſe joined with the propitiouſneſ of climate to that
ſort of tree and the length of age it ſhall ſtand and grow,
may produce an oak. - Temple.
PROPLA's M. n.ſ. [763 and TA&amp;raz.] Mould; matrix.
Thoſe ſhells ſerving as proplaſms or moulds to the matter
which ſo filled them, limited and determined its dimenſions
and figure. //codward's Nat. Hiſł.
Addison's Cato.
PRoPLA'stice. m. ſ. ſtraorx2;ix}. The art of makin
§ ng
moulds for caſting.
PRopo'NENT. m. ſ. [from proponens, Lat..] One that makes a
propoſal.
For myſterious things of faith rely
On the proponent, heaven's authority. - Dryden.
PROPORTION. n.ſ. [proportion, Fr. proportio, Lat.]
1. Comparative relation of one thing to another; ratio. .
Let any man's wiſdom determine by leſſening the territory,
and increaſing the number of inhabitants, what proportion is
requiſite to the peopling of a region in ſuch a manner, that
the land ſhall be neither too narrow for thoſe whom it feedeth,
nor capable of a greater multitude. - Raleigh.
By proportion to theſe rules, we may judge of the obliga-
tion that lies upon all ſorts of injurious perſons. Taylor.
Things nigh equivalent and neighb'ring value
By lot are parted ; but high heav'n thy ſhare,
In equal balance weigh’d gainſt earth and hell, -
Flings up the adverſe ſcale, and ſhuns prºportion. Prior.
-&gt; 2. Settled<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">d
P R O
P R O
ſ
comparative quantity; equal º: ſ
iſible good does not always raiſe men's deſires,
- º . the intº it is acknowledged to have, though
º: *. trouble ſets us on work to get rid of it. - Locke.
“. muſt be little ſkilled in the world, who thinks that
men's talking much or little ſhall hold proportion only º:
knowledge. - - -
Several nations are recovered out of their ignorance, in
lion as they converſe more or leſs with thoſe of the re-
#. ...' Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
In proportion as this reſolution grew, the terrors before us
ſeemed to vaniſh. Tatler, N° 81.
3. Harmonick degree.
His volant touch -
Inſtina through all proportions, low and high, -
Fled, and purſu'd tranſverſe the reſonant fugue. Milton.
4. Symmetry; adaptation of one to another.
It muſt be mutual in proportion due -
Giv'n and receiv'd. - Milton.
Noman of the preſent age is equal in the ſtrength, prºpºr-
tion and knitting of his limbs to the Hercules of Farneſe.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The proportions are ſo well obſerved, that nothing appears
to an .. e, or diſtinguiſhes itſelf above the . Addison
#ºn. with ev'ry grace,
Plays in the fair proportions of her face-
5. Form; ſize. -
All things receiv'd, do ſuch proportion take,
As thoſe things have, wherein they are receiv'd ;
So little glaſſes little faces make, -
And narrow webs on narrow frames are weav'd. Davies.
To Proportion. v. a. [proportionner, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To adjuſt by comparative relation.
Meaſure is that which perfecteth all things, becauſe every
thing is for ſome end; neither can that thing be available to
any end, which is not proportionable thereunto: and to pro-
*. Settled relation of
Mrs. Carter.
portion as well exceſſes as defects, are oppoſite. Hooker.
Till body up to ſpirit work, in bounds
Proportion'd to each kind. Milton.
In the loſs of an obječt, we do not proportion our grief to
the real value it bears, but to the value our fancies ſet upon
it. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 256.
2. To form ſymmetrically. -
Nature had proportioned her without any fault, quickly to
be diſcovered by the ſenſes; yet altogether ſeemed not to make
up that harmony that Cupid delights in. Sidney.
Propo'RTIonable. adj. [from proportion.] Adjuſted by com-
parative relation ; ſuch as is fit.
His commandments are not grievous, becauſe he offers us
an affiſtance proportionable to the difficulty. Tillotſon.
It was enlivened with an hundred and twenty trumpets, aſ-
ſiſted with a proportionable number of other inſtruments. Addison
Propo'RTIon ABLY. adv. [from proportion.] According to
proportion; according to comparative relations.
The mind ought to examine all the grounds of probability,
and upon a due balancing the whole, reject or receive it pro-
portionably to the preponderancy of the greater grounds of
probability, on one ſide or the other. Locke.
The parts of a great thing are great, and there are propor-
tionably large eſtates in a large country. Arbuthnot.
Though religion be more eminently neceſſary to thoſe in
ſtations of authority, yet theſe qualities are proportionably con-
ducive to publick happineſs in every inferior relation. Rogers.
PR opo'Rtion AL. adj. [proportionel, Fr. from proportion.]
Having a ſettled comparative relation; having a certain de-
gree of any quality compared with ſomething elſe.
As likely taſting to attain
Proportional aſcent, which cannot be
But to be gods or angels. Milton’s Par. Loft.
Four numbers are ſaid to be proportional, when the firſt
containeth, or is contained by the ſecond, as often as the
third containeth, or is contained by the fourth. Cocker.
If light be ſwifter in bodies than in vacuo in the proportion
of the fines which meaſure the refraction of the bodies, the
forces of the bodies to refle&amp;t and refract light, are very nearly
proportional to the denſities of the ſame bodies. Newton.
Proportion ALITY.. n.ſ.. [from propertional.] The quality
of being proportional.
All ſenſe, as grateful, dependeth upon the equality or the
proportionality of the motion or impreſſion made. Grew.
Propo'RTIonally. adv. [from prºportional.] In a ſtated
degree.
If theſe circles, whilſt their centres keep their diſtances
and poſitions, could be made leſs in diameter, their interfer-
*ś9" with another, and by conſequence the mixture of the
is hºterogeneous rays would be prºportionally diminiſhed. Newt.
º: º adj. [from proportion.] Adjuſted to ſome-
". ſe, according to a certain rate or comparative relation.
Sonnection between the end and any means is ade-
º º between the end and means proportionate. Grew.
gave i. of º by an adequate connection of truths,
- 9&amp;cation to think of microſcopes and teleſcopes;
but the invention of burning glaſſes depended on a protor-
tionate; for that figure, which contračts the ſpecies of any
body, that is, the rays by which it is ſeen, will, in the ſame
proportion, contračt the heat where with the rays are ac-
companied. Grew's Coſmºl.
In the ſtate of nature, one man comes by no abſolute
power, to uſe a criminal according to the paſſion or heats of
his own will; but only to retribute to him, ſo far as con-
ſcience dićtates, what is proportionate to his tranſgreſſion. Locke.
To PRopo'RT 1 on At E. v. a. [from proportion.] To adjuſt,
according to ſettled rates, to ſomething elſe.
The paralleliſm and due proportionated inclination of the
axis of the earth. More's Divine Dialºgues.
Since every ſingle particle hath an innate gravitation toward
all others, proportionated by matter and diſtance, it evidently
appears, that the outward atoms of the chaos would neceſſa.
rily tend inwards, and deſcend from all quarters towards the
middle of the whole ſpace. Bentley's Sermons.
PR opo'R'rio NAT EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from proportionate.] The ſtate
of being by compariſon adjuſted.
By this congruity of thoſe faculties to their proper objeas,
and by the fitneſs and proportionateneſ of theſe objective im’
preſſions upon their reſpective faculties, accommodated to
their reception, the ſenſible nature hath ſo much of percep-
tion, as is neceſſary for its ſenſible being. Hale.
PRopo's Al. n.ſ.. [from propoſe.]
1. Scheme or deſign propounded to conſideration or acceptance.
If our propoſal; once again were heard,
We ſhould compel them to a quick reſult. Milton.
The work, you mention, will ſufficiently recommend it-
ſelf, when your name appears with the propoſals. Add to P2.
2. Offer to the mind.
Upon the propºſal of an agreeable objećt, a man's choice
will rather incline him to accept than refuſe it. South.
This truth is not likely to be entertained readily upon the
firſt propoſal. Atterbury.
To PROPOSE. v. a. [propoſer, Fr. prºpono, Lat..] To offer
to the conſideration.
Raphael to Adam's doubt propos'd,
Benevolent and facil thus reply'd. Milton.
My deſign is to treat only of thoſe, who have chiefly pro-
poſed to themſelves the latter as the principal reward of their
labours. Tatler, N° 81.
In learning any thing, there ſhould be as little as poſſible
firſt propoſed to the mind at once, and that being underſtood,
proceed then to the next adjoining part. JWatts.
To Propo's E. v. n. To lay ſchemes. Not in uſe.
Run thee into the parlour,
There ſhalt thou find my couſin Beatrice,
Propoſing with the prince and Claudio. Shakeſp.
Propo's ER. m. ſ. [from propoſe..] One that offers anything to
conſideration.
Faith is the aſſent to any propoſition, not made out by the
deductions of reaſon, but upon the credit of the propºſer, as
coming from God. Locke.
He provided a ſtatute, that whoever propoſed any altera-
tion to be made, ſhould do it with a rope about his neck; if
the matter propoſed were generally approved, then it ſhould
'paſs into a law; if it went in the negative, the propºſer to
be immediately hanged. - Swift.
PR oposition. n.ſ. [propoſition, Fr. propºſitio, Lat.]
1. A ſentence in which any thing is affirmed or decreed. . .
Chryſippus, labouring how to reconcile theſe two prºpoſitionſ,
that all things are done by fate, and yet that ſomething is in
our own power, cannot extricate himſelf. Hammond.
The compounding of the repreſentation of things, with ºn
affirmation or negation, makes a prºpºſition.
2. Propoſal; offer of terms. -
The enemy ſent proroſitions, ſuch as upon delivery of a
ſtrong fortified town, after a handſome defence, are uſually
granted. Clarendon.
Proposition AL. adj. [from propoſition.] Conſidered as a
propoſition. - - -
If it has a fingular ſubject in its propoſitional ſºnſe, it is al-
ways ranked with univerſals. I?'atts's Logick.
To PROPOU'ND. v. a. ſ.ropono, Lat.]
1. To offer to conſideration; to propoſe.
The parli’ment, which now is held, decreed -
Whatever pleas'd the king but to propound. . . . Daniel.
To leave as little as I may unto fancy, which is wºn"
irregular, I will propound a rule. Wºtton.
Dar'ſt thou to the ſon of God propound -
To worſhip thee. Milton.
The greateſt ſtranger muſt prºpound the argument. Mºre.
The arguments, which chriſtianity prºpounds to us, * rea-
ſonable encouragements to bear ſufferings patiently. Tillotſºn,
2. To offer; to exhibit.
A ſpirit rais'd from depth of under-ground,
That ſhall make anſwer to ſuch queſtions,
As by your grace ſhall be propounded him.
PRopou'NDER. m. ſ. [from propound.] He that propounds;
that offers ; propoſer.
Shakeſp.
ht
PROPRI'ETARY,
Hale.
T
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P. R. O
i
ſ:
º,
º:
PropRi'FTARY. H. ſ. ſprºpriataire, Fr. from prºpriety..] Poſ-
ſeſſor in his own right.
'Tis a great miſtake to think ourſelves ſtewards in ſome of
God's gifts, and froprietaries in others: they are all equally
to be employed, according to the deſignation of the donor.
- Government of the 7 ngue.
PR, PR "ETARY. adj. Belonging to a certain owner.
Though ſheep, which are prºprietary, are ſeldom marked,
yet they are not apt to ſtraggle. Grew's Coſmol.
PR, PRI eroR. m. ſ. [from proprius, Lat.] A poſſeſſor in his
own right.
Man, by being maſter of himſelf, and proprietºr of his own
perſon, and the actions or labour of it, had ſtill in himſelf
the great ſoundation of property. Locke.
Though they are ſcattered on the wings of the morning,
and remain in the uttermoſt parts of the ſea, even there ſhall
his right hand fetch them out, and lead them home to their
ancient frtrictor. Rºgers.
Propriºr Rºss. n.ſ. [from fºr prietºr.] A female poſſeſſor
in her own right; a miſtreſs.
A big bellied bitch borrowed another bitch's kennel to lay
her burthen in ; the propriet eſs demanded poſſeſſion, but the
other bºgged her excuſe. L’Eſtrange.
PROPR1E Y. m. ſ. [profrict, Fr. prºprietas, Lat.]
1. Pecularity of poſſeſſion ; excluſive right.
You that have promis’d to yourſelves prºpriety in love,
Know womens hearts like ſtraws do move. Suckling.
Benefit of peace, and vacation for piety, render it neceſ-
ſary by laws to ſecure propriety. Hammond.
Hail wedded love myſterious law, true ſource
Of human off pring, ſole prºpriety
In Paradiſe! of all things common elſe. Milton.
They ſecure propriety and peace. Dryden.
To that we owe not only the ſafety of our perſons and the
propriety of our poſſeſſions, but our improvement in the ſeve-
ral arts. Atterbury.
2. Accuracy; juſtneſs.
Common uſe, that is the rule of prºpriety, affords ſome
aid to ſettle the ſignification of language. Locke.
PR opt, for propped. [from prºp.] Suſtained by ſome prop.
See in her cell ſad Eloíſa ſpread,
Prºft in ſome tomb, a neighbour of the dead. Pope.
To PROPUGN. v. a. [propugno, Lat.] To defend ; to
vindicate.
Thankfulneſs is our meet tribute to thoſe ſacred champions
for frºfugning of our faith. Hammond.
PR opug NATION. m. ſ. [profºgnatio, from propugno, Latin.]
Defence.
What profugnation is in one man's valour,
To ſtand the puſh and enmity of thoſe
This quarrel would excite Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºffda.
PROPU'GNER. m. ſ. [from prºfºugh..] A defender.
So zealous propugners are they of their native creed, that
they are importunately diligent to inſtruct men in it, and in
all the little ſophiſtries for defending it. G. v. of the Tongue.
PROpu LSION. m. ſ. [fºr pujas, Lat..] The act of driving for-
ward. -
Joy worketh by prºpºſ n of the moiſture of the brain,
when the ſpirits dilate and occupy more room. Bacon.
The evaneſcent ſolid and fluid will ſcarce differ, and the ex-
tremities of thoſe ſmall canals will by prºpºlº n be carried off
with the fluid continually. Arbuthnot cn Aliments.
ProRE. m. ſ. ſtrona, Lat. The prow ; the forepart of the
ſhip. A poetical word uſed for a rhyme.
There no veſſel, with vermilion ºrºre,
Or bark of traffick, glides from ſhore to ſhore. Pºpe.
PRoRog A'rio N. m. ſ. [p, orogatio, from prorogo, Lat. fronoga-
tion, Fr.] f -
1. Continuance; ſtate of lengthening out to a diſtant time;
prolongation.
The fulneſs and effluence of man's enjoyments in the ſtate
of innocence, might ſeem to leave no place for hope, in re-
ſpect of any farther addition, but only of the pror gation and
future continuance of what already he poſſeſſed. South.
2. Interruption of the ſeſſion of parliament by the regal autho-
rity.
It would ſeem extraordinary, if an inferior court ſhould
take a matter out of the hands of the high court of parlia-
ment, during a prorºgatin. - Swift.
To PRoRo"GUE. v. a. [prorogo, Lat. proroger, Fr.]
1. To protract ; to prolong.
He ºr r gued his government, ſtill threatning to diſmiſs
himſelf from publick cares. Dryden.
2. To put off; to delay.
My life were better ended by their hate, .
Thai death prorºgued, wanting of thy love. Shakespeare .
3. To interrupt the ſeſſion of parliament to a diſtant time.
By the king's authority alone, they are aſſembled, and by
him alone are they prorogued and diſſolved, but each houſe
may adjourn itſelf. Bacon.
ProRu'pilox. m. ſ. ſtrºrºptºs, from fºrumº, Lat. J The act
of burſting out.
Others ground this diſruption upon their continued or pro-
tracted time of delivery, whereat, excluding but one a day,
the latter brood impatient by a forcible proruption anticipates
, their period of excluſion. Brown's Pulgar Err urs.
Pºſick ad. [prºſaique, Fr. prºſaicus, from irºſ, Lat.j
Bºlonging to proſe; reſembling proſe.
To PROSCRIBE. v. a. [prºjiri, Lat.]
1. To cenſure capitally ; to doom to deſtruction.
p Robert ` º º º the malice of the
peers, Was banlihed the realm, and proſºr;
tº ºria Spenſer.
Thy murder of thy brother, being ſo brib'd,
And writ him in the liſt of my prºſcrib'd
After thy fact. Benj. Jºhnſºn.
Follow'd and pointed at by fools and boys,
But dreaded and proſcrib'd by men of ſenſe. Roſcºmmon.
Some utterly profºibe the name of chance, as a word of
impious and profane ſignification; and indeed if taken by us
in that ſenſe, in which it was uſed by the heathen, ſo as to
make any thing caſual, in reſpect of God himſelf, their ex-
ception ought juſtly to be admitted. South's Sermons.
2. To interdict. Not in uſe.
- He ſhall be found,
, And taken or proſcrib'd this happy ground. Dryden.
Proscri'BER. m. ſ. [from prºſcribe..] One that dooms to de-
ſtruction.
The triumvir and proſcriber had deſcended to us in a more
hideous form, if the emperor had not taken care to make
friends of Virgil and Horace. Dryden.
PROscR1 Ption. m. ſ. [proſcriptio, Lat..] Doom to death or
confiſcation. -
You took his voice who ſhould be prickt to die,
In our black ſentence and priſºription. Shakeſp.
Sylla's old troops
Are needy and poor ; and have but left t” expcćt
From Catiline new bills and new prºſcriptions. B.J. hnſ.
For the title of priſcriptiºn or forfeiture, the emperor hath
been judge and party, and juſticed himſelf. Bacon.
PRose. n.ſ. [prºſe, Fr. proſa, Lat.] Language not reſtrained
to harmonick founds or ſet number of ſyllables; diſcourſe
not metrical.
. Things unattempted yet in proſe or rhime. Milton.
The reformation of proſe was owing to Boccace, who is
the ſtandard of purity in the Italian tongue, though many
of his phraſes are become obſolete. Dryden.
A poet lets you into the knowledge of a device better than
a proſe writer, as his deſcriptions are often more diffuſe. Addison
Proſe men alone for private ends,
I thought, forſook their ancient friends. Prior.
I will be ſtill your friend in prºſe :
Eſteem and friendſhip to expreſs,
Will not require poetick dreſs. Swift.
My head and heart thus flowing through my quill,
Verſé man and proſe man, term me which you will. Ppe.
To PROSECUTE. v. a. proſequor, proſecutus, Lat.]
1. To perſue ; to continue endeavours after any thing.
I am below'd of beauteous Hermia,
Why ſhould not I then prºſecute my right? Shakespeare
I muſt not omit a father's timely care,
To proſecute the means of thy deliverance -
By ranſom. - Milton's Agoniſłes.
He proſecuted this purpoſe with ſtrength of argument and
cloſe reaſoning, without incoherent fallies. Lºcke.
2. To continue ; to carry on.
The ſame reaſons, which induced you to entertain this
war, will induce you alſo to proſecute the ſame. Hayward.
All reſolute to proſecute their ire, -
Seeking their own and country's cauſe to free. Daniel.
He infeſted Oxford, which gave them the more reaſon to
proſecute the fortifications, Clarendon.
With louder cries
She proſecutes her griefs, and thus replies. Dryden.
3. To proceed in conſideration or diſquiſition of any thing.
It were an infinite labour to proſecute thoſe things, ſo far as
they might be exemplified in religious "; º ſº I
22ker, b. IV. J. I.
4. To perſue by law; to ſue criminally. -
5. To proſecute differs from to perſecute: to perſcute always im-
plies ſome cruelty, malignity or injuſtice ; tº prºſº, is to
proceed by legal meaſures, either with or without juſt cauſe.
Pros cu Tios. m. ſ. [from prºſecute.]
I. Perſuit; endeavour to carry on.
Many offer at the ãº, of friendſhip, but they do not
laſt; they are promiſing in the beginning, but they fail,
jade, and tire in the prjecutiºn. - South.
Their jealouſy of the Britiſh power, as well as their prºſe.
cutions of commerce and purſuits of univerſal monarchy, will
fix them in their averſions towards us: Addison.
2. Suit againſt a man in a criminal cauſe. -
Frosecurer. n. /.. [Iron prºſecute.] One that carries on any
thing; a perfüer of any purpoſe ; one who perſues another
by law in a criminal cauſe: º
29 Q- - PRos ELY TE.
*
i
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
Pro's Ely TE. m. ſ. [+º, -ºxº~ ; tryº, Fr. J A convert;
one brought over tº a new, "Pºº".
He that ſaw heli in smelancholy dream,
Scard from his fins, repented in a ſight,
Had he view’d Scotland, had turn'd prºte. Carºland.
Men become profeſſors, and combatants for thoſe oppº
they were never convinced of, nor ºr ſº to. Locke.
Where'er you tread,
Millions of prºſºlytes behind are led,
Through crowds of new-made converts ſtill you go. Grant.
What numbers of proſºytes may we not expect. Alliºn.
To PRU's El YTE. v. a. To convert. A bad word.
Men of this temper cut themſelves off from the opportu-
nities of prºſºting others, by averting them from their com-
pany. Gºrºnt ºf the Tºngue.
Prosfy: INA'TION. m. ſ. [prºſemino, prºminatus, Lat.J Pro-
pagation by ſced.
Touching the impoſſibility of the eternal ſucceſſion of men,
animals or vegetables by natural propagation or prºſºminatiºn,
the reaſons thereof ſhall be delivered. Hale.
PRoso DIAN. m. / [from prºſºdy..] One ſkilled in metre or
proſody.
Some have been ſo bad prºſºdians, as from thence to derive
malum, becauſe that fruit was the firſt occaſion of evil. Brºwn.
PROSODY. m. ſ. [prºſºdic, Fr. 7:2723,2..] The part of
grammar which teaches the ſound and quantity of ſyllables,
and the meaſures of verſe.
PRosoropoe'1A. m. ſ. [76-747272/2 ; proſº ofte, Fr.) Per-
ſonification ; figure by which things are made perſons.
Theſe reaſons are pathetically urged, and admirably raiſed
by the prºſpºſaia of nature ſpeaking to her children. Dryden.
PROSPECT. m. ſ. [proſpecius, Lat.j
1. Vicw of ſomething diſtant.
Eden and all the coaſt in prºffed lay. Al Miltºn.
The Jews being under the ceconomy of immediate re, cla-
tion, might be ſuppoſed to have had a ficer prºſpect into that
heaven, whence their law deſcended. Decay of Piety.
It is better to marry than to burn, ſays St. Paul; a little
burning felt puſhes us more powerfully, than greater pleaſures
in proſpec: allure. Locke.
2. Place which affords an extended view.
Him God beholding from his proffeº high,
Wherein paſt, preſent, future he beholds,
Thus ſpake. 41ſton's Par. Lºº, b. iii.
3. Series of objects open to the eye.
There is a very noble prºſpe: from this place: on the one
ſide lies a vaſt extent of ſeas, that runs abroad further than the
eye can reach : juſt oppoſite ſtands the green promontory of
Surrentum, and on the other ſide the whºle circuit of the bay
of Naples. Addiſon.
4. Object of view.
Man to himſelf
Is a large prºſecſ, rais'd above the level
Of his low creeping thoughts. Denham.
Preſent, ſad prºſe: / can he ought deſcry,
But what affects his melancholy eye; w
The beauties of the ancient fabričkioſk
In chains of craggy hills, or lengths of dreary coaſt. Prior.
5. View into futurity: oppoſed to retroſpect.
To be king,
Stands not within the prºſpeci of belief,
No more than to be Cawdor. Shakeſø. Macbeth.
To him, who hath a prºſpeci of the different ſtate of per-
feót happineſs 9 mitºry, that attends all men after this life,
the meaſures of good and evil are mightily changed. Locke.
- If there be no prºſpect beyond the grave, the inference is
right; let "... ººt and drink, for to-morrow we ſhall die. Locke.
IB º lº his gratitude maintain'd,
Y "Yours pait, not future proſpeci, wain' -
6. Regard to ſomething future. Prºſpecis gain'd. Smith.
!s he a prudent man, as to his temporal eſtate, that lays
deſigns only for a day, without any prºſpect to, or proviſión
for the remaining part of his life. 2. Tillºtſºn.
ſo Prospect. v. a. [prºſcºws, Lat J To look forward. Didi.
PROSPE crive. adj. [froń prºſpect.]
1. Viewing at a diſtance.
2. Acting with forefight.
The French king and king of Sweden are circumſpect, in-
duſtrious and */fective too in this affai * * *
To PROSPER. º. a. ſ.r.º. T. Child.
favour. * [Prºffer, Lat..] To make happy; to
* Kind gods, forgive
\le that, and ºf hi r --
Añº, prºper him. . Shakespeare King Lear.
Al ! things concur to prºſper our deſign;
ºn "… to things to Prºſper any love but mine
Fo Ro's PE - - -
I. To be "...º. n. Iſrººrer, Fr.]
ſy Jº ; to be ſucceſsful.
pleaſe º return void, but accompliſh that which
- imº º hall prºſer in the thing whereto I ſent it. I/.
Pºred with him º º little and little, and thing proſ-
* '''“ and more. 1.7. ..:::
C Surer to * ºffer, than proſperit 2 44ac, viii. 8.
ould have aſſuri us. perity • ?
7 2l/iltºn.
Dryden.
2. To thrive; to come forward.
All things do prºſper beſt, when they are advanced to the
better; a nurſery of ſtocks ought to be in a more barra
ground, than that whereunto you remove them. Bacon.
The plants, which he had ſet, did thrive and prºſer. Cºw e.
She viſits how they prºſper’d, bud, and bloon. 4/lº.
Prospe R1TY. m. ſ. [proſperiº, Lat, prºjerit, Fr. Succeſs;
attainment of wiſhes; good fortune.
Prſterity, in regard of our corrupt inclination to abuſ, the
bleſlings of Almighty God, doth prove a thing dangerous to
the ſouls of mem. flººr, b. v. 1. 48.
God's juſtice reaps that glory in our calamities, which we
robbed him of in our prºſperity. King Charles.
PRO's PERovs. adj. [proſperus, Lat. Succeſsful; fortunate.
Your good advice, which ſtill hath been both grave
And frº/her us. Shaky?...]/acºth.
Either ſtate to bear proſperºus or adverſe. 4/ilian.
May he find
A happy paſſage, and a prºft’rous wind. Denham.
PRo's PE Rously. adv. [from Pºrºus.] Succeſsfully; for-
tunately.
Prºſperºuſly I have attempted, and
With bloody paſſage led your wars, even to
The gates of Rome. Shakespeare. Criºlanºs.
In 1596, was the ſecond invaſion upon the main territories
of Spain, proſperetſ) atchieved by Robert earl of Eſſex, in
confort with the earl of Nottingham. Bacon.
Thoſe, who are prºſperouſly unjuſt, are intitled to panegy-
rick, but afflicted virtue is ſtabbed with reproaches. Dº.
PRO's PERouss Ess. n.ſ. (from prºſperºus. Proſperity.
PRosP1 cle Nc E. m. ſ. [from prºſpiciº, Lat.] The act of look-
ing forward.
Prost ERNATION. m. ſ. [from prºffernº, Lat.] Dejcótion;
depreſion ; ſtate of being caſt down; act of caſting down.
A word not to be adopted.
Pain interrupts the cure of ulcers, whence are flirred up a
feyer, watching, and prºſiernatin of ſpirits. // iſºman,
Prost FTH s. n.ſ. [7;ººls. In ſurgery, that which fills up
- Nº. is wanting, as when fiſtulous ulcers are filed up with
eſh. Dić.
To PROSTITUTE. v. a. ſprºtus, Lat. prºlºr, Fr.]
1. To ſell to wickedneſs; to expoſe to crimes for a reward. It
is commonly uſed of women ſold to whoredom by others or
themſelves.
Do not prºſtitute thy daughter, to cauſe her to be a whore.
- - - Lev. xix. 29.
Marrying or proſtituting,
Rape or adultery. Aſ ſton's Par. Lºft, b. xi.
Who ſhall prevail with them to do that themſelves which
they beg of God, to ſpare his people and his heritage, to
prºſłitute them no more to their own finiſter deſigns. D. of Pie.
Affections, conſecrated to children, huſbands, and parents,
are vilely proſtituted and thrown away upon a hand at loo. Addison
2. To expoſe upon vile terms.
It were unfit, that ſo excellent and glorious a reward, as
the goſpel promiſes, ſhould ſtoop down like fruit upon a full
laden bough, to be plucked by every idle and wanton hand,
that heaven ſhould be prºſtituted to ſlothful men. Tilltºn.
PRostitut E. ad. [proſtitutus, Lat..] Vicious for hire; ſold
to infamy or wickedneſs; ſold to whoredom.
Their common loves, a lewd abandon'd pack,
By ſloth corrupted, by diſorder fed, -
Made bold by want, and prºfitute for bread. Prizr.
PRO's TITUTE. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
I. A hireling; a mercenary ; one who is ſet to falc.
At open fulfome bawdry they rejoice, r
Baſe prºſtitute / thus doſt thou gain thy bread. Dryden.
No hireling ſhe, no profti, ute to praiſe. Pope.
2. [Pro/libula, Lat..] A publick ſtrumpet.
rom every point they come,
Then dread no dearth of prºſtitutes at Rome. ... Dryden.
PRostitution. n.ſ. [prºſtitution, Fr. from prºftitute.]
1. The act of ſetting to ſale; the ſtate of being ſet to ſale.
2. The life of a publick ſtrumpet. -
An infamous woman, having paſſed her youth in a moſt
ſhameleſs ſtate of prºſtitution, now gains her livelihoºd by ſe-
ducing others. Addiſon's Speciator.
PROSTRATE. adj. [prºſłratus, Lat. The accent was for-
merly on the firſt ſyllable.]
ing at length.
I. Lying Once I ſaw with dread oppreſſed
Her whom I dread; ſo that with prºſº ate lying, -
Her length the earth in love's chief cloathing dreſſed. Sidn.
He heard the weſtern lords would undermine
His city's wall, and lay his tow'rs prºſºrate. Fairfax.
Before fair Britomart ſhe fell prºſtrate. Spºnſºr.
Groveling and pryirate on yon lake of fire. A ſilton.
2. Lying at mercy. * *
y Look gracious on thy proft ate thrall. Shakespeare.
3. Thrown down in humb|cit adoration. !-2 r" h
The warning ſound was no ſooner heard, but the churc º
were filled, the pavements covered with to dies ºr Jira*, *
waſhed with tears of devout joy. Ho º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
wº-
Let us to the place
Repairing where he judg’d us, prºſtrate fall
Before huin reverent ; and there confeſs
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg. Milton.
While proſtrate here in humble grief Ilie,
Kind virtuous drops juſt gath'ring in my eye. Pope.
To PRO's TRATE. v. a. [frº/iratus, Lat.]
1. To lay flat; to throw down.
In the ſtreets many they ſlew, and fired divers places, pro-
ſirating two pariſhes almoſt entirely. Hayward.
A ſtorm that all things doth proſłrate,
Finding a tree alone all comfortleſs,
Beats on it ſtrongly, it to ruinate. Spenſºr.
Stake and bind up your weakeſt plants againſt the winds,
before they come too fiercely, and in a moment proſtrate a
whole year's labour. Evelyn's Kalendar.
The drops falling thicker, faſter, and with greater force,
beating down the fruit from the trees, pryirating and la ing
corn growing in the fickls. J/oodward's Nat. }
2. [Se prºſterner, Fr.] To throw down in adoration.
Some have prº/frated themſelves an hundred times in the
day, and as often in the night. J'uppa.
PRošTRATION. m. ſ. [prºſternation, Fr. from prºſºrate.]
1. The act of falling down in adoration.
Nor is only a reſolved frº/?ration unto antiquity, a power-
ful enemy unto knowledge, but any confident adherence unto
authority. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
The worſhip of the Gods had been kept up in temples,
with altars, images, ſacrifices, hymns and priſłrations. Stilling.
The truths, they had ſubſcribed to in ſpeculation, they
reverſed by a brutiſh ſenſeleſs devotion, managed with a
greater prjºration of reaſon than of body. South's Sermºns.
2. Dejection ; depreſſion.
A ſudden proſtration of ſtrength or weakneſs attends this
colick.
PRosty'L E. m. ſ. [prºſtyle, Fr. FºuxGP.] A building that has
only pillars in the front. Die?.
PRosy'lloG is M. m. ſ. [pro and ſyllºgiſin.]
A prºſyllogiſm is when two or more ſyllogiſms are ſo con-
neéted together, that the concluſion of the former is the
major or the minor of the following, //atts.
PROTA'sis. n.ſ. [protºſ?, Fr. 7:27.241;..]
1. A maxim or propoſition.
2. In the ancient drama, the firſt part of a comedy or tragedy
that explains the argument of the piece. 12 icſ,
PRota tick. m. ſ. [protatique, Fr. 7:2727-23:..]
There are protatick perſons in the ancients, whom they uſe
in their plays to hear or give the relation. Dryden.
To PROTECT. v. a. [protećius, Lat. proteger, Fr. J. To
defend ; to cover from evil; to ſhield.
The king
Had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.
Leave not the faithful ſide,
That gave thee being, ſtill ſhades thee and proteſts. Milt.
Fuli in the midſt of his own ſtrength he ſtands,
Stretching his brawny arms and leafy hands,
His ſhade proteºis the plains. Dryden's Wirgil.
Prot Eſcºrio N. m. ſ. [prºtection, Fr. from prºteć7.]
1. Defence; ſhelter from evil. -
Drive tow’rd Dover, friend, where thou ſhalt meet
Both welcome and ºr te:ion. Shakeſp. King Lear.
If the weak, might find protectiºn from the mighty, they
could not with juſtice ament their condition. Swift.
2. A paſſport; exemption from being moleſted : as, he had a
protection during the rºcłion.
PRoy Eſcrive. adj. [from prote: J Defenſive; ſheltering.
The ſtately ſailing ſwan guards his ofier iſle,
Prote ºve of his young.
Prote/croR. m. ſ. [protecieur, Fr. from prºteći.]
1. Defender; ſhelterer ; ſupporter; one who ſhields from evil
or oppreſſion ; guardian.
Hither th' oppreſſed ſhall henceforth reſort,
Juſtice to crave, and ſuccour at your court ;
And then your highneſs, not for our's alone,
But for the world’s protºor ſhall be known. J/aller.
The king of Spain, who is prºtector of the commonwealth,
received information from the great duke. Addiſon.
2. An officer who had heretofore the care of the kingdom in
the king's minority.
Is it concluded, he ſhall be protećior * -
—It is determin'd, not concluded yet. Shakeſp.
PROTE'cTREss. n.ſ. [protectrice, Fr. from protector.] A wo-
man that protects.
All things ſhould be guided by her direction, as the ſove-
Shakespeare
Thomſºn.
reign patroneſs and protectrºſs of the enterprize. Bacon.
Behold thoſe arts with a propitious eye,
That ſuppliant to their great protectreſs fly. Addison.
To PROTEN D. v. a. prztendo, Lat.] To hold out; to ſtretch
forth.
All ſtood with their proteºided ſpears prepard. Dryden.
With his protonded lance he makes defence. Drydºn.
PROTE R v Irx. m. ſ. Uprotervitas, Latin.) Peewiſhneſs; petu-
lance,
Arbuthn t.
To PROTEST. r. n. ſtratºr, Lat. frotºſ”, Fr.] To give
a ſolemn declaration of opinion or reſolution. -
Here's the twin brother of thy letter; but let thine inherit
firſt, for, I protºſi, mine never ſhall. Shakep.
I'he Peaking cornuto comes in the inſtant, after we had
prºteſted and ſpoke the prologue of our comedy. Shakeſp.
I have long lov'd her; and I protºſ to you, beflowed much
on her; followed her with a doating obſervance. Shakeſp.
Hº ** againſt your votes, and ſwears
He'll not be try’d by any but his peers. Denham.
The conſcience has power to diſapprove and to proteſt
againſt the exorbitances of the paſſions. South.
To PROTE's T. v. a.
1. To prove; to ſhow ; to give evidence of Not uſed.
Many unfought youths, that even now
Prºteſ their firſt of manhood.
2. To call as a witneſs.
Fiercely they oppos'd
My journey ſtrange, with clamorous uproar,
Prote/ling fate ſupreme. Miltºn.
PROTE's r. m. / (from the verb.] A ſolemn declaration of
opinion againſt ſomething.
PROT stast. adj. [from protº/?..] Belonging to proteſtants.
Since the ſpreading of the proteſtant religion, ſeveral nations
. . are recovered out of their ignorance. Addiſon.
PR8 TESTANT. n. ſ. [prote/ºnt, Fr. from proteſ?..] One of
thoſe who adhere to them, who, at the beginning of the re-
formation, proteſted againſt the errours of the church of Rome.
This is the firſt example of any proteſtant ſubjects, that have
taken up arms againſt their king a protº/lant. K. Charles.
ProTESTA rios. m. ſ. [protºſlation, Fr. from protºſ?..] A ſo-
lemn declaration of reſolution, fact or opinion.
He maketh protº/iati n to them of Corinth, that the goſpel
did not by other means prevail with them, than with others
the ſame goſpel taught by the reſt of the apoſtles. Hºoker.
But to your protº/lation; let me hear -
What you profeſs. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
If the lords of the council iſſued out any order againſt
them, ſome nobleman publiſhed a proteſtation againſt it. Claren.
I ſmiled at the ſolemn prote atiºn of the poet in the firſt
page, that he believes neither in the fates or deſtinies. Aldſ.
PROTE STER. m. ſ. [from p oty?...] One who proteſts; one who
utters a ſolemn declaration.
Did I uſe
To ſtale with ordinary oaths my love -
To every new prote/ſer Shakespeare . julius Cæſar.
What if he were one of the lateſt proteſters againſt popcry?
and but one among many, that ſet about the ſame work Att.
PROTHO'NOTARY. m. ſ. [pronºtaire, Fr. protonotarius,
Lat..] The head regiſter.
Saligniacus, the pope's prºtºn-tary, denies the Nubians
profeſſing of obedience to the biſhop of Rome. Brerewood.
PROTHoNo TARISHIP. n.ſ.. [from proth-notary..] The office or
dignity of the principal regiſter.
He had the frth-notariſhip of the chancery. Carew.
Pºo"rocol. n. ſ. ſºr tººl, Dutch ; protºcole, Fr. re."ozoxxon,
from reºrge and zoxx...] The original copy of any writing.
An original is ſtiled the protocol, or ſcriptura matrix; and
if the protocºl, which is the root and foundation of the inſtru-
ment, does not appear, the inſtrument is not valid. Áliff.
PRotoMA RTY R. m. ſ. Izºzº and ºv;..] The firſt martyr.
A term applied to St. Stephen.
Pro Top LAs r. m. ſ. [Tºr 32 and T &amp;rº.] Original; thing
firſt formed as a copy to be followed afterwards.
The conſumption was the primitive diſeaſe, which put a
period to our protºplaſ's, Adam and Eve. Harvey.
Prototype. n.ſ. protºtype, Fr. Mºrorvitov.] The original
of a copy; exemplar ; archetype.
Man is the prototype of all exact ſymmetry. J%tion.
The image and prototype were two diſtinét things; and
therefore what belonged to the exemplar could not be attri-
buted to the image. Stillingſleet.
To PROTRACT. v. a. ſprotadas, Lat..] To draw out;
to delay; to lengthen ; to ſpin to length.
Shakeſp. A ſacle!).
Where can they get vićtuals to ſupport ſuch a multitude,
if we do but protra: the war. Anolics.
He ſhrives this woman to her ſmock ;
Elſe ne'er could he ſo long protra: his ſpeech. Shaº ſº.
PRot RAct. n.ſ. [from the verb.] Tedious continuance.
Since I did leave the preſence of my love,
Many long weary days I have out-woº,
And many nights, that ſlowly ſeem d to move
Their ſad protract from evening until morn.
ProtRA cºr ER. m. ſ. [from protrºl
1. One who draws out any thing to tedious i. -
2. A mathematical inſtrument for taking and meaſuring angles.
psors Acros. a. ſ. [from prºtract. The act of drawing to
length.
Spe'ſ r.
Thoſe delays
And long prºtra: n, which he muſt endure,
Betrays the opportunity. . - -
As to the fabulous prºtºaº, ns of the age of the world by
the Egyptians, they are uncertain idle traditiºns, Hale.
~. PR or RA'cTIVE.
Daniel.
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P &amp; O,
P R O
Prot R.A. rive. a j. [ſtom prº-J Dilatory; delaying;
ſpinning to length.
Our works are nought elſe
But the protractive try's of great Jove,
To find perſitive conſtancy in men. Shakesp.
He uſic: 'd their frotra, lºve arts,
And ſtrove by mildneſs to reduce their hearts. Dryden.
PROTRE Prica L. adj. [rºs.) Hortatory; filaſory.
The means uſed are partly didactical and prºtreptical; de-
monſtrating the truths of the goſpel, and then urging the pro-
feſſors to be ited faſt in the faith, and beware of infidelity.
//ard on Jaffaelity.
To PR tº tº DF. v. a. ſprotrud, Lat.] To thruſt forward.
When the ſtomach has performed its office upon the food,
it prºtrude, it into the guts, by whoſe periſtaltick motion it is
gently conveyed along. Locke.
They were not left, upon the ſea’s being frºtruded forwards,
and conſtrained to fall off from certain coaſts by the mud or
earth, which is diſcharged into it by rivers. // ozdward.
By ſlow degrees,
High as the hills frotrud, the ſwelling vales. Thomſºn.
His left arm extended, and fore finger; rºtruded. Garlick.
To PR TRU'p v. n. To thºut itſelf forward.
If the ſpirits be nºt merely detain'd, but prºtrude a little,
and that motion be confu.ed, there followeth putrefaction.
Bacon's Nºt. Hº.
PROTRU's to N. m. ſ. [prºtruſts, Lat..] The act of thruſting
forward ; thruſt; puſh.
To conceive this in bodies inflexible, and without all prºtru.
Jºn of parts, were to expect a race from Hercuſes his
pillars. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
One can have the idea of one body moved, whilſt others
are at reſt; then the place, it deſerted, gives us the idea of
pure ſpace without ſolidity, whereinto another body may enter,
without either reſiſtance or protruſiºn of anything. Locke.
PRQ1 U'BERANCE. m. ſ. [protubero, Lat.] Something ſwelling
above the reſt; prominence; tumour.
If the world were eternal, by the continual fall and wear-
ing of waters, all the protuberanies of the earth would infinite
ages ſince have been levelled, and the ſuperficies of the earth
rendered plain. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Mountains ſeem but ſo many wens and unnatural protube-
rances upon the face of the earth. Mºre.
I’s TU BERANT, a j. [from protuberate.] Swelling; promi-
Ilent.
One man's eyes are more protuberant and ſwelling out,
another's more ſunk and depreſſèd. Glanvil’s Sceſ.
Though the eye ſeems round, in reality the iris is protube-
rant above the white, elſe the eye could not have admitted a
whole hemiſphere at one view. Ray.
To PROTUBERATE. v. n. [protºr, Lat.] To ſwell for-
ward; to ſwell out beyond the parts adjacent.
If the navel protuberates, make a ſmall punéture with a
lancet through the ſkin, and the waters will be voided with-
ºy danger of a hernia ſucceeding. Sharp's Surgery.
PROUI). adj. ſpnube or pnur, Saxon J
1. Too much pleaſed with himſelf.
The raidſt admirer of his own parts might find it uſeful
tº conſult with others, though of inférior capacity. J/airs.
2. Elated; valuing himſelf. With ºf before the object.
Fortune, that with malicious joy,
Does man her ſlave oppreſs,
Prºud of her office to deſtroy,
Jsſeldom pleas'd to bleſs. Dryden's Hºrace.
. In vain ºf pompous chaſtīty you're proud,
V ſtue's adultery of the tongue, when loud.
High as the mother of the gods in place,
And proud, like her, ºf an immortal race. Dryden.
3. Arrogant ; haughty; impatient.
The patient in ſpirit is better than the proud in ſpirit. Eachſ.
A foe ſo Prºud will not the weaker ſeek. AZiltºn.
4. Daring ; preſumptuous.
By his underſtanding he ſmiteth through the proud. jºb.
The blood foretold the giant's fall,
By this proud Palmer's hand.
Dryden.
Drayton.
The fººd attempt thou haſ repel'd. A/ilton.
Proud Sparta with their wheels reſounds. Pope.
5. Lofty of mien ; grand of perſon.
, He like a proud ſteed rein'd, went haughty on. Milton
6. Grand, lofty ; ſplendid; magnificent. -
89 much is true, that the ſaid country of Atlantis, as well
* that of Peru, then called Coya, as that of Mexico then
ºned Tyrambel, were mighty and proud kingdoms in aim
ſhipping and riches. Bacon's New Mºi.
*y and proud ſeat. Aïn.
*ºns of ſtones from the frºnd temple's height
º and ºn our batter'd helms alight, Dryden.
sº by Picus vaſt and proud, ./
7. Oſlº." undred pillars.
3 ſpecious : d
- A. ; grand.
t º brook the loſs of brittle life,
* thoſe proud titles thou haſt won of me. Shakespeare
Dryden.
8. Salacious; eager for the male.
That camphire begets in men an impotency unto vencry
obſervation will hardly confirm, and we have found it . in
cocks and hens, which was a more favourable tryal than that
of Scaliger, when le gave it unto a bitch that was Prºud. Bro.
9. [Prºbe, Sax. is ſwelling. J Fungous; exuberant.
When the veſſels are too lax, and do not ſufficiently reſiſł
the influx of the liquid, that begets a fungus or proud
fleſh. 4 bººt on Ziºn,
This eminence is compoſed of little points, called fungus
or proud fleſh. Sharp's Stºry.
Prov ply adv. [from fraud..] Arrogantly; oftentatiouſly;
in a proud manner. -
He bears himſelf more frºy
Even to my perſon, than I thought he would. Shake?.
The ſwan *
Between her white wings mantling Prº rows. Aſton.
Ancus follows with a fawning air; -
But vain within, and proudly pºpular. Dryden.
Proudly he marches on, and void of fear;
Vain inſolence. Addison.
To PR v E. v. a. [prºbo, Lat. trouver, Fr.]
1. To evince; to ſhow by argument or teſtimony.
Let the trumpet ſound,
If none appear to prove upon thy perſon
Thy heinous, manifeſt, and many treaſons,
There is my pledge; I’ll prove it on thy heart. Shakespeare
So both their deeds compar'd this day ſhall prove. M.
Smile on me, and I will prove,
Wonder is ſhorter liv'd than love. Waller.
If it prºve any thing, it can only prove againſt our author,
that the aſſignment of dominion to the eldeſt is not by divine
inſtitution. Locke.
In ſpite of Luther's declaration, he will prove the tenet
upon him. Atterbury.
2. To try ; to bring to the teſt. .
Wilt thou thy idle rage by reaſon prove 2
Or ſpeak thoſe thoughts, which have no power to move?
* Sandys.
Thy overpraiſing leaves in doubt
The virtue of that fruit, in thee firſt prov’d. A ſilton.
3. To experience. -
Delay not the preſent, but
Filling the air with ſwords advanc'd, and darts,
We prove this very hour. Shakeſp. Coriºlanus.
Could ſenſe make Marius ſit unbound, and prove
The crucl lancing of the knotty gout. Davies.
Well I deſerv'd Evadne's ſcorn to prove,
That to ambition ſacrific’d my love. //aller.
Let him in arms the pow'r of Turnus prove,
And learn to fear whom he diſdains to love. Dryden.
To PRoy E. v. n.
1. To make trya!.
Children prove, whether they can rub upon the breaſ with
one hand, and pat upon the forehead with another. Bacºn.
The ſons prepare
Meeting like winds broke looſe upon the main,
To prºve by arms whoſe fate it was to reign. Drydºn.
2. To be found by experience.
Prºve true, imagination; oh, prove true,
That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you. Shakespeare
All eſculent and garden herbs, ſet upon the tops of hills,
will prove more medicinal, though leſs eſculent. Bacon.
3. To ſucceed.
If the experiment troved not, it might be pretended, that
the beaſts were not killed in the due time. Bacon.
4. To be found in the event.
The fair bloſſom hangs the head
Sideways, as on a dying bed,
And thoſe pearls of dew ſhe wears,
Prove to be preſaging tears. Milton.
The beauties which adorn'd that age, -
The ſhining ſubjects of his rage;
Hoping they ſhould immortal prove,
Rewarded with ſucceſs in love. JP aller.
When the inflammation ends in a gangrene, the caſe proves
mortal Arbuthnot.
Property, you ſee it alter,
Or in a mortgage prºve a lawyer's ſhare,
Or in a jointure vaniſh from the heir. Pope.
PRoy EABLE. adj. [from prove.] That may be proved.
PR ove/DI To R. n.ſ. [proveditore, Italian.] One who under-
PRow EDO'R.E. ; takes to procure ſupplies for an army. . .
The Jews, in thoſe ages, had the office of proved re. Friend.
Prov ENDER. m. ſ. [provande, Dutch ; provende, Fr.] Dry
food for brutes; hay and corn.
Good provender labouring horſes would have. Tºr.
I do appoint him ſtore of provender; * - /,
It is a creature that I teach to fight. Shałęſp.
Many a dateous and knee-crooking knave
Wears out his time, Inuch like his matter's aſs,
- - /akeſ. Oºººo.
For nought but provendºr. Shakespeare . •
--&gt; p Whene'er
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R O
-
Whene'er he chanc'd his hands to lay
On magazines of corn or hay,
Gold ready coin’d appear'd, inſtead
Of paultry provender and bread. Swift's Miſel.
For a fortnight before you kill them, fed them with hay
or other provender. Mortimer.
PROVERB. m. ſ. [proverbe, Fr. proverbium, Lat.]
1. A ſhort ſentence frequently repeated by the people; a ſaw ;
an adage.
The ſum of his whole book of proverbs is an exhortation
to the ſtudy of this practick wiſdom. Decay of Piety.
It is in praiſe and commendation of men, as it is in get-
tings and gains; for the proverb is true, that light gains make
heavy purſes; for light gains come thick, whereas great come
but now and then. Bacon's Eſſays.
The Italian prover ſays of the Genoeſe, that they have a
ſea without fiſh, land without trees, and men without faith.
Addiſon.
2. A word, name or obſervation commonly received or uttered.
Thou haſt delivered us for a ſpoil, and a proverb of re-
proach. Tob. iii. 4.
To Prov ERB. v. a. [from the noun..] Not a good word.
1. To mention in a proverb.
Am I not ſung and proverb’d for a fool
In ev'ry ſtreet; do they not ſay, how well
Are come upon him his deſerts : A4ilton's Agoniſłes.
2. To provide with a proverb.
Let wantons, light of heart,
Tickle the ſenſeleſs ruſhes with their heels :
For I am proverb'd with a grandfire phraſe;
I'll be a candle-holder and look on.
Prov E'RBIAL. adj. [proverbial, Fr. from proverb.]
1. Mentioned in a proverb. -
In caſe of exceſſes, I take the German proverbial cure, by
a hair of the ſame beaſt, to be the worſt in the world; and
the beſt, the monks diet, to eat till you are ſick, and faſt till
you are well again. Temple's Miſcel.
Deſpis'd and curs'd Leontius muſt deſcend
Through hiſſing ages, a proverbial coward.
2. Reſembling a proverb; ſuitable to a proverb.
This river's head being unknown, and drawn to a prover-
bial obſcurity, the opinion thereof became without bounds.
Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Shakeſp.
Irene.
3. Compriſed in a proverb.
Moral ſentences and proverbial ſpeeches are numerous in
this poet. Pope.
PRove RBIALLY. adv. [from proverbial.] In a proverb.
It is proverbially ſaid, formica ſua bilisineſt, habet &amp; muſca
ſplenem; whereas theſe parts anatomy hath not diſcovered in
inſe&amp;ts. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To PROVIDE. v. a. [provideo, Lat.]
1. To procure beforehand; to get ready ; to prepare.
God will provide himſelf a lamb for a burnt-offering. Gen.
Provide out of all, able men that fear God. Ex. xviii. 21.
He happier ſeat provides for us. AMilton.
2. To furniſh ; to ſupply. With of or with before the thing
provided.
Part incentive reed
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire. Milton.
To make experiments of gold, be provided of a conſerva-
tory of ſnow, a good large vault under ground, and a deep
well. Bacon's Nat. Hył.
The king forthwith prºvides him of a guard,
A thouſand archers daily to attend. Daniel.
If I have really drawn a portrait to the knees, let ſome
better artiſt provide himſelf of a deeper canvas, and taking
theſe hints, ſet the figure on its legs, and finiſh it. Dryden.
He went,
With large expence and with a pompous train
Provided, as to viſit France or Spain. Dryden.
An earth well provided of all requiſite things for an habi-
table world. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Rome, by the care of the magiſtrates, was well provided
with corn. Arbuthnot on Coins.
When the monaſteries were granted away, the pariſhes
were left deſtitute, or very meanly provided of any, mainte-
nance for a paſtor. Swift's Miſcel.
They were of goodbirth, and ſuch who, although inheriting
good eſtates, yet happened to be well educated, and provided
with learning. Swift.
3. To ſtipulate.
4. To PRovi DE againſ?. To take meaſures for counteračting
or eſcaping any ill.
Sagacity of brutes in defending themſelves, providing againſ?
the inclemency of the weather, and care for their young. Hale.
Some men, inſtructed by the lab’ring ant,
Provide againſ' th' extremities of want. Dryden.
Fraudulent practices were provided againſ? by laws. Arbuth.
5. To PRovide for. To take care of beforehand.
States, which will continue, are above all things to uphold
the reverend regard of religion, and to provide for the ſame
by all means. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 2.
He hath intent, his wonted followers
Shall all be very well provided for. Shakeſp.
A provident man provides for the future. Raleigh.
My arbitrary bounty's undeny'd;
give ſeverſions, and for heirs provid. Garth.
He will have many dependents, whoſe wants he cannot
prºvide fºr - Addison.
Pºovºre that... [This has the form of an adverbial expreſion,
and the French nu mber pourveu que among their conjunctions;
it is however the participle of the verb provide, uſed as the Latin,
audito her firi. Upon theſe terms; this ſtipulation being
made. sº
If I come off, ſhe your jewel,
gold are yours; provided I have your commºniatiºnſ, my
more free entertainment. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
I take your offer, and will live with you ;
Provided that you do no outrages. Shakespeare.
Provided that he ſet up his reſolution, not to let himſelf
down below the dignity of a wiſe man. L'Eſtrange.
PRovi DENCE. m. ſ. [prºvidence, Fr. providentia, Lat.] o
1. Foreſight; timely care; forecaſt; the act of providing.
The only people, which as by their juſtice and prºlºnce
give neither cauſe nor hope to their neighbours to annoy them,
ſo are they not ſtirred with falſe praiſe to trouble others
quiet. Sidney.
Providence for war is the beſt prevention of it. Bacon.
An eſtabliſhed character ſpreads the influence of ſuch as
move in a high ſphere, on all around; it reaches farther than
their own care and providence can do. Atte bury.
2. The care of God over created beings; divine ſuperinten-
dence.
This appointeth unto them their kinds of working, the
diſpoſition whereof, in the purity of God's own knowledge,
is rightly termed providence. Hºoker.
Is it not an evident ſign of his wonderful providence over
us, when that food of eternal life, upon the utter want whereof
our endleſs deſtruction enſueth, is prepared and always ſet in
this your jewel, and my
ſuch a readineſs. Hooker.
Eternal providence exceeding thought,
Where none appears can make herſelf away. Spºnſºr.
Providence is an intellectual knowledge, both foreſeeing,
caring for, and ordering all things, and d th not only behold
all paſt, all preſent, and all to come ; but is the cauſe of
their ſo being, which preſcience is not. Raleigh.
The world was all before them, where to chuſe
Their place of reſt, and providence their guide. Mºon.
They could not move me from my ſettled faith in God and
his providence. AZare's Divine Dialogues.
3. Prudence ; frugality; reaſonable and moderate care of ex-
pence.
By thrift my ſinking fortune to repair,
Though late, yet is at laſt become my care;
My heart ſhall be my own, my vaſt expence
Reduc’d to bounds, by timely providence. Dryden.
PRovi DENT. adj. [providens, Lat..] Forecaſting; cautious;
prudent with reſpect to futurity.
I ſaw your brother
Moſt provident in peril, bind himſelf
To a ſtrong maſt that liv'd upon the ſea. Shakespeare.
We ourſelves account ſuch a man for provident, as remen-
bering things paſt, and obſerving things preſent, can, by
judgment, and comparing the one with the other, provide for
the future. Raleigh.
Firſt crept
The parſimonious emmet, provident
Of future.
Orange, with youth, experience has,
In action young, in council old;
Orange is what Auguſtus was,
Brave, wary, provident and bold. JWaller.
A very proſperous people, fluſhed with great ſucceſſes, are
ſeldom ſo pious, ſo humble, ſo juſt, or ſo provident, as to
perpetuate their happineſs. Atterbury.
PRovi DENTIAL. adj. [from providence..] Effe?ed by provi-
dence; referrible to providence. -
What a confuſion would it bring upon mankind, if thoſe,
unſatisfied with the providential diſtribution of heats and coids,
might take the government into their own hands. A ºrange.
The lilies grow, and the ravens are fed, according to the
courſe of nature, and yet they are made arguments of pro-
vidence, nor are theſe things leſs providential, becauſe re-
ular. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
The ſcorched carth, were it not for this remarkably provi-
dential contrivance of things, would have bºº, uninha:
Milton.
bitable. //02dward.
This thin, this ſoft contexture of the air,
Shows the wiſe author's providential carº. Blackmore.
ProvideºNTIAlix. adv. [from providential.] By the care of
"...m. is providentially directed to the uſe of its pro-
per weapons. - - - Roy n the Creatin.
It happened very providentially to the honour of the chriſ-
tian religion, that it did not take its riſe in the dark illiterate
ages of the world, but at a time when arts and ſciences were
at their height. Aldiſon.
20 R PRo'y ID ENTLY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">º • - P R O
P R -
O
- - -
PRovi DENTLY. a.ºw. [from prºvident.] With forefight; with
- - -
2 precaution. - -
º wº. jºg deſigned water-fowls to fly in the air, and
. - live in ſhe water, ſhe providently makes their feathers of ſuch
a texture, that they do not admit the water. Boyle.
Provides. n.ſ.. [from prºl He who provides or pro-
CuſcS,
Here's money for my meat,
I would have left it on the board, ſo ſoon
As I had made my meal, and parted thence
With prayers for the prºvider. - - -
PROVINCE. n.). [province, Fr. provincia, Iºatin.]
1. A conquered country; a country governed by a delegate.
Thoſe provinces theſe arms of mine did conquer. Shakespeare
Greece, Italy and Sicily were divided into commonwealths,
till ſwallowed up, and made prºvinces by Rome. Temple.
See them broke with toils, or ſunk in eaſe,
Or infamous for plunder'd prºvinces. Pope.
2. The proper office or buſineſs of any one. -
I am fit for honours tougheſt taſk ;
Shake?.
Nor ever yet found fooling was my prºvince. Otway.
Nor can I alone ſuſtain this day's province. More.
'Tis thine, whate'er is pleaſant, good or fair;
All nature is thy province, life thy care. Dryden.
'Tis not the pretor's province to beſtow -
True frcc.dom. Dryden's Perſus.
The woman's province is to be careful in her deconomy,
and chaſte in her affection. Tatler.
3. A region; a tract.
Over many a tract
Of heav'n they march'd, and many a province wide. Milt.
Their underſtandings are cooped up in narrow bounds;
ſo that they never look abroad into other provinces of the in-
tellectual world. // atts's Improvement of the Mind.
PRovi Nci AL. adj. [provincial, Fr from province.]
1. Relating to a province.
The duke dare not more ſtretch
This finger of mine, than he dare rack his own;
His ſubject am I not, nor here provincial.
2. Appendant to the provincial country.
Some have delivered the polity of ſpirits, and left an ac-
Shakeſp.
count even to their provincial dominions. Brown.
3. Not of the mother country; rude; unpoliſhed.
They build and treat with ſuch magnificence,
That, like th’ ambitious monarchs of the age,
They give the law to our provincial ſtage. Dryden.
A country 'ſquire having only the provincial accent upon
his tongue, which is neither a fault, nor in his power to re-
medy, muſt marry a caſt wench. Swift.
4. Belonging only to an archbiſhop's juriſdićtion; not acume-
nical.
A law made in a prºvincial ſynod, is properly termed a
provincial conſtitution. Ayliffe's Parergon.
PRovi sci AL. m. ſ. [provincia', Fr. from province..] A ſpiritual
governor.
Valignanus was provincial of the Jeſuits in the Indies. Still.
To PRovi'NCIATE. v. a. [from province.] To turn to a pro-
vince. A word not in uſe.
... When there was a deſign to provinciate the whole king-
dom, Druina, though offered a canton, would not accept
of it. Howel's Pocal Foreſ.
To PRoy1'NE. v. m. ſprºvigner, Fr.] To lay a flock or branch
of a vine in the ground to take root for more cncreaſe.
PROVISION. m. ſ. [proviſion, Fr. provyi, Latin.]
1. The act of providing beforehand.
Kalander knew, that proviſion is the foundation of hoſpi-
tality, and thrift the fewel of magnificence. Sidney.
2. Mcaſures taken beforchand.
- Five days we do allot thce for proviſion,
To ſhield thee from diſaſters of the world. Shakespeare
He preſerved all points of humanity, in taking order and
making proviſion for the relief of ſtrangers diſtreſſed. Bacon.
The Prudent part is to propoſe remedies for the preſent
evils, and proviſions againſt future events. Temple.
Religion lays the ſtrićteſt obligations upon men, to make
the beſt pºiſºn for their comfortable ſubſiſtence in this world
and their ſalvation in the next. º:
3. Accumulation of ſtores beforehand; flock colleaed.
Mendoza advertiſed, that he would valiantly defend the
city, ſo long as he had any proviſion of victuals. Anoles.
In ſuch abundance lies our choice,
* a greater ſtore of fruit untouch'd,
Č. *gºng incorruptible, till men
Row up to their proviſion. - Milton.
f º after he had made ſuch vaſt proviſion of materials
* * temple, yet becauſe he had dipt his hands in blood,
"... *d to lay a ſtone in that acred pile. South.
4. * 3 food; provender.
º prºviſiºn: to be brought in. Clarendºn.
'* laid in large for man of beaſt. 44ilion.
5. Stipulation; terms fºttled.
This li *** **
there wº was ºnly to reform the degenerate Engliſh, but
- *** **n for the reformation of the mere Iriſh,
no ordinance, no proviſion made for the aboliſhing of their
barbarous cuſtoms. Davies on Ireland.
PRovisional, ad. [proviſiºnel, Fr. from prºviſion.] Tempo-
rarily eſtabliſhed; provided for preſent need.
The commenda ſemeſtris grew out of a natural equity,
that, in the time of the patron's reſpite given him to preſent,
the church ſhould not be without a proviſional paſtor. Ayliffe.
PRovi's Ion ALLY. adv. (from proviſional.) By way of proviſion.
The abbot of St. Martin was born, was baptized, and
declared a man proviſionally, till time ſhould ſhow what he
would prove, nature had moulded him to untowardly. Lºcke.
PRO//SO. m. ſ. [Latin: as, proviſo ren itaſe habituram ºft.]
Stipulation; caution ; proviſional condition.
This proviſo is needful, that the heriff may not have the
like power of life as the marſhal hath. Stenſer.
. Some will allow the church no further power, than only
to exhort, and this but with a proviſo too, that it extends not
to ſuch as think themſelves too wiſe to be adviſed. South.
He doth deny his priſoners,
But with proviſo and exception, -
That we, at our own charge, ſhall ranſom ſtrait
His brother-in-law. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Provocation. n.ſ. provocatio, Lat. provocation, Fr.]
1. An act or cauſe by which anger is raiſed.
It is a fundamental law, in the Turkiſh empire, that they
may, without any other provocation, make war upon Chriſten-
dom for the propagation of their law. Bacon.
Tempt not my ſwelling rage
With black reproaches, ſcorn and provocation. Smith.
2. An appeal to a judge.
A provºcation is every act, whereby the office of the judge
or his aſiiſtance is aſked ; a provºcation including both a ju-
dicial and an extrajudicial appeal. Ayliff.
3. I know not whether, in the following paſſage, it be aſpeal
OI 1/1ſt teme/11.
The like effects may grow in all towards their paſtor, and
in their paſtor towards every of them, between whom there
daily and interchangeably paſs in the hearing of God himſelf,
and in the preſence of his holy angels, ſo many heavenly ac-
clamations, exultations, provºcations, and petitions. Hooker.
PR ovoc A Tiv F. m. ſ. [from provo e..] Any thing which re-
vives a decayed or clºyed appetite.
There would be no variety of taſtes to follicit his palate,
and occaſion exceſs, nor any artificial provocatives to relieve
ſatiety. Addison.
PRovocative N Ess. m. ſ. [ſrom provocative.] The quality of
being provocative.
To PROVOKE. v. a. [provoguer, Fr. provoco, Latin.]
1. To rou e; to excite by ſomething offenſive; to awake.
Ye provºke me unto wrath, burning incenſe unto other
Gods. jer. xliv. 8.
Neither to provoke nor dread
New war provok'd. Milton.
To whet their courage, and their rage provoke. Dryden,
I neither ear, nor will provºke the war. Drydºn.
2. To anger; to enrage; to offend; to incenſe.
Though often prºvºked, by the inſolence of ſome of the
biſhops, to a diſlike of their overmuch fervour, his integrity
to the king was without blemiſh. Clarendºn.
Such acts - - --
Of contumacy will provoke the higheſt. Miltºn.
Agamemnon prºvokes Apollo againſt them, whom he was
willing to appeale afterwards. Pope.
3. To cauſe ; to promote. - -
Drink is a great provoker; it provºkes and unprovokes. Sha.
One Petro covered up his patient with warm cloaths, and
when the fever began a little to decline, gave him cºld water
to drink till he prºvºked ſweat. Arbuthnºt.
4. To challenge.
He now prºvºkes the ſea-gods from the ſhore,
With envy Triton heard the martial ſound,
And the bold champion for his challenge drown'd. Dryden.
5. To induce by motive; to move; to incite. -
We may hot be ſtartled at the breaking of the exterior
earth ; for the face of nature hath provoked men to think of,
and obſerve ſuch a thing. Bºrnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
To Provok E. v. n. -
I. To appeal. A Latiniſm.
Arius and Pelagius durſt prºvoke
To what the centuries preceding ſpoke.
2. To produce anger. - -
It was not your brother's evil diſpoſition made him. ſeek his
death, but a provoking merit. Shakeſp. King Leº.
The Lord abhorred them, becauſe of the provºking of his
ſons. 19eutr. xxxii. 19-
If we conſider man in ſuch a loathſome and provoking con-
dition, was it not love enough, that he was permitted to ºn-
joy a being. Taylor.
PRoyo K.E.R. m. ſ. [from provºc.] -
1. One that raiſes anger.
As in all civil inſurrections, the ringleader is looked on
with a peculiar ſeverity, ſo, in this caſe, the firſt prºvišer
has double portion of the guilt. Gºvernment ºf the Hºngº.
7 - 2. Cauſe: ;
Dryden.
f
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R O
P R U
º
*
º,
2. Cauſer; promoter. -
Drink, 'Sir, is a great provº'er of noſepainting, ſleep, and
urine. - Shakespeare . Macbeth.
Ps vokINGLY. adv. [from prºcking.] In ſuch a manner as
to raiſe anger.
When we ſee a man that yeſterday kept a humiliation, to-
day invading the poſſeſſions of his brethren, we need no other
proof how hypocritically and provokingly he confeſſed his
pride. . Decay of Piety.
PROV OST. n.ſ. [prapart, Sax. frºwºff, Fr. provºſio, Ital.
rapoſitus, at.)
1. The chief of any body: as, the provoſt ºf a college.
2. The executioner of an army. -
Kingſton, prºvºſt marſhal of the king's army, was deemed
not only cruel but inhuman in his executions. Hayward.
Provost's HIP. m. ſ. [from prºvº/l.] The office of a provoſt.
C. Piſo firſt roſe, and afterwards was advanced to the
provºſſip of Rome by Tiberius. - Hakewill.
Pºow. n.f. [prºte, Fr. proa, Spaniſh; prora, Lat..] The head
or forepart of a ſhip.
The ſea-victory of Veſpaſian was a lady holding a palm
in her hand, at her foot the prow of a ſhip. Peacham.
Straight to the Dutch he turns his dreadful prow,
More fierce th’ important quarrel to decide. Dryden.
Prow. adj. Valiant. Sfenſer.
Prowess. n. ſ. [prº-za, Italian; prou%e, Fr.] Bravery ;
valour; military gallantry.
Men of ſuch proweſs, as not to know fear in themſelves,
and yet to teach it in others that ſhould deal with them ; for
they had often made their lives triumph over moſt terrible
dangers, never diſmayed, and ever fortunate. Sidney.
I hope
That your wiſdom will dire&amp;t my thought, -
Or that your prowſ can me yield relief. Fa. Queen.
By heav'ns mere grace, not by our proweſ done. F. &amp;.
Henry the fifth,
By his proweſ conquered all France. Shakespeare .
"Nor ſhould thy prove s want praiſe and eſteem,
But that 'tis ſhewn in treaſon. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Thoſe are they
Firſt ſeen in aºs of prowſ eminent,
And great exploits; but of truc virtue void. Milton.
Theſe beyond compare of mortal prowſ. Al/ilton.
Michael I of coeleſtial armies prince ;
And thou in military prºwſ next,
Gabriel ! Milton's Par. Lºft, b. vi.
The vigour of this arm was never vain,
And that my wonted proweſ; I retain, }
Witneſs theſe heaps of ſlaughter on the plain. Dryden.
Theſe were the entertainments of the ſofter nations, that
fell under the virtue and proweſ of the two laſt empires. Temp.
Prowest. adj. [the ſuperlative formed from prºw, adj.]
1. Braveſt; moſt valiant.
They be two of the proweſ' knights on ground,
And oft approv’d in many a hard affay,
And eke of ſureſt ſteel, that may be found,
Do arm yourſelf againſt that day them to confound. F. 3.
2. Brave ; valiant.
The faireſt of her ſex, Angelica,
His daughter, ſought by many proweſ' knights. Milton.
To PROWL. v. a. Of this word the etymology is doubtful :
the old dictionaries write prole, which the dreamer Caſaubon
derives from 7:02:35, ready, quick. Skinner, a far more
judicious etymologiſt, deduces it from proteier, a diminutive
formed by himſlf from proier, to prey, Fr. perhaps it may
be formed, b) accidental corruption, from patrol.J. To roye
over.
He prowls, each place, ſtill in new colours deckt,
Sucking one's ill, another to infect. Sidney.
To PRow L. v. n. To wander for prey; to prey; to plunder.
The champion robbeth by night,
And prowleth and filcheth by date. Tuſſºr.
Nor do they bear ſo quietly the loſs of ſome parcels con-
fiſcated abroad, as the great drţriment which they ſuffer by
ſome prowling vice-admiral or publick miniſter. Raleigh.
As when a frºwling wolf,
Whom hunger drives to ſeck new haunt for prey. Milton.
Shall he, who looks erect on heav'n,
E'er ſtoop to mingle with the prowling herd,
And dip his tongue in gore. Thom Žn.
And here the fell attorney prowls for prey. Anon.
PRow LER. m. ſ. [from prowl.] One that roves about for
I CV. -
prey - On churchyards drcar,
The diſappointed prowlers fall, and dig
The ſhrouded body from the grave. Thomſºn.
PRO'XIMATE. adj. [proximus, Lat.] Next in the ſeries of
ratiocination; near and immediate : oppoſed to remote and
mediate. -
Writing a theory of the deluge, we were to ſhew the froxi-
mate natural cauſes of it. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Subſtance is the remote genus of bird, becauſe it agrees
not only to all kinds of animals, but alſo to things inanimate ;
but animal is the proximate or neared genus of bird, becauſe
P it agrees to feweſt other things. #7 atts's Logick.
Rox; MATELY. adv. [from proximatc.] Immediately ; with-
Out Intervention.
***ſation of our mind, which is incorporeal, and
the contemplation of our bodies, which have all the cha-
racters of excellent contrivance; theſe alone eaſily and proxi-
ºnately guide us to the wiſe author of all thin S ntl
PRoxime. ºff. [prºximus, Lat.) Next; mºne. Bentley.
A ſyllogiſm is made up of three propolitions, and theſe of
three terms variouſly joined: the thre' terms are caij tº
remote matter of a ſyllogiſm, the three propoſitions the
proxime or immediate matter of it. //atts's Logick.
Prox1'M1TY. n. J. [proximite, Fr. proximitas, from proximus
Lat.] Nearneſs. - 2.
When kingdoms have cuſtomably been carried by right of
ſucceſſion, according to proximity of blood, the violation of
this courſe hath always been dangerous. Hayward.
If he plead proximity of blood, -
That empty title is with eaſe withſtood. Dryden.
Add the convenience of the ſituation of the eye, in r ſpect
of its proximity to the brain, the ſeat of common ſenſe. Raº.
I can call to my aſſiſtance
Proximity, mark that and diſtance. Prior.
Muſt we ſend to ſtab or poiſon all the popiſh princes, who
have any pretended title to our crown by the proximity of
blood * Swift's 44; cellanies.
PRoxx. m. ſ. [By contraction from procuracy.] -
1. The agency of another.
2. The ſubſtitution of another; the agency of a ſubſtitute; ap-
pearance of a repreſentative.
None acts a friend by a deputy, or can be familiar by
proxy. - South's Sermons.
Had Hyde thus ſat by proxy too,
As Venus once was ſaid to do,
The painter muſt have ſearch'd the ſkies, - -
To match the luſtre of her eyes. Granvil.
3. The perſon ſubſtituted or deputed.
A wiſe man will commit no buſineſs of importance to a
proxy, where he may do it himſelf. L'Eſt ange.
PR Uc E. m. ſ. [Pruce is the old name for Pruſſia. J Pruſſian
leather. -
Some leathern bucklers uſe
Of folded hides, and others ſhields of pruce. Dryden.
PRUDE. m. ſ. ſprude, Fr.] A woman over nice and ſcrupulous,
and with falſe affectation. .
The graver prude ſinks downward to a gnome,
In ſearch of miſchief, ſtill on earth to roam. Pope.
Not one careleſs thought intrudes,
Leſs modeſt than the ſpeech of prudes. Swift.
PRU'DEN ce. n. ſ. [prudence, Fr. prudentia, Lat..] Wiſdom.
applied to practice.
Under prudence is comprehended, that diſcrete, apt, ſuit-
ing, and diſpoſing as well of actions as words, in their due
place, time and manner. Peacham.
Prudence is principally in reference to actions to be done,
and due means, order, ſeaſon, and method of doing or not
doing. Hale.
PRU'DENT, adj. [prudent, Fr. pudens, Lat.]
1. Practically wiſe.
The fimple inherit folly, but the prudent are crowned with
knowledge. Pr v. xiv. 18.
I have ſeen a ſon of Jeſſe, that is a man of war, and pru-
dent in matters. I Sam. xvi. 18.
The monarch prevented all reply, -
Prudent, leſt others might offer. Milton.
2. Foreſeeing by natural inſtinct.
So ſteers the prudent crane
Her annual voyage. Miltºn.
PRUDE NTIAL. adj. [from prudent.] Eligible on principles of
prudence.
He acts upon the ſureſt and moſt prudential grounds, who,
whether the principles, which he acts upon, prove true or
falſe, yet ſecures a happy iſſue to his actions. - Sºuth.
Motives are only prudential, and not demonſtrative. ºt.
Theſe virtues, though of excellent uſe, ſome prudential rules
it is neceſſary to take with them in practice. Rºgers:
PRudentials. n. J. Maxims of prudence or Practical
wiſdom. - -
Many flanzas, in poetick meaſures, contain rules relating
to common prudentials, as well as to religiºn: , ... Watts.
P, UDENTIA/EITY.. n.ſ. [from prudential.] Eligibility on prin-
ciples of prudence. - - - -
Being incapable rightly to judge the prudentiality of af-
fairs, thy only gaze upon the viſible. ſucceſs, and thereafter
condemnor cry up the whole progreſſion. Brown.
PRupº's rally, adv. [from prudential.] According to the
rules of prudence.
If he acts piouſly, ſoberly and temperately, he aëts pru-
dentia A and ſafely. South's Sermons.
Ps Up ENTLY. adv. [from rudert.] Diſcretely ; judiciouſly.
Theſe laws were ſo prudently framed, as they are found fit
for all ſucceeding times. Bacon's Henry ...
, CuC<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P R Y
P U B
Such deep deſigns of empire does he lay
O'er them, whoſe cauſe he ſeems to take in hand;
And prudently would make them lords at ſea,
To whom with eaſe he can give laws by land. Dryden.
PRU'DERY. n. / [from prude..] Overmuch nicety in conduct.
PRU'dish. adj. [from prude.] Affectedly grave.
I know you all expect, from ſeeing me,
Some formal lecture, ſpoke with prudiſh face. Garrick.
To PRUNE. v. a. [of unknown derivation.]
1. To lop; to diveſt trees of their ſuperfluities. -
So lop'd and pruned trees do flouriſh fair. Davies.
Let us ever extol
His bounty, following our delightful taſk, -
To prune thoſe growing plants, and tend theſe flow'rs. Milt.
What we by day
Lop overgrown, or p une, or prop, or bind,
One night with wanton growth derides, -
Tending to wild. A ſiſton's Par. Lºft, b. ix.
Horace will our ſuperfluous branches prune,
- Give us new rules, and ſet our harp in tune. JValler.
You have no leſs right to correót me, than the ſame hand
that raiſed a tree, has to prune it. Pope.
2. To clear from cº-creſcencies.
His royal bird
Prunes the immortal wing, and cloys his beak. Sha'eſh.
Many birds frune their feathers; and crows ſeem to call
upon rain, which is but the comfort they receive in the re-
lenting of the air. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?.
The muſe, whoſe carly voice you taught to ſing,
Preſcrib'd her heights, and prun'd her tender wing. Pope.
To PRUNE. v. n. To dreſs; to prink. A ludicrous word.
Every ſcribbling man
Grows a fop as faſt as eer he can,
Prunes up, and aſks his oracle the glaſs,
If pink or purple beſt become his face. Dryden.
PRUNE. m. ſ. [prune, pruneau, Fr. prunum, Lat.] A dried
plum.
In drying of pears and prunes in the oven, and removing
of them, there is a like operation. Bacon's Nat. Hi/f.
PRU'NEl. n.ſ. An herb. Aſſworth.
PRUNELLo. n.ſ.
1. A kind of ſtuff of which the clergymen's gowns are made.
Worth makes the man, and want of it, the fellow ;
The reſt is all but leather or prunello. - Pope.
2. [Prunelle, Fr.] A kind of plum. Ainſworth.
PRU'NER. m. ſ. [from prune.) One that crops trees.
Left thy redundant juice
Should fading leaves, inſtead of fruits, produce,
The prunel's hand with letting blood muſt quench
Thy heat, and thy exub'rant parts retrench. Denham.
PR UNIFERous, adj. [prunum and ſero, Lat.) Plum bearing.
PRU'NI : G Hook. ;" /. A hook or knife uſed in lopping
PRU'NING K IFE. § trees.
Let thy hand ſupply the pruningknife,
And crop luxuriant ſtragglers. Dryden.
No plough ſhall hurt the glebe, no pruninghº the vine.
Dryden's Pirgil.
The cyder land obſequious ſtill to thrones,
Her pruninghooks extended into ſwords. Philips.
FRURIENCE. "...ſ.. [from pruria, Lat.] An itching or a great
PRU'RIENCY. deſire or appetite to anything. Swift.
PRU RIE T. adj. [pruriens, Lat..] Itching. Ainſworth.
PRU, IGINous, adj [pruria, Lat.] Tending to an itch.
To PRY. v. n. [of unknown derivation.] To peep narrowly;
to inſpect officiouſly, curiouſly, or impertinently.
I can counterfeit the deep tragedian,
Speak, and look back, and pry on ev'ry ſide,
Intending deep ſuſpicion. Shakeſp. Richard III
I pry'd me through the crevice of a wall, -
When for his hand he had his two ſons heads. Shakespeare
Watch thou, and wake when others be aſleep 2/4”
To pry into the ſecrets of the ſtate. » Skakºſº
We of th’ offending fide - y P-
Muſt keep aloof from ſtrict aſſbitrement 3.
And ſtop all fight holes, every loop, from whence
The eye of reaſon may pry in upon us. Shakeſp.
He that prieth in at her windows, ſhall alſo hearken at hºr
doors. Eccluſ. xiv. 23.
And pry
In every buſh and brake, where hap may find
The ſerpent ſleeping. Milton
* have naturally a curioſity to be prying and ſearching
- into forbidden ſecrets. L'I:/trange
Each gr d i. well
*We and thicket, pry in ev'ry ſhape
lºft hid ºn ſome th’ arch º 2 Dryden.
sº d, .*nd looking round the bow'r
If any w i. º, and pry'd on ev'ry flow'r,
h } Where by chance j might eſpy
% rural poet of the melody. Dryden
T. we with a prying eye ſurvey yaen.
º .. . to find the milky way. Creech.
•r obſerve ſ .*.*nixt a nature, that as men pry into them
* Parts more than others, they take different
hints, and put contrary interpretations on them. Addison,
All theſe I frankly own without denying;
But where has this Praxiteles been prying. Addiſon.
PSALM. m. ſ. [pſalme, p/eaume, Fr. Jzºº;..] A holy ſong.
The choice and flower of all things profitable in other
books, the pſalms do both more briefly contain and more
movingly expreſs, by reaſon of that poetical form where with
they are written. Hocker, b. V. ſ. 37.
Sternhold was made groom of the chamber, for turning
certain of David's pſalms into verſe. Peacham.
Thoſe juſt ſpirits that wear victorious palms,
Hymns devote and holy pſalms
Singing continually. Milton.
In another pſalm, he ſpeaks of the wiſdom and power of
God in the creation. Burnet'. Theory ºf the Earth.
PsA'LM is r. n.ſ. Lyalºniſłe, Fr. from pſalm..] W ſiter of holy
ſongs.
How much more rational is this ſyſtem of the fſ, miſ?,
than the Pagans ſcheme in Virgil, where one deity is repre-
ſented as raiſing a ſtorm, and another as laying it Addison
PsAl MoDY. m. ſ. [ſ/almadie, Fr. $24,32. J The act or
practice of ſinging holy ſongs.
Psal Mo CRAPHY. m. ſ. [] 27.42; and 7:422.] The aët of
writing pſalms.
PsA LTER. m. ſ. If ſºutier, Fr. J271"; ov.] The volume of
pſalms; a plaimbook.
PsALTERY. m. ſ. A kind of harp beaten with ſticks.
The trumpets, facbuts, pſalteries and fifes
Make the ſun dance. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Praiſe with trumpets, pierce the ſkies, -
Praiſe with harps and pſalteries. Sandys's Paraph.
The ſweet ſinger of Iſrael with his pſaltery, loudly reſounded
the benefits of the almighty creator. Peacham.
Nought ſhall the ſalt'ry and the harp avail,
When the quick ſpirits their warm march forbear,
And numbing coldineſs has unbrac'd the ear. Prior.
Pseudo. n.ſ.. [from ºf 332.] A prefix, which, being put
before words, ſignifies faile or counterfeit: as, pſeudopºlic,
a counterfeit apoſtle.
Pseu DoGRAPHY. m. ſ. Falſe writing.
I will not purſue the many pſeudºgraphies in uſe, but ſhew
of how great concern the emphaſis were, if rightly uſed. Hold.
Pseudology. m. ſ. ſºoxo;.....] Falſehood of ſpeech.
It is not according to the ſound rules of pſeudology, to report
of a pious prince, that he neglects his devotion, but you may
report of a merciful prince, that he has pardoned a criminal
who did not deſerve it. Arbuthnot.
Pshaw interſ. An expreſſion of contempt.
A peeviſh fellow has ſome reaſon for being out of humour,
or has a natural incapacity for delight, and therefore diſturbs
all with piſhes and pſhaws. Speciator, N° 438.
PTI's AN. m. ſ. [ptiſanne, Fr. Mºrrowſ.] A medical drink made
of barley decocted with raiſins and liquorice.
Thrice happy were thoſe golden days of old,
When dear as Burgundy the ptiſans ſold ;
When patients choſe to die with better will,
Than breathe and pay the apothecary's bill. Garth.
In fevers the aliments preſcribed by Hippocrates, were
ftiſans and cream of barley. Arbuthnot.
PTY'ALISM. n.ſ. (ptyaliſme, Fr. Avexicº;..] Salivation; ef-
uſion of ſpittle.
Pry's 1AGogue; n.ſ.. [n]ºzz and &amp;yw.] A medicine which
diſcharges ſpittle. Diº.
PUBE RTY. m. ſ. [puberté, Fr. pubertas, Lat.] The time of
life in which the two ſexes begin firſt to be acquainted.
The cauſe of changing the voice at the years of puberty
ſeemeth to be, for that when much of the moiſture of the
body, which did before irrigate the parts, is drawn down to
the ſpermatical veſſels, it leaveth the body more hot than it
was, whence cometh the dilatation of the pipes. .. Bacon.
All the carnivorous animals would have multiplied exceed-
ingly, before theſe children that eſcaped could come to the
age of puberty. Bentley's Sermons.
Puºsºsce. n.ſ.. [from pubeſco, Lat.] The ſtate of arriving
at puberty. - -
§. ăiled it into ten ſeptenaries; in the firſt is deden-
tition or falling of teeth, in the ſecond pubeſcence. Brown.
Puble scent. adj. [from pubſ ens, Lat.] . Arriving at puberty.
That the women are menſtruent, and the men pubeſcent at
the year of twice ſeven, is accounted a punctual truth. Brown.
PublicAN. m. ſ. [from publicus, Lat.]
I. A toll gatherer. -
As Jeſus ſat at meat, many publicans and finners came and
ſat down with him. Matth. ix. 10.
2. A man that keeps a houſe of general entertainment. In low
language. -
PublicATION. m. ſ. [publico, Lat.] - a -
1. The act of publiſhing; the act of notifying to the world;
divulgation; proclamation. • *- - - -
For the inſtruction of all men to eternal life, it is neceſſºry:
that the ſacred and ſaving truth of God be openly publiſhed
unto them, which open fiblication of heavenly myſteries is
by an º termed preaching. 2. #:
º º
I. T.
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U B.
P U D
º:
º,
2. Edition; the act of giving a book to the publick.
An imperfect copy having been offered to a bookſeller,
you conſented to the publication of one more correct. Pope.
The publication of theſe papers was not owing to our folly,
but that of others. - Swift.
PU'BLICK. adj. [public, publique, Fr. publicus, Lat.]
1. Belonging to a ſtate or nation; not private. . .
By following the law of private reaſon, where the law of
public. ſhould take place, they breed diſturbance. Hooker.
Of royal maids how wretched is the fate,
Rorn only to be vićtims of the ſtate;
Our hopes, our wiſhes, all our paſſions try’d
For publick uſe, the ſlaves of others pride. Granvil.
Have we not able counſellors, hourly watching over the
fuhlick weal. - Swift.
2. Open; notorious; generally known.
Joſeph being a juſt man, and not willing to make her a
publick example, was minded to put her away privily. Matth.
3. General; done by many. -
A diſmal univerſal hiſs, the ſound
Of public; ſcorn. Milton.
4. Regarding not private intercſ, but the good of the commu-
nity
They were fiblic; hearted men, as they paid all taxes, ſo
they gave up all their time to their country's ſervice, with-
out any reward. Clarendon.
All nations that grew great out of little or nothing, did ſo
merely by the publică mindedneſs of particular perſons. Sºuth.
A good magiſtrate muſt be endued with a publick ſpirit, that
is with ſuch an excellent temper, as ſets him looſe from all
ſelfiſh views, and makes him endeavour towards promoting the
common good. Alterbury.
5. Open for general entertainment.
The income of the commonwealth is raiſed on ſuch as
have money to ſpend at taverns and publick houſes. Addiſon.
PUBLIck. m. ſ. [from publicus, Lat. le publique, Fr.]
1. The general body of mankind, or of a ſtate or nation ; the
people.
The publică is more diſpoſed to cenſure than to praiſe. Addison
2. Open view; general notice.
Philoſophy, though it likes not a gaudy dreſs, yet, when
it appears in fullick, muſt have ſo much complacency, as to
be cloathed in the ordinary faſhion. Locke.
In private grieve, but with a careleſ, ſcorn;
In publick ſeem to triumph, not to mourn. Granville.
In publick 'tis they hide,
Where none diſlinguiſh. Pope.
Pu'Blickly. adv. [from publick.]
1. In the name of the community.
This has been ſo ſenſibly known by trading nations, that
great rewards are publicłly offered for its ſupply. Addiſon.
2. Openly ; without concealment.
Sometimes alſo it may be private, communicating to the
judges ſome things not fit to be publickly delivered. Bacon.
Pu'Blicks ess. m. ſ. [from public.]
1. State of belonging to the community.
The multitude of partners does detraćt nothing from each
private ſhare, nor does the publickneſs of it leſiºn propriety
in it. Boyle.
2. Openneſs; ſtate of being generally known or publick.
Pu‘u Licksri R1T ºp. cºli. Ipublick and ſpirit..] Having regard
to the general advantage above private good.
'Tis enough to break the neck of all honeſt purpoſes, to
kill all generous and public'ſpirited motions in the concep-
tion. L'E/irange.
Theſe were the pºli, ºffirited men of their age, that is,
patriots of their own intereſt. Dryden.
Another pulº', 'ſpirited projećt, which the common chemy
could not foreſce, might ſet king Charles on the throne. Addison
It was generous and public ſpirited in you, to be of the
kingdom's ſide in this diſpute, by ſhewing, without reſerve,
your diſapprobation of Wood's deſign. Swift.
To PUBLISH, v. a. ſpullier, Fr. publico, Lat.]
1. To diſcover to mankind; to make generally and openly
known; to proclaim; to divulge.
How will this grieve you,
When you ſhall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have publiſhed me. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
His commiſſion from God and his doćtrine tend to the im-
preſſing the neceſſity of that reformation, which he came to
p:bliſh. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Suppoſe he ſhould relent,
And fittiſh grace to all.
Th' unwearied fun, from day to day,
Does his Creator's pow'r diſplay,
And pºliſhes to every land
The work of an almighty hand.
2. To put forth a book into the world.
If I had not unwarily too far engaged myſelf for the preſent
pulliſing it, I ſhould have kept it by me. Digby.
Prºf. is HºR. a. ſ. [from full//.]
1. Onc who makes publick or generally known.
Milton.
Addison's Spºtor.
Love of you
Hath made me publiſher of this pretence. Shakespeare
T he holy lives, the exemplary ſufferings of the publiſhers
of this religion, and the ſurpaſſing excellence of that doćtrine
which they publiſhed. Atterbury.
* One who puts out a book into the world.
** : º ". in which the publiſher has
gy; ſºme thing; that did not belong to me. Prior.
PUCE'LAGE. m. ſ. [F rench..] A ſtate ; virginity. Dićf.
Puck. * / [perhaps the ſame with pig.] Some ſprite among
the fairies, common in romances.
O gentle puck, take this transformed ſcalp
From off the head of this Athenian ſwain.
Shakeſp.
Turn your cloaks, hakeſp
Quoth he, for puck is buſy in theſe oaks,
And this is fairy ground. Corbet.
Pu'ckball or pucºſiſ. m. ſ. [from puck the fairy, a fairy tº
A kind of º #4 º y, y }
To Pucker. v. a. [from pu: the fairy; as effocks, from elves;
or from powº, a pocket or hollow.] To gather into corruga-
tions ; to contract into folds or plications.
- I ſaw an hideous ſpectre; his eyes were ſunk into his head,
his face pale and withered, and his ſkin puckered up in
wrinkles. Speciator, N° 192.
A ligature above the part wounded is pernicious, as it
fuckers up the inteſtines, and diſorders its ſituation. Sharp.
Pu DDER. n. ſ. [This is commonly written pother. See
Pot HER. This is moſt probably derived by Mr. Lye from
fidur, Iſlandick, a rapid motion.] A tumult; a turbulent
and irregular buſtle.
Let the great gods,
That keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads,
Find out their enemies. Shakeſp. King Lear.
What a pudder is made about eſſences, and how much is
all knowledge peſtered by the careleſs uſe of words : Locke.
To PU DDER. v. n. [from the noun..] To make a tumult;
to make a buſtle.
Mathematicians, abſtracting their thoughts from names,
and ſetting before their minds the ideas themſelves, have
avoided a great part of that perplexity, puddering and confu-
fion, which has ſo much hindered knowledge. Locke.
To Pu'DDER. v. a. To perplex; to diſturb, to confound.
He that will improve every matter of fact into a maxim,
will abound in contrary obſervations, that can be of no other
uſe but to perplex and pudder him. Locke.
PU DDING. m. ſ. ſpotten, Welſh, an inteſtine; boudin, French;
puding, Swediſh.] ".
2. A kind of food very variouſly compounded, but generally
made of meal, milk, and eggs.
Sallads, and eggs, and lighter fare
Tune the Italian ſpark’s guitar;
And if I take Dan Congreve right,
Pudding and beef make Britons fight.
2. The gut of an animal.
He'll yield the crow a pudding one of theſe days; the king
has kill'd his heart. Shakeſp. Henry V.
As ſure as his guts are made of puddings. Shakeſp.
3. A bowel ſtuffed with certain mixtures of meal and other in-
gredients.
Mind neither good nor bad, nor right nor wrong,
But eat your pudding, ſlave, and hold your tongue. Prior.
PU'D DINGP. e. n.ſ. ſpudding and pie..] A pudding with meat
baked in it.
Some cry the covenant, inſtead
Of puddingpies and gingerbread.
Pu'DDINGT:M E. n.ſ. [pudding and time.]
1. The time of dinner; the time at which pudding, anciently
the firſt diſh, is ſet upon the table.
2. Nick of time; critical minute.
Mars that ſtill protects the ſtout,
In puddingtime came to his aid. Hudibras.
PU'DD le. n.ſ.. [from puteolus, Lat. Skinner; from poil, dirt,
old Bavarian, junius; hence pool.] A ſmall muddy lakes
a dirty plaſh. -
The Hebrews drink of the well-head, the Greeks of the
ſtream, and the Latins of the puddle. Płall.
Thou did'ſt drink
The ſtale of horſes, and the gilded puddle
Which beaſts would cough at. Shakespeare Ant and Cleºp.
A phyſician cured madmen thus: they were tied to a flake,
and then ſet in a puddle, ’till brought to their wits. L’E/ºr.
Treading where the º: lay,
- - : and on the gra OOT -
His heels flew up; a grally Dryden's Virgil.
He fell, beſmear'd with filth.
Happy was the man, who was ſent on an errand to the
moſt remote ſtreet, which he performed with the greateſt ala-
crity, ran through every puddle, and took care to return co-
vered with dirt. Addison's Freeholder.
To Pºpple. v. a. [from the noºn.] To muddy; to pollute
with dirt; to mix dirt and water. -
As if I ſaw my ſun ſhine in a pitädled water, I cried out of
nothing but Mopſa. Sidney.
22 S Some
Prior.
Hudibras.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">p U F
P U I
i
:
Some unhatch'd praćtice -
Hath puddled his . ſpirit| .. 111 º º
's natures wrangle with inferiour º
}. º ones . their object. Shakeſp. Othello,
His beard they fing'd off with brand of fire,
And ever as it blaz'd, they threw on him -
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair. Shakeſ?.
The nobleſt blood of Africk . .
Runs in my veins, a purer ſtream than thine;
For, though derived from the ſame ſource, thy current
Is puddl’d and defil'd with tyranny. .. Dryden.
Pu'dpi.v. adj. [from puddle.] Muddy; dirty; miry.
Limy, or thick puddly water killeth them. Carew.
Pu'ddock or purrock, n.f. [for paddock or parrºck.] A provin-
cial word for a ſmall incloſure. Dić.
Pu'dency. m. ſ. ſpudent, Lat.] Modeſty ; ſhamefacedneſs.
A pudency ſo roſy, the ſweet view on't
Might well have warm'd old Saturn. . . Shakeſp.
Pubi'city. n.ſ. ſpudicité, Fr. from pudicitia, Lat.] Modeſty;
chaſtity. Dicº.
PUEFe'llow. n. ſ. A partner.
This carnal cur
Preys on the iſſue of his mother's body;
And makes her pusfellºw with others moan, ... Shaft:%.
Pue'Rile. adj. [puerile, Fr. puerilis, Lat.] Childiſh ; boyiſh.
I looked upon the manſion with a veneration mixt with a
pleaſure, that repreſented her to me in thoſe puerile amuſe-
In entS. Pope.
Puert'LITY. m. ſ. ſpuerilité, Fr. from puerilitas, Lat..] Child-
iſhneſs; boyiſhneſs.
A reſerve of puerility not ſhaken off from ſchool. Brown.
. . Some men imagining themſelves poſſeſſed with a divine
fury, often fall into toys and trifles, which are only puerili-
ties. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Pu'et. m. ſ. A kind of water fowl.
Among the firſt fort are coots, ſanderlings and pewets. Car.
The fiſh have enemies enough; as otters, the cormorant
and the puct. J/alton's Angler.
PUFF. n.ſ. ſpºf Dutch, a blaſt which ſwells the checks.j
I. A quick blaſt with the mouth.
In garret vile, he with a warming puff
- Regales chill'd fingers. Philips.
2. A ſmall blaſt of wind.
The Roſemary, in the days of Henry VII, with a ſudden
fºſſ of wind ſtooped her ſide, and took in water at her ports
in ſuch abundance, as that ſhe inſtantly ſunk. Faleigh.
The naked breathleſs body lies,
To every puff of wind a ſlavé,
At the beck of every wave,
That once Perhaps was fair, rich, flout and wiſe. Fatman.
A pºff of wind blows off cap and wig. L'Eſt, ange.
There fierce winds o'er duſky vallies blow,
Whoſe cvery puffbears empty ãº. away. Dryden.
With one fierce puff he blows the leaves away,
Expos'd the ſelf-diſcover'd infant lay. Dryden.
3. A muſhroom. Ainſworth.
4. Anything light and porous: as, puff pºſłe.
5. Sºmething to ſprinkle powder on the hair. Ainſworth.
To PUFF. v. m. ſloffen, Dutch.]
1. To ſwell the cheeks with wind.
2. To blow with a quick blaſt.
- Wherefore do you follow her,
Like ſoggy South puffs with wind and rain. Shaºp.
P º with a broad and powerful fan,
*3 at all, winnows the light away.
3. To blow with ſcornfulneſs. ” way Shałęſp.
Some pºff at theſe inſtances, as being ſuch as were under
d different ‘economy of religion, and conſequently not di-
icºly pertinent to ours. South's Sermons.
It is really to defy heaven, to Pºff at damnation, and bid
ºn potence do its worſt. South.
4. To breathc thick and hard.
Seldſhown flamins
Do Preſs among the popular throngs, and puff
To win a vulgar ſtation. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The aſs comes back again, puffing and blowing, from the
chaſe &gt;
- L’E/? -
A true ſon of the church :/trange
Çame fºg with his greafy bald-pate choir,
T. fumbling o'er his beads. Dryden.
5. To do or move with hurry, tumour, or tumultuous agita-
tion. c
More unconſtant than the wind, who woes
Å. now the frozen boſom of the North,
nu, being *ger'd, puffs away from thence,
§. his face to the dew-dropping South. Shakeſp.
I i. * brave glory puffing by
"ºks that whiſtled, who’i. he
eſcarce allow'd ºn i t --- - - - -
6. Tº half an eye. Herbert.
A new coal is
- .*.* not to be caſt on the nitre, till
tion be quite ended : , till the detona-
out of the crucible.’ unleſs the Puffing matter blow *; l
it.
To PUFF. v. a.
1. To ſwell as with wind.
Let him fall by his own greatneſs,
And puff him up with glory, till it ſwell
And break him. Denham's Sºphy.
Flattering of others, and boaſting of ourſelves, may ſe
referred to lying ; the one to pleaſe others, and puff them up
with ſelf-conceit: the other to gain more honour than is due
to ourſelves. Ray on the Creatiºn.
2. To drive or agitate with blaſts of wind.
I have ſeen the cannon,
When it has blown his ranks into the air,
And from his arm pufft his own brother. Shakespeare .
Have I not heard the ſea, puff"d up with winds,
Rage like an angry boar chafed with ſweat Shakespeare .
Th'unerring ſun by certain ſigns declares,
When the South projects a ſtormy day,
And when the clearing North will puff the clouds away.
Dryan's Wirgil', Georgiºs.
Why muſt the winds all hold their tongue? -
If they a little breath ſhould raiſe,
Would that have ſpoil'd the poet's ſong,
Or puff"d away the monarch's praiſe Prior.
I have been endeavouring very buſily to raiſe a friendſhip,
which the firſt breath of any ill-natured by-ſtander could
puff away. Pºpe.
3. To drive with a blaſt of breath ſcornfully.
When ſhe dances in the wind,
And ſhakes her wings, and will not ſtay,
I puff the proſtitute away;
The little or the much ſhe gave is quietly reſign'd. Dryd.
4. To ſwell or blow up with praiſe.
The attendants of courts engage them in quarrels of juriſ-
dićtion, being truly paraſiti curiæ, in puffing a court up beyond
her bounds for their own advantage. Bacon.
5. To ſwell or elate with pride.
His looke like a coxcombe up puffed with pride. Tºſºr.
This army, led by a tender prince,
Whoſe ſpirit with divine ambition puff,
Makes mouths at the inviſible event. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Think not of men above that which is written, that no
one of you be puffed up one againſt another. I Cor. iv. 6.
Your anceſtors, who puff your mind with pride,
Did not your honour, but their own advance. Dryden.
Who ſtands ſafeſt; tell me, is it he
That ſpreads and ſwells in puff'd poſterity? Pope.
The Phaeacians were ſo puffed up with their conſtant féli-
city, that they thought nothing impoſſible. Brzºne.
Pu‘FFER. n.ſ. [from puff..] One that puffs.
Pu'FFIN. n.J. [puffino, Italian.J
1. A water fowl.
Among the firſt ſort, we reckon the dipchick, murrs,
creyſers, curlews and puffins. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwall.
2. A kind of fiſh.
3. A kind of fungus filled with duſt.
Pu’F FING A PPLE. m. ſ. A ſort of apple.
Pu FFINGLY. adv. [from puffing.]
1. Tunidly; with ſwell.
2. With ſhortneſs of breath.
Pu‘FFY. adj. [from puff.]
1. Windy; flatulent.
Emphyſema is a light puffy tumour, eaſily yielding to the
preſſure of your fingers, and ariſeth again in the inſtant you
take them off. ///eman's Surgery.
2. Tumid; turgid.
An unjudicious poet, who aims at loftineſs, runs eaſily
into the ſwelling puffy ſtile, becauſe it looks like greatneſs.
- Dryden.
PUG. m. ſ. ſpiza, Saxon, a girl. Skinner.] A kind name of a
monkey, or any thing tenderly loved. -
Upon ſetting him down, and calling him tug, I found him
to be her favourite monkey. Addison's Speciatºr.
PU GGER ED. adj. [perhaps for packered.] Crowded; compli-
cated. I never found this word in any other paſſage.
Nor are we to cavil at the red puggered attire of the turkey,
and the long excreſcency that hangsdown over his bill, when
he ſwells with pride. Mºre's Artidºte againſ Atheiſm:
Pug H. interſ, [corrupted from puff, or borrowed from the ſound.]
A word of contempt.
PU'GIL. m. ſ. [pugile, Fr.] What is taken up between the
thumb and two firſt fingers. Diº.
Take violets, and infuſe a good pugil of them in a quart
of vinegar. Bacon's Nat. Hi/i.
Pu GNAc ious. adj. [..ºugnax, Lat..] Inclinable to fight; quar-
relſome ; fighting.
Pug NA’city, n. J. [from pugnax, Lat.j Quarrelſomeneſs;
inclination to fight.
PU is N E. adj. [fili; nº, French. It is commonly ſpoken and
written pany. See PUNY.]
1. Young ; younger; later in time. -
When the place of a chief judge becomes vacant, a fºſſie
judge, who hath approved himſelf deſerving, ſhould be pre-
ferred. Bacon's Advice to *:::
Fie
Aiyworth.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U L
º
-
If he undergo any alteration, it muſt be in time, or of a
puiſne date to eternity. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
2. Petty; inconſiderable; ſmall.
A puiſne tilter, that ſpurs his horſe but one ſide, breaks his
ſtaff like a noble gooſe. Shakeſp. As You Like it.
Pu1'ss ANce. n. ſ. [puiſance, Fr.] Power; ſtrength; force.
The chariots were drawn not by the ſtrength of horſes,
but by the puiſſance of men. Deſiruction of Troy.
Grandfires, babies and old women;
Or paſt, or not arriv'd to, pith and puiſance. Shakeſp.
Look with forehead bold and big enough
Upon the pow'r and puiſance of the king. Shakeſp.
Our puiſſance is our own; our own right hand
Shall teach us higheſt deeds. Milton.
PUISSANT. adj. [puiſant, Fr.] Powerful; ſtrong; forcible.
The queen is coming with a puiſant hoſt. Shakeſp.
Told the moſt piteous tale of Lear
That ever ear receiv'd; which in recounting
His grief grew puiſant, and the ſtrings of life
Began to crack. Shakep. King Lear.
For piety renown'd and puiſant deeds. AMilton.
The climate of Syria, the far diſtance from the ſtrength of
Chriſtendom, and the near neighbourhood of thoſe that were
moſt puiſant among the Mahometans, cauſed that famous en-
terpriſe, after a long continuance of terrible war, to be quite
abandoned. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Puissantly, adv. [from puiſant.]. Powerfully ; forcibly.
PUKE. m. ſ. [of uncertain derivation.] Vomit; medicine
cauſing vomit.
To Puke. v. n. To ſpew ; to vomit.
The infant
Mewling and puking in the nurſe's arms. Shakeſp.
Pu'KER. n. J. [from puke.] Medicine cauſing a vomit.
The puker rue,
The ſwectner ſaſſafras are added too. Garth.
Pu'lcHRITUDE. m. ſ. [pulchritudo, Lat..] Beauty; grace;
handſomeneſs; quality oppoſite to deformity.
Neither will it agree unto the beauty of animals, wherein
there is an approved pulchritude. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Pulchritude is conveyed by the outward ſenſes unto the ſoul,
but a more intellectual faculty is that which reliſhes it. More.
By their virtuous behaviour º, compenſate the hardneſs
of their favour, and by the pulchritude of their ſouls make
up what is wanting in the beauty of their bodies. South.
That there is a great pulchritude and comelineſs of propor-
tion in the leaves, flowers and fruits of plants, is atteſted by
the general verdićt of mankind. Ray on the Creation.
To Püle. v. n. (piauler, Fr.]
1. To cry like a chicken.
Let the ſongs be loud and cheerful, and not chirpings or
pºilings; let the muſick likewiſe be ſharp and loud. Bacon.
2. To whine; to cry; to whimper.
To ſpeak puling like a beggar at Hallomaſs.
To have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To anſwer, I’ll not wed. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
Weak tuling things unable to ſuſtain
Their ſhare of labour, and their bread to gain. Dryden.
When ice covered the water, the child bathed his legs; a
nd when he began this cuſtom, was puling and tender. Locke.
This puling whining harlot rules his reaſon,
And prompts his zeal for Edward's baſtard brood. Rowe.
Pu Lick. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
Puli'cos E. adj. [pulicºſus, fulºx, Latin.] Abounding with
fleas. Dicſ.
Pu'liol. n.ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
To PULL. v. a. [pullian, Saxon.]
1. To draw violently towards one.
What they ſeem to offer us with the one hand, the ſame
with the other they pull back. Hooker.
He put forth his hand, and pulled the dove in. Gen. viii. 9.
His hand which he put forth dried up, ſo that he could not
pull it in again. 1 Kings xiii. 4.
Pull them out like ſheep for the ſlaughter, and prepare them
for the day of ſlaughter. jer. vii. 11.
They pulled away the ſhoulder and ſtopped their ears. Zech.
Ill fortune never cruſhed that man, whom good fortune
deceived not; I therefore have counſelled my friends to place
all things ſhe gave them ſo, as ſhe might take them from
them, not pull them. Benj. john, on's Diſcovery.
2. To draw forcibly.
He was not ſo deſirous of wars, as without juſt cauſe of
Shakeſp.
his own to pull them upon him. Hayward.
A boy came in great hurry to pull off my boots. Swift.
3. To pluck; to gather.
When bounteous Autumn rears his head,
He joys to pull the ripen'd pear. Dryden.
Flax pulled in the bloom, will be whiter and ſtronger than
if let ſtand till the ſeed is ripe. AMortimer.
4. To tear; to rend. - -
He hath turned aſide my ways, and pulled me in pieces ;
he hath made mc deſolate. Lann. iii. 2.
P U L
Yº ſº" off the robe with the garment from them that paſs
by ſecurely. º Mic. ii. 8.
hº" my cloaths, and pulled off the hair from off my
- E dr. iii. -
5. To Pull down. To ſubvert; to demoliſh. 1 Eſdr, viii. 71
Although it was judged in form of a ſtatute, that he ſhould
ºniſhed, and his whole eſtate confiſcated, and his houſes
pulled dºwn, yet his caſe even then had no great blot of ig-
nominy... - Bacon.
In political affaiº, as well as mechanical, it is far eaſier ,
pull down than build up; for that ſtructure, which was above
ten ſummers a building, and that by no mean artiſts, was
deſtroyed In a moment. Howel's Vocal Forg/?.
When God is ſaid to build or pull dºwn, 'tis not to be un-
derſtood of an houſe; God builds and unbuilds worlds. Burn,
6. To Pull down. To degrade.
He begs the gods to turn blind fortune's wheel,
To raiſe the wretched, and pull down the proud. Roſcom.
What title has this queen but lawleſs force :
And force muſt full her down. Dryden.
7. To Pull up. To extirpate; to eradicate.
What cenſure, doubting thus of innate principles, I may
deſerve from men, who will be apt to call it pulling up the old
foundations of knowledge, I cannot tell; I perſuade myſelf,
that the way I have purſued, being conformable to truth, lays
thoſe foundations ſurer. Locke.
Pult; nº ſ [from the verb.] The aët of pulling; pluck.
This wreſtling pull between Corineus and Gogmagog is
reported to have befallen at Dover. Carºw.
Duke of Glo'ſter, ſcarce himſelf, -
That bears ſo ſhrewd a maim ; two pulls at once;
His lady baniſh'd, and a limb opt off. Shakeſ?.
I awaked with a violent pull upon the ring, which was
faſtened at the top of my box. Gulliver's Travels.
PU'LLER. m. ſ. [from pull.] One that pulls.
Shameleſs Warwick, peace
Proud ſetter up and puller down of kings.
PU'LLEN. n.ſ. (pulain, old Fr.j Poultry.
PU'LLET. n.ſ. [poulet, Fr.] A young hen.
Brew me a pottle of ſack finely.
—With eggs, Sir
—Simple of itſelf; I’ll no pullet ſperm in my brewage. Sha.
I felt a hard tumour on the right ſide, the bigneſs of a
pullet's egg. J/ſeman's Surgery.
They died not becauſe the pullets would not feed, but be-
cauſe the devil foreſaw their death, he contrived that abſti-
nence in them. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
PU'LLEY. n.ſ. [poulº, Fr.] A ſmall wheel turning on a pivot,
with a furrow on its outſide in which a rope runs.
Nine hundred of the ſtrongeſt men were employed to draw
up theſe cords by many pulleys faſtened on the poles, and, in
three hours, I was raiſed and ſlung into the engine. Gulliver.
Here pullies make the pond’rous oak aſcend. Gay.
To PULLU'LATE. v. n. [pullulo, Lat. pulluler, Fr.] To ger-
minate ; to bud.
PU'LM on ARY. adj. [from pulmo, Lat.] Belonging to the
lungs.
The force of the air upon the pulmonary artery is but ſmall
in reſpect of that of the heart. Arbuthnot.
Cold air, by its immediate contact with the ſurface of the
lungs, is capable of producing defluxions upon the lungs, ul-
cerations, and all forts of pulmonick conſumptions. Arbuthnot.
Pu'l Mon ARY. n.ſ. [pulmonaire, Fr.] The herb lungwort. Ainſ.
Pu‘LMo Nick, ad. [pulmo, Lat.] Belonging to the lungs.
An ulcer of the lungs may be a cauſe of pulmonick conſump-
tion, or conſumption of the lungs. Harvey.
PULP. m. ſ. ſtupa, Lat. pulpe, Fr.]
1. Any ſoft maſs.
The jaw bones have no marrow ſevered, but a little fºlp
of marrow diffuſed. Bacon’s Nat. Hi/?.
2. The ſoft part of fruit; the part of fruit diſtinct from the ſeeds
and rind. -
The ſavoury pulp they chew, and in the rind, -
Still as they thirſted, ſcoop the brimming ſtream. Miltºn.
Beſides this uſe of the pulp or pericarpium for the guard of
the ſeed, it ſerves alſo by a ſecondary intention for the ſuſte-
nance of man and other animals. Ray.
The grub
v Oft unobſerv’d invades the vital core,
Pernicious tenant, and her ſecret cave
Enlarges hourly, preying on the pºp
Ceaſeleſs. -
PU'LPIT. n. ſ. [pul; it um, Lat. pulpitre, pipitre, Fr. J
1. A place raiſed on high, where a fpeaker ſtands.
Produce his body to the º
d in the pulpit, as becomes a friends
sº in ...!!!" of his funeral. Shºff. julius Caſar.
2. The higher deſk in the church where the ſermon is pro-
nounced, diſtinct from the lower deſk where prayers are read.
We ſee on our theatres, the examples of vice rewarded,
yet it ought not to be an argument againſt the art, any more
than the impletics of the pulpit in the late rebellion. Pºg
I ir
Shakeſp.
Bailey.
Philips.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U L
P U M
- ºr sciven a handſome pulpit cloth, and railed in
wº .. %, Spectatºr, No 112.
Biſhops were not Wont to preach out of the fulfit. Aylºff.
Pulpits their ſacred ſatyr learn d to ſpare,
And vice admir'd to find a flatt rer there. Pºpe.
Pulpous, adj. [from pulp.J. Soºt. -
The redſtreak's pulpous fruit
with gold irradiate, and vermilion ſhines. . Philº.
Pulpousness. n.ſ. (from pulpºus.] The quality of being
pulpous.
Pulpy, adj. [from pulp.] Soft; pappy. -
In the walnut and plumbs is a thick pulºy covering, then al
hard ſhell, within which is the ſeed. Kay on the Creation.
Putrefaction deſtroys the ſpecifick difference of one vege-
table from another, converting them intº a pulpy ſubſtance of
an animal nature. Arbuthnºt on Mºnts
Pulsation. n.ſ. [pulation, Fr. flºatia, from pºſº, at-l
The act of beating or moving with quick ſtrokes againſt any
thing oppoſing.
#. of the left vein was thus contrived, to avoid
the pulſation of the great artery. . Brown's J. ulgar Errours.
Theſe commotions of the mind and body oppreſs the heart,
whereby it is choaked and obſtructed in its fu/ation. Harvey.
Pulsa"ror. m. ſ. [from pulſº, Lat..] A ſtriker; a beater.
Pu’s E. m. ſ. [pulſus, Lat.] - - - -
1. The motion of an artery as the blood is driven through it by
the heart, and as it is perceived by the touch.
Pulſe is thus accounted for : when the left ventricle of the
heart contracts, and throws its blood into the great artery, the
blood in the artery is not only thruſt forward towards the ex-
tremities, but the channel of the artery is likewiſe dilated ;
becauſe fluids, when they are preſſed, preſs again to all ſides,
and their preſſure is always perpendicular to the ſides of the con-
taining veſſels; but the coats of the artery, by any ſmall impe-
tus, may be diſtended : therefore, upon the contraction or ſyſ-
tole of the heart, the blood from the left ventricle will not only
preſs the blood in the artery forwards, but both together will
diſtend the fides of the artery: when the impetus of the blood
againſt the ſides of the artery ceaſes; that is, when the left
ventricle ceaſes to contract, then the ſpiral fibres of the ar-
tery, by their natural elaſticity, return again to their former
ſtate, and contračt the channel of the artery, till it is again
dilated by the diaſtole of the heart: this diaſtole of the artery
is called its pulſe, and the time the ſpiral fibres are returning
to their natural ſtate, is the diſtance between two pulſe: ; this
pulſe is in all the arteries of the body at the ſame time; for,
while the blood is thruſt out of the heart into the artery, the
artery being full, the blood muſt move in all the arteries at
the ſame time ; and becauſe the arteries are conical, and the
blood moves from the baſis of the cone to the apex, therefore
the blood muſt ſtrike againſt the ſides of the veſſels, and con-
ſcquently every point of the artery muſt be dilated at the ſame
time that the blood is thrown out of the left ventricle of the
heart; and as ſoon as the elaſticity of the ſpiral fibres can
overcome the impetus of the blood, the artcries are again con-
tracted : thus two cauſes operating alternately, the heart and
fibres of the arteries, keep the blood in a continual motion:
an high pule is either vehement or ſtrong, but if the dilatation
of the artery does not riſe to its uſual height, it is called a low
or weak pulſe ; but if between its dilatations there paſſes more
time than uſual, it is called a ſlow pulſe: again, if the coats
of an artery feel harder than uſual from any cauſe whatſoever,
it is called an hard pulſe ; but if by any contrary cauſe they
are foſter, then it is called a ſoft fift. &amp;iny.
Think you, I bear the ſhears of deſtiny
Have I commandment on the puff of life? Shakeſp.
The proſperity of the neighbour kingdoms is not inferior
to that of this, which, according to the fuſe of ſtates, is a
great diminution of their health. Clarendºn.
My body is from all diſeaſes free;
My tempºrate pulſe does regularly leat. Dryden.
If one drop of blood remain in the heart at every pulſe,
theſe: in many fulº, will grow to a conſiderable maſs. ’Aſ’
2. Oſcillation; vibration; alternate expanſion and contraction :
alternate approach and receſſion. - &gt;
The vibrations or pules of this medium, th
cauſe the alternate fits of eaſy tranſmiſſion aſ d eaſy reflexion,
muſt be ſwifter than light, and by conſequence above ſeven
hundred thouſand times ſwifter than ſounds. Newtºn.
3. Tº fºci one's Pºsk. To try or know one's mind artfully.
4. [From pºll.] Leguminous plants.
With Elijah he partook,
at they may
Or as a gueſt with Daniel at his pºſſ. Milion.
V Mºrtals, from your fellows blood abſtain
W hile corn and pulſe by nature are beſtow'd. Dryden.
To º * as advantageous to land as other pulſes. Mºrt.
†. ** [from the noun..] To beat a tie pulſe.
animals ** when ſeparated wholly from the body in ſome
Pl: ; º sº ſtill to ſº for a conſiderable time. Rºy.
º ºn pulſus, Lat.] The act of driving or of
Admir it mi h * 9PPoſition to ſuction or traštion.
1ght - -- -
that of attractiºn ule the motion of pºſion, yet it could never
- 4/ºre's Divine Dialºgues.
By attraſtion we do not here underſtand what is improperly
called ſo, in the operations of drawing, ſucking and pºp-
ing, which is really pulſºn and truſion. Bººtley.
Pe Lv ERA el E. adj. [from pulveri, Lºt. Poºle to be reduced
, , , , , ſº
o (ſult.
In making the firſt ink, I could by filtration ſeparate a pretty
ſtore of a black pulverable ſubſtance that remained in the
fire. Pºyle on Cºlours.
Puly ERIz Arios. m. ſ. [from pºwerize.J. The act of pow.
dering ; reduction to dult or powder.
To PU'LVERIZE. v. a. [from ful cris, Lat. pulverift r, Fr.]
To reduce to powder; to reduce to duit.
If the experiment be carefully made, the whole mixture
will ſhoot into fine cryſtals, that ſeen to be of an uniform
ſubſtance, and are conſiſtent enough to be even blittle, and
to endure to be fulverized and ſiſted. Bºyle.
Pu Ly ERULExce. n.ſ. (fulverulºnia, Lat..] Duſtincſ, ; abun-
dance of duſt.
Pulvi L. n.ſ. ſpid'villºn, Lat.) Swect ſcents.
The toilette, nºrtcry of charms,
Completely furnin'd with bright beauty's arms,
The patch, the powder-box, prºviſ, perfumes. Gay.
To Puly 1. v. a. (from the noun..] To ſprinkle with per-
fumes in powder.
Have you fulvilled the coachman and poſtilion, that the
may not ſtink of the ſtable. Congreve's jºy ºf the J/ºrld.
Pu'Mice. m. ſ. ſtumex, pumicis, Lat.j -
The twice is evidently a ſlag or cinder of ſome foº!, ori-
ginally bearing another form, and only reduced to this ſtate
by the violent action of fire : it is a lax and ſpºngy matter
full of little pores and cavities, found in maſſes of different
ſizes and ſhapes, of a pale, whitiſh, grey colour: the prºmise
is found in many parts of the world, but particularly about
the burning mountains Etna, Veſuvius and Hecla : it is uſed
as a dentiffice. Hill"; J/iteria Jºlia.
So long I ſhot, that all was ſpent,
Though pumice ſtones I haſtly hºt,
And threw ; but nought availed. Spenſºr.
Etna and Veſuvius, which conſiſt upon ſulphur, ſhoot forth
ſinoke, aſhes and pumice, but no water. Bacon.
Near the Lucrine lake,
Steams of ſulphur raiſe a ſtifling heat,
And through the porcs of the wann pumice ſweat. Addison.
Pu MMEL. m. ſ. Sec Pox:Mel.
PUMP. n.ſ. pompe, Dutch and French.] -
I. An engine by which water is drawn up from wells: its ope-
ration is performed by the preſſure of the air.
A pump grown dry will yield no water, unleſs you pour a
little water into it firſt. Al/re's Antidºte againſ? Zhejºn.
In the framing that great ſhip built by Hiero, Athenæus
mentions this inſtrument as being inſtead of a pump, by the
help of which one man might cally drain out the water
though very deep. // 'ins's Dicºlaluf.
Theſe pumps may be made ſingle with a common pºp
handle, for one man to work them, or double for two.
A ſortinier.
2. A ſhoe with a thin ſole and low heel. -
Get good firings to your beards, new ribbons to your
pumps. Shºff. ..] ſºftºnner Night's 12 ºn.
Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' th' heel. Shºp.
Follow me this jeſt, now, till thou haſt worn out thy ſº,
that when the ſingle ſcle of it is worn, the jeſt may remº"
ſingular. Shakeſp. Kºmº and jºist.
Thalia's ivy ſhews her prerogative over comical pocy;
her maſk, mantle and pumps are ornaments belonging to the
flage. Prachº.
The water and ſweat • ,-- * * *
Spliſh ſplaſh in their pumps. Swift' ºffº.
To Pum P. v. n. [fornpºn, Dutch..] To work a pump : *
throw out water by a pump. - -
The folly of him, who pumps very laboriouſly in a ſhip,
yet neglects to ſtop the leak. D.ay ºf Piety.
To PUMP. v. a.
1. To raiſe or throw out by means of a pump.
2. To examine artfully by fly interrogatories, ſo as to draw out
any ſecrets or concealments.
The one's the learned knight, ſeek out,
And pump them what they come about.
Aſk him what paſſes
Amongſt his brethren, he'll hide nothing from yoº . .
But pºmp not me for politicks. Otway's ſeniº. Prºſºrºd.
PCM PER. n.ſ.. [from famp.] The perſon of the inſtiun”
that pumps. -
The Hºme laſted about two minutes, from the time *
pumper began to draw out air. Bºyle.
PUM Pios. m. ſ. A plant. - - -
The flower of the puniºn conſiſts of one leaf, which is
bell-ſhaped, expanded at the top, and cut into ºver” “g.
ments: of theſ flowers ſome are male, and ſome female, *
in the cucumbers and melons: the female flowers grow Pº"
the top of the embryo, which afterwards becomes an oblong
or round fleſhy fruit, having ſometimes an hard, rugged and
2 u:1eVell
Huillºras.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U N
P U N
uneven rind, with knobs and furrows, and is often divided
into three parts, incloſing flat ſeeds that are edged or rimmed
about as it were with a ring, and fixed to a ſpongy pla-
centa. - Miller.
We'll uſe this groſs watry pumpion, and teach him to know
turtles from jays. Shakeſp. Merry //ives of I/indſor.
PUN. n. ſ. [I know not whence this word is to be deduced:
to pun, is to grind or beat with a pºſtle; can pun mean an
empty ſound, like that of a mortar beaten, as clench, the old
word for pun, ſeems only a corruption of clink Pj An equi-
vocation; a quibble ; an expreſſion where a word has at once
different meanings. -
It is not the word, but the figure that appears on the me-
dal: cuniculus may ſtand for a rabbit or a mine, but the
picture of a rabbit is not the picture of a mine: a pun can be
no more engraven, than it can be tranſlated. Addiſon.
But fill their purſe, our poet's work is done,
Alike to them by pathos, or by pun. Pope.
To Pun. v. n. [from the noun.] To quibble; to uſe the ſame
word at once in different ſenſes.
The hand and head were never loſt, of thoſe
Who dealt in doggrel, or who punn'd in proſe. Dryden.
You would be a better man, if you could pun like Sir
Triſtram. Tatler, N° 57.
To PUNCH. v. a. ſpoin;onner, Fr.] To bore or perforate by
driving a ſharp inſtrument.
When I was mortal, my anointed bod
By thee was punched full of deadly holes. Shakeſp.
By reaſon of its conſtitution it continued open, as I have
ſeen a hole punched in leather. JWiſeman's Surgery.
Your work will ſometimes require to have holes punched in
it at the forge, you muſt then make a ſteel punch, and har-
den the point of it without tempering. Moxon.
The fly may, with the hollow and ſharp tube of her womb,
punch and perforate the ſkin of the eruca, and caſt her eggs
into her body. Ray on the Creation.
PUNCH. n.ſ. (from the verb.]
1. A pointed inſtrument, which, driven by a blow, perforates
bodies.
The ſhank of a key the punch cannot ſtrike, becauſe the
ſhank is not forged with ſubſtance ſufficient; but the drill cuts
a true round hole. A40xon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
2. [Cant word.j A liquour made by mixing ſpirit with water,
ſugar, and the juice of lemons.
The Weſt India dry gripes are occaſioned by lime juice in
punch. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
No brute can endure the taſte of ſtrong liquor, and con-
ſequently it is againſt all the rules of hieroglyph to aſſign
thoſe animals as patrons of punch. Swift.
3. [Punchinello, Italian.] The buffoon or harlequin of the
puppet-ſhow.
Of rareeſhows he ſung and punch's feats. Gay.
4. Punch is a horſe that is well ſet and well knit, having a ſhort
back and thin ſhoulders, with a broad neck, and well lined
with fleſh. Farrier’s Dić7.
5. [Pumilio obºſus, Lat..] In contempt or ridicule, a ſhort fat
fellow.
PU'NcheoN. m. ſ. [poinſon, Fr.]
1. An inſtrument driven ſo as to make a hole or impreſſion.
He granted liberty of coining to certain cities and abbies,
allowing them one ſtaple and two puncheons at a rate. Camd.
2. A meaſure of liquids. -
Pu'NchF R. m. ſ. [from punch.] An inſtrument that makes an
impreſſion or hole.
In the upper jaw are five teeth before, not inciſors or cut-
ters, but thick punchers. Grew's Muſæum.
PUNCTILIO. m. ſ. A ſmall nicety of behaviour; a nice
point of exactneſs.
Common people are much aſtoniſhed, when they hear of
thoſe ſolemn conteſts which are made among the great, upon
the punéſilios of a publick ceremony. Addiſon.
Punºffilio is out of doors, the moment a daughter clan-
deſtinely quits her father's houſe. Clariſſa.
PUNCTI Lious. adj. [from punéſilio.] Nice; exact; punétual
to ſuperſtition.
Some depend on a punéſilious obſervance of divine laws,
which they hope will attone for the habitual tranſgreſſion of
the reſt. Rogers's Sermons.
PUNct I Liousness. n. ſ. [from pundilious.] Nicety; exact-
neſs of behaviour.
Pu'Ncto. m. ſ. [punto, Spaniſh.]
I. Nice point of ceremony.
The final conqueſt of Granada from the Moors, king Fer-
dinando diſplayed in his letters, with all the particularities
and religious puncios and ceremonies that were obſerved in
the reception of that city and kingdom. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. The point in fencing.
Vat be all you come for 2
–To ſee thee here, to ſee thee there, to ſee thee paſs thy
puncio. Shakeſ?. Merry //ives of //indſºr.
PUNCTUAL. adj. [fºund/uel, Fr.] ºf - ſ
1. Compriſed in a point; conſiſting in a point.
* This carth a ſpot, a grain
An atom with the .. tº, -
And all her number'd ſtars, that ſeem to row!
Spaces lºcomprehenſible; for ſuch
Their *ance argues, and their ſwift return
Diurnal, merely to officiate light
Round this opacous earth, this punctual ſpot. Milton.
2. Exact ; nice; punctilious.
A gentleman punciual of his word, when he had heard that
two had agreed upon a meeting, and the one neglected his
hour, would ſay of him, he is a young man then. Bacon.
This miſtake to avoid, we muſt obſerve the punéïual diffe-
rences of time, and ſo diſtinguiſh thereof, as not to confound
or loſe the one in the other. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
That the women are menſtruent, and the mºn pubeſcent
at the year of twice ſeven, is accounted a punctual truth. Bro.
He was punéïual and juſt in all his dealings. Atterbury.
The correſpondence of the death and ſufferings of our loºd
is ſo punctual and exact, that they ſeem rather like a hiſtory of
events paſt, than a prophecy of ſuch as were to come. Rogers.
PUNCTU'ALITY. m. ſ. [from punctual.] Nicety; ſcrupulous
exactneſs.
For the encouragement of thoſe that hereafter ſhould ſerve
other princes with that punctuality as Sophronio had done, he
commanded him to offer him a blank, wherein he might ſet
down his own conditions. - Howel's ſocal Foreſt.
Though ſome of theſe punctualities did not ſo much con-
duce to preſerve the text, yet all of them ſhew, the infinite
care which was taken, that there might be no miſtake in a
ſingle letter. Grew's Coſmol.
PUNCTUALLY. adv. [from punéſual.] Nicely; exactly; ſcru-
pulouſly.
There were no uſe at all for war or law, if every man had
prudence to conceive how much of right were due both to
and from himſelf, and were withal ſo punctually juſt as to per-
form what he knew requiſite, and to reſt contented with his
OWn. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Concerning the heavenly bodies, there is ſo much exactneſs
in their motions, that they punctually come to the ſame pe-
riods to the hundredth part of a minute. Ray on the Creation.
I freely bring what Moſcs hath related to the teſt, compar-
ing it with things as now they ſtand; and finding his account
to be punctually true, I fairly declare what I find. Woodward.
Pu'NcTUALNEss. n. ſ. [from punéïual.] Exactneſs ; nicety.
The moſt literal tranſlation of the ſcriptures, in the moſt
natural ſignification of the words, is generally the beſt ; and
the ſame punélualnéſ, which debaſeth other writings, pre-
ſerveth the ſpirit and majeſty of the ſacred text. Felton.
PUNCTUATION. m. ſ. ſpunčium, Lat.] The act or method of
pointing.
It ought to do it willingly, without being forced to it by
any change in the words or punctuation. Addiſon.
Pu'NcTURE. m. ſ. ſpunčius, Lat..] A ſmall prick; a hole
made with a very ſharp point. - -
With the loadſtone of Laurentius Guaſcus, whatſoever
needles or bodies were touched, the wounds and punctures
made thereby were never felt. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Nerves may be wounded by ſciſſion or puncture : the former
way being cut through, they are irrecoverable ; but when
pricked by a ſharp-pointed weapon, which kind of wound is
called a princiure, they are much to be regarded. Wiſeman.
To Pu'Nct ULATE. v. m. ſpunéjulum, Lat.] To mark with
ſmall ſpots.
The ſtudds have their ſurface punétulated, as if ſet all over
with other ſtudds infinitely leſſer. J/oodward.
PU'NDLE. n. ſ. [mulier pumila &amp; obeſa, Lat.] A ſhort and fat
WOn 1311. Ainſworth.
Pu'NGA R. m. ſ. ſpagurus, Lat.] A fiſh. . Aidſworth.
Pu'NGENcy, n.ſ.. [from pungent.]
1. Power of pricking. -
Any ſubſtance, which by its pungency can wound the worms,
will kill them, as ſteel and hartſhorn. - Arbuthnot.
2. Heat on the tongue; acridneſs.
3. Power to pierce the mind. - -
An opinion of the ſucceſsfulneſs of the work is as neceſ:
ſary to found a purpoſe of undertaking it, as the authority of
commands, the perſuaſiveneſs of promiſes, pungeny of me-
naces, or proſpect of miſchiefs upon neglect can be. Hanºi.
4. Acrimoniouſneſs; keeneſs. - -
when he hath confidered the force and pungency of thºſe
expreſſions applied to the fathers of that Nicene ſynod by the
Weſtern biſhops, he may abate his rage towards me. Stillingfl.
PUNGENT. aff. [pungens, Lat.]
1. Pricking. - ..
Juſt where the breath of life his noſtrils drew,
A charge of ſnuff the wily virgin threw ;
The gnomes direct to ev'ry atom juſt, - r
The jungent grains of itiliating duit. Pºpe's Rq. ºf the Lºt.
2. Sharp on the tongue; acrid. - - -
Do not the ſharp and pungent taſtes of acids ariſe from the
ſtrong attraction, whereby the acid particles ruſh ºpºl, anº
agitate the particles of the tongue. Newton's Opticº.
20 T 3. Piercing :
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U N
P U P
I
3. Piercing; ſharp;
Thou can't
Incloſe him in a wo *
with pungent pains on ey'ry
So Regulus in torments dy’d.
4. Acrimonious ; biting.
It conſiſts chiefly a • - a -
facetious way of jetting.
ſet him on the rack,
oden tow'r,
ſide ;
Swift's Miſcellanies.
ſharp and pungent manner of ſpeech ;
Dryden.
tly in a - - -
rº. ...) A wallouſe; a bugg. Hudibras. Ainſwºrth.
PUN'ceous adj. [pumiceus, Lat: Purple. Dićf.
ſmallneſs.
pºsiness. n.ſ.. [from puny..] Pettine's 3
To PUNISH. v. a. ſpuniz, Lat.]
1.To chaſtiſe; to affict with penalties of death for ſome crime.
Your purpos'd low correction
Is ſuch, as baſeſt and the meaneſt wretches --
Are puniſhed with. - - Shakeſp. King Lear.
If you will not hearken, I will puniſh you even times
more for your ". ith pain or deatl Lev. xxvi. 18.
. To revenge a fault with pain or death.
#!. adj. º Fr. from puniſh..] Worthy of
puniſhment ; capable of puniſhment. . . - -
Theft is naturally puniſhable, but the kind of puniſhment ls
poſitive, and ſuch lawful, as men ſhall think with diſcretion
convenient to appoint. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 9.
Sith creatures, which have no underſtanding, can ſhew no
will; and where no will is, there is no ſin; and only that
which finneth, is ſubject to puniſhment; which way ſhould
any ſuch creature be puniſhable by the law of God Hooker.
Their bribery is leſs puniſhable, when bribery opened the
door by which they entred. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
Pu'Nish' bleNEss. n. ſ. [from puniſhable.] The quality of
deſerving or admitting puniſhment.
Pu'Nisher. m. ſ. [from puniſh..] One who inflicts pains for a
crime.
This knows my puniſher; therefore as far
From granting me, as I from begging peace. Miltºn.
Pu'Nish MENT. n.ſ. ſpuniſement, Fr. J. Any infliction impoſed
in vengeance of a crime.
The houſe of endleſs pain is built thereby,
In which ten thouſand ſorts of puniſhments
The curſed creatures do eternally torment. Fa. Queen.
Unleſs it were a bloody murtherer,
I never gave them condign puniſhment. Shakesp.
Thou, through the judgment of God, ſhalt receive juſt
puniſhment for thy pride. 2 Mac. vii. 36.
Is not deſtruction to the wicked and a ſtrange puniſhment
to the workers of iniquity ? job xxxi. 3.
Had I a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues,
I could not half thoſe horrid crimes repeat,
Nor half the puniſhment; thoſe crimes have met. Dryden.
The rewards and puniſhments of another life, which the
Almighty has cſtabliſhed, as the enforcements of his law,
are of weight enough to determine the choice, againſt what-
ever pleaſure or pain this life can ſhew. . Locke.
PUNITION. n.ſ. [punition, Fr. punitio, Lat.] Puniſhment. Ainſ.
PUNITIVE. adj. [from punio, Lat..] Awarding or inflicting
puniſhment.
Neither is the cylinder charged with fin, whether by God
or men, nor any punitive law enacted by either againſt its
rolling down the hill. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Pu‘NIT or Y. adj. [from punio, Lat..] Puniſhing; tending to
puniſhment.
PUNK. m. ſ. A whore; a common proſtitute; a ſtrumpet.
She may be a punk; for many of them are neither maid,
widow, nor wife. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
And made them fight, like mad or drunk,
For dame religion as for punk. Hudibras.
Near theſe a nurſery erects its head,
Where unfledg'd actors learn to laugh and cry,
r Where infant punks their tender voices try. Dryden.
Pu'NSTER. m. ſ. [from pun.] A quibbler; a low wit who en-
deavours at reputation by double meaning.
His mother was couſin to Mr. Swan, gameſter and punſler
of London. Arbuthnot and Pope.
To Punt. v. n. To play at baſſet and ombre.
QHe is for ſetting up an aſſembly for baſſet, where none
ſhall be admitted to punt, that have not taken the oaths. Z.
When a duke to Janſen punts at White's,
9. .. lº. melts away,
atan himſelf feels far leſs joy than they.
PUNY. adj. [pui, ne, Fr.] Joy y Pºpe.
1. Young.
* Interior; petty; of an under rate.
Aº the king's name forty thouſand names :
Atº * my name; a puny ſubject ſtrikes
y great sº - Shakeſp. Rich. II,
Leſt that thv wi now me not,
In puny i. with ſpits, and boys with ſtones,
*y me. . . Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The puny habita Drive -
Seduce them to nts; or if not drive,
our party, Milton.
This friendſhip is of that ſtrength, as to remain unſhaken
by ſuch aſſaults, which yet are ſtrong enough to ſhake down
and annihilate the friendinip of little pºny minds. South.
Jove at their head aſcending fion the ſea,
A ſhoal of pany pow're attend his way. 1)rydºn.
Pu's Y. m. ſ. A young unexperienced unſeaſoned wretch.
Tenderneſs of heart Inakes a man but a puty in this fin ;
it ſpoils the growth, and crºps the crowning exploits of this
vice. South's Sermºr.
To Pup. v. m. [from pººr.] To bring forth whelps : uſed of
a bitch bringing young.
PUPIL. n.ſ. pupilla, Lat.]
1. The apple of the eye.
Looking in a glaſs, when you ſhut one eye, the tºpil ºf
the other, that is open, dilateth. Bacºn's Nat. Hiſt.
Setting a candle before a child, bid him look upon it, and
his pºſil ſhall contract itſelf very much to exclude the light;
as when after we have been ſome time in the dark, a bright
light is ſuddenly brought in and ſet before us, till the pupil of
our cyes have gradually contracted. Ray on the C cation.
The uvca has a muſculous power, and can dilate and con-
tract that round hole in it, called the fupil of the eye. Mºre.
The rays, which enter the eye at ſeveral parts of the pupil,
have ſeveral obliquities to the glaſſes. Newton's Opticks.
-2. [Pºpille, Fr. Pºpilus, Lat...] A ſcholar; one under the care
of a tutor.
My maſter ſues to her, and ſhe hath taught her ſuitor,
He being her pupil, to become her tutor. Shakespeare
One of my father's ſervants, ~ *
With flore of tears this treaſon 'gan unfold,
And ſaid my guardian would his pupil ki!!. Fairfix.
If this arch-politician find in his pupils any remorie, any
fear of God's future judgments, he perſuades them that God
hath ſo great need of men's ſouls, that he will accept them
at any time, and upon any condition. Rakigh.
Tútors ſhould behave reverently before their papils. L'Eſt.
The great work of a governor is, to ſettle in his pupil good
habits, and the principles of virtue and wiſdom. Lºcke.
3. A ward; one under the care of his guardian.
Tell me, thou put iſ to great Pericles,
What are the grounds
To undertake to young ſo vaſt a care : Dryden,
So ſome weak ſhoot, which elſe would poorly riſe, -
Jove's tree adopts, and lifts him to the ſkies;
Through the new pºil ſoft'ning juices flow,
Thruſt forth the gems, and give the flow’rs to blow. Tickel.
Pu‘Pi LAGE. m. ſ. [from pupil. J
1. State of being a ſcholar.
The ſeverity of the father's brow, whilſt they are under
the diſcipline of pupilage, ſhould be relaxed as faſt as their age,
diſcretion, and good behaviour allow. Lºc.
2. VVardſhip ; minority.
Three ſons he dying left, all under age,
By means whereof their uncle Vortigern
Uſurp'd the crown, during their pºpulage ;
Which the infant's tutors gathering to fear,
Them cloſely into Armorick did bear. Fairy Queen.
Pupil.A.R.Y. adj. [pupillaire, Fr. pupillaris, Lat. from pupil.]
Pertaining to a pupil or ward.
Pu'PPET. n.ſ. ſpºuſee, Fr. pupus, Lat.]
1. A ſmall image moved by men in a mock drama; a wooden
tragedian.
Once Zelmane could not ſtir; but that as if they had been
puppets, whoſe motion ſtood only upon her pleaſure, Baſilius
with ſerviceable ſteps, Gynecia with greedy eyes would fol:
low her. Sidney, b. ii.
Divers of them did keep in their houſes certain things made
of cotton wool, in the manner of flººrs. Abbot.
His laſt wife was a woman of breeding, good humour and
complaiſance; as for you, you look like a P"Pºº moved by
clock-work. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory ºf jobn Bull.
As the pipes of ſome carv'd organ move,
The gilded puppets dance.
In Horid impotence he ſpeaks,
And, as the prompter breathes, the Pº ſqueaks. Pope.
2. A word of contempt.
Thou, an Egyptian puppet, ſhalt be ſhºwn -
In Rome as well as 1. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Oh excellent motion oh exceeding puppet { Shakespeare.
PU'ppET MAN. m. ſ. [puppet and man.] Maſter of a puppet-
ſhow. - •
why is a handſome wife ador'd
By every coxcomb but her lord?
From yonder puppetman inquire, . -
Who wiſely hides his wood and wire. Swift.
Puppershow. n.ſ. [puppet and ſhºw.] . A mock drama Per-
formed by wooden images moved by wire.
Tim. you haye a taſte I know,
And often ſee a puppet/how. -
To induce him to be fond of learning, he would frequently
carry him to the puppet/hºw. Arbuthnot and Pope.
* Pope:
A pre-
Swift.
3.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U R
A preſident of the council will make no more impreſſion
upon my mind, than the fight of a puppet/how. %c.
Puppy. m. ſ. ſpºr, Fr.]
1. A whelp ; progeny of a bitch.
He
Talks as familiarly of roaring lions,
As maids of thirteen do of puppy dogs. Sºft.
The rogues flighted me into the river with as little remoiſe,
as they would have drowned a bitch's blind puppies, fifteen
i' th' litter. Shakespeare . Merry I/ives of I/indſor.
The ſow to the bitch ſays, your puppies are all blind. L'Eſ.
Nature does the puppy's eyelid cloſe,
Till the bright ſun has nine times ſet and roſe. Gay.
2. A name of contemptuous reproach to a man.
I ſhall laugh myſelf to death at this puppy headed monſter;
a moſt ſcurvy monſter | Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Thus much I have added, becauſe there are ſome puppies
which have given it out. - Raleigh.
I found my place taken up by an ill-bred aukward puppy,
with a money bag under each arm. Addiſon's Guardian.
To Puppy, v. n. [from the noun..] To bring whelps.
PURBLI'ND. adj. [corrupted from poreblind, which is ſtill
uſed in Scotland; fore and blind.] Nearfighted ; ſhortfighted.
Speak to my goſſip Venus one fair word,
One nickname to her purblind ſon and heir. Shakeſp.
The truth appears ſo naked on my ſide,
That any purblind eye may find it out. Shakeſp.
'Tis known to ſeveral
Of head piece extraordinary; lower meſſes
Perchance, are to this buſineſs purblind. Shakeſp.
Like to pººrblind moles, no greater light than that little
which they ſhun. Drummond.
Darkneſs, that here ſurrounded our purblind underſtandings,
will vaniſh at the dawning of eternal day. Bºyle.
Dropt in blear thick-fighted eyes,
They'd make them ſee in darkeſt night,
Like owls, though purblind in the light.
Purblind man
Sces but a part o' th' chain, the neareſt links;
His eyes not carrying to that equal beam,
That poiſes all above. Dryden and Lee's Oedipus.
PURBll'NdNEss. m. ſ. [from purhind.] Shortneſs of fight.
Pu'rch AsABLE. adj. [from purchaſe.] That may be purchaſed
or bought.
Money being the counterbalance to all things purchaſable by
it, as much as you take off from the value of money, ſo
much you add to the price of things exchanged for it. Locke.
To PU'RCHASE. v. a. ſpourchaffer, Fr.]
1. To buy for a price.
You have many a purchas'd ſlave,
Which like your aſſes, and your dogs and mules,
You uſe in abject and in ſlaviſh part. Shakespeare.
His ſons buried him in the cave, which Abraham purchaſed
of the ſons of Heth. - Gen. xxv.
2. To obtain at any expence, as of labour or danger.
A world who would not purchaſe with a bruiſe. Milton,
3. To expiate or recompenſe by a fine or forfeit.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuſes,
Nor tears nor prayers ſhall purchaſe out abuſes;
Therefore uſe none. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
Pu'P CHASE. m. ſ. [pourchas, old Fr. from the verb.]
1. Anything bought or obtained for a price.
He that procures his child a good mind, makes a better
purchaſe for him, than if he laid out the money for an addi-
tion to his former acres. Locke on Education.
Our tº:riving dean has purchas'd land;
A purchaſe which will bring him clear -
Above his rent four pounds a year. Swift.
2. Any thing of which poſſeſſion is taken.
A beauty waining and diſtreſſed widow
Made prize and purchaſe of his wanton eye;
Seduc’d the pitch and height of all his thoughts
To baſe declenſion. Shakeſp.
The fox repairs to the wolf's cell, and takes poſſeſſion of
his ſtores; but he had little joy of the purchaſe. L’Eſtrange.
Pu‘R chAs I.R. n. ſ. [from purchaſe.] A buyer; one that gains
any thing for a price.
Upon one only alienation and change, the purchaſer is to
paſs both licence, fine and recovery. Bacon.
So unhappy have been the purchaſers of church lands, that,
though in ſuch purchaſes, men have uſually the cheapeſt penny-
worths, yet they have not always the beſt bargains. South.
Moſt of the old ſtatues may be well ſuppoſed to have been
cheaper to their firſt owners, than they are to a modern
purchaſer. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
PURE. adj. [fur, pure, Fr. purus, Lat.]
1. Not filthy, not ſullied.
There is a generation that are fºre in their own eyes, and
yet is not waſhed iron their filthineſs. Prºv. xxx. 12.
2. Clear; not dirty ; not muddy. -
Thou pure/f tone, whoſe pureneſs doth preſent.
My pureſt mind. Sidney, l. ii.
Hudibras.
3. Unmingled ; not altered by mixtures; mere. -
What philoſophy ſhall comfort a villain, that is Haled to
the rack fºr murthering his prince his cup is full of pure and
unmingled ſorrow, his body is rent with torment, his name
with ignominy, his ſoul with ſhame and ſorrow, which are to
laſt eternally. - Taylor's Rule of Living Hºly.
Pure and mixt, when applied to bodies, are much a kin to
fimple and compound; ſo a guinea is pure gold, if it has in
it no allay. - l/atts's Logick.
4. Not Sonnected with any thing extrinſick: as, pure mathe-
maticks. -
Mathematicks in its latitude is divided into pure and mixed ;
and though the pure do handle only abſtract quantity in thé
general, as geometry; yet that which is mixed doth conſider
the quantity of ſome particular determinate ſubject. Wilkins.
When a propoſition expreſſes that the predicate is connected
with the ſubject, it is called a pure propoſition; as every true
chriſtian is an honeſt man. Watts.
5. Free ; clear.
His mind of evil pare
Supports him, and intention free from fraud. Philips.
6. Free from guilt; guiltleſs; innocent.
Who can ſay, I have made my heart clean, I am pure
from my fin Prov. xx. 9.
O welcome pure ey’d faith,
And thou unblemiſh'd form of chaſtity. Milton:
No hand of ſtrife is pure, but that which wins. Daniel.
7. Incorrupt ; not vitiated by any bad practice or opinion.
Her guiltleſs glory juſt Britannia draws
From pure religion, and impartial laws. Tickel.
8. Not vitiated with corrupt modes of ſpeech.
As oft as I read thoſe comedies, ſo oft doth ſound in mine
car the pure fine talk of Rome. Aſcham.
9. Mere: as, a pure villain, purus putus nebulo, Lat. -
The lord of the caſtle was a young man of ſpirit, but had
lately out of pure wearineſs of the fatigue, and having ſpent
moſt of his money, left the king. Clarendon.
There happened a bloody civil war among the hawks,
when the peaceable pigeons, in pure pity and good na:
ture, ſend their mediators to make them friends again.
- L’E/irange's Fables.
Io. Chaſte; modeſt.
- Ainſworth.
PU'RELY. adv. [from fare.]
1. In a pure manner; not dirtily ; not with mixture.
I will purely purge away thy droſs, and take away all thy
tin. Iſaiah i. 25.
2. Innocently ; without guilt.
3. Merely. -
The being able to raiſe an army, and condućting it to fight
againſt the king, was purely due to him, and the effect of his
power. . . - Clarendon, b. viii.
Upon the particular obſervations on the metallick and mi-
neral bodies, I have not foundel any thing but what purely
and immediately concerns the natural hiſtory of thoſe
bodies. //oodward's Nat. Hiſt.
I converſe in full freedom with men of both parties; and if
not in equal number, it is purely accidental, as having made
acquaintance at court more under one miniſtry than another.
- - Swift.
PU'RENEss. n. ſ. [from pure.]
1. Clearneſs ; freedom from extraneous or foul admixtures.
They came to the river ſide, which of all the rivers of
Greece had the prize for excellent pureneſ, and ſweetneſs, in
ſo much as the very bathing in it was accounted exceeding
healthful. Sidney.
No circumſtances are like to contribute more to the ad-
vancement of learning, than exact temperance, great furt-
neſ of air, equality of climate, and long tranquility of go-
Vernment. Temple.
2. Simplicity; exemption from compoſition.
An eſſence eternal and ſpiritual, of abſolute pureneſ and
ſimplicity. - Raleigh.
My love was ſuch,
It could, though he ſupply'd no fuel, burn;
Rich in itſelf, like elemental fire,
Whoſe pureneſs does no aliment require. Dryden.
3. Innocence; freedom from guilt. . . . .
May we evermore ſerve thee in holineſs and pureneſ of
living. Common Prayer.
4. Freedom from vitious modes of ſpeech.
In all this good propriety of words, and purch'ſ ºf phraſes
in Terence, you muſt not follow him always in placing of
them. - Aſcham's ...!!!.
Pu'RFILE. m. ſ. [pourfilée, Fr.] A ſort of ancient trimming fºr
women's º |. of tinſel and thread; called alſo
bobbin work. - Baily.
To Pu RFLE. v. a. ſpoutfiler, Fr. proflare, Italian: ) To de-
corate with a wrought or flowered border; to border with
embroidery ; to embroider.
A goodly lady clad in ſcarlet red,
Pºyed with gold and pearl of rich aſſay. Fa. Queen.
An
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U R
P U R
=-
Emrold tuffs, flow’rs tº: sº white,
- aphire, earl, in rich embrol ery, -
łº, knighthood's bending knce. Shakeſp.
ſis there with humid bow,
waters the odorous banks that blow
Flowers of more mingled hew,
Than her puffed ſcarff can ſhew.
In velvet white as ſnow the troop was gown'd,
Their hoods and ſleeves the ſame, and purſied o'er
With diamonds. Dryden.
Purple. n.ſ. ſpouflée, Fr. from the verb.] A border of
PU'RFL Ew. ; embroidery.
Pu R GATION. n.ſ. [purgation, Fr. purgatiº, Lat.] .
1. The act of cleanting or purifying from vitious mixtures.
We do not ſuppoſe the ſeparation finiſhed, before, th; ?”
gation of the air began. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. The act of cleanſing the body by downward evacuatiºn.
Let the phyſician apply himſelf more to purgatiºn than to
alteration, becauſe the offence is in quantity. Bacon.
3. The act of clearing from imputation of guilt. -
If any man doubt, let him put me to my purgation. Shakespeare
Próceed in juſtice, which ſhall have due courſe,
Even to the guilt or the purgatiºn. . Shaft.
Purgative. adj. [purgatif, Fr. purgatiºns, Lat.] Cathartick;
having the power to cauſe evacuations downward. -
Purging medicines have their purgative virtue in a fine ſpi-
rit, they endure not boiling without loſs of virtue. Bacon.
All that is fill'd, and all that which doth fill
All the round world, to man is but a pill;
In all it works not, but it is in all
Poiſonous, or purgative, or cordial. Donne.
Lenient purgatives evacuate the humours. Jºſeman.
Pu'RGA Tor Y. m. ſ. [purgatoire, Fr. purgatorium, Lat.) A
place in which ſouls are ſuppoſed by the papiſts to be purged
by fire from carnal impurities, before they are received into
heaven.
Thou thy folk, through pains of purgatory,
Doſt bear unto thy bliſs. Spenſer's Hymn on Love.
In this age, there may be as great inſtances produced of
real charity, as when men thought to get ſouls out of purga-
12ry. Stillingfect.
To PURGE. v. a. ſpurger, Fr. purgo, Lat.]
1. To cleanſe ; to clear.
It will be like that labour of Hercules, in purging the ſtable
of Augeas, to ſeparate from ſuperſtitious obſervations any
thing that is clean and pure natural. Bacon.
2. To clear from impurities.
To the Engliſh court aſſemble now
From ev’ry region apes of idleneſs;
Now neighbour confines purge you of your ſcum. Shakespeare.
Air ventilates and cools the mines, and purges and frees
them from mineral exhalations. //oodward.
3. To clear from guilt.
Blood hath been ſhed ere now, i' th' olden time
Ere human ſtatute purg’d the gen'ral weal. Shakeſp.
My ſoul is purg'd from grudging hate;
And with my hand I ſeal my true heart's love. Shakeſp.
The blood of Chriſt ſhall purge our conſcience from dead
works to ſerve God. Heb. ix. 14.
Syphax, we'll join our cares to purge away
Our country's crimes, and clear her reputation. Addison.
4. To clear from imputation of guilt.
He, I accuſe,
Intends tº appear before the people, hoping
To purge himſelf with words. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Marquis Dorſet was haſting towards him, to purge himſelf
of ſome accuſation. Bacon's Henry VII.
5. To ſweep or put away impurities.
I will purge out from among you the rebels. Ezek.xx. 38.
Simplicity and integrity in the inward parts, may purge out
every prejudice and paſſion. Decay of Piety.
6. To evacuate the body by ſtool.
Sir Philip Calthrop purged John Drakes, the ſhoemaker of
Norwich, of the proud humour. Camden's Remains.
- The frequent and wiſe uſe of emaciating diets, and of purg-
ingº, is a principal means of a prolongation of life. Éac.
If he was not cured, he purged him with ſalt water.
Arbuthnot.
Miltºn.
7. To clarify 5 to defecate.
To PURGE. v. n. To have frequent ſtools. -
Puk GE. m. ſ. [from the verb..] A cathartick medicine; a me-
dicine that evacuates the body by flool.
Meet we the medicine of the fickly weal,
And with him pour we in our country's purge
Each drop of us. w
O . Pills nor laxatives I like;
º his gain the ſharp phyſician makes,
nº often gives a purge, but ſeldom takes. Dryden.
Shaiſ.
* * * seat friend to purging and cliff
- . . - r - h
P mixing aloes with all purges, Purging 11teſ S ; ...
tº G F. R. m. ſ. [from purge.] 0l.
I. One who clears dIn ino'
i. away y -
thing Il QX lous.
- This ſhall make
Our purpoſe neceſſary, and not envious ;
We ſhall be call'd purgers, not murtherers. Shake?.
2. Purge ; cathartick. -/
It is of good uſe in phyſick, if you can retain the purging
virtue, and take away the unpleaſant taſte of the purger. Ea.
PURIFICATION. m. ſ. [purification, Fr. purificatio, Lat.]
1. The act of making pure ; act of cleanſing from extraneous
mixture.
I diſcerned a conſiderable difference in the operations of ſe-
veral kinds of ſaltpetre, even after purification. Boyle.
2. The act of cleanſing from guilt.
The ſacraments, in their own nature, are juſt ſuch as they
ſeem, water, and bread, and wine; but becauſe they are
made ſigns of a ſecret myſtery, and water is the ſymbol of
purificatiºn of the ſoul from fin, and bread and wine, of
Chriſt's body and blood; therefore the ſymbols receive the
names of what they ſign. Taylor's I/Orthy Communicant.
3. A rite performed by the Hebrews after childbearing.
PU'R1 FIcAt 1 v E. }*. [from puriff.] Having power or ten-
PU'RIFICA ToRY. W. dency to make pure.
Pu‘RIFIER. m. ſ. (from purify.] Cleanſer; refiner.
He ſhall fit as a refiner and purifter of ſilver. Mal. iii. 3.
To PURI'FY. v. a. [purifier, Fr. purifico, Lat.]
1. To make pure.
2. To free from any extraneous admixture.
If any bad blood ſhould be left in the kingdom, an honour-
able foreign war will vent or purify it. Bacon's Henry VII.
The maſs of the air was many thouſand times greater than
the water, and would in proportion require a greater time to
be purified. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
By chace our long-liv'd fathers earn'd their food,
Toil ſtrung the nerves, and purified the blood. Dryden.
3. To make clear.
It ran upon ſo fine and delicate a ground, as one could not
eaſily judge, whether the river did more waſh the gravel, or
the gravel did purify the river. Sidney, b. ii.
4. To free from guilt or corruption.
He gave himſelf for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himſelf a peculiar people. Tit. ii. 14.
If God gives grace, knowledge will not ſtay long behind;
ſince it is the ſame ſpirit and principle that purifies the heart,
and clarifies the underſtanding. South's Sermons.
5. To free from pollution, as by luſtration.
There were ſet fix water pots of ſtone, after the manner of
the puriying of the Jews. jo. ii. 0.
6. To clear from barbariſms or improprieties. -
He ſaw the French tongue abundantly purifted. Sprat.
To PURI FY. v. m. To grow pure.
We do not ſuppoſe the ſeparation of theſe two liquors
wholly finiſhed, before the purgation of the air began, though
let them begin to purify at the ſame time. . . Burnet.
Pu'R1st. m. ſ. [purifte, Fr.] One ſuperſtitiouſly nice in the uſe
of words.
Pu'RITAN. m. ſ. [from pure.] A ſedary pretending to emi-
nent purity of religion.
The ſchiſm which the papiſts on the one hand, and the
ſuperſtition which the puritan on the other, lay to our charge,
are very juſtly chargeable upon themſelves. Sanderſon.
PURITA Nica L. adj. [from puritan.] Relating to puritans.
Such guides ſet over the ſeveral congregations will milteach
them, by inſtilling into them puritanical and ſuperſtitious prin-
ciples, that they may the more ſecurely exerciſe their preſby-
terian tyranny. - Walton.
Pu'RITAS is M. n.ſ.. [from puritan.] The notions of a puritan-
A ſerious and unpartial examination of the grounds, as
well of popery as puritaniſm, according to that meaſure of
underſtanding God hath afforded me. //alton.
PURITY. m. ſ. [purité, Fr. puritas, Lat.]
1. Cleanneſs; freedom from foulneſs or dirt.
Her urn -
Pours ſtreams ſelect, and purity of waters. Prior.
From the body's purity, the mind
Receives a ſecret aid.
2. Freedom from guilt; innocence.
Death ſets us ſafely on ſhore in our long-expe&amp;ted Canaan,
where there are no temptations, no danger ºf falling, º
1 purity and immortal joys ſecure our innocence an
.# ... J #.ake's Preparation fºr Death.
3. Chaſtity; freedom from contamination of ſexes.
Couá Í come to her with any detection in my hand, I could
drive her then from the ward of her purity, her reputation,
and her marriage vow. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of //indſor:
Purl. n.ſ. [this is juſtly ſuppoſed by Min/cw to be contracted
from purſle.]
1. An embroidered and puckered border.
Himſelf came in next after a triumphant chariot made of
carnation velvet, enriched with purl and pearl. Sidney.
The jagging of pinks is like the inequality of oak leaves;
but they ſeldom have any ſmall purls. - Bacºn.
2. [I know not whence derived.] A kind of medicated malt
liquor, in which wormwood and aromaticks are infuſed.
To PURL.
•
f
Thomſºn's Summer.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">- P U R
To PUR L. v. n. [of this word it is doubtful what is the pri-
mitive ſignification ; if it is refered originally to the appea-
rance of a quick ſtream, which is always dimpled on the fur-
face, it may come from pur., a fucker or finge; but if, as
the uſe of authors ſeem to ſhow, it relates to the ſound, it
muſt be derived from porla, Swediſh, to murmur, according
to Mr. Lye.] To murmur ; to flow with a gentle noiſe.
Tones are not ſo apt to procure ſleep, as ſome other founds;
as the wind, the purling of water, and humming of bees.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Inſtruments that have returns, as trumpets; or flexions, as
cornets; or are drawn up, and put from, as ſacbuts, have a
purſing ſound; but the recorder or fiate, that have none of
theſe inequalities, give a clear ſound. Bacon.
All fiſh from ſea or ſhore,
Freſhet, or purling brook, or ſhell or fin. Milton.
My flow'ry theme,
A painted miſtreſs, or a purling ſtream. Pope.
Around th’ adjoining brook, that purl, along
The vocal grove, now fretting o'er a rock. Thomſºn.
To Pub L. v. a. To decorate with fringe or embroidery.
When was old Sherewood's head more quaintly curl’d,
Or nature's cradle more enchas'd and purl’d. B. Johnſon.
Pu't lieu. m. ſ. The grounds on the borders of a foreſt; bor-
der; incloſure.
In the purſicus of this foreſt ſtands
A ſheepcote, fenc'd about with olive trees. Shakeſp.
Such civil matters fall within the purlicus of religion. L’É?.
To underſtand all the purlews of this place, and to illuſ-
trate this ſubject, I muſt venture myſelf into the haunts of
beauty and gallantry. Spectator.
He may be left to rot among thieves in ſome ſtinking jail,
merely for miſtaking the purlieus of the law. Swift.
A party next of glitt'ring dames,
Thrown round the purlicus of St. James,
Came early out. Swift.
Pu'RLIN3. n.ſ. In architeśture, thoſe pieces of timber that
lie acroſs the rafters on the inſide, to keep them from ſinking
in the middle of their length. Bailey.
To PURLO IN. v. a. [this word is of doubtful etymology.
Skinner deduces it from pour and loin, French; Mr. Lye from
punllouhnan, Saxon, to lie hid.] To ſteal; to take by theft.
He, that brave ſteed there finding ready dight,
Purlain'd both ſteed and ſpear, and ran away full light. F. 2,
The Arimaſpian by ſtealth
Had, from his wakeful cuſtody, purloin'd
The guarded gold. - Milton.
They not content like felons to purloin,
Add treaſon to it, and debaſe the coin. Denham.
Some writers make all ladies purloin'd,
And knights purſuing like a whirlwind. Hudibras.
when did the muſe from Fletcher ſcenes purloin,
As thou whole Eth'ridge doſt transfuſe to thine : Dryden.
Your butler purlins your liquor, and the brewer ſells your
hog-waſh. Arbuthnot's H/lory of john Bull.
* Prometheus once this chain purloin'd,
Diſſolv’d, and into money coin'd. Swift.
PURLo". NER. m. ſ. [from purloin..] A thief; one that ſteals
clandeſtinely.
It may ſeem hard, to ſee publick purliners fit upon the
lives of the little ones, that go to the gallows. L'E/irange.
Pu‘RPARTY. m. ſ. [pour and parti, Fr.] Share ; part in diviſion.
Each of the coparceners had an entire county allotted for
her purparty. Davies on Ireland.
PURPLE. adj. [pourfre, Fr. purpurcus, Lat.]
1. Rcd tinctured with blue.
The poop was beaten gold,
Purple the ſails, and ſo perfumed, that
The winds were love-ſick with e'm. Shakeſp.
You violets, that firſt appear,
By your pure purple mantles known;
What are you when the roſe is blown Iłºtion.
A ſmall oval plate, cut off a flinty pebble, and poliſhed,
is prettily variegated with a pale grey, blue, yellow, and
purple. JWoodward on Foſſils.
In poetry, red.
2. in poetry, I view a field of blood,
And Tyber rolling with a purple flood. Dryden.
Their mangled limbs
Craſhing at once, death dyes the purple ſeas
With gore. Thomſºn's Summer.
To Pu'RPLE. v. a. [purpuro, Lat.] To make red ; to colour
with purple.
Whilſt your purpled hands do reak and ſmoak, .
Fulfil your pleaſure. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
Cruel and ſuddain, haſt thou ſince
Partled thy nail in blood of innocence ? Donne.
Though fall'n on cvil days,
In darkneſs, and with dangers compaſs'd round,
And ſolitude yet, not alone, while thou
Viſit'ſt my ſlumbers nightly; or when morn
Purples the Eaſt. Milton's Par. Lºſº, b. xxx.
Throw hither all your quaint enamel'd eyes,
That on the green turf ſuck the hopied ſhow’rs, - - -
And purple all the ground with vernal flow’rs. Milton.
Aurora had but newly chas'd the night,
And purpled o'er the ſky with bluſhing light. Dryden.
Not with more glories in th' ethereal plain;
The ſun firſt riſes o'er the purpled main. Pope.
Reclining ſoft in bliſsful bow’rs,
, Purpled ſweet with ſpringing flow’rs. Fenton.
Pu'RPLEs. n.ſ. [without a ſingular.] Spots of a livid red,
which break out in malignant fevers; a purple fever.
Pu‘RELISH, adj. [from purple..] Somewhat purple.
I could change the colour, and make it purpliſh. Boyle.
Purport. n. ſ. [pourporte, Fr.] Deſign; tendency of a wri-
ting or diſcourſe.
That Plato intended nothing leſs, is evident from the whole
ſcope and purport of that dialogue. Norris.
Tººroºr. v. a. [from the noun..] To intend; to tend to
ow.
There was an article againſt the reception of the rebels,
purpºrting, that if any ſuch rebel ſhould be required of the
prince confederate, that the prince confederate ſhould com-
mand him to avoid the country. Bacon's Henry VII.
They in moſt grave and ſolemn wiſe unfolded
Matter, which little purported, but words
Rank'd in right learned phraſe. Rowe.
PURPOSE. n.ſ. [propos, Fr. propºſitiºn, Lat.]
1. Intention ; deſign.
... He quit the houſe of purpoſe, that their puniſhment
Might have the freer courſe. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Change this purpoſe,
Which being ſo horrible, ſo bloody, muſt
Lead on to ſome foul iſſue. Shakespeare.
He with troops of horſemen beſet the paſſages of purpoſe,
that when the army ſhould ſet forward, he might in the
ſtreights, fit for his purpoſe, ſet upon them. Knolles.
And I perſuade me God hath not permitted
His ſtrength again to grow, were not his purpoſe
To uſe him farther yet. Milton's Agoniſłes.
St. Auſtin hath laid down a rule to this very purpoſ. Barn.
They, who are deſirous of a name in painting, ſhould
read and make obſervations of ſuch things as they find for
their purpoſe. Dryden's Dufreſhoy.
He travelled the world, on purpoſe to converſe with the
moſt learned men. Guardian, N9 165.
The common materials, which the ancients made their
ſhips of, were the ornus or wild aſh ; the fir was likewiſe
uſed for this purpoſe. Arbuthnot.
I do this, on purpoſe to give you a more ſenſible impreſſion
of the imperfection of your knowledge. Watts.
Where men err againſt this method, it is uſually on purpoſe,
and to ſhew their learning. Swift.
2. Effect; conſequence.
To ſmall purpºſe had the council of Jeruſalem been aſ.
ſembled, if once their determination being ſet down, men
might afterwards have defended their former opinions. Hoker.
The ground will be like a wood, which keepeth out the
ſun, and ſo continueth the wet, whereby it will never graze,
to purpoſe that year. Bacon's Nat. Hiſſ.
Their deſign is a war, whenever they can open it with a
proſpect of ſucceeding to purpoſe. Temple.
Such firſt principles will ſerve us to very little purpoſe, and
we ſhall be as much at a loſs with, as without them, if they
may, by any human power, ſuch as is the will of our teachers,
or opinions of our companions, be altered or loſt in us. Locłe.
He that would reliſh ſucceſs to purpoſe, ſhould keep his
paſſion cool, and his expectation low. Collier on Deſire.
What the Romans have done is not worth notice, having
had little occaſion to make uſe of this art, and what they
have of it to purpoſe being borrowed from Ariſtotle. Baker.
3. Inſtance ; example. -
'Tis common for double-dealers to be taken in their own
ſnares, as for the purpoſe in the matter of power. L'Eſ.
To Pu'rpose. v. a. [from the noun..] To intend; to deſign;
to reſolve.
What he did purpoſe, it was the pleaſure of God that So-
lomon his ſon ſhould perform. Hoºker.
It is a purpos'd thing, and grows by plot, ... ?
To curb the nobility. Sº?: Cricanus.
I am purpoſed, that my mouth ſhall not tranſgreſs, P/ Xvii.
This is the purpoſe that is parpºſed upon the whole
earth. 1/. xv. 26.
Paul purpoſed in the ſpirit, to go to Jeruſalem. Acts xix. 21.
The chriſtian captains, purpºſing to retire home, placed on
each fide of the army four ranks of waggons. Knºlles.
The whole included race his pur.” Prey. Milton,
Oaths were not purpº'd more than law,
To keep the good and juſt in awe,
But to confine the bad and ſinful,
Like moral cattle in a pinfold. . - Audibras.
Doubling my crime, I promiſe º, Pri
..}, . : ºrive r
arºſs to ſlay, whilſt ſwearing to forgive. rtar,
Purpºſe 2 Pu'rpose LY.
22
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">p ti R
P U R
Fur post ly, adv. [from fº.) By deſign ; by ".
Being the inſtrument which God hath purpºſely frame f
thereby to work the knowledge of ſalvation in the hº O
men, what cauſe is there wherefore it ſhould not be acknow-
fººd a moſt apt mean? + - Hººr.
i have fºy avoided to ſpeak any thing concerning the
- - ºf 1. . .
treatment due to ſuch perſons. Addison.
In compoſing this diſcourſe, I purpºſ y declined all cit nſive
and diſpleaſing truths. - - - Atterbury.
The vulgar thus through imitation err,
As of the learned by being ſingular 3.
so much they ſcorn the crowd, that if the throng
By chance go right, they furiºſely go wrong. Pºpe.
Pu’rpſ. Isr. m. ſ. ſpºrtris, old Fr. purpriſºn, law Lat..] A
cloſs or incloſure; as alſo the whole compaſs of a manour.
The place of juſtice is hallowed; and therefore not only
the bench, but the foot-pace and precincts, and purpriſe ought
to be preſerved without corruption. Bacºn's Eſſays.
PURR. m. ſ. A ſea lark. - A ſwºrth.
To Po RR. v. a. To murmur as a cºt or leopard in Płºſure:
PURSE. m. ſ. ſhººtſ, Fr. piers, Welſh.) A ſmall bag in
which money is cºntained. - - - - -
She bears the fºye too; fl. c is a region in Guiana ...] gºld
and bounty- Salºp. 4/ºry //ives ºf JP'indſºr.
Shah the ſon of England prove a thief, -
And take parſe; " Sºak. ?. Henry IV.
He ſent e, i. in of the chief priſoners, richly apparalled
with their furſes full of money, into the city Knºllº.
I will give him the thouſand pieces, and, to his great fur-
priſe, preſent him with another furſe of the ſame value. 4d.
To Pt as E. v. a. [from the neun.]
1. To put into a purſe. -
I am ſpell-caught by Philide!,
And purs'd within a net. Dryden.
I furs'd it up, but little reck’ning made,
''':ll now that this cat cnity compell’d,
! find it true. Milton.
1. To contract as a parſe.
Thou cried'ſ,
And did'ſt contract and purſe thy brow together,
As if thou then had'ſt ſhut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit. Shakespeare. Othell.
Pu's sex ET. n.ſ. [purſe and net.] A net of which the mouth
is drawn together by a ſtring.
Conies are taken by purſenets in their burrows. Mºrtimer.
Pursºrroup. ad. [purſe and proud] Puſed up with money.
!", m. ſ. [from purſe.] The paymaſter of a ſhip.
tºº. {n-ſ [from fºrff.] Shortneſs of breath.
Pu Rs.1.A in. m. ſ. ſportuſaca, Lat..] A plant.
The flower of fur/ſain conſiſts of many leaves, which ex-
Fahd in form of a role, out of whoſe flower-cup, which con-
fiſts of one leaf, ariſes the pointal, which, together with the
flower-cup, becomes a fruit, for the moſt part oval, full of
ſh;all ſects, and furniſhed with two ſhells or huſks at top; of
which the outer one, which was the part of the flower-cup
that was ſplit in two, opens fiſt; and the inner one, which
is the pointal inlarged, opens laſt, doubly and tranſverſely,
while the lower Part of the flower-cup adheres to the foot-
ſtalk. Miller.
The medicaments, proper to diminiſh the milk, are
lettice, fºſſain and chdive. // iſºman's Surgery.
£º. adj. [from purſue..] What may be purſued.
Pºst ANCE. m. ſ. [from furſue..] Proſecution; proceſs.
Pºst'Asr, adj. Iſom piſt...] Done in conſequence or pro-
ſecution of any thing.
To PURSU’E. v. a. ſpotoſilivre, Fr.]
1. To chaſe; to follow in hoſtility.
Love like a ſhadow flies, when ſubſtance love purſue: ;
Purſuing that that flies, and flying what purſues. Shakeſp.
When Abram heard that his brother was taken captive,
he armed his trained ſervants, and purſued. Gen. xiv. 14.
To thy ſpeed add wings,
Left with a whip of ſcorpions I purſue
Thy lingering. - Miltºn.
2. To proſecute; to continue.
As righteouſneſs tendeth to life; ſo be that purſueth evil,
fºurth it to his own death. Prov. xii. 19.
Inſatiate to purſue -
Vain war with heaven. ..!/ilton.
- I will purſue
this ancient ſtory, whether falſe or true. Dryden.
When men purſue their thoughts of ſpace, they ſtop at the
‘...”ines of body, as if ſpace were there at an end, Locke.
3. * initate; to follow as an example.
The fame of ancient matrons you parſe,
.* ſtand a blameleſs pattern to the new. Dryd
4. To endeavour to attain. yacn.
sº then twº
We happineſ,
Yet the purſuit
A ſilion.
purſue; we fly from pain;
&gt; *nd yet the flight is vain. Prior.
To Pursu'E. v. n. To go on ; to proceed.
I have, purſues Carncades, wondered chymiſts ſhould riot
confider. Bºyle,
Pursu's R. n.f. [from purſue..] One who follows in hoſtility.
Fled with the reſt,
And falling from a hill he was ſo bruis'd,
That the pulſiºr, toºk him. - - Sº?. H. nº IV.
His ſwift purſuers from heav'n's gates diſcern -
Th' advantage, and deſcending tread us down
Thus drooping. 4.iitºn's Par. Loff, b. i
- ~ . ... " ) - - -
Like a declining ſtateſman left forlorn
To his friends pity and purſuers ſcorn. Denham
Pursuit. m. ſ. ſpoutſuite, Fr.]
1. The act of following with hoſtile intention.
Arm, warriors, arm for fight ! the foe at hand,
Whom fled we thought, will ſave us long Purſuit. Miltºn.
2. Endeavour to attain.
This means they long propos'd, but little gºin'd,
Yet after much purſuit, at length obtain'd. Dryden.
lis hºnours and vanities are continually paſſing before him
and inviting his parſuit. A gºrs.
He has annexed a ſecret pleaſure to the idea of any th:g
that is new or uncommon, that he might encourage us in tº:
º, , , , -, --&gt; !, ºre a tr- - * - - -
purſuit after knowledge, and engage us to ſearch into the
wonders of his creation. Aºi ºn
The will, free from the determination of ſuch deſire, is
left to the pºſuit of nearer ſatisfactions, and to the removal
of thoſe unea.ºnefies it feels in its longings after them. Lº,
3. Proſecution.
He concluded with fighs and tears, to conjure them, that
they would no more preſs him to give his conſciit to a thing
ſo contrary to his reaſon, the execution whereof would bicº
his heart, and that they would give over further pºſuit
of it. - Curºn...on.
Pursuiv ANT. n.ſ. ſpouſiivant, Fr.] A ſtate meſſenger;
an attendant on the beralds. - -
How oft do they with golden pinions cleave
The flitting ſkies, like flying frºſitivºt. Fairy Qºm.
Purſuivaji:; he often for them ſent. 11…erſ.
Theſe grey locks, the purſuivants of death,
Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer. Shaft.
Send out a fºur titant at arms
To Stanley's regiment; bid him bring his power -
Before ſun-riſing. Shakeſp. Richard III.
For helmets, creſts, mantles, and ſupporters, I leave the
reader to Edmond Bolton, Gerard Leigh, John Ferne, and
John Guillin Portiſmouth, purſuivants of arms, who have
diligently laboured in armory. Camden's Kemains.
The purſuivants came next,
And like the heralds each his ſcutheon bore. Dryden.
PU'RSY. aff, ſpouſſ, Fr.] Shortbreathed and fat.
In the fatneſs of theſe purſy times,
Virtue itſelf of vice muſt paidon beg,
Yea courb and woo for leave to do it good. Shakeſp.
Now breathleſs wrong
Shall ſit and pant in your great chairs of caſe,
And purſy infolence ſhall break his wind
With fear and horrid flight. Shakeſp. Timºn ºf Æthens.
By theſe, the Medes
Perfume their breaths, and cure old purſy men. Temple.
An hoſteſs dowager,
Grown fat and purſy by retail
Of pots of beer and bottl’d ale. Hudibras, p. iii.
Pu'RTENAN ce. n. J. [appertenance, Fr.] The pluck of an
animal.
Roaſt the lamb with fire, his head with his legs and with
the purtenance thereof. Ex. xii. 9.
The ſhaft againſt a rib did glance, - -
And gall'd him in the furtenance. Hudibraſ, p. i.
To PU'RVEY. v. a. [pourvºir, Fr.] - -
1. To provide with conveniencies. This ſenſe is now not in
uſe.
Give no odds to your foes, but do ſurvey
Yourſelf of ſword before that bloody day. Fa. Queen.
His houſe with all convenience was purvey'd,
The reſt he found. Dryden.
2. To procure.
what though from outmoſt land and ſea purvey'd
For him; each rarer tributary life
Bleeds not. Thomſºn's Summer.
To Pu'Rvey. v. n. To buy in proviſions.
I the praiſe
Yield thce, ſo well this day thou haſt purvey’d. Milton.
Purvey AscL. m. ſ. [from purvey.]
I. Proviſion.
Whence mounting up, they find furºcyance meet
Of all, that royal princes court became. Fa. 9acen.
2. Procurement of vićtuals.
Some lands be more changeable than others; as for their
lying near to the borders, or becauſe of great and continual
-
purjances that are made upon them. Bacon.
PUR v E Yok.
!.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U S
P U S
drº
~,
*}.
i.
Perve Yor. m. ſ. [from purvey.]
1. One that provides victuals. -
The purveyors or vićtuallers are much to be condemned, as
not a little faulty in that behalf. Raleigh.
2. A procurer ; a pimp.
Theſe women are ſuch cunning purveyors /
Mark where their appetites have once been pleaſed,
The ſame reſemblance in a younger lover, -
Lies brooding in their fancies the ſame pleaſures. Dryden.
The ſtranger, raviſh'd at his good fortune, is introduced
to ſome imaginary title ; for this purveyor has her repreſenta-
tives of ſome of the fineſt ladies. Addiſon.
Pu'Ry: Ew. m. ſ. [pourveu, French..] Proviſo; providing
clauſe.
Though the petition expreſſes only treaſon and felony, yet
the aët is general againſt all appeals in parliament; and many
times the purview of an act is larger than the preamble or the
petition. Hale's Common Law of England.
Pu RULENCE. }" / [from purulent.] Generation of pus or
PU'RUL Nc Y. y matter..
Conſumptions are induced by purulency in any of the
viſcera. Arbuthnot on Diet.
Pu RULENT. adj. [furtlent, Fr. purulentus, Lat..] Conſiſting
of pus or the running of wounds. -
A carcaſe of man is moſt infectious and odious to man,
and furulent matter of wounds to found fleſh. Bacon.
It ſpews a filthy froth
Of matter purulent and white,
Which happen'd on the ſkin to light,
And there corrupting on a wound,
Spreads leproſy. Swift's Miſcel.
An acrimonious or furulent matter, ſtagnating in ſome or-
gan, is more eaſily depoſited upon the liver than any other
art. A luthnot on Alinents.
p's n. ſ. [Latin.] The matter of a well digeſted ſore.
Acrid ſubſtances break the veſſels, and produce an ichor
initead of laudable pºs.
To PUSH. v. a. ſpouſer, Fr.]
1. To ſtrike with a thruſt. -
If the ox fiſh a man-ſervant, he ſhall be ſtoned. Ex. xxi.
2. To force or drive by impulſe of any thing. -
The youth puſh away my feet.
3. To force not by a quick blow, but by continued violence.
Shew your mended faiths,
To puſh deſtruction and perpetual ſhame -
Out of the weak door of our fainting land. Shakeſp.
Through thee will we pºſ' down our encil.ies. Pſ. xliv. 5.
Waters forcing way,
Sidclong had puſh'd a mountain from his ſeat,
Half ſunk with all his pines. Milton.
The deſcription of this terrible ſcene threw her into an hy-
ſłcrick fit, which might have proved dangerous, if Cornelius
had not been puſhed out of the room.
4. To preſs forward. -
He forewarns his care
With rules to puſh his fortune or to bear. Dryden.
With ſuch impudence did he puſh this matter, that when
he heard the cries of above a million of people begging for
their bread, he termed it the clamours of faction. Addiſon.
Arbuthnot and Pope.
Arts and ſciences, in one and the ſame century, have ar-
rived at great perfection, and no wonder, ſince every age has.
a kind of univerſal genius, which inclines thoſe that live in
it to ſome particular ſtudies, the work then being puſhed on
by many hands, muſt go forward. Dryden.
5. To urge ; to drive. -
Ambition Mºſhes the ſoul to ſuch actiens, as are apt to pro-
cure honour to the actor. Addison's Speciator.
6. To enforce; to drive to a concluſion.
We are pºſhed for an anſwer, and are forced at laſt freely
to confeſs, that the corruptions of the adminiſtration were in-
tolerable. Swift.
7. To importune ; to teaze.
To PUSII. v. n.
1. To make a thruſt.
But iſſues, ere the fight, his dread command,
That none ſhall dare
With ſhortned ſword to ſtab in cloſer war,
Nor puſh with biting point, but ſtrike at length. Dryden.
A calf will ſo manage his head, as though he would pºſh
with his horns even before they ſhoot. Ray.
Lambs, though they never ſaw the actions of their ſpecies,
pºſ, with their foreheads, before the budding of a horn.
Addison.
2. To make an effort.
War ſeem'd aſleep for nine long years; at length
Both ſides reſolv'd to piſh, we try’d our ſtrength. Dryden.
3. To make an attack.
The king of the South ſhall pºſh at him, and the king of
the North ſhall come againſt him. Dan. xi. 40.
Pusii. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Thruſt; the act of ſtriking with a pointed inſtrument.
Arbuthnot.
job xxx. 12. .
Ne might his corſº be harmed -
With dint of ſword or pºſ' of pointed ſpear. Spenſºr:
º So great was the puidance of his puſh,
That frºm his ſadle quite he did him bear. Fa. Sººcen.
They, like reſolute men, ſtood in the face of the breach,
receiving them with deadly ſhot and puſh of pike, in ſuch fu-
**r, that the Turks began to retiré. Knolles.
2. An impulſe; force impreſſed.
Jove was not more
With infant nature, when his ſpacious hand
Had rounded this huge ball of earth and ſº
To give it the firſt tiſ, and ſee it roll
- Along the vaſt abyſ.
3. Aſlault; attack.
He gave his countenance againſt his name,
To laugh with gybing boys, and ſtand the pºſ,
Of every beardleſs vain comparative. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
When ſuch a reſiſtance is made, theſe boſã talkers will
draw in their horns, when their fierce and feeble puſhes againſt
truth are repelled with puſhing and confidence. J/atts.
4. A forcible ſtruggle; a ſtrong effort.
A ſudden pºſh gives them the overthrow ;
Ride, ride, Meſſala. Shakespeare .
Away he goes, makes his puſh, ſtands the ſhock of a
battle, and compounds for leaving of a leg behind him.
L’Eſtrange.
We have beaten the French from all their advanced polis,
and driven them into their laſt entrenchments: one vigorous
pºſ”, one general aſſault will force the enemy to cry out for
Addison's Guardian,
quarter. Addison:
5. Exigence; trial.
We'll put the matter to the preſent puſh. Shakeſp.
'Tis common to talk of dying for a friend; but when it
comes to the puſh, 'tis no more than talk. L’Eſirange.
The queſtion we would put, is not whether the ſacrament
of the maſs be as truly propitiatory, as thoſe under the law
but whether it be as truly a ſacrifice if ſo, then it is a true
proper ſacrifice, and is not only commemorative or repreſen-
tative, as we are fold at a pºſh. Atterbury.
6. A ſudden emergence.
There's time enough for that ;
Left they deſire, upon this puſh, to trouble
Your joys with like relation. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
7. [Pu/iula, Lat..] A pimple; an effloreſcence; a wheal.
He that was praiſed to his hurt, ſhould have a puſh riſe upon
his noſe ; as a bliſter will riſe upon one's tongue, that tells
a lye. Bacon's Eſſays.
PU's HER... n.ſ.. [from pºff.] He who puſhes forward.
PU's HING. adj. [from pºſſ.] Enterpriſing; vigorous.
PU's HPIN. m. ſ. [puſ, and fin.] A child's play, in which pins
are puſhed alternately.
Men, that have wandering thoughts at the voice of wiſdom
out of the mouth of a philoſopher, deſerve as well to be
whipt, as boys for playing at pºpin, when they ſhould be
learning. L'Eſtrange.
Pusill ANIMITY... n.ſ. [pºſilaninité, Fr. puſillus and animius,
Lat.] Cowardice; meanneſs of ſpirit.
The property of your excellent ſherris is the warming of
the blood, which, before cold and ſettled, left the liver white
and pale, the badge of pºſillanimity and cowardice. Shakeſp.
The Chineſe ſail where they will; which ſheweth, that
their law of keeping out trangers is a law of puſillanimity and
fear. Bacon's New Atlantis.
It is obvious, to diſtinguiſh between an act of courage and
an act of raſhneſs, an act of pºſillaninity and an act of great
modeſty or humility. South's Sermons.
PUSILLATNIMOUS. adj. [puſillanime, Fr. puſillus and animºus,
Lat.] Meanſpirited ; narrowminded; cowardly.
An argument fit for great princes, that neither by overinea- -
ſuring their forces, they loſe themſelves in vain enterprizes;
nor, by undervaluing them, deſcend to fearful and puſillani-
mous counſels. - Bacon's Eſſays.
He became puſilanimous, and was eaſily ruffled with every
little paſſion within; ſupine, and as openly expoſed to any
temptation from without. ſtºodward's Nat. Hiſł.
What greater inſtance can there be of a weak puſillanimous
temper, than for a man to paſs his whole life in oppoſition to
his own ſentiments. Addison Speciatºr, N° 576.
Pusill ANIMousNEss. n.ſ.. [from fuſilaninous.] Meanneſs
of ſpirit. - r
Puss. n.ſ.. [I know not whence derived; fuſe, Lat, is a dwarſ..]
1. The fondling name of a cat. - - -
A young fellow, in love with a cat, made it his humble
ſuit to Venus to turn ptſ into a woman. L lºgº.
Let puſ; practiſe what nature teaches: - ºutts.
I will permit my ſon to play at apodidraſcinda, which can
be no other than our pºſs in a corner. Arbuth, and Pope.
2. The ſportſman's term for a hare.
Poor honeſt ptſ,
It grieves my heart to ſce thee thus ;
But hounds cat ſheep as well as hares. Gºy.
PU'ST. L.E.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U Tº
fü'STUſ.E. n.ſ. ſºftuſ, Fr. pºla, Lat..] A ſmall ſwelling;
P
1
t
I.
2.
3
- - - - - - - fHoreſcence.
a pimple; a puſh ; an eff -
"F. bloºd turning acrimonious, corrodes the veſſels, pro-
ducing hemorrhagºs, puſtules red, black and gargrenous. Arb.
Pºst vious. ad. [from pºſłule.] Full of puſtules ; pimply.
"o Put. v. a. ſo
f this word, ſo common in the Engliſh lan-
guage, it is very difficult to find the etymology; putter, to
fant, is Daniſh. ſº
To lay or repoſite in any place. --
º 3. º there he put a man. Gen. ii. 8.
Speak unto him, and put words in his mouth. Ex, IV. I 5.
If a man put in his beaſt, and feed in another man's field;
of the beſt of his own ſhall he make reſtitution. Ex. xxii. 5.
In theſe he put two weights. Milton.
Feed land with beaſts and horſes, and after both put in
ſheep. A ſºrtimer's Huſbandry.
To place in any fituation. -
when he had put them all out, he entereth in Mar. v. 40.
Four ſpeedy cherubims -
Put to their mouths the founding alchimy. Milton.
Put all your other ſubjects together; they have not taken
half the pains for your majeſty's ſervice that I have. L'B/ir.
. To place in any ſtate or condition.
Beſore we will lay by our juſt born arms,
We'll put thee down, 'gainſt whom theſe arms we bear,
Or add a royal number to the dead. Shakesp.
Put me in a ſurety with thee. job xvii. 3.
The ſtones he ut for his pillows. Gen. xxviii. 11.
He hath put my brethren far from me. job xix. 13.
As we were put in truſt with the goſpel, even ſo we ſpeak,
not as pleaſing men, but God. 1 Thºſ. ii. 4.
They ſhall ride upon horſes, every one put in array like a
man to the battle againſt thee. jer. l. 42.
He put them into ward three days. Gen. xlii. 17.
She ſhall be his wife, he may not put her away. Deut. xxii.
!)aniel ſaid, put theſe two aſide. Suſ. v. 51.
Having loſt two of their braveſt commanders at ſea, they
durſt not fut it to a battle at ſea, and ſet up their reſt wholly
upon the land enterprize. Bacon.
This queſtion aſk'd puts me in doubt. AZiltºn.
So nature prompts; ſo ſoon we go aſtray,
When old experience puts us in the way. Dryden.
Men may put government into what hands they pleaſe.
- Locke.
He that has any doubt of his tenets, received without ex-
amination, ought to put himſelf wholly into this ſtate of ig-
norance, and throwing wholly by all his former notions, ex-
amine them with a perfect indifference. Locke.
Declaring by word or action a ſedate, ſettled deſign upon
another man's life, puts him in a ſtate of war with him. Locke.
As for the time of putting the rams to the ewes, you muſt
conſider at what time your graſs will maintain them. Mºrt.
lf without any provocation gentlemen will fall upon one,
in an affair wherein his intereſt and reputation are embarked,
they cannot complain of being put into the number of his
c 1 he ill 1 ts. Pºpe.
4. To repoſe.
5
How wilt thou put thy truſt cn Egypt for chariots. 2 Kings.
God was entreated of them, becauſe they put their truſt in
him. * I Chr. v. 20.
. To truſt; to give up.
Thou ſhal; pºt all in the hands of Aaron, and wave them
for a wave-offering. Ex. xxix. 24.
0. To expoſe; to apply to anything.
A ſinew cracked ſeldom recovers its former ſtrength, or the
*mory of it leaves a laſting caution in the man, not to put
the part quickly again to robuſt employment. Locke.
7. To puſh into action.
8
Thank him who puts meloth to this revenge. Milton.
W hen men and women are mixed and well choſen, and
fººt their beſt qualitics forward, there may be any intercourſe
of civility and good will. Swift.
. To apply.
Your goodlieſt young men and aſles he will put them to his
work. - - I Sam. viii. 16.
No man, having put his hand to the plough and looking
bººk, is fit for the kingdom of God. Luke ix. 62.
*joice before the Lord in all that then puttg/? thine hands
tinto. Deut. xii. 18.
Chymical °Fºrations are excellent tools in the hands of a
natural philoſopher, and are by him applicable to many nobler
uſes, than they are wont to be put to in laboratories. Boyle.
The .**ise of their relations put them to painting, as
more gainful than any other art. Dryden’s Djº.
** great difference in the notions of mankind, is from
the º uſe they pºt their faculties to. &gt; Locke.
I expect an offspring, docile and tractable in whatever we
fit them to. Tatler, Nº 75
9. To uſe any action by which the place or ſtate of any thing
is changed.
I do but keep the peace, put up thy ſword. Shakeſp.
Pat up your ſword; if this young gentleman
Have done offence, I take the fault on me. Shakeſp.
He put his hand unto his neighbour's goods. Ex. xxii.
Whatſoever cannot be digeſted by the ſtomach, is by the
ſtomach either put up by vomit, or pat down to the guts.
- Bacon.
It puts a man from all employment, and makes a man's
diſcourſes tedious. Taylºr's Rule ºf Living Haly.
A nimble fencer will put in a thruſt ſo quick, that the foil
will be in your boſom, when you thought it a yard off. Digby.
A man, not having the power of his own life, cannot pºt
himſelf under the abſolute arbitrary power of another to tike
it. - - - Locke.
Inſtead of making apologies, I will ſend it with my hearty
prayers, that thoſe few directions I have here put together,
º, be truly uſeful to you. lºat.
e will know the truth of theſe maxims, upon the firſt
occaſion that ſhall make him put together thoſe ideas, and ob-
ſerve whether they agree or diſagree. Lºcke.
When you cannot get dinner ready, pºt the clock back.
Swift's Directions to the Cº.
Io. To cauſe; to produce.
There is great variety in men's underſtanding; and their
natural conſtitutions put ſo wide a difference between ſome
men, that induſtry would never be able to maſter, Locke.
11. To compriſe; to conſign to writing.
Cyrus made proclamation, and put it alſo in writing. 2 Chr.
12. To Addison
Whatſoever God doeth, nothing can be put to it, nor any
thing taken from it. Eccl. iii. 14.
13. To place in a reckoning.
If we will rightly eſtimate things, we ſhall find, that moſt
of them are wholly to be pºt on the account of labour. Loºe.
That ſuch a temporary life, as we now have, is better than
no being, is evident by the high value we put upon it cur-
ſelves. Lº, e.
14. To reduce to any ſtate.
Marcellus and Flavius, for pulling ſcarfs off Ceſar's images,
are put to ſilence. º Shakſº. Julius Cajar.
This diſhonours you no more,
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which elſe would put you to your fortune. Shakespeare .
And five of you ſhall chaſe an hundred, and an hundred of
ou ſhall put ten thouſand to flight. Lev. xxvi. 8.
With well-doing, ye may put to ſilence fooliſh men. 1 Pet.
The Turks were in every place put to the worſt, and lay
by heaps ſlain. Knolles's Hiſł. of the Turki.
This ſcrupulous way would make us. deny our ſenſes; for
there is ſcarcely any thing but puts our reaſon to a ſtand. Cºl.
Some modern authors, obſerving what ſtraits they have
been put to to find out water enough for Noah's flood, ſay,
Noah's flood was not univerſal, but a national iºdation.
Burnet's Theºry ºf the Earth.
We ſee the miſerable ſhifts ſome men are put to, when
that, which was founded upon, and ſupported by idolatry, is
become the ſanctuary of atheiſm. Bently.
15. To oblige; to urge.
Thoſe that put their bodies to endure in health, may, in
moſt ſickneſſes, be cured only with dict and tendeling.
Bacon.
The diſcourſe I mentioned was written to a private friend,
who put me upon that taſk. Bºyle.
He put to proof his high ſupremacy. AMilton.
When the wiſeſt counſel of men have with the greateſt
prudence made laws, yet frequent emergencies happen which
they did not foreſee, and therefore they are put upon repeals
and ſupplements of ſuch their laws; but Almighty God, by
one ſimple forefight, foreſaw all events, and could therefore
fit laws proportionate to the things he made. Hale.
We are put to prove things, which can hardly be made
plainer. Tillºtſºn.
Where the loſs can be but temporal, every ſmall probabi-
lity of it need not pat us ſo anxiouſly to prevent it. . . South.
They ſhould ſeldom be put about doing thoſe things; but
when they have a mind. Locke.
I6. To propoſe; to ſtate.
A man of Tyre, ſkilful to work in gold and filver, to find
out every device which ſhall be put to him. 2 Chr. ii. 24.
Put it thus—unfold to Staius ſtraight,
What to Jove's ear thou didſt impart of late:
He'll ſtare. Dryden.
The queſtion originally put and diſputed in publick ſchoºls.
was, whether, under any pretence whatſoever, it may be
lawful to reſiſt the ſupreme magiſtrate. - Swift.
I only put the queſtion, whether, in reaſon, it would nCE
have been proper the kingdom ſhould have received timely
notice. Swift.
I put the caſe at the worſt, by ſuppoſing what ſeldom º:
pens, that a courſe of virtue makes us miſerable in this life.
speciator, Nº. 576.
17. To form ; to regulate.
7 2 &gt; 18. To reach
!.
:
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P UT
P U T
18. To reach to another.
Wo unto him that giveth his neighbour drink, that puiteſ?
thy bottle to him, and makeſt him drunken. Hab. ii. 15.
19. To bring into any ſtate of mind or temper.
Solyman, to put the Rhodians out of all ſuſpicion of inva-
ſon, ſent thoſe ſoldiers he had levied in the countries neareſt
unto Rhodes far away, and ſo upon the ſudden to ſet upon
them. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
His highneſs put him in mind of the promiſe he had made
the day before, which was ſo ſacred, that he hoped he would
not violate it. Clarendon.
To put your ladyſhip in mind of the advantages you have
in all theſe points, would look like a deſign to flatter you.
Temple.
I broke all hoſpitable laws,
To bear you from your palace-yard by might,
And put §. noble perſon in a fright. Dryden.
The leaſt harm that befalls children, puts them into com-
plaints and bawling. Locke on Education.
20. To offer; to advance.
I am as much aſhamed to put a looſe indigeſted play upon
the publick, as I ſhould be to offer braſs money in a pay-
ment. Dryden.
Wherever he puts a ſlight upon good works, ’tis as they
iſland diſtinét from faith. Atterbury.
21. To unite; to place as an ingredient.
He has right to put into his complex idea, ſignified by the
word gold, thoſe qualities, which upon trial he has found
united. Locke.
22. To Put by. To turn off; to divert.
Watch and reſiſt the devil; his chief deſigns are to hinder
thy deſire in good, to put thee by from thy ſpiritual employ-
Inent. Taylor.
A fright hath put by an ague fit, and mitigated a fit of the
gout. Grew's Coſmol.
23. To Put by. To thruſt aſide.
Baſilius, in his old years, marrying a young and fair lady,
had of her thoſe two daughters ſo famous in beauty, which
put by their young couſin from that expectation. Sidney.
Was the crown offer'd him thrice
—Ay, marry, was’ſt, and he put it by thrice,
very time gentler than other. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
Jonathan had died for being ſo,
Had not juſt God put by th’ unnatural blow. Cowley.
When I drove a thruſt, home as I could, -
To reach his traitor heart, he put it by,
And cried, ſpare the ſtripling. Dryden.
24. To Put down. To baffle; to repreſs ; to cruſh.
How the ladies and I have put him down / Shakeſp.
25. To Put down. To degrade.
The greedy thirſt of royal crown
Stirr'd Porrex up to put his brother down. Fa. Queen.
The king of Egypt put Jehoahaz down at Jeruſalem. 2 Ch.
26. To Put down. To bring into diſuſe.
Sugar hath put down the uſe of honey; inaſmuch as we
have loſt thoſe preparations of honey, which the ancients
had. Bacon.
With copper collars and with brawny backs,
Quite to put down the faſhion of our blacks. Dryden.
27. To Put down. To confute.
We two ſaw you four ſet on four; mark now how a plain
tale ſhall put you down. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
28. To Put forth. To propoſe.
Samſon ſaid, I will now put forth a riddle unto you. judg.
29. To Put forth. To extend.
He put forth his hand, and pulled her in.
30. To Put forth. To emit, as a ſprouting plant.
An excellent obſervation of Ariſtotle, why ſome plants are
of greater age than living creatures, for that they yearly put
forth new leaves; whereas living creatures put forth, after their
period of growth, nothing but hair and nails, which are ex-
CrementS. - Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
He ſaid, let th' earth
Put forth the verdant graſs, herb yielding ſeed,
Gen. viii. 9.
And fruit-tree yielding fruit. Milton.
31. To Put fºrth. To exert.
I put not forth my goodneſs. Milton.
In honouring God, put forth all thy ſtrength. Taylor.
We ſhould put forth all our ſtrength, and, without having
an eye to his preparations, make the greateſt puſh we are
able. Addiſon.
32. To Put in. To interpoſe.
Give me leave to put in a word to tell you, that I am glad
you allow us different degrees of worth. Collier.
33. To Put in practice. To uſe; to exerciſe.
Neither gods nor man will give conſent,
To put in practice your unjuſt intent. Dryden.
34. Tº PUT off. To diveſt; to lay aſide.
None of us put off our cloaths, ſaving that every one put
them off for waſhing. Nehem. iv. 23.
Put off thy ſhoes from off thy feet. Ex. ii. 5.
Ambition, like a torrent, ne'er looks back;
And is a ſwelling, and the laſt affection
A high mind can put off. Benj. johnſºn's Cataline.
It is the new ſkin or ſhell that putteth off the old; ſo we
ſee, that it is the Young horn that putteth off the old; and in
birds, the young feathers put off the old; and ſo birds caſt
their beaks, the new beak putting off the old. Bacon.
Ye ſhall die perhaps, by putting off.
Human, to put on gods; death to be wiſh'd. Milton.
I for his ſake will leave -
Thy boſom, and this glory next to thee
Freely put off, and for him laſtly die. Milton.
Let not the work of to-day be put off till to-morrow ; for
the future is uncertain. L'Eſtrange.
When a man ſhall be juſt about to quit the ſtage of this
world, to put off his mortality, and to deliver up his laſt.
counts to God, his memory ſhall ſerve him for little elſe, but
to terrify him with a frightful review of his paſt life. South.
Now the cheerful lighther fears diſpell’d,
She with no winding turns the truth conceal’d,
But put the woman off, and ſtood reveal’d. Dryden.
My friend, fancying her to be an old woman of quality,
fut off his hat to her, when the perſon pulling off his º:
appeared a ſmock-faced young fellow. Addiſon.
Homer ſays he puts off that air of grandeur which ſo pro-
perly belongs to his charaćter, and debaſes himſelf into a
droll. Broom's Notes on the Odyſſey.
35. ſ PUT off. To defeat or delay with ſome artifice or ex-
Cu16.
The gains of ordinary trades are honeſt; but thoſe of bar-
gains are more doubtful, when men ſhould wait upon others
neceſſity, broke by ſervants to draw them on, put off others
cunningly that would be better chapmen. Bacon.
I hoped for a demonſtration, but Themiſtius hopes to put
me off with an harangue. Boyle.
Some hard words the goat gave, but the fox puts off all
with a jeſt. L’Eſtrange.
I do not intend to be thus put off with an old ſong. More.
Do men in good earneſt think that God will be put off ſo *
Or that the law of God will be baffled with a lie cloathed in
a ſcoff? South.
This is a very unreaſonable demand, and we might put him
off with this anſwer, that there are ſeveral things which all
men in their wits diſbelieve, and yet none but madmen will
go about to diſprove. Bentley.
36. To Put off. To delay; to defer; to procraſtinate.
So many accidents may deprive us of our lives, that we
can never ſay, that he who neglects to ſecure his ſalvation to-
day, may without danger put it off to to-morrow. Wake.
37. To Pur off. To paſs fallaciouſly.
He ſeems generally to prevail, perſuading them to a con-
fidence in ſome partial works of obedience, or elſe to put off
the care of their ſalvation to ſome future opportunities. Rog.
38. To Put off. To diſcard.
Upon theſe taxations,
The clothiers all put off
The ſpinſters, carders, fullers, weavers. Shakeſp.
39. To Put off. To recommend; to vend or obtrude.
The effects which paſs between the ſpirits and the tangible
parts, are not at all handled, but put off by the names of vir-
tues, natures, ačtions, and paſſions. Bacon.
It is very hard, that Mr. Steele ſhould take up the artificial
reports of his own faction, and then put them off upon the
world as additional fears of a popiſh ſucceſſor. Swift:
40. To Put on or upon. To impute; to charge.
41. To Put on or upon. To inveſt with, as cloaths or covering.
Strangely viſited people he cures,
Hanging a golden ſtamp about their necks,
Put on with holy pray'rs. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Give even way unto my rough affairs;
Put not you on the viſage of the times,
And be like them to Percy troubleſome. Shakeſp.
** So ſhall inferior eyes,
That borrow their behaviour from the great,
Grow great by your example, and put on
The dauntleſs ſpirit of reſolution. Shakeſp. King john.
Rebekah took goodly raiment, and put them upon Jacob.
Gen. xxvii. 15.
If God be with me, and give me bread to eat, and raiment
to put on, then ſhall the Lord be my God. Gen. xxviii. 20.
She has
Very good ſuits, and very rich; but then
She cannot put 'em on ; ſhe knows not how ---
To wear a garment. Benj. jºhnſºn's Catiline.
Taking his cap from his head, he ſaid, this cap will not
hold two heads, and therefore it muſt be fitted to one, and
ſo put it on again. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
Avarice puts on the canonical habit. Decay; Piety.
Mercury had a mind to learn what credit he had in the
world, and ſo put on the ſhape of a man. L’Eſtrange.
20 X The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U T
P U T
. . . ths, be-
The little ones are taught to * proud of their cloa Lºº.
can put them on. - - -
4. *ś, * To forward; to promote ; to incite.
I grow fearful,
By what yº. . late º º done,
t you protect this courie, and put it on -
#; iºnº, y Shakeſp. King Lear.
Say, you ne'er had don't, -
But by our putting on. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Others envy to the ſtate draws, and put ºn , , , ,
For contumelics receiv'd. Benj. johnſºn's Catiline.
This came handromely to put on the peace, becº º
a fair example of a peace bought. . . . Bacon's Henry VII.
- As danger did approach, her ſpirits role, -
And putting on the king diinay'u her fºes. Halifax.
43. Tº PöT on or upon. I o impoſe ; to inflict. -
I have offended; that which thou *. me, I will
bear. 2 Kings xviii. 14.
*. not only undermineth the baſe of religion, but puts upon
us the remoteſt error from truth. Brown.
The ſtork found he was put upon, but ſet a good face how-
ever upon his entertainment. - L'Aſirange.
faijacies we are apt to put upon ourſelves, by taking words
for things. - - Locke.
why are ſcripture maxims put upon us, without taking no-
tice of ſcripture examples which lie croſs them. Atterbury.
44. To Put on: To aſſume ; to take.
The duke hath ºut on a religious life,
And thrown into neglect the pompous court. Shakeſp.
Wiſe men love you, in their own eſpight,
And, finding in their native wit no eaſe,
Are forc'd to put your folly on to pleaſe. Dryden.
There is no quality ſo contrary to any nature which one
cannot affect, and put on upon occaſion, in order to ſerve an
intereſt. Swift.
45. To Put over. To refer.
For the certain knowledge of that truth,
I put you o'er to heav'n, and to my mother. Shakeſp.
46. T. Put out. To place at uſury.
Lord, who ſhall abide in thy tabernacle? he that putteth
not out his money to uſury. Pſ, xv. 5.
To live retir’d upon his own,
He call'd his money in ;
But the prevailing love of pelf,
Soon ſplit him on the former ſhelf,
He put it out again. Dryden's Horace.
Money at uſe, when returned into the hands of the owner,
uſually lies dead there till he gets a new tenant for it, and can
put it out again. Locke.
- An old uſurer, charmed with the pleaſures of a country
life, in order to make a purchaſe, called in all his money;
but, in a very few days after, he put it out again. Addiſon.
One hundred pounds only, put out at intereſt at ten per
cent. doth in ſeventy years encreaſe to above one hundred
thouſand pounds. Child.
47. To Put out. To extinguiſh.
The Philiſtines put cut his eyes. judg. xvii. 21.
Wherefover the wax floated, the flame forſook it, till at
laſt it ſpread all over, and put the flame quite out. Bacon.
I muſt die
Betray'd, captiv'd, and both my eyes put out. Milton.
In places that abound with mines,when the ſky ſeemed clear,
there would ſuddenly ariſe a certain ſteam, which they call a
. º and thick, that it would oftentimes put out
CII Candles. Boyle.
This barbarous inſtance of a wild unreaſonable rº,
quite put out thoſe little remains of affection ſhe ſtill had for
her lord. Addison's Speciator, N° 171.
48. To Put out. To emit, as a plant.
Trees planted too deep in the ground, for love of approach
to the ſun, forſake their firſt root, and put out another more
towards the top of the earth. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
49. Tº Put out. To extend; to protrude.
When ſhe travailed, the one put out his hand. Gen.
50. Tº Put out. To expel; to drive from.
When they have overthrown him, and the wars are finiſhed
ſhall they themſelves be put out P sº.
I am reſolved, that when I am put out of the ſtewardſhip,
they may receive me into their houſes. Luke xvi. 4.
The nobility of Caſtile put out the king of Arragon, in fa-
vour of king Philip. Bacon's Henry VII.
51. Tº Put out. To make publick.
You tell us, that you ſhall be forced to leave off your mo-
deſty; you mean that little which is left; for it was worn to
rags * put out this medal. Dryden.
º was at Venice, they were putting out curious
Or *::::::: ſeveral edifices, moſt famous for their beauty
52. T., F. Ince. - Addiſon.
i. º:
- ** affectation in paſſion; for that putteth a man
- i. º his Precepts, and in a new caſe there cuſtom leaveth
Bacon.
53. 7, Put tº... To kill by ; to puniſh by.
* From Ireland am I come,
To fignify that rebels there are up,
And put the Engliſhmen unto the ſword. Shakespeare
There were no barks to throw the rebels into, and ſend
them away by ſea, they were put all to the ſword. Bacon.
Such as were taken on either ſide, were put to the fivord or
to the halter. Clarendon,
Soon as they had him at their mercy,
They put him to the cudgel fiercely. Hudibrar.
54. To Put to it. To diſtreſs; to perplex; to preſs hard.
What would'ſt thou write of me, if thou ſhould'ſt
praiſe me.
– O gentle lady, do not put me to't,
For I am nothing if not critical. Shakeſp. Othello.
Lord Angelo dukes it well in his abſence;
He puts tranſgreſſion to't Shakeſp. Meaſ for Maſ:
They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to't. Shakespeare .
It is to be put to queſtion in general, whether it be lawful
for chriſtian princes to make an invaſive war, fimply for the
propagation of the faith ? Bacon.
1 was not more concern'd in that debate
Of empire, when our univerſal ſtate
Was put to hazard, and the giant race
Our captive ſkies were ready to embrace. Dryden.
He took the opportunity of purſuing an argument, which
had been before ſtarted, and put it to her in a ſyllogiſm. Addison
They were actually making parties to go up to the moon
together, and were more put to it how to meet with accom-
modations by the way, than how to go thither. Addiſon.
The figures and letters were ſo mingled, that the coiner
was hard put to it on what part of the money to beſtow the
inſcription. Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
I ſhall be hard put to it, to bring myſelf off. Addison.
55. To Put to. To aſſiſt with.
Zelmane would have put to her helping hand, but ſhe was
taken a quivering. Sidney.
The carpenters being ſet to work, and every one putting to
his helping hand, the bridge was repaired. Knollei.
56. To Put to death. To kill.
It was ſpread abroad, that the king had a purpoſe to put to
death Edward Plantagenet in the Tower. Bacon.
One Bell was put to death at Tyburn, for moving a new re-
bellion. Hayward.
Teuta put to death one of the Roman ambaſſadors; ſhe was
obliged, by a ſucceſsful war, which the Romans made, to
content to give up all the ſea coaſt. Arbuthnºt.
57. To Put together. To accumulate into one ſum or maſs:
This laſt age has made a greater progreſs, than allages bºr
fore put together. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
58. To Put up. To paſs unrevenged.
I will indeed no longer endure it; nor am I yet perſuaded
to put up in peace what already I have fooliſhly ſuffered. Shakespeare
It is prudence, in many caſes, to put up the injuries of a
weaker enemy, for fear of incurring the diſpleaſure of a
ſtronger. L’Eſtrange.
How many indignities does he paſs by, and how many aſ-
ſaults does he put up at our hands, becauſe his love is in-
vincible. South.
The Canaanitiſh woman muſt put up a refuſal, and the re-
proachful name of dog, commonly uſed by the Jews of the
heathen. Boyle.
Nor put up blow, but that which laid -
Right worſhipful on ſhoulder-blade. Hudibrar.
Such national injuries are not to be put up, but when the
offender is below reſentment. Addiſon.
59. To Put up. To emit; to cauſe to germinate, * plants.
Hartſhort ſhaven, or in ſmall pieces, mixed with "g.
and watered, putteth up muſhrooms. Bacon.
60. To Put up. To expoſe publickly: as, thºſe good are put
up to ſale.
61. To Put up. To ſtart.
In town, whilſt I am following one charaćier, I am croſſed
in my way by another, and put up ſuch a variº of odd .
tures in both ſexes, that they foil the ſcent,9.9′ "...”
and puzzle the chace. Addiſon's Spediator.
62. To Put up. To hoard.
Himſelf never put up any of the rent,
the aſſiſtance of a reverend divine to aug
portion.
63. To Pet up. To hide.
Why ſo earneſtly ſeck you to put up that letter. Shakespeare .
64. To Put upon. To incite; to inſtigate. ..." ion of
The great preparation put the king “P” the reſolution 9
having ſuch a body in his way. Clarendon, b. #
Thºſe who have lived witkedly before, muſt nºt "'.
a great deal more trouble, becauſe they are put “” changing
the whole courſe of their life. - #!.
This caution will put them upon conſidering, and .
them the neceſſity of examining more than they do. Locke.
It
but diſpoſed of it by
ment the vicar's
Spelman.
- 5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P U T
P U T
!.
º,
º
º:
º
It need not be any wonder, why I ſhould employ myſelf
upon that ſtudy, or put others upon it. J/alker.
He replied, with ſome vehemence, that he would under-
take to prove trade would be the ruin of the Engliſh nation;
I would fain have put him upon it. Addiſon.
This put me upon obſerving the thickneſs of the glaſs, and
conſidering whether the dimenſions and proportions of the
rings may be truly derived from it by computation. Newton.
t baniſhes from our thoughts a lively ſenſe of religion,
and puts us upon ſo eager a purſuit of the advantages of life,
as to leave us no inclination to reflect on the great author of
them. Atterbury,
Theſe wretches put us upon all miſchief, to feed their luſts
and extravagancies. Swift,
65. To Put upon. To impoſe; to lay upon.
When in ſwiniſh ſleep,
What cannot you and I perform upon
Th'unguarded Duncan f what not put upon
His ſpungy officers, who ſhall bear the guilt
Of our great quell ? Shakespeare. Macbeth.
66. To PUT upon trial. To expoſe or ſummon to a ſolemn and
iudicial examination.
Chriſt will bring all to life, and then they ſhall be put every
one upon his own trial, and receive judgment. Locke.
Jack had done more wiſely, to have put himſelf upon the
trial of his country, and made his defence in form. Arbuth.
To PUT. v. n. -
1. To go or move.
The wind cannot be perceived, until there be an eruption
of a great quantity from under the water; whereas in the
firſt putting up, it cooleth in little portions. Bacon.
2. To ſhoot or germinate.
In fibrous roots, the ſap delighteth more in the earth, and
therefore putteth downward. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
3. To ſteer a veſſel.
An ordinary fleet could not hope to ſucceed againſt a place
that has always a conſiderable number of men of war ready
to put to ſea. Addiſon.
His fury thus appeas'd, he puts to land;
The º forſake their ſeats. Dryden,
4. To Put forth. To leave a port.
Order for ſea is given;
They have put fºrth the haven. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
5. To Put forth. To germinate; to bud; to ſhoot out.
- No man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Amongſt the infinite doings of the world,
Sometimes puts forth. Shakespeare Winter's Tule.
The fig-tree putteth forth her green figs. Cant. ii. 13.
Take earth from under walls where nettles put forth in
abundance, without any ſtring of the nettles, and pot that
earth, and ſet in it ſtock gilliflowers. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Hirſute roots, beſides the putting forth upwards and down-
wards, putteth forth in round. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
6. To Put in. To enter a haven.
As Homer went, the ſhip put in at Samos, where he con-
tinued the whole winter, ſinging at the houſes of great men,
with a train of boys after him. - Pope.
7. To Put in for. To claim; to ſtand candidate for. A me-
taphor, I ſuppoſe, from putting each man his lot into a box.
This is ſo grown a vice, that I know not whether it do not
put in for the name of virtue. Locke.
8. To Put in. To offer a claim.
They ſhall ſtand for ſeed; they had gone down too, but
that a wife burgher put in for them. Shakeſp.
Although aſtrologers may here put in, and plead the ſecret
influence of this ſtar, yet Galen, in his comment, makes no
ſuch conſideration. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
If a man ſhould put in to be one of the knights of Malta,
he might modeſtly enough prove his ſix deſcents againſt a leſs
qualified competitor. Collier.
9. To Put off. To leave land. -
As the hackney boat was putting off, a boy deſiring to be
taken in, was refuſed. Addiſon.
Io. To PUT over. To ſail croſs.
Sir Francis Drake came coaſting along from Cartagena, a
city of the main land to which he put over, and took it. Abbot.
11. To Put to ſea. To ſet ſail; to begin the courſe.
It is manifeſt, that the duke did his beſt to come down,
and to put to ſea. Bacon.
He warn'd him for his ſafety to provide;
Not put to ſea, but ſafe on ſhore abide. Dryden.
They put to ſea with a fleet of three hundred ſail, of which
they loſt the half. Arbuthnot.
With freſh proviſion hence our fleet to ſtore, -
Conſult our ſafety, and put off to ſea. Pope.
12. To Put up. To offer one's ſelf a candidate.
Upon the deceaſe of a lion, the beaſts met to chuſe a king,
when ſeveral put up. L’Eſtrange.
13. To Put up. To advance to ; to bring one's ſelf forward.
With this he put up to my lord,
The courtiers kept their diſtance due,
He twich'd his ſleeve. Swift.
#4. 7” Put up with. To ſuffer without reſentment.
PUT. n, ſ. (from the verb.] -
1. An action of diſtreſs.
alº *** was a forc’d put, and a chance rather than a
2. A ruſtick; a clown. L Æſirange.
Queer country puts extol que ?----"
And of loſt º, .." Beſ s reign,
3. Put off. Excuſe; ſhift. -
The fox's P*.’ſ is initrućtive towards the government of
our lives, provided his fooling be made our eaſieſt. L'E/ºr.
PU TAGF. m. ſ. [putain, Fr.) In law, proſtitution on the wo—
man's part. - -
Pu’t AN is M. n.ſ. [*iſºne, Fr.] The manner of living of
trade of a proſtitute. †).
Pu'tative. adj. [putatiſ, Fr. from puto, Lat.] Suppoſed :
reputed. - 5.
If a wife commits adultery, ſhe ſhall loſt her dower, though
ſhe, be only a putative, and not a true and real wife. Ayliff.
PUTID. adj. ſputidas, Lat.] Mean; low; worthleſs.
He that follows nature is never out of his way; whereas
all imitation is putid and ſervile. L'Eſtrange.
ºu'ripsess. n.f. [from putid.] Meanneſs; vileneſs.”
PuTLoG. n.ſ.
Putags are pieces of timber or ſhort poles, about ſeven foot
long, to bear the boards they ſtand on to work, and to lay
bricks and mortar upon. Moxon's 44-ch. Exerciſes.
Puſtke DiNous, adj. [from putred, Lat..] Stinking; rotten.
A putredinous ferment coagulates all humours, as milk with
rennet is turned. - Floyer.
PUTREFA'ction. n.ſ. [putrefaction, Fr. putri, and facio, Lat.]
The ſtate of growing rotten; the act of making rotten. -
Putrefatiion is a kind of fermentation, or inteſtine motion
of bodies, which tends to the deſtruction of that form of their
exiſtence, which is ſaid to be their natural ſtate. Quincy.
. . If the ſpirit protrude a little, and that motion be inordinate,
there followeth putrefaction, which ever diſſolveth the con.
ſiſtence of the body into much inequality. Bacon.
Vegetable putrefaction is produced by throwing green vege-
tables in a heap in open warm air, aſid preſſing them together,
Bramſon.
by which they acquire a putrid ſtercoraceous taſte and .
odour. Airbuthnot on Aliments.
. From ſwampy fens, . . . . . . -
Where putrefaction into life ferments,
And breathes deſtructive myriads: Thomſºn's Summer.
Puts ºf Active. adj. [from putrefacio, Lat.] Making rotten.
They make putrefactive generations, conformable unto ſe-
minal productions. " Brown's Wulgar Errours.
If the bone be corrupted, the putrefactive ſmell will diſ-
cover it. //iſeman's Surgery.
To PUTRE FY. v. a. [putrifier, Fr. putrefacio, Lat..] To make
rotten; to corrupt with rottenneſs.
To keep them here,
They would but ſtink, and putreſ; the air, Shakeſp.
* ill projects are undertaken, and private ſuits putrºſy
the publick good. - - - - - Bacon.
The ulcer itſelf being putraffed, I ſcarified it and the parts
about, ſo far as I thought neceſſary, permitting them to bleed
freely, and thruſt out the rotten fleſh. Jºſeman.
A wound was ſo putreffed, as to endanger the bone. Žemple.
Such a conſtitution of the air, as would naturally putieſ,
raw fleſh, muſt endanger by a mortification. Arbuthnot.
To Pu‘TREFY. v. n. To rot.
From the ſole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no
ſoundneſs in it, but wounds, and bruiſes, and putraffing
fores. - .* . . If, i.
All imperfeół mixture is apt to putreſ, and watry ſubſtances
are more apt to putrºſ; than oily. Bacon's Nºt. Hiſt.
Theſe hymns, though not revive, embalm and ſpice
The world, which elſe would putrefy with vice. Donne.
The pain proceeded from ſome acrimony in the ſerum,
which, falling into this declining part, putrefied. JPiſeman.
PUTRE'scENce. n.ſ.. [from putrºſco, Latin. The ſtate of
IOtting.
Now if any ground this effect from gall or choler, becauſe
being the fiery humour, it will readieſt ſurmount the water,
we may confeſs in the common putrºſcence, it may promote
elevation. Brown's ſugar Errours.
Put Rescent, adj. [putreſſens, Lat..] Growing rotten.
Aliment is not only neceſſary for repairing the fluids and
ſolids of an animal, but likewiſe to keep the fluids from the
putreſcent alkaline ſtate, which they would acquire by conſtant
inotion. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
PUTRID. adj. [putride, Fr. putridus, Lat..] Rotten; corrupt.
The wine to putrid blood converted flows: //allºr.
* - If a nurſe feed only on fleſh, and drink water, her milk,
inſtead of turning ſour, will turn putrid, and ſmell like
urine Arbuthnºt on Aiments.
Putrid fever is that kind of fever, in which the humours,
or part of them, have ſo little circulatory motion, that they
fall into an inteſtine one, and putrºſy, which is commonly
the caſe after great evacuations, great or exceſſive heat. Quin.
Pu‘TRIDNE. s.
~.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">P Y G
P Y X
i
(TRIDNess. n.ſ.. [from putrid.] Rottenneſs.
PU 'Nº. *č. º: on the foetid ſpirituoſity of the fer-
ment, and the putridneſs of the meat. Floyer on the Humours.
Pu‘TTER. m. ſ. [from put.]
1. One who puts.
The moſt wretched ſort of people are dreamers upon events
and putters of caſes. D'Eſtrange.
2. Put TER on. Inciter ; inſtigator.
My good lord cardinal, they vent reproaches
Moſt bitterly on you, as putter on
Of theſe exactions. Shakespeare . Henry VIII.
You are abus'd, and by ſome putter on, *
That will be damn'd for’t. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
Pu'ttingstone. n.ſ.
In ſome parts of Scotland, ſtones for the ſame purpoſe are
laid at the gates of great houſes, which they call puttingſtones,
for trials of ſtrength. Pope.
Puttock. n.ſ. [derived, by Minſhaw, from luteo, Lat.] A
buzzard.
Who finds the partridge in the puttock's neſt,
But may imagine how the bird was dead. Shakespeare.
The next are thoſe, which are called birds of prey, as the
eagle, hawk, puttock, and cormorant. Peacham.
pu'rty. n.ſ. -
1. A kind of powder on which glaſs is ground.
An object glaſs of a fourteen foot teleſcope, made by an
artificer at London, I once mended conſiderably, b grinding
it on pitch, with putty, and leaning on it very eaſily in the
grinding, left the putty ſhould ſcratch it. Newton.
2. A kind of cement uſed by glaziers.
To PU'ZZLE. v. a. [for poſtle, from poſe. Sáinner.]
1. To perplex ; to confound ; to embarraſs; to entangle; to
gravel ; to put to a ſtand; to teaze.
Your preſence needs muſt puzzle Antony. Shakeſp.
I ſay there is no darkneſs but ignorance, in which houſ:
more puzzled than the Egyptians in their fog. Shakeſp.
Both armies of the enemy would have been puzzled what
to have done. Clarendon, b. viii.
A very ſhrewd diſputant in thoſe points is dexterous in puz-
zling others, if they be not thorough-paced ſpeculators in
thoſe great theories. More's Divine Dialºgues.
He is perpetually puzzled and perplexed amidſt his own
blunders, and miſtakes the ſenſe of thoſe he would confute.
Addison.
Perſons, who labour under real evils, will not puzzle them-
ſelves with conjećtural ones. Clariſa.
2. To make intricate; to entangle.
The ways of heaven are dark and intricate,
Puzzled in mazes, and perplex'd with error. -?ddſon.
Theſe, as my guide informed me, were men of ſubtle tem-
Perº, and puzzled politicks, who would ſupply the place of
real wiſdom with cunning and avarice: Tatler, Nº 81.
I did not indeed at firſt imagine there was in it ſuch a jargon
of ideas, ſuch an inconſiſtency of notions, ſuch a &amp;#.
of particles, that rather puzzle than connect the ſenſe, which
- in ſome places he ſeems to have aimed at, as I found upon m
- nearer peruſal of it. Addiſon.
To Pu'zzle. v. n. To be bewildered in one's own noticſ. ;
to be aukward. -
, The ſervant is a puzzling fool, that heeds nothing. L'E/ir.
Pu'zzle. *ſ [from the verb.] Embaraſsment ; perplexity.
Men in great fortunes are ſtrangers to themſelves, and while
º they are in the puzzle of buſineſs, they have no time to tend
their health either of body or mind. Bacon's Eſſays.
£uzzler. n.ſ.. [from P*.] He who puzzles.
PY'GARG. m. ſ. A bird. Ainſworth
Py'GMean. Adj. If - - -
adº. (from pygmy.] Belonging to a pygmy.
They, leſs than ſmalíeſ. dwarfs in narrow room
Throng numberleſslike that pygmean race &gt;
Beyond the Indian moun.
Milton.
"PYRAM1'dical.
PYGMY. m. ſ. ſpygmſ, Fr. "Vrººº..] A dwarf; one of 2.
nation fabled to be only three ſpans high, and after long wars
to have been deſtroyed by cranes. -
If they deny the preſent ſpontaneous Production of larger
plants, and confine the earth to as Pygmy births in the vegetable
kingdom, as they do in the other; yet ſurely in ſuch a ſup-
poſed univerſal decay of nature, even mankind itſelf that is
now nouriſhed, though not produced, by the earth, muſt have
degenerated in ſtature and ſtrength in *Very generation.
Bºnilº.
Pylo's U.S. n.ſ.. [***62s.] The lower orifice of the ſº
PY'pow DER. See PIE Powder.
PY’RAMID. n. ſ. [pyramide, Fr. *****, from ºf, fire;
becauſe fire always aſcends in the figure of a cone..] In geo-
metry, is a ſolid figure, whoſe baſe is a Polygon, and whoſe
ſides are plain triangles, their ſeveral points meeting in one.
Harrºr.
Know, Sir, that I will not wait Pinion'd at your maſter's
court; rather make my country's high pyramid, my gibbet,
and hang me up in chains. **ašºp. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
An hollow cryſtal pyramid he takes,
In firmamental waters dipt above,
Qí it a broad extinguiſher he makes, -
And hoods the flames. Dryden.
Part of the ore is ſhot into quadrilateral pyramid. If ...,
PYRA'MIDAL. }*. [from pyramid.] Having the form of a
pyramid.
Of which ſort likewiſe are the gems or ſtones, that are here
ſhot into cubes, into Pyramidal forms, or into angular
columns. - //codward's Nat. H/.
The pyramidical idea of its flame, upon occaſion of the
candles, is what is in queſtion. Locke.
PYRAMI'dically. adv. [from Pyramidical.] In form of a
pyramid.
Olympus is the largeſt, and therefore he makes it the baſis
upon which Oſſa ſtands, that being the next to Olympus in
magnitude, and Pelion being the leaſt, is Placed above Oſſa,
and thus they riſe pyramidically. Broome's Notes on Odºſy.
PYRAMis. n.ſ. A pyramid. -
The form of a pyramis in flame, which we uſually ſee, is
merely by accident, and that the air about, by quenching the
fides of the flame, cruſheth it, and extenuatéth it into that
form, for of itſelf it would be round, and therefore ſmoke is
in the figure of a pyramis reverſed; for the air quencheth the
flame, and receiveth the ſmoke. Bacon's Nat. Hyl.
Pyke. a. ſ. ſpyra, Lat..] A pile to be burnt.
When his brave ſon upon the fun'ral pyre
He ſaw extended, and his beard on fire. Dryden.
With tender billet-doux he lights the pyre,
And breathes three am’rous fighs to raiſe the fire. Pºpe.
PYRITEs. n.ſ. [from Tº..] Fireſtone.
Pyrites contains ſulphur, ſometimes arſenick, always iron,
and ſometimes copper. J/oodward.
PY Romancy. n.ſ. [Tutºrſz.] Divination by fire.
Divination was invented by the Perſians, and is ſeldom or
never taken in a good ſenſe: there are four kinds of divina-
tion, hydromancy, pyromancy, aeromancy, geomancy. Ayliff.
PyRotechNicAl... adj. (pyrotechnique, Fr. from pyrotechniº.]
Engaged or ſkilful in fireworks.
PYROTECHNICKS. n.ſ. [7% and rºxy?..] The aët of
employing fire to uſe or pleaſure; the act of fireworks.
XRoTechN.Y. m. ſ. ſpyrotechnie, Fr.] The art of managing
fire.
Great diſcoveries have been made by the means of
pyrotechny and chymiſtry, which in late ages have attained to
a greater height than formerly. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Pyºkhonism. n.ſ.. [from Pyrrho, the founder of the ſcep-
ticks.] Scepticiſm ; univerſal doubt. -
Pºx. m.ſ. . [fyxis, Latin.] The box in which the Roman'ſs
keep the hoſt.
